11098 99838142 2505
A WORLDE of Wordes, Or Most copious, and exact Dictionarie in Italian and English, collected by IOHN FLORIO. Printed at London, by Arnold Hatfield for Edw. Blount. 1598
To the Right Honorable Patrons of vertue, Patterns of Honor, Roger Earle of Rutland, Henrie Earle of Southampton, Lucie Countesse of Bedford. THis dedication (Right Honorable and that worthily) may haply make your Honors muse; well fare that de∣dication, that may excite your muse. I am no auctorised Herauld to marshall your precedence. Priuate dutie might perhaps giue one the prioritie, where publike respect should prefer another. To choose Tullie or Ansonius Consuls, is to prefer them before all but one; but to choose either the former of the twaine, is to pre∣fer him before all. It is saide of Atreus in a fact most disorderly, that may be saide of any in so ordering his best dutie, It makes no matter whether, yet he resolues of neither. I onely say your Honors best knowe your places: An Italian turne may serue the turne. Lame are we in Platoes censure, if we be not ambidexters, vsing both handes alike. Right-hand, or left-hand as Peeres with mutuall paritie, without disparage∣ment may it please your Honors to ioyne hand in hand, and so iointly to lende an eare (and lende it I beseech you) to a poore man, that inuites your Honors to a christening, that I and my poore studies, like Philemon and Baucis, may in so lowe a cottage entertaine so high, if not deities, yet dignities; of whom the Poet testifies. Ma sopra ogni altro frutto piu gradito Fu il volto allegro, e'l non bugiardo amore. E benche fosse pouero il conuito, Non fu la volontà pouera e'l core. But of all other cheere most did content A cheerefull countenance, and a willing minde, Poore entertainment being richly ment, Pleaded excuse for that which was behinde. Two ouerhastie fruites of mine nowe some yeeres since, like two forewarde fe∣males, the one put her-selfe in seruice to an Earle of Excellence, the other to a Gentleman of Woorth, both into the worlde to runne the race of their fortune. Now where my rawer youth brought foorth those female fruites, my riper yeeres affoording me I cannot say a braine-babe Minerua, armed at al assaies at first houre; but rather from my Italian Semele, and English thigh, a bouncing boie, Bacchus-like, almost all names: And being as the manner of this countrie is, after some strength
gathered to bring it abroade; I was to entreate three witnesses to the entrie of it in∣to Christendome, ouer-presumptuous (I grant) to entreate so high a presence, but your Honors so gracious (I hope) to be ouer-entreated. My hope springs out of three stems: your Honors naturall benignitie; your able emploiment of such ser∣uitours; and the towardly likelie-hood of this Springall to do you honest seruice. The first, to vouchsafe all; the second, to accept this; the third, to applie it selfe to the first and second. Of the first, your birth, your place, and your custome: of the second, your studies, your conceits, and your exercise: of the thirde, my endeuours, my proceedings, and my proiect giues assurance. Your birth, highly noble, more then gentle: your place, aboue others, as in degree, so in height of bountie, and other vertues: your custome, neuer wearie of well dooing: your studies much in al, most in Italian excellence: your conceits, by vnderstanding others to worke aboue them in your owne: your exercise, to reade, what the worlds best wits haue written, and to speake as they write. My endeuours, to apprehend the best, if not all: my pro∣ceedings, to impart my best, first to your Honors, then to all that emploie me: my proiect, in this volume to comprehend the best and all. [In truth I acknowledge an entyre debt, not onely of my best knowledge, but of all, yea of more then I know or can, to your bounteous Lordship most noble, most vertuous, and most Hono∣rable Earle of Southampton, in whose paie and patronage I haue liued some yeeres; to whom I owe and vowe the yeeres I haue to liue. But as to me, and manie more the glorious and gracious sunne-shine of your Honor hath infused light and life: so may my lesser borrowed light, after a principall respect to your benigne aspect, and influence, affoorde some lustre to some others. In loyaltie I may auerre (my needle toucht, and drawne, and held by such an adamant) what he in loue assumed, that sawe the other stars, but bent his course by the Pole-starre, and two guardes, auowing, Aspicit vnam, One guideth me, though more I see. Good parts impar∣ted are not empaired: Your springs are first to serue your selfe, yet may yeelde your neighbours sweete water; your taper is to light to you first, and yet it may light your neighbours candle. I might make doubt, least I or mine be not now of any further vse to your selfe-sufficiencie, being at home so instructed for Italian, as teaching or learning could supplie, that there seemed no neede of trauell: and nowe by trauell so accomplished, as what wants to perfection?] Wherein no lesse must be attributed to your embellisht graces (my most noble, most gracious, and most gracefull Earle of Rutland) well entred in the toong, ere your Honor entred Italie, there therein so perfected, as what needeth a Dictionarie? Naie, if I offer seruice but to them that need it, with what face seeke I a place with your excellent Ladiship (my most-most honored, because best-best adorned Madame) who by conceited industrie, or indu∣strious conceite, in Italian as in French, in French as in Spanish, in all as in English, vnderstand what you reade, write as you reade, and speake as you write; yet rather charge your minde with matter, then your memorie with words? And if this présent presènt so small profit, I must confesse it brings much lesse delight: for, what plea∣sure in a plot of simples, O non viste, o mal note, o mal gradite, Or not seene, or ill knowne, or ill accepted? Yet heere-hence may some good accrewe, not onelie to truantlie-schollers, which euer-and-anon runne to Venuti, and Alunno; or to
new-entred nouices, that hardly can construe their lesson; or to well-forwarde students, that haue turnd ouer Guazzo and Castiglione, yea runne through Guarini, Ariosto, Tasso, Boccace, and Petrarche: but euen to the most compleate Doctor; yea to him that best can stande All'erta for the best Italian, heereof sometimes may rise some vse: since, haue he the memorie of Themistocles, of Seneca, of Scaliger, yet is it not infinite, in so finite a bodie. And I haue seene the best, yea naturall Italians, not onely stagger, but euen sticke fast in the myre, and at last giue it ouer, or giue their verdict with An ignoramus. Boccace is prettie hard, yet vnderstood: Petrarche harder, but explaned: Dante hardest, but commented. Some doubt if all aright. Alunno for his foster-children hath framed a worlde of their wordes. Venuti taken much paines in some verie fewe authors; and our William Thomas hath done pretti∣lie; and if all faile, although we misse or mistake the worde, yet make we vp the sence. Such making is marring. Naie all as good; but not as right. And not right, is flat wrong. One saies of Petrarche for all: A thousand strappadas coulde not compell him to confesse, what some interpreters will make him saie he ment. And a Iudicious gentleman of this lande will vphold, that none in England vnderstands him thoroughly. How then ayme we at Peter Arctine, that is so wittie, hath such va∣rietie, and frames so manie new words? At Francesco Doni, who is so fantasticall, & so strange? At Thomaso Garzoni in his Piazza vniuersale; or at Allessandro Cittoli∣ni in his Typocosmia, who haue more proper and peculiar words concerning euerie seuerall trade, arte, or occupation for euerie particular toole, or implement belon∣ging vnto them, then euer any man heeretofore either collected in any booke, or sawe collected in any one language? How shall we vnderstand Hanniball Caro, who is so full of wittie iestes, sharpe quips, nipping tantes, and scoffing phrases against that graue and learned man Lodouico Casteluetri, in his Apologia de' Banchi? Howe shall the English Gentleman come to the perfect vnderstanding of Federico Griso∣ne, his Arte del Caualcare, who is so full of strange phrases, and vnusuall wordes, peculiar onely to horse-manship, and proper but to Caualarizzi? How shall we vn∣derstande so manie and so strange bookes, of so seuerall, and so fantasticall subiects as be written in the Italian toong? How shall we, naie how may we ayme at the Venetian, at the Romane, at the Lombard, at the Neapolitane, at so manie, and so much differing Dialects, and Idiomes, as be vsed and spoken in Italie, besides the Florentine? Sure we must saie as that most intelligent and graue Prelate said, when he came new out of the South into the North, and was saluted with a womans sute in Northren. Now what is that in English? If I, who many yeeres haue made pro∣fession of this toong, and in this search or quest of inquirie haue spent most of my studies; yet many times in many wordes haue beene so stal'd, and stabled, as such sticking made me blushinglie confesse my ignorance, and such confession indeede made me studiouslie seeke helpe, but such helpe was not readilie to be had at hande. Then may your Honors without any dishonour, yea what and whosoeuer he be that thinkes himselfe a very good Italian, and that to trip others, doth alwaies stande All'erta, without disgrace to himselfe, sometimes be at a stand, and standing see no easie issue, but for issue wish a direction, which in this mappe I hold, if not exactlie delineated, yet conueniently prickt out. Is all then in this little? All I knowe: and
more (I know) then yet in any other. Though most of these you know alreadie, yet haue I enough, if you know anie thing more then you knew, by this. The retainer doth some seruice, that now and then but holds your Honors styrrop, or lendes a hande ouer a stile, or opens a gappe for easier passage, or holds a torch in a darke waie: enough to weare your Honors cloth. Such then since this may prooue, prooue it (right Honorable) and reprooue not for it my rudenes, or my rashnes: rudenes in presuming so high, rashnes in assuming so much for it that yet is vnap∣prooued. Some perhaps will except against the sexe, and not allowe it for a male∣broode, sithens as our Italians saie, Le parole sono femine, & i fatti sono maschij, Wordes they are women, and deeds they are men. But let such know that Detti and fatti, wordes and deeds with me are all of one gender. And though they were commonly Feminine, why might not I by strong imagination (which Phisicions giue so much power vnto) alter their sexe? Or at least by such heauen-pearcing de∣uotion as transformed Iphis, according to that description of the Poet. Et ognimembro suo piu forte e sciolto Sente, e volge alla madre il motto, e'l lume. Come vero fanciullo esser si vede Iphi va con parole alme, e deuote Altempio con la madre, e la nutrice, Epaga il voto, e'l suo miracoldice. Feeling more vigor in each part and strength Then earst, and that indeede she was a boy. Towards hir mother eies and wordes at length She turnes, and at the temple with meeke ioy He and his nurse and mother vtter how The case fell out, and so he paide his vow. And so his strength, his stature, and his masculine vigor (I would, naie I coulde saie vertue) makes me assure his sexe, and according to his sexe prouide so autenti∣call testimonies. Laie then your blisse-full handes on his head (right Honorable) and witnes that he by me deuoted to your Honors, forsakes my priuate cell, all re∣tired conceites, and selfe-respects to serue you in the worlde, the world in you; and beleeues in your Honors goodnes, in proportion as his seruice shall be of moment and effectuall; and that you will not onely in due censure be his iudges, but on true iudgement his protectors; and in this faith desires to be numbred in your familie, so in your studies to attend, as your least becke may be his dieugarde; for he hath toong to answer, words at will, and wants not some wit, though he speake plaine what each thing is. So haue I crost him, and so blest him, your god-childe, and your seruant; that you may likewise giue him your blessing, if it be but as when one standes you in steede, supplies you, or pleases you, you saie, Gods-blessing on him. But though in the fore-front he beares your Honorable names, it may be deman∣ded how is it, your Honors gaue not him his name? Heerein (right Honorable) beare with the fondnes of his mother, my Mistresse Muse, who seeing hir female Arescusa turn'd to a pleasing male Arescon (as Plinie tels of one) beg'd (as some
mothers vse) that to the fathers name she might prefixe a name befitting the childes nature. So cald she him, A worlde of wordes: since as the Vniuers containes all things, digested in best equipaged order, embellisht with innumerable ornaments by the vniuersall creator. And as Tipocosmia imaged by Allessandro Cittolini, and Fabrica del mondo, framed by Francesco Alunno, and Piazza vniuersale set out by Thomaso Garzoni tooke their names of the vniuersall worlde, in words to represent things of the world: as words are types of things, and euerie man by himselfe a little world in some resemblances; so thought she, she did see as great capacitie, and as meete method in this, as in those latter, and (as much as there might be in Italian and English) a modell of the former, and therefore as good cause so to entitle it. If looking into it, it looke like the Sporades, or scattered Ilands, rather then one well-ioynted or close-ioyned bodie, or one coherent orbe: your Honors knowe, an armie ranged in files is fitter for muster, then in a ring; and iewels are sooner found in seuerall boxes, then all in one bagge. If in these rankes the English out-number the Italian, congratulate the copie and varietie of our sweete-mother-toong, which vnder this most Excellent well-speaking Princesse or Ladie of the worlde in all languages is growne as farre beyond that of former times, as her most flourishing raigne for all happines is beyond the raignes of former Princes. Right Honorable, I feare me I haue detained your Honors too long with so homelie entertainment, yet being the best the meanenes of my skill can affoorde; which intending as my childes christening-banquet, heereunto I presumed to inuite your Honors: but I hope what was saide at your Honors first comming (I meane in the beginning of my Epistle) shall serue for a finall excuse. And in conclusion (most Honorable) once againe at your departure giue me leaue to commend this sonne of mine to your fauourable protections, and aduowe him yours, with this licence, that as Henricus Stephanus dedicated his Treasure of the Greeke toong to Maximilian the Emperour, to Charles the French king, and to Elizabeth our dread Soueraigne, and by their fauours to their Vniuersities: So I may consecrate this lesser-volume of little-lesse value, but of like import, first, to your triple-Honors, then vnder your protections to all Italian-English, or English-Italian students. Vouchsafe then (highlie Honorable) as of manie made for others, yet made knowne to your Ho∣nors, so of this to take knowledge, who was borne, bred, and brought foorth for your Honors chiefe seruice; though more seruice it may do, to many others, that more neede it; since manie make as much of that, which is made for them, as that they made them-selues, and of adopted, as begotten children; yea Adrian the Em∣perour made more of those then these; since the begotten are such as fates giue vs, the adopted such as choise culs vs; they often-times Stolti, sgarbati, & inutili, these euer with Corpo intiero, leggiadre membra, emente sana. Accepting therefore of the childe, I hope your Honors wish as well to the Father, who to your Honors all-deuoted wisheth meede of your merits, renowme of your vertues, and health of your persons, humblie with gracious leaue kissing your thrice-honored hands, pro∣testeth to continue euer Your Honors most humble and bounden in true seruice, IOHN FLORIO.
To the Reader. I Knowe not how I may againe adventure an Epistle to the reader, so are these times, or readers in these times, most part sicke of the sul∣lens, and peeuish in their sicknes, and conceited in their peeuishnes. So should I feare the fire, that haue felt the flame so lately, and flie from the sea, that haue yet a vow to pay for escaping my last ship∣wracke. Then what will the world say for ventring againe? A suo danno, will one say. Et a torto si lamenta del mare, chi due volte ci vuol tornare, will another say. Good counsell indeede, but who followeth it? Doe we not daily see the contrarie in practise? Who loues to be more on the sea, then they that haue bin most on it? Whither for change if they haue kept at a stay: or for amends if they haue lost: or for increase if they haue gotten. Of these there are ynow, and wise-ynough to excuse me. Therefore I haue put forward at auenture: But before I recount vnto thee (gentle reader) the purpose of my new voyage: giue me leaue a little to please my selfe, and refresh thee with the discourse of my olde danger. Which because in some respect it is a common danger, the discouerie thereof may happily profit other men, as much as please my selfe. And here might I begin with those notable Pirates in this our paper-sea, those sea-dogs, or lande-Critikes, monsters of men, if not beastes rather then men; whose teeth are Canibals, their toongs adder-forkes, their lips aspes-poyson, their eies basiliskes, their breath the breath of a graue, their wordes like swordes of Turkes, that striue which shall diue deepest into a Christian lying bound before them. But for these barking and biting dogs, they are as well knowne as Scylla and Charybdis. There is another sort of leering curs, that rather snarle then bite, whereof I coulde instance in one, who lighting vpon a good sonnet of a gentlemans, a friend of mine, that loued better to be a Poet, then to be counted so, called the auctor a rymer, notwithstanding he had more skill in good Poetrie, then my slie gentleman seemed to haue in good manners or humanitie. But my quarrell is to a tooth-lesse dog, that hateth where he cannot hurt, and would faine bite, when he hath no teeth. His name is H. S. Doe not take it for the Romane H S. for he is not of so much worth, vnlesse it be as H S is twice as much and a halfe as halfe an As. But value him how you will, I am sure he highly valueth himselfe. This fellow, this H. S. reading (for I would you should knowe he is a reader and a writer too) vnder my last epistle to the reader I. F. made as familiar a word of F. as if I had bin his brother. Now Recte sit oculis magister tuis, said an ancient writer to a much-like reading grāmarian∣pedante: God saue your eie-sight, sir, or at least your in-sight. And might not a man, that can do as much as you (that is, reade) finde as much matter out of H. S. as you did out of I. F? As for example H. S. why may it not stand as well for Haeres Stultitiae, as for Homo Sim∣plex? or for Hara Suillina, as for Hostis Studiosorum? or for Hircus Satiricus, as well as for any of them? And this in Latine, besides Hedera Seguace, Harpia Subata, Humore Superbo, Hipocrito Simulatore in Italian. And in English world without end. Huffe Snuffe, Horse Stealer, Hob Sowter, Hugh Sot, Humfrey Swineshead, Hodge Sowgelder. Now Master H. S. if this doe gaule you, forbeare kicking hereafter, and in the meane time you may make you a plaister of your dride Marioram. I haue seene in my daies an inscription, harder to finde out the meaning, and yet easier for a man to picke a better
meaning out of it, if he be not a man of H. S. condition. There is a most excellent preface to the excellently translated booke signed A. B. which when I sawe, I ft soones conceiued, could I in perusing the whole ABC omit the needelesse, and well order the requisite le∣ters, I should finde some such thing as Admitabilis Bonitas, or Amantum Beatissimus. But how long thinke you would H. S. haue bin rooting and grunting ere he could haue found as he is Hominum Simplicissimus; or would haue pickt out as he is Himdo Sa∣guisuga, so honest a meaning? Trust me I cannot but maruell at the disposition of these men, who are so malicious as they will not spare to stab others, though it be thorough their owne bodies, and wrong other men with their owne double harme. Such mens worder a wise man compares to boltes shot right-vp against heauen, that come not neare heauen, but downe againe vpon their pates that shot them: or a man may compare them to durt flung at another man, which besides it defiles his handes that flings it, possibly it is blowne backe againe vpon his owne face: or to monie put out to vsurie, that returnes with increase, so they deliuered with hatred, are repaide with much more: or to the blasting Sereno in hot countries, rising from puddles, dunghils, carions, putrified dampes, poysoned lakes, that being detestable it selfe, makes that much more detested from whence it comes. On the other side a good word is a deaw from heauen to earth, that soakes into the roote, and sends forth fruite from earth to heauen: It is a precious balme, that hath sweetenesse in the boxe, whence it comes, sweetenesse and vertue in the bodie, whereto it comes: it is a golden chaine, that linkes the toongs, and eares, and harts of writers and readers, each to other. They hurt not God (saith Seneca) but their owne soules, that ouerthrowe his altars: Nor harme they good men, but themselues, that turne their sacrifice of praises into blasphemie. They that raue, and rage, and raile against heauen, I say not (saith he) they are guiltie of sacrilege, but at least they loose their labour. Let Aristophanes and his comedians make plaies, and scowre their mouthes on Socrates; those very mouthes they make to vilifie, shall be the meanes to amplifie his vertue. And as it was not easie for Cato to speake euill, so was it not vsuall for him to heare euill: It may be Socrates would not kicke againe, if an asse did kicke at him, yet some that cannot be so wise, and will not be so patient as Socrates, will for such iadish tricks giue the asse his due burthen of bestonadas. Let H. S. hisse, and his complices quarrell, and all breake their gals, I haue a great faction of good writers to bandie with me. Thinke they to set their teeth on tender stuffe? But they shall marre their teeth, and finde me tough.Conautes frangere frangam, said Victoria Collonna:Those that to breake me striue, I'le breake them if I thriue. Yet had not H. S. so causelesly, so witlesly prouoked me, I coulde not haue bin hired, or induced against my nature, against my manner thus far to haue vrged him; though happily heareafter I shall rather contemne him, then farther pursue him. He is to blame (saith Martiall, and further he brandes him with a knauish name) that will be wittie in another mans booke. How then will scoffing readers scape this marke of a maledizant? whose wits haue no other worke, nor better worth then to flout, and fall out? It is a foule blemish that Paterculus findes in the face of the Gracchi, They had good wits, but vsed them ill. But a fouler blot then a Iewes letter is it in the foreheads of
Caelius and Curio, that he sets, Ingeniose nequan, they were wittily wicked. Pitie it is but euermore wit should be vertuous, vertue gentle, gentrie stdious, students gracious. Let follie be dishonest, dishonestie vnnoble▪ ignobilitie scandalous, and scandall slanderous. Who then are they that mispend all their leisure, e a take this cheefe pleasure in back¦ting well-deseruers? I see and am sorie to see a sort of men, whose fifth element is male∣diction, whose life is infamie, whose death damnation, whose dates are surfeting, whose nights lecherie, yea such as Nanna could neuer teach Pippa, nor Comare and Balia dis∣course of and whose couches are Spintrie; whose thrift is vsurie, meales gluttonie, exercise cousenage, whose valour bragardrie, Astolpheidas, or Rodomontadas, or if it come to action, crueltie: whose communication is Atheisme, contention detraction, or pillardise most of lewdnes, seld of vertue, neuer of charitis; whose spare-time is vanitis or villanie: yet will I not deale by them, as they doe by others. I like not reproofe where it pertaines not to me: But if they like to see their owne pictures in liuely colours of their ornaments habillements, attendants, obseruances, studies, amours, religions, games, trauels imploy∣ments, furnitures, let them as gentlemen (for so I construe Nobiles, and more they be not, if they be no lesse) goe to the Painters shop, or looking-glasse of Ammianus Marcellinus, an vnpartiall historian, in his 28. booke about the middle, and blush, and amend, and thinke, that thence, and out of themselues I might well drawe a long declamation: they that vnderstand him, wil agnise this; they that doe not let them learne: let both conceiue, how they conforme, and both reforme their deformities; or if they will not, at least let them for beare to blur others, bicause they are blacke themselues, least it be saide to them, as Seneca saide to one not vnfitly. Te fera scabies depascitur, ut naeuos rides pulchrio∣rum? this let them construe, and take to them the meaning for their labour. And though I more then feare much detracting: for I haue already tasted some, and that extraordi∣narie though in an ordinarie place, where my childe was beaten ere it was borne: some diuining of his imperfectnes for his English part; some fore-speaking his generall weake∣nes, and very gently seeming to pitie his fathers. And one auerring he could be get a better of his owne, which like ynough he can, and hath done many a one, God forgiue him. But the best is, my sonne with all his faultes shall approoue himselfe no misse-begotten. And for those exceptions knowing from whom they come, I were very weake minded if they coulde any thing mooue me. And that husbandman might be counted very simple, that for the ominous shreekes of an vnluckie, hoarce-voist, dead-deuouring night-rauen or two, or for feare of the malice of his worst conditioned neighbors, would neglect either to till and sowe his ground, or after in due time to reape and thresh out his haruest, that might bene∣fite so many others with that, which both their want might desire, and their thankfulnes would deserue. So did I intend my first seede so doe I my haruest. The first fruites onely re∣serued to my Honorable Patrones, the rest to euery woorthie Ladie and gentleman that pleases to come and buy; and though I doubt not but rauens and crowes both, will haue a graine or two now and then in spite of my teeth, especially H. S. who is so many graines too light: yet I am well content to repay good for euill, thinking it not impossible that by the taste of the corne those very foules may in time haue their mouthes stopt for speaking euill against the husbandman. And let this comparison of a labouring man by the way put you in minde (gentle reader) of his labours; that hath laboured so much, and so long to saue you a labour, which I doubt not but he may as iustly stand vpon in this toong work,
as in Latin Sir Thomas Eliot, Bishop Cooper, and after them Thomas Thomas, and Iohn Rider haue done amongst vs: and in Greeke and Latin both the Stephans, the father and the sonne, who notwithstanding the helpes each of them had, yet none of them but thought he might challenge speciall thankes for his speciall trauell, to better pur∣pose then any before him. And if they did so in those toongs, where they had so many, and so great helpes, and in toongs which vvere helpes to one another; they that vnderstande, vvill easily acknovvledge the difference betvvixt my paines and theirs: yet I desire no preeminence of thankes; but either equall thankes, or equall excuse. And vvell may I make that comparison betvvixt our labours, that Allessandro Cittolini maketh in his Tipocosmia: vve all fared indeede like Sea-faring men (according to my first compa∣rison) and lanched foorth into a deepe, and dangerous sea, but they had this aduantage of me, that they vvere many to steere a passage-boate; I was but one to turne and vvinde the sailes, to vse the oare, to sit at sterne, to pricke my carde, to vvatch vpon the vpper decke, boate-svvaine, pilot, mate, and master, all offices in one, and that in a more vnruly, more vnvveildie, and more roome-some vessell, then the biggest hulke on Thames, or burthen-bearing Caracke in Spaine, or slaue tiring Gallie in Turkie, and that in a sea more diuers, more dangerous, more stormie, and more comfortlesse then any Ocean. If any thinke I had great helpes of Alunno, or of Venuti, let him confer, and knovve I haue in tvvo, yea al∣most in one of my letters of the Alphabet more vvordes, then they haue in all their tvven∣tie; and they are but for a fevv auctors in the Italian toong, mine for most that vvrite well, as may appeere by the Catalog of bookes that I haue read through of purpose for the accomplishing of this Dictionarie. I vvould not meddle vvith their defectes and errors, nor yet amplifie the fulnesse or perfection of my ovvne worke, farther then vpon a iust ground to satisfie his good desire that vvisheth the best helpe. If any man aske vvhether all Italian vvordes be here? I ansvvere him, it may be no: and yet I thinke heere be as many, as he is likely to finde (that askes the question) vvithin the compasse of his reading; and yet he may haue read vvell too. I should thinke that very fevv vvordes could escape those auctors I haue set dovvne, vvhich I haue read of purpose to the absolute accomplishing of this vvorke, being the most principall, choisest, and difficult in the toong; especially vvriting in such varietie not onely of matters, but of dialects: But vvhat if I aske him againe hovv many hundred vvordes he, and possibly his teachers too vvere grauelled in? vvhich he shall finde here explaned? If no other bookes can be so vvell perfected, but still some thing may be added, hovv much lesse a Word-booke? Since daily both nevv vvordes are inuented; and bookes still found, that make a nevv supplie of olde. We see the expe∣rience in Latin, a limited toong, that is at his full grovvth: and yet if a man consider the reprinting of Latin Dictionaries, euer vvith addition of nevv store, he vvould thinke it were still increasing. And yet in these Dictionaries as in all other that that is printed still is reputed perfect. And so it is no doubt after the customarie and possible perfection of a Dictionarie, vvhich kinde of perfection if I chalenge to mine (especially conside∣ring the yeerely increase, vvhich is as certainly in this, in French, in Spanish, in Dutch &c. as vve finde by experience it is in English; and I thinke I may well saie more in this, then in the rest; yea and in the rest mostly from this) I hope no man that shall expend the woorth of this vvorke in impartiall examination, will thinke I challenge more then is due to it. And for English-gentlemen me thinks it must needs be a pleasure to them,
to see so rich a toong out-vide by their mother-speech, as by the manie-folde Englishes of manie wordes in this is manifest? The vvant vvhereof in England heeretofore, I might iustly say in all Europe, might more endeare the vvoorth. Though vvithout it some knevv much, yet none knevv all Italian, as all may do by this. That well to know Italian is a grace of all graces, vvithout exception, vvhich I euer exemplifie in her gra∣cious Highnes; vvhose due-deserued-praises to set foorth aright I may rightly say, as a notable Italian vvriter saide earst of hir most-renovvmed father of famous memorie, Che per capir le giuste lodi della quale conuerrbbe o che il cielo s'nalzasse, o ch'il mondo s'allargasse; or as the moderne Italian Homer saide of a Queene far inferiour to hir thrice-sacred Maiestie, Chele glorie altrui si esprimono scriuendo e parlando, quelle di sua Serenissima e sacratissima Maestà si possono solo esptimere marauigli∣ando e tacendo. Of vvhose innumerable excellencies, if not the fore-most, yet most famous I haue heard, and often haue had the good hap and comfort to see, that no Embassador or stranger hath audience of hir Maiestie, but in his natiue toong; and none hath ansvvere but in the same; or in the common toongs of Greeke and Latin, by hir sacred lips pronoun∣ced. That the best by hir patterne desire to doe as much, I doubt not; but I doubt hovv they can vvithout such helpe, and that such helpe vvas to be had till novv, I denie: yet doe I vnderstand that a gentleman of vvorshipfull account, vvell trauelled, vvell conceited, and well experienced in the Italian, hath in this very kinde taken great paines, and made as great proofes of his inestimable vvorth. Glad vvould I be to see that vvorke abroad: some sight vvhereof gaue me tvventy yeeres since the first light to this. But since he sup∣presseth his, for priuate respects, or further perfection, nor he, nor others will (I hope) prize this the lesse. I could here enter into a large discourse of the Italian toong, and of the tea∣chers and teaching thereof, and shevv the ease and facilitie of it, vvith setting dovvne some fevv, yea very fevv obseruations vvhereunto the Italian toong may be reduced: vvhich some of good sort and experience haue merrily compared to iugling-tricks, all vvhich afore a man knovve or discouer hovv they are done, one vvould iudge to be very hard and difficult; but after a man hath seene them and knovves them, they are deemed but slight and easie. And I vvas once purposed for the benefite of all learners to haue done it, and to haue shewed why through my Dictionarie I haue in all verbes of the first coniugation onely set downe the Infinitiue moode, except it be of fower irregular verbes, and wherefore in all of the seconde and thirde coniugations I haue noted be∣sides the Infinitiue moode, the first person singular of the present-tence of the Indi∣catiue moode, the first person singular of the first preterperfect-tence of the Indicatiue, and the participle. And why in the verbes of the fourth coniugation, I haue besides the Infinitiue moode, the participle, the first person singular of the present-tence of the Indi∣catiue moode, onely noted the first person singular of the first preterperfect-tence of the Indicatiue moode of some very few, and not of all, and how by those fewe onely one may frame all the persons of all the tences of all the verbes in the Italian toong; without the knowledge of which, and of those few obseruations glanced at before, no man can or shall euer learne to speake or write true Italian in England: But that I vnderstand there be some that are perswaded, yea and affirme, that nothing can be set downe either by me, or any else that they haue not or knowe not before; and I am informed, that some would not be ashamed to protest they knewe as much before: and therefore contrarie to my first reso∣lution
I forbeare to doe it, grieuing that for their sakes the gentle reader and learner shall be barred of so necessarie a scale of the Italian toong. If these, or others thinke of this no such paines, little price, or lesse profit then I talke of, I onely wish, they felt but halfe my paines for it; or let them leaue this, and tie themselues to the like taske, and then let the fruites of our labors, and the reapers of the fruites iudge betwixt vs whose paines hath sorted to best perfection: which ere long (if God sende me life, and blesse these labors) I meane to perfect with addition of the French and Latine, and with the wordes of some twenty good Italian auctors, that I could neuer obtaine the sight of, and hope shortly to enioy: And I intend also to publish and annexe vnto this, an Alpha∣beticall English Dictionarie, that any man knowing but the English word, shall presently finde the Italian for it. Meane-while I wish to thee, as of me thou shalt deserue, and wish of thee as I knowe of thee I haue deserued. Resolute Iohn Florio.
To the Right Honorable Roger Earle of Rutland, &c. In Italie your Lorship vvell hath seene Their manners, monuments, magnificence, Their language learn't in sound, in stile, in sence, Proouing by profiting, where you haue beene; Bemantling graue conceits in colours greene: A Dictionarie yet, which might dispence Of euery worde, the true intelligence Of that toong, erst of toongs the Peerelesse-Queene You saw not there: Now see and ioy the sight, It matcht, and ore-matcht by an English mate: That he, whom in good grace your Honor placeth, Graced by you, may grace you with your right. "By ancient manners stood the Romane state; From th' ancient stock yong Manors England gra∣ceth. Il Candido.
To the Right Honorable Henrie Earle of Southampton, &c. Braue Earle, bright Pearle of Peeres, peerelesse Nobilitie, The height of armes and artes in one aspiring, Ʋalor with grace, with valor grace attiring, Who more to amplifie vertues habilitie, To adde to fore-learn'd facultie facilitie Now liu'st in trauell, forraine rytes inquiring, Honors ingendred sparkles thereto firing, Immutable in trauels mutabilitie. Though there your Honor see what here we heare, And heare what here we learne at second hand; Yet with good grace accept what was inuented For your more-ease, by yours-deuoted here, So may you more conceiue, more vnderstand, Returne more complete, trauell more contented. Il Candido.
To the Right Honorable Lucie Countesse of Bedford, &c. Excellent Madame, chiefe grace of the graces, Minde of the Muses, commendations letter, To whom for vertue, Nature is a detter; By whom wit, beautie; beautie, bountie graces: In whom worth, Honor; Honor, wonder places; Of whom this strife, if fortune could make greater, Or nature fairer, or instruction better, So faire, great, good, each-other entre-laces. To offer wordes, a worthlesse sacrifice: Yet wordes mans priuiledge, mindes trouch-men are, Loue-lawyers, Princes-Herauldes, marchants-factors, If they to things, as things to them suffice. Yet heauens, and you, accept what poore can spare, Beyond poore powre nor they, nor you exactors. Il Candido.
A friendes gratulation, to his beloued friend Master Iohn Florio, for that which God hath sent him, and he vs. And (Florio) well may this the burden be, Whereof thy head hath trauelled so long: Minerua excepted, all th'olde birth's among, Neuer had head such a deliuerie: Were not the head an vniuersitie; A boy, a doctor-borne, and with that store Of strangest learning in his facultie, As England and Italie hath no more. A wondrous birth, in these childe-breeding daies: Did not his sisters make the wonder lesse, Being (but for their sexe'-imperfectnesse) As he, equall in blood, and next in praise: These three their fathers house shall ioyntly raise; And for the boy reade him this destinie, Some of his name may breede his Right delaise, But none in th'end caries the land but he. De eodem partu, lusus eiusdem. Dic quibus in terris inscripti nomina Regum Nascantur flores: Phyllida solus habe. Disce quibus terris inscripti nomina rerum Nascuntur flores: Pallada solus habe. Illi Mar tui lymphae vulgaris alumni; At tantum nostros aureus imber alit. B. B.
The names of the Bookes and Auctors, that haue bin read of purpose, for the accomplishing of this Dictionarie, and out of which it is collected. APologia d' Annibal' Caro, contra Lodouico Ca∣steluetri. Arcadia del Sanazzaro. Capitoli della venerabile compagnia della lesina. Cento nouelle antiche, e di bel parlar gentile. Decamerone o Cento nouelle del Boccaccio. Del' arte della Cucina di Christofano Messisbugo. Descrittione del Regno o stato di Napoli. Dialogo delle lingue di Benedetto varchi, detto Her∣colano. Dialoghi della corte del' Aretino. Dialoghi delle carte del' Aretino. Dialoghi, o sei giornate del' Aretino. Dialoghi piaceuoli di Stefano Guazzo. Dialoghi di Nicolo Franco. Dialoghi di Speron Speroni. Dittionario volgare & Latino del Venuti. Dittionario Italiano e Francese. Dittionario Inghilese & Italiano. Duo volumi di Epistole di diuersi gran Signori e Pren∣cipi scritte al' Aretino. Epistole o lettere facete del Rao. Fabrica del Mondo di Francesco Alunno. Galateo di Monsignore della Casa. Gierusalemme liberata di Torquato Tasso. Georgio Federichi del Falcone & Vccellare. Gloria di Guerrieri ed Amanti del Dottor Cataldo-Antonio Mannarino. Herbario Inghilese di Giouanni Gerardo. Herbario Spagnuolo del Dottor Laguna. Historia delle cose Settentrionali di Ollao Magno. Hospedale degli Ingnoranti di Thomaso Garzoni. Humanità di Christo del' Aretino. Il Cortegiano del Conte Baldessar Castiglione. Il Genesi del Aretino. I Marmi del Doni. I Mondi del Doni. I sette salmi del' Aretino. La pelegrina, comedia di Girolamo Bargagli. La nobilissima compagnia della bastina. La diuina settimana di Bertas tradotta da Ferante Guisone. La ruffiana, comedia. La minera del mondo di Giouan-Maria Bonardo. La vita della vergine Maria del' Aretino. La vita di San Thomaso del' Aretino. La vita di Santa Catarina del' Aretino. La P. Errante del' Aretino. La vita del Gran Capitano del Giouio. La Tipocosmia d' Allessandro Cittolini. La Zucca del Doni. Le lodi del Porco. Lettere Famigliari d' Annibale Caro. Lettere Famigliari di Claudio Tholomei. Lettere facete e piaceuoli di diuersi grand' huomini, raccolte da Francesco Trchi. Le opere del Petrarca. Le quatro comedie del' Aretino. Le opere burlesche del Berni, e d' altri, Duo volumi. Mathiolo sopra Dioscoride. Opere di Senofonté, tradotte da Marcantonio Gan∣dini. Ordini di Caualcare del S. Federico Grisone. Osseruationi sopra il Petrarca di Francesco Alunno. Piazza vniuersale di Thomaso Garzoni. Pistolotti amorosi degl' Academici Peregrini. Primo volume del' Epistole o lettere del' Aretino. Ragioni di stato del Botero. Relationi vniuersali del Botero. Ricchezze della lingua Toscana di Francesco A∣lunno. Rime piaceuoli di Cesare Caporali, del Mauro et d' altri. Secondo volume delle lettere del' Aretino. Sinagoga de' pazzi di Thomaso Garzoni. Specchio di vera penitentia di Maestro Iacopo Pas∣sauanti. Theatro di varij ceruelli di Thomaso Garzoni. Terzo volume delle lettere del' Aretino. Tito Liuio tradotto dal Narni. Tre volumi di Conrado Gesnero degli animali, pesci, et vccelli. Vocabulario delas dos lenguas, Italiano e Spag∣nuolo.
A most copious and exact Dictionarie in Italian and English. A A, The first letter of the alphabet, and the first vowell A. A, the signe or preposition of the datiue case, to, vnto, at, at the, to the. A, the signe or preposition of the accusatiue case, by, through, for. A, the signe or preposition of the ablatiue case, namely being ioyned with priua∣tiue verbes, as Togliere, Rubbare, and such like, from, from of, of. A, the preposition to gouerne the infinitiue mood of verbs, for, to, for to, by, through. A, being ioyned with the article la, and any noune of profession, becomes an aduerbe of quality, or similitude, as Ala Fran∣cese, after the french fashion. Alla soldata, soldier-like. Ab, vsed before Antiquo, Esperto, Eter∣no, from, or of. Abastare, as Bastare. Abba, a Syrian word signifying father or dad. Abbabare, to astonish, to amaze, to dis∣may: to loiter about idly. Abbacare, to number or cast account: to raue, to seeke out diligently. Also as Ar∣meggiare. Abbachiere, an arithmetician or caster of accountes. Abbachista, as Abbachiere. Abbaco, arithmeticke. Also a deske, a ca∣binet, a casket, or court cupboord, a coun∣ting table, a chesseboord, a paire of play∣ing tables, a dresser. Also a quadrant or square of a piller belowe, which may serue to sit vpon. Abbacinare, to dazle, to glimmer, to glimpse or blinde the sight. Abbacinamento, a dazeling, a glimme∣ring, a glimps, a blearing, a dimming. Abbada, leasurely, at a stay, with expe∣ctation, at a bay, in hope, in delay. Abbadare, to delay, to demurre, to pro∣long, to hold off, to attend, to waite, to keepe at a bay. Abbadessa, an abbesse, or lady of an abbey. Abbadia, an abbey, or a priorie. Abbagliaggine, Abbagliamento, as Abbacinamento. Abbagliare, as Abbacinare. Abbaiare, to barke, to howle, to quest or bay like a dog, to raile, or to boast and rak. Abbaiatore, a barker, a howler, a railer, a brawler, a backbiter, a scould or a boaster. Abbai, barkings, howlings, questings, rai∣lings, scouldings, braulings, boastes, vauntes. Abballordire, as Ballordire. Abballordimento, as Ballordia. Abbandonare, to abandon, to forsake, to leaue, to cast off, to shake off, to giue ouer, to refuse. Abbandono, refusall, at randon, vnre∣garded, in forsaken maner. Abbarbagliare, as Abbacinare. Abbarbicare, to fasten, to binde, to twine about or clinch togither, to take roote. Abbare, as Abbaiare. Abbassare, to abase, to depresse, to sup∣presse, to stoupe, to incline, to bende downe, to abate, to descend, to humble, to submit, to prostrate, to alay, to cast downe. Abbassamento, an abating or humbling or submission, or casting downe. Abbastardire, Abbastardisco, Abba∣stardito, to degenerate, to corrupt, to adulterate, to bastardize. Abbastardimento, a bastardizing, a de∣generation, a sophisticating. Abbate, an abbot, a prior or religious man. Abbattere, Abbatto, Abbattei, Ab∣battuto, to beate, throwe or cast downe, to depresse, to suppresse, to spoile or ouer∣throw, to meete, light, fall, come or hap∣pen on by chance. Abbattimento, a meeting by chance, an encounter, an assault, a fight, a combat, an ouerthrowe, a depressing, a spoiling, a hap, a chaunce, a casualtie. Abbattitore, an encountrer, an ouer∣thrower, a combatant, a suppressor. Abbatutamente, by chance, by fortune, casually. Abbauare, to slauer or driuell at the mouth as children do. Abbellare, to please ones minde. Also as Abbellire. Abbellire, Abbellisco, Abbellito, to beautifie, to make faire, to decke, to a∣dorne, to decore, to embellish. Abbellimento, an adorning, a beautify∣ing, an embellishing. Also a painting that women vse. Abbendare, as Bendare. Abbentare, to rest, to be quiet, to be glad, to enioy, to reioice. Abbergo, as Albergo. Abbeuerare, to water cattell, or giue drinke vnto. Abbeueratoio, a watering or drinking place for cattell. Abbicare, Abbiccare, to heape or hud∣dle vp togither, to make hay-cocks. Abbiendo, hauing. Abbigiare, to make or become gray or ashcolour. Abbigliare, to attyre, to apparell, to ar∣ray, clothe, to adorne, to set foorth, or make readie. Abbigliamenti, attires, ornamēts, clothes, apparell, furniture, raiments. Abbisognare, as Bisognare. Abbissare, to engulfe or sinke, to throwe downe, as into bell or a pit. Abbisso, hell, a gulfe, a bottomlesse pit, a deepe, an infinite gathering of waters. Abbitumare, to bepitch, to cement or clam togither. Abboccare, to meete at a parlie to parlie or speake togither, to come face to face, to put to the mouth. Abboccamento, a parlie, an enter∣uiew, a speaking face to face, an enter∣parlie. Abboccatoio, the mouth of a lymbeck or of a furnace. Abboccatore, a broker, a daies man, such as bring men to speake togither. Abbollire, Abbollisco, Abbollito, to abolish, to abrogate, to disanull, to can∣cell. Abbollitione, an abolishing, a cancelling, an abrogation. Abbominare, to abhorre, to haue in ab∣homination, to loath, to detest. Abbominando, as Abbomineuole. Abbominatione, abhomination, loath∣somnes, detestation. Abbomineuole, abhominable, detesta∣ble, loathsome. Abbominio, as Abbominatione. Abbonacciare, as Bonacciare. Abbonare, to ripen, to make good or sea∣sonable, to asswage, to appease, to per∣fect. Abbonamento, a ripening, a making good, a perfecting, an appeasing. Abbonire, Abbonisco, Abbonito, as Abbonare. Abbordare, to approch or boord, or grap∣ple with a ship, to go neere the shore. Abbordire, as Abbortare. Abborracciare, as Abborare. Abborrare, to stuffe, to quilt, to prepare, to make readie. Also to speake very
thicke as some men do. Abbortare, to bee deliuered abortiuely, to cast vntimely, to be borne out of time. Abortiuo, abortiue, vnseasonable, out of time, monstrous, vntimely. Abbortire, as Abbortare. Abborto, as Abbortiuo. Abbottare, to swell or become venemous as a toade. Abbottinare, to mutinie, to praie, to rob, to spoile, to sacke, to subuert, to seduce, to go a freebooting. Abbottinamento, a mutinie, a praying, a disordring, a robbing, a subuersion, a bootehaling, a freebooting, a bootie. Abbottinatore, a mutinous, factious or seditious fellowe. Abbozzare, to rough hewe any first draught, to bungle ill fauouredly. Abbozzamento, Abbozzatura, a rough, course, imperfect, bungling peece of worke. Abbozzatore, a rough, vnskilfull, bun∣gling workeman. Abbracciare, to embrace, to claspe, to coll, to hugge, or receiue louingly. Abbracciamenti, embracements, col∣lings, huggings, clippings, blandish∣ments. Abbracciatoie, a kinde of tongs or mul∣lets, or pincers that goldsmiths vse. Abbragiare, to set on fire, to blaze, to kindle, to glowe. Abbreuiamento, as Abbreuiatione. Abbreuiare, to shorten, to abridge, to cut off, to abreuiate. Abbreuiatione, an abreuiation, an a∣bridgment, a shortning. Abbreuiatura, as Abbreuiatione. Abbrigliare, to bridle, to snaffle. Abbrigliamento, a brideling, a snaf∣fling. Abbruggiare, as Abrusciare. Abbrunire, nisco, nito, to make or be∣come browne, darke, duskie or blacke. Also to burnish. Abbrusciare, as Abrusciare. Abbrustire, Abbrustisco, Abbrustito, as Abbrustolare. Abbrustolare, to burne, to singe, to toste, to roste, to seare, to blast, to parch, to scorche. Abbrutare, to make or become brutish or beastly. Abbruttare, to defile, to foule, to pollute, to sully. Abbuiare, to darken, to obscure, to ouer∣cloud, or grow duskie. Abbuire, as Abbuiare. Abburattare, as Burattare. Abburattamento, a boulting. Abacare, as Abbacare. Abachiere, Abachista, as Abba¦chiere. Abaco, as Abbaco. Abacinare, as Abbacinare. Abada, as Abbada. Abadare, as Abbadare. Abadessa, as Abbadessa. Abadia, as Abbadia. Abaiare, as Abbaiare. Abandonare, as Abbandonare. Abandono, as Abbandono. Abantiquo, of yore, of old, from the be∣ginning. Abaruffare, to ruffle togither. Abastanza, ynough, sufficiently. Abate, as Abbate. Abattuta, orderly, in proportion, as kee∣ping of time in musicke. Abauare, as Abbauare. Abece, the criscrosse rowe. Abecedario, a teacher of ABC. Also a horne booke. Abdomen, the outward part of the belly betweene the nauel and priuie members, and couereth all the entrals. Abduto, led, remooued or carried away. Also lawlesse, one exempt from lawes. Abella posta, for the nonce, purposely, wittingly, voluntarily, expressely. Abel studio, as Abella posta. Abenche, howbeit, although. Abentare, as Abbentare. Aberrare, to stray, to wander or gad vp and downe. Abertolotto, scotfree, at other mens char∣ges. Abesperto, by experience, by proofe, ex∣pertly. Abestone, a kinde of blackish stone. Abete, Abeto, the wood or tree called Firre. Abeterno, of yore, from the beginning of the world. Abgiurare, to abiure, to forsweare, to de∣nounce or deny with an oth. Abhorrire, to abhorre, to loath, to detest. Abhorreuole, abhominable, lothsome, de∣testable. Abiccare, as Abbiccare. Abiettare, to abiect, to despise, to scorne, to contemne, to outcast. Abiettamente, abiectly, basely, vilely, contemptibly. Abiettione, abiection, basenesse, vilenesse, scorne, contempt. Abietto, abiect, base, vile, outcast, scorne∣full, contemptible. Abiga, the herbe Iuie. Abigare, to binde, claspe, or clinch about as Iuie doth. Abile, able, sufficient. Abissare, as Abbissare. Abisso, as Abbisso. Abisto, a stone which once being heated keepes his heate eight daies. Abitare, as Habitare. Abitatiuo, as Habitatiuo. Abitatione, as Habitatione. Abito, as Habito. Abitudine, as Habitudine. Abituro, as Habitatione. Ablatiuo, the ablatiue case, signifying ta∣king away. Ablato, carried away violently or by force. Abnegare, to abiure, to renounce, to de∣nie. Abolatiuo verme. Looke Verme. Abocca, by word of mouth. Abollire, as Abbollire. Abollitione, as Abbollitione. Abomba, a mans home or resting place: home againe, home againe. Abombare, to powre in, to fill vp, to steepe or lay in soke. Abominando, as Abbomineuole. Abominare, as Abbominare. Abominatione, as Abbominatione. Abomineuole, as Abbomineuole. Abominio, as Abbominatione. Abonamento, as Abbonamento. Abonare, as Abbonare. Abondare, to abound, to haue store or plenty. Abondante, abundant, plentious, plen∣tifull. Abondanza, abundance, plenty, store. Abondeuole, Abondoso, as Abon∣dante. Abordare, as Abbordare. Abortare. Looke Disperdere, or Abbor∣tare. Abosimare, as Bosimare. Abottinare, as Abbottinare. Abottinamento, as Abbottinamento. Abottino, to wracke, to hauocke mti∣nously, a bootehaling, a freebooting. Abozzare, as Abbozzare. Abrame, a fish called a breame. Abrano, by peecemeales, by mammockes, slicingly. Abrano abrano, as Abrano. Abriolo, a singing Canarie bird. Abristicare, as Abbrustolare. Abrocare, to sort, or to be harce. Abrogare, to abrogate, to abolish, to fore∣do, to disanull, to cancell. Abronuntio, hath been taken for a boe or whirret on the eare, or any es to rid one out of the way. Abrotano, the herbe Southernwood.
Abruggiare, as Abrusciare. Abruscare, to make sower or sharpe. to burne, to seare, to singe, to scorch. Abrusciare, to burne, to consume with fire, to smart, to itch. Abrusciamento, a burning, a smarting. Abrustire, as Abbrustolare. Abruttamente, abruptly, out of order, without preface or due course. Abrutto, abrupt, disordred, out of course, absurd. Abrutare, as Abbrutare. Abruttare, as Abbruttare. Absentia, Absenza, absence. Absinthio, the herbe Wormwood. Also a kinde of blackish stone. Absite, a kinde of precious stone. Absoluere, as Assoluere. Absolto, as Assolto. Absoluto, as Assoluto. Absolutione, as Assolutione. Absorbere, Absorto, to swallowe or glut vp. Abstenere, as Astenere. Abstinente, as Astenente. Abstinentia, as Astenenza. Abstergere, to clense or wipe away. Abstruso, secret, inward, darke or hard to be vnderstood. Absurdamente, absurdly, vnorderly, a∣ganst reason. Absurdo, absurd, orderlesse, abrupt. Abuon conto, in part of paiment, to∣wards the reckoning. Abuon hora, betimes, earely, timely. Abuon hotta, idem. Aburattare, to boult or sift meale. Abusare, to abuse, to misorder, to misuse. Abusione, as Abuso. Abusiuo, abusiue, misordred, improper. Abuso, abuse, misorder, disorder, a mis∣using of a thing. Abuzzago, a kinde of buzzard, puttocke or kite. Acaccia, a hunting, a hawking or a fow∣ling. Acacia, a thorny plant bearing great tim∣ber. Also a little shrub full of thornes, with leaues much like Rue. Academia, an vniuersitie where studies are professed. Academiante, of or pertaining to an vni∣uersitie. Academico, a student in any vniuersitie, academicall. Acalzoppo, skipping or hopping away vp∣on one foote. Acambio, mutually, by exchange. Acanino, an eawer, a casting bottle, a glasse to keepe sweete waters in. Acantauola, an instrument which Chi∣rurgions vse to pull out bone with. Acante, a dumbe grashopper which can∣not chirpe. Also the herbe Grounswell. Also a birde called a siskin or linnet. Acantica, a kinde of gum or drug. Acanthio, the brazell tree. Acantida, as Acante. Acanto, neare, by, ioyning vnto. Also the herbe Bearefoote, Brank vrsin or Beares breech. Acapo, at the head or end, againe. Acapo chino, reuerently, with the head bending, stowping, or louting. Acarno, a sea fish hauing a great head and scales like golde. Acaro, wilde Mirtle or gow. Also a little worme or mite. Als odeere, or gladly. Acasa, at home, home. Acaso, by chance, by fortune, by hap. Acaualcioni, stradling as men vse to ride. Acauallo acauallo, in post haste, a snatch and away. Also a march sounded vpon the trumpet. Acausache, bicause that, forsomuch as. Acca, the letter h. Accadere, Accaduto, to happen, to be∣fall, to chance, to neede. Accaffare, as Acceffare. Also as Vnci∣nare. Accagionare, as Occasionare. Also to blame or accuse. Accaldare, to chafe, heate or warme. Accampanare, to settle or hang vp in any frame: to bring into due forme or fashion. Accampare, to encampe, beleager or lay siege vnto. Accanalare, to chamfure, to make gutter or chanell wise, to enchanell. Accanalatura, a chaneling or chamfu∣ring, a furrowing. Accanellare, as Accanalare. Also to dresse with cinnamond. Accannare, to pearce, pricke, or streake with canes, reedes or goades. Also to fill vp to the throte. Accaneggiare, to bite, beset or baite with dogs. Accanneggiare, as Accannare. Accantonare, as Cantonare. Accantoniere, as Cantoniere. Accapacciato, busied in minde and body, as one ready to lose his wits, entangled in busines. Accapere, to cull, to choose. Accapestrare, to tie or entangle with ropes or halters, to entramell. Accapezzare, to put in a maunde, a hutch or a bin. Accappiare, to entangle, to ensnare, to catch in a springe, to claspe, to entramel, to make in sliding knots. Accappiatura, an entangling or ensna∣ring, a clasping togither, an entrame∣ling or making into sliding knots. Accapigliare, to binde, to tie, to knit. Also to ioyne or wage battell. Also to binde vp a womans haire. Accaponare, to geld, splaie or lib. Accappacciato, as Accapacciato. Accappucciare, to grow hard and round as a cabage or hard lettice doth. Accapricciarsi, to looke staringly, to be affrighted til ones haire stand for feare, to take a humour. Accarezzare, to cherish, to cocker, make much of, or entertaine louingly. Accarrezzeuole, as Carezzeuole. Accarierare, to bring or teach a horse to cariere. Accarnare, to flesh, to enter a dog, to in∣carnate, to become flesh. Accarno, as Acarno. Accarpionare, to dresse any maner of fish with vineger to be eaten colde, which at Southampton they call marling of fish. Accasare, to marrie, to ally, to ioyne house to house. Accascare, as Accadere. Accasciare, to bruise, to squat, to squease, to make flat. Also to crud as milke doth. Also to diminish or weare. Accastiare, to fall heauily, to bruise in falling. Accattamenti, borrowings, shiftings, findings, gettings. Also entertainments. Accattarrato, as Accattaroso. Accattabrighe, as Cattabrighe. Accattaroso, reumatick, ful of catarrhes. Accattare, to get, to borrow, to shift for, to acquire. Also to beg vp and downe. Accattatore, a getter, a borrower, a shif∣ter, a purchaser, a begger. Accattatozzi, a begger of scraps, mam∣mocks or broken peeces of meate. Accattalingua, a borrower or getter of the word or language. Accattastare, to pile or heape vp orderly as they do billets. Accatti, purchases, gettings, gaines, pro∣fits, vailes. Also borrowings. Accauigliare, to stringe silke or giue it a glasse. Accauigliatore, a stringer of silke. Accecare, as Acciecare. Accedere, Accedo, Accedei, Acce∣duto, to come, to arriue, to approach, to haue accesse vnto, to assent or agree vnto. Acceffare, to take by the snowte, to roote, to busse or beake as a hog doth.
Accegia, a moore hen. Some take it for a woodcocke. Accelerare, to hasten, to dispatch or make speede. Accendere, Accendo, Accesi, Acce∣so, to kindle, to enflame, to light, to pro∣uoke. Also vsed in Florence for to curse, to banne, to chafe and sweare. Accendimento, an enflaming, an en∣kindling, a burning, a blazing, a prouo∣king. Accennamento, as Cenno. Accennare, to becken, to nod, to make a signe or glance at any thing a far off, to giue an inkling. Accensione, an enkindling or enflaming, a chafing. Accenso, Acceso, enflamed, kindled, set on fire, prouoked, chased. Accentare, to accent or giue a due sound to any word or letter, to tune. Accento, an accent or due sound ouer any word or letter. Accentuare, as Accentare. Accerchiare, to hoop, to compasse or en∣circle about. Accerrimo, cruell, sell, moodie. Accertare, to certifie, to assure, to war∣rant, to ascertaine. Accertamento, an assurance, a warrant, a certificate, a certaintie. Acceruire, Acceruisco, Acceruito, to heape or huddle vp togither. Acceruo, a heape, a huddle, a bundle, a hay cocke: a masse. Acceso, as Accenso. Accessione, an encreasing, augmentation or eeking. as Accesso. Accesso, accesse, approach or entrance vnto. Also a fit of an ague, or a qualme ouer the stomacke. Also an encreasing or a flowing: a sconce. Accessore, an accessorie, a consenter or approcher vnto. Accessorio, accessarie, consenting vnto, approching vnto. Accetta, an hatchet or an adze. Accettabile, as Accetto. Accettabolo, a kinde of plant: a certaine measure: a iuglers boxe. Also the hol∣lownes or pan wherein the huckle bone turneth. Also a kinde of instrument of musicke or pipe. Accettare, to accept, to take, to receiue. Accettar l'inuito, to accept an offer or bidding when one is inuited. Accettatione, an acceptation, a taking or receiuing. Accetteuole, as Accetto. Accetto, acceptable, gratefull: in good woorth. Also accepted. Accheggia, as Accegia. Acchenea, an ambling nag or gelding, a hackney. Acchetare, to appease, to quiet, to as∣swage, to mitigate, to hush, to still. Acchetatione, an appeasing, a mitigati∣on, a stilling, a quieting. Accheteuole, quiet, peacable, pliable, gentle, easie to be intreated. Acchiappare, to take, to catch, to lay hold on by the buttocks, to take napping. Acchinea, as Acchenea. Accia, any yarne that is to be wouen: spinning, cruell or statute yarne. A hat∣chet or a chopping knife, an axe or chip∣axe. Acciaio, Acciaro, the mettall steele. Acciapinare, to miche, to shrug or sneake in some corner, and with powting and lips shew some anger, as an ape being beaten will, grinning with his teeth. Accialino, a steele to strike fire with: the swiuell of a chaine. Acciare, to mince, to shred or chop small with a chopping knife. Accidente, an accident, a chance, a hap. Also a fit of an ague. Accidentale, accidentall, casuall, subiect to fortune. Accidia, sloth, lazines, idlenes, slothful∣nesse. Accidioso, idle, slothfull, lazie, slowe. Acciecare, to blinde, to enueagle, to hood∣winke. Acciecatura, a blindnes, an enueagling. Accieffare, as Acciuffare. Accigliare, to seele a pigeons eies. Also to looke staringly. Accimatura, as Cimatura. Accimare, to sheare clothes, to top or lop trees, to clip or to pare. Also to trim, to dresse, to pranke vp: to girde, to prepare or make ready to do some thing. Accingere, to girde about, to prepare ones selfe to do some thing. Accino, a crane to drawe vp any thing with. The wheele of a well wherein the chaine goes. The kernels, graines or seeds that be in any fruit, a grape stone. Accinoso, full of kernels, graines or seedes. Accioccare, as Accoccare. Also to tust, to betassell or reduce into locks. Acciò, to the end, that, bicause, forsomuch, to that purpose. Accioche, that, to the end that, bicause that, least that or enaunter. Acciocche viole, a kinde of violets. Accipensero, a fish hauing the scales tur∣ned toward the head, and swimmeth against the streame. Some take it for the sturgion or elops, or stuer. Accismare, to molest, to vexe, to trouble, to grieue, to afflict: to be headstrong and obstinate: to diuide. Acciucche, trifles, nifles, toies, vanities. Acciuga, a kinde of minced meate or gal∣limaufrie. Also a kinde of fruite. Acciuffare, to gripe, to seazeon, to pinch, to catch or clinch by the snoute. Acciuire, Acciuisco, Acciuito, to put to exchange, to barter or trucke for pro∣fit, to get, to procure, to atchieue, or to shift for: to bring to passe. Acclamare, to exclame, to crie out, to call vnto. Acclamatione, an acclamation, a calling vnto, a hue and crie. Acclinare, to incline, to bende or stoupe vnto. Acclino, inclined, bent, stouping, addi∣cted. Acclinatione, an inclining, bending or stouping vnto. Accobalista, Looke Balista. Accoccare, to fasten a iest vpon one: to make one swallow a gudgeon: to sticke or cleaue vnto, to nocke. Accoccatura, a iest, a gudgeon, a faste∣ning of a iest vpon one: a sticking vnto. Accoccolare, to coure or squat downe close to the ground. Accodare, to set or fasten a taile vpon one. Accodunare, to gather or assemble togi∣ther, to heape vp. Accogliere, Accolgo, Accolsi, Accol∣to, to receiue or entertaine with loue and affection: to gather, to reape or assemble togither. Accoglienza, friendly entertainment▪ a collecting togither. Accolare, as Accollare. Accola, a sea swallow, or a sea reare∣mouse. Accollanare, to adorne with chaines of golde. Accollare, to coll, to hug, to imbrace about the necke. Accollatura, a colling, a hugging or im∣bracing. Accoltellarsi, to buckle togither and fight with cutting weapons. Accolto, receiued or entertained louing∣ly: reaped, gathered, collected, assem∣bled. Accomandare, to recommende or be∣queath vnto. Accombiatare, as Accomiatare. Accomiatare, to dismisse, to discharge, to giue licence to depart, to take leae. Accomitare, to accompanie, to associate.
Accomodamento, an ordring, setling or agreeing of a matter: a bestowing, a placing, a lending. Accomodare, to lend, to accommodate, to ease, to borrow, to bestowe, to place, to stowe. Accomodo, at ease, commodiously, by lone, in good plight. Accompagnate, to accompanie, to asso∣ciate. Accompagnamento, a companying to∣gither. Accompagnatura, a coupling of com∣panies. Accompire, to accomplish, to atchieue, to finish, to end. Accomunare, to publish or make com∣mon. Acconciare, to mende, to dresse, to re∣dresse, to set in order, to piece, to order, to settle, to make handsome: to ease, to reforme, to repaire, to dight. Acconciamento, a mending, a dressing, a setling, an ordring, a reforming, an attiring. Acconciastagni, a tinker, a mender of pewter. Acconciatore, a reformer, a dresser, a mender, a setler, an ordrer. Acconciatura, as Acconciamento. Acconciatamente, handsomely, orderly, properly, in good sort. Acconcio, well ordred, handsome, setled in good sort, mended, drest, at ease. Also an ease or conueniencie. Acconcimi, mendings, reparations, or∣drings, dressings. Accone, a fish called in Latine Agonus. Acconsentire, to consent, to yeelde, to grant or condescend vnto. Acconsentiente, consenting, accessarie, yeelding vnto. Acconsentimento, a consent, a grant, a yeelding or condescending. Accontare, to count, to reckon, to num∣ber. Accontentare, to content, to appease, to satisfie. Acconto, a reckoning, an account. Also in part of paiment, towards. Acconuenire, as Conuenire. Accoppare, to knocke on the head and fel as a butcher doth an oxe. Accoppiare, to couple, to yoke or ioyne togither. Accoppiatura, a coupling a yoking or ioyning togither. Accorare, to grieue, to pang or pinch at the hart. as Incorare. Accorato, grieued or toucht at the hart: hartie, true, louing, passionate. Accorataggine, griefe or panting at the hart: hartie affection. Accorciare, to shorten, to clip, to cut off, to curtall, to pare, to abridge. Accorciatura, an abridgement, a shorte∣ning, a curtalling, a paring, a clipping. Accordare, to agree, to accord, to attone, to consent, to grant vnto or with: to tune an instrument. Accordare col fornaio, to bee well to liue: to haue no neede of bread: to keepe the wolfe from doore. Also to die. Accordo, Accordamento, an accord, an agreement, a consent, an attonement, a tuning. Accordeuole, agreeable, to be accorded, tunable. Accórgere, Accorgo, Accorsi, Accor∣to, to perceiue, to foresee, to be aware. Accorgimento, warines, foresight, craft, wilines, wit. Accorrere, to run, flie or flocke vnto. Accorri, helps, succors, assistance. Accorri huomo hue and crie for helpe. Accortare, as Accorciare. Accortamente, warily, wisely, craftily, cunningly, with foresight, wittily. Accortezza, as Accorgimento. Accorto, aware, perceiued, foreseene, wa∣rie, wise, wily, wittie, craftie, foresee∣ing. Accorrucciare, to be angrie, to anger, to vexe, to fret, to moue, to be wroth. Accorruccieuole, angrie, fretful, wrath∣full, subiect to anger. Accorruccioso, as Accorruccieuole. Accosciare, to sit or cowre as women and tailors do: to ioyne thighes. Accostare, to approch, to come neare, to ioyne side to side. Accostamento, an approching or ioyning side to side. Accostante, familiar, milde, gentle, easie to be acquainted with: a kinde of briske and well rellishing wine. Accostiare, as Accosciare. Accostiatamente, cowring or sitting lowe. Accosto, neare, by, ioyning vnto. Accostumare, to accustome, to vse, to be woont: to nourture or bring vp to good education and manners. Accostumato, accustomed, woont, vsed, well brought vp, ciuil, mannerly. Accostumeuole, vsuall, woont. Accostumatamente, mannerly, ciuilly, customably, according to good nourture. Accottonare, to cotton or set a nap vpon. Accouare, to hatch, to lie close as a hen ouer hir chickens, to squat, to coue. Accouerare, to haue recourse, or attaine vnto: to get shelter, countenante or protection: to recouer. Accozzare, to but: to shock: to encoun∣ter or entershocke as rams do: to ioyne, to fit, to vnite, to put togither, to shuffle or shake togither. Accozzamento, an entershocking, a shocke, a butting, a violent meeting: a putting, fitting or ioyning togither: a shuffling of cardes: a shaking of the dice. Accozzatura, as Accozzamento. Accquietae, as Acquetare. Accrescere, to increase, to accrease, to adde vnto, to augment, to growe, to multiplie, to spring, to accrew, to eeke. Accrescimento, encrease, accrease, pro∣fit, aduancement, accrew, eeking. Accrestare, to set a crest or a coxcombe vpon one. Accrestimento, as Accrescimento. Accrosture, to harden or bring to a crust. Accubiare, to drawe in a slipor a leash as a dog, to couple vp dogs. Accuire, as Aguzzare. Accumare, as Accumulare. Accumulare, to heape vp, to lay vp in store, to heord vp. Accumulatore, a heaper, a gatherer, a sauer, a hoorder. Accupare, to occupie, to vse or to pos∣sesse. Accupatore, an occupier, an vser, a pos∣sessor. Accuratamente, diligently, curiously, exactly, studiously, warily. Accuratezza, curiousnes, exactnes, dili∣gence, warines, precisenes. Accurato, diligent, curious, exact, studi∣ous, slie, warie, precise. Accurbare, to bend or make crooked. Accusa, an accusation. Accusare, to accuse. Accusatione, an accusation. Accusatiuo, the accusatiue case. Accusatore, an accuser. Acento, Acentinaia, by hundreds, by an hundred at once. Acerbare, to make sowre or sharpe: to exasperate, to waxe cruell or eager. Acerbamente, sowrely, sharply, cruelly, seuerely, eagerly, bitterly, hardly. Acerbezza, sowrenes, sharpnes, eagernes, tartnes, crueltie, hardnes. Acerbitá, as Acerbezza. Acerbo, sowre, sharpe, tart, cruell, bitter, seuere, eager, vnripe. Acerco, about, wheeling, circling. Acerrimo, most eager, sharpe, tart, fell, cruell, fierce, sore, vehement. Acero, the maple tree, or wood.
Acetare, to make or waxe sowre like vi∣neger. Acetosa, the herbe Sorrell or Sowrell. Acetosella, as Acetosa. Aceto, vineger or alliger. Acetoso, sowre, sharpe, or tart like vi∣neger. Achante, as Acante. Ache? to what end? wherefore? for what purpose? to what? Ache egl è dentro? fast or loose: in or out? as iuglers vse to say. Ache egli è fuora? out or in? Ache effetto? to what end or purpose? Achefare? what to do? Ache fine? to what end or purpose? Ache guisa? in what sort? how? Ache modo? how? in what maner? Ache proposito? to what purpose? Achemene, an herbe, which as some write being cast into an armie, will make the soldiers to be in feare and run away. Achetare, as Acchetare. Achi? to whom? for whom? Achia, a fish called a mullet. Achilea, the herbe Milfoile, Nosebleede or Yarrow. Achirade, Achirada, a kinde of herbe. Achiusi occhij, hood winkt, blindfold. Aciaio, Aciaro, steele. Acialino, as Accialino. Acialare, to steele or temper with steele. Acicula, a horne fish or hornebacke. Acido, sowre, sharpe or tart in relish. Acie, the front of an armie, a battell ar∣ray: a squadron or maine battell: the edge or point of any toole or weapon. Acidari, a kinde of hat, broad about the brim, and sharpe and winding vpward. Aciloffo, Andar aciloffo, to go sleepe or snort, to go fizle or fiste. Aciliaca, an ague proceeding of corrup∣tion of humors. Acino, as Accino. Acipensero, as Accipensero. Aco, Ago, a needle. Aco a pomo, a pin with a head. Aco da pomolo, a pin. Acolito, a resolute man, one that will not be brought from an opinion. Acomparare, to compare, to confront to∣gither. Acomparatione, in comparison, in re∣spect. Acompitare, to spell or reade distinctly. Acompito, distinctly, syllable by syllable Aconcorenza, striuing one with another. Aconito, a venemous herbe called Wolfes bane. Aconscienza ritta, with a ready consci∣ence, with a stiffe standing pricke. Acontia, a firie impression in the aire like a dart. Also a kinde of swift gliding serpent of colour greene. Acopi, medicines, plaisters or ointments to cure wearines, or vnlustines of the bodie. Acorataggine, as Accorataggine. Acoro, the sweete Cane: or as some thinke the great Galingale or false Calamus. Acorataggini, sobs or pantings drawne from the hart: blubbrings. Acorpo di cauallo, within the length of an horse. Acorrhuomo. Looke Acorrihuomo. Acqua, any kinde of water. Acqua dilatte, clarified whay of milke. Acqua d' orgio, barly water or tysane. Acqua nanfa, sweete washing water. Acqua rosa, rose water. Acqua viua, running spring water. Acqua morta, standing puddle water. Acqua vite, Aquauite, aqua composita. Acqua piouana, raine water. Acquaio, a cesterne for water. Acquaiuole herbe, all manner of herbes growing by or in the waters. Acquaiuole, a kinde of winde-galles full of water in a horse. Acquare, to water, to sprinkle, to ouer∣flowe. Acquarella, a little brooke or water. wa∣trish matter running from sores. Also washt or water colours. Acquarello, an eawer to giue water with. Also a kinde of small single wine. Acquario, one of the twelue signes named Aquarius. Acquastante, standing water. Acquaruolo, a water man. Also a wa∣terbearer. Acquastrino, that groweth or liueth in the water. Acquattare, to hide or squat as a hare doth. Acquatelle, a kinde of fresh water fish. Acquatico, as Acquazzoso. Vccello acquatico, a water fowle. Acquazzoso, waterish, plashie, full of water, moist, fennie, moorish. Acquedotto, a water conduit. Acquèo, a waterie colour. Acquetta, a little brooke or water. Acquetare, as Acchetare. Acquietare, as Acchetare. Acquifoglio, as Agrifoglio. Acquisitione, acquisition, obtaining, pro∣curing, purchasing. Acquistare, to purchase, to get, to obtaine, to acquire, to conquer. Acquisto, a purchase, a getting, an obtai∣ning, a conquest. Acquone, a fish called in Latine Agonus. Acquosità, waterishnes. Acquoso, as Acquazzoso. Acre, as Agro. Acredenza, vpon trust or credit, for day, for time, at trust. Acreditare, to trust or credit, or giue daies of paiment. Acredito, as Acredenza. Acrepacuore, at harts ease, as a mans hart would wish, wallowing at ease. As we say, hold belly hold. Some take it in the contrarie sense, against ones will or hart. Acrestare, as Accrestare. Acrimonia, as Agrimonia. Acrimonio, as Agrimonio. Acrisia, want of iudgement and wit. Acrita, sharpnes or sowrenes. Acro, as Agro. Acrocordone, a kinde of warts so small at the rootes, that they seeme to hang by a sinew. Acrume, as Agrume. Acuino, a hornfish or hornbacke. Acuire, as Aguzzare. Aculeo, a pinne, a pricke, a thorne or a sting. Acume, the sharpnes of the sight or wit of man. Also wit. Acutezza, sharpnes, policie, subtiltie, vi∣nacitie of wit or sight. Acuto, sharpe pointed, keene, subtill, wit∣tie, politike, wilie, warie, ingenious. Al∣so a pin or peg of wood. Ad, ioyned to a noune is a signe of the da∣tiue case, to, vnto, at, at the. As A. Ad, ioyned with a verbe is a preposition, for, to, for to, at, by, through. As A. Ad, with verbes of priuation is a signe of the ablatiue, from. As A. Adacquare, to water, as men do wine, gardens or herbes, or cattell. Adagiare, to accommodate, to settle, to place, to sit or ly at ease: to fit or plea∣sure. Adagio, at leasure, at ease, faire and soft∣ly, by little and little. Also a prouerbe, an adage or wittie saying. Adamante, a diamond, an adament. Adamantino, adamantine, hard as dia∣mond, hard, cruell, sterne. Adami, a kinde of ducke, mallard or wi∣gin. Adanda, a kinde of diuiding in arithm∣ticke that marchants vse. Adano, as Adeno. Adare, to be aware or circumspe per∣ceiue, to foresee. Adarmacollo, armed about the cke, imbracing or colling wise, hugging.
Adastare, to striue, to contend, to vexe, to molest, to prouoke or set on. Adastiare, as Adastare. Adasto, griefe, vexation, strife. Adatamente, warily, circumspectly, sub∣tily, formally, fitly. Adattare, as Addattare. Adda, a kinde of roote. Addare, as Adare. Addato, wise, warie, subtill, circumspect. Addattare, to fit, to accommodate or ap∣propriate any thing. Addebolire, as Indebolire. Addegnare, to make woorthie, to daygne or vouchsafe. Addempire, to fulfill, atchieue or accom∣plish. Addentare, to seaze, to catch hold, to bite, to nip, to pinch as a dog doth a deere: to indent any worke: to engraile as some things in armorie are. Addestrare, to teach, to instruct, to tame, to reclaime, to fit, to enable, to make nim∣ble. Also to adapt, to accommodate or sute vnto, to soothe one vp, to followe ones humour or bias. Addimandare, to demande, to aske, to question, to name, to nominate, to call by name. Addire, that is to say, id est, to wit, to speake. Addiscere, to learne. Additare, to point at with the fingers. Additione, an addition, an adiunct. Addito, in sight, in view, at gaze, to be pointed at. Addobbare, to adorne, to set foorth, to attire, to enrobe, to dresse, to acoutre, to array, to dight. Addobbamento, an enrobing, an ador∣ning or costly rayment. Addocchiare, to eie, to looke, to marke, to gaze vpon or take view of. Addogliare, to grieue, to smart, to ake, to vexe, to oppresse or afflict. Addolcire, to sweeten, to appease or as∣swage. Addolorare, as Addogliare. Addomandare, as Addimandare. Addomesticare. Looke Domesticare. Addoppiare, as Doppiare. Addormentare, to lull asleepe, to fall a∣sleepe, to slumber, to make to sleepe. Addormire, as Addormentare. Addossare, to lay or heape vpon ones back, to loade or heape vpon. Addosso, as Adosso. Addottrinare, as Adottrinare. Addotto, alleaged, produced, brought. Addozzenare, to make vp or set in do∣zens. Addrizzare, as Indrizzare. Adduare, to double two by two. Adducere, Addotto, to alleage, to pro∣duce, to bring, to leade, to bring to passe. Adduggiare, to bewitch, to charme, to en∣chant, to forspeake: to darken. Adduggiato, bewitched, charmed, forspo∣ken, ill, vnluckie, fatall, hard, darke. Adduggiatore, a witch, an enchanter, a sorcerer, a charmer. Addurre, as Adducere. Adeguare, to equall, to eeuen, to match, to compare, to consort. Adello, as Adena. Adempimento, a fulfilling, an accompli∣shing. Adempire, as Addempire. Adena, a kinde of fish called in Latine Attilus. Adentare, as Addentare. Adentellare, to prop, to vnderhold, to sup∣port, to lay a ground for. It is properly to ietty out, or indent stones or timber of any vnfinished building, that another may the easier be ioyned vnto, or that finished. Adentellato, an outbutting, or out-ietty of an vnfinished worke, the ground∣worke of another building. Adentro, within, deepely in, far in, in∣wardly. Adescare, to allure, to entice, to seeke to catch by bait or hooke. Adescamento, Adescatura, an allure∣ment, a baite, an enticement. Adesso, now, at this instant, presently, by and by. Adess' adesso, now now, euen now, at this very instant. Adestare, to awaken, to rowze, to stir vp. Adestrare, as Addestrare. Adherbare, to grase, to feede with grasse, to go to grasse. Adetta, by, at, or vpon report. Adherente, adherent, coherent, taking part with. Adherenza, adherencie, coherencie, affi∣nitie. Adherire, to adhere, to cohere, to take part with. Adhora, now, at this instant, at times, some times. Adhor' adhora, now now, euen now, by times, at times. Adhorrire, to feare with horror. Adhuggere, Adhuggiuto, to shadow, to obscure, to darken, to trouble, to hate, to burne, to consume, to swallow vp. Adhuggiare, as Adduggiare. Adianto, an herbe called Venus haire or Maidenshaire. Adiacente, adiacent, neare bounding: neare vnto. Adietro, behinde, after: in times past: heretofore. Adiettiuo, an adiectiue noune. Adigiuno, early: fasting, before any fee∣ding. Adiguazzare, to dash, to plash, to bedab∣ble in the water: to make good cheere. Adiguazzo, in sport, merily, making good cheere. Adilongo, at large, at length: forthright. Adimaino, a beast in India of the bignesse of an asse, with wooll and hornes as a sheepe. Adimma, as Adimaino. Adimare, to descende, sinke, fall or goe downe. Adimesticare, as Domesticare. Adinstanza, at the intreatie, at the re∣quest: for the loue. Adinuenire, to encounter, to meete or to finde by the may. Adio, fare yee well, God bee with you, adiew. Adio non piaccia, God forbid, Gods∣forbode. Adipene posteme, as Adipina. Adipina, a bile, a blaine, a sore, an impo∣stume full of fat matter. Adirare, to anger, to vexe, to grieue, to enrage. Adiritto, foorthright, straight on, directly foorth, point blanke. Adirittura, as Adiritto. Adiroso, wrathfull, angrie, fretting, sub∣iect to anger, refull. Adismisura, beyond measure, vnmeasu∣rably. Adispetto, in despite, manger, against ones will. Aditare, as Additare. Adíto, as Addito. Adito, accesse, way or approch, or entrance vnto. Aditto, addicted or inclined vnto. Adiuenire, as Auenire. Adiuenimento, as Auenimento. Adiurare, to abiure, to renounce. Adiuratione, an abiuration, a renoun∣cing. Adiustare. Looke Aggiustare. Admettere, as Ammettere. Administrare, as Amministrare. Administratione, as Amministrati∣one. Administratore, as Amministratore. Adocchiare, as Addocchiare. Adoganiere, as Doganiere. Adogho, as Adogo. Adogni hora, at all times, euer.
Adogni modo, howsoeuer, all manner of waies. Adogni tempo, at all times, euer. Adogo quasi adunamento di feuda∣tarij, a beneuolence or gift of subiects to their king or prince. Also that which we call to hold in Knights seruice. Adolomato, troubled with a cricke or wrinch in the necke or backe. Adolorare, as Addolorare. Adoloscenza, childhood or youth. Adoloscentulo, a childe, a youth, a yong lad. Adomandare, as Addimandare. Adombrare, to darken, to obscure or ouershadow: to start or giue backe for feare, as some horses will do at the sha∣dow of some thing. Adonare, as Adunare, to giue vnto. Adoncia adoncia, by ounces, ounce by ounce. Adonestare, to make honest: to excuse. Adonta, in despite, manger, in reproch, in wrong. Adontare, to despite, to iniurie, to wrong, to be or make ashamed. Adoperare, to vse, to occupie, to imploy or to worke withall. Adoppiare, as Addoppiare. Adoppio, double, doubly. Adoprare, as Adoperare. Adorare, to adore, to worship, to reue∣rence. Adoratione, adoration, worship or reue∣rence. Adorcare, to harrow, to grub or breake ciods of earth. Adoreza, ashadow, a shade or darknes of trees or boughes. Adorezare, to shade, to shadow or obscure with trees or leaues. Adormentare, as Addormentare. Adornare, to adorne, to beautifie, to deck, to trim, to dight, to embellish. Adornamento, Adornezza, ornament, beautie, trimming, trappings: embel∣lishing, garnishment. Adossare, as Addossare. Adosso, on, vpon, vpon ones backe, about one. Adottione, adoption or endowment. Adottiuo, adoptiue or fostred. Adottare, to adopt, to endow, to foster vp. Adottorare, to take the degree of doctor, to doctor. Adottrinare, to teach, to instruct, to en∣doctrine. Adro, Atro, blacke, pitchie, filthie, sootie, duskie, gloomie, sable, obscure. Adua, Adue, Aduo, two by two, two and two togither: a dewce at tennice play, that is two strokes for it. Aduare, to double two and two togither. Adue, as Adua. Aduedere, as Accorgere. Aduerbio, as Auuerbio. Aduersario, as Auersario. Aduersità, as Auersità. Aduerso, as Auerso. Aduilire. Looke Auilire. Aduggiare, as Adduggiare. Aduicinare, as Auicinare. Aduincere, as Auincere. Adulare, to flatter, to fawne or to blan∣dish: to clawe with one. Adulatione, flatterie, adulation, faw∣ning, blandishment. Adusatore, a flatterer, a cogger, a fawner, a clawbacke. Adulatrice, a woman flatterer or blan∣disher. Adulta, a woman mariage-able. Adulterare, to commit adulterie or forni∣cation, to adulterate, corrupt or sophi∣sticate. Adulterino, a base, bastard or degenerate fellow: false, sophisticated. Adultério, fornication, corruption, vn∣cleannes of life. Adultero, an adulterer, a fornicator, a lecher, an vncleane liuer. Also false, counterfeit or sophisticated. Adulto, growne, well sproong vp. Aduna, togither, with, in companie. Adunare, to assemble, to congregate, to ga∣ther togither. Adunanza, an assemblie, a congregation. Aduncare, to bende or make crooked, to bow downwards. Adunco, Naso adunco, crooked, bending or like an eagles beake. Adunghiare, to catch, seaze on or take hold with ones nailes, clawes or pounces. Aduno aduno, one by one, one at once, by one and one. Adunque, then, therefore. Adun tratto, at once, at a cast, at a draught, at a throwe: roundly away. Aduo, as Adua. Aduo aduo, by two and two, two and two togither. Aduocare, as Auocare. Aduocato, as Auocato. Aduolo, mourning. Vestito aduolo, clad in mourning attire. Adusanza, like, as, according, after the manner. Adusare, to vse or accustome, to be woont. Adustare, to burne, to scorch, to parch or consume with heate, to tan. Adustibile, that may be burned, parched: burning, scorching. Adustione, consuming, soultrie, parching heate: a tanning in the sunne. Adustiuo, burning, parching, tanning. Adusto, adust, burnt, scorched, parched, scalded, tanned. Aelio, a kinde of hawke. Aello, a name of a dog, as much to say tempest. Aerare, to aire, to weather, to hang vp in the aire. Aere, the element aire: a countenance, a looke, a cheere, an aspect, a presence or apparance of man or woman. Also a tune, a sound, a note, or an ayre of mu∣sicke or any ditty. Also a kind of wood good to make oares with. Aeréo, ayrie, of the nature of the ayre. Aeromantia, diuination of things by the ayre. Aerone, a bird called a hearon. Aeroso, ayrie, full of ayre, full of counte∣nance, cheerfulnes or good aspect. Aetite, boras or solder to solder mettals. Afa, hath been vsed for tediousnes or an∣noiance. Afaca, a kinde of wilde weede growing among corne. Affabile, gentle, kinde, courteous, affable, gracious, debonaire. Affabilire, to make or become gentle, kind, courteous or affable. Affabilità, affabilitie, kindnes, courtesie, gentlenes. Affabilmente, kindly, louingly, gently, courteously. Affacere, as Confare. Affachinarsi, to play the porter or base fellow, to become base minded. Affaccia affaccia, afaccia afaccia, face to face: in view or sight one of another. Affacciare, to appeere or looke out of a window: to face, to outface: to come before ones face. Affagianare, to persume or season meates, to dresse feasans-like. Affalcare, is properly taken when the horse doth stop and stay vpon his hinder partes. Affaldare, to fold vp, to wrinkle, to puc∣ker, to pleit. Affaldatura, a folding, a wrinkle, a puc∣kring in any clothes, a pleting. Affalsare, to falsifie, to counterseit. Affamare, to famish or hungerstarue. Affangare, to bemire; to bedirt, to dash with dirt or mire. Affannare, to grieue, to vexe, to molest or trouble in minde. Affanno, griefe, vexation, sorow or trou∣ble of minde: dreriment. Affannoso, full of griefe, sorow or vexa∣tion
of minde: drerie. Afare? Afare sia, nay, if it be so? do your worst, I care not for you. Affare, as Confare. Affarinare, to white with flower or meale. Affarsi, to beseeme, to be seemely, to be con∣uenient, to agree with. Affasciare, to swathe, to binde or tie about: to huddle vp, to sheaue. Affascinare, to bewitch, to forspeake, to charme with lookes or words. Also to fagot or binde vp as a fagot or bauin. Affascinatione, Affascinamento, a be∣witching, forspeaking, or charming with lookes or wordes. Affascinatore, a bewitcher or charmer with lookes or words. Affasgianare, as Affagianare. Affastellare, to gather togither into sheaues, bundles or fardles. Affastidire, Affastidito, to tire, to weary, to trouble, to vexe, to be tedious vnto. Affatare, to enchant, to forspeake or charm as Fairies are said to do. Affaticare, Affatigare, to labour, to toile, to moile: to tire, to wearie, to en∣deuour. Affatica, Afatica, hardly, scarcely, with much ado. Affatocchiare, as Affascinare, to vse sorcerie, to bewitch. Affatocchiara, a witch, a sorceresse. Affatucchiare, as Affatocchiare. Affaturare, as Affatocchiare. Affatto, Afatto, wholy, altogither, tho∣roughly, vtterly, incomplete manner. Affè, in good faith, by my faith. Affebbrare, to take or haue an ague. Affedare, to trust, to giue faith or credit, to warrant, to assure, to affie, to enfeoffe. Affede, Affè, Afè, in good faith, in good troth, in sooth, by my faith. Afferesi, a figure which taketh a letter or syllable from the beginning of a word. Affermare, to confirme, to affirme, to as∣sure, to stand to. Affermagione, Affermatione, an affir∣mation, an assurance. Affermatiuo, affirmatiue, sure, assuring. Affetrare, to gripe, to grapple, to snatch, to clinch or seaze on violently. Afferro e fuoco, put to fire and sword: to vtter destruction. Aferro di cauallo. Looke Briglie. Affettare, to affect, to desire, to wish, to imitate curiously: to go against the haire, to slice, to mince. Affettatione, affectation, a desire of that which nature hath not giuen: curio∣sitie. Affettatuzzo, somewhat affected, nice, coy, minion, ouerweening or selfe-con∣ceited, ouercurious. Affettionare, to affectionate, to loue or beare good will vnto. Affettionato, affected, affectionated, ad∣dicted. Affettione, affection, loue, kindnes or good will. Also a desire. Affetto, an affect, a motiue, a disposition, a passion. Also affected, inclined, addi∣cted, tied, bound or liable vnto. Affettuoso, affectionate, following the disposition or passion of another. Afette, mincingly, by slices, by collops, by line and measure. Affia, Afia, a kinde of fish. Affiatare, to breath, to drawe breth. Affibbiare, to buckle, to claspe, to lace or tie togither. Affibbiatura, a buckling, clasping, lacing or tying togither. Afficcare, to thrust, to driue in or fixe in hardly. Affidare, to assure, to credit, to giue trust, credit or faith vnto. Affidanza, vpon trust, vpon credit, at credit, at trust, affiance. Affiggere, Affiggo, Affisi, Affisso, or Affitto, to fixe, to fasten, to stick vnto, to nàile fast vnto, to cleane vnto. Affigurare, to view, to marke, to gaze vpon, to take notice of. Affila, Afila, in ranks, in order, in files as soldiers march. Afildispada, to the edge of the sword. Affilare, to grinde, to whet, to make sharpe or set an edge vpon. Affinare, as Affilare. Also to refine or make perfect. Affinatore, a refiner, a perfecter of any thing. Also a sheare grinder. Affinunundo, at the worldes end, till the world lasts. Affino, a kinsman by mariage or bobtaile. Affiocare, to growe hoarse in speaking. Affioccare, to flake as snowe doth: to hang with locks or tassels: to burst out in laughter: to flocke togither, to come thicke and threefold. Affioccamente, pelmell, thick and three∣fold, in flocking maner. Affirmare, as Affermare. Affirmatione, as Affermagione. Affirmatiuo, as Affermatiuo. Affissare, Affisare, as Affiggere. Affissatione, a fixing or fastening togi∣ther. Affisso, Affiso, fixed, set on or made fast vnto: an affixe, a thing fixt to ano∣ther. Affittaiuolo, as Affittuale. Affittare, to rent, to hire, to sarme or de∣mise. Affittatore, Affittaruolo, a farmer, a landlord, a letter. Also a tenant. Affittagione, Affittatione, a fee-farme, a letting or demising. Affitti, rents, reuenues, profits that come of rents. Affitto, Afitto, by rent, in farme, by lease, for rent, a fee-farme, a renting: fixed, fastned or nailed vnto. Affittuale, a landlord or farmer that ta∣keth rent. Also a tenant. Affiubare, as Affibbiare. Afflare, to blow, to breath or draw breth, to blast. Also to fill with winde. Afflato, a blast, a winde, an inspiration, a blowing, a breathing, an aspiration. Affliggere, Affliggo, Afflissi, Afflitto, to afflict, to trouble, to vexe, to molest. Afflittiuo, full of affliction, afflicting. Afflittione, affliction, trouble, vexation, persecution, torment or calamitie. Affluenza, confluence, affluence, flowing, store, abundance. Affocare, to kindle, to burne, to smoulder, to choke, to stifle, to fire, to neale red hot. Affocato. Looke Saro. Affodello, the herbe Affodill or Daffodil. Affodillo, as Affodello. Affogare, to smother, to smoulder, to sti∣fle, to drowne, to choake, to strangle. Affollare, to breathe or blowe with bel∣lowes, as Ansare. Affoltare, to presse, to thrust, to crowd, to heape, to thicken, to speake very thicke or fast. Affoltata, a hudling speech, a faste, thicke tolde tale. Affondare, to sinke or plunge downe to the bottom, to ouerwhelme. Affondere, as Fondere. Affondo, Afondo, to the bottom, into the deepe. Afforticare, to binde vp, to tucke vp, to trusse vp. Affortificare, to fortifie, to strengthen. Afforismi, Aphorismi, documents, or briefe sentences. Afforzare, to enforce, to force. Affossare, to dike, to ditch or moate about, to make trenches or dikes, to endich. Affra, Afra, a kinde of fish. Affrangere, as Frangere. Affrappare, as Frappare. Affrappatore, as Frappatore. Affratellare, to become brotherly or lo∣uing togither. Affreddare, to coole, to make or take colde.
Affrenare, to bridle, to refraine, to re∣straine. Affreno, Afreno, in awe, bridled, re∣strained, in feare. Affrettare, to hasten, to speede, to make haste. Affrezzolare, as Affrettare. Affrico, Africo, the winde Southwest and by west. Affrico austro, the winde Southwest and by north. Affrittellare, to frie, to make like fritters or pancakes. Affrodisiace, a stone which once heated keepes his heate seauen daies. Affrontare, to affront, to encounter, to set vpon, to outface, to conicatch, to cheate. Affrontatore, an afronter, an encountrer, a cosener, a cheater. Affronte Afronte, face to face, opposite, ouer against. Affronto, an affront, a knauish or coni∣catching tricke, an iniurie, a bold part. Affrustare, to whip, to scourge, to swinge, to shiuer or breake in peeces. Affrusto affrusto, by peeces, by scraps, by peecemeale. Affumare, to besmoke, to dry in the smoke as baken is, or ble as hearings. Affumicare, as Affumare. Affuocare, as Affocare. Affuselare, to stretch vpon a frame as painters do canuas to paint vpon it. Affusolare, to shaue, to make or cut small like a spindle. Affusolate gambe, spindle shankes. Affusolato, smugde, trickt vp, spruce, fine, also small or spinie. Affustare, to stocke to breech or mount any ordenance. Agabbo, in iest, in sport, in play. Agaglino, a kinde of coine in Italie. Agala, a flote, swimming as corke vpon the water: smoothly. Agalare, to flote lightly vpon the water. Agapi, a yellow stone good against the stinging of serpents. Agara, striuingly, contending for the ma∣strie. Agarico, a drug called Agarike. Agasilli, the herbe whereof Ammonike is made. Agata, Agatha, a precious stone called an Agate. Agauignare, to binde, to swathe, to claspe fast, to tug, to wrestle. Agauocciare, as Gauocciare. Agente, an agent, a dealer, a doer, a fac∣tor, an embassador, a negotiator. Ageuolare, to make easie. Ageuole, easie, tractable, gentle, kinde, nimble, light, ethe. Ageuolezza, easines, facilitie, nimblenes, dexteritie, agilitie. Aggabbare, as Gabbare. Aggabbo, as Gabbo. Aggeggia, a moore hen. Aggelare, as Gelare. Aggerato, the herbe Cottonweede, golden Stechados or Mothweede. Aggettiuo, a noune adiectiue. Aggetto, abiect, despised, base, outcast. Agghiacciare, as Ghiacciare. Agghiadare, as Ghiacciare. Aggiacente, adiacent, neare bordering, neighbouring. Aggiacciare, as Ghiacciare. Also to vnderprop, to vnderhold, to make sure. Aggielare, to freeze. Aggiontare, as Giontare. Aggiontatore, as Giontatore. Aggiontione, an addition, an adiunct. Aggiornare, to adiorne, to summon, to conuent. Also to waxe day. Aggiornatore, a summoner, an appari∣tor, a conuenter. Aggiramenti, as Giramenti. Aggirare, as Girare and Armeggiare. Aggiugnere, Aggiongo, Aggionsi, Ag∣giunto, to reach, to ouertake, to ioyne, to adioyne, to annexe, to ad, to get, to obtaine, to compasse, to outgo, to ouergo, to ouerreach, to ariue or to come to any place. Aggiungere, as Aggiugnere. Aggiunta, an addition, a vantage, an ouertaking, an ouerreaching. Aggiuntare, as Giontare. Aggiuntatore, as Giontatore. Aggiurare, to adiure, to coniure, to vrge. Aggiustare, as Giustare. Aggobbare, as Gobbare. Aggoluppare, as Goluppare. Aggradare, as Gradire. Aggradire, as Gradire. Aggranchiare, to crampe or haue the crampe. Also to stiffen or benum with cold, to pinch, to scratch, to torture, to seaze or take hold of, to gripe with ones clawes. Aggrandire, Aggrandito, to greaten, to aduance, to prefer, to make great. Aggrappare, to grapple, to gripe, to seaze on fiercely, to take holde, to clime, to clammer, to rampe, to craule vp, to shrinke or drawe togither. Aggrappamento, a grappling, a seazing, a shrinking, a climing. Aggratiare, as Gratiare. Aggratiatino, a gracious, comely pleasing fellow. Aggratta, as Grata. Also a watch tower. Aggratare, as Gradire. Aggratticcare, to fasten, clich, take hold or cling, or grapple, or gripe fast, or to make grater-wise, to make like a hur∣dle, to hurdle: to broile vpon a gridion: to be entangled in some grate or hur∣dle: to be merie and blithe. Aggratigliare, as Aggratticciare. Aggrauare, as Grauare. Aggrauio, as Grauio. Aggrauoso, as Grauoso. Aggregare, to aggregate, to assemble to∣gither. Aggregatione, an assemblie. Aggreuamento, as Grauio. Aggricciare, to affright, to astonie, to make ones haire to stande for feare. Aggricciamenti, astonishments, frigh∣tings, starings. Aggricciolare, to become toyish, foolish, or fantasticall. Aggrinzare, as Grinciare. Aggrizzare, as Aggricciare. Aggroppare, as Groppare. Aggroppamento, as Groppo. Aggropparsi, to knit togither, but proper∣ly when the horse doth knit himself close togither to shewe the strength of his backe. Aggrottare, to make rugged or craggie, to frowne, to scoule, to lowre. Aggrottare le ciglia, to frowne, to lore, to scoule or looke grim. Aggrumare, to heape or scrape togither on a heape. Agguagliare, Aguagliare, to equall, to match, to compare. Agguaglio, as Agguagliaza. Agguaglianza, Aguaglianza, equali∣tie, a match or comparing. Agguerrire, a Aguerrire. Agguindilare, to winde or reele yarne or silke. Agguindilatore, a winder or reeler of silke or yarne. Aghedare, as Ghiacciare. Aghiadare, as Ghiacciare. Aghiado, frost, benummed, stiffed with colde, also perforce, vpon constraint, greeuously with paine and smart. Aghirone, as Aerone. Agiambo, a kinde of steele so called. Agiare, to ease, to accommodate, to settle, to make easie. Agiato, at ease, eased, setled, at pleasure, able to liue, wealthie, commodious. Agiatamente, easily, commodiously, at leysure, pleasantly, at will. Agies, an herbe in India whereof they make good bread, and yet the iuice ther∣of is poison.
Agio, ease, leasure, opportunitie, pleasure, delite, libertie, commoditie. Agile, easie, nimble, light. Agilita, agilitie, nimblenes, lightnes, dexteritie, facilitie, easines. Agilitare, to make easie, nimble, or light. Agimina, a kinde of tapestrie worke so called. Aginina, a kinde of wouen or net worke that women vse to weare ouer tinsell or cloth of golde or siluer, to make it shewe the better. Agioccia agioccia, by drops, drops by drops. Agioco, in iest, in sport, in mirth, iestingly Agiotto, a kinde of eagle that hath so strong a beake that she breaketh bones. in Latin Ossifragus. Agironda, round about, about and about. Agirone, a hearon. Agitare, to mooue, to stirre, or tosse vp and downe: to perturbe the minde. Agitatione, a motion, a moouing: an agi∣tation, a tossing: a perturbation of the minde. Agla, a kinde of flat fish like a flounder or plaise. Aglaudo, a dogs name called white tooth. Agliado, with a sworde. Morto aglia∣do, kild with a sworde. Agliata, a meate vsed in Italie made of walnuts and garlicke. Aglio, garlicke. Aglione, as Agliata. Aglietti, yoong little garlickes. Agna, an ewe lambe. Agnello, Agnelletto, a lambe. Agni, a kinde of fresh water fish. Agnista piombina, a kinde of eagle cal∣led an Ospray. Agno, a he lambe. Agno casto, the chaste tree. Agnolo, Agniolo, an angell. Also a kinde of birde. Agnome, a surname, a nickname. Agnus dei, a little lambe with a crosse painted for Christ, figured by Saint Iohn Baptist. Aso a kinde of rauenous sea foule. Ago, a needle to sowe with. Ago a pomo. Ago da pomolo, A pin with a head. Ago da pomella, a pin with a head. Agognare, to wish, to couet, to desire, to long for: to bae, to pant or be out of breath as a dogge when he hath run hard, to be embost as a deare. Agognanti cani, baying dogs, dogs panting out of breath. Agognante damma, a deare embost and wearie. Agogno, Agugno, carke, care, thought, or trouble of minde. Agoluppare, as Goluppare. Agoluppo, as Goluppo. Agomitolare, as Gomitolare. Agone, a place in Rome to ride horses in; at this day called Piazza nauona. Al∣so taken for a campe or a battell. Agonizzare, to fight valiantly or con∣tend, as in priuate lists. Agono, a fish called in Latin Agonus. Agonta, a kinde of ancient coyne in Ialie. Agonzi, a kind of broad sleeues like a ma∣ster of artes gowne. Agora, sowing needles. Agorgogliare, as Gorgogliare. Agoselle, as Agufeo. Agostane, a kinde of plum in Italie that is ripe in August. Agosto, Aosto, the moneth August. Agozzino, a butcher, a hangman, an exe∣cutioner, a prouost marshall, a captaine or ouerseer of slaues in a galley. Also a clarke of the market: a surueier of good orders: a catchpole, a serieant, a beadle. Agradare, as Gradire. Agradire, as Gradire. Agrado, thankefully, acceptably, in good worth. Agramente, sharply, eagerly, sowrely. Agramonia, as Agrimonia. Agranchiare, as Aggranchiare. Agranfatica, very hardly, with very much ado. Agran pena, as Agranfatica. Agratiare, as Gratiare. Agrauare, as Grauare. Agrauio, as Grauio. Agregare, to assemble. Agregatione, an assemblie. Agresto, Agresta, vertiuice, alligar, sow∣rish, vnripe grapes. Also taken for the Watercresses or Waterkarnes, or Nose∣smart. Agreste, rusticall, rurall, clownish, like a swaine, wilde, an vplandish man. Agretto, somewhat sowre. Also Water∣cresses. Agrezza, sowrenes, sharpnes, tartnes, ea∣gernes. Agreuamento, as Grauio. Agrico, rude, foolish, clownish. Agricola, a husbandman, a ploughman, a labourer, a till-man: Agricoltore, as Agricola. Agricoltura, husbandrie, tillage, plough∣ing and harrowing. Agrifolio, the Holly, the Holme, or Hul∣uer tree. Agrigento, in Latine Hoc Agrigentum. Agrimonia, the herbe Agrimonie or Li∣uerwoort. Also sharpnes that biteth the toong. Agrimonio, sharpnes, biting the toong. Agrippa, a childe borne with his feete forward. Also a kinde of herbe. Also a wilde Oliue. Agrire, to make or become sowre, sharpe or tart, to exasperate. Agrosto, Dogs grasse or Stitchwort. Agro, sowre, sharpe, tart, vnripe. Also eager or fierce. Also a field. Agropparsi, as Aggropparsi. Agrotto marino, a birde like a swan braying like an asse. Agrumare, as Aggrumare. Agrume, Sowrenes, sharpnes or tartnes: any kinde of sowre meate. Agruzzolare, to get, to scrape or spare to∣gither by hooke or crooke. Agruzzo, a disease in a hawke called the frounze. Aguale, as Eguale. Aguaglianza, equalitie. Aguatare, as Guatare. Aguati, stratagems, wiles, ambushes, lur∣kings, deceits. Aguazzo, wash or water colour. Also pashing or plashing. Agucchia, a needle. Also a spire steeple or sharpe pinacle. Also knit with needles. Agucchia da pomella, a pin with a head. Agucchiare, to thred a needle, to pin with pins: to make sharpe as a needle. Also to knit with knitting needles. Agucchiaruolo, a needle or pin maker. Agueffare, to match, to equall, to compare, to ioyne togither. Aguerrire, risco, rito, to enure or traine vp to war, to make or become a soldier or warrier. Agufeo, an eelepout. Some take it for a Lamprey. Others haue taken it for a kinde of dogfish. Aguglia, as Agucchia. Also an eagle. Agugliare, as Agucchiare. Aguglino, a kinde of graine in Italie. Aguifoglio, as Agrifoglio. Aguisa, in maner, like, as, after the fa∣shion. Aguisare, to fashion, to reforme or accu∣stome. Agulla, a fish called a roche. Aguluppare, as Goluppare. Agurio, Aguro, as Augurio. Aguseo, as Aguseo. Aguto, as Acuto. Aguzzare, to whet, to make keene, to set an edge vpon, to entice, to sharpen. Aguzzatore, a grinder of kniues, an en∣ticer, a sharpener.
Aguzzino, as Agozzino. Aguzzo, as Acuto. Ah, alas, helas, oh, wo is me: welladay: aye me. Ah, in stead of an answere when one is called: ah? what? Ahi, Ahime, as Ah. Ahotta, now, at this time, by times, some∣times, now and then. Ahuomo per huomo, man by man, one by one, man for man. Ai, to the, for the, by the, from the. Aia, a barne, yard, floore or court to thresh corne vpon: a meeting place for mar∣chants: banks, beds, or quarters in a garden. Also as Aere. Aiace, a flower so called. Aiare, to thresh or beate corne: to houer or linger about a thing as a kite doth about his pray: to lose time, to loyter, gaze or gape vp and downe idly. Aietta, a kinde of hauke called a buzzard. Aime, as Ah. Aio, a cuckow bird. Also a long toonged knaue, one full of words that telleth all he knoweth. Also taken for a minion, a darling, a fauorite, a white sonne. Aione adar aione, to gad, to roue, to gaze or loiter idly vp and downe. Aiosa, store, hold belly hold, Gods plenty. Airâ, Aire, as Aere. Airone, a hearon. Aita, aide, helpe, succour, assistance, re∣dresse, reliefe. Aitante, helping, helpfull, succouring, lu∣stie and well disposed. Aitare, to aide, to helpe, to assist, to re∣dresse, to relieue. Aitatore, a helper, an aider, an assister. Aiutare, as Aitare. Aiutante, as Aitante. Aiutatore, as Aitatore. Aiuto, as Aita. Aiutorij, the arme bones of a man. Aiuteuole, helpfull. Aiutorio, aide, helpe, succour. Aiuola, the diminutiue of Aia. Some haue vsed it for a little soule. Aiuolare, as Aiare. Aizza, anger, fude, moode, prouocation, wrath, fretting, vexation. Aizzare, to set on, to eg on, to prouoke, to hisse on with hissings and clappings as they do dogs vpon beares. Aizzatore, a prouoker, a setter on, a hisser on, one that setteth men togither by the eares. Al, a signe of swearing, as Alcorpo, Al∣sangue, by the bodie, &c. Al, a signe of the datiue case, to the, at the. Al, a signe of the ablatiue with verbes of priuation, from the, of the, from him. Ala, the drinke Ale. A wing of any bird, a wing or side of a squadron of men, a wing of a dublet, the brim of a hat, a flap of any thing. A measure which we call an ell. The datiue case, to the, at the. The ablatiue case, from her or from the. Put to any noune it makes it an ad∣uerbe of similitude. Looke A. Alabandino, a kinde of blacke stone. Alabarba, in despite, mauger, euen in dis∣grace. Alabarda, a holbard. Alabardaro, a holbard maker. Alabardina, a little holbard. Also a kinde of yellow precious stone, which being drunke is good against poyson, but it prouoketh the bloodie flixe. Alabardiere, a holbardier, vsing such a weapon. Alabarra, at the bar or barriers. Alabastro, the Alablaster stone. Alabastrite, a transparent Alablaster stone. Alabastrino, made of Alablaster. Ala buona, simply, plainly, without fraude. Ala caccia, as Acaccia. Ala carlona, as Alabuona. Alada, Haec Armisa in Latine. Aladistesa, at large, at length. Alafede buona, in good faith. Alaffio, a kinde of Pomegranat. Alagare, to ouerflowe or turne to a lake. Alagamento, an ouerflowing of waters. Alaggio, the alloy or value of coyne as it is allowed by a prince, as we say ster∣ling. It is also the losse of monie by ex∣change. Alamana, a lesson in musicke called an Alemaine. Alambico, a still or limbecke. Alamoderna, after the late or new fa∣shion. Alano, a mastiue dog. Alantica, after the old fashion. Alantide, the filme or skin compassing that skin wherin the infant is wrapped. Ala pedona, like a footeman. Alardare, to larde, to inlarde. Alare, to wing or set wings on. Alarma, an alarum in time of war. Ala riuerscia, waiwardly, topsie turuie, cleane contrarie. Al'arma, to armes or weapons. Also a march so called, sounded vpon the drum or trumpet. Alasboccata, as Allasboccata. Allasgangherata, lauishly, at randon, royishly, out of frame. Ala spiegata, at large, in open view. Ala sprouista, extempore, on a sudden. Alato, neare, hard by, by the side, in re∣spect, in regarde, incomparison, win∣ged, hauing wings. Alauentata, furiously, rashly, lauishly, carelesly. Alba, the dawne, the morne or breake of day. Albagia, fondnes, peenishnes, toyishnes, sottishnes, a humour, a fancie, a conceit. Albanello, a kite, a puttocke or buzzard. Albano, a kinde of wine. Also a kinde of tree. Albarello, a gallie pot, a kinde of limbecke or stillatorie, a little measure. Albari, a kinde of sea fish. Albaspina, the white thorne. Also Ladie thistle or white thistle. Albatro, a kinde of wilde sowre orenge. A tree called a Strawberrie tree. Albazzano, a kinde of stone to make lime with. Albedine, as Albugine. Albenduccio, a let, an impediment. Albéo, as Aluéo. Also a kinde of tree. Albergare, to lodge, to dwell, to lie, to har∣borrow, to abide, to house. Albergatore, a lodger, a herbenger, an host. Alberges, a kinde of fruit in Italie. Albergo, Albergamento, a dwelling, a lodging, an abiding place. Alberello, a little tree. Also as Alba∣rello. Alberetto, a little tree. Albero, as Arbore. Albichista, as Abbacchiere. Albio, a pigs trough. Also a fish called in latin Aburnus. Also an iron toole that smiths vse. Also a racke to fodder cat∣tle in. Albipéde, white footed. Albo, white, whitish. Also a fish called in latin Capitonus, or Orfum. Albogaléro, a hat like a bishops miter which the priests of Iupiter were wont to weare. Alborata, an arbor, or a booth or bowre made of trees and boughes. Albóre, whitenes. Also the daune, peepe, morne or breake of daie. Albore, as Arbore. Alboretto, a groue, a thicket, or tufft of trees: a yoong tree. Albuco, the white or dutch daffodill. Albugine, the white of an egge or of a mans eie: whitenes. Albume, as Albugine. Albuolo, a pigs trough: a kneading tub to make dowe in. Albuscello, as Arbuscello.
Alcaido, a spanish word, but vsed among some Italians: a captaine or chieftaine. Alcatrazzi, a birde as bigge as a goose, and liues on fishes, a sea gull. Alce, a beast called an elke: some saie it is like a fallowe deare. Alche, to which, at which. Alchimia, the arte of Alchimie. Alchimista, an alchimist, a chimicke. Alcibiade, vipers herbe, or vipers bu∣glosse. Alcione, a birde called a kings fisher which makes hir nest vpon the sea side, and then it is a token or signe of faire weather. Alcionei giorni, the quiet daies during which the kings fisher buildeth hir nest by the sea which all that while is verie calme and still. Alconspetto, Alcospetto, before, in the presence, in view. Alcontrario, contrarie, arsiuersie. Alconuerso, cleane contrarie, arsiuersie. Alcorano, the booke of the turkish insti∣tutiones or lawes called the Alcorane. Alcuna volta, sometimes, at times, one time or other. Alcuno, some, some one, some bodie, anie, any one. Aldasezzo, at last, in fine, at the ende, in conclusion. Aldiritto, foorthright, right on, ouer against, directly ouer. Aldispetto, indespite, maugre ones will. Aldisotto, vnder, vnderneath, belowe. Alea, an allie, a walke or going. Aleche, as Alice. Aledia, as Alice. Alefangine, all maner of spices. Also a kinde of pils so called. Alega, as Alga. Alegoria, an allegorie. Alegoricamente, allegorically. Alegorizzare, to allegorize, to vse alle∣gories. Alegrare, as Allegrare. Alenare, to giue or take breath or winde: to rest, to relent, or to enseame a horse, to bring in breath. Alepe, a little fish: the name of an herbe: the name of an ointment. Aleppe, the first hebrue letter. Alérta, readie, heedefully, prepared, watching alwaies at an aduantage. Alessandrina, the herbe perwinkle. Alessare, to boyle or seeth meate. Alesso, boyled or sodden meate. Alettere discatole, plainly, in all mens view: as plaine as a pack-staffe. Aletteria, a stone in the mawe or gizard of a cocke about the bignesse of a beane, and in colour like chrystall. Alettorio, Aletorio, as Aletteria. Alfa, the first greeke letter: a beginning. Alfabeto, an alphabet, or a b c. Alfabetico, alphabeticall, in order of let∣ters. Alfana, a breeding mare, a strange, iadish or wilde mare. Alfar del giorno, by breake, peepe, or dawne of daie. Alfeste, a kinde of fish. Alfiero, an ensigne or standerd bearer. Also a bishop at chesse. Alfino, Alfero, as Alfiero. Alfio, an itch, a tetter, a ringworme, a spauin in a horse: the herbe liuerwoort. Alfonsino, a kinde of coine in Naples. Alfordio, a kinde of venemous serpent. Alga, sea-grasse, duckweede, reeke or reits. Also spelt corne. Algebra, the arte of bone setting. Also of arithmetike or figuratiue numbers. Algebrista, a bone setter: an arithmeti∣cian. Algente, cold, chill, freezing. Algere, Algo, Alsi, Also, to chill; to freeze for cold. Alghebra, as Algebra. Algiro, about, turning about. Also in La∣tinè Dianapharum. Algironi, a kinde of rauenous sea fowle. Algura, as Augurio. Alguzzino, as Agozzino. Alheppe, vsed of Dante for Alehebbe, he had wings. Alhor, Alhora, then, at that time. Alhotta, as Alhor. Alia, a band, a troupe, a companie or a wing of men. Aliare, to go or sneake, or range about sneakingly. Alibanti, such as die for want of moistnes. Alibire, to make lawfull. Alica, as Alga. Alice, a little fish called a pilcher or a sprat, like a herring. Alicorno, an vnicorne. Also an vnicornes horne. Alida, alida carne, stale, tainted, morti∣fied or flie-bitten meate. Alidare, to mortifie, taint or make meate stale. Alie, vsed for Ale: wings. Alienare, to alienate or estrange. Alienatione, an alienation or estranging. Alieno, an alien, a stranger, a forraine, a frenne. Alieta, a kinde of eagle which alone fixeth hir eies against the sunne. Aliga, as Alga. Aligare, to tie or binde togither. Aligero, one bearing wings. Alima, an herbe whereof eating a little one shall bee kept a long time from hunger. Alimentare, to nourish, to feede, to su∣staine. Alimento, nourishment, sustenaunce, foode. Al'impensata, vnawares; extempore, not thought vpon. Al'imprescia, in great haste. Al'improuiso, on a sudden, at vnawares, vnprouided for, extempore. Al'improuista, as Al'improuiso. Al'incanto, at who giues most, sold by a common crier. Al'incontro, on the other side, ouer-against, opposite, contrarie. Alimo, a kinde of tree in India. Some take it for Licorice. Aliossi, a play called Nie pins or keeles, or skailes. Alipo, a weede growing vpon rocks by the sea side. Aliso, a blew Lillie flower. Alisma, a kinde of weede growing in fens or marshes. Alitare, to breath, to pant or draw breth. Alito, breth, breathing or panting. Aliungia, the plant Spikenard. Alla, at the, to the, from the, of the, accor∣ding, as, like. Allacciare, to tie, to binde, to knit, to en∣tangle, to lace. Also to trap. Allacciamenti, latings, tyings, entan∣glings, trappings. Alla distesa, at length, at large. Alla facchina, homely, basely, after the porters fashion, clownishly. Alla finfine, in the end, at last, in fine. Alla foggia, after the fashion, like as. Alla fuggita, by the way, cursoriwise, se∣cretly, running away. Allagare, to ouerflowe, to drowne. Alla giornata, in time, day by day, in tract of time. Allaginetta, after the manner of a ginnet horse. Alla grossa, grossely, homely, clownishly. Alla lunga, at length, at last, in time, at large. Alla malhora; with a mischiefe, in an ill hower. Alla mano, redily, at hand. Alla muta, dumbly, mutely. Alla non pensata, extempore, not thought vpon. Allancare, to breath, to pant, to sigh, to sob, to throb, to blubber. Allanciare, to fling, to hurle, to cast, to throw with violence.
Allarappa, snatchingly, higledi-pigle∣die, shiftingly, rap and run. Allargare, to enlarge, to spread, to vn∣fold, to set free. Allargatura, an opening, an enlarging a gap. Allaria, the herbe sauce alone, or Iacke of the hedge, which tastes of garlicke. Alla rinfusa, pelmell, helterskelter, higle∣di-pigledie, confusedly. Alla rotta, disorderly, confusedly, pelmell. Allardare, to larde, to inlarde. Alla sbardellata, roistingly, swagge∣ringly, rashly, carelesly. Alla sbracata, carelesly, without shame or honesty. Alla sboccata, without shame or hone∣stie, impudently. Alla scapestrata, riotously, swaggringly. Alla scatenata, furiously, madly, rashly, desperately. Allasciare, to let loose, to slacken, to vn∣bend, to weaken. Alla sfilata, disordredly, without rule order or files. Alla sfuggiasca, as Alla sfuggita. Alla sfuggita, without staie, cursory, run∣ning on by stealth, a snatch and away. Alla spianacciata, as Alettere disca∣tole. Allasser, an herbe which yeeldes a kinde of bitterish sugar. Allattare, to giue sucke, to feede with milke. Allatiuo caso, as Ablatiuo. Allato, as Alato. Alla tua barba, in despite of thy beard. Alla volta, towards, toward. Alle, to the. Also a kinde of birde. Allecchiare, to licke, to sleeke, to trim, to deck: to faune, to entice, to flatter, to make smooth, to stroke ones beard: to licke and wash himselfe as a cat doth. Allegare, to alleadge, to direct vnto. Allegatione, an allegation, an alleaging. Alleggeramento, as Alleggiamento. Alleggerire, to lighten, to ease, to disbur∣den, to refresh. Alleggiamento, an ease, a refreshing, a lightning. Alleggiare, as Alleggerire. Allegranza, as Allegrezza. Allegrare, to reioice, to glad, to be merie, to waxe merie, blithe or frolike. Allegramente, gladly, merily, pleasant∣ly, iocondly. Allegrezza, mirth, ioy, solace, pastime, glee, sport. Also a marche sounded on trumpet and drum in signe of victorie. Allegro, ioyfull, merie, iocond, sportfull, pleasant, frolike. Alleluia, praise to God or God be praised. Also the herbe wood-sorell. Alle mani, togither by the eares, in hand. Allenare, as Alenare. Allenire, to asswage, to relent, to mollifie, to soften. Allentae, to relent, to let go, to loosen, to slacke, to appease, to staie, to sloe, to de∣laie, to put of, to deferre, to diminish. Allessare, as Alessare. Allesso, as Alesso. Alletta, a fish called a mullet. Allettare, to entice, to allure, to inuegle, to flatter. Allettamenti, enticements, allurements, flattrings. Allette, lodgings, dwellings, hosteries, a shroud, a shelter. Alleuare, to foster, to breede, to bring vp, to feede, to nourish. Also to take from. Alleuatrice, a midwife, a nurce, a foster-mother. Alleuiare, to ease, to lighten, to disbur∣then. Alleuiamento, an ease, a lightning, a dis∣burdening. Alleuolte, at times or some times. Alhora, then, at that time. Alhotta, then, at that time. Alliaria, as Allaria. Allignare, to prosper, to take roote, to thriue, to fadge, to grow, to followe kinde. Allieuare, as Alleuare. Allieuo, a foster childe or seruant of ones bringing vp. Alligare, to binde or tie with or vnto. Allincanto, as Al'incanto. All'incontro, as Al'incontro. All'ingrosso, in grosse, by the great. Allisciare, as Allecchiare. Allodola, Allodetta, a larke. Looke Darel'allodola. Allogare, to place, to settle, to set in a place, to let, to rent, to farme, to de∣mise. Allogagioni, farmings, lettings. Also placings. Alloggiare, to lodge, to harbor. Also to quarter or lodge a campe or soldiers. Alloggiamento, a lodging, a harbor. Al∣so the part of a campe whereon anie companie or numbers of soldiers be quartered and lodged. Allongare, to prolong, to defer, to put of, to lengthen, to prorogue. Allongoandare, in time, in processe of time. Allontanare, to elonge, to go farre off or distant, to separate, to alienate. Alloppiare, Alopiare, to bring or lull a sleepe by arte, by drugs or potions, to stupefact ones sences. Alloppiato vino, wine that will prouoke sleepe. Allora, then, at that time. Alloro, the laurell or baie tree. Allúdere, Alludo, Allusi, Alluso, to al∣lude, to haue reference vnto, to dallie or plaie with. Allumare, to kindle, to light, to illumine. Also to allume silkes or clothes before they can be died into any light colour. Alluminare, as Allumare. Allungare, as Allongare. Allungoandare, as Allongoandare. Allusingare, to flatter, to faune, to blan∣dish. Allusione, an allusion, or reference vnto. Alma, the soule of man. Almadeu, a strange character or name of diuell that nigromants vse to call vpon. Almadia, a little boate, wherrie or cock∣boate. Almen, Almeno, at least. Almicanthari, the circles imagined, to passe through euery degree of the meri∣dian, paralell to the horizon vp to the zenith. Almiraglio, Almirante, an admirall of the seas. Almocohol, as Burra. Almo, high, omnipotent, life-giuer, su∣stainer, holie, faire, soueraigne. Also an alder tree. Also a foster father, ones nurces husband. Also nourishment. Almoniaca, an apricock plum. Almucabala, as Algebra. Alno, an aller or alder tree. Alnonegro, the blacke alder tree or su∣gerchest whereof some make arrowes. Alocco, an owle, or howlet. Also a sillie gull, or fond ninnie. Aloè, a bitter drug called aloes, whereof there be diuers sorts. Aloetta, a larke. Alogía, want of reason. Alopecia, the falling away or shedding of the haire through diseases. Alopiare, as Allopiare. Al'opposito, ouer-against, on the contra∣rie part. Alosa, a fish that killeth the tunnie to haue a vaine in his iawes. Also as Laccia. Alosso, an herbe which diers vse called madder. Alospicchio del sole, at the rising or peeping foorth of the sunne. Alostendardo, the name of a marche vp∣on the drum and trumpet. Alpa, Arpa, an instrument called a harpe.
Alpari, alike, euen, hand to hand. Alpe, Alpi, the alpes or high mountaines. Alpedica pernice, a kinde of partridge breeding on mountaines. Alpeggio andare, at woorst, if the woorst fall out. Alpestrezza, craggednes, wildenes, rug∣gednes of hils. Alpestre, alpish, mountanous, craggie, wilde, rugged. Alphi, a kinde of vlceration. Also a mor∣phew or staining of the skin. Alphitomantia, diuination or witchcraft by corne. Alpiè, Alpiede, at the foote or below. Alpisano, borne and bred in the moun∣taines or alpes. Alpiù, at the most, to the vtmost. Alpiu alpiù, at the very most, at the vt∣most. Alpossibile, with the most, to the vtter∣most. Alpostuto, altogither, with al possibility, with might and maine, to the vttermost of all notwithstanding any thing else. Alpresente, now, at this present. Alquanti, some, some few in number. Alquanto, some, somewhat in quantitie. Alrado, seldome times. Alse, did freeze for cold. Alseréno, in the cleere, in the open aire. Alsi, also, moreouer, eftsoone. Altabasso, a kind of wrought veluet with high and lowe worke. Also a kinde of musicall instrument with strings. Altalena, a kinde of fish or serpent. Altana, a bay window made out of the roofe of a house. Altano, a pleasant gale of winde blowing on the sea. Altanto, as much more. Altardi, late, lately, at last, lastly. Altare, an altar of a church. Also an oyle mill. Altéa, a kinde of herbe called Smallage. Alteluogo, in Latin Colophon. Alterare, to alter, to change, to remooue. Also to waxe angrie. Alteratione, alteration, change. Altéramente, proudly, stately, disdain∣fully, haughtily. Altercare, to contend, to chide, to brabble, to braute, to wrangle, to debate. Altercatione, a contention, a chiding, a wrangling, a brabling, a debate. Altérezza, haughtines, pride, statelines, disdainfulnes. Altério, Alterigia, as Alterezza. Alternare, to do by course or turne: to change or be inconstant. Alternamente, by turnes, by courses, in∣terchangeably. Altèro, haughtie, proud, stately, disdain∣full, high minded. Altersi, as Altresi. Altezza, height, highnes, deepenes. Also Altesse, a title giuen to Dukes. Altezzoso, as Altéro. Altièramente, as Altèramente. Altièrezza, as Altèrezza. Altièro, as Altèro. Altimetria, measuring of height or alti∣tude. Altitonante, high thundring. Altitùdine, as Altezza. Alto, high, eminent, loftie, deepe, profound. Also a treble in song and musicke. Alto, is vsed for broad. As Pannoalto, broad cloth. Altouolante, high flying. Altrabacche, a kind of great cart, wagon, or such thing that will carrie much. Altramente, Altrimente, otherwise. Altrauolta, another time, at other times. Altresi, also, eke, eftsoones, moreouer, ouer and besides, likewise, withall, as well, as much besides. Altretale, of the selfesame qualitie, such another. Altretanto, as much more. Altrice, a nurse, one that nourisheth and maintaineth. Altrilo, the bird called a wren. Altro, other, another, ought else, any thing else, except. Altroche, except, sauing, reseruing, if not. Altrocivuole, something else is requi∣red. Altronde, from elsewhere, elsewhence. Altroue, elsewhere, somewhere else. Altrui, others, to others, of others, from others, other mens. Altura, height, altitude, depth. Altutto, wholy, altogither. Aluala, an acquittance, a bill, a schedule, a warrant, a ticket. A Luca ti vidi, those daies are past, ac∣quaintance is gone, I know you no more. Aluéo, a bee-hiue. Also a shelter, a couer or a roofe. The chanell of a riuer, the pipe of any conduit, a vaine in any body, a bathing tub: the bulke, belly or bottom of a ship. Aluerde, almost in the end: as we say, in the socket. Aluiuo, liuely, done or drawen to the life. Alumare, as Allumare. Alume, allome. Alume di rocca, roche allome. Alungo andare, as Allongoandare. Alunno, a nurse childe, a foster childe, a childe kept for Gods sake. Aluo, a womans wombe, a tombe or se∣pulcher: the bed or bottome of a riuer. Alzana, a crane to drawe or hoise vp any thing with: properly a halse or cable to draw a bote or ship withall. Alzaniere, a halsier or he that haleth a ship or barge by a rope: a halse or hal∣sier in a ship. Alzare, to aduance, to raise, to lift vp, to eleuate, to hoise vp, to heaue, to reare vp. Alzare il fianco, to fare well, to make good cheere, to haue the world at will. It is prouerbially vsed. Alzare vela, to hoise vp saile. Amabile, louing or to be beloued, amiable. Amacco, dog cheape, plentie, hold belly hold. Also scot free, at other mens charges. Amadriadi, nymphes of the woods. Amainare, to peece or patch a ship or a saile, to amaine. Amalare, to sicken, to fall sicke. Amalato, sicke or diseased. Amalgame, a kinde of drug that Alchi∣mistes vse. Amano, at hand, ready, y. Aman amano, in order, orderly, by and by, anon, presently. Aman chitide, a stone that coniurers vse to coniure vp infernall spirits. Aman destra, at the righthand. Amandio, a stone of diuers colours good against poison, which maketh him vi∣ctorious that weares it about him, and teacheth to interprete dreames or rid∣dles. Amandolata, a kinde of meate made of almonds or almond milke. Aman gionte, with ioyned or clasped hands, humbly. Aman manca, at the left hand. Amannire, Amannito, to seaze or lay hands on. Also to accomplish. Amanpiene, with full hands. Aman salua, safely, without danger. Amantici rami, shadie, shadowing or spreading boughes. Amante, a louer. Also louing. Amantilla, the herbe Valerian, Capons taile or Setwall. Amantino, as Amandio. Aman vuote, emptie handed. Amanza, a mans mistres, loue, sweet hart or beloued, a paramour. Amarancino, the name of a precious ointment. Amaranto, the herbe Maudlin: and also the Flower gentle. Amaranto gallo, goldilocks, Gods flower or Gold-flower.
Amare, to loue, to be in loue, to delight, to please, to like, to reioice. Amareggiare, to make or taste bitter. Also to grow or flowe to a sea. Amarella, the herbe Mugwort. Some take it for Feuerfew. Amaretto, bitterish, somewhat bitter. Amarezza, Amaritudine, bitternes. Amaricino, a kinde of precious ointment. Also somewhat bitter. Amarine, the first cheries that come, cal∣led so because they are something bit∣ter. Amarire, to make bitter. Amaro, bitter, tedious, sharpe, spitefull, curst, hard to be appeased, breame. Amartora, a beast called a Martin. Amarulente, bitter, spitefull, malitious. Amarulentia, bitternes, spitefulnes. Amassa, by heapes, gods plenty. Amassare, to heape vp. Amatisto, a precious stone called an A∣mathyste. Amatore, a louer, an amorous louing man. Amatorio, to be beloued or louing. Amatrice, a woman that loueth. Amaturare, to ripen, to grow ripe. Amazzacchera, as Amazzata. Amazzare, to kill, to slea, to slaughter, to quell, to murther. Amazzamenti, killings, slayings, slaugh∣trings, murthers. Amazzata, a fishing or angling rod. Also to be taken in a baite as fishes are. Also standing starke still as one key cold▪ Amba, a fruite like an oliue but somthing bigger. Ambage, a reeling or dizines in the head. Also an ambiguitie, a compasse or cir∣cuite of wordes, that makes the sence doubtfull. Ambágia, noie, griefe, torment, vexati∣on, a lothsomnes, a dismaie, a swouning or qualme ouer the stomacke: an extasie or passion of the minde, a shortnes of ones breath. Ambascia, as Ambagia. Ambasciadore, Ambasciatore, an em∣bassador, a legaete, a messenger. Ambasciare, to grieue, to vexe, to tormēt, to fall into a swoune, to lose ones breath. Ambasciata, Ambasciaria, an embas∣sage, a message. Ambassi, ams ace, two aces at a cast at dice. Ambastia, as Ambagia. Ambedue, Ambeduo, both. Ambi, both. Ambiare, to amble, to pace it. Ambiatura, Ambio, an ambling pace. Ambiguità, ambiguitie, doubtfulnes, vn∣certaintie. Ambiguo, ambiguous, vncertaine, doubt∣full. Ambio, an ambling pace. Ambire, Ambisco, Ambíto, to aspire, to compas or seeke after with ambition. Ambitione, ambition, an immoderate desire, a circuit or compassing. Ambitioso, ambitious, very desirous of honour. Ambito, a circle, an ambition, a compas, an vnlawfull suite for offices. Ambligonio, blunt cornered. Ambo, both. Ambodestro, that hath the vse of both hands alike. Ambra, Ambre, Ambro, amber such as they make beads with. Also amber∣greece. Also the sperme of a whale fish called Parmacetie. Ambracane, amber greece. Ambracani, pomanders made of amber greece. Ambragatta, ambergreece. Ambragialla, yellow or stone amber. Ambrici, tiles laid ouerthwart betweene other tiles. Ambrogino, a kinde of coyne in Italie. Ambrósia, ambrosia, a meat that the gods are said to feede vpon. Also an herbe called Oke of Ierusalem, or of Cappa∣docia. Ambrosine, a kinde of almond so called. Also Dandelion, Priests crown, Swines snout, Monks head or Dogs teeth. Ambubeia, a kinde of herbe. Amé, as Amen, to me. Ambulatione, a walking, a walking place, a gallerie, an alley. Ameda, Amita, an aunt. Amello, a kinde of weede growing in the water. Amèn, Amèno, at least, within lesse or within a little. Amen, amen, so be it. Amenadito, at fingers end, by rote, by hart, perfectly. Amenare, to leade, to bring, to direct. Amenazampetto, as Amenadito. Amenazzare, to driue, to droue or bring cattell into droues: to threaten. Amenda, amends or satisfaction, a cor∣rection. Amendare, to amend, to correct, to re∣dresse. Amendola, an almond. Amendolo, an almond tree. Amendua, Amendue, Amendui, A∣menduo, both, both togither. Amenduni, idem. Amenità, pleasance, pleasantnes or de∣lightsomnes to the eie. Ameno, pleasant, faire, delightsome to the eie or in situation. Amente, by rote, by hart. Imparar a¦mente, to learne by rote. Amerochita, a fish called in Latine No∣tola. Ametistino, an amathist. Also an azure or violet colour that painters vse. Ametisto, as Amatisto. Amfodillo, the Affodill or Daffodill fower. Amia, a fish like a Tunie but hath no scales, which hauing swallowed the hooke, nibleth the line in sunder, and so freeth himselfe. Amiamo, a kinde of stone so soft that it is both spun and wouen into cloth, which like Salamander will endure the fire: in such were the Egyptians wont to wrap their kings being dead, that so they might burne them and keepe the ashes of them. Amfisbena, as Anfisbena. Amfiscij, as Amphiscij. Amianto, as Amiamo. Amica, a she friend, a louer, a paramour, a concubine, a leman. Amicabile, amiable, friendly, kinde, lo∣uing. Amicare, to make or become a friend. Also to crum or crumble. Amicheuole, friendly, louing, kinde. Amicitia, friendship, good will, good fel∣lowship amitie, friendlines. Amico, a friend, a louer, a paramour, a make fauorable, propice. Amida, an aunt. Amidare, to starch. Amido, starch. Also a kinde of graine or rise. Aminuto, by retaile, by small peeces, di∣stinctly, seuerally, smally. Amir, a kinde of drug or fruit comming from India. Amissione, a losse or leesing. Amistá, as Amicitia. Amita, an aunt. Amitare, to starch. Amito, starch. Amitarrice, a starcher. Amma, a lath or thin small boord. Ammaccare, to bruise, to breake or frush togither. Ammaccatura, a bruise, a bruising, a frushing together. Ammacchiare, as Macchiare. Ammaestrare, to teach, to instruct. Ammaestramento, a teaching or instru∣ction.
Ammaestreuole, cunning, skilfull, able to teach or to be taught. Ammagliare, to waste, to destroy, to bruise, to breake, to clatter, to frush, to hauocke. Also to charme or bewitch. Ammagrire, to make or become leane, to to take downe ones fat. Ammaliare, to charme, to bewitch, to be∣sot, to forespeake. Ammanire, to prepare or make readie to ones hande. Ammannare, to prepare, to deck, to set in order, to set foorth. Also to gather togi∣ther by handfuls as gleaners do corne. Ammantare, to cloke, to enmantle, to en∣robe, to decke, to couer. Ammantellare, as Ammantare. Ammantino, a kinde of precious stone of many colours. Ammanto, as Manto. Ammarcire, as Marcire. Ammareggiare, as Amareggiare. Ammaricare, as Ramaricare. Ammarire, to make bitter. Ammartellare, to hammer, to forge, to beate, to stampe, to appassionate with ielousie. Ammartellato, one that is passionated with loue or ielousie. Also forged or hammered. Ammascarare, as Mascherare. Ammasciare, as Ammassare. Ammassare, to gather, to heape, to huddle vp, to make solide, massie or stiffe. Ammassicchiare, as Ammassare. Ammassicciare, as Ammassare, but properly to harden, enure, or accustome himselfe to endure all hardnes, to becom, grow or make massie or tough. Ammasso, a heape, a masse, a huddle, a gathering. Ammattonare, as Mattonare. Ammattonato, as Mattonato. Ammattire, to become foolish or mad. Ammazzare, as Amazzare. Ammazzamenti, as Amazzamenti. Ammazzata, Ammazzacchera, as Amazzata. Ammazzatore, a killer. Ammè, as Amen. Ammelato, a bright dun colour of a horse. Ammenda, Ammendamento, Am∣mendatione, amends, amendment, sa∣tisfaction. Ammendare, as Emendare. Ammentare, to remember, to call to minde, to mention, to name, to ming. Amméttere, Ammétto, Ammisi, Am∣messo, to admit, to auowe, to allowe. Ammessione, an admission, an allowing. Ammi, the herbe Ammie, Ameos, herbe William, bulwoort or bishops weede. Ammicare, to marke, to note, to point at, to glance at, to nod at, to becken or make signes at any thing, namely with win∣king of the eies. Ammiccare, as Ammicare. Amminiculo, any kinde of helpe, fur∣therance, aide, or assistance. Amministrare, to administer. Amministratione, administration. Amministratore, an administrator. Ammirabile, admirable, wondrous. Ammiraglio, an admirall of the sea. Ammirando, as Ammirabile. Ammirare, to admire, to wonder at. Ammiratione, admiration, wondermēt. Ammiratiuo, admirable, wondrous. Ammirante, an admirall of the seas. Ammissario, a stallion horse. Ammissibile, that mayor or is woorthie to be admitted. Ammogliare, to wiue, to wed, to marrie. Ammogliamento, a marriage, a wed∣ding. Ammollare, as Ammolire. Ammollire, Ammollito, to mollifie, to soften, to appease, to steepe in water. Ammoniaco, a iuice or gum that com∣meth of an herbe called Agasilli. Ammonimento, as Ammonitione. Ammonire, to warne, to admonish. Ammonitione, warning or admonition. Ammonitore, an admonisher. Ammontare, to heape vp, to cocke as they do hay, to amount. Ammontonare, as Ammontare. Ammorbare, to infect or make contagi∣ous, to fester. Ammorbidare, to soften, to mollifie, to smooth. Ammorbidire, as Ammorbidare. Ammorciare, to quench, to extinguish. Ammortare, to drawe towards death, to quench, to extinguish. Ammorzare, as Ammorciare. Ammostare, to make muste or new wine. Ammucchiare, to heape vp, to cocke into heapes or cocks as hay is, to hoord vp, to muzzell. Ammuffare, to growe mustie, to dance, to leape, to skip, to excell: to peepe foorth. Ammurcare, to calke a ship. Also to snort. Ammusare, to roote as a pig, to busse, to breake: to snout, to bill: to muse. Ammutire, to become or make dumbe or silent, to put to silence. Ammutinare, to mutinie, to seduce, to rebell. Ammutinamento, a mutinie, an insur∣rection, a rebellion. Ammutolire, as Ammutire. Amnestia, forgetfulnes of things past. Amo, a fishing hooke. Amomeglio, I would rather, I had ra∣ther. Amomo, a sweete-smelling shrub in Ar∣menia with leaues like the vine, called our Ladies Rose, or the Rose of Ierusa∣lem, or garden Pepper. Amonte, to swig or deale againe at cards. Amoraccio, filthie loue or lust. Amore, loue, fauour, grace, desire, lust, affection, sake. Amore dei, gratis, for Gods sake. Amor d'hortolano, Goosegrasse, Goose∣share, Cleuer or Cleuergrasse. Amoreggiare, to play the wanton, to make loue, to court with lust. Amoretto, an amoret, a little loue, a wan∣ton, a paramour. Amoreuole, louing, courteous, kinde, gentle, affable. Amoreuolezza, louingnes, kindnes, cur∣tesie, affabilitie. Amorosa, Amoroso, a louer, a para∣mour, a fauorite, a loue: amorous. Amorosanza, Amorosità, amorousnes, louingnes. Amortare, as Ammortare. Amorte, to the death, mortally. Amoscire, Amoscito, to wither, to en∣feeble, to droope, to quaile, to fade, to faint, to faile. Amostante, a chiefe, a ringleader, a chieftaine. Amotto amotto, verbatim, worde by worde. Ampaludare, as Impaludare. Amparare, to learne. Ampelite, a kinde of earth in Syria good to kill woormes, rubbing the veines with it. Amperlo, the white thorne or Hawthorne tree. Also a Berberie tree. Amphesibena, as Anfisbena. Amphibio, that liueth as well on water as on land. Amphitrite hath been vsed for the sea, the maine Ocean or watrie kingdome. Amphibraco, a foote of a verse, hauing the first and third syllable short and the middle long. Amphicirto, the state of the moone not yet come to the halfe compasse bending and crooked on both sides. Amphideo, the head of the wombes mouth. Amphimacro, a kinde of lasciuious verse vsed at wanton weddings. Amphibologia, an equiuocation or doubtfull meaning.
Amphibologico, equiuocall, ambigu∣ous, or doubtfull. Amphiscij, those that haue their shadows cast on both sides of them, as those that dwell within the fieri zone whose sha∣dowes sometimes go north and somtime south. Amphisbena, as Anfisbena. Amphiteatro, an amphitheatre. Amphodillo, the daffodill flower. Ampiare, to amplifie, to enlarge. Ampiezza, amplenes, largenes, scope. Ampio, ample, large, scopefull, great. Ampleare, as Ampiae. Amplessi, embracements, louings, fauors, clippings, collings. Ampliare, as Ampiare. Ampliatione, as Ampiezza. Amplo, as Ampio. Amplificare, to amplifie, to enlarge, to augment. Amplificatione, an amplification, an en∣larging, an encrease. Amplitudine, largenes, greatnes, aucto∣ritie, dignitie, or spreading power. Ampolla, a thin violl glasse. Ampollose parole, words that be windle without substance or matter, puft words. Ampollosamente, foolishly, vainglori∣ously, boastingly, puffingly. Ampolluzza, a little violl glasse. Amucchiare, as Ammontare. Amucchio, by heapes, by huddles, by the great. Amuda a muda, by turnes, by courses, by changes. Amuta a muta, idem. Amutata, an entermewed hauke. Amutire, as Ammutire. An? how? ah? what? quoth you? Ana, a worde vsed by phisitions in their receipts signifieng of ech a like in quan∣titie. Anabattista, an anabaptist. Anacangris paschi, a birde in India whose dung is as sweete in smell as am∣bergreece. Anaccare, to share or diuide in rogues language. Anacardio, a tree in India that hath a fruite like the hart of a bird, and yeeld∣eth a iuice red like bloud: and out of the fruite proceedeth a kinde of honie that exulcerateth where it toucheth. Anacapsirote, an herbe which will make one remember old forgotten loue. Anachite, a stone good against poison and madnes: some take it for a dia∣mond. Anacrisi, an examination of a matter. Anacreontici, a kinde of verses that Anacreon deuised. Anacithido, as Amanchitide. Anadiplossia, doubling of words. Anadrotti, yoong ducks, or ducklings. Anaffiare, to water or sprinckle with water. Anagallide, sea purslaine or brookelime. Anagallo, as Anagallide. Anagiri, an herbe faire to the eie but stinking, beane trifoile. Anagogia, the high and subtill vnder∣standing of the scriptures or other things. Anagógica strada, a way leading in and out, heere and there. Anagógico, full of high and mysterious vnderstanding. Analesía, a disease taking away the sen∣ces from all parts of the head. Analisi, resolution. Analogía, proportion, conueniencie. Análogo, an answering in proportion. Anapestici, a kinde of verse hauing the first syllable short and the two last long. Anaphóra, an ascension of the planets from the east by daily course of the fir∣mament. Also a figure called repeti∣tion. Anapolitanata riuerenza, a neapolita∣nized, lowting curtzie. Anarancio, an orenge tree or fruite. Anarchia, a kinde of confused licentious common wealth. Anarco, without a prince or beginning. Anasarca, a dropsie ouer the whole body. Anasare, to smell or sent. Anaspamento, a reeling, a winding. Anaspare, to reele or winde vp yarne. Anastomosi, a coniunction of two veines in one, or of an arterie and a veine. Al∣so bleeding by a broken veine. Anatomia, an anatomie. Anatomista, an anatomist. Anatomizzare, to anatomize. Anatra, a ducke or mallarde. Anatrario, a kinde of kite or hauke that kils ducks. Anca, a hanch or hip of a mans bodie. Al∣so the ankle bone. Ancarella, a tripping or hopping. Also a little hanch. Ancella, a maiden seruant or waiting woman. Ancheggiare, is when a horse doth cor∣uet with a quicke time, carying himself altogither vpon his hanches. Anche, also, moreouer, besides, yet, again, a new, withall, to, eeke. Anchioue, a little fish called Anchoues. Anchiroide, the interior processes of the shoulder blade. Anciana, as Alzana. Anciano, as Anziano. Ancidare, to kill, to slea. Ancídere, Ancído, Ancisi, Anciso, to kill, to slaie. Ancile, a short shield, buckler, or skut∣cheon. Ancilla, as Ancella. Ancinelli, little hookes and claspes. Also little crookes. Ancino dipesce, a fish hooke. Ancioue, as Anchioue. Ancipite, cutting, sharpe, keene. Anclude, a fish called a pilchard or a sperlin. Anco, as Anche. Also a kinde of great waight vsed in Italy. Also some part of a cart. Ancó, this day, to day. Ancóra, as Anche. Ancora, an anchor for a ship. Ancòra ancòra, yet, as yet, also, moreo∣uer, eftsoones. Ancòrache, Ancorche, howbeit, al∣beit. Ancoraio, an anchor master or an anchor maker. Ancorare, to anchor or cast anchor. Ancroia, a iade, an old filthie whoore, a common stale rampe. Ancude, Ancudine, an anuill. Ancuò, this day, to day. Ancusa, a kinde of pricking weede. Andare, to go, to walke, to march, to pace, to proceede, to depart, to wend. Andamenti, goings, walkings, procee∣dings, behauiours. Andanti, trauellers, wayfaring men. Andata, a going, a walking, a proceeding, a departure, a voyage. Andar'amonte, to swig or deale againe at cardes. Andar'alla caccia, acaccia, to goe a hunting, a chasing, a coursing, a hauking or fowling. Andar alla crocciata, to go to the crosse or to torments. Andar'alla mazza, to go to be killed, to go to the slaughter. Andar'al bosco, to go to the weed: to take the diet drinke. Andar'a seconda, to follow the tide, to second or sooth one. Andar'a fila, to go or march in rankes or files. Andar'a onde, to go reeling, to stagger. Andar'a scosse, to go reeling like a drun∣ken man. Andar'ripoere, to go put vp .
Andar'a gala, to flote vp and downe the water: to run a drift. Andar'aione, to go idly gaping vp and downe loosing of time. Andar'a ruba, to go a freebooting, to go a bootehaling. Andar'a contrafar'i morti, to goe to sleepe. Andar'a vanga, to fadge, to prosper with, to go as one would haue it. Andar a saccomanno, to go a freeboo∣ting: to be ransacked. Andar carpone, to go creeping. Andar a pisciare, a game at cardes so called. Andar'in cornouaglia senza barca, to be made a cuckold, to be cuckolded. Andar'in corso, to go a rouing, a shifting, a robbing or a freebooting. Andar'in sincopi, to swoune or fall in a traunce. Andar di palo in frasca, to go from one matter to another. Andar tentone, to go groping, fumbling or feeling in the darke. Andar in barberia, to go and be cured or laide of the pocks. Andar doue vannoi sauij e'matti, to go to sleepe or to die. Andar doue ne papa, ne imperatore, puó mandar imbasciatore, to go pisse or shite. Andar in dozzina, to go among the com∣mon sort of people, or as liuerie horses. Andar in frega, to go a catterwalling, to be lecherous or proud, to go to rut. Andar in amore, as Andar in frega. Andar in Carnafau, to go a fleshing or a wenching. Andar ramengo, to go rouing, wandring or begging. Andar in striazzo, to go a shifting or a robbing. Andar del corpo, to go to stoole. Andar in pelliccieria, to go to be tor∣mented. Andar in piccardia, to go to be hanged. Andar palpegone, to go groping or fum∣bling in the darke. Andar a spasso, to go a solacing, a wal∣king or a sporting. Andar di portante, to pace or amble. Andar di trotto, to trot or go a trotting pace. Andatura, a going, a gate or manner of going. Andiriuieni, as Fagiolata. Andito, a porch, a portall, an entrie, a go∣ing, a way, an accesse. Ando, a rising hill that hath neither dale nor vallie about it. Andragone, a manly woman, a virago. Andrino, a kinde of blacke coloured horse of the worst sort. Androgino, he that is both male and fe∣male, or man and woman, or of both sexes and kindes. Andromada, as Andromante. Andromante, a kinde of precious stone very hard and ponderous, bright like siluer, that drawes siluer as the ada∣mant doth iron. Androna, an alley, a narrow lane, a pri∣uie, a sinke, a sew or draught for water. Also a chamber for houshold men ser∣uants: a space betweene two wals. Andronica, the vertue called fortitude. Androsace, an herbe growing in the sea, white, without leaues, hauing greene huskes in the tuftes. Androsemo, the herbe Saint Iohns wort, or rather Tutsane. Anegliare, to growe or make thinne, to rarifie. Anelito, naturall drawing of breth or breathing. Anellaro, Anelliere, a ring maker. Anello, Anella, any kind of ring or rings. Anello da bolla, a seale ring. Anelletti, little rings. Anelli, links or rings of chaines. Anemone, the herbe Coquelourds or Passeflowers. Also wilde Poppie. Anèro, with black or mourning weedes. Anetho, Aneto, the herbe Dill or Anet. Anetra, as Anitra. Anfanare, to raue foolishly, to commit follies, to go idly loytring vp and downe as we say, to go seeking for a halfepenie worth of gaping seede. Anfanamenti, foolish rauings, follies, toyes, trifles, vanities, fooleries: loy∣trings. Anfanatore, a rauer, a foolish trifling fellow, a loytrer. Anfanie, as Anfanamenti. Anfisbena, a kinde of venemous serpent with two heads one before, another in his taile. Anfibologia, as Amphibologia. Anfitano, a stone of the vertue of the adamant, but it maketh gold to growe in quantitie. Anfitrite, as Amphitrite. Anfiscij, as Amphiscij. Anfora, Anphora, a vessell with two eares for wine. Also a certaine measure. Anfodello, the Daffodill flower. Anfusaglia, base, rascally people: onely fit to make spindles. Angaraio, an imposer of taxes or imposi∣tions. Angareggiare, to impose, aggrauate or oppresse with taxes. Angariare, as Angareggiare. Angarie, taxes, impositions, toles, customes or impostes. Ange, a kinde of water snake. Also vex∣eth or grieueth. Angelica, the herbe Angelica. Also an∣gell-like or angelicall. Angelino, a kind of fine glasse to drink in Angelo, an angell. Angere, a verbe irregular, to vexe, to molest, to carke, to care, to grieue, to afflict, to anguish, to fret, to smart, to paine. Anglio, a bile, a blaine, a pocke or a sore, a swelling, a bunch. Anghiorno, the name of a little bird. Anghirone, a hearon. Angina, a disease in the throte called the Squinancie. Also the herbe Dodder or Withwinde. Angione, a corner, a nooke, a canton, an angle. Angiporto, a close narrow lane or alley that hath but one entrance, and yet ma∣ny windings. Angoella, as Anguello. Angolare, Angulare, hauing corners. Angolo, as Angione. Angoloso, full of corners, nookes or an∣gles. Angonia, as Angoscia. Angoscia, anguish, paine, carke or care of minde, a swouning. Angosciare, to anguish or fal in a swoun. Angoscioso, full of anguish. Angue, a snake, an adder or a serpent. Anguello, a fish called in Latine Atha∣rina or Lauaronis. Anguettare, to wriggle to and fro as an adder or snake doth. Auguilla, an eele or eelepout. Anguinaglia, as Anguinaia. Anguinaia, the groine, the thigh, the hip or flanke. Also a mortall disease. Also a disease in horses in the inside of a horses hinder legs. Anguistara, as Inghistara. Angulo, Anguloso, as Angione. Anguria, a cucumber or kinde of Pom∣pilion. Angusigola, a needle, a pin, a pricke: a fish with a sharpe taile called a hornefish. Angustia, straitnes, strictnes, narrownes. Angustiare, to straiten, to pinch, to vrge, to bring to a narrow passe. Angustioso, full of anguish, pinching, strait, narrow. Anhelare, to pant or fetch winde with paine, to aspire or gape after earnestly.
Anhelanti cani, baying, panting or brea∣thing dogs, embost as an ouerwearied deere. Anhelo, a panting or shortnes of breth. Anichilare, as Annullare. Anichilatione, as Annulatione. Anidare, Anidiare, to rest, to roost, to nusle. Aniello, a steele to strike fire with. Also the swiuell or ring of a chaine. Anima, the soule of mankinde. Also the core or kernell of any fruite. Animadurtere, verto, versi, verso, to consider, to regarde, to minde, to thinke, to heede. Animaduersione, consideration, regard, mindefulnes, heede, remembrance. Animale, any liuing creature: the brea∣thing or vitall part of any body. Animale sentacchio, a sitting, squat∣ting, groueling or cowring creature. Animare, to giue soule or life vnto. Also to encourage or animate. Animato, hauing or created with a soule. Animante, breathing, liuing or hauing a soule. Animella, the kernell of any nut or stone. Animetta, a little prettie soule. Animetto, a sillie minde, a little minde. Animo, a minde, a courage, a hart, a spi∣rit, wit or hardines. Animoso, couragious, hardie, bold, ad∣uenturous, valorous, stout. Animosità, courage, hardines, bouldnes, valour, stoutnes. Animuccia, a little, poore, sillie, wret∣ched soule. Aniso, Anisi, the herbe or seede Anise. Anitra, a ducke, a drake, a mallard, a wi∣gin. It hath bin vsed for the birde that breedes of a barnikle hanging vpon old ships. Anitraro, a keeper or seller of ducks or drakes. Anitrella, a teale, a duckling or little mallard. Anitrire as Annitrire. Anitroccolo, a duckling, a yoong duck. Aniun modo, by no meanes, no way. Anna, as Ana. Annacquare, as Anaffiare. Annaffiare, as Anaffiare. Annale, yeerely, yeere by yeere, annuall. Annali, annales, histories of yeeres, or don by yeeres. Annalmente, annually, yeerely. Annasare, to smell or sent vnto. Annaspamento, a reeling or winding. Annaspare, as Anaspare. Annata, any yeeres season, time, profit, rents, fruits, or gouerment. Annatomia, an anathonie. Annatomizare, to anatomize. Annatomista, an anatomiste. Annebbiare, to bemist, to befogge, to cloud, to grow duskie, to lowre. Annebbiatino, effeminate, sweete smel∣ling, comely araid, wantonly drest vp, smug. Annegare, to drowne, to stiflle vnder water, to smother. Anneggiare, as Annegare. Annegrare, as Annerare. Annegrite, as Annerare. Annellare, to curle, to frizle or reduce in∣to rings. Annella, rings. Annellati crini, curled or frislled haires. Annelleti, little rings, little rings in the mouth of a bit. Annello, any kind of ring. Annerare, to darken, to make blacke. Annerire, as Annerare. Annessare, to annex or ad vnto. Annesso, annexed or added vnto. Also a tying or ioyning vnto. Annestare, to engraffe, to insert. Anni, yeeres. Annicchiare, to neighe or braie as some horses do either for ioy or when they encounter another horse or mare. Also as Ranicchiare. Annichilare, as Annullare. Annicolo, a yeereling, of one yeere, one yeere old. Annidare, Annidiare, as Anidare. Annido, shelter, lodging, rest, dwelling, a shrowde, a nest. Anniegare, to drowne, or be drowned. Annighitire, as Impigrite. Annitrire, to neigh as a horse. Anniuersario, from yeere to yeere, once a yeere, done euery yeere at a certaine time. Anno, a yeere, twelue moneths. Annobilire, to ennoble, to nobilitate. Annobilitare, as Annobilire. Annodare, to knot, to tie or binde in knots. Annoia, tediousnes, annoy, lothsomnes, annoiance. Annoiare, to annoy, to vexe, to molest. Annolare, as Nolare. Annolino, a bird so called, as Annicolo Annona, prouision of corne, and all ma∣ner of sustenance and other necessa∣ries. Annoso, full of yeeres, aged, old. Annotare, to note or to marke. Annottare, to darken or grow night. Annouerare, to number, to tell, to count, to reckon. Annullare, to disannull, to cancell, to make voide, to frustrate. Annullatione, a cancelling, a disanul∣ling. Annumerare, as Annouerare. Annuntiare, to pronounce, to denounce or do in message vnto. Annuntiata, Annuntiatione, the an∣nuntiation or salutation day, our ladie day in lent. Annuntiatore, a pronouncer, a denoun∣cer, a messenger. Annuntio, a message or embassage. Ano, an arse or hum. Anodide, a kinde of herbe. Anodini, medicines which prouoking sleepe do put away paines and griefes. Anolare, to hire as a horse or a ship. Anomali, out of rule, irregular, inequall. Anona, at high noone, about midday. Anormale, without rule or order. Anotare, to note, to marke, to recorde. Anotatione, an annotation. Anphiscij, as Amphiscij. Ansare, to breathe, to pant, to gaspe, to la∣bour, to toile, to moyle: to long, to de∣sire, to carke, to care, till one be out of breath. Ansatio, a disease in a horse: a shortnes of breath. Ansciare, as Ansare. Ansero, a goose, a gander, a gosline. Ansia, as Ansieta. Ansiare, as Ansare. Ansietá, curiositie, longing, desire, thought, anguish, sorrow, care, toile. Ansima, a birde that braieth like an asse and hath three feathers in his wings like hornes, and one on his head with which he defendeth himselfe from wilde beasts, for he is so heauie and great that he cannot flie. Ansio, Anscio, as Ansioso. Ansioso, curious, carefull, sorrowfull, longing, desirous, toilesome, tedious. Anta, an addition to euery tenth number aboue thirtie, as Quaranta, as we saie she is in hir teenes. Antano, some take it to be a kind of wood or borne. Antartico, the antartike pole. Ante, before, rather, soo. Also a wilde beast in India as big as an asse with round eares with the neather lip like a trumpet neuer going but by night. Antecedente, antecedent, going before. Antecédere, to go or take place before. Antecedentia, antecedencie, precedencie, superioritie. Antecessore, a predecessor, a forefather. Antecóre, a griping or pinching at the
hart: a disease in a horses brest oppo∣site to the hart. Antelaus, a monstrous beast with great hornes, and so sharpe that it will sawe and cut downe any tree with them. Antelucano, before breake of day. Anteméttere, metto, misi, messo, to pre∣fer or put before. Antenscere, nasco, nacqui, nato, to be borne before. Antenati, predecessors, forefathers, pro∣genitors, ancestors or elders. Antenna, the maine yard or saile yarde of a ship, a pole, a perch or stake, a staffe. Antenoti, as Pederetti. Antepasto, as Antipasto. Antephitheatro, an amphitheater. Antepónere, pongo, posi, posto, to pre∣fer, to set or put before. Antepenultimo, the last sauing two. Anteriore, former or foregoing. Anthema, an anthem in a church. Anthia, Anthea, as Antia. Anti, a word much vsed in composition be∣fore other words, signifying contrarie∣tie or against. Antia, a kind of broad flat fish very wary and subtill. Antianita, eldership, ancientnes, senio∣ritie. Antiano, elder, ancient, senior, an alder∣man. Antibachio, a foote of a verse of three syllables, whereof the two first are long, and the last short. Antica, that part which is towarde the east. Anticamente, anciently, of old, of yore. Anticamera, an outward or forecham∣ber. Anticaglie, antiquities, old monuments, ancient reliques. Anticápere, as Anticipare. Anticare, to make ancient, to settle or take roote in a place. Anticato, setled, rooted, antiquated. Anticatoni, bookes which Caesar wrote against Cato. Anticaio, an antiquarie. Anticategoria, pleading when one accu∣seth the other. Antichi, elders, ancestors, predecessors, progenitors, forefathers. Antichità, antiquitie, ancientnes, age, Antichristo, antichrist, contrarie to Christ. Anticipare, to preuent, to supplant, to an∣ticipate. Anticipatione, anticipation, preuention, supplanting. Anticipatore, a preuenter, a supplanter. Antico, ancient, senior, anticke, old, stale. Anticoli, as Antiesi. Anticuore, as Antecóre. Antidoto, an antidote or remedie for poison. Antiesi, those that dwell vnder one halfe meridian and parallel of like distance from the Equator, the one northwarde, the other southward. Antifana, an antheme in the church. Antifate, a kinde of blacke stone. Antifrasi, a figure where a word hath a contrarie meaning. Antiguardia, a vantgarde, a forewarde, a vawarde. Antillida, an herbe whereof there be two kindes something like vnto Lentils. Antilogia, contradiction or gainsaying. Antimonio, a minerall called Stibium or Antimonium. Antinomia, a repugnance betweene two lawes. Antipasto, any thing that is eaten or ser∣ued in first at a table. Quelquechoses to prouoke appetite. Also a kinde of verse or rime. Antipate, a kinde of blacke stone. Antipathia, a contrarietie in naturall qualities. Antiperistasia, a repulsion on euery part, whereby any thing is made more strong in it selfe, by the restraining of the con∣trarie. Antipetto, a stomacher. Also a disease or swelling in a horses breast. Antipodi, the antipodes that be vnder vs. Antiporto, a portall or porch before a doore. Antiquare, as Anticare. Antiquato, as Anticato. Antiquario, an antiquarie. Antiquaglie, as Anticaglie. Antiquita, as Antichità. Antiquo, as Antico. Antiracino, as Antracino. Antirrino, a kinde of herbe which a scor∣pion seeing he loseth his venome and be∣commeth senselesse. Antisapére, to foreknowe, to knowe be∣fore. Antispasi, a turning to the contrary way. Antispodij, in latin Antispoda: some kinde of phisicke. Antista, a prelate or religious man, a chief ruler, one that excelleth others. Antistite, a president ouer sacred things, as Antista. Antithesi, a figure in rhetorike opposing one contrarie against another contra∣rie. Antitosi, a figure when one case is put for another. Antiuedere, veggo, vidi, veduto, to forese. Antoeci, as Antiesi. Anthora, the yellowe helmet flower, or munkes-hood. Antro, a caue, a den, a hole, a grot, a ca∣uerne. Antracino, blacke as a cole, coleblacke. Antracitide, a precious stone wherein seeme to be sparkes of fire, cast water in it, it kindleth, put in the fire and it quencheth. Antropófago, a deuourer or eater of men. Anulare, the little finger. Anza, a kinde of water snake. Anzare, as Ansare. Anzi, rather, sooner, but. Anziano, an ancient, an elder, a chiefe, a magistrate, an alderman, a senior, a prior. Anziche, rather then, sooner then. Anziche nò, rather, rather yea then no. Anzi piu, rather more. Anzolo, the part of the bell whereto the clapper hangeth. Aogni guisa, howsoeuer, euery way, euery maner of way. Aogni patto, as Aogni guisa. Aombrare, to ouershadow, to obscure, to shadow, to start as a horse. Aoncia, by ounces, by retaile. Aondare, to waue as the sea doth. Aonde, made wauing, wauie, to go stag∣gering, reeling or indenture wise. Aonghiare, to tip with horne as a naile Also to catch with ones nailes. Aornello, a kinde of wilde ash tree with broade leaues. Aorta, the chiefest arterie in any creature the roote, whereof is fastned to the gri∣stle bone which is in the hart, it is called the mother of all arteries. Aorza, sailing with a quarter winde, as mariners say. Aorzare, to saile with a quarter winde. Aotto, put to any day maketh come sea∣uen-night, as Lunedi a otto, a mon∣day come seauen-night. Aparare, as Apparare. Apanciolle, merily, carelesly, without care or thought, hold belly hold. Apar'a paro, hand to hand, euen hand. Aparo, equally. Also as Aparuolo. Aparuolo, a birde in colour greene with red feathers in his wings who feedeth vpon bees and flies. Also one that keep∣eth bees. Aparte, seuerally, apart, from others.
Aparte aparte, part by part, seuerally. Apartare, as Appartare. Apartenére, as Appartenére. Apartenente, as Appartenente. Apartenentia, as Appartenenza. Apartito, put to voices, in doubt. Apasso, by paces, by steps. Ape, Api, a bee or bees. Apeggio, at the woorst, to the woorst. Apelo, by the haire, iust, iumpe, pat, euen, barely, poorely, mincingly. Apena, scarcely, hardly, scantly, scant, vp∣on paine or forfeiture, vnnethes. Apenello, curiously, perfectly, exquisite∣ly, by line and measure, done with a pensill. Aperitiuo, opening, soluble. Aperire, to open, to set open, to declare, to reueale. Aperto, open, opened. Also a man that is burst. Apertura, Apertimento, an opening, an ouerture, a gap, a breach made by as∣sault. Also a leake in a ship. Also a bur∣sting of a mans cods. Apétere, to wish, to couet, to desire or haue an appetite vnto, to long for. Apetibile, to be wished or longed for, longing, wishing for. Apetire, as Apétere. Apetitéuole, as Apetitiuo. Apetito, a stomacke or appetite. Also desi∣red, wished, coueted, longed for. Apetitiuo, sauourie in taste, hauing a good appetite. Apetitiuamente, hungerly, with a good appetite. Apetitoso, as Apetitiuo. Apettare, when a horse doth carie his head so lowe that hee doth touch his breast with it. Aperto, in respect, in comparison, in re∣garde. Also a pursines or shortnes of breath. Apezza, for a wh, a while since, not long since. Apezzo, by peeces. Apezzo apezzo, peece by peece. Aphorismo, a briefe sentence or a docu∣ment. Apiacère, as Piacere. Apiaria, the trade of keeping of bees and making of home, or a place where bees are kept. Apiastra, a birde called a Moodwall that destroieth bees. Apiastro, the herbe baulme or baulme gentle. Apibúe, a strange beast of some pagans heeretofore deemed a prophet and ado∣red as a God. Apice, a teg or a sheepe with a little head and little wooll. Also a foote stoole, a place where one setteth his foote. Apiè, apiedi, at the foote. Also a foote or on foote. Apieno, fully, at full. Apieno popolo, before the people, in viewe of all men. Apigionare, to farme, to rent, to demise. Apigione, at rent, in farme, to hire. Apihuolo, a nickname for a sillie foolish noddie. Apilottare, as Appilottare. Apio, as Appio. Apiolo. Looke Pomo apiolo. Apiombino, perfectly, by line, square, and measure. Apiombo, plump downe, downe right, eeuen or leuell. Apiu modi, many maner of waies. Apisso, a blacke stone pointed with blew vaines, which being once heated with fire remaineth hot seauen daies after. Apiupotére, with might and maine, to the vtmost of ones power. Apláudere, Aplauso, as Appláudere. Apocalissi, a reuelation or a vision. Apocino, a kinde of herbe or weede. Apóco, within a little, by little. Apoco apóco, by little and little. Apócopa, an abridging of the last letter or syllable of a word. Apocopare, to cut off the last syllable or letter of a word. Apocrifa, a thing hid, the originall wher∣of is not knowne. Apogei, windes rising out of the ground. Apogeo, that point of heauen wherein the sunne or any other planet is far∣thest from the centre of the earth. Apoglicarni, a disease in the gums of the teeth. Apógrafo, a copie, an extract, a draught. Apologia, an excuse, an apologie, a de∣fence, a purgation. Apólogo, a tale or fable, teaching lessons for life and manners. Apóna, a medicine helping without pain. Apophiade, certaine strings hanging to the entrailes. Apophisi, that part of a bone which the Anatomists call the processes. Apoplessia, an apoplexie, which is a dis∣ease that taketh away moouing, brea∣thing and feeling, an vnsensiblenes or a numnes. Apopletico, one subiect to the apoplexie. Apoplética vena, the name of a vaine. Aporogie, certaine impressions in the aire, falling or shooting of stars. Apossessionare, as Appossessionare. Apósta, for the nonce, of purpose, expres∣lie, wittingly, voluntarily. Apostare, as Appostare. Apostasia, an apostasie or abiuring of ones religion. Apóstata, a renouncer or abiurer of his religion. Apostatare, to renounce and abiure ones vowed religion. Apostéma, an impostume. Apostemare, to grow to an impostume. Aposteparnismo, a cutting awaie of a bone with a wounde. Aposticciare, to make by art, to worke by the hand any thing, to imitate na∣ture. Aposticcio, made by art or wrought by the hand, counterfait. Apostolato, an apostleship. Apostólico, apostle-like, apostolicall. Apóstolo, an apostle. Apóstrofe, a signe denoting the taking away of the last letter of a worde. Al∣so a figure in speech, as when one con∣uerte his speech from one partie to another, as from the present to the ab∣sent. Apotegma, a short, wittie, and quicke sentence. Apotelesma, a declaration of the signifi∣cation of stars at ones natiuitie, a cal∣culation of ones natiuitie. Apotheosi, a consecration or dedication, a canonization. Apotosi, a disease when the haires about one fall and shed. Appagare, to satisfie, to appaie. Appago, appaid, satisfied. Appaiare, to couple, to paire, or yoke to∣gither. Appalesare, to reueale, to manifest. Appaltare, to set to farme, to hire, to farme, to rent, to demise. Appaltatore, a hucster, a retailer, a ren∣ter, a tenant, or farmer of any thing. Appaltaruolo, as Appaltatore. Appalto, a see farme, a demise. Appamondo, the map or type of the world. Appannare, to hide, to couer, to close, to hoodwinke, to stop or dim or bleare the light. Appannate, drawing board windowes. Appannatotto, fast, plumbe, pampred, fat, well fed, in good plight. Apparare, as Apparecchiare, to learn. Apparato, a preparation, a garnishment. Apparecchiare, to prepare, or set in or∣der, to couer or lay the boord, to dight. Apparecchio, Apparecchiamento, as Apparato.
Appareggiare, to compare, to match, to equall. Also as Apparecchiare. Apparére, as Apparire. Apparente, as Appariscente. Apparentare, to ally or become kinsmen, to marrie togither. Apparenza, as Appariscenza. Apparimento, as Apparitione. Appariscente, appeering or comely, seem∣ly, woorth the seeing, of a good presence. Appariscenza, comelines, seemelines, ap∣parance, an apparition, a shewe, an ap∣pearing, an illusion. Apparire, Appaio, Apparso, to appeere or come in sight, to seeme. Apparitione, as Appariscenza. Apparitore, an officer called an appari∣tor or paritor, a sumner, a beadle, a catchpole. Apparitoria, herbe pellitory of the wall. Apparsione, as Appariscenza. Appartamento, a diuidence, a separation, a seuerall part, a partition. Appartare, to part, to diuide, to sunder, to share. Appartatamente, seuerally, apart. Appartato, parted, diuided, apart, seue∣rall, a sunder. Appartenére, to appertain or belong vnto. Appartenente, appertaining, belonging. Appartenenza, an appurtenance. Appastare, to kneade paste, to make paste, to bepaste. Also to soften, to cram, to feed, to mew, to fatten: to bait a booke: to lay in paste. Appatumare, to reconcile and appease, to pacifie. Appellare, to appeale. Also to name or call, to challenge. Appellagione, Appellatione, an ap∣peale, a challenge. Appellatiuo, appealing. Also that may be appealed. Appello, as Appellagione. Appèndere, Appendo, Appesi, Appe∣so, to hang vp. Also to waigh. Appendice, an appendix, a penthouse, a houell, that hangeth to another thing. Appendio, downe-hanging, downe-ben∣ding, sloping. Appensione, a hanging, an appendixe, a penthouse. Appertenere, as Appartenere. Appertenente, as Appartenente. Appertenenza, as Appartenenza. Appestare, to infect with any plague or contagious disease. Appetire, as Apètere. Appetibile, as Apetibile. Appetitiuo, as Apetitiuo. Appetito, as Apetito. Appetitoso, as Apetitiuo. Appettare, as Apettare. Appetto, as Apetto. Appeuerare, to pepper or to season with pepper. Appeuerata, a kinde of pottage or sauce made with pepper. Appiacére, in sport, for pleasure, in iest. as Piacére. Appianare, to plaine or raze or make smooth, or leuell. Appiano, a kinde of greene colour that painters vse. Appiastricciare, to beplayster, to be∣daube, to belome, to clam or slime togi∣ther, to sticke. Appiattare, to squat or hide, to make flat. Appiatto, squat, hid, secret, closse, flat∣ling, lurking. Appiccare, to hang or fasten vnto, to ioine, sticke or cleaue vnto. Appiccaticcio, clammie, gluish, slimy, burrish, pitchie. Appiccarla a qualcuno, to fasten a iest on one, to make one beleeue the moone is made of greene cheese. Appicatura, a fastning or holding. Appicciolare, to make little, to lessen. Appicco, a hould taking, a holdfast. Appigionare, as Apigionare. Appigione, as Apigione. Appigliare, to take hold off. Appilottare, to tie, to binde, to manickle or make fast, to fetter. Appio, the hearbe smallage or water par∣sley. Applàudere, plaudo, plausi, plauso, to applaude or clap hands for ioy. Applauso, applaude, applause, a clapping of handes in signe of gladnes. Applicare, to applie or haue reference vnto. Applicatione, an application. Appo, with, by or neare, in respect, in re∣gard. Appogare, as Affogare. Appoggiare, to leane vnto or stay vpon, to relye, to rest vpon. Appoggio, a leaning place, a stay, a rest, a helpe. Appònere, pongo, posi, posto, as, Ap∣porre. Apponitore, an obiecter, an imputer, an accuser, an vpbraider. Appontare, as Appuntare. Apponto, iust, iump, fit, euen so, point by point, right so, in the nicke, pat. Appoplessia, as Apoplessia. Appopletico, as Apopletico. Appopolare, to people or store with peo∣ple. Appòrre, to obiect, to charge with, to ap∣pose, to impute, to accuse, to twit, to vp∣braide or cast in the teeth. Also to de∣uine, to hit, to tell or guesse a truth, to lay against. Apportare, to bring or eare vnto. Aportatore, a bringer, a bearer. Appositione, an obiection, an apposition, a charge, an imputation, a guessing of a truth. Appositiuo, that which may be obiected against another. Also supposed. Appositiuo padre, a supposed father. Appossessionare, to take possession of, to put in possession, to impossesse of any thing. Apposta, as Aposta. Appostare, to appointe, to marke, to spie, to lay waite for, to prefix, to pointe. Apposticcio padre, a supposed father. Apposto, guessed or hit a truth, deuined. Appozzare, to diue, to ducke, to plunge vnder water. Appreggiare, as Apprezzare. Appretiare, as Apprezzare. Appréndere, to learne, to take hold off, to take. Apprendimento, a learning or apprehen∣ding. Apprenditore, a learner, an apprentise. Apprensiua, an apprehension or conceit. Also apprehensiue. Apprehéndere, to conceiue or apprehend. Apprehendimento, an apprehension or a conceit. Apprehensiua, as Apprensiua. Appresentare, to present vnto. Appreso, learnt, taken hold off. Appressare, to approche, to come neare or ioine vnto. Appresso, by, neere, fast by, after, behinde, moreouer, besides. Apprestare, to prepare, to make readie, to speed or dispatch. Apprezzare, to prise, to esteeme, to re∣gard, to accoūpt of, to rate or sesse men. Apprezzo, a rate or sessing of men. Also at a price. Appriccioso, as Capriccioso. Approbare, as Approuare. Approbatione, as Approuatione. Approcciare, as Appressare. Approdare, to boord, to ioine, to grapple as ships do: to come to shore. Also to further, to helpe, to succour, to come vp∣on one. Approfittare, to profit, thriue or gaine by. Approfumare, to perfume. Appropiare, as Appropriare. Appropinquare, to approch. Appropriare, to appropriate.
Appropriatione, an appropriation. Approssimare, to approch, to neighbour. Approssimante, approching, neighbou∣ring. Approuagione, as Approuatione. Approuare, to approoue, to allow, to con∣firme. Approuatione, an approbation, a confir∣mation, an allowing. Apputidire, to corrupt, to infect with a stinke. Appulcrare, to beautifie or make faire. Appuntare, to point, to appoint, to prefix: to vnderprop, to set downe, to set the feete or stay against any thing, to set a point on a thing, to tie or binde fast vn∣to. Also to finde fault with one, to be captious or snappish, to carpe at euery trisle. Appuntamento, an appointment or fix∣ing of time or place, an agreement, a pointing. Appuntino, Appuntatore, a nice pee∣uish finde-fault, a Momus, a Zoilus, a carper. Appunto, as Apponto. Appuzzare, to stinke or make to stinke. Aprendere, as Apprendere. Aprenditore, a learner, an apprentice. Apresso, as Appresso. Apretio, a prezzo, at a price, at a rate. Aprico, open, wide, discouered, wide open to the sunne, faire, pleasant. Aprile, the month Aprill. Aprire, Apro, Apersi, Aperto, to open, to set open, to manifest, to declare. Apritura, as Apertura. Apriuare, as Priuare. Apropriare, to appropriate. Aprossi, an herbe that drawes fire vnto it. Apruoua, for the nonce, contending, stri∣uing, vpon proofe. Also to the vtmost, Aptoto, without case. Apuntare, as Appuntare. Apunto, as Apponto. Aquando aquando, from time to time, now and then, somtimes. Aquattro, by fower and fower. Aquattro occhij, face to face, boldly. Aquesta volta, at this time, toward this way, this way. Aqui, here or hither, hitherto. Aquifoglio, the holie or huluer tree. Aquila, an eagle: a kinde of fish: the name of a star: a kinde of coine. Aquilastro, a buzzard. Aquilegia, the herbe or flower Columbine or Setwall. Aquilino, eagle-like. Also a long beakt or nookt nose: a columbine colour. Aquilina, as Aquilegia. Aquilone, a great eagle. The northren winde, the northren partes. A fish much esteemed in Rome. Aquosità, waterishnes, moistnes. Ara, an altar or sanctuarie. Also a star neare Scorpio called the Altar. Also as Aia. Arabascio, a soldiers coate, cassocke, iac∣ket or mandillion. Arabbiare, as Arrabbiare. Arabico, a kinde of gum called Gum A∣rabicke. Taken in iest for Arabiato, enraged. Arabile, earable or plowable ground. Arabo, a kinde of marble stone. Also an Arabian. Aracelle, a kinde of mushroms or tode∣stooles. Aracnoide, a thin skin of the eie. Aragatta, striuing, contending, as it were playing at musse. Aragione, iustly, reasonably, vpon good reason, good cause why. Aragna, Aragne, a spiders web, a fowlers net, toyle or haye. Aragno, a spider. Araldo, an herald, a messenger, an inter∣preter. Aranata, a wilde beast in India as big as a grayhound, bearded as a goate, mou∣thed, footed and handed as an ape. Arancare, to skud or scowre away, to lash out, to swager, to waste, to riot, to lauish. Arancatore, a swaggrer, a waster, a la∣uish riotous man, a swasher. Arancia, Arangia, Aranza, an orenge. Aranciata, the hearbe baulme or baulme gentle. Arancio, Arangio, Aranzo, an orenge tree. Aranda, hardly, scarcely, with much ado. Arare, to plough, to till, to eare or harrowe the ground. Aratiuo, earable, or ploughable grounde Aratolo, as Aratro. Aratore, a ploughman, a husbandman, a harrower, an aker man. Also a kinde of fish which who toucheth hath presently an ague, and let go is presently eased. Aratro, a plough. Also a harrow. Arazzarie, tapistrie or arras works. Arazzi, as Arazzarie. Arbalestra, as Balestra. Arbero, as Arbore. Arbicocche, the fruite Apricocks. Arbintro, hath bin vsed for Laberinto. Arbitrare, to arbitrate, to iudge, to cen∣sure, to awarde, to thinke, to suppose, to giue sentence. Arbitrato, an arbitrement. Also arbi∣trated. Also a compromise. Arbitrio, an arbitrement, an a ward, a censure, a iudgement, a sentence. Arbitro, Arbitratore, an arbitrator, a iudge, an awarder, a sentence giuer. Arbolino, a fish called a Bleake. Arborata, an arbor or bowre of boughs or trees. Arbore, any kinde of tree in generall, a mast of a ship, a pedigree, a stock, a race, a stem. Also the name of a monstrous great fish, and also taken in particular for a Poplar tree. Arboreggiare, to growe or spread as trees. Arboréo, of or pertaining to a tree, branchie or farre spreading. Arbuscello, a shrub, a yong tree, a thicket of yong trees. Arbusto, a shrub, a bramble, a brake, a brier, a bush, a yong groue or thicket planted with yong trees shread and cut: a cops. Arbuto, an arbute or strawberie tree. Arca, an arke, an arche, a great chest, a tombe, a vault, a house. Arcáito, a keeper of a fort or castle. Arcamo, the back or chine-bone of any creature. Arcanamente, secretly, in hidden maner. Arcangelo, an arch-angell. Arcano, Arcani, the secrets or secrecies of heauen. Arcare, to bend like a bowe, to arche or vault. Arcaro, a bowyer, a bowmaker. Arcase, a birde called a Curlue. Arcata, a blow or shot of a bow. Also an agate stone. Arcauolo, a great grandfather. Arcazzene, a kinde of rauenous sea sowle. Arcera, a Woodcock or a Snite. Arcelle, a kinde of scallop, cockle, or such shell fish. Also a kinde of mushrome or todestoole. Archetipo, after the first example, or originall copie. Archetto, a little bowe, a fidling sticke, a racket, a springe to catch birds with. Archibugiare, to shoote, hit, or hill with any kinde of gun, caliuer, or pistoll. Archibugiata, a blowe, or stroke, or shot with a caliuer. Archibugiaro, a gun or caliuer maker. Archibugiere, an harquebusier, a mus∣ketier, a gunner, a shot. Archibugio, a harquebuse, a pistoll, a ca∣liuer, a gun, a musket. Archiciocco, Archicioffo, an Arti∣chock. Archiero, as Arciere.
Archiloici, a kinde of verse. Archimandrita, a chiefe abbot, a prior or prelate, a rector. Archimia, alchimie. Archimista, an alchimist, a chimike. Archipendolo, Archipenzolo, Ar∣chipezzolo, a plummet that carpen∣ters vse to leuell works by. Archipenzolare, to leuell by a plummet. Architetto, Architettore, an architect or builder. Architettura, architecture or building. Architriclino, a steward or maister of a houshold, a marshall of a hall. Architiclino, idem. Archiuescouato, an archbishoprike. Archiuescouo, an Archbishop. Archiuo, as Arciuo. Archiuio, as Arciuo. Arcia, a Woodcock or a Snite. Arciauola, a dopchickin. Arcicanne, Tu menti per le arcican∣ne della gola, Thou lyest in thy very grand archthrote. Arcidiacono, an arche-deacon. Arciduca, an archduke. Arciere, an archer. Also a bowyer. Also a kinde of dry measure. Also taken for such as be of a princes or kings guard. Arcifanfana, a spirit, an illusion, a hob∣goblin, a hag, a robingoodfellow. Arcifanfano, a supreme ruler, director, or find-fault▪ taken in mockerie. Arcifanfo, as Arcifanfano. Arcigoloso, a gormand, an arch-glutton. Arcigno, frowning, lowring, skouling, grim, sowre-looking, powting. Arcionata, any arch-roofe or bow-like building, the vpper part of a coach. Arcione, the arson or saddle bowe. Arcipanca, vsed of Caro for a prince of formes or stooles. Arciprete, an archpriest. Arcissa, a kinde of coche, wagon or cart. Anciuescouado, an archbishopricke. Arciuescouo, an archbishop. Arciuo, a place where records or euiden∣ces be kept: the treasury of monuments, charters or roules, the chancerie or ex∣chequer office, the office of the master of the roules. Also the arches or spirituall court. Arco, a bowe or an arche. Also a tiller of a bowe. Arcobaleno, the raine-bowe or Iris. Arcobalista, a crosse-bowe, a steele-bowe or tiller. Arcobugiare, as Archibugiare. Arcobugiata, as Archibugiata. Arcobugiaro, as Archibugiaro. Arcobugiere, as Archibugiere. Arcobugio, as Archibugio. Arcoceleste, a raine-bowe. Arcolagio, a reele, a rice or wheele to winde reele or spin with. Arcolai, foolish totes, humorous fancies, castles in the aire. Arcolare, to reele or winde silke or yarne vpon a reele or rice. Arcolaio, Arcolo, as Arcolagio. Arcontici, certaine heretikes that denied the resurrection of the flesh, and saide the world was made by princes. Arcopago, a chiefe senate of excellent men in Athens of no certaine number. Arcopendolo, a fish called in latine Zy∣gaena. Also as Archipendolo. Arcorano, as Alcorano. Arcotraue, a crosse beame or chief beame of any frame. Arcotriumphante, a pageant or trium∣phant chariot. Arcouolta, a vault or an arche. Arcouoltare, to vault or arche. Arcturo, a star by the taile of Vrsa ma∣ior. Ardea, a kinde of moore-hen. Ardente, burning, violent, ardent, hot, earnest, furious, glowing. Ardere, Ardo, Arsi, Arso, to burne or consume with fire, to fire. Ardire, Ardisco, Ardito, to dare, to haue courage. Also stoutnes, daring or cou∣rage. Arditamente, boldly, couragiously, stout∣ly, daringly. Arditanza, Ardire, courage, stoutnes, boldnes, daring, valour, hardines. Arditello, a bold, malepert, saucie fellow. Arditezza, Ardimento, as Arditanza. Ardola, as Ardoesa. Ardoesa, a kinde of precious stone where∣in are naturally the pictures of sundrie beastes and birdes. Ardore, heate, burning, violence, furie, ardencie. Arduo, hard, difficult, vneasie, painfull, perilous, dangerous to be attained vnto. Arduità, difficultie, hardnes, vneasines to climbe or reach vnto. Arecare, to bring, to reach, to yeeld. Also to take. Aregano, the herbe Origan or wild Mar∣ioran. Aregazza, Aregata, a woodpie or a piot. Arena, sand or grauell. Arendere, as Rendere. Arendamento, the fruites or rents that any thing yeeldeth. Arendare, to let, to farme, to rent out, to demise. Arendatore, a farmer or yeelder of any paiment, a tenant. Areuino, as Armelino. Arenoso, sandie, grittie, grauelly. Arenga, the fish herring. Arente, aneust, anenst, very near, hard by. Areolo, a little Greeke waight of halfe a caret or two graines. Arequisitione, at the request, instance, intreatie or sute. Aresta, the bone or fin of a fish: the pricks of eares of corne. Arestare, as Arrestare. Arestamento, Aresto, as Arresto. Aretaglio, by retaile, by small, as huck∣sters sell things. Areticare, to torment, to vex, or afflict in minde. Aretio, a kinde of hearbe or weede. Arfilo, a bishop at chesse. Argano, a crane to draw vp heauie things with, a gouldsmiths or wyer-drawers bench to draw with, an instrument or engine to mount any piece of ordinance vp into the cariage. Arganare, to draw vp with a crane, or mount vp any thing. Arganello, as Arganetto. Arganetto, a wyer-drawers bench. Also a crane or pullie vsed in ships to remue wares. Argema, the white of the eye, a disease in the eye, which being in the black of the eye is white, and being in the white is black. Argemone, wilde tansie, or siluerwort. Also as Argema. Argentare, to siluer ouer. Argentata, lip-salue. Also a painting for wmens faces. Argentéo, as Argentino. Argenteria, plate of gold, siluer, or par∣cell gilt. Also a goldsmith rowe. Argentiere, a siluer smith, a steward, spender or cater for a house. Argentina, the hearbe stone-serne, or finger-serne: others affirme it to be the siluer weede or tanzie. Also a kinde of fish. Argentino, siluerie, of a siluer colour, like siluer, of a shrill siluer sound. Argento, siluer, or monie or coyne. Argento solimato, sublimate. Argentolo, full of siluer, siluerie. Also a monied man. Argento viuo, quickesiluer. Argeste, the northwest or westerne wind. Arghe, a wilde beast with the face like a woman. Argilla, potters clay. Argilloso, full of clay, claish, fattie or fertile.
Argillo, as Arzeglio. Arginare, to banke, to trench, to mound, to fortifie, to fence against water, to rampire. Argine, a banke, a trench, a mound, a fence, a rampier against water. Also embost or reared worke. Argirite, the foame that commeth of leade tryed, being in colour like siluer. Argo, Argus with a hundred eyes, cleere-sighted, watchfull. Argoire, to argue or dispute. Argolici, as Argonauti. Argomentare, to argue, to dispute, or make an argument. Argomento, an argument, a signe, a token, a reason, a remedie. Also a gli∣ster. Argonauti, Argonaui, the noble Greekes that went with Iason to fetch the gol∣den fleece. Arguire, to argue or dispute. Argusella, a hornefish, or horneback. Argutamente, subtillie, sharplie, crafti∣lie, wittily, wilily. Argutia, a craft, a subtilitie, a sleight, a wyle. Arguto, subtile, sharp, wylie, craftie, wittie. Aria, looke Aere. Ariamide, an herbe of the colour of fier. Aricordare, to remember. Aricordeuole, mindfull. Aridamente, barrenlie, dryly, parchedly, harshly. Aridezza, as Aridità. Aridire, to make or become dry or barren. Aridità, drynes, barrennes, parchingnes. Arido, dry, barren, parched, harsh. Aridosso, looke Caualcare. Aridromada, a pretious stone growing square like a dye. Ariento, as Argento. Ariete, a ramme, a tupp. Also a warlicke instrument. Arifuso, enough and to spare. Arigogoli, as Arzigogoli. Arilento, slowly, softly, sparingly, hee∣dily. Arimetica, Arithmetica, the arte arith∣meticke. Arimetico, Arithmetico, an arithme∣tician. Arimpetto, oueragainst, opposite. Arincontro, opposite on the other side. Arine, bee-hiues. Arinella, a wrinkle or pleit, a pucker. Arinellare, to wrinkle, to pucker, to pleit. Aringa, as Arringa. Aringare, as Arringare. Aringo, as Arringo. Ariolare, to diuine or soothsay. Ariolatione, a diuination or soothsay∣ing. Ariolo, a diuiner or soothsayer. Arioso, as Aeroso. Ariotino, a wren. Arisato, the hearbe wake robin, rampe, or cuko-pintle. Arischiare, to hazard, to aduenture, or ieopard. Arischio, in hazard, in aduenture, or ieopardie. Arisigare, as Arischiare, Arisigo, as Arischio. Arismetica, the arte of arithmetike. Arismetico, an arithmetician. Arispetto, in respect, in comparison, in regard. Arista, a pin, a prick, a thorne, a prickle, a sting. Aristocratia, a gouernment or principa∣litie of good men. Aristologia, the hearb hartwort or birth∣wort. Aristolochia, idem. Aristula, a pin, a prick, a thorne, the prickles of eares of corne, a sting. Aritroso, frowardly, akewardly, thwart∣ly, crossely. Aritaglio, by retaile, by small pieces. Arithmantia, a foretelling or diuina∣tion by numbers. Aritmo, a rime, or meeter. Arizzare, to stand vp, to reare vp stiffely or rightly. Arlasso, an affront, a wrong, an iniurie, a cousening trick. Arlotta, a prowde, filthie, common whore. Arlottare, to play the common foolish priest, or to play the whore. Arlotto, the name of a merie priest, a lack-latine, or hedge priest. Arma, any weapon or armour, a badge, or armes. Armaio, Armaro, a cupbord, a presse, a wardrobe, an ambrie, a shelfe, an ar∣morie. Armaiuolo, a little ambrie, presse, or shelfe, or cupbord. Armamento, a compleate armour, an ar∣ming. Also an armorie. Armare, to arme, to weapon. Armararo, an armorer. Armare di fuora, as Fare Chiomaz∣suoli. Armaria, an armorie. Armarla galea, a kind of christmas game so called. Armaruolo, an armorer. Armata, an armie, a nauie, a fleete. Armatura, an armour a weapon. Arme, armes, weapon, badges. Arme auree, the chiefe shoulder bones in a horse. Armeggiare, to follow, exercise, or pro∣fesse armes or feates of armes. Also in prouerbiall manner taken for to raue or commit some foolish part, to misse the cushion, or be wide from the purpose, to speake nothing to the matter, tu Ar∣meggi, thou art wide. Armeggiamento, any exercise at armes in what kinde so euer. Armeggiarie, all sorts of armes or ar∣mings, or exercises in armes. Armeggiatore, one that followeth or professeth armes. Armelle, apricock plums. Armellino, an hermine, an hermelin. Also an apricock tree: the colour of a horse so called. Armellina, an apricock plum. Armenio, a kinde of marble or such hard stone. Also a kinde of cullour that pain∣ters vse. Armento, a droue or heard of cattell. Armentaio, a Grasier, a Drouer or heardsman of cattell. Armentale, of or pertaining to heards or flocks. Also a stallion that liues abroade with mares. Armeuole, the name of a birde. Also that may be armed. Armi, all manner of armes or weapons. Armiero, an armorer. Armigero, a follower or professor of armes, an Esquire. Armiggi, an implement about a ship. Armilla, a bracelet about ones armes, a wristband. Also an astronomers instru∣ment made of hollow circles like hoopes. Armi manesche, short hand weapons. Armipotente, mightie in armes. Armolla, the hearbe orage, or orache. Armoneggiare, as Armonizzare. Armonia, harmonie, melodie, accord in musike. Armoniaco, an apricock tree. Also a kind of salt so called. Armoniaca, an apricock plum. Armonioso, Armonico, harmonious, melodious, well tuned, musicall. Armonizzare, to make harmonie, to make melodie. Armonizzante, harmonious, melodious, full of melodie. Arnabo, a kinde of tree in India. Arnese, harnesse, furniture, implements, any thing about arming or apparelling, houshold stuffe, ornament about any thing.
Arnie, beehiues. Arnioni, the raines of the backe. Aro, as Arone. Arogare, as Arrogare. Arogante, arrogant, presumptuous, male∣pert, saucie. Arogantia, arrogancie, presumption, sau∣cines. Arogatione, as Arrogatione. Aromataio, a perfumer, one that sels per∣fumes or spices: an apothecarie. Aromatico, aromaticall, sweete smelling, sauoring sweete: an apothecarie. Aromatite, a kinde of precious stone that hath the smell of myrrhe. Aromatizzare, to perfume or make to smell sweete. Aromatizzante, as Aromatico. Aromato, as Aromatico. Aromore, in a hurly burly, in an vprore. Aronano, a kinde of little fish. Arondella, a sea Swallow, a sea Bat, a sea Reremouse. Arone, the herbe cuckowpintle or wake robin. Aronfa, a plaie at ruffe or trump. Arosegare, to gnaw, to fret, to nibble. Arosigare, as Arosegare. Arostire, to roste, to toste. Arostita, a toste. Arosto, any kinde of rostmeate. Also ro∣sted. Arotare, to grinde the teeth or any thing else▪ to grinde sharpe, to wheele about. Arouersciare, to ouerturn, to ouerthrow, to reuerse, to turne the inside out. Arouerscio, Arouescio, cleane contrary, kim-cam, inside outward, arsiuersie. Arouerscione, Arouescione, as Aro∣uerscio. Arpago, Arpagone, a great hooke, a dragging hooke, a weeding hooke, a rake a harrow, a grubber. Also a pothooke, a crooke. Arpegare, to digge, to rake, to harrowe, to grub, to breake clods of earth or the ground. Arpegone, as Arpago. Arpia, a monster called a Harpie. Arpiceri, the names of certain guts in any bodie. Arpicordo, an instrument like clarigols. Arpicone, as Arpago. Arpigia, greedines, rauenousnes, rapaci∣tie. Arpino, as Arpago. Arpione, as Arpago, the hinge of a gate, the hooke whereon a dore hangeth and mooueth. Arpioncelli, tacks or tenterhookes, or little hookes. Arquata, as Auosetta. Also a curlue. Arra, any earnest, pledge or earnest penie giuen vpon bargaine, a gods penie. Arrabatarsi, to shrug or shrinke, to crinch togither as one when he is a cold. Arrabbiare, to enrage, to grow furious, or franticke, to be mad or moodie. Arragiato, a horse that hath the laske. Arramacciare, to cut off, to lop boughes or trees, to spoile, to hauocke. Arrampare, to take hold of, to climbe vp, to holde fast, to drag, to gripe, to creepe, to twine about as Iuie doth: to rampe or branch vp. Arrampegare, as Arrampare. Arrampinare, as Arrampare. Arrancare, to snatch vp, to hurle, to fling, to throwe, to twirle about violently. Arrancato, stripes, blowes, hurlings, throwes. Also plucked vp. Arrancigliare, as Arrampare. Arrandella, a cudgell or sticke to winde a corde about, as carriers do about their packs or pack-saddies. Arrandellare, to hurle, to throwe or fling with violence. Arrangolare, to wrangle, to dodge, to chafe aloud that all may heare. Arrappare, as Arrampare. Arraspare, as Raspare. Also to snatch with haste or greedines. Arrecare, as Arecare. Arredare, to dight, to adorne, to set out handsome, to decke to garnish. Arrenato, sicke or troubled with the stone or grauell in the bladder, graueled. Arrendare, as Arendare. Arrendamento, as Arendamento. Arréndere, to yeeld, to render, to giue, to restore, to stretch. Arrendeuole, yeelding, stretching, plia∣ble, giuing, tractable, gentle. Arredi, Arrendi, as Arnese. Arrequiare, to quiet, to rest, to appease, to asswage. Arrestare, to arrest, to stay, to cease, to de∣taine: to set a launce in his rest, to rest. Arresto, an arrest, a staie, a rest, a detai∣ning. Also a decree and ordinance or iudgement in lawe. Arretitio, which creepeth in priuily, or is pulled by violence of a diuell or spirit. Also pores or little vnseene holes. Arretrare, to retire or withdraw backe. Arretrattare, to treate or handle againe. Arreso, yeelded, giuen, rendred, stretched, restored. Arrezzare, as Arizzare. Arricciare, to affright, to terrifie till ones haire stand and stare, to curle, to frizle, to make rough or brissly. As Arizza∣re. Also to rough-cast any worke with mortar. Arricchire, to enrich or grow rich. Arricordare, to remember. Arricordeuole, mindfull. Arricordo, a remembrance, a warning, an admonition, a document. Arridere, to smile, to fauour, to laugh to∣gither. Arringa, as Aringa, an aray: an arange: an oration, a declamation. Arringare, to arange or set in aray or or∣der of troupes, to professe armes, to de∣clame or make a noise, to make an ora∣tion in some publike place: to run at tilt. Arringatore, a declamor, an orator, a common speaker: a runner at tilt, a tilter. Arringhiera, as Arringo. Arringo, a pulpit: a riding or carreering place, a liste for horses, or feates of armes: a declamation, an oration, a noise, a common loud speech. Arrischiare, to hazard, to aduenture, to ieopard, to endanger. Arrischieuole, hazardous, aduenturous, bold, fond hardie, ieopardous. Arrischio, hazard, danger, ieopardie, ad∣uenture. Arriuare, Arribare, to arriue, to reach vnto, to obtaine. Arriuata, an arriuall or comming to a place. Arriuo, an arriuall or reaching, or com∣ming vnto. Arrizzare, as Arizzare. Arroba, a pipe, a barell, a tun, a hogshead, or a great measure of wine or oile in Spaine. Also a waight waying fiue and twenty pound waight. Arrobinare, to make or become red or ruddie: to fill or swell with drinking. Arrocare, to become or be hoarse, to snort. Arrocchiare, as Arrocare, to tell incre∣dible tales, as we say to lie for the whet∣stone. Arrochisire, as Arrocare. Arrogare, to arrogate, to ascribe, to im∣pute, to attribute, to presume, to insult, to adopt. Arrogante, as Arogante. Arrogantia, as Arogantia. Arrogatione, arrogation, a presuming, an adopting, an imputing. Arrógere, rogo, rogei, rogiuto, as Ar∣rogare. Also to yeeld or giue helpe, to adde vnto. Arroginire, to become rustie, mouldie or mustie. Arroginoso, rustie, mustie, mouldie. Arrolare, to enroule or write, or note vp∣on
a checke roule, to register, to put vpon the files or recordes. Arroncigliare, to snort, to speake hoarse, to hooke, to rake, to snatch, to filch, to seaze on or gripe violently. Arrosigare, to gnawe, to fret, to nibble. Arrossare, to blush, to make or become red. Arrossire, as Arrossare. Arrostare, to roste, to toste, to burne, to parch, to blast, to scorch. Also to turne or winde round. Arrostire, as Arrostare. Arrostita, a tost or rosting. Arrosto, as Arosto. Arrotare, to grinde or make sharpe or keene, to set an edge vpon, to gnash with the teeth, to set ones teeth an edge, to prouoke or stir vp, to incense. Also to clip money. Arrouelare, to wheele or turne about, to dodge, to wrangle, to chafe, to skould. Arrouersciare, Arrouesciare, as Aro∣uersciare. Arrouerscio, Arrouescio, as Arouer∣scio. Arrozzire, to become or make rude or clownish. Arrubbare, to steale, to rob. Arrubinare, as Arrobinare. Arruffare, to brissle, to desheuell or stare with ones haires. Also to strut or pranck it as a Turkie cocke. Also to touze, to tug, to bang or ribbaste one. Arruginire, as Arroginire. Arruotare, as Arrotare. Aruotatore, a sheare grinder: any grin∣der else. Arsenale, a storehouse for munition, but properly a place of exercises. Arsenico, Arsnick or rats-bene or Or∣pine. Arsibile, that which may burne. Arsicciare, to burne, to blast, to parche, to scorch, to tan in the sun. Arsiccio, burnt, blasted, scorched, tand with the sun. Arsinico, as Arsenico. Arsione, a burning, a skalding, a fire, an inflammation, a flame. Arsiuo, burning, skalding, parching. Arsis, the eleuation or lifting vp of the voice in singing. Arso, burnt, skalded, consumed with fire. Arsura, heate, burning, scorching. Artamente, Artatamente, subtilly, craf∣tily, wittily, by arte. Also in strict maner, straightly, in bonds or fetters. Artano spade, a diuelish character that nigromants vse. Arte, an arte, a trade, an occupation, a sci∣ence, a craft. Artefice, an artificer, a trades-man, a man of an occupation, a crafts-man. Arteficiale, Arteficioso, artificiall. Arteficio, arte, knowledge, skill, worke∣manship. Artegiano, as Artefice. Arteggiare, to artize, to liue by an arte, to professe an occupation, to shew arte or skill. Arteglieria, as Artiglieria. Artegliero, as Artigliero. Artelaria, as Artiglieria. Arteria, an arterie or beating or panting or pulse of a mans veine. Artemisia, the hearbe Motherwoort or Mugwoort. Artenne, a kind of rauenous sea fowle. Artetica, a disease in a Hauke. Arti, artes, trades, sciences, occupations. Artico, the articke pole, northward or northren. Articolare, Articulare, to articulate, to condition, to couenant, to distinguish. Also pertaining to the ioints. Also a painfull swelling or gout in any ioint. Also the Cowslip or Primrose. Also to speake distinctly, to point or distinguish ioint by ioint. Articolatamente, articulately, distinct∣ly, from point to point, ioint by ioint. Articolo, Articulo, an article. Also a na∣turall composition of bones or ioints, a ioint, a knuckle. Artificiale, Artificioso, artificiall, accor∣ding to arte. Artifice, as Artefice. Artificij, deuises, sleights, deceits, cunning shifts or tricks. Artificio, arte, skill, knowledge. Artigiano, as Artefice. Artiglieria, artillerie, ordinance. Artigliero, a gunner, a caster or founder of ordinance. Artiglij, the talents, clawes or pounces of birdes or haukes. By a metaphor the bands of loue. Artimone, the maine or greatest saile of a ship, a foresaile. Artista, as Artefice. Arto, narrow, straight, pinching. Artomi, a beast like a Hedgehog, hauing the shape of a Mouse and a Beare. Arturo, as Arcturo. Aruba, Arruba, by stealth, filchingly, a bootehaling, a free-booting, in a hurlie burlie, a snatch and away. Arue, foolish, idle, loytring sports. Aruggiare, to make or dye red. Aruotare, as Arrotare. Aruspicio, a diuiner or soothsayer, by looking into beasts bowels. Arze, haec Arsenaria, or Colonia in latine. Arzauola, a ducklin, or a dbchickin. Arzeglio, a horse with a white foote on the farther side. Arzenale, as Arsenale. Arzente, burning, scorching. Arzere, to burne, to scorch. Arzigogalo, a lifter, a heauer, a leaer, an vnderprop: a foolish, fond, toyish fellow. Arzigoghelarie, foolish toyes, fond tricks, toyish parts. Arzigogolare, as Fantasticare. Arzigogoli, suddaine toyes, foolish hu∣mors, fantasticall deuises. Arzilla, clay, or a tough earth, claie earth. Arzinanello, a kinde of watersnake. Asacco, Asaccomano, to the spoile, to the sacke, ransakt. Asaluamento, Asaluo, to safetie, safely. Asalto a salto, leape by leape, skipping. Asanzo, a kind of game at tables so called Asaro, the hearbe folesfoote, or wilde Spikenard. Asbacco, careleslie, at randon, enough, hold-belly-hold. Asbaraglio, at sixe and seauen, in con∣fusion, careleslie. Asbergo, a brest plate, a curasse or vat∣plate. Asbestino, a kinde of web in India that no fier can consume. Asbesto, a stone in Arcadia, which once kindled will neuer be quenched againe. Asca, a rafter, a single quarter, a stub, a stake, a pile, a chip, a lath, a stump, a stocke. Ascapezzo, a kinde of multiplying by broken numbers. Ascatafascio, at randome, at sixe and seauen. Ascaride, arse-wormes, or gut-wormes. Ascauezzacollo, headlong, furiouslie, careleslie. Ascella, the armehole, the armepits. Ascéndere, scendo, scesi, sceso, to as∣cend, to mount vp. Ascendente, ascendent, ascending. Ascentio, woormewood. Ascentione, an assension or Ascension day. Ascesa, an ascending place. Aschifo, Aschiuo, loathsome, yrkesome, filthie, in abhomination. Aschincio, reeling or staggering as a drunkard, indenturewise. Aschio, spite, rage, vexation, disdaine, yrkesomnes, swelling, malice, venome,
rancour. Aschioso, spitefull, raging, disdainfull, furious, yrkesome, moodie, venemous, full of rancoure. Aschite, a kinde of dropsie when much waterie humor is heaped vp betweene peritoneum and the bowels, and makes the bellie swell. Ascia, a pickaxe, an adze, a chipaxe, a plane. Also a boord or a planke. Asciare, to cut out worke with an axe or adze. Also to plane, to boord or to planke. Asciogliere, to assoile, to free, to absolue, to acquit. Asciomene, an herbe which maketh wilde beasts leese their fiercenes. Asciro, a plant, or herbe called in latine Ascirum. Asciugare, to wipe or dry. Asciugatoio, a wiper or a towell. Asciutto, wiped or dried. Asclopiadi, a kind of verse or meter. Al∣so an herbe like Iuie hauing manie rootes. Ascoltare, to harken, to listen. Ascoltatore, a harkner or listner. Ascondaregli, lurking, secret, or hiding holes or corners. Ascondere, to hide, to conceale. Ascondimento, a hiding. Ascoso, Ascosto, hidden, hid, lurked, se∣cret. Ascrittitio, a writer, a clarke, an enregi∣strer. Ascriuere, to ascribe, to impute. Ascrocco, scot-free, at other mens char∣ges. Asdegno, in contempt, in disdaine. Asenno, wittingly, for the nonce. Asella, cod-fish or hadock-fish. Asfadello, a flower called a Daffodill or Affodill. Asfalto, a kinde of drug or gum that bur∣neth. Also a kinde of medicament. Also the English Galingale. Some take it for a kinde of wilde Oliue. Also our ladies Rose or Rose of Ierusalem. Asfodillo, as Asfadello. Asiati, a kinde of ducke, wigin or eale. Asicurtà, vpon assurance or safetie. Asia, a fish which brought in sight of the fire is presently enough and fit to bee eaten, else very harde. Asieme, togither, helter-skelter. Asilo, Asillo, a racke to soder cattle in. Also a place of sanctuarie, a franchise or place of priuiledge. Also the sting of a waspe, or a waspe it selfe. Asima, a disease in a horse growing in the lungs, a fainting or swouning. Also a painfull drawing of the breath with a wheezing or puffing, a pursines or cough in the lungs. Asimiglianza, Asimilitudine, like or resembing, as. Asinaggine, as Asinaria. Asinaria, follie, foolishnes, of an asses con∣dition, assishnes. Asinaro, a driuer or keeper of asses. Asindicare, as Assindicare. Asinello, a little asse. Also a kind of fish. Asinesco, asselike, like an asse or a foole. Asinino, assish, foolish. Asinità, as Asinaria. Asino, an asse. Also a cod or codfish. Asio, a kinde of stone called Eate-flesh, bcause that dead bodies laid therein in fortie daies consume away. Also a kinde of owle called a horne coute with fea∣thers on each side of his head like eares. Asma, as Asima. Asmatico, pursie, short winded, broken winded. Asmodeo, a friend or louer of lecherie. Asofficientia, sufficiently, ynough. Asoleo, by furrowes, chamsured. Asorte, by chaunce, by lot, by fortune. Aspada tratta, to swords drawing. Aspagnolato, spaniolized, foolish, effe∣minate or bragging. Aspalto, Aspalato, as Asfalto. Asparago, the plant Sparage. Aspare, to reele, to winde or make silke into skeines. Aspasso, to solace, to walke, to sport, to re∣create. Aspe, as Aspide. Asperella, a kinde of weede growing in the water. Aspergere, to sprinkle, to bedeaw. Aspergolo, asprinkle or brush to sprinkle holy water with. Asperino, a beast bearing a rich surre: some take it to be the budge. Also a coine in Turkie. Asperita, sharpenes, sowrenes, craggednes, roughnes, eagernes, seueritie, surlines, rigour, austeritie. Aspernabile, contemptible, to be skorned or reiected. Aspero, sharpe, sowre, rough, craggie, ea∣ger, seuere, cruell, sure, vnpleasant, churlish, rude, austere, hard, grieuous, fierce, stubborne, rigorous, rugged, stinging, biting. Also a kinde of come in Turkie. Also a kinde of twining brier or wee. Asperso, sprinckled, bedwed. Aspersorio, as Aspergolo. Asputtare, to expect, to tarrie for, to per∣taine or belong vnto. Aspettatione, expectation, tariance. Aspetto, aspect, countenance, presence. Aspid, an aspike or aspe. Also deafe. Al∣so a short piece of ordinance called a chamber or a mortar. Aspidochilone, a fish that swims in the water, flies in the ayre, and creepeth on the ground. Aspilate, a pretious stone like siluer. Aspirare, to aspire, to aime at to pretende, to breath, to desire. Aspiratione, an aspiration, a drawing of breath, an influence. Aspleno, the hearbe Ceterach, Waleferne, Miltwaste, Stoneferne, Scaleferne, or Fingerferne. Aspo, Aspolo, a reele to reele or winde yearne. Also a ring put in the spindle to make it way, a whirroll. Aspramente, cruelly, seuerely, roughly, surly, sharpely. Aspredo, a fish called a ruffe or a gold∣fish. Aspreggiare, to prouoke to roughnes, to misuse, to abuse sharpely, to exasperate. Asprezza, as Asperita. Aspro, as Aspero. Asprone, a kind of soft, blackish, rugged stone, that they haue about Rome to build with. Aspruso, deawie, sprinckled. Asquadra, by troopes or squadrons. Asquarzo, in hauocke, at six and seuen. Assadolce, a kinde of sweete gm called Beniamin or Benzoin. Assafetida, a kinde of lothsome liquor so called of the Apothecaries. Assaggiare, to taste, to trie, to prooue, to assay. Assaggiatore, a taster, a proouer, an as∣sayer. Assaggio, a taste, a triall, an assay, an es∣say. Assaiare, as Assaggiare. Assai, enough, sufficient, many, much, mi∣ckle. Assaiuolte, many times. Assaissimo, very much, enough to spare. Assaiuólo, a bustard, a bistard. Also a harmowle or schechowle. Assaldare, to solder or ioine togither clos∣ly, to staunch, to close vp a wound or blood. Assaldatura, a closing, a stanching, a sol∣dring. Assalire, to assaile, to assault, to set vpon, to inuade. Assalitore, an assayler, an assaulter, an inuader. Assalone, the name of a bird.
Assalto, an assault, an inuasion, an on∣set. Assannare, to bite, to take hold off with the tuskes. Assanno, a biting, or pinch with the teeth. Assaporare, to sauour, to taste. Assassinare, to murther; to rob by the high way. Assassinamento, Assassinaria, a mur∣ther or a robberie. Assassino, Assassinatore, a murtherer, a high way theefe, a robber. Asse, a boord, a planke. Also an axletree of a wagon or cart: the diameter of the world, a hooke of a doore or gate. Also a wilde beast in India with a speckled skin. Assecurare, to assure, to warrant. Assedare, to swage, to appease, to qualifie, to mitigate. Assedére, to sit neere or by. Assediare, to besiege or heleaguer. Assedio, a siege or leagre. Asseggere, Asseggo, Assisi, Assiso, to sit downe, to pitch in a place, to place. Asseggiare, to sit downe or rest. Assegnamento, an appointment or assig∣nation. Assegnare, to appoint, to assigne, to al∣leadge, to addresse, to teach, to delegate, to institute. Assegnatamente, orderly, duly, accor∣ding to appointment. Asseguire, to attaine, to atchieue, to bring to passe. Asseguimento, an obtaining, an atchie∣uing, an accomplishing. Assellare vena, a large vaine being a branch of Vena caua. Assemblare, to assemble, to gather togi∣ther. Also to seeme to resemble. Assemblea, an assemblie or congrega∣tion. Assembrare, as Assemblare. Assembramento, as Assemblea. Assemplare, to copie or take an example by. Assennare, to nod, to becke, to winke or make any other signe. Also to instruct, to teach. Assenso, Assentimento, an assent or con∣sent: a voice or a grant. Assentare, to absent or sit downe. Assentatione, absence, an absenting. Al∣so an assenting vnto. Assente, absent. Assentia, Assenza, absence. Assentio, Assenzo, frankensence. Also the herbe Wormwood. Assentione, an ascension or ascending. Assentire, to assent, to consent, to graunt, to condescend. Assepare, to compasse with hedges, to hedge, to fence or mound about. Assepatore, Assepiatore, a hedger. Assepiare, as Assepare. Asserenare, as Rasserenare. Asserire, Asserisco, Asserito, to affirme, to assure, to auerre, to auouch. Assertione, an assertion, an affirmation, an auouching. Asserto, affirmed, auouched, asserted. Assertiuamente, affirmatiuely, auouch∣ingly, with an assertion. Assessare, to limit or assise, to assesse, to taxe, to impose. Assessinare, as Assassinare. Assessinamento, as Assassinamento. Assessino, as Assassino. Assesso, the assise, value or alloy of mo∣ney, as we say sterling or according to the standard. Assessore, an assessor or assiser, a limiter, a counsellor. Assestare, as Assettare. Assetare, to bee or make thirstie, to long for. Assettare, to settle, to order, to place, to dresse vp, to reforme, to redresse, to fix, to conforme. Assettatura, a fishing line: a setling, an ordring of any thing. Assettatuzzo, a minion, a gallant, an af∣ffected fellow. Also accommodated. Assetto in Assetto, in order, in good order, in good forme, handsomly: staie or setling. Asseuerare, to affirme, to protest, to swear, to auerre, to auouch. Assibilare, to hisse like a serpent. Assicella, a little board or a planke or splint of thin boords, a spall of a broken stone. Assicurare, to warrant, to assure. Assicuranza, suretie, assurance. Assicurtà, boldly, vpon assurance. Assiderare, to stiffen or benum with cold, to swoune, to enterfer as a horse doth, to blast or strike with a planet, to be ta∣ken: to gall or rub off the skin. Assideratione, freezing, benumming, en∣terferring, galling or rubbing off the skin, blasting or a striking with a pla∣net. Assidére, to sit downe, to situate. Assidenza, the act of sitting downe, a sit∣ting, a setling. Assidi, as Epicicli. Assiduare, to continue with diligence. Assiduità, continuance, diligence, daily labour. Assiduo, carefull, continuing, diligent, la∣boursome. Assieme, togither, helterskelter. Assiepare, to hedge or fence about. Assiepatore, a hedger, a maker of hodges. Assillare, to bite with a horseflie. Also to leape and skip furiously as oxen do when they are stung and bitten with flies. Assillo, a sting or pricke of a waspe. Also a sharpe goade. Assimigliare, to resemble or be like. Assindicare, to iudge, to arraine, to con∣demne by order of law, to trie by law. Assinghiozzati sospiri, sobbing, deepe fetcht sighes. Assioma, authoritie by reason of an of∣fice, a maxime, a principle, a generall ground or rule of any art. Assinomantia, diuinaon or witchcraft done by hatchets. Assisa, size that painters vse. Also an as∣sise or manner. Also a liuerie, a guise or fashion, an assise or session. Assisare, to sise, to sesse, to assise, to sute well. Assiso, sitten downe, seated, situated. Assistere, to assist, to aide, to helpe. Assistenza, helpe, assistance. Assistente, assistant, helping. Assito, a beame, a prop, a quarter, a iaw, a supporting peece of timber. Assiuólo, as Assaiuólo. Asso, an ace vpon a die or vpon a carde. Also a nought or nothing. Associate, to accompanie or associate. Assodare, to make solide, fast or hard, to order or settle a matter. Assogna, grease or tallow. Assognare, to dreame, to raue. Also to tallow, to grease. Assolato, setled vpon fower feete, sld. Assoldare, to presse soldiers, to take men into pay. Assóluere, Assoluo, Assolsi, Assolto, to acquit, to discharge, to pardon or ab∣solue, to remit, to forgiue, to assoile. Assoluto, absolued, discharged, remit∣ted, forgiuen, quitted. Also absolute. Assolutione, absolution, remission, for∣giuenes, assoiling, perfection, vprigh∣nesse, absolutenes. Assolutorio, pertaining to absolution. Assomiglianza, resemblance, like, after the maner. Assomigliare, to resemble. Assomigliante, resembling, like. Assommare, to summe or heape vp. Assongiare, to grease with hogs grease. Assongia, tallow or hogs grease. Assontione, an assumption. Assonto, assumed, mounted vp, obtained,
climed, ascended. Also a charge or office. Assopire, to supple, to mitigate, to asswage, to smoother. Assorbire, to swallow vp or sip vp. Assordaggine, deafnes, thicknes of hea∣ring. Assordare, to make or become deafe. Assordaforni, a common scould or railer. Assortare, to sort, to consort or accompa∣nie, or come to effect. Assortire, as Assortare. Assotigliare, to subtilize, to make small, slender or thinne, to distinguish, to de∣uide, to beate or stamp thin. Assúmere, to assume, to vndertake, to mount vp. Assunto, as Assonto. Assùrgere, to raise or rise vp. Asta, a staffe, a launce, a speare, a pike, a long poule. Astace, a Lobster-fish, a sea-crab. Astaffetta, in post-hast, hastelie. Astallare, to abide or stay in a stable, to stable, to stale, to abide, to remaine. Astanti, by-standers, being present. Astare, to arme one as a speareman, or pikeman. Astase, Astese, Astrase, as Astace. Astenère, tengo, tenni, tenuto, to ab∣staine or forbeare, to temper. Astenente, abstinent, temperate. Astenentia, abstinence, temperance. Astenuato, leane, meagre, gaunt, lanke. Asterite, a kinde of pretious sparkling stone. Asteratico, a kinde of skie colour. Also a stone or earth so called. Astersione, a wiping away, a cleansing, a drying vp. Astersiuo, that will wipe away, cleanse, or dry vp. Asti, or Cucchi, monie in rogues lan∣guage, or pedlers french. Astesi, a kinde of sea-crab or lobster, so called in Italie. Astinenza, as Astenentia. Astio, as Aschio. Astioso, as Aschioso. Astipulatore, that is of one accord or as∣sent with another. Astiuóla, Asticciuola, a little launce, a little speare, a little staffe. Astoccata, by or with a thrust or stoc∣cado, or a phoine. Astolfeida, a fault which many haue to presume to haue that which they haue not, as Astolfo presumed by his force to do that which his enchaunted speare did. Astorre, a Gossehauke. Astorella, a tassell of a Gossehauke. Astrabacca, the herbe Asarabacca or Hazellwort. Astracco, a floore or a seeling that is fret∣ted. Astragalomantia, a diuination or casting of lots with dice, or hucklebones. Astragalo, a hucklebone. Also the neck∣bone. Also a kind of word in building. Also the herbe Peasearthnut. Astrapia, a kinde of whitish, and greenish stone. Astrapié, in haste, a snatch and away. Astrarre, to abstract or draw out. Astrattezza, a strange, far-fetcht con∣ceite, an abstractnes. Astratto, abstracted, drawne out, an ab∣straction. Astrattione, abstraction. Astrèa, taken for iustice, the daughter of Astrea and Aurora. Astretta, a gripping or pinching at the heart. Astrettiuo, restrictiue, restringent. Also enforcing. Astretto, constrained, vrged, forced, bound, at a narrow passe, compelled. Astrico, a pauement, a place that is paued. Astringente, astringent, enforcing. Astringere, to constraine, to force, to binde, to inforce, to compell. Astrio, a precious stone in India with a shining star in the centre or midst of it. Astro, a starre. Astroccomusiato, floored, seeled, or pa∣ued with frets. Astroide, a stone which being laide vpon marble wet with vineger or iuice of li∣mons doth stirre and creepe away. Astrolabio, an astrolobe, an instrument whereby the motions of the stars is ga∣thered. Astrologare, to play the Astrologer. Astrologia, Astrologie. Astrologo, an Astrologer. Astronamo, an Astronomer. Astronomare, to plaie the Astronomer. Astronomia, Astronomie. Astronomizzare, as Astronomare. Astronomo, an Astronomer. Astroppicciare, to rub or claw hard. Astura, a shell-fish called a nakre. Astutia, craft, malice, subtilitie, wit, shrewdnes. Astuto, craftie, malicious, subtill, wittie, shrewd. Asua posta, at his pleasure, at his perill. Asua scelta, at his choice. Asuefare, to accustome, or be wont. Asuefatione, as Asuetudine. Asueto, wont, accustomed. Asuetudine, a custome, a fashion, a wont. Asuo danno, at his perill. Asuolo asuolo, piled in order as herrings be in barrels. Asuo mal grado, in despight of him. Asu senno, after his owne wit. Atagliare, to fit, to cut or square any thing Atalche, so that, then. Atanato, the herbe Rose campion. Atanasia, the herbe Tansie. Also a kind of salue so called of the Apothecaries. Atante, in stead of Aiutante, helping. Atanto, in the meane time, there whilest, insomuch, so farre foorth, then. Atapezzare, as Atapezzire. Atapezzire, to burnish, to trim or smug vp, to hang or adorne with tapestrie. Atarantolati, such as are bitten or stung with the serpent Tarantola. Atarantula, as Tarantola. Atare, to helpe, to addresse, to fit, to settle. Atastare, as Attastare. Ateo, Atheo, Atheista, an atheist, a mis∣creant, godles, one that thinkes there is no god. Atempo, in time or season, for time, vpon trust, fitly, oportunely. Atempo luogo, in due time and place. Attentione, attention or heede. Atento, attempted, attentiue, heedie, marking. Atentone, groping in the darke vpon all fower. Aterina, a fish called in latin Atherina. Atergo, behinde ones backe, behinde. Athleta, a wrestler or a contender with hande and foote, a champion. Atimo, Attimo, an atome or mote or an indiuisible thing. Also a moment of time. Atleta, as Athleta. Atomo, Attomo, as Atimo. Atorno, about, in a rounde, in a circle, touching, concerning. Atorto, wrongfully, against right or rea∣son. Atoscare, as Atossicare. Atossicare, to poison or enuenome. Atramento, a kind of dying or colouring. Also inke. Also a kinde of minerall salt. Atramento sutorio, copperas or vitrioll, or shoomakers blacke. Atrauersare, to trauerse or crosse the ground: to thwart, to crosse, to hinder. Atrauerso, acrosse, contrarie to expecta∣tion, ouerthwart. Atristare, as Attristare. Atro, darke, blacke, sable, pitchie, dread∣full, cruell, lothsome, gastly, grisly, dred∣full, horrible. Atroce, fierce, cruell, fell, seuere. Atrochite, as Astroide.
Atrocità, fiercenes, crueltie, seueritie. Atrophia, a disease, when one for feare eateth lesse, or through too much greedi∣nes eateth more than he ought, where∣vpon followeth a consumption or pining away. Some take it for a disease in the eies. Attaccare, to fasten, to cleaue, to ioyne, to hang vp, to pitch vp, to tacke, to attache. Attaccar battaglia, to ioyne battell. Attaccaticcio, clammie, slimie, pitchie, fastning, cleauing vnto. Attaccatura, a fastning, tying or ioyning vnto. Attacco, a holdfast, a fastening. Attafanato, a flie-stoong or flie-bitten-coloured horse. Looke Tauani. Attagene, a daintie bird called a godwit. Some take it for a moore hen. Some say that in companie it sings, but neuer alone. Attagliare, to sooth one vp in his speeches, to make good what one saies, to fit, to grace, to fadge or square fit with any thing. Attalentare, to assent or agree to ones minde. Attalianato, Italianated or Italianized. Attamente, aptly, fitly. Attanagliare, to tanacle, to pinch with tanacles or tongs. Attare, to act, to make apt, to fit. Attasentare, to put to silence, to husht. Attastare, to feele, to grope, to trie, to prooue, to taste, to assay, to tent as a sore. Attasti, the frets of any instruments. Attauanato, as Attafanato. Attediare, to wearie, to ouercome one with tediousnes. Attegare, idem. Also to dance on ropes of to tumble. Attegatore, a teacher of nimblenes, a iug∣ler, a tumbler, an actiue man, a dancer vpon ropes. Atteggiare, to teach, to make docile or actiue, to be nimble, to iugle, to tumble. Atteggiatore, an actor, a teacher, a tum∣bler, a iugler, an actiue man. Attelana, a kinde of comedie diuided into actes. Attelare, to put or place in due, right and euen order. Attempare, to grow or increase in age. Attempato, aged, old, in yeeres. Attendare, to encampe, to pitch a tent. Attèndere, tendo, tesi, teso, to accom∣plish, to keepe, to harken, to expect, to stay, to tarrie. Also to attend, to waite, to follow, to sollicite, to marke, to heare, to regarde, to apply. Attenenti, kinsmen, allies, cosins, pertai∣nings. Attenère, tengo, tenni, tenuto, to keepe, to hold fast, to take hold, to pertaine, to belong vnto, to obserue. Attentare, to attempt, to hazard, to ad∣uenture. Attentato, attempted, hazarded. It is also taken in Grisoni, when a horse goeth so heedfully or warily, that he dareth not tread one foote on another. Attentione, attention, attendance, dili∣gence, care, heed. Attentiuo, attentiue, diligent, carefull, heedfull, vigilant, prone, ready. Attento, as Attentiuo. Also an attempt, an intent or purpose. As Attentoche. Attentoche, since that, sith, seeing that, considering. Attentone, as Atentone. Attenuare, to extenuate, to make fine, small or leane. Attenuatione, extenuation, finenes, smal∣nes, thinnesse, leannesse, gauntnes. Attenuire, as Attenuare. Attergare, to turne the shoulders or backe towards. Atterrare, to suppresse, to throwe or cast downe to the ground, to humble, to fell. Also to fill or dam vp with earth. Atterrire, Atterrito, to deter, to affright, to feare, to amaze, to terrifie. Atterzare, to ioyne three and three togi∣ther, to packe or pricke the cardes. Atteso, attended, waited, followed, solli∣cited, marked, hard, accomplished, kept, expected, regarded, applied, harkned, stayed, tarried. Attesoche, seeing that, since that, sith, since. Attestare, to witnes, to testifie. Attestatione, a witnessing, a testimonie. Attestatore, a witnes, a testifier. Attezza, aptitude, dexteritie, actiuitie, aptnes. Atti, acts, actions, deedes, iests, doings, customes, behauiors, statutes, decrees. Attica, one of the foure Greeke tongues that were commonly spoken. Atticciare, as Attizzare. Attidudine, as Attitudine. Attignere, as Attingere. Attillare, to notifie, or set out with a grace, or to make handsome. Attillato, ntified, refined, set out with a grace, or handsome, smug, triuie, trim, fine. Attillante, gallant, fine, neate, spruce, handsome in clothes. Attillatezza, neatnes, finenes, handsom∣nes, comlines. Attillatuzzo, nice, fine, spruce, smug, selfe-conceited, or ouerweening. Attimo, Attomo, as Atimo. Attinare, to make fit, commodious, or pro∣per for any action. Also to tunne. Attinenza, pertaining or pertinencie. Attinente, pertaining, belonging, allied, liable. Attingere, to touch or dip in, or draw wa∣ter. Also to dye into any colour, to reach or fetch water. Attinto, touched, dipped in, or dyed, or reached, or keeched water. Also when a horse is tainted or hurt, or ouer∣reacheth one foote with another, and withall doth hurt a sinew. Some conster it to be a taint or ouer-reach in the back or shanke of a horse. Attione, an act, an action, or a deede. Attirare, to draw vnto, to allure. Attitudine, aptnes, fitnes, actiuitie, dex∣teritie, gesture, action. Attiuo, actiue, nimble, full of agilitie, do∣ing, actuall, effectuall. Attizzamento, a stirring vp, or prouo∣cation. Attizzare, to stirre, to moue, to prouoke to anger, or to stirre vp the fire. Attizzatoio, an iron or forke to stirre vp the fire with. Also a kindling place. Attizzonare, as Attizzare. Atto, an act, a deede, an action, a ge∣sture, a part, a tricke. Also apt or meete, readie, fit, prone, prepared, proper, good, ordained. Attondare, to round or make round, to go round. Also for a horse to close vp his turne roundlie. Attondar di sproni, to help with both spurres at one time to make a horse to close his turne iust. Attoniare, as Attorniare. Attonire, to astonie or be astonished, to amaze. Attónito, astonished, amazed. Attore, a challenger or prouoker in any combat or quarrell, an actor, a doer, a demandant, a plaintife, an accuser, a pleader, an atturney, a factor, a player in a comedie, a bailife in husbandrie. Attorcicchiare, as Attortigliare. Attorcigliare, as Attortigliate. Attòrcere, attorgo, attorcei, attorto, or attorciuto, to make crooked, to wind about as a with, to torment, to racke, to wind vp together. Attorneggiare, as Attorniare. Attorniare, to compas, to enuiron, to in∣circle, to girde about. Attorno, as Atorno. Attortigliare, to curle or turne round,
to entangle. Attorto, wrong fullie. Attoscare, as Attossicare, Attossicare, to enuenome or poison. Attraggere, as Attrarre. Attrarre, to attract, to draw out from, to abstract, to benumme, to shrinke vp the sinewes, to allure, to entice. Attratile, a kinde of burre or pricking weede, good against the bitings of Scor∣pions. Attrattiuo, attractiue, enticing, allu∣ring. Attratto, drawne out from, attracted, be∣nummed in the ioints, shronken in the lims, allured, enticed. Attrattore, a Surgeons toole, or drawing instrument so called. Attrauersare, to crosse or ouerthwart. Attrauerso, acrosse, athwart, ouer∣thwart. Attrecciare, to pleite or make vp in tres∣ses, to pleite flowres as in a garland. Attribuire, tribuisco, tribuito, to at∣tribute, to impute, to ascribe, to referre, to presume. Attribuitione, attribution. Attriplice, the hearbe Orache or Orage. Attristare, to make sad or melancolicke, to grow bad. Attritare, to mince, hew, or cut small. Attrittione, rubbing, fretting or wea∣ring. Also attrition, that is a remorce proceeding of seruile feare, fearing ei∣ther punishment, or losse of something, a fained contrition. Attropicamento, a stumbling-blocke, a stumbling. Attropicare, to stumble. Attuale, actuall, effectuall. Attuccio, a tricke, a seate, a pranke, a sleight. Attuffare, to diue or ducke or plunge vn∣der water. Attuiare, to obscure, to darken, to ouer∣shadow, to blemish, to beguile. Attuire, as Attuare. Atturaccio, a stopple, also a skowring∣sticke for great Artillerie. Atturare, to stop or shut, to extinguish. Atturatoio, as Atturaccio. Attustare, to drowne, to smother, to stifle. Attuttare, to sum or cast vp, to dam vp, to fill vp, to extinguish, to assure, to appease. Attutare, to ducke, plunge or diue vnder water, to asswage, to appease, to hush, to extinguish, to qualifie, to temper. Also to assure or warrant. Attutire, to make one perforce to hold his peace, to husht. A tua posta, at thine owne pleasure, pe∣rill, or hazard. Aturfo, the Tamariske tree. Atutta oltranza, with might and maine, with all ones strength and force. A tutto transito, as A tutta oltranza. A tutti i modi, by all meanes, howsoeuer. A tutto pasto, all the meale through, from the beginning to the end of dinner or supper. Atutto corso, without stop or let, with might and maine, on a maine gallop. Aua, a grandmother, a grandame. Auacciare, to dispatch, to rid, to hasten, to make short. Auaccio, with speede, in haste, hastelie, quickly, out of hand, shortly. Auale, now, euen now, by and by. Auallare, to descend, to make a valley, to swallow downe, to stoope, to alight. Al∣so to diminish, to confound, to sincke, to suppresse, to vaile downe, to encompasse or encircle round. Aualere, to preuaile. Also to serue ones owne turne, to auaile. Aualorare, to make valiant, to encourage, to animate, to become valorous. Auampare, to set on fire, to flame, to blaze, to kindle. Auangare, to thriue or prosper well, to succeed happilie. Auania, an vndeserued wrong, an insul∣ting iniurie, a secret grudge. Auantaggiare, to aduantage, to excell, to exceed. Auantaggiato, aduantaged, to haue more pay then others. Auantaggio, aduantage, ods. Auantaggioso, aduantageous, hauing ods or aduantage. Auantare, to brag, to boast, to glorie, to crake, to vaunt. Auantatore, a bragger, a boaster, a vaun∣ter. Auante, Auanti, before, formost, former, tofore, first, afore. Auant'hieri, the day before yesterday. Auanticuore, as Anticuore. Auanuára, at a venture, at hazard, hab or nab, at sixe or seuen. Auanzare, to grow, to increase, to aug∣ment, to out goe, to forgoe, to exceede, to excell. Also to leaue ouerplus, to get a∣forehand, to aduance, to prefer, to profit, to surmount. Auanzamento, as Auanzo. Auanzaticcij, as Auanzi. Auanzi, scraps, leauings, mammocks, re∣liques, shreads, vailes of any thing, odde ends. Auanzo, aboue, moreouer, profit, gettings, increase, ouerplus, gaine. Also the rest at Primero. Auanzugli, as Auanzi. Auaritia, couetice, couetousnes, auarice. Auaro, couetous, sparing, a niggard, a mi∣ser. Auarone, a chuffe, a niggard, a great co∣uetous man, a pinch penie, a paltrer, a dodger, a miser, a penie father. Auccellare, as vccellare. Audáce, bold, hardy, daring, aduentu∣rous, couragious, valiant, presumptu∣us, audacious. Audacia, boldnes, hardines, courage, vali∣ancie, daringnes, presumption. Audientia, audience, listening, hearing. Audire, to heare, to hearken, to listen, to giue eare. Auditore, an auditor, a hearer, a disci∣ple. Auditorio, an auditorie, a place of audi∣ence. Auedére, veggo, vidi, veduto, or visto, to perceiue, to forsee, to beware, to fore∣cast, to aduise. Auedimento, warines, foresight, forecast, discretion, wisedome. Auedutamente, warily, discreetly, wise∣ly, with forecast, aduisedly. Aueduto, Auisto, foreseene, perceiued, aware, forecast. Also warie, wise, sub∣tile, craftie, foreseeing, a forecaster, discreete or aduised. Auegna che, howbeit, albeit, although. Auegnadioche, idem. Auellana, a filbert or hazell nut. Auellano, a filbert or a hazell nut tree. Auelenare, to enuenome, to poison. Auéllere, to pluck by the rootes, to roote out. Auéllo, a vault, a tombe, a sepulchre, a hollow den or caue. Auemaria, euening tide or euening praier time, euensong, an auemarie. Auéna, oates or prouander for horses. Al∣so an oaten pipe. Auenaro, an Auenor in a stable that hath the charge of oates or prouander. Auenante, as Auenente. Auenenare, to poison, to enuenim. Auenente, comely, gracious, handsome, seemely, proper, fine, with due proportio∣on. Auenentia, comelines, graciousnes, hand∣somnes, propernes, seemelines. Auenentezza, as Auenentia. Auenga che, as Auegna che. Auengadio che, as Auegna che. Auenire, vengo, venni, venuto, to hap∣pen, to come to passe, to chaunce, to meet,
to hap. Also to come, in time to come, hereafter. Auenimento, a hap, a chance, an acci∣dent, a successe, an issue, an euent. Auentare, to hurle, to fling, to throw, to darte, to cast violently, to seaze greedi∣ly or leape vpon. Auentata, as Al'auentata, a flinging. Auentitij beni, goods that come by chance. Auentitio, a stranger, strange, happe∣ning, chauncing. Auento, Auuento, Aduento, aduent, a time of the yeere so called. Also an a∣riuing or a passage vnto. Auentore, as Auentitio. Also a custo∣mer or a frequenter to a place. Auentura, aduenture, hap, fortune, chance, by hap, hab or nab, by chance. Auenturare, to aduenture, to hazard. Auenturiere, an aduenturer, a hazarder. Auenturoso, Auenturato, hardie, fortu∣nate, aduenturous. Auerare, to verifie, to auer, to affirme. Auerbio, an aduerbe: one of the eight parts of speech. Auere, as Hauere. Auersario, an aduersarie, an opponent. Auersione, a turning or driuing away. Also a contrarietie. Auersità, aduersitie, contrarietie. Auérso, aduerse, contrarie, turned. Auertente, warie, foreseeing, subtile, ad∣uertising, heedefull. Auertentia, aduertisement, warning, regard, notice, an admonition, a re∣spect, a heede. Auértere, to warne, to aduertise, to mark, to note, to take heede, to admonish, to re∣garde, to take warning, to respect, to at∣tende, to looke vnto. Auértimento, as Auertentia. Auertire, as Auértere. Auertito, warned, aduertised, marked, heeded, regarded, admonished, noted, respected, attended, looked vnto. Also warie, slie, circumspect. Auezzare, to accustom, to be wont, to vse. Auezzamento, a custome, a fashion, a vse. Auezzo, Auezzato, accustomed, woont, vsed. Auge, the highest point of any planet. Augéllo, Augé, a bird, a fowle in ge∣nerall. Augelletto, a little bird. Augumentare, as Aumentare. Augumento, as Aumentatione. Augurale, that by which any thing may be guessed. Also the ornaments of a soothsaier. Augurare, to forbode, to soothsay, to fore∣tell, to foreshew, to diuine. Augúrio, an augure, a soothsaying, a pre∣diction, a signe, a coniecture, a diuina∣tion, a bad or ill hap, a wishing of good hap, a forboding. Augúro, a soothsaier, a foreboder, a con∣iecturer, a diuiner, a wisher. Augusta, the chiefe kinde of eagle that is. Augusto, consecrate, holy, noble, royall, imperiall, full of maiestie, reuerende. Also worshipfull, honorable, of great magnificence, sanctified. Auiare, to addresse, to set forward, to set in the way, to conuey, to direct. Auiamento, as Auiatione. Auiatione, a conueiance, a direction, an addressing. Auidità, greedines, rauenousnes, desire, couetousnes. Auido, greedie, couetous, rauenous, desi∣rous. Auignare, to plant, to set or store with vines. Auile, in scorne, in contempt, in spite, in vile sort. Auilire, to debase, to vilifie, to deiect, to suppresse, to scorne, to defile, to dishonor, to despise. Auilluppare, to fould vp, to entangle, to enwrap, to bundle vp, to winde vp. As Armeggiare. Auiluppo, a bundle, a fardle, a winding. Auinato, a kinde of wine of grape colour. Auincere, vinco, vinsi, vinto, to binde, claspe or tie harde togither. Also to ouercome, to imbrace, to winde or com∣passe about as Iuie doth about a tree, to clinch ones fingers. Auinciare, as Auincere. Auincigliare, as Auincere. Auinchiare, as Auincere. Auinghiare, as Auincere. Auisamento, as Auiso. Auisare, to aduertise, to marke, to note, to consider, to aduise, to thinke, to view, to heede, to regarde, to informe, to warne, to iudge, to imagine. Auisatamente, aduisedly, considerately. Auiso, aduertisement, aduise, considera∣tion, notice, an opinion, account, or a see∣ming. Auiso auiso, face to face, ouer against. Auisto. Looke Aueduto. Auiticchiare, as Auincere. Auiuare, to reuiue, to quicken. Auiuatoio, a goldsmiths or guilders toole. Aula, a kings or queenes court, a pallace, a hall. Aulimento, as Alimento. Aumentare, to augment, to increase, to multiple. Aumentatione, Aumento, augmenta∣tion, increase. Aumento, a disease or sore in the eies. Aumiliare, as Humiliare. Aun per uno, one by one. Auo, a grandfather, a gransire. Auocare, to plead or lawe, or play the ad∣uocate, to sollicite. Auocaria, an aduocate or atturneyship. Also a bar where lawyers pleade. Auocato, pleaded, lawed or plaid the ad∣uocate, sollicited. Also an aduocate, a lawyer, an atturney or counsellor at law, a sollicitor. Auocadore, an aduocate or counsellor at lawe. Auogadare, as Auocare. Auola, a grandmother, a grandame. Auolgere, volgo, volsi, volto, to turne, to enwrap, to entangle, to winde vp, to roule or bundle vp. Also as Armeg∣giare. Auolgimento, an enwrapping, an entan∣gling, a bundle, a rowle. Auollere, as Armeggiare. Auolo, a grandsire, a grandfather. Auólo, in flight, flying. Also in post haste. Auolpacchiare, to plaie the foxe or craf∣tie companion, to deale subtillie. Also as Armeggiare. Auoltacchiare, as Auoltare. Auoltare, to ouerturne, to ouerwhelme or ouerthrow, to wallow or rowle in, to tosse or turn, to wander or range about. Auoltatiuo, one of the eight kinds of wormes breeding in horses. Auoltóio, Auoltóre, a kinde of hauke, a gripe, a vulture or a geyre. Also a precious stone found in a vulturs head. Auólto, enwrapped, turned, entangled, wound vp, rowled. Auoltolare, as Auoltare. Auório, Yuorie. Auoserta, as Auosetta. Auosetta, a fowle like a Storke with a white bill bending vpwarde, and of a whitish colour. Auotare, to vowe, to promise: to empty. Auóto, empty, idle, for nought or in vain. Also vpon a vow or promise. Auotire, as Auotare. Aura, the aire, a pleasant gale of winde or sweete morning breath, a blaste. Auraco, golden, of gold, glistring as gold. Aurare, to gild or decke with gold. Aurélia, the herbe called Mothweede, or golden Floweramour, or golden Ste∣chados or Cudweede. Aurélio, shining like gold, yellow, golden. Also the little wings of butter flies.
Auréo, golden, of a golden hewe. Auréo d'Allessandro, a precious phisicke against poison. Auricalco, latten or copper metall. Also taken for a trumpet. Auricolare, auricolar. Also the name of a certaine vaine in ones body: the finger next to the little finger. Auricóne, of a golden or sunshine colou∣red haire. Auriflamma.   Aurifrigio, a kinde of water and lande fowle· Auríga, a carter, a wagoner, a waneman. Auro, gold. Auróra, the morning, the morne, the dawne or breake or peepe of day, the gray morning. Auruspicio, he that looked into the liue parts of the sacrifices to gesse at the issue of them. Ausa, Auso, bold, daring, aduenturous. Ausáre, to dare, to be bold, to aduenture. Aúsare, to vse, to be woont, to enure. Aúscio aúscio, dore by dore, from dore to dore. Ausiliare, auxiliare, fighting vnder one standerd, a helping neighbour. Ausiliari soldati, auxiliare, aiding or helping souldiers. Aúso, after the fashion, custome or vse. Auspice, a soothsaier, a deuiner, a guesser. Also a direction or guide. Also he that giues a woman to the priest to be ma∣ried. Auspicio, a foresigne, a foreshew, a diui∣nation, a guessing, fortune. Also the man that couples the man to the wife in mariage. Also conduct, gouernment, disposition, authoritie, direction of a captaine. Austerità, seueritie, crueltie, strictnes, au∣steritie. Austéro, seuere, cruell, strict, austere, harsh or vnpleasant. Australe, of the south or southern. Austro, the south winde, or the southerne part of the world. Autenticare, to make authentike, to giue authoritie, to make lawfull, to approoue. Auténtico, lawfull, authentike, powerful, authorised, approoued. Autonno, as Antunno. Autore, an actor, an author, a dooer, a be∣ginner of a thing. Autoréuole, powerfull, hauing power or authoritie. Autorità, authoritie, power, freewill, com∣mand, swaie, rule. Autorizzare, to giue power, freewil or au∣thoritie. Autrice, a shee author. Autunnale, of or pertaining to Au∣tumne. Autunno, the autumne or fall of the leafe. Aúzzare, Auzzo, as Aguzzare. Note that whersoeuer Au comes before a vowell, the u may either be pronounced and written single or double as pleaseth the speaker or writer: for you may say and write Auacciare, or Auuaccia∣re, Aualorare and Auualorare, A∣uedere and Auuedere. and so with all the rest. Azaireth, a kinde of phisicall pils. Azimo, bread without leuen, vnleue∣ned. Aziminthi, great circles meeting in the Zenith point, and passing through all the degrees of the horizon. Azimuccio, one that suffers shortnes of breth. Azio, a dog fish. Some take it for a fish like a lamprey. Azizare, to settle, to reforme, to dresse, to adorne. Azurrino, a kinde of blew colour that painters vse called bisse. Azurigno, somewhat blewish or azure. Azurro, azure, blew, watchet, skie co∣lour. Azza, as Accia. Azzale, Azzalino, as Acciaio. Azzampato, hauing fanges or clawes, caught with clawes or griped. Azzannare, to catch with the teeth or tuskes. Azzeuia, a kinde of fish much like a soale. Azziccare, to tickle, to set on, or to start suddenly, to prouoke or intice, to dan∣dle. Azzicchetto, a tickling, a starting, a so∣daine motion of the bodie, a dandling, a prouoking. Azzimare, as Accimare. Azzimi, a kinde of marchpane or com∣fets. Azzimino, a kinde of fine worke vsed in Persia vpon their cimitaries or other iron works like damasking. Azzollare, to beate, to bang, to tugge, to cudgell, to clod togither. Azzoppare, to halt, to become lame or criple. Azzopegare, as Azzoppare. Azzuffare, to fight, to quarrell, to bicker, to combate, to make a fraie, to buc∣kle, cope or grapple togither. Axinomantia, diuination or witchcraft by hatchets or axes. B BAaras, an herbe of the colour of a flame of fier. Babbione, a great babuine, monkie or ape, a gull, a sot, a ninnie, a foole. Babbo, the first word children call their fathers by; as we say dad. Babbole, bubbles, trifles, toies, vanities, nifles, fond deuises. Babbuasso, as Babbione. Babbuino, Baboino, an ape, a monkey, a babuine. Also a stammering fellow, a foole, an asse, a doult. Baccalaro, a batcheler in any arte, a scholler, a licentiate, a clerke. Also taken for a fond self-conceited fellow. Baccana, a tauerne, a tipling house. Baccanali giuochi, feasts and sports for Bacchus sake, we call them wakes. Baccano, Bacano, a forrest in Italy where much robbing and murthering is vsed. Bàccara, an hearbe, whose roote is very sweete, the leafe like the Iuie, called our ladies gloues, or London buttons: some take it for the ploughmans spikenard. Baccàro, as Vaccaro. Baccàta, an hearbe called spikenard. Also a furious foolish woman. Baccato, a drunkard, an ale-knight, a tipler, mad and foolish, a Bacchus priest. Baccelliere, as Baccalaro. Baccerélli, silke wormes. Bacéllo, a cod of any thing, as of beanes or peason. Also yong beanes. Also a gull, or a foole: it is also taken for a pilli∣cocke or pricke. Bacche, the berries of Lawrell, or Iuni∣per. Bacchélle, the graines or kernels that be in any fruite. Bacchetta, a wand, a rod, a bat, a sticke, a little staffe, a cudgell, a scepter, an officers sticke. Also a drummers sticke. Bacchetta da vino, a tauerne, or ale∣house bush. Bacchi, silke wormes, as Bacchio. Bacchiale osso, a chiefe bone in a mans arme. Bacchio, as Pacchio. Also a foote of a verse consisting of one short and two long sillables. Bacciletto, a kinde of basket so called. a little bason. Bacco, the god Bacchus. Also a ruffler, a swaggrer, a furious fellow. Also a silke∣worme. Bacherózzoli, all kinde of little creeping
or crawling wormes, silke-wormes. Bachi, as Bacherozzoll. Baciare, to kisse, to smacker. Bacicare, to practise or canuas much for a thing, to fumble. Baciello, as Bacello. Bacielliere, as Baccalaro. Bacile, Bacino, a bason, also a kinde of musicall instrument. Bacinetto, a little bason. Also a skull, a sallet, a murrion or headpeece. Bacio, a kisse, a smackering. Baciózzo, a smacking kisse. Baco, Bacho, a silke-worme. Bacócche, as Bacche. Also apricocks. Bácolo, a wand, a sticke, a truncheon, a cudgell, a bat. Bácolo di Giacob, a staffe that Mathe∣maticians vse, called Iacobs staffe. Bacueco, a manger, an oxe stall. Baculo, as Bacolo. Bada, a delay, a stay, a lingering, a de∣murre, losse of time, vaine hope. Badagliare, to gape, to yawne, to loiter about. Badaglio, as Badalone. Badaglione, a gaper, as Badalone. Badalone, a slow, idle, lazie, loitering, negligent fellow, a loggarhead, a dull, lither companion. Badaluccare, as Baloccare. Badalucco, loitering pleasure, a lazie mans delight, idle gaping about. Also an idle fellow. It hath also been taken for an engin of warre to batter walles withall. Badare, to delay, to stay, to linger, to tar∣rie, to lose time, to be idle, to attend, to gape idlie vp and downe. Baderlo, as Badalone. Badessa, an Abesse, or a Prioresse. Badía, an Abie, or a Priorie. Badiále, idlie, abot-like, at ease, loi∣tringlie. Badile, a spade, a digging shouell, a skoope. Baéna, the name of an hearbe. Baffetta, a kinde of meate vsed in Italie made of paste. Baga, a wine measure of a pinte. Bagaia, the white-thorne, hawthorne tree, or landouers maie bush. Some take it for the Berberie tree. Bagaglie, baggage stuffe, luggage, trum∣perie, bag and baggage, or cariage of an armie. Bagaglioni, idle fellowes, as souldiers, boyes that follow the campe, and carie their maisters bag and baggage. Bagaír, as Bagaia. Bágaro, a mite, or the least piece of money that is. Bagascia, a baggage wench, a harlot, a strumpet, a whore. Bagasciare, to play the baggage, harlot or whore. Bagascione, an idle, sluttish, vnthriftie riotous fellow, a bawde, a ruffian. Bagasciuolo, a wanton boy, an ingle. Bagatélla, as Bagatelliere. Bagatellare, to iuggle or trifle with the hands, to play legerdemaine. Bagatelliere, Bagatello, a iugler, or a trifler. Bagatellaria, a iugling or trifling tricke. Bagatélle, trifles, ioyes, nifles, vanities, or iugling tricks, driblets, legierde∣maines. Bagatino, Bagattino, a little coyne vsed in Italie, a nickname for a kitlin or whelp as we say, a pug, a pusse, a puppie. Baggéo, as Badalone. Baggiane, looke Dare Panzane. Bagianotta, husht, close, squatting. Bàglia, a she nurce. Bàglio, as Bàlio. Bagliori, drowsines, or enticing to sleepe. Bagliuo, a bayliwike, the office of a Bay∣liefe. Bagnare, to wet, to wash, to bathe, to moyst. Bagnaruolo, a bathe or baine-keeper. Bagno, a bathe, a baine, or bathing house. Bagnolo, a bathe, a bathing or suppling medicine. Bagnomaria, a kind of limbecke or still, or serpentine. Bagolaro, a lote tree, or nettle tree. Bagordare, to maske, to mum, to reuell. Bagordi, maskings, mummings, reuel∣lings. Bagordiere, a masker, a mummer, a re∣ueller. Baia, a trifle, a toy, a nifle, a iest, a vani∣tie, a little wicker basket which the cariers in Italie fasten at their moyles muzles with hay or prouender in it, so that they may eate as they trauell. Baiana, a shell, a cod, a huske, a cace. Baiante, looke Da baiante a ferrante. Baiaccia, Baiata, as Fagiolata. Baiare, to barke, to bay, to howle, to toy, to iest, to trifle, to gape, to yawne. Baicolo, a fish called a Base. Baiarda, a common filthie ouer-ridden whore, a common skould. Baiella, a trifle, a toy, a iest, a kinde of small coyne. Baietta, bayes or pennistone vsed for li∣nings. Baigua, an hearbe, the iuice whereof cast into the water makes fishes so drunke that as dead they will flote vpon the water with their bellies vpward. Some thinke that Verbasco will do so. Baila, a woman nurse. Baíle, as Badile. Báilo, a man nurse, a foster-father, a tu∣tor, an ouerseer; a bailie, an agent, an embassador. Baio, the bay colour of a horse. Also an abot. Baio cactagno, a bay chesnut colour. Baio dorato, a bright bay colour. Baio ferrante, a browne bay. Baio scuro, a darke bay. Baioccare, to flurt or click with ones fin∣gers as Barbers do, to snap. Baiocco, a smale coine, a flurt, a snap or clicking with ones fingers. Baiólo, Baiúlo, a base, abiect fellow, a porter or burthen bearer. Baióne, a gull, a nodie, a ninnie, a foole, a iolt head, a mocker, a iester. Baiucche, trifles, toyes, iests, fooleries. Baladore della naue, the vpper decke of a ship. Balamite, a kinde of precious stone of sundrie colours. Balancia, as Bilancia. Balanciare, as Bilanciare. Baláno, a kind of shell fish. Balare, to gape or yawne. Also to bleat as a sheepe. Balarina, a bird called a wagtaile. Ballascio, Balasso, a precious stone. Balátro, a slouen, a greasie, sluttish, durty companion, a raskall, a pratler, a railing fellow. Balatroni, dashings of durt or mire, mi∣rings, clods of earth, as Balatro. Balausto, a Pome-granate-flowre. Balaustino, a kind of mixt coloure. Balbeggiare, to stut, to stutter, to stam∣mer, to lispe, to mutter, to mumble, to maffle; not to be able to pronounce the letter R. Balbettare, as Balbeggiare. Balbezzare, as Balbeggiare. Balbezza, a stammering, a stutting, a lis∣ping or maffling in speech. Also toong∣tied. Balbo, a stutter, a lisper, a stammerer, one toong-tyed, a maffler. Balbotteuole, stutting, stammering, maf∣fling. Balbutiente, idem. Balbuttimento, as Balbezza. Balbuttire, as Balbeggiare. Balbuzzare, as Balbeggiare. Balchi, a fustian, roguish, gibbrish word, vsed for money. Balco, a skaffold or a stage, an out-ietting corner of a house. Balcone, a windowe, a bay-windowe, a
bulke, a stall of a shop. Balcorare, to snatch vp, to filch, to pilfer, to hooke at windowes, to burglarie. Baldacca, Baldacco, an alehouse, a tap∣house, a tipling-house, a tauerne: it was woont to be the name of an Inne in Flo∣rence. It is taken in ill sence for Babylon, or the whore of Bablyon. Baldacchino, a canopie, a cloth of estate, a testerne carried ouer Princes. Baldamente, Baldanzosamente, Bal∣dosamente, boldly, assuredly, confi∣dently, saucily, without blushing, licen∣ciously. Baldanza, Baldezza, boldnes, hardines, confidence, saucines, iolitie, mirth or glee. Baldanzoso, bold, hardie, confident, assu∣red, saucie, presumptuous, vndanted, licentious. Baldo, as Baldanzoso. Baldocchino, as Baldacchino. Baldoria, as Baldanza. Baldósa, bold, hardie, saucie. Also a musi∣call instrument so called. Also a kinde of countrie daunce. Baldracca, a common strumpet, a filthie contemptible whore. Balena, a great fish called a whale. Balenare, to twinkle, to lighten, to flash, to sparkle, to shine, to glister, to glim∣mer. Also to stammer, to trip, to stutter, to maffle, to erre or misse in speaking. Baleno, a twinkling, a lightning, a sudden flashing, a glimps. Balestra, a crosse-bow, a stone-bowe, a til∣lar, a little pillar, an engine of war to batter wals. Balestrare, to shoot in or with a crosse-bow or stone-bow, to batter. Balestraro, a crosse-bowe or stone-bowe maker. Balestrata, a blow or shot with a stone∣bow. Balestriera, a spike hole or loope hole, to shoote out at. Balestriere, a crosse-bow-man, a shooter in a crosse-bow. Balestrucci, a kinde of swallow or mar∣tin. Balía, power, freewill, auctoritie, selfe∣will, libertie, choise, will, force. Bália, a woman nurse. Balice, a cloke-bag, a male, a port-man-teawe. Bálio, as Báilo. Balin, a kind of herbe. Balire, to bleat as a sheepe. Balista, a warlike engine to cast stones or darts. Also a crosse-bow, a stock-bow or tillar. Also a sling. Balistario, a steele-bow-man, a crosse∣bow-man, a shooter of stones, a slinger or maker of slings. Balla, a ball, a bullet, a round boule, a packe of any thing: a ball of wilde fire. Balladore della naue, the vpper decke of a ship. Ballanzuola, a kinde of fowling net, springe or haie. Ballare, to dance, to hop, to skip. Ballarino, Ballatore, a dancer, a teacher to dance. Ballata, a ballade, a song, a gigge, a roun∣delaie. Ballerino, he that leades or giues a bride to hir husband in Venice. Balliero, a tenis ball maker. Ballo, any kinde of dance. Ballocaggine, Balloccamento, foolish, idle, droning, loytring or gaping a∣bout. Balloccare, to gase, to loyter, to gape or looke about idlely. Ballocco, as Badalone. Ballo d'acqua, a moore hen or such foule. Ballo della botte, a kinde of Christmas game vsed in Italie. Ballonaro, as Balloniere. Ballonchio, a countrey hopping or mor∣rice dance. Also a handball, a footefall. Ballonciuolo, a merrie countrey dance. Ballóne, a great ball, a ballone, to play at with braces, a footeball. Balloniere, a ballonier, a ballone-maker, foote-ball maker. Ballose, a kinde of round, light, puft cake∣bread. Ballotta, a rounde bullet. Also a voice or lot. Ballottare, to choose, to cast or draw lots with bullets as they vse in Venice. Ballottadore, a caster or drawer of lots by bullets. Ballotto, a gull, an ignorant round asse, ninnie or meacocke. Ballottola, any kinde of little bullet. Also a weasell. Baloardo, as Belloardo. Baloccare, Balocco, as Balloccare. Balordagine, Balordezza, as Balordia. Balordia, foolishnes, dissines, giddines, sim∣plicitie of wit, the staggers in cattell. Balordire, to become or plaie the foole, idiot, noddie, or dizard, to stagger or become giddie-headed. Balordo, a foole, a noddie, a dizzard, an idiot, a giddie-head. Balordon balordone, dingle dangle, carelesly, very foolishly. Balottara, a kinde of stone bowe or trunke to shoote pellets in. Balsamare, to embalme or enspice. Balsamina, a kinde of weede that twines about trees. Balsamita, the herbe Costemarie or Mau∣delin. Balsamo, Balsamum or baulme. Balsate, a kinde of blacke stone. Balso, a little hole or caue, or den in a caue. Baltéo, a belt, a sword or arming girdle. Baltresca, as Beltresche. Baltroni, as Balatroni. Baluardo, Baluarte, as Belloardo. Balza, a hill, a mountaine, a rocke, a cliffe. Also a certaine head attire for women. Also a locke or fetter for a horse. Balzacchini, buskins. Balzano, a horse with white feete. Balzano ceruello, a hopping, skipping, leaping, foolish iumping wit. Balzare, to bound, to hop, to skip, to iumpe. Balzello, as Bargello. Also tallage, cu∣stome, tole, tribute or imposition. Balzi, washing bals, sope bals. Balzo, a bound of a ball: a skip, a hop. Also a certaine head attire. Bamba, a babie or puppet for children to plaie withall: a doting woman. Also vaine, childish or triuiall. Bambacina, as Bambagiuola. Bambagia, Bambace, bumbast. Bambagina, a womans long wastcote. Also bombasine. Bambagiuola, Bambasina, a kinde of stuffe made of bumbast, we call it Bum∣basine. Bambagiotta, a plum, soft, fat, rounde, daintie or white skind woman. Bambaro, a foole, an asse, an idiot that hath no more wit then a babie. Also a childe. Bambina, a babe or babie. Bambinesco, childish, foolish. Bambire, to doate or play the childe. Bambo, a foolish simple fellow, a sillie gull, a dotard. Bamboccia, as Bambola. Also a cotton cod. Bambola, a babie, a puppie for children to play withall. Bamboleggiare, to doate or plaie the childe againe, to plaie the babie. Bamboleggiamento, as Bambolità. Bambolino, a little babie or yong childe. Bambolità, childishnes, dotishnes, babish tricks. Bambolo, the foile or lead of a looking glasse. Also a dotard. Banca, a bench or a forme. Bancali, all manner of benches & formes. Also hangings or clothes to couer ben∣ches,
bench carpets. Bancarotta, Banchierotto, a bankrupt. Banchettare, to banquet or to feast. Banchettiere, a banquetter or feaster. Banchiere, a banker or Lombard, or a money lender. Banco, a bench, a marchants banke or counting house, a counter, a butchers stall, a bulke, a seat. Also a kind of fish. Banco fallito, a game at cards. Banda, a side, a shore. Also a skarfe or a swathe, a rowler. Also a garding, a band or companie of men. Also a bende in armorie. Bandare, to garde with lace or gards. Al∣so to bandie or company togither. Also as Bendare. Bandatuola, a streamer, a fane, a bande∣roll. Bandeggiare, to cry, to banish, to pro∣claime. Bandela, a ring or hammer of a doore, a boult or a bar. Bandelle, corners in a house. Banderaio, Banderale, an ensigne bea∣rer, a standard bearer, a crier, a pro∣claimer. Banderella, a litle streamer, a little bane∣roll, or a fane, a banderoll. Banderesi, as we say knights banerets. Bandiera, a banner, an ensigne, a stan∣dard. Bandieraio, as Banderaio. Bandimento, as Bando. Bándine, the lay-bande of a skaine of threed. Bandinella, as Bandine. Also the hinges of a dore that are fastned to the dore. Also a case, or boxe or cabinet. Bandire, to crie, to proclaime, to banish, to exile, to publish. Bandita, proclaimed, publicke, open, as tener corte bandita, to keepe open house. Banditi, outlawed, outlawes, rebels, fugi∣tiues. Banditore, a crier, a proclaymer, a bani∣sher, a publisher. Bando, a proclamation, a cry, a banish∣ment, a publication: an act or law pub∣lished. Bandolo, as Bandine. Baneretto, a knight baneret. Banzuola, any kinde of stoole or seat, set∣tle, or little cupboord. Baobáo, to play bo-peepe with children. Bara, a coffin or beere for a dead man. Baradra, a birde called in latin Rubetra. Baragella, a market place or meeting place. Barare, as Barrare. Baratta, a fight or battell as Dante doth vse it. Barattare, to barter, to trucke, to chop and change one thing for another, to chaf∣fre, to marte, to sell things forbid, to bribe. Baratteria, a bribing, a selling of forbid∣den things in hugger mugger. Also a dicing or cheating house. Also a chea∣ting, cogging or conie catching tricke. Barattiere, a barterer, a trucker, a mar∣ter, an exchanger, a briber, a cheater, a false gamster, a cousener, a broker, a fripper, a chaffrer, a cogger, a foyster, a deceiuer, a coni-catcher, a bareter, a prowler. Baratto, a barter, a marte, an exchange, a trucking, a chopping, a chaffring. Barattoli, Baratolini, those little pots of lead or earth that Apothecaries put muske and drugs in. Also a kinde of ra∣uenous sea fowle. Barattoro, a kinde of gallie pot or drink∣ing pot of earth. Baratro, the throte or weasand pipe, a pit, a depth or a dark place, a whirlepoole. Al∣so an vnthriftie spendall, or waste good in bellie cheere. Barba, a beard. Also an vncle. Also the curbe place or chin of the horse. Barbacane, a toole belonging to masons and carpenters. Also an outnooke or corner standing out of a house, a iet∣tie. Barbacapri, the herbe maides-sweete or medowe sweete. Barbacino, a round, a watch or a senti∣nell. Barba cheppo, a kinde of munkey or ape. Also a goate with a great beard. Barbad'albero, the knots of the roote of a tree. Barba di becco, as Barba capri. Barbagia, a common bawdie house. Barbagianni, an owle, an howlet. Barbagliare, as Abbarbagliare. Barbagrigia, a gray beard. Barbaniccare, to play the common base fellow. Barbanicchi, a word in iest taken for the common base people. Barbanterie, as Furfanterie. Barbarauoce, blew bottle, corne floure, or hurtsickle, a weede growing among corne. Barbare, to take first hould of, as a roote in the ground. Also to beard. Barbariccia, a curled, grim, shagd, goa∣tish beard. Barbárico, Barbarésco, as Bárbaro. Barbarie, barbarousnes, inciuilitie. Barbarismo, barbarisme. Also the cor∣rupt forme of speaking or pronoun∣cing. Bárbaro, barbarous, inciuill: it is also a barbary horse. Also a bird called a Woodpecker. Barbarossa, a red beard. Barbasco, as Verbasco. Barbasso, a mariners or fishers habite with a hood. Barbassòre, as Valuasore. Barbastrello, a night-bat, or rearemouse. Barbazzale, the curbe of a horses bit. Barbataccio, a filthie bearded fellow. Barbegghie, a kinde of worme or cater∣piller. Barbéllo, a fish called a Barbell. Also a bird so called. Also a kind of butterflie. Barberìa, a barbers shop. Bàrbero, a barbarie horse. Barberòtto, an vnderbarber, that is next to his maister, the chiefe seruant. Barbetto, a little rough or shagged Spa∣niell. Barbicane, as Barbacane. Barbicare, as Abbarbicare. Barbiccine, the little small beards or threeds that some rootes haue. Barbiera, a sheebarber. Also a common harlot. Barbiere, a barber. Barbiglioni, the haires about a womans or mans priuities. Barbine, a kinde of ornament or carkanet about a womans head. Barbiton, a musicall instrument called of some a Dulcimer, and of some a Harpe. Barbo, a barbell fish. Barbole, a disease in a horse called the barbles. Barbolo, Barboro, a barble fish. Some take it for Smelts, or another fish called in latine Orcynnus. Barbone, a rough shagged spanniell. Also a fish called a Barbell. Also a great beard. Barboncello, the barbes or little tetes in the mouth of some horses. Barbottare, to stut, to stammer, to maffle, to lisp, to grumble, to mutter, to mumble. Barbotto, as Barbozzo. Barbozzo, the chinne where a ma beard growes, the vnder lip of a horse. Barbozzale, a curbe for a horse. Also an vnderlip or chap. Barbugliare, to paddle, to garboyle, to trouble, to intangle. Also as Balbeg∣giare. Barbuglio, a garboile, a confusion, a trouble, a buddle. Barbuta, a piece of armor called a beaer.
Barbuto, bearded, hauing a beard. Barca, a barke, a boate, a barge, a wherrie, a lighter. Barcaruolo, a waterman, a barge-man. Barcata, a boate full, the fraight or lading of a boate. Barca vergola, a kinde of gondola, barke or wherrie. Barcheggiare, to goe by boate or by wa∣ter. Barchetta, a little boate or whirrie. Barchiero, a boate-man, or waterman. Barco, as Varco, or as▪ Parco. Barcollo, a shaking of the necke, a stag∣gering. Barda, the trappings or ornaments of a horse, or a caparison, or the bardings. Bardare, to trap or bard a horse, to ca∣parison. Bardascia, a bardash, a buggering boy, an ingle. Bardassone, as Bardascia. Bardella, a straw pad vsed for coults at the first riding, and so continued vntill they be tractable. Some haue taken it for a foote-cloth. Bardellaccia, a kind of pack-saddle vsed in Italie for asses and mules. Bardellette, labels hanging at a myter. Bardello, a foole, a patch, a gull, a noddie. Bardiglio, friers gray. Bardocco, a gull, a sot, a patch, a noddie. Bardo, light, nimble, bould, saucie. Also blunt or blockish. Bareggiare, as Barrare. Bareggiatore, as Barro. Barella, a wheele-barrow or a tumbrell. Also a kinde of birde. Barganella, the name of a bird. Bargello, Barigello, a captaine of ser∣ieants, or such base officers that walketh vp and downe with them by day and night in some cities of Italie to see good orders kept. Bargelli, silkewormes. Bariare, to fight at bariers. Baricare, to baricado, to fortifie with barels full of earth and other timber. Baricata, Barricada, a baricado, or for∣tification with barels, timber, & earth. Baricocoli, as Biricocoli. Also a kinde of boyes play in Italie. Baricola, a little wheelebarrow. Bariglietto, as Barletto. Barilare, to barrell vp. Barildo, the name of a colour that pain∣ters vse. Barile, a barrell, a hogshead, a firkin. Al∣so a kinde of coyne sometimes currant in Italie. Baripto, a kinde of stone like an agatte. Barire, as Barrire. Barlacco, a gull, a noddie, a meacock, a foole. Barleffo, a gash, a cut, a slash, a skarre. Barletto, a rundlet or little barrell, a firkin. Barlione, a barrell, a rundlet. Also a drinking pot. Barlotto, Barlozzo, as Barletto. Barlume, a thing that is foggie, darke, or not transparent, a duskie light, a twy∣light. Barnire, as Barrire. Barnusso, as Barbesso. Barocco, a shift made for good cheere, meate and drinke gotten by hooke or crooke. Barone, a Baron, a Lord. Baronaggio, a baronie, a baronship. Baronia, a baronie, a Lordship. Baronzi, instructions, instructors. Also apparell or clothes, rags, clouts, tatters. Baronzola, a kinde of play that boyes vse in Italie. Barra, a barre. Also a stang: it is also that part of the neather iawe where the bit resteth on the gum. Barrare, to cheate, to cog, to cosen at game. Also to barre, to conycatch. Also to truck, or barter. Barratteria, as Barraria. Also a bartring or trucking. Barraria, a cheating house where false dice are vsed. Barrattiere, as Barattiere. Barre, looke le barre. Barricello, Barrigello, as Bargello. Barriera, a barre, where pleading or figh∣ting at barriers is vsed. Barriere, a barrister, one that stands or pleades at the barre, a fighter at bar∣riers. Barrire, to bray, as an Asse or Elephant. Barrito, braide. Also a braying. Barro, Baro, as Barattiere. Bartaldare, to teazell clothes. Baruffa, a bickering, a fray, a quarrell, a hurlyburlie, a tumult, a brabble. Baruffare, to chide, to skould, to quarrell, to make a fray. Baruola, as Barutola. Also the name of a bone in the roote of a horse taile. Baruto, a boulter, or boulting cloth. Barutola, a cheese-fat, or any round hol∣low thing. Also a churning-fat. Barzellette, a kinde of madrigall, song, gigge, or sonnet. Barzuole, casting stones for a hauke. Basa, Base, a base or foundation of a pil∣lar. Basalisco, as Basilisco. Basalte, a kinde of blacke stone. Basamento, a base or foundation or ground worke of any thing. Basar, the Bezars stone. Baschi, the common raskall people. Basanite, a stone whereof they make whet∣stones. Baschiera, is taken for the priuie parts of a woman. Basciabile, that may be kissed, to be kissed. Basciare, to kisse, to busse. Bascio, a kisse, a busse. Bascioso, a liuely kisse, a busse, full of kis∣ses, kissing. Basciozzo, a smacking kisse, or busse. Basciuccare, to kisse smackingly. Basciucchiare, as Basciuccare. Basilica, a Kings house, a Princes palace or court: also the liuer veine in mans body. Basilico, herbe Basill. Basilinda, a plaie called one penie one pe∣nie, come after me. Basilisco, a basiliske. Also a peece of great ordinance so called. Basiotto, a beggers drinking dish. Basoffia, a kinde of potage or broth. Also any kinde of light stuffing. Basire, to yeelde vp the ghost, to gaspe the last. Basole, a kinde of fine drinking glas made at Murano. Bassa, a low dale, a bottom, a vale, a valley. Bassare, to stoupe, to fall, to decline, to descend, to abase. Bassetta, a kinde of play at cards vsed in Italie. Bassezza, lownes, basenes, humilitie. Basso, low, base, below, deepe. Also a base in singing. Also narrow, as Panno, basso. Bassotta, a kinde of cake. Bassura, as Bassezza. Basta, it is sufficient, enough, well, goe to, sufficient, hold. Bastagio, Bastaggio, a porter, a bearer of burthens, a base fellow. Bastante, able, enough, sufficient. Bastanza, sufficiencie. Bastango, Bastonago, a forke-fish, it is like a ray; some call it a puffin-fish. Bastardello, as Bastardolo. Bastardire, to corrupt, to degenerate, to fall from kinde. Bastardo, a bastard, a kinde of sweete wine so called, a mungrell. Bastardolo, a blotting booke, a daie booke, a house booke to write in euery thing. Bastardume, bastardise, mungrelism, cor∣ruption, vnlawfulnes. Bastare, to suffice, to be enough. Bastar l'animo, to dare, to haue the hart.
Bastar la vista, to dare, to haue the cou∣rage. Bastante, Basteuole, sufficient, enough. Bastanza, sufficiencie, enough. Basteggiare, to play the porter, to beare like an asse. Basterna, a kinde of little cart, a chariot, a pageant. Basteuole, able, sufficient. Bastia, a skonce, a rampier, a block-house, a sort, a keepe in a castle, a bastion. Bastina, a pad, a pack-saddle, an asses sad∣dle. Bastinare, to saddle with a pack-saddle. Bastionare, to enskonce, to fortifie, to blocke, to rampire, to flanke. Bastione, as Bastia. Bastitta, as Bastia. Basto, a pad-saddle, a pack-saddle, a pan∣nell, a dosser. Also a doublet or ierkin, in rogues language. Bastonare, to cudgell, to strike, to beate with a stick. Bastonata, a bastonadoe, a blow or stroke with a cudgell. Bastone, a cudgel, a sticke, a staffe, a trun∣cheon, a bat, a waster. Bastonetto, a bastonet of a bridle. Also a little cudgell. Bastoso, a porter, one that beareth bur∣thens or loades, a loads-man. Bata, a bird like a bunting. Also a fish cal∣led a raye or a skeate. Batalo, a kinde of miniuer hood that Doc∣tors are woont to weare in signe of ho∣nour. Also a haukes hoode. Batedore, as Battitore. Batellaro, a boat-maker. Batelliere, a boat-man, a ferie-man. Batello, a little boate. Batessa, an abbesse. Batia, an abbie. Bátolo, as Batalo. Batrachio, a kind of sea fish. Also a stone which is found in a toades head. Also a kinde of colour to paint vizards. Also a swelling growing vnder the toong with an inflammation▪ Also as Battachio. Battacchio, the herbe Crowfoote, or but∣ter-flower. Battaglia, a battel, a fight. Battagliare, to battel or fight. Battagliero, a man at armes, a warrior, a soldier, a fighter. Battaglio, a bell clapper. Also a hammer vpon doores to knocke with. Also a belly clapper. Battaglione, a battalion, a great squa∣dron, the maine battle. Battalo, Battolo, as Batalo. Battata, a kinde of fruite growing in In∣dia. Some haue taken it for the hearbe Sampire. Battente, panting, beating. Báttere, Batto, Battéi, Battuto, to smite, to beate, to strike, to knocke, to thump, to swing, to thresh corne, to batter. Batter denari, to mint, to coyne money. Batter il cuore, to pant the hart. Batteria, a batterie. Battesimo, baptisme, christening. Also a kinde of coyne in Florence. Bettesimale, of or belonging to baptisme. Battezzare, to baptise, to christen. Batticuore, a panting of the hart, or sud∣den passion. Batticuli, the tases or base that horsemen vse behinde. Battiferro, an iron beater or forger. Buttifolle, a skonce, a fort, a rampire, a blockhouse or bulwark. Also vsed for a belly clapper. Battidore, as Battitore. Battifuoco, a flint to strike fire with. Al∣so the steele to strike fire. Also a tinder boxe. Battifuora, a goldbeaters flat hammer. Battigrano, a corne thresher. Battigliuola, a mil-clapper. Battilana, a wool-winder or dresser of wooll. Battimano, a kinde of great waight in some parts of Italie. Battimento, a beating, a tumult, a quar∣relling. Battino, as Battimano. Batti l'oro, a gold beater. Battipotta, a crampe fish, looke Sgramfo. Battirame, a copper-smith or brasier. Battisecula, as Battisegola. Battisegola, a stone called a Zaphire. Also blew bottle, corne flower or hurtsickle. Battisteo, Battisterio, a font for to bap∣tise in. Also a clapper. Battisuocere, a kinde of weede, hearbe or grasse. Battitoio, a clapper or such a hammer as is set vpon doores to knocke with. Battitore, a striker, a hitter, a smiter, a thresher, a clapper. Also a paper mill. Also a threshing flaile, a cudgell, a staffe, a powle. Also a Printers presse∣man. Battitura, a beating, a thumping. Battocchio, a bell-clapper. Also a bellie clapper, a trounser. Also a hammer to knock at a doore. Battola, a pot, a pipkin, a posnet: a kind of garment or ornament about a garmēt. Battuta, a beating, a panting, a keeping of time in musicke. Battuto, beaten, smitten, striken, knockt, thumpt, bumbasted, threshed corne, floo∣red, seeled, an open terrasse, a gallerie, a leads, a walke, a causey, a path, a tro∣den high way, a keeping of time in mu∣sicke. Also a bowling allie. Bau, as Baubau. Baua, slauer or slauering, foame, driuell▪ a kinde of sleauie, raw or riuling silke. Bauare, to slauer at the mouth as children doe, to foame at the mouth, to driuell. Bauaro, Báuero, a bib or muckeler. Al∣so a hood or a vaile, a Friers cowle, a beauer. Also a cape about the necke of any garment. Baubau, boe-peepe, boe, to feare children with. Bauccare, to maske or muffle. Baucco, a womans maske or muffler. Bauella, a kinde of raueled silke or sleaue silke. Also sattin of Bridges. All man∣ner of rawe silke. Bauellare, to rauell. Also to picke silke. Bauellaro, a picker of silke. Bauero, as Báuaro. Also a kinde of stuffe made of rawe silke, as curled or rawe cipers. Bauiéra, the chin peece of a caske or head∣peece. Bauisi, the finnes of any fish. Bauonare vna naue, to rub a ship ouer with grease to make it glide through the waters the faster. Bauoso, slauerie, slimie, filthie, sluttish. Baurach, a matter much like salt that Alchimists and goldsmiths vse to solder with, called nitre or borace. Baurda, a kinde of rauenous birde. Bazaro, a shifter, a conicatcher, a setter, a cogger, a haltersacke. Bazzarro, an attonement, an agreement, an accord, a consort. Bazzegare, to stut, to stammer, to lispe, to fumble, to filch, to purloine, to proule, to sneake about, to wagge vp and down. Bazzesco, as Croio. Bazzicare, as Bazzegare. Bazzicatore, a stealer, a theefe, a filcher, a purloiner. Bazzicature, stealings, filchings, burgla∣ries, purloinings, prowlings. Also baggage, foolish things, rags, trash, tat∣ters, things much worne. All manner of houshold stuffe. Bazzicchiare, to shake betweene two hands, to play handy dandy. Bazzigare, as Bazzegare. Bazzo, a coyne in Germany woorth three pence. Bazzotto, vnperfect, vnpolished, rough hewen, vnfinished, vnhandsome. Bdelio, a tree in Arabia. Also the g of
the same tree, sweete of sauour and bit∣ter in taste. Bè, well? how now? how goes it? go to, it is well. Beare, to blesse, to make happie. Beatificare, to blesse, to make happie. Beatitudine, blessednes, happines. Beato, happy, blest. Becabunga, seapurslaine, or brooke∣lime. Beccacénere, a fire-forke to stir the fire with. Beccaccia, a Woodcocke. Beccaccini, the birdes called Snites. Becca fico, a little birde much like the black-birde that feedes vpon figs. Some take it for a Witwall. Some also take it for a gnat-snapper. Becca lite, as Catta brighe. Beccaio, a butcher, a slaughterer. Becca in cauo, a fish whose gall healeth scars of woundes, and superfluous flesh in the eies. Beccamento, a pecking, a billing. Beccare, to bill, to picke, to snatch, to pecke as birds do. Beccare della padrona, to haue a snatch at ones mistresse. Beccarelli, such as helpe to carie, search and burie the dead. Also graue or pit makers. Beccamorti, as Beccarelli. Beccarocchi, a birde called a Wood∣pecker. Beccaria, a shambles, a butchers rowe, a slaughter house, a flesh market. Beccaroueglia, a kinde of faulkon, taken for the passenger that will praie for hirselfe. Beccarsi il ceruello, to bestowe or study ones wit about any matter. Beccarsi il cuore, to fret or gnawe the hart. Beccati su questa, cracke me this nut. Swallow this gudgeon. Beccata, a mouth full, a billing, a pecking with ones bill. Beccatura, a biting, a pecking, a billing. Beccheggiare, as Boccheggiare. Becchéra, the beake or bill of a hauke. Beccheria, as Beccaria. Becchi, as Beccarelli. Also bucks, he goats, or cuckolds. Becchietti, a kinde of birde. Also a kinde of fruite. Becchigno, gotish or rammish. Becchini, as Beccarelli. Also gotish or rammish. Becchina, a womans quaint or priui∣ties. Béccilo, weake, faint, tired, feeble. Becco, the bill of a birde: a he goate, a bucke, a ram, a cuckold: the beake of a ship. Beccodi oca, the herbe wilde Tansie or siluer herbe. Becco mal guardato, a kinde of Christ∣mas game vsed in Italie. Beccone, a foole, an idiot, a gull, a patch. Beccorella, Beccostorto, as Auosetta. Bechiche, a kinde of pilles against the cough. Bechio, Folefoote, All-hose or Horsehoofe. Bede, the white Thistle. Bedona, a kinde of sarge or saye. Bedollo, the Birch tree. Been, wilde Sage: some vse it for Horse∣mint. Beffania, the Epiphanie: it is spoken in mockerie. Beffa, a flout, a scoffe, a gibe, a frumpe, a iest, a mocke. Beffana, a bug-beare, a bull-begger, a scar-crowe, a toy to mocke an ape. Beffare, to flout, to scoffe, to gibe, to frump, to iest, to mocke. Beffardo, Beffatore, a flouter, a scoffer, a frumper, a mocker. Beffeggiare, as Beffare. Beffeggiatore, as Beffardo. Beffiare, as Beffare. Beffiardo, Beffiatore, as Beffardo. Bega, a Bee, an humble Bee. Beghino, as Pinzocchero. Also a kinde of course graie cloth, religious or poore old men were woont to weare. Also vsed for a bighin that our children weare. Belare, to bleate as a sheepe. Belbéllo, faire and softly, leasurely, fair∣lie. Beleno, a kinde of fish. Beletta, as Belletta. Belfegore, the name of a diuell, a bug∣beare, a cruell man. Belgimi, a sweete drug called Beniamin. Belgioino, Belgini, as Belgimi. Belico, as Bilico. Beliale, the diuell, an apostata. Also a prophet. Belido pliniano, as Coppadi Gioue. Belicato, hauing a nauell or middle. Bella bellina, taken for a womans priui∣ties or quaint. Belletta, claie, mire, dirt, a dead water, slime, bogge or mud. Also a wheale or a pimple. Bellettare, to paint, to beautifie, to make faire. Also to deceaue. Belletto, painting that women vse for their faces. Also a deceit. Bellézza, beautie, fairenes, comelines. Bellico, as Bilico. Béllico, as Bellicoso. Bellico di venere, an herbe so called. Béllicoso, warlike, martiall. Bellificare, to beautifie. Bellino, prettie and faire: somewhat faire. Bellirici, a kinde of plum or prune. Bellis, the white Daisie. Bello, faire, beautifull, well-fauoured, handsome, goodly, shene, comelie, pret∣tie. Belloardo, Bellouardo, a bulwarke, a blockhouse, a skonce, a forte, a ramkin. Bello in piazza, a cracker, a boaster, a vanter, great boast and small roste. Bellor, as Bellezza. Beltà, Beltade, as Bellezza. Beltramo, faire, handsome goodly. Beltresche, rampiers to defende wals, scaffolds. Beltro, a mixt colour of greene, white, and red. Belua, a wilde beast or dreadfull mon∣ster. Beluardo, as Bellouardo. Beluedére, a place of a faire prospect, or a faire sight, an herbe called Topa re∣gia in latine, which some take to be the toade flaxe, or flaxe weede. Belzini, Belzoino, as Belgimi. Bembé, very well, go to, good enough. Benaggia, well fare his hart, gods bles∣sings be with him. Ben or bene, very well, well, go to, good, enough, wealth, much. Benandata, a farewell that men giue, or drinking pennie giuen when men goe away. Ben bene, very well. Benche, howbeit, although. Benda, a skarfe, a vaile, a swathe, a fil∣let, a hairelace, a bend in armorie. Also a hosegarter. Bendare, to enskarfe, to swathe, to hood∣winke, to bend with a bend about, to blindfold. Bendella, a fillet, a ribond, a tape, a little skarffe, a bandell, a swathe, a rowler. Bendellare, to goe staggering as dronken men do, to bandell, to enskarffe. Benedicite, a grace afore or after meate, a thanks-geuing, a blessing. Benedicente, a well-speaking man. Benedicenza, a well-speaking, a bles∣sing. Benedire, to blesse, to blisse. Benedittione, a blessing, a blisse. Benedetto, blessed, happie, blist. Benefattore, a benefactor, doing good, or liberall to do good deedes. Beneficare, to benefite, to benefice, to do
a good turne vnto. Beneficiale, beneficiall. Also of or per∣taining to benefices. Beneficiare, as Beneficare. Beneficenza, a benefite, a good deede, a good turne. Also liberalitie. Beneficiario, he that receiueth a good turne. Also a pencioner, or one that liueth vpon some annuitie, allowance, or exhibition. Beneficio, a benefite, a good turne, a be∣nefice, a good deede. Benéfico, as Benefattore. Bene habbia, as Benaggia. Bene merito, well deseruing. Bene spesso, very often, very thick. Bene stante, well to liue, able, ritch. Beneuolenza, beneuolence, or good will. Bengodi, as we say well fare your hart. Also a fained name of a countrie where they say dogs run away with whole shoulders of mutton. Bent, goods, wealth, chattell. Beni castrensi, goods gotten in warre. Benignità, benignitie, gentlenes, kindnes, louingnes, goodnes, bountie. Benigno, gentle, kinde, louing, benigne, good, bountifull. Beninanza, as Benignità. Beniuolenza, beneuolence, or good will. Beniuolo, as Benigno. Ben parlante, well-speaking, eloquent. Ben per tempo, earely, or very timely. Benuenire, to well come home, to welcome. Benuenuto, well come home, welcome. Benuénuta, a welcome, a welcome home. Benuedére, to loue, or view with a good will. Benueduto, well regarded, well respec∣ted, well beloued. Benuoglienza, beneuolence or good will. Benuogliente, a good willer, well willing. Benuolére, to loue, to affect, to befriend. Benuoluto, well beloued, affected, regar∣ded. Benna, a kinde of dungcart, or tumbrell. Bennola, a wad of strawe or clouts to carie burthens with vpon the head. Also the stalke of a Cucumber. Beóne, a carelesse, idle, lazie, lotring fel∣low, an ale-knight, a tospot. Bera, a Drone, a Hornet, a Humblebee. Berbéna, the hearbe Veruein. Bérberi, the tree or fruite we call ber∣beries. Berbici, all manner of sheepe. Berbiciaro, a shepheard. Bére, beuo, or beo, beuui, beuuto, to drinke. Beretta, a cap or a bonet. Beretta da prete, a priests cap. Also a broad leafed weede growing in the wa∣ter as a dock leafe. Berettare, to put on a cap, to cap one. Berettaro, a capper, a cap-maker. Berettata, a capping. Berettina, a little cap or bonet. Berettino, a little cap, a night-cap. Also gray or ash-colour. Berettone, a great cap or bonet, a cap of maintenance as the Maior of London hath caried before him. Bergamotte, a kinde of excellent peares. Bergantino, a Brigandine, a Pinnace, a Foist, a light boate. Berghinella, a gadding, idle, gossoping, abroade going, a tittle tattle woman, an idle huswife. Berghinellare, to gad or go idlie abroad a gossoping from house to house as idle huswiues do. Bergola, a sheepe that is dizzie and stag∣gers as she were dronke. Bergolo, a skullion, a drunkard, a brab∣ler, a wrangler, a common bareter, a beastlie foolish fellow. Bergolare, to brable, to wrangle, to skold, to prate, to loyter idlie vp and downe. Bergogliere, as Bergolo. Bergumélla, a sillie wretched woman. Berilla, the hearbe water parslie, or yellow water cresses. Berillo, a precious stone called a berill, in colour like oyle or sea-water, a seawater stone. Berlengo, a tipling or drinking house where all manner of riffraff companie comes. Berlesche, windowes, drawing windowes, out-bay windowes, or skaffolds. Berli, little bushes, locks, or tufts of haires. Berlina, Berlino, a pillerie, or cucking∣stoole, heretofore called a tombrell. Berlingare, to prate, to prattle, to chat, to skould, to raile. Berlincione, a foole, an idiote, a noddie. Berlingaccio, the thursdaye before shrouesunday, when euery man giues himselfe to sport: so called in Florence. Berlinghiera, a pratling, rayling, bab∣ling, skoulding woman. Berlingozzo, a kinde of bisket, simnell, or sugar bread, a tansie of egs, a dronken song, a threemens song▪ Also the wind or wezell pipe, the name of a bird. Bernacche, the barnickles that growes vpon the sides of ships. Bernasso, a cloke with a hoode as shep∣heards weare, a thrumbed hat. Bernia, an irish rug, or mantle, a rug, such as seamen weare. Berretta, a cap or a bonet. Berrettare, as Berettare. Berrettaro, as Berettaro. Berricocoli, apricocks. Also a kinde of comfets or suckets. Berrina, larde. Also a larding stick. Berrouiere, a catchpole or seriant. Bersaglio, a but or marke to shoote at. Bersela, to swallowe a gudgeon: to pocket vp any wrong, to beleeue any tale. Berta, as Beffa, a birde called a Iai. Berteggiare, as Beffare. Berteggiatore, as Beffatore. Bertesche, as Beltresche. Bertolotto, a noddie, a gull, a ninnie, a foolish shift. Bertonare, to loue lecherously or secretly, abusing maried folkes beds. Bertone, a maried mans or wedded wo∣mans secret louer, leman, whore or adul∣terer. Bertonega, a kinde of herbe. Bertuccia, Bertuccio, a pugge, a mun∣kie, a marmoset, an ape. Bertuccione, a great munkie, a babuine or ape. Berzagliare, to condemne, cast, iudge, confine or limite. to shoote at a marke. Berzaglio, as Bersaglio. Berze, the blew markes of any stripe or beating, the prints of the lashes of a whip. Also vsed for long shankes or stalking legs. Besegnini, a kinde of rauenous sea fowle. Besenfio, swolne, puffed vp, bladdered. Also pursie or broken winded. Bessaggine, lisping, flutting, stammering, maffling, faltring in speech, foolish∣nes, idiotisme. Besso, a foole, a gull, an idiot, a ninnie. Beste, in latin Hyrium. Bestemmia, a blasphemie, a curse. Bestemmiare, to blaspheme, to curse, to banne, to sweare and forsweare. Bestemmiatore, a blaspemer, a curser, a banner. Bestia, any kinde of beast: it is taken for a mans priuy parts, a buls pizell. Bestiaggine, as Bestialità. Bestiale, beastly, terrible, mad, foolish, vnreasonable, furious. Bestialità, beastlines, filthines, madnes, hugenes, vnreasonablenes, beastlihead, brutishnes or rudenes. Bestiame, all kinde of cattle. Bestione, a great beast, a gull, a noddie, a foole, a patch. Betilo, a kinde of stone called in latine Betilus. Bettino, a page, a knauish wagge, a halter sacke. Bettola, a common drinking, ding, ga∣ming,
base ale house, a tap house, a tip∣ling house. Bettolare, to haunt ale houses, tipling houses, dicing houses, to play the drun∣kard, to tipple, to quaffe or to gourman∣dise. Bettoliere, Bettolante, a common dicer, a quaffer, a tipler, an ale knight. Bettonica, the herbe Betonie, Speedewell, Groundhale, or herbe Fluellin. Bettula, a kinde of herbe or tree. Betonica, as Bettonica. Betulo, the Birch tree. Also as Ceraunia. Beua, a beauie. Beuacchiare, to tipple, to drinke, to sip, to swill, to bouze, to quaffe. Beuacchiatore, Beuacchione, a tipler, a quaffer, a drunkard, an ale knight. Beuanda, a drink, a drench, a mashe, a be∣uerage. Also a potion. Beueltutto, a tipler, a quaffer, a sounde drinker, an ale knight. Beuere, Beuo, Beuei, Beuuto, to drinke, to quaffe, to tipple. Also a drinking pe∣nie. Beueraggio, as Beuanda. Also a drin∣king penie. Beueratoio, a workemans apron or bib. Also a watring place for cattell. Beuer la briglia, when a horse drawes vp the bit with his toong. Beuero, a beauer, a badger, a graie wherof they make beauer hats. Also a poole, a pond or watring pit. Beueróne, a drench or mashe for a horse; swilling for swine, a drunkard, or a tos∣pot. Beuicare, as Beuacchiare. Beuitore, Beuitrice, a drinker, a quaf∣fer. Bezar, Bezoar, a beazer stone. Bezzicare, to pricke, to sting, to prouoke, to allure, to egge on. Bezzo, a small coyne in Venice. Bezuca, an old monkie, an ilfauoured ape, a withered face. Biacca, a kinde of white leade, called Ce∣ruse. Biaccare, to white, to dawbe, to paint with Ceruse. Biada, any kinde of corne or graine, any blade of corne. Also prouender for hor∣ses. Biadare, to feede or prouender a horse. Biancare, to white, to whitten, to blanche. Biancaria, all manner of naperie or white linnen. Biancheggiante, whitish or drawing vp∣pon white, blanching. Biancheggiare, as Biancare. Metapho∣rically it is taken to raile at one secretly. Bianchetta, a blanket. Also some thing white. Bianchetto, as Biacca. Also prettie and white. Also a fish called a Dace, a Merlane, and of some a Menow. Bianchezza, whitenes, hoarines, palenes. Bianchiccio, whitish, somewhat white, pale, wan or salow coloured. Bianchimento, a whitening, a blanching, a whitishnes. Bianciardo, as Bianchiccio. Bianco, white, blanke, pale, wan, horie: the name of a worme breeding in horses. also a disease in a horses knee or the ioints therof. Som take it to be a disease in a horses eie. Bianco del' occhio, the white of the eie. Bianco del'uuouo, the white of an egge. Bianco mangiare, a kinde of white meate. Biancone, a goodly, great milkesappe, a fresh water soldier, a kinde of coine. Biancure, the monethly flowers that wo∣men haue. Biaos, a tree with whose leaues they couer their houses in India. Biasciare, to smack or smacker in chaw∣ing, to mumble as a toothsse olde wo∣man. Biasimare, Biasmare, to blame, to con∣demne, to accuse, to reprooue, to checke, to taunte. Biasimabile, Biasmabile, blamewoor∣thie. Biasimeuole, Biasmeuole, blamewoor∣thie. Biasimo, Biasmo, blame or reproch. Biassare, as Biasciare. Biastemmiare, as Bestemmiare. Biaua, as Biada. Biauo, a bright pale yellow colour. Bibia, Bibbia, the Bible or holie writ. Al∣so the funnell or tunnell of a butte. Also the leese or dregs of wine. Bibliopola, a Stationer or seller of books. Bibliothéca, a library or studie of books. Bica, Bicca, a heape, a huddle, a hay cocke, a great masse, a great deale, a rick, a stack, or houell of haie or corne: it is al∣so taken for anger or pepper in the nose. Montare su la Bica, to take pepper in the nose, to be sore angrie. Bichiacco, a smack or smackring with the toong. Bichiacchie, iestes, toyes, frumps, flim∣flam tales, smackrings. Bicchiére, any kinde of drinking glasse or beaker. Bicchieraro, a drinking glasse maker. Bicchigno, rammish, goatish, smelling of a goate. Bicchignolo, the socket of a candlesticke or lampe. Bicocca, a hamlet, a cottage, a little village. Bicocche, the principall feathers of a hauke. Bicollo, a cowle-staffe to carie behinde and before with, as they vse in Italy to carie two buckets at once. Bicornia, a kinde of bending anuile that goldsmiths vse. Bicorporeo, that hath two bodies. Bidello, a beadle. Bidente, a pitch forke with two teeth, or hauing two teeth. Bidetto, a little horse, a nagge, a tit, a lit∣tle doing horse. Bieco, squintie, sidelin, crooked, twart awrie. Bieco atto, an vnhonest, vnlawfull acte. Biedone, the dregs of honie. Also the herb Blit or Blites, a kinde of Beet that hath no sent. Bielletta, some stone or shell that Ichne∣mone vseth to kill the crokodill with. Biestemmia, as Bestemmia. Biestemmiare, as Bestemmiare. Bieta, Bietole, the potherbe Beetes. Bietolone, a foole, a ninnie, a gull, a mea∣cocke. Bietta, a wedge to cleaue wood with. Biettola, as Bettola. Biffara, a fidle or croude. Biffaro, a fidler, a crouder, a minstrell. Biffera, ill, soule, duskie, gloomie weather, a whirlewind, a gust or berry of wind, a contrarietie of winds. Bifera, as Biffera. Bifida lingua, a clouen toong, that is clo∣uen in two. Bifoglio, the herbe Twaie-blade or Ei∣foile. Bifolca, a kinde of measure in Italy. Bifolco, a ploughman, a husbandman, a heardes-man. Biforca, a forke, a pitchforke. Biforcato, or Biforcuto, that hath two points like a forke, forked. Biforcopiede, a clouen foote. Biforme, of two shapes or formes. Bifronto, with two foreheads, bifronted. Bifulca, any lande that is twice ploughed. Biga, a tumbrell, a dung cart with two wheeles. Bigamia, the mariage of two wiues. Bigamo, a man twice maried. Bigatti, silke-wormes, wormes. Bigiaccio, a friers gray or sheepes russet. Bigio, gray or russet colour. Also home∣spun cloth or sheepes russet.
Bigiocco, as Bizocco. Bigiuccia, a kind of gray or clay colour. Bigolo, as Bicollo. Bigoncia, a wine-measure in Italie. a pulpit or a chaire for a common speaker to speake or declaime in. Bigonzolo, as Bicollo. Bilancia, a balance, or paire of scales. Bilanciare, to balance, to waigh, to pon∣der, to consider. Bile, gall, anger, choler, melancholie. Bilicare, as Bilanciare, Bilicato, hauing a nauell, or middle. Bilico, the nauell of any body, the middle of any thing. Also a mill clapper. Biligato, part of a wyer-drawers bench. Bilingue, a man that hath two toongs or languages. Bilta, as Bellezza. Bimba, a babe, a babie, a childe, a puppie. Bimembre, of two members or parts. Bimense, of two moneths. Bimole, of the age of two yeares. Binangolo, hauing two angles or corners. Binare, to accompanie for good fellowship, to gather, to couple, to yoke together. Binato, accompanied, gathered, coupled, or yoked together. Also twice borne. Bindella, as Bendella. Bino, two and two, double, twofold. Binomio, that hath two names. Biocca, as Bicocca. Bioccole, locks or fleeces of wooll. Bioccoloso, slouenlie, slauerie, sluttish, snottie, sniuelie. Bionda, a kind of lye to wash and make womens haires yellow. Biondeggiante, shining yellow, or of the colour of gold. Biondeggiare, to make shine, or become yellow, or as the sunne. Biondella, the herbe centorie so called, because washing ones head with it, it makes the heares yellow. Also a golden∣lockt wench, as we say a goldilocks. Biondello, such a one as we call a goul∣dilock. Biondezza, yellownes of haires. Bioua, raine, or drizle. Bipalmo, two handfuls broade or long. Bipalio, a grubbing axe. Bipara, that hath brought forth twice. Bipartire, to deuide in two parts. Bipartito, diuided in two parts, bipartite. Bipedale, two foote long, wide or broade. Bipede, two footed, hauing two feete. Bipenne, Bipanne, a carpenters axe that cuts on both sides, a twybill or twale. Also hauing two wings. Bircio, I finde vsed for Guercio. Bireme, a ship or gallie with two ranges of oares, or two oares in a seate. Birettino, as Berettino. Biricuocoli, the fruite apricocks. Biroldo, a kinde of pudding, or haggas. Birra, the drinke we call beere. Birraria, places where knaues and ser∣ieants meete together. Also a bruhouse, a beerehouse. Birresco, rascally, or seriantlike. Birro, a serieant, a catchpoale, a paritor. Birsa, the cheuerill skinne to make purses with. Bisa, a cold winde that brings a frost with it. Bisaccia, a wallet, a scrip, a bag. Bisacuto, the hearbe toothpick, or cher∣uill. Bisanta, a kinde of coyne. Bisaua, a great grandmother. Bisauo, Bisauolo, a great grandfather. Bisbigliare, to whisper, to mutter, to buzze, to murmur. Bisbiglio, whispering, muttering, buz∣zing. Bisbiglione, a murmurer, a whisprer, a mutterer. Biscacciare, to waste, to spende riotous∣ly. Biscantare, to sing and sing againe. Bischencho, a iest, a knauish pranke, a mad trick. Bischeri, lute pins or pegs, or virginall keies. A childes pillicocke or prick. Bischiccio, an agnomination or a concor∣dance of two words, as piu che vn toro tira. Bisciere, a harrow, a rake. Also a pin or peg of a lute: the key of a virginall. Al∣so a childes hobbie horse or sticke to plaie with: a furner or a maulkin. Bischizzare, to draw the first draught of any deede or writing. Also to agno∣minate or accorde wordes togither. Bischizzoso ceruello, a fantasticall, heteroclite wit. Biscia, a snake, an adder. Bisciare, as Serpeggiare. Biscia scutaia, a tortoise. Biscia scutelaia, a tortoise. Biscio, as Bigio. Bisco, slime, birdlime. Biscoso, slimie, clammie. Biscottare, to bake, seeth or roste twice. Biscottelli, a kinde of comfet or bisket bread. Biscotto, bisket. Also twice sod or rosted. Biselli, yoong peason. Bisestare, to change as the leape yeere. Bisestile, the leape yeare. Bisesto, the leape yeere, or one day added in fower yeeres. Bisgiello, home-spun cloth, sheepes russet. Bisigare, to be busie or meddle with anie thing. Bisigarare, as Bisigare. Bislacco, a gull, a vaine light-headed man. Bisleggiante, faire, handsome, prettie, sightly, goodly. Bislingua, as Bonifacia. Bislongo, twice long, a slangrell. Bismalua, the weede water mallowes, or marsh mallowes. Biso, a pease, as Bigio. Bisogna, a busines, an affaire, a neede. Also, it behooueth, it is requisite, it is conuenient. Bisognare, to haue neede, to behooue, to want. Bisognéuole, needefull, needie. Bisogno, neede, necessitie, want. Bisognoso, needie, poore, distressed, wan∣ting. Bisolco, as Bifolco. Bisonte, a great beast like a horse in Po∣lonia. Bisonto, a filthie, greasie, slowenlie fel∣low. Bisuntone, as Bisonto. Bissa, as Biscia. Bissino, a kinde of fine silken stuffe called bisse. Bisso, idem. Bistentare, to languish, to pine, to lin∣ger. Bistento, languor, languishing, pining. Bisticciarla con alcuno, to stand out to any thing stoutly, not to yeeld or giue one an inch of ground vpon any contro∣uersie, to keepe tacke with one. Bisticcio, a bisticke or two verses. Also as Bischiccio. Bistorta, the hearbe snakeweede, bistorte, oysterloite, or adderwort. Bistrattare, to misuse, or abuse one, to euill intreate. Bisulco, clouen foote, forked. Bitontoni, certaine greene figs. Bitorze, the swelling of a blow, bunches or swelling knobs. Bitorzolare, to make, or goe crooked, crankling, winding or turning in and out. Bitorzolo, a crooked crankling in and out. Bitorzoluto, crabbed, knottie, knobbie, ruffled, curled or clustrie. Also crooked crankling, winding or turning in and out. Bittore, a fowle called a Bitter. Bitumare, to bepitch, to make clammie, to tarre, to morter.
Bitume, lime, clay, pitch, tarre, rosin, or any such burning or sulphurous slimie or clammie thing. Bituro, Butiro, butter. Biualuo, opening two waies, twofold. Also that hath two, or double scales, shels, or huskes. Biuio, a way parting into two or on both sides. Biui, a swallow. Biumbe, a kinde of pipe, crowd or fiddle. Biuto, vsed for Beuuto, drunke. Bizzaria, fantasticalnes, toyishnes, a foo∣lish humour, rashnes. Bizzarire, to grow or become humorous, fantasticall or toyish. Bizzarro, fantasticall, humorous, toyish, selfe conceited, a haire-brane. Bizzer, heertofore vsed for Messere, ma∣ster, sir. Bizzicare, to pricke, to stinge, to pinch. Bizzocca, a puritan dissembling wo∣man. Bizzocco, a frier of the thirde order of Saint Fraunces, but taken for a dissem∣bling puritan. Bizzucche, munkies, apes, pugs. Bladiseri, as Fiorecampese. Blandire, to flatter, to sooth or smooth one, to blandish. Blandimenti, flatterings, allurings, sooth∣ings, blandishments. Blanditie, as Blandimenti. Blando, flattering, alluring, blithe, bonny, pleasant, buxome, gamesom, blandish∣ing. Blatta, a little worme or flie like a moth. Also a beetle or silke worme. Blatterare, to bleate as a lambe, to clatter out of measure, to make a noise like a ca∣mell. Blattaria, the herbe called purple or moth-mullein. Bleconia, pudding grasse or peny-royall. Bleso, stammering or slutting, or lisping, or toong-tide. Boaccia, mud, mire, durte, a quag mire. Boaccio, a kinde of great beast like an oxe. Boare, to go to bull as a cow doth, to bellow like an oxe, to calue. Boarina, a birde which some take for the siskin or titmouse. Boaro, an oxeheard or cow-heard. Boazzo, filthie bull beefe or a filthie oxe. Boba, mud, mire or puddle. Bobolco, as Bisolco. Boca, a sea fish that belloweth as a bull. Bocasia, a kinde of wine made in Sicilie like malmesie. Bocca, a mouth, the mouth or fall of any riuer or hauen. Bocca, looke tirar di bocca. Boccadoro, golden mouth, taken for mo∣ney. Bócca in capo, a fish called in latine Callionimus. Boccále, a quart pot, a drinking pot, a crewse, any kind of pot. Also an Ewer. Boccaláro, a pot maker, a potter. Also a tipler, a tospot, a quaffer. Boccaletto, Boccaruolo, a little pot or crewse. Boccalino, as Boccaletto. Boccárico, a tribute that is paid, so much for euerie head or mouth. Boccasino, properly, such stuffe as we call Buckram. Also such stuffe as we call Callimanco. Also a single garment for a woman. Some haue vsed it for fine Calico or lawne. Boccata, a mouth-full. Also a bucke of cloathes. Also a word vsed when one is about to tell a thing & knows not what it is: or that a scholer would faine read his lesson and cannot, and that we by some signe or voice will let him knowe that he is out, wide, and saies he wots not what. We vse to say Boccata, as in En∣glish, yea in my other hose, or iump as Germans'lips, you are as wise as Wal∣tams calfe, and such other phrases. Boce, hath beene vsed for Voce. Boccellato, a kinde of fine bisket bread. Boccheggiare, to gape, to yawne, to make moes, to play or checke with the mouth as some ill horses doe. Bocchetta, a little prettie mouth. Bocchetto, a posie or nosegay of flowres. Bocchina, Bocchino, a little prettie mouth. Boccia, a viall of glasse. Also a pot to di∣still in, a receptorie. Also a mouth. Also a kinde of limbecke. Also a cupping glasse. Boccicata, Boccicone, as Boccata. Boccie di rose, buds of roses or flowers, blossoms. Bocciero, a butchr. Boccinare, to buzze, to mutter, to mum∣ble. Boccinamento, a buzzing, a muttering, a mumbling. Boccinolo, a silke or muske cod. Bocciolare, to bud foorth, to blossome. Boccioloso, buddie, full of buds or blos∣soms: full of cupping glasses or lim∣becks. Bocciuolo, a reed to make a pipe with: the ioints of a cane or reed. Also the cod of a silkeworme. Also that part of a horne, of a cornet or trumpet, which is put to ones mouth to winde or sownde him. Boccole, stones that are giuen vnto haukes. Boccoleccia, a steele to strike fire with, or a swiuell for a chaine. Boccolo, Boccolor, a bud of any flowre or blossome. Boccone, a morsell, a peece, a scrap, a mammcke. Also groueling on the ground with the face downeward. Bocconcellare, to mince it or bite little morsels, to eate mincingly, to simper it. Bocconcino, a little morsell. Boccon d'adamo, the bone that some men haue sticking in their throate. Bocconeggiare, as Bocconcellare. Boccore, a kind of graine or corne to fat∣ten poultrie with, called Bucke-wheat. Boccuccia, a little simpering mouth. Bociare, as Vociferare, to call alowd to one. Boda, the plague or pestilence. Boemo, a coine or ducket of Bohemia: a Bohemian. Boffa, Buffa, Buffone, a toade. Boffetteggiare, to buffet, or box on the eare. Boffetto, a blow, or boxe, or buffet giuen on the eare. Also a cupbord. Also a kind of manchet or cheate bread so called. Boghe, as Boope. Boglia, pap for children, water gruell. Bogliente, boiling, seething hote. Bogliere, as Boglire. Boglire, boglio, boglito, to boile, to seeth. Boglio, the boyling or seething of the pot, a boyling, a bubbling, a waume. Boglione, warme broth. Bognone, a bile, or such sore. Boia, a hangman, an executioner. Boiaro, a neatheard. Boie, a kind of great Serpent. Boiesco, hangman-like. Bolasso, a fish called a Pearch. Bolcello, a little worme breeding be∣tweene the skin and the flesh. Bolcione, a boult, or shaft. Bole, marks of sores or plaisters. Bolerminio, as Boloarmeno. Bolgetta, a budget. Bolgia, a budget, a wallet, a maile, a bag, a pit or poole of water. Bolgicchino, a little budget. Also a kind of torture, rack, or little ease. Boldone, a pudding made of bloud. Boldoniere, a pudding-maker, or sel∣ler. Boletti, a kinde of Mushroms or tode∣stooles. Boletta, a shoomakers tack or little nail
to fasten his leather to his laste. Bolino, a chizell to cut stone with. Bolla, a viall of glasse, a bull, a marking iron, a seale, a print. Also a wheale, o bladder, a bubble. Also any round stud or bosse. Bolladore, as Bollaro. Also a branding-iron, a stamp, or a seale. Bollare, to marke with a hot iron, to seale, to imprint, to bubble. Bollaro, a marker, a sealer, a printer. Bollatura, a marking, an impression, a sealing, a bubbling. Bolletta, Bollettino, a schedule, a ticket, a billet, a bill, a note, a docket. Bolletta is also taken for dry mud, dirt, or claish earth. Bollente, boyling, seething. Bollite, to boyle, to seeth. Bollisola, Bollifola, a push, a wheale, a pimple, a scab, a scurfe, an itch. Bollimento, steame or boyling heate: also the foaming, or swelling, or wor∣king of the sea. Bollino, a toole that stonecutters vse. Bollo, a seale, a marking or branding iron, a marke: also a boyling, or a waume. Bollore, steame, or boyling heate, a sud∣daine waume, a bubling or boyling of waters. Boloarmeno, a kind of yellow or reddish earth good against poyson and infecti∣on, it groweth in Armenia. Bolognino, a kinde of small coyne. Bolpino, a fish, which hauing swallowed a hooke, will cast vp all his entrailes with it, and so saues himselfe. Bolso, pursie, shortwinded, sicke of the lungs, puffed, swolen. Bolsiua, pursines, a cough in the lungs. Bolsiuo, as Bolso. Bolseggiare, to blow, to puffe as a broken winded iade, to cough in the lungs. Bolzacchin, buskins. Bolzo, as Bolso. Bolzone, a boult, a shaft. Bolzelli, the wards of a locke. Bomba, a pump of a ship. Also home, a mans owne home, roost or neast, a kinde of play that children vse in Italie. Bombagia, all manner of bumbast, or cotton wooll. Bombagiaro, a carder of bumbast, a bumbaste maker. Bombagiare, a kinde of stuffe called bumbasine made of cotton wooll. Bombarda, a gun, or any kinde of bum∣bard. Bombardare, to batter, to shoote, to beate, to cannon a cittie. Bombardaro, a gun-maker, a gunner. Bombardiera, a spike hole, a loope hole to shoot out at. Bombardiere, a gunner, a harquebusier, a musketier. Bombare, to resound, to buzze, to hum as Bees do. Bombice, a silke worme. Bombilare, as Bombare. Bombilio, a kinde of buzzing Bee or waspe. Bombitare, as Bombare. Bombo, a humming, a buzzing, a resoun∣ding hoarse noise. Bombone, a kinde of kernell that comes in the fat of man. Bomolcho, a cauelling, a foolish fellowe, one that prefers gaine before friendship. Bonaccia, a calm or faire weather at sea. Bonacciare, to calme, to appease, to quiet, to asswage. Bonaga, the herb Cammock, rest-harrow, Whin, Groundfurze, or petie Whin. Bonamano, a new yeeres gift, a good han∣sell, a reward, a drinking pennie. Bonario, debonaire, honest, good, vncor∣rupt. Bonaso, a beast as big as a bull with great hornes, but bending backe. Bonetto, a bonet or a cap. Bonificamento, any profit or encrease comming of lands. Bonifacia, the herbe called horsetoong, toongwoort, toong-blade, or double toong. Bonigoldo, as Bilico. Bonità, as Bontà. Bono, as Buono. Bonoga, as Bonaga. Bon prò, as Buon prò. Bon prò vi faccia, as Buon prò. Bontà, bountie, goodnes, honesty, vpright∣nes. Bontà del mio signore, god a mercie my lord. Bontadoso, bounteous, bountifull, liberal, good. Bonzole, a kinde of daintie meate, pud∣ding or haggas. Booba, as Boope. Boope, a kinde of strange fish hauing scales backward, called in latin Boops. Boote, a serpent liuing by milke of rudder beasts. Also a star in heauen following charles waine. Borace, borace that goldsmiths vse to sol∣der with. Boraciere, a borace boxe that goldsmiths vse. Boranez, a kinde of tree in India. Borbo, as Borgo. Borbocca, a kinde of sea fish. Borbottare, to mutter, to mumble, to grudge, to grumble. Borbottolare, as Borbottare. Borchie, the bosses of a bridle, the hang∣ing lips of a mule. Borda, the name of one of the little sailes of a ship. Bordare, to border about, to embroder. Also to boord a ship. Bordatura, a border, a bording, a boar∣ding of a ship: also a cheuron in armory. Bordellare, to haunt the stewes, to followe or frequent whoores. Bordelleggiare, as Bordellare. Bordelletti, foolish toies for whoores: any scornefull things. Bordelliere, a whooremonger, a frequen∣ter of harlots. Bordello, a brothell house, a bawdy house, a stewes. Bordo, a kinde of silke stuffe wouen. Bordonali, rafters or quarters of timber. Also a great clarke or doctor wearing a tippet. Bordone, a staffe, a bat, a verge, a sound, a noise, a tennor or keeping of time in musicke, the burden of any song: a prop of timber, a pilgrims staffe. Also the se∣cond base string of any instrument. Borea, the northeast winde, boreas blasts. Boreale, northren, of the north. Borella, a bowle to plaie at bowles with. Borellare, to plaie at bowles, to bowle. Borellatoio, a bowling allie. Borelliere, a bowler, a plaier at bowles. Borellone, a great bowle. Borfare, to huffe, to puffe, to snuffe, to chafe, to snort. Borfiare, as Borfare. Borfio, a puffing, chafing, huffsnuffe fel∣lowe. Borgare, to cast or scowre as a hauke. Borgatura, casting or scowring for a hauke. Borge, as Borchie. Borghese, a burgesse or towne dweller. Borghigiane, as Berghinelle. Borghinelle, as Berghinelle. Borghinetta, a burganet, a skull, a caske. Bórgno, bleare-eied, squint-eied, pur∣blinde, sand-blinde. Borgo, a burrough, a towne, a suburbe. Bória, vaineglorie, ostentation, vaunting. Boriate, to boast, to glorie, to brag, to vaunt. Borico, Boricchio, as Borrico. Borine, the names of certaine shroudes or ropes in a ship. Borino, a small sharpe pounce that gra∣uers vse.
Borióso, boasting, proud, a bragger, a vaunter, a vaineglorious man. Boriosuzzo, somewhat vaineglorious. Bornio, as Borgno. Borniola. Looke Dare vna borniola. Borra, any stuffing for saddles, or other quilting or bombasting. Also as Bo∣race. Borrabozza, a fish called in Latine Blen∣nus. Borrace, Borraso, as Borace. Borragine, Borrana, the herbe Borage. Borrare, to solder, to stuffe. Borrattare, to sift or boult meale. Also a racking betweene an amble and a trot. Borratto, a boulting cloth, a sieue▪ a rack∣ing of a horse. A kinde of stuffe called Burato. Borreuolmente, stuffingly, fully, gul∣chingly. Borrico, a kinde of quilted wastecoate. Also a frocke. Borrire, to rouze a deere for to hunt him. Also to fill or stuffe. Borro, the wood called Corke. Borsa, a purse, a little bag. Borsapastoris, the herbe Shepherds purse or scrip. Borsare, to imburse or put into a purse. Borsetta, Borsella, a little pouch, a little purse. Also a glister. Also a bladder or a blister. Borsia, a purse, a satchell, a little bag. Borsiére, a purser, a purse keeper. Borsone, a pouch, a hauking bag, a great purse. Borza, as Borsa. Borzacchini, buskins, fine bootes. Borzachinato, hauing buskins on, bus∣kined. Borzachinetti, little buskins, little che∣uerell purses. Borzetta, as Borsetta. Bosca, a bird called a pocard. Boscaglia, wooddie ground, boscage. Boscare, to grow to wood or wilde. Boscareccio, Boschereccio, rurall, sa∣uage, woodie, siluan, desert, swainlike. Bossatore, a forester. Also a woodfeller or a woodman. Boschetto, a groue, a thicket, a little wood, a cops of woode. Also a rispe, a lushe or lime twigge to catch birds. Bosco, a woode, a forrest, a groue. Boscoso, woodie, full of wood. Bosecchie, as Busecchie. Bosima, a kind of yeast or gum that wea∣uers vse to stiffen linnen cloth with. Bosimare, to stiffen linnen cloth as wea∣uers do. Bossetto, a shoe-makers rounde peece of wood to sow his shooes vpon. Bossita, Bossitella, a little boxe. Bósso, the wood or tree called boxe. Bóssola, a boxe that mariners keepe their compasse in. Also taken for the com∣passe. Bossolare, to put in a boxe. Bossolétto, a little boxe. Bóssolo, a boxe such as they put ointments in. Also a mariners compasse. Bóssoro, a silke cod, a cod of raw silke. Bota, a fish that grunteth called a Mole∣bout. Bostrizzo, as Bottarissa. Botare, to vowe, to promise, to sweare, to vouch. Botargo, a kinde of salt meate made of fish vsed in Italy in Lent. Botauro, a kind of beast breeding in cold countries. Botéro, Botíro, butter. Bóto, a vowe, a promise. Botola, as Bottolo. Botonária, a flower called the blew or globe Dasie. Botri, the herbe Oke of Cappadocia, or Ie∣rusalem. Botrio, a disease or sore in the eies. Botonomantia, a diuination by herbes or weedes. Botrite, a kinde of blackish stone. Botta, a blowe, a stroake, a time. Also a toad. Also the flowing or surging of the sea. Also a kinde of fish called a Millers thumbe, or a gull. Bottaccio, a filthie ut or pipe, or hogs∣head. Also a bottle or flagon. Also as Bota. Bottadi graselle, that which our farriers call stifeling, or a hurt in the stifeling place. Bottana, a kinde of flanell or such stuffe. Bottaréllo, the calfe of the legge. Bottarissa, a kinde of lampreie or eele∣pout. Bottaro, Bottaio, a cooper or tubmaker. Botta scudaia, a tortoise. Botte, a But, a tub, a barrell, a hogshead, a pipe. Also stripes or blowes. Bottéga, a shop. Also taken for a stall or a tauerne. Bottegaio, a shopkeeper. Botteghiero, a shopkeeper. Botteghino, a little shop or stall. Bottegino, a little rundlet, a firkin or ba∣rell. Also the hole of a priuie or iakes. Botteglia, a flagon or bottle. Bottégliére, a bottle-maker, yeoman of the bottles, a butler. Bottéro, a cooper. Botteguccia, a poore stall or shop. Botticelle, a toole that ropers vse. Also rundlets or little barels. Botticino, as Bottegino. Bottiglia, a bottle or a flagon. Bottigliere, as Bottegliere. Bottiglione, a great flagon r bottle. Bottinare, as Abbottinare. Bottinamento, as Abbottinamento. Bottini, buskins or thin bootes. Bottino, as Abbotinamento. Also a lit∣tle but, barrell or firkin. Botto, as Botta. Bottoli, flockes of course raw silke. Bottolo, a whelpe, a puppie, a sheapheards cur, a filthie dog. Also as Bottarissa. Bottonare, to button. Bottoncini, little buttons, buds of floures quips, iests or taunts. Bottone, a button, a scoffe, a quippe or a taunt. Bottoneggiare, to quip, to scoffe, to mock, to gibe slilie or couertly. Bottonetto, a little button. Bottonetto di fuoco, an instrument of iron that farriers vse, hauing at one end a little knot like a button. Bottoniéra, a button hole or a loope hole. Bottoniére a button-maker. Boturo, butter. Bouare, to play the oxe or bellowe as an oxe. Bouáro, a neatheard or oxekeeper. Bouazzo, filthie bull or cow-beefe. Also a filthie oxe. Boue, an oxe, a beefe. Bouemarino, a fish taken for the sea calfe. Bouile, an oxe-stall, a court or yard where cattell goe. Bouina, of an oxe or beefe. Also an oxe dung. Bouine, certaine biting flies called briz∣zes. Bouino of the nature of an oxe. Also a poore sheapheards cottage, an oxe-stall. Bóuolo, a snayle, a cockle, a Perwincle, a Tortoise. Also a paire of winding staires. Also the place where a rower sits to row in anie boate. Bozza, the first rough draught of anie thing. Also a round violl glasse. Bozzacchio, an acorne. Also a puffe or mushrump full of dust. Bozzacchioni, dried Prunes or Peares. Also the gall or fruit breeding on Oake leaues, a puffe. Bozzare, to rough hew or draw, cast, cut, worke or write any thing, to bungle. Bozzatura, a rough-hewing or hudling vp of any thing in haste, a bungling piece of worke.
Bozze, deceits, trumperies, trash, vnlaw∣full trickes, forbidden parts, as when a woman makes her husband cuckold, vntimely or abortiue fruits, vnper∣fect bungling workes. Bozzima, a huddle, an hotchpoch or vn∣perfect thing, as Bosima. Bozzo, a bastard or a mungrell. Also a thorne or brier. Bozzolato, as Bucellato. Bozzoli, a fish called a Millers thumbe. Braca, a breech or a slop. Bracato, breeched, hauing hosen on. Bracatura, a breeching, the seate of a saddle. Bracca, a brache, or a bitch. Braccare, to breech, to brack, to mount, or binde about with iron: to hunt or quest as a dog. Braccésca licentia, as we say in English, Stafford law. Braccia, an arme, armes. Also a yarde or an ell. Also a vine branch. Also a horses forelegs. Braccia boschi, woodbind or honysuckle. Bracciale, a bracer to play at ballone with. Also pouldrons. Braccialetti, bracelets or wristbands. Bracciamenti, as Abbracciamenti. Bracciare, as Abbracciare. Bracciatura, the imbracing place of a shield, an imbracing. Bracciatéllo, Bracciéllo, a kinde of cake, bun, rowle, simnell, bisket or ginger bread. Bracciolare, a yarde or ell to measure by. Bracciuole, a bracer, a little arme, a han∣dle, a stocke. Bracciuoli, are short links and buttons set to one side of the vpset in the place of the water cheine of a horse. Brache, all maner of breeches, slops, hosen, breekes, gascoines, venetians. Also silke wormes. Bracheraro, a maker of trusses or bree∣ches. Brachetta, Brachietto, a cod peece. Some haue vsed it for the iesses or varuels of a hauke. Brachiéro, a hosier or breech-maker, breeches or slops. Also a trusse, such as those that be burst or open-bellied vse to weare. Bracchio, Braccio, an arme, a yarde, or an ell measure. Bracco, a beagle, a hound, a spaniell, a blood hound, a draught hound, a ver∣mine called a hog-louse. Braccoda rete, a setting dog. Braciare, as Bragiare. Brachecuculi, the flowers Cowslips, Pai∣gle, Palsiewort or Oxe-lips. Bracie, as Bragie. Braco, as Brago. Braga, as Braca. Bragare, to breech or put on breeches or hosen: to set a peece vpon the stock. Braghe, as Brache. Bragheraro, as Bracheraro. Braghesse, as Brache. Braghiero, as Brachiero. Bragiare, to burne, to broyle, to set on fire, to consume to cinders. Bragie, quick-burning coles or imbers. Bragiole, as Brasuole. Brago, mud, dirt, mire, earth or clay: a puddle. Bragoni, great breeches, slops, breekes or hosen. Brama, a wish, a desire, a coueting. Bramangiare, a kinde of meate so called. Bramare, to wish, to couet, to desire ear∣nestly. Bramoso, desirous, couetous, wishing. Branare, to hauocke, to hew, to cut or slice in peeces or mammocks. Branca, the clawe or pawe of any beast, a clinch, a fang. Also a mans fist. Also a kinde of cockle, or such shell fish. Branca polpo, a kinde of crab fish. Branca leonina, the herbe Harts-fodder or wilde Parsnep, Brancare, to gripe, to clinch, to catch with the clawes or fangs. Brancata, a handfull, a griping, a bundle, a wad, a fagot, a trusse. Branca vrsina, the hearbe beares foote, beares wort, or beares breech, or branke vrsine. Branchi, the clawes of crabs. Also multi∣tudes, heards, flocks, or droues. Brancicare, to gripe, to groape, or fumble, or to be handling. Branco, a flocke, a heard, a droue, a shole of fishes, a flight of birds. Also a ca∣tarre or rheume descending into the throte of a man. Brancolare, to grope, to fumble, or feele in the darke. Also to gripe. Brancoloni, gropingly, fumblingly. Brancorsina, as Branca vrsina. Brancuti, hauing clawes, or pawes. Brandire, to trick, smug, spruce, or trim vp any thing. Also to brandish a sword. Brando, a sword. Also a gad of steele. Brandone, a great torch, taper, or waxe candle. Branla, a french dance called a bransle. Brano, a piece, a scrap, a mammock, a cob, a luncheon, a lump. Branoabrano, piece by piece, in small mammocks, by piecemeale. Brasare, as Bragiare. Brasci, plats, quarters, beds, allies, vide places, or banks in gardens. Also thresh∣ing places. Brasciare, as Bragiare. Brasciuole, as Brasuole. Brase, as Bragie. Brassare, to brue, to embrue. Brassaro, a bruer. Brassarura, a bruing, an embruing. Brassica canina, the herbe dogsbane, or dogscole. Brasuolare, to frie, or broyle in steakes or collops. Brasuole, steakes, collops, rashers, or car∣bonados. Also a kinde of hose or slops so called. Brauare, to boast, to brag, to braue it, to vaunt, to swagger, to cut it out, to flaunt it, to be all a hoigh. Brauazzo, a swashbuckler, a swaggrer, a cutter, a quareller, a roister, a flaunting fabian. Brauo, a boaster, a brauer, a vaunter, a braue fellow, a gallant, a swaggrer. Al∣so braue, fine, or gallant. Brauoso, as Brauo. Brauura, Braueria, brauerie, brauing, boasting, swaggring, flanting. Breccia, a breach, a gap, a rupture. Brena, a kinde of ginnie or turkie wheate. Brenna, taken for branne or course meale. Some take it for an hearbe. Brendola, a kinde of butterflye. Brenta, a certaine vessell to carie wyne in vpon mens shoulders vsed in Italie. Brentadori, wine-porters that carie wine from place to place, or wine-measurers, dreymen. Brentari, as Brentadori. Bresca, a honie combe. Bresuole, as Brasuole. Bretonica, the hearbe Betonie. Breue, briefe, short, or compendious: a briefe, a note, a word, a motto, an em∣blem, a posie, a briefe in musike. Breuiale, a breuiarie, a breniall, a pray∣er, seruice, or masse-booke. Breuiare, to abreuiate, to shorten, to cut off, to make briefe. Breuiario, as Breuiale. Breuiatore, a register, a remembrancer, an abreuiator, a shortner. Breuicino, a little manuell or prayer booke, a pamphlet. Breuiloquentia, short or compendious speaking. Breuità, breuitie, briesenes, shortnes. Brezza, Breza, a raw, cold, shiuering or dampish weather, a chillnes.
Briachezza, dronkennes, carousing, bou∣sing, canning. Briacare, to be or make dronke. Briaco, dronken, or a drunkard. Briacone, a filthie beastlie drunkard. Briccia, a crum, a iot, a myte, a whit. Bricchi, Bricconi, sergeants, catchpoles, or such raskalie base people. Bricciolo, as Boccata. Bricco, Briccore, a rock, a cliff, a crag of any mountaine. Briccola, a creeping hole, a hole or corner to creepe in at. Also a brikoll or re∣bounding of a ball from one wall to a∣nother in a tenis court. Also a tillar, or stockbow to shoote boults or arrowes in. Brieue, as Breue. Brifalda, a bould, shamelesse, mankinde, virago woman. Briga, a trouble, a braule, a strife, a brable, a contention, a quarelling, a fumbling. Brigante, a pirate, a rouer or robber by sea on land, a lout, a wag, a good lad, a false craftie knaue, a cheating com∣panion. Brigantino, a kinde of pinnasse or small barke called a Brigantine. Brigare, to trouble, to braule, to striue. Al∣so to practise, sneake, or canuas for any thing. Brigata, a companie, a flock, a knot, a rout, or crue of good fellowes. Briglia, a bridle or a snaffle. Looke Beuer la briglia. Briglia d'oro, a golden bridle. Also the name of a horse in Ariosto. Brigliamenti, bridlings, all things per∣taining to a bridle. Brigliare, to bridle, to snaffle. Brigliaro, a bit or bridle-maker. Briglie a ferro di cauallo, in times past they called bits with ports so, by reason that the port hath somewhat the shape of a horseshooe. Brigoso, contentious, or quarellous. Brillante, sparkling, twinkling, twiling, quauering. Also leaping, or chucking for ioy. Brillare, to twinkle, to sparkle, to quauer, to leape or chuck for ioy. Brillo, a twinkling or sparkling, as a dia∣mond doth in turning it. Brina, a must or a hoarefrost, a nipping frost, a breame, so called by Chaucer. Brinaccia, a filthie fogge, mist, or hoare∣frost. Brinare, to fogge, to mist. Brincia, the name of a toole that sadlers vse. Brindéllo, a stalke of a peare or apple, a little scantling or erum of any thing. Bríndesi, Brindisi, a drinking or health to one, I drinke to you. Brinosa, mistie, foggie, frosen, couered with a hoare frost, breamie. Brio, an hearbe growing in water called in latin Pes galli. Brionia, the herbe Brionie, wilde nep, or white vine. Brisaro, a hogs hastle. Briscióle, as Brasuole. Brissi, a kinde of biting flie, called brizzes. Britanica, the hearbe Spone-wort. Brittanica or Britonica, as Britanica. Broare, to parboile, or skalde with skal∣ding water. Broca, a pipkin or posnet of earth. Brocca, a stud or a naile, or a bosse with a great head. Also a blocke, a slock, or a pearch for a hawke. Broccaglio, a bodkin, or pouncing iron. Broccale, something about a plough. Broccame, all manner of cloth of tissue, gold, or siluer. Broccare, to naile, to stud, to bosse. Also to but, to shock, to encounter. Broccata, an encounter, a butting, a shock, Also afore-right blow, a thrust ouer the dagger. Broccatellò, thin tinsell, or slight cloth of gold or siluer. Broccato, cloth of gold or siluer. Also cloth of bodkin, or tissue. Brocchette, Brochette, little studdes, nailes, or bosses. Brocchiéro, Broccoliéro, a buckler, a target, a shield. Brocco, a kinde of red or yellowish co∣lour. Broccoli, Broculi, the stalkes, sprouts, or tops of coleworts. Broccuta, the mute of hawkes or other birds. Bróco, a fish, called in latine Pastinaca. Broda, wash, swill, or draffe for swyne. Brodaglione, as Brodolo. Brodaiuolo, Brodaruolo, as Brodolo. Brodare, as Broare. Brodetto, Broduso, a little fine broth. Bródo, any kinde of broth, or thin pot∣tage. Bródolo, a broth-bellie, a slouen, an idle bodie, one that makes his bellie his god, a swinish kitchin fellow. Broetto, a fine broth. Bróffola, a push, a wheale, a bile, a gall, a blister, a pimple, a skab, a skurfe, an itch, a tetter. Broffolétta, a little push, worme, pimple, wheale, blister, skab, itch, or tetter. Brógie, red pimples in mens faces. Brogiotti, a kinde of excellent good figs so called. Also red pimples in mens fa∣ces. Brogliare, to pill, to spoile, to marre, to waste, to huddle vp together, to canuas for any office, to take vp commodities, to rob Peter and pae Paule, to shift for, to confound, to hurlie urlie, to mangle, to mingle mangle, to tosse, to disorder, to ouerturne any mat∣ter. Broglio, a hurlie burlie, a confusion, a mingle mangle, a huddle, a canuasing trick, a coyle, a shift, a shifting, a hotchepoch. Brogna, Brognola, any kinde of plum. Brognata, a kinde of stuffe made of prunes to make tartes with, which they call blacke stuffe. Brogno, Brognolo, a plum tree. Broilo, a kitchin garden. Broio, as Broglio. Brolardélli, a kinde of fritter or pan∣cake. Brollare, as Brogliare and Brullare. Brollo, as Broglio and Brullo. Also a kitchin garden. Brolo, as Brullo. Brómboli, stalkes or stems, namely of coleworts and cabbage. Bronchi, branches or loppings of trees, shrubs, stubs, stumps, snags, or logs of wood. Bronco, the fish Cungar. Broncolare, to top or lop trees. Broncone, Broncolo, a stump, or stocke of a tree, or a dried bough, a stub, a snag. Bronfare, Bronfiare, to snort, to huff, to snuff, to puff, to chafe. Bronfatore, Bronfiatore, a snorter, a huff snuff, a chaser. Brongie, pushes or pimples in mens fa∣ces. Brongino, as Bronzino. Bronia, a precious stone, good against thunder and lightning. Brontea, as Bronia. Brontolare, to grumble, to mutter, to mumble, to grudge, to repine. Bronzino, brasen, of brasse or copper. Also an eawer to giue water with, a cock for a cesterne of water. Also a lauer, a barbers basen of copper. Bronzo, brasse, or bell-metall. Brostolare, Brostolire, as Brustolare. Brotto, Broto, as Brullo. Brouare, as Broare. Brouetto, a messe of fine broth. Brozze, knobs or bunches as vpon a crab∣sticke, the markes, skarres, or sores of
the poxe. Also pimples, pushes, biles, skabs, skurfes or tetters. Also the skurfe or crust of any skab or sore. Brucamaglia, a route of raskals and base fellowes. Bruchi, Brucchi, brizze flyes. Also ca∣terpillers, or silke-wormes. Bruccioli, a kind of weede or wilde pulse. Also dried small wood to make a sud∣daine blaze. Brucco, as Bastango. Bruccuda, the muting of hawkes or other birds. Bruciare, to burne, to itch, to smart. Bruciore, a burning, a smarting, an it∣ching. Bruculo, or Bruco, a vermine, caterpil∣ler, or worme that eateth vines. Bruffola, as Broffola. Bruggiate, a kinde of fritters or hard cakes. Brughe, silke-wormes. Also caterpillers. Brugiare, to burne, to itch, to smart. Brugna, Brugnola, any kinde of plum. Brugnata, as Brognata, Brullare, to singe or skald a hog, to par∣boile, to pill and pull as a hen, to parch, to scorch. Also to tanne or sun-burne. Brullo, singed, skalded, burnt, parboiled, pild, pluckt, spoiled, bald, bare, poore, naked, sillie, wretched, parched, skor∣ched, tanned, or sun-burnt. Bruma, Brumale, mid-winter, frost, mist, fog, colde frosen weather, breame. Brumale, feeding at othermens cost, one that liues by others labours. Also win∣terie, frozen, cold. Brunazzo, brounish, blackish, darke, duskie, pitchie, black, sable, broune, gloomie. Brundulare, to grumble, to grudge, to mutter. Brundulatore, a grombler, a muttrer. Brunella, the hearbe selfheale. Brunire, nisco, nito, to burnish, to rub close together. Brunitoo, a burnishing toole. Brunotta donna, a nutbrowne woman. Bruodare, as Broare. Bruodaiuólo, as Bródolo. Bruódo, as Brodo. Bruólo, any ground tilled about a house, a garden plot. Bruosina, Bruosa, a flake of ise, a hoare-frost, an isesickle. Brusca, ling or heath to make brushes or broomes with. Bruscare, to prune, to lop, to cut. Also to burne, to singe, to skalde, or broile. Also to make sowre, sharpe or tarte. Brusciare, to burne, or consume with fier. Also to smart or itch. Bruscióre, smarting, itching, or bur∣ning. Brúsciolo, a bile, a blane, a push, a pimple. Bruschetto, the diminutiue of Brusco. Brusco, sowre, tarte, sharpe, vnripe, eagre. Also a push, a pimple or a wheale. Also a moth or a thing of nothing. Also the shrub, kneeholme, butchers broome, petiegree, or kneehuluer. Bruscolino, a push, a worme, or wheale, or pimple. Brusola, a bird called a Witwall. Also a fish called in latine Alpheste, or Cy∣naedo. Brustolare, as Brullare, to toste, to singe. Brusuola, as Brasuole. Brutale, brutish, beastlie, vnreasonable. Brutalità, brutishnes, beastlines. Bruto, brute, brutish, without reason. Brutta, a staggring or falling disease, in a horse. Bruttare, to defile, to pollute, to foule, to sullie. Bruttézza, Bruttura, pollution, foulenes, filthines, filth, illfauourednes, vgli∣nes. Brutto, foule, illfauored, vnhandsome, polluted, defiled, filthie, vglie. Bruzaculo, the name of an hearbe. Also the hip of a rose. Buaggine, oxishnes, foolishnes. Buasso, a gull, a mome, an oxe, an asse. Buba, Bubo, an owle, an owlet or a howpe. Bubare, to crie or skriche as an owle. Bubola, as Pupa. Bubolare, as Bubare. Also to bubble. Bubole, Bubbule, toies, iests, vanities, ni∣fles, trifles, bubbles. Buca, Buco, a hole, a gap. Bucarare, as Bucherare. Bucare, to boare, to make a hole, to make hollow or full of holes. Also to wash or lay in a bucke. Bucarone, a scarabe flie, a beetle, a hor∣net. Bucata, a bucke. Also lye to wash a bucke with. Bucati, cleane, new-washt clothes. Bucato, buckt, washt in a bucke. Also a bucke. Also holed, hollow, or full of holes. Bucellato, a kinde of simnell, or spiced bread. Bucello, bisket, simnell or cracknell bread. Bucentoro, looke Buccintoro. Bucherame, buckram or Calicoe cloth. Bucherare, to boare or pearce full of holes. Also to shift or canuasse hard for voi∣ces or for any office by any indirect meanes, to sneake, to lurke, to miche, to toote, to prie or peepe into any mat∣ter diligently. Bucchia, the barke of a tree, the parings of fruite, a shell of an egge. Buccia, the paring of any fruite, a button of a flowre, a kind of a limbecke. Also a hide, a fell, a skin, a shell, the barke of a tree, a hukse, a molde. Also a cod of any pulse. Bucciacchere, filthy guts, garbish, offale. Bucciare, to pare or shell or shale. Bucciario, a bustard. Buccina, as Bucina. Buccinare, as Bucinare. Buccinamento, as Bucinamento. Buccine, a kinde of shell fish or seasnaile. Buccinelli, springes or ginnes or nets to fowle with. Also tooles to picke lckes with. Buccintóro, a gally-foist, a stately gal∣ley in Venice that the Duke goes in tri∣umphe in. Búcciolo, a reede to make a pipe with. Also the ioynts in a cane. Buccisoffiola, a flimflam tale whether it be true or false to make a man feare or suspect shame or losse, as we say a tale of Robinhood. Buccólica, heardmens songs. Also eating or gluttonie. Buccólici, things pertayning to plowmen or heardsemen. Bucigatti, lurking holes, sluts corners, by-corners. Bucina, a hornepipe. Also a sordine trum∣pet. Bucinare, to hum, to buzze, to whisper or murmur. Also to clange or blow out as a trumpet, to proclaime, to publish. Also to blow a pipe. Bucinamento, a humming, a whispe∣ring, a buzzing, a murmuring. Bucinelli, as Buccinelli. Buco, a hole, a gap. Bucolino, a little hole, a peeping hole. Budello, a gut. Budello culare, the arsegut. Bue, an oxe. Also a grosse gull. Also a greeke coine of two drams. Also a kinde of fish. Buessi, simple fooles or guls. Buffa, the buffie or breathing holes of a head-piece or helmet. Also a toade. Al∣so a brawle, a hurliburly, a strife, a con∣tention, a puffe, a push with the mouth in skorne. Also as Buffera. Buffalagine, foolishnes, idiotisme, gulli∣shnes. Buffalaro, a buffe-keeper, a buffle-heard.
Buffalino, of buffe, buffin. Also a kind of cheese made of bufs milke Buffalo, a buffle, a buffe. Also an ignorant fellow: as we say a gull or loggarhead. Buffare, to puffe: to blowe. Buffera, a confusion or varietie of windes, a blast or gust or berrie of winds. Buffetare, to blowe or puffe with ones mouth. Also to buffet one. Buffetto, as Boffetto. Buffettone, a great boxe, blow or whirret on the eares or cheeks. Buffo, a puffe, a blast, a berrie or a gust of winde. Also a toade. Buffonare, to iest or play the iester. Buffone, a iester, a foole, a pleasant com∣panion. Also a great toade. Buffoneggiare, to iest or play the iester. Buffoneria, iesting, pleasant meriment. Bufolo, as Buffalo. Bufonchiare, to grumble as one that is neuer pleased, to grudge at euery thing, to swell as a toade doth. Bufonchino, a grumbler, one that will grudge at euery thing. Buftalme, the hearbe May-weede or Ox∣eie, or stinking Cammomill. Bugancie, kibes or chilblanes. Bugandiera, a landres, a washer of bucks. Bugerare, Bugierare, to bugger. Bugerone, Bugierone, a buggerer. Bugetta, a budget. Bugia, a lye, a leasing. Bugiardo, a lyer, a leaser. Bugiare, to lye. Also to boare or to make hollow. Bugigattolo, a sneaker, a pryer into cor∣ners, a tooter. Also a sluts corner. Búgio, a hole. Also hollow. Bugliare, to shake betweene two handes, to play handie dandie, to shift for. Buglosa, as Bugolosa. Bugna, a kinde of worke in building. Bugnola, a fraile, a wicker, a basket, a cade or a dosser. Also a binne for bread. Bugno, as Bugnone. Bugnone, a push, a bile, a blane, a botch. Bugolosa, the herbe Lang-de-beuf or Bu∣glosse or Rose-campion. Bugone, a snaile, a cockle. Also a paire of winding stayres. Buiare, to darken or obscure, to huddle vp. Also to cast or throw. Buio, darke, pitchie, obscure. Also dark∣nes, obscuritie. Bula, chaffe of corne. Bulbari, a kind of meate vsed in Mantoa. Bulbo, ani roote that doth pill as Oinions, Scalions or Garlicke. Also Dogs-bane, Dogs-stones or Corne-leeke. Bulboso, round headed in the rootes, made bladder-like, as Oinions are. Buldriana, a common strumpet, a filthie whore. Bulesco, gullish, foolish knauish, momish. Bulette, studs, tacks or nailes with great heads. Buli, asses, woodcockes, guls, fooles, cox∣combes, noddies, patches, momes. Bulicame, a mans bum or tale, a naturall warme bathe, the naturall heat or boy∣ling of hot water. Bulicane, as Bulicame. Bulimia, exceeding great famine or hun∣ger. Bulino, a kind of toole that goldsmiths vse. Buliuacca, an arche cow, a filthie cow. Bulla, a bubble. Also as Bolla. Bullette, bubbles, vanities, trifles. Bullo, a ruffian, a swashbuckler, a tistie-tostie, a swaggrer. Bumbo, as Bugone. Buoine, as Bouine. Buolerminio, as Boloarmeno. Buonamano, as Bonamano. Buonamemoria, God haue mercie on his soule. well fare all good tokens. Also of good memorie. Buonamercé, god amercie, or by meanes. Buonaria, good or pleasant aspect to looke vpon. Buonarobba, as we say, good stuffe, a good wholesome plum-cheeked wench. Buonauentura, good hap, good lucke. Buondato, a iot, a trifle, a thing of no∣thing. Buono, good, apt, fit, honest, much, great, able, happines or summum bonum. Buonpartito, a good course, a good inter∣tainment, a good resolution. Buonpresso, a pullie in a ship, called dead man he. Buon prò, much good, much good may it do you, god giue you ioy. Buon prò vi faccia, as Buon prò. Buora, as Bórea. Buorino, as Boarina. Buosega, a clowne, a clownish fellow. Also a wooden pantofle. Buouale. as Bugone. Buóuolo, as Bouolo. Bupresti, a very venemous flie called a Wag-leg or Long-leg. Also the name of an herbe. Burasca, a tempest, a storme, a gust or flawe of winde. Buratelli, a kinde of salt fish. Burattare, to boult or sift meale. Burattadore, a boulter of meale. Burattino, a kinde of stuffe called Burato. Also a boulter. Also a millers or bakers man. Buratto, a boulter or sieue. Burazzino, as Burattino. Burbanza, a swelling, a puffing, a frow∣ning, a fiercenes, a sturdines, grudge, pride or disdaine. Burbare, to swell, to puffe, to frowne or looke grim, to growe fell, cruell or furi∣ous, to grudge. Burbero, a frowning, grim, grisly, gastly swart, or horrible looke or countenance. Also fierce, fell, cruell, sturdie. Also a fish called a carpe. Burbo, as Burbero. Burchio, a boate, a hulke, a bark, a craire, a lighter, a barge. Burchio ferrante, a kinde of hulke with sailes. Burchiello, as Burchio. Burdello, as Bordello. Burella, as Borella. Also a darke narrow place, a by-corner. Burellare, as Borellare. Burghera, a gorget, a partlet. Buriasso, a stickler or iudge of any comba∣tants, such a one as brings into the listes such as shall fight a combat, or run at tilt. Also a prompter, or one that keepes the book for plaiers, and teacheth them, or schollers their kue. Burino, a kinde of caruing, cutting, or iagging in garments. Burla, a iest, a scoffe, a mocke, a gibe, a floute, a frumpe. Burlare, to iest, to floute, to frump, to mocke, to gibe, to scoffe. Burlenghi, a kinde of bisket or simnell bread. Burleuole, iesting, merrie, flouting, plea∣sant. Burliere, merrie, iesting, pleasant-concei∣ted, a iester, a pleasant fellow▪ a giber. Burlone, a merrie conceited iester. Burna, a wilde beast so fierce in Affrica, that it will fight with two elephants at once, it ouercommeth the lion and the panther. Burra, a part of a plough. Also as Borra. Burratino, as Buratino. Burrato, a deepe darke dungeon, a pit, a downefall, a deepe, a depth. Also a streame running violently in some low valley making a hideous noise with the downefall. Burro, Butiro, butter. Burrone, a crag, a cliffe, a rocke, a grot, Also a sheepes or goates walke. Also a streame or currant, or downfall of wa∣ters out of some hill or rocke. Burzacchini, buskins. Busare, to make hollow, to bore. Also to tell a lie.
Busbaccone, a sneaker, a searcher, a gro∣per or a creeper into corners. Busca, a getting, a filching, a shifting or prowling by hooke or crooke, a musse, as boies play at. Buscamento, as Busca. Buscandoli, hops wherewith they brewe beere. Buscare, to get, to filch, to make shift for, to proule for any thing by hooke or crooke. Buschetta, a play at musse, as children vse. Busciarella, a reede, a cane, an oaten pipe. Buscio, as Buso. Busecchie, guts, entrailes, garbage, tripes, bowels, emptie guts. Busigattolo, as Busbaccone. Busnar d'orecchie, a buzzing or hum∣ming in ones cares. Buso, a hole, hollow. Also voide. Bussare, to knocke, to strike, to beate, to smite. Busse, knocks, blowes, strokes, stripes, bea∣tings. Busso, a tree or wood called Boxe. Also a confusion, a hurly-burly, a great quoile or rumbling. Bussola, a mariners or seamans compasse. Bussolo, as Bossolo. Busta, an implement or toole that Apo∣thecaries vse, or rather a kinde of gally pot. Bustello, a kinde of drie measure. Busto, a trunke, a bodie without a head, a trusse. Also a womans buske. Bustuaria, a witch frequenting and kee∣ping about graues and tombes. Butafaro, a kinde of pudding. Buteone, a kinde of hauke or buzzard. Buthisià, a great sacrifice, wherein were killed an hundred beastes. Butirare, to butter. Butiro, Butire, butter. Butta in sella, a charge that trumpetters vse to sounde when they would haue men arme themselues and take horse. Buttare, to cast, to throwe, to hurle, to fling. Buttar in occhio, to hit in the teeth. Buttiro, a maister or mistres of boules or coites, whereat the plaiers cast or play: some call it the blocke. Butturo, butter. Buzzago, as Paracucchino. Also a puft or dried mushrom full of dust. Buzzellato, bisket bread, simnell bread. Buzzicchiare, to whisper, to buzze, to mutter in hugger-mugger. Buzzicchio, a priuie whisperer, a close mutterer in hugger-mugger. C CA, as Casa. Cabacello, a kinde of fish like a dace or a menow. Some haue taken it for a mullet. Cabala, Cabalia, a hidden science of hea∣uenly and diuine mysteries professed by the Rabbies, a reuelatiō of secret things Cabali, a kinde of beast in Samatra more hunted after than the Bezoar, for the bones of it are most forcible to stanch bleeding. Cabalista, any professing Cabala. Cabalistico, mysterious, cabalisticall. Cabarino, a gabardine, a frocke, an Irish rug, a shepherds cloke or cassocke. Cabinetto, a cabinet, a closet, a casket. Cabuccio, a cabbage. Cabuli, a tree, the fruite whereof eaten doth cure all maner of diseases, and is of much estimation in India. Cacabalde, Cacabaldole, foolish, toy∣ish, trifling shitten things or tricks, cog∣gings and foistings. As Fagiolata. Cacabo, the herbe called Solano. Cacabre, a kinde of whitish stone. Cacafiori, a vaine, selfe-conceited, others scorning find-fault-foole. Cacafretta, a hastie fellow, a squirt, a laske, shitten haste. Cacafuoco, a hot violent fellow, a shite-fire. Cacalia, as Cacalide. Cacalide, wilde Carowaies, or wilde Cheruill. Cacaloro, the name of a bird. Cacama, a kinde of many coloured stone. Cacamento, a shiting or a cacking, a shit∣ten toy. Cacamo, a kinde of tree that yeeldeth a precious liquor. Cacao, a fruite in India like vnto an al∣mōd wherof they make a kind of wine. Cacapensieri, a kinde of croude, fiddle or kit. Also an idle, lazie, loytring, care∣lesse or thoughtlesse fellow. Cacamusone, a foolish conceited gull, a fond shitten fellow. Cacare, to shite, to cacke, to scummer. Cacarella, as Cacaruola. Cacarelle, the trickles or dung of sheepe, goates, rats or conies. Cacaruola, the squirt, the laske or flixe. Cacarie, trifles, toyes, vanities, shitten tricks. Cacasangue, the bloodie flixe or laske. Cacasotto, Cacasisotto, a pisse-kitchin, alwaies cowring by the fire: an idle flurt, a driggle-draggle, a durtie slut: one that will beray hirselfe. Cacastraccie, a shite-rags, an idle, lzie, loobie fellow. A pinch penie, a niggard. Cacastecchi, a hard chuffe, a shite-sticks, a niggard, a shittē fellow: dung or durt. Cacatamente, sneakingly, drawingly, faire and softly, faltringly, ddgingly, shittenly. Cacatoio, a priuie, a iakes. Cacatreppola, a kinde of thistle, teazell or such pricking wede. Cacauinci, as Cacauincigli. Cacauincigli, a base abiect fellow, a mi∣serable wretch, an idle lubber. Cacazibetto, a fine perfumed effeminate fellow. Caccherare, to cackle as a hen. Caccherelli, cacklings of hens. Also egs, as we say cockanegs. Cacchione, a prating smell-feast para∣site. Cacchioni, the first downe or feathers of yong birdes. Caccia, a hunting, a chasing, a driuing, an expulsion, a fouling. Also a chace at tennis, a blot at tables. Cacciacornacchie, a skar-crowe in a field. Also a kinde of shot or peece of ordinance. Cacciadiauoli, the herbe Saint Iohns woort. Cacciafrusto, a kinde of sling. Cacciagione, hunting game. Caccialepre, an herbe called Sowthistle. Cacciamosche, a fan to put away flies. Caccianemico, a bragging craking boa∣ster, a bugbeare, a rawe-flesh and bloo∣die-bone. Cacciare, to hunt, to driue, to chace, to banish, to expel, to driue forth or away, to lill, to thrust foorth. Cacciarcarote, to make one swallowe a gudgeon, to make one beleeue the moone is made of greene cheese. Cacciata, a chace, a chacing, a banish∣ment, a driuing: a gudgeon or gull giuen to any man. Cacciatore, a hunter, a chacer, a driuer, a huntsman, a woodman. Caccima, a bitch with whelpes. Caccole, Cacole, as Cacarelle. Cace, a blot at tables, a chace at tennis. Cacetico, as Bolso. Cachessia, an euill disposition or state of the bodie, either by long sicknes or bad diet. Cachetto, a man of ill disposition of the bodie, one that nothing proueth with, but pineth and consumeth away. Cachinare, to laugh immoderately, to pule, to cackle, to prattle.
Cachino, a prattling, a whining, a pu∣ling, a cackling. Also an immoderate foolish laughter. Cacro, the mossinesse of the outward part of fruites. Cacoccia, Cacozza, as Cacasotto. Cacochimia, ill digestion or ill iuice in the bodie. Cacochimico, an ill alchimist. Cacodemone, an euill spirit or diuell. Caconite, a precious stone that makes him conquerour that hath it about him. Cacume, the top or height of any thing. Cadalétto, a horse-litter or chaire to car∣rie one in. Also a couch or little bed, al∣so a beere for dead men. Cadáuero, a carkasse, dead bodie, corps or carian. Cadaúno, each one, euery one. Cadéna, any kinde of chaine. Cadenaccio, a boult or barre of a doore. Cadenacciare, to boult or barre of a doore. Cadenélle, little chaines, chaine-lace or chaine-stich. Cadente, falling, declining. Cadenza, a cadence, a falling, a declining, a low note. Cadére, cado, caddi, caduto, to fall, to decline. Cadiletto, as Cadaletto. Cadimento, a fall, a falling. Cadino, a bason, a trey, a milke panne, a washing bowle, a charger, a platter, a broade dish. Cádmia, the oare of brasse, or a stone out of which brasse is drawne which is me∣dicinable. Cadmite, a precious stone hauing blewe specks about it. Cado, a certaine wine measure. Cadréga, a chaire. Cadregaro, a chaire-maker. Caducéatore, an Ambassadour or He∣rauld sent to treate of peace. Caducéo, Mercuries rod, a caducy, a white rod or wande that Heraulds or messengers are woont to carrie in their handes. Caducità, falling or readines to fall, a staggring. Caduco, falling, mal Caduco, the fal∣ling sicknes. Also fraile, inconstante, momentarie, subiect to fall, fading. Cadúta, a fall, a falling, a cheate, a win∣ter fall. Caére, Caendo, vsed for Cercare. Caffettáno, a cassocke, a gabardine, a cloke or such like garment. Caffo, the number which we call od. Al∣so a kinde of wormes. Also the working, boyling or skum of new wine. Cafiso, a kinde of weight or measure. Cafórchio, a clay pit, a lime pit. Also a cliffe, a rocke, a crag. Cafro, a cipher of nothing. Cagiana, a birde called a coote. Cagionare, to occasion, to cause. Cagione, an occasion, a cause, a meane. Cagioneuole, casuall. Also weake, cra∣sed and feeble, defectiue. Caggia, let him fall, that he may fall. Cáglia, may care or take thought for. Cagliare, to crud or congeale as milke doth. Also to grow hard as a corne. Also to hold ones peace. But it is taken from the Spanish. Cagliata, crudded milke. Cáglio, a crudding or congealing. Also a corne in a mans hand. Also rennet to make cheese with. Cagna, a bitch. Also taken for sloath, idle∣nes or lazie stretching, sluggishnes. Al∣so an interiection of swearing or deny∣ing a thing. Also a dragging hooke, a hooke. Cagnaccia, a filthie currish bitch. Cagneggiare, to play the dog or cur, to be currish. Cagnesco, dogged, doggish, currish. Cagnetto, a puppie, a whelpe, a little dog. Cagnóla, Cagnoletta, a little bitch. Cagnolare, to whelpe or puppie as a bitch doth. Cagnoletti, whelpes, little dogs, puppies. Cagnolino, as Cagnetto. Also a toole to draw teeth with. Cagnotto, a sheapherds cur or whelpe. Caiandra, a tortoise, or a shell-crab. Cai di latte, creame. Caie, a kinde of rauenous sea bird. Calabráche, a game at cards which we call laugh and lye downe. Calabróne, a flye called a Beetle, a Hor∣net. Caláce, a precious stone, so called because it remaineth cold being cast into the fier: it resembleth haile. Calafáte, a caulker of a ship, a shipwright. Also a swabber in a ship. Calaia, a narrow lane or path, a passage, a foord or ferrie ouer the water. Calalini, as Farfalla, as Pauiglioli. Calamagio, as Calamaio. Calamaio, Calamaro, a fish called a sea-cut, or cuttle-fish. Also a standish, or a pen and inkehorne. Calamandrina, an hearbe called Be∣tonie. Calamandrina palustre, water or gar∣like Germander. Calamenta, an hearbe called bush cala∣mint, or hoare calamint: another kinde called wilde penniroyall, or nip cala∣mint. Calamistro, an iron that women vse to curle and frizle their haires with, a crisping wyer. Calamita, the adamant stone. Calamità, calamitie, miserie. Calamitóso, miserable, poore, needie, vnfortunate. Cálamo, a cane or reede, a writing pen. Also an arrow or shaft. a kinde of mea∣sure vsed of yore in Greece. Calandario, an Almanacke, a Calen∣dar. Calandra, a woodlarke, or a bunting. Calandrelli, wooden shooes, wooden pat∣tens. Also buntings. Calandrino, a Goldfinch. Also taken for a gull, a ninnie, or simple fellow. Calappiare, to take by deceit in a trap or cage, as fishes and birds are. Calappio, a basket, a pannier, a cage of twigs, a trap, a fishing cage with a nar∣row mouth. Calare, to diminish, to fall, to stoupe, to descend, to strike sailes, to abate, to fall as the tide, to wane as the moone, to a∣bate or bate in price, to descend a paire of staires, to stoupe from aloft, to come downe from on high, to vaile bonet, to stoupe to a lure as a hauke, to welke. Calata, a falling note. Also a fit of mirth. Also a trap dore, a descending. Calatabelletta, as Cacasotto. Calatide, a kinde of tree. Calatura, as Calo. Calaurita, the north pole, Vrsa maior. Calaurone, a hornet, a beetle. Calca, a crowde, a presse, a throng, a thrust. Also as Calta. Calcagnare, to dodge, to cog, to wrangle, to cauill, to streeke with ouerheeles. Calcagnaria, dodging, wrangling, a ca∣uelling. Calcagno, a heele of a man. Calcagnolo, a terme of founders, and is some part of a piece of ordinance. Calcára, a lime-kill. Calcare, to crowde, to presse, to throng, to thrust, to stamp, to tread, to kicke. Calcarello, a lime-maker. Calcatoio, a stick to ram the powder into a cannon, a rammer. Calcatrippa, Star-thistle, or Saint Bar∣nabaes thistle. Calce, a kicke, a blow with the foote, a wincing blow. Also a vanplate, the iron about a tilting-staffe neere the hand. Also the big end of a launce or staffe. Also hosen, breeches, slps, stoc∣kings. Also lyme. Also the heelebone of
a mans leg. Calcecumia, as Calcimia. Calce vergine, vnslaked lyme. Calcedonio, a precious stone called a chalcidonie. Calcese, the neather part of the mast of a ship. Calcestre, any stone good to build or make lyme withall. Calcette, hosen, or neather stockings, or shinners. Calcetti, linnen socks, by a metaphore a narrow passage, pinch or straight. Calchi, rogues, crosbiters, vprightmen, vagabonds. Calcia, any kinde of hose. Calciamento, any kinde of hosing or shooing. Calciante, befitting, meete-for, agreeing with, squaring in proportion, fit. Calciapiade, a shooinghorne. Calciare, to put on hosen, or shoes. Also to fit, to agree, or square in propor∣tion. Also hosen or shoes. Calciaio, a shoomaker. Also a hosier. Calciatoio, a shooing horne. Calciette, as Calcette. Calcidonio, as Calcedonio. Calcie, hosen. Also taken for shoes. Calcifraga, the weede or hearbe called Sampeere, growing vpon rocks by the sea side. Calcimia, a word vsed of alchimists for calcination. Also a kinde or part of al∣chimie, or transmutation. Calcina, lyme. Also loame or mortar. Calcinaccio, all manner of rubbish of broken walles, the rugged or stonie mute of a hauke. Also a tanners fat or pit. Also a lyme-pit. Calcinare, to calcinate, to morter, to loame, to lyme, to glase earthen pots within. Calcinato, calcinated, mortred, loamed, glased. Also as Calcinaccio. Calcinatione, a calcination, or a morte∣ring. Calcinatoio, a lyme-kill. Calcinetti, a kinde of little fish. Some take it for a shell fish. Calcio, a kick, a yerke, a wincing blow with ones foote. Also lyme. Calcioni, great breeches, hosen, slops. Also boote-hosen. Calcite, the stone whereof brasse is tride. Also red vitrioll. Also a kinde of fish. Calcitrante, kicking, yarking, wincing, stubborne, froward. Calcitrare, to kick, to wince, to yarke, to spurne, to sling, to be stubborne. Calco, a dresser, or dressing-boord in a kitchin. Also a Sewer or Vsher of a hall. Calcofano, a kinde of blackish stone. Calcole, the tredles of a weauer. Also knobs or cornes in ones hands or feete. Calcosa, a presse, a throng, or croud of people, a common high troden way. Calculare, to calculate, to count, to num∣ber, to reckon. Calculo, a calculation, a computation. Calda, a heating, a flaming, a skalding. Also hot, proude, lecherous, or salt as a bitch. Caldacci, soultrie, filthie, faint, burning, skalding heates. Caldaia, Caldara, a caudron, a kettle, a bruers leade or vat. Caldaio, Caldaro, as Caldaia. Caldaraio, a brasier, a tinker, a kettle-maker. Caldarello, a little heate or warmth, a little kettle. Caldarino, Caldaruolo, a little kettle or posnet. Caldarone, a great caudron. Calderugio, the bird goldfinch. Caldezza, heate, warmth, earnestnes, vio∣lence. Caldéi, the Chaldeans: but it is taken for hot and violent people. Caldicciuolo, a little temperate heate or warmth. Caldo, hot, warme, earnest, violent: also warmth, or heate. Cále, he careth for, or taketh care. Caléa, as Solatro. Also dogs grasse. Calefare, Calefacere, to warme, to heate, to chafe. Caleffare, to mock, to skoffe, to iest, to flout, to dallie. Calefattar le naui, to calkeships. Caleffo, a plaie, a iest, a dalliance, a flout, a mock, a skoffe. Calegaio, a cord-wainer, a shoomaker. Calére, caglio, calsi, caluto, to care, to take care or thought for. Calendario, an Almanacke, a kalender. Also a booke of accounts. Calende, the Calends or first day of the moneth. Calene, a kind of harpies. Calenzuolo, a kind of little singing bird. Caleselle, foolish, mimik, apish, iugling trickes. Also a kinde of paste meate so called. Calia, as Boccata. Calice, a chalice or a cup. Calicia, an herbe which cast into any wa∣ter, it will make it freese. Calidita, heat or warmth. Cálido, hot or warme in operation. Calidónia, a kinde of stone or earth that chiick vse. Caligare, to darken, to obscure, to bst, to besmoulder, to  or make mistie, duskie, glomie, suttie, darke, pitchie or smouldring. Caligáro, a cord-ai or shoomaker. Calígere, as Caligare. Caliginare, as Caligare. Calígine, the sut or smouldring of a chi∣ney, darknes, miste or duskishnes. Caligo, as Caligine. Caligoso, a tree that euerie morning is so full of fog and mist, that it distils so much water, that the people and cattell of manie countries in India haue no o∣ther water to drinke. Calimana, a kinde of Apple in Italie. Calisoni, a kinde of comfets so called. Calistefano, a kinde of wild Oliue tree. Calliuola, a narrow little pathe, way or causey. Calle, Callaia, a causey, a pathe, a high way, a narrow lane, a beaten wait or trode. A habite or custome that a man cannot leaue. A braunie flesh or corne growing in mens hands or feete. Callionimo, a fish whose gall healeth scars of wounds. Callire, callo, callito, to grow hard or brawnie as a corne. Callitrico, a kinde of Ape in AEthiopia. Callo, as Calle. Also the fastning of an Oyster shell. Calloso, brawnie, hard, knobbie with la∣bour, full of cornes, hauing a thicke skin. Callosità, hardnes, brawes. Callostro, butter-milke, the ill milke of a womans breast, sowre curded milke. Callostro, the shrub we call Priuet or Prime printe. Calma, a calme or faire weather. Also calme or quiet. Also a branch, a twig, a sprig, a graft, a sien, a set, a plant. Calmare, to graffe, to engraffe, to calme. Calmazza, a kinde of Peasant-powte. Some take it for a Bustard. Calmei, such as speak the rogues language or pedlars French. Calmo, calme, quiet, peaceable, milde or flexible, and gentle: also as Calma. Calmone, the roguish language, pedlers French or gibrish. Calo, the diminishing, losse, abatement or defalking of any thing. Calónica, Calónaca; the chiefe chap∣pell in a Church, a queere of a Church, the chancell of a Church. Also a c∣ster. Calónico, as Canonico.
Calonicáto, as Canonicato. Calónio, a fish that hath his scales con∣trarie to others, and swimmeth against the tide or course of the water. Calóre, heate or warmth. Calorifico, Caloroso, full of heate or warmth. Calorite, a greene stone which set in iron and worne about one, is good against magick and charmes. Calpestare, to trample or tread vnder foote. Calpestio, a trampling noise, a pathe or high common way. Calta, the flower Marigold or braue Bas∣sinet. Also a kinde of Violet that comes in Autumne. Calterito, vsed for Scaltrito. Caluária, baldnes. Caluaria, the head or skull of a dead bo∣die. Calueggiare, to become balde. Caluezza, baldnes. Caluire, to become bald. Caluitie, Caluitio, baldnes. Calunnia, a false or craftie accusation, a forged crime, a malicious surmise, cauill or detraction to slander or trouble one. Calunniare, to accuse or laye to ones charge falsly and maliciously. Calunniatore, a malicious detracter or deceitfull accuser. Calunnioso, alwaies readie to accuse or forge crimes falsly, full of deceitfull in∣terpretations, false, vniust, cauillous. Caluo, bald on the head. Calza, as Calcia. Calzaiuolo, a hofier or shoomaker. Calzamento, as Calciamento. Calzante, as Calciante. Calzare, as Calciare. Calzari, either hosen or shooes. Calzato, hosed or ho. Also a horse that is white footed aboue the pasternes. Calzapiedi, a shooing horne. Calzatoio, idem. Calze, hosen or shooes. Calzolaio, a shoomaker or a hosier. Calzolaria, a shoomakers shop, or where they sell shooes or hosen. Also the trade of shoomakers. Calzoni, as Calcioni. Calzoppare, to hop, to skip, to go a false gallop. Calzoppo, hoppingly, roundly away, a false gallop, skippingly. Camaglio, a gorget of maile. Camaldole, a place frequented or full of people. Camamilla, the herbe Cammomill. Camangiare, all kinde of victuals beside bread and drinke. All manner of hous∣hold victuals. Camarina, a stinking herbe prouoking vomite. Camarzo, a kinde of game at tables with dice. Camato, a long staffe or cudgell or bat. Camarra, a martingall vsuall among horsemen. Cambetta, as Crambetta. Also a fish called in Latine Zingana. Cambiare, to exchange, to change. Cambiatore, an exchanger, a changer. Cambiatura, a changing or exchanging. Cámbio, a change, an exchange, a stead, liew or place. Cambrai, cambricke cloth, named of the towne where much is made of it. Cambrasia, a kinde of light dart or ar∣rowe. Came, a kinde of shell fish or cockles. Camecisso, some take it for Hare-hoofe: some for ground Iuie, and some for Perwinkle. Camedafne, the herbe Perwinkle. Also a plant called Lawry. Camédrio, the herbe Germander or English Treacle. Cameíne, the nine muses. Cameléa, as Cameleuca. Cameleone, Cameleonte, a camelon, an herbe growing vpon rocks by the sea side called Chameleon. Cameleuca, the herbe Colts hoofe, or asses foote. Camellino, a kinde of daintie sauce vsed in Italie. Also of a camell. Camelo, Camello, a beast called a ca∣mell. Camelopardo, a beast begotten of a ca∣mell and a panther. Camelotto, the stuffe we call chamblet: a kinde of wilde sheepe in India shaped like a camell. Camene, the nine muses. Also a poeticall song. Cámera, a chamber or lodging: the cham∣ber of a peece of ordinance. Cámera locanda, a hiring chamber. Cámera terrena, a lowe chamber next the ground. Cameraio, Camerario, a chamberfel∣lowe, a camerado souldier. Also a chamberlaine. Camerale, of, or pertaining to a cham∣ber. Camerare, to chamber or lodge. Camerata, a camerada, a societie in a chamber, a chamber full. Camerélle, little holes, flawes or cham∣bers. Camerino, Cameretta, a little cham∣ber or studie. Cameriéra, a chamber maide or waiting woman. Cameriéro, a chamberlaine or groome of a chamber. Camerléngo, a chamberlaine. Also an auditor. Camerlengheria, a chamberlaineship, or an exchequer of a prince. Camerlengato, as Camerlengheria. Camescice, a kind of wede or herbe. Camia, a kinde of fish. Camice, a surples, or priests garmēt called a robe, that is, plaine without plaiting. Camicia, as Camiscia. Camiciara, as Camisciara. Camiciata, as Camisciata. Camiciótto, as Camiscióne. Camiciuola, as Camisciuola. Caminate, to go, to walke, to march, to wander, to trauell, to waiefare. Caminante, going, walking, marching, wandring, a wandrer or waiefaring man. Caminata, a chimney. Also a great chamber, or dyning hall. Camino, a way, a high-way, a path, a streete. Also a chimney. Camiscia, a shirt, a smocke, a priests sur∣ples, a porters frocke, a long white gar∣ment. Camisciara, a seamster or maker of shirts or smocks. Camisciare, to shirt or put on a shirt, surples, smocke or frocke. Camisciata, a sudden secret attempt or surprise in time of warre, so called bi∣cause it is done and executed with shirts ouer the souldiers armour, a camisado. Camiscio, as Camiscia. Camiscióne, a porters frocke, a body cote or great shirt. Camisciótto, as Camiscione. Camisciuóla, a little shirt or a waste-cote. Cammarugie, a kinde of shrimpe or praune. Camo, a bridle, a binding, a snaffle. Camoccia, Camozza, a chamoy or cha∣moise, or wilde goate. Camoccina, a chamoy or wilde goates skin. Camomilla, the herbe Camomill. Camorra, an irish rugge. Also an vpper cassock. Camorro, a murre, a pose, a colde. Also a womans frock. Camoscello, a kinde of buffin, sarge, rash, or such stuffe. Campacchio, a kinde of great basket to
carie haie or fodder in vpon mens shoul∣ders, vsed in Italy. Campale, pertaining to the fields, fieldie. Campagna, a fielde or a champaine. Campagna rasa, a razed plaine, an open field without any hedge, ditch or other encumbrance. Campána, a bell. Also a couer of a lim∣becke or still. Campana azzurrea, blew birdweede. Campana a martello, to ring the bels backward as they vse in Italy in dan∣gerous times. Campanaio, a bell-ringer, a sexten of a church, or a bell-founder. Campanati, a kinde of duck, wigin, or mallard that is wilde. Campanaria, a iangling, or ringing of belles. Campane, a kinde of peare so called in Italie. Campanella, a little bell, a haukes bell, a couer for a Still or Limbecke. Campanelle, the hearbe called Bind∣weede. Also a worme that deuoureth vines. Campanello, a campanell or rowle in the mouth of the bit of a horse in forme of a bell. Also a kinde of flowre. Campanello con timpano piano, when the broade end of the campanell is flat and plaine. Campanello con timpano a volta, is when the broad end of the campanell is compasse like a cannon mouth. Campanile, a steeple, or belfrie. Campare, to escape, to flye, to auoide, to deliuer, to free, to liue. Also as Cam∣peggiare. Campeggiare, to beleagre, to encampe. Also to showe well, to sute, to square, to becom well. Campestre, of or pertaining to the fields. Also a field hawke. Campicello, a little field. Campignare, to reioice, to make merie, to riot, to reuel, to be frolike, to swagger. Campione, a champion. Campo, a field, a campe, an armie, an hoast, a field in armorie. Also an es∣cape, a scape. Camporeccio, fieldie, that growes in the fields. faire and seasonable for the fields. Camuffare, to stare, to swagger, to riot, to reuell, to ruffle it out, to deale rough∣lie, to pack craftilie. Also to put one out of countenance. Also to smooth stones. Camuffo, a man out of countenance, ha∣uing lost his speech for shame, or else made a foole or a gull, and then laught at by others. Camurra, as Camorra. Camusino, a little pretie flat nose. Also a kind of pretie dog. Camuso, one with a flat nose. Camussati, a kinde of worke in rings of gold. Camuzzone, a kinde of rack, or torture to make one confesse. Can, Cane. Looke Cane. Canaglia, Canagliaccia, raskaliti  people, the skum of the earth, raskal people onelie fit for dogs companie. Canaia, a seller, or a butterie. Canaio, a butler, a cater, a steward, a clarke of a kitchin. Canalano, a grayhound, a harier. Canale, a chanell, a gutter, a water-pipe, or course. Canalétto, a little chanell, gutter, or wa∣ter-pipe. Canapáro, one that sels hemp. Canapázzo, course hempen canuas. Also hempen hurds or sackcloth. Cánape, hempe. Also a hempen halter, or great cable. Canapétto, a little hempen roape. Canápolo, a bough, or a branch. Canaria, houndgrasse, wherewith they prouoke vomite. Canarino, a daunce called the canarie daunce. Also a canarie man, or bird. Canaruccio della gola, the gullet of ones throte. Canata, a fence made of canes, or reedes. Cánaua, a seller, a buttrie. Canauáccio, as Canapazzo. Cancamo, a kinde of gum or perfume like mirrh, brought out of Arabia. Cancarire, to cancre, to rankle, to fester. Cancarito, cankred, festred, rankled. Cáncaro, a cankre, a curse or banning the Italians vse to wish one to another in anger. Also an interiection of deny∣ing. Also a sea-crab. Cancaróso, Cancheroso, cankrie, full of the cankre, pockie, skuruie, festred, rankled. Cancellare, to cancell, to abolish, to fru∣strate, to disanull. Cancellaria, a Chancerie. Cancellerésca, pertaining to the Chan∣cerie, a chancerie hand. Cancelliére, a Chancellor. Cancéllo, a writing deske, a grate be∣fore a gate or a dore, a prying hole, or letteise. Cancéllo della poppa, the nipple of a womans breast. Canchero, as Cancaro. Cancherire, as Cancarire. Cancheroso, as Cancaroso. Canciola, as Cancaro. Cancorso, a gray-hound. Cancrena, as Gangrena. Cancro, as Cancaro. Candela, a candle, a light. Candelabro, a candle-sticke. Candelaio, a Chandler. Candeliere, a candle-sticke. Candelosa, Candlemas-day, the purifica∣tion daie, a moneth after Christmas day. Candelotti, the droppings or runnings of candles. Candelotti di ghiaccio, Ise-sickles. Candidare, to whitten, to blanch, to puri∣fie, to candie. Candidato, clothed in white, bleached, whitened. Also such a one as stands or sues for an office, and is like to speede. Candidezza, whitenes, puritie, vnspot∣tednes. Candido, pure, white, vnspotted. Candiotto, a kinde of cheese made in Candie. One borne in Candie. Candore, as Candidezza. Cane, a dog in generall, an instrument to pull out teeth, a snap hance, the name of a fish. Cane alano, a gray-hound, a harier. Cane botolo, a cur, a sheapheards dog. Cane da rete, a Spaniell or setting dog. Cane di gabbatelle, a tumbling dog. Cane da vccello, a faulkners Spaniell. Cane e lupo, tra cane e lupo, cock-shut or twilight, as when a man cannot dis∣cerne a dog from a Wolfe. Cane leuriere, a gray-hound, a harier. Canélla, as Cannella. Canellato, as Cannellato. Cane molosso, a mastiue-dog, a beare dog. Cane sparaniero, as Can sparaniere. Canestro, a basket, a hand-basket. Canestraio, a basket maker. Canestrino, Canestruccio, a little hand-basket. Canéto, as Cannetto. Canetto, a little dog, a whelpe. Cáneua, a celler, a butterie. Caneuaccio, sack-cloth or canas. Caneuáro, as Canouaro. Caneuélla, the ankle of the leg. Cáneuo, hempe. Also a hempen halter. Canfora, a drug called Camphire. Also a kinde of tree or wood thereof. Canforchio, a narrow lane, a little ally. Cangiamento, Cangiatura, a changing, a change, an exchange. Cangiante, changeable, as we say Ta∣feta of diuers colours.
Cangiare, to chance, to exchange, to alter. Cangiatore, a changer, an exchanger. Caniaro, a kinde of bird or fowle. Canibale, a caniball, a man that eates mens flesh or rawe flesh. Canibello, a kestrell. Canicula, a fish so called. Also a star much seen in the dog daies, the dog star. Canicie, hoarines, whitenes. Also gra∣uitie. Caniculare, canicular, doggish, dogged, the dog daies. Caniglia, bran. Also course bread. Canile, a dogs kennell. Canino, currish, dogged, of a dog. The weede called Houndgrasse prouoking vomite. A worme breeding in a horse. Looke Corcaiuolo. Also a little dog. Looke Riccio canino. Can leuriere, a grayhound, a harier. Canna, a cane, a reede, a pipe, a fishing or angling rod. a barrell, a rundlet▪ a mans throte, a flute, a recorder, a pipe to play vpon. Also a fish called in Latine Or∣cynus. Also a leaden pipe or gullet to carrie water. Cannaca, a fish called a lamprey. Also a carkanet or billiment of gold. Cannacca, a lamprey fish. Cannafoglia, a cane, a reede, or sedge. Cannafossa, a gutter, a sluce or trench to let out water: a toole to let blood with. Cannagola, a single yoke about a cowes necke or other beast to keepe them out of hedges. Cannaletto, a little chanell or gutter. Cannamella, a kinde of musicall instru∣ment or pipe. Also a sugar cane. Cannara, a bin for bread, a great wicker basket. Cannariccia, a place where canes or reedes growe. Also gluttonie or gor∣mandise. Cannarola, a bird called a linnet. Cannarone, a glutton, a gormand. Cannaruto, one wel throted. Also a glut∣ton or gormand. Cannata, an inclosure, a fence or hedge of reedes or canes. Canneaguzze, sharpe-pricking canes. Cannella, a little cane, pipe or reede, a flute, a spigot. Also the arme bone of a man. Also Cinnamome. Cannellata, a kinde of meate or pottage drest with much cinnamome. Cannellato, that is wrought hollowe, chamfured, or indented as a reede or pipe. Cannelli delle gambe, as Cannoli. Cannello postremo, the chiefe bone in the rumpe or taile of a horse. Also a weauers toole or shuttle. Cannetta, a little cane or pipe, a tobacca pipe. Cannetto, a plot of ground bearing canes or reedes. Canneuaccio, canuas or sackcloth. Cánneuo, as Caneuo. Cannoli, the bones of either leg betwixt the knee and the pasterne of a horse. Cannonare, to canon or batter with ar∣tillerie. Cannone, a canon or peece of ordinance, the barrell of any gun, a condit pipe or gutter, a kinde of wafer, a canon, a rule, or a lawe, a cannon of a horses bit. Cannoniera, a spike hole, a loope hole to shoote out at. Also the place where the canon is placed vpon a bulworke. Cannoniere, a cannoniere or a gunner. Cannonaro, a caster or founder of or∣dinance. Cannuccia, a little reede or pipe, or cane, a small angling rod. Cannuole delle gambe, the ankles of ones leg. Cánoa, as Canoua. Canóa, a canowe or Indian bote made of one peece. Canodello, a kinde of fish. Canone, as Cannone. Canonicare, to make one chanon of a church. Canonicato, a canon-ship. Canónico, a chanon of a church. Also canonicall. Canonizzare, to canonize. Canopa, a distaffe full of flaxe, hempe, or wooll. Canopo, a digger or worker about mines or minerals. Canóro, shrill, loude, resounding. Canoua, a cellar, a vault, a buttrie. Canouaro, a yeoman of the cellar, a cellar keeper, a butler. Canouo, hempe. Also a hempenhalter. Cansare, to diuide, to seuer, to part, to go out of sight, to ouerthrow, to go aslope, to giue place, to cleaue asunder. Can sparauiere, a spaniell, a bloud hound, a beagle, a hunting dog. Canso, deuided, seuered, parted, gone out of sight, ouerthrowne, gone aslope, giuen place. Cantacchiare, to sing foolishly. Cantafauole, a singer of ballads or tales, a mountibanke. Also a kinde of quaffing glasse. Cantafole, idem. Cantara, a fish of the colour of a chesnut, of a most vnsauory tast. As Cantharo. Cantare, to sing, to chaunt, to chirp as a bird, to crow as a cock. Cantarella, the treble string or minekin of an instrument, a yong frog. Also cantharides. Also a kinde of pipe or call to call birds to the net. Cantáride, a kinde of blue and greene flye called Cantharides. Cantarini, such as sing three mens songs, common begging singers. Cantarino, Looke oro cantarino. Cantaro, as Cantharo. Cántaro, as Cantharo. Cantaro forfori, Cantarozeroi, a waight called a kintall. Cantatore, a singer, a chanter. Canterella, as Cantarella. Canteria, a chantrie. Cantharo, or Canthero, a fish endued with great chastitie as the turtle is, ha∣uing an vnsauorie taste. Also a beast wherof there is no female, a black beetle. Also a kinde of boate. Also a ring or hammer to knocke at a dore. Also a waight called a kintall. Also a kinde of measure of dry things. Also a tankard or iug that houldeth much. Also a close stoole. Cantiere, a toole with a vice in it that ioyners vse. Also a chanter. Cantilena, a ballad, a tale, a report, a flim-flam discourse. Cantina, a seller, a butterie. Cantinaro, as Canouaro. Cantinbanco, a mountibanke, a ballad-singer. Canto, a song, a singing, a sonet, the treble string of an instrument. Also a side. Cantonare, to cozen, to deceiue, to cony∣catch, to giue one the slip at a cor∣ner. Also to canton. Cantonato, a conycatching trick, a cor∣ner of a house or streete, a meeting at a corner. Cantóne, a corner, a nooke, a canton, an angle. Cantoniére, a cozener, a conycatcher, a deceiuer, an affronter. Cantóre, a chanter, a singer. Cantuccio, Cantoncino, a little cor∣ner. Canudo, a fish called in latine Alphestus, or Cynaedus. Canuólo, a bobbin to winde silke vpon. Also the quill of a spinning wheele. Canuto, hoarie-white. Canutezza, hoarines. Canzelleria, a Chancerie. Canzelliere, a Chancellor. Canzona, Canzone, a song, a canzonet, a ballad, a dittie, a laye, a roundelay, a virelaye.
Canzonare, to sing, to chaunt, to make songs, to write songs and sonets. Canzoniere, a maker or writer, or singer of songs. Caos, as Chaos. Caosi, a kinde of rauenous sea-foule. Caostelli, a kinde of fish. Capa, a kinde of wilde, blacke, hairie beast bigger then an asse breeding in India. Capace, capable, ample, large, or able to receiue or containe. Capacità, capacitie, amplenes, ablenes to receiue and containe. Capale, a gorget or piece of armour for the necke. It is also taken for a skull. Capanna, a cottage, a bullie, a cabin, a cell. Capanella, a little homely cottage, bul∣lie, cabin, or cell, a stack or houell of bushes. Capanello, a stake whereat malefactors be tide to be burnt. Capanetto, a kinde of call, pipe, or net for to catch birds. Also as Capanella. Capano, Capanotto, a poore homelie shepheards cloke, or such vpper gar∣ment. Capanuccia, as Capanella. Caparbio, frowarde, stubborne, heade∣strong, stiffenecked, wilfull, obstinate, humorous. Caparbità, frowardnes, stubbornes, obsti∣nacie, fonde selfe-conceite, testines. Capare, to take, to laie hold or seaze vp∣on. Caparra, an earnest pennie giuen in hand vpon any bargaine. Caparrare, to laie, giue, or leaue earnest vpon any bargaine. Caparrone, a pugge, an ape, a munkie, a babuine, a gull, a ninnie, a mome, a sot. Capassone, a nickname as we say a ioult∣head, a gull, a loggarhead, a mome. Cápe, it containeth or it is capable of. Capecchio, course hurds of hempe or flaxe, course towe. Also a hempen hal∣ter. Capeccina, that part of a yoke that goes about an oxes necke. Capeccio, as Capecchio. Capeccione, the name of a farriers toole. Also as Cauezzana. Capegli, as Capelli. Capella, a chappell, a little church. Capellaccio, a filthie great broad hat. Capellania, a chaplain-ship. Capellano, a chaplaine. Capelletto, a chaplet, a little hat, a hanks hood, the labell of a letter. Also the husk of any fruite that is not altogither close as of the hasell nut. Also a little tuffe vpon a peacocks head. Also a kinde of disease about a horses knee. Capelli, Capei, the haires of a man or woman. Also hats. Capelli di venere, the herbe Maiden∣haire, Venus-haire, or our Ladies∣haire. Capelli, ricci, crespi, inannellati, cur∣led, frizled or crisped haires. Capellina, a little chapple. Also a bush or locke of haire before. Also a little hat that women vse to weare in their hou∣ses in Italie. Also a kinde of larke with a bushe or tuffe on his head. Also the foreskin of a mans priuities. Capello, a hat, a hood, a haukes hoode, the dignitie of a cardinall. Also a haire. Also a couer of a Still or Limbecke. Also as Boccata. It is also taken for a checke, a taunt, a rating of one with authoritie, Fare vn capello ad vno, to giue a checke or rating to one. Capelluta, a larke with a tuffe on his head. Capelluto, hooded, couered, hatted, hairy, or full of haires. Capeluenere, as Capelli di venere. Cápere, Capio, Capei, Caputo, as Ca∣pire. Capestrare, to hang or tie with a rope or a halter. Capestrarie, knaueries, villenies, raskal∣lie or gallowes tricks. Capestratura prima, the first haltring of a coult when he is first taken vp. Capestrature, hurts or gals in horses legs. Capestro, a rope, a halter, a headstall. Also a wag, a halter-sack or gallowes-clapper. Also a shoomakers strap. Capéuole, capable, able to containe. Capezza, as Cauezza. Capezzale, a bolster for a bed. Capezzadi moro, blacke like a moore, cole blacke. Capézzolo, the nipple of a womans brest. Also a stalke, a stale, or a stemme. Cápide, a kinde of little Persian mea∣sure. Capidieci, a kinde of magistrate in Venice. Capifosso, as Caponegro. Capidio, Capidolio, a kinde of great whalefish, or hurlepoole. Capigliare, to dresse, to tresse, to plaite, to curle, to frizle, to lace, to tye vp haires. Capigliata, the fore-lock of a man or wo∣mans head. Also hairie. Capigliuto, a man that hath good store of haire on his head. Capidoglio, the fish called a whale. Capifogli, the hearbe woodbine, bearing the honnie-suckle. Capifuochi, andirons, rangers, or racks for a chimnie, brandirons. Capifuori, as Capifuochi. Capillato, hairie, hauing haires on his head. Capillare, the name of a vaine in any bodie. Also the hearbe called maiden∣haire. Capillatura, the haire of any mans head. Capimaestro, a chiefe workeman, a sur∣uayer or controuler of others. Capinero, a kinde of little singing bird. Capio, the sliding of a knot. Capire, Capisco, Capito, to containe, to conceiue, or be capable of, to take, to hould, to receiue. Capiromante, a diuiner by looking-glasses. Capirota, a kinde of daintie potage or sauce vsed in Italie. Capistorico, the staggers in a horse. Capitale, capitall, chiefe, mortall, princi∣pall. Also a mans wealth, goods, worth, or stock. Capitana, the admirall ship of a fleete or nauie. Capitanato, a captaine-ship, the place or dignitie of a captaine, a gouernment. Capitáno, a captaine, a chiefetaine, a lea∣der, a cheefe. Capitare, to come, to happen, to chaunce, to fall, or light to any place by fortune. Capite, a kinde of white stone. Capitello, the head of any piller, a little head, a nipple of a womans breast. Also frets in any roofe, or knobs in any worke. Capitolare, to capitulate, to couenant, to condition. Capitolatione, a capitulation, condition, or couenant. Capitolo, a chapter. Also a meeting place for any societie, a conuocation house. Capitómolo, a tombling trick, or cast, a downefall. Capitone, a kinde of course silke called sleaue silke. Also a fish called a cur, a gull, a bull-head, or a millers thumbe. Capitoni, as Capifuochi. Capitonzo, an Item with a great letter, or beginning of a chapter. Capitulare, as Capitolare. Capitulatione, as Capitolatione. Capitulo, as Capitolo. Capituto, a loggar-head, a ioult-head, a great-headed fellow. Capnomante, a diuiner by smokes and fumes.
Capnomantia, diuination by aire, smoke, and fumes. Capo, Cao, a chiefe, a head, a leader. Also a pate, a nole, a skonce: a cloue of gar∣like: an end or beginning: a chiefetaine or principall: a cape or but of any lands end. Also a fish called a cur, a gull, a bulhead, or a millers thumbe. Capocaccia, a maister hunter, a chiefe hunts-man. Capocchia, the foreskin or prepuce of a mans priuie member. Capocchio, a doult, a noddie, a loggar∣head, a foolish pate, a shallow skonce. Capocerro, the staggers in a horse or o∣ther beast. Capo d'angolo, a chiefe corner stone. Capo d'anno, the yeares end. Capo di latté, the creame of milke. Also clouted creame. Capo di squadra, a ringleader, a chiefe, a head maister. Capofronte, the fore-front of a horse. Capogatto, a kinde of foule euill or fal∣ling sicknes in a horse. Some conster it to be a swelling ouer all the horse head, possessing the eyes, the throte, and all parts, so as for the time he can receiue no foode. Capogirli, foolish, fantasticall, sodaine, humorous toyes, fancies or conceites, giddines in the head, or qualmes ouer the stomacke. Capolétto, the testerne, or canapie, or head of a bead, a sparuise or vallance of a bed. Capolino, a little head or pate. Cápolo, a certaine instrument about a plough. Caponara, Caponera, a coope, a pen or cage for capons or poultrie. Caponato, Caponiera, a poultrer, or seller of poultrie. Caponato, guelded, caponed, splaide, libd. Capone, a capon. Also a kinde of shell∣fish. Also one that is guelded. Caponegro, a titlin, a titmouse, or an oxeye. Capoparte, a ringleader, a head or chiefe of a faction, or side. Caporale, an officer in a band of men, called a Corporall. Caporione, a Marshall of a camp, a Cor∣porall of the field, a Iealour, a Sheriffe, a Iustice. Capotorto, a bird called a wrynecke. Some take it for a hickway. Capotto, as Cappotto. Capostorno, the staggers in a horse or other beast. Cappa, a cape, a cape-cloke, a spanish cloke, the shell of any fish. Also a kinde of vaile that women weare about their heads in Italie. Also an angle, a canton, or a pile in a coate of armes. Also a coape for a priest. Cappácciolo, a kinde of dressing of meate, so called in Italie. Cappanella, a rout, a crue, a troupe, or flock of people. Cappanelli, a kinde of giues, fetters, or shackles for prisoners. Cappare, to cloke or hood one, to snatch and filch vp, to choose or traine vp men, to giue or lay an earnest pennie in hand for any bargaine. Cáppari, a kinde of sallet called capers, an interiection of admiring or refusall. Capparocchiole, a kinde of cockles, or paireawinkles. Capparole, a kinde of little cockles, or winkles. Capparone, a gull, a sot, a patch, a ninnie, an idiot. Cappati, chosen or trained men for any actiō or attempt. Also cloked or hooded. Cappe, clokes, spanish clokes, or capes, all manner of shell-fish, as oysters, cockles, muscles, or scallops. Cappelonge, a kinde of long skallops or cockles. Cápperi, as Cáppari, those markes vpon the playing cards called spades. Cápperone, a hood, frocke or garment for the raine. Also a Fench-hood. Capperoni, a kinde of great capers for sallets, called caperons. Capperuccia, a poore sillie cloke or such gabardine. Cappesante, as Cappelonghe. Cappetonde, a kinde of round cockles or such shell fish. Cappi, the clawes of any crab-fish. The knots or steps that be vpon the cordes or shrouds of a shippe, by which mariners climbe vp, sliding knots. Cappio, a snare, a ginne, a spring to catch birdes with, a sliding knot. legata a Cappio, is a ioint in the middle of a port or vpset of a horses bit, where one end of the iron claspeth another like two single hookes. Cappio scorridore, a sliding knot in a cord, which being drawne will shut and open. Cappocchio, as Capocchia or Capoc∣chio. Capponara, as Caponara. Cappone, as Capone. Cappotto, a short Dutch cloke, a Spanish cape cloke, a hood or a coule. Cappucciare, to hood. Also to slip, trip or stumble. Cappuccio, a hood or a cowle. Capra, a goate in generall. A kind of racke or torture to make one confesse. Capragina, goates Rew or Italian fitch. Capraio, a goate heard, a keeper of goates. Capránica sapiētia, foolish, gotish wise∣dome. Capreccio, as Capriccio. Capreóla, as Capriola. Capreólo, as Capriolo. Capretta, a little yoong goate or faune. Capretto, a kid or a yoong faune. Caprétio, beastly, of the nature of a goate. Capriata, a cheese-cake or such other meat made of goates milke. Capricciare, to growe or be humorous, toish or fantasticall. Cappriccio, a sudden toie, a selfe con∣ceite, a fantasticall humor. Also a chil∣ling cold. Capriccióso, toysh, humorous, fantasti∣call, conceited, wauering in minde. Capricórno, one of the twelue signes in heauen, called Capricornus, a beast bo∣died like a stag, and footed and horned like a goate. Caprificatióne, a seeking of that which may not be. Caprifico, a wilde Fig tree, or wilde Fig that will neuer be ripe. Caprifoglio, Woodbinde or Honysuckle. Caprigno, Caprino, goatish, rammish, wild, humorous, lecherous. Capri mulgo, a bird or skrich owle, that in the night sucketh the goates vdders. Also a milker of goates: some take it for a night rauen. Caprina, gotish. Also a cheurell skin. Also goates dung. Caprinella, the herbe Dogs-tooth. Caprino, cheese made of goates milke. Al∣so gotish or rammish. Caprióla, a caper or loftie trick in dācing A faune, a kid, a calue of a hinde, a yoong hinde, a capriole, a sault or goates leape that cunning riders teach their horses: an herbe called Dogs-tooth. Capriolare, to caper in dancing. Capriolo, as Capriola. Capriólo delle vite, a withe of willowe wherewith they binde and tie vp vines, the twinding of a vine about a pole. Capro, a bucke or hee goate. Capróne, a great goate or bucke, a goates or chamois skin. Also a dull pate, a shal∣lowe sconce. Captiuare, to captiuate or take prisoner. Capto, taken, catcht, it hath been vsed for Preso.
Capucciare, as Cappucciare. Capuccini, an order of friers called Ca∣pussins wearing hoods. Capuccio, a hood or cowle. Capula del capello, the head of a hat without the brims. Capúto, a kinde of sea fish. Cara, a kind of herbe in India, which min∣gled with milke makes a kinde of bread. Carabattola, a boxe wherein a shooma∣ker keepes all his implements, with what soeuer belongs to it, vpon the right hand of the stoole where he works. Carabaccia, as Carabozzada. Carabo, a kinde of fish that is a great enimie vnto the fish Polypo. Carabozzada, a kinde of daintie dish or quelquechose vsed in Italie. Caracca, a kinde of great ship in Spaine called a caricke. Carabrone, a Scarabe flie, a horse flie, a beetle, a hornet. Caraccia, as Characcia. Caraffa, a kind of viol glas. as Inghistara. Caraffoni, great bottles of glasse. Carafullo, a gull, a noddie, a ninnie. Caragnola, a snaile, a periwinkle. Caramaio, as Calamaio. Caramellata, worme-eaten, ouerworne, rugged. Caramote, a kinde of shrimps or praunes. Carampana, a little house, a homely cot∣tage, a meane place. Caramusolina, a kinde of ship or hulke. Carantano, a kinde of coin or monie. Caranto, a greene finch. Caráza, the herb called the Balsam apple. Carattare, to touch or trie gold, to refine or make perfect, to caract. Caratéllo, a ship of Crete. Also a little cart, wheelebarrow or tumbrell. A kinde of measure for liquid things. Caratte, a kinde of fruit in Italie. Carattero, a character. Carattéro, a carter. Caráto, the touch or resining, or loye of gold: a waight or degree called a caract. Caratto, a violl of glasse. Also a certaine fee which euerie man paies in Venice to Saint Marke that obtaines any suite by law. Paying so much the hundred, it is called in Rome la Sportula. Caráua, a knot, a packe, a rout or crue of knaues. Carauána, a carauan: properly a com∣panie of men and horses marching togi∣ther, as they vse to trauel in Egypt with camels. Carauella, a kinde of ship called a cara∣uell. Also a kinde of peare so called in Italie. Carbonaia, a cole-pit or place where coles are made. Carbonare, to besmeare as black as coles, to besmother. Carbonaro, a collier. Carbonáta, a carbonada, meate broiled vpon the coles, a rasher. Carboncéllo, Carboncino, as Car∣bonchio. Carbonchio, a pretious stone called a Carbuncle: an infirmitie so called: a blaine, a pock, a plague sore, a bile, a botch, a swelling in any part of the bo∣dy. Also a little cole. Carbóne, any kinde of cole: a carbuncle. Carbone aquatico, a cormorant. Carbone di terra, seacole, or smiths cole. Carbóncolo, as Carbonchio. Carcasso, a quiuer for arrowes. Carcassóne, a kinde of course stuffe so called, whereof sailers make frocks. Also a sailers frocke. Carcare, as Caricare. Carcerare, to imprison, to lay in prison. Carcerato, a prisoner. Also imprisoned. Cárcere, a prison. Carcidonio, as Calcedonio. Carcioffi, hartichocks. Carciocchi, Carcióffoli, Hartichocks. Carco, loden, charged, burthened, fraigh∣ted: Also a loade, a charge, a burthen, fraight. Carda, as Cardo. Cardamómo, graines of paradise. Cardare, to carde, to teasell wooll, or bum∣base. Also taken to backbite or to raile vpon any man behinde his backe. Cardarelle, a kinde of Mushrums or tode stooles. Cardassare, to carde or teazell wooll. Cardassóne, Cardaturo, cardes to carde wooll or flaxe. Cardassore, a carder of wooll. Cardatore, a carder of wooll. Cardellino, Cardéllo, Carderino, a Gold-finch or a Thistle-finch. Cardiaca, the herbe Motherwoort. Cardinale, a cardinall or chiefe man. Cardinalato, the office and dignitie of a cardinall, a cardinalship. Cardinalésimo, the order and function of cardinals. Cárdine, the hinge or hooke of a dore. Cárdine del cielo, heauens axle tree. Cardini del mondo, the fower corners of the world. Cardo, any kinde of Hartichock or Thi∣stle or Teazell. Cardoino, a goldfinch. Cardo santo, the blessed Thistle or Car∣dus benedictus. Cardoncello, a little Thistle: but pro∣perly an herbe growing on wals and tyles, and is hairie in sommer with red stalks, called Groundsell. Cardóne, a great Thistle: the huske of a Chessenut. Also a kinde of tree in the east Indies that growes vp straight a∣bout a quarter of a mile, and no bigger then the body of a man, and hath but fewe leaues, of the roote whereof they make wine, honie, vineger, sugar, with many other things: with the leaues they couer and tile their houses: it is also cal∣led Magnei or Meth. Cardonetta, the herbe stinking weede. Careggiare, as Accarezzare. Careggie, as Carezze. Caréllo, a square cushion made of diuers peeces as tailors and beggers vse to sit vpon. It is also a hassocke or a mat to stop a priuie with. Caréna, the keele or bottom of a ship. It is also taken for a whole ship. Carestia, dearth, penurie, want, scarcitie. Carestiolo, penurious, full of dearth, want, or scarcitie. Caretto, a weauers toole or loome where∣on he warpeth his web. Carezzare, as Accarezzare. Carezze, cherishings, friendly entertain∣ments, flatteries, fawnings, blandis∣ments. Carezzeuole, cherishing, making much of one, blithe, kinde, buckesome, gentle, fawning, blandishing. Carfagna, base, vncared for, neglected, not set by. Cari, Carowaies. Cariaggio, cariage, baggage, luggage. Cárica, a charge, a burthen, a waight, a fraight▪ a lode, a lading. Cárica l'asino, a play at cardes which we call lodam. Caricare, to charge, to lade, to lode, to burthen, to fraight. to impute, to wrong. Caríce, the herbe Sheare-grasse or sedge. Cárico, as Carica. Also loden or char∣ged: a wrong, an imputation, an iniury. Cariega, a chaire or a seare. Cariglionare, to chime the bels. Cariglione, a chime of bels. Cariéra, a careere of a horse. Carierare, to careere a horse. Carina, as Carena. Carióla, as Carriuola. Caristio, a kinde of greene marble. Also a birde that will flie through the fire and not burne his feathers. Carità, charitie, loue, agreement. Caritatiuo, Cariteuole, charitable, lo∣uing.
Carlina bianca, a kinde of little Thistle wherewith Charles the great cured the plague, and of him tooke the name: it is also taken for a Fullers teazell. Carlina nera, the common Thistle with a long stalke wherewith they curde milke to make cheese. Carlino, a small money so called. Also a fish like a Tench. Carlóna, plainly, dunstable way, homelie fashion. Alla carlona. Carlotto, a birde called a Curlue. Carme, a verse or a rime. Carmeggiare, to versifie, to rime. Carmelle, locks, tuffs, or bundels of wooll. Carminare, to picke, to teaze wooll: to carde or kembe as they do flaxe: to tug, to beate, to bang, to twang, to bum∣feagle. Carmosino, as Cremisino. Carnadino, a carnation colour. Carnagione, the hewe or colour of anie bodies flesh or skin. Carnafau, the brat-getting place or hole of content. Carnafistola, a kinde of drug comming out of India. Carnaio, Carnario, a lardrie or place to hang and keepe meate in. Also a place to cast bones into. Also a shambles. Carnale, carnall, fleshly. Also lawfull issue of children. Also a weauers toole. Carnali, some part about a weauers home. Carnalità, carnalitie, fleshlines: alliance in blood. Carname, all maner of flesh meate. Also carion or dead carcases. Carnario, as Carnaio. Carne, all maner of flesh or meate. Carne bouina, di porco, di castrato, di capretto, et cet. beefe, porke, mutton, kidde. Carnefice, a hang-man, a heads-man, an executioner. Carneggiare, to flesh it, to feede vpon flesh: to follow the lust of the flesh. Carnero, Carniéro, a net-bag to carie meate in, a hawking bag. Carnesciale, Carnosciale, as Carne∣uale. Carneuale, Shroue-tide, shrouing time. Carneualeggiare, to shroue it, to be mer∣rie and reuell as they do at shrouetide. Carnicella, Carnicina, yoong tender flesh growing vpon any sore. Carnizzo, sinewes or threds of parch∣ment to make size or glew. Carnosa, a fish so called in Rome. Carnosità, carnositie, fleshines. Carnoso, fleshie, brawnie, full of flesh. Carnosso, flesh and bone togither. Caro, deere, beloued, precious, costly, gratefully, acceptable, leefe. Also caru∣waie seede. Also a dearth or penurie. Caróba, Caróbola, a fruit or pulse cal∣led Fenugreeke: properly the fruite or tree called the Carob tree, which beares a kinde of sweete cod or huske. Carobia, Carobio, an highway that turnes or goes fower waies, a crosseway. Caróbo, a carob tree. Carogna, stinking carion. Caróla, a caroll or a song. Also a kinde of dance. Carolare, to caroll, to reuell, to sing and dance, to be merie. Also to make hol∣low, to worme or moth-eate. Also to de∣uour or fester with any gnawing sore, to grow to a cuntbotch. Caroliccio, moth-eaten, worme-eaten, rotten as timber and old wood will be. Carolo, a moth or timber-worme. Also a cuntbotch or winchester goose. Also dust or powder of rotten timber vsed about yoong children against fleaing. Carománo, a kind of fine steele so called. Carone, a Carob tree. Carósa, a yoong maide, a lasse, a girle, a wench, a maiden seruant. Carosare, to sheare as they do sheepe. Caróta, a carot roote. Looke Cacciar carote. Carouána, as Carauana. Carouélle, a kinde of peare so called in Italie. Carpa, a fish called a carpe. Also a kinde of worm or moth that consumes clothes. Carpano, Carpeno, a fish called a carpe. Carpare, to creepe, to craule. Carpéa, a kinde of dance vsed among the Grecians. Carpentiéro, a carpenter. Carpesia, an herbe that is poyson. Also a kinde of apothecaries ware called cu∣bebs. Carpetta, a carpet for a table. Carpiccio, a canuasing, snatching, tug∣ging or shifting▪ for, a snatching from one. Carpignare, as Carpire. Carpinare, as Carpire. Carpino, the vtmost or last tree of any ranke. Also a charme. Also the Horne-beame, Hard-beame, or Yoke-elme tree. Carpionato pesce, fish that is marlde, as they vse at Hampton. Carpione, a fish called a carpe. Also cree∣pingly. Carpire, Carpisco, Carpito, to snatch, to filch, to prowle, to pilfer, to shift for, to get by hooke or crooke, to clime or grapple for. Carpita, a snatch and away, a filching, a prowling, a pilfring, a shifting for, an assent, a mounting or climing vp. Carpo, a way, a path, a streete or high way. Carpone, groping in the dark in creeping or crauling sort. Carra, carts, waggons or waines. Carraguoli, a kind of cockles or mushles. Carraiuólo, Carráro, a carter, a wheele wright or cart maker, a waine-man. Carrareccia, a slough or rut that the wheele of a cart makes in soule way. Carratello, a tumbrell, a wheelebarrow, a little waight called a caract. Carrattiero, as Carraiuolo. Carreccia, as Carrareccia. Carreggiare, to bring or carrie by cartes or waines: to lode or pile vp in a cart. Carreggiata, a cart way, or the rut or slough of a cart wheele. Carreggiatore, as Carrettaro. Carrera, as Cariera. Carretta, a cart, a waggon, a waine. Carrettare, to cart or carrie by cart. Carrettaro, Carrettiero, a waggoner, a carter, a car-man, a waine-man. Carrettata, a cart full, a cart or waggon lode. Carretto, the frame of a weauers loome. Also a childes standing stoole to learne to go by. Carriaggio, as Cariaggio. Carrìera, a careere of a horse. Carribo, manner, forme, rule, fashion, sort or guise. Carriola, as Carriuola. Carriolaro, a bearer or maker of Cari∣uola. Carriuola, a trundle bed, a wheele bar∣row, a stoole with wheeles that children learn to go by, a stāding stoole. The root of a horses taile. Also a kinde of chaire couered, vsed in Italie for to carrie men vp and downe by porters, vnseene of any bodie. Carro, a car, a chariot, a waine, a wag∣gon. Also a pageant. Also a kinde of measure. Carrocchiero, a coche-man, a coche-maker. Carroccia, Carrozza, a caroce, a coche, a chariot. Carrocciaro, Carrozzaro, a coch man, a coche maker. Carruca, Carrucola, as Carrucula. Carruccio, a little cart or wheele bar∣row, but properly those little carts or sleds as haue lowe woodden wheeles
as they vse at Bristow. Carrucula, as Carriuola. Also a pullie of a well or ship. Also the rumpe of a hor∣ses taile. Carrucolare, to trundle or rowle or draw vpon little wheeles or pullies. Carta, all manner of paper, a leafe of a booke, a folio, a carde, a map, a type, a playing carde. Also a paste boord. Cartaccia, filthie, course, waste paper. Also a play at cardes so called. Carta di figura, a cote carde. Carta da nauigare, a sailing carde. Carta da straccio, waste paper. Carta di punto, any other carde beside a coate carde. Carta pecorina, vellume made of sheepes skin. Carta pergamina, parchment. Carta sciuga, sucking paper that will beare no inke. Cartaro, a carder, a carde maker, a seller or maker of paper or cardes. Carte, cardes, leaues of bookes, maps, paste boardes. Cartecca, as Colatro. Also Dogs-gras. Carteggiare, to plaie at cards. Also to card silke or wooll. Cartellante, a chalenger, a libeller against one with cartels. Cartelle, a paire of tables, writing tables. Also the side postes of a doore. Cartello, a cartell, a chalenge, a defiance, a libell. Cartesimo, the arte or play at cards. Carti, carding cards. Cartiero, a carder or player at cards. Also a carter. Cartilágine, a gristle. Also a little leafe. Cartilaginóso, gristly, full of gristles. Carto, a card, to card wooll withall. Catoccio, a piece of waste paper to put any thing in. Also a kinde of yonike worke in building so called among ma∣sons. Also a charge of powder to put into a cannon or musket. Cartoliere, a paper seller. Cartolina, a little skin or thin caule ouer any thing, a little sinewie or gristly peece of flesh. Cartone, paste boord. Caruca, as Carrucula. Caruóla, as Carrucola. Caruólo, Taruolo, a kunt botch. Also a moth or consuming timber worme. Carza, the bramble bush or blacke berrie bush. Carzerino, as Cardellino. Casa, a house. Also a familie, a name or blood, a manor, a dwelling place. Also a point in the playing tables. Also a house or point vpon the chesse boorde. Casacca, a cassocke, a frocke, a horse-mans cote, a long cote. an habitation or dwel∣ling. Casacchino, a ierkin, a mandillion. Casaccia, a filthie, old, ruinous house. Casale, a hamlet, a little village, a manor house, a farme-house. Also a dayrie house. Casalengo, as Casalingo. Casalingo, homely, houshold, pane casa∣lingo, houshold bread. Also tame or be∣longing to a house or a home. As Co∣lombi casalinghi, house or tame pige∣ons. Casamatta, a kinde of fortification called in English a Casamat or a slaughter house, and is a place built low vnder the wall or bulwarcke, not arriuing vnto the height of the ditch seruing to skoure the ditch, annoying the enemie when he entreth into the ditch to skale the wall. Casamento, a building, a house frame, a mannor or farme house. Casare, to marrie, to wed, to house. Casata, married, wedded, a houshold. Casatelle, a kinde of paste-meate vsed in Italie. Casato, as Casale. Also a house, a stocke, a blood or race of a house. Cascaglio, a kinde of course cheese that clownes eate in Italie. Cascante, falling or pining away, droo∣ping, fraile, crased, readie to fall. Cascapeli, a disease called the shedding of the haire. Cascare, to fall. Cascata, a fall. Caschetto, a caske or head-piece. Casciare, to squice, to crush, to presse, to wring out. to curd to cheese. Casciaro, Casciaruolo, a cheese-mun∣ger, a cheese maker. Cascina, a countrie cottage, a houell, a stacke of hay, a shelter of boughes, a booth, an arbor, a thatcht house. Cáscio, Cacio, cheese or a cheese. Cascio cauallo, a kind of cheese made of mares milke. Casciólo, Caciolo, a little cheese. Cascio marzolino, a kinde of cheese made about Florence. Cascose, a kinde of dride paste-meat vsed in Itali, as Tagliarini. Casearo, as Casciaro. Caseo, as Cascio. Caselle, little houses or holes for pigeons. Casenda, a custome or tole house, where a Princes custom is paide. Casetto, a little fresh cheese. Caserino, a little, poore house or cottage. Casese, Cassese, a fellow that keepes home and neuer goes abroad: a kinde of mea∣sure. Casiacca, as Casacca. Casiccio, Cassiccio, a tame Lamb bred vp by hand in a house. Casipula, a little house or cottage. Casma, a flash of fier from heauen, a lightning. Caso, fate, destinie, chance, lot, fortune, venture, hap, accoumpt, estimation, reckoning, a casualtie, a case, or manner how a matter is. Casoche, if so be that, put case, admit∣ting that. Casolana mela, a red or queene apple. Casolare, a ruinous decayed house, a farme house, any dwelling tenement or house, a mesenage, a manor house. Casonada, a kinde of dressing of meate so called. Casone, a great house, a countrie thatcht house. Caspo, a bush, or shrub, a bramble, a briar, a brake, a thorne. Cassa, a chest, a coffine, a shrine, a trunke, a hutch, a binne, a chase at tennis, a blot in the tables. Also a bee∣hiue. Also a cace of any thing. Also the stock of a caliuer or other piece of ordi∣nance, a merchants cashe, or counter. Cassare, to crosse or blot, or casheere out of a booke, to cancell, to annull, to put out of checke roule, to discharge, to fru∣strate, to make voide. Cassatura, a crossing of any account or writing, a casheering. Casse, chests. Also the frames of a wea∣uers loome. Also cases. Casselletta, a little chest, coffine, or boxe, namely such as printers keepe their let∣ters in. Also a little basket. Casserta, a little chest or coffine, a forcer. Cassettare, to enshrine or lay vp safe in some casket. Also a boxe, a casket, a case, a shrine, a cabinet. Also a kinde of musicall in∣strument. Cassettino, as Cassetta. Cássia, a drugge, called so in english. Cássiafistula, a pudding pipe fruite, or tree, or Cassia fistula. Cassiére, Casséro, a casheer, or factor, a purcer, one that keepeth a marchants accoumpts, or monie. a trunke-maker. Casso, Cassato, voide, or depriued. Also a bodie from the necke to the thigh, the stomack. Also crossed, blotted, casheered out of a booke, put out of check-roule, cancelled, anulled, frustrated, or made void, discharged.
Cassone, Cassione, a great chest, or standard. Casta, chaste, temperate, continent, mo∣dest. Castagna, a chesnut. Castagnato, chesnut colour. Castagne, is a piece of iron in likenes of a scallop shell standing vp in the midst of a bit, not vsed now adayes. Castagnette, little shels, such as they vse that daunce the canaries, to make a noise or sound or clack with their fin∣gers. Castagnetto, a groue of chesnut trees. Castagnuóle, little wilde chesnuts, a kind of fig so called in Italie. Castaldia, a bailie-weeke for husban∣drie. Castáldo, a bailie for husbandrie, an ouerseer of a mans lands. Also a hinde, a swaine. Castánco, a bay or chesnut colour. Castellania, a castleship, the priuileges or territories of a castle. Castellano, a captaine, commander, or keeper of a castle or cittadell, a keeper, or iailour. Castelletto, a little castle. Also a play that children vse called cobnut. Castéllo, a castle. Castello della naue, the poupe, or vpper walke of a ship. Castigare, to punish, to chastise. Castigatore, a punisher, a chastiser. Castigo, Castigamento, a punishment or chastisement. Casto, chaste, honest, temperate, conti∣nent. Castoréo, a kinde of oyle made of beuer stones, which stinks. Also a fish that liues on the land, as in the water. Castória, idem. Castório, an herbe which makes a mans nose to bleede but touching it. Castorre, a brock or badger. Also a beuer. Capello di Castorre, a beuer hat. Castracane, a dog gelder. Also the In∣dian fitch or goates rue. Castrametare, to pitch a camp, to en∣camp, to lodge an armie, to pitch tents. Castrametatione, the pitching of a campe, maine battell, or of tents. Castramento, a libbing, or a guelding, or a splaying. Castrangola, the herbe figwort, or ker∣nell wort. Castrare, to gueld, to splay, to lib. Castrato, guelded. Also ewe or wether mutton, a turpe. Carne di castrato. Castratore, a guelder, a libber. Castra porcélli, a sow-gelde. Castrense, of or pertaining to a castle or a campe, vide Corona. Castréo, a fish that neuer eateth other fi∣shes, and can be taken with no baite. Castro, that part of a ring wherein the stone is set. Castronaggine, foolishnes, grossenes, sim∣plicitie, fondnes, sheepishnes, foolish, simple, sheepish tricks. Castróne, a gelded man. Also a wether or ewe mutton. Also a noddie, a mea∣cocke, a cuckold, a ninnie, a gull. Castronerià, as Castronaggine. Casuále, casuall, by fortune. Casualità, casualtie, chance. Casúpula, Casúcula, a homely simple poore little house. Catacresi, a figure when one worde is abused for lacke of the proper worde. Catafalco, Catafarco, a stage, a scaf∣fold. Also a hearse. Catafratta, a kinde of engine of warre, a forte or fence against the assault of the enimie. Catalogare, to register, to put in re∣corde. Catalogna, a countrey in Spaine. Also an Irish rugge for a bed. Catálogo, a catalogue. Cataléssi, a disease, whereof they that be sicke haue the holes of their eies wide and deepe, and their body stiffe. Cataletto, as Cadaletto. Catamito, a ganimed, an ingle, a boie hi∣red to sinne against nature. Catanace, an herbe vsed of witches to prouoke loue and lust. Catapano, the triall of waights. Catapasma, as Cataplasma. Catapecchie, entanglings, ensuarings, cranklings, turnings in and out, clifts, crags, holes or dens, or downfals in rocks or mountaines. Catapiromantia, diuination by looking in a glasse. Cataplasma, a plaister or cataplasme or greene salue laide vpon a sore. Catapotio, a kinde of pill to be swallowed for phisicke. Catapulta, a warlicke engine to shoote darts or long quarrels out of. Also a sling. Cataputia, Catapuzza, the herb spurge. Also an instrument which Surgeons vse to search the bladder and to open the passage to vrine when it is stopped. Cataratte, cataracts. Also purculleises. Also sluces, or violent fals of waters. Cataratto, purculleised or cataracted. Catáro, a close stoole. Catárro, a catarre, or rheume. Catarróso, rheumatike, flegmatike. Catasta, a pile or heape of any thing, as of billets. Also a measure whereby wood is sold in Florence: a wood stack. Catastare, to pile vp as billets are. Catastato, piled vp. Catástrophe, the end or shutting vp of a comedie, or any thing else. Catatrata, a paire of secret staires, a backway to dnd. Catedra, Catra, any kinde of chaire. Catedrale, cathedrall. Catedrante, a professor or reader in a chaire. Categorematico, that is predicable. Categoria, a predicament, an accusation. Categorico, categoricall, predicable. Catena, any kinde of chaine. Catenaccio, a boult or barre of a dore. Catenare, to chaine or linke, to binde in chaines. Catenazzi, a kinde of rauenous sea fowle. Catenella, a little chaine. Caterata, the lattice of a windowe, a grate of iron. Also a windowe in the roofe of a house. Also a trap-dore. Cateratta, as Cataratta, and Caterata, Also a disease in the eies called a pin and a web. Caterua, a companie, a flocke, a crue, a rout, a shole, a troupe, a heard. Cateto, a kinde of yonike worke in buil∣ding. Also a beuie, a knot of any thing of an vncertaine number. Cathechizzare, to catechize, to informe, or teach by mouth. Cathechismo, a catechisme, an instruc∣tion or teaching by mouth or by the booke. Catino, as Cadino. Cato, a little water mill. Catoblepa, a serpent in India so vene∣mous that with his looke he kils a man a mile off. Catocchia, the neathermost part of the bellie or pauche. Catochite, a stone so clammie that it will stick to his hands that doth but touch it. Católico, catholike, vniuersall. Catollo, a logge, a blocke, a stocke. Also a tormenting instrument called a griper or pincher. Also a sowe of leade, a gad of steele, a lumpe of mettall, or such vn∣wrought peece. Catorcio, a bolt or stang of a dore. Catotta, euen-now, at this hower. Catrafosso, a deepe, hollowe, vgly or dreadfull ditch, hole, pit, den, trench, gulfe, dungeon or downfall. Catramessi, a kinde of perfuming pot or pan.
Catriosso, the bone called the merie thought. Cattabriga, a pickthank, or pick-quarrell, a busie fellow. Cattaletto, as Cadaletto. Cattanéi, such as hold a princes bason whē he washeth, and therefore are reputed for noblemen and such as are chieflie fauored of the prince. Cattani, chiefe or principall officers among gentlemen, men honored with some place or dignitie. Cattare, to get, to obtaine, to purchase, to acquire, to make shift for. Cattaratte, as Cataratte. Cattasta, as Catasta. Cattiuanza, as Cattiuità. Cattiuare, to captiuate. Cattiuello, a slie, subtill, craftie, bad, shrewd: fellow. Cattiueria, knauerie, shrewdnes, craft, badnes, naughtines. Cattiuezza, idem. Cattiuità, captiuitie, bondage. Also as Cattiueria. Cattiuo, captiue, bond, bad, naughtie, craftie, subtill, slie, caitife, shrewd. Cattiuo di nido, bad, shrewd, naught or craftie by nature from his youth. Catto, catcht, taken, ouer-reacht. Also a getting or a borrowing. Cattura, a taking, a captiuating, a capti∣uitie, a catching. Catúno, euery one, ech one. Caua, a seller, a caue, a vault, a ditch, a furrow, a pit. Also hollow. Caua', Cauai, horses, iades. Cauadenti, a tooth-drawer. Cauagna, a basket, a flasket, a dosser, a fishers basket, or haske. Cauagnare, to knead dowe for bread. Cauagliere, a knight or gentleman ser∣uing on horsebacke: but in fortification it is a mount or platforme of earth built or raised high, either within or without the wall for to plant great ordinance vpon. Also it is taken for a silke worme or spinner. Also a kinde of sea crab or lobster. Cauagliere a cauallo, is a high mount or platforme of earth, raised verie high that the artillerie vpon the same may shoote ouer the wals and bulwarks to scoure and cleere the fields all about. Cauagliere marino, a sea horse. Caualcare, to ride, to stradle. Caualcare a ridosso, to ride a horse bare∣backt. Caualcata, ridden, strided or stradled on. Also a troope of horse men. Also a riding. Caualcatore, a rider, a horseman. Caualcatória arte, the arte of ryding or horsemanship. Caualcatura, a riding. Also a hackney. Caualcionare, to ride stradling. Caualcioni, stradling, as men ride. Caualla, a mare. Cauallaro, a carrier or driuer of horses. Cauelleresco, knight-like, like a good horseman, cheualrous. Cauellerizza, a princes quierie or stable where his horses of seruice are kept and ridden. Cauallerizzo, a rider of great horses, a professor of horsemanship. Caualliere, as Cauagliere. Caualleria, horsemen, cauallerie. Also knighthood, cheualrie, horsemanship. Caualleriáto, a knighthood. Caualleressa, a ronciuall woman, a huge bosse of Billingsgate. Cauallessa, a filthie iadish mare. Cauallette, locusts, grasse-hoppers. Caualletti, haycocks, or round heapes. Caualletto, a stay, a prop, a tressell. Also a bedstead. Also a little pretie nagge. Also a sadlers, or ioyners, or armorers, or such little wooden horse. Caualli, Cauagli, Cauai, horses. Caualli delle velette, light horses in war that go to discouer. Cauallina, an herbe called Horsetaile. Also horse-dung. Caualline, a kinde of biting horse flie. Cauallino, a little nagge, a prettie horse, a tit. Also greedie, desirous or longing for. Cauallo, a horse in generall, a knight in chesse-play, a kinde of fish. Also a bea∣ting or whipping of a schoole boy. Cauallo di mezza sella, a horse that is but halfe taught and is not yet come to his perfection. Cauallo di portante, an ambling nag. Cauallo di rifiuto, a spare horse. Also a cast horse. Cauallo di posta, a post horse. Cauallo di trotto, a trotting horse. Cauallo di tutta sella, a horse fully taught, and ready brought to his per∣fection, a ready horse. Cauallo di Christo, an asse, bicause Christ rode vpon an asse. Cauallone, Cauallaccio, a great filthie horse, a filthie lubberly iade. Cauallotto, a handsome well-fauoured, and well trust nag. Caualluccio, a poore sillie leane horse. Caualocchi, such as are appointed or hi∣red to receiue and gather vp money of detters, and are very importunate and earnest vpon them: so termed bicause it is thought that they grieue and mo∣lest the eies of them. Cauamento, a digging, a hollownes. Cauana, a warehouse, a storehouse, a place couered ouer where they build or keepe little boates or barges in, a shed or shel∣ter. Also a hole or den vnder ground, a lurking or starting hole. Cauardina, an vpper frocke, a gaber∣dine. Cauare, to dig, to make hollow, to get or draw foorth, to put off, to take away: to caue, to mine. Cauar denari, to get money of any thing. Cauar fuori il limbello, to begin to speake and vtter the worst that a man knowes against any body. Cauar la voglia, to haue ones longing. Cauar il capello, to put off the hat. Cauar sangue, to let blood. Cauar macchie, to take or get out staines. Cauatore, a digger, a pit maker, a miner. Cauatura, a digging, a pit, a graue, a ma∣king hollow, a mining. Cauauena, as Chili. Cauazzana, a cauetzan or head straine. Caucalida, an herbe called bastarde Parsley. Caudatarij, such as hold vp princes or bi∣shops traines or trailes. Cauecchia, as Cauicchia. Cauedale, a mans maine stock, wealth or woorth. Cauedano, as Cauezzale. Cauedoni, as Capifuochi. Also as Ca∣pitoni. Cauelle, as Couelle. Cauello, a nipple of a teate. Also a little stalke or stem. Cauconi, as Capifuochi. Cauerna, a caue, a den, a cauerne, a grot, a pit, a hole. Cauernoso, full of caues, holes, dens, pits or cauernes, hollow. Cauestro, as Capestro. Cauestrolo, a wag, a haltersacke. Cauezza, a halter, a rope, a horse collar, a headstraine. Cauezza di mero, a browne bay colour of a horse. Cauezzale, a fish called a pollard or a chieuen. Cauezzana, a cauetzan or headstraine. Cauezzare, to halter a horse. Cauezzone, as Cauezzana. Cauiále, Cauiáro, a kinde of salt meate vsed in Italie like blacke sope, it is made of the roes of fishes. Cauicchia, as Cauiglia.
Cauicchiare, to string silke. Also to peg or pin in, to wrench. Cauicchiatore, a stringer of silke. Cauicchina, a little pin or peg. Cauiglia, any ring or peg fastned in the wall to tie horses to, any peg or pricke, a pinne or dibble. Also taken for a mans yard, the ankle bones of a mans leg. Al∣so a carpenters tenno to fasten timber. Cauigliare, as Cauicchiare. Cauigliatore, as Cauicchiatore. Cauigliuolo, as Cauiglia. Also a setting sticke or dibble. Also a poking iron or setting sticke. Cauillare, to cauill or vse deceit, to dodge to wrangle, to contend. Cauillatione, cauilling, dodging, wrang∣ling, contention. Cauillatore, a cauiller, a dodger, a wran∣gler, a contentious person. Cauilloso, cauillous, dodging, wrangling, contentions. Caula, a kinde of musicall instrument. Cauli, as Cáuoli. Caulicolo, a piece of architecture compo∣sed of Ionike, of Dorike, and of Corinth worke. Cauo, hollow: also a hollownes. Cáuoli, Cáoli, Coleworts, Cabbages. Cáuoli fiori, a kind of Colewoorts, called Colli-flowers. Cáura, as Capra. Cauretto, a kid or yoong faune. Also cherell or kids skin. Caurióla, as Capriola. Cauriólo, a fawne. Also a kid. Also a kinde of rauenous sea fowle. Cáuro, the northwest winde. Some take it for the west wind. Cauróne, a cheuron in Armorie. Also a great goate. Causa, a cause, a meanes, an occasion. Causale, casuall, subiect to chance. Causare, to occasion, to cause. Causatiuo, efficient, that is the cause. Causia, a broade cap or hat that haruest folke vse to keepe them from the sunne. Also a kind of hat that the kings of Ma∣cedon were woont to weare. Caustico, costiue, hardbound or stopt in the bellie. Cautéla, a cautell, a taking heed, a proui∣sion. Cautelóso, cautelous, full of cautles. Cautério, an iron which surgeons vse to cauterize or seare with: a searing iron. Cauterizzare, to cauterize or seare or burne with an iron. Cautionare, to caution, to assure, to pledge, to baile. Cautione, a caution, a suretie, a pledge, a baile, an assurance, a shift or starting hole: an obligation. Cauto, caute, wearie, wise, wittie. Cazude, a magistrate in Venice. Cazza, as Caccia. Also a skoope or a la∣dle. Cazzaforata, a skimmer. Cazzafrusto, a slinge. Cazzare, as Cacciare. Cazzarenga, a kind of sparow. Cazzaria, a treatise or discourse of pricks. Cazzáride, a certaine rope in a ship about the misensaile. Cazzica, an interiection of admiration and affirming, what? gods me, god for∣bid, tush. Cazzo, a mans priuie member. As Caz∣cica. Cazzolata, a kind of countrie musicall in∣strument without strings. Cazzomarino, a pintle-fish. Cazzo ritto, a stiffe standing pricke. Cazzuola, Cazzetta, a little ladle. Also a bricklayers trowell. Cazzuto, a man that hath a pricke. Ce, an aduerbe of place, there, in that place. Also a pronoune primitiue of the Datiue, Accusatiue, and Ablatiue ca∣ses, to vs, vs, from vs. C'è, there is, there is in that place. Cecca, a minte or coyning place. Ceccardola, a philip with the fingers. Ceccare, to coyne, stampe, or mint. Ceccaro, a minter, a coyner, a monier. Cecare, to blinde. Cecatello, somewhat blinde. Cechità blindnes. Ceci, fitches, ciches, chichlings, or wilde tares. Cecia, the east northeast winde. Some say the northwest winde. Cecità, blindnes. Ceco, as Cieco. Cédere, Cedo, Cedei, Cesso, or Cedu∣to, to yeeld, to giue place, to graunt, to resigne, to surrender, to affoord. Cedebonis, a game at cards so called, as we say are you pleased? Cedra, a drinke of apples called cyder. Cedriolo, a little cedar tree, it hath bin vsed for a cucumber. Cedro, a cedar tree. Also a citron. Cedrone, a citron, a pomecitron. Also, a kinde of wilde hen. Cedronella, baulme mint, or baulme∣gentle. Cedula, a bill, a schedule, a note, a ticket, an obligation, or any hand-writing, a docket. Cefaglione, leaues of the wilde date, which be good to eate. Cefálica, the humerall or shoulder vaine. Céfalo, Céfaro, a fish called a mullet. Some take it for the fish pollard. Some haue in mockerie vsed it for the bill or beake of a bird: and also for a mans priuities. Cefalu, a scornefull nickname, as we say, a limlifter. Cefaut, a key in musick. Ceffare, to take by the snoute. Ceffata, a boxe, a clap, or blow giuen on the mouth. Ceffo, a snoute, a mussell of any beast. Also a foule called a whitecob, or sea∣meaw. Cefo, a kinde of ape, monkie, or mar∣moset. Cegolite, a kinde of blackish stone. Ceice, a bird called a kings-fisher. Célabro, as Ceruello. Celadone, a great skull, helmet, morion, or headpiece. Celága, a sparrow. Celare, to hide, to conceale. Celata, a scull, a helmet, a morion, a sal∣lat, a headpiece. Celeberrimo, most renowmed, honorable, or much spoken of. Celebrate, to celebrate, to solemnize, to make famous, to renowme, to frequent. Celebratione, a celebration, a solem∣nitie. Célebre, famous, renowmed, glorious, noble, honorable, frequented. Celebrità, fame, renowme, glorie, solem∣nitie, good name, or report, an honora∣ble assemblie. Célebro, as Ceruello. Celéga, a sparrow. Celerare, to speede, to hasten. Célere, hastic, speedie, swift, light, nimble. Celerità, haste, speede, swiftnes, light∣nes, celeritie. Celéste, heauenlie, celestiall. Also skie-colour, or azure and watchet. Celeste arco, the raine-bow. Celestiale, celestiall, heauenlie. Celestino, as Celestro. Celestro, azure, watchet, or skie-colour. Celato, a kinde of fish. Celibato, single, or vnmaried life. Celibeuita, an vnmaried or single life. Celidonia, the herbe Celandine, swallow∣wort, or tetter-wort, or silken cisley. Cella, a cell, a caue, a cabine. Also a seller or butterie. Also those hedge berries which we call black-berries. Cellaro, a butler, or cell keeper. Cellarao, an ouerseer of friers cels. Celo, as Cielo.
Celoma, the marriners crie when they pull vp ankre, or hoise saile. Celomare, to cry together as marriners do when they are earnestlie at worke. Celone, a testern for a bed. Celoni, course hangings, or rugged clothes. Celsa, a mulberie. Celsità, loftines, hautines, height. Celsitudine, highnes, nobilitie, excellen∣cie. Celso, a mulberie tree. Also high, noble or bright. Celsomino, a gelsemine floure. Cembalo, a cymball, or timbrell. Cementare, to cement, or fasten toge∣ther. Cemento, cement, a kinde of glue. Cemetério, a Church-yard, or burying place. Cemmanella, as Cennamella. Cena, a supper. Also the sacrament of the Lords supper. Cenábrio, cinaber, or vermilion. Cenácolo, a parior, or a supping place. Cenare, to sap. Cenarélla, a little light supper. Cen', Cene, to vs of it, vs thereof. Cenci, rags, clouts, tatters, filthie shreds. Cenciglio, a little rag or clout. Céncio, a rag, a clout, a tatter. Cencióne, Cengione, a ragged, torne, beggerlie, rogish companion. Concióso, ragged, tottered, rent, torne, full of patches, beggerlie, sluttish, fil∣thie. Cencri, certaine serpents or snakes that be spotted. Cendalo, Cendaletti, as Sandalo. Ceneraccio, the ashes that a buck hath been washt with. Also the finest siluer that can be tride out with fire. Cenerare, to couer with ashes, or make of the colour of ashes, to cinder. Cénere, ashes, cinders. Cénere aspersa, the herbe Ethiopian mullem. Cenericcio, Cenerino, ashcolour, or one that lyes in the chimnie corner. Cenghia, a girt or cingle. Cenghiare, to girt or cingle a horse. Cennamella, a kinde of musicall instru∣ment. Cennare, as Accennare. Cenno, a nod, a becke or signe or a glance or touch at any thing, an inkling. Cenóbio, a conuent or religious house, a or house where people liue in common. Censale, a receiuer or customer of fines, subsidies, tribute, taxes or valuation. Censo, tribute or rent. Also a fee or rate, or estimation, or valuation of a mans whole substance: a sessing, a taxing, a rating or a subsidie. Censore, a censor, a iudge, a corrector, a high constable, a doomer, a reformer of policies and disorders. Censuale, by denumberment or valua∣tion, that is, to be taxed, sessed, rated, fined or valued. Censura, censure, iudgement, reforma∣tion, correction. Censurare, to censure, iudge, reforme or correct. Centa, a girdle. Centaura, Centauréa, the herbe Cen∣torie. Centauro, a centaure, halfe a man and halfe a bull. Centenaia, hundreds. Centenaio, an hundred or fiue score. Centésimo, the hundred. Centina, an hundred. Centinella, a centinell or watch. Cento, an hundred. Centocapi, an herbe that causeth him that hath it about him to be beloued. Centonaia, hundreds. Centone, an herbe called Mouseare or Chickweede. A kinde of quilt which in war was vsed for a defence against slings or bowes. Also a course couerlet made of shreds and listes. Also a quil∣ted iacke or iacket. Also as Centoni. Centoni, a mingle-mangle of many kinds of verses gathered from diuers authors. Cento gambe, as Centopiedi. Centonocchio, the herbe Perwinke or Lesseron. Centonodia, the herbe knotgrasse. Centopiedi, a fish hauing an hundred feete. Also a worme called a palmer hauing an hundred feete. Centoplicare, to multiplie by hundreds. Centoplicato, an hundred fold. Centorio, the herbe Moniewort or two pennie grasse: Some haue taken it for Clarie or Centorie. Centouirale, of an hundred men. Centro, the centre or middle point of any thing. Also the depth. Centrone, the herbe Clarie. Centura, a girdle. Centurare, to gird or compasse about. Centurino, a little girdle, a waste band. Centurione, a captaine of an hundred men. Centurola, a little girdle or garter. Also a horne booke for children to learne to reade hanging at their girdle. Cepea, some take it for sea Purslaine, and some for Brookelime. Cephalea, a long continuing bead. Cephalica, as Cefalica. Cephalo, as Cefal. Cepo, a wilde beast or monster hauing feete like a man. Cepocapite, or Cepite, a stone that doth reiect all whitenes. Cepola, a kinde of cheese cake. Ceppa, a kinde of chirping sparrow. Ceppo, a stocke, a blocke, a log. a branch, a graffe-fetters, stocks, shackles, mani∣cles, giues boults. Also the stocke, blood, house, familie or pedegree of any man. Also the trunke of a tree. A footetrap. Also a stock of a plane, and of a pistoll and such. Cera, wax of any kinde. Also fare, cheere, countenance, looke or aspect. Ceraginoso, like waxe or full of waxe. Ceraiuóla, a woman that selleth waxe candles, or hath care of waxe candles in a nunnerie. Also Candlemas day. Ceraiuólo, he that hath the looking to the waxe lights in a conuent. Also a waxe chandler. Ceramela, a pipe or bagpipe. Ceramento, a waxing togither. Cerare, to waxe or to seale vp. Ceraro, a waxe chandler, a maker of waxe. Cerasciuólo, a wine betweene white and claret, as we say pallet wine. Cerase, all manner of cherries. Cerase d'inuerno, a lote tree or nettie tree. Cerasta, a kinde of snake or serpent, said to haue hornes as a ram. Cerasuolo, as Cerasciuolo. Ceraunia, Ceraumo, a kinde of blackish and blewish stone, which put in vineger and salt peeter will in time growe to haue a bright glittering star in the cen∣ter of it, and taken out will iust in so long time lose it againe. It is said to fall out of the clouds, & who wears it about him cannot be drowned. Some haue ta∣ken it for a kinde of glittering pearle. Cerauro, as Ceraunia. Cerbiatto, the calfe of a stag, but properly a staggard or a brocke. Cerbia, a hnd of a stag. Cerbio, a stag or hart. Cerbottana, as Ciarbattana. Cerca, a search or inquiry. Also touching, concerning, about. Cercamento, an enquirie, a seeking, an inquest. Also a combate, a fight, a fray. Cercare, to seeke, to require, to enquire. Also to fight, to striue, to contend. Cercare partito, seeke entertain.
Cercari, as Cercati. Cercati, searchings, enquirings, deuises. Cercatore, a seeker, a searcher. Cercéglio, a ciret, coronet, wreath, chaplet, or garlande about the head, a necke-lace, an ear-ring. Also a hoope∣ring or carkanet, or billiment, or border that women weare vpon their heads. Cercegne, a kind of rauenous fowle. Cerceuolo, a kind of small ducke, called a Teale or a wigin. Cerchiare, to hoope, to circle, compasse or enuiron about. Cerchiaro, a hooper, a cooper. Cerchiello, Cerchietto, as Cerceglio. Cerchij, Cerci, circles in a horses hoofe. Some take them for another disease also about the feete. Cerchio, a hoope, a circle, a chaplet, a gar∣land. Also a troupe of men, a round of men, a circuit, vsed also for a tauerne or ale-house bush. Cercolare, round, circular, sphericall. Cercone, the turning or becomming sower of wine, beere or ale by thunder or heat, a sudden turning of wine. Cercopiteco, a marmoset or monkie. Ceréale, pertayning to the goddes of har∣uest or to haruest. Also smooth as waxe. Cérebro, as Ceruello. Cerebattana, as Ciarbattana. Cerefóglio, the herbe tooth-picke or cher∣uill. Ceregia, a cherie. Cerégio, a cherie-tree. Ceremónie, as Cerimonie. Ceréo, a pale yellow like waxe. Ceretanarie, babling, foolish, skoulding trickes. Ceretanare, to play the prating mounti∣bancke or idle iester. Ceretano, as Ciaratano. Cerfoglio, as Cerefoglio. Cérica, Ceriga, a shauen pate or nole, a shaueling. Cerico, Cerigo, a clerke or cleargie man, a shaueling. Cerigone, a kinde of wilde beast in India with a great bag vnder his bellie, wher∣in in times of danger he carieth his yong ones. Cerillo, a kinde of daintie wine so called in Rome. Cerimonia, a ceremonie, a complement. Cerimoniale, ceremoniall, ceremonious or pertayning to them. Cerimoniare, to vse ceremonies or com∣plements. Cerimonioso, ceremonious, full of cerimo∣nies or complements. Cerino, Cerigno, a kinde of colour like yellow waxe. Cerio, Ceri, a taper, a torch of wax: waxe sises. Ceriolo, a fish called a ruffe. Cermisone, a gull, a foole, a bold bayard, a ninnie. Cerne, a fish called a ruffe or gilt head. Also as Cernita. Cernede, as Cernite, Cérnere, cerno, cernéi, cernuo, to dis∣cerne, to picke, chuse or cull out, to sise, to bolt. Cernire, as Cérnere. Cernicchio, a picker or culler or deui∣der of any thing, but properly a bod∣kin, which women vse to part their haire on their heads withall, a crisping wyer. Cérnita, Cernitura, a choice, a culling or election or picking out, a sifting out. Pa∣ne di cernitura, ranged bread. Cérnite d' Italia, the choise trained sol∣diers in Italie. Cernitore, a chuser, a culler. Céro, Zéro, a sipher of naught, a null, as Cerro. Ceroto, Cerotto, a feare cloth. Cerretta, basebroome, woodwaxen, gree∣ning weed or diers weede Cerro, the tree like an oake that beareth maste, called the holme oake. It is also taken for a bush of haire. Also a fish called a cakrell. Certame, a conflict, a fight, a combat, a contention, warre, strife. Also the prize for which men striue in any bodle ex∣ercise. Certanità, certaintie. Certano, certaine, sure. Certatore, a combatant, a contender, a striuer. Certezza, certainty, assurednes. Certificare, to assure, to warrant, to cer∣tifie, to ascertaine. Certificatione, a certificate or assurance. Certificatore, an assurer, a certifier. Certificato, a passeport or certificat. Certo, certaine, certes, true, faste, firme, sure. Also surely, truly, verily, indeede, sycker. Certósa, a charterhouse, an order of friers or munkes so called. Certosino, Certogiano, a Carthusian, one of the Carthusian order. Certusino, Certugino, as Certosino. Cerua, a hinde or shee hart, a Doe. Ceruato, of the colour of a stagge, a spec∣kled dun or russet. Ceruellaccio, a mad fantasticall wit. Ceruellato, a kinde of dry Sausage. Ceruellira, a fonde fantasticall humo∣rous end. Ceruellino, a fonde humorous wit. Ceruello, braine, wit, conceite, discretion: Also the braine of any creature: the pith, the head. Cerueto, chmois or bucks-skin. Ceruice, the hinder part of the necke, the shoulder. Also the necke or crest of a horse. Ceruicuto, thicke necked. Also vntracta∣ble, or stiffe necked. Ceruiéro, as Lupo ceruiere. Ceruina pelle, a stagges or bucks skin. Ceruino, of a stagge or hart. Ceruito, a calfe or staggard. Cerugia, the Arte of Chirurgerie. Cerúgico, Cerúsico, a chirurgion. Ceruléo, skie colour, azure or watched. Céruo, a hart or stagge. Ceruosa, Ceruogia, the drinke Beere or Ale. Ceruogiaro, Ceruosaro, a beere brewer. Cerussa, as Cirossa. Cesana, a kinde of swan. Cesarane, a kind of linkes or chaine worke that goldsmiths vse in Italy. Cesare, a proper name. Also an Empe∣rour. Cesareo, Imperiall, maiesticall. Cesca, vsed of Bocace for Francesca. Cesendéllo, a lampe. Cesila, Cesilla, a swallowe. Cesio, a kind of colour that painters vse. Cesóie, a paire of sheares or cezers. Cesone, a kind of ducke. Cespite, Céspo, as Cespuglio. Cespuglio, abush, a shrub, a brake, a briar, a bramble, or a busket. Cessare, to cease, to leaue, to relinquish, to linne, to giue ouer, to stint. Cessio occho, a kinde of whale eye, as some horses haue. Cessione, a cession, a yeelding, a resigna∣tion, a geing place. Cessite, a kinde of whitish stone. Cesso, a priuie, or close stoole. Also a scroule of paper. Also yeelded. Looke Cedere. Cesta, a basket, a flasket, a panni. Cestaro, Cestaio, a basket-maker. Cestaruolo, a basket-bearer, or a por∣ter. Cestella, a Seamsters worke-basket, a little basket. Cesti, foiles, walers or cudgels that fen∣ters vse in schooles. Cestino, a kinde of measure of liquid things. Cesticillo, a wispe, a wase or wreath of clonts or strawe which women vse on their heads to carie things vpon.
Cesto, a basket, a pannier, or a flasket. Also a bush or shrub. Also a kinde of heauie flaile, a kinde of weapon. Also a mariage girdle suil of studs, that the husband gaue his wife, and guirded her with the first day, and at night tooke it from her againe: poets speake much of them. Cestóne, Cestotta, a great basket. Cestopilotto, a kinde of basket so cal∣led. Cestra, a battlexe, or poleaxe. Cestuto, bushie, thick, leauie, shrub∣bie. Cesura, the cutting, breaking, or falling of a verse in reading it. Cétara, Cetarella, a citterne, a gitterne, a croud, a kit. Céta, as Céto. Also a hatchet. Cetacei pesci, whale-fishes. Cetarédo, a player vpon a citterne or gitterne. Cetarei pesci, pond or poole-fishes. Céthera, Cetera, Cetra, as Cétara. Ceterare, to play vpon a citterne. Ceteratore, as Cetaredo. Cetola, a fish, in latine, faber marinus. Ceto, a whale, or such other great fish of the sea. Cetrino, a pome-citron, a citron. Cetro, a scepter, a mace of dignitie. Cetrone, a citron, a pome-citron. Cetronella, an hearbe called balme-mint. Cetruolo, a little citron, a cucum∣ber. Cetta, a hatchet. Also an axe. Cettina, a little hatchet, a chopping-knife. Cettolino, as Cettina. Céualo, as Céfalo. Céuera, a fish called a mullet. Céuole, oinions, skallions, ciues, or ci∣uets. Chalcide, a kinde of serpent or lizard. Also a kinde of fish that hisseth like a serpent. Chalco, a little greeke waight, halfe a carrect. Chalta, as Calta. Cham, a persian word, signifying a great Lord or Prince, or a mightie one. Chambrone, the shrub we call priuet, or prime print tree. Chaos, a chaos, a confused lump, a forme∣lesse masse, a mishmash. Characcia, or Guado, or Pastello, the herbe called woad, good for dyers. Charate, a precious stone like chrystall, good against the dropsie, and makes him eloquent and well spoken that weares it about him. Charitá, as Caritá. Charta, as Carta. Che, that, which, then, than, what, when, because, for, to the end, except, sauing, but, but onely, who, wherefore, a no∣thing, whereof, so that, the which, in the which, in whome, what? what thing? since, since that, forsomuch as, nothing, no whit, least, least that, a somewhat. Chebuli, a kinde of mirobalane plum. Checcalare, to cackle as a hen. Ch'èche nonè, a manner of speech v∣sed very often in talke, as we say, I know not how it came to passe, but soone after, but presently. Che che, what soeuer, what thing so e∣uer. Che chi, that who, that whosoeuer. Chec'é? Che ci é? what newes? what is there? Che domin? what a gods name? what a good yeare? Che è del fatto tuo? what becomes of thee? how doest thou? Chéggiere, as Chiédere, or Chiég∣gere. Chel, Chello, that he, to the end that he. Chele, the cleyes or forepart of the cele∣stiall signe Scorpio. Chelidonia, a kinde of stone sound in a swallow, or a swallow. Also a kinde of serpent. Also the herbe Celandine the great. Some take it for fig-wort, or pile∣wort, or tetterwort. Also a west winde. Chelindro, Chelidro, an adder, or wa∣ter snake. Chella, that she, to the end that she. Chelonia, or Chelonitide, as Che∣lonite. Chelonite, a precious stone like vnto a tortoise shell and taken out of a tortoise head, good against stormes. Chemele, Chemite, a kinde of stone like iuorie, as hard as marble, the bodies buried in them are neer consumed. It is sayd that Darius king of Persia was buried in a tombe made of such stones. Chemerison, a kinde of salt for alchi∣mists. Chéma, a greeke measure of liquid things. Chene, a kinde of stone found in the eye of an old Hart, good against poison. Chenero, a kind of snake or serpent. Chenica, a greeke dry measure. Che no? Che non? I hold not, what will you lay not? not so. Che non, if a verbe follow, then, least, least that, that not. Also in any com∣parison if a second verb follow it affir∣mith, and signifies the, as for example, Il sauio sa piú che non sa il mato, the wise man knoweth more then the foule. Chente, how much? how? how long? how farre? Also, as, as much, as well. Also a kinde of fine linnen cloth. Chente fi fia, how much soeuer it be. Chérere, chéro, chesi, chiesto, as Chi∣édere. Chergna, a fish called a ruffe or gold∣head. Chérica, as Chierica. Chericato, as Chiericato. Chérico, as Chierico. Chernite, a stone like Iuorie. Chéro, I require, I request, I seeke, I de∣maund, I sue for. Chersea, as Chersidro. Chersina, a land snaile. Chersidro, a serpent that liues as well in the water, as on the lande. Cherubino, a Cherubin. Chesta, Chesto, vsed for questa. Chetare, to appease, to asswage, to pacifie, to stil, to put to silence, to quiet, to calme, to allay, to whusht. Chete, a kind of stinging waspe. Chetichegli, Looke Fare a chetichegli. Cheto, whusht, still, quiet, silent, calme, gentle. Chi, who, which, he the which, who that, who? Chi chi, Chi che, whosoeuer, what man soeuer. Chia, a white earth which giueth an ami∣able colour to the whole bodie being ap∣plied vnto it. Chiácchiara, a chatte, a prittle prattle. Chiacchiarare, to chat, to prate, to prat∣tle, to babble, to tittle tattle, to skould. Chiaccherata, as Fagiolata. Chiaccheria, Chiacchere, a prating, a pratling or tittle tattle, a babbling. Chiaccherone, a pratler, a chatter. Chiacco, a letteise window, a drawing window, a tooting, lurking or prying hole. Also a snare, a springe, a ginne. Also a smacking with the toong. Chiacchi bichiacchi, higgledepiggle, heltershelter, tut, tushe. Also prating, meerie lads or tatling companions that will vtter all they know. Chiaga, a kinde of rauenous water foule. Chiaggia, a sinke, a gutter, a common shore to conuaie filth away. Chiamare, to call, to hight, to na, to clae, to inuoke, to adiourne. Chiamóre, a clamor, a calling, a cryers call.
Chiana, a standing poole. Also a watring place. Also a carpenters plane. Chianare, to plane, to make smooth. Also to stande or growe to a poole. Chianca, a shambles, a butcherie, a slaughter house. Also a torturing place. Also a pauement, a floore that is plan∣ked or paued. Also a trap for birds. Chiancara, as Chiaranzana. Chiancasano, a kinde of horse-shoe for a horse that hath a tender hoofe, vsed for horses that haue false quarters, be∣ing shorter on the one side then on the other. Chianetta, a helmet, a caske, a head peece. Chiantare, as Schiantare. Chiappa, an earthen pan, a dripping pan. Also a buttocke, a bum. Also a ship, a peece of tymber. Also a step of a ladder or staires. Chiappare, as Acchiappare. Chiappe, the buttocks or hips. Also splints or rugged stones diuided by nature, clifts, crags. Also a kinde of tyle. Also the part of a knife that goes into the handle. Also the breech of a cannon or musket. Chiappedi bue, a kinde of horse-shoe. Chiappeggiare, to clap or beate on the buttocks: to pinch by the hanch. Chiappeggiata, a clap, a stroke or pinch on the buttocks or hanch. Chiappetine, little buttocks or hips. Chiappole, foolish, wanton, riggish wen∣ches. Also a huddle or a bead roule. Chiappone, that which is called the porte in the mouth of the bit. Chiara, cleere, thinne, apparant, bright, shining, famous. Chiara del'vuouo, the white of an egge. Also according to Alchimists quicke siluer. Chiaramella, a kinde of musicall instru∣ment. Chiaranzana, a kind of leape, or hopping or dauncing, as the Alman leape. Chiaréa, a kinde of sauce vsed in Italie made of graines. Also the herbe Clarie. It is properly wine made of spices cal∣led Ipocrasse. Chiaréllo, chiaretto, claret wine. Also somewhat cleere. Chiarezza, cleerenes, thinnes, brightnes, light, shining. Chiarificare, as Chiarire. Chiarire, Chiarisco, Chiarito, to clari∣fie, to cleere, to rarifie. Also to resolue, to put out of doubt. Chiarità, as Chiarezza. Chiaro, cleere, apparent, certaine, resol∣ued, out of doubt, thinne, rare. Also bright, shining, noble famous. Chiarore, as Chiarezza. Chiaroscuro, a kind of darke puke colour. Chiassare, to spot, to blur, to dash with dirt. Also to follow whore houses. Chiassetto, Chiassolino, a little lane, a little alley: a little bawdie house. Chiasso, a narrow lane, or an alley where poore folkes dwell: an out nooke in any town. Also a brothell, a stewes, or baw∣die house, or vaulting house. Chiattare, to squat on the ground, to gro∣uell. Chiatto, a squatting on the ground, gro∣uelling. Also a toade. Chiaualli, a kinde of wooden boultes or keies to locke or open dores. Chiauare, to locke with a key: but nowe a daies abusiuely vsed for Fottere. Chiauardi, a disease in a horse. Chiauarina, as Chiauerina. Chiauarino, as Chiauaro. Chiauaro, a locke-smith: a porter or key∣keeper: an vsher. Chiauaruola, the name of a principall wheele or spring in a clocke. Chiauatore, a locke-smith, a locker. Also as Fottitore. Chiauatura, a locke with a key. Also as Fottitura. Chiauattiere, as Chiauaro. Chiaue, a key. Also the roote of a horses taile. Also a clif in musike. Chiaueca, a mother, a dame. Also a bel∣dame. Chiauellare, to fumble or grope about a key-hole, or womans priuities. Chiauesca, Chiaueuole, Chiauante, of like, or pertaining to a key, or locking. Looke Chiauare. Chiauerina, a little speare or launce, or pike staffe. Chiauichetta, a gutter or pipe to con∣uaigh water. Chiauicola, the chanelbone of the throte, the neckbone or crawbone. Chiauistello, a lock for a doore. Also a bolt. Chiauisterio, an occupying house, a baudy house. Chiazzare, as Chiassare, Chiazzate, as Chiazze. Chiazzato, spotted with diuers colours. Chiazze, spots of durt, or myre. Chicchera, a flurt or fig with ones fin∣gers in derision or contempt. Chicchirillare, as Anfanare. Chichi, Chi che. Looke Chi. Chiédere, Chiéggio, Chiédo, Chiesi, Chiésto, to require, to request, to aske, to demaund, to sue for. Chiedibile, that may be required. Chiega, the lining of a garment. Chiegge, splints, shiuers, riuings or spalls. Also the ridges of a hill. Chiéggere, as Chiédere. Chiendena, a nit. Chiendinoso, nittie, lousie. Chiepa, as Chieppa. Chieppa, a kinde of fish called in latine Lupea, that for desire of a vaine in a tunnies iawe, killeth him. Chiepino, Chieppino, a dissembling hy∣pocriticall puritan. Chieresia, the whole bodie of the clergie. Chiérica, a priests shauen pole or pate, or nole. Chiericante, clarkelike. Also perching, crowing, or prating ouer one. Chiérica rasa, a shauen pole, a shaueling. Chiericato, a benefice, or ecclesiasticall liuing. Also shauen or notted, a clearks liuing, the clergie. Chiérico, a clerke, a priest or religious man, a clergie man. Chieri chetti, little nouices, or young clarkes. Chierigni, a kinde of fish. Chiéro, as Chero. Chiersi, a kind of duck, wigin, or mallard. Chiesa, Chiesia, a church, a temple. Chiesetta, Chiesicciuola, a litle church. Chiésta, a request, an inquirie, a de∣maund, a suite, a vaunt or vye in ga∣ming. Chiésto, required, asked, demaunded, intreated, sued for, requested. Chietarie, dissembling, hypocriticall tricks. Chiéti, dissembling hypocrites. Chietino, an hypocriticall Puritan. Chietinare, to dissemble hypocriticallie, to play the hypocrite. Chieuegli, a gull, a sot, a ninnie. Chili, the mother of all other vaines in our bodies, called Caua vena. Chilo, a white iuice comming of the meate digested in the stomacke, which in∣gendred the bloud. Chilosi, Chilosetti, a kinde of rauenous water fowle. Chimedio vespertino, as Draconite. Chimere, foolish toyes, fond imaginati∣ons, castles in the ayre. Also mon∣sters. Chimerino, a circle, whereto when the sunne commeth the dayes be at the shor∣test, winterly. Chimerizzare, to build castles in the ayre, to raue. Chimia, the arte of alchimie. Chimicho, a chimicke or an alchimist.
Also chimicall. Chimista, a chimike or an alchimist. Chimo, the phisicions take it for the se∣con digestion in the liuer. Chimosi, a moysture in the skin enclo∣sing the eyes. Chimus, a kinde of fish that foreseeth stormes, and then hideth himselfe vnder some stone. China, a fullers teazell, or Venus bason. Chinance, Chinanche, the squinan∣cie. Chinare, to encline, to stoupe, to bend, to make a curtsie, to bow, to lowte lowe. Chinéa, a hackney, a guelding, an ambling or pacing nag. Chineuole, bending, enclining, stou∣ping. Chino, bended, bowed low, stouping or lowting, &c. Also a reuerence, a curt∣sie. Also downe hanging as a hill. Chinoceto, a precious stone good to ex∣pell euill spirits. Chintana, a quintan, a sport vsed in the countrie, a running at the ring. Chio, a skriche-owle. Chiocca, a lock or handfull of wooll, a bush or lock of haire. Also a cowring or squatting downe. Also a clocking hen. Chiocca a chiocca, by locks, by peece∣meale, in number and quantitie. Chiocciare, to whiske or yarke as a whip doth. Also to cowre or squat downe, to reduce into locks or bundles. Chioccare, as Chiocciare. Chioccia, a clocking or sitting hen, a broode hen or a clucke hen. Also hoarse in the throte. Chiocciare, to clocke, sit or broode as hens do. Also to be hoarse. Chioccio, hoarse or snorting. Chiocciola, a cockle, a scallop or any shell fish, but properly those blacke snailes with hornes and without shels. Chiodare, to naile vp. Chiodaro, a maker of nailes. Chiodaruolo, a tenter man. Chiodo, a naile, a spike. Chioma, the whole haire. Also the maine of a horse. Also a peruwig. Chiomazzuoli. Looke Far chiomaz∣zuoli. Chioppa, a dripping pan. Also a splint or spall of some broken stone. Chioppare, to clack or snap with ones fin∣gers as barbers vse, or such as dance the canaries. Chioppo, a clacke, a snap, a clicking with ones fingers ends. Chiosa, a glose, an interpretation or ex∣position. Chiosare, to glose vpon any thing, to in∣terpret, to expound. Chiasatori, glosers, expounders. Chioso, molten, thawed. Chiostra, Chiostro, a cloister or inclo∣sure. Chiostrare, to cloister vp, to locke vp, to coope or shut vp, to pen vp, to immure. Chiotta, close, squat, husht as a hen ouer hir chickens, lurking, secret. Chioua, a kinde of great waight in Italy. Chiouara, tenters for to drie and stretch clothes vpon. Chiouarda, the spokes of a cart or wheele. Chiouardo, a swelling and vlcering at the cronet of a horses hoofe, proceeding of a hurt in the foote by a naile, or such like accident. Chiouaro, Chiouaruolo, a tenter man or keeper of tenters. Chiouiale, a sleeuelesse garment. Chiouo, any kinde of naile, peg, tacke or spike. Also a disease in the eies. Chiouola, the knee pan of any creature. Chiozza, a sluce to let out waters at, a water gate. Chipassa, the name of a galliard. Chirade, ruptures or chaps in the hands and feete. Chiragra, the goute in the fingers or hands. Chiribizzare, as Ghiribizzare. Chiribizzo, as Ghiribizzo. Chiricoccola, a wagtaile. Chirografo, an obligation or bill of ones hand, a bond for any debt. Chiromante, a palmester, a diuiner by the palme of the hand. Chiromantia, palmestrie. Chironie. Look Vlcere chironie. Chiroteca, a flower called our Ladies gloue. Chiruca, a little beast with eares, skin, taile, and shape like a mouse, hauing vnder his belly a great bag, wherein he carrieth his yoong ones. It doth much hunt after hens and such poultrie: but there be two sortes of them, one bigger than another, and somewhat like a foxe with a great taile. Chirugia, the art of chirurgerie. Chirugico, a chirurgeon. Chitarra, a gitterne, or such instrument. Chistetto, a kinde of deepe measure of drie things vsed in Italie. Chiù, hath been vsed for Più. Chiuca, as Chiruca. Chiudara, a turner or ioyners, or sadlers toole. Chiúdere, Chiudo, Chiusi, Chiuso, to shut, to locke, to close, to make fast, to pen vp, to coope vp, to inclose, to cloister. Chiudenda, Chiuditura, an inclosure, a close, a parke, a ground impaled, any locking or shutting. Also a locke, a pad∣locke or horselocke. Chiunque, Chiunche, whosoeuer. Chiusa, a little hole, a little shop, an vnder∣stall, a water sluce. Chiusarello, a bird so called. Chiuso. Looke Chiudere. Also a close, an inclosure, a parke, &c. Chiusura, Chiuco, as Chiudenda. Chizza, a gill, a gicksie, a minx, a trull, a strumpet. Also old and withered. Chizzuola, a whitepot, a pot pudding. Choe, a Greeke measure of liquid things. Choro, a quire, a companie, a chorus. Also a musicall instrument. Chorista, a querister, or singing boy in a church. Chrich, a creaking noise. Also a clicking, a snapping or lirping of the fingers, as they vse that dance the canaries. Chrisantemo, an herbe so called. Chrísocollo, as Crisocollo. Chrisi, the conflict of nature and sicknes. Chrisolito, a chrisolite stone. Chrisopazzo, a kinde of precious stone. Christalloide, as Cristalloide. Christallina. Looke Tunica. Christeo, a glister. Christianesimo, Christendom, Christia∣nisme. Christianità, Christianitie. Christiano, a Christian, one professing Christ. Christo, our sauiour Christ. Chrónica, a historie or chronicle. Chronichista, a chronicle writer. Chrónico, idem. Ci, an aduerbe of place comming with a verbe. there, in that place, heere, in this place. Also a pronoune primitiue of the datiue, accusatiue, and ablatiue cases, to vs, vs, from vs. Cià, a birde called a yellow hammer or golden hammer, or a yowlring. Ciabatta, an old erworne shoo. Ciabattare lout, to tacke or cobble shooes. Ciabattarie, rascallie foolish things, paul∣trie, not worth an old shoo, trash. Ciabattinesco, rascally, foolishly, cobler like. Ciabattino, Ciabattaro, a cobler, a clouter, a sowter. Ciacco, a hog, a bore or swine. Also a hogs stie, a slouenly hoggish churlish fel∣low, a gormand or glutton. Ciaffare, to catch by the shoulders, to
snatch violently, to arrest suddenly. Ciaffo, a catchpole, a base sergeant. Also the bung hole of any but or pipe of wine. Ciagola, a chough, a cornish chough. Cialdaro, a wafrer or wafer maker. Cialde, bread made with honie, sugar bread. Also wafers or simnels. Also flakes of snowe. Cialdonaro, Cialdaro, a wafer maker. Cialdoni, wafers, long wafers that are rouled vp. Ciallone, a kinde of canopie, sparuis or couering. Cialtrare, to chat, pratile, brabble, babble, prate, tattle. Cialtrone, a babling, pratling, tatling fellow. Ciamarra, a habite or garment worne ouer a gowne as graduats weare in vniuersities. Ciambaglione, a caudle or drinke made for a sicke man. Ciambellaro, a maker of wafers, simnels or buns. Ciambelle, little manchets, rowles, buns or cakes of bread. Also wafers. Ciambelotto, Ciamelotto, chamblet. Ciamberta, a fish called in Latine Zy∣gena. Ciambetta, as Ciamberta. but properly when the horse doth holde vp his fore∣foote on the same side that he is to make his turne. Ciambudelli, a kinde of pudding like our haggas or liuering. Ciamorro, a disease in horses called the mourning of the chine, issuing at the nosthrils. Ciampoline, a kinde of daintie peare in Italy. Cianciafera, a durtie draggletaile, a filthie slut, a dunghill queane. Also dung. Cianciare, to chat, to prattle, to babble, to tattle, to scolde, to playe the mounti∣banke. Cianciatrice, Cianciatore, a babler, a tatler, a chatter, a pratler, a scould, a tittle tattle. Ciancie, Cianciume, chattings, bab∣lings, tatlings, fables, tales, leasings. Ciancione, a babler, a tatler, a pratler, a flattring song. Cianeo, a kinde of bright blewe or azure colour. Cianfrogna, gibrish, pedlars french, ro∣guish language, fustian toong, prittle prattle. Cianfrognare, to speake cianfrogna. Cianfrognone, one that speaketh fusti∣an, pedlers french or gibrish, a pratler. Cianfrone, as Zanfrone. Cianfrusaglia, rascallie people, a huddle, a gallimaufrie, a hotchpoch of absurdi∣ties. Cianfrusagliume, idem. Ciangola, a wooden tray. Also a basen or a washing bowle. Also a pisse-pot or a pan for a close stoole. Ciangolare, as Cinguettare. Ciano, a floure called blew-bottles. Ciantolo, Ciantolino, a little scantling. Ciaperone, a french-hood or bonnet, a lettuce cap. Ciappola, a gold smiths toole. Ciarabattana, as Ciarbattana. Ciaramella, a bagpipe. Also a chatting, a pratling or a babling. Ciaramellare, to play musicke, to fiddle, to be blithe, as Cinguettare. Ciaramiglia, as Ciaramella. Ciaratano, a mountebanke, a pratler, a tatler, a babler, or a foolish prater. Ciarbattana, a trunke to shoote pellets with ones mouth. Also a kinde of mor∣ter, chamber or short bumbard. Ciarla, Ciarleria, a chat, a prattle, a tit∣tle tattle, or scoulding. Ciarlare, as Chiacchiarare, as Cian∣ciare. Ciarlatore, Ciarlatano, as Ciaratano. Ciarliere, as Ciaratano, or Ciancione. Ciarlone, as Ciancione. Ciarma, a charme. Ciarmare, to charme. Ciarmatore, a charmer. Ciarpa, a scarffe. Also any filth, trash, rabble, matter, or stuffe. Also a flurt, a slut, a baggage, a trull, a minxe, a gill, a gickesie, a queane. Ciarpame, trash, rifraffe, baggage things, pelfe, things of no woorth, luggage. Ciarperaccia, a filthie souterly ragged queane, a flurt, a driggled ragle. Ciascuno, echone, euery bodie, euery one. Ciascheduno, Ciastuno, as Ciascuno. Ciato, Ciatho, a measure to sell oile in. Ciauarello, a kid, a cheurell. Ciauariare, to varie, to wauer, to be in∣constant, to raue. Ciauariamento, wauering, inconstancie, mutabilitie, rauing in sicknes. Ciáuattare, to play the cobler to patch old shooes. Ciáula, a bird called a chough. Ciaulélla, a little breakefast or nunchi∣ons. Cibaglie, any foode, victuals or meate. Cibali, the name of an herbe. Cibare, to feede, to sustaine, to finde with foode. Cibário, a larderie or place where meate is kept. Cibatta, as Ciabatta. Cibattone. as Busbacone. Cibecca, an owle, an owlet. Cibega, a kinde of boies play in Italy. Cibo, Cibi, foode, sustenance, or meate. Cibibi, dried raisins of the sun. Cica, as Boccata. Cicada, a Grashopper: also a Cricket. Cicadestra, a kind of noysome waspe. Cicala, as Cicada. Cicalaccia, a common skould or pratler. Cicalare, as Cianciare. Cicalarie, Cicalamento, as Ciancie. Cicalata, a pratling noise, a prating. Cicalatore, Cicalone, as Ciancio∣ne. Cicalatrice, Cicaliera, as Ciancia∣trice. Cicaleccio, Cicalino, a pratling, a bab∣bling, a tittle tattle, a slim-slam tale. Cicatrice, a skarre, a marke or signe of a sore or hurt. Cicatrizzare, to cicatrice or close vp a hurt, to scarifie. Cicardola, a phillip or flurt with the fin∣gers. Ciccantona, an old, cast, forsaken, ouer∣ridden whoore. Ciccune, a slood-goose or a wilde goose. Cice, as Ceci. Cicerbira, a Sowthistle. Some take it for the Hares-Lettuce. Ciceri, Cicerchia, as Ceci. Cicerlandia, a boyes play vsed in Italy. Cicigna, a kind of serpent or snake. Cicindile, the nose or socket of a candle∣sticke. Cicogna, Cigogna, a storke. Cicolina, a little pushe, pimple or whelke. Cicómero, a cucumber or water Melon. Cicoréa, Cicória, Cicorélla, the herbe Cicorie. Cicoriara, a woman that sels herbes or salads. Cicórlia, a chirping of birds, a chatting, a pratling. Cicóttola della testa, the nape of the head. Cicrone, as Cicomero. Cicuta, the herbe Hemlocke, Kex or herbe benet. Cicutaria, mock-cheruil, or the herbe asse∣parslie or kexes. Cidari, a wreath or cap that the Kings and priestes of Persia were woont to weare, a Turkish tuffe or turbant. Cidrióli, Cidriuóli, cidrons, citrons. Ciéco, blinde. Also a blinde man, yblent, hidden, ignorant, inuisible. Also the fourth gut which because it hath diuers
enfoldings and turnings, seemeth to haue no end. Ciefalo, as Céfalo. Ciéffare, Looke Ceffare. Ciéffo, as Céffo. Ciégo, as Ciéco. Ciélabro, as Ceruéllo. Ciélo, heauen, the skie, the firmament or welkin. Also a canopy or testern of a bed. Also the seeling, vpper-face or rooffe of a house. Ciémbalo, as Cémbalo. Ciera, as Céra. Cierio, as Cério. Ciertosino, a Carthusian. Ciése, a brake, bramble or bryer, a firbush, a hedge, a quick-set-hedge. Ciesso, a priuie, a close stoole, a iakes. Ciéualo, as Cefalo. Cifarista, a cipherer, an Arithmetician. Cifello, a piper, a crouder, a whistler. Cifera, Cifra, the arte of ciphering. Ciferare, Cifrare, to cifer. Ciferatore, Cifratore, a cipherer. Cifi, a kinde of sweete perfume dedicated to the gods. Cifolo, Ciffoletto, a whistle. Cifolare, Ciffolare, to whistle. Cifrante, a cipherer. Cigare, as Cigolare. Cigliadigratia, a tree, of whose wood chaines and beades are made of rare vertues to procure loue. Cigliare, to seele, as pigeons or haukes eyes are seeled. Ciglio, Ciglia, the eiebrowes, or eie lids. Ciglione della grotta, the lips or browes of a caue, the side or front of a hill. Ciglioso, Cigliuto, he that hath bushie eyebrowes. Cigna, Cigne, a girt or cingle for a horse. Cignale, a wilde boare. Cignare, to girt a horse, to cingle. Cigno, Cigni, a swanne, swannes. Cignere, cingo, cinsi, cinto, to girt or compasse about. Cignetto, a cignet, or little swanne. Cigolare, to riue, to crack, to splint, to creake or make a noise as the wheele of a cart. Also to blow or whistle. Cigola, a creaking or shrill speaking wo∣man. Cigógna, a Storke. Cilecare, to drop. Also to dash with durt. Cilecca, a flap with a foxe taile, foolerie, iesting, deceite. Cilecchi, iests, toyes, newfangles. Cilestro, azure, blewe, skie-colour, or watched, Also a kinde of lillie so called. Cilicio, a kinde of rugged hairecloth. Cilindro, a kinde of diall or square fi∣gure, a long pearle fashioned like an egge. Also a long plaister made like a couer. Ciloma, as Fagiolata. Cillone, à kinde of colour. Cima, the top, or vpper parte of any thing. Cimara, as Ciamarra. Cimare, to cut off the top, to lop trees, to sheare cloth. Cimatio, Cimasa, things or roomes that be foure-square, the vpper ledge of any waineskot worke. Cimatore, Cimadore, one that shea∣reth cloth, a clothe worker. Cimature, shearings of wollen clothes. Cimba, a fishers boate, a cockboate, a fer∣rie boate. Also an herbe growing on stone walles somewhat like Iuie. Also the name of a bone in ones legs. Cimbale, as Cimba. Cimbalista, one that playes vpon a Cym∣ball or Timbrell. Cimbalo, a Cymball or Timbrell. Cimbanello, as Cimbalo. Cimbello, a whistle. Also a baite for birds or fish. Cimbottolo, a tumbling cast, or trick. Cimedia, a kinde of precious stone. Cimentare, to cement, or fasten toge∣ther. Also to trie, or experience. Cimento, cement. Cimiére, Ciméra, the crest or timber of a helmet. Címici, a kinde of vermin in Italie that breedeth in heads and biteth sore, called punies, or wall-life. Cimíno, the seede or herbe comin. Ciminide, a kinde of hauke or faucon. Cimitara, Cimitarra, a Cimitar, a Tur∣kish sword. Cimitéro, Cimitério, a church-yard, a burying place. Cimolare, to sheare off the top of any thing, to sheare clothes. Cimolia, a kinde of medicinable earth. Címolo, a stalke, a stem, a sprig, a bud, a sprout, or little top of any thing. Cimossa, the seluage or list of any cloth. Cinábro, Cinapro, a colour that pain∣ters vse called cinabre, or vermilion. Also that which Apothecaries call san∣guis draconis. Also a soft red stone found in minerals. Cinadella, a fish like a pearch. Cinalopia, a bird, which to saue her yong ones if she see fowlers, will shew her selfe to be taken. Cinamomo, the spice Cinnamom. Cinchio, a guirt. Also a round iron that keepeth in any thing. Cineigliare, to tipple square, to quaffe or to bib. Also to pratile, babble, prate, or scolde. Cinciglione, a tipler, a quaffer, a tatler in drinking, an ale-knight, a prater, a scolde. Cincinnare, to curle, or thrum any haire. Cincinno, Cincino, a tuffe or lock of haire. Also a curled or frizled head. Cincischiare, to minse it or bride it in eating or speaking. Also to spoile or cut in small peeces. Cinédo, Cinédulo, a bardarsh a bug∣gring boy, a wanton boy, an ingle. Cinedulare, to bugger, to bardarsh, to ingle. Cinerigno, ashe colour, friers gray. Cineritio, Cinericcio, idem. Cinerugia, something about keeping of silke-wormes. Cinforniata, as Fagiolata. Cingallegra, a kinde of little singing bird. Cingani, Cingari, the roging Giptins that go filching about the countries. Cíngere, cingo, cinsi, cinto, to guirt or compasse about. Cinghia, a guirt or surcingle. Cinghiale, Cinghiaro, a wilde boare. Cinghiare, to girt or cingle a horse. Cinghio, a trench, or girting about. Cingiale, a wilde boare. Cingiare, as Cinghiare. Cingolo, a girdle or a garter, an en∣girdling. Cingottare, as Cincigliare. Cinguetta lingua, a pratling tongue. Cinguettare, as Cincigliare. Cinice, imbers or cinders. Cinico, Cinisk, doggish, currish. Cinizza, a sparckle. Cinocefalo, a kinde of monkie or ape hauing a face like a dog, that pisseth euery houre iust, it doth much obserue the moone, and reioiceth at it. Cinodie, a kinde of fish, out of which is taken a stone called Cinodio, that hath the propertie to be cleere and bright be∣fore calme and faire weather at sea, but if any storme be at hand it wil looke duskie and cloudie. Cinoglossa, the herbe hounds-tongue, or horsepisse. Some take it for a kinde of buglosse. Cinomia, a horseflye, or a dog flye. Cinosura, a figure of starres in heauen. Cinquanta, fiftie. Cinquantesimo, the fiftieth in number. Cinque, fiue, a cinque. Cinque cento, fiue hundreth.
Cinquefoglio, cinkefoile, fiue-leaued grosse, or fiuefinger grasse. Cinquine, numbers of fiues. Cinta, guirt, girded or compassed about. Also a belt, a wast-band, or girdle. Cintimularo, a miller. Cinto, guirt, girded, or compassed about, a girdle, a girdle stead, a waste. Cintola, a girdle, a belt, or wast-band. Also a garter. Cintolare, to gird about, to garter. Cintolini, garters, or little girdles. Cintura, a girdle, a belt, a wast-band. Cinturaio, Cinturaro, a girdler. Ciò, that, that same, that which. Ciocca, a tuft, a locke, a tassell or bush of haire. Also a hadfull of flaxe or hempe or wooll, a bunche, a cluster. Ciocco, a stocke, a stump, a log, a blocke, a truncke of wood. Also hoarse in spea∣king. Cióche, that which, whatsoeuer. Cio è, that is, that is to say, to wit. Cioffo, a horse collar, a halter. Cioncare, to maime, to curtallanie lim. Also to tipple, to bouze, to swill, to quaffe. Cioncia, a womans priuie parts. Cioncio, Cionco, the taile, bum or fit∣ting place. Cionco, curtalled, wanting a lim, mai∣med, halting or lame. Also drunke, or tippled. Cioncola, a filthy, iadish, scabbed queane. Cioncolare, as Cioncare. Ciondolare, to droppe or thaw, to hang downe dangling as ice-sickles. Ciondoli, ice-sickles, danglings, labels. Ciondoloni, dingle-dangle, hanging downe, as ice-sickles. Cione, a peg or pin, to play at nine pinnes withall. Also a bird called a fieldfare. Cioppa, a sheapheards cap, a scottish cap, a knit cap, a frocke, a safegard. Also a dripping pan. Ciorro, a horse coller or halter. Ciotto, maymed, halting, lame. Ciottola. Some take it to be a dish that beggers vse to beg drinke in or a broken dish. Also a pibble stone or flint stone. Some think it to be a potshard. Ciottoso, lame, crooke-backt. Also cockled or puckred, as sometimes clothes will be. Ciparisso, a Cipresse tree. Also a proper name. Cipellina, as Capelluta. Cipero, the herbe Galingale or Galan∣gale. Cipólla, an Oinion or chiboll. Cipollaro, one that sels Oinions or a plat of Oinions. Cipollata, a flim-flam tale, a tittle tattle, a skoulding, a rayling. Also a kinde of meate or tansie full of oinions. Cipolle maligi, a kinde of chibols or sca∣lions or oinions that are eaten greene in salads in the spring time. Cipollette, little yoong oinions or ciues. Cipone, a beast like a panther. Also a kind of bird. Ciporro, as Granchi porro. Cippero, a thrush or fieldfare. Cipresso, a Cipresse tree or Cipresse wood. Cipressro, a thicket or groue planted with Cipresse trees. Ciprio, a foote of a verse of fiue syllables. Circa, about, touching, concerning. Circea, a kinde of hearbe. Circhi, windings, turnings or circles. Circhiello, that which is called a feather in a horse. Circinare, to teare or rent or desheuell the haire, to tug by the haire. Circio, a whirle-winde, a vehement sou∣thern-winde. Circoire, circoisco, circoito, to goe or trauerse about. Circoitione, a going or trauersing about, a circling. Circoito, a circuit. Also gon or trauersed about. Circolare, to encircle or enuiron. Also to go talking from one matter to another. Also circular, round or sphericall. Circolatione, a circulation or encircling. Circolatore, a visitor or goer from place to place. Circolatorio, a kinde of serpentine or winding Limbeck. Circolo, a circle or cōpasse, a hoop, around. Also a knot or crue of good fellowes. Circolopolare, that circle which is de∣scribed by the pole of the zodiacke, being caried about the pole of the world. Circonnauigare, to saile or go about by sea. Circoncidere, cido, cisi, ciso, to cir∣cumcise, to cut about. Circoncisione, circumcision or cutting about. Circondare, to compasse about, to enui∣ron about, to circumpasse. Circondurre, to leade or guide about. Circonduttione, a leading or guiding about. Circone, a kinde of hauke or faulcon, as Cercone. Circonferenza, a circumference or com∣passe about. Circonflesso, bowing or bending about, or round. Circonflessione, a bowing or bending about. Circonfuso, wet round about. Circonfulgere, to shine about. Circonlocutione, a circumlocution. Circoncursare, to gad about idly. Circonscriuere, scriuo, scrissi, scritto, to define, to write about, to circum∣scribe, to appoint, to institute, to circum∣uent, to deceiue. Circonscrittione, a circumscription, a circumuenting. Circonuenire, vengo, venni, venuto, to circumuent or come about. Circonuicinare, to border or neighbour neere about. Circonuicino, neere neighbouring. Circonstantia, a circumstance. Circonstanti, by-standers, standers a∣bout. Circonstare, to stande by, to stand about. Circopiteco, a munkey or marmuset. Circospetto, circumspect, warie, subtill. Circospettione, circumspection, wari∣nesse. Circostanti, by-standers, standers about. Circostanza, a circumstance. Circostare, to stand by or about. Circuire, as Circoire. Circuitione, as Circoitione. Circuito, as Circoito. Circulare, as Circolare. Circulo, as Circolo. Circustanzia, a circumstance. Ciregia, a cherrie. Ciregiaro, one that sels cherries, or an orchard of cherries. Cirégio, a cherrie tree. Cirélla, a pullie, such as ropes go through in ships. Ciribrustolon, as Verbesco. Cirnicchio, a sieue to sift corne. Ciro, a hogge, a swine, a filthie fellowe. as Ciacco. Ciróico, a chirurgion. Cirossa, ceruse or white leade that women vse for painting. Cirro, a bush of haire or a locke. Cirsio, the herbe Langue-de-beuf or great buglosse. Cirugia, the art of chirurgerie, surgerie. Cirugico, a chirurgion, or surgeon. Cirussa, as Cirossa. Cisca, a paile or a bucket. Ciscilla, a kinde of swallow or marten. Ciscranna, a footestoole, a lowe stoole. Cisellare, to pounce with a chizell. Cisello, a chizel or caruing toole, a pounce Ciserchia, as Ceci. Cisone, a bird so called. Cispa, withered, faded. Also a kind of
game at cardes. Also waterish matter in sore eies. Cispare, to fade, to wither. Cispo, withered, wrinkled, shrunke vp with drynesse. Cissa, the longing or lust of a woman with childe. But properly a corrupt ap∣petite or desire to eate earth, coles, can∣dles or such things. Cissare, to long, to desire, to lust as a wo∣man with childe after strange meates. Cista, a basket, a pannier, a flasket. Cistarella, a little basket. Cistellaro, a basket maker. Cisterna, a cesterne for water. Cisto, a kinde of bramble growing on rocks. Cistone, a great basket, or a binne for bread. Cita, a wench, a lasse, a yoong girle. Also a signe or word to command silence, Citáde, Città, a citie or walled towne. Citadella, Cittadella, a citadell, castell, or spacious fort built not onely to de∣fend the citie, but also to keepe the same in awe and subiection. Citara, a gitterne, a citterne, a crowd. Citaredo, a fidler, a musition. Citare, to cite, to call, to sommon, to con∣uent. Citaro, a fish whose teeth are like a sawe, called a sharke. Citatione, a citation, a sommoning, a conuenting. Citatórie, citations, processes, endite∣ments. Citélla, a yong wench, a little lasse, a pret∣tie girle. Citello, as Cittino. Citeriore, nigher or neare to vs. Citharista, Citharello, one that plaies on such instruments. Cithera, Citera, a citterne, a gitterne, a croude, a kit. Citiscare, as Citire. Citi, as Frinfri. Citire, Citisco, Citito, to mooue the lips or toong for to whisper, to hush or be still. Cito, a yong boy or lad. Citri, toyes, baggage things, trifles, fansies, humours, conceits, fooleries. Citrinella, a kinde of goldfinch with yel∣low feathers. Citrino, a pale yellow limon colour. Also a citron. Also a kinde of mirabolane plum. Citriolo, Citriuolo, a citron. Citronata, a kinde of sauce made of ci∣trons, a tart made of citrons. Citrone, a citron, a pome-citron. Città, Cittade, a citie or cities, a walled towne. Cittadella, as Citadella. Cittadinanza, the comminaltie of a citie. Also a franchise or libertie of a citizen. Cittadinare, to denison or make free of a citie, to dwell in a citie. Cittadinesco, citizen-like. Cittadino, a citizen, a denison. Città di Dite, limbo or hell. Cittino, a yong boy, a lad. Citto, a word to bid children holde their peace, as we say whusht, husht. Cittolo, a kinde of fish. Cittona, a big wench. Citusella, the herbe sorrell. Ciuadera, the name of a saile in a ship. Ciuaie, all sortes of herbes in the market, herbage. Ciuanza, profit, gettings, gaine, aduan∣tage, ouerplus, a forecast. Ciuanzamenti, profits, gettings, vailes or gaines. Ciuanzare, to profit, to get, to gaine, to preuent or forecast. Ciuffa, a braule, a contention, a strife, a brabble. Ciuffare, to braule, to contend, to striue, to snatch, to tug. Also to take by the snout, to lug by the face. Ciuffetto, a tuft or locke of haire. Also a little snoute, a forehead or front. Ciuffo, a kinde of staffe big at one end, wherewith porters holde vp their bur∣dens when they rest. Also a snoute or muzzle of a beast. Also a locke of haire before. Ciuffolare, to whistle. Ciuffole, Ciufole, toyes, trifles, fooleries, nifles, vanities, foolish tricks. Ciuffolo, a whistle. Ciuetta, an owle. Looke Occhio di ci∣uetta. Ciuettare, to prie or looke narrowly about, to sneake vp and downe. Ciuettini, effeminate, wanton, bawdie lads. Also yong owlets. Ciuico, of a citie, ciuill. Looke Corona. Ciuile, ciuill, modest, gentle, courteous, temperate, meeke, kinde. Ciuilità, Ciuiltà, ciuilitie, curtesie, mo∣destie. Ciuilire, isco, ito, to growe ciuill, to tame, to make courteous. Ciuillari, a common iakes in Florence, or place where all filth and dung is cast out. Ciuire, isco, ito, to barter, to change, to trucke. Ciuogne, a kinde of deuice to drawe wa∣ter out of a deepe well, as it were with two buckets. Ciurlo, a twirle or round tricke in dan∣cing. Ciurma, the common rascalitie of gallie slaues, a base route. The mariners call it in English ghing. Ciurmaglia, as Ciurma. Ciurmare, to play the common base fel∣low: to perswade or allure with craft or deceit: to charme: to ineagle, to prate, cog and foist, to brag with intent to cosen one. Ciurmarie, cosening or cheating houses. Also cosening or cheating tricks, trifling baggages, trash, luggage. Ciurmatore, a bragger, a pratler, a coni∣catcher, a rogue, a scoundrell, a swag∣grer, a swabber. Ciutaccia, a flurt, a trull, a harlot. Ciziceno, a Greeke coine of golde. Cizza, a dug, a teate, a pap, a womans breast. Cizzarca, a kind of peason. Cizzare, to sucke a teate or dug. Cizzuta, hauing great teates or dugs. Clamore, a clamor, an outery, a noyse, a shout, a roaring. Clamoso, Clamoroso, clamorous, excla∣ming. Clandestino, secret, hidden, close, by stealth. Clango, a kinde of kite or buzzard. Clangore, a clangor or sounde of a trumpet. Also the crie of an eagle or goose. Clanugine, as Lanugine. Clarea, the herbe Clarie. Claretto, a claret colour. Claua, a club. Claudo, lame, halting, reeping, feeble. Clauicembalo, a kind of instrument like our rigols or virginals. Clauicola, a little key, a little club. Also the necke bone or crawe bone. Also ground Iuie. Clauicordo, as Clauicembalo. Classe, a degree or forme in a schoole, a companie. Also a nauie or fleete at sea. Claustrale, cloister like. Also a cloister man, pertaining to a cloister. Claustro, a cloister. Clausula, a clause or conclusion: an end, a sentence which doth conclude. Clausura, a clause. Also a close, an enclo∣sure or a parke. Clematite, Saracens herbe. Clemente, clement, pittifull, mercifull, benigne, gentle, meeke. Clementino, a gentle, kinde, louing bo∣die. Clementia, clemencie, pittie, mercy, gen∣tlenes,
meekenes, benignitie. Clepsiambo, a kinde of musicall instru∣ment. Clepsidra, a water dyall, a vessell measu∣ring howers by the running of water or sand out of it. Also an astronomicall instrument to measure the stars. Also a water pot to water a garden. Clericale, clarke-like, of a clarke or per∣taining to a clarke, religious. Clérico, a clarke or clergie man. Cléro, the clergie or spiritualtie. Cleromantia, a soothsaying or diuinati∣on by lots. Clibano, an armour for a horse which armeth the necke and crupper. Cliente, a client, or a sutor. Clientéla, a protection, a maintenance, or a countenancing, or bearing out. Cliéntulo, a client, or a sutor. Clima, a climate, the diuiding of heauen and earth, a clime. Climaterico, the dangerous and perilous yeer of ones life: cōmonly the yeere 63. Climeno, water Betonie: according to some Tutsain or Parke-leaues. Climo, a kinde of measure vsed of yore in Greece. Clindri, a kinde of toole about a plough. Clinica medicina, the Arte of Physicke healing by diet or medicines. Clinico, a physicion that healeth by diet or medicines. Clinopalia, ouermuch letcherie or occu∣pying. Clinopodio, the herbe Puliall-moun∣taine, or Horse-time. Clipeo, a kinde of shielde or target that footemen were woont to weare. Clisi, declination or bending. Clitia, a flower into which Clitia was transformed. Cliuo, a little hill, a hillocke. Also steepe, difficult, hard, a going downe or pitch of a mountaine. Also a bending downe of any thing. Cliuoso, steepie, bending downe, hanging, full of hils, cliffes, crags, or hardnes. Cloaca, the chanell, sinke, or gutter of a towne whereby all filth doth passe: a common shore. Clocitante, gaggling or prating idly. Clocitare, to gaggle as a goose or a duck. Clora, a small nut, a filberd. Clupea, a fish that pursues the tunie to death, biting him in a vain in the iawe. Some take it for a Blaie or a Bleake. Co vsed for Congli, with, or with the. Cò, vsed for Capo. Cóa, a Greeke measure of liquid things. Coáca, as Cloaca. Coadunare, to gather, to assemble. Coadunanza, an assemblie, a gathering. Coagulare, to congeale, to curde, to ioine togither. Coagulo, a kinde of salt in alchimie, a curding, a congealing. Coaiutore, a evadiutor, a fellow helper. Coaliotto, a kinde of water snake. Coassare, as Coazzare. Coazzare, to crie or croke as a frog. Also to scould or raile: to blurt with ones toong. Cobacello, a noddie, a cods head, a gull, a patch, a foole, a cockscombe. Coca or Cocahe, an herbe in India, the leafe whereof being carried in ones mouth doth quench hunger and thirst. Cocatrice, a Coccatrice. Cocagna, as we say Lubberland. Cocalli, a kinde of water fowle. Cocca, Cucca, the nut or nocke of a crossebowe, or of an arrow, a dent, a chinke, a nocke. Also a cockebote or a little skiffe: the ni of a pen. Coccale, a gull, a ninnie, a sot, such a one as will beleeue the moone is made of greene cheese. Coccare, to fasten vpon one. Also to cut off, or to shoote off, to giue a snap. Coccaro, a quiuer for arrowes. Coccea, a kinde of shell fish like a cockle. Cocche, the berries as of bayes, iuniper, or iuie. Also cockbotes or little skifs. Cocchiara, a ladle. Also a long spoone. Cocchiaro, a spoone or a ladle. Cocchiére, a coche man. Cocchiglie, all manner of cockleshels. Cocchio, a coche, chariot, a caroze. Cocchiume, a bung or stopple of a vessel. Also a bung hole. Coccij or Coccy, a kinde of fish that crieth as a cuckow. Also broken peeces of potshardes. Coccia, the shell of a tortoise or snaile. Coccinéo, died in graine, scarlet or crimson, of a scarlet colour. Coccino, a scarlet robe or vesture. Cocco, graine to die scarlet withall. Also the blew flower among corn called coc∣kle. Also cockring, sport, dandling, de∣light or glee. Also scarlet, or scarlet die. Coccole, berries or graines, as of laurell or iuniper trees, or oke-apples, and such like gals or fruits growing vpon some leaues. Also bables, toyes or iests. Coccolone, cowring, sitting or squatting downe. Coccone, a bung of a barrell. Coccoueggia, as Cuccoueggia. Coccoui, a kinde of serpent in India. Cocenti, boiling, scalding, burning, smar∣ting, hot. Cócere, Cuóco, Cocqui or Cocéi, Cotto, to boile, seethe, roste or bake. Also to smart, ake, itch or burne, to be sore, greeuous, painfull or aking. Cocige, the name of a bone in ones legs. Cocina, a kitchin. Also a scullerie. Cocinare, to dresse meate or play the cooke. Cocinatore, a cooke or dresser of meate. Cociniglia, a kinde of rich flie or graine comming out of India to dye scarlet with, called Cutchenele. Coccióre, a smarting, itching or bur∣ning. Cocituro, a boiling or dressing of meate. Also a smarting, a burning. Coclée, a round warlike engin of war. Coclério, a small Greeke measure. Cocodrillo, a crocodile. Cocolla, a munks coule or hood. Also a nuns vpper garment or attire. Also a silke-worme cod. Cocole, as Cocche. Cocoma, such brazen vessels as butlers vse to put in pots by the cupboord. Cocómero, a cucumber. Also a citron. Cocone, as Caccone. Cocos, a prètious and rich kind of tree in India, of the nature of the palme. Cocozza, a wilde gourd or Pompilion. Cocume, the top or height of any thing. Cocumero, as Cocomero. Cocuzza, as Cocozza. Coda, a taile, a traine, a traile. Also taken for a mans priuie member. Codacinciuola, a wagtaile. Codacciuola, idem. Codacciuto, well tailed, hauing a taile. Also a man well tooled. Coda da mosca, a stick with a horse tail in it or a foxe taile to beat away flies. Coda di cauallo, the herbe Shauegrasse or horsetaile, a horse taile. Coda di leone, as Orobanche. Coda di pesce, an herbe. Codale, a docke for a horses taile. Codare, to set a taile on, to put on a taile. Codardia, cowardise, dastardlines. Codardo, a coward, a dastard. Codatremola, a wagtaile. Codazzo, a great traine of seruants fol∣lowing or of idle retainers. Codega, the taile or rump of a loyne of mutton or such like. Coderinzo, the taile where the sting is. Coderizzo, as Coderinzo. Codica, a mans skin. Codicillo, a codicill, a booke, a libell. It is a word vsed by lawyers. Codile, a birdes rump or where the taile is
fixed. Codillo, the nape or pole of the head. Codilungo, Codirosso, a kind of singing bird. Codirone, the rump of a taile, the stump of a tree. Codognata, marmalade of quinces. Códolo, a small round pibble stone. Codotaria, one that beares vp a princes traine. Codurza, the rump or skue of a bird. Coetáneo, one of the selfe same age, of the same time, equall in yeares. Cofaccia, a cake, a whitepot, a cheese∣cake. Cófano, Coffino, a cofin, a runke, a cof∣fer. Coforona, a tortoise, or a shell-crab. Cofrate, a brother with one, a fellow frier. Cofrateria, a brotherhood. Cogitabondo, musing, or in a browne studie. Cogitare, to muse, to thinke, to imagine, to minde. Cogitatione, musing, thinking, cogita∣tion. Cogiuvanella, a Wagtaile. Coglia, a mans ballocks. Cogliandro, Coriander seedes. Coglicumero, an idle, lazie, slothfull fellow. Cógliere, Colgo, Colsi, Colto, to col∣lect, to assemble. Also to hit, to take napping. Coglionare, to cosin, to cog, to foist, to deceiue. Coglionarie, foolish toies, deceitfull things, knaueries. Coglione, a noddie, a foole, a patch, a dolt, a meacock. Coglioni, the stones or testicles of men. Coglitore, a gatherer, a collector. Cogliúto, one that hath a good prick. Cognare, to cleaue wood, or to coine. Cognata, a sister in lawe. Cognato, a brother in lawe. Also clea∣ued or coyned. Cognatore, a cleauer of wood. Also a coyner. Cognitione, an acknowledgement, a re∣cognison. Cógnito, knowen, acknowledged. Cogno, a wedge to cleaue wood. Cognome, a surname, a nickname. Cognomento, idem. Cognóscere, as Conóscere. Cognoscenza, as Conosenza. Cogola, a pan, or caudron, or kettle. Coheréde, a coheire, a ioint-heire. Coheredità, a coinheritance. Cohereditare, to inherit together, or with one. Coherénza, coherence, affinitie, sticking or cleauing to. Cohorte, a band or troupe of men, where∣of a Roman legion contained ten. Coi, with the, with, together. Coincidente, coincident, incident with or vnto. Coinfiammato, enflamed with or to∣gether. Coio, Coiro, Cuoio, leather, or fell. Coiraro, Coiaio, a tanner, a fellmon∣ger, a currier, a cord wainer. Coito, carnall copulation. Col, with, with the. Cóla, glue. Colà, there, thither, yonder, in that place. Colabacco, a fish, of whose skin water glue is made. Coladura, a colander. Also as Cola∣tura. Colafo, a buffet, a whirret or blow giuen with ones hand. Colanza, Corcalle, a kinde of bird. Colare, to glue together. Also to straine or sift through a colander. Also to drop, or to trill. Also to honor or embrace, to hug, to coll. Also a band, collar, or car∣canet. Also to leake as a ship doth. Also a kinde of sparrow. Also a cape for a cloke or any collar. Colarino, a little band or coller. Also a gorget piece. Colaterale, colaterall, of the side. Colationare, to collation, copie, or draw from the originall. Colatione, a breakefast, drinking, nun∣tion, or beuer. Also a collation, a ioyning together, a coping, a conferring or com∣paring. Also a taske, a sise, or collection. Colatoio, a colander or strainer. Also a sinke, or a gutter. Also a leake in a ship. Colatura, a gluing, or straining, a drop∣ping, a running, a leake in a ship or o∣ther, a trilling. Colcare, to lye downe, to rest. Colcata, a lying downe, a downe lying. Also layd downe. Colcetra, a fetherbed. Colcitra, a little couch or bed, a pallet. Coleganza, Colegamento, as Colle∣gamento. Colegare, as Collegare. Colei, she, that woman. Colendo, honorable, to be respected. Cólerá, choler, anger, wrath, indignati∣on, or flowing of the gall. Colérico, cholerick, angrie, wrathfull. Colére, Colo, Colei, Coluto, to ho∣nor, to embrace, to respect, to coll, to hug. Colfo, a kinde of drug that burneth. Also taken for brimstone. Colfonia, as Colfo. Cóli, Coleworts. Coli, there, yonder, in that place. Coliambi, verses made of the foote of meetre, called Iamb. Cólica, the winde-colick, the colike pas∣sion. Colicello, a hillock, a little hill. Colo, as Collirio. Coléo, a spire steeple. Also a mans bum. Colla, a strappado. Also a cord where∣with they giue the strappado. Also glue. Also with her, with the, a kinde of rack or torture to make one confesse. Collagrimare, to weepe together. Collana, a chaine about ones neck. Collanella, a little chaine. Collare, to embrace about the neck, to behead, to giue the strappado, to glue together, to torture, to torment. Also, a collar, a band about ones neck, a gor∣get, a neckercher, a carcanet. Collarino, a gorget of plate, a little band. Also a little collar. Collaterale, collaterall. Collatione, as Colatione. Collatore, he that conferreth or layeth his portion with other. Collaudare, to praise with or toge∣ther. Colle, a hill, or a hillock. Also with the. Colleganza, Collegamento, a combi∣ning, a league, confederation, ligament, affinitie, alliance, coherence, a knitting or vnitie together. Collegare, to colleague, to binde, to com∣bine, to confederate or knit together. Collegati, confederats. Collegiale, of one colledge, or a collegiall man, of one companie, or corporation. Collegio, a colledge, a companie, a bro∣therhood, a fellowship, a fraternitie, or corporation. Colleppolarsi d' allegrezza, to shuckle, to chuck or rouze ones selfe to gladnes and mirth. Collera, Collerico. Looke Colera. Collerina, the deaw-lap of a bull or cowe. Collétta, a collection, a gathering. Collettione, a collection or gathering. Colletto, a leather ierkin. Also collected. Collettore, a collector or gatherer. Colli, coi, co', coni, congli, with the, with them.
Colli, hilles, hillocks. Collibetti, quodlibets, euerie one, any bodie, it is no matter who, who so list. Collico dolore, the collick passion. Colliganza, as Colleganza. Colligere, as Cogliere. Collina, a little hill or hillock. Collirio, a medicine for eyes, or for horses and oxen to slake their bellies, or a kind of earth in Samia. Collisione, a breaking, brusing, knocking, or dashing together. Collo, a neck. Also with the. Collocare, to place or settle in a place: to bestowe, to stowe. Collo d'oca, a kinde of bit for a horse made like the necke of a goose. Colloquio, as Coloquio. Collotorto, as Capotorto. Collottola, the nape of the necke. Collubra, a serpent so called, a snake. Collumellari denti, the sharpe teeth or eie teeth. Collurione, a birde called a Fieldfare or Iuniper. Collusione, collusion, fraude, deceit. Colmare, to heape or fill vp. Colmestra, a kinde of hauke or falkon. Colmezza, the top, fulnes or height of any thing. Colmo, the top or height of any thing. Al∣so heaped or filled vp. Also a heape. Colocasia, the Egyptian beane. Also the herbe Calues foote or Cuckow-pintle. Colofoni, a kinde of foote in metre or verse. Colomba, Colombo, a doue or pigeon, or a culuer. Also a fishe called a lumpe. Colombara, Colombaio, a doue house, a pigeon house, a culuer house. Colombino, doue colour: colombine co∣lour. Also a yoong doue. Also a kinde of blew marble. Colommo, a kinde of figge that is soone ripe. Colonna, a columne, a pillar. Also a kinde of pipe like a recorder. Colonnare, like a piller, to vnderset or adorne with pillers. Colone, a colon or point in writing, the member of a sentence. Also the fifth gut or great gut rising from the left side to the right, in which is the disease called the colicke. Colonella, a little piller. Colonello, a coronell of a regiment. Colonellato, a coronell-ship, the office of a coronell. Colonia, a colony of people as the Ro∣mans were woont to send into any place to dwell. Coloquintida, a kinde of wilde gourds purging fleame. Coloquio, a talke, a conference or com∣munication. Cólora, as Colera. Colorare, Colorire, to die or to colour. Colore, a colour, a hue. Coloritore, a painter, a dier, a limmer. Colóro, those, them-same, those-same men. Coloróso, full of colour, high coloured. Colosso, a colossus, a great high and huge statue, bigger then any man. Colostra, the first milke that commeth in the teates after a birth in woman or beast, called beestings. Colostratione, a disease in yoong chil∣dren by sucking ill or curded milke. Colpa, a fault or blame, a want, an error, a defect. Colpare, to accuse, to blame, to make faul∣tie. Also to commit a fault. Colpeggiare, as Colpire. Colpesce, as Colabacco. Colpeuole, faultie, cul pable, guiltie. Colpire, colpisco, colpito, to strike, to hit, to touch, to smite. Colpiscere, as Colpire. Colpo, a blow, a stroke, a hit, a venie. Al∣so one time, one cast. Also a tricke, a iest, a caste, a pranke, a throwe. Also a draught at chesse. Colta, any rent, tythes, or paiment that is gathered by collection: a haruest. Coltare, to grub or harrow lande. Coltellaccio, a curtelax, or chopping knife. Coltellata, a blowe with a knife, or anie cutting weapon. Coltelli, kniues. Also the second feathers of a hauke. Coltellinaio, a pen knife maker. Coltellino, a little knife or a pen knife. Coltello, a knife, a whittle. Cotellone, as Coltellaccio. Coltiuabile, as Cultiuabile. Coltiluoghi, grounds that are tilled, ea∣red or manured. Coltiuare, as Cultiuare. Coltiuatore, a husband-man, a plowgh∣man. Cólto, of Cogliere, taken, hit, collected, gathered. Also for Culto, worship or honor. Also a garden or any ground that is tilled about a mans house. Also honored, embraced, respected. Also la∣boured, manured, tilled. Also trimme, choice, or fine. Coltre, Coltrice, a quilt for a bed. A counter-point. Coltro, a ploughs share or culter. Coltura, tillage, manuring, husbandrie. Colubrina, a culuerine. Colubro, a kinde of venemous snake or scorpion. Colui, he, that man, the same man. Coluore, a hasell nut, a filbert tree. Coluri, great circles imagined in heauen, meeting in the poles of the worlde; of which there are two principall. Coluurina, a culuerine. Coma, a mans or womans haire of the head. Also a horses maine. Also a point in oration or writing called a Coma. Comalange, a fruit like a muske Melon. Comandare, to will and commaund, to impose, to inioine, to bid. Comandamento, a commandement, a command, a behest, a bidding. Comandella, as Commandella. Comante, bushie or full of haire. Comarca, a shire, a countie or diuision of a countrey. Comare, Comadre, a woman gossip. Al∣so to combe, to dresse or polish ones head or haires. Combaciare, to kisse, to clip, to colle or embrace togither. Combáttere, batto, battei, battuto, to fight, to combat. Combattitore, Combattente, a figh∣ter, a combater, a combatant, a fighting man. Combattimento, a fight, a combat. Combiatare, as Comiatare. Combiato, as Comiato. Combilia, a composition or argument fra∣med to ones selfe in his minde, with pur∣pose to discourse vpon it. Combinare, to combine or ioine togither. Also to spell in reading. Combinatione, a combining or ioyning togither. Also a spelling of letters. Combricca, a confused crew or rout of od strange fellowes mette togither. Combricche, foolish, ignorant assem∣blies, base haunts. Also as Combilia. Combúrere, buro, bursi, busto, as Combustiare. Combustiare, to burne, to blaste, to parche. Combusteuole, Combustioso, that will burne or may be burned. Combusto, burnt, combusted, parched. Come, when, how? so soone as, euen as, since that, as much as, in what sort? whilest, then, so long as, like as, in such sort, when as, as. Also as chiome. Come che, howbeit, although, though, al∣beit, howsoeuer. Come domine? how a gods name? Come Iddio vel dica, a phrase, as wee
would say: God himselfe tell you, I can∣not. Come se, as if. Come si sia, Come si voglia, howsoeuer it be, howsoeuer, in what maner you wil. Comédia, a comedie, a merry play, an en∣terlude. Comediante, a comediant, a stage-plaer. Comediare, to play an enterlude. Coména, a cable of a ship. Comenda, a cōmendum, a custodie of any ecclesiasticall liuing put to ones trust. Comendabile, Comendeuole, com∣mendable, praise-worthie. Comendare, to commend or praise. Comendatione, commendation, praise. Comendatoria lettera, a letter of com∣mendations. Comendatitie lettere, idem. Comendatore, one that hath commen∣does put to his charge. Comendeuole, Comendabile, com∣mendable, praise-woorthie. Comensale, a fellow boorder, a fellowe commoner, a fellow tabler. Comentare, to comment or expound. Comentatore, a cōmenter or expounder. Comento, a comment or exposition. Comercio, trafficke, intercourse, com∣merce. Cométa, a comet, a blazing star. Comiatare, to licence or giue leaue, to dis∣misse, to discharge. Comiato, leaue, congy, licence, or a passe∣port to depart. Comico, comicall, pertaining to comedies. Also a writer of comedies. Comignolo di tetti, a gutter or pipe to conuey water from the top of an house. Comiliton, fellowes in armes, fellowe∣mates in armes, fellow soldiers, compa∣nions in seruice of war. Cominatione, a commination, a threat∣ning, a menacing. Cominciare, to begin to commence. Cominciaménto, a beginning, a com∣mencement. Cominciante, a beginner or a com∣mencer. Comino, cumin seede. Comisto, Commisto, mixt or mingled togither. Comitij, an assemblie of people, or place where the assemblie is. Also a parlia∣ment house. Comitiua, a traine or following of men. Cómito, the masters mate of a ship. Comissure, as Commessure. Commandare, as Comandare. Commandella, a kinde of play vsed among boyes in Italie. Commando, as Comando. Commare, a woman gossop. Commemorare, to remember, to comme∣morate, to mention. Commemoratione, a remembrance, a commemoration. Commendare, Commendabile. Looke Comendare. Commensale, as Comensale. Commentare, as Comentare. Commentatore, as Comentatore. Commento, as Comento. Commessa, a bet, a lay, a wager. Commessario, a commissarie. Commessione, a commission. Commesso, a committy or an arbitrator, an vmpier. Also a kinde of semsters worke or a lowe stitch. Also wrought or put togither. Commesurare, to measure togither. Commessura, Commettiture, as Com∣missura. Comméttere, metto, misi, messo, to commit, to inioine, to impose. Also to lay a wager, to bette. Also to ioyne, put, or set close togither. Commiatare, as Comiatare. Commiato, as Comiato. Comminatione, as Cominatione. Comminella, a little cable, a little rope. Commiserare, to pitie, to haue compas∣sion of. Commiseratione, commiseration, pitty, ruthe. Commisereuole, pitifull, rufull. Commissiua lettera, a letter importing any commission or iniunction. Commissúra, a chinke a creuisse, a cleft in a wall, or ioynts. Also a commixture. Commistione, commixture or medlie. Commodare, Comodare, as Accom∣modare. Commodità, Comodità, commoditie, ease, leasure, opportunitie, fitnes, means, occasion. Cómmodo, Cómodo, commodious, fit, proper, at ease, at leasure, profitable: al∣so ease, leasure, profit or commoditie. Commonicare, as Comunicare. Commósso, mooued, stirred, commoued, out of order, out of frame, or out of ioint. Commotione, Commoto, a commoti∣on, a stirre, a moouing. Commóuere, móuo, mossi, mósso, to mooue or stirre togither. Commune, as Comune. Communale, as Comunale. Communicabile, as Comunicabile. Communicare, as Comunicare. Communicanti, as Comunicanti. Communione, as Comunione. Communità, as Comunità. Commutabile, as Comutabile. Commutare, as Comutare. Commutatione, as Comutatione. Comodezza, as Commodità. Comolanga, a fruit like a muske melon. Compagna, a she fellow. Compage, the conioining or knitting to∣gither. Compagnare, to accompanie, to asso∣ciate. Compagneuole, sociable, gentle, conuer∣sant. Compagnia, companie, societie, fellow∣ship. Compagno, a companion, a mate, a fel∣lowe. Compagnone, a good craftie, subtill, sneaking companion, a merrie lad. Companaggio, as Companatico. Companatico, all cates, foode or victu∣all besides bread and drinke: meate as we saie. Comparabile, comparable, atchable. Comparare, to compare, to match. Comparatione, a comparison. Comparatico, gossoping, or gossopship, a gossops meeting, a knot of good fellow∣ship. Comparatiuamente, comparatiuely. Comparatiuo, the comparatiue degree. Compareuole, seemely, of a good pre∣sence, comely in shewe. Comparére, paio, parsi, parso, to ap∣peere. Compare, a hee gossop, a compeer. Comparíre, parisco, parsi, parso, to ap∣peere. Comparigione, a mans appeerance being cited. It is a word of lawe. Compariscente, as Appariscente. Compartire, parto, partito, to impart, to diuide. Compartimento, a compartment, a par∣tition. Compassionare, to compassionate, to take pitie or commiseration. Compassione, pitie, compassion or ruthe. Compassioneuole, compassionable, pi∣tifull. Compassare, to compasse about. Compasso, a compasse. Also a paire of compasses. Compatire, tisco, tito, to suffer with an other. Compatibile, compatible, suffering or abiding one another. Compéllere, pello, pulsi, pulso, to force, to compell, to constraine. Compendio, breuitie, an abbreuiate, an epitome, a short way.
Compendioso, compendious, shorte, briefe. Compensa, a recompence, a reward. Compensare, to recompence, to reward. Compénso, a remedie, a foresight. Also a recompence. Cómpera, a purchase or a buying. Comperare, to buie, to purchase. Compestoio, a toole that a weauer vseth. Competéntia, a competencie, sufficiencie or conueniencie. Competénte, competent, sufficient or conuenient. Compétere, péto, petéi, petuto, to con∣tend or striue for any suite, office, place or dignitie. Competitóre, a competitor or riuall, or concurrent. Compiacére, to please, to delight, to gra∣tifie, to content. Compiacéuole, pleasant, pleasing. Compiaciménto, Compiacenza, a de∣lighting, gratifying, content, pleasing, or satisfaction with others. Compiágnere, to bemone, to mone, to be∣waile or lament with one. Compiángere, as Compiagnere. Compianto, a wailing togither in com∣panie, a complaint. Compière, as Compire. Compieta, comlines. completorie, a peece of seruice among Roman catholikes. Compilare, to compile. Compilatione, a compilation, a heaping or gathering togither in one. Compimento, an end, a finishing, a fine, a complement. Compire, pisco, pito, to finish, to end, to make an end, to complete, to fulfill or to accomplish. Compitamente, at full, fully, accompli∣shedly. Compitare, to spell in reading. Compitura, an ende, a fine, a finishing, a fulfilling. Also a mans spending. Complessi, as Amplessi. Complessionato, complexioned. Complessione, a complexion. Also a con∣taining, or compasse. Also an agree∣ment in words. Complesse parole, comprized wordes, words well described. Complessotta, a good handsome trull or wench. Completo, complete, accomplished, full. Complice, a partaker, a complice, a con∣federate, a coherent. Compliménti, complements, ceremonies, curtesies, kind offices, a fulfilling or fur∣nishing, a making perfect of that which is wanting. Complimentoso, full of complements, curteous, ceremonius. Complire, plisco, plito, to vse or accom∣plish all complements. Compónere, pongo, posi, pósto, to compose, to frame, to endite, to agree, to accorde, to appoint, to compromize, to order. Comporre, as Componere. Componimento, as Compositione. Componitore, Compositore, a compo∣sitor, a framer, an agreer, a maker, a composer. Comportamenti, suffrings. Also the be∣hauiour, carriage, or gouernment of a man. Comportare, to suffer, to beare, to abide, to behaue, to gouerne himselfe, to brooke. Comporteuolmente, tollerablie, indif∣ferently, so so, to be borne with. Compositione, composition, agreement, or an accord. Compositore, as Componitore. Compositura, a composition. Composta, any kinde of wet sucket. Compra, a purchase, a buying. Comprare, to buie, to purchase. Compratore, a buier, a chapman. Comprauendi, retailers, hucksters. Compreda, a buying, a purchase. Compredómine, profit, thrift, gaine. Compréndere, to comprehende, to con∣ceiue, to vnderstand. Comprendente, comprehending, concei∣uing. Comprensione, a comprehending. Comprehensibile, comprehensible, that may be comprehended. Compreso, comprehended, conceiued, vn∣derstoode. Compressione, a crushing togither, vsed as Complessione. Compresso, hardned, crusht or pressed to∣gither, well trust, well compact, hand∣some. Comprimere, to presse togither, to har∣den. Compro, Comprato, bought, purcha∣sed. Comprobare, to approoue, to allowe. Comprobatione, an approbation, an al∣lowing. Compromettere, to compromise, or ar∣bitrate. Compromessario, an arbitrer or vmpier to compromise a thing. Compromésso, compromised, or a com∣promise. Compulsione, compulsion, constraint. Compulso, compelled, constrained. Compuérta, a perculleis. Compúngere, to prick together, to pro∣uoke. Compuntione, a compunction. Compunto, pricked together, prouoked, toucht with compunction. Compuntare, to prick, or prouoke. Compurgare, to purge, to quit, to cleare. Computare, to compute, to reckon. Computatione, a computation, calcula∣tion, reckning, or casting of accoumpts. Computista, a computator a reckoner. Comulgare, to communicate. Comunale, a common popular man, a vulgar man. Also a comminaltie. Comunanza, a comminaltie, a commons. Also a corporation. Comúne, vulgar, publick, commune, the commons. Comunella, an imparting, a commoning. Also a common wench. Comunicabile, that may be imparted or communicated to others. Also recei∣uing the communion. Comunicare, to communicate, to impart, to reueale, to common. Also to take the communion. Comunicanti, communicants, receiuers of the holie supper. Comunicatione, a communication. Comunione, communion, or commu∣nitie. Comunità, a comminaltie, a communi∣tie. Comunque, Comunche, howsoeuer. Comunquemente, in what manner so∣euer. Comutabile, that may be changed or al∣tered, mutable. Comutare, to alter or change with. Comuratione, a change or alteration, a shifting. Con, with, together, withall, in com∣panie. Conbuon ricordosia, wellfare all good tokens, in good time be it spoken. Con autorità, with authoritie. Con licenza, with your leaue. Con mappa mondo, with all iolity, with the world at will. Con reuerenza, sauing your reuerence. Con tanto di naso, to haue the canuaze or ouerthrow in any sute, to remaine as one ashamed. Cona, a painted table or boord. Conaglio, rennet to curd milke, and make cheese with. Conato, a thing whereabout labour hath bin taken. Also he which endeuoureth himselfe to do any thing. Conca, a tray, a bowle, a bason, a pan. Also any fish shell, a graue, a tombe.
Also a greeke measure of liquid things. Also a treene dish, a wooden bowle. Concatenare, to chaine or linke toge∣ther. Concatenatione, Concatenamento, a chaining or linking together. Concausa, a cause ioyned with another cause. Concauità, concauitie, hollownes, or bowing. Concauo, concaue, hollow, bowed, croo∣ked, caued. Concédere, cédo, céssi, césso, or ce∣dúto, to graunt, to yeeld vnto, to con∣sent, to giue place, to surrender, to re∣signe, to affoord. Concénto, a consort, or concordance in musick. Concentrare, to grow or incorporate, or concentre hard together. Concentrice, a circle within an orbe, ha∣uing the same superficies. Concépere, cépo, cepéi, cepúto, or cetto, to conceiue with childe. Concepito, Conceputo, conceiued. Concérnere, cérno, cernéi, cernúto, to concerne. Concernente, concerning, touching. Concertare, to agree, or tune together, or proportion or accord together, to sing or play in consort. Concérto, as Concento. Concessióne, a grant, or yeelding, or a gift. Concésso, Looke Concédere. Concettione, a conception, or concei∣uing. Concetto, a conceit or apprehension of the minde. Also conceiued. Conchiglie, fish-shelles, as of cockles, muscles, oysters, or skallops. Conchile pesce, all manner of shell-fish. Conchiúdere, chiúdo, chiúsi, chiúso, to conclude. Conchiusione, a conclusion. Concia, a dressing, a reforming, a repai∣ring, a refining, a washing or perfuming of gloues. Concia lauezzi, a mender of old pots, pans, posnets, or pipkins, a Tinker. Conciamenti, mendings, reformings, dressings, or repairings, orderings. Conciare, to dresse, to mend, to settle, to order, to reforme, to repaire, to dight, to pight, to attire. Conciastagni, a Tinker, or mender of pewter. Conciatetti, a Tyler, a Thatcher. Conciatore, a dresser, a mender, a refor∣mer, an orderer. Conciatura, any kinde of dressing, men∣ding, or perfuming. Conciatura di testa, a head attire, or dressing. Concidere, Concido, Cōcidei, Con∣ciduto, or Conciso, to cut or back small. Also to chop, to iag or pounce. Also to beate, to kill, to slay. Also to fall downe, to dye or faint. Concidentia, a cutting, a hacking, a chopping, a iagging, a pouncing, a bea∣ting, a killing, a falling, a dying, a fain∣ting. Also a kinde of disease in the eyes. Conciéro, an attire of haire or other things for a womans head. Also any dressing, ornament, or decking: it hath been taken for a hearse, or stately fu∣nerall. Conciglio, Concilio, a councell gene∣rall. Conciliábolo, a councell place, a councell house. Conciliare, to reconcile, to atone. Conciliatione, a reconciliation. Concime, all manner of dung to dung the ground with. Concinnità, propernes, seatenes, aptnes, iollines, galantnes. Concino, a reformer, a find fault, a cor∣rector of magnificat. Concio, drest, mended, setled, ordered, reformed, dight, plight, attired, repai∣red. Also fitnes. Concio fosse, forsomuch as it was, be∣cause, for why. Concio fosse che, forsomuch as that it was, for why. Concio fosse cosa che, as Concio fos∣se che. Conciosia, for so much, because, for why. Conciosia che, for somuch as, because, for why. Conciosiacosa che, for somuch as that, for why. Concípere, as Concépere. Concipiente, conceiuing. Concistório, a consistorie, or a coun∣cell house. Concitare, to prouoke, or stirre vp a∣gainst. Concitatione, a prouoking or stirring vp. Conclaue, a place where the Popes are chosen. Also a congregation, a consisto∣rie. Also a closet, a priuate roome, or inner chamber. Conclauista, a fellow-chooser of a Pope in Conclaue. Conclúdere, clúdo, clúsi, clúso, to conclude. Conclusione, a conclusion. Conclusiuo, concluding, conclusiue. Concobina, a concubine, a leman. Cóncola, as Conca. Concolla, as Concola. Also a ridge or greene soard betweene ploughed lands. Concone, any kinde of great tray, or woodden bowle. Concordanza, an accordance, an ac∣cord. Concordare, to agree, or accord toge∣ther. Concordeuole, agreeable, concordable, Concordi, agreed, of one consent. Corcordia, agreement, concord, peace, vnitie. Also the herbe called wilde pop∣pie. Concorrénte, a concurrent, a riuall, a competitor. Concorrenza, a concurrencie or agreeing in one, or running togither. Concórrere, corro, corsi, corso, to con∣cur or flocke togither. Concorso, concurred or flocked togither. Also a concurse of people or running to∣gither. Also an ouerflowing of humours in man or beast. Concottione, a concoction. Concótto, concocted, baked togither. Concreato, created togither. Concretare, to grow, ioyne, clotter, com∣pact or congeale togither. Concretatione, a ioyning, clottring or congealing togither. Concreto, growne, clotted, congealed or compact togither. Concubina, a concubine, a leman. Concubinare, to match or loue or entan∣gle himselfe with a whore. Concubinario, one that lieth with a concubine. Concubuire, isco, ito, as Concubina∣re. Conculcare, to conculcate or presse down or tread downe, to suppresse. Concuócere, cuóco, cóssi, cótto, to concoct, to bake togither. Concupiscenza, concupiscence, lust, fil∣thie desire. Concupiscere, pisco, piscei, pisciuto, to desire or long for with great lust and earnestnes. Concupiscibile, lecherous, lustfull. Condannagione, a condemnation, a doome, an amercement. Condannare, to condemne, to cast, to damne, to sentence, to iudge, to doome, to amerce. Condannatione, a condemnation. Condecente, decent, beseeming, seemely. Condegno, condigne, woorthie, with o∣thers.
Condennaggione, as Condannaggi∣one. Condennare, as Condannare. Condennatione, as Condannaggione. Condennata, a game at cardes so called. Condensare, to condense to thicken. Condenso, condense, thicke, spisse. Condensita, a thicknes, a densitie, a spis∣nes. Condescéndere, scéndo, scesi, sceso, to condescend, to consent or yeeld vnto. Condilomati, a swelling in the funda∣ment proceeding of an inflammation. Condimento, a dressing, a seasoning, a tempring or confecting of meates. Condire, Condisco, to dresse, to season to sauce, to comfite, to temper meates. Condito, dressed as meate, seasoned, sau∣ced, comfited, tempered. Also the drip∣ping of roste meate. Condiscepolo, a fellow-scholler. Conditore, a seasoner, a cooke, a temprer, a comfiter. Conditionale, conditionall. Conditionare, to condition, to couenant. Conditione, a condition, a qualitie, a co∣uenant, an estate. Condoglienza, a condoling or grieuing with others. Condolére, dolgo, dolsi, doluto, to con∣dole, to bemone, to mone or bewaile to∣gither. Condonare, to pardon, to remit, to for∣giue. Condotta, a conduct, a charge, a leading, a guide. Condottiére, Conduttore, as Condu∣citore. Condotto, brought, guided, conducted, led to any place. Also a conduite, a pri∣uie, a iakes, a sinke. Condrilla, wilde Endiue, or gum Cicory, or rush Cicorie. Condro, a bone or gristle that commeth ouer the mouth of the stomacke for de∣fence of the same. Conducimento, a conduct, a leading, a guiding. Condúrre, Condúcere, duco, dussi, dutto, or dotto, to conduct, to leade, to guide to a place, to bring. Conducitóre, a guider, a leader, a cap∣taine, a conductor, a chiefetaine, a brin∣ger. Condutto, as Condotto. Conduttura, a conduct, a guiding, a lea∣ding. Conegliera, a waren or conie-grea for conies. Con esso meco, with me, or with my self Conestabile, Connestabile, a constable. Conetto, a disease in a horse. Confabulare, to talke or fable togither. Confacéuole, conuenient, behoouefull, expedient. Confaceuolezza, conueniencie, or agree∣ing in nature. Confaloniere, a standerd bearer. Confalone, a chiefe standard. Confare, Confacere, feci, fatto, to a∣gree, to make togither. Also to be conue∣nient, fit, or seemely, to become, to sute, to proportion or agree togither. Confederare, to confederate or agree to∣gither. Confederatione, a confederacie, a com∣bination. Confederato, confederate, agreed, com∣bined. Conferentia, a conference: an aduowson of a liuing, a comparing, a conferring. Conferire, risco, rito, to conferre, to be∣stowe, to impart. Confermare, to confirme, to establish. Confermatione, a confirmation, an esta∣blishment. Confertini, a kind of spice or sugar bread. Confessare, to confesse, to shriue, to ac∣knowledge. Confessionale, a confessionall, a booke of confession. Confessione, a confession or shriuing. Confessore, a confessor, a shriuer. Confettare, to comfite or to candie, to pre∣serue with sugar. Confettaro, a comfit-maker. Confetti, Confettioni, comsets. Confettiera, a sugar boxe, a comfet boxe. Confettinaro, a comfet maker. Confettionale, confectionall. Confettionario, a confectionarie, or con∣fet maker. Conficcare, to thrust or driue in faste, to fixe hard togither. Confidanza, confidence, or trust. Confidare, to trust or put in feoffie. Confidente, confident, trustie, true. Confidenza, confidence or trust. Configere, figgo, fissi, fitto, as Confic∣care. Confinare, to confine, to limit, to bounde, to banish, to exile. Confinante, confining, bounding, neigh∣bouring, bordering. Confinatione, an exile, a banishment, a confining. Confini, confines, limits, bounds, meare∣stones. Confino, neere bordering, neere boun∣ding, neighbouring. Confiscare, to confiscate, to forfeit. Confiscatione, a confiscation, a forfei∣ture, a fine. Confitente, confessing, acknowledging, bewraying. Confittaro, as Confettaro. Confitti, Confittioni, as Confetti. Confitto, fixed, obstinate, beadstrong. Also as Conficcato. Confiutare, to confute. Confiutatione, a confutation. Conflitto, a battle, a conflict, a skirmish, a fight. Also afflicted. Confluentia, confluence, flowing togi∣ther, or meeting of two or diuers ri∣uers in one. Confóndere, fondo, fondei, fuso, to confounde, to disturbe. Conformare, to conforme. Conforme, Conformeuole, conforma∣ble or like. Conformità, conformation, conformitie, or affinitie. Confortare, to comfort, to perswade. Confortatiuo, comfortable. Confortatore, a comforter, a perswader. Confortini, a kinde of simnell or ginger bread. Also little comforts. Conforto, comfort, perswasion, helpe. Confrateria, Confratria, a brotherhood: a fricrie, a conuent where men liue in a fraternitie togither. Confratre, a sworne brother with one, a fellowe frier. Confrontare, to confront or compare to∣gither: to butte or shock togither. Confrustagno, some toole about digging of mynes. Confuggere, to flie in companie or runne away with others. Confusione, confusion. Confuso, confused, troubled, disturbed in minde, confounded, or adawed. Confutare, to confute, to confounde. Confutatione, a confutation. Confuteuole, that which may be confu∣ted. Con garbo, with a grace, handsomely. Congédo, leaue, licence, a dismission. Congegnare, to worke or frame togither. Congelare, to congeale. Congelatione, Congelatura, a congea∣ling. Congelatori di mercurio, Alchimists. Congenerato, begotten or engendred to∣gither. Congénito, begotten with, or engendred with. Congerie, a heape, a pile or masse of di∣uers things, a huddle. Congettura, Congiettura, a surmise, a coniecture. Congetturare, to surmise, to coniecture.
Congettureuole, coniecturable. Congio, a measure holding about a gal∣lon. Congióngere, Congiógnere, giongo, gionsi, giunto, to cunioyne, to combine. Congiongimento, a conioyning or com∣bining. Congiontione, Congiuntione, a con∣iunction or combination. Congiontura, a conioyning. Also a ioint or iointing of any lims togither. Congionto, Congiunto, conioyned, con∣bined. Also a kinseman. Congiugale, that is or may be ioyned to the male. Congiugare, to conioyne or couple togi∣ther, to marrie. Also to coniugate verbs. Congiugatione, a coniugation, a coupling a mariage. Congiúra, Congiuramento, a conspi∣racie, a coniuration. Congiurare, to conspire, to coniure. Congiurati, conspirers, coniurators. Congiuratore, a conspirer, a coniurator. Congola, a fish so called. Also a traie, a washing bowle or such vessell. Congratia, with grace, kindlie, grati∣ously. Congratulare, to congratulate, to reioice togither. Congratulatione, congratulation, a re∣ioycing togither. Congregare, to assemble togither. Congregatione, an assemblie or congre∣gation. Congresso, an assemblie, a resorting to∣gither, a congresse. Congrio, Congio, the fish congre. Conguentia, meetnes, likenes, agreeable∣nes, accord. Congruità, fitnes, decorum, congruitie. Cóngruo, fit, proper, meete, agreeing to∣gither. Coniare, to coine, to mint money, to stamp, to brand or marke: to deuise, to forge. Coniatore, a coyner, a minter, a stamper, a deuiser, a forger. Coniella, the herbe winter sauorie. Coniettura, a coniecture, or surmising. Conietturare, to coniecture or surmise. Conigliera, a conigrea or waren for co∣nies. Coniglia, a doeconie, or rabet. Coniglio, a buckcony, or rabet. Cónio, a coine, a stamp, or mint. Also a wedge to cleaue wood. Coniugio, mariage, matrimonie, wed∣lock, copulation. Conizza, the herbe fleabane. Conlegare, to binde or tye together. Conlettione, a choise or election made together. Connaturale, conaturall, ioyned to na∣ture. Conne, a coniunctiue letter for Con. Connesso, annexed or ioyned vnto. Connisa, an herbe, the smoke whereof kil∣leth fleas, and chaseth serpents. Conno, a womans priuie parts or quaint as Chaucer calles it. Connocchia, Conocchia, a rocke or distaffe. Also a kinde of squib of wilde fire. Connocchiare, Conocchiare, to spin. Also to winde vpon a distaffe. Connubiale, of or pertaining to wedlock or mariage. Connubiare, Conubiare, to wed, to marie, to couple together, to spouse. Connubio, Conubio, a wedding, a ma∣riage, a matrimonie, a conioining, a bridall. Connumerare, to number together. Conóscere, nosco, nobbi, nosciuto, to know, to wot, to acknowledge, to vnder∣stand, to ken. Conoscenza, knowledge, witting, ac∣quaintance. Conoscénte, an acquaintance or friende, a knowen man. Also gratefull. Conoscibile, that may be knowne. Conoscimento, knowledge. Conoscitore, an acknowledger, one that knoweth. Conquassare, to tosse, to beat, to hull vp and downe, as a ship vpon the sea. Conquassatione, Conquasso, a tossing a tumbling, a shaking, a rouling, as a ship at sea. Also hauocke, ruine, spoile, or dissolution, a hurlie-burly, a commo∣tion. Conquesta, a conquest, a victorie. Conquestare, to conquer, to subdue. Conquidere, to conquer, to subdue. Conquisitore, a commissioner to enquire for any thing, a muster master. Conquistare, as Conquestare. Conquistatore, a conqueror, a subduer, a victor. Conquiso, conquered, subdued. Conquisto, a conquest, a victorie, a sub∣duing. Consacrare, to consecrate. Consacratione, a consecration. Consagrare, to consecrate. Consanguíneo, a kinse-man, one neere in blood, cosen, kinne. Consanguinità, consanguinitie, neerenes in blood, kinred. Consapeuole, of counsaile, knowing, wit∣ting, giltie. Conscientia, a conscience. Conscientieuole, as Conscientioso. Conscientioso, consciencious, full of con∣science, conscionable. Conscinomantia, diuination with sieues or searces. Conscinante, a diuiner by sieues or searces. Conscio, giltie, witting, of counsell, ac∣cessarie. Conscritti padri, enrolled, or registred among the fathers or senators. Conseco, with him. Consecrare, to consecrate. Consecratione, a consecration. Consegnare, to appoint, to assigne, to re∣signe, to deliuer. Consegnatione, an appointment, an as∣signation, a resignation, a deliuerie, an assigning. Conseguente, a consequent. Conseguentemente, consequently, by consequence. Conseguenza, a consequence. Conseguire, guisco, guito, to get, to at∣chieue, to attaine, to follow with. Conseguimento, an atchieuance, an ob∣taining, an attaining. Conseguitare, as Conseguire. Conseguitore, an atchieuer, an obtai∣ner. Consegurta, surely, with security or safe∣tie. Consenso, a consent, a voice or grant. Consentáneo, conuenient, agreeing, con∣senting. Consentimento, a consent, a grant. Consentire, Consento, Consentito, to consent, to assent or grant vnto with others. Consertare, to reduce to order, forme, tune or proportion. Consertatamente, proportionably, tuna∣bly, in order. Conserto, a consort or vnison in musicke. Conserua, a buttrie, a larderie, a pantrie or spicerie, a comfet-house. Also a store-house, a wardrobe. Also any conserue or preserue. Conseruare, to keepe, to conserue, to pre∣serue. Conseruatiua, preseruing. Conseruo, one that serueth with other, a fellow-seruant. Considerabile, to be considered, conside∣rable. Considerando, as Considerabile. Considerare, to consider, to bethinke. Consideratione, consideration. Consigliare, to counsell, to aduise. Consigliere, a counseller. Consiglio, counsell, aduice, persuasion.
Consignare, as Consegnare. Consignatione, as Consegnatione. Consiligine, an herbe: thrust an iron through the roote thereof, and thrust that iron through the eare of any poy∣soned or infected beast, all the poyson and venome will voide at that place, and the beast liue. Consimigliare, to be alike and sembla∣ble. Consimile, all alike, semblable, like to others. Consistenza, a standing fast or a consi∣stence, a setling. Consistere, sisto, sistei, sistuto, to consist. Consistório, a consistorie or councell as∣sembled in such a place. Consobrino, a cofin germain, or sisters sonne. Consolare, to comfort, to persuade. Also pertaining to a consul, or one that hath borne the office of a consul. Consolato, comforted, persuaded. Also the office of a consul, the consulship. Consolatoria lettera, a letter of comfort. Consolatione, consolation, comfort. Consolatore, a comforter, a persuader. Consolida, the herbe Larks-foote. Consolida maggiore, the herbe Com∣frie, Knit-backe or backwoort. Consolidare, to consolidate, to harden, to make solid, to make tough: to confirme, to establish. Consolidatione, a confirmation, a conso∣lidation, an assuring. Consolidatiuo, that will consolidate, con∣firme, assure, make fast or solide, or whole againe. Consolido, hard, solide, tough stiffe, con∣firmed. Cónsolo, Cónsole, a consul, a burga∣master or portreeue. Consonante, consonant, agreeing. Also a letter called a consonant. Consonantia, a consonance or agreement in voices or sounds. Consonare, to agree in voices. Consono, a concordance in sounds or soun∣ding. Consonto, consumed, wasted, spent. Consopportatione vostra, with your toleration, by your leaue. Consorte, a wife, a companion, a fellow∣mate. Also a consort, a fellow, a mate, make or a husband. Consortio, companie, societie, fellowship or consort. Consortire, tisco, tito, to consort togi∣ther. Conspérgere, spergo, spersi, sperso, as Cospargere. Conspetto, the presence or viewe of a man. Conspicuo, conspicuous, open, cleere, ma∣nifest, plaine. Conspira, a conspiracie. Conspirare, to conspire. Conspiratione, a conspiracie. Constante, constant, stedfast. Constanza, constancie, stedfastnes. Constare, to persist, to consist, to conti∣nue, to perseuere, to stand togither. Consternare, as Costernare. Consternatione, as Costernatione. Constituire, tuisco, tuito, to constitute, to institute, ordaine, establish or ap∣point. Constitutione, a constitution, institu∣tion or ordinance. Constituto, a constitute, an institute. Constitutore, a constituter, an establi∣sher. Constórcere, as Contórcere. Construrre, Construggo, Construssi, to conster, to builde, to frame, to con∣struct, to erect, to set vp. Construtto, construed, built, framed. Also a construction. Construttione, a construction. Construttore, a framer, a builder, a con∣struer, a maker of construction. Consuéto, accustomed, vsed, woont, en∣ured. Consuetudine, Consueto, custome, woont, vse, fashion, habit, vre. Consulta, Consultatione, a consulta∣tion. Consultare, to consult, to deliberate. Consultore, a consulter. Consumabile, that may be consumed. Consumare, to consume, to waste, to spend. Consumamento, a consuming, a wasting Consumatione, a consummation. Consumato, absolute, perfect, consumed, spent, wasted. Conta, recounted, manifest, knowen, de∣clared, counted, numbred, told. Also a dwelling place. Contadina, a countrie maide, a coun∣trie woman, wench, homely wench or lasse. Contadinelle, countrie songs, gigs, ma∣drigals or pastorall sonets. Contadino, a clowne, a peasant, a coun∣trie man, a swaine, a hinde, a borrell. Contadinozza, a handsome countrie lasse. Contado, a countie, an earledome, a shire, a region. Also the countrie. Contagio, contagion, infection. Contagione, as Contagio, an infection. Contagioso, contagious, infectious. Contaminare, to contaminate, to pollute, to corrupt, to infect. Contaminatione, contamination, cor∣ruption, infection. Contana, a disease in a horses forelegs. Contanti, readie money. Contare, to count, to reckon, to cast, to number, to tell, to report. Contastare, as Contrastare. Contasto, as Contrasto. Contatore, a reckoner, a numbrer, a tel∣ler, an auditor, a keeper of account. Contatto, a touching or feeling with or togither. Conte, an earle, a count. Also noted, re∣ported, knowen or famous. Contéa, a countie, an earldome, a shire. Conteggiare, to account, to reckon. Contegno, coines, nicenes, pecuishnes, gra∣uitie, sobrietie. Contegnoso, coie, nice, peeuish, scrupu∣lous, graue, sober. Contemperare, to temper, to moderate, to accord, to tune with. Contemplare, to contemplate, to specu∣late. Contemplatione, contemplation, specu∣lation. Contemplatiuo, contemplatiue, specula∣tiue. Contemptibile, contemptible, base, to be skorned. Contenaro, a kinde of huge great waight or measure. Conténdere, tendo, tesi, teso, to con∣tend, to striue, to debate, to wrangle. Contenenza, a contayning, continence. Contenente, contayning, the continent. Contenére, tengo, tenni, tenuto, to con∣taine or hold. Contenuto, contayned, held. Contentare, to content, to please. Contentione, a contention, a debate, a strife, a wrangling. Contentioso, contentious, full of debate. Contentatura, a content or contentment. Contentezza, content, contentment. Contento, content, pleased, satisfied. Also contentment. Contenuto, contained. Also the thing contained. Contermine, a concordance, an vnitie, a being togither. Also bordering, limiting or ioyning with or neare. Conterráneo, one of the same towne or countrie. Contesa, a contention, a strife, a debate or wrangling. Contessa, a countesse, an earles wife. Contéssere, tesso, teslei, tessuto, to weaue
or worke togither. Contestabile, a Conestable. Contestare, to striue, to debate. Contesto, Contesso, or Contessuto, in∣wrought or wouen togither, enterlaced or entrailed togither. Contezza, account, information, certain∣tie, aduertisement, familiaritie. Contigiare, to dight, to adorne, to trim. Contigie, leather hose, such as our elders were wont to weare. Also trimming, deckings, ornaments, garnishings. Contiguità, neighbourhood, contiguitie, that ioineth neare togither. Contiguo, adioyning neere or touching one another. Continenza, continencie, chastitie, a countenance. Continente, continent, chaste. Also the maine land or continent. Contingente, that chanceth or fortuneth, happening. Also that may be or not be. Continuare, Continouare, to continue. Continuatione, Continouatione, per∣seuerance, continuance. Continuanza, as Continuatione. Continuo, Continouo, Continuale, continuall. Contista, an arithmetician, a caster of accoumpts. Conto, knowne, noted, counted, cast, num∣bred, told, reported, related, proclai∣med. Also an accoumpt, a reckoning, a report, an estimation. Also a tale, a discourse, a count. Contórcere, tórco, torcéi, tórto, to wriggle, to writhe, to turne, to toste, to wrest, to winde vp with, to spraine, to wrinch. Contornare, to encompas, or encircle a∣bout. Contorno, a place neere about, a circuit. Also the purlies about a wood, or for∣rest. Contorta, a wrinching or a spraining of ones limmes. Contorto, wrigled, wreathed, turned, tossed, wrested, wrinched, sprained, wound vp with. Contra, against, opposit, contrarie. Contrabandiere, a forfaiter, one that meddles to buy or sell forbidden wares or goods, a transgresser of the lawes. Contrabandito, counterbanished, b properly, one that doth against lawes. Contrabando, a forfeiture against any statute, vnlawfull dealing, forbidden marts, what is done against procla∣mation. Contrabasso, a false base in musick, a counterbase, voice or string of any in∣strument. Contrabatta, a counter-buffe. Contracambiare, to counterchange. Contra cambio, a counterchange. Contracifera, a countercifer, a cifer that doth answer another. Contracolpo, a counterbuffe. Contrada, a high way, a parish, a streete, a neighbourhood, a cuntrie, a precinct. Contradetta, a contradiction. Contradetto, contradicted, gainesayd. Contradicente, contradicting, gaine∣saying. Contradíre, dico, dissi, detto, to con∣tradict, or gainesay. Contradistinto, distinguished moreouer and besides. Contradittione, contradiction, gaine∣saying. Contradittorio, a contradictorie. Contradiuieto, a countermand, or coun∣terbidding. Contrafare, faccio, feci, fatto, to coun∣terfait, to imitate, to do against. Contrafatto, a counterfait, a false or not right thing. Also counterfaited, trans∣gressed, done against, imitated. Contrafattore, a counterfaiter, an imi∣tator, an offender. Contrafodera, a counterlyning. Also a false skabberd. Contraforte, a counterfort, or skonce. Contrafronte, a spurre, or the inner part of a bulwarke. Contrággere, to contract, to couenant, to bargaine. Contra lettera, a countermand, a letter written against another. Contralto, a counter treble in musicke. Contramaglie, crownes or coyne in gib∣rish or rogues language. Contramandare, to countermand. Contramezzana, the name of a saile in a ship. Contramina, a countermine. Contraminare, to countermine. Contramuro, a countermure. Contraoperatione, a counterworke, a contrarie operation. Contrapassare, to do or to forfait against any edict. Contrapasso, a forfaiture against any statute, a law as we should say limme for limme, as if one kill another with a stone or a fall, he must be killed so him∣selfe; it is a word of lawe. Contrapelo, against the haire. Contrapesare, to counterpoise, Contrapeso, a counterpoise. Contrapoliza, a countermand, a coun∣terbill. Contrapónere, Contraporre, to oppose, or lay against. Contrapositione, an opposition, a con∣trarietie. Contraposta, an opposition, a contra∣diction. Contraposto, opposed, or layd against, foreanenst. Contrapuntare, to counterpoint. Contrapunto, counterpointed. Also a back-stitch in sowing. Contrariare, to contrarie, to impugne. Contrarietà, contrarietie, opposition. Contrario, contrarie, opposite, against. Contrarispondere, to answere against another. Contrárre, traggo, trassi, tratto, to con∣tract, to treate together, to pul together. Contrarondo, a certaine number of commanders or officers going to visite the corps de guard watches, sentinels, or the round, to see if they performe their dutie. Contrascarpa, a counterscarffe, a coun∣termure. Contrascritto, a counterwriting. Contrasegno, a token, a marke, a signe. Contrastare, to resist, to withstand, to striue, to contend. Contrasto, a contention, a withstanding, a strife, a contecke. Contratenore, a countertenor in musike. Contratondo, as Contrarondo. Contrattare, to contract, to treate togi∣ther. Contrattatione, a contract, a contrac∣ting. Contratto, a contract. Also contracted, couenanted, bargained. Contraueníre, vengo, venni, venuto, to come against, to transgresse. Contrauenimento, a transgressing, or breach of lawe. Contribuíre, buisco, buito, to contri∣bute. Contribuli, men borne in the selfesame parish, of the same tribe. Contributione, a contribution. Contributore, a contributor. Contristare, to be sorrowfull with. Contristamēto, a sorowing with others. Contritione, contrition, penitence, repen∣tance, remorse. Contrito, contrite, penitent, sorrowfull. Contro, against, opposit, contrarie. Controuersia, a controuersie. Contubernio, a tent, or a pauillion, a fellowship in a house. Also a camerada of souldiers. Contumace, disobedient, stubberne, wil∣full, selfwilled, headstrong, stiffnecked.
Contumacia, disobedience, stubbornes, wilfulnes, frowardnes, contempt. Conturbamēto, a perturbation, trouble, hinderance, or disquietnes. Conturbare, to trouble, to vexe, to mo∣lest, to hinder, to disquiet, to confound. Conturbato, conturbed, or troubled with. Contusione, a bruise, or bruising of a mans bodie. Contutto, with all, for all that. Contuttoche, withall that, howbeit, for all that, notwithstanding. Contuttociò, as Contuttoche. Conualescente, in health, in good estate. Conualescenza, health, good estate. Conubiare, as Connubiare. Conubio, as Connubio. Conuegna, a couenant, a bargain or con∣dition. Conueneuolezza, Conueneuolità, as Conuenienza. Conuenente, as Conueneuole, Also a couenant. Conueneuole, conuenient, meete, proper, beseeming, expedient, necessarie. Conueniente, as Conueneuole, a con∣uenience. Conuenienza, conueniencie, expediencie, meetenes. Also an agreement. Conuenire, to behooue, to be conuenient, to be expedient. Also to come or meete togither. Also to conuent, to cite, to som∣mon. Also to appeere. Also to agree to∣gither, or condition togither. Conuentare, to conuent, or enter into a religious house. Conuenticulo, a conuenticle, a conspira∣cie, a complot. Conuentione, a couenant, an agreement, or a bargaine. Also a condition. Conuento, agreed vpon. Also a conuent or religious house, a meeting place: som∣times it is ioined with Per, as Per con∣uento. In such sort or manner, so. Also a couenant or agreement. Conuentuale, of a conuent or religious house. Conuenuto, come or met togither, con∣uented or cited, agreed or conditioned togither. Conuersare, to conuerse or frequent gi∣ther. Conuersatione, conuersation, societie. Conuerseuole, conuersable, sociable. Conuersatiuo, conuersable, sociable. Conuersione, a conuersion or change, a transformation. Conuerso, conuerted. Conuertentia, a conuerting or turning. Conuertire, tisco, tito, to turne, to change, to transforme, to conuert. Conuertito, Conuerso, conuerted, tur∣ned, changed, transformed. Also a con∣uertite. Conuéssità, the bending of a hollow thing turning downward. Conuesso, crooked and bending downe as the heauen doth. Conuiare, to conuay, to lead, to conduct. Conuicino, neere by, about, neighbouring with. Conuiéne, it behooueth, it is requisite, it is necessarie. Conuíncere, vinco, vinsi, vinto, or vit∣to, to conuince, to conuict. Conuinto, conuinced, conuicted. Conuitare, to inuite, to bid, to feast, to banquet. Conuitati, inuited, bidden, feasted or banquetted. Also guests. Conuitatore, an inuitor, a bidder, a fea∣ster, a banquetter. Conuito, Conuiuio, a banquet, a feast, a guest-meale or eating togither. Conuittione, Conuittura, a conuiction, or conuicting, a vanquishing. Conuitto, vanquished, conuicted, conuin∣ced. Conuiuare, to feast or banquet, or make good cheere togither. Conuiuenza, a conuiuencie, a liuing to∣gither. Also a conuiction. Conuiuere, viuo, vissi, viuuto, to liue, to eate and drinke togither. Conuiuio, a feast, a banquet, or eating togither. Conuocare, to conuoke or call togither. Conuocatione, a conuocation or assem∣blie. Conuólgere, volgo, volsi, volto, to ouerturne, to ouertosse, to diuert. Conuoluoli, any twinings or windings about, a rumbling in ones bellie. Conuóluere, as Conuolgere. Also to turne or twine togither or about. Conuulsióne, a conuulsion or shrinking vp of the sinewes. Conzare, as Conciare, &c. Conziro, as Concier. Coorte, as Cohorte. Copella, as Coppella. Copellare, as Coppellare. Copercero, a kinde of vpper frocke, or such garment. Coperchia, a couerlid, a hilling, a shroud, a shelter. Coperchiare, to couer, to shroud, to shel∣ter. Coperchio, a couer, a lid, a shroud, a shel∣ter. Coperco, a kinde of coine or money. Coperticula, the herbe water-lillie. Copérto, a couer, a lid. Also shrouded, hilled, couered or sheltred. Copertoio, a couer, a lid, a couering, a hilling. Copertura, a couerlet or couering. Copese, as Colabacco. Copetelle, the name of an herbe. Copetta, a kinde of sweete bread made of honie and spice. Copettaio, that maketh such bread. Cophino, a coffin, a chest. Also a panier, a maund, a bin. Copia, store, plentie, abundance. Also a couple, or paire, or brace. Also a copie, an originall, a patterne, a transcript. Copialettere, a clarke, a secretary, a booke keeper. Copiare, to copie or write out. Also to en∣sample or match. Copiba, a tree in India, the barke where∣of being cut yeeldes foorth precious balsamum. Copiére, Copiero, a cup-bearer, a fill∣cup. Copila, a bee hiue. Also the hole at which the bee goeth in. Copioso, copious, plentious, large, great. Copista, a copie writer, a register, a re∣membrancer. Copistaccio, a foolish writer, scribler or note-gatherer. Copistare, to write, copie or scribble from booke to booke. Copistuzzo, as Copistaccio. Copoiello, a pullie. Copola, a kinde of hunting staffe vsed in Italie. Coppa, a cup, a bowle, a goblet: the nape of the head. Some part of a saddle. Also the test of any mettall. Coppadi gioue, a kinde of high growing weede, which euery morning as the sun riseth it bendeth his tops to him, and so soone as the sunne is risen it standeth vp againe, and bends againe at his setting: and being set it riseth againe looking westward, & in the morning eastward. Coppare, to knocke out the braines, to kill, to quell, to slay. Copparella, a little cup, a little goblet. Coppe, cups, bowles, goblets. Coppella, a refiners woord, called the test or loye of siluer or gold. Also a kinde of wheelebarrow. Also a dosser or panier. Coppellare, to bring to the test, to refine as siluer and gold. Coppetta, a little cup or goblet. Also a kinde of countrie cake or sugar bread. Coppi, tiles ouer houses. Coppia, a couple, a brace, a cast, a paire.
Coppiére, Coppiéro, a cup-bearer, a fil∣cup. Coppo, a tile ouer a house. Coppola, a shepheards cap, as we say a Scottish cap. Copriletto, a couerlet for a bed. Coprimento, a couering, a protection, a shroud or shelter, a hilling, a head at∣tire. Copritura, a couerlet, a couering. Coprire, Copro, Copérsi, Copérto, to couer, to hill, to protect, to shroud, to shelter, to cloke. Copritesta, a cap or hat, or any couer for the head, a couer-sheafe. Copso, a fish called in Latine Cops. Copula, a couple. Also a copulation or doubling. Copulare, to ioyne or couple togither. Copulatione, a copulation or ioyning to∣gither. Copulatiuo, that coupleth or may couple togither. Coquo, a cooke. Cor, Core, the hart or core of any thing. Coraccia, Corazza, Coraccina, a cui∣race, a brestplate, a vantplate. Some take it for the arming of the bodie, and backe. Coracino, a little hart, a bright rauen or crowe-blacke colour. Also a kinde of blackish sea fish with a head shining like golde. Coraciesia, as Calicia. Corada, Corrada, the plucke, the geither, hasselet or midriffe of any beast. Coradella, a little plucke, midriffe, gei∣ther or hasselet. Also a goose giblets, or vmbles of a deere. Coraggio, courage, stoutnes, hardinesse. Coraggioso, couragious, hardie, stout. Corale, hartie, cordiall. Corallina, the herbe Male pimpernel. Al∣so Corall or mountaine coralline. Corallino, Corall colour, a little Corall. Corallo, Corall, which groweth in the sea like a shrubbe, and taken out waxeth hard. Corame, leather tanned or drest. Coranta, Corranta, a kinde of French-dance. Coratiere, a broker for any bargaine. Corba, a basket, a flasket. Also a kinde of measure of liquid things. Corbacchione, a filthie rauen. Also a filthie fellow, a gull or a ninnie. Corbacchio, a filthie great rauen. Also the name of a worme breeding in hor∣ses. Corbastro, a water rauen. Corbella, Corbetta, a little basket. Corbetto, a fish called in latin Glaucus. Corbézzolo, Corbezzuólo, a kinde of wilding or crab tree or the fruit thereof. Also a kind of wild tree in Italie, bea∣ring a fruite much like a strawberrie; & therfore some call it strawberrie tree or an Arbute tree. Also the fruit of that tree. Corbine, a kind of wild blacke cherries. Corbita, a great ship or hulke for burthen and cariage. Córbo, a rauen or a crow. Also a kinde of sea fish. Corbona, hell or a place whence no re∣demption is. Also such a place as we cal, little ease in our prisons. Corcalle, Colanza, a kind of bird. Corcaiuolo, a kind of worme breeding in horses: whereof cunning ferriers say there be eight kindes. Corcare, to lie downe, to rest, to lie along. Also to bray as a stag or a bucke. Corda, a rope, a cable, a corde, a halter, a line, a string. Also a torment or strap∣pado. Also a kinde of measure vsed in Italie. Cordaglia, Cordaggi, the shrowdes or tacklings of a ship, all maner of cords or cordage. Cordapso, the wringing and torment of the small guts in ones bodie. Cordare, to cord or string. Cordaro, Cordaruolo, a rope-maker, a roper. Corde, strings for instruments. Corde di minugie, strings made of guts, as lute strings. Cordegliére, Cordigliere, a fryer. Cordélla, as Cordicella. Cordelline, little strings, twists, laces or shirt strings. Cordialità, hartines. Cordicélla, a little cord, a string, a line, a tape, a lace, a ribond, an inkle, a binding, a twine or a fillet. Cordiglio, a certaine habite that Spanish Friers vse. Cordini, little thongs or latchets of lea∣ther. Cordilla, a kinde of fish. Cordoglio, harts greefe, teene, sorrow. Cordoncella, as Cordicella. Also the name of an herbe. Cordouano, Cordoano, Spanish lea∣ther or cordouane. Also as Corribo. Cordogliére, as Cordegliere. Cordoncini, as Cordelline. Cordóne, a great cord, a hatband. Also the name of a certaine gut in a horse. Córe, a hart, a core. Also a Greeke coine of fower dragmes. Corecino, Coresino, a little hat or core. Coréo, a foote in meetre of two syllables; the one long, the other short. Corgna, the fruit of the tree Corgno. Corgnialc, a wood called dog wood. Corgno, a tree called a dog tree. Corgnola, a kinde of red stone worne in seale rings called a cornix. Cori, an herbe which boiled in wine and giuen to any bodie in a swoune, he will presently sweate and come to himselfe againe. Coriaginoso, sicke of the hide-bound. Coriagmea, sickenes in cattel called hide-bound, that is when the skin doth cleane so fast to their sides that they cannot stir. Coriambi, a foote in meetre hauing the first and last long, and two in the mid∣dleshort. Coriandoli, Coriander comfets. Coriandro, a shrub bearing Coriander graines. Coricante, couchant, a word of armory. Coricare, Corigare, as Corcare. Corila, a hasell nut or filbert. Corilo, a hazell nut or filberd tree. Corimbi, a kinde of loope rings. Corinca, the snarling of a dogge. Corintha, an herbe the iuice whereof is present poison. Corinthi, the small raisons, we call them corans. Corio, a foote in meter of two syllables one long, the other short. Corintho, a kinde of Architecture. Corione, a thin skin or membrane vnder Dura mater. Coriza, a catarrhe or rheume in the nose. Corlare, to winde or reele silke vpon bo∣bins. Corlo, a bottome or clue of thread. Also a reele, a winder or rise to winde silke with. Also a top or gigge that children play withall. Cornacchia, a chough, a dawe, a rooke. Cornacchiare, to chat like a dawe. Cornacchione, a great filthie iackdaw. Also a pratler, a railer. Cornamusa, a bagpipe or a hornet. Looke Fare cornamusa. Cornamusare, to plaie vpon a bagpipe or hornepipe. Also to call aloud to one that will not heare. Cornare, to horne, to set hornes vpon ones head. Also to shocke or but as rams do. Also taken for to call aloud, or impor∣tune one that will not heare. Cornaro, Corniere, a horner. Corna, the hornie tunicle of the eie,
wherein the apple of the eie is placed. Corneggiato, bowing or bending as a horne, horned. Cornéo, harde, hornie, of, or like a horne. Cornetta di caualli, a cornet or troupe of horses, or their ensigne. Cornetta, a kinde of miner hod  schollers and masters of Arts weare  Vniuersities for honor. Also the ensigne which is caried by the Lanciers. Cornettaro, a cornet maker. Also one that windes a cornet. Cornetto, a fish so called in Genoa. Also a cornet or little horne, a bugle, an inck∣horne. Also a cupping glasse. Cornice, a chough, a daw, a rooke. Also a red Cornix stone. Also the ledge where∣on they hang tapistrie in any roome. Also an out-ietting peece or part of a house or wall. Cornicello, a little horne, or bugle. Cornicina, as Corniola. Cornicine del fagiano, the red gilles of a phesant. Cornicione, as Cornice. Cornifero, Cornigero, one bearing hornes. Cornio, Corniola, Corniolo, the cor∣nell or long Cherrie tree: Houndes tree: Dogs-berrie tree: Pricke-timber tree, or gater trull tree, or wilde cherrie tree. Also a red precious stone called a Cornix. Also a kinde of Shepheards cur or mungrell dogge. Cornisone, as Cornice. Cornizaro, a kinde of water fowle or sea rauen. Corno, a horne. Also a kind of brazen in∣strument like a horn. Also the hornes or hard bones growing vnder the saddle in the side of a horse. Also as Cornio. Cornobio, a kinde of little fish. Cornola, a carobe or carobe beane cod. Corno d' homone, one of the most preci∣ous stones or gems in Ethiopia, informe like a rams horne. Cornolo, a carob tree. Cornuola, as Corgnola. Cornuoluzza, a little cornix stone. Cornuto, horned. Also a cuckold. Also a fish so called. Also a kinde of loafe, bun, or roll of bread. Coro, the south winde. Also a Quier of a church, or company of people. Corognale, as Cornio. Corografia, the description of a region or countrie. Corografo, a describer of regions or cun∣tries. Corolario, Corollario, correspondent, agreement with the matter spoken be∣fore. Also an aduantage, an addition, a litle guift, or ouerplus aboue measure. Corona, a crowne, a chaplet, a garlande, a diademe or circlet wherewith prin∣ces bee crowned. Also a companie, a crewe: a circle or rounde of persons standing rounde togither about one. Also a paire or set of beads. Also a peece of coyne called a crowne. Also a rounde circle or compasse about the moone, a signe in heauen vpon the shoulder of Artophylax. Also the rounde circle be∣tweene the white and the apple or sight of the eie. Also the browe of a wall or a pillar to caste off the raine. Also the beginning, ioyning or crowne of the hoofe of a horse. Also a thicke and poin∣ting processe of bones much like to the snagge of a Hartshorne. Also a gar∣land of flowers. Also the brim, tip, or edge of a pot. Corona regia, the herbe Melilot. Corona regale, as Coppa di Gioue. Corona della terra, ground Iuie. Corona castrense, a crowne giuen to him that first inuaded the enimies campe. Corona vallare, idem. Corona murale, a crowne giuen to him that first scaled the wals. Corona ciuica, a garland of oke giuen to him that saued a citizen, by him that was so saued. Corona nauale, a crowne giuen to him that first boarded a ship. Corona rostrata, idem. Corona ossidionale, a crowne giuen to a captaine that raised a force. Corona triomfale, a crowne sent to an Emperour or captaine generall in ho∣nour of triumph. Corona ouale, a crown giuen to a prince or captaine for a victorie without slaughter of men. Corona mirtea, idem. Corona donatica, a crowne giuen for valour and prowes. Corona prouinciale, idem. Coronale, that future or seame which is in the forepart of the skull, compassing the forehead like a halfe circle. Coronale vena, a veine which being a branch of Chilis enuironeth the hart like vnto a crowne. Coronamento, a crowning, a corona∣tion. Coronare, to crowne, to engarlande, to encircle. Coronatione, a coronation. Coronella del piede, the vpper part of the foote. Coronetta, a coronet, a circlet, a chaplet, a garland. Coroniere, a crowner, a maker of beades or crownes. Corossolo, a robin red breast, or red-taile. Corpacciata, a panchfull, a glutting. Corpo, a body, a corps, a corporation, a volume. Corpo di guardia, a corp de gard, the maine watch, a court of gard, the bodie of a watch consisting of a certaine number of souldiers. Corpolénte, Corpulénte, corpulent, big of bodie. Corpolénza, corpulencie, greatnes of bodie. Corporale, corporall, pertaining to a bo∣dy, a boxe wherein priests keepe their hostias or sacrament. Corporéo, hauing a bodie, corporeall. Corporatura, as Corpolenza. Córre, Cólgo, Cólsi, Cólto, Looke Cógliere. Corredare, to adorne, to equip, to rig as ships be, to tackle, to furnish, to adorne, to dight. Corrédi, ornaments, equipage, tacklings of a ship, furnitures, or dightings. Corrédo, is properly those things that a bride hath giuen her by her friends at her marriage. Corréggere, réggo, réssi, rétto, to cor∣rect, to punish, to chastice, to controule. Correggia, a girt, a cingle, a stirrop lea∣ther, a strap, a scourge. Also a latchet of a shoe. Also a girding loude fart. Correggiare, to girt, to scourge, to strap. Also to fart aloude. Correggiata, a blow with a scourge or a strap. Correggiati, Correggiali, the straps of a flaile, or of a stirrop. Also flailes. Correggiaro, Correggiere, a farter, a guirder. Correggimento, a correction. Correggiola, Correggiuola, a little girt, strap, scourge or fart, the squirt or laske. Also a kinde of boyes plaie vsed in Italie. Also swine-grasse, or knot-grasse, or bloud-wort. Correggitore, a corrector, a controuler. Correllatiuo, correllatiue, hauing rela∣tion to another. Corrénte, running, currant. Also a streame or channell of a riuer, a tide. Córrere, corro, corsi, corso, to run. Córrere il palio, to runne a race. Córrere la lancia, to tilt, to runne at tilt. Córrere fortuna, to suffer shipwrack, to be in danger.
Córrere l'istessa fortuna, to runne one same fortune. Córrere pericolo, to runne in danger. Correria, an excursion, an outrode. Correspóndere, to answer to, to be cor∣respondent, to be answerable, to agree vnto. Also to answer for. Correspondénte, that agreeth with, that answereth to, a suretie, correspondent. Correspondénza, a correspondencie, an agreeing with. Corresponditore, that agreeth with, that answereth for, a suretie, a cor∣respondent. Correttione, correction, punishment. Corrétto, corrected, punished, chastised, controuled. Correttore, a corrector, a punisher. Correzza, as Correggia. Correzzuola, as Correggiuola. Corr'huomo, as Corrihuomo. Corribo, as Corriuo. Corricale, a tree, the male whereof is euer barren, and the female euer frute∣full. Corrihuomo, the noise and cry that men make when they raise hue and cry for help. Corridore, Corritore, a runner, a swift horse. Also a long terrase or gallerie. Also the vpper deck of a ship. Corriéro, Corriére, a post, a carrier, a messenger, a pursiuant, a runner. Corriggibile, that may be corrected. Corrispóndere, as Correspondere. Corrispondénte, as Correspondente. Corrispondenza, as Correspondenza. Corriuale, a riuall, a coriuall, a compe∣titor. Corriuare, to arriue or come to a place together. Also to be or plaie the coriuall in loue. Also to banke, to land, or come neere the shore. Corriuo, hastie, foolish, headlong, fond, rash, fond-hardie, foole-hardie, vio∣lent. Also a hastie louer. Also a fellow that will be perswaded to do or say any thing that no bodie else will do, a simple gull, a credulous gull, one more rash then wise. Corrizza, a rheume, or catarrhe, or run∣ning at the nose. Corroborare, to corroborate, or streng∣then. Corroboratione, a corroboration, or strengthning. Corrocciare, to anger, to vexe, to chafe, to fret, to moue to wrath. Corroccio, anger, vexation, wrath, cha∣fing, ire, fretting. Corroccioso, angrie, subiect to anger, wrathfull, irefull, fretfull. Corródere, ródo, rósi, róso, to gnaw, to fret, or corrode. Corrómpere, rompo, ruppi, rotto, to corrupt, to putrifie. Also to bribe. Corrompimento, a corrupting, a cor∣ruption. Also a bribing. Corrompitore, a corrupter, a briber. Corrosiua, a corosiue. Also corosiue. Corróso, gnawne, fretted, or corroded. Also as Caroliccio. Corrottione, a corruption, a putrefa∣ction, a bribing. Corrotto, corrupted, rotten, putrified, bribed. Also mourning or sorowing for the dead. Corruca, a bird called a tittling. Also the bird which hatcheth the cckoes g. Corrucciare, as Corrocciare. Corruccio, as Corro. Corruccioso, as Corrocioso. Corruscare, to lighten▪ , to flash, to brandish. Corrusco, Corruscatione, a lightning, a sparkling, a flashing, or fier in the ayre. Corruttla, a corruption, a corrupting. Corruttibile, corruptible. Corruttione, as Corrottione. Corrutto, as Corrotto. Corruttore, as Corrompitore. Corsa, a running or race, or course of horses. Corsaldo, a horse called a courser of Naples. Corsale, Corsaro, a pirate, or rouer by sea. Corsalare, to rob by sea, to commit pira∣cie, to play the pirate. Corsaletto, a corselet, or an armour of a foote-souldier compleate. Corseggiare, to roue, to runne, to gad, or range vp and downe, to plaie the pirate. Corsesca, a kinde of darting or shooting weapon, some take it for a partisan or iauelin. Corsia, a crane in a ship. Also the vpper deck of a ship, a planke, or the hatches in a ship. Corsiere, Corsiero, a fleede or courser of Naples. Corso, a course or running or race of a horse, a place where races are run. Also a kinde of wine in Corsica. Also the participle of Correre, run. Corsore, as Cursore. Also a kinde of rundlet or firkin or little barrell for dry things. Corta, short, briefe, curtald. Cortalda, a kind of short bumbard, cham∣ber or pot-gun. Cortaldo, a curtall, a horse without a taile. Cortare, to shorten, to curtall, Corte, a court or palace of a prince, a guild  magistrates sit. Also a yard.  trew of magistrates . A court of alder∣ cia, the rinde or barke of a tree. Also a hide, a skin or a fell. Corteccioso, rugged as the barke of a tree. Cortegiana, a curtezan, a harlot, a strumpet, a whore. Cortegianare, to court it, to play the cur∣tier, to play the curtizan or to followe harlots. Cortegianamenti, courtings, courtiers-hollie-water trickes, curtezans prankes or deuises. Cortegianesco, courtier-like or curte∣zan-like. Cortegiania, courtier-ship. Cortegiano, a courtier. Corteggiare, to court or faune vpon one, to blandish or make loue vnto. Cortellaro, a knife-maker, a cutler. Cortellata, a blow or lash or cut or wound with a knife. Cortellino, a pen-knife, a little knife. Cortello, anie kind of knife, a whittle. Cortesana, as Cortegiana. Cortesano, as Cortegiano. Cortese, courteous, louing, milde, kinde gentle, meeke, affable. Corteseggiare, to shew courtesie, louing∣nes, or kindnes, to faune vpon one. Cortesia, courtesie, kindnes, mildnes, meek∣nes, affabilitie, gentlenes. Cortezza, as Corteccia. Also shortnes or breuitie. Corticcia, as Corteccia. Cortice, the smooth barke of a tree good to carue or graue in. Corticella, a little court, yard or backe∣side of a house. Cortigiana, as Cortegiana. Cortigianare, as Cortegianare. Cortiglio, as Cortile. Cortile, a court, a yard or back-side of a house. Cortina, a curtain of a bed. also a curtain of a long wall running leuell from one bulwarke to another. Cortinaggio, the curtaines or valance of a bed. Also a sparuis of a bed. Cortinare, to encurtine, to flank or forti∣fie about with a wall. Corto, short, briefe, succinct. Coruare, to bend, to stoop, to make crooked.
Corue, Corbe, as Curba. Coruetta, a coruet, a fault, a prancing or continuall dancing of a horse. Coruee, to coruet or prance as horses of sice are taught to do. Coruia, Coruina, a stone of manie ver∣tues, which they say is found in a rauens est, fetch thither by the rauen: if in hir absence a man haue sodden her egs and laid them in the nest againe to make them raw againe. Coruo, crooked, bent, hooked. Also a ra∣uen or crow. Also a kind of fish called a cabot. Coruzzo, some take it for the raile, and some for another bird. Cosa, a thing in generall, gheare, a mat∣ter. Cosalina, Cosaretta, as Cosetta. Cosaria, as Ceretta. Cosche, a kinde of venemous shrubbe or weede. Coschinomante, a soothsaier by sieues or searces. Coscia, a thigh, a hip, a hanch, a gammon. Cosciale, a peece of armour called a cui∣shard, bicause it couers the thigh. Coscie, thighs, hips or hanches. Coscieggiare, to clap on the thighes or buttocks. Also to dallie, to dandle, to play, or grope on the thighes or hips. Coscienza, as Conscientia. Cosciette, Cosciettine, little pretti thighes, hips, or hanches. Coscietto, a leg of mutton, or a pestle of porke. Coscinello, as Cossinetto, Coscinetto, as Cossinetto. Coscino, a cushin, a cushinet. Coscuta, as Cuscuta. Coscioni, cuishards, armour for the thighes; it hath been vsed for breeches or slops. Coserta, Cosalina, a little thing, a toy, a trife, a iest, a bable. Cosi, so, thus, as, like, as well, as much. Cosiche, so that. Cosicome, euen as, so as, like as. Cosi cosi, so so, indifferently, in meane sort. Cosifattamente, in such sort, thus. Cosifatto, thus, such, like, so made. Cosino, as Coscino. Cosmico, of the world, or worldlie. Cosmico nascer dellestelle, the arising of any starre in the day time. Cosmico occaso, the falling of any star in the day time. Cosmografia, the arte of Cosmographie, or describing of the world. Cosmógrafo, a cosmgrapher, or descri∣ber of the world. Cosmologia, a description of all things created, or discoursing of the world. Cospárgere, spargo, sparsi, sparso, to sprinkle with or together, to scatter, to strow, to mingle with. Cosparso, Cosparto, sprinkled with or together. Cospérgere, spergo, spersi, cosperto, as Cospargere. Cospétto, the presence, view, or aspect of a man. Cospi, wooden pattins, or pantofles, shoes with wooden soles, startops, or ga∣lages. Cospirare, Cospiratione, as Conspi∣rare. Cossetti, little pesties of porke, or legs of mutton, or such. Cossi, a kinde of noysome vermine, or hog∣louse. Also wrinkles in ones face. Cossico, belonging to the arte of figu∣rate numbers. Cossino, a cushion, a cushinet. Cossinello, as Cossinetto. Cossinetto, a little cushion, or cushinet, a seamsters cushion, a post pillion. Also a little pillow or boulster for any thing, a stuffing or bumbassing. Cosso, a kinde of fishers basket to catch fish in. Cossolo, the cod or shale, or huske of any pulse. Costà, there, thether, in yond place. Cósta, a rib or coast of any bodie. Also a coast of a countrie, an habitation, or dwelling place, a little hill or craggie hillock. Also a side. Also the back of a knife. Also a stalke or stem of a leafe. Costa canina, the herbe dogs rib. Costaggiu, there belowe, or beneath. Costana, a disease vpon a horses back. Costante, constant, stedfast, firme, re∣solute. Costanza, constancie, stedfastnes, per∣seuerance. Costare, to cost in price. Also comelines. Also a side or rib of a man. Costato, ribbed, that hath ribs. Also the side, the breast, or whole ribs of any creature. Costeggiare, to coast, or go along any coast. Also to approch. Costei, this woman. Costellatione, a constellation. Costernare, to trouble, to vexe, to asto∣nish, to abash, to affright, to ouerthrow in minde. Costernatione, a trouble, feare, sorow, anguish, amazement, or astonishment of the minde. Costéuole, Costóso, costlie, chargeable, deere in price. Costi, there, yonder, in that place. Costiale, a cuishard, or piece of armor for the thighs. Costiéro, aslope, sidelin, wide, askew. Costinci, thence, from thence. Costionare, to question. Also to contend or quarell. Costione, a question, a contention, a quarell. Costionéuole, questionable, quarelsome, contentious, litigious. Costituire, as Constituire. Costitutione, a constitution. Costo, coste, or charge. Also the herbe Coaste or herbe Marie. Cóstola, the stalke or rib of any leafe, the back of a knife. Costoluto, that hath good ribs, that is strong, tough or hard. Costóro, these men. Costoso, costlie, chargeable. Costréngere, as Costringere. Costretto, constrained, forced, compelled, vrged. Costringere, stringo, strinsi, stretto, to constraine, to force, to compell, to vrge. Constrúggere, struggo, strussi, strutto, to conster, to frame, to build, to con∣struct. Construttione, a construction, a framing, a building. Costrutto, construed, built; framed, con∣structed. Also a construction. Costui, this man, this same man. Costumare, to teach nurture, manners, or ciuilitie, to accustome, to vse to be wont, to enure. Costumatamente, mannerlie, ciuilie. Also by wont, cstome, or habit, won∣tedlie. Costumatezza, mannerlines, or ciuilitie. Costumato, accustomed, vsed, wont. Also mannerlie, ciuill, well brought vp. Costume, Costuma, custome, fashion, vse, guise, wont, habit, vre. Costumi, manners, education, nurtures, good fashions. Costura, a seame or sowing of any gar∣ment. Costure, comelines, handsomnes. Also seames. Cotaio, a piece of an old shoe that mo∣wers vse to hang at their girdle, and keepe their whetstone in. Cotale, such, like, so made. Also as we say what you call it. Also taken for a mans or womans priuities. Cotalina, a little pretie thing, or quaint.
Cotanti, so many, thus many. Cotanto, so much, thus much. Cotare, to quote, or to note. Cotatione, a quotation, or a noting. Cotatoio, as Cotaio. Cóte, a whetstone, or a touchstone. Cotecha, as Cotenna. Cotegia, a touch-stone. Cotenna, the skinne or hide of any crea∣ture. Also the soard of bakon. Cotenella, a little thin skin, hide, or filme. Cotesta, this, this same woman or thing. Coteste, these things or women. Cotesti, these things or men. Cotesto, this, this same thing or man. Cotestóro, these men. Cotestui, this man, this same man. Cothurno, as Coturno. Cotica, as Cotenna. Coticola, a thin, little, tender skinne or filme. Coticone, a great gull, sot, patch, lubbar, lourdain, or meacock. Cotidiano, daily, cotidian. Cotigiè, leather hosen, or trusses such as our elders were woont to weare. Cotila, a Greeke dry measure of fower Osibasi. Cotonare, to cotton, to bumbace, to thrum, or set a nap vpon. Cotone, cotton, bumbace, a nappe or a thrum. Cotonéa, an herbe like Orgament. Cotognare, to preserue, to conserue, or candie as marmalade is. Cotognato, preserued, conserued, can∣died. Also Marmalade made of Quin∣ces. Cotogni, Quinces. Cotremola, as Cotretola. Cotretola, a birde called a Wagtaile. Cotretula, as Cotretola. Cotronise, a Quaile. Cotta, any kinde of coate or vpper gar∣ment. Also a haking, rosting, or seeth∣ing. Cotta delle arme, a heraulds coate, a coate of armour. Cottame, any thing that is baked, boiled, or rested. Cottigli, all manner of boyled meates. Cotto, boyled, sodden, baked, rosted. Also drunken or tipsie. Also a kinde of sodden wine called cute. Cottoia, a quotation or perfecting of any thing. Cottone, as Cotone. Cottura, a boiling or dressing of meate. Also a smarting, a burning, or scalding. Also a concoction. Also a nealing or baking of glasses when they are made. Coturnice, a Quaile. Coturno, a kinde of buskin. Also a loi tragicke stile. Also a wanton or effemi∣nate garment. Coua, as Couata. Couadori, a kinde of birde alwaies sit∣ting. Coualle, a valley, a dale, or a lowe be∣tweene two hils. Couamele, a base abiect swaine or groome. one that milkes a cows in the stable. Also a nickname of disgrace for a rascall, or a dastard. Couare, to hath, to couie, to brood, to coure as a hen doth ouer hir egges or chickens. Couarella, as Capelluta. Couata, a couie of partridges, a beuie of phesants, a broode of chickens, an ayrie of haukes: or any birds hatching or sitting, a nestfull, a layrie, an eyas. Couaticcio, an addle or rotten egge. Couatremola, a bird called a Wagtaile. Couelle, trifles, nifles, or matters of no∣thing. Couerchiare, as Coprire. Couerchiate fiche, a kind of figge so cal∣led as our fraile figs be. Couerta, a couerlet, a couer, a hilling, a lid. Couertoio, the testern of a bed, or of a Well. Couertura, a couerture or couering. Couiglio, as Couile. Couile, a dog kenell, a hogs stie. Also a roosting place, a dogge hole. Couo, a hatching vpon egges, a couie, a hens sitting. Couolo, a kinde of fowling net, springe or gin, or pipe to call birds. Also a kinde of trays or wooden bowle. Couone, a great nest, a couie, a beuie, a broode, a squatting cowring fellowe, a couch, a rooste. Courire, as Coprire. Cozzare, to but, to shocke, to thumpe, to iumpe, or shoulder as rams do. Cozzo, a butting, a shocke, an encounter, a shouldring. Also a blanket to wrap a childe in that nurces vse. Cozzolo, a certaine iron instrument in a ship. Also a knuckle bone. Cozzonare, to breake horses, to plaie the horse-courser, or knauish knaue. Cozzonato, broken, beaten, drest, well tugd, past all danger, knauish. Cozzone, a horse-courser, a horse brea∣ker, a craftie knaue. Crai, hath beene vsed for Domani, to mroe. Craizo, a kinde of Dutchmonie. Crambetta, atrne, a sal, a  or pransing of a hoos. Craneo, as Cranio. Crangini, little shrimpes, or pres. Cranio, the pan o  wherein the brain lyeth. Cranocolatte, a kinde of spid. Crapula, Crapola, furfeit, excesse, gor∣mandizing, o gulletting. Crapulare, Crapolare, to surfeit, to gor∣mandize, to commit excesse in meat and drink. Crapulatore, a surfeiter, a gormand, a glutton, a gullie-gut. Crapulone, idem. Crassame, any thick dreggis matter. Also the thicknes of any thing, a spissenes. Crasso, thicke, spisse, grosse, clubbish. Crasta, as Grasta, a flower pot, a lillie pot. Crate, a hurdle. Some take it for a Har∣rowe. Crategono, the herbe arse-smart, or cul∣lerage. Craticula, as Graticula, or Gratug∣gia. Cratitia, that is made of reedes, rods, or sticks, wrought like a hurdle. Crea, Creta, chalke, claie, or . Creado, creatd. Also a seruant or foster childe. Also ciuill, mannerly, or well brought vp. Creanza, nurune, manners, education, ciuilitie. Creare, to create, to engnder, to beget, to make, to frame. Creatione, a creation. Creato, created, begotten. Also as Creo∣do, a seruant of ones bringing vp. Creatore, a creator, a maker, a framer. Creatura, a creature. Crebbi, Crebbe, Crebbero, of Cres∣cere, I, he, or they did grow or increase. Crebe, Crebre, oftentimes, many times, frequented, thicks, full of. Also I finde it vsed for shoulders. Credentiere, a cupboards keeper, a but∣ler, a steward. Also a creditor, one that trusteth. Also a princes taster, cupbea∣rer, or assaier. Credential, a letter of credence or trust. Credenza, credence, credite, trust, confi∣dence, safe-condit. Also a tken, a pledge, a pawne. Also a cubbod of plate, a butterie, a court ubbode of plate in a chamber. Also the taste or as∣saie of a pres meate and drinke. Al∣so a fault that some horses haue, who turne not so readily on the one side as on the other, a refusing to turne of one hand.
Credente, credulous, beleeuing, trusting. Credére, credo, credei, creduto, to be∣leeued, to trust, to credite, to affie. Credibile, credible, that may be beleeued. Credibilità, beleefe, crediblenes. Créditi, debts, credites. Crédito, credit, trust, beleefe, affiance, loyaltie, truth, faith. Creditóre, a creditor, one that belieueth or trusteth. Credo, a beleefe, a creede. Credulità, credulitie, beleefe. Crédulo, credulous, beleeuing. Créma, the creame or best of any thing. Cremastice, two long and slender mus∣kles by which the stones of a man are drawne vpward, least by loose hanging downe, the seminarie vessels shoulde be ouerladen. Cremento, encrease, an encreasing. Also the seed of man or any other male crea∣ture. Cremesi, Cremesino, crimson, skarlet, stamell in graine. Cremore, yeast, barme, quickning, gods good, good speede. Also the creame or simpring of milke when it seethes. Crena, a notch in a score, a nocke in a bowe or arrowe: the nib, slit, or clift of a pen. Also ags or notches aboue the edges of leaues, indentures or such like. Crenedi, a kinde of beast in India. Crepa, as Cranio. Crepacci, the scratches, cratches, or rats tailes in a horse. Some construe it to be little chaps or rifts about the cronet of the horses hoofe. Crepacuore, harts bursting, harts griefe or sorrow, or any other passion of the hart. Looke Acrepa cuore. Crepaggine, might and maine, harts bursting. Also a bursting or cracking. Crepanella, the herbe leade-woort. Crepare, Creppare, to burst, to cracke, or riue a sunder, to chap. Crepatura, a bursting, a cracking, a ri∣uing a sunder, a chap. Crepitacolo, a shrill timbrell, a rattle for children. Crepitante, cracking, crackling, ratling. Crepitare, to cracke, to crackle, to rattle. Crepito, a crack, or a crackling, a ratling, a rush, a rap, or any violent sound. Crepito di denti, a chattring of the teeth. Creppare, Creppatura, as Crepare. Crepusculo, as Crepuscio. Crepuscio, the twilight either in the eue∣ning or morning. Crepuscie, things borne about twilight. Crepuso, a vanter in speeche, one that speaketh with maiestie. Cresce, or Crescinmano, the name of a saint vsed wantonly by Bocace, as much to say as sain standing or growing in a womans hand. Crescenta, a kinde of whitepot or tarte. Also meate to cram pullets. Crescénte, growing, encreasing. Also the halfe moone or a croisant. Crescentine, a kinde of cakes with spice and butter in them. Crescénza, a growing, an encrease. Also the flowing of the sea. Crescenza di carne, a kinde of carnosi∣tie, or growing of knobs of flesh about some men. Créscere, cresco, crebbi, cresciuto, to grow, to encrease, to flowe, to waxe. Crescimento, a growing, an encrease, a flowing, a waxing. Crescinmano, as Cresceinmano. Crescioni, the weede water Cresses. Cresima, a crisum vsed at christening of children. Also an vnction. Looke Man∣dar a cresima. Cresimare, to crisum or annoint. Crespa, a curling, a frizling, a crisping, a wrinckling. Also curled, frizled, cris∣ped, or wrinckled. Crespare, to curle, to frizle, to crispe, to wrinckle, to plaite, to wither, to pucker. Crespatura, a curling, a frizling, a cris∣ping, a wrimpling, a withering, a plai∣ting. Crespello, a kind of bird. Crespine, an herbe or a weed. Also goose∣berries, some vse it for berberies. Crespo, wrinkled, withered, frizled, cur∣led, puckered, crisped. Cresta, a coxe-combe or a creste. Also a bunch of fethers in a helmet. Also a dis∣ease that comes in the fundament of man or woman, called the piles or he∣morrhoides. Also monie in gibbrish or rogues language. Cresta di gallo, the herbe cox-combe or yellow rattle. Also a cox-combe. Creste, the disease called the piles or he∣morrhoides. Crestoso, creftie, full of the piles on hemor∣rhoides, rugged, skuruie, full of sores or scabs. Crestuto, as Crestoso. Creta, chalke, claie, loame. Also the weede called Sampier. Cretale, a plot of chalke, loame or claie. Creta marina, the weede Sampier. Some take it to be the Semper viuens. Cretica, as Alima. Creticolatio, a kinde of verse or foote of sixe syllables. Cretoso, loamie, chalki, clayish. Criare, to create, to foster, to ture or bring vp. Crianza, as Creanza. Criado, Criato, as Creado. Cribare, to sift, to searce, to fanne, to win∣now. Cribo, a seue, a searce, a fan, a winnow. Cribrare, as Cribare. Cribro, as Cribo. Cricca, a game at cardes vsed in Italie. Also a Printers toole so called. Also a rout, a crue, a troupe or knot of good fel∣lowes. Chricchiare, to creake as a cart wheele, to cricke. Cricco, a crick. Also as Capriccio. Criccoso, as Capriccioso. Criccone, a game at cardes so called. Crida, Crido, a crye, a report, a procla∣mation, a crying. Cridare, to crie, to whine, to chide, to pro∣claime. Criminale, criminall, faultie or capitall wherein is offence. Crimine, a crime, a fault. Crinale, a haire lace. Also a crispin-wier or bodkin that women vse about their haires. Crine, the haire of man or woman. Crinita stella, a blazing star or a comete. Crinuto, hairie, bushie, shaggie. Crippione, a rack, a manger or stale in a stable. Crisaria, a scab in horses called the crowne scab. Crisi, the conflict betweene nature and sicknes. Also the vnction or annointing. Crisima, Crisimare, as Crésima. Crisite, gold fome comming of tryed lead. Also a precious stone. Crisoberillo, a kind of precious stone shi∣ning like gold. Crisocollo, a minerall found like sand in the veines of brasse, siluer or gold or bo∣ras that goldsmiths vse to solder with. Crisocomo, a kinde of stone to trie the goodnes of gold. Crisocome, Crisogono, a kind of herbe. Crisolampo, a precious stone darke and pale by day, cleere and fierie by night. Crisoletro, a precious stone that drawes amber vnto it: if it come in sight of fire it will flie into it. Crisólito, a stone called a chrisolite. Crispino, crisped, curled, frisled. Also a kind of glistring stone. Cristallino, christalline, transparent, cleere, sounding. Cristallo, christall. Cristallóide, the light, the cleere or tran∣sparencie
or sight of any bodies eies. Cristégio, a glister or a suppositorie. Cristélla, a bird called a howpe. Cristéo, cristiére, a glister a suppositorie. Critica, an arte of cutting of stones. Criticale, critical, which iudgeth by obser∣uations written. Critico, criticke, iudging mens acts and workes written. Criuellare, to sieue, to sift, to searce, to winnow. Criuellarò, a sifter. Also a sieue maker. Criuéllo, a sieue, a sift, a winnow, a searce. Criues, a kind of trout or Salmon trout. Criuo, as Criuéllo. Criuola, a coupe or pen to keepe poultrie vnder. Crocalle, a precious stone much like a cherie. Crocalo, a fowle called a Seamew. Crocare, to croke as a rauen doth. Crocca, a croche, a snap, a creake. Also a sickle. Croccare, as Crocchiare. Crocchiare, to halt or goe on crutchets. Also to snort at the nose. To keepe a great showting or clapping of handes. Also to crackle, to creeke, to snap. Also to crake or brag. Also to stagger or shake. Also to strike as the clocke. Crocchiate, clappings of hands, houtings or shoutings. Crocchio, a shaking, a crackling. Also one that goes on crutchets. Also a croke, a snap, a creaking or clicking. Also a snaphance of a piece. Also some part a∣bout a mans nose. Crocciare, to vex, to fret, to be moodie, to be wrathfull, to anger. Also to clocke as a hen doth that hath yoong chickens. Crocciata, as Crociata. Croccicchiare, to crutch or go on crut∣chets. Croccicchiero, a crutchet-Fryer or one going on crutchets. Also a crutching fel∣low. Croccicchio, a crutch, a crutchet. Croccie, crutchets. Crocciette, haycocks or such heapes. Also little crosses or crutchets. Also croslets. Also a Bishops crosier. Crocciola, the handle or hold of a sieth. Also a silke winders reele or rise. Also a pearch or a stocke to remooue and set hawkes vpon. Crocciolare, to croke or crie as a crow or a rauen. Also to knead paste. Crocciole, crutchets that lame men vse to go with. Crocco, as Crocchio. Croce, a crosse, a torment. Croceare, to crosse, to marke with a crosse. Crocefiggere, as Crocifiggere. Crocefisso, as Crocifisso. Crocéo, a saffron colour. Croceola, a kinde of weede growing a∣mongst corne. Also a little crosse. Crocette, croslets. Also as Crocchiette. Also a kinde of sling to shoote stones with. Crocheggiare, to strout it and put out the necke, as a turkie-cocke doth being angrie, to strut or rouze vp. Crociata, a crusado. Also a crosse-way. Also the herbe crossewort or golden mugwet. Also a kinde of torture or tor∣ment. Crocietta, a little crosse or croslet in ar∣morie. Also a crutchet or a crotchet. Crocífero, a bearer of the crosse. Also a knight of any order of the crosse. Crocifiggere, figgo, fissi, fislo, to cru∣cifie, or martyre, or torture. Crocifissione, a crucifying, or torturing. Crocifisso, a crucifixe. Also crucified. Crocifissore, a crucifier. Crocigeri, crutchet friers. Crociola, a hawkes pearch, or little stock to set a hawke vpon. Crocióli, cruses, or little melting pots for goldsmithes. Crocitante, croaking as a rauen, or cack∣ling as a hen. Crocitare, to croke like a rauen. Also to cackle as a hen. Cróco, saffron, or the flower of saffron. Crocodillo, a Crocodrill, or Crocodile, which onely stirres his vpper iawe or chap. Also an herbe, that touching any bodies nose with it, it will presently gush out with bloud. Crocoton, a kinde of garment of the colour of saffron. Crocuta, a beast gotten betweene a Lio∣nesse and a Hiena, hauing his row of teeth of one piece alone. Crogioli, as Crocioli. Crogliare, to cry and chafe as a turkie cock when he is angrie. Croglio, the anger or fretting of a beast, as of a turkie cock when he is angrie. Croiare, to waxe hard, to harden, to bake or make in crust. to speake in the throat. Croio, foule, fat, greasie, gulchie. Also harsh speaking in the throte. Crollare, to shake, to tosse, to tremble, to wag, to tot, or totter. Crollare il pero, to shake a peare tree, but taken, to tickle a womans roundlie. Crollatura, a shaking, a wagging, a tossing. Crollo, a shaking, a fall, a tossing, a tot∣ting. Croma, a burning iron. Also pleasant and delightsome musike with descant, faining or quauering. Cromatica musica, musicke deuided by halfe notes. Cromatico, one whose colour is tanned in the sunne, or one who neuer blusheth. Crome, a crotchet in musike, that is the fourth part of a note. Cromi, a kinde of fish. Crónaca, as Cronica. Crónica, a chronickle, a note of acts done, with the time expressed. Croniche, a kinde of lingring feuer or ague in a horse. Cronica nascer della stelle, the arising of any starre in the day time. Cronista, Cronichista, a Chronicler. Cropa, a rump of a bird. Cropiera, a crupper of a horse. Also a dock for a horse. Croppa, a crupper. Crosata, as Crociata. Croscere, Croscuito, as Crosciare. Croscia di acqua, a storme, a gale, a berrie, or flaw of winder, a tempest or blustring of many stormes together bringing water. Also a sodaine showre. Crosciare, as Crollare, but properly the clashing, or clattering, or falling of haile and raine with violence vpon the tiles of a house. Also to crush. Crosolo, a goldsmiths melting pot, or cruse. Crosserone, a robin redbrest. Crosta, a crust. Also a scurfe or skab. Al∣so vsed for ice. Crostacei pesci, as Crostarei. Crostame, chippings, or crusts. Crostare, to crust, to scurffe, to grow hard. Crostaréi pesci, rugged, hard, stonie shell fishes. Crostata, a kinde of daintie pye, chewet, or such paste meate. Croste, crusts or parings. Crostelli, as Crostata. Crostuta, the paring or pilling of a mans skinne away. Crótalo, a musicall instrument, made like a great ring of brasse, and beaten with an iron rod maketh a sweete har∣monie. Also a childs rattle or bell. Also a cimball, a gingling rattle or clapper. Crotesca, a kinde of antique worke in any thing. Also fretted or carued worke. Crucciare, to vexe, to anger, to fret, or moue to wrath, to molest, to torment, to
torture, to rack. Croto, a bird like a Swanne, with a bag vnder his chin, braying like an asse. Cruccicchiero, as Croccicchiero. Cruccio, as Corroccio. Crucciolo, as Crosolo. Cruccicchio, a crutchet. Also a crosse way. Cruccioso, as Corroccioso. Cruciata, an herbe growing on moun∣taines. Also as Crociata. Crucifero, as Crocifero. Crucifisso, as Crocifisso. Crudele, cruell, fell, moodie, fierce or vn∣gentle. Crudelire, lisco, lito, to waxe cruell or fell. Crudeleggiare, as Crudelire. Crudeltà, Crudelità, crueltie. Crudezza, rawnes, cruditie. Crudità, rawnes, cruditie. Crudo, raw, crude. Also fell, moodie, cru∣ell, surly. Cruénte, bloodie, moodie, fell, cruell, bloo∣die minded, blood thirstie. Cruentoso, as Cruente. Cruità, rawnes of a wound, and blood comming out. Cruna, the eye of a needle. Cruore, blacke gaore-blood. Crusca, bran of flower. Cruscata, a thing made of bran. Also as Fagiolata. Crustacei, as Crostarei. Crustula, a pancake, a fritter. Also a little crust. Cuba, a coope or pen to keepe poultrie in. Also a bed, a couch or horselitter. Cubaita, a kinde of sweete cake or march∣pane. Cubare, to lie downe, to lie in childbed. Cubebe, the fruit of an herbe that apothe∣caries sell, called Cubebs. Cubia, a slip or lesh for a dog. Also the couples for spaniels. Cubiare, to couple vp hounds or dogs. Cubiculario, a chamberlaine, a chamber or bedfellow. Cubiculo, a chamber. Cubile, a bed, a couch, a nest or a den. Cubitale, a fore-sleeue for the arme no further then the elbow. Also a cushion for ones elbow. Cubito, a cubit or an elbowt. Also from the elbow to the ende of the middle fin∣ger. Also a measure of a foote and a half or foure and twentie inches. Cubo, a cube or figure fower square like a die. Cucagna, the epicures or gluttons home, the land of all delights, so taken in moc∣kerie. Cucca, a babie, a foolish toy or trifle. Cuccaia, a cuckoes nest, hole or roost. Cucchi, monie in gibbrish or rogues lan∣guage. Cucchiaruoli da montagna, a kinde of countrie meate. Cucchiaio, Cucchiaro, a spoone. Also a ladle. Cucchino, a knaue, a varlet, a lout, a wag. Cucchio, a kinde of small money. Cuccia, a kinde of ioyners fretted worke: it is also a couch or trundlebed: vsed also for an ape, a pug or monkie. Also a whelp or puppie. Cucciare, to whelpe as a bitch. Cucciaro, Cucciaio, as Cucchiaro. Cuccietto, Cuccinólo, a verie yoong puppie or whelp, a playing dog. Cucciolo, a kind of snailes. Also as Cor∣riuo. Cucco, the bird called a Cuckoo, and idle, loytring, gasing gull. Also a fish called a gournard, a red fish or a rotchet. Also taken for a minion, a fauorite or pigs∣neye. Cuccouáia, a place where cuckoes roost or build. Also a flim-flam, cuckoes tale or song. Cuccoueggia, cockshoot or twilight. Al∣so an owle tide to a stocke to catch other birdes with. Cuccoueggiare, to sing or play the cuc∣koe. Also to catch other birdes with an owle. Cuccuma, pouting, louting, mumping, frowning, chafing. Cuccuzza, a gourd, a pompilion. Also a bottle or salt boxe made of a gourd. Al∣so a paring of a gourd or pompilion. Cucina, a kitching, a skullerie. Cucinare, to dresse meate or play the cooke. Cucinaria, the arte of cookerie. Cucinatore, a man cooke. Cuciniera, a woman cooke. Also a kit∣ching maide. Cuciniére, a man cooke. Cucire, cucio, cucito, to sowe with a needle. Cucitrice, a shee-seamster or sower. Cucitúra, a seame or sowing. Cucitusa, a part of a mans priuities. Cucuglio, Cuculio, a cuckoe birde. Also a kind of cowle or hood. Cucula, Cuculla, a friers cowle or munks hood, as Cocolla. Cuculare, Cucullare, to hood or attire a Frier. Also to cry, as a cuckoe. Cuculli, silke wormes. Also cuckoes. Also gournards or rotchets. Cuculo, a cuckoebird. Also a fish called a gournard or a cur. Cucumero, a cucumber. Cucurbità seluatica, as Coloquintida. Cucurma, a kind of three cornered rush or cane, so great that they make walking stickes of them. Cucurire, risco, rito, to crowe as a cocke. Cucuzza, as Cuccuzza. Cucuzzolo, the vppermost top, tip or spire of any thing; but namely of a hill. Cueuri, Cuemari, a fish called a sardine: it is like a sprat. Cuffia, a coiffe, a caule, a biggin, a night∣cap. Cuffiare, to coyfe or put on a coife, or a caule or a nightcap. Cuffione, Cuffiotto, a coiffe, a caule, a biggin or womans head night attire. Cufurma, a tortoise or shell crab. Cugino, a cosin, a brother in lawe. Cugino germano, a cosin germaine. Cuglia, a pinacle or spire of a steeple. Cugno, a wedge to cleaue wood. Cui, whose, to whom, of whom, by whose, whom, from whom. Culabrese, as of Calabria we say Cala∣brese, so of Culo we say Culabrese. Culacciare, to beat or clap on the arse. Culacciate, claps on the arse. Culare, the arsegut or pertayning to the arse. Culatorio, a woord of mockerie, as wee would say arserie. Culate, the buttockes, the bummes, the hippes. Culatta, the breech of a piece of ordinance. the seat of a saddle. Culattare, to clap on the buttocks. Culattore, a beast hauing a rich furre or skin. Culcitra, as Cultrice. Culd' asino, a fish called in latin. Vrtica. Culdi, a Greeke measure of liquid things. Culla, a cradle. Cullare, to lull or rocke the cradle. Cullura, a wad or wase of straw or rags to carrie any thing on vpon the heade with, as milke women vse vnder their pailes or buckets. Culo, the arse, taile, fundament or bum. Culobianco, a birde called a gnat-snap∣per. Culpa, fault, blame, guilt. Culpeuole, faultie, blamewoorthie, guil∣tie. Cultiuabile, eareable, that may be manu∣ned, tilled or husbanded. Cultiuare, to till, to manure, to plough; to eare the ground, vsed of Bocace to occu∣pie
a womans hand. Also to polish, to correct, to ouersee. Cultiuatore, a ploughman, a husband∣man. Culto, husbanded, plowghed, manured. Also corrected, polished. Also the wor∣ship or seruice of God. Cultore, a husbandman, a ploughman. Cultremola, a wagtaile. Cultrice, a quilt, a couerlet or counter∣point for a bed. Cultura, husbandrie, tillage, manuring, ploughing. Cumatile, a kinde of colour which pain∣ters vse. Cumolanza, a heaping or hoording vp. Cumolare, to heape, to hoord vp, to lay vp in store. Cumolo, a heape, a masse. Also increase. Cumulanza, as Cumolanza. Cumulatione, as Cumolanza. Cumulare, as Cumolare. Cumulo, as Cumolo. Cuna, a cradle. Cunare, to rocke the cradle. Cuneato, in forme of a wedge, sharpe cor∣nered. Cúneo, a wedge to cleaue wood, a coine or a corner of a wall in building. Cuniare, as Coniare. Cuniatore, as Coniatore. Cuniculo, an vndermyning engin of war. Cunilaggine, the herbe winter sauory, or as some thinke Orgament. Cunno, a womans priuie part. Cunnuta, a woman nocked. Cuntatione, slacknes, slownes, delaying, prolonging or lingring of time, a de∣mur in law. Also a staggering. Cuntatore, a lingrer, a prolonger, a slo∣wer or deferrer of time. Cuoca, a woman cooke. Cuocaria, the arte of cookerie. Also a cookes shop. Cuócere, cuóco, cócqui, cótto, as Có∣cere. Cuociore, as Cociore. Cuócola, a pot to stew meate in, a pipkin or posenet. Cuocóme, a brazen vessell for pots to stand in at a cubboord. Cuocouáia, as Cuccaia. Also a kinde of bird. Cuogóma, a paile or bucket. Also a ket∣tle. Cuógola, a flint-stone or a pibble-stone Cuoiaio, Cuoaro, a currier or tanner of leather. Also a fell munger. Cuóio, leather, hides, or fell. Cuór, Cuóre, a hart or courage. Also a core of any fruit. Cuorame, any kind of leather drest. Cuoricino, a prettie little sweete hart. Cupella, a kind of bucket or skoope. Cúpere, cupio, cupei, cupito, to desire, to wish, to couet, to thirst after. Cupéta, a march pane or sweete cake. Cupidigia, as Cupidità. Cupídine, desire, lust, longing. Cupidità, couetousnes, greedines, aua∣rice. Cúpido, the god of loue or lust. Also gree∣die, desirous or couetous. Cupillo, Cuppio, a hiue for Bees or the hole or mouth of a Beehiue. Cúpo, full, deepe or high. Also a Beehiue. Cupola, a spire-steeple. Cúppola, a chappell or a church. Cúppula, a spire-steeple. Cupresso, vsed for Cipresso. Cura, care, thought or charge: a care. Curabile, curable, that may be cured. Cura denti, tooth-picks. Cura destri, a iakes goong or doong far∣mer. Cura orecchij, an eare-picke. Curante, caring, regarding, healing, ma∣king cleane. Curare, to cure, to care, to take thought, to dresse or cure a hurt, to heale, to cleanse, to make cleane, to picke. Curata, Curatella, as Coradella. Curatiére, a broker or spokes man. Curatione, a cure, a charge. Curatiua medicina, curing or healing phisicke. Curatore, a broker or spokesman. Also a curat or one that hath a charge or cure. Curba, a swelling in a horse called the curbe. Curcume, the roote of Celandine. Curia, any court of Princes or iustice. Curiandoli, Corianders. Curiosità, curiositie, nicenes, diligence. Curioso, curious, nice, scrupulous, careful, diligent, charie. Curro, a round peece of wood or roule that carpenters vse to lay vnder great pee∣ces of wood or timber, with holes in it neare the end, to roule the timber with more ease. I finde it also for a kinde of vessell. Currucca, the bird that hatcheth the coo∣koes egs thinking they be hir owne. Currucula, as Currucca. Curso, as course, a race, a carreer. Cursore, a courser, an office sometime in Rome called a cursor. Also a runner: an apparitor or a sumner. Cursoria, Cursorato, the office of a cur∣sor. Curte, knobs or wens growing vpon a horse Curti, short. Also a folde or pen made of sticks for sheepe. Curto, short, breefe or succinct. Curtola, a kind of toole that braziers vse. Curuare, to bow, to bende, to stoope, to crouch, to make crooked. Curuatura, a bending, a stooping, a crou∣ching, a bowing, a crookednes. Curucca, Curuccula, as Currucca. Curuilíneo, with crooked or bending lines. Curuo, crooked, bent, bowed, stooped, crouched. Curuopiede, splaifooted, hauing crooked feete. Cúrule, seats as our pewes in churches. Cúrulo, a little cart, a wheelbarrow. Cuscino, Cuscinetto, as Coscino. Cuscire, cuscio, cuscij, cuscito, as Cu∣cire. Cuscitrice, a woman seamester. Cuscitura, a seame or sowing. Cuscuta, a weed called dodder or withe∣wind. Cuscusu, a kinde of graine, pulse or fruite comming out of Spaine, called cuske. Cusire, as Cuscire. Cusioffola, as Baccisaffiola. Cusso, an owle with standing feathers on his head called a hornecout. Custódia, charge, keeping, custodie. Also a cace or boxe to keepe any thing in. Custódire, disco, dito, to keepe or haue in charge. Custode, Custoditore, a keeper, a war∣der, a rector. Cúte, the outward skin of man or woman while they be liuing, a thin rinde, pill or barke of any thing. Also a whetstone. Cuterizole, a kinde of ant, emmet or pis∣mier. Cuticula, a filme, a skin or skinles, a thin rinde or pill. Cuticágna, the crowne or skonce of ones head. Cutretta, a bird called a wagtaile. Cutrettolo, as Cutretta. Cutta, a chough, a cornish chough, a iake∣daw, a kadow. D DA, ioyned with any number signifi∣eth about, as Da venti, about twentie. Da, from, of, by, the signe of the Ablatie case. Da, a preposition before Infinite oodes, as Da fare, to do, for to do. Da, a prepositiō of the Ablatie case, from.
Da, with the verbe Andare, naming the partie to whom you go, is for the Datiue case, as Doue andate? Io vado dal signor Andréa. Da, like or as, being with a Noune of anie professiō, as Da huomo da bene, like an honest man, an Aduerbe of likenes. Dá, of the verbe Dare, he giueth. Da baiante a ferrante, from bad to worse out of gods blessing into the warme sun, out of the parlor into the kitchin. Da banda, on the side, from the side. Da banda a banda, from side to side, quite through. Da benaggine, honestie, goodnes, vertue, sinceritie. Da bene, good, honest, debonaire, as huomo da bene, an honest man: it is also taken for honestie. Da benissimo, very honest, most honest. Dabile, that may be, or is to be giuen. Dábudà, a famous foole so called, as wee alleage Will Sommer in iests. Also a kinde of musicall instrument among shepheards. Da burla, iestingly, in iest. Da canto, a side, a part, a toneside, on the side. Da capo, againe, a newe, from the begin∣ning. Da che, since that, sithence, since, sithe. Dacciò, Daciò, for that, fit for that, of that. Daccordo, agreed, attoned, accorded, tu∣ned. Dadaro, a dice-maker. Also a dicer. Dadeggiare, to plaie at dice. Dadi, dice to plaie with. Da hora inanzi, henceforwarde, heere∣after. Da huomo da béne, like an honest man. Also an oth as I am an honest man. Da douéro, in sooth, in earnest, in truth. Da dosso, from vpon, or of from. Da duchi, certaine priests of Ceres in Greece. Da fanciullo, from a childe, from infancy, like a childe. Da fermo a fermo.   Dafarina, a kinde of fullams or false dice. Dafino, euen from the time. Dafnia, a precious stone good against the falling sicknes. Daga, a wood-knife, a short sword. Daghetta, a little dagger. Dagióco, in sport, in iest, in play. Dagli, strike him, hit him, beate him. Also from thee, of thee. Dai, from thee, of thee. Also thou gi∣uest. Daindi, from thence, thence. Daindi inanzi, from that time fore∣ward. Da indi in qua, since that time, from that time to this, or till now. Daina, a fawne, a Do. Dáino, a fawne, a pricket, a sore, a sorrell, a bucke, or fallow deere. Da in poi, except, but, excepted, sauing. Dal, Dallo, Dalla, Dagli, Dalli, Dalle, from the, of the. Dal'altera parte, on the other part or side. Dalfino, Dalphino, a fish called a Dol∣phin. Dal'in fuori, except, but the thing ex∣cepted must come betweene Dal and in fuori. Daltra maniera, after another manner, otherwise. Dalli, hit him, strike him. Also from the, or of the. Dalli dalli, to him, hit him, vpon him. Dalmata, as Dalmatica. Dalmatica, a priests surples, or such reli∣gious garments. Some take it for a shep∣herds long frocke. Dalongi, Dalungi, a farre off, from farre. Daltrui, others, other mens, of others. Dama, a dame, a ladie, a mistres. Also a Do, a fallow deere. Also a queene at the chesse. Also a man to play at tables with. Da mano in mano, successiuely, in order, from hand to hand. Damarito, mariageable. Damascare, to damaske. Damaschino, damaske worke vpon blades, or anie thing of Damasco. Damasco, the stuffe called Damaske. Dáme, men to play at tables or chesse with. Also ladies, dames. Damè, of me, from me, to me, by my selfe. Daméno, of lesse woorth. Dame stesso, by my selfe. Damiére, a paire of tables, a boord to play at draughts. Damigélla, Damicélla, a damosell, a waighting-woman. Damigéllo, a batchelour, a waighting man. Damma, a Do or wilde goate, a hinde or fallow deere. Damò inanzi, heereafter. Damolto, of much, of woorth. huomo da molto, donna da molti. Danaio, Danaro, a pennie. Also mo∣nie. Danaioso, Danaroso, full of monie, mo∣nied. Danari, pence. Also any monie. Dandola, Dandolare, as Dondola. Daneta, the herbe wilde Wormewood. Daniénte, of nothing, of nought. Dánio, as Daino. Dannabile, damnable. Dannaggiare, as Danneggiare. Dannaggio, as Danno. Dannaggioso, domeageable, dangerous. Dannare, to damne, to condemne, to can∣cell, or crosse any reckoning. Dannarpartite, to crosse or cancel any re∣konings. Dannati, condemned or damned persons. Dannatione, damnation, condemna∣tion. Danneggiare, to damnifie, to endom∣mage. Danneggieuole, hurtfull, dangerous. Danneuole, idem. Danno, hurt, losse, danger, dammage, pe∣rill, skath. Dannoso, as Danneggieuole. Da non dire, not to be spoken, vnlawfull. Da nulla, of no woorth, of naught. Dante, a kind of great wilde beast in Af∣frike hauing a very hard skin. Danza, a daunce. Danzare, to daunce. Danzatore, a dauncer. Daparte, a part, a farre off, a side. Also in the name or on the behalfe. Dapartito, common, veniall, that may be had for money. Dápe, meate, foode, viands for gods or princes. Dapermè, te, se, lui, noi, voi, loro, by me, the, him, vs, you, or themselues, a∣lone, or seuerall. Daper tutto, each where, in euery place. Dapié, againe, from the foote. Dapocaggine, simplicitie, foolishnes, grossenes, insufficiencie, retchlesnes. Dapoco, of nothing, of little, of small worth. Dapóco in qua, not long since. Dapoi, Dapò, since, after, then, after that. Da poi che, sith, or since that. Daprésso, neere, at hand, by, not farre off. Daprima, at first. Daqua inanzi, heereafter, hencefor∣ward. Da qui in poi, heereafter, henceforward. Dar al'arma, a kinde of march sounded vpon the drum and trumpet, to strike vp an alarum. Dardana, the great clote-burre. Dardani, Dardanini, a bird called a woodpecker, or catebill: some take it for seaswallowes.
Dardeggiare, to cast a dart, to shoote, to darte. Dardo, a dart. Also an arrow. Also a kinde of serpent that will fling himselfe from of any high place, without hurting himselfe. Also as Dardani. Dare, Do, Diedi, Dato, to giue, to pre∣sent, to offer. Also to hit, to strike, to beate, to deale. Dare a pigione, to let to rent or farme. Dare a diuedére, as Dare a vedere. Dare a vedere, to make one beleeue, to perswade or giue one to vnderstand. Dare baggiane, as Gonfiare alcuno. Dare cacabaldole, as Dare l'allodola. Dar cartaccia, a kinde of game vsed at cardes. Dare carote, to make one swallow a gud∣geon. Dar di cozzo, to but, to chock, to frunt, to iussle violently, to shoulder. Dar di piglio, to take hould of, to take by the hand. Dar di mano, to lay hould on, to take by the hand. Dar del tù, to thou any man. Dar de'calci a Rouaio, to be hang'd, to kicke the winde. Dar delle bótte, to giue blowes, stripes or strokes. Dar delle muccie, to giue one a flap with a foxe tayle. Dar di penna, to crosse or blot out any thing. Dar delle bastonate, to strike one with a cudgell, to giue the bastonado. Dar di piatto, to strike flat with a wea∣pon. Dar di punta, to phoine or thrust at one. Dar di taglio, to strike with the edge. Dar dentro, to sal to, to strike in, to hit in. Dare finocchio, to giue fennell, to claw, to cog, to foist, to flatter, to dissemble. Dare fastidio, to trouble, to molest. Dare il passo alla macina, to giue the mill free passage. Dare il guasto, to giue the spoile, to ran∣sack, to ruine. Dar la baia, to mocke, to iest, to cog, to foist. Dar la berta, to mocke, to iest, to gibe. Dare le ceruélla a ripedulare, to let ones wits goe a woolgathering. Dare l'allodola, to cog, to foist, to flat∣ter, to giue one court-hollie water, to giue a gudgeon. Dar le mósse, to giue the start, to set foorth. Dar la quadra, to giue one a gudgeon, to flatter, to cog and foist with. Dar la squadra, to sooth or smooth vp a mans tale. Dar la buona mano, to giue a new yeares gift. Dar la mancia, to giue something to drinke. Dar le carte, to deale the cards. Dar la corda, to giue the strappado or torture. Dar la stretta, to giue the ierke or pinch to some body. Dar la traue, as Dare l'allodola. Dar le pesche, to giue ones taile, to con∣sent to buggerie. Dar la pinta, to giue the thrust or push, to throw downe headlong. Dar le calcagna, to turne the heeles. Dar le spalle, to turne ones shoulders, to runne away. Dar luogo al compagno, a kinde of Christmas game called rise vp good fel∣low, or itch buttock. Dare moine, as Dare l'allodola. Dar nella ragna, to fall in the net, to fall in a trap. Dar nelle mani, to fall into the hands. Dare noia, to trouble, to grieue, to mo∣lest. Dare nelle scartate, to speake what hath bin spoken of before, for want of mat∣ter. Also to fall among ill companie, as a man would say among such as are discarded from others. Dare martello, to make one iealous, or passionate. Dare panzane, as Gonfiare alcuno. Dare roselline, as Dare l'allodola. Dare ombra, to giue a suspicion or inck∣ling of any matter. Dare vna sinta, to giue an offer, to faine to do a thing, to proffer and not do. Dare vna borniola, to giue false iudge∣ment of any matter referred vnto one, of gamesters and players, a phrase vsed in tenis courts and gaming houses. Dare vna occhiata, to giue a looke, to cast an eye, to looke about. Dar menda, to finde fault, or picke a thanke. Dare pasto, to keepe one in hope, to feede one with words. Dare vn cauallo, to breech or ierke one in a schoole. Dare vn stacci queto, to giue one a box on the eare to make one be quiet. Dare vn pax tecum, to giue one a good blow or a marke. Dare opera, to indeuor, to take paines. Darsi vanto, to boast, to brag, to crake, to vaunt. Dare recapito, to giue entertainement, to deliuer safelie. Da riuolto, turning downe as a falling band, or a womans rabato. Darmacco, a kinde of coyne. Da se, by himselfe. Da se a se, by himselfe alone. Da senno, in good earnest, in good sooth. Da sezzo, at last, in good sooth, lastlie, at length. Da scherzo, in iest, in sport. Dasia, thicknes of breath, pursines. Dasiéme, asunder, from together, apart. Dasio, a kinde of verse consisting of fiue syllables. Dáta, the date, or dating of any writing or letter. Datanto, of so much worth, of so much, of as much. Datare, to date a letter or writing. Datario, be to whome one giueth. Also a dignitie sometimes in Rome. Datarocco, foolish, gullish, wayward, froward, peeuish. Datiare, to set a taxe, a tole, or a custome, to sesse. Datiaria, a custome house, where customes are payed. Datiaro. Datiero, a receiuer of any cu∣stomes or tolles, or tallages, a custo∣mer. Datilo, a fish so called in Venice, in latine Bilanus. Datio, custome, tribute, toll, tallage, im∣position. Datiuo caso, the datiue case. Dato, giuen, hit, stroken, dealt, beaten smitten. Datoche, put case that, since that. Datore, a giuer. Datorno, about. Dattero, Datero, a date tree. Also a date. Also a kinde of hard shell fish. Dattilo, as Datero. Also a greeke mea∣sure being about an inch. Dattili, a foote of three syllables, the first long, and the two other short. Dattilo dogma, a greeke measure about foure inches. Also a handfull. Dattolo, as Dattero. Datrauerso, ouerthwart, crossely. Dauantaggio, moreouer, besides, more, beyond, with aduantage. Dauante, Dauanti, before, afore-hand. Dauantino, a womans apron, or halfe kirtle. Dauanzo, too much, ouerplus, to spare, to leaue, more then neede, enough and to spare. Dauco, a kinde of hemlocke. Others haue taken it for the yellow carrots. Dauéro, in sooth, in earnest, in truth. Dazaria, as Datiaria.
Daziaro, as Datiaro. Dazio, as Datio. De, a preposition of the genitiue and ab∣latiue case, of, from. Déa, a goddesse. Deacrite, as Draconite. Debe, as Debbe. Debére, as Douére. Débile, weake, feeble, faint. Debilità, feeblenes, weaknes, debilitie. Debilitare, to infeeble, to weaken. Debitare, to indebt. Débiti, debts, duties, bonds, obligations. Also due, fit, seemely, orderly. Débito, a debt, a dutie, a bonde, an obli∣gation. Also due, fit, seemely, orderly. Debitóre, a debter. Débbo, I owe, I ought, I shall, I should. Debbe, Debba, he oweth, he ought, he shall, he must. Also belike, or he is like. Débole, weake, faint, feeble. Deboletto, somewhat feeble or weake. Debolézza, weaknes, faintnes, feeblenes. Debolire, as Indebolire. Decacordo, an instrument of ten strings. Décade, Decades, as those of Titus Liui∣us consisting of ten. Decadére, cado, caddi, caduto, to de∣cline, to decay, to descend, to come down. Decadénza, a declyning, a decaying, a cadence. Decagono, hauing ten corners or angles. Decalogo, containing the ten commande∣ments of God giuen to Moises. Decamerone, the booke of Bocace, so cal∣led of ten daies works, or of ten parts. Decanato, a Deanrie, or deaconrie. Decáno, Decane, a deacon, or a deane. Decantare, to sing out. Decapitare, to behead. Decémbre, the moneth of December. Decemuirato, an authoritie, or office of ten men, as was earst in Rome. Decenne, of ten yeeres. Deceno, the tenth. Decenoue, nineteene. Decettione, a deception, an illusion, a deceit. Déche, as Decade. Dechiarare, to declare or manifest. Dechiaratione, a declaration. Dechinare, to decline, to descend. Decídere, cido, cisi, ciso, to decide, to de∣termine, to define. Deciferare, to decipher. Deciferatore, a decipherer. Décima, the tithe or tenth. Decima, halfe a score, a number of ten. Decimare, to tithe or tenth. Decimario, a tither. Deciméro, a tither. Décimo, the tenth in number. Decisione, a deciding, a defining, a deter∣mining, a decision. Deciso, decided, determined, defined. Declamare, to declaime. Declamatione, a declamation. Declinare, to decline, to descend. Declinatione, a declination. Also a de∣clension. Decliuo, downe hanging, bending, or sidelin. Decondimento, as Condimento. Decorso, past, run-ouer. Decottione, a decoction. Decótto, decocted. Decrépito, very olde, at the pits brinke, decrepite. Decrepità, Decrepitudine, olde age, decrepitie. Decréscere, cresco, crebbi, cresciuto, to decrease, to wane. Decrescimento, a decreasing, a dimi∣nishing, a waning. Decretale, decretall, according to decrees: the popes lawe bookes. Decretare, to decree, to consult, to iudge to enact. Decréto, a decree, a iudgement, an or∣der. Decretorio, iudiciall, established, de∣creed. Decretorij giorni, perilous, fatall, dis∣mall, vnauoidable daies. Decurione, a decurion, a captaine of ten. Dedále, a thimble, a finger-stall. Dedicare, to dedicate, to consecrate, to ad∣dict. Dedicatione, a dedication, a consecra∣tion. Dedicatoria, a dedicatorie epistle. Dédito, giuen, addicted, dedicated, encli∣ned. Dedúrre, duco, dussi, dutto, to deduce, to deduct. Deduttione, a deduction. Dee, goddesses. Also he oweth, he must, he shall. Deffalcare, to defaulke, to abate, to bate, to deduce, to deduct. Deffalcatura, a defalking, an abating, a deducing, a deducting, a bating. Defféndere, as Diffendere. Deffensore, as Diffensore. Deffendeuole, that may be defended. Deffesa, as Diffesa. Deffesso, wearied, tired, faint. Defetto, as Diffetto. Deffinire, nisco, nito, to define. Deffinitíone, a definition. Deffinitiuo, definitiue. Deffinito, defined. Defloratione, a kinde of bloodie flixe that yoong coults haue. Defonto, Defunto, dead, past out of this life, deceased. Deformare, to deforme, to mis-shape. Defrodare, to defraude, to beguile. Degli, of the. Deggettione, a deiection. Deggio, I must, I owe, I shall, I ought. Degenerare, to degenerate, to growe out of kinde, to change kinde. Degeneratione, a degenerating. Degénero, a degenerator. Degna, woorthie. Degnare, to daine, to vouchsafe. Degnità, dignitie, office, authoritie. Degno, woorthie. Degradare, to degrade. Degradatione, a degrading. Degrédere, gredo, gredei, gresso, to de∣gresse from the purpose. Degressione, a digression. Degresso, digressed. Degrignare, to grin, to snarle. Degustare, to distrust. Deh, oh, alas, I pray you, oh that: an in∣teriection of wishing. Dehiscere, to gape and open wide. Dei, gods. Also De' of the. Also thou owest or must. Deiettione, a deiection. Deificare, to deifie. Deificatione, a deifying. Del, of the, with any diuisible thing, some, as Dammidel pane, giue me some bread. Delantéra, the fore-part of the horse. Delapidare, to delapidate, to ruine or ouerthrowe, to pull downe stone wals. Delapidatione, a delapidation, a ruine, an ouerthrow, a pulling downe of stone wals. Delatore, a spie, an eaues dropper, a tell∣tale. Delcontinuo, continually, still. Delegare, to delegate, or commit, or ap∣point, to assigne to some charge or of∣fice. Delegati, delegates, committies, men ap∣pointed. Also embassadors. Delegatione, a delegation, an appoint∣ment, an assignation to anie charge or office. Deleggiare, to mocke, to flout, to scoffe, to gibe. Deleuare, to leuie. Delfino, Delphino, a dolphin. Also that peece at chesse which we call a bishop. Deli, there-away, that way. Delibare, to taste, to assay with the toong. Deliberare, to deliberate, to determine.
Deliberatione, a deliberation, a determi∣nation. Deliberatiuo, deliberatiue. Delicatezza, daintines, delicacie, wan∣tonnes, nicenes, effeminacie. Delicato, delicate, daintie, wanton, nice, effeminate, weake, a milkesop. Delicatura, as Delicatezza. Delinquente, an offender, a man guilty of any fault. Delirare, to dote, to raue, to fable, to be∣come a foole, to go out of the right way. Delitio, a doting, a rauing, a foolishnes, a bestraughting of the wit. Deliro, doted, raued, fabled, become a foole. Also a foole, a sot, a gull, a dotrell, a swaruer from reason, bestraughted of his wit. Also peeuish and fond. Delitia, deliciousnes, daintines, pleasure, reioicing, sport, wantonnes. Delitioso, delicious, dainty, delicate, wan∣ton, effeminate. Delitto, an offence, a fault, a trespasse. Della, delle, of the. Dello, delli, idem. Del tutto, altogither, wholie. Delubro, a temple, a church. Also an im∣age or idoll of woood. Deludere, ludo, lusi, luso, to delude, to mocke, to deceiue. Deluso, deluded, mocked, deceiued. Demaniale, a man hauing demaines of landes. Also of or pertayning to de∣maines. Demanio, the demaines of any land. Demensione, a demension, a body, a sub∣stance. Demente, mad, foolish, doting, sance wit. Dementia, madnes, furie, woodnes, folly, lacke of wit. Demeritare, to demerite or deserue thankes. Demérito, a demerit or desert. Demerto, as Demerito. Demisso, demisse, base, submisse, faint. Democratia, a free common-wealth, ha∣uing no Prince or superior but them∣selues, as Venice is. Demoniaco, Demoniato, endiuelled, possessed with an euill spirit. Demoniare, to possesse with a diuell, to indiuell. Demonio, a diuell or euill spirit. Also a kind of pretious stone of seuerall colours like the rainebow. Demostrare, to shew by demonstration, to demonstrate. Demostratione, a demonstration. Denaioso, monied, rich, full of money. Denari, money, pence, coyne. Denari contanti, readie money. Denaro, Denaio, a penie or money. Dendritide, a kinde of precious stone which put to the roote of a tree, the axe that cuts it cannot be dulled. Dendroide, a kind of spurge. Denegare, to denie, to refuse. Denigrare, to obscure, to darken, to taxe, to blacken, to blemish. Denominare, to nominate, to name by. Denominatione, a denomination. Denominatiuo, that is deriued of a noune or some one case, a denomina∣tiue. Denontia, a denouncing, a denuncia∣tion. Denontiare, to denounce. Denotare, to denote, to shew, to meane, to signifie. Denotatione, a denotation or meaning. Densare, to thicken, to condense, to make foggie, duskie, obscure, bushie or spisse. Densità, thicknes, densitie, spisnesse. Denso, thick, foggie, duskie, obscure, spisse, bushie, condense, compact. Dentale, a rakes tooth or any great tooth. Also a fish that hurteth much with his teeth so called. Also the share of a plough or the wood wherein the culter is closed. Also the herbe dogs-tooth. Dentare, to tooth, Dentaria, toothed violet or corall woort. Dentato, that hath teeth, toothed, snaggle or gogtoothed: also tanting and spiteful. Dentatura, any mans toothing or ranke of teeth. Dénte, a tooth, a dent. Dente caballino, a kind of herbe. Denteggiare, to tooth. Dentelli, the teeth of a rake or such. Also little spike nailes, the dents or teeth of a saw. Denti, teeth or dents. Dentice, a kinde of fish which hurteth much with his teeth. Denti dauanti, the fore-teeth. Denti mascellari, eie-teeth or iaw-teeth. Dentro, within, inward. Dentrouia, inaway, inward. Dentuto, Dentoso, as Dentato. Denudare, to open, to reueale, to strip, to manifest, to make naked. Deo, hath beene vsed for Dio, God. Depaisare, to vncontrie. Depalare, to vnpole. Depanare, to reele or winde yarne. Depannare, to open, to cleare. Depéndere, pendo, pendei, penduto, to depend, to relie, to be towards, to hang by. Dependente, depending, relying, depen∣dent. Dependenza, a dependencie, a relying, a hanging by. Deplorare, to deplore, to bewaile, to be∣mone. Deploratione, a deploring, a bewayling, a bemoning. Deponente, deponent, laying downe. Depónere, pongo, posi, posto, to depose or to lay downe. Depositare, to leaue in trust or feoffie, to pledge, to pawne, to enshrine. Depositario, one that takes in trust or a feoffie, a shrine, a secret trustie friend, a secretarie. Depositione, a deposition, a deposing. Depósito, in trust or feoffie, a pledge, a shrine. Also a toombe, a graue or sepul∣cher. Deprauare, to depraue, to backbite, to mar to spoile, to corrupt. Deprauatione, a deprauation, a backbi∣ting, a corrupting. Deprauatore, a deprauer, a backbiter, a corrupter. Depredare, to pray, to ransacke, to spoile. Depredatione, a depredation, a pray, a spoiling, a spoile. Depressare, to depresse, to suppresse. Depressione, a depression, a suppression. Deprésso, depressed, suppressed. Deprímere, primo, primei, presso, to de∣presse, to suppresse. Deputare, to depute, to substitute, to ap∣point. Deputati, deputies, substitutes. Deputatione, a deputation, a substitution. Deputatore, a substituter, a deputer. Deramare, as Diramare. Derata, as Derrata. Derbio, a kind of little fish. Deredare, to disinherite. Deredatione, a disherison. Derelitto, left, forsaken, cast off, abando∣ned, relinquisht. Deretano, Derettano, last, lag, latter, hindmost, behind. Derídere, rido, risi, riso, to deride, to mock to floute. Deriétro, hindermost, behinde, lag, last, latter. Derisiore, derision, mocking, flouting. Deriso, derided, mockt, flouted. Derisore, a mocker, a derider, a flouter. Deritto, as Diritto. Deriuare, to deriue. Deriuatione, a deriuation or etymologie. Deriuatiuo, a deriuatiue. Deriuieno, a starting hole, an euasion, a shift to scape or go from ones word. Derogare, to derogate, to diminish, to impaire.
Derogatione, Deroganza, a derogation. Derrata, a cheapning, a bargaine. Also cheape, a good peni-woorth, good han∣sell. Some haue also taken it for a kinde of money or coine. Descéndere, scendo, scesi, sceso, to de∣scend, to fall or come downe, to alight. Descésa, a descending, a fall, a comming downe. Also a running rheume, a pose or murre. Descéso, descended, fallen, come downe, a∣lighted. Deschetto, a little deske, a little boord, a little table. Descinare, to dine. Also a dinner. Desco, a deske, a table, a boord, a counting boord. Descriuere, scriuo, scrissi, scritto, to de∣scribe, to declare. Descrittione, a description. Desertare, to make desert, to waste, to consume, to desolate. Desérto, a desert, a waste, a wildernes, a heath. Deseruire, as Diseruire. Desiare, to desire, to wish, to long for. Desiderabile, to be desired, to be wished. Desiderare, to desire, to wish, to long for. Desiderata, a kinde of comfet or paste of Genoua so called. Desidério, desire, wish, longing. Desidereuole, as Desiderabile. Desideroso, desirous, wishing, longing for. Designare, to desseigne, to appoint, to allot, to intend. Designo, a deseigne, an appointment, an intent. Desinare, to dine. Also a dinner. Desinéa, a dining, a dinner space. Desinentia, a desinence, an end or ter∣mination of a word. Desío, desire. Desioso, desirous. Desir, Desire, Desiro, desire. Desiroso, desirous. Desisténza, a leauing off, or ceasing, or desisting. Desístere, sisto, sistei, sistuto, to desist, leaue off, cease, or giue ouer. Despittare, to despight, to spite. Despitto, despight, spite. Also despised, or contemned. Despittoso, despightfull, spitefull. Despóta, a Lord, a lordlike gouernour. Despotico, lordlike, commanding wise. Dessa, she, the very same, the same. Desse, they, the very same, the same. Desserrare, to vnlock, to vnfasten, to set or let loose. Desseruire, as Diseruire. Also to deserue. Dessi, they, the same. Desso, he, the very same, the same. Dessolare, to make desolate, or waste. Dessolatione, desolation, ruine, waste. Dessolatura, Dessolato, as Dissola∣tura. Dessono, they might, would, or should giue. Destare, to waken, to awake, to stirre vp, to prouoke, to rouze. Also to allure, to incourage. Destatoio, an alarum, or larum to a∣waken one, an awaker. Deste, you gaue. Destinare, to destinate, to appoint, to depute, to allot, to ordaine. Destinatione, destination. Destino, destinie, fate, chance, lot. Destituire, isco, ito, to make destitute. Destituto, destitute, voide, wanting. Désto, quicke, awakened, stirred vp, in∣censed, vigilant, awakefull. Destolo falcone, a kinde of hauke or falcon. Destra, the right hand. Also happie, for∣tunate, or luckie. Also handsome, pret∣tie, fine, and neate. Destramente, nimblie, quicklie, with a∣gilitie, or dexteritie, happilie, fortu∣natelie, luckilie. Destrezza, nimblenes, quicknes, dexteri∣tie, agilitie, or sleight. Destriére, Destrieto, a horse, a courser, a steed, a palfrey, a swift running horse: it hath bin also taken for a mans priuie parts. Destrino, a right-handed man. Destro, nimble, quicke, agile, slie, cun∣ning, handsome. Also fauorable, secon∣ding, prosperous, fortunate, necessarie. Also a priuie, or close stoole. Also right-handed. Also conuenient, liuely. Destrorso, on the right hand. Destrúggere, as Distruggere. Destruggitore, Destruttore, as Distrug∣gitore. Destruttione, destruction. Destrutto, destroyed, wasted, consu∣med. Desuano, a garret, or cockeloft. Desuetudine, as Disuetudine. Desuiare, to entice, allure, or set out of the way, to debauche. Detale, a thimble, a finger-stall. Detarello, a little thimble, or finger-stall. Deteriorare, to make or become worse, more wicked or vnhappie. Deterioratione, a becomming or making worse, or more wicked. Determinare, to determine, to resolue. Determinatione, a determination, a re∣solution. Detestabile, detestable, abhominable, loathsome, hainous. Detestare, to loath, to abhorre, or detest. Detestatione, abhomination, detestation. Detesto, detested, loathed. Also abho∣mination. Deto, a finger, or a toe. Deto grosso, the thumbe. Deto alato al grosso, the finger next to the thumbe. Deto di mezzo, the middle finger. Deto a lato al piccolo, the wedding fin∣ger. Deto picciolo, the little finger. Detrarre, to detract, to backbite, to slaun∣der, to draw from. Detrattione, detraction, backbiting, slaundering. Detratto, detracted, backbitten, slaun∣dred. Detrattore, a detractor, a backbiter, a slaunderer. Detrimento, detriment, damage, hin∣derance. Dettare, to endite, to compose. Dettarello, a prettie saying or sentence. Dettatione, a composition, or enditing. Dettato, endited. Also a sawe, or saying. Dettatore, an enditer. Detti, sayings, speeches, prouerbs. Detti ferlini, counters to cast accounts with. Detto, said, spoken, named. Also a saying, a speaking, a speech, a prouerb, a motto. Deturpare, to defile, to pollute. Deuastare, to waste, spoile, subuert, or destroy. Deuastatione, a wasting, spoiling, deso∣lation, or destruction. Deuiare, as Desuiare, or to goe or leade out of the way, to digresse. Deuio, a digression, or stay, or going out of the way. Deuóluere, volgo, volsi, voluto, to de∣uolue, to fall, to come or happen from one to another. Deuolutione, a deuolution, a tumbling or falling downe. Deuotare, to deuote. Deuotione, deuotion, religion. Deuoto, deuoted, religious, deuoute. Deuér, Deuere, Debbo, Deuo, Deo, Deggio, Deuei, Deuuto, a verbe im∣personall, to be indebted, to owe, to be conuenient, to belong, or appertaine, to shall, to be due, to beseeme, to be meete. Deuuto, due, owing, right, appertaining. Also seemelie, conuenient, orderlie. D'hora inanzi, from hence forward, hereafter.
D'hora in hora, from houre to houre, from time to time. Di', a preposition of the genitiue and the ablatiue cases, of, from. Also with any comparison it stands for then, Maggior di te: with any infinite moode, to, for, for to. Also a noune substantiue, for a day, or morrowe, buon di. Also the imperatiue moode of dire, say thou. Diabólico, diuelish. Diachilon, a kinde of plaister or oynt∣ment so called. Diacciare, to freese. Diaccio, a kinde of goldsmiths worke hol∣low or transparent. Also ice or frost. Diacciuoli, ice-sickles dangling downe. Diácene, god forbid, gods forbode▪ an in∣teriection, gogs nounes. Diacéte, a kinde of thorne called in Latin Diachaeton. Diacódion, a sirup made of poppie and water. Diacódo, a kinde of whitish stone that cniurers do vse to coniure vp spirits. Diaconato, a deaconship, a deanerie. Diácono, a deacon, a minister, a seruant. Diacórion, a medicine made of onions. Diadéma, a diadem, a twist, a wreath for kings. Also a crowne or coronet. Diademare, to crowne with a diadem. Diadocos, a precious stone, so pure and so vnspotted that it can abide no vnclean∣nes or corruption neere it. Diafanità, translucencie, transparencie as through cristall. Diafano, transparent or cleere like cri∣stall. Diafonia, a discord. Diaforesi, the figure dubitation. Also digestion or euaporation. Diafragma, a rounde muscle lying ouer∣thwart the lower part of the brest, se∣parating the hart and lights from the stomacke. Diagonale, a line of Geometrie from one corner to another. Diagono, hauing two corners or angles. Dialettica, the arte of Logicke teaching to reason. Dialettíco, a Logician, one that teacheth the arte of reasoning to an fro. Dialetto, a manner of speech in any lan∣guage differing from others of the same countries. Dialgacitrino, a kind of oyntment so cal∣led. Dialgar, a drug so called. Dialhora, from that time. Dialibano, a kinde of medicament, medi∣cine or sirup to oppiate one to sleepe, or to dead griefe. Dialogare, to dialogue or dispute be∣tweene two or moe persons. Diálogo, a dialogue or disputation be∣tweene two or more. Dialtéa, a kinde of drug vsed in phisicke. Di alto affare, of good woorth, of high ac∣count. Diamantaro, a diamond cutter. Diamante, a precious stone called a dia∣mond. Di-amante, of a louer, a louers. Diamantina, a kinde of herbe the leafe wherof is as hard as a diamond to be cut Diamantino, diamantine, as harde as a diamond: also adamantine. Diambo, a kinde of verse consisting of Iambikes. Diametrale, diameter-like. Diámetro, a diameter, or line diuiding any thing into two equall parts. Diaméttere, metto, misi, messo, to shake, to tosse, to beate downe. Diamone, a kinde of manie coloured stone. Diamoron, a kinde of drug or herbe, me∣dicine or syrup. Diamusco, a kinde of drug or perfume. Diana, a kind of march sounded by trum∣petters in a morning to their generall and captaine. Dianzi, before, forward, aforehand. Diapanton, a rule or note in musicke. Diapason, a diapason, a concorde in mu∣sicke of all parts. Diapente, a composition of fiue, of the number of fiue. Diaprasso, a kinde of medicine or syrup. Diaquilone, a drug so called. Diarodon, a kinde of phisicke or syrup to mitigate paine and griefe. Diasatirion, a medicine to stir men to the lust of the flesh. Diascane, Diascene, as Diácene. Diasene, a medicine to stir men to lust of women. Diaspe, a kinde of cruell serpent. Diaspro, a iasper stone, it is of a greene co∣lour. Diastéma, a distance or space, a word vsed in musicke. Diastole, a distinction in a sentence. Also a figure whereby a syllable that is short by nature is made long: phisicions take it for the rising vp of the hart, the arte∣ries and braine, which is sensiblie felt by the pulses. Diatessaron, consisting of fower in nūber Diatonico, a certaine concord in musicke, or plaine song betweene two. Diatóno, D sol re, or G sol re ut. a plaine song betweene two. Diatragante, certaine sugar pellets. Diáulo, a Greeke measure of two stadios, 250. paces a quarter of an Italian mile. Diauolarie, Diauolamenti, diuelish parts, or deuices. Diáuolo, a diuell, a seende, an euill spirit. Also a needle fish, or hornback, or horn-fish. Diauoloso, diuelish. Dibalzo, to take a ball at the bound. Dibarbare, to vnbeard, to vnroote. Dibáttere, batto, battei, battuto, to mooue, to stirre, to wriggle or beate vp and downe. Dibattersi, to bathe as a hauke doth. Dibattimento, a moouing, a shaking, a wrigling or beating, or tossing, a stir∣ring. Dibattito, a doubt, a confusion, a deba∣ting with himselfe. Also debated. Dibattuto, mooued, stirred, wrigled, or beaten vp and downe. Also debated. Di bene in meglio, from good to better. Di bótto, quickly, soone, out of hand. Dibrigata, with, togither, all on a rowe. Dibucare, to vnhole. Also to plucke out. Dibuccato, newly washt, white, cleane, sweete, newly huckt. Dibucciato, budded or burst foorth as a flower or beane, or chestnut out of the bud, cod, or huske. Di buon cuóre, hartly, with a good hart. Di buon hora, betimes, earely, in a good houre. Di buona voglia, with a good will, meri∣lie disposed, ioyfull. Dicace, a iester, a scoffer, a railer, a re∣procher or mocker. Also a prater or babler, a talking fellow. Dicacità, iesting, scoffing, railing, re∣proching, prating, babling or chatting. Dicadénza, Dicaduta, as Decadenza. Dicadére, as Decadere. Dicaduta, a falling, a decay, a declining. Dicantare, to sing out. Dicapitare, to behead. Dicare, to vowe, to dedicate, to addict, to promise. Dicatione, a vowing, a dedication, a promise. Dicattiua voglia, ill disposed, sad, male∣content, with an ill will. Dice, he saith. Dicémbre, the moneth of December. Dicesi, it is said, men say. Dicere, dico, dissi, detto, to say, to speak, to tell. Diceria, a speech, a saying, a speake, a dis∣course, a flim-flam tale. Diceruellare, to vnbraine, to become foo∣lish, doting or sottish.
Dicesette, seauenteene. Dicéuole, to be spoken, seemely, decent, laudable, praise-worthie, commenda∣ble. Di che? whereof? of what? whereat, of which. Di chi? whose? Dichiarare, to declare, to manifest. Dichiaratione, a declaration or mani∣festation. Dichinare, to decline. Dichinatione, a declination or declen∣sion. Dicídere, cido, cisi, ciso, to decide, to de∣termine, to resolue. Diciótto, eighteene. Dicisétte, seuenteene. Dicilla, vsed for iustice. Dicisione, a decision, a deciding, a deter∣mination. Diciso, decided, resolued, determined. Dicitore, a sayer, a speaker, a prolocutor, an auditor. Diclinare, as Declinare. Diclinatione, as Declinatione. Di colta, taken at a vollie or hit as one doth a ball. Di concordia, with loue and agreement. Di continuo, continually, alwaies. Dicoréo, a kinde of verse or meetre consi∣sting of two Trochej or sixe syllables. Di corto, shortly, briefly, not long hence, out of hand. Dicósta, sidling. Also with the backe of the knife. Di costa, thereaway, that way, beyond. Dicotómo, that is diuided in two parts or in the middle. Dicouelo, Dicouel, I tell it you. Di dentro, within, inward. Di dí, by day. Di di festa, a holie-day. Di di lauoro, a workie-day. Di magro, a fish day, a fasting day. Di grasso, a flesh day. Di diétro, behind, after. Di di in di, from day to day, day by day. Didramma, a Greeke coyne of two dragms. Didurre, duco, dussi, dutto, to deduce, to deduct. Diduttione, a deduction. Diè, Diéde, he or she gaue. Diéci, the number of ten. Dierése, a kind of figure in speech. Diesi, Diepsi, the quarter of a tune, the halfe of halfe a tune in musicke. Di età, of age. Diéta, a diet or abstinence from meate or prescription when to eate. Also a parli∣ament or generall assembly of estates. Dietéri, the space of two yeares. Diétro, behind, after. Dietro pasto, fruite that is serued after meate. Dietro punto, a back-stitch in seamstrie worke. Dietrouia, behind, after, backward. Difalta, a fault, an error, a misse, a tres∣passe, a default. Difaltare, to misse, to erre, to faile, to want. Di fatto, out-right, out of hand, suddenly, indeed, in the nicke, ipso facto, in good sooth. Diféndere, fendo, fendei, or fesi, feso, to defend, to ward, to protect, to shield. Difensore, Diffenditore, a defender, a warder, a protector, a shielder. Difesa, Difensione, a defence, a ward, a protection, a shielding. Difettare, to defect, to want, to blame or taxe one with anie defect, to disable one. Difetto, a defect, a fault, an error, a want, an offence, a blame. Difettoso, faultie, defectiue, erronius, wanting, sicke, crazed, imperfect. Difettuoso, idem. Diffalcare, to deduce or deduct in recko∣nings, to defulke, to abate, to bate. Diffalcatura, a deduction or defalking. Diffalta, a default, a fault, a want, an er∣ror. Diffaltare, to default, to faile, to want. Diffamare, to defame or slander. Diffamatione, a defamation or sclaun∣der. Diffamatorio, defaming, sclanderous. Diffamatore, a defamer or slanderer. Difféndere, fendo, fendei, feso, to de∣fend, to ward, to protect, to shield. Diffenditore, a defender, a warder, a pro∣tector, a shielder. Diffensatore, Diffensore, as Diffendi∣tore. Diffesa, Diffensione, a defence, protecti∣on, shield or ward. Diffenditrice, Diffensitrice, a defen∣dresse. Diffensare, to defend. Differénte, different, diuers. Differentia, difference, diuersitie. Differentiato, with a difference, diffe∣ring, varied. Differire, risco, rito, to deferre, to pro∣long. Differrire, risco, rito, to differ or be di∣uers. Diffibiare, to loose or to vnbuckle, to vn∣tie. Difficile, difficile, vneasie, hard. Difficio, a building, a frame, an edifice. Difficoltare, to make hard, difficult or vneasie. Difficultà, difficultie, vneasines, hardnes. Difficultoso, difficile, vneasie, hard. Diffidanza, distrust, mistrust, diffi∣dence. Diffidare, to distrust, to mistrust, to defie. Diffidénte, mistrustfull, diffident. Diffigurare, to disfigure. Difiggere, figgo, fissi, fitto, to vnfixe, to launch out, to loose out, to vnfasten. Diffinire, finisco, finito, to define. Diffinitiuo, definitiue. Diffinitione, a definition, a defining. Diffitto, vnfixed, lanched out, thrust out, loosed out, vnfastened, in the nick. Diffondare, to vnbottom. Diffóndere, fondo, fondei, fuio, or fon∣duto, to defuse, to shed, to waste, to riot, to scatter, to consume, to melt. Difformare, to mishape, to misforme, to deforme, to disfigure. Difforme, mishapen, misformed, defor∣med, disfigured, shapelesse, formelesse. Difformità, deformitie, a mishaping. Diffrenare, to vnbridle. Diffúndere, as Diffondere. Diffusione, a defusion, a confusion, a chaos. Diffuso, defused, wasted, confused, shed, spread. Difilato, forthright, outright, streight on, by line and measure. Also vnthredded. Difinitione, a definition. Difio, a kinde of meetre or verse, or the foote thereof. Difitto, downe right-streight downe, right downe, out-right. Diformentata, of wheate, as wheaten bread, cheate bread. Diformento, of wheate, or wheaten. Diforza, by maine strength, perforce, of necessitie. Difriges, a kind of ore or minerall earth, that founders and finers vse. Diftongo, as Diphtongo. Di fuóra, Di fuori, without, forth, a∣broad, out. Also from abroade or from forth. Digenerare, as Degenerare. Digeneratione, degeneration. Digénero, one that doth degenerate. Digeríre, risco, rito, to digest, to brooke. Digesteuole, that may be digested. Digestibile, as Digesteuole. Digestione, digestion. Digestiua, digestiue or digestion. Digesto, digested, disgiested, considered, viewed, brooked, disposed, trimmed,
ordred. Digiesto, idem. Digiorno, by day. Digiorno in giorno, day by day, from day to day. Digitale, a thimble, or thumstall. Also the herbe foxegloues. Digito, a finger. Digiù, below, beneath, from below. Digiunabile giorno, a fasting day. Digiunare, to fast, or abstaine from meate. Digiuno, a fast, a fasting, also absti∣nence, one that hath not broken fast. Also a gut in mans bodie called the hungrie gut, because it is alwayes emptie. Dignare, to daine, to vouchsafe. Dignità, dignitie, authoritie, superiori∣tie, worthines. Dignitoso, worthie, full of dignitie. Digno, worthie, deseruing. Digrandinare, as Grandinare. Digran senno, of great wit, of high vn∣derstanding. Digradare, to degrade. Digradatione, a degradation. Di grado in grado, from degree to de∣gree Di gran lunga, by a great deale, by much. Di gratia, I pray you, in curtesie, of kind∣nes. Digrédere, gredo, gressi, gresso, to di∣gresse, to transgresse, to trespas, to goe from the purpose, to swarue. Digressione, a digression, transgression, or trespas, a swaruing. Digrignare, to grinne, to sarre, to yarre as a dog doth. Digrignire, gnisco, gnito, as Digrig∣nare. Di grossa pasta, of no woorth, of no ac∣count, of grosse conceit. Di grosso, by great, by much, in grosse. Diguazzare, to paddle or dash in the wa∣ter. Also to brandish in the aire, to lauish. Dignazzo, a padling, a dashing. Also a brandishing in the aire. Di hora in hora, hower by hower, from hower to hower. Di huopo, D'huopo, necessarie, meete, conuenient, behoofull. Dij, Gods. Di là, that way, beyond, on the other side. Dilaccare, to rent, to teare, to hauock in pieces, to open, to vnbarre. Also to va∣nish out of sight. Dilacerare, to rent, to teare in rags. Dilagare, to ouerflow with water. Dilaniare, to rent, to teare, to breake, to tug in pieces. Dilapidare, as Delapidare. Dilapidatione, as Delapidatione. Dilatare, to dilate, to enlarge, to spread. Also to delay. Dilatatione, as Dilatione. Dilatione, a dilation, enlarging or ouer∣spreading, a delay. Dilattare, to weane, to vnmilch. Dilauatione, a washing away with wa∣ters. Dilauía, that way, thereabout. Dileggiare, to mocke, to scoffe, to flout, to iest at. Dileggieri, Dileggiero, easily, lightly. Dileguado, tride sewet to frye meate with. Dileguare, to melt, to thawe, to consume, to waste, to vanish, to disperse, to de∣stroy. Also to depart out of sight, to auoid, to vndo. Dileticare, to tickle. Diletico, a tickling. Dileticoso, ticklish. Dilettabile, as Diletteuole. Dilettanza, Dilettatione, delight, plea∣sance, content, delectation, sport, li∣king. Dilettare, to delight, to please, to like. Diletteuole, delightsome, pleasant, de∣lightfull, delectable. Dilettione, as Dilettanza. Diletto, as Dilettanza. Dilettoso, as Diletteuole. Dilí, thereaway, that way. Diliberare, as Deliberare. Diliberatione, as Deliberatione. Dilibero, free, franke. Dilicatezza, as Delicatezza. Dilicato, as Delicato. Diligentare, to solicite, to hasten, to ply, to hye. Diligénte, diligent, carefull. Diligenza, diligence, care. Dilinquente, as Delinquente. Diliscare, to vnhuske or clense fish from bones. Diliueranza, deliuerance. Diliuerare, to deliuer. Diliurare, to deliuer. Dille, tell hir, say vnto hir. Dilli, tell him, say vnto him. Dillo, tell it, tell the same. Diloggiare, to dislodge, to vnlodge. Dilollare, to weede corne from tares or cockle. Also to powre from one vessell into another, as wine. Dilombare, Dilombiare, to vnlyne, to make leane or lanke about the loines. Dilongare, to lengthen, to onge, to goe farre off, to deuide. Dilongo, forthright, forward, on along, straight on. Dilontanare, to separate, to elonge, to go farre off, to deuide, to remoue. Di lontano, a farre off, distant, farre. Dilucidare, to declare or make plaine to be vnderstoode. Dilucida, plaine to be vnderstoode. Dilucidatione, a declaring, or explai∣ning. Diludio, the space betweene playes. Dilungi, farre off, farre, distant. Dilungo, as Dilongo. Diluuiare, to ouerflow with waters. Also to denounce, to swallow, or to waste and consume wastfullie, and riotouslie. Diluuio, a deluge, a flood, an inunda∣tion. Diluuione, a waster, a consumer, a de∣stroyer, a spendthrift, a glutton, a gul∣lie gut, a deuourer, a gormand. Dimacerare, to macerate, to mortifie. Dimacchiare, to vnspot, to take away spots, to pull or rouze out of bushes. Dimagrare, to make leane, to become leane, to take downe the flesh. Di mala voglia, ill disposed, out of or∣der, sad, malecontent. Di male in peggio, from bad to worse. Dimaliare, to vnwitch, to vncharme. Di mal pelo, bad of condition, of a bad haire. Dimanda, a demaund, a question, a re∣quest. Dimandare, to demaund, to question, to aske, to request. Dimane, Dimani, to morrow. Dimaniale, as Demaniale. Dimanicare, to vnhandle, to vnhaft, to vnsleeue. Dimaniéra, in such sort, in such manner, so that. Dimani'altro, to morrow next, next day after to morrow. Diman' in mano, from hand to hand, successiuely. Dimantellare, to vnmantle, to disman∣tell, to raze the walles of a towne. Dimarchesarsi, to be deliuered of the monthly flowers that women haue. Dimaritare, to vnmarrie. Dimasta, a gouernour, a ruler, a poten∣tate. Dimastia, gouernment, might, rule, or power. Dimatina, to morrow morning, in the morning. Dimattonare, to vnpane, to vnbrick. Dimmelo, tell it me, tell me it. Dimenare, to mooue, to stirre, to wriggle,
to shake vp and down, to bestir, to tum∣ble, to wagge. Dimenamento, a moouing, a stirring, a wrigling or shaking. Dimembrare, to dismember, to disioynt, to cut vp, to carue, to teare, to deuide. Dimensione, a measuring, a demension. Dimenticaggine, forgetfulnes, obliuion. Dimenticanza, forgetfulnes, obliuion. Dimenticare, to forget. Dimentichiuole, forgetfull, obliuious. Dimentire, mento, mentito, to belie ones selfe, to giue a lie. Dimentita, a belying. Dimesticare, to tame, to become or make familiar or gentle. Dimestichezza, familiaritie, gentlenes, tamenes. Diméstico, familiar, gentle, tame. Dimessione, forgiuenes, submission, low∣lines. Dimesso, demitted, intermitted, submisse, lowlie, humble, base, demisse. Also for∣giuen. Dimesticare, Dimestichezza, as Do∣mesticare. Dimétro, a kinde of verse or meetre. Diméttere, metto, misi, messo, to demit, to intermit, to forgiue. Dimezzare, to deuide in halfes, to seuer, to cut in sunder. Dimézzo, betweene, in the midst. Dimicare, to fight it out as enimies. Dimito, a kind of course cotton or flanell. Dimmi, tell me. Diminuíre, nuisco, nuito, to diminish, to abate. Diminuito, Diminuto, diminished. Diminutione, Diminuimento, a dimi∣nishing, a diminution. Diminutiuo, a diminutiue. Dimisciare, to waken, to awaken. Dimira, point blanke, leuell. Dimitriare, to vnmitre. Dimoccare, to snuffe, as a candle. Dimoccolare, as Dimoccare. Also to put out of ioynt. Dimollare, to vnsteepe. Dimone, Dimonio, a diuell, a spirit. Dimora, a stay, a demurre, a delaie, a pause, a lingring, a slownesse. Also an abiding, a dwelling, a remaining. Dimoranza, idem. Dimorare, to stay, to delay, to demurre, to linger, to pause, to dwell, abide or re∣maine. Dimostranza, a demonstration, declara∣tion. Dimostrare, to shewe, to demonstrate, to declare, to discouer, to manifest. Dimostratione, as Dimostranza. Dimostratiuo, demonstratiue. Dimprouiso, on a sudden, vnprouided, extempore, vnlooked for. Dimucchiare, to vnheape. Dinanzi, Dinanti, before, foreward. Dinari, pence, money or coyne. Dinaioso, Dinaroso, monied, rich. Dinaro, a penie. Also monie. Dinascoso, Dinascosto, secretly, hid∣denly, in hugger-mugger. Dinaspare, to vnrecle, or winde yarne. Dindi, thence, from thence. Also a childish word for money, as we say chinke. Dinegare, to denie, to refuse. Dinetto, cleanly, handsomly, neately. Dino, an open place for aire. Dinoccare, as Dinocciolare. Dinocciolare, to vnhuske, to vnshell, to vntie, to vnknot, to crash or snap, or spraine out of ioynt: to cracke as some make their knuckles to do. Dinoccolare, as Dinocciolare. Dinobilitare, to vnnoble, to put from no∣bilitie. Dinodare, to vnknot, to vntie. Dinontiare, to denounce, to declare. Dinontiatione, denuntiation. Dinominare, to denominate, to name. Dinominatione, denomination. Dinotare, to denote. Dinotatione, denotation. Dinotte, by night, in the darke. Dinotte tempo, idem. Dinóuo, Di nuouo, againe, a new. Dinubilare, to vncloud, to cleere vp. Dinudare, to strip, to make naked, to vn∣clothe. Dio, God, almightie God. Dióbolo, a Greeke coyne about two pence farthing sterling. Diocése, a diocesse. Diodéo, the name of a certaine toole that a surgeon doth vse. Dio lo facia, God grant it, God make it. Dio me ne guardi, God shield me from it, God defend me from it. Dio non voglia, God forbid. Dio voglia, God grant. Dio voglia che, God grant that. Dio volesse, would to God. Dio volesse che, would to God that. Dionisio, a kinde of precious stone hauing red spots, good against drunkennes be∣ing caried about one. Dipanare, to winde or reele yarne or silke. Dipar, Dipari, Diparo, euen hand, hande to hand, euen, equally, alike, quit. Diparangone, perfect, tried, able to stand to the touch. Diparecchiare, to make vnreadie. Dipari, Diparo, as Dipar. Dipartenza, a departure, a going away, a diuidence, a separation. Dipartimento, idem. Dipartíre, parto, partito, to diuide, to se∣parate, to sunder, to diuorce, to impart. Also to depart, to go away. Dipartito, deuided, separated, sundred, diuorced, imparted. Also departed, gon away. Dipartita, a departure, a going away, a diuidence, a separation. Dipassaggio, in passing by, by waie of passage. Dipegnare, to vngage, to vnpawne, to re∣deeme. Dipelare, to vnpill, to vnhaire, to vnskin, to pull out haires or feathers. Dipenare, to rid from pain. Also to winde a bottom or clue of thread. Dipenna, written. Dipennare, to blot, to blur, to crosse out of any writing. Dipendente, dependent, hanging by. Dipendenza, dependencie. Dipéndere, pendo, pendei, penduto, to depend or hang by. Diperse, by himselfe, alone, seuerall. Dipeso, waightie, by maine waight, full waight. Dipezzare, to vnpeece, to vnpatch. Diphtongo, two vowels contract in one body or forme, called a diphthong. Dipiato, secretly, lurkingly, closely. Dipingere, pingo, pinsi, pinto, to paint, to depaint, to draw a picture. Dipintore, a painter, a drawer. Depintura, a painting, a picture. Di piuma, of feather, letto di piuma, a feather bed. Diplorare, as Deplorare. Diploratione, as Deploratione. Dipoca leuatura, of small woorth, scarce woorth the taking vp. Dipocciare, to suck dry, to exhaust. Dipoi, afterwarde, after, then, behinde, moreouer. Diponto, with a thrust or a foyne. Dipónere, Diporre, pongo, posi, posto, to depose or lay downe, to gage downe. Diponitore, Dipositore, a deposer, a gager. Diportamenti, behauiours, solaces, di∣sports. Diportante, an ambling pace. Diportare, to disport, to solace, to be∣haue. Diporto, solace, sport, pastime. Dipositione, as Depositione. Dipositare, as Depositare. Dipositario, as Depositario.
Dipósito, as Deposito. Diposta, at vollie, to take the ball before it bounds. Dipredare, to depray, to pray, to rob, to spoile, to strip. Dipredatione, a robbing, sacking, spoi∣ling, depredation or stripping. Dipresente, now, presently, by and by, at this instant. Dipresso, depressed. Also near, by, or with∣in a little. Diptóto, a noune hauing two cases. Diputare, as Deputare. Diputati, as Deputati. Diputatione, as Deputatione. Diputatore, as Deputatore. Di quà, on this side, hereaway, this way. Also from hence or hence. Di quà et di là, this way and that way, on this side and on that. Di quando in quando, from time to time. Di quercia, of oake, made of oake, oken. Di qui, as Di qua. Di quinci, from hence, hence. Di quindi, thence, from thence: Díra, as Diro. Diradare, to make thin, to rarifie. Diradicare, to vnroote, to pluck vp by the rootes. Dirado, seldome, seldome times. Diramare, to vnbranch, to vnbow, to loppe trees. Diraro, seldome, seldome times. Dire, dico, dissi, detto, to say, to speake, to vtter, to tell or to report. Dire a Dio, to bid farewel. Dire il pater nostro ella bertuccia, to curse, ban, sweare, chase, fret or grum∣ble in vaine and to no purpose to ones selfe, as an ape doth grinning his teeth. Dire cio che pasquino dice de'Cardi∣nali, to raile, to exclaime, to speake all euill. Diredare, to disinherit. Also to vntangle, to vnfould. Direnato, broken backt, hauing the backe out of ioint. Diretano, Direttano, last, lagge, hind∣most. Dirétro, behind, after. Direttiuo, hauing or giuing direction vn∣to, directiue. Diretto, direct. Also directed or adrest. Direttore, a director, a leader, a guide: al∣so a carpenters ruler or squire. Direttorio, a directorie. Dire villania, to reuile, to chide, to rate one. Diricciare, to vnhuske, to vnshale ches∣nuts. Also to vncurle or vncrispe. Diriéto, lag, last, hindermost. Dirietro, behind, after. Dirimpetto, oueragainst, face to face, foreaneanst. Diritezza, directnes, straightnes, vpright∣nes of liuing. Diritto, due, right, iust, straight, stif, forth right, vpright, honest, good, direct. Also reason, iustice, right, law. Also directed. Dirittore, as Direttore. Dirittura, rightnes, streightnes, vprightnes, honestie, goodnes, Looke Adirittura, reason, right, iustice, law. A dirittura, foorthright, point blanke. Diriuare, to deriue. Diriuatione, a deriuation. Diriuatiuo, deriuatiue. Dirizzare, as Drizzare. Dirizzadore, as Drizzadore. Dirizzatoio, as Drizzatore. Díro, dire, cruell, fell, seuere, austere, re∣morceles. Dirò, I will say. Dirobare, to disrobe, to strip, to spoile, to steale, to filch. Diroccare, to tumble or throwe downe headlong from a hill or rocke. Also to flow out of a rocke as water doth. Dirocciare, as Diroccare. Dirómpere, rompo, ruppi, rotto, to breake downe, to burst foorth. Also to bruise or crush in peeces. Dironcare, to prune a vine or tree. Dirosa, of a rose, acqua rosa, rosewater. Dirotta, a downeright huddle or blow. Also broken or burst out. Dirottamente, out-right, foorth-right, amaine without stop or let. Dirottare, as Dirizzare. Dirotto, burst out, broken foorth, bruised, crushed or broken. Diróuro, of oke, made of oke. Dirtelo, to tell it thee. Dirti, to tell thee. Diruccare, as Diroccare. Diruginire, to vnrust, to cleanse or skoure. Dirupare, as Diroccare. Also to waste, to destroy, to shiuer, to riue, to splint, to breake, to crush, to rumble downe. Dirupamento, a shiuering, a splinting, a riuing, a slattering, a rocke, a downe rumbling. Dirupo, a rocke, a cliffe or headlong downe rumbling. Disaccentato, vnaccented, without an accent or due sound. Disacerbare, to vnsower, to sweeten, to ease, to asswage. Disacostumato, vnaccustomed. Also vn∣mannerly. Disacrare, to vnhallow, to degrade. Disadattare, to incommode, to trouble, to displaie, to disorder. Disagéuole, vneasie, hard, difficult. Disaghiadare, to thaw, to vnfreese. Disagiare, to disease, to trouble, to molest, to vexe. Disagrato, diseased, troubled, incommo∣ded. Also crased in bodie. Disagio, trouble, inconuenience, suffe∣rance, disease, molestation. Also want, penurie or lacke. Disagioso, penurious, wanting, difficult, hard, inconuenient. Disagrauare, to disburden, to ease, to lighten. Disaguaglianza, inequalitie, disparage∣ment. Disaguagliare, to inequall, to disparage. Disaiutare, to vnhelpe, to hinder, to dis∣fauour. Disaiuto, hinderance, vnhelpt, let. Disalbergare, to vnlodge. Disamalare, to vnsicken. Disamare, to hate, to vnloue. Disaminare, to examin or discourse vpon. Disamorare, to disinamor. Disamorato, out of loue, disinamored. Disamoreuole, vnlouing, vnkind. Disamoreuolezza, vnkindnes, vnlouing∣nes. Disanimare, to discourage, to disswade from, to depriue of soule and life. Disanottare, to vnnight, to wax day. Disapito, vnsauorie, tasting of nothing, wallowish. Disapricare, to set in the cold againe. Disarcare, to vnbend, to vnarche. Disarenare, to cleare from sand, to vn∣sand, to vngrauell. Disarmare, to vnarme, to disarme. Disascóndere, scondo, scosi, scoso, or scosto, to manifest, to vnhide, to re∣ueale. Disauantaggiare, to disaduantage. Disauantaggio, disaduantage. Disauantaggioso, disaduantageable. Disastro, disastre, mischance, ill lucke. Disastróso, vnfortunate, vnluckie. Disauedére, vedo, viddi, veduto, to mis∣see, to be vnwarie, not to regard. Disaueduto, vnwarie, without regard, vnaduised. Disauedutamente, vnwarily, at vn∣wares, vnaduisedly. Disauedutezza, vnaduisednes, vnwari∣nes. Disauentura, a mishap, a misfortune. Disauenturato, vnhappie, vnfortunate. Disauertenza, ouersight, vnwarines. Disauezzare, to disaccustome, to vnuse.
Disauezzo, vnaccustomed, vnused, vn∣woont. Disbalordire, disco, dito, to leaue or shake of dissines, giddines or staggering, to become wise againe. Disbarcare, to disimbarke, to land. Disbarco, a landing out of a ship, a com∣ming on land. Disbardare, to vntrap as a horse. Disbattezzare, to vnchristen. Disbiadare, to vnprouender a horse. Disbiauato, as sbiauato. Disbottonare, to vnbutton. Disbollare, to cleare from marks or plai∣sters. Disboscare, to vnwood, to vnfurnish of wood or timber. Disbracare, as sbracare. Disbramare, to haue ones longing, to vn∣wish. Disbrattare, as sbrattare. Disbrauare, to disadorne or spoile of bra∣uerie. Disbriacare, to become sober againe. Disbrigare, as sbrigare. Disbrigliare, to vnbridle, to vnsnaffle. Discacciare, as Scacciare. Discadére, as Decadere. Discaggere, as Decadere. Discalciare, Discalzare, as Scalciare. Discadenacciare, to vnboult a doore, to vnbar. Discalcio, as Scalcio. Discancellare, as Cancellare, Discane, as Diácene, or Diáscane. Discapellare, as Scapellare. Discapigliare, as Scapigliare. Discapitare, as Scapitare. Discaricare, as Scaricare. Discarcerare, to vnprison. Discarlatto, of purple, of or with skar∣let. Discarnare, as Scarnare. Discaro, hatefull, hated, odious, not deere, ill beloued. Discasciare, Discassare, to make loose the teeth, to dismount artillerie, to vn∣settle any thing, to vnbreech, to vn∣chest. Discatenare, to vnchaine. Discemare, as Scemare. Discéndere, as Scéndere. Discendénte, descending, declining. Also an allie, or kinsman. Discénte, a disciple, a learner, a scholler. Discendenza, a descendence, a descent, a petigree. Discépolo, a disciple, a scholler, a lear∣ner. Discérnere, scerno, scernéi, scernuto, to discerne, to perceiue, to know, to dis∣tinguish, to know a farre off, to ken. Discernénte, discerning, perceiuing, ken∣ning. Discerneuole, that may be discerned or distinguished, that is apparant. Disceruellare, as Sceruellare. Disceruicare, to vnnecke. Discésa, a descent, a declining. Also a rheume, a catarrhe, a pose, or murre. Discéso, descended, declined, come downe, alighted. Discettare, to disagree, varie, iarre or square. Dischiauare, as Schiauare. Dischiodare, as Schiodare. Dischiomare, to vnhaire, to vncoiffe, to disheuell, to touze ones haire. Dischiúdere, chiudo, chiusi, chiuso, to vnshut, to open, to vnclose, to dis∣close. Dischiuso, vnshut, opened, disclosed, vn∣closed. Disciferare, to vncifer, to decifer. Discigliare, to vnhoode a hawke, to vn∣seere a birds eyes. Discinare, to dine. Also a dinner. Discingere, cingo, cinsi, cinto, to vn∣guirt. Discinto, vngirt, loose, free. Disciógliere, as Sciógliere. Disciolare, to open or vncase a slouen, to put off hose and doublet without vndo∣ing of points. Disciólto, as Sciolto. Discioperato, not idle, busied. Discipare, to dissipate, to waste, to con∣sume, to riot away. Discipito, vnsauorie, tastlesse, without salt, wallowish. Also simple minded. Disciplina, discipline, correction, in∣struction. Disciplinanti, a religious order of such as will scourge themselues, docile. Disciplinare, to discipline, to teach, to correct, to instruct. Disciplinario, disciplinarie, pertaining to discipline or correction. Disciplinéuole, disciplinable, docile, cor∣rigible. Discipolo, as Discepolo. Discluso, excluded, exempted, seuered. Disco, a quoit to play with. Also a great ring of iron, leade, or stone, which men vsed to cast vp in the aire for exercise, as we vse to throw the sledge or pitch the barre. Discolare, to vnglue. Discolmo, a kinde of colour in a horse. Discolo, disobedient, stiffnecked, way∣ward, naught, shrewde. Discolorare, to discolour. Discoloríre, risco, rito, to discolour. Discolpare, as Scolpare. Discolpeuole, vnguiltie, blamelesse. Discomodare, as Incomodare. Discómodo, as Incómodo. Discompagnare, as Scompagnare. Discompiacere, to displease, to dislike. Discomposto, vncomposed, shapelesse, formelesse. Discomunale, that which is not com∣mon. Discomunare, to appropriate that which is common. Disconciare, as Sconciare. Disconciatura, as Sconciatura. Disconcio, as Sconcio. Disconfermare, to vnconfirme, to dis∣establish. Disconficcare, as Sconficcare. Disconfidare, to distrust. Disconforme, vnconformable. Disconfortare, to discomfort, to dis∣swade. Disconforto, disswasion, discomfort. Disconocchiare, to emptie or spinne from a distaffe. Disconoscenza, vnacknowledging, vn∣thankefulnes. Disconosciuto, vnknowne. Disconsigliare, to discounsell, to dis∣swade. Disconsecrare, to degrade, to profane, to vnconsecrate. Disconsertare, to bring out of order, frame, tune, or proportion. Disconsolare, to discomfort. Disconsueto, vnaccustomed, vnwont, vnused. Disconsuetudine, an vnwont. Discontare, to vnreckon, to abate in reckoning. Discontentezza, discontentednes. Discontento, discontent. Discontinua, discontinuall. Discontinuare, to discontinue. Disconuenire, vengo, venni, venuto, to misbeseeme, to be vnconuenient, vn∣seemelie, vnlawfull, or vnmeete, to dis∣agree. Disconueneuole, disconuenient, vndecēt, vnseemely, misbeseeming, inconuenient. Disconueneuolezza, an inconueniencie, or vnseemelines. Disconuersare, to vnfrequent, not to con∣uerse together. Discoppiare, to vncouple, to vnyoke. Discoperta, a discouerie. Discoperto, discouered, open, manifest, reuealed, vncouered. Discopríre, copro, copérsi, copérto, to discouer, to vncouer, to reueale.
Discordanza, a discorde, a iarring, a squaring, a disagreement, forgetful∣nesse. Discordare, to disagree, to vntune, to contend, to iarre, to square, to forget. Discordante, Discordeuole, Discor∣de, discordant, disagreeing, differing. Discordia, discorde, iarre, squaring, con∣tention. Discordo, a disagreement, a discorde, a iarre, a squaring. Discorrentia, a discourse, a tale, a speech. Also a loosenes in the body, a laske. Discorrenza, a running, a flixe or flo∣wing of humours. Discórrere, corro, corsi, corso, to dis∣course, to reason, to run to and fro. Discorribanda, a glance or touch at anie thing in discourse, a word and away. Discorrimento, a running to and fro, a gadding vp and downe, a discoursing. Discorrucciare, to pacifie from anger, to forget, or forgo ones anger. Discosiuamente, by way of discourse. Discorso, discoursed, reasoned, runne or gadded to and fro. Also reason, wit, discourse, consideration, or foresight. Discortese, discourteous, vnciuill. Discortesia, discurtesie, inciuilitie. Discorzare, to shaue, to pare, to pil, to vn∣rine. Discoscéndere, as Scoscéndere. Discoscéso, as Scoscéso. Discostare, to separate, to disioine, to se∣uer, to sunder, to eslonge or go far off. Discosto, farre, farre off, distant, farre a sunder. Discotennare, to flea, to vnskin, to gall or rub off the skin. Discourire, as Discoprire. Discouerta, as Discoperta. Discouerto, as Discoperto. Discozzare, as Scozzare. Discredénte, misbeleeuing, mistrustfull, vnbeleeuing, a miscreant. Discrédere, credo, credei, creduto, to misbeleeue, to vnbeleeue, to distrust, to be a miscreant. Discrepante, different, disagreeing. Discrepantia, difference, or disagree∣ment. Discrescénte luna, the waning or de∣creasing of the moone. Discréscere, cresco, crebbi, cresciuto, to vngrow, to diminish, to wane. Discrespare, to vncurle, to vnfrizle, to vncrispe, to vnwrinkle, to smooth, to sleeke. Discretézza, as Discrettione. Discretione, discretion, iudgement, wise∣dome, consideration, discreetnes. Discréto, discreet, wise, wary, considerate, circumspect. Discrittibile, that may be described. Discríuere, as Descriuere. Discrostare, as Scrostare. Discrudelire, lisco, lito, to become from cruell, gentle and milde. Disculminare, to vntop, to vnroofe, or vntile a house. Discumulare, to vnheape. Discursione, a discourse, a discoursing. Discuscíre, as Scuscire. Discuscíto, as Scuscito. Discussiuo, which hath strength to dis∣solue or breake, discussiue. Discusso, discussed, searched, related, dis∣solued. Discútere, cuto, cussi, cusso, to discusse, to relate, to search out. Disdebitare, to vndebt, to come out of debt. Disdegnare, as Sdegnare. Disdegno, as Sdegno. Disdegnoso, as Sdegnoso. Disdentato, as Sdentato. Disdetta, a forespeaking, an ill lucke, a misfortune, a gainsaying, a foreboding. Disdetto, vnsaide, recanted, reuoked a saying, gaine-saide, withstoode, fore∣spoken, misbeseeming, vndecēt, vnmeet, a controuersie or contention. Disdicéuole, vnseemely, vndecent, not to be spoken. Disdíre, dico, dissi, detto, to vnsaie, to recant, to gaine saie, to forespeake, to be vndecent, to misbeseeme, not to become. Disdogliare, as Sdogliare. Disdolorare, as Sdogliare. Disdottorare, to vndoctor, to degrade a doctor. Disdossa, alla disdossa, loosely on ones backe, a pick-apack. Disdossare, to take from ones backe. Disegnante, a map or modle maker. Also a desseigner, a complotter, a contriuer, a drawer, a painter. Disegnare, to purpose, to intende, to des∣seigne, to drawe, to modle, to plot, to contriue, to paint, to pourtraie. Disegnatore, as Disegnante. Disegni, purposes, desseignes, draughts, modles, plots. Disegno, a purpose, an intent, a desseigne, a draught, a modle, a plot, a picture, or pourtrait. Disegualità, inequalitie, disproportion. Disellare, Disellato, to vnsaddle. Disenfiamento, an vnswelling. Disenfiare, to vnswel, to vnpuffe, to alay, to asswage. Disensato, senceles, madde, frantike, out or reason. Disenteria, as Dissenteria. Diseparare, as Separare. Diséra, in the euening, by night. Diserrare, to vnlocke, to vnshut, to open. Disertare, to make desart, to waste, to spoile, to reduce to a wildernes. Also for a woman to miscarie in childe-bed or come before hir time. Disérto, a desart, a waste, a heath, a wil∣dernes. Also eloquent, well spoken, of good vtterance. Diseruíre, seruo, seruito, to vnserue, to disobey, to be vnthankefull, to iniurie. Diseruito, vnserued, offended, disobeyed, bin vnthankefull, wronged. Diseruitio, a shrewd turne, a bad ser∣uice, an offence. Disfacendato, as Sfacendato. Disfacimento, as Sfacimento. Disfaldare, to vnfold, to vnplait. Disfaltare, to misse, to erre, to trespasse, to default. Disfalta, an errour, a default, a tres∣passe. Disfamare, as Sfamare. Disfangare, to clense from dirt or mire. Disfantare, to vanish out of sight, to free or take away infanterie, o becom from a footeman a horseman. Disfare, faccio, feci, fatto, to vndoe, to spoile, to waste, to marre, to vnmake, to defeate. Disfaretrare, to vnquiuer, to emptie a quiuer. Dísfarinare, to vnmeale, to vnflower. Disfattione, as Sfaccimento. Disfatto, vndone, spoiled, wasted, vn∣made, defeated. Disfasciare, as Sfasciare. Disfauore, a disfauour, a disgrace. Disfauoreuole, vnfauourable, disgrace∣full. Disfauoríre, risco, rito, to disfauour or disgrace. Disferrare, as Sferrare, Disfiancare, to vnflanke, to vnhip, to vnhanch. Disfibbiare, as Sfibbiare. Disfida, as Sfida. Disfidare, as Sfidare. Disfigliare, to fillie as a mare, to eawe as a sheepe, to be brought a bed as a woman. Disfigurare, to disfigure, to misshape. Disfilare, as Sfilare. Disfocare, as Sfogare. Disfoderare, as Sfodrare. Disfogare, as Sfogare. Disfogliare, as Sfogliare. Disfoiato, as Sfoiato. Disforato, without holes, vnbored.
Disforcare, to vnforke, to free from the gibet or gallowes. Disformare, as Sformare. Disfornare, to vnfurnace, to pull out of an ouen. Disfornire, as Sfornire. Disfrancare, to vnfranchise, to vnbind. Disfranciosato, as Sfranciosato. Disfrangiare, to vnfringe, to vnlase, to vngard, to disadorne. Disfratare, as Sfratare. Disfregiare, as Sfregiare. Disfrenare, as Sfrenare. Disfrondare, as Sfrondare. Disgangherare, as Sgangherare. Disgannare, as Disingannare. Disgelosire, sisco, sito, to resolue or free from ielosie. Disghiacciare, to vnfreese, to thaw. Disghirlandare, to vngarlande, to vn∣crowne. Disgiogare, to vnyoke, to free. Disgióngere, giongo, gionsi, gionto, to disioyne, to disunite, to deuide. Disgiontione, a disioining, a disiointing, a diuision. Disgiontiuo, a disiunctiue. Digionto, Disgiunto, disioyned, disuni∣ted, deuided, seuered. Disgiouare, to disauaile, to hurt. Disgiúgnere, as Disgióngere. Disgoluppare, as Sgominare. Disgombrare, as Sgombrare. Disgomentare, as Sgomentare. Disgommare, as Sgommare. Disgonfiare, as Disenfiare. Disgouernare, to misgouerne, to misrule. Disgradare, to degrade. Disgradire, to dislike, not to take in worth. Disgrassare, to vnfatten, to make leane. Disgratia, a disgrace, a mishap, a misfor∣tune. Disgratiare, to disgrace. Disgratiato, disgraced, vnhappie, grace∣lesse, bad, shrewed, naughtie. Disgrauare, as Sgrauare. Disgrauidare, as Sgrauidare. Disgrauio, a discharge, a disagrauating. Disgregare, to deuide, to scatter. Disgroppare, as Sgroppare. Disgrossare, as Sgrossare. Disgustare, as Sgustare. Disgusteuole, apt to conceiue a hard opi∣nion or vnkindnes, distrustfull. Disgusto, as Sgusto. Dishabitato, disinhabited, vnfrequented, vncothe. Dishabilità, dishabilitie, vnablenes, insuf∣ficiencie. Dishabilitare, to disable, to disinable, to disparage. Disherbare, to vngrasse, to weede out. Disherbeggiare, as Disherbare. Disheredare, to disinherite or disherit. Dishereditare, idem. Disheritare, to disherit or disinherit. Dishonestà, dishonestie, vnhonestie. Dishonésta, dishonest, vnhonest. Dishonestare, to dishonest, to shame, to defame. Dishonoranza, dishonor, shame. Dishonorare, to dishonor, to shame. Dishonore, dishonor, discredit. Dishonoreuole, dishonorable. Dishorreuole, idem. Dishumanare, to shake off all humanitie, to become inhumaine, cruell or moodie. Dishumano, inhumaine, cruell, fell, moo∣die. Dishumile, proud, high minded, haughtie, without humilitie. Disianza, a desire, a wish. Disiare, as Desiare. Disiderare, as Desiare. Disiderio, a desire, a wish. Disideroso, desirous, wishing. Disiecorare, to panch or pull out the en∣trailes of any beast. Disiecore, the vmbles, plucke, midriffe, panche, entrailes, garbish, hastlet, gib∣let or geither of any beast. Di si fatta maniéra, in such sort, so that. Di si fatta sorte, idem. Disigilare, to vnseale, to pull off the seale. Disimbarcare, to disimbarke, to vnship. Disimboscare, as Sboscare. Disimbrattare, as Sbrattare. Disimbriacare, to become or make sober againe. Disimparare, to forget, to vnlearne. Disimpegnare, to vnpaune, to redeeme. Disimpiastrare, to vnplaister. Disimpiccare, to vnhang. Disinamorare, to disinamoure. Disinare, to dine. Also a dinner. Disincantare, to vncharme, to disinchant. Disincarcerare, to free out of prison. Disinténdere, tendo, tesi, teso, to mis∣understand. Disinebbiare, to vncloude, to cleere vp. Disinebriare, as Disimbriacare. Disingannare, to vndeceiue, to cleare, to free or resolue from any doubt. Disinsegnare, to vnteach againe. Disintonare, to vntune, to disagree. Disintricare, to vntangle, to vnfold. Disinuescare, to vnsnare, to vnbaite. Disinuitare, to vnuie at any game, to vn∣bid, to disinuite. Disinuolto, loose, free, vntangled, vn∣wrapt. Disio, a desire, a wish. Also I wish or de∣sire. Disioso, desirous, couetous. Dislacciare, as Slacciare. Dislagare, to vnflow, to ebbe or fall as waters do, to dilate as water doth. Dislattare, to weane from sucking. Dislauare, to vnwash. Dislegare, to vntie, to vnbinde. Dislendinare, to vnnit, to vnlouse. Disleale, as Sleale. Dislealtà, Disleanza, as Slealta. Dislenguare, to vntoong. Dislinguare, idem. Dislocare, as Slogare. Dislodare, to dispraise, to discommend. Dislogare, as Slogare. Dislogatione, an vniointing of any lim or ioint, a displacing. Disloggiare, to vnlodge, to dislodge. Dislombare, to vnloyne, to back-breake. Dislongare, as Allontanare. Dislustrare, to darken, to obscure. Dismacchiare, as Smacchiare. Dismagare, as Smagare. Dismagliare, as Smagliare. Dismalare, to vnsicken, to recouer health. Dismandasi, in Grison is taken when a horse doth flie or depart out of the ring or compasse where he is ridden. Dismanicare, as Smanicare. Dismatire, to become wise from foolish. Dismembrare, as Smembrare. Dismenticanza, forgetfulnes. Dismenticare, to forget. Dismenticheuole, forgetfull. Dismetriare, as Smetriare. Disméttere, metto, misi, messo, to dis∣mish, to leaue off, to renounce. Dismiare, to wake, to awaken. Dismisciare, Dismisiare, to awaken. Dismissione, a dismissing or dismission. Dismisura, an vnmeasure, out of mea∣sure. Dismisurato, as Smisurato. Dismonacare, as Disfratare. Dismontare, as Smontare. Dismontata, as Smontata. Dismorbare, as Smorbare. Disnebbiare, to vncloude, to cleare vp. Disneruare, as Sneruare. Disnidare, to vnroost, to vn-nest. Disnodare, as Snodare. Disnodatione, as Snodatura. Disnóre, dishonour, dishonestie. Disnottare, to wax day or cleare againe. Disobligare, to free from bonds. Disóbligo, no bond nor dutie. Disocupato, vnocupied, idle, waste, vn∣used. Disolare, to make desolate, to vnsole. Disolatione, as Desolatione.
Disonante, dissonant, disagreeing. Disonanza, a dissonance, a discord, or iarre in musicke. Disonare, to disaccord, to iarre, to dis∣agree in sound, to dissent. Disonghiare, to vn-naile, or to vn∣hoofe. Disonnare, Disonniare, to awaken, to free from sleepe. Di sono, Di suono, by the sound, soun∣ding. Disopra, aboue, ouer, aloft, ouer and a∣boue, from aboue, moreouer, besides, aboue hand. Disopracalcie, as Sopracalcie. Disoprauia, as Disopra. Disorbitante, absurd, irregular, out of order, square, or measure. Disorbitantia, absurdnes, irregularitie, disorder, confusion. Disordinare, to disorder, to confound, to commit disorder, riot or excesse. Disórdine, disorder, confusion, riot, ex∣cesse. Disornare, to disadorne, to vndeck. Di sórte, in such sort, in such manner. Disorte che, so that, in such manner as. Disossare, to vnbone, to pull out the bones. Disottérra, from vnder ground. Disotterare, to vnburie, to dig from vn∣der the ground. Di sotto, from vnder, vnder, vnderneath, below, from below. Disouerchio, superfluous, ouermuch, ex∣cessiue. Dispagliare, to winnow or rid from chaffe or strawe. Dispaiare, to vnpaire, to vncouple. Disparare, as Sparare. Disparére, a disopinion, a diuersitie in conceit. Also a disgust or vnkindnes. Also not to seeme. Dispárgere, as Dispérgere. Dispari, vneeuen, vnlike, not match. Also ods in number. Disparíre, as Sparíre. Disparità, vnequalitie, ods. Disparo, vneeuen, or od in number, vn∣equall. Disparuccare, to pull off ones haire or perawig, to vnhaire. Disparte, a part, a side, seuerall, re∣mote. Dispartíre, as Spartire. Disparutezza, as Sparutezza. Disparuro, as Sparuto. Dispedire, as Spedire. Dispegnare, as Spegnare. Dispegolare, to vnpitch, or vntarre. Dispelare, as Spelare. Dispendio, expence, charges, cost, de∣fraying. Dispensa, a dispensation, a distributing, an expence, a charge. Also a buttrie, a pantrie, a cupboard, a lardrie, or storehouse. Dispensagione, as Dispensa. Dispensare, to dispence, to order, to dis∣pose, to distribute, to spend, to defray, to discharge, or as we say commonly to finde one meate and drinke. Dispensatione, a dispensation. Dispensiére, a spender, a cater, a trea∣surer, a steward or butler of a hous∣hold, a distributer. Dispéndere, as Spéndere. Dispepsia, ill concoction or cruditie in the stomacke. Disperaggine, Disperanza, desperation. Disperare, to despaire. Disperate, a kinde of waylefull songs. Disperatione, desperation. Disperato, desperate, mad. Dispérdere, pérdo, pérsi, pérso, to dis∣perse, to miscarie as a woman in child∣bed. Disperdimento, a mischance to a woman in labour. Dispérgere, spérgo, spérsi, sperso, to de∣spise, to contemne, to set at naught, to disperse. Dispergiuto, despised, contemned, set at naught, dispersed, scattred. Dispersa, Disperso, dispersed. Also mis∣caried in child-bed. Dispersamente, dispersedlie. Dispersione, an abortion or miscarying with a childe, or such mischance, a dis∣persing or scattering. Disperuccare, as Disparuccare. Dispésa, expence, charge, defraying. Dispettare, to despight, to shew spite vn∣to, to despise, to contemne. Dispetteuole, despightfull. Dispétto, despight. Also despised, loathed, contemned. Dispettoso, despightfull. Dispiacenza, vnpleasantnes. Dispiacére, as Spiacére. Dispiacéuole, as Spiaceuole. Dispiaceuolezza, vnpleasantnes. Dispiccare, to vnhang, to vnfasten. Dispidocchiare, as Spidocchiare. Dispiegare, as Spiegare. Dispietato, as Spietato. Dispíngere, to vnthrust. Dispiron, a kind of herbe. Dispitto, despight, spite. Dispittoso, despightfull, spitefull. Displicenza, vnpleasantnes, displeasing. Dispo, a kinde of venemous serpent. Dispogliare, as Spogliare. Dispolutione, a spoiling, a robbing. Dispónere, póngo, pósi, pósto, to dis∣pose, to order, to settle, to appoint. Dispondeo, a double spondeo of foure long sillables. Dispontare, to disappoint, to vnpoint, to vnbridge. Dispórre, as Dispónere. Dispositione, Dispostezza, disposition, lustines, gallantnes, a minde or af∣fection. Disposare, to vnmarie, to vnwed. Dispósto, disposed, ordred, settled. Also lustie, strong, sound in health, blithe, gallant. Dispréa, pursines, or stopping of breath. Dispregiare, as Spregiare. Dispregieuole, contemptible, skornefull, base, abiect. Disprégio, as Spregio. Disprezzabile, as Dispregieuole. Disprezzare, as Spregiare. Disprezzeuole, as Dispregieuole. Disprezzo, as Spregio. Disproposito, as Sproposito. Disproportione, a disproportion. Disprouare, to disproue. Disprouédere, as Sprouedere. Disproueduto, as Sproueduto. Disprouisto, as Sproueduto. Dispuntare, as Dispontare. Disputa, Disputatione, a disputation, a reasoning, or debating. Disputabile, as Disputeuole. Disputare, to dispute, to debate, to reason, to treate. Disputante, Disputatore, a disputer, a reasoner, a debater. Disputéuole, disputable, that may be rea∣soned of. Disquagliato, melted, vnthawed, liqui∣fied, vncurded. Disquietare, as Squietare. Disquiéte, Disquietudine, as Squie∣tudine. Disquiéto, vnquiet, turbulent, stirring, sance rest. Disquagliare, to vncurd as milke is. Disquartare, to vnquarter. Disradicare, as Sradicare. Disredare, to disinherit. Disregolare, to disorder, to confounde. Disroncare, to grub or roote vp. Dissaco, a carde-teazell, or Venus bason. Dissaccare, to vnsacke, to emptie out of a sacke. Dissacrare, Dissagrare, to degrade, to vnhallow, to vnconsecrate. Dissada, a kinde of venemous serpent all speckled with white spots.
Disse, he said. Dissero, they said. Dissecabile, that may be dried vp. Dissecare, to exsiccate or dry vp. Dissecatione, exiccation or drying vp. Dissediare, to vnbesiege, to free from a siege. Dissegnare, as Disegnare. Disseminato, scattred, forlorne, sowne heere and there, spred abroad. Dissenteria, a dangerous flixe with exco∣riation and wringing of the bowels, and some blood comming with it. Dissentiente, dissenting, differing, con∣tending. Dissentione, dissention, contention, strife, squaring. Dissentioso, dissentious, contentious, squaring, quarelsome. Dissentíre, sento, sentito, to dissent, to disagree. Disseparare, to separate, to seuer, to part asunder. Disserrare, to vnlocke, to vnshut. Dissetare, to quench or slake the thirst. Dissi, I said, I did say. Dissigilare, to vnseale. Dissimiglianza, vnlikenes, difference in resemblance, diuersitie. Dissimigliare, to differ in resemblance, to be vnlike. Dissimilare, as Dissimile. Dissimile, Dissimigliante, vnlike, vnre∣sembling, differente in shew. Dissimilitudine, as Dissimiglianza. Dissimulare, to dissemble, to cloke or dis∣guise. Dissimulatione, dissimulation, dissem∣bling. Dissimulatore, a dissembler, a cloker. Dissipare, to waste, to consume, to dissi∣pate, to riot vnthriftily. Dissipatione, a dissipation, wasting, con∣suming or vnthriftines. Dissipatore, a waster, a consumer, an vn∣thrift. Dissipito, vnsauorie, tasteles, wallowish, without sauour. Dissitte, the Dixit, meaning him that said dixit Dominus Domino meo. Dissitio, foolish, gullish, lubbarly, shallowe witted. Dissiuare, to straine out of ioynt. Dissiuatione, a straining out of ioint. Al∣so another disease in a horse. Dissolare, to loose, to seuer, to sunder, to part as the shooe from the sole, to vnsole. Dissolatura, is a paine in the bottome of the horses foote proceeding of the prick∣ing of a naile being not well healed, or such like accident: which causeth a con∣course of euill humours, bereauing the horse of his lim. Dissolato, the place in the horses foote pained or grieued with Dissolatura. Dissóluere, sóluo, soluéi, soluto, to dis∣solue, to loose, to vnbinde, to vndoo. Dissolutezza, dissolutenes, riotousnesse, lewdnes. Dissolutione, a dissolution, a dissoluing. Also an abolishing or breaking, a dis∣order. Dissoluto, dissolute, lewde, riotous, dis∣orderd, dissolued, vnbound, loosed, abo∣lished. Dissomigliare, as Dissimigliare. Dissomigliante, as Dissimigliante. Dissomiglianza, as Dissimiglianza. Dissonante, as Disonante. Dissonanza, as Disonanza. Dissonare, as Disonare. Dissorare, to diuide or share, or part. Dissoterrare, as Disoterrare. Dissugelare, to vnseale. Distaccare, as Staccare. Distante, distant, farre off, farre asun∣der, diuers. Distantia, Distanza, distance of place, difference, space betweene. Distare, to be distant or stand farre off. Distemperare, to distemper. Distemperamento, a distemperature. Distemperanza, idem. Distemperatezza, idem. Distemprare, as Distemperare. Disténdere, as Sténdere. Distenére, tengo, tenni, tenuto, to de∣taine, to withhold. Disterrare, to vnburie, to digge from out the ground. Distesamente, at large, abroad, exten∣dedly, copiously, fluently. Distéso, extended, spread, displaide, laide along, out-stretched, out-reached, out-sprouted, copious, fluent, at large. Distessére, tésso, tessei, tessuto, to vn∣weaue, to rauell out. Distettare, to weane from the dugge. Distico, a double meeter, two verses con∣taining one matter. Also the herbe cal∣led Smilax. Distillare, to distill, to trill, to drop by lit∣tle and little. Distilatione, a distillation, a distilling, a trilling, a dropping. Also a consump∣tion. Distilatoio, a still or distilling house. Also a still or limbecke. Distinare, to destinate, to appoint, to alot. Distino, Distinatione, destinie, lot, fate, chance, or fortune. Distínguere, stinguo, stinsi, stinto, to distinguish, to distinct, to deuide, to se∣parate. Distintamēte, distinctly, seuerally, poin∣ted in order: variablie. Distintione, a distinction, diuersitie or separation. Also a point or a note. Distintiuo punto, a distinctiue point. Distirare, to stretch out, to pull out, to stretch vpon a tenter hooke: to wrest in length. Distirpare, to extirpe, to grub or plucke vp by the roote. Distiuallare, to vnboote, to pull off boots. Distoccata, with a foyne or a thrust. Distógliere, tolgo, tolsi, tolto, to re∣mooue, to withdraw, to diuert from any purpose or action. Distólto, remooued, withdrawne, diuer∣ted or taken from any purpose or ac∣tion. Distonare, to vntune, to disorder, to bring out of frame. Distórcere, torco, torsi, torto, to extort, to writhe, to wriggle, to wrest and vn∣wrest. Also to make crooked, to twist or vntwist. Distornare, as Distogliere, to turne backe, to turne away from. Distorno, a backe returning, a turning a∣way from. Distorre, as Distogliere. Distorto, extorted, wrigled, crooked, wri∣thed, awrie, winding, or crankling in and out. Distrarre, traggo, trassi, tratto, to with∣draw, to distract, to leade awaie, to misleade. Distratto, withdrawne, distracted, led away, mislead. Distregare, to vnwitch. Distretta, a destraine, a trouble, an in∣conuenience, a narrow pinch, an impri∣soment, a durance. Distretto, distressed, troubled, brought to a narrow pinch, imprisoned, straight, bounde, in durance. Also a precinct, a verge, a circuit, a bound, a limit or narrow place, a prison. Also a wapen∣take or hundred of a shire. Distrettuati, such as dwell in any limited precinct or bound. Distribuire, buisco, buito, to distribute, to deale, to deuide. Distributione, a distribution, a dealing or diuision. Distributore, a distributor, a dealer, a de∣uider: Also the master or chiefe gut in any bodie. Districare, to free, to rid, to cleare, to dis∣intricate, to vntangle, to dissolue, to leuse.
Districamento, an vntangling, a rid∣dance, a loosing. Distrigare, as Districare. Distringere, stringo, strinsi, stretto, to distraine, to streighten, to bar of liber∣tie. Distrúggere, struggo, strussi, strutto, to destroye, to waste, to consume, to thaw, to melt. Distruggitiuo, destroying or consuming. Distruggitore, Distruttore, a destroyer, a waster. Distruttione, Distruggimento, a de∣struction, a destroying, a consuming. Distrutto, destroied, wasted, cōsumed, tha∣wed, melted. Also clarified fat or sewet. Disturare, to vnstop, to open. Disturbo, Disturbio, a disturbance, a trouble, a molestation. Disturbamento, as Disturbo. Disturbare, to disturbe, to trouble, to mo∣lest. Disù, Di suso, aboue, vp, aloft, from a∣boue, Also say on, speake vp. Disuadére, suado, suasi, suaso, to dis∣swade. Disuantaggiare, to disaduantage. Disuantaggio, a disaduantage. Disuantaggioso, disaduantagious. Di sua pósta, at his owne will, of his owne choise. Disuasione, a disswasion, a disswading. Disuasorio, disswading, discouraging. Disubidiente, disobedient. Disubidientia, disobedience. Disubidire, disco, dito, to disobey. Disubito, suddenly, presently. Disuefare, to disaccustome. Disuelare, as Suelare. Disuellere, as Suellere. Disuelto, as Suelto. Disuenire, as Suenire. Disuenimento, as Suenimento. Disuentrare, as Suentrare. Disuerginare, as Suerginare. Disuestire, as Suestire. Disuestito, as Suestito. Disueto, vnaccustomed, vnwont. Disuetudine, an vnuse, an vnwont. Disuernicare, to vnuarnish. Disuezzare, to disaccustome, to vnuse. Disuezzo, vnwont, disaccustomed. Disuguaglianza, inequalitie. Disuguale, vnequall. Disugualita, as Disuguaglianza. Disuiare, to entice, to draw or go out of the way. Disuiamento, an enticement or drawing or alluring out of the way. Disuiluppare, as Suilluppare. Disuiticciare, Disuitticchiare, as Suil∣luppare. Disunghiare, to vnnaile, to pare the nailes, to vnhoofe. Disunione, disunion. Disuníre, nisco, nito, to disunite. Di suo capo, of his owne head, of his owne choise. Disuolére, as Suolere. Disuria, inflammation of the bladder or hardnes to pisse. Disusanza, disuse, an vnusing, an vn∣woont. Disusato, vnused, vnwoonted. Disuticciare as Suilluppare. Disutile, vnprofitable, vnprofit. Dita, fingers or thumbs. Ditaglio, to hit with the edge of any weapon, edgeling. Ditale, a thimble or a finger stall, or hearb fox-gloues. Dite, is sometimes taken for hell or limbo. Also you say. Ditélla, the arme holes or arme pits. Diterminare, to determine, to resolue. Diterminatione, a determination, a reso∣lution. Ditestare, to detest, to abhor. Ditestatione, a detestation, an abhor∣ring. Ditestéuole, detestable, abominable, loth∣some. Ditirambo, a song made in honor of Bac∣chus. Ditirambico poéta, a Poet singing in praise of Bacchus. Dito, a finger, an inche, a thumbe. Ditóno, hauing or making two sounds or two parts in musicke. Ditrahére, as Detrarre. Ditrattione, as Detrattione. Ditratto, as Detratto. Ditrattore, as Detrattore. Ditrauerso, athwart, sideling, askaunce, askew. Ditre cotte, perfect, three times tried, of three bakings. Ditrochéo, a double trocheo verse. Dittamo, the herbe dittanie, dittander or gardenginger. Dittare, as Dettare. Dittatore, an inditer. Also a dictator, a chiefe imperiall commander. Dittaura, a dictatorship. Dittella, as Ditella. Dittionario, a dictionarie. Dittione, a saying, a mot, a word, a brief. Ditto, sayd, spoken, told. Also a speech or a saying. Diua, a goddesse. Also deuine, heauenly. Diuallare, to fall or descend downe. Also to flote downe the water. Diuallire, lisco, lito, as Diuallare. Diuampare, as Anampare. Diuantaggio, as Dauantaggio. Diuario, a separation or stradling. Diuedére, vedo, viddi, veduto, to de∣uide, to separate. Also to winde silke, to perceiue, to be aware of. Looke Dare a diuedere. Diueduta, Diuista, by sight, by the eye. Diuéllere, as Suellere. Diuenimento, a becomming. Diuenire, vengo, venni, venuto, as Di∣uentare. Diuentare, to become, to betide, to chance, to be fall, to happen. Diuérbio, the first part of a comedie or a part wherein manie persons are occu∣pied. Also an old said saw. Diuersare, to differ, to be diuers. Diuersificare, to differ. Diuersione, a diuerting, a turning away. Diuersità, diuersitie, difference, contra∣rietie. Diuersiuoco, signifiyng diuers things. Diuérso, diuers, different, differing, strange, vnwont. Diuerticolo, a narrow by-lane or side-way, a turning, winding lane or riuer. Also a craftie slip. Diuertire, tisco, tito, to diuert or remoue, to turne away. Diuertiua, diuertiue or remouing, Guerra diuertiua, diuertiue war. Diui, saints, sacred, holie, godlie. Diuidare, to winde silke or reele yarne. Diuidatrice, a silke winderesse. Diuidente parlare, a distinct, lesurely speech. Diuídere, vido, viddei, viso, to deuide, to separate, to part, to seuer or sunder. Diuiduo, separable, a diuisible thing, that that may be diuided. Diuietare, to forbid, to prohibit. Diuieto, a forbiding, a prohibition. Diuimare, to vnbinde any thing bound with twigs or osiers. Diuinare, to deuine, to guesse, to fortell, to presage, to prophesie. Diuinatione, diuination, guessing, fore∣telling. Diuinatore, a deuiner, a soothsayer. Diuinatoria arte, the arte of diuination, or sooth-saying. Diuincolare, as Nicchiare. Diuinità, diuinitie, deitie, Godhead. Diuino, diuine, heauenlie. Also a prea∣cher or professor of diuinitie. Also of wyne, tasting of wine. Diuisa, a diuise, a liuerie, an inuention, an emprese. Also a maner, fashion, or forme. Also deuided.
Diuisamento, a deuise, a talke, a parti∣tion, a diuiding, a blazoning of armes. Diuisare, to deuise, to talke, to conferre, to inuent, to discourse, to surmise, to seeme, to thinke, to blazon armes. Also to diuide or part asunder. Diuisato, partie-coloured, partie perpale. Diuisibile, separable, diuiduall, that may be diuided. Diuisione, diuision, partition, separa∣tion. Diuiso, deuided, deuised, separated. Al∣so a discourse, a tale, a speech. Diuitia, plentie, store, ritches. Diuitioso, ritch, plenteous, abundant. Diuo, diuine, heauenly, a saint, a God. Diuolgare, to publish, to make common, to diuulge or make knowne. Diuolgatione, a publishing, or publica∣tion, a proclamation. Diuolgatore, a publisher, a proclaimer. Diuoluere, voluo, volsi, voluto, to re∣uolue, to reuolt, to turne back, to de∣uolue. Diuoluto, reuolued, reuolted, turned back, ouerturned, deuolued. Diuolutione, a reuolution, a deuolution. Diuorare, to deuoure, to glut, to gorge vp, to swallow vp. Diuoracità, gluttonie, deuouringnes, Diuoratore, a deuourer, a glutton, an engorger. Diuotare, to deuote. Diuotione, deuotion, earnestnes, reli∣gion. Diuoto, deuoted. Also deuoute, reli∣gious. Diuortiare, to diuorce, to part asunder. Diuortio, a diuorce or separation. Diuorzare, as Diuortiare. Diuorzo, a diuorce or separation. Diurno, daily, continuall, lasting. Diurnità, continuance, dailines, lasting∣nes, perpetuitie. Diuturnale, continuall, lasting, daily, perpetuall. Diuturnare, to continue, to perpetuate. Diuturnità, as Diurnità. Diuturno, lasting, continuing. Diuulgare, as Diuolgare. Diuulgatione, as Diuolgatione. Diuulgatore, as Diuolgatore. Diuulsione, a diuulsion, vnioyning, cut∣ting, or diuiding. Dó, of the verbe Dare, I giue. Also for Doue, where, whether? Doaggio, a kinde of course garment, or shepheards cloth. Doana, as Dogaa. Doaniere, as Doganiere. Dobba, a kinde of dressing of meate so called. Dobbiamo, we owe, or we ought, or we must, or we shall. Dobbiendo, owing, of Douere. Doble, Dobre, a kinde of coyne, a double double ducket. Dobletta, a kinde of silken stuffe worne in doublets. Dobretto, Dobletto, a kinde of white garment, like a mandilion. Doccia, a water pipe of lead, vnder the ground, a damme of a mill, a spout. Docciare, to spout out as water doth out of a cock. Docciatura a spouting of waters. Doccio, a kinde of waterpot that bar∣bers vse to let water trill vpon mens heads to wash it with. Doccione, a great water-pipe vnder ground. Also a great spout or cock for water to run out. Docére, hath bin vsed to teach, to in∣struct. Dochimo, a foote of fiue sillables, a short, two long, a short, and a long. Docile, docile, tractable, that will learne. Docilità, docilitie, easines in learning. Documentare, to teach, or instruct. Documento, a document or instruc∣tion. Dodeci, Dodici, the number twelue. Dodicina, a dozen, but properly that which we call a grose, 12. dozen. Doga, a deale boord to make hogsheads with. Dogale, Ducale, pertaining to a Duke. Dogana, a common storehouse, a maga∣zin or custome house. Also the custome that is paid for merchandize. Doganiéro, a customehouse keeper, a cu∣stomer, a receiuer. Dogare, to ioyne barrels bords together. Dogatore, a cooper, or barrell maker. Dogato, the Duke of Venice his Duke∣dome, place, or raigne. Dogaressa, the Dukes wife of Venice is so called, of Doge, as much as Dutches. Doge, a title which only the Dukes of Venice and Genoa haue. Doglia, as Dolore. Dogliare, to greeue, to molest, to aggra∣uate, to vexe, to adolorate. Also to ake, to smart, to paine. Doglienza, as Dolore. Doglio, a barrell, a tub, a woodden ves∣sell, a bruing vat, a pipe: in some places of Italie it is taken for an earthen pot to keepe oile in, with vs a iarre. Doglioso, sorowfull, greeuous, dolorous, full of paine, smarting. Dogma, a greeke measure, about foure inches or a handfull. It is also a decree or determination. D'ogni hora, at all times, at all howers. D'ogni in torno, round about, in euery place about. D'ogni parte, on all parts, on all sides. Dohana, Dohaniere, as Dogana. Dola, a carpenters plane. Dolare, to plane timber or boords. Also to polish or smooth. Dolatóia, a carpenters plane. Dolatoio, a carpenters or ioyners bench to woorke vpon. Dolatore, a planer of boords. Also a plane to plane withall. Dolce, sweete, soote, pleasant, pliable, gentle, tractable, nulde, easie, flexible, delicious, toothsome. Dolcemelle, a kinde of musicall instru∣ment called a dulcimer. Also taken for a mans pilicock. Dolcetto, somewhat sweete or pleasant. Dolcezza, sweetnes, pleasantnes, gentle∣nes. Dolciare, as Dolcire. Dolciata, sweetenes, a kinde of sweete sauce. Dolcibuono, as Dolcemelle. Dolcigno, sweetish, somewhat sweete. Dolcime, a kinde of disease in a horse. Dolcire, cisco, cito, to sweeten. Also to appease, to alaie, to mitigate. Dolciore, Dolcitudine, sweetenes. Dolcitudine, sweetenes. Dólgo, I grieue, I sorrow, I paine, I smart, I ake. Dolente, greeuous, sorrowfull, paining, smarting, aking. Also poore, sillie, wret∣ched, wailefull. Dolenza, as Dolore. Dolére, dolgo, dólsi, doluto, to be sor∣rowfull, to ake, to smart, to paine. Dolfinio, the herbe Larkes-heele, Larke-sprre, Larkes-clawe, or Munkes-hood. Dolico, a Greeke measure, containing 12. stadij or furlongs, 1500. paces, a mile and a halfe. Dólio, as Doglio. Dólo, deceit, fraud, guile, trecherie. Dolorare, to greeue, to adolorate. Dolore, greese, paine, dolour, smart, ache, vexation, anguish, teene, sorrow, aking. Doloroso, dolorous, greeuous, sorrowfull, painfull, male-content, sillie. Dolubri, vsed for temples. Dolzaina, as Dolcemelle. Dolzolina, the herbe Galingale. Dolzore, as Dolcezza. Doma, tamed, submitted, ouercome, quel∣led. Domanda, a request, a demand, a que∣stion.
Domandare, to request, to demaund, to question, to aske, to name, to call. Domandatore, a demander, a requester, a questioner, an asker. Doman da notte, to morrow night. Domane, Domani, Doman', to mor∣rowe. Doman l'altro, to morrowe next, next daie after to morrow. Domare, to tame, ouercome, vanquish, quell, or submit. Domaschino, damaske worke. Domasco, as Damasco. Domatina, to morrow morning. Domatore, a tamer, a vanquisher, a queller, an ouercommer. Domatura, a taming, a vanquishing, a quelling, a submission. Domene dio, our Lord God. Doménica, sunday. Domenicale, dominicall, cheefe. Domenticare, to forget. Domenticanza, forgetfulnes. Domentico, forgotten, forgetfull. Domentre, whilest, so long as. Domentre che, whilest that. Domesticare, to tame, to make familiar, milde or gentle. Domesticabile, as Domesticheuole. Domesticheuole, familiar, that may be tamed, homely, gentle, reclaimed. Domestichezza, familiaritie, homeli∣nes, gentlenes, conuersation, acquain∣tance, tamenes. Doméstico, tame, familiar, gentle, home∣ly, household, milde, conuersant, tracta∣ble, acquainted. Dométa, an old worde for a shitten fel∣low, or goodman turde, for meta is a heape of turdes. Domicilio, an habitation, a dwelling, a mansion place. Domila, two thousand. Dominare, to rule, to gouerne, to domi∣neere, signorize or swaie. Dominatione, Dominanza, dominati∣on, gouernment, lordship. Dominatore, a ruler, a gouernor, a lord, a swayer. Dómine, Sir. Also an admiration or signe of woonder, as we say good Lord! or Gods! Domin fallo, good Lorde is not this strange? why, what a good yeere? Dominica, sunday. Dominicale, dominicall, cheefe. Dominicanti frati, fryers of saint Do∣minicks order. Dominio, dominion, lordship. Domisella, a kinde of water snake. Domitare, as Domare. Domitatore, Domitore, as Domatore. Dómito, tamed, ouercome, vanquished, quelled, submitted. Domo, as Domito. Also as Duomo. Domo petri, vsed in mockerie for a pri∣son or stone house. Don, a lord, a commander, a sir, a Don. Donadello, a dilling, a darling, a wan∣ton. Also a fiddle or a croude. Donare, to giue freely, to present. Donatica, vide Corona. Donatione, Donagione, a gift, a dona∣tion, a present, a deed of gift. Donatore, a giuer. Donatorio, he to whom a gift is giuen. Donde, whence, from whence, why? wher∣fore? whereby, whereupon. Dondola, a babie, a puppie, a pugge, a con∣ceit, a humour, a fancie, any foolish sport or solace. It is also a kinde of play at the ball. Also dandling or dangling. Dondolare, to play the babie, puppie, or gull. Also to dandle or dangle. Dondolo, a gull, a foole, a thing to make sport. Donméta, as Dométa. Donna, a woman, a ladie, a mistres, a wife, a louer, a dame, a queene at chesse. Donna Beatrice, Dame Bettrice, it is taken in mockerie, and ironically, for an idle huswife. Donna che fa le fusa storte, shee that makes hir husband cuckold. Donna che manda il marito in cor∣nouaglia senza barca, idem. Donna che silascia scuoter' il pellic∣cione, idem. Donna da bene, an honest woman. Donna da molto, a woman of account. Donna da molti, taken in ill part for a woman of many. Donna da póco, a woman of no esteeme. Donna da partito, a woman that wil ac∣cept of any condition, a venale or mer∣cenarie woman. Donna nouélla, a newe maried wife, a bride. Donnazucca al vento, a foolish fonde woman, a lasie huswife, a light hea∣ded wife. Donnaria, womanhood, womanishnes. Donneare, to man, to court, to vsher, to squire, to marshall, to waite, to attend, or follow women. Also to rule or swaie, Also to play the wanton woman. Donneggiare, as Donneare. Donnesco, womanish. Donnetta, a litle woman. also as much as goodie flurt, or goodie driggle-draggle. Donnicella, Donnina, a little prettie woman. Donniciuola, a poore sillie woman. Donno, a syr, a lord, a commaunder, a Don. Donnola, the beast called a weazell. Donnolino, a little weazell. Dono, a gift, a present, a grant, a deed of gift. Donola, as Donnola. Donzella, a damzell, a maiden, a virgin, a waiting woman. Also a fish called in Latin Alphestus. Donzellare, as Donneare. Donzellesco, maiden-like, like a mai∣den. Donzello, an appointer, an officer, a ser∣geant, an apprentise at the law, a clark. Also a batchelor, a waitingman, an vnmaried man, a page, a squire, a cu∣strell, a waiter, a seruingman. Dopo, Dopoi, after, then, behinde, since. Dopoche, Dopoiche, after that, since that. Dopodescinare, an afternoone. Also after dinner. Dopo non molto, not long after. Dopo nona, after-noone, or since noone. Dopo l'untume, after dinner, after meat, since meate. Dopo pasto, after meate. Also dishes af∣ter the first or second seruice, as fruit. Dopo vn non nulla, after a trice, by and by. Doppia, a doubling, a foulding, a double, a copie. Also anie counterfait precious stone, a foile for stones. Also a lining. Doppiamento, a doubling, a falsehood. Doppiare, to double, to couple. Also to line any thing. Also to yoke. Doppiezza, doublenes, a doubling. Doppio, double, false, corrupt, twofolde, ambiguous. Also a copie or patterne of any thing. Doppione, Doppiere, a kinde of great torch of waxe, which we call a quar∣rier. Also a double silke cod. Doppio più, double againe, as much more. Dorare, to gilde, to couer or beset with gold. Dorarie, gold workes, workes of gold. Doratore, a gilder. Dorcade, a Do, or a bucke. Dorchéo, the name of a dogge, hunt Do, kill bucke. Also spie all, or quicke sight. Dorialtide, a precious stone founde in a cockes head: some others say it is found in another beasts head. Dorica, one of the fower Greeke toongs that were commonly spoken in Greece. Also a kinde of graue solemne musicke.
Also a kinde of architecture, called do∣rike worke. Doricnio, as Doriénio. Dórico, a graue solemn musition, repre∣senting grauitie. Dório, a musition that plaies graue mu∣sicke. Dorienio, a venemous herbe wherewith they poyson arrow heads and darts, cal∣led dogs grasse. Dormacchiare, to slumber, to droope, to slug. Dormacchione, a sleeper, a slumberer, a drouser, a lazie boodie, a sluggard. Dorménte, Dormiente, sleeping, slum∣bring, sluggring. Also dormant, or cou∣chant, a word in armorie. Dormetorio, as Dormitorio. Dormia, any drinke or phisicke to prouoke sleepe. Dormigliare, as Dormacchiare. Dormiglione, Dormicchione, as Dor∣macchione. Dormioso, Dormitore, as Dormac∣chione. Dormire, dormo, dormito, to sleepe, to slumber. Dormire della bruna, the first sleeping of silke wormes. Dormire della bianca, the second slee∣ping of silke wormes. Dormire della grassa, the third sleeping of silke wormes. Dormitorio, Dormitoio, a sleeping chamber, a dortor in religious houses. Dormitura, a sleeping, a slumbring, a ly∣ing with one. D'oro, of gold, golden. Dorone, a Greeke measure about fower inches or a handfull. Doronico, a root or weed good and whol∣some for the stomacke called pisse in bed or cray-fish. Dorrà, he shall grieue, smart, or ake. Dorrai, thou shalt grieue, smart or ake. Dorrei, Dorrebbe, I or he should grieue or smart. Dorrò, I shall grieue, smart or ake. Dorrupare, as Dirupare. Dorso, a mans backe, the backe or ridge of any thing. Dossare, to charge, lay or load vpon ones backe. Dosso, a backe or ridge of any thing, the backe of a knife. Also a kinde of course home-spun cloth. Also a beast bearing a rich sur. D'osso, of bone, made of bones. Dotale, belonging to a dowrie or a wo∣mans ioynter. Dotare, to endow, to giue a dowry, to make a iointer, to endue. Dotato, endowed, giuen a dowrie, made a iointer, endued. Dotatione, as Dote or Dota. Dote, Dota, a dowrie, an endowment, a iointer, a guift. Doti, guifts, dowries, endowments. Dotta, learned, wise. Also doubt, feare, mistrust or suspition. Also a small time, euen now, at this time. Dottanza, doubt, feare, suspition, mi∣strust. Dottare, to feare, to suspect, to doubt, to distrust. Dotto, learned, wise, clarke-like. D'otto, of eight, consisting of eight. Dottoraggine, doctorship, foolish doctor∣ship. Dottorare, to take or giue the degree of a doctor. Dottorato, the degree of a doctor, a doc∣tor-ship, doctored. Dottoratico, a doctor-ship. Dottoratura, as Dottoratico. Dottore, a doctor, a learned man. Dottrina, doctrine, learning, scholer-ship, science, knowledge. Dottrinale, a booke of doctrine, contay∣ning doctrine. Dottrinare, to endoctrine, to learne, to teach, to instruct. Douana, as Dogana. Douaniere, as Doganiere. Doue, where, whether. Doue che, whereas whetheras. Doue si sia, wheresoeuer it be. Doue si voglia, wheresoeuer. Douére, as Deuere, to owe, to be endeb∣ted. Douéro, earnest, good sooth, good ear∣nest. Douinadoio, Douinatoio, a reele or rise to winde silke or yarne with. Douitia, store, plentie, riches, abun∣dance. Douitioso, rich, plentious, abundant, storefull. Douungue, wheresoeuer, in whatsoeuer place. Douutamente, dulie, rightlie, lawful∣lie. Dozzena, a dozen or twelue, a kinde of comminaltie or boording togither of schollers in some house. Dozzenale, a common fellow, such as a man may buy whole dozens of, that liues at liuerie with others. Dozzenalmente, commonly, familiarly, good cheape, by whole dozens. Dozzenante, a commoner or boorder with others as schollers are, one that stands at liuerie. Dozzenare, to boord or common in com∣panie, to put vp in dozens, to stand at liuerie. Dozzina, as Dozzena. Dozzinale, as Dozzenale. Dozzinante, as Dozzenante. Dozzinare, as Dozzenare. Dozzino, a kind of small coyne. Draba, an hearbe hauing a tuft like elder at the top. Draconite, Draconio, a stone taken out of a dragons head, good against poi∣son. Dragante, a kinde of gum or drugge that burneth. Drago, a dragon. Dragona, arren, fruitles, fierile. Dragoncélla, as Dragontea. Dragoncelli, little dragons. Also galles or kernels growing in the throte of some. Dragone, a great dragon, a kind of fish so called. Dragontéa, the herb dragon wrt, or dra∣gon serpentie or Taragon. Dramma, a small waight called a dram. Also a kind of Greeke coine worth sea∣uen pence sterling. Drappéllo, Drapéllo, a company of men, a beuie of women, a crue of good fel∣lowes. Also an ensigne, a baneret, a ba∣neroll, a little cloth, a little sheete. Drapperia, a draperie or streete where cloth is sold. Drappetto, a little cloth, narrow cloth. Drappi, all maner of clothes, vestures ap∣parell, vestments or attires. Drappiére, Drappiéro, a draper, a seller of cloth, a clothier. Drappo, any kind of cloth. Drappo alto, breade cloth. Drappo basso, narrow cloth. Drappo di lino, linnen cloth. Drappo d'oro, cloth of gold or tissue. Drappo di seta, all manner of wouen silke. Drento, Dentro, in or within. Dresso, a thrush or fieldfare. Driadi, certaine wood-nymphes so cal∣led. Drieto, Dietro, behinde, after, backe∣wards. Drieto punto, as Dietro punto. Drijno, a kinde of venemous serpent or worme. Driníre, nisco, nito, to crie as a wea∣zell. Driottéri, a kind of weed or herbe growing vpon trees. Dritta, right, straight, direct, honest, vp∣right. Also the right hand.
Drittamente, dulie, directly, vprightly, straightly, forthwith. Dritti, right handed blowes, down-right-blowes. Dritto, iust, right, due, vpright, standing, straight, reason. Also a right handed man, a downe right stroke. Drittorare, to make straight or right, to right. Drittura, rightnes, iustnes, vprightnes. Also out right, straight on. Drizzare, to direct, to erect, to streighten, to adresse, to raise, to reare, to stand vp, to set vpright. Drizzata, a directing, an adressing, a rai∣sing, a rearing. Drizzatore, a glouers sticke to stretch out gloues with: a shoomakers piece of wood to stretch a boote or shoe with, or knocke his worke vpon. Also as Calamistro. Dromedario, a beast called a dromedary: it is maruellous swift, and is a kinde of cammell. Dromone, a fish so called. Also a place to runne horses in. Dropaci, a medicine to take away haire, or to make one balde. Drudo, a wanton louer, a secret letcher. Druidi, certaine learned priests or pro∣phets that were wont to be in France in the times of ignorance. D, hath bin vsed for Doue, where, whe∣ther, whereas. Also whence. Also a kinde of serpent. Dua, the number two, of the feminine gender. Duaggio, a kinde of course home-spun clothing, or russetting. Duale, of or pertaining, or consisting of two. Duana, as Dogana. Duanero, as Doganiero. Duare, to double, to couple, to paire, to yoke, to put two together. Duassi, two aces at dice. Dubbiare, to doubt, to feare, to suspect. Dubbio, doubt, suspect, feare, vncer∣taintie. Also as Dubù. Dubbioso, doubtfull, vncertaine. Dubbiosità, doubtfulnes, vncertaintie. Dubitabile, that may be doubted. Dubitante, doubtfull, vncertaine. Dubitanza, doubt, feare, suspect. Dubitare, as Dubbiare. Dubitatione, as Dubbio, or Dubi∣tanza. Dubiteuole, as Dubbioso. Dubitoso, as Dubbioso. Dubù, a monstrous beast somewhat like a Wolfe, that hath feete like a man, bree∣ding in Africa. Duca, a duke, a captaine, a chiefe, a lea∣der, a chiefetaine, a generall. Ducato, Ducado, a dukedome, a dut∣chie. Also a coyne called a ducket. Ducati, duckets, crownes, onie. Also dukedomes. Duce, a Duke, a cheefe, a leader, a cap∣taine, a generall, a cheefetaine. Ducénto, two hundreth. Duchessa, a ladie, a Dutches. Duco, a night owle. Due, Duo, Dui, Dua, the number two. Due cotanti, twice so many. Duellare, to fight one to one. Duellista, Duellante, a man skilfull in combats, or the lawes of them. Also a combatant or fighter with another. Duello, a single combat, a fight betweene two. Duerno, of the number two. Dugento, two hundreth. Dugentesimo, the two hundreth in or∣der. Dughi, a roguish or fustian word for crownes. Also night owles. Duini, two dewses at dice. Dulia, the seruice of a bondman or slaue. Dumi, brambles, briers, brakes, thornes, shrubs, firzes, bushes. Dumoso, thornie, shrubbie, full of bush∣es, briers, brambles or brakes, shrub∣bish. Dune, the downes or plaines. Dun' in vno, from one to one. Dun' in altro, from one to another. Dunque, Dunche, then, an aduerb of concluding. Duo, the number two. Duodeci, the number twelue. Duodecimo, the twelfth in order. Duodeno, the mawe or stomack gut, the gut that is fastned next to the neather mouth of the ventricle. Duóle, it greeueth, paineth or smarteth. Also as Dolore. Duolo, Duol', griefe, sorrow, smart, paine, affliction, care. Duplicare, to double. Duplice, twofold, double. Duplo, double, twofold. Dura, as Cornea, for that it commeth from dura mater. Durabile, lasting, durable. Durabilità, lastingnes, continuance, du∣rance. Duracino, lasting, during, of continu∣ance, fruites so called, as aples deusans, because they last long. Dura mater, the brainepan, or the skull. Duramente, hardlie. Durante, lasting, continuing, during. Duranza, lastingnes, durance, suffe∣rance, continuance. Durare, to harden, to obdurat. Also to last, to indure, to continue. Also to suf∣fer, to sustaine, or to abide. Durar fatica, to indure labour, to take paines. Durata, as Duranza. Duratione, as Duranza. Durelle, a kinde of hard stone peare in I∣talie, choke peares. Durengo, an oxe pizell, or a salt eeleskin to beate one with. Duréuole, lasting, induring, throughlie. Durezza, hardnesse, roughnesse, rug∣gednes. Duro, hard, tough, marble minded, inex∣orable, surlie, cruell, hard-harted. Duro di bocca, a horse with a hard mouth, or naturallie hard in the curbe place. Dusolino, the colour of a horse. Duttile, pliable, that may be wrought by hand, or that will abide the hammer. E E' vsed for Egli, he, or they, it. E' mi fu detto, it was tould me. E', of the verbe Essere, he or she is, t'is, it is, the coniunction &, and, both. E' bisogno, it is needefull, it is requi∣site. E' forza, it must needes be, of force, of necessitie, perforce. E' d'uopo, it is neede, it is necessarie. E' mestieri, it is conuenient, it is behoo∣full. Eale, a beast in India, of the bignes and like a horse, with great hornes, and they be loose in his head. Ebano, Ebeno, a kinde of black wood called Ebanie, or Ebene. Ebbe, he, or she had or hath bad. Ebbrezza, dronkennes, tipsines. Ebdomadario, consisting of seauen times seauen. Ebio, a kinde of tree or shrub. Ebriacare, to be or make dronke. Ebriachezza, dronkennes, tipsines. Ebriáco dronken, dronke, tipsie. Ebriare, to be or make dronke. Ebrietà, dronkennes, tipsines. Ebrio, Ebro, dronken, tipsie. Ebulo, the weede wallwort, or danwort, or dwarf elder. Eburnéo, of iuorie, or like iuorie. Eccédere, cedo, cessi, cesso, to ex∣ceede, to excell, to out-goe. Eccedenza, an exceeding, an excelling.
Eccellente, excellent, notable. Eccellenza, excellence, excellencie. Eccéllere, cello, celsi, celso, to excell, to outgo, to aduance, to raise. Eccélso, excelled, outgon, aduanced, rai∣sed, excellent, haughtie, high, loftie. Eccelsitudine, excellencie, excelsitude, highnes, loftines. Eccene? is there any of it? is there some? Eccentrici, circles, one inclosing another, yet not hauing one common centre. Eccessiuo, excessiue, immeasurable, im∣moderate. Eccésso, an excesse, a surfeite, a superflu∣itie, an ouersight, a fault. Eccettione, an exception, an excepting, an exempting. Eccétto, except, saue, sauing, excepted. Eccetto che, except that, sauing that. Eccettuare, to except, to reserue. Eccettuatione, as Eccettione. Ecci, there is, is there? Eccidiare, to burne, to hauocke, to de∣stroy, to slaughter, to spoile, to ruine. Eccidio, burning, hauock, destruction, slaughter, spoile, ruine. Eccio, or Ecchio, vipers hearbe, or vi∣pers buglosse. Some take it for a kinde of tree. Eccitare, to incite, to prouoke, to egge on, to set on. Eccitatione, an inciting, a prouoking. Eccitatore, an inciter, a prouoker. Eche? and what? and that. Echenéa, as Echino. Echino, a fish that is saide to haue the power to staie a ship, called a suck-stone or sea lamprey. Echinometro, a kind of Echino that hath prickles like a hedge-hogge. Echo, an eecho, an answering or resoūding of the voice backe againe. Ecco, behold, lo heere, at hand, heere. Eccoci, behold vs, heere we are. Eccomi, behold me, heere I am. Eclesiastico, a man of the church, a clear∣gie man, ecclesiasticall. Ecliptico, eclipticke, pertaining to the e∣clipse. Eclissare, to eclipse, to obscure, to darken, to ouercast, to wane or fall. Eclissi, an eclipse, a darkning, an ouerca∣sting, a waning or failing. Eclittico, pertaining to the eclipse, eclip∣ticke. Eclittica linea, the ecliptike line, the cir∣cumference of the circle wherein the sun finisheth his yeerely motion, a line in the middle of the Zodiake wherein the sun doth keepe his course, in it is measured the length of heauen. Ecloga, an egloge or title. Also election, choise, or communication. Also an a∣bridgement or gathering made out of any author that one hath read. Ecmeli, as Emmeli. Eglogario, a short breuiarie gathered out of a long worke. Ecneide, a kinde of fish. Eco, Echo, an eccho, as Echo. Ecoare, Echoare, to eccho or resounde a voice backe againe. Economia, economie, the gouernment of a priuate house or familie. Economico, economicall, pertaining to the gouernment of a priuate house. Economo, a house-keeper, a master or steward of a house. Eculéo, a sharpe stake whereon the offen∣der being put, is tormented and racked so that his bowels are almost crushed out. Ed, Et, the Coniunction copulatiue, and vsed before vowels. Edace, an eater, a deuourer, a greedigut. Also eating, consuming or gluttonnes. Edacità, vnsaciable feeding, gourmandi∣zing. Edera, the herbe Iuie. Edeti, a chiefe magistrate or president of the councell among the Grecians. Edicola, a little house, a chapple, a cot∣tage, a shelter, a shroud. Edificare, to builde, to frame, to edifie. Edificatore, a builder, a framer, an edi∣fier. Edificatoria arte, the arte of building or architecture. Edificio, an edifice, a building, a frame. Edile, an officer among the Romans whose charge was to ouersee the buildings of the temples: a church-warden, or ouer∣seer of high waies. Edilità, the saide office to ouersee the buil∣ding of temples. Edilitio, what pertaines to the surueying of that office. Edi mestiere, it is needefull, expedient, or necessarie. Editione, a setting foorth, a publishing, a creating or an edition. Edittare, to edict, to decree, to enact, to consult. Editto, an edict, a decree, an act, a sta∣tute. Educare, to teach, to instruct, to nurture, to bring vp. Educato, taught, instructed, nurtured, brought vp. Educatione, education, instruction, nur∣ture, bringing vp, manners. Educatore, a teacher, a nurturer, an in∣structer. Edulio, cates, foode, sustenance and other victuals besides bread and drinke. Ee, hath beene vsed of Dante for E of the verbe Essere, is. Efemera, a feauer during but one day. Also Daie-flies which liue but one daies space. Effabile, that which may be spoken or ex∣pressed. Efféméro, as Ephemero. Effeminare, to effeminat or grow woma∣nish. Effeminato, effeminate, womanish, deli∣cate, base minded. Efferità, fiercenes, madnes, crueltie, fel∣nesse. Efferrato, fierce, cruell, fell, raging, rude. Effestide, Effestite, a stone sound in Co∣rinth, that as a looking glasse will reflect any image; if it be put in cold water it will presently heate it, lay it before the sun, and it will presently set any matter a sier, that is able to receiue it. Effettiuo, effectuall, effectiue. Effetto, effect, or working. Effettuale, effectuall. Effettuare, to effect, to effectuate, to bring to passe. Efficace, effectuall, forcible. Efficacia, efficacie, force. Efficiente, causing, making, bringing to passe, efficient. Efficientia, efficience, force or power to do. Effigiare, to figure, to shape, to forme. Effigie, a figure, a shape, a picture. Effimera, a fish that is borne in the mor∣ning, and dieth at night. Effiocare, to grow, to be or make hoarse. Effrenato, as Sfrenato. Effundere, fundo, fusi, fuso, to shed blood, to scatter, to melt, to cast, to powre out, to spend riotously. Effusione, effusion or blood shed, shedding or scattring, wastefull spending. Effuso, shed, effused, scattred, melted, cast or powred out. Eforza, it is necessarie, perforce, it must needes be. Eftimemeri, a kinde of fall or breaking of a verse. Efula, a kind of garden herbe. Egide, a shield with Medusaes or Gorgons head in it spoken of in histories and po∣ets. Egilopa, the herbe beane trifoli. Also an infirmitie in the eies. Egiptila, a kinde of blackish stone. Egiziachi giorni, vnluckie, fatale, vnfor∣tunate daies.
Egli, he. Also it. Egli vien detto, it is said. Egli doueua essere, belike he was. Eglino, they, them. Egli stesso, he himselfe, himselfe. Egloga, an eglogue, a choise discourse. Eglogare, to write or sing eglogues. Egrédere, gredo, gressi, gresso, to goe foorth. Egregio, egregious, excellent, singular, passing. Egresso, an egresse, a going foorth. Also gone foorth. Egritudine, sicknes, maladie, infirmitie. Egro, sicke, crazed, ill at ease. Egrotare, to fall sicke. Egroto, sicke, crazed, ill at ease. Eguagliare, to compare, to equall, to match, to euen. Eguaglianza, equalitie. Egualare, to equall, to match. Eguale, equall, euen, matched. Egualità, equalitie. Ei, he, it. Ei si dice, it is said. Eime, aye me, alas, aye is me, wo is me. Eh, an interiection of intreating or of sor∣row, alas, I pray you, or oh. Ehugola, a kind of wild beast. El, the letter L. Also he or they. Elafabosco, oliue phyllon or maidens Mercurie. Elande, as Alce. Elasso, past, ouerworne or consumed. Elatine, running buckewheate or binde∣corne, a weed growing among corne. Elce, Elcia, a tree like vnto an oke. Also a holme. Elciario, as Alzaniere. Eléboro, a kinde of drug or herbe to purge melancholie or madnes. Eleboro bianco, the hearbe lingwort or neesewort. Eleboro nero, bearefoote, tetterwort or tettergrasse. Elebroth, as Elembroth. Elefante, an elephant. Elefantia, a disease in a horse called the farcine. Also a disease in a man called the leaprie proceeding of melancholie, choler or fleame. Elegante, elegant, cleane, neate, handsom, trimme, fine, eloquent, gracious, gorge∣ous. Elegantia, elegancie, cleannes, neatnes, handsomnes, finenes, eloquence, gracious∣nes. Eléggere, leggo, lessi, letto, to elect, to choose, to cull, to picke out. Elegia, an elegie or mournfull verse. Elegiaco, an elegiacal or mournful verse. Elegiare, to sing or make elegies in wail∣full verse. Elegidio, a kind of lamentable verse. Elego, a lamentable verse or writer of elegies. Elembroth, a kinde of salt that alchimists vse. Elementale, elementall. Elementi, the grounds of any arte or be∣ginnings of all things. Also the skies or firmaments. Elemento, an element as water, earth, fire, aire. Elemi, a kinde of gum dropping from the oliue tree in Syria. Elemosina, an almes. Elemósinare, to giue almes. Elemosinario, Elemosiniere, an almner or an almes giuer. Elenco, an argument subtilly reproouing. Also a table or index in a booke to shew places by letters. Eleno, an herbe the iuice whereof doth poi∣son arrow heads. Eleomele, a kinde of liquor or gum that apothecaries sell. Elepodi, as Ellepodi. Elera, Ellera, the herbe Iuie. Elescof, cosa medcinale.   Eletta, a choise, a culling. Elettionario, by election or that may be chosen, electionarie. Elettionare, to call, name or appoint by election or choise, to elect. Elettione, an election, a choise. Elétto, chosen, culled, pickt, elected. Elettore, an elector, a chuser. Elettro, a kind of gum, but properly Am∣ber whereof beads are made. Also a mixture of golde and siluer, the fifth part being siluer. Elettuario, an electuarie. Eleuare, to eleuate, to raise, to lift vp, to aduance, to heaue or reare vp. Eleuatione, an eleuation, a raising, an heauing or rearing vp, a preferment or aduancing. Eliaco, belonging to the sun. Elice, he sucketh or draweth forth: he ex∣tracteth, chooseth or culleth. Also a bar∣ren, scarlet oke or holme oke tree. Elícere, lico, licei, lito, to sucke or drawe out, to extract, to allure, to cull or choose or to draine out. Eligmato, a kind of medicament or medi∣cine. Elio, a kind of musicke or concord. Eliopia, a kind of greene stone. Eliocriso, the gold flower or herbe Aure∣lia. Elisio, a place of pleasure where poets faine the soules of good men to dwell. Elissero, elixer or the quintessence of any extraction. Elito, suckt or drawen foorth, extracted or drayned out. Also allured, culled, cho∣sen. Elitrópia, as Helitropia. Elitropio, as Helitropio. Ella, she, that woman. Elle, Elleno, they, those women. Ellepadi, a kinde of warlike instrument to batter a citie. Ellera, the herbe iuie, Elmettato, helmed, hauing a helmet or a caske on. Elmetto, a little helmet, head-piece or caske. Elmo, a helme, a helmet, a caske, a head∣piece, a burganet. Ello, he, that man. Eloquente, eloquent, well spoken. Eloquenza, eloquence, grace in spea∣king. Eloquio, eloquent speech or eloquence. Elsa, Elso, Elza, Elzo, the hilt or warde of a sword or dagger. Eluro, a fish whose eies encrease and wane as the moone doth. Eluuione, a spring tide, an ouerflowe of waters aboue their bankes. Emancipare, to make free, to free, to en∣franchize, to denize, to free out of ward. Emancipatione, the making of a bond-slaue free, an enfranchizing. Emanite, a kinde of stone called a bloud-stone, bicause it stancheth bloud. Emarite, as Emanite. Embadi, a kinde of shooes that princes were woont to weare. Emblemma, an emblem. Emblici, a kinde of Mirabolan plum. Embolio, the argument or first entrie in∣to a comedie. Embolismo, the adding of a daie in the yeere. Embriacare, to be or make drunke. Embriachezza, drunkennes, tipsines. Embriaco, drunke, drunken, tipsie. Embrice, tiles, gutter tiles. Also the tiling or couering of a house. Embrione, the wombe of a woman with childe. Also the childe in it before it haue perfect shape. Embrioretto, a crooke or hooke vsed to drawe dead children out of womens wombes. Embrochi. Looke the latine Embroche, a phisicall worde. Emenda, amends, redresse, amend∣ment. Emendabile, that may be amended. Emendare, to amende, to redresse, to re∣forme,
to dresse, to correct. Emendatione, an amendment, a redresse, a reforming, a correction. Emendatore, a mender, a dresser, a re∣former. Emérgere, mergo, mersi, merso, to swim out, to issue or come foorth of the wa∣ter. Emerso, swimde foorth, issued out of the water. Emetren, a precious stone much esteemed of the Assyrians, and vsed of Nigro∣mants. Emfasi, emphasis, an expresse significati∣on of that which is intended. Emfatico, emphaticall. Emigranda, an ache or paine in halfe the head. Some write it Emigrania. Eminente, eminent, apparent, high, in sight, in viewe, a loft. Eminenza, eminencie, apparantues, a high place. Also supremacie. Emisphero, as Hemisphero. Emméli, Ecmeli, a worde of arte about musicke. Some take it to be lowe silent musicke. Emmi, it is to me. Emmisi scordato, I haue forgotten. Emolatione, as Emulatione. Emolia, a proportion or vnion in musicke. Emolo, as Emulo. Emolumento, commodity, benefit or pro∣fite gotten by labour. Emoroide, a kinde of venemous serpent. Also a disease called the Hemorrhoides. Empasma, a composition of diuers sweete powders to take away sweate and cause itching. Empétro, the herbe called Sampier. Empia, wicked, vngodly, impious, vnrigh∣teous. Empiastrare, to plaister, to dawbe, to em∣playsire. Empiastro, a plaister, a dawbing. Empiastracciare, as Empiastrare. Empiastramento, as Empiastro. Empiastricciare, as Empiastrare. Empietà, Empiézza, impiety, vngodlines, vnrighteousnes, wickednes. Empio, as Empia. Empimachi, such as haue impostumati∣ons in their brests within and vnseene. Empimento, a fulfilling, an accomplish∣ment, a replenishing. Empíre, pisco, pito, to fill, to replenish. Empiréo cielo, the chrystalline skie, the firie heauen. Empirico, an empirike, a practitioner in phisicke vpon other mens receits, hauing no great skill himselfe. Empito, filled, full, replenished. Empito, furie, violence, force, rashnes, out∣rage, rage, a sodaine motion or passion. Empitoio, a tunnell or a filler. Empitoso, violent, sudden, forcible, passi∣onate, raging, rash, outragious. Empitura, a filling or stuffing full. Empegnare, to engage, to gage, to pawne, to pledge. Empegno, a pawne, a pledge, a gage. Empório, a mart, such a place as Rialto in Venice is, or the Royall exchange in London. Empugnare, to gripe with the fist, to sease vpon, to take hold with the hand. Empusa, a supposed spirit that haunteth such as be vnluckie, changing it selfe in∣to diuers formes. Emulare, to enuie, to grudge, or seeke to excell another man in any thing. Emulatione, emulation, enuie, a laudable grudging. Emulatore, a competitor, a concurrent, a coriuall, an enuiour. Emulgente vene, two large vaines which springing out of Caua vena vnder the ventricle, are caried into the raines. Emulo, as Emulatore. Enai, a fine white stone which being shaken will seeme to haue something moouing in it, as it were a rotten or addle egge. Enante, a kinde of herbe or shrub. Enargia, euidence, perspicuitie, euident representing of a thing. Enarmonico, a certaine harmonie and concord in musicke of nine voices or nine strings. Enchiridione, a little portable booke, as may be caried in ones hand, a manuell. Encolesare, to estrange, to alienate, to se∣quester. Encomenda, a comendum: an ecclesiasti∣call liuing so called. Encómio, a song of praise or commenda∣tions. Endego, blewe Inde for diers, to die blewe with. Endecasillabo, a verse consisting of ele∣uen syllables. Endelechia, a continuing, an euerla∣stingnes. Endeuenare, to guesse, to diuine, to fore∣tell, to soothsaie. Endicaiuoli, retailers, hucksters, such as buie to sell againe. Endiuia, the herbe Endiue. Energia, efficacie, or effectuall operation. Energumeno, one possessed with some euil spirit, or lunatike. Eneruare, to weaken, to enfeeble, to vn∣sinew. Enfasi, Emfasi, as Emfasi. Enfiagione, Enfiatura, a swelling or a puffing vp. Enfiamento, as Enfiagione. Enfiare, to swell, to puffe vp. Enfio, swollen, puffed vp. Enfiteotico contratto, a contract for some yeerely pension or rent, a kinde of lease. Enghistara, a glasse to holde wine in, or to power wine out of. Engistara, Enhistara, as Enghistara. Engonasi, a signe or starre in heauen cal∣led Hercules. Enguinaglia, Enguinaia, the groine or ham of a mans bodie. Engudre, a kinde of little fish. Enimma, Enigma, a riddle or doubtfull speech. Enimmare, to tell riddles, or speake ob∣scurely. Enimmatico, enigmaticall, obscure, rid∣dle like. Enimmatore, a speaker of riddles, a rid∣ler. Ennagonale, nine cornered, hauing nine angles. Ennumeratione, a numbring, a reckoning or rehearsing. Enoa, Enola, the herb Elicampane, Scab∣woort or Horse-heale. Enontiare, as Annuntiare. Enórme, hainous, wicked, foule, filthie, enormous, sinfull. Enormità, enormitie, wickednes, iniquity. Enothéra, an herbe which bound about any beasts necke makes him loose his force and fiercenes. Ensiforme cartilagine, the brestblade, or hart-blade, or the mouth of the sto∣macke. Enthelechia, Entelechia, perfection, that which mooueth it selfe. Enthimena, Entimena, an imperfect syllogisme wanting maior or minor. Ente, a being. Enteriora, Entraglie, the entrailes, gar∣bage, guts, panche or off all of any crea∣ture. Enteriore, inward, interiour, familiar, acquainted with. Enterocela, the disease of bursting when the gut falleth into the cod. Entimemo, as Enthimena. Entrante, entring, an entrer. Entrare, to enter or go in. Entrar' in collera, to be angrie. Entrar' in mare, to take shipping, to put foorth to sea. Entrata, an entrie, an entrance, an accesse. Also rents, reuenewes, incoms, commings in or profits.
Entratura, an entrance, an entrie. Entro, in, within. Entromezzare, to intermix, to interlard, to come or put betweene. Entromezzato, a pide horse, a horse of di∣uers colours. Enudare, to strip or make naked, to inter∣pret or expound. Enumerare, to number, to tell, to count. Eoi campi, the easterne fields, taken for the morning or where the sunne riseth, or the East. Eolica, one of the foure greeke tongues that were commonly spoken. Eolio canto, a kinde of song or musicke. Eone, a tree, the wood whereof is so hard that neither fir nor water can consume it. Poets say that Argos his ship was made of it. it resembleth the oke. Epa, the bellie, panch or wombe of any creature. Epact, the Epact in the Almanacke, an addition vnto. Epagogia, a figure, when like things or arguments are compared together. Epanadilósi, a figure, when a sentence be∣ginneth and endeth in one word. Epanado, when two things rehearsed to∣gether are afterwards seuerallie spo∣ken of. Epanafóra, a figure, when diuers clauses begin with one word. Epanalessi, a repetition after a long pa∣renthesis. Eparchia, a prouince. Eparco, a president of a prouince. Epatica, the herbe liuerwort. Also of or pertaining to the liuer. Epatico, a kinde of aloës so called. Epatico morbo, a disease in the liuer. Epausesi, an increase, or augmentation. Epenthesi, the putting in of a letter or sillable in the midst of a word. Ephebia, striplings age, about fourteene yeares of age. Ephebo, a stripling, about the age of fourteene. Ephémera febbre, an ague during but one day. Ephémere, windeflyes, or dayflyes which liue but one dayes space. Ephémeri, day bookes, or registers of single seuerall dayes. Epheméride, as Ephemeri. Ephémero, a beast which liueth but one day. Also a kind of strong purge, or the herbe liriconfancie, or may lillies, the flowre whereof drunke in wine, maketh one very drunke. Ephestij, the gods that be called Penati, or Lares. Ephestite, a stone that reflecteth the image like glasse. Ephestio, a familiar, of the same house or familie. Ephialta, a disease called the night-mare. Ephóro, was among the Lacedemonians as a Tribune among the Romanes. Epiale febbre, a feuer rising of colde fleame, that is sowre and like glasse, wherein at one time hote and cold is felt in euery part of the bodie. Epibade, a kinde of barge, or ferrie-boate. Epicauma, a foule sore in the eyes. Epicedio, a funerall song, sung before the corps be buried. Epicherema, an argument made in rea∣soning. Epiciclo, a lesser circle, whose centre is in the circumference of a greater, whereby the irregular motion of some planet is salued. Epiceno, of both kindes, male and female. Epicitharisma, the last part of the enter∣lude, wherein after the auditors had bin wearied, musitians stept foorth and plaide. Epicoma, the difference of sores which riseth in the eyes. Epico, which maketh or is made in heroi∣call, hexametre, stately and loftie ver∣ses. Epicuréo, voluptuous, epicureall, giuen to nothing but pleasure. Epicurizzare, to liue an epicureall volup∣tuous life. Epicuro, an epicure, a gourmand, a vo∣luptuous liuer. Epidemetici, herbingers for a princes traine. Epidemia, an vniuersall sicknes, a pe∣stilence. Epiderme, the outward thin skinne of the bodie, which being of it selfe insensible, doth as it were spring out of the true and naturall skinne. Epididime, one of the foure thin skinnes that couer the testicles, thicker then the rest, and outmost of all. Epidittico, demonstratiue, that pertai∣neth to praising and dispraising. Epifania, the epiphanie or twelftide. Also an apparition or manifestation. Epifora, a rheumatike watring or drop∣ping of sore eyes. Epigamia, affinitie by mariage. Epigastrio, all the outward part of the bellie that couereth the entrailes from the bulke downe to the priuie member, called also Abdomen. Epiglotti, the couer or wesill of the throte, the flap or little tongue that closeth the amplitude of the larynx and way of the rough arterie, least any meate or drinke should slip into the inner capacitie thereof, and so fall into the lungs. Epigliotta, a crick or wrinch in the neck or back. Epigonéa, a kinde of musicall instrument or musicke plaide at mariages. Epigónio, one gotten in a second ma∣riage. Epigramma, an epigram or superscrip∣tion. Epigrammizzare, to write epigrams. Epigrifo, one that hath a crooked nose. Epijcia, indifferent interpretation or tem∣pring of the rigor of the law according to reason and equitie. Epijcizzare, to mitigate the rigour of the law according to reason and equity. Epilentico, sicke of the falling sickenes or foule euill. Epilessia, the falling sickenes or foule euill. which taketh holde both of sence and mind togither. Epiléttico, one that is sick of the Epilessia. Epilogare, to conclude or make an epi∣logue. Epilogatione, as Epilogo. Epilogo, a conclusion or finall end, a knit∣ting vp of a matter. Epimachi, a kinde of impostume in a mans breast. Epimedio, a medlar tree, the fruite wher∣of hath three stones. Epiméla, a white precious stone hauing a blackish colour ouer it. Epiménio, a meane small gift, a souldiers moneths paie. Epimittide, the spot, marke, or skarre of any sore or tetter. Also a wheale, pimple, or push rising vpon the skinne by night. Also a disease in the eyes which in Florence is called la porcellana. Epimithio, the morall sence of a fable. Epinicie, verses or songs of triumph af∣ter some victorie. Epinitte, as Epimittide. Epipattide, wilde white Ellebor or neese∣wort. Epiphania, as Epifania. Epiphonéma, a pleasant ending or shut∣ting vp of a matter, a wittie sentence in the end of a thing declared or discus∣sed. Epiphora, the watering or dropping of the eyes by meanes of a rheume issuing thereat. Epiphisi, called of the anatomists an ad∣dition or coagmentation of some bone, obtaining a peculiar circumscription,
yet not being a true portion of that bone whereto it is committed and annexed, an appendance. Epiplóceo, bursting, that is when the entrailes or thin skinne or sewet com∣passing the entrailes falleth into the cods. Epipomfalo, a disease, when the caule or sewet wherein the guts are lapped fal∣leth out of the nauill. Episcopato, a bishopricke. Episcópio, a bishops house, a bishops sea. Episcopo, a bishop, an espie, an ouerseer, a coadiutor or fellow helper in ecclesia∣sticall matters. Episusi, episeusi, a figure, doubling a word in one sence, and hauing no other word betweene. Epismo, a watrish disease in the eyes. Episodio della tragedia.   Epistalma, a princes commission hauing the charge subscribed. Epistato, an ouerseer, a stuard, a baylife. Epistatório, a place or court where mat∣ters are heard and debated. Epistebe, a kinde of weede or herbe. Epistola, an epistle or letter sent from friend to friend. Epistolare, to write epistles. Epistómio, a stop in a paire of organes whereby the sound is made high or low. Epistrite, a kinde of precious stone. Epistropheo, the formost ioint in the neck, wherein it is turned about. Epitalamio, a song sung at a wedding. Epitaphio, Epitasio, an epitaph or wri∣ting set vpon a graue or tombe. Also a funerall song vsed or sung at a tombe. Epitasi, the most busie part of a comedie. Epithema, a kinde of moist medicine laid on linnen to bathe any place of the bodie to coole the liuer. Epithesi, a counterfaited description to deceiue a man. Epitetto, as Epitheto. Epitheto, an addition to a noune for some qualitie, an epithete. Epithimia, lust or concupiscence of the flesh. Epitimbro, Epithimbro, dodder gro∣wing vpon the herbe Tithymale, it bea∣reth a floure like Time, and is vsed to purge melancholie. Epitimia, good name and report, not dis∣tained with any spot of infamie. Epitimalo, as Epitimbro. Epithimo, as Epitimbro. Epitome, an epitomie, an abridgement, or breuiarie. Epitomizzare, to epitomise, or abridge. Epitragij, wormes that deuoure vines. Epitrito, a foote consisting of foure sil∣lables, whereof one doth alwayes differ from the other three. Also a proportion containing some number, and the third part thereof. Epitrocasmo, a figure, whereby we do speedilie runne ouer many differing things, and so we maze and trouble our aduersaries. Epitrope, a figure, when as we seeme to permit one to do what he will, and yet thinke nothing lesse: it is also vsed for a procuration or wardeship. Epoca, a withholding of ones assent. Epodo, a kinde of verses, hauing the first verse longer then the second. Epopéia, a verse or song containing things both of god and man. Epule, flesh growing about the gummes of the teeth. Epuléa, the name of an herbe. Epulone, a glutton, a gormand, a smell∣feast, a tall trencher-man, a ban∣quettor. Epulie, meate, foode, or whatsoeuer else is to be eaten. Equabilità, gentlenes, meekenes, mild∣nes. Equalare, to equall, to eùen, to match, to compare, to counteruaile. Equale, equall, euen, matched, compa∣red. Equalità, equalitie. Equatore, a circle in heauen, to the which the sunne comming, maketh the day and night of one length. Equestre, a knight or a horseman, or be∣longing to them. Equidistante, equidistant. Equilatero, hauing euen sides. Equile, a stable for horses. Equinottiale, Equinottio, the equi∣noctiall, when dayes and nights are euen. Equiparare, Equiperare, as Equalare. Equiparatione, comparison, or equaling. Equiperantia, a comparison, or equaling. Equisono, an equall or tunable sounding. Equità, equitie, iustice, vprightnes. Equiualente, equiualent, worth as much. Equiualenza, a like valuation. Equiualere, vaglio, valsi, valuto, to va∣lue, or be worth alike. Equiuocale, equiuocall, of diuers signifi∣cations. Equiuocare, to equiuocate or reduce words to diuers significations. Equiuocatione, an equiuocation, or doubtfull signification. Equiuoco, equiuocall, of a doubtfull sig∣nification. Equiuolentia, an equall will or con∣sent. Era, I, he, she, or it was. Eradicare, to vnroote, to pull vp by the roote. Erario, as Errario. Eremita, a hermite or solitary man. Eremitaggio, a hermitage or solitarines. Erémo, a hermitage or solitarines. Eréolo, a waight of two graines. Also a coine among the Athenians, woorth a about a penie sterling. Eretria, a kind of ceruse. Ergere, ergo, ersi, erto, to erect, to set vp, to aduance, to raise or stand vp. Erice, heath, hather or linge to make bru∣shes of. Ericetto, a place or heath, full of heath or linge. Eripile, a kind of faulkon. Erifilla, auarice, couetousnes, greedines, strife bringing, litigious. Eringio, Erigne, Erige, the weede sea∣holme, sea-hollie or sea-huluer. Also Eringos rootes. Erinni, the furies of hell. Erino, the fruit of the wilde fig tree which neuer commeth to ripenes. Also a medi∣cine vsed to stop bleeding, to prouoke sneesing, to cause childbirth, and to purge the braine. Eripere, to take away, pluck out or snatch from by force. Erisimo, wild mustard seed. Erisipila, an inflammation or inflamed vl∣cer, aswelling full of heate and rednes. Some call it S. Anthonies fire. Eritaco, a bird so solitarie that there is ne∣uer two seene togither. Some take it for the Robin-redbreast. Eritino or Erithrino, a sea fish called a rotchet. Erithrotaone, a kinde of bird. Also the hearbe woodrooffe or madder. Eritride, one of the fower thin skins that couer the testicles, next to the inner∣most. Ermo, a hermitage or a solitarines. Also vncoth, vnhanted or solitarie. Erniauentosa, a disease in a hanks gorge. Erpete, a kind of S. Anthonies fire, which some cal the shingles, the running worm or wild fire. Erpicare, to grub or harrow the ground. Erpice, a harrow to breake clods of earth, a weeding hooke or a grubbing iron. It is also taken for a mans priuy member. Also a kind of weed or herbe. Errabondo, wandring, straying, gadding, roauing, vagabond. Errante, errand, wandring, roauing, gad∣ding,
erring vp and downe. Erranza, as Errore. Errare, to erre, to misse, to faile, to tran∣gresse, to trespaas, to mistake, to roaue, to wander, to gad or straie vp and down. Errario, a princes exchequer or treasurie, a common treasurie of a citie. Also a clearke of the exchequer or keeper of bookes of accounts, an auditor or teller of the exchequer. Erratico, as Errabondo or Errante. Erro, hath been vsed for Ferro. and also for Errore. Erronéo, as Erronico. Erronía, as Ironia, a mocking or scoffing, a figure in speaking meaning contrary to the word. Errónico, erronious, false, erring, mista∣king, in another sence. Errómpere, rompo, ruppi, rotto, to breake or burst foorth with violence. Errore, an error, a fault, an ouersight, a trespasse, a mistaking, a misse. Errutare, to cast or throw foorth with vi∣olence. Erruttione, an eruption, a violent out breaking, a bursting foorth. Erta, steepie, vpright, high, craggie. Looke Stare al'erta, a hillocke, a steepie, crag∣gie place, an ascent, a watch towre. Al∣so subtile, watchfull, slie, wilie, craf∣tie. Ertezza, steepnes, craggines, ruggednes, height of hils. Erto, erected, set vp, stood vp, aduanced, raised, heaued vp. Also as Erta. Erubescentia, blushing shame. Eruche, stalkes or stems of coleworts or cabbages. Also the worme called a can∣ker or palmer. Also the herbe rocket. Erudire, disco, dito, to teach, to instruct, to informe, to bring vp, to nurture. Eruditione, erudition, teaching, instructi∣on, nurture, education, bringing vp. Erudíto, taught, instructed, informed, nurtured, brought vp. Erusca, bran: also any thing made of bran, bread of bran. Es, Esse, the letter S. Esacolito, Esacontalito, a kinde of stone that hath a circle in it, wherein may di∣stinctly be perceiued threescore seuerall colours, and hath so many vertues as co∣loures. Esacordo, an instrument of sixe strings. Esagonale, sixe cornered, hauing sixe an∣gles. Esalare, to exhale or euaporate, to vent out. Esalatione, an exhalation or euaporati∣on. Esalatoio, a vent or exhaling place, a breathing hole. Esaltare, to exalt, to aduance, to raise, to prefer. Esaltatione, exaltation, aduancement, preferment, raising. Esaltatore, an exalter, an aduancer, a rai∣ser. Esancimata, the name of a disease in the head. Esangue, bloodlesse, wan, pale, dead, liue∣lesse. Esanimare, to let out ones soule, to depriue a man of life. Esarcato, a dignity or magistrate hereto∣fore vsed in Rauenna. Esarco, a supreme magistrate or iudge in∣stituted by another. Esasperare, Essasperare, to exasperat, to exagerate, to aggrauate. Esatto, Essatto, exact, perfect, compleate, Also exacted or drawen out, extracted. Esausto, exhaust, drawen dry, soaked dry. Esbrefone, a fish called in latin Phoxi∣nus. Some take it for the menw fish. Esca, a baite, a foode, a fewell. Also tinder to light fire with. Also of the verbe vs∣cire, let him go out. Escandescenza, a sudden rage or anger or pepper in the nose. Escane che voglia, come of it what will, prooue how it list. Escára, a baiting place, a place where meat is kept, a lardrie. Escara, Escaro, a core or lump of morti∣fied flesh corroded and fetcht out of any sore or fistula. Escare, to baite, to allure, to inueagle, to angle for fish. Escaro, a fish which is saide to chaw his meate. Escauare, to dig, to grub, to open, to disco∣uer, to disclose. Eschinomene, an herbe which if one ap∣proche his hand vnto it will draw as it were for shame hir leaues in and close them vp. Eschio, as Esculo. Escire, Escita, as Vscire. Esclúdere, cludo, clusi, cluso, to exclude, to except, to shut out, to exempt. Esclusione, an exclusion, an exception, a shutting out Escluso, excluded, excepted, shut out, ex∣empted. Escomunicare, to excommunicate. Escomunicatione, an excommunication. Escrementale, excrementall, of or per∣taining to excrements. Escrementare, to voide or put foorth ex∣crements. Escremento, an excrement. Escubie, Escubre, a sentinell or watch in time of war. Escuccione, a skutcheon in armorie. Esculo, a tree like an oke, bearing maste and leaues bigger than any oke. Escusa, Escusatione, an excuse. Escusare, to excuse. Esdia, Esdra, a confection against poison or diseases of the braine. Ese non che, and but that, were it not. Esente, as Essente. Eseredare, to disinherit. Eseredatione, a disinheriting, a disheri∣son. Eserstite, a kind of whitish stone. Eshilare, as Allegrare. Eshilerare, as Allegrare. Esicio, Esitio, death, ruine, consummation, hauocke, destruction, spoile. Esimio, as Essimio. Esipo, a kind of beast bearing wooll. Esistimare, as stimare. Esitiale, deadly, ruinous, fatall. Esitio, death, consummation, destruction, hauocke, ruine, spoile. Esito, the end, issue or euent of any thing. Esocéto, a sea fish, round like a gudgeon, yellow in colour, liueth in the water, but sleepeth on the shore. Esole, banished, exiled. Also a banished man. Esorbitante, as Disorbitante. Esorbitantia, as Disorbitantia. Esorcista, as Essorcista. Esórdio, an exordium, entrance or begin∣ning of a discourse. Esornatione, a decking, a trimming, a garnishing, an elegancie. Esortare, to exhort, to perswade, to admo∣nish, to encourage. Esortatione, an exhortation, a perswasi∣on, an admonition. Esortatore, an exhorter, a perswader, an admonisher. Esostra, a vice or gin of wood wherewith things done within with turning of a wheele are shewed to those that are without. Esparagnare, as Sparagnare. Esparagno, as Sparagno. Espárgere, as Spargere. Espediénte, expedient, necessarie, needful. Also an attempt, an exploite. Espedire, spedisco, spedito, as Spacci∣are or Spedire. Espeditione, as Speditione. Espedito, as Spedito. Esperienza, as Sperientia. Espérimentare, as Sperimentare. Esperiménto, as Sperimento.
Espérto, expert, perfit, tride. Espianare, as Spianare. Espiare, to expiat, to blot out, to make a∣mendes or satisfaction, to cancell, to purge, to satisfie. Espiatione, expiation, satisfaction, pur∣gation, cancelling. Espilare, to rob, to poll, to take by extor∣sion or deceit, to spoile, to proule from. Espilatione, pillage, extorsion, robbing, prouling. Espinetta, virginals or claricords. Espirare, as Spirare. Espiratione, an expiration, ending or breathing. Esplanare, as Spianare. Esplicità, an vnfolding, an exposition. Esplorare, to bewaile with exclamation, to espie, to grope or feele, to explore. Esponibile, that may be expounded or ex∣plained. Esporre, Espónere, pongo, posi, posto, as Sponére. Espositione, as Spositione. Espositore, as Spositore. Espósto, as Sposto. Espressamente, expreslie, for the nonce, purposely, of purpose. Espressione, an expression, an expounding, a pronuntiation, a manifesting. Espressiuo, expressing, expressiue. Esprésso, expresse, of purpose, for the nonce. Also expressed, expounded, wroong foorth, crushed out. Also pronounced. Esprimére, primo, primei, presso, to ex∣presse, to expound, to pronounce. Also to wring foorth. Esprobare, Esprobrare, as Rimproue∣rare. Espugnare, to ouercome, to vanquish, to expugne, to raze, to conquer. Espugnatore, an ouercommer, victor or vanquisher. Espugnatione, a conquest, a vanqui∣shing, a victorie. Espulsione, expulsion or driuing out. Espulsiua, expulsiue or expelling. Espurgare, as Spurgare. Espurgatiua lettera, a letter of purgati∣on or clearing of a fault. Esquisitezza, exquisitnes. Esquisito, exquisite. Essa, she, the same, the said. Essagerare, to exasperat, to prouoke, to ir∣ritate, to agrauat, to exaggerat, to am∣plifie, to extoll. Essageratione, exasperation, prouocation, an irritation, an agrauating, an encrea∣sing, an amplifiyng, an extolling. Essaltamento, exaltation, aduancement, a raising, a magnifying. Essaltare, to exalt, aduance, raise, heaue or lift vp, or to magnifie. Essaltatione, exaltation, aduancement, greatnes, magnificence. Essame, Essamine, a triall, examining or enquirie. Essametro, an exameter, a kind of verse. Essamina, Essaminatione, an examina∣tion, an enquirie. Essaminare, to examine, to enquire, to consider. Essaminatore, an examiner, an enquirer. Essaminato, an examinate, a partie exa∣mined. Essanimare, as Esanimare. Essarcato, as Esarcato. Essarco, as Esarco. Essare, to exact, to extort. Essasperare, to exasperat, to prouoke, to irritat, to egge on, to aggrauat. Essasperatione, exasperation, prouocati∣on, aggrauation. Essattamente, exactly, compleatly. Essattatione, an exactnes. Essattione, exaction, extorsion, exactnes, a constrayning to, a pilling of the peo∣ple. Essatto, exacted, extorted or wrested out. Aso exact. Essato, as Esatto. Essattore, an exactor, an extortor. Also a receiuer of rents or subsidies. Essaudeuole, gentle, milde of hearing. Essaudire, disco, dito, to heare, to listen. Essauditore, a hearer, a harkner, a listner. Essausto, drawen dry, exhaust, soken dry. Esse, the letter S. Also they or those, of the feminine gender. Essecrabile, execrable, abhominable, de∣testable, blasphemous, cursing. Essecrare, to execrate, to detest, to blas∣pheme, to curse. Essecratione, execration, blasphemie, cursing, banning. Essecutare, to execute, to performe. Essecutione, execution, performance. Essecutiuo mandato, a warrant of exe∣cution. Essecutóre, an executor, a performer. Esseguire, guisco, guito, to execute, to obtaine, to accomplish, to atchieue. Esseguito, executed, obtained, attained, atchieued, accomplished. Essei, certaine religious Iewes that ab∣staine from flesh, wine, and women, feeding only on dates. Essempiare, to copie, to exemplifie, to take a patterne. Essempio, Essemplo, an example, a pat∣terne, a copie. Essemplare, notable, worthie to be imita∣ted, imitable, as a noune, but being a verb, it signifieth as much as Essem∣piare. Essemplarità, exemplification, example. Essemplificare, to exemplifie. Essemplificatione, exemplification. Essemplificatore, an exemplifier. Essentare, to exempt, to excuse, to free, to quit, to seuile. Essente, exempted, excused, freed, quit. Essentia, Essenza, essence, being, rea∣litie. Essentiale, essentiall, reall. Essentione, an exempting, a freeing, or quitting. Esséquie, obsequies, funerals, burials, Essequiale, funerall, mourning. Essequire, as Esseguire. Essequiscere, as Esseguire. Esserénti, hath bin vsed for sergeants, or such like officers. Essercitare, to exercise, to practice, to trade, to traine. Essercitio, exercise, arte, trade, occupa∣tion, or studie. Essercitatione, an exercising, trading, or studying. Essército, an armie, a camp, an hoste of men. Essere, sono, fui, fóra, stato, suto, to be. Also a state, essence, or being. Esser' a ferri, to be a grapling, to be toge∣ther by the eares, or a busting. Esser' in conclaue, to be in secret coun∣sell, to be a consulting. Esser' in pagliuola, to lye in childbed. Esser' a mal partito, to be in an ill ta∣king. Esser' auiso, to thinke, to imagin, to seeme, to be aware. Esser' per, to be about, to be readie for. Esser' a l'oglio santo, to be readie to dye. Esser' di poca leuata, to bee of small woorth. Esser' in frega, to be proud or salt as a bitch or a catterwalling as cats. Essere scruito, to be pleased, or serued. Essi, they, or those of the masculine gen∣der. Essibire, to exhibite, to offer, to present, to set abroade for all men to behold. Essibitione, an exibition, a representa∣tion, a deliuerance, or giuing. Essibitore, an exhibitor, an officer, a set∣ter abroade of things. Essicare, to exiccate or dry. Essicatione, a drying, or exiccation. Essigere, to expell, to extract, to draw out, to expresse. Essigliare, to exile or to banish.
Essiglio, exile, banishment. Essiguo, little, slender, scant, small, slight. Essile, as Esule. Also fine and thin. Essiliare, to exile, to bannish. Essilio, exile, banishment. Essimio, high, singular, notable, excellent of choise. Essitiale, vnhappie, dangerous, deadlie, ruinous. Essitio, ruine, destruction, ouerthrowe, vtter vndoing, danger. Essitioso, as Essitiale. Esso, he, that, the same. Essorbitante, as Disorbitante. Essorbitantia, as Disorbitantia. Essorcismare, to exorcisme, to coniure, to adiure. Essorcismi, exorcismes, incantations, con∣iurations, spels. Essorcista, a coniurer, an exorcist. Essordio, as Esordio. Essornare, to deck, to trim, to garnish, to dresse. Essornatione, a decking, a trimming, a garnishing. Essortare, to exhort, to perswade. Essortatione, an exhortation. Essortatiuo, exhorting, exhortable, per∣swasiue. Essortatore, an exhorter, a perswader. Essortatoria lettera, a letter of exhor∣tation. Essoso, vexfull, cruell, exacting, intolle∣rable, hatefull, detestable. Està, sommer season. Esta, hath bin vsed for Questa, this. Estade, Estate, the sommer season. Estasi, an extasie, an amazement, an a∣stonishment, a trance, a quandarie. Also a figure when the short sillable is made long. Estasire, sisco, sito, to be in an extasie, to be amased, to astonish, or be in a trance. Esténdere, as Stendere. Estenduto, as Stenduto. Estensione, an extension, or extending. Estensiuo, extending, or farre stret∣ching. Estenuare, as Stenuare. Estenuatione, as Stenuatione. Estenuatiuo, that doth extenuate, or di∣minish. Esterefare, to affright, to terrifye, to vn∣do, to ouerthrow. Esterefatto, affrighted, terrifyed, vn∣done, ouerthrowne. Esteriore, the exterior or outward. Esterminare, to destroy, to deface, to de∣solate, to waste, to spoile, to ruine. Estermínio, destruction, desolation, waste, spoile, ruine. Esternale, externall, outward. Esternare, to alienate, to estrange, to forraine. Estérno, externall, outward. Also of yesterday. Estesi, as Estasi. Estima, estimation, or esteeme. Estimabile, estimable, valuable. Estimare, as Stimare. Estimatiuo, valuable, estimable, estee∣ming. Estimatore, an esteemer, a regarder, a deemer. Estiméuole, estimable, valuable. Estimo, an esteeme or valuation. Estinguere, stinguo, stinsi, stinto, to extinguish, to quench, to put out, to kill, to slay, to quell. Estintione, an extinguishing. Estinto, extinguished, extinct, quenched, killed, dead, slaine, put out. Estiomenate, certaine vlcers, which cor∣roding and fretting rot and putrifie a mans members. Estirpare, as Stirpare. Estirpatiuo, as Stirpeuole. Estirpatione, Estirpamento, an extir∣pation, a rooting out, a grubbing. Estiuare, to sommer in some coole place. Estiuo, Estio, pertaining to sommer. Esto, hath bin vsed for Questo, this. Estóllere, tóllo, tolsi, tólto, to extoll, to aduance, to raise vp, to eleuate, to preferre. Estórcere, as Storcere. Estorquere, to take away, to wrest from by force and violence, to extort, or wring from, to put out of ioynt. Estorsione, extorsion, or wresting from by violence. Estórto, extorted, taken away, wrested, or wrong from by violence, put or wrin∣ched out of ioynt. Estracorrere, as Stracórrere. Estracorso, as Stracorso. Estrággere, as Estrarre. Estránio, as Stranio. Estranome, without or out of name. Estrarre, traggo, trassi, tratto, to extract, to draw forth, to wrest out. Estrattione, an extraction. Estratto, an abstract, an extract. Also extracted, drawne forth, wrested out. Estrauagante, as Strauagante. Estrauagantia, as Strauaganza. Estremare, as Stremare. Estremità, as Stremità, Estrémo, as Stremo. Estretto, as Stretto. Estri, a kinde of gnats or horseflyes. Estrinsico, externall, outward, extrin∣secall. Estro, a hornet, a horseflye. Also a sting. Esulare, to exile, to banish. Esulatione, an exiling, a banishing: Also exile, banishment. Esule, an exile or banished man. Esultare, to reioice, to leape, to triumph, to skip for ioy. Esultatione, a reioicing, a leaping, and skipping for ioy. Esurie, hunger, or greedines. Esuriendo, vsed by Dante for thirsting, longing, greedie, couetous or hungrie. Et, a coniunction, and, moreouer, besides. Età, Etade, Etate, age. Etere, Eteréo, as Ethera. Eternale, eternall, euerlasting, aie-during, perpetuall. Eternare, Eternizzare, to eternize, to perpetuate, to make eternall. Eternita, eternitie. Etérno, eternall, euerlasting, euerdu∣ring. Etesie, windes blowing out of the east, or∣derly about the canicular or dog daies. Ethera, the heauen, the skie, the firmamēt, the aire, the fire. Etheréo, ethereall, heauenly, airie, fierie, bright. Etheróclito, Eteroclito ceruello, fan∣tasticall, vnruly, vnreasonable conceit or wit. Also properly declined other∣wise then the other nounes. Ethica, Etica, a sicknes called the consump∣tion or dropsie. Also morall philosophie, or a booke entreating of morall philo∣sophie, called the ethicks. Ethice, a kinde of precious stone. Ethico, Etico, sicke of a consumption or dropsie. Also morall, belonging to man∣ners and behauiour, or that represen∣teth or setteth them foorth. Ethimo, Ethimologia, as Etimolo∣gia. Ethimólogo, as Etimólogo. Ethmo, the middle bridge or gristle of the nose. Ethmoide, the holes or issues of the nose or nosthrils. Ethnarchia, principalitie. Ethnarco, a ruler or prince of people. Ethnico, a gentile, an ethnik, a pagan, an infidell. Ethologia, the feate of counterfeiting mens manners. Ethólogo, one that with voice or gesture expresseth mens manners. Etianche, howbeit, although. Etiandio, also, moreouer, besides, yea, yea
further, and, eftsoones. Etiandioche, howbeit, although, that. Etimologia, true saying, true exposition, or reason of wordes. Etimologo, he that searcheth out the true interpretation of words. Etindro, a kind of whitish stone. Etiologica, causale medicina.   Etiopide, an herbe which cast into the water, it will dry it vp, and if horses treade vpon it, it will make them caste their shooes. Etite, a stone founde in an eagles nest, of great vertue to make a woman be deli∣uered of childe without paine or la∣bour. Etologia, Etologo, as Ethologia. Etra, whatsoeuer is aboue the element of fire. Also the element of fire, the firma∣ment, the skie, the welkin, light or brightnes. Ettagonale, seauen cornered, hauing sea∣uen angles. Ettalche, a kind of tree so called. Also and so that. Ettasi, a figure when a short syllable is made long. Etti, it is to thee, is it to thee? Euacuare, to euacuate, to emptie. Euacuatione, euacuation, emptying. Euadére, vado, vasi, vaso, to escape, to euade, to shun. Euangelico, euangelicall, or of the gospel, gospellike. Euangelio, the gospell. Euangelista, an euangelist, a gospeller. Euangelizzare, to euangelize, to preach the gospell. Euaporare, to euaporate or steame out. Euaporatione, an euaporating, or stea∣ming out. Euasione, an euasion, an escape, a shun∣ning. Euaso, escaped, euaded, shunned. Also one that hath escaped. Eucharista, the sacrament of the Lords supper. Also thankes-giuing or good grace. Euenire, vengo, venni, venuto, to hap∣pen, to chance, to come to passe. Euentilare, to waue in the winde. Also to blowe or breath, to winnowe, or trie in the winde. Euentilatione, a winnowing in the winde Euento, an euent, a successe, an issue, a hap a chance. Euersione, an euersion, an ouerthrowing, a ruine. Eufonia, a good sound, a pleasant noise or vtterance of words. Euforbio, Euphorbiū, or gummie thistle. Eufragia, the herbe Eiebright. Euganeo, a kinde of excellent cheese. Eugenia, noblenes of blood or birth. Eugenico, noble in blood and birth. Euidente, euident, cleere, manifest, appa∣rent. Euidenza, euidence, apparance, an eui∣dence, a testimonie. Euincere, vinco, vinsi, vinto, to con∣uince, or euict by law. Euitabile, euitable, that may be auoided. Euitare, to shun, to auoide, to escape. Euitatione, an auoiding, a shunning, a flying from. Euittione, a conuicting by lawe. Eulogia, a praise, an honest and profita∣ble reason, a thing well spoken. Eumenide, the furies of hell. Eumetre, a kinde of greene precious stone like flint, which being put vpon ones head causeth him to dreame of strange sights. Eunucare, to geld, to eunuch, to splaie, to libbe. Eunuco, one that is gelded, an eunuch, a gelding, splaid or libd. Euocatione, an inuocation or calling vp∣on, a calling foorth. Euo, time euerlasting, euerduring time. Euphonia as, Eufonia. Eupatoria, the herbe Agrimonie, or Li∣uerwoort. Some take it for Maudelin, or Balsamint. Eupelato, a precious stone of fower co∣loures, fierie, blew, greene, and vermil∣lion. Eupilide, a swelling of the flesh in the gums by the cheeke teeth. Eupotria, an herbe good against agues. Euripo, an arme of the sea often ebbing and flowing. Also a water pipe. Eurithmia, a beautie where euerie thing or part answers his iust or due propor∣tion. Euro, the easterly winde, the east winde. Euro austro, a northeast winde. Euronato, a southeast winde. Eusébia, pietie, religion, godlines. Eutimia, securitie, quietnes, hartes-ease. Eutrapelia, good behauiour, gentlenes or garbe. Euuene, there is of it, or else is there anie thereof? Euui, there is, is there? F FA, a note in musicke. Also he doth. Al∣so do thou. Fabraria, the arte of Smithes. Also a smithes forge or workehouse. Fábrica, a frame, a building. Fabricare, to builde, to frame, to forge. Fabricatione, a building, a framing, a forging. Fabricatore, a builder, a framer, forger. Fabricense, a suruayer, or master of workes and buildings. Fabrile, pertaining to a smith. Also that may be wrought. Fabro, Fabbro, a smith, a workeman, a forger. Also a kinde of fish. Fabuloria, the herbe Henbane. Fabulosità, fabulousnes, inuention of fa∣bles and lies. Faccette, the name of some part of a hor∣ses bit. Facchinante, base, playing the porter. Facchinare, to play the porter, or the base companion. Facchinarie, base, filthie, rascally, por∣terlike-trickes. Facchino, a porter, a bearer of burthens. Also a soule base knaue. Faccia, a face, a visage, a sight or counte∣nance. Also the semblāce, figure, forme, fashion, proportion or likenes of a thing. Also let him do, make, or cause, or that he may do, or make. Faccia, Facciata, a side of a chamber or of a house, or of a leafe of a booke, a page of a booke. Also a soresnt. Faccia a faccia, face to face. Facciólo, Facciuólo, Faccioletto, as Fazzoletto. Fáce, Faccola, a torch, a linke or anie great light, a firebrand, a cresset light. Facélla, Facellina, a little torch or linke, or any burning light, a little brande. Facendare, to busie, to deale, to be doing. Facende, busines, affaires, negotiations, dooings, dealings. Also a mans or wo∣mans priuities. Facendiére, Facendaro, a dealer in bu∣sines, affaires, a negociator, an agent, a dealer, a factor, or dooer. Facétie, pleasantnes, myrth, wittie con∣ceits. Facetioso, as Faceto. Facéto, pleasant, conceited, wittie. Fácile, easie, tractable, pliable, facile, ethe, light, gentle, tractable, prone. Facilità, easines, readines, curtesie. Facilitare, to make easie. Facillimo, most easie. Facinio, a mischiefe, an ill deede, a wic∣ked act. Facino, bread made of a kinde of pulse or graine called Ciue. Facinoroso, wicked, vngracious, lewde, full of mischiefe.
Facitore, a dooer, a maker. Facitrice delle fusa storte, a woman that spinnes crooked spindles, id est, ma∣keth hir husband a cuckolde. Facitura, a dooing, a making, a workman∣ship, or labour. Facoltà, Facoltoso, as Facultà. Facondia, eloquence, pleasant speech, grace in speaking. Facondo, eloquent, well spoken. Facultà, riches, wealth, goods, facultie, powre, abilitie. Facultoso, rich, wealthie, well to liue. Faganello, the birde called a linnet. Also a kinde of fish. Fagiana, a phesant hen. Fagiano, Faggiano, a phesant. Fagianella, a phesant poute. Fagianótto, Faggianótto, a phesant poute. Faggio, a beech tree. Faggiola, a kinde of gall or acorne, or maste that the Beech tree beareth. Faggiolata, Fagiolata, a flim-flam tale, as women tell when they shale peason, which hath neither head nor foote, nor rime nor reason: a flap with a foxe∣taile: court-holie water, a tittle tattle, or such. Fagióli, Fagiuoli, a kind of pease like vn∣to a beane, called faseoles, french pea∣son, welsh beanes, or kidney beanes. Fagioli pinti, french beanes, or beanes of Rome. Fagiólo, a colts tooth, whereby a horses age is knowen. Fagnone, an idle loytring gll, a ninnie. Fagótto, a faggot, a bundell, a bauin, a fardell, a trusse, a packe. Also a kinde of musicall instrument. Faguccia, the name of a goldsmiths toole. Faina, a mincing, coie, nice, puling, squea∣mish woman, an idle huswife, a flurt, a gigxi. Also as Foina. Fainare, to mince it, to pule, to be squea∣mish, to play the idle huswife. Falangagio, an herbe that cureth the bi∣ting of the spider Phalangio. Falange, a militarie order that Alexan∣der the great vsed, a great squadron, consisting of eight thousand footemen. Falangiale, pertaining to that militarie order. Falangio, a kinde of venemous spider. Also an herbe that cureth the biting of that spider. Falangose, a kinde of disease in a mans eielids. Falaride, a kinde of herbe called grasse corne. Falbo, a baie colour of a horse. Also a kind of fish. Falcare, to wreath, to wrest, to bende, to make crooked. Also to abate, to defeate. Also to arme with crampers. Falcati, hooked, armed with crampers, as the Romaines were woont to arme their carts. Falce, a sieth, a sickle, a hooke, a bill, a crampern. Also a fish called in Latine Taenia. Falce fenaia, a sieth to mowe haie. Falchi, are staies when a horse doth rest vpon his hinder parts. Falciare, to mowe corne or haie. Falciatore, a mower. Falcidia, a word taken from Falcidius the Roman, who made a lawe that the Se∣nate should haue the fourth part of the lands that were gotten. The Italians vse it for the abatement of the fourth part of any thing, but spoken in mockerie. Falcifero, a mower, or one that beareth a sieth. Falcinella, a sickle. Also as Auosetta. Falcione, a bending forrest bill, or welsh hooke. Falcone, a faulcon. Also a kinde of bum∣bard so called. Also gold according to Alchimists phrases. Falcon trauescio, a kinde of faulcon. Falconzafiro, a kinde of faulcon with yellow legs and feete. Falconeggiare, to hauke or to faulcon. Falconello, a kinde of lanaret hauke. Falconetto, a faulconet, a kinde of shot or bumbard. Falconiera, a faulkners bagge, a hauking pouch. Falconiere, a faulkner, a hauker. Falcon randione, a kind of faulcon that is king of al birds, for that no bird dares flie neere it, no not the eagle. Falda, a folde, a plate, a wrinkle, a gathe∣ring, the skirts of the cote. It is also the side or foote of a hill. Also the armour called taces or cuishards. Also a flake. Faldare, to folde, to pleite, to entresse, to wrinkle, to cockle, to gather, to curle, to entraile. Also to flake. Faldarello, a little pretie dogge, a playing dogge, a puppie sitting vpon a womans cotes. Faldéa, a kinde of open or loose garment which the noble women of Venice were woont to were. Falde, swathes, roulers or bandles to swath children with. Also flakes of snow: also those pieces of armory, that are called cuishards or taces. Also plaitings, wrinckles, folds, gatherings, curlings, plaites. Also lockes or handfuls of wooll or flaxe. Also a folding, an inwinding or a plaiting of a garment. Faldelare, as Faldare. Faldigliare, as Faldare. Faldiglie, as Falde. Also a frocke or ga∣thered garment. Faldigie, idem. Faldoni, as Falde. Falecio, a kind of verse or poeme. Falegname, a carpenter or timber ma∣ker or worker, a cutter downe of wood, a woodman. Fal in bello, a goodly gallant spruise fini∣call fellow▪ in the worst sence, a fresh wa∣ter souldier, a milke sop. Falace, false, deceiueable, deceitfull, frau∣dulent, guilefull. Fallacia, fallacie, falshood, deceit, illusi∣on, fraud, guile. Fallacioso, fallacious, deceitfull. Fallaci loquentia, deceitfull speech. Fallante, falling, missing. Fallare, to fail, to misse, to erre, to deceiue, to trespasse, to fraud. Fallenza, Fallore, Fallanza, as Fallo. Falletto, is a little ring in the mouth of the bit set at one end of the roote. Falli, faults, as Annelletti. Fallimento, as Fallo, a breaking, a ban∣krout. Fallire, Fallisco, Fallito, as Fallare. Al∣so to becom bankrout, to crack his credit. Fallito, a bankrout, one that hath crackt his credit. Also broken, bankrout, crackt in credit, mist, erred. Fallo, Fallore, a fault, an error, a misse, a sin, a transgression, an ouersight, a tres∣passe, couen, fraud or guile. Also a fault in tenise. Also do it. Falope, a kind of shell fish. Falsare, to falsifie, counterfeit or forge. Falsario, Falsatore, a falsifier, a counter∣feiter, a forger, a false corner. Falseggiare, as Falsare. Falsetto, a false treble or counter-tenor in musicke. Falsidico, a lier, a leaser, one that tels no truth. Falsificare, as Falsare. Falsifico, Falsificatore, as Falsario. Falsità, falshood, falsenes, deceit. Falso, false, counterfeit, deceitfull. Falsoni, haukes or faullons. Falsonetti, little yoong haukes. Falso quarto, a cleft in the hoofe of a horse by the talent naile, commonly cal∣led a false quarter. Faluo, a bay colour. Fama, fame, report, brute, renowne, re∣putation, credit. Fama vt, or Fame vt, in iest vsed for
Fama vt, a note in musicke, but taken for hungerly or greedily. Fame, hunger, famine. Also greedines and desire, an appetite, a good stomacke or lust to eate. Fame canina, a hungrie dogged stomack. Also a disease so called. Fame contadina, clounish hunger, raue∣nous hunger. Famélico, hungrie, greedie, rauenous. Famfaluche, as Fanfaluche. Famiglia, a familie, a household. Famigliaccio, a filthie groome, hinde or swaine, a scullion. Famigliare, to set vp houshold, to become familiar, to tame. Also familiar, tame, gentle, acquainted, conuersant, a hous∣hold guest. Famigliarità, familiaritie, acquain∣tance. Famiglio, a groome, a seruant, a hinde, a swaine, a manseruant. Famiglióla, Famigliuóla, a little fami∣lie, or household. Familiare, as Famigliare. Familiarità, as Famigliarità. Fammelo, do it me, do it to me. Fammi, make me, do me. Famoso, famous, renowmed, glorious, excellent. Famulénte, hungrie, or hunger staru'd. Fanale, a lanterne of a ship or gally. Fanatico, vsed for a pagan priest, pro∣perly fanatike, inspired, rauished, or mad. Fanciulla, a wench, a lasse, a girle, a childe, a maiden. Fanciullesco, childish, toyish, indiscreete, puerile, brattish. Fanciullezza, childhood, youth, pueri∣litie. Fanciullo, a boy, a childe, a lad, a page, a stripling, a brat, a barne. Fando, vsed in verse for facendo, doing. Fanello, a little bird, we call it a Linet, some take it for a Lapwing. Fanfaluche, Fanfalughe, flim flam tales, old wiues fables, a ribble rabble dis∣course, idle words, speeches of no worth. Fanfaluco, a simple, sottish, prating fellow. Fanfalucole, as Fanfaluche. Fangare, to bemire, to bemud, to bedash with durt, to bedabble. Fangarolla, a kinde of bird, alwayes dab∣ling in the mud or myre. Fango, durt, mud, mire. Fangoso, durtie, murie, bedasht, muddie, bedabled. Fangro, a fish called in latine Pagrus. Fanne, do vs, make vs, make of it. Fano, the lanterne of a ship or galley. Fantaccino, a sillie souldier, a meane footeman. Fantaguzzo, a nickname for a fresh wa∣ter souldier, a milkesop. Fantaria, infanterie, footemen. Fantasia, a fansie, a conceit, fantasie, hu∣mor, imagination or intent. Fantasma, a ghost, a hag, a robin good-fellow, a holigoblin, a sprite, a iade, the riding hagge, or mare. Fantasticare, to raue or be fantasticall, foolishly conceited, or humorous. Fantasticarie, fantasticall toyes, vaine humors, idle imaginations. Fantastico, fantasticall, conceited, hu∣morous, rauing, skittish. Fante, a man or woman seruant, a groome, a footeman, a souldier seruing on foote, the knaue or varlet at cards, a pawne at chesse. Fantella, a girle, a lasse, a yong maide. Fantesca, a kitchen maide, a househould seruant, a drudge seruant. Fanticella, a yong mayden seruant, a yong wench, a little girle. Fantino, a yong lad or boy, a prentice, a childe. Fantocchio, a foolish seruing creature. Fantoccia, an elderlie vnmaried maide. Fantolino, a yong childe, lad or boy, a babie. Farassa, a great round fish that is an ene∣mie to the Whale. Farciglione, a kinde of cormorant or such water rauenous foule. Farcina, a disease in a horse called a Far∣cin, or fashions, or farcies, a creeping vlcer. Farcinoso, a horse that hath the farcins, full of the farcins. Fare, Faccio, or Fò, Feci, Fatto, to do, to make, to cause, to compose, to acte. Fare a guisa della coda del porco, che tutto il giorno se la dimena & poi la sera non ha fatto nulla, do and vn∣do the day is long enough, mutch ado and neuer the neerer, to do as the hog doth that all day wags his taile and at night hath done nothing. Fare aguati, to lay ambushes, to seeke to entrap. Fare ala, the name of a certaine march sounded vpon drum and trumpet in time of warre. Fare alto, as Fare ala. Fare alle coltellate, to fight with wea∣pons that cut. Fare alla grappa piu, to play at musse, to shuffle, or skamble for. Fare acqua, to water, or take in fresh wa∣ter in a ship. Also to pisse. Fare a gara, to striue, or to contend for the victorie. Fare a chetichegli, to go closely and se∣cretly about ones busines, to play the slye or suttle companion, the lurking and close foxe, to sneake or mich about lur∣kingly, to play least in sight. Fare alle braccia, to wrestle, to struggle. Fare a gucchia, to knit as silke hosen be with needles. Fare a cozzi, to shock, to but as Rams doe. Fare accoglienza, to entertaine, to giue entertainment. Fare brindisi, to drinke a health, to pledge a health to one, to carrouse it. Fare broglio, to canuas, to trudge about, or shift for, to rob Peeter and pay Paule, to take vp commodities. Fare beffe, to mocke, to floute, to scoffe. Fare buon partito, to make a good offer, to giue good entertainment. Fare baco baco, to play boe peepe. Fare bel tempo, to be faire weather. Fare a rigatta, to striue or play at musse for any thing. Fare capitale, to make especiall account of, to account as his owne, to gather a stocke. Fare chiomazzuoli, a horse to defend the bit with his neather lip: Some con∣ster it to be when a horse doth couer or defend his gumme with his lip. Fare colatione, to breake ones fast. Fare cattiuo tempo, to be foule weather. Fare cornamusa, as Gonfiare alcuno. Fare di meno, to choose whether one will doe a thing or no. Fare di beretta, to put off ones cap or hat for reuerence sake. Fare d'occhio, to winke vpon one, to giue a signe with the eyes, to giue an inkling. Fare fare, to cause or force to do. Fare frit frit, to play cricket a wicket. Fare festa, to keepe holyday. Also to che∣rish, to make much of, to entertaine lo∣uingly. Fare giornata, to fight a battaile. Fare forfici, when a horse doth wry both his chaps like a paire of sheares. Fare il rosso, to iest, to dallie, to play the wanton. Fare il solecchio, to make a shadow, to shadow, to shade. Fare il sole, the sunne to shine. Fare il ballordo, to play the noddie or foole. Fare il calle, Fare la piega, to make a habit, to enure. Fare il pane, to dye, to kick vp ones heeles,
neuer to haue more need of bread. Fare il santo, to play the hypocrite, to dis∣semble. Fare il buon prò, to do one good. Fare il sene, to come to perfection, to come to a full groth. Fare la credenza, to take the essay for a Prince, to be sewer to a prince. Fare la quarantana, to keepe lent or fast fortie daies, properly in time of plague or sicknes, to keepe fortie daies from company, namely if one come from in∣fected places, as they vse in Italy. Fare le bozze, to graft hornes on ones head. Fare le fusa sorte, to spin crooked spindles, a woman to make hir husbād a cuckold. Fare le carte, to deale the cards. Fare la sposa, to play the bride, to bride it, to mince it. Fare le none, to preuent one for borro∣wing, as if I feare that one comes to borrowe money of me: as soone as I see him I beginne to complaine that I am poore and haue no money, and know not where to get any: of such a one they say, Lui fa le none, that is there is nothing to be hoped for of such a dissembler. Fare la quaresima, to keepe lent. Fare le forche, to know a thing and to dis∣semble the knowledge thereof. Also to blame one when one should praise him, vsed in both these sences. Fare la busca, to play at musse. Fare le lustre, as Fare le forche. Fare le fica, to bid a fig, a flurt or a turde for one. Fare la honesta da campi, to counterfeit honestie. Farla in tre paci, to haue but three casts for it, not to stay long vpon the matter. Also to make a conclusiue peace between man and woman putting two in one. Fare la minuta, to make a draught of any writing or worke. Fare montar in collera, to make one be angrie or take pepper in the nose. Fare merenda, to make a drinking after dinner. Fare la luna, the moone to shine. Fare peduccio, to sooth one vp with good words, to currie fauour one, to allow and make good whatsoeuer one saies. Fare tauola, to make a stale at the play of chess, to be idle, neither win nor lose. Fare ribuffi, to chide or giue a checke. Fare scommessa, to laie a wager, to bet. Fare tempone, to feast and make good cheere, to passe away the time merily. Fare vna finta, to make an offer or shewe to do any thing. Fare stare, to coosen, conicatch, to ouer∣reach or fetch one ouer. Fare scala, to land or set footing on any land. Fate vezzi, to wantonize withall. Fare stocchi, to take vp commodities, to rob Peter and pay Paule. Fare le posate, to make a horse aduance, when at a stoppe he riseth twise or thrise with his forefeet. Fardellare, to fardle, to pack, to trusse, to bundle vp. Fardello, a fardell, a pack, a trusse, a bun∣dle, a burden. Farétra, a quiuer for arrowes. Faretrare, to quiuer or adorne a man with a quiuer. Farfa, the dandrafe that comes from the head or lies on the head. Farfalla, a gnat, a mote, a flie that houe∣ring about a candle burnes it selfe cal∣led a bishop. Farfallone, the filthie snot of ones nose or gubbon of fleame. Also a kinde of great flie, or humble Bee. Also a filthie, snot∣tie, slouenly, slauering, driueling fellow. Also a shamelesse lying fellow. One that will lie for the whetstone. Farfanicchio, a foolish milkesop or fresh water souldier. Farfante, as Furfante. Farfara, Farfarella, as Farfa. Also the hearbe folefoote, coltes foote or horse∣foote. Farfaro, the white poplar tree. Farfaroso, one that hath dandrafe on his head. Farfoso, Farfuso, as Farfaroso. Farina, flower or meale. Farinaccio, Farinato, made of flower, flowred or mealed. Farinaio, Farinaro, a mealeman, a hutch or bin to keepe meale in. Farinaiuolo, a mealeman. Also a malte man. Farinare, to beflowre or bemeale. Fario, a kinde of troute. Farlacchio, a gull, a noddie, a sot. Farneticare, to raue, to be franticke, or frenzie. Also to ruminat, to muse. Farnético, rauing, franticke or frenzie, musing, ruminating, mad. Farnice, a kinde of tree bearing a hard fruite. Farò, I will do, I shall make. Faróle, the lanterne of a gallie or ship. Also a beacon. Faróna, a stubble goose. Farraina, a kinde of mash giuen to horses made of diuers sorts of graine together. Farro, a kinde of wheate which they make pottage or formentie of in Italie like our oatmeale. Also spelt corne. Farsa, Farza, a pleasant discourse or en∣terlude, a mery tale, a play. Farsetto, Farseto, a trusse or thin doublet for sommer, a little iacket. Fartagna, a kinde of Larke with a bush on his head. Fasanello, a feasant pout. Fasano, a feasant. Fasce, bundles, swathes, withs, fardels, gardings, borders, laces, roules, or bin∣dings about a garment. Also sesses in armorie. Fascello, a Bee-hiue. Fascetto, a little bundle, a sheafe of any thing. Fascia, the singular of Fasce. Fasciano, a feasant, or feasant pout. Fasciare, to swathe, to swaddle, to bandle, or binde about, to sheafe vp, to roule or tye vp. Also to fesse in armorie. Also to binde, to garde or lace, or border a garment about. Fasciatoio, a bandle, a swathe or rouler. Fascicolo, a little bundle, a sheafe. Fascina, a countrie cottage, a shepheards bullie, a cabbin, a shelter, a shroude, a thatcht house. Also a saggot or a bauin. Fascinare, to bewitch, to forspeake, to charme with words or lookes. Fascinatione, a bewitching, a forespea∣king or charming with lookes, an eyebi∣ting proceeding of the wry lookes of en∣uious persons and of wolfes. Fascinatore, a bewitcher, a charmer with the eyes. Fascinélle, little fagots, little bauins, little fesses. Fascino, as Fascinatione. Fáscio, a bundle, a sheafe, a fardle, a trusse. Fasciola, a little bandle, a little swadling clout, a swathe, a binder, a rowler. Fasciuole ondose, a word in armorie, barrie-wauie. Fascitelli, sheafes, or handfuls of corne. Fastello, a fardell, a bundell, a sheafe, a burthen, as of wood or strawe. Fastidiare, to trouble, to vexe, to molest, to be tedious or lothsome, to importune, to accloye. Fastidio, trouble, vexation, molestation, wearines, tediousnes, lothsomnes. Also care, griefe, anguish, or importunitie, a loathing of the stomack, an accloying. Fastidiosità, as Fastidio. Fastidire, disco, dito, as Fastidiare. Fastidioo, troublesome, importune, te∣dious,
lothsome, wearisome, irkesome. Fastigiare, to raise, or worke vp to th top or height. Fastigio, the top or height of any thing, namely of a tree. Also the deapth of any thing. Fasto, pride, hautines, loftines, disdaine, surquedry. Fastoso, proude, hautie, loftie minded, disdainfull. Fasuoli, as Fagioli. Fata, a fairie, a witch, an enchantres, an elfe. Fatale, fatall, destined. Fatappi, doltes, fooles, noddies, guls, noddie poopes. Also a kinde of night bird. Fatare, to enchant, to bewitch, to satuate by fayries. Fatatura, a bewitching by fayries. Fateui in colà, go a little farther, as wee say away. Fatezze, Fattezze, features, beauties, shape, handsomnes, making. Also dispo∣sition, propernes, good making, forme. Fatica, labour, paine, trauell, toile, ende∣uour, industrie, swinke. Faticare, to labour, to trauell, to endeuour. Faticoso, laboursome, laborious, painfull, toilsome, industrious. Faticosità, as Fatica. Fatidico, Faticido, a soothsayer, a diui∣ner, a prophet, a secretarie of the gods. Fatione, the fashion or making. Fato, destinie, chance, lot, fortune, fate. Fattà, as Fratta. Also a fashion or ma∣king. Sifatta, such, so made, like. Fattamente, perfectly, in such sort, in such manner but ioined with Si. Fatti, facts, gestes, actes, dooings, deedes, feates, or actions. Also done, made, cau∣sed, composed, acted, accomplished, or performed. Fattibile, that may be done or wrought, or made. Also to be done or made. Fattionato, fashioned. Fattione, a faction or sect. Also any acti∣on or seruice. Fattioso, factious, turbulent, troublesom, sectious. Fattitio, any thing to be done or acted. Also artificiall, counterfait or fained. Fattiuo, as Fattibile. Fatto, an estate, a busines, a mans wealth. Also the singular of Fatti. Fatto a gucchia, knit with knitting nee∣dles as silke hosen be. Fatto d' arme, a conflict, a battaile, a warlike peece of seruice. Fatto stare, conie-catcht, crosse-bitten, ouer-reacht, fetcht ouer, cozened. Fattocchiare, to bewitch, to forespeake, to enchant, to charme, to besot. Fattocchiera, a shee witch, or enchantes. Fattocchiero, a he witch or enchanter. Fattocchierie, base charmes, enchant∣ments, bewitchings or forespeakings. Fattoio, a iarre, a pot, a fat or bottle, to put oile in. Fattorare, to plaie the factor or merchant for another. Fattore, a factour, an agent, a dealer, a so∣licitour, a founder, a maker or dooer. Fattoria, a storehouse or a custome house, or merchants warehouse. Also a place of traffike. Fattorino, a factour, a petti-fogger, a so∣liciter. Fattosene, hauing made to himselfe of it. Fattucchiare, Fatucchiare, as Fattoc∣chiare. Fattucchiera, Fatucchiera, as Fattoc∣chiera. Fattucchiero, Fatucchiero, as Fattoc∣chiero. Fattucchiarie, Fattucchiaie, as Fattoc∣chierie. Fattura, a making, a fashion or worke∣manship of any thing, a doing or handy worke. Fatturare, as Fattocchiare. Fatture, charmes, incantations, forespea∣kings. Fatturéra, as Fattocchiéra. Fatuare, to make or play the foole, fonde or idiot, to besot. Fatuità, foolishnes, blockishnes. Fátuo, foolish, fonde, simple, idiot, natu∣rall, a sot, a blockish fellowe. Faua, a beane. Also a kinde of pottage of beanes. Also vsed for the prepuse or top of a mans yard. Fauagello, vnguento di fauagello.   Fauale, made of beanes. Faua lupina, the herbe Hnbane. Faua menata, a kinde of beane pottage. Faua porcina, an herbe called in Latine Alterum. Fauaro, one that sels beanes. Also a fielde of beanes. Fauata, a meate made of beanes. a flap made with a foxetaile, as Fagiolata. Fauce, the throte, gorge, or gullet pipe. Fauè, certaine running vlcers from which comes a matter like honie. Also certaine kernels that come betweene the flesh and the skin to men and beasts. Fauélla, a speech, a language, a toong. Fauellare, to speake, to discourse. Fauellatore, a speaker, a discourser. Fauelleni, a poison maker. Fauerotti, earth nuts, kipper nuts, or earth chestnuts. Fauetta, a little beane. Fauilla, a sparke, a sparkle, a twinkling. Fauillare, to sparkle, to sparke, or twinckle. Fauillante, Fauilloso, sparkling, twink∣ling. Fauilluccia, Fauilluzza, a little sparkle, or twinkling. Fauine, Looke Vlcere fauine. Faule, chaffe or stubble of corne. Fauni, Faunes, certaine Siluane gods, halfe men halfe goates, as Satires. Faunico, wilde, siluane, rude. Fauo, a honie combe. Also a kinde of scaule in the head running matter like honie. Also a Bee-hiue. Fáuola, a fable, a tale, a leasing, a lie. Fauolare, to fable, to tell tales. Fauoleggiare, as Fauolare. Fauoletta, a little fable, a short tale. Fauolone, a pleasant conceited fellowe, a teller of tales or fables. Fauoloso, fabulous, false, vntrue, pro∣phane. Fauolosità, falsehood, a tale, lie, or leasing. Fauónio, a west winde. Fauorabile, fauourable. Fauore, fauour, grace, a boone, a grant, a gift, a good turne. Fauoreggiare, to fauour, to be friend. Fauoreuole, Fauoreggiante, fauorable, friendly. Fauorire, risco, rito, to fauor or grace one Fauorito, fauored. Also a minion, a fa∣uorite▪ a louer, a friend. Fauoscello, the herbe Celandine, figwort, or pilewoort. Fauotti, a kinde of ducke, mallarde, or wi∣geon. Fauro, a smith. Faustità, good fortune, good lucke. Fausto, hap, fortune, propiciousnes, lucke. Faustoso, happie, fortunate, propicious, luckie. Fautore, a fauorer, a protectour, a furthe∣rer or maintainer. Fautrice, she that fauoureth, furthereth, or maintaineth. Fazende, as Facende. Fazzatoia, Fazzatora, a maunde to put bread in. Fazzo, a fashion, a maner, a guise, a cu∣stome. Fazzoletto, a handkerchiffe, a mucketer, a towell, a barbers cloth, a wiper. Fazzuolo, Fazzuoletto, as Fazzoletto. Fè, he did. Also as Fede. Feace, voluptuous, giuen to all pleasures. Febbre, a feauer, an ague. Febbre continua, a continuall ague. Febbre cotidiana, a quotidian ague. Febbre quartana, a quartane ague.
Febbre terzana, a tertian ague. Febbricella, a little, slow, faint, gentle or easie ague. Febbreggiante, as Febricitante. Febbreggiare, as Febricitare. Febbricitante, troubled with an ague. Febbricitare, to haue or be sicke of an ague. Febbriccioso, Febbriggioso, idem. Febbrone, a violent or great ague, a mightie feauer. Febraio, Febraro, the moneth of Febru∣arie. Fecatelle, as Fegatelle. Fecato, as Fégato. Fecatoso, as Fegatoso. Feccia, dregs, les, or filth of wine or anie thing else, drosse, ordure, rif-raffe. Feccioso, dreggie, slimie, filthie, drossie. Feciale, a herauld, an ambassador, or offi∣cer of warre to denounce war or peace. Fecondare, to fructifie, or make frutefull. Fecondia, fruitfulnes, fertility, plentie. Fecondità, Fecondezza, as Fecondia. Fecondo, fruitfull, fertill, plentifull. Fede, or Fe, faith, trust, truth, troth, reli∣gion, honestie, credit. Also a ring made with hand in hand: also a pasport, a te∣stimonie, a warrant, an assurance. Fedele, faithfull, trustie, true, honest, of credit, loyall, vpright. Fedeltà, faith, faithfulnes, trust, credit, troth, loyalty, fidelitie. Fedére, fedo, fedéi, feduto, to hurt, to wound, to strike, to smite. Fedire, as Fedére. Fedita, a wound, a hurt, a sore, a cut, a gash with a weapon. Fedito, hurt, wounded, striken. Fedo, filthie, foule, abhominable, lothsom, stinking. Feduto, hurt, wounded, strooken. Fegato, a fish called in latin Glaucus. Fégato, the liuer of any creature. Also a fish like a breame called in latine He∣par. Fegatelle, certaine meates made of liuer, liuerings. Fegatello, a little liuer. Fegatoso, one that hath a great liuer. Feggiare, as Fedére. Félce, the herbe ferne, blake or brake. Féle, Fel, the gall of ones bodie. Feleggiare, to make or be as bitter as gall. Felice, happie, fortunate, blessed, luckie, prosperous, blissefull. Also the hearbe ferne or blake. Felicità, felicitie, blisse, happines, prosperi∣ty, good lucke. Felicitare, to prosper, to blesse, to make happie. Felizzette, a kind of daintie bird. Fellare, to commit fellonie. Felléo, of gall, as bitter as gall. Fellifluo, choler or flowing of the gall, ri∣sing commonly of rawnes. Fellio, a kind of musicall instrument. Fello, fell, cruell, seuere, inexorable, moo∣die, wrath. Also fellonius, murderous, cruell, wicked, trecherous, peruerse, fro∣ward. Fellone, a fellon, a fellonious, wicked, cru∣ell, trecherous man. Fellonia, fellonie, villannie, treacherie, cruelty, rebellion. Felluca, a kind of boate, barge or ship. Feltraro, a felt-maker. Feltro, a felt, whereof hats are made or ri∣ding clokes and bases. Also a hat it selfe or cloke made of felt. Also a kinde of limbeck or stillatorie. Felzata, a kind of course woollen stuffe so called likefelt. Felze, the place of a barge or boat couered where passengers sit, namely in gondo∣las. Féme, the vpper and inner parte of the thigh, the priuie parts of a woman. Also the partes about the pastell or neather ioint of a beasts leg. Femina, a woman, a wife, sometime ta∣ken for a bad light woman. Femina del mondo, a bad light wo∣man. Femina di partito, a common queane. Feminable, weake, faint, of a womans na∣ture. Feminaccia, a filthie lothsome woman. Feminacciolo, a whore-monger, a fre∣quenter of women. Feminare, to effeminat, to womanize. Feminella, a sillie little woman. Feminelle, the little claspes and hookes that women vse to tie their peticots with. Feminéo, of the feminine kind or gender. womanish, feminine. Feminetta, a very little woman and pret∣tie. Feminiére, a whore-monger, a frequen∣ter of women, a mutton monger▪ Also belonging or pertaining to women. Feminina, a verie little and prettie wo∣man. Also of the feminine gender. Feminile, feminine or womanish. Feminuccia, a poore sillie wretched wo∣man. Femora, the priuie parts of a woman; but specially the thigh or foreparte there∣of. Fenaia, of or pertaining to haie or to cut∣ting of haie. Fenaiuolo, Fenaruolo, an hoster, one that makes haie-bottles or lockes of hai, a hay man or maker. Féndere, fendo, fendei, fenduto, to cleaue, to burst asunder, to riue, to chap, to splint, to shiuer, to spall. Fendente, cleauing, a downe right clea∣uing blow. Fendeuole, that may be cleft, shiuered or broken. Fendita, Fenditura, a cleauing, a chinke, a cranish, a flaw, asplint, a cleft, a chop. Fenditore, a cleauer, a wood cleauer, a ri∣uer, a splinr. Fenestra, a window. Also a casement, a hole through any thing. Fenestrare, to make windowes or holes through any thing. Fenestraro, a glasier or window maker. Fenestrata, windowed, holed through. Al∣so a row of windowes. Fenestrella, Fenestretta, a little window, a loope hole, a spike hole, a button hole. Fenestreuole, Fenestroso, full of win∣dowes or holes. Féngere, as Fingere. Fenice, the bird Phenix. Also a kinde of hearbe. Fenico, a kinde of musicall instrument with strings. Fenile, a hay-ricke, a stacke of hay, a house for hay, also made of hay. Also a racke where hay is put. Feno, haie. Fenocchio, as Finocchio. Fenogreco, the hearbe fenegreeke. Fenoso, full of hay. Fenta, as Finta. Fera, a fierce monster, a wilde beast. Ferace, fertill, fruitfull, plentifull, bring∣ing foorth much fruit, full of. Feracità, fruitfulnes. Feraiuolo, Feraruolo, a riding cloke. Ferale, a taper, a torche, a quarier or a linke. Also deadlie, dangerous, lamen∣table, mourning. Feralia, a day dedicated to the gods, to pa∣cifie them toward dead soules, all soules daie. Ferbotto, a robin-red-breast. Ferétro, a tombe, a hearce, a beere, a cofin for the dead. Feretta, a ferret to catch conies with. Ferge, fetters for horses, or any other cat∣tle. Fergolastro, a kind of weed or hearbe. Feria, a holy festiuall day, a wake day, a vacation, a holie daies life. Feriale, festiuall, holie, vacant from la∣bour. Also common. Feriare, to make holie day, to be idle, to
keepe holy day. Ferigno, cruell, fierce, of the colour or na∣ture of iron, rustie, canckred. Ferina carne, venison, meate of wilde beasts. Ferino, cruell, monstrous, beastly, inhu∣mane, sauage, wilde, as a beast. Ferire, risco, rito, to hit, to strike, to hurt, to wound. Feristo, the middle or chiefe post of a tent, or any thing else. Ferita, a hit, a hurt, a wound, or stroke. Ferità, fiercenes, cruelty, pride, hautines, disdaine, beastlines, wildenes. Feríto, hit, strucken, hurt, wounded. Feritore, a wounder, a striker. Ferla, a haukes pearch, or a little stake. Ferle, crutchets for lame men to goe with. Fermagliare, to adorne with iewels, ou∣ches or brooches, or pendants. Fermaglio, an ouch, or iewell, a pendant, namely a brooch. Fermamento, the firmament, or skie. Fermare, to confirme, to settle, to establish, to ratifie, to conclude, to assure. Also to affirme, to warrant, to stay, to order, to refraine, to determine or remaine. Also to make fast, to pound, to empale, to close, to shut, to locke, to seale. Fermatiuo, affirmatiue. Fermentare, to leauen, to mixe with, as leauen with dowe. Fermento, leauen for bread. Fermezza, firmenes, constancie. Fermo, firme, steadie, established, setled, assured, certaine, ratified, concluded, fixed. Also sure, confirmed, warranted, fastned, ordered, stayed, arrested. Also fast, empaled, closed, shut, lockt, sealed. Fernanbucco, brasill wood to dye with∣all because it comes from such a place in Brasile. Ferneticare, as Farneticare. Ferneticamento, a rauing. Fernetichezza, rauingnes, franticknes. Fernético, frantick, rauing, humorous, toyish, mad. Féro, Feróce, fierce, cruell, seuere, sterne, hastie, headlong, hard-harted, eager. Féro, Fécero, Férono, they did, they made, they caused. Ferocia, as Ferocità. Ferocità, fiercenes, cruelty, seueritie, eagernes, hastines, arrogancie. Ferolagine, as Ferola. Férola, Ferula, a clouen cane or reede. Also a kinde of mantle that shepheards weare. Also a reede or sedge, or bent growing by the water side. Also a kinde of shrub. Also an herbe like big fennell, called herbe Sagapene, or fenell giant. Ferragina, a kinde of weede or hearbe. Ferraine, all maner of iron works. Also greene barlie cut for horses. Ferrame, all maner of iron, or iron works. Ferramenti, iron works, or peeces of iron, all manner of iron tooles. Ferrante, an iron or darke colour of a horse, an iron gray. Ferrare, to shooe a horse, or any such beast, to trim, or dresse with iron, to tagge points. Ferrar la mula, a prouerbe, to steale, to filch from ones maister, to deceiue him in his expences. Ferraio, Ferraro, a lock-smith, a horse∣smith, a frrier. Ferraria arte, the arte of smiths working in iron. Ferraria, an iron myne. Ferrastringhe, a tagger of points. Ferrata, as Ferriata. Ferrata mazza, an iron club. Ferrato, couered, plated, or wrought with iron. Also shod with iron as a horse, or any other beast. Ferratura, any iron worke. Ferra vecchio, a cryer of old iron, or that sells all manner of old iron works. Ferrazza, a forkefish, it is like a raye. Ferréa, of or pertaining to iron. Ferretti, little irons. Also tags for points. Ferri, horseshoes, all manner of irons. Also iron tooles. Also fetters or shackles of iron. Ferriata, a grate of iron for a window or such like, or before a prison dore, a perculleise. Ferriere, a harbinger, one that takes vp lodgings for others, a forerunner. Ferrigno, cruell, hardharted, of the na∣ture or colour of iron, rustie. Ferro, iron. Also a horseshooe, the mettall iron, any iron toole. Ferro a ghiaccino, a horseshooe to goe in the frost with. Ferroliche, toyes, vanities, bables, iests, nifles, fooleries, fopperies. Ferroso, full of iron, or of iron. Ferruginéo, of an iron colour. Also bea∣ring iron, or of the nature of iron. Also rustie. Ferrugine, rust of iron. Ferruzzi, all manner of iron tooles. Ferruginoso, tasting of iron, full of iron, rustie. Fersa, a sicknes proceeding of extreame heate. Also a violent heate, or a bur∣ning ague. Fersora, a frying pan. Fersura, a frying pan. Also meate fryed. Fersuto, fryed in a pan, scorched. Fertile, fertile, fruitefull, abundant, plentious store bringing. Fertilire, lisco, lito, to waxe, or become, or make fruitefull, plentifull, or fertile. Fertilita, fertilitie, fruitefulnes, plentie. Feruente, feruent, fierce, hote, violent, earnest, burning, ardent, raging, boi∣ling, parching. Feruenza, feruencie, violence, raging heate, ardencie. Féruere, féruo, feruéi, feruuto, to burne, to scalde, to be hote, to rage, to boile, to parch. Feruido, as Feruente. Ferula, as Ferola. Feruléo, like vnto Ferola. Also full of reedes or canes. Feruore, feruor, heate, earnestnes, va∣liantnes, ardencie, feruencie. Feruoso, as Feruente. Feruto, a disease in a horse called the swaying of the neck. Feruuto, burned, scalded, hote, raged, boiled, parched. Ferza, a whip, a scourge, a flaile. Ferzare, to whip, to scourge. Ferzatore, a whippe, a scourger. Fescéia, a great maund, a dosser, a basket, a panier. Fescénio, baudie, filthie, dishonest. Fessa, Fessura, clouen, cleft, burst. Al∣so a cleft, a chinke, a creuis, a hole, a slit, a chop. Fessile, fendible, that may be cleft, or splinted. Fesso piede, clouen-footed. Fessurare, to cleaue, to open, to burst. Festa, a feast, a holyday, a banquet, ioy, pleasure, solace, a shew. Also a kinde of simnell, cracknell, or gingerbread. Festante, as Festoso. Festare, to feast it or make holyday, to re∣ioyce, to glad, to solace, to banquet. Festatore, a feaster, a banqueter. Festeggiante, feasting, merrie, banquet∣ting, pleasant, of good entertainment. Festeggiare, to feast it, to banquet, to make holie-day, to cherishe, or make much of. Festeggieuole, Festeggioso, as Festoso. Festeuole, as Festeggieuole. Festichina seta, a kinde of rawe sleaue silke. Festinare, to hasten, to dispatch. Festinità, haste, speede, quicknes. Festino, Festinamente, quickly, nimblie, hastily, comming before time, spee∣dily. Festiuale, as Festoso. Festiuamente, by way of sport or holie∣daie festiualie.
Festiuità, a festing, a festiuitie, a fe∣stiuall, a mirth, ioyfulnes or iolitie, a pleasant grace. Festiuo, as Festeuole. Festoccia, as Mottozzo. Festone, a garland, a wreath, a chaplet, a crowne of flowers. Festoncello, a little garland or wreath, or chapiet, or coronet of flowers. Festoso, feasting, merrie, pleasant, iolly, ioyfull, blithe, bonnie, iocond, conceited, solacing, buxsome, idle, reioicing, play∣ing, gamesome, festiuall. Festuca, Festuga, a shrub, a stake, a single quarter, a staffe, a pole. Also chaffe, or straw, or stubble. Also a feskue. Festucco, a little sticke, a fease-strawe, a tooth-picke, a moth, a little beame. Fetente, stinking, ill sauouring. Fetida, Fetido, stinking, ill sauouring. Fetidare, to smell, to stinke, to sauour ill. Fetidezza, as Fetore. Fetore, a stinke, an ill smell or sauour. Feto, all things brought foorth by genera∣tion of man, beast or fish, a broode or birth. Fetta, a slice, a collop of any thing, a cut of any meate, Fetta di pane, a shiuer of bread. Fetta di stame, hath beene vsed for a girdle. Fettone, a disease in a horse, called the running frushe. Fettore, as Fetore. Fettuccia, a little collop, slice, or cutting. Fettuccia di presciutto, a slice of ba∣con. Fettuccie, iags, iaggings, cuttings or snips in garments. Feudatare, to let or take in fee farme, or feude. Feudatario, a feudation or tributary per∣son. Feudo, a fee, a feud, or tribute. Feudoso, that paieth tribute, feude or fee. Fia, shall be, of the verbe Essere. Fia, times, as tre fia tre, three times three. Fiabbe, as Fanfaluche. Fiacca collo, a breake-necke, a halter∣sacke, a wagge. Also tumbling downe headlong. Fiaccare, to breake, to bruse, to batter, squease, crush, spoile, marre, or craze. Also to tire, faint, wearie, consume, weaken, wither, or droope. Fiac cato, tyred, made fainte, wearied, consumed, weakned, withered, faded, drooped. Also broken, brused, battered, squeased, crushed, spoiled, mard, crazed. Fiacche, Fiappe, as Fanfaluche. Fiacchezza, wearines, weakning, withe∣ring, faintnes. Fiacco, as Fiaccato. Fiaccola, a firebrand, a torch, a linke, a cresset light, a quarier. Fiaccolare, to burne, to blase, to light as torches or brands do, to flash. Fiadone, a honie-combe. Also taken for a Bee hiue, or hith. Also a kind of flawne, egge-pie, doucet or custard. Fiadonello, idem. Fiala, a wine glasse. Also a certaine mea∣sure for wine. Fialone, a great glasse for wine or oyle. Also as Fiadone. Fiamma, a flame, a light, a twinkling, a blase. Fiamma di volto, a blush, or maidens blush colour. Fiammare, to flame, to blase, to burne, to light, to twinkle, to sparkle, to flash or to blush red. Also to streame in the aire as streamers. Fiamme, the streamers or baneroles of a shippe. Fiammeggiare, as Fiammare. Fiammeggiante, flaming, blazing, spark∣ling, &c. Fiammella, Fiammetta, a little flame, a sparkle, a twinkling, a blaze. Fiamméo, a flame colour. Fiancare, to flanke. Also to fortifie. Fiancata, a blow or thrust giuen vpon the side or flanke. Fiancheggiare, as Fiancare. Fiancheggiante, flanking. Fianco, a side, a flanke, a hip. Also a side of any squadron of men. Fiappare, to wither, to fade, to droope, to faint, to make hollow, to foist. Fiapparie, witherings, droopings, foistings, vanities. Fiappe, as Fanfaluche. Fiappo, withred, faded, drooped, faintie, hollow, foisting, spungie, wrimpled. Fiasca, a flagon, a bottle. Also a whoore, a harlot, an ouer-ridden whoore. Also a gunners flaske. Fiascheggiare, to plie the bottle, to tipple square, to haunt the tauerne, to quasse with bottles. Fiasco, a flagon, a bottle, a flaske. Fiascone, a great flagon or great bottle, a flaske. Fiata, a time, one time, a turne, vna fiata, once, a fit. Fiatare, to breath, to drawe breath, to blowe. Fiate, times, turnes, Piu fiate, many times. Fiato, breath, winde, aire, spirit, a blast, a gale. Fiatoso, sauouring ill, stinking, brea∣thing. Fibbia, any kind of buckle, a latch, a claspe or haspe, or latchet. Fibbiare, to buckle, to lace, to tie, to ioyne or fasten togither. Fibbiatura, a buckling, a lacing. Fibella, hath beene vsed for the moone. Fibra, a veine so called. Also the tip of ones liuer, or the hem or skirt of garments. Also the beast called a Brocke or Bad∣ger, a Beuer. Also entrailes or guts of beasts. Also the small strings hanging vpon rootes of trees or herbes. Also the border or brim of a riuer. Fibula, Fibola, as Fibbia, in building it is a brace to fasten beames, a crampiron or hooke to hold square stones togither, the pin of a truckle, the cleuer or axe. Also a surgeons instrument wherewith a wound is stitched and drawne togi∣ther. Also the lesser bone of the legge. Also the nut of a crosse-bowe. Also a haspe or little hooke of brasse. Fibulare, as Fibbiare. Fica, a figge. Also a womans conie or quaint. Also a flurt with ones fingers giuen in disgrace, fare le fica, to bid a figge for one. Ficaia, Ficaide, a shade or arbor of figge leaues, a bower of figge leaues. Also a discourse made of figs, or rather of wo∣mens quaints. Ficaldi, a kinde of figs so called. Ficarda, one that loues figs. Also a leche∣rous woman. Ficarelli, a kinde of little figs. Ficaretto, a place set with figge trees. Ficato, the liuer of any creature. Ficatoso, pursie, short breathed, troubled with the cough of the lungs. Ficatelli, a kinde of meate made of liuer, liuerings. Ficcare, to thrust in, to driue in, to fasten in, to peg in, to fixe. Ficcare la pasta, to knead the paste. Ficcatoio, a mallet or beetle, or any thing to thrust in withall. Ficcatura, a thrusting, a driuing in, a fastning, fixing or pegging in. Ficedula, a birde called a stare or a star∣ling; but properly a gnat snapper. Fice, a fish that with sea weede makes his nest by the shore to lay in his yoong ones. Fichi Secchi, drie figs. Fico, a fig tree. Also a fig, a disease in a horse foote called the fig. Also a fish like a breame called in latin Hepar. Also a whiting mop. Also a kinde of scab gro∣wing about a man where haire is, name¦ly
in the head or fundament. Ficod'egitto, a sicomore tree. Some take it for the mulbery tree. Ficolini, little or greene figs. Ficone, a glutton or greedie of figs. Ficoso, full of scabs, sores or figs. Ficulino, made of fig tree. Also a little fig tree. Ficulo, a little fig tree, a little fig. Fida, a suretie, a warrantise. Fidanza, faith, trust, affiance, confidence, assurance, feoffment, credit. Fidare, to trust, credit, affie, assure, enfe∣offe or beleeue. Fidato, trusted, credited, affied, &c. Also trustie, secret, sure and confident. Fide, as Fede. Fidecomesso, put in trust, committed to his charge, enfeoffed, a feoffement of trust. Fidecomessore, a feoffer of trust, one put in trust, to dispose and order a thing. Fidele, trustie, true, faithfull, confident. Fidentemente, trustily, truly, confident∣ly, faithfully. Fiditio, a kinde of parcimonious feasting among the Lacedemonians. Fido, trustie, faithfull, loyall, true, assu∣red. Fiducia, trust, faith, confidence, affi∣ance. Fie, shall be, of the verbe Essere. Fiédere, fiedo, fiedei, fieduto, to hurt, to wound, to strike, to smite. Fieduto, hurt, wounded, strooken, smit∣ten. Fiedita, a wound, a sore, a hurt. Fiena, as Hienna. Fienaro, a hay mower, a hay seller, a haie∣stacke, a haie man. Fiéno, all maner of hay or fodder for cat∣tle. Fienogreco, the hearbe fenugreeke. Fienoso, full of hay, hayish. Fiera, fierce, cruell, beastly, sauage. Also a faire or a fairing or a publike marte or a market. Also any manner of fierce wilde beast. Fierezza, fiercenes, cruelty, arrogancie. Fiéro, arrogant, fierce, crue, beastly, wild. Fiéto, a smell, sent, sauour, stinke or aire. Fieuolare, as Indebolire. Fieuole, as Debole. Fieuolezza, as Debolezza. Fieuolire, as Indebolire. Fieura, as Febbre. Fifaro, as Pifaro. Figadello, Figadetto, as Fegatello. Al∣so a purse of money in gibbrish or rogues language. Figaruola, a womans priuities or quaint. Figgere, figgo, fissi, fisso, or fitto, to fixe, to driue in, to thrust in, to fasten. Figlia, a daughter, a wenche, a girle, a lasse. Figliare, to encrease, to bring issue, to fruc∣tisie, as well to women as to beasts, pro∣perly to filly. Figliastra, a daughter in law. Figliastro, a son in law. Figlio, a son, a childe, a brat, a barne, a fil∣lie. Figlióla, Figliuóla, a daughter, a childe, a wench. Figliolanza, as Figliuolanza. Figliolare, Figliuolare, as Figliare. Figliólo, Figliuólo, a son, a boy, a childe. Figliale, Filiale, Amor Figliale, filial loue. Figliozza, Figlioccia, a god-daughter. Figliozzo, Figlioccio, a god-son, a fo∣ster childe. Figliuolanza, procreation, issue, or bea∣ring of children. Figmenti, fictions, deuises, inuentions, conceits, forged tales or lyes. Fignolo, as Fistola, or Fistolo. Figo, as Fico. Figora, figs. Figula, any thing wrought or formed or shaped in clay or earth. Figulare, to worke or shape in clay or earth. Figulino, Figularo, a potter, a worker in clay. Figulo, idem. Figura, a figure, a picture, a shape, a statue, an image, fashion, fauoure, likenes, or making. Figurale, bearing a figure. Figurantia, an expressing or figuring. Figurare, to figure, to picture, to shape, to image, to forme, to fashion, to con∣ceiue in minde. Figuratione, a fashioning or forming. Figuratiuo, figuratiue, expressiue. Figurato veluto, figur'd veluet, wrought or branch't veluet. Figuressa, a she figure. Figuretta, Figurina, a little figure, a little picture or image. Fila, files, ranks, orders, rowes, or lines of such souldiers as do stand or march consequentlie one after another in ordi∣nance or array of battell, extending from the front vnto the traine of the battell. Filaccio, course threed, or yarne to be wouen. Also course rawe silke. Filagine, cottonweede, or bloudieflixe woort. Filagna, the cranes to lure a hauke with. Filandre, a disease in a hauke called the Fillander. Filarco, one that loueth to beare rule. Filare, Filatare, to spinne. Also to set an edge on any weapon, to twist or draw into threads. Also a streake or line drawne by any mathematician. Filatamente, threadmeale, thread by thread. Filaterie, trifles, toyes, or vanities spoken by spinners to keepe them from wa∣king. Filato, spunne or twisted. Also with an edge, sharp, keene, cutting. Also any kinde of yarne that is spunne, or spin∣ning, made in manner of a threed. Filatoio, a silke mill. Also a spinning wheele. Filatoia, Filatrice, a spinner, a woman spinner. Filatore, a spinner. Filari, the vttermost ranges of vines, or the walles that compasse them, an em∣palling. Filastrocca, as Filastroccola. Filastroccola, slimflam tales, ould wiues tales as they tell when they spinne, a tale without rime or reason, or head or foote. Filatera, a web, a woofe, a deuise, a com∣plot. Fil di terra, the herbe centorie. Filaterio, a precious stone which worne about one comforteth the spirits, and driueth all melancholie away. Filello, a little yarne string or thred. Also the string of the toong. Fileolo della lingua, the string of the tongue, which makes some toong-tide. Filera, a woman spinner. Also as Filagna or Filiera. Filetti, are little water chaines extending from one side of the porte to the cheeke. Filetto, a little thred, or line, a wire or twist. Fileul, a tree in India with a very broade leafe, and so sharp at the point, that the Indians make their needles of them, and through the leafe goeth certaine threads, that serues them in stead of threed, so one leafe findes them needle and threed. Filfilo, euen, iust, leuell, as it were close to it, by lyne and measure. Filibustacchina, the burden of a coun∣trie song, as we say hay doune a doune douna. Filicare, to notch about the edges as ferne is, or indenter wise. Filiera, a toole to draw wine with being full of round holes. Also a spinner. Filigine, Filigne, the blacknes proceeding
of smoake, blacking of smoake. Also blacking for shooes. Filipéndola, the hearbe dropwort or red saxifrage. Filisello, a kinde of course silke which we call, filosetta or flouret silke. Filo, a thread, a line, a strike, a twist, a fil∣let or yarne. Also the edge of any knife or weapon. Also as Fetta. Also a stile or manner. Also the string in the mouth wherewith children are toong-tied. Filo del'acqua, the brim of the water. Filo di ferro, an iron wir. Filomena, Filomela, a nighting all. Filone, a vaine of mettall. Also a me∣dicine to make one sleepe or to forget paine. Filosello, as Filisello. Filosofare, to play the philosopher, to phi∣losophise. Filosofastro, a foolish philosopher, as wee say, a foolesopher. Filosofia, philosophie, knowledge, ver∣tue. Filosófico, philosophicall. Filósofo, a philosopher, a louer of know∣ledge. Filostoccola, as Filastroccola. Filtro, an amorous potion or medicine to make one loue. Also the hollownes vpon the vpper lip vnder the nostrels. Also a comely proportion and sweet behauiour of mans bodie, able to mooue loue. Filza, a file, a thread full of pearles, of beads or of snailes, a chaine of pearles. Filzare, to enthread or put vpon a thread, as beads, bugle or pearle. Fima, as Fimate. Fimate, a kinde of swelling or sirie infla∣ming disease about a man, namely in his priuities. Fimbria, the hem or skirt, a fringe, a welt, a garde, a border or an edge of any gar∣ment. Also a fryers girdle. Some haue taken it for the meridian line or the horizon. Fimo, dung or ordure of cattle or man. Fimoso, a disease when the nut of a mans yard will not be couered, or being coue∣red will not be opened. Also silthie, full of dung or ordure. Fin, Fino, fine, subtile, craftie. Also euen, whilest. Also so far. Also vntill. Fin' alhora, euen then, vntill then. Fin' a quando, vntill when, how long? Fin' a tanto, so long as, vntill that, whilst that, whilest. Finale, finall, concluding, lag, last. Also that which pertaineth or serueth for bounds or limits. Finalmente, finally, to conclude, lastly. Finare, to cease, giue ouer or make an end, to rfine or make fine. Fin che, vntill, vntill that, whilest that, so far as, so long as. Fin hoggi, vntill this day, till to day. Fine, a fine, an ende, vntill, euen, whilest, the successe or end of a thing. Finemente, finely. Finentro, euen within, so far as in, verie in. Finestra, as Fenestra. Finestrare, as Fenestrare. Finestraro, as Fenestraro. Finestrata, as Fenestrata. Finestrella, as Fenestrella. Finestreuole, as Fenestreuole. Finestroso, as Fenestroso. Finezza, finenes. Also craftines. Fingardaggine, as Infingardaggine. Fingardare, as Infingardire. Fingardigia, as Infingardaggine. Fingardo, as Infingardo. Fingere, fingo, finsi, finto, to faine, to dis∣semble, to counterfait, to forge. Fingimento, a faining, dissembling, coun∣terfaiting or forging. Fingitore, a fainer, a dissembler, a coun∣terfaiter, a forger. Finire, nisco, finito, to ende, to finish, to accomplish, to make an end. Finimento, an ending, a finishing, a con∣clusion. Finita, an end, a fine, a finishing. Finito, finished, ended, accomplished. Finito il vespro delle voci, talke being ended. Fin lá, thitherto, so far as that. Fin qui, hitherto, euen to this place. Fino, fine, subtill, craftie. Also vntill, whilst, euen, so far as. Finocchiare, to enfennell. Also to flatter to cog, to foist, to claw, as we say. Finocchio, the herbe fennell. Looke Dare finocchio. Finocchio marino, sampier growing vpon rockes. Finta, a faining, an offer, a profer to doe any thing. Finto, fained, dissembled, counterfaited, forged. Fio, a fee, a penaltie, a rent, a tribute, a for∣fet, a fine, an amercement. In Lumbard Italian for Figlio, a sonne, a child. Fioccaggio, Fioccatura, tasslings, bu∣shes, tuffes or lockes of haire or wooll or silke. Fioccare, to flake, to snow, to betassell, to hang with tassels or buttons or tuffes. Fiocco, a tassel, a button, a locke or bush of haire, a flake, a flocke or tuffe of wooll. Also hoarse or saint. Fioccone, a great tassell, bush, locke, flake or tuffe of any thing. Fiocare, to burst out or breake out in lan∣guishing or weeping. Also to bee hoarse. Also to betassell. Fiocino, a yoong cluster of grapes begin∣ning to grow. Fioco, faint, wearie, hoarse, weake. Fiolca, a kind of sea crab called a frill. Fiomba, a slinge. Fiombino, a slinger. Fionda, a slinge to hurle withall. Fiondare, to slinge or cast with a slinge. Fiondaro, a maker of slings. Fiondatore, a slinger. Fioramuzzi, flourishing or budding loues, effeminat wantons. Fioraranci, Orenge flowers. Fiorata, flowrie, a thing to die blew with∣all. Fior belle piantate, grasse flower-de∣luce. Fiore, a flower, a prime, a beginning, a blossome, vsed as Boccata, a flow∣ret. Fior campese, blew-bottle, corne-flower or hurt-sickle. Fior del sole, a marie golde or sunne∣flower. Fior di latte, creame, the creame of milke. Fior di notte, blew bind-weed. Fior di primauera, the daizie flower. Fior d'ognimese, a mariegold or rud. Fior di ligi, flower-de-lis, flower-de∣luce. Fior sole, a sun-flower or mariegold. Fior velluto, the flower gentle. Fiorrancio, a robin-red-breast. Also orenge flowers. Some take it for a wren. Fioreggiante, flowring, flourishing. Fioreggiare, to flower, to flourish, to blos∣some, to flourish or set a faire show vpon any thing. Fiorente, flourishing, flowrie. Fioretti, little flowers, flowrets. Also flou∣rishings or quauering vpon any musi∣call instruments or running vpon them. Also a kind of course silke called foret or ferret silke. Also foiles to play at rapier and dagger with. Fiori, flowers or flowrets. Also clubs at cards. Fiorifero, flourishing, bearing flowers. Fiorina, the chiefest railer or scoulde in a parish. Fiorino, a gilder, a florin or kinde of mo∣ney so called. Fiorio, a till in a chest. Fiorire, fiorisco, fiorito, to flourish, to
flower, to blossome, to bloome. Fiorita, creame of milke. Also Florie for diers. Fiorito, flowred, blossomed, bloomed, flou∣rished. Fioroni, garlands or chaplets made of flo∣wers. Also great branches in damaske. Fiottate, to flote, hull or waue vpō the sea. Fiotto, Fiotta, the floting or fome of the sea, the eddie or furious stirring or turning of the sea. Firia, a kinde of disease in a mans eares. Firmaglio, as Fermaglio. Firmamento, the firmament. Firmare, as Fermare. Firmezza, firmenes, steddines. Firugelli, silke wormes. Fisamēte, fixedly, earnestly, attentiuely. Fiscale, fiscall, an officer as the Princes attourney generall. Also penall. Fiscare, to confiscate, to condemne, to fine, to aerce. Fiscellare, to plate, to work baskets, frailes or cades of bulrushes, strawe, or osiers. Fiscelle, little baskets of wicker plated and made of bulrushes, straw or osiers, wherein countrey folkes presse their cheeses: and also carie things in them to the market: and also make straw hats of them: also frailes or wickers as they put figs in. Fiscello, a plating of strawe to make hats withall: or a fraile or wicker as they put cherries in. Also a Bee hiue. Fischietto, Fischetto, as Fiaschetto. Al∣so a little whistle. Fischiare, to whistle, to hisse as serpents. Fischiata, a whistling, a hissing. Fischio, a whistle, a whistling, a hissing, a houting, a shouting, a noise. Fiscina, a kinde of pipe made of a reede. Fisco, the princes treasurie or exchequer, where all penalties and amercements are paid. Fisculo, a basket or fraile, or wicker for fruite. Fisetro, a kinde of sea fish. Fisica, phisicke. Also the Arte or science of naturall things, or naturall philosophie. Fisicare, to be snappish, captious, or car∣ping, to take pepper in the nose for eue∣rie strawe, to seeke a knot in a rush. Al∣so to practise phisicke, or take medicines. Fisicale, physicall, medicinable. Also ac∣cording to naturall philosophie. Fisicoso, a snappish, carping, captious fellowe, that for a wagging of a strawe will picke a quarrell, one that will ra∣ther loose his freend then his iest. Fisico, a phisition, phisical. Also a naturall philosopher. Fisiologica, naturale medicina.   Fisionomia, the arte or rule to knowe a mans naturall affection by his visage, physiognomie. Fisionomista, one that professeth physi∣ognomie. Fiso, fixed, fast, earnest, driuen in. Fisolara, Fisolera, as Fisoliera. Fisoliera, a pinnace, a litle fliebote, a scou∣ting bote, a light barge. Fison, golde according to Alchimistes phrases. Fisonomia, as Fisionomia. Fisonomista, as Fisionomista. Fissare, to fixe, to driue in, to fasten vnto, to ioine vnto, to scout. Fisso, fixed, driuen, earnest, fast, shut, ioy∣ned vnto. Fissura, Fessura, a chinke, a cleft, a creuise, a hole. Fistera, a kinde of great fish. Fistiare, to whistle, to hisse. Fistio, a whistle, a hisse. Fistola, a spigot, a tap or cocke for a con∣duit. Also an impostumation or run∣ning sore called a fistula, bicause it gro∣weth in length like a pipe. Looke Cassia fistola. Also a pipe. Fistolare, to grow to a fistula, to infistulate Fistolatione, an infistulation. Fistolo, a hobgoblin, a hag, a sprite, a ro∣bin-goodfellow, a hodge-pocher. Fistula, as Fistola. Fistulare as Fistolare. Fistulatione, as Fistolatione. Fistulo, as Fistolo. Fiteuma, a kinde of herbe. Fitta, a thrust, a foine, a push, a punch. Al∣so hard wouen. Fittagione, a letting, a farming. Also a lease for any land, or indenture of let∣ting, a demising. Fittauoli, Fittaruoli, tenants, farmers, or such as take land to rent. Fittare, to let, to rent, to farme, to hire, to demise. Fittatore, a renter, a farmer, a landlorde, a hirer, a demiser or letter of land. Fittile, earthen, or made of earth. Fittione, a fiction, a dissembling, faining or inuention. Fittitio, fained, dissembled, counterfaite, false, made by arte, not naturall. Fitto, fixed, driuen in, pedg in, fast, close, shut. Also obstinate, earnest, wilfull, stubborne, stedfast. Also the rent, fine, or tribute a man payeth for a house or land. Also fained, or supposed. Fitto merigio, highnoone, midday. Fittonessa, a witch, an enchantresse. Fittonico, bewitched, charmed. Also as Fittitio. Fiumara, Fiumana, a riuer, a fludde, a streame. Fiume, a riuer, a flud. Fiumenale, fluuiall, waterie, fennie, ma∣rishe. Fiumarella, Fiumaretta, as Fiumetto. Fiumetto, Fiumicello, a little riuer, a brooke. Fiutare, to smell, to sent. Fiutarino, a blood-hound, a senter, a sen∣ting dogge. Fiutino, a little flute. Fiuto, a sent, a smell. Also a flute. Flaccido, weake, faint, effeminate, droo∣ping. Flagellare, to scourge, to punish, to whip, to plague. Flagellante, scourging, whipping, puni∣shing, plaguing. Flagellatione, a whipping or scourging, a punishing or plaguing. Flagello, a rod, a whip, punishment, a plague, a flaile, a scourge. Flagitio, mischiefe, villanie, vngracious∣nes, a detestable acte. Flagitioso, vngracious, wicked, lewde, or full of mischiefe. Flagrare, to burne, to flame, to scourge. Flamméo, a flame colour. Flammola, the herb trinity, or harts-ease Flauio, Flauo, a bright shining strawe yellow. Flautare, to play vpon a flute. Flauto, a flute, a player vpon a flute. Flebotomia, fleabotomie, or letting of bloud. Flegonite, a stone which being put in wa∣ter seemeth to burne with a great flame. Flemma, flegme, fleame. Flemmatico, Flegmatico, flegmaticke, rewmatick. Flemmone, a winde-gall, a great byle or swelling, an inflammation in the bodie, a great fleame, an hot red inflamma∣tion of bloud. Flessibile, flexible, pliable, gentle, trac∣table, tunable, mutable, vnconstant. Flesso, wept, wailed, whined. Also croo∣ked winding in and out. Flessuoso, crooked, winding in and out. Flétere, fléto, fléssi, flésso, to weepe, to waile, to whine. Fleuma, as Flemma. Fléto, weeping, wailing, whining. Flórido, flourishing, flouring. Floscio, faint, weake, lanke, idle, lazie, drooping. Flotta, a fleete, a nauie of ships. Flottare, as Fluttuare. Flottante, as Fluttuante. Fluente, as Fluido.
Fluere, to flowe, to abound, to come flo∣wing in. Fluenza, fluence, flowing, affluence. Fluida, a kinde of hearbe. Fluido, running as cleare water doth, flowing, running, floting, mouing, flu∣ent, thinne, feeble, weake. Fluire, fluisco, flusso or fluito, to flow as the sea doth. Flussata, a play at cardes called Flush. Flussibile, that may be molten or made to runne, fluxible. Flusso, a flxe. Also a flush in play at cards. Also a laske. Also a flowing, or flow of the water, the currant of the sea. Also fading, or passing away. Flutto, a flood, a storme, a raging sourge or billow, a troublous stirre, pang, or passion. Fluttuare, to waue, to floate, to hull vpon the sea, to fleete, to rise in waues or sourges, to be boistrous as the sea doth. Fluttuante, Fluttante, floting, wauing, hulling, flowing, fleeting, sourging, pas∣sionate, vnquiet. Fluttuoso, floating, wauing, hulling, that which is fleeting or flowing, as Flut∣tuante. Fluuiale, fluuiall, waterish, fennie, mar∣rish, that which is of the riuer, or per∣taining to the riuer. Fluuio, a floud, a riuer, a streame. Fò, or Faccio, of the verbe Fare, I do or make. Foca, a fish, called a sea calfe. Focaccia, any kinde of cake. Focaia, fierie, that hath fire in it. Focale, a harth, or chimnie. Focare, to burne, to fire, to seare, to cau∣terize, to neale mettals. Focarello, a harth or chimnie. Focarone, a great fier, a bonfire. Foce, the mouth of a riuer, the closing of vallies, a hole, a ditch, and also the gul∣let of ones throte, an out let into the sea. Foci, vsed for Fauce. Focile, a steele to strike fire, a tinder∣boxe. Also the name of a certaine bone in the armes. Focina, a forge, a smithes forge, a worke∣mans shop. Foco, fire, the element fire. Focolare, Foccolare, a harth, a chimney Focone, a great fire. Also a furnace of earth to keepe fire, and to be remoued, a barbers fyer pan. Focoso, hote, burning, ardent, firie, glo∣wing hote, red hote. Also testie. Fódera, a lining, a scabberd, a sheath. Foderare, to lyne a garment. Foderaro, a scaberd, a sheath-maker. Foderetta, a pillowbeere. Fódero, a scaberd or sheath. Fodra, as Fódera. Fodrare, as Foderare. Fodraro, as Foderaro. Fodretta, a pillowbeere. Fodrighetta, a pillowbeere. Fodro, as Fódero. Foga, for fuga, a flight, or running away. Fogaccia, a cake, a cheese-cake. Fogacciera, a cake-maker. Fogamento, a drowning, a smothering, stifeling or choking. Fogare, to drowne, choake, smother or stifle, to put to flight. Foggia, a fashion, a maner, a guise, a sort, a kinde, an vse, custome. Foggiare, to fashion, shape, vse, custome, or to follow a fashion. Foggiatore, a fashioner, a shaper, a follo∣wer of a fashion. Foglia, a leafe, a sheete, a foile to set vn∣der precious stones, a blade of grasse. Also a flaw in any iron worke. Also a purce in gibrish or pedlars french. Also a foile vnder a looking glasse. Fogliami, all manner of leaues. Also foillage, or branched worke. Fogliare, to leafe, to bud. Also to lay a foile vnder a precious stone. Fogliaruole, a kinde of broadleafed cole∣worts. Fogliata, a kinde of thin light puft paste meate made in Italie. Foglietta, a certaine measure, cruse or pot of wine vsed in Florence. Fogliette, little tender yong leaues. Foglio, a leafe or sheete of paper, a folio. Foglioso, leafie, full of leaues, greene. Also flawie or full of flawes. Fogna, an interiection of contempt, as we say fogh. Also carrion, or baggage stuffe, filth, a cōmon shore, iakes or sinke. Fohonello, a bird called a Linnet. Foi, deceitfull, false, fraudulent, wilie. Foia, lustfull, bitchie, salt, filthie, beastlie lecherie. Foiare, to lust for beastly leacherie, to be salt as a bitch. Foietta, a kinde of wyne measure. Foina, a polecat. Some take it for a Ferret. Foiosa, beastly, leacherous, or salt like a bitch. Fola, a fable, a vaine tale, a vanity, a trifle, a toy, a flim flam, a leasing. Folare, to tell tales, to iest, to fable, to trifle, as Follare. Folcire, cisco, cito, to susteine, to vphold, to strengthen, to vnderprop, to set vp. Folcito, susteyned, held vp, strengthened, set vp. Folcitore, a susteiner, an vpholder, a strengthner, a setter vp. Folega, the birde called a Coote. Also a Mooreben or Fenducke, a ducke or mal∣lard. Folgente, shining, fulgent, bright, flaring. Fólgere, folgo, folsi, folgio, to shine, to glister, to brighten, to flare, to blaze, to twinkle. Folgola, the name of a guilders toole. Folgiuto, shined, flared, glistred. Folgorare, to lighten, to shine, to blaze, to flake, to blasten. Folgorante, lightning, shining, blazing, flashing, blasting. Fólgore, a lightning, a shining, a blaze, a flashing, a blasting. Folgoreggiare, as Folgorare. Folice, as Folega. Folio, a folio, a leafe or blade. Also a kind of herbe. Folla, a presse, a throng, a croud, a company of people. Follare, to full, as clothes in a presse, to presse wines. Follata, a seaduck, or moore-hen. Follate, fooleries, foolish tricks. Follatore, a fuller, a presser. Also a presser of wines, a tucker. Folle, a paire of bellowes. Also vain, fond, or foolish. Also a foole, an idiot, a sotte, a gull, a coxcombe. Folleggiare, to play the foole. Folletto, a little foole, a little vaine, sot∣tish, foolish fellow. Also a spirit, a hag, a hobgoblin, a robin-goodfellowe, a hodgepoker, an elfe. Folli, the names of certaine guts in anie bodie. Also taken for the lungs. Follia, follie, fondnes, foolishnes, ouersight, sottishnes. Follica, Folica, as Folega. Follicoli, hollow things in some trees like a little bagge. Also the greene huskes or hose of wheate, the hull, peele or skin in∣closing the seede, or huskes of grapes be∣ing pressed. Folligine, Foligine, the soote or st of a chimney, a darke mist, a fog. Follo, a paire of bellowes, a fulling mill, or a fulling fat. Also an arwig, or arecreeper, a forketaile vermine. Folminare, to flash, to lighten as it doth before thunder. Also to strike with a thunderbolt. Folminante, flashing, lightning. Folmisse, a flashing, a lightning. Also a thunder bolte. Folo, as Follo. Folore, Folone d' acqua, a birde called a blacke-macke, or water zell.
Folo del molino, a mill clapper. Folpo, a fish called a cuttle fish, or pore∣cuttle. Folta, Folto, bushie, thicke, spisse, darke, obsucre, soggie, mistie, duskie, gloomie, also a presse, a throng, or croud of people. Foltamente, bushie, thickly, darkly, fog∣gily, mistily &c. Also throngingly, pressingly, gloomingly. Foltare, to thicken, to bemist, to befogge, to darken, to croude, to presse. Foltezza, thicknes, foggines. Fomentare, to nourish, to comfort, to feed, to foster, to harten with any applicati∣on, to abette. Fomentatione, a fomentation, a comfor∣ting, a feeding with any plaisters ap∣plied to the stomacke, a strengthning with any cordials. Also a nourishment laid to the body to comfort & warme it. Fomentatore, a comforter, a strengthner, a fosterer, a maintainer, an abettor. Fomento, as Fomentatione. Fondaco, a sore-house, a merchants shop, or warehouse. Fondaghiro, a shop or ware-house kee∣per, a merchants factour. Fondamentale, fundamentall, that hath or is a ground or foundation. Fundamento, a grounde, a foundation, a building. Fondare, to found, to ground, to settle, to lay a foundation, to build. Fondatore, a founder or layer of any foundation, a builder. Fondello, little circles made of brasse or osiers to lay vnder dishes, as they vse in Germany to saue the cloth from fouling. Fóndere, fondo, fondéi, fonduto, to melt, to cast, to confound, to sound met∣tals, to vndoo, to thawe. Fondico, as Fondaco. Fondigli, tappings of wine, lees or dregs, or groūds in the bottom of pots or glasses. Fondime, the dregs, lees, or groundes of wine. Fonditore, a founder, a melter, a casier. Fonditura, Fondura, a melting, a casting, a founding, a thawing. Fondo, a bottome, a ground, a foundation, a depth, a deepe or dungeon. Also a mans wealth, stocke or sate. Fondola, a fish called a Loche. Fonduto, melted, caste, confounded, foun∣ded as metals be, thawed, vndone. Fonghini, little mushrums, or srothes growing in the fields. Fongo, a mushrum, a todestoole. Also a sea fish so called. Also a kinde of winde∣gall in a horse. Fongoso, full of mushrums, or todestoles. Also spungie. Fontana, a fountaine, a well, a spring. Fontanaccio, a bogge, a quag-mire, a continuall slowe of water. Fontanella, Fontanetta, a little foun∣taine. Also the roweling of a horse. Fonte, a source, a spring, a fountaine, a well, a grounde, a beginning, a fount. Fontego, as Fondaco. Fora, foorth, out, excepted, abroad. Also an anger, a borer, a piercer, or wimble. Also when it comes of the verbe Essere, for Sarebbe▪ he should be; and is ra∣ther vsed in verse then in prose. Forabosco, a birde called a Wood-pecker. Also a sneaking prying busie sellowe. Foracchiare, to bore, to pierce. Foragna, a fish called a Loche. Forame, a hle. Also taken for the arse. Foramello, a nice, cie, squeamish fellow, that will finde fault with euerie man, and neuer be pleased with any thing, but still be prating and haue an are in others mens matters. Forare, to bore, to pierce. Forasiepe, a little birde called a Wren. Foratoio, an anger, a borer, a piercer. Foratore, a borer, a piercer. Forbici, cizers, sheares, tailers sheares. Looke Fare forbici. Looke Zoccoli zoccoli. Forbiciaro, a maker of cizers or sheares. Forbicini, Forbicette, little prettie ci∣zers or sheares. Forbire, bisco, bito, to furbish, to rub, to make cleere, to clense, to wipe. Forbito, furbished, rubd, spruse, fine, neat, craftie. Forbitoio, a wiper, a rubber, a furbishing iron. Forbitore, a wiper, a rubber, &c. a srub∣ber of blades. Forbottare, to spoile, to waste, to hauocke, to raze. Forca, a gibbet, a gallowes. Also a wagge or haltersacke. Also a haie-sorke. Forcabile, fit for the gallowes, or to be hanged vp. Forcare, to hange on the gallowes, or to make like a forke, to vnderprop. Forcarie, knauish, gallowes trickes, ra∣scalities. Forcata, the mouth of the stomacke. Forcaro, a gallowes or sorkemaker, an vnderpropper. Forche, the gallowes. as Fare le forche. Forchebene, a knaue fit for the gallowes. Forcheggiare, to hang dangling, to plaie the hang man. Forchetta, a little gibbet, a hempe-wre∣ster. Also a little gallowes. Forchette, little forkes, or vnderprops, or musket rests. Also the barres, trailes, or vizarde of a helmet or caske. Force, a paire of tongs or mullets, or pin∣cers. Forcella, a little forck: also a muskets rest. Forcella della vite, an vnderprop to hold vp vines. Forcellare, to vnderprop with forkes. Forciare, to make like a forke. Also to en∣force, to compell, to constraine. Forciere, as Forziere. Forchetta, a disease in a horse called the running frush. Also as Forcella. Forcola, the place where the oares staie when the watermen rowe. Also a mus∣kettiers reste. Forcone, a great forke, a great gallowes, a roguing fellow. Forcuto, forked, or the mouth of the sto∣macke. Fore, foorth, out, abroade, without. Forense, forraine. Also pertaining to the common place, vsed in pleading. Foresana, Foretozza, as Foresosa. Forese, Foresano, a forreiner, a stranger, an alien, a countrey swaine, a clowne. Foresennato, madde, out of his wits, or sencelesse. Foresosa, Foresetta, a countrie wench, a countrie lasse. Foresta, a forrest. Forestaro, a forrester, a woodman. Forestiere, a stranger, an alien, or for∣rainer, a seen. Foretta, a pillow-beare for a pillow. Forfecchie, a kinde of biting flies. Forfici, sheares, cizers, tailers sheares. Looke Fare forfici. Forficette, little cizers or sheares. Forficini, little cizers or sheares. Looke Fare forfici. Forfante, as Furfante. Forfantare, as Furfantare. Forfantarie, as Furfanterie. Forfecchie, a kind of earth worme. Fórfora del capo, the dandraffe or scurf that comes on the head. Also a kinde of waight. Forgia, a forge, it is also vsed for Foggia. Forgiare, to forge, to frame, as Foggiare. Forgiatore, a forger, a framer. Forica, a common draught, sinke or iakes. Foricario, a iakes or goong sar mer. Forichetta, as Forchetta. Foriere, a harbinger for a camp or prince. Forma, a forme, a manner, a fashion, an order, a method, a custome, an vse. Also a modell, a draught, a pattern, an intro∣duction. Also a cheese presse, a piece or whole cheese. Also the last of a shooe.
Also a mould or frame of any thing. Forma d'huomo, gold, according to al∣chimists phrases. Formaggio, cheese. Also a whole cheese. Formaggiare, as Informaggiare. Formaggiaro, a cheesemonger. Formaggiata, a matter or discourse of cheese. Formaggiera, a cheese maker. also a place to keepe cheese in. also a cheese presse. Formaglio, a shoomakers last. Formale, formall, orderly. Formalita, formality, ceremoniousnes. Formare, to forme, to fashion, to order, to accustom, to vse, to institute, to shapen. Formatione, a forming, a formation, a shaping. Formatore, a former, fashioner, &c. Forme, as Formella. Also a swelling a∣bout the pasterns ioint. Formella, a swelling at the corner of the horses hoofe being ouermuch trauelled when the horse was yoong. Formentaccio, a kinde of tart made of wheat. Formentada, houshold, common, cheat or wheaten bread. Also a kinde of potage which we call formentie. Formentaro, a meale or wheatman. Formento, wheat: also any kind of corne. Formentone, a kind of formentie potage or a kind of wheat. Formica, an emmet or an ant, a pissemire. Also a raging euill, the shingles or run∣ning worme. Formicare, to swarme or creepe as thicke as emmets or ants or pissemires. Formicaro, Formicaio, a neast of em∣ments, ants or pissemires. Fomicatione, a pricking of warts or ring-wormes in ones bodie, an itching, a crawling. Formichino passo, a slow pace as a pisse∣mire maketh. Formicola, a bird called a wrinecke. Some take it for a hickway. Formicolatione, as Formicatione. Formicone, a great ant or emmet. Also a traftie sneaking companion. Formicoso, full of emmets or ants or pisse∣mires. Formidabile, dreadfull, to bee feared, ter∣rible, vndanted. Formidare, to dread, to feare, to daunt, to fright. Formiga, as Formica. Formigare, as Formicare. Formigaio, as Formicaro. Formigone, as Formicone. Formigoso, as Formicoso. Formolo, a mould, a forme, a modell to cast any thing in. Formosità, fairnes, beautie, comelines. Formoso, faire, beautifull, comely. Formularo, Formulario, a practitioner in the lawe, a writer of processes or writes, a drawer of presidents. Fornace, a furnace, a kill, a lime kill, a glasse house. Fornaciaio, Fornagiaio, a furnace man, a lime man, a kill man, a glasse maker. Fornagiotto, a lime kill or such furnace. Fornaia, Fornara, a shee baker. Fornaio, Fornaro, a baker of bread. Fornasaro, a glasse maker, a furnacer, a lime man, a kill man. Fornase, as Fornace. Fornata, an ouen full or a batche of bread, a baking. Fornello, a litle ouen or little furnace, a kind of racke or torture or little ease. Fornetto, as Fornello. Fornicare, to commit fornication. Fornicatione, fornication. Fornicatore, Fornicario, a fornicator. Fornicatrice, a whore, a woman that commits fornication. Fornire, fornisco, fornito, to furnish, to adorne, to be autifie, to decke, to dight, to store, to perfect, to supply. Also to gar∣nish, to trap. Also to accomplish, to pro∣uide. Also to ende, to finish, to make an end, to dispatch. Fornimenti, furnishings, ornaments, beau∣tifyings, deckings, dightings, supplies, strings, garnishments, trappings, ac∣complishments, prouisions, furnitures, embellishings, caparisons. Forniscila, dispatch it. Fornito, furnished, adorned, beautified, decked, stored, supplied, perfited, garni∣shed, dight, trapped, accōplished, proui∣ded. also ended, don, finished, dispatched. Fornitore, a furnisher, adorner, supplier, storer, garnisher, accōplisher or prouider Forno, an ouen or a furnace. Fóro, a market place. Also a court or iudg∣ment seat. Also a hole or the bore of a canon or musket. Foroncolo, a kinde of swelling or bile or pimple in the bodie. Forore, furie, rage, outrage, madnes. Forosetta, as Foresosa. Forsanello, a kind of bird. Forse, perhaps, by chance, by hap, perad∣uenture. Forsennaria, madnes, priuation of wit. Forsennato, mad, out of his wits or right∣sences. Forte, strong, fortified, aloud, high, fast, much, greatly, sowre, hard, stout, stur∣dy, tough. Fortezza, a fortresse, a fort, a towre, a keepe, a castle, a skonce, a citadell. Also a bulwarke, a strength, a blockhouse, a hold. Also fortitude, power, strength, force, valour. Forticello, somewhat strong. Fortificare, to fortifie, to strengthen. Fortificatione, fortification. Fortificatore, a fortifier, an enginer. Fortitudine, fortitude, strēgth, force, valor Fortino, rammishnes, sowrenes, rancknes in taste or smell. Fortore, a damp, a smell, a stenche; name∣ly of the stomacke when one belcheth. Fortuito, casuall, by chance or hap. Fortuna, a storme, a tempest, ill weather at sea. Also fortune, chance, hap, lot, good or bad hazard or aduenture. Fortunale, a storme or tempest. Also casu∣all or accident all. Fortunato, fortunate, happie. Fortunesimo, fortunatnes, happie lucke or chance. Fortuneuole, fortunate, luckie, happie. Fortunio, a chance, a casualty. Fortunoso, fortunat, happie, luckie. Foruiare, to stray or wāder out of the way. Forza, force, power, strength, might, abili∣tie, meanes, authoritie, constraint, com∣pulsion. Forsanelle, a kind of foule or bird. Forzare, to force, to rauish, to rape, to vrge, to constraine, to compell. Forzatamente, 'forciblie, perforce. Forzeuole, forcible, strongly. Forzina, a little forke. Forziere, a chest, a forcet, a coffin, a cas∣ket, a cabinet. Forzierino, a little chest, a little coffine. Forzoso, strong, hardy, daring, sturdie, tough, forcible, of force. Forzuto, as Forzoso. Fosca, Fosco, duskie, gloomie, darke, thicke, mistie, lowring, foggie, of a dun, or swart colour, dim. Foscare, to darkē, to thicken, to be miste, to fog. Foscina, as Focina. Foscio, as Fosca, or Fosco. Fossa, a ditch, a dike, a graue, a pit, a trench Fossame, all kinde of ditches or trenches. Fossamenti, dikes, trenchings, diggings, graues, pits. Fossare, to dig or make ditches, or trenches, to mote about. Fossatello, Fossolo, a little ditch, graue or pit, a mote about a house. Fossato, digged or made in a trench, ditch or dike, a pit, a ditch, a dyke, a graue. Also moted about, or a mote. Fossetta, Fossicella, a little ditch, a little graue or little pit. Fossettine, little dimples or holes in fine
womens cheekes or chins. Fossina, as Fossetta. Also a long pole to bob fore eles. Fosso, a ditch, a dike, a pit, a trench, a caue. a graue, a dell. Fossolare, as Fossare. Fossole, a kinde of disease in a mans eies Also as Fossetta. Fottarie, iapings, sardings, swiuings, fuc∣kings. Fottente, occupying. Also an occupier. Fóttere, fotto, fottei, fottuto, to iape, to sard, to fucke, to swiue, to occupy. Fotterigia, a crampe fish. Fottisterij, baudie or vauting houses. Also occupyers or baudie fellowes. Fottitrice, a woman fucker, swiuer, sar∣der, or iaper. Fottitore, a iaper, a sarder, a swiuer, a fucker, an occupier. Fottitura, a iaping, a swiuing, a fucking, a sarding, an occupying. Fottiuenti, windefuckers, stamels. Fottura, as Fottitura. Fottuto, iaped, occupied, sarded, swiued, suckt. Fra, betweene, betwixt, among, amongst. Also a fryer. Fra mé, with, or betweene my selfe. Fra quanto? in what space? Fra qui, here away, betweene here. Fra tanto, in the meane while, whilest. Fraccare, to bruse, to batter, to crush, to make flat. Fraccuradi, a kinde of game or play in Italie. Also toyes, iests, fooleries, trifles, fopperies. Fracassare, to teare, to rent in peeces, to bruze, to breake, to batter, to destroy, to hauock. Fracasso, a tearing, renting, broozing or breaking to peices: also a destructiō, a ha¦uock, a hurlibury, a breaking, a wrack. Fracidire, fracidisco, fracidito, to rot, to corrupt, to putrifie. Frácido, rotten, corrupted, putrifide, wearied, cloyed. Fracidume, rottennes, corruption, putre∣faction. Also importunitie, trouble, vexation of or with words. Fradiciare, to tyre, to wearie. Also looke Fracidire. Fradiccio, weary, tyred: also as Fracido. Fradicciume, as Fracidume. Also wea∣rines. Fraga, a strawberrie. Fragara, a strawberrie woman. Fragaria, the hearbe bearing strawberies, or strawberie bush. Fragata, a strawberie plot. Frágile, fraile, corruptible, weake, brittle. Fragilità, frailtie, corruption, bricklenes, weakenes. Fragitide, the twelue great veines appea∣ring on each side of the neck. Fragmento, a fragment or sharde. Fragnere, as Frangere. Frago, a fish called in latine Pagrus. Fragola, a strawberie. Fragolara, a strawberie woman. Fragolata, a strawberie plot. Also as Fa∣giolata. Fragolino, a fish so called in Rome, in la∣tine Erithinus, some thinke it to be the gurnet and rotchet. Fragore, a noise, a cracke causing terror or fright, a crashing, a cracking, a clat∣tering, as of things broken in sunder. Fragranza, a fragrancy or sweet smelling. Fragrare, to cracke violently causing ter∣ror. Also to cast a sweete smell. Frainténdere, tendo, tesi, teso, to haue intelligence one betweene another, to heare and vnderstand very well, vsed also to misunderstand. Frainteligenza, intelligence betweene one another, enterintelligence. Also misun∣derstanding. Fraintenditore, one that hath intelligence between others. Also a misunderstāder. Frainteso, vnderstanding or hauing in∣telligence, or that had intelligence with another. Also misunderstoode. Frale, Fralo, as Fragile. Fralla, as Frulla. Framéttere, metto, misi, messo, to in∣terpose, to intermit. Framesso, intermitted, interposed. Framettitore, an intermitter, an inter∣poser. Frammenti, Fragmenti, fragments, scraps, peeces. Framponato, a kinde of high horse shooe, such as the bruers horses vse in London. Franare, to breake, to sunder, to spoile. Francare, to free, to enbolden, to enfran∣chise, to exempt, to endenize. Francatione, an enfranchisement. Francatrippa, a grosse greasie, sullionlike loggerheaded lubberlie foolish fellow. Francese, french, malfrancese, the french pocks. Francesare, to frenchifie. Also to insect with the french disease. Francescani, friers of the order of Saint Francis. Francheggiare, as Francare. Franchezza, freedome, boldnes. Also a sanctuarie, a place of safetie, a libertie, a place of refuge, a frankenes. Franchigia, Franchitia, franchise, free∣dome, boldnes, a place of refuge or safe∣tie, a sanctuarie, a libertie, a priuiledge, an immunitie. Franchigiare, as Francare. Franciosare, as Francesare. Francioso, as Francese. Franco, franke, free, bold, vnrespectiue, liberall, exempt, endenized. Francolina, a daintie bird called a good∣wit. Some also take it for a moore hen, others for a seasant pout. Frangenti, fragments, ruptures, hurly∣burlies, squarings. Frángere, frango, fransi, franto, to breake, to broose, to shiuer, to batter, to riue, to crush, to splint. Frangia, Franza, a fringe. Frangiare, Franzare, to fringe. Frangibile, that will or may be broken, brittle. Frangitore, a breaker, a bruzer. Fragna, may breake, brooze, craze or batter. Frangolino, as Fragolino. Franguello, as Frenguello. Also as Francolina. Frantendere, as Fraintendere. Franto, broken, broozed, shiuered, bat∣tered, braide, or stamped. Fraolino, as Fragolino. Frappa, a bragge, a boast, a crake, a vaunt, a conycatching trick. Frappare, to bragge, to boast, to crake, to vaunt, to deceiue, to conicatch. Also to iagge, to snip, to cut as garments be. Also to teare, to hale, to tug, to drag a∣long the ground. Frappatore, a bragger, a boaster, a cra∣ker, a vaūter, a conycatcher, a bragart. Frappatura, a bragge, a boast, a crake, a vaunt, a conycatching trick. Frappe, fringes, embroderings, gardings, lacings. Also cuttings or iagges, or snips of garments. Fra quanto? in what space? Fra questo mezzo, in the meane while. Frasca, a twigge, a bough, a sprig of any greene leaues. Also a wag, a knaue, a knauish wag. Also a vintners or ale∣house bush or srash. Frascare, to make a booth, bower, or shade of boughes, to branche, to trifle. Frascarie, Frascherie, knaueries, youthly waggish tricks, branches, foolish things. Frascata, a bowre, booth, or shading place, an arbour of boughes, branches, or frash. Frasche, knaueries, waggish or knauish tricks, branches, toyes, vanities. Also shrubs, srashes, bowres, shades made of leaues, boughes, or bushes. Also tat∣tlings, chattings, or idle words. Frascheggiare, as Frascare, and also to play the knaue, to trifle, to raue, to chat.
Fraschetta, a little wagge, a little knaue. Also little bough, a branchlet. Also the name of a toole that printers vse. Fraschetto, a seamans whistle. Fraschiere, a wagge, a knaue, a varlet, a toyish foolish fellow. Frascone, a great bough. Also a great fil∣thie knaue, a trifler. Frassinella, the herbe Polipodie, or oke∣ferne. But some Herbals take it for Sa∣lomons Seale or Whitewoort. Some take it for a kinde of bastard Dittanie. Frassinelli, yoong ash trees. Frassino, the tree called ash. Frastagliare, to entercut, to enterfer. Also to falter, to hauocke, to swagger. Frastagliatamente, faultringly, swash∣ingly, helter-shelter, swaggringly. Frastagli, cuts, iags, snips. Frastornare, to turne backe, to diuert. Al∣so to intermit or leaue off. Frastuono, huge roring thunder. Fratacchiare, to plaie the filthy greasie frier. Fratacchione, a filthy, fat, greasie, idle frier. Frataccio, as Fratacchione. Frataia, a friers leman, a friers wench. Fratarsi, to become a frier. Frataria, the crue or order of friers, frier∣hood. Also a frierie. Fratarie, frierish tricks. Frate, a frier, a brother. Fratellanza, a brotherhood. Fratello, a brother. Fratello cugino, a cosengermane. Fratelleuole, brotherlike. Fratelmó, my brother. Fraterna, a frierie, a brotherhood. Fraternale, brotherly, pertaining to, or of a brother. Fraternità, fraternitie, brotherhood. Frateria, a frierie, a brotherhood, a frater∣nitie. Fratesco, frierish, frierlike. Also a gray or ash colour. Fratérno, brotherly, or belonging to a bro∣ther, fraternall. Fraticéllo, a little yoong frier. Fraticida, a murtherer of his brother. Fratino, a little yoong frier, Fratta, a brake, a firbush, a bush, a bram∣ble bush, a brier bush, a hedge or quick-set hedge. Frattione, a fraction, a fracture, a brea∣king, a breach. Fratto, broken, bruzed, crazed, shiuered, battered. Frattura, a rupture, a breaking, a breach, a gall. Fraudare, to defraude, to beguile, to de∣ceiue. Fraude, couine, guile, deceit, fraud. Fraudeuole, fraudulent, guilefull. Fraudolente, Fraudoso, fraudulent, de∣ceitfull. Frauicinanza, an entre-neighborhood. Frauicinare, to border neere among neighbours. Frauicino, an entre-neighbour. Frauolino, a fish so called in Rome, it is our Rochet or Gurnet. Also a robin red∣brest. Frauto, as Flauto. Freccia, an arrow, a shaft, a dart. Frecciare, to shoote arrowes. It is also ta∣ken for to cosen, or to affront a man. Frecciaro, a fletcher, a cosener, a cheater, a conicatcher, a shooter, a darter. Frecciata, a blowe or shot with an arrow, an affront, a conicatching tricke. Frecciatore, as Frecciaro. Freddaccio, a filthie great colde. Freddare, to coole, to take colde, to chill. Fredetto, a little easie colde, chillish. Freddezza, a colde, a chilnes, a coldnes. Freddiglioso, subiect to colde, coldish, fro∣zen, chillie. Freddiccio, coldish, chillie. Freddire, freddisco, freddito, to coole, to take colde, to chill. Freddito, cooled, or taken colde, chilled. Freddo, colde, chill, breme. Also faint, slow or cold. Also a cold. Freddoloso, full of colde, coldish, frozen, chillie. Freddore, a cold, a coldnes, a chilnes. Freddoso, full or subiect to cold, coldish, chillie. Freddorifico, that bringeth or maketh colde. Freddura, a colde, a chilnes, a coldnes. Frega, a catterwalling, or to be proude as cats and bitches be. Looke Andar in frega. Fregagione, rubbing, friging or frica∣tion. Fregare, to rub, to frigle, to frigge, to claw, to fret. Also to chafe with one. Also to cogge and foist, or fasten a iest or gull vpon one. Fregatore, a rubber or clawer. Fregadénti, a rubber for teeth, a tooth∣picker. Frega piatti, a scullion or rubber of dishes Fregaruolo, a fish called a menowe. Fregata, a kinde of ship called a frigat, a pinace, a barge, a fliebote, a brigan∣dine or spiall ship. Fregatino, Freghetra, as Fregata. Fregatura, as Fregagione. Fregiaccio, a filthie scarre, a great ble∣mish or cut in the face. Fregiare, to fringe, to garde, to lace, to adorne or garnish any thing, to border. Also to cut, hacke, wound, hurt, scarre, or gashe any body in the face. Fregiato, fringed, bordred, garded, laced, adorned. also cut, hackt, wounded, scar∣red or gasht in the face. Fregiatamēte, finely, adornedly, as with lace; fringes, or other gardings for or∣naments. Also like vnto marks, scars, gashes, cuts or other mangling in the face. Fregio, a fringe, a garde, a lace, a bor∣der, a welt, embroderie, ornament or garnishment about any garment. Also a cut, a hurt, a cicatrice, a marke, a gash, a wounde, a scarre, or such a slash ouer ones face. Fregna, a womans or beasts priuie parts. Also the smell of a salt bitch, a quaint as Chaucer cals it. Fregola, a crum or little peece, a mam∣mocke. Also lust or catterwalling. Fregolare, to crum, to crumble, to mam∣mocke, to moulder. Also to go a cat∣terwalling. Fregolatura, a cruming, a crumbling, a mouldring. Fregole, crums. Also toyish or foolish hu∣mours imitated of others. Frego torto, an errour in any writing or reckoning. Fregona, a whelping bitch. Freguente, as Frequente. Frémere, frémo, freméi, fremuto, to rore, to bray, to ruffle, to rage, to rum∣ble, to shoute, to royne as a lyon, to gnash the teeth. Fremitare, as Fremere. Frémito, fremóre, a roring, a raging, a rumbling, a braying, a shouting or ruf∣fling noise as the sea maketh, the roa∣ring or royning of a lyon. Freménte, roaring, braying, raging, ruf∣ling, royning, rumbling. Fremuto, rored, braied, royned as a lyon, rumbled, shouted. Frenare, to refraine, to restraine, to bri∣dle, to curbe, to snaffle. Frendire, disco, dito, to grunt as a hogge, to grumble. Frendito, grunted, grumbled, as a wilde bore. Also a grunting, a grumbling. Frenello, a curbe for a bridle. Also little crispes of haire for womens heads, or headbands. Also a little bridle or a lit∣tle bit, or a little snaffle. Frenesia, frenzie, or rauing, or madnes. Freneticare, to raue or be frenzie. Frenético, mad, franticke, rauing.
Frenguellare, to chat, to prate, to tattle. Frenguello, a goldfinch, a lobfinch, a chaf∣finch, a spinke or shaldepile. Also as Francolina. Frenguello montano, a birde called a brambing. Frenire, nisco, nito, to grunt, to grum∣ble. Frenito, grunted, grumbled. Freno, a bridle, a curb, a restraint, a bit. Frequentare, to frequent, to haunt, to peo∣ple, to woon. Frequentatione, frequencie, hanting, con∣uersation. Frequénte, frequent, populous, hanting, oftentimes. Frequentia, as Frequentatione. Freri, harbingers for a campe or for princes courts. Freschezza, freshnes, newnes, sweetnes, greennes, coldnes, coolnes. Fresco, fresh, new, vnsalt, coole, cold, green, sweet, newlaid, sound, lustie. Frescoline, little, yoong, fresh, new. Frescolino, a fine pleasant coolenes. Fresone, course frize rug or home spun∣cloth. Fressora, a frying pan. Fressorare, to frie. Fretia, the name of a colour that painters vse. Freto, a narrow sea or a streit betweene two lands. Fretta, haste, speed. Frettare, to hasten, to make speed, to dis∣patch, to speede. Frettoloso, hastie, quicke, speedie, nimble. Frezza, as Freccia. Frezzare, as Frecciare. Frezzaro, as Frecciaro. Frezzata, as Frecciata. Frezzoloso, as Frettoloso. Fricassea, a kinde of fried minced meat v∣sed in France. Fricciare, to pricke forwarde, to frig, to wriggle, to tickle. Friccioso, frigging, wrigling, pricking, tickling. Friére, a harbinger for a campe or a prince. Also an hoste or inholder. It is vsed by Bocace for a fryer or a brother. Frigere, to vrge or molest with words. Friggere, friggo, frissi, fritto, to frie in a pan. Frigidità, coldnes, cold, coolenes. Frigido, cold, coole. Frigio, a kind of soft moldring stone. Also a melodie or tune wherein seemed to be a deuine furie. Frignoccola, a filip or flurt with ones fin∣gers. Frignoccolare, to filip or flurt with the fingers. Frigulare, to crie as a cuckoe doth. Frilingotti, a kinde of daintie chewet or minced pie. Fringuellare, as Frenguellare. Fringuello, as Frenguello. Frimfri, Frinfri, sudden foolish, fond, head∣long humours, violent toyes or fancies. Frinire, nisco, nito, to creake or cry as grashoppers do. Frinzone, Frinsone, a greene finch. Fripparo, a fripper, as our brokers be, that sell old clothes. Fripperia, the place where old clothes sel∣lers dwell, a fripperie. Frisa, the stuffe called frize. Frisaccia, filthie course frize or rug. Frisada, a kind of stuffe called, frizado. Frisare, to frize, to cotton, to set a nap. Also as Fregiare. Frisaro, a frize-maker, a rug-maker. Frisetta, Frisella, verie fine frize or nap∣pie cloth which we call peni-stone or cot∣ton. Also a kind of frizado. Frisigna, a sow pig, a hoglouse, a wherle for a spindle. Friso, as Fregio. Frisoggia, a frying pan. Frisone, a Frizeland horse. Also a rough hairie garment. Also a Frizeland man. Also course thicke frize. Also the stuffe we call rug. Also as Frusone. Friscolo, a mill hopper. Also a fraile for figs or such other things. Fritone, a fish called in latin Lacerta. Fritelaca, as Menta greca. Fritta, a kinde of composition to make Ve∣nice glasses with. Frittata, a tansie fride, a pancake, a fraise. Frittare, to frie in a pan. Frittellare, to make fritters or pancakes or tansies. Frittelle, Frittole, fritters, pancakes. Fritt fritt, as we say cricket a wicket. Look Fare fritt fritt. Fritto, fried in a frying pan. Frittura, a frying. Friuolare, to make voide, vaine or friuo∣lous. Friuolo, friuolous, vaine, voide. Frizza, as Freccia. Frizzante, shrill, quauering, frisking, sharpe, tarte or smacking in taste, as a briske cup of wine. Frizzare, to frie, to quauer vpon any in∣strument, to friske. Also to breake, to bruise, to crush, to squash, to spurt as wine doth being powred into a glasse. Froda, frode, frodo, fraud, deceit, guile. Frodare, to defraud, to deceiue, to beguile. Frodatore, a defrauder, a deceiuer, a be∣guiler. Frodolente, fraudulent, deceitfull, guile∣full. Frodolentia, fraud, deceit, guile. Froghe, Froge, the nosthrils. Froire, froisco, froito, as Fruire. Froitione, as Fruitione. Frole, tender, mortified, short, as they make flesh with hanging it in the aire. Frollare, to mortifie meat, to make it ten∣der and short. Frollatura, a mortifying, or making meat tender or short. Frollire, lisco, lito, as Frollare. Frollo, mortified, short, tender with hang∣ing in the aire. Fromba, Frombola, a slinge. Frombare, to hurle in a slinge. Frombata, a cast or blow, or throw with a slinge. Frombatore, a slinger. Frombolare, to hurle in a slinge. Frombolata, as Frombata. Frombolatore, a slinger, a thrower in a sling. Fromentaria, pertaining to corne. Fromento, wheate. Also any kinde of corne. Fromentata, as Formentata. Fronda, a sling or green bough or branch. Frondare, to sling, to bud leaues, to branche. Frondata, a blow with a sling, a throw with a sling. Also a branching. Frondatore, one that casteth in a sling. Fronde, greene leaues or boughes, or bran∣ches, or bloomes, or blossomes. Frondeggiante, budding forth leaues, branching, blooming, blossoming. Frondeggiare, to bud forth leaues, to branch, to bloome, to blossome. Frondifero, bearing greene leaues, leafie, branchie, blossomie, bloomie. Frondola, a sling, a little branche or bough. Frondolare, to cast in a sling. Frondolata, a cast, blow, or throw with a sling. Frondolatore, one that casteth in a sling, a slinger. Frondoloso, Frondoso, full of greene leaues, leafie, branchie, blossoming, blooming. Frontaccia, a filthie front or broad for∣head. Frontale, a forhead peece, or headband, a frontstall or a bridle, a square as women weare on their heads, a frontlet. Frontamento, a fronting a confronting. Frontare, to front, to confront, to meete
face to face. Frontatore, a fronter, a confronter. Fronte, a front, a forhead, a brow, the space or forefront of a squadron or battell. Also the forepart of a wall or bulwarke. Fronteggiare, to frontire, to border neere, to front, to confront. Frontespicio, the forefront of the house. Frontiera, a frontier or bounding place. Also a defence, a ditch, a trench. Also a hedge, an empaling, a skonce, a forte, a bastion. Frontino, a little prettie forhead. Frontino, was the name of Rugiero his horse named by Ariosto; but now we take it for a saucie, malapert, impu∣dent, shamelesse companion, whose brow will not blush. Frontoso, one that hath a broad and high forhead. Fronza, the stalkes of colewoorts. Fronzale, a kinde of frounzing or orna∣ment about a womans head or haire. Fronzare, to stalke or bud, or sprig forth with leaues or boughes. Also to frounze. Fronzuto, stalkie, buddie, spriggie, leafie, full of boughes, frounzed. Frotta, a troupe, a companie, a shole, a multitude. Frottare, to flocke in troupes, to gather to∣gether in companies and multitude. Al∣so to rub or claw or frig. Frottola, a countrie gigge, or round, or countrie song, or wanton verse. Frottolare, to sing gigges, rounds, coun∣trie songs, or wanton verses. Fruanza, a wearing out or consuming of any thing. Fruare, to weare out, or consume with wearing. Frucare, as Frugare. Frucatore, an iron furbishing toole, a rubber, a polisher. Also a toole that founders vse. Frugacciare, to rush vp and downe. Also to grope or fumble. Frugale, frugall, neere, sparing, thrif∣tie. Frugalità, frugalitie, nearenes, sparing∣nes, thriftines. Frugare, to sift, to purge, to spare, to saue, to prickon, to burnish, to rub, to fumble, to grope, to mingle together. Frugatoio, a burnishing toole, a sife, a rubbing cloth. Frugatore, a sifter, a sauer, a sparer, a frugall fellow, a burnisher, a fumbler, a groper, a thriftie fellow. Frugelli, silkewormes, or spinning wormes. Frugo, sparing, neere, frugall, thriftie. Frugone, as Frugo. Also a downeright blowe. Fruíre, fruisco, fruito, to inioy or haue fruition of, to gaine, to frolicke. Fruitione, fruition or enioying. Fruito, enioyed, or had fruition of. Frulla, a flurt or lirp with ones fingers, a toy, a iest, a matter of nothing. Frullare, to flurt or lirp with ones fingers, to raue about matters of nothing. Frullo, as Frulla. Also bones of calues feete which children play withall. Also a small coyne. Frumentata, as Formentata. Frumento, wheate. Also all kinde of corne. Frusone, a bull finch or howpe. Some take it for a clothird, a smatch, an arling, or a staine-cheeke. Frusta, a whip, a scourge. Also worne out. Frustabordel, a brothel haunter, or com∣mon filthie whore. Frustare, to whip, to scourge, to ierke, to weare out. Frustata, a blow with a whip or scourge, a ierke. Frustatore, a whipper, a scourger, a ierker. Frutta, Frutte, Frutti, all manner of fruites. Fruttare, to fructifie, to beare fruites. Also to thriue. Fruttaiuolo, a fruterer, a costardmon∣ger. Fruttaro, a place yeelding fruites. Fruttata, as Frittata. Frutteggiare, to fructifie, to beare fruits. Fruttice, or Frutice, a shrub or that which groweth vp of a yoong shoote, and riseth not to the iust bignes of a tree. Also an hearbe with a great stem or stalke. Fruttifero, Fruttoso, fruitfull. Frutto, fruit, profit, commoditie. Fruttuale, one that enioyeth the fruits or profits. Also fructuall. Fruttuare, to fructifie or beare fruit. Fruttuario, as Fruttuale. Fruttuoso, fruitfull, profitable. Ftisi, a disease in the lungs with a consump∣tion of the whole bodie. Also pionie. Fù, Fue, of the verbe Essere, he was or shee was. Fucatione, a colouring or disguising. Fucato, coloured, disguised, painted. Fucile, a steele to strike fire. Also a tinder boxe. Fucina, a forge or smithes shop. Fucinare, to forge or worke in a forge. Fuco, a kinde of Bee flie or drone. Also de∣ceit, dissimulation, couey, guile, colou∣rable deceit. Fuga, a flight, ouerthrow, defeature, run∣ning away or escape. Fugaccia, Fugazza, a cake, a tarte, a cheese cake. Fugacciera, Fugacciara, a woman cake-maker. Fugace, flying, escaping, slippery, fugitiue, fleeting, flickring. Fugare, to put to flight, to defeat. Fugatore, a defeator or one that puts o∣thers to flight. Fuggeuole, that is readie or apt to flie, fu∣gitiue or slipperie, running away. Fuggire, fuggo, fuggito, to flye, to runne away, to escape, to slip away. Fuggita, a flight, an escape, or running away, a slipping away. Fuggitiuo, a fugitiue. Also slipping a∣way. Fuggito, fled, escaped, runne away. Fugo, a gull, a sot, a patch, a ninnie, as Fuco. Fugolo, a whirlewinde, a whirlepoole. Fugone, part of a gallie. Fuio, a pilfrer, a hooker, a filcher, a sub∣tile craftie theefe. Fulgente, fulgent, shining, glistring, bright, flaring, blazing, flashing. Fulgenza, fulgencie, a glistring, a shi∣ning. Fúlgere, fulgo, fulsi, fulgito, to shine, to glister, to brighten, to blaze. Fulgido, as Fulgente. Fulgito, shined, glistred, brightned. Fulgore, a shining, glistring, blazing, or flashing. Fulgolo, a whirlewinde, a whirlepoole. Fulgurare, as Folgorare. Fulica, a moorehen, or a fen ducke. Some take it for a water crow. Fuligine, Fuligne, the sut or smut of a chimney, a fog or darke miste, blacking for shooes, smouldring. Fuliginare, to sut, to smut, to be foggie or mistie, to besmoulder. Fulima, a cobweb, or spiders web. Fulisello, a silke cod, the cod of a silke worme. Fulminante, flashing, lightning, striking with thunder. Fulminare, to flash, to lighten before thunder. Also to strike with thun∣der. Fulmine, a flashing, a lightning, a thun∣derbolt. Fulminoso, flashing, lightning, or stri∣king with thunder. Fuluido, bright, shining, glistring, fla∣shing, flaming, blazing. Fuluo, of the colour of gold, or bright
yellow. Also a weazell colour. Fumana, as Fiume, or Fiumara. Fumante, smoking, reeking, vaporating, breathing, fuming. Fumare, to smoke, to reeke. Also to drie in the smoke, to besmoke, to fume. Fumati, fishes dried in the smoke, fumed, bloated. Fumicare, to besmoke or dry in the smoke, to fume, to bloate. Fumicoso, smokie, suttie, fuming. Fumicotrémola, as Sgramfo. Fumiéro, a dunghill, a muckhill, dung, or mucke. Fumigare, as Fumicare. Fumigoso, as Fumicoso. Fumo, smoke, reeke, vapour, exhalation, a fume, a steame. Fumosità, fume, smoke, or strēgth in wine Fumoso, smokie, suttie, fuming. Fumostore, as Fumoterra. Fumoterra, the herbe Fumitorie. Funale, a torch or waxe candie. Also the weeke or cotton of a torch or candle. Fundaco, a shop or merchants warehouse. Fundico, as Fundaco. Fune, Funi, a cable, rope, corde, halter, ca∣bles, ropes, cordes, halters. Funebré, mornefull, funerall, deadly. Funerale, Funeréo, mornefull, funerall, deadly. Funerare, to morne, to celebrate funerals. Fúnere, mourning. Also the funerals them selues. Funestare, as Funerare. Funésto, mournefull, funerall, deadly. Fungo, a todestoole, a mushrome. Also a kinde of winde-gall in a horse. Fungoso, spungie, airie, light, as a mu∣shrome. Funicella, a little cable, a little rope, a lit∣tle corde or line. Funiculo, as Funicella. Also a little handfull. Also a Persian measure con∣taining 60. furlongs. Funne, there was thereof or to vs. Funtione, a function, the executing of a charge or office. Fuoco, a fire, the element fire. Sometimes vsed for a whole house or familie. Fuoco a cencio, to pitie one by giuing him a little fire vpon a ragge, for want of a shouell. Fuocarello, Fuochetto, a little fire. Fuocolare, a harth, or a place for fire. Fuocone, a cole-basket, but more proper∣ly a great fire shouell. Fuocare, as Infuocare. Fuogo, as Fuoco. Fuogo a cencio, as Fuoco a cencio. Fuogarello, as Fuocarello. Fuogone, as Fuocone. Fuogolare, as Fuocolare. Fuor, fuora, fuori, fuore, out, forth, with∣out, abroad, except, sauing. Fuorche, except, sauing, onely, excepted. Fuor di casa, out of the house, abroad, from home. Fuor di se, out of his wits, besides himselfe. Furacciare, to pilfer, to steale, to purloin, to filch, to proule, to shift for by hooke or crooke. Furace, theeuish, subiect or giuen to steale or filch, filching, stealing. Furare, to steale, to rob, to filch, to pilfer. Furatore, a stealer, a filcher, a pilfrer, a theefe, a robber. Furattola, a tipling house, a tap-house. Furattolare, to frequent common tipling houses or tap houses. Furattoliere, a frequēter of tipling houses. Furbare, to plaie the cosener or cheater, or coni-catcher, to crossebite. Furbarie, cosenings, cheatings, conicatch∣ing tricks, knaueries. Furbeggiare, as Furbare. Furbesco, full of conicatching, cosening, or cheating tricks. Furbo, a cheater, a coni-catcher, a stea∣ler, a setter, a crosse-biter. Furchetta, Furcina, a little forke or rest. Furénte, madde, outragious, raging, terri∣ble, furious, blustring. Furetto, a ferret to hunt conies with. Furfantaggine, as Furfanterie. Furfantare, to play the rogue, rascall, va∣gabond, knaue, to rogue vp and downe. Furfante, a rogue, a varlet, a knaue, a va∣gabond, a rascall, a loute, a theefe, a co∣nicatcher, a setter, an vpright man, a rakehell. Furfanterie, knaueries, rogueries, villa∣nies, rascalities. Furfanteuole, Furfantesco, roguish, knauish, rascalike, vagabondlike. Furfantone, a great rogue, rascall, or knaue, or varlet, a rogue or vpright mā. Fúria, a furie, rage, madnes, furiousnes. Furiare, to growe furious, to rage, to en∣rage, or be madde, to hasten. Furibondo, furious, ragie, frantike, mad, bedlam. Furie, furies, the furies of hell. Furigare, to fumble or be clumsie, to grope. Also to sweepe an ouen. Furigone, an ouen sweeper, or maulkin. Furioso, furious, raging, mad, frantike, bedlam, outragious. Furlano, a pratler, a chatter, a mounte∣banke. Furmaggio, as Formaggio. Furno, as Forno. Also they were. Furo, Furon, Furono, they were of the verbe Essere. Furo, a theefe, a filcher, a hooker, a pilfrer, a cosener. Furó, he stole, or shee did steale. Furon furone, by stealth, stealingly, se∣cretly, sneakingly. Furore, Furrore, furie, rage, madnes, out∣rage, bedlam madnes. Furtarello, a pettie filching or theeuish tricke. Furtiuo, by stealth, stealing. Furto, a theeuery, a larcine, a burglarie, a pilfring, a filching. Fusaiuolo, a spindle maker, or a wreather, a turner. Also a swiuell for a spindle. Fusano, Pricke-woode, Pricke-timber, or Spindle tree. Fusare, to spindle: but taken to flatter or go about the bush with one. Fusaruolo, Fusardo, as Fusaiuolo, Gambe fusaruole, spindle shankes. Fusare, to twirle a spindle. Also to spin. Al¦so to winde a man about as women do their spindles, id est, to flatter or fetch one ouer. Fusarie, trifles, vanities, nifles, baggage things. Fusaro, a spindle maker. Fuscellare, to sprigge, to stalke, to stubbe to pricke. Fuscellino, Fuscelletto, a little sprig, a little sticke, a pricke or flalke, or straw. Fuscello, a stub, a sprig, a stalke, a little sticke, a short straw, a pricke. Also spin∣dle shankes, little stalking or small legs. Fusciellare, as Fuscellare. Fuscielle, as Fuscello. Fusciellino, as Fuscellino. Fusellare, to twirle spindles, to spinne, to make or cast squibs. Fuselli, little spindles, little pegs. Also fly∣ing squibs. Fuseragnolo, a spindler. Fusetto, a kinde of small sharpe poynado or dagger vsed in Italy, as Stilletto. Fusibile, any thing that will melt. Fusile, any thing that will melt or may be melted. Fusione, a melting, a casting, a founding, a thawing. Fuso, a spindle to spin with. Also melted, thawed, founded or caste. Fusore, a founder, a melter, a caster. Fusolare, to twirle a spindle, Fusoria, the arte of founding or melting. Fusse, fussi, fussero, I, hee, or they shoulde be, or were. Fusta, a kinde of small barke called a foist, a pinace or Fliebote. Fustagno, the stuffe we call Fustian.
Fustagnaro, a fustian maker. Fustagnoso, made like fustian. Fustagnetto, a kinde of fine thinne fusti∣an. Fustibalo, as Balista. Fusto, a stocke, a truncke, a stump, a log, a blocke, a bodie without a head. Also a stalke. Also a stocke, or a breech for any artillerie. Also a tree of a saddle. Fustoso, like a log, a truncke, a stocke or block or stump. Futta, Futa, a confutation, a confoun∣ding. Futtare, Futare, to confute, to confound. Futuro, future, aftercomming, to come herafter. G GAbano, Gabbano, a fishermans or a shepheards cloake or gabbardine. Gabanare, Gabbanare, to couer with a course cloke or gabbardine. Gabbanello, a gabbardine or sheapheards coate, or cloke. Gabbare, to cosen, to cheat, to conicatch, to mocke, to flout, to cog withall, to deceiue or fetch one ouer. Gabbatore, a cosener, a cheater, a conicat∣cher, a mocker, a flouter, a cogger. Gabba christo, an hyppocrite, a dissem∣bler. Gabba donne, a cosener or deceiuer of women. Gabba santi, a precise dissembling puri∣tan, an hypocrite. Gabbatella, a foole or vice in a play or painted vpon cardes. Gabbatelle, as Bagatelle. Also a kind of dog to play withall. Also foolish and a∣pish trickes. Gabbatelliere, as Bagattelliere. Gabbeuole, cosening, cheating, conicat∣ching, mocking, flouting, deceiuing. Gabbo, a cosening, a cheat, a conicatching tricke, a mocke, a flout, a deceit, a moc∣kerie. Gabella, toll, tallage, custome or imposi∣tion. Gabellare, to toll, to tallage, to custome as merchandise are. Gabelliere, Gabellotto, a receiuer of toles, tallages or customes. Gabbia, a cage, a coope, a pen. Also the top of the maste of a shippe where the shrouds are fastened. Also a womans priuie parts. Gabbia della naue, the top or cage of a ship. Gabbiare, to encage, to cage, to coope or pen vp. Gabbione, a gabbion, a great cage or coope. Also those baskets full of earth that are set by the ordinance in the campe, to hide the canoniers. Gabbionare, to strengthen or compasse with gabbions, to barricados. Gabbionaro, a gabbion or barricado ma∣ker. Gabbietta, a little cage. Gabiano, a fish called in latine Ago∣nus. Gabrina, an old filthie ouerridden whore or witch, a stallion ramp. Also a womans name in Ariosto. Gaffare, to filtch or snatch away, to proule, to miche or shift for. Gaffo, a snatching or taking hold of, a prowling or shifting. Gagalare, to chucke or laugh extremely. Gagate, as Gagatronica. Gagatronica, a stone called ieat or agath stone, that being burned smels of brim∣stone. Gaggia, as Gabbia. Gaggia di naue, the cage of a ship. Gaggia di sorgij, a mouse trap. Gaggiandra, a kind of great snaile. Gaggiare, to wage, to lay a wager, to en∣gage, to coope, to encage. Gaggio, a gage, a wager, a pledge. Gagite, a stone found in an eagles neast, which being shaken sounds hollow. Gagliarda, a dance called a galliard. Gagliardetti, streamers, banerols or en∣signes in ships. Gagliardia, Gagliardezza, lustines, brauerie, gallantnes, strength, valian∣cie, force. Gagliardo, strong, lustie, braue, gallant, valiant, disposed, stout, frolike, blith. Gagglioffa, a pocket, a pouch, a budget. Also a baggage or filthie queane. Gaglioffare, to cosen, to coniatch. Also to pocket vp. Gaglioffarie, cosening, conichatching or cheating tricks, knauish pranckes. Gaglioffo, a craftie knaue, a cosening companion. Gaglioffone, a filthie great cosener or craftie varlet. Gagnolare, to mutter, to grumble, to fal∣ter or speake between the teeth. Gaiandra, a tortoise or shelerah. Gaiezza, gaita, ioe, mirth, glee, blithnes, iolitie, buckesomnes, gaynesse. Gaietto, a pleasant conceited man. Gaino, a wilde peruerse hauke. Gaio, ioyfull, glee, merrie, pleasant, blith, gay, tollie, buckesome. Gaiola, a cage for birdes. Gaiolare, as Gabbiare. Gaiolaro, a cage maker. Gala, glee or mirth, idlenes or lazines. Al∣so an oke apple or galnut, which serueth to make inke with. Also gallantnes, io∣condnes, light somnes or ornament. Also a kinde of fantasticall diuers coloured clothing or apparell. Gala, Andar a gala, to runne a drift or to flote vp and down the water as corck or a gall doth. Galana, a kind of snaile. Also a bird fly∣ing low, and euen to the ground. Also a kind of fish. Galanga, the hearbe or spice Galangall. Galanga the weede called cats taile or flags or Galangall. Galangola, a kinde of poppingaie greene birde, about the bignesse of a fieldfare; whereof there is store in Italy. Galante, gallant, braue, disposed, hand∣some, decent, gracious. Galant'huomo, an honest proper true man. Galanteria, gallantnes, brauenes, hand∣somnes, decencie, a good grace. Galantino, prettie, quaint, fine, neat, spruce, decent, handsome. Also a fauo∣rite, a mnion or darling. Galare, to float light vpon the water. Also to adorne, to beautifie, to be meery, to reioice, to triumphe. Also to be idle and lazie. Also to sleepe in gals. Galaricide, a whitish stone full of red veines. Galateista, one professing good manners or ciuill curtesie, as Galato did write off. Galatina, a kind of Galantine or sauce. Galatite, a precious stone of a white milky colour good to make a woman that giues sucke to haue store of milke. The stone put in ones mouth doth seeme to taste of milke. Galaurone, a beetle or horse flye, an humble Bee. Galbano, a kinde of gum or liquor issuing out of a kind of scrula. Galbedro, as Galgolo. Galbula, as Galgolo. Gale, fashions, liueries, sutes or deuises in clothes. Also the plurall of Gala. Galéa, a kind of ship called a galley. Also a sea lamprey or cele pout. Galeazza, a galleasse. Galearo, a gallie-maker or ship wright. Galedore, a sea cob or sea gull. Galeffae, to mocke, to scoffe, to flout one in scorning manner. Galeffone, a mocker, a flouter, a scoffer. Galega, Italian fitch or goates rue.
Galéo, a fish much like a Lamprey, or a Lamprey it selfe. Galeone, a great gallie or gallion. Galeotta, a kinde of galley. Galeotto, a gallyman or shipman, a sea∣man, a mariner, a skipper. Galéro, a dormouse. Also a dogfish, and some take it for a sea calfe. Galette delle gambe dietro del caual∣lo, the ioint of the hinder legs of a horse, called the hought or the spliterne of a horse. Galette, silke cods, the cods of silke that silkewormes spinne. Galgolo, a bird called a witwall, a hick∣wall, or woodwall. Also a bird, whome if a man that hath the yellow iaundise behold, he is presently cured, and the bird dyeth. Galio, our ladies bedstraw, maidenhaire, or cheeserenning herbe. Galla, as Gala, a disease called a winde∣gall. Gallana, a land tortoise, or shell crab. Gallare, as Galare. Galle, a disease in a horse called the wind∣galles. Galleggiare, to flote lightlie vpon the water, to runne adrift. Also to cocker, to pamper, to make wanton, to play the cocke. Also to be troubled with the winde-galles. Galleria, a gallerie, or long walke. Gallette, as Galette. Galletto, a cocke, a spout in a conduit, a tap or spiggot of a barrell. Also a stop of any instrument, wherewith the strings are wreathed higher or lower. Also a little cocke. Galletto di maggio, a bird called a howpe. Galliare, to saile or go in a galley. Also to cockre or crow as a cocke. Gallicinio, cockcrowing time. Gallina, a hen. Gallina d' India, a Turkie hen, a fish which some take for the colefish. Gallina bagnata, a wet hen, id est, a milkesop, or freshwater souldier, or one that lookes like a drownd rat. Gallinaccia, a filthie old hen. Gallinaio, the hens rooste. Gallinaro, a poultrer or seller of hens. Gallina rusticella, a Woodcocke, or Snite. Gallinelle, the seauen starres that are al∣wayes neere Taurus. Also woodhens or suites. It hath also bin taken for moorchens. Gallo, a cocke. Also gold, according to alchimists phrases. Gallo alpestre, a feasant poute. Gallo cresta, the hearbe we call Clarie. Gallo d'India, a turkiecocke. Gallo di paradiso, a bird called a howpe. Gallone, a mans thigh, hip or hanche. Galloppare, to gallop. Galloppo, a galloping pace, a gallop. Galloria, cockishnes, iollity, mirth, taken from the crowing of the cocke. Also pride, or disdaine. Also a gallerie, or long couered walke. Gallosa, Galosa, blithe, bonnie, merrie, iocond. Gallozza, Galozza, a kinde of wooden patins, startops, gallages, or stilts. Also a gall, a bladder, a blister, or a bubble on the water. Also a windegall. Gallozzole, blisters, galles, puffes, wind∣galles. Galluta, a cockish wanton or riggish wench, a cockring wench, a ramp. Gallutia, wantonnes, cockring. Galluzzare, to cocker, to wantonize. Galluzze, galles or oakeapples, also hollow beades of gold or siluer for bracelets. Galta, or Guancia, a cheeke, a iawe, a chap. Galuppo, a lackey, a foote-boy, a horse∣boy. Galogna, a kinde of venemous hearbe. Gamanto, the name of a surgions toole. Gamarro, a lobster or sea-crab. Gamaut, a note in musicke, the name of a barbers toole. Gamba, a legge, a shanke: vsed also for Boccata, but vsed in mockerie. Gambaccia, a disease in a mans legs so called, a filthie leg. Gamba torta, a crooked legge or shanke. Gambale, the greues or armor for the legges. Gambaro, a crabfish. Also a lobster. Gambarelli, creuishes, praunes, shrimps, or little crabs. Gambe, legges, or shankes. Gambetta, a little small spindleshanke or legge. Gambettare, to shake the legs sitting. Gambieri, greues or armor for the legs. Gambiglia, the foote of any vessell. Gambo, a stalke, stemme, or stub of any flower. Also the foote of any vessell or cup. Gambone, a hanche, or gammon of bacon, a great leg. Gambrieri, as Gambieri. Gambuto, hauing legs, legd. Gambuzzi, legs, hanches, or gammons of bakon, pestles of porke. Also cabiches. Gamelione, Gamalione, the moneth Ianuary dedicated to Iuno because of mariages. Gamma, a pipe or reede. Also a note in musicke. Gamorra, a womans garment or gowne. Gamurra, as Gamorra. Ganascia, Ganassa, a iawe or the iaw bone, or a chap of ones mouth. Ganascione, Ganassone, a blow or boxe giuen on the iawe or chaps. Ganga, a moath. Also a cheeke, a iawe. Also a pullie. Gangale, as Ganascia. Also a check∣tooth. Gangheggiare, is properlie when a horse doth wry with his vpper iawes. Gangherare, to stretch on tenterhookes, or set vpon hinges. Gangheri, tenterhookes, also hinges, whereon a dore hangeth or moueth. Ganghero, Ganghiero, a tenterhooke, a claspe, or any hooke, or hinge of a dore. Ganghitella, a whirret blowe or boxe on the eare. Gangolare, a dewlap of an oxe, or ker∣nels in ones throte. Gangolaro, one troubled with kernels or wartles in his throte. Gangole, kernels or wartles in the throte. Gangrena, a disease called the gangrene, or mortifying of a mans flesh. Ganguto, one that hath kernels or wartles in the throte. Gannare, as Ingannare. Gannatore, as Ingannatore. Gannire, Gannisco, Gannito, Gani∣re, to snarle, to grinne, to houle as a dog, to hall or barke as a foxe. Gannito, Ganito, snarled, grinned or houled as à dog, the balling or barking of a foxe. Ganzeghe, fooleries, fondnes, fopperies, goose tricks. Gara, a strife, a contention, a iarring, a brawling, a debate, a contending for the victorie. Garabattulo, a cloke, a frocke, a gab∣bardin, or vpper homely garment. Garabullare, as Anfanare. Garafelli, a kinde of peares in Italie so named. Garafono, a gilliflower, or the spice cal∣led a cloue. Garagnoni, good, handsome, strong nags or hackneis. Some haue vsed them for stallions. Garamatica, a precious stone like an e∣merauld, but hath a white line a∣thwart it. Garamella, the wrist of ones arme. Garamuffola, a word immockerie for
Gramatica, as we say for Philosophie, foolelosophie. Garancia, the herbe that dyers vse called madder. Garatide, a kind of precious stone. Garbare, as Garbeggiare. Garbatezza, as Garbezza. Garbato, fine, neate, handsome, proper, spruce, with a good grace, gracious, de∣cent, dapper, deafe, feate. Garbatura, as Garbezza. Garbeggiare, to spruce it, to be comely, to be handsome, neat or proper, to grace, to adorne, to set foorth, to fadge, to sute∣well, to decore, to beseeme or square with, to giue or adde a grace vnto. Also to be or taste sowrish. Garbetto, somewhat sowr or tarte. Also a merie, wittie, close quip or scoffe. Garbezza, sowrenes, tartnes, sharpenes. Also grace, comelines, neatenes, hand∣somnes, ordecorum, featnes, prettines. Garbella, a Witwall. Some take it for another birde. Garbino, the southwest winde. Garbo, grace, handsomnes, finenes, neate∣nes. Also a garbe, a propernes, a comeli∣nes. Also sower, tarte or sharpe, as vine∣ger is. Garbugliare, to garboile, to hurli-burlie, to turmoile, to disorder, to intangle, to be in a pecke of troubles. Garbuglio, a garboile, a hurli-burlie, a tumult, a confusion, a disorder, an en∣tangling, a pecke of troubles. Gardello, Gardolino, a Gold-finche or Thistle-finche. Some take it for a Lin∣net. Gareggiare, to striue, to contend, to braule to scoulde, to chat, to square, to debate. Also to chirpe as birds do. Gareggiatore, a striuer, contender, brau∣ler, scoulder, or chatter. Gareggioso, contentious, giuen to brau∣ling, striuing, chatting or scoulding. Garesolo, a birde called a Howpe. Garetto, the bone in the knee, the kneepan. Also the ham of a horse. Gargancio, as Garganello. Garganello, a kinde of small ducke called a Teale or Wigeon. Some take it for a diuer or diue-dapper. Gargareggiare, to gargarize, to washe the throte, to rattle in the throte. Gargarismo, a gargarisme, a water to wash ones throte. Gargarizzare, as Gargareggiare. Gargaro, a chiefe leader of a flocke. Gargatile, a throte or ousell pipe. Gargatoglio, idem. Gargatone, a throte or ousell pipe. Also a worme that deuoureth corne, called a mite or weeuell. Gargea, Garzetto, Garietto, a Hearon. Gargiolo, a word about a weauers trade or loome. Gargogliare, as Gargareggiare. Gargozzo, as Gargatile. Garietto, as Garzetta. Gariglio, the kernell of any fruite or nuts. Garire, as Garrire. Garletto, as Garetto. Garo, a kinde of medicament. Garof, a stone that stancheth blood, there∣fore it is called a blood-stone. Garofanare, to spice or make sweete with cloues or gilloflowers. Garófano, Garofolo, a gilloflower. Al∣so a cloue. Also a pinke flower. Garófilo, as Garofano. Garoni, pinkes or gilloflowers. Garra, a braule, a brabble, a strife, a quarrell, a squaring, a iarring, a fal∣ling out. Garreggiare, as Gareggiare. Garresi, the withers of a horse. Sometimes taken for the galling of the withers. Garretti, the hams of a horse. Garrire, Garrisco, Garrito, to chide, to braule, to scoulde, to raile, to striue, to prattle. Also to chirpe, to chante, to sing as birdes do, to chat, or to chaunt. Garrito, chirpped, chanted or chatted as birdes. Also a chiding, a brauling, a chirping, a chatting. Also chiddē, brau∣led, scoulded, railed, striued, pratled, chanted. Garro, a chiding, a checke, a braule. Also a chirping. Garugli, a kind of nut so called. Garulare, to chat, to iangle, to prattle, to babble. Garulita, a chatting, a pratling, a brab∣ling. Garulo, tatling, babling, pratling, iang∣ling, a babler, a prater, a tatler. Garza, a magot a pie, or piot. Some haue taken it for a Hearon. Garzabianca, a white Hearon, or a cryell dwarfe Hearon. Garzara, a kinde of Hearon. Garze, a disease in a horses mouth. Garzetta, a magot a pie, or piot. Also a dwarfe Hearon, or myre dramble. Garzicolo, a woman distaffe to spinne with. Garzo, a thorne, a thistle, but properly the teazell to dresse clothes with. Garzolo, as Garzuolo. Garzonastro, a yong lustie stout lad or boie. Garzone, a boie, a lad, a youth, a yong∣man, a page, a lackie. Garzoneggiare, to play the boy, the lad, the lackie, the wagge or page. Also to followe boies. Garzonetto, Garzoncello, a little boy, a yong lad or page. Garzonissimo, very yong or childish, boyish. Garzuolo, a bale of flaxe, a handfull of flaxe, a locke of wooll. Gasiare, to worke in purle, worke or stitch worke. Gasio, a kinde of purle or stitch worke. Gasidane, a precious stone which is saide euery three moneths to bring foorth yong ones as other liuing creatures do. Gastaldia, the bailiship ouer landes or countrie affaires. Gastaldo, a baily of a mans farmes or lands. Gastigamento, as Castigo. Gastigare, as Castigare. Gastigatore, as Castigatore. Gastigo, Gastigatura, as Castigo. Gastronomante, a deuiner, or soothsaier, by glasses. Gastronomantia, diuination by glasses. Gatromeo, a kinde of precious stone. Gatta, a shee cat. It is taken for a brabble, braule, a quarrell, as we say he hath an ill crowe to pull, so they saie lui ha vna mala gatta a pelare. Gattacieca, as Gatta orba. Gattafura, a kinde of sops or pottage in in Italie. Also a kinde of tarte. Gattaiuola, as Grattaiuola. Gatta orba, a kinde of Christmas game called blinde is the cat. Gattaria, the herbe Cat-mint or Nep. Gattarigolare, to tickle. Gattarigole, ticklings. Gatticciole, little kitlings, yong cats. Gattillare, to mewe or crie as a cat. Also to kitten as a cat. Gattillatura, the meweing or crying of a cat. Also a kitling of a cat. Gatticino, a yong cat or kitlin. Gattino, of a cat kinde, cattish. Also a lit∣tle cat or kitlin. Gatto, a he cat. Gatto gatto, groping, creeping, fumbling in the darke, sneakingly as a cat. Gatto maimone, a great kie. Gattonare, to grope or creepe, to sneake or fumble in the darke. Gattone, a great cat. Gatton gattone, as Gatto gatto. Gattone della noce, the kernell of a nut. Gattoncini, yong cats, kitlin▪ Gattorbole, a kinde of countrey sport or
game vsed in Italy, as we saie blinde is the cat. Gattorigole, ticklings, ticklishnes. Gattuccia, a yoong little cat or pusse. Gattucciare, to kitten as a cat, to haue yoong cats. Gattuccini, as Gattoncini. Gauagna, a great basket or hand-bas∣ket. Gauagnare, to get, to gaine, to profit. Gauagno, gaine, profit, getting. Gauanello, a yoong pig or porckling. Also a kestrell. Gauanetti, mad yoong lustie lads. Gauardina, a frocke, a gabbardine, a shep∣heards garment. Gauazza, a dance, a leape, a skip or hop. Gauazzare, to hop, to skip, to dance, to leape, to friske, to skud, to iump, to tum∣ble, to play gambols. Also to encircle or swell round as a bile. Gauazzatore, a skipper, a hopper, a dan∣cer, a frisker, a tumbler, a iumper. Gauazzi, hoppings, leapings, skippings, dancings, friskings, iumpings. Gaudio, ioie, mirth, gladnes, reioicing, glee. Gaudioso, ioifull, merrie, blithe, bucke∣some. Gaudire, gaudisco, gaudito, to reioice, to be glad, to be merrie. Gauetta, a tray, a trug, a woodden bowle or little trough. Also a skeane of yearne. Gauettone, a hogges trough, a draffe tub. Gauia, a bird in Naples which is a great enimie to grashoppers and locusies. Gauignare, to clinch, gripe or clasp fast. Gauillare, to cauill, to wrangle, to con∣tend. Gauillatione, a cauilling, a wrangling, a contention. Gauillatore, a cauiller, a wrangler, a con∣tender. Gauilloso, cauillous, wrangling, contenti∣ous. Gauinello, a kestrell or kind of hawke. Gauio, a part of a cart wheele. Also a sea-cob or sea-gull. Gauio marino, a sea-cob or sea-gull. Gauitella, a little bowle, vessell, goblet or standing cup. Gaulno, a birde whom if any looke vpon that hath the yellow iaundise; the pa∣tient is presently cured, and the bird di∣eth. Gaulo, as Dardani. Gauocciare, to come or swell to a botch, to a blane, to a bile or plague sore. Gauoccio, Gauocciolo, a botch, a bile, a blane, a plague sore. Gauocciolare, as Gauocciare. Gauótta, a French dance or round so cal∣led. Gaulino, the bird wit-wall or wood-wall or hickwall. Gausto, an hearbe the iuice whereof will make ones skin verie blacke. Gauzo, bleere-eied, pinck-eied, squint∣eed, goggle-eied, whal-eied. Gazza, the bird we call a pie or a pyot. Gazza sparuiera, a kind of lanaret hauke called a skreeke or nine murtber. Gazzana, an ambrie or hole or cubbord in a wall to set things in. Gazzetta, a young pie or piot. Gazzettare, to write or report daily oc∣curences one to another, to tell flying tales. Gazzette, the daily newes or intelligence written from Italie, tales, running newes. Gazzettiere, an intelligencer or such as haue daily occurences. Gazzetto, squint or goggled eie. Gazzinio, a pie-colour. Gazino, Looke Molin gazino. Gazzo, Gazo, a whal-eied horse, a squint or goggle-eie. Also a pie coloured horse. Gazzéra, Gazzuolo, the bird we call a pie, a iay or piot. Gazzolare, to chat as a pie, to babble, to tattle, to skould. Gazzoloni, great pies. Also great pra∣ters. Gazzotto, a maggot-a-pie. Gazzouiglia, Gazzouigliare, as Goz∣zouiglia. Gazzuolare, to chat as a pie, to prattle or tattle vainely. Gazzuolina, a yoong little pie. Ge, the letter G. Gebo, a kinde of meate so called in Ita∣lie. Geietta, a kinde of precious stone. Geladia, Geladina, the meate we call gellie. Gelamento, a frost or congealing. Gelare, to freese or congeale, to stiffen or benum with cold. Gelata, Gelatina, a froste or the meate gellie. Gelatide, a kind of precious stone, as Ga∣ratide. Gelatione di denti, teeth set on edge. Gelettia, as Gelata. Gelidézza, coldnesse, chilnesse, freesing, frost. Gelido, cold, chill, freesing, congealing. Gellamina, a kind of stone or minerall. Gelo, frost or ise. Gelosia, iealousie, suspect, suspition, mi∣strust, a letteise window or drawing window. Also a kind of white stone. Gelosire, sisco, sito, to be or become iea∣lous or suspicious. Geloso, iealious, suspicious, mistrust∣full. Gelsa, the fruit called a mulberrie. Also the fruit called raspis. Gelso, a mulberrie or raspis tree. Gelsomino, a little white flower called gelsomine orgesmine. Gemare, to deuide, to seuer, to sunder. Al∣so to winde clues of thread or yarne. Gemelli, twins, borne togither. Gémere, gemo, geméi, gemúto, to sob to grone, to blubber, to bewaile, to la∣ment. Also to whoor as doues do. Gemiti, sobs, gronings, wailings, mour∣nings, pitious grones, sighes or sobs. Also blubbrings, bewailings. Also whor∣rings as turtles vse. Geminare, to double, to ioine, to couple, to paire, to twin, to encrease. Gémini, twins or paires. Also one of the twelue signes in the Zodiacke, called Castor and Pollux. Gemire, misco, mico, as Gémere. Also to whoore or cry as turtle doues. Gemitio, a wailing, a blubbring, a whoorring of turtles. Gemuto, sobbed, groned, blubbred, sighed, whorred Gemma, a gemme, a iewell, or precious stone. Gemma di venere, as Pederetti. Gemmare, to engemme or deck with pre∣cious stones. Gemmaro, a ieweller, or lapidarie. Gemmoso, full of gemmes, iewels, or pre∣cious stones. Gemo di silo, a clew or bottome of thrid. Genaio, Genaro, the moneth Ianuary. Géne, iawes, cheekes, or chaps. Genealogia, a genealogie, pedigree, or description of a kindred. Genébro, a iuniper tree, or wood. Generábile that may breede or engen∣der. Generalato, the office of a generall or chiefe leader. Generale, generall, vniuersall, common. Also a generall or chiefe leader. Generalissimo, chiefe or soueraigne, or most generall. Generalità, generalitie, vniuersalitie. Generare, to ingender, to beget as the male, to conceiue, beare, or bring forth as the female, to spring as hearbs do, to make, to create, to breede, to inuent.
Generatione, a generation, or begetting, an engendring, a kinde. Generatiuo, that may engender or be∣get. Generatore, an engendrer, or begetter, a father, a creator. Génere, a kinde, manner or sort of any thing. Género, a sonne in lawe, one that maries another mans daughter. Also a linage, a stock, or kindred. Generoso, generous, noble, of good race, excellent, of a gentleman-like dispo∣sition. Generosità, gentrie, noblenes, excellen∣cie, gentilitie, generositie. Génesi, generation, natiuitie. Also the planet vnder which one is borne. Genéstra, the shrub which we call broome. Genestra spinosa, furze, furzen bushes, whins, gorse, or thorne broome. Genestrata, a kinde of meate or potage vsed in Italie. Gengébro, Géngero, the spice ginger. Gengidio, the hearbe called cheruill. Gengiua matre, as Dura matre. Gengiue, Gengie, the gummes wherein the teeth stand. Gengíuo, Gengiouo, the spice ginger. Geniale, whatsoeuer pertaines vnto a mans genio. Also pleasant, blithe, buck∣some, merie, giuen to pleasure and re∣creation. Also pertaining to mariage, hoshould, and procreation. Geniana, a kinde of precious stone. Geniare, to follow the good or euill natu∣rall genium of a man. Genio, the good or euill angell of man, the spirit or instinct of man giuen him by nature. Genitale, the herbe glade, or sword grasse. Also the priuities of man or woman, seruing for to ingender or to breede. Genitali, the instruments of generation, a mans or womans priuities. Genitare, to ingender, to beget. Genitiuo, the genitiue case. Also natu∣rall, that hath power to ingender. Génito, begotten, ingendred, borne, bred. Genitore, a father, a Syre, an engendrer, a creator, a maker. Genitrice, a mother, a dam, she that en∣gendreth. Genitura, a generation. Also a thing be∣gotten, an engendring. Géno, as Genio. Genocchiare, to kneele downe. Genocchio, a knee of any creature. Genocchione, kneeling vpon ones knees. Génsola, a fruite called of the apothecaries Iuiuba. Génsolo, the tree bearing the fruite Gen∣sola. Gentaglia, Gentaccia, common base people, riff raff, skum of the earth. Gentale, borne of such a kindred. Gentarella, as Genterella. Génte, men, people, folks, nations. Gente a piedi, footemen, souldiers ser∣uing on foote. Gente d'arme, horsemen, souldiers ser∣uing on horse, men at armes. Genterélla, poore, sillie, meane people. Gentiána, the herb fellwort, bitterwort, or gentian. Gentile, courteous, gentle, kinde, af∣fable, louing, milde, noble, fine, gra∣cious, prettie, quaint, soft, tractable, smooth, supple, dapper, deafe. Also a kinde of peare so called in Italie. Gentilezza, gentlenes, kindnes, curtesie, mildnes, quaintnes, affabilitie. Also a toy, a pretie deuise, a fauour, a boone, a grace, a knacke. Gentilire, lisco, lito, to become or make gentle, kinde, louing, or milde. Gentilesco, gentleman-like, louing, kinde. Gentildónna, a gentlewoman. Gentilhuómo, a gentleman. Gentilità, as Gentilezza. Also heathe∣nisme, or paganisme. Gentilmente, gentlie, louinglie, softlie, affablie, curteouslie, kindlie, deafelie, dapperlie. Gentilótto, a meane gentleman. Genuamente, voluntarilie, of a mans proper instinct, without constraint. Genuflésso, with bended knee, humblie. Genuini denti, the innermost cheeke or iaw teeth, which are bred and dye with a man. Genuino, proper, peculiar, naturall. Genuro, the tree and wood iuniper. Géo, the hearbe auens, or hearbe bennet, or hearbe blessed. Geografia, the description of the earth. Geógrafo, a geographer, or describer of the earth. Geománte, a sorcerer that workes by circles or pricks in the earth. Geomantia, Geomantina, the arte of enchanting by circles or pricks on the earth. Geométra, a geometrician, a surueyor or measurer of lands. Geometria, the arte geometry, or of mea∣suring of lands. Geometrico, geometricall, according to the arte of geometrie. Geometriggiare, to practise geometrie. Geométro, a geometrician or measurer of lands. Georgia, culture and tillage of the earth. Georgiche, bookes intreating of tillage. Gerachide, a kinde of blackish stone. Gerade, a kinde of reddish flaming pre∣cious stone. Geranio, a greeke measure of liquid things. Also the hearbe Geranion or storks bill, whereof there bee diuers kinds, as pinkneedle, or herbe robert, or cranes bill, or bloodroote, or gratiadei, or bassinet geranion, or crowfoote ge∣ranion. Gerarchía, a holie gouernance or princi∣palitie, a hierarchie of Angels. Gérda, as Gierda. Gergare, to speake fustian pedlers french, or rogues language, or gibbrish. Gergo, pedlers french, fustian or roguish language, gibbrish. Gerliero, a kinde of porter or burthen carrier that carrieth in baskets. Gerlo, a kinde of basket which they vse in Italie to carie on mens backs like a dos∣ser. Germana, a right lawfull sister. Germanino, a wyerdrawers toole. Also a kinde of gould smiths worke. Germano, a brother of one selfe father and mother. Also the waterfowle which we call a teale. Also a weede or herbe called germander. Gérme, a branche, a sprig, or twig, or imp of a tree or hearbe, a tendrell. Germinare, to spring, to sprout, to bud, to braunch, to bloome, to blossome. Germinatione, a springing, spreuting, sprigging, braunching, blooming, or blossoming. Gérmini, springs, sprouts, twigs, sprigs, buds, branches, bloomes, blossoms, or ten∣drels. Also a kinde of playing-cards which we call terrestriall triumphs. Germinoso, springing, sprouting, bud∣ding, braunching, blooming, blosso∣ming, shooting vp. Germogliare, Germolare, as Germi∣nare. Germogli, Germoli, as Gérmini. Germoglioso, as Germinoso. Geroglifico, a gieroglife, mysticall or enigmaticall letters or cyfers vsed a∣mong the Egyptians, who vnder cha∣racters vsed to comprehend whole sen∣tences. Gerondio, the gerond of a verbe. Gerone, a wagtaile. Gerso, soothsaying. Also as Gergo. Gersomino, as Gelsomino. Gesmino, Gesmano, as Gelsomino.
Gessaiuolo, a chalke-man. Also a iakes∣farmer. Gessare, to marke or score with chalke. Gesso, white chalke. Also whiting, or white plastering. Gessomino, as Gelsomino. Gessoso, chalkie, full of chalke. Gesta, a part, a faction, a party, a name, a bloud, a consort. Gesteggiare, to act, or iest with hands, to make much gesture or signe of mirth. Gesti, acts, deeds, feats, dooings, actions, iests, gestures, proceeding, behauiours. Also the iesses of a hauke. Gesticcolare, as Gesteggiare. Gestire, gesto, gestito, as Gesteggiare. Geti, haukes iesses. Also the traines of a hauke. Getia, a kind of nigromancie. Gettare, to throwe, to hurle, to fling, to cast away. Also to cast or founde or melt, as melters and founders do. Gettar in occhio, to hit or twit in the teeth. Gettaruolo, a haukes cranes. Also a lure. Gettatore, a caster, a thrower, a hurler, a flinger. Also a caster, a founder or mel∣ter. Gettata, Gettatura, a throwing, a hur∣ling, a casting, a flinging. Also a casting, founding, or melting of mettals. Getti, haukes iesses, voi ne beccarette igetti, you may go shake your ears: also brambles, briers, thornes, bushes, sprigs, or buds. Also fetters, giues, or shackles. Getto, the casting of a hauke. Also a path betweene beds in a garden. Also vsury. Also any thing or worke that is caste of mettall. Also the Arte of casting or founding of mettals. Gettoni, counters to caste accounts with. Gezo, a lizard or a newte. Ghembare, to bowe, to bende or make crooked. Ghembo, bowed, bent, crooked, winding, crook-backt. Ghemo, a bottome or clue of thred or yarne. Ghengheria, wantonnes, foolish toying, in iesting maner. Ghennone, a munkie, or marmoset. Gheppio, a certaine birde that onely flies in the night. Some take it for a kinde of hauke. Ghere, as Ghiere. Gherminella, subtletie, malice, deceit, trumpery, trash, foolish toyes, iugling tricks, or legier de maine. Gherminellare, to iuggle, to play fast and loose. Gherminettiere, a iugler, a toyish fel∣lowe. Ghermire, misco, mito, to embrace, to cleaue or slicke too, to take holde of, to to cling hard. Also to snatch or gripe for a praie as a hauke doth. Gheroni, the skirts or quarters of a coate, or ierkin, the gores or gussets of a smocke or shirt, the side peeces of a cloke. Ghetta, a kinde of ore of mettals, but pro∣perly the first founding of them. Ghetto, a place appointed for the Iewes to dwell-in in Venice, and other citties of Italie. Ghezzo, foolish, simple, grosse-headed, a dull sconse, a shallowe pate. Also ripe or withered. Ghiabaldano, a trifle, a nifle, a matter of nothing, a flap with a foxetaile. Ghiacciare, to freese, to congeale. Ghiacciatura, a frost or freezing, a con∣iealing. Ghiaccino, Looke Ferro a Ghiaccino. Ghiaccio, frost or ise, a congelation. Ghiacciuoli, Ise-sickles, dropping ises. Also a kinde of peare so called in Italie. Ghiadare, to freese, to benum or stiffen the bloud, to paine. Ghiadatura, a frost or benumming of the vitall bloud, paine. Ghiado, as Ghiadatura. Ghiaia, grauell or course sand. Ghiaiare, to grauell, or sand. Ghianda, an acorne, or oke-apple. Also maste. Ghiandaia, Ghiandara, the birde called a Pie, or pyot. Also a Iaie. Ghiandare, to feede with acornes, to fat∣ten with maste. Ghiandole, wartles or kernels that come in the throte, the glanders in a horse. Ghiandoso, Ghiandifero, bearing or hauing akornes or maste. Also measely porke, or full of the glanders. Ghiandule, as Ghiandole. Ghianduloso, measely porke. Also trou∣bled with the glanders. Ghiandussa, Ghianduscia, the sickenes which we cal the murrein or the plague. Ghiara, Ghiarra, as Ghiaia. Ghiarare, Ghiarrare, as Ghiaiare. Ghiaretta, Ghiarella, small grauell or sand. Ghiaroso, Ghiarroso, grauely, full of sand, sandie. Ghiaradadda, a compasse or circuit of groūd. also the name of a town in Italy. Ghiarone, old gold laide vp by mizers, pinche-pennies, or pennie-fathers. Also a coyne. Ghiartura, as Iattura. Ghiaue, the stocke whereon a ship is built. Ghibbo, as Ghembo. Ghierde, swellings about the pasterns ioynt of a horse. Also taken for the dis∣ease we call the wet spauen. Ghiere, the furniture or pendants about a funerall sword, hung ouer tombes. Ghignate, to smile, to simper. Also to grin. Ghigno, a smile, a simpring, or simper, or a grinning. Ghignoso, similing, simpring, grinning. Ghiga, a croud, a fidle, a violin. Ghigaro, a crouder or fidler, a minstrell. Ghignacese, a gull, a ioult-head, a sot, a leering foole. Ghiminelle, toies, fooleries, bables. Ghimphe, ruffe bands as men and wo∣men weare. Ghindare le vele.   Ghinocchietti, as Ginocchietti. Ghioccia, a drop of any thing. Ghiocciare, to drop or trill, to baste rost∣meate. Ghiocciola, a little drop. Ghiocciolare, to drop or trill, to baste roste-meate. Ghioccioloso, dropping, trilling. Ghiosa, a glose, an exposition, a scholion. Ghiosare, to glose, to expound. Ghiosatore, a gloser or expounder. Ghiosatura, a glose or expounding. Ghiotta, a dripping pan. Ghiotto, a craftie, knauish, slie, subtill, malicious man. Also a saucie iacke, a malapert or saucie companion. Also a glutton, a gourmand or gullie gut. Ghiottola, a dripping pan. Ghiottonare, to gluttonize, to plaie the glutton, to become saucie or knauish. Ghiottonarie, knaueries, saucie prankes, gormandizing tricks, gluttonise. Ghiottonia, gluttony, gourmandizing. Ghiottone, as Ghiotto. Ghiottoncello, Ghiottocino, a little yoong glutton or knauish wag. Ghiottornie, as Ghiottonarie. Ghiozza, a drop of any thing. Ghiozzare, to drop or trill or trickle. Ghiozzi, a kind of meat so called in Lom∣bardie. Ghiozzo, a fish called a gudgeon, but ra∣ther according to some the fish called a gullhead, a millers thombe, a cur or bulhead. Ghirandolare, as Girandolare. Ghirandole, as Girandole. Ghirandolo, ioyned, intermedled, inter∣laced or set togither. Ghiribizzare, to deuise humorous, fanta∣sticall conceits, as Fantasticare. Ghiribizzi, sudden, humorous, fantasti∣call,
toyish conceits. Ghiribizzoso, fantastical, humorous, toy∣ishly conceited. Ghirlanda, a garland, a chaplet, a circlet, a coronet of flowers or of any thing else, a coronall, a wreath, a border. Ghirlandare, to engarlande, to encircle with chaplets, to border about. Ghirlandella, Ghirlandetta, a little garland, wreath, chaplet, coronall or cir∣clet. Ghiro, a dormouse or reremouse. Some take it for a bat. Ghisa, part of a horses necke. Ghisello, a gull, a ninnie, a shallow-hea∣ded foole. Ghitandola, a blane, a plague sore, a botch, bile or swelling, a kernell in the flesh. Gi, he went or did goe. Già, whilome, earst, of yore, heeretofore, sometime. Also now, alreadie, so soone, right now. Gia, he went, he did go. Già longo tempo, a long time since. Gia molto, long since. Già molto tēpo, long time since, of yore. Gio tempo fù, the time hath beene, long time since. Giaccare, to arme with a iacket. Giacchera, as Baia, as Fagiolata. Giacchetta, a little iacket. Giacchio, a fish net. Also a fowling net, a hay for conies, Also as Giaccio. Giacénte, iacent, a word of armorie. Giacére, giaccio, giacqui, giacciúto, to lie downe. Giacchere, foolish trickes, mad prancks, humorous toies. Giacco, a iacke of maile made like a cor∣slet, a iacket or shirt of maile. Giacinthine, certain nights feasts among the Lacedemonians. Giacinto, a precious stone called a iacint. Also a flower called Hyacint. Giacitura, Giacimento, a downe lying. Giaciuto, Giacciuto, laine downe. Giallare, to die or make yellow. Giallastro, Gialliccio, yellowish, some∣what yellow. Giallo, the colour yellow. Giamai, euer, at any time. Also neuer, at no time. Giambare, to gibe, to flout, to mocke, to dallie or solace with. Giambo, as Gambo. Also sport, glee, dalliance, solace. Also a mocke, a gibe, a flout. Gianda, as Ghianda. Giandaia, as Ghiandaia. Giandosa, full of blaines, pimples, or ker∣nels. Also full of akornes, or glanders. Giandussa, Gianduscia, the disease we call the murren or a pestilence. Gianetto, a Spanish horse, a gennet. Gianfrusaglia, a huddle, a hotchpotch of absurdities, or a sort of rascally people. Giannolino, a kinde of blew colour that painters vse. Also little Iohn. Giara, Giarra, grauell or sand. Also a brazen vessell to put wine pots in at a cupboord. Also a certaine measure of li∣quid things, which we call a iarre. Giarda, a mocke, a floute, a scoffe, a iest, as Cilecca. Giarde, as Ghierde. Giardinaio, a gardner. Giardinare, to gardine. Giardineggiare, to gardine, to make or frequent gardins. Also to talke foolishly or loiter vp and downe idly. Giardinetto, a little gardine or orchard. Giardiniére, a gardiner. Giardíno, a gardin or orchard. Giardoni, as Ghierde. Giarelle, pibble stones, such as they giue haukes. Also grauelly stones. Giarioli, Giraldelli, moore-hens. Giaroncelli, as Giarelle. Giaroso, Giarroso, grauellie, sandie or grittie. Giattire de' cani, the questing of dogs. Giattantia, Iattantia.   Giattare, as Iattare. Giattura, as Iattura. Giauetta, a bottom or clue of packthread. Also a mullet fish. I finde it also for a toole that roapers vse. Gibar, a kind of fish. Gibba, a bunch vpon ones backe. Gibboso, bunch-backt, crooke-backt. Al∣so hilly or full of knobs or mole-hils. Gibellino, a beast called a Sable. Gielare, as Gelare. Gielata, as Gelata. Gielatina, as Gelatina. Gielatura, as Gelatura. Giele, a game at cardes so called. Giélo, as Gelo. Gielsa, Gielso, as Gelsa. Gielso, as Gelso. Gielsomino, as Gelsomino. Gienca, Gienco, a heifer, a steer, a year∣ling, a runt. Giérgo, as Gérgo. Giérlo, as Gerlo. Gierliére, as Gerliére. Giérda, Gierdóne, as Ghiérdo. Giesú, our Sauiour Iesus Christ. Giesuato, Giesuista, a Iesuite. Giettare, as Gettare. Giettatore, as Gettatore. Giettatura, as Gettatura. Gietti, Gieti, as Getti. Gietto, a thawing or melting, a rotting. Also as Getto. Giffa, a beast like vnto a camell, as Gi∣raffa. Giga, a fiddle, a croud, a kit, a violin. Gigalo, a kind of hearbe. Gigante, a giant. Gigantesco, Gigantéo, giant-like. Gigaro, a fidler, a crowder. Also the herb cuckoe-pintle or wake-robin. Gigis, a precious stone which as some write makes those that weare it inuisible. Gigliato, a kind of coine in Florence stam∣ped with the flower-de-luce. Also li∣lied. Giglio, the flower we call lillie or flower-de-luce. Giglio azzurro, a blew flower-de-luce. Gigliolino, a little lillie. Also light bay coloured or little colour. Gigotto, a leg of mutton or veale or a pestle of porcke. Gimbo, a bunch on mens backes. Also such a one as camels haue. Gimboruto, Gimmo, crook-backt or bunch-backt. Gimnasiarca, as Ginnasiarca. Gimnasio, as Ginnasio. Gimnasta, as Ginnasta. Gimnicigiuochi, a kinde of wrestling game among the Grecians. Gimnosophista, a gymnosophist, certain philosophers or wise men or naked men among the Indians. Ginaldo, a dog or a curre in rogues lan∣guage or gibbrish. Ginebraio, as Ginepraio. Ginebro, Ginepro, the wood Iuniper. Also the tree. Ginepraio, a thicket or brake of Iuniper. Also taken for a maze or laberinth. Ginesta, as Genestra. Ginestrata, as Genestrata. Ginetta, a spanish horse called a iennet. Also a kind of little beast like a weazel. Also a kind of iaueling or dart vsed in war. Ginettarij, horsemen that ride spanish iennets. Also such as fight with a kind of iaueling so called. Ginettone, a great huge iennet. Gingerbro, the spice called ginger. Also dittanie. Gingidio, the hearbe toothpicke or cher∣uill. Gingiue, Gingie, the gummes of ones mouth. Ginnasio, a schoole of learning or exer∣cise either of body or minde, a colledge or
studying place. Ginnasiarca, a rector, a ruler, a principal of a colledge or schoole. Ginnasta, a maister or one that teacheth exercise of body and minde in a schoole. Ginocchiare, to kneele downe. Ginocchiato, a kneeling, a thump or push with ones knee. Also kneeled. Ginocchietti, greues or knee pieces. Also knee cushions that carpenters vse or knee peeces of harneis. Ginocchio, the knee of any creature. Ginocchioni, kneeling vpon ones knees. Gio, he or she went or did goe. Giobbia, the day called thursday. Giobbia grassa, the thursday before shrouesunday. Giocacchiare, to play foolishly or idle for sport. Also to dallie. Giocacchiamenti, filthie beastly sports. Giocare, to game, to play, to sport, to so∣lace, to dally, to iest. Giocar' a leua culo, to play at leuell coile or itch buttockes. Giocar' alla mora, a kind of play casting of the fingers and numbring togither. Giocar' al damiere, or Tauoliere, to play at tables. Giocar' a gli ossoli, a sbrigli or a zoni, to play at nine pins or at keeles. Giocar' a che egli è dentro? to play at fast or loose. Giocar' alle piastrelle, to play at quoites. Giocar delle mani, to play with ones hands, to be foolish in hitting or striking others, to be ouerbusie with ones hands, which is taken as a discurtesie in Ita∣lie, and therefore they say Gioco di mano è gioco di villano. Giocar a Scacchi, alle carte, a dadi, alla palla, al ballone, alle borelle, to play at chesse, at cardes, at dyce, at tennis, at ballone, at bowles. Giocarello, a prettie game, play or sport, a meriment in a play. Giocatello, as Giocarello. Giocatore, a player, a gamester, a spor∣ter, a iester. Giocatória professione, the arte or trade of playing, or of gaming. Gioco, a game, a play, a sport, a solace, a ieast, a delight. Gioco di palla, a tennis court. Gioco di mano, hand play. Gioco marzo, a maiden set or lurch at any game. Giochi, Giuochi, games, playes, sports, solaces, iests, delights. Giochi di veglie, christmas games. Giocciola, a drop, a trill. Giocciolare, to drop, to trill. Giocogliére, a iugler, iester, or moun∣tibanke, or tumbler. Giocolare, to iuggle, to ieast or play the mountibanke, to play with puppets. Also as Giocogliere. Giocolatore, as Giocogliere. Also a puppet player. Giocheuolmente, in sport, in play, in iest, merily. Giocondare, to reioice, to make merrie, or be iocond. Giocondezza, as Giocondità. Giocondità, iocondnes, iolitie, mirth, blythnes, glee. Giocondo, iocond, pleasant, merrie, blithe. Giocoso, sportfull, merrie, blithe, game∣some. Gioga, a kinde of long measure of land, as much as a Giugero. Giogare, to make hillie, steepie, or to yoake together. Gioggiolino, a kinde of colour which we call flesh-colour, or brickcolour. Gioglio, the cockle or darnell that growes among corne, the corne rose. Giogna, the dewe lap of an oxe. Giogo, a hill, a steepe. Also a yoke. Gioia, a gemme, a iewell, or any precious thing. Also ioy, pleasure, delight, com∣fort, harts-ease, iouissance. Gioiare, to ioy, to delight. Also to set with gemmes or iewels. Gioiellare, to set forth or adorne with iewels, to bespangle. Gioielleria, the arte of iewellers, or lapi∣daries. Also a iewell house. Gioielliére, a ieweller, a lapidarie, one that selleth iewels. Gioiélla, Gioietta, a little prettie iewell. Gioioso, ioyous, iocond, pleasant, blithe buckesome. Gioíre, gioisco, gioíto, to reioyce, to ioy, to blithe it. Gioliuità, iollines, blythnes. Gioliuo, iollie, pleasant, ioyous, blithe, bonnie, buckesome. Gioncare, as Giuncare. Gioncata, as Giuncata. Gioncastri, as Giuncastri. Gionchi, as Giunchi. Gioncho, as Giuncho. Also the herbe galingale. Gionconi, as Giunconi. Giónica, one of the foure greeke tongues that were commonly spoken. Gióngere, giongo, gionsi, gionto, to come, to arriue. Also to attaine, or reach vnto. Also to ouertake, to ad, to ioyne, to conioyne, to ouerreach. Gionta, an arriuing, a comming to a place, a reach, a ioyning. Also an ouer∣plus, an addition to boote, an aduan∣tage or to boote giuen in buying any thing. Also a coosening, cheating, or conycatching tricke. Giontamente, iointly together, linked in one, coupled, yoaked. Giontamento, a coosening, cheating, or conycatching tricke. Giontare, to coosen, to beguile, to cony∣catch, to ouerreach one, to cheate. Giontarie, coosening, cheating, cony∣catching tricks. Giontatore, a coosener, a cheater, a co∣nycatcher. Gionto, Looke Gióngere. Giontura, as Giuntura. Giornalaccio, an idle, loytring, lazie bodie. Giornale, dayly, eueryday. Also a day∣booke, or iornall. Giornaliere, an obseruer of dayes, a day∣booke keeper, one that cares but for to day and lets to morrow care for it selfe. Giornata, a fight, a battaile, a dayes iour∣ney or trauell. Also a dayes worke or labour. Giorne, parte d' un edificio.   Giornéa, a certaine garment made long like a gowne or horsemans coate. Giorneare, to goe, to wander, to iet vp and downe idlie. Giorneone, an idle loytering ietter vp and downe. Giorno, a day. Goirno di festa, a holyday. Giorno di lauoro, a workiday. Giorno grasso, a flesh day. Giorno magro, a fish day. Giostra, a iusting, or tilting, a tourney. Giostrare, to iust or tilt, to tourney. Giostramenti, iustings, tiltings, or tour∣neis. Giostranti, tilters, iusters, or tournears. Giostratore, a iuster, a tilter, or tour∣neant. Giota, a iot, a whit, a mite, a crum. Giotto, as Ghiotto. Also a kinde of pot or pitcher. Giottola, a dripping pan. Giottonare, as Ghiottonare. Giottonarie, as Ghiottonarie. Giottone, as Ghiottone. Giottonia, as Ghiottonia. Giottoncello, Giottoncino, as Ghiot∣toncello. Gioua, something about a saddle or part thereof. Gióuane, yong, lustie, gallant, youthlie, youthfull, tender. Also a yong lad, a youth, a yong man, a yong lasse, wench,
or girle. Giouanastri, yong, sturdie, stout lads. Giouanesco, youthly, youthfull. Giouanetta, a handsome yong woman, a prettie lasse. Giouanetto, a prettie yong boy, or very yong and tender. Giouanezza, youth, greennes, tendernes. Gióuani, yong men or women. Giouamento, auailing, helpe, succour, profite or furtherance. Giouare, to auayle, to helpe, to succour, to do good, to profit, to further, to besteade. Giouatore, an auayler, a helper, a succo∣rer, a good dooer. Gióue, the mettall tin according to Al∣chimists phrases. Also Iupiter. Giouedi, thursday. Giouedi santo, maundie thursday. Giouenca, a heyfer or yearling calfe, a weanling, a runt. Giouencélla, a yoong lasse, a prettie wench. Giouenco, a steere, a runt, a bullocke, a yeereling, a weanling. Gióuene, as Gióuane. Giouenile, youthly, youthfull, childish. Giouentù, Giouentudine, youth, yong, or tender age or youthfulnes. Giouéuole, helpefull, auailefull, profita∣ble. Giouiale, one borne vnder the planet Ioue, iouiall. Giozza, as Gocciola. Giozzare, as Gocciolare. Gipsiera, a faulkners or hauking bagge. Gippatura, as Giubba. Also a kinde of worke that tailers vse vpon doublets. Giraffa, a beast greater then a leopard, resembling a panther with a long neck. Also a kinde of glasse that they vse to drinke wine in, in Italie. Girac chiare, as Girare. Girafalco, a ier-faulcon. Giranda, a garlande or chapplet of flo∣wers. Girandola, a traine of powder. Also a flying squib. Also as Fagiolata. Girandolare, to roue, gad, scud, trudge, or wander about, to go about the hedge. Also as Fantasticare, to lay a traine. Girandole, long flim-flam discourses, foolish babling tales, humorous fancies, as Fagiolata. Girandolina, a wauerer, a gadder, a wanderer about. Girardina, a fine kinde of birde. Girare, to gre, to turne, to winde, to com∣passe: to twirle about, to wander, to roue, to gad vp and downe, to crankle in and out, to wheele about, to circumuent, or leade about, to go about the bush with one. Giramenti, girings, turnings, windings, compassings or twirlings about, whee∣lings about, circumuentings, goings a∣bout the bush. Girasole, an herbe called in latin Ricinus, or Croton. Also as Helitropia. Also changeable taffeties. Some take it for fiue-leafed grasse. Girassa, as Giraffa. Girata, a turning about, a crankling in and out. Also a reach along a riuer side, a twirling of any thing. Girauento, a weather-cock, or fane on the top of a house. Also a winde-mill of paper for children to play with. Girauolta, a walking turne, as wee saie a bout. Gire, to go: an imperfect verbe wanting many tenses and persons. Girélla, a fane on the top of a house. Also a twirle, a weathercocke. Also a pullie of a well or ship. Also a sodaine humorous to ye or fancie. Also a weauers toole. Girellaio, a light headed, vnconstant, wa∣uering man. Girellare, to twirle or gire about. Girello, a fish called in latin Iulis. Also some ornament about a horse. Gireuole, turning, winding, or twirling about. Giribbizzi, as Ghiribizzi. Girifalco, Girfalco, a ier-faulcon. Girino, a tadpole, or yoong frogge. Girioli, a kinde of daintie birde. Girlo, as Molinello, or Ciurlo. Also as Pirlo. Gironda, Looke Agironda. Girondare, as Girandolare. Giro, a gire, a turne, a turning about, a circle, a compasse, a fane, a circlet, a re∣uolution, a crankling, a winding about, a twirle. Giro, Giroli, a fish called a menowe. Girone, the name of some implement of wood in a ship. Giroella, Giroetta, as Girella. Gita, a going or departing away. Giterella, a little going. Gittare, as Gettare. Gittar tempo dietro a tempo, to bestow time idlie. Gittata, Gittatura, as Gettata. Gittatore, as Gettatore. Gitti, as Getti. Gitto, as Getto. Gittone, the herbe coriander of Rome, Nard or pepperwoort. Giù, Giuso, downe, off, below, from-of. Giua, he went, or did go. Giuara, a kinde of birde. Giubba, Giuba, an vpper cassock, a man∣dilion, a soldiers or horsemans coate, or iacket. Giubbarello, Giubarello, a little horse∣mans coate, a mandilion, a trusse, a sleeueles doublet. Giubbone, Giubone, a doublet. Giubebba, a drug called iubebes. Giubetta, a gibbet. Giubetto, the perfume called ziuet. Giubilare, to reioice, to ioy, to blithe, to make merry, to shoute for ioy. Giubeléo, the yeere of Iubilee or gladnes and remission of sinnes. Giubiloso, ioyfull, ioyous, blithe, iocond, merric, shouting for ioy. Giubilo, a reioycing, a shouting for ioye, with signes and voice expressing the same. Giucare, to plaie, to game, to dallie. Giucolare, as Giocolare. Giucolatore, as Giocolatore. Giudeo, an incredulous or vnbeleeuing man. Also a Iewe. Giudicamento, a iudging, a iudgment. Giudicare, to iudge, to doome, to deeme, to censure, to condemne, to decree, to discerne, to suppose, to thinke, to deter∣mine, to sentence. Giudicato, iudged, doomed. Also the of∣fice of a iudge. Giudicatura, a case of iudgement, a ses∣sions holden, a determination. Giudicatore, a iudger, a determiner, a decider. Giúdice, a iudge, a commissarie, a righter of causes. Giudiciale, iudiciall, of or pertaining to iudgement, determinable. Giudiciario, pertaining to iudgement, determinable, iudiciall. Giudicio, iudgement, examination, sute, sentence, opinion, aduise, a decree, re∣spect, vnderstanding, consideration, learning, wit, discretion, skill, wisdome. Also a place or seate of iustice, a doome. Giudicióso, iudicious, learned, wise, di∣screet. Giúe, vsed for Giu, downe, lowe, below. Giuero, Giuerone, a bird called a diuer, a didapper, or arsefoote. Giugale, of or pertaining to a yoke. Giugale osso, the iugall bone, which is a portion of the bones of the head and of the vpper iawe. Giugare, to yoke or couple togither. Giúgero, an acre of grounde, as much ground as one yoke of oxen can eare in a day. Giuggiare, as Giudicare.
Giuggiola, a fruite of the Apothecaries called Iuiuba. Also I iudge it, vsed by Dante. Giuggiolo, the tree bearing that fruite. Giugiuba, as Giuggiola. Giuliuo, as Gioliuo. Giúgnere, giungo, giunsi, gionto, as Gióngere. Giugno, the moneth Iune. Giugnole, a kinde of peare in Italie com∣ming in Iune. Giugulare, to behead, or cut ones throte. Giula, the herbe Maudleine. Giuléppe, Giulébbe, a ilep, a kinde of potion. Giúlio, the moneth Iulie. Also a kinde of coine currant in Italie, made by Iu∣lius the pope. Giulillità, iolines, blithenes. Giuliuo, as Gioliuo. Giullare, to mocke, to frumpe, to iest, to scoffe or dallie with. Also to iuggle or plaie the foole, to plaie the vice. Giullaro, a iugler, a iester, a pleasant vice. Giumenta, a mare or breeding beast. Al∣so any beast of carriage. Giumentario, one that hath the charge to ouerlooke the breeding mares of a horse race. Giuncare, to strewe with rushes or flo∣wers. Giuncata, a kinde of fresh cheese and creame, so called bicause it is brought to market vpon rushes. Also a iunket. Also a prettie worke made of bents or ru∣shes. Giuncaro, one that selleth rushes. Giuncastri, pretie baskets made of ru∣shes, or frailes for figs. Giunchi, rushes, bull-rushes. Giunco, a rush, or bull-rush. Giunconi, great bull-rushes. Giuncoso, full of rushes. Giúngere, giungo, giunsi, gionto, as Gióngere. Giungo, as Gionco. Giunta, as Gionta. Giuntare, as Giontare. Giuntarie, as Giontarie. Giuntatore, as Giontatore. Giuntamento, as Giontamento. Giunte, as Gionture, ioints. Giunto, as Gionto. Giuntura, as Giontura. Giuocare, as Giocare. Giuocatore, as Giocatore. Giuóchi, as Giochi. Giuocolare, as Giocolare. Giuocogliére, as Giocogliere. Giuocacchiare, as Giocacchiare. Giuóco, as Gioco. Giuppa, as Giubba. Giuppone, Giupone, as Giubbone. Giupponaro, Giuponaro, or Giubbo∣naro, a doublet maker. Giuracchiamenti, swearings, bannings, cursings, othes. Giuracchiare, to sweare, to ban, to curse. Giuradios, taken in mockerie for a Spa∣niard, or a braggart. Giuramenti, othes, swearings, depositi∣ons. Giurare, to sweare, to protest, to depose, Also a kinde of water fowle called in latine Colymbus. Giuri, othes, swearings, depositions. Giuridico, of or pertaining to the law. Giuriconsulto, Giureconsulto, a law∣yer, an expounder of the law. Giuridicénte, a lawyer or counseller at law. Giuridicamente, according to due course of law, iudicially. Giuridittione, Giurisdittione, iurisdic∣tion, power or authoritie. Giurista, Giurisconsulto, as Giuricon∣sulto. Giúso, downe, below, low, of, from of. Giuspatronato, a patronage by law. Giusquiamò, the hearbe henbane. Giustamente, iustly, euen, leuelly, equal∣ly, vprightly, righteously. Giustare, to make iust or leuell or euen, to take leuell or ayme. Giustezza, iustes, euennes. Giustitia, iustice, vprightnes, rightnes, equity, indifferencie. Also a place of ex∣ecution. Giusticiaro, a iustice of peace, a iusticer. Also a headsman or hangman or exe∣cutioner. Giustitiare, to behead or put to death or execute iustice on malefactors. Giustitiato, beheaded, put to death, exe∣cuted iustice on malefactors. Giustitiére, as Giusticiaro. Giustificare, to iustifie, to cleere, to purge. Giustificatione, a iustification, a clea∣ring or purging. Giustificábile, that which may be iusti∣fied. Giustificatore, a iustifier, one that iusti∣fieth. Giusto, iust, iump, right, straight, leuell, vpright, righteous, lawfull, indifferent, vncorrupt, euen, impartiall, vertuous, perfect. Glaciale mare, the frozen sea, that will freese. Glacitare, to bray as an asse Gladolo, an herbe called great Galangall or swordgrasse. Some write it Gla∣diólo. Gladiatoria arte, the arte of fencing. Gladiatore, a fencer or flourisher with his weapon. Glandire, disco, dito, to crie as an eagle doth. Glagopo, a kind of herbe. Glandule, as Ghiandole. Glanduloso, as Ghiandoso. Glangíre, gisco, gito, as Glandire. Glangolo, as Ghitandola. Glasto, a stuffe to die blew with, called woad. Glaucare, to stretch on the tenter hookes. Glauchiera, a paire of tenters. Glaucia, the herbe celandine the great or the iuice thereof. Glauco, a tenter hooke. Also a kinde of bird so called. Also a kind of grayish co∣lour. Some saie it is the colour of a lions eies. It hath beene vsed for a bay colour of a horse. Also the herbe milke woort or sea trifoly. Also a kind of fish. Glaucoma, a disease in the eies or fierie rednes in them. Some take it for a whale eie. Gléba, a clod or turffe or lumpe of clay or earth, a gleebe. Glebare, to gleebe, to breake clods or turfs of earth. Glencino, a kind of oile so called. Gleotophilida, an herbe which druncke with wine will procure laughter. Gli, a masculine article of the plural num∣ber, they, them, those. Also to him or to them. Also from him or from them. Gliandra, kernels or wartles growing be∣tween the flesh and skin or meazels that comes to hogs. Gliceritia, licorice wood. Gliel, to him it, ioined with verbes. Gliela, it to him, ioined with verbs. Glielo, it to him, but with a verbe. Gliene, to him of, to him thereof. Some of it to him. Gliero, a dormouse. Gliomaro, a clue or bottom of thread. Gliombaro, the licorice wood. Gliotto, as Ghiotto. Gliottonare, as Ghiottonare. Gliottonarie, as Ghiottonarie. Gliottóne, as Ghiottóne. Gliottonía, as Ghiottonía. Gliribizzare, as Ghiribizzare. Gliribizzi, as Ghiribizzi. Glirio, foolish, sottish. Gliro, a dormouse, a rearmouse. Glóbo, a globe. Also a type of the whole world. Glocitare, to bray as a wild asse. Also to
clucke like a hen. Glocitatione, the braying of a wild asse or clucking of a hen. Glomerare, to wind thread vpon a bot∣tom. Gloméro, a clue or bottom of thread. Glomo, a bottome of yarne or clue of thread. Glória, glorie, renowme or good name. Gloriare, to glorie, to boast, to brag, to vaunt. Glorificare, to glorifie, to magnifie. Glorióso, glorious, full of glorie. Glosa, Glosare, as Ghiosa. Gloso, a precious stone in forme like a mans toong which fals from heauen when the moone is in the wane. Glotorare, to crie as a storke doth. Glutinatiuo, that is clammie or sticking vnto. Gnaccara, a musicall instrument, a cym∣ball or a rattle or a bag pipe. Gnaflio, the herbe cudwort, chafweed, peticotton or small bumbase. Gnaffe, an interiection of admiring and refusall, and swearing, as we say gogs, gods, by the masse, no bir-ladie. Gnaffe si, yea in goodsooth, yea forsooth, yea by our ladie. Gnaffe nò, no by our Ladie, no in good∣sooth, no forsooth. Gnarità, skilfulnes, knowledge. Gnaro, skilfull, knowing, expert. Gnatone, a parasite, a smell-feast, a flat∣terer, a gnatho, a trencher friend. Gnauità, actiuitie, lustines or quicknes to do any busines. Gnauo, quicke, lustie, actiue to any thing. Gnene, for Gliene. Gnéo, a marke in the bodie whereby a man may be knowen. Gnoco, a foole, a grosse-pate, an idiot, a gull. Gnocchi, a kinde of paste meate vsed in Italy. Gnoccone, a great gull, a doult, a patch. Gnomo, a mathematicall instrument to measure land. Gnomone, the know-man or gnow-man of a diall; the shadow whereof pointeth out the howers. Also the tooth whereby a horses age is knowne, a coults tooth: in mathematicall it is one diagonall with two complements of any parallelogram. Also a square, a squire or rule to know any thing by. Gnomonica architettura, a kind of ar∣chitecture so called, according to geo∣metrie or the true arte and science to know the situation, lying or measure of any place or countrey. Also according to the rule of dialing. Gnuno, no one, not any, any one, any. Gó, goi, a fish called a quap, which is poi∣son to man and man to him. Gobba, a bunch, a knob or crooke backe, a croope. Gobbare, to bunch, to knob, to make a crooke backe. Gobbazza, a great bunch or knob. Gobbe, a kind of shell fish. Gobbio, Gobbione, as Ghiozzo. Also as Gozzo. Gobbo, crook-backt. Also a kind of faul∣kon. Gobbuto, that hath a crook-back. Goccia, a drop, a drizzle, a iot, a whit. Gocciare, to drop, to drizzle, to trill, to distill, to drip. Gocciò de gli vccelli, the crop, craw or gorge of any bird, the panell or maw of a hauke. Gocciola, a little drop or drizling, drip∣ling or trilling. Also an Apoplexie. Al∣so a palsie. Gocciolamento, a dripping, drizling or trilling. Gocciolare, to drop, to drizzle, to trill, to distill, to drip, to dangle downe. Gocciolatoio, a gutter or drainer in a house. Gocciolone, one that goes a dingle-dan∣gle, that hath a good toole. Also a filthy nodie peake, a sneaker, one dropt downe by chance. Gocciuto, hauing a great gorge. Also gorged. Godano, the bird called a witwal or wood wall. Godére, gódo, godéi, goduto, to enioy, possesse, hold or owe: also to reioice, to be glad, to ioy, to delight. Godezzo, a kinde of strange birds in In∣dia. Godimento, an enioying or possessing, a delight, a iouissance. Godino, as Godano. Goduta, an enioying, possessing, ioying, holding, owing. Goduto, reioyced, gladded, ioyed, de∣lighted, enioied or possessed. Goffaggine, as Melensagine. Goffarie, grosse, foolish, fond, bungling tricks. Goffità, Goffezza, as Melensagine. Góffo, foolish, doultish, grossewitted, a bungler. Goffone, a great foole, a dolt, a grosse lubberly wit. Gogna, a kinde of torture or racke, a cage or stocks for vagabonds. Also some part of a piece of ordinance. Also the pumpe of a ship or such stinking place. Gogolare, as Gongolare. Gogusciada, a kinde of bird. Goi, as Gó. Góla, the throate or gullet of any crea∣ture. Also gluttonie. Golano, the bird, on which if one sicke of the yellow iaundise looke, he becomes whole and is cured, but the bird dieth suddainly, the bird is of a yellow co∣lour. Golarina, the dewlap of cow or oxe han∣ging downe his throate. Goletta, a gorget or piece of armour for the neck. Golfare, to engulfe. Golfo, a gulfe, a pit, a downefall. Golfo di setalia, the rugged or brislie gulfe, a womans priuities. Golino, as Godano. Golomastico, a principall glutton, a gul∣liegut, or gutling. Golosino, gluttonous, greedie, a gullie∣gut, a gutling. Golosità, gluttonie, gourmandize, gree∣dines. Goloso, a glutton, a gourmand, a greedie deuourer. Golpe, hath bin vsed for Volpe, a foxe. Golpeggiare, to play the foxe. Golpone, as Sopiattone. Goluppare, to fould, winde, wrap, roule, huddle vp, to winde or rowle vp as yarne. Also to faulter in speeches. Goluppato, foulded, wound, wrapt, rowled, hudled vp as they do any bundle. Goluppo, a bundle, a fardle, a clue, a rowle, a huddle, a winding vp, a faul∣tering in speech. Gombine, the thongs or straps of leather that tye a flaile, or bels, they are com∣monlie made of synewes or strong white leather. Gombitare, to hit, thrust, or iustle with the elbow, to push. Gombito, an elbow. Also a cubit, the measure betweene the hand and the elbowe. Gombitoso, crooked, or bending as an elbow doth. Gómedo, an elbow, as Gomito, or Gombito. Gomedra, a braue, goodly, great Ladie taken in mockery. Also a kinde of bird. Gomena, a great anker cable. Gomenare, to store a ship with cables, to cable an anker. Gomenaro, a cable maker. Gomitare, as Gombitare.
Gomitello, part of a horse vnder the shoulder or ioynts thereof. Gómito, as Gombito. Gomitolare, to roule, to winde, to huddle, or wrap vp. Gomítolo, a bottome or clue of threed. Also a bundle, fardle, heape, or packe of any thing. Gomma, gumme. Gomma Arabica, a kinde of gum so cal∣led. Gomma bianca, quick-siluer, according to Alchimists phrases. Gomma dragante, a kinde of gum so called. Gommare, to gum, to glue, to size. Gommena, as Gomena. Gomoréo, a Gomorrhean, a Sodomite. Gommoso, gummie, gluish. Gonagra, the goute in the knees. Gondola, a kinde of small boates like our wherries vsed in Venice. Gondolare, to go or saile in a gandole. Gondolaro, a gondole maker. Gondoliére, a rower in such gondoles. Gonfalone, a chiefe standard. Gonfaloniere, a chiefe standard bearer. Gonfiamento, a swelling or puffing. Gonfiare, to swell, to puffe vp, to blather. Gonfiare alcuno, to make one beleeue any thing, to perswade one that the moone is made of greene cheese, to set one a gogge, to bring one with faire words into a fooles paradice, to ouercom one with faire words, to sooth vp and flatter one. Gonfiasone, a swelling or puffing. Gonfiatoio, any thing that will cause a swelling: properly a squirt of brasse that Balloniers vse to blowe their bal∣lones full of winde. Gonfiatura, a swelling, a puffing, a pride. Gonfietto, as Gonfiatoio. Gonfieuole, any thing that may be swol∣len or puffed. Gonfiezza, a swelling, a puffing. Gonfio, swollen, puffed. Also proude or hautie: a swelling, a puffing. Gonfiotto, as Sughero, as Gonfione. Gonfione, a man swolne or puffed vp with pride, as Sughero. Gonfo, a bundle of woode or stones, or such things. Gongola, the shell fish which we call scal∣lop. Gongolacchiare, as Gongolare. Gongolamenti, chuckings. Gongolare, to laugh at the hart till it be sore, or shoulders ake, to chuck. Gongolatione, a hartie laughing or chucking. Gonna, a womans vpper gowne, robe, or mantle. Gonnélla, a little gowne, a sauegarde, a petticote, a streight gowne. Gonnellaro, a womans robe-maker. Gonnellino, a little gowne, robe, saue∣gard, or petticote, a iacket, a cassocke, a gabardine. Gonoréa, the running of the raines or shedding of seed. Gonzi, wide sleeues, or trunke-sleeues. Also idle lubbars, grosse clownish fel∣lowes. Gora, a gutter to conuey water, a mill trough. Gora morta, a standing poole of water. Gorga, Gorgia, the throte, gullet, or weason pipe, the gorge or pannell of a hauke. Also a roaring noise. Gorgazzule, a disease called the quin∣zey. Gorgheggiare, to gargarize, to rattle, or gurgle. Also to speake in the throte. Gorghiera, as Gorgiera. Gorghetta, as Gorgiera. Also the pur∣ling spring of water. Gorghierino, as Gorgierino. Gorgiéra, a gorget, a partlet, a necker∣cher, a raile about ones necke, a col∣lor of harneis. Gorierino, Gorgiarino, a gorget or peece of armour for the necke. Gorgietta, a little gorget. Also a partlet. Gorgo, a spoute of water, a gutter to con∣uey water, a gullet, the eddie of the wa∣ters, a gulfe, a whirlepoole, a streame of water, a swallow of water, a gurgle. Gorgogliare, to gurgle as water doth running, or to rattle in the throte. Gorgogliestro, a weede of some called yellowe water-cresses. Of some water perslie, of others belders, or bell-rags. Gorgogliccia, the yellow roote which we call licorice. Gorgolio, a gurgle, or gurgling noise. Gorgolare, to gurgle as water doth run∣ning. Gorgolita, the sweete roote licorice. Gorgolestro, the weede we call water∣cresses. Gorgonia, a kinde of precious stone. Gorgorizzare, to gargarize in the throte. Gorgorismo, a gargarizme. Gorgozzare, as Gorgogliare. Gorgozzulo, a mans throte, gullet or weazon pipe. Gorgozzuolo, as Gorga, or Gorgo. Goro, a kinde of wine or the colour there∣of. Gorzarino, a gorget armour for the neck. Gosso, as Gozzo. Gota, a cheeke, a iaw. Also a drop or trill. Gotata, as Guanciata. Gotta, a drop, or a drizle. Also the disease called the gout. Gottacciuola, a little drop. Also a squi∣nancy in the throte. Also a botch, a bile, a blane, a plague sore: but properly lit∣tle knobs or bunches, wartles or kernels growing in a mans mouth. Gottanciuola, the goute. Also as Got∣tacciuola. Gotte, a disease in a horse called the weak∣nes in the backe. Also the goute. Gottimbrillo.   Gottomano, a digger or workman about mynes or minerals. Gottonare, to cotton or set a nap on, to frize. Gottonato, a kinde of cotton, frizado, pe∣nestone, or buffin sarge. Gottone, cotton, bayes, frize, penestone. Gotto, a pot or iarre for oyle, a drinking glasse. Also a drop of any thing. Gottoso, goutie, troubled with the goute. Gottuccia, a creeping goute that is not yet setled. Also a little drop. Gouernamento, a gouernment or charge Gouernare, to gouerne, to rule, to swaie. Gouernatore, a gouernour, a ruler. Gouernatrice, a gouernesse, a woman ruler. Gouérno, a gouernance, a rule, a swaie. Gousaghina, a gudgeon fish, or a mop. Gozza, as Goccia, as Gotta. Gozzauiglia, pleasure, blithenes, glee, pa∣stime in good companie, especially ma∣king good cheere togither. Also good cheere, cates, all manner of viandes to∣gither, and bellie cheere. Gozzauigliare, to go and gad abroade onely to make good cheere, to gossop, and take onely delite in gluttonie and riot, to fare daintilie. Gozzo, a bunch or knob in the throte, cal∣led the throte bole. Gracchia, the birde we call a chough, or a dawe. Also a blab, a pratler, a tatler. Gracchiare, to chat, to cackle as a chough: to raile, to prate, to tattle. Gracchione, Gracchiatore, a chatter, a cackler, a railer, a prater, a tatler. Gracculo, Graculo, a dawe, a choughe, or cornish chough. Gracidare, to croake as a toade or frogge. Also to hisse as a goose. Gracillare, to cackle as a hen. Gracitare, as Gracidare. Graciughe, a kinde of pincers, tongs, or mullets that gold-smiths vse. Grada, a grate or lettice window. Also a net. Also a gridiron.
Gradare, to giue a degree vnto. Gradeggiare, as Gradare. Gradélla, a gridiron. Also a windowe grate. Gradéuole, acceptable, gratefull, thanke∣full, pleasing. Gradire, disco, dito, to accept, to take in good woorth, to prize, to esteeme, to ac∣knowledge gratefully, to bee pleased with. Graditamente, gratefully, thankefullie, deerelie, acceptablie. Gradi, Gradora, steps or staires, degrees, waies, meanes, ladders, greeses. Gradito, accepted, taken in good part, pri∣zed, esteemed, deerely accoumpted. Grado, a degree, a dgnitie, a state, an of∣fice, a step. Also content, or thanks. Also a greece, a staire or step in ladders. Also a meane, an entrie, a way to any thing, a will, a desire, a minde, an intent, a size or proportion. Also a pace or step, that is two foote and a halfe. Graduare, to graduate, or take degree in schooles. Graduato, graduated, a graduate, one that hath taken degrees of learning. Graffi, scratches or rakings. Also hooke or crooke. Graffiare, to scratch, to claw, to scrape. Graffiatura, a scratching, a clawing, a scraping. Graffiere, a register, a remembrancer, or writer, or clerke of recordes. Graffignare, to scratch, to claw, to scrape, to gripe. Graffigne, gripes, clawes, pounces of a hauke, nayles or talents. Graffigno, a scratch. Also a dragging hooke, a griping. Graffio, a scratch, a claw, a scrape, a flesh hooke or other hooke. Graffione, a great dragging hooke. Graffiuolo, the name of a carpenters toole. Gragniuola, small haile, or drizeling raine. Gragniuolare, to haile, to drizle or miste. Grallo, a woodpecker, or eate-bill, or wit∣wall. Gramaglia, any mourning garment. Also a robe of state. Gramagliare, to clad in mourning attire. Gramaia, as Gramaglia. Gramare, to make wailefull, sad, or in miserable plight. Gramégna, all kind of grasse, but chiefe∣ly dogs tooth. Gramenare, to knead any thing, or dow as bakers do. Also to hazzell or breake flaxe. Gramercè, as Grammercè. Gramezza, sorrow, miserie, wretched∣nes, sillines. Gramfo, as Granfo. Gramigna, the herbe or grasse called dogs tooth. Also all maner of grasse. Gramignoso, full of grasse. Gramineo, made of grasse. Gramma, as Gromma. Grammamente, greatly. Grammatia, a kinde of precious stone. Grammatica, a grammar, the arte of grammar, that is to teach to speake well, and write correctedlie. Grammaticale, grammaticall, according to grammar rules. Grammatico, a grammarian, one that teacheth to speake and write well. Grammerce, god amercie, I thanke you, gramercie. Gramo, sad, wofull, wretched, miserable, heauie, in poore plight, a poore sillie wretch. Grámola, a iawe, a cheeke, a chap, but namely, a kneading tub. Also a hassell to breake flaxe with. Also a bin that receiues the meale being ground. Gramolare, as Gramenare. Gramolato, ranged bread. Gramone, a kneader of dowe for bread. Also a kneading tub. Gramoso, as Gramo. Also bedawbed or laied on. Grampella, a kinde of sea-crab. Gramuffa, a kinde of staring, stately, staulking, puffing looke. Also in deri∣sion vsed for grammer. Grana, the graine wherewith they dye scarlet. Granaio, Granaro, a garner, a barne, a maund. Granare, to kerne as corne doth, to graine. Granata, a broome, a beesome. Also a pomegranet. Also a kinde of red pre∣cious stone. Granatare, to sweepe, or brush. Granatella, a brush, or little broome. Granato, a pomegranet tree. Also kerned as corne doth, grained. Grancelli, Grancetti, as Granceoli. Granceóli, creuisses, praunes, or shrimps. Granchiare, to clinch, to gripe, to take hold of, to pinch. Granchio, a crab or creuisse. Also a dragging hooke, also the cramp, a foolish fellow, a noddie, a gull. Also a disease or crampe in a horse. Granchiolini, Granchiuellini, as Granceóli. Granchiporo, Grancipoo, a crab or creuisse. Also a kinde of shrub so called. Gran, great, big, mightie, huge, alwayes before a consonant. Grande, great, huge, mightie, big, before a vowell. Grandeggiare, to become great, huge, or big, to braue, to sweare, to swagger. Grandezza, greatnes, bignes, hugenes. Grandicéllo, indifferent great. Grandinare, to haile. Grándine, haile. Grandinélla, small haile. Grandiloqui, such as speake with a high and loftie stile. Grandire, disco, dito, to greaten, to ad∣uance, to preferre, to raise. Grandito, greatned, aduanced, prefer∣red, raised. Grando, great haile. Grandone, huge, big, very great, a big lubber, a loggerhead. Grandura, as Grandezza. Granélli, certaine little graines which the Apothecaries sell, all manner of kernels or graines. Granéllo, a little graine, the kernell of any fruite, or nut. Granellosa, an hearbe that is alwayes greene called sengreene, or houseleeke, some thinke it to be the prickmadame. Granelloso, full of graines, full of ker∣nels. Granfare, to cramp one. Granfatto, hardlie, with much ado. Granfo, the crampe, or shrinking of the synewes. Also a kinde of waspe or hr∣net with hornes. Also as Sgramso. Grangia, a grange, a countrie farme. Grangio, Granzo, as Granchio. Granito, a kinde of speckled or many co∣loured stone. Grano, any kinde of graine or corne. Also a graine, or waight of a graine. Graphie, a kinde of engine of warre so called. Also delineations or drawings out of any worke. Grappa, a dragging hooke, a clinch, a gripe, a snatching, or playing at musse, a scambling. Grappare, to drag, to hooke, to clinch, to gripe, to seaze as a hauke doth on his pray, to skamble, to snatch, to grapple. Grappe, a kinde of skab in a horse called the paines. Grappello, Grapello, a dragging, or grapling hooke. Grappo, as Grapello. Also a bunch or cluster of grapes. Also a snatch. Also as Grappe. Gráppola, a bunch, a cluster, as of grapes.
Grappóso, full of bunches as vines and trees are, full of clusters. Graspare, to graspe or grapple. Graspia, Graspéa, a kinde of common houshold wine, the last wine that is made. Graspie, the grapes when the wine is pres∣sed out of them. Graspo d'uua, a bunch or cluster of grapes. Graspolo, a cluster, or a bunch. Graspugliare, to scrape as a hen doth. Grascia, fat, grease. Also white meates, as cheese and butter. Also all manner of flesh meates. Also sport, play, delight, pastime, good fellowship, ease. Grasciare, to fatten, to grease, to noynt, to tallow, to make good cheere. Grasciero, a puruaier, or ouerseer of all sorts of flesh victuals. Grasciume, fatnes, fat, grease, plentie, cheese and butter, oyle, tallow, sewet. Graselle, Looke Botta. Grassa, as Grascia, Grassare, as Grasciare. Grassella, incense or frankincense. Grassetto, somewhat fat or greasie. Grassezza, fatnes, greasines. Grasso, fat, rich, fertill, as grasso terre∣no. Also any kind of fat, fatnes, grease, tallow, sewet, oyntment, oyle or but∣ter. Grassola, parte of a horse about the shoulder. Grassone, very fat or greasie. Grassume, as Grasciume. Grasta, an earthen pot to plant sweete flowers or gilliflowers in to keepe them in houses, we call them flowerpots, or lillypots. Grata, a grate of iron, a gridiron, a gra∣ter, a hurdle. Gratamente, gratefullie, thankefullie, kindlie, in good worth. Gratare, to grate. Grate, grates of iron, gridirons, hurdles. Gratélla, a grate, a grater, a grediron. Gratellare, to grate, to broyle vpon a gridiron. Gratia, a grace, a pardon, a boone or guift, grace, comelins, feature, welfauorednes, fauour, ornament. Gratia dei, the herbe blew cranes bill or blew crowfoot. Gratiano, a gull, a foole or clownish fel∣lowe in a play or comedie. Gratiare, to grace, to fauour, to counte∣nance, to pardon. Also to decore or a∣dorne. Gratiato, graced, fauoured, countenan∣ced, pardoned. Also gracious, fauoura∣ble, louing, kinde, mild, gentle, comely, welfauoured. Graticolato, a grate before a doore. Gratiosa, the sunne flower or rud or ma∣rigold. Gratioso, gratious, fauourable, louing, milde, gentle, comely, welfauoured. Graticola, as Graticula. Graticolare, as Graticulare. Graticcij, grates or gridirons: but most properly hurdles of rods. Graticciare, to grate or broile vpon a gri∣diron, to hurdle. Graticcione, a great grater, a gridiron▪ a great hurdle. Graticula, a grater, a grate, a gridiron. Also a hurdle. Also a kind of torment or torture. Graticulare, to grate, to broile vpon a gridiron. Gratie, the three graces, Agalia, Thalia, Euphrosina. Gratificare, to gratifie. Gratificatione, a gratification. Gratisicoso, gratfull, acceptable. Gratigliare, to be merrie or pleasant, to tickle, to blith. Gratiglioso, merrie, blith, pleasant, io∣cond, iolly. Gratis, gratis, for god a mercie. Gratitudine, gratitude, thankefulnes. Grato, gratfull, acceptable, thankefull, in good woorth. Gratta cascio, Gratta cacio, a grater to grate cheese or any thing with. Grattaculo, the hip of a rose. Grattaiuola, a grater to grate spices with. Grattalice, a scratching, a clawing, a scra∣ping. Grattamento, a scratch, a clawing, a scra∣ping. Grattapugia, a wire brush that gold∣smiths vse. Grattare, to scratch, to claw, to scrape. Grattatore, a scratcher, a clawer, a scra∣per. Grattatura, as Grattamento. Grattéra, a mouse trap, a grater. Gratuccia, as Gratuggia. Gratucciare, as Gratuggiare. Gratuggia, a shauing iron. Also a grater. Gratuggiare, to shaue as curriers do lea∣ther, to grate. Gratuire, tuisco, tuito, to gratifie. Gratuito, gratified. Gratuità, grātuitie. Gratulare, to gratulate, to reioice with, to giue thankes. Gratulatione, a gratulation, a thankes∣giuing. Gratulatoria lettera, a letter of congra∣tulation or thankesgiuing. Graua, a pit, a trench, a breach in the earth, a deepe, a dungeon. Grauaccione, a heauie, dull, lumpish, slow, leaden witted man or beast. Grauagni, a kind of birde abiding in cold countries, supposed of some to breed of shrubs or sprigs of trees. Grauame, idem. Grauamento, a greeuance, an aggraua∣ting, a burthen, a charging, a trouble. Grauare, to aggrauat, to grieue, to molest, to burthen, to charge, to oppresse, to an∣noy or trouble. Grauato, aggrauated, grieued, molested, burthened, charged, oppressed, annoied, troubled. Grauatore, an aggrauator, a grieuer, a molester, a burthener, a charger, an op∣presser, an annoier, a troubler. Graue, heauie, burthenous, troublesome, dolorous, sorrowfull, grieuous, noisome. Also graue, solemne, maiesticall, impor∣tant. Grauélla, grauell or sand. Also the grauel or stone in the bladder. Grauezza, grieuance, oppression, grauity, heauines. Grauezza di petto, a disease in a horse called griefe in the breast. Grauiare, to aggrauat, to wrong, to op∣presse. Grauicémbalo, a musicall instrument like our claricoes. Gráuida, Gráuido, great, big, with child. Grauidanza, Grauidezza, a being great with child. Grauidare, to beget with child. Gráuio, grieuance, wrong, oppression, in∣iurie, heauines, griefe. Also a burthen or heauines. Grauità, grauitie, solemnitie. Graulo, Graulano, as Golano. Grauore, as Grauio, as Grauezza. Grauoso, grieuous, troublesome, full of op∣pression, intolerable, heauy, dull, leaden. Grebbéno, a crag, a rocke, a cliffe. Grecheggiare, to saile according to the north east wind. Also to play the greeke. Greco, the north east wind. Also greeke wine. Also a greeke. Greco leuante, a north east winde. Greco tramontana, east and by north. Gregali, as Guaidignoni. Also vulgar or common. Gregge, a flocke of sheepe. Greggia, flocks of sheepe. Greggiaro, a sheapherd or keeper of flockes. Greggioso, rich in flocks of cattle.
Gregnappola, as Grignappola. Gregne, sheafes or handfuls of corne, a wad of strawe, a bottle of hay. Grembiale, Grembiule, an apron, a sauegard, a halfe kirtle. Grembo, a lap or a bosome. Gremiale, Gremiolo, as Grembiale. Gremire, misco, mito, to hide or pull vp close. Gremmiale, as Grembiale. Gremmo, as Grembo. Gremola, bran or course meale. Greppo, a crag, a cliffe, a rocke, a hillocke, a molehill, a heape, a rounde, a turfe, a clod. Greppola, drosse, dregs, or lees of anie thing. Greppolare, to grow to drosse, dregs or lees, as wine doth. Also to make craggie, rockie, hillie, or in heapes. Grespia, Raspise wine. Gretta, leane, spinie, narrowe, straight, bare, meager, gaunt, lanke. Grettitudine, finicalnes, nicenes, thinnes, leannesse, lanknesse. Gretto, flat, squeased, squatted, shotten as a shotten hering, crushed. Grettole, narrowe cliffes or crags, or creekes. Also chinkes or little holes. Gréue, heauie, waightie, greeuous, pon∣drous. Grezza, of the colour of hempe or course canuas vnwhited. Gricciare, to lust, to desire, to long, to haue a toie or conceit in the head. Griccio, a lust, a desire, a longing, a sud∣den toie, humour or conceit. Gricciolare, to be toyish, humorous, fan∣tasticall, or full of strange conceits. Gricciolo, a toie, a conceit or sudden mo∣tion in the head, a fantasticall hu∣mour. Griccioloso, humerous, toyish, fantasti∣call, wauering, skittish. Griccione, a kinde of water foule. Griccioso, lustfull, longing, full of toyes and humours. Grida, a proclamation, cries, cryings, whi∣nings, callings, contentions, brawlings, chidings, outcries. Gridare, to proclaime, publish, to chide, braule, striue, or contend, to crie, whine, weepe, call, or call out. Gridatore, a crier, a proclaimer, a chider. Grido, fame, report, brute, relation. Also a crie, a weeping, a noise, a call, a cla∣mour. Gridore, a crie, a call, a noise, a shoute, a clamour. Grieue, as Greue. Grifagno, Grifano, any birde that is ra∣uenous, or that hath clawes or gripes. Also a haggard hauke. Naso Grifag∣no, a haukes nose. Grifare, Griffare, to gripe, to seaze as a hauke doth. Also to feede as a hog. Grifo, Griffo, a griffon, a gripe, a clawe, a pounce, a hogs snoute. Also a bill, a grinning, or yawning, or scornefull ope∣ning, or moouing of the mouth. Also a kinde of shepherds garment or weede. Grifone, Griffone, a griffon who hath a beake like an eagle, and hath fower feete, and is hairie. Grigietto, a fine graie or sheepes russet. Grigio, graie▪ sheepes russet, darke, brown, blacke, hoarie, white. Also a shepherds weed, or home spun sheepes russet cloth. Grigione, a course graie, a homespunne cloth. Also as Frusone. Grignappola, a mans or womans geere or priuities. Also a kinde of slowe flying birde. Grillaie, cricket-holes, cricketings. Grillante, reioicing, glad, blithe, buck∣some, briske, skipping for ioy, cricketing. Grillare, to creake as a cricket, to leape for ioy, to be blithe. Grilli, crickets. Also toyes, as we saie his head is full of Bees-nests. Grillo, a cricket, a fantasticall toie or con∣ceit. Also a kinde of creuise or praune. Grilloo, toyish, one whose head is full of proclamations. Grima, Grimma, withered, wrimpled, wrinkled, faded, old, wretched, sillie. Also a beggers scrip, bag, lap, or sat∣chell. Also a mam, a dam, or mother. Grimaldellare, to picke locks, to hooke out of windowes. Grimaldelli, picklock irons, or hookes to picke any locke with. Also a kinde of darting weapon. Grimaldelliere, pick-locke tricks, conie∣catching or prowling tricks, picklocks. Grimare, to wither, to wrinkle, to fade. Grimo, as Grima, a sire, a dad, a father. Grincia, Grinza, a withering, a wrim∣ple, a fading, a wrinkle. Grinciare, Grinzare, to wither, to wrin∣kle, to fade. Grincioso, Grinzoso, full of wrinkles or wrimples. Grinzo, as Grincia, a red kinde of fish called a gournet, a rotchet or a red fish. Gripho, as Grifo. Grippia, a case or boxe wherein a mason doth put his chisels or tooles. Also a handfull, a wispe or wadde of strawe, a bottle of haie, or any such thing. Grippo, a little skiffe or cocke bote. Also as Grepppo. Grippola, the dregs or lees that the wine leaues sticking to the vessell. Grippone, a good big skiffe or cockbote. Grisare, to grow graie, white or hoarie. Griscella, a fish called a loch. Grisetto, as Grigietto. Griso, as Grigio. Grisone, as Grigione. Grisoméle, the fruite called Apricocks. Grisopazzo, a kinde of greene stone with veines of gold in it. Gritta, a kind of sea crab. Grizzolo, as Gricciolo. Grobio, a kinde of precious stone like corall. Grocchi, as Gnocchi. Grofolare, to roote or grubbe vp as hogs do▪ also to filtch, to embezie, to purloine, to pilfer. Grogna, haulme, stubble of corne. Also thatch. Grognano, a kinde of stuffe called gro∣gram or mockadowe. Grola, Grolla, a chough, a dawe, or a rooke. Groma, Gromare, Gromoso, as Gromma, &c. Gromma, mosse, also gum or glue. Also the earth, morter, or daubing that is laid on wals. Also the crust or lees of wine that it leaues sticking to the ves∣sell. Also any kinde of scurffe or durt sticking to any thing. Grommare, to become mossie, hard, rug∣ged, durtie, crustie, scuruie, grettie, gummie, gluish, scabbie. Grommoso, mossie, gummie, gluish. Also daubed or laid on with morter, rugged, knottie, scuruie, scabbed. Gronda, a gutter vpon the roofe of hou∣ses, the eaues of a house. Also the ridge of the haire about the eie-lids, the eie-browes. Also a top or height. Grondaia, Grondara, the ridge or vp∣permost part of a house, the top of anie thing, a penthouse, a gutter betweene two houses. Also the pipes of lead to con∣uey water from the tops of houses. Grondalla, as Grondaia. Grondare, to trill, trickle, or drop downe as water doth of from a house. Grongo, a cunger fish. Groppa, a buttocke or crupper of a horse, a rumpe, vsed also for Feccia. Groppamenti, knottings, tyings, entan∣glings. Groppare, to knot, to tie in knots, to grow to nodes or knobs. Groppeggiare, is when a horse doth knit himselfe togither carying himselfe vpon his hinder parts and drawing them vp
as though he would yarke. Groppi, knots, nodes, knobs, bunches. Groppiera, a crupper for a horse. Groppo, a knot, an entangling, a node, a knob, a bunch. Also a flawe or berrie of winde, a whirle winde. Groppone, a great crupper or buttocks. Also a rumpe or buttocke peece of meat. Gropposo, Groppoloso, knottie, full of knots. Grossa, grosse, big, fat, round, with childe, course. Also a kinde of measure for wet things. Grossaggine, lowtishnes, grossenes, clow∣nishnes, foolishnes, coursenes. Grossamente, grossely, bungerly, slouen∣lie, oursely. Grossare, to make grosse, big, rounde or with childe, to make course. Grossetta, Grossettina, somewhat big, or course. Grossezza, bignes, greatnes, coursenes, grossenes. Grosso, grosse, big, rounde, loggerheaded, lubbarlie, clownish, great, course. Also a coyne that we call a grote. Grossograno, a stuffe which we call gro∣guran. Grossolaneria, clownishnes, basenes, slo∣uenlines, grosnes, bungerlines. Grossolano, Grossolone, a lubber, a log∣gerhead, a clowne, a boore, a rude fel∣low. Also bungerly, grossely, clownish∣ly, homely, coursly. Grotta, a caue, a den, a cauerne, a grot. Also a disease in a hauke. Grottesca, a kinde of rugged vnpolished painters worke, anticke worke. Grotto, Grottomarino, as Grottomo∣linaro. Grottola, a little den, caue, or cauerne. Grottolare, to enden, to encaue or en∣grot. Grottomolinaro, a bird like a swan that brayeth like an asse. Grottoso, full of grots, caues or dens. Grottoso osso, the name of a bone in a mans head. Gru, Grue, the bird we call a crane. Also a kind of long fish. Gruario, a nest of cranes. Gruccia, a haukes pearch. Also a stake to tie an owle vnto when they go a birding with them. It is also taken for the crut∣ches of lame men. Grufolare, to roote or grub as hogs doe, to filch, to embezle, to pilfer, to purloine, to shift for, to scrape or hoord vp toigther. Gruga, a bird called a crane. Grugnare, to grunt as a hog, to grumble. Grugnire, gnisco, gnito, as Grug∣nare. Grugno, the snout of a hog. Also the herbe cicorie. Also as Grifo. Grugno di porco, the herbe cicorie. Also a hogs snout. Grúgnolo, the snout of a hog. Grugnoloso, grunting, grumbling. Grugnóne, a great snout. Gruire, gruisco, gruio, to crie or crankle as the crane doth. Grullo, a gull, a sot, a foole, a patch. Also as Brullo. Gruma, the eie of a needle. Grummoso, as Grommoso. Grumo, a lumpe, a ddle or masse of any thing, a cob. Grunello, a kind of wild beast. Grunire, nisco, nio, to grunt as a hog, to grumble. Grunito, grunted, grumbled. Also the grunting of a hog. Gruno, as Grifo. Gruogo, saffron. Gruppo, Gruppare, Grupposo, as Groppo. Gruzzare, as Ruspare. Gruzzolare, as Ruspare. Gruzzolo, as Gozzo. Also a scraping or hoording vp togither. Gua, a kind of fishing net. Guaccetto, as Guazzetto. Guacchi a kind of birds. Guaco, as Guaiaco. Guadagnare, to win, to gaine, to get, to profit, to saue. Guadagnatore, a winner, a gainer, a get∣ter, a profiter. Guadagneria, as Guadagno. Guadagno, gaine, profit, commings in, getting, cheuissante. Guadagnoso, gainefull, profitable. Guadare, to wade, to ferrie or to foard ouer a riuer. Also to wod with blew. Guado, a stuffe to die blew withall cal∣led woad. Also a ferrie or passage of a riuer, a shallow, a ford or a wading place. Also the bottom of a water or ri∣uer. Guadoso, that may be ferried or waded ouer. Also ground that beareth woad, full of woad. Guagina, a sheath or a scabbard. Guaginare, to sheath or put vp in a scab∣bard. Guaginaro, a scabbard or sheath-ma∣ker. Guagnastra, a common whore, strumpet or harlot in rogues language or gib∣brish. Guagnélo, a Lombard word for Vangé∣lo, the Gospell. Guagnélle, a countrey mans oath, as much to say as, by the Gospell, by the masse. Guai, woes, troubles, vexations, sorrowes, crosses, stowers. Guai a voi, woe to you. Guaiaco, the wood called Guacum, good to cure the poxe, pockwood or wood of life. Guaimembro, a kinde of fine bird in In∣dia that onely feedeth vpon deaw. Guaina, as Guagina. Guainare, as Guaginare. Guainaro, as Guaginaro. Guaioso, full of woes or troubles or sor∣rowes. Guaire, isco, guaito, to be full of woes, troubles or sorrowes, to whine or waile, to yell or crie out. Also to quest about for a prai as a dog. Gualano, a ploughman, a husbandman. Gualare, to waile, to lament, to mone. Gualca, a calender or presse for cloth, a mill to full cloths in. Gualcare, to calender or presse cloth, to full clothes. Gualcatore, a calender or presseman, a cloth fuller. Gualchiera, Gualchera, as Gualca. Gualcherare, as Gualcare. Gualda, an excursion, an outroad against enemies, a bootehaling, a freebooting. Gualdana, the furie of soldiers when they spoile or pray vpon their enimies. Gualdo, a weede to die yellow with called woald. Guallare, a bursting or opening of a man as when the guts fall into the cods. Gualloroso, burst, open bellied. Gualloppare, as Galloppare. Gualloppante, as Galloppante. Gualloppatore, as Galloppatore. Gualloppo, as Galloppo. Guancetta, a little cheeke. Guancetto, a little claspe or kirble hooke about a horses bit. Guancia, a mans cheeke. Guanciale, a pillow. Guancialetto, a little pillow. Guanciata, a blow, a cuffe, a boxe or a whirret on the cheeke. Guanciatore, a striker, a cuffer. Also a iugler, a cosener, a pilferer, a flicker. Guancietta, a little cheeke. Guancietto, a kinde of kirble hooke that horse-riders vse. Guangiare, to knead dow, to clap with the hands. Also to rub. Guantaio, Guantaro, Guantiero, a glouer, a gloue-maker. Guantare, to gloue or put on mittins. Guanti, a kinde of paste meate so called
in Italie. Guanto, a gloue, a mittin, a gauntlet. Guantone, a gauntlet, a great gloue. Guarallo, a kind of noisome beast liuing in Africa. Guardacuote, a stomacher, a mariners or fishers habit with a flap ouer the belly. Guardacenere, a brasen vessell to couer the ashes when the fire is raked vp. Guarda donna, a womans keeper when she lies in child-bed, a midwife. Guarda festa, an idle lazie fellow, a kee∣per of holidaies. Guarda nappa, nappo, a cubboord, a court cubboord. Guardanaso, a defence or cace for ones nose. Guarda porci, a swineheard, a hog-kee∣per. Guarda robba, a wardrop, a buttrie, a lardrie, a pantrie. Guarda robbiero, a wardrop keeper. Guardarobbo, a sparing miser, a nig∣gardly chuffe. Guardante, gardant, viewing, a word in armorie, looking, beholding. Guardare, to see, to looke, to behold, to view, to gard, to beware. Also to note, to consider, to aduise, to regard, to re∣spect, to keepe, to heede, to ouersee. Also to holud, to retaine, to defend, to go∣uerne, to protect, to shield. Guárdati, take heede, looke to thy selfe. Guardatore, a gardian, a warden, a kee∣per, a maister, a looker, a tutor, an ouerseer, a protector. Guardatura, a looking, a viewing, an aspect, a countenance, a semblance. Guardia, a gard, a watch, a tuition, a custodie, a gouernment, a protection, a defence, a keeping. heede, ouersight. Looke la guardia, a warde of a lock, or a keye. Also a part of a bit for a horse. Guardiáno, a gardian, a warden, a kee∣per, a maister, a looker, a tutor, an ouerseer, a protector. Guárdie, sentinels, watches. Also a ward of a locke or key. Guardigno, nice, coye, scrupulous, pre∣cise, heedie, watchfull, considerate, dili∣gent, carefull, respectiue. Guardignoni, stalions that liue abroade with mares. Guardingo, Guardiuo, as Guardigno. Guardo, a looke, a regard, a glaunce, a shew, a semblance, a beholding, a view∣ing, a countenance, an aspect. Guárdoli, the randes of a paire of shoes. Guarentare, to warrant, or assure. Guarentire, to warrant, to assure. Guarenza, a cure, a recouery, or hea∣ling. Guari, an aduerb of quantitie, much, or long since, or too much, mickle. Guarigione, as Guarenza. Guarimente, hath bene vsed for Guari. Guarire, guarisco, guarito, to cure, to heale, to recouer. Guarito, cured, healed, recouered. Guarna, as Guarnaccia. Guarnaccia, Guarnacca, a kinde of vpper garment for women. Also a kind of wine like malmesie. Guarnaletto, a frocke, petticote, saue∣gard, or such like garment. Guarnéllo, fustian, or that stuffe we call bustian or carell. Also an vpper long vaile that women weare in Italie. Guarnigione, a garrison of souldiers. Also furniture. Also any kinde of lace, gard, or fringe for garments. Also a garnishing. Guarnimento, a garnishment, a furni∣shing, a munition, an adornement, a decking, a trimming. Guarnire, nisco, nito, to garnish, to fur∣nish, to store, to puruay. Also to decke, to adorne, to bewtifie, to set forth, to trimme, to munite. Guarnito, garnished, furnished, stored, puruayed, decked, adorned, beawtified, set foorth, trimmed, munited. Guasca, a kinde of measure for drye things. Guastada, a glasse to bring wine in to the boord. Guastadella, a little glasse or violl. Guastadetta, Guastaretta, as Guasta∣della. Guastadori, Guastatori, pioners in a camp, destroyers, spoilers. Guastamento, a spoile, a marring, a wasting, a corruption, a defacing, an vndoing. Guastare, to waste, to marre, to spoile, to corrupt, to rot, to consume, to vndo, to ouerthrow, to spoile, to besot or in∣tangle in loue, vsed also to execute or put to death. Guastato, wasted, marred, spoiled, cor∣rupted, rotten, consumed, vndone, ouer∣throwne, defaced, destroyed, spoiled, besotted, or entangled in loue. Also ex∣ecuted or put to death. Guastatore, a marrer, a spoiler, a de∣stroyer, a pioner, a waster. Also a hangman or executioner. Guastatura, as Guastamento. Guasto, a waste, a spoile, a destruction, a defacing. Also as Guastato. Guatare, to prye, to peepe, to spie, to looke narrowly, to peere, to watch, to lurke, to toote. Guatatore, a prier, a peeper, a spie, a pee∣rer, a watcher, a tooter. Guataro, as Guatatore. Guatatura, a prying, a peeping, a spying, a peering, a watching, a tooting. Guataro di puttane, a bawde or apple∣squire. Guati, snares, entanglings, ambushes, ambuscadoes, or waitings for. Guatta, a kinde of dogfish. Guáttaro, Guáttero, a scullion in a kit∣chin, a drudge in a kitchin. Guatto, flat, squatted, brused, close, whoosht, close lurking. Guauliare, to whine as children do. Guazza, the morning deaw. Also a plash, moore, slow, or standing water. Guazzabugliare, to mingle mangle, or confound together, to mesh. Guazzabuglio, a hotchpotch, mingle-mangle, a gallymauphrey, a mesh. Guazzare, to dash, to wade or trample in the water, to lauish or riot in good cheere. Guazzarone, a top-saile of a ship. Also an vpper course smocke, such as women vse to weare ouer their cloathes when they spinne. Also as Gherone. Guazzerone, as Guazzarone. Guazzetare, to make fine or daintie sau∣ces. Also as Guazzare. Guazzettino, as Guazzetto. Also min∣ced meate. Guazzétto, a kinde of fine saucie meate, or galliemaufrey, or pottage. Guazzo, a foord, a ferrie, a plash of wa∣ter, a wading place, a wash poole. Also lauishnes, riot, wasting in good cheere. Also a water or washed colour. Guazzolare, to babble, to tattle, to chat. Guazzoso, plashie, waterish, fennie, moorish, boggie, that may be waded. Also lauish, or riotous in gluttonie Guccio, a gull, a sot, a ninnie, a m∣cock. Guércio, squint eyed, bleare eyed. Guercietto, a little squint eyed. Guére, as Ghiere. Guerminella, deceit, guile, trumperie, a knauish tricke. Guernimento, as Guarnimento. Guernire, nisco, nito, as Guarnire. Guernito, as Guarnito. Guerra, warre, or warfare. Guerreggiante, warring, warfaring. Guerreggiare, to warre, to warfare. Guerreggieuole, warlike. Guerreggioso, warlike. Guerriera, a she warrior.
Guerriere, Guerriero, a warrior. Guetto, as Ghetto. Gucchia, a needle. Also a knitting needle. Gucchiare, to threed a needle. Gucchiaro, Gucchiaiuolo, a needle maker. Gucchiata, a needlefull, a prick with a needle. Guffo, Gufo, a kinde of owle called a horne cout, with feathers on each side of his head like eares, vsed also for a gull, a ninnie, or foole. Guffone, Gufone, a great owle, a foule noddie, gull, patch, or coxecomb. Gugélle, a kinde of wilde beast in India. Guglia, a needle. Also a spire, or sharp pointed thing, a knitting needle. Gugliare, to threed a needle, to make sharp pointed. Gugliato, a needle maker. Gugliata, a needle-full. Guia, as Gucchia. Guiardo, a kinde of hearbe or weede that sheepe loue to feede vpon. Guiare, as Gucchiare. Guiata, as Gucchiata. Guida, a guide, a direction, a leader, a chiefe. Guida leschi, gore bloud, clottred bloud, the gall of a horse backe. Also rogues, vagabonds, raskals. Also the bare and leane ribs of a horse. Guidamento, a guiding, a direction. Guidardonare, as Guiderdonare. Guidardone, as Guiderdone. Guidardonatore, as Guiderdonatore. Guidare, to guide, to direct, to leade. Guidareschi, as Guidaleschi. Guidatore, a guider, a director. Guidatura, a guiding, a direction. Guidático, a pasport, a safeconduit, a conuoy, a guiding. Guidegi, the names of certaine vaines in the throte. Guiderdonare, to guerdon, to reward, to recompence. Guiderdonatore, a guerdoner, a rewar∣der, a recompencer. Guiderdone, a guerdon, a reward, a re∣compence. Guidereschi, as Guidaleschi. Guido, a dog or a cur in gibrish or rogues language. Guidone, a guidon or a banner for horse∣men that be shot. Also a rogue, a cros∣biter, an vpright man, or vagabond. Guiggia, a whip wherewith friers whip themselues. Guiggiare, to whip, or scourge. Guigi, a stuffe called sattin of Briges. Guindalo, as Guindolo. Guindolare, to reele, or winde yarne, or silke. Guindolatore, a reeler or winder of yarne. Guindolo, a reele or rice to winde yarne or silke vpon. Guinedra, a barbarous word taken for the Tartars Queene or Empresse. Guinzaglio, the rings that are vpon dogs slips or couples. Also a slip or couple for dogs. Also among riders a long rayne of leather called a quinzell. Guinzare, to couple vp dogs. Also to wrimple, or to wither. Guinzo, withered, outworne, or wrimp∣led through age. Guisa, fashion, manner, guise, custome, forme. Guisare, to fashion, to guise, to custome, to forme. Guistrico, the hearbe that we call priuet print, or prime print. Guizzare, to tumble, to skip, to leape, to flourish a sword in the ayre. Also to slide, or glide, or slip, or glibe away sodainely as an eele doth out of ones hand. Also to wither, or sade away. Guizzo, a sliding, a gliding, a slipping, a glibbing away sodainely. Also a tumbling, a skipping, a leaping, or flourishing. Also withered, faded, slip∣perie as an eele, wrimpled. Gulone, a beast like a beauer, or a bad∣ger very vnsatiable and greedie. Also a sea-gull, or a sea cob. Also a gullygut, a gulling, or a bellygod. Guluppo, as Goluppo. Gumedra, as Gomedra. Gumma, as Gomma. Gummare, as Gommare. Gummoso, as Gommoso. Gurghiera, Gurgiera, as Gorgiera. Gurgiarino, as Gorgiarino. Gurgetta, as Gorgiera. Guscella, Gusella, a pinne. Guscelletta, Guseletta, a little pin. Guscia, as Guscio. Gusciare, to shell, to huske, to pare. Gúscio, a shell, a huske, a paring, a cod. Gusciolare, as Gusciare. Gúsciolo, a little shell or huske, or cod. Gustare, to assaie, to taste. Gustatore, a taster, a sewer, or assaier. Gusteuole, smacking, tarte, tastesome, ta∣sting well, delight some to the taste. Gustia, Gustio, a barke, a rinde, a shale, a shell, a huske, a paring or cod. Gustiare, to pare off the rinde, or barke, to shale or vnhuske. Gusto, a taste or assaie. Also the sence of tasting. Gustoso, tasting, sauorie, hungrie, tasting well. Guttarosa, as Glupea. Gutture, a throte. Guuo, as Guffo. Guzzo, Looke Gorzo, it is also a little whelpe. H HA, he hath, also a word of chiing, as we say to dogs, hagh? what? Habbo, Haggio, Ho, I haue. Habile, able, sit, apt, proper, handsome, conuenient. Habilitare, to make able, to enable, to make fit, apt, proper, or conuenient. Habilità, abilitie, fitnes, aptnes, power, puissance, ablenes. Habitabile, Habiteuole, inhabitable, that may be dwelt in, lodgeable. Habitante, dwelling, inhabitant, lodg∣ing. Habitanza, Habitacolo, an abode, a dwelling or abiding place. Habitare, to dwell, to abide, to inhabite, to woone, to lodge. Habitatione, a dwelling, an habitation, an abiding place, a lodging. Habitatiuo, dwelling, a dweller, inhabi∣ting. Habitatore, a dweller, an inhabiter, a lodger. Hábito, a forme, an habite, a fashion, a manner, a custome, a qualitie. Also a disposition, an attire, or sute of apparell. Habituare, to habituate, to accustome, to vse, to fashion. Habituatione, an habituation, a custome, a vse, a fashion, a condition. Habitúdine, the state, plight, liking, or disposition of the bodie. Habitúri, dwellings, mansions, frequented places. Hacca, the letter H. Haffe, in good saith, by my faith, truly. Hai, as Haime. Also an herbe which will blacke ones teeth. Haime, aie me, wo is me, alas, welladaie. Halare, to reeke, to fume, to smoke, to eua∣porate, to exhale, to vent. Halce, a herring or pilchard. Halcione, Halciónei, as Alcione. Haléci, herrings. Also pilchards. Halcacabo, the herbe dogs grasse. Haliéto, a kinde of kite or buzarde that keepes the seas, an Ospraie which liueth on fish.
Halitare, to breath, to pant. Hálito, a breth, a breathing, a panting. Haloni, a circle about the stars, and name∣ly about the moone. Hamadriadi, nimphes of the wood. Hamare, to catch with a hooke. Hameth, a kinde of medicinable thing. Hamo, a fishers hooke. Hamone, a kinde of precious stone of the colour of gold. Hanelare, to pant for breath, to drawe breath, to breath. Hannire, nisco, nito, to hem or cleere the voice with hemming. Hargolottiere, a soldier seruing on horse∣backe vnarmed vsing a caliuer with a snaphance. Haringo, as Aringo. Harmonia, harmonie, musike, melodie. Harmonioso, harmonious, musicall, sweeelie sounding, melodious. Harmonizzante, as Harmonioso. Also melodiouslie. Harmonizzare, to harmonize, to make musike. Harpa, a harpe. Harpia, a harpie, a monster so called. Hasta, a launce, a speare, a staffe seruing for any weapon. Hastare, to arme or dight with a launce, staffe or speare. Hastaro, a launce or speare-maker. Hastatore, a launcier, a soldier bearing a launce, staffe or speare. Hastetta, Hstacciuola, a little launce, staffe, or speare. Hauere, Ho, or Haggio, Hebbi, Hauu∣to, to haue, to hold, a verbe. Also habi∣litie, wealth, rides, goods, chattle, a noun substantiue. Also among old au∣thors for Essere, non vha, there is not. Hauer voglia, to long for, or haue a long∣ing. Hauer fame, to hunger. Hauer sete, to thirst. Hauer sonno, to be sleepie. Hauer paura, to feare, to be fearefull. Hauer caldo, to be warme or hot. Hauer freddo, to be a cold. Hauer a cao, to be glad of, to esteeme, to account, to hold deere. Hauer a grado, to take in good woorth, or in good part, to prise much. Hauer di gratia, to be glad to do anie thing. Hauer mestieri, to haue need, to need. Hauer duopo, to haue need, to need. Hauer' agio, to haue leisure or conueni∣encie. Hauer' ardire, to dare, or be so bold. Hauer' animo, to dare, to bee so bolde, to haue a hart. Hauer' a fastidio, to loth, to despise, to contemne. Hauer del asino, to be of the asses condi∣tion. Hauer' a schiuo, to loth, to abhor, to con∣temne, to scorne. Hauer' a male, to take in ill part. Hauer martello, to be iealous, to be appa∣sionate, to be in loue. Hauer diecio venti anni, to be tenne or twentie yeeres old. Hauuto, had, possessed, enioyed. Haustorio, a wheele of a well to drawe water, a bucket to draw water, a skoope to wet sailes with. Also a kinde of pot, iugge, cup, or cruse. Hé, an interiection, oh, alas, I pray you, for Gods sake, ah. Hebano, Hebeno, the blacke wood cal∣led Hebanie. Also Sable or sad colour. Hébbe, Hébbero, of the verbe Hauere, he had, they had. Hebére, hebsco, hebéi, Hebuto, to make blunt, dull or weake. Hebetatione, a dulling, a qualing, a di∣minishing, an vnsatiablenes, a blunt∣nesse. Hebetudine, as Hebetatione. Hebuto, made blunt, dull, or weake. Hecatompo, a fish hauing a hundreth feete. Hecatonchito, one hauing a hundreth hands. Hechinométri, a kinde of sea hedgehog. Hédera, the herbe Iuie Hédera spinosa, a kinde of Iuie or binde∣weede. Hederóso, full of Iuie. Hediosmo, the herbe minte. Hedisaro, an herbe which some take to be the mint. Hefestite, a precious stone of a fierie co∣lour, which as a looking glasse reflecteth any thing. Hegira Hecira, a mother in law. Helebria, a kinde of blacke Hellebore, bearefoote, or setwoort. Helénio, the herbe elicampane. Heliaco, as Eliaco. Helice, the signe called Vrsa maior, or Charles waine. Also a kind of iuie bea∣ring no berries. Heli, Heloi, Helois, an Hebrue word sig∣nifying God. Helicrisio, yellowe cammomill, or golden flower, some take it for the marigolde. Heliocriso, as Helicrisio. Heliopoli, a kinde of warlike engine to batter citties. Helióscopio, a kinde of spurge with a leafe like purslaine: or a little tree like a figge tree. Helióropio, as Helitropia, as Helitro∣pio. Helitropia, the herbe Turnesole, Ruddes, Wartwoort, or Sun-flower, which tur∣neth with the sunne, both at rising and at going downe. Some take it for the Marigold. Helitropio, a precious stone, which as a burning glasse receiueth the sunne. Helléboro, an herbe whereof there be two kindes, as Helleboro bianco, which is called in English Lingwoort, the roote whereof maketh neesing powder. The other Helleboro negro, and in Eng∣lish Beares-foote, Terwoort, or Set∣woort It is vsed to purge melancholie. Héllera, the herbe Iuie. Heluatione, gluttoning, greedie eating, gormandizing. Heluo, a deuourer, a destroyer. Hemarite, a bloud-stone, good to stanch bloud. Hemeróbio, a worme liuing but one day, of one daies life. Hemeroso, that dureth but one day. Hemiciclo, a halfe circle, a demie-circle, a halfe round. Hemicranéa, a sicknes called the migram, or an ache on the one side of the head comming by fits. Hemicránio, subiect to the migram. Hemina, a greeke measure about three quarters of a pinte, or nine ounces. Hemiólio, an arithmeticall proportion called Sesquialter or Ssquiplex, which is so much, and halfe so much againe. Hemónio, the herbe Harts-oog. Hemionite, the herbe Harts-toong. Hemiplessi, the pasie in the halfe of the bodie. Hemispéro, Emisféro, halfe the compasse of the visible heauen. Also a kinde of musicall instrument. Also a kinde of sun¦dyall. Hemistico, an halfe verse. Hemitritea febbe, a semitertian fea∣uer. Hemoroidli, or Hemoróide vene, the veines whereby the bloud passeth back∣ward. Hemoréo, a kinde of serpent. Hemoróide, a disease in the arse called the piles or hemorrhoides. Hendecasilabo, a verse of eleuen sya∣bles. Hepatario, that pertaineth to the liuer. Also a disease or greefe of the liuer. Hepate, the liuer. Also a fish verie daintie in taste like a breame.
Hépatica, noble agrimonie, three leafe Liuer-woort, herbe Trinitie, white Crowe-foote, or water Crowefoote. Hepatica vena, the liuer veine. Hepatico, of the liuer, diseased in the li∣uer, liuer growne. Hepatite, a precious stone of the figure of a liuer. Also the master liuer vaine. Hepatizone, a temperature of the aire, representing the colour of the liuer. Hephestite, as Hefestite. Hepistite, as Hefestite. Hepta, the number seauen in greeke. Heptámeron, a worke of seauen daies, or seauen parts. Heracleóne, the loadstone or magnet. Heraclio, a touch-stone to trie golde and siluer. Also taken for one that hath a singular fine readie wit. Heradione, as Dispiron. Herba, an herbe, grasse, woort, weede, leafe, or blade, all maner of simples. Herba beneditta, Spearewoort, Setwall, or Sidewall. Herbaccéo, of grasse or herbes: springing like herbes. Herba casta, the herbe Pionie. Herbaccia, any fithie weede. Herba del vento, winde-flower. Hérba da buoi, the herbe calues grasse: but many times vsed for a princock boy, a frsh man, a milke sop, a nouice, or fresh water souldier. Herba di muro, pellitorie of the wall. Herba di san pietro, the weed sampier. Also the Cowslip. Herba di sant António, the herbe lead∣woort. Herba di san Giouanni, the herbe Cla∣rie. Herba gatta, the herbe catmint or nep. Herba impia, an herbe so called bicause no beast doth eate of it but feeleth some hurt, wee call it chaffeweede or cud∣weede. Herba latace, the name of an herbe which is a token of great plentie of all things, and who so first findeth it shall want nothing. Some take it for the herbe thrift. Herba latte, an herbe called in latin Her∣ba lactis. Herba lupa, as Orobanche. Herbaggij, herbage, all maner of herbes. Herba murale, pellitorie of the wall. Herbaggio, all manner of herbage or grasse. Also a kinde of stuffe like water chamlet. Herbale, of or pertaining to herbes, an herball. Herba lista, an herbalist, a simpler. Herbaio, Herbaiuólo, an herbe man, a simpler, an herbarist. Also an herball. Herbaro, Herbario, as Herbaio. Herba nesa, goates rue, or Italian fitch. Herba torpa, as Orobanche. Herba rossa, the herbe arsesmart, or cule∣rage. Herba turca, the herbe burstwoort. Herbeggiare, to spring as grasse, to bring foorth weedes, to strew with herbes. Herbéi, a kinde of mountaine partridge. Herbéo, greene like grasse, grassie, a grasse greene. Herbescénte, growing to an herbe. Herbélla, a kinde of broad leased grasse. Herbéna, the herbe Verucin. Herbetta, small, yoong, tender, budding grasse or herbes. Herbiccine, al maner of tender pot herbs. Also a kind of potage made of herbs. Herbido, full of herbes, weedes or grasse. Also greene or grasse colour, or grassie. Herbi grada, a kinde of snaile going still in the grasse. Herbile, of or belonging to herbes, or that feedes on herbes and grasse. Herbolaio, as Herbaio. Herbolata, a kinde of tarte made of yoong herbes: greene sauce. Also a kinde of potage made of herbes. Herboso, grassie, leafie, weedie, full of grasse or herbes. Herbuccie, filthie weedes, wilde weedes, sillie, little, yoong weedes. Heréde, an heire, a succeeder in a mans goods or lands, an inheritour. Hereditare, to inherite. Heredità, Hereditaggio, an inheritance, an heritage, a patrimonie. Hereditario, hereditarie, by inheritance. Hereditéuole, hereditable, that may be inherited. Heremita, an Hermite, a solitarie per∣son. Heremitaggio, an hermitage or solitarie place. Heremitano, an hermite, or hermit-like. Herémo, as Heremetaggio. Heresia, an heresie. Heresiarca, a chiefe heretike. Herético, an heretike. Herisipilla, as Erisipilla. Heritaggio, heritage or inheritance. Hermafrodito, an hermafrodite, both man and woman. Hermino, the herbe clarie. Hermita, as Heremita. Hermitaggio, an hermitage. Hermisino, syndall or taffatie sarcenet. Hermo, an hermitage or solitarie place. Also solitarie, alone. Hermodatile, an herbe called Mercuries fingers, dogs stones or wilde saffron. Hermofrodito, as Hermafrodita. Hermoso, solitarie. Also taken from the spanish for beautifull, faire or come∣lie. Hernie, a kind of swelling or inflammati∣tion in a mans cods or stones, but proper∣lie the bursting or rupture of a man when the bowels fall into the cods. Herodio, a kind of eagle or faulkon. Heróe, a heroe, a noble woorthie, a fa∣mous man, in whom there is more vertue and excellencie then in ordinarie men. Heróico, heroicall, noble, magnanimous. Herpete, as Erpete, a kinde of Saint An∣thonies fire. Some call it the shingles. Some the wilde fire, and some the run∣ning worme. Herpicare la terra, to harrow or grubbe land. Herpicone, a grubbing iron. Hesonicon, as Dispiron. Hespera, an herbe smelling more in the night then in the day. Hespero, the eeuening star. Also twilight in the eeuening. Heteroclito, declined otherwise then the common nounes be. Heteroranea, a disease in the head, aking and swelling with little round pushes rising vp. Heterogenio, of another kind, not of the common kind. Heteroscij, those which haue their sha∣dowes cast but one way, as those which dwel in either of the temperat zones, we that dwell in the worth temperate haue at noone the sunne alwaies south; and therefore our shadowes north. They that dwell in the south temperate haue the sunne at noone in the north; and there∣fore their shadowes alwaies south. Hiacintho, a precious stone called a hya∣cint. Also a flower called crowtoes. Also a purple colour. Hiade, the fiue stars in the head of tau∣rus. Hialino, a glassie greene colour, glassie. Hialoida, the third humour of the eies, for that it is like molten glas. Hiastio, a kind of musicke among the Gre∣cians. Hiato, an opening or bursting of a man, a wide opening or yawing of the mouth, an open vnpleasant sound with ones mouth. Hibbo, a kind of fish. Also a kite or buz∣zard. Hibre, a mungrell, one borne of parents
differing in countries. Hictiofagi, seeders vpon fish, eaters of fish. Hidra, a serpent hauing seauen heads. Hidria, a kind of pot or pitcher. Hidro, a kind of serpent breeding in Nilus that feedeth on frogs. Hidromante, a deuiner or soothsayer by waters. Hidromantia, diuination by calling spi∣rits in the waters. Hidromele, a kinde of drinke as Methe∣glin. Hidiopepe, the hearbe arsemart or cule∣rage. pico, a man that hath the drop∣se. Hidropisia, the disease called the drop∣sie. Hiécora, nowe, at this instant, euen now. Hiemale, winter, of the winter. Hiéna, a beast of all other the most subtile, about the bignes of a wolfe. It counter∣feits mans voice; it hath a maine like a horse: the doung it yeelds is called ciuet. Also a kind of pretious stone taken out of the Hienas head. Hier, Hieri, yeasterday. Hieracio, the herbe hauk-weede or sow∣thistle. Hieraite, a kind of pretious stone. Hierapicra, a bitter confection to purge choler. Hierarchia, an holie gouernance or prin∣cipality. Hierde, as Ghierde. Hieria, a kinde of pretious stone good a∣gainst the falling sicknes. Hiermatina, yeasterday morning. Hierobotamo, the herbe verueine. Hiersera, yeasternight, yeasterday ceu∣ning. Hiernotte, yeasterday at night, the last night. Hierofante, an expounder of mysteries or holy scriptures. Hieroglisico, mysticall or enigmaticall letters or ciphers, signifying whole sen∣tences vsed by the Egyptians. Hierone, the bird called a hearon. Hile, a kind of salt or mixture that alchi∣mists vse. Hillare, cheerefull, glad, blith, ioyous, plea∣sant. Hillaria, the eight day of the kalends of Aprill, when the day beginneth first to increase, and be longer then the night. Vsed also for shrouing time or other times of mirth. Hillarità, gladnes, cheerfulnes, glee, reioy∣cing, mirth, iocondnes, pleasantnes. Hillo, the little gut. Hilo, the northwind. Himeccere, an interiection of admira∣tion; as we say good Lord, who would haue thought it. Himenéi, the weddings or marriages. Himenéo, the god of marriage. Himmon, a kinde of adamant stone, that on the one side drawes iron to it; and with the other driues it away from it. Hinchinchiare, as Fottere. Hinnire, nisco, nito, to niegh as a horse. Hinnito, the neighing of a horse, neighed as a horse. Hinno, a hymne, a praising song. Hinnulare, a kind of kite or buzzard. Hiosquiano, the weed henbane. Hipangi, the planets so called when they are hidden with the light of the sun. Hipérbasi, a figure when words are tran∣sposed from the grammaticall order. Hiperbáton, an herbe that will cure hurts of poysoned arrowes. Hiperbérico, the moneth October. Hipérbole, an hyperboll or excesse in ad∣uancing or depressing. Also a certaine crooked line comming of the cutting of a cone or cylinder. Hiperbólico, hyperbolical, beyond all cre∣dit or estimation or liklyhood of truth. Hiperbolizzare, to hiperbolize, to ad∣uance or depresse any thing beyond like∣lyhood and truth. Hiperboréi, they which dwell aboue the blowing of the northwinde, who com∣monly liue aboue a 100. yeeres. Hiperdúlio, aboue or ouerseeing the ser∣uice of slaues and bondmen. Hipérico, the herbe saint Iohns woort. Hipéricon, an herbe called in latine Co∣lion. Hiperzeugma, maniera di costrutti∣one.   Hipice, an hearbe which chewed in ones mouth taketh away hunger. Hipocausto, a stew or hot house. Hipochisi, a disease in the eies called Suf∣fusio. Hipocondria, the forepart of the bellie and sides, vnder which lyeth the liuer and spleene. Hipocrisia, simulation, hypocrisie, fained holines. Hipócrita, Hipócrito, an hypocrite, a dissembler of another mans person. Hipocritico, hypocriticall, full of dissimu∣lation. Hipodório, a kind of graue accent in mu∣sicke. Hipofrigio, as Hipodório. Hipogaustrio, that part of the belly which reacheth from the nauell to the haires of the priuie parts. Hipolidio, a kind of accent or note in mu∣sicke. Hipopij, the bones that bee vnder the eies. Hipostasi, a substance. Also residence in vrine flitting toward the bottom. Hipotetica, a word of the ciuill law im∣porting pledge, baile or maine price. Hipothesia, an argument or matter wher∣upon one should dispute and argue. Hipozeugma, a figure when euerie clause hath his proper verbe. Hippagreto, such a one as is captaine ouer armed men. It is vsed in Xenophon. Hippicone, a greeke measure of 500. pa∣ces, or halfe an Italian mile. Hippo, as Hipuro. Also the greeke word for a horse. Hippodamo, a breaker, tamer or rider of horses. Hippodromo, a place where horses are excercised in games, races, running or coursing. Hippofae, Hippofesto, a kind of herbe. Hippofrigio, Hippolidio, Hippodo∣nio, certaine kindes of musicke or ac∣cent in musicke. Hippoglosso, the hearbe horse toong or double toong. Hippolapato, the hearbe patience. Hippopotamo, as Hippotamo. Hippotamo, a beast liuing in the riuer Nilus, hauing feete like an oxe, backe and maine like a horse, tucked like a bore, and a long winding taile. Hipuro, a kind of lobster or sea-crab. Also the herbe cats taile or horse taile. Hirco, a wild bucke or he goat. Hirondinaria, as Celidonia. Hirondine, the bird called a swallow. Hirsuto, hairie, brizlie, shaggie, rough, haired, prickie, horride, sharpe, slut∣tish. Hirto, as Hirsuto. Hisopo, the herbe hysop. Hispido, brizled, hairie, rough, pricked, sharpe haired. Hispidoso, as Hispido. História, an historie, a storie, a declarati∣on of true things in order set downe, a true tale. Historiagrafare, as Historiare. Historiale, historicall. Historiare, to historize, to write or tell histories. Histórico, an historian or historicall.
Historiógrapho, an historie writer. Histrice, a porcupine. Histrione, a stage player, an enterlude player. Histrionia, the feate or science of stage plaiers. Hittiofagi, fish eaters or feeders vpon fish. Hó, of the verbe Hauere, I haue. Hobo, a tree, the roote whereof if a man hould but a piece of it in his mouth it yeeldeth so much water as he shall feele no thirst. Hodiérno, moderne, of this day, a late man or thing. Hóggi, this day, to day. Hoggidi, now adaies, at these times. Hoggimai, now at last, now adaies, at length, at last. Holà, hoe? who is there? what hoe. Holestio, a kinde of hearbe. Holiostrophio, an herbe, the touch where∣of killeth Scorpions. Holla, Holle, I haue her, I haue them. Hollo, Holli, I haue him or it, or them. Holocausto, a sacrifice killed and laied whole on the Altar. Homaccione, a great euill fauored man, a lubbarly man, a loggarhead. Homai, now, at last. Homaggio, homage, fealtie, liegenes, fidelitie. Homeri, the shoulders. Hometto, a little man. Homicida, a man-slayer, a killer of men. Homicidiale, guiltie of mans bloud. Homicidio, manslaughter, murther. Homicidioso, killing of men. Homicranca, a dizzines, or giddines in the head. Homilia, a sermon, or homilie. Homo, Huomo, a man. Homoemere, likenes of partes, all the partes in a bodie that haue affinitie with the braine, liuer, and hart. Homogeneo, of one kinde. Homographia, like writing or pain∣ting. Homologia, a confession, a consent, an agreement. Homone, Homoncione, as Homac∣cione. Homoncino, a little man. Homonea, concord, agreement. Homonimia, when diuers things are signified by one word. Homori, humors, conceits. Honestà, Honestáde, honestie, truth, dignitie, worship, honour. Honésta da campi, a dissembling wo∣man. Honestamente, honestlie, indifferentlie. Honestare, to make honest, to excuse, to colour a fault. Honésto, honest, ciuill, vertuous, vp∣right. Also honestie it selfe. Honoranza, as Honore. Honorare, to honor, to worship. Honorato, honored, worshipped. Honorando, worshipfull, worthie of honor. Honóre, honor, worship, reputation, ho∣nestie, credit, estimation, the reward of vertue. Honoréuole, honorable, worshipfull. Honoreuolezza, honor, worship, repu∣tation. Honorificenza, honor, worship. Honorifico, honorable, worshipfull. Hor, now, at this instant, sometimes. Hora, as Hor. Also an houre. Hora mai, Hor mai, now, at last, at length, in the end. Horanza, as Honore. Horario, hourely, the space of an houre. Hora si, yea marrie now, now indeede. Horbene, well go too, it is well. Hor hora, by and by, euen now, pre∣sentlie. Horetta, a small short houre. Horfanità, orphanisme. Hórfano, an orphan, or fatherlesse childe. Horgiáta, a kinde of meate or drinke made of barlie, barlie-water. Hórgio, the graine we call barlie. Horiólo, Horiuólo, an horologe, a diall, a clocke, an hower-glasse, a watch. Horioletto, Horiuoletto, as Horo∣logio. Horiuolaro, an howreglasse maker. Horologiaro, a clock-maker or keeper, a dyall maker. Horologiére, idem. Horológio, as Horiólo. Horológio dal sole, a sunne diall. Horolóio Horlógio, as Horológio. Horóscopo, the ascendent of ones nati∣uitie, that part of the firmament that riseth euery houre from the cast. Also any thing wherein howres be marked, as in dyall. Also a diligent marking of the time of the birth of a childe. Horizonte, the horizon, a circle deui∣ding the vpper part of the sphere from the lower. Hormisino, taffetie sarcenet. Hormino, the hearbe called Clarie, or sage of Rome. Horranza, as Honore. Horrendo, horrible, frightfull, grizlie, gastfull, vglie, hideous, dreadfull, strange, to be eschued. Horreuole, honorable, worshipfull. Horreuolezza, as Honore. Horribile, as Horrendo. Horribilità, horriblenes, horror, hideous∣nes, grizlines, fright, trembling for feare. Horrido, horride, hideous, terrible, gast∣lie, grizlie, euill fauoured, dreadfull, frightfull, lothesome to behold. Horrifico, terrible, horrible, that ma∣keth one quake for feare or cold. Horrisuono, roaring, or hauing a ter∣rible sound or voice. Horrore, a horror, a shiuering for feare or cold, a fright, a terror, or shaking fit. Also a dreadfull sound, a reuerent feare, a frowning or iowring cote∣nance. Also a loathing, as when one cannot away with a thing. Hortata, Hortaglie, all manner of fruites or profits that gardens giue. Hortami, idem. Hortare, to exhort, cheere vp, encourage, to moue, to emboulden, to counsell. Hortatione, an exhortation, a cheering, an encouraging. Horténse, pertaining to a garden, or growing in a garden. Horticello, a little garden. Horti di venere, the womans secret parts. Horto, a garden. Also an orchard. Hortolano, a gardiner. Also a daintie bird so called. Horsu, Horsuso, as Horuia. Horuia, an aduerb of encouraging, go too, now, away, on, forward, to it. Horzada, as Horgiada. Horzo, as Horgio. Hospedale, an hospitall or spittle. Hospitabile, keeping hospitality. Hospitale, as Hospedale. Also pertai∣ning to hospitalitie. Hospitaliéo, a keeper of an hospitall, one keeping hospitalitie. Hospitalità, hospitalitie, entertaing of friends and guests. Hospite, an hoste. Also a guest. Also a friend that entertaineth strangers. Hospitoso, a man keeping hospitality, full of hospitality. Hospitio, an inne or house of lodging, rea∣die to receiue friends and guests. Hostaggio, Hostale, an hostage or pledge, a suretie or pawne. Hostaria, an inne or hosterie, a victualing house, an ale-house, a tauerne; but pro∣perly a house where meate and drinke and lodging for men and horse is to be had.
Hoste, an hoste, a guest, being of the mas∣culine ginder. Hoste, an hoste, a campe or an armie of men and souldiers, being of the feminine gender. Hostelleria, as Hostaria. Hostelliere, as Hosteriero. Hostéllo, an hostell, a house or place of re∣ceite, an habitation. Hostria, as Hostaria. Hosteriero, an hoste, an hoster, an in∣holder. Hosterietta, a little inne, a little hosterie, a victualing house, an ale-house. Hostiére, Hostiero, an hoste, an inhol∣der. Hostessa, an hostesse. Hóstia, an hoste or sacrifice. Hostile, hostile, of or belonging to an eni∣mie. Hostilità, hostilitie, enmitie, feude. Hostolano, an inne-keeper, an hoste. Hotta, now, at this time, presently. Also an hower. Hotta a hotta, still, euerie foote, often∣times, now and then. Hotta catotta, now now, euen now, by and by. Hui, an interiection of sighing, alasse, oh Lord, aie me. Humanere, to become humane or take vp∣on him humanitie. Humanità, humanitie, gentlenes, curtesie, ciuilitie, pleasantnes in manners. Humanista, a humanist or professor of hu∣manitie. Humano, humaine, gentle, curteous, ciuil, pleasant, milde, affable. Humaro, a kind of great shell fish, which is said to take men as they swim. Humeggiare, to moisten, to steepe, to wet, ta danke, to run as a sore doth. Humeri, the shoulders of any creature. Humettare, as Humeggiare. Humettatione, a moistning, wetting, stee∣ping, dankishnes. Humidare, as Humeggiare. Humidire, disco, dito, idem. Humidità, Humidezza, humiditie, moistnes, danknes. Humido, moist, wet, dankish, humid, li∣quid, waterish. Humidore, as humidità. Humigare, as Humeggiare. Humiggiare, as Humeggiare. Humile, humble, base, low, lowly, simple, poore, abiect, vile, meeke, faint, feeble, creeping, crouching. Humiliare, to humble, to make low or lowly, to tame. Humiliatione, an humbling, humilitie, lowlines, meekenes. Humilimmo, most humble. Humiltà, Humilità, humilitie, lowlines, meekenes, gentlenes. Humorale, an ague proceeding of humors. Also as Humoroso. Humore, humor, moisture, liquor, iuice or sap. Also a toy, a humour, a fancie, a conceit. Also sap in a roote or tree. Humorista, humorous, fantasticall, toyish, passionate in his humours. Humoroso, ful of humours, of moisture, of iuice, of sap, of liquor. Also humorous, toyish, conceited, fond, vnconstant, newfangled. Huoi, to day, this day. Huomo, Huomini, a man, men. Huomo di bardella, a yoong rider that can scarce sit in the saddle. Huomo di poca leuatura, a man scarce woorthie the taking vp. Huomo da bene, an honest man. Huomo di grossa pasta, a grosse logger-headed man. Huomo da nulla, da poco, a man of no worth. Huomo di mezza sella, a man proceeded but to the middle degree in the arte of riding. Huomo materiale, a foolish grosse concei∣ted man. Huomini cappati, chosen trained men. Huomo di tutto sella, a horseman in euerie pointe of horseman-shippe com∣pleat. Huominesco, manlike, manlie, man∣nish. Huomicino, Huomicello, a little man. Huopo, need, occasion, want. Huouo, an egge. Hurlare, to howle as a woulfe. Hurlatore, a howler. Hurli, howlings. Hurloso, howling as a woulfe. I I, For Io, namely in verse; I, me selfe. Also a masculine article of the plu∣rall number; they or the. Iacente, iacent, lying flat, flat. Iacolo, a dart, and whatsoeuer else may be throwen, or cast with the hand. Al∣so a kind of very swift serpent. Iacono, a deacon, a degree among the cleargie. Iaculatore, a shooter, a darter, a dart, slinger. Iada, a kinde of precious stone like an eme∣rauld. Iaia, grauellie sand, grauell. Iambi, certaine verses called Iambickes. Ianchetto, a fish called a pilchard or spar∣ling. Ianizzeri, the Turkes gard, Ianizers. Iantino, as Hiacinto. Iapiga, the western wind; yet some take it for the northcast winde. Iaspe, a pretious stone called a iasper-stone. Iatraleptica, curing by ointments and fri∣cations. Iattantia, bragging, boasting, vaun∣ting. Iattare, to brag, boast or vaunt. Iattatore, a bragger, boaster or vaunter. Iattura, losse, dammage, hurt, decay or ca∣sting away. Iberide, the herbe wild cresses. Some take it for another hearbe. Ibi, a kinde of bird in Egypt which hath stiffe legges and a long bill, wherewith when he is sicke he glistreth himselfe with salt water. And some write that Hippocrates first learnd of this birde to giue glisters. Icnografia, a plot, modell or frame of a house drawne in paper, describing euery roome of it. Ichneumone, a rat of India which cree∣peth into the crocodils mouth when he gapeth, and cating his bowels killeth him. Ide, the ides of euery moneth, that is the eight day after the nones, called so for deuiding the moneth. Iddea, a goddesse. Iddio, God almightie. Idea, the idea, figure or forme of anything conceiued in imagination. Ideale, ideally, figuratiuely, formely, ima∣ginatiuely. Identia, an imaginarie figure of anie thing. Idiachigiorni, the fatall, ill or vnluckie daies that be in the yeere. Idioma, a proper perfect toong, speech or language. Idiomista, a man professing a proper lan∣guage. Idióta, an ignorant, a sot, an idiot, a na∣turall, a foole. Idolatrare, to commit idolatrie. Idolatria, idolatrie. Idolátro, an idolator. Idolo, an idoll. Idóneo, conuenient, fit, apt, sufficient. Idromante, a soothsayer or deuiner by the aire. Idromantia, dinination by the aire.
Idropesia, the sickenes which we call the dropsie. Idrópico, one troubled with the drop∣sie. Iella, the roote of Elecampane or as E∣nola. Iemo, a bottom or clue of thread. Ierda, as Ghierde. Ieri, yeasterday. Ieuolo, a bird called a woodpecker or eat∣bill. Ifidino, a precious stone good against the stone in the bladder. Ifsilonne, the letter y, so called in I∣talian. Igiena, conseruatiua medicina.   Ignauia, cowardnes, basenes of minde, lithernes, dullnes, sluggishnes. Ignauo, a coward, a dastard, base of courage, lither, dull, sluggish. Ignéo, firie, of the nature of fire. Ignite, a precious stone of the colour of glasse. Ignobile, ignoble, infamous, vnrespec∣ted, base, dishonored. Ignobilità, ignobilitie, basenes. Ignocco, a foole, a sot, a patch, a noddie, a gull, or a ninnie. Ignominia, ignominie, reproach, dis∣honor. Ignominioso, ignominious, reproach∣full, dishonorable. Ignorante, ignorant, vnwitting, not knowing, dull, foolish. Ignorantesco, foolish, or ignoraunt-like. Ignorantia, ignorance. Ignorare, to ignore, not to knowe, to be ignorant of. Ignóto, vnknowen. Ignudo, naked, bare, voide. Also a fish called a dace or a merlune. Iguale, equall, alike, match. Igualare, to equall, to match, to make euen. Igualità, equalitie, likenes, euennes. Il, an article masc. singuler, the, namely with nounes. Also a pronoune primitiue of the datiue and accusatiue cases, him the same, it, with verbs. Ileo, the third gut from the ventricle. Iliaco dolore, an obstruction or stop∣ping of the small guts, causing a great paine in the bellie. Ilio, Ilione, Illione, as Ileo. Ilio osso, that bone which is committed or ioyned to the transaers processes of osso sacro, albeit in old bodies this seemth to be but one bone, yet because in chil∣dren it is by a cartilage intersected with three lines, therefore the anato∣mists deuide it into three parts, calling the first (which is the supreme part thereof, being the broadest of the rest and ioyned to osso sacro) by the name of the whole Ilio osso, the second osso pube, the third osso cossendico. Illecito, Illicito, vnlawfull. Illeiare, to enter into hir. Illeso, vnhurt, vnoffended. Illetamare, to vndoong, to cleanse, to farme. Illiberale, not liberal, miserable, a snudge, a miser. Illiberalità, couetize, miserie, auarice. Illicito, as Illecito. Ilice, the tree called an oke. Illudere, ludo, lusi, luso, to mocke, to flout, to frump, to delude, to dazle, to illude. Illuiare, to turne or enter into another then himselfe. Illuminare, to illuminat, to cleere, to ligh∣ten, to brighten, to enlumine. Illuminatione, an illumiation, a light or opening of the eies. Illuminatore, an illuminator or light∣giuer. Illusione, an illusion, a deluding, a moc∣king, dazling. Illustrare, to illustrate, to glorifie, to brigh∣ten, to dignifie. Iullustratore, an illustrator, a glorifier, a giuer of honors. Illústre, cleere, famous, excellent, honora∣ble, woorthie, bright. Illustrezza, brightnes, excellencie, woor∣thines, honor. Illustrissimo, most excellent, most woor∣thie, most renowmed. Il perche, wherefore, the reason why. Ima, low, deepe. Imaginábile, as Imagineuole. Imaginare, to imagine, to thinke, to sur∣mise, to deuise, to conceiue. Imaginario, imaginarie. Imaginatione, Imaginamento, an imagination or surmising. Imaginatore, an imaginer, a thinker, a surmiser. Imaginatiua, imaginatiue. Imágine, Imágo, an image or likenesse in forme, a similitude, a counterfeit, a vision, a sancie, an imagination, a fi∣gure, a pretence or colour for any mat∣ter. Imaginéuole, imaginable, that may be imagined. Imbabolare, to blubber with ones eies. Imbacuccato, masked, muffled, hooded, hood winkt about the head. Imballadore, as Imballatore. Imballare, to packe vp in packes, as they doe marchandise. Imballamenti, packes of wares, pac∣kings. Imballatore, a packer, such as packe vp marchandize in packes. Also a wooll-winder. Imbaligiare, to put in a male or cloke-bag. Also to suppresse. Imballordire, disco, dito, to be or make dizzie or giddie. Imballordito, beene or made dizzie or giddie. Imballordimento, a dizzines or gid∣dines. Imbalsamare, to embalme or preserue with Balsamum. Imbambagiare, to stuffe, fill, or quilt with bumbaste, to bumbaste. Imbambinare, to dote or become a childe againe. Imbambire, bisco, bito, as Imbambi∣nare. Imbambolare, to blinde, dazie, or bleare the sight. Imbancadura, the formes, benches or seates in a gallie. Imbandigione, any kinde of naperie or linnen seruing for the boord. also swa∣things, sewings, or dishing and drssing vp of meates. Imbandire, disco, dito, to swath or ban∣dle about. Also to crie or proclaime by proclamation: but properlie to spred or lay the boorde or cupboords, to play the sewer, to dish or dresse vp meate readie to be caried vp. Imbanditore, a gentleman sewer, a di∣sher or dresser vp of meates, a laier of the tables. Imbarazzare, to disorder, to put to confu∣sion, ruine, spoile, or hauocke, to trouble, to busie. Imbarazzo, trouble, confusion, disorder, luggage, trumperie stuffe, or an entan∣gling. Imbarbare, as Abbarbicare. Imbarbigliare, as Imbardare. Imbarberescare, to teach any creature to do anything, as to teach a horse to run a race, to hunt a match, to come to the staffe, to entre a dog or a hauke, to en∣seame, the worde is taken from those that teach Barberie horses. Imbarbuglio, a garboile, a trouble, an entangling. Imbarcare, to imbarke, to ship or take shipping. Also to cosen, to setch ouer, to bring one into a fooles paradice. Imbarcamento, a shipping or imbar∣king.
Imbardare, to bard or trap a horse. Also to loue foolishly. Imbardigliare, as Imbardare. Imbarilare, to barrell vp, to imbarell. Imbasciadore, Imbasciatore, an Am∣bassadour. Imbasciata, an Ambassage. Imbascieria, idem. Imbastaggiare, to put a packe saddle, a pad or carriers saddle on, to harnish a carriers horse. Imbastare, as Imbastaggiare. Imbastardare, to bastardize or corrupt, to adulterate. Imbastardire, disco, dito, as Imbastar∣dare. Imbastinare, as Imbastaggiare. Imbastire, tisco, tito, to put a packe sad∣dle on. Also to stuffe or quilt. Also to furnish, to store or to be set. Imbasto, a packe saddle, a pad, a carriers saddle. Imbastonare, to put anie ensigne vpon a staffe. Imbattagliare, to embattle. Imbattere, batto, battei, battuto, to meete or light vpon by chance. Also to fight or beat in. Imbattimento, a meeting or lighting vp∣on by chance. Imbattuto, met or light vpon by chance. Also foughten or beaten in. Imbauagliare, to enbib, to put a bib before one. Imbaucare, to maske as women be when they goe abroad. Inbeccare, to embill or feede birds, to bill, to smouch. Imbeccata, Imbeccatura, an embilling, a billing or feeding, a kissing, a smou∣ching. Imbeccatore, one that embilleth or fee∣deth birds. Imbecherare, to put into ones fancie or head, to teach, to instruct one to doe or say any thing. Also to deceiue or beare false witnes, to suborne. Imbecille, weake, feeble, faint. Imbecilità, weaknesse, faintnesse, imbe∣cilitie. Imbélle, weake, bare, vnarmed, naked, vnapt to war, cowardous, timorous. Imbellettare, to paint as women do their faces. Imbellettamenti, slauerings and pain∣tings that women vse vpon their fa∣ces. Imbellire, lisco, lito, to adorne, to beauti∣fie, to decke, to embellish. Imbendare, to enskarffe, to hoodwinck, to blindfold. Imberbe, beardles, without a beard. Imberciatore, a shooter in a hand-gun or fouling piece. Imbertescato, made rampier wise or full of skaffolds. Imbertonato, besotted, adulterously in loue. Imbertestato, aloft or surmounting o∣thers. Imbestialare, as Imbestiare. Imbestialire, as Imbestiare. Imbestiare, to become a beast, wilde or beastly. Imbeuere, to drinke or sucke in, to swal∣low or gulpe vp. Imbiaccare, to paint with ceruse or white lead. Imbiaccamento, a whitning, a blan∣ching or a washing white. Inbiancare, to whiten, to blanch, to wash white, to become pale or wan. Imbiancheggiare, as Imbiancare. Imbianchire, chisco, chito, as Imbi∣ancare. Imbianchito, whitened or become pale or wan. Imbiondire, disco, dito, to make yellow or of a golden colour. Imbizzarire, risco, rito, to become fond, mad or fantasticall. Imboccamento, an mowthing or an en∣trance. Imboccare, to feede or cram. Also to snatch with the mouth. Also to stop the mouth of a cannon: also to run into some creeke of the lande as the sea doth in some places. Imboccata, a feeding or cramming. Also a mouthfull, a mouthing. Imboccatura, the mouth of a horses bit. Also a mouthing. Imbolare, to filch, to steale, to purloine, to lurche, to pilfer, to prowle. Imbolio, a stealing, a filching, a larcenie, a theeuing. Imbollare, to mark with a branding iron. Also to beplaster or be patch. Imbonire, nisco, nito, to make good, to endeare. Imborbare, to bemire with durt. Imborcare, to cloth with cloth of gold. Imborgare, to enter in a towne or bor∣rough. Imborsare, to emburse or put in a purse. Imboscare, to enter a wood, to lay in am∣bush, to take shelter as a deare doth, to grow wild, wooddie or desert. Imboscata, an ambush, an ambushcado. Imboschire, chisco, chito, as Imbos∣care. Imbosimare, to stiffen linnen cloth after it is wouen as weauers vse to do. Imbossare, to worke embost worke. Imbossolare, to dight or decke any roome or chamber with all necessarie furni∣ture. Also to put into a boxe. Imbossolata, furnished, dight or deckt ve∣rie brauely. Also put into a boxe. Imbottare, to barrell vp, to put into bar∣rels or pipes, to tun vp wines. Also to swell as a toad. Imbottatoio, a tunnell. Also a deuise or pipe of leather vsed in Italy to tran∣sport wine from one vessell to ano∣ther. Imbottire, tisco, tito, to stuffe, to quilt, to bumbase or counterpoint, to stiffen. Imbottitura, a stuffing, a quilting, a bum∣basing, a counterpoint. Imbottonare, to butten togither. Also to quilt and stuffe. Imbottonatura, a buttoning. Imbozzare, to hew out roughly, to draw the first rough draught of any worke. Imbozzamento, a rough or first rough draught of any worke. Imbozzatore, a drawer or framer of any first draught. Imbozzatura, as Imbozzamento. Imbozzimare, as Imbosimare. Imbracare, to embreech or put any ar∣tillerie vpon a stocke, to put into bree∣ches. Imbraccato, become a brach or medled with braches. Imbracciamenti, embracings, claspings, collings, huggings. Imbracciare, to embrace, to coll, to hug. Imbraciatura, an embracing: also a shield or target. Imbragare, as Imbracare. Imbrattare, to foule, to sully, to defile, to pollute, to durtie, to besmeare, to filth. Imbrattamento, a fouling, a polluting, a defiling, a besmearing, a sulling. Imbrattaria, as Imbrattamento. Imbrattatura, idem. Imbratti, foulings, pollutings, defilings, filthe, trash, ragges, clouts, sluttish∣nes. Imbréda, a breakefast. Imbrenare, to bridle, to snaffle, to re∣fraine. Imbreuiare, to abreuiat, to shorten, to a∣bridge. Imbreuiatura, an abreuiation, a short∣ning, an abridgment. Imbriacare, to be drunken, to make drunk to tipple, to quaffe. Imbriacaggine, drunknes, tipling, quaf∣fing, tipsines. Imbriacamento, as Imbriacaggine.
Imbriachezza, as Imbriacaggine. Imbriaco, dronke, tipld, a drunkard, a quaffer, a suck spig. Imbriacone, a filthie drunkard, a tipler, a quaffer. Imbricare, to couer, or roofe with tyles, to make like a rooft. Imbriccato, become or made, as Sbric∣co, or Bricco. Imbrici, the ridge, top, or vppermost tyles of a house. Also the caues of a house, gutter, or roofe tyles. Imbrigantato, become a raskall, a piras, a theefe, or a varlet. Imbrigliare, to bridle, to snaffle, to curbe. Imbrigliamento, a bridling, a snaffting, a curbing. Imbrigliatura, as Imbrigliamento. Imbroccare, to hit right, to faster with studs, to stud, to seazeon, to powre in, to clothe, or put into cloth of gold, to giue a thrust at fence ouer the dagger. Imbroccato, hit right, studded, seazed on, clothed with cloth of gold. Also cloth of gold. Also a thrust giuen at fence o∣uer the dagger. Imbroccata, a thrust at fence, or a venie giuen ouer the dagger. Imbrodolare, to fowle with brothe or dish wash, to fill with swill. Imbrogliare, to entangle, to enwrap, to intricate, to encomber, to confound to∣gether. Imbroglio, an entangling, an enwrap∣ping, a garboile, a coyle, an intricate∣nes, a mish-mesh. Imbroglione, a sad, busie, frowning, gar∣boiling fellow, a swash buckler. Imbrucare, to trouble, to wast, to spoile, to deface, to deuoure as it were with caterpillers. Imbrunire, nisco, nito, to burnish. Also to darken, to obscure or make broune. Imbrunitore, a burnisher. Imbucare, to lay or wash in a buck, to put or creepe into a hole. Imbucatare, as Imbucare. Imburchiare, as Imbarcare, as Imbe∣cherare. Imbussare, as Imbossare. Imbuire, isco, ito, to teach, to instruct, to traine vp, to endue. Also to sinke into. Also to infect, to distaine, to moyst or wet, to embrue. Imbuito, taught, trained vp, instructed, endued. Also sonken into. Also in∣fected, distained, imbrued. Imbumento, an infecting or staining, an imbruing. Imburiassare, as Imbecherare. Also to stuffe or fillfull. Also to beate, to bang, to bumbaste, to swaddle. Imbutirare, to butter, or dresse with butter. Imbutire, tisco, tito, as Imbottire. Imbuto, as Imbuito. Imiagolare, to meaw or cry as a cat. Imitabile, imitable, that may be imi∣tated. Imitando, to be followed or imitated. Imitare, to imitate, or follow or do the like. Imitatione, an imitation. Imitatore, an imitator, a follower. Immacchiare, to enter or grow to bush∣es, brambles, brakes, briers or thornes. Immacerare, as Immollare. Immaculato, Immacolato, vnspotted, cleane, vnsoyled. Immagrare, to become or make leane, magre, gant, or lanke. Immagrire, grisco, grito, as Imma∣grare. Immane, cruell, fell, fierce, moodie, out∣ragious, wilde, bloudieminded, bru∣tish. Immanità, crueltie, fiercenes, brutishmes, blood-thirstines, outragiousnes. Immanicare, to put a handle, haft, or hilt vpon any thing. Also to sleeue a garment. Immansueto, vntamed, wilde, cruell, fierce, sauage, vnmilde, vngentle. Immansuetudine, wildnes, crueltie, vn∣tamednes, fiercenes, vngentlenes. Immantare, to enrobe, to enmantle, to inuest, to deck, to dight, to cloke. Immantellare, as Immantare. Immantinénte, incontinently, presently, by and by. Immarchesata, hauing the flowres or monethlie flowres as women haue monthlie. Also become a marques. Immarcire, cisco, cito, to rot, to adle, to putrifie. Immarginare, as Marginare. Immargine, as Margine. Immariuolare, to become a cutpurse, a conycatcher, or craftie villaine. Immarzapanato, become or made fine, braue, sweete, or daintie, or smug, or trickesie, and trim as a marchpane. Immascarare, to maske, to enmaske, to hide, or couer ones face. Immascherare, as Immascarare. Immaschire, chisco, chito, to become of the masculine gender. Immastellare, to lay or put into tubs or such vessels, to lay clothes in a bucking tub. Immateriale, immateriall, without mat∣ter. Immattire, tisco, tito, to become mad, foolish or sottish, to go one of ones wits, to assot. Immaturamente, vntimely, vnipely, before season or time. Immaturità, vnripenes, too much haste in doing. Immaturo, vntimely, vnripe, out of sea∣son, greene, rawe. Immediatamente, immediately, next after. Immediáte, immediate, next. Immedicabile, incurable, that can not be cured. Immeditatamente, without premedi∣tation, extempore, sodainly. Immeditato, vnpremeditated, extem∣pore, on a sodaine. Immegliare, to better, to mend, to make better. Immembrare, to carue, vnlace, cut vp, or dismember any piece of meate. Immemorabile, vnmemorable, not worth the remembrance, forgetfull. Immemoria, forgetfulnes. Imménso, Immense, vnmeasurable, passing all measure, that can not be filled. Immensità, exceeding greatnes, bound∣lesse largenes. Immensurabile, vnmeasurable. Immentecatto, as Mentecatto. Immerdare, to beshit, to beshite, to be∣ray. Immergare, to drowne, to plunge, to duck, to drench, to diue in the water. Immérger, mérgo, mergér, merso, as Immergare. Immeritamente, vndeseruedly, wrong∣fully, without iust cause. Immeritéuole, vndeseruing, vnworthie, not meriting. Immérito, vnworthines, vndeseruing, without desert. Immérso, drowned, plunged, diued, duckt, or drencht in the water. Immeschiare, as Mescolare. Immescolare, as Mescolare. Immetriare, to mytre, or crowne with a mytre as bishops be. Immiare, to enter into me selfe, to become or make me selfe. Immigratione, an entring or changing into a place. Immillare, to multiplie by thousands. Imminénte, imminent, aloft, on high, ap∣parant, hanging ouer ones head, at hand approching, readie to fall. Imminénza, imminencie, nearenes, ap∣parance, height, an hanging aboue as it were readie to fall.
Immiserabile, vnpittie, vnmiserable. Immisericordia, vnmercifulnes. Immisericordioso, vnmercifull, merci∣lesse. Immisto, vnmixed, pure, simple. Immitriare, as Immetriare. Immo, but rather, yea rather, yea but, nay rather. Immobile, vnmooueable, stedfast. Immobilità, immobilitie, stedfastnes. Immoderatione, immoderatenes, vnsaci∣etie, vntemperance. Immoderato, immoderate, vntemperate, vnsatiable. Immodestia, immodestie, intemperancie, vnciuilitie. Immodésto, immodest, intemperate, sau∣cie, vnchaste, vncleane, vnseemely. Immodico, vnmeasurable, excessiue, too much, exceeding. Immolare, to offer sacrifice. Also to baste rostmeate. Immolatione, an offring or a sacrifice. Immolire, lisco, lito, to built, or erect. Immollare, to mollifie, to soften, to ap∣pease, to faint, to weaken. Also to wet, to bathe, to wash or steepe in water, to laie in water. Also to become wanton or effeminate. Immollire, lisco, lito, as Immollare. Immollito, mollifide, softned, appeased, wet, moistned, steeped or laid in water, become wanton or effeminate. Immondezza, as Immonditia. Immonditia, vnclenlines, filthines, pollu∣tion, sluttishnes. Immondo, vncleane, filthy, polluted, slut∣tish, beraide. Immorigerato, vnnurtured, vntaught. Immortalare, to immortalize, to make immortall. Immortále, immortal, neuerdying, euer∣lasting. Immortalità, immortalitie, euerlasting∣nesse. Immóto, stedfast, immooueable, fast, firme, vnmoouing, constant, resolte, fixt. Immóuere, to make some innouation, vp∣rore or commotion. Immuggire, gisco, gito, as Muggire. Immúne, exempt, free, quit, discharged of any office, lawe, or paiments. Immunire, nisco, nito, to vnfence, to vn∣furnish, to vnmunite, to vnwall, to to vnfurnish of garison, or other mu∣nition. Immunità, immunitie, franchise, liberty, priuiledge, exempting. Immurare, to wall in, to immure, to en∣close within a wall. Immuschiare, to perfume or dresse with muske. Immutabile, immutable, constant, vn∣changeable. Immutabilità, immutabilitie, constant∣nes, firmenes. Immutanza, as Immutabilità. Immutare, to change or transforme into. Immutire, to make or become dumbe or mute. Immutito, made or become dumbe or mute. Immutolire, as Immutire. Imo, lowe, deepe, the lowest, the bottome, the deepest. Impacciare, to empeach, to meddle with, to care for, to trouble, to hinder to di∣sturbe. Impacciato, empeched, medled with, ca∣red for, troubled, hindred, disturbed. Impaccio, trouble, care, hindrance, let, disturbance, vexation. Impaciénte, as Impatiente. Impacienza, as Impatienza. Impacciuccare, to squatter, to blot, to blur, to bedaube. Impadellare, to put into a frying pan. Impadronire, nisco, nito, as Insigno∣rire. Impagare, to pay one home for anie thing. Impagliare, to lie in childe-bed as a wo∣man: to betroth in mariage, to plight faith. Also to fill with strawe, to litter or lie in straw. Impagliuolare, to lie in childbed. Impagliuóla, laide in childbed: a woman lying in childbed. Impagliuolata, as Impagliuola. Impalare, to empale, to vnderset with poles as they do hop and vines, to put bread into an ouen with a beale, to put to death with a stake as the Turkes do the Christians, putting a stake or sharpe pole in at the fundament, and out as the mouth. Also to fortifie or set about, or raile in with stakes, railes or pales, to stake. Impalato, empaled, vnderset with poles, put bread into an ouen with a beale: put to death as Christians are by the Turkes, fortified, or set about with railes, stakes, or pales, staked. Impalamento, an empaling, an vnder∣setting with poles, a staking. Impalidire, disco, dito, to waxe or be∣come pale, wan or colourles. Impalizzare, as Impalare. Impalizzata, a palizada or setting about with stakes. Impalmare, to affiance, to betroth man and wife in mariage, to plight faith and truth, to fasten and . Impalmato, faith and truth, the man that is sre or betroth. Impalmata, a woman that is sure or an∣ced to  husband. Impalpabile, impalpable, that  not be felt, without a body. Impaludare, to make or grow , ar∣rish, waterish, to marish. Impanare, to make or red , as sugar or bread is. Impanatione, a reall turning of another substance into bread. Impancare, to bench, to set vpon a for or bench. Impaniare, to entangle or catch with birdlie, to beslime, to make , slimie or gish. Impannarazzare, to hang or dight with tapistrie or hangings. Impannarazzata, hanged, light, or fur∣nished with tapestrie. Impannare, to close, to shut vp with dra∣wing or paper windowes. Also as A∣pannare. Impannate, certaine drawing windowes of boardes or paper vsed in Italy. Impantanare, to beyre, to bed, to be∣fog, or fill with d. Imparadisare, to emparadize, to bring to paradize. Imparare, to learne or conceiue any thing in minde. Imparare a mente, to learne by rote or hart. Imparentarsi, to allie, to become kinsemen togither. Impari, ods, vnequall, vneuen. Imparità, odnes, inequalitie. Imparnasare, to bring, to le, or enter into parnassus. Impartite, tisco, tito, to impart, to diuide. Impartimento, an imparting, or deu∣dence. Impascinto, vnfed. Impassabile, that cannot be passed, vn∣passable. Impassibile, impassible, that is not mooued with any pertrbation, that cannot suffer. Impassionare, to appassionate, to become passionate. Impassire, sisco, sito, to fade as flowers in the sunne, to drie as raisins and , to grow flappy, withered, or pled. Impastare, as laie or put into paste, or dow as venis is, to would, to knead, to reduce into dow or paste as bread is, to cram with  as they do ca∣pons, to be paste, to laie lee for bread.
Impastata, any kinde of paste or pasting. Impasteggiare, to laie in paste for pa∣sties, to knead, to mould. Impasticciare, to laie in paste for pa∣sties, to knead, to bedaube, to beplaister. Impasticciato, laied in paste for pa∣sties, kneaded. Impastoiato, besotted, taken, caught with some shackels or fetters. Also fettred, shackled. Impastricciare, to bedaube, to beplaister, to squatter, to be-dabble, to besmeare. Impasturare, Impastorare, to shackle, to fetter. Also to pasture. Impatibile, vnsufferable, vntolerable, that can not be suffred. Impatiénte, impatient, that cannot abide or refraine. Impatienza, impaciencie. Impatronire, as Insignorire. Impattare, to bargaine, to condition, to co∣uenant. Also to chalenge a man with contempt, to bid a figge for one. Impauidézza, boldnes, stoutnes, courage, vndantnes. Impauido, bold, feareles, vndanted, sans∣feare. Impaurire, risco, rito, to feare, to dread, to put in feare, to terrifie. Impaurito, feared, dreaded, possest with feare, terrified. Impazzare, to become madde, foolish, or frantike, to assot. Impazzire, zisco, zito, as Impazzare. Impazzo, as Impaccio. Impeccabile, that cannot sin, trespas, or do amisse, vnsinfull. Impeccabilità, vnsinfulnes, puritie. Impeciare, to bepitch or soule with tarre, to marke or stop with pitch. Impeciatura, a bepitching or stopping with pitch. Impecorarsi, to become sheepish. Impedalate, to take roote, to fixe fast, to take good footing. Impedicinare, to set, fasten, or ioine to the foote or roote of any thing. Impedimenti, cariages, luggage, bag and baggage of an armie. Impedimento, an impediment, a hin∣drance, a let, a trouble, an encombrance. Impedire, disco, dito, to hinder, to let, to encombe, to busie. Impedito, hindred, let, busie, busied, en∣combred. Impeditore, a hinder, a letter. Impegnare, to paune, to engage. Impegno, in paune or ingage. Also a gage or a paune, or a pledge. Impegolare, as Impeciare. Impegolatura, a pitching or tarring of anything. Impegrire, grisco, grito, as Impigrire. Impelagarsi, to engulfe himselfe into the maine, to go into the deepe sea. Impelare, to begin to haue haires, or bud out haires. Impelire, lisco, lito, as Impelare. Impellicciare, to cloth or put into a surd garment. Impellizzare, as Impellicciare. Impéndere, pendo, pendéi, peso, to hang vp, to hang ouer ones head. Impendénte, hanging, pendent. Impendola, fast, steadie, firme. Also downe hanging, or downe dangling. Impenetrabile, impenetrable, that can∣not be pierced. Impennacchiare, to decke, to dight, or adorne with plumes or feathers. Impennare, to fledge or begin to haue feathers as yoong birds, to decke or a∣dorne with feathers, to fill a featherbed. Also as Impannare. Impennarsi, is to bounde or plunge iadish∣lie as some horses do. Impennata d'inchiostro, a pen full of inke. Impennato, fledged as a yoong bird, fea∣thered, full of feathers. Impennate, as Impannate. Impensabile, not to be thought or imagi∣ned. Impensato, not thought on, vnregarded, vnawares, vnaware, without thinking on it, extempore. Impensibile, without consideration. Impensierato, fraughted with thought. Impepato, drest with pepper, pepperd. Imperadore, Imperatore, an emperour, a generall of an armie, a chiefe ruler. Imperadrice, Imperatrice, an emperesse Also an herbe so called. Imperante, raigning, commanding, ru∣ling, swaying. Imperare, to command, to swaie, to rule, to gouerne. Imperatiuo, imperatiue, or commanding. Imperatoria, a certaine herbe whereof there be two sorts. Imperatorio, belonging to an emperour. Impercio, therefore, bicause, forasmuch. Impercioche, bicause that, forasmuch as that. Impercolla, a precious sione. Impercosso, vnstroken, vnbit. Imperfetto, imperfect, vnfinished. Imperiale, imperiall, royall, maiesticall. Imperiato, as Imperio. Imperio, an empire, an empirie, a monar∣chie, a dominion, a maiestie, a rule, a solemne charge, a supreme prehemi∣nence, a royall powre, a gouernment, a chiefe command, an authoritie royall, a princely iurisdiction, an imperious swaie. Imperióso, imperious, maiesticall, royall, stately. Imperiosità, imperiousnes, statelines. Imperitia, vnskilfulnes, vnexpertnes, ignorance. Imperíto, vnskilfull, vnexpert, igno∣rant. Imperlare, to empearle or decke with pearles, to set with pearle. Impermesso, vnpermitted, vnlawfull. Impermutabile, as Immutabile. Impéro, as Imperio. Imperò, as Imperciò. Imperoche, as Impercioche. Impersonale, impersonall, that hath no person. Impersuaso, vnperswaded. Imperturbabile, that can not be distur∣bed, vnuexable. Imperturbato, quiet, vntroubled, not di∣sturbed, cleere, calme. Imperuersare, to grow peruerse, peeuish, or froward, or woorse and woorse. Imperuersamento, a peeuishmes, a per∣uersenes, a frowardnes. Impeso, hanged vp. Impetigine, a totter, a scurfe, a mangie, itch, or a ringworme. Impetenare, to white-wash a wall or house. Impeto, a violence or furie, a vehemencie, a shocke, an assault, a brunt, a force, a sodaine motion, a rage, a pange, a passi∣on, a head-strong toie, fit, fancie or pas∣sion. Impetrabile, that may bee obtained or gotten by praier or entreatie. Impetrare, to obtaine or get by entreatie. Also to grow hard or turne to a stone. Impetratione, an obtaining by entreatie. Impettolare, to bedash, to bedaube, to be∣blur, to foule. Also to entangle. Impetuosità, as Impeto. Impetuoso, impetuous, violent, rash, so∣daine, raging. Impia, vide Herba. Impiagare, to wounde, cut, gash, or hurt one. Impiagatura, a wounding, a hurt, a gash, or cut. Impiantare, as Piantare. Impiastracciare, as Impiastrare. Impiastracci, plaistrings, saluings or be∣daubings. Impiastracciamenti, as Impiastramēti. Impiastrare, to beplaister, to plaister, to salue, to bedaube.
Impiastramenti, plaistrings, daubings, saluings. Impiastratore, a plaistrer, a dauber, a saluer. Impiastri, plaisters, salues, daubings. Impiastro, any kind of plaister or salue. Impiccare, to hang vp. Impiccatéllo, a wag, a cracke-rope, a hal∣ter-sacke. Impiccatoio, a hooke to hang any thing at, a halter sacke, a hanging thing. Impiccatore, a hangman, a headsman. Impicciare, to kindle, to set on fire. Impicciolire, lisco, lito, to grow or make small or little, to lessen. Impicciolito, made or growen little or small, lessened. Impiegabile, that will not or cannot bend, inflexible. Impiegare, to employ, to enfold, to wrap vp, to bestow, spend or lay out ones mo∣ney. Impiégo, an imployment. Impietà, impietie, vngodlines, wickednes, vnrighteousnes, vngraciousnes. Impietrare, to grow hard to a stone, to be∣come stonie. Impigliare, to fill, to replenish, to take hold on, to sease vpon. Impignoccato, candied or preserued with confets of pine apples. Impigrire, grisco, grito, to make or becom dull, lazie, sluggish, slow or idle. Impimento, a fulfilling, a filling, a reple∣nishing. Impinguare, to fatten, to make fat, to grow fat. Impingue, fat, grosse, greasie. Impinguere, as Impinguare. Impinguire, guisco, guito, as Impin∣guare. Impinzare, to fill, to glut, to gorge, to cloy. Also to tie fast. Also to kindle the fire. Impio, impious, vngodly, wicked, vngrati∣ous, vnrighteous, cruell, hating god and man, blasphemous. Impiombare, to enlead or fasten or couer with lead, to lead. Impiombatura, an enleading or fastning with lead. Impire, Impio, Impito, to fill, to accom∣plish. Impirio, as Empiréo. Impiso, hanged vp. Impito, filled, filled vp, accomplished. Impisciare, to bepisse on, to pisse vpon one, not to care for a man. Impiumare, to sether, to fledge. Impizzare, as Impicciare. Impizzicare, to raise vp to the top. Implacabile, inexorable, obstinate, im∣placable, that cannot be appeased. Implicare, to imply, to fold vp, to inwrap. Also to busie or trouble one. Implicatione, an implying, an infolding, an inwrapping, an encombrance. Implicità, an entangling, an encombring, an obscuritie. Implorare, to implore, to craue beg∣gingly. Impoderare, as Insignorire. Impolare, to go or enter between the poles of the world. Impolire, lisco, lito, to vnpolish, to make rude or rough. Impolito, vnpolished, rough, rude. Impolla, a violl glasse. Impollare, to put into a violl of glasse, to store with chickens. Impoltronare, to become or make lazie, sluggish, idle or roguish. Impoltronire, nisco, nito, as Impoltro∣nare. Impoluerare, to bedust, to bepowder, to make dust or powder. Impoluerizzare, as Impoluerare. Impomitare, to polish, sleeke or trim with a pumi-stone. Impomolare, to set a pomell or a round head vpon. Impónere, pongo, posi, pósto, to impose, to inioine, to lay vpon, to command. Impopolare, to impeople. Also to prop a vine or any thing else with a pole or stake. Impórre, as Impónere. Importabile, intolerable, not to be borne. Importante, important, of weight, of mo∣ment, of force, earnest. Importantia, importance, force, earnest∣nesse. Importare, to import, to be of force. Importunamente, vntimely, vnfitly, im∣portunatly. Importunare, to importunat, to sollicit, to vrge, to trouble. Importunità, importunity, troublesom∣nes. Importúno, importune, vrging, out of sea∣son, troublesome, presumptuous. Importuoso, hauing no hauens, without portes or harboroughs. Impositione, as Imposta. Impositore, an imposer, an inioyner, a charger, a commander. Impossibile, impossible. Impossibilità, impossibilitie. Imposta, an impost, imposition, inioyning, commaund or charge. Impostare, to cosen, to decieue, to beguile by false promises. Impostéma, an impostume. Impostemare, to grow to an impostume. Impostumare, as Impostemare. Impostumatione, an impostumation. Impósto, imposed, inioyned, laide vpon, commanded. Also an impost vpon any marchandize. Impostóre, a deceiuer, a beguiler, a cose∣ner by false promises, a iuggler, a con∣iurer. Impostura, a deceit, a beguiling, a cozing cast, a iuggling tricke, a coniuration. Impoténte, impotent, maimed, lame, vnable. Impoténza, disablenes, lamenes, impoten∣cie, maime, disability, lacke of power. Impouerire, risco, rito, to empouerish, to begger, to waxe beggerly or poore. Impozzare, to put into a well or ditch. Impraticabile, vnconuersable, not to be conuersed with. Imprecabile, that cannot or will not be mooued with praier or entreatise. Imprecare, to desire or wish euill or good to one. Also to curse. Imprecatione, an imprecation, a cursing, an imploring. Impregionare, to imprison. Impregióne, imprisoned, in prison. Impregnaggine, as Impregnatura. Impregnabile, that cannot begotten with childe or couered or lined. Also bar∣ren. Also that may be gotten with child. Impregnare, to get with child. Also to co∣uer or line any beast. Impregnatiuo, as Impregnabile. Impregnatura, a begetting with child or couering or lining of any beast. Impréndere, préndo, prési, préso, to learne. Also to vndertake, to enter∣prise. Imprentare, as Improntare. Imprésa, an imprese, a mot, an embleme, a word. Also an enterprise, an action, an vndertaking, an attempt. Imprescia, haste, speed. Also in haste. Impreso, learnt or vndertaken. Impressare, to impresse, to imprint, to stampe. Also to hasten. Impressionato, hauing an impression. Impressione, an impression or imprinting or stamping. Imprésso, impressed, imprinted, obstinate, wilfull, hard or fixed in. Impressóre, an imprinter, a stamper. Imprestanza, a lone or lending. Imprestare, to lend or giue to lone. Impréstito, Impresto, lent, giuen to loue, a lending or a lone, a borrowing. Imprestatore, a lender. Impretarsi, to become a priest or impriest himselfe.
Imprigionare, to emprison. Imprigióne, in prison, emprisoned. Imprima, first, before, earst, sooner. Imprímere, primo, pressi, presso, to im∣presse, to imprint. Improbabile, that cannot be prooued, im∣probable. Improbilità, improbabilitie. Improbare, to improoue. Also to im∣pugne. Improbità, dishonestnes, malapertnes, wickednes, naughtines, badnes, ilnes. Impróbo, ill, caitife, dishonest, malapert, wicked, wanton, hurtfull, bad. Impróle, he that is not yet come to mans estate or that hath no children. Improméttere, metto, misi, messo, to promise, to warrant, to assure. Impromesso, as Promesso. Impromessa, as Promessa. Impronta, an impression, a stamp, a print, a marke. Improntare, to stamp, to imprint, to im∣presse, to marke. Improntitudine, Improntezza, vnrea∣dines. Also importunitie. Impronto, as Impronta. Also vnreadie, importunate, presumptuous, bold. Also a stamp or print, or coyne, or marke. Improperare, to vpbraid, to twit, to cast in the teeth. Improperatione, an vpbraiding, a twit∣ting, or casting in the teeth. Improportionare, to disproportion. Improportione, a disproportion. Improportionalità, a disproportion. Impropriare, to impropriat, to appro∣priat. Impropriatione, an impropriation. Impróprio, improper, vnfit. Improspero, vnhappie, not thriuing. Improuare, to improue, to impugne. Improuerare, as Improperare. Improueratore, an vpbraider, a twitter. Improueduto, as Improuiso. Improuidénte, improuident, rash, vncir∣cumspect, without foresight. Improuidénza, improuidence, rashnes, ouersight. Impróuido, as Improuidente. Improuisare, to sing or speake extempore. Improuisatore, a speaker or singer ex∣tempore. Improuiso, vnprouided, extempore, so∣daine. Improuista, as Improuiso. Improuostarsi, to become a prouost mar∣shall, vsed by Caro. Imprudénte, vnwise, foolish, ignorant. Imprudéntia, imprudencie, follie, igno∣rance. Imprunare, to prune, to enprune trees. Also to shroud or couer with brambles, briars, brakes, or thornes. Impuberi, children of the first age, as of foure or fiue yeares old, or before they be twelue. Impubertà, a childs age afore twelue. Impudénte, impudent, shamelesse, grace∣lesse, ouer-bold, that will not be dasht out of countenance. Impudéntia, impudencie, shamelesnes, saucines, vnshamefastnes. Impudica, vnchaste, vncleane, wanton, incontinent. Impudicitia, vnchastnes, vncleannes of liuing. Impugnare, to impugne, to resist, to with∣stand. Also to clinche with the fist. Impugnatione, a fighting against, a re∣sisting, an impugning. Impulsare, to perswad often, to vrge. Impulsore, an inciter, a perswader, a motiue, a prouoker, a summoner. Impúne, scot-free, quit, without danger or feare of punishment by lawe. Impunito, vnpunished, quit from all dan∣ger, scot-free. Impunità, libertie, lacke of punishment, impunitie. Impuntare, to fixe, to point, to sharpen, to resist, to stand vpon points, to re∣solue or settle in an opinion, to falter. Impunto, fixed, appointed, pointed, sharpned, or faltred in speech. Impurità, impuritie, vilenes, reprochful∣nes, sluttishnes. Impuro, impure, dishonest, vile, reproch∣full, vncleane, sluttish, polluted. Imputanire, nisco, nito, to become who∣rish, or a whore. Imputare, to impute, to ascribe, to at∣tribute. Imputato, imputed, ascribed, attributed. Imputatione, an imputation, an attri∣bution. In, the preposition, in. In, is also verie much vsed in composition of other words as a signe of priuation as we vse vn in english, as Incapace, In∣felice, Intrépido, vncapable, vnhap∣pie, fearelesse, &c. It is also vsed in composition for to put, to enter, or worke in, as Insignorirsi, to enpossesse him∣selfe, Intrapónere, to enterpose, In∣cauare, to dig in, or worke hollow, &c. Inabandono, carelesly, in forsakē maner. Inabilire, to enable. Inabilità, vnablenes, disabilitie. Inabissare, to sinke, to precipitate, to tumble, to strike, or to cast down to hell. Inacerbare, to make or become sowre, sharp, eagre, or tarte, to exasperate, to prouoke, to instigate, or excite to wrath. Inacerbire, bisco, bito, as Inacerbare. Inacessibile, inaccessible, that no man can come vnto. Inacésso, hauing no accesse vnto. Inacetare, to make sowre as vineger. Inacetire, tisco, tito, as Inacetare. Inacquare, to water as they do gardens, or wine, to lay in water, to sprinkle with water. Inaffettato, vnaffected, not curious, na∣turall. Inaffiare, as Inacquare. Also to fill with wind or breath. Inagitato, not moued, not tossed. Inagnellarsi, to become a lambe or like a lambe, to become milde and gentle. Inalbare, to whiten or make white. Inalberare, to climbe vpon a tree. Also a word about alchimie, to put into a lim∣bike. Also to furnish with trees, to rig a ship with masts, to climbe trees, to set an enseigne vpon his staffe. Inalborare, as Inalberare. Inalborarsi, is when a horse doth rise and fall backward. In alcun luogo, in any place, in some place. Inalienare, to alienate, to make strange, to allien, or estrange. Inalmare, to quicken or infuse a soule into. Inalterabile, that can not be altered, im∣mutable. Inalzare, to aduance, to eleuat, to raise, to lift vp, to set vp, to preferre. Inamabile, not amiable, vnpleasant. Inamicare, to become friends together. Inanellare, to linke together, to frounse, or crisp, or curle haires. Inanimale, that hath no soule, void of life. Inanimare, to animate, to encourage, to harten. Inanimato, without a soule or life. Inanimire, as Inanimare. Inanti, Inante, Inanzi, before, sooner, rather, formost, forward, lieuer, eare. Inanzi tratto, before hand, before ones cast. Inapellabile, not to be appealed. Inarborare, as Inalberare. Inarcare, to bow, to bend, to make vaute∣wise. Also to frowne, to scoule. Inarcato, bowed, bent, made vaultwise, a frowned or scouled countenance. Inarcata, bending wise. Inarcatura del collo, the bending of the neck. Inargentare, to siluer, to couer ouer with siluer. Inargentatore, a siluerer of any thing.
Inarrabile, that cannot be counted or re∣ported. Inarrare, to giue earnest vpon any bar∣gaine. Also to declare or report. Inarsicciare, to sindge, or halfe burne. Inartificiale, without arte, vnartificiall. Inasimire, to make or become like or of the blockish condition of an asse. Inaspare, to reele, roule, or winde vp as women do yarne. Inasperare, as Inacerbare. Inaspettato, vnexspected, vnlooked for. Inaspreggiare, Looke Inacerbare. Also to abuse in words. Inasprire, risco, rito, as Inacerbare. Inassettare, to order, to settle, to place, to dispose things in good order. Inassetto, in order, in good sort, in due forme, nothing vnready or out of frame, readie. Inaudace, fearefull, cowardous. Inaudibile, not to be heard. Inaudito, vnheard, that was neuer heard, strange to heare, incredible. Inauersabile, ineuitable, vnauoidable. Inauertenza, a vnwarmes, or negligence. Inauertire, tisco, tito, not to marke or re∣garde, to neglect, to forslowe. Inaurare, to gild, to couer with gold. Inbandinare, to bandle, to make into skeynes as thred. Also to swathe about. Inbandire, disco, dito, as Inbandinare. Inbando, outlawed or banished. Inbarcare, as Imbarcare. Inbiscia, winding-wise like a riuer, or a winding paire of staires, winding as a snake crankling in and out. Inbolare, as Inuolare. Inbracare, as Imbracare. Inbréue, briefely, shortly, in briefe, out of hand. Incacare, to beshite, to becacke, to bid a turd for one. Incaciare, as Informaggiare. Incadenacciare, to bolt or barre with bolts of iron. Incagliare, to crud as milk, to make cheese with. Incagliatura, the rennet wherewith they crud milke to make cheese with. Incagnesco, doggedly, currishly, like a dogge, coyishly, nicely. Incagnire, gnisco, gnito, to become cur∣rish, doggish, skittish, or churlish. Incalcinare, to lome, to morter, to plaster, to calcinate. Incalciare, to constraine, to vrge, to pro∣uoke, to sollicite, to kicke, to pursue, to as∣sault, to charge one vpon aduantage. Incalciamento, kickings, constrainings, prouocations, secret wrongs, an assault, a pursute. Incalciatore, a constrainer, a prouoker, a busie fellow, an assailer, a pursuer. Incalcio, diligence, a helpe, a wrong, an assault, a prouocation, an earnestnes, a straightnes, a pursute. Incallire, Incallisco, Incallito, to becom and growe harde, tough, or braunie, as cornes in labourers hands, or cornes vp∣on mens feete. Also to take such a cu∣stome or habite that one cannot leaue. Incalmare, to engraffe, to imbranch, to plant, to prune trees, to insert. Incalmatore, a graffer, a planter, or pru∣ner of trees. Incalmatura, an engraffing, an enbran∣ching, a planting. Incalmo, a branch, a sprigge, a yoong graffe, a syen. Incaluare, to become balde, to loose the haire. Incaluato, become bald, an allusion taken from the trees, when they loose their leaues. Incalzare, as Incalciare. Incalzo, as Incalcio. Incamerare, to chamber, to sue one in the common chamber. Incaminare, to addresse, to set forward, to set in the way. Incamino, in the way forwarde, ad∣dressed. Incamisciata, a camisado, a stratageme, attempted by night with shirts vpon armour, so to deceiue the enimie. Incamocciare, ta dresse leather, like shammoise, to tanne leather. Incancarire, risco, rito, to growe to a canker, to canker, to fester, to rankle. Incanellare, to spice or dres with cinna∣mon. Also to chamfure or make hollow. Incanestrare, to put into a basket. Incannare, to winde silke vpon bobbins. Incantare, to enchaunt, to bewitch, to charme, to witch, to vse spels and sorce∣ries. Also to sell goods by a crier, at who giues most. Incantagione, Incantatione, an en∣chantment, a charming a bewitching, a sorcerie, a spell, an incantation. Incantesimo, Incantamento, as In∣cantagione. Incantatore, the crier that sels goods at who giues most. Also an enchanter, a he witch, a charmer, a sorcerer. Incantatrice, a woman witch, sorceresse, or enchantresse. Incanto, as Incantagione. Also a place where goods are to be solde by a crier at who giues most. Incanutire, tisco, tito, to become graie, white or hoarie through age. Incapace, vncapable, not able to containe or conceiue. Incapacità, vncapacitie, vnabilitie to containe. Incaparbire, bisco, bito, to take pepper in the nose, to become peeuish, angrie, or skittish. Also to become obstinate, wil∣full, headie, rash, headstrong, foolish, mad, skittish, toyish, froward. Incapare, as Intestarsi. Incapellare, to hoode as they do haukes. Also to hat one. Incapestrare, to halter, to binde in hal∣ters, to entangle, to entramell. Incapo, at the end, or on the head. Incapocchiarsi, to become a dolt, a log∣gerhead, or nodie, to take a foolish con∣ceit in ones head. Incapparrare, to giue or leaue money in earnest vpon any bargaine. Incappare, to meete, to light on, or stum∣ble on by chance, to fal vpon. Also to co∣uer with a cloke, to muffle with a cap, to cloke. Also as Incapparrare. Incappricciarsi, to take a toie or conceite in ones head. Incapucciare, to hoode or couer with a friers cowle. Incarbonare, to blacke, to besmeare with coales. Also to broile vpon the coales, to make a carbonado. Incarbonata, a carbonado of broyled meate, a rasher on the coales. Incarbonchiare, to grow to a carbuncle, or to an impostume. Incarca, a charge, a burden, an imputati∣on, a blemish remaining on one. Incarcare, to oppose, to charge a man, to impute or blame one. Incarcatore, an opposer, a burthener, a charger of one, an imputer. Incarcerare, in imprison, to put in prison. Incarco, as Incarca. Also taken for mans bodie. Incaricare, as Incarcare. Incarico, as Incarca. Incarire, risco, rito, to endeare, or growe or make deare. Incarnadino, Incarnatino, a carnation or flesh colour. Incarnagione, as Carnagione. Incarnare, to incarnate, to inflesh, to flesh a dogge, to entre or reclaime a hauke. Incarnato, enflesht, flesht, or entred a dog, reclaimed a hauke. Also as Incarna∣dino. Incarnamento, an enfleshing, an incar∣nating, incarnation. Incarnatione, as Incarnamento. Incarnatiuo, that doth incarnate or make
the flesh grow togither. Incarognare, to become or grow a carri∣an, to infect. Incartare, to fixe or hit into a marke. Also to put into paper, to paper, to couer with paper. Incartocciato, rouled vp in a piece of waste paper. Incasciare, to dresse with cheese, to en∣cheese. Incassare, to put vp in a chest. Also to en∣chase or set a stone in a ring or to put or set caliuers or such into the stockes, to stocke muskets. Also to put into a cofin. Incastellare, to reduce or bring to a castle: a horse to haue his hoofe dride vp, so that it sounds hollowe, to be hoofe∣bound. Incastellatura, a disease in a horse, the shrinking of a horse hoofe, hoofe bound, which is when there is a dry hollownes in it, which sometimes makes it sound hollow, bicause it wants moisture. Incastigato, vnpunished, vnchasticed. Incassatura, an inchasing or setting of a stone in a ring: the hollownes of ones eies. Incastrare, to inchase with iewels or gemmes. Incastrato, inchased with iewels or preci∣ous stones▪ it is taken in Grison when the rowle in the mouth or bit of a horse is set close or well ioined to the other partes, as if it were of one piece. Incastramento, Incastratura, an incha∣sing with iewels or pretious stones. Incastro, a farriers iron to pare the horses hoofes. Incatenare, to enchaine or binde with chaines. Incaténe, bound in chaines, in chaines. Incattiuire, visco, vito, to growe bad, naughtie or worse. Incaualcare, is when a horse doth set one foote ouer the other in turning round. Incauallare le braccia, when a horse doth set one fore foote ouer the other. Incauallare, to lap one thing ouer another, properly to hold your rod ouer the right shoulder of the horse, to make him bring in the right fore foote ouer the left. Incauare, to dig or make hollow. Also to free from vnder. Also to indent or graue deepe. Incauicchiare, to pin, to claspe, to peg or grapple togither. Incauicchiatura, a pricking of a horse. Incaucinare, as Incalcinare. Incautezza, vnwarines, vnheedfulnes, fol∣lie, simplenes. Incauezzare, as Incapestrare. Incauto, not warie, not heedfull, fond, foolish, simple. Incazzare, to rage lecherously with or for a standing pricke. Incazzire, zisco, zito, as Incazzare. Incélebre, nothing famous. Incédere, incedo, incedei, inceduto, to walke or stalke vp and downe proudly, leasurely, aloft and high. Incéndere, cendo, cendei, cénduto, to burne, to kindle, to inflame, to vrge, to prouoke, to insence. Incendiario, which setteth on fire, a kindler. Incéndio, a flame, a burning, a fire, a flashing of fire. Incendioso, burning, flaming, kindling. Incenerare, to burne or reduce to ashes or to cinders, to couer with ashes. Incénere, burnt or consumd to ashes, to cinders or in ashes. Incenerire, risco, rito, as Incenerare. Incensare, to burne, or perfume with frankinsence, to offerre incense, to in∣cense. Incenso, as Incenduto. Also a kinde of sweete gum called frankinsence, or in∣cense. Incensorio, a censor or pan to burne in∣cense or frankincense in, vsed in chur∣ches. Incentiuo, kindling, flaming. Incerare, to fill or stop vp with waxe, to waxe ouer, to ceare. Also to grow stiffe or hard. Inceramento, Inceratura, a searing or waxing, a seare-cloth. Incertare, to assure or ascertaine, to war∣rant, to fold vp in order. Incertezza, vncertainty. Incertitudine, idem. Incérto, vncertaine, vnsure. Inceruéllo, wise, warie, with his wits a∣bout him. Incespare, to encumber or entangle, as thornes do one with another in bushes or hedges, to trip or stumble. Incespiare, as Incespare. Incespugliare, to embush, to hedge, to grow to a bush or shrub. Incessabile, vncessant, neuer ceasing. Incestare, to commit incest or pollution with one of his owne kin. Also to put in∣to a basket. Incesto, incest or lecherie committed with one that is neere in kin and blood. Also all maner of pollution. Incestuoso, an incestuous person that hath committed incest with some of his neere kin. Incetra, an ingrosing, a forestalling of any wares. Also an inquirie. Incettare, to engrosse, to forestall any market. Also to enquire. Incettatore, an engrosser, a forestaller of markets, an enquirer. Inche, in what, in which. Inchiancare, to paue. Inchianettare, to arme with a helmet or caske. Inchiappare, to offend, to wrong, to mis∣use, to take or surprize one. Inchiatare, to hurt, wound or strike. Inchiato, Inchiatato, wounded, hurt, striken. Inchiauare, to shut or lock in with a key. Inchiédere, chiedo, chiesi, chiesto, to enquire, to request. Inchiésta, an inquirie, an enquest, a quesi, searching out. Also an enterprise, a request. Also a forestalling. Inchiésto, inquired, requested. Inchiétta, as Incétta. Inchiettare, as Incettare. Inchinare, to incline, to bend, to stoope, to bow, to crouch, to loute. Inchinatione, an inclination, a bending, a bowing, a louting. Inchinéuole, inclining, bowing, bending, stooping, louting. Inchino, inclined, stooping, bent, crouched, reuerenced, a louting, a curtesie. Inchiocca, plentie, store, hold belly hold. Inchiodare, to clow or pricke a horse with a naile, to naile faste, to clow ordi∣nance. Inchiodato, clowed or prickt with a naile, nailed fast. Inchiodatura, a pricking or clowing of a horse with a naile, called a clowing, a nailing in or fast. Inchiostrare, to encloister, to cloister vp. Also to blur or daube with inke. Inchiostraro, an inke-man, an inke-ma∣ker. Inchióstro, inke to write withall. Inchioua, as Anchioua. Inciampare, to stumble or light vpon by chance, to encounter, to shocke, to trip, to meete, to rub by the way. Inciampatura, a stumbling vpon by chance, an impediment, a let, a tripping, a shocke, a meeting. Inciampo, a stumble, a fall, an encounter, a shocke, a tripping. Also a stumbling blocke, a stone or let or impediment, a rub by the way. Incidente, incident, falling or that chanceth. Incídere, cido, cisi, ciso, to cut in, to make an incision, to gash, to slit, to lance.
Incielare, to aduance vp or place in hea∣uen, to enter heauen. Inciélo, in heauen. Inciermetore, a soothsayer, a wizard. Incinabrare, to make red with cinabre or red oker. Incinare, to hooke, to drag. Incinaro, a hooker, a dragger. Incinerare, as Incenerare. Incineratione, incineration, a word of alchimie. Incíngere, cingo, cinsi, cinto, to gyrd or compasse in. Incino, an irchen or hedgehog. Also a hook, as Vncino or Rampino. Incino di mare, a kinde of fish with pric∣kles on the backe. Incinqua, in fiue, or at fiue times or for fiue. Incinquare, to deuide or reduce into fiues. Incinta, great or big with child. Also loose or vngyrt. Incinto, gyrt or compassed in. Incipiénte, an incipient, a beginner. Incirconciso, vncircumcised. Incischiare, to cut, to shaue, to cleaue stickes, to chip, to mince small, to chop to peeces, to slice. also to dodge and wran∣gle about a matter of nothing. Incisione, an incision, an incutting, a gash, a garsh, a lancing, a slitting. Inciso, a short member of a sentence. Inciso, cut in or made an incision, gashed, lanced, slit. Also wrought, grauen or carued, snipt or iagged. Incisóre, an incider or maker of an incisi∣on, a gasher, a lancer, a grauer or cutter. Incisorij, the foreteeth of any creature. Incisura, as Incisione. Incitare, to incite, to allure, to prouoke, to egge on, to incense. Incitamento, Incitatione, an incite∣ment, alluring, prouoking or incita∣tion. Inciuile, vnciuill, vnmannerly, euill nur∣tured, rustick, clownish. Inciuilire, lisco, lito, to grow or become ciuill or mannerly. Inciuilità, Inciuiltà, inciuilitie, vnman∣nerlines, basenes in behauiour, clow∣nishnes, rusticitie. Inciuittire, to transforme into the quali∣tie of an owle. Inclastare, to enchase, or set stones in rings, or to set in little peeces of wood as ioyners vse. Inclasto, an inchasing or setting in of a stone in a ring or in laide-worke. Inclaustrare, as Inchiostrare. Incleménte, cruell, rigorous, seuere, mercilesse, sterne, fell, vnclement. Inclemenza, rigorousnes, crueltie, au∣steritie, mercilesnesse, inclemencie. Inclinare, as Inchinare. Inclinatione, as Inchinatione. Inclinéuole, as Inchineuole. Inclino, as Inchino. Inclito, famous, renoumed, of great name, glorious, noble. Inclitezza, Inclità, fame, renoume, greatnes, glorie, nobilitie. Inclúdere, cludo, clusi, cluso, to in∣clude, or shut in. Inclusione, an including. Inclusiuo, inclusiue. Incoare, to performe, or finish, to begin and leaue off. Incoatiuo verbo, deriued of a verbe of the second coniugation, and of a certaine adiectiue. Incoccare, to falter, to mumble, to stut in the throte. Also to twyrle round, to nock, to set an arrow in the nock. Also as Accoccare. Incodare, to set a taile on or vpon. Incógliere, colgo, colsi, colto, to ga∣ther or collect in, to shrinkein. Also to hit or ouertake, to take napping. Incógnito, vnknowen, disguised, vnkend, vnkent, vncouth. Incolà, further off, beyond, further that way. Incolare, Incollare, to glue together. Incolatura, Incollatura, a gluing to∣gether. Incoli, enhabitants or dwellers. Incolorire, risco, rito, to giue a colour vnto, to dye or colour. Incolpare, to blame, to accuse, to lay the fault vpon. Incolpéuole, blamelesse, faultlesse. Incólto, vngathered. Also gathered or shronken in, collected or gathered in. Also hit, ouertaken, taken napping. Also as Inculto, vnhusbanded, vnpolished, vnhandsome, vnperfit, rough, without husbandrie, vnmanured. Incoltrare, as Incoltrecciare. Incoltrecciare, to inwrap or winde vp in a quilt or couerlet. Incolume, whole, safe, sound, vndistai∣ned, healthie. Incominciare, to begin, to commence. Incominciamento, a beginning, a com∣mencement. Incomodare, Incommodare, to in∣commode, to trouble, to disease, to hin∣der, to disturbe. Incomodità, Incommodità, incom∣moditie, trouble, hinderance, dis∣commoditie, disturbance, tedious∣nes. Incomodo, Incommodo, incommo∣dious, troublesome. Also as Incom∣modità. Incompagnia, together, in companie, with. Incomparabile, incomparable, vn∣matchable, matchlesse. Incompararsi, to engossip himselfe, to become a gossip. Incompatibile, vnsufferable, that can not be suffred. Incomplesse parole, words not well de∣scribed, vncomprised words. Incomportabile, intollerable, vnsuffe∣rable. Incomposto, vncomposed, vnfinished, vnperfect, disordred. Incomprehensibile, incomprehensible, that can not be conceiued in minde. Incomprehensibilità, incomprehensibi∣litie. Incompreso, vncomprehended, incom∣prehensible. Incomutabile, immutable, stedfast, vn∣changeable. Inconcesso, denyed, vngranted, for∣bidden. Inconcinnità, vnfitnes, vnhandsomnes. Inconfuso, vnconfounded. Incongelabile, that will not freeze or congeale. Inconclusione, an vncertaintie. Also in conclusion, finallie. Inconcluso, vncertaine, vnconcluded, vndetermined. Incongruità, incongruitie, absurdnes. Incongruo, absurd, against forme or rule. Inconocchiare, to winde about a distaffe as they do flaxe, to huddle vp or take all that commes. Also for a man to entangle himselfe about womens matters. Inconquasso, in a hurlieburlie, hauocke or confusion. Inconscio, vnwitting, guiltlesse. Inconsiderabile, that cannot be conside∣red, or imagined, inconsiderable. Inconsideratione, rashnes, inconsidera∣tion, vnaduisednes. Inconsiderato, rash, vnregardfull, in∣considerate, vnaduised. Inconsolabile, that can not be comfor∣ted. Inconsueto, vnwont, vnaccustomed. Inconsumato, vnconsumed. Inconsumabile, that can not be consu∣med. Incontaminato, vndefiled, vnspotted. Inconstante, vnconstant, mutable, wa∣uering, fickle.
Inconstanza, vnconstancie, mutabilitie, ficklenes. Incontanente, presently, out of hand. Inconte, vnreckoned, not counted, vn∣counted, vnkemd, disheueld, disordered. Incontegno, in coynes, vpon nicenes, dis∣dainefully, squeamishly. Inconti, vnkemd, vndrest, desheueled haires. Incontinénte, vnchaste, vncontinent, vn∣cleane of life, vntemperate. Incontinénza, incontinencie, vncleannes of life, intemperancie. Incontinuo, vncontinuall. Inconto, in account, in part of paiment, towards a reckoning. Incontra, against, opposite, ouer against, contrarie, in exchange, in steed. Incontrare, to incounter, to meete, to shock, to but, to charge vpon. Incontrario, on the contrarie, against, contrarie. Incontro, an encounter, a shock, a mee∣ting, a butting, an assault, a hap. Also on the other side, contrarie, against, ouer against, opposite. Inconuenéuole, vnconuenient, vnbesee∣ming, vnbecomming, vnfit. Inconueniénte, inconuenient. Also an inconuenience. Inconueniénza, an inconuenience. Inconuiuente, that mooueth not, or twinkleth not the eyes. Incoprire, copro, copersi, coperto, as Coprite. Incoraggiare, as Incorare. Incorare, to encourage, to harten, to ani∣mate, to imboulden, to perswade. Incorazza, armed with a cuirace. Incorazzare, to arme with a cuirace, Incorbare, to put into a basket, to bowe, or stoupe, to make crooked. Incordare, to stiffen or benum with cold. Also to tune, string, or cord. Incordato, stiffened, benummed with cold. Also tuned, strung, and corded as an instrument. Also the incording or bursting of a horse. Incordatura, Incordamento, a stiffe∣ning or benumming with cold, a tuning, stringing, or cording, the incording or bursting of a horse. Incoronare, to crown a prince, to wreath or engarland about. Also to reduce to a perfit shape, forme and bodie. Incoronato, reduced to a perfit shape, form and body. Also crowned as a king. Incorotto, as Incorrotto. Incorottibile, as Incorruttibile. Incorporale, that hath no bodie. Incorporalità, hauing no bodie. Incorporare, to incorporate or ioine togi∣ther. Incorporéo, incorporeall, hauing no bo∣die. Incorporatione, an incorporation or ioining togither. Incorreggibile, that can not bee correc∣ted, faultles. Incórrere, corro, corsi, corso, to incurre danger, to run in. Incorrétto, vncorrected, vnpolished, vn∣handsome. Incorrigibile, not to be corrected, blame∣lesse. Incorrottamente, vncorruptedly, sin∣cerely. Incorrotto, vncorrupted, entire, sounde, perfit. Incorrottibilità, vncorruptiblenes. Incorruttibile, vncorruptible, that will not be corrupted. Incorruttione, incorruption. Incorsione, as Incursione. Incorso, stumbled vpon anie let. also in∣curred, incurred into danger, run in. Incortare, to shrinke in, to shorten. Incortinare, to decke or hang about with curtaines. Incosi fattamaniera, in such sort. Incostà, Incosti, further of, beyond, that way, fatteùi in costà, goe farther. Incostante, as Inconstante. Incostanza, as Inconstanza. Incostare, to enribbe, to thrust into the ribs or sides. Incotta, raw, vnsodden, a rawhead. Incozzare, Looke Accozzare. Increato, vncreated, not created. Incredibile, incredible, maruelous. Incredulità, incredulity, lacke of beliefe. Incrédulo, vncredulous, vnbeleeuing. Incremento, increase, augmentation, a growing greater. Incremesi, ingraine, crimson, scarlet. fur∣fante incremesi, a knaue in graine. Increpare, to blame, reprooue or chide, to threaten. Increpatione, a chiding, a threatning. Incréscere, cresco, crebbi, cresciuto, to molest, to grieue, to vexe. Also to be sorie, to grieue inwardly, to thinke the time long. Increscimento, a vexation, a vexing, a greeuing, or thinking the time long. Increscioso, tedious, troublesome, irck∣some, vnpleasant. Incresciuto, molested, greeued, vexed. Increspare, to curle, to frounze the haire, to wrinkle, to crispe. Increspatura, Increspamento, a curling or frounzing of the haire, a wrinkling. Increstare, to set a crest or coxecombe vp∣on one. Increstamento, Increstatura, a cresting or setting a coxecombe vpon one. Incretare, to lome or daube with clay. Incrocchiare, as Incrocicchiare. Incrociare, as Incrocicchiare. Incrocicchiare, to crosse or go on crut∣chets, to crucifie. Incrocicchiamento, a crossing, or cruci∣fying, or gving on crutchets. Incroiare, as Croiare. Incrostare, to thicken or make crustie, to grow rugged, hard or scuruie. Also to parget or rough caste. Incrostatura, Incrostamento, a thick∣ning or making crustie, a ruggednes, sandines, or scuruines. Also a pargeting or rough casting. Incrudelire, lisco, lito, to incrudelize, to become cruell. Incrudelito, incrudelized, or become cruell. Incrudire, disco, dito, as Incrudelire. Also to make rawe. Incrustolire, lisco, lito, to growe hard or crustie. Incubi, certaine wicked spirits that trou∣ble men sleeping. Also the disease called the night-mare or night-witch. Incude, Incudene, a smithes anuile or stithie. Incudine, Incugine, idem. Inculare, to recoile or drawe backe, or to thrust into the arse. Inculcare, to pore or thrust in, to repeate often, to presse in by force. Inculto, vnhusbanded, vnmanured, vn∣tilled, desart, wilde, barren, vnpoli∣shed. Incumbii, certaine spirit so called, who in the shape of women will subiect them∣selues to men, as Incubi. Incurabile, incurable, that cannot be cu∣red. Incurioso, carelesse, negligent, nothing curious. Incursione, an inuasion, an inrode, or forrey. Incustodito, not kept, not looked vnto, vntended. Incuruato, crooked, bending, bowing. Indanaiare, as Indenaiare. Indaracare, to become fierce, fell, or cruell as a dragon. Indarno, in vaine, for nought, amisse, for nothing, vainly. Indebitaménte, vndulie, vnlawfullie. Indebitare, to indebt or grow in debt. Indébito, vniust, vndue, vnlawfull, vn∣seemely. Also indebt, in debted.
Indebilitare, as Indebolire. Indebolire, lisco, lito, to weaken, to en∣feeble, to faint. Indebolito, weakned, enfeebled, fain∣ted. Indecénte, vndecent, vnseemely, vncome∣lie. Indecénza, indecencie, vnseemelines, vn∣comlines. Indeciso, vndecided, vndetermined. Indeclinabile, that cannot be declined. Also vnauoidable. Indecóro, an indecorum, an vnseemlines, an inconueniencie, a disorder. Indefaticábile, vnweariable, that cannot be wearied or tired. Indeficiénte, a thing that neuer fai∣leth. Indefinito, not defined, vndetermined, vndiscussed. Indefinitiuo, that cannot be defined or de∣termined. Indegnare, to be, make or become wroth or angrie. Indegnità, indignity, vnworthines, wrong, abuse, vnnoblenes, basenes. Indégno, vnwoorthie, vndeseruing, vn∣meete, vnhonest, shamefull. Indelibato, not diminished, sounde whole. Indello, within or in the. Indemoniare, to possesse one with some euill spirit, to make one diuelish. Indemoniato, possessed with a diuell, ha∣uing an euill spirit in him, diuelish. Indenaiare, to store with money, to make rich or to bribe with money, to money. Indénne, without hurt or harme, harme∣lesse, exempt from harme. Indénnità, eschuing of danger, escaping of hurt. Independénte, not depending of others but absolute of himselfe. Indeplorato, not bewailed, vnlamented. Inderitto, indirect, crooked. Indesinénte, alwaies continuing, without ceasing, vncessaunt. Indeterminabile, that cannot be deter∣mined or decided. Indeterminato, vndetermined, vndeci∣ded. Indettare, as Imbecherare. Indeuenare, to reele or winde silke yarne or thread. Indeuenatoio, a reeler or reeling sticke. Indeuoto, vngodly, irreligious, impi∣ous, without deuotion. Indi, thence, from thence, thereby, thereup∣on. Also a kind of plum so called. Indiarsi, to become deuine or godlike. Indiato, become deuine or godly. Indica, a kinde or pretious stone in India, of reddish colour; which being rubbed sweateth purple drops. Indicare, to shew, to declare, to vtter, to accuse, as Indicere. Indicatiuo, that whereby any thing is shewed or declared. Indicatiuo dito, the forefinger of ones hand. Indice, an index, table or direction of a booke. Also the gnomon of a dyall. Also the forefinger of ones hand, atouch stone to trie gold, a witnes. Also a summarie or inuentorie of ones goods, a token, a signe or a shew or a guide. Also the in∣scription or title of a booke. Also the trumpe carde that is turnd vp. Indicere, indico, indissi, indetto, to dis∣close, to manifest, to appeach, to accuse, to detect, to betoken, to declare, to noise abroad, to promise, to denounce, to pro∣claime, to summon. Indicibile, vnspeakeable, not to be spoken off. Indicio, Inditio, a signe, a marke, a to∣ken, a show, a note, a signification. Indicióso, Inditioso, that hath or giueth signes, markes, tokens, showes, notes or significations. Indico, blew Inde, a kinde of blew colour, wherewith diers vse to die blew. Also a kinde of musicall instrument with strings. Indiétro, behinde, backe, backward, af∣ter. Indifferénte, indifferent. Indifferénza, indifferencie. Indiffésa, in defence, to lye in a ward, to stand vpon a guarde. Indifféso, vndefended, not forbidden. Indiffensibile, vndefensible, not to be de∣fended. Indigénte, needie, poore, lacking, wan∣ting. Indigénza, neede, lacke, want, pouertie, penurie. Indigéstibile, that cannot be digested, or∣dered or pollished. Indigestione, indigestion, confusion, dis∣order. Indigésto, vndigested, vnpollished, confu∣sed, disordered. Indignato, scalded, vexed, galled, rubd the skin off, wroth, mooued or angrie. Indígnatione, indignation. Indignità, indignitie, vnworthines. Indigno, vnworthie, vndeseruing. Indigrosso, by great, by the great. Indiligénte, negligent, slothfull. Indiligentia, negligence, drowsines. Indigo, as Indico. Indilnuiare, to ouerflow. Indimesticheuole, vnconuersable, that can not be conuersed withall or tamed, wilde, vntameable. Indirettione, indirection. Indirétto, indirect. Also directed or a∣dressed vnto. Also forthright, or di∣rectly. Indiritto, as Indiretto. Indirizzare, to direct, addresse, or raise vp. Indirizzamento, a direction, an addres∣sing, a raising vp. Indisciplinabile, that can not be taught or broken. Indisciplinato, vntaught, vnlearned, vn∣broken. Indiscretezza, indiscretion, or fondnes. Indiscrettione, indiscretion, fondnes. Indiscréto, indiscreet, fond, rash. Indisiare, to possesse one with a desire. Indisparte, a part, aside, elsewhere, farre off, out of the way, seuerall. Indispositione, indisposition, vnlustines, crasednes, weakenes, disorder. Indisposto, indisposed, vnlustie, crazed, weake, without order, disordred. Indissecabile, that can not be dried vp. Indissolubile, indissoluble, inseparable, that cannot be loosed, or dissolued. Indissolubilità, inseparablenes. Indissoluto, not dissolued, still knit to∣gether. Indistintamente, without distinction, confusedly. Indistinguibile, not to be distinguished. Indistinto, vndistinct, vndistinguished, confused. Inditio, a marke, a signe, a token or notice of any thing, a shew. Inditioso, as Indicioso. Indittore, a declarer, a denouncer, a pro∣claimer. Indittione, an indiction, an inditement, the space of fifteene yeares, time it selfe. Indiuerse maniere, in diuers manners, diuers wayes. Indiuerse parti, in sundrie parts, in many partes. Indiuia, the hearbe we call endiue. Indiuiduità, indiuiduitie, vnseparable∣nes. Indiuíduo, so small as it can not be de∣uided, inseparable. Indiuinare, as Indouinare. Indiuinatoria arte, the arte of deuining. Indiuisato, comparted, deuided. Indiuisibile, not to be deuided, insepa∣rable. Indiuiso, vndeuided, vnseparated.
Indocile, a dullard, a heauie skonce, vn∣apt to learne. Indocilità, indocilitie, hardnes of lear∣ning. Indóglia, a pudding or haggasse. Indoglire, glisco, glito, to be ful of smart, paine, greefe or sorrow, to benum with stiffenes or with cold. Indoglito, full of smart, paine, &c, stiffe with cold. Indolcire, cisco, cito, to sweeten, to make sweet, to mitigate, to appease, to as∣swage. Indole, a good or bad naturall inclination, a towardnes, an aptnes to good or euill, a vertuous disposition, a towardnes to vertue. Indolénza, lacke or want of paine, when no griefe is felt, sencelesnes in paine. Indolenzire, zisco, zito, to ake or feele any ache or paine. Indolére, dolgo, dolsi, doluto, as In∣doglire. Indomabile, that cannot be tamed, wild, vnbroken. Indomare, to make wild or vntame. Indomesticabile, as Indimestiche∣uole. Indómito, that is not tamed, wilde, vn∣broken, vnruly, outragious, inuinci∣ble. Indonnare, to become a lord, to make or become possessor or owner of a thing. Indono, in gift, freely, franckly. Indorare, to gilde with gold. Indorata, a gilding. Also gilt or gilded. Also the herb walferne, ceterach, stone∣ferne, scaleferne, miltwaste, or finger∣ferne. Indoratore, a gilder, one that guildeth. Indormentare, as Indormire. Indormire, dormo, dormito, to fall or bring or lull a sleepe. Also to bid a fig, or a turd for one, not to care for one. Indossare, to put or lay vpon ones backe. Indosso, vpon, about, on the backe. Indotato, without a dowrie or iointer. Also disindowed, not endowed with any gift. Indotta, as Induttione. Indottorae, to doctor or take the degree of a doctor. Indótto, induced, vrged, constrained, brought vnto. Also vnlearned, igno∣rant. Indottrinare, to teach or instruct. Indouanadore, a winder of wooll or silke. Indouanadura, a winding or reeling of silke. Indouanare, to winde or reele silke or yarne. Indouare, an old word of Dante, compo∣sed of Doue, to go or enter whether. Indouato, gon or entred whether. Indouinare, to deuine, to guesse, to fore∣tell, to soothsay. Indouinamento, Indouinatione, a de∣uining, a foretelling, a deuination or soothsaying. Indouinatore, a deuiner, a soothsayer, a foreteller. Indouinéllo, a tell-truth, a tom-tell-troth. Indouino, as Indouinatore. Indozzamento, as Induttione. Indozzéna, in commons, boording in a place as schollers do, at liuerie. Indozzenare, to be in commons, boorded with others. Also made vp in dozins. Indracare, as Indaracare. Indragare, as Indaracare. Indragonare, as Indaracare. Indrizzare, as Indirizzare. Indrizzamento, as Indirizzamento. Indrizzo, a direction or addressing vnto. Indubbiare, to make one or put one in doubt. Indubbio, in doubt, doubtfull, vncer∣taine. Indubitabile, as Indubiteuole. Indubitato, vndoubted, certaine, assu∣red. Indubitéuole, not to be doubted, assu∣redly. Indúcere, duco, dussi, dutto, to induce, to put in, to cast into, to lead into, to bring in, to allure, to perswade, to seduce, to deceiue, to intangle, to bring to naught, to mooue. Inducimento, an inducing, an induction, a seducing. Inducitore, an inducer, a perswader, a seducer. Indugiare, to delay, to demur, to slowe, to linger. Indugio, delay, lingring, a demurre, a slownes. Indulgéntia, an indulgence, a permission, gentle intreatie, mercie, fauour, milde∣nesse. Indulgentiato, hauing indulgence or suf∣ferance to do any thing. Indúlgere, to graunt lightly, to pardon, to consent, to permit with fauour and mercie, to dispence with. Indulto, forgiuen, suffred, permitted, dis∣pensed with. Indurare, to indure, to last, to suffer, to tolerate, to abide. Also to harden or grow hard, to stiffen. Induratiuo, that doth harden. Also that may be indured. Indurire, duro, durito, as Indu∣rare, to harden, to make hard, to ob∣durate. Indurre, as Inducere. Indústria, industrie, trauell, labour, ende∣uour, diligence, paines taking, careful∣nesse. Industriare, to indeuour, to labour, to take paines, to be industrious. Indústre, as Industrioso. Industrióso, industrious, painefull, dili∣gent, endeuoring, laborious. Indutto, perswaded, induced, prouoked, brought in. Induttione, an induction, an entrance, an inducement, a perswasion. Induttore, an inducer, a prouoker, a per∣swader. Inebriare, to be drunken, to tipple, to bouze, to quaffe. Also to besot. Inebriezza, drunkennes. Inedia, hunger, famine, want of meate and drinke. Ineffabile, ineffable, vnspeakeable, that cannot be spoken. Ineffabilità, ineffabilitie. Ineffétto, in effect, indeed, in good sooth. Ineffettuale, vneffectuall, of no force, of no vertue. Inefficace, as Ineffectuale, of no force. Inefficacia, vneffectualnes. Ineguale, vnequall, vneeuen, odde, diffe∣rent, not match. Inegualità, inequalitie. Inelegante, vneloquent, without grace, or beawty, vnhandsome. Inelegantia, vneloquence, vnhandsom∣nes, rudenes, sluttishnes. Ineloquénte, vneloquent, without elo∣quence. Inemendábile, not to be amended. Inemendéuole, as Inemendabile. Inenarrabile, that can not be spoken, vn∣speakeable. Inequale, as Ineguale. Inequalità, as Inegualità. Inequità, vnequitie. Inérme, vnarmed, vnweaponed, vnfen∣sed. Inérto, base minde, weake harted, cow∣ardly minded, ignorant, lasie, lither, vnlearned, artlesse, dull, rude, slouth∣full. Inértia, ignorance of artes, lack of know∣ledge, idlenes, lasines, lithernes. Ineruare, as Ineruorare. Inerudíto, vnlearned, vntaught, vnin∣structed. Ineruorare, to vnsinewe, to weaken, or
enfeeble, to benumme, to stiffen the ioints. Inesausto, that cannot be drawen dry, consumed, or spent. Inescare, to lay a baite, to entice, to al∣lure, to inueigle. Inescatore, a baiter, enticer, or allurer. Inescusábile, inexcusable, that cannot be excused. Inescuséuole, inexcusable, which can not be excused. Inesperiéntia, inexperience, vnskilfulnes, vnacquaintance. Inespérto, vnexpert, vnskilfull, without experience, vnacquainted. Inespiabile, inexpiable, that can not be purged or appeased, vnmercifull, dead∣lie, marble-minded. Inesplicabile, inexplicable, that can not be expounded, intricate. Inespugnabile, inprennable, inuincible, vnuanquishable. Inessorabile, inexorable, vnappeasable, that cannot nor will be intreated. Inessorato, as Inessorabile. Inestare, to ingraffe, to graft. Inestatore, a grafter. Inestatura, Inestamento, a graffing, a graft. Inestimabile, inestimable, vnualuable. Inestiméuole, as Inestimabile. Inestinguibile, vnquenchable, that can∣not be put out or extinguished. Inestricabile, inextricable, that cannot be dissolued. Inestricare, to enfolde a thing so that it cannot be vnfolded, to intricate. Inéterno, eternally, euerlastingly, for euer and euer. Inetrire, trisco, trito, to play the vnto∣ward foole. Inetrimento, as Inettudine. Inettamente, foolishly, simply, fondlie, grossely, clownishly, vntowardly. Inettia, follie, foolishnes, fondnes, simpli∣citie. Inétto, foolish, fonde, vnapt, vnconueni∣ent. Inettudine, vnaptnesse, vntowardnesse, grossenes, follie, fondnes. Ineuitabile, ineuitable, vnauoidable. Infabricato, vnbuilt, not wrought. Infaccia, in the face, face to face, before ones eies. Infacciare, to vpbraid, to twit, to hit in the teeth. Infacchinasi, as Affacchinarsi. Infacendare, to busie, to occupie, or laie some busines vpon one. Infacendato, busied, occupied, or charged with busines. Infacéto, vnpleasant, not merie. Infacondo, vneloquent, vnpleasant in speech. Infaldare, to infolde, to plate, or set in foldes, to tucke vp a garment as milke∣maides do. Infaldatura, an enfolding, a plaiting or setting in foldes. Infaldellare, as Infaldare. Infallibile, infallible, certaine, assured. Infallo, amisse, awrie, for nothing, in er∣ror, mistaken. Infamare, to defame, backbite, or make one infamous, to detect, to slander, to shame, to report ill of, to dishonest. Infáme, infamous, reprochfull, detected, shamed, defamed, slandred, ill spoken of. Also dismall or vnluckie. Infámia, Infama, infamie, reproch, de∣tection, shame, defamation, slander, ill name, obloquie. Infamatore, a defamer, infamer, backbi∣ter or reprocher. Infamatorio, a defamatorie or reproch∣full writing or speech. Infancillire, as Ribambire. Infanciullare, as Infantare, as Ribam∣bire. Infando, so hainous, so horrible, and so villanous that may not be spoken or vt∣tred, most wicked. Infangare, to bemyre, to beraie with dirt, to bedash. Infanta, a woman childe. In Spaine and Portugall, the kings daughter or in∣fant. Infantare, to be deliuered of childe, to play the childe. Infante, a man childe or infant. Also a title for the kings sonnes of Spaine and Portugall. Infanteria, infanterie, soldiers that bee footemen. Infantescarsi, to become a maide seruant, or to enter into a maide. Infantilità, Infantia, infancie, childish∣nesse. Infarcire, cisco, cito, to stuffe as they do saddles, to quilt, to farce. Infardato, filthie, bedaubed, besmeared. Infaretrare, to put in a quiuer, to arme with a quiuer. Infarina pastinache, a gull, a drone, a foolish fellow, a simple sot. Infarinare, to bemeale, to bestower, to be∣white with meale. Infasciare, to swathe or binde togither. Infascinare, as Fascinare. Also to binde vp as fagots or bauins be. Infascie, one in his swatheling cloutes. Infastidire, disco, dito, to trouble, to mo∣lest, to disturbe, to be lothsom or weary. Infastidito, troubled, molested, disturbed, bin lothsome or wearie. Infastidio, troublesome, noisome, lothsom, wearisom. Infaticabile, vnweariable, that cannot be wearied. Infatti, indeed, in effect, in good truth, in deedes. Infauare, to be turned or coupled into a mans priuities, to turne to a beane. Infauoreuole, not to be fauoured. Infausto, vnhappy, vnfortunate, vnluckie, dismall, blacke, dire. Infecondità, barennes, vnfruitefulnesse, sterilitie. Infecondo, barren, vnfruitfull, sterill. Infedéle, vnfaithfull, infidell, vnrighte∣ous, false, disloyall. Infedeltà, vnfaithfulnes, infidelitie, vn∣righteousnes, disloyaltie, falshood. Infelice, dismall, vnhappie, vnluckie, vn∣fortunate. Infelicità, vnhappines, infelicitie, infor∣tunatenes, aduersitie, misfortune. Infellonire, nisco, nito, to become a fel∣lon, or ragefull, or cruell. Infellonito, enfellonized, or become a fel∣lon, or cruell. Infeltrato, growen stiffe, tough, starke, as a horse when he is cold. Infeminire, nisco, nito, to become wo∣manish or effeminate. Inferiore, inferior, lower, vnder, or vn∣derling. Inferire, risco, rito, to inferre, to implie, to signifie, to conclude, to alleage. Inferito, inferred, implied, signified, con∣cluded, alledged, enforced a reason. Infermare, to become sicke, to sicken, to fall sicke. Also to shut or locke in. Infermaria, a place for sicke folkes, a la∣zaret. Inferméuole, sickie, sicklie, subiect to ma∣ladies, crasie. Infermiccio, as Infermeuole. Infermità, infirmitie, sicknes, disease or maladie, weaknes, feeblenes. Infermo, sicke, diseased, sickish, ill at ease, crazed, weake, feeble, vnable. Infernale, Infernoso, infernall, hellish, belonging to hell. Infernare, to bring or put into hell, to suf∣fer the torments of hell. Infernetichire, chisco, chito, to growe frantike, rauing, mad, or frenzie. Inférno, hell, the deepe pit of hell, lowe, nethermost, deepest. Inferocito, become cruell, fell, fierce or moodie. Inferrare, to locke in irons.
Infertilità, vnfruitfulnes, barrennes. Inferuorato, become earnest, or feruent. Infésta, infected, molested, annoied, vex∣ed, infested, hurt. Infestare, to infect, to molest, to annoie, to trouble, to vexe, to hurt with sundrie incursions or rodes. Infestamento, a molestation, an annoy∣ance, a trouble, a vexation or hurt. Infestatione, as Infestamento. Infestatore, an infester, a molester, an annoier, a vexer, a troubler. Infestéuole, noisome, troublesom, vexing, irkesome, greeuous, tedious. Infésto, hatefull, odious, troublesom, com∣bersome. Infettare, to infect, to corrupt, to staine, to poison. Infettione, Infettatione, a contagion or infecting, infection or contagion. Infétto, infected, corrupted, stained, poiso∣ned. Infeudato, enfewded, brought vnto a tri∣bute. Infiaccare, to weaken, to tire, to wearie, to faint. Infiacchire, chisco, chito, as Infiac∣care. Infiagione, a swelling, a bunch, a puffing vp, a timpanie, a gathering of winde. Infiammagione, an inflammation, a burning, a kindling, a blistring heate. Infiammare, to enflame, to kindle, to in∣cense, to burne, to blister with heate. Infiammatione, as Infiammagione. Infiare, to swell, to puffe or blow vp. Infiatura, a swelling, a puffing vp, an in∣flation. Infibbiare, to buckle or claspe togither. Inficato, conuerted into a womans priui∣ties. Inficcare, to thrust or driue in, to fixe. Infidele, as Infedele. Infideltà, as Infedeltà. Infido, vnfaithfull, faithlesse, trustlesse, traiterous, disloyall, false, vnconstant. Infiebolire, lisco, lito, as Indebolire. Infieuolire, idem. Infilare, to spinne one thing with another, to worke togither. Also to order, range or marshall souldiers in files, rankes, rowes, lines, or orders. Infilzare, to thread as they do pearles or beades vpon a thread or riband. Infilzatura, a threading vp of pearles or beades. Infilzatrice, a woman that threadeth vp pearles or beades. Infimo, base, lowest, and most abiect, meane, vile, of no reputation, a common rascall. Infin'a quando, vntill when? how long? Infin'a tanto, vntill such time, vntill that, so long as. Infin', vntill, till that, so farre as, euen, in fine, in the end, in conclusion. Infine, in fine, in conclusion, in the ende, when all is done. Infingardaggine, Infingardiggine, idlenes, slothfulnes, lasines, lithernes, dulnes, sluggishnes, retchlesnes. Infingardia, as Infingardaggine. Infirgardire, disco, dito, to become idle, lazie, lither, artelesse, carelesse, negli∣gent, &c. Infingardito, become idle, slowe, lazie, lither, retchlesse, carelesse, dull, or slug∣gish. Infingárdo, slothfull, careles, dull, idle, la∣zie, slothfull, lither, sluggish. Infingere, as Fingere. Infinità, infinitie, that which cannot bee numbred, an vnmeasurablenes. Also generalitie. Infinita, infinite, numberles, endles, innu∣merable. Infinitiuo, the Infinitiue moode, defining neither time, number, nor person. Infinito, infinite, numberles, endles. Infino, vntill, vntill when, euen, so farre as, so farre foorth. Infino a quando, how long? vntill when? Infino a tanto, so long as, vntill that. Infino che, so long as, vntill that. Infin a qui, hitherto, vntill this place or time. Infinocchiare, to flatter, to enfenell, to fetch in with flatterie, as Gonfiare alcuno. Infinta, a faining, a shewe, a flourishing, a profer. Infintezza, fainednes, faining. Infinto, fained, dissembled, counterfait. Infiorare, to flourish, to flower, to adorne with flowers, to bloome. Infiore, in prime, in youth, in ones flower. Infiorire, risco, rito, as Infiorare. Infirmare, as Infermare. Infirmaria, as Infermaria. Infirmità, as Infermità. Infirmo, as Infermo. Infisso, fixed, or fastned in, that sticketh in. Infistolare, to impostume, or growe to a fistula, to fester. Infistulare, as Infistolare. Inflatione, as Enfiagione. Inflessibile, inflexible, vntractable, that will not bend, yeeld, or be intreated, cruell. Inflesso, bowed, bent, crooked, crump. Inflitto, stroken violently, inflicted, smit∣ten against. Influenza, an influence, or a fatall gift, a flowing in. Influire, fluisco, fluito, to flow in, to en∣ter in, to sinke into, to runne into as wa∣ter doth. Influsso, an influence or flowing in, an influxe. Infocare, to kindle, burne, inflame, or set on fire. Also to neale red hote, to bake red hote, to glow, to fire. Infocato, kindled, burned, inflamed, set on fire. Also nealed or baked red hote. Also earnest, feruent, hote, and violent. Infoderare, to line a garment, or to sheath a weapon. Infoggiare, to fashion, to enfashion, to frame or reduce to a fashion, to ac∣custome. Infogliare, to enleaue with leaues. Infoare, to be leacherous as a goate, or a salt bitch. Infollare, to become foolish or fond. Also to thicken, to become thicke, to presse, to throng. Infolpare, to become foolish or sencelesse. Infóndere, fondo, fondéi, fuso, to in∣fuse, to melt in, to powre in. Infóndersi, a disease in a hauke, called the melting of the grease. Infonditore, an infuser, a melter, a pow∣rer in. Infóndo, in the bottome. Informabile, that can not be framed. Informaggiare, to crud, or dresse with cheese. Informa camera, a promooter or infor∣mer. Informare, to giue forme or shape to any thing, to forme, to frame. Also to in∣forme, to instruct, to giue knowledge, to giue information. Also to set a shoe vpon a last as shoemakers vse, to put a cheese into the cheesefat or presse. Informatione, information, instructi∣on, a fashioning. Informatore, an informer, an instructer, one that fashioneth. Infórme, formelesse, shapelesse, wanting shape, forme or fashion. Informità, informitie, shapelesnes. Infornare, to put in to an ouen. Infornata, a batch or ouen full of bread. Infornaro, Infornatore, a baker, or one that puts in to an ouen. Inforsa, Inforse, in doubt, vncertaine, vn∣sure, in peraduenture. Inforsare, to make doubtfull, vncertaine, or vnsure, to put in doubt. Infortunato, vnfortunate, vnhappie, vn∣luckie. Infortunio, a misfortune, a mishap, a
mischance, a mischiefe. Infortunità, misfortune. Inforzato, enforced, strengthned. Infoscare, to darken, to obscure, to growe cloudie, mistie, duskie or foggie. Infoscatione, Infoscamento, a darke∣ning or obscuring, a growing mistie or cloudie or duskie. Infossare, to dig or dike in. Infra, betweene, amidst, amongst, a∣mong. Infra questo, betweene this, whilest, meane while. Infra tanto, in the meane time, in the meane while. Infracassare, as Fracassare. Infracidare, to rot, to fester, to putrifie, to corrupt. Infracidire, as Infracidare. Infradicciare, to wearie or make tedious with fond discourses and foolish beha∣uiors. Infragidare, as Infradicciare. Infragidire, disco, dito, as Infradic∣ciare. Infragile, vnfraile. Infragnere, as Infrangere. Inframéttere, métto, misi, mésso, to intermit, to interpose, to put betweene. Also to inlay, or worke in among other things. Inframéssa, an intermission, or interpo∣sition. Inframésso, intermitted, interposed, put betweene. Also any thing inlayde, wrought, or put in betweene other things. Inframezzare, to entermixe, to enter∣larde. Inframézzo, in the meane while, in the middle. Infranciosare, to infect, or be infected with the french poxe, to frenchisie. Infrángere, as Frangere. Infrangiare, to infringe, or decke with fringe. Infranto, broken, brused, crashed, burst, shiuered, battered, splinted, riuen. Infrantoio, any hammer or any thing else to braie, breake and bruse with. Infrascare, to intangle togither with twigs or boughes or frashes, to become a halter sacke, to feede with vaine hopes, to fetch one ouer, as Gonfiare alcuno. Infrascata, Infrascamento, a bower or arboure of twigges or leaues or boughes. Infrasconare le vele, to fasten the sailes to their mastes. Also to hoiste sailes. Al∣so as Infrascare. Infrascritto, vnderwritten. Infrastagliare, as Frastagliare. Infratarsi, to become a Frier or religious man. Infratoio, any kinde of breaking or bru∣sing toole. Infreddare, to take or be cold, to coole, to make cold. Infreddaggione, Infreddura, a cold or taking of cold, a rheume. Infreddire, disco, dito, as Infreddare. Infréga, a catterwaling, proud as cats and dogs will be. Also salte as a bitch. Infregiare, to fringe, to decke, to lace, to adorne, to dight, to marke. Also to scarre, as Fregiare. Infrenare, to enbridle, to refraine, to stay, to rule. Infrenato, not bridled, vnrulie, rebel∣lious. Infreno, in bridle, bridled, restrained, refrained. Infrequenza, solitarines. Infrequentato, vnfrequented, vnhan∣ted. Infrescare, to refresh, to coole, to ease, to rest. Infretta, in haste, with speede, hastilie, speedily. Infrettare, to hasten, to make haste, to speede, to make speede. Infrigidatione, a cooling, a freesing, a chilling. Infrigidire, to coole or take colde. Infringere, fringo, frinsi, frinto, to in∣fringe or breake, to transgresse a lawe, to breake or teare in pieces. Infrinto, infringed, broken, or transgres∣sed a law, broken or torne in pieces. Infrogiare, to besot or bewitch one with flatteries and faire words. Infrondare, to enbow, to enbranch, to bud with leaues, to blossome, to bloome. Infrótta, in troupes, in heapes, in squa∣drons, pell mell, in multitudes. Infruttifero, Infruttuoso, vnfrutefull, barren, fruitlesse, vnprofitable. Infula, an ornament which priests in old time did weare on their heads, vsed also for a bishops mitre. Also a labell han∣ging on each side of a mitre. Infumare, to smoke, to fume, to blote, to drye in the roofe or smoke. Infúndere, fundo, fusi, fuso, as Infon∣dere. Infuocare, as Infocare. Infuora, Infuori, abroad, without, out∣ward, out. Also except, sauing. Infuria, in a furie, ragingly. Infuriare, to raue, to rage, to be furious, to grow franticke or mad. Infusióne, a powring in, a steeping, an infusion. Infúso, infused, melted, powred in. Infustare, as Inbracare, or Imbra∣care. Infuturare, to make perpetuall, to set vp to posteritie. Infutúro, hereafter, in time to come. Ingabbiare, to encage, to coope vp in coopes or cages. Ingaggiare battaglia, to wage or gage battaile, to engage. Ingaggiato, engaged, waged. Ingagliardire, disco, dito, to growe strong, or lustie, or disposed, strength∣ned. Ingaglioffare, as Ingaglioffire, to put vp in ones pocket or pouch. Ingaglioffire, fisco, fito, to become craf∣tie, suttle, slye or knauish. Ingallare, Ingalare, to ingall, or lay in steepe in galles. Ingallonarsi come vna nane, to be rea∣die to sinke and hang on one side. Ingalluzzarsi, to become wanton, riggish, cockish, foolish or prowde vpon some humor or conceit. Ingannare, to deceiue, to beguile, to de∣fraude. Ingannatore, a deceiuer, a beguiler, a defrauder. Ingannauillano, the name of a leape or sault so called in Italian, as we should say mock-clowne. Inganneuole, deceitfull, fraudulent, guilefull. Inganno, a deceipt, a guile, a fraude, a cosening tricke. Ingarafonare, to perfume or sticke with cloues. Also to beset or adorne with gilloflowers. Ingarbarsi le braccia, when a horse doth set downe his forefeete cunningly after the manner of true horsemanship. Ingarbugliare, to entangle, to confound, to garboile, to trouble. Ingarbuglio, a confusion, disorder, hur∣lie burlie, discord, disagreeing or gar∣boile. Ingasiare, to worke or purle stitcht needle worke. Ingauitare, to feare, to doubt, to suspect, to mistrust. Inge, the name of a louing bird. Also taken for loue dalliances. Ingegnarsi, to endeuour, to take care or thought to do any thing, to applie ones wit about any matter. Ingegnéuole, as Ingegnoso. Ingegniéro, Ingeniére, an inginer, a for∣tifier, a deuiser of engines. Also an ar∣tificer, a maker of any tooles, one skilfull in fortifications, machines, and strata∣gems
of war. Ingégno, an engine, a toole, a deuise, an artifice, an inuention, an implement. Also wit, arte, skill, knowledge, discreti∣on, foresight, fancie, cunning. Also the nature, inclination or disposition of a thing. Ingegnóne, the whole frame that con∣taines the mil-stones of a mill. Also a notable great wit. Ingegnóso, wittie, wilie, ingenious, sub∣tile, wise, cunning, craftie, full of inuen∣tion. Ingegnétto, a little prettie wit. Also a little toole or implement. Ingelábile, that doth not or cannot freeze. Ingélido, not frozen, vnfrozen. Ingelosia, in iealousie, in suspect, hid in a letteise window. Ingelosire, sisco, sito, to become iealous or suspitious. Ingeminato, doubled, redoubled. Ingemmare, to wind vp thread or yarne, to bud foorth as vines and willowes doe. Also to adorne or decke with gemmes, iewels or precious stones. Ingenerabile, that cannot be ingendred, not to be ingendred. Ingenerabilità, vnbegetting, ingenera∣bilitie. Ingenerare, as Generare. Ingeneratione, as Generatione. Ingenerato, vnborne, vnbegotten, com∣ming by nature. Ingeniculo, a figure among the stars now called Hercules. Ingeniére, as Ingegniero. Ingénito, naturall, giuen or bred in by nature. Ingénte, verie great, big, excellent and famous. Ingentilire, lisco, lito, to make or become gentle, curteous or noble, to ennoble. Ingenuamente, freely franckly, according to ones conscience, vnconstrained, inge∣niously, of a free and liberall disposition, in good sooth. Ingenuità, freedome or free-state, inge∣nuitie, a liberall, free, or honest nature and condition. Ingénuo, free borne, natural, good, honest, fine, daintie, comely, noble. Ingerire, risco, rito, to bring, to carrie, to put or to powre in, to throwe or caste downe, to presse into. Also voluntarily to presse into, to presse in, to offer him∣selfe vndesired. Ingeríto, brought, carried, put or brought in, throwen or caste downe, pressed into. Ingessare, to white with chalke, to chalke. Inghiottire, tisco, tito, to englut, to glut, to swallow, to deuour. Inghiottonare, to become a glutton or a cosening knaue. Inghiottonire, nisco, nito, as Inghiot∣tonare. Inghiozzare, as Inghiottire. Inghirlandare, to engarland or enwreath to crowne with a garland. Inghistara, a glasse or pot of glasse to bring wine in, to the cubboord. Ingiaccare, to put one in a iacket, or shirt of maile. Ingiallare, to waxe, make or become yea∣lowe. Ingiallire, lisco, lito, as Ingiallare. Ingigliare, to decke, to adorne or set with lillies. Inginocchiare, to kneele downe. Inginocchiate, kneeling places. Inginócchio, a knee. Also kneeling. Inginocchióni, kneeling, or vpon the knees. Ingiocondità, vnpleasantnes, sadnes, pensiuenes. Ingiocóndo, vnpleasant, sorrowfull, sad, not merrie. Ingioncare, to tie or binde about with bulrushes, osiers or willowes, to make fresh cheese and creame. Ingioncata, a kinde of fresh cheese and creame or clouted creame. Ingióngere, giongo, gionsi, gionto, to inioine, to commaund, to impose, to will, to charge. Ingiontione, an iniunction, commaund, imposition or charge. Ingionto, inioined, commanded, imposed, willed or charged. Ingiorneare, as Giorneare. Ingiouenire, nisco, nito, to become yoong againe. Ingiouentù, in youth. Ingiro, about compassing, giring, turning, circling. Ingiú, Ingiuso, downeward, beneath, low, below. Ingiúria, iniurie, wrong, abuse, misusage, trespasse, offence, hurt, displeasure. Ingiuriare, to iniurie, wrong, abuse or misuse, to offend, to hurt. Ingiuriatore, an iniurer, wronger or abu∣ser, an offender. Ingiurióso, iniurious, wrongfull, abusiue, offensiue, hurtfull. Ingiuncare, as Ingioncare. Ingiuncata, as Ingioncata. Ingiustare, to leuell, to make euen or iust. Ingiustitia, iniustice, wrong or false dea∣ling. Ingiusto, vniust, false, wrong, vneuen. Ingluuio, the craw, crop or panell of a bird or hauke. Ingobbare, to bow, to bend or make crook∣backe or bunchie. Ingobbire, bisco, bito, as Ingobbare. Ingoffire, fisco, fito, to grow foolish, sot∣tish, vnwise or clownish. Ingogna, as Gogna. Ingognare, to torture or racke with a kind of torment. Looke Gogna. Ingolare, to glut, to swallow, to deuour without chawing, to gorge vp. Ingolfare, to enter into a gulfe or hauen, to engulfe. Ingogliare, as Ingolare. Ingolare, as Ingolare. Ingoire, goisco, goito, as Ingolare. Ingoluppare, to folde vp, to roule vp, to winde vp, to intangle. Imgombrare, to encumber, to trouble, to let, to hinder. Ingombramento, an incumbrance, trou∣ble, let or hinderance. Ingombro, as Ingombramento. Ingordigia, greedines, rauenouses, coue∣tise. Ingordo, greedie, rauenous, insatiable, couetous. Ingorgare, to gurgle, to gargarize, to rat∣tle in the throte, to swill, to gulche, to swallow, to choke or ouerdrowne with water. Ingorgare la lingua, when a horse doth swallow or draw vp his toong. Ingorgamento, a gurgling, gargarizing or ratling in the throte, a gulching, a swilling, a swallowing. Ingorgo, Ingurgo, a place where springs do gurgle, or a gargarize, a gulch. Ingorgogliare, as Ingorgare. Ingottato, sicke of the goute, goutie. Ingozzare, to falter or rattle in the throt to engorge, to swallow vp. Ingozzatura, a faltring, an engorging, a ratling in the throte. Ingradare, to graduate, or enter into some degree. Ingramare, to make or be sorrowfull, sad, mourning, or pensiue. Ingramire, as Ingramare. Ingrandire, disco, dito, to greaten, to make great, bigge or high. Also to ad∣uance, to preferre, to eleuate, to raise. Ingrandito, greatned, made or become great or bigge, or high. Also aduanced, preferred, raised, eleuated, set vp. Ingranella, the stone that breedeth in a mans bladder, or kidneis. Ingranellare, to growe to cornes or little
graines, to graine. Ingrannire, nisco, nito, as Ingramare. Ingrassare, to fatten, to become or make fatte. Ingratitudine, vnthankefulnes, ingrati∣tude. Ingráto, vnthankefull, ingratefull, vn∣pleasant, vnacceptable. Ingrauare, to aggrauate, to oppresse, to ouercharge. Ingrauidare, to get with childe, to become big with childe, to couer or line a beast. Ingrauidanza, as Grauidanza. Ingrédere, gredo, gréssi, greduto, to go or enter in, to put in. Ingrediénte, an ingredient, a putting in. Ingreduto, gone or entred in, put in. Ingressione, an ingression, or going in. Ingrésso, as Ingreduto. Also an entrance, an egresse, an accesse. Ingremire, misco, mito, as Griffare. Ingrognare, to grumble, to loute, to poute, to grunt as a hogge. Ingrommare, as Grommare. Ingroppare, to knot, to knit, to tie in knots. Ingrossare, to make great or bigge, to en∣grosse. Also as Ingrauidare, to swell. Ingrosso, by great, in bigge, by great sums, as to sell by the great. Ingrottare, to enter or put into a grot, cauerne, or caue. Ingrugnare, as Ingrognare. Inguagiare, as Ingagiare. Inguaire, isco, ito, to enwoe, or make sor∣rowfull, to fill with woes. Inguantare, to gloue, to put on gloues or gantlets. Ingufato, hoodded, muffled about the head as an owle. Inguidarescare, to gall or rub off the skin till rotten matter come out. Inguinaia, Inguinaglia, the groine, or part neere the priuities of man or wo∣man. Inguisa, in such sort, in maner, so. Inguisache, so that, so as, in such maner. Inguisare, as Infoggiare. Ingugiare, as Ingolare. Inguistara, as Inghistara. Ingustabile, not to be tasted, without tast, tastelesse. Ingustóso, Ingusteuole, as Ingustabile. Inhábile, vnable, vnapt, vnfit, vnproper, not able, vnwildie. Inhabilitare, to enhable, to make apt, fit, proper, or able. Inhabilità, disabilitie, vnaptnes, vnfitnes. Inhabitabile, vnhabitable, that cannot be abidden or dwelt in. Inhabitare, to inhabite, to dwell, to wone. Inhalatione, a breathing in. Inhibire, bisco, bito, to inhibite, to for∣bid, to hinder, to withhold. Inhibitione, an inhibition, a forbidding. Inhonestà, dishonestie, vndecencie. Inhonésto, dishonest, vnhonest, shame∣full. Inhonorato, without honor, dishonored. Inhospitale, a miser, a snudge, a wretch that keepes no hospitalitie, a churle that suffers none to harbor or lodge with him. Inhospitabile, idem. Inhospitalità, rudenesse, inciuilitie, ill vsing of strangers, lacke of humanitie. Inhospite, as Inhospitale. Also vnhaun∣ted, vnfrequented, or wilde. Inhumanità, inhumanitie, vngentlenes, vnkindnes, crueltie. Inhumano, vngentle, cruell, inhumane, vnkinde, wilde, beastly, ignorant, vn∣curteous. Inhumidire, disco, dito, to moisten, to water, to soften, to wet. Inhúmido, moist, wet, waterish, dampish. Inimaginabile, that cannot be imagined. Inimicare, to become an enimie, a foe, or vnfriendly, to varie. Also to make eni∣mies, to set togither by the eares. Inimicitia, enmitie, fude, variance, ho∣stilitie. Inimico, an enimie, a foe, an aduersarie, a back-friend. Also quick-siluer, accor∣ding to Alchimists phrases. Inimitabile, that cannot bee imitated or followed, inimitable, without com∣pare. Iniquità, iniquitie, vnrighteousnes, impie∣tie, wickednes, iniustice, inequalitie. Iniquo, wicked, vnrighteous, vngodly, im∣pious, partiall, vniust, vnreasonable. Inlaudabile, not woorthie of praise, that cannot be praised. Iniscambio, in exchange, mistaken, in steede, in liewe, in mistaking maner. Initiamenti, the first instructions in any kinde of religion, science or knowledge. Initiato, which hath ended, his appren∣tisehood, one entred into rules, instruc∣ted in the principles. Initio, a beginning, an entrance, a plat∣forme. Iniungere, as Ingiongere. Inlagare, to ouerflowe and become as a lake. Inlardare, to larde as cookes do rostmeate, to enterlarde. Inlécito, vnlawfull. Inleiare, to come or enter into her. Inlendinare, to haue or to store with nits. Inlendinire, nisco, nito, idem. Inliuidire, disco, dito, to make blacke, blewe, wanne. Also to enuie and hate secretly. Inliuidito, Inliuido, blacke, blew, wan or of the colour of lead and ashes. Also en∣uied or hated. Inlordare, to foule, to pollute, to defile, to soile, to sully. Inluógo, in liewe, in stead, in place. Inlustrare, as Illustrare. Inmalhora, with a mischiefe, in an ill hower. Inmano, in hand, fastholding. Inmantare, to inmantell, to inrobe, to dight, to inuest. Inmantellare, as Inmantare. Inmarare, to become a sea, to enter into the sea. Inmattire, tisco tito, to become foolish, mad, or sottish, to runne mad. In men d'un che, in a trice, on a so∣daine, in the twinckling of an eye. In men d'un batter d'occhio, in lesse then the twinkling of an eye, sodainlie. Inmentre, whilest, whilest that, so long as. Inmirare, to looke inlie into, inlie to view. In molle, in steepe. Inmetriare, to enmitre, to crowne with a mitre. Innaffiare, to water a garden in hote weather, to sprinkle with water. Also to fill with winde or breath. Innalzare, to aduance, to leuat, to raise, to preferre, to lift vp, to enhance. Innalzamento, an aduancement, a pre∣ferment, a raising, an eleuation, a lif∣ting vp. Innamoracchiare, to fall foolishly in loue. Innamorare, to enamour, to fall in loue. Innamorato, inamored, fallen in loue. Also a louer, an amorous fellow. Innamoramento, Innamoranza, an inamoring, a falling in loue. Innamorata, a shee-louer, ones mistres, or sweete hart, an amorous woman. Innamoraccio, filthie, absurd, beastly loue. Innamoracciare, to fall wantonly or foolishly in loue. Innamoracchiarsi, as Innamoracci∣are. Innamorbare, to infect, to pollute, to cor∣rupt, to fester. Innamorbamento, an infection, pollu∣tion, corruption, festring or conta∣gion.
Innanti, Innanzi, before, sooner, rather. Also forward, onward, on, afore. Innanzi che, rather then, before that. Innarcare, as Inarcare. Innarrare, as Narrare. Innáscere, nasco, nacqui, nato, to be borne inward, to inbreede, to ingender in one. Innaspare, to reele or winde yarne. Innaspatore, a reeler or winder of yarne. Innaspettato, vnexpected, vnlooked for. Innastrare, to tye or binde vp in fine ribands, as Inostrare. Innastri, bindings or dressings with ri∣bands. Innato, inbred, inborne, naturall, inward, ingendred in one. Also borne in or with, naturally bred. Innauerare, to wound or hurt to death. Innauigabile, innauigable, that can not be sailed through. Inneccitabile, that can by no meanes be enticed, prouoked, allured, or stirred vp. Innegrare, to blacke, to obscure, darken, ensable or smoke blacke. Innegrire, as Innegrare. Innescare, to entice, allure, baite, to catch with a baite. Innestare, to engraffe one thing within another. Innésto, a graffe, a yong scien. Inneuitabile, vnauoidable, that can not be shunned, incuitable. In niun luogo, in no place, no where. In niun modo, by no meanes, in no wise. Innobilitare, to ennoble, to make noble, to nobilitate. Innocciolare, Looke Snocciolare. Innocénte, innocent, guiltlesse, harme∣lesse, sillie, hurtlesse. Innocéntia, innocencie, sillines, without harme, hurt, or guilt, integritie, harme∣lesnesse, true intent, guiltlsnes. Innominabile, not to be named. Innorare, as Honorare. Also to guild. Innouare, to innouate, to breede some in∣nouation, to alter. Innouatione, innouation, alteration, disturbation or change. Innouatore, an innouator, alterer, di∣sturber or changer. Innuba, she that was neuer maried. Innubo, he that was neuer maried. Innumerábile, innumerable, vncoun∣table, that cannot be numbred. Innúmero, innumerable. Inobediénte, disobedient, stiffnecked, stubborne. Inobedienza, disobedience. Inofféso, vnoffended, vntoucht, vn∣wrongd. Inofficióso, vngentle, that doth no good turne for his friend. Inogni luogo, in euerie place, each where Inogni módo, howsoeuer, by euerie meanes. In ogni parte, in euery part, euery where. Inoltra, Inoltre, furthermore, besides, beyond, further. Inoltrare, to go further, or beyond. Inominabile, not to be named. Inondare, to ouerflowe, to surrounde, to ouerwhelme or couer with water. Inondatione, an inundation, an ouerflo∣wing, a spring tide, a deluge. Inopaco, not shadowed, open. Inopia, penurie, scarcitie, necessitie, want, pouertie, neede lacke of necessaries. Inopinabile, that no man woulde haue thought, contrarie to common sence. Inopinae, to neglect, not to thinke vpon. Inopinato, neglected, not thought vpon, vnlookt for. Inopioso, needie, poore, wanting. Inopportuno, vntimely, vnseasonable, vnmeete, out of season. Inorbato, made blinde, blinded. Inordinatezza, excesse, inordinatenes, in∣temperancie. Inordinato, inordinate, excessiue, immo∣derate, intemperate, disordred. Inornato, vndeckt, disadorned, vntrim∣med, disaraide, without eloquence. Inorpellare, to gild with painters golde, or base gold. Inospitabile, Looke Inhospitale. Inossare, to enter or pierce into the bones, to growe harde or close togither to the bone. Inosseuábile, that can not be kept or ob∣serued. Inosseruanza, inobseruancie, not keep∣ing. Inostrare, to decke with purple, to beauti∣fie in graine colours: to dresse vp a wo∣mans head with fine ribands and pretie deuices, and knots. Inpadellare, to put, set, or laie in a pan. Inpalése, openly, apparantly, in sight, in view, in the fae. Inpaludare, as Paludare. Inparte, in part, partly, in some sort. Inparuccare, to attire with a pernwig, to put on a peruwig. Inpendénte, in doubt, in suspence, hang∣ing by, a slope. Inpettinente, vnpertinent, not fit, not be∣longing. Inpertinentia, impertinencie. Inperuccare, as Inparuccare. Inpeuerare, to pepper, to dresse with pep∣per. Inpeuerata, a kinde of blacke pottage they vse in Germanie, made of much pepper. Inperuersare, to grow woorse & woorse, to grow peruerse and stubburne. Inpie, Inpiedi, on foote, standing, vpright. Also in steede or in lieu. Inpó, except, sauing. Also heereafter, af∣terwards. Inponto, as Inpunto. Inpotsta, in the power or iurisdiction. Inpéndere, to vndertake, to learne, to en∣terprise. Inpreséntia, in presence, in view, in sight. Inprima, at first, before, first. Inpróle, hauing no childe or issue. Inpronto, readie, prepared, prompt, dight. Inpruoua, as Apruoua. Inpúnto, readie, prepared, at all assaies, at all points, in the nicke, in a readines. Inputare, as Imputare. Inputatione, as Imputatione. Inquadernare, to ensquare, to ioyne some part togither. Inquadrata, a thrust at fence where he that offers it turnes presently his backe to his enimie. Inqualche modo, in some sort, in some maner, some way. In qual maniera si voglia, in what ma∣ner soeuer. Inqualungue modo, in what maner so∣euer. Inquanto, for asmuch, in asmuch, concer∣ning, touching, as for, so far foorth. Inquanto si potrà, in asmuch as may be done, so farre foorth. Inquartare, to quarter ones cote or armes with others. Inquella, Inquello, in the meane while, at that instant. Inquesto mezzo, in the meane while, whilest. Inquietare, to disquiet, trouble, disease, or molest. Inquiéte, vnquietnes, trouble of minde, disease, molestation, vnrest, care, lacke of rest. Inquiéto, vnquiet, troublesome, busie, troublous, that hath no rest. Inquietudine, as Inquiete. Inquilino, he that dwelleth where neither he nor his ancestors were borne. Inquirire, risco, quisi, rito, to enquire, to search after, to make enquirie, to aske, to demande, to examine, to make inquisition. Inquisitione, an inquirie, inquisition, or promoting, a search or examination.
Inquisitiuo, enquiring, searching, seeking, inquisitiue, busie. Inquisito, examined, enquired. Inquisitore, an inquirer, an inquisitor, a promooter, an examiner. Inrationale, vnreasonable, brutish. Inrationalità, vnreasonablenes. Inreppatare, to fasten in and vnto. Inreprobabile, as Irreprobabile. Inresoluto, irresolut, vnresolued. Inritrosire, sisco, sito, to growe or become froward, squeamish, waiward, fone, or peeuish. Inrosare, to enrose, to strow with roses. Inrotellare, to role vp in roles. Inrotta, ouercome, defeated, ouerthrowne, discomfited, in ruine. Inrubinare, to die or make red, to make rubie-like. Inruginire, nisco, nito, to ruste or waxe rustie. Insaccare, to put vp in a sacke, to pocket vp, to sacke vp, to put in a bagge. Insacco, in the bagge, in the sacke, put vp. Insaffranare, to die or to colour, or to sea∣son with saffron. Insagna, a letting of blood. Insagnare, to let blood. Insalami, any kinde of salt meate that will keepe, as bacon, neates-toongs, and mar∣telmas beefe. Insalare, to salt, to powder, to lay in brine, to pickle, to make brackish. Insalata, a sallet. Insalatuccia, a little sallet,, a medlie sal∣let. Insaldare, to solder mettall with solder, to make stiffe, hard, or faste. Insaldatura, soldering, solder. Insalicare, to paue a high way, to make a causie. Insalicata, a pauement, a causie. Insalicatore, a pauer or causie maker. Insaluatichire, chisco, chito, to make or growe wilde or desert, or strange. Insalúbre, vnholsome, vnhealthfull, noi∣some, contagious. Insalubrità, vnhealthfulnes. Insaluo, safely, surely, in safegarde, in safetie, safe enough. Insalutato, vnsaluted. Insanábile, incurable, that cannot bee healed or cured, recureles. Insanguinare, to besmeare or gore with blood, to bloodie. Insanguinacci, clods, or gore blood. Also bloodlings, or blood-puddings. Insanare, to be mad, to dote, to be peeuish, to raue, to play the idiot, to make vn∣sound, or vnholsome. Insanábile, that cannot be cured, incu∣rable, recureles. Insanire, nisco, nito, as Insanare. Insánia, follie, fondnes, madnes, foolishnes, skittishnes, sottishnes, witlessenes, pee∣uishnes, dotage, frowardnes. Insano, vnsound, vnhealthfull. Also foo∣lish, fonde, senceles, an idiot, raging, wood, furious, witlesse, vnruly, madde, doting, peeuish. Insanto, vnholie, not holie. Insaponare, to ensope, to sope clothes, to lather, to lay in suds. Insaponamento, a soping, a lathering, a suds. Insaporare, to ensauour, to giue a taste or sauour to any thing. Insapore, in sauour so as ones teeth water for longing. Insaporetto, somewhat longing, till ones teeth run a water. Insaporire, risco, rito, as Insaporare. Insatalare, to become a satelite, a garde, a halbardman, an officer, a catchpole, a sergeant, or some such base office. Insatelire, lisco, lito, as Insatalare. Insatiábile, insatiable, greedie, that can∣not be filled, that neuer hath his fill. Insatiabilità, as Insatietà. Insatiéuole, as Insatiabile. Insatietà, insacietie, greedines, rauenous∣nesse. Insatio, vnsatiate, greedy. Insaturabile, as Insatiabile. Insauire, visco, vito, to growe wise, wit∣tie, or discreet. Insauorrare, to fill with duste, rubbish, or chaffe, to stuffe. Insberleffo, a skonce, a skewe, all-aflant. Inscambio, in steede, in place, in lieu, in exchange, in counterchange. Inscio, an ignorant, a simple man, a natu∣rall, a foole. Inscolpire, pisco, pito, to engraue, to graue, to carue. Inscoltore, an engrauer, a grauer, a car∣uer. Inscoltura, an engrauing, a grauing, a caruing. Insconciare, as Sconciare. Insconciatura, as Disconciatura. Insconcio, as Disconcio. Inscriuere, scríuo, scrissi, scritto, to write in. Inscrittione, an inscription, or superscrip∣tion. Inscritto, in written, made an inscription or superscription. Inscrittore, a secretorie, a superscriber, a writer. Inscrittura, an inscription, a writing. Al∣so in writing. Inscrutabile, inscrutable, vnsearchable, not to be sounded. Inscurare, to obscure, to darken, to disable a man. Insegna, an ensigne, a standard, a banner, a band of soldiers. Also a companie of men, so many as march vnder one en∣signe. Also a marke, a token, a signe, a note. Insegnamento, a teaching. Insegnare, to teach, to instruct. Insegne, ensignes, armes, scutchions, mo∣numents, cotes in armes. Inselciare, to fill or paue with flintstones. Inselciata, a pauement, a causie of flint∣stones. Inselciatore, a pauement, or causie maker of flintstones. Insélla, the name of a point of warre soun∣ded vpon the trumpet. Also in the sad∣dle, in a saddle. Insellare, to saddle, to ensaddle, to leape or put into the saddle. Inseluare, to growe to a woode, to become a wood. Also to enter a wood or forrest. Inséme, Insembre, as Insieme. Insemitare, to followe ones steps or foo∣ting. Insempitérno, for euer and euer. Insemprare, to eternize, perpetuate or make eternall. Insémpre, for euer. Insempremat, for euer and euer. Insensabile, insensible, senceles, without reason, vnfeeling. Insensare, to be or make sencelesse or in∣sensible, to growe out of reason. Insensato, insensible, senceles, growen out of reason. Also foolish, fond, without reason. Insenséuole, as Insensabile. Insensíbile, as Insensabile. Insensibilità, sencelesnes, vnfeelingnes. Insensitiuo, senceles, vnfeeling. Inseparabile, inseparable, that cannot be diuided. Insépolto, vnburied. Insepoltura, in his graue, intoombed. Also the vnburying of one. In sérbo, in keeping, in store, a fore∣hand. Inseríre, risco, rito, to set, put or bring in, to adde, to meddle, to mixe, to insert, to ioine, to ingraft. Inseríto, Inserto, set in, put in, ingrafted, added, ioined, mixed, brought in, in∣serted. Inserrare, to locke or shut in. Insertare, as Inserire. Insertatione, an intermedling, a grafting an implying, an insertion.
Insertatore, a medler, an intermedler, a grafter, an insertor. Insessioni, certaine bathing medicines. Inseuerire, risco, rito, to growe or become seuere, cruell or austere. Insetti animali, small vermine beasts ha∣uing no blood, flesh nor sinewe, as flies, gnats, pismiers, and such. Insida, the name of an office in Venice be∣longing to the custome house. Insidiare, to lie in waite, to deceiue, to practise wiles, to seeke to intrap, to lie in ambush, to molest, to trouble. Insidiatore, one that seekes to deceiue, that practiseth wiles, intrappeth, spreadeth snares, a treacher. Insidie, wiles, deceits, intrappings, am∣bushes, treacheries. Insidióso, deceitfull, treacherous, craftie, wilie, full of secret intrappings. Insiéme, with, togither, withall, moreouer, besides, therewith, iointly, yfere, in com∣panie. Insiememente, wholly, togither, altogi∣ther, therewithall. Insiémeseco, togither with himselfe. Insignorire, risco, rito, to become lorde, patron or possessor. Insignorirsi, to become lord or possessor of any thing. Insignorito, made lord, possessor or master of any thing. Insilicare, to paue or to make a causey. Insincéro, corrupt, not pure, false. Insino, vntill, so far as, euen vnto, vntill when, so far foorth, vnto. Insino a quando? howe long? vntill when? Insino a tanto, so long as, vntill, till that, whilest. Insino che, vntill that, so long as, whilest. Insin' hora, vntill now, vntill when. Insinuare, to insnuate, to conioine, closely to creepe into ones bosome or mind. Insinuatione, an insinuation or close cree∣ping into ones bosome or mind, a colou∣rable or craftie beginning of an oration, whereby we couertly creepe into the fa∣uour of the audience. Insinuatore, an insinuator, a craftie slie creeper into ones bosome, fauor or mind. Insipa, foolish, fonde, witlesse, vnsauorie, without reason. Insipidire, disco, dito, to take away all sauour or taste, to depriue of reason. Insipiditia, Insipidezza, vnsauorines, ta∣sting of nothing. Also follie, fondnes, lacke of wisedome and discretion. Insipido, vnsauorie, vnseasoned, wallo∣wish, without any taste or smacke fond, without relish. Also quick-siluer accor∣ding to alchimists phrases. Insipiente, without discretion, foolish, vn∣iust, an ignorant, a sot, an idiot. Insipiénza, foolishnes, ignorance, doting, follie, lacke of discretion. Insistere, sisto, sistei, sistuto, to insist, to persist, to continue, to staie, rest or leane vpon. Also to vrge, to enforce, to pursue, to sollicit. Insistuto, insisted, persisted, continued, vr∣ged, inforced, pursued, sollicited. Insisténza, a persisting, an insisting, a staying or pausing. Insitare, to ingraft, to ioine or put togither, to put or set in. Insitamento, a grafting or ioining togi∣ther. Insitatore, a grafter or ioiner of things closely. Insito, a graffe, a stocke, a plant, an in∣stinct. Insoaue, vnsweete, sower, vnpleasant. Insoauire, as Addolcire. Insoauità, vnsweetnes, vnsauorines, vn∣pleasantnes. Insociabile, insociable, not to keepe com∣pany with. Insognare, to dreame. Insogno, dreaming. Also a dreame. Insoldatarsi, to become a souldier or put on the habit of a souldier or to take on the profession of a souldier. Insolénte, insolent, proud, haughtie, arro∣gant, not accustomed, vnwoont. Insolenza, insolencie, pride, arrogancie, haughtines, vnwoontednes, strangenes. Insolfare, to set pricke song. Insólido, a law word, in the whole and for the whole, throughly and fast. Also not sound or weake. Insolito, vnwoont, vnused, vnaccustomed, strange. Insollare, to make loose or vnsteadie. Insolubile, insoluble, that canot be dissol∣ued or loosed, indissoluble. Insomma, in fine, in summe, at last, lastlie. Insommo, in a readines, at full, plentie, at hand. Insonare, to sound or play vpon an instru∣ment. Insongiare, to tallowe or grease. Insonnare, to lull or bring a sleepe. Insopito, watchfull, sleepelesse, not drowsie. Insopportabile, vntollerable, vnsuffe∣rable. Insórgere, surgo, sursi, surto, to rise vp. Insorte, by lot, in lot, by chaunce, by for∣tune. Insorire, risco, rito, to lothe, to shun or to be wearie of the sight of any thing. Insospettire, tisco, tito, to make or become suspicious or mistrustfull. Inspeciale, in especiall, especially, namely, particularly. Inspeciare, to enspice, to spice, to mingle with spices. Inspéce, as Inspeciale. Insperabile, not to be hoped for. Insperato, vnhoped for, vnlooked for, vnexpected, sudden, contrarie to expec∣tation. Inspessare, to thicken, to make thicke, to enspisse. Inspessire, sisco, sito, as Inspessare. Inspirare, to inspire, to breath or blow into Inspiratione, an inspiration, a blowing or breathing into. Inspiritare, to possesse with a diuell or euill spirit. Inspiritato, possessed with some diuell or euill spirit. Insporcare, to fowle, to sullie, to distaine. Instabile, vnconstant, wauering, mutable, vnstable, sickle, shittle, skatsh. Instabilire, lisco, lito, to establish, to settle. Also to be or grow vnconstant or sickle. Instabilità, inconstancie, instabilitie, mutabilitie, ficklenes. Instante, instant, vrging, pressing, im∣portunat, diligent, earnest. Also an in∣stance, a motion, a moment, without ceasing. Also being neigh or at hand. Instanteménte, instantly, pressingly, importunatly, presently, incessantly, diligently, earnestly. Instanza, an instance. Also earnestnes, or importunitie, earnest and continuall diligence, a constraint that vrgeth. Instare, to vrge, to presse, to importune, to sollicite. Instauratione, repairing, renewing, re∣edifying. Instaurare, to make new, to reforme, to repaire. Instazzonare, to stationize. Instercorato, durtie, beraide, beshitten. Instigare, to moue, to stirre, to prouoke, to egge on, to prick forward. Instigatione, Instigamento, an insti∣gation, a prouocation, a motion, a pric∣king or egging on. Instigatore, an egger on, a prouoker, a pricker forward, an instigator. Instillare, to drop, to trill, powre or put in drop by drop, to drizell in. Instillatione, Instillatura, infusion, in∣stillation, dropping or putting in by lit∣tle and little.
Instínto, an instinction or perswasion, an inward motion or stirring, an inclina∣tion, an inspiration. Institore, as Institutore. Instituíre, isco, ito, to institute, to ap∣point, to ordaine, to depute, to begin, to set in good order, to found, to intend or deuise, to inuent, to instruct, to traine vp. Institutióne, an institution, an iniuncti∣on, a deputation, an order, an instruc∣tion, a bringing or training vp. Also bookes or precepts preparing a way to some arte. Institúto, as Institutione, an ordinance, a decree, a statute, a trade, or custome. Institutore, an instituter, a deputer, an appointer, an orderer, an instructor, a teacher, a trainer vp, a deuiser. Instizzare, to prouoke, to exasperat, to set on, to stirre vp as brands of fire be. Instruire, isco, ito, to instruct, to teach. Instruito, Instrutto, instructed, taught. Instruttione, instruction, teaching, learning. Instruttore, a teacher, an instructor, a tutor. Instrumentale, instrumentall, vsed as an instrument, or meanes. Instruménto, an instrument, a deede, a writing, an euidence, an indenture, a conueyance, a bond, an obligation, a patent, a charter, a musicall instru∣ment, any engin or deuise for warre, a meane, a help, a direction, a toole for any occupation, an implement. Instupidire, as Stupidire. Insturione, a fish called a Sturgeon. In sú, Insuso, vpward, aloft, a high, vp. Insuaue, vnsweete, sower, vnpleasant, irkesome. Insuauita, vnsweetnes, vnsauorines, vn∣pleasantnes. Insubia, a shoomakers awle. Insubiare, to pricke with an awle. Insubbiare, to roule vpon a beame as weauers do their cloth when they weaue it. Insucidire, disco, dito, to defile, to be∣ray, to sullie, to foule, to pollute. Insufficiénte, insufficient, vnable. Insufficiénza, insufficiencie. Insueto, not vsed, vnwont, vnusuall. Insulare, belonging to an ile. Insulfatto, ipso facto, with the deede, nap∣ping, vpon the nick, on the instant. Insulsare, to make or taste vnsauorie. Insulsità, foolishnes, vnsauorines. Insulso, vnsauorie, foolish, without smack or salt, or wisedome. Insultare, to insult, to iniurie, to delude, to scorne, to offer wrong, to reproch. Also to leape, to rebound or leape vp for ioy. Insultamento, Insultatione, an insul∣ting, wronging, or scorning, wrong, in∣iurie, reproach, an offence, an assault. Also a leaping vp. Insultatore, an insulter, an iniurer, a scorner, a prowd man, scornefull, re∣prochfull, a reproacher. Insúlto, as Insultamento. Insuperabile, vnuanquishable, inuin∣cible, that can not be ouercome. Insuperato, vnuanquished, vnconquered, vndaunted, not ouercome. Insuperbire, bisco, bito, to become, make or grow proud. Insuppare, to feede with sops as birds be. Also to lay in sops, to sop. Insúrgere, surgo, sursi, surto, to rise vp against, to resist by force, to rebell, to oppose. Insurgittura, a rising, an insurrection, a resistance, a rebellion. Insurgittore, a riser, a resister, a re∣bell. Insurettióne, an insurrection, a commo∣tion, a rebellion. Insurto, raised vp against, resisted by force, rebelled, opposed against one. Insusare, to lift vp, to go vp to, to ad∣uance. Insuso, Insu, vp, vpward. Intabaccare, to russianize, to panderize, to play the baude, to besot or dote in lust, namely for boyes. Intabacchinare, as Intabaccare. Intabarrare, to couer or muffle with a ri∣ding cloke. Intabarro, a man in his cloke, with his cloke on. Intaccare, to cleaue, to hewe, to cut tim∣ber. Also to peece or patch together, to debase, to blame, to vilifie, to disable, to charge one with some fault, to cleaue or fasten vnto, to lay hould vnto. Intaccatura, a cleauing of timber, a ioi∣ning or patching together. Intacconare, to cloute, to soute, or patch shooes. Intagli, cuttings, iaggings in fine neate apparell, all manner of cut works. Also shreads or od ends. Intagliare, to cut in, to graue or carue. Intagliatore, a grauer, or cutter, or car∣uer. Intagliatura, a grauing, an incutting or caruing. Intaglio, cutting, grauing, or caruing worke. Also fitlie, handsomly, properly, curiously. Intalentare, to haue, possesse, or make one to haue a will, a desire, a lust, or a longing. Intalguisa, in such sort, in such manner, so. Intal modo, as In tal guisa. Intal sorte, as In tal guisa. Intaminato, not defiled, vndestained. Intanare, to indenne, to put, enter, go, or creepe into a caue or denne. Intanto, whilest, in the meane time. Intapezzare, to hang or furnish with tapestrie. Intaraccare, to arme or couer with shield or target. Intargare, to arme with a target, to en∣shield. Intaracconare, as Intaraccare. Intarlare, to motheate, to wormeeate, to consume, to waste with mothes. Intarsire, sisco, sito, to worke mosaicall worke, or inlayd worke. Intasato, hauing the pose or murre, stopt or stuft with the cold. Intascare, to pocket vp, or put vp in a pouch. Intatto, vntouched, vnspotted, vncorrup∣ted, not defloured, vnuiolated, vndi∣stained. Intauolare, to table, to boord, to waine∣scot, to pale about with boords. Also, to set any song to musicall notes. Intauolato, tabled, boorded, wainescot∣ted, paled about with boords. Also set in song or notes. Also a pale of a parke, a floore of boords, a wainescot worke. Intauolatura, any song or musicke set in notes, pricke song. Integerrimo, entyre, whole, safe, sounde, vpright, honest. Intégnere, tegno, tinsi, tinto, as Intin∣gere. Integramente, wholy, entyrely, vpright∣lie. Integrare, to make whole, to make sounde, or entire againe. Integrissimo, most full, or entire, honest, righteous, or vpright. Integrità, integritie, honestie, innocencie, vprightnes, soundnes, healthfulnes. Intégro, entire, whole, sounde, honest, healthfull, not broken, and whole of lym and ioynt. Also vpright, honest, righte∣ous. Also vngelded. Intellétto, vnderstanding, wit, discretion, capacitie, knowledge, skill, reason, dis∣course, perceiuing, intelligence, sence, or iudgement. Intellettuale, intellectuall, belonging to
vnderstanding. Intélligente, intelligent, knowing, vnder∣standing, skilfull, perceiuing. Intelligentià, vnderstanding, intelligence memorie, knowledge, sence, skilful∣nesse. Intelligentiére, an intelligencer, or news-bearer. Intelligenza, as Intelligentia. Intelligibile, that may bee vnderstoode, plaine and easie to be vnderstood. Intemerando, holie, consecrate, that may not be prophaned. Intemerata, vndefiled, vnspotted, vnpol∣luted, vncorrupted, not violated. Also as Fagiolata. Intemperante, vntemperate, not master of his owne appetites, immoderate. Intemperantia, intemperancie, disorder, vnrulines of minde, excesse, wantonnes, vnstaiednes. Intemperare, to dispemper, to disorder. Intemperato, distempered, disordered, in∣temperate. Intempérie del aria, the vntemperance or vnseason of the weather. Also an outrage, madnes, or furie, or rage of minde. Also vnseasonablenes, or euill disposition. Intempestiuo, vntimely, vnseasonable, disordred, abortiue, out of time and season. Also that giueth a signe of some euill to come. Intendacchio, of good vnderstanding, of a good wit and conceite: it is vsed in derision. Intendénte, skilfull, of vnderstanding, hauing knowledge, intending, purpo∣sing. Inténdere, tendo, tesi, teso, tenduto, to purpose, to meane, to intende, to applie. Also to vnderstande, to know, to haue skill of. Intenduto, Inteso, vnderstoode, knowen, had knowledge of. Also purposed, inten∣ded, ment, or applied. Intendéuole, able to vnderstande, that may be vnderstoode. Intendimento, as Intelletto, a purpose, an intent, an intendment. Intenditore, an vnderstander. Intenerire, risco, rito, to soften, to make tender, to mollifie. Inténso, Inténto, attentiue, intentiue, fixed, vehement, diligent, bent, great, bigge. Intentabile, that cannot be assaied. Intentato, vnattempted, not assaied. Intentissimo, most diligent, most atten∣tiue. Inténto, an intent, or purpose, a meaning. Also attentiue. Intentione, a purpose, an intent, an inten∣tion, a meaning, a will, a minde. Also an earnest consideration of the minde. Intentato, vnattempted, vnassaied. Intenza, hath bin vsed for intention. Intepidire, disco, dito, to coole, to ease, to asswage, to make luke warme. Intercalare, put or set betweene, to enter∣lace. Intercalare giorno, the odde day of the leape yeere. Also a time put or set be∣tweene that the yeere may agree with the course of the sunne. Intercalare calende, the calends of March, bicause in the latter end of Fe∣bruarie, which is reputed as the calends of March, the odde daies of the leape yeere were added. Intercalare verso, the foote or refret of the dittie. Also a verse interlaced. Intercalario, the time that is put or set betweene that the yeere may agree with the course of the sunne. Intercalatione, a putting or setting be∣tweene. Intercalare anno, the leape yeere. Intercápulo, the place betweene the loines and the backe. Intercédere, cedo, cessi, cesso, or cedu∣to, to make intercession, to sue for, to go betweene, to let, to hinder, to forbid, to be suretie, to vndertake for another, to mediate. Intercedúto, made intercession, sued for, gone betweene, letted, hindred, forbid∣den, bin suretie, or vndertaken for ano∣ther. Intercessióne, an intercession, a mediati∣on, a suretie. Also a prohibition, a with∣standing, a gainsaying. Intercesso, as Interceduto. Intercessore, an intercessour, one that makes intercession, that sues, that goes betweene, that lets, hindreth, or forbid∣deth any thing, that is suretie for ano∣ther, a mediator. Intercettare, to preuent, to forestall, to in∣croch, to intercept. Intercetti, interceptings of forfaited goods. Intercétto, Intercettato, preuented, forestalled, encroched, intercepted. Intercettore, a preuenter, a forestaller, an enrocher, an interceptor. Interchiúdere, chiudo, chiusi, chiuso, to enclose, to shut in betweene. Interciare, Looke Interzare. Intercidente, falling, decaying, or peri∣shing. Interciglio, the space betweene the eie browes, where the nose beginneth. Interciso, intercut or cut betweene. Intercolonnio, the place betweene pil∣lars. Intercorrénte, running or going between. Intercute, betweene the skin and the flesh, secret, hidden. Interdire, dico, dissi, detto, to prohibite, to forbid, to restraine, to barre, to keepe from, to let, to hinder, to giue charge to the contrarie, to interdict. Interditto, Interdetto, prohibited, for∣bidden, &c. the participle. Interdétto, Interdittione, an interdicti∣on, a prohibition, a forbidding, a hin∣drance, a let. Also an iniunction made by the magistrate. Interessare, to interesse, to touch in the maine or fee-simpe of ones state, to touch, to appertaine or concerne a mans estate or reputation. Also to let out to interest. Interessato, interessed, toucht in honor, or reputation. Interésse, Interesso, the inttrest, or pro∣fite of money for lone. Also what tou∣cheth or concerneth a mans state or re∣putation. Interézza, entyrenes, wholenes, integrity. Interfinio, the middle part or bridge of the nose. Intergettione, a putting betweene, an Interiection. Interiora, the interior or inward parts, bowels or entrails of man or beast. Interiore, inwarde, inmost, familiar, in time. Interito, the death, end or desolation of all things. Interizzare, to rise or grow, stiffe-stan∣ding. Interlacciare, to enterlace, to tie, to bind, to claspe, to lace togither. Interlasciare, to omit, to leaue off, to forsake, to neglect. Interlassare, as Interlasciare. Interlocutióne, an interlocution, an in∣terposition of speech. Interlocutore, an interlocutor, a speaker. Interlunio, the space or time when neither the new nor old moone is seene. Intermédio, Intermezzo, that lieth or is betweene two; the musicke that is be∣tweene the actes in a play. Interméstro, belonging to the space be∣tweene the old moone and the new. Interméttere, metto, misi, messo, to in∣termit or put betweene, to cease, to dis∣continue, to giue ouer, to defer or put off. Intermésso, Intermettuto, intermitted, put betweene or delaied time, ceased,
discontinued, giuen ouer, put off. Intermettitore, an intermitter, a delayer of time. Intermezzare, to interlade, to interlace, to intermit, or worke betweene, to in∣termixe. Intermézzo, betweene, in the middle, an intermission. Interminable, that cannot be determi∣ned. Intermissióne, an intermission, a putting betweene, a delay of time, a letting passe, a ceasing for a time, a breaking off. Interminato, vnbounded, boundles, vn∣limited. Intermisto, intermixed, put betweene, mingled togither, mixte among or be∣tweene. Intermóndio, the space or distance be∣tweene diuers worlds according to the imagination of Epicures. Intermurale, that is betweene two wals. Internale, internall, inward. Internare, to enter or pearce into ones minde secretly. Internére, terno, ternei, térnuto, to enter goe or passe in. Interno, internall, inward, inmost. Internuntio, a messenger that goeth be∣tweene man and man. Internuto, entred, gon or passed in. Intéro, whole, perfit, sound, vntoucht, en∣tire, vnbroken, vnguelded. Also honest, iust, vpright. Interogare, to aske, to question, to de∣maund, to examine. Interogatorio, an interrogatorie. Interogatione, an interrogation, a que∣stion, a demaund, an examination. Interogatiuo punto, a point of interro∣gation. Interogatore, an examiner, a demaunder of questions. Interotto, interrupted, let, hindred. Interpónere, pongo, posi, posto, to in∣terpose, to intermit, to put betweene, to intermeddle, to prolong or driue off. Interporre, as Interponere. Interpositione, Interposito, an interpo∣sition or putting betweene. Interpósto, interposed, put betweene, in∣termitted, intermedled, put off. Interpretare, to interpret, to expound. Interpretamento, as Interpretatione. Interpretatione, an interpretation or ex∣position. Intérprete, Interpretatore, an interpre∣tor or expounder, a translator, a decla∣rer. Interramento, an interring, a buriall. Interrare, to burie, to enter. Interregnare, to raigne betweene. Interrégno, an interraigning, an inter∣raigne, the space of gouernment between the death of one ruler and the creation or election of another, an interreg∣num. Interrito, without feare, vnamazed. Also as Mosciò. Interrómpere, rompo, ruppi, rotto, to interrupt, to confound, to breake in the middest. Interrompimento, an interruption, a breaking off. Interrotto, interrupted, broken off, con∣founded. Interruttione, an interruption, a brea∣king off. Intersecatione, a cutting off in the mid∣dle. Interserire, risco, rito, to interweaue or worke togither. Intersiatore, a squarer, or hewer of timber. Intersiare, to square or hew timber or any thing els. Intersitio, Interstitio, a diuision, a di∣stance, a separation. Also a space be∣tweene. Also the space betweene the old moone and the new. Intertenére, tengo, tenni, tenuto, to en∣tertaine, to delay, to hold off. Intertenuto, intertained, delaied. Intertenimento, an intertainment, a delay. Intertéssere, tesso, tessei, tessuto, to inter∣weaue, to weaue or worke betweene, as tinsell or striped canuasse is. Also to knit, to folde, to wrap in, to plate or en∣terlace with other workes or things. Intertessuto, interweauen or wouen be∣tweene or tinseled, knit, folded, wrapt in, plated or interlaced with other worke. Intertessitura, an interweauing or wea∣uing betweene, a tinseling. Intertessitore, an interweauer or weauer betweene, a tinseler. Intertigine, a panching of one, filthines of sweate: but properly the galling or rub∣bing of the skin with going, or rubbing one lim against another. Interuallo, a distance or separation, or space betweene of time and place. Also a pause or respite. Interueniénte, that commeth, floweth or runneth betweene. Interuenio, a space betweene veines. Interueníre, vengo, venni, venuto, to happen or come betweene or in the mean while, to meete togither, to befall, to chance, to happen. Interuenúto, happened or come betweene, come to passe, met togither, befallen, chanced, hapned. Interuenimento, a hap, a comming to passe, a chance, a meeting togither, an ouertaking, a comming betweene. Interuentione, a comming betweene or among, a hapning. Interuento, as Interuenimento. Interzare, to packe or set the cardes, to put three and three togither, to pricke the cardes. Interzamento, a packing or setting of the cardes, a pricking of the cardes. Intérzo, a packe or setting of the cardes. Also by a third. Also a pricking of the cardes. Intéso, vnderstood, attentiue, intentiue, diligent, applyed. Intéssere, as Intertéssere. Interssitura, as Intertessitura. Intessuto, as Intertessuto. Intessitore, as Intertessitore. Intestabile, that cannot make a will, inte∣stable, that by law can make no testa∣ment. Intestare, to put into ones minde or fan∣cie, to take an opinion or grow head-strong. Intestarsi, to take a head-strong opinion or conceit. Intestato, one that dieth without making of a will or testament, intestate. Also put into ones minde or head, taken an opinion, become head-strong in some conceit. Intestatura, a head-strong opinion. Intestino, intestine, inward, the inwarde parts of ones belly, the intrailes, a bo∣wel, a gut, a garbage, that belongeth to the inward parts, hidden, priuie, secret, deadly, spitefull, long borne in mind. Intestino primo, the beginning of the guts or the gut which is fastened to the nea∣ther mouth of the ventricle called in la∣tine Pilorus. Intestino digiuno, the second gut from the ventricle called the hungrie gut: bi∣cause it is alwaies emptie. Intestino tenuo, as Ilio, the small guts. Intestino céco, or ciéco, the fourth gut; which by reason of the seuerall and di∣uers enfoldings and turnings of it, see∣meth to haue no end. Intestino rétto, the straight gut or arse gut. Inteuidire, vidisco, vidito. Looke Inte∣pide. Intiéro, as Intero, as Integro.
Intimare, to denounce, to proclaime, to intimate, to set abroach, to shewe, to signifie. Intimatione, a denouncing, an intima∣tion, a setting abroach, a signifying or declaring of any thing. Intimatore, a proclamer, a denouncer, a broacher, a signifier, a declarer. Intimélle, pillowbeeres, or tikes for boul∣sters, or pillowes. Intimo, most inward, most secret, hartie, affectionat, in the hart, entirely belo∣ued, a nigh, especiall, and very friend. Also mortall or deepely rooted in the stomacke. Intíngere, tingo, tinsi, tinto, to dip in, to kiche vp, to steepe or put in water. Intinto, dipped in, kiched vp, steeped or put in water. Intingolare, to make sauces, to dresse meate, to dip in. Intingolétti, little prettie sauces to pro∣uoke appetite, dippings. Intingoli, sauces to whet the stomacke withall, dippings. Intirisi nel sangue, soiled, stained, defi∣led in bloud. Intirizzare, to waxe stiffe or benummed with cold. Also to stretch forward. Intirizzato collo, a long out-stretched stiffe necke. Intisichire, chisco, chito, to grow pur∣sie, or sicke of a consumption, tisicke. Intitolare, to entitle or lay claime to any thing. Intitolatione, an intitling, or intitula∣tion or claiming of a thing. Intitulare, as Intitolare. Intitulatione, as Intitolatione. Intoccabile, that cannot be felt or tou∣ched. Intoccato, vntouched, vnfelt. Intodescarsi, to become dutch, or drunke. Intolerabile, intollerable, vnsufferable. Intolerando, intolerable, vnsufferable, not to be borne. Intoleranza, intolerablenes, impacience. Intonare, to make to sound, to tune, to raise the voice, to resound, to tune a voice or instrument. Also to thunder, to make a rumbling. Intonicare, to clothe, to inuest, or put on a fryars garment. Also, to lyme, to loame, to morter, or plaister a house, to be paste, to compasse about. Intonicatura, a loaming, a liming, a mor∣tering or plaistering of a house. Also a clothing, or putting on a fryars gar∣ment. Intoppare, as Inciampare. Intoppicciare, as Inciampare. Intóppo, a stumbling blocke, a stumble, a let, a hinderance, an encounter, a shocke. Intorbidare, as Intorbolare. Intorbidamento, as Intorbolamento. Intorbidire, disco, dito, as Intorbo∣lare. Intorbolare, to trouble, to vexe, to moue, to fret, to vrge, to sorrow, to molest, to stirre, to scoule, to frowne. Intorbolamento, a troubling, a vexing, a molestation, a thickning of water. Intórcere, torco, torcei, torto, to wreath, to turne, to wriggle, to bend, to wrye. Intorcétta, a little torch, or a taper. Also a linke. Intórcia, a torch, a linke, a taper. Intorciare, to entorch, or light with a torch. Also as Intorcere. Intorcicchiare, as Intorcere. Intorcicchiamento, as Intorcimento. Intorcimento, a wrying, a wrigling, a bending, a crookednes. Intorciuto, wreathed, turned, wriggled, bent, crooked, wryed. Intornare, to compasse, to go round, to turne about, to incircle about. Intorneare, as Intornare. Also to tour∣ney. Intorneamento, a tournie, a tournea∣ment. Intorneatore, a tournie-man, a man at armes fit to tournie, a tournyer, a tour∣noyer. Intorniare, as Intornare. Intorniatura, Looke Giro. Intorno, about, touching, concerning, as for, round about, gyring, reeling round. Intortogliato, a kinde of wreathed bunne or rowle or simnell, or cracknell of bread. Intossicare, to exasperate, to vexe, to poison, to enuenome. Intossicatore, a poisoner, an inueno∣mer. Intra, among, betweene, betwixt, amongst. Intralasciare, as Interlasciare. Intralciare, to entangle, to encumber, to intricate, to make hedges, to hedge yong trees. Intralciamenti, entanglings, encombran∣ces, hedging or binding of hedges. Intrambi, Intrambo, both togither, both. Intraméttere, as Intermettere. Intramezzare, as Intermezzare. Intramézzo, as Intermezzo. Intraperto, when a horses forelegs and shoulders are as we cal split or stretched wide from the bodie, that he hath no vse of them. Intrapertura, a splitting of a horses lims. Intraponere, as Interponere. Intrapositione, as Interpositione. Intraposto, as Interposto. Intraprirsi, is properly when a horse doth split himselfe. Intrare, as Entrare. Intrata, as Entrata. Intratanto, in the meane while. Intrate, as Entrate. Intraténere, as Intertenere. Intratenimento, as Intertenimento. Intrattabile, vntractable, that cannot be treated of, vnrulie, troublesome, intol∣lerable. Intrauagliare, to trauell, to trouble, to molest, to grieue. Intrauaglio, in trauell, in trouble, in greefe, in sorrow. Intrauenire, as Interuenire. Intrauegnénte, hapning, chancing, com∣ming to passe. Intrauentura, a hap, a chaunce or fortune comming betweene. Intrauenimento, as Intrauentura. Intrauersare, to crosse, to trauerse, to thwart, to ouerthwart. Intrauérso, acrosse, athwart, ouerthwart. Intreanni, in the space of three yeares. Intreare, to make a threed, to reduce three together. Intrecciamento di parole, an entang∣ling of words. Intrecciare, to tresse, to plot, to weaue. Also to packe or prick the cards. Also to entramell. Intrecciara, a tressing, a plaiting, a pac∣king, an entrameling. Intreccie, in her tresses, in her haire en∣trameled. Intredi, in three dayes. Intremódi, three manner of wayes. Intrepidezza, fearelesnes, hardines, stout∣nes, boldnes. Intrepidità, as Intrepidezza. Intrépido, fearelesse, vndaunted, stout, bold. Intresca, iesting, ingling, dauncing, ium∣bling, all a hoit, tumbling. Intricare, to intricate, to turne, to tosse vp and downe, to entangle, to entrap. Intrico, Intricamento, an intricatenes, a labirinth, a maze, an entangling or ensnaring, an encumberment, an en∣wrapping. Intricoso, intricate, entangled. Intrídere, trido, trisi, triso, to kneade meale, to make paste or battre. Also to mince, slice, or cut small. Also to enfolde or enwrap. Intrigare, as Intricare, or Intrecciare.
Intrigo, as Intrico. Intrinsicamente, inwardly, hartily, fa∣miliarly. Intrinsicarsi, to become familiar, friendly, or inward with one. Intrinsichezza, familiaritie, acquain∣tance, inwardnes, friendlines. Intrinsico, familiar, acquainted, friendly or inward, and on the inside. Intriso, Looke Intridere. Also enwrapped or enfolded. Intristire, tisco, tito, to become woorse and woorse. Also to become knauish. Al∣so to become sad or pensiue. Introdurre, duco, dussi, dutto, to intro∣duce or bring, or leade in. Introdotto, Introdutto, introducted, led, lead or brought in. Introduttione, an introduction, a helpe, a meane, an entrance, a bringing or lea∣in, a beginning. Introduttorio, a helpe, a meane or en∣trance to bring one in. Introire, to entre or go in. Introio, entred or gone in. Also an en∣trance, an entrie or going in. Introméttere, metto, misi, messo, to take in, to introduct, to intromit, to put in, or to conuaie in, to let in. Intromesso, introducted or put in, con∣uaied in, let in. Also a iudge, an vm∣pire, an arbitrator, a compromiser. Intromissione, a putting or letting in, an intromission. Intronare, to enthrone. Also to thunder, to amaze, to astonish. Intronato, enthroned. Also thundred, amazed, astonished, as Stordito. Intronizzare, to enthrone. Intropiccare, as Inciampare. Intropiccata, as Inciampo. Introque, in, further in, within, vsed by Dante. Introsire, as Inritrosire. Intrúdere, trudo, trusi, truso, to intrude, or thrust in violently. Intrusione, an intrusion, or intruding. Intuare, to become thine, to entre into thee. Intuonare, to sounde, to resounde, or en∣thunder, to tune, to raise the voice. Inturbolare, as Intorbolare. Intutto, whollie, altogither, in all. Inuadóre, vado, vasi, vaso, to inuade, to entre, to assaile, to set vpon. Inuaghire, ghisco, ghito, to become amo∣rous, louing, desirous or faine. Inuaghito, become amorous, desirous, lo∣uing or faine, enamoured. Inuaghimento, a falling in loue, a becom∣ming desirous, louing or faine. Inualére, vaglio, valsi, valuto, to make or be no value, force, woorth, or ver∣tue. Inualido, of no force, vertue, strength, woorth, or power, feeble, weake. Inualidare, to make valide, lawfull, or forcible. Inualidità, inualiditie, want of force, vertue, woorth, or value. Inualigiare, to put vp in a male or cloke∣bagge. Inualisgiare, as Inualigiare. Inualitudine, feeblenes, weaknes. Inualuto, made or beene of no vertue, no woorth, no value or force. Inuano, Indarno, in vaine, voide, for nought, idly, vainely, hootlesse. Inuasare, to put into a vessell, to vessell vp, to be amazed, confounded or affrigh∣ted, to fetch one ouer the coles. Inuasato, put into a vessell, vesseled vp. Also amazed, confounded, affrighted, one fetcht ouer the coles. Also one pos∣sessed with some ill spirit. Inuasati dal sonno, oppressed with sleepe, deadly asleepe. Inuasione, an inuasion or entring vpon by force. Inuaso, inuaded or assailed. Inudito, vnheard of, neuer heard of. Inuece, in steede, in place, in lieu. Inuecchiare, to grow old or aged. Inuecchiaia, in age, in eldership. Inueggia, enuie, hatred, malice, spite, ma∣lignitie. Inueggiare, to enuie, to hate, to malice, to spite, to maligne. Inuelenare, to poison, to enuenom, to ran∣kle, to fester. Inuelenire, as Inuelenare. Inueltrato, become of the nature of a grai∣hound, or beset and baited with graie∣hounds. Inuelutare, to put or cloth in veluet. Inuénia, a deuice, an inuention, a newe found out thing, a surmise. Inueníre, hath bin vsed of some olde wri∣ters for Trouare, to finde. Inuentare, to inuent, to deuise, to forge, to surmise, to faine. Inuentario, an inuentorie, register, re∣corde, or memoriall. Inuentione, an inuention, a deuise, a for∣gerie, a surmise, a finding. Inuentitia, to be found out. Inuentiuo, inuentiue, that can deuise, sur∣mise, or forge. Inuentore, an inuenter, a forger, a deui∣ser, a surmisor. Inuentrare, to enbowell or go into some place, to enwombe. Inuentrice, a shee inuenter, or deuiser, a forgeresse, or surmiseresse. Inuerare, to verifie, to auerre, to confirm, to prooue true. Inuerdire, disco, dito, to grow greene or yoong. Inuer', towards, toward. Inuerecondia, shamelesnes, impudencie. Inuerità, in truth, verily, truly, in veritie, certainly, surely, in sooth. Inuernale, wintrie, for the winter. Also wintrish. Inuernare, to winter, or passe, or liue the winter. Inuernata, a winter, a wintring. Inuernecciare, to varnish. Inuernicare, to varnish. Inuernicatore, a varnisher. Inuerno, a winter, the winter season. Inuero, in truth, in veritie, verily, truely, certainly, surely, in sooth. Inuersione, an inuersion, a turning inside out, or vpside downe, a misplacing. Inuértere, verto, vertei, verso, to inuert, to turne one against another, to wrest to another sence, to turne vpside downe, to turne in, to peruert. Inuerso, inuerted, turned one against another, wrested to another sence, tur∣ned in, turned vpside downe, or the in∣side out, peruerted, misplaced. Also to∣ward or towards. Inuescare, to lime, to trap, to entrap, to entangle, to allure, to entice, to ensnare, to enueagle. Inuescamento, a lime twigge, an en∣trapping, an allurement, an enticement, an enueagling, an ensnaring. Inuescatura, as Inuescamento. Inuestigabile, that may be founde, sear∣ched, sisted, or sought out. Inuestigando, idem. Inuestigare, to seeke, to search, or finde out diligently, to discouer by the steps or print of the feete, to trace out. Inuestigatione, a searching, a seeking, a finding, or diligent discouerie. Inuestigatore, a searcher, or seeker, a fin∣der or discouerer with diligence. Inuestire, vesto, vestito, to inuest, to in∣stall, to cloth, to enrobe, to put in posses∣sion. Also to charge vpon an enimie. Also to laie out or emploie ones money vpon any bargaine for aduantage. Inuestitione, as Inuestitura. Inuestitore, an inuestor, an installer, an enrober, an endower, a presentor. Inuestitura, an enstalment, an enrobing, an endowrie, an imploiment, an inue∣sting. Inueterare, to become olde and aged, to
inueterate. Inueterato, become old and aged, inuete∣rate, confirmed by long vse. Inuetriare, to glaze, to calcinat, or inui∣triat, as new earthen pots be within. Inuetriato, glased, calcinated, inuitria∣ted. Also a brazen face fellow. Inuetriata, a glasse window. Inuettione, as Inuettiua. Inuettíre, tisco, tito, to inueigh, to raile against in words. Inuettiua, an inuectiue, cursing or railing discourse, an outrage in words. Inuettiuo, an inuectiue, railing or in∣uaighing man. Inuiare, to sende, to adresse, to set in the right way. Inuidare, as Inuidiare. Inuidénza, as Inuidia. Inuidia, enuie, hatred, rancor, spite, ma∣lice, grudge, ill will, grudging, repining, griefe to beholde and heare that ano∣ther prospereth. Inuidiate, to enuie, to hate, to spite, to maligne, to grudge, to repine, or haue a spite and griefe to see another prosper. Inuidioso, enuious, hatefull, spitefull, grudging, repining, malicious. Inuido, as Inuidioso. Inuigilare, watchfullie to studie or take paines. Inuilire, lisco, lito, to vilifie, to despise, to embase, to disparage, to disable, to set at naught. Also to become a coward. Inuiluppare, to turne, to tosse, to tumble. Also to enwrap, to entangle, to huddle vp, to enfould. Inuiluppabile, that may be wrapped vp, folded vp, or enfolded. Inuiluppo, a bundle, a huddle, a wrap∣ping, an infolding, a fardle. Inuincibile, inuincible, vnconquerable, not to be ouercome, vnuanquishable. Inuiolabile, inuiolable, that cannot be vi∣olated, broken or corrupted. Inuiolare, to adorne with violets or to make to smell of violets. Inuiolato, adorned with violets or made to smell of violets. Also inuiolable, in∣corrupt, vnspotted, cleere, pure. Also firme, constant, inuiolated, true, faith∣full, vncorrupted. Inuiperare, to become venimous as a viper Inuiperire, risco, rito, as Inuiperare. Inuischiare, as Inuescare. Inuischiatura, as Inuescamento. Inuisibile, inuisible, vnseene, that may not be seene. Inuisitato, not visited. Inuiso, as Inuista. Inuista, in sight, in the presence, in view, before the face. Inuitabile, delectable, alluring or bidding and inuiting one. Inuitamento, an inuiting, a bidding, a desiring to doe any thing, a vying at plaie, an alluring or prouoking. Inuitare, to inuite, to bid, to desire to in∣treate, to mooue to do any thing, to al∣lure, to perswade, to intice, to desire, to come, to prouoke. Inuitare a far brindesi, to inuite one to drinke a health. Inuitare al giuoco, to vie or to reuie at any game, to drop vie. Inuitata, as Inuitamento. Inuitato, enuited, bidden, desired, in∣treated, mooued to do any thing. Also vied or reuied at any game, plaied at drop vie, perswaded, allured. Inuitatore, an inuitor, an intreator, a bid∣der of any feast. Inuito, a vie at play, a vie at any game. Also an inuiting, offer, proffer or bid∣ding, a perswading, an alluring. Inuitiare, to growe vitious or wicked, to corrupt, to inuitiate. Inuitto, vnconquerable, inuincible, vn∣uanquishable, valiant, mightie. Inulto, vnreuenged, not punished, without hurt or danger, sans ieopardie. Invn, In uno, togither, in one, withall, therewith, at once. In vn balneo, in the twinkling of an eie. In vn batter d'occhio, idem. In vn fiato, in a breath, in a sudden. In vn instante, in an instant, in a moment. In vn soffio, in a breath, in a sudden. In vn momento, in a moment, in an in∣stant. Inunire, nisco, nito, to make or ioine one with. Inuocatione, an inuocation or calling vp∣pon, as when one demaundeth aide. Inuocare, to inuoke, to call vpon for aide and helpe. Inuoglia, a table basket, wherin napkings, kniues, salt, and bread is brought to the table. Inuogliare, to become or make one willing or consenting or desirous. Also to rowle or folde vp. Also to make one long for anie thing. Inuogliato, rouled or foulded vp. Also possessèd with a longing desire. Also be∣come or made willing, desirous or con∣senting. Inuógliere, volgo, volsi, volto, to en∣wrap, to infold, to bundle, to roule. Inuoglio, a bundle, a fardle, a trusse, an infolding, an inwrapping, the huske or hull inclosing any fruit. Inuolare, to steale, to filch, to purloine, to to pilfre, to coneigh away. Inuolatore, a theefe, a stealer, a filcher, a purloiner, a conueigher away. Inuólgere, as Inuógliere. Inuolgimento, a turning or winding a∣bout, a gadding about. Also an infol∣ding or inwrapping. Inuolontario, not voluntarie, vnwilling. Inuolta, made vault-wise. Also turning or ranging about. Inuólta, about, rouing, gadding, wan∣dring about, back-turning, turning back Inuoltare, to make as a vault, to arche, to turne backe. Inuólto, in the face, in view, in presence, in sight. Also inwrapped, infolded, bun∣deled, swathed, folded or rouled vp. Al∣so vault-wise, arch-wise, bending, a∣slope. Inuóluere, as Inuógliere. Inuoluolo, an infolding, an inwrapping, an intangling. Also a worme like a can∣cre that destroieth vines, called a vine∣fretter. Inuoluppare, as Inuiluppare. Inuolutare, to tósse, or wallowe in mud or mire. Inuoluto, vnwilled, neuer consenting. Al∣so a gut called the blind gut. Inuotare, to vow, to promise, to make an oath. Inurbare, to endenizen, to become or make a citizen or a ciuill man. Inurbanità, inurbanitie, rudenes, discour∣tesie, clownishnes, vnmannerlines. Inurbano, vnciuill, vncourteous, rude, clownish, vnmanerly, homely, discour∣teous. Inusitare, to vnuse, to forget, to leaue off, to disaccustome. Inusitato, vnused, forgotten, disaccusto∣med, left off, strangely, not woont. Inustione, an inwarde burning or scal∣ding. Inútile, vnprofitable, to no vse, vnseruice∣able, nothing worth. Inutilire, lisco, lito, to make void, to disa∣null, to make vnprofitable and of no effect. Inutilità, disprofit, inutilitie, vnprofita∣blenes. Inuulnerabile, that cannot be hurt, woun∣ded, pearced or thrust through the skin. Inuulnerato, vnhurt, not wounded. Inzaccherare, to defile, to make foule, to dash with durt or mire. Inzafranare, to die, to colour or dresse with saffron. Inzampognare, as Gonfiare alcuno. Also as Infinocchiare. Also to put a
bell about some cattles necke. Inzamprognare, as Gonfiare alcuno. Inzazzeare, to goe walking wantonly, idly or feminatlie vp and downe the streetes, to gaze vp and downe foolish∣lie. Inzazzerare, to weare long lockes of haire curled or bushie. Also to make the haire on the head curled. Inzeppare, to fill brim full. Inzessare, to whiten or colour with chalke, to chalke. Inzoppare, to become or make one to halt or to cripple. Inzuccherare, to sugar, to candie, to com∣sit, to couer with sugar. Inzuccherata, any paste candied or made of sugar, a sugar cake. Inzuppare, to sop, or lay in sops. Io, the first pronoune primitiue, sing. I, my selfe. Also a kinde of wood that they vse to make oares with. Io proprio, medesimo or stesso, meselfe, I me selfe. Io per me, as for me, as for my selfe. Io t'afferro, I haue you fast, I know your minde. Io t'ho per il becco, I haue you by the bill, I haue you by the fingers ends. Io t'ho doue si soffiano le noci, I care not a turd for you. Io vi dico di no, I tell you no, I bid you no. Ione, a kinde of flower. Also a precious stone of the colour of that floure, which rubbed, drawes paper and strawe to it. Ionica, a kinde of auncient Architecture. Also a kinde of musike among the Gre∣cians. Ionici, a kinde of verses so called. Iontio, a kinde of raye or thornebacke fish. Iosa, plentie, store, hold bellie hold, good store, good plentie. Iota, a iot, a nifle, nothing, a whit, a crumme, nought. Iozzo, as Ghiozzo. Iperborei, as Hiperborei. Ippopatamo, a beast in India, with feete like an oxe, backe and maine like a horse, tusked like a bore, and a long winding taile. Ipricon, the name of an hearbe. Ipsilonne, the letter y. Ipostasi, as Hipostasi. Ira, anger, ire, wrath, stomack, displea∣sure, choler, disdaine, desire of reuenge, vexation, rage, or such passions that last not. Iracondia, Iracundia as Ira, but that lasteth. Iracondo, Iracundo, wrathfull, angrie, cholerike, moodie, fretfull, raging, ire∣full, fumish, testie. Iradiare, to shine vpon, to lighten, to cast his beames vpon, to flare, to streame. Iradiatione, an inlightning or casting of beames. Iradiante, shining vpon, lightning, or ca∣sting his beames vpon, flaring, glistring, streaming. Iragionéuole, as Irationale. Irare, to anger, to wroth, to vexe, to fret, to displease, to rage. Irato, angred, wroth, vexed, fretted, grie∣ued, moued, raged. Iráscere, to be angrie, moued, or displea∣sed, to grieue, or be sorie for. Irascibile, subiect to anger or wroth, or rage, vnreasonable. Irationale, vnreasonable, brutish, with∣out humane reason. Irationalità, vnreasonablenes, brutish∣nes. Ire, Gire, Andare, to goe, to wend, to walke, to march, to wander, to yode. Ireconciliabile, inexpiable, that can ad∣mit no reconciliation. Ireiate, a kinde of precious stone. Irice, a hedgehog. Iride, as Irride. Iringio, a kind of shrub or pricking weede. Iringo campestre, as Eringo campe∣stre. Iritare, as Irritare. Irios, a kinde of sweete white roote called oris-roote. Iritatione, as Irritatione. Iritire, to make voide, of no force or effect, to disappoint, to asswage or mollifie. Iritto, vnlawfull, vndue, vnfit, vnright. Ironia, a figure in speaking when one meaneth contrarie to the word, a moc∣king or skoffing. Ironico, erronious, mocking, meaning contrarie to his words. Iroso, wrathfull, cholerike, angrie. Irpice, a rake with iron teeth, wherewith they pull vp weedes and rootes. Irragioneuolezza, vnreasonablenes. Irragioneuole, as Irrationale. Irrecompensabile, that can not be re∣quited. Irrecordabile, that can not be remem∣bred. Irrecuperabile, vnrecouerable. Irregolare, irregular, voide of rule, sub∣iect to no order. Irregolarità, irregularitie, disorder, con∣fusion, want of order, rule or forme. Irregulare, as Irregolare. Irregularità, as Irregolarità. Irreligione, irreligion, vngodlines. Irreligióso, irreligious, prophane, vnde∣uous, vngodlie, without feare of God. Irremeabile, neuer to returne or passe a∣gaine. Irremediabile, remedilesse, not to be re∣dressed, irremediable, recurelesse. Irremissibile, irremissible, that can not be forgiuen or remitted. Irremunerabile, that can not be rewar∣ded or recompensed. Irreparabile, that can not be withstood, warded, resisted, or repaired. Irreprehensibile, faultlesse, that can not be reproued, without fault. Irreprobabile, as Irreprehensibile. Irrepugnabile, as Irreparabile. Irresolutione, an irresolution, an vncer∣taintie. Irresolubile, that can not be resolued, or determined. Irresoluto, irresolute, vnconstant, vncer∣taine, wauering. Irretare, to entrap, to entangle, to ensuare or take in a net or ginne, to entramell, to ennet. Irretire, tisco, tito, as Irretare. Irreuerénte, vnreuerent, rude, vnman∣nerly. Irreueréntia, vnreuerence, rudenesse. Irreuocabile, irreuocable, that can not be reuoked or called backe. Irride, the rainebow. Also a flower de∣luce. Also a kinde of precious stone which sparkles all the colours of the rainebow. Also the circle which is be∣tweene the white and the apple of the eye, replenished with diuers colours. Irrídere, rido, risi, riso, as Deridere. Irrigare, to water ground, or fields, to bring water into fields by little gullets, to streame or streake along. Irrigamento, a watering of any fields by little gullets. Irrimissibile, vnpardonable, that can not be remitted, irremissible. Irrisione, as Derisione. Irritabile, quicklie moued to anger. Irritare, to prouoke, to kindle wrath, to moue, to stirre, to incense to anger. Irritatione, a prouocation, an incensing, or mouing to wrath. Irritire, tisco, tito, as Irretare. Irrito, voide, of no effect or force, nothing worth, vaine, blunt, that can not hurt. Irrocare, to haue a boarse voice, to waxe hoarse. Irrochiare, as Irrocare. Irrochire, chisco, chito, as Irrocare. Irrochimento, a hoarsenes, a hoarse
voice. Irrocità, hoarsenes, a hoarse voice. Irrogiadare, to bedew or dew, to sprinkle. Irrondine, a swallow. Irrómpere, rompo, ruppi, rotto, to breake, rush, burst, or entre in by vio∣lence, or maine strength, to make a for∣cible entrie. Irronia, as Ironia. Irrotto, broken, rusht, burst, or entred in by maine force and violence. Irrottione, a forced entrance, a violent breaking or bursting in. Irrugare, to grow or make full of wrinkles or to frowne and wrinkle ones brow. Irrugiadare, as Irrogiadare. Irrugiadoso, dewie, full of dewe. Irruggire, gisco, gito, to rore, to roine, or braie out as a lion. Irrugginire, nisco, nito, to rust, or growe rustie. Irrugginoso, rustie, full of rust. Irrumare, to commit all maner of villanie or mischiefe. Irtare, to thrum, to make rough, hairie or brislie. Irto, thrummed, rough, hairie, brislie. Also high or steepie, or vpright, as Erto. Also foule or filthie. Isagógico, of, or belonging to an intro∣duction, or beginning. Isame, as Essame. Isaminare, as Essaminare. Isaminatione, as Essaminatione. Isatide, woade to die blue withall. Isbadagliare, as Sbadagliare. Isbadigliare, as Sbadigliare. Isbadiglioso, as Sbadiglioso. Iabaiaffare, as Sbaiaffare. Isballare, to vnpacke, to vnlode. Isbarleffare, as Sbarleffare. Isbarléffo, as Sbarleffo. Isbarbare, to vnbeard. Isbattere, as Sbattere. Isbattuto, as Sbattuto. Isbauare, as Sbauare. Isbigottire, as Sbigottire. Isbigottimento, as Sbigottimento. Isbizzarrire, as Sbizzarrire. Isboccaggine, as Sboccaggine. Isboccato, as Sboccato. Isbollarsi, as Sbollarsi. Isborsare, as Sborsare. Isbracciata, as Sbracciata. Isbramare, as Sbramare. Isbranare, as Sbranare. Isbrigliare, as Sbrigliare. Isbruffare, as Sbruffare. Isbucare, as Sbucare. Isbuffare, as Sbroffare. Isbuttafattore, as Sbuttafattore. Iscacciare, as Scacciare. Iscalciare, as Scalciare. Iscambiare, as Scambiare. Iscambio, as Scambio. Iscampanare, as Scampanare. Iscampare, as Scampare. Iscampo, as Scampo. Iscapucciare, as Scapucciare. Iscapoli, as Scapoli. Iscarso, as Scarso. Iscarmigliare, as Scarmigliare. Iscarognato, glutted or gorged with ca∣rion, vncarioned. Iscarpore, as Scarpore. Iscéde, as Sceda. Iscelerattézza, as Sceleraggine. Iscemare, as Scemare. Iscempio, as Scempio. Iscésa, as Scesa. Ischerzare, as Scherzare. Ischerzéuole, as Scherzeuole. Ischérzo, as Scherzo. Ischia, a disease, as the Sciatica. Ischiacciare, as Schiacciare. Ischiacciata, as Schiacciata. Ischiamazzare, as Schiamazzare. Ischiamazzo, as Schiamazzo. Ischiantare, as Schiantare. Ischiarire, as Schiarare. Ischiatta, as Schiatta. Ischiéna, as Schiena. Ischiettézza, as Schiettezza. Ischifare, Ischiuare, as Schifare. Ischifo, Ischiuo, as Schifo. Ischifetto, Ischiuetto, as Schiuetto. Ischifezza, Ischiuezza, as Schifezza. Ischifiltà, Ischiuilta, as Schifezza. Ischio, a kinde of tree, some take it for a kinde of wilde radish. Also the huckle bone of the hip. Ischiodare, as Schiodare. Ischiúdere, to shut out, to locke out. Ischiumare, as Schiumare. Ischiuma, as Schiuma. Isciabordo, as Sciabordo. Isciagura, as Sciagura. Isciagurato, as Sciagurato. Iscialacquare, as Scialacquare. Iscialacquaggine, as Scialacquaggine Isciancare, as Sciancare. Isciancato, Isciano, as Scianco. Isciéde, as Sceda. Iscientiato, as Scientiato. Iscimonito, as Scimonito. Isclúdere, as Escludere. Isclusione, as Esclusione. Iscluso, as Escluso. Iscnotesia, a certain incōgruitie in speech Iscodélla, as Scodella. Iscolare, as Scolare. Iscollare, as Decapitare. Iscolatura, as Scolatura. Iscoméssa, as Scomessa. Iscomesso, as Scomesso. Iscométtere, as Scomettere. Iscomiatare, as Licentiare. Iscompagnato, as Scompagnato. Iscompisciare, as Scompisciare. Iscomunicare, as Scomunicare. Iscomúnica, as Scomunicatione. Isconciare, as Sconciare. Isconciatura, as Sconciatura. Isconcio, as Sconcio. Isconosciuto, as Sconosciuto. Isconoscenza, as Sconoscenza. Isconquassare, as Sconquassare. Isconquazzare, as Squaccarare. Isconsolato, as Sconsolato. Iscontro, as Scontro. Isconueneuole, vnconuenient. Isconueneuolezza, vnconuenience. Isconuenire, as Sconuenire. Iscopare, as Scopare. Iscorciare, Iscorcio, as Scorciare. Iscorticare, as Scorticare. Iscorzare, as Scorzare. Iscotere, Iscuotere, as Scuótere. Iscósso, as Scosso. Iscossale, as Scossale. Iscoria, as Iscuria. Iscretio, Iscritio, as Scritio. Iscriuano, as Scriuano. Iscriuere, as Scriuere. Iscritto, as Scritto. Iscrittura, as Scrittura. Iscroccante, as Scroccante. Iscroccare, as Scroccare. Iscrocco, as Scrocco. Iscrollare, as Scrollare. Iscrollo, as Scrollo. Iscuria, a disease or stopping of a mans water in the bladder or passage of it. Iscusare, as Scusare. Iscusa, as Scusa. Iscusabile, as Scusabile. Iscuscire, as Scuscire. Iscuscitura, as Scuscitura. Isdebitato, as Sdebitato. Isdegnare, as Sdegnare. Isdegno, as Sdegno. Isdegnóso, as Sdegnoso. Isdentato, as Sdentato. Isdicéuole, as Disdiceuole. Isdogliarsi, as Sdogliare. Isdogliatiuo, as Sdogliatiuo. Isdrusciolare, as Sdrucciolare. Isdruscire, as Sdruscire. Isdrusciolo, as Sdrusciolo. Isfacciato, as Sfacciato. Isfacendato, as Sfacendato. Isfacchinarsi, as Sfacchinarsi. Isfacciatezza, as Sfacciatezza.
Isfagumato, as Sfagumato. Isfamare, as Sfamare. Isfalcare, vide Isfalcatura. Isfalcatura, when the shoulder of a horse or any other lim is bent, or by violence forced from the right place. Isfasciare, as Sfasciare. Isfilare, to rauell out in threds. Isfilatura, a raueling out in threds. Also a disease in some horses. Isfinire, as Sfinire. Isfiorare, as Sfiorire. Isfiorire, as Sfiorire. Isfogare, as Sfogare. Isfortunato, as Sfortunato. Isforzare, as Sforzare. Isforzo, as Sforzo. Isfratare, as Sfratare. Isfregiare, as Sfregiare. Isfrenato, as Sfrenato. Isfrondare, as Sfrondare. Isfrontato, as Sfrontato. Isfuggire, as Sfuggire. Isgallinare i pollai, as Sgallinare. Isgannare, as Disingannare. Isgarare, as Sgarare. Isgarrire, as Garrire. Isgombrare, as Sgombrare. Isgomentare, as Sgomentare. Isgomento, as Sgomento. Isgommare, as Sgommare. Isgorgare, as Sgorgare. Isgramaticare, as Sgramaticare. Isgualembro, as Sgualembro. Isitare, to sing, chirp or crie as a stare. Islandra, as Slandra. Isleale, false, vntrue, disloyall. Islealtà, disloyaltie. Islogare, as Slogare. Ismaccare, as Smaccare. Ismacco, as Smacco. Ismaltare, as Smaltare. Ismaltire, as Smaltire. Ismalto, as Smalto. Ismancerie, as Smancerie. Ismania, as Smania. Ismaniare, as Smaniare. Ismanire, nisco, nito, as Smaniare. Ismarrire, as Smarrire. Ismascellare, as Smascellare. Ismattonare, as Smattonare. Ismemorare, as Smemorare. Ismemoraggine, as Smemoraggine. Ismemorataggine, as Smemoraggine. Ismenticaggine, as Smemoraggine. Ismerdare, as Smerdare. Ismerdolare, as Smerdare. Ismetriare, as Smetriare. Isminuzzare, as Sminuzzare. Ismoccolare, as Smoccare. Ismoderato, immoderate, intemperate. Ismoltato, bare, shauen, made bald. Ismontare, as Smontare. Ismóuere, as Smóuere. Ismósso, as Smosso, strained or put out of ioint. Ismucciare, as Sdrucciolare. Isnéllo, as Snello. Isneruare, as Sneruare. Isocólo, when two sentences are alike in length. Isodomo, a forme of building where euery thing is equally straight, leuell worke. Isofago, a part of mans bellie so called. Isola, an ilande, a place compassed with waters. Isolano, Isolare, an ilander of an iland. Isolare, to reduce into an iland, to compasse about with waters. Also pertaining to an iland. Isoletta, a little iland. Isonomia, equalitie of lawes to all man∣ner of persons. Isoperimite, that which is of equall com∣passe or circuit to any thing. Isopiro, the herbe Phaselium, and hath leaues like a nise. Isopleuro, a figure with all the sides e∣quall. Isopo, the herbe Isop. Ispacciare, as Spacciare. Ispaccio, as Spaccio. Isparagnare, as Sparagnare. Isparagno, as Sparagno. Isparauiere, as Sparauiere. Isparare, as Sparare. Isparecchiare, as Sparecchiare. Ispárgere, as Spargere. Ispargimento, as Spargimento. Isparigli, an odde number. Isparmiare, as Sparagnare. Isparmio, as Sparagno. Ispassare, Spassare.   Ispasseggiare, as Spasseggiare. Ispasso, as Spasso. Ispatio, as Spatio. Ispauentéuole, as Spauentoso. Ispauénto, as Spauento. Ispaurire, risco, rito, as Spauentare. Ispecchiare, as Specchiare. Ispecchio, as Specchio. Ispediénte, as Espediente. Ispedagliera, a spittle keeper. Ispedire, disco, dito, as Spacciare. Ispedito, as Spedito, as Spacciato. Ispeditione, as Speditione. Ispegnare, as Spegnare. Ispégnere, as Spégnere. Ispelato, as Spelato. Ispéndere, as Spéndere. Ispensierato, as Spensierato. Ispergiuro, as Spergiuro. Isperientia, as Sperientia. Isperimentare, as Sperimentare. Ispesa, as Spesa. Ispeso, as Speso. Ispessire, as Spessire. Ispesso, as Spesso. Ispetiale, as Speciale. Ispianatore, an explainer. Ispiare, as Spiare. Ispianare, as, Spianare. Ispiccare, as Spiccare. Ispiccate, as Spiccate. Ispiditiuo, dispatching, full of expedi∣tion. Ispidocchiare, to louse, to vnlouse. Ispietato, as Spietato. Ispione, as Spia. Ispirare, as Inspirare. Ispiritare, as Inspiritare. Isplicare, as Esplicare. Isplicatione, as Esplicatione. Ispónere, as Espónere. Isporre, as Esporre. Isporcare, as Sporcare. Isporcitia, as Sporchezza. Isporco, as Sporco. Isposa, as Sposa. Isposo, as Sposo. Ispositore, as Spositore. Ispositiua, expounding, declaring. Ispositione, as Spositione. Isposto, as Esposto. Ispretare, as Spretare. Ispresso, as Espresso. Isprímere, as Esprimere. Ispronare, as Spronare. Isproportione, as Sproportione. Ispulare, to filch, to steale, to pilfer cun∣ningly. Ispultrice virtu, expelling or expulsiue vertue. Isputacchiare, as Sputacchiare. Isputare, as Sputare. Isputo, as Sputo. Isquadra, as Squadra. Isquadrare, as Squadrare. Isquadro, as Squadro. Isquarciare, as Squarciare. Isquarscina, as Squarcina. Isquassare, as Spuassare. Isquatro, as Squadro. Isquietare, as Squietare. Isquisito, exquisite, perfect. Isreuerenza, as Irreuerenza. Issilon, the letter Y, so called in Italian. Issa, euen now, presently, at hand, by and by. Issuto, vsed for Stato, the participle of Es∣sere, bin. Also as Vscito. Ista, as Questa. Istabilità, as Stabilità.
Istaccare, as Staccare. Istanchezza, as Stanchezza. Istanco, as Stanco. Istanga, as Stanga. Istangare, as Stangare. Istante, as Instante. Istantia, as Stantia, as Instantia. Istantiare, as Stantiare. Istate, the sommer season. Istático, as Statico. Istáto, as Stato. Isteccato, as Steccato. Istécco, as Stecco. Isténdere, as Sténdere. Istentare, as Stentare. Isténto, as Sténto. Istenuare, as Stenuare. Istenuatione, as Stenuatione. Isterminato, as Sterminato. Isternutare, as Sternutare. Istéso, as Stéso. Istessa, Istesse, as Medesima. Istesso, Istessi, as Medesimo. Istia, a coope, or penne for poultrie. Istiacciare, as Schiacciare. Istiertezza, as Schiettezza. Istigare, as Instigare. Istigatione, as Instigatione. Istigatore, as Instigatore. Istima, Istimatione, as Stima. Istimare, as Stimare. Istimiéra, a fence, a couer, a shroude, a shelter, a defence. Istinguere, as Estinguere. Istiniéri, greues for mens shins. Istinto, extinguished, extinct, quenched, put out, an instinct or naturall disposi∣tion, or inclination. Istipulare, as Stipulare. Istiracchiare, as Stiracchiare. Istirpare, as Stirpare. Istitico, as Stitico. Istitichezza, as Stitichezza. Istituire, as Instituire. Istitutione, as Institutione. Istituto, as Instituto. Istizza, as Stizza. Istizzare, as Stizzare. Istizzolo, Istizzone, as Stizzone. Istizzonare, as Stizzare. Istmici giuochi, certaine sacred games among the Graecians. Istmo, a narrow part of a countrie where two seas are but a small distance asun∣der, enclosing the land on both sides. Also the middle part or bridge of the nose. Istmos, a stone of the colour of saffron, which is so soft, that it may be spunne, and no fier will consume it. Istoccata, as Stoccata. Istocco, as Stocco. Istolto, as Stolto. Istomacaggine, lothesomnes. Istomacheuole, as Stomacheuole. Istomacóso, as Stomacheuole. Istolto, as Stolto, as Distolto. Istordire, as Stordire. Istordito, as Stordito. Istória, a historie. Istoriale, historicall, pertaining to hi∣storie. Istoriare, to write or compose a historie, to historize. Istorico, a historian, a historie writer. Istoriographo, as Istorico. Istorlomia, as Astronomia. Istorlomo, as Astronomo. Istórre, as Distórre. Istortura, as Stortura. Istrabocchéuole, as Straboccheuole. Istracchezza, as Stanchezza. Istraccare, as Stancare. Istracco, as Stracco. Istracciare, as Stracciare. Istracurataggine, as Stracuraggine. Istramortire, as Stramortire. Istrapazzare, as Strapazzare, Istratiare, as Stratiare. Istratio, as Stratio. Istremare, to draw or set out to the vtter∣most, to force, to constraine, to bring to extremitie. Istremità, as Estremità. Istrenuità, as Strenuità. Istrénuo, as Strenuo. Istretta, as Stretta. Istrettézza, as Strettezza. Istrétto, as Stretto. Istriano, a kinde of marble stone comming from Istria. Istrice, a porpuntine, or porkepine, a beast like a hedgehog, whose pricks are dan∣gerous, an vrchin. Istringere, as Stríngere. Istrología, as Astrologia. Istrólogo, as Astrologo. Istroncare, as Stroncare. Istronzo, as Stronzo. Istruffare, as Struffare. Istruffo, as Struffo. Istrumentale, as Instrumentale. Istrumento, as Instrumento. Istruire, as Instruire. Istruttione, instruction or teaching. Istrutto, taught, instructed, trained. Istruttore, a teacher, an instructer. Istuccare, as Stuccare. Istucco, as Stucco. Istudiare, as Studiare. Isturare, as Sturare. Isturione, a fish called Sturgeon. Isuagare, as Vagare. Isualiggiare, as Sualiggiare. Isuarietà, as Varietà. Isuegliare, as Suegliare. Isuenire, as Suenire. Isuentare, as Suentare. Isuentate, foolish fancies, sodaine toyes, humorous conceits. Isuentolare, as Suentolare. Isuerginare, as Suerginare. Isuenare, as Suenare. Isuernare, as Suernare. Isuiare, as Disuiare. Isuillaneggiare, as Suillaneggiare. Isuergognare, as Suergognare. Isuiscerare, as Suiscerare. Isuiscerato, as Suiscerato. Isuolgarizzare, as Suolgarizzare. Ita, hath bin vsed of Dane, in the latine sense, yea, yes. Itaco, as Galgolo. Iterare, to iterate, to redouble, to renewe, to repeate. Iterario, a booke or note of repetitions, or reiterations. Iteratione, an iteration, an iterating, a renuing, a redoubling, a repeti∣tion. Itifalico verso, a verse of filthie bauderie. Itinerario, a commentarie, or hooke of re∣membrance. Also a kalender of miles, as the gestes or remooues of princes. Itinere, a way, a passage, a going, a trade, a course, or a meane. Ito, Gito, gone, wandred, marched, wal∣ked. Itteritia, as Mal verde. Ittiocola, a great fish which some take for a Sturgeon. Iua, ground pine, hearbe iuie, or field ci∣pres. Iuane, a kinde of serpent in India, which is very good meate. Iubar, the day-star called also Lucifer. Also brightnes, or a sunne beame. Iugero, as Giugero. Iugulare, as Giocolare. Iui, Quiui, there, yonder, in that place, thither. Iui a non guari, not long after. Iulca, Looke Foce. Iumenta, as Giumenta. Iurisconsulto, as Giurisconsulto. Iurisdittione, as Giurisdittione. Iurista, a lawyer, a professor of the lawes. Iusdicente, as Giurisconsulto. Iuspatronato, as Giuspatronato. Iusquesito, a rightfull, iust, or lawfull de∣maund or sute. Iusquiano, the hearbe henbane.
L LA, an article of the feminine gender, the, but being ioyned with a verbe it is a pronoune, she, hir, it, or the same. It is sometimes an aduerbe of place, there, thither, yonder, or in that place. It is al∣so a note in musicke, La. La doue, whereas, whether, whereupon. Labante, fainting, drooping, decaying. Labarda, a halbard. Labaro, a streamer, banner, or ensigne that is hung vp in churches ouer noble mens tombes. Also a rich banner or streamer, beset with precious stones that till Constantine his time, who comman∣ded the figure of the crosse to be caried before him, was woont to be caried be∣fore the emperours, and was worshipped of the soldiers. Labbia, Labbra, the lips, the brims of any thing. also a mans looke or countenance. Labbro, Labro, a lippe. Also the brim or brinke of a fountaine, the brim, tip, or edge of a pots mouth, or any thing else. Labroso, Labbruto, that hath bigge lips, or is well lipped. Labdáce, filthines in the mouth. Labdoide, that suture or seame which is in the hinder part of the head and in the foundation thereof, where it goeth on both sides toward the eare, the going vp of which in the beginning is broad, but ascending higher becommeth narrower. Labe, a spot, a blot, or a blemish. Also a violent fall or torrent of raine waters. Lábile, to wash with, sliding, slipperie, or fading, faint or weake, vnstable. Labirinto, Labirintho, a laberinth or place full of intricate windings and tur∣nings, made in such wise that whosoeuer came into it coulde not get out againe without a perfect guide, or without a thred directing him, the clew or bottom whereof should be left at the entrie, wee call it a maze. It is also taken for an oration, or any other thing very intri∣cate, difficult, and entangled. Labizo, a kinde of gum not much, vnlike to myrrhe, but much more odoriferous and precious. Lábole, weake, faint. slipperie, flitting. Laborióso, laborious, painfull, taking paines, difficill, wearisom. Labretto, a little lip. Labrusca, as Lambrusca. Laca, as Lacca. Also a rocke, a cliffe, a downfall, a ruinous hill. Lacca, white leade, or a kind of gum. Also a ditch, a puddle, a poole, or muddie place. Lacca ogliata, a kinde of ointment for swelling. Lacche, taken for spaniels with long flapping eares. Lacchietto, the sweete bread of a brest of veale. Lacchia, as Laccia, Chieppa, or Alo∣sa. Also a kinde of drinke made of spi∣ces. Laccia, a fish called a chewme, others take it for a blaye or a bleake. Lacciare, to tie, to binde, to lace, to claspe, to snare or entangle, to tramell. Laccietto, as Lacciolo. Laccio, a snare, a tramell, a binding, a lace, a spring or gin to catch birds with Also a fish who for desire of a vaine in a tunnies iawe killeth him: a latchet. Lacciolo, Lacciuolo, a little snare, tra∣mell, binding, ribond, lace, or string: a latchet of a shooe. Also a maze. Lacerabile, that may be torne. Lacerare, to teare, to rende, to totter in peeces, to mangle, to dismember, to tor∣ment. Lacerna, a kinde of cloke to keepe the raine out. Lácero, Lacerato, torne, rent, ragged, tottred in peeces, mangled, dismembred. Lacerto, the braune or sinewes or mus∣cles of a mans armes or legs. Also the arme from the elbow to the pitch of the shoulder. Also a muskle bicause it is like a lizard. Also a fish which some saie grunteth as a hogge, and other some take to be the makrell. Also a lizard. Also a kinde of disease in a horse a∣mong the muscles and sinewes. Lachè, a lackie or footeman. Lachetta, a gum called gum lacke. Lacchezzini, prouokings, enticements, allurements, drifts, deuices, sleights. Lacessitore, he that prouoketh or abuseth one in speech. Lacessire, sisco, sito, to prouoke, stirre, or egge a man to wrath, to abuse in speech, to raile against one, to vexe and mo∣lest. Lacessità, prouoking, prouocation, vexa∣tion, or abusing in speeches. Lacinio, a barbers bason, or a milke pan. Lacinioso, cut in sundry fashions, iagged, snipt, crumpled, full of plaits, intricate, crankling in and out. Lacno, a dogs name, as we say a shaghaire or ruffian. Laco, Lago, as Lago. Lacònico, briefe, laconicall, short, witty, or compendious in speaking. Laconismo, a short kinde of speaking con∣teining in fewe words much matter. Laconizzare, to speake compendiouslie. Lacrima, a teare in weeping, a drop, a trilling, a trickling. Also rosin, turpen∣tine or gum drops. Lacrimabile, lamentable, to be bewailed. Lacrimare, to weepe, to shed teares, to di∣still, drop, or trill in teares, to trickle. Lacrimale, Lacrimeuole, as Lacri∣moso. Lacrimóso, weeping, wailefull, whining, distilling teares or drops, trickling, full teares, sorrowfull, lamentable, shedding teares. Lacúna, a marsh, a moore, a fen, a fennie, marish or waterish grounde, a ditch wherein water standeth, a furrowe or trench whereby fields are drained. Lacunóso, fennie, moorish, or waterish, full of ditches or holes. Lada, a swift runner. Also a kinde of Iuie. Also a kinde of Cassia smelling like wine mingled with spices. Ladano, a kinde of sweete gumme to per∣fume with. Also a kinde of fish. Ladetta, a hymne, a psalme or song of praise. Ladino, large, wide, broad. Also easie and facile. Ladone, the name of a dogge as we saie harier, or hunt haire. Ladoue, whereas, there where. Ladrarie, as Ladroncellerie. Ladro, a theefe, a stealer, a filcher, a pil∣frer. Ladronare, to filch, to steale, to pilfre or plaie the theefe. Ladroncéllo, a little theefe, stealer, fil∣cher or pilfrer. Lardoncellerie, pilfring, stealing, or fil∣ching tricks. Ladroncellesco, theeuish, pilfring. Ladrone, a great or old thiefe, a high way theefe. Ladroneccio, theft, larcenie, theeuing, stealing, filching, pilfring. Ladroneggiare, to plaie the theefe, to steale. Lagana, a kinde of chough in India. Lagagnosia, weakenes, sloth, faintnes, la∣zines, negligence, idlenes, lithernes. Lagare, as Allagare. Lagari, a kinde of birde. Lagaro, the part of the body from the sto∣macke to the nauell. Laghetto, a little lake, pond, or poole. Laggio, the aloye or losse of money by ex∣change, coyning or banke. Lagiono, as Lambena. Lagna, sorrow, trouble, griefe, vexation,
wailing, moning, complaining. Lagnare, to waile, to lament, to bemone, to complaine. Lago, a lake, a meare, a poole, a fen, a mar∣rish, a deepe place alwaies full of waters. a kinde of fowle that alwaies loues storms and foule weather. Lagopo, the herbe haresfoote. Some take it for trinitie grasse or trinitie herbe. Lagotalmo, a disease in the eies, when as the vpper eielid doth not mooue downe∣warde. Laguna, as Lacuna. Lagunoso, as Lacunoso. Lagrima, as Lacrima. Lagrimabile, Lagrimeuole, as Lacri∣moso. Lagrimare, as Lacrimare. Lagrimoso, as Lacrimoso. Lagrimatione, a weeping, a moaning, a distilling or shedding of teares. Lagrimetta, a little teare, distilling or drop. Laguardia, a kinde of cheeke of a horses bit, so called by Grison. Lai, laies, wailings, lamentations, moanes, complaints. Laia, sea grasse, ducke weed or reeke. Laico, a layman, a temporall man, a secu∣lar man. Also popular or vulgar. Laidezza, filthines, foulenes, deformitie, ilfauourednes. Laido, filthie, foule, deformed, ilfauou∣red. Lainéro, a kind of hauke called a lanard or a lanaret. Laiuólo, the place where fishers stand to draw their nets to shore. Laldetta, a song of praise, a thankes∣giuing song. L'althrieri, the other daie, the day before yeasterday. Lama, a blade of any sworde, any thin plate of iron to make armour with, any wedge or sowe or thin plate of mettall. Also a laund, a downe or plaine. Also a standing water, poole or puddle or deepe ditch with little water in it. Also a gad of steele. Lambena, a fish which changeth his co∣lour: for all the yeere she is white, and in the spring time speckled. Lambicare, to distill, to limbecke. Lambicatore, a distiller of waters. Lambichi, stillatories or stils. Lambire, bisco, bito, to licke or lap with the toong, to touch softly, to flowe, to glide or slide softly. Lambrace, a fish which hauing swallo∣wed the hooke, doth so much shake him∣selfe that he castes it out againe. Lambrusca, Lambrasca, wilde, desert, sauage, rurall. Also a kinde of sowre wine. Lambruscare, to prune, to crop or trim the vines. Lamella, a thin plate of mettall. Lamentanza, as Lamentatione. Lamentabile, as Lamenteuole. Lamentare, to lament, to complaine, to be∣waile, to waiment, to weepe or mourne for. Lamentatione, a lamentation, a com∣plaint, a bewailing, a wailing. Lamentatoria, wailing, plaining, lamen∣ting. Lamentéuole, lamentable, doleful, moan∣full, pitifull, wailefull, drerie, woofull, mournefull. Laménti, lamentings, bewailings, moa∣nings, complaints. Lamento, as Lamentatione. La mia passera è nel nido, a kinde of christmas game vsed in Italy, called my sparrow is in her neast. Lamia, a beast that hath a mans face and the feete like a horse. Also a sea-dog or dog-fish. Also a kind of fish that hath so great a iawe, and is so rauenous that it will deuoure an armed man. Also a witch, a sorceresse or a hag. Also women that were thought to haue such eies as they could put out and put in at their pleasure, or rather certaine diuels in a counterfeit shape, which with flatte∣rings allured faire yoong springals and boies, and taking vpon them the like∣nes and fashion of women were thought to deuoure them and bring them to de∣struction. Some thought them to be la∣dies of the fairies or such as make chil∣dren afraide, or such witches as sucke childrens blood to kill them. Also an arche, a vault or such hollow place. Vsed also for a whore or harlot or shamelesse woman. Lamina, any kinde of flat stone, plate or slate, wedge or sow or ingot of mettall, as a gad of steele, a thin plate of iron or any other mettall; namely such as they make tags for points. Also a gad of steele or iron, a shingle or slate. Lamio, dead or blind nettle, archangell. Lamiola, a kind of dog-fish. Lampada, Lampana, a lampe. Also a torche. Also a leame of fire or bright∣nesse. Lampante, bright, glistring, shining. Lampare, as Lampeggiare. Lamparo, a lamp-maker. Also the socket of a candlesticke. Lampasco, a disease in a horse called the lampase, it comes in the mouth. Lampazo, the weede we call a bur, a clot∣bur. Lampeggiante, lightning, flashing, sparc∣kling, blazing, flaring, twinckling. Lampeggiare, to lighten sodainely, to twinkle, to sparkle, to flash, to blaze. Lampere, certaine stars. Lampiro, a kind of lizard or euets. Lampo, a lightning, a flashing, a flash, a sparkling, a blaze. Lampreda, the fish called a lamprey or luckestone. Lampsana, an hearbe growing among corne. Lampuro, white taile or foxe. Lana, any kind of wooll. Lanaio, Lanaro, as Lanaiuolo. Lanaiuolo, a wooll-man, a wooll-wn∣der. Lanaria, cotton-weed, sullers hearbe, cud∣woort. Lanario, a lanard or lanaret hauke. Lance, a balance, or skale of a balance. Lancella, Lancetta, a lancet or fleame as surgeons vse to let blood with. Also a kind of measure. Lanci, as Lanzi. Lancia, a lance, a speare, a horsemans staffe or iauelin. Lanciare, to lance, to throw, to cast, to hurle, to darte, to fling, to pitch: vsed al∣so for Sbalestrare. Lanciar' il dardo, to cast a darte. Lanciar' il palo, to pitch the barre. Lanciaspezzata, as Lanciere. Lancíata, Lanciamento, a lancing, a throw, a cast, a hurle, a darting. Lanciatore, Lanciiuolo, a lance-man, a pike-man, a darter, a hurler, a thro∣wer. Lanciere, a souldier on horseback vsing a lance for his chiefe weapon, but not so heauily armed as is the man at armes, a lancier. Lancio, a throw, a cast or a darting. Also a skip, a hop, a leape, a friske. Lanciola, a kind of plantaine called rib∣wort. Lancione, a great lance, pike or speare. Landa, a laund, a downe, a plaine. Also a going. Landrica, the flower of virginitie. Lanefice, bearing wooll, woollie, a woll-man, a wooll-winder. Lanfa, a kinde of sweete water made of Orenges flowers. Langa, as Landa. Langanino, a kind of bird. Lange, a kind of fowle or bird. Langio, a disease in a horse about the
crupper. Langore, as Languore. Languénte, languishing, failing, fain∣ting, pining away, feeble, weake, faint or wearie. Languidezza, as Languore. Lánguido, languishing, faint, lingring, weake, tired, drooping, pining, feeble, wan, sicke, idle, lazie, lither, slow, de∣caied, as it were without spirit or life. Languire, guisco, guito, to languish, to linger, to droope, to faint, to pine, to be sicke or feeble, to be timorous, to de∣crease, to be afraide, to be idle or lither, to be as it were without life or spirit. Languito, languished, lingred, pined, drooped, fainted, &c. Languóre, languishment, languor, faint∣nes, drooping, pining, failing of strength, and naturall moisture, wearines, grief, paine, idlenes, lithernes, lacke of life and spirite. Languria, a kind of beast. Langurio, a languet of amber like to a bead stone. Laniare, to breake, to teare, to rent, to splinter in peeces. Laniatione, a renting, a tearing or brea∣king in peeces. Lanicio, clothing or the craft of making woollen clothes. Lanifero, bearing wooll, fruitfull in wooll. Lanificio, the arte, trade or dealing for wooll. Lanóso, woollie, full of wooll, thrummie, soft, full of nap. Lantana, the waifaring mans tree. Lanterna, a lanterne. Lanternare, to make lanternes, to dallie, to spend time idlie, to loyter, to play the foole, to seeke others and loose him∣selfe. Lanternaro, a lanterne maker, a loyte∣rer, an idle companion. Lanternetta, a little lanterne. Lanterniére, as Lanternaro. Lanugine, the soft and tender haires, downe, or mossines which first appeares in the visages of children and women. Also the soft wooll, cotton, or furre in fruites or hearbs, as in Clarie, the first downe feathers in yong birds. Lanuginoso, downie, soft, full of downe, mossie, full of soft cotton, couered with soft haire. Lanuto, as Lanoso. Also vsed for a sheepe. Lanza, as Lancia. Lanzare, as Lanciare. Lanzi, dutch men, because in dutch they are called lanceknights, muffs. Lanzinetti, idem. Lanzo, taken in mockerie for a high dutch man or lanceknight. Laonde, whereupon, whereby, whence. Lapida, any manner of stone. Lapidare, to stone, to beate, to kill or batter with stones. Also to raine stones. Lapidario, a lapidarie, a ieweller. Also a mason or digger of stones. Lapidatione, a stoning or hurling of stones. Lapidoso, stonie, full of stones, hard as a stone, grettie, grauellie. Lapiéna, the tide, the full sea, the full tide. Lapis lazuli, a kind of blue precious stone called an azull stone. Lapitudine de gli occhij, as Lippitu∣dine. Lappa, Lapa, a burre, a clotburre, a lap∣ping, or burre-dock. Lappagine, the herbe called maidens lips, shepheards rod, or teazill. Lappare, to lap as dogs do, to lop trees. Lappe, il culogli fa lappe, his taile makes buttons, his buttocks goes a twitter twater. Lappola, as Lappa. Lappolare, as Lappare. Lappolette, stubbles, chafs, little strawes, sticks or strawes. Lapso, a fall, a sliding, a gliding, a glance or flying. Lappolone, an importunat fellow, that will stick as close to one as a burre. Larantola, a kinde of sea-crab, or lob∣ster. Lardare, to larde, or enterlarde. Lardaruola, a lardrie, a larder, a lar∣ding pinne. Lardaruóli, chandlers. Also such as sell dride salt meates, as larde, bakon, sau∣ceges, neates-tongs, and poudred beefe. Lardatore, a larder, one that lardes meate. Lardegli, Lardelli, the pieces of larde, or larder that they put into rostemeate. Also a wittie, quipping, girding iest, skoffe, or tante. Also a kinde of fig so called. Lardiera, a lardrie, or lardnes. Lardiero, a larder. Lardoni, as Lardegli. Lardirone, Lardirolo, a Ferret, some take it for a Wezell. Larese, as Larice. Laresino, a kinde of fish. Largare, to enlarge, to make broade, wide or open, to open or make roome. Largheggiare di parole, to talke, to promise or speake more then is true or one meanes to performe, to speake vnad∣uisedlie. Larghezza, largenes, breadth, amplenes, widenes. Largiloquente, full of words, free and liberall of his tongue. Largire, gisco, gito, to giue or bestowe liberallie vpon one, to graunt, to per∣mit, to offer himselfe. Largità, Largitate, largesse, liberalitie, bountie, free guift, aboundance. Largitore, a liberall giuer, a prodigall spender. Largo, large, wide, open, ample, liberall, free, prodigall. Lari, the sides of an ouen. Larij dei, familiar spirits, household gods, good or euill angels. Larice, a tree called the larix tree, larch tree, or turpentine tree, which will not rot, nor no fier can consume. Larince, a bone in the head of man, by which we receiue and put forth breath, and also forme the voice. Laro, a waterfowle called a Sea-cob, or Sea-gull. Larua, a vizard or a maske, a vision, a night-ghost, a hag, a spirit, a bgob∣lin, a walking or appearing spirit. Lasagna, a kinde of thinne paste meate vsed in Italie. Lasagnera, a woman that makes or sels the saide kinde of meate. Lasca, limber, or thin wouen. Also a fish which some take for the roch. Some take it for a fish like our Seuerne Shad. Lascia, Lasciata, a lease of land, a le∣gacie, guift, or donation left to ano∣ther. Also a leash for dogs. Also a be∣queathing. Lasciarci del pelo, to pay well for any thing, to leaue some good thing be∣hinde. Lasciare, to leaue, to forgoe, to abandon, to forsake, to cast off, to let alone, to suf∣fer, to let, to lin, to permit, to slacken, to let loose. Also to let to lease, to farme also to leash as hunters do, to bequeathe. Lascita, Lasso, as Lascia. Lasciuia, lasciuiousnes, leacherie, wan∣tonnes, lust, vncleannes of life, ribau∣drous iesting or behauiour. Lasciuiare, to be or play the lasciuious or leacherous part in bodilie lust. Lasciuétto, somewhat lasciuious and wanton. Lasciuire, visco, vito, as Lasciuiare. Lascíuo, lasciuious, wanton, leacherous, lustfull with women, wanton in beha∣uiour, ranke, dishonest, womanish.
Lasciuólo, a kinde of night bird. Some take it to be the night bat. Lasene, stiffhaires, or hogs brissels, as they make head brushes with, and shomakers vse. Also the arme pits. Laserpitio, the hearbe Angelica, or mai∣sterwort, or fumitorie of Spaine. Lassana, a kinde of hearbe. Lassare, to be, to make, or grow wearie, faint, or tyred, to tyre. Also as Las∣ciare. Lassatiuo, laxatiue, loose. Lassero, the tree that brings Belgioino. Lassezza, faintnes, wearines. Lassito, as Lascia. Lasso, a lease, or letting of any land for terme of yeares. Also wearie, tyred, faint, or weake. Also an interiection of lamentation alas, aye me, welladaie. Lassú, Lassuso, as Lasù. Lastra, a plate, a leafe, a wedge, a sowe, a gad of steele, or an ingot of any mettall, a slate, or any thin stone. Also balast for a ship. Also a lath of wood. Lastrare, to balast a ship, to slate a house, to couer with plates, to lath. Lastregare, to paue with stones. Also to slate or tyle a house. Lastregatore, a pauier, a tyler. Lastricare, as Lastregare. Lastricatore, as Lastregatore. Lastrico, paued. Also a pauement of stones. Lasú, Lasuso, aboue, there aboue, aboue yonder. Lata, a sowe, or plate, or gad of mettall. Latace, vide Herba Latace. Latarina, a fish, in latine Atherina. Latebra, darkenes, obscuritie, secrecie, a corner, a denne, a lurking hole, a couert for beasts, the forme of a haire. Latebroso, full of holes or corners to hide or lurke in. Laterale, collaterall, or of and pertaining to the side. Laterina, a fish called in latin Atherina. Laterino, a close stoole, a iakes, a priuie. Lati campi, broad wide fields. Latici, wide, large, broad, spacious. Laticlauo, a kinde of long robe or mantle which Emperours and Poets were woont to weare. Latifólio, that which hath broad leaues. Latína, the mizen saile of a ship. Also the Latine toong. Latinare, to speake, write, or compose la∣tine. Latinità, pertaining to the latin toong, la∣tinitie. Latinizzare, as Latinare. Latione, a bearing, an ordaining, a mar∣king, a giuing. Latino, the latine toong, latine: also cleere, bright, open, easie, broad, wide. Latitudine, latitude, breadth, broadnes, largenes, widenes. Lato, broade, ample, large, bigge, great, wide, spacious. Also a side. Latora, sides. Latore, a bringer, a bearer, a porter, a messenger. Latrare, to barke, to baie, to baule as a dog. Latrato, barked, or baide as a dogge, a barking or baying of a dogge. Latratore, a barker, a bauler, a houler, a railer, a detractor. Latria, the deuine seruice of God, dutie, homage, seruice or reuerence to God. Latrina, a iakes, a priuie, a close stoole. Latro, Latrone, as Ladro. Latroneccio, as Ladroneccio. Latroneggiare, as Ladroneggiare. Latrocinio, as Ladroneccio. Lattace, vide Herba Latace. Lattaccini, white meats, as milke, creame and cheese. Lattacino, a custarde, a flaune, an egge pie made of milke or creame. Lattaciuóli, doucets, custards, flawnes, egge-pies, or any thing made of creame or milke. Lattamento, any thing made of milke. Lattaiuola, as Lattaria. Lattaiuoli, any thing that suckes, or suck∣lings. Also the first teeth that any crea∣ture hath. Also such as sel milke, or that make white meates. Also custards, dou∣cets, flaunes or egge-pies. Lattante, giuing sucke or milke. Also yong and sucking. Lattare, to milke, to giue sucke or milke, to sucke milke. Lattaria, herbe Tithimale, spurge or milk∣weede. Also wartewoort. Also a deary house. Lattarini, any soft rowed fish. Also a kind of mackrell fish. Lattario, made of milke, or that bringeth foorth milke. Lattaruolo, one that sels milke, or is a dairie man. Lattaruola, a dairie mayde. Lattatirce, a nurce that giueth sucke. Also a drie nurce. Latte, milke, any kinde of milke, whitish. Lattemele, a kinde of clouted creame. Latte di pesce, the soft roe or spaune of fishes. Lattéo, of milke, milkie, milken. Also a milke white colour. Latte premulo, curded milke, curds. Latte rapreso, curded milke, curds. Latterone, the herbe sowthistle, or milke∣thistle. Latti, the small guts by which first the meate passeth out of the stomacke, some take them for two kernels vnder the canell bone, which in a man are slender, but thicker in beasts. Latticinio, any thing made of milke, as we say white meate. Also the sweete bread of a brest of veale. Latticino, a kinde of composition that glasse-makers vse to make glasse with. Lattisicio, Lattisiccio, with milke, anie thing milkish or made of milke, white-meate. Lattine, the scurffe or scalde growing on childrens heads. Lattoaro, Lattouario, an electuarie. Lattone, the mettal we cal laton or lattin Lattonaio, Lattonaro, a brasier. Lattoso, milkie, fat, full of milke. Lattuaro, Lattuario, an electuarie. Lattuca, Latuca, the sallet Lettuce. Lattucella, Latucella, a milke thistle. Lattuche, Latuche, the sallet herbe let∣tuce. Also ruffe-bands. Also chitter∣lings. Laua, a running gullet, streame, or gutter sodainly caused by raine. Also a wa∣shing place. Lauacéci, Lauacenci, as Lauaceti. Lauaceti, a vile base person, a dung far∣mer or such a drudge good onely to wash shitten rags or dish-cluts. Lauacciare, to wash, bedabble, or rense in the water. Lauaccio, dishwash, swines-draffe. Lauacro, a font, a lauer, an ewer. Lauagnotto, a kinde of ship or pinnace or such vessell. Lauana, as Lauanese, Lauanda, the herbe lauender. Lauandaia, Lauandara, a laundresse or washing woman. Lauamento, a washing or lauing. Lauanése, goates rue, or Italian fitch. Lauare, to washe, to laue, to bathe. Lauarone, a fish called in latin Atherina. Lauatoio, Lauatorio, a washing or la∣uing place, a wash house. Lauastracci, as Lauaceti. Lauatora, a washing or bucking tub. Lauatare, to dabbie, or paddle in the water. Lauatina, a washing, a rencing, a dab∣ling, a padling. Lauatione, a washing. Lauatrice, a washing woman or laun∣dresse. Lauatura, as Lauamento. Lauda, praise, commendations, laude,
thankesgiuing, a hymne, a song or psalme. also the hinder part of the head. Laudano, a kinde of sweete gum. Laudabile, laudable, commendable, praise worthie. Laudare, to praise, to laude, to commende. Laudatiua, commendatorie, praising, lau∣datorie. Laudatoria, as Laudatiua. Laude, praise, commendation, as Lauda. Laudentio, the fiftieth part of anie bar∣gaine. Laudési, schoole-masters or such as sing in churches songs of praises. Laué, where, there where, whereas. Laueggio, a kinde of seething pot made of one peece of thinne stone like a kettell. Laueggiaro, one that makes those kindes of pots. Lauello, a lauer in a barbers shop. Lauezzo, as Laueggio. Lauezzaro, as Laueggiaro. Lauorare, to worke, to labour, to trauell. Also to till, to manure, or husbande grounds. Lauorato, wrought, laboured, or traue∣led, manured, tilled, or husbanded. Lauoratore, a labourer, a worker, a workman, a husbandman, a plough∣man. Lauoratrice, a worke or labouring wo∣man. Lauoro, Lauorio, worke, labor or work∣manship. Lauoretti, prettie, fine, little works. Lauorieri, labourers or workmen. Lauréa corona, a crowne or wreath of bay or laurell. Laureare, to laureate or crowne with lau∣rell as poets be. Laureato, laureate, crowned with baie, a poet laureate. Lauréo, made of laurell or bay. Laureóla, the herbe perwinkle. Also the shrub lowrie or lawrell. Laurétto, a place where laurell trees grow. Láuro, Laurio, laurell or bayes. Lautezza, daintines, finenes, trimnes in bankets. Lautie, presents and gifts that the Ro∣mans sent to the Ambassadors of other realmes. Lauto wel-seasoned and trimmed, daintie, fine, wealthie, rich, costly, stately, neate, tricke, spruce. Lautrice, the wiues of two brethren. Lazoli, an azure or lazull stone: it is ble∣wish of colour. Lazza, as Lasca. Lazzare, as Lasciare. Lazzaretto, an hospitall for the poore diseased. Lazzarico, a fruit called in latine Hipo∣melis or Trigonium. Lazzarina, a kinde of scurffe, itche or tettera, leaprosie. Lazzarino, a lazare or one that hath the leprosie. Also a little hospitall or spittle. Lazzarito, a lazare or a leaper. Lazzeroso, a worme breeding in a horse: whereof there be eight kinds. Lazzaruoli, a kind of fruit in Italy. Lazzo, as Laccio. Also sowre, sharpe, tarte or wallowish in taste. Le, the sem. article plur. the, a pronoune of the Dat. and Accusat. cases, to hir, hir. Also of the Ablat. from hir. Leale, loyall, true, trustie, vpright, faith∣full, honest, righteous. Lealtà, loyaltie, faith, truth, vprightnes, integritie, faithfulnes. Leandro, as Rododafne. Leanza, Leana, as Lealtà. Leardo, dapple, flea-bitten, with red taw∣nie spots. Leate, Lealare, to make loyall. Lebarre, the places where the bit should rest in the horses mouth. Lebbra, the disease we call the leapre or leaprosie. Lebbraccia, as Lebbra. Lebbroso, one that is a leaper. Lecanomante, he that practiseth Leca∣nomantia. Lecanomantia, a kind of diuination by water in basons and fish shels. Lecca altari, a dissembling puritan. Leccafune, a halter-sacke, a knauish wag. a gallowse-clapper. Leccagine, lickrishnes, gluttonie, gor∣mandize or licking. Leccami, all manner of daintie meates. Also lappings or lickings. Leccardia, gluttonie, surfaiting, gurman∣dizing. Leccardo, Leccardone, a glutton, a fri∣and, a gurmand, a lickerish fellow, a gullie gut. Leccapiatti, a licke-dish, a scullion in a kitching, a slouen. Leccapignatte, a lick-pot, a drudge, a scullion in a kitching, a slouenly greasie fellow. Leccare, to licke, by a metaphore, to claw, to flatter. Leccatore, a licker. Also a flatterer. Leccatura, a licking. Also gluttonishnes, lickrishnes. Leccétto, Leccéto, a groue of holmes, a maze, a labirinth. Lecchetto, a baite, an allurement, a sweet intisement. Also a little pleasant rowle in the mouth of a bit. Lecchia, a kinde of fish like a tunnie that hath no scales. Some take it for a kind of dog fish. Some for a kinde of mackrell fish: and others for a fish like our Se∣uerne shad. Leccio, a tree much like an oake, and be∣reth acornes. Some call it a holme. Lecco. Is properly the maister or mistres at bowels or quoits, whereat all men cast or play. Also a glutton or a gullie gut. Leccone, a glutton, a gormand, a lickrish man. Leccornia, as Leccardia. Léce, it is lawfull, or it is seemely. Le cérnite, the trained or choice or llings of anie thing, and of men especially. Lecitare, to allow, to make lawfull. Lecito, lawfull, conuenient. Lecora, Lecoro, a bird called in latine, Liguris or Nucedula. Lédere, lédo, ledéi, or lesi, leduto, to of∣fend, to wrong, to misse or iniurie in word or deed. Leduto or leso, wronged, misused, offen∣ded in word or deed. Lega, a league, a confederacie, a truce, an agreement or condition. a french league, that is two english miles by lande and three by sea. The aloy, qualitie or worth of gold or siluer that is coyned, as we say sterling: the solder, to solder, vnite or combine mettals togither. Also a kinde of measure of corne so called in Italy. Legaccia, a bande, a garter, a fillet, a swathe, a rouler, a bandle, a binding. Legaccio, as Legaccia. Legaggio, a packet, a bundle or trusse of any thing. Also a bond or an obligation, a list, a checkroule or note in writing, a schedule or bil. also the hire that porters haue for making vp of packes of mar∣chandize. Also the binding of anie thing. Legale, lawfull, belonging to the lawe, or triable by law. Legame, Legamento, a ligament, a bin∣ding, a tying, any thing that bindeth, the ligatures or strings of the bodie, where∣with the ioints of bones & the gristles are compact & boūd togither: so that by euerie violent motion they cannot be loosed one from another. It is a substance white, hard, and voide of sence and hol∣lownes. Legare, to bind, to tie, to fasten togither, to solder or combine mettals. to leaue or bequeath by will and testament. to a∣grize or set ones teeth an edge. to binde,
tye, or nick a cast at dice. Also to set any pretious stone in a ring or iewell. Legar'i dadi, to tye, to binde or nick a cast at dice. Legato, bound, fastned, tide, soldred or combined mettals, left or bequeathed by will and testament, tyde, bound, or nickt a cast at dice, agrized or tyde ones teeth on edge. Also a lease or legacie or any thing left one by will and testament. Also a legate, a delegate, an embassa∣dor, a deputie, or substitute. Legatione, a legateship, an embassage, a message, or deputation. Legatorio, pertaining to legacies. Legazza, as Legaccia. Légge, a lawe, a statute, an ordinance, a decree, a rule, an order, a couenant or condition. Leggénda, a legend or writing. Leggendario, a legendarie, of or pertai∣ning to legends. Léggee, léggo, léssi, létto, to reade any booke or writing. Leggia, fleshie, fast, braunie, tough. Leggiadramente, gallantlie, wittilie, beawtifullie, finelie, prettilie, graci∣ouslie, seemelie, comelie, handsomlie. Leggiadria, gallantnes, wittie-handling, beawtifulnes, finenes, graciousnes, seem∣lines, comelines, handsomnes. Leggiadro, gallant, wittie, faire, comelie, gracious, handsome, seemelie, fine. Leggiéro, Leggero, light, nimble, easie, swift, fleete, speedie, light minded, mu∣table, wauering, vnconstant, fickle, vaine. Leggierézza, lightnes, nimblenes, swift∣nes, speedines, vnconstancie, mutabili∣tie, ficklenes. Leggíbile, legible, that may be read. Léggio, a deske or pulpit in a church or schoole to set bookes on. Leggislatore, a lawgiuer, or lawmaker. Leggista, a lawyer, or professor of the lawe. Leggitore, a reader. Leghe, leagues, confederacies, conspira∣cies, complots, practises, french miles or leagues. Legionario, a legionarie, a souldier per∣taining to a legion. Legione, a legion or squadron containing (as the Romaines were wont to haue them) sixe thousand footemen, and 730 horsemen. Legislatore, as Leggislatore. Legista, as Leggista. Legitimare, to make legitime, or lawfull, to legitimate. Legitimatione, a legitimation, or ma∣king lawfull. Legítimo, legitime, right borne, truly be∣gotten, lawfull, right, conuenient, meete, iust, according to law and order. Legnaio, Legnaro, a woodmonger, or dealer in timber or wood. Legnaiuolo, a carpenter or woodmonger. Also a ioyner. Legna, any kinde of firewood, or fewell. Legnaggio, lineage. Legname, all kinde of timber. Legnata, a blow giuen with a cudgell or any piece of wood. Legnato, a heape, or pile of wood or tim∣ber, a frame of wood. Also wane∣skotted. Legnetto, a little piece of wood, a little boate, barke, barge, whirrie, cockboate, skiffe, or any other little vessell. Legno, any kinde of wood, any kinde of ship. Also a kinde of musicall instru∣ment. Also vsed for the wood Guaiaco. Legnoso, wooddie, of wood, full of wood. Legoro, a hawkes lure. Also as Luga∣rino. Legramento, a kinde of blacking that coblers vse to black lether or old shoes with. Legumaro, one that sels all manner of pulse. Legume, any kinde of pulse, as peason and beanes. Legumoso, a ground bearing pulse, full of pulse. Leguro, a Newte, an Eft, or a Lizard. Also as Lugarino. Legustro, as Ligustro. Lei, she, hirselfe, hir. Lella, the hearbe Elicampane. Lellare, as Nicchiare. Lema, a humor congealed hurting the eye sight, matter like sniuell in sore eyes. Lemargia, gluttonie. Lemargo, a glutton. Lembire, bisco, bito, to cut and teare in pieces. Also to licke or lap, to touch softlie. Lembo, a purfle, a welt, a lace, a border, or gard about a long garment. Also a hem or skirt of a garment. Lemma, an argument, a reason. Lemone, the fruite we call a lymond. Also a lymond tree. Lemonino, a kinde of lymond colour. Also a little lymond. Lemósina, an almes or guift for deuotion or gods sake. Lemosinare, to beg or giue almes. Lemosinaro, an almes-giuer, one that liues by almes, an almoner. Lemosiniére, as Lemosinaro. Lemuri, the ghosts or spirits of such as dye before their time, or hobgoblings, black bugs, or nightwalking-spirits. Lena, breath, winde, breathing, force, toughnes, or strength of any creature. Léndene, Léndine, the little nits where∣of lice breede. Lendenóso, Lendinoso, nittie, full of nits, or louzie. Lenesini, the sweete-bread of a breast of veale. Lengua, Looke Lingua, with all the com∣pounds. Lenguaggio, as Linguaggio. Lenguattola, the flat long fish which we call a Sole. Lenguella, Lenguetta, as Linguella. Lenità, lenitie, meekenes, gētlenes, smooth∣nes, mildenes, facilitie. Lenitiuo, lenitiue, asswaging, appea∣sing. Lenice, a surgeons lancet or fleame to let bloud withall. Lennia, a kinde of easing or swaging oint∣ment, or medicament. Lenocinio, baudrie, leacherie, entice∣ment, allurement, blandishment. Lenone, a bawde that bringeth men and whores together, a marchant of whores. Lenonia, bawderie, letcherie. Lenosa, a kinde of plaister for a horse. Lensa, as Lenza. Lentare, to slow, to slacke, to relent, to stay, to linger, to loyter. Lente, a kinde of pulse, called lintle or lentill. Also a nit, or a chit. Lentezza, slownes, slacknes, softnes, lin∣gering. Lentecchia, Lenticchia, as Lente. Lenticolaria, ducksmeate, or fenne lin∣tell. Lenti di paludi, ducks meate, ducks weede or herbe. Lentígine, a speck, a freckle or pimple in a mans face, red or wanne like a lintle. Lentiginóso, full of freckles, spots, or specks or pimples. Lentima, a kinde of sack-cloth so called. Lentisco, a wood called prickwood, or foule rice, whereof they make toothpicks in Italie. Some call it the lentiske or mastike tree. Lento, slow, soft, lazie, late, idle, drousie, milde, meeke, negligent, lither. Lenza, fine linnen cloth, as lawne or cam∣bricke. Also a longing to laugh when one dares not, but stops his breath to keepe it in. Lenzare, to binde, to hoodwinke, to roule about with a skarfe.
Lenzuolo, a sheete for a bed. Leocorno, as Lioncorno. Leofante, Leonfante, a famous beast called an elephant. Leona, Leonza, Leonessa, a liones or of the nature of ashe lyon. Leonato, the colour of a lyon, or tawnie. Leoncino, a lyons whelpe. Leone, a lyon, a fish called a lobster fish. Leoneggiare, to be furious or plaie the lyon. Leonesco, lyonish, of a lyons nature. Leonessa, a shee lyon. Leonina, an herbe whose flowers are like a lyons mouth when he gapeth. Leonpardo, a leopard. Leontofano, a little woorme breeding where lyons do, which if the lyon eate he dieth. Leontopetalon, the herbe called Pat a de lion or lion foote. Leontopodio, the herbe lyon foote, or Pied de lion. Leontio, a kinde of precious stone like a lyons skin. Leonza gattesca, an ounce, or cat of mountaine. Leopardo, a leopard. Lepe, the belly, panch, or wombe of man. Lepidio, a kind of herbe which some take for Dittander. Lepido, pleasant, blithe, cheerefull, merry, gamesome, neate, prettie. Lepidote, a kinde of precious stone like the skale of a fish. Leporaccio, the name of a weede. Leporario, a kinde of kite or rauenous birde. Lépore, a bucke of a hare. Lepóre, pleasantnes and grace of speech, comelines and pleasant grace. Leporina, Lepporina, a leueret or yoong hare. Also a kinde of herbe. Leporini, a kinde of disease in the eye∣browes of a man. Leporino, a leueret, a yoong hare. Also a hare. Leppo, bleere eid, spur-blind, sandblinde. Also a fish that is poison to man, and man to him. Lepra, a shee hare, a doe hare. Lepre, a hee hare, a bucke hare. Also a fish that is poyson to man, and man to him. Lepretino, a leuret or yoong hare. Leprosia, a sicknes called the leaprie or le∣prosie. Leproso, sicke or full of the leprosie, a le∣prie. Lepto, a greeke little waight, about a mi∣nute. Lepusculo, a leuret. Lequila, a birde called a siskin. Lerce, as Lerze. Lerco, a glutton, a gurmond, an epicure. Lercola, or Lergola, a bird called a bun∣ting. Lerlichirollo, a birde called a blackmacke or merle. Lerna, a water serpent. Lerze, the blew or blacke wales or marke of a blowe or stripe. Some haue taken this word to signifie legs or shanks. Lesa magestatis, offence against the kings maiestie. Lescia, as Liscia, or as Lessa. Lesciare, as Lisciare, or Lessare. Lesegno, a bale or bundle of flaxe. Also a distaffe full. Lesina, a shooe-makers ende or awle. Lesióne, a hurting, a harming, an annoy∣ing, a hurt or dommage. Also losse, hin∣derance, offence, or wrong. Léso, hurt wrongd, iniuried, offended, en∣dommaged, wounded, violated. Lessare, to boile or seeth meate. Lesso, boiled or sodden, all maner of boiled meate. Lesto, nimble, quicke, slie, liuely, full of a∣gility, quick-sighted, wimble & wight. Letale, moornefull, deadly, obliuious. Letamare, to mucke and dung ground. Letamáio, Letamaro, a mucker or dun∣ger: Also a muckhill, a dunghill. Letáme, mucke, dung, dure. Letania, a letanie sung or saide in chur∣ches. Letargia, Lethargia, Letargo, a letargie or the drowzie ill, a disease contrarie to frantikenes, wherein is leannes and a necessitie of sleeping in a manner not to be resisted, whereby memorie and rea∣son almost perisheth, and the power sen∣sitiue is greatly annoyed. Letargico, drowzie, dull, heauie, sleepie, sicke of the drowzie euill. Letargio, Lethargirio, lythargie or the fome or drosse of melted leade or siluer. Lethale, mortall, deadly, pestilent, obli∣uious. Lethe, mortalitie, death, pestilence, obli∣uion. Letitia, gladnes, ioy, mirth, or blithenes, pleasure, delight, reioicing of the minde. Letitíare, to glad, to ioie, to make merrie or blithe, to reioice, to delight. Letificare, to glad or reioice. Letificatione, gladding or reioicing. Letregani, a kind of fish. Letroso, froward, tedious, peeuish, fonde, skittish, akeward. Letta, a fish called a mullet. Léttera, Lettra, a letter or a character, an epistle or a missiue, or a letter missiue. Also taken for learning, knowledge, good letters, or any writing or euidence. Letterare, to endoctrine, to teach, to in∣struct in learning. Letterato, endoctrined, taught, instructed in learning, learned, literated, possessing letters. Letterale, literall, according to learning. Letteratura, literature, learning, know∣ledge in letters, lore, cunning. Léttera di procura, a letter of atturney. Léttere di credenza, a letter of trust or fauour or credit. Léttere di scatola, such great letters as Apothecaries haue vpon their boxes. Lettérina, a little letter, scrole, writing, bill or epistle, a little letter of the crisse-crosse rowe. Lettica, Lettiga, a litter, a horse litter. Letticaio, Lettigaro, a maker or keeper of horse-litters. Letticello, Letticciuolo, a little bed or couch. Lettione, a lesson, a lere or lecture, a rea∣ding, an exercise of reading. Lettiera, a bedstead, a couch. Létto, the participle of Leggere, read any letters. Also a bed, a couch or pallet. Al∣so the bottome or bed of any riuer. Létto da giardino, a square or bed in a garden. Lettoaro, Lettouario, an electuarie. Lettóre, a reader. Lettuccio, a little bed, a little couch, a pallet on the ground. Lettura, a lecture, a lesson, a reading. Leua, as Lieua. Leuame, leauen for bread. Also solace, comfort or consolation. Leuamento, a raising, a rising, a heauing or rearing vp, an aduancement. Also a remoouing or taking away. Also lea∣uen for bread. Leuante, the east winde, the cuntrey lying toward or in the east. Also a limlifter, a shifter, an vptaker, a pilfrer, a bold b∣yard, one that hath learnt his taking vp. Leuantiere, an easterly winde. Leuantino, a lifter, a shifter, a limlifter, a pilferer, an vptaker, a bould bayard. Also one borne in the east countries, an easterlin. Leua macchie, one that takes out spots. Leuare, to take away, to remooue, to set away, to raise, to rise, to lift vp, to hoiste vp, to heaue, to reare, to aduance, to set vp, to preferre, to eleuate, to leuie, to de∣liuer a woman of childe or bring hir a bed, to drawe a draw bridge, to leauen bread, to abate, to diminish, to asswage,
to mitigate, to make easie or light, to vnburthen, to ease, to lighten. Leuato, taken away, remooued, set away, raised, risen, lift vp, hoisted vp, heaued, reared, aduanced, set vp, preferred, lea∣uied, deliuered or brought a woman a bed. Also leauen for bread, abated, de∣minished, made easie or light, vnbur∣thened, lightned, eased. Leuata, deliuered a woman of childe or brought a woman a bed, a rising, a hea∣uing or rearing vp, a leauie. Also a kind of march sounded vpon drum and trumpet in time of war. Leuata, huomo di poca leuata, a man of no worth, scarce worth the taking vp. Leuar le carte, to cut the cards before one deale. Leuar li panni della scena, a prouerbe, to manifest or make apparant some secret. Leuare la beretta, il capello, to put off ones cap or hat. Leuare il pane, to leauen the bread, to make the bread rise. Leuatelli, a kind of daintie pies or chewets or other paste meat. Leuatoio, a leauer. Also that may be drawen or lifted vp. Also a drawing bridge or trap-bridge. Leuatore, a leauer, a raiser, a riser, an ad∣uancer, a remouer, &c. Leuatura, a rising, a raising vp, a lifting, a heauing, an vprising, a deliuerie or bringing a woman a bed, a prefermēt or aduancing, worth the taking vp or stoo∣ping for, as Huomo di poca leua∣tura. Leuatrice, a midwife, a nurce or womans keeper. Leuca, a measure of ground containing fiftie paces. Also a kind of herbe. Leucacantha, saint Marie thistle. Leucacathe, a kinde of white precious stone. Leucatheme, the herbe cammomill. Leucisco, a kinde of mugle or lamp fish. Some take it for a fresh water mullet. Leuci, a kind of measure among the Gre∣cians, a white poplar tree, an herbe like Mercurie. Also a fowle spottines in the bodie like morphew. Leucoio, a flowre called a stocke gillo-flower. Leucopetra, Leucogagea, Leucogra∣fia, as Galatide. Leucoma, the web in the eie. Leucoplemmantia, a kinde of dropsie ri∣sing of fleame in all parts of the bodie, and makes all the bodie to swell. Leucrocuta, a beast that hath all his teeth of one piece, as big as an asse, with neck, taile and breast like a lyon, and head like a cammell, and counterfeits the voice of a man. Leuce, as Leggiero. Leuero, a leauer as carpenters vse to heaue timber with. Leuertigi, the weede or leaues, we call hops to brue withall. Leuistico, that wood or bush we call pri∣uet. Also a lisander or louage. Leuità, lightnes, leuitie, vnconstancie, mu∣tabilitie, nimblenes, smoothnes or poli∣shing. Leuitare, to lift, to reare, to raise vp, to heaue, to make light, to leauen bread. Also to smooth or polish. Leuitistico, a kinde of herbe growing in fennie places. Leuito, leauen for bread. Leurera, Leuriera, a bitch grayhound or harier, a hunt hare. Leuorocuta, as Leucrocuta. Leurero, Leuriero, a dog grayhound, a harier, a hunt-hare. Leure, a hare. Leuti, certaine hand-barrowes to carrie corne with. Leuto, a lute. Lezza, a dead standing water, a puddle, a mire, a durtie bog. Lezzo, a rammish, goatish, leacherous, sweatish stinke. Lezzoso, rammish, goatish, stinking of goates, of sweate or fih. Li, an article of the masculine gender and plural number, the. also a pronoune, him, to him, them, to them. Also an Aduerbe of place, there, thither, in that place. Liardo, a horse marked with red or tan∣nie spots or sleabitings. Liardo argento, a white liard like siluer. Liardo rotato, a dappled graie. Liardo pomato, a dapple graie. Liatico, a kind of wine so called. Libamenti, whatsoeuer was tasted by the priests in old sacrifices. Libano, the frankincense tree. Libanoto, the northeast wind. Libare, to taste, to assaie, to cull out or to offer in sacrifice. Also to sacri∣fice. Libarda, a halbard or such glaue. Libatione, a sacrifice offered. Also a ta∣sting in offering. Libéccio, the northeast winde. Libéllo, a libell, a pasquine, a defaming libell, a little booke, a manuall booke. Also a declaration of a mans plea or processe. Libellatore, a libellor, a maker of libels. Liberale, liberall, francke, free in giuing, free harted, full of largesse, bountifull. Liberalità, liberalitie, franknes, bountie. Liberalona, alla liberalona, after the plaine, homely or dunstable way, after the free harted fashion. Liberare, to free, to enfranchise, to deliuer, to quit, to set free, to release, to rid out off. Liberatione, a freedome, an enfranchis∣ment, a deliuerie, an acquittance. Liberatore, a freer, an enfranchiser, a de∣liuerer. Libero, free, enfranchised, open, quit, dis∣charged, at libertie, not bound, not sub∣iect. Libertà, freedome, libertie, free choice. Libertino, a libertine, a freeman, one that is manumissed or one that is borne of him that was once bound & is now free. Libérto, a libertine, a freedman, one that of bonde is made free, a late seruant or bondman. Libídine, leacherie, lust, pleasure, luxurie, desire, sensualitie, vnlawfull appetite, wanton lust of bodie, concupiscence. Libidinóso, leacherous, lustfull, giuen to pleasure, desirous, incontinent, baudie, fleshly, giuen to the lust of the bodie. Libito, will, pleasure, selfe-will. Libra, Libbra, a pound waight. Also a signe in heauen. Librare, to houer, to soare in the aire, to poise, to weigh. Libraria, a librarie. Libraro, Libraio, a stationer▪ also a book∣binder. Libreria, as Libraria. Libricciuolo, Libretto, a little booke. Libro, a booke. Liburnica, a kind of light and swift foist, pinnace or ship that pirats were woont to haue. Libso, the southwest winde. Lica, the span from the thumbs end to the forefingers end stretched out. Licano, the forefinger string. Licantrofia, a kind of frenzie or madnes, wherewith some being haunted do for∣sake the companie of men, & hide them∣selues in caues and holes, howling like wolfes. Licaone, a kind of wild beast of all colours in the raine bow. Lice, it is lawfull or conuenient, it is per∣mitted. Licentia, Licenza, licence, leaue, suffe∣rance, permission, libertie, wantonnes, boldnes, vnrulines, licence to do as one will. Licentiare, to giue license or leaue, to per∣mit,
to license. Licentiato, licensed, permitted, giuen leaue, admitted. Also a licensed man or batcheler of diuinitie or lawe. Licentioso, licentious, luxurious, sensual, wanton, giuen to pleasures, ouerbold. Lichena, the herbe liuerwort. Lichinco, a kind of sparkling stone which rubbed drawes stickes vnto it. Licchetto, liquorishnes. Also a liquorish fellow. Also alluring. Also a baite for fish. Licchetto del mele, a honie pot, a honie-combe. Lichnide, an herbe which if scorpions eate they lose their sences. Licci, as Lici. Licciatura, the ends or weauing threads of a web. Lici, hurdes of flaxe or hempe. Also there or in that place. Also the ends, the thrum or threads of a seluage, or weauing threads at the end of a web of cloth. Licinia, the base or slat varuen. Also a kinde of oliues. Licio, boxe thorne or thorne boxe. Licischo, a dog ingendred of a woulfe and a dog. Licitare, as Lecitare. Licito, as Lecito. Licofo, cleare light or the first appearing of day light. Liconobio, he that in stead of the day vseth the night, one that turnes day in∣to night. Licontopia, a kinde of disease or passion in the braine. Licopo, the herbe motherwoort. Licopodio, a kind of mosse called woulfes clawe. Licopside, garden buglosse. Some take it for hounds toong. Licoptalmo, a stone of fower colours. Licore, liquor or moistnes. Licorno, as Lioncorno. Licostaphilo, water elder or dwarfe plane tree. Licostomo, a kind of long fish. Licotono, a kinde of poison that hunters vse to kill woulfes. Licuide, a kinde of hearbe bearing a fine flower. Lidio, a kinde of mournefull solemne mu∣sicke. Also a touchstone to trie gold and siluer. Lido, a banke, a side, a coast, or shoare or strond of the sea, or of a riuer. Liduna, the ebbing of the sea. Lientéria, a kind of fluxe of the stomacke and bellie, which can keepe nothing therein, but presently voideth the same vndigested. Lientérico, one sicke of the flux of the stomacke. Liepre, a hare, as Lepre. Liesena, as Lesena. Lióto, glad, merrie, ioyfull, pleasant, glee, buckesome, ioyous, frollike, luckie, for∣tunate, battle, fruitefull, cheerefull. Lieua, a bender to bend a crossebow with, a racke, a gaffel. Also a leauer, an iron crow or such to lift vp any thing with. Lieuame, as Leuame. Lieuare, as Leuare. Lieuato, as Leuato. Lieuata, as Leuata. Lieuatoio, as Leuatoio. Lieuatore, as Leuatore. Lieuatrice, as Leuatrice. Liéue, light, smooth, plaine, polished. Also slipperie. Also wanton, effeminate, or vaine. Lieuero, as Leuame. Lieuitare, to leauen paste, or to make it to rise. Lieuito, leauen for bread. Lieuo, as Leua. Lieuito, as Leuame. Lisiasi, a kinde of disease about a mans eyes. Liga, as Lega. Ligaccio, as Legaccio. Ligame, as Legame. Ligamento, as Legamento. Ligare, as Legare. Ligato, as Legato. Ligatura, as Legatura. Ligidino, a kinde of marble stone to build withall. Ligio, a liegeman, subiect, or vassall. Ligname, as Legname. Lignaiuolo, as Legnaiuolo. Lignite, a kinde of precious stone of the colour of glasse. Lignola, a marke, line, or streake with red oker. Lignolare, to marke with red oker, as car∣penters do their timber. Ligoritia, the sweete wood we call lico∣rice. Ligula, a measure vsed in Greece, contai∣ning three drammes and a scruple. Also a lace or point. Also a shoelatchet. Also a little slice or scummer. Also a lingel, a little tongue, a tenon, a spoone or ladle that apothecaries vse. Also a hosegarter or any binding. Ligurino, a canarie bird. Ligurio, a precious stone that slancheth the bloodie flix, and drawes strawe vnto it. Liguro, an eft, a lizard, a nute or aske. Ligustico, Lombardie louage. Ligustro, the priuet or prime print tree vsed in gardens for hedges. Also a kind of white floure. Lima, a file to file withall. Lima sorda, a deafe file, the noise where∣of can not be hard, theeues vse them. Limaca, Limaga, as Lumaca. Limaccioso, muddie, durtie, boggie, mirie, slimie. Limare, to file, to fret, to gnaw, to polish, to trim, to amend, to correct. Limaria, a fish called a tunie. Limaro, a filer or maker of files. Limato, filed, fretted, gnawne. Also po∣lished, neate, pure, elegant, curious, a∣mended, corrected. Limatore, a filer. Limatura, filing dust, or filing that com∣meth of filing. Limbello, Looke Cauare fuori il lim∣bello. Limbellerto, a carpenters toole. Limbico, a limbeke or still. Limbo, as Lembo. Also it is vsed for hell. Liméa, an herbe wherewith hunters poy∣son their arrowes. Limfe, prettie fresh-siluer-streaming springs, or waters. Limiero, a hound, properly a limehound, or bloodhound. Liminale, the trestle, or first step of the dore, the haunse of a dore. Also a fron∣tire, or an entrie. Limitale, as Liminale. Also a meare-stone, or marke or bound or limit. Limitario, a beame or trauerse, that is layd ouer a doore. Also a mantle ouer a chimnye. Also a haunse of a dore, a frontire or an entrie. Limitare, to limite, to bound, to prescribe, to stint. Also a limit, a bound, or a stint. Limitatione, Limitanza, a limitation, a bound, a stint. Limito, Limite, a limite, bound, prescrip∣tion, marke or meare-stone, a stint, a frontire, a border, a land marke, a bound or butting in fields. Limo, durt, mire, mud, bog, puddle, slime, clay in water. Limone, a limon. Also a limon tree. Limoncéllo, a little limon, or limon tree. Limonia, the hearbe anemone. Limoniato, a precious stone called Sma∣ragdus. Limoncino, a kinde of limon colour. Limonéa, a kinde of sauce made of li∣mons. Limonino, as Lemonino.
Limonio, the hearbe wintergreene, or wilde beetes. Limosa, a kinde of moore hen. Limosina, as Lemosina. Limosinare, to giue almes. Also to beg almes. Limosinaro, as Lemosiniere. Limosiniére, as Lemosiniere. Limóso, durtie, mirie, muddie, boggie, slimie, full of slime or mud. Limpidezza, cleerenes, brightnes, tran∣sparancie. Limpido, cleere, bright, transparent, through shining, sheene. Limula, a little file. Linaccio, course flaxe. Also canuas, or holland cloth. Linaloè, the aloes tree, a wood that is very bitter. Linaria, a bird called a Lenet, or a lack∣backer. Linaruola, a flaxe woman. Linaruolo, a flaxe man. Lince, a beast like vnto a woolfe, hauing manie spots, exceeding quick of sight, called a los or linx. Lince, as Lupo Ceruiero. Also a losse, or a linx. Linci, thence, from thence. Lincuro, a stone which is congealed of the vrine or water of a luzard, which drawes iron, leaues, and straw to it. Linéa, any kind of line, streake, or draught in generall, a carpenters line, a sounding plummet, an angling or fish line, a de∣gree of kindred. Also among mathema∣ticians, a length without breadth or thicknes. Linéa abba, the line or hollow tying from the nauell, the white line, the vmbeli∣call veine. Lineale, lineall, successiue. Lineamenti, lineaments, features, formes, proportions, draughts or shapes of a bo∣die or visage drawne out. Also streekes, lines, or draughts in painting or geo∣metrie. Lineare, to draw lines, to line, to streake, to drawe the figure of any thing in lines. Linfe, all maner of fresh fine siluer strea∣ming springs or waters. Linfico, a kinde of precious stone. Lingua, a toong. Also language or speech. Also an instrument to take salues out of a boxe. Also a narrow piece of land or long ridge running into the sea like a tongue blearing out of the mouth. Also a kinde of herbe good against the falling of the haire. Linguaccia, herbe adders tongue. Lingua bouina, the herbe buglosse or oxe, tongue, lang de beuf. Linguace, as Linguacciuto. Linguacciuto, a tell-tale, a pratler, a railer, tatler, or a blab. Lingua ceruina, the herbe harts tongue. Lingua di cauallo, horse tongue, tongue blade, or double tongue. Lingua d'agnello, lambs grasse, or sheepes grasse. Lingua pagana, as Lingua di cauallo. Lingua di bue, the herbe buglosse, or lang de beuf. Lingua di cane, hounds grasse, or dogs grasse. Lingua di ceruo, the herbe harts tongue. Lingua serpentina, the herbe adders or serpents tongue. Linguaggio, a language, or speech, or tongue. Linguélla, Linguetta, a little tongue of any thing. Also as Vgola, the little tongue of a paire of balances. Also the tongues of a rauens quill vsed in vir∣ginals, &c. Linguatta, Linguattola, as Lenguat∣tola. Lini, linnen. Also sheetes. Liniamenti, as Lineamenti. Linimento, a kinde of ointment. Also an annointing. Lino, line, flaxe or linnen. Also all kinde of stuffe fit for weauing, or any yarne that is spunne, whether it be hemp or flaxe. Linosa, a stopple of flax or tow, or a hand∣full of flax. Linoso, full of flaxe, flaxie. Linostrofo, the herbe horehound. Linozoste, the herbe mercurie. Linterna, as Lanterna. Linternaro, as Lanternaro. Linzuolo, any kinde of sheete for a bed. Liona, Lionessa, as Leonessa. Lionato, as Leonato. Lioncino, as Leoncino. Lioncorno, an Vnicorne. Also vnicornes horne. Lione, a Lyon, whose neck is of one bone alone. Lioneggiare, as Leoneggiare. Lionpardo, a Leopard. Lipare, Liparia, a stone which hath the propertie to draw all wilde beasts vn∣to it. Lipiria febbre, a hote ague or feauer, but outwardlie very cold. Liposichia, a swouning when one see∣meth to be dead. Lippa, a trap or cat, such as children play at. Lippare, Lipare, to crye or pule like a kite. Lippitudine, a blearednes, rednes, or run∣ning of sore eyes. Some call it a bleare-eyednes, or bloudshot of the eyes. Lippo, bleare-eyde, whose eyes are wa∣trish, and runne matter. Also properlie sandblinde, poreblinde, or dimme of sight, as Leppo. Liptota, a figure, when as the force of words is not answerable to the matter. Lippoftalmia, an inflammation through sharp humors in the eyes which makes them almost blinde. Liquabile, moist, liquid, full of liquor. Also which may melt. Liquefare, Liquefaccio, Liquefeci, Li∣quefatto, to thawe, to moisten, to melt, to make liquid, to dissolue. Liquefatto, thawed, moistned, made li∣quid, melted, dissolued. Liquefattione, a thawe, a thawing, a moistning, a making liquid, a melting. Liqueritia, the sweete wood liquorish. Liquidambro, liquid amber. Liquidare, as Liquefare. Also to make vp an euen reckoning. Liquidità, moistnes, softnes, waterishnes, humorousnes, dampishnes. Liquido, liquid, moist, wet, dampish, soft, melted, pure, dissolued. Liquiritia, the wood called liquorish. Liquore, any kinde of liquor. Lira, an instrument of musicke called a lyre or a harp. Also a pound sterlin. Al∣so a kinde of coine. Also as Solco. Also a kinde of measure of liquid things. Lirare, as Solcare. Lirico, a kinde of verse or song made to the harpe. Lisaro, a kinde of narrow cotton cloth. Lischa, Lische, the finnes or bones of fi∣shes. Liscezza, smoothnes, or softnes in feeling. Liscia, as Lisciua, all manner of lie. Lisciare, to wash in lie or in a bucke, to buck, to slide, glide, or slip vpon ice, to smooth or slecke, to polish or painte, as women do their faces, to flatter, to cog, to clawe, or to stroke smoothly. Lisciato, washt in lie, or buckt, slided, gli∣ded, or slipt as vpon ice, smoothed, slic∣ked, polished or painted as women do their faces, flattred, clawed, or cogged withall, stroked smoothly. Lisciamento, a smoothing, a polishing, a sliding, a gliding, a slipping, a painting of faces, a flattring, a clawing, a smooth stroking, a washing in lie. Lisciatrice, a woman that paints hirselfe or others.
Liscio, a kind of painting that women vse for their faces. Also as Lisciato. Lisciolare, to slide, slip, or glide vpon ice. Lisegna, a handfull of flaxe or hempe, a locke or tuffe of wooll. Lisimachia, willow herbe, loosestrife, or water willowe: if a horse eate of it, it makes him verie faint. Lisina, as Lesina. Lisciua, Lissiua, such lie as they wash bucks with. Lista, a list or seluage of any cloth, a list where tilting or turneaments are vsed, a role, a checkrol, or catalogue of names, an inuentorie. Listare, to liste or seluedge about, to welt or garde about. Also to lace. Listoso, full of listes or seluedges. Listra, as Lista. Litame, as Letame. Litamare, as Letamare. Litamaro, as Letamaro. Litargia, as Letargia. Litargirio, Litargo, as Letargirio. Lite, strife, contention, variance, contro∣uersie, debate, or arring. Also a sute, a plea, a processe, or pleading in law. Literale, literall, according to the letter. Literario, of or pertaining to learning or letters. Literatura, grammer, learning, lore, lite∣rature, cunning. Litergirio, as Letargirio. Lithiasi, the disease of a stone ingendred in mans body. Also a little white and hard push or swelling, growing vpon the eye∣lids. Lithoide, the bone in the temples which in the vpper part towardes the Sagittall Suture is equallie circumscribed with the skalie agglutinations, but behinde with the parts or additions of the Su∣ture Labdoides. Litica, Litiga, a litter, a horse litter to ca∣rie sicke folkes in. Litigante, a litigious, suing, contending or troublesome man, a wrangler. Litigantia, as Lite or Litigio. Litigare, to plead, to sue, to debate, to con∣tend or go to law, to wrangle, to varie, to striue. Litigatione, as Lite or Litigio. Litigatore, as Litigante. Litigio, Litigo, a plea, a pleading, a sute or controuersie in lawe, debate, vari∣ance, contention. Litigioso, Litigoso, litigious, debatefull, contentious, full of strife and wrang∣ling. Lito, as Lido, Lidi. Litohospermo, as Dispiron. Litora, shores, bankes, sides or strondes of the sea, or of a riuer. Litorale, of the sea side or sea shore, shore bordring. Litospermo, some take it for grummell or graie mile, and some for stone crop. Litotóma, a chirurgion that cutteth out the stone in the bladder. Lítra, a worme in a dogs toong, which ma∣keth him mad if it be not taken out. Littori, sergeants or such like ministers to execute corporall punishment among the Romanes. Lituo, a crooked staffe that augures vsed in diuination to point the quarters of the firmament. Also a crosier or bishops staffe. Also a kinde of crooked horne or trumpet. Liuellamento, a swinging or hurling, a sounding or fadoming. Also a leuilling or aiming, a houering or soaring. Liuellare, to leuell, to aime at, to houer, to soare, to swing, to caste, to sounde, or fadome the sea. Liuello, leuell, smooth, plaine. Also a ru∣ler or squire to leuell any thing by. Liueranza, deliuerance. Liuerare, to deliuer. Liuero, deliuered, free. Liuidare, to enuie, to malice, to spite, to bruse blacke and blew, to fester. Liuidézza, enuie, malice, rancor, spite, a festring, a deadly blewish bruzed co∣lour, ghastlines, palenes, the print or marke of any stripe or beating. Liuidità, as Liuidezza. Liuido, swollen, festred, rankled, blacke and blew, wanne, bruzed, of a leaden, ghastlie, & dead colour, enuious, spite∣full, malicious, backbiting, detracting. Liuidori, a kinde of ringworme or tetter. Liuore, Liuidore, as Liuidezza. Liurare, to deliuer. Liurea, a liuerie garment, or sutable sute. Liureare, to giue or go, or put into liueries, to iet it idlie gazing vp and downe. Liuto, Liutto, an instrument called a lute. Liutiére, one that plaieth vpon a lute. Lizza, as Lista. Also a combating or til∣ting place. Lo, an article masculine of the singular number vsed before vowels, the: a pro∣noune when it is ioyned with a verbe, it, the same, that, or him. Lobrico, as Lubrico. Lobricità, as Lubricità. Locale, locall, of or pertaining to a place, as Memoria locale, locall or places memorie. Locanda, that is to be let or hired, as Ca∣mera locanda. Also a siquis or a bill denoting the letting of a house or selling of any thing. Locare, to place, to settle, to order, to di∣spose, to bestowe, to laie vp, to set vp. Also to let, to set, to rent, to farme. Locarna, a kinde of fish. Locaro, Locarino, as Lugarino. Locatione, Locagione, a farming, a renting, a letting or setting, a de∣mising, a placing, &c. Locca, Locchia, a cob, or gudgeon fish. Locchetto, a padlocke, a little padlocke, such as we vse vpon trap doores. Locco, an owle, an owlet. Lochè, the which, that which. Locignoli, as Lucignoli. Loco, as Luoco, Luogo. Locolo, a bird called in latin Nictionax. Locotenénte, as Luocotenente. Locotte, a buckle, a button, a clasp. Also a padlocke. Locuino, a kinde of flie shining in the night. Locusta, a locust or grashopper. Also a lobster or sea-crab. Loda, Lode, as Laude. Lodabile, as Laudabile. Lodano, a kinde of sweete perfuming gum, called in latine Artilus. Lodare, as Laudare. Lodeuole, as Laudabile. Lódola, the bird we call larke. Lodra, Lotria, as Lontra. Lodrare, to lure a hauke, to call with a lure. Lodro, a kinde of rugged and shagged beast that liues in water. Also a hawks lure. Loffa, a fizle, a fiste, a close fart. Loffare, to fizle, to fiste, to fart closely. Logara, Logaro, a lure for a hauke. Also a baite. Logare, as Locare. Logaro, Logarino, as Lugarino. Logatione, as Locatione. Loggia, a gallerie, a dining chamber, a faire hall, a terrace or walking place, a faire porche vpon the street side, a lodge, a banquetting house. Loggiare, to lodge, to harborough. Loggietta, a little lodge, &c. Logica, Loica, logike, dialect, the maner or arte of reasoning or the way and meanes to reason. Also a subtile dispu∣tation according to the arte of logike without rhetoricall ornaments. Logicale, Loicale, according to the rules of logicke. Logico, Loico, a logician. Logicone, the breast plate of iudgement made of gold, blew silke, scarlet, purple,
and fine linnen fower square and dou∣ble, hauing in it twelue precious stones. Loglio, cockle or darnell growing amongst corne. Logista, he that casteth an account or doth diligently weigh a thing, one that cau∣seth writings to be made. Logistilla, hath beene vsed for reason it selfe. Logodédalo, an inuentour or forger of new words and strange termes. Logomachia, a contention in words, an vndiscreet alteration. Logorare, to weare out, to consume with wearing. Also to lure a hauke. Logorato, Logoro, woren out, spent, ex∣hauste, consumed with wearing, lured a hauke. Logoro, as Logorato, a haukes lure. Lograre, as Logorare. Logio, as Logoro, or as Logorato. Loica, as Logica. Loico, as Logico. Lolla, stubble, straw, litter or hawme. Loligine, a fish called a Calamarie or cut∣tle fish. Loligno, idem. Lombagine, as Lumbagine. Lombardo, a kinde of Sea-crab or lob∣ster. Lombi, as Lumbi. Lombo in the sin∣gular. Lomboli, as Lumbi. Lombricelli, as Lumbricelli. Lombrico, as Lumbrico. Lombrina, a fish called an halibut. Lonchite, great or wilde spleene woort. Longa, a long in musicke. Longamente, as Lungamente. Longanimità, long sufferance or forbea∣rance. Longagnola, Lungagnola.   Longanone, the arsegut, of some called the straight gut. Longare, as Lungare. Longhezza, length, longitude, length of time. Longia, Lonza, a loyne. Longia di castrato, a loyne of mutton. Longietta, a little loyne. Longinquità, long distance of place, length of time, long lastingnes. Longinquo, distant, far off, long, conti∣nuall. Longitudine, longitude, length of time, place or other things: the length of hea∣uen is measured in the ecliptike line, be∣ginning at Aries: and in the earth, in the equinoctiall, and beginneth at the fortunate and Canarie ilands. Longo, long, tedious, irkesome, impor∣tunate. Longone, a long gangrill, a slim, a long tall fellow that hath no making to his length, a tall slang. Also a tedious wea∣risom man. Longurio, a long and thwart pole or piece of timber laide acrosse. Lontananza, distance, a great distance. Lontanare, as Allontanare. Lontano, far, far off, distant. Lontra, an otter which liues both on land and in water, a beauer. Lonza, a beast called an ounce, a panther or cat of mountaine. Also as Longia. Lontro, such a boate as the Indians vse, made of one piece called Canoa. Lopadi, a kind of hard shell fish. Lopello, a disease in a horse proceeding of corrupt and venemous humours. Lopola, a cob or gudgeon. Loppa, any kinde of drosse, trash, filth or dregs. Also a stopple of claie that foun∣ders vse. Also clods or flakes of soot in a chimney. Loquace, a prating, speaking or prat∣ling fellow, or a man full of words, ve∣rie talkatiue. Loquacita, prating, pratling, speaking, tittle tattle, babbling. Loquela, Loquella, speech, speaking. Loquentia, speaking, talking. Lora, a tunnell. Also as Vappa, a small thinne wine. Lordare, to pollute, to defile, to sullie, to foule. Lordezza, ordure, filth, foulenes, slouen∣lines, filthines. Lordo, foule, filthie, full of ordure. Lordone, a lubberlie slouenlie filthie fel∣low. Lordura, Lorditia, as Lordezza. Loro, they, them, those, the same, theirs, those mens, to them, vnto them, them. Lorica, a brestplate, a iacket, a habergion, a cuirace, a brigantine, or cote of maile. Also a place made vpon walles like an open gallorie with grates of timber or hurdles to keepe men from falling. Also the coping or head of a wall made to cast off the raine. Loricare, to put on a habergeon, cote of fence, or shirt of maile, to arme. Also to couer with a crust of clay or durt. Loripéde, croompfooted, wrye-legged. Losa, any baite to catch fish or fowle with, a trap, a springe, or deuise to catch birds with. Loscare, to looke dimly, squintingly or blearing. Loschetto, somewhat dimme-sighted or sand-blinde, that seeth somewhat by day light, worse after sunnerising, and no whit at night. Losco, dimme-sighted, sande or pur∣blinde, squint-eyd, or hauing but one eye. Losingare, as Lusingare. Losingatore, as Lusingatore. Losinghe, as Lusinghe. Losingheuole, as Lusingheuole. Lotho, a kinde of herbe with a floure like poppie. Loto, durt, mire, mud, bog, puddle, clay, lome. Also the lote tree, of the fruite whereof whosoeuer doth eate, forgetteth his owne countrie and state. Lotofagi, men that eate of the lote tree, and liue as sencelesse and forgetfull people. Lotoso, durtie, mirie, muddie, boggie, puddlish. Lotta, Lutta, the game of wrestling. Lottare, to wrestle. Lottatore, a wrestler. Lotto, a lot, or chance in a lotterie. Louazzo, as Lupasso. Louino, a kinde of fruite. Lubiano, a kinde of linnen cloth so cal∣led. Lubricare, to slip, to slide, to wauer, to stagger. Lubricità, slipperines, sliding, waue∣ring, or staggering. Lubrico, slipperie, wauering, vnconstant. Also quick-siluer, according to the al∣chimists phrases. Lucanica, Lucaniga, a pudding, a hag∣gas, a sausage. Lucanicaro, a pudding maker. Lucaria, feasts solemnized in the holie woods. Lucarino, Lucaro, as Lugarino. Luccide, as Lucciole. Luccio, a fish called a pike, a pickrell, or a iacke. Also a fish called in latine Studis. Lucciola, the herbe adders tongue, or ser∣pents tongue. Lucciola del'occhio, the apple of the eye. Lucciol, glow wormes, or glaze wormes. Lucciolo, a little pike or iacke, a pick∣rell. Lucco, a padlock. Lucchetto, a little padlock. Luce, the light, brightnes, daylight. Also sight, to glow, to glaze, to blaze. Luce del' occhio, as Lucciola del Oc∣chio. Lucegni, the angles or corners of a lampe. Lucengola, the itch or tetter. Also a slow-worme, or a glow worme.
Lucegnólo della lucerna, the cotton or weeke of a lamp. Lucénte, shining, bright, resplendent, cleare. Lucérdo, a disease in a horse called the cricke, which maketh him to carie his necke awry. Lúcere, luco, lucéi, luciuto, to shine, to giue light, to be bright. Lucérna, a lamp, a candle, a light. Also a gournard, a red fish, or a rotchet. Lucernale, a lamp, a light, a candle. Also the weeke of a light. Also torch-herbe or loongwort. Lucernario, a bearer of a lamp, or a lamp-maker, a candlesticke. Lucernetta, a little lampe or candle. Lucerniére, a great lampe. Also a lampe bearer. Also a brazen plate candlestick, that some set on staires heads. Lucerta, as Lucertola. Lucertola, a lizard or newte, or eft. Lucetone, a great eft or lizard. Luchela, as Loquela. Luchetto, as Locchetto. Luci, lights, lamps, candles. Also the eies. Lucido, shining, bright, splendent, light. Lucidezza, shining, brightnes, glistring, splendor. Lucignola, a kinde of serpent. Lucifero, that bringeth light. Lucifugo, that flieth light and loueth darknes. Lucignolare, to giue fire with a match, to put weeke or cotton in a candle or lamp. Also to frounze, or curle, or dresse vp in fine knots as women now a daies do their haire. Lucignolato, I finde vsed for an abrome colour of a womans haire. Lucigno, a weeke, a match or cotton of a lampe or of a candle. Lucignoli, or Lucignuoli, locks, flocks, tuffs, tassels, or feakes of wooll, hempe, haires or flaxe, roules of wooll or flaxe ready for the spinners, a lock of haires, peakes or tips of beards. Also weekes or cottons of candles. Also certaine sliding knots, entramelings or curlings of haires wrought and enterlaced togither with ribands, and made in rings as women weare. Also matches or match cordes, as muskettiers vse. Lucignoletti, the diminutiue of Lucig∣noli. Lucimoni, men so called of their madnes, because they made those places vnhap∣pie or vnluckie whereunto they came. Lucinio, pink-eide or that hath little eies. Lucio, a childe borne at the sunne rising. Lucisco, one that seeth little in the night and in the morning. Luco, a thicke groue or woode vntouched and vncut, consecrated to gods or nymphes. Lucore, a great light or blaze or splendor. Lucrare, to gaine, to profit, to win, to get. Lucro, lucre, gaine, profit, vantage. Lucroso gainfull, profitable, full of lucre. Lucubratione, a studie or worke by can∣dle. Lucubrare, to make or studie by candle light. Luculentia, brightnes, shining, beautie. Luculento, full of light, brightnes, shining faire, beautifull, pleasant. Luculleo, a kinde of bright shining marble. Lucumone, a man that makes the place vnhappie where he commeth. Ludificatione, a deceiuing, a mocking. Ludibrio, a mocke, a mockerie, or mock∣ing stocke to be laughed at. Ludro, a haukes lure. Also a baite. Ludimaestro, a schoole-master. Lue, a plague, a pestilence or murrian, or common destruction in men and cattle. It is also vsed for the french poxe. Luffo, the skirt or quarter of a cote or ier∣ken. Also a lap or fold of a garment. Luganiga, Luganica, a pudding or sau∣sage. Luganigaro, a pudding maker. Luganighette, little small puddings or sausages. Lugarino, a bird called a siskin, some take it for a goldfinch, and others for a ca∣narie bird. Lugaro, Luganello, as Lugarino. Luggiala, the name of an herbe that is sharpe in taste. Luglio, the moneth of Iulie. Lugúbre, mourning, wailing, greeuous, sorowfull, lamentable, funerall. Also mourning apparell. Lui, Lu, he, the same, him. Lui medisimo, or stesso, himselfe. Lulla, a barell, a pipe or hog shead, the bot∣tome boord of a barrell, a teale board to make barrels with. Lulligine, a kinde of sea fish neere Mau∣ritania which comming in a skull is able to ouerthrowe a ship. Lumaca, Lumaga, any kinde of snaile. Scala a lumaca, a winding paire of staires. Lumaca di mare, a sea snaile, or pera∣winkle, or other kinde of cockle. Lumacone, a great snaile, a gull, a log∣gerhed, a ioulthead, a patch, a lubie, a sneaker, a lurking companion. Lumbagine, feeblenes, paine, or ach in the loines. Lumbi, the loynes, hanches, flankes, or raines of a bodie, that part of a body we call the chine. Also the ridges of a house Lumbolo, a little loyne or legge. Lumbrici, little easses or earth-wormes. Also wormes breeding in any creatures bellie, bellie wormes, or mawe wormes. Lumbricelli, very little earth wormes or mawe wormes. Lumare, to light, to kindle, to lighten, to giue light. Lumato, lighted, kindled, lightned, giuen light. Lúme, a light, a lampe, a candle, a bright∣nes, a shining, the seeing or sight of the eie, or the eie of a man alone. Lume di rocca, roche alume. Lume scaiola, a kinde of allome so called. Lume zuccarina, a kinde of allome so called. Lumi, lights, lamps, candles, shinings, the eies. Lumia, the slime of fishes. Lumicino, a little light. Lumiera, as Lume. Luminare, to shine, to giue light, to kindle, to illuminate. Also as Luminario. Luminato, shined, giuen light, kindled, illuminated. Also a light or lightning. Luminario, a light, a lampe, a beacon, a signe fire, a torch. Luminóso, bright, splendent, shining, transparent. Lumoso, bright, shining, brightsome. Luna, the moone, one of the seauen planets. Also the mettall siluer according to al∣chimists phrases. Luna nuona, the newe moone. Luna piena, the full moone. Lunare, of or pertaining to the moone, like the moone, made like a halfe moone, crooked, two horned, or with two peakes like the moone. Also the monethly dis∣ease of women. Luna scema, the waining moone. Lunaria, the herbe called torch herbe or woollblade. Lunario, a kalendar of the moone, or monethly almanacke. Lunaticare, to be lunatike or frantike. Lunatico, lunatike, frantike or frenzie at certaine times of the moone, a kinde of staggring, or falling disease in a horse, moone sicke. Lúne, moones. Also monday, the first daie of the weeke. Lunedi, monday. Lunetta, a little moone, a cressant. Lunette, a kind of horse shooes, called halfe moone shooes. Also the name of a gold∣smiths
toole. Also loope-holes, and glas∣ses to looke through to keepe the dust out of ones eies in riding. Also spectacles. Lungagnola, a fishing rod, a fishing pole, an angling rod. Lungamente, a long time, very long time. Lungare, to prolong, to lengthen, to stretch foorth in length. Lunge, Lungi, far off, far away, wide off, distant, asunder, far. Lungheria, length, tediousnes, a long flim flam tale, a delay, a demur. Lunghetto, somewhat long or tedious. Lunghezza, as Longhezza. Lungi, as Lunge. Lungo, as Longo. Lungone, as Longone. Luogare, Luocare, as Locare. Luogo, Luóco, a place, a seate, a stead, a rome. Also a state, condition, case, qua∣litie, credit, reputation or account. Also occasion, estimation, leasure, calling. Also a familie, a house, a kindred or countrey. Also a point in the tables or in the checke boord. Luogora, places. Luogotenénte, Luocotenente, a lieute∣nant, a vicegerent, a substitute, a de∣putie, a vicar. Lupa, a she wolfe, a disease called a wolfe, a disease about a horses legs. Lupaga, a kind of sea-crab or lobster. Lupanari, stewes, brothels or baudie hou∣ses. Also wolfes dens. Lupasso, a gournard, a redfish or a rotchet fish. Some take it for a dace. Lupato, a horse of a wolfes colour, a kinde of bright dunne colour. Lupazzo, as Lupasso. Lupéca, Lupecca, a bird called a houp or dunghilcocke. Some thinke it to be the lapwing. Lupegaiare, to play the wolfe, to howle as a wolfe, to deuoure greedily. Lupercalia, solemne sacrifices and plaies dedicated to Pan. Luperci, certaine priests of Pan. Lupertica, the print, the marke, the bruze, or swelling of a blow, the blacke and blew skin after a stripe or blow. Lupicini, yoong wolfes, whelp-wolfes. Lupi di fiume, a fish called a sea wolfe. Lupino, a kinde of pulse called Lupines or figbean▪ Lupo, a wolfe. Also a kind of fish that som take to be a pike. Also a disease called a wolfe. Also a kind of hooke or drag to draw things out of a pit, a well or such deepe place. Lupo ceruiéro, a beast like a wolfe, but spotted and exceeding quicke of sight, it doth somewhat resemble a stag which we call a luzarde. Lupo del' api, a wood-pecker or eate-bill. Lupulí, Lupoli, the herbe hop or hops, to brew beere with. Lurco, Lurcone, a glutton, a cormorant, an Epicure, a gurmond. Lurido, pale, wan, blacke and blew. Luriuole, a kind of plum in Italy. Luscignolo, Lussignolo, a nightingall. Lusciolo, a night bat, a reare mouse. Lusco, as Losco, purblind. Lucello, a gold-smithes or founders toole. Lusinga, flatterie, adulation, fauning, inticement, allurement, blandish∣ment. Lusingare, to flatter, to entice, to faune, to allure, to blandish or to claw with faire wordes. Lusingaria, as Lusinga. Lusingatore, a flatterer, an inticer, a fau∣ner, an allurer, a blandisher. Lusingatrice, a woman flatterer, &c. Lusingheuole, flattering, inticing, allu∣ring, &c. Lusone, a gamster, a player. Lusquiame, something about Alchimie. Also the herbe called Henbane. Lussare, to commit or liue in all voluptu∣ousnes, luxurie, and sensualitie. Lusso, all manner of voluptuousnes, luxu∣rie, sensualitie or worldly pleasure. Lussurare, as Lussuriare. Lussureggiare, as Lussuriare. Lussuria, leacherie, lust, vncleannes of life, luxurie, all superstuitie and excesse in carnall pleasures, riot or ranknes. Lussuriare, to commit leacherie, to be lea∣cherous, luxurious or wanton, to exceed in carnall pleasures, and all maner of riot. Lussurióso, leacherous, luxurious, lustfull, wanton, riotous, ranke. Lustra, a den, a grot, a cauerne, a hole where wilde beasts do abide. Also a iest or a mockerie. Also a show or proffer to do anie thing, a countenance vpon any matter. Also a compassing or going a∣bout a matter with faire words. Lustrale, certaine sacrifices or ceremonies that were vsed euery fiue yeeres, Looke Lustro. Lustrare, to giue a lustre or a glasse, to shine. Also to offer sacrifice once in fiue yeers, as some ancients were wont to do. Also to purge, to clense, to prune. Also to shine, to brighten, to lighten, to bur∣nish or giue a glasse vnto, to sleeke pa∣per. Lustre, Looke Fare le lustre. Lustrezza, brightnes, clearnes, shining. Lustro, a lustre, a glasse, a shining. Also the space or time of fiue yeeres. Lustrore, as Lustro. Lustroso, shining, bright, cleare, splen∣dent. Luta, a sparcke or sparckle of fire. Lutéllo, an oile pot, an oile vessell. Lutéo, yellowish or somewhat yellow in colour like the yolke of an egge. Luterani, Protestants, or of Luthers re∣ligion. Lutero, a kind of beast so called. Luto, a kinde of deepe measure of drie things. Lutta, wrestling. Luttare, to wrestle. Also to durt, to mire. Also to mourne, to blubber. Luttatore, a wrestler. Lutto, Luto, weeping, wailing, mourning, blubbring, durt, mire, mud. Luttoso, Lutoso, mourning, wailing, wailfull, muddie, durtie, mirie. Luttulente, as Luttoso. Luttuoso, as Luttoso. Luzziola, as Lucciola. Luzziolo, as Lucciolo. Luzzo, as Luccio. M MA, but, except, but that, but if. Also ioyned with other words vsed for Mia. Mache? but what? but then? but that. Mapoi, but then, if then, but after. Mapure, but yet, neuertheles. Ma se, but if, what if Macalepo, a kinde of perfume or sweete smell. Macanopoietico, an inginer, an en∣gine-maker. Macarco, a barrell, a tub, a steane, a fat or vat or tunne. Macarello, the fish called mackrel, which comes in Aprill. Some haue taken Ma∣carello, for a bande or a pander. It is taken from the French. Some take it for a rauenous fowle. Maccagnano, as Magagna. Macca, a bruse, a spot, a tainting. Also a frocke or such like garment. Also plenty, store, Gods plentie, hold bellie hold. Maccare, to bruise, to batter, to pester. Also to spot, to taint. Maccatura, a bruise, a spot. Maccarone, a gul, a doult, a patch, a foole a lubber, a loggerhead. Maccaroni, a kinde of paste meate boiled
in broth, and drest with butter, cheese, and spice. Maccheroni, as Maccarone. Macchia, a spot, a blemish, a speckle, a note of infamie or reproche. Also a brake, a bramble, a bush, a brier, a fir∣rie place, a purley, a shrub, a thicket of briers. Macchia nel' occhio, a pin and web or blemish in ones eie. Macchiare, to spot, to blemish, to be∣speckle. Macchietta, a little spot or blemish. Also a little brake, bush, or bramble. Macchione, a great brake, bramble, bush, or place full of firres. Macco, plentie, store, hould belly hould. Maccole, spots, freckles, specks, blemi∣shes. Maccoloso, speckled, freckled, or spot∣ted. Macedonica, the name of an hearbe. Macellaio, Macellaro, a butcher, a slaughterer. Macellare, to kill, to butcher, to slaugh∣ter, to shamble. Macello, a butchery, a shambles, a slaugh∣terhouse, a flesh market. Macerare, to macerate, to mortifie, to suppresse, to tame, to make wanne, to weaken, to mortifie with beating or pressing, to soke or steepe in water. Macerie, leanenes, barrennes. Also a row or set of teeth. Macerie herbe, all manner of vsuall knowne pothearbs. Macero, Looke Macerare, torne, totte∣red, ragged, hauocked. Maceroni, a kinde of hearbe good for sallets. Mach, a kind of beast that hath no ioints in her legs. Ma che, but, only, except, but what. Machera, a kinde of curtelaxe or wood∣knife. Machila, the robe of the Ephod made al∣together of blue silke, hauing round a∣bout the skirts thereof 72. pomegranats of blue silke and purple and scarlet, and as many bels of golde betweene them round about. Machina, a frame, an engine, a deuise, a building, an edifice, an inuention, an instrument. Also a conspiracie, a stra∣tagem, a contriuing, a plot, a complot, a skaffold in building. Machinare, to frame, to deuise, to build, to complot, to contriue, to conspire. Machinatione, a complot, a conspiracie, a contriuing, a framing, a subtile in∣uention or deuising. Machinatore, a framer, a deuiser, a buil∣der, a contriuer, a conspirer, an inuen∣tor, an author, a maker of engins. Mácido, filthie, pale, hoarie, mustie, soft, rotten, mouldie. Macignare, to growe rustie, rough, rug∣ged, hard, stonie, or crabbed. Macigno, rustie, grettie, stonie, rough, rugged, crabbed, grislie, stearne, fil∣thie, pale, hoarie, mustie, rotten, moul∣die, a kinde of gray hard stone. Macilénte, leane, meagre, gant, barren, thin. Macilenza, leanenes, meagernes, gant∣nes. Macina, a millstone, or grinding stone. Macinare, to grinde. Macinato, ground, or grinded. Also greast or corne to grinde. Macinatore, a miller, a grinder. Macinatura, a grinding. Macine, taken for the teeth and iawes to∣gether, grinding stones, millstones. Macinella, a little mustard mill for a kitchin. Macinette, little grinding millstones. Al∣so little mils. Also a kinde of shrimps or praunes. Macinio, the grinding or greest. Also ta∣ken for carnall copulation. Macis, the spice we call mace. Maciulla, Macciula, a brake to kneade dowe withall, or a block to breake hemp or flaxe vpon. Maciullare, Macciullare, to breake or beate hemp or flaxe, after it is dry. Macola, as Macchia, a spot, a blot, a blemish, an infamie, or reproch. Macolare, as Macchiare. Macrare, to make or grow leane. Macrezza, leanenes, gantnes, meager∣nes. Macro, leane, meagre, gant. Macrologia, long and tedious talke, wherein is no substance, friuolous idle speech. Macula, as Macchia. Maculare, as Macchiare. Maculoso, full of spots, freckles, or speckles. Madaglio della campana, the clapper of a bell. Madale, a barrow hog. Madarazzo, a clowne, a loobie, a logger∣head, a grosse fellow. Madenò, no forsooth, no indeede. Madesi, yea forsooth, yes indeede. Madera, a kinde of stuffe to dye red with∣all, called Mather. Madia, a spokeshaue, a maund to put in bread. Also a kneading tub, a hutch. Madoni, treene dishes, bowles or treyes of wood vsed in a kitchin. Madonna, mistres, mistresmine, ma∣dam. Also taken for our ladie. Madonna no, no forsooth mistres, no madame. Madonna si, yea mistres mine, yes ma∣dame. Madre, a mother, a damme. Also taken for the earth. Also the disease called the mother. Also a womans wombe or matrix. Looke Matre. Madrebosco, woodbinde, boniesuckle. Madremagna, the earth who is the mo∣ther and bringer forth of all things. Madre perla, mother of pearle. Madre selua, woodbinde or bonniesuckle. Madregna, a stepdam or mother in lawe. Madremma, Madrema, my mother, my mam, as children say. Madrezzuola, as Madrebosco. Madrifoglio, knapweede, bullweede, or matfellon. Madrigali, Madriali, madrigals, a kind of short songs or ditties in Italie. Madrigaletti, short madrigals. Madrigna, Madrina, a stepdame, a mo∣ther in lawe. Madrone, a disease called the mother. Madune, a bricke or red square pauing stone. Madunelli, small bricks, or little pauing stones. Maesa, land that lyeth fallow. Maesare, to breake or grub vp land, to let it lye fallow. Maestà, maiestie, soueraintie, dignitie, honour, lordlines, honorable dignitie, royall authoritie, or supremacie. Maestale, maiesticall, soueraigne, great, royall, lordlike. Maesteuole, maiesticall. Maestra, a mistres, or chiefe, Looke Stra∣da maustra. Maestrale, a magistrate, a superior ouer other. Maestranza, maistrie, or cunning, or skill, or workemanship. Maestrare, to teach, to instruct, to maister. Maestrato, taught, instructed, maistred. Also a magistrate, a great head officer. Also the authoritie, office, power, and dignitie of a ruler or magistrate. Maestreggiare, to saile north-west. Also to play the maister. Maestreuole, cunning, learned, artificiall, like a maister, skilfull. Maestria, as Maestranza. Maéstro, a maister, a teacher, a ruler, an ouerseer, one that hath the instruction of others. Also the north-west winde, or north-west and by west.
Maestro tramontana, the north-west winde. Maestro di campo, a marshall of a camp, a master of the fielde. Maestro di casa, a stewarde of a house. Also the master or chiefe gut in any bo∣die, in a horse it is taken for his whole or great paunch. Maestro d' arte, a master of artes. Maestra di scuola, a schoolemaster. Maestro di stalla, a noblemans gentle∣man of his horse. Mafaro, the saile of the foremaste. Also a bung or stopple of a barrell. Maffé, in good sooth, by my faith, yea by our ladie. Maga, an enchantres, a witch, a sorceresse. Also the arte of witchcraft or pertai∣ning to sorcerie. Magace, a kinde of musicall instrument. Magade, a musicall instrument of twenty strings. Also the bridge of a lute that holdeth vp the strings. Magagna, faulte, corruption, rottennesse, addlenes, putrefaction, defect, want, imperfection, waste, riot, hurt, losse. Also a rankling, a festring. Magagnare, to rot, to addle, to putrifie, to corrupt, to be defectiue, to hurt, to bruse to battre as a boare doth with his tusks, to rankle, to fester, to mangle. Magagnoso, rotten, addle, ful of corrupti∣on, tainted, rankled. Magalda, a queane, a harlot, a strumpet, an old trot, a trull or minxe, a gixie. Magara, a witch. Magari, I would to God it were so, woulde to God. Magaria, witcherie, witchcraft. Magasi, as Maggiorini. Magazzino, Magazzeno, a storehouse or a warehouse. Magazzino di grano, a store house for corne. Magazzino reale, a storehouse for the king. Magazzino d' artegliaria, a storehouse for ordinance. Magazzino publico, a publick storehouse. Magazzinetto, a little storehouse or warehouse. Magazziniero, a storehouse keeper. Magese, as Maiese, or Maggese, or Ma∣giese. Magestà, hath bin vsed for Maestà. Maghero, as Magro. Magherire, as Magrire. Maggio, the moneth of Maie, it hath bin vsed for Maggiore. Maggiorana, the sweete smelling herbe Marieram. Maggioranza, eldership, superioritie. worship, precedencie, greater greatnes. Maggiorale, hath beene vsed for Mag∣giore. Maggiore, greater, superior, better, high∣er, bigger, more auncient, a senior or a maior. Maggiordomo, the steward or chiefe of∣ficer of a house. Maggiorengo, an alderman, a chiefeman in a towne or of any societie, an elder, a greater. Maggiorente, idem. Maggioretto, somwhat greater or higher. Maggiori, elders, greatest, aldermen, chiefe. Also our elders, auncestors, pre∣decessors, progenitors, or forefathers. Maggiorini, a kinde of ducke, mallarde, or wiggin, or such fowle. Magi, wise men, whom we call the three kings of Collein, wise philosophers. Magia, naturall Magike, witchcraft or sorcerie. Magica, arte magike, or sorcerie, magicall. Magicale, according to the arte of magike, magicall. Magico, a magitian or enchanter. Magiese, as Maiese, carable land, or fal∣lowe lande. Magione, a house, habitation, or mansion. Magiorana, sweete marieram. Magiriano, a kinde of serpent which is saide to growe out of a dead mans backe or chine bone. Magistério, Magistéro, maisterie, myste∣rie, cunning, arte, skill. Magistrale, a magistrate, or capable to be made a magistrate, like a magistrate. Magistrato, a magistrate, a gouernour, a iudge. Maglia, is properly the holes in any net. Also a shirt or iacket of maile, as Gi∣acco di Maglia. Magliare, to maile, to arme with maile, or iackets, to bte with a mallet. Also to beate a packe of wooll to make it lye close. Maglie, mailes. Also little holes through a net or cages. Maglietta, a little maile, a shirt of maile. Maglio, a mallet or a beetle, as carpenters vse, a sledge. Magliuoli, little stakes driuen into hed∣ges. Also slips of vines to be set to grow. Magna, Looke Madre. Magnanimità, magnanimity, high cou∣rage, greatnes and noblenes of mind. Magnánimo, magnanimous, high minded, all daring, stout harted. Magnano, a locke-smith, a key-maker; but properly a tinker or a forger. Magna pagnotte, a deuourer of Pana∣does, a glutton, a cormorant. Magna guadagno, as Mangia guadag∣no. Magnare, to eate, to feede. Also foode or meate. Magnarie, anie thing that is to be ea∣ten. Magnati, the ancients, elders, chiefe, head officers or aldermen of a towne or corpo∣ration. Also noble men or great peeres of a realme or state. Magnatione, a ripening or corroding plaister. Magnatore, a feeder, an eater, a deuou∣rer. Magnatora, as Mangiatoia. Magnesia, the load stone which drawes iron to it. Some call it a magnet stone. Magneti, a kinde of stone called catsil∣uer. Magnificare, to magnifie, to honor, to ad∣uance, to extoll, to exalt. Magnificat, the song of our Ladie, called Magnificat. Magnificente, magnificent, noble, noblie minded. Magnificentia, magnificence, the doing or atchieuing of great things, sumptuous∣nesse. Magnifico, magnificent, noble, nobly min∣ded. Also a Magnifico or chiefe man or one of the chiefe men in Venice. Magniloquentia, a loftie and high stile or manner of speaking. Mágniloquo, he that hath a loftie stile & speakes of great matters. Magnitudine, greatnes, amplenes, large∣nes, couragiousnes, noblenes. Magno, great, high, mightie, large, big, no∣table, noble. Magnosa, a coife or caule. Magnosetta, a little coise or caule. Mago, Magolo, a magitian, an enchan∣ter, a sorcerer, a wiseman, a philoso∣pher. Magone, the maw or gizard of capons, hens, or other fowle. Magotto, a kind of bird or fowle. Magrana, a kind of disease, the megram. Magrare, to make or grow leane. Magreria, any leane, poore or cold iest or deuise or leannes. Magrezza, leannes, meagrenes, gant∣nesse. Magro, leane, meagre, lanke, gant. Maguei, Meth, as Cardone. Maguno, a kind of cormorant or seagull. Mai, euer, neuer, at no time, at any time. It hath also beene vsed for braunches.
Looke Maio. Maidè, tush, fie, no, away, will you? Maimone gatto, a catte of the moun∣taines. Mainare vna naue, as Amainare. Mainò, tush, no, no forsooth no, away, will you? Maipiù, neuer more, euermore. Mai sempre, for euer, euer and euer. Maiestà, Magestà, as Maestà. Maiese, lande sowne euery other yeere, any lande that lies fallowe, and is newly ploughed or broken vp. Maio, a greene bough newly cut from the tree, a may-pole, a may-bough. Also a mallet or beetle to cleaue wood with, or a sledge or great hammer or iron crow. Also a kind of sea-crab called a frill. Maiolica, as Maiorica. Maiolichino, a kind of small coyne. Maiorana, the herbe Marioram. Maiordomo, a cheefe or stewarde of a house. Maiore, as Maggiore. Maioranza, as Maggioranza. Maiorica, the earth we call porcelane, whereof China dishes are made. Maisi, yea marie, yes indeed. Maiz, a kind of graine or wheat whereof they make bread in India. Maiuscula, greater then others, text let∣ters, letters of the greatest sort. Mala, the ball of the cheeke. Also taken for the iawe or cheeke bone. Looke osso Malo. Malabatro, a kind of leafe that swimmeth in pooles without any apparant roote: whereof is made a kinde of sweete oyle. Malaccorto, vnheedful, foolish, vnwary, il-aduised. Malachite, a stone of a darkegreene co∣lour. Malacreanza, euill nurture, bad educa∣tion, vnmannerlines. Maladicenza, as Maldicenza. Maladire, dico, dissi, detto, to curse, to banne, to speake ill, to raile, to slanu∣der. Maladetto, cursed, banned, spoken ill, rai∣led, slandred. Mala dispositione, ill disposition, crased∣nes in bodie or minde. Maladittione, a curse, a banning, a male∣diction, a railing, a slaundring. Maladra, a water foule called a teale: some take it to be the Mallard. Malageuole, hard, difficile, vneasie. Malageuolezza, vneasines, difficultie. Malaghetta, a flower called the flowre of Paradise. Malagiato, ill at ease, ill prouided for, ill looked vnto, hardly bested. Malagro, a disease in a hawkes head. Malagurato, vnfortunate, vnluckie. Malandrinare, to rob by the high way, to play the theefe. Manlandrino, a high way theefe, a rob∣ber, a spoiler. Mal' anno, an ill yeere, continuall trouble & sorrow. They vse it as a curse in Ita∣ly. Il mal' anno che Dio ti dia, an ill yeere God giue thee. Malanuro, a kind of fish. Malare, to fall sicke, to sicken. Malato, fallen sicke, sickned, sicke, cra∣zed. Malatia, Maladia, a maladie, a sicknes. Malaticcio, sickish, subiect to sicknes. Mala sorte, ill hap, ill chance, ill lucke. Malattaccaticcio, contagious, infecting, infectious or sticking vnto. Malaueduto, simple, negligent, vnheedful, foolish. Malauentura, ill lucke, ill fortune, ill happe. Malauenturoso, vnhappie, vnluckie, vn∣fortunate. Malauoglienza, ill will, hatred, dis∣like. Malbauisco, marsh mallowes. Malcaduco, the falling sicknes. Malcomposto, ill framed, ill contri∣ued. Mal concio, ill drest, in an ill plight, hardly bested. Malcontento, malcontent, displeased, dis∣content. Mal creato, ill brought vp, vnmannerly, ill nurtured. Mal del' asimo, Looke Asima. Mal del corno, a disease about a horses necke. Mal del panno, a disease about a horses head or necke. Mal destro, vnhandsome, vnproper, vnfit. Maldetto, cursed, banned, forespoken, de∣tracted, ill spoken, ill said, an ill saying. Maldicente, a detractor, an iniurer, an ill speaker, a backbiter. Maldicenza, detraction, iniurie, backbi∣ting, slander, a curse, an ill report. Maldisposto, ill disposed, vnlustie. Mal di pietra, the sickenes of the stone collicke. Mal di febbre, an ague or feauer. Mal di tisico, a pining or lingring disease, a consumption. Male, harme, hurt, euill, ill, mischiefe, sicke∣nes, disease, infection, paine griefe, smart. Also ill, bad, naughtie, hurtfull, vnseemely, vndecent, sickly, euilly, bad∣lie, ill at ease, vnhappily, not well, shreudly, wickedly, lewdly. Male affare, of mischiefe or ill doing. Malearriuato, at an ill staie, in ill plight, in bad taking, ill bested. Maledicente, as Maldicente. Male del orzuolo, a falling or staggring disease in a horse. Maledicenza, as Maldicenza. Malediceuole, as Maldicente. Maledico, a cursed man, a cursing man, an euill speaker, ill toonged, foule mou∣thed, a railer, an ill speaker. Maledire, as Maladire. Maledetto, as Maladetto. Maledittion, as Maladittione. Malefattore, a malefactor, an offender, a misdoer. Maleficiare, to misdoe, to do euill. Maleficio, an ill fact, an ill deed, a mis∣doing, a shrewd turne. Malefico, hurtfull, noysome, wicked, euill, deadly, venemous, ill doing. Malfare, faccio, feci, farto, to misdoe, to do ill, to do wrong, to abuse. Malfatto, misdone, ill done, ill made, a misdeede, an offence, a fault, a wrong, an abuse. Malferito, the name of a disease in a horse. Malenaggia, a curse, as we say an euill yeere on him, for Malanno habbia. Malenanza, as Maleuolentia. Maleoli, the ankles or ankle bones. Malescalco, as Mariscalco. Maleuolére, to hate, to lothe, to detest, to wish euill vnto, to grudge. Maluoluto, hated, lothed, grudged at. Maleuadore, a pledge, a suretie, a baile, an hostage. Maleuolentia, ill will, hatred, grudge, malice. Maléuolo, malitious, maleuolent, spite∣full, that oweth ill will, that beareth a grudge, enuious. Maluédere, to lothe, to see vnwillingly. Malueduto, lothed, vnwelcome, not seene willingly. Mal del l'anca, broken hipt, or hipbroken. Mal del fico, a disease rising in the sole of a horses foote, of euill carying a former disease. Mal di lingua, the sorenes of the tongue in a horse. Mal di napoli, the french pocks. Mal del dosso, a hurt in the back, which in some horses is suffered to runne so long that it is not easie to be cured af∣terward. Mal francese, the french poxe. Malfranciosato, infected with the french
pocks, pockie. Malforo, a mischieuous hole, taken for a womans priuities. Malgrado, maugre, in despight. Malgrado, vnpleased, vnaccepted, vn∣thankefully. Malgradeuole, as Malgrado. Malgradito, as Malgrado. Malgramma, the name of a goldsmiths toole. Mal gratioso, vnhandsome, vngracious, vnwelcome. Mal napolitano, the french pockes. Malhora, an ill howre, a mischiefe, ill for∣tune, bad luck. Malia, witchcraft, witcherie, sorcerie. Maliare, to bewitch, to witch. Maliarda, a shee witch, a sorceresse. Maliardo, an enchanter, a hee witch. Malichite, a kinde of darke greenish stone of the colour of Malua. Malificare, to do or commit euill. Maligie, Maliglie, yong chibols, oinions, scalions, or ciues. Malignanza, as Malignità. Malignare, to maligne or beare ill will vnto, to spight, to malice, to enuie, to grudge. Malignità, malignitie, ill will, spight, de∣spight, malice, enuie, grudging, naugh∣tines, wickednes, frowardnes. Maligno, wicked, malicious, spightfull, enuious, naught, euill, malignant, grudge-bearing. Malinconía, melancholy, sadnes, pensiue∣nes, black choler. Malincónico, melancholie, sad, sullen, solitarie, heauie, or pensiue, full of black choler. Malinconióso, as Malincónico. Malióso, an enchanter, a witch, full of sorcerie or witchcraft. Maliscalco, Maliscialco, a marshall, or such like officer. Also a farrier, or horse∣smith. Also a horseleach. Malitia, malice, ill will, spite, enuie, kna∣uerie, naughtines, lewdnes, shrewdnes, a craft, a deuice, a policie, a sleight, a wyle. Malitiare, to malice, to enuie, to spite, to beare a grudge or enuie to one. Malitioso, malitious, spitefull, enuious, shrewde. Maliuoglieza, ill will, hatred, maleuo∣lence. Maliuolo, churlish, dogged, currish, ha∣ting, bearing ill will, ill minded. Malléo, a beetle, a mallet. Malleolo, a little mallet that carpenters vse. Also a kinde of darting weapon. Also the lower part of the leg, or ankle bone. Also bundles of sticks with pitch and so set on fire are floong ouer walles vpon men. Malleuadore, a suretie, a pledge, a baile, an hostage. Malleueria, baile, maineprise, or sureti∣ship. Also a trespasse or offence. Mallo, as Maglio. Mal in assetto, disordered, confused, in ill plight, in ill estate. Mal in ordine, as Mal in assetto. Mal in punto, as Mal in assetto. Malmenare, to misuse, to abuse, to euill intreate. Malmenato, ill vsed, ill handled, in ill ta∣king, in poore plight. Malmendo, a fault annexed to another fault, fault vpon fault. Malmérito, that hath deserued ill. Malnetto, vncleane, polluted, foule. Maloméllo, a kinde of apple called a sweeting. Malore, a sicknes, disease, euill, harme, or maladie. Malpica, the herbe watercresses. Malprò, hurt, harmefull, that doth not good. Malsano, vnholsome, vnhealthie. Malsicuro, vnsafe, vnsure, dangerous. Malsottile, a pining lingring disease, a consumption. Malta, morter, lime, plaster of Paris, loame. Also a kinde of monstrous sea fish. Maltare, to morter, to lome, to plaster. Maltaruola, a trowell. Maltatore, a plastrer, or mortar-man. Maltire, tisco, tito, to disgest, to brooke, to digest. Malua, Malba, the hearb Mallowes. Maluagia, Maluasia, the wine called Malmesie. Maluàgio, wicked, bad, ill, naughtie. Maluagità, wickednes, badnes, illnes, naughtines. Maluaresca, marsh or water mallowes, or white mallowes. Maluauisco, as Maluaresca. Maluauone, as Maluaresca. Maluerde, a disease called the yellow iaundise. Also the greene sicknes. Maluiccio, a thrush, or field fare. Maluolontieri, vnwillinglie. Malusare, to misuse, to abuse, to vse ill. Maluso, a bad custome, an ill vse, an ill fashion. Mamalucco, a kinde of souldiers, that the Souldans of AEgypt were wont to haue. Mamau, a machound, a bugbeare, a raw∣head and bloodie bone. Mamma, a teate, a pap, a dug, an vdder, a breast. Also the word that children vse to call their mother by as we say Mam, or my Mother. Mammana, a Midwife, or keeper of a woman in childebed. Mammatà, thy mam, thy mother. Mammella, a little dugge, teat, pap, or vdder. Mammellare, to sucke a dugge. Mammetta, as Mammella. Also a pre∣tie little mam or mother. Mammillari processi, processes in the temple bones hanging downe like the broken browes of banks, representing the fashion of teates in a cowes vdder. Mammina, as Mammetta. Mammola, a whore, a strumpet, a har∣lot, a craftie queane. Mammole viole, a kinde of violets so called. Mammolino, whosht, quiet, and still as children are. Mammolo, an olde craftie lad, a subtile slye foxe, an olde babie. Mammone, a kinde of cat of mountaine. Mamucco, a kinde of great fowle that flieth, runneth and swimmeth very swift, and liueth by the aire in the Moluccas. Manacchia, a bird called a chough. Manacordo, as Monacordo. Managetto, a bird so called. Manaia, Manara, an axe, an adze. Manantiale, flowings of the sea, perpe∣tuall, endlesse, alwayes comming. Manaretta, Manarino, a hatchet. Manatto, a kinde of excellent fish in In∣dia, round in shape, with two feete, and a head like a calfe. Mancanza, want, defect, lacke, ailing. Mancanza della luna, the wane of the moone, the fall of a tyde. Manca, left, as the left hand, mano man∣ca. Also, it wants or lacks. Mancamento, want, lack, ayling, de∣fect, waning of the moone. Mancare, to lack, to want, to ayle, to faile, to misse, to erre, to cease, to leaue off, to be defectiue, to defalke, to fall, to make lesse. Also to wane as the moone doth, to fault. Mancatore, a breaker, a failer, or misser of his word. Mancheuole, wanting, defectiue. Mancia, a drinking pennie, a newyeares gift, handsell. Manciata, a baite by the way for man or horse. Also a drinking pennie. Also a handfull of any thing, a bundle, a wad, or wispe of any thing.
Mancinare, to play with the left hande, to dissemble. Mancino, a left handed man, a blow gi∣uen with the left hand. Mancino edritto, both right and left handed. Mancipare, to subiect, to enthrall, to em∣bondage or depriue of libertie. Also to sell, to let, to hyre, or farme by order of law. Mancipatione, a selling, letting or far∣ming by course of lawe, a liuerie and season. Mancipio, a bondman, a thrall, a slaue, a vassal, a subiect, a captiue, a manciple, a farmer, a letter, a baily, any thing taken with the hand. Manciulla, a deuise in Italy to breake hempe and flaxe withall. Also to knead bread or dowe. Manco, lesse, lesser, not so much, failing, ayling, wanting, lacking, defectiue, vn∣perfect. Also one that lacketh a lim or that hath but one hand. Manculo, left-handed. Mandaia, Mandara, as Manara. Mandamento, a commandement, a sen∣ding for, a warrant, a commission. Mandare, to send, to addresse, to direct. Mandato, sent, addressed, directed. Also a mandate, a commandment, a commis∣sion, a warrant. Mandar a cresima, to defer and put off a matter till doomes day. Mandar' al palegro, to send to ones last home. Mandar' ad effetto, to put in effect, to effect. Mandar' a male, to spoile, to waste, to consume, to riote. Mandar' a chiamare, to sende for, to call for. Mandar giu, to send down, also to disgest or put ouer as a hauke doth hir meate. Mandar per, to send for. Mandaria, as Mandra. Mandatore, a sender. Mandatorio, a commaunde, a manda∣torie. Mandatuccio, a small commandement. Man destra, the right hand. Mandestro, right handed. Also a blowe giuen with the right hand. Mandibula, the mandible or iawe where∣in the teeth be set. Mandiglione, a mandillion, a souldiers iacket. Mandola, Mandorla, an almond. Mandolata, a kinde of tarte made of al∣monds. Mandolo, Mandorlo, an almond tree. Mandra, a herde, a droue, a flocke of anie cattle. Also a folde, a pownde, a sheepe∣cote, or pen to put cattle in. Also a sta∣ble, a stall or place for fodder. Mandragola, Mandragora, a mandrake, which is of a very colde temperature, and therefore is vsed to cast men into deepe sleepes when they must be cut by surgeans, and for many other purposes in phisick. Mandrano, Mandraro, a herdesman, a drouer, a grasier. Mandretta, a little sheepecot, a little fold, a little heard or droue. Mandria, as Mandra. Mandriale, Mandriano, a heardesman, a grasier, a drouer, as Madrigale. Mandriano, the name of a toole that a potter or founder doth vse. Mandritto, a right hand blowe, a downe∣right blowe. Mandrolina, a little almonde. Also a daintie queane, a prettie wench. Manducare, to eate, to feede, to chewe. Manduco, a disguised or vglie picture vsed in shewes to make children afraid, as we say a snapdragon, a turke, or a bug-beare. Mane, earely, betimes, to morrow morning Manecchia, a handle or haft, to handle a thing by, a ploughs handle. Maneggiare, to manage, to handle, to deale with, to touch with the handes, to exercise, to trade, to trafique, to plie, to solicite, to gouerne, to follow. Maneggiatore, a manager, a handler, a dealer, an exerciser, a trader. Maneggiabile, as Maneggeuole. Maneggiamento, a managing, a hand∣ling, a dealing, a negotiation, a trading, an exercising. Maneggiante, as Maneggeuole. Maneggiare a repoloni, to pace, trot, or gallop a horse too and fro in one path: and still returneth to the same. Maneggeuole, manageable, tractable, gentle, that may be handled. Maneggiere, as Maneggiatore. Maneggio, a busines, a managing, a hand∣ling, a negotiation or affaire, a trade, an exercise. Manegoldo, a hangman, a headsman, an executioner. Manelle, sheafes or handfuls of any thing. Also bracelets. Manéra, maner, fashion, vse, course, stile, order. Also a hatchet. Manere, mango, manei, manuto, to re∣maine, to abide, to stay, to dwell. Manuto, remained, staied, dwelt. Also hauing hands. Manescallo, Manescalco, as Mares∣callo. Manesco, readie, nimble or quicke-han∣ded, working with his hande, a tall man-of his hands. Manestra. Looke Menestra. Manetia, a muffe, a snufkin, a mitton. Manette, manicles, fetters for the handes, mittons, giues. Manezza, a manchon, a sleeue, a muffe, a mitton, a snufkin, a long gloue. Manezza di ferro, an arming gantlet. Manezze, bracelets. Also manuall things. Manfrigoli, a kinde of daintie dish meate, or quelquechose vsed in Italy. Mangano, a kinde of presse to presse buc∣krom, fustian or died linnen cloth, to make it haue a luster or glasse. Manganare, to presse all manner of lin∣nen cloth died, to put a lustre or glasse on it. Manganaro, a presser of linnen clothes, namely of buckrom or fustian. Manganello, a sillie garment of a sheepe∣heard. Also a musicall rusticall instru∣ment. Manganese, a stuffe or stone to make glas∣ses with. Also a kinde of minerall stone. Mangano, as Manganaro. Mangetta, Mangeola, a yoong heifer, a yoong cow, a steere. Mangerie, vnthriftines, spendings. Also as Angarie. Also all maner of meates. Mangetto, a prettie kind of meat, a dain∣tie dish, a heifer, a runt, a yoong calfe. Mangiaglia, all maner of things to be ea∣ten, foode or feeding. Mangiare, to eate, to feede. Also meate, foode, sustenance or nourishment. Mangiar in tinello, to eate in the common hall, to feede in a hutch, or homely. Mangiar a scrocco, to eate and drinke & make good cheere at freecost, to shift for victuals. Mangiar e bere, meate and drink, to eate and drinke. Mangia guadagno, a fellow that is good for nothing but to steale another mans dinner away, and that liues by other mens gaine, an vnthrift. Mangiaguerra, a kinde of strong wine so called in Italy. Mangiar pan pentito, to eate bread of repentance, to repent all daies of his life. Mangiamento, all maner of things that are to be eaten, bellie cheere. Mangiatiuo, that may be eaten, eatable. Mangiatoia, a manger, a racke in a sta∣ble, a cratch. Mangiatore, a feeder, an eater, a glut∣ton.
Mangio, a heifer, a steere, a yoong oxe, a runt. Mangione, a glutton, a cormorant, a great feeder. Also a great heifer, runt, steere or yoong oxe. Also as Magione. Mangiolo, as Mangetto. Mangiucone, a glutton, a deuourer, a cor∣morant, a gormand. Mania, madnes, outrage, furie, properly a disease rising of too much abundance of good blood hauing recourse to the head; whereby the partie is in a furie or rage, brainsicknes. Maniare, to be mad, raging, outragious, brainsicke, and fantasticall. Mani, hands. Also ranks, courses or files or rowes of things or men. Also spirits, soules, and ghosts of the dead, the good and bad angels. Also the punishment that the soules do abide. Also hobgoblins or elfes, or such misshapen images or imagined spirits that nurces fraie their babes withall to make them leaue cry∣ing, as we say bug-beare, or els rawe head and bloodie bone. Manica, any kind of sleeue or manche. Al∣so a haft or handle, any flap couering the hand, a manche in armorie. Manicare, to eate, to feed. Also to sleeue anie garment. Also to haft or put on a handle vpon any weapon. Manicaretti, minced small meates, daintie quelquechoses, fine sauces. Manicatore, a feeder, an eater. Also a sleeuer, a hafter, a handler. Manicelle, Manine, little, prettie hands or bracelets. Maniche, sleeues, manchons. Maniche di ferro, sleeues of iron or of maile. Manichetto, Manichino, a little haft or handle. Manico, a haft or a handle or helue. Manico di scopa, a handle for a broome. Bocace doth vse it for a hard turd, a turd as hard as a sticke. Manicone, a great sleeue, manchon, muffe or snufkin. Manicordo, an instrument like vnto a rigoll or paire of virginals, a clari∣corde, guise. Maniera, manner, fashion, vse, custome, woont. Maniero, a gentle or reclaimed hauke, any thing that will be handled. Manifattore, a handie workman, a hand-labourer. Manifattura, workemanshippe, handie∣worke. Manifatturare, to counterfeit or frame by arte or handie labour. Manifestare, to manifest, reueale, declare or publish, to bewraie, to make appa∣rant. Manifestatione, a manifestation or de∣claration. Manifesto, manifest, cleere, certaine, vn∣doubted, open, apparāt, publick, euident. Also a manifestation or declaration. Manigliare, to adorne with braslets, to manicle. Maniglie, Manigli, Manili, braslets. Also manicles, ornaments about the armes or hands. Manigoldaggine, the part or tricke of a hangman. Manigoldarie, hangmens trickes. Manigoldo, an executioner, a hangman, a headsman. Manili, manicles or giues for the hands. Manine, little prettie yoong or tender hands. Also a kind of mushroms or todes stooles. Maninconia, as Malinconía. Manincónico, as Malincónico. Manipola, a part of so many rankes and files of soldiers throughout a battle or squadron of pikes drawn forth to march through any streight or passage. Some thinke it to be but a band of ten soldiers vnder one captaine, as it were but a handfull in comparison of a greater number. Also a handfull, a gripe, a bun∣dle, a bottell. Manipolare, Manipulare, to gripe with the hands, to make bottles or wads of hay. Also to arme with a gantlet, to bundle vp. Manipolo, Manipulo, a gantlet, a racket to plaie at tennis with, a handfull, a bottle of haie, a wad of straw, a gripe, a bundle. Maniscalco, as Marescalco. Maniscalcheria, as Marescalcheria. Maniscintola, an idle, lazie, slothfull companion, lazines, idlenes, sloth. Manizza, as Manezza. Manna del cielo, the dewe of heauen or manna. In the scripture it is a delicate thing that god caused to fal from heauen in great abundance in maner of dewe, white in colour and like a Coriander seed, and verie pleasant in eating. In phisicke it is a manner of dew congealed on trees and plants, and so is gathered in certaine hot countries and reserued as a gentle purge of choler. Mano, a hand, a ranke, a course or file. Al∣so a maine in game and plaie. Also po∣wer or authoritie. Manocordo, as Manicordo. Man destra or dritta, the right hand. Man manca, sinistra, mancina, zanca, stanca, the left hand. Manométtere, metto, misi, messo, to manumit, to make free, to enfranchise. also to broach or set a broach any thing. Manomesso, manumist, made free, en∣franchised, set a broach. Manomissione, deliuerance out of bon∣dage, or making free of a bondman. Manopola, a gantlet, a iacket, a handfull, a bottle of haie, as Manipola. Manopretio, wages or reward for work∣manship. Manoualderia, an administration or proouing of ones will. Manoualdo, an administrator of ones will. Manouale, a workeman, a handiecrafts man, a day labourer, a trades man. Manouelle, the name of a rope-makers toole. Also little pieces or parcels. Mansano, a coopers toole or something about a tub or barrell. Manse, meeke, humble, milde, gentle. Mansionaro, a homekeeper, a houslin, one that seldome goes abroad. Mansorio, a muscle which springing in circled sort from the throte bone, and from the first bone of the vpper iaw mo∣ueth the neather iaw. Mansuefare, faccio, feci, fatto, to hum∣ble, to make lowlie or milde, to tame, to make meeke and tractable. Mansuefatto, made mild, tamed, humbled, and made tractable. Mansueto, milde, meeke, gentle, humble, lowly, tame, tractable. Mansuetudine, mildnes, meeknes, lowli∣nes, humilitie, gentlenes. Manta, a mantle, a robe, a long cloke. Mantaio, Mantacuzzo, the name of a goldsmithes toole. Mantaro, Mantarro, a cloke, a riding cloke, a shepheards frocke. Mantare, to enrobe, to enmantle, to cloke. Mante, a diuiner, a foreteller, a soothsaier, a teller of things to come. Mantegate, a kind of paste meate vsed in Italy. Mantellaccio, a filthie, course, great cloke. Mantellare, to mantle, to enrobe, to couer, to cloke, to shelter, to shroude, to flatter. Mantellaro, a mantle, a cloke-maker. Mantelletti, penthouses of boordes, couers, shrouds, shelters. Also little clokes. Mantellina, a little loose mantle as wo∣men are wont to weare. Mantello, a cloke, couer or mantle. Also the coate or colour of a horse. Also a kind of broad flat fish.
Mantellizzare, to flatter, to faune, to claw, to sooth vp, to cog and foist with, to giue one court holie water. Mantenére, tengo, tenni, tenuto, to maintaine, to vphold, to sustaine, to de∣fend, to protect, to keepe, to backe, to countenance. Mantenuto, maintained, vpheld, sustai∣ned, defended, protected, backt. Mantenimento, maintenance, sustenance, vpholding, a defence, a protection. Mantenitore, a mainteiner, a sustainer, an vpholder, a defender, a chalenger. Mantia, diuination, fortelling of things to come. Mantica, a bag, a wallet, a budget, a cap∣case. Also the broad side of a paire of bellowes with a hole in it. Mantice, Mantici, Mantico, a paire of bellowes. Also the guts whereby euery creature drawes breath. Manticora, a beast in India, hauing three rowes of teeth, the face of a man, bo∣die of a lyon, and coueteth much mans flesh. Manticciaro, a bellowes maker. Mantile, a table cloth or napkin. Mantiglia, a kinde of clouted creame cal∣led a foole or a trifle in English. Mantiletto, a napkin, a drinking cloth, a cubboord cloth. Manto, a robe, mantle or cloke, a long vp∣per garment. Also taken for the coate or colour of any beast. Mantone, a great robe, with a traine. Mantouarie, mantuan or baudy tricks. Manuale, manual, wrought with the hand or that may be handled. Manualista, a handiecrafts-man, a hand-labourer. Manubia, the praie or bootie taken of e∣nemies. Also the generals or chiefe cap∣taines part of the bootie. Also a spoile taken of a noble person that yeeldeth himselfe, or the monie that is made of it. Manucare, to eate, to feede hungerlie. Manucatore, a hungrie feeder, a glut∣ton, an eater. Manuche, a fine colored bird in India, which neuer toucheth the ground but when he is dead. Manuelle, as Falde. Manufatto, made or wrought by hand. Manumissione, as Manomissione. Manuméttere, as Manométtere. Manumesso, as Manomesso. Manupretio, wages or reward for worke∣manship. Manutia, the plough taile. Manuto, Masto, Looke Manere. Manuzza, a little hand. Also a bracelet. Manza, a yong cow, a steere, a heifer, a runt, a mans sweetehart, loue, or mi∣stres. Also a prettie lasse or girle, as Mancia. Man zanca, the left hand. Manzetto, a young calfe, a little runt, a heifer or steere. Manzo, a young oxe, runt or steere, or bullock. Also beefe, Carne di Manzo. Maona, a kinde of great hulke. Mappa, a map, or type, or carde of any countrie. Mappa mondo, the map of the world, all the world at will, ioy, solace. Mappello, a kinde of poison or venome. Maragone, a kinde of waterfowle, or cormorant. Marana, a kinde of ship, hoy, boate, or hulke. Marangonare, to play the carpenter. Marangone, a carpenter. Maranello, a young pig, or a porklin. Marano, a Iew, an Infidell, a renegado, a nickname for a Spaniard. It hath also bene vsed for a kind of pinnace or flye-boate, or such ship. Marasandola, a water-lizard, or newte. Marasca, a kinde of sowre cherrie. Marasco, a sowre cherrie tree. Marasmo, the third degree or extremitie and end of the hectike and consuming feauer when vnnaturall heate hath so preuailed in the substantiall parts of the hart and other members, that the naturall moisture thereof is cleane ex∣hausted and consumed, and thereby is become vtterly incurable. Marasmode, a kinde of hecticke feauer which hapneth of a burning ague so farre spread as that it consumeth the humor of the whole bodie. Marasso, a viper. Marauiglia, a wonder, a maruell. a viper. Marauigliare, to wonder, to maruell. Marauiglioso, wonderfull, maruellous, miraculous. Marca, the bounds, limit, confines or mar∣ches of any countrie, thereof comes the word Marchese, for he was called a Marquesse that had the charge of some bordering countrie, or that kept the marches. Also a marke, a signe, a token, or a brandingiron. Some take it to be a horse, for in such a sence it hath bin taken, a coine called a marke. Marcantare, to cheapen, to bargaine, to marchandize, to mart. Marcante, a merchant, a chapman. Marcantesca, marchandlike, Mano Marcantesca. Marcantia, merchandize. Marcare, to marke, to note, to brand, to stamp. Marcasita, as Marchesita. Marcello, a coyne currant in Rome. Marchesana, Marchegiana, the wife of a Marquesse, a ladie Marquesse. Marchesato, a Marquisate, a Marquesse his Lordship, Marqueship. Marchesata, a woman hauing the month∣ly flowers running vpon hir. Marchese, a Marques, next before an Earle. Also the monthly flowers of wo∣men. Marchesita, a kind of stone called a mar∣quesite or fire-stone. Marchetto, a coyne currant in Italy. Marchia, a marche or marching. Marchiare, to marke or brand horses, to march in ranke and order as souldiers doe. Marchio, a brand or marke vpon horses. Also a branding iron. Marchio della stadera, a counterpoise, anie thing put in the ballances or scales to make euen waight. Marcia, a march or marching of souldiers or vpon the drum. Also rotten matter, corruption or putrefaction comming from any sore or fistula. Marciacotto, the mettall wherewith glas∣ses are made, as it is in the pots in fur∣naces. Marciare, to marche in order, as souldi∣ers. Marciapane, a kind of banquetting meat called a marchpane. Marcido, rotten, feeble, vnlustie, withe∣red, flagging, lither, corrupt. Marciliana, a kind of hulke, pinnace, ship, barge or flie-boate. Marcire, cisco, cito, to rot, to putrifie, to corrupt, to addle, to become faint, vn∣lustie, and drooping. Marcio, rotten, addle, corrupt, putri∣fied. Also a lurch or a maiden set at any game. Marcita, as Marcia. Marco, a marke vpon any thing, a gold∣smithes weight. Marcozza, a kinde of game so called. Mardore, a beast called a martinet. Marea, a tyde, a full sea, a full tyde. Mare, the sea, the ocean, the maine, the watry wildernes. Mareggiare, to flote vpon the sea, to keepe the course of the sea. Maremma, the sea strond or shore. Marénda, Marendare, as Merenda. Marene, a kinde of great cherrie. Marescalco, Marescialto, a marshall of
field or house. Also a farrier or horse∣smith. Marescalcheria, a farriers forge. Also a marshalfie or marshalship. Marga, a picke axe or hedge-hill, a plough∣share or any such cutting toole. Also a kinde of earth named marle, which is a fat claie and chalke togither, seruing to dung fields. Margarita, a pearle, a margarite, a gem. Also a flower called a daizie. Margaritaro, one that makes bugles, or one that pierceth and boareth pearles. Margaritine, bugles or seede pearles. Margaulzo, a strange birde in India. Margello, sniuell or snot, or filth of ones nose. Marginare, to heale vp a scar or wounde, to keepe alongst the coastes of the sea, to leaue or make a margine, side, or banke. Margine, a margin, a brinke, a border, an edge, a brimme, a bound, a frontire or side of any thing, a scarre or marke or signe of any cut or hurt healed vp. Marginoso, hauing a large margine, side, border, brim or edge. Mariche, a kinde of wilde beast in China, with a face like a woman, a bodie like a a lyon, and a taile as a scorpion. Mariconda, a kinde of daintie chewet or little pies vsed in Italy. Marina, the sea coast or stronde, or of the sea. Also the sea. Marinare, to play the marriner, to trauell by sea, to marl or dres fish with vineger to make it keepe long to storme, to chafe, to fret, or rore as the sea doth, to scoulde, to wrangle aloud that all may heare. Marinaro, Marinaio, a marriner, a sea∣man, a shipman, a sailer. Marinaresco, Marinesco, marrinerlike. Marinarezza, the sea-faring trade, or arte of nauigation. Marincusach, a monstrous beast in Per∣sia, with a face like a woman, a bodie like a lyon, and a taile like a scorpion. Marine, Marinelle, sowre cherries. Marinella, Valerian, capons taile, or Set∣wall. Marino, of the sea, neere or bordering vpō the sea, borne or bred in the sea. Also sea water greene, Pesce marino, sea fish. Marino pescatore, a kinde of sea frogge. Mariolare, to play the cut-purse, rogue, or coni-catcher. Mariolarie, cut-purse or coni-catching trickes, or knaueries. Mariólo, Mariuolo, a cut-purse, a coni∣catcher, a villaine. Marische, a disease called the pyles or hemorrhoydes in the fundament. Maritaggio, a marriage, a spousall, or wedding. Maritale, of or pertaining to marriage or to a husband. Maritare, to marrie, to spouse, to wedde. Maritato, married, spoused, wedded, a bridegroome, a married man, a hus∣band. Maritata, a bride, a married woman, a wife. Mariteuole, marriage-able, fit to be mar∣ried. Maritimo, pertaining to, or of the sea, of the sea side or coaste, bordering on the sea. Marito, a husband. Mariuolare, to plaie the cut purse or coni∣catcher. Mariuolo, as Mariolo. Marmarita, the herbe beare-breech. Marmegge, a kinde of birde. Marmo, marble. Marmocchio, a gull, a foole, an idiote, a patch or coxcombe. Marmoréo, made of marble, harde as marble. Also a marble colour. Marmoroso, Marmorino, idem. Marmotta, a marmoset, a babie for a childe to play withall, a pugge. Maróbio, as Marrobiastro. Maroelle, a disease called the hemor∣rhoides or pyles. Maroncini, a kinde of simnell, cracknell, bun or roule of bread. Maroni, Marroni, a kinde of greater chestnuts then any we haue. Also some∣thing about a plough. Maroso, rough, stormie, full of billowes, tempestuous, blustring. Marra, a mattocke, a spade, a shouell, a rake to mingle sand and lome togither, a pickaxe, or such rusticke instrument. Marrobiastro, the herbe horehounde or marrube. Marrubio, as Marrobiastro. Marrochino, spanish lether, frizeleather. Marro, the name of some part of a horses backe. Marrobio, as Marrobiastro. Marrone, a great mattocke, paring shouell or pickaxe or iron rake. Marrucca, a hempe or flaxe pit, a place in water to rot or steepe hempe or flaxe in. Also a kinde of thornie shrubbe or tree called ramme or harts thorne. Marruffino, the yoongest prentise in a house, one that is put to all druggerie, a swobber in a ship. Marsione, or Marsone, as Ghiozzo. Some take it also to be the dace, the me∣nowe: others the merlane fish. Marsori, a kinde of pot, pitcher, pipkins glasse, or other vessell. Marsupio, a kinde of pot that alchimistes vse. Also a pouch or a purse. Martagnone, a kinde of herbe bearing a fine flower. Martaro, Marturo, as Martora. Marte, tuesday, Mars the God of warre, and one of the planets. Also the mettall iron according to alchimists. Martanica, goates rue, or Italian fitch. Martedi, tuesday. Martedi grasso, shroue-tuesday. Martegone, as Martegnone. Martellare, to hammer, to forge, to knocke, to make one iealous or appassionated in loue, to make ones hart to pant. Martelletto, Martellino, a little ham∣mer. Martello, a hammer, a sledge, a carpenters mallet. Also iealousie or suspition in loue: panting or throbbing of the hart. Martera, a bakers kneading or boulting tubbe. Martiale, a martiall man, a man of Mars his constitution. Martialista, a martialist of the nature of Mars. Martinacci, a kinde of rauenous cormo∣rant or such foule. Martinello, a gaffell, a racke or bender of a bowe. Martinisti, martinists, of Martins pro∣fession. Martingalla, a martingall about a horse. Martino, taken for the arse or bumme of a man. Martin pescatore, a fish so called, resem∣bling a frogge: in latin Piscatrix. Martinello, Martinetto, a bender, racke or gaffell of a crosse-bowe. Martino pescatore, a kings fisher. Also a kinde of fish. Mártire, a martyr, one suffring in witnes of another. Martíre, Martirio, affliction, torment, martyrdome. Martirizzare, to martyre, to torment, or afflict. Martora, a beast called a martin, whose furre is verie deere. Martorella, a yoong martine, or a shee martin. Martori, the furre of martins. Martoria, as Martorella. Martorizzare, as Martirizzare. Martoriare, as Martirizare. Martóro, Martorio, as Martíre. Marturio, as Martire. Marubia, Egrimonie, the hearbe hore∣hound or Marub.
Maruca, as Maruca. Marucco, a prating foole, or selfe-concei∣ted asse. Maruda, a kind of Greeke measure. Marulose, a kind of salt fish. Maruzza, a kind of shell fish. Marza, as Marcia. Also a grasse, a plant, a scien or an imp. Marzapane, marchpane. Also a panter fish. Marzacotto, an instrument or toole that ptters vse. Marzarolo, a haggard hauke. Marzemino, in latine Armisium, a kinde of wine. Marzire, as Marcire. Marzo, the moneth of Marche. Also as Marcio. Marzocca, a game at cardes vsed in I∣talie. Marzocco, a nickename for a dog, an Is∣land cur. Also an ape, a pusse-cat, a munkie or pug. Marzolino, a kinde of cheese in Flo∣rence. Marzone, the fish we call a gudgeon. Mascalzonare, to play the rogue, raskall, base and abiect fellow. Mascalzone, a rogue, a raskall, a base, an abiect shifting companion. Mascara, a maske, a vizzard, a couert. Mascarare, to maske, to reuell, to mum, to cloke, to hide. Mascarata, a masking, a maske, a mum∣ming or reuelling. Mascarone, a chimney sweepers vizzard to keepe the dust from his face. Mascarpa, a kinde of fresh cheese or thicke clouted creame. Mascella, a iaw, a chap, a cheeke, the cheeke bone, the iawe bone, the mandible, or iaw wherein the teeth are fixed. Mascellare, belonging to the iaw bone. Denti mascellari, the cheeke teeth or grinders. Mascellone, a boxe, a blow, a clap or whir∣ret on the cheekes Maschera, as Mascara. Mascherare, as Mascarare. Mascheraro, a maske or vizard maker, a masker or mummer. Mascherata, as Mascarata. Maschile, male, masculine, of man kinde. Also manly or manlike. Maschio, a male, a mankinde, a mascu∣line. Also a keepe or hold or fort, or to∣wer in the mid of a castle, a strong to∣wer or cittadell. Mascolino, as Maschile. Mase, but if, but what if. Maselli, something about minerals. Masnada, a company, crew, knot, rout, hud∣dle or cluster of knaues or theeues. Masnadiero, a ruffler, a swashbuckler, a swaggerer, a high way theefe, a hack∣ster. Massa, a masse, a heape, a store, a huddle, a pile, a wedge, a lump, a chaos of anie thing, a cub, a haie mowe or stacke. Also paste. Massacara, a kind of shrimps or praunes. Massára, Massaia, a housholde or kit∣ching woman seruant, a kitching drudge, a huswife. Massare, to heap togither, to gather, heape or pile or lump vp togither. Massario, stacke-fish. Massaritie, all manner of houshold stuffe or implements. Massaritioso, thriftie, full of good husban∣drie. Massaro, Massaio, a groome or houshold seruant, a husbandman, a bailife or ouerseer, a good husband, a thriftie or thriuing man. Also stock-fish. Massata, as Massa. Masséra, as Massára. Masseritie, as Massaritie. Masseritioso as Massaritioso. Masséro, as Massáro. Massi, heapes, lumps, cubs, hillocks, or little hils. Massiccio, Massiuo, massie, lumpish, substantiall, thicke, tough, heauie, full. Massima, as Coppa di Gioue. Massima, a maxime, a principle, a rule, a specialtie, an axiome. Also excellent, high, chiefe, or most good. Massime, Massimamente, especiallie, namely, principallie, chiefely, most of all. Massimo, greatest or most in estimation, most worthie, noble, and excellent. Masso, a rock, a shelfe, a cliff, or a shal∣low standing in the sea, a masse, a heape, a lump. Mastella, a bathing, washing, or bucking tub. Mastellaro, a couper or tub-maker. Mastelletta, Mastellino, a little tub, a bowle, a trough, a tray, or such vessels of brasse as be set by a cupbord of plate to put pots of drinke in them. Mastello, a tub of any kinde, a bruers or vintners fat, a trough, or washing∣bowle. Also a kinde of measure of li∣quid things. Masticare, to chaw, to chew, to eate, to gnaw, to play on the bit, to champ. Masticatorio, a champing, or chawing bit for a horse, any thing that chaweth. Masticatura, a chawing, chewing, eating, or gnawing, or playing on the bit. Mastice, a gumme we call mastike. Mastinare, to play the curre, to be dog∣gish. Mastino, a mastie dog. Mastrare, to teach, to maister, to instruct. Mastro, as Maestro. Mastro d' ascia, a hewing carpenter. Mastro di campo, a marshall of the field. Mastro di casa, a steward, or controuler of a house. Mastrozzo, a clout, a wad, or rowle of cloutes, as milke-maides carie things vpon their heads. Mastruca, a garment or robe made of wolues, deeres, or goates skinnes. Masturzo, the weede we call watercres∣ses. Masuole, the name of a roapemakers or glassemakers toole. Matapane, a kinde of base piece of coine. Matara, a maund to put bread in. Mataraccio, Matarazzo, a mattresse. Matarazzo, a mattres, or flock-bed. Matarozza, a wood-cleauers beetle. Matarozza, something about a piece of ordinance or bell, the sinnewes where∣with the clapper of a bell is hanged vp. Matassa, a skeane of threed or yarne. Also a bundle or cluster. Matassara, a reeler of yarne or threed. Matassare, to make or reele vp in skeines. Also to kneade paste. Matassina, a little skeine or locke of wooll. Materaccio, Materazzo, as Mata∣razzo. Materazzaro, an vpholster, a mattres maker. Matarozzolo, a bunch to hang keyes at. Matéria, a matter, stuffe, or substance whereof any thing is framed. Also a thing. Also occasion. Materia, madnes, follie. Materiale, materiall, substantiall, made of anie matter. It is also taken for a foolish, grosseheaded or shallowheaded fellow. Materna, Materno, motherlie, mater∣nall, of the mother, of the mothers side. Matematica, or Mathematica, the arte or profession or knowledge in mathe∣matike, which is skill in Augurie, Geo∣metrie and Astronomie, or to caste na∣tiuities. Matematicale, mathematicall or pertai∣ning
to the Mathematickes. Matemático, a Mathematician, hee that hath cunning in Augurie, geometry and Astronomie, one that casteth ones nati∣uitie. Materozzolo, as Matterozzolo. Matesia, Mathesia, learning by demon∣stration. Maticare, to heale the shrunken sinewes in a horse. Matina, as Mattina. Matinata, as Mattinata. Matita, a thing to colour withall, as black∣lead or oker. Matonzini, a kinde of gold-smiths worke in chaines so called. Matre, a mother, a damme. Also the ma∣trix or wombe of a woman. Also a dis∣ease in women called the mother. Matre magna, the earth, for it is the generall mother of all things. Dura matre, the hard & thicke pannicle or membrane, which in compassing the braine about gathereth the same not straightly and closely togither, but loosely and in re∣misse order, after the maner that Peri∣cardio inuolueth the hart: Pia matre the caules of filmes of the braine. Matregna, a stepdame, or mother in law. Matremma, mother mine, my mother. Matrebosco or selua, Woodbine, or ho∣nie suckle. Matre perla, mother of pearle. Matricaria, feuerfeu, whitewoort or mo∣therwoort. Matricali vapori, as Prefocatione. Matrice, the matrix, mother, or wombe of a woman. Matricida, the murtherer of his mother. Matricidio, the murthering of ones mo∣ther. Matricolare, as Matriculare. Matricula, a role or checke, or catalogue or register of names. Also a sea snaile or Venus shell. Matriculare, to matriculate, to enregister, or admit of a societie or vniuersitie. Matriculatione, a matriculation, regi∣string, or admitting. Matrigna, as Matregna. Matrignale, like a stepdame, vnnatural∣ly, vnkindly. Matrimoniale, of or belonging to mar∣riage. Matrimoniare, to marrie, to wedde, to spouse. Matrimonio, a matrimonie, a mariage, a wedding, a wedlocke. Matrona, a matron, a sage dame, a graue sober woman. Matronale, matrone-like, grauelie, so∣berlie. Mattacchione, a merrie lad, a good fel∣low, a simple gull. Mattacciuola, a sillie foole, a simple gull. Mattacini, a kinde of antique daunce or morris vsed in Italy. Mattalone, a gull or ninnie, a patch, a meacocke. Mattana, hath bin vsed in iest for Matti∣na. Also a madding or gadding hu∣mour. Mattapane, a kinde of base little coyne. Mattare, to play the foole, gull, or noddie, to become foolish, to mate or giue a mate. Mattarie, foolish toyes, fooleries, madde tricks, sotteries. Mattarozza, the head or bigge ende of a beetle or iron crow or club. Mattea, as Poauola. Also as Mattana. Matteggiare, to play the foole or coxcomb, to become foolish. Mattelico, a foolish conceited felow, a gul. Mattera, as Madia. Matterie, fooleries, foolish or mad tricks. Mattero, a sticke, a truncheon, a cudgell, but properly a butchers pricke, a pegge, a pinne. Matterozzolo, a gull, a noddie, a foole, a patch. Also a bunch or knob at a bunch of keyes. Matresco, foolish, mad, fonde. Mattezza, madnes, follie, fondnes, foolish∣nesse. Matti, a rope-makers cart, which as the rope twists so it creepes. Also fooles Matrina, a morning, a forenoone, earely in the morning. Mattinata, a morning space, a mornings worke, mornings musike or hunts vppe plaid in a morning vnder ones window. Also a mattins. Mattinare, to praie in the morning, to saie mattins. Mattino, as Mattina. Also mattins sung in churches. Matto, mad, fond, foolish, simple, a mad, foolish simple gul. Also a mate or check∣mate at chesse. Also the middle or ninth pin at keeles, or nine pins, the mistres bowle to caste at. Mattonaio, Mattonaro, a brick-layer, a brickler, a brickmaker. Mattonare, to paue or to laie with bricks. Mattonato, paued with bricks, laide with bricks, a pauement, a streete or market place. Also a foole borne. Mattone, a bricke or little pauing stone, a square red stone. Mattonelle, a weauers toole. Mattoni cotti, baked brickes, red bricks. Mattoni crudi, vnbaked brickes, white bricks. Mattonelli, Mattoncelli, little brickes or square tyles. Mattoniera, a brick-kill. Mattonzini, a kinde of worke in chaines of gold vsed in Italy. Mattorelle, some instrument or part a∣bout a weauers loome. Mattotta, a queane, a harlot, a gill, a minx gixie or trull. Mattutina, earely, or morning, or morne, La matutina rosa. Mattutino, mattins or morning praier. Also earely in the morning. Also of the morowe or morning. Maturare, as Maturire. Maturezza, ripenes, iudgement, prudence, consideration. Maturire, risco, rito, to be or waxe ripe, to ripen, to come to full grouth, bignes, and perfection, to become mellowe, to grow due. Maturità, ripenes, ripe age, mellownesse, perfection, maturitie, good season, time conuenient. Maturo, ripe, aged, olde, sage, mellowe, fit, conuenient. Also graue, wise, discreet, considerate, perfect, constant. Also due as any paiment is, debito maturo, a due debt. Mauro, the graie colour of a horse, a darke graie. Mauséolo, a great rich tombe or graue, or monument. Maza, a kinde of meate made of meale, milke, oyle, and water that countrimen were woont to eate. Mazza, a clubbe. Also a beetle to cleaue wood with. Also a pensioners polaxe. Also a great sledge or hammer. Looke Andar' alla mazza. Also a mace or any thing with a great knob at the ende of it. Mazzabuò, a butcher, an oxe killer. Mazza cani, a dogs-slayer. Mazzacaballo, a great knobbed cudgell, a club. Mazzacara, the tender part of any bird. In a goose we call it the soule. Also a kind of shrimps or praune. Mazzacare, to bruise, to beate blacke and blew. Mazzachera, an angling rod, a fishing pole. Mazzacotto, a kinde of stuffe whereof glasse is made. Mazzaferrata, an iron club. Mazzafrusto, a sling to hurle stones with∣all. Also a club with some chain or stone or lead or iron fastened to it.
Mazzagattone, a killer of cats, a bug∣beare to feare children with. Mazza gente, a killer or queller of people, a man queller. Mazzapengolo, as Mazzaruolo. Mazzare, to kill, to slay, to quell, to braine, to knocke on the head. Mazza sorda, the herb cats taile or flags. Mazzaruolo, a sprite, a hag, a hobgoblin, a robin-goodfellow, a hodg poker, a lar in the chimney. Mazzasorgij, a rat-catcher, a rat-kil∣ler. Mazzata, a blow giuen with a cudgell or a club. Mazzenetta, a kind of shrimp or praune. Mazzera, as Mazziero, as Mazza. Mazzerare, to diue, to cast, to steepe or lay in water, as Macerare, Also to knocke or kill with a club. Mazzetto, a little bunch, or bundle, a būch of cardes. also a litle mace or verge born before Princes. Also a nosegaie or posie of flowers, a sheafe or handfull of corne or such like. Mazzetta, Mazzuola, a kinde of little anuile that goldsmithes vse. Mazzicare, to swallow or glut downe. Mazziére, Mazziéro, a mace bearer, a verger, a sergeant of the mace. Also a halbardier or poleaxe man, such as the Queene of Englands gentlemen pencio∣ners are. Mazzina, a sheafe, a handfull or bundle Also a little club. Mazzo, a heape, a masse, a lump, a bundle, a sheafe, a bottle or wad of straw, a bunch, a club, a hammer, a sledge, a bee∣tle. Also a codde or cod-fish. Some take it for a sea-tench. Some vse it also for a whiting mop. Mazzo di siori, a nosegaie, a posie or bunch of flowres. Mazzocca, as Mazza. Mazzoccola, as Mazzuola, a womans rowle or rowler for hir head. Mazzuola, a little club, bunch, bundle, sledge or beetle, or mallet. Mazzuolo, a little bunch, a handfull, a poesie of flowers, a nosegaie, a little sheafe or club. Me, me, meselfe, to me, to meselfe, from me, from meselfe. Also mine. Me, vsed for Meglio, better. Mea, mine, mine owne. Meabile, that which runneth or passeth and glideth away easily. Meandro, a winding, a turning or a cran∣kling in and out. Meanta, a kind of water fowle. Meare, to go or passe on further. Meato, gon or passed on further. Also a way, a passage or moouing course. Also the pores or holes in any body. Mecanico, mechanical, base, vile, a work∣man in whom there is a good hand and a good wit, a handicrafts man, a man of an occupation. Meccere, as Messére, but rather in ill part and as a nickename, as we say sir knaue. Meccole, a kinde of disease in a horses legs. Mecenato, a Mecenas, a patron, a fauou∣rer of learning. Meco, with me, togither with me. Meco medesmo, or stesso, with me selfe. Medaglia, a iewell, a monument, anie em∣bossed or grauen worke, a bruche, an ouch. It is also taken for a womans bum or geare. Also any ancient coyne. Madaglietta, any little brouch, ouch, iew∣ell, monument or ancient coyne. Medaglista, a ieweller or an antiquarie of old coines. Medea, a kind of pretious stone, black with veines in it, yeelding a sweate like saf∣fron, and taste like wine. Medela, hath beene vsed for a medicine or phisicke. Medesimamente, likewise. Also in such sort. Medesimo, selfe, selfesame, same, the same. Medémo, Medesmo, idem. Mediale, a blacke sacrifice which was offe∣red at noone daie. Mediane vene, the middle veine or blacke veine, branches of Cefalica and Basi∣lica, constituting the common veine in the arme. Mediante, by meanes, through, by. Mediastino, that partition which is made by certaine thinne skins, deuiding the whole breast from the throte to the mid∣riffe into two bosoms or hollowes: the one on the right side, the other on the left Mediate, by meanes or intercession. Mediatore, a mediator, an intercessor. Medicale, Medicabile, curable, medici∣nable, that may be cured. Medica, a kind of clauer grasse or Spanish trefoile. Also a woman phisition. Medicamento, a medicine, a medicament a salue, a curing, a phisicke, a remedie, a slibber sauce. Medicame, as Medicamento. Medicante, a phisition, a leach. Medicare, to cure, to heale, to dresse, to giue phisicke, to salue, to leach. Medicastro, an empirike, a foolish phisiti∣on, a horse-leach. Medicina, Medecina, phisicke, a medi∣cine or purgation, the arte of curing the sicke. Medicinale, Medecinale, medicinable, good for phisicke. Medicinare, as Medicare, to practise phisicke. Médico, a phisition, a leach. Also a kind of tree in Media which at all times hath blossoms. Apples halfe ripe, and apples ripe; which when they fall, others come presently in their place. Medimno, a certaine measure vsed in Greece. Médio, the middle finger of a hand. Also a kinde of blacke stone. Also a kind of herbe. Mediocre, meane, indifferent, moderate, not too big nor too little. Mediocrità, a mediocritie, an indifferen∣cie, a meane, a measure. Meditare, to meditate or muse with the minde, to ponder or consider, or studie with diligence. Meditatione, a meditation or musing, a deepe discreete consideration, an exer∣cise of the mind. Mediteráneo, in the middle of the land, in the maine land, farre from the sea, in land countrie. Meditore, a mower of hay. Medolla, the marrow, pith, substance or core of any thing. Meffe nò, No, no no, no in good sooth, no by my fay, no sir. Mefite, as Mephite. Mege, a disease in horses feete. Megge, a kind of sea fish. Megistani, gouernours, princes, great men, states, nobles, heroes. Megliaccio, as Migliaccio. Megliarina, a bird called a yellow ham∣mer, a golden hammer or yowlring. Meglio, Megliore, better, or best, rather. sooner, more, Io amerei meglio. Megliorare, to mend, to redresse, to reco∣uer, to better. Meglioramento, a mending, a recouerie, Meguei, a tree among the Indians, where∣of their gardens be full, for of the leaues they make their shoes, and vse them in stead of paper to write vpon: of the iuice thereof they make wine, vineger, honnie, and sugar, the fruite thereof and the rootes are verie good meate. Mei, a kinde of fish like the Cefalo. Mel', for Mi il, as Mel disse, he told it mee. Mela, any kinde of apple. Melabatro, an hearbe like to camomill.
Melacotogno, the fruite wee call a quince. Melacchino, full of honie, honnied, sweet, a kinde of wine in Italie. Melagrana, granata, a Pomegranate. Melagrano, a Pomegranate tree. Mela insana, a kinde of fruit, in latine Melongeua. Melampiro, an hearbe full of branches, hauing a seede like fenigreeke. Melampo, black-footed, a dogs name v∣sed of some poets. Melampodio, an hearbe called blacke hellebor. Melanconía, Melancónico, as Ma∣nincónico. Melancio, an orange tree. Melandrino, a kinde of broad flat fish. Melaneto, a bird called a Saker. Melangole, a kinde of cytron, or li∣mon. Also the parings of them, or of other fruites. Melane, a stone which yeeldeth a iuice. Melaneo, cole-blacke, a dogs name so called. Melano, sweete like honie. Melanteria, a kinde of blacke or inke wherewith phisitions vse to consume putrified flesh. Melantio, the hearbe narde, gitte, or pep∣perwort. Also a kinde of monstrous sea fish. Melanuro, a kinde of fish called a sea breame. Melanzana, the herbe mad or raging apple. Melarancia, an orange. Melarancio, an orange tree. Melare, to sweeten with honie. Melato, sweetned with honie, honied, sweete, of the colour of honie. Mele, bonie. Also any kinde of apples. Also a mans or womans bum, arse, or buttocks. Mele cotogna, a quince. Mele d'api, stone-honie, bee-honie. Mele di canna, hath bin vsed for sugar. Melega, the name of an hearbe: some take it for a kinde of corne. Melensaggine, foolishnes, or simplicitie of wit. Melensare, to become or play the gull or simple foole. Melerugiadoso, as Manna. Melesiogallo, a bird called a witwall. Melenso, foolish, gullish, simple witted. Melia, a tree bringing forth a pleasant fruite. Also a kinde of earth vsed in phisicke of the vertue of allom; painters vse it to make their colours last the longer. Meliceride, impostumes that runne a kind of matter like honie. Melico, musicall, or musician-like. Melicrato, a drinke of water and honie sodden together. Melifero, Mellifero, bearing or breeding honie. Melificare, to make or bring forth honie. Melifluo, Mellifluo, honnied, sweete, mellifluous. Meligine, a mell-dew falling on trees or corne, honie-dew. Meliloquente, a sweete speaker. Meliloto, the hearbe melilote, or clauer. Melino, a kinde of sweete-smelling oynt∣ment. Also a kinde of colour that pain∣ters vse, honie-colour. Melire, lisco, lito, to honnie, to sweeten, or season with honie. Melissa, the herbe baulme mint, or baulme gentle. Melissofillo, as Melissa. Melite, a kinde of yellow stone, which broken and put in water yeeldeth the sauour of honie. Melito, honied, or mixt with honie. Melitena, a kinde of herbe. Melitéra, a dry medicine seruing to fill vp the hollownes of vlcers after they are clensed. Mellonaggine, as Melensaggine. Mellone, the fruite we call a muske me∣lon. Also a gull, a log garhead, or a foole. Also a kinde of play that children vse in Italie. Also rowels in the mouth of a horses bit like melons. Melo, any kinde of apple tree. Melochite, a kinde of greene stone. Melóde, melodious, harmonious, musicall, sweetlie singing. Melodia, melodie, harmonie, sweete sing∣ing, a tunable singing, whereof be three kinds, that is to say Harmonia, Chronia, and Diatonia. Melodioso, melodius, harmonius, sweete singing. Melogna, a kinde of fish or beast. Melonaggine, as Melensaggine. Melonare, as Melensare. Melone d'acqua, a cucumber. Meloparadiso, the paradise apple. Meloteragno, a kind of shrub, or weede. Meltusio, the fish we call a hadock, or a cod. Melza, the spleene or milt of anie bodie. Membrana, a parchment, a sheepeskin, or vellame, the pill or skinne betweene the barke and the tree, the vppermost thin skinne of any thing, a membrane. Membranza, remembrance. Membrare, to remember, to ioine toge∣ther, to forme or shape limmes, partes, and members in due proportion. Membratura, the settling or order of members or partes. Membreuole, proportionable, according to true proportion of limmes. Also mindefull. Mémbro, a member, a limme, or a part of ones bodie or any other thing, in an oration it is a short sentence or clause. Membro virile, the priuities of man. Membroso, as Membruto. Membruto, limmed, strong, long limmed, hauing great members. Memfite, a stone fattie and of diuers co∣lours, in curing or burning any mem∣ber, it taketh away sense and feeling without any danger. Memorabile, memorable, notable, renou∣med, to be remembred, worthie of re∣membrance. Memoraggine, as Memoria. Memoranza, as Memoria. Memorando, as Memorabile. Memoria, memorie, mindefulnes, remem∣brance, souenance. Also time, dayes, chronicles, writings, histories, re∣cords. Memore, as Memoroso. Memoreuole, as Memorabile. Memoriale, a memoriall, pertaining to memorie, a record, a remembrancer. Memorióso, as Memoróso. Memoróso, mindfull, remembring, me∣morable, that will remember, that is thankefull. Men', for Me ne, Io men vado. I am going hence. Also for Meno. Mena, behauiour, fashion, cariage of a man. Also a kinde of waight. Also a cackrell, because it maketh whosoeuer eateth thereof laxatiue. Some take it for a herring or a pilcherd. Menacordo, the instrument wee call Claricords. Menaculo, a smug, nice, wanton, effemi∣nate fellow. Menaia, as Manara. Menadi, certaine women that were wont to sacrifice to Bacchus, dancing at the sound of hornes, and crying as mad wo∣men, carying staues wreathed about with vine leaues. Menare, to leade, to bring, to conduct, to direct, to guide, to frig, to wriggle, to iumble, to wag or stirre to and fro. Menamenti, stirrings, friggings, wrig∣lings, leadings. Menata, a leading, a bringing, a conduct, a wrigling, a frigging, a iogging, a iumbling.
Menatina, a thrust, a frigling, a wrig∣ling, a iogging, a ierk. Menar il cazzo, to frig, to wrigle, to frigle ones et cet. Menar l'agresto, as Menar il cazzo. Menar la rilla, as Menar il cazzo. Menar la danza, to leade the dance, to begin, to giue the onset. Menar giù, to bring downe, to put ouer as a hauke doth her meate. Menar moglie, to marrie or bring home a wife. Menar le mani, to lay about, not to be idle, to go freely about a matter. Menar alla mazza, to bring to destruc∣tion. Menare i mantici, to blow the bellowes. Menar il cane per l'aia, to vndertake some foolish action. Menar tanta puzza, to keepe a stinking coile. Menar per il naso, to leade by the nose, to make a foole of one. Menar di punta, to thrust or foine at. Menarosto, a iacke to turne the spit, a turnespit. Menar l'arosto, to turne the spit. Menar di taglio, to strike edgling, with purpose to cut. Menar le calcole, to be a free whore, to occupye freely. Menatore, a leader, a guide, a conducter, a directer, a bringer. Menchiatte, the name of a game at Cards. Menchia, sport, pleasure, game, glee, pastime. Also a womans geare. Menchiattaro, a gull, a foole, a cheater, a cogger, a shifter. Menchionarie, foolish, sottish, gullish, simple tricks. Menchionare, to gull one, to cosen, to flout in words, and iesting. Menchione, a foole, a sot, a gull, a coxe∣combe, a patch, a noddie, a freshman. Menda, a fault, an errour, a blemish, tres∣pas, dammage, condemnation, or a fee. Mendace, false, lying, vntrue, leasing, a lyer, a counterfeite. Mendacia, a lye, a leasing, an vntrue tale, an vntruth. Menda squarci, a botcher, a findefault. Mendatore, a finde fault, a Momus, a Zoilus, a mender. Mendicare, to beg, to procure, and get. Mendicante, a begger. Also begging. Mendicanti frati, begging friers. Mendicità, beggerie, pouertie, begger∣lines. Mendico, a begger, a needie poore bodie, one that goeth a begging. Mendo, false, that may be mended, faultie. Mendose, with fault, corrupted, full of errors, that may be mended. Mendoso, faultie, that may be men∣ded. Men dotto, lesse learned. Also lesse then eight. Mend'uno, lesse then one. Mene, a little fish that in winter is white, and in sommer blacke. Menescalco, as Mariscalco. Menestra, any kind of pottage or broth. Menestrare, to dresse meate, to make pot∣tage, to kich vp potage. Menestrella, Menestrina, any kinde of fine pottage or broth. Menestrino, a little porringer, a pottage dish. Also some fine kind of pottage. Menfite, a stone fattie and of diuers co∣lours, in curing & burning any mem∣ber it taketh away sence and feeling without any danger. Menia, a certaine piller in Rome where∣unto fugitiues and theeues were bound. Menince, the thin skin or filme inwrap∣ping the braine. Dura menince, as Dura matre. Menna, a dug, a pap, a teat, an vdder. Menno, as Menco. Meno, lesse, also I bring or lead. Menola, the fish herring or pilcherd, or a cackrell, as Mena. Menoma parte, the least part. Menomare, to diminish, to lessen. Menomamento, a diminishing or ma∣king lesse. Menome, low, least, base or abiect. Menomo, a simple gul, a shallow wit. Also the least. Menospreggiare, to despise, to contemne, to scorne, to vilifie. Mensa, a table or boord to eate meat on, a square table, a merchants table or coun∣ting boord. Also the broader part of the grinding teeth which chaweth the meate. Mensale, pertaining to a table or boord. Menscredenza, misbeliefe, incredulity. Menso, foolish, gullish, without order, forme or proportion. Mensola, a staie of stone or timber, carpen∣ters call it a bragget: the mazones a corbell; and some others a shouldring piece. Also a little table. Menstruale, of or pertaining to a moneth, or to the monethly disease of women, menstruall. Menstruo, a womans monethly termes or flowres or fluxes or issues. Also quicke-siluer according to Alchimistes phra∣ses. Mensula, as Mensola. Menta, the herbe called mint. Also a mans yard. Menta greca, a kind of sage called Roman sage. Mentagra, a foule tetter or scab running ouer the face, breast or necke of some. Mentale, mentall, pertaining to memorie or mind. Mentastro, a kind of herbe or weed. Mente, the highest and chiefest part of the soule, the mind, vnderstanding, wit, me∣morie, intent, will, aduise, remembrance, counsell, prudence, iudgement, thought, opinion, imagination, conceit, know∣ledge, hart, wisedome, prouidence or foreknowledge of man. Mentecaggine, madnes, foolishnes, fol∣lie. Mentecatto, Mentecato, rauished of his wits, sencelesse, out of his wits, besides himselfe. Mentecattaggine, as Mentecaggi∣ne. Mentegate, a kinde of paste meate so cal∣led. Mentionare, to name, to mention, to ming, to nominate. Mentione, mention, naming, minging, no∣mination. Mentire, mento, mentito, to lie, to belie, to giue the lie, to speake falsely, to forge, to faine, to counterfeit, to disguise. Mentito, lide, belide, spoken falsely. Also the partie belide. Also false or counter∣feit or vntrue, fained, forged, disgui∣sed. Mentita, a lie, a leasing, an vntruth. Also false, vntrue or counterfait. Mentitamente, falsely, vntruly, leasing∣ly, lyingly. Mentitore, a lier, a leaser. Mento, the chinne or vnder chap of anie creature. Mentoare, Mentouare, to name, to men∣tion, to ming, to nominate. Mentole, a mans or woman ingendring parts or priuities or quaint. Mentouanza, naming, mencioning, min∣ging or mention. Mentone, as Mento. Mentre, whilest, while that, in the meane time, so long as. Mentre che, whilest that, while that, so long as. Mentuccia, young mint. Also as Men∣tola. Mentula, as Mentola. Menutezza, as Minutezza.
Menzogna, a lye, an vntruth, a leasing. Menzognare, as Mentire. Menzogniere, as Mentitore. Meo, hath beene vsed for Mio, mine or my. Also the herbe spignll, ew, beare-woort or baldmoney. Mephite, a stinke or damp of corrupt wa∣ter mixed with mud or brimstone. Merauiglia, a wonder, a marueile, a rare thing, a miracle. Merauigliare, to wonder, to marile. Merauiglioso, wonderfull, meruellous. Mercadante, a merchant, a trafficker, a chapman, a trader. Mercadantia, merchandise or ware. Mercadantare, as Mercantare. Mercadantesco, mrechantlike. Mercantare to bargaine, to cheapen, to play the chapman, to merchant, to marting. Mercante, as Mercadante. Mercantia, as Mercadantia. Mercantesca mano, a hand that mer∣chants vse to write. Mercantesco, merchant like. Mercantile, merchant like, full of mar∣chandise or trafficke. Mercatantare, as Mercantare. Mercantantuccio, as Mercantuccio. Mercantuccio, a poore sillie merchant. Mercatantia, as Mercadantia. Mercatante, as Mercadante. Mercare, as Marchiare, as Mercan∣tare. Mercatare, as Mercantare. Mercato, a market, a market place, a faire a marte. Also cheapned, bargained or trafickt or merchandized. Also cheape, as Buon mercato, good cheape. Also cauterised, markt or branded with a hot iron. Mercato caro, deare bought, verie deare. Mercatura, the trade of merchandise, a bargaining. Merce, as Mercatantia, as Mercede. Also mercies, thankes, gramercies, com∣miseration, pittie, ruthe, compassion. Also wages or hire, the rewarde of sci∣ence. Mercede, a rewarde, a meede, a hire. Mercenale, as Mercenario. Mercenario, mercenarie, that laboureth for hire, a hireling, corrupted with mo∣ney. Merceria, Merciaria, mercerie ware. Merciaio, Merciaro, a mercer, a pedler, a haberdasher of small wares. Merco, a white or but, or marke to shoote at. As Marchio. Mercole, Mercoledi, wednesday. Mercol, Mercoldi, wednesday. Mercore, Mercoredi, idem. Marcorella, the herbe Mercurie or dogs caule. Mercorella saluatica, wilde Mercurie or dogs caule. Mercuriale, of the nature of the planet Mercurie. As Mercorella. Mercurio, Mercurie or quickesiluer. Also the God of eloquence and merchandise: he is feigned to be sonne of Iupiter and Ma. And is also called the messenger of the Gods. Merda, the excrement or ordure of man or beast, a turd. Merdare, to beray, to beshite. Merdoso, beraide, beshitten, dirtie, full of turdes. Merenda, a repast betweene dinner and supper, a nunchin, a beuer and anders∣meate. Merendare, to eate betweene dinner and supper. Merendina, a hungrie scambling, nun∣chion, or andersmeate. Merendone, an idle loggerhead, good but to feede, that will eate sixe meales a day. Meretrice, a whoore, a harlot, a strum∣pet. Meretricio, whoorish, like a strumpet, ad∣ulterous, or whooredome. Mérgere, mergo, mersi, merso, to diue, to duck, to drench, to plunge, to dippe, to sinke, to drowne vnder water. Merso, diued, duckt, drenched, plunged, dipt, sunke or drowned ouer head and eares. Mergo, a diuer, a di-dapper, or arsefoote. Also a name common to sundry birdes of the sea as a cormorant, a seagull, or a pewet, &c. Mergolare, to build with pinnacles or battlements. Mergolo, as Mergo. Also a pinnacle or battlement. Mergone, a diuer, a didapper. Meri, the throte or winde-pipe. Mericonda, a kinde of meate, sauce, or pudding. Meridiano, the noone marke, the meri∣dian noone tide, a meridian. Meridionale, of or belonging to the meri∣dian or to the south. Meriggiare, to dine, to feede at noone. Al∣so to watch and not sleepe in the daie time. Meriggio, midday, noone-tide, highnoone. Also the south part of the world. Merismo, a figure called also Distribu∣tione. Meritamente, woorthily, deseruingly, de∣seruedly, iustly. Meritare, to merit, to deserue, to earne. Meriteuole, deseruing, woorthie, meri∣ting. Meritissimo, most woorthie. Mérito, a merite, a desart. Also a benefite, a deseruing, a good turne, a reward, a merit. Meritorio, meritorious, deseruing. Meritrice, as Meretrice. Meritricio, as Meretricio. Merla, a fish called a whiting or a mer∣ling. Merlare, to make or builde with battle∣ments, pinnacles or loope-holes. Also to very, a word of armorie. Merlato, made or built with battlements, pinnacles, or spikeholes. Also verie, or varrie. Merletti, the seuerall wards of a locke. Merli, little turrets, spires, pinnacles or battlements vpon wals. Merlo, the birde called an owsell, a mearle, or a blacke-birde: a fish called a mer∣ling or a whiting. Some haue vsed it for the fish Lambena. Gesner saith that it is a fish that cheweth his meate like a beast, and takes it for the gilthead. Merlo alpadico, a bird that feede, much vpon nuts and will crack them. Merlo delle vesti, a garde or hem, or fringe, or binding of a garment. Merlo di muraglia, the battlements of a wall. Also loope-holes in a wall. Merlone, Merlotto, a foole, a gull, a dolt, a patch. Merluzzo, the fish wee call a haddocke: others saie it is another fish with white and purple spots on his bellie. Mero, meere, simple, sheare or true, pure without mixture, very right. Merope, a birde that eateth bees, whose nature is to feede and keepe his parents, which neuer com abroad, called a wood∣pecker or eate-bee. Merra, vsed for Menera, the future of Menare. Mertare, as Meritare. Merso, Looke Mergere. Merto, as Merito. Merula, a birde called a black-mack, an owzell, a mearle, or black-bird. Also a fish called a whiting or merling. Merzamino, a kinde of strong wine so called. Mesa, victuals or prouision for trauellers or waifairing men. Also a spokeshaue, or maund for bread. also a kneding tub Mesale, as Mensale. Mesanca, a fish called in latin Phycides. Mesareone, as Mesenterio. Méscere, mescio, mescei, mesciuto, to
skinke, fill, or powre out wine. Also to mixe, to mingle, to meddle or put togi∣ther, to blend, to meshe. Mesciuto, skinkt, powred or filde wine, mixed, mingled, medled togither, blen∣ded, meshed. Mescianza, Meschianza, as Mesco∣lanza. Mesciandola, idem. Meschia, as Mescolanza. Also a braule, a quarrell, a fray, a hurli-burly. Mesciare, Meschiare, as Mescolare. Mésciere, as Méscere. Meschina, a maide house-hold seruant, a kitchin drudge. Meschinare, to go a begging, to begge. Meschinello, poore, sillie, wretched, pit∣tifull. Meschinità, wretchednes, sillines, pouerty. Meschino, a wretch, miserable, poore, sil∣lie man or groome. Also poore, wret∣ched, sillie or miserable. Meschio, mixt, mingled togither. Also a medlie or partie-coloured colour. Mescirobba, an eawer or lauer to giue water with, a water pot. Meschita, a church or temple among the paganes and turkes. Mescitore, a skinker, a filler of wine, a cubboord keeper, a mixer, a mingler, a medler. Méscola, a mazons or carpenters squire ruler or plummet, a bricklayers trowell. Also a plummers melting ladle, anie kind of ladle or great spoon. also a kind of measure like vnto a bushell or a streeke. Also a medlie, a mixture, a blending, a mesh, a hochpoch. Also taken for a foo∣lish idle huswife, a sluttish driggle draggle. Mescolanza, Mescolamento, vsed for a salet of many sorts of herbes: a min∣ling, a medlie, a mesh, a melling, a blen∣ding, a mixture, a hochpoch or gallie∣mafrey of diuers things mixt togither without order. Mescolare, to mixe, to mingle, to blend, to meddle, to intermeddle, to mash, to mesh, to mell. Mescolato, mixed, mingled, blended, med∣led, intermedled. Also a kind of diuers coloured medley cloth. Also a mixture or blending. Mescolarsi, to intermeddle with. Mescolate, minglings, mixtures, med∣lings. Mescolo, as Mescuglio. Mescolino, a little mixture of diuers things together. Mescugliare, as Mescolare. Mescuglio, a hochpoch, a medley, a mix∣ture, a mesh, a mash. Mese, a moneth, the middle string. Also a-lam-ire in musicke. Mesenterie vene, braunches of the veine Porta, which conuey the iuice of the meat concocted from the stomacke to the liuer. Mesenterio, the middle of the bowels or intrailes. Also the double fat skins that fasten the bowels to the backe and each to other, and incloseth a number of veines, being branches of the carying veine, by which the guts are nourished, and the iuice of the meate concocted is conuaide to the liuer to be made blood. Meseraice vene, as Mesenterie. Mesio, the moneth of May. Mesochoro, one that standing among singers giueth a signe when they should begin to sing. Mesocraneo, the crowne of the head, the midst of the skull. Mesolabio, an instrument to finde out one or manie middle proportionall lines. Mesoleuco, a blacke precious stone ha∣uing a white stroke in the midst. Mesomelo, a precious stone hauing a blacke veine parting euery colour by the midst. Mesopleuria, the middle space betweene the ribs. Messa, a masse or sacrifice. Messacara, a kind of shrimps or praune. Messaggio, a message or embassage. Messaggiere, a messenger, an ambassador, a pursiuant. Messale, a missall or massebooke. Messedare, as Mescolare. Messer, Messere, a sir, a master. Messer nò, no sir, no maister, no for∣sooth. Messersi, yea sir, yea forsooth, yea mai∣ster. Messettaria, the name of a magistrate or office ouer brokers in Venice, and to cor∣rect their abuses. Messetti, brokers or messengers that go be∣tween man and man to make bargaines, and sell marchandise. Messia, an hebrew word signifiying our annointed Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ. Messo, a messenger, a pursiuant, an am∣bassador, a message, an ambassage. Also of Mettere, put, placed, seated, set, laid, waged, situated. Mestara, as Mestura. Mestiere, Mestieri, Mestiero, a trade, an occupation, a craft, a misterie. Also need, necessitie, lacke, ayling or want. Mestitia, sadnes, sorow, pensiuenes, heaui∣nes of hart. Mesto, sad, sorrowfull, pensiue, heauie in hart, woefull, full of lamentation. Mestola, Mestela, a skummer. Also a la∣dle or a trowell, as Mescola. Also a foolish simple idle huswife, that can do nothing but skum a pot. Mestolare, to stir with a ladle, to kiche vp pottage. Mestolone, a noddie-peake, a foolish fel∣low, a log gerhead, a slouen. Mestro, Mestruo, as Menstruo. Mestura, any filthie rotten corrupt matter or bealing. Méta, a bound, a marke, a limit, an ayme or but, or pricke to shoote at, a pyrami∣des, a mearestone. It hath bin also taken for a soft turde. Also a beacon. Also a haie reeke, or a stacke. Also a marke or gole in the field whereunto men or hor∣ses do run. Also a staffe or stake set at the end of a race. Metà, Metade, a moytie or halfe. Metacarpio, the backe of a mans hand. Metacismo, certa incongruità nel par∣lare.   Metadella, a kinde of measure for liquid things. Metafisica, things supernaturall. Metafisico, one that professeth things su∣pernaturall. Metafora, a metaphor, a figure, when the worde is translated from his proper sig∣nification to another. Metaforico, metaphoricall, figuratiue. Metallaro, a founder or dealer in mettals, a coyner. Metallificarsi, to growe hard or congeale to mettall. Metalessi, a figure whereby a word is put from his common signification. Metallino, a kind of glistring stone so cal∣led. Also of the colour of iron or other mettall. Also made of mettall. Metalloso, full of mettall, hauing mettall in it. Metamorphosi, a transformation or changing of one likenes or shape into another. Metaplasmo, a figure called a transfor∣mation, when some thing is necessarilie changed. Metafreno, the part of the backe that is against the hart. Metatesi, a transposition, when one letter is put for another. Metempsicosi, a passing from one body to another of the soules. Metéore, as Metheore. Meteoría, speculation of high things. Meteoróscopo, a beholder of high things.
in it. Metella, a kinde of Indian nut. Meteorologo, a student of high things, as of stars and planets. Métere, meto, mietei, metuto, to mowe haie or corne, or to reape. Meth, Maguei, as Cardone. Méthodo, a ready way to teach or do any thing, a method. Metheore, meteors, vnperfect mixt things, engendred in the aire. Metitore, a mower. Also a measurer, a reaper. Metonomia, a figure when the cause is put for the effect. Metódico, methodicall. Método, as Methodo. Metoposcopo, a metaposophist, one that by the fauour and face of a man will gesse his qualities and conditions. Metope, a kinde of dorike worke in buil∣ding. Also as Metope in latin. Metra, a bishops mytre. Also mitre. Metrare, to mitre, to versifie, to rime. Also to mytre or crowne with a mytre as bi∣shops are. Also to measure. Metraro, a rimer, a mytre, a measurer. Metrenchito, an instrument with which phisicions vse to conuey medicines into the bellie. Metretta, a measure vsed among the Gre∣cians, containing about eleuen gallons. Metria, any kinde of measuring. Metrico, pertaining to measure. Also a Poet. Metrocomia, a chiefe village or towne a∣bout other villages and townes. Metro, any kinde of rime, verse or mitre, measure or demension. Metroposcopia, a diuination of mens conditions by looking in their faces. Metroposcopo, one that looketh in ones face and thereby iudgeth his conditi∣ons. Metropoli, the chiefe head citie or towne of any land. Metropolitano, a metropolitane, a bishop of a chiefe citie. Also one of a chiefe citie. Méttere, metto, misi, messo, to put, to laie, to set, to place, to founde, to scitu∣ate, to wage or lay a wager. Metutto, Messo, put, laide, set, setled, pla∣ced, founded, scituated, waged, or laid a wager. Metter' al'incanto, to put to sale, at who giues most. Metter' all' ordine, or in ordine, to pre∣pare, to make readie, to set in order. Metter auanti, to propose, to exhibite, to prefer, to set forward.. Metter' a monte, to heape vp, to swigge the cardes. Metter' adosso, to put on, to lay on. Metter' amore, to settle ones affection. Metter' a fil di spada, to put to the sword. Metter' a ferro efuoco, to put to fire and sword. Metter' a sacco, to sacke, to spoile, to ha∣uocke, to ransacke, to massacre. Metter' a schio, to hazard, to aduen∣ture, to endanger. Metter' in voce, to proclaime or publish. Mettersi a fare, to begin or prepare to do. Metter' in campo, to enter the listes, to begin, to propose. Metter' in aia, to put a man in hope, to feede a man with faire words. Also to meddle with busines that one hath no∣thing to do with. Metter' in assetto, to prepare, to settle, to order, to dispose. Metter' la chiesa sopra il campanile, to set the church vpon the steeple, id est, to set the woman vpon the man. Metter' il capello, to put on a hat. Metter in letto, to go to bed, to lie downe in bed, to lay or bring a bed. Metter da banda, to laie aside, to put bie. Metter' in molle, to laie in steepe, to laie in water. Metter diligentia, to employ or endeuor all diligence. Metter' il chiauistello al vscio, to lay or set a barre before the dore. Metter' il freno, to put on the bridle, to bridle. Metter' in scritto, to set downe in wri∣ting. Metter fuori, to publish, to set foorth. Matter in fuga, to put to flight. Metter in rotta, to ouerthrowe, defeate, or put to flight. Metter in non cale, to neglect, to despise, not to set by, to care nothing for. Metter' in banco, to put, set, or lay in a banke, or in safetie. Metter' in mare, to go to sea, to go out in∣to the maine, to put to sea. Metter la faua nel bacello, to put the beane into the cod. Metter la casa sopra il camino, to put the house vpon the chimney. Mettersile scarpe, to put on his shooes. Mettersi in letto, to go to bed, to lie downe in bed. Metter mano, to set abroch, to broch, to manumitte, to tame. Metter la via tra le gambe, to begin a iourney. Metter paura, to make one afraid. Metter pegno, to lay a wager. Mettere scala, to ride at an anre neere the shore, to come neere the shore. Mettere vna camiscia, to put on a shrt. Mettersi in ceruello, to call his wits to∣gither, to put into his wit. Mettere sotto, to subdue, to vanquish, to put vnder. Metter sotto sopra, to ouerthrow, to turn topsie turuie. Metter' vn pulce nel' orecchio, to put a toie in ones head. Mettigarzoni, a placer of boyes or seruing men. Metti massare, a woman that helps maids to seruice. Mettitoio, the name of a toole that gold∣smiths vse. Mettitore, a putter, a setter, a laier. Mezza, a kinde of measure holding about a pottle. Also rotten, ripe or mellowe. Also halfe or a moitie. Mezzaaria, is taken among horsemen when a horse doth bound high continu∣ing it without rest, whereof commeth mezzaaria aspra, which is, bounding with a yerke. Mazzalancia, as Lanciere, a demilance. Mezzalana, a stuffe called linsic woolsie, or any stuffe made of halfe wooll and halfe silke or linnen. Mezzana, a saile in a ship called the poope or misen saile. Also a meane string of an instrument. Mezzanamente, by way of mediation, or intercession. Also meanely or indif∣ferently. Mezzanare, to mediate, to deale betweene others. Mezzanaro, a mediatour, an vmpier, an arbitrator, a compromiser. Mezzano, a meane or countertenour in musicke or singing. Also a meane man betweene great and little. Also a medi∣ator, an intercessor, an arbitrator, an vmpier. Mezzanità, a meane, a helpe, an occasion, a cause, a mediocritie. Mezzara, a play called nine pinnes, or keeles. Mezzare, to deuide, to keepe the middle, to mellow, to rot as fruite. Mezzaruola, a kinde of small wine mea∣sure. Mezza sella, the second kinde of saddle vsed to coultes. Also the time of the ry∣der, or the horses exercises. Looke Ca∣uallo and Huomo. Mezzene, the middle rib of a peece of ba∣con or porke, or brest-peece of porke. Mezziauolo, a dai-laborer, a meane hus∣bandman.
Mezzenoci, a kinde of drinking glasse. Mezzetta, a kinde of wine measure, it is about a pinte. Mezzina, idem. Mezzo, a meane, an occasion, a cause, a way, a helpe. Also halfe, middle, moitie, mid, midst, or mid part. Also mellow or rotten ripe. Mezzo di, noone-tide, mid-day, noone, high noone. Also the south. Mezzo giorno, mid-day, noone-tide. Also the south part of the world. Mezzo sapore, neither sower nor sweete. Mezzule, the middle boords of the bot∣tome of a barrell, the middle ribs. Mi, to me, my selfe, from me. Also a note in musicke. Mia, Mie, mine, my. Miagolare, to meaw as a cat doth. Also as Nicchiare. Miagro, the herbe Cameline. Miarese, a kinde of great waight vsed in Italie. Mica, a whit, a iot, a crum, a little, a no∣thing, a corne, a graine, or very small quantitie of any thing. Micancalo, cockle, or field niggel weede. Micca, scot and lot, a shot, a paiment of any reckoning, any fees. Micchi, vsed for A me, to me. Miccia, a niggardly, paltrie, scuruie, pis∣kitchen wench, a foole, a gull. Also a pug, an ape, a munkie, a pusse-cat. Miccie, a kinde of foode that asses feede vpon. Miccino, a little bit, mangiare a mic∣cino, to eate minsingly, a crum, a iot. Miccio, a weeke of a candle. Also a match to fier with. Micco, a becke, a signe, a nod. Michelazzo, an idle, lazie, loytring fellow. Micia, a pusse-kat, a kitlin. Micida, a manslayer, a murtherer. Micidiale, a murtherer, a manqueller. Micidio, murder, manslaughter. Micista, a kinde of powder made of dride beefe, which in Earberie, and among the Fuoruscitos of Italie they vse to giue to their horses and soldiers to keepe them in breath: and they say, that a horse with halfe a pound of it will go a hun∣dreth miles vpon the spurre, and they neuer go without some. Micola, a crumme, a whit, a iot. Micolare, to crum, to cramble. Micolino, a little crum, whit, iot, or nothing. Miconij, people that be commonly balde of the Iland of Mycos. Microcósmo, a little world. Also vsed for man. Micrologia, curiositie about things of no value. Midolla, the marrow that is in the bones, or pithe. Midolla del'albero, the pithe of a tree. Midollone, the pith of any thing. Midolloso, full of marrow, strong, lu∣stie. Midriasi, a disease in the eyes, which though it change not the colour of them, yet it maketh things seeme lesse then they are. Mie, Miei, mine, my, my owne. Mielare, as Melare. Miele, honie. Miétere, mieto, mietei, mietuto, to mow grasse or corne, to reape. Mietuto, mowed, reaped. Mietitore, a mower, a reaper. Miga, as Mica. Miglia, miles, of thousand paces. Migliaccio, a kinde of pottage, tarte or custard made of millet and hogs bloud. Migliaia, Migliara, Migliaro, thou∣sands, a thousand. Migliarese, a kinde of coyne in Italie. Miglio, a mile. Aso a graine called millet, or hirse. Miglioranza, Miglioramento, a bette∣ring, or mending, mendment. Migliorare, to better, to mend. Migliore, better. Also best. Miglioria, as Miglioranza. Migliosole, the herbe gromell. Mignatta, a horseleach or bloodsucker. Mignatti, a kinde of silke-worme. Mignattola, Mignera, as Mignatta. Mignocco, a gull, a meacocke, a sillie foole. Mignone, a minion, a fauorit, a dilling, a minikin, a darling. Mignore, vsed for Minore. Migrare, to remoue or go to dwell from one place to another. Also to returne back againe. Also to issue or go out. Migratione, a remouing from place to place, a returning backe. Mila, thousands. Milanta, a number numberlesse, spoken skoffingly. Milantare, to brag, to crake, to vaunt, to boast. Milantarie, braggings, crakes, vaunts, boastings. Milantatore, as Milantiere. Milantesimo, the thousand in number or order. Milantiere, a bragger, a boaster, a van∣ter. Milesimo, the thousandth in order. Milia, thousands. Mili, a gold drawers toole. Miliaia, Miliara, Miliaio, thousands, a thousand. Milicchio, a surname giuen to loue, id est, pleasant, sweete, milde or gentle. Milione, a million in number. Also a put∣tock, a buzzard, a kite or a glade. Miliosole, a kinde of shrub. Militante, militant, fighting, warring. Militare, to warrefarre, to follow the warres, to fight, to warre. Also mili∣tarie, warlike. Milite, a souldier, a man at armes. Also a knight at armes. Militia, warfare, militarie profession, the exercise of warre. Mille, a thousand. Millesimo, the thousandth in order. Millefoglio, milfoile, yarrow or nose∣bleed. Millepiedi, a worme hauing manie feete called a furrie or a palmer. Millione, a million in number. Millosphilo, as Melitena. Milo, a goldsmiths toole. Miluio, a kite, a puttocke or glade. Miluogo, middle place, in the midst. Milza, as Melza. Also a filme or skinlet. Mimare, to iest, to play the vice, to scoffe, to counterfeit actions. Mimesi, a figure called imitation or coun∣terfaiting of words and gestures. Mimico, mimike, iesting, scoffing, full of counterfeit actions. Mimo, a iester, a vice, a counterfeiter of mens actions, a scoffer, a tumbler. Mimógrafo, a writer of wanton matters. Mina, a mine or digging vnder grounde, a coyne of ten crownes. Also a kinde of measure for drie things. Minacciare, to menace, to threaten. Minacciatore, a menacer, a threatner. Minaccie, menaces, threates, threat∣nings. Minaccioso, Minaccieuole, threatning, menacing. Minacciamento, a threatning, a mena∣cing. Minaide, a venemous herbe. Minale, a measure of corne about a bu∣shell. Minare, to mine or dig vnder ground. Minatore, a miner or vnderminer. Minchia, as Menchia. Minchionare, to play the foole, the gull, the sot or simple asse. Minchionarie, as Menchionarie. Minchione, as Menchione. Minda, a play called hoodman blind, blind
bob or blindman buffe. Minella, a kind of little measure. Minera, a mine that yeeldeth mettals. Minerale, minerall, containing mettals. Minerarie, minerall, of or pertaining to mettals. Minestra, as Menestra. Minestrare, as Menestrare. Minestrino, as Menestrino. Mingherlina, a daintie lasse, a minnikin smirking wench. Miniare, to die, to paint, to colour or limne with vermilion or sinople or red lead. Miniatore, a painter or limner with ver∣milion. Miniatura, a limning, a painting with vermilion. Minima, a minim in musicke. Minimamente, leastly, in no wise, at no hand, in no case, least of all. Minimi, an order of Friers in Italy so called. Minimo, the least or yoongest, or smallest of all. Minio, vermilion, a kinde of red colour or sinople or red lead. Also a limning, a painting. Ministerio, a ministery, a seruice, a labour, a vocation, a function. Ministrale, a minister or officer of iustice Ministrare, to minister vnto, to serue, to affoord, to offer or affoord vnto. Ministratore, an administrator or assigne Ministro, a minister, a vicar, a person, a priest. Also a seruant, a squire, an offi∣cer, a deputie, an instrument, one that deales for another. Minone, a kind of game at cardes. Minore, lesse, lesser, the yoonger, the least. Minoretto, somewhat lesse, somewhat lit∣tle. Also a kind of game so called at ta∣bles with dice. Also at cardes. Minoringo, one of the least of a societie, as we say one of the court, but none of the counsell. Minotauro, a minotaure, halfe a man and halfe a bull. Minugia, the small guts, the entrailes or garbage of a deare. Also any smal thing or little trifles or shreads or sraps. Minugiare, to play the ioyner. Minugiere, Minusiere, a ioyner. Minuire, isco, ito, to diminish, to make lesse, to abate, to appaire. Also to fa∣uour the voice in singing, as it were to fall from the highest to the lowest. Minuitione, a diminishing, a diminution, an appairing, an abating. Minuscula, little, least, smallest. Minuscula lettera, the smallest letter. Minutaglia, the basest kind of people, the skum of the earth, as Plebe. Minutaglia dipesce, the frie of fish. Minutamente, peece-meale, distinctly, particularly. Minuare, to mince or cut in small peeces, to shread. Minuta, a rough draught or copie of any writing. Also small as pouder. Minutezza, smalnes, littlenes. Minutia, a particularity, a copie. Minutie, as Minugia. Minutille, all maner of small wares. Minuto, small minced, shredded small, a minime or a minute. Also an herbe so called. Minuzzare, as Minutare. Minuzzami, mammockes, peeces, scraps, vailes, shreads. Minuzzarie, mincings, shreddings, small peeces. Minuzzolare, as Minutare. Minuzzolarie, as Minuzzarie. Minuzzoli, mammockes, shreads, little peeces. Mio, Miei, mine or my. Mira, an ame, a leuelling, an intent or pur∣pose. Also the sight hole of a stone bow or any other shooting artillerie. Mirabao, a prying knaue, a sneaking com∣panion, an cawes dropper. Mirabile, admirable, woonderfull, mar∣uellous, strange. Mirabilita, wonderment, admiration. Mirabolani, a nut of Egypt called of the Apothecaries a Ben. Also a kinde of daintie plum. Also a kinde of precious sweete ointment. Mirabondo, admiring, looking with ad∣miration. Mirach, as Abdomen. Miracolo, a miracle, a wonder, a mon∣strous thing, a thing exceeding ordinary reason. Miracoloso, miraculous, woonderfull. Miraglio, an admirall of the sea. Also a looking glsse. Miragliato, an admiraltie or office of an admirall. Mirando, admirable, woonderfull. Mirante, as Miraglio. Miraos, a kinde of pottage so called. Mirare, to beholde, to prie, to looke, to watch, to ayme, to leuell at, to sneake, to viewe, to consider, to regarde, to aduise, to ponder. Mirasole, as Girasole. Also in latin Cro∣ton or Ricinus. Miratron, a prince of faces. Miria, a kinde of small waight or measure. Mirifico, woondrous, maruellous. Miriofillo, the herbe milfoyle, or yarrow. Mirite, a kinde of yellow precious stone, which rubbed with woollen cloth, yeeld∣eth a swet smll. Mirmecia, warts in the priuie parts. Also a kinde of blackish stone. Mironi, were those who for their defor∣med mouthes were greatly woondred at. Miro, a kinde of measure of liquid things. Mirra, a kinde of gumme called myrrhe, or the tree that beareth it. Mirrare, to preserue with myrrhe, to en∣balme. Mirride, a kinde of herbe. Mirrite, as Mirite. Mirtéa, made of mirtle, vide Corona. Mirtidano, of mirtle or tempred with it, Also a knob or bunch or gall growing vpon mirtles. Mirtilli, yoong mirtle trees. Mirto, a mirtle tree. Mis, an adiunct added to verbes or nounes to alter the sense of them, to a contrarie or bad signification, as Mis, in English. Misalta, a smirking lustie wench, a good trull. Misantropo, he that hateth the companie of men. Miscéllame, things mixed togither with∣out any order, a gallie-mafrie, a mesh or hotchpotch of diuers things. Miscellioni, they which do not holde anie certaine opinion, but are of diuers and mixt iudgement. Mischia, as Meschia, as Mescolanza. Mischianza, Mischiamento, as Mesco∣lanza. Mischiare, as Mescolare. Misciare, to awaken or rouze from sleepe, Also as Mescolare. Mischina, Mischino, Looke Meschina. Mischio, a medlie, a mixture, mixed. Miscio barbaro, he that hath a Grecian to his father, and a Barbarian to his mother. Miscoceto, a kind of long fish. Miscedenza, misbeliefe. Miscrédere, to misbeleeue. Miscreduto, misbeleeued. Miscredente, misbeleeuing. Miscuglio, as Mescuglio. Mise, he did put, set or laie. Miserabile, Misereuole, miserable, wret∣ched, sillie, lamentable, pitifull, piti∣ous, to be pitied. Miserando, as Miserabile. Miseratione, commiseration, pitie, com∣passion, ruthe, mercie. Miseréllo, poore, sillie, wretched, miserable Miserére, the name of one of the seauen Psalmes so beginning. Miséria, miserie, wretchednes, distresse,
misfortune, infelicitie, aduersitie. Also couetise, niggardize, or sparing. Misericórde, as Misericordioso. Misericordia, mercie, pittie, ruthe, com∣passion. Misericordioso, mercifull, tender harted, that hath pitie and compassion. Miserrimo, lamentable, wretched, to bee pitied. Miseritia, as Miseria. Misero, miserable, wretched, sillie, ruth∣full. Also greedie, couetous, niggard, sparing, or streight handed. Also of Mettere, they put or did put. Miseróne, a chuffe, a snudge, a niggard, a miser, a pinch-penny, a paltrer, a penie-father. Misfare, to misdoe, offende or trespasse. Misfatto, misdone, offended, trespassed. Also an offence, a misdeede, a trespasse. Misfattore, an offender, a misdoer, a tres∣passer. Mislea, as Mischia, a hurli-burlie. Misleale, false, disloyall, vntrue. Misleanza, Mislealtà, disloyaltie, faith∣lesnesse, falshood. Misoginia, the hate or contempt of wo∣men. Misolidio, a kinde of song or musicke. Missiua, a missiue, a letter, an epistle. Missolidio, Mixolidio, mournefull, me∣lancholike, or graue musike. Missore, as Becca in cauo. Mista, he that learneth, or he that is ex∣pert in the mysteries of religion. Mistagogo, a chiefe enterpreter of mi∣steries or ceremonies, he that had the keeping and shewing of church reliques to strangers. Mistate, a measure of liquid things. Mistério, Mistéro, a misterie or secret in holie things, properly a thing secretly hid in wordes or ceremonies, whereunto the common sort might not come. Misterióso, misterious, conteining some misterie or secret meaning. Mistico, Misticale, misticall, figuratiue, secret. Mistiéro, Mistiére, as Mestiére. Also as Mistéro. Mistione, as Mescolanza. Misto, mixed, or mingled, or mesht. Mistro, a measure vsed in Greece. Mistura, a mixture, a mingling, a medley, a hochpoch, a mangle. Misturaggine, idem. Misturare, as Mescolare. Misuéndere, vendo, vendei, venduto, to mis-sell, to sell wrongfully. Misuenire, vengo, venni, venuto, to de∣cay, to fall in a swoune, to come to ill, to miscarie. Misuenuto, decaid, fallen in swoune, come to ill end. Misura, a measure, a rule, a direction, a method, a proportion. Misurare, to measure, to consider, to poise, to weigh, to moderate. Misurato, measured, considered, weighed, poised, pondred, moderated. Also a wa∣rie, circumspect, aduised, staid, or con∣siderate man. Misurare a peso, to measure by waight. Misurare ad occhio, to measure by the eie. Misuratore, a measurer. Misusare, to misuse, to abuse. Misuso, an abuse or misusing. Mità, Mitáde, a halfe, or a moitie. Mite, milde, meeke, lowlie, gentle, pacient, tractable, soft, simple, not striuing, quiet. Mitigare, to mitigate, to asswage, to ap∣pease, to allay. Mitigatione, a mitigation, an asswaging, an appeasing. Mitigheuole, that may be appeased, mit∣tigated, or asswaged. Mitissimamente, most lowly, mildely, meekely. Mitologia, a declaration of fables, a mo∣ralizing of a tale. Mitologo, he that expoundeth fables or tales. Mitra, Mitria, a bishops mitre. Also the skinne wherein the stones or cods are wrapped. Mitrace, a stone of the colour of damaske roses, which laide in the sun, shineth of diuers colours. Mitrare, Mitriare, to enmitre, as bi∣shops be. Mithridate, a confection vsed in phisicke, called Mithridatum. Also as Mitrace. Mituli, a kinde of shell fish. Miuolo, a kinde of drinking glasse, it is a Lombard worde. Mizzare, to rot, to wither as fruits do, to be mellow. Mizzato, Mizzo, rotten, withered, squea∣zed, brused, or mellowed. Mizzi frutti, rotten, withered, bruzed or squeazed fruites, mellowe. Mò, now, euen now, at this instant, ioyned with other words, it stands for Mio. Momò, euen now, now now. Mobile, moueable, mutable, inconstant, wauering, that may be moued. Mobili, moueable goods, chattles. Mobilità, mutabilitie, motion, mouing, inconstancie, waueringnes, ficklenes. Mobilmente, mooueably, mutably, in∣constantly, waueringly. Mocca, a mowing mouth, an apish mouth. Mocaiaro, as Moccaiaro. Moccaiaro, Moccaiorro, the stuffe we call moccado. Moccaiuólo, Moccatoio, a mucketor, a handkercher, a snuffer. Moccamento, Moccatura, a snuffing, a blowing of the nose. Moccare, to snuffe or blow the nose, to blow or clense the nose, to snuffe a candle. Also to mocke, flout, or skoffe. Moccato, Mocco, snuft, blowen, or clensed, (the nose) snuft, (a candle.) Moccatore, Moccadore, a snuffer, or a muckador. Also a paire of snuffers. Moccatura, the snuffe of a candle. Mocceca, as Moccicone. Moccenigo, a kinde of coyne currant in Venice. Mocci, the snots or snuffings of ones nose. Mocciaccia, a flurt, a trull, a rigge, a harlot. Mocciare, to pare, or clip about, to snuffe or blow the nose, to snot. Mocciatura, any kinde of snot or snot∣ting, any kinde of paring or clipping. Moccicone, a snottie, slouenlie, lubberly fellow, a gull, a ninnie. Moccicoso, snottie, sniuelie, slouenlie, dropping at the nose. Moccioso, Moccignoso, as Mocci∣coso. Moccinigo, a kinde of coyne vsed in Venice. Mocchiare, to heape or pile vp. Mocchignoso, snottie, slouenlie, filthie. Mocchio, a heape, a huddle, a pile, a masse of any thing, a hey mow. Mocco, Moccolo, a snuffe or candles end. Also wilde fitch or cichling. Moccolare, to snuffe ones nose, or a candle. Moccolino, a little snuffe or candles end. Moccolone, an idiot, a gull, a ninnie, a patch. Moccoloso, snottie, slauering, slabberie, sniuelie. Mocenigo, as Moccenigo. Mocherino, an arme, whose hand is cut off, a stump of an arme. Mochi? but who? Moco, a kinde of pulse called tare. Modale, according to moode and forme. Modellare, to modell, to frame, or cast in a frame, to plot. Modello, a modell, a frame, a plot, a mould. Modeno, a toole that a stone-cutter v∣seth.
Moderabile, that may be moderated. Moderanza, Moderatione, temperance, moderation, moderate rule. Moderare, to moderate, to temper, to re∣fraine, to measure with reason. Moderatamente, temperatlie, moderat∣lie, meanely, with reason, patiently. Moderato, moderated, tempred, tempe∣rate, moderate, patient. Moderatore, a moderator, a temperer, a guide, a ruler. Modernaglie, new, fresh, last, or mo∣derne sights: it is taken for yong wen∣ches. Modernare, to reduce or fashion to late and new fashions. Moderno, Modernale, moderne, new, of this age. Also a masons or caruers toole. Modestia, modestie, ciuilitie, manner∣lines, temperance, shamefastnes, sober∣nes, humilitie, humblenes. Modésto, modest, temperat, mannerly, ciuill, moderate, shamefast, sober, humble. Modi, meanes, fashions, behauiours, man∣ners. Also the measures, rest, times, or pauses in singing or playing. Modica, Modico, a little, a modicum, a bit, or somewhat. Modificare, to measure, to poise, to pon∣der. Modificatione, a measuring, a poising, a pondering. Modiglione, a kinde of yonike worke in building. Modione, Looke Mensola. Modo, manner, way, fashion, guise, meane, custome, measure, rule, forme, quantitie, bignes, or size. Also a moode of a verbe. Modolantia, singing, musicall measure, pleasant tuning, modulation. Modolare, to sing or make harmonie, to measure, to tune and accent, to sing tunable, and according to due num∣ber. Modolatione, as Modolantia. Modolatore, he that singth or learneth to sing in measure, in tune and accent. Módolo, the measure, bignes or quantitie of a thing, a modell or frame, a conuei∣ance for water through pipes or con∣duits. Also that whereby a whole worke is measured or squared. Modorra, the drowsie ill. Modulantia, as Modolantia. Modulare, as Modolare. Modulatione, as Modolatione. Modulatore, as Modolatore. Mofolo, a kinde of great horned goate with so hard hornes that fall he neuer so high vpon them he neuer hurts him∣selfe. Moggia, bushels, or strikes. Moggiare, to measure by bushels, to heape or stacke vp. Moggio, a kinde of corne measure as our bushell is, a heape, a masse, a lump, a stack, or rick of hay. Mogliaccio, Mogliazzo, wiuing or ma∣rying, foolish wiuing. Mogliatà, thy wife. Moglie, Mogliera, Mogliere, a wife, a wedded wife. Mogliemma, my wife. Moglieta, thy wife. Mognere, as Mongere. Moia, tush, fye, phough, gup, no no, what? and is it so? good Lord. Also, let him dye. Moiette, mullets, fire-tongs, pincers. Moina, a nunne. Also a simpring fauning leering wench, a mowing face, or sim∣pring countenance. Moinare, to flatter, to faunt, to cog, to foist, to simper it, to make a mowing face. Moinatore, Moinero, a flatterer, a fauner, a cogger, a foister. Moine, flattries, faunings, coggings, foi∣stings, Looke Dare moine. Mola, a mill-stone, a grinding stone, a wheele. Also a lump of flsh in womens bellies which they call a tympanie or a moone calfe. Also a lump or peece of flesh without shape. It is also vsed for the whirrle bone of the knee. Mola del ginocchio, the whirrle bone of the knee. Molagrana, the fruite called a loue-ap∣ple. Molare, to grinde or wheele or turne a∣bout. Also a mill or grinde stone. Also such a stone as they make mill-stones of. Molari denti, the great iaw or eie teeth of any creature called the grinders or cheek teeth; which being fiue on each side of the mouth both aboue and beneath are made to grinde and fret asunder finely the meat receiued into the mouth. Mólcere, molcio, molsi, molciúto, to please, to make much of, to hug, to paci∣fie, to appease, to mitigate, to comfort, to refresh, to asswage, to delight, to po∣lish, to annoint, to stroke or smooth, to make tame or gentle. Molcire, Molcio, &c. as Molcere. Molciuto, Molto, pleased, fauned vpon, made much of, hugd, pacifide, appeased, mitigated, comforted, refreshed, asswa∣ged, delighted, polished, annointed, stro∣ked or smoothed with blandishments, made tame and gentle. Móle, a masse, a lump, a chaos, a cub or heap of any thing. Also a iaw or eie-tooth of any body. Also a great pile or bulwarke. Also a wharfe by the water side, or as we call it a key. Molecche, a kinde of crabbe-fish or lob∣ster. Molegnare, a kind of plum so called. Molendinao, whatsoeuer pertaines to a mill. Molestare, to molest, to trouble, to vexe, to grieue, to paine, to disquiet. Molestatione, as Molestia. Molestazzo, some part of a mill. Molestia, molestation, trouble, vexation, griefe, sorrow, paine, tediousnes, disqui∣etnes. Molésto, troublesome, tedious, grie∣uous, painefull, disquiet, offensiue, yrkesome. Mólgere, as Móngere. Molette, as Mollette. Moli, rue, hermall or herbe grasse. Molichino, a kind of purple coloure. Molinello, Molinetto, a little wheele, a spinning wheele, a little mill, and as Ventarello. Also a wheele for a dog to turne the spit in. Molinaio, Molinaro, a miller. Molinaia, Molinara, a woman miller. Molinamento, a winding, a reeling or turning like a mill. Molinare, to grinde in a mill, to full cloth. Also as Ghiribizzare. Molino, any kind of mill. Molino a braccia, a handmill. Molino ad acqua, a water mill. Molino a vento, a wind mill. Molino gazzino, a kinde of mill so cal∣led. Molino da poglia, an oyle mill. Molino terragno, a kinde of low mill or handmill. Moliri, a iocust that destroieth corne. Molitore, a bird like a swan braying like an asse. Molla, a wheele of a clocke that mooueth all the rest called the sprng. Mollare, to moisten, to steepe in water, to laue, to wet, to wash, to bathe. Also to leaue off, to cease, to finish, to giue ouer. Also to slacke, to loosen, to let goe a hold. Molle, soft, tender, slēder, limmer, lithe or soft in feeling. Also pliable, gētle, trac∣table, yeelding, effeminat, nice, emisse, easie, delicate, pleasant, calme, milde, wanton. Also moist, wet, watrish, dam∣pish
or soft vnder foote. Also a paire of tongs, pincers or mullets. Also a whi∣ting fish or any soft fish: in musicke it is taken for flat. Molle di fuoco, fire tongs. Mollechi, all maner of soft row fishes. Also a kind of shrimps. Mollemente, effeminately, wantonly, softly, tenderly, slenderly, limmer, wa∣trish. Mollette, mullets, pincers or tongs or nip∣pers. Mollette da fuoco, fire tongs. Molletine, little mullets or pincers or nip∣pers. Mollica, any kinde of crumme or crum∣bling. Mollicare, to crumble, to crum. Molliche, crums. Also a kinde of small pulse. Mollificare, to mollifie, to make soft or tender. Mollesino, Mollosino, Molesino, soft, limmer or slender in feeling, smooth, or lythe. Mollitia, softnes, wantonnes, effeminacie, dalliance, delicatnes, tendernes, nicenes, calmnes, smoothnes. Mollitre, softnes in feeling, as Mollitia. Mollitiuo, softning, suppling. Mollo, as Molle. Molo, a wharfe or hithe by the water side made by arte, we properly call it a key. Molobatro, an ointment made of mal∣lowes. Molochino, a kinde of colour like a whi∣tish purple, or like the flowers of mal∣lowes. Molochite, a kind of precious stone of a thicke greene colour like to mallowes. Molocuccia, an herbe so called taken for mallowes. Molosso, a mastiue dog, a bull dog. Also a foote of a verse consisting of three long syllables. Molte cose, many or sundry things. Molte volte, many or diuers times. Molti, many, diuers, sundry. Moltiforme, of many fashions, formes or shapes. Moltiformità, that hath many formes, a multiformitie. Moltifidi, clouen or cleft many waies, hauing many slits or full of scotches. Moltilátero, hauing many sides. Moltigenio, of diuers kindes or sundrie sorts. Moltinomio, hauing many names. Moltiloquente, much speaking or full of words. Moltiplicare, to multiply, to increase, to augment. Moltiplicabile, that may be multiplied or augmented. Moltiplicatione, multiplication, increase or augmenting. Moltiplicatore, a multiplier, an augmen∣tour. Moltiplice, manifold, of diuers and sun∣drie sorts. Moltipoténte, of great power, that may do much. Moltiradice, the lesser centorie. Moltissimi, verie many. Moltitudine, a multitude, a many or great number. Moltiuoco, of manie significations. Moltizzo, a skinners toole so called. Molto, much, store, verie, a great deale, mickle, a long time or season, a great while. Molto a buon hora, very timely, verie early. Molto bene, very well. Molto fa, long agoe, long since. Molto meno, much lesse. Molto per tempo, verie earlie, verie timely. Molto piu tosto, much sooner, much ra∣ther. Molto tempo fà, long time since, verie long agoe. Molto volontieri, verie willingly, most willingly. Molua, the fish we call cod. Some take it for the hadocke. Molucro, a square piece of timber where∣on painims were woont to sacrifice. Momentale, of moment, of consequence, Also during but a little time. Momentano, momentarie, transitorie, which dureth but a little while. Momentare, to moment, to make of con∣sequence. Momento, a moment, a minute, the least part of time which cannot be assigned, a very little quantitie or portion of any thing or matter, a little iot. Also the estimation, force, value, weight, impor∣tance, strength or vertue of a thing. Also aduantage or helpe. Also conse∣quence, worth, moment or respect of a matter. Also a graine or little more then weight. Momentoso, that is of some weight or value. Momméa, a mumming. Mommeare, to mum or goe a mumming. Momméo, a mummer. Momò, euen now, by and by, now now. Mómo, a Momus. The god of reprehensi∣on, he that carpeth at all things and is pleased with nothing. Momordica, a kind of hearbe. Mona, an ape, a munkie, a pg, a kitlin, a munkie face. Also a nickname for wo∣men, as we say gammer, goodie, good∣wife, such a one. Monaca, a nun or religious woman, a so∣litarie woman. Monacale, monasticall, after munkes or nuns life. Monacare, to become a munke or nunne. Monacarie, the whole order or profession of nuns. Monachelle, a kinde of rauenous water fowle. Monacherino, a stump of an arme, a man that hath his arme cut off. Monachetta, Monachina, a yoong little nunne. Monachetto, Monachino, a yoong munke or a nouice. Monacordo, an instrument with one string. Also as Monocordo. Monaco, a munke or religious and solita∣rie man. Also a kind of fish. Monacuccie, the flowre of Galingale or Sword-grasse or Corne-flag. Monangolo, hauing but one corner, of one corner. Monanno, the last yeere, a yeere ago, now one yeere since. Monarca, a monarch or sole ruler, a prince ruling without peere. Monarchia, a monarchie, a rule or go∣uernment of one prince alone. Monaro, Monaio, a miller. Monasteriale, belonging to a monaste∣rie. Monastério, Monastéro, a monasterie, a conuent, a nunnerie, a religious house, a cloister for solitary liuers. Monastico, monasticall, liuing solitarie. Monatto, a burier of the dead. Monaulo, a pipe or a recordor. Moncano, Looke Frenguello. Moncara, drie, barren, parched, rough, vnprofitable. Moncare, to stump, to maime, to lame or cut off any lim. Moncato, Monco, stumped, maimed, la∣med or cut off any lim. Moncerare, to bugger, to commit sinne against Nature. Moncherino, a stump of an arme without a hand. Monco, maimed, lame, stump armed or legd, as Moncato. Mondanità, wordlines. Mondano, mundane, worldly, of the world.
Mondare, to pare, to pill, to shale, to shell, to vnhuske, to cleanse, to neatifie, to pu∣rifie, to mundifie, to make cleane, to sift, to winnow, to fan, to purge. Mondatore, a clenser, a purifier, a purger, a parer, a sheller. Mondatore del aratro, the plough staffe. Mondature, parings, shales, huskes, suf∣tings, chaffe, drosse, dregs. Mondezza, cleanlines, neatnes, finenes. Also dung or ordure or filth of man or cattle. Also sweepings or dust. Mondezzaro, a dunghill, a muckhill. Also a scauinger. Mondiale, pertaining to the world. Mondiale machina, the worlds frame, the whole world. Mondicare, as Mondificare. Mondificare, to mundifie, to make cleane, to purge. Mondificatione, a mundifying or pur∣ging. Mondificatiuo, that doth purge or mun∣difie. Mondiglia, cleansings, purifyings, swee∣pings, parings, shellings. Also chaffe. Mondino, a measure for drie things. Monditia, cleanlines, neatnes, clensings. Mondo, the vniuers, the whole worlde, a mound such as Princes are painted with in their hands. Also neate, pure, cleane, cleansed, purified, winnowed, sifted, pared, shaled, vnhusked. Mondóra, Mondi, worlds. Monéta, Moneda, money or coine, the stampe of money. Also vsed for the wombe of a woman. Monetaio, Monedaro, a coyner, a money maker, a minter, a monter. Monélle, a roguish or fustian word, a word in pedlers French, signifying wen∣ches, strumpets or whores. Monetére, Monetario, as Monetaio. Monetoso, monied, pecunious, hauing mo∣ney, full of money. Mongara, a kinde of meate vsed in Italy. Mongaro, wettish, moist, marrish, fenny, waterish. Móngere, mongo, monsi, monto, or mongiuto, to sucke or drawe a teat or dugge, to milke. Mongibéllo, a continuall burning flame, a burning hill in Sicilie. Móngiere, as Mongere. Mongitore, a milker of any cattle. Mongiuacche, as Couamele. Mongiuto, Monto, milked, suckt, or drawne a dugge or teate. Mongrellino, an effeminate, wanton, coy, fond smell-feast, a spruce-fellow. Moniache, the fruit called apricocks. Moniaco, an apricocke tree. Monibile, that is easilie warned, or may be warned. Monicchio, a pugge, a munkie, an ape. Monile, a carcanet, a billament, a coller, a border, a iewell about ones necke, a neck lace hauing iewels or pearles in it, an ouche, a tablet or a brouch. Monimento, a monument, a graue, a tombe, a sepulchre, a memoriall, a re∣cord, a chronicle, a historie, a remem∣brance left to posteritie of some notable acte. Monina, a womans geere or conie, a quaint as Chaucer calles it. Monipolio, a conspiracie, a complot, a conuenticle. Monire, nisco, nito, to admonish, to warn. Also to furnish, to munite with prepa∣ration for defence. Also to aduertise, to aduise of somthing to come. Monito, admonished, warned. Also fur∣nished, munited, fenced, garded. Monitione, admonition, warning, ad∣uertisement. Also all maner or muni∣tion. Monitore, an admonisher, a warner, an informer, an aduertiser, a monisher, a counsellour. Also a furnisher, a muni∣ter. Monitorio, that warneth, that signifieth somewhat to come. Mono, the number of one, or a vnitie, namely in composition. Monna, as Mona. Monocentauro, a fained beast like a horse and a man. Monocerote, a strange monster who hath the body of a horse, the feete of an ele∣phant, the taile of a hogge, the head of a stagge, and one onely long shining horne in his forehead, taken for an vnicorne. Monocca, a nunne. Monocordo, an instrument hauing ma∣nie strings of one sound, which with lit∣tle peeces of cloth make distinct sounds, called claricords. Monocroma, a kinde of picture all of one colour without mixture. Monoculo, that hath but one eie. Also the gut that is called Cieco, the blinde gut. Monodia, a mourefull song where one singeth alone. Monodo, he that hath but one continued tooth in his mouth. Monogamia, a marrying of one wife and no more all their life time. Monologia, a long tale of a little matter. Monologo, one that talkes much about nothing. Monomachia, a combat or fight between man and man, a single combate. Monomaco, he that fighteth alone with∣out aide. Monophagia, a liuing alwaies with one kind of meate. Monophago, he that eateth but one kind of meate. Also one that feedeth alone. Monopolare, to engrosse into one hand, to forestall. Monopoliére, an engrosser of any com∣moditie into one mans hands that none may sell and gaine by but he. Monópolo, an engrossement of any mer∣chandize into one mans handes that no man may sell and gaine by but he, or the place where such monopolies are kept. Monoptoto, a word hauing but one case. Monosilaba, hauing but one syllable. Monosino, as Mollosino. Monostico, that which consisteth of one verse. Monotropo, of one fashion, alwaies soli∣tarie, or vnmarried. Monsignore, my lorde, a title onely for prelats. Monstro, Monstruoso, Looke Mostro. Monta, a stallions couering of mares. Also a mounting or ascent. Also a blocke to get vpon horse-backe. Montagna, a mountaine or hill. Montagnetta, a little mountaine or hill, a hillocke. Montagnaro, a man borne or dwelling on the mountaines. Monta in banco, a mountibanke. Monta in sella, a charge that trumpet∣ters vse to sound to prepare and call men to take horse and get vp. Montanaria, an ascent full of mountains, hillie. Montanaro, hillie or mountainous, as Montagnaro. Montanello, a kinde of fine singing bird. Montano, as Frenguello. Also a kind of eagle or faulcon. Also of or pertaining to the mountaines. Montare, to mount, to ascende, to climbe vp, get vp, to rise vp, to flowe vp, to go vp, to encrease or growe deere, to heape vp, to amount. Montar' in banco, to plaie the mounti∣banke. Montar' in collera, to growe or become angrie. Montar la mosca, to take pepper in the nose, to be soone angrie. Montar il pane, the price of bread to rise. Montar' a cauallo, to mount on horse∣backe. Montar' in barca or naue, to take ship∣ping, to take bote.
Montar' in mare, to lanch out to sea, to take shipping. Montar l'acqua, to flow as the tide doth. Montar' adosso, to leape vpon, to fall vpon. Montata, a paire of staires, an ascent, a mounting, an ascending, a heaping vp. Montatore, a mounter, an ascender, an engroser, a forestaller, a heaper. Montatura, a riding or mounting beast, an ambling hackney, an ascent or mounting vp. Monte, a hill, a mount, a mountaine, a heape, a lumpe, a huddle, a stocke or full paire or bunch of cardes. Andar a monte, to swig or deale againe. Monte di venere, the hill or line of Venus in a mans hand. Montemari, impossibilities, gods cope, heauen and earth, seas and mountaines. Montiana, a kind of cheese-cake or tarte. Monticello, a hillocke, a little hill, a little heape, a little mount. Montiera, a kinde of cap or hat hauing no brim behinde, now worne in Italy. Montiuago, a wandrer vpon mountaines. Montone, a ram, a mutton or tup: one of the twelue signes in heauen. also a great hill or heape. Also a kinde of sea fish. Also a kinde of coine in Italy, a cub. Montonile, mutton or sheepe-like, faced like a sheepe. Also a kinde of fish. Montolino, any thing that is of mutton. Montuare, to commend, to extoll, to exalt, to raise, to aduance, to heape vp. Montuoso, Montoso, hilly, mountainous. Monumento, a monument, tombe, graue, or sepulchre. Monzicchio, a heape or huddle of anie thing. Mora, staie, delay, lingring, prolonging. Also a blackamore wench, a black-berie or mulberie. Also a kinde of game vsed in Italie, with casting of numbers and casting of the fingers of the right hand. Moraglie, a deuise to pinch a horse about the nose to tame him when he is a shoo∣ing. Also any kinde of stone wals. Morale, morall, pertaining to maners. Moralità, moralitie, a morall sencè. Moraro, a blackeberrie tree, or a mulberie tree. Morato, blacke, or black-berrie colour. Moratoria, a staying, or a dispensation to staie. Morbare, to infect with any contagion or disease. Morbezza, as Morbidezza, as Morbo. Morbezzi, foolish, wanton, iesting toyes or tricks. Morbidezza, smoothnesse, wantonnesse, ranknesse, softnes, tendernes, fruiteful∣nesse. Morbidamente, smoothly, wantonlie, ranklie, softly, tenderly fruitefully. Morbidire, disco, dito, to make smooth, wanton, soft, or tender. Morbidito, made smooth, wanton, soft, or tender. Mórbido, smooth, soft, tender, wanton, fruitefull, ranke, proude in growing. Morbisciatto, a wagge, a craftie ladde, a loute, a rascall, a varlet. Morbo, a sicknes, disease, contagion or euill. Morbo regio, a disease called the yellow iaundise. Morboso, contagious, infectious, full of diseases. Morca, a kinde of fruite like an oliue. Also a kinde of stinking oyle made of them. Also a snuff of a candle. Also filth, tare, or rubbish. Morchia, as Morca. Morchioso, snottie, sniuelie, filthie. Mordace, biting, nipping, pinching, snip∣ping, detracting, backbiting, tanting, satiricall, stinging, sharp, be it with teeth or words. Mordacità, bitternes in tanting, in bi∣ting, in detracting, sharpnes of words. Mordella, a whelke-flye, or blister-flye. Mordente, mordant, or biting. Also the name of a colour that painters vse. Mórdere, mordo, mordei, morduto, or morso, to bite, to champ, to gnaw, to snip, to pinch. Also to detract, to back∣bite, to grieue with words, to taunt. Morduto, Morso, bitten, champed, gnawen, snipped, or pinched with the teeth. Also detracted, backbitten, taun∣ted, or grieued with words. Mordimento, a biting, a champing, a gnawing, a snipping. Also a backbiting, a detracting or taunting. Also a re∣morce, or compunction. Morditore, a biter, a champer. Also a de∣tractor, or backbiter. Morditura, a biting, a snipping, a pin∣ching with teeth. Also a backbiting. Moreci, as Marouelle. Moredale, Morredale, a close stoole. Morella, a fish called a menow, some take it for a cob or gudgeon. Morena, the fish called a Lamprey. Morello, the colour murrie, or darke red. Also the name of a Sawyers toole. Morellotto, ruddie, red, flaming red, red hote, high, or firie coloured. Moretto, a little blackamoore. Also the name of a bird. Morettone, the name of a bird. Moresca, a kinde of morice or antique dance, after the moorish or ethiopian fashion. Moresco, a blackamoore. Also a barbarie horse. Morféa, hath in mockerie bin taken for a womans priuie partes. Also in rogues language a mans mouth. Morfia, as Morfea. Morfino, a kinde of kite, or rauenous bird. Morgone, a didapper, a diuer, or arse∣foote. Moria, a murrian, a plague, an infection, a pestilence, a rot that commes among sheepe. Also vsed for follie or foolishnes, but it is a greeke word. Moriano, as Ombriano. Moribondo, that is readie to dye, dying. Morice, Morrice, the disease called the Hemorrhoides or piles. Moriente, dying, yeelding vp the ghost. Morigerare, to obey, to do as one biddeth, to conforme himselfe to another mans will, to be, or teach to be dutifull. Morigerato, obeyed, done another mans will, obedient, dutifull, mannerly, kno∣wing his dutie, well brought vp, and well nurtured. Morigiare, to bring vp mannerly and ci∣uillie. Morione, a murrion, a helme, a skull, a headpeece, a caske. Also a kinde of stone. Also the male Mandragora. Morire, Muoio, morij, morto, to dye. Morir di voglia, to dye with longing. Morir di riso, paura, freddo, rabbia, or fame, to dye with laughing, feare, cold, rage, madnes, or hunger. Morise, a muzzle for a dog. Mormillo, Mormira, a sea-fish, hauing diuers colours. Mormo, Mormora, as Mormillo. Mormorare, to murmur, to grudge, to mutter, to grumble, to mumble, to re∣pine. Mormoramento, a murmuring, a grud∣ging, a repining, a muttring, a mum∣bling, a humming, or buzzing, a ro∣ring. Mormório, Mormoratione, as Mor∣moramento. Also the noise of water running, or any such like thing. Also the belching or rasping of the stomacke, or any kinde of rumbling in the guts. Mormoréuole, murmuring, muttring, grudging, grumbling, repining. Also roaring or making a noise as water doth running among stones. Móro, a blackamoore. Also a mulberie tree. Also a wart in a horse called an
Auburie. Morocto, Morotto, a stone in Egypt, wherewith linnen-drapers make their cloth white. Moroglie, as Emoroide. Morólogo, wayward, foolish, tipsie, tat∣ling, babling, full of wyne. Morona, as Murena. Morone, a mulberie tree. Also a mul∣berie. Also a kinde of sweete meate so called in Italie. Also a kinde of fish much like flesh, that is eaten in Lent. Moronella, a kind of meate like Cauiaro, made of the fish Morone. Morosa, a loue, a mistres, a paramour. Moroso, a louer, a paramour, an amorous fellow. Morsaro, a bit-maker. Morse, as Moraglie. Also he dide. Also the great pincers that a smith doth vse to take the hote iron out of the fire with. Morsecchiare, to morsell, to bite. Morse di muro, the vtmost stones of a wall that is not finished. Morselletto, a little morsell or bit. Morselli, a kinde of daintie paste meate vsed in Italie. Also a paire of pincers or claspers that smithes vse. Also mor∣sels, or bits. Morsicare, to bite, to snip, to pinch with teeth. Morsicatura, a biting, a pinching, a nip∣ping. Morsicatura delle reni, a disease in a horse, called the weakenes of the backe. Morsicello, a little bit, or morsell. Morsico, a bite, a pinch, a nip. Morso, a bit, a bridle, or a snaffle for a horse. Also a biting, a snip, or a pinch. Also bitten, snipt, pinched, a check, a taunt, a rebuke, a morsell, a mouthfull. Also a kind of fish. Morsodirana, the herbe frogbit. Morsudiaboli, an herbe called the diuels bit, or forebit. Morsugalline, chickweede, or henbit. Morsura, a biting, a snipping, a nipping. Mortadelle, a kinde of sliced meate made of veale. Also a kind of meate of chiter∣lings, or of the vmbles of a deere. Also a kinde of sausages or puddings, or li∣uerings. Mortaio, Mortaro, a morter to stamp any thing in. Also a kinde of ordinance called a morter or a chamber. Also vsed for a womans priuities. Mortaiuólo, Mortaruolo, a little mor∣ter, a little chamber or potgunne. Also the blacke and blue marke of any hurt, stripe, or bruse. Mortale, mortall, deadly, subiect to death, that shall perish. Mortal marca, the whole world, the worlds frame. Mortalità, mortalitie, death, murraine, frailtie. Morte, death it selfe. Mortella, Mortello, the mirtle tree. Also as Vallonia. Mortelletto, a place or groue of mirtle trees. Morte subitana, sodaine death. Morticino, any dead carrion. Mortifero, deadly, infectious, contagious, that causeth or bringeth death. Mortigno, pale, wanne, gastlie, a dead looking colour. Mortina, a mirtle tree. Also a mistle. Mortise, a morteise in wood. Morto, dead, slaine, kild. Also a dead corse, a carcase. Also a pullie in a ship called the dead man he. Morto agliado, kild or slaine with a sword. Mortóio, Mortorio, the obsequies, fu∣nerals, hearse, or buriall. Morzone, the fish, called a gudgeon. Mosa, a tree in India bearing a daintie kinde of fruite like an apple. Mosaico, à kinde of curious stone worke of diuers colours, checkie worke, so cun∣ningly painted, that it seemed to be embossed. Mosca, any kinde of flye. Moscadello, Moscatello, the wine mus∣cadine. Moscardino, a kinde of muske comfets: the name of a kinde of grapes & peares: a fish called in latin Osmilus, which som say is a kinde of shell fish in forme like a bote, and swimmeth with his bellie vpward. Some thinke it is a kinde of cuttle or poor-cuttle-fish. Moscardo, a kind of birde. Also as Mos∣cardino. Also a musket hauke. Moscare, Muschiare, to sweeten, or per∣fume with muske. Moscaruola, a net for cariers horses in Italy, as they trauell to shake flies a∣way. Also a flap to beate flies away. Moscaruolo, a woorme breeding in a horse, whereof there be eight kindes. Al∣so as Moscardino. Moscato, sweetened or perfumed with muske, muske, a pomander or graine of muske. Also a dapple-graie, fleabitten, speckled horse. Also the wine muska∣dine. Moscata, a nutmegge. Moscatini, certaine grapes, peares and apricocks so called. Moscherino, a kind of flie: the name of a birde: vsed also for pepper in the nose. Moschette, little flies. Also flie bitings, or little spots about horses. Moschetti, a kinde of sparowes in India so little, as with feathers and all one is no bigger then a little wal-nut, and yet woonderfull faire to behold, it is writ∣ten that a whole nest full of them wai∣eth but 24. graines. Moschetto, a musket. Also a musket hauke. Moschettiere, a muskettier. Moschettone, a great horse-fly or hornet. Moscio, benumd in such sort that one feeleth nothing, stiffe with cold. Moscione, a flie, a gnat, a horse-flie, a butter-flie. Mosco, musse. Moscolo, a muskle of the bodie: also a top or gigge such as children play with. Moscoloso, full of muskles. Moscone, any great flie, a horse flie. Moscoso, mossie. Mose, a tree among the Indians which is thought to beare that fruit that Adam tasted of, for cut the fruit which waie you will and you shall finde the figure of the crosse. Mossa, mooued, stirred, iogged. Also a moo∣uing, a stirring, a starting, a ogging, a motion. Also the start or first motion of any thing, the starting place or start of any horse when he first takes his start to runne a race. Mossettine, little motions, ioggings, stur∣rings, moouings, wriglings, ierkes, ium∣bling tricks. Mosso, mooued, stirred, iogged, remooued, motioned, wauered, wagged, throbbed. Also mosse growing vpon trees. Mostacciata, a blowe, a clap, or boxe, or whirret on the mouth. Mostaccino, a little face, a little snout, a little mostacho. Mostaccio, Mostazzo, a face, a snout, a mostacho. Also as Mustacchio. Mostaccione, Mostazzone, a blowe or whirret giuen on the face. Mostacciuoli, a kind of sugar or ginger-cake, or simnell. Mostarda, mustard. Mostardelle, a kinde of meate boiled in mustarde. Mostardo, a musket. Mosto, new, sweet, vnrefined wine, muste. Mostoso, sweet, vnrefined, tasting of muste Mostra, Mostranza, a muster or mu∣string of soldiers, a facing of any gar∣ment, a shewe, a viewe, a patron or sight of any thing. Also a watch or a dyall of the sunne.
Mostrare, to shew, to put to view, to de∣clare. Also to muster souldiers. Móstro, shewed, put to view, or declared. Also a monster or any deformed crea∣ture, or misshapen thing that exceedeth, lacketh or is disordred in natural form, any thing done against the course of nature, a monstrous and incredible thing, a maruellous signe, a strange sight. Mostruosità, monstruositie, deformitie, monstruousnes, exceeding the course of nature. Mostruoso, Monstruoso, monstrous, de∣formed, strange, against the course of nature. Mota, a mud, a mire or puddle, that is in the bottom of a pond or ditch, a mote a∣bout a house or myre where eeles breed. Motacilla, a wagtaile. Motione, a motion, a moouing. Motiuo, a motiue, that is mooueable, not abiding. Moto, a motion, a moouing, a gesture, a wagging, a motion or cause of stirring of any thing, a passion of a mans minde. Motore, a moouer, a stirrer. Also taken for God almightie. Motoso, muddie, durtie, boggie, myrie. Motteggiare, to frumpe to quip, to scoffe, to iest, to gibe. Motteggiatore, a frumper, giber or ie∣ster, a quipper. Motteggiére, full of merrie conceits, quippes, frumps and iestes. Motteggioso, Motteggieuole, as Mot∣teggiere. Mottetto, Mottino, a dittie, a verse, a gge, a short song. Also a quippe a frumpe, a scoffe, a iest, a wittie saying. Motto, a word, a mot, a phrase, a saying a posie or briefe in any shield, ring, or emprese, a quip, a frump, a scoffe, a iest, or wittie saying. Mottozzo, a long tale or discourse of good tidings, a tale of reioicing. Motu proprio, of selfe motiō & freewil. Mouenza, moouing, motion, or stirring. Móuere, muóuo, mossi, mosso, or mo∣uuto, to moue, to stir, to wauer, to wag, to motion, to iog, to throb, to remoue. also to prouoke, to entice, to allure, to cause, to stirre vp, to make, to trouble, to di∣sturbe. Mouetizzo, moouing, wauering, stirring, wagging. Mouimento, a moouing, a stirring, a wa∣uering, a wagging. Mouuto, as Mosso. Mozza, a wench, a lasse, a girle. Also a womans geere or cunnie. Mozzare, to shorten, to curtall, to cut off, to behead, to stumpe or maime. Mozzargo, as Sgramfo. Mozzatura, a curtalling, a cutting off, a shortning, a stumping. Mozzenigo, Looke Mocenigo. Mozzi, snots, dots, or sniuels at the nose. Mozzo, shortned, curtald, cut off, behea∣ded, stumped, maimed. Also a boie, a ladde, a wagge. Also the stocke of a wheele. Mozzoraso, a kinde of course sattin so called. Mucchiare, as Mocchiare. Mucchio, as Mocchio. Mucchino, a snuffe of a candle, a candles end. Muccia, Mucia, a yoong cat or kitlin or pusse to play with, a foxe taile to brush withall. Dare lo muccie or mucie, to giue a flap with a foxe taile, to giue a bobbe. Mucciaccia, a wench, a girle, a lasse, a harlot, a strumpet, a flurt, a minx, a trull, a gixie. Mucciare, to flie, to depart, to runne away, to scape, to shift or sneake away by craft. Mucciata, Muciata, a flap or bob with a foxe taile, an escape, a departing, a shif∣ting, running or sneaking away. Muccichino, a mucketter, a handkercher, a hand-napkin. Muccini, yoong cats, kitlins or whelpes. Mucidire, disco, dito, to droope, to faint, to fade, to soften. Also to become mustie, pale, mouldie, hoarie or sinewed. Mucido, tender or soft, withered, faded, drooping. Also filthie, hoarie, palled, mu∣stie, mouldie, sinewed. Mucilage, a kind of strange beaste. Mucini, yoong cats, kitlins or whelpes. Mucronata cartilagine, the notable gri∣stle that groweth at the lower end of the breast bone, called the triangular car∣tilage. Muda, a change, a shift or suite of appa∣rell. Also a mew, to mew a hauke in. Mudare, to change, to shift, to alter. Also to mew as haukes and other fowle are. Mudato, Mutato, changed, shifted or al∣tered. Also a mewd hauke. Muffa, mouldines or mustines. Muffare, to grow mouldie or mustie. Mufiono, a kind of wild beast in Sardi∣nia, coated like a stag, and horned as a sheepe, which makes the best Cordouan that is. Muffo, Muffato, growen mouldie or mu∣stie, sinewed. Muffola, a kind of colour that goldsmithes call colourish. Muffoso, Muffolente, as Muffo. Muffire, fisco, fito, as Muffare. Muffri, a kind of beast like a shamoye or wild goate, as Muffiono. Muganza, a kibe, a chilblaine comming vpon ones heele or hands through cold. Mugghia, bellowings, lowings, roarings, hideous cries, gronings. Mugghiare, to low and bellow as a bull or cow doth. Also to roare or make a great noise. Also to grone. Mugghio, a lowing or bellowing. Also a groaning or a roring and great noise. Mugghire, ghisco, ghito, as Mugghi∣are. Muggia, a fish that so loues his make that if he be taken, it will follow him to the shore and there either be taken or pine away. Some take it for the mullet. Muggiare, as Mugghiare. Muggine, a fish called a mullet. Muggire, gisco, gito, as Mugghiare. Muggito, Mugghiato, as Mugghio. Mugile, a kind of fish called a mullet. Mugio, the fish called a mullet. Mugliare, to shake betweene two hands as one would play handie-dandie, to shake togither. Mugnaio, Mugnaro, a miller. Múgnere, as Móngere. Mugolare, to meaw as a cat. Mugolo, a meawing of a cat. Muiare, to roare as the sea or fall of a wa∣ter doth. Muinare, as Moinare. Muine, as Moine. Mula, a moyle or mule gotten of a horse and a female asse. Mulacchia, Mulaccia, a daw, a rooke or a chough. Mulardo, a kinde of daintie fish, which some take for the mullet. Mulatiere, a driuer or keeper of mules or moiles, as we say a carrier: for the car∣riers in Italy commonly driue mules, and vse them to carrie as we vse horses in England. Mulatieresco, of or pertaining to mules or moiles. Mule, a fish taken for the mullet. Also a disease in man and beast called kibes or mules or chilblaines. Also pantofles or slippers. Muletto, a yoong mule or moile. Mulgere, mulgo, mulsi, mulgiuto, as Mólgere. Muliebre, womanish, effeminate, vncon∣stant, wauering, slipperie, of or pertai∣ning to a woman. Muliebrità, womanlines, delicatenes.
Mulinaio, Mulinaro, a miller. Mulinamento, as Molinamento. Mulinare, as Molinare. Mulinello, Mulinetto, as Molinello. Mulino, any kind of mill. Mullei, a kind of shoe like the turkish shoes vp to the middle of the legs that Kings and Princes were woont to weare. Mullo, a barble fish. Mulo, a horse mule or moile. Also a ba∣stard. Also a kind of fish which some take for the barble fish. Mulomédico, a horse-leach or mule-leach. Mulone, a great old moile or mule. Mulsa, the herbe Clarie. Also a drinke of wine, honie and spices, as Metheglin. Multa, a forfeiture, punishment, paine, chasticement, a penalty, a fine, an amer∣cement. Multi lustre, of many yeeres and ages. Mumia, Mummia, a drug made of dead mens flesh called mummie. Some take it for the liquour that floweth out of the Cedar tree. Munacchia, a chough, a rooke or a daw. Munaio, a miller. Múngere, as Mongere. Mungiuacche, as Mongiuacche. Mungitore, as Mongitore. Muniaca, the fruit we call an Apricocke. Muniaco, an Apricocke tree. Municipali huomini, base condicioned or priuate housholders that are neuer cal∣led to any office or authoritie. Municipale, priuately belonging to the burges of one citie. Municipio, a citie hauing her own & spe∣ciall officers, lawes, and priuileges. Also freedenizon. Munifica, inriched, or endowed with ma∣nie guifts. Munisicentia, liberality, largesse, bounty. Munifico, free, liberall, bountifull, that yeeldeth fruit and commoditie. Munire, nisco, nito, to munite, to arme, to fence, to strengthen, to fortifie, to re∣paire. Munito, munited, fenced, armed, fortified, strengthened, repaired. Munitione, munition, armour, garrison, fence, fortification. Munitore, a prouider of munition or ar∣mour, a fortifier. Munto, milched or drawen a teat or dug, dried vp. Munusculo, a small guift, a present. Muolino del' onghia, the paring of ones nailes. Muóuere, as Mouere. Muouimento, as Mouimento. Muraglia, any kind of wall. Muraiuola, a kind of small coyne. Also an herbe growing vpon wals or snaile bree∣ding in wals. Murale, that pertaines to a wall. Vide Corona. Murare, to build or make vp a wall. Muratore, a builder or bricklayer, a ma∣zon or maker of a wall. Murca, the snuffe of a candle or lamp. Murena, a kinde of shell fish, the liquor whereof makeh a purple colour. Muria, a kind of medicament. Also a kind of salt meate made of the fat of fishes. Murice, an engine of warre with sharpe points to cast in the enemies way, called Caltraps. Also a kind of hard shell fish; of the liquor whereof purple colour is made. Muriccio, a poore mud wall. Muricciolo, a slender thin or small wall, it is also vsed for a porche. Muro, Mura, a wall, any kinde of wall. Muro a secco, a dry wall. Muro in volta, a wall made vault or arche-wise. Murone, a kinde of conserue, or preserue, or sweete meate. Murtella, the mirtle tree. Musa, a Muse, or a sweete song. Also the mose tree hauing very broade leaues. Musaico, as Mosaico. Musare, to muse, to thinke, to surmise. also to muzle, to muffle, to mocke, to iest, to gape idlie about, to hould ones musle or snout in the aire. Musaruola, a muffler, a musler, a muzle, a musroll or caetzan for a horse. Musata, a mocke, a iest, a skoffe, a taunt. Also a musing. Muscata, a nutmeg. Muschetto, a hawke called a Musket. Al∣so as Moschetto. Muschiare, to perfume, or make sweete with muske. Muschiero, Muschiaro, a perfumer or muske seller. Muschio, the sweete perfume called muske. Musco, as Muschio, it is also greene tree mosse. Also a muske or Ciuet cat. Muscolare, Muscoleare, as Muschiare. Muscolo, Muscoli, a muskle or fleshie part of the bodie consisting of flesh, veines, sinnewes, and arteries, being an instrumentall part of the bodie, seruing for voluntarie moouing, being a sub∣stance harder and endued with lesse sence then a sinew, as also softer and endued with more sence then a ligature: it is also an engine of warre, vnder which the Romaines were wont safely to approch to the walles of a towne to fill vp the ditches. It is also vsed for a fish which continuallie swimmeth before the whale, and serueth as a guide vnto him that he runne not vpon rocks. Muscoloso, Musculoso, full of muskles, hard and stiffe, with many muskles or braunes of hard and compact flesh. Musco marino, sea mosse, flauke, or herbe corall. Muscorini, muske grape floure. Muscoso, mossie, full of mosse. Also full of muske. Muse, Muses or Nimphes, properlie the muses or goddesses of learning, poesie & musike. Also poetrie, learning or studie of good letters. Museo, a study, a cabinet, a colledge, a schoole-house for learned men or of learned men. Also taken for delight∣full. Museragno, a kinde of mouse called a shrew, deadlie to other beasts if he bite them, and laming any bodie if he but touch them, of which that curse came I beshrew thee. Museruola, as Musaruola. Musette, a kinde of daintie apple so called in Italie. Musetto, a little musle or snout. Musiare, to worke Mosaico worke. Musiatore, a worker in Mosaico worke. Musica, the arte of Musike, it was vsed for studie of humanitie, and namely poetrie: hereof some make three kindes, first, with the voice, 2. with the hand, 3. with blowing, or as some call it vo∣call, instrumentall, and proportionall. Also of musicall instruments there be three kindes, one in blowing, as the organs, or the flute, &c. 2. in strings or wyers as the Lute, the Virginals, &c. the third, in striking or beating, as the drumme, &c. Musicale, Musicheuole, musicall, accor∣ding to musicke. Musicare, to play the Musition. Musico, a musition, or singing man. Musillo, a little musle or snout. Musimone, a beast like a sheepe, but hath hairie wooll like a ramme, engendred of a goate and a ramme. Musino, as Musillo. Muso, a musle, a snout, a face. Also a spout. Muso di cane, a dogges snout. Muso del boccale, the snout of a pot. Musoli, a kinde of fish that swimmeth as a guide before the whale that he runne not vpon rocks.
Musone, a great musle, snout or face. Musorone, a nickname for a foolish mea∣cocke, a lumpish pouting fellow, that in good companie will not speake with o∣thers, but lout and pout. Mussare, to mumble or speake betweene the teeth. Mussatore, a mumbler or speaker between the teeth. Musse, mumblings in speech. Mussitare, as Mussare. Musso, soft speech or silence. Mussolo, a kinde of great oister. Also an Asse hoofe. Also a wyer-drawers toole. Mustacchio, a horses lower part of his head, which we call the mosell. Mustaccio, Mustazzo, as Mostaccio. Mustaccione, as Mostaccione. Mustalo, a wyer-drawers toole. Mustella, a Weasell. Also a Powte or Eele-powte. Mustellino, a kind of colour like a weasel. Muta a muta, by turnes, one after ano∣ther. Also as Muda. Mutabile, mutable, inconstant, moue∣able, wauering, changeable. Mutabilità, mutabilitie, inconstancie, waueringnes, vncertaintie. Mutade, panniers or paddes, such as Rippiers bring fish in. Mutamento, a change, an alteration, a shifting, a remoouing, a transformation, a translating, a disguising. Mutande, thinne vnder-breeches, such as wrestlers vse for lightnes. Mutare, to change, to translate, to turne, to disguise, to shift, to alter, to remoue, to transforme. Also to make dombe, mute, still, or silent. Also to mue a hauke, or any other fowle. Mutatione, as Mutamento. Muteggiare, to be dumbe, or play the mute man. Mutezza, mutenes, dumnes, silence. Muti, a kinde of verses called blanke ver∣ses. Mutilare, to maime or diminish in some limme or member, to cut. Mutilamento, a maiming, or maime in some limme. Mutilato, maimed, imperfect in some limme, cut off. Mutinare, to mutinie. Mutino, a mutinie. Mutire, tisco, tito, to make dumbe or mute, or put to silence. Muto, Mutolo, mute, dumbe, speechlesse, silent, tonguelesse, quiet, still, making no noise. Also a blanke verse. Mutuamente, mutually, enterchange∣ably. Mutuare, to lend, to borrow, to take of a∣nother, and vse as his owne. Mutulo, a stay cut out of stone or timber in building to beare vp the summer or other part, in masonrie they call it a corbell, in timber worke a bracket, or shouldring piece. Also a kinde of shel∣fish that the Venetians call Cappa∣ruole, or Cappe. Muzza, a baude or pander. Muzzaro, as the fish Moscardino. Muzzo, a hee-baude, or applesquire. Also a cod or codfish. Also a whiting mop. N NAbissare, to make a rumbling noise as water doth at a downefall. Nacca, a cradle, a childs rattle to play with. Náccare, bagpipes, dromslades, a childes rattle. Also sarts. Also the shell-fish which some call a nackre. Naccari, tush, fye, no, gods, what? Nadir, the point directlie opposite to the Zenith, or the point vnderneath the Horizon, right and vnderneath our feete. Naffe, Looke Gnaffe. Naffiare, as Inaffiare. Nafissa, a woman taken to be the protec∣tresse or patronesse of whores. Nafta, a kinde of liquor like oyle, or a kind of chalkie clay, which hauing fier put to it will burne so that no water can quench it: some call it Petroll. Nagene, the rootes we call Turneps. Naiade, elfes, nimphes or fairies, haun∣ting riuers and fountaines. Nalba, a kinde of hearbe. Nalda, a kind of garment vsed in Bocace his time. Namorato, as Inamarato. Nanerelli, little dwarfes, pigmeyes, or wattles. Nanfa, sweete or perfumed water, smel∣ling of muske and orenge leaues. Nanigio, lothsomnes, horror, contempt. Nanigioso, lothsome, horrible, irke∣some. Nanino, Nanetto, a little dwarfe, or a pigmey. Nano, a dwarfe, or dandiprat. Nanna, a word that women vse to still their children with, as we say lullabie. Also the name Nanne. Some thinke it may be vsed for mournefull songs, or al∣luring verses. Nanti, Nanzi, before, sooner, rather, liefer, eare. Nantilo, a kinde of fish. Nanzi pasto, a repast before a meale, dishes that are first serued in for appe∣tite sake. Napa, a bird like vnto a partridge. Napee, flower nymphes. Napello, the hearbe called wolfes bane. Napicciata, a salt stone, such as pigeons feede on. Nappa, a table-cloth, a drinking-cloth, a napkin. Nappatello, a little cup, mazor, goblet, or drinking dish. Nappe, labels hanging downe, ribands or tassels of a garland, hawkes iesses, the varuels of a hawke. Nappo, a cup, a mazor, a goblet or drin∣king dish, a godard. Narancia, the fruite called an Orange. Narancio, an orange tree. Narcissino, a kinde of precious oyntment made of white daffodillies. Narciso, the hearbe called white laus tibi, or the flowre called a white daffodillie. Narcotico, causing astonishment, amaze∣ment, or wonderment. Nardo, the hearbe spikenard or spike. Al∣so a kinde of precious oyntment made of spikenard. Narica, a kinde of little fish which swim∣meth very softly. Narici del naso, the nostrils. Also the nayres of a hawke. Naridole, a shell fish, in latine Nerita. Narrabile, that may be shewed, told, or declared. Narrare, to shew, to tell, to report, to de∣clare, to relate, to expresse, to discourse, to demonstrate, to speake, to say, to vtter. Narratione, a narration, a tale, a report, a relation, a declaration, a discourse, a demonstration, a saying. Narratiua, as Narratione. Narratiuo, that may be shewed, tould, reported, declared, related, vttered, ex∣pressed, sayd, spoken, discoursed, or de∣monstrated. Nasaggine, a nosenes or qualitie of ones nose. Nasale, a remedie or couer for the nose, of or pertaining to a nose. Nasamonite, a stone of sanguine colour, with little black veines in it. Nasare, to smell, to sent, to nose. Nasamento, a traine-sent, a smelling, a sent. Nascénte, rising, growing, springing, beginning, new budding. Nascenza, a growth, a growing. Also a swelling, an impostume. Also a birth,
or natiuitie. Náscere, nasco, nacqui, nato, or nas∣ciuto, to be borne, but in herbes to grow, to spring, to bud forth, to breede, to be ingendred, to begin, to rise. Nasciuto, Nato, borne, growne, sprung, budded, or sprouted, bread, ingendred. Nasche, nome di parte o membro d'un cauallo.   Nascimento, a birth, a growing, a sprin∣ging, a natiuitie. Nascita, as Nascimento, as Nassita. Nascóndere, scondo, scosi, scoso, or scosto, to hide, to conceale, to lurke. Nascoso, Nascosto, hidden, concealed, lurked, secret. Nascondeuole, secret, close, solitarie, where one may hide himselfe. Nascondimento, a hiding, a lurking. Nascondigli, Nascondaglie, lurking-holes, by-nookes, hiding-places, sluts corners. Nasea, a discourse of noses. Nasello, a cod, or cod-fish. Also a whi∣ting fish. Nasipurgio, a kinde of liquor to drawe vp into the nose to purge the head withall. Nasito, the weede watercresses. Also wild mint. Nasitorto, as Nasturcio. Naso, a nose. Also a beake. Nasone, a great nose. Naso adunco, a beake-nose, a hawke-nose, a crooked nose. Naso amaccato, schiacciato, a flat, or squeased nose. Naso acquilino, an eagles nose. Naso camuso, a flat nose like a shooing hone. Naso del boccale, the beake or spout of a pot. Napamento, a reeling or winding vp of lke. Naspare, to reele or winde vp silke or arne. Naspatrice, a reeler, or windresse ofthrid, silke or yarne. Naspo, a reele for silke or yarne. Nassa, a weele, or bownet to take fish in. Some call it a haske or wker pad. Nassio, a kinde of marble stone. Nasso, an ewe tree. Also another t like a firre tree, which is venemous. Nassita, a birth, or birth time, or breeding or falling of any cattell. Nastari, snares or bonds made of silke ei∣bones. Nasto, a kinde of meate made of meal, oyle, honie and spice. Also a kinde of pole, reede or canes, whereof in time past they made arrowes and darts. Nastro, any kinde of silke ribond. Also a signe in heauen. Also the part of the ring whereinto the stone is set, or a seale is grauen. Nasturcio, Nasturzo, the hearbe wilde mint, or nose-smart. Also water cres∣ses. Nasuto, nosed, hauing a nose. Nata, a wenne, or flesh growing vpon ones bodie. Also borne. Natale, Christmas day, or the birth day of any bodie, or ones natiuitie day. Also natiue or naturall, or belonging to a mans birth. Natalitio, a birth day, or day of nati∣uitie. Natare, to swimme, to floate. Natatile, Natatoio, that swimmeth or floateth as waterfowle doth. Naticchia, as Saliscende. Natiche, the buttocks, hanches, or bummes Naticuta, well buttockt, broad arst, bum∣basted about the bumme. Natio, natural, natiue, borne with one. Nationale, nationall, pertaining to one nation. Natione, a nation, a countrie, a people hauing their beginning in the cuntrie where they dwell. Natiuità, natiuitie or birth. Natiuo, natiue or naturall, vsed also for borne and bread in such a place, or na∣turallie ingendred in a thing. Nato, borne, bread, hauing beginning, descending of, brought forth, framed of nature, descended from. Natrice, a water-snake. Also an hearbe, the roote whereof stinketh lyke a gate. Natta, a white spot or pearle in ones eye. Also a wenne. Also as Cilecca. Nattico, a kinde of salt so called. Natto, a kinde of little fish. Natura, the nature, qualitie, condition, manners, fashion, propertie, vertue, strength, naturall inclination, motion or constitution of a creature, which as Seneca saieth is nothing but god or rea∣son deuine, sowen in all the world, and all the parts thereof. Also the priuie members of man or beast. Also the pri∣uie parts or quaint of a woman, that whereby a thing is properly in that kind that it is. Naturale, naturall, of or according to nature, lawfull. Also a mans priuities. Also a base borne, or bastard. Naturalezza, as Naturalità. Naturalità, nature, naturalitie, libertie, denisonship, franchise. Naturalone, a plaine homely man, or a well tooled man. Naturare, to enure, to accustome, to na∣turalize. Nauale, pertaining to ships or sailing. Also a ship dock wherein ships are built, vide Corona. Naue, any kinde of ship, boate, or barke. Also the ile of a church. Naufragare, to suffer shipwracke, to wrack. Naufragio, shipwracke, wrack on the sea. Naufrago, sea-beaten, suffering ship∣wrack. Nauicabile, that may be sayled, naui∣gable, where ships may passe. Nauicante, a sailer or sea-man, he that saileth. Nauicare, to saile or trauell by sea. Nauicatione, nauigation or arte of say∣ling. Nauicamento, a sailing or wandring by sea. Nauicatore, a nauigator, a sailer, a sea∣man. Nauicchia, that part of a mill wherein the grinding stones do turne. Nauicella, Nauetta, a little barke, bote, ship or pinnace. Also a weauers shuttle. Also the incense pan of a church. Also a kinde of coine. Also the knee pan in a mans legge. also a bone in a mans heele. Also a kind of simnell, cracknell or bun of bread. Nauigabile, as Nauicabile. Nauigante, as Nauicante. Nauigare, as Nauicare. Nauigatione, as Nauicatione. Nauigatore, as Nauiatore. Nauigiaro, a shipwright, a shipman. Nauigio, Naiglio, any kinde of shippe, boate or brke. Nauile, Niuilio, any kinde of ship. Naulet, passage money or ferrie monie. Nasse, Nauone, the roote nauew. It is a ks of rape. Nauoilio, a sea fish like a cuttle. Nausa, nausines, a desire to vomit, but no vomit, lothing or abhorring of things. Nauta, a shipman, a sailer, a boatesman, a shipper, a mariner. Nautilio, a kinde of fish which at a pipe which is vpon his backe casts out much water, and vseth cetaine broad fins he hath both for wings o flie with, and as sailes to flote vp and downe the water, and his feete for oares, and his taile in steade of a helme or rudder. Naxia, Nassia, a kinde of white stone.
Ne, without a verbe, neither, nor, also in, or in the: with a verbe, sometimes it sig∣nifieth any, some, of it, of the same, ther∣of: somtimes it stands for vs, to vs, vnto vs, from vs: and other times it standes for thence, hence, from hence, from thence, away. Also either, or so much as. Neade, a beast in Samos with so strong a voice that when it roareth, it shaketh the earth, whose bones are so bigge that they are kept for a maruell. Nebbia, a cloude, an ouercasting of the skie, a miste, a fogge, or any such deawie exhalation: it is properly a thickning of exhalations, hauing in it plentifull force to ingender water: taken also for a multitude togither. Also aduersitie or trouble or any thing wherewith the knowledge of mans is hidde and ouer∣cast. Nebbiare, to be mistie or foggie, or clou∣die, to cloude, to ouercloude, to make cloudie or obscure. Nebbiarella, Nebbietta, a little miste, fogge or cloude, a deawie exhalation, thinner then a cloud. Nebbigenio, one engendred of a cloude, the cntaures are so called. Nebbione, simple witted or shallow hea∣ded. Also a great muste. Also a rough, tempestuous, stormie miste or cloud. Nebbioso, mistie, foggie, cloudie, full of cloudes, boistrous, rough, stormie, tem∣pestuous. Nebrite, a kinde of precious stone. Necessario, necessarie, needfull, ineuita∣ble. E'necessario, it is needfull, it is re∣uisite, it must be. Also a priuie, a takes, a close-stoole. Necessità, necessitie, neede, vrgent busi∣nesse. Necessitare, to constraine, to force, to compell. Necessitóso, needie, poore, lacking. Necessitudine, neede, necessitie, also kin or alliance, or a knot of allia. Necia, a funerall ceremonie at  raues of dead men. Necidalo, a worme which in six weekes space dth turne to a silke worme. Necromante, an enchanter, a nigromant a coniurer of spirits▪ Necromantia, nigro mancie, enchanting, diuination by calling of spirits. Ned, neither, nor sed in verse. Neente, nothin▪ as Niente. Nefando, wicked, execrable, hainous, mischieuous, horrible, not to be spoken of, not to be named, lewde. Nefand eria, wickednes, mischieuousnes, execrablenes, horriblenes. Nefariamente, wickedly, mischieuouslie, lewdly, villanously. Nefario, cursed, wicked, full of mischiefe, detestable, villanous. Nefro, a kinde of eagle or faulkon. Negare, to denie, to renounce, to refuse, to abiure, to say no. Negamento, a deniall, a refusall. Negatione, Negatura, as Negamen∣to. Negatiuo, negatiue, denying. Neghienza, as Negligentia. Neghittoso, idle, slothfull, negligent, la∣zie, retchles, lither. Negletto, despised, neglected, forgon, con∣temned, lightly regarded, not set by. Negli, Nelli, in the. Negligente, negligent, careles, retchlesse, not regarding. Negligentia, negligence, retcssenes, contempt, ill regard. Negotiana, the herbe Tobacco. Negotiare, to exercise, to negociate, to deale, to occupie, to emploe, to be busied, to exercise merchandize, to occupie a woman. Negotiante, a dealer, an exerciser, an oc∣cupier, a soliciter,  factor. Negotiatore, as Negotiante. Negótio, busines, dealing, occupying, an errand, affaires, matters, cumbersom∣nesse. Negotioso, busie, full of busines, much bu∣sied. Negotta, nothing, or any thing. Negrare, to darken, to black, to obscure, to deface, to blemish, to disable, to di∣sparage ones credit. Negressi conserue.   Negretto, somewhat blacke, blackish, or swart. Negrezza, blacknes, blackishnes, swart∣nesse. Negricante, blackish, browne, sable, swart. Negriccio, blackish, blacke, sootie, sable, darke, obscure, dun, swart. Negrire, grisco, grito, as Negrare. Negro, blacke, sable, darke, swart. Negromante, a nigromant, an enchanter. Negromantia, nigromancie, enchanting. Nel, Nella, Nello, Nelle, Ne', Nei, Nelli, Negli, in the. Nel far del giorno, by breake of day. Nel torno, about. Nel'un nel' altro, neither one nor th'o∣ther. Nembo, a great showre of raine, a sodain storme of raine or haile. Also a tempest of weather, a darke tempestuous wea∣ther. Also a cloude or great blast of winde. Also a cloud that Poets say the Painims gods were woont to descend in from heauen. Nembo di vento, a gust, a berrie, a flawe or whoorr of windes. Nemboso, stormie, tempestuous, cloudie, rainie. Nembrilla, a fish called an halibut. Neméi, a sacred kind of games among the Grecians. Nemicamente, like a foe or an enimie. Nemicare, to prouoke to anger, to mooue one to be his enimie▪ or foe. Nemicheuole, like an enimie or a foe. Nemicitia, enmitie. Nemico, an enimie or a foe, a foeman. Nemistà, enmitie. Nena, a nurce or foster mother. Nencio, a foole, an idiot, a naturall, a doult, a gull. Neo, a naturall marke or mole, or freckle vpon the skin of any bodie. Neomenia▪ the time of the new moone. Nepente, an herbe which put into wine driueth away sadnes. Some take it for buglosse. Nepeta, the herbe mint, neppe, or catmint. Nepetella, Nepitella, as Nepeta. Nephelide, small spots in the eies. Nephrite, an ache in the raines of the backe. Also the stone or grauell in the raines. Nephritico, he that is troubled with paines in the raines of the backe. Nepitelli, the nipples of a dug or teat. Nepote, a nephew, ones brothers childe. Also the sonne or daughters sonne, a grand-childe. Nepoti, hath beene vsed for posteritie, of∣spring or succession. Nepotino, a little nephewe or a great grand-childe, whether it be by sone or daughter. Neputo, the herbe bush calamint or aire calamint. Nequitezza, as Nequitia. Nequitia, wickednes, treacherie, baores, lewdnes, vnthriftines, naughtines, n∣gratiousnes, negligence. Nequitoso, wicked, bad, lewd, vnthrifte, vngratious naughtie. Nerare, as Negrare. Nerbo, as Neruo. Nerboso, as Neruoso. Nerbotuto, Nerbuto, as Neruoso. Nerbosità, as Neruosità. Nereggiare, to grow or become blacke  darke. Nereggiante, blackish, drawing towa blacke, sad, sable, duskie. Neréide, sea nymphes. also a kind of mon∣strous
fish. Neretto, as Negretto. Nerezza, as Negrezza. Nericcio, as Negriccio. Nero, blacke, darke, sable. Neronarie, cruell, Neronian cruelties. Neruigno, as Neruoso. Neruo, Nerbo, a sinew. Also strength, force, might or power. Also stoutnes or constancie of minde. Also the string of a harpe, of a lute or other instrument. Also vsed for the yard of a man, and in leaues the nerue, sinewes or veines. Neruo crinale, a sinew going from the head downe to the necke. Neruo di bue, a buls pizell. Neruoso, Nerboso, hauing great or ma∣nie sinewes, pithie or strongly made in bodie, neruie. Neruoruto, Neruuto, as Neruoso. Neruosità, sinewenes, strength, toughnes, the hauing of sinewes and strength. Néruulo,   Nescientemente, vnwittingly, igno∣rantly, vnknowingly. Nescientia, ignorance or want of know∣ledge. Nescio, a foole, an idiot, a natural, a dolt. One that knowes nothing, ignorant. Nescione, a great foole, idiot, gull or na∣turall. Nespola, the fruit we call a Medler or an open-arse. also a kind of musicall instru∣ment without strings. Nespolo, a Medler tree. Nessunamente, by no meanes, in no wise, at no hand. Nessuno, no one, no body, not any one, not any. Nestare, to ingraffe. Nestatore, an ingraffer. Nesto, a graffe, an impe, a set, a planting, a scien. Nettamente, neatly, cleanly, purely, fine∣ly, handsomely, smugly. Nettadenti, a maker cleane of teeth. Also a tooth picker. Nettáre, to cleanse, to polish, to make cleane, to sweepe, to brush, to skoure. Néttare, a pleasant liquor fained to be the drinke of the gods called Nectar. Netta orecchie, an eare-picke. Nettaréa, the herbe Elecampane. Nettaréo, immortall, deuine, sweet, plea∣sant, Nectar-like. Nettezza, cleanlines, neatnes. Netto, neate, fine, cleane, polished, smug, smirke, handsome. Nettuto, cleane, neate, fine, polished, as Netto. Neuare, to snow. Neuegare, idem. Neue, snow. Neuicare, to snow. Neuigare, idem. Neuigare al monte, to begin to haue white haires about the temples. Neuno, no one, no bodie. Neuo, as Neo. Neuoso, snowie, full of snow. Neuola, as Nebbia. Also a kind of sim∣nell, wafer, cracknell or sugar bread. Neurico, one that hath the goute in the sinewes. Neutrare, to be neutrall, to take neither part, to be indifferent, to be betweene both. Neutralità, indifferencie, neutrality. Neutro, neuter, indifferent, betwen both, neither the one nor the other, belonging to neither, neutrall. Nezza, a niece. Nezzina, a little niece, a mans daughters daughter. Niaso, an eyase hauke. Nibbio, a kite or a puttock or a buzzard or a glade. Also a kind of fish. Niccihia, a nocke, a corner. Nicchiare, to lament, to grieue or fret in∣wardly, to dodge, to miche, to grumble closely or show some signe of discontent, to stand thrumming of hats, to speake doubtfull words, to hang off and on, as if more money would make all well. Nicchio, the shell of any shell fish, a nooke or corner. Also such little cubboords in churches as they put images in or that images stand in. also a bird in India so great that will take vp an Elephant a∣liue, and being aloft in the aire let him fall downe and so kill him and then eate him, whose feathers are saide to be three score soote long. Nicchietti, little round pibble stones. Nicciola, a small nut. Niccolo, a kind of pibble stone. Nicerobiano, a kinde of precious oint∣ment. Nicosiana, the herbe Tobacco. Nidare, to nuzzle, to nestle, to builde a nest. Nidaso, an eyase hauke taken out of the nest. Nidata, as Nidiata. Nidetto, a little nest or roosting place. Nidiata, a nestfull, a couie, a beauie, an airie, a brood, a sitting, &c. Nidificare, to build or make a nest. Nidio, Nido, a nest or roost. Niegare, as Negare. Niego, a deniall, refusall. Also as Neo. Niello, a foole, a gull, a sot, a ninnie. Niffolare, as Musare. Niffolo, as Muso, or as Ceffo. Nigella, the herbe Pepper-woort, narde or Coriander of Rome. Some take it for the herbe Githe or Bishops-woort or sweete sauour, it is verie good against rheumes. Niggo, as Nibbio. Nigotta, as Niente. Nigredine, blackishnes, blacknes. Nigricante, blackish, black, broune, sable. Nigrino, Nigrigno, blackish, dun. Nigromante, as Negromante. Nigromantia, as Negromantia. Niffola, a muzzle or muffler. Niénte, nothing, any thing, naught, no∣thing at all, not any thing. Nientedimanco, neuertheles, not∣withstanding. Nientedimeno, as Nientedimao. Nimfa, a nymphe whereof there be many sorts. Also a new maried wife or bride. also such ruffe bands as are worne now a daies. Also the hollownes or voide space in the neather lip. Also the cup of any floure by litle & litle gaping & opening it selfe. Also among phisitions a little piece of flesh rising vp in the midst of a womans priuie parts, which closeth the mouth of the necke and driueth colde from it. Also yoong bees before they flie. Nimfadóro, Nimfodóro, an effemi∣nate, wanton, milke-sop, perfumed la∣dies-courting courtier. Nimfarsi, to trim, to smug, to trixie, to decke or spruce himselfe vp as a nimphe or as one that would alwaies court his mistresse. Nimféo, nimphe-like, wanton, effemi∣nate. Nimicare, as Nemicare, as Inimicare. Nimicheuole, as Nemicheuole. Nimicitia, enmitie, deadly feud, hatred, foedom. Nimico, an enimie or a foe, a foeman. Nimietà, an ouermuch quantitie or ex∣cesse, too much aboundance. Nimistà, enmitie or feud. Nimo, a foole, a gull, a ninnie, a mea∣cocke. Nimpha, Nimpharsi, as Nimfa. Nimphadóro, as Nimfadóro. Ninfadóro, as Nimfadóro. Ninna, a foolish wanton wagging of the head. Fare la ninna, to play the wan∣ton. Nipote, a nephew. Nipotella, the herb burnet or Pimpernel. Nipotino, a little nephew or ones sonnes childe. Niquitia, iniquitie, wickednes.
Niquitoso, full of iniquitie, mischieuous, or furious. Niquo, wicked, vngodlie, as Iniquo. Niso, a kinde of Eagle, or the female of a sparrow hawke. Also a kinde of fish. Nisso, a starre in the firmament called in latine Ingeniculum. Also the god of child-bearing. Also the birth of a child, or a child-bearing. Nissunamente, as Nessunamente. Nissuno, no one, none, no bodie, not any, not one. Nitido, cleane, neate, gay, trim, smugge, spruse, bright, shining. Nitorano, a night-rauen, or night-crow. Nitrire, trisco, trito, to neigh as a horse doth. Nitrito, neighed as horses do. Also the neighing of a horse. Nitrimento, the neighing of a horse. Nitro, nitre, a matter much like salt, of colour white, with holes in it, and spun∣gie. take it and boyle it and refine it, and it will be borace that goldsmiths vse to solder with. Some do abusiuely take it for salt-peeter to make gunne-pouder with. Also vsed for a stone-salt, or salt stone vsed in doue houses. Also the neighing of a horse. Nitroso, grettie, full of salt-peeter. Nittalopia, a disease comming in the eyes. Nittare, to twinkle with the eye, or winke for want of sleepe. Nitticorace, a night-rauen. Also a schreech-owle. Niuale, snowie, snowish. Niuello, a kinde of fine singing bird. Niuéo, snowe-white colour. Niunamente, as Nssunamente. Niuno, no one, not one, not any, no bodie. Nizzola, a little beast much like a wee∣sell. Also a kinde of precious stone. Also an herbe. No▪ no, not. Noale, any place, roome, or thing that containeth choise and varietie of things as Noes arke did. generall, common, vulgar. Also Christmas day, or the birth day of any bodie. Nobile, noble, excellent, famous, greatly knowne, a gentleman. Also a certaine coyne in England, called a Noble. Nobilista, a professor of nobilitie, a herauld. Nobilitare, to ennoble, to make noble, to promote to dignitie. Nobilità, Nobiltà, nobilitie, excellencie, worthines, noblenes of birth, a noble race, estimation, dignitie, renowme. Nocca, the nocke of a bowe. Also the knuckle of ones fingers. Nocche, the knuckles of a mans hand. Nocchia, as Nocca. Also a nut. Nocchio, a knot, a knob, or ruggednes of any wood. Also as Nocciolo. Nocchioso, as Nocchiuio. Nocchiuto, knobbie, knottie, rugged as a crabsticke, crabbed. Nocciola, Nocciuola, as Nocetta. Nocciolo, Nocciuolo, the stone of any fruite, as peach or oliue. Also a hazell nut tree. Also a kinde of play that chil∣dren vse, or else the nut to throw at Castelletto. Nocci, nut trees. Nocco, a nut tree, a knuckle bone, the nock of a bow, a gull, a sot, a foole, a ninnie. Noce, any kinde of nutte. Noce moscata, a nutmeg. Noce della balestra, the nutte of a crossebow. Noce del collo, the nape of the head. Noce d'India, an Indian nut. Nocepina, a pine-apple. Noce del ginocchio, the panne of ones knee. Noce metello, a kinde of Indian nut. Noce vomico, a kinde of Indian nut. Nocetta, Nocella, anie kinde of small or hasell nut. Nócere, Nuoco, nocqui, nociuto, to hurt, to annoy, to damnifie, to harme, to offend, to endomage, to hinder. Nociuto, hurted, annoyed, damnifyed, harmed, offended, endomaged, hin∣dered. Nocénte, guiltie, witting, knowing, no∣cent, hurting, dangerous, noysome, harmefull, that hath done a trespas or iniurie. Nocéuole, hurtfull, noysome, dange∣rous, harmefull, that may hurt or do harme. Nociménto, as Nocumento. Nociuo, as Nocéuole. Nocumento, hurt, domage, harme, wrong, hinderance. Nodare, to knotte, to knit, to tye with knottes. Noddo, a noddie, a foole, a patch, a gull, a ninnie. Nodia, an herbe that curriers vse called mularie. Nodi di salomone, loue knottes, or loue entanglings. Nodificare, to make knots, or fill with knots. Nodo, a knot or a knob, a knurre. Also a ioint. Also an intricate matter. Nodo celeste, or Celeste nodo, the signe Pisces. Also those two places in the which the circle of the moones mo∣tion, or of any other planet out of the ecliptike, vsed also for the knuckles or turning ioints in the back-bone or chine. Nodoso, knottie, knobbie, crabbed, surly, hard, tough, full of knots or knurres. Nodoroso, Noderoso, as Nodoso. Nodrigare, as Nodrire. Nodrire, nodrisco, nodrito, to nourish, to foster, to finde, to feede, to bring vp. Nodrimento, Nodritura, nourishment, foode, finding, sustenance, mainte∣nance. Nodritore, a nourisher, a fosterer, a finder, a feeder, a sustainer. Noéma, a sentence, when one thing is ment and another spoken. Nohier l'altro, the day before yesterday, the other day. Noi, we, vs. Noi altri, we others. Noi ce lo, we our selues, it, or the same. Noi ce ne, we our selues thereof. Noi stessi, or medesimi, we our selues. Noia, annoiance, annoy, hurt, harme, trouble. Noiare, to annoy, to harme, to trouble. Noioso, Noicuole, noyous, noisome, tedious, troublesome. Nol, for non il, not it, not the, not him. Nolre, to hire any mouing thing, as a horse, or as a ship. Noleggiare, idem. Nolatore, a hyrer, a hackney man. Noleggiante, idem. Nolesino, idem. Noli me tangere, a kinde of mercurie, the seede whereof as one toucheth doth skip away. Also a kinde of disease in the nose. Looke Polipo. Nolla, for Non la. Nollo, for Non lo. Nolo, the hire of any mouing thing, as of horses, ships, or boates. Also the passage monie, or fraight of a ship. Nomarca, he that hath the preheminence in the administration of lawes as a chiefe officer. Nomare, to name, to ecclip, to hight, to ming. Nomatamente, namely, by name. Nome, a name, a nomination, a title, an honor, a calling, a noune. Also but, one∣ly, except, sauing. Also certaine painfull sores, which by creeping on do eate vp and consume the bodie. Nomenclatore, hee that knoweth the names of things and persons, and calleth
them thereby. Nomerare, to number, to count, to tell. Nominaglio, an officer or bedell to call or register mens names. Nominanza, a name or naming or deno∣mination, a mentioning. Nominare, to name, to eclip, to hight, to ming, to appoint, to mention, to nomi∣nate. Nominatamente, namely, especially, particularly, expressely. Nominatiuo, the nominatiue or right case. Nominato, a name or naming, named. Nominatore, a namer or giuer of names. Non, no, not, betweene two verber, but. Nona, noone, noonetide. Also an hower to go to seruice after dinner. Non anco, ancora, not yet, not as yet. Non che, not onely, much-lesse. None, the nones of euerie moneth, bicause from that daie nine are counted to the Ides, they are the first daies after the calends, that is to saie after the first day of the moneth, in March, Maie, Iune and October there be sixe, but in al the other moneths but fowre-looke Fare le none. Non hora, not now, not at this time. Non mai, neuer, at no time. Non non, no no, no indeed. Non perdio, no by God. Non couélle, fables or tales of no worth, or consequence, matters of nothing. Non importa, no force, it is no matter, it skils not. Non per nulla, no by no meanes, at no hand. Non prima, no sooner. Non si tosto, no sooner. Non posso non, I can not but, I can not chse but. Non punto, no whit, no iot. Non però di meno, notwithstanding yet, neuerthelesse. Non pure, not onely, much lesse. Non instante, notwithstanding, neuer∣thelesse. Non solo, not onely. Nondimeno, Nondimanco, neuerthe∣lesse, notwithstanding, yet. Nonanta, ninetie, fowerscore and ten. Nonantesimo, the nintieth in order. Noncupare, to pronounce, to calby name, to rehearse, to make mention by word of mouth. Noncupatione, a pronouncing, a reci∣ting, a declaration of a will by word of mouth. Nonio, the name of a colour. Non meno, no lesse. Non meno che, no lesse then. Nonna, a grandmother, a beldame. Nonne, but that, but onely, except. Nonno, a grandsire, a grandfather. Non nulla, a matter of nothing, nought, nothing, nought at all. Nono, the ninth in number. Nonoplo, nine-fold, nine double. Nonupo, nine-times double, a paiment vsed in Naples for some forfaitures. Nora, Nuora, a mans sons wife, a daugh∣ter in law. Norma, a rule, a leuell, a line, a direction, a trace, a forme, a fashion, a president. Normare, to follow rule and direction, forme, fashion, or trace. Normatamente, according to rule, lyne, and square, after the maner, custome and forme. Normeuole, that will be ruled, gouerned, directed, formed, or fashioned. Nosco, with vs, in our companie. Nosella, as Nocetta. Also the kernels that breed betweene the skin and the flesh. Nosellaro, Nosello, a hazell nut tree. Nostrale, of ours, of our countrie or kinde. Nostralmente, according to vs, or our fa∣shion. Nostrano, as Nostrale. Nostro, our, ours. Nota, a note, a marke, a signe, a blot, a blemish, a token, a touch of infamie, a notice, an obseruation, a warning, a forewarning, a note of musicke. Notabile, notable, or woorthy to be mar∣ked and noted. Notabilità, notablenes. Notamento, a noting, a marking, an ob∣seruing, an aduisement. Notare, to note, to marke, to obserue, to discerne, to aduertise, to blemish, to touch, to reprooue, to twit, to rebuke, to accuse, to call, to terme, to defame. Notato, noted, marked, aduertised, obser∣ued, discerned, blemished, toucht, repro∣ued, twitted, rebuked, accused, defamed. Notaro, Notaio, a notarie, a scriuener. Notatione, a notation, a marking, a no∣ting, an obseruing, a consideration. Notatore, a noter, a marker, an obseruer. Notia, a precious stone falling down with showers. Notificare, to notifie, to make knowne, to giue notice. Notificatione, a notification or publish∣ing. Notificatore, a proclaimer, a crier, a publisher. Notione, knowledge, vnderstanding, ac∣quaintance, the examination of a cause in iudgement. Notitia, notice, knowledge, aduertise∣ment, vnderstanding, acquaintance. Noto, noted, knowen, marked, famous, apparant, acquainted, discerned, nota∣ble, obserued. Also the south or southern winde. Notomia, as Anatomia. Notomista, as Anatomista. Notomizzare, as Anatomizzare. Notorio, notorious knowne, marked. Notricare, as Nodrire. Nottare, to waxe night. Nottata, a nights worke. Notte, night. Also quick-siluer, according to alchimists phrases. Notteggiare, to frequent or do night-workes, to waxe night. Nottola, a birde flying in the darke, a bat or a reare mouse. Also a schrecke owle. Notturnale, nocturnally, nightly. Notturno, nocturnall, nightlie. Notulani, a kinde of daintie birde. Noua, newe, fresh, a noueltie, a newe re∣port. Nouamente, newly, freshly. Nouanta, ninetie. Nouantina, a number of 90. Nouastro, newish, moderne. Nouatione, an innouation, an altera∣tion. Noue, nine. Also newes, nouelties. Nouecento, nine hundreth. Nouella, a tale, a nouell, a noueltie, a dis∣course, a newes, a message. Nouellante, a newes teller, a reporter of tales or fables. Nouellare, to tell or report newes, fables, tales or nouels▪ Nouellatore, a teller of tales or nouels. Nouellette, prettie newes, or newfangles, or tales or fables. Nouelliero, Nouellista, as Nouel∣lante. Nouello, new, fresh, of late. Nouelluzze, foolish, idle, or childish fables, toyes, tales, bables, trifles, new-fangles. Nouembre, the moneth of Nouember. Noue mille, nine thousand. Nouendiale, a solemnitie or sacrificing at burials vsed nine dayes after the partie was dead. Also of nine dayes space or continuance. Nouerare, to number, to tell, to count. Nouero, a number. Nouerca, a mother in law, a stepdame. Nouicello, a turnecote, runnegate, or nouice. Nouilunio, the time of the new moone,
the new moone. Nouina, a stance of verses consisting of nine. Nouità, noueltie, newes, or alteration, strangenes, newnes. Nouitiato, the state and function of a nouice. Also entred or past a nouice. Also a place for nouices and schollers to be brought vp in. Nouitio, a yong nouice, a freshman. Nouizza, a bride, a spouse, a new-maried wife, a nouice. Nouizzo, as Nouitio. Nouo, new, rare, strange, fresh, vncoth, not seene before, sodaine. Nozze, nuptials, weddings, marriages. Nube, as Nebbia. Nubigénio, as Nebbigénio. Nubilare, as Nebbiare. Nubilo, Nubiloso, as Nebbioso. Nuca, the nape of the head. Nucca, as Nocca. Nudare, to discouer, to make bare or na∣ked, to explaine, to strip naked, to spoile, to leaue succourlesse, to disclose, to make voide. Also to make cleere, plaine or eui∣dent, to vncouer, to reueale. Nudezza, nakednes, barrennes, pouertie, barenes. Nudità, as Nudezza. Nudo, bare, naked, discouered, vncouered, destitute of, poore. Also plaine, cleere, euident, without fraude, guile or glosing, made voide, reuealed, vncouered. Nudrire, nudrisco, nudrito, as No∣drire. Nudrimento, as Nodrimento. Nudrice, Nutrice, a nurce, a nouri∣sher. Nudritiuo, nourishing, nutritiue. Nudritore, a he nource, a nourisher. Nudritura, nourishment, nourture, food. Nugola, a cloud or ouercasting of the skie. Nugolare, as Nebbiare. Nugoloso, as Nebbioso. Nugolo, a cloud. Nulla, nothing, naught, ought, any thing. Nulladimanco, neuerthelesse, yet, not∣withstanding. Nulladimeno, as Nulladimanco. Nullamente, by no meanes, in no wise, at no hand. Nullare, to disanull, to frustrate, to make voide, and of no effect. Nullità, a disanulling, a nullitie, of no ef∣fect, nothing, annihilation. Nullo, no one, not any, any, some, not any one, vaine, blanke, of no force. Numachia, a fight or combate by sea. Nume, the power, will, maiestie, might, deitie, maiestie or will of God. Some∣time a God, a deitie. Also a soueraigne or diuine power and maiestie. Also po∣wer or authoritie. Also an oracle or iudgement. Numella, a tumbrell wherin malefactors were punished, or a kinde of pillorie or stocks. Numerabile, that may be numbred, nu∣merable, that may be tolde. Numerale, as Numerabile, pertaining to number. Numerate, to number, to tell, to count, to summe, to recken in order. Numerario, as Numerale. Numeratione, a numbring, a summe, a numeration. Numeratore, a numbrer, a teller, a coun∣ter. Numero, a number, a count, a summe, a quantitie. Also order, due time and pro∣portion. Also measure and order in syl∣lables or verses. Also a true verse. Numerosità, a number, a numeration. Numeróso, numerous, of a great summe. Also in great number. Also framed in measure or number of feete or going in due proportion of syllables. Numidino, a kind of marble stone. Numisma, a kind of coine of old times. Nun, vsed for In vno, in one. Nuntiare, to shew or bring tidings, to re∣port, to tell, to signifie. Nuncupare, as Noncupare. Nuncupatione, as Noncupatione. Nuntiata, the annuntiation or our Lady day in lent. as Nuntiatione. Nuntiatione, a shewing or bringing of ti∣dings, a report, a declaration. Nuntiato, the office of a legate or ambas∣sador. Nuntiatore, a shewer or bringer of tidings Nuntio, Nuncio, an ambassador or brin∣ger of tidings or of newes. Nuócere, as Nocere. Nuocimento, as Nocumento. Nuociuo, as Nociuo. Nuocéuole, as Nocéuole. Nuolare, as Nolare▪ Nuolatore, as Nolatore. Nuólo, as Nólo. Nuóra, a daughter in law, a mans sonnes wife. Nuota, a waue as of dammaske or chamlot. Nuotare, to swim, to waue, to flote. Nuotatore, a swimmer, a wauer, a floater Nuóto, swimming, a wauing, a floating. Nuóua, a new, of late. Also a new report, a tidings, newes. Nuoue, the number of nine, 9. Also newes. Nuouità, nouelty, newnes. Nuouo, new, of late. Also a new report, a tidings, newes, simple, strange. Nuro, a birde in Samatra like a popping∣iay, but of fairer colour, and speaketh more plaine. Nutrire, nutrisco, nutrito, as Nodrire. Nutrimento, as Nodrimento. Nutritiuo, nutritiue, nourishing. Nutrice, a nource, a foster-mother. Nutritore, a nourisher. Nutritura, nourishment, sustenance, food, feeding, nurture. Nutricare, as Nodrire. Nuuilare, as Nebbiare. Nuuiletta, as Nebbiarélla. Nuuola, Nuuolo, a cloud, a fogge, a miste. Nuuole, a kind of simnell, cracknel or bis∣ket bread. Nuuolare, as Nebbiare. Nuuoloso, as Nebbioso. Nuuolosità, cloudines, mistines, foggi∣nesse. O O, One of the fiue vowels. O. an ad∣uerbe of exception, either, onely, or. the signe of the vocatiue case oh, an interiection of griefe, of derision, of ad∣miration, of imprecation, and of reproo∣uing, as oh, alas, aie me, good lord, oh that, tush, figh, away, and such. Obbrigare, Obrigare, as Obligare. Obbrigo, Obrigo, as Obligo. Obbrobriare, as Obrobriare. Obbrorio, as Obrorio. Obbrobrioso, as Obrobrioso. Obediénte, obedient, milde, meeke, plea∣sant, obeying. Obediénza, Obedientia, obedience, humblenes, obeisance. Obedire, disco, dito, to obey, to please, to yeeld vnto, to do according. Obelisco, a great square stone, broade beneath, and growing smaller and smaller towardes the top, of a great height, there were diuers of them made in Rome. Obiata, are properly thinne wafers, or sugar-bread. Obiettióne, an obiection. Also a repro∣ching or casting in ones teeth, a laying to ones charge. Obiétto, an obiect, a thing before a mans eyes and may be seene. Also the laying or setting of a thing before ones eyes or against one, a shadow or ouerthwart casting.
Oblare, to offer a sacrifice or oblation. Oblatione, a sacrifice, an oblation, an offring, an ayde. Oblianza, forgetfulnes, obliuion, dul∣nes. Obliare, to forget. Oblico, Oblicare, as Obliquo. Obligare, to binde, to tye, or enter into bands. Obligatione, an obligation, a bond. Obligo, a duty, a bond, an obligation. Oblio, forgetfulnes, obliuion, dulnes. Oblioso, forgetfull, obliuious, dull. Obliquare, to crooke, to make crooked, a wry, bending or trauers. Obliqua sphera, that place of the world where the inhabitants haue the equi∣noctiall cutting their Horizon, not plumb downe, but sidelong. Obliquità, obliquitie, crookednes, wry∣nesse, thwartnes. Obliquo, crooked, wry, thwart, bending, oblique, trauers, sidelong. Oblire, blisco, blito, as Obliare. Obliterare, as Obliare. Obliuione, obliuion, forgetfulnes. Obliuioso, forgetfull, vnmindefull. Obnósso, that hath deserued to be puni∣shed, guiltie, faultie. Also dishonest, base, easie to be hurt. Also sicklie, or diseased. Obnubilare, to make darke with cloudes, to ouercloude, to make heauie and sad in countenance. Obolo, a little waight of halfe a scruple. Also a small coyne about a pennie far∣thing sterlin. Obrobriare, to shame, to reproch, to slander, to rebuke, to twit or cast in ones teeth, to taunt, to check, to re∣uile. Obrobrio, shame, reproch, rebuke, or slander, a reproching in words, a re∣bukefull speaking, an vpbraiding or ca∣sting in ones teeth, an iniurie, a check, a reuiling. Obrobrioso, shamefull, reprochfull, slan∣derous, iniurious, reuiling, taunting. Obsiana, a kinde of bright stone that will change his colour. Obsidiano, that is pure black, or sable. Also a kinde of black glasse. Obuia, comming towards, or meeting, withstanding. Obuiare, to go against, to meete one in the way, to withstand. Oca, a goose, or a gander. Oca marina, a sea-cob, or sea-gull. Ocagionare, as Occasionare. Ocagione, as Occasione. Ocarella, a gosline, a yong goose, a greene goose. Occare, to breake clods of earth, to harrowe. Occatore, a breaker of clods of earth, a harrower. Occatura, a breaking of earth, a har∣rowing. Occasionare, Ocasionare, to occasion, to cause, to happen, to befall. Occasione, Ocasione, occasion, season, or oportunitie of time, meete, fit and conuenient time to do. Also a cause, a hap, or befalling. Occaso, Ocaso, the setting or going downe of the sunne, the west part. Also death, fall, ruine, or decay of man or beast. Occastro, a wilde goose. Occhiate, the hollow or compasse of the eyes. Also the eyes. Occhialaro, a maker of spectacles. Occhiali, spectacles to looke with, as Occhiara. Occhiara, the fish called a Seabreame, some thinke it to be a Pearch, others take it for the fish Sgramso. Also the dimnes of sight. Occhiare, to eye, to prye, to marke, to winke, to toote. Occhiata, a glance, a cast or looke with the eyes, a wanton winking. Also as Occhiara. Occhiatello, as Sgramfo. Occhiatina, a little glance, cast, or looke with the eyes, a winking. Occhietti, small or little eyes, or oylet holes, a kinde of sugar or ginger bread. Occhio, an eye. Occhio bouino, a bird called an oxeye. Occhio di ciuetta, an owles eye, a peece of gold, a red ruddock. Occhio della vite, the first buds or bur∣gen of the vine. Occhio di boue, the hearbe called oxe∣eye, maywood, or stincking cammo∣mill. Occhio del tetto, a louer of a house or hall. Occhio di gallo, a kinde of tack or ten∣ter hooke. Occhij liuidi, blew eyes, blubbred eyes. Occhio di gatta, a kinde of precious stone. Occhiolino, a little eye, an oylet hole. Also the name of a goldsmiths toole. Occhiuto, eyed, that hath eyes as a pea∣cocks tayle, or as Argus had. It is also taken for one that is watchfull, vigilant or warie. Occidentale, westerly, of the West, of the west part. Occidénte, the sunne-set, the west part of the world, also the west winde. Also declining, decaying, falling, going downe, or drawing to an end. Also quick-siluer, according to Alchimists secret phrases. Occidere, cido, cisi, ciso, to kill, to slay, or wound to death, to murther. Also to torment, or molest grieuously, to cause to perish, or bring to destruction. Occiditore, a killer, a slayer, a queller, a wounder, a murtherer. Occipute, the hinder part of the head, the nape of the necke, the noddle, the third bone of the head ending at the labdal suture, disioyned in the founda∣tion of the head from osso sphenoido by the sixth suture, ouerthwartly chan∣cing. Occiso, killed, slayne, wounded, or mur∣thered to death, vtterly vndone. Occisione, a killing, a slaying, a mur∣dering, a quelling, or slaughter of men and beast. Occorénza, an occurrence, a chance, a hap, or an accident. Occorenze, occurrences, chances, haps, accidents. Occórrere, corro, corsi, corso, to hap∣pen, to chance, to ocurre, to come to passe, to beide, to befall, also to remember, to come to minde, to meete with, to come in place. Occorso, happned, chanced, occurred, come to passe, befallen, remembred. Also an encounter, a meeting, an accident, come to minde. Occultare, to hide, to close, to conceale, to keepe secret, to lurke, to couer, to hide cleane that nothing be seene. Occulto, Occultato, in hugger mug∣ger, hid, priuie, that is not knowne, very secret, concealed, close. Occupare, Ocupare, to occupie, to pos∣sesse, to be seised of, to busie, to vse. Also to get and take before another man, to vsurpe from another, to hold one busied and occupied. Occupato, Ocupato, occupied, posses∣sed, seized of, busied, vsed, emploied, let in busines, entangled. Also woon, got∣ten, and vsurped. Occupatione, Ocupatione, occupati∣on, possession, seisure, necessarie busines, the holding, possessing, or being seazed of a place. Also a taking of a thing be∣fore as it were by way of preuention. Occupatore, Ocupatore, an occupier, a possessour, a busier, an vser, a seyser, an vsurper or possessour of another mans right or due.
Occeano, Oceano, the sea, the ocean, the maine deepe that compasseth the whole worlde. Ocimo, the herbe called garden basiill, basill royall, or basill gentle. Ocio, as Otio. Ocioso, as Otioso. Ocra, Ocria, oker that painters vse. Som take it for another kinde of blacke stone. Oculare, as Occhiare. Also oculare or pertaining to the eies. Also an eie wit∣nes. Ocularia, the herbe eie-bright. Oculatella, as Sgrampho, a crampe fish. Oculato, full of eies or holes, quicke of sight, hauing eies, that is circumspect, quick-seeing. Oculato testimonio, an eie witnes, an assured testimonie. Oculista, an oculist, one that professeth to know or cure the sores in eies. Oculo, an eie, a sight, a looke. Vsed also for a yoong bud of a tree beginning to spread. Od, either, or, or else, vsed before vowels. Oda, a kinde of verse or song, called an ode. Also let him heare. Ode, songs called odes. Also he heareth. Odéo, a place like a theatre to represent plaies in. Odema, or Oedema, a moist and wate∣rish swelling, thinne and without griefe consisting of a cold intemperature and flegmatike matter, it is easily pressed downe with the finger, and leaueth a dent and hollownes, the member so af∣fected retaining a white colour. Odiare, to hate, to haue in abhominati∣on, to grudge, to spite, to repine at one, to bedre ill will vnto. Odiaria, a cotidian ague. Odiatore, a hater, a grudger, a bearer of ill will, a spiter or repiner at one. Odio, hatred, hate, rancor, ill will, grudge, displeasure, hatefull importunitie, tedi∣ousnes. Odioso, hatefull, odious, that is hated, displeasant, hurtfull, tedious, yrkesome. Odire, odo, udij, odito, to heare, to li∣sten, to harken. Odito, hard, listned, harkned. Also the sense of hearing. Odontoide, a round and long processe, in fashion like a tooth, rising from the middle of the second turning ioint of the necke. Odorare, to odore, to giue a smell, to per∣fume, to smell, to sent, to sauour, to yeeld a sent or sauour. Also to perceiue or vn∣derstand or smel out a matter. Odorato, odored, perfumed, or giuen a sent vnto, smelt, sented, sauoured, yeel∣ded a smell, sent, or sauour, sweete, sa∣uourie, smelling. also the sense of smell, or smelling. Odoramento, a smelling, a senting, a sa∣uoring, an odour. Odore, an odour, a sent, a smell, a sauour. Also perceiuing, senting, smelling. Also doubt, suspicion, an inkling or feeling of a thing. Odorifero, as Odoroso. Odoroso, sauorie, odoriferous, smelling, senting, bringing spices and sweete sa∣uoring things. Oeconomia, the guiding and ordring of things pertaining to houshold. Oeconomico, hee that doth order and gouerne a house. Oeconómo, he which hath the handling or gouernance of the goods of any honest or good house, a house-keeper or master of a house. Offa, a kinde of tarte, pudding pie, or bag-pudding. Also a morsell, or gobbet of flesh or paste. Offellaro, a maker of wafers or bisket bread. Offelle, a kinde of wafers or bisket bread. Offéndere, fendo, fesi, feso, to offend, to trespasse, to wrong, to displease, to hurt, to do amisse, to be lothsome vnto, not to away with, to discontent. Offendeuole, offensiue, lothsome vnto one, that doth offend. Offenditore, Offensore, an offender, a trespasser, wronger, displeaser or hurter. Offensione, Offesa, an offence, a crime, a trespasse, a displeasure, a hurt, a harme, a losse. Offensiuo, offensiue, hurtfull, vnpleasing. Offenduto, Offeso, offended, trespassed, wronged, hurt, annoied, discontented. Offerire, fero, fersi, ferto, to offer, to pro∣fer, to present. Offerto, offred, proffered. Offerta, an offer, an offring, a proffer. Offertorio, an offertory, an offring place. Ofiasi, a kinde of sore in childrens heads growing like a tetter, and causing the haire to fall off heere and there. Officiale, Officiario, an officiall, an of∣ficer, according to office, a magistrate. Officiare, to saie seruice in a church, to giue an office vnto, to execute an office. Officiato, that hath an office, serued with due offices. Officiata chiesa, a church well officed, id est, well serued, or duly serued. Officio, an office, a dutie, a charge, a ma∣gistrate, a degree, a place of office, the seruice in the church. Also dutie of be∣hauiour in honestie and reason, a thing that ought to be done, a benefite, a good turne. Officiosità, officiousnes, seruiceablenes, friendlines. Officioso, officious, dutifull, friendlie, seruiceable, full of good offices. Officiuolo, a little praier or seruice booke Offilare, to refine, to polish, to neatifie, to clense, to smugge, to purifie. Offita, a kind of stone to build withall. Offrire, offro, offrij, offerto, as Offerire Oftalmia, an inflammation of the vtter∣most skin of the eies proceeding of sharp humours. Offuscare, to darken, to obscure, to blind, to dazle, to ecclipse, to shadow, to dim. Offuscamento, a darkning, an obscu∣ring, a blinding, a dazeling, a dimming. Offuscatione, as Offuscamento. Oggettare, to obiect or cast against one. Oggettione, an obiection. Oggetto, an obiect. The thing whose qua∣litie mooueth the sences to their natural working. Oghetto, a marche that drummers and trumpetters sound, called to the watch, to the round or sentinell. Ogliara, an oyle glasse. Ogliare, to oyle, to dresse with oyle. Ogliaro, Ogliaruolo, an oyle seller, or maker of oyles. Oggi, to day, this day. Oggidi, now a daies, this time, this day. Oglio, any kinde of oyle. Oglio santo, Looke Olio santo. Oglio di rauazzone, rape oyle. Oglio di vezzo, a kinde of rosin or tur∣pentine. Oglio d'oliue, oyle of olyues. Oglio rosato, oyle of roses. Oglioso, oylie, fattie, soft, full of oyle, glibbie. Ognella, a purple fish. Ogni, each, euery, all, euery one. Ogni santi, Tutti santi, all saints daie, all-hallowes, all-hallandtide. Ogni vno, ech one, euery bodie, all. Ogni volta, euery time, at all times, al∣waies. Ogni volta che, whensoeuer that, ech time as, euery time that. Ogni hora, at all times, at all houres, eue∣rie hower. Ogni di, daily, euery day, ech day. Oh, a voice of griefe, alas, oh, aie me. Oh dio, oh that, would to God. Oh dio che, oh God that, would to God that. Oh che, oh that, would to God.
Ohime, alas, aie me, welladay, oh. Ohibo, fie, fie vpon it, fough. Oi, alas, wo is me, aie me, oh, ah. Oia, a fish called a sea-breame. Oimare, to waile, to complaine, crie out alas or well-aday. Oime, Oimene, as Ohime. Oissa, the crie of marriners heauing, hoi∣sting or waying anker. Oissare, to crie as marriners do hoisting heauing or waying anker. Ol, or the, either the. Oladiga, a fish called a roche. Olaro, a potter, a pot-maker. Oldano, a kinde of perfuming drug, cal∣led Oldanum. Oleandro, a daffadowndilly. Also a rose baie-tree, or rose-tree. Oleare, to smell, sent, or sauour. Oleario, a place where oyle is made, kept or sold. Also an oyleman. Oleastro, a wilde oliue tree. Also oliue colour. Oleba, a kinde of owle. Olére, olo, olei, oluto, to smell, to sent, or sauour of, to haue a sauour, to stinke, to haue a smell. Oluto, smelt, sauoured, or sented of. Olezzare, to smell, sent, or sauour. Olfare, Olfacere, as Olezzare. Oliara, an oyle glasse. Oliare, to oyle. Oliaro, Oliaruolo, a maker or seller of oyles. Olibano, a kinde of sweete gum so called. Olidoro, a kind of bricke. Oligarchia, a state or common wealth where a fewe haue all the authoritie. Olimpia, the space of fiftie moneths, or fower yeeres, allowing 30. daies to a moneth. Olimpici giuóchi, the Olimpike games among the Grecians instituted by Her∣cules in the honour of Iupiter, they were celebrated euery fiftieth moneth, and the exercises were fiue, that is to saie, whurle bats, which is a kinde of weapon with a plummet of lead at the ende, the second running: the third leaping: the fourth a kinde of quoit or heauie stone to caste in the aire: the fift wra∣stling. Olimpo, is sometimes taken for seauen. Olio, all maner of oyle. Olio santo, holie oyle. Also taken for the last gaspe, needing the last vnction. Oliosità, oylienes, fatnes. Olira, a kinde of ghinnie wheate. Olire, olo, olij, olito, as olezzare. Oliua, Oliue, an oliue. Oliua perpetua, golde according to the alchimists phrase. Oliuaccie, filthie wilde olyues. Oliuastro, Oliuato, of an oliue colour or swart, forswonke, forswat. Also a wild oliue tree. Oliuella, the priuet or prime-print bush. Oliuelle, Oliuette, small, little oliues. Oliuetto, a groue of oliue trees. Oliuo, an oliue tree. Olla, a pipken, a possenet, a pot. Vsed also instead of Ola, either the, or the. Ollaio, Ollaro, a pot-maker, a potter. Olmo, an elme tree. Olocausto, burned sacrifice. Oloconite, the herbe Moli. Olocrisio, the herbe Semper vinum. Olorare, to smell, to sauour, to sent. Olore, a smell, a sauour, a sent, an aire. Oloscheno, a kinde of bull rush. Olotiri, a kind of shell fish. Oltra, beyonde, besides, more, moreouer, further, forwardes. Also, except, saue, sauing. Oltracotanza, presumption, ouerwee∣ning, selfeloue. Oltraciò, Oltradiciò, moreouer, besides that, furthermore. Oltra modo or misura, beyond measure. Oltrafino, superfine. Oltraggiare, to wrong, to iniurie, to out∣rage, to misuse. Oltraggiatore, a wronger, a misuser, an iniurier, an outrager. Oltraggio, wrong, abuse, outrage, in∣iurie. Oltraggioso, wrongfull, iniurious, out∣ragious, cruell. Oltra marauiglioso, most maruellous. Oltra marino, of beyond the seas. Oltra mirabile, most woonderfull. Oltra mini, a kind of fish. Oltrandare, to go beyond, to outgo. Oltranza, might and maine. Looke A tut∣ta oltranza. Oltrare, as Allontanare. Oltrarno, beyond the riuer Arnus. Oltre, Looke Oltra. Oltrepassare, to go beyonde, to outgo, to passeouer. Omai, now, at last, at length. Omaso the thicke and fattie part of the bellie or paunch. Some take it for a full gut. Ombè, well, go to, on, how now? Ombilico, the nauell of any creature. Also the middle of any thing. Also a bosse or bullion such as are set vpon great bookes: the centre of any thing. Also a kind of shell fish. Ombra, a shade, a shadowe, a ghost, a sprit or larue. Also an inckling or least cause of suspicion. Ombragione, a shading or shadowing. Ombrare, to shade, to shadow, to yeelde a shadowe. Also to starte at any thing for feare as horses do. Ombratile, one that liues in the shadow. Ombreggiare, as Ombrare. Ombreggiante, shadowing, casting a shadow, shading. Ombrella, a fan, a canopie. also a testern or cloth of state for a prince. also a kind of round fan or shadowing that they vse to ride with in sommer in Italy, a little shade. Also a bonegrace for a woman. Also the huske or cod of any seede or corne. also a broad spreding bunch, as of fenell, nill or elder bloomes. Ombretta, a little small, airie, coole sha∣dow or shade. Ombria, as Ombra. Also a thunderbolt-stone. Ombriana, a fish called an halibut. Ombriano, a horse that goes with his head lowe as it were looking to the ground and on his shadow. Ombrini, the fish in latine called Scia∣deus. Ombrizzo, the water, waue or shadowe of damaske or chamlot. Ombroso, Ombrio, shadie, shadowie. Also suspicious, fearfull or doubtfull. Also starting as a horse doth. Ombuto, a tunnell. Oméi, weladaies, griefes, layes, com∣plaints. Omenaggio, waging law. Also the top of a tower. Oméne, Omen, the lucke or fortune of somthing to come, gathered either of somthing spoken or done, a forespeaking, good or ill fortune, lucke or chaunce or foreboding. Omento, a fat pannicle, caule, sewet, rim or couering which being inserted with manie veines springing in branches from Vena porta representeth the forme of a net. Properly the caule or sewet, rim or kell wherein the bowels are lapt. Also the rinde or thin skin inwrapping the braine called Pia matre or Matre pia. Omero, as Homero. Omeschita, as Meschita. Omesso, forborne, left off, ceased, o∣mitted, neglected, past ouer. Ométtere, metto, misi, messo, to for∣beare, to leaue, to cease, to omit, to neg∣lect, to let goe, to passe ouer. Ominoso, Omenoso, ominous, luckie or vnluckie, that portendeth good or ill lucke. Omicida, as Homicida.
Omicidio, as Homicidio. Omine, as Omene. Omméttere, Ommesso, as Omet∣tere. Omninamente, altogither, euerie way, wholly. Also by no meanes, at no hand. Omofági, they which eate raw flesh. Omologia, a congruence, proportion or agreeablenes. Omonimo, specie di costruttione.   Omphacino, sowre, sharpe, tarte, greene, vnripe. Onagra, the herbe asse-hoofe. Onagro, a wilde asse. Also a kind of war∣like engine in fashion like a scorpion. Oncare, to roare or crie as a beare doth. Oncia, the weight of an ounce. Onciare, to weigh by ounces. Oncinare, to hooke or to drag. Oncinatore, a hooker or a dragger. Oncino, a hooke, a claspe, a dragging iron. Oncinelli, as Vncinelli. Onco, some part or piece of a cart. Onda, a waue, a surge or billow in the water. Onde, waues, billowes or surges of the sea. Also whence, from whence, wherby, whereupon, therefore. It hath also been taken for the shels of any shell fish. Ondeggiare, to waue, to wagge as the waues in the sea, to floate, to dangle. Ondeggiante, wagging, wauing, billo∣wing, dangling, floating. Also wauie in armorie. Ondeggiamento, a wauing, a wagging, a billowing, a floating, a dangling. Ondoso, as Ondeggiante. Ondungue, whence soeuer. Onero, a charge, a weight, a burthen, a heauie loade. Onerare, to loade, to burthen, to charge. Onerario, a ship or lighter or hulke that serues onely for burthen. Onerocritica, an interpretation of dreames. Onestà, Onestare, Looke Honestà. Ongaro, an vngarian kinde of coine or crowne. Onfadillo, a kind of herbe. Ongere, as Vngere. Onger i stiuali, to grease ones bootes, id est, to flatter or cog with, to faune vpon one. Onghia, as Vnghia. Onghiadicauallo, Looke Vnghia. Onghioso, hauing nailes or hoofed. Ongita, ile of Iumper. Ongiuto, Onto, ointed, annointed, greased, tallowed. Onguentaro, a maker of ointments or salues, vsed also for a leach or Apothe∣carie. Onguénto, an ointment, a salue. Onice, an Onix or cornalin stone, which resembleth the colour of a mans naile. Also a kinde of marble, whereof they were wont to make cups. Onicchio, as Onice. Onichino, made of the Onix or cornalin stone or like vnto it. Also a kind of thin bombasin stuffe or burato. Onigena, a kinde of cuttle fish or poure∣contrell. Onire, onisco, onito, to shame or re∣proch. It is an old Tuscan word vsed in Cento nouelle antiche, and from, or the French is taken the word Hony a∣bout the garter of England. Onito, shamed or reproched. Onisco, a worme which bendeth like a bow when he goeth. Of some called a hundred foot or a lope. Onite, a kind of orgament. Onnipaténte, which beareth and suffe∣reth all things. Also father or mother of all things. Onnipotente, omnipotent, almightie. Onnipoténtia, omnipotencie, almighti∣nes. Onnitenénte, all holding, containing all things. Onniualénte, which is worth all things. Onniuolénte, that willeth and desireth al things, all-willing. Onniuóro, all-deuouring, that deuoureth all. Onobricho, an herbe growing by the sides of wels. Onocardio, a kind of tassels. Onocléa, the herbe Alkanet. Onocentauro, a beast whose vpper part resembleth a man, and the neither part an asse. Onocrótalo, a certaine rauenous birde like a swan, with a gorge beneath his mouth, wherein he swalloweth his meat very greedily, and afterward doth chaw it againe, and brayeth verie loude like an asse. Onogiro, a rough and sharpe herbe good and wholsome against poison. Onomantia, a kinde of diuination and soothsaying by names. Onomante, a soothsayer or diuiner by names. Onomatopeia, a figure whereby a word is made by a certaine sound, the faining of a name. Onone, Restharrow, Cammock, or Petti∣whin. Onórico, a kinde of diuelish character vsed by nigromants. Onorógano, the issue or running of the seed in sleepe. Onosma, a kind of herbe. Onoterra, a kind of herbe. Also as Ona∣gra. Ontà, spite, reproch, disgrace, iniurie, wrong. Also shame. Ontare, to grease or oint, to annoint. Ontione, vnction, annointing. Onto, annointed, nointed, greased, tallo∣wed. Also butter, or any kind of fat. Ontoso, shamefull, spitefull, reprochfull. Also greasie, fat, buttrie, full of oint∣ments. Onto sottile, butter. Ontura, as Ontione. Onustare, to charge, to load, to burthen. Onusto, charged, loaden, burthened. Onza, an ounce weight. Also a beast cal∣led an ounce or cat of mountaine. Onzare, to weigh by ounces. Opaco, shadie, shadowed, darke, duskie, gloomie, blacke, thicke, bushie with trees. Opacità, shadines, duskishnes, gloomines, blacknes, thicknes of boughes, vmbrage. Opalo, a diuers coloured precious stone called an Opale, wherein appeareth the firie brightnes of the Carbuncle, the shi∣ning purple colour of the Amethist, the greene lustre of the Emeralde, all shi∣ning togither with an incredible mix∣ture. It is also called a Pedero. Opefice, a worke-man, a crafts-man. Openione, an opinion, a thought, a con∣ceit, a surmise, an imagination, an vn∣certaine iudgement, a supposing or wee∣uing. Also fame, esteeme or reputa∣tion. Opera, a worke, a labour, a deede, a doing a piece of worke, an action, a trauell, an industrie, a paine, a diligence, a worke∣manship. Also meanes or aide. Operare, to worke, to labour, to make, to do, to actt. Operaio, Operario, a work-man, a la∣bourer, a worker, an actor, a crafts∣man. Operante, a worke-man, a worker. Also working, acting or doing. Operatione, an operation, a labouring, a doing. Operatore, a worker, a labourer. Operetta, Operina, a little piece of worke, a prettie labour. Operosità, great paine or trauell or wor∣king. Operoso, full of worke, working, diligent or painefull in labouring, toilesome or laborious. Operto, opened, set open.
Opertura, an ouerture or opening. Ophiasi, a kind of sore in the head, name∣ly in children, causing the haire to fall here and there, fretting the skin off. Ophiusa, an hearbe whereof who so ta∣steth is much frighted with spirits and diuels. Ophtalmia, an inflammation of the vt∣termost skin of the eie called in latine Adnata, proceeding either of the fulnes of the body, or of the sharp cholerick hu∣mour, or of grosse humours and windi∣nes puffing vp the place. Opifice, as Operario. Opificio, worke, worke-manship, la∣bour. Opilare, to stop with obstruction, to shut vp. Opilatione, an opilation, a stopping, a binding or obstruction of the liuer or other chiefe entrailes. Opimamente, fatly, grossely, plentifully, richly, at ease. Opimità, abundance, plentie. Opimo, fat, grosse, in good plight, plenti∣full, well furnished, rich, royall, prince∣ly. Opinare, to muse, to surmise, to thinke, to suppose, to imagine. Opinante, musing, surmising, thinking, supposing, imagining. Opinatiuo, as Opiniastro. Opiniastro, Opiniatiuo, opinatiue, stifnecked, stubburne, conceited, humo∣rous, fantasticall, head-strong. Opiniatamente, opinatiuely, stubburn∣ly, humorously stifneckedly. Opinione, as Openione. Opinioso, as Opiniastro. Opistotono, a cricke in the necke, or a disease that letteth one to turne his necke. Opopanace, an herbe called Panax or the liquor thereof. Oppiare, as Alloppiare. Oppio, Opio, Poppie. Also the iuice of Poppie. Opporre, Oppónere, pongo, posi, po∣sto, to oppose, to contend, to lay against, to reuile, to obiect. Opportunamente, fitly, needfully, op∣portunelie, commodiously, in good time, in due, fit or good time, conueniently. Opportunità, opportunitie, fitnes, com∣moditie, good occasion, conueniencie of time and place. Opportuno, fit, needfull, oportune, com∣modious, meet for the purpose, conueni∣ent, verie good and conuenient for. Oppositione, an opposition, a contrariety, a contrarie setting. Oppósito, opposite, contrarie, against, set, put or placed against. Oppositore, an oppositor, an opponent. Opposto, opposed, laide against, conten∣ded, resisted, opposite, contrarie, against, obiected. Oppressare, as Opprimere. Oppressione, oppression, greeuance, sup∣pression, a violating, extortion or vio∣lence. Oppresso, oppressed, greeued, suppressed, violated, violently wronged, holden and kept vnder, ouerlaide, ouercharged. Oppressore, an oppresser, a suppressor, an extortioner. Opprímere, primo, primei, présso, to oppresse, to grieue, to suppresse, to presse, to wiegh downe, to represse. Oppugnare, to oppugne, to resist, to with∣stand, to assault, to batter, to laie siege vnto, to fight against, to endeuour to hurt, to labour might and maine against one. Oppugnatione, an oppugnation, a with∣standing, a resistance, an assiege or an assault against a towne or fortresse. Oppugnatore, a withstander, a resister, an opposer, he that seeketh the hurt of another, a wrong doer, a besieger of any place. Opra, as Opera. Oprare, as Operare. Opraio, Opraro, as Operaio. Opretta, Oprina, as Operetta. Oprire, to open, to set open. Opropriare, as Obrobriare. Oproprio, as Obrobrio. Oproprioso, as Obrobrioso. Optica, the science whereby the reason of sight is knowen. Optico, pertaining to sight, skilfull in sight. Opulente, riche, abundant, plentious, wealthie. Opulentia, riches, plentie, wealth, abun∣dance. Opuscula, a little worke or labour. Or', as Ora. Ora, now, at this instant, by and by, pre∣sently, sometimes, at times. Also the ayre, a fresh coole winde, a sweete gale, a pleasant blast. Also an houre, or space of an houre. Orade, a kinde of fish called a guilt head. Oramai, now, at last, at length, more then time. Oracolo, Oraculo, an oracle, or prophe∣cie, a sentence, a counsell, or answere giuen by God. Also a worthie and no∣table saying or iudgement. Oradiga, a kinde of roche fish. Orafo, Orefice, a goldsmith. Orare, to make an oration or sermon, to speake as an orator, to pleade, or to preach. Also to pray, to desire, to in∣treate, to beseech. Also to guild or gar∣nish with gold. Oraria, a small barke to saile neere the shore, a shoare ship. Orata, a fish called a guilthead. Also the herbe stone-ferne, or finger-ferne. Oratione, an oration, a prayer, an orai∣son. Also speech, talke, vtterance, or words, a stile, a communication, elo∣quence. Orato, made an oration or sermon, spoken as an orator, pleaded or preached, praid, desired, entreated, besought. Also guilt, or adorned with gold. Oratoio, Oratorio, an oratorie place, a place dedicated only to prayers. Also a pulpit, a chappell. Also pertaining to an oratour or embassadour. Oratore, an oratour, an embassadour, an aduocate, a pleader, a beades-man, a spokes-man, a sutor, a speaker, an at∣turney, a prayer, an intreater, he that can make a speech wisely, aptly, and e∣loquently. Oratoria, Oratorie. Also Rhetorick. Orbacche, Orbachelle, berries of any tree, namely of bayes or iuniper. Orbare, to blinde, to depriue or reaue of sight, goods, children, or kinred. Orbauillano, a mock-begger, or blinde begger. Also a kinde of bright change∣able colour. Orbè, well, go to, now, on, away, how now? Orbesina, a bird called a great titmouse, or oxeye. Orbe, a circle or round compasse, the world, a continuall course or succession of things, an orbe, or a sphere. Also a region or countrie. Also a fish called a lump, a paddle, or a sea-owle. Orbezza, Orbità, blindnes, priuation, want, widowhood, orphanisme. Orbiculare, in a round fashion, round like a circle or compasse. Also the herbe sow-bread, or swine-bread. Orbitá, the rut or way that a cart ma∣keth. Also want of sight, or any thing else. Orbo, blinde, sightlesse, depriued, wan∣ting sight or any thing else, one bereft, succourlesse, and forsaken. Orbo budello, Looke Cieco, or Inte∣stino. Orca, a great sea fish or monster, which is an enimie to the whale. Also a kinde of precious stone.
Orcadi, mountaine nymphes. Orcana, a harde round fish which is no∣thing but head, in latin Orcynus. Orcare, to braie as an asse. Orcaste, a precious stone, good against the falling sicknes. Orcellare, to orchall or laie silke in steepe in orchall, to die with orchall. Orcello, orchall, an hearbe to die purple withall. Orchessa, a she monster of the sea. Orchestra, a theatre or scaffolde where musitions and singers sit, a chiefe place in a theatre. Sometimes vsed for a kind of winding staires. also a place between the stage and the common seates of a theatre. Orchetta, a kinde of crabfish or creuise∣fish. Orchio, Orcio, a pitcher or pot for wa∣ter, a iarre for oyle, a little melting pot, a measure for liquid things. Orchi, the herbe ragwoort, gandergoose, or dogs-stones, hauing a roote like to a little codstone. Orciólo, Orciuolo, a little pot, a iugge, a cruze, a pitcher, a melting pot. Orcioletto, Orciolino, as Orciolo. Orciolaio, Orciolaro, a pot, cruze, pit∣cher or iugge maker, a potter. Orco, as Orca, a sea monster. Also the darknes or pitchines in hell. Orda, a crewe, a troupe, a companie, a con∣fused masse. Ordegno, Ordigno, any toole or imple∣ment, or mechanicall instrument. Ari∣osto hath vsed it for a caliuer, gunne, or harquebuse. Ordimento, as Orditura. Ordinali, a kinde of mushrooms or toade∣stooles so called. Ordinamento, as Ordinanza. Ordinanza, order, methode, ordinance, iniunction, forme, rule, an institution. Also the name of a march, sounded in time of warre by trompetters, an aray, or marshalling in order. Ordinanza di soldati, a ranke or mar∣shaling of souldiers. Ordinare, to order, to dispose, to ordaine or set in order, to make readie, to pre∣pare, to manage, to marshall, to de∣termine, to appoint, to direct, to will, to command, to range, or set in aray, to inioyne. Ordinario, ordinarie, wherein order is obserued, common, vsuall, accustomed. Also a carier of letters, a post, an ordi∣narie messenger. Also a priuie, close stoole, or iakes. Also an ordinarie place where gentlemen meete to take their comons. Also a kinde of Commissarie or Chanceller in Ecclesiasticall iuris∣diction. Ordinatione, an order, an institution, ordinance, disposing, appointing, go∣uernment, or administration. Ordine, Ordinatione, an order, a methode, a rule, a ranke, a forme, a de∣gree, a range, a ray, a fyle as souldiers now of late march in, a course, a circle, the estate of men concerning fortune and goods, men of one estate order or degree. Also the dignitie of men of one state or calling, as Aldermen and such like. Ordini, orders, methods, rules, rankes, formes, degrees, ranges, rayes, files, circles. Also the states of people in a common wealth, as the clergie, the nobles, the gentlemen, and the com∣mons. Ordire, disco, dito, to warpe or lay as weauers do their webbs before it be wouen, to contriue, to complotte, to fore∣cast, to deuise, to plot, to lay a worke. Ordito, warped, or laide as weauers do their webs, contriued, complotted, fore∣cast, deuised. Orditore, a warper, a weauer, a contri∣uer, a complotter, a deuiser. Orditura, Ordimento, a warping, a weauing, a deuise, a complotting, a con∣triuing. Oreadi, Nimphes which dwell in moun∣taines. Orecchia, an eare of any creature. Orecchia di topo, a kinde of hearbe, or cod called mouse-eare. Orecchiara, idem. Orecchiare, to set or prick vp ones eares, to listen or harken attentiuely. Orecchini, pendants, or iewels to hang at ones eares, little eares. Also night-caps. Orecchione, that part of a bulwarke which is called by some the pome, guard, or shoulder. Orecchiuto, hauing eares, eared. Oréfice, Orefo, a goldsmith. Oreficina, a goldsmiths workehouse, or else the goldsmiths trade. Oreolo, a makrell fish. Oressi, a good stomack to meate, or gree∣dines to eate. Oresta, a skreeke or nynemurther. Orezza, Orezzo, a shadie place, a plea∣sant gale, where no sunne comes. Orezzare, as Ombrare. Also to blow a fresh coole sweete winde. Orfanelli, young little Orphans, or fa∣therlesse children. Orfanità, Orphanisme. Orfano, an orphan, a fatherlesse child. Also a precious stone that glisters in the darke. Orfo, a goldsmith. Also a kind of sea fish with great eies and teeth like a saw. Organaro, an organ-maker. Organale, Organico, organall, instru∣mentall. Organico, organicall, of or belonging to instruments. Organista, an organist, a plaier on or∣gans. Organo, an organ, an instrument to make or do any maner of thing withal, al ma∣ner of instruments. Also an instrument or toole to meat land with, an ordinance or engine of war. Also any pipe of con∣ueyance, a conduit. Also a fish called in latine Orcynus. Organetti, little slender organs or pipes. Organizzato, well proportioned, orga∣nised. Orgia, a pace or step, or sixe foote, or foure cubites. It is a greeke measure. Orgiata, a kinde of furmentie made of barley. Orgio, barlye. Orgoglio, pride, disdaine, haughtines. Orgogliofo, proude, disdainefull, haugh∣tie. Oricalco, latten or copper mettall. Also taken for a trumpet. Oricanio, Oricanno, a casting bottle to cast sweete water with. Orice, as Orige. Oricello, as Orcello. Orientale, Orientall, borne in the East, orient, bright, as Oriente. Oriente, glistring, bright, shining, spark∣ling, fierie, orient, the east part of the world. Also the east winde. Also gold according to the Alchimists phrase. Oriete, a kinde of blacke stone. Orificio, the mouth, brimme, or orifice of any thing. Origano, the hearbe Origan, or wilde marierome. Orige, a wild beast, a kinde of wild beast like a goate, with a great horne, and his haires contrarie to others. Originale, an originall or beginning, ori∣ginall, that which one hath from his birth. Originare, originally, from the begin∣ning. Also to fetch his beginning or ori∣ginall from. Originario, originarie, that hath a thing from the beginning, or that is borne in a place naturall. Originatione, the originall of a word,
according to his proper and naturall deriuation, an etymologie, a rising or beginning. Origine, a beginning, a ground or of∣spring of anie thing or person, a pedi∣gree, a birth, a stock, kinne or kindred, an originall, a fountaine, a welspring or head. Origliare, to whisper closely to ones eares, to listen or lend ones eares attentiuely, to be an eauesdropper, to sneake or lurke about for newes, to prick vp ones eares. Origliére, a pillowbeere. Origlione, an eauesdropper, a listner, a whisperer, a sneaker, a lurking knaue. Origo, as Origano. Orimpele, painters gold. Orina, vrine, pisse, or mans water. Orinale, an vrinall, or chamberpot. Orinare, to vrine, to pisse, to stale, to make water. Orinda, a kinde of bread or cake made with honie and pepper, and of orindo meale. Orindo, a kinde of corne growing in E∣gypt. Orione, the name of a starre in the skie, called Oryon. Oriuólo, Oriolo, an howre-glasse. Also a Sunne-dyall. Also a bird called a witwall. Oripelargo, a kinde of white eagle, flat and thin of the colour of iron. Orite, a kinde of precious stone, whereof there be three kindes, one blacke and round, another greene with white spots, the third yellowish. Orizonte, the Horizon, a circle deuiding the halfe of the spheare or firmament, the seene halfe from the vnseene halfe. Orlare, to welt or hemme any linnen or garment, to brimme. Orlatrice, a seame-stresse, a welter, a hemmer. Orletto, a little welt, hem, or brim. Orliccio, the vtmost crust, hem, welt, brimme, or paring of any thing. Orlo, a brim, a welt, a hem, a banke. Also a skirt, an edge. Orma, a tracke, a footing, a trace, a step∣ping, a footestep, a rule or direction, the view of a hare or pricke of a deere. Ormare, to tracke, to foote, to trace, to rule, to direct. Ormesia, a kinde of red stone. Ormesino, Ormisino, sarcenet, taffeta sarcenet. Ormini, a kinde of herbe, called sage of Rome, clarie. Also spurge. Orna, a pitcher, a pot or pipkin, a possenet. Ornando, to be decked, garnished, ador∣ned, or beautified. Ornare, to adorne, to dight, to decke, to beautifie, to set foorth, to trim, to gar∣nish, to dresse, to furnish, to apparell, to make readie, to make saire, to prepare, or make meete, to embelish, to set foorth with commendations. Ornamento, Ornatura, an ornament, a decking, a beautifying, a trimming, a garnishing. Also honor, dignitie, promo∣tion, praise or commendation, and set∣ting foorth, a gracing or embellishing of any thing. Ornatamente, honestlie, comely, graci∣ouslie, gorgeously, gaiely, elegantly, rhetorically, with all ornaments. Ornatura, as Ornamento. Ornatuzzo, nice, fine, smugge, spruce, su∣perfine. Ornitogalo, a kinde of herbe. Orno, a wilde ashe tree or quicken tree with broade leaues. Also a kind of mea∣sure of liquid things. Oro, the precious mettall gold. Orobace, the flowre called the pionie. Orobanche, an herbe which round about where it groweth killeth all manner of pulse, whereof if a cowe doth eate she presently runneth to a bull. Orobe, kind of strangle-tare, choke-fitch, or choke-weede. Also a kinde of pulse corne. Also the flowre called pionie. Also a kinde of frankincense. Also a kinde of grasse-greene colour. Orobia, a kinde of frankincense in little graines. Orobite, the herb Carneole, or sage aqua∣tique. Orocantarino, a kinde of false golde to gild withall that painters vse. Orochino, Orecchino.   Oromeno, a kind of stone. Oromusico, a kinde of gold which pain∣ters vse to paint withall. Oropendulo, as Galengola. Oropimento, as Orpello. Orosità, fattines, pituitie, or slimines. Orpellare, to gild with painters golde or orpine, to set on a faire shewe. Orpellatura, a gilding with painters gold or orpine. Orpello, Orpimento, base painters gold or orpine. Orpho, a sea fish which alwaies keepeth by the shore, and hath great eies and teeth like a saw. Orpimento, as Orpello. Orsa, a she beare. Also a signe in heauen. Orsacchio, a beare whelpe. Orsetta, a kinde of sea crab. Also a lock∣fish. Orsetto, Orsino, a yoong beare whelpe. Orso, a beare. Orsù, Orsuso, go to, on, away, to it, well, enough, now, vp, lustily. Orsumò, Orsusomò, go to, nowe, on, a∣way, forward, lustily. Orsunò, no, not now, I bid you no. Orsu col nome di Dio, well, go to, on, away in the name of god. Ortaggij, all maner of gardning herbes or fruites of gardens. Ortense, of or pertaining to a garden. Ortica, the herbe we call a nettle. Also a kinde of fish which pricketh as a nettle, and assoone as he is touched changeth his colour. Orticare, to sting or to nettle. Ortice, a quaile. Orticello, a little prettie garden. Ortichetto, a desart place where nothing but nettles grow. Ortichino, a kinde of cloth we call calico or nettle cloth, or the rootes to make it. Ortigia, a kind of fish. Looke Ortica. Ortio, a foote of a verse of fiue syllables. Ortigometra, the captaine or leader a∣mong quailes. Orto, a garden, an orchard. Also a sprin∣ging, a rising, or beginning, the ri∣sing of the sunne, the first appearing of the heauenly bodies in our hemisphere, the east part of the world. Also birth or natiuitie, an appearing or growing vp. Ortodoro, a greeke measure of ten in∣ches. Ortodossia, the right opinion or faith. Ortodosso, he that hath a true and good opinion, fayth or beleefe. Ortographia, the arte of orthographie, or of true writing. Also a plot of buil∣ding drawne out with the figure and order of the whole worke. Ortogonio, a right corner, equall on both sides, euen cornered, hauing right or euen corners. Ortografo, Ortographista, an ortogra∣pher, or teacher or professor of orthogra∣phie. Ortolano, a gardner, an orchard keeper. Also a kinde of daintie birde in Italie, some take it to be the linne. Ortoponéa, such a straightnes of breath by stopping of the lights, that one can∣not breath but holding his neck vpright Ortoponeico, he that hath the pipes of his lights so stopped as he cannot breath but holding vp his necke. Orza, the name of a saile and of a rope in a ship. Orzare, to saile with halfe the sailes. Also to trend as a ship doth. also to hul at sea.
Orzata, as Orgiata. Orzo, as Orgio. Orzuolo, an infirmitie that comes into ones eies, called in latine Grithe. Osanna, saue now I pray thee: the Iewes called so the willow branches which they bare in their hands at the feast of tabernacles. Osannare, to sing or crie praises vnto God. Osare, to dare, to hazzard, to ieopard. Osattini, little buskins or thin bootes. Oscedine, an impediment which will not suffer a man to staie from gaping and yawning often. Also a kinde of sore in a childs mouth. Oscenità, villanie in acts or words, i∣haudrie, filthines, vncleannes, baudines, baudrie. Oscéno, vnhonest, vnseemely, vnciuill, vnclean, filthie, bandie, obscenous, fouie, wanton, vnchaste, dishonest, ribaudrie. Also vnluckie. Oscino, a bird that by his voice signifieth somewhat to happen or come to passe. Oscitantia, negligence, sluggishnes. Oscurare, to obscure, to darken, to dim, to make darke or dim, to cloke, to hide, to keepe in silence or from the knowledge of men, to conceale. Also to make of no fame or reputation. Oscuratione, an obscuring, a darkening, a hiding, a dimnes, a dimming. Oscurità, an obscuritie or darkenes, dimnes. Also difficultie or hardnes, weaknes, vnnoblenes or basenes of birth or place. Oscuro, obscure, darke, vnknowen, mirke, dim, blacke, not shining, mistie, hard to finde, hidden, secret, diffuse, close and se∣cret, hard to be vnderstood, of no gentle blood, of base and low parentage. Oscuretto, somewhat darke, obscure, se∣cret, dim, mistie or hidden. Oscurezza, as Oscurità. Osiacanta, a kind of tree in Egypt. Osibafo, a certaine measure vsed in Greece. Osigonio, euen or equally cornered. Osmonda, waterferne, Osmund or the water-man. Osnilo, a kind of fish▪ Oso, dared, daring, bold, hazardous, ad∣uenturous. Osofago, Osophago, the mouth of the stomacke. Osolare, to spie, to prie, to peere, to peepe, to toote, to looke narrowly. Osolamento, a spying, a prying, a pee∣ring, a peeping, a tooting. Ospitale, an hospitall or a spittle. Ospitalità, hospitality, good house-kee∣ping, cheare and good intertainment. Ospite, a ghest. Also an inne-keeper or hoste. Ossa, any kind of bones. Ossame, all manner of bones, bone-worke. Ossamento, all the bones togither. Also a setting of bones. Ossare, to set bones that be out of ioint. Ossatura, the whole order of the bones in any body. Ossecrare, to beseech hartily, to pray or desire for Gods sake. Ossecrando, to be intreated or desired, or that may be intreated. Ossecratione, a speciall desire, a desire for Gods sake. Ossequente, as Ossequioso. Ossequentia, obedience, obeisance. Ossequie, dutifulnes, attendance, wai∣ting, pliantnes, humble seruice, obedi∣ence. Ossequioso, Ossequente, seruiceable, readie at hand, alwaies attending, obse∣quious, pliant, obedient. Osseruabile, that may or ought to be ob∣serued, regarded or respected, meete to be obserued, woorthie to be had in reue∣rence. Osseruando, worshipfull, to be regarded, respected, kept or reuerenced. Osseruandissimo, right worshipfull or worthie of regard and respect. Osseruantina, an obedient obseruer, a keeper of all behestes, a heedfull marker. Osseruanza, obseruance, regard, respect, reuerence, honor, good behauiour. Also obseruing or custome, a dutie, an awe. Osseruante, obseruing, respecting, regar∣ding, keeping, reuerencing, one that ob∣serueth and reuerenceth, dutifull vnto one, one espying all occasions to do one pleasure. Osseruare, to obserue, to awaite both with eies and mind, to be readie at, to consider, to marke, to aduise well, to watch, to espie, to take good heed. Also to haue in reuerence, to honour, to wor∣ship, to esteeme, to respect, to regard, to loue and sauour with a reuerent and awefull loue. Osseruatione, as Osseruanza, obserua∣tion, obseruing, marking, awaite, good heed, aduisement or regard. Osseruatore, an obseruer, a keeper, a regarder, a reuerencer, a dutifull adui∣ser. Ossetto, Ossicello, a little gristle bone. Ossia, a sharpe disease whereof a man di∣eth or recouereth quickly. Ossidione, a besieging or siege of a towne or fort. Ossidionale, Vide Corona, pertaining to a siege. Ossifraga, a kind of furious beast. Also a kind of hauke or eagle called a bone∣breaker; bicause that with hir beake she breaketh great bones. Ossimathia, a learning when one is old. Ossimathe, one that learneth or goeth to schoole in his old age or neuer learnte before. Ossimoto, a sentence spoken with such af∣fectation of wit and grauity that it see∣meth foolish. Osso, any kind of bone. Also the stone of any fruit as Oliues, Dates, &c. Osso basillare, as Osso cuneale. Osso cossendico, the middle part of Ilio osso, which is straighter and thicker, and outwardly ingrauen with a large and deepe caue. Osso cuneale, the cuneall bone, which be∣ing as it were a ground or foundation to the braine, is thrust in like a wedge be∣tweene the bones of the head and the vpper iaw. Osso ilio, Vide Ilio. Osso malo, the cheeke bone, which being in diuers places spongious, containeth also in it selfe a verie large cauitie, ten∣derly walled on each side with thin sca∣lie bones, for lightnes so ordained of nature. Osso pube, the second part of Osso ilio, which being not so broad as the former is throwed on each side with a large and ample hole. Osso sacro, the great bone whereupon the ridge bone resteth. Osso sphenoido, as Osso cuneale. Ossolare, to picke out the bones of any thing. Ossoli, bobbins to wind silke vpon, keeles or nine pins as they vse to plaie at with a bowle. Also knuckles, or knuckle∣bones. Ossolieri, the strings wherewith the slops are tied vp or shirt strings. Ossolini, little small gristly bones. Ossoso, bonie, full of bones. Ossuario, a charnell house, a shrine or place where bones are kept. Ossuto, as Ossoso. Osta, the name of a roape in a ship. Ostacolo, an obstacle, a hinderance, an opposition, an impediment, a let. Ostaggio, an hostage, a pledge, a paunt. Ostante, withstanding, resisting, opposing, against, hindring, letting. Ostare, to withstand, to resist, to oppose, to
let, to hinder, to stand against or be∣tweene, to be in the way. Ostata, a kinde of smooth stuffe called woosted. Ostatione, as Ostacolo. Ostatrice, a Midwife. Oste, an hoste, an inkeeper. Also aguest being of the masculine gender. Also a campe or an hoste of men being of the feminine gender. Ostéa, a kinde of stuffe called woosted. Ostello, an hostell, a mansion, a mansion house. Osteleria, as Osteria. Osteliero, an hostler, an host, an inkee∣per. Osténdere, tendo, tesi, teso, to shew, to tell, to declare, to point at, to pronounce, to proclaime. Ostentare, to boast, to brag, to vaunt, to crk, to shewe a thing for vaine∣glorie. Ostentatione, an ostentation, a brag∣ging, a vaunting, a boasting shewing forth vaine-glorie. Ostentatore, a bragger, a vaunter, a brauer, a vaineglorious braggard. Ostenti, foretokens or prodigies, all things comming against nature, or otherwise then nature giueth, monsters, wonders, strange things hapning seldome, betoke∣ning something to come. Ostentoso, that which maketh or causeth a monster or strange sight. Osteria, an hostrie, a Tauerne, an Inne, a victualling house. Ostia, the hoast, a wafer-cake made for an hoast, a sacrifice. Also an entrie or mouth of a great riuer where it falles into the sea. Ostiario, a dore-keeper, a porter. Also one that keepes the ostias in a church. Ostica, Ostiga, an oyster. Ostigine, Ostiga, a kind of scab in sheep, lambs, goates, or kids, about their mouthes and lips, being deadlie to them whilest they are sucklings. Ostinarsi, to be obstinate, stubborne, stif∣necked, or wilfull, to take a resolute con∣stant resolution or determination, to persist in one sentence or purpose. Ostinato, obstinate, stubborne, stifnec∣ked, opinatiue, constant, inuincible, fixed, firmely, firme, certainely deter∣mined. Ostinatione, obstinacie, wilfulnes, stub∣bornes, stifneckednes, selfe-will, con∣stancie, stifnes in opinion. Ostipante, a medicine that stoppeth and shutteth the mouths of the vessels of the bodie, not suffering any thing to passe by euaporation or emptying. Ostipare, to stop holes or chinkes. Also to lay the head aside vpon ones shoulder as one were musing. Ostracismo, a kinde of banishment of the best men in Athens, and was v∣sed not so much for punishment of a∣nie offence, but to abate the immo∣derate power of noble men: it was for tenne yeares space, and was done by deliuering of certaine shels with the names of the condemned persons written in them. Ostracia, or Ostracite, constancie, stif∣nes in opinion, or a precious stone brittle like a shell, and somewhat like the A∣gathe. Ostreca, Ostrega, an oyster. Ostregaro, an oyster seller, or dregger of oysters. Ostrica, Ostriga, an oyster. Ostrigaro, as Ostregaro. Ostro, graine to dye scarlet with. Also scarlet or stamell it selfe. Also the south winde, but properly the liquor, iuice and colour of the fish, whereof is made the colour of purple, as violet, or scarlet. Ostrocismo, as Ostracismo. Ostrogarbino, a southwest winde. Ostrosirocco, south and by west. Ostruso, hid, hard to finde. Ostruttione, an obstruction, or stopping. Ostrutto, stopped, shut vp, very hard to attaine vnto. Oti, the name of a bird. Otio, idlenes, rest, leasure, time, conuc∣niencie of tim, drousines, slth, vacation from busines or labour, ease, peace, qui∣etnes, vacant time from studie or busi∣nes, a light exercising of the minde and bodie. Otioso, idle, drousie, sluggish, lazie, li∣ther, sure, carelesse, quiet, restfull, at ease, at rest, without trouble or busines, at leisure, vnoccupied. Otonna, a kinde of hearbe. Otorno, as Oresta. Otriare, to graunt, or yeeld vnto. Otro, a iarre, or borracho of leather to carrie wine in, an earthen pot. Otroiare, as Otriare. Otrabile, that may be, or is to be desired or wished for. Ottacatotta, by and by, euen now, at this instant. Ottagonale, hauing eight angles, eight cornered. Ottalmia, an inflammation of the vtter∣most skin of the eyes. Ottalmo, a kinde of blue precious stone. Ottangolo, eight cornered. Ottanta, the number of eightie, or soure skore. Ottantesimo, the eightieth in order. Ottare, to wish, to desire and pray, to couet, to haue leauer or rather. Ottatiuo, the wishing or optatiue moode. Ottato, wished, coucted, desired, or lon∣ged for. Ottauario, pertaining to the number of eight. Ottauo, the eight in order, an eight in musicke. Ottenebrare, to darken, to obscure, to ouercloude. Otténebre, darke, obscure, ouerclouded. Ottenére, tengo, tenni, tenuto, to ob∣taine, to get, to acquire, to atchieue. Ottenitore, an obtainer, a getter, an atchieuer, an acquirer. Ottentatore, an attempter, an assayer. Ottestare, humblie to beseech, to desire for gods sake, or for the loue of any deere thing. Ottestatione, an humble desiring, a ta∣king of God or some other thing to wit∣nes for a thing. Ottica, the science whereby the reason of sight is knowne. Ottici, Ottico, pertaining to the sight. Ottici nerui, the sinewes which bring the vertue of seeing vnto the eyes. Ottimati, the chiefe persons among the people, by whom the rest be gouerned in a common weale, noblemen, aldermen, or such great and principall men in any state. Ottimato, excellent, chiefe, high, of the chiefe magistrate, an Alderman. Also the estate or condition of head men of a towne or countrie. Ottimo, excellent, exquisit, or perfect good, best of all, very good or best, right good and honest, most blessed. Otto, the number of eight, an eight vpon the cards, vsed also for Ottone. Ottobre, the moneth of October. Otto cento, eight hundreth. Otto mila, eight thousand. Otto volte, eight times. Ottofero, a kinde of chariot with eight wheeles. Ottonaio, Ottonaro, a worker in brasse or copper, a brasier. Ottonario, of eight, consisting of eight. Ottone, brasse, latten, or copper. Otturare, to stop, to shut vp, to close vp. Ottusare, to make dull, dim, blunt, heauie or sluggish. Ottuso, dull, heauie, leadenwitted, slug∣gish, blunt, dim, without spirit, weake∣ned or decayed, in mathematikes it is
the propertie of an angle or corner, namely such a one as is bigger then a right angle. Oua, egges. Ouadelle, the seedes of silke wormes, the hard rowe or egges or spawnes of fishes. Ouale, like an egge, ouall, more long then round, vide Corona. Oua maritate, egges in moone shine. Oua di pesce, the frie or spaune of fishes. Ouatione, the season of laying of egges Also a captaines triumph or victorie. Ouato, as Ouale. Oue, whence, whereas, whither, when. Oueche, whereas. Ouer, Ouero, or else, or, either. Oueramente, or else, either, or. Oueriere, a workman, a worker. Ouiatura, as Ostacolo. Ouile, a sheepefold or sheepecote, or poun, a sheepe pen. Ouo, an egge. Ouo fresco, a new-laide egge. Oura, as Opera. Ourare, as Operare. Ouriere, a worker or workeman. Ouuiare, as Ostare. Also to meete with one. Ouuiatione, as Ostacolo. Also a mee∣ting. Ouuiatore, a resister, a withstander. Also a meeter. Ouunque, wheresoeuer, whethersoeuer. Ouunque che, wheresoeuer that, whe∣thersoeuer that. Ozena, a disease in the nose causing a stinking sauour. Also a fish so called of his strong and ranke sauour. Oxipori, a kinde of piercing or penetra∣ting medicine. P PAcchia, greedines or gluttonie in ea∣ting, gormandizing, lauishnes, riot. Pacchiare, to gormādize it, to riot, waste or lauish in feeding. Pacchiatore, Pacchierotto, as Pac∣chione. Pacchione, a glutton, an epicure, a gor∣mande, one that makes his belly his god, an ale knight, a quaffer, a lauish, rio∣tous, wasting, louer of bellie cheere. Pace, peace, rest, quietnes, agreement, ac∣cord, attonement, libertie. Also pardon and forgiuenes, sauour, permission or leaue. Also a voice commanding silence. Con vostra pace. Con pace vostra, Con licētia, with your fauor, by your good leaue, sauing your displeasure. Pace di marcone, a peace, that concludes with an occupying. Paciente, as Patiénte. Paciéntia, as Patiéntia. Pacificare, to appease, to pacifie, to as∣swage, to still, to quiet, to make peace. Pacificatione, a pacification, an appea∣sing, a peace-making, a quieting. Pacifico, peaceable, quiet, still, that ma∣keth or treateth of peace. Paciozza, a good feeding, nunchons, or meales meate, a repast, a baite. Also a truce, or well meaning peace or agree∣ment. Padella, a frying pan. Padellata, a pan full of any thing. Padellina, Padelletta, a little frying pan. Padiglione, a pauilion or tent for a field. Also a canapie or sparuier for a bed. Padire, disco, dito, to digest, to brooke ones meate, to put ouer as a hauke doth hir feeding. Padimento, a digestion, brooking, or put∣ting ouer. Padre, a father, a sire. Padre di famiglia, a houshold father. Padre e figliuolo, the name of an herbe Padreggiare, as Patrizzare. Padregno, a father in lawe. Padri, fathers, elders, forefathers, aunci∣ents, our ancestors. Also the graue sena∣tours, aldermen, or borrough maisters of a cittie or state, gouernours, graue men. Padriciuoli, little fathers. Padrino, a iudge or stickler in any contro∣uersie. Also a god father. Padrocinio, patronage or protection, safegard, defence, maintenance, refuge in trouble of suite, supportation, bea∣ring out. Padrona, a mistres, a dame, an owner, a patronesse, a defendres. Padronare, as Padroneggiare. Padronato, the act of patronage or pro∣tection, a patronage. Padrone, a master, a patron, a sir, an ow∣ner, a lord, a possessour. Also an aduo∣cate, a proctor, a counsellour, or one that speaketh for him that is accused, an at∣turney, a spokesman, he that in trouble or perill defendeth. Also he that manu∣misseth and maketh free a seruant or bondman. Padrone di casa, the lord, the possessour, the master, the owner, or goodman of the house. Padrone del tutto, lord, master, or owner of all. Padrone di naue, the master or owner of a ship. Padroneggiare, to patronize, to protect. Also to play the maister, to defende them that be poore and falsely accused, to vphold, to support, to beare out, to maintaine ones right or quarrell, to backe one. Padronimico, deriued of the fathers or auncestors name. Padule, a fennie ground, a meere, a mar∣rish soile, a moore. Paduloso, fennie, marrish, boggie. Paesano, a countriman, a peasant, a clowne, a swaine, a hinde. Also a man of the same countrie. Paese, a countrie, a region, a prouince. Al∣so the countrie. Paffuto, pampred, well fed, in good liking, fattie fed, crammed. Paga, a paie, wages, or hire for souldiers. Pagamento, a payment. Paga morta, a dead paie. Paganalia, the wakes or ploughmans feastes, countrie hollie-daies, as weekes of ploughmen, or sheepeshearing. Paganelle, a kinde of fish. Paganesimo, as Pagania. Also the pro∣fession of paganes or heathens, paga∣nisme. Pagania, the countrie of painims, pagans, or heathens. Also paganisme or hea∣thenisme. Paganina, a kinde of dance vsed in Italy. Pagano, a pagan, a painim, an infidell, a heathen. Pagare, to paie, to content, to satisfie, to please, to apae, to reward. Pagare lo scotto, to paie the shot or rec∣koning. Pagare contanti, to pay readie money, or to pay downe right. Pagare la buona mano, to paie or giue a new yeeres gift, or a drinking pennie. Pagare la mancia, idem. Pagare di posta, to pay at inposte or poste as our gamesters vse. Pagare di moneta morta, to paie with words. Pagato, paide, contented, satisfied, rewar∣ded, pleased. Pagatore, a pai-maister, a paier, a pr∣cer, a steward, a treasurer. Paggio, a page or yoong squire, a bench∣man. Paggietto, a yoong page, squire, or bench∣man. Pagina, a page or side of a leafe in a booke. Also taken for a writing. Paglia, strawe, also hawme or litter. Pagliaccia, filthie broken strawe or lit∣ter,
a pallet or straw-bed. Pagliaio, Pagliaro, a ricke or stacke of strawe. Also a straw-bed. Pagliarella, a small cottage made of strawe, serne or such like stuffe. Pagliaresco, made of strawe, strawish, as commonly our mudwals be. Pagliariccio, a pallet of straw, a straw∣bed. Also old broken straw or litter. Pagliato, pallet, pale or strawe colour. Pagliccio, of a strawe colour. Also as Mondezza. Paglióla, Pagliuola, the lying in childe∣bed of a woman. Also the dewe-lap of a bull or oxe. Pagliuola della testa, as Farfa. Pagliuolare, to lie in childebed, to be brought a bed. Pagliuolata, laide in childe-bed, a woman lying in childebed. Pagliucche, straw, haume, stubble or lit∣ter, or chaffe. Pagnosa, a kinde of wide long garment. Pagnotta, a kinde of meate like a panado, or sops. Also whusht, close, squatting downe. Pagnottina, a little daintie panado. Pago, paide, pleased, apaid, contented, sa∣tisfied. Also punished. Also a countrie towne or village. Also a paie or paie∣ment. Pagolino, a birde like a sparrowe with a blew necke. Pagonaccio, a purple colour or french russet. Pagona, a pea-hen. Pagone, a pea-cocke. Pagoneggiare, as Pauoneggiare. Pagro, a fresh water fish called in latine Pagrus. as Paguro. Pagurino, as Paguro. Paguro, a kind of creuis or crafish called a grit, a grampell, or a punger. Paia, couples, paires, braces, castes, yokes. Also that it may seeme. Paiara, Paiarina, Paiarona, a kinde of home-spoone linnen cloth. Paiarizzo, a birde called a yellowe ham∣mer. Paidimento, as Padimento. Paidire, as Padire. Painelle, as Panie. Paio, a paire, a couple, a brace, a cast. Also I seeme or appeere. Paipo, a bird with a forket taile. Paisare, to range or seeke lurkingly for pray as a hauke doth. Paiuóla, as Pagliuola. Also a bucket, a paile, a kettle or a flat brazen pan. Paiuolare, as Pagliuolare. Paiuolata, as Pagliuolata. Paiuolaro, a brazier, a tinkar, a bucket-maker. Paiuólo, a scullion in a kitchin, a scourer of pans. Also a frier of meats in a pan. Paiula, as Paiuola. Pala, a fan, a winnow, a spade, a shoouell, a skoope, a peele to put bread in an ouen with. Paladare, to winnow corne. Paladelle, a kind of stickes or sprigs to catch quailes. Paladinesco, like a man at armes. Paladino, a valiant man at armes, an er∣rant knight, a warrier. Paladore, a winnower of corne. Palafreniere, a horse-keeper, an hostler, a horse-courser, a horse-boy, a lackie. Palafreno, a palfrey, a horse. Palagio, as Palazzo. Palagietto, a little palace. Palamaglio, a sticke with a mallet at one end to play at a wooden ball with. Also the name of such a game. Palamagliare, to play at Palamaglio. Palamagliere, a player at Palamaglio. Palamaro, as Palamagliere. Also a fishing line. Palamento, any kind of fence or hedge made of poles or stakes, a railing about, a decke or hatches of a ship. Palamite, a fish called a tunnie before it be a yeere old, a sommer whiting. Palandaria, a kind of hulke or ship. Palandra, a long Turkish garment, a horse-mans cote, a riding garment. Palandrana, as Palandra. Palandrina, a common queane, a harlot, a strumpet, a gill. Palanga, a leuer, a cowle-staffe. Also as Palandra. Also a rowling piece of tim∣ber to lanche out ships from the docke or to remooue timber with. Palangario, an ale-stand-bearer, a porter that carrieth burthens with slings. Palange, slings to carrie burthens with be∣tweene two, as brewers vse. Palangra, the lap, skirts or quarters of a cote. Palara, a thrush or field-fare. Palare, to cast with a shoouell, spade or scoope. Also to garnish with stakes or with thick square lathes, to set vp vines or hops with stakes, to pale, to hedge in or vnderprop with stakes. Palascermo, as Paliscermo. Palata, a shoouell, spade or scoopefull. Also a staking, empaling or vnderpropping or vndersetting with stakes as vines and hops be. Palatara, as Paretara. Palatari, a disease in a horse. Palatina, the impostumation or swelling of the palet. Palatino, as Paladino. Also a countie palatine. Also of or belonging to a prin∣ces court or to a palace. Palato della bocca, the pallat, vuola or vpper roofe of the mouth. Palatore, a caster with a shoouell, spade or scoope. Palatura, as Paretara. Palazzo, a palace, a court, an emperours, Kings or Princes court. also a Guild-hal, a seat of iustice, a sessions house. Palazzo di consiglio, a palace where the Parliament or councell is kept. Palazzo reale, a Kings palace, mansion or court, a royall palace or house. Palcare, to seele or to floore, or make into stages or skaffolds. Palchetto, a little sollar, floore, loft, tar∣ras, stage or skaffold. Palco, an Elephants trunke. Also a stage, a floore, a skaffold, a sollar or seeling. Palcone, a great sollar, floore, loft, tar∣ras, stage or skaffold. Palcora, the plurall of Palco. Pale, those parts of the backe which stand out on the right and left side. Pale del molino, the boordes of the mill-wheele which the water turnes about. Palegro, a beere to carrie dead folkes on to be buried. Paleneza, a kind of little fish. Palengaro, a deuise or basket made of osi∣ers to catch fish with. Paléo, a top or gigge that children vse to play with. Also an Elephants truncke or snout. Palesare, to reueale, to publish, to mani∣fest, to bewraie. Palesatore, a reuealer, a publisher. Palese, publicke, apparant, manifest, open, in view. Palesta, a Greeke measure of fower inches or fower handfuls. Paléstra, a wrestling or a wrestling place. Also the game or seat of wrestling, bar∣riers or other feates of bodily actiuitie, any thing or any place wherein a man doth chiefely excercise himselfe. Palestrade, iron hookes that be made fast in wals. Paléstrico, pertaining to wrestling, of wrestling or thereto belonging. Also one that teacheth or vseth wrestling. Paletica, something about a plough. Paletta, any kind of fire shoouell, slice, tro∣well, scoope or batledar to play at tenis with. Paletta da fuoco, a fire-shoouell or
slice. Paletta di muratore, a trowell. Paletta di spetiale, a lingell, a spoone, a te∣non, a spattle or slice as Apothecaries vse. Palettaro, a shoouell or slice maker. Pali, poles, stakes, piles, staues, perches, long rods. Paliare, to cloke, to mantle, to couer, to shade, to hide, to shroude. Paliatiua, that may be mantled, shaded or hid or cloked. Palido, Palidezza, Palidire, &c. as Pal∣lido, &c. Palificare, to make a foundation vnder water of piles, stakes, poles or timber. Palificamento, Palificatione, Palifica∣ta, a foundation of piles vnder water. Palli, as Paliscelli. Palimbacchio, a foote consisting of one long and two short syllables. Palingenesia, regeneration, new birth or second natiuitie. Palinodia, a recantation or vnsaying of that hath been spoken or written, a con∣trarie song. Palio, a cloke, a roabe, a mantle, a long garmēt, a couer, a vesture. also the prize, game or goale of any running, race, wrestling, leaping or iusting. Also a race or running course for horses. Also a horse cloth. Also a paule or hearse-cloth. also a shroud or shelter, as Pallio. Palio funebre, a paule or hearse-cloth. Paliscalmo, a kind of small ship, pinace, boate, barge, gallie or foist, such as sea men triumph in. Paliscelmo, Palischermo, as Paliscal∣mo. Paliscermo, as Paliscalmo. Paliscelli, Paliselli, small sticks as chand∣lers vse to make candles with. Paliuro, ram of Libia, Christs thorne, white thorne, sea rush or hollie tree. Palla, any kind of ball, bullet or boule. Palla da giuocare, a tenis ball. Palla d'arteglieria, a bullet for cannon. Palla del cielo, a thunder boult. Palla muschiata, a muske ball or Po∣mander. Palladelli, poles or staues for vines or hops to grow and twind vpon. Palletta, a little ball or bullet. Also a bird so called. Palliare, to enmantle, to cloke, to enrobe, to shroude. Pallidetto, somewhat pale, wanne, whi∣tish, sallow coloured, or bleake. Pallidezza, palenes, wannesse, sallownes, bleakenes. Pallidire, disco, dito, to be, to make or growe pale, wanne, sallow, bleake, or whitish as it were through feare, or sicknes. Pallidiccio, palish, wannish, sallowish, bleakish, fearefull. Pallidità, as Pallidezza. Palliferio, a tree in India, the wood whereof is as hard as iron, which no water can rot. Pallio, a mantle, cloke, robe, or other long garment as the knights of the gar∣ter weare. Also a cope or a surplis. Pallone, a ballone, a footeball, or any kinde of great bullet. Palloniero, a ballonier, a footeball ma∣ker. Pallore, as Pallidezza. Pallotta, a bullet or round ball. Pallottare, as Ballottare, but properlie among riders when the horse doth stand aduancing himselfe attending the hand of the horseman or rider to turne on either side. Pallottola, as Balla, or Palla. Also a bottome of thred. Pallottole, the kernels or wartles that breede betweene the flesh and the skin, about the neck or groine. Palluzzare, to tosse and dandle as a ball. Palma, the palme of an hand when it is wide open, the hand it selfe. Also the space betweene the wrist of the hand and the first ioynt of the fingers. Also a measure of an hand breadth. Also a tree called a palme or date tree. Also a victorie, or the price, goale, glorie, ho∣nour, best, signe or reward of a victorie or triumph in any kinde of action. Also the broader part of an oare. Palma christi, the hearbe Satirion. Palmare, to measure by the spannes, or hand-breadths, to gripe with the palme of the hand. Also to sleeke or stroke, or make smooth with ones hand, to crowne with palme. Palmata, a handfull, a spanne in mea∣sure, a hands-breadth. Also a box, a clap, a blow or whirret giuen with the hand flatlin, a souse on the eare. Palmatoia, a cane, a reede, a palmers staffe, a walking-staffe. Palmeggiare, to stroke with the palme of the hands, to clap softly. Palmento, a presse to presse grapes, a wine-fat. Palmite della vite, as Pampano. Palmetto, a groue of palme trees. Also a little spanne, or hands-breadth. Palmipede, whole footed, that hath a plaine and flat foote. Some haue vsed it for splaie-footed. Palmito, a groue of Palme trees. Palmo, a handfull, a spanne, or hands-breadth, a shaftman. Palmula, the broader part of the ribs. Palo, a pole, a stake, a pile, a post, a staffe, a pearch, a barre, a crow of iron. Also a kind of dog-fish. Palo di ferrò, an iron barre, leauer, or rostle, or crow of iron. Palomba, Palombo, a stock-doue, a ring-doue, a woodculuer, or cowshot. Palombara, a doue-house, a pigeon-house. Palombino, a doue-colour, a ring-doue colour. Palpabile, palpable, that may be felt, touched, or handled. Palpare, to feele, to groape, to feele and handle gentlie, to stroke and touch soft∣ly, vsed also to flatter, to cog, to foist, and to deceiue with faire words. Palpebre, the eye lids. Also the haires that grow on the eye lids. Palpegone, gropingly, fumblingly, snea∣kingly as men grope in the darke, by guisse, hab or nab. Palpetante, as Palpitante. Palpetare, as Palpitare. Palpicone, as Palpegone. Palpitante, panting, beating, throbbing, mouing, boading. Palpitare, to pant, beate, or throb as ones hart doth being wearie, out of breath, to moue, to dance, to stirre as ones braine doth sometimes. Palpitatione, a panting, or mouing or throbbing, a beating often, a quicke mouing as the hart when it throbs. Palpitio, as Palpitatione. Paltono, a varlet, a knaue, a rascall. Paltrocca, a pussell, a pugge, a paltry wench, a driggle-draggle, a slut, a whore, a flurt, a strumpet, a gixie, a minxe. Palsero, a thumb of a hand. Also an inch. Paltoniere, a farmer of any liuing or lands. Also taken for a carier or dro∣uer. Paltrufalo, a kinde of fruite of a water-weede. Paludamento, a coate-armour, a horse∣mans cote, a heraulds cote of armes, a chiefe captaines ritch garment, a tri∣umphant robe, or imperiall mantell. Paludare, to grow fennie, marrish, or moorish. Palude, a fennie or marrish ground, a meare, a moore. Paludoso, fennie, marrish, moorish, wa∣trie, full of bogs. Paluscelli, as Paliscelli. Also a roape-makers toole.
Palustro, as Paludoso. Paluesana, as Paluese. Paluese, a kinde of old fashioned target, shield, or buckler, called a Palueise. Pambasilia, a perfect kingdome or domi∣nion, a kingdome where one hath all in his owne power. Pambere, bread and drinke togither, ta∣ken also for a nunchions or beuer, or drinking in an afternoone. Pampalo, a fish called in latine Pompi∣lius. Pampanare, to cut off superfluous leaues, branches, or sprigs of vines that the sun may come to the grapes to ripen them. Also to budde, to sprout, or spring with buds or blossoms. Pampani, buds, sprouts, or leaues or bran∣ches of vines, called the tendrels that spring the first yeere of the vine, and beareth leaues onely and no grapes. Pampanoso, full of leaues, sprigs, bran∣ches or buds. Pampapato, a kind of simnell or cracknell bread. Pamphago, the name of a dogge as one would saie a rauener, an eate-all. Pampinare, as Pampanare. Pampinatione, a cutting and pulling off superfluous and needeles leaues and branches from vines. Pampini, as Pampani. Pampinoso, as Pampanoso. Panace, the hearbe Al-heale, or wound-woort. Some take it for Tobacco. Some for Costemarie. Some for Angelica: and some for Scabwoort or horseheele. Panachea, as Panace. Panada, a kinde of meate called a Pa∣nado. Panadella, Panadina, a little messe of Panad. Panadelli, a kinde of torch, taper, or linke. Panae, hath been vsed by Dante for lime-twigs. Panaia, a hand-basket, a bread-basket. Also a bellie or a panch. Panara, a kinde of simnell bread. Also a binne or basket for bread, a bakers bas∣ket. Panaréco, that containeth all vertue. Panariccio, a fellon, a whitblowe, that comes on ones fingers tops. Panaro, as Panara. Panaruola, a little binne, a basket for bread. Panata, as Panada. Panatella, Panatina, as Panadella. Panateria, a pantrie or bread-stall. Panathenee, a kind of games and solem∣nities vsed by the Athenians. Panatiére, a baker. also a panter. Panca, a bench, a stoole, a forme, a seate, a settle. Pancali, benches, stooles, formes, seats, set∣tles. Pancetta, a brest of porke. Also a bald-rib of porke. Panche, brogues or such shooes as Irish men weare. Panchetta, a little forme, stoole, bench, seate or settle. Pancia, a paunch or bellie. Panciano, as Pancione. Panciare, to paunch any beast, to vnbo∣well. Panciata, a paunch or bellie full. Panciatura, the paunching of anie crea∣ture. Panciera, a peece of armour to arme the bellie, a bellie peece. Pancietta, a little belly or paunch. Panciolle, Looke Apanciolle, or stare a panciolle. Pancione, a bigge belly, a paunch, a gulch or gorbelly. Panciuto, that hath a bigge paunch or bellie, gorbellied. Pencratio, a kinde of onion or garlicke growing by the water. Also a wrestling or exercise in all feates of actiuitie. Pancratisti, certaine wrestlers or conten∣ders with hand and feete, expert in ac∣tiuitie. Pancrea, a kernell vnder the ventricle, to defend it from receiuing hurt. In a hog it is called the sweete bread. Pancreo, a part of the body in the nea∣ther rimme of the caule betweene the liuer and the stomacke. Pancresto, a medicine seruing for all dis∣eases, a salue for euerie sore. Pancro, a kind of many coloured precious stone. Pancucco, a kinde of fruit that okes bring foorth like the gals. Panda, the goddes of peace. Pándere, pando, pandei, panduto, to spred, to open, to set abroad, to iette out. Pandette, books of diuers arguments trea∣ting of all matters, a volume of the ciuill lawe called Digestes. Pandiculare giorno, all Saints daie, wherein they did sacrifice to all the gods in common. Pandiculatione, a gaping, a reaching or stretching out of the body that so the vapours may bee blowne and puffed downe. Pandolo, a kinde of boyes-plaie vsed in Italie. Pandora, Pandura, a musical instrument with three strings, a kit, a croude, a re∣becke. Also signifying all guifts. Pane, all maner of bread. Also anie kinde of loafe or manchet. Pane azimo, vnleauened bread. Pane biscotto, bisket bread, shipbread. Pane bollito, a caudle, honie-sops, or a Panado. Pane buffetto, mancht bread or roule. Pane cornuto, course crustie bread. Pane di zuccaro, a sugar loafe. Pane di formentada, breade made of wheate. Pane di cernita, manchet bread, cho bread, ranged bread. Pane di semola, bread made of branne, chaffe bread. Pane di sembolelli, vnranged or chaffe bread. Pane di rauisciuolo, rie or typhe bread. Pane di segala, rie bread. Pane di tritello, rie or typhe bread. Pane ficato, a kinde of bread so called. Pane fiesco, new bread. Pane grosso▪ great course bread. Pane gramolato, ranged bread or knea∣ded bread. Pane leuato, leauened bread. Pane muffato, mouldie or mustie bread. Pane pagato, simnell bread. Pane vnto, bread and butter, a toste and butter. Panedra, a bird that feedeth vpon fishes. Panegirico, that conteineth commendati∣ons and praise. Also a licentious and la∣sciuious kinde of speaking or oration in the praise and commendations of kings, wherein men do ioyne many lies with flatterie. Panegli, flying squibs made of gunpow∣der. Panellare, to charme, to bewitch, to en∣chant. Panello, a charme, an enchantment. Also a riding cloth or horse cloth, a little cloth, a clout. Panereccio, a great swelling, blane or sore, but properly as Panariccio. Panerello, a little wicker basket. Paneto, a kinde of precious stone which helpeth women in their trauell, hauing it about them. Panetaio, as Panetiere. Panetaria, a place where bread is solde. Also a woman baker. Panetera, a woman baker or pantler. Panetiere, a baker or a pantler. Panetto, an ingot or lumpe of any mettall new cast. Pangio, a deuout and most religious man.
Pani, broad and flat impostumations. Pania, any slimie, gluish, or clammie mat∣ter. Also slime or birdlime. Also a lime twigge, or luske, or a rispe. Paniare, to lime twigs. Also to entangle, to clam. Panicello, as Pannetto. Panicio, a graine like millet, panike, ote∣meale. Also that which men vse in stead of bread. Panico, a graine like vnto mill, with a knop full of corne, some red, some blacke or white, called panike. Also a sudden feare wherewith one is distraught, and put besides his wit, comming without knowne cause. Panicone, a great feeder, a cormorant, a gourmand, a gullie-gut, a gorbellie. Panicula, a long rounde thing hanging downe of diuers herbes and trees like a cats-taile, as in nut trees and others, called red plum or cats-taile. Also anie thing that groweth round and long. Panieraro, a panier or basket maker. Paniére, a panier, a basket, a dosser. Panioni, lime twigs or sprigs to catch fowle with, called lushes or rispes. Panizza, a kind of meate made of grated bread. Panizzo as Panico. Pannaccio, filthie course cloth, rugge or frize, home-spun cloth. Pannadi latte, a kinde of clouted creame, trifle or foole. Pannaiuolo, a draper or a clothier. Pannareccia, a whitlowe or fellon, a dis∣ease comming on the finger an vncom. Pannetto, a little cloth, ragge or clout, a napkin, a handkercher, a towell, a rub∣ber, a kercher. Panni, all manner of clothes, garments, raiments, or apparell, be it woollen or linnen. Pannicelli, Pannelli, as Pannetto. Also filmes or thin skin-lets. Pannicola carnosa, as Pannicula. Pannicoli, little rags, clouts or clothes. al∣so any thinne skin about a mans bodie. Pannicula carnosa, a pannicle or fleshie membrane or skin that lieth next vnder the fat of the outward parts, and is the fourth couering that wrappeth all the bodie ouer. Panni lini, any linnen clothes. Panni lini di gamba, linnen hose or stoc∣kings. Panni di razza, cloth of arraz, tapestry cloth. Pannine, all maner of woollen clothes or the trade of woollen clothes. Panni vendoli, such as sell olde clothes, frippers, brokers. Pannito, a frock or cassocke. Pannizzuola, a toole that stone cutters vse. Panno, any kinde of cloth. Also a tent for a wound. Also a marke which a man hath by nature. Panno accottonato, cottoned, or freezed cloth. Panno alto, broad cloth. Panno basso, narrow cloth, as carzies. Panno collo, a neck-cloth. Panno del occhio, a disease in the eie, as we say a pin and a web. Panno lana, woollen cloth. Panna lino, linnen cloth. Panno di seta, any cloth made of silke. Pannocchia, a cunt botch, a winchester goose, an impostume about the priuie members, a boile, a blane, a pocke, a plague sore, a knob, a bunch or wenne of flesh. Also a stalke, a stem, or an eare of milet, panike, or Indian wheate. Pannoro, a kinde of measure in Italy. Pannosita, a dimnes ouer ones eies. Pannoso, woollie, full of clothes, clothed with cloth. Also couered with a rine or slimie skin. Pano, reeling, round, closely rounde, the round lying of a snake or of a worme. Also a weauers roule. Also touchwood, or a spungie swelling on trees like a mu∣shrume. Also knobs, kernels, or cornes growing behind many mens eares, or other parts. Also a hot swelling or in∣flammation of blood. Pan pentito, bread of repentance, conti∣tinuall repentance. Pan porcino, an herbe good for women in labour to hasten their deliuerie called sowbread. Pansebasto, a precious stone which taketh away barrennes. Panselono, the full moone. Patalena, a kinde of fish that stickes vpon the outside of shippes, called a barnakle: some take it for another kinde of shell fish. Pantano, mudde, mire, durt, a bogge. Pantanoso, muddie, mierie, durtie, bog∣gie. Pantegana, a great rat. Pantero, a precious stone, hauing manie colours. Panthera, a beast called a panther or a leoparde. Also a net or haie to catch conie with. Also a kind of fowling net. Also a kinde of many coloured stone. Pantice, a fluxe of the bellie. Also a great fat paunch or gorbelly. Pantide, a stone of some called Graida, for they saie it bringeth foorth yoong ones euery three moneths. Pantiera, a kinde of traell or fowling net. Pantofole, slippers, pantofles, chopines. Pantonimo, a player, a dizzard or com∣mon iester, that moouing his bodie, and vsing filthie gesture can counterfait the manners and gestures of anie man. Also a kinde of poeme. Panurgia, craftines, deceit, guile, subtilty. Panurgo, a slie, deceitfull, craftie old foxe, a craftie knaue. Panza, as Pancia. Panzane, Looke Dare panzane. Panzare, as Panciare. Panzata, as Panciata. Panzette, as Pancette. Panziera, as Panciera. Panzone, as Pancione. Paolino, as Pagolino. Paonaccio, Paonazzo, as Pauonazzo Paone, a pea-cocke. Paoneggiante, as Pauonegiante. Paoneggiare, as Pauonegiare. Papa, a Pope, a bishop of Rome. Papabile, able to be Pope. Papadindi, dad or father giue me some money, as children vse to say. Papafico, a kind of frock or gabardine to ride in. Papagallo, a parrat, a popping iay or Pa∣rochito. Also a woonderfull cocke: for Pape in latine is admirable, and Gallo is a cocke, a cocke of the game. Also as Merluzzo. Papali, a kind of peare so called in Italy. Paparello, Paparino, as Paparo. Paparo, a gosling or yoong goose. Papasso, a Pope or bishop among the in∣fidels. Papato, the papacie or Popedome. Also a kind of simnell bread. Papauerale, wild poppie, which being sub∣iect to falling off doth soone loose his flower, some call it corne-rose. Papáuero, poppie or chestoule. Pape, a word of admiration, as Gods! oh! alasse! aie me! Papero, Paparello, a yoong goose or gos∣lin. Papesimo, the Popedome or papacie, or poperie or popish religion. Papiglione, a butterflie. Papiro, a kind of great rush in Egypt gro∣wing in fens or moorish grounds wher∣of they were woont to make great leaues to write on, and whereof the first paper was made, and of that came our word paper· Papiro della candela, the snuffe or
weeke of a candle. Papironco, Looke Lucegnolo. Papisti, the papists or catholikes. Pappa, pap for children. Also the first word children vse, as with vs dad or daddie or bab. Also a nurce father or foster father. Pappafico, a daintie bird in Italy feeding on figs called a gnatsnapper. Pappagallesca lingua, the parrats lan∣guage, as we say pedlers french, gibbrish or the fustian toong. Pappardelle, a kind of meat vsed in Ita∣ly like steakes of veale rosted or baked in a dripping pan vnder the rost meate, the dripping or basting of which giues it a verie daintie taste. Pappare, to feed with pap, to pap, to sucke. Also as Pacchiare. Also to call dad as children do when they learne to speake. Also to eat small and chewed meate as nurces giue children. Papparotta, Papparoto, as Pappa. Pappatore, a feeder on pap. Also as Pac∣chione. Pappatura, any kind of pap or feeding with pap. Also as Pacchia. Pappe, teates, dugs, vdders, pappes, as Pape. Pappo, a word vsed by children, as dad or dadie or bab. Also the soft downe of flowers that the wind bloweth about as thistle downe or the mossines and cotton that groweth on some herbes. Also the herbe called Groundswell. Pappolata, as Fagiolata. Papponare, as Pacchiare. Pappone, as Pacchione. Papula, a botch, a boile, a pocke, a blane, a sore or impostume in the priuie parts. Also a blister, a push, a whelke or anie swelling or inflammation which riseth on the skin with itch. Papuzzana, a worme called a weenell. Par, a paire, a couple, a cast, a brace, a yoke. Also for Pare, it seemeth. Par, pari, alike, euen, iust, match, equall, semblable, iump. Pario dispari, euen or ods. Parpari, all alike, all euen. Also a kind of play called euen and odde. Para, Paia, paires, couples, casies, braces, yokes. Parabasi, transgression, as it were spea∣king somthing besides the argument. Parabola, a parable, a similitude or com∣parison, a resemblance. Also a certaine crooked line comming of the cutting of a cone or cilinder. Parabolano, a parable speaker. Also a mountibanke, a pratler, a babbler, a chatter, a prater. Parabolare, to speake parables, to chat, prate or tattle by way of similitudes and parables. Paracéntesi, a pricking as it were or cut∣ting of the skin with a lancet or a fleam or any other sharp pointed instrument to draw water from them that haue the dropsie. Paracentério, an instrument wherewith such a cure is done. Parachinanca, as Parasinanca. Paracimeno.   Paracismo, as Parocismo. Paraclesi, a comforting or exhortation. Paraclito, a man defamed or ill reported of, that hath an ill name. Paracnastico, a kinde of continuall hot and burning feauer wherein the heate when it is at the greatest by little and little diminisheth and ceaseth. Paracnémio, the vttermost bone in the shanke of the leg. Paracóculo, a strange plant or thistle called the apple of Peru, the thornie or prickly apple. Paracope, alienation of the mind. Paracore, a defence for the hart, a cordi∣all, a goose giblets or such cookes vailes. Paracucchino, a flurt, a iot, a pins head, a strawes head Also as Pancucco. Paracuore, as Paracore. Paradelo, the great daizie with the knob in the midst. Paradimma, Paradigma, an example of some ones fact or saying. Paradisare, to emparadize. Paradiseo, a birde breeding in paradise hauing verie costly feathers. Paradiso, paradise. Also a garden of plea∣sure or orchard of delight. Paradossale, paradoxicall, contrarie to the common opinion. Paradósso, a maruellous, wonderfull and strange thing to heare, and is contrarie to the common receiued opinion, a para∣doxe, an old opinion maintained by som one man or some few sectaries. Parafimosi, some parte of a mans priui∣ties. Parafo, a paraffe, a paragraffe, whatsoe∣uer is contained in one sentence. Parafuoco, a skreene to warde one from the fire. Paragalli, the name of a roape in a ship. Paraggi, the knuckles or turning ioints of the chine or backe bone. Paraggio, equalitie, comparison, a match. Also a preparation, an ornament or set∣ting foorth. Paragóge, a figure when a letter or sylla∣ble is added to the order of a word. Paragonanza, a comparison, an equality, a matching. Paragonare, to compare, to equall, to con∣fer togither. Paragone, a paragon, a match, an equall, a proofe, a triall, an experience, an e∣quality, a comparison. Also a confer∣ring togither, a touch stone to trie gold or good from bad. Also a like as good as one brings. Paragrafa, a marke in a margent. Paragrafo, a paragraffe, a paraffe, a pil∣crow, whatsoeuer is contained in one sen∣tence. Paralelli, Paralello, as Parallelli. Paralesia, the sickenes which we call palsie. Paraliopesi, a preuention, an anticipation. Paralipómene, left out, not spoken or written of. Paraliscia, as Paralesia. Paralisi, a resolution of the sinewes, a de∣priuing of feeling and moouing, or of both in any part of the bodie. Paralisis, an herbe with a golden flower, and is the first signe of spring time, the primrose or cowslip. Paralisi herba, the primrose, cowslip or oxelip. Paralitico, one that is sicke of the palsie. Parallassi, the difference between the true & apparant place of a planet or comet, by reason that we behold it not from the center, but from the superficies of the earth. Parallella sphera, that place of the world where the inhabitants haue the equi∣noctiall, and the Tropikes parallel to their horizon, as they haue who dwell vnder the north or south poole. Parallelli, the circles and lines in the spheare of the world drawen from the east to the west hauing one of the poles for their centre, and in euery part e∣quallie distant one from another. Parallello, euerie where alike distant, as lines drawen in childrens copie bookes to write by. Paralo, a kind of ship at Athens where∣in certaine went to Delos euerie yeere in the name of all the rest to sacrifice to Apollo, and they which went in that ship were called Parali. Paralogismo, a deceitfull conclusion or captious reasoning and arguing. Paramento, a preparation, a setting forth, a trimming, a garnishing, a digh∣ting. Paramése, the fift string or next to the middlemost. Also B. fa. b. mi. Paramosche, a fan of feathers to keepe
away flies with. Parandra, a beast or birde of manie co∣lours. Paranesi, an admonition or a precept, an exhortation, namely such a one as ought not to be gainsaied. Paranetico, containing such precepts and instructions. Parango, a span measure or shaftsman as drapers call it in London. Parangonare, as Paragonare. Parangone, as Paragone. Paranunpha, he or she that is ioined with the bride or bridegroome to make him or hir readie, to see that all things may be well, an ouerlooker of a marriage or wedding. It is now a daies vsed in ma∣nie parts of Italy for a mariage maker. Also an effeminate, nice, milkesop, pu∣ling fellow. Parate, a kind of Amethist stone. Parapécchio, one of the bones in the arme called also Badio. Parapétto, a cuirace, a breast plate, a sence for the breast or hart. Also a pa∣rapet or wall breast high. Also the vp∣per part of the wall which shadoweth the soldiers from the sight and annoy∣ances of the enemie. Paraphrna, or Parapharnalia, al things that the woman bringeth to hir hus∣band beside hir dowrie called in latine Peculium. It is a word vsed in the ciuill law. Paraphrasi, a paraphrase, an exposition of one selfe thing by other words. Paraphrastico, paraphrasticall, a larger exposition of any thing. Paraphrasto, he that interpreteth the sen∣tences of an author plainly. Paraphrosina, a kind of phrensie. Parare, to adorne, to dight, to decke, to beautifie, to set foorth, to trim, to pre∣pare, to furnish, to garnish, to prouide, to dresse, to mend, to order, to make rea∣die, to set in a readines. Also to warde or defende a blow, to couer, to shield, to shelter, to shroud, to repaire. Also to teach a horse to stop and staie orderly. It is also taken for the stop in the action of horsemanship. Para bene, he stops well. Parato, adorned, dight, deckt, beautified, set forth, trimmed, prepared, garnished, prouided, drest, mended, ordred, made readie, set in a readines. Also warded or defended a blow, couered, shielded, sheltred, shrouded, repaired. Also rea∣die, quick, nimble, prompt, readie with good meditation, aduised. Parasanga, a Persian measure vsed much by Xenophon in describing marches, con∣taining 30. stadios, and is about three miles and three quarters of ours. Parasi, a kinde of disease in the eyes. Parasinanca, a kinde of squinsie or swel∣ling in the outward muscles or fleshie parts of the iawes with a rednes, being a disease ordinarily hapning to hogs: some call it in men the mumps or out∣ward swelling of the throte. Parasismo, Paracismo, Parasimo, a grudge, fit, accession, or remaining of a disease. Parasitare, to play the parasite, to scoth one vp in all things, to hold one vp with yea and nay, to faune and flatter, to cogge and foist with one for a meales meate. Parasito, a smell-feast, a flatterer, a pa∣rasite, a trencherd or bellie friend, one that saieth and doeth all things to please the humor of another, and agreeth vnto him in all things to haue his repast scot∣free. Parastasi, assistance or proofe by witnes. Parastatiche, the spindle-bone in the shanke. Also two kernels full of seede in mans bodie at the end of the bladder, receiuing the seede from other vessels. Parastrate, the spindle-bone in the shanke. Also two kernels full of seede, which in a man do grow at the end or neck of the bladder, and serue to receiue the seede brought thither by vasa deferentia. Parata, a warde, a defence, a shroud, a shelter, a preparing. Parathesi, apposition. Paratilmo, a kinde of punishment by dra∣wing out of haires out of the secret parts of the bodie of poore men taken in a∣dulterie. Parauanghi, countrie labourers or plough∣men. Parauento, a fanne or anie thing else to defend one from the wind. Parche, the fates of mans life, Poets faine them to be three. Párcere, to spare, forgiue, or pardon, to forbeare, or abstaine. Parcimonia, as Parcità. Parcimonioso, as Parco. Parcità, niggardnes, thriftines, frugali∣tie, sparing, scarcenes, sparingnes, good husbandrie. Parco, sparing, sauing, frugall, scarce in expences, hard, niggard, neere, miserly, loth to, little desirous of. Also a miser, a churle, a snudge, a pinchpennie, a pen∣nie-father. Also a parke for deere, an empaled piece of ground. Pardai, a kinde of flat bottome boate. Pardalianche, an hearbe called libards bane. Pardalio, a kind of sweete oyntment. Also a kinde of precious stone speckled like a panther. Pardalo, a bird called a plouer. Pardello, a fish called a menowe. Pardiglio, a darke spotted gray colour of a horse. Pardo, a deere or sandie-colour. Also the colour of a horse. Also a Leopard. Pardolo, a kinde of boyes-play so called. Also a bird that seemeth to be a plouer. It is of a dunne colour, and flyeth in flocks. Pare, equall, alike, euen, iust, matching. Also it seemeth, it appeareth. Pareaso, Pareasi, a serpent, hauing to the greatnes and length of his bodie but a small head, yet such a wide mouth that he is able to swallow downe a sparow or a pigeon whole: he maketh a furrow on the ground as he creepeth with his taile. Parechij, manie, sundrie, diuers, mani∣fold, some, more. Parecchiare, to prepare, to set forth, to make readie, to dresse, to dight. Parecchio, a preparation, a setting forth, a making readie, a dighting. Pareggiare, as Paragonare. Pareggio, as Paragone. Pareglia, as Paragone. Parélio, any thing bright like the sunne. Parencephali, the hinder part of the braine. Parencima, the substance of the liuer, spleene and lights, so called because it is supposed that they are congealed of much thick and feculent bloud. Parentado, a mariage, or matching, or allying together of houses, an assemblie of kinsmen, a kindred, an aliance, a pa∣rentage, an affinitie, a consanguinitie, a kin, a familie, a stock, a house, a name, a blood of a name or kindred, an ancestrie, a pedigree. Parentare, to allye or ioyne in marriage, to become kin, or kinsmen. Parentato, allyed, or matched in marri∣age. Also as Parentado. Parénte, a kinsman, an allye, one ioyned in allyance: it may also be vsed for the father and mother that begat and bare vs, a parent, an ancient eler. Also the maker and creator, or that breedeth and bringeth forth. Parentéla, as Parentado. Paréntesi, a parenthesis or interposition of words within a sentence, a clause com∣prehended within another sentence,
which may be left out, and yet the sense perfect. Parentezza, as Parentado. Parenticida, he that murthereth his father, mother, kinsfolke, or deare friend. Parentório, as Paremptorio. Parére, an opinion, a will, a conceit, a thought, a minde, a voice, a seeming. Parére, Paio, Parsi, Parso, or Paruto, to seeme, to appeare, to thinke, to suppose, to shew himselfe, to haue an opinion or conceite. Parergo, something put to, being nothing of the matter, all that is besides the principall purpose that one hath in hand. Paresi, negligence, slacknes, a decaying or weakening of the strength of bodie or minde. Paretara, Paretaria, the hearbe called Pellitorie of the wall, or binde-weede, or with-binde. Paréte, any kinde of wall or partition in a house. Pareuole, seemely, appearing, apparant, making a good shew, sightlie, that makes a faire shew, handsome, likely, in good plight. Pargoleggiare, to wauer, to play the childe, to be quaint, prettie or trixie. Pargoletta, Pargolo, quaint, prettie, umble, daintie, trixie, tender, small, little. Pari, paires, couples, braces, casts, yokes, equall, alike, resembling, euen, matches. Pari del regno, the peeres of the king∣dome, the states, or great men, or prin∣ces of a state. Pari di francia, the peeres of France. Pari dispari, euen and odde, a kinde of play so called. Paricida, a murtherer of his father, mo∣ther, or any of his neere kindred. Also he that killeth his equall, or he that wit∣tinglie or willinglie had slaine a free man, any hainous murtherer. Parietaria, an hearbe called pellitorie of the wall. Pariete, as Parete. Parigioli, a kinde of mushroms or toade∣stooles. Pariglia, Pariglio, as Paragone. Parigliare, as Paragonare. Parilità, equalitie, likenes, euennes, simi∣litude, resemblance. Parimente, alike, equallie, euen, likewise, also, moreouer, besides, together, natu∣rallie, semblablie, as well as, in lyke manner or sort. Pario, a kinde of stone or marble. Parisola, an oxeye, or great titmouse. Paristhimia, two spongious kernels in the iawes containing great aboundance of humiditie, which serueth to moisten the rough arterie, the stomacke, and all the parts in the mouth. Parità, equalitie, as Parilità. Paritello, a thinne wall of reedes, or rods. Paritonio, a kinde of colour that painters vse. Parmegiano, a man borne in Parma. Also Parmesan cheese, cheese made a∣bout Parma. Parlamentare, to parly or speake toge∣ther of graue matters. Parlamento, a Parliament, a parlie, a speaking, a speech. Also a Parliament, or assemblie of the states of a king∣dome. Parlante, speaking, discoursing, reasoning, talking. Parlantina, as Ciaramella, a talking or tatling woman. Parlare, to speake, to talke, to reason, to discourse. Also speech, talke, or dis∣course. Parlare alla muta, to speake by signes and nods. Parlare co cenni, to speake by signes, or beckning. Parlasia, the palsie. Parlatoio, a roome in a house called a parlour. Parlatore, a speaker, a discourser, a tal∣ker. Parlatura, a speech or speaking. Parletico, sicke of the palsie. Also the palsie. Parliere, a speaker. Parma, a kinde of shield or target that footemen were wont to vse in warres. Parmola, a part of the plough so called. Parnocchie, a fish called shrimps or praunes. Paro, a paire, a couple, a brace, a cast. Also equall, like, match, euen. Parochetto, Parochito, a kinde of Par∣rats, called a Parokito. Parocchia, a parish. Parochiale, a parishioner, pertaining to a parish. Parochiano, a parishioner. Also a parish priest. Parocismo, a fit, a stowre, a grudge, or an assault of an ague, the comming a¦gaine of an ague. Paroo, as Parochiano. Paroffia, as Parocchia. Parodia, a turning of a verse by altering some words. Paroffiale, as Parochiale. Paroffiano, as Parochiano. Parogli, a disease in the teeth. Paróla, a word, a motto, the word, a speech or talke. Also a promise or as∣surance. Parolie, little sweete pleasing words. Parolo, a Tinkar. Parolozza, a grosse vnseemely word. Paroluzze, foolish words, tittle lattle words, the least words. Paronichia, as Panariccio. Also an hearbe growing in rocks good to heale felons in fingers. Parosolina, a titmouse. Parossola, a titmouse. Paroti, an impostume or sore that com∣meth of matter distilled from the head into the burres or kernels of the eares. Parotide, the two arteries, or the right and left side neere the throte, and going vpward aboue the eares. Parpaglione, a kinde of manie coloured butterflye, or the colour thereof. Parpagliuola, a coyne worth three pence sterling. Parpegliola, a butterflye, a ladie-bird. Parruzza, a titmouse. Parsimonia, parcimonie, sparing, hus∣bandrie, as Parcità. Parsimoniare, to spare, to be thriftie, and play the good husband. Parsimonioso, sparing, thriftie, parci∣monious, pinching, frugall, as Parco. Parso, Paruto, seemed, appeared, thought, surmised, supposed, imagined. Partanza, a departure or going away. Partatamente, seuerally, apart, by it self. Parte, a parte, a portion, a share, a side, a limme, a ioint. Also an office, a functiō, a charge, a dutie. Also a way, a coaste, a turne, or course. Also a partie, a facti∣on, a sect or side. Also partly, in some sort, or in part. Parte che, whilest that, partly that. Partécipe, a participant, a partaker, a partner, a sharer, a confederate, an ad∣herent, an accessorie, a companion, a complice, a copartner, one that taketh part, and runs the same fortune good or bad. Partecipante, partaking, participating, communicating, adhering, confedera∣ting. Partecipare, to participate, to partake, to communicate, to take part with, or be partaker. Partecipatione, a partaking, a partner∣ship, a communication. Partefice, as Partecipe. Partegiana, a partesan, a iauelin.
Partegiano, a partner, a copartner, a sha∣rer, a partiall man. Parteggiamento, a deuidence, a sharing, a taking part with any faction. Parteggare, to share, to diuide, to be fac∣tious, or take part with. Partenére, tengo, tenni, tenuto, to ap∣pertaine, to belong vnto. Partenimento, a pertaining or a belon∣ging. Also a purtenance. Partenénte, pertaining or belonging vnto. Partenza, a departure or going away. Partesana, as Partegiana. Parti vergognose, the priuie parts of man or woman. Parthenia, virginitie. Parthenio, the sonne of a maide vnmari∣ed, or of one supposed to be a maid when she was maried. Also the herbe feather-fewe, saint Peters woort, white woort, or motherwoort. Parti, partes, factions, sects, sides. Also, seemes it to thee? the plurall of Parte. Partiale, partiall, factious. Partialità, partialitie, factiousnes. Particelle, little particles in speech, as mi, ti, si, ci, vi, ne, and such. Particella, a parcell, a particle, a little portion or part or mēber, the least share. Participiale, that soundeth like a parti∣ciple. Participio, a participle. Particola, as Particella. Particolare, to particularize, to share, to deuide, to seuer, to distinguish. Also particular, seuerall, or distinct. Particolarità, a particularity, a distintion Particulare, as Particolare. Particularità, as Particolarità. Partigiano, as Partegiano. Partigione, a partition, a diuidence, a se∣paration, a share, a part. Partimento, a diuidence, a part, a share, a deuiding, a parting, a diuision, a distin∣guishing, a compartement, a partiti∣on, a sorting. Partire, Parto, Partito, to depart, to be gone, to go awaie. Also to deuide, to share, to sunder, to part. Partita, a departure, a going awaie. Also a diuidence, a diuision, a sharing. Also a set or match at any game or plaie. Also a parcel, parte or share of any reckoning or accounts. Partitamente, seuerallie, by peece meale, euery part by it selfe. Partito, departed, gone, gone awaie. Also deuided, shared, sundred, parted. Also a course, a match, an order, a resolution, an offer or entertainment for any ser∣uant. Partitione, as Partigione. Partitoie, a kinde of peach so called in I∣talie. Partitore, a deuider, a sharer. Partitori, the names of certaine principall forefeathers in a hauke. Parti vergognose, the priuities or priuie parts of man or beast. Parto, a birth or deliuerance of a childe, the fruite of any mans inuention, what∣soeuer any man or woman brings forth, a laying, a whelping, a litter, a layrie, a farrowing, a caluing, a hatching, a kit∣ling, a filling, &c.. Partoggio, a horse litter or chaire to carie people in. Also a beare to carie dead folkes. Partoríre, risco, rito, to bring foorth or be deliuered of children, or yoong. Also to laie, to whelpe, to farrow, to calue, to hatch, to kitten as cats, to fillie. Also to get, to produce, to breede, to ingender any fruite or labour, whether of the bo∣die or minde. Partorito, brought foorth, or deliuered of a childe, laide, whelpt, farrowed, calued hatcht, kittend, fillied, produced, bred, gotten, engendred any fruite or labour of body or minde. Parturire, as Partorire. Parucca, a periwigge or a gregorian. Parue, it seemed, or did seeme, it appeared. Paruenza, apparance, resemblance, seem∣lines. Also as Picciolezza. Parula, as Parussola. Paruo, Paruolo, a titte-mouse. Also a lit∣tle one, a babe, a yoong one. Paruoletto, little, small, pretie, handsom. Parussola, an oxe-eie or great titmouse. Paruta, a seeming to the eie. Paruto, seemed, appeared, goodly in view, seemly, comely, faire in shewe, woorth the appearing, proper, beautifull to see vnto, of good presence. Pascale, pascall, pertaining to easter daie or the pascall. Paschi, as Pascoli. Páscere, pasco, pascci, pasciuto, to feed, to nourish, to eate, to graze, to pasture. Also to giue meat vnto, to bring vp, to maintaine. Also to take nourishment or receiue food. Pasciuto, fed, full fed, nourished, eaten, grazed, pastured, giuen meate vnto, brought vp, maintained. Also taken nourishment or receiued food. Pasciona, a good feeding, a noonchions, a panch full. Pasciozza, as Pasciona. Pasciozzare, to feed merily, to make good cheere. Pascibietole, a foole, a ninnie, a gull, a patch. Pasco, Pascolo, a pasture. Also foode, meate, fodder, or feeding for cattle. Pascolare, to pasture, to feed, to graze, or foder as cattle doth, to goe to grasse. Pascolatore, a letter out of pastures. Pascoloso, full of pasture grounds. Also seruing for pasture, good for grazing. Pascuone, a horse stealer, or cattle stea∣ler. Pasone, a kind of cornish chough with red feete. Pasqua, the holie time of easter. Pasqua di maggio, whitsontide. Pasqua di resuressi, easter-day. Pasquare, to keepe easter. Also to feast and make good cheere, to leaue fasting. Pasquinare, to make or write railing li∣bels, or satiricall inuectiues. Pasquinate, railing libels, rimes, satiricall inuectiues or such detracting stuffe. Pasquino, a statue in Rome on whom all libels, railings, detractions, and satiri∣call inuectiues are fathered. Passa, dried, withered, faded, drooped, as Vua passa, dried raisins. Also it passeth Passa caualli, a barge or ship to carie and transport horses. Passa dieaei, a game at dice called passage or aboue ten. Passadore, a kinde of darte, shaft, or such shooting weapons. Also a squib or pe∣tard of wilde fire. Passaggiere, a passenger, a waie-faring man. Passaggio, a passage, a foord, a cut ouer any water. Also custome or tole for passage. Passamano, any kind of lace. Also bor∣dring or garding for garments. Passamano d'accia, statute lace, crewell lace. Passamano di seta, any kinde of silke lace. Passamano di oro, gold lace. Passamanini, little or small laces or twists. Passamantare, to lace, or set or border a garment with lace. Passamantaro, a silke-weauer, a lace-weauer. Passamento, as Passaggio. Passamezzo, a passameasure in dancing a cinquepace. Passamorto, ferrie man. Passante, passant, passing, transitorie, mo∣mentarie. Passare, to passe ouer, to ouer slip, to passe, to exceede, to surpasse, to goe beyond, to decease, to transport ouer. Also a kinde
of flat fish as a flounder or plaise. Also a sparrow bird. Passato, past, ouer-slipt, exceeded, sur∣passed, gone beyond, deceased, transpor∣ted ouer. Passata, a passado, a word in fencing. Passati, the deceased, the forepassed, our forefathers or predecessors. Passato domani, to morrow next, the next day after to morrow. Passare a guazzo, to wade ouer, to foord ouer any water. Passare a nuoto, to swim ouer. Passare alcuno, to exceede some bodie. Passare di questa vita, to die, to goe out of this life. Passare i termini, to go beyond the bounds or limits. Passare il tempo, to passe the time. Passaporto, a ferrie-man. Also a passe∣port. Passatempo, a pastime, a solace, a sport. Passauolāte, a kind of great ordinance or artillerie. Also a kind of shaft or flight. Passeggiare, to walke or pace it for plea∣sure. Passeggiamento, a solacing walke, a walke or allie of pleasure. Passeggiata, a walke or walking. Passeggiatoio, a walking place, an allie. Passeggiatore, a walker for solace. Passera, a bird called a sparrow, a fish cal∣led a turbut, a brut or bret. Also the fish called a plaise, or a flounder. Some take it for the Sole-fish. Passeragazzera, as Regestola. Passere, Passare, as Passera. Passerini, yong sparowes. Passerini occhij, little sparow eyes. Passernici, a kinde of white stones found in Italie. Passerelle, little plaise, or flounders. Also dride fish called poore Iohn. Passerótto, a cock-sparow. Passetti, little steps or paces, little bosses, or buttons of gold or siluer. Passi, paces, steps, footings, streds. Passibile, passibile, full of passion, or trouble. Passina, Passino, a space or measure con∣taining about three yards english mea∣sure. Passin, Passino, leisurely, faire and soft∣ly, soft pacing. Passio, vsed for the passion of Christ. Passionare, to appassionate, to distemper, to perturbe, to grieue, to vexe. Passionato, passionate, distempred, grie∣ued, vexed, earnest, perturbed in minde. Also giuen to some humour or passion. Passióne, passion, griefe, or perturba∣tion of minde, trouble. Also a passion, an accident, or symptome, concurring with some disease offending the bodie, and bringing it out of temper, being an enimie to the naturall constitution of the bodie, whether any thing happen a∣gainst the course of nature to the part affected, or be wanting, which natu∣rally accustomed to resort thither. Passiuità, licentiousnes, variablenes. Passiuo, passiue, passiuely, importing pas∣sion, that which signifieth or causeth passion, trouble or griefe. Also incon∣stant, changeable, fickle. Passo, a step, a foote, a footing, a pace in going, a stredding, the measure of two foote and a halfe. Also a passage, a foorde, a ferrie, a place to which a man may passe or come, a place of any booke aleaged, a common place. Also withered or sere. Also the pacing of a horse. Passo geométrico, a pace or faddome of fiue foote, and by this pace are miles measured. Passo a passo, step by step, foote by foote, faire and softly. Passo d' asino, the herbe all-hose, or horse-hoofe. Passolare, to wither or dry in the sunne, as they do prunes or raisins. Passola vua, dride grapes or raisins. Passole, dride, baked, or withered fruites. Passa mezzo, a passameasure, or a cinquepace. Pasta, any thing or paste that is kneaded, all manner of paste or dow. Also a bait for fishes or pigeons, all maner of march∣pane, or mazapane. Pasta d'ambro, paste or pomander of amber. Pasta di genoua, paste of genoua. Pastadelle, as Pastelli. Pasta regia, a confection or sweete paste ordained of our phisitions for diseases of the breast, and against leanenes. Pastare, to paste together, to make dow, or kneade together, to impaste, to be-paste. Pasteggiare, to banket, to feast, to make good cheere. Pasteggiamenti, banquetings, feastings, good cheere. Pasteggiatori, banketers, feasters, epi∣cures, such as make their bellie their god. Pastegli, fine quelquechoses, or daintie paste meates or tartes or marchpanes, or chewet pyes. Also plaisters, or be-plaistrings. Pastelli, as Pastegli. Pastello, woad to dye blue withall. Pasticciami, all manner of paste meates, and pye meates. Pasticciare, as Pasteggiare. Pasticciatori, as Pasteggiatori. Pasticcietti, doucets, chewets, little pyes. Pasticciere, Pasticciaro, a cooke, or pa∣stie-maker. Pasticcini, as Pasticcietti. Pasticcio, any manner of pastie or pye. Pastinaca, the parsenep roote, a fish called a raie▪ also a forke fish, or a puffin: som∣times taken for a mans priuie member. Also as Fagiolata. Pastinaca muranese, a dildoe of glasse. Pastinare, to graffe, to plant, to set, to insert. Pastingoli, a kinde of pastemeate like our tartes and florentins. Pastizzaio, a pastie, or pyemaker. Pastizzare, as Pasteggiare. Pastizziere, as Pastizzaio. Pastizzo, as Pasticcio. Pastone, as Pacchione. Also a kinde of plaister for a horse. Pasto, foode, pasturing, maintenance, pa∣sture, meate, feeding, a baite, a meales meate, a dinner, or a supper. Also idle words, vaine entertainment, or court holly water. Also a pasture. Also haukes meate. Pastocchia, Pastocchiata, as Fagio∣lata. Pastoia, Pastora, pasterns for horses, a tumbrell, a stock, a pillorie, a clog, a yoke, or fetters, or shackles to tye men by the neck or feete, or to set on the no∣ses of vnrulie horses, called barnacles. Pastoiare, to fetter, to clog, to shackle, to pastern, to giue. Pastophori, certaine sacred priests in Egypt, and more honorable then the others. Pastora, as Pastoia. Also a shepheardesse, a woman keeping cattle. Pastorale, pastorall, rurall, pertaining to swaines or shepheards, a pastorall co∣medie treating of shepheards, swaines, and rurall people. Also a verge, a crosse caried before a prelate. Also a mans priuie member. Pastore, a shepheard, a keeper of cattle, a heards-man, a neates-man, a swaine, a grasier, a drouer, a flock-keeper, a heard-grome. Also a pastor, a feeder, a preacher. Pastorella, a shepheardesse, a yong prettie countrie wnch keeping sheepe. Pastoressa, a shepheardesse. Pastoritia, the arte or trade of shep∣heards. Pastricciano, a nick-name for a foolish conceited fellow.
Pastriccione, Looke Pacchione, or Lu∣macone. Pastume, any kinde of fine paste meate. Pastura, as Pascolo, or Pasto. Pasturaggio, as Pascolo. Pasturare, as Pascolare. Pataccia, Patassa, a kinde of hulke, flat boate, or patache. Also a kind of coine. Patago, a kind of sicknes leauing spots or as we saie gods markes or tokens in the dead, the plague. Patarino, a base mechanical fellow, a por∣ter or daie labourer. Patascia, a kinde of great ship of burthen so called. Patassio, a tit-mouse. Patecchi, chopinos or high shooes for wo∣men. Also stilts. Patella, as Padella. Also a fish called in latin Lapas, or else Partella. Also the whirle bone of the knee. Patena, a dish, a platter, a charger a wooden traie, a treene dish. Patente, a patent, a charter, a priuilege, Also open, discouered, appearing, mani∣fest, wide, subiect vnto, in danger. Patera, a kind of sacrificing cup, boule or chalice. Paterina, a queane or a drab. Paternale, fatherly, pertaining to a fa∣ther. Paternita, fatherhood, paternitie. Paterno, fatherly, of or like a father, or belonging to a father. Pater nostri, Pater nosters. Also beades. Also round beades of iron in the mouth of a bit. Pater nostro della Bertuccia. Looke Dire il pater nostro della Bertuc∣cia. Pathetico, patheticall, forcible, perswa∣siue, moouing affection. Patibile, tolerable, that may be suffred, easie to be suffred. Patibolo, a gibbet or little paire of gal∣lowes. Patico, a kind of aloes or drug. Patiénte, pacient, suffring, abiding, endu∣ring, bearing. Also a pacient, a suffrer, one that can suffer, endure, abide, away with, sustaine, tollerate, or beare. Patienza, Patientia, patience, suffrance, endurance, forbearing, constancie in a∣biding euill, aptnes to suffer or abide. Also subiection and obedience. Also a kinde of habite or frocke made of course haire cloth, that gallie slaues are made to weare, or else certaine religious men weare. Patimento, a suffring, an enduring, a forbearing. Patire, pato, patito, to suffer, to abide, to endure, to beare, to sustaine. Patito, suffred, abided, endured, borne. Patitore, a suffrer, an endurer. Patir vna disgratia, to suffer or pocket vp an iniurie. Patrasso, a selfe conceited chiefeman. Patregno, a father in lawe, a step father. Patria, a mans owne countrey or naturall soyle where he was borne, the citie, vil∣lage, or towne wherein any man is born: taken sometimes for a whole region or countrie. Patriale, according to ones owne countrey, pertaining to ones naturall countrey. Patriarca, a patriarke, or chiefe father. Patriarcato, the dignitie, place, or functi∣on of a patriarke or chiefe bishop. Patriare, to patriate, to endenize, or en∣franchise into a countrie. Patricida, a murtherer of his owne father or neere friend and cosin. Patricidio, the murthering of ones owne father or friend. Patricii, those which in Rome were de∣scended and came of the race and stocke of senatours, whose fathers and aunce∣stors bare that office, the sonnes of sena∣tours. Patricio, of, or belonging to the state of se∣natours, a patrician, descended of noble race, or one that descendeth lineally of senatours. Patrimo, that hath the father aliue, or borne of the same father. Poets say that Minerua was called Patrima, bicause she was borne of hir father alone. Patrimoniale, patrimoniall, inherítable, of, or belonging to inheritance. Patrimonio, a patrimonie, a birthright, a liue-lode or inheritance, the goods or landes that a father doth leaue to his children after his death. Patrigno, as Patregno. Patrio, as Paterno. Also of ones countrie. Also peculiar, or naturally incident to some one place or countrie. Patriotto, Patriotta, a mans countriman borne in the selfesame countrie. Patrizzare, to resemble ones father, to imitate his father, to do as his father did, to be the fathers owne childe in conditions. Patritio, as Patricio. Patrocinio, as Padrocinio. Patrona, as Padrona. Patronare, as Padroneggiare. Patronaggio, as Padrocinio. Patrone, as Padrone. Patron del tutto, a master or owner of al. Patron di casa, an owner, a master or landlord of an house. Patron di naue, a master or owner of a ship. Patroneggiare, as Padroneggiare. Patronimico, iust of the fathers conditi∣ons, or deriued of the fathers name. Patrono, an atturney or counsellor at the lawe. Patta, accordes, agreements, couenants, conditions, bargaines, contracts, trea∣ties. Pattaccia, as Pataccia. Pattacchiare, to besmeare, to bedaube, to beblurre, to bespot, to sullie, to slauer, to grease. Pattacchione, a slouenly, filthie, greasie slauering fellow, a gore-bellied gulch. Pattare, as Patteggiare. Pattarina, as Patarino Patteggiamenti, as Patta. Patteggiare, to couenant, to condition, to bargaine, to agree, to cope, to indent, to promise, to capitulate, to vowe, to make a contract. Patteggiatore, a bargainer, a couenan∣ter, a conditioner, a promiser, a contract maker. Patteggioso, that may bee conditioned, agreed, or bargained for. Patti, as Patta. Pattico, a kinde of aloes so called of the apothecaries. Patti epagati, when all parties be plea∣sed, and al is euen, and nothing but good will remaining. Pattiggiare, as Patteggiare. Pattitio, done, or to be done vpon coue∣nant, condition, or agreement. Patto, a bargaine, a couenant, a condition, an agreement, an accorde, a coping, a treatie, a contract. Pattoire, pattoisco, pattoito, as Pat∣teggiare. Pattoito, Pattuito, couenanted, conditio∣ned, bargained, agreed vpon, affianced. Pattuire, isco, ito, as Patteggiare. Pauana, a dance called a pauine. Pauegliatta, a kinde of butter-flie, a ladie birde. Pauentare, as Spauentare. Pauento, as Spauento. Pauentoso, as Spauentoso. Pauerazzo, a kinde of butterflie. Pauerine, an herbe so called. Also a kinde of butterflie. Pauero della lucerna, the match, weeke, snuffe, or cotton of a lantern or candl Pauese, Pauesce, a kinde of target or shield called a palueise. Pauido, as Spauentoso, fearefull, timo∣rous, quaking, skittish, starting, aweful.
Pauiera, a kind of wood to make chaires with. Pauiglioli, a btter-flie, a ladie bird. Pauiglione, as Padiglione. Also a butter¦flie or ladie birde. Pauimento, a pauement. Also a terrace or walking place. Pauìrazze, bushes, brakes, brambles, bry∣ers or thornes. Also bon-fiers or great lights. Pauonacchio, a kind of purple, puke or French russet colour. Pauonaccio cupo, a deepe darke purple or puke colour. Pauonaccio di grana, a purple in graine. Pauoncino, a yoong peacocke or pea∣chicken. Pauona, a peahen. Pauone, a peacocke. Pauoneggiare, to braue it, to court it, to peacockise it, to wantonize it, to iet vp and down fondly gazing vpon him∣selfe as a peacocke doth. Pauoneggiante, brauing, courting, fond∣ly courting of himselfe. Pauoneggiatore, a fond, wanton fellow that will court and gaze vpon him∣selfe. Pauonessa, a peahen. Pauonino, a yoong peacocke or peachic∣ken. Pauonio, a kind of stone which drunke with a little sweate prouoketh loue and liking of him that gaue it. Pauonzino, a lapwing, a peachicken. Pauore, feare, dread, terrour, fright, mi∣strust, diffidence. Paura, as Pauore. Paurire, paurisco, rito, as Spauentare. Paurito, feared, daunted or made afeard. Pauroso, as Spauentoso. Pausa, a pause, a rest, a stop, a leisure, a tar∣riance, a repose, a staie, a delay or demur in law. Pausare, to pause, to rest, to staie, to repose, to stop. Pazzacchione, a grosse, great, slouenly, lubbardly, foole, gull or noddie. Pazzacone, as Pazzacchione. Pazzarello, a little foolish, fond, mad, rash fellow. Pazzarone, as Pazzacchione. Pazzeda, a chirning fat to make butter. Pazzeggiare, to play the foole or mad man, to dote, to raue. Pazzesco, foolish, fond, rash, doting. Pazzia, follie, fondnes, madnes, rashnes, doting. Pazzire, pazzisco, pazzito, as Impaz∣zire. Pazzito, as Impazzito. Pazziuola, a foolish woman, a sillie foole, a foolish tricke. Pazzo, foolish, fond, mad, rash, doting, ra∣uing or simple. Also a foole, a gull, an idiot, a mad man, a naturall. Pè, Piede, a foote, a measure of twelue in∣ches. Pe', Per, Looke Per. Peani, hymnes or songs of praises made & sung to Apollo at such time as anie plague or pestilence raged, and also after the obtaining of some victorie or tri∣umphe. Peantide, a kinde of precious stone of the colour of frozen water. Pecca, as Peccato. Peccante, offending, sinning. Peccare, to sinne, to trespasse, to offend, to commit a fault, to faile in something, to do amisse, not to do what we ought, to swarue from the law. Peccato, a sin, a fault, an offence, a crime, a trespasse. E' peccato, it is a sinne, as we say it is pittie. è peccato che la virtù non viene stimata, it is pitie that vertue is not regarded. Peccato, sinned, offended, trespassed, com∣mitted a fault. Peccatore, a sinner, an offender, a tres∣passer. Peccatrice, a woman sinner or offen∣der. Pecchia, the Bee that makes honie. Pecchiare, to sting as a Bee doth. Pecchietto, a robin-red-breast. Pecchione, an humble Bee or a drone. Also a gull or a noddie. Peccia, a kind of tree. Pece, pitch or tar. Pece nauale, a kind of pitch or tar to pitch ships with. Peciare, to be pitch or tar. Pecilia, a fish that chirpeth like a thrush. Pecolo, the stalke of any fruit, the nipple of a dug. Pecora, any kind of sheepe or mutton. Pecoggine, sheepishnes, foolishnes or simplicitie of wit. Pecoraio, Pecoraro, a sheapheard, a kee∣per of sheepe. Pecorella, a little yoong sheepe, a lambe. Pecoreccio, a sheepe-cote or sheep-pen or fould. Pecoriio, sheepish, of or pertaining to sheepe. Pecorile, as Pecoreccio. Also shee∣pish. Pecorina, a yoong little sheepe or lambe. Also parchment, vellam or sheeps skin. Pecorino, of or pertaining to sheepe, a pen or fold for sheepe. Also sheepes cheese. Pecorone, a simple man, a grosse simple gull, a beastly fellow. Pecoroso, full of sheepe, hauing manie sheepe. Pectide, a musical instrument like a psal∣terie. Peculiare, peculiar, proper, speciall, parti∣cular, pertaining to some one. Peculio, Pecuglio, the profit that comes of sheepe or wooll, of grazing and of cat∣tle. Also our owne proper goods gotten by our labour and industry, as substance or wealth or riches, whether it be in mo∣ney or cattle. Pecunia, money or coine or paiment. Pecuniaria, of or pertaining to money. Pecunioso, monied, rich, full of money. Also gainefull, profitable and yeelding money. Pedagiere, a footeman. Pedagio, the tole that footemen pay at any passage. Pedagogaggine, as Pedantaggine. Pedagogheria, as Pedantaggine. Pedagogo, a schoole-master that teach∣eth the principles of learning, a teacher or trainer vp of yoong children, a tutor or one that hath the charge to teach or bring vp children. Pedale, the stocke or roote of a tree, a base, ground or foundation, a foote-stall, a mans stocke, wealth or substance, a sock or a thin pumpe. Also a stake or forke whereby a vine, hops or other like thing is sustained and borne vp, a prop, a stay. Also of a foote, measure or space. Pedali di lino, woollen or linnen sockes for ones feete. Pedantaggine, pedantisme, idiotisme, grossenes or foolishnes, selfe-conceite. Looke Pedantesco. Pedante, a pedante or a schoole-master, as Pedagogo. Pedanteria, as Pedantaggine. Pedantesco, pedanticall, foolishly affec∣ted, as one that would faine seeme wise and learned, and is but a foole and an ignorant selfe conceited gull. Pedare, to foote it, to tracke, to trace, to tread or trample with ones feete. Pedarij, a word much vsed in ancient Ro∣man histories. Senatours of Rome so called because they did not vtter their opinion in words, but went to the parte and side of them whose opinion they did allow, as in deuiding the parliament house. Some writers suppose that all the Senatours who were not of the number of them that were called Curules were named Pedarij, bicause they alwaies
went on foote to the Senate-house. O∣thers haue taken them to be certaine yong Romane gentlemen comming into the Senate, but not admitted to speake, or to be of the number of Senators. Pedata, a track, a tracing, a footing, a footestep, the print of a foote, a rule, the prick of a hare, or view of a deare. Péde, Piede, a foote, a measure of twelue inches. Pedéma, a kinde of dance, wherein they lifted their feete very hye backward. Pedena, a weauers toole about a loome. Pederastia, a vicious, vnnaturall, and dishonest louing of children, buggerie. Pederasto, a vicious, vnnaturall louer of boyes, a buggerer. Pederetti, of some called Gemma di ve∣nere, a kinde of stone, good against poison and drunkennes. Pédero, a precious stone called an Opale, vide Opalo. Pedestallo, a foote-stall, a foote-pace. Pedéstre, of or pertaining to footeman∣ship. Also a footeman, or one that goeth and serueth on foote. Pedeculo, a small stalke of any fruite. Also a nipple of a dug. Pedetaro, one that farteth often. Pedia, instruction or teaching of children, or bringing vp in good artes and honest trades. Pedicello, a little worme or ring-worme breeding betweene the flesh and skin. Pedicino, as Pedeculo. Also a little foote. Pedicino del' otre, a little foote of a iarre, a pot or kan for wine or oyle▪ Pedicone, a buggrer, an ingler of boyes. Pediculare herba, staues-acre, red-rattle or licebane, rattlegrasse, or lousewort. Pediculare, the lousie disease, that is when the bodie is pestred and full of lice and nits. Pedicularia, as Pediculare herba. Pediculo, a kinde of fish called the Dol∣phins parasite, for he alwayes waits on him. Pedignoni, kibes vpon mens heeles, or chilblanes. Pedina, a pawne at chesse. Pedio, the plant or middle part of the foote from the first ioynt of the toes to the instep, being answerable to the back of the hand. Pedo, a shepheards hooke, forke, or sheepe∣hooke. Pedocchiare, to louze, or pick lice. Pedocchio, a louse. Also a disease in a horse about the crupper. Pedocchio marino, a kinde of little shell fish. Pedocchioso, lowsie, or full of life. Pedomante, a kinde of prophet, or sooth∣sayer. Pedomantia, a kinde of diuination, or soothsaying. Pedona, a pawne at chesse. Pedone, a footeman. Pedoro, a precious stone or gemme in whitenes next to the pearle or mar∣garite. Pedóta, a pilote or guide by sea. Pedotta, Pedottina, a kinde of fishers boate, or whirrie. Pedotto, a guide or direction. Also a sea marke, or guiding-marke for trauel∣lers. Pedrello, an ignorant gull, an ouerwee∣ning asse. Pedrinale, a kinde of gunne called a Pe∣trinall. Pedrolina, a strumpet, a harlot, a trull, a minion, a flurt, a minx. Peduccij, all manner of feete or petitoes drest to be eaten, as calues, sheepes, neates, or hogs feete, or pigs petitoes. Peduccio, the base, foote, or foundation of anie thing. Looke Far peduccio. Pedule, a foote, a footeman. Also a sock, or thin pumpe. Pegame, a basting ladle, to baste rost meate. Pegaso, a winged horse. Also a signe of starres. Pegeria, pledge, suretiship, baile, or maineprise. Peggio, worst, worse, more ill, the worst, more wicked, farre worse. Peggiorare, to grow or make worse and worse, to empaire, to become more ill and wicked. Peggioramento, an empairing, a grow∣ing from bad to worse. Peggiore, worse, more ill, more bad, more wicked. Pegiare, to pledge, to be suretie for. Peglia, the outward pricking huske of a chesnut. It hath also bin vsed for Pelle. Peglio, the haires aboue the eye lids. Pegnare, to pawne, to engage, to pledge, to lay a wager, to bet in gaming, to lay a gage, to morgage, to take a stresse, or distresse, to distraine for rent. Also to be suretie for, to baile one. Pegno, a pawne, a gage, a pledge, a wa∣ger, a gage or pledge whereupon some thing is lent. Also a thing strained for rent, a distresse, or stresse. Also a paune or stake or bet of such as contend in game. Also a wager, a token, a morgage, an assurance, a baile, a sure signe, or te∣stimonie. Pegnora, as Pignora. Pegnorare, as Pignorare. Pegnoratiuo, as Pignoratiuo. Pegola, pitch or tarre. Also an infectious whre. Pegolare, to bepitch or tarre. Pegritia, Pegro, as Pigritia, and Pi∣gro. Pel, Per il, by the, through the, for the. Pelacane, a dog-fleaer, a base fellow. Pelagia, a fish called a purple. Pelagione, as Pelaruola. Pelagigi, of the se, or that liueth in the sea. Pélago, the maine deepe, the ocean sea, the sea, the huge, deepe, or maine sea, the bottome of the sea. Pelaia, as Pelaruola, as Pelarella. Pela mantelli, a dresser of old woollen clothes or clokes. Also a filcher of clokes. Pelame, a fish called a sommer whiting, or a tunnie before it be a yeare old. Pelamide, as Palamito. Pelanda, as Palandra. Pelare, to pull, or pluck as they doe the feathers of fowle, to scld as a hog, to vnskin, to singe, to pull off the haire or skinne of any thing. Also to gall the skin off. Also by a metaphor, to pill, to pare, to spoile, to pull or take from any man by hooke or crooke. Pelato, puld, pluckt the feathers off, skal∣ded or singed as a hog, vnskinned, puld off the haire or skinne, galled, pilled, pared, or prouled. Pelarella, a disease which makes the haires or the skinne to goe off. Also a plaister to pluck off the skinne. Pelargo, a Storke. Pelaruola, as Pelarella. Pelatina, as Pelarella. Pelatura, a singing, a pilling, a pulling, a skalding of fowle, or any thing else. Pelare galline, to pull or pluck a hen. Pelare porci, to skald or singe hogs. Pelare qualcuno, to pill or poll some bodie. Pelare la borsa, to rob or emptie ones purse. Pelatoio, as Scorticatoio. Peleggio, as Pelaghetto, a little way, or walke. Pelegrinaggio, as Pellegrinaggio. Pelegrinante, as Pellegrino. Pelegrinare, as Pellegrinare. Pelegrinatione, as Pellegrinatione. Pelegrino, as Pellegrino. Pelera, as Pelarella. Pelicano, a bird called a Pellican: some
take it for a shoueler hauing a broade bill. Also a fish called a pellicane. Also a toole or snap, or dogge to pull out teeth with. Also a kinde of limbecke or ser∣pentine. Pella, Per la, for the, by the, through the. Pellacia, faire speech to deceiue. Pellami, all maner of fell or skins. Pellare, to vnskin. Also to paunch or vn∣bowell one. Pelle, any kinde of skin or furre. Also for the, through the, by the. Pelle di camoccia, a shamoyes skin. Pelle di vacca, a cowes hyde, an oxe hyde. Pelle di zebellini, a Sables skin. Pellegate, little sinewes that go through the fleshie parts of any body. Pellegrinaggio, a pilgrimage, or peregri∣nation, a wandring into some farre and strange countrie. Pellegrinante, going or trauelling in a strange countrie, being as it were a stranger or a pilgrim. Pellegrinare, to wander or go on pilgri∣mage, to go or trauell into strange coun∣tries, to dwell or be in a strange lande, to seeke farre off. Pellegrinatione, a peregrination, a pil∣grimage, a going or being abroade in a farre or strange countrie, a voiage, a seeking farre off. Pellegrinità, strāgenes, being in a strange countrie, a strange maner of behauiour, going, speech or pronunciation, the condition of such as bee in a strange countrie. Pellegrino, a wandrer, a pilgrim, a pal∣mer, a stranger, an alien, an outlander, an outlandish man, a fren, a forraine, one of a strange countrie. Also a hag∣gard hauke. Pelleri, the garnishing of gates or dores. Pelle pelle, husht, softly, closely, holde there, there ho, slylie. Pellesina, a thinne little skin, skinlet, caule or filme. Pellettaria, Pelletaria, the skinners or furriers trade. Pelletta, the name of a birde. Pellica as Pelliccione. Pellicegli, little woormes breeding in ones hand betweene the flesh and the skin. Pelliccia, any kinde of furre or furred garment. Pellicciaio, Pellicciaro, a skinner or a furrier, a fell-monger, a leather seller, he that maketh things of skins and furs, and sels them, a pelt monger. Pellicciare, to furre or line with furres. Pelliccina, Pellisina, as Pellesina. Pelliccino, the eares or corners of a sacke, or full bag by which hold is taken when they bee very full. Also a little furde garment. Pelliccieria, a skinners or furriers shop. Also death or a mans last home. Pelliccione, a furd gowne or garment. Pellicola, as Membana. Pelligata, any thinne, skinnie, or flappie peece of meate. Pellizza, as Pelliccia. Pellizzaio, as Pellicciaio. Pellizzare, as Pellicciare. Pellizzone, as Pelliccione. Pelloridi, as Pelore. Pelo, any kinde of haire. Also the cote or colour of a horse, or the countenance of a man. Also as Boccata. Peloni, great, long, shagged haires. Pelore, a kind of shell fish called a palour. Pelosella, Pelosina, the hearbe mouse-eare. Pelottare, to thump, to cuffe, to smite, to bang, to rib-bste. Pelotti, thumps, cuffes, blowes, stripes. Peloso, hairie, shagd, full of haires. Pel passato, in times paste, heeretofore. Pelta, a kind of shielde or target made like a halfe a moone. Peltraio, Peltraro, a pewterer. Peltrame, all maner of pewter stuffe. Peltro, any kind of pewter. Peluccare, Pelucare, to plucke off the haires or skin of any thing, to picke out haires. Peluzzi, little small haires. Pena, paine, punishment, torture, griefe, labour, swinke, torment, execution, for∣faite, penaltie, reuengement. Also vpon paine or forfeiture, a Pena, hardly, scarcely. A gran pena, with very much adoo, very hardly. Penace, painfull, paining, languishing. Penare, to paine, to pine, to toyle, to linger. Penati, houshold gods, peculiar gods to eue∣rie family: the secret parts of ones house, spirits of the butterie. Penazz, a kind of birde. Penco, butter. Pendaglio, a tassell or pendent of a trum∣pet, a downe hanging pendent. Pendente, hanging, depending, belonging, downe-hanging, stooping, bending, en∣clining, dangling downe. Also doubt∣full, or doubtfull and vncertaine what to do in suspence. Also pendent, a word in armory. Also a pendent or iewell in ones eares. Also the bending or slopenes of a parapet out ward. Pendente da orecchia, a iewell or pen∣dent for ones eares. Péndere, péndo, péndei, penduto, pe∣so, to hang vp or bee hanged, to encline on one side, to stoope, to lie a slope, to de∣pend, to subiect or belong to, to staie vp∣on. Also to be in doubt or vncertaine, to be in suspence, to waie or bee of anie waight. Also to dangle downe. Also to poise, or ballance. Also to ponder, to con∣sider. Penduto, Peso, hanged vp, enclined on one side, &c. Looke Péndere. Pendice, a penthouse, a downe-hanging, a hanging labell of any thing, a houell. al∣so a hauen, a rode, or a porte, the ouer-hanging or hollow of a rocke, the han∣ging or side of a hill. Pendino, as Pendente, a down-hanging, a fall or sloping of a hill. Pendinoso, as Pendente, or Pendino. Pendio, as Pendino, or Pendente. Pendolante, dangling, bending, downe-hanging as a bunch of grapes. Pendolare, to dangle, to bende or hang downward. Pendolina, a kinde of bird. Pendolo, as Pendolante. Pendoloni, as Pendolante. Pendulo, as Pendolante. Pendule labbra, bigge, down-hanging blabberd-lips. Pene, paines, punishments, tortures. Also forfaitures. Pene del' inferno, the paines of hell. Penese, a kinde of officer in a ship. Penesti, men foiled in fight that volunta∣rily yeeld themselues vnto the victorie. Peneti, a kinde of apothecaries stuffe for the colde called pennets. Penetrabile, penetrable, that may pierce or be pierced or entred in, piercing or passing through, that will sinke or go in deepely. Penetrante, as Penetratiuo. Penetrare, to penetrate, to pierce or enter in, to go, to come, to pierce or bore through, to go beyond or passe through, to sinke in deepely. Penetratiuo, piercing, penetrating, sharp, that will go or sinke in deepely. Penetreuole, piercing, penetrable, as Pe∣netrabile. Penisola, a place almost enuironed about with water, that is but partly an iland. Penitentia, penitencie, repentance, pe∣nance, forethinking. Penitenza della quaresima, the passion or penance of lent. Penitentiale, penitentiall, of, or pertai∣ning to penitencie. Pentitente, penitent, repenting, he that repententh him. Penitentiero, a penitentiarie, a man
professing penitencie. Penna, anie kinde of feather or quill, or penne, a writing penne. Also a plume. Also a wing. Pennaccio, Pennacchio, a plume or bunch of feathers. Penna da scriuere, a writing penne. Pennacchiato, all hanged or drest with feathers. Pennacchino, a bunch or plume of fea∣thers. Also a wag-feather, a tospot. Pennacciaro, a feather-maker. Pennaiuolo, Pennaruolo, a penner to put in writing pens, a womans needle case. Pennati, anie kinde of feathered fowle or bird, feathered. Also hedge bils, forest bils, welsh hookes, or weeding hookes▪ it hath also bin vsed for the latine word Penates, which is as much to say little houshold gods, or peculiar gods to euery familie, or spirits of the butterie, or of the secret parts of ones house. Pennato, feathered, winged, flying, fledged. Pennecchio, a roule of wooll readie car∣ded for the distaff or spinning. Pennellare, to drawe, limne, or paint with a pensell. Pennellata, a draught or line with a pen∣sell, painted or drawen with a pen∣sell. Pennellatore, a painter or drawer with a pensell. Pennelleggiare, as Pennellare. Pennello, a painters pensel or pincill. Al∣so a fane on the top of a house to knowe the winde by, a wethercocke. Pennello, fatto a pennello, perfectly, curiouslly wrought. Penne maestre, a hawkes principall fea∣thers. Pennetta, Pennina, a little small pen, quill or feather. Pennipoténte, mightie in flying, strong and puissant of wings, well winged or feathered, able to flie. Pennola, as Cugno. Pennoncione, a great plume or bunch of feathers. Pennone, as Pennoncione. Pennoncello, a plume or bunch of fea∣thers, the little streamers or banderols that souldiers haue at their lances point▪ the tassell, pendent or fringe about a hal∣bard or a iauelin. Pennuto, feathered, full of feathers, win∣ged, fledged. Penocchij, a kind of long comfets to sticke vpon march panes. Penole, strings or veines in the liuer. Penoso, painefull, taking paines, labori∣ous. Pensare, to thinke, to imagine, to deeme, to weene, to suppose, to muse, to care, to weigh, to ponder, to consider, to sur∣mise. Pensabondo, as Pensoso. Pensamento, as Pensiere. Pensatamente, consideratly, warily, with good deliberation. Pensierato, full of thought, care or car∣king. Pensiere, Pensiero, thought, care, imagi∣nation, deeming, weening, musing, sup∣posing, carke. Pensiereggiare, to take care, thought or carking. Pensieruccio, a little foolish thought. Pensionare, to wage, to pension, to stipend, to keepe in paie. Pensionario, a pensioner, a stipendarie. Pensione, a pension, a stipend, a pay. Pensole, as Pendolante. Pensoso, pensiue, carefull, musing, full of care or thoughts. Pensoroso, Pensieroso, as Pensoso. Pensule, as Pendolante. Penta, the number of fiue in Greek, wher∣of many words are composed. Pentacolo, any thing or table of fiue cor∣ners. Also certaine tables or boords. Pentadramma, a coine in Greece of fiue dragmes. Pentagonale, hauing fiue angles, fiue-cornered. Pentametri, a pentametre verse. Pentapoli, of fiue cities. Pentarco, a captaine of fiue men. Pentateuco, a volume of fiue booke, as the booke of the lawes of Moses. Pentathlo, he that wonne the best or was victor at the fiue kindes of games vsed among the Grecians called the Olimpiks games. Vide Olimpici giuochi, which was casting with the slinge, running, leaping, wrastling, and shooting or whurling. Pentatoti, nounes declined onely by fiue cases. Pentaura, a precious stone that hath the vertue of all other stones, and will draw them also to it if they be no bigger then the same. It shineth and is of the colour of fire. Pentecoste, the fiftieth, the feast of pen∣cecoste or whitsontide. Pentemimeri, a certaine part of an he∣roicall verse. Penteori, the space of fower yeeres com∣pleat, or that which returneth euerie fifth yeere. Penthali, Looke Quinquercij. Penticulo, a kinde of fish about Tarato that will flie out of the water. Pentina, a little pike, lance, speare or staffe. Pentimento, repentance, penitencie, rath or sorrwing for some thing done and paste. Pentire, pento, pentito, to repent, to rue, or to be sorrie for some thing done and paste, to be grieued, to forethinke, to be ashamed of, to wish a thing had neuer beene done, to be miscontented. Pentiremi, a gallie that hath fiue oares on a seat or banke. Pentitamente, with repentance, repen∣tingly. Pentola, any kind of pitcher, pipkin, posse∣net or pot of earth. Pentolaio, a potter or pipkin maker. Pentolino, a little pipkin, pot or possenet. Pentolo, bals made of earth and filled with ashes. Pentuto, as Pentito. Penula, a kind of cloke worne when it rai∣neth. Penultimo, the last sauing one. Penuria, penurie, want, dearth, scarsitie, neede, extreme neede, and necessitie, lacke or want of all necessaries. Penurioso, penurious, scarce, needie, poore, wanting all necessaries. Pensolare, as Pendolare. Penzolo, as Pendolante. Penzolone, as Pendolante. Peóne, as Peónico. Peonia, the hearbe Peonie or Kings bloom or Rose of the mount. Peonico, a foote in meeter of fower sylla∣bles, the first long, and the three short, or the first three short, and the fourth long. Peota, Peotta, a pilote or guide by sea. Pepato, a kind of simnell or ginger bread. Pepe, Pepere, the spice called Pepper. Pepe acquatico, the weed arsesmart. Pepe montano, Spurge-flaxe, Dwarfe-bay or Widow-waile. Pepe di monte, as Pepe montano. Peperata, a kind of meat or pottage made of pepper. Peperella, Pepper-woort. Peperigno, a kind of black building stone. Also of the colour of pepper. Pephago, a beast in India as big as a horse with a verie faire taile and fine haire. Peplio, the herbe Diuels milke or petie-Spurge. Pepolo, as Peplio. Some take it for Pur∣slaine. Pepone, as Melone, a Pepon or Pum∣pion.
Per, for, by, through, to, readie to, for to, in with, by reason of, what betweene. Per ben che, howbeit, although, albeit. Per il, Pel, Perlo, Perla, Peri, Pe', Pergli, Pelli, Pegli, Pella, Pelle, Perle, for the, by the, through the. Peril che, wherefore, whereupon. Perloche, wherefore, whereupon. Per finche, vntill that, till such time. Pera, a peare, peares. Also let him perish. Peracuto, verie sharp, wittie, fine, and subtile. Per adietro, heretofore, in times past. Per alcun tempo, for any time, for a while. Per amore, for loue, for the sake, gratis. Peraio, Peraro, a peare tree. Also an orchard of peares. Perauanti, hereafter, in time to come. Perauentura, perhaps, peraduenture. Per cagione, by reason, for because. Per chi? for whome? for who? who for? Per dio, for the loue of God, for God sake, by God. Per doue? which way? whether away? Per entro, within, inward. Per me stesso, for or by me selfe. Per quà, this way, hereaway. Per qui, Per qua via, as Per qua. Per caccio, as Procaccio, a mule-tier, a mule-driuer, a horse-keeper, a carrier. Per casa, at home, in the house, vp and downe the house. Per caso, by chaunce, by hap, perhaps. Per costà, Per colà, that way, therea∣way. Per cadére, readie to fall. Per andare, readie for to goe, for to goe. Perbenche, although, albeit. Per buon rispetto, for a good considera∣tion. Pertanto, therefore, for so much. Per tornar' a casa, to come home, to come to the matter againe. Per tutto, each where, in euerie place. Per fare, readie for to do. Per mé, hath beene vsed for Per mezzo, ouer against or by meanes. Per niente, for nothing, for any thing, by no meanes. Per cosa alcuna, for any thing, for no∣thing. Per nulla, for nothing, by no meanes, at no hand. Per vista, by sight, by view. Per pratica, by practise, by experience. Per amicitia, for loue, for friendship-sake. Per inauertenza, by ouersight, at vn∣awares. Per esperienza, by experience, by triall. Per tanto, therefore, whereupon. Per transito, coursorie-wise, in a trance, a snatch and away. Per maniera di dire, as a man would say, for example sake. Per consequente, then, by consequence. Per certo, certainely, for a certaintie. Per vn poco, for a little, for a while. Per poco, almost, within a little, for a little. Per via, by the way, by meanes. Per quanto, for as much, as concerning. Per quando? when? against when? Perca, a fish called a pearch. Perche? why? wherefore? for what cause? Perche, because, forsomuch, for that, that, to the end. Perche conto? for what cause? where∣fore? Perche mò, wherefore? why now? Perche nò? why not? wherefore not? Per che via? what way? how? by what meanes? Perche modo? by what meanes? how? Perchi? for whome? Per la qual cosa, for which thing. Per via di dire, by way of speech, as a man would say. Per mezzo, by meanes, through, by, by the midle, oueragainst, foreanempst. Per mano, by the hand, through. Per grosso, by the great, in grosse. Per minuto, by retaile, by small, dis∣tinctlie. Per molto chesia, how much soeuer it be. Per chi si sia, for whome soeuer it be. Per chi si voglia, for whome soeuer it be. Perchia, a fish called a pearch. Also a kinde of sparow. Perciato, bored, or pearced through. Perciere, a partridger, a hauke for par∣tridges. Perciò, therefore, whereupon, whereof, because, forsomuch. Percioche, for because that, because that. Percipere, to take or receiue, to conceiue or comprehend. Perciuto, any kind of smoke-dride meate, as bakon. Percnottero, a kinde of kite called a bald buzzard. Also a kinde of eagle keeping much about pooles and lakes like a Vul∣ture, and hauing very little wings. Percotare, to baste rostmeate. Also to parboyle. Percótere, coto, cotei, cosso, to strike, to beate, to smite, to hit. Percósso, Percotuto, strooken, beaten, smitten, hit, troubled in minde, vexed, astonished. Percóssa, a stroke, a blowe, a stripe, a smiting. Percotitore, a striker, a smiter, a beater, a fighter, a quareller. Percrocetta, a kinde of multiplying in arithmetike that merchants vse. Percuotere, as Percotere. Percussione, a percussion, a smiting, a striking. Percussiuo, percussiue, hitting, striking. Pérdere, pérdo, pérsi, or perdéi, pérso, or perduto, to loose, to forgoe, to let slip, or omit an occasion. Perdúto, Pérso, lost, forlorne, let slip, or omitted an occasion. Perder la patienza, to growe out of pa∣tience. Perder la vergogna, to lose shame and honestie. Perder' il tempo, to lose time, to be idle. Perder la liscia, & il sapone, to lose both lye and sope, that is, to lose both time and labour. Perder' il tempo, & la fatica, to lose both time and labour. Perdenza, Perdezza, losse, loosing, da∣mage, hurt, harme. Perdibile, subiect to be lost, that may be lost. Perdicio, pellitorie of the wall. Perdice, a partridge. Perdigiornata, a kinde of bird that ne∣uer feedeth but at night, and all day skips vp and downe idlie. Also taken for an idle loytrer. Perdimento, as Perdenza. Perdiqui, this way, heereaway. Perdita, as Perdenza. Perditione, Perdicione, losse, ruine, de∣struction, loosing. Perditore, a looser. Also a wast-good, or spend-thrift. Perdonanza, pardon, forgiuenes, remis∣sion. Perdonare, to pardon, to forgiue, to re∣mit any fault or payment. Perdonde, whence, whereby. Perdono, pardon, forgiuenes, a pardon. Also by guift, a remission of any fault. Perdúcere, Perdurre, as Condurre. Perduto, Looke Pérdere. Pere, the fruite peares. Also he perisheth. Pere sementine, a kinde of stone, hard choke-peare so called. Peredi, too great or a rauenous desire to eate. Peregrinaggio, as Pellegrinaggio. Peregrinante, as Pellegrino. Peregrinare, as Pellegrinare.
Peregrinatione, as Pellegrinatione. Peregrinità, as Pellegrinità. Peregrino, Peregrinatore, as Pelle∣grino. Peremptalia, among Augures were those lightnings which did vtterly destroie and put away the significations of other lightnings and tokens preceding. Peremptorio, peremptorie, sodaine, rash, hitting to death without heede or care, deadly, killing without peraduenture. Peremptório editto, a peremptorie war∣ning giuen to him that maketh default in appearance, after which he shall ne∣uer haue any day giuen him, but the iudge shall proceede to the determinati∣on of the matter. Perenne, perpetuall, aie-during, euerla∣sting, endles, neuer-ceasing, continuall, alwaies running as riuers do, hauing a continuall course, and that is neuer drie. Perennia, a certaine ceremonie obserued of diuiners and Augures. Perennità, continuance, long-lasting, euerduring, perpetualnes. Perentrare, to enter in, readie to enter. Per entro, within, inward. Per entro via, within, inwarde. Peretro, a kinde of venemous herbe. Perfettare, to perfect, to finish, to accom∣plish, to performe or bring to an abso∣lute and perfect end. Perfettionare, as Perfettare. Perfettione, perfection, absolutenes, a full dispatching and atchieuing of a matter. Perfetto, perfect, very good, finished, com∣pleate, absolute, performed, atchieued, ended, made vp, accomplished. Perfidia, trecherie, disloyaltie, treason, vn∣faithfulnes, falsehood against promise and trust, discredite, vntruth, false dealing. Perfidiare, to become or plaie the treche∣rous or disloyall, to betraie, to be false of truth, trust and promise, to be vnfaith∣full, to practise all maner of trecherie and disloyaltie. Pérfido, Perfidióso, perfidious, treche∣rous, disloyall, traytrous, false, vntrue, vnfaithfull, deceitfull, craftie, false of promise, dooing against the trust com∣mitted to him. Per fin a tanto, as Perfinche. Perfinche, vntill that, vntill such time as. Perfino, vntill, vntill such time, so far as. Perfitone, a diuination when the diuell speakes in another man. Perforare, to boar, to make a hole or pierce through, to thrust into. Perfoliata, Perfogliata, the herbe tho∣row-waxe or thorow-leafe. Perfóndere, fondo, fondei, fonduto or fuso, to powre out on euery part, to sprinkle, to flowe, to powre, or wash all ouer. Perforata, the herbe saint Iohns woort. Perfuga, a run-away, he that forsaketh his owne captaine and runneth to the enimie. Perfugio, a place whereunto one runneth for succour, a place of refuge or shelter, any thing whereby a man may be suc∣coured. Also an excuse, an euasion, or a starting hole. Perfumare, to perfume. Perfumiere, a perfumer. Perfumo, perfume or sweete sent. Pergamena, Pergamina, parchment, vellame, or sheepes dride skin. Pérgamo, a pulpit or chaire for a prea∣cher. Pérgere, to go, proceed, continue or tell on. Pergiuramenti, periurings, for swearings, a breaking of ones oath or swearing. Pergiurare, to periure, to forsweare, to sweare vntruly and falsely, to breake an oath. Pergiúro, periured, forsworne▪ also a for∣sworne knaue, false of his word. Pérgola, an arbour made in gardens, or a boure of vines or other boughes, anie kind of close walke couered with leaues or boughes. Pergolare, to reduce into arboures or sha∣die couered places. Pergolato, as Pergolo. Pergoletta, a little arbor, boure, or shadie place. Pergoletto, a little pulpet in a church. Pérgolo, as Pergamo, as Pergola. Pericardio, the membrane or thinne skin inuoluing the whole hart like a case or casket. Pericarpio, a kind of rootes round like to onions. Periclitare, to hazard, to ieopard, to en∣danger, to venter, to put in perill. Pericolare, as Periclitare. Pericolo, Periclo, perill, danger, hazard, venter, ieopardie, harme, mischiefe. Pericoloso, perilous, dangerous, hazar∣dous, full of danger and perill. Pericranio, the hairie scalpe or skin coue∣ring and compassing all the scull. Periermenia, a certaine figure in speech. Periesi, as Perisci. Periergia, curiositie. Periergo, curious. Perigéo, that point of the heauen wherein the sunne or other planet is neerest to the center of the earth. Periglio, as Pericolo. Periglioso, as Pericoloso. Periféria, as Periphéria. Perifrasi, a circumlocution, one worde ex∣pressed by many. Peril che, wherefore, whereupon. Peril passato, heeretofore, in times past. Perileuco, a precious stone hauing a white thred going downe from the very mouth to the roote. Perinanzi, hereafter, in time to come. Perinéo, a line like a seame parting the wrinkled skin of the cods in the midst, and reaching to the fundament: of some taken for the fundament, and of other some for the part betweene the rising of the yard and the fundament. Perineunomia, an inflammation or im∣postume of the lungs, with shortnes of breath, and rednes of the cheekes. Perioca, Periocha, a briefe argument containing the summe of a whole mat∣ter or discourse. Periodichi, those diseases that are not continuall, or else that goeth and com∣meth by course or fits. Periodo, a period, an ende, a conclusion, a perfect sence. Also the last date, a stint, a course, a perfect sentence falling in ful compasse and measure: that terme of time wherein any thing is finished, an ende. Periostio, a little thinne skin immediate∣lie enwrapping the bones of any bodie, by reason of which skin and not of their owne nature, the bones are supposed to feele. Peripatétici, a sect of walking philoso∣phers, whereof Aristotle was chiefe. Peripheria, a circumference, a carying or going about, the crooked line where∣with a circle is bounded and compas∣sed in. Perire, Pero, or Perisco, perij, perito, to perish, to come to naught, to be lost, to be consumed, to die, to wither, to misca∣rie, to be cast away, to be vtterly vn∣done, or to be past all hope, to consume away, to be bankcrupt, to come to decay. Periscij, those that haue their shadowes cast rounde about them, as they haue that dwel in the colde zes, for to them the sunne after it is once risen goeth round about their Horizon, and so ca∣steth the shadowes round, som call them the people that dwell in one selfe para∣lell, how distant soeuer east or west. Perissologia, superfluous speaking. Peristerio, the herbe verueine. Peritarsi, to grow expert. Also to be of∣fended with.
Peritia, cunning, skilfulnes, experience, knowledge. Perito, perished, come to naught. Also ex∣pert, wise, skilfull, learned, cunning in a science. Looke Perire. Peritóneo, the inner rinde of the bellie ioining to the caule couering all the in∣trailes. Peritoso, expert, skillfull. Perizoma, a trusse worne about the pri∣uie parts or couer for them. Perla, a gem, a pearle. Also for the, by the, thorough the. Perlare, to impearle, to adorne with pearles. Perlaro, a tree that beares a fruit like a cherrie, called the lote or nettle tree. Perle, pearles, iewels, gems. Also for the, by the, through the. Perlecébra, a thing that presently dra∣weth a man to fauour it, a maruellous allurement or inticement. Perlenga, a flurt or toy, or trifle or no∣thing. Perlette, little, small, seede pearles. Permanére, mango, mannei, manuto, to abide, to remaine, to tarrie, to conti∣nue, or stay till the end. Permanuto, abided, remained, tarried, continued. Permanente, permanent, remaining, con∣stant, abiding. Permanenza, continuance, permanencie, constancie. Per mè, as Per mezzo. Also for the best. Also for me. Perméttere, metto, misi, messo, to per∣mit, to suffer, to allow, to tolerate, to let, to graunt, to licence or pardon, to beare with, to giue commission, power or au∣thoritie. Permesso, permitted, suffered, allowed, tolerated, let, graunted, licenced, pardo∣ned, borne with, giuen commission, po∣wer or authoritie. Permetténte, permitting, suffering, tole∣rating, granting, bearing with, licen∣cing, giuing commission or authoritie. Permezzo, ouer against, by meanes, by way, through, through the midst. Perminenza, preheminence, prerogatiue. Permissione, permission, toleration, suf∣ferance. Permissiuo, tolerable, that may be per∣mitted. Per molti modi, manie waies, by manie waies or meanes. Permutare, to change, to shift, to alter, to transmute, to barter or exchange one thing for another. Permutatione, a permutation, a change, an alteration, a shifting, a bartring, an exchange of one thing for another. Permutanza, as Permutatione. Perna, a shell fish called a nakre or a narre. Perne, the fins of fishes. Pernice, a partridge. Pernicie, perniciousnes, mischiefe, wicked∣nes, death, hurt, danger, destruction, corruption, vndoing. Pernicioso, pernicious, wicked, deadly, hurtfull, mischieuous, mortall, bringing death or destruction, dangerous, noy∣some. Pernicità, swiftnes, quicknes, nimble∣nes. Perniconi, great olde partridges or sta∣gers. Perniente, for nothing, by no meanes. Pernione, a kibe on the heele, or a chil∣blane on the hands. Perno, a peg or a pin of wood, a carpen∣ters swallow tale, the axel tree of a cart, a stalke of an apple or a peare. Legata a perno, is a ioint in the port or vpset of a bit, hauing a pin thorough it, where∣with the players in the midst do hang. Pernocchia, a kinde of crabbe or creuis fish. Also as Perna. Pernottare, to tarrie or lodge all night, to watch, to staie, or walke all the night, to passe the night in. Péro, a peare tree. Also the fruit thereof. Però, therefore, whereupon, then. Péro a cappione, the mouth of a bit set with peares hauing a port. Però che, bicause that, for so much as. Peródi meno, neuerthelesse, notwithstan∣ding. Péro ghiacciolo, a kind of peare red on one side. Péro moscatelleo, a muskadine peare. Péro tardio, a late or lateward peare. Péro zoccolo, a kind of long peare. Perolo, a little button or tassell of wooll on the top and middle of a knit cap. Peroratione, the last part of an oration, which most mooues the hearer. Perona, a kind of herbe. Perone, such high shoes as clownes vse to weare. Perosarasa, a kind of rough ray or thorn∣backe. Perpéndere, pendo, pendei, penduto, to consider diligently or examine exactly. Perpendiculare, perpendicular, directly downe right. Perpendiculo, a plum line such as carpen∣ters vse, a plum rule with a piece of lead in the end. Pérpero, rude, foolish, vaine, rough, froward, wrongfull. Also a kinde of coine. Perpensa, the herbe Cabaret or Hazle∣woort. Perpetrare, to do, make, finish or atchieue. Perpetuale, perpetuall, aye-during, con∣tinuall, euerlasting, endles, neuer cea∣sing. Perpetuare, to perpetuate or continue a thing or any course without ceasing. Perpetuità, perpetuitie, euerlastingnes, continuance, fulnes, perfectnes, eterni∣tie, endlesnes, a continuance without breaking, interruption or stopping, im∣mortalitie, that shall neuer faile, decay or come to naught. Perpétuo, perpetuall, euer-during, aye∣lasting, continuall, eternall, euerlasting, constant, that shall alwaies and euer in∣dure, immortall. Also whole, continued, all of one piece, not in portions or deui∣ded. Perpetuo cárcere, the whole world. Also perpetuall prison. Perplessamente, perplexedly, ambiguous∣ly, doubtfully, intricately, obscurely, vn∣certainlie. Perplessare, to perplexe, to grieue or vexe in mind, to intangle so togither that the meaning is not perceiued, to speake am∣biguously, and words of a double mea∣ning. Perplessione, perplexion, trouble or griefe of mind, doubtfulnes, an ambiguitie or intricatenes of wordes, that shall leaue a perturbation or perplexion in the minde. Perplesso, perplexed, troubled, grieued, doubtfull, intangled, twisted togither, intricate, hard to be loosed, perplex, ambiguous. Per poco, for a little, verie neare, within a little. Per qualche luogo, in some place, some where or some way. Per questo, for this, by this, through this. Perrompere, rompo, ruppi, rotto, to breake asunder and in the midst, to breake or splint or riue or shiuer in pie∣ces violently, to breake or enter in by force, to breake through violently. Persa, the herbe Margerome. Also lost, of Pérdere. Persecutare, to persecute, to prosecute, to pursue, to follow. Persecutione, persecution, prosecution, pursuite, processe, following on. Persecutore, a persecutor, a prosecutor, a pursiuant, a follower. Perscriuere, scriuo, scrissi, scritto, to write through or to an end.
Persega, a fish called a pearch. Perseguitare, as Persecutare. Perseguire, guisco, guito, as Perse∣quire. Perseo, a kind of strange tree like a peare tree, alwaies greene and loaden with fruit good for the stomacke. Persequitare, as Persecutare. Persequire, quisco, quito, as Persecuta∣re, but properly to pursue, to hunt, to continue in that mind or worke one be∣gan, to follow on, to fulfill, to accomplish, to persecute, to reuenge. Perseuerare, to perseuere, to continue, to remaine stedfast, to abide, to stand sted∣fastly or stoutly in one minde and opi∣nion. Perseuerante, perseuering, constant, sted∣fast and stoute in one opinion and minde. Perseueranza, perseuerance, constancie, stedfastnes, continuance, a stoutnes or stable abiding in a thing reasonable. Persicaria, the herbe arsesmart. Persico, a peach tree, the fruit called a peach. Also peach colour. Persi fiori, peach flowres. Persichino, a peach colour. Persillo, a vessell, wherein was the oynt∣ment with which Remus had his arme annointed. Persistere, sisto, sistei, sistuto, to persist, to continue, to abide or stand stoutlie to the end, to hold out. Perso, lost, forlorne. Also a darke, broune, black mourning colour. Some take it to be properlie the colour of dead marie∣rom, for Persa is marierom. Some haue vsed it for peach colour. Persolata, a kinde of herbe that beareth burres. Persona, a person, a personage of man or woman, a bodie, a wight. It is defined of some to be the qualitie or state wher∣by one man differeth from another. Also a false face, as a vizard or mas∣king face, an image, an appearance. also a charge or office, a maiestie. Also a part in a play. Persona di male affare, a naughtie wic∣ked bodie. Personaggio, a personage, as Persona. Personale, personall, in person, of or per∣taining to a person. Personare, to personate, to acte, to imitate any person, to acte or play a part in a play, to counterfaite another person. Personcina, a little bodie or person. Per sorte, by chance, by hap, casuallie. Perspettiuo, perspectiue. Also a profes∣sor of the perspectiues. Perspicace, sharp, quick, wittie, wise, warie, prouident, foreseeing, foreca∣sting, perspicuous, quick of fight, of vn∣derstanding, and perceiuing of a thing, quick-witted, quick of iudgement, ha∣uing a good insight into a thing. Perspicacia, as Perspicacità. Perspicacità, sharpnes, quicknes, fore∣sight, wit, farseeing, perspicuitie, quick∣nes of sight, of vnderstanding or percei∣uing of a thing, a quick insight. Perspicientia, perfect knowledge, or full perceiuing of a thing. Perspicuita, as Perspicacità, but proper∣lie cleerenes, plainenes, or perspicuitie namely in words and sentences. Perspicuo, as Perspicace, but properlie cleare, that may be seene through. Also plaine, easie, euident, apparant, or ma∣nifest. Persuadére, suado, suasi, suaso, to per∣swade, to counsell, to animate, to make to belieue, to put, bring, or cause to sinke into ones minde or head, to exhort, to moue, or induce to do a thing, or to be∣lieue it. Persuaso, Persuaduto, perswaded, coun∣selled, animated, made to belieue, ex∣horted, induced, or moued to belieue or do a thing. Persuasione, perswasion, a perswading, a sure beliefe in a thing. Persuasiuo, perswasiue, that can, or may be perswaded, perswadable. Persuasore, a perswader, a counseller, an inducer, or exhorter to a thing. Persutto, Persuto, dride bakon. Also a gamon of bakon. Per tanto, therefore, wherefore, then, for so much. Per tempestiuo, betimes, verie earelie, most timelie. Per tempo, betimes, earelie. Pertempissimo, verie timely, or earelie. Pertenére, tengo, tenni, tenuto, to ap∣pertaine or belong vnto. Pertenuto, appertained or belonged vnto. Pertenente, pertaining, pertinent, or be∣longing vnto. Pertenenza, pertinency, an appurtenance. Perterrito, skared, affrighted, flighted, dismaide, astonished, terrified, a∣mazed. Pértica, a pearch, a pole, a rod, or long staffe to measure land or timber with. Also an akre of ground, properlie a furlong. Perticare, to measure by pearches, poles, rods, akres, or furlongs. Perticato, a houell, or rick, or stack of any thing. Also a fence made of rods or poles. Perticatore, a measurer of grounds by pearches, rods, or furlongs. Perticone, a long pole, a great pearch. Also a gull, or a noddie, a slagrell. Pertinace, obstinate, headstrong, sacie, stubborne, stiffnecked, opinatiue. Also taken sometime in good part, for con∣stant, or resolute or firme in some o∣pinion. Pertinacia, obstinacie, wilfulnes, stub∣bornes, strong opinion: ntimes taken in the good part for perseuerance, con∣stancie, or firme opinion. Pertugiare, to boare or pierce through full of holes. Pertugio, Pertugia, any kinde of hole, or boaring. Perturbare, to disturbe, to disquiet, to vexe, to trouble in minde, to bring out of quiet. Perturbamento, a perturbation, passion, vexatiō, or trouble of mind, a troublous passion, affliction or motion or agita∣tion of the minde and spirits, distur∣bance, disquieting. Also a boistrous, stormie, or tempestuousnes of the wea∣ther. Perturbatione, as Perturbamento. Perturbatore, a disturber, a promoter, a vexer, a troublous fellow, a man that disquieteth and disturbeth much. Perturbo, as Perturbamento. Pertusare, as Pertugiare. Pertuso, as Pertugio. Per tutto, euerie-where, in all places, wheresoeuer, for all, withall. Per tutto ciò, for all that, with all that. Per vana gloria, for vaine-glorie, for o∣stentation. Perucca, a periwig or gregorian of coun∣terfait haire. Peruccare, to dresse with a periwig. Perucchiera, a periwig or gregorian ma∣ker. Peruenire, vengo, venni, venuto, to be∣come, to come vnto, to reach vnto, to happen, to come to a place or to his iour∣nies end, to attaine vnto. Peruenuto, become, come vnto, reacht vnto, hapned, attained vnto, or come to a iournies end. Peruenimento, a hap, a chance, a com∣ming vnto, a befalling, an attay∣ning vnto, a comming vnto a iournies end. Peruento, as Prouento. Peruersare, to become or make peruerse, froward, malicious, skittish, or mischie∣nous. Also to spoile, to marre, to subuert, or ouerthrow.
Peruersione, a peruerting, a peruersion, a subuerting, a deprauing, &c. Peruersità, peruersenes, skittishnes, fro∣wardnes, crabbednes, waywardnes, ma∣liciousnes of nature, ouerthwartnes, do∣ing or seeking to do that which one ought not to do. Peruérso, peruerse, skittish, froward, wai∣ward, crabbed, hard to please. Peruertíre, verto, vertito, to peruert, to ouerturne, to ouerthwart, to turne vp∣side downe, to subuert, beate, or cast downe to the ground, to marre and de∣stroy, to depraue, to make ill, to vndoo and cast away, to wrest to an ill sence. Peruertito, peruerted, subuerted, ouer∣turned, ouerthwarted, turned vpside downe, beaten or cast downe, marred, destroied, depraued, made ill, cast away, wrested to an ill sence. Peruertitore, a peruertor, a subuertor, an ouerturner, a destroier, a deprauer, &c. Perugino, a kinde of fretted or carued ioyners worke. Peruicace, as Pertinace. Peruicacia, as Pertinacia. Per vn vie va, glancingly, cursorie wise, a snatch and away, in haste. Peruzze, wilde, little, hedge-peares. Pesare, to waie, to poise, to ponder, to grieue, or lie heauie vpon. Pesato, waide, poised, pondred, grieued, laide heauie vpon. Also graue, consi∣derate, discreete. Pesante, heauy, waightie, poisie, pondrous. Pesanza, heauines, waight, griefe or vex∣ation of minde. Pesatore, Pesaro, a waigher, a poyser, a pondrer. Pesatamente, waightily, heauily, pon∣drouslie, considerately, discreetly. Pesca, a peach, a yoong mans bum. Also all maner of fishing. Pescagione, any kinde of fishing or fish. Pescaia, a fish pond. Also a fish market. Pescare, to fish, to catch fish. Pescarezza, a fishers bote. Pescaria, a fish streete, a fish market. Pescata, a fishing. Also fished. Pescatore, a fisher, a fishmonger. Also a fish that with a budget hanging at his necke which he like a net lets in and out catcheth other small fishes. Pescatore del Re, a birde called a kings fisher. Pescatorio, of, or pertaining to fishing. Pescatrice, a fish woman, or seller of fish. Also a kinde of sea fish much like a frogge. Pescauento, an idle loytrer, a vaine foo∣lish gadding gull. Pesce, any kinde of fish. Also a signe in heauen. Pesce balestra, a fish called in latine Zy∣gaena. Pesce calamaro, a cuttle fish, a cutfish, or a calamarie. Pesce cane, a dogge fish. Pesce coruo, a fish yellow in the sea, and blacke in fresh water. Pescelegno, the fish we call stockefish. Pesce molle, soft, smooth or slippery fish, a whiting fish, a cod, or codfish. Pesce martello, a fish called in latine Zy∣gaena. Pesce ignudo, a fish called a dace or a merlane. Pesce di fortezza, a fish called in latine Blennus. Pesce di pietra, a fish called in latine Blennus. Pesce porco, a hogge or swine fish. Pescefico, a cod, or codfish. Some take it for a sea tench. Pesce prete, a kinde of fish that hath but one eie in his head. Pesce stella, a starre fish. Pesce piano, a plaise-fish, or any kinde of flatfish. Pesce san Pietro, a fish called a dorea, or gold fish. Pesce porco, a sea hogge, a hogge fish. Pesce spada, a fish that hath a beake like a sword, called a sword fish. Pesce in canella, a fish called in latine Enyx. Pesce squaglioso, scaglioso, any shell or scalie fish. Pesce marino, any kinde of sea fish. Pesce d'acqua fresca, fresh water fish. Pesce di conca, any kind of shell fish. Pesce ratto, a fish like a raye or skeate. Pesce palombo, a fish like a lamprey. Pesce pastinaca, Looke Pastinaca. Pesce rondine, a sea swallow, a sea night bat, or reare-mouse. Pesce rospo, a tode-fish. Pesce pescatore, Looke Pescatore. Pesce papagallo, a fish called in latine Pauo, or Pauus. Pescestella, a star-fish or fiue foote. Pesce tarantola, to fish called in latine Scaurus. Pesce vanga, a sole fish with rough skinne or a skate. Pesce salato, any kind of salt fish. Pesce volatore, a kind of little fish wher∣of there flie whole sholes togither. Pescheggiare, to feele or grope ones but∣tocks or arse. Also to fish. Pescherello, a fish called a bleise. Peschiera, a fish streete or market, a fish ponde. Pescina, as Peschiera. Pesciolini, all maner of minutes, frye, or small fishes. Pesci vendolo, a fishmonger or seller of fish. Pesco, a peach tree. Also taken for a yoong mans bum or arse. Pescoso, full of fish, fishie, or that may be fished. Pescuglio, a little pibble stone. Pesetto, a little waight. Peso, a waight, a stone waight, a loade, a burthen, a charge, waightie, lawefull, ful waight. It is also taken for a mans bodie. Also hanging downe, hanged. Pesole, dangling or hanging downe. Pessimamente, woorst of all, most ill, badly, wickedly, most naughtily. Pessimare, to marre, to spoile, to make of bad woorse. Pessimo, very bad, most ill, very naught, woorst, exceeding naught. Pesso, a pessarie or suppositorie made of soft wooll like a finger vsed for secret purposes among women. Pessolo, a creeke in the sea. Also as Pesso. Pesta, a footing, a track, a trace, a foote∣step, the print or marke of a foote. Also a croud, a throng, or presse of people. Also a way much beaten and frequen∣ted, the view of a hare, or the pricke of a deere. Pestacchio, a pistacho, a fistike nut or bladder nut. Also a flurt with ones fin∣gers vsed in disgrace. Pestacciare, as Pestare. Pestare, to stampe, to pound, to bray or pill in a morter, to bruse, to breake, to bang, to bebast, to beswaddle with a cudgell. Pestare l'agresto, as Menare l'agresto. Pestare la salsa nel mortaio, to pill, to pounde, braie or beate sauce in a mor∣ter. Pestatoio, a pestle of a morter. Pestatore, a stamper or beater in a mor∣ter. Peste, the plague, or pestilence, a contagion or infection. Also a thing or person that marreth or is confusion to another, a mischiefe, a death. Also a poison. Also as Pesta. Pestello, a pestle of a morter, or pouner. Also taken for a mans toole or priui∣ties. Pestello di vetro, a dildoe of glasse. Pestero, a kinde of venemous serpent in India. Pestifero, plaguie, pestiferous, pestilent, contagious, deadly, mortall, vnwhole∣some,
dangerous, signifying plague or death to come, that bringeth pestilence and destruction. Pestilentia, as Pestilenza. Pestilentiale, as Pestifero. Pestilentioso, as Pestifero. Pestilenza, a plague, pestilence, murrian, or contagion, the foule euill, the infecti∣on of the aire or vnwholesomnes of a place. Pesulo, a bench, a forme or a seat. Peta, farts. Petaccie, rags, clouts, dragles. Petalite, the herbe Harts-horne. Petalio, the plate of pure gold which was set in the forefront of the high priest and head hauing Iehouah grauen in it. Petalismo, a kinde of banishing vsed in Siracusa by writing the parties name in Oliue leaues. Petamogeto, a kind of weed growing in water. Petare, to fart, to cracke behind, as Pet∣tare. Petate, farts, fartings. Petasetto, a little hat or round couer for any thing, a lid. Petasite, Lagwoort or Butter-bur. Petaso, a Persian or Turkish cap, hat, bon∣net, head attire or turbant. Petecchia, a specke, or freckle or spot in ones face. Petecchie, the disease we call the meazels or Gods markes. Petardo, a squib or petard of gun pouder vsed to burst vp gates or doores with. Also a farter. Petaruolo, a cracking squib made of gun pouder. Also a farter Peteggiare, to fart or blurt at one. Petegola, a slut, a flurt, a pikitching, a filth, a gixie, a gill, a minxe. Also the chiefest skold in a parish, an idle proud huswife. Petegolare, to play the idle flurt, trull, slut or whore, to braule, chide or skold. Petenecchio, as Pettinale. Peteriggio, the pilling or going off of the skin about the nailes. Peterrare, to shead, to spill, to scatter. Petignone, the grine betweene the pri∣uities and the thighes where haire gro∣weth. Petilio, a flower growing among brambles in the later end of sommer, like a wilde rose with fine small leaues. Petimbosa, the bitter herbe called Fell∣wort or Gentian. Petitione, a petition, a demaund, a labou∣ring for, a sute, a request. also the name of a magistrate in Venice. Petitore, a petitioner, a suter, a requester, a demander, an asker, a begger. Petitoria lettera, a letter of request, a supplication. Peto, one that doth lightly roule his eies with a grace from corner to corner, goat-eied, rouling-eied. Also he that looketh as his eies were halfe closed, or he that looketh a squint vpward. Petone, something about a fullers mill. V∣sed also for the herbe Tabacco, but it is taken from the French. Petorselo, a saucie malapert companion, a bold haiard. Petra, Pietra, any kind of stone. Petraia, a quarie of stones, all manner of stone worke. Petraio, Petraro, a mazon or stone cutter, a digger of stones. Petrale, a quarie of stones, stonie, made of stones. Petranciana, a kinde of fruit: but some take it for the herbe Saxifrage. Petraruolo, as Petraio. Petrata, a blow, a hit, a hurt or cast with a stone. Petrelle, a toole to melt mettals with or cast in them, an ingot. Petrificare, to grow hard as a stone. Petrificatione, a growing hard to a stone. Also a disease in the eie or eie-lids. Petrina, any little stone. Petrinale, a kinde of gunne called a petri∣nall. Petriuolo, a kind of gumme or drug that burneth. Petronciana, as Petranciana. Petrone, a great huge stone or rocke. Petronella, a larke with a bush on his head. Petronelli, as Pietranelli. Petronello, as Pietronello. Petrosa, a kind of rough hard thorne back. Petrosellino, the herbe we call Parslie. Petrosemolo, Petrosillo, as Petrosel∣lino. Petroso, stonie, grettie, full of stones. Petruzze, small pibble stones. Pettacchiare, as Pettacciare. Pettacchina, as Petegola. Pettacciare, to botch, to piece, to cobble, to clout, to stud, to beset. Also to fart, to crackell. Pettacciaro, a botcher, a souter, a cobler, a tinkar. Pettanculo, a kind of fish. Some take it for the scallop fish. Pettare, to fart, to crackle, to rattle, to breake wind backward, to let a scape or a fart. Pettaro, a farter, a crackler, a ratler. Pettardo, as Pettaro, as Pettaruolo. Pettaruolo, as Petardo. Petteggiare, to fart or blurt at. Pettegola, as Petegola. Pettegolare, as Petegolare. Petteneggio, the haires about mans or womans priuities, or the grine about the priuities. Pettenorzo, a kind of scalop fish. Petti, breasts. Also fartes. Pettido, a kind of musicall instrument. Pettiera, a stomacher or breast garment. Pettiggiare, as Petteggiare. Pettignone, as Petignone. Pettinale, the priuities that haue haires vpon them. Pettinecchio, as Pettinale. Pettinara, a combe-case, or boxe for combes. Pettinare, to combe, to currie, to dresse flax, to card wooll, to scrape. Also to feede, eate, or make good cheere merily, hungerlie, or at other mens charges: it is a phrase vsed only among good fellowes and souldiers, taken from the metaphor of the combe, because it hath teeth. Pettinaio, Pettinaro, a combe-maker. Pettinatore, a comber, a currier, a carder, a wooll-man, a scraper. Also a good feeder, a hungrie fellow, a tall tren∣cherdman. Pettinare la lana, to card wooll. Pettina zázzere, vsed for a Barber, be∣cause he combeth mens fore-locks, or bushes of haire. Péttine, anie manner of combe to combe, or kemb the head or beard. Also a cur∣rie-combe for a horse. Also a combe to dresse flaxe or hempe, called a beche, or a hatchell. Also a stay of a weauers loome, through which his web or woofe goeth, hauing teeth like a combe. Also a paire of cards to card wooll withall. Also a kinde of rake with small teeth to rake corne. Also a rake, a dragger, or harrow. Also the grine about the priuie members where haire groweth. Also a stick wherewith they play on dulcimers. Also a shell-fish called a scallop. Also another fish with a hard finne on his back. Also a kinde of herbe. Pettine di legno, a wooden combe. Pettine d'auorio, an yuorie combe. Pettine di tessitore, a weauers part of his loome with teeth in it like a combe, some call it the stay of the loome. Pettirosso, a robin red-breast. Petto, that part of the bodie which is next beneath the channell or neck-bone called the breast: it is also vsed for a fart. Petto di castrato, a breast of mutton.
Pettole, fritters or pancakes. Pettoncolo, as Pettanculo. Pettone, a great loud fart. Pettorale, a brest-plate, a peitrell, a sto∣macher, the arming of the breast of a horse. Also that belongeth to the breast. Pettorale del cauallo, a peitrell of a saddle. Pettoreggiare, to fart, or to blurt with the mouth. Pettoreggiare, to beare downe, to front, or resist with the force of ones breast. Pettorina con lardo, a fat breast of hogs flesh. Pettoroso, as Pettoruto. Pettorosso, a bird called a robin red-breast, or rudcock. Pettoruto, breasted, hauing a big large breast. Also that is hollow chested. Also bossed. Pettozzo, a guirding, loude, shrill fart. Pettunculo, the name of a fish. Petulante, wanton, shamelesse, malapert, saucie, ribaude, dishonest, reprochfull, outragious, readie to do wrong, one that passeth not how ill he speaketh or doth to a man. Petulantia, wantones, saucines, malapert∣nes, ribaudrie, lecherous wantonnes, reprochfull speaking, dishonestie, im∣pudencie. Petusso, a robin red-breast. Peucedano, hog-fenell, sulphur-wort, or sow-fenell, or maiden-weede. Peuera, a kinde of wooden leauer. Also a great tunnell. Peuerare, to pepper, or dresse or season with pepper. Peuerata, a kind of meate or potage made with much pepper. Peuerazze, a kinde of cockle, or other shell-fish. Péuere, the spice called pepper. Peuerigno, of the colour of pepper. Peuerino, a pepper boxe. Also of the co∣lour of pepper. Peuerone, as Peuerata. Also long pep∣per. Pezza, a while or space of time. Also any piece, cloat, rag, or tatter. Also a patch. Pezza di denaro, a piece of monie. Pezza di panno, a piece of cloth. Pezza di veluto, a piece of veluet. Pezza intiera, a whole piece. Pezzare, to clout, to piece, to patch, to cobbe, to botch. Pezzaruolo, a botcher, a cobler, a clou∣ter, a outer, a tinkar, a patcher. Pezze, ragges, clouts, tatters, patches, pieces. Pezzenare, to begge for pieces of broken meate. Pezzente, a begger for broken pieces of meate. Also as Pezzaruolo. Pezzetta, a little clout, rag, patch, tatter. Pezzette di leuante, certaine pieces of linnen that women rub and paint their faces with. Pezzetto, as Pezzetta, a small while or space of time. Pezzigaruolo, wanton, froward, peeuish, puling, ticklish, skittish. Also as Piz∣zicagnolo. Pezzire, zisco, zito, as Pezzenare. Pezzo, a piece of any thing, a while or space of time, a pine tree, or pitch tree. Pezzo a pezzo, by piece-meale, in pieces, piece by piece. Pezzola, a kind of purple clout that pain∣ters and cookes vse to colour meates with. Pezzolana, sand or grauell. Pezzuco, a swallow-taile to ioyne tim∣ber, a pinne or peg of wood. Pezzuole, as Pezzette. Pezzulo, dangling, or downe-hanging. Pezzuto, sharp, sharp-pointed, or keene. Also patched, botched, or pieced. Phagedena, a kinde of pock or running canker, which fretteth through the skin, and eateth the flesh. Phalange, a troupe or squadron of 8000. men that the Persians were wont to warre with, being foure square, and set in such aray that they might encounter with their enemies foote to foote, man to man, and shield to shield. Also a spider so called. Phalarica, an engine of warre with wilde fire enclosed in it to set townes on fire. Phalari, spanish seede, or seede of Canarie, pettie panike. Some call it grasse-corne. Phantasma, a dreame, a vision, an image of things conceiued in the minde, an ap∣pearance, a vaine vision or false imagi∣nation, a fairie, a hobgoblin. Phanatico, one that hath vaine visions. Pharee, a kinde of serpent that creepeth on his taile. Pharetra, a quiuer for arrowes or shafts. Pharetraro, a quiuer-maker. Pharmace, a medicine, a remedie, all kind of dregs good or euil. also that part of phisicke that cureth with medicines. Also taken for a sorceresse or enchan∣tresse. Pharo, a towre, a beakon, or high place by the sea coast, wherein were continu∣allie lights and fires which serued for sea-men to see the hauen and the safest entrance: a sea marke. Phasma, a horrible, ghastlie, grizlie vision or sight. Phebéa, the Moone so called because she is Phebus sister. Phebo, the Sunne. Also Phebus. Phemigno, a medicine causing rednes, making the bodie to breake out in pushes. Phecasio, a kind of shoes that priests were wont to weare, peculiar to sacrificing priests. Phemo, a certaine medicine good against the colike. Phenice, a bird in Arabia, a Fenix, or the quintessence of fire, or philosophers stone. Phenomeno, an appearance either in the heauen or the aire. Phici, a fish which changeth her colour, being sometimes white, and other times speckt. Phicite, a precious stone, hauing the co∣lour of Alga. Phidicie, the common suppers among the Lacedemoniās openlie kept in the streets with great temperance. Phigethlo, a little swelling hard and red, rising chiefely in the crowne of the head, or in the arme-pits, or in the priuie parts, our chirurgions do call it a little loafe or manchet. Philadelphia, brotherlie loue. Philagatho, he that loueth goodnes. Philalethe, a louer of truth. Philanthio, an herbe vsed to dye purple. Philantropia, humanitie, or louing of men. Philantropo, a louer of mankinde, gentle and louing. Also the herbe goose-grasse or loue man. Philarco, one that loueth to beare rule. Philargiria, couetousnes, or loue of monie. Philatteria, scrolles of parchment, hauing the commandements written in them, which the Pharises ware about their heads and armes. Philatterio, a preseruatiue against poy∣son. Philautia, loue of ones selfe, selfe-loue, selfe-liking. Philerenio, a louer of solitarines. Philetéria, an hearbe, of some called wild sage, but in ecclesiasticall bookes it is v∣sed for enchantments. Phillite, the hearbe called harts-oong. Philocalia, delight in fairenes. Philocare, an herbe called horehound. Philocrate, constant in loue. Philoginia, doting on women. Philologia, loue of learning, studie, or talke. Philologo, a louer of learning, knowledge and studie.
Philologo, a man giuen to studie, a louer of learning, talke or conference. Philomathia, the loue or desire of lear∣ning. Philomela, a Nightingall. Philosarco, voluptuous, louing his flesh. Philosofare, to bestow his studie in phi∣losophie, to professe, to teach, to dispute and reason of philosophie. Philosofante, a philosopher, or one pro∣fessing and studying philosophie. Philosofastro, a smatterer in philosophie, a foolish, pedanticall, counterfaite phi∣losopher. Philosofia, philosophie, a loue of learning, studie, knowledge, and wisedome. Philosóphico, philosophicall, pertaining to philosophie. Philósofo, a philosopher, a louer of lear∣ning, vertue, wisedome or knowledge, or a student of them. Philostorgia, the loue of parents toward their children. Philosseno, Philossino, a louer of hos∣pitalitie, one that gladlie and with a cheerefulnes entertaineth guests and friends. Philoteoro, one giuen to speculation and contemplation of things. Philtro, Philtri, amorous potions, poisons of loue; or medicines to make one loue. Also the hollownes or gutter in the vp∣per lips vnder the nosthrils. Also the faire and comely proportion of ones bo∣die, and his curteous behauiour, which with the verie sight doth purchase loue and fauour. Philura, a little thin skin as parchment, a sheete or leafe of paper, that which is betweene the barke and the wood of the tree, of some called Tylia, whereupon in old time they were wont to write. Phima, a little swelling like a fellon or bile, but somewhat rounder and flatter. Also a certaine beast, which if a man behold, it maketh him to looke pale ma∣nie dayes after. Phimosi, a disease when the nut of a mans yard will not be couered, or being coue∣red, will not be opened. Phiontidi, those creatures which nature hath made deadly enemies each to other, as the Storke and the Frog, the Cat and the Mouse, the Spider and the Toade, &c. Phisato, a great fish called a Whirlepoole, that with his tongue casteth great store of water into ships. Phisica, the arte of phisicke or naturall philosophie, the arte of naturall things. Phisicale, phisicall, naturall, according to naturall causes, of or pertaining to na∣turall things and causes. Phisico, he that vnderstandeth or setteth out the causes of things naturall, a phi∣sition, or thereunto belonging. Phisiognomia, a science or rule to con∣iecture or iudge of mans naturall af∣fections by his visage or forme, phisi∣ognomie. Phisiognomo, one that professeth to know the manners and natures of men by the view of their bodie, eyes, face, and forehead, a Phisiognomist, for Physis is nature in greeke. Phisiologia, a searching out of naturall things, a reasoning of the nature of any thing. Phisiologo, he that searcheth naturall things, or disputeth of naturall causes. Phisitero, Phisistro, as Phisato. Phiteuma, a kinde of herbe. Phitone, a kinde of great serpent. Phlebotomia, the cutting of a vaine, or blood-letting. Phlemma, all manner of fleagme. Phlemmone, an inflammation of bloud which the Chirurgions call Phlegmon, an inflammation or swelling against nature, being white and red. Phlegonte, a precious stone hauing as it were a flame of fire in it. Phlittena, a rising or swelling much like vnto blisters, caused when the skinne is scalded with hote water, which swelling or blister is full of yellowish matter, commonly called wilde fire, or wheate on the eyes. Phoca, a sea calfe. Phormione, an hearbe good against the pinne and the web in the eye. Phosophoro, the day or morning starre. Also the twy-light either in the euening or morning. Phrase, a phrase or proper forme of speech. Phrene, the midriffe, which deuideth the vmbles of a man or beast. Phreneticare, to raue, to be frantike, to be possest with a frenzie. Phrenesia, frenzie, the chiefe and greatest mischiefe that can happen to the braine, cōming by an inflammation of the mid∣riff, and alwayes drawing a feuer with it. Phrenético, one that hath the frenzie, or is franticke. Phrigio, a melodie, a musicke or tune, wherein seemed to be a diuine furie. Phronesia, hath bin vsed for prudence and wisedome. Phronimo, one that is prudent, wise, or wittie. Phthiriasi, a disease called the lousie euill. Phthisico, he that hath the consumption of the lungs. Phthisi, a disease in the lungs, with a con∣sumption of all the whole bodie. Phthoe, a consumption of the whole bodie with a little ague following. Also the incurable sores of the lungs. Phtongo, a sound, a tune, or a note. Phthorio, a medicin which killeth childrē being yet in the wombes of their mo∣ther. Phu, the herbe that some call Valerian, great Setwall, or capons taile. Pia, godlie, deuout, pitifull, religious, ver∣tuous, mercifull, gentle, benigne, good, honest, iust, righteous. Piabile, for which satisfaction may be made. Piacére, piáccio, piacqui, piaccinto, to please, to satisfie, to delight, to like, to content, to thinke good. Also a pleasure, a content, a delight, a liking. Also a benefit, a good turne, a gratitude, a kindnes, a fauour, mi piace, it pleaseth me, it liketh me, I am glad of, mi dis∣piace, it displeaseth me, I am sorie. Piaciuto, pleased, satisfide, liked, de∣lighted. Piacénte, pleasant, pleasing, delight∣some. Piacénza, as Piacere. Piacéuole, pleasant, delightsome, merrie. Piaceuoletto, somewhat pleasant, merie, or delightsome. Piaccuolezza, pleasantnes, delight, mirth, pleasure, iollitie, blithnes, glee. Piacimento, a pleasing, a delighting. Piaculare, seruing for the purging of, or that hath powre to purge some fault or offence. Also that which sheweth some sorowfull thing. Piaculo, a sacrifice, and all other things that are done and giuen for the purging and satisfaction of some grieuous sinne and offence. Also a hainous offence by some satisfaction to be purged. Piadena, a dish, a platter, a charger. Piadire, disco, dito, to pleade, to sue, to lawe, to contend in lawe. Piadito, pleaded, sued, lawed, contended in lawe. Piado, a plea, a pleading, a sute, a pro∣cesse. Piadoso, litigious, pleading, contentious. Also pitifull, ruthfull, mercifull, iust. Piadotto, a kinde of course bread. Piaga, a wound, a sore, a hurt, a plague, an vlcer, a blow, a beating or a stripe, a cut, or an incision. Also a great losse, hurt, hinderance, or displeasure, a
heauie chance: vsed also for a clymate, a countrie, a region, a coaste, a lande or portion of the world. Piagare, to wounde, to plague, to hurt, to torment, to beate, to cut, to mangle or make an incision with any cutting wea∣pon, to vexe, to hinder or cause some great hurt or hinderance to one. Piaggia, a meadow, a plot of grounde, a large open fielde. Also the stronde of the sea. Piaggia del mare, the stronde of the sea. Piaggiare, to reduce into meadowes, to walk in the open fields, to coast along the sea strond. Also to stand still and moone not, to cogge, to foist, to flout or clawe one iniuriouslie, to consent, sooth vp and yeeld vnto. Also to pledge, to an∣swer or be suretie for. Piaggioso, medowie, large, bleach, fieldie. Also full of plaine shores or strondes. Piaggietta, a little medow or fine open field. Piágnere, as Piángere. Piagnuto, as Piangiuto. Piagneuole, as Piangeuole. Piagnesterio, a place of wailing, whining or lamenting. Piagnone, a whining, crying, weeping fellow, an hypocriticall fellow. Pialla, a plane such as carpenters vse to plane timber or boords with. Piallare, to plane, to smooth or shaue boordes, to planish. Piallure, shauings, chips, or planings of timber. Pia mater, or madre, the caule or filme of the braine. Piamente, deuoutly, godly, dutifully, mercifully, with a honest affection. Piana, as Pialla. Pianare, as Piallare▪ also to raze or make plaine, to planish. Pianca, a pauement, a seeling, a flooring, a planking, a planke of boordes. Pianella, Looke Pialla. Also a womans pantofle. Pianellaio, a pantofle or chopinos ma∣ker. Pianellaria, a place where shooes and pantofles are made and sold. Pianelle, night slippers, chopinos or pan∣tofles. Pianellette, little pantofles, chopinos or night slippers. Pianéta, Pianétta, a planet or wandring star, of which sort are rekoned seauen, so called bicause it keepeth not alwaies one place vnder the firmament, nor is al∣waies of one distance from the fixed, but is sometime higher, and somtime lower, somtimes swifter, and somtimes slower, according to the particular motion it hath in the Zodiacke. Taken also for a chance, lot, destinie, fortune, lucke or fate. Pianezza, plainnes, euennes, smoothnes. Also a downe, a plaine fielde, a leueld grounde. also a certaintie, an apparance or cleannes of any thing. Pianezza del' anello, the bezell or head of a ring where the stone is set in. Piángere, piango, piansi, pianto, to weepe, to whine, to crie, to waile, to be∣waile, to lament, to mone, to sob, to blubber. Piangiuto, or Pianto, wept, whined, cride, wayled, sobd, &c. Piangimento, a weeping, a whining, a cry¦ing, a wailing or lamenting, a sobbing. Piangéuole, full of weeping or whining, lamentable, waylefull. Pianger dirottamente, to weepe out right, to crie out amaine. Piangolare, to whine and crie as little children do. Piangolina, a whining puling woman. Piangoloso, mournefull, whining, wee∣ping, puling. Piano, a plaine, a fielde, an euen ground, a champaine, a medow. Also soft, smooth, plaine, manifest, without wrinckles, eui∣dent, cleer, easie, flat▪ apparāt. also softly smoothly, quietly, lowlie, openly, flatly, easily, certainly, without doubt, indeed, euidently, plainly, apparantly, mani∣festly, leisurely. Also a fish called a plaise. Also low, as Parlar piano, can∣tar piano, to speake or sing low. Piano piano, soft and faire, faire and softly, leisurely, very softly and plainly. Piano vn poco. soft and faire, staie a lit∣tle, not so faste. Pianta, a plant, a roote, a stock, a graffe, a set, a syen, a tree. also a ground, a plat∣forme or foundation of any thing, the sole of the foote. Also among the Ana∣tomists as Pedio. Pianta chese, any plant that is remooued. Pianta de' piedi, the soles of a mans foot, the plant or middle part of the foot from the first ioynt of the toes to the instep, being answerable to the backe of the hand. Pianta da cuoio, an herbe vsed to die blacke and to tanne leather with called sumach. Pianta di lione, the herbe sauce or our la∣dies mantle. Also the herbe Pate de lion. Piantagine, the weede or herbe called plantaine. Piantagine minore, the herbe rib-woort or lambs-toong. Piantagine aquatica, the herbe water plantaine. Piantagione, the planting, setting or graffing of any thing. Piantanimale, a fish with many feete. Piantare, to plant, to set, to ground, to set∣tle, to graffe. Also to cosen, to cheate, to coni-catch, to giue one the slip. Piantarsi la in quatro, to lie downe after the plaine fashion, to lie abroad. Piantarsi, to stande and stop still, as some horses that are restie. Piantata, a cheating or coni-catching tricke. Piantatoio, a dible or gardners setting sticke. Also a goldsmiths toole. Piantare lo stendardo nella rocca, to set vp ones colours in the castle. Piantatore, a planter, a setter, a graffer, a setler, a gardner. Also a cheater, a coni∣catcher, one that giues others the slip. Pianto, wept, whined, moaned, cride, wai∣led, plained. Also a weeping, a whining, a moaning, a crying, a wailing, a play∣ning, greete. Piantone, a great plant. Also a stake or a pile driuen in the ground. Also a sudden slip. Pianura, a plaine fielde, a champaine ground, a plaine or a downes. Piasire, a plate or leafe of any mettall. Piastra, any kind of plate or leafe of met∣tall, namely a breast-plate, as Plasma. Piastra d'argento, a coine or plate of sil∣uer vsed in Spaine. Piastra di mettallo, a plate or leafe of mettall. Piastrella, a little leafe, plate or blade of mettall. Looke Piastrelle. Piastrellare, to play at quoits. Also to slate a house, to quoit. Piastrelle, slates, flat-stones, tiles, sowes of lead, bars of iron, blades or plates of any thing. Also quoites to plaie at quoites with. Also little plaisters. Piastrine, as Piastrelle. Also a breast plate or vant plate. Piatà, as Pietà. Piastro, a plaister. Piatano, the platane or plane tree. Piatanza, a pittance or allowance of meat and drinke. Piatire, as Piadire. Piatitore, a pleader in law. Piato, a plea, a suite in law, a controuersie, a processe, a pleading. Also flat, squat, cowred downe, hidden, close to the ground, euen, leuell, iust, razed with the ground.
Piatosarie, as Pietosarie. Piatoso, as Pietoso. Also litigious. Piatta, a flat bottome boat or barge. Piatta forma, a plat forme, a ground worke or modell of a forme. Piategli, little dishes. Also crablice. Piattello, a little dish or platter. Piatti, all manner of dishes, platters or plates. Piatto, a platter, a dish, a charger, a plate, a messe or dish of meat. Also the allow∣ance giuen to any officer for his messe or boord, a course serued in at any feast. Also made flat, razed or leuell to the ground, hidden, squatted, close, husht, secrete, lurking, cowring downe flat. Piattole, crablice: but namely quoiting stones or quoits. Piattoli, a kind of fig, so called in Italy. Piattonare, to streeke flatlin with any weapon. Piattonata, a blow giuen with the flat side of any weapon. Piattoncella, a close, slie, craftie, lurking wench. Piattoni, Piatoni, crablice. Piazza, a market place, the chiefest streete or broad way or place in a towne. Also an open court or castle yard, a place or seat of iustice. Also a place, a fort, a hold, a fortresse. Also a court in great mens houses where the people do walke. Piazza di mercanti, a place where mar∣chants meet daily, as the roiall exchange in London or Rialto in Venice. Piazzaro, a common crier or proclaimer of a towne. Piazzeggiare, to walke or frequent the common streets. Pica, the bird we call a pye, a iaie or a pi∣ot. Also the strange lusting and long∣ing of women. Picardia, the countrie of Piccardie; but taken in common speech for hanging or the place where men are hanged. An∣dar in picardia, to go to the gallowes. Picca, a pike, a speare, a lance or souldiers long staffe. Piccafichi, as Pappafico. Piccare, Looke Appiccare or Impicca∣re. Also to leaue a touch, a loose, a tang or pleasing taste vpon the toong in tasting any thing. Piccante, well sauoring, smacking, briske, biting vpon the toong as wine doth, re∣lishing somewhat sharpe or tarte. Also a tartenes vpon the toong, a tang left vpon the toong. Piccarello, a wag, a halter-sacke, a kna∣uish boy. Also a little hammer or clap∣per hangd at doores to knocke with. Picchiare, to knocke at a dore. Also to beate, to bang, to streeke, to bounce, to thump. Picchiarello, as Piccarello. Picchiata, a knocking, a beating, a boun∣cing, a blow. Picchiate, blowes, bouncings, strokes, knocks, bangs, thumps. Picchia petto, a dissembling, hypocriti∣call puritan. Picchiatoio, a hammer to knocke at a doore with, a striker, a knocker, a little bell that begging Friers vse to ring and g at doores with. Picchiere, a pike-man, a lance-man. Picchij, great iron hammers, sledges, mat∣tockes or crowes. Picchio, an iron hammer, a sledge, a bee∣tle, a mattock. also a bird called a wood-hacker, a wood-wall or a wood-pecker. Also a knocke, a stroke, a thump. Picchione, a great hammer, a sledge, a beetle or mattocke, a stone cutters picke. Also a kind of coine. Picchio verde, a birde called a greene peake. Piccia ferro, a birde called a wood-pec∣ker. Picciare, to knocke, to bounce at a doore, to pinche, to itch. Also to kindle fire, to smart. Picciare, to pinch, to snip. Also to itch or smart. Piccicatura, a pinching, a snip, a pinche, a smarting, an itching. Piccico, as Piccicatura. Piccichetto, a glouers toole. Piccicotto, as much of any pouder or any thing else as a man may take vp be∣tweene the thumbe and the forefinger. Piccigare, as Piccicare. Piccin, Piccino, verie little, slender or small. Piccinino, as Piccin. Piccio, as Picchio. Also the bill, beake or snout of any bird. Picciocolo, the stemme or stalke of any fruit. Picciolare, to turne or twirle a top or gig about as children. Also to make little. Picciole, a kind of praunes or shrimps. Piccioletto, verie little or small. Picciolezza, littlenes or smalnes. Piccioli, a little kind of coine. Also casting counters. Picciolino, verie little or small. Picciolo, little or small, pettie. Also a stalke of any fruit. Also a top or gig or twirle that children vse to play withall. Piccione, a pigeon, a doue. Also a chicken. Piccirillo, a childes wastband or swathe. Also a yoong infant child or babie. Picciuolo, as Picciolo. Piccolezza, as Picciolezza. Piccolino, as Picciolino. Piccolo, as Picciolo. Piccone, as Picchione. Piccozzo, as Picchio. Picicth, an herbe. Picilla, a ferriers toole or shauer to pare the hoose of a horse before be she him. Picio, a kind of seabreame or ruffe. Pico, a kind of menow fish. Pico verde, a bird called a greene peake, wood-peaker or hickway. Picrócoli, cholericke men, so vsed among phisitions. Pidocchiare, to louse or vnlouse one. Pidocchieria, lousines, niggardlines, i∣chingnes, roguerie, roguishnes, filthines, wrangling, dodging, paltring. Pidocchio, a louse. Pidocchioso, lousie. Pidottare, as Pilottare. Piè, as Piede. Piecora, all maner of sheepe, a wether, a mutton. Piecoraio, a sheepheard. Piede, a foote, a base, a footstall or foun∣dation of any thing. Pide d'asino, the weed sauce alone or iack of the hedge. Piede di colomba, the herbe doues foote or cranes bill. Piedestallo, a footstall or a treshall of a doore. Piede di lepre, the herbe hares foot. Pie di ceruo, an herbe called in latin Po∣lynathemum. Pie di gallo, a kind of herbe. Pie di gatto, a kind of horse bit that some riders vse for some kind of horses made like a cats foot. Piega, a fold, a plait, an infolding, a ben∣ding, a bowing, a stooping, a yeelding, a wrinkling, a wrinkle. Piegabile, as Piegheuole. Piegamento, as Piega. Piegare, to bend, to wrye, to fold, to plie, to plaite, to bow, to encline, to stoope, to yeeld. Also to appease, to mollifie, to a∣lay, to asswage, to drawe which waie one list. Piegaria, Piegatura, as Piega. Piegatoie, a paire of benders that gold∣smithes vse called bowing pincers or ply∣ers. Piegheuole, bowing, bending, folding, wrying, plying, inclining, stooping, yeel∣ding, stoping, easie, tractable, flexible, limber, pliable. Pieggiare, to pledge, to paune, to baile, to
be surety for. Pieggieria, a pledge, a baile, a suretie, a maine prize. Also suretiship. Piego, as Plico, an infolding. Piégora, a sheepe, a mutton. Piegoraio, a sheepheard. Piéna, a tide, a ful tide, a flow, a flood. Also full or filled. Also a fulnes. Pienamente, fullie, throughly, wholy, compleatly. Pienezza, fulnes, store, plentie. Pieno, full, ample, large, whole, perfect. Also wealthie, full of goods, abundant, well furnished, stored, rich, plentious, gorged, stuft. Also a pudding or farcing in any meat. Piercia, ods, vneuen. Pierla, as Perla. Pietà, the dutie, honestie, conscience, and good affection & dealing that is due by euerie Christian first vnto God, & af∣terward to our parents, father and mo∣ther, children, kinsfolkes, &c. Also de∣uotion, godlines, godly affection, pietie, righteousnes. Also natural and reuerent loue, naturall affection or zeale, reue∣rence, remorse, conscience, pitie, ruth, mercie, compassion, commiseration or compunction of anothers harme. Piéta, as Piega. Pietanza, large or bountifull almes. Also a pittance. Also as Pietà. Pietosarie, pitifull or mournefull conditi∣ons. Pietoso, pitifull, mercifull, ruthfull, com∣passionate, naturall and louing. Pietra, any kind of stone. Pietra d'arotare, a whet-stone, a grin∣ding stone. Pietra da oglio, a whet-stone. Pietra colombina, a kind of stone good to make lime with. Pietra cotta, any kind of baked stones, namely brickes. Pietra de gli indi, gold according to the Alchimists phrase. Pietra focaia, a flint stone or any stone that will strike fire. Pietra pomega, a pumice stone. Pietranelli, souldiers seruing on horseback well armed with a paire of cuirasses and weaponed with a fire-locke-piece, or a snaphance or a petronell. Pietraria, a quarie of stone, a mazons shop, all maner of stone worke. Pietraro, a lapidarie, a digger, a cutter, a worker or seller of stones. Pietra spugna, a kind of stones found in spunges, which broken small and drunke breaketh the stone in the bladder. Pietricina, a little stone. Pietronello, a petronell. Pietroso, stonie, rugged, grettie, full of stones. Pietruccia, a little or small stone. Pieua, a vicarage, a curatship or parso∣nage. Pieuale, Pieuiale, a church-vestment or coape or a bishops rotchet. Piezzaria, as Pieggiaria. Piezzo, Piezo, a suretie, a baile, a paune, a pledge. Pifara, Piffara, a flute, a pipe, a fife, a re∣corder, a bag pipe. Pifarata, Piffarata, a fit of mirth. Pifaro, Piffaro, a musition that plaies vpon any wind instrument. Pifero, Piffero, as Pifaro. Piferoni, Pifferoni, all maner of great winde instruments. Also musitions. Pigamo, bastard Rewbarb. Pigargo, a beast like a row-bucke. Also a bird. Some take it to be the hearn, & some a kinde of hauke hauing a white taile; other some take it to be the eagle or faulkon of the second kind. It doth keepe much in townes and fields. Pigazzo, the name of a toole that turners vse. Piggiorare, as Peggiorare. Piggiore, as Peggiore. Pigionare, to rent or farme house or land. Pigionaro, a renter or a farmer of house or land. Pigione, a doue or a pigeon. Also rent for house or land. Also as Pigone. Pigista, one that vseth buggerie. Piglia mosche, a flie catcher. Piglia pesci, a fisher, a fish taker. Piglia sorgij, a rat-catcher. Piglia vccelli, a bird-catcher, a fowler. Pigliare, to take, to catch, to snatch, to sur∣prise, to receiue. Pigliare alcuno, to take or catch anie bodie. Pigliare ad impréstito, to borrow, to take to loane. Pigliare a crédito, to take vp on credit or trust. Pigliare a fitto, to take to farme or rent. Pigliare a vettura, to hire by the day or at liuerie. Pigliare alla riuersa, to take in a contra∣rie sence. Pigliare ad onta, to take in scorne or as an iniurie. Pigliare ombra, to take snuffe or pepper in the nose. to mistrust. Pigliare ad interesse, to take vp at inte∣rest. Pigliare animo, to take courage or hart. Pigliare la punta, vsed for wine to loose his force and vertue. Pigliare partito, to take a resolution. Pigliarla conqualcuno, to take or picke a quarrell with any bodie. Pigliare querela, to take or picke a quar∣rell. Pigliare porto, to take or come to a ha∣uen. Pigliare per il verso, to take the right waie or true biase. Pigliare amore, to conceiue or set loue to any thing. Pigliare marroni, to gad, roaue or wan∣der vp and downe idlie. Pigliare il legno, to go to the wood, id est, to take the diet drinke for the poxe. Piglia piglia, a hue and cry, take and hold, catch and take. Pigliatore, a taker, a catcher. Piglio, a looke of the eye. Also a taking or snatching vp. Pigma, a greeke measure of 22. inches. Pigmaico, according to the stature of pigmeys. Pigmento, the figures and colours, and ornaments of rhetorike. Also guile, de∣ceit, lyes, vaine florishes. Also womens paintings, or painters colours. Pigméo, a pigmey, a kinde of little man like a dwarfe, a dandiprat, a twattle, or an elfe. Some thinke that they be but a kind of spirits ingendred of the corrup∣tion of the earth, euen as the Scarab is bread of horses doung. Pigna, a stoue or a hot house. Also a pine-apple. Pignatta, a pitcher, a pipkin, a posnet, or such earthen pot. Pignattaro, a potter, a pipkin maker. Pignatella, a little pipkin or earthen pot. Also a pot of wilde fier. Pignatto, a kinde of basket. Pignere, pingo, pinsi, pinto, to paint, to deuise, to draw out the forme and shape of a thing, to distinct with diuers co∣lours. Also to describe or set out a mat∣ter. Also vsed for Spingere. Pignetto, a groue or thicket of pine trees. Pigno, a pine-apple tree. Pignocata, a kinde of conserue, preserue or comfets made of pine-apples. Pignolare, to dresse hemp or flaxe vpon the hetch, or hatchell. Pignolo, a hatchell to dresse flaxe or hemp withall. Also a kinde of meate of pine-apples. Pignora, a pawne, a pledge, a maineprise, a suretie, a baile, a morgage, an assu∣rance, a destresse, a destraining. Pignorare, to pawne, to gage, to pledge, to baile or be suretie for, to binde by as∣surance,
to morgage. Also to seize, to di∣stresse or distraine. Pignoratiuo, bailefull, that may be bai∣led, pledged, or pawned. Also that which is laid in pledge, or pertaining to a gage. Also that hath a gage, or may straine and take distresse. Pignottare, to sneake and lurke vp and downe for good heere. Pignottante, a sneaker, or lurker vp and downe for good cheere, a smell feast. Pignuoli, a kinde of duck or mallard. Pigo, a fish, called in latine Cyprinus. Pigolare, to croke or cry as a dawe or chough, to wauer, to waue, to twind in and out. Also as Nicchiare. Pigone, as Pigma. Pigozzo, as Picozzo. Pigritia, sloth, idlenes, lazines, slownes, vnlustines, lithernes, slothfulnes, slug∣gishnes, dulnes, heauines, lumpishnes, sweatines. Pigro, slow, idle, lazie, slothfull, lither, sloth, sluggish, loth, long, dull, nothing quick, heauie, cold, vnlustie, as it were vnwilling. Pigrone, an idle, slothfull, lazie, lither companion, a slow, sluggish, heauie, vnlustie bodie. Piissima, most godlie, deuout, or pious, Looke Pietà. Pila, a bote of a fountaine, a sunt in a Church, a waterpot, a lauer. Also a morter, or flat sided piller. Also a dam, arch, or bay, made of plankes, or piles to beare off the force of the water. Also a ball or round thing. Pilandra, as Palandra. Also a kinde of bird. Pilare, a paine in the breasts or dugs of a woman, caused by some haire by chance swallowed in drinking, and neuer cea∣seth, till it either be sucked out, or till it goeth out of his owne accord. Pilastrelli, little pillers. Pilastro, any kinde of piller or pilaster. Pilate, a kinde of white stone. Pilati, as Pilone. Also pyled, or vnder∣piled with stakes. Pilaturo, a paire of mulets to pull out haires with. Pilello, the name of a goldsmiths toole. Pilla, a pile of wood, a great fier of logs. Also a lime-pit. Pillaia, a tanners pit. Pillara, a thrush, or blackbird. Pillola, a pill as phisitions giue to purge. Pillolare, to make round, or reduce into pills. Pilloso, rugged, hairie, rough. Pillotto, a kinde of small coyne. Pilluccare, to pick or pull out haires or feathers one by one. Also to molest or vexe one, to pick vp, to dodge, to muche, to wrangle. Pillucone, a foole, a gull, a sot, a coxe-combe, a dodger, a wrangler, a micher. Pillula, as Pillola. Pillulare, as Pillolare. Pilo, a unt. Also a bole, or lauer. Also a trough. Also a iauelin or a dart with a head of steele. Pilone, a great pile, stake, or piece of tim∣ber thrust into the water to build brid∣ges vpon. Piloro, the neather orifice or mouth of the ventricle which transmitteth the meate changed into the entrailes, called other∣wise the stomacke gut, or mawe gut. Piloso, as Peloso. Pilota, a pilot or director of a ship. Pilottare, to rib-baste, to bang, or beate one, to fling any thing at one. Pilotto, a kinde of wicker-basket. Pilucare, as Pillucare. Pilucone, Pilluccone.   Pimmei, little men called pigmeis. Pimpinella, the hearbe pimpinell, or burnet. Pina, a spire, or sharp steeple, a towre or a turret. Pinacolo, a pinnacle or spire of a steeple. Pinaro, a groue, or thicket of pine trees. Pinazza, Pinaccia, a kinde of ship cal∣led a pinnace. Pinca, a womans quaint, or priuie parts. Pincellone, as Pinchellone. Pincerna, a butler or cupbearer to a prince, a fill-cup, one that waiteth on a mans cup. Pincette, little pincers. Pinchellone, a chopping boy, a handsome striplin, a pillicock, a gull, a noddie. Pinchino, a pillicock, a primcock, a prick, a prettie lad, a gull, a noddie. Pincia, a fauorite, a minion, a sweete hart, a pigsneye, a darling, a dilling, a babe, a beloued. Pincino, as Pincone. Pincione, as Frenguello. Also a doue or a pigeon. Also a kinde of bunne or rowle of bread. Pinco, a prick, a pillicock, a pintle, a dildoe. Pincone, as Pinco. Also a gull, a foole, or a noddie. Pindatelli, a kinde of sparowes in India. Pingére, as Pignere, or Dipingere. Also as Spingere. Pinello, a fire-forke to stirre vp the fire with. Pinetto, a groue or thicket of pine trees. Pinguedine, fat, or fatnes. Pino, a pine-apple tree. Pinna, a shell-fish which some call a nakre. Also a finne of a fish. Also the great or chiefe feather of a bird. Also the broad gristle part of the eare, vsed also for the crest of a helmet. Also turrets, spires, battlements, or pinnacles of walles. Pinnacolo, a pinnacle of a towre. Pinnofilace, Pinnotero, a nakre fish. Pinocchiata, a kinde of drug or conset made of pine-apples. Pinocchiati, a kinde of banqueting dish or comfets. Pinocchij, kernels of pine-apples. Pinta, a thrust, a iob, a iustling, a pin∣ching. Also a measure called a pinte. Pinto, painted, drawne. Also thrust a∣way, or put by. Pintore, a painter, a drawer, a limner. Pintura, a painting, or a picture. Pinza, a tarte, a white-pot, or a cake. Pinzerna, as Pincerna. Pinzo, glutted, or full gorged. Pinzoccherare, to play the hypocriticall puritane frier. Pinzócchero, a frier of the third order of Saint Francis, a dissembling hypo∣crite. Also a kind of figs so called. Pinzone, as Pincione. Pinzotta, a dissembling hypocriticall woman. Pinzuto, stalking aloft. Also long and sharp. Pio, godlie, deuout, religious, honest, vp∣right, righteous, mercifull, gentle, be∣nigne, good, iust. Piodare, to slate or tile a house with slate or flat stones. Piode, slate stones, or such other flat stones to slate houses with. Pioggia, a showre of raine, a raine. Pioggiale, rainish, showring, moist, wet, drizling. Piola, as Pialla. Piolare, as Piallare. Pioletta, as Pianella. Piolaro, a playner or shauer of boords. Piombaggio, a kinde of stone of the co∣lour of brasse. Also lead ore or earth, wherein is both siluer and lead togither. Also a mine or veine of lead and siluer. Also the herbe called Leadewoort. Piombare, to throw, to hurle, to fling or cast with violence, to fall heauilie as a plummet of leade. Also to leade or co∣uer with leade, to solder or fasten with leade. Also to leuell or measure with a plummet or a ruler. Also to sound any depth.
Piombaro, a plummer, or merchant of leade. Piombaruola, a plummet of leade. Piombata, a plummet of leade, a leading, a terrace of leades. Piombatore, a plummer, a leader, a ca∣ster. Also a violent flinger, a hurler, a sounder of any depth, a plummeter. Piombatura, a soldring, a leading, a fastning or couering with leade. Piombello, a play that children vse with a plummet of leade tide to a thread, and so seeke to catch it at the end of a stick that is hollow. Piombino, a plummet of leade or leuell as carpenters vse. Also a seale or stamp of leade set to any merchandise. Also leaden, of leade, of the colour of leade. Also a bird called a kingsfisher. Some take it for a dobchickin. Also blunt, dull, lumpish, heauie, or blockish. Piombo, the mettall called leade. Some haue taken it for a certaine disease in the eye. Piomboso, leadie, full of leade. Also hea∣uie, dull, course, leaden minded, lum∣pish, blunt. Pioppo, a poplar tree. Piorno, lowring, duskie, gloomie, foggie weather. Piota, a greene turfe or clod of earth with grasse vpon it, a kinde of roch fish. Piottolare, to play or cast at quoites. Piottole, quoites to play withall. Pioua, as Pioggia. Piouaiuolo, rainish, waterish, shourish, drizling. Piouaiuoli giorni, raynie, wet dayes. Piouale, a church-coape, or priests gar∣ment. Piouana, rayne-water. Piouano, a vicar, a curate, a parson, a countrie priest, a sir Iohn lack-latine. Piouego, the name of a magistrate in Venice. Piouelicare, to drizle, to mizle, or raine smallie. Pióuere, piouo, piouei, piouuto, to rayne, or showre downe. Piouuto, rayned, showred, drizled. Piouiale, raynie, drizling, showring, mizling, moist. Piouetta, a small drizling showre of rayne. Piouoso, raynie, showrie, wettish. Pipa, the pip of a hen. Pipare, to cackle or clock as a hen, to pip, to pule as a hawke. Pipata, the cackling or pipping of a hen, a pip, a puling of a hawke, a childs babie, or puppet. Piperna, the herbe pepperwort, or cock∣weede. Pipillare, to chirp as a sparow, to squeake as a peacock. Pipione, a pigeon, or a doue. Pipioncello, a yong pigeon or doue. Pipire, pipisco, pipito, to peepe as a chickin. Pipistrello, a night-bat, or rearemouse. Pipira, as Pira. Pipita, the pip that chickins haue. Pipitula, the skinne growing at the fin∣gers ends about the nayle, called of some the wortwales, or liuereages. Pippa, a kinde of measure of liquid things. Pippionata, as Fagiolata. Pippione, as Corribo. Also a pigeon, a doue. Pira, a pile of wood made for the burning of dead men. Pirale, as Pirausta. Pirama, a kinde of rosin dropping from the tree Merodion. Piramidale, Piramidato, made steeple-wise, broade beneath, and sharp toward the top. Pirámide, a piramide, or steeple, broade at the low end and narrow at the vp∣per end, any great building of stone or other matter, broade or fouresquare be∣neath, and vpward small and sharp. Also a geometricall bodie, broade be∣neath and sharp aboue, with a right li∣ned bottome. Pirata, a pirate or roauer by sea, a thiefe, a robber. Piratare, to rob by sea, to commit piracie, to be a rouer by sea. Piratia, Piratica, piracie or robbing by sea, rouing and stealing by sea. Pirausta, a fire-flye or worme bred and liuing in the fire, and going from it di∣eth, and flieth into the leame of a candle: some call it a candle-flie, a stout, a miller-fowle, or bishop. Piretro, the hearbe pellitorie or sneesing-woort. Pirgo, a companie of horsemen in battell, containing fortie souldiours. Piria, a tunnell to put liquor into any ves∣sell with. Also the hopper of a mill. Piriolo, a cock of a conduit. Also a spigot, or a tap for a barrell, or a forcehead, such as Vintners vse. Pirite, a kinde of marcasite or fier-stone which being rubbed will burne ones finger. Pirla, a top or a gigge. Also a twirle, as Piriolo. Pirlare, to turne a top or a gigge with a scourge, to twirle round. Pirlo, as Pirla. Also a kinde of childes play vsed in Italie. Piro, a peare, or a peare tree. Pirois, the starre of Mars. Also one of the horses of the Sunne. Pirola, the herbe piroll, or winter greene. Pirolo, a winding stopple of a flagon. Al∣so a pinne or a peg for an instrument of musick. Also a play called nine pinnes or skailes. Also a top or gigge to play withall. Also a kinde of beast. Piromante, a deuiner or foreteller by fier. Piromantia, diuination by fier. Pirone, a forke of siluer wherewith they eate meate in Italie. Also the name of one of the wheeles of a clock. Piropo, a precious stone called a car∣buncle. Pirotecnia, all manner of fierworks. Pirotico, a medicine that serueth in stead of fier vsed to restore life in decaide parts, a caustike. Pirrafarro, spelt corne. Pirrera, a quarie of stones. Pirrica, a kinde of dancing in armour v∣sed in Athens. Also a kinde of verses or song to dance by. Pirrico, a foote consisting of two short sil∣lables. It is so called of nimble moouing vsed in the dance Pirrica. Pirula, the bout or tip of ones nose. Pirune, as Pirone. Piruolo, as Pirone, as Pirolo. Pisa, a kinde of childs play so called. Piscagione, as Pescagione. Piscare, as Pescare. Piscaria, as Pescaria. Piscatore, as Pescatore. Pisceuendolo, as Pesciuendolo. Pisciare, to pisse, to stale, to vrine, or make water. Piscianza, stale, pisse, or vrine. Pisciatoio, a pissing-place, a pissing-con∣duit. Also a pis-pot. Pisciaruola, a burnt prick, an inflam∣mation in the priuities. Pisciauino, a drunkard, a quaffer, a haunter of tauernes, a piss-wine. Piscina, a pissing-place, a pissing-conduit, a poole, a pond, a lake. Also a piskitchin wench. Piscio, any kinde of pisse, vrine, or stale. Pisciotta, a piskitchin, a flurting wench. Pisciotto, as Piscina. Pisciozza, as Pisciotta. Pise, false dice, high men or low men. Piselli, all manner of small peason. Pisellone, a round shapelesse thing, a dunce, a gull, a noddie.
Pisera, a paire of ballance or skales to weigh with. Pisistrello, a kinde of fish. Also a night∣bat or reare-mouse. Pisitare, to chirpe as a stare, a thrush or a sparrow. Piso, as Peso. Pisolare, to slumber or be drowsie. Pisolone, a slumbrer, a drowsie leaden companion. Pispigliare, as Bisbigliare. Pispiglio, as Bisbiglio. Pispissa, a wag-taile. Pispinelli, gushings, spinnings or strea∣mings out as blood doth out of a veine. Also a kind of birde. Pispola, a little birde. Some take it for the wren. Pissacaro, a wood-cocke. Some take it for a snite. Pisso epasso, a kind of childs play vsed in Italy. Pisside, a boxe, namely made of boxe∣wood. Also the hollownes whereon the huckle bone turneth. Pista, as Pesta. Pistacchiade, a kind of conserue or com∣fets made of pistaches. Pistacchio, as Pestacchio. Pistare, as Pestare. Pistello, as Pestello. Pisterna, a bustard. Pistico, a kind of fish. Pistóla, a dag or pistoll. Pistola, an epistle, a pistle, a letter. Pistolenza, as Pestilenza. Pistolese, a great dagger, a wood-knife. Pistoletta, a little short epistle or letter. Pistoliere, a pistolier, one that shootes in a dag or a pistoll. Also as Pietranelli, but weaponed with a pistoll. Pistone, as Pestello. Pistore, a baker of bread. Pistredo, a kind of verie long fish. Pistrello, a night bat, a reare mouse. Pistrina, a bake-house, a mill, a grinding house, a place where before mils were in¦uented men vsed to braie their corne in morters, which bicause of the intolera∣ble paines they vsed as a prison to punish their bondmen and slaues among the Romans: the wheele in Bridewell may well be called so. Pistrinaro, a miller or white baker. Pistrino, a white bakers shop or worke∣house. Also a hand-mill or grinding house. Pitaphio, an epitaph vpon ones death. Pitalamio, a kind of marriage song. Pitale, a close stoole, the pan or pot of a close stoole. Pitania, a kind of red fruit in India. Pitarusa, a kind of berrie or graine. Pitero, an earthen pot or potsheard or pit∣chard. Pitéta, or Pitheta, a comet or firie impres∣sion in the firmament, appearing in a mist like a tunne. Pithone, as Pitone. Pithonici, as Pitonici. Pitigio, a tetter, a ring worme or an itch. Also a horne in a horse leg neere the in∣side of the knee. Pitignone, as Petignone. Pitimia, as Pitigio. Pithij giuochi, certaine games in honor of Apollo among the Grecians. Pitoccare, to beg vp and downe for bro∣ken meate, to dodge about a matter. Pitoccheria, beggerie, pouertie. Pitocchiare, as Pitoccare. Pitocchio, a dodger, a micher, a begger. Pitocco, as Pitocchio. Pitome, an epithome or abreuiation of anie discourse. Pitone, a kind of great serpent. Also a pro∣phecying spirit. Pitonici, such as prophecie and tell things to come by some diuelish spirit that is in them. Pitrimo, an executor, an administrator, an assigne of ones will. Pitta, a cake, a tarte, a whitepot. Pittaro, a kind of earthen pot or pitcher, a gallie pot. Also a menow fish. Pitteloni, crablice. Pittime, pittimes, a kind of phisicke so cal∣led. Pitto, painted, drawen in colours. Pittore, a painter, a drawer, a limner, a colourer. Pittura, a picture or painting. Also the arte of painting. Pituità, flegme or a rheume. Also sniuell, a running matter out of sores. Also a watrie disease in trees. Pituitaria, an herbe called Stanes-acre, that drieth the rheumes in the mouth. Pituoso, flegmatike, rheumatike, sniuely, slimie. Più, more, both in quantitie and qualitie, in space and time, in waight, number, and measure, manie, diuers, sundrie, a∣boue. Also better. Also a long or longer time. Piu e Piu, more and more. Piu d'una volta, more then once. Piu in là, further, beyond. Piu in qua, more on this side, neerer. Piu o meno, more or lesse. Piu tosto, sooner, rather, leuer. Piu volte, manie, sundrie, diuers or more times: Piua, a pipe, a bag-pipe. Also taken for a mans priuities. Also a kind of butter∣flie or of the colour of a butterflie. Also a bird called a piot or a pie. Piua sorda, a sourdine put in a trumpet, to still the shrilnes of it. Piuaro, as Piuero. Piue, vsed for Piu. Piuero, a kind of bird called a plouer. Piuiero, as Piuero. Piuma, a quill, a pen, a feather. Also downe or feathers for beds. Piumacetto, a little bolster, a pillow. Piumacciaro, an vpholster, a featherbed maker. Also a feather maker. Piumaccio, a bolster or a pillow. Piumacciolo, a litle bolster or pillow of a saddle. Piumacciuoli. Looke Fare chiomaz∣zoli. Piumacchio, as Piumaccio. Piumare, to begin to haue feathers. Also to feather or plume. Piumato, feathered, hauing feathers, plu¦med. Piumazzaro, as Piumacciaro. Piumazzo, as Piumaccio. Piuméo, of a feather, plumish, fetherie. Also downe or full of downe. Piumetta, a little feather, quill or pen. Also a counterpoint or quilt for a bed. Piumigero, that beareth feathers. Piumipiedi, rough footed with feathers, that hath feathers on his feete. Piumoso, full of feathers or plumes. Piuiale, coapes or church vestments. Piuina, a feather. Also a feather bed. Piuiolo, a mans pricke or yard, a pillicocke or dildoe, a pin or peg of wood, a setting or poaking sticke to set ruffes with Also a gardners toole to set herbes with cal∣led a dibble. Piuolo, as Piuiolo. Pizza, an itch, a tetter, an itching, a scurf, a skald-head, a ring-worme. Also a kinde of cake or simnell or wafer. Pizzacagnolo, a retailer, a regrater or huckster of all maner of victuals as our chandlers be or our fruterers. Pizzamosche, a hedg-sparrow. Pizzare, as Picciare. Pizzaruolo, as Pizzacagnolo. Pizzacaruolo, as Pizzacagnolo. Pizzelo, a kind of pulse as our peason or hastings be. Pizzetta, a ioint in the midst of a part or vpset of a bit which our riders common∣lie call a piece or compartement, where∣at the plaiers in the midst of the port are fastened.
Pizzicagnolo, Pizzicaruolo, as Piz∣zacagnolo. Pizzicaiuolo, as Pizzacagnolo. Pizzica questioni, as Accatta brighe. Pizzicare, to plucke, to rend, to pinche, to twing, to carpe, to tant, to raile, to snip, to bite, to detract, to depraue, to wran∣gle, to hucke, to itch, to claw, to smart, to tetter, to burne, to ake. Pizzicata, a plucking, a rending, a pin∣ching, a twinging, a carping, a tanting, a railing, a snipping, a biting, a detrac∣ting, a deprauing, a wrāgling, a hucking an itching, a clawing, a smarting, a tet∣tering, a burning, an aking, a twitching. Also a clot, a cluster or clotter of anie thing, a kind of banqueting dish of paste pinched and fretted about, as tartes and custards be. Pizzico, as Pizzicuore. Pizzicuore, a griping, a smarting, a pin∣ching or gnawing at the hart, an itching or pinching. Pizzigamorti, a burier of the dead, such as carrie dead men to be buried. Pizzigotto, a pinch, a pinching, a snip or griping, a biting. Also a smarting. Also a handfull. Pizzo, a peake or tip of any thing. Pizzocchera, a poore dissembling hypo∣criticall woman. Pizzocchero, as Pinzocchero. Pizzocolo, a lone man, a single man, a batcheler, an vnmarried man. Also as Pinzochero. Pizzoni, pigeons or doues. Pizzopazzo, a kinde of boyes plaie in I∣talie. Placabile, gentle, milde, tractable, flexi∣ble, soone qualified, that may be appea∣sed, placable. Placabilità, gentlenes, mildnes, asswa∣ging, appeasing, flexiblenes, calmnes, when a bodie is easie to be appeased or pacifide. Placamento, an appeasing, an asswaging, a qualification, a calming. Placare, to appease, to asswage, to calme, to molifie, to pacifie, to quiet, to content, to reconcile, to tame, to make calme, milde or gentle, to alay. Placidamente, pleasantly, mildly, gently, quietly, tractablie, calmely, softly, pa∣ciently, without noise or trouble. Placido, calme, pleasant, milde, gentle, tractable, patient, quiet, still, amiable, running quietly as a still water, blo∣wing softly as a gentle winde, without trouble or noise, tame, fauourable. Placitare, to please often. Placito, a firme consent in opinion. Plaga, as Piaga, as Piaggia. Some take it for the meridian line. Plagoso, full of wounds or hurts, plaguie. Also a beater, one that beateth much. Plana, a plaise fish. Plango, a kinde of kite or such rauenous birde. Planiloquio, that speaketh his mind plain∣ly, boldly, and freely. Planimetria, measuring of land in length and breadth or leuell. Planipedia, a comedie where the players are simply arraide and barefooted. Planipedio, that goeth barefoote or with∣out shooes. Also a flat whole foote as water fowle haue. Planispherio, an astrolabe, a plaine spheare, the spheare cast into a plaine. Plasma, a kind of coine or plate of siluer in Spaine. Also as Prassina. Plastica, the arte of plaistring or working or pargetting in earth. Platanista, a fish in the riuer Ganges ha∣uing a snout like a Dolphin, but is much bigger. Platano, the platane or plane tree. Platéa, a kind of birde that is an enimie to the rauen. Platiasmo, a certaine incongruitie in speech. Platicerote, a certaine beast that is ar∣med with a great broad horne. Pláudere, plaudo, plausi, plauduto, to applaude, to consent, to yeeld vnto, to re∣ioice, to clap our hands togither for ioy, to reioice with countenance, to clap, to clutter, to chuckle. Also with claping the hands to incourage or shew that they do allowe and praise one. Vsed also to flat∣ter, to sooth vp or seeke to please one. Plauduto, Plauso, applauded, consented, yeelded vnto, reioiced. Looke Pláu∣dere. Plausibile, plausible, that may or will be applauded, acceptable, a thing that men do reioice at, or wherefore men do re∣ceiue praise. Plausiuo, as Plausibile. Plausitare, to waile or lament or mourne, or crie as a doue or a wood-culuer. Plauso, as Plauduto. Also a clapping of hands in signe of reioicing, a shouting, an allowing of a thing with praise. Plaustro, a cart, a wane, a waggon, a tum∣brel, a dung cart. Also taken for Charles wain nigh the north pole. Plauto, he that is flat or splaie-footed, or that goeth flat with his feete, as if they were made of a peece of boord. Vsed al∣so for one that hath broad eares. Plebaccia, the filthie, common, base, ra∣scall kind of people. Plebe, the common kind of base people, the meaner sort, the multitude or route, the many headed monster multitude. Plebéa, Plebéio, of, or pertaining to the common base people. Also one of the comminaltie, poore, base, meane, simple, homely, of little value, of the common sort, of small account or estimation. Plebicciuola, the poore base abiect, or sil∣ly kinde of people. Plebiscito, a decree, a lawe, an ordinance or statute made onely by the consent of the common people without the senate. Plebità, basenes, ignobilitie, meane or ob∣scure estate. Pleco, Plecho, the space betweene the groynes and the thighs. Pleiade, the seauen stars about the bull. Plenaria, plenarie, full, absolute, whole, totall. Plenilunio, the fulnes of the moone. Plenitudine, fulnes, amplenes, plenitude. Plethora, Pletora, a head-ach caused of equall aboundance of the fower humors of the body. Also taken for a fulnes or abundance of good humors in the body, a plenitude. Plethorico corpo, a body ouer full of good bloud or good iuice. Pletro, a fidling sticke, a bowe, a sticke or quill to play vpon any instrument of musicke. Also a greeke measure of a pace, a step, or sixe foote, or fower cubits: yet some thinke that it should be a 100. foote or 60. cubits, some would haue it to bee all one with Giugere. Also a spurre of brasse set vpon a figh∣ting cocke. Also two processes breaking foorth from the foundations of the bones of the temples, which are verie small, long, and hard. Pletro dello coscia, the hollownes of the huckle or hip bone. Pleura, a thinne and smooth skin which closeth the ribs on the inner side. Pleuritico, one that hath or is subiect to the pleurisie. Pleurisi, Pleurisia, or Pleuritisia, the pleurisie, which is an inwarde inflam∣mation of the vpper skin girding the ribs and the sides, shooting and pricking with a continuall feauer and shortnes of breath. Plicare, as Piegare. Plichetto, a little packet, role, bundle or boult. Plico, a packet or plike of letters, a fardle, a bundle, a boult, a role. Also as Piega. Plinterie, certaine holli-daies among the Athenians dedicated to Ceres.
Plocitare, to croke or crie as a rauen. Plocitamento, the croking or crying of a rauen. Ploia, as Pioggia. Plombata, a pellet of leade with iron pricks vsed as an engine or weapon in warre. Plombéo, leadish, leaden, of leade, leaden coloured. Also dull, lumpish or heauie. Plorare, as Piágnere. Plurale, that containeth manie, plurall. Pluralità, a pluralitie, a morenes. Pluralitie, pluralities, a morenes. Plutéo, a kinde of warlike engine made of boardes like a penthouse, and couered with haire-cloth and rawe-hides, vnder which the souldiers marched when they approched neere the wals of any towne or forte to besiege it, which kept them from stones, darts, arrowes, or wilde∣fire that was cast at them. It hath also beene vsed for a presse, a hutch, or other fit place to keepe any thing in. Also a place or distance betweene pillars. Also a wooden frame to set tables vpon. Pluuiale, rainie, showrie, wet, moist, dri∣sling. Also a cope or church vestment. Pluuieri, the birds we call plouers. Pluuioso, as Pluuiale, as Pioggioso. Pneuma, a spirit, a winde, a blowing, an inspiration. Pneumatomfoli, they which by winde or inflation in the bellie haue their nauell thrust out. Pnigite, a kind of blacke claie or earth. Pnosi, a disease comming in the eies. Pò, Può, may, can, or is able. Also an in∣teriection of swearing putting anie thing to it, as. Pò farche, an oath of swearing, as gods me, and may it be? Pò, a little, as Poco. Poauola, a childes babie to play withall. Pocaggine, as Dapocaggine. Poccia, a teat, a pappe, a dugge, a nipple. Pocciare, to sucke a teate, to teat a dugge. Poccietta, a little dugge or teat. Pocenio, a banquet after supper, a reare supper. Pochetto, a little, a very little, a little while. Pochetino, a very very little. Pochi, fewe, not many. Pochino, as Pochetto. Poco, a little, a small quantitie, a little while. Pocolino, as Pochetto. Poco a poco, by little and little, by line and leisure. Poco poco, very very little. Poco dapoi, a little while after. Poco fa, a little while ago, not long since, whilome. Poco stante, in a small while, shortly, not long since. Poco auanti, a little while before. Podagra, the sicknes called the gout in the feete, and as some thinke it is the gra∣uell that gathereth in the ioints where∣by the goute is caused. Podagroso, goutie in the feete. Podare, as Potare. Podargo, the name of a dog as we woulde say swift-foot, or make-speede. Podatore, as Potatore. Podére, a farme, a liuing in the countrie, a freehold. Also a copie hold, a husband∣mans liuing. Also power, might, puis∣sance, strength, abilitie, woorth or wealth. Poderetto, a little farme, liuing, copie-holde freeholde or cottage. Also small power or might. Poderoso, strong, mightie, sturdie, powre∣full, puissant, stout, able, wealthie, boi∣strous. Podestà, a potestate, a mayor, a portrieue a iustice, a shrieue, a burgamaister, a gouernour, a great officer or magistrate, a prouost. Also powre, authoritie, might, puissance, or iurisdiction, abili∣tie, strength, office, rule, gouernement, dominion, facultie, force, vertue, liber∣tie, free choice, permission, leaue, suffe∣rance or opportunitie. Podestaria, the office or precinct of a po∣testate, a mayor or a shrieue. Also a mayors house, a guildhall. Podesteria, as Podestaria. Podice, the arse or fundament. Podomani, to morowe next. Poéma, a poeme, a composition or Poets worke or inuention, a worke in verse or rime. Poesía, poetrie, poesie, a poets worke. Poéta, a poet, a writer in verse, one that writeth of diuers matters in verse. Poetaggine, poetishnes, riming. Poetana, as Poetessa. Poetare, to poetise, to write poetrie, to ex∣ercise poetrie, to make verses. Poeteggiare, as Poetare. Poetessa, a poetesse, a woman poet or ry∣mer, she that can make verses. Poética, the arte of poetrie, poetrie, the science to make verse. Poético, poeticall, like a poet, pertaining to poetrie. Poggia, the sheete or cable that ties the maine yard of a ship, on the right hand of a ship. Poggia piedi, a rowers stretcher, anie thing to set ones feete against, a foote∣stoole. Poggiare, to soare vp as a hauke, to ascend vp, to leane, or poise vpon. Poggio, a hill or mounting side of a hill, a blocke to get vp on horsebacke. Poggiolo, Poggiuolo, a hillocke, a little hill. Also a turret. Also an outbutting high window, a little ascent or climbing place. Poggietto, as Poggiolo. Poglio, Looke Molino da Poglio. Pogniamo, let vs presuppose, or put case, let vs put or set. Poiana, a birde which some take to be the bittour, and others for a kite, a glade or puttocke. Poi, after, then, than, since, afterward. Poi che, since, since that, after that, nowe that. Poi da che, as Poi che. Poina, a kinde of fresh cheese and creame. Pola, a birde like to a swallow called a martin. Some take it to be a dawe or a chough. Polami, all maner of foule or poultrie. Polanda, a shell-fish in forme like a horne. Polana, a kinde of course woollen cloth. Polandra, as Palandra. Polare circolo, that circle that is descri∣bed by the pole of the zodiake being ca∣ried about the pole of the world. Polare, a kinde of woollen stuffe as buffin, mockadowe, durance, or rash. Also of or pertaining to the poles. Looke Circolo Polare. Polastraro, a poultrer. Polastrelli, yoong chicks or chickens. Polastriera, a woman poultrer. Also ta∣ken for a baude. Polastreria, a poultrie, where poultrie is to be sold. Polastro, a pullet, a chicke, a chickin. Polcella, a mayden, a virgin, a girle. Polcello, a yong lad, a batcheler, a vir∣gin boy. Polcino, a chick, a chickin. Also a flea. Poledra, a mare-colt. Poledrino, a horse-colt, or a fillie. Poledro, a horse-colt. Poledruccio, a yong colt, or fillie. Polegnia, a blazing starre, with a long streaming or beame before it, like a beard Polemonia, the hearbe wilde sage. Some take it for horse-mint. Polenta, a meate vsed in Italie made of barlie or chesnut flowre soked in water, and then fride in oyle or butter. Poletto, a kinde of butterflye. Polezzuolo, the hearbe called pudding-grasse, or pennyriall. Poliantho, the hearbe gould-cup, golden
knap, butter-flowre, or batchelers buttons. Policanto, starre-thistle or caltrop. Policare, a thumb of a mans hand. Poligrammo, a precious stone like a Smaragde. Policata, an inche, the breadth of a thumb. Pólice, a thumb, a great toe. Also an inch measure. Polidoria, magnificence or liberalitie. Poligala, the herbe milkewort, or franke, or spurie. Poligamia, the hauing of more wiues then one. Poligonato, the herbe called Salomons seale, or whitewort. Poligónio, swine-grasse, or knot-grasse, or bloud-woort. Poligono, that hath many corners. Polihistro, he that knoweth much or many things. Polinemone, wilde sauorie or origane. Polino, a flea, louse or worme that breeds vpon hawkes. Polion, an hearbe called Poley, whose leaues in the morning are white, at noone purple, and at night greene. Poliorcete, a destroyer of cities. So was Demetrius called. Polipo, a fish called pourcontrell, or many feete. Also a disease called noli me tangere, which comes in the nose, bree∣ding a piece of flesh that often stifleth the nose, and stoppeth the winde of it. Polipodio, the herbe called polipodie, oke-ferne, wall-ferne, or mosse-ferne. Poliposo, he that hath the disease Po∣lipo. Poliptoto, a noune that hath many cases. Polire, lisco, lito, to polish, to trim vp, to beawtifie, to burnish, to cleanse, to rub, to skoure, to smooth, to plane, to make neate and fine, to neatifie, to gar∣nish, to deck, to make smooth and bright, to skoure or make cleane. Polito, polished, trimmed vp, beawtified, neatifide, burnished, cleansed, rubbed, skoured, smoothed, planed, garnished, deckt, or made neate, bright, and fine. Also neate, fine, smug, smirke, handsome, trim, spruse, gallant, trixie, prettie. Also eloquent, exquisite. Polisa, as Poliza. Politamente, neatelie, finely, cleanely, smuglie, smoothlie, polishedlie. Politello, somewhat neate, fine, smug, trim, handsome, or cleanlie. Politezza, neatenes, cleanlines, polished∣nes, finenes. Politia, policie, politike or ciuill gouern∣ment, the gouernance and rule or poli∣cie of a towne or common-wealth, a po∣litike regiment. Politica, a booke written of policie, or touching the ciuill gouernment of a state. Politico, politike. Also a politician, one that hath good vnderstanding, or that dealeth in the gouernance or rule of a common wealth. ciuill, a states-man. Also pertaining to a politicall or ciuill gouernment. Politura, a polishing. Poliza, Polisa, a schedule, a bill, a note, a writing, a remembrance, a bond, an in∣uentorie, an obligation. Polizetta, a little schedule, note, bill, or memoriall in writing, a ticket. Polizono, a kinde of precious stone with many black circles in it. Polla, a henne-pullet, a spring of water, a vaine of water, a spout, or gushing of waters. Pollaio, Pollaro, a hens roost, a capons coope or pen. Also a poultrer. Pollaiuolo, Pollaruolo, a poultrer. Pollami, all manner of poultrie ware or fowle. Pollastraro, a poultrer. Pollastrelli, yong chickins, or pullets. Pollastriera, a woman poultrer. Also taken for a bawde or chickin carier. Pollastrini, very yong chickins or chicks. Pollastreria, a poultrie, or place where poultrie is to be sold. Pollastro, a pullet, a chick, a chickin. Polle, drops, or droppings, trillings. Polledra, a mare-colt. Polledrino, a yong colt, or fillie. Polledro, a horse-colt. Pollena, a kinde of panne or pot-pud∣ding. Pollentia, might, puissance, power. Pollera, a coope or roost for poultrie. Pollero, any kind of yoong colt. Polli, chickens or pullets. Pollicini, yoong chickens or chicks. Pollire, as Polire. Pollito, as Polito. Pollitezza, as Politezza. Pollo, a pullet, a chicken, a colt or a fillie. Pollo pesto, to be at the last gaspe, to need a culleis or some cordiall thing. Pollore, a branch, a graffe. Polluro, a bird called a coote. Pollutione, a pollution, a defiling, a de∣staining, a corrupting, a soiling. Polluto, polluted, defiled, distained, disho∣nested, corrupted, soiled, beraide, fil∣thie. Polmo, a kinde of fish without sence, who when hee shewes himselfe betokeneth stormes to be at hand. Polmonaria, lungwoort, or our ladies wildewoort, or cowslips of Ierusalem. Polmoncello, as Polmone. Polmone, the lights or lungs of any crea∣ture. Also a disease in a horse called the nauell gall. Polmon marino, as Polmo. Polo, the pole, end, or point of the axeltree, or axetree, whereon astronomers ima∣gined heauen to be mooued, there be two of them, one in the north, noted by a star called Polo Artico, and another in the south out of sight called Polo Antartico. It is also taken for heauen, and so vsed of poets. Polognia, as Polegnia. Polono, as Morgone. Polpa, the pith or brawne of any flesh or wood, a peece of meate or flesh closed in muscles without bandes: in woode it is properly that which may be separated or cleft by the graine. Also the fish Polpo. Polpa della gamba, the pith, the brawne, or flesh, or calfe of ones legges. Polpa di capone, the white or brawne of a capon. Polpare, to grow fat, pithie, plum, fleshie, or brawnie, to pampre. Polpastrella delle dita, the flesh or brawne, or pulpe-top of ones fingers. Polpette, a kinde of meate made of veale called oliues of veale. Polpettone delle dita, the brawne or thicke flesh of ones fingers ends. Polpo, a fish called a pourcontrel or many feete, or cuttle-fish. Polposo, brawnie, pithie, fleshie, plum, or thicke in feeling, full of substance or meate, pampred. Polputo, as Polposo. Polsare, as Pulsare, to beate, to pant, as the pulses do. Polso, the moouing of the arteries called the pulse, whereby the strength or weaknes of the vital powre is discerned. also beating or thumping, or panting. Poltiglia, a morsell, a gobbet, a collop, a steake, or such brawnie peece of flesh, a pudding pie, a bagge pudding. Also a white pot, or such other kinde of meate Also a pultis. Poltrare, as Poltroneggiare. Poltrire, poltro▪ poltrito, as Poltroneg∣giare. Poltreggiare, as Poltroneggiare. Poltrémola,   Poltro, a colt or a filly, a varlet, a knaue, a villaine, a raskall, a base idle fellowe,
a coward. Also a bed or a couch. Poltronaccio, a base coward, a raskall, a lazie villaine, lout, rogue, or knaue. Poltronare, as Poltroneggiare. Poltroncione, as Poltronaccio. Poltroneggiare, to play the coward, var∣let, lout, raskall, idle and base fellowe, to loll or wallow in idlenes, to lie idlie a bed. Poltroneria, cowardize, knauerie, raska∣litie, idlenes, dastardize. Poltronesco, cowardish, knauish, loutish, baselike. Poltroniere, as Poltronesco. Polue, Poluere, all maner of dust or pow∣der. Poluerare, as Poluerizzare. Poluere da bombarda, gun-powder. Poluereggiare, as Poluerizzare. Poluerina, small dust or powder, touch-powder. Poluerino, small dust or powder. Also a dust boxe. Also a sand or dun colour of a horse. Poluerizzare, to cast dust vpon, to be∣sprinkle with dust, to dust, to bedust, to reduce into dust or powder, to braie or poune to powder. Polueroso, dustie, full of dust, bedusted. Poluizze, a kinde of swelling or disease in a horse. Polzonetti, the two buttons with hookes at the ends, which do passe through the branch and hold the water cheine. Polzone, a cizell, a pouncer. Also as Bol∣zone. Poma, any kinde of apple. Also a womans dugge or pap. Pomada, Pomata, a pomado to supple ones lips, lip-salue. Pomaro, an apple tree, an orchard of ap∣ples. Pomato, as Pomellato. Pomega, as Pomice. Pomellare, to spot or bespeckle as it were with drops of fleabitings. Pomellato, spotted, bespeckled, pide, da∣ple-graie or fleabitten, the colour of a horse. Pomelle, the berries of any tree, as of baies. Also the head of a pin or little pomell of a dagger. Pomettato, as Pomellato. Also poudred in armorie. Pometti, yoong, little, greene, prettie ap∣ples. Pomice, a pumice-stone, a stone growing in the sea, which is light and spongious and full of little holes, vsed of scriue∣ners to make parchment smooth. Pomifera stagione, the apple-bearing season. Pomettare, as Pomellare. Pomettato, as Pomellato. Pomo, an apple tree, an apple, the apple of ones eie, the pomel of a sword or dagger, or of a saddle. Also the round ball or globe that princes hold in their hands. Pomo apiolo, a kind of greene apple. Pomo cotogno, a quince apple. Pomo della spada, the pomell of a sword or rapier. Pomo d'Adamo, a knob or bunch that some men haue in their throte. Pomo granato, a pomegranate. Pomo nano, an apple called a paradise apple. Pomo rancio, an orenge. Pomolino, a little apple, or pommell, a yong apple tree. Pomolo, a pommell of a sword or of a saddle. Pompa, pomp, statelines, maiestie, glorie, pride, magnificence, a solemne sight, a sumptuousnes, a glorious ostentation, a triumph, a braue shew. Also a pump for water, or of a ship. Pompa funebre, funerall pompe, fune∣rall obsequies with great brauerie and sumptuous shewes. Pompare, to pumpe water. Pompeggiare, to lauish or riot, or cut it out of the whole cloth, to shewe pompe, maiestie or statelines, to flant or swag∣ger it out. Pompholice, the foyle that commeth of brasse called nill, which is so light that it flies like a feather in the aire. Also a kinde of mettall. Pompilo, as Nautila. Pomposo, sumptuous, pompous, glorious, stately, maiesticall, proude, full of mag∣nificent shewes. Pondera, a griping or gnawing in ones bellie. Also a push, a bile, a whelke. Ponderare, to ponder, to poize, to weigh, to consider, to examine, to iudge, to esteeme. Ponderezza, waightines, pondering, hea∣uines, consideration. Ponderosità, as Ponderezza. Ponderoso, ponderous, waightie, of con∣sequence, heauie, substantiall and mas∣sie. Pondo, a waight, a burthen, a poize, a consequence, a burden, a loade, a heauie thing. Pondora, kinde of painfull bloodie flixe. Ponénte, the west part of the world, the west winde. Also downe-lying or set∣ting downe. Ponente garbino, the southwest winde. Ponente maestro, the north-west winde. Ponente tramontana, a north-west winde, or west and by north. Pónere, pongo, posi, posto, as Porre. Ponere amore, to settle loue, to place affection. Ponere da canto, to cast off, to lay a∣side. Ponere in mente, to put in minde, to re∣member. Ponere odio, to put, to settle hatred or ill will. Ponfolige, a kinde of ore to draw mettals out of. Póngere, Pongo, Punsi, Pongiuto, or Ponto, as Pugnere. Pongiuto, Ponto, prickt, stung, pro∣uoked. Pongénte, as Pungente. Pongitopi, the shrub kneeholme, butchers broome, petigree, or kneehuluer. Pongitore, a pricker, a stinger, a pro∣uoker. Pongitura, as Pungimento. Pongolo, as Pungolo. Ponno, Possono, they may, can or be able. Ponta, as Punta. Ponta della spada, the swords point. Pontale, the chape of a dagger or sword, a tag of a point, an aglet in a cap. Also according to line and measure, iust, leuell, euen, iump. Pontali, aglets in caps, or tags of points. Pontalmente, particularlie, point by point, precisely, iustly, euen, iump, ac∣cording to line and measure, nicely, squeamishly, captiously. Pontapiè, as Poggiapiedi. Pontare, as Puntare. Pontaruola, as Puntaruola. Pontatamente, prickingly, sharply, as Pontalmente. Ponte, any kinde of bridge. Ponte arcato, a bridge with arches. Ponte leuatoio, a draw-bridge, a fal∣ling-bridge, or trap-bridge. Ponte sisto, the name of a bridge in Rome, but taken for an impudent, vn∣blushing, or brazen face. Pontefice, a Bishop, a Prelate, a Pope, a chiefe Bishop. Pontega, a bird that is an enemie to pigeons. Ponteggiare, as Punteggiare. Pontellare, as Puntellare. Pontello, any kinde of vnderprop or stay, a bodkin, a prick. Also a little bridge. Pontellini, little vnderprops, or stayes, little bridges, little pricks or bodkins. Ponteruola, as Pontaruola.
Ponti, points, pricks. Also bridges. Pontia, a stopping of the lungs, or hinde∣rance from breathing. Ponticello, a little bridge. Pontica, a kinde of pale but verie bright glittering stone. Pontico, sowre, sharp, or tarte in taste. Also a fish called a beauer. Also a kinde of hearbe. Pontificale, pontificall, lordlike, sump∣tuous, like a pope or great prelate. Pontificato, the estate, place, or digni∣tie of a Pope, or a chiefe Bishop. Pontificio, of or pertaining to a Bishop. Also the charge, office, function, or au∣thoritie of a Bishop. Pontifice, as Pontefice. Pontiglio, strickt points of honor, a small point, a puncto, the lest prick that can be. Pontito, sharpe pointed, hauing a point. Ponto, as Punto. Ponto, A ponto. Looke Punto. Ponto, Catta di ponto. Looke Punto. Ponto fermo, a full point in a sentence. Pontogopi, as Pongitopi. Pontone, a great broad bridge. Also a great bodkin. Pontuale, as Puntuale. Pontuare, as Puntuare. Pontura, a pricking, a stinging, a pleurisie, a stitch. Also a foine, a thrust, a stoc∣cado, &c. Pontuto, pointed, sharpe, keene, hauing a point. Ponzare, to speake ones words sneaking∣ly, drawingly or faltringly. Ponzecchiare, as Punzecchiare. Ponzecchij, as Punzecchij. Ponzellare, as Punzellare. Ponzellatura, a pricking, a stinging, a goading. Ponzello, as Punzello. Ponzello delle api, the sting of a Bee. Ponzello de'bifolchi, a ploughmans goad. Ponzettare, as Ponzellare. Ponzzettura, as Ponzellatura. Ponzetto, as Poncello. Ponzone, as Punzone. Pople, the hamme of ones leg behinde the knee. Popa, he that slew sacrifices and offered them being slaine, or he that bound them to the altar, strooke them and cut the throte of them. Ponzonare, to pounce or pricke or worke pouncing worke. Also as Punzec∣chiare. Popolaccio, Popolazzo, the grosse, base, vile, common people, rifraffe people, as Plebe. Popolaglia, as Popolaccio, or Plebe. Popò, a verie little. Popolano, a parish priest, a popular or common man. Popolare, popular, of or belonging to the common people, accepted and fauoured, of the people, that delighteth and plea∣seth the people, fauouring the quarrell or giuen to maintaine the libertie of the commons: one that seeketh by all possi∣ble and flattring meanes to haue the fa∣uour of the people, one that is made by the people a companion of the same towne or cittie, vniuersall to the com∣mon people, a companion or fellow with the common people. Also to people a towne, countrie or place. Popolarità, a popularitie or common peo∣ple. Also friendship or familiaritie by reason of countrie-ship, the fauour and will to maintaine the popular common kind of people. Popolarmente, homelie, after the fashion or opinion of the common people, com∣monlie, ordinarilie. Also with the loue and fauour of the commons. Popolato, populous, peopled, inhabi∣ted. Popolatione, a population, a popularitie. It hath also bin taken for a wasting, a destroying, a pilling, a robbing, and spoiling of people, or a ransacking of countries. Popolesco, popular, of the common people, as Popolare. Popolini, a kinde of small coyne. Also casting counters. Popolo, the people or folkes of a nation or countrie. Also the white poplar tree. Popoloso, populous, peopled, full of people. Popone, a fruite called a muske mellon. Poppa, a teate, a dug, a pap, a breast, an vdder. Also a poope. Poppa della naue, the poope or hinder part of a ship, the hindeck, taile, poope, or castle of a ship, sometime taken for the whole ship. Also vsed for the admi∣nistration or gouernment of a com∣mon weale. Poppabile, hauing teats or paps. Poppara, a suckling, a sucking girle, a yong wench, a childes babie, or puppet. Poppare, to suck or draw a dug, to milch or draw milke, to feele or grope dugs or teates. Popparella, a little pretie childes babie, or puppet. Poppoline, little teates, dugs, or breasts. Poracchia, the herbe called purcelane. Por, Looke Porre, or Ponere. Porca, a sowe, a swyne, a hog. Also a fi∣thie, sluttish, driggle draggle queane. Porca fattrice, a Sowe that bringeth pigs. Porcaio, Porcaro, a hogheard, a swine∣keeper, a sowter. Porcaggine, as Porcheria. Porcaruolo, as Porcaio. Porcella, a sow-pig, a porkelin. Also a yong sow or yelt which neuer farrowed but once. Porcellana, the hearbe called purcelane. Also a kinde of fine earth called Porce∣lane, whereof they make fine China di∣shes, called Porcellan dishes. Also as Epinittide. Also a purple fish. Porcellette, a kinde of cockle or such other shell-fish. Also yong sow-pigs. Porcello, Porcellino, a yong hog, a pig, or a porkelin. Porcelletti, a kinde of worme with many feete, called a urrer, or palmer. Also a hog-louse. Also yong pigs. Porcheggiare, to wallow like a hog, to play the swyne or sow. Porcheide, hoggishnes, swinishnes. Porcheggiamento, a wallowing or play∣ing the hog. Porcheria, a wallowing like a swine, all hoggish tricks. Porchesco, hoggish, swinish. Porchetta, as Porcella. Porchetto, as Porcello. Porcile, a place for swine, a hogs-stye. Porcile di venere, the hogs-stye of Ve∣nus, a womans priuities or geare. Porcina, swines or hogs-flesh, or porke. Also hoggish or swinish. Porcinaia, the hearbe called purcelane. Porcini, yong pigs, hogs or porklins. Also a kinde of mushrome, or toade-stooles. Porco, a hog, a swine, a porke, a boare. Porco cinghiale, or Cignale, a wilde boare. Porcinali, any kinde of meate or pudding made of porke. Porcine, a kinde of peare so called in Italie. Porcino, hoggish, swinish, sowish, beast∣lie, filthie, Looke Riccio. Porcone, a filthie great hog, swine, porke, or boare. Porconeggiare, as Porcheggiare. Porezzuolo, the hearbe called pennyriall or pudding-grasse. Porfido, porphyrie, or fine marble of di∣uers colours, namely red. Porfirione, a bird drinking as though he did bite the water, hauing long and red legs and bill. Also a serpent in India, hauing a white head, wanting teeth,
his bodie of a purple colour: that which he vomiteth out of his mouth consumeth what it toucheth. Porfiro, as Porfido. Pórgere, pórgo, porgéi, porgiuto or porto, to reach foorth, to yeeld, lend or giue helpe, to affoord or bring. Also to stretch, reach or spread out, to offer with ones hand. Also to iut, to iettie, or butte foorth as some parts of building do fur∣ther then the rest. Porgiuto, reached, yeelded, lent, giuen, brought, affoorded, &c. Porgimento, a reaching, an affoording, a yeelding, a bringing. Porgitore, a reacher, a deliuerer, a brin∣ger, an affoorder. Pori, small and vnsensible holes whereby the sweate and vapours passe out of the body by the skin, called in English pores. Looke Poro, the singular of Pori. Porisma, a consectarie, id est, a thing that followeth out of things alreadie demon∣strated. Poro, of phisitions is called the brawne or hard thicke skin which ioyneth and fa∣steneth vp the breaking of gristles and bones. In the ioints Pori be called swel∣lings comming of a thicke and earthly humour flowing thereto. Porosa, the herbe saint Iohns woort. Poróso, full of pores or little holes. Also tough or strong. Porphirione, as Porfirione. Porpo, as Polpo. Porpora, purple or scarlet. Also a Kings roabe. Also a purple fish. Porporare, to inpurple or inroabe with scarlet. Porporéo, of purple or of scarlet hew. Porporina, of purple colour. Porradello, a kind of wilde leeke. Porrata, as Fagiolata. Pórre, pongo, posi, pósto, to put, to set, to lay, to place, to pitch, to pight, to make or build or lay a foundation, to lay in wa∣ger or as a gage, to laie a side, to leaue of or cease, to lay downe or put off, to set before one. Posto, put, set, laide, placed, pight, pitcht. Porre aguati, to laye ambushes, to set snares. Porre auanti gliocchij, to set before ones eies. Porre il campo, to set or pitch a field. Porre l'assedio, to lay siege. Porre in campo, to propose, to lay foorth, to publish. Porre a cauallo, to set on horse backe. Porre in naue, to set or lay aboorde anie ship. Porre in collera, to anger, to vexe, to grow angrie. Porre cura, to indeuour, to applie the minde, to take care. Porre da canto, to lay by, to set aside. Porre diligenza, to indeuour with dili∣gence. Porre giuso, to lay or put or set downe. Porre le mani adosso, to lay hands vpon one. Porre in ordine, to set or place in order. Porre pensiere, to sette or take care or thought. Porre amore, to place or settle loue and affection. Porre in luce, to publish or set foorth in light. Porre in oblio, to forget, to cast in obli∣uion. Porre legge, to set, to make, or impose a law. Porre in sbaraglio, to scatter, to hauocke, to disorder, to confound. Porre paura, to make afraide. Porre in tauola, to set or lay vpon the boord. Porre a pericolo, to put or set in danger. Porre campo, to pitch a field. Porréo, of the colour of a leeke. Porrezzuolo, as Porezzuolo. Porsi in letto, to laie downe in bed. Porrifico, as Porrofico. Porrigine, the dandraffe, scurffe or scales in mens heads, beards or browes. Porro, a wart growing about one. Also a Leeke. Porrò, I will put, place, set, lay or pitch. Porrofico, a disease called the piles or he∣morrhoides. Porroso, full of warts, wartie, knobbie, ful of pores. Porrosità, porositie, thicknes of pores. Porta, a gap, a doore, a gate, an entrance, a way to enter at. Also vsed for the great Turkes court, palace or counsell cham∣ber. Portaggio, the fraight, the custome, tal∣lage or impost, carriage or portage of any thing or marchandise, or as we call it a fare. a beere for dead men to be car∣ried vpon, a horse litter or chaire to car∣rie folkes in, the reward giuen for car∣rying or bringing of any thing. Porta beretta, a capcase, a hat case, a bug∣get, a portmanteaw. Portafede, a veine in a horse proceeding from the liuer. Porta grano, a malt man, a corne man. Porta di ferro, an iron gate. Also the name of warde or guarde that fencers vse. Porta lettere, a carrier, a currier, a poste, a messenger or bearer of letters, a bugget or satchell to carrie letters in. Porta maestra, a chiefe great gate. Porta mantello, a male, a bugget, a port∣manteaw. Portamorsi, is that part of the headstall, whereunto the eie of the bit is made fast. Porta seggiette, a porter or bearer of chaires with men in them as they vse in Italy. Porta sonno, a drinke to make one sleepe. Porta fede, a litle veine in a horse leading vnto the liuer. Portabile, that is portable, that may be carried, tolerable. Portamento, carriage or bringing, bea∣ring or sufferance of any thing. Also behauiour, demeanor, manners, fashion, or the carriage of a man. Portante, bearing or suffering. Also an amble or an ambling pace. Porta pennacchij, a tosse feather, a slan∣ter, a swaggrer. Portare, to carrie, to bring, to beare either on the breast or on the backe, to weare, to behaue, to suffer, to indure. Portare a Giorgio, or a Cauallo, to car∣rie or ride a cock-horse. Portarsi da Paladino, to behaue or de∣meane himselfe like a tall fellow. Portata, a carriage. Also import, worth or consequence, the carriage or burthen of a ship. Also the fraight paide for car∣riage. Looke Portaggio. Portatore, a porter, a bringer, a bearer, a carrier, a wearer. Portatile, as Portabile. Portatura, as Portamento. Portello, a little doore, a wicket, a gate, a postern or entrance. Also a port hole. Porténdere, tendo, tesi, teso, to portend, to foretell, to betoken, to giue token of a thing to follow, to betoken, to foresigni∣fie, to foreboade. Porténte, monstrous, strange, prodigious, maruellous, seldome seene, betokening good or ill. Portento, a thing monstrous, strange, and seldome seene, a maruellous thing, fore∣boading some mischance or euill fortune to come. Portentoso, as Portente. Porti, vsed for Ponerti, to put thee. Also reached. Porticella, as Portello. Pórtico, a porch, a portall, a gallerie or walking place vnderpropped with pil∣lers, where men to auoide the parching heate of the sunne or the rayne do walke
in the shadow, they be much more com∣mon in Italy then in England. Portiéra, a portall or the hangings ouer a dore. also a woman porter. Portiere, an vsher, a dore-keeper, a por∣ter. Portinaio, Portinaro, as Portiere. Portionare, to portion, to share, to part, to rate, to measure, to deuide equally and in iust shares and proportion, to par∣tage. Portióne, a portion, a share, a parcell, a part, a rate, a quantitie, a proportion, a measure or peece, a partage. Portioncélla, a small portion, share, or rate. Portitio, as Portiére. Pórto, brought, reached, caried, worne, borne, Looke Pórgere, fraighted. Also a hauen, a rode, a port, or harborough for ships. Also the cariage, bringing, or fraughting of any thing, as Portaggio. Also a place of refuge or succour against danger. Portonaio, as Portiere. also a porte kee∣per or ferrie man, one that receiueth toll or custome at anie porte or pas∣sage. Portone, a great gate. Portuale, hauing ports, hauens or harbo∣boroughs for ships. Portuóso, bearing, able to beare. also full of hauens, rodes, portes or harboroughs for ships, hauing manie good hauens. Porzane, a kinde of birde. Posa, a pause, a quietnes, a ceasing or re∣pose, an intermission, a giuing ouer. Posada, a dwelling, a house, or resting place. Also a pausing. Posamento, a place of rest, quietnes or re∣pose, aresting, a reposing. Posare, to rest, to quiet, to pause, to re∣pose. Posata, a resting, a baiting place, a baite, a rest. Posatamente, leisurely, quietly, reposed∣ly, with a pause or rest. Posate, a rest which a horse doth make in aduancing his forepart. Looke Fare le posate. Posaturo, a resting, a reposing, a pausing, a ceasing. Posbrachiale, the space betweene the wrist of the hand and the first ioynt of the fingers. also the backe of the hand. Poscena, eating or drinking after supper, a reare banquet. Poscenare, to eate or drinke after sup∣per. Poscia, after, then, since, afterwarde, be∣hinde. Poscia che, since that, after that. Poscimane, to morrow next. Poscrai, to morrow next. Poscritta, a postscript, an afterwriting. Posdomani, to morrow next. Posero, they did put, set, laie or place. Posgénito, borne, bread, sprunge, ingen∣dred, and brought into the world after. Positione, a position, a putting, a placing, a scituation, the state of. Also the fall of a clause in a sentence. Also a scitua∣tion, a seate, a soyle. Also a terminati∣on. Also a primitiue worde whence o∣thers are deriued. Positiuamente, positiuely, affirmatiuely, without contradiction. Positiuo, positiue, that is of it selfe. Positore, a positor, an affirmer. Positura, a positure, setting or standing of a man going about to do any thing. Posliminio, a returne of one which was supposed to be dead, & so restored to his house not by going ouer the threshold, but by making a hole in the wall. Posolino,   Pospórre, pongo, posi, posto, to omit, to neglect, to ouerslip, to set behinde, to esteeme lesse. Pospositiuo, to be put behind, or set after. Posposta, a kind of after-turne that cun∣ning riders teach their horses. Postposto, omitted, neglected, ouerslipt, set behinde, esteemed lesse. Posprandio, an afternoone. Also a nun∣chions or anders meate betweene din∣ner and supper. Possa, puissance, might, power, strength, abilitie, wealth, auctoritie. Also that I or he may. Possamorire, an oth of swearing, as we saie, I woulde I might die and if it bee not so. Possanza, as Possa, as Podestà. Possedére, seggo, sedei, seduto, to pos∣sesse, to enioy, to hold, to owne, to haue in possession, and to his proper vse. Also to haue, to get or obtaine. Posseduto, possessed, enioyed, held, had in possession, owned. Also had, gotten, or obtained. Posseditore, a possessor, an owner. Possente, mightie, powrefull, puissant, strong, able. Possessione, a possessing, owing, enioying, possessing, or proprietie, or rightfull vse of a thing. Also a farme, a copie-hold, a free-holde, substance, goods, landes, or wealth. Possessioncella, a small possession, copie-hold, free-hold, farme or lande. Possessiuo, possessiue, of or pertaining to possession. Possesso, as Posseduto, as Possessione. Possessore, as Posseditore. Possibile, possible, that may be. Possibilità, possibilitie, likelihood. Possuto, as Potuto. Posta, a running poste or currier, or mes∣senger, a poste. Also a station or stande. Also a winde-fall, or vnexpected good hap. Also a stake at any game. Also a present, a bribe or a gift. Also an as∣signement, or appointment. Also a gar∣ter, a philet or girdle. Also an impo∣stume or a swelling. Also will, pleasure, selfe conceit, opinion, selfe-chife, perill, or danger. Also put, set, placed, or laide, of Ponere. Also a good hand or win∣ning at any plaie or game. Also a kinde of thinne silke stuffe. Posta▪ Aposta, for the nonce, expresselie, of purpose. Posta, the place, stande, or station where the sentinell stands to watch. Posta, Di posta, taken at the volie as a ball is, before it fall or bound on the ground. Posta, In Posta, in poste haste, in great haste. Posta, A tua posta, at thy perill or choise be it. Postare, to prefixe, to appoint, to ordaine, to station, to poste. Postbrachiale, as Posbrachiale. Postema, an impostme, a swelling, an im∣postumation, a byle. Postemare, to swel, to impostume, to grow to an impostumation. Postemetta, a little swelling or impo∣stume, a byle. Postergano ratto, a crampe hapning to the hinder parts of the body, and tur∣ning the head awry to the backe and shoulders. Postergare, to put, laie, cast, or set behind ones backe, to neglect, to caste by. Pósteri, successours, posteritie, ofspring, children, they that succeed in blood, and follow, and liue after vs. Posteriore, posterior, succeeding after, comming behinde, hindemost, lagge, base, vile, inferiour, hinmost, latter, slower. Posterità, posteritie, the world to come, ofspring, they that shall come after vs. Póstero, that commeth or followeth af∣ter, next. Posthieri, the day before yesterday. Posthumio, Posthumo, a childe borne after the fathers death. Postra, as Poscia. Postiache, as Posciache. Postica, a line diuiding the sides from the
east to the west, that part which is to∣ward the west or behinde vs. Posticcio, Posticco, forged, false, coun∣terfaite, supposed, fained, shewing what it is not. Posticciare, to forge, to counterfaite, to falsifie, to faine, to dissemble. Posticciamente, forgedlie, falsely, fai∣nedlie, dissemblinglie. Postiglione, a postilion, a postes guide, a forerunner. Postilla, a glose, a short compendious ex∣position, the image that a man sees of himselfe in a looking-glasse or in the water. Postillare, to glose vpon, or expound com∣pendiouslie. Posto, put, laid, set, placed, pight, pitched, setled, fixed. Also put case, supposed, or imagined. Also laide aside, builded, founded, situated, Looke Ponere. Posto che, since that, seeing that, sith that, howbeit, although, albeit. Posto scritta, a post-script, or after-wri∣ting of a letter, a subscription. Postremità, as Estremità. Postremo, the last, lag, or the hinmost, vilest, or worst, finall, last of all, at the last. Postriboli, horse-boyes, base groomes, base people, raskals, the skum of the world. Postribolo, a stewes or bawdie house, a brothell. Postulare, to require, to desire, to couet, to demaund, to complaine, to expostu∣late, to accuse or sue by lawe. Postulatione, an expostulation, a desire, a demaunding, a complaining, a re∣quest, a supplication, a complaint made against one. Postura, the setting or disposing of a mans bodie, as Positura. Potacchio, Potaggio, any kinde of potage. Potaggiere, a potage cooke, a louer of potage. Potamantina, an herbe which put into drinke and drunke, maketh them that drinke of it runne mad. Potamogito, an herbe that hath the power to make crocodils tame & gentle, called water-speeke, pond-weede, or water-grasse. Potare, to prune, to cleanse, or to lop trees, or cut and dresse vines, to cut off su∣perfluous boughs. Potate, certaine spanish rootes which we call Potatoes. Potatore, a pruner, or cutter or lopper of vines, or other trees. Potatore d'alberi, a lopper, a cutter, a pruner. Also a setter, or a graffer of trees. Potéa, Potéua, he might, could, or was able. Potentato, a potentate, a puissant man, a dominion, a great powre, puissance, or authoritie. Poténte, mightie, puissant, able, strong, ritch, wealthie, powrefull, that can or is able to do much, of great power, va∣liant, of great strength and vertue. Potentia, Potenza, might, habilitie, powre, strength, puissance, wealth, au∣thoritie, force, rule, vertue. Also as Podestà. Potentiale, potentiall, that may be. Potentilla, wilde tanzie, or siluer hearbe, and as some thinke wilde Agrimonie. Potére, posso, potéi, potuto, or possu∣to, to may or can, to haue power or might, to be able, to be possible, to haue strength and vertue. Also as Podere. Also as Possa. Poterio, an hearbe good for the sinewes, named by Galen, but not knowne now adayes. Potestà, as Podestà. Potestaria, as Podestaria. Potione, a potion, or drinke that phisici∣ons giue to patients. Potissima, forcible, efficient, mightie, able, chiefe of all, the best, or prin∣cipall. Potuto, bin able, had powre or might or strength, bin possible. Potta, a womans priuie parts, a cunt, a quaint. Pottaccia, a filthie great cunt. Pottamarina, a fish, in latine Vrtica. Pottuta, that hath a cum, cunted, quain∣ted. Poueia, a Butterflye, or a Ladie-bird. Pouento.   Poueracci, filthie, poore, beggerlie people. Poueraglia, the poore, base, sillie, abiect people. Pouerello, Poueretto, poore, meane, wretched, sillie, beggerlie, a poore sillie man. Poueri, the poore kinde of people. Pouerissimo, most poore, very beg∣gerly. Pouero, poore, sillie, wretched, meane, de∣fectiue, simple, beggerlie, bare, needie, that lacketh, hauing little. Pouertà, Pouertade, pouertie, beggerie, neede, want. Pouioni, hath bin vsed for doues or pi∣geons. Pozza, a well, a poole, a puddle, a pit, a slow of water, a standing-water. Pozzanghera, as Pozza. Pozzale, that is full of wels, or pits, that may be digged. Pozzare, to dig a pit, to make a well, to make as a well, to well. Pozzaro, a well or pump-maker, a dig∣ger of wels. Pozzaroia, a kinde of earthen pot, pit∣cher, or bucket to drawe or keech water with. Pozzette, dimples, pits, or little holes in womens cheekes. Pozzettine, as Pozzette. Pozzetto, a little well or pit. Pozzo, a well, or deepe pit, a puddle or standing poole of water. Pozzolana, grauell or sand to mingle with lyme to make mortar of. Also as Porcellana. Pozzolino, a little well. Pozzuolo, a little well. Pragma, an act or busines. Pragmatica, a pragmaticall lawe, a thing done in the common weale. Pragmatico, an atturnie or practicioner in the lawe, a proctor, a petiefogger or sollicitour of suites. Also one wont to stand by a pleader or oratour instruc∣ting him in lawe points. Also one ex∣pert in doing of things. Prandére, prando, pransi, pranso, to dine, to eate his dinner. Pranso, dined. Also a dinner. Prandio, a dinner, a refreshing, or fee∣ding at noone. Pranzare, to dine. Pranzo, a dinner. Also dined. Prasino, a kinde of yellowish greene, or as some thinke a greene-leeke colour. Prasio, the herbe horehound. Also a kinde of greene stone. Prasmo, a kinde of fish. Also a kinde of greene precious stone. Prasoide, a stone of the colour of leekes. Prassina, a kinde of precious stone, which if it be where any poison is, will glitter with sparkes like fier. Pratello, a little medow or field, a close of medow-ground. Also the herbe me∣lilot. Pratense, of or belonging to a medow, or greene field. Prateria, any kinde of medow or hay-grounds. Pratica, practice, experience, triall. Also a haunt, a frequenting, or an acquain∣tance. Also a canuasing, a trying, a pro∣uing or vsing. Praticabile, conuersable, that may be
frequented or practised. Praticare, to practise, to try, to experi∣ence, to put in vre, to vse, to haunt, to frequent, to conuerse with, to followe. Also to shift or canuase for any thing. Pratichéuole, as Praticabile. Prático, expert, experienced, skilfull, wise, prudent, wary, frequented, practike, ful of practise and skill. Praticone, a suttle, old, practized, experi∣enced, craftie foxe, a slie companion. Pratino, Praticello, as Pratello. Prato, a field, a medow ground. Prauare, to depraue, to detract, to be per∣uerse, ouerthwart or lewde. Prauamente, wickedly, shrewdly, badly, peruersely, prauely, detractingly, lewd∣ly, crookedly, knauishly, ouerthwartly, &c. Prauità, shrewdnes, wickednes, prauitie, detraction, peruersenes, crookednes, ouerthwartnes, illnes, lewdnes, waggish∣nes, vnhappines, knauishnes, deformitie, badnes, dishonestie, corruptnes, stuborn∣nes, obstinacie, frowardnes. Prauo, wicked, shrewd, bad, deprauing, detracting, peruerse, crooked, knauish, vnhappie, corrupt, dishonest, stubborne, obstinate, frowarde. Pre, vsed much in composition, and set be∣fore other wordes, as a going, or acting before. Preambulo, a preamble, a foregoing, a forespeech. Prebenda, a prebend, an ecclesiasticall li∣uing so called. Also prouender, fodder, or foode for cattle and horses. Prebendare, to prouender, to feede or fod∣der horses or cattle. also to benefice with some church liuing. Precario, most deere, or verie deere. Precatione, a desiring, a crauing, an en∣treating. Precédere, cedo, cedei, or cessi, cedu∣to, or cesso, to precede, to go before, to take the vpper hande, to out go, to out-strip, to out-passe, to surpasse, to sur∣mount, or to ex-cell in any action. Preceduto, Precesso, preceded, gone be∣fore, out-gon, out-stript, out-past, sur∣past, surmounted. Precedénte, precedent, going before, of better woorth, ouerpassing, outpassing, surmounting. Precedéntia, precedencie, eldership, seni∣oritie, surmounting. Precésso, as Preceduto. Precertione, a lesson, a precept, an instru∣ction, a document, a warning, an admo∣nition. Precétto, a precept, an institution, a com∣mandment, an iniunction, a rule giuen, an admonition, an aduisement, a good lesson or instruction, a document, a war∣ning, a lore. Precettóre, a tutor, a master, an instruc∣ter, a gouernour, a teacher. Precí, praiers, oraizons, supplications, sutes, requests, intercessions. Precidere, cido, cisi, ciso, to cut off, to shorten, to decide, to curtall, to chop off, to take away, to preuent, to note and marke. Also to note and tell precisely what one will speake of. Precinto, a precinct or compasse. Also girt in or compassed about. Precipere, cipo, to command absolutely, or giue commandement. Preciputo, commanded absolutely. Precipire, pisco, pito, to teach, to in∣struct, to correct, to rule, to gouerne. Precipitantia, a tumbling, rolling or fal∣ling downe from some high place, ouer∣much rashnes. Precipitatione, as Precipitantia. Precipitare, to precipitate or tumble downe headlong into some pit, to cast, to hurle, to bring, to fall, or throw downe headlong, to ouerthrowe, to do vnadui∣sedly and rashly. Precipitato, a kind of corroding powder, or corosiue that chirurgians vse to cor∣rode rotten flesh from out of sores. Precipite, according to rule, gouernment, instruction or order. Precipitio, a precipise, a steepe downfall, a downe right pitch or fall, or dangerous place. Precipitoso, ruinous, steepe downe, that hath a downe-fall, dangerous, perilous. Also sudden, quicke, or ouer-hastie, without consideration, headstrong, foole-hardy, ouer-bolde, furious, rash, violent, headlong, haire-braind. Precipuamente, specially, chiefly, princi∣pally, peculiarly, aboue all things. Precipuo, chiefe, principall, especiall, sin∣gular, soueraigne, excellent, aboue all. Precisamente, precisely, determinately, purposedly. Also shortly, cuttedlie, briefely. Precisione, a breuitie in writing or spea∣king, leauing somewhat to be vnder∣stood. Also precisenes. Also a cutting off. Preciso, cut of, cut short, curtalled, cutted, taken away. Also decided. Also precise, determined, exquisite, exact. also a part of the entrals. Precissione, a procession or going before. Precognitione, fore-knowledge. Precondia, the skin about the hart. Precónio, a praise, a glory, a renoume, a commendation or setting foorth. Also a solemne crie, or cryers office, or publi∣shing of any thing to be solde. Preconoscentia, foreknowledge. Preconóscere, conosco, conobbi, co∣nosciuto, to foreknow, to know before. Precontratto, a precontract, a handling, or treating of a matter before. Precrdij, or Precordio, the fleshie skin, called also Diafrāma, or Diafragma, or the midriffe separating the hart and lungs from the stomacke, the liuer, and other bowels, the parts about the hart. Also the hart strings, or the filme of the hart. Also the sides of the bellie vnder the ribs. Sometime it is taken for all the vmbles or entrailes, as the hart, li∣uer, lungs, the spleene, &c. Also inward cogitations, affections, passions, and apprehensions of the hart. Also the mind or brest. Precórrere, corro, corsi, corso, to fore∣run, to outrun, to excell, to ouerrun, to preuent. Precorsione, a going before, a forerun∣ning, a preuention. Precorso, forerun, outrun, preuented, ex∣celled, ouerrun. Precorsore, a forerunner, an outrunner, a foregoer, an ouerrunner, a preuenter, a fore-rider, a fore-messenger. Precuio, Precoio, a lardrie to keepe meate in. also a dairy house. Precursore, as Precorsore. Preda, Predagione, a bootie, a praie, a prize, a robberie, a spoile, a foraging, a pillage. Predare, to praie, to spoile, to rob, to make a bootie, to forage, to poll and pill. Predatione, a foraging, a spoyling or praying, or stealing away, a pillaging. Predatore, a theefe, a robber, a spoiler, a pouler, a praie-taker, a forager, a seeker for a praie, a piller. Predecessore, a predecessour, a foregoer, our forefather, an auncestor, one that hath gone before vs, or hath beene be∣fore vs. Predella, any kinde of footestoole, settle, or kneeling low stoole. Also the rayne of a bridle. Predestinare, to predestinate, to preor∣daine, to ordaine afore what shall come after. Predestinato, predestinated, foreordai∣ned. Predestinatione, predestination, foreap∣pointment. Prédica, a sermon, a preaching, or publike declaration.
Predicabile, predicable, that may be told and spoken of publikely. Predicamento, a predicament. Predicante, a preacher, a sermon maker, a publisher, a reporter. Predicare, to preach, to publish, to de∣clare openly, to noise abroad, to make report, to praise. Predicatione, a preaching, a publishing or open declaring, a common or open talke and report, a praising. Predicatore, a preacher, a publisher, a re∣porter. Predire, dico, dissi, detto, to foretell, to prophesie, to tell of a thing before it com to passe. Predetto, foretolde, foresaide, prophesied, forespoken, saide, fore-mentioned, fore-alleaged. Predicitore, a foreteller, a prophet. Predittione, a prediction, a foretelling, a prophesie. Prediuinatione, a foretelling, a diuinati∣on or guessing of things to come. Predominare, to predominate, to gouerne afore others. Predominante, predominante. Predominatione, predomination, predo∣minancie. Predoni, a high-way theefe, bootehailers, such as liue by praying. Predutio,   Prefatione, a preface, a forespeech. Prefato, fore-alleaged, fore-named. Prefatto, done before, foredone. Prefetto, a ruler, a gouernour, a deputie, a prouost marshall, a president, a captain, a principall, or chiefe officer, a lieute∣nant. Prefettura, a presidencie, a chiefe place, a marshalship, a lieuetenancie, a rule, a deputation, a gouernment, or captaine∣ship, an authoritie, a iurisdiction com∣mitted to the powre of some officer to do right and iustice. It may also be taken for a shire-weeke, beeing a certaine li∣mited place of lande, vnder a certaine iurisdiction. Preferrire, risco, rito, to prefer, aduance, or set before, to esteeme or set more by. Preferrito, preferred, aduanced, set be∣fore, raised vp, esteemed or set more by. Prefigurare, to prefigure, to figure afore hand, to foreshew. Prefiggere, figgo, fissi, fisso, to prefixe, to appoint, to limite. Prefisso, prefixed, limited, appointed, fa∣stened or set in the forepart. Prefocatione di madrice, a disease in women called the mother, which is a choaking or stopping of the matrix, wherby a woman falleth into a swne. Preforata, herbe saint Iohn woort. Pregare, to praie, to beseech, to intreate, to sue, to craue, to desire, to request. Pregato, praied, beseeched, intreated, sued, craued, desired, requested. Pregatore, a praier, a beseecher, a suter, an intreater. Preghi, praiers, intreaties, sutes, requests, intreatings, beseechings. Preghiera, a praier, a beseeching, an in∣treating, a request. Pregiare, to prize, to esteeme, to value, to regard, to endeere, to make prize or bar∣gaine for a thing. Pregiaria, baile, suretiship, maineprize. Pregieuole, woorth the estimation, value, regard or to be prized. Looke Pregio. Pregio, prize, value, woorth, honor, wor∣ship, glorie, regard, esteeme, the prize that is giuen for a thing that is bought or bargained for, hire, value, account, reward or money. Pregionare, to imprison or take prisoner. Pregione, a prison, a ieale. Also a priso∣ner. Pregionéro, a prisoner, one that is in pri∣son, a iealor or keeper of a prison. Pregiudicare, to foreiudge, to iudge afore hand, to preiudice, to concerne, to hurt, to touch neere, to preiudicate, to iudge first or before another to whom the matter appertaineth, to iudge by an example of another like matter before iudged. Also to conceiue an ill opinion or iudgment of a thing before he commeth to the place to heare it. Pregiudicatamente, preiudicately, with a fore iudgement, with preiudice, wrong, hurt or losse, with a fore conceiued opi∣nion. Pregiudicatione, a giuing of sentence or iudgement before, a conceiuing of iudg∣ment before due time. Pregiudiciale, preiudiciall, hurtfull, concerning or touching the state of some thing. Pregiuditio, preiudice, hinderance, hurt, wrong, foreiudgement, a foreconceiued opinion, a hurting of ones case. Also a case which being once decided maketh a rule or example to iudge semblably in like matters, as those which we call ru∣led cases in lawe. Also a manner of sen∣tence giuen before iudgment, as if two did contend for one office, and the ma∣gistrate bicause the controuersie will be long, in the meane time appointeth one of them to minister the office, wherein he seemeth to giue iudgment before for him whom he fauoureth. Pregiuditioso, foreiudging, iudging a∣fore, as Pregiudiciale. Pregna, pregnant, a woman great with childe, a beastfull of yoong ones. Pregnante, pregnant, fruitfull. Pregnanza, greatnes with child, pregnan∣cie, a being great with childe or with yoong. Pregnare, to beget with child, to lie or couer as a dog or a horse. Pregneuole, fruitfull, that may be gotten with childe. Pregnezza, as Pregnanza. Pregno, full, pregnant, big with childe or full of yoong ones. Also full of good sap and iuice. Prego, an intreatie, a prayer. Pregressione, a going before, a preuen∣ting, an outgoing. Pregresso, that is gone before or that hath ouerpassed. Pregustare, to taste before, to take a taste or assaie before. Preheminenza, preheminence, preroga∣tiue, aduantage. Prelatesco, prelate-like, like a priest. Prelato, a prelate, a cleargie man. Prelatura, the dignitie of a prelate. Preliare, to fight, to skirmish, to battell, to fight in battell. Prelio, a fight, a battell, a skirmish, a con∣flict, a combat, a foughten field. Preludio, a proheme in musicke, a volun∣tary before the song, a flourish, a pream∣ble or entrance to a matter, as ye would saie signes and profers to do a thing, or before the doing of it. Premeditare, to premeditate, to forethink, to muse and thinke on a matter before hand, to deuise with himselfe before hand. Premeditatione, a premeditation or fore∣musing, a foremeditation, a musing or thinking of a thing before hand. Prémere, premo, premei, premúto, to presse, to presse or weigh downe, to tread downe or vpon, to vexe, to grieue, to en∣dammage, to ouercharge, to suppresse, to wring, to straine, to be instant or vrgent vpon, to force, to compell, to vrge, to make, to constraine, to presse on. Also to keepe a thing in that it come not abroad, to dissemble and hide, to keepe vnder, to squise, to crush, to thrust, to thrust downe, to destroy, to be contrarie or a∣gainst, to pursue them that flie, to blame in words, to rate and speake earnestly against, to aggrauate, to weaken and ouerthrow. Also to concerne or touch a mans person or state-neere.
Premuto, prest, crusht, supprest, wroong, strained, forced, inforced, compelled, vr∣ged, made, constrained. Also concerned or toucht neere. Vide Prémere. Premesse, premitted, put or set before, the premises, premised. Premitore, a crusher, a strainer, a presser, a constrainer, a wringer. Vide Pré∣mere. Premitura, a pressing, a crushing, a wrin∣ging, a straining. Vide Prémere. Premiare, to reward, to meede, to guer∣don, to recompence one according to de∣sert. Premiatore, a rewarder, a recompencer. Preminenza, preheminence, preroga∣tiue. Prémio, a reward, a meede, a guerdon, a recompence giuen to any man for his de∣serts. Premoníre, nisco, nito, to forewarne, to giue warning before hand, to foreaduise Premonito, forewarned, foreaduised, gi∣uen warning before hand. Premonitione, a premonition, a fore∣warning, a foreaduise. Premósso, promoted, preferred, premo∣ued. Premostrare, to foreshew, to foretell. Premostranza, a foreshewing, a foretel∣ling. Premura, a close pressing or working to∣gither. Premutare, to forecharge. Prence, as Prencipe. Prencipato, a principalitie, a soueraignty, a lordship, a seignorie. Also excellencie, soueraintie, dominion, seignorie, rule, preheminence. Prencipale, principall, chiefe, higest. Also pertaining to a Prince, of a Prince, be∣longing to the first, chiefe or Prince∣like. Also a beginning. Prencipalità, as Prencipato, a principa∣litie, a chiefe-dome. Prencipe, a Prince, a soueraine, a poten∣tate, a gouernor, a chiefe, he that hath the soueraigntie or dominion. Also a noble-man, a ruler, a head-ruler, the first, the foremost, a ring-leader. Prencipessa, a Princesse, a woman Prince or gouernesse. Prencipetto, a yoong or little Prince. Préndere, prendo, presi, preso, prendu∣to, to take, to receiue, to take hold off, to catch, to snatch, to accept, to embrace any occasion. Prenduto, Preso, taken, receiued, taken hold off, caught, catcht, snatcht, accep∣ted. Préndere la fortuna per il ciuffetto, to take occasion by the snout. Préndere in errore, to mistake one for another. Préndere in iscambio, to mistake. Préndere a nuolo, to hire ship or horse. Préndere a fitto, to hire, to rent or farme. Préndere a vettura, to hire a horse at li∣uerie. Préndere per la mano, to take by the hand. Préndere fastidio, to take care. Prenomato, Prenominato, forena∣med. Prenome, the first name, the name giuen at the font. Prenominare, to forename, to foreal∣leage. Prenominanza, a forenaming. Prenonciare, to foretell, to foreshew, to declare a fore hand. Preocupare, to preoccupate, to anticipate, to preuent, to ouerreach, to take or pos∣sesse by preuention or anticipation, to take before another. Preocupatione, a preuention, an antici∣pation, an ouerreaching. Preordinare, to fore-ordaine, to ordaine or appoint before. Preordinatione, the first ordinance, a fore-ordaining. Preparamento, a preparing, a prepara∣tion. Preparantia vasa, the seminall veines and arteries. Preparare, to prepare, to prouide, to dight, to make readie, to make prouision be∣fore hand. Preparatione, a preparation, a prouision, a readines, a preparing. Preparatiuo, a preparatiue or a prepara∣tion, that pertaineth to preparation. Preparatore, a preparer, a prouider. Prepede, swift, or light in flying, Vcello Prepede, the bird that first sheweth himselfe to the Augure, whereby he guesseth what is to come. Prepónere, pongo, posi, posto, to pre∣ferre, to aduan, to put before, to set before, to esteeme or set much by, to giue one a place before another. Prepositiuo, to be put or set before. Preporre, as Preponere. Preposto, preferred, put before, made chiefe, aduanced, one preferred or ad∣uanced before others. Also as Prouo∣sto: one that is in authoritie aboue the rest. Prepositione, a part of speech called a pre¦position. Also a putting or setting be∣fore. Prepositore, a prepositor, an aduan∣cer. Prepositura, a preferring before others. Preposteramente, preposterouslie, back∣wardlie, ouerthwartlie, arsiuersie, ake∣wardlie, contrarie to due course. Prepóstero, preposterous, ouerthwart, out of order, backward, arsiuersie, cleane contrarie to all good order and due rule and formall fashion. Preputio, the fore-skinne that couereth the head or nut of a mans yard. Prerogatione, a prerogation, a prehe∣minence. Prerogatiua, a prerogatiue, a prehemi∣nence, a priuiledge, an authoritie, an aduantage, a sway or rule aboue other men. Prerogatiuo, he whose voice, consent, or sentence is first asked, that man or that thing that is of more effect, preroga∣tiue, and authoritie then others. Presa, a prize, a reprizall, a taking, a snatching. Also taken. Presagia, the arte of presaging or diuina∣tion, or fore-boding, or fore-guessing, or fore-telling of things to come. Presagiare, to presage, to deuine, to fore∣tell by tokens what shall happen, to per∣ceiue or haue a guesse before what will follow, to perceiue a thing that is to∣ward before it come, to betoken, to fore∣bode, to prophecie. Presagiente, a presager, a foreteller, a deuiner. Also deuining, fore-guessing, fore-boding, prophecying. Preságio, a presage, a diuination by to∣kens, a deuining, a foreguessing, a pro∣phecying, a foretelling, a foreshewing or token of that that is likely to come, or shall happen, a foresignification, or be∣tokening of some thing to follow. Presagire, presago, presagito, as Pre∣sagiare. Presaglia, whatsoeuer may be taken or is taken, a bootie. Presago, a presaging or foreguessing man, one that foreguesseth, foretelleth, pro∣phecieth, or forebodeth things toward before they come, or betokening of some∣thing to come and follow. Prescia, haste, or speede, care, vrging, hying, sollicitation. Presciare, to hasten, to make haste, to speede, to sollicite, to hye, to dispatch, to presse, to vrge. Presciénte, hauing foreknowledge, that knoweth things perfectly before they come to passe. Prescientia, fore-knowledge or presci∣ence, an vnderstanding before-hand of a thing before it come to passe.
Prescioso, hastie, speedie, hying, pres∣sing, vrging. Presciutto, any kinde of dride bacon. Prescríuere, scriuo, scrissi, scritto, to prescribe, to assigne, to limit, to ap∣point, to shew how and what, to giue aduertisement, to make and ordaine. Also to write before. Prescritto, prescribed, assigned, limited, appointed, shewed how and what, giuen aduertisement, made and ordained. Also written before. Also a forme or precept, a determinate rule, order, or fashion. Prescrittióne, a prescription, a limiting, a rule, an assignement, a limitation, an appointing or determining, an ordi∣nance, or forme. Also a forme or precept, a determinate rule, order, or fashion. Presentagione, a presentation, or pre∣senting. Presentáneo, present, sodaine, at hand, for the present only, readie, speedie, dispatching. Presentare, to present or offer, to repre∣sent. Also to resemble. Also to make readie, or set in a readines before the presence of some man. Presentatione, a presentation, a presen∣ting, a representing. Presentatore, a presenter, a represen∣ter. Presente, present, in sight, before his face, in view, in mine owne person, before. Also the time present, or instant. Also a present, or a guift. Presentia, the presence of a man, the coun∣tenance or aspect of a man, present∣nes. Presentiale, presentiall, that hath a good presence, personall, in person. Presentialmente, personallie, in person, in presence. Presentíre, sento, sentito, to heare or vnderstand afore-hand, to fore-heare, to fore-know, to perceiue or haue a fee∣ling or hearing of a thing before it happen. Also to smell or sent before. Presentíto, fore-heard, foreunderstoode, foreknowne, perceiued, or had a fee∣ling or hearing of a thing before it come to passe. Also smelt or sented before. Presentuccio, a small or meane guift, a little poore present. Presépio, a cratch, a rack, a manger, an oxe-stall in a stable, a crib, or a critch. Presedére, seggo, fedéi, seduto, to pre∣seade, or sit before, to be or sit in more aucthorjtie and dignitie, to haue the protection or tuition of any thing, pro∣uince, place, or people, to haue the ouer∣sight or charge of, to sit in some place of preheminence. Preseduto, Presiso, preseaded, or sitten before. Looke Presedére. Preseruare, to preserue, to keepe, to main∣taine, to saue, to defend. Preseruatione, a preseruation, a keeping, a sauing, a defending. Preseruatiuo, preseruatiue, that will pre∣serue, sauing, defending. Preside, a kinde of tree in Egypt. Prési, prese, presero, I tooke, he tooke, they tooke. Presidente, a president, a lieutenant, a captaine, a gouernour, a prouost, a viceroy, a chiefe, a defender, a ruler or president, he that hath aucthoritie in a prouince next vnder a King, a lord pre∣sident, a chiefe ruler, he that hath the tuition, protection, disposition, and go∣uernment of. Also an example, a pa∣terne, or a president to follow or shew to others. Presidiale, of or pertaining to a president, or presidencie, presidiall, of a garrison. Also that is ordained to be an ayde to others, as soldato presidiale, a soul∣dier in garrison, either for the defence of the frontiers of a land, or some other part in the land. Presidiare, to munite, to fortifie, to de∣fend, to strengthen, to arme with gar∣risons, to liue, to stay, or continue in a garrison. Presidio, a help, a succour, a fortifying, a reenforcing, a defence, an auaile, a camp, a force of men, a supplie of forces, a garrison of men set with a captaine to defend and keepe a fortresse or countrie. Also all manner of ayde and defence. Also a place of refuge or succour, a for∣tification of a thing. Presidioso, that hath forces, fortifications, garisons or men, Looke Presidio. Presignificare, to signifie, to notifie, or shew before, to fore-token, to fore-bode. Preso, taken, receiued, vndertaken, caught, snatcht, accepted, hent. Preso nella rete, taken or caught in a net. Preso disputa, taken a disputation in hand. Presoluta, an herbe which who so hath a∣bout him shall be able to commit no letcherie. Presontione, as Presuntione. Presontuoso, as Presuntuoso. Pressare, Pressiare, as Presciare. Pressa, Pressia, as Prescia, as Calca. Presso, neere, by, with, hard by, fast by, neere vpon, almost, as it were. Presso che, almost, as it were, neere vpon. Presso di me, neere me, by me, with me. Pressore, as Impressore, as Oppres∣sore. Pressoso, as Prescioso. Pressura, oppression, heauines, grieuance. Also a wringing or wresting. Prestamente, quickly, readily, presentlie, out of hand, nimblie, speedily. Prestante, excelling, passing, surmounting, excellent, notable, noble, better, vertu∣ous, mightie, great, honorable, regard∣full, or to be regarded. Prestantia, worthines, excellencie, vertue, noblenes. Prestantissimo, most excellent, passing, notable, vertuous, or chiefely to be re∣garded. Prestanza, lone, or the lending of anie thing. Also as Prestantia. Prestare, to lende. Also to borrow. Also to prepare, to dight, to make ready. Prestare ad vsura, to lend or giue out to vsurie. Prestare fede, to giue credite, to yeelde trust. Prestatore, a lender, a borower, a prepa∣rer, a prouider, a dighter, a vsurer. Prester, a kinde of venemous worme cal∣led Dipsas. Also a kinde of tempest or whirlewind. Prestezza, quicknes, nimblenes, speede, dispatch, haste, promptnes, fleetenes. Prestigiare, to practise or plaie legerde∣maines, iuglings, or craftie conueyan∣ces. Prestigiatore, a iugler, a cosener, one that deludeth the eiesight, or playeth leger∣demaine tricks. Prestigie, deceits, illusions, iuglings, leger∣demaines, craftie conueyances, things seeming to be that are not, subtile and wilie delusions. Prestigioso, deceitfull, craftie, suttle, slie, full of craft, or dissimulation. Prestinaro, a baker or kneader. Presto, quicke, nimble, suddaine, quicklie, out of hande. Also fleete, swift, quicke, wight. Also presently, ready, prepared, adressed, prompt, prone, dight. Also a lone or lending of money. Présto, presto, by and by, suddainly, out of hande, very ready or quickely, verie nimblie. Presule, a prelate, a prior, or he that lea∣deth the daunce among the Romaine priests called Salij sacen.
Presúmere, sumo, sumei, sumuto, to pre∣sume, to suppose, to coniecture. Also to take first or before. Also to preuent. Al∣so to deeme, to gesse, to count himselfe, to conceiue, to do or take before hand. Presuntione, presumption, ouerboldnes, arrogancie, sawcines, malapertnes, con∣iecture, conceit, vncertaintie, or taking or receiuing before. Also preoccupation, or preuenting of our aduersaries obiec∣tion. Presunto, as Presumuto. Presuntuoso, presumptuous, saucie, mala∣pert, ouerbold. Presupónere, pongo, posi, posto, to pre∣suppose, to coniecture, to imagine, to put case, to admit. Presuporre, as Presupónere. Presupósito, a purpose, an intent, a pre∣supposed matter. Presupósto, presupposed, imagined, con∣iectured, admitted, put case. also a pur∣pose or intent. Presuta, a taking, a scazing or laying hold of. Also an herbe in Italy which they vse for rennet to make cheese with. Presutto, any kinde of dried bacon. Pretacchione, a filthie, lubbarly, greasie, hedge priest. Pretaria, the order or crue of priests, a priests dwelling, a parsonage. Also a priesthood. Préte, a priest, a church-man, a clergie man. Also a fish so called. Préte, or Preue, as Becca in cauo. Pretélle,   Preténdere, tendo, tesi, teso, or tendu∣to, to pretend, to designe, to intende, to meane, to chalenge. Also to laye for a thing before it come, to make a pretence or colour, to shewe or pretend, to dissem∣ble. Also to draw, set, holde or hang a curtaine or other thing before, to couer, or hide with any thing, to laie for ones selfe or against another, to lay for a cloke or excuse. Pretenduto, Preteso, pretended, deseig∣ned, intended, ment, chalenged, claimed, Looke Preténdere. Pretendénte, a pretendent, a pretender, an intender, a meaner. Also pretending or intending. Pretendentia, as Pretensione. Pretensione, a pretence, an intent, a cha∣lenge, a pretext, a claime, a preten∣ding. Preteríre, risco, rito, to transgresse, to trespasse, to passe or go ouer, to go be∣yond, to go past, to escape, to ouerslip, to make no mention of, to ouerpasse, to leaue out a thing that should be spoken. Preteríto, transgressed, trespassed, past ouer, ouerslipt, ouerpast, past, that is gone past, neglected. Also dead or de∣parted, vide Preterire. Pretérito, past, forepast, of yore, ouerpast, neglected, ouerslipt. Pretérito perfétto, the preterperfectence of a verbe. Pretérito piu che perfétto, the preter∣pluperfectence of a verbe. Preterméttere, metto, misi, messo, to pretermit, to omit, to neglect, to inter∣mit, to ouerslip, to leaue vntouched, to forget, to passe ouer, not to speake of. Preterrnesso, pretermitted, omitted, neg∣lected, intermitted, ouerslipt, left off, left vntoucht, forgotten, past ouer, not spoken of. Pretermissione, a pretermission, an omit∣ting, a neglecting, an ouerslipping, a lea∣uing out, a letting a thing passe, a for∣getting. Pretesa, as Pretentione. Pretesco, priestlike, like a priest. Pretesmo, Pretesimo, priesthood, the or∣der of a priest. Pretéso, as Pretenduto. Pretésta, as Pretésto. Also according to Romaine histories a long roab or gown edged or garded about with purple silke that noblemens children vsed to weare till seauen yeeres of age, and therefore were called Pretestati. It was also the robe of estate that the king of Rome or other chiefe officer did weare when they sat in their maiestie, and was woont to be burned with them that died in their office: neither could any iudge giue sen∣tence on a man, till he had put off the robe. It was also a cote that captaines wore in triumph, and that senatours were knowne by from the order of gen∣tlemen. Pretesto, a pretext, a pretence, a meaning, a colour, a shew, a cloke, an excuse for anie thing. Pretiare, as Pregiare. Pretio, as Pregio. Pretiatore, a prizer, a valuer, an estee∣mer, a sessor a syzer, a setter of prizes. Pretignolo, a poore sillie priest. Pretiosità, preciousnes, deerenes, great price and value. Pretioso, precious, costly, deere, of great price and value, very good, sumptuous, excellent. Pretóre, a pretor, a captaine, a chiefe in iustice, a lord mayor, namely according to the Romaine histories: an office in old time hauing the rule of an armie, who afterward had authority in iudge∣ment, and was as a chiefe iustice, ha∣uing other iudges sitting vnder him: the Romaines had as manie pretors cho∣sen, as they had countries or prouinces subiect to the Empire. Pretoriale, of or pertaining to a pretor. Pretório, a place of iudgement, a guilde∣hall, a seate or court of iustice, the house or pauilion of the pretor or chiefe cap∣taine, of a mayor, of a iudge or of an al∣derman or such magistrate. also a prin∣ces pallace, court or manour. Also a place or court where iudgement was giuen, and matters were heard by the pretour, or lord chife iustice. Pretta, full, perfect, right, verie, meare, sheare, pure. Pretura, the office, dignitie, or degree of a pretor, lorde chiefe iustice or other like slate. Preualentia, the excellēcy or better value. Preualére, vaglio, valsi, valuto, to pre∣uaile, to excell, to passe, to be better or of more value, to bee more woorth, to be more strong and doughtie. Preualuto, preuailed, past, excelled, vide Preualere. Preuaricare, to offende, to transgresse or breake the lawe, to make semblance or shew to do a thing and do cleane contra∣rie, to worke by collusion in pleading, and purposely to suffer his aduersarie to obtaine against him that he defendeth, to betray ones cause to his aduersary: to falsifie by collusion, and swarue from truth, to go out of the right way, to leaue out that which ought to be spoken, and more earnestly declared, as effec∣tuall to the matter. Preuaricatione, preuarication, collusion in pleading, corrupting of an accuser, a letting passe or light touching of that which should more earnestly haue been declared, as making much to the matter. Preuaricatore, a corrupter, an offender, a worker by collusion, a transgressor. also he that leaueth the right, or speaketh not that which ought to be spoken, he that pleadeth by collusion and furthe∣reth the aduersaries cause, an atturney or man of the law pretending to helpe a man and betrayeth his cause to his ad∣uersarie, an answerer corrupted by the person accused, a false dealer, a corrupt accuser, a swaruer from truth, reason, and honestie. Preuatura, prouender. Also a kind of fresh cheese and creame. Preue, as Pieue. Preuedére, veggo, viddi, visto, or vedu∣to, to foresee, to forecast, foreunderstād,
to preuent, to see before, to forespie. Preueduto, Preuisto, foreseene, forecast, fore-vnderstood, preuented, seene-be∣fore, fore-espide. Preuedimento, foresight, forecast, a foreheedines, a fore-espying. Preueditore, a fore-seer, a forecaster, a foreheeder, a fore-espyer. Preueníre, vengo, venni, venuto, to pre∣uent, to come or go before, to forestall, to outgo, to ouertake, to do a thing before another. Preuenuto, preuented, come before, ouer∣taken, forestalled, outgon. Preuentione, preuention, anticipation, an ouertaking, an outgoing, a comming be∣fore one. Preuento, as Preuenuto, as Prouento. Preuentore, a preuentor, an ouertaker, an anticipator. Preuertire, tisco, tito, to peruert, to di∣uert, to let, to hinder. Preuertito, peruerted, diuerted, let, hin∣dred. Preuia, priuate, particular, singular. Preuincia, as Prouincia. Preuosto, as Prouosto. Prezza, as Prescia. Prezzare, as Pregiare. Prezzemolo, the herbe parsely. Prezzo, as Pregio. Prezzolare, to hire, to bargaine vpon a price. Pria, first, erst, sooner, before. Pria che, rather then, before that, sooner. Priapea, all maner of filthie, bawdie ver∣ses touching priuities of men. Priapo, the god of gardines. Also a mans priuy member or yard. Priapismo, the office of the god of gardins, of, or pertaining to a mans priuities, or the standing of a mans yard, which is when the yard is stretched out in length and breadth, nothing prouoking the pa∣cient to lust or desire. If it come with a beating and panting of the yard the phi∣sicions call it then Satiriasi. Called also in English priapisme, pricke-pride, or lust-pride. Priario, the first, chiefe, or supreame, as Primario. Pridiano, of the day before. Priegare, as Pregare. Prieghi, as Preghi. Prieghiera, as Preghiera. Prigionare, to emprison, to take prisoner. Prigione, a prisoner, a iaylor or keeper of a prison. Also a prison. Prigionia, emprisonment. Prigioniere, as Prigione. Prignuoli, a kinde of mushroms, or tode∣stooles. Prima, first, erst, sooner, rather, before. Also a game at cardes called Prime, Primero, or Primanista. Primamente, first, erst, sooner, before. Primaio, Primario, the first or chiefe man, chiefe, passing, good, woorthy, aboue other. Primano, the tribune or lieutenant that appointed wages to the first legion, or a souldier of the first legion. Primare, to choose or prefer first. Primato, chosen or preferred first. Also a primate or chiefe in the clergie. Also a magistrate or chiefe gouernour of a city with other by whom the people are go∣uerned, a chiefe or noble man. Also pri∣macie, chiefe place, excellencie, chiefe rule and auctoritie, the hiest state. Prima rosa, the flowre called the primrose or cowslip. Primaticcio, such fruites as are arelie ripe, and come before others. Primauera, the spring time of the yeere. Also the flower called cowslips. Prima vista, a game at cardes called Pri∣mauista. Primera, a game at cards called Primero. Primeramente, as Primamente. Primero, as Primiero. Primeuo, the elder, or the first age. Primicci frutti, such fruits as are soonest ripe, timely or early fruites. Primicero, as Primocero. Primicie, as Primitie. Primiéra, the game at cards called primero Primierano, a primerian, one that plaies at primero. Primiéro, first, sooner, rather. Also a chiefe or principall. Primigenia, as Primogenitura. Primigenio, that commeth naturally of it selfe, that hath not the beginning of an∣other, the first or originall. Primi nati, our forefathers, our ancestors, our elders, such as were before vs. Primipilaro, as Primipilo. Primipilo, a captaine of the vantgarde or he that fighteth next the standard. Primitie, the first offrings or first fruits of the yeere that are offred vnto God or the firstlings of yeerely fruits. Primitio, the foremost, the first, he that is next to one. Primitiua, the first cause or former matter Primitiuo, primitiue, first, that hath no beginning of other. Primo, first, erst, before, sooner, rather, soonest, prime. Also best, more esteemed, new, more excellent, chiefe, principall, highest, soueraigne, aboue others. Primocério, a supreme, first or chiefe in dignitie or authoritie, a Princes chiefe secretarie: he that in a religious house hath charge of the waxe, torches, tapers or lights. Primogénito, the first borne or first be∣gotten. Primogenitura, the eldership in birth, the title of the eldest childe in inheritance. Primo nato, as Primogénito. Primo piatto, the first or chiefe messe at a table. Also a yoong ridden horse. Primordio, a first beginning, ofspring, or originall. Primori, noble men, chiefe men, peeres, states. Also they that stand foremost in an armie. Primpilo, the first or chiefe ranke or order of souldiers, or as Primipilo. Primula, a Primrose or a Cowslip. Prince, as Prence. Principale, as Prencipale. Principalità, as Prencipalità. Principatione, a beginning, a commen∣cing. Principato, as Prencipato. Principe, as Prencipe. Principetto, Principino, as Prencipeno Principessa, as Prencipessa. Principiante, a beginner, a commencer. Principiare, to begin, to commence, to giue the onset. Principij, beginnings, principles, the grounds of any thing. Principio, a beginning, a commencement, an onset, an entrance, a proem, a ground, a fountaine, a well spring, a race, a stocke or chiefe originall of a thing. Priorato, Priorado, a priorie or religious house for men, a priorship, eldership, senioritie or preheminence. Priore, a prior, a chiefe, a superior, a se∣nior, an ancestor, a former, a preceding man, a more excellent. Prioretto, a little priorie, a little prior. Prioria, a priorie or a priors office. Priorità, prioritie, eldership, ancientnes, senioritie. Prisco, as Pristino, that is of the time pas∣sed, of old time, ancient, former, old. Priste, a kinde of fish of great length and slender, which in going cutteth the waues. Also a long and narrowship or gallie fashioned like that fish. Pristino, old, ancient, former, first, woon∣ted, accustomed. Pritanij, the presidents of the senate of Athens were so called. Priuagione, as Priuatione. Priuare, to depriue, to bereaue, to take from, to spoile, to reaue.
Priuato, Priuado, bereaued, depriued, spoiled, reaued, bereft or taken from one. Also priuate, familiar, acquainted or neere and inward with one. Also pro∣perly a mans owne, of or belonging to one or to a few, particular, peculiar, speci∣all, priuate. Also a priuate person that hath no common office or authoritie, out of office. Priuatamente, priuately, secretly, priui∣ly, familiarly, peculiarly, seuerally as a priuate man. Priuatione, a priuation, a depriuing, a bereauing, a reauing. Priuatiuo, priuatiue, that doth depriue or bereaueth or may be depriued. Priuigna, a daughter in law whose first husband is dead. Priuigno, a sonne in law whose first wife is dead. Priuilegiare, to priuiledge, to giue prehe∣minence or prerogatiue. Priuilegio, a priuiledge, a preheminence, a prerogatiue, a grant. Priuo, voide, naked, emptie, bare, sance, without, depriued, bereaued, reaued, made voide, exempted. Also as Pri∣uato. Prò, valiant, worthie, couragious, hardie, full of prowesse. Also gaine, sauing, wealth, riches. Also good, profit, health or welfare. Bun prò vi faccia, much good may it do you. Prò vi faccia, much good may it do you. Also vsed for God giue you ioy. Proagonio, whoredome, adulterie. Proámita, a great aunt, a great grandfa∣thers sister. Proaua, a great grandame or great grand∣mother. Proauo, a great grandsire or great grand∣father. Probabile, probable, likely, that may be prooued to be true, like to be true. Probabilità, probabilitie, likenes of truth, a colour or apparance of truth. Probare, to prooue, to approue, to confirme, to establish, to allow, to perswade or shew by reason, and example that it is good. Probatione, a probation, an approbation, an allowing, a proofe, a triall or assay. Probeuole, probable, that may be proo∣ued, as Probabile. Probità, honestie, sinceritie, goodnes, ver∣tue, vprightnes. Probléma, a problème, a proposition or sentence proposed with a question an∣nexed. in Mathematikes it is opposed to Thora, and signifieth such a pro∣position as is especially referred to prac∣tise or the doing of something. Probostide, the snout, nose or trunke of an Elephant. Procacchia, the herbe called purslane. Procacciante, a procurer, an obtainer, a purueyer, a purchaser. Also a good lad, a bon companion. Procacciare, to procure, to obtaine, to get, to puruey, to shift for, to indeuour for to get. Procacciatore, a procurer, an obtainer, a shifter, a purueier. Procaccino, a broker or procurer for ano∣ther, a shifter for himselfe. Procaccio, as Procacciatore. Also a carrier or poste, namely the ordinarie poste that goeth betweene Rome and Naples. Also a procuring or shifting for. Procace, a malapert or shamelesse asker, reprochfull, ill toonged, a railer, one al∣waies saucily crauing, violent and im∣portunate, lecherous, a wanton riotous banquetor or Epicure. Procacità, a procuring, getting or shifting for. Also saucines, wantonnes, malapert∣nes, scoffing. Procedénte, proceeding, a proceeder, mar∣ching forward, passing on. Procedéntia, a proceeding or going on, a marching forward. a behauiour. Procêdere, cedo, cedei, ceduto, to pro∣ceed, to goe on, to goe forward, to goe be∣yond, to go or passe foorth, to preuaile or profit, to keepe on a course, to rise to dig∣nitie or promotion, to increase or runne on, to aduance himselfe or prosper. Procédere alla sfacciata, to proceed im∣pudently. Procédere alla carlona, to proceed clow∣nishly or plainely. Procédere realmente, to proceed like an honest man. Procedimento, a proceeding or going on, a marching forward. a behauiour. Proceditore, a proceeder, a goer on. Procedura, a proceeding, a behauiour, a going forward, a marching on. Proceduto, proceeded, gone on, gone fore∣ward. Looke Procédere. Procelemmatico, consisting of fower short syllables. Procélla, a storme or a tempest of winde or rains, namely at sea. Also a danger, a blustring, an aduersitie. Also a trou∣bling or ruffling in a common weale. Procellare, to storme, to be tempestuous, to ruffle. Procelloso, stormie, tempestuous, blu∣string, troublesome, turbulent. Procerità, length, height, tallnes. Processare, to sue, to processe, or call one in sute or lawe. Processione, a procession, or going in pro∣cession. Also a processe, a successe, a go∣ing on, a proceeding, a progresse, a pas∣sing forward. Processionale, of or pertaining to pro∣cession. Processo, of the latins and greekes called Apophisi, that part of a bone which ex∣ceedeth in height the naturall places neere vnto it, stretching forth its sub∣stance in encreasing manner like a knot swelling out from the stock of a tree, such parts of bones the Anatomists call Processes, and are true partes of the bones themselues. Also a processe, a proxie, a sute in lawe. Also space, tract, or processe, or proceeding of time. Also going on, proceeding. Also progresse, in∣crease, successe, or euent. Prochemasi, a foretoken of a tempest to come. Prochi, hath bin vsed for riuals or foe∣fellowes in loue. Also a greedie lecher, or lecherous man. Prochissi, riuals, corriuals, or copartners in loue. Procianare, to approch. Procianamente, neerely, neighbourlie. Procianità, neighborhood, neerenes. Prociano, neere, nigh, neighbour. Proci, as Prochi. Procidentia, the falling downe of the fundament, a falling downe of his place. Procinto, readie, prepared, in order, in a readines. Also the procinct or state of an armie or battell when it is readie to giue the onset. Also guirt and encom∣passed about. Also prouision before any thing is done. Also readines, or prompt∣nes. Proclama, a proclamation. Proclamare, to call or proclaime, to cry out. Proclamatione, a proclamation, or cry∣ing out. Proclino, a riuall, a competitor, or foe∣fellow in loue. Procliuio, prompt or readie to fall, encli∣ning, bending. Procliuità, inclination, disposition, easi∣nes, or facilitie to any thing. Proco, as Proclino. Proconsolo, a proconsull, a commissioner or a deputie, he that was sent with an extraordinarie powre of a consull into any countrie to gouerne it. Proconsolare, of or pertaining to a pro∣consull, or such an officer.
Procrastinare, to deferre, to prolong, to put off from day to day, to make delay, to linger the time. Procrastinatione, a deferring, a pro∣longing, a delaying or putting off from day to day, a lingring. Procreare, to ingender, to beget, to create, to make and bring forth, to procure and worke. Procreatione, an ingendring or beget∣ting. Proculo, he that is borne when his father is farre out of the countrie, or when his father is very old. Procura, a letter of atturney, a proxie, a commission, an administration, a pro∣curement, a meane, a procuration, or sollicitation. Also an administration of a thing, the office or charge in doing a thing. Procurare, to procure, to obtaine, to play the proctor, to do or sollicite another mans busines, to haue the charge of ano∣ther mans matters, to see to the affaires of another man. Procuraria, Procureria, the doing or managing of another mans busines by atturneyship. Procuratia, a proctorship. Also a procu∣ration, as Procura. Procuratione, as Procura. Procuratiuo, procuring, that may be pro∣cured. Procuratore, a proctor, a procurer, a sol∣licitor, an atturney, an aduocate, an ad∣ministrator, an obtainer, an agent for another, a factor, one that seeth to ano∣ther mans affaires, or that hath the charge of a thing committed to him. Procuratoria, the office or dignitie of a lawyer, atturnie, or proctor. Próda, the side, shore, banke or brim of a riuer. Also the fore-deck, fore-part, fore-castle, or prore of a ship. Prodare, to come neere or touch the shore, to board or grapple ships together. Prodato, come neere the shore or banke or side. Also boarded or grapled with a ship. Próde, valiant, hardie, couragious, full of prowes, stout, noble, worthie, haugh∣tie, wise, graue, notable, of great worth. Prodese, the name of a cable in a ship. Prodéuole, as Prode. Prodeuolménte, valiantlie, hardilie, couragiouslie, stoutlie, noblie, haugh∣tilie, wisely. Prodezza, valiantnes, hardines, courage, prowesse, valour, stoutnes, noblenes, worthines. Prodigale, as Prodigo. Prodigalità, prodigalitie, lauishnes, vn∣thriftines, wastefulnes, riot. Prodigalmente, prodigallie, wastefully, riotouslie, excessiuely, outragiously, dis∣orderly. Prodigare, to be or play the lauish or pro∣digall man, to be wastefull or riotous, to lashout monie wastefully, or in things needlesse, to consume or spend riotously, to spend frankely. Prodigéntia, as Prodigalita. Prodígio, a prodigie, a woonder, a thing monstrous and vnnaturall, a thing sel∣dome seene, which signifieth that some great good or euill shall follow. Prodigioso, prodigious, monstrous, vnna∣turall, woondrous, that giueth a strange signe or token, woonderfull, contrarie to the common course of nature. Prodigita, as Prodigalità. Prodigo, prodigall, riotous, lauish, exces∣siue, wastefull, outragious, disordred in expences, a spendall, a waste-good, an vnthrift, that will lauish where it nee∣deth not, one ouer liberall. Prodire, disco, dito, to betray, to ac∣cuse, to bewray with treason, to shew, to vtter, to appeach, to accuse, to disclose, to deceiue, to forsake in ones neede, to leaue without succour. Prodito, betraide, accused, bewraid with treason, detected, deceiued, discoue∣red. Proditione, treason, betraying, vttering, bewraying, disclosing, disloyaltie. Proditore, a traitor, a villain, a deceiuer, a betrayer, an accuser, a discloser. Proditoriamente, traiterouslie, villai∣nouslie, trecherouslie. Prodotti, the fruites or gaines of any mans labour. Prodotto, as Produtto. Prodrómo, he that runneth before to bring tidings of ones comming, a fore∣runner. Prodúcere, duco, dussi, dutto, or dotto, to produce, to yeeld, to bring forth. Also to prolong or draw in length. Also to draw forward. Also to driue off with faire words and promises. Produceuole, bringing forth, fruitefull, producing. Producitore, as Produttore. Produtto, produced, yeelded, or brought forth, prolonged, or drawne in length, driuen off, &c. Produrre, as Prodúcere. Produttore, a producer, or bringer forth. Produttone, a production, or bringing forth. Produttino, fruitefull, producing, yeel∣ding, bringing forth. Proemiale, of or pertaining to a proeme. Proemio, a proeme, a preface, a pro∣logue, a fore-speech. Profanare, to profane, to abuse, to vn∣hallow, to peruert, or turne holie things to a common and vnholie vse. Profanatione, profanation, or making of a thing profane that was holie. Profanatore, a profaner, an abuser, an vnhallower. Profanità, profanenes, abuse of holie things. Profano, profane, vnhallowed, wicked, not consecrated or giuen to God. Also conuerted from an holie to a base or common vse. Profato, a generall or vniuersall propo∣sition or rule in any science or arte, a po∣sition, an axiome, as the logitians call it. Also a principle or maxime as lawyers terme it. Proferenza, a pronunciation, or readie vtterance in speech. Proferíre, prófero, proferito, to profer, to offer. Also to pronounce, to bring, put, or shew forth, to take or bring out, to shewe, publish, disclose, tell abroade, vtter, set or beare forth, to set forward, to alleage, or say for himselfe, to recite, to reherse, or reckon. Proferta, an offer, a profer, an offring. Proferto, Proferito, offred, profred, pronounced, Looke Proferíre. Professare, to professe, or make profession of. Also to reade publikelie. Professione, a profession, a qualitie, a trade, a calling, a vocation, a facultie, an open confession or acknowledgement, an open reading or professing. Professore, a professor, a reader in open schooles. Proféta, a prophet, a soothsayer, a fore∣teller of things to come. Profetare, as Profetizzare. Profetessa, a prophetesse, a woman pro∣phet. Profetia, a prophecie, a diuination, a fore∣telling of things to come, a reuelation. Profético, propheticall, as a prophet, per∣taining to a prophet, or diuination. Profetiggiare, to prophecie, to soothsay, to foretell things to come. Also to sing prai∣ses to God, to preach, to interpret. Profetizzare, as Profetiggiare. Proficiente, helping, profiting, doing much good. Profilare, to draw, to limne, to paint, to marke, to erect. Profilatoio, the name of a goldsmithes toole.
Profilo, a border, a limning or drawing of any picture. Profio, as Porfido, or Profilo. Also in Grison, a round welt or ring filed and raised in the neather side of the scath to keepe the horse in subiection by pressing the gum, not greatly needfull at all. Profittare, to profit, to gaine, to get, to thriue. Profitteuole, profitable, gainfull, good. Profitto, profit, gaine, vtilitie, cheuissance. Profluentia, abundance, plentie, flowing store. Profluuio, an issuing, a gushing or violent streaming out. Profondare, to sinke, to dig deepe. Profóndere, fondo, fondei, fonduto or fuso, to powre or cast out largely, to spend exceedingly, and out of measure, to lauish or lash out, to burst foorth abundantly. Profondità, profoundnes, deepnes, depth. Profondo, profound, deepe, high, insatia∣ble, of much receipt. Also a gulfe, a deepe place of water. Also a bottomlesse pit, the sea, the deepe. Also the bellie. Profugio, a place of refuge or helpe, a place of safetie, a sanctuary, a thing whereto one flieth for succour Profugo, a fugitiue, a wandrer, a fleeter, a runnagate, one that flieth or is driuen out of his countrie, a wandrer from place to place. Profumare, to perfume, or cause to smell sweet. Profumaro, a perfumer. Profumato, perfumed. Profumaria, a perfumers shop. Profumatello, an idle, wanton, perfumed, effeminate smell-seast. Profumatore, a perfumer. Profumeria, a perfumers shop. Profumiere, a perfumer. Profumo, a perfume or sweete smell. Profundare, as Profondare. Profúndere, as Profóndere. Profundità, as Profondità. Profundo, as Profondo. Profuso, profuse, flowing, gushing, issu∣ing or streaming out, verie abundant, very much, liberall, prodigall, lauish, ri∣otous, excessiue, sumptuous, glorious, im∣moderate, disordered, wastfull, vn∣thriftie. Progénero, my nieces husband. Also the husband of my daughter. Progénie, a progenie, an issue, a genera∣tion, a stocke, an ofspring, a pedegree, a linage, a successe in blood. Progenitóre, a progenitor, a father, a grandfather. Progettare, to proiect, to caste off, to pro∣strate. Progettione, as Progetto. Progetto, a proiect, a casting out, a pro∣strating, a iutting out. Also throwen out a farre, cast forth, prostrate, forsaken and laid aside. Also contemned or of a little account. Proglossi, the forepart of the toong. Prognata, a kind of meate or sauce made of prunes. Also venison sauce or galan∣dine for swans. Prognato, borne, descended or come of a stocke or linnage, begotten. Progne, a swallow Progrédere, gredo, gredei, gresso, to go foorth, on, out, before or forward, to proceed, to enter or goe forward in. Progrésso, a progresse, a proceeding, a marching or passing foorth, that hath passed or gone forwarde, the course or continuing of a course begon. Progressione, a progression, a proceeding, a going forward, a progresse. Prohemiare, to begin an oration, to make an entrance or proheme. Prohémio, a proheme, a preamble, a pre∣face, a beginning of a matter. Prohibire, bisco, bito, to forbid, to pro∣hibit, to let, to hinder, to stop, to stay, not to suffer. Prohibito, forbidden, let, hindred, pro∣hibited, stopt, staide, not suffred. Prohibitione, a prohibition, a forbid∣ding, a let. Proietto, as Progetto. Prolatione, a prolation, a speaking or pronouncing. Also a prolonging or de∣ferring. Prolato, spoken, pronounced, rehearsed, delayed or prolonged, vttered, set, brought, or shewed forth. Prole, issue of ones bodie, progenie, a child, a race, a stocke, a linage, or ofspring. Proléssi, a figure in speaking, whereby we preue and dissolue what is intended to be said against vs, a certaine naturall knowledge conceiued in the minde. Proletaro, vel Proletario, of a poore and base condition, that hath many children and little or no maintenance by reason of their small abilitie, or such a one as giueth nothing to the common∣wealth, but onely a supplie of children, poore sorts of people vnfit for warre. Prolissità, prolixitie, liberalitie, abòun∣dance, length, tediousnes in speech. Prolisso, prolixe, tedious, long, plentious, sumptuous, liberall in speech, large, free, bounteous, enclined to. Prologare, to speake first, or make a pre∣face or a prologue. Prologio, as Prologo. Prologo, the partie that speakes a pro∣logue, a prologue, a preface, a fore∣speech, the first entrie into a communi∣cation. Prolonga, a delay, a demur, a deferring, a prolonging, a delaying or putting off. Prolongamento, as Prolonga. Prolongare, to prolong, to prorogue, to de∣fer, to lengthen, to put off. Prolongatione, as Prolonga. Prolóquio, a perfect sentence. Also a be∣ginning, a proposition, a maxime, an axiome, an aphorisme, a clause taken as a sure ground to prooue a thing. Proluuie, filth or ordure washed off from any thing. Also the laske or loosenes of the bellie. Proluuio, a shedding of waters or any thing else in great abundance: ordure or filth washed from any thing. Also pro∣digalitie and wastefull spending. Promésciere, to shed and powre out. Also to mesh or mingle togither. Promessa, a promise, a warranting, a ow a couenant. Promessione, Promissione, a promise, a vow, a couenant. Prométtere, metto, misi, messo, or met∣tuto, to promise, to warrant, to answere for, to vow. Promesso, Promettuto, promised, war∣ranted, answered for, vowed. Prometter mari & monti, to promise heauen and earth or impossible things. Promettere Roma & Toma, to promise impossibilities or gods coape. Promettitore, a promiser, a warranter, a suretie, a vower. Prominentia, the extending or iutting of a thing out or ouer. Also a penthouse, a prominence, by which word the Ana∣tomists vnderstand what portion soe∣uer doth notably surmount the parts circumiacent in thicknes, like as a hill in the plaine. Promiscuo, confused, mingled, one with another, mingle mangle, common to ma∣nie, without difference, mutuall. Promissione, a promise, a vow. Promolgare, to publish, to proclaime, to noise abroad, to propose. Promontorio, a promontorie or hill lying and shooting out into the sea as an el∣bow. Promóto, mooued forward, set forth, pro∣moted, aduanced. Promóuere, to prefer, to aduance, to pro∣mote. Promulgare, as Promolgare. Promulgatione, a proclaiming, a publi∣shing.
Promuside, the trunke or snout of an E∣lephant which he vseth in steed of a hand. Pronepote, a nephewes sonne. Pronica, a kind of roote in Arithmetike. Pronezza, a nieces daughter. Prono, hauing the face downward, flat∣ling. Also prone, inclined, readie, easie, quicke, light, prompt, nigh at hand, quickly passing or running away, ben∣ding to an end, headlong downe. Pronome, a pronoune. Pronontia, a pronunciation or vtterance of speech, a speaking out. Pronontiare, to pronounce or vtter in speech, to declare openly, to name, to make expresse mention, to tell precisely and expresly, to giue and pronounce sen∣tence, to say by hart. Pronontiatione, a pronunciation or vt∣terance in speech, a speaking out. Pronosticare, to prognosticate, to fore∣shew, to foretell or foreknow things be∣fore they come to passe. Pronosticatione, a prognostication, a fore¦telling, a fore-signe: a token of a thing to come. Pronosticatore, a prognosticator, a fore∣teller of things or rather he that kno∣weth things ere they come to passe. Pronóstico, as Pronosticatione. Prontare, to make readie, to prepare, to prouide. Also to prompt. Prontezza, promptnes, readines, pronenes, preparation. Prontitudine, as Prontezza. Pronto, readie, prompt, prone, quicke, pre∣pared, carefull, speedie, apt, fit, nimble, easie, at hand. Also shamelesse or bold. Pronuba, she that bringeth a bride home to the bridegroomes house, or else that trimmeth and maketh hir readie when she goeth to bed, a bride maide. Also the goddesse of marriage. Pronulo, a kind of thornie tree. Pronuntia, as Pronontia. Pronuntiare, as Pronontiare. Pronuntiatione, as Pronontia. Pronuora, the nephewes wife. Prophanare, as Profanare. Prophano, as Profano. Propagare, to propagate, to extend, to di∣late, to increase, to multiply, to prolong, to continue. Also to prune or cut vines to make them grow the faster. Propagatione, a propagation, an increase, a multiplying, an extending, a conti∣nuing. Propagatore, an increaser, a multiplier, a continuer, an inlarger. Propagina, as Propagatione. Propensione, inclination of minde or rea∣dines. Propenso, readie, toward, inclined vnto, weightie and great, apt, bent or readie for. Propensità, readines, towardnes, inclina∣tion. Properantia, speedmaking, haste. Prophéta, as Profeta. Prophético, as Profetico. Prophetizzare, as Profetiggiare. Propiare, as Propriare. Propietà, as Proprietà. Propio, as Proprio. Propina, a drinking, a health or a pledge to one. Also a place a part from another place. Propinquare, to approch, to adioine vnto, to neighbour, to come neere. Propinquità, propinquitie, proximitie, neighbourhood, affinitie, neerenes, alli∣ance, kindred. Propinquo, neere, by, adioyning, close to it, a neighbour, a kinsman, an allie or a nigh friend. Propitiabile, soone pleased with supplica∣tions or intreatie, meete to do sacrifice with. Propitiare, to reconcile, to appease, to at∣tone, to mitigate, to asswage God with sacrifice. Propitiatione, a sacrifice to appease Gods displeasure. Propitiatorio, the place wherr God is pa∣cified. Also a table set on the arke of the old testament. Also of or belonging to such a sacrifice. Propitio, propitious, fauourable, louing, not displeased, gentle, propice, not dis∣pleased with. Propoli, that which Bees make at the en∣trance of the hiues to keepe out cold cal∣led Beeglue. Propolsato, repelled, driuen backe, beaten downe. Propónere, pongo, posi, posto, to pro∣pose, to purpose, to propound, to intend, to meane, to set out, to shew, to publish and set abroade to the people, to be aduised, to set before him, to promise or lay down a prize or reward for any notable acte, to open and declare. Also to consider, regard or imagine, to appoint or de∣termine. Proporre, as Propónere. Proponimento, a purpose, an intent, a deseigne, a proposition. Looke Propo∣nere. Proportionare, to proportion, to rate, to measure out equally, to make one thing answer another in due proportion. Proportionale, proportionable, according to true measure and proportion. Proportionalità, proportion, proportiona∣litie, equalnes. Proportione, a proportion, a share, a sise of any thing, a measure, an equalnes, when one thing answereth to another in comparison. Proportioneuole, proportionable, each part answering other in due propor∣tion. Propósito, a purpose, an intent, a meaning, a deseigne, an end. Propositione, a proposition, an intent, that whereby we shew whereof we will speak or what we will prooue, a sentence pro∣posed containing the summe of that we will speake. Propóso, as Proposto. Proposta, a purpose, a proposition. Also as Propositione. Propósto, proposed, purposed, determined, appointed, propounded, intended, meant, a decree, a purpose, an intent, a law, a proposition, a determination, a deseigne. Also one that is aduanced or set in a place of dignitie, preferred, aduanced. Also a prouost ouer others, set abroad or open before mens eies, proclaimed. Looke Propónere. Propretóre, a lieutenant sent to gouerne a Prouince with the autoritie of a Pre∣tor, a Lord iustice. Propriamente, properly, particularly, conueniently, as the nature of the thing requireth. Propriare, or Propiare, to appropriate, to make proper, to make speciall ones owne. Propriatione, an appropriation. Proprietà, a proprietie, incidencie, quali∣tie, nature, or specialtie. Próprio, proper, peculiar, ones owne, in∣cident, priuate, particular, specially ones owne. Propudio, shame, dishonestie, abhomi∣nable vse of lecherie in most vnseemely sort. Also the partie so abused. Propudioso, that is filthilie abused in lecherie. Propugnacolo, a fortresse, a strong hold, a bulwarke, a skonce, a defence, a block∣house. Propugnare, to fight, to defend or contend for. Propugnatione, a defending or fighting for. Propugnatore, a defender, a maintainer, one that fighteth in defence of some bo∣die, a champion.
Propulsato, as Propolsato. Proquestore, he that extraordinarilie is sent as questor into anie countrie. Prora, as Proda. Prorare, as Prodare. Prorire, risco, rito, to itch, to smart, to tetter, to gnaw inwardlie. Also to haue a list or desire to a thing. Prorito, itched, smarted, tettered, skur∣ned, gnawne inwardlie. Also an itch, a smart, a tetter, a skurffe, a ring∣worme. Proritatione, a biting or gnawing in the entrailes or stomacke, which is caused by a sharp humor, ingendred of sorow, anger, watching, mawe-wormes, &c. Prorogare, to prorogue, to prolong, to de∣ferre, to delaie, to driue off. Prorogatione, a proroguing, a prolong∣ing, a deferring, a delaying, a driuing off. Prorogatiua, a prerogatiue, a prehemi∣nence. Prorómpere, rompo, ruppi, rotto, to breake or burst foorth with violence, to burst out, to leape or goe out of a place with violence, to rush out. Prorotto, broken, or burst forth with vio∣lence, lept or gone out rushinglie or run∣ning swiftlie. Also desperate and head∣long. Prorsi, limits or bounds of land directed to the east. Prosa, any thing written or spoken in prose, a continued stile, that which is not meetre. Prosapia, a progenie, a descent of bloud, a pedigree, a generation, a race, a li∣nage. Prosare, to write or speake in prose. Prosatore, a writer or speaker in prose. Proscenio, a stage or skaffold for play∣ers to play vpon, but properlie the place before the skaffold out of which the players come. Prosciutto, any kinde of dride bakon, or martlemas beefe. Prosciógliere, sciolgo, sciolsi, sciolto, to loosen, to free, to set at libertie, to discharge. Proscriuere, scriuo, scrissi, scritto, to sell, publish or proclaime openlie, to ba∣nish, to proscribe. Proscrittione, the manner of condemna∣tion when it is proclaimed, that who so euer findeth a man may lawfully kill him, and haue a reward, a proscription, a banishment. Also an open sale. Proscritto, set out, or proclaimed to be sold, proscribed or banished, so that any man may kill him. Prosedano, an vnaptnes to generation by ouermuch labour, namely in beastes. Proseguire, guisco, guito.   Proseguitare, to prosecute, to pursue, to follow after, to declare or speake fur∣ther, to continue with, to bring to an end. Prosimurio, a place without the walles of Rome where the bishops of the Gentiles made their diuinations. Prosodia, the arte of accenting, or rule of pronouncing words truly, long, or short. Proslanuanomeno, a kinde of musicall note, or tune. Prosontione, as Presontione. Prosontuoso, as Presontuoso. Prosone, a slowe, warie, circumspect speaker. Prosopopéia, a faining of any person to speake, a representing of persons. Prosperare, to prosper, to thriue, to haue good successe in things, to be fortunate, to giue prosperitie, to make prosperous, to giue successe vnto. Prosperéuole, as Próspero. Prosperità, prosperitie, thrift, good for∣tune, good successe in things. Próspero, prosperous, thriuing, in good plight, that giueth or receiueth prosperi∣tie, luckie, fortunate, good, happie. Prosperóso, as Próspero. Prospicientia, prouidence, circumspect∣nes, foresight, and consideration, fore∣heede. Prospicuo, goodlie or faire to see, or be∣hold, or which may be seene a farre off. Prossimano, as Prossimo. Prossimare, to approch, to come neere, to neighbour, to adioyne vnto. Prossimità, the nighest degree of kindred, kindred, linage, neighbourhood, nigh∣nes, proximitie. Prossimo, neere, neerest, next to, the se∣cond, the very next and immediatlie, by, at hand, adioyning, neighbouring. Also a neighbour, a neere-dweller, a kinsman, an allye. Prossimurio, a place without the walles ioyning to the citie. Prostasià, preheminence. Prostate, a captaine that commeth to help in warres, a gouernour. Prosténdere, tendo, tesi, teso, to stretch for lazines or want of sleepe. Prostéso, stretcht for lazines or idlenes. Prostérgere, tergo, tergei, tergiuto, as Prosternare. Prostergiuto, as Prosternato. Prosternare, to ouerthrow, to fell, to foile, to cast downe, to beare, fell, strike, or cut downe, to fell flat, or lay a long to the ground, to vanquish in battell, to saint or faile. Prosternatione, an ouerthrow, a casting downe, a felling flat, a vanquishing in battell. Prosthapherusi, a number or part which is sometime to be added, and sometime to be taken away, called in latine Ae∣quatio, in astronomie it is commonlie vsed for the difference of the true and equall motion. Prostibula, a common whore, harlot, or strumpet. Prostituire, isco, ito, to abandon to euery mans abusing for monie, to set to sale, to forsake, to play the whore or bawde. Also to set open to euery man that com∣meth, to practise bawdrie or harlotrie. Prostituito, abandoned to euery mans a∣busing for monie, forsaken, set to sale, giuen ouer to others pleasure, plaid the whore, the harlot, the bawde, or com∣mon strumpet. Also one that for monie suffereth himselfe to be abused. Prostitutione, a prostitution, a setting to sale, or open for monie, a playing the whore, &c. Prostrare, to prostrate, to lye along, to foile, to fell. Prostratione, an extreeme weakenes or feeblenes of the bodie, insomuch that the diseased is faine to lye groueling in his bed, being not able to stand on his feete, a prostrating, a lying flat, an ouer∣throw, a destroying. Prostrato, prostrate, lying flat, ouer∣throwne, destroyed. Prostibolo, as Postribolo. Prosúmere, sumo, sumei, sunto, as Pre∣súmere. Prosunto, as Presumuto. Prosuntione, as Presontione. Prosuntuoso, as Presontuoso. Protasio, a proposition, or a prologue of a comedie. Protatica persona, he which is brought in in the beginning of a comedie to lay open the argument, and appeareth no more throughout the whole comedie, the prologue. Protéggere, teggo, tegei, teggiuto, to protect, to maintaine, to vphold, to de∣fend, to couer, to hide, to saue, to shield, to countenance, to back or vphold one. Proténdere, to set, put, cast, or stretch forth, to spread, to deferre, to prolong. Proteruia, as Proteruità. Proteruità, frowardnes, peeuishnes, per∣uersenes, curstnes, waywardnes, skit∣tishnes,
snappishnes, saucines, mala∣pertnes, pride. Protéruo, froward, peeuish, wayward, curst, peruerse, skittish, snappish, saucie, malapert, prowd, foolish, knauish, fierce, arrogant, impudent. Protesi, a kinde of figure in speech. Protesta, as Protestatione. Protestare, to protest, to sweare, to af∣firme, to denounce, or to declare openly and manifestly whether a thing be to be done or no. Protestatione, a protestation, a declara∣tion, a denouncing, a swearing, an open declaring of ones sentence or minde. Protestatore, a protestator, a swearer, a denouncer, a declarer, he that decla∣reth manifestlie what is to be eschued and not done. Protésto, as Protestatione, as Pre∣testo. Protettione, a protection, a couertbarne, a defence, a couering or fence of a thing. Protettore, a protector, a defender, a maintainer. Prothimia, promptitude, gentle enter∣tainement. Protipo, that is made for an example or paterne, an image or forme whereof moulds be made in which things be cast. Proto, chiefe, principall, highest, best, first, vsed much in composition, and taken from the greeke. Protocollo, a booke wherein Scriueners register all their writings, any thing that is first made, and needeth cor∣rection. Protógono, of the first kindred. Also the first child or first borne. Protomartire, a chiefe or first martyr or witnes. Protomatto, a chiefe or principall foole. Protomédico, a chiefe or first phisi∣cion. Protomédia, an herbe much vsed at ban∣quets in Persia, that makes all them merie and forget all sorow that eate of it. Protomista, a first or chiefe Bishop, or Deane. Protonotário, a chiefe notarie, or scriue∣ner, or secretarie. Protoplasto, first formed, or made. Protosi, a disease or inflammation in the eyes, which by rupture makes them fall out of their places, or when the mem∣brane of the eye called Vuea by rupture falleth through Cornea. Prototipo, the first patterne. Protrarre, traggo, trassi, tratto, to draw or drag forth, to protract, to deferre, to prolong. Protratto, protracted, deferred, prolon∣ged, drawne foorth. Protribunale, in iudgement before the magistrate seate. Proua, proofe, tryall, experience. Also an attempt, a proffer, a shew, an enterprise. Prouana, a bud or branch of a vine. Also obstinate, wilfull, or headstrong. Prouaneria, obstinacie, stiffneckednes, wilfulnes. Prouanare, to bud or branch as a vine doth, to be obstinate, headstrong, or stiffnecked. Prouanza, obstinacie or wilfulnes. Also a proofe or triall. Prouare, to prooue, to trye, to experience, to perswade or shew by reason or ex∣ample. Prouatore, a proouer, a trier, a probatio∣ner, a practicioner. Prouatura, as Preuatura. Prouedenza, as Prouidenza. Prouedére, veggo, viddi, veduto, or vi∣sto, to prouide, to purueie, to prepare, to forecast, to see for, to fore-see, to take heed, to see, to consider, to take order for. Proueduto, Prouisto, prouided, purueied, prepared, forecast, foreseen, taken-heed, taken order for. Prouedimento, a prouision, a prouiding, a purueying, a prouidence, a supply, a foreseeing, a taking heed, a taking order for. Proueditore, a prouider, a purueier, a foreseer, one that takes order for all things. Prouenca, as Prouinca. Prouenda, prouender or meate for horses. Prouendare, to prouender or meate horses Prouento, the profit, increase or fruit that commeth and is gathered of any thing, plentie, reuenewes, yeerely rents and profits. Also good successe. Prouenire, to come or proceed from. Also to come or stepfoorth, to growe or in∣crease, to be borne or brought foorth in∣to the world, to happen or chance, to come to passe, to prooue or come to good. Prouenuto, commen or proceeded from. Also growen or increased, borne or brought foorth, hapned or chanced, come to passe, prooued good. Prouerbiale, prouerbiall, frumping, full of skoffes, tants, quips, prouerbs or olde sawes. Prouerbiare, to rebuke, to check, to tant, to reprooue, to quip, to frump, to skffe, to cog withall. Prouerbiatore, a frumper, a skffer, a quipper, a flouter. Prouerbietto, a fine wittie prouerbe or old sawe: a quip, a frump. Prouérbio, a prouerbe, an adage, a short wittie saying, a common saying, an old said saw. Prouerbioso, full of prouerbes, quips or sententious sayings, tants, frumps or skoffes. Prouetto, growen, sprung vp, aduanced, promoted, continued, far spent. Pró vi faccia, much good may it do you. Also God giue you ioie. Prouidénte, as Prouido. Prouidéntia, prouidence, foresight, wari∣nes, forecaste, wisdome in prouiding for things to come, fore-heed. Próuido, prouident, warie, charie, fore-seeing, wise, prudent, diligent, fore-see∣ing a thing a far off and prouiding for it before it come, circumspect, heed∣full. Prouigione, as Prouisione. Prouinca, the herbe called Lesseron or Perwinke. Prouincia, a prouince, a region, a countrie, a shire, properly a prouince or far coun∣trie subdued by force of armes, and kept vnder iurisdiction by a lieutenant sent thither with commission to gouerne the same. Prouinciale, prouinciall, nationall, per∣taining to a prouince. Vide Corona. Also a forreiner. Prouisanti, prouiders, purueiers, caters. Also such as sing extempore and speake at randome. Prouisare, to speake or sing extempore. Prouisionale, prouisionall, pertaining to prouisions. Prouisionare, to prouide for, to giue a pen∣sion or a standing fee. Prouisione, a prouision, a purueying or prouiding for, a fore-seeing of a thing. Prouisore, as Proueditore. Prouocare, to prouoke, to chalenge, to de∣fie one to fight, to appeale, to stir vp, to call a far off, to call foorth, to stir, to in∣uite, to exhort. Prouocatione, a prouocation, a prouo∣king, a chalenging. Prouocatiuo, prouoking, chalenging, de∣fying. Prouocatore, a prouoker, a chalenger. Prouósto. as Proposto, a prouost, a mar∣shall. Prua, as Proda.
Pruare, as Prodare. Prudénte, wise, warie, wittie, prudent, sut∣tle, slie, charie, sage, expert, cunning, circumpect, learned, skilfull, witting, knowing. Prudentia, prudence, wisedome, wit, wa∣rines, cunning, sage knowledge. Prudentissimo, most prudent, wise, wit∣tie or sage in eschuing of things. Prugna, Prugnola, any kinde of small plum, damzon, bulloes or slow. Prugno, Prugnolo, a plum tree, damzon tree or slow tree. Pruina, a hoare frost, a white frost. Also a mist, a fog, a chilling cold. Pruinare, to freeze to a white hoarie frost, to be mistie or foggie. Pruire, pruisco, pruito, as Prorire. Pruito, as Prorito. Pruna, Prunola, as Prugna. Pruneggioli, as Pruniggioli. Prunella, the herbe Selfheale, prunell, car∣penters herbe or hooke-heale. Pruno, Prunolo, as Prugno. Pruni, shrubs, brakes, sprigs, bushes, thorns, brambles or firs. Pruniggioli, small shrubs, brakes or bram∣bles. Prunoso, thornie, shrubbie, bushie, full of shrubs or thornes. Prunotta, a kind of plum or damzon or prune. Pruoua, as Proua. Pruouare, as Prouare. Pruouatore, as Prouatore. Prutire, as Prorire. Prurito, as Prorito. Prusa, a kind of flie called a horse flie or a brizze. also a kind of fish so called in Ge∣noua. Also a worme that breedeth in a kind of fish. Psalmodia, as Salmodia. Psalmo, as Salmo. Psaloide, as Saloide. Psegma, as Semma. Psephisma, as Sephisma. Psaltério, as Saltério. Pseudisodomo, a kind of building when the wals be made of stone and of vne∣quall thicknes. Pseudo, false, counterfeit, forged. Pseudographia, a writing of a forged matter, a counterfeit writing. Pseudólogo, a lyer, a false speaker. Pseudomartire, a false martir. Pseudomeno, a sophisticall argument, a captious conclusion, a fallacie in reaso∣ning. Pseudonimo, h that hath a counterfeit name. Pseudoprophéta, a false prophet or false teacher. Psice, a kind of beast hauing a voice like a man. Psicomantio, a place where inchanters call vp spirits. Psidracio, a little swelling or rising in the vppermost part of the skin like vnto blisters full of yellow matter. Psillio, an ointment to take away haire. Also the herbe Fleawoort or Fleabane. Psolóe, a kind of lightning which doth kill and destroy with the flash. Pterigio, a skin growing from the corner of the eie, and in continuance couering the sight. Also the going away of the flesh from the naile with great paine, or the little peeces of skin that sometimes rise about the nailes at the fingers endes called in English wort-whales or liure∣ges, or as some thinke a swelling of the flesh ouer the naile. Pterigóde, that hath the bones of his shoul∣ders or his shoulder blades standing out like wings, which kinde of men are subiect to consumptions. Pterigóide, fower processes to the out∣ward part of the cuneall bone at the foundation of the skull, where the teeth called the grinders are fastened, that is to say on each side two, spreading like vnto the wings of a bat. Ptiade, a kind of adder of a greenish co∣loure, somewhat drawing to the colour of gold. Ptinge, a rauenous bird sometime fighting with the eagle so valiantly, that in grapling togither they fal to the ground, and be taken of shepheardes. Ptisana, Ptisan or Tysan, that is to say barley husked and sodden in water, or barley water such as phisitions com∣monly giue to sicke folkes to drinke. Puauola, as Poauola, as Putta. Pube osso, the second part of Osso ilio, which being not so broade as the for∣mer is throwed on each side with a large and ample hole. Púbero, of age, able to ingender, ful grown, properly of the age of twelue or foure∣teene yeeres. Pubertà, the age of foureteene yeeres in men, and twelue in women. Also the first comming foorth of yoong haires. about the priuie parts. Pubéscere, besco, bescei, besciuto, to begin to grow from a boy to a man, to be∣gin to haue a heard, to waxe ripe, to shoote out plentifully. Pubesciuto, begun to grow a man, begun to haue a beard, waxed ripe. Pubi, the haires about the priuie members in man about fourteene yeeres of age, and in women about twelue. Pública, a publication, a proclamation, a manifestation, a reuealing, a making common. Also a confiscation. Publicamente, openly, publikely, in the face of the world, in the name or behalfe of the common weale. Publicano, a farmer that hath taken in farme the common rents of the King or of the people. he that tooke to farme of the people of Rome the reuenewes due to the citie at a certaine rent, who were reputed as gentlemen. Also a publicane. Publicare, to publish, to proclaime, to set foorth, to declare, to manifest, to make knowne, to lay open, to cause to be cride. Publicatione, as Publica. Publicatore, a publisher, a cryer, a pro∣claimer. Publice, a flea. Publico, publike, open, manifest, apparant, common, vulgar. also the comminalty or publike people. Also pertaining to euery estate of the people iointly or seuerally. Also in the streets or common places abroad among people. Also the reue∣newes or ordinarie paiments due to a common weale. Publicola, he that reuerenceth, and hono∣reth the people. Puche, berries of bayes or iuniper. Pudendágra, a disease about the priuie parts like a winchester goose. Pudende, filthie, vncleane, stinking. Also the priuie parts Pudica, chaste, cleane, vnspotted, maiden∣like, shamefast, honest. Pudicità, chastitie, cleanlines of life, vir∣ginitie, maiden-head, honestie, puritie. Pudicitia, as Pudicità. Pudore, shamefastnes, bashfulnes or cha∣stitie, moderation, letting the mind to doe any thing wantonly or dishonestie, virginitie. Also a shamefull or vncleane acte. Puerile, childish, boyish, trifling, of or per∣taining to a child. Puerilità, as Pueritia. Also a childs act. Pueritia, childishnes, infancie, childhood, noneage, boyishnes. Pufera, as Bufera. Puffino, a kind of fowle called a puffin. Puga, a pricke, a pilicocke, a dildoe. Pugile, a champion, a paladine, an errand knight, a strong fighter. Pugna, fists, handfuls, blowes with fistes. Also a fight, a braule, a skirmish, a bat∣tle, a combate, a fraie, a conflict, a buf∣feting. Pugnace, warlike, fighting, contentions,
quarrellous, a great fighter. Pugnacità, a sharpe desire or longing to fight. Also a contention or fighting. Pugnacolo, a place where men do fight. Pugnalare, to stab, to strike or hurt with a dagger. Pugnlata, a blow, a stab or hurt with a dagger. Pugnale, a dagger, a poynado, a poyniard. Pugnale vetrino, a dagger or poynado of glasse, a dildoe. Pugnaletto, a little dagger, poynado or poyniard. Pugnante, fighting, striuing, contending, repugnant. Pugnare, to fight, to skirmish, to combate, to contend, to assault, to striue, to re∣pugne. Also to dispute or reason con∣trarie. Pugnata, a hand or fistfull, as Pugna. Pugnatore, a fighter, a combatant, a skir∣misher. Pugnetto, a little fist or handfull, a blow with a fist. Púgnere, pungo, punsi, punto, to pricke, to sting, to stitch, to foine. Also to make somewhat carefull or pensiue, to touch to the quicke, to nettle, to bite the stomack, to be sharpe vpon the toong, to vexe or disquiet. Pugno, a fist or a handfull. Also a blow with a fist. Pugnoro, a measure being about a hands breadth or shaftman. Puiana, a kind of bird. Puina, a kind of fresh cheese and creame. Pula, an herbe or weede which growes a∣mong corne and choketh it much. Pulce, Pulice, a flea. Pulcella, a maiden, a virgin, a damzell, a maide, a lasse, a girle. Pulcino, a chicke, a yoong chicken, a little flea. Pulcra, faire, beautifull, comely, welfa∣uoured, handsome, gaie, exellent, glori∣ous. Pulcritudine, fairnes, beautie, fauour, handsomnes. Puledra, a mare colt. Puledro, a horse colt. Pulegio, Peniroyall, Pudding-grasse or Puliall-royall. Puleggio, a pullie in a ship or a well. Pulicano, an instrument to draw out teeth with. Pulice, Pulce, a flea. Pulicare, an herbe called Flea-woort or Fleabane. Pulicaria, as Pulicare. Pulione, some take it to be the Flea-woort or Fleabane. Pulire, as Polire. Pulito, as Polito. Pulitello, as Politello. Puliteo seluatico, a wilde asse colt. Pulitezza, as Politezza. Pulitura, a polishing. Pullano, a glade, a kite or a puttocke. Pullato, rude, ignorant. Pulli prema, a stealer of children. Pullore, a bird called a coote. Pullulare, to bud, to blossome, to spring, to sprout, to shoot out yoong shootes. Pullulatione, a budding, a blossoming, a sprouting. Pulluli, buds, blossomes or yoong sprigges, sprouts, yoong shootes. Pulmone, as Polmone. Pulmonaria, as Polmonaria. Pulpa, as Polpa. Pulpito, a pulpit or chaire or place for a preacher, or to make an oration in. Pulpo, a cuttle fish. Also a cuttle bone. Pulsare, to beate, to knocke, to smite, to strike, to pant, to thump. Pulsatilla, the herbe blacke Hellebor. Pulsatile, breathing, panting, beating, knocking, striking. Pulsatione, a panting, a striking, a smi∣ting, a thumping. Pulsatiuo, as Pulsatile. Pulsiuo, pursie, pursicke, broken winded, panting. Pultiglia, a poultis. Also a pap. Pulzella, as Pulcella. Pumice, a pumice-stone. Puncella, as Pulcella. Púngere, as Púgnere. Pungénte, pricking, sharpe, stinging, keen, foyning. Pungentino, a suttle, slie, quipping, close fellow, a stinger. Pungetopi, Knee-holme or Butchers-broome. Pungetto, a plowghmans goade or a sting or a pricke. Pungimento, a pricking, a stinging, a compunction, a remorse. Pungolo, a pricke, a sting, as Pungimen∣to, a goade. Punico, a colour as red as scarlet. Some take it for yellow. Punire, nisco, nito, to punish, to cha∣stice, to correct, to take vengeance of. Punito, punished, chastised, corrected. Punitione, a punishment, a chastisement, a correction. Punitore, a punisher, a corrector, a cha∣stiser. Punta, a point, a sting, a sharpnes, a prick, a foyne or thrust with any weapon▪ a disease called a stitch, or a pleurisie, a tip. Looke pigliar la punta. Puntale, the chape of a dagger or sword. Puntali, tags of points, aglets▪ bodkins. Puntaletti, as Puntali. Puntalmente, particularlie, point by point, coylie, nicelie, as Pontalmente. Punta di coltello, the point of a knife. Punta di piedi, the tip of the toes. Punta delle stringe, the tag of a point. Puntare, to point, to sharpen, to appoint, to prefix, to spurne, to prick, to sting, to prouoke, to egge one, to whet, to stitch, to quilt any worke, to foyne, to prick, or thrust at, to wyre-draw any matter. Also to finde fault with, to oppose, to carp at anything. Also to set ones foote against any stay▪ to blame, to taxe. Puntato, pointed, sharpned, appointed, prefixed, spurred, prickt, stung, prouo∣ked, egged on, whetted, sticht or quilted, counterpointed any worke, foyned or thrust at. Also nice, coy, fine, daintie, affected, scrupulous, ouerweening. Also keene or sharp-pointed, a man standing on points. Also carped, or found fault with, blamed or taxed. Puntaruola, nice, coy, scrupulous, stan∣ding or going on tiptoes, carping, squea∣mish, captious, still finding fault with others. Puntaruolo, a nice, coy, affected, scru∣polus, selfconceited fellow▪ a bodkin▪ a man that stands vpon points, a carper, a findefault, a gouldsmiths pouncer. Puntatamente, as Puntalmente. Punteggiare, to sharpen, to make sharp, to prick, to foyne at, to point, or prick by points. Puntellare, to vnderprop, to vnderset, to strengthen, to vphold. Also to make sharp. Puntelli, vnderprops, stakes of timber to vnderset anything, the spakes of a cart. Also bodkins, or pricks. Punteruola, as Puntaruola. Puntiglio, little, small, nice points, as we say punctos of honour and reputation. Punto, prickt, pointed, stung, stitched, counterpointed, foyned, or thrust at. Also prouoked, encited, egged on, prickt on. Also a prick, a point, a prick with a pinne or any sharp thing, a centre, a foyne, a thrust, a stitch▪ a moment of time, an instant, a minute, or the least portion of a thing that can be, a iot, a whit, a dram, a crum, at all, neuer a∣whit, no iot, no point as the frenchmen say▪ a game on the head at cards, fiue and fiftie at primero▪ a point in the tables, a point vpon the dice, a point or prick, or full point in writing, a stitch
or prick in any worke or sowing, a coun∣terpoint. Also the principall proposition or chiefe point of an argument. Also vexed, disquieted, netled, toucht to the quick. Punto, Carta di punto, a card that hath no cote on it. Puntofermo, a full point or a period in a sentence. Punto, A punto, iust, iump, euen so, in the nick. Also as Boccata. Puntuale, punctuall, according to points. Puntuare, to point, to sharpen, to make keene or sharp-pointed. Puntura, a foyne, a prick, or a thrust, a stoccado. Also a disease called a stitch or a pleurisie. Also a stinging. Puntuto, sharp-pointed, keene, hauing a point. Punzecchiare, to iussle, to push, to thrust, to shooue, or heaue off with ones hands or elbow, to foine at, to iog, to shoulder, to punch, to thump. Punzecchij, blowes, pushes, iogs, shoul∣drings, or iusslings with ones elbow, punches, thumps. Punzella, as Pulcella. Punzellare, to prick, to sting, to goade, to push at, to thrust at, to prouoke, to pricke or egge on. Also as Punzec∣chiare. Punzello, a pricking or setting on, a shouldring, iogging, or iusling, a goade that ploughmen vse, a prick, or a sting, the sting of a bee or waspe. Punzello delle api, the sting of a bee. Punzello de' bifolchi, a ploughmans goade. Punzonare, as Punzecchiare. Also to pounce or worke pouncing worke. Punzone, a blow with the fist, a thum∣ping, a iogging, a iusling or shouldring. Also a bodkin, or any sharp pointed thing. Also a piece, a barell, a tierce, pipe, rundlet or hogshead for wine▪ a thump, a bounce, a knock or a blowe, a goldsmiths pouncer or pounce. Also a little stamp. Può, Puole, Puote, he may, he can, he is able. Può fare, an oth that Italians vse, adding to it what they will sweare by, as Può fare la natura, can nature do this? Puotére, as Potére. Puotuto, as Potuto. Puóuolo, a popler tree. Pupicella, a babie or puppet for children to play with. Pupilla, the sight of the eye, the ball or apple of the eye. Also a woman-childe within age and vnder ward, one that hath no mother aliue, a pupill, a ward. Pupillare, to cry as a Peacock, to play the pupill, like a warde or a pupill; of or be∣longing to one in warde by reason of nonage. Pupillo, a pupill, or a warde, a fatherlesse childe, an orphane, a man-childe within age. Also one that is not vnder his fa∣thers charge. Pupina, as Pupicella. Pupo, a pigsneye, a sweet-hart, a prettie musse, a daintie mop, a playing babie, a puppet. Pupola, a bird called a houpe. Puppa, as Poppa. Puppare, as Poppare. Puppula, a bird called a houpe. Pura, pure, neate, chast, cleane, naked, vnspotted, cleare, honest, fine, vpright. Looke Puro. Puragna, corruption of bloud, goare bloud, clods of bloud. Puramente, purely, cleanlie, vnspotted∣lie, candide, clearely, finely, vprightly, honestly, without welt or guard, with∣out exception or condition. Looke Puro. Pur, as Pure in all places. Pur che, so that. Pur adesso, euen now, now now. Pur assai, to to many, or to to much, ouer∣much and enough, or many. Pur come, euen as, euen when, yet how. Pure, a word of great ornament in the I∣talian tongue, yet, albeit, although, notwithstanding, in case, not onely, at least, surely, onely, when all is done, in the end, so much as, for all that, algates, and as we say needes, as Mi conuien pure, I must needes, or of force. Pure alhora, euen then, at that in∣stant. Purhora, euen now, now now, not long since. Pur mò, euen now, now now. Pur púre, neuerthelesse, notwithstan∣ding. Purvia, on, away, go to, on on, for∣ward. Pur vn tantino, as much as nothing, a iotkin. Puraccio, a simple, foolish, nice, wellmea∣ning gull, a noddie-poope. Purata, as Puragna. Puretto, somewhat cleanely, or neate, or pure. Purga, a purge, a purgation, a cleansing. Also a purgation or cleare discharge. Also a skouring. Also an excuse or clearing. Purgabile, that may be purged or clean∣sed. Purgamento, a purging, a cleansing. Also taken for any filth comming from that that is cleansed. Also a purgation or cleare discharge. Purgare, to purge, to cleanse, to cleare, to skoure, to make cleane, to excuse, to remedie. Purgatione, as Purga. Purgatiuo, purging, that doth purge, or may be purged. Purgatore, a purger, a cleanser, a skou∣rer. Purgatore di panni, a trimmer, a skou∣rer or dresser, or cleanser or washer of clothes. Purgatório, a purgatory, a purging place, a clensing place. Purificare, to purifie, to clense, to purge, to scoure or make cleere. Purificatione, a purification, a clensing, a scouring, a clearing. Also the purificati∣on of the virgin Marie, Candlemas day, the day whereon women be churched, hauing laine in a moneth in imitation of our lady. Purità, puritie, clenlines, neatenes, vnspot∣tednes, purenes, cleerenes. Puritani, puritaines, such as professe puri∣tie. Puritanismo, the profession or order of puritanes. Puro, pure, neate, vnspotted, vpright, sin∣cere, naked, cleane, cleere, honest, iust, fine, thinne, innocent, spotlesse, with∣out filth, faire, white, simple, plaine, of it selfe, vncorrupted, without mix∣ture, without exception or condition. Púrpura, the purple colour, a princes or chiefe mans purple garment, or the dig∣nitie of a chiefe magistrate. Also a a purple fish, which is a shell-fish, wher∣of the purple colour commeth. Purpurato, purpured, apparelled in pur∣ple, of, or belonging to purple or purple colour▪ also belonging to the place where fishers kill or take the purple fish. Also clothed in garments of purple. Also a noble man, a peere of the realme. Purpuréo, of the colour of purple, like pur∣ple, red, bluish, araid in purple. Purpurisso, red painting wherewith some women do vse to paint their faces, a liuely ruddie colour called cheeke-var∣nish. Also like purple, or of the colour of purple. Purpurino, as Purpuréo. Also a liuely redde colour women vse for painting, called cheeke-varnish. Purpurite, a kinde of marble in Egypt, ruddie and full of white spots. Pur tróppo, euen too much, to too much,
enough and enough. Pur vno, so much as one, one onely. Purulente, full of matter and filthines, as of an impostume or other running sore, filthie, irkesome, matterie, scuruie. Purulentia, a sre full of corruption and matter. Pusilla, small, little, short, slender. Also a virgin or a maiden. Pussilanimità, pusillanimitie, cowardise, dastardise, basenes of courage, faint∣hartednes. Pussilanimo, weake or base harted, co∣wardish, a crauen, a dastarde, faint∣harted. Pustella, as Pustula. Pustula, a push, a blisher, a blane, a wheale or winde-gall in a horse. Pustuloso, full of blisters, pushes, blanes, wheales or winde-gals. Pusula, a little bladder rising on bread when it is baked. Also a disease rising of hot cholericke bloud, and which begin∣neth with a blister, and groweth to a sore or scabbe like a tetter, called saint Anthonies fire. Putana, as Puttana. Putanare, as Puttaneggiare. Putatiuo, presupposed, thought, reputed, imagined, imaginarie, supposed. Putelle, little wenches, girles or lasses. Puténte, stinking, vnsauorie, tainted. Pútido, stinking, vnsauorie, vnpleasant in smell. Putigine, as Lentigine. Putiginoso, as Lentiginoso. Pútire, putisco, putito, to stinke, to sa∣uour ill, to haue an ill sauour. Putore, a stinke or ill sauour. Also a beast called a fitch. Putrédine, putrefaction, corruption, rot∣tennes. Putrefare, to putrifie, to rot, to corrupt, to taint, to be addle. Putrefatto, putrifide, rotten, addle, tain∣ted, corrupt. Putrefattiuo, that will putrifie, rot, or corrupt. Putrefattione, putrifaction, corruption, rottennes. Putrida, rotten, putrifide, addle, tainted. Putridezza, as Putrefattione. Putta, a wench, a girle, a modder, a lasse, a yoong maide. Also a whore, a harlot, a strumpet. Also a magot a pie, a aie or piot. Puttana, a whore, a harlot, a strumpet, a queane. Puttanare, as Puttaneggiare. Puttanaccia, a filthie great whore or ia∣dish strumpet, a stallion rampe. Puttanaria, whoredome, the arte of whoring. Puttanella, a yoong whore, a prettie strumpet, a little harlot. Puttaneggiare, to play the whore, to fol∣low harlots. Puttaneggio, whorisme, whoredome, bawdrie, the arte or trade of a whore. Puttanesco, whorish, bawdie, strumpet-like. Puttanesimo, as Puttaneggio. Puttanina, as Puttanella. Puttanità, whoredome, whorishnes. Putina, a little girle, wench or lasse. Putti occhi, greedie eies: vsed by Dante so. Putto, a boye, a lad, a yoong man, a strip∣lin, a lackey. Puttotta, a good handsome, plum-cheekt wench or lasse, a prettie trull. Puuione, a doue, a culuer, a pigeon. Puzza, a stinke or an ill sauour or smell. Puzzare, to stinke, to yeelde an ill smell. Puzzo, as Puzza. Puzzore, as Puzza. Puzzolente, stinking, yeelding an ill sent. Puzzulente, as Puzzolente. Q QVa, heere, hither, in this place. Quaderni, two fowers, or two qua∣ters at dice. Quaderno, fower-square. Also the arse by a metaphor. Also a little quier of fower sheetes. Quadra▪ Dare la quadra, to smooth or sooth vp a matter finely, to make one be∣leeue the moone is made of green cheese, to giue one a gudgeon. Quadragesima, the fasting time of the yeere called lent. Quadragesimo, the fortieth in number. Quadrane, a kinde of peare in Italy. Quadrangolo, a quadrangle, a place that hath fower corners. Quadrangolare, quadrangular, fower-square. Quadrante, fower-square, a quadrant, a sun-dyall, squaring. Also a kinde of waight. Quadrare, to square, to make fower-square. also to befit, to sute well, to agree togither. Quadrato, squared, made fowre-square, befitted, become, suted, well agreed or squared well. also quarrie & big, great and strong, well pight, handsome, well made and fashioned. Also a square number, a number which is made by the multiplying of some one number vpon it selfe. Quadratura, a squaring or setting in or∣der, the squaring of any thing. In astro∣nomie it signifieth the halfe moone, bi∣cause then the sunne and the moone are a quarter of a circle a sunder. Quadrella, a quarer, the arrowe of a crosse-bowe, a shaft, an arrow, a thun∣der bolt. Quadrelli, brickes, or the square coloured stones in chimnie paces. Quadretti, little dishes, rondlets, wreaths, or plates, that are vsed to put or laie vnder dishes to keepe the table clothes cleane. losenges in armory. Quadretto, any little fowre-square thing, a womans lowe stoole, a foote stoole, a picture or a square, a square or a bed in a garden: a bricke or square stone, a cushion, namely a tailors cu∣shion, a gusset. a trencher, a tablet, a table. a losenge in armorie. Quadri, squares, those that we call dia∣monds or picts vpon playing cardes. Quadriga, a cart or wagon with fowre wheeles. Also a teeme of fower horses. Quadrilátero, hauing fower sides. Quadrifórme, that hath fower formes. Quadriglio, a crue, a troupe, a companie. Quadrigémino, fower double. Quadrilingue, that speaketh fower toongs. Quadri parti, square, fower-squared. Quadrimembrale, of fower parts. Quadrinóttio, fower nights space. Quadripartito, deuided or cut in fower parts. Quadriuio, a fower-way, a way that hath fower turnings, a place where fower waies meete. Quadro, square, fower-square, a square, a cushion, a fower-square trencher, any fower square tablet, boord, or pic∣ture. Quadrucci, a kinde of square bricks. Quadrunciale.   Quadrupede, fowerfooted, hauing fower feete. Quadruplicare, to double fower times, to make fower-times so much as it was. Quadruplo, fowe-folde, or fower double, of fower fashions. Qua e la, heere and there, vp and downe. Quaglia, a birde called a quaile. Quagliare, to curd or congeale as milke doth. Quagliato, curdded or congealed as fresh cheese. Quagliaruolo, a quaile pipe, a catcher of quailes.
Quagliata, a dish of curds, a curdding, a congealing. Quagliera, a quaile-net. Also one that sels quailes. Quagliere, a catcher of quailes, a quaile basket. also a tailers cushion. Quagliette, yoong quailes. Quaglio, the rennet that they curd milke withall to make cheese. Quai, who? which? what? such as, whosoeuer. Qual, who? which? whether? such, as, so as. Qualche, some, some one. Qualche sciocco, none but some foole, some foole. Qualcheduno, some one, some body. Qualcheuolta, some times, at times, nowe and then. Qualcosetta, some little thing. Qualcuno, some one, some body. Qual di duo, whether, which, or whosoe∣uer of two. Qual tu vuoi, which, or whether thou wilt. Qual si voglia, which, or whatsoeuer. Qualhor, Qualhora, at what time, whensoeuer. Quale, which, who, what, as, like, like vn∣to, such, such as, euen as, whosoeuer, whatsoeuer, whether. Quales, a tree in Prouence about the root whereof groweth certaine bladders full of a kinde of liquor as red as bloude, which dried in the sunne at the ende of sommer there arise out of them certaine woormes wherewith they die crimson in graine. Qualificare, to qualifie. Qualificatione, a qualification. Qualità, a qualitie, sort, size, or matter, a condition, a state, a calling or profession. Qualitatiuo, that may be qualified, full of qualities, well conditioned. Qualmente, how? in what sort? Also howsoeuer, so, that, how, how as. Qualunque, whosoeuer, whatsoeuer. Qualunque si sia, who, or whatsoeuer he be. Qualunque si voglia, whosoeuer, whoso∣euer he be. Qualunque volta, what time soeuer. Quando, when? when as, then, at that time, at what time, if, if so, if that, if so be that. Quando bene. Quandopure, if so be that, if, howbeit, all were it. Quondo che sia, whensoeuer it is, at what time soeuer. Quando mai, whensoeuer. Quandunquè, when soeuer. Quante, how many? as many. Quante volte, as manie times, how many times. Quanti, how many, as many. Quantità, a quantitie, a deale. Also a store, bignes, greatnes or multitude. Quanto, howe much? howe farre? howe long? what? so much as, concerning, touching, as much, as for, about, so, or as much as it is woorth, what or how great a matter, how or so much, howe great, so much as, as farre, assoone, how farre, so manie, according as, to the vttermost, howe great, how excellent? as bigge or great. Quanto a questo, as touching or concer∣ning this. Quanto piu, as much as may be, the most. Quanto presto, assoone as, the soonest, so soone as may be. Quanto prima, as Quanto presto. Quanto sia, how much soeuer. Quanto tèmpo, how long, how long time, so long as. Quantunque, howbeit, albeit, although. Quaranta, the number of fortie. Quarantana, the space of fortie daies fa∣sting or abstinence. Looke Fae la quarantana. Quarantesimo, the fortieth in number. Quarantia, a magistrate of fortie in Ve∣nice. Quarésima, the time of the yeer we cal lēt Quaresimare, to faste, to abstaine, to lent it, to keepe lent. Quaresimeggiare, as Quaresimare. Quarnara, the name of a roape in a ship. Quaro, a kind of bird. Quarra, a kind of saile in a ship. Quarta, a measure called a quart, a fourth part, the fourth. Also a quarter winde of the compasse. Quarta leuante verso greco, east and by north. Quarta greco verso leuante, north east and by east. Quarta greco verso tramontana, north east and by north. Quarta tramontana verso greco, north east and by east. Quarta tramontana verso maestro, north and by west. Quarta maestro verso tramontana, north west and by north. Quarta maestro verso ponente, north west and by west. Quarta ponente verso maestro, west and by north. Quarta ponente verso garbino, west and by south. Quarta garbino verso ponente, south west and by south. Quarta garbino verso austro, south and by west. Quarta austro verso garbino, south and by east. Quarta austro verso scirocco, south east and by south. Quarta scirocco verso austro, idem. Quarta scirocco verso leuante, south east and by east. Quarta leuante verso scirocco, east and by south. Quartana, a quartane ague. Quartare, to quarter or cut in quarters. Quartario, a measure vsed in Greece. Quarteria, a paiment or taking of the fourth part of any thing. Quartiere, a quarter of a yeere or of any thing else, a quarters rent, wages, pae or stipend, a quartredge. Also the part of a campe, whereon any company or num∣ber of souldiers be quartred and lod∣ged. Quartirone, a quarters rent, wages or pay, a quarter of a yeere, a quartredge. Quarto, the fourth in number. Also fourthly. Also a quarter or fourth part of any thing, the sise or volumne of a booke called quarto. Also a false quar∣ter vpon the hoofe of a horse toward the talon. Quarto decimo, the fourteenth in num∣ber. Quarto di castrato, a quarter of mutton. Quartuccio, a little wine measure. Quarza, the name of a saile in a ship. Quasi, almost, as it were, veri-neere, as if, neere like as, in a manner, as though, as who saieth, about. Quasi che, as if, as if it were, neere that, as though. Quassare, as Conquassare. Quasso, as Conquasso. Quaterno, as Quaderno. Quaternità, a companie of fower togi∣ther. Quatórdeci, fourteene in number. Quatórdecimo, the fourteenth in order. Quatriduano, of fower daies continu∣ance. Quatriglia, a little squadron, crue or troupe. Quatrino, a farthing, a small coine. Quattare, to squat, to husht, to lye close. Quatto, squatte, husht, close, still, lur∣king. Quatto quatto, very squat, very whsht, close or still. Quattraggio, a certaine rate of cloth that is giuen aboue measure, as we say a shaft man or a handfull. Also a kind of
course home-spunne cloth that shep∣heards vse. Quattro, the number of fower. Quattro a quattro, by fower and fower. Quattro tempora, the fower embring weekes that be in the yeere. Quattro fia tanto, fower times as much. Que', Quegli, they, those, them same. Also he, the same, that man. Quei, as Que', or Quegli. Quel', as Quello. Quel che, that which, the which, he which. Quel che tu vuoi, whether, what or which thou wilt. Quella, she, that, the same. Quelle, those, those same, them. Quelli, as Que', or Quegli. Quello, he, that, that man, yond, the same, thilke. Quello istesso or medesimo, the verie▪ same. Quel' tanto, that much, that so much. Quennaro, a fish in latin called Atheri∣na. Quercia, a tree called an oake. Quercietto, a groue or thicket of oakes. Quercino, made of oake or wainscot. Also a little cake. Quercióla, herbe Germander or English treacle. Querciólo, a yoong or little oake. Querculo, a little yoong oake. Querela, a complaint, a moane-making, a griefe, an vnkindnes, a wailing, a moan. Also a quarrell, a fraie, a fight, a bicke∣ring, a braule, a suite. Querelare, to complaine, to grieue, to waile, to moan. also to quarrell, to fight, to make a fraie, to scuffle, to braule. Querelatore, a quarreller, a complay∣ner, a plaintife. Quereloso, quarrelsom, quarellous, trou∣blesome, complayning, that complayneth or is full of complaints. Querimonia, complaint, moane, moa∣ning, wailing or lamentation, a moane-making, a lamentable expressing of a thing that one is grieued at. Querimoniare, to complaine, to moane, to waile, to lament, to make moane. Querimonioso, moaning, wailefull, la∣menting, complayning, wailing. Quero, as Quirino. Querquedule, a kind of water fowle. Querulare, as Querimoniare, to shril, sing or chirp. Quérulo, as Querimonioso. Also shril, singing or chirping. Quesitare, to question, to demaund, to in∣quire, to aske, to quest. Quesitante, questioning, demaunding, inquiring, asking, questing. Quesitatore, a questioner, a demaunder, a disputer. Quésito, a question, a questing, a de∣maunding, an asking, a thing asked. Al∣so a thing obtained. Also inquired, as∣ked, demanded, searched. Also gotten or obtained. Questa, this, this same. Questa mane, this morning. Questa notte, this night. Questa volta, this time, this once. Queste, these, these same. Questi, these, these here. Also this man, this same man. Questionare, to question, to dispute, to contend, to examine, to aske, to quest. Also to fight, to quarrell, to braule, to scould, to cope, to square. Questionabile, questionable, disputable, litigious. Questionante, questioning, disputing, contending, fighting, brauling, scoul∣ding. Questione, a question, a demand, an as∣king, an inquisition or examination, a disputation, an inquest, a searching. Also a fraie, a braule, a contention, a scoulding. Questioneuole, questionable, disputa∣ble. Questioncella, a small or idle question, a demaund or disputation, a little foolish braule, fraie or contention. Questo, this, this same, thilke. Questo istesso or medesimo, this verie same. Questóre, a treasurer, a receiuer, an au∣ditor or gatherer of rents, a treasurer of wars. Also a iudge of criminal matters. Also a chamberlaine of a citie. Questório, a place as the exchequer of a Prince or citie is. Also the questors tent in a campe. Also of or belonging to questore. Questura, the dignitie of a treasurer, the office of a questor, of a treasurer or of a chamberlaine. Quetare, to quiet, to pacifie, to appease, to whosht, to still, to rest, to sleepe, to take rest, to be at quiet, to cease or end, to be voide of labour, care and busines, to be calme, to hold ones peace and make no more adoe, to pause and take breath, to stand still and not to mooue. Quéto, quiet, whosht, still, at rest, si∣lent. Also a quietus est or generall dis∣charge. Quéto, Dare vn stacci queto, to giue a whirret or boxe on the eare. Quéto queto, verie quiet, still or whosht. Qui, here, in this place, verie here, hither, hereaway, hereabout. Quici, here, in this place. Quiconce, a kind of orderly and verie exact planting and setting of trees in an orchard by square, so that which way soeuer one looke the trees shall stand directly one against another, and of like distance. it hath the name of the letter V, that signifieth fiue, and being double maketh ten, which may be mul∣plied many waies. Quietare, as Quetare. Quietanza, as Quiére. Also a quietus est. Quiéte, quietnes, rest, repose, peace, silence, ease, sleepe, vacation, and ceasing from labour and trouble. Also calmnes, faire and still weather. Quietitudine, as Quiéte. Quiéto, quiet, still, at rest, gentle, milde, whosht, restfull, calme, peaceable, with∣out trouble and combersomnes, free from worldly matters. Quil, a kind of little beast like a firret. Quilino, Looke Aquilino. Quinario, containing fiue. Quinci, hence, from hence, thence, from thence, then, after, afterward. Quinci e quindi, hence and thence. Quinci inanti, henceforwarde, heereaf∣ter. Quinci in poi, as Quinci inanti. Quinconce, set or planted fiue in a rank. Quincuplo, fiue double, fiue-fold. Quindeci, the number of fifteene. Quindécima, the fifteenth, a subsidie we call a fifteene. Also the full of the moone or the second quarter of the same. Quindécimo, the fifteenth in number. Quindi, thence, from thence, then, after, afterward. Quindici, the number of fifteene. Quindi e quinci, thence and hence. Quindi inanzi, thence forward, from that time forward. Quindi in poi, as Quindi inanzi. Quini, two cinques or two fiues at dice. Quinquennale, that lasteth fiue yeeres or that is done euerie fift yeere. Quinquennio, the space of fiue yeeres. Quinqueremi, a kind of gallie that hath fiue oares of a side or fiue men to an oare. Quinquertij, certaine fiue-fold games v∣sed among the grecians. Quinta essentia, a quintessence or spirit extracted out of any thing. Quintare, to deuide or share into fiue partes:
Quinternare, to tosse and turne ouer bookes and quiers or records. Quinternale, that is diuided into qui∣ers. Quinterno, a quier of paper. Quintile, the moneth of Iuly, the fifth mo∣neth from March reckoning it for one. Quinto, the fifth in number, the fifth parte. Quintuple, fiue-fold. Quirino, a precious stone found in the hoopes nest, which laide vpon a mans breast that sleepeth, it will make him tel what he hath done. Quisquiglia, sweepings, filth, rubbish, vn∣cleanlines, a sluts corner. Quistionare, as Questionare. Quistionabile, as Questionabile. Quistionante, as Questionante. Quistione, as Questione. Quistioneuole, as Questioneuole. Quitanza, a quittance, a release, a dis∣charge. Quiui, there, thither, yonder, in that place, here. Quosi, red pimples, bumbs or pearles in ones face. Quotidiano, daily, quotidian, that retur∣neth euery day. Quotò? how many in order? how long, how much? of what number? Quoto, hath beene vsed of Dante for iudgment. R RA, in composition is as much as the doing, vndoing, or redoubling of any thing, according as the word to which you ioyne it doth import. Rabbarbaro, the drug rewbarbe. Rabbáttere, batto, battei, battuto, to meete, to chance vpon. Also to rebeate back, to clinch a naile. Rabbattuto, met or hapned vpon by chance, rebeaten, clinched a naile. Rabbattimento, an encounter, a meeting by chance, a clinching of a naile. Rabbellire, lisco, lito, to beawtifie, to readorne againe. Rabbellimento, a readorning or re∣beawtifying. Rabbia, rage, furie, madnes, wrath, moode, cruelnes, woodnes, outragious∣nes, fiercenes, terriblenes. Also the mad∣nes of a dog. Rabbiare, to enrage, to be furious, mad, raging, or fell. Rabbicane, a horse shapened like a gray∣hound. Rabbino, Rabi, Rabis, the Rabbies, or Rabbins. Rabbio, as Furigone. Rabbioso, mad, raging, furious, fell, moodie, enraged, wood, outragious, in great rage, enraged as a dog. Rabboffare, as Rabbuffare. Rabbracciare, to embrace againe. Rabbracciamenti, embracings, huggings, collings. Rabbruscarsi, for a man to strut or rouze himselfe aloofe in anger as a Turkiecock doth being angrie. Rabbuffare, to skould, to braule, to chide, to check, to taunt, to looke staringlie as a mad man, to rouze, to tug, to stare, to disheuell ones haires, to shag, to ruffle. Rabbuffato, skoulded, brauled, chidden, checkt, taunted, looked staringlie as a mad man, rouzed, tugged, disheueled, stared, flaring, all shagd, or ruffled. Rabbuffo, a check, a taunt, a skoulding, a brauling, a staring, a tugging, a chi∣ding. Rabicano, a horse that hath a white taile or rump. Racanello, Racano, as Ramarro. Raccappezzare, to piece, to cobble, to botch, to patch or put together. Raccapricciare, to looke staringlie, to raise the haires of ones head as one frighted with spirits. Raccendere, cendo, cesi, ceso, to re∣kindle or set on fier againe. Racceso, rekindled or set on fier againe. Racchetta, a racket to play at tennis with. Racchettare, to tosse or beate to and fro with a racket. Racchiúdere, chiudo, chiusi, chiuso, to re-enclose or shut vp againe. Racchiuso, re-enclosed or shut vp a∣gaine. Racciabattare, as Rattaconare. Raccò, gather, or collect thowe. Raccógliere, cólgo, cólsi, cólto, to gather together againe, to recouer and get vp againe, to collect, to assemble. Also to receiue or entertaine friendlie. Also to gather in haruest. Raccólto, gathered together againe, re∣couered or gotten vp againe, collected, assembled. Also a gathering, a collecti∣on, an assemblie, a haruest. Raccoglienza, Looke Accoglienza. Raccólta, the time of haruest, the haruest or gathering in of the fruites of the earth. Also as Raccolto. Also as Raccoglienza. Also the call or as∣semblie of souldiers together into the place of armes by the sound of a drum. Also a collection, a gathering, an as∣semblie. Also entertainement or em∣bracing, or receiuing of friends. Raccomandare, to recommend. Raccomandatione, recommendations. Raccominciare, to begin againe. Raccominciamento, a rebeginning. Raccompagnare, to accompanie a∣gaine. Raccomunare, to make common to o∣thers. Raccomunicare, to make common, to impart to others. Racconciare, to reforme, to redresse, to mend, to dresse, to settle, to order. Racconciamento, as Racconcia∣tura. Racconciatore, a reformer, a redresser, a mender. Racconciatura, a reforming, a redres∣sing, a mending, a setling. Racconciliare, to reconcile, to accord, to atone, to agree. Racconcio, mended, reformed, patcht vp, setled in order. Racconsolare, to recomfort or cheere vp againe. Raccontare, to recount, to rehearse, to report, to recite. Raccontamento, a recounting, a re∣port, a relating. Raccontatore, a reporter, a recounter, a rehearser. Raccorciare, to shorten, to abridge, to curtall. Raccordare, to remember. Also to ac∣cord againe. Raccórre, as Raccógliere. Raccosciare, to sit close with legs acrosse as tailers and women do. Raccozzare, to ioyne, to piece, or patch together againe, to shock or but a∣gaine. Racémi, boughes, branches, sprigs, vn∣derwood, hedges, briers, brambles, shrubs. Racémo, as Racemi, a bunch or cluster of grapes, a grape. Also the kernell of a grape. Racemoso, full of clusters of grapes, kernels or beries. Racente, sharp, sowre, or tarte in taste. Racese, a kinde of sharpe wine in Italie. Racha, an hebrue word signifying ex∣treame anger of the person that spea∣keth it to him that he speaketh. Rachetare, to reapease, to quiet, to as∣swage, to still againe. Rachinarsi, to stoupe, to decline or come downe.
Racimillo, Racimolo, as Racemo. Racogno, a Serpent called a Lizard, or an Eft. Racopiare, to write or copie ouer againe. Racoppiare, to recouple or double againe. Racquetare, as Rachetare. Racquistare, to recouer, to reobtaine, to repurchase, to reget. Racquistatore, a recouerer, a reobtainer, a repurchaser. Racquisto, a recouerie, a repurchase, a reobtaining. Racula, a kinde of greene frog. Radain, a kinde of black stone. Raddolcire, cisco, cito, to sweeten, to appease, to asswage, to mollifie, to soften, to pacifie, to calme. Raddolcito, sweetned, appeased, as∣swaged, mollifide, softned, pacifide, calmed. Raddolcimento, an appeasing, a paci∣fying, a sweetening, a mollifying. Raddomandare, to redemaund or aske againe. Raddoppiare, to redouble, or double a∣gaine. Raddoppiamento, a redoubling or two∣foulding. Raddoppiata, a double trick or turne in riding or dancing. Raddrizzare, to right or set vp right, or straighten againe. Rade, few, thin. Looke Rado. Rade volte, few or seldome times. Radere, rado, rasi, raso, or raduto, to shaue, to notte, to pole. Also to raze or go along the shore as a ship doth, or to flye leuell to the ground as some birds do. Also to graze on the ground as an arow or a bullet. Also to make smooth, or scrape. Also to cut, to scoure, or flye a∣way swiftlie. Raduto, Raso, shauen, notted, pouled, razed, gone neere the ground or shore, grazed along as an arrow or a bullet, made smooth, or scraped, &c. Radiano, a bright black stone found in a cocks head. Radij, beames, rayes, streames. Also as Zatte, Looke Radio. Radiante, radiant, shining, blazing, glim∣mering, twinkling, flaring, streaming, blazing bright, casting beames of light, glittering. Radiare, to shine, to beame, to ray, to ra∣diate, to gleame, to leame, to glitter, to cast beames or rayes of light, to glim∣mer, to blaze, to twinkle, to flare, to streame. Radicale, radicall, proceeding from a roote or beginning, humido radicale, the naturall moysture. Radicare, to roote, to settle, to take holde or roote, to plant, to set. Radicchio, cicorie to make sallets with. Also a kinde of meate made of hearbs. Also a kinde of wet sucket. Radice, any kinde of roote, a cause, a spring, or beginning. Also the foote or bottome of a thing as of a hill. in ma∣thematikes, that number, which by one or often multiplication of it selfe brin∣geth forth any number. Radice dolce, the wood licorish. Radicella, a little or small roote. Radico, a kind of salt so called. Radimadia, a kneading tub that bakers vse to knead their paste or dough in, a scraping toole that bakers vse to scrape their kneading tubs with. Radimandare, as Raddomandare. Radio, a beame or raie of the sunne or o∣ther bright starre, the brightnes of the eies. Also a line, a rod, a yard or staffe that Geometricians vse. Also a weauers shuttle. Also the spoke of a wheele. Also a striking round sticke to make mea∣sures euen. Also the vppermost and greater of the two long bones of the cubit, which are both ioyned togither betweene themselues, as also with the shoulder bone and the wrest of the hand, which is also called Focile mag∣giore. It is also vsed for the bigger bone of the shanke. Also the sharpe weapon of a fish supposed to be the Raye. Also the streaming of any thing or blaze. Radioso, as Radiante. Raditore, a shauer, a barber that shaues. Raditura, a shauing, a powling. Rado, rare, not often, seldome, fewtimes, thin, cleare, geason, daintie, seld, not oft, thinly, not thicke, seldome seene, not thicke growne or set. Also excellent, precious, rare to be had or seene. Radrizzare, to stiffen, to reare or set vp∣right againe. Radunare, as Adunare. Radunanza, as Adunanza. Rafano, a radish roote. Raffardellare, to fardle, to bundle or trusse vp againe. Raffazzonare, to bring or reforme to a fashion, to fashion againe, to tricke vp smuglie. Raffermare, to affirme or settle againe, to reconfirme. Raffernare, as Raffrenare. Raffetto, a toole that carpenters vse. Raffij, hookes, dragging hooke, as Rastelli. Raffiare, to hooke, to drag with dragging hookes, as Rastellare. Raffiggere, to fixe vnto againe. Raffigurare, to marke, to viewe, to note with the eie, to remember well. Raffilare, to whet or make sharpe againe, to make keene. Raffinare, to refine, to whet, to make sharp keene or cutting, to lin, to cease, to come to an end. Raffio, any scratch or scratching toole, a rake or dragging hooke. Raffittare, to hire, let or farme againe. Raffolare, to pinch, to scrape, to hug, to get by hooke or crooke, to gather, to hoord vp to rake or huddle vp togither. Raffola ruffola, by rifraffe, by hooke or crooke, by pinching or scraping. Raffrancare, to incourage, to harten, to make lustie, to infrāchise or set at liber∣tie. Also to giue the start to a running horse, to take hart of grace or courage. Raffreddare, to coole or take cold againe. Raffreddamento, a cooling, a cold, a ta∣king cold. Raffreddato, a cold in a horses head being congealed in the braine. Raffreddatoio, a cooling place. Raffrenare, to refraine, to restraine, to bridle or snaffle againe, to pull backe, to stay or stop, to hold backe, to keepe short, to draw backe with the bridle. Raffrenato, refrained, restrained, bridled or snaffled againe, puld backe, staid or stopt, held backe, kept short, drawen back with the bridle. Raffrettare, to hasten or make haste a∣gaine. Raffrontare, to affront, to confront, to meete face to face, to compaire togither. Also to chocke againe. Rafioli, Rafiuoli, a kind of daintie paste meate vsed in Italy, in forme like little pies or chewets. Rafla, a rifling for any thing at dice. Raflare, to rifle at dice. Ragade, a certaine disease in the funda∣ment like the chaps that the cold March winde maketh in mens hands or lips. Also the chaps or clefts comming tho∣rough cold in hands or lips. Ragadie, a kind of disease in the priuities of man or woman. Ragagno, Ragano, an efte, a lizard, a nute, an aspe. Also a clown or a boore or a raskall. Ragate, a kinde of disease in the funda∣ment or priuie parts of women. Ragauignare, to recouer againe suddenly when one is almost fallen. Ragatta, as Rigatta. Ragazza, a lasse, a ench, a girle, a maid-seruant. Also a magot-a-pie or piot.
Ragazzo, a lad, a lackie, a page, a boy, a footman. Raggelare, to freeze againe, to recon∣geale. Ragghiare, to bray as an asse. Ragghio, the braying of an asse. Raggia, a fish with whose skin fletchers smooth their arrowes called a ray or a skate. Some haue taken it for the thorn∣backe. Also rasin. Raggiare, as Radiare, as Ragghiare. Raggietti, little twinkling beames or raies. Raggio, a ray, a beame, a glimps, a strea∣ming, a gleaming light, a squib of wilde fire. Also a spoke of a cart wheele or of a cart. Also the hand or needle of a dyall, horologe or clocke. a certaine rod, yard or staffe that Geometricians vse. Also the greatest of the two long bones of the cubit. Also the bigger bone of the shank. as Radio. Raggioso, as Radiante. Also full of ra∣sin. Raggiornare, to reiourne, to adiorne a∣gaine, to waxe day againe. Raggiúngere, giungo, giunsi, giunto, to ioyne or ouertake againe. Raggiunto, ioyned or ouertaken againe. Raggrauare, to aggrauate or ouerbur∣then againe. Raggrazzolare, as Raffolare. Raggricchiare, as Raggrinzare. Raggrinzare, to wither, to pucker, to wrinkle, to grow full of wrinkles. Also to shrinke vp close togither. Raggrinzata, withered, growne full of wrinkles, wrinkled, shronken vp. Raggruzzolare, as Raggrinzare. Ragguaglianza, as Ragguaglio. Ragguagliare, to make equall againe. Al∣so to aduertise or giue information of any thing. Ragguagliato, made equall againe. ad∣uertised, or giuen information of. Ragguaglio, information, notice, aduer∣tisement or instruction, an equalling or match. Ragia, a knauerie, a knauish plot, a craf∣tie deuice. Also rasin. Ragiatura, a disease in a horse called the laxe. Ragio, a kinde of spider. Ragionamento, a reasoning, a discourse, a talke, a speech, a parlie. Ragionare, to reason, to discourse, to talke, to speake, to parlie. Ragione, reason, right, due, knowledge, wit, wisedome, discourse, discretion, iudgement, aduise, purpose, counsell, care, respect, consideration, aduisement, regard▪ the case, the matter, the state, the meanes, the way, the fashion, the forme, the proportion, the kinde, the sise, the sort. a rule, the trade, the feate, the manner and sort, a minde, a counsell, a perswasion, a cause, an account, a recko∣ning▪ busines, quantitie, value. Also iu∣stice, doome, or place of iustice, and lawe. Ragioneuole, reasonable, endued with reason, that hath the vse of reason. Ragioneuolezza, reasonablenes, rea∣son. Ragioni, sorts, kindes, manners of things. Ragioniere, a discourser, a talker. Ragioso, as Radiante. Ragliare, to bray like an asse. Raglio, the braying of an asse. Ragna, a cobweb, a spiders web or spin∣ning. a fowling net, or hay to catch comes, a bait, a trap, a springe, or en∣trapping. Ragnatella, a small net, or hay. a spiders web or spinning. Ragno, any kinde of spider or spinner, a kinde of shell-fish like a crab. Ragnuola, a little fine sowling net, a little cobweb. Ragóide, the third rind or skinne that compasseth the eye wherein is the hole by which we see. It is also called Vuéa. Ragosta, a fish called a Crab, or Lobster. Ragroppare, to tye or knot together a∣gaine. Ragroppamento, a tying or knotting to∣gether againe. Ragruppare, as Ragroppare, as Rac∣cosciare. Ragruzzolare, to scrape together as a hen doth. Raguardare, as Riguardare. Raguardeuole, as Riguardeuole. Ragunare, as Radunare. Ragunanza, as Radunanza. Ragunata, as Radunanza. Rahumiliare, to rehumble, to asswage, to make gentle, tame, or humble. Raia, as Raggia. Raiare, as Radiare. Raio, as Radio. Raimondina, the secret arte of Alchimie of Raymondus Iulius. Raina, a fish called a Carpe. Rainese, a kinde of coyne. Raitare, to cry, to yell, to whine, to bray out as a woman in labour, to baule, to waule. Raitamento, a crying, a yelling, a whi∣ning, a braying, a walling, a bauling. Raitri, Swart rutters in Germanie. Rallargare, to enlarge or spread out. Rallegrare, to reioyce, to glad, to make merie, to blythe. Rallentare, to relent, to yeeld, to giue o∣uer, to slacke. Rallentamento, a relenting, a yeelding, a slacking. Ralli, the hearbe Saltwort, or prickled kalie. Also the birds called Rayles. Rallieuare, as Rileuare. Ralignare, as Allignare. Raluminare, to lighten, to illuminate. Ralustrare, to reshine, or make bright a∣gaine. Ramaiuolo, a grater to grate with. Ramaria, the trade or shop of a brasier. Ramarginare, to cure, to heale, or close vp a wound or a sore. Ramaricare, to bewaile, to lament, to mone, to sorrow, to waile, to whine bit∣terly. Ramaricamento, a bewailing, a lamen∣ting, a sorrowing, a moning, a wailing, a whining, a weeping. Ramarichéuole, wailefull, sorrowfull, monefull, whining, dolorous. Ramárico, Ramarco, harts-griefe, sor∣rowe, dolour, griefe, mone, wailing, a grudging, a complaining. Ramaricchio, as Ramaricamento. Ramario, a brazier, a copper-smith. Ramaruola, a ladle, a scoope, a great spoone. Also a grater to grate with. Ramarro, an eft, a nute, an aske. Also a kinde of birde. Ramata, a bastonado, a blow with a cud∣gell, a bough full of fruite. Ramatata, as Ramata. Ramatica, full of boughs or branches. Ramazzótto, a chimney sweeper, a drag∣ger, a raker, a farmer. Rame, the mettall called copper or brasse. Raméa, brazen or made of brasse. Raméce, a kind of swelling namely in the cods, which commonly is called a rupture or bursting, whereof there bee diuers kindes, according to the place where it hapneth. Ramegliero, a brazier, a copper-smith, a tinker. Ramembrare, to remember or call to minde. Ramembranza, remembrance, memorie, mindefulnes. Ramemorare, as Ramembrare. Ramemoratione, as Ramembranza. Ramengo, wandring, rouing, loitring, gadding, roming, poore, solitarie, sillie, forlorne. Also a rammish hauke. Ramentare, as Ramembrare. Ramentatione, as Ramembranza. Ramenteuole, mindefull, remembring.
Ramerino, rosemarie. Rametto, a little bough, branch, spraie or twigge, or sprigge. Rami, boughes, branches, spraies, sprigs. Ramicéllo, as Rametto. Ramigno, made of copper or brasse, bra∣zen. Ramingo, as Ramengo. Also when a horse goeth as it were in two mindes, as betwixt going and not going. Ramini, pots, ladles, pans, or kettels of brasse. Rammaricchio, as Ramarico. Rammarino, rosemarie. Rammattonare, to paue with brickes a∣gaine. Rammentare, as Ramembrare. Rammentatione, as Ramembranza. Rammorbidare, to make soft, daintie, or gentle againe, to cockre or make much of. Rammorbidamento, a cockring, a wan∣tonizing, a softning. Rammorbidire, disco, dito, as Ram∣morbidare. Rammorbidito, made soft, dainty, coc∣krish, or gentle againe. Rammorzare, to extinguish, to suppresse, to put out againe, to quench. Ramno, a kinde of tree. Ramo, any bough, branch, sprig or spraie. Also the mettall called copper or brasse. Also an arme or a part, as an arme of the sea, a branch of a tree, of hornes, or of the sea. Ramo di mare, a branch or arme of the sea. Ramogna, successe or following chance. Romolacci, a kinde of rounde blacke ra∣dish rootes. Ramóra, branches, boughes, sprigs, spraies. Ramoracci, as Romolacci. Ramorbidire, as Rammorbidare. Ramoso, full of boughes or branches, branchie, farre spredding. Ramoscioloso, Ramoscoloso, idem. Rampante, rampante, climbing, clamme∣ring. also a word in armorie. Rampardo, a rampier, a fortification or wall of earth. Rampare, to rampe, to clammer to climbe, to hooke, to dragge. Rampata, a blowe giuen with a beasts pawe, foote, or clawe. Rampazzo d'vua, a bunch or cluster of grapes. Rampecare, as Rampegare. Rampegare, to grapple, to hooke, to drag. Also as Rampare. Rampegone, a graper, a hooke, a dragge, a clasping iron, a graple. Rampi, iron hookes or drags, or snags. Rampicare, as Rampegare. Rampicone, as Rampegone. Rampinare, as Rampegare. Rampinato, full of hookes, snags, or ten∣trehooks. also dragged or hooked, ram∣ped or clammered. Rampino, as Rampegone. Also a ten∣ter hooke. Rampogra, a grumbling, a muttring, a grudging, a repining, a snuffing. Rampognare, to grumble, to mutter, to grudge, to repine, to snuffe, to twit one in the teeth any good turne done him. Rampognoso, grudging, muttring, grumbling, repining, snuffing. Rampollare, to grow or bud foorth into branches, as Scaturire. Rampollo, a yoong branch, bough, sprigge or spraie. Ramponato, a kinde of high horse shooe called a calkin shooe. Rampone, a calkin in a horses shooe to keepe him from sliding. Ramponzoli, a kind of roote vsed in sal∣lads called rampes. Ramuscéllo, as Rametto. Rana, a frogge or a padock. Also a certaine push or swelling commonly in the toong of beasts. Pescerana, a fish of the sea, called a frog fish. Morso di rana, an herbe hauing rounde leaues lying flat and spread vpon the water called frog∣bitte. Ranabótolo, a yoong frogge. Ranauotto, a little frogge. Ranca, scarcely, hardly, with much adoe, almost, a neanst. Rancare, to make a matter difficult or hard. Rancia, an orenge. also reazie, stale, tain∣ted, or olde. Also pale or wan, sallowe coloured. Rancia rosso, orenge tawnie colour, al∣most like red. Ranciata, a kinde of sucket of orenges called ranchado. Ranciato, orenge tawnie colour. Rancidire, as Rancire. Rancido, reazie or stinking bacon. Also rammish, mouldie, mustie, ranke, or stinking like things vinewed or rotten. Also very vnpleasant and out of vse. Rancio, orenge tawnie colour, an orenge, or orenge tree. also reizie, stale, tainted, rotten, vinewed, withered, stinking, old as bacon will be. Rancire, cisco, cito, to growe or become reazie, to become rotten, mouldie, ram∣mish, mustie, ranke, vinewed, vnplea∣sant, stale, tainted in taste and smell. Also to make a noise, yell, or braie out like a tygre. Rancito, growne or become reazie as stin∣king bacon is, tainted, rotten, mouldie, rammish, mustie, ranke, vinewed, vn∣pleasant in taste and smell, rammish. Also braide, yelled or made a noyse like a tygre. Rancorare, to rankle, to fester, to waxe full of rage, spite, rancor or malice. Al∣so to animate, to reincourage, to har∣ten. Rancóre, rancor, hatred, malice, spite, ve∣nome, deadly feede. Also rammishnes or rottennes. Also a rankling, a festring. Rancura, as Rancóre. Rancurare, as Rancorare. Randa, scarce, verie neare, almost, a neanst, a neaust, scarcely, nothing. Randagio, a hard harted, cruell, couetous man. Also a gadding or roauing about. Also a hagard hauke. Randellare, to hurle, to fling or pitch or throwe furiouslie, to make a whirling noise. Randéllo, a hurling, whirling or hissing noise in the aire. A randello, at ran∣dom, carelesly, furiously, hurlingly. Randione. Looke Falcon randione. Ranegga, as Brasci. Rangifero, a beast in Lapland as big as a moyle, in colour like an asse, horned like a stag, which they vse in stead of horses to draw their chariots and are woon∣derfull swift in going, for in a day and a night they will goe an hundreth and fiftie miles. Rangolamenti, grumblings, grudgings, muttrings. Rangolare, to grumble, to grudge, to mut∣ter. as Rampognare. Rannicchiare, to shrug, crinch or shrink, in the back as a frog doth, to lie close to∣gither, to cowre. Rannicchio, stooping, shrugging, cow∣ring, close shrinking, crinching. Ranniére, a lie pot that barbers vse to boile and make their lie in. Ranno, a kind of poore folkes pottage like water gruell. Also hot, strong, sharpe, skalding lie. Also a kinde of white bramble bearing more fruit then others doe hauing branches with straight prickles. the herbalists call it Ramme, Christes-thorne, hartes-thorne, way∣thorne, buckthorne or Rhein-berri∣bush. Rannuuolare, to ouercouer or ouercast with cloudes, to be gloomie, cloudie or duskie, to cloud. Ranócchia, a frog or a padocke.
Ranócchia della lingua, the roote of the toong. Ranócchio, a frog or a padocke. Also a toole to pull out teeth with. Ranóncolo, a yoong frog. Also the herbe Crowfoote, Golden knap or Butter flo∣wer. Rantolósa, withered, full of wrimples, fa∣ding, drooping. Ranula, a plate of mettall, an ingot, a wedge of mettall. Ranza, as Rancia. Ranzata, as Ranciata. Ranzato, as Ranciato. Ranzetto, of the colour of raw silke. Ranzo, as Rancio. Rapa, a roote called a turnep or rape-root. Rapáce, rauenous, greedie, pilling, polling, couetous, an extortioner, violent, deuou∣ring, giuen to pilling and polling, and extortion. Rapacità, greedines, rauenousnes, raue∣ning, pilling and polling, extortion. Rapano, a radish roote. Also the herbe raifort. Rapare, as Rampare. Rapariro, a bird called a thistlefinch. Some take it for a linnet. Rapatumare, as Rappatumare. Rapatume, as Rappatume. Rapata, a blow or hit with a Turnep. Al∣so a flout, a frump, a gudgeon. Raperonzoli, as Ramponzoli. Rapezzare, as Rappezzare. Rapezzatore, as Rappezzatore. Raphio, a beast in shape like a wolfe, and speckled like a libard. Rapicano, as Rabicano. Rapidezza, violence, furie, swiftnes of a streame, suddennes, hastines, quicke∣nes. Rapidità, as Rapidezza. Rápido, violent, furious, swift, hastie, quicke as a running streame, sudden, rauenous, cruell, vehement. Rapimento, as Rapina. Rapina, rape, rauin, taking or snatching away by force, rapine, robberie, pillage, a rauishment, a forcing, a snatching, a violating. Rapinare, to rape, to rauin, to rob, to pill and pole, to snatch, to commit all man∣ner of rapine. Rapinarie, robberies, filchings, rapes, snat∣chings. Rapinoso, rauenous, robbing, pilling, snatching. Rapire, rapisco, rapito, to rauish, to rape, to pull, to snatch or take away by vio∣lence, haste or furie, to take hastily, to carie away by maine force. Rapito, rauished, raped, puld or snatcht by violence or furie, taken hastily, caried away violently. Rapitóre, a rauisher, a raper, a snatcher, an offrer of violence. Rapóncoli, as Ramponzoli. Rapontico, the herbe or roote Sowbread or swinebread. Rappa, a wrinkle, a wrimple, a withering. It is also a coopers toole about a barrell. Looke Alla rappa. Rappacciare, as Rappacificare. Rappacciume, as Rappatuine. Rappacificare, to pacifie, to appease, to asswage, to allay. Rappallozzolare, to shrug or shrinke, to sneake or squat close in some corner. Rappare, to wither, to wrimple, to wrin∣kle. Rapparire, to appeare againe. Rappatumare, to accord, to appease, to a∣gree a matter, to whosht. Rappatume, an accord, an agreement, an attonement. Rappe, a kind of scurffe in a horse called the paines. Rappellare, to reapeale or call againe, to reuoke. Rappellatione, an appeale, a reuoking, a calling backe. Rappéllo, as Rappellatione. Rappezzare, to piece, to patch, to cobble, to soute, to mend, to botch, to clout. Rappezzatore, a patcher, a botcher, a sou∣ter, a cobler, a piecer, a tinker, a clouer. Rappiccare, to reioine, to fasten or cleaue togither againe. Rappicciare, to rekindle, to set on fire a∣gaine. Rapportare, to report, to relate, to refer, to rebring, to recarie. Rapportatore, a reporter, a relator, a re∣bringer. Rappórto, a report, a relation, a rebring∣ing. Also reported. Rappréndere, prendo, presi, preso, to re∣take. Also to curd, to clod, to congeale. Also to shrinke▪ vp sinewes, to become lame, to founder as a horse. Rappresa, is properly when a horse is as we call it taken in his legs so as he cannot stand or goe. Rappréso, retaken. Also curded, clodded, congealed as milke or blood, foundred, lame, shrunke vp. Rapprendimento, the foundring of a horse, as Rimpresione. Rappresa, as Ripresa. Rappresentare, to represent, to resemble, to shewe, to playe comedies or enter∣ludes. Rappresentatori, players, comediants, enterlude-plaiers. Rapsoidi, the interpreters or rehearsers of Homers verses. Rapucci, yoong little turneps. Rapto, as Rapito. Raramente, rarely, thinly, fewtimes, sel∣dome. Rarezza, as Rarità. Rarificare, to rarifie, to clarifie, to make thin, sant and seld. Rarità, raritie, thinnes, seldnes, daintines, seldomnes, sewnes, scantnes, a spoongie hollownes. Raro, as Rado. Rare volte, as Rade volte. Rasagrasso, the fat or gumme that growes in some trees. Rasare, to shaue, to leuell, to smooth, to euen, to streeke corne, to raze. Rasatore, a shauer, a leueler, a smoother, a sirceker or measurer of corne. Rasca, a cobweb, a spiders web. Also a bone or finne of a fish. Also a measure of liquid things vsed in Italie. Also a scraping toole. Rascare, to straine for to cough, as Ras∣chiare. Also to burnish, to rub, to furbish. Rascamento, a coughing, or straining in the lungs, as Raschiatura. Rascassa bianca, as Becca in cauo. Rascatoio, a burnishing or furbishing toole. Rasceta, the wrist of a mans hand. Also a kinde of fine silke rash. Raschia, as Raschiatura. Raschiare, to skud away. Also to rake or scrape together, to hoord vp. Also to cough, to spawe, to spit. Also to file, to sawe, to scratch. Raschiato, skudded away, raked, scra∣ped, or hoorded up. Also cought, spit, spawde. Also filed, sawed, or scratcht. Raschiatura, a skudding, a raking, a scra∣ping, a hoording. Also a coughing, a spitting, a spawing. Also a scratching. Also any maner of fyling or fyle dust. Rascia, a kinde of stuffe called silke rash. Rasciare, as Raschiare. Rasciatura, as Raschiatura. Rasciére, a rash maker. Raschio, a scratch, a scraping, a raking. Also a coughing, a spawing. Rasciucare, as Rasciugare. Rasciugare, to wipe or dry againe. Rasciugatoio, a wiper, a towell, a dryer, a rubber. Raséga, a sawe, to sawe with. Rasegare, to sawe in sunder. Rasempiare, to copie, to match, to en∣sample,
to compare, to patrone, to ex∣emplifie. Rasempiatura, an ensampling, a match∣ing, a coping. Rásene, rosine, it is like turpentine. Rasentare, as Rasare. Rasénte, euen, aneanst, leuell, iust, a∣neust, neere, euen or full measure. Rasiere, a shaer. Also a razor. Rasin, a tree in Arabia, whereof there is but one found, and vpon it the Phenix sits. Raso, the stuffe called Sattine. Also sha∣uen, shaued, smooth, scraped out, made smooth and cleane. Also fled neere the ground, or sailed neere the shore. Also razed, grased, or glanced neere as an arrow or a bullet will do. Looke Rá∣dere. Rasóio, Rasore, a razor to shaue with. Also a shauer, or a scraper, a barber. Rasonare, as Ragionare. Rasonato, a merchants counter, or coun∣ting boord. Rasola, a razor, a file, a scraping toole, a rake, a paring shouell. Raspa, as Rasola. Raspare, to file, to pare, to scrape, to fret. Also to hoord vp. Raspato, filed, scraped, pared, raked, fretted. Also hoorded vp. Also a kinde of raspise wine. Rasparuola, a raker as bakers vse to scrape their kneading tubs. Raspatore, a raker, a scraper, a parer, a filer. Raspatura, a raking, a scraping, a filing, a paring. Also saw-dust, or file dust. Raspo, a kinde of dry skurfe, scab or tet∣ter. Also a fruite or berie called Raspise. Also as Raspa. Rassare, as Raschiare. Rassatura, as Raschiatura. Rassegna, a retreate, or mustring of men. Also a rendezuous. Rassegnare, to shew or muster men, to assigne, to muster together, to sound a retreate. Rassembrare, to resemble, to be like. Also to gather or assemble together. Rassembranza, a resemblance, a likenes. Also an assemblie. Rassemplare, as Rasempiare. Rasserenare, to cleare vp the skie, to be bright or shining, to looke cheere∣fullie. Rassettare, to settle, to set in order, to lay vp, to dresse vp. Rassetto, setling, setting in order, good order. Rassicurare, to assure, to warrant, to con∣firme againe. Rassicuranza, assurance, warrantise. Rassodare, to stiffen, to harden, to streng∣then, to make tough. Rassomigliare, to resemble, or be like. Rassomiglianza, resemblance, or like∣nes. Rastellare, to rake, to scrape, or drag to∣gether. Rastellatore, a raker, a scraper, a drag∣ger. Rastellatura, a raking, a scraping, or a dragging. Rastelliera, as Rastello. Rastéllo, a rake, a harrow, a drag. Also a rack, a cratch, a manger. Also a stile, yate, or gate in a hedge. Also a purcul∣leis, or grate of iron. Also a labell or lambeaw in armorie. Also an instru∣ment to weede corne, or to rid away earth from vines. Rastiare, to poule, or shaue. also to trudge or skud away. Also to rake together as Raschiare. Rastiatura, a raking together, a pouling, a shauing. Rastrare, as Rastellare. Rastratore, as Rastellatore. Rastrellare, as Rastellare. Rastrelliéra, as Rastéllo. Rastréllo, as Rastéllo. Rástro, as Rastéllo. Rasura, a shauing or paring away. Rata, a rate, a share, a part, a portion. also the milt or spleene of any bodie. Ratagli, scrapings, retailings, od ends, small wares, mammocks, small pieces, shreads of tailers, vailes of any cut∣tings, a cookes fees. Ratare, to rate, to portion, to share, to part, to deuide by equall portions. Ratificare, to ratifie, to confirme, to e∣stablish, to approue, to allow, to war∣rant. Ratificatione, a ratification, a confir∣ming, an establishing, an approuing, an allowing. Ratiocinatione, a reasoning, debating, or disputing of matters. Rationabile, as Rationale. Rationale, reasonable, humane, endued with reason. Also a kinde of the priests attire among the Hebrues. Rationalità, reasonablenes, reason, dis∣course. Ratrappare, to ouertake, or entrap a∣gaine. Ratrappirsi, pisco, pito, to be frozen, stiffe or benummed in the ioints with cold. Ratrappito, frozen, stiffe, or benummed in ones ioints with cold. Ratrarto, shrunken or withered, one whose sinewes are shrunken. Ratristarsi, to be sorrowfull. Ratta, as Rata. Rattaccare, to fasten or ioine togither a∣gaine. Rattacconare, to cobble, to clot, to btch, to patch, to peece, to mend or trim vp. Rattamente, swiftly, nimblie, speedilie, sodainly, quickly, out of hande. Rattemperare, to retemper, to temper, to abstaine. Rettenére, tengo, tenni, tenuto, to de∣taine, to withhold, to retaine, to keepe backe. Rattenuto, detained, retained, withheld, restrained, kept backe. Rattenimento, a restraint, a restraining, a withholding, a retaining. Rattentare, to reattempt, to reassaie. Rattento, a reattempting, a reassaying. Also a stay or a delay. Rattepidire, disco, dito, to coole, to as∣swage, to calme, to allay the heate. Rattezza, swiftnes, violence, haste, speede. Ratto, swift, speedie, hastie, quicke, nim∣ble, fleete, sodaine. Also high, steepe, craggy, steepe vp. Also a rat or a mouse. Also rapt, rauished or raped, caried a∣way perforce, taken away suddenly. Also a rape or a rauishment, a raui∣shing or deflowring of a woman against hir consent and will. Also a kinde of fish like a raie or a skeate. Rattoppare, as Rattaconare. Rattopenago, Rattopenugo, a night bat or a reremouse. Rattore a rauisher, a snatcher, a puller a∣way by force, a robber, an extortioner, a spoiler, a violent taker away. Rattrappare, to ouertake, to ouerreach, to ouercatch, to shrinke or draw togither. Rattratto, as Ratratto. Raua, the roote called a turnep. Rauaggiolo, a kinde of daintie cheese. Rauanéllo, a little radish roote. Also the crinits of a hauke. Ráuano, a radish roote. Rauarino, as Raparino. Rauazzóne, rape seede, whereof they make oyle. Raucare, to be or become hoarse in spea∣king. Also to snort. Also to crie or yell as a tygre. Raucisono, that hath a hoarse voice, or maketh a hoarse noise. Raucita, hoarsenes, snorting, which is caused by the meanes of humours falne downe into the winde-pipe and there abiding. also the yelling of a tygre.
Ráuco, hoarse in speaking, whistling, dis∣agrèeing, that fainteth or faileth. Raued, vel Rauet, the herbe Reubarbe, but namely the roote thereof so called of the Arabian phisicions. Rauedére, veggo, viddi, veduto, or vi∣sto, to be aware, to espie, to bethinke himself, to perceiue, to aduise with him∣selfe, or take heede. Raueduto, bewared, espied, foreseene, aware, warie, wilie, foreseeing, percei∣ued, craftie, perceiuing, heedie. Rauedimento, warines, perceiuing, fore∣sight, heede. Rauellare, to reueale, to manifest. Rauellino, a rauelin, a wicket, or a po∣sterne gate. Also the vttermost bounds of the wals of a castle, or sconces with∣out the wals. Rauéllo, a yoong turnep, or radish roote. Rauiare, Rauuiare, to take the waie a∣gaine, to set or addres in the waie, to set foreward. Rauiccie, a kinde of meate made of yoong turnep leaues. Rauiccio, as Radicchio. Rauicinare, to approch, to neighbour or come neere againe. Rauiggiólo, a kinde of conserue, preserue, or sucket vsed after meates to close the stomacke. Rauignoli, as Rafiuoli. Rauincidire, disco, dito, to yeelde, to stretch, or to become tender and soft, humble and meeke. Rauioli, Rauiuoli, as Rafioli. Also a kinde of clouted creame called a foole or a trifle. Rauisare, to readuise or marke againe, to know, to remember, to put in minde. Rauisciuólo, a kinde of course rie or tiph bread. Rauisolare, to recouer health againe. Rauisto, as Raueduto. Rauiuare, to reuiue, to quicken, to encou∣rage againe. Rauizze, the leaues or stalkes of turnep rootes. Raunare, as Radunare. Raunanza, as Radunanza. Raunata, as Radunanza. Rauogliuólo, a kinde of fresh cheese in Italy. Rauólgere, volgo, volsi, volto, to re∣uolue, to ouerturne, to tosse, to tumble, to roule, to range or trudge about, to en∣wrap, or enfold in. Rauólto, reuolued, enwrapped, enfolded, ouerturned, tossed, tumbled, rouled, ran∣ged, trudged about. Rauolgimento, a reuoluing, an enfol∣ding, an enwrapping, an ouerturning, a tossing. Rauóglio, an enfolding, an enwrapping, a bundle, a fardle. Raus, a game at cardes vsed in Italy. Rauuilluppare, to enwrap, to entangle a∣gaine. Rauuiuare, as Rauiuare. Razza, Raza, as Raggia, a kind, a race, a broode, a blood, a stocke, a name, a pe∣digree. Razzamenti, arasse worke, all manner of arasse worke or tapestrie. Razzare, as Raspare. Also to raze out a∣nie thing. Razziere, as Tapezzarie. Razzi, tapistrie, arasse workes, hangings for chambers. Also squibs of wildefire, beames, streames, or raies of the sunne, also spokes of carte wheeles or carts. al∣so as Radio, or Raggio. Razzina, any kinde of little roote or race. Razzimato, smug, spruce, refined, newely shorne or shauen. Razzo, the fish called a raye, or a thorne∣backe. also a peece of arrasse or tapi∣strie. Also as Raggio. Razzolare, to scrape or digge as a henne doth, to rake vp togither, to tosse and tumble ouer any thing. Razzolatura, as Razzolo. Rázzolo, the scraping or digging of a henne. Rè, a king, a soueraigne, a crowned prince. Also a note in musike. Rè d'ucelli, a birde called a wren. Readottare, to chuse by adoption againe, to readopt. Reale, royally, or kingly, princely, pertai∣teining to a king, like to a king, honest, vpright. Also reall or essentiall. Realgare, the sume, vapour or smoke of minerals, and by a metaphor, taken for vile corruption in mans bodie, whereby arise many filthie diseases. Realità, royaltie, kinglines, loyaltie, vp∣rightnes, sinceritie, honestie, realtie. Realizzare, to royalize or make kinglie. Also to exercise the true dutie of a king. Realmente, really, essentially. Also king∣like, royally, vprightly, princelike, like a king. Reame, a realme, a kingdome. Reare, to commit wickednes, to become guiltie. Reassúmere, as Resúmere. Reatino, a birde called a wren. Rebalzata, a trapdore, or drawing win∣dowe. Rebechista, as Ribechista. Rebellare, to rebell against auctoritie, to rise against, to reuenge himselfe. Rebélle, Rebello, a rebell. Rebellione, a rebellion, a rising against. Rebelloso, rebellious, stubborne, rising a∣gainst. Reboare, to low, or bellow againe, to sound or ring againe. Rebuffare, as Rabuffare. Rebuffo, as Rabuffo. Rebuola, a kinde of wine so called. Recalcitrare, to kicke or strike or winze with ones heeles againe. Recamare, to embroder, to beset, to em∣bosse. Recamatore, an embroderer. Recamatura, any kind of embroderie. Recambiare, to exchaunge or shift a∣gaine. Recami, all manner of embroderies. Recantare, to recante, to repent or gaine∣say himselfe. also to sing againe. Recantatione, a recantation. Recapitare, to haue or giue intertain∣ment or refuge. Recapito, intertainment, euent, issue, suc∣cesse, refuge, helpe, supplie, shelter. Also deliuerie of letters. Recare, to bring, to reach, to take, to fetch, to draw, to betake. Also to allure, per∣swade or draw vnto. Recato, brought, reached▪ taken, fetched, drawne, betaken. Also allured, perswa∣ded or drawen vnto. Also spittle, fleagme, or such excrement. Also as Recateria. Recarsi alle cose honeste, to draw, to in∣cline or yeeld to honest things. Recarsi ad honore, to take it or repute it as a grace and honor. Recarsi ad onta, to take it as a shame or disgrace. Recarsi a piangere, to betake himselfe to weepe. Recatare, to buie and sell againe by re∣taile, to regrate, to retaile. Also to fore∣stall markets. Recateria, a fripperie or brokers shop. Recatiére, a huckster, a retailer, a regra∣ter, a fripper, a broker, a forestaller. Recatore, a bringer, a reacher. Recchione, a disease or swelling in the necke called the mumps. Recédere, cedo, cessi, cesso, to recoile, to retire, to retraite, to giue or goe backe, to yeeld ground. Recensione, a tale, a reckoning, a rehear∣sing, a reuiewing or examination of an account or number. Recentare, to make fresh or new. Also to wash, rence or cleanse cleane.
Recénte, fresh, newe, of late, late, lustie, newly or lately made, new come. Récere, recio, recei, reciuto, to spue, to vomit, to caste, to spaule. Reciuto, spued, vomited, cast, disgorged, spauled. Recési, shadie, pleasant or summer pla∣ces. Recésso, a recoiling, a retiring, a going backe or further off, a retraite. Also an innermost or closest place or corner of a house. Also the hollownes of the mouth. Also the ebbing of the sea. Recétta, as Ricetta. Recettácolo, as Ricettácolo. Recéuere, as Ricéuere. Receunto, taken, receiued, accepted. Receuitore, as Riceuitore. Recídere, cido, cisi, ciso, to cut or hewe in sunder, to deuide or part in sunder, to cut againe, to cut behinde, to pare, to shaue, to take away. Reciso, cut or hewen in sunder, cut againe, cut behind, pared, shauen, taken away. Recinio, Recino, a square garment like a nimphes mantell, which they that did weare it did caste one part thereof ouer their shoulders. Recinto, a compasse, a precinct, a circum∣ference, a limite. Also vnguirded, loose, vnlaced, vntide. Recipiénte, the receiuing part of a still or limbecke. Also capable or receiuing. Reciprocamente, mutuallie, interchan∣geably, reciprocally▪ also retiring or re∣turning to the place whēce one came▪ eb∣bing and flowing or going backe as the sea doth. Reciprocare, to returne frō whence one is come, to turne backe, to eb and flowe as the sea doth, to depend one of another by mutuall consequence. Reciprocatione, a going back, a retiring, a returning to the place from whence one is come. the ebbing of the sea. Reciproco, mutuall, reciprocall, answera∣ble, interchangeable, that hath recourse, respect or returne thither from whence it commeth. that ebbeth and floweth or goeth backward. Recisione, a cutting off, away or againe. Recitare, to recite, to rehearse, to relate, to report, to read out aloude that others may heare and vnderstand, to tell by hart or without booke, as players do re∣hearse their plaies or comedies. Vsed al∣so to play a comedie or tragedie. Recitante, a rehearser, a recitor or reader with a loud voice that others may heare. Also an enterlude plaier. Recitamento, a rehearsing, a reciting, a relating with a loud voice that others may heare. Recitatore, as Rcitante. Recitare vna comédia, to rehearse or play a comedie. Rechiamare, as Richiamare. Reciticcimi, spuings, vomitings, ca∣stings, or strainings to cast. Reclamare, as Richiamare. Reclamatione, as Richiamatione. Recoléndo, worthie to be honored or worshipped. Recondità, secrecie, deepenes, profun∣ditie. Recóndito, secret, couered, secretlie kept, hard to be knowne, layd vp, close, remote, deepe. Riconfare, to agree or square with a∣gaine. Recopiare, to copie or write ouer a∣gaine. Recourare, to recouer, to reobtaine, to rescue. Recreare, as Ricreare. Recreatióne, as Ricreatione. Recreatiuo, as Ricreatiuo. Recusare, as Ricusare. Recusante, refusing, renouncing. Also a recusant. Redare, to inherit, to succeede in any in∣heritance. Redarguíre, guisco, guito, to reproue, to reprehend, to blame, to shew by argu∣ment or reason that the same which is said is not true, to controule, to dis∣prooue. Réde, an heyre, a successor, an inheritor. Also a net. Redentione, redemption, redeeming, a ransoming. Redénto, redeemed, reskued, ransomed. Redentóre, a redeemer, a reskuer, a ran∣somer. Rédere, to returne againe, to come or goe againe. Redigere, to bring againe by force, or cunning, to cause, or compell. Reddire, to returne againe. Also to re∣store, to render, to yeeld vp, or giue againe. Reddito, returned againe. Also deliue∣red, restored, rendred, yeelded vp, or giuen againe. Redditione, a restoring, a rendring or giuing againe. Redificare, to re-edifie or build againe, to build anew. Redimere, dimo, dimei, dimuto, to reskue, to redeeme, to ransome, to re∣cour. Redimuto, redeemed, reskued, ransomed, recouered againe. Redinare, to rayne as a horse doth. Rédine, the raynes of a bridle. Redinélle, little or small raynes of a bridle, false raynes. Redintegratione, a renuing, a beginning afresh. Redire, disco, dissi, ditto, as Ridire. Redità, an inheritance, an heritage, a patrimonie. Reditione, a returning or comming a∣gaine. Redituro, returning or comming back. Rediuio, a worme called a tyke, which sucketh bloud from man or beast. Rediuiuo, that which returneth to life a∣gaine, or that which long hath bin vn∣used, and is now occupied againe. Redondare, to redound, to abound su∣perfluouslie, to be so full that it runne ouer, to result, to returne vnto, to o∣uerflow, to reflow, to rise aboue the banke. Redondandia, excessiuenes, ouermuch, a surcharging, a superfluitie, an ouer∣flowing, too much abounding. Redoppiare, to redouble, to make as much more. Redoppio, a double blow, a redoubling, as much more. Redunia, a fellon or sore that breedeth betweene the naile and the flesh. Some conster it to be a loosenes and cleft of the skinne about the rootes of the nailes of the fingers, and call the same wort∣wales, or liureages. Redúrre, duco, dussi, dutto, to reduce, to bring back, to draw or pluck back, to bring safe againe, to leade forth a∣gaine, to deliuer out of perill. Reduttione, a reduction, a leading or bringing home againe. Redutto, reduced, brought back, drawne or pluckt back, brought safe againe, lead forth or home againe. Reduuia, as Redunia, or as Pterigi. Redúuie, the skinne of Serpents which they cast off euery yeare when they waxe olde. Refare, as Rifare. Réfe, any kinde of twisted sowing thred. Reféllere, refello, refelsi, refelluto, to refell, to proue false, to disprooue, to refute, to reprooue of falsehood, to con∣fute that is obiected, to shew reason and argument that it is false that one saith. Referendare, to report, to blab or tell tales from one to another. Referendario, a blab, a tell tale, a repor∣ter, an eawes-dropper.
Referire, risco, rito, as Riferire. Referéntia, as Riferenza. Reférto, as Riferito. Refettione, a refection, a refreshing, a re∣creation, a repaste, a taking of meat and drinke. Also a repairing of that which is worne and decaide, a baite or refreshing by the way. Refettório, a refectorie or dining place in a religious house, a place in monasteries and colledges where the company dine and sup togither, a hall, a refreshing or baiting place. Reficiare, to strengthen with foode or meate, to repaire, recreate or comfort. Refinare, as Rifinare. Refiutare, as Ricusare. Refiúto, as Ricusa. Refléttere, as Rifléttere. Reflésso, as Riflesso. Reflessióne, as Riflessione. Reflessiuo, as Riflessiuo. Refluénte, flowing, returning or recoyling backe againe. Refóndere, as Rifóndere. Refocillare, to comfort, to recreate, to strengthen, to make lusty againe, to whet againe or set a new edge on. Reflusso, as Riflusso. Refocilato, newly whetted or hauing a new edge set on, comforted, strengthe∣ned, made lustie againe. Refragare, to resist, to repugne, to be a∣gainst, to gaine say, to denie, to kicke a∣gainst. Refrángere, as Rifrángere. Refrattario, wilfull in opinion, rebellious, obstinate, headstrong, vnruly, frowarde, skittish. Refrenare, as Raffrenare. Refrendare, as Referendare. Refrendario, as Referendario. Refrigerare, to refresh, to ease, to comfort, to helpe, to recreate, to coole or make cold, to diminish or asswage. Refrigeratiuo, cooling, easefull, refreshing, comfortable, that hath the nature and qualitie to coole and reesh. Refrigeratorio, as Refrigeratiuo. Refrigério, a succour, a helpe, a comforte, an ease, a refreshing, a cooling. Refrustare, as Rifrustare. Refudasone, Refudagione, a refusall, a refusing. Refuga, a runnagate, an vnruly person, a fugitiue, one that will not remaine in subiection. Refugio, as Rifugio. Refuggire, as Rifuggire. Refuggito, as Rifuggito. Refugo, he that flieth away, a runaway, he that taketh his flight. Refúlgere, as Rifúlgere. Refulgido, bright, glittering or shining. Refusati, the coursest veluets that be, called refusados. Refutare, as Rifutare. Refutatione, as Rifutatione. Rega, a strike, a rule, a ruler, a line, a le∣uelling staffe or squire. Regalare, to present or giue guifts vnto, to bestow a largesse vpon. Regalbulo, a birde called a witwall or lo∣riot. Regale, as Reale. Regali, a musicall instrument called ri∣goles. Regalitia, the sweete wood licorice. Regare, as Rigare. Regatta, as Rigatta. Regattare, as Rigattare. Regattiére, as Rigattiére. Regazza, a pie or piot. Regenerare, to regenerate or ingender a∣gaine. Also to resemble in nature and propertie. Regeneratione, a regeneration or newe birth. Regente, regent, gouerning. a regent, a go∣uernor. Regerminare, to bud, to burgen or spring a new. Regéstola, a kind of lanaret hawke called a shreeke or ninemurtherer. Regettare, to reiect. Looke Rigettare. Réggere, reggo, ressi, retto, to rule, to go∣uerne, to swaie, to command, to with∣stand, to weilde. Reggi, vsed of Dante for thou returnest or commest againe. Reggia, a Kings or Emperours palace, court, seat or house. Reggimento, gouernment, a commaund, a rule, a sway, a regiment of men, that is a number of sundrie companines vn∣der the charge of a colonell. Reggitore, a ruler, a commander, a gouer∣nour. Regia, as Reggia. Also kingly, royall or maiesticall. Via regia, the Kings high way, a common high way. Regimento, a direction or diet of mans life, a ruling, a regiment, a gouernance. Also the rudder or sterne in a ship. Regina, a Queene, a kings wife. Regina capri; the herbe Medow-sweet or Maidens-sweete. Régio, regall, kingly, royall, princely, of or pertaining to a king. Also a kind of ree∣ling or falling sicknes in a horse. Morbo regio, the iaundise, which is an ouer∣flowing of the gall ouer the whole bodie. Regióne, a region, a prouince, a countrie, a part, a coast or quarter, a situation. Reginare, as Regnare. Registrare, to register, to record, to in∣roule, to enter in a booke. Registratore, a registrer, an examiner, a clarke, a remembrancer, a keeper of re∣cords. Registro, a register, a record, a file, a tal∣lie, an index of a booke. Regnante, raigning, regnant, ruling, swaying. Regnare, to raigne, to swaie, to rule, to go∣uerne, to be in authoritie, to be a king, to beare rule and swaie, to beare a great or chiefe stroke. Regnatore, a ruler, a gouernour, a posses∣sour, a king, a lord, a maister. Regnicolo, a little kingdome or realme, a petie king. Régno, a kingdome, a realme, a dominion, a rule, a gouernment. Also a raigne or space of raigning. Regóglio, as Orgóglio. Regoglioso, as Orgoglioso. Régola, a rule, a prescription, a ruler, a me∣thod, an order. Also a chip, a splint, a lathe, a squire, a rule, a square. Also a briefe lesson or instruction of things, a patterne or example to follow. Regolare, to rule, to order, to gouerne, to direct, to moderate, to temper. Also re∣gular or according to rules and prescrip∣tions, vnder-rule or made according to rule. Regolatamente, temperatly, moderately, according to order and rule. Regolarmente, regularly, according to prescriptions. Regolatore, a ruler, an order, a gouer∣nor, a moderator. Regolitia, the sweete wood licorice. Régolo, a rule, a direction, a compasse, the hand, stile or index of a dyall. Also a Cocatrix or Basiliske. Also a carpenters squire. also a prince, a Duke, a Kings son or nephew. Also a bird called a wren. Regrédere, to returne backe againe. Regressióne, a regression or returning, a recoling. Regrésso, a progresse or regresse. Also returned or recoled backe. Régulo, as Régolo. Réiere, as Récere. Reiuto, as Reciuto. Reína, a Queene, a kings wife. Also the fish called a carpe. Reillo, a little bird called a wren. Reintegrare, to renew, to restore, to make whole againe.
Reintegratione, a reintegration or ma∣king whole againe. Reiterare, to reiterate, to repeate or doe or say a thing ouer againe. Reiteratione, a reiteration, a repetition, a doing or saying againe, a repeating of a thing. Relapso, fallen or suncke downe againe. Also a relapse or falling downe againe. Relassare, as Rilasciare. Relassatione, a release, a releasing. Relasso, as Rilascio. Relatare, to relate, to report, to declare, to rehearse, to tell. Relatione, a relation, a report, a discourse, a declaration, a telling, a rehearsing. Relatiuo, relatiue, that hath relation to another thing, respectiue. Reláto, shewed, reported, vttered, decla∣red, told, rehearsed. Also brought backe againe. Relatore, a relator, a reporter, a declarer, a teller, a rehearser. Relegare, as Rilegare. Relegatione, a confining, a banishment, an exile, a sending away. Religione, religion, holines, godlines, true worshipping or God, all holy things, a reuerence, a feare, an honestie, a dread, a scruple, a conscience, an vprightnes or dreadnes to do amisse, a deuotion, a so∣licitous care & feare, a reuerent feare, and doubt of conscience least he shall offend in any thing, a scruple of consci∣ence, a curiositie. Religióso, religious, holie, godlie, deuout, honest, vpright, seruing God, truely de∣uout, of great deuotion, timorous, scru∣pulous, superstitious, that hath a con∣science. Reliquia, a relique or old monument, the rest that remaines, the remnant, the ashes or bones of the dead, reliques, scraps, fragments, leauings. also a grud∣ging of a feauer. Reliquiario, as Reliquiero. Reliquiéro, a shrine or place to keepe re∣liques in. Relitto, left, forsaken, relinquished, aban∣doned, cast off, giuen ouer, laide a part. Relúcere, as Rilúcere. Reluuio, as Reduuia. Remandare, to send againe. Remanére, as Rimanére. Remare, to rowe with an oare in anie boate. Remaro, a rower. Also a maker of oares. Rematore, as Remaro. Remasticare, to chewe, to ruminate, to consider well againe. Remasto, remained, left, abided, staide, taried, ceased, giuen ouer. Remasuglia, any kind of leauings, scraps, or reliques, or od ends. Rematiche cose, things to be considered or remembred. Rembrencioli, peeces, or loabes, or bun∣ches of flesh, hanging loose like clusters. Remeligine, a fish which cleauing to the keele of a ship staieth it, as Remora. Reméngo, as Ramengo. Ramenia, the herbe Henbane. Remeritare, as Rimeritare. Reméro, as Remaro. Rémi, oares to rowe with. Amongst horse∣men remi is taken for a mans legges when he is on horsebacke. Remigare, to rowe with oares in a bote. Remígio, the flying of birdes in the ayre. Reminiscéntia, remembrance, memorie, mindfulnes of that was once before in the minde. Reminiscénte, mindfull, remembring, calling to minde againe. Remire, as Rimedire. Remissamente, demislie, remislie, base∣ly, cowardly, remissiuely, slackly, faint∣lie, humbly, without courage, softlie, weakely, nothing liuely, nor vehement∣lie. Remissibile, that may be pardoned or re∣mitted, remissible. Remissione, remission, pardon, forgiue∣nes. Also a slacking a loosing, a release, a faintnes, a remissenes, a negligence. Al∣so a recreating of the minde from stu∣die and labour. Remissiuo, that may be forgiuen or re∣mitted, remissiue. Remisso, remitted, forgiuē, pardoned. also remisse, demisse, cowarde, crauin, base, slacke, that is not vehement, dull, negli∣gent, nothing regarding. Remissoria, as Rimissória. Remisurare, to measure againe. Rémo, an oare to rowe with. Remogliare, to laie in steepe: also to mar∣rie againe. Remóglio, wetting or sleeping in water. Rémola, course bran, as Semola. Remoláta, a poult is such as are applied to horses, to supple anie sore. Remolazzo, a radish roote. Remolino, a whirle-winde, a whirle-poole. also a marke which some horses haue about them called the feather. Remóra, a fish called a suckstone, or sea lamprey, which cleauing to the beake of a ship hindreth the course thereof. Also the weede called rest-barrowe or cam∣mocke. Remórdere, as Rimórdere. Remordimento, as Rimordimento. Remóri, birdes, which by their flight or voice signified that the thing purposed was not to be followed. Remórso, as Rimordimento. Remóto, as Rimóto. Remulcare, to draw a great ship or barge with another lesser vessell, to towe a ship. Remulco, the rope or cable wherewith a great ship being fastened to a lesser is by force of men towed and drawne. Also a towing or rowing barge. Also a row∣ling peece of timber wherewith ships be driuen on lande, and lanched into the water againe. Rémulo, the narrower part of the ribs which toucheth the turnings of the back∣bone. Remunerare, as Rimunerare. Remuneratione, as Rimuneratione. Remuneratore, as Rimuneratore. Réna, grauell, or sand. Also the eating out of that little peece of flesh, which is in the bigger corner of the eie. Renagie, parables, ambages, ambiguous sayings. Renaglie, as Renagie. Réndene, a swallow. Réndere, rendo, resior rendei, reso or renduto, to render, to restore, to yeelde, to giue againe, to repaie. Renduto, or reso, rendred, yeelded, resto∣red, giuen againe backe, repaid. Renditore, a rendrer, a restorer, a yeel∣der, a repaier. Rénder conto, to yeelde or giue an ac∣count. Also to informe. Rénder' il fiato, to yeelde or giue vp the ghost. Rénder il cambio, to yeelde the like a∣gaine. Rénder pane per fogaccia, to giue bread for cakes, to giue as good as one brings. Rénder gratie, to yeeld or giue thanks. Rénder risposta, to giue or yeelde an an∣swer. Rénder frutto, to yeelde profite or giue fruite. Rénder buon odore, to yeelde or giue a good sent or sauour. Rédersi atto, to enable or make himselfe fit. Rendéuole, plyable, yeelding, stretching, enclined vnto, tractable. Rendie, rents, incoms, profits, reuenewes. Rendita, a rent, a reuenue, an income, a profite. Renélla, the grauell or stone in the blad∣der, small grauell. Renga, an oration, a declamation or for∣mall
discourse. Also a herring fish. Al∣so a pulpit to make an oration in. Rengare, to make an oration or formall discourse. Rengatore, an orator. Réni, the raines or kidneies of ones backe. Reniténte, resisting, skittish, frowarde, stubborne. Reniténtia, a resisting, a frowardnes. Renoceronte, as Rinoceronte. Renontia, a renouncing, a forsaking, an abiuring, a refusall, a resigning, a de∣nouncing, the refusall or deniall of that thing which was couenanted and pro∣mised. Also a report or deposition of one sworne, a sommons of an officer by word. Renontiare, to renounce, to forsake, to ab∣iure, to refuse, to resigne, to giue ouer and meddle no more with, to bid fare∣well for euer. Also to make relation, to report, to bring word againe, to signifie, to proclaime or shewe openly, to giue knowledge or warning. Renontiatione, as Renontia. Renóso, sandie, grauelly, greetie, full of grauell. Rensa, Renza, lawne or cambrike, or such fine linnen cloth. Renso, Renzo, verie fine flaxe to spinne lawne with. Rentifoglia, a kind of wilde hedge-roses, that haue neither good smell nor good fashion. Renuntia, as Renontia. Renuntiare, as Renontiare. Réo, wicked, guiltie, culpable, accused of, faultie, condemned, bad, conuinced. Al∣so a defendent in any chalenge. Also the defendent in a processe, he that is accu∣sed or sued, a person arrayned. Reorgarza, the name of a french dance vsed in Italie. Reparare, Reparatione, Looke Ripa∣rare. Repatriare, to restore or come to ones na∣tiue countrie againe. Repatriatione, a restoring or comming to ones countrie againe. Repentaglio, as Ripentaglio. Repénte, sodainlie, violentlie, rashlie, too timely, vnseasonably, vnawares, vn∣looked for, vnexpected. Repentino, sodaine, violent, rash, vn∣seasonable, hastie, vnawares, vnex∣pected. Repentire, as Pentire. Repentito, as Pentito. Repentiménto, as Pentimento. Repentiuo, repentant, penitent. Repertório, a reportarie, a memoriall, a register, an inuentorie of ones goods. Repése, an hearbe called orache. Repétere, peto, petei, petuto, to repeate, to reply, to rehearse or begin againe, to resort and returne eftsoones to a thing, to call or aske againe. Repetuto, repeated, rehearsed, replide, tolde, or begun againe, called or asked againe. Repetitione, a repetition, a rehearsing, a replying, a replication, a telling ouer a∣gaine, a repeating or saying againe, as when a thing is told many times. Repetitore, a repeater, a rehearser, an Vsher of a schoole. Repicare, to sound or iangle as bells, to clatter or clash as armour doth. Repico, a noise, a sound, or iangling, a clattering, a clashing. Repignerare, to redeeme a pledge or gage. Also to replieue a distresse. Repigneratione, a redeeming of a gage or pledge. Also a replieuing. Repilogare, to rehearse or repeate from the beginning what hath bin said. Repletióne, a filling, a refection, a re∣plenishing. Repléto, full, replenished, filled. Réplica, a replye, a replication, a repea∣ting, a rèhearsing, a confirmation of ones saying with new allegations. Also a folding againe, an enfolding. Replicare, to replie, to repeate, to vnfold, to fold againe, to display, to tell a thing twise or often. Replicatione, as Replica. Répo, vsed of Dante, for I creepe like a Serpent. Repolóni, Looke Maneggiare a repo∣loni, is when a horse doth gallop in a right path, and still returneth in the same, in english it is now called a Re∣pelone. Reportare, as Riportare. Reportatore, as Riportatore. Reposare, as Riposare. Reposiótrio, as Ripostiglio. Repóso, as Riposo. Repostiéro, as Ripostiglio. Repréndere, as Ripréndere. Reprensione, as Riprensione. Reprensore, as Riprenditore. Reprensiuo, reprehensiue, reprochfull. Reprenditore, as Riprenditore. Reprenduto, reproued, reprehended. Represaglio, aresting, stopping, repri∣sall, attaching, or staying, as Ripresag∣lia. Represare, to arrest, to attach, to stop, to repriue. Representare, to represent or be like to, liuely to set forth, to offer or present a thing, to exhibit, to bring in presence, to lay before one, to shew or declare, to shew himselfe and be present. Also to play playes or comedies. Representatione, a representation, or re∣presenting of a thing. Représso, repressed, ouercome, suppres∣sed, quelled, refelled, kept downe or vn∣der, tamed. Représo, as Ripréso. Reprímere, primo, pressi, presso, to re∣presse, to suppresse, to refell, to quell, to stop and keepe downe by force, to let that a thing be not done, to keepe vnder, to tame. Reprobabile, reproueable, condemnable. Reprobare, to condemne, or to reprobate, to reproue, to reiect, to disallow. Reprobato, condemned, a reprobate, re∣proued, reiected, disallowed. Reprobatione, reprobation, condemna∣tion, a reprouing, reiecting, or disallow∣ing. Reprofondare, to diue, to duck, to sinke, to plunge againe. Repromettere, as Riprométtere. Repblica, a common-wealth, a free e∣state, the weale publike. Repudiando, to be refused, &c. Repudiare, to deuorce, to repudiate, or separate asunder, to forsake as one doth his wife, to refuse, to put away, to cast off, to reiect, to abandon and leaue. Repúdio, a deuorce or separation of man and wife, a putting away, a refusing, a reiecting. Repudióso, villanous, dishonest, reproch∣full, not to be kept companie with. Repugnare, to contradict, to withstand, to gainesay, to impugne, to resist, to fight against, to repugne, to ouerthwart, to be contrarie with might and maine. Repugnante, repugnant, contrarie, con∣tradicting, impugning, that is contrarie in all things, quarellous, contentious, that gainesayeth and withstandeth e∣uery bodie. Repugnantia, a repugnance, a contra∣dicting, a gainesaying, contrarietie, or disagreement of things one with ano∣ther. Repulsa, a repulse, a foile, a denyall, a re∣iecting, a beating back, a putting by, or refusing of one that sues for some∣thing. Repulsare, to repulse, to beate back, to reiect, to knock againe, to repell, to giue the foile, to put by. Repurgare, to purge, or cleare againe, to cleanse or scoure againe.
Reputare, as Riputare. Reputatione, as Riputatione. Reputéuole, to be reputed, esteemed, re∣garded, or accounted of. Réquie, rest, quietnes, repose, ease, peace, content. Requilitia, the sweete wood licorise. Requisitione, requisition, requirie, re∣quest, instance, entreatie. Resca, a brack, a flawe, a crack, a hole namely in cloth. Also a small sharp bone of a fish, or the prickles of an eare of corne. Rescriuere, scriuo, scrissi, scritto, to copy or write ouer againe, to write an an∣swere. Also to write againe. Rescritto, written ouer againe, written an answere. Also written againe, a copie or a transcript. Reségna, a retraite, a muster, or rendez∣uous for men, a surrender. Resegnare, to resigne or deliuer againe, to surrender. Also to call souldiers to a retraite or to their colours. Reseminare, to sowe or plant againe. Resentare, to wash or rense any thing. Resia, an heresie. Resídere, sido, sidei, siduto, as Rise∣dere. Residénte, resident, remaining, dwel∣ling, abiding, resiant. Residéntia, a residence, an abode, a dwel∣ling, an abiding, a stay. Residità, as Residentia. Residuo, a residue, a remainder, an ouer∣plus or rest, that which is left in arera∣ges. Resignare, to resigne or yeeld vp, to sur∣render. Resignatione, a resignation or yeelding vp, a surrendring. Résima, a reame of paper. Résimo, that hath a camoy nose, or nosed like an ape, flat nosed. Resipiscentia, a repentance, a returning to perfect vnderstanding or health, a reaknowledging. Resipilla, as Risipilla. Resistere, sisto, sistei, sistuto, to resist, to withstand, to oppose, to kicke against. Resistuto, resisted, withstoode, opposed, kickt against. Resisténte, resisting, withstanding. Resisténtia, a resistaunce, a withstan∣ding. Resma, a reame of paper. Reso, Looke Renduto or Réndere. Resolubile, that may be resolued. Resóluere, as Risoluere. Resolutione, as Risolutione. Resoluto, as Risoluto. Resonare, Resonantia, as Risonare. Respingere, as Rispingere. Respinto, as Rispinto. Respirare, to breath againe, to take breth, to vent. Also to take comfort, to be re∣freshed or eased, to pause, to rest. Also to send foorth a certaine sauour. Respiratione, a breathing, a vapouring, a respiration, a venting, a sending forth of some sauour. Respondénte, as Rispondénte. Respóndere, as Rispóndere. Respósto, Respóso, as Rispósto. Respondéntia, as Rispondéntia. Respondéuole, as Rispondeuole. Responsione, as Risponsione. Responsiuo, as Risponsiuo. Ressa, a withstanding, a ruling. Résso, as Retto. Looke Réggere. Resta, an eare of corne, a prickle or bone of a fish. also a bunch of garlike, a rope of onions, a rope, a string, a corde, a with, a cable. Also it remaineth, it resteth. also the reste of a breast-plate or vante-plate. Restagno, a kinde of stuffe like bustian, such as they make waste-cotes of. Restante, a remnant, a rest, a remainder. Also remaining. Restanza, a rest, a remainder. Restare, to rest, to arest, to cease, to re∣maine, to tarie, to stand still or abide in some place. Also to faile, to want, to misse. Restare sopra di se, to stande or relie vp∣on himselfe. Restata, a rest or remainder. Restaurare, as Ristorare. Restauratione, as Ristoratione. Restoratore, as Ristoratore. Reste, a disease in a horse which we call the paines, there is small difference be∣tweene crepaccie and reste. Resticulo, the least remnant or remain∣der that may be. Restio, reastie as some horses are, idle, la∣zie, hackward, slowe, slug, slack. Restipulare, to make answer in the law, to make answere to an action in lawe. Restituire, isco, ito, to restore, to render, to restitute, to yeeld againe, to pardon, to reforme, to set vp againe, to put or set againe in his first state, to repaire, to renewe, to make newe againe. Restituito, restored, rendred, restituted, yeelded againe, pardoned, reformed, set againe in his first estate. Restitutione, a restitution, a restoring, a rendring, a setting of one in his former estate. Restitutore, a restorer, a rendrer, a set∣ter vp of some bodie, he that makes re∣stitution. Restiuamente, restily, idlie, lazily, slow∣lie, slackly, faintly. Restiuare, to bee or become reastie as a horse, to be idle or laizie. Restiuo, as Restio. Resto, a rest, a remainder, a remnant, an ouerplus, a rest at primero. Restóppia, strawe, thatch, holme, haume, huske, or stubble that is left after the reaping or threshing of corne. Restringere, as Ristringere. Restretto, as Ristretto. Restrettiuo, as Ristrettiuo. Restringénte, as Ristrettiuo. Resúmere, sumo, sonsi, or sumei, sonto, or sunto, to reassume, to resume, to take againe, to recouer, to begin againe. Resunto, reassumed, resumed, taken a∣gaine, recouered, begun againe. Resupinare, to turne vpward or vpright, to hold vp backward, to tumble vpside downe. Resupino, with the face vpward, vpright, along on the back. Also effeminate, nice, and womanish. Resúrgere, surgo, sursi, surto, to rise vp againe, to spring or grow againe. Resuréssi, is vsed for the ascension or re∣surrection day. Resurrettione, a resurrection or rising vp againe, an vprising. Resurto, risen vp againe. Resuscitare, to rise vp againe from death, to set in the former state againe. Resuscitatione, a resurrection, an vpri∣sing. Retà, as Retaggio. Also lewdnes, wicked∣nes or naughtines, as Ratagli. Retaggio, inheritance, heritage, patri∣monie. Retagli, vailes, od ends, giblets, shreads, cuttings of tailers. Retardare, as Ritardare. Retardanza, as Ritardanza. Retardamento, as Ritardanza. Retare, to inherit,. Réte, any kinde of net for fish or fowle, a hay, a snare or a trap. Also any kind of net work or caule such as women weare. the caule of any body. Retentione, as Ritentione. Retentiua, the retentiue or holding part, retentiue or holding in. Reticélla, a litle net or casting net. Also a searce or litle sieue. also any caule or net∣worke. Also a kind of paste meate. Reticentia, a silence, a concealing or kee∣ping a thing secret by counsell. Retico, an heretike.
Retina, the fifth thin membrane of the eie, lying more inwardly then doth Vuéa. It is soft and white, and nourisheth the vitrious and glassie humour. Retine, the raines of a horse bridle. Retinénte, that diligently obserueth and keepeth in mind. Retinitiua, as Retentiua. Retórica, the arte of rhetorike, which is the science to speake well and wisely. Retórcere, as Ritórcere. Retoricare, to playe the rhetorician, to teach to speake well and wisely. Also to speake eloquently. Retóre, a rhetorician. Retórico, a rhetorician, he which teacheth rhetorike. Also belonging to rhetorike. Retrattare, as Ritrattare. Retrattatione, as Ritrattatione. Retribuire, buisco, buito, to retribute or reward for merite. Retributione, a retribution or reward for merite. Retriménto, ordure, dung, excrements. Also dregs or drosse of any thing. Retriuo, late comming, last or lag, slow, slacke, repining, grudging or froward. Rétro, backe, backward, behinde, last, lag, being put as an adiunct before manie wordes it signifieth backward. Retrocédere, cedo, cessi, cesso, to retire, to recoile or giue backe. Retrocessione, a retyring, a recoyling back. Retrocésso, as Retrocessione. Retrogradare, to retrograde, to go, to re∣coyle, to giue or draw backe. Retrogradatione, a retrogradation, a go∣ing, recoyling, drawing or giuing backe. Retrogrado, that goeth backward. Also that which is to be read backward. Retroguardia, a rearward or hindwarde of a battell. Retrorso, backward, akeward. Retrosità, frowardnes, waywardnes, pee∣uishnes, skittishnes. Retróso, froward, wayward, peeuish, ake∣ward, backward, skittish. Retrouenditione, a selling backe againe· Retta sphéra, that place of the world, where the inhabitants haue the equinoc∣tiall and the Tropikes plumbe or perpen∣dicular to their Horizon. Retta sutura, as Sagitale. Retángolo, euen-cornered, a right corner, that is when the lines be so ioyned that no parte is longer or shorter than o∣ther. Rettificare, to rectifie. Rettile, Rettitio, anie thing that creepeth or crauleth, as vermine, rootes, plantes, &c. Rettilíneo, with a right line, right-lined. Rettina, a wren. Rétto, ruled, swaide, raigned, gouerned, stood, directed. Also right, direct, vp∣right, straight, not crooked, iust, good and honest. Retto angolo, such an angle or corner wherein the mangnitudes that by their crossing include the angle, fall plumbe or perpendicular one vpon another. Rettoráto, a rectorship, a gouernment or wardenship of a colledge. Rettoria, as Rettorato. Rettóre, a rector, a ruler, a gouernour, a commaunder, a director. Also a rheto∣rician▪ also a warden of a colledge. Reuelare, as Riuelare. Reuelatione, as Riuelatione. Reuellino, as Rauellino. Reuéndere, as Riuéndere. Reuenduto, as Riuenduto. Reuenditore, as Riuenditore. Reuerberare, as Riuerberare. Reuerberatione, as Riuerberatione. Reuérbero, as Riuerberatione. Reueréndo, as Riuerendo. Reuerendissimo, most reuerend, wor∣shipfull or venerable. Reuerénte, as Riuerénte. Reueréntia, as Riuerentia. Reuerire, as Riuerentiare. Reuerito, as Riuerito. Reuersione, a returning or comming back againe, a reuersion. Reuezuolo, a birde called a red-taile. Reuificare, to reuiue, to reuifie. Reuisitare, to visite or go to see againe. Reuma, a rheume, a cartarrhe, a pose, a murre, a distillation of humours. Reumoso, rheumatike, posie, full of the rheume. Reuólgere, volgo, volsi, volto, as Re∣uoltare. Reuolta, a reuolt, a turning, an ouer∣throw. Reuoltare, to reuolt, to turne, to put to flight, to ouerturne, to ouerwhelme. Reuólto, turned, reuolted, ouerthrowne, ouerturned, reuolued, pondred, conside∣red, tossed, ouerwhelmed, bent, turned, or enclined, addicted, turned vp and downe, returned often, rolled or tum∣bled againe, turned ouer leaues, &c. Reuóluere, volgo, volsi, volto, to re∣uolue, to ponder, to consider, to tosse, to turne, to ouerwhelme, to turne vp and downe, to returne often, to roll or tum∣ble againe, to turne ouer leaues, to turne backe to his first place or point. Reuolutione, a reuolution, a reuoluing, a turning backe to the first place or point, a reuolution of celestiall bodies or spheres. Rezza, a fishing or fowling net, a haie. Rezzaglio, as Rezza. Rezzare, to ouershade with boughes or trees. Rezzestolla, as Regestola. Rezzo, a shade or shadowing of leaues, flowers, or trees. Rezzola, a quoife or caule of fine net worke as women vse to weare. Rezzolozo, shadie, colde, coole, full of shades. Rézzere, as Récere. Rezzuto, as Reciuto. Rha, a precious roote vsed in medicines to purge choler, some take it for rubarbe. Ria, wicked, bad, giltie, culpable, faultie. Riaccéndere, cendo, cesi, ceso, to kin∣dle or light againe. Riacceso, rekindled, or lighted againe. Rialzare, to raise or aduance againe. Riamare, to reloue, or loue againe. Riamazzare, to kill or slaie againe. Riandare, to go ouer and consider or view againe and againe. Riapérto, opened againe. Riárdere, ardo, arsi, arso, to reburne, to skald, to frie with heate againe. Riarso, reburned, burnt, skalded or fride with a burning. Riassúmere, as Resúmere. Riassunto, as Resunto. Riatino, a wren. Riáuolo, a cole-rake to make cleane an ouen with, a broad slice, a skimmer, a spade, a shouell, a scoope, a ladle, a tro∣well. Ribadire, disco, dito, to clinch a naile. Ribalderia, ribauldrie, wickednes, knaue∣rie, trecherie. Ribaldo, a ribald, a knaue, a varlet, a lout. Ribaldone, a great or craftie ribaulde, wagge, knaue, or varlet. Ribáltare, to ouerturne, to ouerwhelme, to ouerthrowe, to destroie, to subuert, to raze, to spoile. Ribalzare, to tosse & retosse, to bounde, and rebound as a ball. Ribalzo, a rebound, or rebounding of a ball. Ribambire, bisco, bito, to dote or be∣come a childe againe, to play the foole, to become a dotrell. Ribambito, doted or become a childe againe, plaide the foole, become a dotrell. Ribandire, disco, dito, to reuoke from banishmēt. also to banish again, to pro∣claime
againe. Ribandito, reuoked from banishment, proclaimed againe. Ribasciare, to kisse againe. Ribáttere, batto, battei, battuto, to rebeate, to restreeke. to reiect, to cast by, to refell. Also to clinch a naile. Ribattuto, rebeaten, reiected, refelled, clinched. Ribattezzare, to rebaptise, to christen againe. Ribattimento, a rebeating, a refelling, a reiecting, a clinching. Ribattuta, as Ribattimento. Ribe, red goseberries, beyond sea goose∣berries, bastard corans, or common ribes. Ribébba, as Ribecca. Also a kinde of deepe measure in Italie. Ribécca, a musicall instrument so called, a rebeck, or a croud, or a kit. Ribeccare, as Rimbeccare. Ribecchino, a little croud, kit, or fidle. Ribecchista, a fidler or player vpon a rebeck, or croud. Ribellare, to rebell against authoritie, to rise against, to reuenge himselfe. Ribélle, a rebell. Ribellióne, rebellion, a rising against au∣thoritie. Ribellóso, rebellious, stubborne, rising against. Ribes, red gooseberies, bastard corans, or common ribes. Ribichista, as Ribechista. Ribóboli, short wittie prouerbs, or ada∣ges. Ribolla, a kinde of daintie wine in I∣talie that we call Cuite. Ribollire, bollo, bollito, to reboile, to reseeth, to heate or skald againe. Ribollimento, a reboyling, a heating, or skalding. Ribombare, to resound, to rebound, to make a hollow resounding or ecchoing voice, to ring back againe. Ribombante, resounding, ecchoing, re∣bounding, ringing back againe. Ribómbo, a hollow resounding ecchoing noice, a ringing back againe. Ribrezzare, to terrifie, to wrong, to a∣stonish, to affright, to iniurie. Also to quiuer, or shiuer, or be chill for cold. Ribrezzo, feare, terrour, wrong, asto∣nishment. Also a quiuering, a shiue∣ring, a trembling, or a chilnes through cold, a quaking for feare. Also a hu∣mor, a toy, a conceite. Also an out∣rage, a spite, a shame, a disgrace done to one. Ribue, as Corribo. Ribuffare, to check, to chide, to skould at one, to shent, to rate. Ribuffo, a check, a chiding, a taunt, a skoulding, a rating. Ribuolo, a kinde of wyne in Italie so called. Ributtare, as Ribáttere. Ricadére, cado, caddi, caduto, to fall againe, to escheate, to fall into re∣lapse. Ricaduto, falne againe, escheated, falne into relapse. Ricadia, griefe, annoyance, tediousnes, vexation of minde, a fault, or a tres∣pas, or guilt of conscience. Also a re∣lapse into any fault againe. Ricadimento, as Ricaduta. Ricaduta, a relapse, an escheating, a fal∣ling againe. Ricagnare, to play the froward or busie fellow, to shrug or shrinke vp, to be doggish, or curst. Ricagnato, plaide the froward busie fel∣low, shrugd or shrinkt vp, doggish, cur∣rish, curst, mastiue-like. also flat-nosed as a dog. Ricalcare, to presse, croude, or thrust downe againe. Ricalcitrare, to kick, to wince, to striue, contend, or spurne against. Ricamare, to embroder. Ricamatore, an embroderer. Ricami, all manner of embroderies. Ricamuzzi, foolish embroderies. Ricambiare, to bartre, to truck, or ex∣change againe, to coarce. Ricangiare, to re-exchange, to reward, to redeserue. Ricantare, to recant, to reuoke. Ricantatione, a recantation. Ricapare, to get, finde, or make shift for againe. Ricapére, to containe againe. Ricapitare, to haue or giue entertaine∣ment, to hap or light vpon by fortune. Ricápito, entertainement, supplie, re∣fuge, shelter, couert. Ricapitulàre, to recapitulate, or rehearse a thing ouer againe that was spoken of before. Ricapitulatione, a recapitulation, a sum∣marie or briefe rehearsing of a thing spoken at large before. Ricapricciare, to affright till ones haire stare and stand. Ricascare, as Ricadére. Ricauare, to get, dig, make hollow, or pull out againe. Ricattare, as Riscattare. Also to get or shift for againe. Riccacciare, to enchase. Riccacciamenti, enchasings. Ricchezza, wealth or riches. Richinare, to encline or bend or stoupe againe. Also to reiect. Ricciare, to curle, to crispe, to frizle. Riccio, curled, crisped, frizled, shagged, bushie, hairie, rough, curled cipres, cris∣pin, vnshorne veluet, the vtmost huske or prickles of a chesnut. Also an hedge∣hog, or vrchin. Riccio marino, a sea hedge hog. Riccio porcino, a hedghog or vrchin. Riccio canino, idem. Riccio spinoso, idem. Riccino di mare. Looke Incino di ma∣re. Riccio sopra riccio, the richest cloth of gold or bodkin that is. Ricciuoli, a kind of disease in a horse a∣bout his legs. Ricciuto, curled, frizled, crisped, hairie, brizly, huskie, shagd, bushie. Ricco, rich, wealthie. Riccone, a verie wealthie rich man. Riccore, hath beene vsed for wealth or riches. Riceputa, a receite or receiuing. Ricerca, an inquirie, an inquest, a search. Also a feeling, a groping, a fumbling. Ricercare, to inquire, to inquest, to search out, to require, to feele, to grope, to sue for. Ricercata, as Ricerca. Ricercatina, an easie gentle feeling, gro∣ping, fumbling or searching. Ricétta, a receite, a receiuing, an accep∣ting, a taking. Ricettácolo, a receptacle, a warehouse, a store house, a place to receiue and keepe things safely in. Also a refuge, a com∣fort, a place of securitie. Ricettare, to receiue or intertaine againe, to harborough. Ricétto, receiued or intertained. also inter∣tainment. also a lodge, harborough, rest, aboad or place of receite, a receptacle. Ricéuere, ceuo, ceuei, ceuuto, to re∣ceiue, to take, to accept, to admit. Riceuuto, receiued, accepted, taken, ad∣mitted. Riceuitore, a receiuer, a taker. Also one that receiueth and harboureth theeues. Riceuuta, a receiuing, a receit, a taking. Richiamare, to reuoke, to reclaime, to call backe, to appeale vnto, to crie against, to repugne, to gainesay or denie with a lowd voice. Also to answer with an ec∣cho. Richiamatione, a reclaiming or crying against, a gainsaying, an appealing, a reuoking.
Richiamo, an appeale or calling for iu∣stice, a reuoking. Also a fowlers pipe or call to call birds. Richiédere, chiedo, chiesi, chiesto, or chieduto, to require, to request, to sue for, to aske of or intreat of. Richieduto, required, intreated, reque∣sted, sued for, asked of or intreated of. Richieditore, an intreator, a requester, a sutor. Richiésta, a request, a suite, a requiring. Also all manner of giblets or entrailes of fowle or of beast that be good to eate. Richiésto, as Richieduto. Richiúdere, chiudo, chiusi, chiuso, as Rinchiúdere. Ricidere, as Recídere. Riciso, as Reciso. Also precise. Ricinio, as Recinio. Ricino, a vermine called a tyke that an∣noyeth sundrie kinds of beasts as dogs, sheepe and oxen, &c. Also an herbe in Egypt called Palma Christie, which hath a seed like a tike. Ricinto, a round encompassing againe. Ricgliere, as Raccógliere. Ricoglitore, a gatherer, a collector, an as∣sembler. Ricognitione, a recognisance, an ac∣knowledging, a considering, a calling to remembrance, a reuising, a recognising, a reuiewing or ouerlooking. Ricognitore, an acknowledger, a reknow∣ledger. Ricolcare, to lye downe to rest againe. Ricólta, as Raclta. Ricólto, as Raccolto. Ricomandare, to recommend. Also to commaund againe. Ricominciare, to recommence, or begin againe. Ricompénsa, a recompence, a reward. Ricompensare, to recompence, to requit, to reward. Ricómpera, a purchase or buying againe. Ricomperare, to repurchase, redeeme or buy againe. Ricompónere, to frame, compose or a∣gree or settle together againe. Ricompórre, idem. Ricompra, as Ricómpera. Ricomprare, as Ricomperare. Riconciare, as Racconciare. Riconciliare, to reconcile, to attone, to calme, to parifie, to make peace and at∣tonement againe, to bring in fauour a∣gaine, to set at peace. Riconciliagione, as Riconciliatione. Riconciliatione, a reconciliation or pa∣cification, an agreement that is made, a peacemaking betweene them that had bin friends and afterward foes, an at∣tonement making, a reconciling, a set∣ting at one. Ricondúrre, duco, dussi, dotto, to re∣conduct, bring, or leade againe. Ricondotto, brought, reconducted, or lead againe. Riconfermare, to reconfirme againe, to re-establish. Riconfessare, to confesse or acknowledge againe. Ricongiúngere, giungo, gionsi, gion∣to, to reconioyne together, to ioyne to∣gether againe. Ricongionto, reconioyned againe. Ricongiungimento, a reconioyning to∣gether. Ricongiuntione, a reconiunction. Riconiare, to coine or stamp againe. Riconóscere, nosco, nobbi, nosciuto, to acknowledge, to requit, to be thanke∣full for. Also to suruay, to reuiew, to marke wel, to recognise, to reknowledge, to consider, to call or bring into remem∣brance, to know againe, to ouerlooke. Riconosciuto, acknowledged, knowne, requited, recompenced, bin thankefull vnto, knowne againe, suruaide, re∣uiewde, marked well, recognised, re∣knowledged, considered, called to re∣membrance. Riconoscimento, as Riconoscentia. Riconoscitore, an acknowledger, a thankefull man. Riconoscéntia, acknowledgemēt, thank∣fulnes, mindfulnes, a suruaying, a con∣sidering, a recognising, a reuising, a re∣uiewing, a knowing of one againe. Also vsed for acquaintance. Riconoscénte, thankefull, mindfull, ac∣knowledging, suruaying, recognising. Ricontare, to recount, to relate, or tell againe. Ricontrare, to encounter, to meete. Ricóntro, an encounter, a meeting, a shock. Ricoperchiare, to couer againe. Ricopérta, a couering againe, a sheltring, a shrouding. Ricopérto, couered againe. Ricopríre, copro, copérsi, copérto, to couer againe. Ricopiare, to copie or write ouer a∣gaine. Ricorciare, to abridge, to shorten, or cur∣tall againe. Ricordare, to record, to remember, to put in minde, to call to minde. Ricordantia, record, remembrance, mind∣fulnes, a recording. Ricordatione, as Ricordantia. Ricordatore, a recorder, a remembran∣cer, a remembrer. Ricordéuole, mindfull, remembring. Al∣so to be remembred. Ricordo, an admonition, a document, a precept, a remembrance, a token, a re∣cord, a token or signe to remember by. Ricoréggere, to recorrect or mende a∣gaine. Ricórrere, corro, corsi, corso, to runne or haue recourse vnto, to flie for suc∣cour, refuge or helpe. Also to returne hastily, to come running againe, to run backe againe. Ricorso, runne, fled, or had recourse vn∣to. Also recourse, refuge succour, or helpe. Also returned hastily, runne backe againe, &c. Also a returning or recourse backe againe. Ricoruare, to make crooked, to bende, to stoupe, to bowe or bend backe againe. Ricoruità, a bending backward. Ricoruo, crooked, bending, bowing, bowed or bent backe. Ricótta, a kinde of fresh cheese and creame. Ricótto, sodden, baked or rosted againe. Ricouerare, to recouer, to reobtaine, to rescue or get againe what was lost. Also to flie for succour and refuge to anie place. Ricóuero, a recouerie, or reobtaining, a rescue or getting againe what was lost or taken awaie. Also a remedie, a helpe, a redresse, a refuge, a shroud, a shelter, a safetie, or a succour. Ricourare, as Ricouerare. Ricourire, as Ricoprire. Ricouro, as Ricóuero. Ricosire, as Ricuscire. Ricreanza, as Ricreatione. Ricreare, to recreate, to solace, to delite, to sporte. Also to renew, to make againe, to make lustie, to recouer ones old strength againe, to comfort. Ricreatione, recreation, solace, sport, de∣lite, pastime, pleasure, a refreshing or re∣storing, a comforting, a relieuing. Ricreatiuo, full of recreation, pastime, glee, or solace. Ricreduto, a miscreant, a recreant, a misbeleeuing wretch. Recremento, any superfluous drosse, dregs, or scum of any thing. Ricréscete, cresco, crebbi, cresciuro, to grow or spring againe. Ricrespare, to curle, to frizle, or wrinkle againe. Ricrostare, to harden, or growe crustie a∣gaine. Ricucire, as Ricuscire.
Ricucito, as Ricuscito. Riculare, to recoyle, to retreate, to retyre or giue ground. Ricuócere, cuoco, cocei, cotto, to boyle, roste, or bake againe. Ricuperando, as Ricuperabile. Ricuperare, to recouer, to reobtaine, to reget, to rescue, to get againe. Ricuperabile, recouerable, that may be reobtained, to be recouered. Ricuperatione, a recouery, a reobtaining, a recouering of a thing lost or taken a∣waie. Ricuruare, as Ricoruare. Ricuruità, a bending backe againe. Ricuruo, as Ricoruo. Ricusa, a refusal, a renouncing, a recusing, a deniall, a reiecting. Ricusare, to refuse, to renounce, to recuse, to denie, to reiect, to repell, to say nay. Ricusante, a refusant, a recusant, a de∣nier, a reiecter. Ricuscire, cuscio, cuscij, cuscito, to sowe againe, or mende a seame. Ricuscio, sowed againe, or mended a seame. Rida, a kinde of countrie, rounde, hop∣ping dance. Ridamare, to loue againe, to loue them that loue vs. Ridare, to giue againe. Ridar la volta, to turne backe againe. Ridda, as Rida. Riddare, to dance in a round. Rídere, rido, risi, riso, to laugh, to smile, to simper, to leere. Also to mocke or scoffe. Ridente, laughing, smiling, pleasant, that laugheth much. Ridicolo, Ridiculo, ridiculous, foolish, to be laughed at, that deserueth or is to be mocked and laught at, foolish, to be scorned, a laughing stocke, pleasant, full of laughter, a toie to mocke an ape. Ridicoloso, Ridiculoso, as Ridicolo. Ridimandare, to redemaund or aske a∣gaine. Ridire, dico, dissi, detto, to saie againe, to recant or reuoke a saying, to repeate. Ridétto, saide againe, or repeated, recan∣ted or reuoked a saying. Ridolére, dolgo, dolsi, doluto, to smell or sauour. Also to grieue, vexe, smart, or ake againe. Ridoluto, smelt, or sauoured. also grieued, smarted, vexed, or aked againe. Ridoli, a kinde of toole or part about a plough. Ridomandare, as Ridimandare. Ridondare, to redounde, or returne vnto. Ridoppiare, to redouble. Ridósso, Looke Caualcare. Ridotto, reduced, brought or led vnto. al∣so brought backe safe and sound againe, brought or led home againe. Also a home, a lodging, a withdrawing place. Also a company, a knot, a crue or as∣semblie of good fellowes. Also a gaming or tabling house, or other place where good companie doth meete. Ridortare, to feare, to dread, to redoubt, to mistrust. Ridouentare, to become againe. Ridrizzare, to make straight againe, to stand vp or stiffe againe. Ridúcere, as Ridurre. Ridúrre, duco, dussi, dutto, to reduce, leade, or bring vnto, to bring backe or home againe, to rebring home or leade backe safe againe, to lead foorth again. Ridutto, as Ridotto. Riédere, riedo, riedei, rieduto, to re∣turne or come againe. Riedificatione, a re-edifying, a rebuil∣ding. Riedo, a returne, a returning. Rieduto, returned or come againe. Riella, a carpenters square or squire. also a kinde of adze or pickaxe. Riempire, pisco, pito, to fill or replenish, to repleate. Rienfiare, to swell or puffe vp againe. Rientrare, to re-entre, or come in againe. Rientrata, a re-entrie, a re-entrance. Rienza, a common whore, a stallion ramp. Also as Renza. Riesca, may sorte, issue, effect, or prooue. Riéscere, as Riuscire. Rifare, faccio, feci, fatto, to do or make againe, to satisfie or make amendes, to make one whole againe, to repaire, to a∣mend, to make newe againe, to renew, to restore, to strengthen, to refresh, to com∣fort, to recouer or gather strength. also to reuie at plaie, to set stake vpon stake. Rifatto, done or made again, made whole, satisfied, or recouered, or made amends vnto, repaired, amended, renewed, made new againe, restored, strengthned, re∣freshed, comforted, recouered, or gathe∣red strength. Also reuide at play. Rife, as Refe. Riferénza, a reference, or relation, or re∣spect vnto, a rehearsing, a declaration, &c. vide Riferire. Riferire, risco, rito, to refer, to relate, to report, to rehearse, to make relation, to tel, to vtte, to declare, to expresse. also to direct, to ascribe. also to giue againe, to render, to bring or beare backe again, to requite, to restore, to say or answer, to bend or applie, to interpret, to account, to acknowledge, to haue reference or re∣spect vnto. Riferito, related, reported, remit∣ted, rehearsed, made relation of, tolde, vttered, declared, expressed, re∣ferred, directed, ascribed, giuen, borne or brought backe againe, requited, re∣stored, saide or answered, bended or ap∣plied, interpreted, acknowledged, had reference or respect vnto. Rifiatare, to breath againe, to take breath, to vent. Rificcare, to fasten, to driue or thrust in againe. Rificiare, as Rifare. Rifigliare, to bring foorth more children or yoong ones. Also to fillie againe. Rifinare, to refine. also to cease or giue ouer Rifiotire, to bloome, blossome or flourish againe. Rifiutare, as Ricusare. Rifiuto, as Ricusa. Also any thing that is cast off and may be spared, as Cauallo di rifiuto, a caste horse or a spare horse. Rifléttere, Flétto, Fléssi, Flésso, to bowe, to bend, or turne back againe. Also to reflect, to reuerberate. Riflésso, bowed, turned or bended backe againe, reflected, reuerberated. Also a reflexion. Riflessione, a reflexion, a repercussion, a reuerberation, a bowing or turning back againe. Riflessiuo, reflectiue, reuerberating, bo∣wing or turning backe againe. Riflusso, the reflux or flowing of the sea. Rifondare, to found again, to beat, to rib∣baste, to bumbaste, to swing, to bang. Rifóndere, fondo, fondéi, fonduto, to melt, to found or caste againe, to dis∣solue or melt againe. Riforbire, to furbish or wipe ouer againe. Riforma, as Riformatione. Riformagione, as Riformatione, a law or ordinance made by the consent of the people without the senate. Riformare, to reforme, to redresse, to re∣paire, to correct, to controule, to mend, to renew, to bring to the old state againe, to fashion as it was before. Riformatione, a reformation, a correc∣ting, a controuling, a renuing of anie thing to his old state againe. Riformatore, a reformer, a controuler, a corrector, he that bringeth to a new and better fashion. Riforméuole, that may be reformed or corrected, that may be brought from an olde to a newe and better fashion. Riforníre, nisco, nito, to refurnish, to store againe.
Riforzare, as Rinforzare. Riforzino, a roape, a halter, a coller of hemp. Rifórso, a reinforcing, a restrengthening. Rifósso, a double ditch, a double trench or dike. Rifragrantia, a fragrancie or sweete smel∣ling. Rifrángere, frango, fransi, franto, to breake or splitter againe. Rifranto, broken againe. Rifratta, rebounded, a rebound. Rifrenare, as Raffrenare. Rifrenato, as Raffrenato. Rifrescare, to refresh, to coole, to recreate. Rifrescatóio, as Rinfrescatoio. Rifrigerare, as Refrigerare. Rifrigeratiuo, as Refrigeratiuo. Rifrigério, as Refrigério. Rifriggere, friggo, frissi, fritto, to frie a∣gaine. Rifrustare, to beate, to ribroste, to bum∣baste, to swaddle, to cudgell, to bang. Rifrusto, a whipping, a swadling, a cudge∣ling, a beating. Rifuga, as Refuga. Rifuggire, fuggo, fuggito, to flie or run vnto for helpe. Also to flie away, to run backe, to refuse, to eschew, to shun, to a∣voide, to flie from, to forsake, to runne away againe. Rifuggito, fled or run vnto for help or re∣dresse. Also fled away, run backe, refu∣sed, eschewed, shunned, auoided, fled from, forsaken, run away againe. Rifúgio, a refuge, a helpe or succour. Also a place of helpe, of rescue or safetie, a shelter or shroud. Rifugo, as Refugo. Rifúlgere, fulgo, fulsi, fulso, to shine, to flare, to glimmer, to glister. Rifulgénte, shining, splendent, blazing, bright, glimmering, flaring, glistring, orient. Rifulgénza, a shining, a brightnes, a glimmering, a glistring. Rifulso, shined, shone, blazed, brightned, glimmered, flared, glistred. Rifusati, as Refusati. Rifuso, a refusall. A rifuso, careleslie, refusinglie, heedleslie. Rifutare, to confute, to reiect, to con∣uince, to refell, to denye, to repell the saying of another. Also to refuse. Rifutatione, a confutation, a replication, a conuincing, a refusing, a denyall. Riga, a line, a streeke. Also a rule or a ruler, as Rega. Rigagno, Rigano, as Rigagnolo. Rigágnolo, a little streame, brooke, gul∣let, gutter, or riuer, a slow of waters, to water and sprinkle fields. Riganéllo, as Rigágnolo. Also a kinde of fowle. Rigáno, the hearbe organie, or wilde mar∣ierom. Rigare, to rule paper or bookes, to marke, to lyne or strake out. also to draw little streames or gullets of water into fields, to water grounds or fields, to make wet. Rigaruólo, a gutter, a furrow or gul∣let of water drawne by arte into any field or garden to water it. Also a wa∣terpot to water gardens with. Rigatta, the play that childrē cal at musse. Also a strife or contention for the mai∣strie, a coping or bickering together. Rigattare, as Recatare, to wrangle, to shift for, or play at musse. Also to sell by retaile as hucksters and brokers vse, to pinch, to rake or spare by pinching and sauing. to lye and talke craftilie, to proule and shift for by prouling. to con∣tend, to cope or fight for the maistrie. Rigattiére, a wrangler, a shifter, a player at musse, a huckster, a fripper, a broker, such as sell old clothes and such trash. Rigattiniére, a maker of purse-locks or purses. Rigattino, the lock of the iron of a purse. Also a purse with a lock. Rigelare, to freese againe. Rigenerare, as Regenerare. Rigerminare, as Regerminare. Rigettare, to reiect, or resell, or cast back againe, to cast or fling againe, to cast or shake off, to neglect, to refuse. Rigettaglie, things that are abhorred and reiected, as sicknes, pouertie, sorow, &c. Rigettato, or Rigetto, cast away, reiec∣ted, cast off, refused, forsaken, not set by. Rigettione, a reiecting, a casting away, a refusing or forsaking. Rigidamente, seuerely, austerely, ri∣gorously, sharply, stiffely, sternely, cruelly. Rigidézza, seueritie, roughnes, austeri∣tie, rigor, crueltie, sturdines, Looke Rigido. Rigidire, disco, dito, to grow seuere, cruell, rigorous, fell, austere, or rough. Also to become or grow stiffe or starke or num with cold, to be frosen, and stand stiffe vpright. Rigidito, growne or become seuere, cruell, rigorous, austere, fell or rough. Also stiffe, starke, or num, or frosen stiffe with cold. Rigidità, as Rigidezza. Rigido, rigorous, seuere, austere, sterne, fell, cruell, fierce, rough, sturdie, vn∣mercifull, that can not be bowed or bent, firme and resolute in an opinion. Also stiffe, starke, or num with cold, frozen hard. Rigittare, to reiect, to throw, or cast back againe. Riglitare, to tuck vp, or plait or fould vp a garment. Riglito, a plait or tucking vp of a gar∣ment. Rignando, grinning, snarling, yarring, foaming at the mouth. Rignare, as Rignire. Also to laugh, to simper, or smile apparantlie. Rignire, gnisco, gnito, to snarle, to grin, to yarre as a dog, to neigh as a horse. Also to foame at the mouth with anger. Rignimento, a snarling, a yarring, a grinning, a neighing. Rigno, a dogs snarling, or yarring, or neighing of a horse. Rigóglio, as Orgóglio. Rigoglióso, as Orgoglióso. Rigógolo, a kinde of rooke, dawe, or chough. Rigolétto, a countrie skipping dance, a merrie round or hornepipe, or gigge. Rigolfo, a whirle-poole. Also the eddie of a water. Rigolitia, the wood licorice. Rigonfiare, to puffe vp or swell againe. Rigónfio, puffed vp, or swolne againe. Rigóre, rigor, seueritie, crueltie, fierce∣nes, roughnes, extremitie, rudenes. Also a very great cold, a vehement cold, which at the comming of a tertian ague doth bring quaking and shaking, a hardnes or stifnes, or numnes with cold or frost. Rigoritia, the wood licorice. Rigorosità, as Rigore. Rigoróso, rigorous, seuere, cruell, fiérce, vnmercifull, flint-harted. Rigouernare, to ouersee, to oueruiew, to ouerlooke, to gouerne againe. Rigressato, regressed or escheated vnto. Riguadagnare, to regaine. Riguagliare, as Raguagliare. Riguaglio, as Raguaglio. Riguardare, to behold, to looke, to view, to regard, to respect, to marke, to consider. Riguardare con sicurtà, to behold as∣suredlie, or stedfastlie. Riguardante, beholding, viewing, re∣gardante. Riguardamento, as Riguardo. Riguardatore, a beholder, a regarder, a viewer, a respector. Riguardéuole, honorable, regardfull, to be respected. Also respectingly.
Riguardo, regard, looke, respect, honour, view. also reference. Riguardoso, as Riguardéuole. Riguidardonare, to rewarde, to guer∣don againe. Riguo, that may easily be wet or watred, that is watred with water running by. Also a watrish moist place. Rihauére, ho, bebbi, hauuto, to recouer or haue againe. Rihauersi, to recouer himselfe againe ei∣ther of sicknes or of any losse. Rihauuto, recouered or had againe. Rilasciante, releasing, leauing, relinqui∣shing. Rilasciante medicina, a medicine that openeth those places of the body, where∣by breath is let out, and maketh a waie for the matter to haue issue. Rilasciare, to release, to abandon, to free, or quit againe, to relinquish, to loose or set at large, to vndoe, to open, to dis∣charge, to recreate, to refresh, to begin, to relent or asswage, to haue a respite or release from. Riláscio, a release, a quittance, a freeing, a loosing or setting at large, an abando∣ning, a freeing or quitting, a relinqui∣shing, a discharging, a refreshing, a be∣ginning to relent, an asswaging, a re∣spite. Rilassare, as Rilasciare. Rilassatione, as Rilascio. Rilasso, as Rilascio. Rilauare, to wash or laue againe. Rileccare, to licke againe, to lap as a dog. Rilegare, to binde againe, to fine, to con∣fine, to banish to a place, to remooue or seuer one from another, to send away far, to appoint or limit, to refer. Also to tye or bind fast againe. Rilegatione, a banishing, a confining, an exile, a sending away. Also a tying or binding fast againe. Rilegato, banished, exiled, sent away far off, confined to some place. Also tide or bound fast againe. Riléggere, leggo, lessi, letto, to read ouer againe, to gather togither againe. Rilentare, to relent, to waxe soft and lim∣ber. Rilénto, Arilénto, leasurely, conside∣rately. Riletto, read ouer againe. Rileuante, of importance, of woorth, of consequence. Rileuare, to raise, to relieue, to aduance, to import, to be of consequence, to take, to remooue or list againe, to rise againe. to worke raised or imbossed worke. to take vp againe, to asswage, to comfort, to re∣lieue, to cure, to deliuer. Rileuato, not able, high, woorthie, speciall. Rileuato seruigio, an especiall good turne. Riléuo, raising, relief, aduancemēt, import or consequence, worth or value. also the remainder, leauing, scraps or od ends of meat & drink or any thing else. also rai∣sed or embossed worke. also an vprising or vptaking. Also that which heires paie to the King called the liuerie pay∣ment or reliefe. Also an easing of a man. Rilibo, a flim-flam tale, a thing of no worth or effect. Rilicuare, as Rileuare. Riliéuo, as Riléuo. Riligine, as Religióne. Riligióso, as Religióso. Rilla, taken for a mans yard or pricke. Al∣so a short truncheon or bat. Rilúcere, luco, lussi, luciuto, to shine or giue light, to glister or be very bright. Riluciuto, shined, glistred or giuen light. Rilucénte, shining, bright, orient, gli∣string, glaring. Rima, a rime or verse, a desinence of a verse or metre. Rimamaria, as Alliaria. Rimandare, to sende againe, to counter∣maund. Rimando, a countermand. Rimanére, mango, masi, maso, or ma∣sto, to remain, to abide, to dwell, to con∣tinue. Also to cease, to leaue of, to giue ouer, to lin, to stay or tarie behinde. Rimaso, Rimasto, remained, abided, dwelt, continued, ceased, left off, lind, staid or taried behinde. Rimanér con tanto di naso, to haue the canuasse in any sute, to go away asha∣med. Rimanér smarrito, to be or remaine a∣mazed or affrighted. Rimanér in secco, to be left on the dry sand, to be in that taking as a fish is without water. Rimanér in asso, to haue no crosse or any thing left him, to loose all. Rimanénte, remaining, abiding, dwel∣ling. Also a rest, a remainder, or rem∣nant of any thing. Rimare, to rime or make rymes, to me∣tre. Rimaritare, to marrie, or wed againe. Rimasticare, to chawe againe. Rimatore, a rymer, a maker of rymes. Rimbaldera, as Mottozzo. Rimbalzare, as Ribalzare. Rimbalzo, a bounding, a hopping, a skip∣ping, a running away. Rimbambire, as Ribambire. Rimbeccare, to feede at the bill, or cram as they do capons. also to striue or con∣tend, to strike the ball at the first ser∣uice. also to make one a cuckold againe. Rimbeccársela, to swallowe a cudgeon, to belieue that the moone is made of greene cheese. Rimbombare, as Ribombare. Rimbellire, lisco, lito, to embellish, to beautifie againe. Rimbombánte, as Ribombante. Rimbómbo, as Ribombo. Rimborsare, to re-emburse, to put into ones purse againe. Rimboscare, to enter into a wood againe, to take couert as a deare doth, to grow to wood againe. Rimbréncioli, laces, strings, snips or iags about garments. Also little holes. Rimbrencioloso, all belaced, snipt, cut, iagged, fringed, beiagged, dangling or full of holes. Rimbrontolare, as Brontolare, as Rampognare. Rimbróntoli, as Brontoli. Rimbrottare, as Rimbrontolare, as Rampognare. Rimbrótti, as Brontoli. Rimbróttoli, idem. Rimbucare, to driue, to put, to hide or lurke into a hole againe. Rime, rymes, verses, mytres. Rimeare, to returne, to come againe, or go backe. Rimediare, to remedie, to redresse. Remédio, a remedy, a redresse, a medi∣cine. Rimedire, disco, dito, to gather, to saue, to spare, to get by sparing, to remedie. Rimembrare, to remember, or call to minde. Rimembranza, remembrance, memorie, mindfulnes. Rimemorare, as Rimembrare. Rimenare, to leade or bring againe, to stir or wrigle vp and downe. Rimenata, a leading or bringing againe, Also a tossing, wrigling or stirring vp and downe. Rimendare, to mende or dresse againe. Rimeritare, to remerit or deserue againe. Also to reward. Rimescolare, to blend, to mesh, to shuffle or mingle togither againe. Rimescolamento, a blending or ming∣ling togither. Rimescolanza, as Rimescolamento. Riméssa, demisse, remisse, base, abiect, vile. Also remitted or forgiuen. Also
the beginning of a newe speech or of any action when one hath made a staie or pause, faint, milde, lowlie. Also a remit∣ting of any thing from one man or time to another. Rimessamente, remislie, basely, mildelie, gently, faintly, lowly. Rimessione, a remission, a remitting, or forgiuenes. Rimessibile, remissible, pardonable, that may be remitted. Rimésso, remitted, forgiuen, put ouer, pardoned, acquitted, laide vp, referred, set in a place, restored, replaced, com∣mitted. Also abiect, remisse, demisse, base, vile, saint-harted, lowly, crauin, cowardish, timorous, slacke, dull, negli∣gent, nothing vehement. Also sent or giuen againe, let downe or slacked the strings of an instrument. Rimesta, a shaking, a mixing, a hudling or blending togither, a hochpoch. Rimestare, to mixe, to mingle, to tosse, to blend, to huddle, or shake, or rattle togi∣ther. Rimestamento, as Rimesta. Rimesticare, to bange, to beate, to touze, to tugge or lugge. Rimesticatura, a banging, a beating, a touzing, a tugging, a lugging. Riméttere, metto, misi, messo, to remit, to forgiue, to pardon, to acquit, to put ouer to another, to lay vp, to referre, to set in a place. to restore, to replace, to commit. to defer or put off, to prorogue, to send and giue againe, to let downe as the strings of an instrument. Riminio.   Rimirare, to behold or view diligently, to ayme at, to consider. Rimissione, as Rimessione. Rimissória, a remitting or deferring of a cause in lawe. Rimisurare, to measure againe. Rimodernare, to come to the newe fashi∣on againe. Rimollire, lisco, lito, to soften, to mollifie, to asswage, or calme. Rimondare, to pare or make cleane a∣gaine. Also to farme, to clense, to cleere, or to draine a ditch. Rimondo, pared or made cleane againe. Rimontare, to remount or get vp, or as∣cend againe. Rimorchiare, to giue a wanton looke, to fawne vpon, to allure, to entice or drawe to himselfe. also to towe, to tug, to hale, or drawe, or hull a ship, or any barge. Also to grumble at one and yet not be angry with him. to quip or tant with words, as Remulcare. Rimorchiato, giuen a wanton looke, fawned vpon, allured, inticed or drawne to himselfe. Also towed, tugd, hulled, haled or drawen a ship or barge. Rimorchio, a wanton looke or fawning vpon one, an allurement. Also a haling or tugging. Also a grumbling or grud∣ging. Also a quip or tante. Also as Re∣mulco. Rimórdere, mordo, mordci, morduto, to bite, to snip, to nip or pinch againe, to checke, to rebuke or skould at, to feele a remorse or compunction in conscience, to torment, to vexe or grieue one that hath done so to you. Rimorduto, bitten, snipt, nipt or pinched againe, checkt, rebuked, tanted or skoul∣ded at. felt a remorse or compuncti∣on in conscience. tormented, vexed or gnawne one that hath done so to you. Rimordimento, a remorse or compuncti∣on of conscience, a biting againe. Rimore, as Romore. Rimoreggiare, as Rumoreggiare. Rimórso, as Rimordimento. Rimotione, a remoouing or taking a∣way. Rimótamente, remotely, separately, soli∣tarily, vncouthly, distantly. Rimóto, remote, separate, solitary, far off, vncouth, vnfrequented, out of the way, set aside, withdrawne, far from. Rimóuere, móuo, móssi, mósso, to re∣mooue, to put, set or take away, to set a∣side, to withdraw. Rimósso, remooued, put, set, laide or taken away, set aside, withdrawen. Rimpalmare, to trim or make smoothe, to trim or calke a ship. Rimpastare, to paste or knead togither a∣gaine. Rimpedulare, to shake or shift off. Rimpennare, to haue, to recouer or store againe with feathers. Rimpetagliare, as Periclitare. Rimpetaglio, hazard, danger, ieopardie, perill, hab or nab. Rimpétto, foreanenst, oueragainst, on the other side, right ouer, in respect, in comparison. Rimpiattare, to hide, to lurke, to squat, to shroud, to close vp, to make flatte as a dish. Rimpiumare, to fludge with feathers a∣gaine. Rimpolpettarsela, as Rimbeccarsela. Rimpregionare, to imprison againe. Rimpresione, a taint vpon a horses foote. Rimprouerare, to vpbraide, to twit, to hit in the teeth any good turne done to one, to shame or reproche one, to disgrace one. Rimpróuero, ignominie, shame, disgrace, twitting, hitting in the teeth, a wrong, a fault, a reproch, an vpbrayding. Rimprouério, as Rimpróuero. Rimugiare, to bellow, to low, to roare, or resounde againe, to answer with lo∣wing. Rimulcare, as Rimorchiare, or Remul∣care. Rimulco, as Remulco. Rimunerare, to rewarde, to requite, to recompence, to meed, to guerdon. Rimuneratione, a rewarde, a requitall, a recompence, a remuneration, a meede, a guerdon. Rimuneratore, a rewarder, a recompen∣ser, a guerdoner, a meeder. Rimunire, nisco, nito, to refurnish or munite, to re-inforce, to strengthen a∣gaine. Rimunito, refurnished, munited, re-in∣forced, strengthened againe. Rimuuere, as Rimóuere. Rimurare, to immure, to wal vp, to cloister in. Rimurchiare, as Rimorchiare, as Re∣mulcare. Rimuta, a remoouing or alteration. Rimutare, to change againe, to alter. Rinascénte, new springing. Rináscere, nasco, nacqui, nato, to re∣new, to be borne, to rise, to grow or spring againe. Rinato, reborne or sprung vp againe. Rinascimento, a new birth, a regenerati∣on, a renuing. Rinauigare, to sayle or goe by sea a∣gaine. Rincagnato, crooked, bent, awry, wrested, shrubbie, ilfauoured, flatnosed, doggish, currish, curst, shreud. Rincalcare, to clinch, to abate the edge of any thing. Rincalzare, to reinforce, to fortifie, to charge anew, to set vpon. Also to re∣straine or keepe in subiection. also to vn∣derprop, to vnderlay, to vnderlift, to supplie with forces. Rincalzamento, as Rincalzo. Rincalzata, a new or fresh assault. Rincalzo, a re-inforcement, a recharging, a fortification, a supplie of forces, a re∣straint. an vnderprop, an vnderlifting. a thing laide vnder a barrell to keepe it from rouling or falling, or to set on tilt with. Some call it a ioyce. Rincarire, to make or become deere again, to endeere. Rincarare, as Rincarire. Rincartare, to repaire or amend with pa∣per
or paste boordes. Also to put the cards into the stocke againe, to shuffle the cards, to play one card vpon another, to packe or set the cardes, to pricke the cardes. Rincastellare, to trusse vp, to pack, to ioin to clinch or set any thing well togither. Rincastellato córpo, a bodie well trust, well framed or well compacted. Rincastrare, to ioine, to close, to riuet or clinch togither againe. Rincatiae, to smooth or plaine all man∣ner of mettals. Rinchiare, to grin or shew the teeth as a dog doth. Also to snarle, to ar, to barke, to bay as a dog doth. Also to grumble, to grunt, to skould, to raile, to braule, to wry or wrest the mouth, to make mowes or mouthes in signe of anger, to fret and chase within himselfe. Rinchiatura, a grinning, a yarring, a snarling, a barking, a baying, a grum∣bling, a grunting, a skoulding, a ray∣ling, a brauling, a mowing or wresting of the mouth, an apes face. Rinchio, as Rinchiatura. Rinchiúdere, chiúdo, chiúsi, chiúso, to recluse, to inclose, to cloister, to immure, to shut vp. Rinchiudimento, a prison, an inclosing, a cloistring, an immuring, a locking vp. Rinchiuso, reclused, cloistred, immured, shut vp a recluse or solitarie man, one that liues inclosed or shut vp. Rincirconire, nisco, nito, to turne and become sowre as wine, ale & beere doth by thunder or hot weather. Rincontrare, to reincounter, to incounter, to meete with, to shock, to butte, to front. Also to compare a thing togither, to iump in opinion. Rincontro, an incountring, a meeting, a shocke, a fronting. Also oueragainst, soreanenst▪ Also a comparing one thing with another, a iumping in opnion. Rincorare, to incourage, to animate, to imbolden, to recouer courage. Rincorrere, to runne ouer a matter a∣gaine. Rincréscere, cresco, crebbi, cresciuto, to grieue, to wearie or vexe in minde, to thinke the time long, to be tedious vn∣to. Rincresciuto, grieued, vexed or anoied in mind, thought the time irkesome. Rincrescimento, a grieuance, a tedious∣nes or irkesomnes of the mind, weari∣somnes. Rincrescéuole, grieuous, noysome, tedi∣ous, irkesome to the minde, wearisome. Rincrescioso, as Rincrescieuole. Rincrespare, to curle, to crispe, to frounze, to frizle, to pucker, to wrinkle. Rincrespatura, a curling, a crisping, a frounzing, a frizling, a wrinkling, a puckering. Rincriccare, to laugh so hartily till one shake, to reioice till one shuckle, to shrink togither, as Ranicchiare. Rincricciare, as Rincriccare. Rinculare, to retire, to recoile, to retraite or giue ground. Rinculata, a retiring, a recoyling, a giuing backe, a retraite. Rinegare, to renounce, to denie, to forsake, to reneague, to forsweare. Rinegato, a renegado, a foresworne man, one that hath renounced his religion. Rinettare, to cleanse or make cleane a∣gaine. Rinfacciare, to vpbraid, to twit or hit or caste in ones teeth any good turne done vnto him. Rinfaccimento, an vpbraiding, a twit∣ting or casting in the teeth. Rinfarciare, to satisfie, to make amends, to make whole againe. Rinfermare, to fall sicke againe. Also to shut or locke in againe. Rinfondere, to infuse or melt or powre in againe. Rinfoscare, to become darke, mistie, gloo∣mie, duskie, cloudie or foggie. Rinforzare, to reinforce, to fortifie, to strengthen, to charge againe. Rinforzino, a roape, a halter, a horse col∣ler. Rinfrancare, to refresh, to restore, to re∣deeme or free againe, to reincourage. Rinfrescare, to refresh or coole againe, to ease, to rest, to recreate. Rinfrescamento, a refreshing, a cooling, an ease, a recreation. Rinfrescatóio, a refreshing or cooling place, a shadie place. Also a vessell to keepe or set pots in vsed in sommer, stan∣ding by the cupboordes in noble mens houses. Rinfusa. Looke Alla rinfusa. Ringaluzzare, to cocker or strut or flut∣ter as a Turkie cocke. Ringauagnare, to regaine or recouer any losses. Ringare, to be high in authoritie, to make one afraid, to speak proudly. as Rēgare. Ringentilire, lisco, lito, to grow or be∣come gentle, milde or affable againe. Ringhiare, as Rinchiare. Also to neigh as a horse. Ringhi, the opening, yawning or gaping of the mouth, the snarling, the yarring or barkings of angrie curs. Ringhiera, an orators chaire or pulpit, or a seat of declamation. Ringhio, as Rinchiatura. Ringhire, ghisco, ghito, as Rinchiare. Ringiouenire, nisco, nito, to become yoong againe. Ringo, a sudden assault, a violent shocke or incounter. Also as Rinchiatura, as Ringhi. Ringrandire, disco, dito, to become or make great, stately or haughtie againe. to inlarge. Ringratiare, to giue or yeeld thankes vn∣to, to thanke. Ringratiamenti, thankes, thankings, gra∣mercies, thankes-giuings. Ringrauidare, to gette with childe a∣gaine. Ringrauidanza, a getting with childe a∣gaine. Ringuartare, as Rincartare. Rinocerónte, a great beast or monster called a horne nose, hauing a horne in his snout bending vpwards, and is a great enemie to the elephant. Rinomanza, as Rinoméa. Rinomare, to renoume, to name againe. Rinóme, as Rinoméa. Also a surname, or a pronoune in speech. Rinoméa, a renoune, or fame, or a great name, a glorie. Rinontia, Rinontiatione, as Renontia. Rinontiare, as Renontiare. Rinotrire, trisco, trito, to renourish or feede againe. Rinottare, to become night or darke a∣gaine. Rinouare, to renue or begin againe, to re∣fresh, to re-edifie, repaire, or make new againe. Rinouatione, a renewing or new begin∣ning, a repairing. Rinouellare, as Rinouare. Rinquartare, to pack, to set, or prick the cards in shuffling. Rinsanare, as Risanare. Rinsanire, nisco, nito, to recouer or re∣turne to perfect vnderstanding, to grow or become wise againe. Also to dote or grow mad againe. Rinsegnare, to teach againe. Rinseluare, as Rimboscare. Rinstiacquare, as Risciacquare. Rintegrare, as Reintegrare. Rintegratione, as Reintegratione. Rintenerire, risco, rito, to make soft or tender againe, to mollifie, to calme. Rinterzare, as Interzare, or as Rin∣quartare. Rintónica, as Planipédia. Rintoppare, to fall, stumble, or trip a∣gaine▪
to misplace or set things out of order. Rintóppo, a stumbling block, a tripping. a misplacing of things out of order. Rintracciare, to examine, to enquire, to sift out a matter, to search or track out. Rintracciatore, an examiner, a searcher or shifter out of secrets. Rintralciare, as Intralciare. Rintronare, as Rimbombare. Rintrosire, sisco, sito, as Ritrosire. Rintuzzare, to beate downe, to suppresse, to abate the edge, to make blunt, or dull, to clinch a naile. Rinualérsi, to recouer ones health, to waxe sound againe. Rinualuto, recouered his health, or be∣come sound againe. Rinuenire, to finde out againe. Rinuerdire, disco, dito, to become, waxe or make greene againe, to spring new againe, to waxe yong againe, to take hart and waxe strong againe. Rinuergare, to finde out, to search out, to discouer. Also to melt or bring into in∣gots as goldsmiths do mettals. Rinuersare, as Riuersare. Rinuérso, as Rouerscio. Rinuertíre, to reuert or ouerthrow. Rinuerzire, as Rinuerdire. Rinuescare, to entangle or entrap, or en∣snare againe. Rinuesciare, to tell tales from one to another, to sowe dissention betweene friends. Rinuesciardo, a tell-tale, a blab of his tongue whereby vnkindnes may growe. Rinuiare, to send againe, to set in the way againe. Rinuigorire, risco, rito, to reenforce, to restrengthen, to become or make strong againe. Looke Vigore. Rinuiliare, to bring lowe, to make good cheape, or abate the price of any thing. Rinuitare, to reuye it againe at any game, to drop vye. to bid againe. Rinuito, a reuye, a drop vye at any game. Rinuntia, a renouncing, a refusall. Rinuntiare, to renounce or refuse. Rinuólgere, as Rinuoltare. Rinuoltare, to reuolue, to tumble, to tosse or turne ouer againe, to re-enwrap, or enfold. Rinuóluere, vólgo, vólsi, vólto, as Rin∣uoltare. Rinuólto, reuolued, tumbled, tossed, tur∣ned or enwrapped ouer againe, ouer∣whelmed. Rinuoltura, Rinuolgimento, a reuol∣uing, a reuolution. Rio, bad, guiltie, faultie, culpable. Also a riuer, a flood, a streame, a brooke, a cur∣rēt, a chanell, a gozel or gullet of water. Riobárbaro, a drug called rewbarbe. Rióne, a maine streete, a high way, a mar∣ket place, a warde. Also a Marshall, a Sheriffe, a Sergeant, a Iailour. Riordinare, to reordaine, to redresse, to reforme. Riótta, a riot, a braule, a strife, a conten∣tion, an vprore, a hurlieburlie, a rage. Riottare, to riot, to rage, to braule, to contend. Riottso, riotous, raging, vnlawfull, con∣tentious, lauish. Ripa, a banke, a water-banke, a side, a shore or shore side of sea or riuer, a brim, a brinke, a strond of sea or riuer. Riparabile, that may be repaired or men∣ded againe, that may be recouered, or made new againe, repaireable, that may be warded, defended or shunned. Riparare, to repaire, to bring to his first estate, to restore, to recouer, to renew, to refresh, to make new, to amend. Also to ward, to defend, to shelter, to shrowd, to repaire vnto, to haue accesse vnto, to remedie, to warde a blow. Riparatione, as Riparo. Riparélla, something about a cart or a coache. Riparlare, to replie or speake againe. Ripáro, a repairing, a restoring or making new againe. Also a reparation, a fence, a warde, a defence, a shelter, a shrou∣ding, a help, a redresse, a remedie, a sup∣plie or help at a pinch. Also a rampire, a fort, a banke, a fence, a mound, a starting-hole, a couert-barne. Ripartire, parto, partito, to deuide or sunder, or depart againe, to subde∣uide. Ripartimento, a compartement, a parti∣tion, a diuision of roomes. Ripassare, to repasse or passe ouer againe. Ripassata, a repassing, or passing againe. Ripatriare, to settle, place, or dwell in his owne natiue countrie againe. Ripéllere, pello, pellei, pelluto, to put, beate, or thrust back, to repell, to turne away, to resist. Ripelo, a check or a twitch giuen with a bridle, in managing, turning, or ma∣king a horse to stop. Ripensare, to thinke or consider againe, to ponder, to iudge. Also to recom∣pence. Ripentaglio, repentance, hazard or dan∣ger of repentance, perill, ieopardie or danger, to be sorie and to repent. Ripénte, Ripentino, as Repénte. Ripentire, pento, pentito, to repent, to rue, to be sorie for some thing sayd or done. Ripercuótere, cuóto, cóssi, cósso, to re∣strike or beate againe, to strike againe, to beate or cast back, to ring againe. Also as Riuerberare. Ripercósso, restriken, or beaten againe, reflected, reuerberated, striken againe, beaten or cast back, rung or sounded back againe. Ripercóssa, as Ripercussione. Ripercussione, a reflecting, a repercus∣sion, a reuerberation, a beating, a stri∣king, a ringing or sounding back a∣gaine. Ripercussiuo, reflectiue, or reuerbera∣ting, resounding or ringing back a∣gaine. Ripertório, as Repertório. Ripescare, to fish againe, or drag for. Ripétere, as Repétere. Ripetuto, as Repetuto. Ripetitione, as Repetitione. Ripetire, as Repétere. Ripetitore, as Repetitore. Ripezzare, to patch, to piece, to cobble, to clout, to botch any old thing. Ripezzatore, a patcher, a botcher, a cob∣ler, a tinkar, a souter, a piecer, a clouter. Ripiantare, to plant or set againe. Ripiegare, to enwrap or fould vp a∣gaine. Ripieno, replenished, repleate, filled a∣gaine. Also a replenishing, a stuffing, a pudding. Ripido, full of rocks, cliffs, or crags. Ripigliare, to take againe, to retake, to catch againe, to reproue, to rebuke, to check, to rebegin a speech, to take at the bound, to bandie to and fro. Ripingere, as Rispingere. Ripinto, as Rispinto. Ripitore, an Vsher of a schoole. Also a repeater, or relator of a matter. Riplica, as Réplica. Riplicare, as Replicare. Ripolire, lisco, lito, to repolish ouer a∣gaine, to trimme and make smooth a∣gaine. Ripónere, as Ripórre. Ripórre, póngo, posi, pósto, to lay vp, to keepe, to set aside, to place againe, to put or set againe in his place. Ripósto, layde vp, set aside, placed a∣gaine. Riportamento, as Ripórto. Riportare, to reape, to obtaine, to get, to recarie, or bring, to beare or carie back againe, to referre, to remit, to report.
Riportar partite, to transport rekonings from one booke to another. Riportarsi, to remit or to conforme him∣selfe to others. Riportatore, a reporter, an obtainer, a rebringer. Ripórto, a report, a reference, a relation. Also a rebringing, an obtaining. Riposare, to repose, to rest, to cease, to stay, to settle, to lay vp. Riposanza, as Ripóso. Riposato, rested, reposed, eased. a quiet, reposed, or stayd man. Ripositório.   Ripóso, rest, repose, quiet, ease. Ripostiero, a cater, a dispēder, or steward of a house, a clarke of a kitchin, one that layeth vp any thing in store. Ripostiglio, a corner, a buttrie, a lardrie, a pantrie, or such place in a house where any thing may be layd or set vp, a cub∣bord or wardrobe, a counter, a ware∣house. Also a starting hole or lurking hole, a storehouse to keepe things in, a place where things are laide vp and kept. Ripósto, laide vp, set by, setled, placed, laid vp to be reserued and kept, vsed al∣so for Ripostiglio. Ripregare, to pray, to beseech or intreate againe. Ripréndere, préndo, presi, preso, to re∣proue, to reprehend, to blame, to con∣troule, to check, to rebuke. Also as Ri∣pigliare. Riprenditore, a reprouer, a reprehender, a tanter, a checker, a rebuker, a controu∣ler, a corrector, a finde-fault. Riprensione, a reprehension, a rebuke, a check, a tant, a blaming, a controu∣ling, a checking. Also a shrinking of sinewes, or limmes. Riprensiuo, reprehensiue, rebuking, to be reproued, checked, or controlled. Riprensore, as Riprenditore. Riprésa, a reprisall or taking againe, an answere in musike to begin when ano∣ther leaues off. Ripresaglia, booties, prayes, prizes, pri∣sals, hoardings, or any thing gotten by prize, bribing, or bootie, all fish that comes to net. Also pillage, or luggage. Ripresentare, as Representare. Ripresentatione, as Representatione. Ripreso, reproued, controuled, reprehen∣ded, rebuked, tanted, checkt. Also taken or begun againe. Also withered or shrunke vp. Riprezzo, as Ribrézzo. Riprométtere, metto, misi, messo, to promise againe, or binde himselfe by promise or couenant. Riprouare, as Ripréndere. Also to proue or trye againe. Ripruóua, a reproofe, or a reproouing. Ripudiare, as Repudiare. Ripudio, as Repudio. Ripugnanza, as Repugnantia. Ripugnante, as Repugnante. Ripugnare, as Repugnare. Ripulire, as Ripolire. Ripullulare, to bud, to bloome, to blossome, to burgen or spring againe. Ripulsa, as Repulsa. Ripulsare, as Repulsare. Riputare, to repute, to regard, to esteeme, to respect, to deeme, o account. Also to thinke againe and consider diligently. Riputatione, reputation, regard, esteeme, respect. Also a diligent considering or thinking againe. Riquadrare, to square, to fit or set in or∣der againe. Risa, smilings, laughings, laughters. Risada, a kind of meate made of rise. Also a laughing or simpring or leering. Risa della castagna, the bursting of a chesnut. Risaiuóla, a laughter or smiling. Risaldare, to solder or fasten againe. Risagallo, a kinde of bitter drug or poi∣son. Risaia, any laughing sport. a fielde of rise. Risaldatura, a resoldring, or refastning. Risalgaio, as Risagallo. Risaltare, to leape, to hop or skip againe. Risalutare, to resalute or greete againe, to salute him that saluteth vs. Risaluto, a resaluting or greeting againe. Risanare, to recure, to recouer, reheale or make sound againe. Risapére, sò, seppi, saputo, to know or wot againe, to know that is kept secret and hidden, to heare and vnderstand of a matter. Risaputo, knowen or wotted againe, &c. Risarcire, cisco, cito, to patch, to repaire, to mend or piece vp againe, to reforme. Risaruólo, a smiler, a laughing or leering or yerring fellow. Risca, the skale, the shell or finne of any fish, as Resca. Riscaldagione, an inflammation, a cha∣fing, a heating. Riscaldare, to incense, to inflame, to chafe, to heate or warme againe. Riscaldare alcuno, to perswade and in∣treat one earnestly for a god turne. Riscaldamento, as Riscaldagione. Riscaldatóio, a chafing dish. also a war∣ming pan. Riscalda viuande, a chafing dish. Riscare, to hazard, to aduenture, to ieo∣pard, to indanger. Riscattare, to redeeme, to vngage, to vn∣pawne, to rescue, to ransom. Riscatto, a rescue, a ransome, a redee∣ming. Rischiarare, to clarifie, to purifie, to cleere, to cleere ones voice, to hem, to straine to cough. Rischiare, as Riscare. Rischiarire, chiaro, chiarito, as Ris∣chiarare. Rischiarito, cleered, clarified, purified, cleered the voice, hemmed, strained to cough. Rischiéuole, as Riscoso. Rischio, as Risco. Rischioso, as Riscoso. Risciacquare, to wash, to rence, to cleanse in water, to wash againe. Risciacquatina, a washing, a rencing, a clensing in water. Riscialacquare, to vilifie, to contemne, to despise. Also to consume or waste vn∣thriftily, to swagger riotously. Risco, hazard, danger, perill, ieopardie, aduenture, hab or nab, hardines. Riscontrare, as Rincontrare. Riscontramento, as Rincontro. Riscontro, as Rincontro. Riscóso, hazardous, perillous, doubtfull, aduenturous, bold, foole hardie, rash. Riscríuere, as Rescriuere. Riscritto, as Rescritto. Riscósso, redeemed, rescued, ransomed. Also receiued or taken money in pay∣ment. Also shaken, stirred or rouzed vp. Riscuótere, as Riscattare, to receiue mo∣ney in payment. to shake, stir, tumble or rouze vp violently, to rescue. Riscuotitóre, a redeemer, a ransomer, a rescuer, a receiuer of money. Riseccante parlare, a drie well deliuered speech. Riseccare, to drie againe. Risecco, dride againe. Risedére, seggo, sedei, seduto, to reside, to abide, to remain or continue, to stand faste. Riseduto, resided, abided, continued or re∣mained in a place, stood fast. Risedénte, as Residente. Risedéntia, as Residentia. Risegare, to saw in sunder againe. Risegatura, a sawing in sunder againe. Also saw dust. Risegna, as Resegna. Risensare, to come to his owne sences a∣gaine, as it were out of a trance. Risentare, to sit againe. Also as Risciac∣quare.
Risentire, sento, sentito, to recouer fee∣ling or sence againe, to heare or feele or smell againe. Also to feele or shew a mo∣tion or effect or offer or remembrance of reuenge for any iniurie or wrong receiued, to reuenge or at least to offer to be reuenged. Risentito, recouered feeling or sence a∣gaine, heard, felt or smelt againe, but properly felt or showen a motion, effect, offer or show of reuenge for any wrong receiued. Also a huffe snuffe, one that will soone take ppper in the nose, that will reuenge euerie small matter. Risentimento, a feeling, a motion, a show or effect or offer of renge. Also a re∣uenge. Risentirsi, to be reuenged, to worke re∣uenge or at least to show some desire of reuenge. Risentitamente, with a motion, feeling or action of reuenge. Riserbare, to reserue, to keepe, to lay vp, to hor vp, to keepe for the time to come. Risérba, as Ripostiglio. Riserbanza, a reseruing, a keeping or hoor∣ding vp, a reseruation, a keeping of some thing apart for another time. Risérbe, as Risérue. Riserrare, to shut or locke vp againe, to re∣cluse or cloister vp. Riserratura, a locking or shutting vp a∣gaine. Riseruare, as Riserbare. Riserua, as Ripostiglio. It hath beene also vsed for an aduouson or grant of some liuing giuen before it be voide. Riseruatione, as Riserbanza. Risérue, cubboords, shelues, buttries, lar∣dries, pantries, wardrops, or such offices in a house. Also reseruings, sparings hoordings. Riseruire, to serue or bestead one againe. Riséruo, the rest, the remainder or leuings of any things. Risguardare, as Riguardare. Risguardo, as Riguardo. Risibile, subiect to laughing, smiling or leering, which can laugh. Risicare, Risigare, to hazard, to aduen∣ture, to ieoparde. Risigo, hazard, aduenture, ieopardie. Risima, a reame of paper. Risimetta, a quier of paper. Risimigliare, to resemble or be like. Risimigliante, resembling or a like. Risimiglianza, a resemblance or likenes. Risipila, Risipilla, a disease or swelling or inflammation full of rednes and heate comming in mens legs. Some take it to be called saint Anthonies fire. Risistere, as Resistere. Risisténte, as Resisténte. Risisténtia, as Resisténza. Risma, a reame of paper. Also a knot, crue or rout of good fellowes all alike. Riso, laughed, smiled, leered. Also a laugh∣ter, a laughing or a smile, a mocking, a scorning. Also a graine called rice. Risolare, to sole, floore, planke, boorde or seele any roofe againe. Risoltare, to result or redound. Risolubile, that may be resolued. Risóluere, soluo, soluei, soluto, to re∣solue, to determine or deliberate, to dis∣solue, melt, thaw or consume away, to loose, to vntie, to vnbinde, to vngirde, to vndo, to frustrate, to disappoint, to make voide, to remooue, to destroy, to separate or put asunder, to cut or breake off, to confute. Also to absolue of an ill act. Risoluto, Risolto, resolued, determined, deliberated. Also melted, thawed, dis∣solued, or consumed away, vanished. al∣so resolute, wilfull, hardy, bold, or deter∣minate. Also loosed, vntide, vnbounde, vngirded, vndone, frustrate, disap∣pointed, made voide, separated, put a∣sunder, confuted, broken off, absolued, rid from snares. Risolutezzà, as Risolutione. Risolutione, a resolution, a deliberation, a determination, a resoluing. Also a fain∣ting, a dissoluing, or vnbinding. Risolutiuo, a suppling or dissoluing salue. Also that may be dissolued. Risomigliare, as Risimigliare. Risomigliante, as Risimigliante. Risomiglianza, as Risimiglianza. Risonare, to resound, to sound or ring a∣gaine, to eccho, to rore. Risonante, resounding, sounding againe, ecchoing, ringing againe. Risonanza, a resounding or rebounding noise, that which we call an eccho. Risopino, as Risupino. Risorbire, bisco, bito, to sip, to sup vp, or swallow againe. Risorgente, rising, importing. Risórgere, sorgo, sursi, surto, as Risus∣citare. Risorettione, a resurrection, an vpri∣sing. Risorto, risen vp againe. Risospingere, spingo, spinsi, spinto, to thrust backe againe. Risouenire, vengo, venni, venuto, to remember. Also to helpe or supplie a∣gaine. Risouenuto, remembred, helped, or sup∣plied againe. Rispárgere, spargo, sparsi, sparso, to sprinkle or scatter againe. Risparso, sprinkled or scattered againe. Risparagnare, to spare, to saue, to pinch, or to hoord vp. Risparagno, sparing, sauing, pinching, or hoording vp. Rispargnare, as Risparagnare. Rispargno, as Risparagno. Risparmiare, as Risparagnare. Risparmio, as Risparagno. Risparmiatore, a sparer, a pincher, a hoor∣der, a sauer. Risparmiéuole, as Risparmioso. Risparmioso, sparing, sauing, pinching, hoording. Rispégnere, pegno, pensi, pento, to put out or extinguish againe. Rispénto, put out or extinguished againe. Rispettare, to respect, to regard, to esteem, to repute, to honour, to haue regarde of. Rispétto, respect, consideration, a reason that maketh one do some thing. Also esteeme, woorth, regard. also in regarde, in respect, in comparison. Also a kind of countrie song or Iigge. Rispettiuo, as Rispettoso. Rispettóso, respectiue, regardfull. Rispianare, to explaine againe. Rispiarmo, a sparing or sauing. Rispignere, as Rispingere. Rispingere, spingo, spinsi, spinto, to thrust, shooue, or push backe. Rispinto, thrust, shooued, or pusht backe. Rispiraglio, a breathing or venting hole. Rispirare, as Respirare. Rispiratione, as Respitatione. Rispléndere, spléndo, splendéi, splen∣duto, to shine, to glister, to be bright, to be gorgeous, gaie, or braue. Risplenduto, shined, glistred. Risplendénte, shining, glistring, bright, resplendent, orient, gorgeous, gaie, braue. Risplendezza, brightnes, shining, shine, glistring. Rispondénte, answering, respondent. also a suretie, a pledge, a warrant, a baile, he that answereth, vndertaketh, or pro∣miseth for. Also correspondent. Rispondénza, correspondencie, answering one to another. Also a dependencie or coherence togither, a conueniencie, a pro∣portion. Rispóndere, spondo, sposi, sposo, or spósto, to answer, to giue an answer, to agree, to accorde, to consent, to be like, equall, correspondent, or answerable, to appeere, or answer when one is called, to resemble or bee like, to bee right ouera∣gainst, to paie or satisfie, to answere, to vndertake, be suretie or promise for a∣ny
body, to be a pledge, a suretie or baile for one. Rispondéuole, answerable, or that may be answered. Also answering. Risponditore, an answerer, a suretie, a baile. Risponsione, an answer, an oracle. Risponsiuo, answering, answerable. Risposo, answered, giuen an answere, agreed, accorded, consented, bin like. also equal, correspondent or answerable. also appeered or answered, hauing been cal∣led or cited, resembled, or been like, been right ouer against, paid or satisfied, an∣swered, vndertaken, beene suretie or promised for any body, beene a pledge, a surety or baile for one. Rispósta, an answer, an oracle. Rispósto, Risponso, as Rispóso. Risprangare, to ioyne, or reuet togither, to serue togither, to mend and make whole againe. Risquadrare, to marke, to settle, to square or fit againe. Risquitto, a respite of time. Rissa, a braule, a contention, a iarre, a ian∣gling, a quarrell, a brabling, a chiding, a scolding, a strife, a squaring. Rissare, to braule, to contend, to iarre, to quarrell, to striue, to square, to scold, to chide, to rustle, to brabble. Rissoso, quarrellsome, quarrelous, conten∣tious, brauling, vnquiet, scolding full of strife. Ristagnare, to stanch againe. Ristare, to stande or rest or cease againe. Ristaurare, as Ristorare. Ristauratore, as Ristoratore. Ristauro, as Ristóro. Ristituire, as Restituire. Ristituito, as Restituito. Ristitutione, as Restitutione. Ristoranza, as Ristoratione. Ristorare, to restore, to comfort, to repaire, to reuiue, to make whole againe. Ristoratione, a restoratiue, or comfort, a restoring. Ristoratiuo, comfortable, restoratiue. Ristoratore, he that restoreth, a resto∣rer. Ristro, a restitution, a restoring, a resto∣ratiue, a comfort. Ristréngere, as Ristringere. Ristrétto, restrained, strained or bounde hard, fast bound, straite ced, refrained closed vp or shut vp, cloistred, recluse, streightned, narrow. Also a prisoner or one in durance or close. also shrugd, pin∣ched. Also couetous, niggish, pinching, that will not part with a pennie. Also seuere, harde and straite. Ristringarele calcie, to trusse, tie, or point ones hosen with points. Ristrignere, to restraine, to straine hard, to bind, to enclose, to refraine, to shut vp, to barre of libertie, to immure, to impri∣son, to streighten, to pinch or make nar∣row, to shrugge. Ristríngere, as Ristrígnere. Ristringersi nelle spalle, to shrugge or crinch in ones shoulders. Ristrettiuo, restrictiue, restringent. Ristringimento, a restriction, a streight∣ning, a shrugging or crinching. Ristrittione, as Ristringimento. Ristuccare, to glut, to gorge, to cloie, to fill, to tyre, to wearie, to make loath∣some vnto ones stomacke. Ristucco, glutted, gorged, cloide, fild, ty∣red, wearied, satisfide. Risudare, to sweate againe. Risuegliare, to awaken, to rouze vp from sleepe againe. Risuegliato, vigilant, wakefull, awake∣ned. Risuegliatore, an awakener, a larum in a clocke. Risuegliatoio, a larum in a clocke, an a∣wakener. Risuéglio, as Risuegliatoio. Risugellare, to seale vp againe. Risulta, a redounding, a resulting, a lea∣ping backe. Risultare, to redounde, to result, to re∣bound and make an eccho, to step backe. to hop, to skip, to mooue and leape. Risuonanza, as Risonanza. Risuonare, as Risonare. Risuonéuole, that may or will resound or ring againe. Risupino, falling or lying with the face vpward againe. Risúrgere, surgo, surto, as Risuscitare. Risurettione, a resurrection, an vpri∣sing. Risuscitare, to rise vp againe from death. Risuscitatione, a resurrection, an vpri∣sing. Ritade, hath been vsed for Verità. Ritagliare, to retaile, to regrate. Also to cut, iagge, or pinke or snippe as a gar∣ment. Ritaglio, retailing, regrating, hucksting. a cutting, iagging or snip in a garment. Ritagliuzzi, small iags, cuts, snips, or pinks in garments. Ritardare, to slowe, to linger, to put off, to hold off to demur, to delay, to staie, to defer, to foreslowe, to hold that one go not, to hinder, to let, to stop or staie. Ritardanza, a demur, a delaie, a staie, a lingring, a slowing, a foreslowing, a bol∣ding, a hindring, a let or stop. Ritégno, a withholding, a detaining, a re∣taining, a bond, a respect, a forbearance, squeamishnes. Also a holding op, a hindring or a let, a restrng or hol∣ding backe. Ritenére, tengo, tenni, tenuto, to with∣hold, to detaine, to retaine, to keepe or hold againe, to restraine or hold backe. Also to keepe in remembrance to holde one vp that he fall not. Also as Ritar∣dare. Ritenuto, with-held, detained, retained, kept, hindred, staide, letten, stop, re∣strained or held backe, belde vp, kept in remembrance, held vp that he fall not. Ritenimento, a wiholding, a retaining, a detaining, a respect, a forbearance. Also as Ritegno. Ritentare, to assaie, to trie, or attempt a∣gaine, to put in proofe againe. Ritentione, a detayning, a withholding, a restraining or holding backe. Ritentiua, as Retentiua. Ritentiuo, retentiue, keeping, retaining, withholding. Ritento, a reattempt, reassaying, or proo∣uing againe. Ritētore, a holder, a retainer, a restrainer Ritéssere, tesso, tessei, tessuto, to weaue, to twist, to twine, or worke togither a∣gaine. Rithmi, rimes, rithmes, verses, meeter, number, or harmonie in speaking. Rithmico, of rithme, made in rithme or meeter, that speaketh in meeter, num∣ber, harmonie or proportion. Riti, the plurall of Rito. Ritintire, tisco, tito, to ring, to tingle, to clatter, to clash, to resound, or eccho as a bell. Ritintito, rung, tingled, clattred, iangled, clasht, resounded, ecchoed as a bell. Ritintimento, as Ritintino. Ritintino, a tingling, a clinging, a iang∣ling, a ringing, a resounding of a bell. Ritirare, to retyre, to withdraw or recoyle backe, to retraite, to giue or go backe. Ritiramento, as Ritirata. Ritirata, a retiring, a retraite, a recoiling. a withstanding, a giuing or going back. Ritiratezza, a seuerall withdrawing of himselfe, a solitarines, a retiring. Ritirarsi, to retyre, to recoyle, or giue ground backe. Ritmi, as Rithmi. Rito, a rite, a ceremonie, a custome, a course or order, an approoued custome, an ac∣customed maner of doing. Ritoccare, to touch or feele againe. Ritógliere, tólgo, tólsi, tólto, to take or
snatch away againe. Ritólto, retaken or snatcht away againe. Ritondare, to rounde, to turne or make round. Also to compasse round. Ritondetto, roundish, somewhat rounde, Also a roundlet. Ritondità, roundnes. Ritondezza, roundnes. Ritóndo, round like a globe. Ritórcere, tórco, tórsi, or torcei, tórto, or torciuto, to retort, to cast or wrest backeward, to throw or shoot againe, to writhe, or turne backe violently, to wreath againe, to make crooked againe. Ritorcimento, a retorting, a wresting, a wreathing. Ritornare, to return or come home againe. Ritornare a bomba, to come to himselfe, or to his own home or wits againe. Ritornata, a returne or comming home a∣gaine. Ritorno, as Ritornata. Ritórte, withes, wreathes, bands of woode such as they binde fagots with. Ritortélli, a kinde of wrethed or crooked meate made of paste vsed in Italy. Al∣so a kinde of cake, simnell, or ginger bread. Ritórto, retorted, wreathed, wrested, made crooked, Looke Ritórcere. Ritórtola, as Ritórte. Ritortolare, as Ritórcere. Ritortura, a wreathing, a wresting, a bin∣ding, a haltring. Ritorzere, as Ritórcere. Ritorzolare, as Ritorcere. Ritórzola, as Ritortola. Ritraimento, an impediment, a with∣drawing. Ritrarre, traggo, trassi, tratto, to retyre, to recoile, to giue or go away, to go from, to withdraw back, to shrink in, to wrin∣kle. Also to drawe, to limne, to paint, or pourtraie. Ritratto, retyred, recoyled, giuen or gone backe, withdrawne backe. Also shron∣ken, wrinkled. Also drawne, painted, limned, or pourtraide. Also a picture, a likenes, a similitude. Ritrattare, to retreate, to treat or handle againe, or often, to speake againe of a thing, to repeate or begin a new, to con∣sider often, to recant a saying, to re∣uoke a thing that is done, to vnsaie that one hath said. Also to reuise, peruse or ouerlooke againe. Ritrattatione, a retraction, a reuoking of ones opinion, a reuising or correcting of ones worke, a handling againe. Ritrosia, as Ritrosità. Ritrosire, sisco, sito, to growe or become fond, peeuish, froward, wayward, skit∣tish, or nice. Ritrosito, become or growne fonde, pee∣uish, froward, strange, wayward, skit∣tish, coye, or fantasticall. Ritrosi di vento, boystrous, stormie, tem∣pestuous gales, gusts, whoors, or berries, or flawes of windes. Ritrosi del' onde, surging, boistrous, bil∣lowings of waues. Ritrosamente, waywardly, frowardly, skittishly, peeuishly, squeamishly. Ritrosescamente, as Ritrosamente. Ritrosétta, waiward, nice, coye, squeamish, froward, peeuish, puling, skittish. Ritrosità, waywardnes, nicenes, coynes, squeamishnes, frowardnes, peeuishnes, skittishnes. Ritróso, as Ritrosetta. Ritrótto, as Ritrosetta. Ritrouamento, a finding out, an inuenti∣on, a deuise. Ritrouare, to rereeue or finde out againe. Also to meete againe, to inuent, to de∣uise. Ritrouarsi in vn luogo, to be or meete in a place. Ritrouarsi in sul fatto, to be or meete vp∣on the fact or nicke. Ritrouata, as Ritrouamento. Ritruóuo, as Ridotto. Ritta, the right hand, as Ritto. Rittamente, rightly, straightly, directly, outright, stiflie, standingly. Also truely, euen as it should be, conueniently, ac∣cordingly as the custome is, iustly, pro∣perly. Ritto, vpright, straight, direct, right, stiffe standing. Also true, euen, conuenient, iust, proper. Riturare, to stop againe. Riturbare, to trouble or molest againe. Riua, as Ripa. Riualare, to contend, to striue, to concur or be riuales in loue. Riuale, a corriuall, a riuall, a competitor, a fellow louer, he that loueth, wooeth and sueth to the selfe same woman that an∣other doth, a foe-fellow in loue. Also of or belonging to a riuer or banke of a riuer. Riuali, riuales, corriuals, fellow-louers, foe fellowes in loue. Also they that haunt or dwell by brookes or running waters or they that haue their lands or grounds deuided by brookes and bordering vpon the same. Riualére, vaglio, valsi, valuto, to recouer or turne to health againe, also to restore the woorth againe. Riualuto, Riualso, recouered or returned to health, restored the woorth againe. Riualità, the enuie that is betweene two persons that loue one selfe same wo∣man. Riuedére, veggo, viddi, veduto, or visto, to ouersee, to oueruiew, to see againe, to reuiew or see againe. Riueduto, ouerseene, oueruiewde, reuiewd Riuedimento, an ouerseeing, an ouer∣uiewing. also foresight, warines or heed. Riuedérci, Ariuederci, fare-ye-well, till we see or meete one another againe. Riuelare, to reueale, to manifest, to declare to discouer, to disclose. Riuelatione, a reuelation, a reuealing, a prediction. Riuéllere, vello, velsi, velto, to plucke vp by the rootes againe, to pull away by vi∣olnce. Riuellino, as Rauellino. Riuencidire, as Rauincidire. Riuendaglie, any fripperie or olde ware or old trash sold againe. Riuendaiuólo, a retailer, a huckester, a fripper, a regrater, a broker. Riuéndere, vendo, vendei, venduto, to retaile, regrate or sell againe. Riuenduto, retailed, regrated or sold a∣gaine. Riuendigolo, as Riuendaiuólo. Reuendita, a retayling or regrating or sel∣ling againe. Riuenditore, as Riuendaiuólo. Riuendrolo, as Riuendaiuólo. Riuenire, vengo, venni, venuto, to re∣turne or come againe. Riuerberare, to reuerberate or reflect to strike or beate backe againe. Riuerberatione, a reflection or reuerbe∣ration, a striking backe or rebounding, a repercussion. Riuerberatiuo, reflecting, reuerberating, rebounding or striking backe againe. Riuérbero, as Riuerberatione. Riuerdeggiare, as Rinuerdire. Riuerdire, as Rinuerdire. Riuerditura, a growing greene againe. Riueréntia, reuerence or worship, honor & reuerence done one, a reuerend feare or regard. Also a reuerence or a curzie. Riuerentiare, to reuerence, to worship, to adore, to honor, to feare and haue in re∣uerence. Riueréndo, reuerend, worshipfull, graue, venerable, honorable, woorthie of reue∣rence. Riuerénte, reuerent, he that doth reue∣rence and honor to another, as Riue∣rendo. Riuerire, risco, rito, as Riuerentiare. Riuerito, reuerenced, worshipped, honored,
adored. Riuérsa, arsiuersie, inside outward, by con∣trarie. Looke Alla riuersa. Riuersare, to reuerse, to ouerturne, to ouerthrow, to turne the inside outward, or topsie turuie. Riuersciare, as Riuersare. Riuerscia, as Riuersa. Riuerscio, as Riuerso. Riuerscione, as Riuersone. Riuersicare, as Riuersare. Riuerso, a reuerse, a backblowe. Also topsie-turuie, arsie-uersie, contrarie, in∣side outward. Riuersone, a boxe or whirret on the cheeke giuen with the backe of the hand. Also a backe blow. Also one that lieth with his face vpright. Riuersamento, an ouerthrowing, an o∣uerturning, an ouerwhelming. Riuersata, as Riuersamento. Riuesciare, as Riuersare. Riuéscio, as Riuérso. Riuescióne, as Riuersóne. Riuestire, vesto, vestito, to cloth, reuest, attire or apparell againe. Riuestito, clothed, reuested, apparelled or attired againe. Also a new vpstart gen∣tleman, one newly come to worship. It is taken in ill part. Riuiera, a riuer, a flood, a streame. Riuincere, vinco, vinsi, vinto, to van∣quish, conquer, get or win againe. Riuisita, a reuisiting, a reuiewing. Riuisitare, to reuisit, to reuiew againe or goe to see againe. Riuisore, a surueyer, an ouerseer, an ouer∣uiewer, a visitor, a reuisor. Riuiuere, viuo, vissi, viuuto, to reuiue or liue againe, to recouer life, to growe a∣gaine. Riuo, a flood, a riuer, a streame, a brooke or a gullet of water with a gentle or na∣turall current. Also a brincke or banke of a riuer. Riuocabile, that may be reuoked or called againe. Riuocare, to recant, to reuoke or call backe againe. Riuocatione, a reuoking, a recantation, a calling backe againe. Riuóco, as Riuocatione. Riuolare, to flie againe, to flee back again, to returne flying. Riuolére, voglio, volsi, voluto, to will or desire againe. Riuólgere, as Reuoltare. Riuólto, as Reuólto. Riuolgimento, a reuolution, or tos∣sing vp and downe, a winding in and out. Ríuolo, a little gullet, gutter, brooke, ri∣uer, or streame of water. Riuóluere, as Reuóluere. Riuolutione, as Reuolutione. Riuólta, as Reuólta, a winding, turning, or crankling in and out of a riuer. Riuoltare, as Reuoltare. Riuomitare, to spue, cast vp, or vomit againe. Riúngere, vngo, vnsi, vnto, to annoint againe. Riuscibile, sortable, that may proue, sort, speede, or come to effect. Riuscire, esco, vscij, vscito, to prooue, sort, speede, or come to effect. Riuscito, proued, sorted, sped, or come to successe. Riuscita, a proofe, a sorting, a speeding, an issue, successe or effect. Rizza, a withering, a wrinkle, a wrimple, a puckering in any clothes. Rizzaglio, a fishing or fowling great net. Also a haye for conies. Rizzaglietto, a small net, or haye. Rizzappare, to dig, breake vp sappe, or delue againe. Rizzare, to reare vp, to heaue vp, to erect, to streighten, to stand stiffe. Rizzar la cresta, to lift vp the combe as a cock doth, to take courage, to be bold, to rouze. Rizzarsi, to stand vp, to erect, to growe stiffe standing. Rizzata, a stifnes, a standing vp or stiffe, an erecting. Rizzo, as Ritto, as Riccio. Rizzuto, as Ricciuto. Roan, Roano, the colour of a horse cal∣led roane colour. Róbba, a gowne, a roabe, a mantle, any long garment. Also wealth, ware, stuff, goods, geare, merchandise, or a mans stock or wealth. Also taken for a wo∣man. Also as Robbia. Also trash, or pelfe. Robbacchiare, to filch, to pilfer, to steale, to purloine, to proule, to burglarie, to embezle. Robbare, to steale, to rob, to pilfer, to filch. Robbamento, a stealing, a robbing, a robberie, a piracie, a pilfring, a larcenie, a filching. Robbatore, a robber, a stealer, a theefe, a pilfrer, a filcher, a pirate. Robbe, Looke Robba. Robbia, an hearbe to dye red withall called Madder, Cliuers Madder, or Goslin-weede. Also the hearbe Wood-roofe. Also a certaine measure of corne. Robbo, a kinde of red wheate. Also a bush, a bryer, a shrub, a bramble. Also red or ruddie coloured, as Robbia. Robbone, a great long roabe, gowne, or mantle, a kinde of coyne of golde in Muskouie. Roba, as Robba. Robacchiare, as Robbacchiare. Robare, as Robbare. Robalto, a paire of winding or turning staires. Robeculo, a robin red-breast. Robertiana, herbe robert. Robia, as Robbia. Robicilla, a bird called a red taile or a bull finch. Robicóndo, red, ruddie, high-coloured, blushing, fierie red, a branded red. Robicondità, rednes, ruddines. Robicone, as Robicondo. Robigaglia, gang-weeke. Robino, a precious stone called a rubie. Robinetto, a little rubie. also a pillicock, or dildoe. Also a spigot or cock for a conduit. Robiolo, a kinde of daintie cheese in I∣talie. Robone, as Robbone. Roborare, to make strong or stiffe as an oke. Robore, an oke, vsed also for strength and hardines of bodie and minde, force, courage, or stoutnes. Roboroso, stiffe or hard like an oke. Robrica, red-okre, or marking stone. Robusto, strong, sturdie, sinewie, lustie, tough, valiant, hard, forcible. Robustezza, strength, sturdines, tough∣nes. Rócca, a rock, a block-house, a fort, a castle, a keepe, a strong hould, a citta∣dell. Also a distaffe or rock to spinne with. Roccau, a fish, in latine Alphesta. Rocchezza, roughnes, ruggednes. Roccia, a rock, a cliffe, or crag by the sea side, a grub, or a clod of earth or stone. Rocchi, crags, or ruptures in any rocks or stones. Rocchia, as Roccia. Rocchio, a lump, a cob, a mammock, a lunchion piece. Rócco, as Rocca. Also a rooke to play at chesse with. Rocchello, the wheele about which the cord of a clock goeth. Also a bobbin to winde silke vpon. Rochetta, as Ruchetta. Rochétto, a bishops or cardinals rochet. Also a bobbin to winde silke vpon. Also any kinde of squib of wilde fier. Also
the wheele of a mill which causeth the grinding stones to turne and goe. Rochi, a kinde of great monstrous bird in India. Roco, hoarse in speaking. Rocozeni, a kinde of wilde haggard hauke. Roadafano, as Rododafne. Rodaméle, a kind of drug. Rodanto, the flower of roses. Rodénte, a kinde of red swelling inflam∣mation. Also gnawing and fretting. Ródere, rodo, rosi, roduto, or roso, to gnaw, to fret, to consume, to nibble, to eate and weare away. Also to detract, to backbite, or speake ill of. Roduto, Roso, gnawne, consumed, fret∣ted, nibbled, eaten or worne out. also de∣tracted or backbitten. Rodia, a kinde of herbe, the roote where∣of sauoureth of the rose called rose∣wort. Rodimento, a gnawing, a fretting, a nibbling. Rodite, a kinde of precious stone of a rose colour. Roditore, a gnawer, a fretter, a nibbler. Roditura, as Rodimento. Ródere l'osso, to gnaw a bone. Ródere il basto, a man to gnaw his owne burthen, to fret at himselfe. Ródere di rabbia, to gnaw or fret with rage or anger. Ródersi le labbra, a man to gnaw or bite his owne lips. Rododafne, a kind of tree in Cādia which is so venemous that it doth poison what∣soeuer it toucheth, rosteth or seedeth, and hath a flower like a rose, and a leafe like the Laurell or Bay tree. Rodomontada, a boaste, a brag, a crake, a vainglorious vaunting. Rodóra, an herb which hath a stalke with knots and ioints, and a leafe like a net∣tle, white in the midst, and in continu∣ance waxeth all like a rose. Roffia, darknes, mistines, foggines, pitchi∣nes, densitie or thicknes of vapours, dus∣kishnes. Also dandraf, scabbednes, scurf or the disease called the scuruie. Roffiana, a bawd, a pander, a ruffian. Roffianare, to play the pander, bawde or ruffian, to ruffle, to swash, to hacke as ruffians. Roffianamenti, bawdries or ruffianlike tricks, ruflings. Roffianeggiare, as Roffianare. Roffianeggiamenti, as Roffianamenti. Roffiano, a bawd, a pander or ring carier. Also a cutter, a ruffian, a hackester, a swash-buckler, a swaggrer. Roffianesimo, the arte or tricke or baw∣drie. Rogale fuoco, a bon-fire. Looke Rógo. Rogare, to intreat, to praie, to request, to aske, to desire, to require, to craue or beg. Rogatione, a rogation, a praying, a re∣quest, a question, an interrogation, a demaund. Also a law or ordinance. Roge, filth of meate sticking betweene ones teeth. Rogatore, a praier, a demaunder, a desi∣rer, a requester, an asker, a beseecher, a begger, a crauer, a suter. Rogge, a kind of peare in Italy. Roggia, as Robbia. Roggio, red, rudding, reddish, ruddy. Also that we call tawnie red. Roggiola, Rogióla, the disease called the meazels or red gum that children haue when they are yoong. Rogiada, Rogiadoso, as Rugiada. Rogiti, prouocations, vrgings, eggings on. Rogna, any kinde of scab, itch, tetter or scurffe. Rognaccia, a filthie scab or scurffe. Rognare, as Rignire. Rognonale, a kinde of ague in a horse comming in the kidneies or lungs, per∣taining to the kidneies. Rognone, the kidneie of any bodie. Rognoni, the kidneies or raines of any bo∣dies backe. Rógnosa frittata, a kinde of fride collops and egs vsed in Italy. Rognoso, scabbie, scabbed, scuruie, itchie, full of tetters. Rognuzza, small scabbes, itch or itching pimples. Rógo, a great fire wherin in old time they were wont to burne dead bodies of men. Also vsed for a graue. Roina, as Ruina. Also a toole that surge∣ons vse. Rolare, Rollare, to role, to file, to record, to put vpon a checke roule. Rólo, Rollo, a roule, a checke-roule, a file or record of names. Rollone, water and branne or froth and fome. Roma e Toma, Promettere Roma e Toma, to promise Gods cope, woonders, and all the world besides. Romagnuolo, a kind of course, home spun, sheepes russet cloth, called friers cloth or sheepheards clothing. Also a man borne in Romagna. Romaiuólo, as Romagnuolo. Romania, a kind of excellent wine in Ita∣ly like malmesie. Romanzate, to write fabulous histories or tales in rime. Romanzatore, a romant, a writer or speaker of fabulous stories in doggrell rime. Romanzi, romants, fabulous tales writ∣ten in rime. Also mountibanks. Romanzina, a kinde of dance, or trick in dancing. Romático, as Aromático. Romatizzare, as Aromatizzare. Rombazzo, a whirle winde, a filthie rumbling noise, Looke Rombo. Rombice, the hearbe sorrell, or sowre-dock. Rombo, a rumbling, roaring noise, the clang, sound, or braying of a trumpet, the dubbing of a drum, a clattring or clashing of armour, a ratling of thun∣der. Also a fish called a Burt, or a Tur∣bot, a violent hurling or turning. Also a spinning wheele, or a reele for yarne. Also a figure fouresquare losanged, ha∣uing the sides equall, but not right ang∣led or cornered but like a quarry of glas, whereupon it is vsed for any thing that hath the like forme. Rombóide, as Rombo, or like Rom∣bo. Also a countersaite Turbot, a fish like a Turbot. Rómbola, a sling. Rombolare, to throw or cast in a sling. Also to make a whorring or rumbling noise, taken from the noise that a stone maketh separating the ayre with vio∣lence, as a stone cast out of a sling doth. Also to rumble, to roare, to rattle, to clatter, to clash, to dub, to clange. Romeaggio, pilgrimage, or roaming a∣bout. Romeare, to roame or wander vp and downe solitarilie as a palmer. Roméo, as Romitaggio, a roamer, a wandrer, a palmer. Rometa, a thorneback, or ray, or skeate. Romia, a kinde of Scallop fish. Romice, as Robbia, as Rombice. Romigare, to saile or goe by sea, to roame, to roaue or goe vp and downe solitarie and alone as an hermite. Rominare, as Ruminare. Rominatore, as Ruminatore. Romita, a hermit or solitarie man. Romitaggio, a hermitage, a desert, or solitarie place. Romitaio, as Romitaggio. Romito, as Romita. Romito dalsacco, a begging hermite. Romitóio, Romitório, as Romitag∣gio. Romore, a rumor, a noise, a bruite, a re∣port,
a talke, a rumbling, a hurlieburlie. Also a fame, an vprore, a flimslam tale. Romoreggiare, to noyse, to rumor, to bluster, to raise an vprore, tumult, or sedition. Romoreggiante, tumultuous, seditious, full of noyse or vprores, blustring. Romoreggiatore, a tumultuous, sedi∣tious, storming, blustring, vnquiet fel∣low, a publisher of any noise, sedition, or vprore. Rómpere, rompo, ruppi, rotto, or romputo, to breake, to batter, to bruze, to ouerthrow, to vanquish, to destroy, to weaken, to abate, to represse, to mai∣ster, to tame, to subdue, to confute, to ouercome, to teare, to splint, to shiuer, to rent, to scatter, to totter, to tug, to hauock, to spoile, to defeate, to crush, to craze. Romputo, Rotto, broken, battred, bru∣zed, ouerthrowne, vanquished, de∣stroide, weakened, abated, repressed, maistred, tamed, subdued, confuted, ouercome, torne, splinted, shiuered, rent, scattred, tottred, tugd, hauockt, spoi∣led, defeated, crusht, crazed. Rompibile, any thing that may be bro∣ken, ouercome, or subdued. Rompicóllo, headlong, rashlie, despe∣ratlie, haire-brained. Also a waghal∣ter, a breakeneck, a rogue, a desperate heedlesse fellow, a haltersack. Also a breakeneck place, or a downe-fall. Rompidénte, a tooth-drawer. Also a toole that mazons vse. Rompimenti, all manner of breakings, crushings, ouerthrowes, &c. Rompinare, as Rampinare. Rompino, as Rampino. Rompitóio, a hammer, a mallet, a sledge, a breaker. Rompitore, a breaker, a tearer, a subduer, a destroyer, &c. Rompotimo, a bush growing in France, within twentie foote whereof no corne should be sowen. Ronca, a hedge bill, a browne bill, a forrest bill, a welsh hooke, a boares speare, a partisane, a bramble siethe. Also a kinde of mountaine partridge. Roncagino, a colour that painters vse to lay vpon wood. Roncare, to roote vp, to grub, to dig vp, to extirp, to grunt vp as a hog doth. also to cut with a welsh hooke or any such croo∣ked weapon. Also to snort in sleepe, to bray as an asse. Roncatore, a grubber, a digger, a grun∣ter. Also a cutter or lopper of trees, a snorter, a brayer, &c. Roncamenti, grubbings, gruntings, snor∣tings, brayings. Roncéra, a shell fish called a purple fish. Roncheggiare, as Roncare. Roncheggiamenti, as Roncamenti. Ronchetta, a little faulchon. Also a shoe∣makers knife. also a crooked knife that vine cutters vse. Ronchiare, as Roncare. Ronchiamenti, as Roncamenti. Ronchiatore, as Roncatore. Ronchiggiare, as Roncare. Ronchiggiamenti, as Roncamenti. Ronchiggione, as Roncatore. Ronchione, as Roncone, also a great rocke, cliffe, cragge, or stone, a rugged craggie hill. Ronchioso, knobbie, knottie, craggie, roc∣kie, stony, cliffie, desart, rough as a crab. tree sticke. Ronchisuóno, that hath a hoarse sounde, or imitateth the noise or sound of snor∣ters. Ronciglio, as Roncilio, or as Ram∣pino. Roncigliare, as Ronciliare. Ronciglione, as Rampino, as Ronci∣lio. Ronciliare, to graffe or cut with a sickle, faulchon, welsh-hooke or crooked knife. Roncilio, as Rampino. Also a faulchon, a graffing knife, a crooked knife, or a weeding hooke, or crooked hedge bill to cut hedges or loppe trees with. Also a sickle. Roncino, a nagge, a prettie horse, a hack∣nie, a tit. Roncinótto, a prettie handsome nagge or hackney. Roncito, a bush, a shrub, a brier, a thorne, a brake, a bramble that hath beene cut the tops off. Roncolare, as Ronciliare. Róncolo, as Roncilio, as Ronca. Roncone, as Ronca. Roncrátolo, a bird about the bignes of a goose that brayeth like an asse. Ronda, a companie of certaine souldiers and officers that go visiting the corpes de garde or sentinels at sundry houres of the night to cause them keepe order and see whether they be vigilant. Rondanmi, yoong swallowes or marti∣nets. Rondélla, a sea-bat, or sea-swallow. Al∣so a round target. Róndine, a swallow, a martinet. Also a kind of fish. Also a toole that Anato∣mists vse. Rondinélla, a swallow, a yong swallow. Rondinini, yoong swallowes or marti∣nets. Róndola, as Rondélla. Rondone, a martlet or a swallow. Ronfa, a game at cardes called ruffe or trumpe. Ronfare, to snort, to snarle. Also to tuffe as a cat. Also to ruff or trump at cards. Ronfamenti, snortings, snarlings, or tuf∣fings of a cat. Ronfatore, a snorter, a snarler, a tuffer. Ronféa, a kinde of sling, or a kind of dar∣ting weapon. Ronfeggiare, as Ronfare. Ronfeggiamenti, as Ronfamenti. Ronne, a letter, or a breuiation signifying rum, as Amo-rum. Ronzare, to humme or buzze as a Bee, to make a humming noise. Ronzerare, to humme or buzze as a Bee. Ronzéro, wilde, rammish, vntamed, vn∣broken, haggard, vnmanaged. Ronzino, as Roncino. Ronzone, a filthie nagge, a iade, an ill fa∣uoured horse. Ropegara, as Arpegara. Ropegare, as Arpegare. Rósa, the flowre called a rose. Acqua ró∣sa, rose water. Also gnawne or fretted. Also a rowell of a spurre. Rósa bianca, a white rose. Rósa damaschina, a damaske rose. Rósa del monte, the herbe pyonie. Rósa muschiata, a muske rose. Rósa d' herrico, as Coppa di gióue. Rósa marino, rosemarie. Rósa oltra marina, the flower Hollie∣hocke. Rósa rossa, a red rose. Rósa secca, a kinde of murrie or rose co∣lour. Rosacéo, of the colour of roses. Also of or belonging to roses. Rosaio, Rosaro, a rose bryer. Also a rosa∣rie, a rosier, a garden, a bed, or place where roses grow. Rosaio seluatico, eglantine or sweet bry∣er. Also the caper bush. Rosare, to preserue with roses, or to make to smell of roses. Rosata, a rose cake, rosed, smelling of roses, made of roses. Rosata, Acqua rosata, rosewater. Rosata radice, the herbe rosewoort. Rosato, preserued with roses, made of ro∣ses, smelt of roses, rosiate, of the colour of roses, rose colour, murrie, smelling of ro∣ses, Olio rosato, oyle of roses. Roscignólo, a nightingall. Rosechiare, as Ródere. Rosegare, as Ródere.
Rosegatura, a gnawing, a fretting, a nib∣bling, a biting. Rosegone, a gnawer, a fretter, a nibler, a biter. Rosélli, as Grattaculo. Also dride rose cakes. Also rose leaues. Also a kinde of daintie figs so called. Roselline, yoong little roses. Looke Dare Roselline. Roséo, a kinde of rose colour, of or belon∣ging to roses, or wherein roses grow. Rosette, a disease in a horse. Also litle ro∣ses, or rowels of spurs. Rosicare, as Ródere. Rosicatura, as Rosegatura. Rosicara, a mouse, a rat, a nibbler. Rosigare, as Ródere. Rosigatura, as Rosegatura. Rosigone, as Rosegone. Rosignólo, a nightingall. Rosignolare, to chirpe or sing as a nigh∣tingall. Rosignoletti, yoong nightingals. Rosmaro, a kind of fish. Rosmarino, rosemarie. Rosne, Rosnetta, as Picilla. Roso, as Roduto, Looke Ródere. Rosola, a smiths buttris. Rosolaccio, wilde poppie. Rosolino, a fish that liues on lande and water. Rosoni, a kinde of flawne, egge-pie, cu∣stard, or dowcets. Also a kind of spanish roses. Rospare, to scrape in the durt as a henne doth. to seeke carefully. Also to croke as a tode. Rospatore, a scraper or seeker in the durt, a sneaking companion. Rospature, scrapings in the durt. Rospini, a kind of muske melon. Rospo, a venemous beast called a toade. Rospopesce, a fish like a toade. Rospone, a filthie great toade. Rossa, red, a red-woman. Also a fanne of feathers. Rossardo, somewhat red or ruddie, a red man, reddish. Rosseggiare, to blush or waxe red. Rosseggiante, blushing, ruddie, red, cher∣rie-lip. Rossétto, somewhat red, ruddie. also rus∣set. Also a red man or woman, a blush colour. Also a fish called a merlane or a dace. Rossezza, rednes, ruddines, blushing. Rossiccio, reddish, ruddie, enclining to red, a blush colour. Rossigno, as Rossiccio. Rossignolare, to sing or chirpe as a nigh∣tingall. Rossignólo, a nightingall. Rossino, as Rossiccio. Rossire, Looke Arrossire. Rosso, red, ruddie, blushing, tawnie red. Also a red man. Rosso d'uuóuo, the yolke of an eg. Rossore, as Rossezza. Rossume, rednes, ruddines. Rossola, a kibe or chilblane or any red swelling. Rossolare, to swell red, to grow to kibes or chilblanes. Rosta, a turning wheele or other im∣pediment in the way, a stile ouer a hedg, a yate in any hedge or pale, a weier in a riuer, a stop in the water. a fan of fea∣thers. Also an instrument or crane to draw out any thing out of a mine or cole pit. Also a batledar to play at tenis with Also a dripping pan. Rostare, to hinder, let or stop vp the high way, to forray the countrie. Also to fan. Rostire, stisco, stito, to roste, to toste, to broile. Rostito, rosted, tosted, broyled. Also roste∣meate Rostita, a toste of bread. Rostizzana, a steake, a collop, a slice or gobbet of flesh, a piece of rosted meate called an olife. Rostizzare, to frie in steakes, to parch, to seare, to singe, to scorch. Rostra, the place of common plea at Rome wherein was a pulpit made and trim∣med with stems or forefronts of ships: out of which place they were wont to make orarions, so that it may be taken for a pulpit. Rostrata, vide Corona. Rostrata naue, a ship hauing her stem shod or pointed with iron or brasse. Rostrato, that hath a bill, snout or beake, or a stem, or that is pointed with iron or brasse. Róstro, the bill, beake, or nib of a bird or any fowle, the nose or snout of any beast or fish, the snout or stem of a ship, the tip, end, point or toong of iron, brasse or horn that is put at the end of any thing, as of a rouler to roule any thing with. Rostrum gruis, herbe storkes bill, where∣of be diuers sorts. Róta, any kind of wheele, a grinding stone, a milstone. Also a wheeling, turne or turning. Also the turne or wheeling of a horse. Also a little roule. Also the spred∣ding of a peacocks taile. Also a kinde of monstrous great fish. Rótale, of or belonging to a wheele, or like a wheele. Rotare, to wheele or turne round, to turne or swing about. Also to grind, to whet, to sharpen or set an edge vpon. Rotato, wheeled about, swinged, hurled, wheeled or turned about. Also a pie co∣loured horse. Rotatori, two Apophisis or processes bun∣ching out in the vppermost necke of the thigh, whereof the vttermost being the greatest processe in the whole bodie is of some Anatomists called in latine Na∣tes: the innermost is lower and far lesse then the other: they seeme to be ordai∣ned for the turning and wheeling about of the thigh. Roteggiare, to turne round in a wheele, or round as a horse doth. Rotélla, a little wheele or wheeling or tur∣ning. a buckler or a target. also a round mark or spot about a horse. a little roule. Also as Rotola. Rotelletta, a little wheele, a little target or buckler. Rotellino, the name of a goldsmiths toole or worke so called. Rótola, a wheele. Also a rumbling or a ratling. Also a roule or bundle of any thing. Also a cracknell writhen like a roape. Rótula del ginócchio, the whirle bone ordained to couer the ioint of the knee, which otherwise had beene to open to harme called, hee-bone, the shield like bone, the pattle-bone. Rótolare, to wheele or turne round, to tumble, to rumble, to rattle, to wallow. Also to roule, to winde vp, to bundle vp or binde vp or trusse vp any thing, to trundle. Rotolata, a wheeling, a turning, a tum∣bling, a rumbling, a ratling, a wallow∣ing, a rouling, a winding or binding vp of any thing, a trundling. Rotollare, as Rotolare. Rotollata, as Rotolata. Rótolo, a roule, a bundle, a trusse or far∣dle or bottome or clue of any thing, a roule or checkroule of names, a trun∣dling. Rotolon or Rotoloni, rowling, wallo∣wing or tumbling or rumbling round. Rotondare, to round or make rounde, to make full and perfect, to growe vppe rounde. Rotondità, roundnes, rotunditie. Rotondo, round, well compact or fashio∣ned, handsome, full, perfect. Rotta, as Rotto, a breach, an ouerthrow, a discomfiture, a route or breaking of a squadron or troupe turning them to flight. Rotta d'un essercito, the ouerthrow or discomfiture of an armie.
Rottame, Rotame, any shiuer, splint or piece of thing broken, a shard or a bat, as we say fragments, scraps or mammocks, rubble or rubbish. Rottare, to belch, to raspe, to spue, to break winde vpward. Rottatore, a belcher, a spuer, a rasper. Rotteggiare, as Rottare. Rotteggiatore, as Rottatore. Rottelino, as Rotellino. Rotti, belches, belchings, spuings, raspings. Rottiére, as Rottatore. Rotto, as Romputo, a man that is open or burst in the bellie or cods. Also a ras∣ping, a belching or breaking of wind, a fraction in Arithmetike. Rotto di schiena, backe-broken, broken∣backt. Rottóio, Rottório, a plaister to breake any swelling, a corosiue. Also a nut∣cracker. Rottondare, to round or make round. Rottura, a breaking, a breach, a rupture, a disease called a rupture, a fraction. Also a burglarie or breaking vp of a house. Rótula, as Rótola. Rotulare, as Rotolare. Rótulo, as Rótolo. Roua, a kind of great waight vsed in Ita∣ly. Also a measure of corne. Rouaio, the northren wind, the cold nor∣thren wind, a nipping wind. Rouano, as Roano. Roueia, a kind of peason or sitches. Rouellare, Rouéllo, as Rangolare. Rouentare, to neale, to heate red hot. Also to glow. Rouénte, glowing red, firie hot, red hot. Róuere, the tree called an oake. Also wan∣scot wood. Rouerino, wainscot or oke. Also made of oake. Also strong as oake. Also opina∣tiue, headstrong, wilfull or fixt in some humour. Rouérsa, as Riuersa. Rouersare, as Riuersare. Rouérso, as Riuerso. Rouersone, as Riuersone. Rouérscia, as Riuérsa. Rouersciare, as Riuersare. Rouérscio, as Riuérso. Rouerscione, as Riuersone. Rouescia, as Riuersa. Rouersciare, as Riuersare. Rouéscio, as Riuérso. Rouescione, as Riuersone. Rouetta, a bryer, a shrub, a bramble, a brake, a thorne, a bush, a blacke berrie bush. Rouiglia, a kinde of greene peason. Rouigliare, to role, to tumble or tosse ouer and ouer. Also as Squinternare. Rouiglióne, a kinde of peason as our ha∣stings and bowlings are. Also a scab, a botch, a scurfe, the measels or small pox. Also rowling, rumbling or tossing ouer. Rouina, Roina, ruine, spoile, waste, ha∣uocke, consummation, destruction, an ouerthrowe or wracke, extreame decaie, death, miserie, losse, danger, mischiefe, desolation. Rouinare, Roinare, to ruine, spoil, waste, hauocke, consume, destroy, or defeate. Rouinamento, as Roina. Rouinatore, a ruiner, a spoiler, a waster, a consumer, &c. Rouinazzo, rubbish of broken walles, rubble, brick-bats, tyle-shards. Rouinéuole, ruinous, spoiled, subiect to ruine and destruction, ready to fall. Rouinóio, as Rouinoso. Rouinoso, ruinous, spoiled, wastefull. Rouo, as Rouetta. Rouo ideo, a kinde of strange herbe. Rouo camino, a kinde of tree, shrubbe, bramble, or brier. Rózza, Roza, a iade or filthie bad horse, Also a filthie whore, a rampe-stalion. Also rude or barbarous, or rough. Rozzamente, rudely, brutishly, vnman∣nerly, vnciuily, roughly. Rózzezza, rudenes, brutishnes, vnciuili∣tie, roughnes. Rozzino, as Roncino. Rozzo, rude, vnciuill, brutish, ignorant, that knoweth nothing, vntaught, no∣thing expert, not exercised or traded in any thing, rusticall, vnmanerly, clow∣nish. It is also taken for a branch or bough full of plums, or other fruite hanging, or a bunch of grapes dangling downe from the vine or tree. Also vn∣wrought, rough, not fashioned, homely, simple, plaine, base, blunt, bungler∣like. Rozzola, a cheesefat, a cheese-presse, a cherning fat. Rozzone, a filthie ill-fauoured iade or horse. Also a mans priuie member. Ruba, as Rubaria. Rubbacchiare, as Robbacchiare. Rubbare, as Robbare. Rubaldo, as Ribaldo. Rubaldone, as Ribaldone. Rubalderia, as Ribalderia. Rubacchiare, as Robbacchiare. Rubare, as Robbare. Rubarie, filchings, stealings, larcenies, prowlings, purloinings, robberies, thee∣uings. Rubbi, a kinde of vermine, worme or ca∣terpiller. Rubbia, as Robbia. Also a certaine mea∣sure of corne. Rubbone, a kind of golden coine in Mus∣couie. Rubecchio, red, reddish, ruddie, sanguine colour. Rubellare, as Ribellare. Rubélle, as Ribélle. Rubellione, as Ribellione. Rubelloso, as Ribelloso. Ruberie, as Rubarie. Rubésto, strong, sturdie, rigorous, fell, tough, sterne. Rubeta, a toade that is somewhat red, a land toade. Rubicillo, the birde called a bull-finch, or red taile. Rubicondo, as Robicondo. Rubicondità, as Robicondità. Rubicone, as Robicone. Rubidezza, as Ruuidezza. Rúbido, a kinde of darke deepe red co∣lour. Rubigine, the blasting of trees, or cankre eating of fruits. Rubinetto, as Robinetto. Rubino, as Robino. Rubizzo, as Rossiccio. Also hard har∣ted, or marble minded. Rubo, as Rouetta. Also a great waight vsed in Italy. Rubocanino, the wild eglantine. also the caper bush. Rubore, shamefastnes, rednes, blushing. Rubrica, vermillion, red oaker, red-leade, red stone, or ruddle. Also red writing. Rubricare, to marke as they do sheepe with ruddle or red oaker. Rubricoso, ful of red earth, ruddle or ver∣million. Ruch, a monstrous great birde in India that will kill an elephant. Ruche, the wormes that we call caterpil∣lers or cankers. Ruchetta, the herbe called rocket. Rucula, as Ruchetta. Rude, as Rozzo. Also a rod or yarde that was giuen to sworde players when they were olde in signe that they were set at libertie, and so taken for a discharge and libertie from labour. Rúdere, to braie as an asse. Rudimenti, the first teachings or rudi∣ments, principles, or instructions, or ele∣ments of any thing. Rudità, rudenes, ignorance, when a man knoweth nothing. Ruéllo, a fish called in latine Bopis. Ruffa, mosse or moldings. Also a rifling, a musse, or a scambling. Also a trull, a harlot, a minx, or a gixie.
Ruffare, to rifle, to skamble, to plaie at musse. to mould or be mustie. Also to belch. Ruffia, as Roffia. Ruffiana, as Roffiana. Ruffianamenti, as Roffianamenti. Ruffianare, as Roffianare. Ruffianarie, as Roffianamenti. Ruffianeccio, as Roffianesimo. Ruffianeggiare, as Roffianare. Ruffianéllo, a yong little bawde or ruf∣fian. Ruffianesimo, as Roffianesimo. Ruffianezzare, as Roffianare. Ruffianiccio, as Roffianesimo. Ruffiano, as Roffiano. Ruffo, a belching, a rasping, or breaking of winde. Also a darling, a wanton, or a dilling. Also a red colour. Also a ruf∣fling roister or ruffian, a swaggrer. Ruffola, as Ruffa. Also dandraffe in any bodies head. Ruffola Raffola, by pinching and scra∣ping, by shifting or scambling, pell mell, in hugger mugger, by hooke or crooke, biglediepigledie, helterskeer. Ruffolare, as Ruffare. Also to get by hooke or crooke, or any meanes. Rufo, vsed for Rosso. Ruga, a worme called a cancre or a cater∣piller. Also a streete, a lane, a causey, or long lane. Also a wrimple or rinkle or crowes foote in ones face through age or care, a withering, crampling, or plai∣ting. Also the bitter hearbe called herbe of grace. Some take it to be the hearbe rocket. Rugare, to wrinkle, to wrimple, to crumple. Also to fumble or grope, to fould, to plaite. Also to eate with caterpillers. Rugatore, a fumbler, a deuourer, a ca∣terpiller. Rughetta, a narrow lane, a little streete. Also a little wrimple or wrinkle. Rugghiare, as Ruggiare. Ruggiada, as Rugiada. Ruggiadare, as Rugiadare. Ruggiadoso, as Rugiadoso. Ruggiare, to roare, to bellow, to royne as a Lyon. Also to grunt, to bray, to baule, to howle. Ruggiato, roared, bellowed, royned as a Lyon. Also grunted, brayde, bauled, howled. Ruggiatore, a roarer, a bellower, a roy∣ner, a grunter, a brayer, a bauler. Rúggine, rust, rustines, cankre, foulenes or filth in mettals. Also a kinde of apple called a russetting. Rugginezza, as Ruggine. Rugginire, nisco, nito, to rust, to cankre, to be rustie. Rugginoso, rustie, full of rust. Rugginuzza, as Ruggine. Ruggio, a measure of dry things in I∣talie. Ruggire, gisco, gito, as Ruggiare. Ruggito, as Ruggiato. Also a roaring, a bellowing, a royning of a Lyon. Also a braying, a howling, or bauling. Also a rumbling or croaking of the bellie when it is emptie. Ruggitore, as Ruggiatore. Rughi, bryers, thornes, brambles. Rugiada, the deaw. Also a sprinkling. Rugiadare, to bedeaw, to dewe, to wet, to sprinkle, to deaw-bedable. Also to drop, to trill, or fall downe like dewe. Rugiadoso, deawie, sprinkled, deaw∣bedabled. Rugiola, as Rogiola. Rugidi, a kinde of peares in Italy. Rugione, a good drie bumbasting blow. Rugire, as Ruggiare. Rugito, as Ruggiato. Rugnire, gnisco, gnito, to grunt as a hog, to rore, to royne. Rugnito, grunted, rored, royned. a grun∣ting, a royning, a roaring. Rugimento, a roining, a roaring, a grun∣ting. Rugoso, full of wrinkles or wrimples, crumples, or plaits, rough, riueled, wi∣thered. Rugumare, to crie or braie out. also to ru∣minate or chawe the cud, to consider, to ponder, to reuolue in minde. Ruina, as Rouina. Ruinare, as Rouinare. Ruinaccio, as Rouinazzo. Ruinéuole, as Rouineuole. Ruinoso, as Rouinoso. Rulla, a teale board to make barrels with. Also the iron or the ploughmans staffe, wherewith he clenseth the culter. Rullo, a rouling piece of timber with holes at the endes of it to remooue or roule timber vpon. Also a kinde of high head attyre that women vse in Italie. Ruma, the dew-lap of beasts, the hollowe parte or gorge of the throte, the cud. Rumare, as Ruminare. Rumento, an impostume that bursteth out in the flesh. Rumice, the herbe sorrell or sowre docke. Rumigare, as Ruminare. Ruminare, to ruminate, to chewe the cud as neate do. Also to call to remembrance and consider with ones selfe, to ponder, to reuolue in minde, to study and thinke vpon a matter. Ruminamento, a ruminating, a chewing of the cudde. Also a considering, a pon∣dring, a calling to remembrance. Ruminatione, as Ruminamento. Ruminatore, a ruminator, a chewer of the cud. Also a considerer, a medi∣tator. Rumóre, as Romóre. Rumoreggiare, as Romoreggiare. Rumoreggiante, as Romoreggiante. Ruóla, a rowler to rowle paste with, a rowling pinne. Ruóta, as Róta. Ruótare, as Rotare. Ruótata, a kinde of round trick in dan∣cing. Ruotella, as Rotélla. Ruótola, as Rótola. Ruótolare, as Rotolare. Ruótolo, as Rótolo, a kinde of great waight in Italie. Ruótolozeroi, idem. Rupe, a rock, a cliff, a cliue, a crag, a steepe, a hill, a stone, a high downe-fall, so sleepe that one may not well climbe it. Rupicapra, a wilde Goate or Chamoi. Ruppe, he brake or did breake. Rurale, rurall, rusticall, of or pertaining to the countrie or village. Rusa, a sallacie, an illusion, a deceit, a slight, a craft. Also a cankre, or a ca∣terpiller. Ruscare, to get by pilfring, by shifts, by cosenage, by hooke or crooke. Ruscellare, to runne or trill, or glide along as a little brooke or streame doth. Ruscelletto, a verie little brooke or gullet of water, a gozell of water. Ruscellino, as Ruscelleto. Ruscéllo, a little brooke, streame, or run∣ning water. Ruschi, thornes, brakes, brambles, briers, bushes, firres. Ruscignólo, a Nightingall. Rusco, a certain rough and prickled shrub to make brushes and besoms of, called the hearbe knecholme, or butchers broome, or petigre. Also a kinde of corne in In∣dia, or the bread made thereof. Also a chimnie-sweepers or butchers broome or sweeper. Ruse, a kinde of worme or caterpiller. Ruspare, to scrape in the durt as a henne doth. also to shift, to sneake, or prye for any thing diligentlie. Ruspatore, a scraper, a shifter, a sneaking companion. Ruspatura, a scraping, a sneaking, a shif∣ting, a seeking. Russa, a snorting, or a braying.
Russare, to snort. Also to bray as an asse. Russéi, a kinde of Hearon. Russignólo, a Nightingall. Russo, a snorting, a braying, a hoarsenes. a snorter, a brayer. one that is hoarse. Rusticano, of the countrie or village, rusticall, rude, clownish, loutish, a hus∣bandman or bynde. Rusticare, to play the clowne, swaine, or rustike fellow, to liue a countrie life. Rustichezza, rusticitie, clounishnes, rude∣nes, inciuilitie, grosse manners, churlish∣nes, homelines, simple plainenes, foolish bashfulnes. Rusticità, as Rustichezza. Rústico, rusticall, clownish, vplandish, homelie, churlish, plaine, loutish, that knowes no good fashions, rude, inciuill, barbarous. Also a clowne, a swaine, a hinde, a countrieman, a rude fellow, a husbandman, an vplandish man, a rude bodie. Rusticone, a filthy grosse clowne, a hynde, a rude swaine, a rustike fellow, Looke Rustico. Rustina, as Rusco. Ruta, the hearbe rue, or hearbe of grace. Rutabulo, a rake. Also a harrow, a cole∣rake to make cleane an ouen. Ruta murale, wall rue, or white maiden haire. Ruta saluatica, great Saint Iohns wort. Rutare, as Rottare. Rutatore, as Rottatore. Ruticilla, a bird called a red taile. Rutilante, as Rutilo. Rutilare, to shine or glister, or to make to shine or glister like gold, to make bright yellow. Rutilo, shining red like gold, ruddie, or bright yellow, bright, shining, fierie red, bright shining. Ruttare, as Rottare. Ruttatore, as Rottatore. Rutteggiare, as Rottare. Rutti, as Rotti. Ruuia, a kinde of pulse, as peason or beanes. Ruuidézza, roughnes, ruggednes, rude∣nes, sharpnes, craggednes, harshnes. Rúuido, sharp, crabbed, rough, rugged, grettie, grosse, barbarous, clownish, harsh, as Rozzo. Ruuina, as Rouina. Ruuinare, as Rouinare. Ruuinaccio, as Rouinazzo. Ruuinéuole, as Rouineuole. Ruuinóso, as Rouinoso. Ruzza, Ruzzamento, wantonnes, da∣liance, mocking, iesting, frumping. Ruzzare, to dallie, to skoffe, to iest, to frump, to gibe, to tickle, to wantonize, to dandle, to fumble. Ruzzante, mocking, skoffing, flouting, frumping, tickling, iesting, fumbling. Ruzzatore, a mocker, a skoffer, a flou∣ter, a tickler, a wanton, a fumbler. Ruzzetto, a bird called a Wren. Ruzzo, a tickling, a dalliance, a fum∣bling, an itching. Ruzzo del capo, a sodaine, toyish, fan∣tasticall, humorous conceit, or passion, or toy. Ruzzolare, as Raspare, as Ruspare, as Razzolare. Also to tosse, to tumble, to rumble, to iumble. S SA', he or she knoweth or wotteth, or can, vsed also for hir, or hirs. Saba, new wyne sodden, which we call cute, which they vse to season meates with. Sabaoth, of hostes, of armies, of powres. Sábato, among the Iewes was the seauenth day solemnised in remembrance of the rest after God in sixe dayes had made the whole world: it is now taken for the Saturday, and among some for the Saboth day. Sabatismo, the celebration of the Saboth. Sabatta, as Sauatta. Sabattino, as Sauattino. Sabattare, as Sauattare. Sabattaro, as Sauattaro. Sabattarie, as Ciauattarie. Sabba, as Saba. Sabeth, a swouning or sounding. Sabina, the hearbe Sauine, whereof there be two kindes, the one hath leaues like the shrub Tamariske or Briarie, the o∣ther hath leaues like the leaues of the Cipresse tree. Also a weapon like a bore∣speare. Sabbia, grosse sand, or grauell. Sabbionaccio, course grauell or sand. Sabbionara, a sand or grauell pit. Sabbione, course grauell or sand. Sabbioso, full of grosse sand, sandie, grauellie, grettie. Sabrino, a kinde of venemous beast. Sabuloso, sandie, grauellie, grettie. Saburra, lastage or ballace wherewith ships are poised to make them goe vp∣right. Sacalenola, a dart. Sacca, a bag, a sack, a pouch, a budget, a satchell. Also a fowling net, a pocket. Saccagnare, to tug, to hale, to touze, to towe. also to crumple, to bag, to pucker. Saccare, to put vp into a sack or bag, to pocket vp. Saccardello, a kinde of dride salt-fish like poore Iohn. Also a poore beggerlie wretch. Saccaro, a kinde of hawke called a Sakre. also a kind of tree which yeeldeth sugar. Saccheggiare, to sacke, to ransacke, to massacre, to destroy, to rob. Saccheggiamento, a sacking, a ransac∣king, a robbing, a spoiling. Saccheggiatore, a sacker, a ransacker, a robber, a spoiler. Sacchero, a fish called in latin Chana∣della. Sacchettino, a little bag, sacke, pouch or budget. Sacchetto, as Sacchettino. Sacciare, as Satiare. Sacciente, as Sapiente. Saccienteria, as Sapientia. Saccente, as Sapiente. Saccenteria, as Saccienteria. Saccio, I know, I wot, I ken, I can. Sacciuto, as Foramello, as Sauio. Sacco, a sacke, a bag, a pouch, a budget, a wallet, a pocket. Also a sack, a sacking, a spoile, a massacre, a robbing, a ransacke or a destruction. Also a packe of wooll. Saccóccia, a satchell, a pouch, a budget, a sacke, a pocket, a poke. Saccodi lana, a packe of wooll. Saccofrago, a kind of stone of many co∣lours. Sáccola, a sliding knot. Also as Saccoc∣cia. Saccolare, to pucker or gather or cockle as some stuffes do being wet. Sáccolo, as Sacca. Saccomanare, to ransacke, to robbe, to spoile, to shift for with going a boote-ha∣ling. Saccomanno, a free-booter, a boote-ha∣ler, a skout, a common shifting souldier, a spoiler, a pilfer. Also a souldiers seruant. Saccomano, as Saccomanno. Saccomértere, metto, misi, messo, to ransacke, to spoile, to sacke, to ruine or pillage a towne or any thing. Saccomóro, as Sicomóro. Sacconcia, a pocket, a budget, a satchell, a pouch, a hauking bag. Sacconaccio, as Saccone. Saccone, a great bag or sacke. Also a boulster, a pillow, a straw bed. Sacculi, little bags, pouches, budgets, pou∣ches or hauking bags or satchels. Sacéllo, an oratorie or priuate chappell. Sacénte, as Sapiente.
Sacenteria, as Sapientia. Sacentone, a great, old, notable wise mā. Sometimes taken in ill part. Sacerdotale, of or pertaining to a priest, or minister or churchman. Sacerdóte, a priest or a minister of the church. Sacerdotessa, a woman priest, a vestall virgine or a nunne. Sacerdótio, the order or functiō of priest∣hood or holy ministerie. Also a parso∣nage, an impropriation, a patronage of some priests liuing, any ecclesiasticall liuing. Saciénte, as Sapiénte. Sacienteria, as Sapientia. Sacodio, a precious stone of the colour of a Iacinth. Sacra, holy, sacred, hallowed. Also a sa∣kre. Also a consecration or dedicati∣on. Sacrafistola, the pipe where-through the marrow of the backe bone runneth. Sacra herba, base or flat Veruein. Sacra spina, in latin Otropygium. Sacramentale, sacramentall, mysteri∣ous. Sacramentare, to receiue the holy sacra∣ment, to sweare or take a corporall oath. Sacramentario, a distributer of the holy sacraments, a sacramentarie, a profes∣sor of holy mysteries. Sacramento, a sacrament, a signe of an holy thing containing a deuine mysterie with some promise annexed to it. Also an oath, a swearing. Sacrare, to consecrate, to hallow, to dedi∣cate, to make immortall. Sacrário, a vestrie where holy things be kept, a sextrie Also a priuate chappell or oratorie in a house. Sacrato, Sacrado, a churchyard, a holy ground. Also sacred or hallowed or con∣secrated, appointed for the seruice and sacrifice to God. Sacrestáno, a sexton of a church or a ve∣strie keeper. Sacrestia, a vestrie in a church. Sacrificare, to sacrifice or to offer sacri∣fice. Sacrificatione, a sacrificing, an offring, a consecrating, a hallowing. Sacrificatore, a sacrificer, a priest. Sacrifico, that is vsed in sacrifice, or ser∣ueth thereunto. Sacrifitio, a sacrifice, or an offring, or an oblation. Sacrilegiare, to commit sacriledge, to steal sacred things or church goods. Also to commit any horrible and detestable acte. Sacrilégio, sacriledge or stealing of sacred church things or church goods, theft from some holy and consecrated place. Also any hainous or detestable of∣fence. Sacrilego, a sacrilegious man, a pilfrer or stealer of church goods, a church-rob∣ber, a wicked and cursed man. Sacrio, a kinde of Amber which commeth out of Scythia. Sacriscrinio, a keeper of princes, or sacred letters and records. Sacrista, as Sacrestano. Sacristano, as Sacrestano. Sacristia, as Sacrestia. Sácro, sacred, holie, deuine, hallowed, de∣dicated to God, consecrate, deuoute, or godlie. Also a piece of ordinance called a Sakre, a kinde of hauke called a Sakre. Sacrofuoco, a swelling full of heate and rednes, with great paine about it, a sore commonlie called Saint Anthonies fier. Sacro ósso, as Osso sacro. Sacromorbo, the salling sicknes, the soule euill, or Saint Iohns euill. Sacrosanto, most sacred, and holie, or in∣uiolable, that might not be touched but with reuerence. Saeppolo, a kinde of bowe, tiller, or cros∣bowe. Saetta, an arrowe, a dart, a shast, a boult. Also a thunderbolt. Also a signe in the firmament. Also a certain herbe grow∣ing in the water, vsed also for a lancet or fleame to draw bloud from cattle and beasts. Saettare, to shoote, to throw, to hurle, or dart an arow, a dart, or a shaft, to shoote in any kinde of bowe. Also to strike or hit with a thunderbolt. Saettamento, a shooting or shot of dart or arrowe, as Sacttume. Saettaro, Saettario, a sletcher, or a dart∣maker. Also an archer, a shooter, a bow-man. Also as Sagettario. Saettatore, a shooter of shafts, a caster of darts, a hurler, an archer, a bow-man. Saettia, a very speedie pinnas, barke, soyst, brigandine, or barge. Saettipoténte, mightie or strong in shoo∣ting, or arrowes. Also the signe Sagi∣tarie. Saettume, all manner of shot to shoote or dart withall. Safico, as Saphico. Saffiro, a precious stone called a Saphire. Saffirino, a kinde of blue Saphire colour that painters vse. Saffo, a catchpole, a sergeant, a base ras∣kall, a snatcher. Saffranare, to colour, dye, or dresse with saffron. Saffrano, Safron. Saga, a wise prudent woman. Also taken for a witch or sorceresse. Sagáce, wittie, that perceiueth and fore∣seeth quicklie. wise, prudent, skilfull, cunning, watchfull, heedie, vigilant, circumspect, wylie. Sagacemente, wisely, wittily, circum∣spectly, cunningly, prudently, finely, with quicknes of wit, and sharpnes of snces. Sagacità, a sharpnes of wit, a quicknes or liuelines of spirit, or perceiuing of things, wittines. Sagapeno, a gumme comming out of the hearbe Ferula. Also as Ferula. Sagda, a kinde of greene precious stone that will drawe wood vnto it, which the Chaldees vse to make fast to their hands. Sagetta, as Saetta. Sagettare, as Saettare. Sagettaro, as Saettario. Sagettatore, as Saettatore. Sagettário, one of the twelue Signes in heauen called Sagitarius, as Saetta∣rio. Sagettia, as Saettia. Sagettume, as Saettume. Saggetta, as Saetta. Saggettare, as Saettare. Saggettario, as Sagettario. Saggiare, to assay, to taste, to trye, to at∣tempt, to proffer to do. Also to perceiue quicklie, to smell out a matter quicklie. Saggiata, an assay, a taste, an attempt, a triall, a proffer to do any thing. Saggiatore, an assayer, a taster, an at∣tempter, a tryer. Saggina, maste or akehornes for hogs or swine. Also any meate wherewith any thing is fatned, pampred, or crammed. Also the graine turkie hirse, mill, or millet. Also superfluous fatnes gathe∣red by ouermuch ease. Also filling, stuf∣fing or cramming. Sagginale, any thing made of Saggina, pampred or crammed, very fat, or gloarie. Sagginare, to fatten, to pamper, to feede, to cramme, to franke or feede fat, to mew fowle. Sagginario, a place wherein beasts or birds are fatned, crammed, or mewde fat. Also a coupe, a franke, a penne. Also an oxe-stall. Sagginatione, a pampring, a cramming, or feeding fat, a mewing of fowle. Saggio, wise, wittie, graue, sage, prudent, warie. Also a taste, an assay, or triall,
an attempt, a proffer to doe any thing. Also a pattern or ensample of any thing Also a little waight or measure sixe whereof goes to anounce. Saggitta, as Saetta. Saggittare, as Saettare. Saggittario, as Sagettario. Saggittume, as Saettume. Sagina, as Saggina. Saginare, as Sagginare. Saginato, as Segenato. Saginatione, as Sagginatione. Sagio, as Saio. Sagitta, as Saetta. Sagittale, a future or seame that runneth straite on the top of the head, distingui∣shing the right from the left side of a mans head. It is also called retta sutura, because it lyeth straight lengthwise on the head from Labdoide to Coronale. Sagittare, as Saettare. Sagittaria, the herbe arrow-head. Sagittario, as Sagettario. Sagittatore, as Saettatore. Sagittume, as Saettume. Saglia, a toole that bricklers vse. Sagliénte, climbing, mounting, salliant, ascendent. Ságliere, salgo, salsi, sagliuto, as Salire. Saglio, Saglione, a long skirted coate. Sagliócca, a great club. Saglióccola, idem. Saglito, Sagliuto, as Salito. Sagmina, as Sammina. Sagna, flebotomie or letting of blood. Sagnare, to let blood. Sagógno, a beast like a munkie called a Sanguine. Sagra, as Sacra. Sagramentale, as Sacramentale. Sagramentare, as Sacramentare. Sagramentario, as Sacramentario. Sagramento, as Sacramento. Sagrare, as Sacrare. Sagrato, Sagrado, as Sacrato. Sagrestano, as Sacrestano. Sagrestia, as Sacrestia. Sagretta, a caske, a helmet, a skull. Also a little sakre. Sagrificare, as Sacrificare. Sagrificio, as Sacrificio. Sagrilegiare, as Sacrilegiare. Sagrilégio, as Sacrilégio. Sagrílego, as Sacrilego. Sagristano, as Sacrestano. Sagristia, as Sacristia. Sagro, as Sacro. Sagrosanto, as Sacrosanto. Sagu, a kind of daintie fruit growing in India. Sai, thou knowest or wottest. Also coates with skirts. Saietta, a kinde of fine serge or cloth for coates, it is also rash. Saietto, a little iacket or coate with skirts. Saio, a long side coate with skirts or slops. Saione, a great, long, side mans coat. Saiuppi, a kind of sea crab or lobster. Sal, vsed for Sale. Looke Sale. Sala, a great hall. Also a dining chamber Sala di giustitia, a guild hall, a court of iustice, a sessions house. Sala regale, a Kings hall, a royall hall. Saláce, leacherous, wanton, lustfull, saut as a bitch, hot in lust, much inclined to leacherie. Salacita, leachery, lust, beastlines, sautnes of a bitch or rather an instinct or prouo∣cation to leacherie. Salacónia, boasting ioyned with vanitie and pride. Salacone, a boaster who being in pouertie will seeme to be rich, as we say a proud hart and a beggers purse. Saladino, a souldane or a saladine. Salamandra, the serpent called a Sala∣mander, a beast in fashion like a lizard full of spots; which being in the fire it quencheth it and is not burned. Salamandri, certaine firie spirits which liue and are nourished by the element fire. Salamandria, as Salamandra. Salámi, any kinde of salt, pickled or pou∣dred meats or souse, namely bacon, sau∣sages, martlemas beefe, salt fish or what∣soeuer both fish and flesh. Salamistra, as Salmistra. Salamóia, brine, pickle or brackisnes, li∣quor to pouder in. Salamóra, Salomore, as Salamóia. Salamuoia, Salamuóra, as Salamóia. Salare, to salt, to pouder, to pickle, to souse or season with salt, to lay in brine, to corne with salt. Salariarare, to hire, to wage, to stipend, to giue pay or pension vnto. Salário, a salarie, wages, hire, stipend, pen∣sion or pay giuen to seruants. Also a sal∣ter, one that makes or sels salt or salte meates. Salassare, to let one blood. Salassatore, a letter of blood. Salassetta, a lancet or fleame to let blood with. Salasso, letting of blood or flebotomie. Salata, a salad of herbes or any thing els. Salatina, a little daintie salade. Salatóia, a powdring tub. Salato, salt, powdred, sowsed, pickled, brackish, salted. Salatuccia, a poore, sillie salad. Salatura, any kind of salting or brackish∣nes. Salce, a willow, withie or sallow tree, an Osier. Also a flint stone. Salcetto, a groue or thicket of willowes or osiers, a place planted with willowes. Salci, sallowes, willowes, ofiers. Salciccia, any kind of sausage. Salcicciaro, a sausage maker. Salciccione, a great sausage. Salciare, to vnderprop, to vnderset hops or vines with willow poles. Salciatore, an vndersetter or vnderprop∣per of vines or hops. Salcietto, as Salcetto. Salcio, as Salce. Salcizza, as Salciccia. Salcizzao, as Salcicciare. Salcizzone, as Salciccione. Saldamente, stedfastly, fast, firme. Saldare, to fasten, to stay, to thicken, to set∣tle, to fixe, to pitch. Also to stop or stanch blood. Also to solder mettals. Also to confirme, to strengthen, to heale, close or cure a sore, a cut or a wound. Saldare ferite, to heale, cure or close a wound. Saldare metalli, to solder mettals. Saldare il sangue, to stanch blood. Saldare la gente, to settle, confirme or presse people. Saldaretta, as Saldatóio. Saldatóio, a goldsmiths borace boxe, that they vse to solder with. Saldatore, a solderer of mettals. Saldatura, a setling, a fastning, a soldring, a stanching, a closing or healing of a sore. Saldezza, stedfastnes, firmnes, fastning. Saldo, fast, stedfast, firme, stiffe, tough, hard, fixed. Sta saldo, stand still, firme or fast. Sale, salt or seasoning. Also mirth, plea∣sant wittines in wordes, merie conceites or wittie grace in speaking. wit, conceit, inuention, pleasantnes. Also the hole of a wheele wherein the axell tree goeth. Also the maine sea or the Ocean. Also chambers or halles. Sale amoniacó, a kind of salt that is me∣dicinable. Sale di gemmó, a kind of salt so called. Sale ascali, a kind of salt so called. Sale catino, a kind of salt. Sale natico, idem. Sale elembroth, idem. Sale pietra, a kind of stonie salt. Sale radico, a kind of salt. Sale in banco, a mountibanke. Salebróso, harsh, vnpleasant, hard to vn∣derstand.
Saleggiare, to paue a floore or a streete. Also to be brackish, salt or brinish. Saléra, a salt for a table. Salérno, a kinde of daintie wine so cal∣led. Saletta, a salt for a table. Salettina, a little salt, a trenchard salt. Saliare, a princelie costlie banquet. Salicare, to paue with stones. Also to plant with willowes, or to stake about with willow poles. Salicastro, a willow pole or stake. Also a kinde of wilde oliue running vpon wil∣low trees. Salicato, paned. Also a pauement. Also planted with willowes, or staked about with willow poles. Salicatore, a pauier. Salice, as Salce. Also a flint or pible stone. Salicetto, as Salcetto. Salicórnia, a certaine salt herbe, which is a kinde of kalie, some call it sea-grape, and some knotted or iointed kalt. Saligare, as Salicare. Saligato, as Salicato. Saligiare, as Salicare. Saligiato, as Salicato. Saligastro, as Salicastro. Salimento, as Salica. Salina, a salt pit where salt is made. Also a table salt. Salinaro, as Salinatore. Salinatore, a salter, or salt-maker. Salinetta, a trenchard salt, or little salt. Salio, a kinde of stone that goldsmiths vse to burnish gold with. it is good against sore & running eyes but touching them. Salisatori, certaine prophets or soothsay∣ers that iudged of the euent of things by the rising or swelling of mens limmes or members. Saliscénde, a raile or barre to stay horses from running, a dore, a window, a trap∣dore, or any thing that shutteth and closeth. a barre, a sparre, or stang to barre a dore. Also a step, or ascent of a paire of staires. Also a threshold of a dore, or foote-step, or a foote-pace of a chimnie. Also a great paire of staires. Saliscéndere, scendo, scesi, sceso, to raile in, to barre, to boult, to stang, or to sparre. Also to ascend or step vp a paire of staires, or steps. Salisceso, railed in, barred, boulted, stanged, spard, ascended, or stept vp any steps. Salire, salgo, salsi, salito, to ascend, to mount, or climbe vp. Salita, an ascent, a mounting, a climing vp. Salitore, a mounter, an ascender, a cli∣mer. Saliua, the spettle or water that commeth from a mans mouth, vsed also for iuice. Saliuare, to spet, or gather spettle or clam∣mie fome. Saliuéra, is properlie among riders the plate whereat the players that hang in the mids of a port are fastned. Saliuaria, an oylestone, or barbers whet∣stone be smeared with oyle or spettle. Saliuaro, clammie and thick like spettle. Saliuoso, full of spettle or moistnes in the mouth, or that hath the smack or taste of spettle. Sallo, he knowes or wots it, of Sapere. Sallo Dio, God he knowes it. Salma, a soame, a loade, a burthen, a charge, a fraight. Also a mans bodie, waight, or carcasse. Also a kinde of waight or measure. Salmandra, a Salamander. Salmare, to lode, to burthen, to fraight, to charge. Salmarino, a Salmon-troute, or Salmon-peale. Salmastra, salt, brackish, or brinish. Salmatore, a loder, a burthner, a fraigh∣ter, a porter. Salmeggiàre, to sing, speake, write or compose Psalmes. Salmeria, any cariage, loading, luggage, or fraighting, namely such as Sumpters carie. Also all horses or Sumpters or packhorses that carie packs or loades. Salmista, a psalmist, a composer or singer of psalmes. Also a psalter. Salmistra, a prating dame that will teach and direct the rest. Salmo, a psalme, a song of thanks-giuing and praise to God, a psalme sung to the psalterie, or a song sung by the voice. Salmodia, a singing or praying together on an instrument, a singing together of psalmes. Salmografo, a writer or composer of psalmes. Salmóia, Salmóra, as Salmóia. Salmone, a fish called a Salmon, or a salmon peale. Salmonetto, a little salmon peale, or a salmon trout. Salmitro, as Salnitro. Salnitro, salt-peeter to make gun-powder with. Salnitroso, brackish, tasting or full of salt-peeter. Salona, a great hall, or dining chamber. Also a great waight. Salóide, a hard substance or bodie in forme like to a bridge with three arches that vpholdeth the ventricle or hollow of the braine. Salpa, a fish called stock-fish or poore Iohn. Salpare, to way, or heaue the ankors of a ship. Salpatore, a wayer or heaer of ankors. Salpe, Salpone, as Salpa. Salpego, a kinde of worme or serpent. Salsa, any kinde of sauce or seasoning of meates. Also salted, poudred, pickled, brinish or brackish. Also taken for a gash, a cut, a slash, or a wound. Salsagine, any kinde of salt, brackish, or brinish thing. Also brimstone. Salsame, as Salame, or Salamóia. Salsamento, as Salame, or Salamóia. Salsapariglia, the hearbe saxifrage. Salsare, as Salare. Salsa verde, greene sauce. Salsédine, saltnes, brackishnes. Salsezza, idem. Salsiccia, as Salciccia. Salsicciaro, as Salcicciaro. Salsicciere, as Salcicciaro. Salsiccione, as Salciccione. Salsiéra, a salt for a boord. Salsità, saltnes, brackishnes. Salsiuo, salt, brinish, brackish. Salsizza, as Salciccia. Salsizzaro, as Salcicciaro. Salsizzone, as Salciccione. Salso, as Salato, or Salsiuo. Also wittie, sharp, conceited, pleasant, or quick-spo∣ken and with a grace. Salsume, as Salame. Saltabellare, as Saltellare. Saltabéllo, a kinde of hopping, or skipping dance. Salta in banco, a mountibanke. Saltamartino, a foolish gull or ninnie that one may cause to do any thing. Saltambárco, a kinde of garment made of haire-cloth for mariners, a shepheards frock or cloke. Also a souldiers cassock or mandilion, or a horsemans coate. Saltante, leaping, iumping, skipping, hop∣ping or springing. Also quick-siluer, according to alchimists phrases. Saltare, to leape, to iump, to skip, to hop, to prance, to bound, to dance, to trip, to vault, to tumble, to spring. Also to pant and beate. Also to ride or leape on ano∣ther as males do on the females in the acte of generation. Saltarélle, grashoppers. Saltarélli, the iacks of a paire of virgi∣nals. Saltaréllo, a trick in dancing. Also a dance or a little leape. Saltarino, a dancer, a tumbler, a leaper,
a vaulter, a skipper, a iumper, a hop∣per. Saltatione, a leaping, a tumbling. Saltatore, as Saltarino. Saltatória, the arte of leaping. Saltellare, as Saltare. Saltellatore, as Saltarino. Saltéllo, as Saltetto. Saltellone, hoppingly, skippingly, leaping. Salteréllo, as Saltetto. Saltério, an instrument of musicke like a harpe of ten strings, but more pleasant, called a shalme or psaltery to play ho∣lie hymnes vpon, and to sing vnto. Also a vaile that nuns vse to wear ouer their heads. Also a psalter or psalme booke. Saltéro, as Saltério. Saltetto, a little leape, iumpe, skip, hoppe, bound, dance, prance, tumbling or vaul∣ting tricke, a sault. Salti aggroppati, Looke Vn passo e sal∣ta. Salticchiare, as Saltare. Salticchiatore, as Saltarino. Salticchio, as Saltetto. Salto, a leape, a skip, a hoppe, a iumpe, a prancing, a bound, a sault. Also a laune in a parke, a purleie, a groue, a thicket, or a shadie place. Also a shaking or shi∣uering of some member of the body. Salto mortale, a sommer sault, or as some of our vaulters call it the pomado. Saltuzzo, a goldsmiths toole. Salua, a sauing, preseruing, keeping or spa∣ring, an exception▪ also a volie or tire of ordinance. Salua danaio, a place or chest to keepe monie in, a marchants counter. Salua guardia, as Salua robba. Salua d'artegliera, a volie ortyre of shot or ordinance. Saluaggina, any kinde of venison or wilde beast or fowle. Saluaggiume, as Saluaggina. Salua la signoria vostra, sauing, saue, or excepting your lordship or worship. Saluamento, safegarde, safetie, shelter, or securitie. Saluare, to saue, to escape, to secure, to safe-garde, to keepe, to defende, to pre∣serue, to spare, to except. Saluaróbba, a warderobe, a cupboorde, a presse, a lardrie, a pastrie, a pantrie, a shelfe, a buttrie, or such like thing to keepe things in. Saluatélla, a vaine which being a branch springing out of Cephalica in the outside of the cubite, at length stretcheth aboue the wrist and extreme part of the hand, betweene the little finger and the ring finger. Saluaticare, to make or become wilde, sa∣uage, strange, or rustike. Saluaticcina, any kinde of venison or wilde game gotten by hunting or fow∣ling, all maner of wilde meate. Saluatichezza, wildenes, sauagenes, rudenes, strangenes. Saluatichetto, somwhat peeuish, strange, wilde, rude, sauage, or fond, as Seluag∣gio. Saluático, wilde, sauage, vntamed, vn∣weldie, strange, rude, curst, frowarde, as Seluaggio. Saluatione, saluation, safetie, sauing. Saluatore, a sauiour. Salubre, healthfull, holesome, profitable, comfortable. Salubrità, healthfulnes, wholesomenes, comfort, safegard, health. Salue, vsed for all-haile, god speede, or god saue you. Saluezza, safetie, custodie, assurance. Saluia, the herbe sage. Saluia romana, costemarie, or alecoste. Saluiata, a kinde of sauce or meate made of sage. Saluietta, a napking, a drinking cloth. Salumi, as Salame. Saluo, safe, secure, saued, sure, whole, sounde, in good case, without harme or danger, not broken. Also except, sauing, reseruing the truth. Saluo che, except that, sauing that. Saluo il vero, the truth reserued, sauing the truth. Saluo condotto, a passeporte, a conuoie, a safe-conduit. Saluo se, except that, sauing. Saluum me fac, vsed in common speech for readie money, or money in hand. Salutare, to greete, to salute, to recom∣mend, to all-haile, to bid good morrow or god speede, to do reuerence, to sende commendations. also healthy or health∣full, wholesome, comfortable. Salutatione, as Saluto. Salute, saluation, health, safetie, the good estate of a mans life, sauing health. Saluteuole, as Salubre. Salutifero, as Salubre. Saluto, a greeting, a saluting, a salutation, a recōmending, an all-haile, a bidding god speede, good morrow or good euen. Sambuca, a kinde of horne pipe or dulci∣mer. Also an engine of warre to battre wals. Sambucaro, an elder tree. Sambucato, a greene colour called elder tree colour. Sambuco, the elder tree. also a pipe made of elder. Sambugo, as Sambuco. Samburchio, a kinde of pudding. Sambuzzio, a kinde of pudding. Samia, a kinde of medicament or oynte∣ment. Samina, as Sammina. Samio, a white stone good to polish golde. Also made of earth. Samito, a kinde of sleaue, filosell, feret or course silke stuffe. Sammartina, a kinde of red toade called a lande toade. Sámolo, the marrish whortes or fenne-berries. Sammina, in latine Sagmina, the herbe Verueine. Also grasse pluckt vp with earth, that ambassadors of Rome did vse. Sampogna, a bagge-pipe, an oten-pipe. Also a bell hanged about sheepe or goates, a lowe-bell. Sampognatta, as Sampogna. San, as Sano, as Santo, vsed before con∣sonants. Sanabile, curable, that may be cured, re∣couered or healed. Sanamente, soundly, healthfully, wisely, considerately. Sanamento, a healing or a curing. Sanamunda, herbe Benet, Sanamunda or Auens. Sanare, to cure, to heale, to make whole and sound. Sancéllo, a kind of pudding. Sancito, ordained, decreed, established, confirmed, or ratified by law. Sancresci, as Sancresci in mano. San cresci in mano, vsed for a mans pricke, bicause it growes in ones hand. Sancresci in valle, vsed for a mans prick bicause it riseth in a hollow caue. Sandado, Sandalo, a kinde of thin san∣dall, or sarcenet. Also a kinde of tree. Sandaletti, little sandals, labels or pen∣dents of taffeta-sarcenet. Sandalide, a kinde of date or palme tree. Sandalo, Looke Pezzola. Also a kinde of medicinable wood in India, which some take to be a date or palme. Sandaracca, a bright red colour vsed of painters, and founde in mynes of golde and siluer, some call it red arsenike, or patis red: there is another kinde thereof made of ceruse burned. Also a kinde of burning stone. Also a kinde of gum. Al∣so a kinde of honie-suckle hauing a taste of honie and waxe togither. Sandarlo cedrino, a kinde of perfume, or sweete gum. Sandaso, a kinde of precious stone ha∣uing golden drops in it. Sandastrico, a kinde of christall hauing
within it golden drops shining like fire. Sandice, patisered or arsenike, a kinde of stone, or colour made of ceruse and red okre burned togither. Sandino, as Sandice. Sandisir, vsed for a name of disgrace. Sandolo, a little boate, wherrie, skallop or cockboate. Sandónico, a kinde of herbe which kil∣leth beasts. Sandraccio, a foolish ignorant gull or ninnie. Sangallo, buckrom cloth. San giouanni bocca d'oro, taken for a mans or womans priuities. Sangu, the herbe sanikle. Saguaccio, filthie clods of gore bloud. Sangue, any kinde of bloud. Also a kin∣dred, a stocke, or parentage, a race or lineall descent. It is also taken for life, vigour, force, or strength. Sanguettola, as Sanguisuga. Sanguigne, a kinde of red peaches. Sanguigno, sanguine, bloodie, red, or bloudshotten. Also hauing bloud, bloud∣die or full of bloud. Sanguinaccio, goare or filthie cloddes of bloud. Also a pudding made of bloud. Sanguinare, to bloude, to bleede, to staine or sprinkle with bloud. Sanguinaria, swine grasse, knot-grasse, or bloudwoort. Sanguinélla, as Sanguinaria. Sanguinéllo, Sanguigno, as Corni∣ólo. Sanguinéo, as Sanguigno. Sanguineruólo, a barble fish. Sanguinità, consanguinitie, alliance, kin∣dred, bloud. Sanguinolénte, bloudie, full of bloude, merciles. Sanguinoso, bloudie, cruell, fell, full of bloud, goarie, bloudthirstie, mercilesse, sanguine, red, ruddie, high coloured. Sanguisorba, the herbe burnet or pimper∣nell. Sanguisuga, a horse-leach. Also a bloud-sucker. Sanicula, herbe sanicle, pratling parnell, or beares eare. Sanie, corrupt or mattred bloud squized out of a sore. Sanioso, matterie, bloudy, beraide with corrupt bloud or matter. Sanio, a kinde of marble stone. Sanità, health, soundnes, good stay of the body, of the wit and memorie. Sannare, to take, catch, or scaze on with tkes. Sanne, the tkes of a bore or other wilde beast. Sannicola, as Sannicula. Sanno, they know, wot, or can. Sano, sound in health, healthie, holesome, healthfull, good, comfortable, aduised. Sano e galiardo, safe, lustie, strong, in good plight. Sano e saluo, safe and sounde, in good health. Sano e di buona voglia, safe and merrie, blithe and wanton. Sansuga, as Sanguisuga. Santà, vsed for Sanità. Santamente, saint-like, holilie. Santa Nafissa, the name of a woman saint who is the aduocate of whoores and harlots. Santalo, a kinde of stone called a san∣ders. Santaréllo, as Santóccio. Santerna, solder wherewith golde is sol∣dered. Santi, saints, holie, hallowes. Santificare, to sanctifie, to hallow. Santificatore, a sanctifier, a hallower. Santificatione, sanctification, sanctify∣ing, hallowing. Santimónia, as Santità. Santità, sanctitie, holines, deuotion, holi∣dome, religion, deuoutnes, honestie. Santo, holy, saint, sacred, inuiole, pure, vncorrupt, spotlesse, deuout, honest, of entire life. Also a saint. Santóccio, a simple deuout man, a puri∣tane, a precisian, a little saint. Also a godfather. Santola, a godmother. Santolina, lauender cotton, or fielde cy∣pres. Santolo, a godfather. Santónico, a kinde of wormewood. Santuario, a sanctuarie, a holie priuiled∣ged place, a church, a chapple. Santuccio, as Santóccio. Santuzza, a foolish, simple, precise, fained, holie woman. Sanuro, a fish called in latine Alphesta. Sanza, as Senza. Sanza che, except that, besides that, sa∣uing tha, but that. Sanzaro, a messenger, a purseuant, a bro∣ker. Sanzaria, the office or trade of a broker, or of a purseuant. Saorna, balast for ships. Also a common sinke: also the pumpe of a ship. Saornare, to balast a ship. Also to pumpe a ship. Sapa, a kinde of sodden wine or cute, vsed also for a kinde of sauce. Sapadore, a sillibubbe made of wine and milke. Sapérda, a kinde of shell-fish that hath a very stinking sauour. Sapére, só, seppi, saputo, to know, to wot, to wise, to kenne, to mae, to be wise, to haue a good witte, to vnderstande and perceiue well, to be perfect in, to remem∣ber. Also to taste, to smell, to smacke, to sauour. Also knowledge, wit, wis∣dome, warines, foresight, remembrance, heede, discretion, science, skill. Also to grieue, to fecle, to conceite. Saputo, knowne, wotted, wist, kend, beene able, remembred, tasted, smelt, smackt. Also a wise, wittie, skilfull, warie, or discret man. also greeued, felt, concted Sapér a mente, to knowe by rote or hart. Sapér bene, to knowe or wot, or ken per∣fctly. Sapére di muschio, to smell or sent of muske. Sapér di buóno, to smell or taste well. Sapér grado, to kon thankes, to acknow∣ledge thanks. Sapér male, to grieue, to condole or feele sorrow, to know ill, to smell or taste ill. Sapesmo, specie d'argomento.   Saphena, a veine running aboue the in∣ner ankle and vpon the foot toward the toes, especially the great toe, where it is diuersly bestowed. Sáphici, a verse called saphike verses. Sapiénte, wise, sapient, wittie, sage, warie, prudent, discreet, skilfull. Sapiéntia, wisedome, sapience, prudence, warines, wit, discretion, knowledge of things diuine and humaine. Sapientipoténte, mightie in wisedome. Saponale, an herbe with a stalke like a beane, and a leafe like Plantaine. Saponare, to sope, to lather, to wash in sope. Saponaria, an herbe called Struttie or Sopewoort or Crowsope or wilde Rose campion. Also a sope-house. Saponaro, a sope-maker, a soper. Saponaccio, sudge or sopie water: filthie sope. Saponata, a soping, a lathring, a washing in sope. Also a flim-flam tale. a gudgeon giuen to one. Sapone, sope to wash with. Saponetti, sope bals, washing bals, such as barbers vse. Sapore, a smacke, a sauour, a taste, a smll an inward feeling. Also a sauce or taste that makes the meate to taste well. Saporetti, prettie, daintie kinds of sauces. Sapori, as Saporetti. Saporire, risco, rito, to smacke, to taste, to sauour, to season, to giue a taste vnto. Saporito, smackt, tasted, sauored, sesoned
or giuen a taste vnto. also sauorie, well tasting, tarte, smacking. Saporitamente, sauourly, smackingly, tastingly, hungerly. Saporosità, sauouring or sauour. Saporoso, as Saporito. Sappia, that I or he may know. Saputa, witting or knowledge. Sapuro▪ Looke Sapére. Sarà, he or she shall be. Saraca, a kind of fish called a sprat. Some take it to be the pilcher. Saracélla, a kind of fowle or bird. Saracéna, goates rew or Italian fitch. Saracino, a saracine, a sarcen, a blacke-moore. Saracinesca, a purculleise ouer a gate. also a kind of blacke storke. Saracinesco, saracin-like, barbarous. Sarba, stock-fish. Sarcélla, a kind of fowle or bird. Sarchia, a wedding hooke or a sickle. Also a rake. Sarchiare, to weede out with a sickle. Also to pare or to rake. Sarchiatore, a weeder, a raker, a parer. Sarchero, a weeding hooke. Also a wee∣der. Sarchiéllo, a weeding hooke or a sickle. Sarchio, as Sarchia. Sarcione, a stone of a carnation colour. Sarcire, to patch, to mend, to repaire, to cob∣ble, to clout, to make whole againe, to re∣compence. Sarcocolla, a gum of a tree in Persia like incense. Sarcoma, a bunch of flsh in ones nose. Sarcoràgo, a stone that the Egyptiās wont to make tumbes of which in fortie daies will consume a bodie to ashes all sauing the teeth. Also as Asio. Sarda, as Sardélla. Also a kind of red soft precious stone much vsed in seales. Some take it to be the Onix or Corneoll. Sardanélla, as Sardélla. Sardélla, a little pickled or salt fish like an anchoua, a sprat or a pilcher, called a sardell or sardine. Sardina, Sardone, as Sardélla. Sardio, an Onix or Corneoll stone. Sardona, an herb like Smallage, which be∣ing bitten causeth great laughing and grinning, whereupon followeth death. Sardónico riso, a grinning or laughing without cause, the end whereof is sorrow∣full. Sardónica, as Sardona. Sardónio, a kinde of stone resembling in the vpper end a mans naile, vnderneath of the colour of the fish Sarda, called a Sardonix. Sarébbe mai, good lord, may it be, is it possible. Sargalla, a kind of drug. Sarge, curteins for beds. Also serges. Sargia, the stuffe we call say or serge. Also a curtein for a bed. Sargiero, a weauer of serge or saye. Sargietta, a litle curtein, fine serge or thin saye. Sargo, a kind of fish so called in Rome, in latine Sargus. Sargoni, a kind of vermin or worme. some take them to be bristles or stings. Sari, an herbe growing in waters, hauing a hard roote necessarie for smiths. Sarissa, a speare, a iauelin, a forest bill, a long staffe with a pike in the end. Sarmenti, twigs, sprigs, buds or yoong branches of vines or other trees. Sarmentina, saracens herbe. Also a fraile made of twigs or sprigs. Sarpa, a toole to pull out teeth with Also a vine when it is cut or shred. Sarpare, to pull, to draw, to tug, to tow, to snatch or drag out. also to clense or make verie cleane, to prune trees. Sarpatore, a puller, a drawer, a tugger or a dragger, a cleanser or pruner of trees. Sarpare l'ancore, to weigh or pull vp the ankors of a ship. Sarracinesca, as Saracinesca. Sarta, a woman tailer. Sartagna, as Currucula. Sarte, the tacklings, cordage, cordes or shrouds of a ship. Sartélla, a kind of wild ducke or mallard. Sarto, Sartore, a man tailer. Sartoria, a tailers trade, shop or streete. Sartorino, a little dapper, prettie tailor. Sarza, as Sargia. Sassafrago, as Sassifraga. Sassare, to stone, to hit with stones. Sassaria, a quarrie of stones. Sassata, a blow with a stone, a stones cast. Sassaiuóla, a quarrie of stones, a stones cast, a blow with a stone. Sassatile, stonie, rugged, cragged, grettie, of the nature of stones, liuing among stones or grauell. Sassetto, a little stone. Sassi, all maner of stones. Sassifraga, the herbe Saxifrage, growing in stonie places, and is verie good against the stone. some take it for Goats beard, Star of Ierusalem, Noone-tide or Io∣sephs flower. Sassifrago, that breaketh stones. Sassifrica, as Sassifraga. Sasso, any kind of stone. Also a rocke, a clif or a crag. Sassolini, little stones or pibble stones. Sassoso, stonie, full of stones, rugged, flin∣tie, grettie, full of rockes or growing in stonie places. Sátana, Satanasso, a tempter, a seducer, the diuel, sathan, an aduersarie, an eni∣mie to God. Satellito, a halbardier, a yeoman of a Princes guard, one retained to guard a mans person. Also a sergeant, a catch-pole, one that attacheth. Satiabile, satiable, that may be satisfide. Satiare, to satiate, to glut, to gorge, to sa∣tisfie, to fill with meat, to content. Satiatura, a glutting, a gorging, a full fee∣ding. Satietà, satietie, content, glutting, cloying, plentie, fulnes, so much as one desireth. also wearines, tediousnes or lothsemnes. Satiéuole, as Satiabile. Also lothsome or queasie. Satieuolezza, as Satietà. Satino cagnoletto, a smooth, well-fed, daintie little dog. Sátio, satiate, glutted, gorged, full, satis∣fide, full fed, contented. Sátira, a satire, a kind of poeme rebuking euils and abuses, an inuectiue, that re∣gardeth no person. Satireggiare, to write satyres, to inueigh sharpely. Satiriasi, Satiriasmo, Tentigine, the standing of a mans yard, lust-pride, pricke-pride or priapisme. Satirico, satiricall, bitter, sharpe, inueigh∣ing with speeches. Satirione, the herbe Satyrion. Satirisi, as Satiriasi. Sátiro, a satyre, a man that is halfe a man and halfe a goate. Also the hearbe Sa∣tyrion. Satisfare, to satisfie, to please, to content, to paie that one hath lent, to make satis∣faction. Satisfatto, satisfide, pleased, content. Satisfattione, satisfaction, pleasing, con∣tent, a purging, an excusing. Satollare, as Satiare. Satollo, as Satio. Satore, a father, a maker, a begetter, a creator, a planter, a setter. Satoro, as Satio. Satraperia, the order, state, or profession of bragging foolish captaines. Also a gouernment. Satrapia, a prouince, a countie, a dutchie, a lieuetenantship. Sátrapo, a chieftaine, or captaine, taken rather in bad then good part, a gouer∣nor or president of a countrie, a great ruler, a peere of a realme.
Sattino, the silke stuffe we call sattin. also a kinde of smooth little dog. Saturare, as Satiare. Saturéia, the hearbe wintersauorie. Saturità, as Satietà. Saturnale, as Saturnino. Saturnino, Saturnine, Saturnall, of the nature of Saturne. Also certaine games vsed among the pagans. Saturno, one of the planets called Sa∣turne. Also the mettall leade according to alchimists. Sáturo, as Satio. Sauatta, an old broken shoe. Sauattaro, a cobler, a souter, a mender of old shoes. Sauattare, to cobble, to mend, or sout old shoes. Sauattino, as Sauataro. Sauére, as Sapére. Sauiezza, as Sapientia. Sauina, the shrub sauine. Sauinella, the shrub sauine. Sauino, a duskie stone, which hauing any stone put to it waxeth bright. Sáuio, as Sapiénte. Sauiolino, prettie wise, warie, or wittie. Also nice, coy, puling, selfconceited, hu∣morous. Sauiólo, as Sauiolino. Sauiuzzo, sillie wise. Sauonaccio, as Saponaccio. Sauonare, as Saponare. Sauonaro, as Saponaro. Sauonata, as Saponata. Sauone, as Sapone. Sauonetti, as Saponetti. Sauorare, as Saporire. Sauore, as Sapore. Sauoretti, as Saporetti. Sauorire, as Saporire. Sauorito, as Saporito. Sauoroso, as Saporoso. Sauora, course stonie grauell, or sand, ballast or lastage for ships. Sauoreggia, winter-sauorie. Sauorélla, grauell or sand. Also winter-sauorie. Sauoreggiare, as Saporire. Sauorna, as Sanora. Saura, as Stellione. Sauretto, a prettie sorell nag. Sauro, the sorell colour of a horse. Also a kinde of water serpent. Sauro metallino, a kinde of colour be∣tweene a roane and a sorell. Sauro affocato, a bright sorell. Sauro scuro, a darke sorell. Sbacciellare, to vnshale, to vngraine, or take out of the cods, as peason and beanes. Sbacco, Gods-plentie, store, inough, to spare, hould-bellie-hould. Looke A sbacco. Sbadacchiare, to gape, to yaune for want of sleepe, to loiter. Sbadacchiamento, a gaping, a yauning, a gasping, a loitring. Sbadagliare, as Sbadacchiare. Also to gag ones mouth. Sbadaglio, a gag for ones mouth to let him from speaking. Sbadare, as Sbadacchiare. Sbadigliare, as Sbadacchiare. Sbadigliamento, as Sbadacchia∣mento. Sbadigliacciare, as Sbadacchiare. Sbadiglioso, drouzie, gaping, or yauning for want of sleepe. Sbagiaffare, to chat, to prate, to prattle, to babble, to tattle, to cog, to foist. Sbagiaffone, a chatter, a prater, a prat∣ler, a babler, a tatler, a cogger, a foister. Sbagliaffone, as Sbagiaffone. Sbaiaffare, as Sbagiaffare. Sbaiaffone, as Sbagiaffone. Sbalancare, as Sbarrare. Sbalcio, the name of an honorable kinde of habite that the ladies of Venice were wont to weare. Sbalestrare, to tell incredible tales, to thunder out lyes, to lye for the whet-stone. Sbaligiare, as Sualigiare. Sballare, to vnpack, to vnloade, to dis∣charge any packs. Sbalordire, disco, dito, as Disballor∣dire. Sbalzare, to bound or rebound as a ball or a horse, to leape forth, to skip away, to skud out, to burst, to streame or gush t, to hop, to skip, to bounze. Sbalzo, a bound or rebound of a ball, a bound, a leape, a hop, a skip, a bounze, a skudding away in haste, a sodaine gush∣ing, bursting or streaming forth. Also an abisse, a precipice, a downe-fall, a crag, a cliffe, a rock, a steepe. Also a kinde of rowle, or rouler, that women vse to weare on their heads vnder their quoifes in Italie. Sbanacerare, as Sbadacchiare. Sbancare, to remoue, or vnhorse from ones seate, standing or place, to vn∣bench. Sbandare, to vnbar, to open wide, to scat∣ter, to disseuer, to deuide. Sbandatamente, scattringly, disorderly, confusedlie, in forlorne manner. Sbandeggiare, to banish, to exile, to publish, to cry or proclaime. Sbandeggiamento, a banishment, an exile, a proclamation. Sbandeggiatore, a proclaimer, a publike cryer. Sbandire, disco, dito, as Sbandeggi∣are. Sbandito, exiled, banished, proclaimed. Sbanditore, as Sbandeggiatore. Sbaragliare, to ruine, to vnbar, to ha∣uock, to spoile, to destroy, to confound, to subuert, to offer violence, to disorder, to scatter. Sbaraglio, ruine, hauock, destruction, spoile, confusion, hurlieburlie. Looke A sbaraglio. Sbaraglino, a game at tables like irish-game, or lurch. Sbarattare, as Sbaragliare. Sbarbagliare, as Sbaragliare. Sbarbare, as Sbarbicare, to vnbeard, to cut off ones beard. Sbarbato, beardlesse, vnbearded, without a beard. Sbarbazzare, as Sbarbagliare. Sbarbicare, to loosen, extirp, or pluck vp by the rootes. Sbarbocciata, a thump, a blow, a bang, a rap. Sbarbozzare, to refraine, to restraine, to bridle. Sbarcare, to vnship, to disbarke, to land. Sbarcamento, an vnshipping, a disbar∣king, a landing. Sbarcata, as Sbarcamento. Sbardellare, as Sbaragliare. Also to stare or glote with ones eyes. Sbardellatamente, confusedly, ruinously, carelesly, in a hurlyburlie. Sbarleffare, to marke, skarre, gash, or cut ouer the face. Also to make a mouth in mockerie. Sbarleffato, markt, cut, or gasht ouer the face, disfigured ones mouth. Sbarléffo, a cut, a marke, a hurt, a skarre or gash ouer the face, a mouthing, or looking staringlie. Sbarosole, a kinde of bird. Sbarra, a barre, a barriers, an enclosure of poles or stakes, an enchaining, a yate, or gate, or stile ouer a hedge, a barring, or a hindrance. Also a barre borne in some cotes of armes. Sbarragliare, as Sbaragliare. Sbarraglio, as Sbaraglio. Sbarraglino, as Sbaraglino. Sbarrare, to vnbarre, or open wide, to riue, or disseuer. Also to barre or crosse ouer with a barre as some cotes of ar∣morie are. Sbarrattare, to vnbarre, to disorder, to wrack, to hauock, to confound, to scat∣ter.
Sbarratatamente, confusedly, stragling, disorderly, out of ranke. Sbasire, sisco, sito, to faint, to swaune, to be ready to yeeld the ghost vp. Sbassare, to abase, to suppresse, to caste downe. Also to stop. Also to pul downe. Sbastare, to vnpacke, to vnsaddle a cari∣ers horse. also to pare, to shaue downe. Sbáttere, batto, battei, battuto, to tram∣ple, to crosse, or vexe, to dash, to beate, to shake, to rouze, to strike, to smite, to tugge, to touze, to tosse, to turmoile, to confound, to affright, to tumble, to driue away, to thrash, to wetherbeate. Sbattuto, trampled, crossed, vext, dasht, beaten, shaken, rouzed, striken, tugged, touzed, tossed, turmoled, confounded, affrighted, tumbled, driuen away in a quandarie, thrashed, weatherbeaten, weathershaken. Sbattezzare, to vnchristen, to forget ones proper name. Sbattimento, a beating, a shaking, a rou∣zing, a tossing, a trampling, a thrashing, a confusion, a tugging, a vexing, a tur∣moile, a dashing, a tumbling. Sbattitura, as Sbattimento. Also a bur∣sting of a horses hoofe. Sbauare, to slauer, or some at the mouth. Sbauigliare, as Sbadagliare. Sbazzigante, foolish, fonde, lauish, skip∣ping, froward. Sbeffare, as Beffare. Sbeffamento, as Beffa, as Burla. Sbeffeggiare, as Beffare. Sbeffeggiatore, as Beffatore. Sbellettare, to bedaub or paint as women do their faces▪ also to wash awaie pain∣ting. Sbembrare, as Sbranare. Sberettare, to vncap, to put off hat or cap, to greete or salute with curtesie. Sberettate, cappings, hattings, curtesies, greetings. Sberleffare, as Sbarleffare. Sberléffo, as Sbarleffo. Sberlingaccia, as Berghinella. Sberlingacciare, as Berghinellare. Sbérnia, a kinde of vpper garment which friers vse to weare, an Irish rugge or mantle, a gabardine. Sberrettare, as Sberettare. Sbeuacchiare, to bibbe, to quaffe, to tip∣ple, to drinke, to swill, to hante tauerns. Sbeuazzare, as Sbeuacchiare. Sbeuecchiare, as Sbeuacchiare. Sbeuecchiatore, a bibber, a quaffer, a tippler, a drunkard, an alchouse knight. Sbiacca, as Biacca. Sbiaccare, as Biaccare. Sbiaccamento, a daubing or painting with white. Sbiadare, to make pale, white, wanne, or sallow coloured. Also to depriue of pro∣uender. Sbiadato, made pale, wanne, or sallowe. Also vnprouendred, vnfed, bare, leane. Also an azure or bright skie colour. Sbiagio, Sbiaso, byas, sideline, aslope, a∣wry, bending wise. Sbiancheggiare, to whiten, or bedaube with white. Sbiancido, pale, wan, whitish, leaden co∣lour. Also straw-colour. Sbiauare, as Sbiadare. Sbiauato, as Sbiadato. Also an azure or bright skie colour. Sbiauo, as Sbiancido. Sbiettare, to slip, to slide, to glide, to glib. Sbigottire, tisco, tito, to amaze, to af∣fright, to astonish, to terrifie, to daunt, to amate, to confounde. Sbigottito, amazed, affrighted, astoni∣shed, terrified, danted, mated. Sbigottimento, amazement, fright, ter∣ror, astonishment, feare. Sbirraglia, the crue, company, or order of base catchpoles or sergeants. Sbirraria, Sbirreria, as Sbirraglia. Sbirria cauallo, marshals, satelites, or sergeants on horsebacke. Sbirro, a catchpole, a sergeant, a varlet, a marshall, one that doth arrest men. Sbisao, a Venetian word, gashed, or mar∣ked ouer the face as slaues be. Sbizzarrire, risco, rito, to make or becom wise, to vnfantastike, to obtaine ones earnest longing or humorous fancie, to obtaine ones longing by dooing some mad pranke or other. Sblisciare, as Sblizzigare. Sblizzigare, to slip, to slide, or glide vpon the ice. Sboccággine, a mouthing or falling into the sea of a riuer. Also impudencie, or shamelesnesse in speaking. Sboccare, to mouth or fall into the sea as a riuer doth. Sboccato, mouthed, or falne into the sea as a riuer doth. Also a shamelesse fel∣low, one that wil speak and vtter what∣soeuer comes in his mouth. Also a horse that is false or ouer-hard mouthed. Sbocconcellare, to mince it daintily, to bride it, to morsell it. Sbollare, to vnseale, to vnstampe, to vn∣brand, to vnmarke. Sbollarsi, to be vnplaistred, to haue plai∣sters puld off from sores. Sbolzonata, a blowe or hurt with a bolt, or arrow. Also a thumpe, a blowe, or a stripe. Sbombardare, to shoote off peals of guns, to bombard. Sbombardamento, a shooting off, or a peale of ordinance and guns. Sborare, to burst out with violence as wa∣ter and fire doth when it is kept in by force, to wreake or vent any griefe or anger, to vnburthen ones anger, to vo∣mite, to spue or caste out, to speake de∣spightfully, and vtter whatsoeuer one knoweth. Sborfate, to blowe and puffe as one doth in the water. Sborrare, as Sborare. Also to full or sheare clothes. Also as Suertare. Sborratore, a fuller of cloth, a cloth fuller. Also the place of the mill where the meale being ground falleth out. Sborsare, to disburse, to lay out money, to defraie. Sborsamento, a disbursing, a defraying, a laying out of money. Sbóscare, to op trees, to cut downe woode or branches, to fell wood, to vnwoode, to rouze a deare, or driue out of a woode. Sbóscatore, a wood-feller, a cutter downe of trees. Sbottare, to emptie buts, or any vessels. Also to swell as a toade. Sbottoneggiare, as Bottoneggiare. Sbozzare, to bungle, or sluber any worke. Sbozzi, bodges, or bunger-like workes. Sbracare, to vnbreech, to make bare. Also to vnstocke any piece. Sbracato, breechlesse, opentaild, bare arst, naked, shameles. Sbracatamente, as Alla Sbracata. Sbracata, Alla sbracata, carelesly, wantonly, bare-arst, shamelesly, lauish∣ly, with breeches downe. Sbracciata, a kinde of sleeueles garment. Also open or without armes. Sbraciare, to spend lauishly, or vnthrifti∣ly, to vnbrace. Also to stir vp a fire that is raked vp. Sbracciarsi, to vnbrace ones selfe. Sbracerie, vnthriftines, lauishings, rio∣tous spendings. Also vnbracings. Sbragiare, to put out the embers or fire. Also to stalke it, to go stately or on tip∣toes. Sbragliare, to raile aloude, to scolde, to braule, to chide, to exclaime. Sbramare, to haue or fill ones longing or desires. Sbranare, to dismember, to carue, to teare in peeces, to cut vp, to slaughter, to man∣gle. Sbrancamento, a pulling, halling, tea∣ring, or renting with clawes. Sbrancare, to vnwrap, to vntangle, to
rid or free from any pawes or clawes, to vnclinch. Sbrasciare, to boaste, to bragge, to crake, to swagger as one would kil god almighty. Sbrasgiare, as Sbragiare. Sbrastiare, as Sbragliare. Sbrattare, to make cleane, to rid away, to dresse vp a house. Sbrauo, a swash-buckler, a swaggrer, a hackster, a cutter, a tistitostie. Sbrazzare, to vnbrace, to open, to disclose. Sbriccare, to cut it out, to riote, to hacke or swash as ruffians, knaues, or rascals and sergeants do. Sbriccaria, cutting, hacking, swashing, all manner of riote or villanie, swashing or swaggring tricks. Sbricchi, hackesters, swash-bucklers, rio∣tous rascals, ruffianly villains, swag∣grers. Sbriccóne, a craftie, false, riotous, cose∣ning, conicatching companion. Sbricciare, as Sbrisciare. Sbrigare, to rid, to free, to vnwrap, to dis∣intangle, to vnfolde from out anie trou∣ble. Sbrigamento, a ridding, a clearing or freeing from troubles. Sbrigli, a play called nine pins or keeles or skailes. Sbrigliare, to vnbridle, to vnsnaffle, to set free. Sbrigliata, a twing, a pluck or twitch gi∣uen with a bridle vnto a horse by his rider. Sbrignare, to creepe or sneake secretly. Sbrisciare, to slip, to slide, to glide as vpon vse, to craule, to creepe, to glib. Also to sheare or full cloth. Sbrisciatore, a cloth-worker. also a slider vpon the yse. Sbroccare, to vnstud any thing, to peepe out as studs heads. to loosen as one doth a naile. Sbrócco, a stub, a stake, a rafter or a sin∣gle quarter of timber. Sbrogliare, to vnsnare, to vnnet, to disin∣tangle, to free, to cleare, to rid. Sbroffare, to blow, to puffe, to huffe, to snuffe, to pante, to breath, to tuffe as a cat. Also to threaten, to chafe, to fret an∣gerly. also to sprinkle, to dash, to bedeaw Sbruffa, a sprinkling, a dashing, a be∣deawing, a blowing, a puffing, a huffing, a snuffing, a panting, a breathing, a tuf∣fing, a chafing, a fretting, a threatning. Sbruffare, as Sbroffare. Sbruffolare, as Sbroffare. Sbucare, to peepe as out of a hole, to bore or piercefull of holes. to vnden or rouze a deare, to starte a hare, to spring a par∣tridge, to vnnest, to vnhole. Sbucciare, as Sbucare. Also to pare or shaue or vnbarke or vnrinde trees. Also to rid, to auoide or make cleane. Sbucinare, as Bucinare. Sbudellare, to panch, to vnbowell, to vn∣gut, to kill and slaie. Sbudellatamente, as we say with hart and liuer or with all the guts. Sbuffare, as Sbroffare. Sbuffante, blowing, puffing, huffing, snuf∣fing, panting, breathing, tuffing as a cat, chafing, fretting. Also sprinkling, da∣shing, bedeawing. Sbuffoneggiare, as Buffoneggiare. Sbusare, as Sbucare. Also to make hol∣low. Sbuso, hollow, voide, concaue, full of holes. Sbutta fattore, a foolish factor, a petisog∣ger, a pickthanke knaue, a drudge. Scabbia, a scab, a mangines, a scurffe, an itch or tetter, a disease in a horse called the scuruie. Scabbiosa, Scabiosa, a weede called scuruie grasse, or scabious. Scabbioso, scabbie, mangie, scuruie, it∣ching, rude, rugged, grettie, rough, ru∣stie, craggie, filthie. Scabéllo, a stoole, a foote stoole or any lit∣tle stoole. Scabéllo, d'appoggio, a leaning stoole, a stoole with a backe. Scabinélla, the herbe scabious or scuruie grasse. Scabro, rude, rough, craggie, rugged, gret∣tie, rustie. Also a flie breeding on the ca∣rion of a horse. Scabrosità, roughnes, rudenes, ruggednes, rustines. Scabroso, as Scabro, Scacaccazzare, as Scacazzare. Scaccario, a Princes exchequer. Also a checker boorde. Scacazzare, to beraie, to becacke, to be∣shite. to blur, to blot, to defile. Scacazzature, blurs, blots, beshitings. Scacarnicolo, a cheater, a shifter, a coni∣catcher. Scaccheggiare, to checkie a cote of armes Also to play at chesse. Scacchi, the chesse-men to play at chesse with. Also checkie in armorie. Scacchiére, a check-boord or a checker, a chesse-boord. Scaccia, the mouth of a bit called a scache. Scacciapensiére, a kind of musicall in∣strument. Scacciare, to expell, to chase, to driue or hunt away. Also as Sgarare. Scacciamento, an expelling, a chasing or driuing away. Scacciata, as Scacciamento. Scacciatore, a chaser, a drouer, a hunter, an expeller. Scacco, Scaco, a chesse-boord, a checker. Also a childs rattle. Also a check. Scaccomátto, a mate, a check-mate. Scadére, cado, caddi, caduto, to happen, to befall, to chance, to droope, to fade. Scaduta, a hole or hazard at billiard boord. Scaduco, hapned, befallen, chanced, droo∣ped, faded. Scafa, a skiffe, a cock-bote, a whirrie, a scalop. Also yoong beanes or beanes in the cods, the huskes or cods of beanes. Also a boord, a shelfe, or dresser for a kitching or in a seller to set tubs or bar∣rels vpon. It is also vsed for railes or lat∣teises before a bakers stall. Also a kinde of torture or straight prison. Also the inner compasse or roundnes of the eare. Scaffa, as Scafa. Scafarca, a bucket, a paile or pitcher to draw water with. Scaffare, to shale or vnhuske peason or beanes. Scaggiale, a kind of countrie frock or gar∣ment that fishers and sheapherds vse to weare. also a broad silken girdle or a wo∣mans apron. Scaglia, the scales of any fish. Also a splint or shiuer of stones. Also a worme bree∣ding in horses. Scagliare, to skale or vnskale fish, to splint or shiuer. also to hurle, to throw or fling with violence. Scaglio, the arme pits or arme holes of a man. Scaglioni, steps or greeses of staires or lad∣ders. Also the teeth of a horse called tus∣ses or tuskes. Scaglioso, skalie, full of skales, rough, rug∣ged, splintie. Scagnéllo, the bridge of a lute. Scagno, any kind of stoole, forme, bench or seat. Scaia, as Scaglia. Scaióla, a kind of lome so called. Scaioni, as Scaglioni. Scaioso, as Scaglioso. Scala, a lather, a skale, a paire of staires or greeses. Also a mariners word. as Fare scala, to touch, to land, to boord or come to shore. Also to ride at ankore. a port or a hauen or harborough good to land at. Scala a lumache, a winding or turning paire of staires. Scala a pij, a kinde of narrowe vpright staires. Scala céli, herbe Salomons seale, or white∣woort.
Scala di córda, a ladder of cords. Scala da naue, a ladder for a ship. Scalabrone, a hornet, a beetle, a bull flie. Scalada, an escalado, a scaling of a wall with ladders. Scalappiare, to escape or run away, to shift away, to breake prison, to winde ones neck out of the halter. Scaláppio, a mouse-trap, any kinde of trap. Scalare, to skale or mount by ladder or staires. Scalata, a skalado giuen to any towne or wall. Scalcagnare, to seduce, to deceiue, to vn∣dermine. also to vnbreech, to vnheele, to vnstock or dismount any kinde of great ordinance or artillerie. also to loosen or vnfasten ones teeth. Also to vrge, to molest, to vexe and bring one out of patience. Scalciare, to vnhose, to vnshoe, to vn∣heele, to vnbreech, to dismount, to vn∣stock. Also to skale teeth, or make them loose from the gums. Scalciacane, a base, abiect, vile, raskalie, contemptible fellow. Scalciadénti, a toole that tooth-drawers vse to make teeth loose and pull them cut with. Scalciatore, a puller off of ones hosen and shoes. Scalciatura, an vnshoing, vnhosing, vn∣breeching, vnstocking, or loosing of teeth. Scalcio, Scalciato, bare-footed, bare∣legged, naked, poore, vnshod. Scalcitare, as Scalpestare. Scalco, a steward, an vsher, a seawer of a noblemans house. Scaldare, to heate, or warme, to skald, to skorch, to parch, to chafe. Scaldalétto, a warming pan. Scaldapié, a pot to keepe cinders in that market women vse to keepe their feete warme with. Scaldauiuande, a chafing dish. Scaldatóio, any thing or roome that hea∣teth or warmeth. Scaldatura, a heating, a warming, a cha∣fing, an inflammation. Scaléa, as Scala. Scaleno, a quadrangle with points re∣uersed. Scallentia, Scalentia, a kinde of impo∣stume in the throte. Scalenzini di larese.   Scaletta, a little ladder or paire of staires. Also a kinde of simnell or bisket-bread, or wafers. Scalfarótto, a shepheards weede, frock, or such garment with a hood. Also a kinde of bootes of felt, rug, or mats that students vse to keepe their legs in when they studie. Scalini, steps or greeses of ladders or staires. Scalmana, a drought, or drynes, the dis∣ease called the Callenture. Scalmanato, burnt with thurst, hauing the Callenture. Scalmare, as Scarmare. Scalmato, as Scarmato. Also a disease in a horse. Scalmatória, as Scarmatura. Scalmatura, as Scarmatura. Scalmo, as Scarmo. Also as Schelmo. Scalógna, skallions, yong ciues, chibols or oinions. Scaloni, a word that heraulds vse in ar∣morie as we say piles. Also great steps of a ladder or staires. Scalpédria, figured for a foolish woman, or follie it selfe. Scalpeggiare, as Scalpestare. Scalpellare, as Scarpellare. Scalpellino, as Scarpellino. Scalpéllo, as Scarpéllo. Scalpestare, to trample or treade vnder foote, to make a trampling noise. Scalpestato, trampled vnder foote. Also fond, riotous, or lauish. Scalpéstio, as Scalpiccio. Scalpestrare, as Scalpestare. Scalpiccio, a trampling noise made with ones feete. Scalpire, as Scolpire. Scalpini, as Scarpini. Scalpitare, as Scalpestare. Scalpitio, as Scalpiccio. Scalpitrare, as Scalpestare. Scalpo della testa, the skalp of ones head. Scalpore, wonderment, amazement, fright. Scaltrire, trisco, trito, to discouer, to perceiue, to be aware of, to become craf∣tie, wilie, and suttle. Scaltrito, discouered, perceiued. Also be∣come craftie, slye and suttle, caute, wa∣rie, craftie, wilie. Scaltrimento, warines, foresight, craft, slynes. Scaltro, as Scaltrito. Scaluna, as Scalogna. Scalzadenti, as Scalcia denti. Scalzare, as Scalciare. Scalzacani, a base, raskalie dog-kee∣per. Scalzatura, as Scalciatura. Scalzo, as Scalcio. Scamaidare, to carde, pick, or winde wooll. Scamaidatore, a carder, a picker or wooll-winder. Scamardare, to make ridges in the ground. Scambiare, to change, to exchange, to barter, to truck. Scambiamēto, an exchanging, a change, a trucking. Scambiatore, an exchanger, a trucker, a bartrer. Scambiéuole, by exchange, mutuall, ex∣changeablie. Scambiettare, to barter, to truck, to change ware for ware. also to wrigle, to stirre to and fro. Scambiétti, bartrings, truckings, chan∣gings. Also wriglings, stirrings vp and down. Also mammocks, scraps, or brokē pieces of meate. Some take them to be chibols or yong oinions. Also tumbling tricks. Scambio, exchange, change, bartring, or trucking. Also steade, lieu, place, or mistaken. Scamonéa, Scammonéa, the hearbe Scammonie or Diagridion, the iuice whereof is vsed in medicines to purge choler vehemently. Scampamento, as Scampo. Scampana, hath bin vsed abusiuely for patience. Scampanare, to ring, toll, or iangle bels disorderly. Scampanate, ringings, peales, knels, tol∣lings, or ianglings of bels. Scampare, to escape, to shift away, to saue or deliuer out of trouble. Scampatura, as Scampo. Scampo, an escape, a shifting away, a refuge, a flight, a sauing, a freedome. Scamuffare, to dant, to droope or hang downe the head, to goe away as one a∣mazed. Scamuffo, a drooping, a languishing, a hanging downe the head. Scanale, a kinde of fish. Scancellare, as Cancellare. Scancéllo, as Cancéllo. Scancia, as Scantia. Scanciaria, a ranke or rowe of shelues about a kitchin. Scandagliare, to sound, to leuell, or fa∣dome the depth of the sea with a plum∣met. Scandagliatore, a sounder, a leueller, or fadomer of the sea. Scandaglio, a plummet, or line to sounde with, a leuelling rule. Scandalizzare, to scandalize, to slander, to offend in conscience, or giue occasion to mislike.
Scándalo, a scandall, a slander, an of∣fence, or occasion of sinne giuen by ano∣ther. Scandaloso, scandalous, slandrous, offen∣siue. Scandentia, the squinancie. Scándere, scando, scandei, scanduto, to climbe, to mount, to ascend or get vp. Also to scan a verse. Scandescéntia, as Scandentia. Also a kind of blushing for shame. Scanduto, climbed, clambered, ascended, mounted or gotten vp. Scándice, wilde cheruile, shepheards nee∣dle, or Venus combe. Scandigliare, as Scandagliare. Scandiglio, as Scandaglio. Scándole, oke-lathes, slates, or shindles of woode seruing insteed of tyles to couer houses. Scandolizzare, as Scandalizzare. Scándolo, as Scandalo. Scandoloso, as Scandaloso. Scanéllo, a deske to write vpon. Scanfárda, a common strumpet, an ouer∣ridden whore, a stallion rampe. Scangè, changeable coloured, as we saie changeable taffeta. Scannagállo, a certaine officer in a ship, which some take to be the stewarde or victauler. Scannaglio, a shambles, a butcherie, a slaughter. Scannare, to strangle, to murther, to kill, to cut ones throte. Scannatore, a murtherer, a butcher, a cutter of throtes. Scannellare, to gush or spout foorth as out of a gutter, to vomite or caste foorth. Scannetto, Scannéllo, a foote-stoole, a little stoole. Scanno, any kinde of stoole, forme, bench, or seate. Also a dominion or state. Scannonizzare, to degrade one when he hath bin canonized. Scansare, to cancell, to blur, or blot foorth, to go a slope or a sconce, or a skew, to go sidelin, to stagger or go reeling▪ to ward, to auoide or shun a blow. Also to ouer∣throw, to ouerturne, to subuert or re∣mooue any thing away, to balke by. Scansatura, an ouerthrowe, or ouertur∣ning of any thing, a staggering or ree∣ling. also a blot, a blur or cancelling, a fall, asconce or a-skewe, a balking by. Scancione, a kind of cadence or measure or foote in a verse. Scanso, a blurre, a blot, a cancelling, as Scansatura. Scantia, a shelfe of boardes about a kit∣chin. Also a cupbord. Scantiaria, as Scanciaria. Scantietta, a little shelfe of boords, or lit∣tle cupboord. Scantonare, to shake a man off at a cor∣ner of a streete, to giue one the slippe se∣cretly. Also to vncorner. Scantonarsi, to retyre, or withdrawe into some corner. Scantonata, a slip giuen one at a corner. Also without a corner, disordred. Scantoniére, a cosener, a coni-catcher, one that giues one the slip, and leaues him a corner for paiment. Scantucciare, as Scantonare. Scanzare, as Scansare. Scanzare della via, to misse, to straie, or go out of the way. Scanzaria, as Scanciaria. Scanzia, as Scantia. Scapellare, to vnhoode, to vnhat, to vn∣cap. Scapéllo, a lancet, a fleame wherewith surgeons let bloud. Scapegliare, as Scapigliare. Scaperuccia, a pouch, a budget, a scrip. Also a hood or a cowle. Scapestrare, to vnbridle, to vnhalter, to disintangle, to draw ones head out of the halter, to disorder. Scapestrato, vnbridled, vnhaltred, disin∣tangled, wound ones head out of the hal∣ter. a dissolute, licentious, riotous fel∣lowe. a wag-halter. Scapestrata, wilfully, headlong, disorder∣ly, riotously, lauishly, furiously. Scapestratamente, as Scapestrata. Scapezzone, a blowe, a clap, a boxe or whirret giuen with the hand. Scapigliare, to desheuell, to disorder, to vndresse or vntie ones head or haires. Scapigliata, desheueled, vnkembd, vn∣drest about the head. Also a tugging of one by the haire. Scapilio, the space betweene the shoul∣ders. Scapini, linnen socks or pumps. Scapineuole, of, or pertaining to socks. Scapitare, not to thriue, to loose by the bargaine, to consume a mans stocke or wealth. Also to behead. Also to go away from a place. Also to cut off a debt, to come out of debt. Scapizzare, as Scapitare. Scápola, as Scapula. Scapolare, to escape, to make an escape, or shift away. also a friers hood or a monks cowle. Scápoli, souldiers that ouerlooke gallie-slaues. Also free, loose, or scot-free. Scápolo, haggard, wilde, ranging, vnta∣med. Also a horse that will not easily be taken but will escape away, an escape. Scappare, as Scampare. Scappata, as Scampo. Scappezzare, to rough hewe a peece of timber or stone. Also to turne a horse rounde when first he is taught to trot round, being held by a long rope. Scappino, the vpper leather of a paire of shooes. Also the clocke of a paire of ho∣sen. Also a socke or a pumpe. Scappo, as Scampo. Also a fishing pole or rod. Also sedge or sheare grasse. Scáppola, an escape, or a shifting away. Scappolare, as Scapolare. Scappricciare, to free or rid from toyes, humours, or fancies. Scapucciare, to stumble, or trip by the way, to slip, or fall. Scapuccio, a stumbling or tripping block, a fall, a slip, a trip, or stumbling, a tre∣stase. Scapuccione, as Scapuzzone. Scápula, the shoulder blade. Also the hin∣der part of the shoulders. Scapulare, as Scapolare. Scapuzzare, as Scapucciare. Scapuzzo, as Scapuccio. Scapuzzone, a blowe, a clap, a boxe, or whirret giuen with ones hande. Also a stumbling horse, or a horse that will run awaie. Scarabillare, to squeake as a bagge-pipe, to make an vnpleasant squeaking. Scárabo, as Scarafággio. Scarabótto, idem. Scarabócchi, a foolish idle worde spoken at randon, and without heede. Scaracchiare, as Sgarare. Scarafággio, a beetle, a hornet, an oxe∣flie, a scarabe-flie. Scarágolo, a kinde of sea snaile. Scaramellare, to plaie tricks of legier de maine, to iuggle. Scaramélle, legier de maine tricks, iug∣ling tricks. Scaramuccia, a skirmish, a fight, a fray. Scaramucciare, to skirmish, to fight. Scaramuzza, as Scaramuccia. Scaramuzzare, to skirmish, to fight. Scarani, lowe womens stooles. Scarauaggio, Scarauaccio, as Scara∣faggio. Scarbonchiare, to besmeare with a cole, to snuffe out a candle. Scarbottare, to scatter or caste downe, to throwe or hurle away. Scarcal'asino, a kinde of game at tables with dice, and comes to bearing of men. Scarcare, as Scaricare. Scarcata, as Scaricata. Scarcatore, a discharger.
Scarco, as Scarico. Scarda, the scale or shell of any fish. Also the cards or teasels to carde wooll with. Also as Scardolo. Scardafone, as Scarafaggio. Scardalana, a carder of wooll, a wooll winder. Scardare, to carde, tease, winde, or dresse wooll. also to skale fish. Scardassare, as Scardare. Also to beate, bumbaste, bange, touze, or bumfeagle. Also to backbite, to detract or raile at one behinde his backe. Scardassare il pelo, to bange, beate, or bumbaste, to thumpe or swaddle o. Scardassa lana, as Scardalana. Scardassi, cardes or teazels to card wooll with. Scardassiére, as Scardatore. Scardassino, as Scardalana. also a back∣biter, a railer, a detracter of one behind his backe. Scardásso, a paire of cards to card wooll. Scardatore, a carder or winder of wooll. a skaler of fish. Scardazzo, a kind of bur, teazell or bryer. Scárdola, a verie skalie fish: some take it to be the shad; others the guilt head; others the breame. Scardone, as Scardola. Scardoua, as Scardola. Also a kind of venemous waspe or flie. Scarfaccij, foolish, dogrell rimers. Scargagliare, as Sgargagliare. Scaricare, to discharge, to vnloade, to dis∣burthen. Scaricamento, as Scaricata. Scaricata, a discharge, a disburthning, an vnloading. Scárico, free, quit, discharged, disburthe∣ned, vnloden. Also a discharge. Scarificare, to lance or open an incision, to rich, skale or scacrifie. Scarificatione, a scarifying, an incision, a cutting, a lancing. Scarióla, garden endiue or broad leafe. Scarite, a precious stone hauing the colour of Scaro. Scarlatino, the colour we call stammell red. Also scarlet. Scarlato, Scarlatto, scarlet cloth, scarlet colour. Scarmare, to make leane, to take downe the flesh. Scarmigliare, to teaze, to card or picke wooll, flax, hemp or clothes. Also to hale, to touze, to plucke, to tug, to ruffle, to pull by the haires, to desheuell, to teare ones haires, to lug. Scarmigliato, teazed, carded or pickt, haled, touzed, pluckt, tugged, ruffled, grizly, vnkemd, desheueled, rent or puld by the haires, lugd. Scármo, leane, meagre, gant, drie, spinie, out of flesh, lanke, low as a hawke, bare of flesh. Also the fish we call poore Iohn: some take it for the stock-fish; others take it for the fish Merluzzo. Scarnare, to vnflesh, to pare the flesh from the bones, to pare raw hides. Scarnato, vnflesht, pared the flesh from the bones, as Scarmo. Scarno, as Scarmo. Scaro, a fish that deuours all the small fi∣shes he can come vnto, and cheweth like a beast: some take it to be the guilt∣head or goldenie. Scarpa, any kind of show. a counter scarfe or curtein of a wall. Also a purse of mo∣ney in rogues language or pedlers french. Also a fish with a shining head called a guilt-head. Scarparia, a streete where shooes are made and to be sold. Scarpatore, a shoomaker. a cord wainer. Scarpezzo, a kind of christmas game. Scarpellare, to graue, cut or carue with a chizell. Scarpellatore, a grauer, a caruer or cut∣ter with a chizell, to scarifie any sore. Scarpellinaccio, a bungler, or botcher∣like-grauer. Also a simple gull. Scarpelletto, as Scarpellino. Scarpellino, a little chizell, a penknife, a caruing toole, a caruer or a grauer of stones. Scarpéllo, a chizell, a cutting or caruing or grauing toole. a kind of rauenous fowle. Also a surgeons toole to take away cor∣rupt flesh from the bones, a Barbers lance. Scarpena, a kind of fish. Scarpigliare, as Scarmigliare. Scarpette, thin shooes, pumps or socks. Scarpettoni, a kind of wooden, high or clownish shooes or startops. Scarpinare, to escape or shift away, to tug for, to snatch or pull vp by the root. Scarpini, linnen sockes. Also dancing pumps or little shooes. Scarpioni, a kind of warlike engine of de∣fence. Looke Scorpione. Scarpire, as Carpire. Scarpisatore, a snatcher, a shifter, a hoo∣ker, a pilfrer, a conicatcher. Scarponi, as Scarpettoni. Scarpone, a hurly burly, a brauling noise, a squaring. Scarriera, a place where all knauerie, ro∣guerie, and shifts of false dealing is v∣sed. Scarsélla, a pocket, a budget, a satchell, a pouch, a faulconers bag. Scarsamente, scarsely, sparingly, hardly, pinchingly, couetously, niggardly, scant∣lie. Scarsapepe, a kind of herbe. Scarsare, to scarce, to spare, to pinch, to cut off, to scant. Scarsellare, to pocket vp. Scarsellaio, a pocket or pouch maker. Scarselloni, bases or tases for a horse∣man. Scarsezza, scarsitie, niggardnes, couetise, sparing, hardnes, miserablenes, scantnes. Scarsità, as Scarsezza. Scarso, scarse, hard, couetous, sparing, mi∣serable, scant. Also a snudge, a pinch∣penie, a peni-father. Looke Parco. Scartabellare, to scribble or tosse bookes and papers ouer and ouer. Scartabéllo, any skroule or waste paper. Scartacciare, as Scardassare. Scartaccino, as Scardatore. Scartaccio, as Scardassi. Scartafacciare, as Scartabellare. Scartafaccio, as Scartabéllo. Scartapello, as Scartabéllo. Scartare, to discard at cards. Scartate, the cardes that are discarded. Looke Dare nelle scartate. Scarteggiare, as Scardassare, as Scar∣tare. Scarteggino, a carder or picker of wooll. Scartóccio, a coffin of paper for spice, as Apothecaries vse. Also a charge made readie for any musket or ordinance. Scartózzo, as Scartóccio. Scaruare, as Scardassare. also as Scar∣migliare. Scaruatore, as Scardatore. Scarupare, to breake, to ruine, to teare, to rend, to throw downe. Sarzerino, a bird in latin Serinus. Scassiare, to squat, to bruse, to crush, to squeese, to breake, to make as flat as a cake. Scassiatura, a brusing, a squatting, a cru∣shing, a squeesing. Scascio, Scasciato, squat, flat. Scassare, as Cassare, as Scasciare. Scassatura, as Cassatura, as Scascia∣tura. Scassinato, broken, brused, touzed or shi∣uered in pieces. Scasso, as Casso, as Casciato. Satafáscio, Ascatafascio, pelmell, confu∣sedly, rashly, hudling wise, at random. Scatapócchio.   Scatellare, as Sgarare. Scatenare, to vnchaine, to vnfetter, to vn∣shakle. Scatenata, Alla scatenata, dissolutely,
carelesly, wilfully, madly, riotously. Scato del cielo, or else Scatocéllo, great peni-woort, wall peni-woort, Ve∣nus nauill, peni-wort of the water or sheepe-killing peni-grasse. Scátola, a flat boxe, such as Apothecaries vse to put in comfets. Scátola, A lettere di scatola, plainly & alowd, that all men may heare. Scatolette, Scatolline, little, flat, round boxes. Scatoliére, a boxe-maker. Scattare, as Riscattare. Scaturiggine d'acqua, a spring, a bub∣bling of water, the boyling and rising of water out of a spring. Scaturire, risco, rito, to bubble, to flowe, to purle, to gush, to streame, or spring as water doth. Scaualcare, to vnhorse, to dismount, or alight from horseback. Scaualcatura, an vnhorsing, a dismoun∣ting, an alighting from a horse. Scauardino, a fish called a bleake. Scauare, to dig deepe, to pull vp by the rootes, to make hollow, or to boare through, to dig vp. Scauezzare, to breake or riue in sunder. Also to free from a halter, to breake, to splint, or shiuer. Scauezzacóllo, a breakeneck, a halter∣sack, a wag. Also rashlie, raginglie, furiouslie, madlie, in headlong man∣ner. Scauigliare, as Scapigliare. Also to hurle violently▪ Scáuolo, a kinde of small duck like our teales. Scauro, he that hath ankles standing and bunching out. Scazzambrello, a hobgoblin, a robin good fellow. Scazzata, a thrust, a push, a foyne, or iump to a woman with a mans prick. Scazzellare, to prouoke, to prick, to egge on, to importune. Also to play and dandle with. Scazzonto, a kinde of rime dogrell so called. Scazzótto, a gull, a millers thumb, or bull fish. Scazzuto, couetous, sparing, niggardly, neere-handed. Also purre-blinde. Sceda, Scede, as Modello. Also osten∣tation, vaine-glorie, or foolishnes, a trifle, a iest, or vanitie in talke. Sceggiale, as Scaggiale. Scégliere, scélgo, scélsi, scélto, or sceg∣liuto, to choose, to cull, to elect, to pick out. Scegliuto, Looke Scélto. Sceglitore, a chooser, an elector, a cul∣ler. Scelerággine, treacherie, villainie, kna∣uerie, wickednes, mischiefe, abhomina∣tion, lewdnes, an vnlawfull acte, a de∣sperate wicked attempt. Sceleranza, as Sceleraggine. Sceleratezza, as Sceleraggine. Sceleráto, treacherous, villainous, kna∣uish, wicked, cruel, bad, lewde, vngodlie, vnnaturall, cursed, mischieuous, naugh∣tie. Scelerità, as Sceleraggine. Sceleróso, as Scelerato. Scelesare, to paue a streete. Scelesata, a pauement. Scelesatore, a pauier. Sceléste, wicked, mischieuous, lewde, vengeable, vngracious, &c. Scélmo, as Schelmo. Scélta, a choise, an election, a culling. Scélto, chosen, pickt out, culled, elected, an excellent choise man. Scemare, to diminish, to abate, to wane, to fall, to defalke, to lessen, to want, to faint. Scemamento, a diminishing, an abate∣ment, a waning, a lessening. Scémo, a simple foole or naturall idiote. Also want, or lack. Also the wane or decrease of the Moone. Also waned, abated, as in Scemare. Scempiare, to afflict, to excruciate, to torment, to torture, to vex, to rack, to molest. Scempietà, as Simplicità. Scémpio, torture, affliction, torment, racking, vexation, molestation. Also simple, foolish, poore of vnderstanding or shallow headed. Also single, slight, plaine, thin, alone, nothing double, with∣out welt and gard. Scéna, a scene of a comedie or tragedie. Also a stage in a theater or play-house whereon they play, a skaffold, a pauil∣lion, or fore part of a theater where players make them readie, being trim∣med with hangings, out of which they enter vpon the stage. vsed also for a comedie or a tragedie. Also a place where one doth shew and set forth him∣selfe to the world. Scéndere, scendo, scesi, sceso, to dis∣cend, to alight or come downe. Scénico, of or pertaining to a stage or scene, or skaffolds, or to play in come∣dies. Scéno, an egyptian measure of threescore furlongs which is seauen miles and a halfe. Scenografia, a description of skaffolds, scenes, stages, or pauilions. Scepa, a cuttle fish. Scensa, ascension day. Scergare, to rub, to claw, to wriggle, to frigle. Scergatura, a rubbing, a clawing, a frig∣ging, a wrigling. Scernere, scerno, scernei, scernuto, to discerne, to perceiue, to ken, to know. Scernuto, discerned, perceiued, kennd, knowne a farre off. Scernita, a discerning, a kenning, a distin∣guishing, a perceiuing. Scernitore, a discernr, a kenner, a dis∣tinguisher, a perceiuer. Scérre, as Scégliere. Sceruellare, to vnbraine any bodie, to driue or make one goe out of his wits. Scesa, a descent, a comming downe, a downefall, a declining. Also a rheume. Scesa di catairo, a falling of the rheume. Sceo, Scenduto, descended, alighted, come downe. Scetrigéro, a ruler, a scepter-bearer, a sergeant at armes. Scétra, a target made of leather without wood. Scétro, Scéttro, a kings or princes scep∣ter or mace. Also a kingdome, rule, or gouernment. Sceuerare, as Sceurare. Scéuola, an herbe called small shauegrasse, or tadpipes. Sceurare, to seuer, to sunder, to deuide, to part, to separate. Scéuro, seuered, sundred, deuided, par∣ted, separated. Scheda, a sheete or leafe of paper or parchment. Also a skrowle or a sche∣dule. Schedia, a thing like a bridge with trees pinned together, vsed in stead of barges to carie things vpon by water. Schedio, a bridge made in haste for a time. Schedione, a spit or a broach. Scheggia, a splint, a shiuer, a chip, a flaw. Also as Assicelle. Scheggiale, as Scaggiale. Scheggiare, to splint, to shiuer, to flawe, to chip. Scheggiette, little splints, shiuers, or flawes, or chips. Scheggie, splints, shiuers, chips, flawes. Scheggioni, as Scheggie. Schelentia, a kinde of sicknes. Schelino, as Schelina. Schelma, Schelmo, a little piece of wood or peg in a boate whereat the rowers stay their ares▪ when they rowe called a thoule pin.
Schéma, an ornament or figure vsed in speech. Schena, as Schiena. Also a kind of long measure. Schenuto, as Schienuto. Scherano, a murtherer, a robber, a high∣way theefe, a man-queller, a swaggrer. Scherma, fencing, or the arte of fence. Schermaglia, as Scherma. Schermaglio, a screene for the fire. Schermare, as Schermire. Schermatore, as Schermitore. Schermire, misco, mito, to fence, to fight, to skirmish, to warde, to defend. Schermitore, a fencer, a skirmisher, a de∣fender, a master of fence. Schermo, a fence, a defence, a warde, a shelter. Scherníre, nisco, nito, to scorne, to flout, to frumpe, to mocke, to despise. Schernimento, a scorning, a flouting, a frumping, a mocking. Schernitore, a scorner, a flouter, a frum∣per, a mocker. Scherneuole, scornefull, full of floutes, mocks, or frumps. Scherno, a scorne, a mock, a flout, a frump, a iest. Scheruóle, skirret rootes to make sallads of. Scherzare, to iest, to dallie, to dandle, to plaie or toye withall in iest. Scherzatore, a iester, a dandler, a dal∣lier, a toyer. Scherzamento, a iesting, a toying, a dal∣liance, a dandling or playing withall in iest. Scherzo, as Scherzamento. Schesi, a figure wherein a multitude of words are hudled vp togither. Schiaccia, a squatting or hiding place. Schiacciare, to crush, to bruse, to squeese, to beate, to batter or make as flat as a cake. Also to bedash with durt. Also to beslauer, Looke Schicherare. Schiacciato, crushed, brused, squeesed, battred or made flat. Naso schiacci∣ato, a flat scotch-saddle nose. Schiacciata, any kinde of broad or flat cake. Schiacciatina, a little thinne, flat cake. Schiacchero, as Scacchiére. Schiaffeggiare, to cuffe, to beate, to boxe, to cuffe or streeke, or clap on the eares or cheeke with ones hand. Schiaffo, a cuffe, a boxe, a clap, a whirret on the cheekes or eares with ones hande. Schiamare, to cackle or clocke as a henne doth, to shreeke, to skreeke, or crie out. Schiamazzare, to make a rumbling or trampling noise, to tattle, to prate, to scold, to babble, to cackle as a hen. Schiamazzo, a rumbling or trampling noise, a cackling, a prating, a babling, a scolding. Schiamo, as Schiamazzo. Schiantare, to cleaue woode, to burst, to riue, to splint, to shiuer, to rend in sun∣der, to rap, to chap. Schiantatura, a cleauing, a bursting, a riuing, a splinting, a shiuering. Schiantéuole, that will or may be cleft, burst, splinted, shiuered, riued, chapt. Schiantoncélla, a pretie lasse, a wanton, slie, subtile wench. Schiántolo, a scantlin, a scrap, a mam∣mocke, a little peece, a splint, a shiuer, a shiue. Schianze, the scurffe, the scald or scab, that comes to childrens heads. Schiappalegne, a wood-cleauer, a wood∣feller. Schiappare, as Schiantare. Schiappatura, as Schiantatura. Schieppe, chips, billets, or peeces of wood Schiappéuole, as Schianteuole. Schiara, a kinde of iron that carpenters vse. Schiarare, to clarifie, to cleere vp, to de∣clare, to expound, to make cleere. Schiarazza, a kinde of flat-bottom ship, or hulke. Schiaréa, the herbe Clarie. Schiarire, risco, ito, as Schiarare. Schiarro, a squirrell. Schiatta, a race, a family, a stocke, a pedi∣gree, or bloud of a house. Schiattinare, to pollute, to defile, to spot, to sullie. Schiattíscere, tisco, attei, attuto, to barke, to baie, to houie, to baule. Schiattoncella, a close, slie, craftie, sub∣till wench. Schiauare, to vnlocke, to vnshut, to pull the keye out. Schiauina, an irish rugge, a sea-mans gowne, an irish mantle or course couer∣let. Schiauo, a slaue, a bondman, a bond slaue, a gallie-slaue, a for sat. Schiauone, one borne in Sclauonia, but abusiuely taken for a bondman or slaue. Schiazza, as Schiatta. Schiazzare, as Schizzare. Schiazzi, as Schizzi. Schiba, a kinde of boyes play vsed in Italy. Schiccherare, to blot, to blur, to scrible, as children do learning to write. Also to beslime as a snaile doth when she creeps. Schicchera carte, a blotter, a blurrer, a scribler of bookes, a foolish poet. Schiccheri, dashings, dashes, blurs, blots, scriblings, slimings. Schiccherone, as Schicchera carte. Schicchizzare, as Schiccherare. Schidione, Schidone, a broch or a spit. Schidonare, to broch or to spit. Schidonata, a spit-full, a broch-full, a blow with a spit. Schiembacci, baudy-houses, stewes, bro∣thels. Schiembecci, idem. Schiéna, the backe or chine of ones bodie, the ridge bone. also the backe of a knife, a ridge of any thing. Schienale, a chine or backe bone of beefe or porke. Also a peece of armour for the backe. Schienuto, well or strongly backt, rigged. Schiéra, a troupe, a squadron, a ranke, a bande, or a cornet of men. Schierare, to marshall, to order, to ranke, to araie, or set in troupes. Schierati, marshalled, ordred, ranked, set in araie or troupes. Schiericato, vnshauen, one that hath for∣saken his conuent, an vnfriered fel∣lowe. Schiettezza, neatenes, puritie, cleanlines, plainenes, slightnes. Schiétto, neate, pure, single, cleane, slight, plaine, vnfained, vnspotted, without welt or garde. Schifare, to shun, to auoide, to eschewe, to disdaine, to abhorre, to dspise. Schiféuole, to be auoided or shunned, odi∣ous, hainous, hatefull, filthie. Schifezza, coynes, quaintnes, peeuishnes, fondnes frowardnes, queasines. Schiffeto, a little cockbote, skiffe, whirry or scallop. Schiffo, a skiffe, a whirrie, a cockbote. Schifiltà, as Schifezza. Schifo, coie, quaint, disdainfull, nice, skit∣tish, fonde, frowarde, puling, queasie, aeward. Also filthie, vglie, odious, de∣testable, to be auoided or eschewed. Also a cockbote, a skiffe, or a wherrie. Schille, a kinde of sea-crab or lobster. Schimbiccherare, to blurre, to blot, to bedaube, to slabber as a snaile in cree∣ping or as ill painters do. Schinale, a kinde of salt fish. Schionato, Looke Sedia schionata. Schinchimurra, a filthie great stinking turde. Schinciare, to stagger, or go reeling as a drunken man. Schincio▪ Andare a schincio, to stag∣ger, to reele, to go as a drunken man Schinchi, the shinne bones or smals of the legges.
Schinélle, as Schinchi. Also the disease in a horse called a splint. Schinieri, greaues or armour pieces for the legs. Also gamashes. Schiodare, to vnnaile, to make loose. Also as Suertare. Schionata, backt, hauing a backe to leane vpon. Schioppare, to burst, to cracke, to snap, to pop of as doth a gun. to burst foorth in laughing. Schioppettare, to shoote off with dags or handguns, to cracke or snap, to pop. Schioppata, a cracke, a bursting, a pop, a snap. Schioppettata, a blow or shot with a dag or handgun. Schioppettaria, all maner of shot. Schioppettini, little dags or potguns. Also a kind of Augustine friers so called. Schioppetto, a little dag, pistoll or hand∣gun, a potgun. Schióppo, a dag, a pistoll, a hand-gun, a pot-gun, a snaphance, a harquibuse. Also a crack, a bursting, a snap. Also a sound made with puffing of ones cheeks. Schirantia, the squinancie. Schiraso, a kind of barge, boate, whirrie or pinnace. Schiráttolo, a squirrell. Schirázzo, as Schiraso. Schiriuolo, a squirrell. Schiro, a kind of ring worme or tetter. Schirone, the bird called a field-fare. Schiare, as Schifare. Schiuetto, somewhat coy, quaint, niece, peeuish or daintie. Schiuuole, as Schifeuole. Schiuezza, as Schifezza. Schiuo, as Schifo. Schiúdere, schiudo, schiusi, schiuso, as Schiauare, to shut or locke out. Schiuma, skum, foame or froth. Schiumaccia, filthie froth, foame or skumme. Schiumare, to skum, to foame, to froth. Schiumatóo, a skimmer. Schiumoso, foamie, frothie, skummie. Schiuso, lockt or shut out, vnlockt, vnshut. Schizzare, to spin or gush forth violently, to flie, sparkle or sprinkle abroad, to crush or squease, to squirt, to bedash, to beblur to bemire, to dash with mire, to draw the first draught or ingrosement of any worke or writing. Also to mute as a hauke doth. Also to siringe, to purle or bubble as water doth. also to hop, to leap, to friske, to skip, to spurt. Also to skum∣mer as a dog. Schizzata, the mute or muting of a hauke, a gushing or spinning foorth. Also a squirting. Schizzatoio, a squirt or siring. Also a vintners forset. Schizzatore, a squirter, a siringer, a mu∣ter. Schizzinoso, selfe-weening, peeuish, fro∣ward, skittish. Schizzo, a sparkling, a sprinkling, a spin∣ning or gushing out, a squeasing or cru∣shing, a purling, a bubbling of water. an ingrosement or first rough draught of any thing. the mute or muting of a hauk or any other birde. a squirt or squirting of any thing. a spot or dashing of durt or mire vpon ones clothes. Also a hop, a skip or a leape. Scholia, as Scolia. Sciabórdo, foolish, fond, sottish, senceles, gullish, a meacocke. Scia, the place where the sciatica doth breed. Sciaccare, as Schiantare. Sciacquare, to bedable in water, to wash or rence as a glasse. Sciagrafia, a description of a whole frame and conueiance of euerie roome, a modell or plat forme of euerie part of a buil∣ding. Sciagura, a mischiefe, a mishap, an ill luck, an ill chance, a misfortune. Sciaguraggine, as Sciagura. Sciagurato, mischieuous, vnhappie, vnluc∣kie, treacherous, villainous. Sciagurezza, as Sciagura. Scialacquaggine, lauishnes, riot, vn∣thriftines, wastefull consuming, foolish prodigalitie. Scialacquare, to waste, to consume or spend lauishly, riotously or prodigally, to play the vnthrift. Scialacquamento, as Scialacquaggine Scialacquata di parole, a huddle or tittle tattle of idle words lauishly and foolish∣ly spoken. Scialacquatore, a riotus, wastefull, lauish or prodigall consumer, spender or wa∣ster, an vnthrift, a waste good. Scialácquio, as Scialacquaggine. Scialassare, as Salassare. Sciálbo, pale, wan or sallow coloured. Scialmatore, in latin, Psylus. Schiamachia, a counterfeit fighting. a shadow or image of contention. Sciamannata, Alla sciamannata, topsi∣turuie, vpside-downe, helter-skelter, pell-mell. Sciamarro, an axe, a battle axe, a hat∣chet. Sciamito, a kind of sleaue, feret or filosel∣lo silke. Also a kind of thin stuffe halfe silke, and halfe wooll like burato. Sciamare, to swarme togither as Bees. Sciamo, a swarme of Bees. Sciamunito, vnsauorie, watrish or wal∣lowish in taste. Sciancare, to halt, to goe sideline, to reele, to stagger, to lame, or maime. Sciancato, as Scianco. Scianco, halting, lame, cripple, limping, hiples, lame legd. Sciapito, as Sciamunito. Sciare, to cut or furrow the sea with a ship. also to crie all with one voice or consent, as mariners doe when they hoise sailes or heaue ankre. Also to know, to wit, to kenne. Sciaria, the herbe Clarie or Cleere-eie. Sciarpellone, a grossely, an vnluckie tale, as we say a gudgeon or lying for the whetstone. Also as Farfallone. Sciarra, a brawle, a iar, a vie, a contenti∣on a fraie, a buzling, a strife. Sciarréro, a brauling, iarring, contenti∣ous, striuing fellow. Sciate, an instrument vsed in choosing the situation of cities. Sciática, the disease called the sciatica or hip-gout. Sciático, one that hath the sciatica. Sciaúro, Sciaúrato. Looke Sciagura. Scibile, that may be knowne. Scibilmente, wittingly, for the nonce, ex∣presly, with knowledge. Sciéde, Scéde, mockes, frumps, scornes, iests, gibes, flouts, follies, illusions or vaine-glories, derisions, selfe-conceits. Sciégliere, as Scégliere. Scielinguare, as Scilinguare. Sciélta, as Scélta. Sciélto, as Scélto. Sciemare, as Scemare. Sciemato, as Scemato. Sciémo, as Scémo. Sciempiare, as Scempiare. Sciémpio, as Scémpio. Sciempiezza, simplicity. homelines. Sciena, as Schiena. Sciénte, one that knowes, that is skilfull & hath vnderstanding, and is full of scien∣ces and knowledge, knowing, witting, cunning, skilfull. Sciéntia, knowledge, science, wit, skill, vn∣derstanding, learning, knowledge. Scientiale, scientiall, full of knowledge, skilfull, pertaining to knowledge. Scientiare, to teach or instruct, to make skilfull. Scientiato, as Scientioso. Scientemente, wittingly, skilfully, with knowledge, for the nonce, of purpose. Scientifico, as Scientioso. Scientioso, skilfull, full of knowledge and
sciences. Sciénza, as Sciéntia, Sciepare, to vnhedge or pull vp hedges, to plucke vp by the rootes. Scierpellone, as Sciarpellone. Sciérre, as Sciógliere. Sciferare, to decipher. Sciglia, the roote of the white lillie. Scilinguare, to stutter, to stammer, to maffle or faulter in speech, to lispe. Scilinguato, stutted, stammerd, maffled, or faultred in speech. Also a stutter, a lisper, a stammerer, a maffler. Also one that is toong-tide. Scilinguágno, as Scilinguato. Scilinguágnolo, the string vnder the toong, which if it be not cut in yong chil∣dren, will hinder their speech when they come once to speake. Scilla, a kinde of herbe with a roote like an onion, growing both in the sea and on the land, called the sea oinion, or squilla. Also a kind of fish like a shrimp. Also a gulfe or dangerous place in the Sicilian sea. Scilócco, the south-east winde. Scilóma, as Andiriuieni. Sciloppare, to drinke sirops, to put in sirops. Also to pull, gall, or flea the skin off. Also to skald with skalding water. Also to minister sirops vnto. Sciloppiare, as Sciloppare. Scilóppo, a scirop. Scima, a disease in a horse called the crick. Scimare, to sheare cloth, to pare or cut off the top. Scimatore, a cloth-shearer. Scimatura, a shearing of cloth. Scimia, a munkie or an ape. Scimietta, a little munkie or ape. Sciminesco, a pish, foolish, munkish. Scimionate, a pish tricks, munkish toyes, foolish conceits. Scimione, a great ape or munkie. Scimiótto, a good, faire, handsome ape or munkie. Scimitara, Scimitarra, a turkish or per∣sian crooked sword, a Simitar. Scimoniere, a foolish, fond, apish fel∣low. Scimonito, apish, foolish, simple, doting. Also a foole, a gull, a ninnie, a patch, a coxecombe. Scimunito, as Scimonito. Scinco, a kinde of land Crocodill along the riuer of Nilus. Scindere, scindo, scisi, sciso, to cut or riue in sunder, to cut off, to teare, or rent. Scingere, scingo, scinsi, scinto, to vn∣guirt, to vncompasse. Scinto, vnguirt, vnguirdled, vncom∣passed. Scintilla, a sparke or sparkle of fire, a twinkling. Scintillante, sparkling, or twinkling. Al∣so sprinkling as new wine leaping in a cup. Scintillare, to sparke, to sparkle, to twinkle. Scintilletta, a little sparkle, or twink∣ling. Scioccheggiare, to play the foole or noddie, to raue or play the mad man. Scioccheria, as Sciocchezza. Sciocchézza, follie, foolishnes, simpli∣citie, rauing. Sciócco, a foole, a noddie, a gull, an idiot, a meacock. Also foolish, or simple, or sottish. Scioccone, as Moccicone. Sciógliere, sciólgo, sciólsi, sciólto, to loose, to free, to vnsnare, to quit, to dis∣charge, to dissolue, to vntye, to vn∣tangle. Sciographia, a description of a whole frame and conueyance of euery roome. Scióllare, to spoile, to marre, to waste, to ruine, to flawe, to splint, to shiuer, to riue. Scióllo, spoiled, mard, wasted, ruined, flawne, splinted, shiuered, riued. Scioloppare, as Sciloppare. Scioltezza, loosenes, libertie, freedome, nimblenes, licentiousnes. Sciólto, loose, free, quit, discharged, vn∣snared, at libertie, nimble, quick, vn∣tide, vntangled, licentious. also a kinde of loose verse so called in Italian, a blanke verse. Scioltura, as Scioltezza. Sciomante, a soothsayer by shadowes. Sciomantia, diuination practised by shadowes. Scioni, whirlepooles in the sea. Scioperaggine, idlenes, retchlesnes, la∣zines, fondnes, lithernes. Scioperare, to loyter, to be idle. Scioperataggine, as Scioperaggine. Scioperato, idle, retchlesse, fond, lazie, doing nothing. Sciopério, as Scioperaggine. Scioperone, an idle, lazie, loitring fel∣low. Sciorare, as Sciorinare, as Sciornare. Sciorinare, to hang out clothes in the ayre, to ayre, or coole in the winde. also to burst forth in laughter, to poure, to streame, to purle, to bubble, to gush or pisse forth as water doth, to pisse or make water. Also to soare in the winde as a hauke doth. Sciórre, as Sciógliere. Sciórrere, sciorro, sciorsi, sciorru∣to, to sweepe with a broome, to brush cleane. Sciórro, a Squirrell. Sciosciare, to blowe with a paire of bel∣lowes. Sciosciatore, a paire of bellowes, a blower. Sciotério, an instrument to cast a sha∣dowe. Scióuere, sciouo, sciouei, sciouuto, to breake vp the ground after it is dungd, to let it lye fallow. Sciouuto, broken vp the ground to let it lye fallow. Scipa, a sheepe. Also a gull, a noddie, an idiot, a sillie fellow. Scipare, to play the gull or noddie, as Stir∣pare, as Scialacquare. Scipidezza, as Insipidezza. Scipignate, blowes, stripes, thumps, bangs, claps. Scipire, pisco, pito, as Scialacquare. Also to ripen till it be mellow or rotten. Scirico, a colour mixt with Sinoper and ruddle, a blunket or light watchet. Scirignate, as Scipignate. Scirio, a kinde of stone, which being whole swimmeth vpon the water, and broken sinketh downe. Sciro, a hard swelling in the flesh, caused by cold and fleame. Scirócco, the south-east winde. Sciropare, as Scilopare. Sciroppate, all manner of wet suckets. Sometimes vsed for dry suckets. Sciróppo, any kinde of scirop. Scirpi, captious and subtile sentences. Scirro, an hard swelling without paine growne in the flesh within the skinne, caused through choler, or through thick, cold, and clammie fleame. Scirroma, hardnes in any part of the bo∣die, namely in the liuer. Scirrosi, a disease in the eye hauing flesh growne in or about them somewhat blue. Scischiare, to blowe with a paire of bel∣lowes. Scischiatore, a paire of bellowes, a blower. Scisma, a schisme or diuision in church matters. Scismático, schismaticall, or dissentious in matters of religion. Scisso, deuided, sundred, separated, or cut in sunder. Also a diuision, a sundring or separation. Scissura, ruine, spoile, hauocke, slashing,
sundring or confusion. Scitala, certaine letters or characters in cyphers vsed among the Grecians. Also a kinde of darting weapon with wilde fire in it. Also a kinde of song among the Grecians. Also a kinde of serpent that hath a backe of a maruellous gli∣string colour. Some take it also for a kinde of mouse. Scitalca, as Scitala. Scitale, a serpent, which being very slowe in creeping, staieth those with the mar∣uellous varietie of the speckes of his backe, whom otherwise he cannot ouer∣take. Scitamento, a pleasantnes, or any wittie inuention to adorne ones talke. Scitare, to despaire, to fall in desperation. Vsed also for to aske or demand things secret and vnknowne. Scito, an ordinance, a decree, or statute. Also an apophthegme or sentence. Also wise, prettie, quaint, feate, trim, skilful, cunning, gaie, gallant, proper, goodly, iollie, faire, beautifull. Sciugamano, a wiper or hand-towell. Sciugauiso, a headcloth, a face or head-towell. Sciugaggine, drines, drought, or parching heate. Sciugare, to dry, to rub, or wipe dry. Sciugatóio, a hand-towell, a wiper, a rubbing cloth. Sciugulare, as Sciugare. Also to slip, to slide, to slicke, or smooth. Sciugulatóio, as Sciugatóio. Also a slickstone. Sciumazzo, as Schiamazzo. Sciuro, a kinde of wilde beast. Sciutto, drie, wiped drie, dride. Sclaréa, the herbe Clarie. Sclerocefalo, a kind of vermine or worm. Sclinite, a precious stone which vpō white shineth yellowe, and hath the image of the moone in it, which encreaseth and waneth as the moone in the firmament. Sclopendra, as Scolopendra. Sclusa, a water-sluce. Scócca, the bit of a bridle or snaffle. Scoazze, all maner of sweepings or filth. Scóbbia, a kinde of iron toole that car∣penters vse. Scocatolo, a squirrell. Scoccare, to snap or loose an arrow out of a bowe, to clap, to snap, to poppe, to clicke, to smite, or burst foorth. Scócchi, a kinde of souldiers or outlawes vpon the mountaines of Sclauonia, con∣tinually warring vpon the Turkes. Scoccolato, huge, immense, boundles, vn∣measurable great. Scoccoueggiare, as Galeffare. Scodato, shaken or wagd the taile. Also without a taile. Scodélla, a dish, a porenger, a treene-dish, a little platter. Scodellaio, a dish-maker. Scodellare, to dish, to keech vp, or put in∣to dishes, either meate or potage. Scodellino, a little dish or sawcer. Scodolato, as Scodato. Scoffione, a quoife, a biggin, or a caule, a kercher. Scófole, as Scrófole. Scoffoni, gamashes worne in winter, or vpper-stockins. Scogliare, to geld or splaie anie creature. Scóglio, a rocke, a cliffe or shelfe in the sea. Scoglionare, to gelde, or splaie any crea∣ture, to cut off ones priuie members. Scoglionato, gelded, splaide. Also a gel∣ding, without his priuie members. Scoglioso, rockie, cliffie, stonie, or full of shelues. Scoiátolo, a squirrell. Scóio, as Scóglio. Also an apron. Also a shaking or a shiuering. Scoiuólo, a squirrell. Scóla, a schoole, or colledge. Also the sect or opinion of any sect of philosophers. Also a lesson or disputation betweene the master and the scholler. Scoladura, hath beene vsed for the run∣ning of the reines, any dripping, trilling, or dropping. Also a running out, or a leake in a ship. Scolaio, hath been vsed for a scholler or a disciple. Scolamento, as Scoladura, as Scolati∣one. Scolare, a scholler, a disciple. Also to run, to trill, to straine or drop through a co∣lander, to vnglue, and properly to leake as a ship doth. Scolaresco, as Scolastico. Scolastério, a schoole, a schoole-house. Scolástico, scholasticall, or scholler-like, of or belonging to a scholer, or schooles. Scolatione di reni, the running of the reines. Scolatione di ócchij, the running or dropping of the eies. Scolatóio, a colander, a gutter, a sinke or any conueiance of water, a strainer. Scolatóio di vna città, a common sinke, gutter or shore of a citie. Scolecio, a kind of worme. Scolature, droppings, runnings, or tril∣lings. Also the skirts of a long gar∣ment. Also ise-sickles. Scoletio, a kinde of noysome worme. Scólia, Scólio, a close, short, and compen∣dious exposition. Scoliare, as Glosare. Scoliantidatilo, a foote of a verse of sixe syllables. Scolio coréo, a foot of a verse of sixe syl∣lables. Scolimo, a kinde of sow-thistle. Scolo di latte, butter-milke or whaie. Scolopéndra, an eare-wigge, or long eare creeper. Also stone-ferne, spleene∣woort, miltwaste, or skale-ferne, fin∣ger-ferne, stone-woort, or Ceterach. Scolopéndro, a fish that casteth out his bowels vntill the hooe wherewith he is taken be out, and then sucketh them vp againe. Scolopomachério, an instrument ser∣uing to cut out the rootes of vlcers or sores, called of our surgeons the incision knife, or gammot. Scoloramento, a discolouring, a growing pale or sallowe. Scolorare, to discolour, to waxe pale or wanne. Scolorarsi, to become sodainly wanne or pale. Scolorire, risco, rito, as Scolorare. Scolpare, to excuse, to acquit, to cleere from any blame. Scolpéuole, vnguiltie, cleane, vnfaultie, blameles. Scolpíre, pisco, pito, to carue, to engraue, to cut in, to enchase. Scoltore, a caruer, a cutter, a grauer, a sculpter. Scoltura, the arte of caruing, cutting, or engrauing or sculpture. Scolturesca arte, the arte of caruing or engrauing. Scomagnare, to compasse or go rounde, to encircle. Scombauare, to beslauer, to driuell, to sniuell. Scomberéllo, as Haustorio. Scombiccherare, as Schiccherare. Scombicchiare, as Schiccherare. Scombigliare, as Scompigliare. Scombiglio, as Scompiglio. Scombro, the fish called a makrell. Scomigliare, to vncouer, to vnhill. Scomiglio, an vncouering, an vnhilling. Scomina, a sentence spoken in mirth that soundeth otherwise then it is ment by the speaker. Scommessa, a bet, a lay, a wager. Scomméttere, metto, misi, messo, to lay a wager, to wage, to lay or bet in game or play. Also to disorder, to confound, to remoue away, to misplace. Also to comit to ones charge, or to inoine▪ also to offend
or trespasse, to bring to contention, to pro∣uoke or stir. Also to confiscate or forfeit. Scommesso, laid a wager, laide or betted in playe. disordered, misplaced, confoun∣ded. loose, disiointed, readie to fall. Scommettitore, a better or layer of wa∣gers, a confounder, a disordrer. Scomodare, as Incomodare. Scomodità, as Incomodità. Scómodo, as Incómodo. Scomóuere, muóuo, móssi, mósso, to disorder or put out of ioint, to misplace. Scomósso, disordred, mooued, misplaced or put out of ioint. Scompagnare, to sunder, to seuer, to di∣uorce, to disaccompanie. Scompagnato, sundred, seuered, diuor∣ced, alone, without companie. Scompagnatura, a separation, a diuor∣cing or diuision. Scomparire, to vanish out of sight. Scompartire, tisco, tito, to diuide, to sun∣der. Also to compart vsed in armorie. Scompigliare, to confound, to disturbe, to disquiet, to trouble with a hurly-burly or vprore. Scompigliatamente, confusedly, disor∣derly, pell-mell. Scompiglio, vprore, hurly-burly, pell-mll, confusion. Scompisciamento, a bepissing. Scompisciare, to bepisse, to beraie with pisse. Scomunica, an excommunication. Scomunicare, to excommunicate. Scomunicatione, an excommunication. Scomuzzolo, as Boccata. Sconcacare, to beray, to becacke, to be∣shite. Sconcertato, disordered, out of une, con∣fused. Sconcérto, rashnes, inconsideratenes, fol∣ly, disorder, pell-mell, confusion. Sconchiuso, broken, vnconcluded, vncer∣taine. Sconciamente, vgly, greatly, monstrous∣ly, hugely, beyond measure, disorderly, confusedly, vnhandsomely, unger-like. also vntimely, abortiuely, as when a wo∣man is brought a bed before hir time. Sconciare, to miscarie as a woman doth when she is brought a bed before hir time, to put any part of the bodie out of ioint, to mar, to spoile, to disorder, to trouble, to incommode, to molest, to vex, to distresse. Sconciatamente, as Sconciamente. Sconciatura, a mischance or abortiue de∣liuerie afore time. Sconcio, miscaried, commen abortiuely, vntimely, vnioynted, put out of ioint, ill vsed, ill handled, ill drest, spoiled, mard, vnhandsome, foule, ilfauouredly, vgly, lubber-like. trouble, vexation, tedious∣nes, molestation, disorder. absurde, foo∣lish. Also a mishap, an ill luck. Sconcordanza, a discord, a discordance. Sconcordare, to disaccord, to disagree. Scondaruole, a play that children vse as we say at hoodman blind or foxe in the hole. Sconficcare, to breake vp by force, to breake open. Sconfiggere, figgo, fissi, fitto, to discom∣fite or ouerthrow in fight, to vanquish, to confound. Sconfitto, disconfited, put to flight, van∣quished, ouerthrowen, broken, confoun∣ded, disordered, wasted. Sconfitta, an ouerthrow, a disconfiture. Sconfóndere, fondo, fondei, fonduto, to confound, to put to confusion. Sconfonduto, confounded, put to confu∣sion. Sconfondimento, a confounding, a con∣fusion. Sconfortare, to disconfort, to disswade. Sconfórto, a disconfort, a disswasion. Scongiura, a coniuration, a conspiracie. Scongiurare, to coniure, to conspire, to vrge. Scongiuratore, a conspirer, a coniurer, an vrger. Scongiúro, a coniuring. Sconóscere, nosco, nobbi, nosciuto, to disacknowledge, to forget, to be vn∣thankefull. Sconosciuto, disacknowledged, forgotten, become vnthankefull. Also disguised, or vnknowen, vncouth. Sconoscénte, forgetfull, vnthankeful, vn∣gratefull. Sconoscénza, forgetfulnes, vnthanke∣fulnes, ingratitude, vnacknowledge∣ment. Sconquassare, as Conquassare. Also to rumble. Sconquasso, a tossing, a tumbling, a hur∣ly-burly, an vprore, a commotion. Sconquazzare, as Squaccarare, to tosse, to hauock, to breake, to crush, to dash, to bruse, to riot, to waste, to confound. Sconscientiato, conscience-lesse, without conscience. Sconsertare, to disorder, to bring out of frame, tune and order. Sconsideraggine, indiscretion, inconside∣ration. Sconsideratione, inconsideratenes, indis∣cretion. Sconsiderato, in considerate, indiscreete, rash. Sconsigliare, to disswade, to discounsell. Sconsolare, to discomfort, to disswade. Sconsolato, discomforted, disswaded, af∣flicted. Sconsolatione, a discomfort or disswa∣sion. Scontare, to reckon, to cast vp reckonings, to defalke or abate in reckonings. Scontentare, to discontent, to displease. Scontentezza, discontentment. Scontento, discontentment, displeasure. Also discontent. Sconto, an abatemement in reckoning. Scontórcere, tórco, tórsi, tórto, to shrug, to wriggle, to turne or stir about, to writhe. Also as Nicchiare. Scontórto, shrugd, wriggled, turned or stirred about, wreathed. Scontorcimento, a shrugging, a wrig∣gling, a turning, stirring or tossing. Scontrafatto, counterfeite, deformed, mangled, defaced. Scontrare, to incounter, to meet, to shocke, to butte. Scontro, an incounter, a meeting, a shocke, an affront. Sconturbare, to disturbe, to vexe, to mo∣lest. Sconuenéuole, vnmeete, vnconuenient, vncomely, vnbeseeming. Sconueneuolezza, disconuenience, vn∣seemelines, vncomelines. Sconueniénte, as Sconueneuole, an in∣conuenience. Sconueníre, vengo, venni, venuto, to mubeseeme, to be vnmeete. Sconuenuto, misbeseemed, vnmeete, vn∣seemed. Sconuersare, to disaccompanie, to vnfre∣quent. Sconuersatione, a disaccompanying, an vnfrequenting. Sconuiéne, it is vnconuenient. Sconuólgere, vólgo, vólsi, vólto, to tumble, to tosse, to ouerwhelme, to o∣uerturne. Sconuólto, turned, tossed, ouerwhelmed, ouerturned. Sconuólgimento, a turning, a tossing, an ouerwhelming, an ouerturning. Sconza, a kinde of leauen vsed to leauen bread. Scopa, a broome, a beesome, a brush to sweepe withall. Scopare, to sweepe, to besome, to brush, to whip, to scourge or beate with rods. Also to rouze, to vndenne, to vnkenell, or fetch forth from any corner. Scopare il cannone, to skoure a can∣non. Scoparegia, a kind of bramble, shrub, or
brier that they make broomes with. Scoparo, a broome-maker, a brush-ma∣ker. Scoparóla, a brush, or little broome. Scopatore, a sweeper, a brusher, a whip∣per, a scourger. Also a skauenger. Scopazzara, a place where all sweepings and filth is cast. Scopazze, sweepings or filth, or rubbish. Scopazzo, as Scopazzara. Scoperchiare, to discouer, to vncouer, to vnhill. Scoperchiatura, a discouerie, an vn∣couering. Scopérto, Looke Scoprire. Scopetta, any kinde of brush or little broome. Scopettare, to brush or to sweepe. Scopettaro, a brush-maker. Scopettiére, a brush-maker. Scópo, a marke or but to shoote at▪ a scope, purpose, intent or roome, the end or marke whereat ones purpose is di∣rected, or aymed at. Also a kinde of tree or wood. Scópola, any kinde of brush, namely such as painters or pargetters vse. Also as Scópule. Scopoladore, a kinde of iron toole that smithes vse. Scopolare, to sweepe or brush. Scópolo, as Scópulo. Scopoloso, as Scopuloso. Scoppa, a Wesell. Scoppare, to vntile, to vnslate, to vn∣couer a house. Also to braine, to knock out ones braines, to knock one on the head as a butcher doth an oxe. Scoppetta, as Scopetta. Scoppettare, as Scopettare, as Schiop∣pettare. Scoppettina, as Scopetta. Scoppiare, as Schioppare. Scoppiare dalle risa, to burst out with laughing. Scoppettata, as Schioppettata. Scoppettiere, as Schioppettaro. Scoppietto, as Schioppetto. Scoppiettare, as Schioppettare. Scoppettaro, as Schioppettaro. Scóppio, as Schióppo. Scoppione, a great handgun, caliuer, musket or mortare. Also any great crack or violent bursting. Scoprire, cópro, copérsi, copérto, to discouer, to disclose, to reueale, to vn∣couer, to vnhill. Scopérto, discouered, disclosed, reuealed, vncouered, vnhild. Scopérta, Alla scopérta, manifestlie, openlie, in view. Also a discouerie. Scopritore, a discouerer. Scópule, the shoulder blades, two broade bones comming from the neck to the shoulders on both sides. Scópulo, a rock, a danger, a sea marke. Also a bunch, a knob, a knot. Scopuloso, full of rocks, shelfs, flats, or dangers by sea. Scorare, to discourage, to vnharten. Scorbacchiare, as Sgarare. Scorciare, to shorten, to abridge, to a∣bate, to curtall. Scorciatura, a shortning, a curtalling. Scorcio, as Scurzo. Scordare, to forget, to put out of tune, to vnstring, to disagree. Scordato, forgotten, put out of tune, vn∣strung, disagreed. Scordanza, forgetfulnes, obliuion, a dis∣cordance. Scordéuole, forgetfull, obliuious. Scórdio, the hearbe called water-ger∣mander, or Scordion, hauing leaues like common Germander but larger, and the stalke fouresquare, hauing somewhat the taste like garlike. Scoreggiare, to whip, or to scourge, to stripe. Scoreggiata, a whip or a scourge. Also a whipping or a scourging, a stripe. Scorfanéllo, a fish called in latine Scor∣pena. Scórfano, as Scorfanéllo. Scorfoglio, the rinde of a pomegranate. Scórgere, scórgo, scorgei, scorgiuto, or scorto, to perceiue or be aware of, to guide, to leade, to direct, to shew. Scorgiuto, Scórto, perceiued or bin a∣ware of, guided, lead, directed, showen. Scorgimento, warines, foresight, con∣ceite, a direction or a guiding. Scorgitore, a perceiuer, a guide, a di∣rector, a leader. Scoria, a scourge, a whip, a rod. also drosse, dregs, froth, or skum of any mettall tride by fire. Scoriada, as Scoria. Also a whipping or a scourging. Scoriare, to whip, to scourge. also to skum any mettall being moulten. Scoriata, as Scoriada. Scorlare, to shake, to tosse, to tug. Scorlatura, a shaking, a tossing, a tug∣ging. Scorliere, a ladle or a spoone, a melting ladle. Scorlo, as Scorlatura. Scornacchiare, as Sgarare. Scornare, to skorne, to vilifie, to abhorre, to mock, to deride. Scornéuole, skornefull, to be skorned. Scórno, skorne, a mock, a flout. Scorodo, Garlike or Cresses. Scorodopraso, an hearbe like a leeke or scallion, and hauing the qualities of them. Scoroma, a disease in the head when all things seeme to be round. Scorpacciata, a good full feeding, a panch full, a bellie full. Scorpare, Scorpacciare, to make good cheere, to glut ones gorge, to make ones bellie his god. Also to vnbody. Scorpena, a kinde of fish about Mar∣seilles in France, where they call it Scorpena. Scorpione, a venemous worme called a Scorpion, hauing seauen feete, and stri∣keth with his tayle, euer seeking occa∣sion to strike. Also one of the twelue Signes in the Zodiake. Also an instru∣ment of warre like a Scorpion that shoo∣teth small arrowes and quarels. Also the name of a toole that tooth-drawers vse ordinarily to pull out teeth with. Also a kinde of sea fish. Also a kinde of herbe hauing seedes like a Scorpions tayle, and very few leaues, which is forcible against the sting of that vene∣mous worme. Also a kinde of whip ha∣uing plumments of leade at the ends of the cords to whip slaues and offendors with. Scorpióide, scorpion woort, or scorpion grasse. Scorpion herba, turnesole, or wart woort. Scorraria, as Scorreria. Scorreggiare, as Scoreggiare. Scorreggiata, as Scoreggiata. Scorréggere, réggo, réssi, rétto, to mar, disorder, or vncorrect. Scórrere, corro, corsi, corso, to ouer∣run, to peruse, to runne heere and there, to gad, to wander, to roue or roame to and fro. also to slide or glide vpō the ise. Scorrenza di corpo, a lake, running fluxe, or loosenes in the body. Scorreria, an excursion, an outrode, a running to and fro. Scorrettione, an incorrection or marring of any thing. Scorrétto, vncorrected, vnpolished, rude, rough. Scorrettore, a spoiler, a marrer of anie thing, a disorrer. Scorribanda, a sidewalke, about, a walke, a turne, a turne and away. Scorritore, an outrunner, a gadder to and fro. Also running, sliding, loose. a run∣ning vp and downe. Scorrómpere, rompo, ruppi, rotto, to
breake, to corrupt, to breake forth. Scorrotto, corrupted, polluted, defiled. Scorrubbiare, to chafe, to fret, to curse, to ban, to huffe and snuffe, to sweare, to dodge, to wrangle, to chafe aloude that all may heare. Scorsa, as Scorreria. also a course in run∣ning. Scorso, ouerrun, perused, runne heere and there, gadded, wandred, roaued, roamed. Scórta, a guide, a direction, a leading, a conuoie, a conduct. Scortare, as Scorciare. Scortatura, as Scorciatura. Scortegianato, vncourted, vnfauned vpon, left off the habite of a courtier. Scorrese, discourteous, vnciuill, barba∣rous. Scortesia, a discourtesie, an vnkindnes, an vnciuilitie. Scorticare, to flea the skin off, to rub or gall off the skin. Scórticaporcélli, a fleaer of hogs, a base rascall. Scorticato, fleade, rubd, or galled the skin off. Scorticatore, a fleaer of the skin off. Scorticamento, a gall or fleaing the skin off. Scorticatóio, a kind of toole that women vse to rubbe and make their skin smooth with. Scorticatura, a fleaing or a gall. Scortigianare, to forsake, or renounce to be a courtier or a curtizan. Scórto, perceiued or bin aware of, guided, lead, brought, directed. Scorrucciare, to anger, to fret, to rage. Scorrucciato, angrie, fretted, raged, wroth. Scorruccio, anger, wrath, rage, ire, fret∣ting. Scorruccioso, angrie, wrathfull, raging, irefull. Scorsa, a running, a gadding. looke Scor∣rere. Scórza, the barke or rinde of any tree, the paring of any fruite. also any outwarde garment. also the exterior part or mor∣tall vaile of mankind. also an egge shel, a huske, or any other shell or shale, or pilling or paring, a skale of any thing, any skin. Also taken for a base alehouse, tipling-house, or such pot-house. Scórza di san Pietto, a cloke in rogues language or pedlers french. Scorzare, to pare, to shaue the barke of trees, of fruite or any thing else. Also to depriue or bereaue of life. Also to flea the skin off. Scorzetta, a thin rinde, barke, shale, shell, paring, &c. Scórzo, as Scórza, as Scorzone. Scórzo di serpe, the skin of a snake. Scorzone, a snake, an adder, a serpent that is very venemous & hath a square head. Scorzonéra, an herbe against poison, cal∣led in latine Hiperbaton. Scorzoso, rugged, rough, harde, full of barke or rynde. Scosagna, any kinde of lurking or hiding in hugger-mugger, a lurking hole. Scoscéndere, scéndo, scési, scéso, o tumble or rumble, or come downe a hill ruinouslie. Also to breake, to riue or burst, or cleaue a sunder. Scoscéso, tumbed, rumbled, or come downe a hill ruinously, broken, riuen, burst, or cleft a sunder. Also rugged, steepie, stonie, rockie, ruinous. Scoscesamente, ruggedly, ruinously, steepely, craggily, rockily. Scoscesi, rockes, steepes, cragges, cliffes, ruines. Scoscientiato, inhumane, without con∣science. Scóscio, as Scosceso, and as Scósso. Scóssa, a shaking, a rouzing, a tossing, a trembling, a rumbling, a tottring, a ruine, an ouerthrow. Scossale, a womans apron. Scossalino, Scossaletto, a little apron. Scossare, to shake, to tosse, to rumble. Scossatóio, a sieue, a crib, a winnowe, a fan to fan or winnow corne with. Scósso, shaken, tossed, rumbled, redeemed, rescued, ransomed, or leuied money. also a shaking or a tossing, tottred. Scóstare as Discóstare. Scostarsi, to separate, to eslonge, or go farre off. Scostio, a quicke, a sodaine or hastie moo∣uing. Scostumare, to disaccustome or loose a woont or fashion. Scostumato, disaccustomed, vnmanner∣ly, vntaught, vnciuill, rude. Scotano, a red wood called brasill or fer∣nanbucke. Scotéllo, as Scodélla. Scotellino, as Scodellino. Scotenare, to flea or vnskin. Scótere, as Scuótere. Scotie, a kinde of fruite in Italy. Scotolare, to shake, to tosse, to rumble. Scotoma, a disease in the head which makes all things to seeme round. Scotonato, bare, threadbare, without a nap or cotton. Scothonia, a dimnes or inflammation in the eies. Scótta, a chough or a dawe, a rooke. Also the name of a roape in a ship. Scóttare, to scalde, to burne, to parch, to sing. Scottatura, a scalding, a burning, a par∣ching, a singing. Scotteggiare, to flutter as a birde before it can flie well. Scótto, a shot, or rekoning for meate and drinke. Also a kinde of course woollen stuffe. Scoua, as Scopa. Scouare, as Scopare. Scouaro, as Scoparo. Scouatore, as Scopatore. Scouazzara, as Scopazzara. Scouazze, as Scopazze. Scouazzo, as Scopazzara. Scouetta, as Scopetta. Scouettare, as Scopettare. Scouerchiare, to discouer, to vncouer. Scouiglie, all maner of kitchin stuffe, filth or sweepings. Scouola, a brush or little broome. Scouolare, to brush or sweepe. Scouérta, as Scopérta. Scouérto, as Scopérto. Scourire, as Scoprire. Scozzare, to separate, to sunder, to dis∣ioyne, to scatter. Scozzonare, to breake a coult. Also to coarse or change a horse. Scozzonato, broken a coult, coarsed a horse. also as craftie, as knauish, as sub∣till, or as slie as a horse-coarser, broken to all knauerie. Squérro, the toole of a shipwright. Scranna, a lowe stoole. Also a close stoole. Screare, to straine ones throte to spit, or to fetch vp fleame from the stomacke. Scredénte, vnbeleeuing, a miscreant. Scremire, as Schermire. Scremitore, as Schermitore. Scretiati panni, ragd, rent, tottred, torne clothes, iagged, cut, partie coloured. Scrétio, as Scritio. Scriba, a scribe, a writer, a scriuener, a clarke, a secretarie, a notarie. Scribattare, as Scriuacchiare. Scricciolare, to schreeke, or shrik, to pule, to chirpe. Scrícciola, a little bird called a wren. Scrignare, to make crooked, bunchie, or knobbie. Also to vnchest, to pull out of coffins, to vnshrine. Scrignata, a blow or whirret on the nose. Scrignétto, a little coffin, shrine, chest, trunke or deske, a little bunch or croope vpon ones backe. Scrígno, a shrine, a coffin, a standard, a chesi, a trunke, or a deske, a casket or
other such thing wherein iewels and se∣cret things are kept. Also crooked, lame, halting, maimed. Also a bunch or croope vpon ones backe as a camell hath. Scrígnolo, as Scrignetto. Scrignuto, crookt-backe, croopt, bunch-backt, as camels be. Scrignuto naso, a camoset, a flat-nose, a nose like a scotch-saddle. Scrima, the arte of fence or fencing. Scrimaglia, as Scrima. Scrimatore, as Schermitore. Scrimare, as Schermire. Scrimaruólo, a fencer, a master of fence. Scrimia, as Scrima. Scrimiare, as Schermire. Scrimiatore, as Schermitore. Scriminale, the seares or nares of a hauk. Also a pin or bodkin that women vse to diuide and shed their haires with when they dresse their heads. Scriminatura, the shedding or diuiding of a womans haires of a head. Scriptolo, a kinde of weight so called in Italy. Scristianare, to forsake or renounce ones christendom. Scritiare, to spot with diuers colours. Also to lace, fringe or garde garments. Scritiati, Looke Scretiati. Scritio, Scretio, a braule, a hurly-burly, a breach, a squaring, a rupture. Scritta, written, a writing, a writ, a bill, a schedule, a manuscript. Scrittarello, a writ, a scroule, a schedule, a bill, a band writing or note of ones hand. Scrittarino, as Scrittaréllo. Scritto, as Scritta. Scrittóio, a standish, an inke-horne. Also a counting house or writing house. Scrittore, a writer, a scriuener, a scribe, a secretarie, a cleark. Scrittoria, a scriueners shop. the arte of writing. Scrittorista, as Scritturista. Scrittura, scripture, a writing, a writte, the writing or making of a booke. the stile or maner of the writing of any author. Also any kind of indenture, eui∣dence or hand-writing. Scritturale, of or pertaining to scriptures or writing. Scritture, scriptures, writings, writs, eui∣dences, records. Scriturista, a great reader of holy scrip∣tures or professor of them. Scriuacchiare, to scribble, to write foo∣lishly. Scriuano, a scriuener, a writer, a scribe, a clerke, a notarie, a secretarie. Scriuere, scriuo, scrissi, scritto, to write, to scribe, to scribble. Scrizzótto, as Gonfiatóio. Also a reede that cookes vse to blow the pudding guts before they fill them. Also a funnell or fil-bole to fill puddings. Scroba, a kind of bird that digs a hole vn∣der the ground to lay her egs in. Scroccante, a tall trencherd man, a smell feast, a good feeder, a babbler, a pratler, a bold, presumptuous, saucie shifter for his victuals. Scroccáre, to strike sodainly as the clocke doth, as Schioppare. Also to feed care∣lesly, as one that paies nothing for his commons, to shift for. Scroccatore, as Scroccante. Scrocchetto, a shifting for meate and drinke. a little scrocco. Scrócco, a snap, a clicke, a pop, a snap∣hance of a caliuer. Mangiare a scroc∣co, to feede scot-free at another mans charge, a shift or shifting for. Also as we say a shift, a robbing of Peter to paie Paule, a shift for belly cheere. Scroccolare, to cracke, to clicke as the ioints of some mens fingers will do. Scroccone, a foolish, idle, loitring fellow, a babbler, a pratler, a good feeder, one that loues to heare none speake but him∣selfe, as Scroccante. Scrofa, a sow, a farrowing sow, a pigge∣sow. Scrofano, as Scrofanéllo. Scrofetta, a little sow. Scroffa, a sow, a farrowing sow. Scrofola, idem. Scrofolare, to farrow or to pig. Scrófole, a disease called the Kings euill, a wen or swelling in the necke. Scrofularia, the herbe blinde nettle, fig-woort or water betonie. Scrofule, as Scrófole. Scrollare, to shake downe, to tosse, to wagge. Scrollatura, a shaking, a tossing, a wag∣ging. Scróllo, as Scrollatura. Scrópolo, as Scrupolo. Scropoloso, as Scrupoloso. Also rugged, grettie, harsh. Scrostare, to pare off the crust of anie thing. Scróto, the outward skin of the cods wher∣in be the stones of a man. Scróuola, a farrowing sow. Scrouole, as Scrófole. Scrouoloso, one that hath the Kings euill. Scrunata, without an eie, as some needles are. Scrúpolo, any little sharpe stone. Also a doubt, a scruple of conscience, spicednes of conscience, a difficultie, a care, a trou∣ble, a menes or precisenes vpon strickt points. Also a little poise or waight cal∣led a scruple, and is twentie graines of corne, the third part of a dragme. Also vsed for a measure of ground contai∣ning an hundred foote square. Scrupolosità, curiousnes of conscience, scrupulositie, anxietie, spicednes of con∣science. Scrupoloso, scrupolous, doubtfull, curious in trifles, of a spiced conscience, ll of doubts. Also hard, grettie, harsh, rug∣ged, full of little grauell stones. Scruposo, full of little grauell stones. Scrutatione, a searching. Scrutatore, a searcher, a scrutatore. Scrutinare, to scrutinie or search out by scrutinie, to seeke and inquire out dili∣gently, to bolt out, to trace out, to follow by sent as hounds do. Scrutinio, a scrutinie, a searching. Scuarcóia, filthie, grizly, gastly, horrible and horride to looke vpon. Scucherare, to burst foorth in laughing. Scuccione, an escutcheon of armes. Scudaia, a beast creeping called a tortoise. Scudare, to shield, to shelter, to couer or hide with a buckler. Scudélla, as Scodélla. Scudellaio, as Scodellaio. Scudellare, as Scodellare. Scudellino, as Scodellino. Scudellone, a great ilfauoured dish, boule or traie. Scudetto, a little shield or buckler. Scudiére, Scudiéro, a squire, an esquire, a seruant, a groome, a waiter, a quirie of a stable, a noble mans master or gen∣tleman of the horse. Scudisci.   Scudiscire, scisco, scito, to rip or seame-rent. Scudo, a shield, a target, a buckler, a scut∣chion. Also a defence, a shelter, a shroud. Also a coine called a crowne. Scudo del sole, a french crowne, a crowne soll. Scudone, a great shield or target, &c. Scuffia, a coife, a caule, a biggin, a hood or other womans head attire. Scuffiare, to coife or caule a womans head. Scuffine, a goldsmiths toole or file. Scuffione, a great coife, caule, hood, couer-shef or biggin. Sculacciare, to clap on the buttocks. Sculacciate, claps, clappings or strokes on the buttocks. Sculpire, as Scolpire. Scultore, as Scolpitore.
Scultura, as Scoltura. Scuóiare, to vnskin, to flea or galle the skin off. Scuóla, as Scola. Scuolare, as Scolare. Scuotere, scuóto, scóssi, scósso, to shake, to tosse, to tumble, to totter or clatter. Also to receiue, to rescue. to leuie monie. Scuótere il pelliccione, to ginicomtwig or occupie a woman. Scuóter il pelliccino, to shake out all, to emptie the bag euen to the little eares or corners of sacks, to vtter all, to tell all one knowes. Scuótare il pesco, to follow leacherie, es∣pecially boyes. Scuotitore, a shaker, a tosser. a redeemer, a resuer. Scuotimento, as Scóssa. Scuraccio, a skouring cloth, a dish-clout, a skourer, a rubber. Scuraccino, a little skouring cloth, dish-clout, or skourer. Scuradenti, a tooth-pick, a rubber for the teeth. Scuralo, a Squirrell. Scurapola, a dawe, or a chough. Scurare, to darken, to obscure. Also to skoure dishes, to rub or cleanse harnesse. Looke Oscurare. Scuratore, a skourer, a rubber of har∣nesse. Scurcio, Scurzo, a word common to architects. Scure, an axe, an adze, a hatchet. Scurechetto.   Scuriada, Scuriata, as Scoriata. Scuriare, as Scoriare. Scuriato, a Squirrell. Also whipt or scourged. Scuriátolo, a Squirrell. Scurino, a little hatchet. Scuriscioso, darke, darkish, obscure. Scurità, obscuritie, darkenes. Looke Os∣curità. Scuro, obscure, darke, darkish. also darke∣nes, obscuritie. Looke Oscuro. Scúrolo, a tabernacle or place in a church to put and keepe holie reliques in. Scurrile, scurrill, skoffing, saucie, vn∣cleane, railing, belonging to scurri∣litie. Scurrilità, immoderat iesting, or skoffing, or scurrilitie. Scurzo, something or part about a buil∣ding. Scusa, an excuse. Scusare, to excuse. Scusabile, excusable, that may be ex∣cused. Scusatione, an excuse. Scuseuole, as Scusabile. Scuscire, scisco, scito, to rip, to seame-rent, to vnsow. Scuscito, ripped, seame-rent, or vn∣sowen. Scuscitura, a ripping, a seame-rent. Scusire, as Scuscire. Scusitura, as Scuscitura. Scutica, a whip, a rod, a scourge. Scuticare, to whip, to scourge. Scuticata, a whipping, a scourging, a stripe or print of a whipping. Scutice, a ripping, or a seame rent. Sdebitare, to come out of debt, to vndebt, to free or quit one. Sdegnaiuóo, a nice, coy, homorous fel∣low, that for a straw will take pepper in the nose. Sdegnare, to disdaine, to detest, to ab∣horre, to shun, to skorne, to be or make angrie, to vexe. Sdegnato, disdained, detested, abhorred, shunned, skorned, angrie, vext, wroth, moodie, irefull. Sdegnarsi, to be angrie, moodie, or vexed. Sdegno, disdaine, contempt, skorne, anger, wrath, ire, moode, furie, rage. Sdegnoso, angrie, disdainefull, irefull, moodie, furious, wrathfull, skorne∣full. Sdenaiato, moni-lesse, without coine, poore, bare. Sdentato, toothlesse, without teeth. Sdigiunare, to breake ones fast, to feede. Sdimenticanza, forgetfulnes, obliuion. Sdimenticaggine, forgetfulnes, obli∣uion. Sdimenticare, to forget. Sdimenticheuole, forgetfull, obliuious. Sdilinguito, vnsauorie, taste-lesse, wal∣lowish in taste. Sdogato, a barrell or such vessell whose side boords be out or broken. Sdogliarsi, to remoue or be free from a∣ches, griefes, or sores. Sdogliatiuo, that will remoue aches and griefes. Sdorare, to vnguild. Sdorato, vnguilt. Sdossato, broken backt, broken hipt. Also alighted from ones back. Sdrau, vsed for Esdrau. Looke Esdrau. Sdrauizze, prettie, strange, cunning, slye, knauish tricks. Sdrizzato, vnstiffned, bent, crooked. Sdrusciolante, as Sdrusciolo. Sdrusciolare, to slide, to slip, to glide, or run smoothlie as vpon ise. Sdrusciolatiuo, as Sdrusciolo. Sdrúsciolo, slipperie, sliding, glib, gli∣ding, isie. also a kinde of sth running blanke verse. Sdruscioloso, as Sdrusciolo. Sdruscitura, as Sdruccitura. Sdrusciolare, as Sdrucciolare. Sdrusciolante, as Sdrucciolante. Sdrusciolina, as Sdrusolina. Sdruscio, as Sdrusciolo. Also split, broken, riuen, cleft, shiuered, ript. Sdruscire, scisco, scito, as Sducciolare. Also to split, to riue, to shiuer as a ship that suffereth shipwrack. Also to rip or seame rent. Sdruscíto, slided, slipt, glided, glibd. Also riuen, splint, or shiuered. Also ript, seame-rent. Sdruscitura, a sliding, a gliding, a glib∣bing Also a splinting, a riuing, or shi∣uering, a flawing. Also a seame-rent, a ripping. Also a leake in a ship, a split∣ting of a ship vpon the rocks. Sdrusolina, a prettie wench, pug or fine lasse, a nimble, suttle, prettie whore, a trull. Sdrusire, as Sdruscire. Se, if, if that, if so be that, whether. Also him, to him, himselfe, to himselfe, or them, to them, themselues, to themselues. Also of Essere, thou art, thou beest. also vnlesse. Se alcun altro, if any bodie else, if any other. Sebellini, sable skinnes or furres. Se bene, albeit, although, howbeit. Sebesten, a kinde of plum or damsin, but smaller. Seca, a sawe to sawe with. Secare, to sawe in sunder. Secca, a sheife, a quick-sand, or shallow in the water. Also dry. Seccacapo, a busie importunate fellow that tyres one with talking. Seccággine, a drought, a drynes, a bar∣rennes, a shelfe, a shallow, a flat or quick-sand in the sea or any riuer. Also importunitie, tediousnes, foolishnes, or vexation with words. Seccagna, as Secca. Seccare, to dry vp, to make dry. Also to importune, or wearie one with talke. Seccatélli, fagots or bains of dry wood to kindle the fire with. Seccaticcio, dry, saplesse, burnt, barren, parched, scorched. Secchezza, as Seccaggine. Secchia, a bucket, a paile, a milking paile. Also a pan for a close stoole. Secchiaro, a bucketmaker. Also a place to set buckets vpon.
Secchiella, a little bucket or paile, or pit∣cher. Secchio, as Secchia. Secchione, a great paile or hucket. Secco, drie, parched, barren, meagre, lean, saplesse, gaunt, withered, without moy∣sture, or iuice, spinie, also importunate, tedious, foolish in talke, barren, voide or poore of wit, inuention, or conceite, shal∣lowe witted. also a shelfe, a rock, a dry sand, a shallow, a flat, or quick-sande in anie sea or water. Seccura, as Seccaggine. Secédere, cedo, cedei, or cessi, ceduto, or cesso, to go apart, to go backe, to go from companie, to plaie or cease from la∣bour. Secérnere, cerno, cernei, cernuto, to deuide, to separate or put asunder, to cull or chuse from among other. Secespita, a cutting knife or hatchet that painims were woont to cut their sacri∣fices with. Secessione, a departing from other, a se∣parating of ones selfe from other. Secésso, a departing in some solitarie place, a vacation from businesse, a soli∣tarie and secret abode, a ceasing from labour. Secludere, cludo, clusi, cluso, to seclude or shut apart from other. Secluso, secluded or shut apart from o∣ther. Secomedesimo, with, or betweene him∣selfe. Seco, with him, with himselfe, among or betweene them or him. Secodagnolo, a wadde, or wispe of haie or strawe. Secolare, to perpetuate, to eternize, to make eternall. Also a temporall or se∣cular man, a laie man. Also of or be∣longing to the space of an hundreth yeeres. Secolaresco, wordly, following the vul∣gare, or temporall or secular. Sécolo, an age, or space of time, contei∣ning a hundreth yeeres. Some take it for a thousand, and some for thirtie. Seconda, a seconding, a following, a soo∣thing or smoothing vp. Also as Secon∣dina. Seconda. A seconda, following the na∣turall course or inclination of the streame. Also as Secondina. Secondamente, secondly, secondarily. Secondare, to second, to prosper, to fol∣low course, to sooth or smooth vp. Secondariamente, secondly, seconda∣rilie. Secōdario, of the second sort, the second. Secondatione, a seconding or making prosperous. Secondina, the secondine or afterbirth, or bagge wherein a childe lieth in the mo∣thers wombe. Also the second string of any instrument of musicke. Also a sur∣geons instrument to cut out little bones. Secondo, second, next to the first, inferi∣our, next after. Also according, concer∣ning, or after a mans desire, will, or in∣clination, as, after as, euen as, as for, thereafter, that commeth after our own desire, good, acceptable, meete, and a∣greeable, seasonable, quiet and calme. Also prosperous, fauourable, luckie. Secondo che, according as, thereafter. Secondo il tempo, according to time and season. Secondo me, as for me, according to my opinion. Secondo ragione, according to reason, right or equitie. Secrestare, as Sequestare. Secrestano, as Sagrestano. Secrestia, as Sagrestia. Secréta, a thinne steele cap, or close skull, worne vnder a hat. Also the name of a place in Venice where all their secret records and ancient euidences be kept, as hell is in westminster hall. Secretario, a secretarie, a secret keeper. Secretezza, secrecie, secretnes. Secréto, secret, close, hid, concealed, priuy, separate, solitarie, all alone, priuie and vnknowne. Also a secret, a priuitie, or a receite in phisicke. Seculare, as Secolare. Século, as Secolo. Securare, as Sicurare. Secure, an axe, an adze, a hatchet. Securita, as Sicuranza. Securanza, as Sicuranza. Securtà, as Sicuranza. Securo, as Sicuro. Secutione, execution. Sedacciare, as Setacciare. Sedaccio, as Setaccio. Sedare, to asswage, to mittigate, to allaie, to appease, to order, to pacifie, to quali∣fie, to quench, to stint. Sedatione, as Sedatura. Sedatiua medicina, a medicine that doth presently ease and in time cure the pacient. Sedato, mittigated, qualified, appeased, sober, quiet, temperate. Sedatore, he that appeaseth or qualifieth, or asswageth. Sedatura, an asswaging, a mittigation, an appeasing or qualifying. Sedazzare, as Seracciare. Sedazzo, as Setaccio. Sede, a seate, a chaire, a stoole, a sitting place, a place to abide or dwell in, a cun∣trie, a resting place, a mansion house. al∣so a scituation. Sedeci, the number of sixteene. Sedéllo, a pan, a pot, a posenet, a paile, a bucket, a pitcher. Sedére, seggo, sedei, seduto, or siso, to sit, to sit downe. Also a seate or sitting place. also a mans bum, arse, funda∣ment, taile or sitting place, all that part of the bodie whereon one sitteth. Sedetto, a graffe, a set, a plant, a syen. Sedia, a seate, a sitting place, a chaire. Sédia regale, a roial seat or seat of iustice. Sédia schionata, a chaire with a backe, a leaning chaire. Sedibile, that may be sitten with or vpon. Sédici, the number of sixteene. Sedile, an imminent seat or sitting place. Sedime, some part about a bell. Seditione, a sedition, a rebellion, a muti∣nie, a breach or variance betweene peo∣ple, strife or debate. Seditioso, seditious, rebellious, mutinous, factious, louing discord. Seditóio, any kind of seat, stoole or sitting place. Sedo, houseleeke, or sengreene, Sedola, the name of a disease in a horses foote. Sedónia, a kind of root vsed in salads. Sedrarsi, to fall in a suddaine swoune or trance. Sedulità, care and great diligence. Sédulo, a kind of cart or tumbrell. Also carefull, diligent, painefull, earnest. Sedúrre, duco, dussi, dutto, to seduce, to lead away, aside or apart, to mislead, to deceiue. Seduttione, a seducing, a misleading, a leading aside or apart. Sedutto, seduced, mislead, deceiued, lead away or aside. Seduttore, a seducer, he that seduceth, a misleader. Sefiród, a kind of cabalisticall practise or practike cabala. Sega, a saw to saw withall. Also a sythe or a sickle. Segala, the graine we call rye or winter corne. Segare, to saw. Also to mow or cut. Also to cut or furrow through the sea. Segarino, a sawier, a little saw. Segatore, a sawier, a mower, a cutter. Segatura, a sawing, a mowing, a sickling, a cutting▪ sawings, sawdust. Segenato sopra nero, blacke, full of siluer haires.
Segésta, the goddesse of haruest. Segéta, a little saw, sickle or syethe. Seggiaio, a chaire-maker. Seggietta, a kind of chaire vsed in Italy to carrie men and women vp and downe in. Seggio, a seat, a stoole, a forme, a chaire, a bench or sitting place. Also I sit downe. It hath beene vsed for the heauens. Also for a place of iustice or a tribunall. Seggiola, a little lowe chaire, stoole or seate. Seghetta, as Segeta. Segiamai, if euer, if at any time. Segiorasi, an inflammation in the head. Segnácolo, a marke, a signe or token, a seale or branding iron. Segnalatamente, famously, notably, no∣toriously. Segnale, a signall, a marke, a signe, a to∣ken, a meare-stone, a signet, a seale. Segnaluzzo, a little marke, seale or to∣ken. Segnalare, to make notable, renowmed, famous or notorious, to marke, to signe, to note, to brand, to betoken, to skar. Segnalato, made notable, famous or noto∣rious, marked, signed, noted or branded, betoken or skarred. Also famous, no∣table, renowmed, notorious. Segnare, to marke, to brand, to seale, to signe, to note, to skar, to coine, to make a signe or put on a signe. Also to beto∣ken, to signifie or shewe by signe or to∣ken. Segnatamente, by signes, markes and to∣kens. Segnatura, a marking, a branding, a sea∣ling, a signing, a brand, a mear-stone. Segnetto, a seale, a signet, a small marke, signe or token. Segni, markes, signes or tokens. Segni celésti, the twelue signes in hea∣uen. Segnità, as Segnitie. Segnitie, slownes, lazines, slothfulnes or negligence, barennes. Segno, a signe, a marke, a token, a goale, a mear-stone, a skar. a butte, a marke, a white or ayme or blanke to shoote at. a pawne or pledge. Also a mans water for the phisitions to caste or iudge by. a signe that hangeth at mens doors. Also a banner, a streamer, a flag. Also a signe of stars, a token of things to come. Sego, tallow or grease to make candles. Sególlo, a veine of earth in mines decla∣ring that gold may be found there. Segoso, tallowie, fattie, greasie. Segregare, to lay a part, to seuer, to cull out, to separate, to put from out off. Segretario, as Secretario. Segretezza, as Secretezza. Segretiére, a secretarie, a secret keeper. Segreto, as Secreto. Segrestano, as Sagrestano. Segrestia, as Sagrestia. Seguace, following, insuing, a follower, an attendant, that followeth easie, clammy, pliant. Hedera sequace, Iue growing and spreading euerie way on the wals. Seguénte, following, succeeding, ensuing, that followeth or commeth after. Seguentemente, consequently, following∣ly, succeedingly, in order. Seguentia, a sequence. Also a play at cardes so called. Seguire, seguo, seguíto, to follow, to in∣sue, to succeede, to chance, to happen, to come to passe, to pursue, to goe after. Seguito, followed, insued, succeeded, come to passe, hapned, come after. Séguito, a traine of followers, waiters, attendants or seruants, companie or friends. Seguitare, as Seguire. Segurtà, as Sicuranza. Séi, the number of sixe. Also thou arte of Essere. Seicento, sixe hundreth. It is also vsed for the finite number of all the diuels in hell. Sel, if the▪ it to himselfe. Selagine, a kind of herbe much vsed of the Druides for all eie-sores, called hedge-hysop. Selbastrélla, as Serbastrélla. Sélce, a flint or hard pibble stone. Selciare, to paue with flint stones. Selciato, paued. Also a pauement. Selciata, a pauement. Also a causey of hard stones. Selciatore, a pauier. Seleno, the herbe parsely or smallage. Selenite, a precious stone wherein is a white which decreaseth and increaseth as the moone doth. Seletto, selected, picked or chosen out from among others. Seleueide, a kind of birde that deuoures locustes. Selfo, a warte in a horse called an aubu∣rie. Selice, a flint or pibble stone. Selinusia, térra medicinale.   Sélla, any kind of saddle or pad. Vsed al∣so for a seat or sitting place. Sellare, to saddle. Sellaro, Sellaio, a sadler. Sellecchia, the huskes, shales or cods of any pulse as of beanes and peason. Selletta, a kind of foot stoole or litle saddle Selua, a forest, a chase or a wood full of great trees and timber wood. Seluaggina, any kinde of venison, wilde∣game, fowle or hunting. Seluaggio, sauage, wild, vplandish, home∣lie, of the field or countrey, rurall, clow∣nish, rude, rusticke, swainish or siluane. Also fell, cruell, fantasticall, vntamed, strange, fond, vnsociable. Seluaggiume, as Seluaggina. Seluareccio, as Seluaggio. Seluastrélla, an herbe called in latin Her∣ba trallis. Seluaticcina, as Seluaggina. Seluatico, as Seluaggio. Seluestrélla, as Seluastrella. Seluéstro, as Seluaggio. Seluietta, a napkin or drinking cloth. Seluoso, wooddie, forest-like, full of woods, desert, wilde. Sélze, as Selce. Se mai, if euer, if at any time. Sembiante, a semblance, a seeming, a likenes, a similitude, a countenance, a showe, an apparance. Also seeming, showing, appearing, resembling, doing as if. Sembianza, a semblance, a seeming, a likenes, &c. Sembiare, to seeme, to resemble, to show, to appeare. Sembiéuole, semblant, seeming, appea∣ring. Sémbola, as Sémola. Sembolato, as Semolato. Sembolélli, a kinde of simnell or sugar-bread. Semboloso, as Semoloso. Sembranza, as Sembianza. Sembrare, as Sembiare. Seme, any kinde of seede, ofspring, or be∣ginning. a kernell of fruite. seede, or corne. a graff or set of a yong tree, a nource gardine. kinde or generation. Also a chiefe auctor, beginner or cau∣ser of a thing. that whereby a thing is nourished or maintained. Se medésimo, himselfe. Sementa, Semenza, as Seme. Sementélla, the small touch-pouder that a gunner doth vse. Sementina, Semenzena, wormeseede. Also any kinde of small seede. Also small haileshot. Sementine, a kinde of peare so called in Italie. Semi, a word much vsed in composition for halfe. Seméstre, of sixe moneths. Semiapérto, halfe open. Semi breue, a semibriefe in musike.
Semi capro, halfe a goate, demygoated, semie-goated. Semicinto, a garment comming lower then the bellie. Also halfe guirt, as we may say a halfe kirtle. Semicirculare, halfe circled. Semicotto, halfe sodden, baked, or ro∣sted. Semicrome, a semie crochet in musike. Semi déi, demy-gods, halfe gods, semie-gods. Semidiámetro, halfe the diameter of a figure, a line drawne from the centre to the circumference. Semi-foras. carattero diabólico.   Semidótto, halfe or meanely learned. Semifatto, halfe made, halfe done. Semigraue, halfe heauie, graue, drousie, or halfe a sleepe. Semihuómo, halfe a man. Semi hora, halfe an houre. Semimarino, belonging partlie to the sea, and partlie to the land. Semiminima, a semiminime in musicke. Semimórto, halfe dead. Semituono, a semitune, halfe a note in musicke. Semiditono, a kinde of tune in musicke. Semidente cauallino, an hearbe so cal∣led. Seminare, to sowe any seede, to skatter, to disperse. Also to charge as a field in armorie is. Seminale, of or pertaining to seede, or sowing. Also knotgrasse, or swine∣grasse. Seminali vasi, the seede vessels. Seminato, sowne, scattered, dispersed. Also any ground that is sowne. charged as a cote of armes. Seminario, a seminarie. Also a spring-gardine, or a seede-plot, or a place where plants be set to be remoued: a nource-gardine, a tree whereof plants or graffs be taken. Also the first beginning or chiefe cause of any good or euill. Seminatione, the arte of sowing, sowing, generation, or breeding by seede. Seminatore, a sower of seedes, a disper∣ser, a scatterer, a breeder, an ingendrer, an auctor or procurer of some thing. Seminudo, halfe naked. Seminio, all the gaine or profit of seede, or sowing. Semipedale, halfe a foote in quantitie or height. Semiperfetto, halfe perfect, halfe fini∣shed. Semipieno, halfe full. Semiraso, halfe shauen. Semisepolto, halfe buried. Semistante, a word of derision for a braue fellowe, as we say as good as George a greene. Semitertiana, a shaking ague so called, because the greatest part of the fits thereof is spent in shiuering, on that day specially that the tertian and quotidian do meete together. Semitóno, a demitune, or halfe note in musicke. Semitrito, halfe brused, halfe brayed, or ounded. Semiuiro, halfe a man, a womanish fel∣low, an vnperfect man, an eunuch, one that is guelded. Semiuiuo, halfe aliue, betweene dead and aliue. Semiuocale, sixe consonants so called, because they haue halfe the sound of vowels. Semma, powder growne from brasse mel∣ted, or golden sand. Sémola, the branne of corne. Semód, a kinde of cabalisticall specu∣lation. Semolato, a kinde of course vnboulted bread, full of branne. Semolella, fine branne. Also a kinde of meate or pudding so called. Semoloso, brannie, course, full of bran. Sempietà, as Semplicità. Sempio, as Semplice. Sempiternare, as Secolare. Sempiternità, eternitie, sempiternitie. Sempitérno, sempiternall, ayeduring, e∣uerlasting, continuall, perpetuall, end∣lesse, immortall, alwayes during. Semplice, simple, single, slight, not double, of one sort, not compounded, vnmixt, sincere, pure, vnfained, harmelesse, plaine, without welt or gard, vnla∣boured, not curious. Also foolish, sim∣ple-witted, shallow-headed, homely, meane. Semplicemente, simplie, singlie, slight∣lie, sincerely, homely, purely, vnfai∣nedly, without dissimulation, in good faith, vnwittingly. Also foolishly, sim∣ply, plainely. Semplicetto, somewhat simple, foolish, or shallow witted. Semplicità, simplicitie, singlenes, slight∣nes, homelines, sinceritie. Sempliciótto, as Semplicetto. Semprana, as Sempruiua. Semprano, perpetuall, ayeduring, euer∣lasting. Semprare, as Secolare. Sempre, euer, for euer, euer and euer, aye, continuallie, from time to time. Semprelenità, accustomed gentlenes, continuall mildenes. Sempremai, for euer and euer, for euer, euer and a day. Sempreuina, the hearbe houseleeke, sen∣greene, or prickmadam, or euergreene. Sen, as Sene, as Seno. Sena, an hearbe or spurge much vsed in phisicke called Senie, it is a low plant hauing leaues like Fenigreeke, bearing small, flat, and crooked huskes, where∣in is a flat and brounish seede. Senácolo, a counsell-house or chamber, a Senate-house. Senape, madnes, rashnes, fondnes, rage, follie, pepper in the nose, teene, a toyish humor. Senário, of or pertaining to the number of sixe, that containeth sixe. Senato, the Senate or Parliament house. Senatório, of or pertaining to a Senate. Senatore, a Senator, a magistrate, or chiefe counsellor, a counsellor, an alder∣man, a borough-maister. Senatus consulto, a decree, an acte, an ordinance or deliberatiue made by the whole Senate. Senauro, as Senape. Sene, old, aged, or eld. Also himselfe thence, himselfe thereof, themselues thence or thereof. Seneccione, the weede groundeswell or groneswell. Senepe, as Senape. Senescénte, waxing old, growing in age, wearing away, decreasing, drawing to the wae. Senesciallo, a Seneshall, a Marshall, a Bailife, a Sheriffe, or Gouernour. Senéstra, the left hand, or side, as Se∣nestro. Senestramente, sinisterlie, strangely, a∣gainst the haire. Senestrare, to miscarie, to stray, or put any lim or ioynt out of ioynt. Senéstro, a sinister chance, an ill luck, an ill hap, a box, a blow, or whiret on the eares, giuen with the back of the hand, or with the left hand. Senetio, an herbe. Senettù, ouldage, agednes. Senezone, as Seneccione. Senice, a kinde of disease in a man. Senile, ould, aged, eld, aged-like, of or belonging to age. Also ripe. Senio, as Senile. Seniore, elder, more aged. Also a senior, or a predecessor. Senità, age, eldnes, agednes. Senno, wit, reason, sence, knowledge, dis∣cretion, wisedome, warines, iudgement, earnestnes, good sooth. Da senno, in
good earnest. Sennuto, wittie, sensible, discreet, endu∣ed with reason, sence, or knowledge. Séno, a bosome, a lap, the turning or hol∣lownes of a water-banke, a creeke, a nooke, an angle, a hauen, a gulfe, or arme of the sea, or any riuer. Also the bending, the hole or hollownes of the eyes. Also a lap, a plait, or fold in a gar∣ment. Also a net, or the hollownes and infolding of a net, taken also for the minde or inward and priuiest part of a mans hart or affections. Also the hole or hollow winding of a stalke whereat the branches do sprout and shoote. Also an aporne, a lap. Also a twinding or round circle in haire. Also the hole or foule hollow corner of an impostuma∣tion or sore. a crinkle crankle of any thing. in mathematikes, if from the ends of any arch there be drawne two straite lines meeting, one of the which be a piece of the Diameter, and the other per∣pendicular to the former: the said right lines haue the name of Seno. Senò, if not, but that, were it not, if it were not. Senóche, as Senonche. Senon è che, as Senon. Senon, onely, but onely, except, if not, vnlesse, if it were not, but, sauing, but that, vnlesse, saue. Senonche, if it were not that, but that, except that, if not that, vnles that, saue that. Senónne, as Senon. Senonse, Senonne che, as Senonche. Senopia, as Senape. Sensa, ascension day. Sensalaggio, the money giuen to a broker for his paines, brokage monie. Sensalare, to play the broker, to bargaine by brokers. Sensale, a broker, a dealer betweene par∣tie and partie about making of bar∣gaines. Sensaria, the arte, profession, trade, or companie of brokers. Also brokage. Sensaro, as Sensale. Sensato, as Sennuto, as Sensibile. Sensi, the fiue sences of man. Sensibile, sensible, feeling, that may be felt or perceiued. Sensitiuo, sencible, hauing sence and fee∣ling. Senso, the sence of man. Also wit, reason, conceite, or vnderstanding, feeling, sence, pceiuing, iudgement, know∣ledge, opinion, that which one hath con∣ceiued in minde, that which is known by sence. Also the sence or meaning of any writing. Sensuale, sensuall, licentious, obeying, and pleasing his sences. Sensualità, sensualitie, licenciousnes, con∣tent and pleasing of sences. Sentacchiare, to cowre, squat, or sit down as a goose or a ducke doth. Sentacchio, all maner of squatting, cow∣ring, or sitting downe close. It hath bin taken for one that is quicke of hea∣ring. Sentacchione, a cowring, idle, lazie com∣panion, that will alwaies keepe home. Sentare, to sit downe. Sentata, a session, a sitting. Senténtia, a sentence, an awarde, a de∣cree, a verdict, a iudgement, an opinion, aduice, meaning, or counsell, a wittie or wise sentence vttred vpon any thing, a golden saying. Sententiare, to awarde, to sentence, to adiudge, to caste, to condemne, to giue iudgement. Sententiato, awarded, sentenced, adiud∣ged, cast, condemned, giuen iudgement. Sententiére, a iudge, a censurer, a sen∣tence giuer. Sententioso, sententious, instructiue, pi∣thie or full of golden saying or senten∣ces. Senténza, as Sententia. Sentiéro, a path, a high-waie, a tracke, a tracing, or a causey. Sentieruólo, a little way, a narrow path or track. Sentimento, sence, feeling, conceite, opi∣nion. Sentinare, to pumpe in a ship. Sentina, a sinke, a iakes, a priuie, a common shore, a heape of filth, or any such con∣ueyance of filth. also a cōpanie or filthie packe of lewde base rascals, a packe or heape of mischiefes, a place where ras∣cals and whores meete. Also the pumpe of a ship. Sentinélla, a watch, a sentinell, a souldier which is set to watch at a station. Sentíre, sento, sentito, to feele, to heare, to smell, to taste, to conceite, to vnder∣stande, to perceiue. Sentito, felt, heard, smelt, tasted, concei∣ted, vnderstoode, perceiued. Also warie or wise. Sentita, a warie, slie, fine conceited or apt to vnderstand woman. Sentore, a sent, a smell, a sauour, a taste. Senza, without, besides, sanse. Senza che, besides that, without that. Senza dubbio, sanse-faile, without doubt. Senzale, as Sensale. Senzaria, as Sensaria. Senza riseruo, without sparing, boldly. Sépa, a cuttle fish, or cuttle bone, whose bloud is as blacke as inke, and therefore some haue taken Sepa for inke. Separare, to separate, to deuide, to sunder, to seuer, to disioyne, to parte, to diuorce, to put apart, to put one from another. Separabile, separable, that may be deui∣ded or sundred. Separatione, a separation, a seuering, a diuision, a diuorce, a putting one from another. Sépe, a hedge, a quick-set hedge, a fence, a mound, a closure of grounds. Sepellibile, buriable, that may be buried. Sepellire, lisco, lito, to burie, to enterre, to entombe the dead, to lay in the earth. Also to abolish cleane and cause to be forgotten. Sepellitore, a burier, a digger of graues to burie the dead, a burier of the dead. Sephisma, a decree, a statute, a lawe, an ordinance. Sepia, as Sepa. Sepietta, a little cuttle fish, or cuttle bone. Sepólcro, a tombe, a graue, a sepulchre, a vaulte. Vsed also for a churchyard. Sepólto, Sepellito, buried, laide in the ground, interred, intombed. Also as it were dead, altogither forgotten, vtterly vndone and caste away, or cleane abo∣lished. Sepoltura, as Sepolcro. Sepositione, a putting apart, a setting a∣side. Sepóso, fat, fattie, full of tallow, sewet, or seame. Seppia, Seppa, as Sepa. Séppi, seppe, seppero, I, he, or they knew, of Sapere. Sépto, a sluce, a flud-gate, a watergap. Sepur, sepure, if, if so be, if so be that, if yet. Sequéla, a sequell, a consequence, a follow∣ing, a chance. Sequentia, as Seguentia. Sequestrare, to arrest, to stop, to staie, to attache, to sequester, to sue, to arbitrate, to put into ones hands as indifferent. Sequestratione, a sequestration, a putting a parte, an attachment, an arrest, an action, a sute, an arbitration, an arbi∣trement. Sequestratore, a sequestrator, an atta∣cher, a sergeant, an arbitrator, an vn∣der iudge. Sequéstre, indifferent to both partes, a re∣conciler of parties in controuersie, an ar∣bitrator.
Sequéstro, as Sequestratione. Ser, Sir, a name giuen to priests, and also to lords and masters. Sera, the eeue or euening, the last part of the day, towards night. Bona sera, good euening. Serà, he, or she, or it shall be. Serafo, a coine in India woorth fower shillings sterling. Also a kinde of serpent that the Egyptian worshipped as a god. Seraphino, a seraphin, an angell. Serapica, the herbe called dogs-stones, or raggewoort. Serapino, a kinde of gum or drugge so called. Serbabile, that may be kept. Serbanza, a reseruing, a keeping. Serbare, to keepe, to reserue, to holde, to guarde, to preserue, to saue. Also to ob∣serue, to take heede. Serbatóio, a cupboord, a lardrie, a pan∣trie, a keepe, a place to keepe or preserue any thing in. Serbastrélla, a kinde of herbe called dogs-stones or ragwoort. Serbaticcio, any fruit or other thing that will last and be kept. Serbo, a reseruing or keeping, a sparing or store. Sercontraponi, as Foraméllo. Sere, sir, a title giuen to lords and ma∣sters and to priests. Serena, a sirene or a mermaide. Serenare, to cleere vp, to make cleere, faire and lightsome, to looke cheerfullie and merilie. Serenata, musike giuen vnder gentlewo∣mens windowes in a morning or eue∣ning. Serenezza, as Serenità. Serenissimo, most cleere, very faire, ex∣cellently beautifull and calme. Also a title onely giuen to kings and great princes, as we say most renowmed, most famous, most glorious, most excellent, and soueraigne. Serenità, a title giuen nowe a daies to kings and chiefe dukes, as we saie soue∣raintie, highnes, or renowne. Also faire and cleere weather, quietnes or calme∣nes. Also brightnes, cleerenes, cheereful∣nes, or excellencie. Sereno, bright, cleere, faire, calme, quiet, appeased, cheerefull, merrie, gentle, peaceable. also whaie, or clarified whaie. Also without cloudes or raine. Also cleere and faire weather. Sergente, a sergeant, a catchpole, a bedle or such officer vnder a magistrate, or such a one as is commanded by any su∣perior magistrate. It hath also beene vsed for a groome or a squire, or other seruant. Sergente maggiore, a sergeant maior of a band. Sergozzone, a blowe, a stroke, a bang or rap giuen vpon the necke. Sergiolo, a catchpole, a sergeant. Seria, an earnest, graue, or sad word. Seriè, an order, a succession, a rowe, an is∣sue, a race, a beade-role, a pedegree, a descent. Serica, a kinde of stuffe called fine serge or saie with silke in it. Serico, of silke, silken, made of silke, or like silke. Serifalco, Sirifalco, a kind of shot, bum∣bard, or ordinance. Seriffo, a title giuen to princes in Barba∣rie, as much to saie as king. Serifia, a kind of red toad or frogge. Serifio, a kind of wormwood growing in the sea. Serino, a birde called in latine Serinus, some take it for the Siskin. Serio, earnest, graue, of great importance, serious. Seriosità, seriousnes, earnestnes. Serioso, serious, earnest, in sooth, of conse∣quence, in earnest, without mocking. Sermargóllo, an old doting wizard or wise man, a nickname for a gull or fond fellow. Also a kinde of sport or plaie that children vse to playe at in Italy with beanes or nuts. Sermenti, buds, sprigs, springs, sprouts, or yoong branches of a vine. Also flags, sags, or reeds growing by the water side. Sermentina, hath bin iestingly taken for the good liquor wine. Sermolina, the herbe wilde Betonie, or wilde marierome. Also it is taken for a womans priuie parts. Sermonare, to speake, to reason, to dis∣course, to preach. Sermone, a sermon, a preaching, a lecture a discourse, an oration. Also the speech talke, or communication, or language of mankinde. Sermoniere, a preacher, a discourser, a speaker. Serole, as Serrole. Serotino, late, lagge, latewarde, in the euening. Serpa, the name of a wheele or spring in a clocke. Serpare, as Sérpere, as Serpeggiare. Sérpe, any kinde of serpent or venemous creeping beast or vermine that creepes vpon his belly and not vpon their feete as snakes or adders. Also a limbecke or serpentine, called of our distillers a dou∣ble SS. Serpédine, as Serpedo. Serpédo, a rednes in the skin with pushes or pimples. Serpeggiare, as Sérpere. Also to go win∣ding or crankling in and out. Also when a horse doth gallop writhing like a serpent or a snake. Serpentare, as Subillare. Also as Sér∣pere. Serpentaria, vipers grasse. Also the herbe Dragon, wilde buglosse or borage. Vsed also for monie-woort or hearbe two-penie. Serpentaria maggiore, the herbe dragon woort or serpentine the greater. Serpentauro, a kind of serpent and bull togither. Serpente, as Sérpe. Also proceeding for∣ward, augmenting, creeping, spreading abroad by little and little. Serpentélla, the herbe dragon, buglosse or borage. Vsed also for vipers grasse. Serpentello, a little serpent. Serpentina, as Serpentélla, a kind of or∣dinance, bumbard or artillerie called a serpentine, sakre or a base. Also a kinde of stone. Also a kinde of winding lim∣becke or still called a serpentine or dou∣ble SS, in English. Also as Serpen∣tella. Also a kind of ring worme or fa∣shions in a horse or such creeping di∣sease. Serpentino, serpentine, viperous, like or of the nature of a serpent. a kind of ar∣row head made like an adders toong. a kind of toole or instrument that anato∣mists and grauers vse. a kinde of verie hard stone or marble. Sérpere, serpo, serpei, serputo, to creepe or craule or slide vpon the bellie without feete as a serpent or worme. Also to spread abroad by little and little as herbes do growing closely by the ground. Serputo, crept or crauled. Also spread a∣broad. Serpire, pisco, pito, as Sérpere. Serpega, as Serpedo. Serpettipmale, a venemous serpent. Serpicélla, a kind of crossing of bookes or reckonings so called among marchants. Serpicolato, turning, winding, crankling in and out like a serpent. Serpillo, the herbe wilde time, creeping time, or our ladies bedstraw. Serpolina, a womans quaint or priuities. Serpolina, an herbe or weed. Also a pret∣tie wench, babie, lasse or girle. Serpollo, as Serpillo. Serra, any secluse or shut vp place or cloi∣ster, an inclosure.
Sérra sérra, a kind of march sounded in warre. Serraglio, an inclosure, a close, a padocke, a parke, a cloister or secluse. Serrame, a locke or any thing that per∣taines to locking or shutting. Serrare, to shut, to locke, to inclose, to cloi∣ster, to raile in. Serrata, when the souldiers in squadron do ioine and locke close togither thereby to become more strong, a locking, a shut∣ting. Serratile, that may be shut. Serratula, the herbe called he Betonie. Serratura, a locke, a bolt, a locking or a shutting. Serre di fassi, cliffes, rocks, crags or rugged stones, shiues. Serrette, sharpe points or buttons to make the curb of the bit extreame hard. Serriuóla, a spring or fountaine hedged or closed about that the cattell shall not marre it. Serrole, a kinde of wilde ducke or ma∣lard. Ser sac ciuto, as Foraméllo. Serta, a chapet, a coronet, a circlet or gar∣land or wreath. a tuzzie-muzzie, a sweete poesie of flowers. Sertico, a sweet smelling herbe called Me∣lilot. Also any thing made chapet, cir∣clet, coronet, garland or wreath-wise. Serticella, as Serta. Sertola, as Sertico. Sertula, as Sertico. Ser tutte salle, as Foramello. Serua, a maid or woman seruant. Seruabile, as Serbabile. Seruaggio, bondage, seruitude, thraldom, seruice, subiection, slauerie. Seruare, as Serbare. Seruatoio, as Serbatoio. Seruente, a man or woman seruant. Also seruing or fitting any thing. Seruiale, as Seruigiale. Seruidore, as Seruitore. Seruigiale, a glister giuen to the sicke. Al∣so any houshold seruant. Seruigietto, a little seruice, a good turne, an errand, a busines. Seruigio, a seruice, a good turne, an er∣rand, a busines. Seruile, seruile, base, abiect, submisse, sla∣uish, of or belonging to a seruant or bon∣dage. Seruilità, seruilitie, basenes, slauishnes, subiection, thraldome, seruitude, drud∣gerie. Seruilla, the roote of the herbe skirwort or skirret. Ser vinciguerra, as Foramello. Seruire, seruo, seruito, to serue, to attend, to waite vpon, to do seruice vnto. Vsed also to fit ones turne. Also to vse or im∣ploy in or for any purpose. Vsed also to deserue. A che vi seruite di questo, for what purpose do you vse this? Seruirsi, to make vse of, to vse, to imploy, to serue ones turne with any thing. Seruito, serued, pleased, content, attended, waited vpon, done seruice vnto, &c. Esser seruito, to be pleased and content. Seruitosi, made vse of, imployed, serued ones turne with. Seruitore, a seruant, a seruitor, a ser∣uing man, an attendant, a thrall. Seruitrice, a maide or woman seruant. Seruietta, a napkin or drinking cloth. Seruitiale, as Seruigiale. Seruitietto, as Seruigietto. Seruitio, as Seruigio. Seruitù, seruice, seruitude, bondage or thraldom, slauerie, subiection. Seruo, any kind of seruant, one that oweth seruice or that is in bondage and subiec∣tion, a slaue, a drudge, a bondman. Sesama, as Sisamo, and Sesamino. Sesamele, a kinde of simnell bread made with honie and spice. Sesamini, ossi sesamini, certaine little round bones vnder the ioints of the fin∣gers and toes, created of nature as well to fulfill the voide places left to those ioints where they growe, as also in the hands to strengthen them to the appri∣hending and holding of any thing, and in the feete to the equall passing on the ground. Sesamino, a white graine or pulse in In∣dia, whereof they make oile, called Se∣sam. Sesamóide, an herbe that purgeth melan∣cholie. Sescuplo, sixe folde, six times as much, the whole and the halfe part. Sesino, a kind of small coine. Sesquipedale, a foote and a halfe in mea∣sure. Sesquialtera, halfe so much againe, a pro∣portion of one and a halfe. Sesquiterza, as much as another, and a third part more. Sessanta, the number of threescore. Sessagerario, as Sessagesimo. Sessagesimo, the sixteeth in number. Sessangolare, sixe cornered, hauing sixe corners. Sessangolo, sixe corners, a forme of sixe corners. Sessantesimo, the sixtieth in number. Sessantina, an old beldam, an old trot, an old woman past threescore yeeres. Also a kind of fine lawne, cambreke or fine linnen cloth. Sessione, a session, a sitting, a sises, a mee∣ting place. Sesso, a kind or sex or man or woman. Sessola, a kind of great basket to carrie hay, straw or stubble in. Sesta, a compasse or paire of compasses. A sesta, in order, fadging, in due forme, by line and measure, by compasse. Sestario, a measure whereby all other may be made (after Budeus) and certaine triall by waight and measure. It is of our measures a pinte and a halfe or 18. ounces waight. Sestale, orderly, formally, according to compasse or a mans mind. Sestértio, a certaine veile or loose garment that men vsed to cast about them like a sheete, and was so wouen that euerie third thread was bigger then the other two. Also a kinde of coine among the Romans, a thousand of them were worth fiue pound sterling. Sestile, the moneth of August. Sestina, a kind of song or verse riming sixe times to one word. Sésto, a compasse or paire of compasses. also order, rule, forme, fadging, due byasse, plight, methode or handsome fashion. al∣so the sixth in order or number. Sesterno, the sixth in number. Sestesso, himselfe. Sestiero, a ward or streete or quarter in a towne or citie. Also a kinde of mea∣sure. Seta, any kind of silke. Also a disease in a horse called a quitterbone. Seta cauallina, the herbe Alisander or Louage. Setacciare, to sift, to search, to bolt spice or meale. Setaccio, a sieue, a search, a bolting cloth or strainer made of the haires of a hor∣ses taile. Setaiuolo, a silke-man, a marchant of silke. Setalia, a brizlie, bushie, brakish, hairie, gloomie, cloudie, duskie place. Bocace doth vse it for a womans priuie parts, saying Valle setalia. Setanino, a kind of thin veluet called re∣fusados. Setanio, a kinde of corne that lasteth three moneths, called march or summer wheat. Setazzare, as Setacciare. Setazza, as Setaccio. Sete, all maner of silkes. Also thou arte, of Essere. also thirst or desire to drink▪ gree∣dines, couetousnes, thirstines, drought or
great appetite of any thing. Setino, a kind of thin silke stuffe like bu∣rato or mokado, silken, made or wrought of silke. Setola, any kinde of brizzle such as the make head brushes of. also a brush, head brush or combe brush or beard brush. Also a disease in a horse called the quit∣terbone. Setolare, to brush with a brush made of hogs brizles. Setole, brizles or brushes. Setolina, a little fine head, combe or beard brush. Setoloso, brizly, hairie, grizly, rough, rug∣ged, shaggie. Setoluto, as Setoloso. Setoso, thirstie, greedie, rauenous. Vsed also for Setoloso. Setta, a sect, a faction or company of one opinion, a maner of life, ones doctrine. Also a schoole or manner of teaching, a diuers consent in sundrie wilfull opi∣nions. Settanta, the number of seauentie. Settario, a sectarie or factious man, a fol∣lower, one that imitateth to the ende to learne. Also the seauenth. Settatore, as Settario. Sette, the number of seuen, or seuen vpon the cards. sects or factions. Settembre, the moneth of September. Settenario, containing seauen in number, of or belonging to seauen. Settenne, of seauen yeeres space. Settentrionale, of or belonging to the north, northren. Settentrione, the north or northren wind, or north part of the world, right against south. Also the seauen stars of Charles wane. Settepedale, seauen foote long, or belong∣ing to seauen foote. Setteplico, seauen fold, seauen times dou∣ble, running seauen waies. Settezzoni.   Settico, putrifactiue or corosiue, that rot∣teth as matter in a sore. Settifóglio, setfoile, tormentill, ashweed, herbe Gerard or wilde imperatorie. Settiforme, seauen fold. Settile, that is or may easily be cut or cleaued. Settimana, a weeke, the space of seauen daies. Settimanaro, a weeke or weekely worke∣man. Settimo, the seauenth in number. Settione, a section, a cutting, a deuiding or parting. Also the forfaite or confisca∣tion of ones goods in penaltie. Settore, the name of a mathematicall in∣strument. Also he that cutteth, diuideth or loppeth. Also one that by false com∣plaints seeketh to make others forfaite their goods. Settura, as Settione. Setro, a Kings or Princes scepter or mace. Seudo, as Pseudo. Seudisodomo, as Pseudisodomo. Seudographia, as Pseudographia. Seudólogo, as Pseudlogo. Seudomartire, as Pseudomartire. Seudomeno, as Pseudomeno. Seudónimo, Pseudónimo.   Seudopropheta, as Pseudopropheta. Seueramente, seuerely, rigorously, stern∣ly, austerly, cruelly, roughly. Seuerare, to continue or persist seuerely, obstinately or rigorously. Seuerità, seueritie, rigor, obstinacie, sharp∣nes, crueltie, austeritie, roughnes, hard∣nes, straitnes, grauitie or constancie in ministring iustice. Seuéro, seuere, cruell, hard, rigorous, ob∣stinate, sterne, austere, rough, sharpe, streight, graue, and constant, inexora∣ble. Seuitia, rage, fiercenes, crueltie, furie, ri∣gor, tyrannie. Seuo, tallow, fat, sewet or grease to make candles. Also cruell, fell, raging, fierce, moodie, furious, horrible, terrible, rigo∣rous, vnkind. Seuoso, tallowie, fat, greasie, full of tallow or sewet. Seuro, separated, diuided. Sezzaia, at last, the last, lag or latest. Also the sixth. Sezzaio, the last, lag, lated or hindmost of all. Sezzano, as Sezzaio. Sezzente.   Sezzo, as Sezzaia, as Sezzaio. Sfacchinarsi, to forsake or leaue off the degree of a porter or base knaue, to be∣come from a iacke to a gentleman. Sfacciataggine, impudencie, shameles∣nes, boldnes, saucines, malapertnes. Sfacciare, to deface, to spoile, or ouer∣throw. Sfacciato, defaced, spoiled, ouerthrowne, impudent, shameles, saucie, malapert, ouerbold, blushlesse. Sfacciatamente, impudently, shamelesly, saucily, malapertly. Sfacciatezza, as Sfacciataggine. Sfaccimento, a defacing, a ruine, a spoil, or wasting, a deseasance, an vndooing. Sfaccitudine, as Sfacciataggine. Sfacélo, a disease when any part by in∣flammation is mortified. Also an herbe called wilde sage. Sfacendato, idle, lazie, fonde, loitring, without busines. Sfagianare, to phesant, to peacocke, or wantonize it, to cut or hoite it out, to reuell. Sfagianato, phesanted, peacockized, or wantonized, or reuelled. Sfagitide, two great veines appearing on ech side of the throte, and nourish all the parts of the head and necke. Sfagumato, a gull, a ninnie, that will easi∣ly be cosened, or fetcht ouer the coles. Sfamare, to glut, to gorge, or quench hun∣ger, to fill. Sfamato, glutted, gorged, vnhungred, fild with meate. Sfamatura, a quenching of hunger, a good feeding. Sfangare, to rid cleare, and make cleane from mudde, myre, or durt, to vnmyre. Sfardellare, to strip, to spoile, to robbe, to vntrusse, or disburthen. Sfare, as Disfare. Sfatto, as Disfatto. Sfasciare, to vnswathe, to vnbind, to vn∣bandle. Sfasciume, birdes dung or such filth and ordure. Also a disordred, confused, compassing about. Sfatata, ill-sauoured, roynish, vncomelie, vnhandsome. Sfauellare, to gainsaie, to vnsay, to speake against. Sfauata, a kinde of meate of beanes. Also a flimflam-tale. Sfauilla, a sparke, a sparkle, or twinck∣ling. Sfauillante, sparkling, twinkling. Sfauillare, to sparke, to sparkle, to twin∣kle. Sfeducciato, faithlesse, trecherous, trust∣lesse, deceitfull. Sfegatato, vnliuered, whiteliuered, weak harted. Sféndere, fendo, fendei, fesso, or fen∣duto, to cleaue, to chap, to riue, to shi∣uer, to splint, to slit, to gape, to flawe. Sfenduto, cleft, chapt, riuen, shiuered, splinted, gapt, chinkt, flawd, slitted. Sfendimento, a chap, a chinke, a cleft, a cranie, a gap, a splinting, a flawe, a slit. Sfenditura, as Sfendimento. Sféra, a spheare or a globe, a figure in all parts equally round, a circle, a howle, a rundle, any thing that is round. Sféreale, rounde, sphericall, of, or like a sphere. Sferebrare, to teare, to rent, to tottre or breake in peeces. Sfericare, to builde or frame round like a
globe, or a sphere, to make round. Sferico, sphericall, round like a globe or a sphere. Sferra, an olde caste sute of apparell, or a∣ny thing cast and left off. Sferra caualli, as Etiopide. Sferramento, an vnshooing of a horse, a deliuering out of bonds or irons. Sferrare, to vnshooe a horse, to free or deli∣uer out of bondes or irons. Sferro, a kinde of strong hard chest. Sferza, a whip, a scourge, a staile, a rod. Sferzare, to whip, to scourge, to beate with a whip, to lash, or slash, to yerke. Sferzata, a ierke, a yerke, a lash or slash with a whip or a scourge. Sfesso, as Sfenduto. Sfesso, slit. Also a slit. Sfessura, a slit, a cleft. Sfessura, as Sfendimento. Sfettonare, is by Grison taken for the opening or cutting of the frush of the horse away to cure the disease called Formella, or Fettone. Sfiancare, to make one leane, lanke, or gant. Also to vnflanke or vnhanche. Sfiatare, to breathe and rebreathe. Also to breath ones last. Sfiatatóio, a vent or breathing hole. Sfibbiare, to vnbuckle, to vnlace, to vn∣latch. Sfibbiatura, an vnbuckling, an vnla∣cing. Sfida, a chalenge, a cartell, a defiance. Sfidare, to challenge, to defie, to distrust. Sfidato, chalenged, defide, mistrusted. Sfidatore, a chalenger, a prouoker, a defier. Sfigurare, to disfigure, to deface. Sfigurato, formelesse, shapelesse, disfi∣gured. Sfilaccij, lint, such as Surgions vse to make tents for sores. Sfilare, to rauell any cloth or silke. Also to put out of ranke, or out of ioynt. Sfilata, out of ranke, out of order, dis∣persedlie. Sfilato punto, a kinde of stitch in seame∣strie so called. Sfilatura, the name of a disease in a horse. Also as Sfilazza. Sfilazza, any kinde of raueled stuffe or sleaue silke, or lint that surgeons vse. Sfinga, a beast called a Sphinx, hauing a face and voice like a woman, and hand and feete as a lyon. Sfinge, a kinde of Apes verie hairie, ha∣uing long teates, who are easilie taught to forget their wildenes. Sfinire, nisco, nito, to end, to finish, to accomplish. Also to swoune, or faint, to be in a trance. Sfinimento, a swouning, a fainting, a qualme, an apoplexie. Sfintro, the round compassing muscle of the straight gut, ordained to preuent vntimely excretion. Sfiorire, risco, rito, to vnflowre, to de∣flowre, to vnblossome. Sfirena, a kinde of long fish. Sfocare, as Sfogare. Sfoderare, to vnsheath or draw forth. Sfodrare, as Sfoderare. Sfogare, to wreake, to vent, or rage forth as fier doth being closely rakte vp. Sfogato, wreakt, vented, or raged forth ones griefe or anger. Sfogamento, a wreaking, a venting, a raging, easing or puffing of ones anger. Sfogatamente, earnestlie, raginglie. Sfogare la rabbia, to wreake or vent forth ones rage. Sfoggiamento, a flanting, a lauishing, a rioting, a reuelling. Sfoggiare, to lauish, riot, reuell, or flant it out of all measure and fashion, to bring out of order or fashion, to marre a fashion, to commit any excesse. Sfoggiato, lauished, rioted, reuelled, or flanted it out of order and fashion, brought out of fashion, fashion-lesse, out of fashion, ill fauored, vnhand∣some, huge, big, great. Sfoggiatamente, carelesly, riotously, la∣uishly, out of order and fashion, flan∣tinglie. Sfoggiatore, a riotous, lauish, flanting fabian, a carelesse fellow, an vnthrift. Sfóglia, Sfogliata, a kinde of pye-crust which we call puff-paste. Sfogliare, to pull off the leaues, to vn∣lease. Sfóglio, a flat fish called a sole. Sfoia, Sfoiata, a sole fish. Sfoiato, glutted, cloide or cooled or tamed with leacherie. Sfondare, to sinke downe, to breake out the bottom, to splint a ship. Sfondata, an ouerridden whoore, a stal∣lion rampe, an old strumpet. Sfondato, bottomlesse. Sfondillo, a kind of great oyster. Also a kinde of herbe the iuice whereof makes haire to curle, called the holy-ghosts-roote. Sfondolare, as Sfondare. Sfondrare, as Sfondare. Also to foun∣der a horse. Sfongio, a kind of stone that is very light and spongious. Sforare, to boare, prick, or pierce full of holes. Sforato, boared, prickt, or pierced full of holes. a disease in a horse called the laxe. Sforgiare, as Sfoggiare. Sforicchiare, to tickle, push, or prouoke out. to rouze, to vndenne. to start a hare, to boare full of holes. Sformare, to disfigure, to deface, to de∣forme, to mis-shape. Sfornire, nisco, nito, to vnfurnish, to disaray, to deface. Sfortunato, vnfortunate, vnhappie, dis∣mall, haplesse, vnluckie. Sforzamento, an enforcement, a con∣straint, a compulsion, a rauishing. Sforzare, to force, to enforce, to constraine, to compell, to rauish. Sforzati, gallie-slaues, prisoners per∣force. Sforzatamente, enforcedly, by compul∣sion, or force. Sfórzo, force, powre, strength, vtmost abilitie or endeuour, compulsion or con∣straint. Sfracassare, to breake, to bruse, to hauock, to spoyle, to ruine, to destroy. Sfracasso, hauock, ruine, spoile, destru∣ction, ransack, hurlie burlie. Sfrage, Sfragi, a greene stone, not tran∣sparent, and printeth perfectly. Also a kinde of vermillion. Sfranciosato, cured or healed of the french poxe, vnfrenchifide. Sfrangellare, as Sfracassare. Sfrángere, frango, fransi, franto, as Sfrantumare. Sfrangiare, to vnfringe, to disadorne. Sfranto, as Sfrantumato. Sfrantumare, to breake, splint or shiuer in small pieces, or mammocks. Sfrascare, to rid or free from boughs, leaues, or sprigs. Sfratato, vnfriered, become an apostata, forsaken ones order. Sfreddamento, a cooling, a cold, a pose, a murre, a rheume. Sfreddare, to coole or take cold. Sfreddire, Sfreddisco, Sfreddito, as Sfreddare. Sfreddimento, as Sfreddamento. Sfregiare, to vngarnish, to vndeck, to disadorne. also to gash, to cut, to mangle or marke one ouer the face. Sfregiato, vngarnished, vndeckt, disador∣ned. Also gasht, cut, mangled or skard ouer the face. Sfregio, a gash, a cut, a skarre or marke ouer the face. Sfregolare, to crum, or crumble. Sfrenare, to vnbridle, to vnsnaffle. Sfrenata vóglia, vnbrideled lust. Sfrenatamente, loosely, wildlie, vn∣bridledlie,
furiouslie, riotously, raging∣ly, vntamedly. Sfrisare, Sfriso, Looke Sfregiare and Sfregio. Sfrogiato, a nose that hath no nares or nostrils. Sfrondare, to vnbranch or pull off the leaues, to vndeck, to vngarnish, to vn∣blossome, to make leauelesse. Sfrontare, to affront with some shame∣lesse trick. Sfrontato, a fronted. Also a shamelesse, saucie, impudent blush-lesse companion. Sfrosare, to prowle, to powle and pill by hooke or crooke, to breake good orders. Sfrosatore, a powler, a prowler, a brea∣ker of good lawes or orders. Sfuggire, fuggo, fuggito, to shun, to a∣uoide, or flye from, to escape. Sfuggiasca, Looke Alla sfuggiasca. Sfulignare, to sweepe a chimnie, to wipe away sut. Sfumante, fuming, steaming, smoking, venting forth. Sfumare, to euaporate, to fume, to be∣smoke or smoke out. Also to drye in the smoke. Sfuriare, to rage or be furious. Sgaio, a bird called a Huhole. Sgagliardare, to weaken, to enfeeble, to vnstrengthen. Sgagliardire, disco, dito, as Sgagliar∣dare. Sgaglioffare, to forsake and leaue all knauish and cheating tricks. Scagnolire, lisco, lito, to barke, to yelp, to baule or cry like a dog. Sgallinare i pollai, to steale, remoue, or take poultrie from their roost or nests. Sgalfarone, a kinde of broade brimd hat vsed in Italie. Sgamaiti, certaine tooles that woollwin∣ders vse. Sgamaitare, to beate or full woollen clothes in a fulling mill. Sgambare, to vnleg. Also to play gam∣bols, as Sgambettare. Sgambettare, to skip, to hop, to leape, to shake the legs, to play gambols. Sgambettate, gambols, skippings, or sha∣king of legs. Sgambo, crooked, stump-legd, vnhand∣some, vnproper, roynish. Sgangare, to shread, to mince or slice into mammocks or small pieces. Sgangherare, to set wide open, to loosen, to disorder, to pull off from the hinges. Sgangherato, wide-open, disordred as a dore from off the hinges. Sgangheratamente, disorderly, widely, without forme or order. Sgangheritudine, disorder, confusion, open widenes. Sgangotada, a trip, a tripping, a stum∣bling. Sgannare, as Disingannare. Sgannazzamenti, fopperies, fooleries, fond tricks. Sgarare, to vanquish, to quell, to ouer∣come, to outchide, to outskould, to make ones enemie giue ouer and yeeld, to striue and contend. Sgarato, quelled, vanquished, outchidden. Also treacherous, miscreant, faithlesse. Sgarbatamente, vnhandsomlie, without order, forme, manners, grace, or fa∣shion. Sgarbatezza, vnhandsomnes, graceles∣nes, ill-fauourednes, slouenlines. Sgarbato, vnhandsome, vnproper, grace∣lesse, fashionlesse. Sgarbugliare, to garboile, to trouble, to subuert, to turne topsie turuie. Sgargagliare, to gargarise, to gurgle. Also to blab or prattle careleslie. Sgargareggiare, as Sgargagliare. Sgargarizzare, as Sgargagliare. Sgargarizzo, a gargarise, a gurgling. Sgarrire, as Garrire. Sgarzo, the name of a tree. Sgattigliare, to clinch or snatch fast as a cat doth a mouse. Sgauonare, to catterwall, to meaw as a cat. Sgherrettare, to cut off vnder the knee, to cut off horses legs. Sghérro, a pratler, a blab of idle words, a catchpole, a sergeant, a base raskall, a slasher, a cutter, a swashbuckler. Sghiribizzato, freed or loose from hu∣mors, toyes, or sodaine passions. Sglanare, to pare, to flea, to pill, to gall the skin off, to vnshale, to vnhuske. Also to vnbarke a tree. Sgocciolare, to drop, to trill, to drizle, to mizle. Sgoleggiare, to gluttonize, to gorman∣dize, to deuoure, to riot in gluttonie. Sgolizzare, as Sgoleggiare. Sgoluppare, as Sgominare. Sgombrare, to auoide, to cleere, to disin∣combre, or rid away from a place. Sgombro, the fish called a Makrell. Sgomentare, to astonie, to dant, to mate, to fright, to terrifie. Sgomento, astonishment, terror, fright, danting, amazement. Sgominare, to vnfould, to vntwinde, to disintangle, to vnreele yarne. Sgommare, to vngum, to vnplaister, to vnglue. Sgonfiare, to vnswel, or alay any swelling. Sgonfietto, as Gonfiatóio. Sgonfio, Sgonfiato, vnswolne, alayde any swelling. Sgorbare, to blurre, to dash, to blot, to scrible. Sgorbia, a toole that grauers vse. Sgorbij, blurres, blots, dashings, scrib∣lings. Sgorbiare, as Sgorbare, to scrape, teare, gall, or scratch the skin off. Sgorbiate, as Sgorbij. Sgorbio, a scratch, a gall, or tearing of ones skinne, a marke, a skarre, or print of any hurt or scratch, as Sgorbij. Sgorgare, to gurgle, to purle, to gsh, or powre forth as water doth. Also as Suertare. Sgorgolare, as Sgorgare. Sgoruietta, a carpenters ruler, squire, or plummet. Sgozzare, to pull out ones throte, to take one a hole lower, to wring off ones neck. Sgraffare, to scratch, to claw. Sgraffiare, to scratch, to claw. Sgraffignare, to scratch, to claw. Sgraffo, the name of a goldsmiths toole. Sgraffoni, scratches. Sgramaticare, to play the foolish gram∣marian, or pedante, to dispute gram∣maticallie. Sgramfo, a fish called a crampfish, which hath the nature to make the hands of them that touch it to be astonished, though it be with a long pole. Sgranare, to vngraine, to pick or shale peason. Sgrandire, disco, dito, to become lesse or little, to decline or fall. Sgrasio, a kinde of goldsmiths worke vsed in chaines so called in Italie. Sgratia, a disgrace, a gracelesnes or vn∣handsomnes. Sgratiare, to disgrace, or disable. Sgratiato, disgraced, graceles, disabled. Sgrato, vngratious; nothing acceptable. Sgrattare, to scratch, or scrape. Sgrauare, to ease, or to disburthen, to discharge. Sgrauamento, an easing or disburthe∣ning. Sgrauidanza, a deliuerie of a childe, a mischance in childbed. Sgrauidare, as Dispérdere. Also to be brought abed. Sgrauio, as Sgrauamento. Sgretolare, to breake, to teare, to shiuer, or splint. also to melt, to thawe, or con∣sume. Also to mince into small piéces or powder. Also to crumble or to moul∣der. Sgricciolare, to cry or skreech as an owle.
Sgriccioli, owles, or screech owles. Sgridare, to chide, to braule, to scould at, to cry out, to shent, to rate as we do dogs. Sgrido, a chiding, a brauling, or scoul∣ding. Sgriftare, to scratch, to gripe, to clawe, to disfigure ones face. Sgrignare, to laugh aloud immoderately. Sgrignuto, ill-fauoured, crompt backt, crooked shouldred. Also one that gna∣sheth his teeth. Sgrillare, to make a noise as a cricket, to play cricket-a-wicket, and be mrry. Sgrinzare, to wither, to wrinkle, to shrink vp, or become leane. Also to hop, to skip to friske. Sgroppare, to vntie, to vnknot, to vn∣crooper. Sgrossare, to vnswell, to allay, to growe small, to cut small, to pare a piece of tim∣ber. Sgrugnare, to beate or marke one ouer the face. Sgrugnata, a whieret, a boxe, or clap ouer the face, a slash or gash ouer the face. Sgrugnone, Sgrugnolo, as Sgrugnata. Sguaglio, inequalitie, difference, ods. Sguainare, to vnsheath, to draw any wea∣pon. Sgualdrina, a scondrell, a strumpet, a whoore, a harlot. Sgualembrato, Sgualembro, a sidlin right hand blow. Sguanciata, as Sgugnata. Sguardare, to looke, to beholde, to view, to note, to marke. Sguardo, a looke, a view, a beholding. Sguattaro, as Guattaro. Sguazzare, to make good cheere, to fare well, to leade a merrie life, as Guaz∣zare. also to spend and lauish vnthrif∣tilie. Sguazzo, all maner of water or washed colours. Sguerro, as Sgherro. Sguerzo, squinted or bleare eied, crooked looking. Sguinzaglio, as Guinzaglio. Sguinzare, to slide, to slip, to glide as fish doth in the water, as one doth vpon the yse. Also to squirt water with a squirt. Sguizzatóio, a squirt or siring. Sguizzo, a sliding, a gliding, a slipperines, a squirt. Also childish sport. Sguizzoso, slipperie, glib, smooth as yse. Sgubia, a toole that shooe-makers vse. Sgusciare, to shae, to vnshale, to vnhusk, to picke. Also to crush. Sguscia lumache, a shaler of snailes, an idle-fellow, a foolish gull. Sgustare, to mislike, to distast, to disguise, to vexe or anger one, to conceiue an ill opinion, to giue or take cause of vnkind∣nes, or dislike. Sgusto, disgust, distast, vnkindnes, dis∣like. Sgustoso, vnsauorie, vnpleasant, yrke∣some, vntollerable, subiect to anger. Sguzzare, to vnsharpen, to abate the edge, to blunt. also to foyne or pricke at. Si, yea, yes, as well, euen as, as much, so, thus, such, euen thus, so as, a yea or an oath of affirmation, but if it be ioyned with a verbe, it is a pro∣noune, singular and plurall, him, to him, himselfe, to himselfe, them, themselues, to them, to themselues, namely speaking of persons. But if it be of things, then it makes the verbe passiue, as Si dice, it is saide. Si fa, it is done. Also it stands for man, men, the world, or euerie man, or they, as Si dice, it is said. they say, men saie, the world reports, &c. Sia, be it, it be, he be, or shall be. Sia come si voglia, be it as it will, be it howsoeuer. Sia doue si voglia, be it where it liste, wheresoeuer it be, be he where he will. Si bene, aswell, asmuch, so well. Also yea indeede, very well. Siare, to make a horse or oxe staie or goe backe with the carters voice, as our clownes vse to saie, hay, whoe, hait, &c. Sibbiare, to hisse, to whistle. Also blowe as the winde doth. Sibbio, a hissing or whistling with the mouth by keeping the teeth close togi∣ther. Also the blowing of windes. Sibbiolo, a hissing, or a whizle. also a kind of oten pipe or horne pipe. Sibilla, Sibbilla, a sibill, a prophetesse, or foreteller. Sibillare, Sibilare, as Sibbiare. Sibillo, as Sibbio. Sicamóro, a kinde of shadie tree with broade leaues like a figge tree, whose fruite commeth not out of the tops of the boughes as figs do, but of the very mids of the boughes, and is neuer ripe: there be many of them in England, and are called Sicamore trees, or mulberrie fig∣trees. Sicario, a priuie murtherer, one that go∣eth with a short sword to kill. Siccare, as Seccare. Also to proceede or issue out of. Sichetto.   Siccità, drines, drought, thirst, thirstines, greedines, barrennes, lacke of moysture. Sicco, as Secco. Si certo, certes, yea certainly, yes verily. Si che, so that, so as. Siciliana, the water-cheine of a bit. Sicilico, a kinde of waight about a quar∣ter of an ounce. also a measure of groūd twentie foote broade, and thirtie long. Sicilizzare, to speake the language of Si∣cilie, to play the Sicilian. Sicinnina, or Sicimina, a kinde of tree or bryers bringing foorth berries. Siclo, a kinde of coine or maight, woorth, or waying fower groates. Si come, euen as, like as, so as, aswell as. Sicofante, Sicofantia, as Sicophante. Sícomro, as Sicamoro. Sicomantia, as Psicomantia. Sicophante, a sicofant, a deceiuer, a para∣site, a bearer of tales, a false accuser. Sicophantia, deceite, false-dealing, sico∣phancie, a false accusation. Sicosi, a disease in the fundament making a wart like a figge. it is called in latine Ficus Marisca. Some take it to be cer∣taine little warts comming in eies. Sicumera.   Sicuramente, safely, securely, certainely, assuredly, sickerly. Sicuranza, safety, security, certainty, as∣surednes, suretie, warrantise, trust, con∣fidence, or honestie. Also troth or faith. Also a pledge, a warrant, a baile, a suretie, or a maine-prize. Sicurare, to secure, to warrant, to pledge, to baile, to assure. Sicurezza, as Sicuranza. Sicurità, Sicurtà, as Sicuranza. Sicuro, sure, certaine, secure, sicker, assu∣red. also safe, fast, negligent, fearing nothing, not in danger, quiet, careles, sance care. Sidere, the stars or celestiall signes which haue the course of the yeere in regiment. Siderale, as Sideréo, of, or belonging to stars or planets. Siderare, as Assiderare. Also to blaste. Sideratione, as Assideratione. Also blasting in trees with great heate and drought. Also a taking or benumming, when one is suddenly depriued of the vse of his ms and of all sence. Also a totall and absolute putrefaction and destruction of any member so taken. Sideréo, of, or like the stars, bright, shi∣ning, twinkling, starrie, sunnie, of the sun, heauēly, high, or expert, wonderful Siderione, an herbe hauing a thin stalke fower fingers high, a redde flowre and leaues like coriander, growing by riuers and meeres, and cureth all cuts and ga∣shes. Siderite, the herbe wall sage, or stone sage. Also a kinde of precious stone hauing power to cause variance betwixt men.
Siderite Achilléa, Mill-foyle, or Yar∣row. Siderite Heracléa, herbe-Robert. Sídero, the skie, or firmament of the stars. Sideroso, he that is planet striken. Sido, a starre, or rather a signe in heauen consisting of many stars. Sidracia, a kinde of paine in the head, but properly as Psidrasia. Sie, as Sia, Dante hath vsed it for Si, yea, yesse, so. Si è, it is, is it. Sienità, a kind of marble stone about The∣bes heeretofore in great request. Siepa, Siepe, a hedge, a mound, a fence, a quick-set-hedge, a trench or closure of grounds. Siepare, to hedge, close, fence, or trench a∣bout with hedges. Siepe, as Siepa. Siero, whaie, or butter-milke. Sieue, as Siepa. Sieuo, as Seuo. Si fattamente, so, in such maner, made in such sorte. Si fatta maniera, in such maner, fashion, or sorte. Si fatto, so made, such, like, thus. Sifinite, as Galatide. Siggéllo, a kinde of pouncer goldsmiths vse. Siggillare, to seale, to signe, to marke, to print, to close and shut, to confirme. Siggillaro, a grauer or maker of seales, a sealer. Siggillata, a kind of earth that is found in Lemnos, good against poison. Siggillatura, a sealing, a signature, a marke, or branding. Siggillo, a seale, a signet, a marke, a print, a branding iron. Siggillo di Salomone, an herbe called Salomons seale. Sigillare, as Siggillare. Sigillatura, as Siggillatura. Sigillo, as Siggillo. Sigimno, a kind of shield, target, or buck∣ler. Siglo, a kind of Persian coine woorth a∣bout seauen pence. Signácolo, as Segnácolo. Signalare, as Segnalare. Signalato, as Segnalato. Signale, as Segnale. Signare, as Segnare. Signatura, as Segnatura. Signifero, an ensigne or standard bearer. Also the zodiake or circle wherein the 12. signes are. Significante, signifying, meaning, signifi∣cant, plainly declaring. Significanza, a signification or meaning, a declaring, a notifying, an aduertise∣ment, a signe or token. Significare, to signifie, to meane, to shewe, to giue a signe, to giue knowledge or warning, to betoken, to notifie. Significatione, a meaning or significati∣on, as Significanza. Significato, as Significanza. Also signi∣fide. Significatiuo, that doth signifie. Signora, a ladie, a dame, a madame, a mistres. Signore, a lord, a sir, a maister, a sire. Signoreggiare, to swaie, to rule, to go∣uerne, to dominere. Signoria, signorie, lordship, worship, herie, ladiship, swaie, gouernment, dominion, Also a state, a dominion, a seignorie, a common-wealth, a mannoyr. Signorile, lord-like, stately, princely. Signozzare, as Singhiozzare. Signózzi, as Singhiózzi. Signorto, thy Lord, Sir, or Master. Signuzzo, a little signe, marke, or token. Sigurare, as Sicurare. Siguro, as Sicuro. Sigurtà, as Sicuranza. Silaba, a syllable of any word. Silabizzare, to syllabize, pronounce or di∣stinguish distinctly. Silacéo, of yellow colour. Silagine, the herbe called crowfoot. Silarano, a disease in a hauke. Sile or Sili, a kinde of yellow earth, which being burnt maketh vermillion or red colour for painters. Also an herbe called Sicelis, with the roote or seed whereof they were woont to season that wine which they drunke before noone. Silenite, a kind of stone with many colours in it. Silénte, silent, whosht, quiet, still, keeping silence, without noise or trouble, faire and calme. Silentiare, to silence, to still, to quiet, to ap∣pease, to pease, to put to silence. Also to keepe silence, to speak nothing, to hold his peace, to make no noise, to calme. Silentio, silence, quietnes, stilnes, no noise. Silero, Osier or small withie or spert. Silibo, an herbe so called. Siligo, raw, vntwisted silke. Silio, spert, osier, or small willow tree. Also wicker. Siliqua, a kind of measure in Italy. Also the huske or cod of a beane, pease or such. Also the fruit of the Carobe tree. Siliquastro, an herbe with a leafe like ale∣cost, called Pepper of India, or Pepper-woort. Sillaba, a syllable of a word. Sillabare, as Silabizzare. Sillepsi, maniera di construttione.   Sillio, as Psillio. Silo, he that hath a nose crooked vpward, a flat chamoy nosed fellow. Also he that hath a skowling looke, lowring visage or hangingeie-browes. Silogismo, a syllogisme or perfect argu∣ment of three parts inferring a necessa∣rie conclusion. Silogizzare, to argue, dispute or make syllogismes. Silpo, a syrupe, a potion, a drench. Silua, a wood, a forrest or a chase. Siluano, wooddie, forestlike. Also a forre∣ster, a woodman, a forrest man. Also of, or pertaining to the woods▪ siluane, wild, rusticke, like a swayne. Also a wild and sauage man liuing wholly in woods and desert places. Siluatico, as Seluaggio. Siluéstre, as Seluaggio. Siluoso, as Seluoso. Siluro, a kind of fish. Simboleità, sympathie or agreement in qualitie and nature. Simbolizzante, symbolising or agree∣ing, or sympathising in nature. Simbolizzare, to symbolise or agree in nature and qualitie. Simbolo, a signe, a token, a badge or note to know one by, a token giuen to one vp∣on certaine couenants, a secret and pri∣uie note signifying some mystery. a short and intricate sentence or riddle or my∣sterie. Also an vniformall consent of sundry opinions. taken also for the creed of the twelue Apostles. Also a kind of coine in Greece. Simetria, as Simmetria. Simia, an ape, a munkie or a babuine. Also he that counterfeiteth another. Simiaria, an apes den or lurking hole. Also anie apish tricke or condition. Simietta, a little munkie or ape. Simigliante, resembling, like, semblable. Simiglianza, resemblance, likenes, a simi∣litude. Simigliare, to resemble, to be like, to ap∣peare. Simiglieuole, as Simigliante. Similare, resembling, like. Simile, like, semblable, resembling, alike. Also a simile. Similissimo, most like. Similmente, likewise, semblably. Also a∣like, after the same fashion. Similitudine, a similitude, a likenes, a re∣semblance, likelyhood. Simiotica. giudiciale medicina.  
Simiótto, a little prettie ape or munkie. Simmetria, due proportion of each part to other in respect of the whole. Simo, flat-nosed, camoiset, hauing a flat nose. Also a kind of fish. Simolacro, an image, a figure, a statue, a picture, a counterfeit, a likenes or re∣semblance or patterne of any thing. Simolare, as Simulare. Simolatione, as Simulatione. Simolatore, as Simulatore. Simonia, simonie, buying and selling of spirituall liuings. Simoniaco, a man that offendeth in si∣monie. Simonidéi, a kind of verses called so be∣cause Simonides inuented them. Simonioso, of or pertaining to simonie, full of simonie. Simpathia, a sympathie or naturall com∣bination of things naturall in the opera∣tion of the powers, nature and qualities, as water in coldnes doth participate with the earth, in moisture with the aire, a naturall passion of one to the o∣ther. Simpathizzare, to sympathize or agree in nature and disposition. Simphonesi, a collision of vowels. Simphonia, an accord or consent in tune time or harmonie, a tunable singing without iarring. Simphoniaca, the herbe Henbane. Simphoniaco, of or belonging to consent or harmonie. Simphisi, a ioyning togither of the bones without moouing. Simphito, the hearbe Camfrey or Wall-woort. Simplicista, a sympler, an herbalist. Simplice, Simplicità, as Semplice. Simpósio, a banket or drinking togither. Simptoma, a sencible griefe ioyned with sicknes, or headach with an ague, an ac∣cident or affect following sicknes. Simulacro, an image of a man or woman, the proportion of any thing, the shadow, figure, likenes, semblance, counterfeite, picture or patterne of a thing. Simulare, to faine, to dissemble, to counter∣feite, to make a resemblance, to set a countenance or a face on a thing, to pre∣tend or make as▪ though a thing were not, to play the hypocrite. Also to be like to one or to resemble. Simulatione, simulation, faining or hypo∣crisie, a counterfeiting, a dessembling, a colour or pretence. Simulatore, a dissembler, a fainer, an hy∣pocrite, a counterfeiter, a pretender of that which is not. Simultà, priuie displeasure, grudge, ha∣tred, breach of loue with a dissembling countenance. Also dissimulation. Sinagóga, an assembly, a synagogue or congregation. Sinagro, a kind of broad flat fish. Sinaleffe, figura nel parlare.   Sinanca, Sinanche, the sicknes called the squince or squincie. Sinape, senuie seede whereof mustarde is made, mustard seed. Also mustard. Sinapismo, an oyntment made of mustard to raise blisters vpon the skin. Sinarosi, a coarticulation with obscure moouing as in the bone Talus with the boat like bone. Cyboides with the heele bone, and the wrest bones among them∣selues. Sincerità, vprightnes, true meaning, sin∣ceritie, truth, honestie, puritie, plainnes, integritie, neatnes. Sincéro, sincere, vpright, plaine meaning, true, honest, pure, iust, vnfained, per∣fect, vnmixt, without mixture, whole, entire, sound, vncorrupted, simple, with∣out dissimulation. Sinchiozzare, as Singhiozzare. Sinchiózzi, as Singhiozzi. Sincierità, as Sincerità. Sinciero, as Sincero. Sinciputo, the forepart of the head, or the vpper part of the head forward nigh to the coronall suture, which in late-borne sucklings is so soft and tender, that vnder it the construction and di∣latation of the braine called Sistola and Diastole is plainely perceiued, the bones of Sinciputo close their future called Sagittale betweene Labdoide and Co∣ronale. Sincodrosi, an vnion of the bones made by a cartilage, as is seene in Osso Pube the breast-bone and Ilio, when it is knit to Osso Sacro. Sincopare, to cut off, to diminish, to sin∣copate, to cut away. Sincopatione, a sincopation, cutting off, or diminishing. Sincope, as Sincopatione. Also a swouning, or sounding, or dead trance, a faintnes at the hart. Sincrisi, a comparison of things contrarie, or persons. Sincrisma, a thinne and spreading oynt∣ment. Sindesmosi, a composition of bones by the meanes of a ligament, as appeareth in the ioynts. Sindicare, to iudge, to araigne, to con∣uince, to detect, to condemne, to cast by lawe, to pleade for, to be tride by lawe. Sindicato, iudged, araigned, conuinced, detected, condemned, cast, tride by law, a chiefe court of magistrates, a generall sessions. Also a iudge or an aduocate. Sindicatore, as Sindico. Sindicatura, a iudgement, a sessions, a condemnation, an araignement or triall by lawe. Sindico, an aduocate or atturney for the common wealth, or for the comminaltie of the citie or countrie, one that hath the charge or commission to deale in af∣faires of the common wealth, and also vsed for a iudge, a magistrate, a iusti∣cer, or a ruler. Sinedócche, a figure in speech when part is vnderstood by the whole, or the whole by the part. Sinera, a fish that swimmeth through all stormes. Sineressi, a contraction of two in one. Sineri, a digger or worker about mi∣nerals. Sinfonia, Sinphonia, a concordance or consent in musicke. Singolare, one, one alone, singular, pe∣culiar, without companie, excellent, peerelesse, passing, or exceeding others. Singolarità, singularitie, excellencie. Singhiozzare, to sob, to throb, to grone, to blubbre, to yexe, to hichecocke. Also to clock as a hen doth, to gaspe. Singhiozzi, sobs, throbs, grones, blub∣brings, yeaxings, hichecocks, gaspings, sobbings. Singoltare, as Singhiozzare. Singolti, as Singhiózzi. Singoltire, tisco, tito, as Singhioz∣zare. Singozzare, as Singhiozzare. Singózzi, as Singhiózzi. Singultare, as Singhiozzare. Singulti, as Singhiózzi. Singulare, as Singolare. Singularità, as Singolarità. Singultire, as Singhiozzare. Siniscalo, a seneshall, or marshall, a stuard, comptrouler, or chiefe or seawer of a noble mans house. Sinistra, the left hand or side of any thing. Also a mischiefe, or crosse ill luck. Sinistrale, a left-handed man. Also an ill fortune or mishap. Sinistramente, sinisterly, against the haire, contrarie to expectation, vnluc∣kilie, vnhappilie, vnfortunately, not in good sort. Sinistrare, to miscarie by ill chance, to put any limme out of ioynt. Sinistrezza, sinisternes, contrarietie, op∣position,
crosse-luck, ill chance, bad for∣tune. Sinistro, a left-handed, man pertaining to, or that is on the left hand. Also a mischiefe, a mischance, or ill luck. Also a boxe, blow, or clap on the eare giuen with the left hand or with the back of the hand. Also contrarie, against, or op∣posite to a mans desire or expectation, vnprosperous, vnhappie, vnluckie or vn∣fortunate. Sino, vntill, so farre as, euen till, euen from, euen vnto. Sino alla bocca, vntill, or euen to the mouth. Sino a che, vntill that, till that, till when Sino a quanto? how long? vntill when? Sino a qui, hetherto, euen to this place. Sino a che tempo? vntill what time? till when? Sino a tanto, till that, vntill that, so farre as. Sinochitide, a kinde of stone that sorce∣rers vse much to call vp ghosts. Sinodale, pertaining to the councell or assemblie. Sinodia, a meeting together, or excom∣munication. Sinodo, an assemblie of men, a generall councell. Also a kinde of fish with a precious stone in his head. Sinomino, a sinonime, or word of one signification. Sinonia, or Sinophia, a white and gluish matter lying in the ioynts of mans bo∣die much like vnto the white of an eg, wherein if any grauell chance to growe the gout is caused thereby. Sinópico, of or belonging to the red stone sinoper or ruddle. Sinópio, sinoper, red leade, ruddle, red okre, or redding. Sintassi, construction, or order of con∣struction. Also a volume of diuers works. Sinterice, a consumption wherewith a man pineth away. Sintomato, troubled with Syntome. Sintesi, a figure when a noune collectiue is ioyned with a verbe plurall. Sinteresi, the pure part of a conscience. Sintessi, weakenes, feeblenes, a consump∣tion, wherewith first the soft flesh pineth away, and then the faster parts. Sintettico, one that is weake and brought lowe, or one that taketh no foode. Sinthema, a watchword giuen to souldi∣ers when they should fight. Also an in∣tricate sentence or riddle. Sintome, Sintoma, an affect, accident or passion following any sicknes, a sen∣sible griefe ioyned with sicknes, as one would saye an head-ache with an a∣gue. Sinuare, to turne or winde in the forme of a serpent, making hollow bosoms or fur∣rowes, to bow or bend. Also to pleit as garments do. Also to crankle in and out as some riuers do. Sinuato, gathered into hollow bosomes, enbosomed, crooked, bent. Sinuosità, intricatenes, crankling in and out, making of bosomes, or creekes. Sinuoso, that hath or is full of bendings, turnings, windings, that is indented, that is full of creekes, bosomes, or crinkle-crankles. Sinuta, an herbe which tasted makes one dronke. Sipa, Dante hath vsed it for Sia, or Fia, be it, be he, as Scipa. Sipario, a curtaine or vaile drawne when the players come vpon the stage. Siper, as well, as well because. Si perche, as because. Siphara, the adders dry skinne that he casteth. Siphio, a kinde of stone verie soft, but being heate in oyle it waxeth hard. Siphita, a disease called S. Vitus his dance. Sippa, a great bone fier. Sirasi, a disease in children proceeding of an inflammation of the braine. Also a fault in trees when by exceeding heate they be starued, and burnt. Sire, a title giuen only to Kings, as we say Sir. Sirena, a Syren, a Mermaide, a sea-mon∣ster. Also a kinde of serpent in Arabia that runneth so swift that he seemeth to flye, and is very venemous. Siriasi, as Sirasi. Sirico, a colour mixt with sinoper & rud∣dle. Also a kind of stone. Siringa, a syringe or a squirt. Also a reed, a pipe, a flute or a recorder. Siria, the star Canicula, of which the Cani∣cular or dog daies are called. Sirite, a stone found in the bladder of a wolfe. Sirócchia, a sister. Sirocchiare, to plaie the sister. Sirocchieuolmente, sisterlike, sisterly. Sirócco, the south east wind. Siróppo, a syrupe, a potion, a drench. Sirte, quickesands, or shelfes in the water made by the drift and sand and gra∣uell. Siruolo, a kind of wine so called. Sisa, a kind of syse or glew that painters vse. Sisach, some part about a mans stomacke. Sisamini, little bones about the ioints of hands and feete. Sisare, to syse, to glew, to stiffen. Sisamo, a white graine, corne or pulse, whereof oyle is made growing in In∣dia. Sisara, as Sisera. Sischiare, to hisse or to whistle. Sischio, a hissing or a whistle. Sisembro, a kind of tree. Sisera, the skirret roote vsed in salads. Sisigia, a coniunction or coupling. Also the coniunction of the moone with the sun. Also the new moone. Sisimbro, Water-mint or Balamint. taken also for Water-Cresses. Sisone, a small seed growing in Syria like to Parsely. Sissarcosi, a coniunction of the bones by the apposition of the flesh comming vp∣on them as is seene betweene the teeth and the iawes: as also in those ioints which muskles do inuiron. Sissietieride, as Protomedia. Sisto, an open gallorie, terrace or walking place. Sistola, the shortning of a vowell that is long. Also the motion or panting of the hart and arteries. Sistro, a kinde of musicall instrument of brasse, much like a horne. Sitabondo, Sitibondo, thirsty, dry, gree∣die, coueting or desiring. Sitiente, as Sitabondo. Sitre, tisco, tito, to thirst or long after, to be thirstie, to couet and desire ear∣nestly. Sito, a site, a situation, a seat or foundati∣on, the seating or standing of any place. Situare, to seat, to site, to situate, to found, or lay the standing of any place. Situatione, as Sito. Situra, thirst, thirstines, drought. Also bar∣rennes. Slacciare, to vntye, to vnlace, to vntangle, to vnsnare. Slancato, broken-hipt, back-broken. Slanciare, as Lanciare. Slandra, an olde whoore, an ouer-ridden iade, a roynish rampe. Slargare, to inlarge, to free, to extend, to spread, or stretch out. Slattare, to weane from sucking, to vn∣milke. Slauacciare, to shake vp and downe and dable in the water. Slauato, vnwashed. Also a kind of bright douncolour of a horse, a wash colour. Sleale, disloyall, false, faithlesse. Slealtà, disloyaltie, falsehood, vntruth.
Slegare, to vnbind, to vntie, to free. Slicciare, as Sbrisciare. Sliuidita, flappie, withered, faded in fee∣ling, lanke. Slizzigare, as Sbriscicare. Slocare, as Slogare. Slocatura, a remoouing or putting out of ioint. Slodare, to dispraise, to discommend, to blame. Sloffa, a fizzle, a fiste, a close farte. Sloffare, to fizzle, to fiste, to farte. Slogare, to displace, to remooue. Also to put out of place or ioint. Slombare, to weaken, to infeeble, to man∣gle, to cut vp the carkasse of any thing, to disioyne as a butcher doth a sheepe. Slongare, to prolong, to prorogue, to defer, to lengthen, to stretch out. Slontanare, as Alontanare. Slordare, to cleanse, to farme, to vnpol∣lute. Smaccare, to breake, to bruse, to crush, to batter, to tug, to tread vnder ones feete, as Sgarare▪ to beat flat. Smacchiare, to vnspat. Also to rouze a deare from out his shelter or hold or bu∣shes. Smacco, an ouerthrow, a battring, cru∣shing or brusing, a check or tant in a woord or deede. Also made flat. Smagare, to trouble, to vexe, to annoy or bring one out of his wits. Also to trans∣forme or misshape. to part, to seuer, to sunder, to shiuer, to flaw, to splint, to quell or put to flight. to charme, to forespeake or bewitch. Smagliare, to breake mailes, to vnmaile, to disarme, to breake, to crush, to batter, to bruse. also to possesse, or rauish with delight. Smagonare, to dismay, to affright, to a∣stonie, to swoune. Smagrare, to extenuate, to make leane, to take downe ones flesh, to grow leane. Smagrire, grisco, grito, as Smagrare. Smagro, leane, gante, meagre, poore in flesh. Smaltare, to enamell gold, to plaister, to parget, to belome, to bedaube, to ouercast with morter or loame. Smaltire, tisco, tito, to digest, to brooke, to put ouer as a hauke doth hir meate. Also the tewell of a hauke. Smaltitura, a digesting or putting ouer of a hauke. Smalto, plaister, parget, loame, morter. al∣so amell for goldsmiths. Smalzare, to butter, to dresse with butter. Smalzo, Smalza, butter. Smammire, Smammito, as Suanire, and Suanito. Smancerie, any kind of fine apparell, ray∣ments or ornaments about women ra∣ther worne for pleasure then need, any trimming, lacing, fringing or such orna∣ment to make vp any apparel besides the outside. Smanciera, a woman that loues and wa∣steth much to go finely and gaie in appa∣rell, and deuiseth daily new fashions. Smania, rashnes, fondnes, madnes, follie, rage, furie, fretting, chafing, rauing or such foolish humour or passion, braine∣sicknes, rising of too much abundance of good blood in the head, wherby the par∣tie falleth into such raging passions. Smaniare, to be light brained, to raue, to be fond, to be toyish, to fret, to chafe with anger, to be passionate, raging and brainsicke. Smanicare, to vnsleaue, to vnhaft, to vn∣hilt, to vnhandle. Smaniglie, bracelets about the arme. Smantellare, to vnmantle, to vncloke. also to raze, to batter downe the wals of a towne, to strip naked. Smantellare le mura, to raze or batter downe the wals. Smarginare, to take away the scurffe or skars of any wound, cut or sore. Also to take away the margine or side of anie thing. Smarrare, to pare or shaue downe. Smarrigione, as Smarrimento. Smarrire, risco, rito, to erre, to straie, to gad, to misse, to roame or wander out of the way. also to affright, to mate, to a∣maze, to astonie, to faint for feare, to straggle, to fade. Smarrito, erred, straide, gadded, mist, roamed, wandred out of the way, af∣frighted, amazed, straggled, lost, mis∣caried. Smarrimento, an error, a stray, a strag∣ling, a fright, an astonishment. Smartellare, to batter, beate, or forge with a hammer. Smartellato, freed from ielousie, or pas∣sions of loue. Smascarare, to vnmaske, to open, to dis∣couer, to reueale. Smascellare, to vniawe, or burst ones chaps or cheekes. Smascellare dalle risa, to laugh hartily, to burst ones cheekes with laughing. Smascherare, as Smascarare. Smattare, Smatteggiare, to play the foole or mad man. Smattonare, to vnpaue, to vnbrick, to pull downe bricks. Smembrare, to dismember, to carue, to breake vp, to seuer, to separate, to dis∣ioyne limme for limme. Smemoraggine, obliuion, forgetfulnes, vnmindfulnes. Smemoramento, idem. Smemoranza, obliuion, forgetfulnes, vn∣mindfulnes. Smemorare, to forget, not to remem∣ber. Smemorataggine, as Smemoranza. Smemorato, forgotten, not remembred. Also a forgetfull, obliuious, or vnmind∣full man. Smemoreuole, forgetfull, obliuious. Smemoro, forgetfull, obliuious. Smenticanza, obliuion, forgetfulnes. Smenticare, to forget. Smenticheuole, forgetfull, obliuious. Smentire, smento, smentito, to confute, to reuert, to make one say toong thou lyest. Smentita, a confutation of a lie. Smeraldino, a little emeraulde. Also a kind of greene called sea-grasse greene. Smeraldo, a precious stone called an eme∣rauld. Smerdamento, a beraying, a beshiting, a bedawbing. Smerdare, to beraie, to beshite, to becacke, to bedaube. Smerdolare, as Smerdare. Smergo, a birde called a diuer, a didap∣per, or arsefoote. Also a cormorant or a sea-gull. Smergolo, as Smergo. Smeriglio, a kinde of long wingd hauke called a merline. Some take it for a spa∣rowe hauke: and some for a ringtaile. Also a kinde of hard stone that will cut glasse, armourers vse to scoure armour with Also a kind of small shot or artil∣lerie like vnto a base or robinet. Smerlare le mura, to pull off the battle∣ments of any wall, to raze wals, to de∣face. Smerlo, as Smeriglio, as Smergo. Smetriare, to vnmytre, to vnbishop, to de∣grade from a mytre. Smiagolare, to meaw like a cat. Also to mumble as a toothlesse woman. Smilace, an ewe tree. Also the herbe rope∣weede, or weedebinde. Smilza, the milt or spleene of any body. Smizlare, to vespleene a man. Smilzo, bare, spinie, gant, leane, lanke, meagre, prettie, thinne, fine, withered, drooped, without spleene. Sminuare, as Sminuzzare. Sminuire, isco, ito, to diminish, to make lesse. Sminuzzare, to mince, to shred, to cut, to
slice, to crum into small peeces, to mam∣mocke, to moulder. Sminutamente, mincingly, slicingly, di∣stinctly, in small peeces. Sminuzzoli, mincings, mammocks, shreds or small peeces. Smiracolare, to woonder, to admire, or maruell at any thing, to do woon∣ders. Smirice, a stone that glasiers cut glasse withall, called an emerod. Smiriglio, as Smeriglio. Smirro, Smirno, a hard stone that glasi∣ers vse to cut glasse with. Smirnio, louage, or parslie of Macedo∣nia. Smisuratamente, vnmeasurably, exces∣siuely, beyond all measure. Smisuranza, hugenes, vnmeasurablenes. Smisurato, vnmeasurable, boundlesse, ex∣cessiue, huge. Smoccare, to snuffe or top a candle, to snuffe or blowe ones nose. Smoccatóio, a paire of snuffers. Also a mucketter. Smoccolare, as Smoccare. Smoccolo, a snuffe or candles end. Smoderato, immoderate, intemperate, mimodest. Smoglia, a washing tub, or a tub to laie clothes in water. Smogliare, to lay clothes in water before they be washt. Smognere, smongo, smonsi, smongiu∣to, or smonto, to milch, sucke, or drawe drie. Smongere, as Smognere. Smongiuto, milched, suckt, or drawne drie. Smontare, to dismount, to alight, to des∣cend, to supplant, to decline. Also to go a land from a ship. Smontare da cauallo, to dismount, to a∣light from horse. Smontare di barca, to come out of a bote, to lande. Smontare l'artegliaria, to dismount or vnbreech, or vnstock any ordinance. Smontare le scale, to descende or come downe a paire of staires. Smontata, an alighting, a dismounting, a descending, a landing place, or a lan∣ding. Also a blocke to light from horse∣backe. Smonto, as Smongiuto. Smórdere, smordo, smordei, smor∣duto, to vnbridle, to vnsnaffle, to vn∣twine, to vntangle. Also to rid or free from trouble, to bite in sunder. Smorduto, vnbridled, vnsnaffled, vn∣tangled, vnbitten, rid from trouble. Smorbare, to disinfect, to cure, to heale, to cleanse. Smorfia, a mowing, a mocking, or pish with ones mouth, a mumping, a blur∣ting. Smorfire, fisco, fito, to mock or make mouthes at one. Also to deuoure gree∣dilie, to parboyle. Smorsare, to vnbridle, to vnsnaffle, to nibble or bite in sunder. Smortaccino, somewhat pale, wanne, or sallow-coloured. Smortaréllo, as Smortaccino. Smórto, pale, wanne, grizlie, gastlie, deadlie, or sallow-coloured. Smorzare, to extinguish or put out any light. Smorzo, Smorzato, extinguished or put out. Smóuere, smóuo, smóssi, smósso, to remoue, to stirre, to disioyne, to put any ioynt out of ioynt. Smósso, remoued, displaced, moued, stir∣red, or put out of ioynt. Smóssa, a putting out of ioynt, a mouing, a stirring. Smouitura, as Smóssa. Smouimento, as Smóssa. Smozzare, to curtall, to cut off. Smozzicare, as Smozzare. Smucciare, as Sdrucciolare. Smugnere, as Smognere. Smungere, as Smognere. Smuccire, as Sdrucciolare. Smunto, as Smongiuto. Smuóuere, as Smóuere. Smurare, to vnwall, to raze or pull downe any walles. Smusso, a goldsmiths toole. Snamorarsi, to disinamour, to fall in dislike. Snamoratosi, disinamored, falne in dislike. Snasato, without a nose, vn-nosed. Snellamente, swiftlie, nimblie, fleetlie, tricksie, light-footed, quick in motion, speedilie. Snéllo, swift, fleete, nimble, speedie, light footed. Sneruare, to vnsinew, to weaken ones bodie, to make leane. Snidare, to rouze, to remoue from out a nest, to vnnest, to displace, to vn∣denne. Snocciolare, to crack nuts, to shale nuts, to vnloose, to resolue, to finde out a doubt, to pick or cull out, to rid, to vn∣tangle. Snocciolato, crackt nuts, shaled nuts, vnloosed, resolued, found out a doubt, pickt, or culd out. Snodare, to vnnot, to vntye, to loosen, to vntangle, to put any limme out of ioynt. Snodatura, the knitting of any ioynt. Al∣so an vnknitting. Só, is vsed for Suo, his, his owne. Also of Sapere, I wot, I know, I ken, I wisse. Also ioyned to words in composition, it signifieth vnder, as Sossopra, for Sottosopra. Soáue, sweete or pleasant in taste, hea∣ring or smelling, that hath a pleasant smack or rellish, soft in touching, delec∣table, delicious, soote. Also curteous or pleasant. Soauidico, one that speaketh pleasantly or vseth a sweete manner of speech. Soauiloquéntia, sweete or pleasant lan∣guage. Soauiloquénte, that speaketh sweetly, that hath a sweete sound. Soauilóquio, a kind of sweet and plea∣sant speech. Soauità, sweetnes, pleasance, softnes, deli∣ciousnes. Soauitudine, as Soauità. Soazza, as Cornice. Sobáttere, to surbaite as a horse doth. Sobattuto, surbaited. Sobattitura, a surbaiting. Sobbarcare, to drowne, to drench, to diue, to plunge. Sobbollire, to soften, to mollifie, to supple, to boile vnder. Sobbollito, softned, mollifide, suppled. Also a kind of wine so called. Sobborghi, the suburbs or boroughs of a citie, out streets. Sobero, the light wood called corke. Soblimare, as Sublimare. Soblimato, as Sublimato. Soblime, as Sublime. Soblimità, as Sublimità. Sóbole, stocke, issue, succession, genera∣tion, ofspring. Sobolire, lisco, lito, to increase a stocke or linage. Sobornare, to suborne, to debauch, to al∣lure or intice to euill. Sobornatione, a subornation, debau∣ching or intisement to euill. Sobrietà, sobrietie, sobernes, temperance. Sobrino, a cosin germain. Also a sisters child. Sóbrio, sober, modest, temperate, well ad∣uised, not drunke, well in his wits. Soccato, that weareth sockes, startops or bagging shooes. Sócchi, a kind of socke, startop or bagging shooe vsed in old time, a woollen socke. Soccingere, to vndergirt.
Socchiudere, Socchiuso, to vndershut, to shut or locke vnder. Soccinto, as Succinto. Soccido, Soccidezza. Looke Succido. Soccino, as Succino. Soccolare, to go stalking, to go on stilts. Sóccoli, stilts, such as they vse to goe with in sens, or startops. Also woodden pattins or chopinos. Soccómbere, combo, combei, com∣buto, to lye or fall downe vnder, to faile for feeblenes, not to be able to sustaine, to be ouercome or charged with any thing, to be subdued. Soccórrere, corro, corsi, corso, to suc∣cour, to assist, to helpe, to aide any man, to run vnder. Soccorso, succoured, assisted, helpt, vnder∣runne. Also succour, helpe, aide, assi∣stance. Sócero, a father in lawe, that is a mans wiues father. Sociabile, Socialità. Looke Sotiabile or Sotiare. Sociare, Società, Sócio. Looke Soti∣are. Socido, Socidezza. Looke Succido. Socórdia, sluggishnes, idlenes, luskish∣nes. Socrótio, the name of a drug. Sóda, a disease or giddines in a hauks head. Also a kind of fearne ashes wherof they make glasses. Sodale, a companion or fellow at meales and pastime. Also of one fraternitie, companie or societie. Sodalità, a fellowship, a society, a brother∣hood or a companie. Sodalitio, companie, fellowship or society. Sodare, to baile, to pledge, to answer for. Also to make stiffe or tough or solide, to fasten or make fast. Sodatore, a pledge, a baile, a suretie, a warrant. Sodézza, stifnes, toughnes, hardnes, soli∣ditie. Sodisfare, to satisfie, to please, to content. Sodisfatto, satisfide, pleased, contented. Sodisfatione, Sodisfacimento, a satis∣faction. Sódo, solide, tough, fast, hard, stiffe. Sódo al macchione, stiffe, resolute, vn∣danted, that will not come out for knoc∣king. Sodomia, the naturall sin of Sodomie. Sodomita, a sodomite, a buggrer. Sodomitare, to commit the sinne of So∣domie. Sodomitarie, sodomiticall tricks. Sodomitico, sodomiticall. Sodona, some kind of herbe or drug good in phisicke. Sodotto, seduced, deceiued, mislead. Soette, a kind of fish. Sofferénza, suffrance, toleration, bea∣ring. Sofferire, risco, férsi, férto, to suffer, to indure, to tolerate, to beare. Sofférto, suffred, indured, tolerated, borne. Soffiare, to blowe, to puffe, to gaspe, to breath, to blast, to pant. Soffiante, blowing, puffing, panting, brea∣thing. Soffiatore, a blower, a puffer, a brea∣ther. Sofficiénte, sufficient, able, enough, woor∣thie, apt, learned, well-deseruing. Soffice, pliable, yeelding, gentle, limber, that will not stretch. Sofficiénza, sufficiencie, abilitie. Soffietto, a boxe, a buffet, a whirret on the cheeke, a kirimirie buffe. Also a satchell, a wallet, a budget, a pouch. Also a little blast or puffe of wind. a paire of bel∣lowes. Soffio, a puffe, a blast, a blowing, a breath, a gale or gust or flaw of wind. Soffione, a musket, a caliuer, a petronell or such piece, a shooting trunke. a great puffe, blast, gale or gust of winde, a great paire of bellowes. Also a squib of wild fire. Sofista, a sophister, a subtile disputer. Soffisterie, sophistries or sophisticall mat∣ters. Sophisticare, to sophisticate, to adulte∣rate, to corrupt, to play the sophister. Soffita, a garret, a loft or roome in the top of a house, a roome or chamber with a crosse beame in it. Soffitare, to build bending wise like the rouse of a garret. Soffituto, build rouse or bending wise. Soffitto, prest or fixed vnder. Soffocare, to smoother, to stifle, to suffo∣cate, to strangle, to stop the breath, to choke, to kill. Soffocatione, a stifling, a smoothering, a strangling, a choking, a killing with stop∣ping the breath. Soffogare, as Soffocare. Soffogatione, as Soffocatione. Soffolcire, cisco, cito, to stay, or hold vp, to sustaine, to maintaine, to vnderprop, to vphold, to beare vp, to assist, to bolster vp. Soffólgere, folgo, folsi, folto, as Soffol∣cire. Soffolto, vnderpropt, staide vp. Soffomentatione, a fomentation. Soffondato, vnderlaide or laid vnder, as a foundation is at the bottome of a thing. Soffondere, fondo, fondei, fonduto, or fuso, to cast or powre downe liquor on a thing, to spread ouer and ouer, to caste abroad, to bewet, to staine or dye. Also to trouble and confound. Soffonduto, or Soffuso. Looke Soffón∣dere. Soffósso, an vnder-ditch, dike or trench. Soffragano, a suffragane or a Bishops vicegerent. Soffragare, to speake in ones part fauou∣rably, to fauour or helpe with his voice or suffrage, to choose by voices, to giue ones word, fauour or voice in any elec∣tion. Soffragatione, a declaration of consent or fauour, a giuing of ones voice in electi∣on. Soffragatore, one that helpeth with his good word or voice, a supporter or main∣tainer, an abettor. Soffragatório, of or belonging to him that helpeth one with his good word or voice at any election. Soffraginoso, as Suffraginoso. Soffrágio, a suffrage, a word, voice, con∣sent, helpe, opinion or good word about any election, the voice of men in giuing their consent, helpe or succour. Also a wracke in the sea. Soffrago, the ioint of the hinder leg of a beast called the bough. Also the pastern of a horse. Also one whose thighes are broken. Soffranta, the hinder part of the thigh. Soffratto, a defeature or ouerthrow. Also ruthe or pittie. Soffrenare, as Suffrenare. Soffrenata, as Suffrenata. Soffrenatione, a binding or fast ioyning togither of stones in a wall. Softriggere, friggo, friggei, fritto, to frie in a frying pan. Also to broile. Soffrimento, sufferance, toleration, suf∣fring, bearing, abiding. Soffrire, as Sofferire. Soffritto, fride in a frying pan, broiled. Also a kind of pan pudding. Also a kind of sauce or minced meat. Soffrutice, any maner of vndershrub. Soffumicare, as Suffumicare. Soffumicatione, as Suffumicatione. Soffumigare, as Suffumicare. Soffumigatione, as Suffumicatione. Soffumigij, as Suffumicatione. Soffusione, as Suffusione. Soffuso. Looke Soffóndere. Also indued, sprinkled, that hath spread ouer it, in∣terlaced and mixed with, wetted with.
Soga, a roape, a cable, a cord. Soggettione, subiection, bondage, thral∣dome. Also a casting or putting vn∣der. Soggettíre, tisco, tito, or gétto, to sub∣iect, to subdue, to inthrall, to van∣quish, to constraine, to bring or driue vnder, to conquer, to make subiect. Soggettito, Soggétto. Looke Sogget∣tire. Soggétto, a subiect, a vassall, a seruant, a thrall, a ground or subiect of any mat∣ter to speake or write of. Also put or ly∣ing vnder, in subiection, in danger to. Soghignare, to smile, to leere, to simper. Soghigno, a smile, a smiling, a leering, a simpring. Soggiacére, to vnderlay, to subiect, to lie vnder, to be subiect. Soggiacciuto, vnderlaide, subiect, laide vnder. Soggiogare, to subdue, to vanquish, to yoke, to submit, to tame, to make sub∣iect. Soggiontione, an vndersetting or ioining vnderneath. Soggióngere, giongo, gionsi, gionto, as Soggiungere. Soggionto, as Soggiunto. Soggiornanza, a soiourning, an abiding place, a soiourne, a delay. Soggiornare, to soiourne, to abide, to woon, to dwell or delay in a place. Soggiornatore, a soiourner, a dweller, a delayer, a remainer. Soggiorno, a dwelling place, an habitati∣on, a mansion, a delay or deferring of time. Soggiúgnere, as Soggiungere. Soggiúngere, giongo, giunsi, gionto, to adde, to ioyne, or set vnto or vnder. Al∣so to reply, to say more, to answer. Soggiungimento, an addition, a reply, an answer. Soggiuntiuo, the subiunctiue, ioyning or adding moode of a verbe. Soggiunto, added, ioyned vnto or vnder, replide, said or answered moreouer. Soggola, a part of peece of a yoke so cal∣led. Sóglia, the transome or lintell ouer a dore, a threshold or hanse of a dore. Also for a house or mansion it selfe. Also a sole fish. Sogliarda, a slut, a driggle-draggle, a pis∣kitching, a flurting drudge. Sogliardo, a mocker, a scoffer, a quipper, a flouter, a frumper, a iester. Also slouen∣ly, sluttish, or hoggish. Also a lubbard, a loggerhead, a gull, a foole, a flattrer, a cogger. Sogliare, to mocke, to scoffe, to quippe, to floute, to frumpe, to iest, or gibe. Also to sully, defile, or pollute. also to flat∣ter or to cogge, or to foyst. Sóglio, a place or seate of state where a king sitteth, an imperiall seate, a seate of maiestie, a throne or seate royall made of whole stuffe without any peece. Also a transome, a lintell, a sill, a threshold, or hase of a dore, or entrance. Also of the verbe Solére, I am woont, I am accu∣stomed. Sogna, tallow, grease, fat, sewet or larde. Sognare, to dreame, to raue in sleepe. Sognatore, a dreamer or rauer in sleepe. Sogniolo, a kinde of creuise, or crab-fish. Sogno, a dreame, or rauing in sleepe, a vision in ones sleepe. Also a vaine trifle not likely to be true. Sognoso, dreaming, rauing, full of dreames, that dreameth often. Sogozzone, as Sorgozzone. Sóia, Soiata, a mocke, a iest, a flout, a scoffe, a quip, a frumpe, a flattering, a cogging, a foysting. Soiare, as Sogliare. Soiardo, Soiatore, as Sogliardo. Sol, a note of musike. Also the sunne. Also alone. Sola, the sole of a shooe. Also a sole fish. Solach, a kinde of beast in Tartarie som∣what like a sheepe with a precious horne in his head, which at the sounde of a drum will daunce rounde so long till he fall downe, and so they be taken. Solaio, Solaro, a sollar, a loft, a seeling or floore of a house. Solame, comfort, solace, consolation. Solamente, onely, but, but onely, alone. Solana, a great broad hat to defende one from the sunne. Solano, the herbe nightshade, morelue, or banewoort, or deaths-herbe. Solare, sunnie, of, or pertaining to the sun. Also to sole a paire of shooes. Herba so∣lare, the herbe turnesole or wartwoort. Also a sun dyall. Solari raggi, the sunnie rayes or beames. Solaro, as Solaio. also a canapie caried o∣uer the hoste when they go in procession, in latine Perculum. Also a sun dyall. Solato, as Solatro. Solátro, a weede called wilde fetches, choke-weede, or broome-rape. Solazzare, to solace, to sport, to pastime, to blyth it, to comfort. Solazzéuole, sportefull, pleasant, blythe, buckesome, full of pastime, comforta∣ble. Solazzo, solace, sport, pastime, glee, com∣fort, consolation. Solazzoso, as Solazzeuole. Solbastrélla, pimpernell or burnet. Solcare, to furrow or make furrowes. Al∣so to till, to plough or breake vp the ground. Also to rowe, to cleaue, to de∣uide, to cut the waters or waues. Solcar' il mare, to rowe, cut, cleaue, or furrow the sea with the keele of a ship. Also to saile or passe the seas. Solcato, furrowed, made in furrowes, til∣led, ploughed, or broken vp the grounde. Also rowed, cut, cleft, or deuided the sea with the keele of a ship, sailed or past through the sea. Also the place wherein the streake of a cart wheele is printed. Solcatore, a furrower, a plougher, one that maketh furrowes. Also one that roweth in a vessell on the water, a seaman. Solchi, furrowes, streakes, plowings, til∣lings. Also gullets or gozels of water. also wrimples, as Solco. Solcio, the name of a kinde of fish, as Polpo. Solco, a furrowe, a streake, a wrimple, a gullet or gozell of water. Also tilling or labouring of the ground. Also a range or trench like a furrow to plant or set vines in, like a ditch. Soldana, as Soldanélla. Soldanático, the office or dignitie of a souldier, a souldiership. Soldanélla, sea solefoote, scuruie-weede, dogs-caule, sea with-binde, seabels, or sea coales. Soldare, to presse soldiers into paie. Soldatesco, soldier-like, like a soldier. Soldato, prest with paie as soldiers are. Also a soldier or man of warre. Sóldo, a coine called a shilling, the pay due to soldiers and men of warre. Sole, the sunne, the eie of heauen, the pla∣net Sol. Also of Solére, he is woont. Also golde according to Alchimistes phrases. Solécchio, a glimmering or glimppes of the sunne. Also a little sunne. Also a fanne or canapie, or shade against the sunne. Solecismo, incongruitie, solccisme. Solecitare, to sollicite, to followe, to hie, to speede, to hasten, to procure, to pursue, to disquiet, and make carefull, to vexe, to trouble, to make heauie or solicitous, to prouoke and lie instantly vpon or be earnest with one, to entice one to do a thing. Vsed also to tickle. Solécita, a sollicitation, a pursuite, a ha∣stning, an enticing or moouing to do a thing. Solecitatione, as Solécita. Solecitatore, a sollicitor, a purseuant,
also an egger or enticer to do a thing. Solecitamente, diligently, carefully, vi∣gilantly, speedily, pensiuely. Solécito, diligent, speedy, carefull, hastie, warie, watchfull, sollicitous, pensiue, sad, that neuer resteth, timorous and fearefull, full of carke and care, busie, much occupied. Solecitudine, diligence, haste, care, speed, warines, pursuite, carke and care. Also heauines, pensiuenes, trouble, vexation or anguish of minde. Solecóphano, whatsoeuer hath a shewe of solecisme, which may in some sort be excused. Sole d'in India, as Coppa di Gióue. Solénne, solemne, graue, annuall, yeerely, publike, accustomed, vsed or done at a certaine time. Solenneggiare, as Solennizzare. Solennità, solemnitie, a celebration. Solenizzare, to solemnize, to celebrate ordinarily. Solenizzatione, a solemnitie, a celebra∣tion. Solére, sóglio, solsi, soluto, to be woont, to vse, to accustome, to be accustomed. Soluto, woont, vsed, accustomed. Solére, diligent, heedie, watchfull, vigi∣lant, wittie, craftie, subtill, cunning. Solértia, diligence, heede, watchfulnes, vi∣gilancie, wittines, craftines, skill, cun∣ning, subtilitie in practising good or ill, quicknes or sharpenes of wit or sence. Soleticare, to tickle. Solético, ticklish. Soleticatione, a tickling. Soletta, a shooe-sole. Soletto, alone, all-alone, solitarie. Sólfa, prick-song. Solfanélli, matches of brimstone to kindle a candle with. Solfareità, sulfring, or qualitie of brim∣stone. Solfaria, a place where sulfre or brimstone is made. Solfarini, as Solfanelli. Solfaro, a brimstone maker, a sulfurer. Solfeggiare, to sing, prick-song, to solfa it. Solfo, sulfre or brimstone. Solforare, to sulfre, to touch with brim∣stone. Solforéo, of, or belonging to, mixed with, or of the colour of brimstone. Solforini, as Solfanelli. Solfro, sulfre or brimstone. Solicciuólo, as Solecchio. Solicuria, curiousnes in euery thing. Solidagine, the herbe wall-woort, or com∣frie or camfrie. Solidare, to consolidate, to make firme, whole, sounde, massiue, faste, solide, tough, or hard, to stiffen. Also to solder mettals, to strengthen. also to heale vp a wounde. Solidézza, as Solidità. Solidipiedi, whole footed, without toes. Solidità, soliditie, toughnes, firmenes, soundnes, stiffenes. Sólido, solide, faste, firme, tough, stiffe, hard, sound, whole, continuall, fully and wholie, strong, pithie, not hollowe, not broken, full and perfect, firme and con∣stant. Looke Insólido. Soligéno, begotten of the sun. Solimato, sublimate, or mercurie, or quick-siluer. Solingo, as Soletto. Sólio, as Sóglio. Solipungia, a pysmyre or flie, that pric∣keth and stingeth most vehemently in the sunne. Solistimo, a kinde of dancing among the Augures, or a diuination taken by the falling of the bread to the ground which was giuen to chickens. Sólitamente, woontedly, according to woont. Solitário, solitarie, alone, all-alone, with∣out companie. Solitário passero, a bird somwhat bigger and blacker then a sparrow, going alone on the tops of houses, and singing sweet∣lie. Sólito, woont, vsed, accustomed, woon∣ted. Solitúdine, solitude, solitarines, a liuing alone, an hermitage, a desert or wilder∣nes, where no man dwelleth. Soliuago, that goeth heere and there all alone, and shunneth companie, solitarie, wandring all alone. Solla, a flawe in any iron worke. Solla neue, soft, tender, pliable, that is not harde, halfe melted snowe, thawing snowe. Sollazzare, as Solazzare. Sollazzeuole, as Solazzeuole. Sollazzo, as Solazzo. Sollecismo, as Silogismo. Sollecitare, as Solecitare. Sollécito, as Solecito. Sollecitudine, as Solecitudine. Sollenda, a kind of wilde ducke or moore∣hen. Some take it to be a kinde of long shell-fish, or a kinde of muscle. Sollénne, as Solénne. Sollennità, as Solennità. Sollennizzare, as Solennizzare. Solleticare, to tickle. Sollético, ticklish. Solleuamento, a stirring vp, a prouo∣king, an insurrection. Looke Solle∣uare. Solleuare, to stir vp to any commotion or insurrection. Also to raise vp, to reare vp, to eleuate, to rise vp, to lift or holde vp. Also to helpe, aide, or succour, to de∣fend, to ease, to lighten or lessen. Solleuatione, as Solleuamento. Sollecitare, as Sollecitare. Sollicitatione, as Solecitatione. Sollicitatore, as Solecitatore. Sollicito, as Solecito. Sollicitudine, as Solecitudine. Sollione, a beere or coffin for dead bo∣dies. Also a kind of vessell. Sóllo, as Suóllo, soft, tender, smooth, or limmer in feeling. Sollucherare, to remember with plea∣sure things past. Sollucheramento, a pleasant remem∣brance of things past. Solo, alone, onely, sole, seuerall. Also so that, but, onely that. Solo che, so that, onely that. Solóe, as Psolóe. Solpo, as Polpo. Solséquio, the marigold or turnesole. Al∣so following or turning with the sunne. Solstitiale, of, or belonging to the time when the sunne is at the highest, and farthest. Vsed also for that which con∣tinueth but a little time. Solstitiale mórbo, a sicknes killing with∣in one day, or a short space. Solstitio, the staie of the sunne when he can go neither higher nor lower, which is in winter the 8. calends of Ianuarie, and in sommer the 8. calends of Iulie, at what time the daies be shortest and longest, called in English the sun-stead. Solubile, loose or soluble, any thing that may be dissolued or vnloosed. Sóluere, soluo, soluei, soluto or solto, to loose, to dissolue, to free, to cleere, to quit, to discharge, to resolue, to release, to dispence, to deliuer, to vndoe, to paie or recompence, to acquit, or purge. Also to melt. Soluto, solto, loosed, dissolued, freede, cleered, quit, discharged, absolued, re∣solued, released, deliuered, set at li∣bertie, dispenced with, exempted, &c. Solutamente, absolutely, freely, cleerely, resolutely. Also loosely, wantonly, dis∣solutely. Solutile, that will or may be loosed or vn∣done. Solutione, a solution, an absolution, a dis∣charge, a loosenes, a resolution, a pay∣ing, a loosing or releasing.
Solutiuo, soluble, that may be resolued. Soma, a loade, a burthen, a fraught or charge that a beast doth carie. Also mans body. Somaco, Somacco, a woode to die black withall called sumach, diers sumach, or leather sumach. Somare, to loade, to burthen or charge a horse, to carie burthens. Somaro, Somaio, a sumpter horse. Also a sumpter man. Somata, as Sommata. Someggiare, as Somare. Someggino, a carier or driuer of horses. Also a sumpter horse or man. Somessione, submission. Somesso, submitted, submisse. Looke Sommesso. Also a measure about the length of a span or hands bredth. Somiére, a sumpter horse, a sumpter man. Also a carier or driuer of horses. Somigliante, as Simigliante. Somiglianza, as Simiglianza. Somigliare, as Simigliare. Somiglieuole, as Simiglieuole. Somina, a multitude of any thing. Somma, a collection of things or words, the principal or chiefe point of a matter, an end, a summe, a conclusion or issue of any thing, the height, toppe or fulnes of any thing. a sum of money, consumma∣tion; perfectiō, accomplishing, the end of an account, the whole principall or total summe. Sommamente, exceedingly, greatly, in great summe or quantitie. excellently, chiefly, passing, so much as is possible. Sommare, to summe or cast vp account, to bring to a finall conclusion. Looke Som∣ma. Sommariamente, summarily, in conclu∣sion, breefly, totallie, altogither, compen∣diously, by the tops or highest parts. Sommario, a summarie, an abridgement, an epitomie, a chiefe or principall aboue others. Sommata, a kind of meate made of the paps of a sow, powdred and broyled. Sommati, great personages or men of dignitie, the chiefe persons of a citie, the pieres of a realme. Sommato, Empire, dominion, chiefe rule, soueraigntie. Sommérgere, mergo, mersi, merso, to drowne, to diue, to ducke, to plunge or ouerwhelme in the water, to sinke in the water. Sommersione, a drowning, a plunging in the water. Somrso, drowned, dipped, plunged, di∣ued, duckt, dipped, sunke or ouerwhel∣med in the water. Sommessa, the length of a span or hand∣breadth, a hand shaft so called of our drapers. Sommessamente, submissiuely, humbly, lowly, mildly, basely. Sommessione, submission, humblenes, lowlines, demisnes, faintnes, an hum∣bling, a putting vnder. Sommesso, submitted, subdued, brought or put vnder, subiected, brought in sub∣iection. Also submisse, submissiue, hum∣ble, milde, meeke, demisse, temperate, faint, abiect, base minded, lowly. Also low or base in voice. Also a kind of mea∣sure about a handfull or a spans length, which our Drapers of London call a shafts-man. Also a heape, a lumpe or masse of any thing close compact togi∣ther. Somméttere, metto, misi, messo, to sub∣mit, to subiect, to subdue, to put or bring vnder, to bowe downe, to humble, to de∣base, to giue place. Somministrare, as Sumministrare. Somministratione, as Sumministra∣tione. Somministratore, as Sumministra∣tore. Sommissimamente, as Sommamente. Sommissione, as Sommessione. Sommissiuo, submissiue, humble, lowly, demisse. Sommista, a summer, a caster or keeper of accounts. Sommità, the tip, top or height of any thing, the vtmost top. Sommo, highest, greatest, extreame, vt∣most, principall, passing, excellent, chiefe, notable, so much as more cannot be, be∣yond compare, important, noble, especi∣all or soueraigne. Also the top or height of any thing. also a kind of great waight in Italy. Also a kind of coine. Sommo bene, the chiefest or highest feli∣citie of man. Sommouére, móuo, móssi, mósso, to re∣mooue, take away, laie aside or take from vnder, to remooue or carrie sarre off, to driue out of place, to cause to auoide, to lay apart. Sommosso, remooued, taken away, laide aside or taken from vnder. Sommozzare, as Sommérgere, but properly when a horsed doth thrust down his head at the stop or in any other ac∣tion of riding. Sonabile, that soundeth or ringeth shrill, that may be roong or plaide vpon. Sonagli, little haukes bels. Also taken for a mans stones. Also bubbles in the wa∣ter. Sonaglia, a kind of serpent in India, which going maketh a iangling as if it were of bels. Sonagliera, hathbeene vsed for a mans priuie parts. Also a set of bels as morris dancers dance with. Sonaglietti, little haukes bels or childrens rattles. Sonaglio, a little bell, a haukes bell, a rat∣tle. Sonare, to sound, to resound, to ring bels, to play on any instrument, to winde a horne, to sound a trumpet, to make a noise, to rustle. Sonato, sounded, resounded, roong, plaid, wound, &c. made a noise. Sonanza, a sound, a resounding, a noise, a ringing. Sonare le campane, to ring the bels. Sonare di tamburo, to dub or sound vpon a drum. Sonare di lauto, to play vpon a lute. Sonare d'instrumento, to play vpon any instrument. Sonare la trombetta, to sound, to clange a trumpet. Sonare il corno, to winde, or sounde a horne. Sonata, a sounding or fit of mirth. Sonatiuo, any thing that sounds, or giuing a sound, resounding. Sonatore, a sounder, a minstrell, a fidler, a musition, a plaier vpon instruments. Sonci, there are, are there? Sonco, an herbe called sowthistle, where∣of be two kindes, the one prickled, the other not prickled. Sonettare, to compose, write, or sing son∣nets. Sonettiere, a composer of sonnets. Sonetto, a sonnet, a canzonet, a song. Soneuole, that yeeldeth a sound, soun∣ding, full of noise, resounding. Songia, tallow, fat, grease, sewet, larde or seame of hogs. Songiare, to tallow, to larde, to grease. Songioso, fattie, lardie▪ greasie, tallowish. Sonacchiare, to slumber, to be drouzie. Sonacchione, a sluggard, a slug, a slug∣gabed, a heauie, drouzie, lumpsh fellow. Sonacchioso, drouzie, slumbring, slee∣pie, sluggish, heauie, lumpish, a slug∣gabed. Sónito, a sound, a rustling, a crash, a blu∣string, a roariu noise. Sonnacchiare, Sonnachioso, as Sonac∣chiare. Sonniferare, as Sonacchiare. Sonnifero, that bringeth or causeth sleep. Sonno, sleepe, slumber, a nap of sleepe. al∣so
rest, calmenes, or quietnes. Vsed also for night. Sonnolente, as Sonacchioso. Sonnolénza, sleepe, slumber, drouzines. Sono, a sound, a resounding, a voice, a speech, a noise, a worde, a tune, a note Also the first person singular of the pre∣sent tence, and the third person plurall of the same tence of the Indicatiue moode of the verbe Essere, I am, I ap∣pertaine vnto, and so soorth. Also they are. Looke Essere. Sonorità, shrilnes, a cleere resounding, loudnes. Sonóro, shrill, cleere resounding, cleere voiced, loud, roaring, ringing. Sonocchiare, as Sonacchiare. Sonocchioso, as Sonacchioso. Sontici, a kinde of disease or infection, or rot that comes to cattle. Sontico, noisome, hurtfull. Sontico mórbo, a continuall and ex∣treeme sicknes that hangeth long vpon a man, and is ended within no certaine time. Sontuoso, sumptuous, stately, costly, pro∣digal, lauish, outragious in spending, prfuse. Sontuosità, sumptuousnes, statelines, cost∣lines, prodigalitie, profusenes. Sopalco, a lofte, a sollar floore, a stage. Soperchiare, to vanquish, or ouercome with superfluitie, to exceede. also to mis∣use or offer wrong with oddes or ad∣uantage, as to take one pissing against a wall. Soperchiaria, a superchierie, a wrong or iniury offred with ods or aduantage. al∣so superfluitie, an affront. Soperchiatore, one that wrongeth or mis∣useth another man hauing ods or aduan∣tage of him. Soperchiatura, as Soperchiaria. Soperchieria, as Soperchiaria. Sopérchio, superfluous, ouermuch, more then needs. Soperstitione, as Superstitione. Soperstitioso, as Superstitoso. Sophia, flixweed, flixwoort, or laskewort. Also wisedome or sapience. Sophismo, a true seeming argument, a syllgisme, a fallacie in disputation, a deceitfull sentence, an oration or sen∣tence seeming to be true, but false in∣deede, a cauill or sophistication. Sophista, a sophister or subtile disputer, he that professeth philosophie for lucre or vaineglorie, a deceiuer vnder an elo∣quent or craftie speaking. Sophisticare, to sophisticate, to adulte∣rate, to counterfeit, to argue subtily, to deceiue. Sophisticarie, sophistries, sophistications, deceits. Sophisticatione, a sophistication, an a∣dulterating, a counterfeit, a deceit. Sophistico, sophisticall, deceitfull. Sophrone, a temperate person. Sophronisteri, the two teeth which grow last of all, when a man is about twentie yeeres old. Sophrósina, taken for the vertue tempe∣rance. a bridling of carnall appetites and lust. Sopi, a kind of great cuttle fish. Sopire, pisco, pito, to bring or lull a sleep, to appease, to still, to whosht, to set at rest. Sopito, brought or luld asleepe, appeased, stild or whosht, set at rest. Sópore, a dead swoune, deepe sleepe or drousie sicknes. Soppa, a sop, a toste in drinke, browes. Also vsed for broth or pottage with breade in it. Sopanno, Sopano, vnder ones clothes, closely, vnder hand, vnderboord. Soppare, to sop, to steepe or lay in sops. Soppediano, as Soppidiano. Sopperimento, as Suplimento. Sopperire, as Suplire. Sopperito, as Suplito. Soppiantare, to plant vnderneath, to vn∣der plant and set vp a thing bending to the ground, as vines or hops, to supplant. Soppiare, to blow, to puffe. Soppiatone, a huffe-suffe, a puffing fel∣low, a blower, a pursie broken winded iade, a sneaking lurking companion, a gull, a foole. Also a close, slie, secret fel∣low. Also a cuffe or boxe giuen on the cheeke, a clap, a whirret. Soppidiano, a presse or wardrop to laye roabes or clothes in. Also a settle before a beds side. Sopplica, as Suplica. Sopplicante, as Suplicante. Sopplicare, as Suplicare. Sopplicatione, as Suplicatione. Sopplicheuole, as Suplicheuole. Sopplimento, as Suplimento. Sopplire, as Suplire. Sopplita, a supply, an assistance, an helpe at a pinch, a subsidie. Soppónere, Sopporte, as Sottoporre. Sopportare, to tolerate, to beare, to suf∣fer, to endure, to support, to vnderbeare, to conuaie vnder. Sopportatione, a toleration, a bearing, a suffring, a supporting, an vnderbea∣ring. Supportabile, tollerable, that may be-borne or endured. Sopporteuole, as Sopportabile. Soppórtico, an vnderporch. Soppósta, a kinde of plaister for a horse, or a poultis. Also a pessarie, or suppo∣sitorie. Soppósto, as Sottoposto. Soppozzare, as Sommérgere. Soppréssa, a presse for clothes. Also a pillo∣rie. Also prest vnder. Also a cheese fat. Soppressada, a kinde of meate vsed in Italie. Soppressare, to suppresse, to ouertread, to presse-downe or vnder, to keepe downe, to keepe secret, or in silence. Also to dull and suffocate. Soppressione, a suppressing, a pressing downe, a keeping downe, a stopping or staying, suppression. Sopprésso, suppressed, troden or prest down, kept vnder or downe, staid, stopt, hid, concealed, beaten vnder, drowned, boulged, vnder-printed. Soppressore, a suppressor, an ouertrea∣der. Sopprimere, primo, primei, primuto, as Soppressare. Sopra, aboue, ouer, vpon, before, aloft, on high, on the top, besides, more then, be∣yond, moreouer, ouer and aboue. Soprabondante, superaboundant, excee∣ding, excelling. Soprabondanza, superaboundaunce, store, plentie. Soprabondare, to superabound, to ouer-exceede, to leaue ouerplus, to be super∣fluous, or ouermuch. Soprabondéuole, as Soprabondante. Sopra calcie, vpper hosen, bootehosen, drawing slops. Sopra caricare, to surcharge. Sopracarico, a surcharge. Sopra cibo, any thing or meate, besides ordinarie meate and drinke. Sopra castaldo, the name of a magistrate in Venice. Sopra ciélo, a canapie, a cloth of estate, a testerne of a bed. Also a kinde of fish. Sopra ciglio, the eie-browes of any crea∣ture, as Superciglio. Sopra cinghi, a surcingle or long guirt. Sopra cinghiare, to sursingle, to ouerguirt. Sopra cigna, as Sopra cinghia. Sopra cignere, as Sopra cinghiare. Sopra cinto, sursingled, ouerguirt. Sopra comito, a master, a mastersmate, or boteson of a ship. Sopra correre, corro, corsi, corso, to runne vpon or aboue, to ouerrun. Sopradatio, the name of a magistrate in
Venice, ouer the custome, and custome house. Sopradetto, spoken and said before, aboue saide, fore-saide, fore-aleaged, fore-spoken, aboue-named. Sopradire, dico, dissi, detto, to say more∣ouer, to adde in words or speaking. Sopradurre, duco, dussi, dotto, to bring moreouer and aboue them that bee brought alreadie. Sopra éssere, sopra sono, sui, stato, to remaine, to be left, to be, to suruiue, or be aliue after other, to be superfluous or more then enough, to be ouer or vpon. Sopra fabricare, to builde or frame ouer or vpon. Soprafare, to ouer-do, to ouercome, to ex∣ceede. Also to insult vpon, to wrong. Soprafatto, ouerdone, ouercome, exceeded, insulted vpon, wronged. Soprafódro, a false scabberd of a rapier. Sopra giudicare, to oueriudge, to ouer∣dome. Sopragiuditio, an oueriudgement, an ouerdoome. Sopragiúgnere, as Sopragiungere. Sopragiúngere, giongo, gionsi, gionto, to adde moreouer, to ouertake one by the way, to come ouer one, to go beyond one, to ariue or come to any place on a so∣daine, as Soprauenire. Sopragiunto, added or replide moreouer, ouertaken by the way, come ouer one, gone beyond another, come vpon, arri∣ued or come to a place by chance, as So∣prauenuto. Sopragiunta, an addition, an ouertaking, a vantage ouer and besides any bar∣gaine. Soprahumano, more then humane, aboue humane, super naturall. Sopra insegna, an outward signe, token, or garment, an vpper garment, a super∣scription. Sopraintendénte, a suruayer, an ouer∣seer, a controuler, a superintendent. Sopraintendénza, a suruaying, an ouer∣seeing, a superintendencie. Sopra létto, any thing to couer or lay o∣uer a bed, a testern of a bed. Also a kind of great male. Sopraligare, to binde vpon another thing. Sopraliminare, a transome or a lintell ouer a dore. Sopralto, highest, or high aboue others. Also a chiefe treble in musicke. Sopramano, ouer-hand, aboue-hand, a blow giuen aboue-hand, an aduan∣tage. Sopramercato, aduantage giuen in buy∣ing and selling aboue the bargaine. Sopraméttere, metto, misi, messo, to ouerlay, to put or set vpon. Sopra messo, ouerlayde, put or set vpon. Sopramódo, aboue-measure, exceeding∣lie. Soprana, an vpper garment, a sauegard, a kirtle. Also the treble string of any instrument. Sopranatare, to ouerswim, to swim ouer. Sopranaturale, supernaturall. Soprandare, vado, andai, andato, to ouergo, to outgoe. Also to climbe or goe vpon, to climbe or passe or go ouer. Sopranità, soueraintie, eminencie, su∣premacie. Soprano, soueraigne, chiefe, eminent, su∣preme. Also the treble in musike. Sopranomare, to surname, to nickname. Sopranóme, a surname, a nickname, a byname. Soprapagato, ouerpaide, surpaide, more then paide. Soprapartitori, the chiefe feathers of a hauke. Soprapendénte, ouerhanging, hanging ouer. Soprapéndere, to hang ouer. Soprapeso, ouerhangd. Also ouerwaight, or more then measure. Sopraporre, póngo, posi, pósto, to lay, set or put ouer vpon or aboue, to ouer∣lay. Soprapósto, laide, set, or put aboue or ouer, ouerlaide. Soprapósta, as Sourapósta. Soprapréndere, to surprise, to ouertake, to ouerreach. Soprapreso, surprized, ouertaken, ouer∣reacht. Soprapiú, an ouerplus, or aduantage giuen aboue the bargaine. Soprare, as Superare. Soprariccio, pile vpon pile, the ritchest veluet or cloth of gold that is. Soprarogare, as Superarogare. Soprarogatione, as Superarogatione. Soprascritta, a superscription, an inscrip∣tion, a writing vpon. Soprascrittione, as Soprascritta. Soprascriuere, to write ouer or vpon. Soprascritto, ouerwritten, written vpon, written before, abouewritten. Soprasedenza, delay, deferring, suspence, consideration, a stay of time, a demurre in law. Soprasedére, to sit vpon, to sit ouer, to consider, to ponder, to muse vpon, to su∣spend, to stay, to demur, to omit or leaue to doe a thing, to leaue off, to cease, to spare, to let passe. Sopraseduto, sitten vpon or ouer, conside∣dered, paused, pondred, mused, suspen∣ded, staide, demurred, omitted or left to do a thing, left off, ceased, spared, let passe. Soprasédie, a supersedies. Soprasegnale, as Soprainsegna. Sopraséllo, a burthen, an ouerlading of ones hart. Soprasóma, an vpper burthen, a sur∣charge. Sopraspalle, a hood or garment ouer ones shoulders. Soprastante, a superintendent, a surueier, an ouerseer, a comptrouler. Soprastanza, an vpper lodging. Soprastare, as Soprasédere, to stand vp∣on. Also to remaine. Soprastrare, to paue with stones, to couer or ouercast with perget, to fret any floore or roofe. Sopratenére, tengo, tenni, tenuto, to holde in delay, to hold off, to keepe in suspence, to suspend. Sopratitolare, to surname, to surtitle. Sopratutto, aboue all, chiefly, namely, es∣pecially. Soprauagare, to wander abroad more them needeth, & in trees to haue greater boughes or more then needeth, to extend or grow abroad superfluously. Soprauanzare, as Soprabondare. Soprauanzo, as Soprabondanza, an o∣uerplus. Soprauedére, to surueie, to ouersee, to o∣uerpeere, to see ouer, to looke ouer, to ouerlooke. Sopraueduto, suruaide, ouerseene, ouer∣peered, seene ouer, looked ouer, ouerloo∣ked. Also wise, warie or circumspect. Sopraueditore, a surueier, an ouerseer, a comptrouler, an ouerlooker. Soprauedimento, a surueying, an ouer∣seeing, a comptrouling. Soprauegnénte, succeeding, imminent, at hand, comming, hapning, comming vpon or ouer. Soprauenimento, a succeeding or com∣ming to passe, a hap, a comming vpon or ouer, a comming or arriuing vnlooked for, &c. Soprauenire, vengo, venni, venuto, as Sopragiungere, but properly, to come vnlooked for, to come vpon or after ano∣ther thing, to come vpon suddenly. Also to ouercome. Soprauenuto, as Sopragiunto, commen vnlooked for, commen vpon or after an∣other thing. Also ouercome. Soprauenuto, as Soprauenimento. Soprauénto, to haue the winde and wea∣ther
of one, to haue one vnder the lee, a mariners word. Sopra véste, any kind of vpper garment. Sopra vestito, couered ouer, ouerclad. Also any kind of vpper garment. Soprauia, aboue hand, ouer and aboue, be∣sides. Also an vpper way. Soprauolare, to flie ouer or ouer-flie. Sopraúso, ouercustome, aboue vse, beside the common fashion. Soprauóluere, vólgo, vólsi, vólto, to rowle, to tumble, to reuolue, or wallowe vpon or ouer. Sopre, as Sopra. Sopresciare, to presse, to suppresse, to keepe downe. Sopressione, a suppression, a suppressing. Soprésso, suppressed, pressed, kept downe. Soprimere, as Sopresciare. Soprósso, a disease in a horse called a ringbone. Soprusi, as Bischenchi. Sor, in composition vsed for Sopra, as we say Sur, as Sormentare, to surmount, to surpasse, &c. Sora, as Suóra. Soraglio, a marke of the feathers vpon the breast, whereby a long winged hauke is knowne from a short winged. Soracchiare, to play the sister. Also to spit or spaule. Sorare, as Soiare, to hollow or make void. Also to play the gul or shallow pate. Al∣so to soare in the aire. Sorbélle, as Sorbole. Sorbile, which may be supped vp as an eg. Sorbire, bisco, bito, to sip or sup vp any drinke or broth. Also to receiue in. Sorbibruódo, a greasie, slouenly feeder, a sipper of broth, a swiller. Sorbita, a supping, a sipping. Sorbitéllo, a sip or supping draught. Sorbitione, a sip or supping. Sorbito, sipped or supt vp any broth. Sorbitore, as Sorbibruódo. Sorbitico, sowre, sharp, or tarte in taste. Sorbo, a sippe, or draught of any drinke, Also a seruice tree. Sorbola, the fruite called seruice, or ser∣uice berrie. Sorca, a great shee mouse or rat. Sórce, Sorcio, a mouse or a rat. Also a kinde of fish. Sorcéra, Sorciéra, a mouse trap. Sorcéro, Sorciéro, a mouse or rat catcher Sorcétto, Sorciétto, a little mouse or rat. Sorcigno, a mouse dun colour of a horse. Sorcione, a great rat or mouse. Sorco, the eddie of a streame, the bub∣ling of the water. Also a whirle-poole. Sordetà, deafenes of hearing. Sordetto, somewhat deafe in hearing. Sordidezza, as Sordita. Sordidire, disco, dito, to be or make foul, vncleane, sluttish or filthie. Sordido, absurd, filthy, corrupt, vncleane, beastly, sluttish, vile, vnhonest, albe∣raide, foule, ill-fauoured. Also a nig∣gard, a paltrer, a dodger, a pennie-fa∣ther, a mizer, a pinch-pennie, a couetous wretch. Sordità, absurdnes, filthines, corruption, sluttishnes, absurditie, filth, corrupt matter, vncleannes, the sweeping of houses and chanels. Also auarice, coue∣tousnes, corruption by bribes, niggard∣lines. Also the dregs of the people, the rascall and vile sort of men or wo∣men, the sinke of a citie, the scum of the earth. Also deafenes in hearing. Sordina, a sordine to put in a trumpet to make it sound lowe. Sordire, as Assordire, to be or waxe deafe, to make deafe. Sordimento, as Assordimento, a deafe∣nes. Sordito, as Assordito, made deafe. Sordo, deafe or hard of hearing, that can∣not heare. Also he that speaketh not, or he that marketh not what is said or spo∣ken, that maketh no noise, that is not heard, that which is insensible, that per∣ceiueth nothing. Sorélla, a sister. Also a nunne. Sorellina, a little sister or nunne. Sorge, a mouse or a rat. Also he riseth. Sorgéra, a mouse trap. Sorgetto, a little mouse or rat. Sórgere, sorgo, sorsi, sorgiuto, or sorto, to arise, to rise, to growe, to spring, to rise vp, to appeere. Also to growe in height, to mount, to get vp, to surge. Also to purle, to bubble or flowe foorth as a spring. Also to mount, rise or to billowe as the surges of the sea. Sorgiuto or Sorto, risen vp, growen, sproong vp, surged. Also purled or bub∣led as the water of a spring. Also billo∣wed or mounted as the sea, Looke Sór∣gere. Sorgéuole, surging, rising, purling, mounting, billowing, bubling. Sorgij, all maner of mise or rats. Sorgimento, a rising, an ascending, a mounting, a purling, a billowing, &c. Sorgio, a mouse or a rat. Sorgiéra, a mouse trap. Sorgione, a great mouse or rat. Sorgitore, a riser. Also a rising of a hill, a high ascent, a promontorie. Sorgiuo, rising, flowing, raising vp. Sorgozzo, as Sorgozzone. Sorgo, the graine called turkie hirse mill, or millet. Sorgozzone, a blowe, a thumpe, or clap giuen vpon the necke or throte. Sori, a kind of fish. Soricaria, the herbe Mouse-eare. Sorite, a kinde of subtill argument that proceedeth by diuers probations, and af∣ter a heape of arguments is in the ende concluded of the first and the last. Sormontare, to surmount, to excell, to ex∣ceede. Sornuotare, to ouerswim. Soro, a sore hauke. Also a yoong lad that begins to haue haires on his chin. Also the first haires that appeare in a yoong mans face. Also a foolish gull, or shal∣low headed ninnie, a hallow pate, or do∣trell. Also a kind of tree like a chestnut tree. Sorócchia, Sorore, a sister. Sorpréndere, as Soprapréndere. Sorpresa, a surprise. Sorpréso, as Soprapréso. Sorra, a kind of daintie sauce. Also a fish eaten in lent that is like flesh, called Tunnie. Sorridere, rido, risi, riso, to smile, to leere, to laugh, to smile or laugh priuily. Sorridimento, a smiling, a leering, a laughing, a priuie laughing. Sorriso, smiled, leered, laughed, a smile, a leering, a laughing, laughed priuily. Sorsata, as Sorso. Sorso, a draught, a sip, or sipping, a whiffe Sórte, chance, fate, fortune, lot, destinie, casualtie, hazard, lucke. Also the state, qualitie, function, calling, kinde, voca∣tion or condition of any man. Also a porcion in an inheritance. Also an ora∣cle or the rolle wherein the answers of idols were written. Sorteggiare, to cast lots, to draw cuts, to put it to fortune as lottries are. Sortilégio, a diuination by lots or cuts. Sortilégo, a fortune teller by lots or cuts. Sortimento, a proouing, sorting, issuing, or comming to effect, a salie or issuing out, a lotting, or casting of lots, an allot∣ting by lots. Sortire, tisco, tito, to sort, proone, issue, or come to effect, to salie or goe foorth. Al∣so to make or caste lots for, to take or haue any thing allotted or giuen by lots or chance. Also to dispose or order, to lot or choose out plattes. Sortito, sorted, prooued, issued, or come to effect, salied or gone foorth. Also made or cast lots, taken or had any thing al∣lotted, disposed, or ordred, lotted or cho∣sen by lots.
Sortita, an out-rode, an excursion, an out∣salie, an issue, an euent, a salie, also an a∣lotting, a lotting or comming by chance. Sortitamente, by lots, cuts, hazard, for∣tune, chance, or hap. Sortitione, as Sortimento. Sortiua, that may or can prooue, chance, sorte or come to passe. Also a bubling, flowing, purling or springing of any wa∣ter. Sortitóio, the name of a goldsmiths tooe. Sorto, as Sorgiuto. Looke Sórgere. Soruenire, as Sopragiúgnere. Soruenuto, as Sopragiunto. Soruólo, an ouerflight, a surflight. Sorze, a mouse or a rat. Sorzéra, a mouse trap. Sosamele, a kinde of sugar bread or cake. Soscriuere, Soscrittione, as Sottoscri∣uere. Soscritto, a subscription. Sosina, a prune, a plum, a slowe, or bul∣leise. Sosinaro, a plum, prune, or slowe tree. Sosino, as Sosinaro. Soso, vsed by Dante for Suso. Sospecciare, as Sospettare. Sospeccione, Sospeccioso, vide So∣spérto. Sospéndere, pendo, pendei, peso, to deferre, to suspend, to delaie, to keepe one in suspence and doubt, to pause or rest, to put in doubt. also to hang vp or vpon. Sospeso, deferred, suspended, put in sus∣pense. Also vncertaine, doubtfull, feare∣full, carefull, hanging in doubt or sus∣pence, that cannot tell what to do, irre∣solute. Also hanged vp. Sospesa, a suspence, a doubt, a suspending, an entermission of time, an vncertain∣tie of minde. Also a hanging vp. Sospensione, as Sospesa. Sospettare, to suspect, to mistrust, to misdeeme, to doubt, to distrust, to sup∣pose, to deeme, to coniecture. Also to be∣hold aboue, to looke vpon. Also to see beneath or looke downe. Sospettione, suspition, mistrust, doubt, suspect, diffidence, distrust. Sospettiuo, suspicious, mistrustfull, doubtfull, diffident. Also that may be suspected, full of suspicion, to be fea∣red. Sospétto, as Sospettione, vsed also for admiration, or looking vpward. Sospettóso, as Sospettiuo, that suspec∣teth, or mistrusteth, or feareth. Sospicare, as Sospettare. Sospiciare, as Sospettare. Sospicoso, as Sospettiuo. Sospicioso, as Sospettiuo. Sospígnere, pingo, pinsi, pinto, to com∣pell, to vrge on, to thrust on, to enforce, to prouoke, to induce, to push out. Sospingere, pingo, pinsi, pinto, as Sos∣pignere. Sospinto, thrust on, compelled, vrged, enforced, prouoked, induced, lead vnto, pusht on. Sospinta, a push, a thrust, an vrging, a forcing or compelling. Sospirando, sighfull, wailefull, mone∣full, sobbing. Sospirare, to sigh or drawe a wearie breath, to sob, to gaspe. Also to desire feruentlie, or sigh after any thing. Sospiro, a sigh, a wearie breath, a sob, a gaspe, a throb. Sospiroso, sighefull, sighing, sobbing, gas∣ping, throbbing. Also pursie, that fet∣cheth winde painefullie, short-winded, much-blowing. Sospitale, that is cause of health, that dri∣ueth from danger. Sospittione, suspicion, mistrust, suspect. Sossidiare, as Sussidiare. Sossidiário, as Sussidiarij. Sossídio, as Sussidio. Sossiégo, compliments, ceremonies, ob∣seruāces, nice points of honour, respects, points, punctos of behauiours. Sossopra, as Sottosopra. Sossisténtia, Sossistere, Looke Subsi∣stentia. Sosta, losse or loytring or lingring of time, delay, or lingring. Also quiet, ease, or leasure. Sostantia, substance, or matter, goods, riches, wealth. Sostantiale, substantiall, materiall, full of substance, ritch, wealthie. Sostantiuo, a substantiue, that may stand by it selfe. Sostare, to linger, to delay, to loyter, to trifle the time idlie away. Also to sus∣taine, to stand vnder, to subsist, to stand. Sostégno, a prop, a supporter, a stay, an vpholding, a sustaining, a sustenance, Looke Sostenére. Sostenére, tengo, tenni, tenuto, to hold or stay vp, to sustaine, to maintaine, to support, to vphold, to abes. Also to with∣stand, to haue the charge. Also to beare or represent. Also as Sostentare. Sostenuto, sustained, vpheld, maintai∣ned, propt, supported, abetted, brookt, suffred, endured, Looke Sostenére, or Sostentare. Sostenimento, a sustenance, a mainte∣nance, an abetting, an enduring, an vp∣holding, a staying vp. Sostentácolo, that which sustaineth or beareth vp, an vnderprop, an vphol∣der. Sostentare, as Sostenére. Also to sus∣taine, to beare vp, to vphold, to vnder∣prop, to ayde, to fauour, to defend, to help, to back, to countenance, to nou∣rish, to abet, to comfort, to feede, to find, to maintaine. Also to endure, to suffer, to abide, to beare, or tolerate with paci∣ence, to forbeare. Sostenitore, as Sostentatore. Sostentamento, as Sostenimento. Sostentatore, a sustainer, a maintainer, an vpholder, an abettor, he that hel∣peth. Sostentatione, as Sostenimento. Sosténto, as Sostenimento. Sosternare, to strewe, to lay or put vn∣der, or in the bottome, to cast into, to a∣bandon himselfe to, to make all things inferiour or subiect vnto, to subdue. Sostillo, Sostillio, the dropping of rayne from penthouses. Also a ryme or falling mist. Also the strangurie, which is when one pisseth by drops and with great paine. Sostituíre, isco, ito, to substitute, to ap∣point, to depute, to delegate in ones place. Sostituito, substituted, appointed, depu∣ted for an other. Also a substitute, a deputie, a delegate, a vicegrent, a lieutenant, a commissarie. Sostitutione, a substitution, a delegation, a deputation, an appointing or ordai∣ning in place of another. Sostituto, as Sostituito. Sostrarre, to substract. Sostrattione, a substraction. Sostratto, substracted. Sóstro, a phisicions fee, a reward giuen to him that doth one good. Sotadéi, a kinde of verses so called. Sotéria, saluation or health. Sotiabile, sociable, that a man may keepe companie with, that may be ioyned in fellowship. Sotialita, fellowship, companie, societie. Sotiare, to associate, to accompanie, to ioyne, to match, to confederate, to coup, to fit, to make partake of. Sotietà, a societie, a fellowship, partaking or alliance. Sótio, a companion, a fellow, a make, a complice, a partaker, an allie, a confede∣rate. Also that helpeth, aydeth, or ta∣keth part, that is a fellow or compa∣nion. Sott'acqua, vnder-water, secrtlie, out of sight, in hugger mugger.
Sottana, a peticote, or such vndergarment. Also the string next to the meane string of an instrument. Sottacquéo, that lyeth or liueth vnder water, of vnder water. Sottalpino, of or vnder the alpes. Sottandare, to vndergoe. Sottarare, to eare or till the ground vn∣der. Sottascoltare, to listen or harken vnder or priuilie. Sottecchij, as Sottócchij. Sott'entrare, to enter or goe vnder, to vndergoe. Sotteránco, of or pertaining to things vnderground, of vnderground, that is vnderground. Sotterfugio, an escape priuilie, a slie auoi∣ding of danger. Sotterfuggire, fuggo, fuggij, fuggito, to auoide slilie vnder hand, to giue the slip, to winde ones neck out of the hal∣ter, to escape away priuilie, to eschue or scape the danger of. Sottérra, vnder the earth, or vnder ground, buried. Sotteramento, a buriall, an entombing, an enterring. Sotterrare, to burie, to enterre, to en∣tombe. Sottigliare, to make fine, small, thinne, or little, to sharpen, or to subtilize, to make slender, to refine, to make keene. Also to argue subtilie. Sottigliezza, subtilitie, subtilnes, fine∣nes, smalnes, littlenes, thinnes, slen∣dernes. Also slynes, craftines, sharpnes, keenenes, quicknes of wit or reason. Sottigliumi, all manner of small trifles, trash, odde ends, or shreads. Sottile, subtile, suttle, fine, small, little, thinne, slender, rare, light, delicate, keene. Also slye, wylie, craftie, wittie, learned. Sottilità, as Sottigliezza. Sottilizzare, as Sottigliare. Sottilmente, subtillie, craftilie, thinlie, slenderlie, sharplie, keenely, wittilie, finely. Sotto, vnder, beneath, vnderneath. Sottócchi, leering vnder the eyes, prying vnder hand. Sottocenturione, a pettie captaine, a lieutenant ouer a hundred. Sottocingere, to vndergirt. Sottocinghia, an vndergirt. Sottocinto, vndergirt. Sotto coda, a crupper seruing for a horse. Sottocómito, a boteswaine in a ship. Sotto cuóco, an vnder-cooke. Sottocuratione, the charge of any thing vnder another. Sottocuratore, he that hath the charge of a thing vnder another. Sotto custóde, an vnder-keeper. Sottocutaneo, betweene the skinne and the flesh. Sottodelegare, to commit any matter to another that was committed to vs by our superiors. Sottodiácono, a subdeane, or subdeacon. Sotto disténdere, to spred, strew, put, or lay vnder. Sottodistintione, an vnder-distinction, or subdistinction. Sottodiuisione, a subdiuision. Sotto entrare, as Sottentrare. Sottofibulo, a white, long, fouresquare ornament, which vestall virgins were woont to weare on their heads. Also a tache, or claspe. Sottofuggire, to steale, or escape secretlie, or from vnder, as Sotterfuggire. Sottogiacere, giaccio, giacqui, gaciu∣to, to lye or be vnder, to be subiect, to be situate at the foote. Sottogiaciuto, laid or been vnder, beene subiect, situated vnder. Sottogiúgnere, giungo, giunsi, gionto, to come, to arriue or reduce vnder. Sottogiunto, come or arriued vnder. Sottogola, the curbe of a bridle. Also the throte band of a head stall. Sottoguáttaro, an vnder scullion of a kit∣chin. Sotto hastare, to sell any thing vnder a long pole or iauelin set vp as a marke in the open field, as they vse in time of war or at least were woont to sell. Sotto legare, to vnderbinde, to tye vn∣der. Sottolinguio, the weazell of the throt. Sottolúcere, luco, lussi, or lucei, luciuto to shine vnder, to shine somwhat, to giue a little light. Sottolunétte, the name of a gold-smithes toole. Sottomaéstro, an vnder master, an vsher of a schoole. Sottomano, vnder-hand, closely, secretly, slily, in hugger-mugger. Sottométtere, metto, misi, messo, to sub∣mit, to subdue, to conquer, to put, bring, laie or set vnder, to put into the place of another. Sottomésso, submitted, subdued, conque∣red, put, brought, laide or set vnder. Sottomonire, monisco, monito, to warn priuily vnder-hand, to giue one warning or put in mind. Sottomórdere, mórdo, mórdei, or mórsi, mórso, or mórduto, to bite soft∣ly or priuily. Sotomóuere. Looke Sommóuere. Sottonascere, to be borne vnder, to grow or spring vp vnder, to bud or bloom vn∣der. Sottonato, borne vnder, growen vp or sprung vp vnder. Sottonodare, to vnder-knit, to make a knot vnder a thing. Sottonotare, to note or marke vnder, to subscribe, to note after a fashion. Sotto ornare, to adorne vnderneath. Sotto piantare, to vnder-plant, to vnder-set, to vnderprop. Sotto pónere, as Sottoporre, or Sotto∣méttere. Sotttoporre, pongo, posi, pósto, as Sot∣tomettere. Sottopósto, as Sottomesso. Sottopriore, a subprior. Sottorídere, rido, risi, riso, to smile or laugh priuilie, to make a countenance of laughing. Sottoscaglio, the arme pits or holes of a man. Sottoscríuere, scriuo, scrissi, scritto, to subscribe, signe or vnder-write, to write vnder. Also to fauour a matter, to as∣signe a cause why, to assent or yeeld vn∣to, to agree with one, and to be of his mind and opinion, to ioyne or take part with other in accusation, suite or vari∣ance against another, to write, note or register. Sottoscritto, subscribed, signed or vnder∣written. Looke Sottoscriuere. Sottoscrittione, a subscription, a signing, an vnder-writing. Looke Sottoscri∣uere. Sottosédie, benches or seats wherein men sate in the Theaters to behold, or where∣on iudges sate in courts. Sottoseminare, to sow vnder, to scatter priuily. Sottosentire, sento, sentij, sentito, to vn∣der-heare, to perceiue somewhat or haue some inkling of a matter. Sottoseruire, seruo, seruij, seruito, to serue, to accord, to agree, to helpe for∣ward, to serue vnder. Sottosopra, topsie-turnie, pell-mell, vpside downe, confusedly, helter-skelter. Sottosopraméttere, to turne topsie-tur∣nie, to confound pell-mell. Sottosopramesso, turned topsie-turnie, confounded pell-mell, Sottostríngere, stringo, strinsi, stetto, to binde straite vnderneath, to straine hard, to vnder guid, to ye or trusse vp, to hale in. Also to represse or re∣straine.
Sottotagliare, to vnder-cut. Sottotérra, as Sottérra. Sottoterrare, as Sotterrare. Sottotéssere, tesso, tessei, tessuto, to weaue or ioine to after or vnder. Sottoudire, odo, udij, udito, to vnder-heare, or as we say to ouerheare, to per∣ceiue. Sottouenire, vengo, venni, venuto, to helpe, to aide, to succour, to relieue or come at a pinch vnder. Sottouento, vnder the lee or winde, a terme that marriners vse. Sottraggere, as Sottrarre. Sottrarre, traggo, trassi, tratto, to with∣draw, free or deliuer from vnder, to sub∣stract, to take away, to diminish, to bring out of, to eschew. Sottratto, withdrawne, freed, or drawne from vnder, substracted, taken away, eschewed. Sottrattione, a substraction. Souagge, a goldsmiths toole. Souatta, an old shooe or the leather of a whip, or a strap. Souatto, a strap or leather of a whip. Souazza, as Conice. Souenimento, aide, helpe, assistance, suc∣cour or supply. Soueníre, vengo, venni, venuto, to suc∣cour, helpe, aide, assist or supply ones needes or wants. Also to remember or call to minde. Souenuto, succoured, helped, aided, assi∣sted or supplide. Also remembred or cal∣led to mind. Souénte, oft, oftentimes, many times. Souérchianza, excessiuenes, superfluitie, ouer much store. Souérchiare, as Sopérchiare. Souérchiaria, as Sopérchiaria. Souerchieuole, as Sopérchio. Souérchio, as Sopérchio. Souerchioso, as Sopérchio. Sóuero, the wood or tree we call corke. Souerino, a corke or made of corke. Souertire, as Souuertie. Souersione, as Souuersione. Souesciare, as Souuertire. Souige, a kind of little bird. Soura, as Sopra, and note what word soe∣uer begins with Sopra, may begin with Soura. Souracmito, as Sopracomito. Souracuoco, a maister cooke. Sourafodro, a false vpper scabbard. Souranita, as Sopranità. Sourano, as Soprano. Sourapósta, are properly hurts vpon the cronet of the horses hooses with setting one foote vpon another. Also a double stake at any game or play. Also an o∣uerlaying. Sourascritta, a superscription. Sourauanzare, as Soprabondare. Sourastante, as Soprastante. Sourastanza, as Soprastanza. Sourastare, as Soprastare. Souretti, slippers, pantofles or chopinos made high with soles of corke. Souuenire, as Souenire. Souuentione, a helpe, a supply, an assis∣tance, a reliefe. Also remembrance. Souuertire, to subuert, to ouerthrow, to turne vpside downe, to destroy. Souuertito, subuerted, ouerthrowen, tur∣ned topsie turuie Souuersione, a subuersion, or ouerthrow, a destroying, a turning vpside downe. Souuertiuo, that may be subuerted, or ouerthrowne. Sozzare, to pollute, to sullie, to defile. Sozzezza, foulenes, ill sauordnes. Sozzo, foule, filthie, sluttish, ill sauored, vglie, lothesome. Sozzopra, topsie turuie, pell mell, confu∣sedlie. Sozzura, filth, pollution, illfauerdnes, fil∣thines. Spaccare, to cut, to cleaue, to chap, to riue, to flaw, to splint, to splitter, to deuide, to burst, to nocke, to dent. Spaccatura, the nocke of an arrowe, a chap, a flawe, a dent, a chinke, a cleft. Spacchiare, as Spaccare. Spacchino, a butchers chapping knife, a cleauer. Spacciare, to dispatch, to hasten, to speede, to rid away, to free, to dissolue. Spacciatiuo, quicke, dispatching, hastie, nimble. Spacciato, hath beene vsed for a madde man. Spaccio, a dispatch, a hastning, an expedi¦tion, a riddance. Also a packet or pleeke of letters. Spada, any kinde of sworde, rapier, or blade, or glaiue. Spadaio, Spadaro, a cutler or maker of swordes. Spada a due mani, a long sword, or two hand sword. Spadaccino, a cutter, a fencer, a hackster, a swashbuckler, a ruffian. Spadaromana, that marke which some horses haue about the head or necke cal∣led the feather. Spadapesce, a fish called a sword fish, ha∣uing a beake like a sword. Spadaria, a cutlers trade or shop. Spadaruólo, a cutler. Spadetta, Spadina, a little sworde or ra∣pier, or glaiue. Spadette, the imped feathers of a hauke. Spadice, as Spadico. Also a kinde of mu∣sicall instrument. Spadico, a scarlet or red colour. Also a bright baie colour of a horse. Spadoletta, an apothecaries little slice. Spadone, a long sworde, a two hande sword. Spaga, rosin of the pitch tree. Spaghetto, a small thred, or whipcorde, a twine thred. Spagliera, as Spalliera. Spagnolata, a spanish tricke. Spago, any kinde of pack-thred, twine or twisted corde. Spaiarda, a birde called a yellow hammer, or yowl-ring. Spalagio, a kinde of poisonous flie. Spalancare, to open wide, to set wide o∣pen. Spalco, a gallrie, a terrace, a stage, a scaf∣fold, a leads, an open walke, a floore. Spaldo, the ewes or penteise of a house, an out-butting baie windowe, as Sporto. Spalla, a shoulder of any creature. Spallacci, the pouldrons or shoulder pee∣ces. Also a disease in a horse called the galling of the shoulders. Spallare, to vnshoulder, to put ones shoul∣ders out of ioint, to shoulder, to thrust, to backe, to splaite. Spallato, shoulder-pitched or out of ioint, called also a dislocation. Spallata, a thumpe, a iogge or thrust with ones shoulder. Also a shoulder pitching. Spallatura, as Spallata. Spalleggiare, to backe, to helpe, to sup∣port, to second or to shoulder. Spalliera, any kinde of garment or furni∣ture spred on the ground, bed, tables, or wals, as carpets, hangings, couerlets, or tapestrie, or sparuis. Also a kinde of stuffe made for hangings called Dar∣nix. Also a shoulder arming. Spallone, a great broad shoulder. Spalluto, shouldred, hauing great and broad shoulders. Spalmare, to calke or trim a ship, to make smooth or slicke, to rigge a ship. Spalmatura, the calking of a ship. Spalto, a mannor with the demaines a∣bout it, a farme, lands or fieldes. Spampanare, to brag with idle wordes, to make much ado about nothing. Spampanata, a bragging, a loud craking, great boast and small roste. Spampinare, to pul off superfluous leaues, buds, or branches of a vine. Spándere, spando, spansi, spanso, span∣to
or spanduto, to sheade, to spred, to waste, to powre foorth, to skinke. also to consume prodigally. also to aire or bleach abroade. Spanduto, shed, spred, wasted, powred foorth, skinkt, consumed, aired or blea∣ched. Spanso, Spanto, as Spanduto. Spanna, a span or hand-bredth. Spannacerare, to gape or yaune for want of sleepe. Spannare, to span, or measure by spans. Spano, smooth, slicke. Spampanate, flaring, boasting, vanting, riotous shewes or tricks. Spanto, amazement, a woonderment. Spara, a wad of clouts, or wispe of strawe on the head to carrie vpon as our milk∣maides vse. Sparacina, a stalke of Sparagus. Sparadrappo, a kinde of salue or oynt∣ment. Sparagagno, the name of a disease in a horses foote. Sparagnare, to spare, to saue, or pinch for gaine. Sparagno, sparing, sauing, pinching, thrift. Sparagnatore, a sparer, or thriftie sa∣uer. Sparagi, an herbe called Sparagus. Sparanga, a sprange or stange, or such woodden barre. Sparapétto, a brest-plate, a parapet, a ward-brest. Also a qualme ouer the stomacke. Looke Parapétto. Sparare, to disadorne, to vngarnish, to vndecke, to deuide, to sunder, to open, to vnlace. also to emptie, to panche or pull out the guts, or garbish of any creature, to shoote off, to snap off, or discharge. Also to vnpaire, or to vncouple. Also to ridde or take away a table. Sparato, disadorned, vngarnished, vn∣deckt, deuided, sundred, opned, vnla∣ced, emptied, panched or vnbowelled. Also shot off or snapt off any ordinance or artillerie, vnpaired or vncoupled. Sparare arteglieria, to shoote off or dis∣charge any ordinance or artillerie. Sparauagno, as Spauano. Sparauiere, any kinde of hauke. Also a sparuise of a bed. Sparcina, the name of a rope in a ship. Sparecchiare, to vngarnish, to vnpre∣pare, to vndecke, to take away. Spargadóllo, a kinde of little birde. Sparesi, as Sparagi. Sparganio, sedge, or sword-grasse. Some take it for bur-reede. Spárgere, spargo, sparsi, sparso, to shed, to disperse, to publish, to scatter, to spred, to sowe, to caste abroad, to caste heere and there, to strawe, to sprinkle, to powre out, to deuide or run into diuers parts. Spargesi, a swelling in womens breasts after their trauell. Spargimento, a sheading, a dispersing, a publishing, a scattring, a spredding, &c. Spargo, as Sparago. Spargolare, as Spergolare. Spárgolo, a sprinkling brush, such as they sprinkle holie water with. Sparire, risco, rito, to vanish out of sight, to fade away. Sparitione, a vanishing out of sight. Sparlare, to mispeake, to raile, to detract or speake ill of another. Sparlatore, a railer, a detracter, or mis∣speaker of others. Sparlo, a fish called a purple fish. Sparmiare, as Sparagnare. Sparnazzare, to cast, or sprinkle, or scat∣ter, to flutter. also to waste riotously. Sparo, a kinde of sea fish so called in Rome. Also odde or vneeuen. Also a kinde of darte vsed in warre among the Moores which is bowed and crooked. Sparpagliare, to desheuell, to vnkembe, to touze a womans haire, to looke grislie or vglie, to confound, to waste, to disor∣der, to bring out of frame, to scatter it selfe as haile shot, and breake through violently. Sparso, Sparto, shead, spread, dispersed, scattered, published, sowed, spread abroade, sprinkled heere and there, speckled, full of, loose and hanging a∣broade. Also broade and wide. Spartare, as Spartire. Sparta pareglia, the roote of roughbinde weede, which is reputed verie medi∣cinable. Spartimento, a separation, a deuiding a partition, a sundring, a comparte∣ment. Spartire, tisco, tito, to separate, to seuer, to sunder, to deuide, to part. Sparto, as Sparso. Also a partition, a di∣uision. Also a kinde of broome where∣with they make cables for ships, or to tye their vines in India. Some take it for a kinde of graine or corne. Spartura, a spokesshaue, a bing or maund for bread. also a kneading tub. Sparuierato, pearched. Also peart as a hawke. Sparuiere, any kinde of hauke. Also a kinde of fish. Sparulo, a purple fish. Sparutezza, vglines, deformitie, vn∣handsomnes, illfauorednes. Sparuto, vglie, deformed, vnhandsome, illfauored, disfigured. Spase, a long and narrow fish, called in latine Taenia. Spasimare, to fall into a swoune for want of bloud, or by a conuulsion. Spasimatissima vóglia, a verie earnest or hartie desire, list, or longing. Spasiméuole, dreadfull, horrible, fright∣full, able to strike a man into a swoune. Spásimo, a cramp, a conuulsion. Also a hartes-griefe or swouning, a shrinking or plucking together of the sinewes, ri∣sing either of too much fulnes, or ouer∣much emptines. Spásimo cinico, a kinde of cramp when the nosthrels are pulled and drawne awry like a dogs mouth when he snar∣reth. Spasimoso, as Spasimeuole. Also full of conuulsions, or swouning, or cramps. Spasmare, as Spasimare. Spasmo, as Spasimo. Also a kinde of dart vsed in warre. Spassare, to passe the time away, to sport or solace. Spassa martéllo, a fellow that will talke with a wench for fashion sake, to forget some other loue, or to passe the time a∣way in louing talke. Spassa tempo, as Spasso. Spasseggiare, to walke for sport, solace or recreation. Spasseggiatóio, an allie, a walke, or plea∣sant walking place. Spasseuole, gamesome, sportfull, plea∣sant, full of pastime. Spasso, sport, delight, pastime, recreation, or glee. Spastare, to vnpaste, to take away the paste or crust of any thing. Spastico, one that hath the cramp or con∣uulsion of the sinewes. Spata, Spatha, a kinde of tree resembling the date tree or palme tree. Also a branch of a date tree. Spatagio, a kinde of sea hedge-hog. Spatélla, a flat skummer, a ladle or slice to turne fride meate. Also a masons trowell. also a slice that Surgions vse to spread their salues with, an Apo∣thecaries spatter. Spatiare, as Spasseggiare, to walke a∣broade, to trauell, to wander or iet vp and downe. Spátio, space, roome, distance, time, lea∣sure, largenes. Also a way, a voyage or iourney. Also a walke, a course or sway in walking. Also the length of a place. Also a place of exercise or running, or a
race. Also time, age, length, delaie or continuance. Also the measure or quan∣titie in a foote or meeter. Spatioso, spacious, wide, large, ample, broade, romie. Spátola, as Riauolo, a poticaries slice or spattre. Also a shoulder-blade. Spatulimantia, a kinde of diuination by markes vpon beasts and mens shoul∣ders. Spaualdo, a fond, selfconceited, strange, humorous pouting fellow. Spauanélla, a kinde of spauin, cramp or conuulsion in horses. Spauano, a disease in horses called a spauin. Also a cramp or stiffnes of sinewes. Spauentaglio, a bugbeare, a skarrecrowe, a swaggrer, a terrible huff-snuffe, a swashbuckler. Spauentare, to terrifie, to astonish, to af∣fright, to make afraide, to afflight, to trouble in spirit, to possesse with feare and horror. Spauentéuole, terrible, horrible, fright∣full, fearefull, dreadfull, astonying. Spauentacchio, a terrible huff-snuffe, a bugbeare, a swaggerer, a swashbuck∣ler, a skarre-crowe. Spauento, terror, horror, feare, fright, astonishment, dread. Spauentoso, as Spauenteuole. Spaurire, risco, rito, as Spauentare. Spauroso, as Spauenteuole. Spazzacamino, a chimnie-sweeper. Spazzaforno, a wispe, a maukin or skouell to sweepe the ouen with. Spazzare, to sweepe, to brush. Also to dispatch. Spazzatoio, a brushing place. a chimnie-sweepers broome or rake. Also as Spazzo. Spazzatore, a sweeper, a scauenger. Spazzature, any dust, filth, rubbish or sweepings. Spazzo, as Spaccio. Also a floore or plaine seeling. also a corner where swee∣pings are cast, a sluts corner, a dunghill. Specchiaro, a looking glasse maker. Specchiarsi, to looke or view himselfe in a looking glasse. Specchiera, a looking glasse, a mirror. Spécchio, a looking glasse, a mirror, an example. Speciale, an Apothecarie or such as sell spice. also speciall, proper, peculiar, chiefe particular. Also namely, in especiall, chiefly, in particular. Specialità, a specialtie, a president, a par∣ticular. Specialmente, specially, namely, chiefly, particularly, peculiarly, properly. Speciaria, a spicerie or an Apothecaries shop. Speciaro, an Apothecarie or a spicer. Spécie, a figure, image, forme or shape, portraiture, similitude, likenes, sem∣blance, phisnomie, beautie or sauour, a colour, shadow, pretence, apparance, out∣ward face or shew, goodlines to see vnto. Also a kind, a spice, a species, a genera∣tion or brood, affirmed of many parti∣culars in number, a qualitie or nature. Also any kind of spice or spicerie. Specieria, as Speciaria. Specificare, to specifie, to declare, to de∣note, to particularize. Specificatamente, especially, particu∣larly. Specificatione, a specification, a declara∣tion. Specioso, beautifull, faire, goodly to see, faire in shew or apparance, welfauou∣red, honest, woorthie, honorable. Spéco, a den, a caue, a hole, a cauerne, a grot, a lurking hole, a dungeon. Speculare, to watch in a high towre, to see far. Also to espie, to contemplate, to pre∣meditate, to obserue, to consider dili∣gently. also a kind of transparent stone like glasse, and was vsed heretofore in stead of glasse. Also a looking glasse maker. Speculatia arte, the arte of speculation. Speculatione, speculation, contemplati∣on, watching or spying. Speculatiuo, speculatiue, contemplatiue, watchfull. Speculatore, a speculator, a contemplator, a watcher, a scoutwatch, a considerer, an obseruer. Speculo, a toole that surgeons vse. Spedale, an hospitall, a spittle house. Spedaliere, a proctor of a spittle, an hospi∣tall keeper. Spedare, to spit or broch any thing vpon a spit. Spedetto, a little spit or broch. Spediéra, a range or racke for spits in a kitchin. Spedire, as Spacciare. Spedito, as Spacciato. Also nimble, rea∣die, quicke, slie, full of agilitie, prone, sudden, prompt. Speditamente, nimblie, quickly, readilie, with agilitie. Speditione, an expedition, a dispatch, a quicknes, a nimblenes or speed. Spedo, a spit or a broch. Also a gleaue, a partizan, a boares speare, a iauelin. Spedonare, to spit or broch a piece of meat, to beat with a spit. Spedonata, a spit-full, a broch-full. Also a blow with a spit or broch. Spedone, as Spedo. Spegazzare, to dash, to blur or blot any papers or bookes with inke. Spegazzoni, blots, blurs or dashes of inke or durt. Spegliarsi, as Specchiarsi. Speglio, as Specchio. Spegnare, to vnpawne, to vngage, to re∣deeme. Spégnere, spengo, spensi, spento, to ex∣tinguish, to put out. Spelagare, to flote or wander vp & down the sea. also to become all as a sea. Spelare, to pull or pluck off the haire, wool, skin or feathers of any creature. Also to make or weare thredbare. Spelato, thredbare, worne, plukt, vnskind, vnfeathered. Spelaruola, as Pelaruola. Spelatóa, any kind of brush or rubber. Spellare, as Spellicciare. Spellicciare, to vnskin, to vnsur, to pull off the haire or skin, to tug or touze. Spellicciata, a tugging, a touzing, a sha∣king. Also an vnsurring. Spellicciatura, idem. Spellicciosa, a kind of herbe. Spelonca, as Speco. Spelorcieria, as Spilorcieria. Spelórcio, as Spilorcio. Spélta, a grane, of some called spelt; of som formentie; of some oat-meale, spelt or zea. Spelucare, as Snocciolare. Speluco, a heape, a moate, a hore. Speluiere, a kind of chough with red feet. Spelunca, as Speco. Speme, hope, trust, affiance. Spendacchiare, to spend, waste or con∣sume thriftily. Spéndere, spendo, spesi, speso, or spen∣duto, to spend, to waste or consume, to dispend. Also to vnbang. Spenduto, Speso, spent, wasted, consu∣med. Spenditore, a spender, a waster, a consu∣mer. Also a steward, a treasurer, a clark of a kitchin, a cather of a noblemans house, &c. Spendola, the name of a wheele of a clock. Spendolare, to hang downe dangling, to slide downe, to emptie, to voide, to swing in a halter, to let downe by a roape. Spendolone, dingle-dangle, dangling downe. Spene, hope, trust, or affiance. Spennacchiare, to stretch out the wings as a haukdoth when she takes hir flight. Also to vnfeather, to vnfledge, to vn∣plume,
to pull bare. Spennacchino, a toole that carpenters vse. Spennare, as Spennacchiare. Spennuto, Spennato, vnfeathered, vn∣plumed, vnfledgd. Spennócchia, a kind of disease in a horses foote. Spenséro, as Spenditore, also, they extin∣guished. Spensieraggine, rechlessenes, carelessenes, fondnes. Spensierato, careles, retchles, thoughtles, headstrong, mad, hair-braind. Also an idle gazer or carelesse loytrer about. Spensolare, as Spendolare. Spensoloni, as Spendoloni. Spentacchio, a bug-beare, a skar-crow, a huffe-snuffe. Spento, extinguished or put out. Spenzólare, as Spendolare. Spenzolone, as Spendolone. Spéra, Sphera, a spheare or a globe. Sperabile, that may be hoped for, hope∣full. Speranza, hope, trust, affiance. Speranzale, hope-full, full of hope. Speranzeuole, idem. Sperare, to hope, to trust, to affie. Spérdere, as Dispérdere, to loose or stray. Also to poch egs. Sperdimento, as Disperdimento. Sperdute vuóua, potcht egs. Sperduto, Sperso, as Disperso. Sperga, as Mergone. Spérgere, as Spárgere. Spergiurare, to forsweare, to sweare falsely. Spergiuro, a periurie, a false oath, a periu∣red forsworne man. Spérgola, an herbe which for the propertie it hath to fat cattle, is called Franke or Surrey. Spergolare, to sprinkle as they doe holy water. Spergolo, as Spargolo, as Pergamo. Spericato, vnperched, out of order and proportion. Speriéntia, experience, practise, triall proofe, knowledge. Sperimentare, to trie, to prooue, to expe∣rience, to put in practise. Sperimento, a proofe, a triall, an experi∣ence, an experiment. Spérma, naturall seede whereof things be ingendred. Also spaune of fishes. Also quick-siluer, according to Alchimists new phrases. Spérma céti, the flowre of the sea, Par∣maceti or whitish Amber. Spermatico, spermaticall, spaunie, of or pertaining to ingendring seed. Spermólogo, a kind of birde called also Frugilega. Also a vaine tatler, a foo∣lish pratler. Spernace, that contemneth or despiseth. Spérnere, spérno, spernei, spernuto, to despise, to disdaine, to make no account of. Sperola, a little globe or spheare. Spernozza, a kind of sea crab. Spernozzamento di parole, a huddle or hotchpotch of idle words, a flim-flamme tale. Speronaglia, kibes or chilblanes that come vpon folkes heeles. Speronare, to spur or pricke forward, to adorne with spurs. Speronaro, a spurrier or spur maker. Speronata, a blow or pricke with a spur. Sperone, a spur or prick to make a horse goe. Also the beake, snout, nose or stem of a ship. Also herb larkes-spur, munks∣hood, larkes-heele or larks-claw. Speronélla, goose-grasse, gooseshare, cle∣uer or clauer-grasse. Speronélle, a brasen toole with a spoone at one end, and a rowell or little spur at the other, that cookes vse to cut out or marke their paste meates, called a iag∣ging iron. Spertamente, expertly, skilfully. Speronzola, a birde in whose neste the cuckow laies hir egges, which hatcheth them as hir owne. Spérse, dispersed, scattred, forlorne. Also potcht egges, Vuoua sperse. Sperticare, to vnperch, to vnbranch, to pull from a perch. Sperticato, vnperched, vnbranched. Also huge, great, or monstrous. Also smug or pampred. Spérto, expert, skilfull, experienced. Sperula, a little sphere or globe. Spesa, expence, charge, cost, spending. Spesacchiare, as Spesare. Spesare, to defray ones charge, to spend for one, to finde one all necessaries. Speso, spent, wasted, or consumed. Spesolarsi, for a horse to aduance or raise himselfe from the ground, attending the will of the horseman. Spesseggiare, to dispatch, or frequent of∣ten, thicke, or threefold. Spessezza, thicknes, spissenes. Spesseuólte, often-times, many-times. Spessire, to thicken, to make thicke, to en∣spisse. Spesso, thicke, spisse, grosse, massiue, firme, hard and sound. Also standing thicke and close togither. Also often or manie times. Spetiale, as Speciale. Spetialità, as Specialità. Spetiaria, as Speciaria. Spetiaro, as Speciale. Spetiare, to spice, to dresse with spices. Spétie, as Specie. Spetieria, as Speciaria. Spetile, the fleshie part without bones, be∣neath the middle of a sow. Spetioso, as Specioso. Spéto, a toyle, a net, a haye to hunt fowle or conies with. Spetonare, as Spedonare. Spetonata, as Spedonata. Spetone, as Spedo. Spetrare, to soften, to mollifie, to vnstone, to rid stones away. Spettábile, woorthie to be respected, re∣noumed, notable, woorthie to be regar∣ded or viewed, goodly, faire, well fauou∣red, of goodly fauour or personage. Spettácolo, a spectacle, a fight, a shewe, a pageant, a plaie, a thing to be seene and looked on. Spettante, belonging or appertaining. al∣so beholding, gazing, attending, stay∣ing, expecting. Spettare, to behold, to view, to looke on, to see, to regard, to gaze. Also to staie, to expect, to attend, or tarrie for, to belong or appertaine vnto. Spettatina, an expectation, an expecting. Spettatore, a spectator, a beholder, a loo∣ker on, a viewer. Spettezzare, to despise, to contemne, to scorne. Spettezzamenti, despisings, contemnings, scornings. Spetto, a iauelin, a borespeare, a forrest bill. Also a fish called a pike or pickrell. Spéttro, a ghost, a spirit, a phantasie or vision, an image seene, or imagined to be seene. Spezzabile, fraile, brickle, that will or may be broken. Spezzami, broken peeces, fragments, scraps, mammocks, shiuers, splints, pee∣ces. Spezzare, to breake, to shiuer, to rende, to splint or riue in peeces. Spezzata lancia, a demie-lance, a light horseman. Spezzatura, a breaking, a splinting or shiuering in peeces. Spezzazócchi, a wood or log-cleaner. Sphacelo, as Sfacelo. Sphagidite, as Sfagitide. Sphenóide, Looke Osso. Sphéra, as Sféra. Sphereale, as Sfereále. Sphérico, as Sférico.
Sphinge, as Sfinge. Sphintro, as Sfintro. Sphondillio, as Sfondillio. Sphrage, as Sfrage. Spia, a spie, an espiall, a scout, a pryer, an ewes dropper. Spiacénte, vnpleasant, displeasing. Spiacére, to displease, to mislike. Also displeasure or misliking. Spiaceuole, vnpleasant, displeasing. Spiaceuolezza, vnpleasantnes, displea∣sure. Spiacimento, a dislike, a displeasure. Spiaciuto, displeased, misliked. Spiaggia, a shore or strond of the sea. Spiaggiare, to coaste along the sea strond. Spianacciata, an explaining, a razing, a plaining. Spianamento, an explaining, an expoun∣ding, a razing, a ruine. Spianare, to explaine, to expresse, to de∣clare, to expounde, to make plaine, or smooth, to plain, or to sleeke. Also to le∣uell, to raze or ruine any building. Spianata, a paine path, a high way, a ra∣zed place, a razing. Spiantare, to vnplant, to vnst, to re∣mooue. Spiare, to espie, to peere, to prie, to watch or scout with diligence, to aske or enquire for. Spiattellare, to set out in full dishes, to di∣splaie or set to viewe, as cookes do their meate vpon their stals. Also as Suer∣tare. Spica, an eare of corne. Also a cloue of garlike. Also a signe in heauen, namely a bright starre in the left hande of Virgo. Spica céltica, a kinde of mosse called woolfes-claw. Spica nardo, lauender-spike, spike-narde. Spicare, to grow to eares as corne doth, to shoote out in an eare as corne doth. Spicato, a kind of excellent ointment vsed in Rome among women. Some take it for oyle of spike. Also eared, or in an eare, as corne groweth. Spicardino ingegno, a foolish, loose, skip∣ping wit. Spiccare, to vnhang, to free, to loosen, to rid, to vnfasten, to disioyne, to separate. Spiccatamente, distinctly, choisely, sme∣lie. Spiccate parole, distinct, loose, choise, wrested words. Spicchiare, to bud or sprout as flowers do, to peepe out as the sunne beames do, to cull or chuse out, to spinne, to gush, to purle, to bubble, to spirte, to spout, or squirt out as blode out of a full vaine, or wine out of a spigot hole. Also to spread abroad. Also to reuerberate. Spicchìo, a bud, a sprout or peeping forth, a spinning, a gushing, a spouting or squirting, a little part, crum, or iot. Spicchio d'aglio, a cloue of garlike. Spicchio del sole, a glimps, a glimme∣ring or peeping out of the sun beames. Spicchione, as Spicchio. Spicchiuto, Spicchiato, budded, sprou∣ted, peeped, gushed, spun, or purled out. Spicciare, as Spicchiare. Spiccio, as Spicchio. Spicciolare, as Spicchiare. also to scat∣ter, to disperse, to spread. Also to make little or lesse. Spicciolo, as Spicchio. Spico, as Spica, as Spigo. Spicolo, as Spicchio. Spidocchiare, to louse, or to vnlouse. Spidocchione, a lousie companion. Spiedare, as Spedonare. Spiédo, as Spedo. Spiedonare, as Spedonare. Spiedone, as Spedo. Spiegare, to displaie, to explaine, to ex∣pound, to vnfold, to spred abroad. Spiegatura, a displaying, an vnfolding, an explaining. Spiegazzare, as Spegazzare. Spienza, the spleene or milt of any crea∣ture. Spietà, crueltie, fude, inexorablenes, im∣pietie, vngodlines, fiercenes, vnmerci∣fulnes. Spietanza, as Spietà. Spietatamente, without mercie, cruelly, vngodly, impiously. Spietato, cruell, fell, ruthlesse, vnmerciful, fierce, impious. Spiga, as Spica. Spigare, as Spicare. Spigaro, a cackrell fish. Spignere, as Spingere. Spigo, the herbe spike, or Spikenard. Also the iro of a helme or caske wherein the plume of feathers is set and fastned. Spigola, a base fish. Spigolare, to gleane or lease corne. Also to plaie the dissembling hypocrite. Spigolistra, a gleaner, a leaser of corne. Also a nice, strickt, dissembling, ouer∣weeling hypocriticall woman. Spigolistrarie, gleanings or leasings of corne. Also nice, oie, foolish, strickt, or hypocritall gleaning or prying into other mens matters, hypocriticall tricks. Spigolo, gleaning or leazing. Also anie sharpe pricking point or sting. Also a cloue of garlike. Spigoli della tauola, crums, scraps, or broken peeces of meate left at a table. Spigonardi, the herbe spike or spikenard. Spillare, as Spicchiare. Also to finde out with diligent search. Spillettae, to pinne, to pricke, to stinge, to stabbe. Spilletto, a small pin, a sting, a pricke, a bodkin, a poynado. Also a small haire. Spillo, a pricke, a pin, a sting, a needle, a pricking thorne or bryer, a bodkin, a sharpe poynado, as Spicchio. Spilluzzico, as Spizzico. Spilunca, as Spelunca. Spilorciare, to grudge or dodge or play the niggardlie slouin or pinch-pennie wretch. Spilorciarie, pinching, slouenlie, base, dodging, grudging, iggardiy tricks. Spilórcio, a pild, hald, filthie, snudging, snuffing, miserable, pinching, sparing, base-minded companion, a chuffe, a snudge, a niggard, a couetous pinch-pennie father, a losell, a borell. Spiluzzicare, to pick heere and there by little and little. Spina, a spigot, a gimblet, a forcehead, or tap to drawe drinke with, a cock of a conduit. also a prick, a prickle, a sting, a thorne, a bramble, a bryer. Also the sting of a bee, a bristle of a hedgehog. Also sharp fish bones. Also goose beries. Looke Vna spina, because it grows vpō pricking thornes. Also the streeke or line that runnes alongst a horses back. Also the chine-bone of any bodie. Also a fsse engrayled borne in some cotes of armes. Also a quiditie or subtiltie. Spina bianca, a white-thorne, a white-bryer, a hawthorne. Spina alba, the white thistle, or our ladies thistle. Spina acuta, the white thorns or haw∣thorne tree. Spinacchia, the hearbe called Spinage. Spinacciare, to hatchell flaxe. Spinaccio, the bung hole of a barell. Also a hatchell for flaxe. Spinace, the hearbe Spinage. Spina del dósso, the backbone. Spina di ceruo, waythorne or buck∣thorne. Spina di mezzo, the verie pith of the back. Spina di pesce, the chine of a fish. Spinale medolla, the marow that run∣neth along the back bone, the pith in the backbone. Spina pesce, a kinde of tack or tentre∣hooke. Spina peregrina, globe-thistle, or ball-thistle.
Spinare, to prick with a thorne. Also to pearce or set a vessell of drinke abroch. also to engraile, a word vsed in armorie. Spina régia, the white thistle, the wilde artichock, or our ladies thistle. Spinaro, a bush of brambles, bryers or thornes. Spinaruólo, a sharpling, or shaftlin fish. Spina sacra, the sharp end of osso sacro, the rumpe. Spinato, a kinde of striped worke in silke or linnen cloth. Also engrailed. Spinélla, a splint in a horses leg. Spinéo, of or belonging to thornes, bushes, or brambles, thornie, bushie. Spinéolo, a plumme called a sloe. Spine puccie, a kinde of white thorne or bramble. Spinetta, a paire of virginals. also a little tap, forcehead, spigot, or gimblet. also a prick, a thorne, a bramble, a bryer, a thornie brake. Also Eglantine. Spinetto, as Spinetta, a bush, or thicket of brambles, thornes, or bryers. Spinerute, a kinde of white thorne. Spingarda, Spingerda, a kinde of ordi∣nance, great gunne, morter, or cham∣ber. Spíngere, spingo, spinsi, spinto, to thrust, to push, to shoulder, to shooue, to prick, prouoke, or driue forward, to moue, to vrge, to instigate, to presse or egge on. Spino, a sloe tree, a black-thorne, a snag tree, any kind of prickle, prick, bramble, bryer, or sharp prick. Also the bird Li∣gurie or a Siskin. also such sharp pricks as poore countriemen thrust in their shoe soles to make them last the longer. Spino ceruino, as Spino merlo. Spinola, a fish called in latine Spigola. Also a little sharp thorne. Also a sharp bone of a fish. Also a pinne that fastneth the hat or cap vnder the chinne. Spino mérlo, buckthorne, waythorne, or laxatiueram. Spinose, a kinde of peare in Italie. Spinoso, thornie, full of brambles, thornes, prickles, or briers, thornie, pricklie, crab∣bed, difficult. Also a porpentine, a hedgehog. Also a fish full of bones. Spino zerlino, as Spino merlo. Spinta, a thrust, a push, a iusting, a punch, or shoouing forward. Spinto, thrust, pusht, shouldred, prickt, prouoked, vrged, prest, or driuen out. Spintrie, places where were practised, or men which deuised all manner of vnna∣turall and beastlie, or monstrous lust, leacherie not to be spoken of. Spinturnice, a bird wont to come to the aulter and carie away a burning cole as a token of ill luck or burning to the house where it alighted. Spinula, as Spinola, a little bramble or thorne, or bryer. Spinzago, a kur-lu. Spinzaurino, the name of a colour that painters vse. Spionare, as Spiare, to play the spie, to sneake, to mych, to prye. Spione, as Spa. Spióuere, to showre or raynt violentlie. Spippola.   Spira, a spheare, a circulation, a circling, a rundle, a turning or winding. also the little pillers of a clock. Also a certaine attire of pearle that womē vse to weare on their heads made coronet wise called a chaplet. Also a cracknell or cake made like a trendle, or writhen like a rope. Also a quadrant or square of a piller below which may serue to sit vpon. Al∣so the round making vp of a rope pro∣perly called the coyling of a cable, vsed also for a piller. Spirábile, liuely, that wherewith we liue and breathe. Also that can or may breathe. Spirácolo, as Spiraglio. Spiraglio, a breathing place, a vent, a hole out of the which breath, ayre, smoke or winde passeth and issueth. Also a loope-hole a spike-hole, or anie little thinke through which ayre may passe and breathe. Also the nosthrils. Also a caue or hole which breatheth out a strong and pestilent ayre, a dampe hole it hath also bene vsed for a chimnie, or the tun∣nell of a chimney. Spiraglij del' anima, the lungs or lights. Spiramento, as Spiraglio. Spirante, breathing, or casting out a breath or sauour, a smelling. Also blo∣wing, liuing, that is aliue. Spirare, to breath, to pant, to blowe as winde doth, to sigh, to draw breath. also to cast a sauour or smell. Also to enspire, to expire, to vent or breath forth, to liue. Also to aspire or endeuour to obtaine. Also to sigh. Spirato, as Spiraglio. Spiratione, an inspiration, an in-brea∣thing. Spirillo, a goats beard. Spiritale, as Spirituale. Also a kinde of engine. Also the vitall or breathing parts. Spiritato, mad, raging, frious, out of bin wits, possessed with some euill spirit. Spiritélli, the birds called night-bats or reare mise. Vsed also for hobgoblins. Spirito, spirit, breath, wind, aire or sauour Also the soule, the life, the hart, or ghost of man. Also a ghost or a spirit. Also smell, aire, noise, fiercenes, heat, stomack or hanghtines of courage. Also a sigh or a gaspe. Vltimo spirito, the last gaspe. Spiritócco, a foolish, dissembling, hypocri∣ticall, busie, pickthanke fellow. Spirito santo, the holy Ghost. Spiritoso, full of spirit or life, lustie, liely, strong as aquanite is. Spirituale, spirituall, ghostly, liuely, brea∣thing. Spiritualità, spiritualitie, ghostlines. Spirtale femina, a witch, a hagge, a sor∣ceres. Spirto, as Spirito. Spirtócco, as Spiritócco. Spirula, a little round compasse. Also the base or foundation of a piller. Spitama, a Greeke measure of twelue in∣ches or a span. Spitiale as Speciale. Spito, a spit or a broch, as Spedo. Spiumacciare, to vnfeather, to shake a feather bed. Spiumaccio, a mattrasse, a flockbed, a boulster. Spiumare, as Spennacchiare, as Spiu∣mare. Spizzicare, as Pizzicare. Spizzico, a whit, a iot, a crum, a small deale. Spizzicore, as Pizzicore. Splebeiare, to become from a base clowne or common rakall gentle or noble. Splena, the spleen or il. Splendénte, shining, bright, glittering, glistring, cleere, resplendent, gorgeous. Also being of great fame or renoune. Spléndere, splendo, splendei, splendu∣to, to shine, to glister, to glitter, to be bright and beautifull. Also to haue a very good grace or become passing well. Splendidamente, gloriously, excellently, bountifully, sumptusly, shiningly, brightly, glistringly, glittringly, libe∣rally, cleerely, gailie, gorgisly, beauti∣full, richly, honorably, goodly, notably, brauely. Splendidezza, gloriousnes, excellencie, bountie, sumptuousnes, liberalitie, splen∣dore, brightnes, shining, glistring, glit∣tering, magnificence, &c. Spléndido, glorious, excellent, bountifull, magnificent, liberall, sumptuous, shi∣ning, bright, glittering, , famous, noble, notable, great, honorable, of great bruit, name, fame, & renoune. Also one that hath his house gorgeous and richly decked with abundance of all things,
goodly, beautifull, gaie. Splendore, splendor, brightnes, cleerenes, light, beautie, elegancie, honor, renoune, glorie, noblenes, bruit, bountie, excellen∣cie, glitter, glister. Also the glosse, var∣nish or shining of a colour. Splenético, that is sicke of the spleene or hath a great spleene. Splénio, a long plaister made like a swath for one that is sicke of the spleene. Also the herbe Spleenwort or Miltwaste. Splueabóue, a bird so called. Spodestare, to remooue or degrade from office, power or authoritie. Spódio, a kind of soote rising of the trying of brasse. Spoetato, dispoeted, degraded from a poets being. Spóglia, a spoile taken from the enemies, a pillage, a pray, a bootie, a prize, a repri∣sall. Also a spoiling, a robbing or strip∣ping. Also a rayment, a clothing or weed. Also a mans bodie. Also the co∣fin of paste made for a pye or a tarte or a custard. Also the skinne that a serpent leaues off. Spogliamento, as Spóglia. Spogliare, to strip, to spoile, to rob, to pray, to disaray, to vnrobe, to vnfurnish, to be reaue, to steale or depriue a man of any thing, to pull off ones clothes, to ran∣sacke. Spogliato, stripe, spoiled, robd, depriued and bereaft of that he had, stolne, vn∣furnished, disaraide, ransackt. Spogliaro, a place where common spoiles are kept, a place where men and women strip themselues before they goe into a bathe. Also a place where men be spoi∣led and robbed. Spogliatore, a spoiler, a robber, a pirate, a thiefe, a stripper. Spogliatura, a dispoiling, a stripping. Spóglio, a dispoiling, a spoile, a ruine, a depriuing, the skin that snakes cast. Spogna, as Sponga. Spóla, a weauers shuttle, a weauers role, spoling wheele or quill turne, as wea∣uers call it. Also a kind of cockbote, sca∣lop, skiffe, whirrie or barge. Spoladora, a weauers warpe. Spolare, to weaue with a shuttle. Also to roule vpon a role. Spoletta, a long kinde of shell-fish like a pipe, taken for a muscle fish. Spolpare, to take away the braune or flesh from the bones, to make leane. Spoltrare, to shake off cowardize or sloth, to become lustie or valiant, to rise out of a bed. Spoltrire, trisco, trito, as Spoltrare. Spoluerarsi, to bathe hir-selfe as a hauke doth. Spoluereggiare, as Spoluerizzare. Spoluerino, a dust boxe. Spoluerizzare, to reduce to ponder or dust, to bedust or cast dust vppon. also to speckle▪ as poudred ermines be, to open, or vnfould a doubtfull matter. Sponcioni, the sarcels of a hauke, the principall feathers of a hauke. Sponda, a shore, a banke, or side of any thing, namely of a bedstead. Spondare, to coaste or go along the side, coaste, banke or shore. Spondaruólo, a carpenters toole. Spondéopiede, a foote of a verse consi∣sting of two long syllables in the last word, it is so called of drawing the voice in singing at deuine seruice. Spondili, as Spondolo, the knuckles or turning ioints of the back-bone or chine. Also small bones. Also a kinde of ser∣pents. Also a wheru of wood or stone to put on a spindle. Also a kinde of shell∣fish. Spondio, a kinde of oare to drawe met∣tals out of. Spondolo, a kinde of great oyster like an asse-hoofe. Spónere, spongo, sposi, spósto, to ex∣pose, to expounde, to laie foorth, to de∣clare, to interpret. Sponga, a spunge. Also a fish called a lump or spunge fish. Spongare, to spunge, or wipe with a spunge. Sponghettiere, a lumpe or spunge fish. Spongia, as Sponga. Spongiare, as Spongare. Spongioso, as Spongoso. Spongiotérra, a lumpe or spunge fish. Spongite, a kinde of stone founde in a spunge. Spongoso, spungie, puffie, light, or that will sucke vp, thirstie, like vnto or re∣sembling a spunge, light and full of small holes, or eies like a spunge. Sponsaglie, as Sposaglie. Sponsale, of, or pertaining to marriage, the time of betrothing. Sponsalitio, a marriage, a wedding, a spousall. Also belonging to marriage. Also a token of afflancing or betrothing or contract of a marriage intended. Spontaneamente, willingly, naturally, without compulsion, of himselfe, of his free will, for its owne sake. Spontáneo, willing, voluntarie, naturall of his free will and choise, that doth or is done willingly, naturally, or without constraine or helpe. Spontare, to bud, to sprout, or peepe forth. Also to abate the edge or point of anie weapon, to vnpoint or make blunt. Also to par or clip. Spontare le onghie, to pare or clip ones nailes. Spontonare, as Spontare. Also to foyne, to pricke, to thrust, to iuslie, or push at. Also to vrge or prouoke, or egge on. Al∣so to hit or beate with any staffe, wea∣pon. Also to pinch, to twing. Spontonata, a foyne, a pricke, a thrust, a iusling, a pushing, a prouoking, a blowe with any staffe, weapon, a pritching, a twinging. Spontone, a smal long instrument of iron, sharpe at the end to thrust through any thing, to prooue if anie soldiers lie hid∣den therein. Spontone, the pricke, needle, or sting of any serpent. Also a forrest bill, a black∣bill, a gleaue, a iauelin, a partisan. Also a thrust, a push, a thumpe, &c. Sponzole, a kinde of mushrum or toade∣stooles. Spopolato, vnpeopled, disinhabited. Sporcamente, filhily, foly, stinking∣ly, vncleanly, dishonestly, durily, villa∣nously, bawdily. Sporcare, to foule, to pollute, to defile, to sullie, to durtie, to beraie, to corrupt, to make vncleane, to dishonest. Sporcaria, as Sporchezza. Sporchezza, filth, durt, stinke, impuritie, foulenes, lothsomnes, vncleannes, all maner of filthines, dishonestie or vil∣lanie. Sporcidico, that speaketh dishonestlie or vncleanly, or vttereth bawdie and fil∣thie talke. Sporcifico, that maketh vncleane or fil∣thie. Sporcitia, as Sporchezza. Sporco, filthie, foule, durtle, sullied, im∣pure, lothsome, stinking, vncleane, defi∣led, vnpure, dishonest, vile, corrupt. Spórgere, as Pórgere. Sporgiuto, as Porgiuto. Sporre, as Esporre. Spórta, a great basket, maunde, or panier, a flaske or a hamper. Also a kinde of great waight. Sportaro, a basket maker. Also a carrier or a porter. Sportata, an out-butting, or ietting of a house, as Spórto. Sporteglione, a bat, or reremouse. Sportélla, a little basket, a hand-basket, a little hamper. Also a small banquet or drinking that the rich Romans made to them that came at extraordinarie
houres, to visit and salute them. Sportéllo, a wicket or posterne dore, a lit∣tle out-ietting porch or windowe. Spórti, porches of houses that but or iettie out farther then any other parte of the house. Sportiglione, a night-bat, or a reremouse. Spórto, a porch, a portall, a baie win∣dow, or out butting, or iettie of a house that ietties out farther then anie other part of the house, a iettie or butte. Also the eaues or penteis of a house. Also as Sporgiuto. Spórtola, as Spórtula. Sportoncélla, as Sportélla. Sportoglione, a night-bat or reare∣mouse. Sportone, a great basket or flasket. It is also taken for a trunke or a hamper. Spórtula, was anciently taken for money or meate distributed by Princes to the people as an almes. Also the plaintifes and defendants money paide by both ordinarily for iudgment in law, a coun∣sellours or sargeants fee. But it is now taken in Rome for a certaine fe which euerie man that hath any suite in law paieth to the Pope or saint Peter if he obtaine his suite by law. They call it in Venice il Caratto di san Marco, for euerie one payeth so much the hundred. Also a little panier, maund, or basket. Sporzana, a kinde of little bird. Sposa, a spouse, a bride or new wedded wife, a woman spoused or affianced. Sposaglie, the spousage or betrothing or affiancing of a man or woman before full mariage, a contract. Also the guift which the woer giueth to his affianced wife as a pledge of his vnfained good will. Sposale, as Sponsale. Sposalitio, as Sponsalitio. Sposare, to espouse, to wed, or marie. Also to affiance, to betroth, or make sure to be maried. Sposarie, bride tricks, puling nice tricks, bridings. Spositione, an exposition or expoun∣ding. Spositore, an expositor, an expounder. Sposo, a bridegrome, a new maried man, he to whome a woman is affianced or betrothed. Spóssato, weakened, depriued of force. Spósto, exposed, expounded, laide forth, declared. Spouerire, to disinpouerish. Spranga, a barre, a sprange, a crosse beam. also a flat slate, or plate, or blade. Also a moaning, a wailing, or la∣menting. Sprangare, to barre, to sprange, to stang, to make whole againe. Also to waile or lament. Sprazzare, as Spruzzare. Also to be∣deaw, to showre. Sprazzo, a sprinkling, a deaw, a showre. Also a poole or puddle of water. Also heape of filth and durt or sweepings. Sprecare, to consume or waste rio∣touslie. Sprecamento, a wastefull or riotous con∣suming. Spregionare, to free, deliuer, or discharge out of prison. Spregnare, as Dispérdere. Spregiare, to despise, to condemne, to dis∣parage, to disgrace, to dispraise, to con∣temne, or set naught by. Sprégio, contempt, spite, disgrace, skorne, dispraise. Sprémere, to wring, to squease, to presse or crush out, to wring wet clothes. Also to expresse. Sprémuto, wroong, squeased, crusht, or prest out, expressed. Spressamente, expressely, apparantly. Spretare, to vnpriest or degrade from priesthoode. Sprezzabile, contemptible. Sprezzare, as Spregiare. Sprezzatore, a despiser, a contemner, a dispraiser. Sprezzatura, a despising or contemning. Sprézzo, as Spregio. Sprigionare, as Spregionare. Sprimacciare, to shake, to touze, to tug, to rowle, to turne, to tosse, or rumble vp and downe. Sprímere, as Sprémere, or Esprimere. Springare, to kick, to winse, to spurne. Spríngere, springo, sprinsi, sprinto, as Springare. Sprinto, kickt, winsed, or spurned. Sprizzare, as Spruzzare. Sprofondare, to breake out the bottome of any thing. Also to sinke downe. Sprolongare, as Prolongare. Sprométtere, metto, misi, messo, to vn∣promise, to breake promise. Spromésso, vnpromised, broken promise. Spronare, as Speronare. Spronaio, as Speronaio. Spronata, a prick with a spurre, a spur∣ring. Sprone, as Sperone. Sproportionale, shapelesse, without pro∣portion. Sproportionare, to disproportion, to dis∣order, to confound. Sproportione, a disproportion, a con∣fusion. Spropósito, against purpose, discretion, or reason, a thing or tale to no pur∣pose. Sprouedére, veggo, vidi, visto or vedu∣to, to vnprouide, to vnfurnish. Sproueduto, vnprouided, vnfurnished. Sproueduta, Alla sproueduta, extem∣pore, without warning or meditation, sodainely. Sprouiero, a sparue of a chamber or bed. Sprouista, as Sproueduta. Sprouisto, as Sproueduto. Spruzzare, to sprinkle, to spout, to spirt, to asperge or bedew with drops, to dash. Spruzzo, a sprinkling, a spirting, a beda∣shing with drops, a squirting or dashing. Spruzzolo, a sprinkling brush as they cast holy water with. Spruzzamento, as Spruzzo. Spuazzo, as Sputaccio. Spudare, as Sputare. Spudasto, a louer and fauourer of all vn∣naturall and filthie, &c. Spudo, as Sputo. Spugna, as Sponga. Spugnare, as Spongare, as Espugnare. Spugnoso, as Spongoso. Spulezzare, to mince it, to pule it, to picke flease. Spulso, expelled, throwen out, cast out. Spuma, foame, froth or skum. Spumare, to foame, to froth, to skum, to ga∣ther into foame, froth or skum. Spumante, foaming, full of froth, foame or skum, foamie, being in a foame, frothie. Spuméo, foamie, frothie, casting foame, that hath the colour of foame or resem∣bleth skum. Spumoso, as Spumante. Spuntale, a sting, a pricke, a dkin. Spuntare, as Spontare. Spuntellare, the contrarie of Puntel∣late. Spuntonare, as Spontonare. Spuntonata, as Spontonata. Spuntone, as Spontone. Spuóla, as Spóla. Spuoladora, as Spoladora. Spuolare, as Spolare. Spupillare, to grow out of nounage, to  out of a pupils state. Spurare, to purifie, to cleanse, to purge, to make cleane or neat. Spurchia, a disease in a horse proceeding of corrupt blood. Also corrupt or goare blood. Spurgare, to straine or force to spit, to hem or clere the voice, to purge, to clarifie. Spurghi, fleagme or spittings that is fetch
vp straining, dots of fleagme. Spuriare, to adulterate, to sophisticate, to counterfeit. Spúrio, a whores sonne whose father is not know, a bastard, one base borne. vsed also for a counterfeit. Sputacciare, to bespit or bespawe, to be∣ray with spittle. Sputaccio, Sputacchio, a mans spittle or slauering at the mouth. Sputare, to spit or voide fleagme at the mouth. Sputa sentenze, a nice, coye, scrupulous, selfconceited wise man, that speakes and spits nothing but sentences, an affected man in his speech. Sputatondo, a nice, coy, find-fault fellow that will marke whether men spit in or∣der or no. Sputatore, a spitting, a spauling, snottie fellow. Sputazzo, as Sputaccio. Sputo, the spittle comming from a mans mouth. Spuzza, Spuzzo, any kind of filthie sent, sauour or stinke. Spuzzare, to stinke or yeelde an ill sa∣uour. Spuzzetta, a coye, nice, fine, daintie, puling dame. Spuzzolente, stinking, hauing an ill sa∣uour. Spuzzore, as Spuzza. Squaccarare, to squatter, to squirt or lash it out behinde after a purgation. Also to scatter. Squacchera, a squattring soft turd. Squacciare, to ruine, to spoile, to hauock, to disorder. Squaccio, ruine, spoile, hauock, confu∣sion, disorder. Squaccheracqua, a squattring soft turd as soft and thinne as water. Squacquarare, as Squaccarare. Squacquarata, a foolish chat, pratling, or prating, a flimflam tale. Also a dash∣ing or blurring, a squattring, a squir∣ting. Squaccherare, as Squaccarare. Squadernare, to open, to vnfould, to re∣ueale, to disclose, to vtter, to set, or lay open, to display. Also to tosse, to tumble, or ouerturne bookes or quires of paper. Squadra, a squadron, a troupe, or band of men. Also a square, a squire, or a car∣penters ruler. Also a certaine part of a company of souldiers of 20. or 25. whose chiefe is a Corporall. Squadrante, a quadrant. Squadrare, to square, to rule, to squire, or cut or hew out. also to fadge, to become, to square, to fit, or beseeme or agree or sute well together. Also to marke, to heede, to note, to watch. Also to make foure square. Squadriglia, a route, a troupe, a crue, or band of men. Squadro, a square, a squire, or a ruler. Squadro di mare, a sea fish with a rough skinne called a skate. Squadronare, to marshall or set men in troupes or squadrons, to squadrone. Spuadrone, a squadrone, a troupe or band of men, a great number of souldiers re∣duced in aray and framed in order to stand, to march, to charge, or fight. Squaglia, a skale of any fish or serpent, a plate of brasse or other mettal. Squagliare, to skale fishes or serpents. Also to powre or shed forth. also to melt, cast or found mettale. Also to soften or vncrud milke. Squagliatura, a melting, founding, or ca∣sting of mettals, an vncrudding. Squaglio, Squaia, Squadra, as Squaina. Squaglioso, skalie, full of hard skales as serpents be. Squaina, a skate or solefish, with a rough skinne. Squaiuola, a fish called a gudgeon. Squala, a kinde of bird. Also a kinde of hazell nut. Squalidézza, grizlines, vglines, gastlines, filthines, sluttishnes, vncleannes, defor∣mitie of any thing for lack of trimming. Also the sorowfull and ruthfull estate of those that be arraigned or condem∣ned, or otherwise in great heauines, who shew to all men an heauie counte∣nance. Squalidire, disco, dito, to become, make or looke grizlie, gastlie, vglie, foule, filthie, sluttish, lothsome, or illfauoured, or grim. Squálido, gastlie, grim, grizlie, vglie, foule, lothsome, filthie, sluttish, or slo∣uenlie, illfauored, causing one to ab∣horre the sight of it. Squalo, a fish called a pollard, or a chieuen. Some take it for the skate or ray fish. Squalóre, as Squalidezza. Squama, the skales of fish or serpent or any other beast both of sea and land. Also the little pieces of plate or nailes in any piece of armour or harnesse. Also the skumme, offall, or drosse of leade or other mettal when it is melted. Squammée, the seames or ioyning toge∣ther of the skull which lye about the eares on both sides like scales. Squamoso, full of scales, drosse, skumme, or bagage, rough and sharp as a thing full of scales. Squarcélla, an egge-pie, a flaune, a doucet or custard. Squarciabocca, a kinde of bit for a yong coult. Squarciamenti, rags, totters, tearings, cuts, iags, rentings. Squarciapino, a kinde of flyebote, pin∣nace, barge or whirrie. Squarciare, to rend, to teare, to totter, to breake into rags. Squarciatore, a kinde of rending arrow or shot. Also murthring shot. Squarciatura, a rend, a tearing, a tottring into rags or pieces. Squarciauolpe, a kinde of darting or shooting, or tearing shot. Squarcina, a short sword, or courtelax, a dagger or a poynade. Also a priuie, close, short pocket dag or pistole. Also barre, crosse, tearing, broken, or haile∣shot. Squarcio, rend, torne, ragd or tottred. Al∣so a daie booke, a memoriall or booke of slate stones. Squarina, a sole fish with a rough skin, a skate. Squaroso, rough, foule and sharpe like a thing that is skalie, or hauing some fil∣thines vpon it. Squarra, as Squadra. Squarro, as Squaina. Squartare, to quarter or cut in quar∣ters. Squarscina, as Squarcina. Squarzina, as Squarcina. Squarzo. Looke Asquarzo. Squasimódo, in a manner, almost, as it were, as a man would say, a what you call him? Also a simple gull, a foolish meacocke, an ignorant noddie. one that is almost a man. Squassalare, as Squassare. Squassare, to shake, to tosse, to tumble, to totter, to wag. Squassa coda, a birde called a wagge∣taile. Squassa pennacchio, a wag-feather, a ruffianly swash buckler, a tisti-tostie-fellow, a swaggrer. Squassata, a shaking, a tossing, a tumbling, a wagging. Squassatura, as Squassata. Squassolata, as Squassata. Squatina, a kind of fish. Squatrare, as Squadrare. Squatro, as Squadro. Squérro, a docke to build a ship in. Squietare, to disquiet, to trouble, to mo∣lest, to disturbe. Squietudine, vnquietnes, trouble, molesta∣tion,
vnrest. Squilitico aceto, a kind of vineger made of Squilla. Squilla, a little shrill bell, a sance bell, any shrill thing, a sacring bell. a kinde of sea Onion. Also a kind of shell fish called a shrimp or a praune. Squillante, shrill, resounding, ringing. Squillantia, a diasease in the throat called a squince or squinancie. Squillare, to ring or iangle bels, to sound or speake shrill. Squilletto, a spigot for wine. Squinante, squinanth, cammels meate, or sweet rush which is very medicinable. Squinantia, as Squillantia. Squinternare, to vnfold, turn or tosse ouer books, leaues, records or writings. also to blazon, to displaie, to tell a glorious tale. Squiózzola, as Spoletta. Squisitezza, exquisitenes, exactnes. Squisito, exquisite, exact. Squitato, idle, lazie, drouzie, sluggish, slow, vnquiet, dull minded. Squitinare, as Scrutinare. Squitino, a ioyning or coupling togither. Also as Scrutinio. Squittire, tisco, tito, to squeake or crie as a parret. Squiuezza, as Schifezza. Squiuo, as Schifo or Schiuo. Squizzare, as Schizzare, as Sguiz∣zare. Squizzaruolo, as Schizzaruolo. Squizzaro, a Swizzer or Heluetian. Squizzaréllo, a conduit pipe. Squizzo, as Schizzo. Sradicare, to pull vp by the rootes, to roote out, to grub out. Sramponato, a kinde of flat or smooth horse shooe. Sregolare, to bring out of order and rule. Sregolato, vnruled, out of rule and or∣dred, disordered. Srenato, weake in the reines or hurt in the reines. St, a word commaunding silence, whosht or such like. St, he stands, he dwels, he lieth, he abideth, he remaineth. it stāds, remaineth, it con∣sisteth, &c. Also vsed for questa, this, namely before notte, sera, and mane. Stabbiare, to pollish, to varnish, to steeke or make bright. Stabbio, an oxe-stall, a manger, a racke, a stable or a hai-loft. Stabene, it is well, it is good, it is fit, it is seemely, it fieth, it becommeth. Stábile, stable, firme, fast, constant, sted∣fast, immoouable, sure, fixed, durable, fully determined. Stabili, firme, immoouable goods. Stabilità, stedfastnes, constancie, firme∣nes. Stabilire, lisco, lito, to establish, to con∣firme, to settle, to fixe, to make stedfast, stable, firme or sure, to settle & stay him selfe. Also to repaire and make strong. Stáboli, certaine bones in the hinder part of ones legs. Stabulario, an inholder, a hoste, an ho∣stler, a stable-keeper. Staccare, to pluck away, to disioyne, to se∣uer, to sunder, to vnfasten or pluck away from. Stacchi, a kind of herbe somewhat like to Horehound, but hauing a longer leafe, called wild sage or field sage. Stacchiótto, close, whosht, squat, snea∣king, lurking, prying secretly. Statccia, a cake, a tarte. Also any flat thing or pye plate. Stacciare, to sist or searse or bolt meale. Stacciata, a cake or tarte of sifted meale. Stacciatura, any maner of sifting. Staccio, a sift, a sieue or searse. Staccionata, an ouerridden, foyled whore, iade or spent horse. Stacciquéto, a boxe, a clap, a tip, a whir∣ret or blowe giuen vpon the eare or cheekes. Stadéo, the name of some part of a cart. Stadéra, a paire of great skales or ballan∣ces to weigh with. Stadiale, a measure of ground consisting of 125. paces, which is 625. feete. Stadiéra, as Stadéra. Stádio, a place where running is excerci∣sed, as well of men as of horses, a race. Also a measure of ground whereof be three sorts: one of Italy contayning 125. paces, eight of which make an En∣glish mile: the second Olimpicum, which is 120. paces: the third Pirrhi∣cum, which is 200. paces, we may call it a furlong. Staffa, a stirop of a saddle. Also the bootes of a coche. Staffeggiare, to be alwaies riding poste. Also to loose the stirop in riding. Staffetta, a running poste or currier. A staffetta in poste haste, posting, alwaies riding. Some haue vsed Staffetta for the instrument called Crotalo. Looke Crotalo. Staffetteggiere, as Staffeggiare. Staffiére, a lackey, a foot-man, a horse∣boy running along the stirop. Staffilare, to whip, to scourge, to ierke with a leather strap. Staffilate, blowes, stripes, ierks with a whip leather, lashes, slashes. Staffile, a whip, a scourge, a strap or whip leather. Also as Staphile. Staffita, as Staffile. Staffiro, the name of an herbe. Stafisagria, the weed stanes-akre. Stafóide, as Staphóide. Stagge, a kind of fowling ginne, haie, net or springe. Staggio, as Statico. Staggire, gisco, gito, to heape vp in cocks, and then spread againe as they do hay or corne. Also to sesse or rate one at anie payment. Stagione, a season or time of the yeere, tyde. Stagionare, to season or dresse meats. Stagioncella, a small season, a little while. Stagliare, to cut in peeces, to iagge, pinke or curas garments be. Stagnare, to staie, to stoppe, to stanch run∣ning of bloud. Also to steele, to glasse or tinne any vessell. Also to stand still as a poole doth, or grow to be a stāding poole. Stagnaria, a stannerie. Also the trade of pewterers. Stagnarino, as Stagnaro. Stagnaro, a peawterer or seller of tinne. Also a tinkar. Stagnata, any vessel or pot trimmed with∣in with tinne or glasse. Stagno, the mettall we call tinne or pew∣ter. Also a poole, a ponde, or standing water, a meere, a stagne, or a fish∣poole. Stagnuolo, a kind of clay that founders vse to stop and make their mouldes with. aso a kinde of foyle of tinne that they put ouer iron plates. Stain pace, farewell, abide in peace. Staio, Staro, a measure like an english bushell. Stalla, a stable, a stal, or quierie for horses. Also a residence, dwelling or abode. the generall name of a place where cattle a∣bide, an oxestall, a stable, a den, a sheepe house, pen or foulde. Also an ostellerie, a place for fodder. Stallagio, stabling, stalling, or housing for cattle. Also the rent paid for a stable. Stallare, to stale, or pisse as a horse. Also to stable or stall cattll, to dwell, to em∣pound cattle. Stallaro, a stable or stall keeper. Stallero, Stalliero, as Stallaro. Stallire, to hale or towe a ship. Stallo, a lodging, a chamber, a stable, a stall, a mansion, a shelter or shrouding. Stallone, a stallion or horse to couer mares Stalloneggio, the hire giuen for couering of mares.
Stamaiuólo, a draper, a dresser, or maker of stamels, a dresser of wooll. Stamane, this present morning. Stamatina, this present morning. Stambecchi, a beast called a chamoy. som take it for a roe bucke. Stambucchi, as Stambecchi. Stame, thred, yarne, stamine, whofe, sta∣mell, or a webbe. Also a thred or spin∣ning. Also a kinde of cloth as our pen∣nie-stone or stammell is. Also flaxe, hempe, or wooll, or any other spinning stuffe, or that is in the loome to be wo∣uen. Stamegna, a sieue, a searse, or a colander, or a strainer. Stamegnare, to sift, to searse, to straine through a colander. Stametto, a kinde of woollen stuffe called saye, sarge, or such stanell stuffe. Staminara.   Stamine, the vpright ribs or peeces of tim∣ber of the inside of a ship, of some called footestocks, or footesteecks. Stampa, a forme, a moulde, a presse, a stampe, a print or printing, an impres∣sion, a marke, a shape, a figure, a sta∣tion. Stampare, to print, to presse, to stampe, to forme, to figure. Stamparia, a print or printing house. Stampatore, a stamper, a printer, a sta∣cioner. Stampélla, a kinde of religious garment. Stamperia, as Stamparia. Stampinata.   Stampita, a kinde of countrie dance, a fit of mirth or fidling. Also wearines. Stanca mano, the left hand. Stanca cauallo, the herbe Gratia Dei, or hedge-hysope, which when horses haue eaten, they waxe leane and languish vpon it. Stancare, to wearie, to tire or faint. Stancheggiare, as Stancare. Also to set the dice vpon one, to tyrannize ouer one. Stanchetta, as Stanghetta. Stanchezza, wearines, tyring, faintnes. Stanco, wearie, tyred, faint, ouerlabou∣red, stanke. Stando, standing, considering. Stanélla, a poore shepheards garment or frocke. Stanfélla, a colt or fillie of an asse and a horse. Stanga, a barre, a bolt, a stange, a sprang, a perch to barre a dore with, a coole staffe. Also a haukes perch. Stangare, to barre, to sprang, to stang a dore. Also to perch. Stangheggiare, as Stangare, as Stan∣cheggiare. Stanghetta, a little barre, bolt, stang, or staffe. Also the eie of the branch vp∣ward from the place of the water chain. Stangone, a great barre, sprang, stang, or staffe, or perch. Stanótte, this present night. Stante, standing or being. Pocostante, a little while after. Acqua stante, a standing water. Stante che, since that, whilest that. Stántia, a lodging, a chamber, a dwelling, a residence, an abiding place, an abode. Also as Instantia or Stanza. Stantiare, to lodge, to dwell, to abide, to woone, to remaine, to chamber. Stantietta, a little lodging, dwelling, or chamber. Stantio, Stantiuo, stale, tainted, vn∣sweet, mortifide, flie-bitten meate. Stanze, as Stantia. also a stance or staffe of verses or songs. Stanzare, as Stantiare. Staphile, the vuula when it waxeth black and blue like a grape at the vtmost end. Staphóide, the thirde bone of the foote called of Osso nauiforme, which is put next to the ankle in the inside of the foote, called in English the ship-like, or bote-like bone. Stare, stó, stei, or stetti, stato, to stand, to staie, to be, to do, to lie, to dwell, to re∣maine, to subsist, to relie, to continue, to liue, to endure or abide. Also to consist, to be fit, conuenient or seemely, to be∣come. Looke Fare stare. Stare al'érta, to lie in waite, to be warie, heedy, vigilant, or circumspect, to be rea¦die for all aduantages, to looke well a∣bout, to haue a quicke eie. Stare a disagio, to stande or lie vneasilie. Stare a fare, to do, or stande to do. Star' a giacére, to lie along. Stare alle póste, to stand or wait in some set place or stacion. Stare alla guardia, to watch, to stande and watch to keepe sentinels. Stare a panciólle, as Scorpare. Stare appoggiato, to leane, or stande lea∣ning. Stare apprésso, to stande or dwell neere or by. Stare allegro, to liue and be merrie. Stare a sedére, to sit, or be sitting. Stare a vedere, to stand and see, to marke. Stare a crepacuóre, to liue at harts ease, to wallow at pleasure. Stare a pollo pesto, to be at the point of death, last gaspe or very sicke. Stare a óglio santo, to be readie to giue vp the ghost. Stare attorno, to stande, dwell, or be a∣bout. Stare a schimbecchi, to liue and be in baudie houses. Stare bene, to stande well, to be well, to farewell, to lie well. Also to become, to be fit, conuenient, or seemely. Stare in létto, to lie in bed. Stare in pace, to liue or remaine in peace. Stare lontano, to stande or dwell farre off. Stare di buóna vóglia, to stande or be merrie. Stare di buón' animo, to be merrie, to haue a good hart, to be nothing dis∣maide. Stare di mala vóglia, to stande or be sad and pensiue. Stare buona pézza, to staie or tarrie a good while. Stare fresco, to be in an ill or bad taking. Stare caldo, to lie, stand or be warme. Stare con altri, to dwell or stande with others. Stare fermo, to stande fast, firme, or still. Stare cheto, to be or stande quiet, still, or whosht. Stare in dozzena, to common, to boorde, to eate and drinke with others. Stare in casa, to be, to keepe or dwell at home. Stare in zurlo, to stand roundly togither, to stande starke still till ones teeth runne a water. Stare il fatto, to matter, to consist. Stare inanzi, to stande before or fore∣ward. Stare inamorato, to be, or liue in loue. Stare in arme, to be or stand in armes. Stare in mézzo, to be or stand betweene, or in the midst. Stare in ceruéllo, to keepe ones wits, to looke warilie about. Stare in pendénte, to stand in doubt. Stare in pensiero, to muse, thinke, or con∣sider well. Stare in sul puntiglio, to stande vpon nice points of honour. Stare insieme, to stande, be, or dwell to∣gither. Stare in sospétto, to liue or be in doubt. Stare in villa, to be or liue in the coun∣trie. Stare in speranza, to liue and be in hope. Stare in piedi, to stand vp, or on foote. Stare male, to be, liue, or stand ill, to be sicke or ill at ease. Also to become ill, to be vnfit or vnseemely. Stare per, to be about or readie to do any thing.
Stare per morire, to be about or ready to die. Stare saldo, to stand or be fast and firme, to be resolute. Stare sano, to be or liue in good health. Stare sopra, to be, stand, or dwell ouer or vpon, to muse, consider, or suspende. Stare sotto, to stande, dwell, or be vnder, to be in danger. Stare vicino, to be, stand, or dwell neere. Stare vigilante, to be warie, watchfull, or circumspect. Starna, a partridge. Starnoni, as Perniconi. Starnótto, as Pernicone. Starnutare, to sneese. Starnutire, tisco, tito, to sneese. Starnuto, a sneese, or sneesing. Staro, as Staio. Stasera, this night, or euening. Statarecci, things that onely come in som∣mer, sommerly. Statarie, sommer, or colde shadie places. State, the sommer season. Statéra, as Stadera. Also a kind of coyne in Greece. Statiera, as Stadera. Statico, an hostage, a pledge, a pawne, a suretie, a deputie, a substitute for ano∣ther. Stathmo, a kind of measure vsed of yore in Greece. Stationario, a man that hath his appoin∣ted station, standing place or warde. Statione, a station or standing place, a roade, a baie or station for ships, a place of resort where matters are decided. Stato, stoode, beene, dwelt, lien, subsisted, relide, consisted. Also beene fit, conue∣nient, or seemely. Looke the verbe Es∣sere, and stare, for it is the participle of both. Also the forme, state, fashion, or gesture of the body. Also the condicion or state of things, a quiet state of minde or life, an accustomed trade or being. Also an estate, a dominion, or signorie of any body, a mans whole wealth or stocke. Also the state, being, or qualitie of any thing. Statóua, Statoa, as Statua. Státua, a statue, an image or similitude, or representation of mettall, iuorie, or stone. Statuaria, the craft or arte or place of ma∣king or grauing or ietting of carued images or statues. Statuario, a maker or caruer of images or statues. also of or belonging to images. Statuaro, as Statuario. Statuire, isco, ito, to decree, to institute, to ordaine, to determine, to purpose, to ap∣point, to assigne or to iudge. Statuito, decreed, instituted, determined, ordained, appointed, purposed, assigned, iudged. Statumina, a forke, a stake, a prop, a staie, or pole to vnderprop any thing. Also morter composed of lime and rubbish togither. Statuminare, to vnderprop, or vnderset a vine or tree with sorkes or stakes. Also to mingle and temper rubbish and lime togither. Statuto, a statute, a lawe, a decree, a de∣termination, a thing certainly determi∣ned and appointed, an ordinance. Statura, stature, height, greatnes, propor∣tion, or bignes. Stazzo, a station, a stande or standing place. Stazzonare, to stacion, to stande, to soli∣cite, to manage, to mooue, to be circum∣spect. Stazzone, a station, a stande, or standing place. Also a porter. Ste, vsed for queste, the plurall of Sta. Stéa, vsed by Dante for stia, let him stand. Stearite, a kinde of precious stone like to tallow. Steatóma, a kinde of impostume wherein matter like fat or tallow is contained. Stebe, a kinde of hearbe, hauing stalke and leaues prickled, growing in fennie grounds. Stecade, a kinde of hearbe or floure called cotton-weede, or sticados. Stecca, as Stecco, a riding rod or wand. Also the locket of a dagger, a toole that shoemakers vse or piece of wood. Steccadenti, a tooth-pick. Steccato, the listes or place to combat in, or other place railed in with stake, railes, or poles. Also a combat. Stecchette, little thin lathes, shindles or boordes laid about broken legs or armes. Stecco, a stick, a stalke, a chip, a wand, a bat, a cudgell, or riding rod, a but∣chers prick. Stefano, hath bin vsed in iest for a mans bellie, panch, crauer, mawe, or gut. Also a garland, a coronet, or chaplet. Stegge, bushes, bryers, brambles, brakes, thornes, &c. Stei, flocks of course silke. Also of the verbe stare, I stoode. Stela, a crosse or other like monument set vp by the high way. Also a little piller which was wont to be raised vp on end vpon a sepulcre or graue. Stella, a starre, any of the celestiall bo∣dies that giue light vnto the world, vsed also for a destinie, a fate, an after, a planet. Also a chip or spelt such as carpenters make in hewing of timber. Also a starre-fish, or fiue-foote. Stella fissa, a fixed vnmouing starre. Stella herba, an hearbe called crowfoote plantaine, buckhorne, or hearbe Iuie. Some take it to be sharewort, sterwort, or codwort. Also some for swine-cresses. I finde it also for woodroofe, or wood∣rowe, or woodrowell. Stellamarina, a starre-fish, or fiue-foote. Stellante, shining or twinkling, glistring or blazing like a starre. Stellare, to shine, to glister, to blaze or twinkle as a starre. Also to reduce to chips, to chip. Also the hearbe wood∣rowe, or woodrowell. Stellaria, as Stella herba. Also a medi∣cinable earth found in Samos, marked like a starre. Stellatione, a blasting. Stellato, starrie, full of starres, repleni∣shed or garnished with starres. Also full of eyes like starres, marked with or ha∣uing diuers speckles or spots like starres. Also clipt, or reduced, or cut into chips. Stelletta, the rowell of a spurre. Also a toole that printers vse. a little starre. Stelléo, full of starres, starrie. Stellifero, bearing starres, starrie, twink∣ling. Stellino, a kinde of bird. Stellionato, a deceit in dessembling a thing to take profit by another vniustly, a counterfaiting of merchandise, a co∣sening or cheating, or conycatching of any bodie. Stellione, a kinde of fish. Also a kinde of beast like a Lizard, with spots in his neck like starres. Also an vpright pil∣ler, as Stela. Stelo, a stalke or stemme of any thing that groweth. Stemma, a garland of flowres. Also de∣grees of kindred, or the stock, race, and bloud of a gentle house. Stempanini, those that cut out monie in plates before they be coyned. Stempélla, as Tempélla. Stempellare, to twangle or play foolishlie vpon any instrument, to fumble vpon a Lute. Stemperamento, as Stemperanza. Stemperanza, distemperance, disor∣der. Stemperare, to distemper, to disor∣der. Stemperato, distempred, immoderate. Stendali, as Stentali.
Stendardo, a standard, a streamer, a banner, an ensigne. Sténdere, stédo, stesi, stenduto, or steso, to extend, to reach, to spread, to dis∣play, to stretch, as Tendere. Stenduto, steso, extended, reacht, spread, displaied, vnfoulded, stretcht out. Stenebrare, to waxe cleare, or cleare vp, to vndarken. Stentali, the seluedge or lists of cloth. Stentare, to suffer, to pyne, to tyre, to linger, to languish, to carke and care, to toyle and moyle both with bodie and minde. Stentatamente, painefullie, pininglie, carkinglie, with much ado. Stentatissimo, most painefull. Stentini, the smallest guts in any bo∣die. Stentita, tainted, stale, flye-bitten meate. Stento, suffrance, carke, care, toyle, pi∣ning griefe, passion or paine of bodie and minde. Stentore, a suffring, carking man. Stentoso, full of carke, toyle, care, griefe, passion, and suffrance. Stenuare, to extenuate, make leane, and slender, to minish and make little, to appaire. Stenuatione, extenuation, slendernes, em∣ptines, leanenes, an appairing, a dimini∣shing, a making lesse, an impairing. Stérco, any kind of dung, mucke, compasse, ordure or durt. Also a turd. Stercorare, to dung, to mucke, to compasse, to beray with dung. Stercorario, of or belonging to durt, muck or turds. Stercorato, dunged, mucked, compassed. Stercoréo, of dung or mucke, stinking like dung, durt, dunghill, growing in dung or muck. Stercoroso, as Stercoso. Stercoso, muckie, dungie, durtie, full of dung or mucke, well dunged, growing in dunghils. Sterculino, a muck-hill or a dunghill. Steresi, priuation. Stéria, an order, an appointment. Also a chance. Sterile, sterill, barren, dry, fruitlesse, that cannot ingender, without generation, yeelding or bringing nothing. Sterilite, lisco, lito, to be or waxe barren or vnfruitfull. Sterilità, sterilitie, barrennes, vnfruitful∣nes. Sterlucco, a foole, a ninnie, a gull, a sot. Sterminato, boundles, extreme, big, huge, vaste, infinite, without limits. Sterminatamente, extremely, hugely, in∣finitely, vastly, boundlesly. Sterminio, as Storminio. Sternace, that plungeth or casteth. Stérnere, stérno, sternéi, sternuto, to open, to spread, to manifest. Also to lay along the ground, to throwe or strike downe, to lay flat along, to lay and make readie, to make plaine or smooth. Also to lye downe, to rest, to abate or make calme. Sternuto, opened, manifested, laid along the ground. Looke Stérnere. Also snee∣sed or a sneesing. Sternire, nisco, nito, to sneese. Also to cull or pick out. Sternone, that part of the breast where the ribs meete and ioine togither. Sternutare, to sneese. Sternutire, tisco, tito, to sneese often. Sterometria, a measuring of length, breadth, and depth. Stérpere, sterpo, sterpei, sterputo, to ex∣tirpe or pull vp by the rootes, to roote out. Sterputo, extirped or puld vp by the roots, rooted out. Stérpo, a roote, a stump or snag of a tree. Sterpone, a great roote, stump or snag of a tree. Sterpsicerote, a kind of wilde beast. Sterquilinio, a muck-hill or a dunghill, a mixen. Also a stinking knaue, a base∣brat. Sterrogonia, a kind of frankinsence called also Olibano. Steso, as Stenduto. Stessamente, as Medesimamente. Stesso, as Medesimo. Stétho, Stéto, the Anatomists call it the region of the breast. Stia, let him stand. Also a cage, a pen, a frank or coope for poultrie. as Stipa. Stiaccia, as Stiacciata. Stiacciare, to make, bruse, crush or beat as flat as a cake. Stiacciata, a cake, a tarte or any flatte thing, a beating, a brusing. Stiacciatine, little, thin cakes, cheesecakes or pancakes. Stiamazzo, as Schiamazzo. Stiancio, old, stale, tainted or vnsweete meate. Also sidelin or sloping or glan∣cing, as Dare di stiancio, to strike or hit sidelin or aslope. Stianciare, to bend, stoope or hit or go side∣lin or bending. Stiantare, to cleaue, rap, rent, riue, burst, splint or shiuer in sunder. Stiantatiuo, that may be burst, riuen or cleft asunder. Stiantatura, a riuing, a cleft, a shiue of wood, a bursting, a cracking. Stiantio, as Stiancio. Stianze, kibes or chiblaines. Stiatatiuo, tough, hard, firme, fast. Stiatta, as Schiatta. Stiauo, vsed for Schiauo. Stibio, a paracelsian drug called antimo∣nium or stibium. It is a white stone found in siluer mines good for the eies. It is also taken for a kind of stuffe that women vse to make their browes blacke and smooth with. Sticádo, Lauander gentle or Cassidonie. Sticciato, flat, brused, crusht. Sticchinicchio, an idle, lazie, lubberly Lourdant. Stidionare, to spit or broach a piece of meate. Stidionata, as Spedonata. Stidione, as Spedo. Stiéna, as Schiena. Stienuto, as Schienuto. Stiétto, as Schiétto. Stiettezza, as Schiettezza. Stiféllo, a kinde of pipe, recorder, flute, or hornepipe. Stigi, vsed for hell, stix. Stigio, stigian, hellish, infernall, diuelish, belonging to hell. Stigma, Stigmatico, as Stimma. Stisti, stigian, hellish, or hell it selfe. Stile, a stile, a phrase, a manner or forme in speaking or writing, an elegant forme of speaking or writing, the fashion or manner of ones penning. Also vse, forme, fashion, manner, wont, guise, order, forme, or rule. Also a marking-stone, or a pensill, a surgeons probe or searching needle. Also a gnowman of a dyall. Also an instrument to write in tables. Also any thing made sharp to∣ward the top like a piller. Stilettare, to kill or stab with a poynard or little sharp dagger. Stiletto, a little poyniard, dagger, poyna∣do, bodkin, needle, or pinne, or stabber. Stilla, a drop, a still or trill of any thing. Stillamenti, distillations, droppings, tril∣lings. Stillare, to distill, to drop, to trill. Stillatione, a distillation, a dropping. Stillato, distilled or dropped. Also a di∣stillation or dropping. Stillatóio, a still, a limbecke. Also a distil∣ling house. Stillatore, a distiller of waters, a dropper. Stillecchio, an yse-sickle or flake of yse. Stillettare, as Stilettare. Stilletto, as Stiletto. Stillicidio, the dropping of the ewes of the house, a little sinke or gutter.
Stillicidio del' orina, the strangurie. Stillo, as Stiletto. Stiloidi, certaine small processes in bones like the fashion of a small bodkin. Stima, esteeme, estimation, account, valu∣ation or reputation, or regard. Stimare, to esteeme, to iudge, to suppose, to repute, to value, to regarde, to deeme, to respect. Stimatione, as Stima. Stimatiuo, able to iudge, value, or esteeme Also iudgement or estimation. Stimma, the grosse or thicke matter of any oyntment, the grosse thicke substance or dregs remaining after squeasing or steaming. Stimmate, vsed for the fiue woundes or mark four sauiour. It is properly the markes or printes of hot irons, such as theues haue being burned in the hand, or boared in the eare. Also vsed for in∣famie, dtection, or reproch. Stimmatico, Stimmoso, that is marked with a hot iron, that beareth a marke of shame. Also a rogue, a vagabond, an in∣famous detected fellowe. Stimolare, to pricke, to prouoke, to insti∣gate, to egon, to vrge, to incite, to spur, to mooue, to incense, to stirre forwarde, to enrage. Stimolatione, as Stimolo. Stimolatore, a pricker or stirrer fore∣ward. Stímolo, a pricke, a pricking, a stinging, a prouocation, an instigation, an entice∣ment, a goade, an vrging, a spur, a set∣ting on, an encitement, a feruent moo∣uing, any thing that stirreth, incenseth, mooueth or pricketh forwarde. Also a rage or furie, a sorrow or griefe. Stimoloso, prouoking, vrging, pricking enciting. Stimulare, as Stimolare. Stimulatione, as Stimolatione. Stimulatore, as Stimolatore. Stimulo, as Stimolo. Stimuloso, as Stimoloso. Stincata, a rap or blow ouer the shinnes or legs. Stinche, brushes made of brier. Also the name of a prison in Florence. Stinchi, the shinnes or small of ones legs. Also a kind of fish. Stinchido, shrunken or withered lims. Stinchieri, greaues, armour for the legs, or shinnes. Stinco, a fish that is like a crocodile. Stinieri, as Stinchieri. Stinguere, as Estinguere. Stinto, as Estinto, as Instinto. Stipa, a hedge, a fence, a mound, a pile of wood. Also a cub, a pen or coupe to keepe poultrie in, any kinde of dry fewell to make a sodaine fire with. Also the plough handle. Also stowage in a ship. Also swill, draugh, or dish-wash giuen to swyne and hogs. Also a kinde of lowe tree, broome, or shrub. Stipa di legne, a pile or heape of wood. Stipare, to hedge, to fence, to fill vp, to enuiron with a gard, to mound, or com∣pas, or rayle, or empaile in, to coope in. Also to pile or heape vp wood. Also to presse downe hard, to stowe as mer∣chandise is in a ship. Also to stop chinks or clefts. Stipatione, a bolstring or holding vpon euery side, a garding about or enuiro∣ning. Also a stopping. Stipato, enuironed with men to be defen∣ded, as princes are with a gard. Also filled, replenished, thick, garnished, fur∣nished, stowed, fraighted. Also stopped, or pertaining to stoppings. Stipatore, one that stoppeth chinks. Also a kings gard that is alwayes about him. Also they that lay in, and pack vp, or stowe merchandise or packs in a ship. Stipendiale, of or belonging to wages. Stipendiare, to hyre, to wage, to stipend, to giue wages or pay vnto, to pension. Stipendiário, a hireling, one that taketh wages. Also he that paieth tribute. Stipéndio, a stipend, a pension, a hire, a salarie, a pay, a tribute or toll, a pay∣ment. Stipendioso, that hath often receiued wa∣ges, or one full of wages. Stipia, chaffe, strawe, litter, stubble, haume, or thatch. Stipite, a log, a stump, a snag, or stock of a tree. Also a club, a bat, or cudgell. Stipiti, certaine wooden shoes to slide vp∣pon the ise withall. Also logs or stakes set fast in the ground. Stipo, an armorie, or an ambrie. Stipola, holme, straw to thatch, the huske that closeth in the straw, stubble left in the field after it is reaped. Stipolare, to promise effectuallie, to con∣firme a bargaine, to require by course and order of lawe, to require and de∣maund a thing to be giuen him or done for him with ordinarie words of the lawe, to require afore by couenant, to make a couenant. Stipolatione, a confirmation of couenants by order and course of lawe, a solemne couenant made with words ordinarie in the lawe, wherein he that is demanded of an oth answereth that he will do or giue a thing required, a stipulation, a bargaine, a promise, a couenant, or obli∣gation to pay money, or performe a thing that is required. Stipolatore, he that bindeth another by requiring, and asking, he of whome a thing is required. Stippola, a kinde of windie or spungie substance or puff or fyste like a mush∣rom. Stípula, as Stípola. Stipulare, as Stipolare. Stipulatione, as Stipolatione. Stiracchiamenti, pullings, halings, wrestings, wyre-drawings, or stret∣chings. Stiracchiare, to pull, to hale, to pluck, to wrest, to stretch or set on tenter hookes, to wyre-draw a matter, to shrug, to shrinke in or vp. Stirace, as Storace. Stirare, as Stiracchiare. Stirillo, the beard of a goate. Stirlico, Antimonium or Stibium. Stirpare, to extirp or pull vp by the rootes, to grub vp, to roote out. Stirpe, a progenie, a generation, a stock or kindred, a race, issue, or noblenes of birth, an ofspring, a house, a bloud, a kinde, a pedigree. Also the roote, stem, or stalke of a tree, plant or herbe, a yong branch or set. Stirpéuole, that may be pulled vp by the rootes, or rooted out. Stiticamente, nicelie, scrupulouslie, with affectation, restrictiuely, stiptikly, costiuely, stoppinglie. Stitichezza, stricktnes, nicenes or foolish affectation, too much precisenes, cos∣tiuenes, restriction, stiptickenes. Stitico, stiptike, restrictiue, costiue, hard-bound, that stoppeth or bindeth. Also nice, fond, or scrupulous. Stiticózzi, swearing or swaggring muffs or dutchmen. Stiua, as Stipa. Also the plough-taile or handle. Stiualaio, a boote-maker. Stiualare, to boote, or put on bootes. Stiuali, bootes to ride with, Looke onger i stiuali. Stiualetti, thin bootes or buskins. Stiuare, as Stipare. Stiuiéri, short buskins as old pictures are painted with. Stizza, sodaine rage, wrath, anger, vex∣ation, choler, furie, fretting, impacience. Stizzare, to stirre vp or prouoke. Stizzarsi, to be angrie, raging, or furious, to rage or fret. Stizzato, angrie, vext, fretted, enra∣ged.
Stizzatamente, angerlie, ragingly, fret∣tingly, waywardly, foolishly, passio∣nately. Stizzo, a fyre-brand. Stizzolare, to stirre vp the fyre or fyre∣brands, to make it burne clearer. Stizzolo, a fyre-brand. Stizzone, a fyre-brand. Stizzonare, as Stizzolare. Stizzoso, subiect to rage, wrath, furie, fretting, furie or choler, toyish, foolish, waiward, testie, vexfull, soone vexed and peeuish. Stizzosamente, as Stizzatamente. Stó, vsed sometimes for questo, this, or this same. Also I stand, dwell, or am, Looke Stare. Stoccata, a foyne, a thrust, a stoccado giuen in fence. Stoccheggiare, to strike with a short sword, a tuck or a truncheon, to foyne or thrust at, to giue a stoccado. also to play the ill vnthriftie man taking vp com∣modities, to rob Peter and pay Paule, to liue by the losse, to spend the maine stock. Stócchi, Farestócchi, to make a new stock, to runne in debt, to take vp com∣modities. Stócco, a truncheon, a tuck, a short sword, an arming sword. Stocrofisso, vsed in mockerie for stock∣fish. Stoffo, a foundation, a ground, a stock, a subiect, or stuffe to worke vpon. Stógliere, as Distorre, as Stórre. Stóia, a mat or a hassock of straw, of bents or rushes, any thing spread on the ground. Stoiare, to mat or furnish with mats, to spread on the ground. Stoiaro, a matter or mat-maker. Stóicamente, seuerely, like vnto stoickes. Stóico, a stoicke, a seuere kinde of Phi∣losopher. Stóla, a stole, a roabe, garment or religi∣ous habit, a tippet, such as religious men and doctors weare, or such a hood as the freemen of London weare vpon their shoulders, a roabe of honor and dignity, a long vestment. Stolare, to adorne or attyre with a stoie or roabe, or tippet, or hood. Stolga, Stolca, Stolza, a wilde henne, or feasant. Stolidità, Stolidezza, foolishnes, fond∣nes, dullnes, vnaduisednes, doltish∣nes. Stolido, foolish, fond, dull, vnaduised, doltish. Stolteggiare, to play the foole, Looke Stolto. Stoltezza, foolishnes or follie, as Stol∣titia. Stoltiloquentia, foolish speech, talke or babling. Stoltilóquio, as Stoltiloquéntia. Stoltitia, foolishnes, follie, fondnes, doltish∣nes, idiotisme, doting, a dulnes of the mind, sottishnes. Stólto. Looke Stógliere or Stórre, taken, remooued or retaken, or diuerted. Stolto, a foole, an idiot, a simpleman, a fond, vnaduised or vnwise man. Also foolish, vnwise, doltish, sottish, without discretion. Stomacace, a sorenes of the mouth, a ranknes of the gums so that the teeth fall out. Stomacaggine, lothsomnes, hatefulnes. Also stomaking, anger or fretting. Stomacare, to hate, to lothe, or go against a mans stomacke, to stomacke, to glut or cloy ones stomacke, to haue indignation, to be angrie or displeased. Stomachéuole, lothsome, odious, disday∣nous, against a mans stomack. Also that is sicke in the stomacke, that cannot keepe the meate that it hath taken. Also full of stomacke or indignation. It may also be taken for that which is good for the stomacke. Stomacino, a stomacher for the stomacke, a bib such as children vse. Stómaco, the pipe whereby the meate go∣eth downe into the ventricle, beginning at the roote of the toong in the lower parts of the iawes behinde Larince, to which is knit the meat pipe. It is some∣times vsed (but improperly) for Ven∣tricolo, and is called the stomacke. Also vsed for appetite or desire of a thing. Also digestion. Also indignation, anger or wrath, abhorring of anything that liketh not. Stomacoso, as Stomachéuole. Stomacuzzo, a queasie, a squeamish, pu∣ling, daintie stomacke. Stomána, as Settimana. Stomatico, that hath or is subiect to haue a sore or swelling in the mouth. Also that hath the nature and strength to open. Stoppa, hirdes or towe or course hemp or okum. Stoppare, to stop with a stopple. Stoppacci, hirdes of okum or tow, or any thing to make stopples with. Stoppata, a stopping, a stopple, a bung. Stóppia, stubble, chaffe, straw, litter, haume or thatch, as Stipola. Stoppinato, at an end, neare done, almost finished or come to the snuffe, burning in the socket. Also stust, filde, stopt or hard bound. Stoppino, the weeke or cotton or snuffe of a candle, the socket of a candle sticke. a stopple, a spigot. Also as Lucignolo. Stóppio, as Stoppia. Stóppole, stubble of corne, as Stóppia. Stoppone, Stoppolo, a stopple or a bung. Stóra, as Stóia. Storare, as Stoiare. Storace, a drug, a gum, sweete incence or perfume called Storax, whereof be two kinds: the one called Storace calamita. because it was woont to be brought out of Syria in reeds, and that is the right Storax, bicause it is mixed with Rosin and oyle. Storacini, little perfumes to burne made of Storax. Stórcere, stórco, storcei, storciuto, or stórto, to wrest, to writhe, to bende or make crooked. Also to wrench, to extort. Looke Tórcere. Storciuto, Stórto, wrested, writhed, bent or made crooked, wrenched, extorted. Looke Tórto. Storcolare, to presse, to crush, to squease, or wring as they do grapes to make wine. Stórcolo, a presse to presse grapes or crabs in. Stordigione, as Stordimento. Stordimento, a giddines, a dizzines, a dulnes, a stonishment, a staggering, a rauing in the head. Stordire, disco, dito, to astonish, to be∣come or make giddie, dull or dizie in the head. Stordito, astonished, dull, giddie, dizie, madde, foolish, frantike, rauing in the head. Stória, a historie, a discourse, a tale, a sto∣rie, a narration. Also a kind of musicall instrument. Stórico, a historian, a writer of histories or stories. Storione, the fish called sturgion. Stormare, to make a noise, a rumor, a hur∣lie-burlie, or vprore, to storme. Stormento, any kind of musicall instru∣mēt, any kind of mechanicall toole. Also a writing, a bond or indenture. Storminio, confusion, ruine, hauoke or vt∣ter destruction. Stormire, misco, mito, as Stormare. Stormo, a shoale, a flight, a droue, a rout, a troupe, a flocke, a heard, a companie, a crew. Also a noise, a storme, an vprore, a hurly-burly, a braule, a quoile. Stornare, to turne backe, to remooue or di∣uert from ones purpose.
Stornazzo, a menow fish. Stornéllo, a bird called a stare or a star∣lin. Also a horse of that colour. Storniamento, as Stordimento. Storno, a bird called a stare or a starlin. Also a giddines, dizzines or reeling in the head. Also giddie headed or foolish. Also as Stornio. Storo, as Storno. Storpiare, to lame, to maime or make cripple. Storpiato, lamed, maimed, lame, brused or made cripple. Storpiatura, a maime, a lamenes, a hal∣ting. Storpio, a breaking, a cracking or wre∣sting and wrenching of any thing. Also a let, a maime, a hindrance. Also a crip∣ple or lame man. Stórre, stólgo, stólsi, stólto, to take, to remooue or retake away from, to diuert from any attempt or opinion. Storsione, extortion or wrong. Stortare. Looke Stórcere. Stórta, a withe or a wreath, a toole to pull out teeth with. a wrench or wrest that ioyners vse. Also a wrench or cricke in man or horse. Also a winding still or serpētine, called a double SS. a sprain or strain in a horse. also a sack-but or such other crooked instrument of musicke. Storti, a kind of bisket or spice-bread like symnels or cracknels. Stórto, as Storciuto. Stortocóllo, as Collo torto. Stórtola, as Stórta. Stortura, a wrench or vnioynting in a horse. Storzare, as Strozzare. Stouiglie, all manner of kitchin things, trash, rags, vessels or kitchin stuffe. Stózzo, the name of a goldsmithes toole. Stra, vsed for Strada. Also much vsed in composition with other words for Extra or Oltra. Strabalzare, to bound, or rebound, to hop or skip as a ball doth. Strabalzo, a bound, a skip or skipping of a ball, hopping or skipping tricks. Strabigliare, to wonder, gaze or gape at with wonderment. Strabiliare, as Strabigliare. Strabilio, amazement, or wonderment. Strabismo, the squintnes in the eies. Strabo, he that looketh a squint or is gog∣gle-eide. Straboccantē, rash, furious, head-long, inconsiderate, readie to fall, fond-har∣die. Straboccare, to stumble, to trip, to fall head-long, to powre out of the mouth. Strabocchéuole, as Straboccante. Straboccamento, as Strabocco. Strabocco, rashnes, furie, vnaduisednes, a head-long fall, a stumbling. Strabuzzare gli occhi, to stare or glote with ones eies. Also to dazle ones eies. Stracacciato, a kinde of leape or iumpe vsed in Italy. Straccale, a staffe like a muskets-rest that porters vse to rest their burthens vpon when they are weary. also a rowle of linnen that some old women vse to weare about their neck. Stracaro, more then deere, most deere. Stracantare, to sing and ouer sing a∣gaine. Straccare, to faint, to wearie, to tire. Straccaspiedi, a glutton, a gourmand, an Epicure, a lick-spit. Stracchezza, wearines, faintnes, ty∣ring. Straccij, rags, clouts, totters, torne or rent rags. Stracciable, that may be rent or torne. Staccia brache, a prickled shrub called butchers broome, kneeholme, or peti∣gree. Straccia foglia, a waste paper. Stracciare, to rende, to teare, to tottre, to breake, to ragge or whinder in peeces. Stracciaria, such a place as long lane is in London where old rags and clothes are to be solde. Stracciaruola, a woman that rakes in the kennels for rags to make paper with. Stracciaruólo, a botcher, a patcher or mender of old clothes. Also a fripper or broker that selleth old clothes. Straccioso, torne, tottred, ragged, bare, beggerly, full of clouts or rags. Stracco, wearie, faint, tyred, stanke. Straciare, as Stratiare. Stracio, as Stratio. Stracólli, hopping, leaping, skipping, or knauish tricks. Stracórrere, córro, corsi, corso, to ouer-run, to ouer-view, to run ouer and ouer, to course ouer. Stracorsa, a running or a questing heere and there. Stracorso, ouerrunne, coursed ouer, ouer-viewed, run ouer and ouer. Stracorritore, an ouer-runner, an ouer-seer. Stracrédere, credo, credei, creduto, to beleeue, and rebeleeue againe. Stracuraggine, as Trascuraggine. Stracurare, to neglect, or set at nought. Stracutaggine, as Trascuraggine. Stracurato, neglected or set at nought, careles, negligent, fond, heedles, rechles. Stracuratamente, carelesly, negligentlie, heedeleslie. Stracuratezza, Stracuraggine, careles∣nes, heedelesnes, negligence. Strada, a streete or way, a high way. Stradamaestra, a high way, or chiefe streete. Stradaruolo, as Stradiótto. Stradebita hora, an vnlawfull or vnsea∣sonable houre. Stradélla, Stradetta, a little streete, lane, or way, or path. Stradesiderare, to desire beyonde mea∣sure. Stradico, a kinde of officer, magistrate, iudge, or prouost marshall. Stradiótto, a kind of soldiers that the Ve∣necians vse, a boote-haler, a freebooter, a carbine. Also a wandrer, a gadder, a traueller, an earth-planet, a highwaie keeper, one of saint Nicholas his clarks. Strafalciare, as Sbalestare. Strafalcione, as Farfallone, as Sciar∣pellone. Strafare, to ouerdo, to misdo. Straforato, a disease in a horse. also bored or pierced through. Straforo, any kinde of hollow worke. Strafusaria, the weede called staues akre. Strage, slaughter, murther, hauocke, mor∣talitie, or fall of people, a discomfiture, a multitude of men slaine. Also a felling or cutting downe to the grounde. Stragiare, to slaughter, kill, or murther. Straginare, to kneade or worke paste, doe, lome, morter, or any plaister rouling it vp and downe. Stragiudiciale, besides or without lawe or iudgement. Strahora, out of season, due time, or vn∣seasonable houres. Strainténdere, tendo, tesi, teso, to vn∣derstād throughly. also to misunderstād. Strainteso, vnderstood throughly, or amis. Stralciamenti, vntanglings, vnbindings, vntyings. Stralciare, to disintangle, to vnbind, to rid, to free, to vntye. Strale, an arrow, a shaft, a boult, a dart, a quarrie. Straloccare, to gape or loyter about idly. Stralocco, an idle loytring gaping fel∣lowe. Stralunare, to stare, to glote or looke grim, to lowre, to lou, to pout, to looke squint∣eied, to turne vp the white of the eies. Stralunamento d' occhij, a staring, a gloting, a louring, a pouting, a louting. Stramacchiare, as Stramazzare. Stramacchio, as Stramazzo. Stramacciare, as Stramazzare.
Stramaccio, as Stramazzo. Stramate, to litter or fodder cattell. Stramatto, more then foolish or mad. Stramazzare, to kill, to slaughter, to mur∣ther, to hauock, to tug, to beate, to bang. Also to fall or stumble. Stramazzo, hauock, slaughter, murther. Also a matterasse, a couch, a pallet, a strawbed. Also a hound or dog-fish. Stramazzone, a blow, a clap, a bang, a rap, a cuffe, a boxe or whirret on the cheeke, a downe right blow. Strambasciato, tired, wearie, sweltring with wearines and sweat, out of breath. embst as a deere. Strambe, a kind of rushes or bents. Also withes made of rushes or bents, we call them frailes such as they bring figges or resins in. Strambellata, an vnhandsome, desheueled ill drest woman. Strambélli, as Stramótti. Strambo, squint, bleered or goggle-eide. Also peruerse, foolish, peeuish, and fond. Strambóttare, to sing rounds, gigs, catches or freemens songs. Strambotti, countrie gigs, rounds, catches or songs, virelaies. Strambottiere, a maker or singer of gigs, songs, catches or rounds. Strambottino, a short fine gig, round or catch. Strame, litter, stubble, chaffe, strawe, haume or fodder for cattle. Strameggiare, to litter or fodder cattle. Stramonia, a kind of thistle or teazell cal∣led a thorne apple. Stramortire, tisco, tito, to swoune or fall in a swoune, to faint. Stramortimento, a fainting or a swoune. Stramótti, as Strambotti. Strampolare, to goe or stalke on stilts, crouchets or scatches. Strampoli, stilts, stalkings, crouchets or scatches. Stranamente, strangely, frowardly, pee∣uishly, surly, churlishly. Stranezza, strangenes, surlines, froward∣nes, peeuishnes, churlishnes. Straneggiare, to be or play the strange, foond, peeuish or churlish companion. al∣so to vse a man strangely or churlishly, to estrange. Strangoglioni, the strangullion, strangu∣rie or choking in the throte. Also cho∣king or strangling morsels. Stragolamento, a strangling, a stifling, a choaking or smoothering. Strangolatione, idem. Strangolagione di matrice, as Prefo∣catione. Strangolare, to strangle, to choake, to stifle, to smoother, to throttle in the throte. Strangogiare, to swallow or glut downe. Also to throttle in the throte. Strangoiare, as Strangogiare, and Strangosciare. Strangosciare, as Strangolare. Also to fall in a swoune or dead trance. Stranguliare, as Strangullare. Strangullare, to powre or cast out largely, to spend riotously or lauishly. Strangullioni, as Strangoglioni. Stranguria, as Strangoglioni. Also the strangurie when one maketh water hardly, painefully, and by drop-meale. Strangusciare, as Strangolare. Straniare, to estrange, to allienate, to make strange. Straniero, a stranger, a foreiner, an al∣lien. Straniezza, as Stranezza. Stranio, strange, peeuish, froward, fond, fantasticall, churlish, coye, nice, squea∣mish. Also an alien, a forreine, a stran∣ger. Straniólo, a strange, selfe-conceited, hu∣morous, addle-headed fellow. Strano, as Stranio. Stranutare, to sneese. Stranuto, a sneesing. Straordinario, extraordinarie, not com∣mon. Strapagare, to pay double or more then it is woorth, to ouerpay. Straparlare, to curse, to banne, to raile, to mispeake of others. Straparlatore, a railer, a curser, a banner, a detractor, a mispeaker. Strapiè. Looke A strapiè. Strapióuere, to raine or showre beyonde measure. Strapocino, a kind of little bird. Strappare, to snatch or pull away by force. Strappazzare, to oppresse, to misuse, to put to all drudgerie, to hurrie, to contemne. Stráppazzo, abuse, drudgerie, ill vsing, hurring or oppression, contempt. Stratipare, as Precipitare. Straripeuole, as Precipitoso. Strarupare, as Precipitare. Strasauio, more then wise, very wise. Strascinare, to drag, to pull, to hale, to tug, to draw, to traile along the ground. Strascinatore, a dragger, a puller, a haler, a tugger, a drawer, a trailer. Strascino, Strassico, a Princes or any wo∣mans traile or traine of hir garment. Strasognare, to raue or dreame. Strasordinario, extraordinarie, strange. Strassicare, as Strascinare. Strassinare, as Strascinare. Strata, as Strada. Also plaine, flat, or spreading on the ground. Stratagéma, a stratagem, a policie, a wile or wittie shift in warre. Stratagliare, to tag, snip, or cut through. Stratiare, to torture, to rack, to torment, to hurt, to vexe, to teare, to rend, to handle roughlie. Stratiótico, warre-like, or pertaining to warre. Stratióte, water-millfoile which liueth without a root, & swimmeth only aboue the water, it is like Semperuiuum. Stratio, torture, racking, torment, hurt, vexation, tearing, rending, rough hand∣ling. Stratto, extracted or drawne out. Strauaccare, to play the beast, to yeeld or commit or wallow in beastlie lea∣cherie as a cowe. Strauagante, extrauagant, fantasticall, foolish, peeuish, strange, newfangled. Strauaganza, extrauagancie, fantasti∣calnes, strangenes, madnes, peeuishnes, newfanglenes. Strauagare, to wander, to range, to roame or gad, or stray out of the way. Strauaghezza, as Strauaganza. Strauagliare, to free or deliuer from trouble, care, or trauell. Strauedére, veggo, viddi, veduto, or visto, to see and ouersee againe, to see through. Straueduto, seene, and ouerseene againe, seene through. Strauestire, vesto, vestito, to disguise or shift in apparell, to maske, to counter∣faite. Strauestito, disguised or shifted in clothes, masked, counterfaite. Strauizzeria, Strauizzi, bellie-cheere, gluttonie, as Gozzouiglia. Strauolare, to flye, to houer, or flutter vp and downe, to flye ouer or beyond. Strauólgere, vólgo, vólsi, vólto, as Strauoltare. Strauoltare, to turne, to tosse or tumble ouer and ouer, to ouerturne. Strauolto, turned, tossed, or tumbled ouer and ouer, ouerturned. Strazzare, as Stracciare. Strazzariglia, as Spinaruolo. Strazzi, as Straccij. Strazzoso, as Straccioso. Strebiare, to rub vp and downe, to fumble, to rumble, to tickle, to clawe. Strecole, blowes, claps, raps, strokes, buf∣fets, boxes, or whirrets on the cheeke. Strega, a witch, a sorceresse, a charmer, a
hag or fairie such as our elders thought to change the sauour of children. Stregare, to bewitch, to charme, to for∣speake. Stregamento, a witching, a witchcraft, a charme. Stregaria, Stregheria, as Stregamento. Stregghia, a horse-combe, a currie-combe. Stregghiare, to currie, dresse, rub, or combe a horse. Streggia, as Stregghia. Streggiare, as Stregghiare. Streglia, as Stregghia. Stregliare, as Stregghiare. Strégnere, as Stringere. Stregolare, to stroke or smooth with ones hand. Stregózzo, Andare in stregozzo, to go a witching. Stregonare, as Stregare. Stregone, an old filthie witch, hag, or sorcerer. Stremare, to force, to constraine, or bring to extremitie, to be, or make outra∣gious. Stremamente, extremelie, exceeding∣lie. Stremire, misco, mito, to affright, or be affrighted through wonderment, to wonder. Stremità, extremitie, the vtmost point, top, bound, or end of any thing. Stremo, extreme, vtmost, lag, last, fur∣thermost. Also as Stremita. Strempellare, as Stempellare. Strena, a new-yeares guift, or any pre∣sent or guift giuen to an aduocate. Strenga, a point to trusse hosen with. Strengaio, a point maker. Strengata, a blow, a yarke, or stripe. Stréngere, as Stringere. Strengiturina, an easie pinch, guird, wrench, griping, embracing or twin∣ging. Strenna, a new-yeares guift. Strenuamente, valiantly, stoutly, man∣fully, boldly, vndantedly, couragiouslie. Strenuità, valiancie, stoutnes, manlines, boldnes, courage, vndantednes, actiui∣tie, valiantnes, nimblenes, manhoode, stoutnes. Strénuo, valiant, stout, couragious, bold, hardy, manly, vndanted, strong, doutie, actiue. Strepitare, to crack, to creake, to rustle, to rumble, or make a great noise. Strépito, a noise, a rumor, a rumbling, a rustling, a creaking, a cracking, a shufflling, a trampling, a noise made properly with hitting things one against another. Strepitoso, rustling, rumbling, full of noise, rumorous, harsh in sounding. Streppare, as Strappare. Stretta, a guird, a pinch, a nip, a griping, a ierke, a wrench, a twinge. Also a nar∣row lane, or allie. Also a dace, or as some thinke a mullet fish. Strettamente, streightly, narowly, neere∣ly, strictly, pinchingly. Strettezza, streightnes, narownes, strict∣nes. Strettine, easie thrusts, pinches, guirds, gripes, twinges, or claspings. Strettiuo, restrictiue, hard-binding. Stretto, streight, narow, strickt, close. also straightned, made narow, shronke vp, pinched, griped, tide vp, guirded. Also constrained, forced, bound fast, vrged, enticed, clasped. Also a close, sparing, niggardlie, pinching, narow-handed man. Also a straight, or close passage, or a gulfe, as Stretto di Magelano. Strettóia, a presse to presse napkins, cheese, letters, or caps. Also a wrest, a pincer to wring any thing with. Strettótio, a healing, closing, or restrin∣gent plaister. Also a little wrest, or a pincer. Strettura, a pinching or a wringing. Also as Strettezza. Stria, Strione, Striozza, a witch, an en∣chantres. Also a screech owle or such vn∣luckie bird, as Strie. Striaccio, a gadding, a roaming or wan∣dring about. Striare, to bewitch, to charme, to scritch as an owle. Also to make rabbats, chanels, furrowes or chamfres in timber or stone. Striato, chamfered, chaneled, or wrought inward with a winding. Striatura, a chamfuring, a chaneling, a small furrow made or wrought in stone or timber. Striazzo, Looke Andar in Striazzo. Stribligine, a fault in speaking or wri∣ting called solaecisme or incongruitie. Stricare, to draw, pull, or pluck out, to vntangle or rid away, to put to flight, to grub or roote out. Also to stroke, to sleeke, or smooth vp. Stribuire, isco, ito. Stributione, as Di∣stributione. Stricatóio, a sleeke-stone. Also a currie-combe. Stricca, Striccietta, a thin, long streeke or lyne. Also a thin fine plate of any mettall. Strichna, an herbe which maketh them mad that eate of it. Strida, skreekes or pitifull cryes. Stridare, to cry, to proclaime. Stridere, strido, stridei, striduto, to skreek or crie out pitifully, to gnash the teeth, to creake, to crash, to crie as a night∣bird, to make a whistling noise, to crie as a raile doth. Striduto, skreeked or cride out pitifully, gnasht the teeth, screekt, crasht, made a creaking noise. Strido, a skreeke, a creaking, a clamour or pitifull crying out. Stridore, a skreeking, a wailing or gna∣shing of the teeth, a creaking of a doore turning vpon the hinges. Also whistling noise, as of winde, a rustling, a clamor, a crashing, the crying of railes. Stridula, a skreeking, railing or creeking thing. Stridulare, as Stridere. Stridulo, that maketh a creaking, or cra∣shing or noise. Strie, as Stria. Also those parts in furro∣wed pillers which stand out and swell as it were being higher then the fur∣rowes or gutters, called the ridges. Some take them for carued furrowes, rabbats or champhres in carued worke. Striga, as Strega. Strigare, to disintangle, to rid. Strigarie, as Stregamento. Strigio, Stria, a fish like a dace. Striglia, as Streggia. Strige, a skreech owle, an vnluckie kind of bird, which (as they of old time saie) sucked out the blood of infants lying in their cradles. Also as Strega. Also as Strie, or Stria. Also a kind of fish. Strigliare, as Stregghiare. Strigolare, as Stregghiare. Strigone, as Stregone. Strigoso, leane, gant, meagre, dry, spiny, withered. Also a starueling, a leane scrag, one that is nothing but skin and bone. Strillare, to waile or lament, as Stridere, to yell or crie out aloude. Strillato, a fish like a dace. Strillo, as Strido, a yelling or lowd skree∣king. Strignere, as Stringere. Strinco, Strinzo, a kind of Lamprey or eelepout. Stringiture, as Strengiturine. Stringa, a point with a tag. Stringaio, a point maker. Stringare, to point, to trusse with points. Also to wyre-draw a thing. Also to beate, to bang or ribbaste one. Stringato, pointed or trust with points. Also handsome, neate, fnicall, spruse, smug or fine. Also wire drawen.
Stringata as Strengata. Stringatuzzo, a fine, neat, spruse, smug, handsom, niece, selfe-conceited fellow. Stringere, stringo, strinsi, stretto, to binde, to claspe, to gripe, to clinche, to pinche, to guird. Also to straine, to wring, to bind or trusse. Also to vrge, to force, to constraine, to prouoke or en∣tice. Stringersi nelle spalle, to shrug or shrink in ones shoulders. Stringhette, little, small points, laces, ri∣bands, strings or such bindings. Stringolare, to point, to lace, or to string. Strinno, the herbe Nightshade or Peti∣morrell. Strione, Striozzo, a witch. Also a player of comedies. Striscia, a liste or seluage of any cloth or other thing. Also a streake or line dra∣wen out in length. Also a bedroule. Striscia di paróle, a rabble or huddle of words, a bed roule of words. Strisciare, to make a trampling noise with ones feete, to slide or glide vpon ise, to currie, rub or dresse a horse, to sleeke or make smooth, to drag or traile or creepe along the ground. Also to lay a counter∣feit colour vpon any thing or to paint as women do their faces. Strisciatura, a trampling noise, a sliding, a curring, a sleeking or smoothing, a trai∣ling, a dragging or creeping, a painting of a womans face. Striscio, a kinde of painting that women vse for their faces. a smugging or smoo∣thing. Strisciolare, as Strisciare. Stritolare, to crumble, to mince small or to moulder. Also to digest meate. Also to skreeke or squeake, as the wheele of a carte doth if it be not greased. Strituro, the filme, rinde or barke of a tree or a shell. Striuiére, a blood-hound, a lime-hound, a setting dog. Strófa, a wily deceit or subtilitie in argu∣ing. Also a sudden turning or whir∣ling. Stroffióne, as Strofinaccio. Strofinaccio, a dish-clout, a rag or a wisp to wipe and scoure dishes with. Also a mauking to cleanse an ouen with. a scou∣ring slicke for a piece of ordinance. Strofinacciolo, as Strofinaccio. Strofinare, to rub, to wipe, to scoure, to struggle, to claw vp and downe, to gall or fret away. Strófio, a kinde of garland of flowers that priests were woont to weare. Strófo, a fretting or gnawing in the bo∣wels. Strologare, to professe Astrologie, to play the Astrologer. Strologia, the science called Astrologie. Strólogo, an astrologer. Strombite, a stone in shape like vnto a strombo. Strombo, a kinde of shell fish of the sea that hath a leader whom the whole shole doth follow as their king. Stromentale, instrumentall, that serueth as an instrument or meane. Stroménto, any kinde of toole or instru∣ment, an instrument of musike. Also an indenture, a bond, a record or writing. Also a meane or instrument. Stroncare, to cut off, to curtall, to abridge. Stroncio, a turde. Stronomia, the science of Astronomie. Strónomo, an Astronomer. Stronzo, a turde. Stronzolo, a little turd. Stroppa, a twigge, a with, or osier to binde vines, or hops with. Also the binding whereby a sword or buckler hangeth. Stroppaglio, a stopple of any thing, name∣lie of a cannon. Stroppare, to binde with twigs or osiers. Also to stop. Stroppata, a blowe with a with. Also a withe full. Stroppélli, stopples of bottles, or bungs for barels. Stroppiare, as Storpiare. Stroppiato, as Storpiato. Stroppicciare, to rub, to claw, or trample vp and downe. Also to vse frication. Stroppiccio, a rubbing, a clawing, a trampling noise, a frication. Stroppicciola, a rubber, a wispe, or anie thing to rub withall. Stróppio, as Storpio. Strosciare, as Strozzare▪ to fall furious∣lie and clatter with falling as haile and raine doth vpon tiles. Stróscio, a kenell for dogs, a stie for swine, a trampling noise. Also ruine, spoile, or destruction. Also a violent clattring or crushing. Strózza, the winde pipe or gullet, or vzell pipe or throte of any creature. Strozzàre, to wring a sunder, to pull, to tugge or plucke in peeces, to kill or crush to death, to strangle or wring off ones neck. Strozzamento, a strangling or wringing off of ones necke. Strozziere, a murtherer, a puller or wrin∣ger off of necks. Struccare, to squease, to crush, to presse, to wrench, to wring clothes, to stringe silke. Struccata, the grapes out of which all the iuice is prest, and then giuen to hogges. Struccatóio, any thing to squease, crush, presse, wrench, or wring clothes with. Strucciare, as Struccare. Struccio, the birde called an Estridge. Strucciola, as Sdrusciola. Strue, a pile of wood, a woodstack, a heape of many things togither. Struffare, to commit all maner of riotous∣nes, wantonnes, or lewdnes. Struffione, a shooe-clout, a dish-clout, a wispe or ragge, or maulkin to wipe an ouen with. Struffo, one giuen ouer to all wantonnes, riote and lewdnes. Also a stopple or a wispe or dish-clout, or a mauln. Struffoli, a kinde of tate or such other paste meate. Strúggere, struggo, strussi, strutto, to thawe, to melt, to consume, to destroie. Also to build, to compact, to frame or set in order, to arraie. Also as Struire. Struggimento, a thawing or melting. also a building or framing. Struire, isco, ito, to set in order, fashion or arraie, to builde, to make a frame, to worke, to compact, to lay or make, to prepare. Also to heape vp. Also to con∣triue. Also as Struggere. Also as In∣struire. Struma, a wenne, or a swelling in the neck or arme-holes, wherein be as it were hard kernels closed in the skinne. Some haue taken it to be the kings euill. Also a bunch in the back. Strumático, that hath the impostume struma in the throte, or the kings euill. Struméa. Some take it for the hearbe crowfoote, and other some for a kinde of herbe that beggers vse to make their flesh rawe. Strumentale, as Stromentale. Strumento, as Stromento. Strumo, an herbe or plaister that cureth the kings euill. Also an herbe that cu∣reth that disease. Strumoso, as Strumático, vsed also for one that hath a great throte. Strupo, as Stupo. Strusciare, as Strutiare. Struscio, a tugging, a moiling, a toiling, a vexing. Strutiare, to tug, to toyle, to moyle, to vexe, to excruciate. Strutio, the bird called an eastrige or o∣strich. Also a toyling, a tugging, a vex∣ing, an excruciating. Also the fullers herbe wherewith wooll is commonlie washt.
Struttibile, made of many pieces, or of di∣uers things. Also that may be melted or thawed. Strutto, melted, thawed, or consumed, moulten, founded. Also built, compact, set in order or array, or framed. Also butter or sewet. Also construction. Al∣so as Instrutto. Struttore, a builder, a framer, a com∣pacter, a melter, a mason, a carpen∣ter. Struttura, a construction, a building, a framing, a compacting together, a frame, a setting of things in good order, com∣position. Struzza, a kinde of hunting with hounds so called in Italie. Struzzicare, as Stuzzicare. Struzzo, an eastridge. Struzzolo, a yong eastridge. Stú, vsed for Se tu, if thou. Stua, as Stufa. Stuare, as Stufare. Stuccare, to glut, to gorge, to cloy, to wearie. Also to dry, to stiffen, or to harden. Also to build with stucco. Stucce, a kinde of file that goldsmiths vse. Stuccheuole, tedious, cloying, weari∣some, importunate. Also wallowish, or waterish in taste. Stuccio, Stuccietto, a little pocket cace with cisors, penkniues, and such trifles in them. Stucchio, any fine little cace, namely a combe-cace. Stucco, glutted, gorged, cloyde, wearie, full, satisfide, dride, stiffe, or hardned. Also a kind of stuffe or matter to build statue or image worke with vsed much in Italie, made of paper, sand and lyme, with other mixtures, the imagerie work at Nonesuch in England in the inner court is built of such. Studiante, a student, a scholler, a sollici∣ter. Studiare, to studie, to muse, to endeuour, to applie the minde, to care for a thing, to giue his mind or affections to, to la∣bour, to affect, or couet to get, to haue a desire or minde to a thing, to fansie. Studénte, as Studiante. Studietto, a little studie, cabinet, or closet. Studio, a studie or place to studie in, a cabinet, a closet, a vniuersitie, a colledge. Also a deske, a standing deske in a schoole for great bookes to stand vpon, but properlie an earnest bending of the minde to a thing, great affection that one hath to do good or euill, studie, ex∣ercise, feate, trade, endeuour, will, care, carke, diligence, industrie, appetite, fansie, desire, labour, affection, delight, pleasure, opinion to a thing. Studiólo, as Studietto. Studiosamente, studiouslie, carefullie, desirouslie, earnestlie, diligentlie, with diligence and affection, for the nonce, expressely or of purpose, aduisedly. Studioso, studious, musing, carefull, dili∣gent, earnest, painefull, constant, adict, firmely disposed, desirous of learning, one that giueth his minde to a thing. Stufa, a stufe, a bath, a whot house. Stufaiuolo, a bathe or stufe-keeper. Stufare, to siue meate, to stufe, or bathe in a whot house. Stufaruólo, as Stufaiuolo. Stufetta, a little stufe, siue, bathe, or whot house. Stuffare, as Stuccare, to slue meate. Stuffata, a pot of stued meate. Stuffeuole, as Stuccheuole. Stuffo, as Stucco. Stuiéllo, as Stoppino. Also a tent to tent a sore with. Stuóia, as Stóia. Stuóiare, as Stóiare. Stuóiaro, as Stóiaro. Stuóla, as Stóla. Stuólare, as Stólare. Stuólo, an armie, a troupe, a band, a squadron, a rout or companie of men, a shoale of fish, a flight of birds, a swarme of bees, a crue of good fel∣lowes. Stuóra, as Stóia. Stuórare, as Stóiare. Stuóraro, as Stóiaro. Stupefare, faccio, feci, fatto, to woon∣der, or gaze at with admiration, to a∣stonish or dismay. Also to be amazed, to be astonished, or dismaide, to become abashed, to be driuen into a dump, to stand still immoueable, to be past all sence, to maruell or woonder at, to be or haue one in great admiration. Stupetatto, wondred or gazed at with wonderment, astonished, dismaide, a∣mazed, abashed, that hath lost his strength. Looke Stupefare. Stupefattione, astonishment, amaze∣ment, or wonderment. Stupéndo, wondrous, admirable, mar∣uellous, working admiration. Stupidire, disco, dito, as Stupefare. Stupidità, stupiditie, astonishment, a∣mazement, dullnes, or priuation of the sences, sodaine priuation or lacke of sence or feeling, benumming, astonied∣nes, dulnes or a trouble of the minde vpon a sodaine feare, not perceiuing what is done, vnsensiblenes. Stúpido, foolish, sencelesse, fearefull, a∣mazed, astonished, dull or benummed in fences, dismaide, abashed, that fooleth nothing, that lacketh his sences. Strupiare, Strupio. Looke Stuprare. Stupire, as Stupefare. Stupito, as Stupefatto. Stuporatione, as Stupidità. Stupore, as Stupidità. Stuprare, to rape, to deflowre or rauish a virgin. Also to commit adultrie or rape. Stupratore, an adulterer, a rauisher of women, a deflowrer. Stupro, rape, rauishment, adultrie, shame, reproch, whoredome, deflowring a virgin. Stuproso, corrupt, naught, whorish, adulterous, giuen to aduoutrie or whooring. Sturare, to open, to vent, or vnstop. Sturbare, to trouble, to vexe, to molest, to disturbe. Sturbo, Sturbamento, a trouble, a vex∣ation, a disturbance. Sturione, the fish called Sturgeon. Sturno, as Storno. Sturzo, an estridge bird. Stutare, to do out or extinguish. Stuua, as Stufa. Stuuare, as Stufare. Stuuaiuolo, as Stufaiuolo. Stuzzicamenti, prouocations, ticklings. Stuzzicare, to play, fumble, grope, touch, or dalli withall wantonlie, to tickle, to prouoke, to entice, to allure, or egge on. Stuzzicatore, a fumbler, a groper, a dallier, a tickler, a prouoker, &c. Stuzzico, a fumbling, a groping, a wan∣ton dalliance, a tickling, a prouoking, an enticement, a setting on. Su, vp, vpward, ouer, vpon. Also an ad∣uerb of encouragement, on, vp, away, go to, to it. Su via, away, on, go to, forward, vp and away, an aduerb of encouragement. Sua, hirs, hir owne, his, his owne. Suada, the gods of eloquence or delectable speech. Suadéla, perswasion, faire speech. Suadére, suado, suasi, suaso, to coun∣sell, to perswade, to intreate with faire words, to endeuour with reason, to in∣duce oe to our opinion, to exhort, to mooue. Sualiata, gallant, faire, deckt, trim, ga∣rish. Sualigiare, to rob, to rifle, to strip, to frip, or vncace by the high way.
Sualisciare, as Sualigiare. Suampare, as Vampare. Suangelizzare, as Euangelizzare. Suanimento, a vanishing out of sight. Suanire, nisco, nito, to vanish out of sight to fade away, to droope or faint. Suanito, vanished away, faded away. Al∣so wine that hath lost his strength, drink that is flat or dead drooped or fainted. Suantaggio, disaduantage, ods. Suaporare, as Euaporare. Suariare, as Zauariare. Suarione, as Zauarione. Suaro, a kind of sea fish called in Latine Lacertus. Suasibile, perswadable, that may be per∣swaded. Suasione, exhortation, motion, perswa∣sion, counselling. Suaso, counselled, perswaded, intreated with faire words, induced to our opini∣on, mooued, exhorted. Also a kinde of whitish, pale colour that painters vse. Some take it for a kind of sad graie. Suasore, an exhorter, a perswader, an in∣ducer, a counseller. Suasótio, of or belonging to exhorting, perswading or counselling. Suasório, disswasiue, perswasiue, moouing alluring. Suaue, as Soaue. Suauità, as Soauità. Suazzo, a fish called a Terbut. Subalternare, to succeed in order or by turne. Subaltérno, succeeding in due order and by turne. Subato, Subatione, the appetite or stir∣ring to generation in swine, the grun∣ting of the sowe for the bore. Subatrice, a woman giuen to leacherie or longing for it. Subbentrare, to enter vnder. Subbia, a shoomakers awle. Subbiare, to whistle. also to pricke with an awle. Subbio, a whistle. also the roule whereon the weauer rouleth vp his web or worke, called a yarne-beame. Subbiolare, to roule vpon a role as a wea∣uer doth his worke. Subbiolo, a little whistle. a little weauers roule. Subbisso, a bottomlesse pit or gulfe, as it were Sotto abisso. Subbolire, as Sobbolire. Subdiuidere, vido, visi, viso, to subde∣uide. Subdiuisione, a subdiuision. Sube, a kind of birde which is said to break the eagles egs if he can possible come to them. Súbero, the light wood called corke. Subet, the name of a disease in a horse. Subia, as Subbia. Subiare, as Subbiare. Subio, as Subbio. Subietto, as Suggetto, or Soggetto. Subillare, by meere importunity and ear∣nestnes to intreat and obtaine a suite of any man, as it were against his will. Subire, bisco, bito, to grunt as the sowe doth longing for the bore to do his kind, to long or lust beastly. Subissare, as Precipitare. Subitamente, suddenly, on a sudden, quickly, hastily, vnlooked for. Subitana, sodaine. Morte subitana, so∣daine death. Subitezza, sodainenes, speede, hastines. Subito, sodaine, quick, nimble, hastilie, sodainelie, vnlooked for. Subitoche, so soone as, presently vpon. Sublimare, to raise, to set on high, to ad∣uance, to extoll, to preferre, to celebrate. Also as chimikes say to sublimate. Sublimato, high, raised, aduanced, pre∣ferred, extolled, that is aboue vs, loftie, haughtie, celebrated, as Solimato, sub∣limated. Sublimatione, a sublimation, a subli∣ming. Sublime, as Sublimato, high, that is a∣boue vs, aloft, loftie, haughtie. Sublimità, height, aduancement, prefer∣ment, the top or tipe of any thing, highnes. Subluogare, to place, to lay, to settle, or dispose vnder-hand, or vnderneath. Subluuie, filth or ordure. Also a disease in cattell betweene the clawes of the feete. Subornare, to suborne, to entice, to allure or misleade to euill or to beare false witnes, to send one priuilie and instruct him to do or say a thing to the end to deceiue. Subornatione, a subornation or mislea∣ding. Subornatore, a suborner, a misleader, an enticer, a seducer to some euill. Subsistentia, the subsistence or bottome. Also an appointment. Subsístere, sisto, stei, sturo, to subsist, to abide, to remaine, to stand still, not to giue place or recoyle, to resist, to with∣stand. Also to substitute or appoint in the roome of another. Subsistuto, subsisted. Also a substitute. Also substituted or appointed for a∣nother. Subsolano, the easterlie wynde, an East wynde. Subueare, to lurke or sneake in some hole. Succedáneo, that succeedeth or commeth in place of another. Succédere, cédo, céssi, césso, or cedu∣to, to succeede, to follow, to inherit, to come to passe, to ensue, to come in the place of another, to go well forward, to haue good successe, to prosper and come to passe and effect. Succeduto, Succésso, succeeded, follo∣wed, inherited, come to passe, Looke Succédere. Successione, a succeeding, a succession, an inheritance, or comming in place of another. Successiuo, successiue, orderlie, succee∣ding. Succésso, succeeded, followed, inherited, come to passe, Looke Succédere. Also a successe or succession, an euent, or issue, a comming to passe, increase of fruite, fullnes, prosperitie, good luck. Successore, a successor, a follower, an in∣heritor, he that followeth or commeth after, or in the place of another. Succhia capra, a kinde of bird which is said to suck a goates vdder. Some haue taken it for the winde-fucker. Succhiare, to suck. Also to smack. Succhiatore, a sucker, a suckling. Succhiellare, to boare or pierce through. Succhiéllo, an augre, a percer, a wimblet, a gimblet, a boarer, a forcet. Also a kind of little pipe or flute. Also a bird called a winde-fucker. Succhio, the iuice of any thing. Also a smacking or a sucking till a print re∣maine. Also the sap or moistnes of trees. Also watrishnes, or moistnes, venire in succhio, to haue ones teeth runne a water, longing for any thing. Also as Succhiello. Succiare, to suck or smack. Súccida, new-shorne wooll, vnwashed, greasie. Súccido, sluttish, filthie, foule, sweatie, sullied, stinking, vnwashed, greasie as wooll as when it is new shorne. Also moist or full of iuice. Succidezza, as Succidume. Succidire, disco, dito, to foule, to filth, to defile, to sullie with sweate or grease. Succidume, all manner of filth, sullines, sluttishnes, filthie sweate or grease. Succinare, to make a soft noise, to sing a base or tenour. Succinco, of or belonging to amber. Succíngere, to vnderguirt, to compasse,
to enuiron, to fence about. Succino, rozen or the gumme of sweete trees, specially of the Pine tree: in old time it was called glasse, by reason of the cleanenes thereof. The first and best kind of Succino is Amber, which is yellow and bright through, and where∣of they make beades: the other kinde is white and duskish and called bastard amber. Also as Lincurio. Also a kind of plumme or damzen tree. Also of or belonging to amber. Succinto, succint, short, compendious, briefe, materiall, pithie. Also vnder∣guirt, or trust vp, guirt, trussed about, enuironed, that weareth or hath by his side. Succio, a sucking or a smacking. Succiola, a sucking or a smacking, a suc∣king babie. Succiolare, to suck, or to smack. Succire, cisco, cito, to suck, or to smack. Succiso, cut, slasht, gasht, hewed or mang∣led vnder. Succo, the iuice or moistnes of any thing, vsed also for vigor or strength. Succoso, moist, or full of iuice or moy∣sture. Succumbij, a certaine kinde of spirits which will take the shapes of women vpon them, and so haue the companie of men. Succussario, Succussoni, slowe, dull, heauie going iades. Sucino, Sucina, a kinde of plum, or damzen. Also a plum tree. Suco, as Succo. Sucoso, as Succoso. Sucubij, as Succumbij. Sucule, a number of starres called the seauen starres, which appeare the 12. ka∣lends of Iune, and are called Hiades. Sud, among mariners is vsed for South. Sudaccio, filthie, stinking sweate. Sudare, to sweate, to drop with, to labour sore, to take much paines. Sudarcato, a sicknes called the iandise. Sudario, a towell, a napkin, a wiper, a rubber, a handkercher. Sudatório, a sweating place, a stew or hot house. Sudest, the Southeast winde. Sudetto, aboue-spoken, aboue-said, fore∣named. Suddiácono, a subdeane of a Church. Suddito, a subiect, a vassall. Sudi, a kinde of great fish, and of a plea∣sant taste. Sudice, filthie, sluttish, as Succido. Sudiciume, as Succidume. Sudiciótta, a filthie, sluttish slut. Sudo, the cleare firmament without cloudes, faire and drye weather after wet and raine. Sudore, sweate. Also labour, paine, or trauell. Sue, hirs, his, theirs, Dante hath vsed it for Su. Suefare, Suefatto, as Asuefare, to bring in vse or custome. Sueggiare, as Suegliare. Suegghiare, as Suegliare. Suegghiaruólo, as Suegliaruólo. Suegghiato, as Suegliato. Suegghiatóio, as Suegliaruólo. Suegliare, to wake, to awaken, to watch, to rouze vp. Suegliato, awakened, watcht, awake. Also vigilant, rouzed, warie, quick, carefull, heedie. Suegliaruólo, a larum in a clock to wake a man with striking. Suegliatóio, as Suegliaruólo. Sueglione, a loude instrument called a hautboy. Suelare, to vnuaile, to vncouer, to mani∣fest, to disclose. Suelenire, nisco, nito, to vnpoison, to vn∣rankle, to vnfester. Suéllere, suelgo, suelsi, suelto, to extirp or pull vp by the rootes, to grub vp, to roote out. Suelto, extirped or pulled vp the rootes, grubled vp, rooted out. Suenare, to cut the veines or throte, to kill, to murther, to stab. Suenatabriglia, a bit with an open mouth as ports or vpsets. Suenatore, a murtherer, a stabber, a but∣cher, a killer. Suenatura, riders call it open mouthes, whether it be a cats foote or any other vpset or port. Sueneuole, vnconuenient, ilfauoured, vn∣seemely. Suenire, vengo, venni, venuto, to fainte or fall in a swoune. Suenimento, a fainting or a swouning. Suenuto, fainted or fallen in a swoune. Suentare, to euaporate, to blow or vent out, to aire, to winde, to shake in the wind. Also to let the wind, breath, spi∣rite, force or wit of any thing or man flie out. Suentato, euaporated, blowen, breathed or vented, aired, winded. Also a foolish, light headed, fond minded man. Suentolare, to waue in the aire or wind, to vent or vapour. Suentolo, a fan or van of feathers to make wind with. Suentraglia, the guts, garbish, o ffale, panch or entrailes of any creature. Suentrare, to vnpanch, to panch, to vnbo∣well, to pull out the guts, offale or gar∣bish of any creature. Suentura, a mishap, an ill lucke, a misfor∣tune or mischance. Suenturato, vnhappie, vnfortunate, vn∣luckie, dismall. Suenturoso, as Suenturato. Suerginare, to rauish or deflower a mai∣den. Suerginata, a rauished or deflowred wo∣man. Suerginamento, a rape or a rauishment. Suergogna, shame, reproch, impudencie. Suergognare, to shame, to reproch, to wrong. Suergognato, shamed, reproched, wronged shameles, impudent. Suernare, to waxe sommer. Also to winter or to passe the winter. Suertare, to tell or vtter whatsoeuer one knowes, to be tom-tell-troth. Suestire, suesto, suestito, to disaray, to vncloth, to strip, to pull off ones clothes, to vncase, to disrobe, to disattire, to strip naked. Suestito, disaraide, vnclothed, stript, puld off ones clothes, vnclad, bare, naked. Sueta, a fish called in latine Nasus. Suetino, a kind of yellow precious stone. Suéto, accustomed, wont. Suffarcinare, to lade, to leade, to burthen, to stuffe vp, to trusse vp. Sufficiente, sufficient, able, enough. Sufficienza, sufficiencie, abilitie. Suffilo, a kind of disease in the eares. Suffimento, as Suffumicatione. Suffilare, to whistle. Suffocare, as Soffocare. Suffocatione, as Soffocatione. Suffolare, to whistle. Suffolcere, as Soffolcire. Suffolto, as Soffolciuto. Suffolo, a whistle. Suffolino, Suffoletto, a little whistle. Suffragano, as Soffragano. Suffragare, as Soffragare. Suffragatione, as Soffragatione. Suffragatore, as Soffragatore. Suffragatório, as Soffragatório. Suffraginoso, any beast or horse that is diseased in the boughs or pasterus, that hath the scratches or spauen. Suffragio, as Soffragio. Suffrago, as Soffrago. Suffrenatione, as Soffrenatione. Suffríggere, as Soffríggere. Suffritto, as Soffritto. Suffrenare, to check a horse or giue him a
correction with the bit, or with one raine of the bit. Suffrenata, a checke or iob or twitch with the bit giuen to a horse. Suffulcere, Suffolcere.   Suffuleno, a bull-finch. Suffumicare, to smoake or hang vp in the smoake, to burne sacrifice, to vse suffu∣mications, to fume or perfume vnder∣neath. Suffumigij, as Suffumicatione. Suffumicatione, suffumication, smoa∣king or burning sacrifices, a fuming, a perfuming. Suffusione, a disease in the eies called a pin and a web. Also a spreading abroad or spreading vpon. Sugamano, as Sciugamano. Sugare, as Sciugare, as Succhiare. Sugaro, the wood or tree called corke. Sugatóio, as Sciugatóio. Sugheréllo, an elder pipe. Suggellare, to seale, to signe or stamp. Suggello, ale, a signet, a stamp, a mark. Suggere, suggo, sugge, suggiuto, or sut∣to, to sacke or draw drie. Suggee, risco, rito, to minister, finde, allow or giue one, to yeeld or send foorth things whereof are plentie. Also to sug∣gest or put in mind, to prompt, to shew, to tell. Also to choose in ones place. Suggiuto or Sutto, suckt or drawen dry. Suggéstare, as Suggerire. Suggestione, a suggestion or putting in mind. Suggésto, suggested or put in mind. Also a high bush or round tuft of haire, which auncient matrones were wont to roule somewhat high vpon their heads. Vsed also for a high chaire, pulpet or seate, whereout orations and sermons are made. Suggettare, to subiect, to yoke, to bring in subiection or thraldome, to submit, to bring vnder. Suggetire, tisco, tito, as Suggettare. Suggettito, subiected, brought vnder sub∣iection. Suggettione, subiection, thraldome, bon∣dage, seruitude, as Soggettione. Suggétto, a subiect, a vassall, a thrall. also subiected or inthralled. Also a subiect, a cause, a ground or theame, to write or speake of, as Soggétto. Sughero, the light wood called corke. Also a deuise made of bladders or corke to fasten to ones shoulders to learne to swimme with, that children vse in I∣taly. Sugna, as Songia. Sugo, any iuice or moisture. Sugoso, moist, full of iuice or moisture. Sugumera.   Suiamento, an inticement, an allurement, a misleading, a straying out of the way. Suiare, to intice, to allure, to mislead, to draw or straie out of the right way, to debauch. Suiato, inticed, allured, suborned, mislead, drawen or straide out of the right way. Also an vnthriftie, careles, debaucht or mislead man, debauched. Suillaneggiare, to chide, to braule, to skould, to offer one villanie or wrong. Sul, vpon, ouer, ouer the, vpon the, in the nicke, in and vpon, at the instance. Sulfar del di, vpon or by breake or peepe of daie. Suilluppare, to vnwrap, to vnfold, to vn∣tangle, to rid free. Suilluppo, an vnwrapping, an vnfolding, a riddance, an vntangling. Suinchiare, to whiske with a rod or riding wand. Suisare, to deface, to gash, to slash or cut a mans face. Also to neglect, and not con∣sider vpon. Suiscerare, as Suentrare. Suiscerato, vnbowelled, vnpanched. Suiscerato seruitore, an hartie, louing, affected seruant. Suisceratamente, hartily, withall a mans hart and bowelles. Sulimato, Mercurie or sublimat that chi∣miks do vse. Sultanino, a kind of Turkish coyne. Sumacchio, a drug to die blacke with called Sumacke. Summa, as Somma. Summare, as Sommare. Summario, as Sommario. Summéttere, as Somméttere. Summesso, as Sommesso. Summessione, as Sommessione. Summissiuo, as Sommessiuo. Sumministrare, to minister, to supply, to giue, to finde or deliuer what is asked for. Also to do seruice vnto one. Sumministratione, a subministration, a supply, an aide or helpe at a pinch, an vnderseruice. Sumministratore, an vnderseruant or such a one as supplieth and ministreth what is wanting. Sun, vsed by Dante for Su. Sunto, a sum or totall reckoning. Suntuosamente, sumptuously, gloriously, stately, profusely. Suntuosità, as Sontuosità. Suntuoso, as Sontuoso. Suo, his, his owne, hirs, hir owne. Vsed of Dante for Su. Suócera, a wiues or husbands mother. Suócero, a wifes or husbands father. Suogliare, to bring out of taste, to make vnwilling, to haue ones lust or longing. Suogliato, tastelesse, vnwilling, sad, pen∣siue, vnlustie, crazed, had ones will. Suogliatamente, vnwillingly, sadly, vn∣lustily, without taste. Suói, his, hirs, his owne, hir owne. Suóla, a sole of a shooe or such. Suolaio, as Solaio, as Solaro. Suolare, to sole a paire of shooes, to seele, to floore or plank any roome. Suolazzamento, as Suolazzo. Suolazzare, to beate, to slap, to houer or flutter with ones wings▪ to pur as a par∣tridge. Suolazzo, a fluttring, a flapping, a houe∣ring or beating with ones wings, a pur∣ring. Suolgarizzare, to publish, to explaine, to translate. Suólgere, volgo, volsi, vólto, to turne or winde away from, to dert from. Suolére, voglo, volsi, voluto, to nill, to be vnwilling. Suóle, he is woont, he is accustomed. Suoluto, nilled, or bin vnwilling. Suólo, a thing that beareth any thing on it, the earth, ground floore, soyle, lande, bottome, ground-worke or foundation, or superficies of any thing, a roofe or seeling of a roome, a sole of a shoe. Sulo a suólo, piled in ordre or ranks one vpon another, as herrings be in a bar∣rell. Suólsi, it is wont, the maner or fashion is. Suólto, turned or wound away from, as Suilluppo. Suonanza, as Sonanza. Suonare, as Sonare. Suonatore, as Sonatore. Suóno, what noyse or sounde soeuer the eare of man can comprehend. Suóno di palme, the noyse of clapping of hands. Suono a mórto, a knell or tolling for the dead. Suora, a sister, a title giuen to nuns, or re∣ligious women, a nun. Suoresca, sister-like, nunlike, sisterlie. Supeditaneo, as Suppeditaneo. Supeditare, as Suppeditare. Supeditatione, as Suppeditatione. Supelleticario, as Suppelleticario. Supelletile, as Suppelletile. Superabile, that may be passed or ouer∣come. Superante, exceeding, surmounting, pas∣sing, ouercomming. Superare, to ouercome, to vanquish, to
conquer, to surmount, to excell, to ouer∣match, to performe, to go ouer, to ex∣ceed, to be greater, to passe, to ouerreach or ouerpasse, to ouerliue. Superarogare, to superarogate, to giue moreouer. Superarogatione, superarogation, a gi∣uing more then is required. Superatione, an ouercomming, a conque∣ring, a surmounting. Supérbia, pride, disdaine, haughtines, statelines▪ surquedrie, loftinesse of minde, arrogancie. Supérbiloquente, one that speaketh proudly. Supérbiloquentia, proude, or arrogant speech, haughtie words. Superbire, bisco, bito, to growe proude, haughtie, disdainfull, or arrogant, to be proud, high minded, or haue a lofty sto∣macke. Supérbito, Looke Superbire. Supérbo, proud, haughty, stately, disdain∣full, surly, high minded, arrogant, bea∣sting, wicked. Also magnificent, noble, high, sumptuous, or with a maiestie. Supercéleste, more then heauenly. Superchiare, as Soperchiare. Superchiaria, as Soperchiaria. Superchiamente, as Soperchiamente. Superchiatore, as Soperchiatore. Superchiatura, as Soperchiatura. Supérchio, as Sopérchio. Superciglio, the vpper eie-lid of a mans eie, the eie brows, or ridge of hairs aboue the eie eye-lids. Also the countenance, seueritie, grauitie, pride, stately looke or countenance of a man. Also the hanse of a dore, or mantle of a chimnie. Also the top or height, or highest part, the browe or ridge of a hill. Superciglioso, very squeamishly, or haughtily. Also sowre or grimme in countenance. Supereminentia, a prerogatiue, or excel∣lencie aboue others. Superficiale, superficiall, that is not verie deepe. Superficiare, to peruse ouer superficially. Superficiaro, a superficiall man▪ that hath but meane skill. Also belonging to the outside of a thing. Also he that buildeth a house on another mans grounde, and therefore payeth quitrent. Superficie, the superficies or outside of any thing. Superfluare, to ouerflowe, to be superflu∣ous, to exceede, to run ouer, to abounde. Superfluità, superfluitie, ouer-plus, pro∣fasenes, more then needs. Supérfluo, superfluous, ouerplus, ouer∣much, profuse, that runneth ouer. Superfluire, isco, ito, as Superfluare. Superfugio, a flying away. Superi, as Superiori. Superfuso, powred vpon, ouerflowing, spred abroad. Superiore, superior, elder, senior, aboue, better, higher, chiefer, former, vpper, vppermost. Superiori, ancestors, predecessours, elders, seniors, betters, superiors, they that ex∣cell or passe vs. Also vsed for the gods a∣boue, or they that are in heauen, gods, saints, angels, &c. Superiorità, superioritie, senioritie, or el∣dership, preheminence. Superlatione, the figure hyperbole, or ex∣cessiue amplifying. Also a name giuen to one by excellencie. Superlatiuo, the superlatiue or chiefe de∣gree. Superlato, borne vpon or ouer, excessiuely amplifide, preferred. Supernale, supernall, high, aboue, chiefe. Supernato, borne or growne ouer and be∣side other. Supérno, as Supernale. Supersata, a kinde of haggas, farcing, or pudding. Supérste, as Superstito. Superstito, a suruiuour, or ouerliuer, he that ouerliueth or remaineth aliue af∣ter other be dead, or that tarrieth after other be gone, escaped and safe from death. Superstitione, superstition, curiositie, scruple, or errour in matters of religion, a vaine religion or deuotion, an hono∣ring of that shoulde not be honoured, a vaine reuerence or feare towardes the thing wherein is no efficacie or force but onely by illusion, it may be called a spi∣ced conscience in vaine things. Superstitioso, superstitious, scrupulous, curious, vain or timorous in conscience, one that maketh scrupulositie in consci∣ence to do a thing vainely, timorous in religion without cause. Superuacuo, too much, superfluous, ouer∣much, vaine, not necessarie, vnprofita∣ble, to no vse. Supinare, to lay vpright, or the belly vp∣ward. also to go stately holding the nose vp into the winde. Also to make proude and stately. Supinato, laid vpright, turned vp, holden vp in the ayre. Also vnbended and som∣what bowing backward. Supino, vpright, looking vp, with the face vpward, the belly vpwarde. Also vsed for idle, lither, negligent, retchlesse. Supositório, Suppositório, a supposito∣rie. Suppa, as Soppa. Suppare, as Soppare. Suppedaneo, a footestoole, any thing that is set vnder the foote. Also anie thing that images stand vpon. Suppeditare, to be enough, to haue suffi∣cient, to be able to giue or furnish to o∣thers, to subdue and vanquish, to en∣dure and abide, to giue or minister suf∣ficiently, to haue wherewith to beare and finde ones charges. Suppeditatione, a finding, a giuing, or ministring of things that one lacketh. Suppeleticario, a bondmā or slaue which is accounted for chattle. Also a seruant hauing a charge of houshold stuffe. Suppeletile, any kinde of implements or householde stuffe, all things mooueable in the house, all manner of goods or chattle. Suppilare, to steale or pilfer vnderhande, or craftily to rob, or pill. Supplica, a supplication, an entreatie, a sute, a request, a praier. Also a generall procession or sacrifice. Supplicante, a suter, a suppliant, an hum∣ble entreater. Also humbly entrea∣ting. Supplicare, to beseech, to entreate, to re∣quest, to praie, to sue for, humblie to en∣treate, to make humble request. Supplicatione, as Supplica. Supplice, milde, lowly, suing, entreating, suppliant, humblie entreating, that de∣sireth any thing kneeling or prostrate. Supplicemente, mildlie, in humble suing maner, humbly, lowly, humbly kneeling in maner of supplication. Supplicheuole, as Supplice. Supplicheuolmente, as Supplicemēte. Supplicio, punishment, correction, tor∣ture, torment, or paine. Also supplicati∣on, or humble praier. Supplicioso, full of punishment, torture or correction. Supplimento, a supply or furnishing of a∣ny want, that supplieth or maketh vp that lacketh in number or quantitie, a filling vp the number and places. Supplire, plisco, plito, to supply or fur∣nish any want, to make vp that which lacketh, to make euen and perfect, to fill the places of him that lacketh. Supplita, as Supplimento. Suppónere, as Sottopónere. also to sup∣pose or surmise. Suppositione, a putting of a thing vnder another, a supposition. Suppósito, a suppose, a thing supposed. Al∣so
vnder-set, or put vnder, put in the place of another. Suppositiuo, that may be supposed or coū∣terfeite, suppositiue. Also put vnder. Suppósto, as Supposito. Also supposed, deemed, weened. Suppurare, to matter as a sore doth, or grow to an impostume. Suppuratione, a mattring of a sore, a ga∣thering to matter, an impostume. Suppuratiuo, a sore that mattreth, a salue to rotte or make an impostume runne matter. Supputare, to count, to reckon, or cast. Al∣so to suppose, deeme, or surmise. Also to prune or cut trees slightly. Supputatione, a counting, a computati∣on, a reckoning. Also a supposing, a sur∣mise. Also a pruning of trees. Supremità, supremitie, supremacie, supe∣rioritie, soueraintie aboue all, chiefe∣dome. Suprémo, supreme, chiefe, higest, soue∣raigne, principall, highest of all, grea∣test of all other, extreme, the last, the vttermost. Vsed also for funerall obse∣quies, death, or latter daies. Also a last, will and testament. Sura, the calfe of the legge. Also the whole shanke or legge from the knee to the ankle. Surculo, a yoong set or slip, a yoong graffe a sciene, a shoote, a yoong twigge or branch. Suretti, slippers, chopinos, or pantofles with high corke soles. Surettione, as Resurettione. Suretto, a kinde of daintie compounded drinke which they vse in Turkie in steed of wine. Súrgere, surgo, sursi, surto, to rise, to a∣rise, to grow, or spring vp. Looke Sor∣gere. Surgente, arising, rising, growing, spring∣ing vp. Surgitore, or Sorgitore, a rode for ships to ride at. Surnag, a kind of medicinable roote. Suro, Surélla, a fish called in latine La∣certus. Surpréndere, prendo, presi, preso, to surprise, or take on a sudden. Surpresa, a surprise, or taking on a sud∣den. Surrogatione, a substitution, an appoin∣ting in ones roome, a subrogation. Surrogare, to put in place of another, to make a deputie, to substitute, to put or appoint in anothers roome, to subro∣gate. Surse, vsed by Dante for Suso. Also he did arise, or rise vp. Surso, as Sorso. Also vp, or vpward. Surto, risen, arisen, growne or sprong vp. Looke Sórgere. Suscettione, an enterprise, a taking of a thing in hand, an vndertaking. Suscétto, receiued, enterprised, vnderta∣ken, begotten. Also a thing vndertaken or enterprised. Suscino, as Susino. Suscipere, to vndertake, to take on, to vsurpe, to receiue, to enterprise, to ad∣uenture, to beget, to conceiue. Suscitábolo, a prouocation or stirring. Suscitamento, as Suscitatione. Suscitare, to take one out of his sleepe, to raise or rouse vp, to call to his worke, to stirre or prouoke, to kindle or quicken, to exhort, to mooue, to mooue an vprore or stirre vp some insurrection. Suscitatione, a raising, a tumult, an vp∣rore, a sedition, an often stirring vp, an insurrection. Suscitatore, a rayser, a seditious man, a stirrer of some vprore. Susimani, a kinde of daintie plum in In∣dia. Susina, a kinde of plumme or damzen. Susino, a plum or damzen tree. Suso, vpon, ouer, aboue, vp, on, away, fore∣ward, go to. Suspéndere, as Sospéndere. Suspensione, as Sospensione. Suspeso, as Sospeso. Suspettare, as Sospettare. Suspétto, as Sospetto. Suspettoso, as Sospettoso. Suspicare, as Sospettare. Suspicoso, as Sospettoso. Suspittione, as Sospetto. Susseguénte, consequent, succeding. Susseguenza, a consequence, a subse∣quence. Sussequente, as Susseguente. Sussidiali, as Sussidiarij. Sussidiare, to helpe, to relieue, to comfort, to stande by ready to aide and succour if neede be, to supply, to store, to aide, to defende, to subsidie, or taske with subsi∣dies. Sussidiarij soldati, helpefull soldiers, such as serue for a defence or supplie, or that are sent and giuen to the ayde of other, or comming to aide others. Also of or pertaining to subsidies, helpes, or assi∣stance, or taxes. Sussidio, subsidie, helpe, reliefe, comfort, ayde, succour, supply, assistance, a gari∣son, an aid in an extreme point or pinch, a refuge, a rescue. Sussiego, as Sossiego. Sussurare, to whisper, to mutter, to buzze, or humme as bees. Also to murmur, to charme, or forspeake with whispring wordes. Also to make a lowe, gen∣tle, still noise as a gentle winde doth among trees, or as a riuer when it run∣neth and glideth with a gentle streame amongst the pible stones, or as birdes when they chirpe and chatter amid the woods. Sussuratione, a whispering, a muttring, as Sussurro. Sussuratóre, as Sussurone. Sussurro, a priuie whispring, a soft mut∣tring, a buzzing, a murmuring, a char∣ming, a humming, a soft, gentle, still noise as of running water falling with a gentle stream, or trees make with wind, or birds when they chatter. Sussurrone, a murmurer, a mutterer, a whisperer, a buzzer, a hummer, a char∣mer, a secret carie-tale that slandereth and backbiteth one, he that priuily with carying of tales and false reports ma∣keth dissention. Sustante, vpstanding, standing vpright. Sustantia, as Sostantia. Sustantiale, as Sostantiale. Sustantiuo, as Sostantiuo. Sustentare, as Sostenére. Sustituire, as Sostituire. Sustituito, as Sostituito. Sustituto, as Sostituito. Sustitutione, as Sostitutione. Sustitiuo, that may be substituted or de∣puted. Sutéla, craftie working, subtiltie, a craftie deceit, a cauillation inuented to breake a couenant. Suteloso, he that is a wrangler, a cauiller, one full of cauillations. Suto, vsed for Stato, the participle of Es∣sere, binne. Also fastned togither, so∣wed, seamed. Sutore, a shooemaker, a souter. Sutório, belonging to a shooemaker. Suttérfugio, as Sottérfugio. Sutterfuggire, as Sotterfuggire. Suttilità, as Sottilità. Suttilizzare, as Sottigliare. Sutto, Looke Sciutto, drie, or dride. Also vsed for suckt or drawne drie. Sutura, a seame, a fastening or ioyning togither. Also the line vnder the yarde of a man. Also ioyning togither of bones in the head, much like to a thing drawne togither with long stitches, or that man∣ner of composition seene in the head, wherein the bones being indented one within another, are like the teeth of a sawe, a suture.
Sutura rétta, Looke Sagittale. Suuero, the wood called corke. Suui, thereupon, vpon it. T TA, for Tali, such, such like, vsed also for Tua, thine, thine owne. Tabacchinare, to play the baude or pan∣der secretlie. Tabacchino, a secret baude or pander, namely for boyes. Tabacco, the precious hearbe Tabacco. Also as Tabacchino. Also a bunch or bump of flesh growing betweene the flesh and the skinne. Taballi, drums, drumslades, timbrels, or . Tabano, as Taffano. Tabaro, as Tabarro. Tabarrare, to couer, to aray, to cloke or enmantle with a riding cloke. Tabarrino, a slender, little riding cloke, or shepheards frock. Tabarro, any kinde of riding or shep∣heards cloke, robe or mantle. Tabe, a consuming and wasting of the bodie by long sicknes and want of nou∣rishing. Also an impostume or rotten∣nes of the lungs consuming the whole bodie, the tissike, a consumption and pu∣trifying of the lights, most commonly following a sharp distillation from the head, a pining and drying, a withering or wasting away for lack of naturall moysture. Also infection, poison, rot∣ting, putrefaction, matter, and corrupt bloud comming out of a wound: vsed sometimes for strength to putrifie and consume. Tabélla, a table to write in. Tabellione, vsed for a scriuener or a letter. Tabento, a kinde of spongious stone. Tabernacolo, a tabernacle, a skreene, a cupbord, a chariot or boxe to carie or keepe images in, a shed, a shelter, a shop made of boords, a tent, a pauillion. Tabernarie, comedies playde by common base people, pertaining to tauernes. Tabéscere, to consume and pine away, to corrupt and languish, to weare and waste away. Tabesciuto, Tabito, corrupted, consu∣med, wasted or pined away. Tabi, a kinde of thin silke stuffe called tabis, tissue, or bisse, or tabin. Tabifico, that bringeth into consumpti∣on, pining and wasting away. Tabitudine, as Tabe. Tabo, corrupt, filthie, goare rotten bloud. Taca, the name of a wheele in a clock. Tacca, a spot, a dash, a blurre, a blem∣mish, a fault, a blame, a drop, a bruze, a dent, a flaw, a cut, a gash, or a skarre. Also a smack, a taint, or relish. also any trash, matter, or stuffe. Also a sise, a bignes, or fashion. Taccagnare, to dodge, to wrangle, to cogge, to foist, to iest, to frump, to cauill, to conycatch, to miche, to flinch, to pal∣ter. Taccagnarie, dodgings, wranglings, cog∣gings, cauillations, foystings, ill condi∣tions, blemishes, michings, flinchings, paltries. Taccagnatore, a dodger, a wrangler, a cogger, a cauiller, a foister, a conycat∣cher, a micher, a flincher, a paltrer, a wretch, a niggard, a chuffe. Taccagno, as Taccagnatore. Taccagnone, as Taccagnatore. Taccare, to spot, to dash, to blemish, to taxe, or blame. Taccarélle, ill conditions, blemishes, faults, spots, dashings, dents, gashes, slashes. Taccheggiare, to seeke to hurt, to pro∣uoke, to egge on with pricking. Also to blame or taxe one of some fault. Taccherélle, as Taccarélle. Taccia, as Tacca. Also let him hould his peace, of Tacére. Tacciare, as Taccare. Also to taxe or blame. Taccola, a chough, a rooke, a dawe. Also a skould, a pratler, a railer. Also a bab∣ling, a rayling, or a skoulding, a flim flam tale. Also a spot, a blurre, a ble∣mish, a dash, or a drop. Also a prettie iest, or biting quip. Also a patching, or botching piece of worke, a bungling. Táccolare, to chat, to prattle, to skould, to raile, as Taccare. Taccolata, as Fagiolata. Taccoloso, freckled, speckled, spotted. Tacconare, to cobble, to botch, to clout, to tack, to soute, to piece. Tacconatore, a cobler, a souter, a bot∣cher, a tinker. Tacconcini, little tacks, patches, or pie∣ces. Tacconi, cobling, patching, or botching pieces or patches. Taccuire, to attempt or dodge about a matter. Tacendo, not to be spoken, keeping si∣lence, speaking nothing. Tacére, taccio, tacqui, taciuto, to be silent, to hold ones peace, to conceale, to be quiet, or whosht, not to speake a word of, to be quiet or in rest, to make no noise, to keepe secret. Tacente, speaking nothing, still, quiet, making no noise, mum. Taciuto, bin silent, held ones peace, con∣cealed, bin quiet or hoosht, Looke Ta∣cére. Tacitamente, without speaking any word, couertly, secretly, without noise, inwardly in the hart. Tácito, silent, quiet, hoosht, secret, that holdeth his peace and is still, saying no∣thing, without noise. Also passiuelie that is not spoken of, kept secret, that is, let passe without any mentiō, not vtte∣red in words, dumb, speechles, luna ta∣cita, the new moone or the coniunction of the moone and the sunne, she being not seene. Taciturnità, silence, secrecie, mum, se∣cretnes of tongue, keeping of coun∣sell. Taciturno, as Tácito, but properly that naturally keepeth counsell, that maketh no noise, that is no babler of things told, speaking neuer a word. Tacola, as Taccola. Tacolare, as Taccolare. Tacuino, a foolish astronomer that fore∣tels onely by tokens and imaginati∣on. Also a prognostication or an alma∣nake. Taffano, Tafano, a hornet, or an oxe-flye. Also a kinde of horse-flye which is sayd to haue foure wings in Italie, which do sting their horses and leaue a marke of their biting behinde, which horses so bitten are called Attafanati, or Attauanati. Taffanéllo, Tafanello, a yong little horse-flye or hornet. Taffetà, Taffetado, all manner of taf∣feta. Tafferia, a kinde of toole that goldsmiths vse. Tafferugli, as Strauizzi. Taga, Tagha, a kinde of beame, rafter, or quarter. Tagace, a fellon on a mans finger. Tagemie, a kinde of fish. Taglia, a tallie, a tale, a skore. a stature, height, proportion, or pitch of a man. also a ransom, a hyre, a tribute, a fine, a taxation or imposition of any paiment. Also a taske, a size, or a fee. Tagliare, to cut, to slice, to hewe, to mince, to shread, to slash, to gash, to skore, to iag, to tallie, to hack, to reape or mow corne or grasse, to carue, or to make in∣cision, to pare or clip round.
Tagliamento, a cutting, a slicing, a min∣cing, a shreading, a reaping, a mowing. an incision, a gash, a slash, a collop, a shiue, &c. Also a slaughter. Tagliante, as Taglia cantoni. Tagliarélli, little shreads or cutting pie∣ces. Also a kinde of paste meate vsed in Italie cut small and dride, and so sodden in pottage. Tagliarini, as Tagliarélli. Tagliatura, as Tagliamento. Taglia borse, a cut-purse, a rogue. Taglia cantoni, a cutter, a hackster, a swash-buckler, a hacker, a swaggrer. Taglia pietra, a stone-cutter, a hewer of stones. Taglia legne, a wood-cleauer, a wood-feller. Tagliar a pezzi, to cut, to slash or hack in pieces. Tagliar le carte, to cut or heaue the cards. Tagliar il fieno, to mow, to reape, or cut downe haye. Tagliar minuto, to cut, mince or slice small. Tagliata, a cutting, a gashing, a slashing, a cut or a gash. Tagliatélli, as Tagliarélli. Taglieggiare, to sease, to syse, to sesse, to taxe, to fine, to set a ransome vpon one. Tagliente, sharpe, cutting, slicing, keene. Tagliere, a trencher, a plate, a trencher-plate. Taglietti, cuttings, shreads, iags or little cuts. Taglij, cuts, slashes, gashes, pinkes, iags, cuttings, incisions, shreads, slicings, col∣lops or skars of hurts. Taglio, a cut, a slash, a gash, a pinke, a iag, a cutting, and incision, a shread, a slice, a collop, a skar. Also the edge or sharpnes or keen-nes of any toole or weapon. Al∣so a fitting, an agreeing or squaring with ones qualitie or humour. Looke Intaglio. Also as Taglione. Tagliolo, a little cut, a slice, a shiue, a col∣lop of any thing. Taglion, a fine, a fee, a tribute, a taxa∣tion, a ransom, a subsidie or imposition of any payment, an equall or like paine in recompence of a hurt. Tagliuola, a mouse-trap, a trap for any thing. Tagliuole, tallies or skores as brewers vse. Tagliuolo, a graffe, a set, a branch, sprig, syen or slip, of a vine or other tree to set or graft or plant without a roote, an imp, a bud, a stalke, a stemme. Also the name of a carpenters toole. Tagliuzzare, to slice, to cut, to iag, to pinke any thing small, namely gar∣ments. Tagliuzzatore, a slicer, a cutter, a pinker or iagger. Tagliuzzi, small pinks, cuts or iagges in clothes. Tago, a greeke worde vsed in Xenophon for a leader, a chieftaine or captaine. Tai, the plurall of Tale, such. Tal, such, or so, or resembling. Tala, a dye to play with. Also the shread of a vine. Talacimani, sentinels, watches, guards. Taladro, an instrument, heauer, or en∣gine to mount any piece of ordinance vp into the cariage. Talamo, a bed-chamber, or handsome lodging. Talare, a long garment downe to the ankle. Also shoes with wings as Mer∣cury is fained to weare. Also the ioynt of the foote. Talari, goutie swllings in the ankles, as Talare. Talario, of or belonging to huckle bones, or dyce. Talasione, Talassione, a song contai∣ned in certaine verses vsed to be sung at mariages, an exclamation or cry vsed at mariages hauing the beginning when Romulus and the Romanes rauished the maidens of the Sabines. Talche, so that, so then, why then. Talcimani, as Talacimani. Talco, a drug so called, that chimicks vse. Also a pargetting or plaistring. Tale, such, so, or resembling, syke. Taleni, sobs, blubbrings, grones, sighes. Talentare, to will, to graunt, to affoord, to please, or consent vnto others incli∣nations. Talento, an earnest desire, an appetite, a will, properlie an inclination to the mind of others. Also a value of monie among the greekes, whereof were two sorts, as Talento attico maggiore, which was worth 133. pound and od monie sterlin, and Talento Attico minore, which was woorth about 99. pound sterling, then was there Talento Hebraico maggiore woorth 400. pound ster∣ling, and Talento Hebraico minore worth halfe so much. Talfiata, sometimes, at times. Talhora, sometimes, at times. Talhótta, sometimes, at times. Talia, a swelling of the gout about the ankle. Tali, a kinde of game or play so called. Talietro, the hearbe fluxwort, or laske∣wort. Tallione, as Taglione. Talla, as Tallo. Tallo, as Tagliuolo. Tallone, as Talone. Talmente, in such maner, such, so. Talmenteche, so that, so as, in such maner that. Talmuda, Talmudista, Looke Thal∣muda. Talodino, a kind of tawnie colour. Talone, a heele of a mans foote, an ankle, a huckle bone, the pasterne of a orse, the ankle bone of the foote, the pasterne bone of a beast. Talpa, a mole or want that casteth the earth, a moodie-wart. Tal sia di voi, choose you, do as you will, as you bake so brew. Taluolta, sometimes, at times, now and then. Tama, when with much trauell or going, the blood commeth downe to the leg, and causeth it to swell. Tamaceto, the herbe Tansie. Tamaccto acquatico, Sneesing wort. Tamagnino, a little fellow that is elder then he seemeth for. Also a turde or a shitten fellow. Tamarigio, as Tamarisco. Tamarindi, a fruit in India, the tree whereof is like a Date tree, the fruit like Damascens, very medicinable against the heat of choler, whereof the Indians make a kind of daintie wine. Tamarisco, the shrub called Tamariske, of which be two kindes: the greater which beareth fruit like the lesser oake apples or galles; the lesser bearing grayish leaues without fruit. Some haue abusiuely taken it for the Ewe tree. Tamarisso, as Tamarisco. Tamarro, black Briony. Tambascia, as Gozzouiglie. Tambasciare, as Gozzouigliare. Tambureggiare, to drum, to tabour. Tamburagione, a drumming, a sounding of a drum. Tamburrino, a little drum, a tabour, a timbrell, a drum-slade. Also a drūmer. Also a little trunke. Also a tabour and pipe. Tamburiere, a drummer. Tamburro, a drum, a timbrell, a tabour, a drumslade. Also a drummer. Also a trunke or a chest. Tambussare, to knocke, to thump, to bounze, to dub a dub, to drum. to bang, to beate, to swaddle, to rattle, to rib∣bast. Tamen, yet, notwithstanding, for all that,
howbeit, so that or prouided. Tamendóa, a kind of beast in India fee∣ding on pisse-mires, which it takes by lilling out his toong so long till it be full of them, and hath so long and so bushie a taile, that he will hide all his bodie vn∣der it. Tamerigia, a kind of cruise pot to drinke in. Tamigiare, to sieue or searse, to straine, to sift or boult meale. Tamigio, a sieue, a searse, a strainer. Tamisare, as Tamigiare. Tamiscio, as Tamigio. Tamiso, as Tamigio. Tammuréllo. Looke Crotalo. Tamo, a worme breeding in tallow. the gentle or magot. Tampano, a kind of musicall instrument without strings. Also a toole that stone cutters vse. Tampóco, as Tanpóco. Tamussare, as Tambussare. Tana, a den, a caue, a grot, a cauerne, a lurking hole. Tanaceto, the herbe Tansie, whereof be two kinds. Tanado, a fish of a tawnie colour hauing an vnsauorie smell. Tanagliare, to torture, to pinch, to tana∣kle with toongs, pincers or tanakles. Tanaglie, toongs, pincers, tanakles, mul∣lets. Tanagliette, little toongs, mullets, pincers or tanakles. Tancia, a kind of damaske worke vpon daggers and kniues. Tanco, a kind of beastly vnnaturall lust or occupying. Tanè, Taneto, tawnie colour. Tanfo, a damp or lothsome smell. Tangari, poore, bare, base, idle, loitring, begging or roguing fellowes. Tángere, tango, tangei, tangiuto, to touch, to feele, to ioine neere to, to rub, to mooue, to hit, to mooue or grieue. Tangibile, that may be touched. Tansa, a blame, an imputation, a chiding. Also a taxing, a sessing or fining for any payment. Tansare, to chide, to skould, to brawle, to raile, to tant, to nip, to shent. also to taxe, to sesse to rate or fine any man to any payment or subsidie. Tantaferata, as Fagiolata. Tantarare, to swing in a halter. Tantaro, a swinging in a halter. Tanti, so many, as many. Tantillo, as Tantino. Tantino, a verie little, neuer so little, a little little quantity. Tanto, so much, as much, as well, as, so much, of so great value, price or impor∣tance, so deere or so much to be estee∣med, so great, so many, so worthie, so no∣ble, &c. Tanto che, so that, then, in so much as. Tantolino, as Tantino. Tanto maggiormente, so much the more. Tanto manco, so much lesse, so much the lesse. Tanto meno, as Tanto manco. Tanto meglio, so much the better. Tanto o quanto, but a little, neuer so little. Tanto péggio, so much the worse. Tanto piu, so much the more. Tanto quanto, as much as, euen as much. Tanpoco, much lesse, as little, neither, nor so. Tanto tempo, so long, as long, so long time. Tanto lontano, so far, as far. Tanto apresso, so neere, as neere. Tantosto, soone, anon, by and by, pre∣sently. Tanza, a kind of iron worke. Tao, a stone like a peacocke. Tapelone, as Vranoscopo. Tapeto, a carpet for a boord. Tapezzare, to hang or couer or dight with tapestrie. Tapezzarie, all maner of hangings or ta∣pestrie worke. Tapezziero, a weauer or worker of tape∣strie workes. Also an vpholster. Tapinare, to wander, to roame, to roue, to gad or goe vp and downe, loytring, beg∣gingly or wretchedly, to pine, to linger, to languish, to draw to an end. Tapinélli, poore, silly, wandring or roa∣ming beggers. Tapino, a poore wretched wandrer that goes vp and downe begging. Tappe. Looke Piriolo. Tapsia, an herbe yellow like gold to dye withall. Tapula, a law made for feasts. Tara, the tare, waste or garbish of any marchandise or ware. Tarabara, higledi-pigledie, helter-skelter, cricket a wicket. Tarabusi, a kind of bird. Some take it for the wood-pecker. Tarabasso, a fowle called a bittour. Taraca, a buckler, a target, a shield or a palueis. Taracone, as Taraca. Also the hearbe Taragon or gardine Dragon. Tarando, a beast like a buffe, with head and hornes like a stag, of a red colour, but will change himselfe into the colour of the thing that he toucheth or leaneth vnto. Tarangola, a bird in latine Phoeopus. Tarantéllo, the vttermost part of the belly which couereth all the entrailes. Also a little eft or euet. Taranto, a greene-finch. Tarántola, a serpent called an eft or an euet. some take it to be a flye whose sting is perillous and deadly, and nothing but diuers sounds of musicke can cure the pa∣tient. Also a fish so called. Tarantato, one that is bitten with Taran∣tole. Tarantolato, as Tarantato. Tarare, to abate the allowance which com∣monly is allowde vpon marchandise and ware betweene marchant and cheap∣man. to tare. Taragnuole, a kind of rauenous bird. Tara tantara, the clang or sound of a trumpet. Tarassacone, the herbe sowthistle. Tarantéllo, a kind of salt fish. Tarazzuoli, a kind of ducke or mallard. Tarchiare, to compasse, to enclose, to com∣pact or trusse vp togither. Tarchiato, well and strongly limd, com∣pact and well trussed vp togither. Tarda, a bustard. Tardamento, a delay, a slowing, a stay, a demur, a deferring, a prolonging, a ta∣ring, a lingring. Tardanza, as Tardamento. Tardare, to delay, to defer, to slow, to put off, to demur, to linger, to tarrie, to a∣bide, to let, to stop, to hinder or staie, to make long a comming, to keepe backe and withhold, to be slow. Tardetto, somewhat slow, late, long, idle, lazie or tedious. Tardi, late, verie late, or slowly. Tardigrado, that goeth slow or that hath a slow pace. Tardi-lóquio, that draweth his speech in length. Tardi pede, that goeth slowly, that hal∣teth. Tardità, slownes, latenes, delay, demur, tediousnes, slacknes, hindring or delay∣ing. Tardo, late, slow, tedious, lazie, idle, dull, lither, slacke, long in comming, lingring. hard witted, thicke, grosse. Taréllo, a kind of cheese or sweet cake. Targa, a target, a shield, a buckler, a pal∣ueis. Targare, to arme or couer with a target, a buckler or shield, to shield. Targhetta, a litle buckler, target or shield.
Targhettiere, a targettier, one that fights with target or buckler. Targone, a great shield, target or buck∣ler. Tariffa, arithmetike or casting of ac∣counts. Tarlare, to eate or gnaw as wormes do old rotten wood, to mothe-eate. Tarlatura, dust of old rotten wood, good to skin yoong flesh about children. Tarlino, a bird called a kurlue. Tarlo, a worme that breedeth in old tim∣ber. Also a mothe. Tarloso, full of wormes or worme eaten. Tarma, a mothe breeding in woollen cloths or worme breeding in timber, a worme that eateth flesh, a maggot. Tarmare, to mothe-eate or worme eate. Tarmoso, mothie, full of mothes or wormes. Taroccare, to play at Tarócchi. Also to play the froward gull or peeuish ninnie. Tarócchi, a kinde of playing cardes vsed in Italy, called terrestriall tri∣umphes. Tarócco. Looke Da tarócco. Tarolare, as Tarlare. Tarólo, as Tarlo. Also a cunt-botch or winchester goose. Tarpare, to clip the wings of a birde that he may not flie, to snatch, to catch. Tarsia, a kind of painting, in laying or set∣ting in of small pieces of wood, Iuorie, horne or bone, with prettie workes and diuers colours, as in tables, chesseboordes and such. Tarsiamento, as Tarsia. Tarsiare, to worke or lay in with prettie ioyning works, as chesseboords and tables are. Tarso, the first part of the foote, which immediatly succeeding the leg is an∣swerable to the wrist of the hand. Tartagio, a stutter, a stammerer, a lis∣per, a clipper of his language, a mas∣fler. Tartagliare, to stammer, to stut, to fal∣ter, to lisp, or clip ones speech, to maffle. Tartaglione, a stutting, stammering, or lisping fellow, a maffler. Tártara, a tarte, a custard, or a floren∣tine. Tartarée pórte, the gates of hell. Tartaréo, of hell, hellish, terrible, strong. Tartareschi, a kinde of antike, fretted, or carued ioyners worke. Tartarino, fearefull, terrible. Tártaro, the lees or dregs of wine. Also a kinde of grauellie stone growing fast to the inside of a vessell where wyne is kept good for many purposes, and vsed of dyers, and in phisick, called argall or argoll. Some late writers take Tár∣taro to be the stone or grauell which is ingendred in the reines of a mans body, as also the grauell ingendred in the ioynts whereof the gout is caused. Also a wood-pecker. Also a deepe place in hell. Tartassare, to rib-baste, to bang, to beate, to swaddle, to cudgell, to smite, to tugge, to hale, to vexe, to molest, to hurrie. Tartaruga, as Tarterucca. Tártera, Tarterélla, any kinde of tarte. Tarterucca, Tarteruga, a tortoyse, or shell-crab. Tartuga, as Tarterucca. Tartocca, Tartugella, as Tarterucca. Tartóffola, the swelling, marke, or black and blue of a blow or hurt. Also a blow giuen with ones knuckles vpon ones head. Also a kirimiriebuff. Tartóffalo, as Tartuffo. Tartuffo, a kinde of meate, fruite or roote of the nature of potatoes called traffles. Also a kinde of artichock. Tartuffola, as Tartuffo. Taruca, a kinde of kinglie ornament. Taruólare, as Tarlare. Taruólo, as Tarlo, or Tarolo. Tasca, a pouch, a pocket, a bag, a budget, a purse, a satchell, a hauking bag, a poake, a scrip. Tascaccia, a filthie, foule, greasie pouch, bag, or pocket. Tascare, to put vp into a bag, pouch, or pocket. Tascóccio, as Tascaccia. Tascone, as Tascaccia. Tascónio, a kind of white clay or marble, whereof goldsmiths pots wherein they melt their mettals were made. Tascotato, as Trascurato. Tasentare, to whosht, to still, to put to si∣lence, to hould ones peace. Taso, as Tartaro. Tassa, a taxe, a taxation, a taxing, a fine, a rate, a sise, a sessing, a prizing. Also a blemish. Also a pile or stack of wood. Tassare, to taxe, to sise, to fine, to rate, to sesse at a certaine value. Also to blame, to touch in credite, to slander, to dispa∣rage, or disable ones credite and re∣putation. Tassatione, as Tassa. Tassatore, a taxer, a rater, a finer, a siser, a slandrer, a rebuker, he that re∣buketh or taxeth another. Tasséllo, the vnder roofe of a house be∣fore it be tyled or couered. Also a little anuile. Tassico, the tree Tasso. Tasso, a gray, a brock, a badger, which is sayde to sleepe sixe moneths in the yeare. Also an ewe or yew tree, or ano∣ther tree that beares a berrie that is poyson and venemous, and against mans nature. Also a kinde of anuile that goldsmiths vse. Tasso barbasso, as Verbesco. Tasta, a tent that is put into a sore or a wound. also a taste, a proofe, a tryall, an assaie, a feeling, a touch. Also as Tasca. Tastare, to taste, to assaie, to feele, to grope, to sound, to trye, to proofe, to touch. Also to tent a sore or a wound. Also to fret an instrument of mu∣sicke. Tastatore, a taster, a feeler, a groper, a sounder, &c. Tasti, the frets or keyes of any musicall instrument. Tasto, a taste, a feeling, a touch, a proofe, a groping, a tryall. Tastone, groping, feeling or sumbling in the darke. Tata, a darling, a dilling, a pug, a pigs∣neye, a pillicock, a sweet hart, a minion. Also a wanton word in singing, where∣with one answereth another. Also the voice or speech of yong infants to their fathers, daddie, dad, or bab. Tattamellare, to prattle, to tattle, to play the coye, nice, or wanton foole. Tattamélle, a kinde of sweete fruite. Al∣so a noddiepoope, a gull, or a sot, a blab, a pratler. Also a kinde of instrument of musicke. Tattamellino, a nice, coye, daintie, wan∣ton, cockred, squeamish fellow, one that is better fed then taught. Tattéo, a kinde of salt verie good for the eyes. Táttere, tatters, rags, iags, clouts, trash, shreds, pillage, luggage. Tattici, they whose office it is to set an army in aray. Tatto, the sence of feeling or touching. Also felt or touched. Also a kinde of great toade. Tatula, a chough with red feete. Tatusia, a beast in India of the bignes of a hog, with a scalie hard shell into which it drawes his head like vnto a tortoise. Tauanéllo, as Tafanéllo. Tauani, as Taffani. Tauélla, the huskes, cods, or shales of silke∣wormes, or of any pulse, as of peason and beanes.
Tauérna, a tauerne, a tipling or vic∣tualing house, an ale-house. Also an inne. Tauernaro, a keeper of a tauerne, or tip∣ling house, a vintner. Tauerneggiare, to frequent and haunt tauernes, or tipling houses. Tauernesca, common, fithie, tauerne∣like. Tauerniere, as Tauernaro. Tauernine, wanton, foolish, pendents for eares, onely fit for base people. also poore tipling houses or tauernes. Taugargante, a kinde of herbe or roote. Tauola, a table, a planke, a boord. Also a picture. Also a banquet, a feast, or a feeding. Also a stale at chesse when one hath nothing to plaie. Also a booke or register for memory of things, a paper iornall, a writing table. Tauolare, to table or boord at meate. Al∣so to raile or paile in with boordes, to planke, to boorde, to floore, to seele or fence in with boords, or plankes. Also to set prick-song. Also whereof tables, boardes, and planks may be made. Tauolato, tabled or borded at meat, fea∣sted or banquetted, railed, boorded, fenced, planked, floored, or seeled with boordes, railed, or pailed in. set in prick-song. Also a paile, a raile, a floor, a par∣tition, a pent-house, a planking or sce∣ling of plankes or boordes. also a kind of measure. Tauolata, a table full, or a companie of fellow borders at one table, a tabling. Tauolaccio, a kinde of great target or palueis. Also a great planke, a butte or marke of boords to shoote at. Tauolaccino, a base groome, hinde, swaine or seruant. Tauolatura, a prick-song, a song set in prick-song. Tauole, all maner of boordes, plankes, or tables, Also tables to plaie with, or wri∣ting tables. Tauoletta, a little table, boord, or planke. Also any picture vpon a boord. Also a childes horn-booke. Tauolette, writing tables, little boordes, tables or plankes. Tauoliere, a paire of tables to play with, a man that plaies at tables. Tauolino, a little prettie table, boord, or shelfe of boordes. Taura, hath bin vsed for a cowe. Tauréa, a scourge or whip made of neates leather, or of a buls pizle. Also a buckler or target made of a buls hide. Tauréllo, a yoong bull, a runt, or steere. Tauréo, of, or belonging to a bull. Taurifórme, like a bul, in fashion of abul. Taurina, goates rue, or Italian fitch. Taurino, of, or belonging to a bull. Tauro, a bull. Also one of the twelue signes in heauen called Taurus. Also a little bird being a kind of finch, hauing a voice somewhat like a bull. Some call it a Bittour. Tausia.   Tautologia, a repeating of one and the selfe-same thing in other words. Tazza, a goblet, a boule, a mazor or drin∣king cup, a godard. Tazzetta, a little goblet, boule, mazor, or cup. Tazziere, a cup bearer to a prince. Tè, hould, catch, keepe, or take to thee. Te, thee, thee-selfe, to thee, to thee selfe. Also from thee. Teatro, a theatre, Looke Theatro. Teca, as Tauella. Tecca, as Boccata. Teco, with thee, with thee selfe, in thy companie. Tecolito, a stone like vnto the stone of an oliue, called the stone of India, and is good against the colike and the stone. Teco medesino, with thee selfe, in thy owne companie. Teda, a tree so called. Also a logge, a block or a stumpe of woode: but properly the middle or the hart of the pine tree when it is grown to be so fat and full of liquor, that being kindled it burneth like a torch. Also a wedding. Also a song at a wedding. Tede, torches, lights, tapers, or firebrands vsed at weddings. Tediare, to molest, to trouble, to impor∣tune, to wearie. Tedio, tediousnes, trouble, molestation, yrkesomnes, importunitie, wearines, heauines of minde. Tedioso, tedious, long, troublesome, im∣portunate, yrkesome, wearisome, loth∣some. Tedulo, an importunate pratler that all men shunne and be wearie of. Tefrite, a stone hauing the figure of a newe moone in it, of a blacke or ashe co∣lour. Tega, as Tauélla. Tegame, as Tegghia. Tegametto, as Tegghiame. Tegghia, a dripping pan, a frying pan, a tare pan, any kinde of pot or pan. Tegghiame, all maner of pots or pans. Tegghiola, Tegghiuzza, as Tegghia. Teggia, as Tegghia. Teggiola, as Tegghia. Tegimento, a couer, a cottage. Tegiolare coltedio, to dallie with, to delay or play with, to put off wanton∣lie. Tegiuzza, a pan to burne coles in. Teglia, a tree called linden or teyell tree, Looke Tilio. Also a fish called a Bar∣ble. Tegna, the scurfe or scald that comes to some mens heades. Tegnénte, holding. Also a tenant. Tégnere, as Tingere. Tegnoso, scaldie, or scurfie, hauing a sore head. Tegola, a tyle, or slate to tyle a house with. Tegolare, to tyle, to slate, or couer a house with tyles. Tegolaio, a tyler, a tyle-maker. Tela, any kinde of webbe or wonen cloth so it be not of wooll. Also a worke or bu∣sines. Tela d' argento, cloth of tissue or siluer. Tela di lino, anie kinde of linnen cloth. Tela di sangallo, the stuffe we call buck∣rum Also calico. Tela d'oro, cloth of tissue or gold. Tela di ragno, a spiders webbe, a cob∣webbe. Telami, toyles such as they hunt with, all maner of linnen cloth. Telamoni, images bearing vp pillers, postes or supporters in building. Telarino, a little loome for a weauer. Telaro, a loome to weaue withall. Also a printers frame for his letters. Also anie frame else as for a picture or a looking glasse, or a map. Telaruólo, a linnen draper. Also a little loome. Also a weauer of any thing. Telefio, wall-pepper, or stone-woort. Telenone, as Telone. Telerie, all manner of linnen clothes or weauings. Teletta, as Membrana. Also fine tinsell, tissue, or linnen cloth. Teletta d'oro, tinsell or tissue of gold. Telicardio, a precious stone of the colour of the hart. Teliccina, a little thin skin or caule ouer any thing. Telifero, which beareth arrowes or darts. Telino, a kinde of precious sweete oynte∣ment. Tellicina, as Teliccina. Tellina, a snaile, a cockle, a muscle, a perawinkle or such shell fish. Also a fish called a lamprey. Tello, the earth or ground, our common mother earth. Telo, a darte, a flight, an arrow, a bolt, a quarrey, a little speare or any weapon
that may be cast or thrown with hands, be it stone, woode or iron, and by a me∣taphor it is taken for all maner of helps and defence. Also the sunne beames sha∣king. Also a cruell paine in the side with sudden griefe, as if ones bodie were thrust through with a sword. Some call it the stitch. Telo trisulco, lightning. Telone, an instrument of warre like that which brewers vse with a crosse beame to drawe water, it is called a sweepe. Telossa, the herbe centorie. Tema, feare, doubt, suspect, dread, timo∣rousnes. Also a theame or an argument, as Thema. Temalo, a kinde of verie daintie fish cal∣led in latine Thymalus. Temaro, a fish called a grailing or om∣ber. Temente, fearing, dreading, suspecting, timorous. Temenza, as Tema. Temerare, to violate, to defile, to distain, to pollute, to corrupt, to vnhallowe, to rauish, to commit adulterie. Temerando, to bee violated or bro∣ken, &c. Temerariamente, rashly, foolishly, vn∣aduisedly, lightly, without considerati∣on, regard, or grounde, at rouers, at all aduentures, ha or nab, indiscreetely. Temerario, rash, headlong, vnaduised, foole-hardie, hare-braind, more hardie then needeth, and wisedome requireth, vndiscreete, without iudgement. Temerato, broken, violated, &c. Temerità, rashnes, vnaduisednes, foole-hardines, fondnes, hastines, indiscreetnes Temére, temo, temei, temuto, to feare, to dread, to doubt, to suspect. Temuto, feared, dreaded, doubted. Temero, Temelo, Temolo, as Te∣maro. Temeto, a kinde of strong wine which in∣toxicateth the braine. Temmirio, a necessarie signe or marke, a sea marke. Temo, the sterne, helme, or rudder of a ship. Also a beame of a wane or wagon, a draught tree of a yoke, an axell-tree. Also a stake, a beame, a rafter, or pole laide ouerthwart. Temone, as Temo, Temoniere, the steares man of a ship. Temore, feare, dread, or doubt. Temeroso, timorous, fearefull. Tempélla, a fiddle, a croud, or kit. Also a great swaggring twanger, a horse toole, a great dildo, or good pricke. Tempellare, as Stempellare. Tempera, a temper or temperature of any thing, as Temperamento. Temperante, moderate, temperate, sober, forbearing, sparing. Also tempring, mingling. Temperanza, temperance, moderation, or sobrietie, refraining of sensualitie and vnruly affections. Temperare, to moderate, to temper, to mixe, to mingle, or moderate in order & measure, to rule, to gouerne, to order, to forbeare, to spare, to abstain, to refrain, to mittigate, to allaie, to asswage. Also to supple and make soft. Temperare vna penna, to cut or make a pen that it may write. Temperarino, a pen-knife, a little sharp knife. Temperamento, a moderation, a tempe∣rance, a meane, a measure, a refraining a proportion of the fower chiefe quali∣ties of the bodie. Temperatione, a moderation, a gouer∣ning, a temperature, a tempering, a mixing, an ordring and framing. Temperato, tempred, moderated, for∣borne. Also temperate without excesse, keeping a meane, modest, sober, milde, discreete, as Temperante. Temperatoio, as Temperarino. Temperatura, a tempring, a tempera∣ture, a moderation in mingling and mixing of things togither, a temper, tem¦peratenes or good disposition. Tempérie, a good moderation or tempe∣ratenes in cold and heat. Tempésta, a storme, a tempest, a boistrous weather, a bluster, be it wind, raine or haile. It is commonly taken for a tempest or storme of raine and haile togither. Also great trouble, ruffling or busines in a common-wealth, a storme or trouble of aduersitie, danger or perill, a com∣motion. Tempestare, to storme or to tempest, to fall as thicke as haile, to bluster. Also to engraile, to beset or empaile with pre∣cious stones. Also as Subillare. Tempestiuo, seasonable, timely, ripe for, done in due time and season. Tempestiuamente, seasonably, conueni∣ently, in due time & season, in season, in due and conuenient time, timely. Tempestiuità, seasonablenes, opportuni∣tie, due time or conuenient season, fit∣nes of time. Tempestoso, tempestuous, stormie, blu∣string, turbulent, rough, vnquiet, boy∣strous. Tempiale, the name of a weauers toole. Also the flaps or labels that hang down by the eares of a night cap, or bishops mitre. Tempie, the temples or sides of a mans head, betweene the eie and the eares. Tempio, a temple, a church or a chappell, a place consecrated to deuine seruice. Tempione, a blow or clap giuen vpon the temples or eares of a man. Also an idle loytrer, a gull, a noddie, a lazie compa∣nion. Also one that hath high temples a ioulthead. Tempissimo, verie earely or timely. Tempo, time, season, leisure, oportunitie or occasion, the state of time, commodity or necessitie of the time present. Also weather foule or faire. Bello tempo, faire weather. Cattiuo tempo, fowle weather. Tempo fu, a while agoe, the time was, of ore, in elder time. Tempone, a knot, a crew or meeting of good fellowes to make good cheere. Looke Far tempone. Temporale, temporall, that which dureth or is made for a certaine time, of or per∣taining to time. Also a sudden storme or tempest by sea, a berrie, a gust, a gale or flaw of winde which dureth but a while. Also a temporall man, a lay man. Also temporalitie. Temporalità, temporalitie. Temporaneo, a temporizer, a worldling, one that obeieth times. Also momenta∣rie. Aso done suddenly, at a certaine time, pertaining to time. Temporeggiare, to temporize or obey & follow times. Temporeggiatore, as Temporaneo. Temporiccio, earely ripe, timely, any thing that is ripe betimes. Temporiuo, as Temporiccio. Temposereno, cleare, faire weather. Tempra, as Tempera. Temprare, as Temperare. Tempre, tempers, moderations, rimes, con∣cordances, the feete or measure of verses. Also manners or fashions. Temulente, drunken, tipsie, sottish, cup∣shotten. Temulentia, drunkennes. Temuto, feared, dredded, doubted, sus∣pected. Ten, vsed for Tene, to thee or thee therof or of it. Tenace, that holdeth fast, good and sure, stedfast. Also gluish or clammie. Also constant, wilfull, head-strong, stifnec∣ked, hard to be moued, too much con∣stant, persisting and stiffe in his pur∣pose. Also couetous, hould fast, mise∣rable or pinching, niggish sparing, hard, a pinch-pennie, one that keepeth surely.
Tenacità, niggardnes, stedfastnes, wil∣fulnes, constancie, hardnes in sparing of expences, retaining, keeping. Tenacule, as Tanaglie. Tenagliare, as Tanagliare. Tenaglie, as Tanaglie. Tenagliette, as Tanagliette. Tenasmone, a great desire to go often to the stoole, and yet can do nothing. Tenazza, a little hould or keepe made of one bulwarke or curtine. Tenca, a fish called a Tench. Tencone, as Panócchia, or Taruólo. Tenda, a tent, a pauillion, a curtin, a trauesse. Tendare, to pitch, raise, or set vp tents or pauillions, to entent. Tendecchiare, as Tendare, as Tén∣dere. Tendénte, stretching out. Also tending or extending. Téndere, tendo, tesi, tenduto, or teso, to spread, to extende, to display, to tend, to stretch, to pitch, to bende, to lay a snare, to go, to go forward, straite on, or about, to make toward, to direct, to endeuour, to proffer, to reach, to prepare, to pre∣tend, to purpose, to assaie. Also to pitch tents or pauilions. Tenduto, teso, spred, extended, displaid, tended, stretched out, pitcht, bent, Looke Téndere. Tendini, as Tendoni. Tendoni, the tennous, or instruments moouing in the top of the muscles made of sinewes and ligatures, and knit∣ting them to the bones, and are har∣der then sinewes, and not so hard as li∣gatures. Tenebrare, to darken, to dim, to obscure, to ouercloud, Looke Ténebre. Ténebre, darknes, obscuritie, dimnes, pit∣chines, the lacke of light, night. Also great confusion or disorder, obscu∣ring, disgracing, contempt. Also want of renowme, fame or estimation. Tenebroso, darkesome, obscure, dimme, pitchie. Tenebrosità, darkenes, obscuritie, pitchi∣nesse. Tenente, holding, a tenant or a holder. Tenenza, tenencie, a holding, a keeping, a dwelling. Tenère, tengo, tenni, tenuto, to hould, to keepe, to detaine, to take, to appre∣hend, to hould or keepe in, to restraine, to refraine or bridle. Also to repute, to abide, to dwell, to hinder, to withhold, to haue, to possesse, to esteeme, to reserue, to gouerne, to rule, to choose, to deeme, to iudge, to represse, to shun, to auoide. Also to vnderstand, to knowe, to per∣ceiue, to keepe back, to hinder, let, or make to tarrie, to let or hinder to do. Also to keepe in remembrance, to re∣member. Tenuto, held, kept, detained, reputed, let, taken, abided, dwelt, hindred, withheld, pussessed, esteemed, reserued, ruled, dee∣med, iudged, refrained, shunned, &c. Looke Tenére. Tener' il sacco, to hould the bag, id est, to yeeld or consent, to take part, to keepe ones secrets, to be accessarie with ano∣ther. Tener' a mente, to remember, to keepe in minde. Tener mano, as Tener' il sacco. Tener dozzena, to boord or common schollers at meate and drinke, to keepe an ordinarie. Tener l'inuito, to accept of ones courtesie being enuited to do any thing, to take ones offer, to see a vye at any game, namely at primero. Tener l'auanzo, to see ones vye or rest at primero. Tener memória, to keepe or hould in minde, to remember well. Tener ragione, to keepe a court of lawe, iustice, right, sessions or sises. Teneréllo, somewhat tender or soft, Looke Ténero. Tenerire, risco, rito, to soften, to mollifie or make tender, to become tender and soft, to waxe mercifull and gentle. Tenerito, softned, mollifide, or made tender. Tenericcio, somewhat soft, mellow or tender. Tenerezza, tendernes or softnes, af∣fection in loue. Tenerino, somewhat soft or tender. Ténero, soft or tender, yong, gentle, mercifull, pliant, easilie induced to any thing. Also nice, delicate, effeminate. Tenerone lungone, a tender, yong, lustie, tall striplin, or lad. Tenerume, the soft, braune pithines or fleshines of any thing namely of meate. Téngere, as Tingere. Tenia, a womans head-band, fillet or lace to tye vp hir haire, the knot or fastning of a fillet. Also a rowle that women were woont to weare on their heads. Also a woollen ornament like a turbant that men were wont to weare on their heads. Also a kinde of sea-fish long and narrow. Also a kinde of brow or iutting ouer in pillers. vsed also for a long rowe of rocks or cliffes along the seashore, or a veine of white stones which to them that be a farre off vpon the water appeareth long like vnto a kerchefe. Also a kinde of wormes that be long, broade, and slender, of some called graue wormes, as ingendring of the rotten flesh of bu∣ried bodies. Teniere, a place to hold fast by, a hold-fast. Tenimento, a hould, a houlding, a tene∣ment. Tenitore, a houder, a keeper. Tenore, a tenor or degree in musicke, a forme, a tenor, a tenure or content of any matter, a continuall order, forme, fa∣shion, trade, state or race, continuance of a thing without staying or interruption, neuer changing the maner of. Tentare, to tempt, to attempt, to assay, to trie, to sound, to goe about a matter, to offer or profer to do any thing, to prooue, to handle or feele often, to tempt one to do euill. Tentamento, a tempting, an attempting, an assay, a sounding, a proofe, a triall. Tentatamente, feelingly, by tryall, at∣temptingly, by assay. Tentatione, a temptation, a tempting. Also a proofe or assaying. Tentatore, a tempter, an attempter, an assayer, a proouer. Tentenna pennacchio, a wag feather, one that hath more baire then wit, a ti∣sti-tostie. Tentennare, as Nicchiare. Tentennate, blow, stripes, bangs, whir∣rets. Also a yarke, the sound of a stroke with a whip. Tentenino, a tempter, a tempting, enti∣cing or alluring man, woman or spi∣rite. Tentennone, a doult, a gul, a patch, a fop∣per, a foole. Tentigine, the standing of a mans yard, called lust-pride or prick-prid, as Sati∣riasi. Tentionare, as Tenzonare. Tentione, as Tenzone. Tentipellione, Tentipelone, a medi∣cine or instrument to make the skin plain and without wrinkles. Tento, dyed or coloured of any colour. Also a taint in a horse. Tentonare, to fumble, to grope, to grouell, or go fumbling in the darke. Tentone, gropingly, fumbingly, groueling in the darke. Tenton tentone, as Tentone. Tentore, a dyer of colours. Tentoria, a diers house. Also the arte of dying. Tentura, a dye, a dying, or colouring,
a hewe. Tenturare, to die or to colour. Tenuare, to make small, leane, gante, thin, little or slender, to diminish or growe lesse, to pine, to make feeble. Tenuatione, a making thin or slender. Tenuità, slendernes, gantnes, thinnes, leannes, smalnes. Tenuo, leane, meagre, gant, thin, small, slender, sparing, spinie, little. Tenuta, a holding, a tenure, a possessing, an inioying. Tenuto. Looke Tenere. Tenzonare, to striue, to quarrell, to con∣tend, to brawle. Tenzone, a fraie, a quarrell, a brawle, a contention, a strife. Teofania, vel Theofania. Teogonia, as Theogonia. Teologia, Teólogo, as Theologia, as Theólogo. Teologizzare, as Theologizzare. Teórica, as Theórica. Teórico, as Theórico. Tepefare, as Tepidire. Also to heate or warme. Tepidamente, meanely warme, betweene hot and cold, coldly, faintly, nothing earnestly. Tepidario, the entrie into the stew and first chamber or baine, where they were wont to wash themselues in warme wa∣ter. Also the baine, stew or hot house it selfe. Tepidezza, luke warmth, faintnes, slow∣nes, meannes, between hot and cold. Tepidire, disco, dito, to become hot, to make luke-warme. Also to coole, to al∣lay, to asswage, to mittigate, to appease. Also to faint or grow slowe. Tepidità, as Tepidezza. Tépido, luke-warme, neither hot nor cold, meane betweene cold and hot. Also faint, slowe, or colde and no thing ear∣nest in a matter. Tepore, warmth, warmnes, or heate. Terapestica, remediale medicina.   Terazza, as Terraccia. Terdécimo, the thirteenth in number. Terdura, a kinde of poore mens meate like a hastie pudding. Terebinto, the tree that yeeldeth the gum called turpentine which is faire, cleare, and thicker then the liquid rozen ga∣thered from the barke of the firre tree, which nowe is commonly vsed for tur∣pentine. Teredine, a little worme that eateth wood. Also a moth that eateth clothes. Also a handworme. Teretro, a kind of instrument wherwith a thing is made round. Terfez, a kind of roote or herbe. Tergémino, threefolde, triple, one of, or the three borne at one time. Térgere, tergo, tergei, tergiuto, to bur∣nish, to polish, to smooth, make cleane or scoure. Also to retyre or drawe backe. Also to couer, to shroude, to shelter, to backe. Also to drie. Tergiuto, burnished, polished, smoothed, retired, or drawn backe, couered, shrou∣ded, backt, dride. Tergiduttore, a sergeant or captaine of a bande, that commonly followeth his troupes. Tergirino, a thin wall or partition of bu∣shes, rods, reed, railes or pailes. Tergiuersare, to turne backe, or ones taile vnto, to shrinke from, to auoide from, to denie, to ouerthwart, to wrangle, to run away and fight still. Also to hafte and by no meanes to come to any reasonable point. Tergiuersatione, hafting, ouerthwar∣ting, a none-sute in the lawe when the plaintife letteth his matter fall. Tergiuersatore, he that withdraweth and shrinketh backe and will not holde to a point, a hafter, a wrangler, a dod∣ger, one that runneth backe and yet will not giue ouer. Térgo, the backe of a man, behinde. Also a mans shoulders. Also any hinder part. Also a hide or a skin. Teriaca, treakle against poison. Terigio, as Pterigio. Terigode, as Pterigode. Terigoide, as Pterigoide. Terligia, Terlisa, a kinde of sack-cloth worne in doublets and hosen in Italy. Terlino, a birde called a Kurlue. Térme, Looke Therme. Also a little worm that eateth flesh or wood, a mag∣got, a gentle. Termentina, a kinde of gum called tur∣pentine. Terminalie, feastes instituted to the ho∣nor of the god Terminus, and kept in Februarie at the eight calēds of March, because that betweene Terminalie and Regifugio the odde daies of the yeere were put in. Terminale, of, or belonging or seruing to bounds & limits. Vsed also for a mear∣stone, a land marke, a stone set vppe to shew the limits of fields and lands. Terminare, to decide, to end, to limite, to bound, to finish, to determine, to define, to appoint or assigne boundes or mar∣ches. Terminatamente, determinately, con∣clusiuely. Terminatione, a bounding, a limiting, a termination, a limitation, a defining, a deciding. Términe, a terme, a bounde, a limite, an end, an ayme, a gole, a definition, a mearestone, a precinct, a signe declaring one mans land from another, the end or compasse of a thing. Términe di fébbre, a fit of an ague. Terminto, an herbe so called. Also a hard and red swelling rising in the crowne of the head, in the priuy parts, or arme pits, our chirurgions call it a little loafe, or manchet. Ternale, as Ternario. Ternaria, the name of a magistrate in Venice who hath charge of the custome of oyles. Ternario, of three, consisting of the num∣ber of three. Térni, the cast of two treas vpon the dice, consisting of three. Ternire, to tarnish, to darken any glasse with breathing vpon it. Ternità, a trinitie, a number of three. Terpentina, as Termentina. Térra, the element called earth, anie grounde, earth, countrie, prouince, re∣gion, land, soile, towne, cittie, borough, hamlet, or village. Also a freeholde, a copie-holde, a farme, a mannor. Also of the verbe Tenere, he shall holde. Vsed also for the whole world. Térrabasa, a foule called a Bittore. Térra ferma, the firme or maine lande. Térra di San Paolo, as Terra Samia. Térra lenia, as Terra sigillata. Terra Samia, a kinde of earth against poison, that mountibankes vse in Italy. Térra sigillata, a kinde of earth against poison. Térra franca, a free towne, a common∣wealth. Also a freehold. Térra neóla, a birde called a bunting. Térraccia, a terrace, a leades, an open walke, a gallorie, a flat roofe, or seeling, or floore. Also as Rauellino. Also a lit∣tle hold or keepe where a sentinell doth sit to watch. Térrracciano, a townes man, a townes dweller. Terraglio, as Terrapieno. Térragna, a mud-wall, or any thing made of mud, earth, or such like things. Térragnolo, heauie going, dull, drooping, drowsie, without mettall, as some heauie going horses are. Térrandola, a bird called a bunting. Térrantola, a salamander. Also a bun∣ting. Also as Tarantola.
Térrapieno, a skonce, a blocke-house, a dyke, a bull-warke, or other fence and fortification walled or filled with earth. Also the earth that is rampired and fil∣led vp vnto the inside of any wall, bul∣warke, or rampier. Térrapianato, made euen and leuell to the grounde, razed. Also ensconced, or filled vp with earth or mudde. Also en∣trenched or enflanked with earth or ba∣rikados. Terrazza, as Terracia. Terrazzano, as Terracciano. Térrazzare la terra, to grub, to breake or harrow land. Térrefare, to terrifie, to put in feare, to fraie, to affright. Térremóto, an earthquake, or shaking of the earth. Terrena camera, a lowe grounde cham∣ber. Also earthly. Terreno, earthly, made of earth, terre∣striall, worldly, lowe to the ground, that liueth or keepeth on land. Also ground, land, soyle, earth, or mound. also a field or a land. Térreo, as Terrestre. Terréstre, of, or belonging to the earth, or land, that liueth on the earth, terrestri∣all, earthly. Terrestreità, earthlines, the nature or qualitie of the earth. Terribile, terrible, dreadfull, horrible, gastly, cruell, fell, to be feared. Terribilità, terriblenes, horror, gastlines, crueltie. Terricciuola, a little towne, village, cit∣tie, borough, or hamlet. Terrigenéo, borne, begotten, or bred, or ingendred of earth. Terrieri, townes-men, towne-dwellers. Território, a territorie, a circuit, a pre∣cinct, a dominion, or compasse of lande, lying within the bounds of a cittie. Terrore, terror, dread, horrour, fright, or gastines, feare. Terroso, full of earth, sande or grauell, earthie, grettie, durtie. Tersità, neatenes, cleanlines, smoothnes, polishednes. Terso, neate, pure, cleane, vnspotted, smooth, polished. Terténére, tengo, tenui, tenuto, to en∣tertaine. Tetrenuto, entertained. Tertenimento, entertainment. Tertiana, a tertian ague, as Terzana. Tertiare, to thirde the pike either to beare the same vpon his shoulders, or to charge the same ouer-hande. Also to thirde out. Tertio, the thirde. Also a little regiment of soldiers. Tertufalo, a puffe or todestoole full of winde. Also a swelling, a blister, a bunch or knob of flesh. Tertufo, as Tertufalo. Terza, the howre that priests call prime. Also the third in number. Terzana, the mizen saile of a ship. Some call it the poope saile. Also a tertian ague, or any thing that comes by thirds. Terzanéllo, a kinde of slight silken stuffe made of feret or filosella silke. Terzare, as Interzare, as Tertiare. Terzaria, a payment or taxing of the third part of any thing. Terzaruólo, a mizen or poope saile. Also a little firkin, a rundlet, a tierce, a thir∣den-deale. Terzeruolo, a mizen or poope saile. Terzetto, a terset of rymes, rymes that ryme three and three. Terzino, as Terzetto. Térzo, the third in number, as Tértio. Terzolo, a tassell gentle of a hauke. Terzoletto, a mizen or poope saile. Also the foreman or iacke of a caste of mer∣lins. Terzúlo, as Terzolo. Terzuóletto, as Terzoletto. Tesca. Also Tesqua, rough places that lye vntilled and vnoccupide, places hard to come vp to, where the Augures prac∣tised their diuination by flying of birds. Teschio, the head or skull of any dead creature. Tese, a generall or indefinite question or argument. Teso, spread, extended, displaide, tended, out-stretched, pitcht, bent, stiff-stan∣ding, Looke Téndere. Tesoreggiare, Tesoro, Looke Theso∣reggiare. Tessandro, any kinde of web, or wea∣uing. Tessarélla, as Tessitrice. Tessaretta, as Tessitrice. Tessaro, Tessaruólo, a weauer, Looke Téssere. Tessélla, a small piece that men make checker worke with in tables or boords. Tessellare, to make or worke checker-worke, or inlaid worke. Téssera, a thing in euery part square as a dye, a dye to play with. Also a watch-word, a priuie signe or token whereby spies and enemies are discerned from companions and fellowes in armes, and it was either a dumbe signe or vttered with the voice: among our sentinels it is called the word, or watch-word. Also a token of leade, leather, or other thing which was woont to be giuen to the people as a dole. Also a tale, tallie or skore whereon the number of things de∣liuered are marked, such as our bruers and bakers and checker-men vse to skore vpon. Also a geometricall figure fouresquare. Also the name of a toole that farriers vse. Also some part about a yoke. Also a signe, a note, a marke, or token: Also a kinde of deuice of iron called tarriers to play and passe away the time withall. Also some part of a weauers loome. Tesseracósto, the time of fortie daies be∣fore and after a mans birth, wherein the mother might not be partaker of the holie ceremonies, which time being expired they celebrated a feast called Tesseracósto. Tesserario, a serieant or watch-maister, or he that giueth or bringeth the watch-word among souldiers. Téssere, tesso, tessei, tessuto, to weaue, to worke, to complot, to contriue, to de∣uise, to compact, to make, to build, to write, to compose, to gather, to frame together. Tesserino, a weauer. Also a kinde of fine stuffe like silke mockado, or cali∣manco. Tessuto, wouen, wrought, completted, contriued, deuised, compacted, Looke Téssere. Tessimento, a weauing, a web, a com∣plot, a deuise, a compact, a working to∣gether, Looke Téssere. Tessitore, a weauer, a contriuer, a com∣plotter. Also a kinde of monstrous fish, Looke Téssere. Tessitrice, a woman weauer, vsed also for a spinner. Tessitura, as Tessimento. Tésso, hath bin vsed for Testo. Tésta, a head, a pate, a skonce, a nole, a test, a testerne, a chiefe, a beginning, a spring. Also wouen, wrought, or com∣pact together. Also anciently vsed for a shell. Also an earthen pot or gallie cup. Also burnt tile or brick. Also a piece of broken bone, a sharde of a pot or tile. Testabile, that by the lawe may beare witnes. Testaccia, a ioulthead, a shallow skonce, a great nole. Testacéi animali, all manner of hard shell fishes as oysters and scallops. Testacéo, made of tyle, brick, or earth baked. Testa di cane, the hearbe called dogs∣head.
Téstagrossa, a kinde of bird. Also a ioult∣head, a loggarhead, a grosse pate. Testamento, a testament, or last will. Testamentario, of or belonging to a last will and testament. Also a forger and falfifyer of dead mens wils and testa∣ments. Also a scriuener or writer of mens last wils and testaments. Testardia, headines, wilfulnes, stiffnec∣kednes, self-conceit, or opinion, testi∣nes. Testardo, headie, wilfull, stifnecked, te∣stie, one that hath a head, a testerne of a bed, a self-conceited fellow. Testare, to beare witnes, to testifie, to at∣test, to make ones will or testament, to call to witnes, to shew and declare ma∣nifestlie, to tell openlie, to beare re∣cord. Testato, borne witnes, testified, atte∣sted, made ones will and testament, as Testardo. Also openly prooued and knowne of all men. certaine, sure, and as it were tride by witnes, approoued, allowed, confirmed, witnessed. Testareccio, as Testardo. Testariccio, as Testardo. Testatione, an attestation or bearing witnes. Testatore, a witnes, an attestator, a testifier, he that maketh a testament. Testatrice, a woman-witnes, or atte∣ster. Téste, now, euen now, at this instant, or a little past. Also a witnes, a testis, a giuer of euidence, one that is priuie to a thing. Téste, certaine eminent partes behinde Salóide in the extreame part of the brain, which the Anatomists so called, bicause they are like the stones of a man. Téste, Téste, euen very now, but a very little since. Testericcio, testie, fond, humorous, opi∣natiue, stifnecked. Testeso, vsed of Dante for Teste. Testesso, thee selfe, thou thy selfe. Testicciuólo, a little prettie head, pate, skonce or nole. Testicola di cane, the herbe rag-woort or gander-goose. Testicolato, that hath stones or cods. Testicoli, the cods or stones of any liuing creature. Testiculi, as Testicoli. Testiéra, a testern or head of any thing as of a bed, a headpiece or helmet or caske. Also an obstinate, selfe-conceited, testie or wilfull woman. Also the headstall of a bridle, a headstraine. Testiére, as Testardo. Testificare, to testifie, to beare witnes, to confirme, to beare record. Testificatione, a testification or witnes, a witnes bearing, a proouing by witnes, a testimonie, a declaration. Testificatore, a testifier or witnes, he that beareth witnes. Testìmonianza, a testimonie or witnes, an euidence or a deposition. Testimoniare, to testifie, to witnes. Testimónio, a testimony or a witnes, an euidence or deposition. Testina, a little subtile head. Testio, as Teschio. Testione, a ioult-head, a logger-head, a grosse-pate, a dull-skonce. Tésto, a text, an argument, a theame or ground of any subiect. Also the test of siluer or gold. Also any kind of pot-lid. Also a kind of melting pot that gold∣smiths vse. Also anye thing that is wouen or wrought cunningly. Also a stile or the manner of ones words and speaking. Testone, a coyne so called in France, worth eighteene pence sterling. Also as Te∣staccia. Testore, as Tessitore. Testoso, headie, wilful, testie, headstrong, humorous, opinatiue, self-conceited. Testrice, as Tessitrice. Testudine, a tortoise, a shell-crab, a lob∣ster, a crab-fish, a shell-toade or any great snaile of land or sea. also the roofe or vault of a house which cōsisteth of two arches, the one going crosse-wise ouer the other. Also the belly of a lute, or a lute bicause it resembleth a tortoise shel. Also a warlike engine or fence made of boordes couered ouer with raw hides, which serued against fire and stones flung against soldiers; vnder the which they might safely assault the wals. Also a target fence which was a close-holding and ioining togither of targets ouer head like a roofe, wherewith the footmen be∣ing defended, did beare off the thick shot of arrowes or flinging of stones. Also a great shield, target or paluoise. Testugine, as Testudine. Testuma, as Testudine. Testura, as Tessimento. Tetanico, that hath the cricke in the neck or a kinde of cramp which holdeth the necke so stiffe that it cannot bow. Tetano, a kind of cramp happening to the body in such sort that it can neither bow, bend nor stir no way. Tetanótro, a medicine vsed to take away wrimples from the skin and to make it smooth. Tetra, the number of sower in greeke, but vsed in composition of many words. Tetracórdo, an instrument of fower strings. Tetradóro, fower handfuls broad euerie way. Tetradramma, a coyne of greece of fower dragmes. Tetragano, any thing fower square, a quadrangle. Tetragone, as Tetragano. Tetragramato, of fower letters. Also the great name of God or Iehouah. Tetramelo, a meeter of fower feete. Tetramente, hidiously, gastly, stinkingly, darkely, horribly, grisly. Tetrastico, a sentence of fower verses. Tetrasilabo, of fower syllables. Tetrametro, a meeter of fower feet. Tetraptoti, declined in fower cases. Tetrarca, a gouernment of a fourth part. Tetricità, sowernes or sadnes of counte∣nance. Tetrico, lowtish, crabbed, sowre or sad to looke. Tetrinare, to crie as a duck doth. Tetrigométra, the mother or matrice of grashoppers. Tetrigonia, a kinde of small crickets or the grashoppers. Tétro, hideous, dark, pitchie, foule, gastly, lowring, louting, duskie, black, horrible, abhominable, naught, mischieuous, stin∣king. Tetróbolo, a coine in greece of fower oboles. Tetta, a pap, a teat, a dug. Tettare, to suck or draw a dug. Tetina, a little dug, pap or teat. Tetto, the roofe, ridge or couer of a house, be it of slate, lead, tile or boord. Also ta∣ken for a house or roofe. Also for a deck of a ship. Tettonare, to roofe or couer a house. Tettonato, or couered a house, a roofe, a couer, or a pent-house. Teucrio, an herbe like Germander, great or wild Germander. Teuerio, a kind of venemous herbe. Teuertino, as Tiuertino. Teurgia, Sorte di cabala.   Teurgo, Sorte di cabalista.   Tezzadaaia, a house or little shelter to put corne in in time of raine. Thalasio, a sea-water-greene colour. Thalasseglie, as Potamanti. Thalassino, as Thalasio. Thalmudista, a professor of the chaldeans or Egyptians old lawes. Thalofori, bringers of braunches or
boughes. Thapsia, an herbe like Dill, which being cut yeeldeth a iuice as white as milke. Thargelie feste, feastes and games in ho∣nor of Apollo. Theamede, a stone which contrarie to the adamant, putteth away iron from it. Theangelide, a kinde of herbe. Theatinerie, hypocriticall fryers tricks. Theatini, a kinde of order of fryers, dis∣sembling puritie. Theatro, a theater which was a place made halfe round where people assem∣bled to behold players, a stage or scaf∣fold, a spectacle or common plaie, an open place where all men do see and be∣hold, or wherin one sheweth and decla∣reth. Theletteri, she-ferne, or female ferne. Thelico, a stone like vnto an oliue stone, which drunke breaketh the stone in the kidney. Theligónio, an herbe hauing berries like an oliue, called the grace of God. Thelifóno, an herbe, the roote whereof doth kill scorpions. Thema, a theame, an argument, a matter supposed to be written or spoken of, a subiect or grounde to speake or write of. Also a figure set by astronomers, con∣taining the state of heauen and the pla∣nets at any certaine time, an horoscope, the cōsideration of the time of ones nati∣uitie or birth vnder this or that planet. Themologia, Looke Ethimologia. Thenare, the fleshie part of the hand, be∣tween the thumbe and the middle finger. Theogonia, the beginning of the gods, their generation and beginning, or ori∣ginall. Theologare, to preach diuinitie, or holie things, or reason of diuinitie. Theologia, diuinitie, a profession of holie things, reason and science of holy things. Theológico, pertaining to diuinitie, theologicall. Theologizzare, as Theologare. Theólogo, a diuine, or preacher of diui∣nitie, a professor of diuinitie or holie things. Theomantia, a kind of diuination. Theóphilo, louing God. Theorema, a theorem, a speculation, any axiom or vndoubted truth of an arte, but particularly that which respecteth speculation more then practise. Theoretico, belonging to contemplation. Theoria, contemplation, deepe studie, a sight or beholding. Theórica, as Theoria, Theorica A∣stronomia, that part of Astronomie that giueth the viewe of the motions of the planets by their orbes. Theórico, belonging to contemplation or view. Also theoricall rather then prac∣tike. Also a speculator or contempla∣tiue man. Theréo, the bird called a robin red-brest. Theriaca, treacle, a remedie against poi∣son. Also of a viper or other cruell beast. Theriomata, an vlceration or sore about the priuie members, whereby all the parts about them are corrupted. Therionarca, an herb that if wilde beasts do but tread on they become senceles & drowsie, it hath a flower like a rose. Therme, waters naturally warme, hot bathes. Thero, the name of a dogge, as one would saie kill-bucke, or fierce looke. Thesaurizzare, as Thesoreggiare. These, a generall or indefinite question, or argument. Thesoriere, a treasurer. Thesoreggare, to laie vp treasure, to hoord vp riches. Thesoreria, a treasurie or place where treasure is kept, a storehouse, an inward or secret place. Thesoro, treasure, riches, wealth, aboun∣dance. Thessalico, a kinde of purple colour. Theta, the name of a greeke letter. Also a marke of condemnation to death. Thimba, as Thimbra. Thimbra, the herbe winter sauorie. Thimi, a kinde of warts growing about one, that haue a small roote, and are somewhat long and bigge. Thimo, the herbe Tyme. Also a kernell vnder the canell bone, which in men is slender, and in beasts thicke. Thifone, a violent whirle-winde. Thirsite, a stone like vnto corall, which vsed in drinke procureth sleepe. Thiriatino, a kind of blewish colour that painters vse. Thirso, the stalke, stocke, or stem of anie herbe. Also a iauelin wrapped about with iuie, borne of harlots in Bachus his feasts and sacrifices. Thoro, a bull, as Tauro. Thorace, as Torace. Thracia, a flintstone, or a kinde of blacke Agath, of a woonderfull nature, for be∣ing steeped in water it burneth, and sprinkled with oile it quencheth. Thridacéa, the female mandragora. Thridace, sper-hauk herb, or hauk-weed. Thrissa, a kind of fish. Throno, a throne, or seate of maiestie, a seate of a king or emperour. Also a kingdome. Thú, incense, or frankincense. also ground-pine, or field cipres. Ti, thee, to thee, from thee. Also tho. Tiade, as Ptiade. Tiame, an ouen or a furnace. Tiano, an ouen or a furnace. Tiara, a turbant, or round wreath of lin∣nen for the head such as the Turks vse to weare. Tibia, a flute, a recorder, a pipe. Also the shanke or shinne-bone of a legge which comprehendeth all that space betweene the knee and the foote and containeth two bones, of which the greater hath the name of Tibia. vsed also for a thrash∣ing of corne. Tibiale, a leg harnesse or greaue. Tibiare, to sound vpon a flute, a pipe, or a recorder. Also to thrash corne, or win∣now it. Tibiatore, a piper vpon flutes, recorders or pipes, a thrasher. Tiburino, a monstrous sea-fish that hath two ranks of sharp teeth. Tibidrago, a kind of strong spanish Sack so called, we call it Rubiedauie. Tibilustri, daies in which men went with trumpets as it were in procession about their lands. Tibribastio, gibbrish, pedlers french, or rogues language. Tichirnabo, a great titimouse or ox-eie. Tiella, Tiello, hould it, take it. Also a tarte panne, a panne to bake a tarte in. Tiemo.   Tiepidezza, as Tepidezza. Tiepidire, as Tepidire, Tiépido, as Tepido. Tiermite, a kinde of wilde oliue. Tifa, an herbe growing by the water. Tifolare, as Strillare. Tifole, as Strillo. Tiglia, as Teglia, as Tilio. Tigna, as Tegna, as Tarma. Tignoso, as Tegnoso. Tigname, the lote tree. Tignato, moth or woorme-eaten. Tigno, a meale-worme. Tignola, as Tignuola. Tignosuzzo, as Foraméllo. Tignuóla, a moth that breedes in wollen clothes. Also a little worme that breedes in corne. Tigrame, a kinde of sweete gumme or perfume. Tigre, a tigre, a wild beast of a wonder∣full swiftnes. Tilia, Tilio, Teglia, Tiglia, a tree which beareth a round fruite as big as a beane, in which are seedes like to annis seeds. Som call it the linden, or teile tree.
Timallo, Timalo, a fish called a flowre, goodly to looke vpon, and sweete in taste and smell. Tiariotti, such men as liue vpon timar∣ros, as hould land in knight seruice vn∣der the great Turke. Timarro, lands, liuings, farmes or states of new conquered lands distributed and holden in knights seruice vnder the great Turke, by well deseruing souldiers and captaines. Timbade, witches and sorceresses which keepe about tombes and graues, and cut off some member frō dead bodies which they abuse to their sorceries. Timbo, a tombe, a graue or monument. Timeléa, a shrub bearing a kinde of pepper. Timidézza, as Timidità. Timidire, disco, dito, to be, to make, or become timorous, fearefull or faint, to quaile. Timidità, timiditie, feare, dread, awe, fearefulnes, bashfulnes, timorousnes. Timido, timorous, fearefull, awefull, faint, bashfull, falseharted. Timiópoli, ingrossers or regraters of markets, which make victuall deere and scarce. Timmote, with limmes shrunken vp. Timo, the hearbe tyme. Also a kinde of fish. Also a kernell vnder the canell bone both in men and beasts. Timolo, a kinde of water-snake hauing sixe teeth, which swimmeth on her back. Timonare, to steare or guide a ship. also to waggle the taile as some birds do. Timone, the sterne, helme, or rudder of a ship, the beame of a wagon or waine, the draught tree whereon the yoke hangeth. also a yoke, an axeltree, a stake or a pole, a rafter laide ouerthwart. and among riders Timone is vsed for the riders hand that holds the bridle, for that with it he gouernes the horse. Timoniere, the steares-man of a ship. Timore, feare, dread, awe, fearefulnes, scare or doubt of some euill motion. Timoroso, fearefull, timorous, dreadfull, awefull. Timpanista, a drummer, a tabourer, a drum-player or drumster. Timpanite, a timpanie or drye dropsie, a dry timpanie or dropsie rising of much windines gathered together betweene the skinne Peritóneo and the bowels, which if it be smitten vpon with the palme of the hand maketh a noise like a drumme. Timpano, a timbrell, a tabour, a drum, a drumslade, the name of a printers toole called a timpine. also a bell-pearle fashioned like a bell. Also the water∣mill wheele that taketh and deliuereth water in turning. Timpano a volta, Looke Campanéllo. Timpana piano, Looke Campanéllo. Tina, a tunne, a bruers, a vintners, or dyers fat, or vat. Tinaccio, as Mastéllo, as Tina. Tinacciuólo, as Mastéllo. Tinazzo, as Mastéllo. Tinca, a fish called a tench. Also a milke∣sop, or fresh-water souldier, such as thirtie must goe to dig vp a turnep. Tincone, as Tencone. Also a toole be∣longing to a chimnie-sweeper. Also a mans priuie member. Tindaridi, vsed for the twins Castor and Pollux. Tinélla, a tray, a milke-pan, a washing-bowle, a little tub. Tinellanti, ordinarie seruing men that neuer go farther then the hall or buttrie. Tinéllo, a tub, a fat, a hutch, a bing, a bruing fat or vessell, a bathing tub. Al∣so a common dyning hall where seruants vse to dyne in a gentlemans house. Tinge, as Ptinge. Also he dyeth or co∣loureth. Tingere, tingo, tinsi, tinto, to dye into any hue or colour, to dip in colour. Tinger chi falla, a kinde of Christmas game in Italie. Tinnito, as Tintino. Tino, as Tina. Tinóccio, Tinózzo, a great wooden tunne, or vat. Tinosa, as Tinella. Tinnunculo, a kinde of bird. Tinore, as Tenore. Tinta, a dye, a hue, a dying, a colour, or colouring. Also the water of a precious stone. Tintalhora, a wanton, wylie, tempting wench. Tintene, a kinde of musicall instrument without strings. Also a little shrill soun∣ding bell. Tintinante, ringing, iangling, sounding, clattring, tinkling, that ringeth and maketh a sound, sharp in sound, shrill ringing, tingling. Tintinabulo, as Tintene. Tintinare, to ring, to iangle, to sound shrill, to tinkle or tingle, to gingle as mettals or bels. Tintinamento, as Tintino. Tintinire, nisco, nito, as Tintinare. Tintino, a shrill, sounding, or iangling of a bason or bels, the tinkling that tin∣kers vse, the clattring of armour, a glowing or sound in the eares. Tinto, dyed or coloured, dipped or washed in any colour. Tintore, a dyer of colours. Tintoria, a dyers worke-house, the trade of dying. Tintura, a dying or colouring. Tiórba, a kinde of musicall instrument vsed among countrie people. Tipha, a kind of corne like rye called typh wheate, or wheate of Rome. Tipha acquática, a flowre that flyeth away like the downe of a thistle, called water-torch, cats-taile, red mace, douch doune, marsh beetle, or marsh pestle. Tiphone, a great violent whirlewinde. Tipho, arrogancie, or haughtines of minde. Tipico, mysticall, as it were shadowed. Tipo, a tipe, a figure, an example, a forme, a draught, a likenes, a shadow of a thing, a paterne, mould or sample wher∣by the image-maker or mason noteth his stone, or melteth his brasse. Tipocosmia, a type or figure of the whole world. Tipografia, the arte of printieg of bookes. Tipógrafo, a printer of bookes. Tipulla, a kind of water-spider with sixe feete, which runneth on the water with∣out sinking. Tira longa, a kinde of boyes play vsed in Italie. Tirannia, tyrannie, crueltie, as Tiran∣nide. Tirannicida, a murtherer or killer of a tyrant. Tirannicidio, the murthering or killing of a tyrant. Tirannico, tyrannicall, tyrannous, cruell. Tirannide, tyrannie, crueltie, a cruell or violent rule or gouernment for priuate commoditie, and not the publike weale. Tirannizzare, to tyrannize or play the tyrant. Tiranno, a tyrant, a murtherer, a cruell ruler or Lord. In old time it was taken in good part for a King. It hath also been vsed for a kind of faulkon or eagle cal∣led a nine murtherer. Tirannoso, as Tirannico. Tirante, breeches or hosen in pedlers French or rogues language. Tirare, to draw, to pull, to hale, to pluck, to attract, to tugge, to shrinke, to bring or leade towards one, to withdrawe or re∣tire. Also to throw, to cast, to fling, to hurle, to darte, to shoote, to stretch, to sling, or pitch from one. Also to defer, to dilate, to protract, to prolong, to wyer∣drawe,
to driue off, to extend. Also to entice, to perswade or allure. Also to wrest and drawe to himselfe. Also a draught or drawing. Also to kicke or winze as a horse. Tirato, drawen, puld, haled, pluckt, reti∣red, throwen, caste, flung, hurled, stret∣ched, shot, shrunke, tugd, pitcht. Also a nice, coye, scrupulous, pure, precise, wyer∣drawing, selfe-conceited fellow, attrac∣ted. Looke Tirare. Tirata, a draught, a pull, a pluck, a throw, a cast, a fling, a hurle, a shot. a shrinking, a stretching, a haling, a retyring, an at∣tracting, a dash. Looke Tirare. Tiratiuo, drawing, attractiue, haling Looke Tirare. Tiratore, a drawer, a puller, a haler, a plucker, a thrower, a caster, a flinger, a hurler, a shooter, a stretcher, a shrinker. Looke Tirare. Tirar' inanzi, to draw forward. Tirarcostiero, to shoote sidelin or wide. Tirar' indiétro, to draw or shrink back. Tirar' acqua, to draw water. Tirar le calcie, to pull off ones hosen, id est, to die, to yeeld vp the ghost. Tirar' vn petto, to let a fart. Tirar sotto, to draw, pull, or hale vnder. Tirar vn sasso, to hurle, to fling, to cast or throw a stone. Tirar di bocca, to beare too hard vpon the hit as some head-strong horses do. Tirar dritto, to shoote right, to drawe straight. Tirar da canto, to draw aside. Tirar la barca, to hale or towe a boate. Tirar la barra, to throwe or pitch the barre. Tirar l'anciana, to tug, to hale, to drawe or tow a barge with cords against the streame. Tirar d'arme, to play at sence. Tirar di costiero, to shoote wide. Tirar per i crini, to draw, to tug or pull by the haires. Tirar d'arco, to shoote in a bow. Tirar' vna coreggia, to let a guirding fart. Tirar d'arteglieria, to shoote off great ordinance. Tirar la paga, to receiue or draw a pay. Tiraro, as Carruccio. Tira oro, a gold drawer, that drawes gold wyer. Tirelirare, to sing or chirp as a larke. Tiréo, a stone of the nature of the stone Scirio. Tiremo.   Tirimattare, a kind of play at tables like vnto tick-tacke. Tiro, a shoot, a cast, a throw, a flinging, a hurling, a darting, a hurle, a fling, a shot, a tire, a reach, a distance, a stretching from one. Also a drawing, a pulling, a pull, a haling, a tugging, a plucke, a pluc∣king, a shrinking, a twitch, a twinging, a twang, a draught to or towards one. also a prank, a feate, a part, a trick, a knack, a deuise, a slight, a conceit, a drift or ayme at a thing. Also a stroke, a blow, a bang, a nip. Also a quip, a scoffe, a tant. Also a shoote out of a bow or of a caliuer, a stones caste, a caste at dice, a tyre of or∣dinance. a draught at chesse, a tricke at cardes, a tricke of youth, a pranke of knauerie, a merie pranke, a cunning feat, an odde parte, a draught or line in painting or drawing. a nip on the head. a venie at fence, a hit or hitting to the quicke. a yarke or yerke with a whip. a kicke or winzing of a horses heeles. a slash ouer the face. a draught, suppe or whiffe of drinke or Tobacco. a dash gi∣uen suddenly. Also a shrinking of si∣newes called of cunning ferriers Tiro di nerui. Also a kind of serpent. Looke Tirare. Also a fresh water souldier he that first entreth into experience or practise of any feate, arte or science, a yoong beginner or nouice. Tirocinio, the first excercise in any thing, an apprentiship, a first beginning. Also vnskilfulnes, simplicitie, lacke of expe∣rience and wisedome. Tiro di nerui, a shrinking of sinewes. Ita∣lian riders saie it is a disease in a horse which commeth of great cold and heat; whereby the great sinew in the necke is so restrained as the horse cannot open his mouth: there is no English name for it. Tiromantia, a diuination by cheese. Tirone, a yoong fresh water souldier, a milke-sop, a faint harted wretch. Tirreno, a stone which being whole swim∣meth, but being broken euerie part ther∣of sinketh. Tirsi, as Thirso. Also the circle without the wall of a towne, wherein men may walk for their solace. Tisana, Tysan or barly water giuen to the sicke. Also Ptisana. Tisbina, a kind of childs play in Italy. Tisichezza, pursines or shortnes of breath a cough of the lungs. Tisichire, chisco, chito, to grow short winded, to become pursie. Tisico, pursie, short or broken winded, ha∣uing the ptisicke. Tisicuzzo, somewhat pursie or short winded. Tisigo, as Tisico. Tistera, the cape of any garment, a hood of a cloke. Tita, as Tetta, a tittle in writing, a whit, a iot. Titalora, a gull, a foole, a ninnie, a doult. Titillare, to tickle, to prouok or moue plea∣santly. Titillatione, a tickling, a stirring or a pleasant moouing. Titillico, a tickling. Also ticklish. Titilloso, ticklish. Titimaglio, as Titimalo. Titimalo, spurge herbe. Also the herbe sea-lettuce, woolfes milke or milke-thi∣stle. Titispissa, a bird called a wagtaile. Titolare, to entitle, to title, to surname, to nickname. Also titulare, consisting of titles. Titolato, entitled, titled, surnamed, nick∣named, a man hauing titles or digni∣ties. Titolatione, an entitling, a titulation, a surnaming. Titolo, a title or inscription of a worke or acte, a surname, a name of dignitie, a title, prick or point vsed in writing. Titubante, stumbling, reeling, tripping, staggring, stutting, stammering, quiue∣ring, wauering. Titubare, to stumble, to reele, to trip, to stagger in speaking or going, to slut, to stammer, to falter, to quiuer, to trem∣ble, to wauer, to misse, to erre. Titubatione, a stumbling, a reeling, a tripping, a staggring, a flutting, a stam∣mering, a faltring, a quiuering, a trem∣bling, a wauering, &c. Titulare, as Titolare. Titulatione, as Titolatione. Titulo, as Titolo. Tiuertino, a kind of stone to build with∣all. Also a kind of marble. Tizzare, to stir vp the fire, to eg on, to ir∣ritate, to prouoke. Tizzo, a fire-brand. Tizzonare, as Tizzare. Tizzone, as Tizzo. Tizzoniera, a fire fork to stir vp the fire∣brands with. Tlaguace, a kinde of wilde beast that carrieth hir yoong ones in a pouch or bag vnder hir belly. Tlasi, a disease or brusing in a mans stones or cods. Tlaspi, the herbe called countrey mustard or raifort. Tò, take, holde, catch, take to thee. Also thine, or thine owne, as Tuo. Also he taketh.
Toca, a kinde of birde in India of the big∣nes of a rooke, with a white breast and his bill gilt. Tocca, a touch, or a touching. Toccadiglio, a game at tables like tick∣tacke. Toccadóro, a kinde of tinsell of gold. Toccare, to touch, to feele. to appertaine, to belong vnto, to ioyne neere to, to fall to ones lot. to strike, to smite, to hit, to mooue or grieue, to rub. Also to quip, to taunt, to take vp. Also to write, to speak or mention a thing. Tocca auoi, it toucheth, it concerneth, it belongeth to you, it falles to your lot. Toccare li tasti, to touch the keyes or frets of any instrument, to touch to the quick. Toccarla mano, to touch, to feele or take by the hand, to shake hands. Toccar' ad altri, to belong, to appertain or fall to others lot. Toccar' il polso, to feele or touch ones pulse. Toccare sul viuo, to touch to the quick. Toccata, a touch, a touching. Toccato d' óro, as Tocca d' oro. Tocchetti, a kinde of minced meate, shread, sliced, or cut in collops or steakes. Also a kinde of waight in Italie. Tocco, a touch, a feeling. Also touched, felt. Also striken, smitten, blasted, in∣spired. Also a piece, a scrap, a collop, a slice, or mammock, a cob. Also a venie at fence, a hit. Also a nod, a beck, a signe, a glance. Also a touch stone. Also a childs play vsed in Italie. Tocco di campana, a knock, a stroke, a knell, or peale, or toule vpon the bels. Toculare, to touch, to feele. Tofo, a kinde of sandie, soft, mouldring stone. Toga, a gowne, a robe, or long garment, which garment the Romaines did al∣wayes weare in peace. Togato, gowned, or hauing a gowne on. Also that weareth a gowne. Tógliere, tólgo, tólsi, tólto, to take, to receiue, to accept. Also to take away. Tógliere a fitto, to take to farme, to rent. Tógliere il vanto, to depriue another of glorie. Also to take vpon, to boast of. Tógliere in iscambio, to mistake one for another. Tógliere, a nuólo, to hyre or take to hyre a ship, or a horse. Tógliere, Passunto, to take the charge or burthen vpon himselfe. Togna, a fishing rod. Also a flurt, a slut, a driggledraggle. Tóla, a boord, a planke, a table. Toleone, Tolleone, an engine to draw vp water, called a sweepe. Tolerabile, tolerable, indifferent, that may be endured or borne withall, that may be suffered, or abidden. Tolerabilità, a tolerablenes. Toleranza, toleration, suffrance, per∣mission, pacience, enduring, abiding. Tolerare, to suffer, to endure, to tolerate, to permit, to beare with, to abide. Also to nourish, sustaine, or maintaine him∣selfe. Toleratione, as Toleranza. Tólle, Tóle, a waxen kernell or swel∣ling in the iawes. Tollenone, an engine to drawe vp wa∣ter that hath a great waight at the end, as Toléone. Tóllere, as Tógliere. Tolleta, theft, larcenie, pilfring, purloy∣ning, robbing. Tolleto, as Tolleta. Tólto, taken, receiued, accepted. Looke Tógliere. Tomacélla, a kinde of meate made of the plucke, giblets, or purtenances or tripes of beastes, but properly that meate which we call oliues of veale. Also a kinde of hogs pudding. Tomano, a coine in Persia woorth about twentie crownes. Tomara, Tomaia, the rande of a shooe. Some haue taken it for the vpper lea∣ther. Tomare, to tumble, to rumble, to roule or fall downe. Tomasélla, as Tomacélla. Tomba, a tombe, a graue, a sepulcre, or hollow darke place. Tombare, to entombe, to burie, or laie in a graue. Tombolare, to tumble or fall downe groueling. Tombolo, a tumbling tricke. also a mea∣sure of corne about a bushell. Tomicidenti, the foreteeth. Tómo, a downefall, a rumbling, a tum∣bling, a rouling or falling downe. Also a tome or volumne of a booke where di∣uers workes of one author be deuided in∣to sundry parts. Tomolare, as Tomare. Tomolo, as Tomo. Also a kind of mea∣sure. Tonaca, a coate or a iacket, or a sleeueles coate. Also a petticote, or kirtle. Also a couer like a pill, a rinde or a skin. Also a kinde of gilli-flower. Also a coat that couereth the eie, whereof there be fower sorts, the first Cornéa, which is white & resembleth horne: the seconde Vuéa, which is like a grape kernell: the thirde Vitréa, a which resembleth glasse: the fourth Christallina, which resembleth christall in cleerenes. Tonante, thundring, rumbling, roaring, ratling, sounding, loude, resounding, shrill. Vsed also for God. Tonare, to thunder, to rattle, to rumble, to crackle, to make a great sound, or terri∣ble noise, to roare. Also to tune an in∣strument or voice, to accent, to sounde. Tonarione, a certaine shalme with a sweete sound. Tonda, round, or made round. Tondare, to rounde, to circle, to compasse, to make round. Also as Tondere. Tondeggiare, to round or make rounde. Tóndere, tondo, tondei, tonduto, or toso, to poule, to notte, to sheare, to cut, to pare round, to clip, to shaue, to lop, to top, to crop, to brouze, to bite, to nibble, to reape, to mowe. Tondere moneta, to clip monie. Tónduto, toso, pouled, notted, shauen, shorne, cut, pared, clipped, lopped, top∣ped, cropped, brouzed, bitten, nibled, reaped, mowed. Tonditore, a sheare, a notter, a pouler, a barber, a clipper, a shauer, he that clip∣peth or sheareth. Tonditura, a pouling, a notting, a clip∣ping, a shauing, a rounding, a cropping, a lopping, a shredding. Tondino, as Fondéllo. Tondo, rounde, or mad round. a round, a circle, a compas, or a trencher, a plate, a little dish. Also ones bum or arse. also a grosse pate, a shallow braine, a loggar∣head. Also a fish with white and purple spots on his bellie. Some haue taken it for a lumpe fish. Tondo senza pelo, a hearles rounde, id est, a yoong bum. Tonega, as Tonica. Toneggiante, thundring, sounding, rum∣bling. Toneggiare, to thunder, to rumble, to rattle. Tonéllo, any kinde of tun or barell. Also a kinde of a fish. Tonia, a kind of flat fish. Tonica, a religious long garment, a cas∣socke, a frocke, a coate, or iacket, as To∣naca. Tonicare, to gowne, to put on a cassocke, frocke, or iacket. Tonicella, a body coate, a waste-coate, a petiecoate, a little frocke or cassocke. Tonina, a kinde of meate made of tun∣nie fish.
Tonitrabile, which may thunder or crackle. Tonitrale, wherin is thunder or a crack∣ling noise. Tónitro, a thunder or a crackling. Tonnellata, a tun waight, or burthen. Tonnèra, the fishing for tunnie. Tonnina, as Tonno. Tonno, a fish called tunnie, which lookes like bacon or porke. Tóno, a thunder, a rumbling noise, a tune, a note, an accent. Also as Tonno. Tonsile, that may be shorne, clipped, roun∣ded, notted, lopped, shred, or cropped. Tonsilla, an inflammation of fierie heate about the iawes, a hard swelling. Tonsore, as Tonditore. Tonsura, as Tonditura. Topaio, a rat-catcher. also a mouse-trap Toparca, as Satrapo. Toparchia, the rule of a countrey. Topatio, Topazo, a precious stone cal∣led a topace, of the colour of golde, and shining much in thicke darkenes. Topiaria, the seate of making images, or arbours in trees or herbes. Also the tame or garden Branke-vrsine. Tópica, topikes, books that speake and en∣treat of places of inuētiō in & touching logike. Also inuention or finding out of arguments, the arte of inuention, a part of logike noting the places of inuention. Also pertaining to the places of inuen∣ting arguments. Topicéllo, a little mouse or rat. Topinari, the scratches in horses pasterns. Topinara, a mole hill. Also a mole that liues vnder ground. Also a rats nest. Tópo, a mouse, a rat. Also a kinde of fish. Tópo alato, a night bat, a reare-mouse. Topographia, a description of places. Topografo, a describer of places. Topolino, a little mouse or rat. Tópomarino, a fish that is alwaies a guide vnto the whale. Toporagno, a kinde of rat or mouse. Toporéllo, a little mouse or rat. Tóppa, the spring or warde of a spring∣locke. Also a latch or wooden locke of poore countrey houses. Also a dripping panne. Toppare, to finde or meete withall by chance, to snatch or take away. Tór, as Tógliere. Torace, the brest or bulke of a man. Also the middle space betweene the necke and the thighes. also a placket or a stomacher a brest plate or corselet for the body. Torbante, as Turbante. Torbidare, to trouble, to confound, to di∣sturbe, to puddle, to stir or make water thicke. Torbidezza, thicknes, confusion, muddi∣nes, disturbance. Torbidire, disco, dito, as Torbidare. Tórbido, troubled, troublous, not cleere, muddie, thicke, stirring, pudlie. Also turbulent, tempestuous, fierce, busie. Also fowle, gloomie, duskie, darke, ob∣scure. Torbinale, fashioned, broade aboue and small beneath like a top or a gigge. Torbinare, as Turbinare. Torbine, as Turbine. Torbinéo, as Turbinéo. Torbo, troubled, thicke, muddie. Also as Turbine. Torbolare, as Torbidare. Torbolénte, turbulent, stirring, vnquiet, stormie blustring, contentious, busie, se∣ditious, troublous, angrie, full of con∣tention, confused. Torbolénza, turbulence, disturbance, vnquietnes, bluster, contention, sedition, trouble. Torcalétto, a turners toole that he turns and workes with. Also a little turne. Tórce, a torche or a linke, a taper. Torcéllo, a wreath, or wispe of any thing rouled vp round, that women vse to set vpon their heads to carie any burthen the easier and better. Tórcere, tórco, tórcei, torciuto, or tórto, to wrest, to wreath, to bende, to bowe, to turne round, to twist, to wrap, to winde in, or whirle about. Also to crispe, to curle and frizle. Also to re∣torte, to make crooked. Also to wringe or presse, or squeese out. Also to torture, to torment, to vexe or grieue. Torchia, a kinde of measure of liquide things. Also a torche or a linke. Torchiellare, to presse, to turne, or wrest a presse. Torchiéllo, a presse such as chandlers vse to presse crabs. Torchiero, a torch bearer, or torch ma∣ker. Torchino, blue colour. Torchietto, a little torch or linke. Also a little presse. Also a little pile, a stake, a beame, or poste. Tórchio, a torch, or a linke. Also a presse to presse wine with, or a printers presse. Tórcia, a torch or a linke. Torciaro, a torch bearer, or torch ma∣ker. Torcibile, that may be turned, bended, wrested, that is plyable. Torcietta, a little torch or linke. Torcifecciole, the last dregs or lees wroong out of grapes. Torcimano, an interpreter, or trouche∣man, a spokesman. Also a good fellow, a good ladde. Torcimanno, an interpreter, or trouch∣man, a spokes-man. Torcimento, as Torcitura. Torcino, a little torch or linke. Also a little presse to presse letters or nap∣kins. Torcitóio, the pinne, pegge, wrest, barre, hādle, or winder to turn a presse with. Also a presse to wring out any thing of. Torcitore, a retorter, a twister, a wrester, a bender. Torcitura, a retorting, a wresting, a twi∣sting, a bending. Torciuto, tórto, retorted, twisted, wrethed, bended, turned, bowed, wrested, made crooked, corbe, wrapt, wounde in, whirled about, crisped, or curled, Looke Tórcere. Torcolare, to presse wine, sider, or verd∣iuice. Tórcolo, a wine presse, a presse for wine, sider, or verdiuice. Also the braine tun∣nell. Torculare, as Tórcere, as Torcolare. Tordo, the birde called a thrush, a thrus∣sell, a mauis, an owsel, or a black-birde. Also a fish which some say liues among the rockes and stones, being not a foote long, and hath fower finnes besides the hindermost finne, and is in figure like a tench, in colour russet, hauing on his belly spots of purple and white. Toréllo, a yoong bull, a runt, a yearling, a steere. Also an instrument that a horse∣leach doth vse to clense and feele horses sores. Toribolo, a censor wherein frankincense is burned. Torlo, a twirle, a round turning tricke in dancing. Also a top or a gigge that chil∣dren plaie with. Also a round ring to put vpon a spindle to make it go heauier when women spin. Also the yolke of an egge. Torloru, a foole, a ninnie, a gidd-headed guil. Torma, a companie, a crue, a route, a troupe, a knot of good fellowes, Looke Turma. Tormentare, to torment, to torture, to afflict, to racke. Tormentatore, a tormentor, a torturer, a rack-master. Tormentilla, seauen-leaued-grasse, or setfoyle, or tormentill. Tormento, torment, torture, affliction, a racke, an engine to torment, a paine or
griefe. Also any ordinance pertaining to warre, to caste stones or quarels, anie kinde of battring peece of ordinance or gunne. Also the wringing or griping of the bellie. Tormentoso, greeuous, full of torment. Tormina, fretting or wringing in the guts or bellie. Torminoso, that fretteth the guts, or that hath torments and frettings in the guts. Tormora, as Torma. Tornadura, a kinde of measure in Italy. Tornaio, a kinde of birde or foule. Tornare, to turne, to returne, to reuert, to come againe. Tornato, returned, turned, reuerted, come againe. Torna sole, the turnesole flower so called bicause it turnes with the sunne. Also changeable silke. Tornata, a turne, a returne, a reuerting or comming home againe, a returne of money. Tornatile, that turneth or may be turned. Also that is wrought or made with a wheele or turne or that is turned. Torneamento, a torneament, a torney, a iust, a tilting. Torneare, to tilt, to torney, to iust, to fight at barriers. Also to compasse or en∣circle about, as Torneggiare. Torneggiare, to turne or worke by a tur∣ners wheele, as turners do. Also to po∣lish or make smooth. Tornéo, as Torneamento. Tornellare, as Torneggiare. Tornéllo, a turners wheele. Also a spin∣ning wheele. a turne or instrument that turners vse to make things smooth, po∣lished and round. Tornese, a coyne so called. Torniamento, as Torneamento. Torniare, as Torneare or Tornellare. Torniaro, a turner. Torniatore, a turner. Also a tilter or tornear. Tornidore, a turner. Tornio, as Torneo, as Tornéllo. Torno, as Tornéllo, a turne, a twirle, a turners or spinners wheele. Also about, touching, thereabout. Also a place where a horse is taught to turne. Tóro, as Tauro, a bull. Also a great oxe. Toroni, a kind of comfets. Toroso, mightie and strong in the brawns of the armes and legs, well flesht and brawned, strongly made. Also that hath many knots and swellings in the stalkes or stems, hard, tough, pithie. Torpedine, Torpedo, as Sgramfo, a cramp fish that hath the nature to make the hands of them that touch it to be astonished, though they do it but with a long pole. Also as Torpore. Tórpere, torpo, torpei, torputo, to be or become dull, heauie, slowe or sluggish, to make or become sencelesse, drouzie, slee∣pie or nummie, as parts of the body are sometimes, to be astonied. Also to loose the liuely brightnes and colour. to tar∣nish. Tórpido, dull, drouzie, heauie, sleepie, num, astonished in minde. Looke Tór∣pere. Torpitudine, as Tórpore. Torpotare, to make senceles, drouzie, num, sleepie or astonied. Tórpore, a feeblenes, a debilitation, a dul∣nes, a drouzines, a sluggishnes or num∣nes of the mind, of moouing and feeling, a sleeping of lims and members, a heauie vnaptnes to doe any thing, a slothfull heauines or dulnes as one were asto∣nied. Torquato, a bird called a kurlue. Also that weareth a collar or chaine about his necke. Torquélla, a wry-neck or hick-way. Torracci, old ruinous towres. Torre, as Tógliere. Also a towre or tur∣ret or any thing like it. Torreggiante, towring or soaring high. Torreggiare, to towre or soare vp high, to build towres. Torre la volta, to get the start of one. Also to preuent one. Torrénte, a torrent, a land flood, a raine flood, a swifte running streame, vehe∣ment and forcible, flowing with a great sweepe, rough and boistrous like waters that fall down by mountaines and rocks, running swiftly. Torribolo, a censer. Torricélla, a little towre or turret. Torrido, drie, parched, burnt, scorched. Torrione, a great towre or keepe in the middest of a castle. Torroso, mightie, strong, sturdie, well-limbd, strongly sinewed or brawned in armes or legs, as Toroso. Torsione, a kinde of fish sharpe like a wedge. Also extorsion. Torso, a stem or stalke of any herbe. Torsone. I find it vsed for a hunting pole. Also the name of some part of a horse. Torta, a tart, a cake, a custard, a white-pot, a pudding-pie, a florentine. Tortano, a kind of white-pot, pudding-pie, or cheese-cake. Tortaro, a tarte or pudding-pye-maker. Tortégli, Tortélli, little tarts, cakes, pud∣ding-pies or florentines. Tortezza, crookednes. Tortiéra, a pan to bake a tart or pudding pye in. Tortile, that is or may be bent, bowed, wrested, crompled, rouled or crooked. Tortilóquio, crooked or winding talke. Tortiuo, that is or may be wroong or squeesed or pressed out. Tórto, a wrong, an iniurie, a torte, a dis∣grace. Also as Torciuto. Looke Tór∣cere. Tortora, a turtle-doue. Tortorato, doues, turtles or pigeons co∣lour. Tortore, a torturer, a racker, a tormen∣tor. Tortorélla, a yoong turtle doue. Tortumaglio, an herbe growing by the water side. Tortuoso, crooked, winding, full of crin∣kles and crankles, that windeth or tur∣neth many waies. Tortuosità, a crookednes, a bending, a fol∣ding, a crinkling or crankling. Tortura, torture, torment, vexation, rac∣king or fretting of mind or body. Torturare, to torture or to torment. Toruare, to lowre, to frowne, to loute, to poute, to looke crabbedly or grimly. Toruità, sowrenes, lowring, frowning, louting, pouting, grim-looking, rabbed-looking, sternnes, grimnes. Toruo, sowre, frowning, sterne, crabbed, pouting, lowring, grim, cruell and spite∣full in lookes, fell, rough, vnpleasant, hor∣rid to looke vpon. Also crooked. Torzo, the top or stalke of a cabbedge or a colewort. Tosa, a yoong wench, a girle, a lasse, a maiden. Tosare, as Tóndere. Tosare monetta, to clip or pare money. Tosatore, as Tonditore. Tosatura, as Tonditura. Toscare, as Tossicare. Tósco, as Tóssico. Also a tuskane. Toscoso, venenious, poysonous. Toso, a yoong boy, a lad or striplin. Also as Tonduto. Tosone, a fleese of a sheepe. Also a lad or boy, whose haire is notted. Tosse, the cough, a coughing. Tóssere, tosso, tossei, tossuto, to cough. Tossicamento, a poysoning. Tossicare, to enuenom or to poyson. Tossicatore, a poysoner, an enuenomer. Tóssico, any kinde of venim, bayne or poyson. Tossicoso, venemous, poysonous. Tossilagine, the herbe fole-foot or horse-foot.
Looke Tussilagine. Tossina, a little gentle cough. Tossire, sisco, sito, to cough. Tossito, coughed. Tossoso, coughie, pursie, full of the cough. Tostamente, quickly, out of hand. Tostano, a quicke, speedie, nimble fellow. Also timely or quickly. Also sudden, quicke or speedie. Tostare, to toste, to bloate, to parch with heate. Tostissimo, verie quickly, out of hand. Tósto, quickly, soone, at once, out of hand, by and by, speedily. Tósto tósto, verie quickly, verie soone, by and by, out of hand. Totale, totale, comprehending the whole sum. Totalità, a totalitie or whole sum. Totano, a kind of moorhen. Totena, a cuttle fish or calamarie. Totone, a sea swallow. Tóttela, take it to thee. Touaglia, a table cloth, a boord cloth. Touaglietta, a little table cloth, a cup∣boord cloth, a napkin. Touaglini, little drinking clothes or nap∣kins. Touagliuólo, a towell, a napkin, a drin∣king cloth. Tozzami, all manner of pieces, scraps, mammockes, cobs or lunches. Tozzare, to breake into scraps, mammocks or little peeces. Tózzi, as Tozzami. Tozzolare, as Tozzare. Tózzoli, as Tozzami. Tozzoloni, as Tozzami. Tra, betweene, with, amongst, what with. Vsed also in composition & afore many words for the latine Trans, ouer, from one place to another, beyond or on the other side: and many times they adde an S to it, and say Tras, and sometime ns, as Trans, as Traportare, Tras∣portare, and Transportare, &c. It signifieth also through, as Trauedére, to see through, Translucido, through shining, &c. Trache, what with, what betweene. Tralemani, in hand, betweene hands. Traquesto mezzo, in the meane while. Tratanto, idem. Trabacche, pauillions, tents, boothes, bowres, shelters, shrouds. also sparuises of beds, valances or curtaines for beds. Traballare, to stammer, to stut, to falter, to lispe, to reele or stagger as a drunken man, to shake, to totter as a thing that is loose. Trabalzare, to bound, hop or skippe as a ball. Trabalzo, a bound, a skip, a hopping, a shift for any thing by hooke or crooke. Trabáttere, batto, battei, battuto, to beate, to bang, to touze, to strike, to smite. Trabéa, a roabe worne by Kings vnder their mantles of estate. a roabe that Augures were wont to weare. Trabattuto, beaten, bangd, touzed, stri∣ken, smitten. Traboccamento, an ouerturning or fal∣ling downe headlong. Traboccante, falling or reeling on one side, or as we say downe waight, readie to fall. Also a kind of wine so called. Traboccare, to fall downe groueling or headlong, to reele, to stagger, to stum∣ble. Trabocco, a trap, a snare, a ginne, a pit∣fall to catch birds with, a fall, a stum∣bling, a reeling. Also an engine of war called a ram. also the pin vpon which the ballance yeeld or goe. Trabocco di fiele, a disease called the yellow iaundise, or ouerflowing of the gall. Tra cane e lupo, about twy-light, or cock-shoote, when a dog is not knowne from a wolfe. Tracagante, a kinde of hearbe or shrub. Tracanardo, an ambling hackney or nag. Also an hackney pace. Tracannare, to swill, to bouze, to tipple, to bib, to quaffe, to drinke freelie, to swallow downe. Tracassare, to hauock, to tug, to spoile, to ruine, to destroy, to confound, to fumble, to misuse. Trachéa, the pipe of the lungs, the winde∣pipe. Trachélo, the chine of man or beast from the head to the hanche. Trachinia, a stone that is kindled with water and quenched with oyle. Trachilo, a bird called a Wren. Traccia, a trace, a tracing, a track, a footing, a print, a marke, a footestep. Tracciare, to trace, to track, to follow by the footing. Tracia, as Trachinia. Tracidolce, herbe galingale. Tracollare, to make the ballance giue a yerke on one side, to slip or fall downe. Tracóllo, a yerke, a slip, a stumbling, a breake-neck-fall, a twinge. Tracoma, a roughnes within the eye∣lids. Tracoraggine, as Trascuraggine. Tracorare, as Trascurare. Also to pierce to the hart. Tracórrere, corro, corsi, corso, to o∣uer-runne, to out-runne. Also to ouer-view in haste. Tracorso, ouer-runne, out-runne, ouer-viewed in haste. Tracorsa, a suruaying in haste, an ouer-looking, an ouer-running. Tracotanza, as Trascuraggine. Tracotato, as Trascurato. Tracrédere, credo, credei, creduto, to ouer-weene, to be ouer-credulous, to ouer-beleeue. Tracreduto, ouer-weened, bin too credu∣lous, beleeued too much. Tracuranza, as Trascuraggine. Tracurare, as Trascurare. Tracuraggine, as Trascuraggine. Tracutato, carelesse, without care or con∣sideration. Tra da, what betweene. Tradigione, a treason or treacherie. Tradimento, all manner of treason or treacherie. Tradire, disco, dito, to betray, or be a traitor. Tradito, betraide, or bin a traitor. Traditoraggine, as Tradimento. Traditore, a traitor. Traditione, a tradition, a deliuerie, or doctrine, or teaching left by word of man from age to age. Tradotto, Tradutto, Looke Tradurre. Traduce, a vine or branch brought along from tree to tree, or vpon the branches of manie trees ioyned as a traile to∣gether. Tradúcere, as Tradurre. Tradurre, duco, dussi, dutto, or dotto, to bring, to turne, to conuert, to conuay from one place to another, to bring ouer. Also to translate out of one tongue into another. Also to bring, conuert or tran∣sport from one to another, to leade ouer, to displace and remoue from one place to another, to transpose. Tradutto, translated, brought, conuaide, conuerted, or transported one from ano∣ther, Looke Tradurre. Traduttione, a translation, a transpor∣ting. Also a passing ouer. Traduttore, a translator, a transporter, he that bringeth from one place to a∣nother. Traetta, a traile, a traine, or border of a garment. Trafolciona, a gadding, a stallion ramp, riggish, gixie wench or where. Trafellare, to tyre, or p or throb through wearines, to be host as a deere, to be out of breath. Traferfero, a cruell fell raskall, as Trf∣faréllo.
Traficante, a merchant, a trader, a chap∣man, one that doth trafique. Traficare, to trafique, to trade, or vse merchandise. Trafichéuole, full of trade or trafique, traficable. Trafichino, a trader, a dealer, a bargai∣ner, a broker, a chapman. Trafico, trafique, trade, or merchan∣dising. Traffiero, a kind of sharp pricking needle. Also a surgions probe. Traffiggere, figgo, fissi, fisso, fitto, to transfix, to pierce, to thrust or strike quite through, to prick or sting. Trafila, a toole that wyerdrawers vse with many holes in it to drawe wyer through it. Trafisso, transfixed, pierced through, prickt or stung. Looke Traffiggere. Trafitta, a piercing, a transfixing. Trafitto, as Trafisso. Trafisse, prickings, stingings, piercings, thrusts. Traforare, to bore or worke through. Traforato, borne or wrought through, a transparent, hollow or through worke. Traforellerie, as Truffarie. Traforéllo, as Truffaréllo. Traforeria, as Baratteria. Trafugare, to steale, to filch, to pilfer, to purloine. Also to runne vp and downe like a runnegate or fugitiue. Trafuggire, fuggo, fuggij, fuggito, to flye from place to place, to flee from his owne captaine or from his owne people to the enemie. Trafugo, a runnegate, a fugitiue, an out∣lawed, a wandrer heere and there by stealth, a traitor, one that flyeth from his owne part to the enemies. Trafugone, by stealth, in hugger mug∣ger, stealinglie. Trafugio, a running away, a yeelding to the enemie. Tragacante, a tree which yeeldeth a kind of gumme called draganth, or draga∣gant. Tragédia, a tragedie or moornefull play being a loftie kinde of poetrie, and re∣presenting personages of great state and matter of much trouble, a great broile or stirre: it beginneth prosperously and endeth vnfortunatelie or sometimes doubtfullie, and is contrarie to a co∣medie. Tragediante, a player of tragedies, a tragedian. Tragédo, as Tragediante, a player in a tragedie. Tragelafo, a kinde of wilde beast. Tragettare, as Traghettare. Also to cast or sting ouer. Tragettione, a passing ouer, a conueying or carying ouer, a casting or flinging ouer. Tragetto, as Traghetto. Traggéa, all manner of comfets. Tragga, let him draw, pull, or hale, hurle, or cast. Tragenda, a tragedie. Trággere, traggo, trassi, tratto, as Ti∣rare, or Trarre. Traghettare, to ferrie, to conuaie, to leade, to passe, to carie, to transport, to bring or saile from shore to shore, or ouer anie place or riuer. Traghettaro, a ferrie man. Traghettiere, a ferrie man. Traghetto, a ferrie, a passage, a foarde, a gozell ouer, or from shore to shore. Traghiettare, as Traghettare. Traghietto, as Traghetto. Trágico, tragicall, dismall, deadly, dolo∣rous, cruel, outragious, belonging to tra∣gedies. Also a maker or writer of tra∣gedies. Tragicomédia, a tragicomedie, begin∣ning mournefully, and ending merilie, halfe a tragedie, and halfe a comedie. Tragie, a kinde of penets or cough comfets that Apothecaries vse. Also small com∣fets. Tragio, an herb growing only in Candie, hauing boughes, leaues, and seedes like Iuniper, but it sauoureth like the stin∣king of a goate, false or bastard Dic∣tam. Tragiúngere, to ioyne togither, to entre∣ioyne or ioyne betweene. Tragionto, entreioyned, ioyned togither, or betweene. Traglia, the throte, gullet or vzell pipe of any creature. Traglio, a stalke, a stemme, a graffe, a set, a sprig, a scien. Trago, a goate. Also an herbe like Gion∣co marino. Also a shell fish hauing an ill and stinking sauour. Also a kinde of corne lesse nourishable then our common corne, and very hard of digestion. Also a kind of hard, thick, and rough spunge. Also a net called a dragge. Also the embossement, or bunching out of the eare. Tragone, the rerewarde of a battle, or squadron. Tragonia, the herbe Taragon. Tragopónade, a birde in Ethiopia grea∣ter then an eagle, hauing hornes like a goate. Tragopógo, an herb called goates-beard, hauing leaues like to saffron, and a great knop or bud vpon a sharpe stalke. Tragopiro, a kinde of graine called buck∣wheate, or bolimong, good to fatten cattle. Tragorigano, peni-royal growing wilde. Traguggiarè, as Tranguggiare. Trahente, drawing, attracting, casting, hurling, Looke Tirare. Trahére, as Traggere, or Tirare. Traina, a traine or training for a hauke, a shuffling or racking pace of a nagge. Trainare, to traine, to traile, to dragge or draw along. also to go a shuffling or rac∣king pace. Trainéllo, a stale or a call for birds. Also a kinde of long horse-fetters or pasterns. Also as Traino. Traino, a traine or companie of followers, a trayle. Also a kinde of barow or tum∣brell, or wheele-barow. Tral, as Tra il, betweene the. Tralacciare, to enterlace, or tye toge∣ther. Tralasciare, to omit, to neglect, to ouer∣slip. Tralascio, negligence, carelesnes, ouer∣passing. Tralcij, branches, boughes, poles, props or forks to hold vp vines or hops with. Also all manner of entanglings. Also yong buds or sprigs. Tralciamenti, as Tralcij. Tralciare, to tye, to bind, to vnderlay or vnderprop vines or hops. Tralignare, to degenerate, to digresse, to growe from kinde. Tralúcere, luco, lucei, luciuto, to shine through. Traluciuto, shined through. Trama, a web, a weauers woofe in wea∣uing. Also by a metaphor, adeuise, a complot, a plot, a deceitfull tricke in ima∣gination, a contriuing. Also the mossines of the out ward part of fruits. Trama ci è, I smell a rat, some knauerie is in hand. Tramandare, to send and send againe. Tramare, to weaue, to warpe, to deuise, to complot, to contriue, to forecast. Tramatore, a weauer, a warper, a deui∣ser, a contriuer, a complotter. Tramazzare, to founder or to be apt to be foundred. Tramazzo, an orderles confusion, a hur∣ly-burly, a hauocke, a spoile. Also the foundring of a horse. Tramazzone, as Stramazzone. Trambo, betweene both, both togither. Trambusciare, as Trafellare.
Tramenare, to shuffle, to hādle, to wrigle, to shake any thing togither or to and fro. Tramentire, to lye out of measure, to lye and lye againe. Tramentito, lyde and lyde againe, or out of measure. Traméttere, metto, misi, messo, to inter∣mit, to interpose, to put, set or laye be∣tweene or send betweene. Tramesso, intermitted, interposed, put be∣tweene. Tramettimento, an interposing, an inter∣mission. Tramezzano, an interpositor, one that puts himselfe betweene others. Tramezzamento, as Tramezzura. Tramezzare, to part betweene, to worke among, to intermeddle, to interweaue, to interlace, to intermixe, to mediate, to interpose, to deuide or part in halfes. Tramezzino, as Tramezzano. Tramezzo, as Tramezzura. Tramezzura, an interlacing, an inter∣weauing, an intermixing, an interposi∣sition, a partition, a diuision, a hedge that deuideth land. Tramito, a distance, a space or interuall betweene place and place or time and time. Tramoggia, a sluttish corner, a dust bas∣ket or place where sweepings are caste. Also a mill-hatch or mill-bin, or mill-chest. Tramonta, a cold northerly winde. Tramontana, the north, the northern wind, the north star. the sun set. Tramontani, those folkes that dwell be∣yond the mountaines. Tramontare, to passe ouer the hils, to set or go downe as the sun doth. Tramortimento, a swouning, a falling into a swoune. Tramortire, tisco, tito, to swoune, to faint, to fall into a swoune. Tramortito, swouned, fainted, fallen in a swoune. Trampellare la vita, to rub out, to hold out, to weare out ones life, to keepe the wolfe from the doore. Tramplare, as Trampolare. Trampli, as Trampoli. Trampolare, to stalke it, to go on stilts or high startops. Trampoli, stilts, or high chopinos. Tramutare, to alter, to shift, to change from place to place, to transmute. Tramutamento, as Tramutatione. Tramutatione, a transmutation, an al∣teration, a change, a shift. Trana, an interiection of mockerie, as we say, nay, tush, fye, or I smell a rat. Tranare, to passe, or swim ouer. Also as Trainare. Tranatare, to swim or passe ouer. Tranellare, to entrap, to ensnare, to en∣tramell, to lay a traine for. Tranélli, traines for a hawke. also chea∣ting, craftie, conycatching or cosening tricks. Also a trap or any kind of snare or tramels. Also as Baratteria. Also as Trainéllo. Tranghiottire, tisco, tito, as Tran∣guggiare. Tranghiottito, deuoured, glutted, or swallowed downe. Trangoiare, as Tranguggiare. Tranguggiare, to deuoure, to glut, or swallow downe. Tranguggiatore, a deuourer, a glutter, a swallower. Tranguiare, as Tranguggiare. Trannare, to translate, to transport, to transferre. Tranótare, to swim or passe ouer. Tranóttare, to passe ouer the night. Tranuótare, to swim or passe ouer. Tranquillare, to appease, to calme, to quiet, to pacifie, to make quiet, still, and calme. Tranquillità, tranquillitie, quiet, rest, peace, calmenes, quietnes, stillnes, a calme and quiet season. Tranquillo, quiet, still, content, calme, peacefull, whosht, in rest, in peace, peace∣able, faire, vntroubled, without surges. Also faire and calme weather. Transalpino, which is ouer and beyond the alpes, or on the further side. Transcéndere, scéndo, scesi, sceso, to goe or climbe ouer, to exceede, to sur∣mount, to go beyond. Transcendente, transcendent, surmoun∣ting, or going beyond. Transegna, an vpper ensigne, or marke. Transenna, the netting of a ship like a lettise seruing for defence. Transferire, risco, rito, to transferre, to transport or remoue away, to cary or bring from one place to another, to con∣uay ouer, to translate from one language to another, or from ones possession to a∣nother. Transferito, transferred, transported, or remoued away. Looke Transferire. Transfigurare, as Trasfigurare. Transfiguratione, as Trasfiguratione. Transfuggire, as Trafuggire. Transfugio, as Trafugio. Transfugo, as Trafugo. Transfugone, as Trafugone. Transfulgido, which shineth through, through shining. Transile, that groweth, ouer-reacheth, or goeth ouer another, that passeth ouer. Transire, sisco, sito, to goe foorth, to passe or goe ouer, to runne through, to slip o∣uer, to leaue vntouched, to let passe and not speake of. Also to fall in a swoune, to dye or gaspe the last. Transíto, past or gone ouer, yeelded vp the ghost. Looke Transire. Also that hath bin past ouer. Tránsito, a passage or going ouer, a pas∣sing or going from one place to another. Also a trance. Per transito, cursorie∣wise, in haste, a snatch and away, a glance and goe by, without stop or stay. Transitório, transitorie, momentarie, fraile, fading, soone passing away. Translatare, as Traslatare. Also as Tradurre. Translatione, as Traslatione. Also as Traduttione. Translucido, transparent, through shi∣ning. Transmarino, that commeth from or is of parts beyond the seas, as Trasma∣rino. Transmeatione, a passing through. Transmettere, metto, misi, messo, to transmit, to put, set or send from one place to another. Transmigrare, as Trasmigrare. Transmigratione, as Trasmigratione. Transmontano, that dwelleth beyond or is of beyond the mountaines. Transmóto, remooued from one place to another. Transportare, as Trasportare. Transuersario, the shorter and ouer∣thwart piece of a Iacobs staffe. Transuersione, a turning away or crosse. Transuérso, ouerthwart, a crosse, trans∣uersed, out of order or ill placed. Transricchire, to grow rich suddenly or beyond expectation. Transtri, crosse or ouerthwart, beames transtroms. Transunto, a transcript, a transumpt or exemplfication written out of records or copie of any writing. Trantrana, as Trana. Trapanare, to pierce or passe through. Al∣so to grope or fumble for. Also to open ones skull with a trepan. Trapano, a surgeons toole to open a mans head with, called a trepan. Trapassamento, a transgression, a tres∣passing, a yeelding vp the ghost, a pas∣sing ouer. Trapassare, to passe through, away or ouer, to decease, to die. to trespasse, to transgresse. also to go a racking or shuf∣fling
pace. Trapassati, our deceased forefathers, the deceased and dead. Trapasso, a shuffling or racking pace. Trapazarola, a duckling or dobchickin. Trapelare, to wade or get through lightly, to drop, to trill through. Trapella, a mouse trap. Trapellare, to intrap. Traper, what betweene. Trapere, hath been vsed for a dagger. Trapese, herbe orach or golden flower. Trapiantare, to remooue, to plant or set in another place. Trapiouere, piouo, piouei, piouuto, to raine betweene or through. Trapónere, pongo, posi, pósto, as Tra∣mettere. Traporre, as Trapónere. Trapósto, as Tramesso. Trappanare, to slide, to glide or slip tho∣rough and away. Also as Trapanare. Trappare, to catch, to snatch or take by maine force. Trappola, any kind of trap, snare, pitfall or ginne. Also a game at cards so called. Also a play that children vse called trap. Trappolare, to intrap, to insnare or catch in some gin. Trappolatore, as Barattiere. Trappoleria, as Baratteria. Traportare, to transport or carie ouer. Trapungere, pungo, punsi, punto, to pricke, to pierce or sting through. Also to quilt, to stitch, to embroder, to counter∣point. Trapunto, prickt, stitcht, pierced or stung through, quilted, embrodered or coun∣terpointed. Also a quilt or counterpoint. Also a kinde of stitch, called hollowe stitch. Trar, Looke Trarre. Trar per dado, to cast the dice for, to cast lots, to rifle, to begin any thing. Trarre, traggo, trassi, tratto, as Tirare. Trarre la sórte, to caste lots, to drawe cuts. Trarupi, amongst rocks or clifs. Trasandamento, a going beyond or out of the way, a falling a sleepe, a dying. Trasandare, to goe beyond or out of the way, to fall a sleepe, to giue vp the ghost. to raue or dote. Also to outgo. Trasapére, to ouerknow, to be ouerwise. Trascéndere, scendo, scesi, sceso, to transcend, to go beyond. Trascendénte, transcending, transcen∣dent. Trasceso, transcended, gon beyond. Trascina, a sea fish so called in Rome, like a thorne-backe or ray. Trascinare, as Strascinare. Trascolorare, to discolour or chaunge colour. Trascorrere, corro, corsi, corso, to ouer∣run, to out run, to peruse ouer in haste. also to quest or hunt to & fro as a dog doth, to run ouer, to passe ouer quickely. also to passe with short mention, and not to speake of. Trascorso, ouerrun, out run, perused ouer a booke, &c. Trascorsa, an outrunning, a perusing, an excursion, an outrode. Trascotanza, as Trascuraggine. Trascotato, as Trascurato. Trascrittione, a transcription, a writing, or copying out. Trascriuere, scriuo, scrissi, scritto, to write or copie ouer. Also to transfer or giue ouer his right to another. Trafcritto, written or copied ouer. Also a manuscript, a copie, or a transcript. Transcuraggine, carelesnes, negligence, retchlesnes, want of heede, ouersight, vn∣aduisednes, ouerweening, presump∣tion. Trascurare, to neglect, to set at nought, to be heedles, or carelesse of. Trascurato, neglected, set at nought, been careles. also heedles, negligent, retchles, vnaduised, rash, ouerweening. Trascuranza, as Trascuraggine. Trascuratezza, as Trascuraggine, Trascutanza, as Trascuraggine. Trasecolare, to be astonished or dismaid, to be rauished with some heauenlie ioie. Trasferire, as Transferire. Trasferito, as Transferito. Trasficcare, to thrust or driue through. Trasfigurare, to transforme or change from one shape into another. Trasfiguratione, a transformation or metamorphoses, a changing of shapes. Trasfondere, fondo, fondei, or fusi, fuso, to powre out of one vessell into another, to translate, to transpose, to transferre. Trasformare, as Trasfigurare. Trasformatione, as Trasfiguratione. Trasfuga, a subduing or putting to flight by some wyle. Also an ouerflight. Trasfugare, as Trafugare, to put to flight by some craft. Trasfuggire, as Trafuggire. Trasfugio, as Trafugio. Trasfugo, as Trafugo. Trasfugone, as Trafugone. Trasfulgido, through shining. Trasfumare, to smoke through. Trasgredire, disco, dito, to transgresse, to digresse, to swarue, to trespasse, to passe or go ouer and beyond, to surmoūt or exceed. Trasgredito, transgressed, swarued, di∣gressed, trespassed, &c. Trasgressione, a transgression, a swar∣uing, an offence, a trespasse, a passing or going ouer, a digression from one purpose to another. Trasgressore, an offender, a transgressor, a trespasser, a swaruer. Trasguardo, a sight hole through any in∣strument. Trashumanare, of humane to become di∣uine, to go beyond humanitie. Trasi, a kinde of frute so called. Traslatare, to translate, to reduce from one place to another, as Tradurre. Traslatione, a translation, or transpositi∣on, a transporting or carying ouer, a transferring or remoouing from one to another. Also the vsing of a worde in signification, lesse proper to augment or make the thing lesse. Traslatiuo, transferred, or transposed, taken from other, taken out of others, of no great waight, nothing curious or ex∣cellent, ordinarie, of the common sort. Traslato, a metaphor. Also translated. Also as Traslatione. Traslatore, a translator, or transporter, he that doth transport, translate or con∣uey from one place to another. Traslattare, as Traslatare. Trasmarino, a kinde of precious blue co∣lour that painters vse, as Transma∣rino. Trasméttere, as Transméttere. Trasmigrare, to remooue from one dwel∣ling place to another, to go and dwell farther off. Trasmigratione, a transmigration, a de∣parting from one dwelling to another. Trasmodare, to passe measure, to exceede meane. Trasmudare, to transmute, to alter, to shift, to change from one place to ano∣ther. Trasmutare, as Trasmudare. Trasmutatione, a transmutation, a shif∣ting, a change, an alteration. Trasognare, to raue, to dreame, to slum∣ber, to passe the time drouzily, to go out of his wits. Trasonare, to sounde betweene. Also to crake, to boast or vaunt, as a Thraso. Trasonarie, boasts, crakes, foolish osten∣tations. Trasone, a thraso, a bragger, a boaster, a craker, a vaunter.
Trasparénte, transparent or through shi∣ning. Trasparénza, a transparence or through-light. Trasparére, paio, parsi, parso, or paruto to be transparent, to shine through. Trasparso, beene transparent, or shined through. Trasparuto, as Trasparso. Traspiantare, as Trapiantare. Traspietare, as Trapiantare. Traspontino, a stile, a gappe or yate ouer a hedge, a little bridge ouer a ditch. Traspónere, as Trasporre. Traspórre, pongo, posi, pósto, to tran∣spose, or remooue from one place to ano∣ther. Trasportamento, a transporting. Trasportare, to transport, or carrie ouer, or remooue from one place to another. Trasportatione, a transportation. Traspositione, a transposition or remoo∣uing. Traspósto, transposed or remooued. Trasricchire, to become very rich sud∣denlie. Trassinare, as Strascinare. Trassostantiale, transubstantiall. Trassostantione, transubstantiation. Trassostantiare, to transmute substance. Trasti della barca, the formes or benches or seates of a gallie, whereon the ma∣riners vse to sit when they rowe. Also a transome or beame going crosse a house. Vsed also in Venice for the highest or chiefe place in a gondola, as we saie the cushions in a paire of oares. Trasto, as Trasti. Trastornare, to turne or returne backe. Trastrauato, a horse that hath a forefoot and a hinder foote crossewise white. Trastullare, to solace, to sport, to dandle, to dallie with, to still, to quiet. Trastullo, sporte, pastime, sollace, delight, daliance, quietnes. Trasuedére, vedo, viddi, visto, or ve∣duto, to ouersee, or see through. Trasueduto, ouerseene, or seene through. Trasuérso, as Trauérso. Trasuolare, to flie ouer, or ouer flie. Tratanto, in the meane while. Tratenimento, entertainment. Tratenére, tengo, tenni, tenuto, to en∣tertaine. Tratenuto, entertained. Tratenéuole, full of entertainement. Tratta, leaue, or priuiledge to transport merchandise. Also a trade or trading. Also a space or a distance. Also a com∣panie, a troupe, a rout, or a crue. Also as Tirata. Trattabile, tractable, tractible, that may easily be entreated, handled, or ordred, gentle, quiet, pliant. Trattamento, an entertainment, a trea∣tie, a treatise, a vsage, a parlie, a dea∣ling, a handling, a carriage, a behaui∣our. Trattamessa, the pricking of a naile, or re∣treate in a horse. Trattare, to treate, to entreate, to reckon vp, to exercise or to vse, to behaue, to deale, to negotiate, to order and gouern, to see to, to do, to emploie, to handle, to practise, to contriue, to complot, to par∣ley, to describe, to write, or discourse of or vpon, to manage, to meddle with. Trattato, treated, entreated, vsed, dealt, negotiated, done, handled, practised, complotted, contriued, reasoned, writ∣ten, or discoursed vpon. Also a treatie, a tract, an entreaty, a treatise, a practise, a complot, a poeme, a discourse, a hand∣ling, a describing, a part of a booke wherein any thing is handled, Looke Trattare. Tratteggiare, to shadowe in painting. Tratteggio, a lyne or shadowing in pain∣ting. Trattenimento, entertainment. Trattenitore, an entertainer. Trattéuole, tractable, that may be han∣dled, managed, treated, or discoursed vpon. Tratti di córda, strappadoes giuen with a corde. Tratto, as Tiro. Also as Fiata, or vólta, vn Tratto, one time or once. Also a space or a distāce, as vn gran Tratto, a great distance. Also a draught of drinke, a whiffe, Looke Inanzi tratto. Also a drawing in length, a space. a countrie, a coaste, a region, a trace, or reach, a course, a deriuing. Tratto di vino, a draught of wine. Trattolino, id est a little tratto. Trattório, a winde-lace, to drawe vppe heauy things. Trattoso, quicke in answers, full of quips and wittie iests. Tratto, tratto, now and then, euery foote, very often. Trauagliare, to trauell, to trouble, to mo∣lest, to labour, to toyle, to wander, to busie, to moyle, whether it be in body or minde. Trauaglio, trauell, care, trouble, labour, molestation, busines, toyling, moyling, swinke, teene. Also the name of a farri∣ers toole. Trauaglino, a factour, a pickthanke, a promoter, a dealer, a negotiator. Trauaglie, vsed by Dante as Traua∣glio. Trauaglio da buoi, an oxe-stall, or racke for oxen to feede in. Trauaglione, a painfull, laboursome, toy∣ling fellow, a drudge. Trauaglioso, laboursome, carefull, trou∣blesome, busie, tedious, toylesome. Traualcare, as Traualicare. Traualicare, to swarue, to trespasse, to transgresse, to offend. Also to passe or go downe a riuer according to the tide or streame of it, to flote down the streame, to go a drift. Traualicatore, an offender, a trespasser, a transgressour. also a floter or passer of a riuer. Trauasare, to put, remooue, or change from one vessell to another. Trauasatore, such as our wine porters be, that remooue wine from place to place. Trauato, a horse that hath two white feet of any one side. Trauariare, to raue, to trifle. Also to go out of the right way. Trauata, any compact made of beames or timber, a houell of tymber. Trauatura, a frame or ioyning togither of beames of timber. Traue, any kind of beame, transome, raf∣ter, quarter, or great peece of timber. Looke Dare la traue. Traueggole, mistaking, or seeing amis. Trauérsa, a trauers, a cortine▪ a crosse-fortune, a mishap. Also a womans saue∣garde or kirtle. Also a trauersing or thwarting ground. Also a crosse currant of waters. Also a flanker of a wall. Also a thwart or crosse-fortune. Trauersare, to crosse, to thwart, to tra∣uers. Trauérse, or Trauérsi, a kinde of scurffe in a horse. Also the trauesses of a horse. Trauérso, a crosse, a thwart, crosly, thwartly. Trauescio, a kind of faulcon so called. Al∣so a kind of small household wine. Trauersone, a thwart, ouerthwart. Also a crossebowe. Trauestire, as Strauestire. Trauestito, as Strauestito. Trauetto, a little beame, transome, raf∣ter, quarter, or such peece of timber. Tra via, betweene, or crosse the way. Trauiare, to digresse, to strait, or go out of the right waie. Also to passe or go through. Trauicello, as Trauetto. Trauio, a missing or straying out of the way. Trauisare, to aduise very well▪ Also to
ouersee amisse, to see one thing for another. Traulo, a stutterer, a stammerer, a maf∣fler, one that can scarcely vtter his words. Trauo, as Traue. Trauolare, to ouerflie, to flie beyond. Trauólgere, vólgo, vólsi, vólto, to tosse to turne, or tumble ouer. Trouólto, ouer-turned, tossed, or tum∣bled ouer. Also lame. Trazza, as Traccia. Trazzare, as Tracciare. Trazzeina, a fish called a viuer. Tre, the number of three. Treaggio, a kinde of course home spunne cloth, that shepheards vse to weare. Tre fia tre, three times three. Tre volte, thrice, three times. Tre vólte tanto, three times as much. Tre cénto, three hundreth. Trebbiano, a kinde of precious wine in Italie. Trebbiare, to mowe, to reape, to thresh, or to winnow corne. Trebbio, as Trebbiano. Also a knot, a crue, or route of good fellowes. Trebellico vino, as Trebbiano. Tre caponi, a kind of boies plaie in Italy. Trecca, a woman frutrer, costermunger, or seller of fruites. Trecciare, to plate, to tie, to tramell, or role vp in tresses as women doe their haires. Treccie, plaites, tresses, tramels, or roules of womens haires. Trecciuoli, tramels, tressels, tapes, filets, laces, or ribands to tie womens haires. Trecena, a kinde of shell-fish. Treccola, a squeamish, nice, coy, prating, skoulding woman, a skould, a rig, a flurt, a gixie. Treccolare, to prate, to prattle, to chat, to skould, to rig vp and downe as a gixie wench. Treccone, a fruitrer, or costermunger. Also a sad sullen person that neuer laugheth. a busie, prying, lurking pick∣thanke companion, one alwayes full of sutes and busines. Trecotanti, thrice as many. Tredeci, the number of thirteene. Tredecimo, the thirteenth in number. Trefoglio, as Trifoglio. Trega, as Tregua. Tregare, as Treguare. Tregénda, as Versiera. Treggéa, all manner of small comfets as biskets and carowaies. Also such little sticks or strawes as birds build their nests with. Treggia, a sledge or cart without wheeles. Treggiéia, a remedie against poison cal∣led treacle. Treglia, a fish called a Barble. Some take it to be the Mullet. Tregliuzza, a little Barble or a Mul∣let fish. Tregua, a truce, a league, an atonement, a peace, rest, repose, or quiet. Treguare, to make a truce, a league, a peace, an agreement, or atonement. Tremaccio, as Tremaruola. Tremante, trembling, shaking, shiue∣ring, chilling, quiuering, quauering, chattring or quaking. Also wauering or warbling. Tremare, to tremble, to shake, to quiuer, to shiuer, to be chill, to quauer, to chat∣ter for cold, to quake, to wauer, to warble. Tremarina, as Tremaruola. Tremaruóla, a shiuering, a trembling, a quaking, a chilnes, a shaking or qui∣uering for cold, a quauering, a chat∣tring. Also great feare. Also an earth∣quake. Tremazzo, as Tremaruola. Tremebondo, as Tremendo. Treméndo, dreadfull, redoubted, feare∣full, that troubleth much. Tremiscere, misco, miscei, muto, as Tremare, but properlie to tremble or quake for feare, to shake and be sore afraide. Tremuto, shaken, trembled, quiuered, quauered for, or through feare. Trèmito, as Tremaruola. Tremo, as Tremaruóla. Trémola, a kinde of thin plate like gold that vintners vse to adorne their bushes with. Tremolante, as Tremante. Also a stop in musicke called the quauering, waue∣ring or warbling stop. Also goldfoyle, thin leaues of gold, of siluer, or other mettals. Also aglets or spangles. Tremolare, as Tremare, but properly to quauer, to wauer, or warble. Tremolo, as Tremante. Also as Sgramfo. Tremoloso, as Tremolante. Tremore, as Tremauola. Tremoto, an earthquake. Trempella, as Stempella. Tempellare, as Stempellare. Trempellino, a tressle of a table. Trémulo, as Tremante. Trenta, the number of thirtie. Trenta paia, il trenta paia, a curse they vse in Italy, as if one should say all the diuels in hell take thee. Trentauécchia, as Trentina. Trentena, the number of thirtie, one and thirtie. Trentina vecchia, an old trot, an old beldam. Also a number of thirtie. Trentuniera, a woman that hath bin occupide by 31. men. Trentuniere, one of the one and thirtie that hath occupide a woman. Trentuno, one and thirtie. Also a game at cards called one and thirtie, or else the game on the head. Also a punishment inflicted by ruffianly fllowes vppon raskalie whores in Italy, who (as we pump them in England) so they cause them to be occupide one and thirtie times by one and thirtie seuerall base raskalie companions. Also an occupying of one and thirtie times to such a colmon hedge whore or ouer-ridden iade, as we say in England a pumping of a common whore. Trepese, a kinde of hearbe called orage, or orache. Trepidare, to feare, to dread, to be feare∣full, or quake for feare, to be or make astonied or amazed. Trepidatione, feare, dread, fearefulnes, or trembling for feare. Trépido, timorous, fearefull, faint-harted, trembling for feare, astonied or amazed for feare. Trepiedi, or Trepiè, a triuet of iron as they vse in kitchens. Also a threefooted stoole or pot, any thing that hath three feete, as a tressle. Treppare, to tickle, to wantonize, to dal∣lie, to dandle, or iest with. Treppese, an hearbe called orache or orage. Treppo, a tickling, a dalliance, a wanto∣nizing, a iest. Trepudio, as Tripudio. Tresca, a kind of antike, or morice dance, a iest, a daliance. Trescare, to iest, to dallie, to dandle, to dance, to hop, to skip. Trescata, as Fagiolata. Trescatore, a iester, a dallier, a dandler, a morice dancer. Trespido, a tressell, or a three-footed stoole. Tréspito, as Trespido. Tréspodo, as Trespido. Trespolo, as Trespido. Trespeggio, a rumbling, crackling, or ratling noise. Also a route, or crue of good fellowes. Tretanto, three times as much. Treuella, as Triuella. Treuellare, as Triuellare. Treuellino, as Triuellino. Treuisco, a kind of shrub whereon Cocu∣lus
India groweth. Tre vólte piu, three times as much, or more. Trezzare, as Trecciare. Trezze, as Treccie. Triaca, a remedie against poyson, called treacle. Triade del cielo.   Triafarmaco, a kinde of plaister vsed among horse leaches. Triangolare, three angular▪ hauing three corners, three cornered. Triangolo, a triangle, a figure that hath three corners. Triarij, souldiers among the Romans that alwaies fought in the rereward, and were the strongest men: they fought euer standing and bowing somewhat their knees, as if they would rather die then remooue their places. Tribali, a kinde of weapon or engine of warre. Tribbiano, as Trebbiano. Tribbiare, as Trebbiare. Also to shake for feare. Tribilio, a kinde of measure vsed in Greece. Tribo, as Tribu. Tribolare, to loyter or go gazing idlie vp and down. Also to teaze clothes. Also to trouble, to molest, to afflict, to vexe, to oppresse. Also to stir togither. Also to breake, to thresh or to bruise with a flaile. Tribolatione, tribulation or trouble of mind, anguish, griefe or paine. Tribolo, a kind of thistles, bur or teazls to teaze or scrape clothes with, called land calthrops. Also caltrops vsed in war to pricke horses feete. Looke Tri∣bulo. Tribracho, a foote in verse of three short syllables. Tribu or Tribo, the 35. part of the people of Rome, bicause the whole number of citizens was deuided in 35. tribes, we may call them tribes, bands, wardes or hundreds. It seemeth that in old time the same people were deuided into three parts onely, and that this name Tribu did first rise thereof. Tribuire, buisco, buito, to giue, to fa∣uour, to attribute, to ascribe vnto, to set much by, to esteeme or account, to impute vnto, to graunt, to bestow, to apply or yeeld vnto. Tribula, as Tribolo. Tribulare, as Tribolare. Tribulatione, as Tribolatione. Tribule, one of the same band or warde, and as some thinke one of the same stock, tribe or kindred. Tríbulo, a kinde of weapon like a flaile. Also caltrops vsed in war to pricke hor∣ses feete; they are so made with fower prickes of iron that which way soeuer they be cast one pricke standeth vp. Also as Tribolo. Tribuna, a tribunall or royall court, a guild-hall, a court or seat of iustice or iudgement. Tribunale, a iudgement or tribunall seat, a iudgement seat. Tribunato, the office or dignitie of a tri∣bune, the protectorship of the commons. Tribunitio, of or belonging to the tribune. Also he that hath been tribune. Tribuno, an officer among the Romans hauing chiefe iurisdiction among the commons, a protector of the commons, which office was appointed to maintaine the liberties and benefits of the commons against the power of the nobles, and for that cause had the gates of their houses alwaies standing open both night and daie, a tribune. Tributare, to bring to subiection, to sub∣iect, to make or cause to pay tribute vn∣to. Also to pay tribute to one. Tributario, tributarie, that payeth tri∣bute. Tributione, a giuing, a dealing, a distri∣bution. Tribúto, a tribute or money raised vpon the goods of subiects according to their abilitie. Triccare, to shuffle, to iumble, to trip, to stumble, to stagger. Also to goe a shuf∣fling or racking pace. Also to trifle, to iest or loytringly spend the time, to toye with trifling words. Triccatina, a kind of tripping dance vsed in Italy. Also a nimble dancing wench, a trifling, iesting wench. Tricche tacche, a kind of game at tables called tick-tacke. Triccolare, to feede hungerly, to make good cheare, to fare well, to tipple, to quaffe. Triccolo, a fruterer, a costermunger, a huckster. Triccone, as Treccone. Trichiasi, a disease in womens paps that giue sucke, which commeth by drinking downe of some haire. Also a cleft about the backe bone running out in length, but so small that it cannot be seene, and oftentimes it causeth death. Trico, a kind of stone that hath 3. diuers colours in it, at the root it is black, in the middle sanguine, and at the top white. Tricomene, the hearbe maiden-haire or goldi-locks. Tridénte, a three forked mace, any wea∣pon or toole hauing three teeth, any toole or instrument that hath three teeth. Tridramma, a coyne of three drages in Greece. Triduano, of three dayes continuance. Triegua, as Tregua. Trieguare, as Treguare. Triemare, as Tremare. Triemito, as Tremito. Trienne, that hath three yeeres. Also a small coine about the value of a far∣thing. Trienza, a pitch-forke, a dung-forke. Trienzetta, a little pitch-forke or dung-forke. Trifatdico, that is a great prophet. Triface, a darte or quarell three cubits long shot out of a Catapulta. Trifauce, hauing three throtes or mouthes, as Cerberus had. Trifóglio, three-leafed-grasse. Some call it trefoyle or suckles. Trifórme, that hath three formes or three shapes. Trigamo, he that hath had three wiues. Trigémino, three children at a birth, or one of those children. Also three fold. Trigesimo, the thirtieth in number. Triggéa, as Treggéa. Triglia, as Treglia. Triglite, a fish called a mullet. Also a stone of the colour of a mullet. Triglifo, grauen hollow like three gut∣ters or furrowes, as we see in wainscot workes. Trigonale, three cornered or that hath three corners. Trigonia, the third age. Trigono, a triangle, three cornered, ha∣uing three corners. Also a fish called a thorne-backe. Trigoli, a kind of fruit in Italy. Some take it for a kind of thistles. Trilingue, one that speakes three langua∣ges. Also three forked. Also one that hath three toongs. Trilustre, containing three lustres, that is fifteenth yeeres. Trimacro, a foote in meeter of three long syllables. Trimétri, a verse of three measures, which are sixe feete, as Iambikes. Trinare, to chirp as a swallow. Trinario, cōsisting of the number of three. Trinca, a game at cards called swig or new cut. Trincare, as Tracannare. Also to trim or smug vp. Nuoua di trinca, as we vse to say spike and span new.
Trincato, fine, neate, smug, feat, trickesie, trim, craftie, wily, slie, subtile, spruse. Trincéa, a trench, a dike, or askonce about a camp or fort. Trinceare, to intrench, to inskonce, to for∣tifie with trenches. Trinchtto, a small saile in a ship called a trinket. Trinci, gardings, fringings, lacings, iag∣gings, hemmings, weltings or other or∣naments of garments. Also cuts, iags, or snips in garments. Trinciante, a caruer at a noble mans boord. Also keene, or sharpe. Also a caruing knife. Trinciare, to cut, to carue, to slice, to break vp or shread any meate, to mince. Trine, cuts, iags, snips, or such cutting or pinching, pinckt worke in garments. Trine velutate, a kind of silken stuffe so called. Trinepote, he that is three lineall descents from my childs child. Trinézza, she that is three lineall descents from my childs child. Trinfare, to chirp as a swallow. Trini, three togither. Also two treis vpon the dice cast at once. Trinità, the holie Trinitie, the number of three. Also a kind of hearbe called He∣patica. Looke Hepatica. Trino, trine, consisting of three, three∣folde. Trinomio, of three names. Trinsare, to chirp as a swallow. Trinzante, as Trinciante. Trióbolo, a coyne in greece of three oboles worth about two pence sterlin, a dan∣diprat. Trione, seauen starres being in the north, called Charles waine. Triomfale, triumphant, vide Corona, of or belonging to triumph. Trionfante, triumphant, reioycing. Trionfare, to triumph, to reioyce, to get the conquest. Also to reioyce greatlie. Also to trump at cards. Trionfatore, a triumpher, a reioycer. Trionfetti, a game at cardes as our trump. Trionfo, triumph, ioy, gladnes, which is a solemne pomp or shew at the returne of a captaine for some victorie gotten. Also a trump at cards, or the play cal∣led trump or ruff. Triorca, a kinde of the herbe centorie. Triorco, a kinde of hawke, named so be∣cause it feedes vpon Triorca, which is sayd to haue three stones. Triotalmo, a stone hauing the figure of three eyes in it. Tripe, as Trippe. Tripara, as Trippara. Triparco, verie sparing, niggish. Tripartire, to deuide in three parts. Tripartito, tripartite, deuided in three partes. Tripedale, that hath three feete, or is three foote long. Tripettore, thrice breasted, or that hath three breasts. Triplicare, to treble, to triple, to put three together, to fold a thing three times. Triplicatione, a tripling, or folding, or doing thrice. Triplice, triple, treble, three-fould, or three together. Triplo, triple, three-fould. Tripode, a kinde of musicall instrument. Also a three-fooed stoole, a treuet, a tressle. Tripolio, the hearbe Serapions turbith, the roote whereof is thought to be Tur∣bith, vsed to purge fleagme. Some call it blue camomill or blue dasies. Tripolo, a toole that stone-cutters vse. Tripone, as Trippone. Trippaccie, filthie foule tripes. Trippa, a kinde of tripe veluet that they make womēs saddles with called fustian of Naples. Trippara, a tripe-woman. Trippe, all manner of tripes or souse. Trippone, a filthie, foule, fat, greasie, gorbellied man. Triptoti, nounes hauing but three ca∣ses. Tripudiare, to dance, to trip on the toes. Tripudij, dancing of birds or trippings, trippings on the toes. Tripudio, a kind of foolish countrie dance or tripping on the toe. Trireme, a gallie of three oares on a banke or side. Trisagio.   Trisciato, smooth, vp-straight, smug, smirke, handsomlie drest vp. Trisilabo, of three sillables. Trissa, a kinde of grate of timber which some ships haue for an vpper deck. Trissagine, the hearbe Germander, after some the vpright Verueine, or as some call it Chamaepitus. Tristacciuolo, as Tristanzuólo. Tristamente, sadlie, pensiuely. Also bad∣lie, naughtilie, or craftilie. Tristanzuolo, a wearish, crazed, sicklie man. Also a craftie, slye, knauish wag. Tristaréllo, somewhat knauish, wilie, or craftie. Also sad, discontent, hea∣uie, or pensiue. Also a kestrell. Looke Tristo. Tristezza, knauishnes, craftines, subtil∣nes. Also sadnes, heauines, pensiuenes, sorowfulnes. Tristinculo, a kestrell. Tristitia, as Tristezza. Tristitiuóle, little knaueries or trum∣peries. Tristo, sad, discontent, grieued, melan∣cholie, pensiue, heauie, full of discomfi∣ture, sorowfull, wofull, of much graui∣tie, vnpleasant. Also knauish, wilie, craftie, subtle, malicious, deceitfull, slye. Trisulca, hauing three edges, or three-forked, an arrow-headed tongue. Trita, tender, or mortified. Also small, minced, or common, worne and beaten small. Tritale, an herbe which thrice a yeare hath flowres. Tritamente, by piecemeale, mincinglie, smallie, commonlie vsed. Tritamento, a mincing, a wearing, or cutting small. Tritare, to bruze, to weare, to champ, to stamp, to cut, to crumble, to slice, to shread, or mince as small as may be. Also to grinde or thresh corne, to weare to nothing. Tritaua, Tritauola, a great grandmo∣thers mother. Tritauo, Tritauolo, a great grandfa∣thers father. Tritéllo, a kinde of ranged bread. Tritéo, a kinde of measure. Tritéra, as Fagiolata. Tritico, all manner of corne that may be ground, we call it in english greest, but it is properly red wheate. Tritinare, to cry or hisse as a goose or a duck. Trito, small, minced, worne, made in dust, common, vsuall, homely, ouercome, olde, threadbare, broken, wasted, much vsed. Also the acte of breaking, brusing, thre∣shing or grinding. Tritolare, as Tritare. Tritolo, as Trito. Also as Boccata. Tritono, consisting of three tuns. Tritoni, a kind of serpents, tritons. Triturare, as Tritare. Trituratura, any kind of grinding small. Looke Trito. Triuélla, a wimble, an agre or a boarer. Triuellure, to boare through with an agre. Triuellino, a little wimble or agre. Triuéllo, a wimble, an agre or a boarer. the boare of a cannon. Triuellone, a boaring iron to boare
a canon. Triuiale, common, vsed, homely, triuiall, vsed or taught in high waies, of small estimation. Triuialita, homelines, triuiality. Triuio, a place that lookes three waies, or where three sundrie waies doe meete, a way that passeth outright, and par∣teth on the left and on the right side. Also a market place where com∣mon people do meete, and where com∣mon resort is. Also a cottage or poore countrie house. Triumuirale, of or belonging vnto the office of Triumuiro. Triumuirato, the office of three in like authoritie. Triumuiro, one of the three officers that are in equall and like auctoritie. Triuolo, a kinde of burre, bramble, or thistle. Some haue taken it for mourne∣full. Triuoloso, full of thistles, brambles, or burres. Also mournefull. Trochéo, a foote in a verse consisting of two feete, the first a long sillable and the last a short, so called of swiftnes in run∣ning, and because it was fit for dan∣cing. Trochilo, a wren. It is also another kind of water-fowle friend to the Crocodile, some take it for a wagtaile, because it doth continuallie wag the taile, other∣some for a sea-wood-cock because it hath a long bill. Trochisci, any kinde of medicine made round like a loase, the Apothecaries call them Trochiske. Trocciola, a pullie of a well or a ship. Also any kinde of little wooden wheele. Trocléo, a pullie wherein cords do runne, a windelace. Troféo, as Tropheo. Trogliare, as Balbezzare. Troglio, a stutting, stammering, lisping fellow. Troia, a farrowing sow. Also a common filthie whore. Troiare, to farrow, or pig as a sowe doth. Troiata, a farrowing sowe, a hog-stye. Also a sowes pigging, a farrowing. Tromba, a trump, or a trumpet. Also a sackbut. Tromba d'amore, as Coppa di Gióue. Tromba di fuóco, a kinde of casting wilde-fier vsed in warres and fights. Trombare, to sound a trumpet, to busse, to make a rumbling noise. Trombattore, a trumpeter. Trombeggiare, to sound a trumpet, or to play vpon a sackbut. Also to pro∣claime. Also to snort, to trump or bray as an asse. Trombeggiata, any marche or point of warre sounded vpon a trumpet. Trombeggiatore, a trumpeter. Trombetta, a trumpet, a trump. Also a trumpeter. Trombettare, as Trombeggiare. Trombettaro, a trumpeter. Trombettéro, a trumpeter. Trombettiero, a trumpeter. Tromboncino, a treble or meane sack∣but. Trombone, a bace or great sackbut, a great trump. Also a fowle called a Bittor. Troncare, to cut off, to clip, to pare, to curtall, to cut short, to abridge, to mayme. Troncato, cut off, clipped, pared, cur∣talled, cut short, abridged, maymed, mangled, vnperfect. Tronco, as Troncato, a trunk, a stock, a log, a block, a stump, a stem without boughes. Also a bodie without a head. Also a troncheon or a bat. Also a log∣gerheaded felow, a block-headed dunce, a heauie-nole. Troncone, a great Tronco. Troncoli, the vailes of a cooke, the giblets or shreds of meate or fowle. Tronfare, to puffe, to swell, to blowe vp. Also to trumpe at cardes. Tronfiare, as Tronfare. Tronfiezza, a puffing swelling, or huf∣fing. Tronfio, puffed, swolne, full, blowne vp Also a trumpe at cards, a game at cards called trumpe. Tronfo, as Tronfio. Tronera, a loope hole, a spike hole to shoot out at. Trono, a throne or seate of maiestie. Tronzoli, the dung or truttles of any cat∣tle, as of sheepe. Trophéo, a trophey, a signe or token of victorie, anie spoiles gotten from the enimie kept in signe of victorie, a marke or token set vp where a victorie was had, and where enimies were vanqui∣shed, with their harnes or other spoiles hanged on it, a braue, a victorie for ioy. Also vsed for a certaine winde moo∣uing and stirring, which comes from the sea to the land. Tropéllo, a troupe, a route, a croude, a crue, a band, or company of people. Tropiccare, to stumble, to trip, to fall, or tumble downe. Tropicciare, as Stropicciare. Trópici, two great circles in heauen being of equall distance from the Equator, the one is called Tropico di Capricorno, the other Tropico di Cancro, at the which the sunne turneth either higher hauing beene at the lowest, or lower ha∣uing beene at the highest, whereof they haue their names. Trópico, figuratiue. Trópo, a figure, a manner or fashion of speaking. Tropologia, a figuratiue speech or spea∣king. Tropólio, a kinde of hearbe. Troppa, a troope, a squadron, or band of men. Tróppi, too manie, ouer-manie. Tróppo, too much, ouer-much, super∣fluous. Tróppo grande, too great. Etróppo, it is too much. Tróscia, a flow of water, a sinke. Also a small standing water. Also a violent showre of raine. Trosciare, to showre downe violently. Also to grow to a standing water. Tróta, as Truta, or Trutta. Trótta, as Truta, or Trutta. Trottante, trotting, a trotting horse. Al∣so drudging, a drudge. Trottare, to trot, to goe a trotting pace, to trudge. Trottatore, a trotter, a trotting horse, a trudger. Trottiera, a place where horses learne to trot. Also a word much vsed in Venice about their magistrates. Trottino, a trotting nag. Trótto, a trot, or trotting pace. Trottolare, to turne round as a top or a gigge. Also to rack or goe a shuffling pace, that is neither an able nor a trot. Tróttolo, a racking or shuffling pace, a top or a gigge to play with. Also a kind of fish. Trottone, a trotter, a trotting horse. Trouadélli, findlings, children found, findings. Trouare, to finde, to deuise, to inuent, to imagine, to get, to obtaine, to procure, to seeke out. Trouato, found, deuised, inuented, ima∣gined, gotten, obtained, procured, sought out. Also a deuice, an inuention, a con∣ceit, an imagination, an excuse. Trouatore, a finder, an inuentor, a deui∣ser. Also vsed for a poet or actor. Trozzare, as Strozzare. Also to tread a path. Trozzetto, a little path or narrow way.
Trózzo, a path or common high troden way. Trucca, a fustian or rogish word for a trull, a whore, or a wench. Trucca bocca.   Trucca coltelli.   Truccare, to truck, to barter, to change ware for ware, to swab. Also to trudge, to skud, or pack away, to chop and change. Also to play at billiards. Trucco, a kinde of play with balles vpon a table called billiards, but properly a kinde of game vsed in England with casting little bowles at a boord with thirteene holes in it. Truculento, cruell, fell, grim, gastlie, grislie, horrid in lookes, rough, terrible. Truculentia, crueltie. Truce, Trucido, cruell, fierce, terrible, dreadfull or rough. Trucidare, to kill, to murther, to slea in most cruell and bloody maner. Trucidatione, a killing or murthering in most cruell maner. Trucitare, the voice of the mauis or thrush Truffa, a cosening, cheating, conicatching, pilfring, crosbiting or purloying tricke. Truffare, to cosen, to cheat, to concatch, to crosbite, to pilfer or purloyne. Truffaria, as Truffa. Truffaruóla, a cosening, cheating or co∣nicatching wench. Truffaréllo, a craftie, cosening, cheating, conicatching, filching knaue. Truffatore, a cosener, a cheater, a crosbi∣ter, a conicatcher, a pilfrer, a filcher. Truffoli, a kinde of paste-meate vsed in Italy. Truggiolare, to tug, to touze, to hale. Truogo, Truogola, a trough to feede swine in. Trulla, a close stoole▪ vsed also for a traie of wood or bread washing bowle, or a woo∣den broad cup or mazor to drinke in. Trullare, to go to a close stoole, to cacke, to fart, to breake wind behind. Trullo, a roch-fish. Truóuare, as Trouare. Truóuato, as Trouato. Trusciare, to blurt with ones lips or toong to incourage a horse in managing him. Also to pop. Truscio di labbra, a blurting with ones toong or lip to incourage a horse, a pop∣ping with ones lips. Truta, Trutta, a fish called a trout, a Sal∣mon trout or a Salmon peale. Trutilare, as Trutillare. Trutillare, to sing as a thrush or a blacke birde. Trutina, a diligent examination or consi∣dering, a good aduise or iudgement. Trutinare, to weigh or examine, to consi∣der well and throughly. Tu, thou, thy selfe. Tua, thine, thine owne. Tuare, to thou a man, to make thine. Tuba, a trump or a trumpet. Tubercoli, a little swelling or push, a pim∣ple or wheale. Tubero, a puffe growing on the ground like a mushrome or toade stoole. Also a swelling in a mans body, a bunch, a knob, a round rising commonly with a fall. al∣so a knot in a tree. Tubertana, in French Granate. Tubo, a pipe wherein water is conueied to a conduit. Also the pipe wherethrough the marrow of the backe bone runneth. Tucia, as Tutia. Tudice, a printers inke bals, called pum∣ping bals, wherewith they beat the let∣ters in the forme lying vpon the presse. Also a printing iron. Tudone, a fowle called a bittor. Tuéllo, part of a horses foote. Tuffare, to diue, to ducke or plunge vnder water, to dampe, to smoother, to stifle. Tuffata, a diuing, a ducking or plunging vnder water. Tuffo, as Tuffata. Also a damp or loth∣some smell comming out of some dunge∣on. Also a turfe, a clod or lump of earth to burne▪ also a kind of blacke stone that is verie soft and mouldring. Tuffolare, as Tuffare. Also to feed, to cram or pamper or make fat. Tuffolotta guancia, a plum, round, apple checke. fat or pampred. Tufo, a kind of soft crumbling or moldring quarrie stone to build with. Tugurio, a sherpherds cottage, bully or shead, a house in the countrey. Tugurietto, a little homely shepherds cottage. Tul, for Tuil, as Tulfaceti, thou didest it, thout it. Tulipa, an herbe called little Narcissus. Túmere, to swell, to rise, to puffe vp, to in∣crease or burst out. Also to waxe proud, stately and disdainfull. Tumidamente, swellingly, puffingly, proudly, haughtily, disdainfully. Tumidezza, as Tumore. Also surque∣drie. Tumidire, disco, dito, to swell, to fester, to rankles to puffe vp. Also to become proud and disdainfull. Tumido, swollen, risen, festred or puffed vp. Also proud, disdainfull or haugh∣tie-minded, loftie. Tumolo, a tombe, a graue or a sepulchre, a hearse. Also a little hill, hillock or bar∣row, a heape of any thing. Tumore, a swelling, a rising, a puffing vp, a festring. Also loftines, pride, disdaine or haughtines. Also an inflammation, a rising of flesh by some malicious matter or ill humor. Tumorosità, as Tumore. Tumoroso, full of swelling, festring or inflammation. Tumulo, as Tumolo. Tumulto, a tumult, a sedition, a hurly-burly, a ruffling, a busines, stir, trouble or broile, that riseth of a great feare, sedi∣tion, insurrection, commotion of people, great noise and broile, vprore or muti∣nie. Tumultuante, as Tumultuoso. Tumultuare, to raise a tumult, an vp∣rore, a sedition or a hurly-burly, to ruf∣fle, to make a tumult, ruffling, stir or bu∣sines, to storme, to trouble, to be in an vprore. Tumultuario, that is done in haste with∣out aduisement, that is done suddenly and without feare, hastie, vnorderly, suddenly, rashly, made or hudled vp in haste, tumultuous, ruffling. Tumultuatione, a tumult, a trouble or busines, a ruffling or stirring in a sud∣den feare. Tumultuoso, tumultuous, seditious, tur∣bulent, ruffling, full of busines, trouble, and ruffling, troublous, that stirreth to sedition, busie, full of that which causeth hurly-burly, broile and stir, rough and tempestuous. Tunara, fishing for tunnies. Tunica, as Tonaca, or Tonica. Tune, a ginnie-hen. Túo, thine, thine owne. Tuò, take, hold, catch, haue to thee. Tuoi, thine, thine owne. Tuonare, to thunder to rumble, to tune, to sound or giue a true accent. Tuonante, thundring, rumbling, tuning, sounding, accenting. Tuoneggiare, as Tuonare. Tuóno, a thunder, a rumbling, a tune, a note, a sound, an accent. Tuor, Tuorre, as Tóglicre, or Tórre. Tuordo, Tuordello, as Tordo. Tuórlo, as Torlo. Tuósa, a purse of money in rogues lan∣guage or pedlers french. Tuppo, the docke or the rump of a horses taile. Turaccio, a stopple, a bung, a muffler. Also a skouring sticke for a piece of or∣dinance. Turacciolo, as Turaccio.
Turaglio, as Turaccio. Turare, to stop, to muffle, to dam vp. Turba, the common people, a multitude, a rout, a crue or croud of people, an assem∣bly of people, a throng, a swarme, a rab∣ble or rout, the many-headed-monster multitude. Also trouble, debate, stur or ruffling. Turbamento, a perturbation, trouble or molestation of the mind. Turbante, a turbāt, that is a round wrea∣thed round attire of white linnen, as all the Turkes weare on their head. It is iust like a top or gig that children play with∣all turned vpside downe. Turbare, to trouble, to molest, to disturb or mooue, to anger, to stir, to ruffle, to disorder, to confound and make vn∣quiet. Turbato, troubled, molested, disturbed, vexed, angrie, stirred, mooued, ruffled, disordred, confounded, and made vn∣quiet. Turbe, troubled, fatall, duskie, gloomie, darke. Also turfes or turues of earth to burne. Turbidare, as Torbidare. Turbido, as Torbido. Turbinare, to make round and sharpe like a top. Turbinatione, the fashion of a thing broad aboue and small beneath, like a top. Turbinato, round, or sharpe like a toppe, broad aboue and small beneath, contra∣rie to a turbant. Turbine, a whirle winde, a gust, a berrie, or flawe, or sodaine blast of winde, a boystrous storme or tempest, or winde beating downe trees and houses. Also a breaker & disturber. also a tempest and danger. Also furie and sodaine rage. also a whirle-poole, a violent and great ruinous streame. Also a toppe, gigge or nunne that children plaie with, a whir∣legigge. Also a bird called a wrie-neck. Also a woodpecker, or specht. Also a shell-fish called a welke or wrinkle. Also a still or stillatorie, a limbecke. Tubinéo, of, or belonging to a storme and blustring winde, or whirling rounde. Turbistro, a thing mixt with liquor wherewith wooll is died, which maketh the die sinke into the wooll. Turbith, a roote vsed in phisicke to purge fleame. Turbo, as Turbine. Also as Trottola. Turbolente, as Torbolénte. Turbolénza, as Torbolénza. Turbone, a ruffler, a swaggrer, a swash-buckler, a tistitostie, a ruffian. Turbulénte, as Torbulénte. Turcasso, a quiuer to put in arrowes. Al∣so a goldsmiths case or boxe for his poun∣ces. Turchesa, a blue precious stone called a Turkoise. Turchesca, as Turchesa. Also turkish. Turchimano, as Torcimano. Turchina, as Turchesa. also blue, azure, or skie colour. Turchino, blue, azure, watchet, or bisse colour. Turcimano, as Torcimanno. Turdélla, as Tordo. Turdo, as Tordo. Turco, a Turke, a turkie horse. Turesia, as Turchesa. Túrgere, turgo, turgei, turgiuto, to swel, to puffe, to fester, to blow vp, to rankle, to burgen and growe, and waxe bigge, and swell for anger. Turgiuto, swolne, puffed, festred, blowne vp. Looke Túrgere. Turgido, swollen, puffed vp, risen, inflate, bigge, strouting out. Turibolo, as Toribolo. Turini, a kinde of mushrums, or toades stooles. Turma, a troupe, a crue, or companie of men, as Turba▪ but properly, a compa∣nie or troupe of souldiers containing 32 horsemen. Turluru, a foole, a gull, a ninnie, a patch. Turpe, filthie, dishonest, shamefull, foule, vnlawfull, reprochfull, vnhonorable. Turpidire, disco, dito, to beraie, to de∣file, to pollute, to dishonest, to deface, to bring out of good fashion, to disfigure. Turpilla, as Sgramfo. Turpitudine, filthines, dishonestie, shame, reproch, villanie, deformitie, rebuke, ill-fauourednes. Turpore, as Torpore. Tuso, brused, beaten, or stamped. Tussilagine, an herbe good for the cough called folefoote, or coltesfoote, horsefoot, or bull-foote. Called also of the apothe∣caries Vnghia cauallina, or Vnghia di cauallo, it hath leaues like Iuie, but bigger, with many corners, the vpper parte green, the neather whitish, and li∣eth flat on the ground. Tussire, Tussito, as Tossire. Tutela, a wardship, a gardianship, or cu∣stodie of a childe in his noneage. Also tuition, safe-keeping, protection, de∣fending. Tutelare, to garde, to keepe, or protect a childe. Also of or belonging to protecti∣on, to a gardian, or to the custodie of a warde, or to defence. Tutelina, the goddesse hauing the tuition of corne. Tutthora, at all houres or times. Tutia, a kind of medicinable stone or dust good for bruses, called Tutie, which is the heauier foyle of brasse that clea∣ueth and sticketh to the higher places of fornaces or melting houses. Tutilare, to sing as a black-birde or a thrush. Tuto, sure, safe, secure, out of danger, de∣fended from perill. Tutore, a tutor, a gardian, a protectour, a defender, he that hath the tuition of a warde. Tutória, a tutorship, a protection. Tutta fiata, still, alwaies, continually, euermore. Also neuerthelesse, or yet. Tutta via, as Tutta fiata. Tutta via che, notwithstanding that, whensoeuer that. Tutta volta, as Tutta fiata. Tutto, all, altogither, the whole, euerie whit or iot. Tutto che, all that, whatsoeuer that. Tuttocio, all that, whatsoeuer that. Tutto a vntratto, all at once, all at a caste. Tutto per tutto, as Tututto. Tutto quanto, as Tututto. Tutto in sapore, louing earnestly, euen till ones teeth run a water. Tutto di, all day long. Tutto sella, the ful time of a mans or hor∣ses perfection in ryding. Looke Huomo and Cauallo. Tutto solo, all alone. Tuttuno, all one, all alike. Tutulo, the top of the haire wounden with a purple lace, or the crowne of a matrons head, proper to the high priests wife to discerne hir from other women. Tututto, altogither, euerie whit and deale. V V, Where? whether? there, thither. Also you. Va, go, go thou. Also he goeth. Vacalsuth, a tree in America that bea∣reth a frute, in forme like a mans hart and smelleth most sweete. Vacante, vacant, voide of, being without. Also that is at leysure, at good leysure, as though he had nothing to do. Vacanza, vacation, vacancie, leisure, cea∣sing from labour or common busines. vacation of time, ceasing, exemption,
immunitie, dispensation. Vacare, to cease or giue ouer labour, to haue or be at leisure. Also to endeauour or applie the time, and studie to anie thing, to attend and giue his mind and diligence to a thing. Also to be emptie, voide, cleere or without. Vacatione, as Vacanza. Vacca, a cowe. Also a kind of fish. Vaccamente, like a cowe, whorishlie, beastly. Vaccareccia, cowish, beastly, filthie, or cowe-beefe. Vaccarélla, as Vacchetta. Vaccaro, a coweheard, a neate-heard. Vaccheggiare, to play the cowe, the beast or filthie whore. Vacchetta, a little heifer, or yoong cowe. Also neates leather. Vacciare, to speede, to hasten, to ridde, to dispatch. Vaccina, as Vacchetta. Vaccina, of a cowe or neates leather. Also cowes flesh, or beefe. also of or belonging to a cowe. Vaccinio, as Vacinio. Also cowes cheese. Vaccio, speedilie, quickly, hastilie, out of hand. Vaccinari, the fruites of brambles. black∣berries. Vacconaccia, a filthie great cowe, a com∣mon strumpet, a filthie whore. Vacérra, a raile or perclose made of tim∣ber, wherein something is closed. Also a stake or post wherunto horses be tide in stables. Vacile, a basen to wash hands in, a lauer. Vacillare, to wauer, to be fickle, to stag∣ger, to totte, to mooue inconstantly, not to stande sure, to reele or stagger, to shake, to wagge, or wauer, to be loose and vnconstant. Vacillamento, inconstancie, wauering, ficklenes, mutabilitie, a totting, a wag∣ging. Vacillante, vnconstant, vnperfect, fickle, staggring, wauering, tottring, reeling, mutable. Vaccillatione, as Vacillamento. Vacinio, the fruite of the great bramble, a black-berrie, a whort, or whortle ber∣rie. Some take it for the sweete violet, garden violet, or marsh violet. Other∣some for the flower of the herbe Hiacin∣thus or crowe-toes, Vacinio palustre, a fen-berrie, or marsh whort. Vacuare, to emptie, or voide, to make hol∣low. Vacutà, vacuitie, emptines, voidenes, hol∣lownes, cleerenes, or freedome from. Vacuo, voide, emptie, idle and vaine, waste, hollow, open and wide, carelesse, free, deuoide, that bringeth no profite, quiet and free, not letted or troubled with any occupation or busines, at lai∣sure, hauing nothing to do, voyde of care, deliuered, free or exempt from. Vada, let him go, let it go, a worde at pri∣mero, as we say passe, let it go, or plaie. Vadare, to wade, to foarde or passe ouer a water. Also to go or runne as a riuer doth. Vadetti, narrow wading places or foards. It is also taken for button holes. Vadia, some kinde of mournefull habite that the widowes in Venice weare. Vadimónio, a promise or bonde of appee∣rance before a iudge at a day appointed, a day of appearance. Vado, any foard, frrie, passage, or wading place, a shallowe place, where men and beasts may go ouer a foote or wade through without danger. Also taken for the sea. Also the first person singular of the present tence of the Indicatiue mood of the verbe Andare, I go, Looke Andare. Vadoso, a water that may be waded ouer by man or beast without danger. full of foardes or shallow places. Also fennie, watrish, deepe, moorish, plashie, or bog∣gie. Vadrito, a birde that seemes to chirpe Va∣drito. Vaframento, a crafte, a guile, a wile. Vafro, craftie, wilie, guilefull. Vagabondo, a vagabond, wandring, gadding, ranging, rouing or roguing idly about or vp and downe. Also a rogue or earth planet, or a faitour. Vagame, as Vagabondo. Vagante, as Vagabondo, wandring from place to place, now in one part, now in another. Vagare, to wander, to roame, to gadde, to iet, or loytre idlie vp and downe, to va∣garie, or range, to straie abroade, to go from coast to coast. Vagatione, a vagarie, a gadding, or roa∣ming of the minde, a wandring or strai∣ing about. Vagellamenti d'occhi, dimnes, mistines, or darknes, or rowling of the eies. Vagellare, to dimme, to darken, to ouer∣caste or turne vp ones eies. Vagheggiare, to beholde or viewe amo∣rouslie, to court or make loue vnto with lookes, to desire, to admire, to consider or gaze vpon with delight. Vagheggiatore, an amorous beholder, or louer, a gazer, an admirer or viewer with delight. Vaghezza, beautie, handsomnes, fauour, delite, grace, propernes, loue, delightfull admiration, amorous desire or lust. Al∣so hope. Vaghire, ghisco, ghito, as Inuaghire. Vagghire, ghisco, ghito, to crie as a hare doth. Also to houle as a woolfe. Vagghito, cride as a hare, howled as a woolfe. Vaggimento, a whining or crying of a childe. Vaggire, as Vagghire. Also to crie or whine as a childe or little infant. Vaggito, cride, or whined as a childe. the crying or whyning of infants or yoong children. Also as Vagghito. Vagillare, as Vacillare. Vagina, a sheath for a knife, a scabberde for a rapier, a case of leather. Vagimento, a whining, a crying, a wal∣ling, a howling. Vaginare, to sheath or put into a scab∣bard. Vagire, as Vaggire. Vagito, as Vaggito. Vagitamento, as Vagimento. Vagitare, to cry or whne as a little in∣fant. Vagli, sieues, fans, boulters, scarces, or win∣nowes to winnow corne with. Vaglia, woorth or value. Vagliare, to sist, to purge, to winnow, to searce. Vaglio, a sieue, a winnow, a searce, a van. Also I am worth. Also a valuation or esteeme. Vagnéle, as Guagnéle. Vago, beautifull, saire, trim, glad, hand∣some, gracefull, proper, prettie, louely, gracious, louing, gentle, comely, blithe, bonnie vnto the ere. Also buckesome, full of glee, desirous, glad, amorous, longing, delightfull, sheene, enamoured, lustie, lustfull, thirstie, couetous. Also gad∣ding or wandring vp and downe, and abiding in no place, vncertaine, roauing, vnconstant, flickering, moouing and restles, running at random, flittering. Also ones fauorite, minion, louer, ser∣uant, pigs-ney, wanton, darling, para∣mour or harts delight. Vaiaro, a surrier or a skinner. Vaio, Vai, a kind of rich furre called gray miniuer. Vaiólo, Vaiuólo, a pocke, a blane, a plague, a sore, a carbuncle, a botch, a winchester goose. Also a fish called a bace. Vairone, a fish called a cob, a quob or gud∣geon. Valanghino, the name of a smiths toole.
Val caua, vsed by Bocace for a womans priuie parts, a hollow caue or vallie. Valcare, as Valicare, as Gualcare. Valchera, as Gualca. Valco, as Vado, or Varco. Valcostura, the seame-vallie, vsed for the priuities of a woman. Valdrappa, a foote clothe to ride with∣all. Vale, vsed to bid one farewell. Also it is worth. Also as much to say. Valénte, valiant, worthie, valorous, puis∣sant, mightie, strong, in good health, that can do much, of great force, like to pre∣uaile. Also value or worth. Valentia, as Valentigia. Valentigia, value, valour, worth, valian∣cie, worthines, puissance, might, power, strength. Valentre, as Valente. Valenterie, valiant, worthie or valorous exploits. Valenza, as Valentigia, as Valore. Valenzana, a kind of saye, serge or stuffe to make curteins for beds with. Valenzana del létto, the valances of a bed. Valére, vaglio, valsi, valuto, to be worth, to preuaile, to be of value, to be able, of autoritie, of force and power, to may or can, to do much, to profite, to serue or be good for, to be strong or puissant, to be whole, to be in health, to haue the force of, to be much or greatly esteemed. Valuto, been worth, preuailed, been of va∣lue. Looke Valére. Valeriana, the herbe Valerian, capons∣taile or setwall. Valetudinario, subiect to sicknes, sickly, often sicke, queasie. Also an hospitall for sicke folkes. Valetudine, as Valitudine. Valeuole, worth, valuable, able, mightie, vaileable, of woorth. Valgio, an instrument to make floores smooth. Valgo, a man that hath his legs bowed out∣ward, narrow betweene the knees and the feete inward, that goeth like a cre∣uisse, crooked or wry in going. Valicare, to foard, to wade or ferrie ouer, to flote or go downe a riuer according to the streame and tide of it, to go a drist. Valido, strong, valiant, mightie, puissant, sturdie, able, valide, of force, in good health, that can do much, forcible. Valigia, a male, a cloke-bag, a budget, a portmanteaw. Valigiare, to put vp in a male or cloke-bag. Valigiaro, a maker of males, a budget ma∣ker, a cloke-bag maker. Also a drum∣mer. Valigietta, a little male, budget or cloke-bag. Valimento, value, worth. Valitudine, health or welfare. Also sicke∣nes or crasednes, crasines or weaknes. Vallare, to inclose, to intrench, to fortifie, or fence or hem in about. Also to de∣scend into a vallie▪. vide Corona. Also of or pertaining to a trenche or bull∣warke. Vallata, a vallie, a dale, a vale. Valle, a vale, a vallie or a dale. Valléa, as Valle. Valle di Acheronte, a womans priuie parts or gheare. Also hell Valletta, a little dale or vallie. Valletto, a varlet, a lackey, a groome, a page, a seruing boy, a squire. Vallo, a rampier, a skonce, or bulwarke made of wood, a hold or a fort, a trench made to defend an armie. Also a pole or long sparre of timber, a stake or pile or post sharpe at one end to be driuen into the ground. Vallone, a great vallie or dale. Also a strong high rampier, forte or bulwarke of wood. Looke Vallo. Valloncéllo, as Valletta. Vallonia, a kinde of barke of a tree that tanners vse to tan leathers. Valloso, full of dales and valleies, and low bottoms. Vallura, a vallie or a dale. Valóppa, a kind of monstrous shell fish somewhat like a beare. Valorare, as Aualorare. Valore, worth, value, valor, worthines, esteeme. Valorosità, as Valore. Valoroso, valorous, worthie, valiant, no∣ble, hardie. Valsénte, worth or value or valuation. Valuare, to value, to prise, to esteeme. Valuasore, a principall officer hauing some dignitie of honour about a Prince, a Lord or commander in his owne pre∣cinct, a vauoser: but sometimes nowe a daies taken in mockerie, as we say a iollie fellow, a great man. Valuolo, the shale, busk or peele of a bean. Also a pease shale or cod. Valuta, worth, value, or valuation. Vampa, a sudden flame, flash or blaze of fire. Vampare, to flame, to blaze, to flash, to burne bright or suddenly. Vanaglória, vaine-glorie or ostenta∣tion. Vanagloriare, to bragge vaine-glori∣ouslie. Vanaglorioso, vaine-glorious, brag∣ging. Vanare, as Vaneggiare. Vanazzi, buzzards wings, goose wings. Vaneggia, vanity, folly, lightnes, fondnes, doting in wordes or deeds. as Vanità. Also a voide place or grasse plot in a garden. Vaneggiare, to trifle, to raue, to play any maner of vanitie▪. to doate. Vaneggiatore, a trifler, a rauer, a foole, a fondman, a doater. Vanéllo, a bird called a lapwing. Vanezza, as Vaneggia. Vanga, a goade. Also a spade, or a mat∣tock. Also a fish called Pesce vanga. Vangaiuóla, a fishing net. Also a little goade, spade, or mattock. Vangare, to delue or digge the grounde. Also to pricke with a goade. Vangaruola, as Vangaiuola. Vangaticcio, delued, or digged grounde. Vangélio, the gospell, or gladsome ti∣dings. Vangelista, an euangelist, a gospeller, a bringer of good tidings. Vangelizzare, to preach the gospell, to bring glad tidings. Vangélo, as Vangélio. Vanghetto, as Marra. Vania, miserie, wretchednes, ruth, or silli∣nes, vanitie. Also a wrong, an iniury. Vanidico, a lyer, a teller or vaine speaker of foolish and vaine tales. Vaniloquentia, vaine talke, vaine bab∣ling. Vanire, nisco, nito, to vanish out of sight. Also to wrong, to iniurie. Also to come to miserie. Vanità, vanitie, trifling, fondnes, lightnes, leasing, lying, follie, inconstancie. Vannare, to winnow or vanne corne. Also to flutter with wings, or to fanne with feathers. Vanni, vsed for the whole wings of anie bird. Also the principall forefeathers, or sarcels of any birdes wing. Vanno, a fanne, or vanne to winnowe corne with, and to clense it from chaffe and drosse against the winde. Also they go, being the thirde person plurall of the presentence of the Indicatiue moode of the verbe Andare. Vano, vaine, voide, hollow, or emptie. Also foolish, vaine, forcelesse, frustrate, that misseth. idle, fonde, or friuolous. Also false, lying, delighting in lying and try∣fles. Also light of credite or beleefe. Also a hollow or voide place. Vantaggiare, to aduantage, to giue oddes,
to saue, to spare, to hoord vp. Vantaggiati, such souldiers as haue more paie or priuiledge then others. Vantaggio, aduantage or ods. Vantaggioso, aduantagious, hauing ods or aduantage. Vantamento, as Vanto. Vantarsi, to boast, to bragge, to glorie, to vante, to crake. Vantatore, a boaster, a bragger, a vanter, a craker. Vanto, a vante, a boaste, a glory, a bragge, a crake, an ostentation. Vapiccare, to catch, to take hold of, to fa∣sten vnto, to seaze on. Vapido, that giueth an ill smacke, that ca∣steth a vapour of an ill sauour, stinking. Vaporare, to exhale, to fume, to smoke, to vent, to euaporate, to steams, to reeke, to send out vapours, to breath. Vaporatione, a casting of vapours or hot breath, a sweating or a reaking of hot breath. Vapore, a vapour, a smoke, a fume, an exhalation, a steaming, a reaking, a hot breath. Vaporoso, full of vapours, or exhala∣tions. Vappa, wine that hath lost his force and strength, vsed also for a man in whome is no wit or reason. Vara, a kinde of grapes. Looke Vua va∣ra. Also a post set vpright with a forke in the vpper end to beare vp another post ouerlaid. Varare, to lanch a ship from out the dock into the water. Varcare, to wade, passe, foard, or ferrie ouer any water, as Vadare. Varco, a foard, a ferrie, a passage, or wading place of any riuer, as Vado, Looke Vado. Also a kinde of measure in Italy. Vardare, as Guardare. Vare, net shoares, little forkes wherewith nets are set and borne vp for wilde beasts. Also as Varóle, or Varuóle. Vari, a kinde of furre called gray mi∣niuer. Variabile, variable, changeable, mu∣table, diuers, fickle, vnconstant, sub∣iect to change. Variamente, changeablie, vnconstantlie, diuerslie, variablie. Variante, diuers, of diuers colours and fashions, varying, changing, changeable, mutable, inconstant. Also verrie or varrie in armorie. Variantia, as Varietà. Variare, to varie, to change, to differ, to alter, to make diuers or of sundrie fa∣shions, to interlace, to worke with diuers colours, to deck, trimme, or mingle di∣uerslie, to varie, to differ, to disagree or square in opinion, to write diuerslie. al∣so to change, to alter, or be mutable. Variatione, a variation, a change or al∣teration, a changing, a being or ma∣king diuers. Variato, varied, verrie or varry in armes, changed, wrought with diuers colours, made diuers. Varice, a crooked vaine swelling with corrupt and melancholie bloud namely in the legs, temples, or bellie. Varicare, to go wide with the knees or legs, or to goe stradling. Also to trans∣gresse or passe ouer negligentlie. Varico, that hath the veines of his legs puffed, swolne, and full of bloud. Also that goeth wide or stradling. Varicola, as Varice. Varicoso, that hath the veines swolne and puft vp more then ordinarie with ill and grosse melancholie bloud. Varietà, varietie, difference, change, ficklenes, or vnconstancie, diuersitie, mutabilitie, choise. Varile, any kinde of barell or firkin. Vario, diuers, sundrie, vnlike, variable, vnconstant, flickering, doubtfull, changeable, mutable, of diuers colours or fashions. Also that hath spots in the face, or is speckled and freckled. Also one well seene in diuers and sundrie matters, full of varietie, that changeth colour, vsed also for a trout or burne∣trout, vsed also for Vaio. Varlótto, a rundlet, a little barell, or firkin. Varo, crooked, winding, bending, awrye. Also that hath crooked legs bending in∣ward. Also open to gripe and embrace. Also a dock wherein ships be built. Also diuers and repugnant. Also a spot, a speck, a fleck, or freckle in ones face. Varóla, a kinde of fish called a Base. Varolare, to infect, or be infected with the poxe. Varóle Vare, or Varuóle picciole, the small poxe, which be little white risings but red round about. Also little red pimples or specks on the face being hard and round, such as we see commonlie in drunkards faces. Varóle, grosse, the great or french poxe. Varólo, as Vaiuólo, a fish called a Base. Varoloso, pockie, full of the pox, botches, or blanes. Varone, as Vairone. Varotaio, a skinner or a furrier. Varra, any kinde of barre, as Barra. Varrélla, a little barre. Varrile, as Varile, or Barile. Varrilótto, as Varlótto. Varro, a kinde of long measure so called in Italy. Also a kinde of cormorant. Varuasore, as Valuasore. Varuóla, as Varóla. Varuólare, as Varolare. Varuóle, grosse. Looke Varóle. Varuóle picciole. Looke Varóle. Varuólo, as Vaiuólo. Vasa, all manner or any kinde of vessels. Vasaio, a vessell maker, a potter. Vasca, Looke Tina. Vascapo, a kinde of Munks habite. Vascolo, any kinde of little vessell. Vascellanie, all kinde of vessels. Vascellamento, all manner of vessels. Vascellaro, a potter, or vessell maker. Vascéllo, any kinde of vessell. Vase, any kinde of vessell. Vasélla, as Vascélla. Vasellamento, as Vascellamento. Vasellaro, as Vascellaro. Vaséllo, as Vascéllo. Vasetto, any kinde of little vessell. Vaso, any kinde of vessell. Vaso di zibetto, a siuet boxe. Vasone, a great vessell. Vassallo, a vassall, a subiect, a slaue, a bondman. Vassallaggio, vassallage, subiection, bondage. Vastare, to waste and destroy, to make waste of, to bring to desolation and vastnes. Vastezza, as Vastità. Vastità, vastnes, desertnes, hugenes, ex∣cessiue greatnes, destruction, desola∣tion. Vasto, vaste, huge, great, wilde, desert, great beyond measure, bourlie, wide, broade and large, mishapen, ill fauoured, desolate, not inhabited. Also insatiable, outragiouslie couetous. Vate, a prophet, or soothsayer. Also a poet. Vaticinare, to diuine, to foretell, to sooth∣say, to prophecie, to coniect. Vaticinatione, prophecying, soothsay∣ing, foretelling. Also an oracle or pro∣phecie. Vaticinatore, a prophet, a soothsayer, a foreteller, a teller of things to come. Vaticinio, a soothsaying, a prophecie, a foretelling, a diuination, an oracle. Vaticino, of or belonging to prophecying or deuining, or to them that practise it, propheticall. Vatigaro, a harrier, a drouer, a driuer of cattell.
Vatio, he that hath legs bowed inwards, wide betweene the knees, and the feete outward. Vatrace, one that hath ill legs from the knees downeward. Vattene, goe, or get thee hence, away from hence, get thee gone. Vattina, a kinde of great pot or cesterne to keepe water in. Also a pond of wa∣ter. Vattino, the name of an implement that Apothecaries vse. Vbbia, a foolish, false, lying tale, or lying for the whetstone. Vberare, to make plentious and fruitefull, to fatten, to feede as it were with paps or dugs. Also to be fruitefull and plen∣tious, to be in good plight and liking, to be aboundant. Vberi, breasts, paps, vdders, dugs, teats. Vberifero, plentifull, aboundant, plen∣tious, fertile, fruitefull, copious, ample, rich, store-full, fat. Vbero, as Vberifero. Also as Vberi. Also a bosome. vsed also for the cock or spout of a conduit. Vberoso, fertile, plentious, plentifull, battle. Vbertà, plentie, store, aboundance, fer∣tilitie, fruitefulnes, battlenes, copie of, cheapenes. Vbertiera, as Vbertifero. Vbertoso, as Vbertifero. Vbidiente, obedient. Vbidienza, obedience, obeysance. Vbidire, disco, dito, to obey. Vbiero, as Vbino. Also the name of the colour of a horse. Vbinetto, a little yong hobbie-horse. Vbino, a hobbie horse, such as Ireland breedeth. Vbiquinario, such a one as professeth v∣biquitie, as some of the sacramentaries of Germanie do. Vbiquità, an vbiquitie, in what place or thing soeuer. Vbliare, as Obliare. Vbligare, as Obligare. Vbligatione, as Obligatione. Vblio, as Oblio. Vblioso, as Oblioso. Vbriacarsi, as Imbriacarsi. Vbriachezza, as Imbriachezza. Vbriaco, as Ebrio, or Imbriaco, cup-shotten. Vbrigare, as Obligare. Vccellabile, that may be caught as a bird, or cozened, or ouer-reached, or conie-catcht. Vccellaccio, a filthy rauenous bird often taken for the cuckow. Also vsed for a simple gull that will soone be caught and cosened. Vccellaia, any place where birding or fowling is, or a place where fowle is kept in mue. Vccellaio, a birder, a fowler, a faulkner. Vccellamento, as Vccellaggine. Vccellami, as Vccellaggine. Vccellaggine, all manner of fowle, fow∣ling, birding, or hawking, all manner of cozening or conycatching tricks. Vccellaggione, as Vccellaggine. Vccellare, to catch birds, to fowle, to hawke. Also to cosen, to cheate, to cony∣catch, to deceiue, to crossebite. Vccellatóio, a fowling, a birding, or hawking place. Vccellatore, a birder, a fowler, a faulk∣ner. Also a cosener, a cheater, a cony∣catcher, a cross-byter. Also a keeper of fowle or poultrer. Vccellessa, a craftie, subtile, conycatching woman, a hen-bird. Vccelliere, as Vccellatore. Vccelliera, a great bird-cage. Also a fowling place. Vccelletto, any kinde of little or small bird. Vccellino, a little bird. Vccéllo, any kinde of bird or fowle. Vccéllo del paradiso, a kings fisher. Vccéllo del Duca, as Grótto moli∣naro. Vccéllo di Santa maria, a kings fisher. Vccellone, any great bird or fowle. Also a gull, a foole, or a ninnie, as Vccel∣laccio. Vccéllo d'oro, a wittwall. Vccéllo di neue, a wagtaile. Vcchiéllo, an oylet hole, a button hole. Vccidere, cido, cisi, ciso, to kill, to slay, to murther, to quell. Vcciso, kild, slayne, murthered, quel∣led. Vccidimento, a slaughter, a killing, a murther. Vcciditore, a killer, a slayer, a mur∣therer. Vccisione, as Vccidimento. Vccisore, as Vcciditore. Vdénte, as Vdiente. Vdiénte, hearing, listning, harkening. Vdientia, audience, hearing, listening. Also an auditorie, or an audience. Vdiénza, as Vdientia. Vdire, odo, vdij, vdito, to heare, to li∣sten, to harken. Vdito, heard, listned, harkned, as V∣dita. Vdita, the sence of hearing. Also an au∣dite. Vditore, a hearer, a harkner, a listner. Vditório, an auditorie, a place of hea∣ring. Vdo, wet, moyst, flashie, flabbie, vsed al∣so for cupshotten or drunken. Vdriare, to lure a hawke, to bring to the lure, vsed also to entice, or allure. Vdrio, a hawkes lure, to lure a hawke with. Also an enticement or allure∣ment. Vè, see, behold, looke, note, take heede. Also where? or whether? Also there, or in that place. Also there is. Also you, or your selues. also to you, to your selues, or your selfe. Vecchia, ould, or aged. Also an old wo∣man. Vecchiaccio, a filthie ould man. Vecchiaia, age, eld, eldernes. Vecchia trentina, an ould hagge that would faine be yong againe, one that is very very ould, and would be taken but for thirtie, an ould beldame. Vecchiardo, as Vegliardo. Vecchiare, to growe ould, to become a∣ged. Vecchiarélla, a little, sillie, poore ould woman, somewhat ould, elderlie. Vecchiaréllo, a little, sillie, poore ould man, or somewhat ould or elderlie. Vecchietta, as Vecchiarélla. Vecchietto, as Vecchiaréllo. Vecchiezza, age, elde, eldership. Also quick-siluer, according to Alchimists phrase. Vecchio, aged, ould. Also an ould aged man. Vecchionaccio, as Vecchione. Vecchio marino, a kinde of sea-monster or fish. Vecchione, a goodlie aged ould man, a graue ould man. Veccia, the pulse called vetch or tare. Vece, stead, place, liew, vice, standing for another. Vecórdia, madnes, or trouble of minde, lack of good sence or reason, doting and follie. Vecórde, mad, troubled in minde, out of his wits, doting, without sence or rea∣son. Vedéllo, a calfe, a yong neate, or steare, or runt. Vedére, vedo, or veggo, or veggio, vidi, or viddi, veduto, or visto, to see, to look, to behold, to view, to suruay, to prye, to marke, to note, to foresee, to perceiue, to vnderstand, to aduise, to consider, to take heede, to regard, to see to, to passe, to care or prouide for. Also to deuise or finde some meanes.
Veduto, seene, lookt, viewed, beheld, sur∣ueied, pried, marked, noted, foreseene, perceiued, vnderstood, aduised, conside∣red, taken heed, regarded, seene vnto, cared or prouided for. Veder l'mimico, a kind of march soun∣ded in time of war vpon the trumpet and drum. Vedetta, a watch towre, a loouer or lan∣tern on the top of a house, a beacon, a prying or peeping hole. Veder l'muito, to see the vie at play, to see the rest at Primero. Veditore, a seer, a viewer, a looker, a be∣holder, a surueier, &c. Vedoua, a widow. Also alone, destitute or without. Vedouanza, widow-hood. Also lacke of things. Vedouare, to widow, to bereaue, to di∣uide, to leaue alone, to make widow, to depriue, to leaue desolate, to destitute, to make comfortlesse, to diuorce or take ones deere thing from, to deuide or take a way, to separate, to leaue alone. Vedouatico, as Vedouanza. Also what belongs to a widow. Vedouetta, a sillie poore little widow. Vedouile, viduall, widow-like. Védouo, a widower, bereft, depriued, alone, voide, destitute, without. Veduta, seene, viewed. Also the sight of man. Also a high prospect. Also expe∣rience, knowledge. Looke Vedere. Vegentana, a kind of precious stone found in Italy, of a black colour, mingled with white spots. Vegetabile, vegetable, all manner of ve∣getables, as herbs, plants, and trees. Vegetatione, a making strong, liuely and quicke, a refreshing or comforting. Vegetatiuo, vegetatiue, that is fresh, quicke, sound, liuely or growing. Vegetare, to refresh, to quicken, to recreat, to make liuely or strong. Veggénte, viewing, seeing, looking, be∣holding. Vegghia, a watch, a watching, a wake, a waking, a sentinell, a reuelling a nights. Vegghiare, to watch, to spie, to wake, to reuell a nights. Vegghie, watches, sentinels, wakes, re∣uels a nights. Vegga, let him see, that he or I may see. Veggia, a pipe, a but, a tun, a hogshead, a barrell. Also a wake, a watching, a re∣uelling, a meeting of good company by night. Veggiare, as Vegghiare. Veggilante, as Vigilante. Veggilanza, as Vigilanza. Veggio, Veggo, Vedo, I see, I looke, I view, I behold. Looke Vedére. Vegli, see them, view them, behold them. Also aged or old men. Veglia, as Vecchia, as Vegghia. Vegliaia, as Vecchiaia. Vegliacco, as Vigliacco. Vegliardo, an aged elderly man. Also a foolish old doting fellow, a dotrell, a do∣tard. Vegliare, as Vegghiare, as Inuechi∣are. Vegliezza, as Vecchiezza. Veglio, as Vecchio. Veggo, as Veggio. Looke Vedére. Vehementare, to vrge, to force, to con∣straine, to violent, to make vehement, to vse vehemencie. Vehemente, vehement, fierce, rash, ear∣nest, violent, great, vrgent, sharpe, for∣cible, verie strong, sturring, vnruly, of great force. Vehemenza, vehemencie, fiercenes, ra∣shnes, violence, earnestnes, strongnes or ranknes. Vehicolo, a kinde of cart, tumbrell, or wheel-barrow. Veentana, a kind of blackish stone. Looke Vegentana. Vel, to you it, it to you. Io vel diedi, I gaue it you. Vela, any kinde of saile for a ship. Also a vaile or shadowing, a couering, a cur∣teine. Velame, all kind of sailes, vailes, lawnes, shadowes or couerings or curteins. Velare, to saile by sea, to hoyse vp saile and saile foorth, to passe by water. Also to vaile, to couer, to hide, to shadow, to curtein, to heale, to apparell. Velaregli, bone-graces, shadowes, vailes or lawnes that women vse to weare on their foreheads for the sunne. Veleggiare, to saile by sea, to waue as a saile doth, to hoyse vp saile and saile foorth. Velenare, to poyson, to enuenom, to in∣fect. Velenatione, a poysoning, an infection, a venoming. Velenato, poysoned, venomed, infected with poyson. Velenifero, venemous, bringing poyson. Also as Venefico. Veléno, poyson, venim, infection, baine, any thing that doth alter the nature or colour that it is mixed with. Also vsed for witchcraft or sorcerie by drinks. Velenoso, infectious, bainfull, venemous, poysonous, full of poyson. Veletta, as Vedetta. Also a little saile. Also a kind of fine lawne or cipresse. Velettaro, a vaile or cipresse maker. Also a spie or eaues dropper. Velette. Looke Caualli delle vellette. Also a kinde of souldiers garment or horse mans cote. Veletto, a little vaile, lawne, cipresse, sha∣dow or bone-grace as women weare on their heads. Veliuolante, running, and as it were fly∣ing with full saile. Velli, hath beene vsed for the haires. Also fleeces. Vellificare, to bring foorth fleeces, to fleece. Vello, a fleese of wooll, a fell or skin that hath wooll on. Vello d'óro, the golden fleese. Velloso, hairie, woolly, soft, thrummie, fleesie, full of fleeses or wooll. Velo, a vaile, a cipresse or lawne as women weare in Italy. Also the roofe of a house or church. Also a saile. Also the mor∣tal vaile, mans carkas or body. Veloce, swift, speedie, nimble, fleet, quick, light, subtile, lightly and quickly passing away. Velocità, swiftnes, speed, ftnes, quick∣nes, nimblenes. Velte, a kind of hurdle. Veltra, a gray-hound-bitch. Veltro, a gray-hound-dog. Velucchio, as Vilucchio. Velutare, to make soft or woolly, to worke veluet wise. Velutaro, a weauer or maker of veluets. Velutato, made soft or woolly, or wrought as veluet is. Velutino, fine, slender, course, refusado veluet. Veluto, a stuffe of silke called veluet. Veluto figurato, figured veluet, or wrought veluet. Veluto riccio, vnshorne veluet. Velutoso, soft, woolly, thrummie, full of silke or veluet. Vellutare, as Velutare. Velluttino, as Velutino. Velluto, as Veluto. Vellutaro, as Velutaro. Ven. Looke Vene. Vena, any kind of veine. the naturall dis∣position, instinct or veine of a man. a pulse or an arterie. Also a veine of the earth. Also a veine or stile of writing or speaking. Vena pórta, a veine which hauing diuers rootes in the hollow parts of the liuer, doth at length ioyne togither into one trunke or stocke, and so passeth foorth between the two eminences or ri∣sing parts of the liuer into the bladder
of choler, into the ventricle, into the spleene, into Mesenterio, into Omen∣to, and other parts of the body. Vena di fontana, the veine of a fountain, the belling or rising vp of water out of a spring. Vena di mettallo, a veine of the earth yeelding mettall. Venaccione, a great veine. Venale, venale, mercenarie, that may be bought, that is set to sale, that doth and speaketh what one will for mo∣ney, that will be bribed, and sell his troth and faith for money. Venalitio, a place where seruants and slaues are sold, the market where anie thing is sold. Also the selling it selfe or the thing that is bought and solde or to be bought and sold. Vena lustrante, gold, according to the Alchimists phrase. Vena magna. Looke Chili. Vena porta. Looke Vena. Venardi, the day called fridaie. Venasone, as Venatione. Venatione, venizon or hunting game, a hunting or chasing. Venatore, a hunter, a chaser, a hunts-man. Vencastro, as Vincastro. Véncere, as Vincere. Venchi, as Vinchi. Vencibile, as Vincibile. Vencido, tractable, yeelding, soft, flexi∣ble, gentle, plyable, withie. Vencidire, as Rauencidire. Vencita, as Vincita. Vencitore, as Vincitore. Vendemmia, vintage, haruest or ma∣king of wine, the gathering of grapes to make wine, grape gathering or grape haruest or wine haruest. Vendemmiale, of or belonging to gathe∣ring of grapes or ripe fruits in haruest, namely about wines or making of wines. Vendemmiare, to vintage, to gather grapes, to make wine, to gather in wine haruest. Vendemmiatore, a vintager, a vineroll, a vintner, a maker of wines or a grape ga∣therer, he that in haruest gathereth grapes to make wines. Also the name of a star which appeareth the third Nones of March. Véndere, vendo, vendei, venduto, to sell, to set to sale. Venduto, sold, or set to sale. Véndere all' incanto, to sell at who giues most, or by a common cryer. Véndere buóna derrata, to sell good cheape. Vénder buón mercato, idem. Vénder caro, to sell deare or at a high rate. Vendereccio, that is to be sold, vendible, saleable, venale, mercenarie. Looke Ve∣nale. Vénder finócchio, to sell fenell, id est, to cog, to foist, to blandish or to flatter withall. Vendetta, reuenge, vengeance, punish∣ment, reuengement, a taking of punish∣mēt. also according to old histories a rod which was laide vpon the head of a ser∣uant when he was made free, or a rod that the Lord deliuered to his bondmen when he set them at libertie. Vendibile, Vendereccio, vendible, sale∣able, easie and readie to be sold. Also vulgare and of the common sort. Vendicare, to reuenge, to auenge, to pu∣nish, to wreake. Also to vendicate, to claime or chalenge to himselfe. Also to defend, deliuer or saue from danger or wrong, to restore or set at libertie. Vendicatiuo, reuengefull, cruell, inexora∣ble, wreakefull, full of reuenge. Vendicatore, a reuenger or punisher of wrongs, as Vindice. Vendice, as Vindice. Vendicheuole, as Vendicatiuo. Vendi legne, a wood-munger, a seller of wood. Vendi óglio, one that sels oyle. Vendita, the sale or selling of any thing, a vendition. Vendi téla, a linnen draper or a seame∣ster. Venditione, as Vendita. Venditóre, a seller, one that selleth. Vene, to you of it, to you thereof, you of it. as Io vene parlai, I spoke to you of it. Also you hence or away or you thence or away. as Voi ve ne andaste male sodisfatto, you went away or thence, or hence not pleased. Veneficare, to bewitch, to inchant, to fore∣speake, to charme. Also to venome, to poison or infect with poyson. Veneficatore, a witch, a sorcerer, an in∣chanter, a charmer, a magitian, a ne∣cromancer. Also he that poisoneth. Veneficio, the arte or craft of poysoning. Also of sorcerie, witchcraft, charming or forespeaking. Venéfico, as Veneficatore. Also vene∣mous, that poysoneth, poysonfull. Venenare, as Velenare. Venenario, a poysoner, one that makes or prouideth poysons. Venenaro, as Venenario. Veneno, as Veléno. Venenoso, as Velenoso. Venerabile, venerable, worshipfull, reue∣rend or honorable, worthie to be hono∣red. Venerabilità, as Veneranza. Venerando, as Venerabile. Veneranza, worship, honour, reuerence, awe. Venerare, to reuerence, to honor, to wor∣ship. Veneratione, as Veneranza. Venerdi, the day called friday. Venerdi santo, good friday. Vénere, the day called friday. Also the goddesse of loue, wantonnes, lust, or lea∣cherie. Also beautie. Also the day or morning star, lucifer or venus. Also twilight or cock-shoote. Veneréo, venerian, wanton, luxurious, fleshly, lustie, disposed to leacherie, lea∣cherous, veneriall. Also faire and loue∣lie. Venéria, fearne. Veneto, a light or Venice blew, a Turkie colour. Vengiare, as Vendicare. Venia, leaue, licence, permission, pardon, toleration, mercie, forgiunes, fauou∣ring. Veniale, veniall, pardonable, remissible, tolerable, woorthie pardon or forgiue∣nesse. Venire, vengo, venni, venuto, to come, to become, to ariue, to chaunce, to happen, to come to passe, to spring, to growe, to prooue, to be brought or con∣ueied to a place, to enter into. Venuto, come, become, arriued, chanced, come to passe, sprung, growen, prooued. Looke Venire. Venire adósso, to fall or come vpon one, to happen to one. Venir a casa, to come home, to come to the matter or purpose. Venir a galla, to flote vp and downe the water. Venire al fatto, to come to the matter or to the purpose. Venire alle mani, to come to handie∣blowes, to grapple togither. Venire al quia, to conclude, to come to a conclusion or to the reason of the mat∣ter. Venire a manco, to come to lesse. Also to swoune, to fall in a swoune. Venire a sesto, to come to some good order, forme, or condition, or according to com∣passe and rule. Venire a vólo, to come flying, or in poste∣haste. Venire in succhio, to long for a thing, to
haue ones teeth run a water. Venire detto, to be said, told or repor∣ted. Venir fatto, to be done, to succeed, to hap∣pen, to come to passe. Venire meno, to swoune, to fall in a swoune. Venoso, full of veines or arteries. Ventaglia, as Ventaglio. Ventagliare, to fan or van or make wind. Also to winnow. Ventaglio, Ventaio, a fan or van of fea∣thers. Also a flip flap or any thing to make wind with. Ventare, as Ventagliare. Also to blow a winde. Ventaréllo, as Ventaglio. Also a plea∣sant or small gale of winde. Also a piece of a card or paper cut like a crosse, and with a pin put in at the end of a sticke, which running against the wind doth twirle about▪. our English children call it a wind-mill. Ventaruólo, the name of a wheele in a clocke. Ventena, a score or twentie in number. Ventesimo, the twentieh in number. Venti, the number of twentie. Also winds. Venticéllo, a little pleasant gale of wind. Ventiera, vsed for a window, or a case∣ment of a window. Ventilare, to waue, to wauer, to houer or aire in the wind, to breath, to blow as the wind doth, to van or winnow corne. Also to caase a matter to and fro, to turne out of one hand into another. Ventilatione, a wauing, a houing, a panting, a breathing, a vanning or win∣nowing, a stirring or wauing to and fro. Vento, a winde, a puffe, a gal, a guste, a blaste, a blowing, a berrie or flaw of winds. Also vsed for fauour or reputa∣tion. Also a storme or tempest. Also va∣nitie or trifle. Vento-contrario, a contrarie wind▪. looke Vento in faccia. Vento in faccia, the wind in the face, to haue no good successe in any attempt. Vento in popps, the wind in the pope. all things fauourable as one would haue them, in all prosperitie. Vento prospero, a prosperous or good wind. Also good successe. Vento secondo, good successe or a prospe∣rous wind. Ventola, a fanne or winnow to winnow corne with. Ventolare, as Ventilare. Ventolino, as Ventaréllo. Ventolo, as Ventaréllo. Ventosare, to let blood with cupping glas∣ses, to cup with cupping glasses. Ventose, boxing or cupping glasses, to let men blood withall. Ventosità, windines. Ventoso, windie, full of wind, light, swift, vnconstant, bragging, vanting. Ventraglia, as Ventraia. Ventraia, a panche or great belly. Also as Ventresca, a gorbelly or great guts, a gulche. Ventraiuóla, as Ventresca. Also a child that through ill diet hath his belly big and swollen or hard. Ventrale, a stomacher, an apron or other garment that couereth the belly. Ventre, a belly or panch of any creature. Also a womans wombe or child she goeth with. Also belly-cheere. vsed also for Ventricolo. Ventreggiare, to follow all lust and sen∣sualitie, to wallow in sinne. Ventrepieno, hath beene vsed for a turd. Ventresca, an oxe-midrif, a calues pluck, a sheepes gather, a hogs hastler, the om∣bels of a deare, the offal, panch or guts or intrailes of any body, be it man or beast. Ventricchia, as Ventresca. Also meate made of tripes, liuer, guts, lungs, hart and such intrailes. Ventricchio, the gargill or throte hole, the craw, the maw, the crop or gorge or panell of a hauke. Also as Ventresca. Ventricéllo, a little belly, panch or womb. Ventricolo, the ventricle whereby the meate which we eate, being thither con∣ueied by the stomacke is first digested. Some vse it for Epigastrio, many call it the stomacke. Also a little belly. Ventri∣coli del cuóre, two notble and large cauities sited after the sides of the hart; one on the right side, the other on the left, the sleeke or hollowe partes of the hart. Ventriglio, as Ventricéllo. Ventrino, as Ventricéllo. Also the calfe of a mans leg. Ventroso, panchie, that hath a great belly, bellied, a gor-belly, a grand-gut, is gulche. Ventruto, as Ventroso. Ventura, fortune, hap, lucke, chance, ad∣uenture, hab or nub. Venturuto, happie, fortunate, luckie. Venturo, comming, to come. Venturoso, as Venturato. Venustà, beatie, fairenes, grace, comely∣nes, fmlines, fauour, , a grace or pleasantnes in speaking, a delectable vtterance. Venusto, beautifull, faire, gracefull, come∣ly, seemely, welfauoured, proper, delec∣table, pleasant to the eie, sightly, hauing a good grace. Venuta, a comming, an arriuall. Venuzza, a little veine in any body. Vepre, thornes, brambles, shrubs, bryers, brakes, bushes. Vepretto, a thornie, bushie, shrubbie or brierish place, a bryer bush. Vepricoso, full of bryers, brambles or bu∣shes. Ver, toward, towards. Also true or the truth, as Verso, as Vero. Verace, true, tru-saying, that sayeth true, very, sooth. Veracità, truth, verity, sooth, saying of the truth. Veramente, Veracemente, truly, veri∣ly, soothly, according to veritie and truth, indeed, rightly, as truth is. Veratro, the herbe neesing woort or bears-foote, or ling-woort. Verbale, verbale, acording to the word, consisting of words, that is of a word, or that descendeth of a word. Verbasco, as Verbesco. Verbascolo, the pettie-mulleyn, of which be diuers kinds, as Verbascolo odo∣rato, the cow-slip. Verbascolo albo, the oxe-lip, Verbascolo minore, the primerose. Verbena, the herbe Veruein, whereof be two kinds; one called Verbena rétta, or Verbena colombina, vpright or straight Veruein; the other Verbena supina, base or flat Veruein. It is also vsed for all kind of herbs and boughes pertayning to purging or making holie, which were occupied in or about any re∣ligious ceremonies, or were hanged a∣bout the altars to garnish them, as the Mirtle, the Oliue, and the Lawrell. Verbenario, a herauld or embassador which did beare on his head a garland of Veruein when he was sent to the eni∣mies. Verberabile, that may be or is worthie to be beaten. Verberare, to beate, to punish, to strike, to batter, to bit against  the snne doth. Verberatione, a beating, a dasng, or battering. Verberéo, worthie of beating, that deser∣ueth to be swinged or . Verbero, a beating, a stroke or a lsh, al∣so a heate or striking of the sunne beames against somthing. Verbesco, wooll-blade, touch herbe, ng∣woort, bares-beard, french
or wooddi-mullein. Verbi gratia, as for example, as a man would say. Verbo, a word, a terme, a quip, a prouerbe. Also a verbe one of the eight parts of speech. Also a whole sentence or saying. Also a litterall sence. Verbosità, much talking or speaking. Verboso, wordie, full of words, prouerbial, a wrangler, a iangler, a pratler, one that vseth many words. Verbum caro, the holy writ or gospell. al∣so taken for Christ or Messias. Verdacchij, certaine kinds of green plums so called in English. Verdadéro, as Veritiero. Verde, greene, new, yoong, fresh, lustie, in prime, liuely, youthfull, strong. Also the greengrasse. It hath also bin vsed of Pe∣trarke for the finall end, when he sayes, Guinto al verde, alluding to a candle which they were wont to paint greene at the big end, as we should say in En∣glish, burning in the socket, almost con∣sumed, drawing to an end, beginning to to faint, decaying. Verdeazzurro, a kind of colour that pain∣ters vse. Verdeggiante, flourishing, lustie, youth∣full, greene, verdent. Verdecchio, as Verdiccio. Verdegiallo, a yealowish greene. Verdeggiare, to flourish, to be greene, lu∣stie or yoong. Verdemontano, a greene finche. Verderame, verdi-greese or greene co∣perasse. Verdero, a greene finch. Verdiccio, greenish or drawing to greene. Verdiero, a greene finch. Verdone, a kind of darke french greene. Also a bird called a greene finch. Verdugo, a rapier, a tucke or little sword. Verdura, greennes, all maner of greene, as grasse, boughes, or leaues. Also youth or lustines. Verecondia, bashfulnes, modestie, shame∣fulnes, demurenes. Verecondo, shamefull, bashfull, demure, modest. Verénde, the priuie parts of man or wo∣man. Verettone, as Vereto. Vereto, a kind of boult, shaft or arrow. Also a turning vice or skrue. Verga, a rd, a verge, a kind of measure like a yard, a mans yard or priuy mēber. Also a gimmall ring of gold or a plaine hoop ring. also a wād, a little stick, a ma∣gistrates staffe, a sergeants mace, a roy∣all scepter, an officers verge. a twig, a sprig, a brāch, a scourge, a whipping rod, a carpenters ruler or squire. Also the gnow-man or needle or index of a dyall. a painters pensell, a scriueners ruler. Al∣so a ledge, a sowe, an ingot, a plate, a wedge or gad of any mettall. Verga di pastore, fullers thistle or tea∣zell. Verga auréa, the hearbe called golden rodde. Vergare, to rule, to wright, to folde, to plaite, to ingraue, to draw, to limne, to paint, to stripe, to drawe lines. Also to whip, to scourge with a rod. also to work any wouen stuffe with striped worke as canuasse is. Vergate, stripes or lashes giuen with a rodde. Vergato, Looke Vergare. Also that hath rod, or long and slender raies or strikes in it like rods. Also made of twigs. Also laced or laide ouer as a garment with stripes or rayes of golde or any thing else. Vergellato, hogs grease clarified or puri∣fied. Also a kind of fish. Vergélle, little rods, braunches or vnder wood. Verghe, the plurall of Verga. Also as Vergate. Vergheggiare, as Vergare. Verghetta, a small or litle Verga, a plate, ledge or ingot of mettall. Verghezzino, a wooll-winder, or dresser of wooll. Vergie. Looke Verze. Vergieto, an orcharde full of trees and fruit. Verginale, maiden-like, virgin-like, per∣tayning to a virgin or maiden. Vergine, a virgin, a maide, an vndefiled damzell. Also a kind of tormenting iron to torture men with. Also one of the twelue signes in heauen. Verginélla, a yoong prettie virgin or maiden. Verginéo, as Verginale. Verginità, virginitie, puritie or maiden-head, chastitie, pussilage. Vergiótti, as Verzótti. Vergogna, shame, reproch, infamie, disho∣nor, disparagement. Also bashfulnes, modestie, blushing, shamefastnes, or de∣murenes. Vergolato, wrought or women with stripes, as striped canuasse is. Vergole, the stripes that are women in any canuasse. Also a kind of little bote vsed heretofore in Venice. Vergognare, to shame or be ashamed. Vergognarsi, to be ashamed or bashfull. Vergogne, the priuie parts of man or wo∣man. Vergognose, Parti vergognose, the pri∣uities of any creature. Vergognoso, shamefull, shamefast, bash∣full, modest, demure. Vergotta, nothing, any thing. Veridico, a true sayer, a truth teller, a soothsaier, that sayeth or telleth truth. Verificare, to verifie, to aer, to approoue, to prooue any thing true. Verificatione, a verifying, an approo∣uing, an auerring, a proouing of a thing true. Verilóquio, the true exposition of a word, an ethimologie or right meaning of a word, a true tale, speech or report. Verisimile, likely, like the truth, possible, credible, like or likely to be true. Verisimilmente, likely, possibly, according to truth. Verisimilitudine, likely-hood, possibili∣tie, a semblance of truth. Verità, truth, veritie, sooth, verie deed, simple sooth. Veritiero, a truth teller, a soothsayer. Vérme, Vermo, any kind of worme. Also a disease in a horse called the bots. Vermena, a rod, a sprig, a twig, a wand, a branch, a graffe, a set, a plant, an impe, a syen. Also the herbe called veruein. looke Verbena. Vermicata, a ring worme or tetter. Vermicélli, all maner of little wormes or vermin. Also a kind of small cut paste meate they vse in Italy to make pottage with, & th put grated cheefe in them. as Tagliarini. Vermiculare, to be full of verie or wormes. Also as Vermigliare. Also to make checker worke or other like, with small pieces coloured as in tables, boards or pauements. Vermiculatione, worme eating or bree∣ding of wormes in fruite or trees. Vermiculato, wrought with checker work or with small pieces of diuers colours re∣presenting sundrie pictures, as we see in tables or counters. in-laid work. Vermigliare, to creepe and crawle as all sorts of wormes do. to run thicke and threefold as cets do. Vermiglio, red or vermillion colour. Also a kind of silke worme. Vermina, as Vermena. Verminacola, holy-herbe, pigeons grasse or Iunoes teares. Verminare, to haue a wringing in the bel∣ly. to haue, bread or voide wormes.
Verminatione, a desease with wormes properly in cattle. Also a vehement ache or wringing of the guts, as if they were gnawne with wormes. Vermini, any kind of little wormes or ver∣min. Verminoso, full of wormes, worme eaten, troubled or pained with wormes, or that wherin wormes are. Verminucci, as Vermicélli. Vermocane, a kind of sicknes which some take to be the french pox. Vermoso, as Verminoso. Vermo volatico, a cankrous vlcer in the nose of a horse. Vernaccia, a kinde of strong wine like malmesie or muskadine, or bastard wine. Vernacciuola, as Vernaccia. Vernale, of or pertaining to winter. Vernare, to winter, to become winter or cold weather. Vernareccie, a kind of winter peare in Italy. Vernata, a winter or a wintring. Vernatione, the old skin of a snake or ad∣der that he casts off in the spring time. Also vsed for the spring time of the yeere. Vernecare, as Vernicare. Vernicare, to varnish with a kind of co∣lour. Vernice, varnish. Also a kind of binding silken lace or riband. Also a kind of white stone. Vernile, seruile, sausie, malapert. Vernilità, flattring, seruile or slauish be∣hauiour. Vérno, a winter, the winter season. Vernócchio, the swelling of a blow or stripe. Vero, true, verie true, sooth. Also truth, sooth or veritie, a true tale, a true mat∣ter. Also vncorrupted, verie, iust, sub∣stantiall, vnfained, of it selfe, right, good, naturall, vnmingled. Veróla, the small or the french poxe. Looke Varóla. Veróla grossa, the great or french poxe. Looke Varóla. Veróla picciola, the small poxe. Looke Varóla. Verolato, pockie or full of the poxe. Veroloso, as Verolato. Verone, a building of pleasure ietting or butting out in prospects or galleries, a ietting out of houses, a bay-window, a round out window. Veronica, the herbe Betonie. Verpa, a mans yard. Verpo, he that hath the foreskin of his yard cut off, and is circumcised. Verrà, he shall come. Verretone, as Vereto, or Veretone. Verrino, of or belonging to a boare. Verro, a boare hog, an vngelded hog. Verrò, I will or shall come. Verrone, as Verone. Also a great bar∣row hog or boare. Verruca. Looke Verruche. Verrucaria, the herbe wartwort or turne∣sole. Verruche, holes in steeples or old buildings for birds to breed in. Also a hillocke or knap of a hill. Also wartes or knaps of flesh rising in the bodie. Verruca pen∣sile, a long and hanging wart with a great head and slender at the foote. Verruca sessile, or els Formicante, a wart blacke like an ant, an ant-wart, which being deepe rooted, broad below, and little aboue, doth make one feele as it were the stinging of ants when the same is pulled at. Verrucoso, full of wartes, hillockes or knaps. Versabile, that may be turned or winded. Also that may be powred out. Versaglio, as Besaglio, a marke to shoot at. Versante, turning, moouing. Also pow∣ring forth. Also conuersing or frequen∣ting. Versare, to shead, to powre or skinke forth as they doe wine from one pot to another, to reuerse or ouerturne. Also to leake as a ship doth. A so to conuers with, to hant or frequent or come often to a place. Also to turne often, to wind. Versato, conuersant, expert, frequented, that is often in place, occupied or busie. Also turned or whirled about. Versatore, a skinker of wine, a sheader, a reuerser, a fill cup. Versatile, that turneth or may be turned, that is turned or wounden one about another. Versatione, a sheading, a skinking, a tur∣ning, a reuersing. Also a conuersing, fre∣quenting or comming often to a place. Versatura, a leake in a ship, as Versati∣one. Verseggiare, as Versificare. Versicare, as Versificare. Versiera, an old hag, beldam, wizard or witch-walking by night. Versificare, to versifie, to make verses. Versificatore, a versifier, a rimer, a poet, a maker of verses. Versificatura, a versifying or riming, a making of verses. Versifico, that maketh verses, that versi∣fieth. Versione, a turning, a translating. Vérso, toward, towards, against. Also a verse or a rime. Also a line of any wri∣ting. Also order, course, method, byasse, proportion, according to the haire or wooll or true byasse. Also turned or changed. Also an order or a row. Also a turning or twirling round. Verso dentro, towardes the inside, in∣ward. Verso doue? towards what place? which way? Verso casa, home-warde, towardes home. Verso man déstra, towarde the right∣hand. Verso qui, this way, towards this way. Versolino, a little verse or line. Versória, the needle of a compasse vsed in a ship to know the coastes. Versório, that turneth it selfe, that run∣neth backe. Versura, as Verdura. Versucia, wilines, craft, cunning slights. Versuto, wilie, craftie, mutable, changing, variable, often changing or turning, shifting, quick witted. Vertago, a hound that will hunt by him∣selfe and bring home his game. Vertebre, a ioint in the body where the bones so meet that they may turne as in the knuckle bone. Looke Verticale. Vertente, as Verticale. Verticale, that whirleth, turneth or twirleth round, verticall. Vertice, the top, the tip, the crowne or height of any thing as of a hil, or a mans head. Also a whirle poole, the dde or turning round of the water or a whirle wind. Vsed also for the hookes that a doore hangeth on by. Also the crowne of the head. Also the seame in the head that rūneth from the middle of the fore∣head directly ouer the crown to the neck, & deuideth the head & haire into two parts, as it is easily to be seene in a wo∣mans head, when the haire falleth halfe to the right side of the head, and halfe on the left side. Vertici del mondo, the north and south poles. Vsed also for the elect people of God that go to heauen. Verticéllo, a wherue or wherle, or whirle of lead or stone that spinners vse to put vpon their spindles. Verticillato, knit togither as a ioint, apt to turne as a wherue. Verticórdio, that turneth the hart and changeth the mind. Verticoso, as Verticale. Vertigine, a whirling or turning round,
the eddie of a water, a giddines, a diz∣zines, or a swimming in the head, with a mistines, a dimnes, sparkling or glim∣mering of the eies, a rowling, a change, a turning about, a sickenes by the means of windines which doth so trouble one, that all things seeme to turne round. Verticoli, or Verticuli, the knuckles or turning ioints of the backe bone or chine. Vertiginoso, giddie, dizzie, dim, mistie or glimmering in the head or eies, giddie∣brained or that hath the disease Ver∣tigine. Vertù, vertue, honestie, strength, grace, puissance, power, perfection or autoritie, valiantnes, manlines, manhood, pro∣wes, helpe, merit or desert. Also a pro∣pertie. Vertuoso, vertuous, honest, full of ver∣tue. Veruice, vsed for a weather or a sheep. Veruilagine, the blacke Chamaeleon thi∣stle. Veruina, a kind of long dart or iauelin. Verule, a kinde of cherrie so called in I∣talie. Verunamente, by no meanes, in no sort, at no hand. Veruno, any one, not one, no body, no one, not any body. Veruto, a short and narrow weapon or dart headded with iron, called a casting dart with a slinge. Verzaino, as Verzerótto. Verze, cole-worts. Verzellata carne, a kinde of dressing of meate in Italy. Verzerótto, a bird called a yellow ham∣mer or golde hammer. Verzette, yoong cole-worts. Verziere, an orchard. also a plot of ground where cole-worts grow. Verzinare, to colour red with brazell. Verzino, brazell wood or fernanbucke to dye red withall. Verzolino, as Verzerótto. Verzótti, yoong cole-worts that are be∣tween a cabbage and a cole-wort. Verzura, as Verdura. Veschiare, as Vischiare. Veschio, as Vischio. Veschioso, as Vischioso. Vescia, a fizzle, a fiste, a close fart. Also a puffe, a push or a toads-stoole, a blister, a bladder. Vesciare, to fizzle, to fiste, to blister, to bladder. Vescica, as Vessica. Vescicare, as Vessicare. Vescie di lupo, puffe-fistes or fusse-balles. Vescouado, a Bishopricke. Vescouato, idem. Vescouo, a Bishop. Vesina, as Stambecco. Véspa, a waspe or a hornet. Vespaio, a waspes or hornets nest. Also a kind of goldsmiths worke in chaines so called. Vespare, to sting with a waspe. Véspe, a waspe. Vespertillo, a night-bat, or reremouse. Vespertillone, as Vespertillo. Vespilone, a digger of graues or pits, but properly he that carieth foorth dead bo∣dies in the night times to be buried as they vse in times of great sicknes or plague. Véspra, the hower when they ring in to euening prayer. Vesprale, pertaining to euening, or eue∣ning prayer, or belonging to the west parts. Vesprata, an afternoone, euen, or eue∣ning. Véspro, the euening, euen, euening tide, afternoone, or euening. Also euensong or euening praier. Also the euening starre Lucifer or Venus. Vessa, as Vescia. Vessare, to vexe, to trouble, to molest, to disquiet, to grieue, to cumber, to disturb. also to tosse or tormoyle too & fro or hi∣ther and thither, to afflict, to do all mis∣chiefe that can be, to torment grieuous∣ly. Also as Vesciare. Vessatione, vexation, trouble, molestati∣on, griefe, torment. Vessica, any kinde of bladder or blister. Vessicare, to blister, to bladder, to grow to a bladder or blister, to gall. Vessicaria, the herbe bladderwoort, or night-shade, winter cherries, bladder∣nut, or Alkakengie. Vessichetta, a little bladder or blister. Vessiconi, great blisters or bladders, or windgals in a horse. Also puffs or pu∣shes, or dry toadestooles that be full of dust, fusse-bals. Vessiga, a blister, or a blader. Vessigoni, as Vessiconi. Vessilaro, a standarde or enseigne bea∣rer. Vessillo, a standard, a banner, a flagge, a streamer, an enseigne. Vessiuillo, a kinde of sparrow, some thinke it to be a thrush. Vesta, veste, any kinde of garment, robe, mantle, attyre, clothing, sute, vesture, a weede, vestment, or habite. Also the goddesse of chastitie. Vestale, vestall, of, or pertaining to the goddesse of chastity. Vergini vestali, the vestall virgins, whose charge it was to preserue and keepe fire in a certaine temple in Rome from going out or being quenched. Veste, as Vesta. Vestiaria, a vestrie, a place where gar∣ments are solde, or wardrope where ap∣parell is kept and laid vp. Vestiario, one that sels clothes ready made Also a wardrobe keeper, or a yeoman of a wardrobe. Vestibolo, a porch, an entrie, or voide place before a dore, a lobbie. Vesticciuole, pillowbeares, or tykes for beds, cases for anything. Also poore sim∣ple clothes. Vestigare, to seeke, but properly to seeke by the print of the foote, to trace, to search diligently, to hunt after and seek out. Vestigatore, a hunter, he that seeketh and traceth out as hunters do. Vestigio, a step, a tracke, a footing, a tra∣cing, a marke, the print of a mans foote, a footestep, a trace, or tracke, a token, signe, or marke of any thing, according to Anatomists the same that Pedio. Vestimento, as Vesta. Vestire, vesto, vestij, vestito, to cloth, to apparell, to attire, to couer, to array, to decke, to garnish, to enrobe, to adorne, to inueste. Also any sute of apparell, vestment, or attyre. Vestito, clad, attyred, apparelled, enrobed, adorned, inuested, couered, yclad, or ar∣raide, deckt, garnished. Also any sute of apparell, rayment, ornament, trimming, or apparelling. Vestiri, all manner of clothing, or sutes of apparell. Vestito alla francese, apparelled after the french fashion. Vestito di corrotto, clad in mourning weedes. Vestito di duólo, clad in mourning clo∣thes. Vestito da furfante, apparelled as a rogue Vestoriano, a kinde of colour that pain∣ters vse. Vestura, any kinde of vesture or gar∣ment. Vetera, old, aged, ancient, eld. Veteranamente, agedly, anciently. Veterano, old, aged, ancient, eld, one that hath serued long in a place or office. Al∣so as Rediuio. Veteraneo, after the old and ancient fa∣shion. Veterare, to grow old or aged, to make an∣cient.
Veterinaria, the trade or arte of making of glasses. Vetérno, a drowsie disease▪ ingendred through idlenes, a continuall desire of sleeping. Also slothfulnesse, sluggish∣nesse. Vetolaro, a tub, a fat, a cowle that they carie grapes with to the presse between two men. Vetonica, the herbe called Betonie. Vetralla.   Vetraio, vetraro, a glasier. Also a glasse-maker. Vetrare, to glase, or couer with glasse. Vetraria, a furnace where glasses are made. Also a shoppe where glasses are solde. Vetrici, as Vinechi, or Vimini. Vetrino, of glasse, glassie, made of glasse. Vetriola, the herbe called Basill. also glas∣sie, or made of glasse. Vetriare, as Vetrare. Vetriolo, vitrioll, or coperas. also a kind of herbe. Vetriótto, a kinde of transparent alabla∣ster. Vetro, any kind of glasse. Vetta, as Vedetta. Also a top, a tipe, or height of any thing. Also a with to bind withall. Also a blocke, a stumpe, a snag, or logge of a tree, the barke of a tree, a truncheon. Also small, thinne, narrowe plates of any mettall. Also a kinde of earthen pot. Also as Vitta. Vettina, a kind of earthen pot with a nar∣row long necke for birds to breed in. al∣so a little Vetta. I finde it also vsed for a chime of bels, or for a squirels maze, going about in a cage with bels. Vettória, as Vittória. Vettorioso, as Vittorioso. Vettouaglia, victuals, meate, foode, or su∣stenance. Vettouagliare, to victuall, or furnish with foode. Vettura, the hyring of a horse. Also the hyre it selfe. Vetturale, as Vetturino. Vetturare, to let foorth to hyre, to hyre namely horses or mules of hackney men. Vetturino, a hackney man, that lets foorth horses or mules to hyre, a muletier. Vetustà, age, antiquitie, eld, ancientnes, oldnes, eldertime, long continuance. Vetustamente, agedly, anciently, accor∣ding to the olde time, of a verie long time. Vetusto, aged, ancient, old, of long conti∣nuance. Vetustezza, as Vetustà. Vezza, the pulse Veccie, or Vitches. Vezzeggiare, to wantonize, to dallie, to dandle, to play the wanton with, to plaie with, to pamper, to iest, to blythe, to flat∣ter, to quaint it, to mignardize it either in words or gestures. Vezzeggiamento, a wantonizing, a dandling, a flattring, or mignardizing. Vezzeggiatore, a wanton, a minion, a dandler, a mignard, a quaint fellowe. Vezzi, wanton to yes, wantonnes, quaint∣nes, flattries, dandlings▪ as Vezzo. Vezina, a kinde of fish in Muscouie that hath no bones at all in him, and is verie good meate. Vezzo, a wātonnes, a quaintnes, a squea∣mishnes, a dandling, a dalliance, a wan∣tonizing, a mignardizing, a pampring, a flatterie, a toie, a iest, a blythnes. Also a plaie. Also a fault or ouersight, a vice, an errour, a sinne. Also a custome, a woont, a fashion or habite in a man. al∣so a chaine or file of pearles, a carka∣net, a necklace, an ornament or collar worne about the necke for a grace. Vezzosamente, wantonly, dandlinglie, quaintly, squeamishly, flattringlie. Vezzoso, quaint, pleasant, blithe, buck∣some, wanton, louing, flattring, bonnie, nimble, peart, prettie, coie, squeamish, puling, nice, spruce. Vezzura, as Verdura. Vfficiale, officiall, any kinde of officer, of, or pertaining to offices and duties. Vfficiamenti, all manner of offices togi∣ther. Vfficiario, an officer. Vfficio, an office, a dutie, a point, a part, a tricke, a good turne, a seruice, a benefite, a pleasure. Also homage, honour. Also state, degree, charge, or diligence, double diligence. Also the morning or euening praier, or seruice that is saide in chur∣ches. Also a Primer booke or Seruice booke, or Prayer booke. Also a calling or function of a man. Vfficioso, officious, dutifull, kinde, dili∣gent. Vfficiuolo, a Seruice booke, a Primer, a Prayer booke. Vffo, vffoli, some part of a horse. Vggia, feare, fright, terror, amazement, importunitie, irkesomnes. Also darke∣nes, or pitchines. Also annoyance, hate, spite, blemish, obscuritie, malice, darke. Vggiare, to darken, to obscure, to maligne, to hate, to blemish, to afright, to anoye. Vggio, as Vggia. Vgnere, vngo, vnsi, vnto, to anoint, to oynt, to grease. Vnto, anointed, ointed greased. Vgnéa, a kinde of fearne to burne to ashes whereof they make glasses. Vgnianno, yearely, euery yeare. Vgnolo, single, plaine, slight, vnlyned. Vgóla, the vuula or falling of the palet of a mans mouth. looke Vuola. Vguaglianza, equalitie. Vguagliare, to equall, to match, to com∣pare. Vgualare, as Vguagliare. Vguale, equall, alike, match, euen. Vgualità, equalitie. Vgualmente, equallie, alike. Vguanno, this yeare, this very yeare. Vi, to you, to your selfe, you, your selfe. Also there, in that place, or thether. Via, an aduerbe of encouraging, much v∣sed by riders to their horses, and by com∣manders, go on, away, go to, on, for∣ward, quicklie. Also a way, a high way, a path, a streete, a causey. Also being ioyned with meno, manco, and piu, it stands for much, or a great deale, as, via piu much more, via meno, much lesse, &c. Also a manner, a meane, or a way, a custome, a trade, or fashion, a rule, method or order. Viale, a path, or allie in fields or gardens, a walking place. Via meno, via manco, much lesse, a great deale lesse. Via piu, much more, a great deale more. Via croce, a crosse high way. Via via, an aduerbe of encouraging, on, away, go to, forward, go on, quicklie. Viaggiare, as Viandare. Viaggio, a voyage, a trauell, a wayfa∣ring, a way. Viandante, a wandrer, a traueller, a wayfaring man. Also trauelling, iour∣neying, wandring. Viandare, to trauell, to voyage, to iour∣ney, to wander, to wayfare. Viaticare, to prouide necessaries, or fur∣nish with prouision for a iourney. Viatico, prouision of whatsoeuer is neces∣sary for a iourney, be it victuals, or any thing else, voiage prouision, a mans farewell giuen him at his setting forth to trauell. Viatolo, a narrow path, a little causey. Viatore, a traueller, a wayfaring man, a pursuiuant, a beadle. Vibice, a marke or print of a stripe or blow remaining in the flesh black and blue. Vibio, any creature that liueth on water and land. Vibone, the flowres of the herbe Britan∣nica, which being eaten before thunder,
are thought to keepe men from feare of lightning. Vibrante, brandishing, trembling, sha∣king. Also warbling, or quauering. Vibrare, to brandish, to shake, to flourish, to wag, to tosse, to quauer, to warble any kinde of weapon in the ayre, to quauer, or warble in musike. Vibrire, riso, rito, to warble or quauer in singing. Vibrisse, the haires within the nostrils. Vibro, a branishing, a shaking, a flori∣shing, a wagging, a tossing any kinde of weapon in the ayre. Also a quauering, a warbling, or running in musike. Vcaria, a vicar-ship, a deputation, or lieuetenant-ship. Vicariato, a vicarage, or a vicar-ship. Vicario, a vicar, a deputie, an vnder∣seruant that doth the office of another, that is in stead or place of another, that supplieth another mans roome, and ta∣keth paines for him. Vice, stead, liew, place, roome, course, time, turne, behalfe, change, or muta∣tion. Also office or dutie for another, and vsed much in composition of other words. Vicecapo, a vicepresident, a lieutenant, a deputie, a viceroy. Vicénda, Auicenda, by course, by turne, orderlie, successiuely, interchangeably, in the second place, in order, now one, and then another. Also a mans share or part chosen by turnes. Also the turne or course in altering now one now ano∣ther, an interchangeable course. Vicendeuole, interchangeably, by turne, by course, in order one after another. Looke Vicenda. Vicendeuolmente, as Vicenda. Vicecameriere, a vice-chamberlaine. Vicegerente, a vicegerent. Vicegouernatore, a vicegouernour, a deputie-gouernour. Vicenome, a surname, a nickname. Also a pronoune. Viceré, a viceroy, a deputie king. Vicereggente, a vicegerent, a deputie∣gouernour. Vici, or Vicci, you there, there you. Vicina, a neighbour, she that dwelleth next vs, or not farre from our house. Vicinanza, neighbourhood, companie of neighbours dwelling together, as Vici∣nità. Also the ioyning of houses one to another, nighnes. Vicinare, to approch or dwell neere to∣gether. Vicinato, as Vicinanza. Also appro∣ched, or dwelt neere. Vicinità, neighborhood, proximity, neer∣nes, nighnes, likenes. Also the companie of neighbours dwelling nigh one. Vicino, neere, nigh, next, by, not farre off, next to, hard by, very like, almost. Also a neighbour, one that dwels neere ones house, or not farre from him. Vicissitudine, changing or succeeding by course, the turne or course in altering now one now another, an interchange∣able course. Vico, a streete, a suburbe, a maine streete, a village, a hamlet, a borough, but pro∣perlie a row of houses close one to ano∣ther with a way betweene them. Vide, as Vite. Vidità.   Vie, much or a great deale, but it must be ioyned with piu, meno, or man∣co, as. Vie meno, much lesse, a great deale lesse. Vie piu, much more, a great deale more. Vietare, to forbid, to prohibite, to let, to hinder, to inhibite, to interdict. Vietatore, a forbidder, a hindrer, a let∣ter, a prohibiter. Vieto, a forbidding, a prohibition, a let, a hindrance, an inhibition, an interdic∣ting, a stop, a let, an obstacle. it hath beene vsed for a mans priuie parts. also faint, lither, limber, weake, feeble, that hath lost his naturall strength. Vietta, a little narrow lane, waie, path, or allie or causey. Vie va. Looke Per vn vie và. Vieuocato, forenamed, named, fore∣said, inuoked. Vigentesimo, the twentieth. Vigesimo, the twentieth in number. Vigilante, watchfull, wakefull, vigilant, quick-sighted, charie, that watcheth di∣ligentlie, waking, diligent, neuer slee∣ping, nimble, quick. Vigilanza, vigilācie, wakefulnes, watch∣fulnes, diligence. Vigilare, to watch, to wake, to be vigilant or verie diligent, to take paine. Also to fast, to keepe the euen of any holie daie or solemne feast. Vigile, as Vigilante. Vigilia, an euen or vigile before any so∣lemne feast or of a holie day, an euen, a wake, a vigile, a fasting day. Also a watch, a watching, or abstaining from sleepe, a watch by night, which was wont to be vsed in old time, deuiding the night into foure parts, whereof com∣meth the first, second, third, and fourth watch. Also vigilancie and diligence. Vigliaccarie, rakalitie, skuruines. vile, base, raskallie, skuruie tricks. Vigliaccamente, raskallie, skuruilie, basely, roguishlie, villainouslie. Vigliacco a raskal, a villain, a base, vile, abiect, skuruie fellow, a scoundrell. Vigliaccone, a filthy, base rascally, scoun∣dring companion. Vigliare, to binde or tie. Vigna, a vine, or a vineyard. Vignaio, a vinekeeper, a vineroll, a viner, a vine-yard-keeper. also a prop to staie vp a vine. Vignaiuolo, as Vignaio. Vignale, a vineyard. also of or pertaining to a vineyard. Vignale, whatsoeuer pertaines to a vine∣yard, or the rent thereof. Also a vine∣yard. Vignetta, a little vine, or vineyard. Also a vine, or such border about any work, namely in printed bookes, or vpon guilt bookes. Vigorare, as Vigoreggiare. Vigore, force, vigor, strength, sturdines, lustines, liuelines, courage. Vigoreggiare, to flourish, to thriue, to prosper, to battle in strength and force, and vigour, to be or shewe himselfe lu∣stie, strong and vigorous. Vigorire, risco, rito, as Vigoreggiare. Vigorosità, as Vigore. Vigoroso, vigorous, strong, lustie, sturdie, firme, tough, able, sorcible. Vil, vile, vile, base, abiect, skornefull, co∣wardly, crauen, faint harted, base min∣ded, contemptible, of no woorth, of no value or account, little woorth or set by, good cheape, of little price, dogge cheape. Vilimento, vilenes, basenes, contempt, scorne, cowardize, Looke Vile. Vilipéndere, pendo, pesi, peso, to de∣spise, to contemne, to scorne, to vilifie, to disable. Vilipensione, contempt, scorne. Vilipeso, despised, contemned, scorned, vi∣lified, disabled. Vilire, lisco, lito, as Vilipendere. Also to be or become vile of small price, value, or estimation. Vilito, as Vilipeso. Vilmente, vilely, basely, abiectly, con∣temptiblie, cowardlike. Villa, a towne, a village, a borough, a ham∣let. Also a countrie farme, manour, place, house or pallace of pleasure out of a cittie or towne. Also the countrie  selfe. Villa rustica, that part of a cun∣trie house wherein the farmer dwelleth that keepeth the house, with all manner of things pertaining to husbandrie or a
farm to occupie husbandrie in. Villa Vrbana, that part of a manour where the lord himselfe doth lie, as we call it the place or chiefe house, manour, or hal. Villaccarie, as Vigliaccarie. Villacco, as Vigliacco. Villaggio, a village, a borough, a hamlet, a countrie towne. Villana, a kind of haggard faulcon. Villanata, a kinde of countrie song, iigge, or dance. Also a kinde of country meate for the poore. Villanamente, villainously, clownishlie, carterly, basely, inciuilie. Villaneggiare, to iniurie, to wrong, to a∣buse, to offer wrong in words or deeds. Also to plaie the base companion, or countrey clowne. Villanélla, a prettie little country wench lasse, or girle. Also a countrey daunce, a iigge, a round, a song, a horne-pipe, or a ballat, such as countrie milke-maids sing. also a milke-maide. Villancione, a grout-headed, clownish, filthie, rusticall, lubbarly, inciuill, car∣terly fellow. Villanetta, a little pretty country wench, girle, milke-maide, or lasse. Villanetto, a little countrie man, ladde, clowne, boore, or ploughman. Villania, villanie, abuse, wrong, iniurie, basenes. a carterlie, clownish or scuruie tricke. Villanesco, as Villesco. Villano, a clowne, a villaine, a countrey-man, a plough-man, a carterly fellowe, or one that dwelleth in the countrey, or in a farme, and is giuen to husbandrie, a husband man. Villeggiare, to dwel, go, abide, or frequent countrey townes, or the countrie. Also to be occupied or busied about husban∣drie, or to haue the rule of husbandry in the countrey. Villesco, clownish, carterlike, rustically, inciuilie, basely, countrey-like. Villetta, a little pretie towne, hamlet, vil∣lage, farme-house, manour, or place in the countrey. Villicare, as Villeggiare. Villicatione, the rule of husbandry vn∣der the owner or master of a manour. Villico, a clowne or seruant holding in soccage. Also a baylife or stewarde of husbandrie, and the whole stocke, and fruits thereof, or officer that belongeth to a countrey manour, to ouersee and order the husbandry, and hath authori∣tie to paie quick-rents issuing out of the manour, distraine or empound beastes vpon the grounde, fell trees, repaire hou∣ses, &c. Villoso, full of towns, or villages. Also full of haires, hairie, or hauing a high nap. Vilpestrello, a night-bat, or a reremouse. Viltà, basenes, cowardise, vilenes, cōtempt, inciuilitie, faintnes of hart, dastardie. Also cheapenes. Vilucchio, the herbe withy-winde, or weede-binde, or hedge-bels, it is like Iuie. Vilucchio maggiore, the greater withi∣binde. Viluppare, to enwrap, to bundle, to folde, to fardle, to role vp, to entangle, to trusse vp, to heape vp. Viluppo, a huddle, a bundle, a fardell, a trusse, a role, a heape, a packe, an en∣wrapping. Vime, as Vimini. Viminale, apt to winde and binde. of, or belonging to osiers or twigs. Vimini, twigs, such as a cooper bindeth his hoopes with, sprigs, withs, rods, wandes, osiers, or wicker. All manner of twigs that winde and are pliant to make things of. Vimoli, as Vimini. Vinaccia, the kernels, seed, or graine that are in grapes, or grape stones. Also the mother of wine. Vinaccio, filthie, mustie, naughtie, small wine, the tappings of wine. Also the grapes that are stamped and giuen to hogs to eate. Vinacéo, of, or belonging to kernels of grapes or to wine it selfe. Vinagro, sowre wine, vineger. Vinaiuolo, a vintner, a tauerner, one that makes or sels wine, a vinerol. Vinalie, feastes belonging to tastings of wine, an order kept among the painims, and yet obserued in some parts of Eu∣rope about Saint Martins day, and are called Saint Martins feasts. Vinca, the herbe Perwinkle. Vincastrare, to strike with a wande or a with. Also to tie or binde, to wrappe, to guird or hoope with twigs or osiers. Vincastrata, a blow or stripe with a wand or a with. Vincastro, as Vimini. Also a sheepheards staffe, wande, rod, hooke or crooke. Vincente, vanquishing. Looke Vincere. Vincere, vinco, vinsi, vinto, or vitto, to winne, to ouercom, to vanquish, to ouer∣master, to get victorie, to subdue or con∣quer. Also to passe, to excell, to exceede. Also to prooue, or conuince with reason. also to preuaile or take place, to haue the vpper hand. also to gaine, to get, or win at any game or plaie. Vinchi, as Vincigli. Vinci, as Vincigli. Vincibile, vincible, that may be vanqui∣shed, or ouercome, easie to be vanquished or ouerthrowne, vanquishuble. Vincibósco, wood-binde, or honie-suckle. Vincigli, the shreads, loppings or sprigs cut off from vines, Looke Cacauincigli. Vincire, as Vincere. Vincitore, a conquerer, a vanquisher, an ouercommer, a victor, a winner, a gai∣ner at games, a subduer. Looke Vin∣cere. Vincita, a conquest, a victorie, a subdu∣ing, an ouercomming, a winning at play. also a good hand or maine at anie game or play. Looke Vincere. Vinco, a sprig, a with, a rod, a reed, a sedg, a bull-rush, a bent, a wande, an osier. Vincolo, a bonde, or any thing that bin∣deth or tieth, or fastneth. also fetters, shackles, manicles, fastnings, giues, cordes, or imprisonment, as Vinco. Vin cótto, a kinde of sodden wine which we call cute, to put into otherwines, to make them keepe the longer. Vinculo, as Vincolo. Vindemmia, as Vendemmia. Vindemmiare, as Vendemmiare. Vindicare, as Vendicare. Vindicatiuo, as Vendicatiuo. Vindice, vendice, a reuenger of wrongs. a redresser of things, and abuses. a de∣fender, one that restoreth and setteth at libertie or out of danger, a punisher of things done amisse. Vinéa, a warlike engine made of timber and hurdles, vnder which in assaultes men marched safely to assaul or scale any wall or towne. Vineca, as Vinaccia. Vinessa, as Vinaccia. Vinetto, small, meane, weake wine. Vino, any kinde of wine. Vsed also for quassing or drunkennes, the cause for the effect. Vino adaquatto, wine that is watred. Vino del monte, the best kind of wine in Italie. Vino gagliardo, strong wine. Vino garbo, sowre wine. Vino grande, great, strong wine. Vino cerasuólo, a kinde of wine made of cherries. Vino leggiero, light, small, weake wine. Vino liatico, a kinde of wine in Italie. Vino muffato, mustie wine. Vino nuouo, newe wine or muste. Vino picciolo, small weake wine. Vino potente, mightie, strong, full wine. Vino suanito, wine whose strength is gon
out, dead wine. Vino racente, sowre or sharpe wine. Vino sobbollito, boyled or sodden wine, called cuite. Vino tibidrago, a kind of strong wine or sacke. Vino trebbiano, a kind of muskadine wine. Vino chiaréllo, claret wine. Vino rosso, red wine or alligant. Vino voltato, sowre wine that hath lost his strength, dead wine. Vino muffo, mustie wine. Vinno, a bush or locke of haire gently or softly curled. Vinolo, soft, gentle, warbling or wanton, as it were merie with drinking & wine bibbing, tipsie, cup shotten. Vinolentia, drunkennes, ouer-much drin∣king of wine. Vinolénto, a drunkard, one giuen to drink much wine. Vinoso, that is full of wine, headie, strong or fuming. Also one that loues to drinke, to tipple, quaffe or taste wine. Also ta∣sting or smacking of wine; hauing a smacke or sauour of wine. Vintena, a score, twentie in number. Vintesimo, the twentieth in number. Vinti, twentie in number. Vinto, subdued, vanquished, conquered, ouercome, gained, woon or gotten in ga∣ming, accoyed. Looke Vincere. Vióla, a flowre called a Violet. Also an instrument called a Violl or a Violine. Also a violl of glasse. Also a violet co∣lour. Vióla di gamba, a violl de gamba. Vióla bianca, the stocke-gilloflower. Vióle acciocche, a kinde of violets so called. Viole mammole, idem. Violabile, violable, that may be violated, forced, broken, abused, hurt, rauished, &c. Violacéo, a kind of purple or violet co∣lour. Also like a violet. Violare, to force, to rauish, to pollute, to defile, to marre, to spoile, to rape, to vio∣late, to corrupt, to make fowle, to de∣flowre, to distaine, to hurt, to misuse, to wrong, to infringe, to do against, to transgresse, as a man doth a lawe. Also to adorne with violets, to dye violet. Violatione, a forcing, a deflowring, a ra∣uishment, a polluting, a violating, an abusing, &c. Violata, forced, rauished, polluted, raped, violated, wronged. Violaro, a place or plat where violets grow. Violato, forced, rauished, polluted, de∣flowred, defiled, mard, spoiled, violated. Looke Violare. Also a colour called a violet colour, a purple, a puke or a french russet. Also drest with violets. Violatore, a forcer, a rauisher, a deflow∣rer, a wronger, an infringer, a trans∣gressor. Violébbo, a iulep made of violets. Violentare, to force, to vrge, to constraine, to compell, to offer violence vnto. Violente, violent, forcible, cruell, rash, headlong, harebraind, constraining, fierce, vehement, iniurious, offring vio∣lence, one that is impatient. Violenza, violence, force, compulsion, con∣straint, crueltie, rashnes, fiercenes, vehe∣mencie, a violent rage. Violetto, Violettino, a violet or purple colour, or a kind of french russet. Violina, a little violet flowre. Violino, a little violl of glasse. Also an in∣strument of musicke called a violine. Viólo, a kind of white violet. Violone, a great violl, or Viole de gam∣ba. Viotórtolo, a kind of drinking glasse with a crooked winding necke, called a bub∣bling glasse. Viottéllo, as Vióttolo. Vióttolo, an allie, a way, a path, a walke or narrow causey. Vipera, a venemous serpēt, adder or snake called a viper. Viperale, the hearbe Rew or hearbe of grace. Viperare, to enuenim, to enuiper, to becom serpent-like. Viperéo, viperous, serpentine, of the na∣ture of a viper. Also of or belonging to vipers or adders. Viperina, snakes-grasse, or vipers-grasse. Viperino, as Vipereo. Vipistréllo, a night-bat, or a reremouse. Virago, a woman of stout and manlie courage, a manlie or mankinde wo∣man. Virénte, greene, flourishing, budding, yong, springing. Virga, as Verga. Virga auréa, an herbe called golden rod. Virgile, the seauen starres about the bull. Virginale, as Verginale. Virgine, as Vergine. Virginélla, as Verginélla. Virginéo, as Verginéo. Virginità, as Verginità. Virgola, a little yard, or rod. Also a little stroke, lyne, poynt, or gnowman. Virgulto, a shrub, a twig, a spring, a sprout, a yong branch, a sprig, a yong shoote, but properlie a companie of yong shootes, or many yong tender sprigs and sproutes growing together out of the ground. Viridario, a garden, an orchard, or greene plot, or pertaining to them, a greene place enclosed, wherein beastes and fowle are kept, or place that is alwayes greene. Viridiale, a bird called a Greene-finch, or Canarie bird. Viriere, a glasier. Also a glasse-maker. Virile, manlike, valiant, stout, male, graue, of mankinde, pithie, substantiall. Also of, belonging, or meete for a man. Toga virile, a gowne or garmēt which was taken and worne when pretesta was left off, to wit, after the age of sixteene yeares was expired, it was commonly worne of yong beginners and new maried persons, a wedding gowne, a gowne without welt, gard, stitch, or lace. Virilire, lisco, lito, to growe a man, to growe or make strong. Virilità, virilitie, manlines, manhood, courage, valiancie. Also the priuie parts of a man, mans genitors. Viriólo, vitriole, or greene coperas. Viripoténte, ripe for mariage, able to liue and lye with a man. Viro, a man. Virolare, to scrue, or turne round with a scrue, or a vice. Viroletto, a scrue, or vice to turne round. Viroso, desirous or lusting after man, full of manlie force, valiant as a man. Also of ill sauour or taste, full of poison or venemous. Virtilla, a wyneck, or hickwaie. Virtù, as Vertù. Virtudioso, as Vertuoso. Virtuoso, as Vertuoso. Virulénto, full of poison, venemous, sti∣king, of an euill taste. Visaccio, a filthie, illfauored face. Visaggio, the visage, face, or looke of a man. Visare, to marke, to ayme at, to note, to consider. Visaruola, a visard, a maske. Also a pry∣ing hole, as Visiera. Viscappa, a double, or a lyned cloke. Viscardo, a Thrush, a Mai, or Thros∣sell. Viscarugine, the Chameleon which brin∣geth forth bird-ly. Vischiare, to intangle, to enfare, to
make clammie, to couer, catch, or take with bird-lyme. also to become or make slimie. Visceglio, a groue of yong okes. Viscerare, to panche, or pull out the bowels. Visceratamente, hartelie, with all ones hart and guts, but properlie by the bowels or entrailes, euen to the verie in∣wards, piece by piece, or by part. Viscere, the entrailes, bowels, guts, panch, of any creature. Also the garbage that hunters giue their dogs. Vischio, bird-lyme, slyme, glue, gum, clammishnes Also the shrub miscelden, or mistletoe. Also all the flesh that is betweene the skinne and bone. Also the chiefe entrailes of man or beast, as the hart, spleene, liuer, lungs, and the bowels. Vischioso, slimie, clammie, gluish, gum∣mie. Viscido, clammie, slimie, fast as glue. Visciuolo, as Foroncolo. Visco, as Vischio. Visconte, a Vicount. Also a Sheriffe of a countie. Viscoso, as Vischioso. Visenteria, in Spanish Camaras. Visera, as Visiera. Visetto, a little prettie face. Visibile, visible, apparant, that may be seene. Visiera, the sight of a helmet, or caske, or stone-bow, or any other shooting piece. Also a mans looke, aspect, or counte∣nance. Also a visard or a maske, a paire of spectacles. Visione, a vision, a seeing, an apparition, a phantasie. Also the sight of the eye. Also a thing that one hath seene in his sleepe, a sight, a vision, a dreame, a phantasie. Also any thing that is set before one to behold. Visir, a chiefe counseller or states-man of the Turke. Visita, a visiting, or visitation, a suruaie, a view. Visitare, to visite, to suruaie, to view, to come to see often. Visitatione, as Visita. Visiua, as Visuale. Visiuamente, visibly, apparantly. Visiuo, visible, apparant, that may be seene. Visnepote, the sonnes sonnes sonne. Viso, the face, visage, looke, sight, or aspect of a man. also the sence of sight. Dante said Fu viso a me, meaning me thought or it seemed vnto me. Viso arcigno, a grim, frowning looke, or countenance. Visone, a great, big, huge face, or looke. Visório neruo nel ceruello.   Visso, liued, breathed, bad life. Visse, he liued. Looke Viuere. Vista, the sence of sight, seeing, or looking of any creature, a looke, a prospect, an aspect, a view, a show, a grace, a pre∣sence or semblance, a sight, a spectacle of any thing. Also a countenance of a man. Also seene, noted, viewed, or looked. Vistamente, as Vistosamente. Also quicklie, out of hand, taken from the French. Vistosetta, somewhat comely or welfa∣uored, or hamdsome to looke vpon. Visto, Looke Vedere, or Veduto. Vistosamente, comely, seemely, wel∣fauoredly, sightly, in sight, in open view. Vistoso, seemely, comely, welfauored, sightlie, worth the seeing, that makes a good showe. Vistrici, as Vimini. Visuale, visuall, pertaining to the sight. Visualmente, visuallie, apparantlie, vi∣siblie. Vita, lfe, forme, fashion, or manner of liuing, or any bodies manner of life▪ it is sometimes taken for the stature or pro∣portion of man or woman. Vitalba, wilde vine or tetterberrie gro∣wing in hedges with red berries and winding about sets; the iuice whereof will cause the skin to blister: some call it the Trauellers ioy: some haue taken it for the herbe Sengreene or housleeke the greater; other some for the herbe Per∣winkle. It is also a belt or guirdle of lea∣ther or cord that friers or hermits vse to weare about them. It is also taken for Brionie, wild Nep or white wine. Vitali, le parti vitali, the vitall or life parts, as the braine, hart, liuer, lungs, &c. Vitale, vitall, liuely, that may liue or hope for life. Also that whereby we liue, and doth either bring or preserue life, any thing pertaining to the maintenance of life. Also the herbe Sengreene or hou∣sleeke the greater. Vitatino, a gull, a ninnie, a silly fellow. Vitalità, life, liuelines, the spirit of life whereby we liue. Vita militare, a militarie life, or professi∣on. Vite, an arbor of vines, the vine it selfe. Also a vice or a serue. Viteale, the herbe with-winde, or binde-weed. Vitélla, a cowe calfe or yoong heifer, a veale. Vitellare, to reioice in skipping and lea∣ping like a yoong heifer or cow. Vitellina, a yoong cow calfe or veale. Also calfes or neats leather. Vitéllo, a bull calfe or veale. Also a kind of fish called a Seale or a sea calfe. Also the yolke of an eg. Vitéllo marino, a fish called a sea calfe or seale fish. Vitiare, to rauish, to corrupt, to deflowre, to spoile, to vitiat, to seduce, to sinne, to de∣file, to deforme, to marre, to infect, to hurt. Vitiatore, a corrupter, a deflowrer, a ra∣uisher of yoong maides. Vitice, a kind of withie or willow, called in English parkeleaues, chastetree, hemp tree or Abrahams balme. Viticélla, a yoong springing vine, but ra∣ther an herbe which taketh hold of any thing next vnto it, as doth the vine. Also white brionie. Vitici della vite, the tendrels of a vine, the sots or branches of a vine. Vitile, pliant, flexible, meet to binde with, that may be wounden. Vitiligiuoso, full of the leprosie. Also full of the morphew. Vitiligine, the morphew vpon ones skinne. Also the leprosie. Vitio, a fault, a vice, an errour, a sinne, a defect, an impediment, naughtines, an imperfection, or corruption, an incura∣ble disease, a blemish, a blame, an of∣fence, a villanie, a default, the contrarie to vertue. Also a disease or impediment in all the body, or in any part. Vitiosità, vice, naughtines, lewdnes, the contrarie to vertue, corruption, an in∣constant affection of minde in all man∣ner of behauiour. Vitioso, vicious, faultie, naughtie, imper∣fect, corrupted, diseased, blemished, of∣fensiue, full of vices, wicked, ewd, cor∣rupt, full of errours, false, sick, shaken, rotten, not sounde, worme-, peri∣shed. Vitréa, Looke Tónica. Vitrearia, a glasse house, or trade of glas∣ses. Vitréo, of, or belonging to glss, glssie, glassie greene, cleere like glasse, or re∣sembling glasse. Also bri, so thinne and fine that one may see through i as through a glasse. Vitriolo, vitrioll or coperasse. also a kings fisher. Also an herbe growing on wals wherewith glasse being scoured, it is made wonderfull cleane and bright.
Some take it for pellitorie of the wall. Vitta, a kinde of linnen veile, coife, head∣band or hairelace, wherewith the priests wifes did tie their haires, a ribband, a garland or wreath for the head. Vittima, a sacrifice, an oblation. Also the beast killed for sacrifice. Vittimari, one that hath charge of or kil∣leth the sacrifice. Vitto, vanquished, ouercome, conuinced, subdued, conquered, caste or beaten or let of his purpose and intent. Also suste∣nance, liuing, foode or feeding, victuals, prouision, and things necessarie to liue by as meat and drinke. Vsed in iest for a mans priuie member. Vittore, a vanquisher, a conqueror, a vic∣tor, a conuincer, he that vanquisheth & ouercommeth, one that hath his purpose and intent, one that hath gotten the goall. Vittória, victory, conquest, the vpper hand or vanquishing. Vittoriale, of or belonging to victorie. Vittoriola, toong-blade, double-toong, horse-toong, toong-lawrell or lawrell of Alexandria. Vittorioso, victorious, triumphant, that hath conquered and gotten victories. Vittouaglia, as Vettouaglia. Vittouagliare, as Vettouagliare. Vittrice, she that vanquisheth or ouer∣commeth, a woman victorious. Also tri∣umphant, victorious, declaring victo∣rie. one that hath hir purpose and in∣tent. Vitullare, as Vitellare. Vituperabile, as Vituperoso. Vituperare, to shame, to reproue, to blame, to rebuke, to defame, to discredit, to dis∣commend, to reproche, to deface, to dis∣grace, to wrong, to disparage, to accuse. Vituperatore, a shamer, a wronger, a re∣proouer, a rebuker, a blamer, a defamer, an accuser, a reprehender, a discom∣mender. Vituperéuole as Vituperoso. Vitupério, shame reproche, rebuke, blame, discredit, defamation, defacing, dis∣grace, wrong, discommendation or dis∣praise. Vitupéro, as Vitupério. Vituperoso, shamefull, reprochfull, blame∣worthie, defaming, disgracefull, that may be blamed. Viua, viuat, god saue, liue. Also as Sem∣preuiuo. Viuacchiare, to rub and hold out, to keep the woolfe from the doore, to make shifts for ones liuing, to liue. Viuace, liuely, breathing, quicke, nimble, actiue, full of life, of long life, strong of nature, valiant, lustie, greene, that li∣ueth and continueth long. Also gaie, trim, gallant, braue. Viuacità, liuelines, nimblenes, viuacitie, quicknes, naturall strength or long life. also gayenes, gallantnes, brauerie, trim∣nes. Viuagno, the hem, skirt or welt of a gar∣ment. Viuaio, a pond to keepe fresh fish aliue in it. a wear to take fish in. Also any place where wild beasts, birds or fishes be kept, as a parke, a waren, a coniger, a walke for birds, a pond or poole for fishes. Viuanda, any kind of viands, foode, suste∣nance or victuals or meate or cates. Viuandiere, a victualer, a prouant man, a cater. Viuario, as Viuaio. Viuénte, liuing, quicke, liuely, that alwaies runneth, breathing. Viuere, viuo, vissi, viuuto, or visso, to liue, to breath, to haue life, to lead or spend his life. Viuerra, a feret that kils conies. Viuezza, liuelines, quicknes, viuacitie. Looke Viuacità. Viui, a kind of rauenous fowle. Viuido, liuely, quicke, full of strength or liuelines. Also gay, trimme, gallant, braue. Viuificare, to quicken, to viuifie, to main∣taine aliue, to giue life vnto. Viuificatione, a quickning, a viuify∣ing. Viuifico, liuely, aliue, quickning. Viuo, aliue, quick, liuing, breathing, that liueth, liuely, quick and naturall, greene. Also strong, vehement or great, running, or that neuer standeth, ha∣uing a continuall course, light and bur∣ning, sparkling, full of life. Acqua vi∣ua, running or liuing water. Calcina viua, vnslackt lime. Viuóla, a violl of glasse. Also a violine. Also a violet: some take it to be also a pinke. Viuole, a disease in a horse called the viues. Viuuto, liued, breathed. Looke Viuere. Vizza, a wrinkle, a wrimple, a withering, a crumpling. Vizzare, to wrinkle, to wrimple, to wi∣ther, to fade, to droope, to crumple, to cockle. Vizzo, full of wrimples, wrinkles, as olde womens faces, crumpled, faded, droo∣ped, cokled, as garments will be. Vizzoso, as Vizzo. Vlcera, an vlcer, an impostumation, a skabbednes, a running or matterie sore, a bile, a botch, a corrupt matter peri∣shing in the skin & couered with a scab, vsed also for a wound, cut, gash, or open place in the barke of a tree. Vlceratione, vlceration, breaking out in∣to a scab or sore, sorenes. Vlcerare, to grow to an vlcer, skab, sore, or impostumation, to make full of sores or scabs, to exasperate or make to grieue, to exulcerate, to raise a bli∣ster. Vlceraria, the herbe stinking horehound. Vlcere chironie, vlcers that can hardlie be cured. Vlcere fauine, vlcers that yeeld and run a kinde of matter like honie. Vlcerino, full of vlcers, sores, skabs, or impostumations, exulcerated, full of blisters. Vlceroso, as Vlcerino. Vlezzare, to smell, to sauour, or to sent, to yeeld a sauour. Vlice, an herbe like rosemary that dra∣weth gold vnto it. Vligine, the naturall moysture of the earth. Vliginoso, soaked with long abode of wa∣ter, alwayes moyst, wet, or plase. Vliua, the fruite called an oliue whereof they make oyle. Vliuale, enclining to the colour of oliues. Vliuastro, browne, or of the colour of o∣liues. Vliuetto, a groue full of oliue trees. Vliuigno, as Vliuastro. Vliuo, an oliue tree. Vlna, the vndermost and lesser of the two long bones of the cubite which are both ioyned together betweene them∣selues, as well with the shoulder-bone as with the wrist of the hand, albeit vlna neere the wrist is committed to radio only: it is also called Focile mi∣nore. Vlpico, great and wilde garlike. Vlteriore, further, beyond, past, or be∣hinde. Vltimamente, lastly, at last, finallie. Vltimare, to finish, to end, to accomplish, to make an end. Vltimatamente, as Vltimamente. Vltimo, last, finall, lag, the furthest or furthermost. Also extreame, chiefe, or greatest. Vlto, that hath reuenged, or that hath taken vengeance and punishment. Vltore, a reuenger, he that taketh ven∣geance, a punisher, an executioner. Vltrice, reuenging, reuengefull, a re∣uenger, a punisher, an executioner. Also
she that reuengeth, or taketh ven∣geance. Vlula, an owle or an howlet. Vlulante, howling, shreeking. Vlulare, to howle as a dog or wolfe doth, to yell, to lament. Also to schreeke as an owle. Vlulato, howled, schreeked, lamented, or full of pittifull crying, a yelling, an howling, a crying, such as women and wolfes do make in lamenting or crying. Vlulo, as Vlulato. Vlzollo, Vlzolo, a kid so called among the Grisons. Vmanità, as Humanità. Vmano, as Humano. Vmbélla, Vmbrélla, a little shadow, a little round thing that women bare in their hands to shadow them. Also a broad brimd hat to keepe off heate and rayne. Also a kinde of round thing like a round skreene that gentlemen vse in Italie in time of sommer or when it is very hote, to keepe the sunne from them when they are riding by the way. Also the round tuft or head of fenell or Dill, or other hearbe wherein the seede is. Vmbilicali arterie, two arteries mar∣ching from the nauill thorough Peritó∣neo vnto the sides of the bladder, they are the first arteries that in the infant are begotten. Vmbilicario, pertaining to the nauill. Also a little knife or lancer with which midwiues vse to cut away the nauill-strings of infants new borne. Vmbilicato, made in the fashion of a nauill. Also that hath a nauill. Vmbilico, the nauill. Also the middle of any thing: Also a little round and smooth stone fashioned like a nauill. also a little circle made like a nauill in the grounds to discerne the coastes of the windes. Also a bullion or bosse, such as are set on the outside of bookes. Also the crowne, top, or head of the apple iust a∣gainst the stalke. also a kind of writhen cockle or shell-fish wrinkled like a na∣uill, vmbilico del'annéllo, the bea∣zill, colet, head, or broadest part of a ring wherein the stone or signe is set. Vmbilico del sole, the little circle in the middle whereof the gnomon of a dyall is fastned. Vmbilico di venere, the herbe peniewort, peniegrasse, venus nauill, or hipwort. Vmbilico del' v∣uóuo, the streine or kenning of the egge: it is also vsed for the bosse of a buckler or a shield. in hilles it is taken for that which standeth out and swel∣leth aboue the rest. Vmbrina, a kinde of fish which some take to be the halybut. Vmidità, as Humidità. Vmido, as Humido. Vmidore, as Humidità. Vmiliare, as Humiliare. Vmile, as Humile. Vn, the number of one, but as we say in english a, as vn liuómo, a man, or one man. Vna, the number of one. Vn' altra vólta, another time, once more. Vn' altro, another, one more. Vna fiata, once, one time. Vnanimamente, ioyntlie, of one accord, of one mind, hart and will, of one consent and accord, or else with one consent and accord. Vnanimità, concord of minde, consent of hart, vnanimitie. Vnanimo, of one consent and accord, of one minde, hart and will. Vn batter d' ócchio, a moment, a twink∣ling of an eye. Vn certo, a certaine man, a certaintie. Vnchie odorate, a kinde of shell fish. Vncinare, to hooke, to crooke, to claspe, to drag with a hooke, to make crooked as a hooke. Also to catch with hookes. Also to set on tenter hookes. Vncinato, hooked, crooked, armed with hookes. Also caught with a hooke. Also set on tenter hookes. Vncinélli, little hookes, crookes, or clasps, tenter hookes, or tacks, or nailes called trashes, or tackes. Vncino, any kinde of hooke, crooke, or claspe, or tenter hooke. Also a little club or bat crooked at the end, the crooked head of a shaft, a broad arrow head. Also a little anker. Also a fish-hooke. Vncinuto, hooked, crooked, made hooke-wise, full of clawes or pounces, armed with hookes. Vndeci, the number of eleuen. Vndecimo, the eleuenth in number. Vn di, one day. Vn di auanti, one day before, one daie sooner. Vndici, eleuen in number. Vn di più, one day more. Also one more∣ouer. Vn di poi, one day after. Vne, the number of one. Vnedine, the fruit of the arbut or straw∣berrie tree, it is in shewe like an apple, bitter and noisome both to the head and stomacke, so that a man cannot eate a∣boue one at a time. Vngélle, as Vnghia, de gliócchij. Vngere, vngo, vnsi, vngiuto, or vnto, to annoint, to grease, to oynte, to allow, to smeare. Vnghia, the nayle of fingers or toes, in man, birde, or beast, a claw, a talon. Al∣so the hoofe of a horse, or other beaste, Also the talon or pounce or clawe of a hauke or other rauenous birde. Also a certaine hooke or crooke that surgeons vse, ordained and vsed for the drawing out of a childe that is dead in the mo∣thers wombe. Also a kinde of tormen∣ting iron toole with two pakes or horns to pinch, cut, and slit the offendor with. Also a disease in the eie called the haw. Also a crooked hooke to cut grapes with. Vnghia de gli occhii, a disease in a hor∣ses eie, called the hawes. Vnghia baldano, the paring of ones nayles, a matter of nothing. Vnghia cauallina, as Vnghia di caual∣lo, or Tussilagine. Vnghia di cauallo, coltes-foote, foles-foote, horse-hoofe, or buls-foote. Looke Tussilagine. Vnghiare, to hooke or crooke, or claspe, or scratch with nailes, or clawes: to sease on, or catch with nayles, clawes or poun∣ces, to hold with a hooke, to come to haue nailes, clawes, talons, pounces or hoofes. Vnghiélla, as Vnghietta. Also a pin and a web in ones eyes. But some take it for the disease called the hawe. Vnghietta, a little nayle, clawe, claspe, hooke, crooke, hoofe, pounce, or talens. Vnghione, as Vngione. Vngione, the talons, gripes or pounces of a hauke. Also a great naile, a clawe or a hoofe. Vngiume, any maner of oyntment, vnc∣tion, or annointing, grease, seame, fat, tallow, or sewet. Vngiuto, annointed, nointed, greased, smeared, or tallowed. Looke Vngere. Vnguentaio, an ointment or salue maker. also a perfumer, one that maketh sweet oyles and selleth them. Vnguentaria, the arte or craft of making sweete oyntments or oyles. Vnguentare, to salue or annoint, to vse vnctions. Vnguento, an ointment or a salue, or an vnction. Also a perfume, or sweete oyle, a liquide perfume, oyntment, or salue consisting of grease, fat, and li∣quors mingled with oyle. Vni, vsed for the number of one. Vni calamo, that hath but one stemme or straw growing out of the roote. Vnicamente, onely, alone, singularly.
Vnicaulo, that hath but one stalke with∣out branches. Vnico, onely, alone, singular, one alone. Vnicogenito, an onely begotten childe. Vnicolore, of one colour. Vnicorno, the beast called an vnicorne. Vnicuba, a woman that lieth or compani∣eth but with one man. Vnifóglio, a kinde of lillie commonly cal∣led monophylon or single leafe. Vnifórme, vniforme, of one forme or pro∣portion. Vniformità, an vniformitie, agreeing in forme, one and the same shape or fashi∣on. Vnigenito, onely begotten, an onely child, one childe without any more. Vnimano, that hath but one hande. Vnimódo, of one sort or fashion. Vnione, vnion, peace, vnitie, concorde, a∣greement, attonement. Also the number of one. Also a faire, great, orient pearle called an vnion. Vnipéde, hauing but one foote. Vnire, vnisco, vnito, to vnite, to attone, to conioyne in one, to ioyne togither and make as it were one. Also as Onire. Vnisone, a vnison in musicke. Vnistirpe, that hath but one stem, stock, or roote. Vnisuono, of one onely sound. Vnità, vnitie, singlenes, attonement, con∣cord, agreement in one, an vnion, vni∣ting or ioyning of two things or more togither. Also the likenes of two things of which one cannot be discerned from another. Vnitamente, iointly togither, of one mind and accord, togither in one. Vnito, vnited, attoned, conioyned in one, ioyned togither, made one. Vniualuo, that hath but one shale, shell, or huske. Vniuersalità, an vniuersalitie, or genera∣litie, as Vniuersità. Vniuersale, vniuersall, generall, common, belonging to all. Vniuersalmente, vniuersally, generallie, altogither. Vniuersare, to make vniuersall or gene∣rall, to publish to all. Vniuersipotente, that hath power ouer all. Vniuersipotentia, power ouer all. Vniuersità, an vniuersitie, a generalitie, a whole estate, al in general, the vniuersal worlde, the whole frame of the worlde, an vniuersalitie. Vniuérso, vniuersall, generall, the whole, publike, altogither, all in generall. Also the vniuerse, the whole world. Vniuira, a woman hauing but one hus∣band. Vniuóco, signifying but one thing. Vno, the number of one. Vnóculo, hauing but one eie. Vno per vólta, one at once. Vnpaio, a paire, a couple, a brace, a caste, a yoke. Vn passo e salta, when a horse doth take one pace and a leape, which saultes or leaps ought to be Salti aggroppati, that is, high and strongly perfourmed on the backe. Vnpóco, a little quantitie. Vnpópo, a very little quantitie. Vnqua, euer or neuer, at any time, at no time. Vnquache, as Vnqua. Vnquemai, euer, or at any time. Vnquanco, as Vnqua. Vnticeio, as Vntume. Vntione, an vnction, a smearing, an an∣nointment, an annointing. Also a conse∣cration. Also one of the Romaine sacra∣ments. Vnto, annointed, ointed, greased, smeared. Also butter, but properly the leafe of a hogge, which is the fat that lyeth by the backe and ribs, good for salues or to frie meate with. Also fattie, oylie, or moyst. Also smooth and polished, and glib. Vntoso, fat, buttrie, greasie, full of fat or grease, oylie. Vntosottile, butter. Also seame of porke. Vn tratto, once, one time, one throwe, one caste, one tricke, one draught. Vntumo, any kinde of grease, fat, butter, ointment, salue, vnction, tallow, sewet, seame or such oylie or fattie substance. Vó, the first person singular of the pre∣sentence of the verbes Volere, and the verbe Andare, I wil, I desire, I require. &c. Looke Volére, I go, I wander, I walke, &c. Looke Andare. Also vsed for Voi, you. Looke Voi. Voarcadumia, a kinde of alchimie or transmutation of mettals. Voarcaumena, idem. Vocabolario, a dictionarie, a register of words. Vocabolista, as Vocabolario. Vocabolo, a word, a name, a terme, a de∣nomination of any thing. Vocabulario, as Vocabolario. Vocabulista, as Vocabolario. Vocabulo, as Vocabolo. Vocale, that hath a voice, that maketh a noise, that resounds or is loud, vocall al∣so a vowell. Vocali nerui, those noble sinewes which haue the vertue of forming the speech. Vocalità, a tune, a soūd, a voice, a calling. Vocare, to call, to bid, to will and inuite, to crie vnto or after. Vocatione, a vocation, a calling, a pray∣ing, a desiring, a requesting, or bid∣ding. Vocatiuo, of, or belonging to calling, vo∣catiue. Vocato, called, hight, named, bidden. Al∣so a praying, a desiring, a requesting, a calling, a bidding. Voce, a voice, a sound or a word, a reper∣cussion of the aire. a brute, a report, a voice, a crying, a tune, a saying, a spea∣king, a talke. Voce humana, humane or mans voice. Vocierare, as Vociferare. Vociferare, to cry out or aloud, to braie, to voice it, to exclaime. Vocina, a little, small, shrill voice. Vocitare, as Vociferare. Vocolari, the kernels or buttons vnder a hogs iawe. Voculatione, the accent of euery worde, the due moderation and measuring of the voice in pronouncing a word. Voga, a good hande or maine at dice or other gaming. also lucke or fortune. al∣so a will or desire, or harts wish. Al∣so the stroke of an oare in the water when one roweth. Vogare, to rowe in a gallie or any bote. Vogata, a rowing, a stroke, a reach or draught with an oare. Vogatore, a rower, a water-man, a scul∣ler. Vóglia, a will, a desire, a wish, a longing, a purpose, an intent, a liste. Vóglia Dio, would to god, god grant, I pray god. Vogliare, to make one willing, to long or liste for. Voglienza, as Vóglia. Vóglio, I will or am willing, my minde or will is. Looke Volére. Voglioso, willing, listing, longing, desi∣ring, wishing. Also disposed, lustie, full of will. Vogliuzza, a foolish, squeamish, womans longing, desire, liste, will, conceite, or hu∣mour. Voi, you, your selues. Voi stesso, or medesimo, your selfe. Vola, the hollownes of the hand being half open and halfe shut, the palme of the hande. Also he flyeth. Volamento, a flying, a fluttring. Also a running swiftly. Volandréllo, a kinde of owle or howlet. Volandole, the name of a rope-makers toole.
Volante, flying, going, or running swift∣ly. Also quick-siluer according to Al∣chimists new phrases. Volare, to flie in the ayre, to fleete or saile swiftly, to run or go quickly or in haste, to passe apace. Volarina, the fine floure or dust that flies away in the mill, and sticks to the wals. Also thistle downe. Volatica, a witch, a hagge, a sorceres. Al∣so a tetter, an itch, a ring-worme, or a dry scab. Also the morphew. Also anie thing that flieth or passeth away quick∣ly, and lightly, that is fleeting and vn∣constant. Volático, that flyeth or goeth awaie so∣dainely, flitting, vnconstant. Verme volatico, a disease in a horse called the bots. Volatile, that flieth or can flie, any kinde of bird, or fowle, that passeth or flitteth, passing swiftly, flitting quickly. Also any thing that is light, or whatsoeuer is easily caried, or flieth vpward into the aire, as ashes, dust, &c. Also quick-sil∣uer according to Chimists new fantasti∣call phrases. Volatiuo, as Volatile. Volatore, a flier, Looke Pesce volatore. Volatura, a flight, or a flying. Also a train for a hauke. Volazzare, to flutter, to houer vppe and downe, to purre as a partridge. Volcano, a hill that continually burneth and casteth out flame and smoke. Also a melting or hammering worke-man that is continually about the fire. Volénte, willing, voluntarie, glad, ready, desirous. Volentieri, willingly, gladly, wishing∣lie. Volenza, as Voglia. Volére, vóglio or vó, vólli, vólsi, voluto to will, to desire, to require, to minde, or to meane, to purpose, to intend. Also a will, a desire, a meaning, an intent, a wishing. Voluto, willed, desired, required, minded, ment, purposed, intended or wished. Voler bene, to loue or wish well vnto. Voler male, to hate or wish ill vnto. Volerla con qualcuno, to picke or seeke a quarrell with some body. Volgare, vulgar, common, publike, gene∣rall, vsuall. Also vile, base, much-vsed, belonging to the common people. Volgarmente, commonly, vulgarly, af∣ter the common sort, in euerie place, for the most part. Volgarità, vulgaritie, generalitie, com∣munaltie, the common manner of the wild and common people. Volgarizzare, to publish, to translate, to make common, to spread abroad. Also to noise, to bruit or disclose. Vólgere, vólgo, vólsi, or volgie, vol∣giuto, or volto, to turne, to ouerturne, to tosse, to tumbell, to transforme, to change, to incline, to bend, to stoope, to reuerse, to wry, to wrest, to addict, to cō∣uert, to folde, wrap or roule, to caste or thinke in the mind, to consider, to weigh, to caste reuolt, or reuolue to and fro, to run round or as a riuer doth. Volgiuto, volto, turned, ouerturned, tossed tūbled, transformed, reuolted, changed, inclined, bent, stooped, reuersed, wried, wrested, addicted, conuerted, reuolued, folded, wrapt or rouled, cast or thought in mind, considered or weighed, cast or reuolted to and fro, run round or in and out as a riuer doth. Volgimento, a turning, a tossing, a chan∣ging, a reuoluing, a bending, &c. Volgiuago, pertaining to the common people, poore, base, meane, of little value, of the common sort, common, vncon∣stant, vncertaine. Volgo, the common sort of people, the vul∣gar multitude, the mani-headed-mon∣ster multitude. Vólo, a flight, a flying, a pitch in flying. Voloni, they that offer themselues wil∣lingly to go to the wars. Volontà, will, good will, affection, mind, hart, meaning, consent, desire. Volontariamente, voluntarily, readily, willingly, promptly, with a readie good mind, of ones free will and accord. Volontario, voluntarie or willing, that is of ones owne accord. Also without any occasion giuen, without procuring, com∣ming of it selfe. Herba volontaria, a weed or an hearbe growing naturally without setting or sowing, Volonteroso, as Volontario. Volpaia, a foxe-hole, a den, a caue, a lur∣king hole. Volpare, to howle, to bray, to yelp, to bark as a fox▪ also to squeak, to pule, to shreek, to skreeke. Also as Volpeggiare. Volpe, a fxe, a renard. taken also for a craftie man or subtle sneaking compa∣nion. Volpeggiare, as Volpare, to play the fox or renard or craftie companion, to be wily, to deceiue with craftie wiles and deceits. Volpetta, a yoong foxe, a craftie childe, a cubbe. Volpe marino, a fish called a sea foxe. Volpicoda, an herbe called fox-taile. Volpino, craftie, slie, wily, subtle, wily-beguily, a yoong fox. Also a kind of fish called a sea foxe. Volpone, an old fox, an old reinard, an old craftie, slie, subtle companion, snea∣king lurking wily deceiuer. Volsélla, an instrument or paire of pinsrs to plucke out haires by the roots. Vólta, a time, once, one time. Also a turne or a course. Also a reuolt or returne. also a circuit or a compasse. Also a flight also a bout. Also a vault, a celler, an arche, a bent or bow. Also a dance called a Vólta. Also a mans turne or lot. Also the turne that cunning riders teach their horses. Vólta colcata, is when a horse doth leane in his turnes. Vólta d'ócchio, a twinkling of an eie. Vólta faccia, a kind of march sounded in time of war when they should retreat. Voltaccio, a filthie, grimme, ilfauoured face. Vólta per vólta, time by time, sometimes, at times, now and then. Vólta radoppiata, a double turn in dan∣cing or riding of a horse. Voltare, as Vólgere. Also to built vault-wise or arche-wise. Voltato, as Volgiuto, or built vault-wise or arched. Voltarélla, a silly time alone, one onely time. Voltare sozzopra, to turne, or ouerturne topsi-turuie. Voltatura, a vaulting or arching or ben∣ding. Volteggiare, to vault on horse backe. Also to tumble. Volteggiatore, a vaulter or a tumbler. Voltesini da poppa.   Volto, as Volgiuto. Looke Vólgere. Also a face, a looke, a countenance, a visage, a fauour or cheere of a man. Also a vault, a celler or arch of a bridge. Volto di ponte sisto, a bold, brazen, vn∣blushing, shameles face. Voltolamento, a rouling, a tumbling, a tossing, an ouerturning, a topsi-turuie. Voltolare, to roule vp and downe, to tum∣ble, to tosse, to ouerturne, to rumble, to wallowe, topsi-turuie. Voltore, a rauenous bird called a vultur, a geyre or grap. Also a greedie cormo∣rant. Voltorino, of or belonging to a vulture or cormorant. Also a kind of graie co∣lour. Voltuoso, of a graue and solemne counte∣nance, of a heauie and sad looke, hauing a big looke, a sowre man.
Volturio, a rauenous fellow, an extortio∣ner, a cormorant. Volubile, voluble, fickle, vnconstant, va∣riable, wauering, changing, nimble, flit∣ting, rolling, alwaies turning, euer run∣ning. Also that is or may easily be tur∣ned, tumbled or rolled. Also hauing a round pronuntiation, gathering it selfe togither. Also vsed for a weed running vp by trees and herbs hauing red bran∣ches, and the leaues biting the toong, cal∣led commonly roape-weed or weede-binde. Volubilità, volubilitie, roundnes, muta∣bilitie, ficklenes, vncōstancie, nimblenes, flittingnes, the turning of a thing, faci∣litie to turne round, aptnes to roule. Al∣so a round or quicke speaking without impediment or staggering, the falling & round going of words by measure. Volubilmente, roulingly, roundly, with a certaine measure in falling. Volucchio, the herbe called withi-wind, weed-bind or roap-weed. Looke Volu∣bile. Volucra, a vermin that eateth tender vines, called a vine fretter, the Diuels gold ring. Volucre, fledge, able to flye. Also any thing that flyeth, swift, light, flitting, vnconstant. Volucro, all things that do flye, a a foule, a bird, a flie, a waspe, &c. Also the af∣ter birth of a woman. Volume, a volume, a booke, a tome, a part of a booke. Also a folding, turning or rouling about. Voluoce, a little worme with many legs, eating the leaues of vines or other trees, a caterpiller, a vine fretter or the Di∣uels gold ring. Volura, that in the head or chapiter of a piller which sticketh out or hangeth ouer in maner of a writhen circle or curled tuft, being a kind of worke of leaues, or some such deuise turning diuers and sundrie waies, caruers and painters call it draperie or cillerie. Some say it is the square table of stone set vpon the chap∣ters of pillers. Volutare, to turne lying, to wallow, to tumble. Also to reuolue, cast and tosse in the mind. Volutatione, a wallowing, a tumbling. Voluttà, voluptuousnes, sensualitie, de∣light or worldly pleasure, solace, com∣fort, delectation, sensual and worldly pleasure. Voluttario, pleasant, bringing pleasure, delighting in, taking and giuen to plea∣sure, voluptuous. Also of or belonging to pleasures and sensualitie. Voluttuoso, voluptuous, sensuall, vnsati∣able in sensuall pleasure. Vóme, he vomiteth. Vómer di penna, vsed by Petrarke in steed of writing. Vómere, Vómero, the sough or plough∣share or culter, or the iron of the plough that pierceth the ground, as Vomitare. Also taken for a mans priuities. Vomica, a kind of Indian nut. Also a kind of impostume full of matter. Also quick siluer. Vomire, to spue, to vomit. Vomitare, to vomit, to cast, to spue, to per∣breake, to cast vp. Vómito, a vomit, a casting, a spuing, a perbreaking. Also that which is vomi∣ted. Vomitório, that hath the nature or strength to make one vomit, spue or caste. Vopisco, of two twins or yoong children in a womans bodie, that which com∣meth to perfect birth is so called. Vopo, neede, or necessitie. Vorace, rauenous, greedie, deuouring, consuming, a spend-good, a glutton, a rauenour, a great deuourer, or eater. Voracità, gluttonie, excessiue eating, rauenous feeding, a deuouring. Also a gulfe. Voragine, a swallow, a gulfe, a whirle∣poole, a quauemyre, or maruelous deepe place that sucketh or swalloweth vp euen riuers, and whereout nothing can come againe. Also gluttonie, insacietie, deuouring, wasting of good, and thrift. Voraginoso, full of gulfes or swallowing pits or whirlepooles. Also gluttonous, deuouring, waste-good, and spend all. Vorare, to swallow or deuoure downe meate before it be chewed, to eate gree∣dilie. Vorrà, he shall be willing, he shall will or list, vsed for Borra. Vortumino, the god of changing things, that is of merchandise. Vosatti, buskins, or high clownish shoes. Vosco, with you, in your companie. Vose, as Voce, as Vosatti. Vostrale, common, or peculiar to you. Vostro, yours, your owne, your. Vota céssi, an emptier of iakes or priuies, or close stooles, a iakes-farmer. Votare, to vowe, to make a vowe, to pro∣mise, to protest. Also to emptie, to make voide, or hollow. Also to bequeath and giue. Votamento, an empting, the act of emp∣ting. Also a vowing or promising. Votario, a votarie, a vower, a promiser, a vow-maker. Votatore, a vower, a promiser, a vota∣rie. Votezza, emptines, vacuitie. Votiuo, that is vowed or promised by vow Also that is or hath beene greatly wi∣shed or desired. Vóto, a vowe or promise made to God, a desire, a prayer, a protestation. Also a wish or a thing much desired, a request. Also an affection or appetite of coue∣tousnes. Also a thing obtained of God by prayer. Also a consent, voice, or suf∣frage giuen to one in any election. Also emptie, hollow, or voide. Vottene meglio, I loue thee better for it. Vouale, oualle, like an egge, more long then round. Vóuo, an egge. Vozzacchio, a kinde of long wingd hawke. Vpega, a bird called a hoope, or dunghill cock. Looke Vpupa. Vpetala, a kinde of speckled stone. Vpilare, to stop, to be bound or costiue in the bellie. Vpilato, stopt, bound or costiue in the bellie. Vpilatione, a costiuenes, or hardnes in the bellie, an oppilation or stopping of the liuer. Vpilatino, costiue, binding, restringent, stopping. Vpupa, a bird no bigger then a Thrush, with a crest from his bill to the vtter∣most part of his head, which he strou∣teth out or holdeth downe according to his affections, called a houpe or a dung∣hill cock, because it nestleth in mans dung, as writers report. Some haue a∣busiuely taken vpupa for a chough, a dawe, or a chuet. Also a kind of beetle, mattock, pickaxe, or such other iron toole to dig stones with out of a quarrie. Vpupare, to crye as a hoope or dunghill cock. Vraco, the way by which vrine is con∣uaide from the infant being yet in the wombe. Vranoscopo, a fish hauing but one eye in his head, and that so placed, that swim∣ming he seemeth to looke vpward. Vrbanità, courtesie, ciuilitie, ciuill life, good manners, gentle behauiour, gentle∣nes in speech and behauiour, pleasant talke or iesting, or pleasant grace in iesting. Also ciuill affaires. Vrbano, of a citie, borne or dwelling in a citie. Also courteous, ciuill, seemelie
or pleasant, ciuill in courtesie, gentle in speech and gesture, pleasant in beha∣uiour and talke. Also a kinde of par∣tridge. Vredine, the blasting of trees or herbes with colde. Also an itch or burning in the skinne. Vrete, Vretro, the pipe or conduite by which the vrine passeth from the reines to the bladder. Vrgénte, forcing, vrgent, vrging, strai∣ning, pressing, calling earnestlie vpon, sore or hardly pressing. Vrgenza, force, vrging, straining, con∣straint, importunitie, an vrging ne∣cessitie. Vrgere, vrgo, vrgei, vrgiuto, to vrge, to importune, to presse on, to prouoke, to hasten foorth, to enforce, to straine, to pursue, to solicite, to call vpon, to vex, to infest, to be streight or earnest vpon, to hasten forth or forward, to charge earnestlie, to lye earnestlie vp∣pon one, to labour and trauell ear∣nestlie. Vrgiuto, vrged, pressed, importuned, pro∣uoked, enforced, strained, pursued, sol∣licited, vexed, infested, &c. Looke Vr∣gere. Vri, a kinde of wylde beast like an oxe, a bugle or a buff, as Vro. Vrica, a caterpiller or such worme. Also a hurt comming to all manner of graine by too much moisture. Vrigine, a burning in sores by occasion of hot medicines, or corrosiues. Vrina, vrine, water of man or beast, pisse, stale. Also a kinde of wilde beast. Vrina genitale, the seede of generation. Vrinale, Vrinaio, a vrinall, a pispot. Also a medicine to prouoke pisse. Also the pipe through which the pisse run∣neth from out the bladder. Vrinare, to pisse, to stale, to make water. Also to diue or duck vnder the wa∣ter. Vrinarij, Vritidi, the passages for vrine to the raines. Vrinatrice, a diuer, a didopper, or duc∣ker. Vritare, to burne sore or vehementlie. Vrlamento, a howling, a baying, a bar∣king, a braying, a yelling. Vrlare, to howle, to baye, to barke, to braye, to yell. Also to hem or welt a garment. Vrlatore, a barker, a howler, a bayer, a brayer, a yeller. Vrlo, as Vrlamento. Also a hem, or welt of any seame. Vrna, any manner or kinde of earthen pot, or a pitcher. Also a tombe, a graue, a sepulcre▪ also a vessell or cophin where∣in the ashes of the dead were kept. Also according to ancient Romane histories a measure of liquid things containing of our measure about foure gallons or gawnes and a halfe. Vrnaio, a potter, or maker of pitchers. also a boord or shelfe in a kitchin where∣on pots and vessels are kept. Vrnale, of or belonging to a pitcher or pot. Vro, a kinde of wilde bull in Hercynia, but bigger then ours in bodie, and very swift. Others take it for the bugle or buff. Vropigo, the narrowest and lowest part of the chine, the rumpe. Vrsa, a shee-Beare. Also a signe of the starres in the north called Charles∣waine. Vrsetta, as Orsetta, as Foracqua. Vrtare, to shoulder, to push, to shoue, to thrust, to iussle, to encounter, to but, to shock, to front, to thump. Vrtatura, as Vrto. Vrto, Vrtone, a push, a shouldring, a shoouing, a thrust, a iussling, an en∣counter, a shock, a fronting, a tripping, a stumbling, a iog, a thump. Vrtica, the weede called a nettle. Also the tickling of letcherie. Also a kinde of fish. Vrticare, to sting, to prick, to tickle, to nettle. Vsante, vsing, accustomed, wont, fre∣quenting. Vsanza, vse, fashion, guise, custome, manner, wont, habite, occupation, em∣ployment, vsage, enurement. Vsare, to vse, to enure, to fashion, to ac∣custome, to be wont. Also to vse or take profit of, to occupie, to employ, to pos∣sesse. Also to be conuersant, familiar, or haue to do with one. Also to behaue himselfe. Vsare diligentia, to vse all diligence or endeuour. Vsato, All'usato, after the common, wonted, or ordinarie fashion. Vsatti, buskins, short, thin bootes. Also high clownish shoes. Vsbergo, a vant-plate, a breast-plate. Vscénte, issuing, or going out. Also an out-tooth. Vsciali, the garnishings of dores. Vsciére, an vsher or a dore-keeper, or a porter. Vscietto, Vsciettino, a little dore or a wicket, a hatch before a dore. Vscignólo, a Nightingale. Vscio, any kinde of dore, or entrance. Vscio di dietro, a back dore. Vsciuólo, a little dore, or wicket, a hatch before a dore. Vscire, esco, vscij, vscito, to issue, or goe forth. Also to proue, to sort, to effect, to come to passe. Looke Riuscire. Vscito, issued, or gone forth. Also pro∣ued, sorted, or come to passe. Vscire del trótto, to goe out of ones pace or trot, to goe out of ones byas, vsed also to become gentle or myld againe. Vscita, an issue, a going forth, an opening, a dore, a gap, an egresse, a regresse. Vsellare, as Vccellare. Vséllo, a gudgeon-fish, or a loche fish. Al∣so as Vccéllo. Vsia, the substance, or being of a thing. Vsignólo, a Nightingale. Vsitato, much vsed or accustomed, won∣ted, ordinarie, common, vsuall, wont, customable. Vso, vse, vsage, custome, fashion, wont, guise, manner or vre. Also the vse, ex∣ercise, tenure, or occupation of any thing. Also profit, help, fruite, seruice, or possession of any commoditie, the oc∣cupation or exercise of a thing. Vsofrutto, as Vsufrutto. Vsolieri, laces, points, or ribands with tagges, such as women lace or tye their peticotes. Also shirt strings, or filets. Vssignólo, a Nightingale. Vstione, a burning, a searing. Also a marking with a hot iron. Vstrigine, burning or smarting in sores. Also blasting of corne through heate. Vstrina, a place where dead bodies are buried. Also a melting-house for met∣tals. Vstulare, to burne or seare a thing. Also to frizle or curle. Vsuale, vsuall, common, wont, customable, much vsed, accustomed, ordinarie, won∣ted. Also as Vsuario. Vsuario, vsuall, that serueth for our vse, that we haue the vse of, but not the pro∣prietie. Also he that hath the vse of a thing, but neither the fruite nor the pro∣prietie. Vsucápere, to attaine and become mai∣ster, lord or owner of any thing by long vse, custome, or prescription, or by pos∣session of long time. Vsucattione, the attaining of a thing by prescription or long possession. Vsucatto, become possessor of any thing by long vse, custome, or prescription. Vsufrutto, the vse, fruite, or profit (but not the proprietie) of another mans goods with the consent of the owner, the
stock and substance being saued. Vsufruttuario, he that hath the vse and profit of any thing but not the proprie∣tie thereof. Vsura, vsage, vsurie, vse, or interest of any thing, monie giuen aboue the prin∣cipall summe for the lone of it. Vsuraio, an vsurer. Also that is let to v∣surie. Also he that paieth vsurie. Vsuratico, of or pertaining to vsurie, or the monie paide for vsurie. Vsuriere, as Vsuraio. Vsurpare, to vsurp, to take against right and reason, to disturbe anothers pos∣session. Also to vse often or much, be it in word or deede. Vsurpatione, Vsurpamento, oft vsing or practising, vsurping, or interruption of possession, or disturbing of prescrip∣tion. Vsurpatore, an vsurper of another mans right. Vt, a note in musike vt. Vtéllo, as Vtréllo. Vtensile, any thing necessarie for the vse and occupying of a man in a house. Vterino, borne of the same mother or dam, both of one wombe or mother. Fratéllo vterino, a halfe brother, or a brother by the mother and not by the father. Vtero, a wombe, a bellie, a panch, the matrix or wombe of a woman wherein the child is conceiued: vsed also for the childe in the mothers wombe. Vtile, profitable, commodious, expedient, conuenient, good, necessarie, prosperous, wholesome, gainefull. Also as Vti∣lità. Vtilità, profit, vtilitie, commoditie, gaine, good, seruice, cheuissance. Vtilmente, profitablie, commodiouslie, conuenientlie, gainefullie, with profit. Vtraio, a maker of pots, bottles, bouges, or borachos, or budgets of lether made bot∣tlewise to carie wyne or oyle in. Vtréllo, a little pot, bottle, bouge, bora∣cho, or budget of lether or gotes skinne wherein wine, water or oyle may be caried. Vtria, as Vtro. Vtriaca, treacle, an antidote against poyson. Vtriculo, Vtricolo, the place in a wo∣man wherein the childe lyeth. Vtro, a pot, a bottle, a bouge, a budget, a boracho, a bag of gotes skinne that they vse in Italie to carie wyne or oyle in from place to place. Vua, any kind of grape to make wine with. Also a vine or branch or cluster of grapes. Also a berrie. Also vsed for the Vuula of a mans mouth, or rather the disease or falling thereof. Looke V∣uola. Vua, a disease in the eies called a pin and a web. Vua passa, dried reisins or grapes. Also Corans. Vua marina, sea grape. of some called a Scorpion. Vua moscatélla, muskadine grapes. Vua crispina, as Vua spina. Vua secca, dried grapes or reisins. Vua spina, goose-berries or thorne ber∣ries. Vua spinélla, as Vua spina. Vua taminia, blacke briony or our Ladies seale. Vua vara, yoong grapes beginning to be ripe, a rath grape. Vuatione, infirmità nel ócchio.   Vuéa, like a grape, of a grape. looke To∣nica. the fourth thin membrane of the eie, called also Corione, Chorione, Secondina, Coriforme, or Chori∣forme, and is the first that clotheth and couereth the optike sinew. Vuéo, of a grape or like a grape. Vui, vsed for Voi, you or your selues. Vuido, wet, moist. Vuifero, which beareth grapes, bringing grapes. Vulgagine, the herbe folefoote, or Asara∣bacca. Vulgare, as Volgare. Vulgarizzare, as Volgarizzare. Vulgato, common, publicke, manifest, pub∣lished, commonly vsed, set out to the vse of all men. Vulgo, as Volgo. Vulna, a wound, a griefe, a pinching, a sore or hurt. Vulnerare, to hurt or wound. Also to nip or grieue. Vulpare, to crie or pule like a kite. Vulsione, a conuulsion, the twinging or pulling of the cramp. Vulturno, the northeast wind. Vulua, the matrice, wombe or mother, the place of conception in any female. Also the way or entrance into the same, the wombe part or womb passage, the priuie passage. Vuóga, as Voga. Vuogare, as Vogare. Vuógli, hath been vsed for Vuói, id est, thou wilt. Vuola, a little piece of spungeous flesh much like the spur of a cock, which hang∣ing downe in the roofe of ones mouth, neere to the passage into the nosthrils, serueth for the vtterance of voice and pronuntiation, when, being distempred, the vpper part thereof is thin, and the lower part blackish, like the vtmost end of a grape, and then it is called Sta∣phile or Vua: but when it is swollen as round and big aboue as below in forme of a piller, then is called Ciona, or Co∣lomella, or Columella. Vuolaria, the herbe horse toong. Vuótacessi, as Votacessi. Vuotare, to emptie, to voide, to farme. also to make hollow. Vuotatore, an emptier, a voider, a far∣mer. Vuóto, void, emptie, hollow. Also as Vó∣to. Vuóua, egs. Vuouale, as Ouale. Vuoua maritate, egs in moone shine. Vuóuolo, a kind of mazons worke so cal∣led. Vurchio, a hulke, a hurk, a crayer, a lyter, a whirrie or such vessell of burthen. Vuula, as Vuola. Z ZAbaione, as Zambaglione. Zaburro, a kind of graine or corne growing in India, which some take to be the ginnie wheat. Zacca, a fowling net, a hay, a bag or sat∣chell made of net worke, a casting net. Záccara, a common whore, a harlot or strumpet, a trull. Zaccarare, to daggle, to dash or spot with durt or mire, to bemire. Zaccarélle, toyes, trifles, vanities, trash, nifles. Also dashings or spots of durt or mire. Záccare, the spots of durt that a long gar∣ment gathereth about the skirts. Also troubles, griefes, vexations or garboiles that a man hath. Also common whores or baudie houses. Zaccaria, fiore di zaccatia, the flowre called blew bottel. Zacchéo, a foolish slouenly dwarfe. Zaccherare, as Zaccarare. Zácchere, as Záccare. Zaccherélle, trifles, toyes, nifles, vani∣ties, as Zaccarélle. Zaccherette di parole, a huddle of foo∣lish words, a flim-flam tale without rime or reason. Zaccheroso, mirie, bemired, durtie. Also all-to be dashed with durt. Zacconare, as Zazzeare, as Anfa∣nare.
Zaffara, an iron hooke or drag that dyers vse to drawe their clothes out of their fattes or vattes. Zaffarano, saffron. Zaffaria, the order, rout, company or crue of sergeants and catch-poles or such base officers, a marshals court. Also a catch∣poles tricke. Zaffare, to gripe, to snatch, or seaze vpon with ones pawes, to catch or arest with a sergeant or catch-pole. Zaffatto, griped, snatcht, seazed on or caught by a sergeant. Zaffata, a gripe, a snatching or a catching. Also a blow or a pat with a claw. Zaffeggiare, to play the sergeant or catch∣pole. Also to pat or beate with ones pawes. Zaffera, a kind of colour that painters vse. Zaffiro, a kind of hauke with yellow feete and legs. Also a precious stone called a saphire. Also a kind of fish of the kind of the gilthead. Zaffo, a sergeant or a catch-pole. Also the eares of a tub. Also the working or boy∣ling of new wine. Zaffora, a kind of soft crumbling stone or minerall. Zaffranare, to dresse or dye with saffron. Zaffrano, saffron. Zafila, Zaphila, as Tanado. Zafiro, a precious stone called a saphire. Zagaglia, a turkish cimitarie or short sword. Also a captaines leading staffe. Zaganélla, a trunke to shoot pellets in. Al∣so a squib or cracker of wilde fire. Zagarélla, any kind of list, hem or lace or welt about the skirts of a garment. Also a curb of leather in stead of an iron curb or any other thing that is gentle, and in steed of the curb that riders vse to yoong coults. Zago, a priests clarke that helps him to say masse. Zaina, any kind of drinking glasse. Also a kind of tree growing in America, wher∣of they make canoas and boates and call them so by the name of the tree. Zainetta, a little drinking glasse. Zaino, a little leather budget, a palmers scrip. Also a horse that is altogither of one blacke or of any one colour without any marke, star or spot about him. Also a certaine musicall instrument that shepheards vse, as a horne pipe. Zaldone, a kind of flowre. Zalolino, a kind of wan pale colour. Zamara, zamarra, a rugge, a freese gowne, a sea-mans gowne, a shepherds, frocke or mantle. Also a kind of musical instrument with strings. Zamarrótto, as Zamara. Zambaglione, a kind of drinke made for sicke folkes called a caudle. Zambélla, a trull, a flurt, a minx, a har∣lot, a whore. Zambellaro, Zambelle, Looke Ciam∣bélle. Zambellótto, a kinde of stuffe called chamblot. Zambetti, that ioynt of meate we call a spring or pestle of porke, as Zampetti. Zambra, a close stoole. Also a chamber, o a closet. Zambracca, a colmon-hedge-whore, a strumpet, a base harlot. Zambudélli, a kinde of dried sausages or pudding. Zampa, the pawe, the clawe, the clunch or gripe of any beast. Zampare, to catch or sease on with a paw, a claw or a clunch. Zampettare, to foote it daintily, to trippe it, to tread the measures faire and soft∣ly. Also to tipple square, to quaffe, to trot to tauerns. Zampette, little clawes, pawes, clinches, or gripes. Zampetti, all maner of beasts feete that are drest to be eaten, as sheepes trotters, or pigs feete, or neates feete. Zampillare, to purle, to bubble, to sprout, to spring, to spin, or gush foorth as wa∣ter doth out of a spring. Also to sprout, to budde, to peepe foorth, to bloome, to blossome, as vines do. Zampillo, Zampilletto, a purle, a bub∣ble, a spinning, a gushing of waters. al∣so yoong shoots, buds, sprigs, or yoonge springs, blossoms, or bloomes of vines. Zampogna, an oaten pipe, a shepheards pipe, a bagge-pipe. Also a bell that is hung about a goate or bell-weathers necke. Zampognare, to sound or plaie vpon any kind of reede, pipe, or bagge-pipe. Zampognaro, a plaier vpon anie pipe or bagge-pipe. Also a bell-weather. Zamponare, to rake or dragge with an iron hooke, to stirre vp the fire. Zampone, an iron dragging hooke, or crooke, or rake. Also an iron fire forke. Zampunare, as Zamponare. Zampune, as Zampone. Zana, a countrey wenches girdle, or skarfe, or countrie frocke. Also a cradle for a childe. Also a great cesterne to receiue and hold water. Also a barrow to carie things vpon betweene two. Also a iest, a floute, a fable, or as we say a gull or gudgeon giuen to one. Zanada, a foolish zanes trike. Zanaiuólo, as Zane, or Zanuólo. Zanca, the left side, or hande, as Mano zanca, the left hande. Also vsed by Dante for a legge. Also as Zampa. Zancaruto, crookt-legd, hauing crooked legs. Zanche, as Strampoli. Zancia, as Ciancia. Zanciare, as Cianciare. Zanciatore, as Cianciatore. Zanciume, as Cianciume. Zanco, a left handed man, a left handed blow. Zane, the name of Iohn. Also a sillie Iohn, a gull, a noddie. Vsed also for a simple vice, clowne, foole, or simple fellowe in a plaie or comedie. Zanfrone, a lustie lad, a yoong gallant, a swaggrer. Also red ruddocks, pelfe, coin, or crownes. Zangarinelli, a kind of fish. Zángola, a close stoole. Zannare, to bite, to snip, to pinch to teare, or take hold of with tuskes. Zanne, the tuskes or foretooth of a bore. Zanni, cosening, crosse-byting, coni-cat∣ching knaues. Zannuolo, a sillie Iohn, a poore Iohn, a iacke, a wagge, a wanton, a dilling, a darling. Zanzale, a gnat. Zanzana, Zanzara, a gnat. Zanzauerata, a kinde of meate made of greene ginger. Also as Fagiolata. Zanzeare, to be bitten with gnats or flies. Also to go idlie loytring and buzzing vp and downe, to iet and braue it vppe and downe wantonlie, to mince it, to plaie the minikin. Zanzeoni, foolishlie, carelessely, wanton∣ly, heedlessely. Also idle, foolish, wan∣ton loytrers. Zanzera, a gnat. Zanzerare, to ingle boies, to play wanton∣ly with boyes against nature. Zanzeri, ingles, ganimeds, cinedos. wan∣ton boies, craftie wags, suttle boies, kna∣uish lads. Zanzerini, as Zanzeri. Zanzeuerino, as Zazzeatore, as Zan∣zeri. Zanzola, a kinde of pot, pan, or traie in a kitchin. Zapino, a tree that yeeldeth a liquor which cureth the leprosie. Zappa, a mattocke to dig and delue with, a sappe. Zappamento, a digging or a deluing. Zappare, to digge, or delue, or grubbe the ground, to sap. Zappatore, a digger, a deluer, a grubber,
lie, grosse, blockish, rude, carterlike fellow. Zottare, to halt or criple, to limp. Zotto, a halting, a limping or cripling fellow. Zuane, as Zane, or Zannuólo. Zucca, a pompion, or a gourd. Also a salt-boxe, for that in Italie they vse to make of dried gourds saltboxes, bottles, or lanternes. It is also taken metapho∣ricallie for a mans pate, head, braine, skonce, or nole, or skull. Also a kinde of wyne-measure. Also a skull, a head∣piece, or steele-cap. Also a kinde of drinking glasse. Zucca al vento, an idle head, a shallow braine, an idle foolish wit, a witlesse skull. Zucca da sale, a salt-boxe. Also as Zuc∣ca al vento. Zucca senza sale, a foolish, idle, dull, blockish, ignorant fellow, one that hath no wit. Zuccaio, a place where gourds and pom∣pions growe. Zucca marina, a pompion or melon. some call it a sea-cowcomber, or turkie pom∣pion. Zuccarina, a kinde of roche allome. Also a kinde of drinking-glasse. Zucca saluatica, as Vitalba. Zucca spadaia, as Vitalba. Zuccata, a meate made of pompions or gourds. Also a flim-flam tale, a tale without ryme or reason, or without head or foote. Zucchetta, a little gourd or pompion. Zuccaro, sugar. Zuccherare, to sugar, to candie, to pre∣serue or dresse with sugar. Zuccheraio, a sugar-maker, a comfet∣maker, a preseruer, a candier. Zuccherini, a kind of sweete meate made of sugar like marchpane, of which they make of diuers formes and fashions, as of beasts and birds. Zucchero, sugar. Zuccheroso, sweete, candied, full of su∣gar, sugrie. Zucchetra, a casting-bottle for sweete water. Also a little skull, or iron cap, or caske. Zucconare, to poule, to nort, to shaue, or cut off ones haire. Zuccone, a shauen pate, a notted poule, a pouled pate, a gull, a ninnie, a ioult∣head. Zuffa, a fray, a quarrell, a braule, a bicke∣ring, a skirmish. Zuffare, to fight, to braule, to quarrell, to skirmish, to bicker. Zuffo, a whistle, a pipe, a flute, or fife. Also some part about a horse or of a horse. Zuffolare, to whistle, to pipe, to fife, to blow hard. Zuffolatore, a whistler, a piper, a fifer. Zuffolini, little whistles or pipes. Zuffolo, as Zuffo. Zugo, a gull, a dunce, an asse, a doult, a patch or a noddie. Also a pillicocke, a darling, or a wanton, or a minion. Zugone, as Zugo. Zui, a kinde of birde. Zuppa, a soppe, a toste, a messe of brewes. Also brth with bread-sop in it. Zuppare, to soppe. Zurlare, to iest, to scoffe, to mock, to frp, to dally with, to carrie-fauour. Zurlatore, a iester, a scoffer, a mocker, a frumper, a crie-fauourer. Zurlo, a round turning tricke in daing. also a kind of dizzines or giddis in the head. Also a whip or scourge to make a top turne round. Also a top or a gig. Al∣so a foole, a ninnie, a gull. Zurma, as Ciurma. Zurmaglia, as Ciurmaglia. Zurmare, as Ciurmare. Zurmatore, as Ciurmatore. Zurumbet, a kind of strange tree. Zuzo, Zuso, an owle. Zuzzare, as Succiare, or Succhiare. Zuzzos, a kind of beast like a coie which carrieth hir yoong ones in a bg that hangs at hir belly, they be good to eat. Zuzzulino, a kind of tanney colour that painters vse. X XAgue, a kind of tree in India, the iuice whereof dyeth all things blacke. Xenofeggia, the first moone in Septem∣ber so called of the Grecians. Xifio, a fish called a sword fish, hauing a beak like a sword. Looke Pesce spada. Also comets or blazing sts in the aire appearing like swords or gleaes. Also an herbe called Stiking-gladen or Spurge-woort. FINIS. Imprinted at London by Arnold Hatfield, for Edward Blunt: and are to be sold at his shop ouer against the great North dore of Paules Church. 1598.
