11300 99849553 14707
A DECLARATION MADE BY THE REFOR∣MED CHVRCHES OF FRANCE AND THE PRINCIPALITIE OF BEARN. Concerning their vniust persecution by the Enemies of the Estate and of their Religion. Together with their lawfull and necessarie defence. Acording to the French Copie printed in Rochell. M. DC. XXI.
A DECLARATION made by the Reformed Chur∣ches of France and the Princi∣palitie of Bearn. Concerning their vniust persecution by the enemies of the Estate and of their Religion. Together with their lawfull and necessary defence. WE the Deputies in the Generall Assembly of the Reformed Churches of France and the Principalitie of Bearn, persecuted by the ene∣mies of the Estate and of their Religion, who abuse the Kings mind and conscience, seeing that to our great griefe we are constrained by the violence of oppression to haue recourse vnto naturall and lawfull meanes (by a necessarie defence) to preserue the libertie of our consciences and the safetie of our liues against these our implacable enemies: We protest in the name of the said Churches before God and men, inuiolably to remaine vnder the subiection of our King, acknowledging that he is giuen vs of God to be our soueraigne Lord. And that all the world may take notice that as this obedience, next vnto the worship of God, is the onely aime of our intention, sufficiently manifested by our former fidelitie ingrauen in the pillars of our Estate, and in the crownes of our late Kings, raised vp againe by our predecessors and our selues, notwithstanding the endeuors of our enemies factions: also the hatred and persecution which we now endure, is raised vp for no other cause by our enemies, but for this holy and iust action; whereunto they know we are inseparably bound, by the rules of our
Religion, by the example of our progenitors, and the right of our owne conseruation. First of all then we beseech the King and all true French men, as also all Kings, Princes and Potentates, friends and confederates of the Crowne, and generally all men who are touched with the zeale of Gods glorie, with commise∣ration of innocencie troden vnder foote, and with griefe for the miseries which at this day threaten France: to in∣forme themselues here of our iust complaints, that in them they may see the perfidiousnesse of our enemies and their crueltie, and which (whether we will or no) they pull out of our bosome, and binde vs to publish for the iustification of our innocencie, and to let all such as loue iustice and truth see, that the refuge of our defence whereunto we are brought, is both necessary and iust; our enemies being thrust forward by no other motiue to kindle the fire in this kingdome, then to put out the light of our Religion, and to ouerthrow the most sure resistance which in the Estate may be opposed to forrein enterprises. But because by their wonted subtilties they haue here followed the common course which tends to violence and crueltie, making to themselues a way by false accusations to the oppression of a iust cause. And for a pretence to inuade vs, they haue pro∣claimed vs rebels and seditious; and to spread euery where this accusation, they employ the Edicts and declarations of the King and of the Parliaments, yea and the mouth of Ambassadours in forrein parts. To the end that the simpli∣citie of those who are least informed either of the hatred, or of the power, or of the craft of our enemies, might not re∣ceiue some sinister impression of vs; touching the dutie of obedience and fidelitie towards our King and country: we will shew here that all the pretences and iniurious crimes wherewith they charge vs, are meerly artificiall disgui∣sings borrowed as a veile to couer the outrages done to in∣nocencie. For as to inflame the hatred of Kings and the fu∣rie of the people against the Gospell, they haue heretofore accused the first Christians, & our fathers in these last times
of like crimes, namely that they transgressed against the de∣crees Act. 17. 7. of Cesar, moued sedition among the people, and did ouerthrow the royaltie of Princes. Vnder these supposed accusations they haue caused them to suffer euery where the violence of the sword, the burning of fire, the crueltie of massacres, the futie of warres, and the horror of all sorts of exquisite torments. It is true, that as our fathers were more weake and naked, or exposed to a more easie slaughter, Re∣ligion then was directly charged with these crimes, and then they haue persecuted and made open war vpon them for their professions sake. But now by a subtiltie fitted to their intentions, our enemies haue altered the method. They enterprise warre vpon the persons, to breake in vpon Rel∣gion. And because that after so many perfidious and cruell practises, the arme of God hauing raised vs vp, as out of our fathers ashes, and by the miraculous prosperitie of the late King (conducted by our sidelitie vpon the throne of this monarchie) the breaches of the Estate being repaired, that there might be established a firme peace, an Edict was gran∣ted vs for the libertie of our consciences, and places of safe∣tie to preserue our goods and liues against the violence which the former euils made vs feare for the time to come: truly it were now too an apparent violating of peace, and they should too manifestly declare themselues enemies of the quiet of France, if openly this Edict made in fauour of vs, should be reuoked, and it they should make war vpon vs for Religion. It were also to ingage too many persons in one selfe same cause. For these causes to couer their pro∣iected purpose of the ruine of this Estate through ours, to arme the King against vs, and to destroy vs with greater ease then other wise they could possibly do. They haue pro∣claimed vs rebels and offenders, they haue endeuoured to make this cause more particular; they call the warre they make vpon vs a chastisement of seditious persons. But when we shall haue here made plaine to the eyes of all the world the purpose of those who are authors of these troubles and confusions; the long oppression we haue hitherto endured
with all patience; the euidences of our right in the course we haue held in our complaints, and most humble suites made to our King, now laid against vs as a crime: Lastly ye open persecutiō which at this instant they inflict vpō vs by the armies already raised against vs in all the parts of this kingdome where they thinke we are able any way to resist, We hope that we shall cleare our innocencie from these slanders, shall approue our iust and necessary defence, which we vndertake, waiting for the help and blessing of the Almightie. And finally we shall obtaine fauour and as∣sistance from all such as loue his glorie and the truth: and the succour and helpe of whosoeuer they be that desire the conseruation of this poore kingdome. Since the most sure stay o the Edict for our safetie, esta∣blished The intent of our enemies, and the meanes to attain therto by the mightie hand of the late King, fell by the stroke of his death; the enemies of our Religion and of the publike peace, lifting vp themselues with more hope of go∣ing forward and of bringing their purposes to passe, turned all their endeuours to ouerthrow this foundation of the tranquillitie of the State, knowing that the surest way to bring againe the confusion of troubles and of the fore∣passed warres, was to destroy the Edict which had destroy∣ed them. But not being able to promise to themselues that the good inclinations of the King, and the wisedome of his Mother then Regent, and all well affected Frenchmen in∣teressd in the peace of the kingdome, would consent, or could suffer an open breach of the Edict, they sought to gaine by peece-meale that which they could not obtaine in the whole summe: and by fleights and more secret pra∣ctises to cause things to fall into the gulfe, whereinto now they haue throwne them. The first groundworke of their plot did bewray it selfe with astonishment and iust apprehension of all of vs, when in the coronation of the King they made him take this oath: I will truly endeuour to my power to exclude from my iu∣risdiction and lands vnder my subiection, all heretickes so de∣nounced by the Church. As if he took his Crowne vnder this
condition and vnder this law, that he should roote vs out when he could do it. The blood of that great Henrie crieth yet for vengeance for the furious and abominable murthe∣rer, who protested and affirmed that the onely reason why he murthered him, was because he was a fauourer of here∣ticks, that he suffered them in his kingdome, that he put them not to the sword: and here they haue caused his son and successor, to promise that he shall employ all his power to roote vs out. By this powerfull and effectuall reason they did ingraue in the Kings heart from his most tender yeares the necessitie of hating and destroying vs; and besides the horror of the example of his Father cruelly slaine for main∣taining peace with those who are called hereticks, they take of him a solemne promise to raigne and sit vpon his throne vnder this condition to persecute those whom his father conserued and kept. For who is ignorant that vnder the name of heretickes, they meane vs? That we are proclai∣med and stiled such by the Roman Church? And therefore if the King be bound to the obseruation of this oath ac∣cording to their intention, what may we not then feare? Wherefore vpon former experience ought we not to feare againe the vnhappie bloodsheds which such impressions and imposed necessities vpon the consciences of Kings, haue caused vs to feele? The like proiect of our enemies hath yet openly mani∣fested it selfe, when endeuouring to make a fundamentall law to passe, and an vniuersall principle of conscience, that we ought not to be suffered in France; they obtained in the last Estates held at Paris, that the houses of the Clergie and Nobilitie should expresly demaund by their roles the exe∣cution of this oath of the King, as also the reception and publication thereof by the Councell of Trent. A Councell which hath bin heretofore reiected publikely by those E∣states which were held when the most bloodie and violent troubles haue bin stirred vp against vs in this kingdome. A Councell which will not endure that Kings should raigne, if they permit life and libertie in their dominions to those
who are called heretickes. But the most apparent and most sensible proceeding of the proiect of our malignant enemies, is principally fur∣thered by the seditious sermons of the preaching Iesuites and other Monkes, who, some yeares since, by an vnbridled licence and a manifest conspiracie, contrary to the Edicts and their authoritie, did take vpon them to calumniate vs in their pulpits, and to make vs odious, preaching furie and sedition, nourishing the people in hatred of vs, instru∣cting them to haue vs in excration, and inspiring in their mindes warres and murthers, do dispose and prepare them vpon all occasions to annoy vs. Hence it is that we conti∣nually feele so many violatings of the Edicts of peace, so many braches which are made in vpon our safetie, so ma∣ny outrages against our libertie. Notwithstanding we may yet boldly affirme, that our patience might haue ouercome and as it were smothered the greatest part of these euils, or at least we might haue conceiued some good hope that in the end some remedies would haue bin prouided for vs by the bountie of the King and the wisedom of his most faith∣full Counsellers, if the Iesuites were not exalted to the height of power whereunto they are come. For it doth eui∣dently appeare, that by all sorts of violent meanes they haue hitherto procured the rooting out of our Religion, and the ouerthrow of this Monarchie. Principally since their power hath growne to the proportion of their euill will, and that they see all obstacles which heretofore were opposed a∣gainst their hardy enterprise to be now broken downe or to yeeld vnderneath their power: what other expectation is reserued for vs, but to feele the danger wherinto so long a time they haue proiected to plunge vs? The miserable face of Christendom at this day almost rent in peeces with warres and horrible confusions, doth manifest sufficiently to all the world what power their wicked and artificiall in∣ductions haue to stirre vp a warre of Religion, almost vni∣uersall. And who can presume that France alone (which they haue made so often to feele so mournfull wounds by
their trecherous hands) being at this day in their power, and as it were vnder their absolute gouernment, should e∣scape the common accident which they haue caused to fall vpon those Estates where their credit and the diuersitie of Religion haue giuen them pretence and matter to cause trouble. There is no man so vnacquainted with their des∣seines, who hath not heretofore foreseene or foretold, that the miserie and ruine of France drew neare when the coun∣sels of Iesuites should preuaile. And now when on the one side we see them in such high esteeme, and on the other side France brought to the miserie of ciuill warres: is any one so blinde that he confesseth it not, to be the worke of their hand? who would seek any other cause or beginning there∣of? The feare of falling into these euils, hath caused vs to heare many aduertisements from the wisest and best affect∣ed French men, which so long time haue withstood it with all their power. The force of the Parliament of Paris hath oft opposed its authoritie against their enterprises. And the remarkable documents which the iudgement thereof hath spread throughout France soone after the death of the late King, touching the danger and pernicious consequences to the Estate, if they attained to greater credit, did guide the wisedome of the Kings Mother to restraine their ouerbold∣nes in the Court and in the managing of affaires. And they could neuer obtaine their desires during her regencie, and the authoritie which she had in the gouernment of the E∣state. But as all things fit their urnes who seeke occasion of What power the Iesuits haue now in France. proceeding, hauing found in the gouernment following a more fauourable support, as they are ready to vent the vse of their ministery, helped by the opportunitie, and propt with that hand, they haue scaled that pinnacle of power, whereon we see them now mounted. Then we saw the boldest Iesuite of the whole Societie brought into the Louure, and with a rashnesse beyond example plac him∣selfe within the house of the Kings sacred Maiestie, that so at all houres and moments he might haue the gouerning
of him in his owne power. And euer since it hath appea∣red in the gouernment of the State, what power the Ie∣suites haue gotten ouer the Kings affections. By two no∣table proofes soon after this Iesuites introduction, it might easily be perceiued, that thenceforth nothing should be im∣possible to those of his Societie, whatsoeuer they would vndertake for themselues or against vs. The necessitie of this discourse requireth that we represent them. All France may well remember, that three dayes after this Iesuite had got the Kings eare, they caused his Coun∣cell to cancell the Act of Parliament, by the which the opening of their Colledge in Paris was interdicted them, vntill such time as they had publikly renounced their prin∣ciples of the ruine of States and killing of Kings. And to shew that all opposition to their violence should thence∣forth be vaine, by an Order from the Councell (by them set vp in euery quarter of Paris in signe of triumph) they caused the Decrees of the Vniuersitie (which had some∣what resisted them) to be annulled. With like facilitie, and at the same time, they obtained an Act in fauour of the Bishops of Bearn the 25 of Iune 1617. for the restoring of all Ecclesiasticall goods of that Country, which by a so∣lemne establishment decreed by the Soueraigne and Par∣liament, were ordained for the maintenance of our Pastors, Colledge, Garrisons, Officers, and other charges of the country. 15 yeares together the Bishops had followed this suite with all possible instance. The late King sundry times sollicited from Rome in their behalf, knowing wel the con∣sequences of such a change, bound also by his oath to in∣nouate nothing (beside the libertie of Exercise giuen to the Roman Catholicks, with restitution of so much Ecclesia∣sticall goods as was needfull for them, granted by Edict, and executed in the yeare 1599) had alwayes refused it them. The Queene mother of the King, for like considera∣tions, and because of the same oath taken by her Maiestie now raigning, for the maintenance of the ancient establish∣ment (confirmed ouer and aboue by twelue seueral Patents
and Declarations obtained against the instance that the Bi∣shops made on the contrary) would not meddle with it. The proiect of our enemies could not be better aduanced then by a blow of this nature. For they knew that the exe∣cution of this Restitution would draw after it (as, alas, it is come to passe) the subuersion of the countrey, and the vtter ruine of our Religion in the same, with hope that with the sparkles they should kindle there, they might set all France on fire. Wherefore they drew the King by his conscience, and by vrging his oath, touching the rooting out of all Religion contrary to his, to make that Decree by prerogatiue: which for this cause (though giuen rashly, without the aduice of the principall Officers of the Crowne and State in a businesse of such consequence, and against the course of Law vpon the onely pursuite of the Bishops, without hearing the Deputies of the country) would neuer be called in, notwithstanding all the remonstrances and supplications that could since be presented, which haue not bene otherwise answered, then that the authoritie and conscience of the King stood engaged in it. Thence we ga∣thered a wofull experience of the Kings inclination in those affaires that most concerne his State and our safetie. Seeing that this Iesuite held all his affections bound with respects of Religion, and that deuotion vnto which his Maiestie out of an inbred goodnesse is naturally giuen, was as a spring vnto his conscience, by the which he incli∣neth his whole will to what pleaseth him best. Hee hath made himselfe the Counsel of the Kings conscience (to vse his owne phrase): and in this Counsell can he propound other Maximes then those of Rome? that may be all redu∣ced to this head of the subuersion of this State and our ru∣ine. He giues him for a law the determination of the Coun∣cell of Constance; That faith is not to be kept with hereticks. That whatsoeuer Edicts he hath made or sworne, bind him not. That therefore he may, nay that he ought to brake them. And the better to induce him, he reades him no o∣ther Lecture then the oath of his Coronation. Propounds
him no greater merit to be rewarded with Paradise, then the rooting out of Heretickes. Incites him to seeke that way a more glorious renowne, then euer S. Lewis got by warring with the Infidels. These and such like are the coun∣sels of conscience of this Iesuite. By the which his Maiestie setting aside all other considerations of his gouernment, hath let himselfe be caried away, and hath often said, It is better to lose his Estate then his soule. Taught (it seemes) to hold it for a Maxime, that there are occasions of sauing his soule with the losse of his kingdome. Now from the pos∣session of the Kings will, enclosed thus within the hand of the Iesuites, they haue drawne to themselues by a necessary consequence, the whole gouernment of the State. Which they haue compassed the easier, by reason that all the sage and old Counsellors and Officers that serued the late King, and France, in the establishment and maintenance of the prosperitie and greatnesse which it was raised to vnder his reigne, being now (as we see) put from all managing of affaires; they to whom the Kings abundant sauour giues all authoritie in the gouernment, do willingly consent, that the directing of the Counsell be committed to the Popes Sollicitors, Cardinals and Bishops. And such as yet re∣maine, or as are newly brought in, some nurtured with the leuen of old Spanish factions and affections, others won with the aduantageous liberalities of the new, or with Ro∣mish honours (whereof the Iesuites are the chiefe brokers) concurre all together in one and the same consent, touch∣ing the subuersion of whatsoeuer the late King had esta∣blished, but chiefly for so much as concernes vs. And these allurements haue bene of such efficacie, that he from whom the best expected an vnvariable affection to peace and good gouernment, in hope of a Church-dignitie, hath deuoted himselfe to be an instrument of the first breach, through which, persecution hath rushed in vpon vs. On the other side, the high and inferious Courts, and all Magistrates of the kingdome are filled with such persons as are wholy subiected to them, either by superstition, or by interest of
fortune. The people haue no other affections then such as they suggest vnto them by their sermons or by their priuate confessions. The power then of our enemies being such, we haue How hardly we are dealt withal also, to our dammage, felt the effects of it by a contrary vsage to that that we found vnder the late King. For since they haue got this authoritie (we might very well say, since their reigne) there is no more fauour nor accesse at Court for those of our Religion. Many to whom their fathers ser∣uices and their owne had thitherto preserued them the ho∣nour of some places neare the King, haue bene put by them. The greater part are constrained to rid themselues of them, vnder this command, Change your Religion, or leaue your Of∣fice. It is told them that the King cannot with a good eye see the Huguenots about his person. In the Priuie Councel our greatest opposites are our Iudges; and they whom we petition, are our sworne enemies. We are shut out of Offi∣ces in all Courts higher or lower, against the freedome of the Statutes. If any one that is now in place turnes of our Religion, presently the Attourneys Generall or their sub∣stitutes oppose his sitting. The Courts contest with him, and repulse him. And how many are there in the Court of Parliament at Paris and elsewhere, who are detained from comming to vs by the oppression of this libertie? But when should we haue reckoned vp all the kindes of iniuries done vnto vs? The seditious insolencies dayly committed to hinder the free exercise of our Religion in those places where we are tollerated. The attempts and enterprises a∣gainst such places as haue bin giuen vs in custody for our securitie. The secret practises to debauch the Gouernours of them, as it is newly confirmed in the Gouernours of Clermont, Ledeue and Argenton. The refusall of proui∣ding for the restitution of those places. The riots and out∣rages that those of our Religion suffer in citie and country by the fury of the people, prouoked by their Preachers. The rauages and firing of our Churches and Church-yards. The inhumanities exercised in digging vp our dead, and hin∣dring
their buriall. The violence offered sick-folkes consci∣ences, euen in the agony of death, thereby to force them to renounce their Religion. The crueltie exercised on our poore and sicke, who are cast out of Hospitals. The vniust force practised in robbing vs of our children to bring them vp in the Roman Religion, against their fathers intent and last will. To be short, all maner of wrongs and violences are done vs, against the Kings authoritie, and publik peace and tranquillitie. In all these mischiefes we haue no other recourse then to our complaints, which we continually direct to the Magi∣strates, either of the Prouinces or of the high Courts. But there, alas, in stead of remedies we finde poison. For not onely they send vs backe, and doe vs no right; but the in∣iustice wherewith they aggrauate the former iniury, aug∣ments their boldnesse that did vs the wrong, encouraged by their impunitie, and by the law that they gather from the Iudges themselues. Our last refuge is to the Kings iustice and Officers of State, whither (forced by the hard vsage we finde euery Our procee∣ding by com∣plaint, which now is imputed vnto vs as a crime. where) we flie as to our sanctuary: and there our enemies oppose our accesse with their vtmost violence. They per∣ceiue that the Kings protection would defend vs against all their iniuries. They know that our course by complaints, which nature opens vnto euery one, would shroud vs vn∣der the couert of his iustice, where both our rest and the publike tranquillitie should be preserued. And therefore we finde their conspiracie to be the more malicious. For not onely they stop his Maiesties eare, and barre vs from all passage thereunto; but when we offer to approach it by our most humble petitions and requests, they lay for vs by a more then diuellish subriltie, the snare of their calumnie, to make vs fall into the blame of a pretended disobedience. They turne our complaints into crimes: they terme vs se∣ditious and rebels. This is the accusation for the which they pursue vs criminally. This is the accusation, for the which they now persecute vs. We here call heauen and earth to
witnesse betweene our enemies and vs, desiring that the procedure of our complaints to his Maiestie, which we wil here truly and fully lay open, being knowne to all, men may iudge of our innocencie, and of the calumnie of their accusation; and finally of the vniust warre and persecution which our aduersaries vnder this pretext haue raised a∣gainst vs. For the maintaining of the Edict of peace and reparation of the breaches thereof, the late King did establish accor∣ding to his equitie an order among vs, by the which we might from time to time with his permission and grant as∣semble our selues by Deputies out of all the Prouinces, to tender him our complaints of all such grieuances as might be done vs, and receiue from his bountie reasonable an∣swers, and such as should be necessary for the keeping of his Edicts. According to this order, feeling a more vrgent necessitie then euer, we addressed our selues vnto his Ma∣iestie by our Deputies generall in the yeare 1619, and it pleased his Maiestie to grant vs, according to our most humble request, a Briefe, by the which we were permitted to assemble ourselues in the Citie of Loudun the 25 of Sep∣tember. The Assembly of Loudun, Where being met together out of all the Prouin∣ces of the kingdome and Soueraigntie of Bearn, our bils of complaints being drawne, we presented them in all hu∣militie to his Maiestie, beseeching him that by a fauourable answer to the principall articles and most important grie∣uances they might carry backe into all the Prouinces, by the testimonials of his good will towards our protection, some assurance to his subiects of the Religion, against so many threats and feares as doe apparently inuiron them. There would neuer be an end, if we should here display the seuerall heads of all those complaints. We will onely touch some of them, to shew their importance, and the necessitie of obtaining speedie iustice vpon them. We complaine that Leytoure a place of suretie hath bin wrested out of our hands. That two of our Religion proui∣ded of offices of Counsellours in the Court of Parliament
of Paris, could not obtaine their admission in three whole yeares pursuite. That the exercise of our Religion being ba∣shed Clermont of Lodeue a place of suretie, vpon the reestablishing of the same sued by vs, the execution of an order from the Kings Counsell was opposed vi & armis. That our Churches haue bene burned or demolished at Bourg in Bresse, at Moulins in Bourbonnois, and at Lauall neare Guise. That at Beaux in Prouince Monsieur de Vere Captaine of the Castle, after many threats and outrages, to prohibite and hinder those of the Religion from their ex∣ercise, did at last driue them out violently by force of armes the eight of Februarie 1620. That iustice could not be ob∣tained for the excessiue outrages done to some of the Reli∣gion at Baugenci, and for ringing the Allarum bell against them; and that the Offenders that threw two men out of a garret, and ran one of them through with a sword, haue bin heard as witnesses to the informations made by the Lieu∣tenant Generall in the iurisdiction of Orleans; and that though the cause was referred to the Parliament of Paris, yet notwithstanding the Attourney Generall in the same hath let the suite fall. That our Pastors haue bin violently expelled the Cities of Bourges and la Chasteigneraye. That diuers persons professing our Religion at Chaalons vpon Saonne, haue bin chased and banished thence, as also out of the Dutchie of Barrois. That the places granted vs for the exercise of our Religion neare the Cities of Lyons, Di∣jon and Langres, were barred vs. That in those places where the inhabitants haue actually enioyed the said exercise euer since the yeares 1596. 1597. and therefore haue full liberty by the Edict, are there molested, as at la Chasteigneraye, at la Chastre, at S. Cyprian, la Herle, Velus, Maussac, Langon, Bourg de Conde in Normandie, at Agiene in Viuarets, at S. Marcelin in Forest, at la Chaulme in Xaintogne by for∣mall opposition of the Officers, at Florence Picusque, at Montfort and Puget by the Consuls, neare the Towne of Perigueux, at Montignac Charente by order from the Se∣neschal of Angoumois vpon forfeiture of a thousand franks.
That the education of children hath bin taken away from their fathers of our Religion, to instruct them in a contra∣ry, as from the Master of Accompts at Paris, and by order of the Court of Parliament at Roane in the cause of one Couurechef. That many children of the Religion, haue bin stolen away by Monks. As at Ambrun the son of a citizen, at Millaud the sonne of Monsieur Valette, at Leytoure a boy of ten yeares old, named Francis Aram, by the Iesuite Re∣gour the fourth of Ianuary 1620. That our graues haue bin inhumanely violated, or the burials hindred in diuers pla∣ces, as at Aix in Prouince, at Gordes, at Mirabeau, at On∣gle, at Xaintes, at S. Georgés of Oleron, and in many pla∣ces of Guienne and other parts with crueltie & barbarisme. That our poore sicke haue bin cast out of Hospitals, or their consciences forced, as during the last contagion at Paris, in the Hospitall of Saint Lewes, where many were violented, and all accesse denied our Ministers and Elders to comfort them. That the Parliaments, to the preiudice of the Courts established, haue attributed to themselues the knowledge of our causes, as the Parliament of Bourdeaux diuers times, and particularly in the businesse of the inha∣bitants of Mas d'Agenois, who thereby haue suffered ex∣ceeding great vexations, whereof many of them are dead in prison. But chiefly in criminall causes, as the Parliament of Thoulouse, which hauing condemned Iohn de Nasses Re∣gister of Montauban to make honorable amends, would not giue way vnto an Order from the Councell for the re∣ferring of it to the Court of Castres. And againe, the Par∣liament of Bourdeaux in the cause of the inhabitants of Tartas, who in the surprize of the Castle hauing bin cru∣elly vsed, outraged and expelled, haue bin pursued and ill handled in the said Parliament, which vpon the recrimi∣nation of the mutinous and seditious retained the know∣ledge of the cause to the preiudice of the Court of Nerac. In the Parliament of Aix, many of ours haue bin detained prisoners many yeares, though their causes were referred to the Court of Grenoble, and there retained according
to the Edict. We desired moreouer that the alteration made in the Cities of Montault, Vareilles, Tarasson, Mont∣gaillard in the Countie of Foix, (where nothing should be innouated, according to the Briefe of 1598.) might be re∣paired. That it would please the King to grant vs the Briefe for the custodie of places of suretie, with the deliuery of the gouernment of the places in Dauphine. To call in the De∣cree for the restoring of the Ecclesiasticall goods of Bearn. That the Towne of Priuas might be put againe into the hands of the inhabitants, and iustice done them of the ri∣ots, violences, and outrages committed against them. Be∣sides an infinite number of other grieuances publike and priuate, too long to rehearse. In all the which we found our enemies strength so great, that all iustice hath bin denied vs therein, and all the answer we could get was an absolute command to breake vp our Assembly. But when as the importunitie of the mischiefe and the necessitie of remedie forced vs to haue often re∣course vnto his Maiestie. Then our Aduersaries be∣gan to stile our suite and humble petition reiterated, by the name of rebellion, that so they might not onely take from vs all hope of iustice, but also make vs odious. And to o∣pen a doore for warre and persecution, they obtained a commination of crime to be proclaimed against vs (as if it were a crime to complaine) threatning aloud our perseue∣rance with the Kings sword, and causing bursall Edicts to be extraordinarily confirmed in Courts of Parliament for preparatiues for warre against vs. The King neuerthelesse out of his naturall goodnes and great inclination to iustice, Promises made at Loudun, with permission to meet againe within six mo∣neths in case of performance. putting by the violence of our enemies, promised vs by the Prince his Highnesse and Monsieur de Luynes now Con∣stable, who gaue their word to the Lords Lesdiguieres and Chastillon for our better assurance, that within six moneths after the day of our separation, the citie of Leytoure should be restored vnto vs, and the Counsellers receiued into the Parliament of Paris. The Briefe for the custodie of places of suretic, and the gouernment of those of Dauphine
should be deliuered vp vnto vs. And the ouerplus of our complaints fauourably answered, and the answers truly exe∣cuted; and that within seuen moneths after the day of our separation, the Deputies of Bearn should haue audience vp∣on that that they had to shew vnto his Maiestie. And in case these promises were not performed within the time, it should be lawfull for vs to meete againe, to re-demand iu∣stice of his Maiestie vpon our grieuances. Now because that vpon the condition of these promises, vpon the assu∣rance with the which they were set forth vnto vs, and vpon the true intent promised in the performance of the same, dependeth the maine iustification of our procedure follow∣ing, for the which we are vniustly declared faultie, and dealt withall by the rigor of armes; let all the world see here vpon what ground we build our sinceritie and plaine mea∣ning, and what right we had to reassemble our selues. For confirmation of the promise made vs to this purpose, we were shewed that it was the very first thing the King on his word promised to his subiects of the Religion, since he came to the Crowne. The Lord Constable, added that his comming in betweene, would be worth Briefes vnto vs, and happily more. The King himselfe out of his owne mouth confirmed it since at Fontainebleau to the Deputies that certified the King of our separation, in presence of the Lord Duke de Lesdiguieres, who had assured vs as much be∣fore. Had it now bin lawfull for vs to desire or imagine a∣ny better licence then the Kings sacred word, the first that euer he gaue vs? Paper and inke can adde no weight nor authoritie to a Kings word. And certainly we should haue held our selues vnworthy of our Kings fauour, and iniuri∣ous to his authoritie, if we had required greater assurance for this permission then his owne word. Thus our Assem∣bly broke vp the 13 of April, 1620. after an Act drawne among vs of our obedience, containing all conditions and promises aforesaid, with order giuen to those of Rochell for the calling of another Congregation, if need should be, in such a place as they should thinke most conuenient. The
Deputies, after they had withdrawne themselues, and giuen account in the Prouinces, were continued, or others ioy∣ned to them, to meete together againe, in case of vnper∣formance of things granted according to the condition of the promises. This was done in all the Prouinces openly, to his Maiesties knowledge and the Lords of his Coun∣cell. It was not misliked. The King made no declaration to the contrary. And yet this is most certain, that if there were any enterprise or attempt against the Kings authoritie, it was the nomination of the Deputies. But as that was ac∣knowledged lawfull by permitting it, because of the con∣dition: so also our Deputies Generall suing the perfor∣mance of things promised, did nor sticke to adde alwayes this remonstrance to the Lords of the Councell; Do vs iu∣stice, and saue vs the labour of another meeting. The Prince his Highnesse being diuers times present in Parliament to confirme the Kings command for the admission of the Councellors, shewed vnto them the permission we had to reassemble our selues, which they themselues occasioned by their refusall. Now the prefixt time of sixe moneths for the perfor∣mance of promises expiring, the 13. of October, without The execution of the order of restitution in Bearn anticipa∣ted, and an alte∣ration made in the country of the suretie and libertie in Re∣ligion. any effect, the King being gone into Guyenne in Septem∣ber, was sollicited by our enemies to enioyne those of Bearn to execute the order of Restitution, and to confirme it in the Parliament of Pau. The terme agreed vpon for their remonstrances, which his Maiestie promised to heare from the mouth of their Deputies, extended to the 13. of Nouember: which caused the Parliament of Pau. vpon the Kings command, to order that the Deputies should make their remonstrances to his Maiestie, within the time agreed vpon (confirmed again by a letter dated the 21 of Septem∣ber from his Maiestie to the said Parliament) otherwise the time being expired, the order of Restitution should be confirmed. His Maiestie not contented with this De∣cree, before the remonstrances of those of the coun∣try were heard, was put on by our enemies to go him∣selfe
thither. And although the Parliament by a second De∣cree of confirmation, had preuented his Maiesties coming; yet through the induction of our enemies, he entred into the country with his armie. We would here willingly conceale the disloyaltie of our enemies, and the cruelties there practised by their induce∣ments, if their calumnious accusations and the bitter an∣guish of our miseries did not now constraine vs to open our mouthes for our owne iustification, and to call on ven∣geance before God and men. We will not speake of the alteration made in the country, by the vniting of it to the Crowne of France, though it be euident it was not so much for any aduantage to France, as to make way for the alteration of our Religion. We will onely touch in few words so much as hath bin done directly for the ruine of the Gospel. The King then being at Nauarenx, and pur∣posing to keepe his promise with Monsieur de Sales, made first at Bourdeaux, and since confirmed in the country, that he would still maintaine him in the gouernment of the Ci∣tie, in consideration of his long seruices, and the ready o∣bedience he shewed by all manner of submission vnto his Maiestie: yet for all this, vrged by our enemies to take the gouernment from him and giue it to a Papist, but with∣held by the religion of his promises, the Iesuite that is still at his elbow interposing his counsell of conscience (or ra∣ther without conscience) perswaded his Maiestie that it was lawfull for him to breake his promise, by an equiuo∣cation, truly deseruing the indignation of God and men. Your promise (saith he) Sir, is either of State or conscience. Of conscience (saith he) it cannot be, for it is contrary to the good of the Church. Seeing then it is of State, your Maiestie ought to beleeue your Counsellours, who shew you, that for the good of your seruice, it is necessary that this place be no longer in the power of an Huguenot. Thus the King led by the Maister of his conscience, who will be a suretie for him to God for all he shall do by his counsell, commanded Monsieur de Sales forthwith to resigne his gouernment to Monsieur de Poy∣ane
sworne enemie to those of our Religion. And then the Towne-garison being first remoued, and the inhabitant dis∣armed, there were brought in foure hundred souldiers Pa∣pists vnder Monsieur de Poyanes command. This done, to take away all that might yet any wayes secure those of the Religion, the six Captaines of the Parsans were cassiered, and the Townes of Sauueterre, Orthes, Oleron and Nai filled with Papist-garisons. The King being come the se∣cond time to Pau, gaue the Bishops the presidencie in the Assembly of Estates there called, that so they might ouer∣sway the whole country. And God grant he trie not the same experiment of their perfidie that chased his father thence in his infancie; and that the neighbour-enemies practises finde not in them a ready way into France through that doore where our fidelitie hath alwayes beene a bulwarke. Now that no part of the securitie and libertie of our Religion might remain vnviolated, the Papists were made masters of all our Churches, notwithstanding the condition of the restitution it selfe, bearing this reserua∣tion, that the Churches should remaine ours till such time as others were prouided vs. These alterations made out of hate to our Religion, and to banish it the country, so aug∣mented their boldnesse who are continually taught and in∣cited to mischiefe vs, that whereas respect of the Kings pre∣sence should haue restrained them, yet their licentiousnesse so ouerflowed, that wheresoeuer they came, our Churches could not be saued from infinite rauages and scandals, so far, that euen within the Citie of Pau (the King himselfe be∣ing there) after they had broken downe the pulpit and seates of the Church, they burned publikly the Bible and New Testament. The Ministers were in diuers places out∣raged, and diuers persons constrained against, their consci∣ences to kneele to Processions. The ouerplus of the inso∣lences, violences and riots that this poore Country endu∣red, was innumerable, and such as the most sauage enemies could exercise in the midst of a conquest. Hereupon for triumph Arnoux makes a booke, titled, The King in Bearn;
where, not able to containe himselfe for ioy to see his des∣seignes so forward, he plainly shewes how far he purposeth they shall entend, and what we must expect will be the se∣quele of them. The King (by his reckoning) is not to sur∣cease till he hath quite extinguished the Religion that hee so much abhorreth: and highly extolling him for this com∣mencement and pursuit of the dessigne, aboue the late King his father; leaues to be vnderstood that the death of that good King hauing bin hastned for refusing to do as much; his Maiestie is to looke for more fauourable vsage at their hands so long as he will continue. Bearn brought to this pitifull estate, the King vpon his returne left part of his army in Guyenne, and scattered the rest in Poictou, filling all our Churches with terror: And thenceforth no talk but of the ruine of all Huguenots. All the discourse at Court is of the siege of Rochell. They say, it is not a three moneths matter; they stay but for weather. In the meane while all the promises made at Loudun be∣ing neglected, the time past, and nothing performed, (saue the deliuery of the Briefe for the keeping of places) not∣withstanding the earnest pursuit of our Deputies Generall all this while; the congregation of Deputies nominated by the Prouinces (and bound to meet to present their requests to his Maiestie vpon the vnperformance of promises) as called at Rochell against the 25 of Nouember. We will not omit that after the alterations made in Bearn, the Towne of Leytoure was restored to a Gentleman of the Religion; but let all in different persons iudge, whether a Papist garison being left-there, and, against the order of the former go∣uernment of the Towne, a Lieutenant established, that ne∣uer had the approbation of the Synod of the Prouince, ac∣cording to the intent of his Maiesties Briefe for the keep∣ing of places of safetie, this be the square dealing that was promised vs. Againe, we leaue it to be iudged, whether af∣ter that the safetie of a whole country hath bin wrestd from vs, this maine promise executed after such a fashion, and all the rest neglected and remaining vnperformed;
our right of complaining of so manifest an abuse, and of these new and so intollerable grieuances, doth cease, whe∣ther the necessitie of it be diminished, & whether the liber∣tie of accesse should be interdicted vs. Such then being the weight of the reasons why we should re-assemble our selues, and withall flie to the Kings iustice, hauing leaue so to doe; yet neuerthelesse we were scarce all met in this place, when as a declaration came forth, that made vs male∣factors, denouncing wrath and iudgement of condmna∣tion against the assemblers and assembled. But notwith∣standing forasmuch as we finde that our grieuances are so vrgent; that our consciences summon vs to fulfil the charge imposed vpon vs by our Churches; and that they witnesse vnto vs in sinceritie that we proceed according vnto iu∣stice. We endeuor to present vnto the King our most hum∣ble remonstraces, to purge vs of the false accusations and crimes laid vpon vs by our aduersaries, who abuse the au∣thoritie of his name to breake his word with vs. To shew vnto his Maiestie the vrgent necessitie of our iust com∣plaints: To beseech him in all humilitie that it would please him to deliuer our Churches from so many alarums and frights as do now enuiron them on all sides. In a word, that he would shew himselfe our Protector against so vio∣lent an opposition as is generally practised against vs ouer all his kingdome, to the preiudice of the authoritie of his Edicts, and against the open threats of our ruine, which by the example of the calamities of Bearn are made more fearfull. But we finde that our enemies had stopt his Ma∣iesties eares against all our requests, which are reiected; nei∣ther will any thing be receiued or heard on our side. And at the same time we are criminally arraigned in Parliaments and other Courts of iustice. This Towne and all of vs are threatened with warre, as rebels and seditious persons. Whereupon iudging by experience of what is past, and by our enemies method, which to our cost we haue but too well learned and experimented, that this accusation and these, threats were to authorize a refusall and demall of iu∣stice,
and to make vs lose all hope of euer obtaining any thing hereafter in our most iust and necessary complaints; we insist at seueral times on the iustification of our innocen∣cie, and continue to beseech his Maiestie, and to lay downe our most humble petitions at his feete. But as all accesse is interdicted vs, and that to bring our proceedings into ha∣tred euen with those of our owne side, and to saue diuision in our Churches, our enemies caused it to be told our De∣puties Generall and diuers others among vs, that the King, though resolued to heare nothing from vs, would notwith∣standing deale fauourably with his subiects of the Religion, and do them iustice. That he was willing to heare our com∣plaints by the Deputies Generall, and in the name of the Churches. To trie what would be the effect of these words, we ceasse all pursuite in our owne name, are silent, and put it ouer wholy to our Deputies Generall, to follow it in their owne name and in the name of the Churches. And certainly we may boldly adde, that if the estate of our cala∣mities increasing daily, and threatning worse, had not aug∣mented our apprehension and iust mistrust, ouercome with so many vexations, repulses, threats, and with despaire of any successe, we could desire nothing more then to retire our selues; and it may be our Churches would haue pardo∣ned vs. But at the same time the fraud of our enemies did further discouer it selfe, and the persecution proiected a∣gainst vs, breaking out in diuers places, hath manifested their dessignes by so many perfidies and outrages, that being forced for iustification of our innocencie and lawfull de∣fence against the warre they make vpon vs, here to lay o∣pen their proceedings before the eyes of all the world, we would be scrupulous for the honour of France to publish deeds so odious, if withall it were not knowne that the au∣thors of them are France's greatest enemies, and haue con∣spired her ruine and ours. First of all, vnder colour of these faire promises, that the the King would keepe his Edicts made in fauour of his subiects of the Religion, and would satisfie their complaints
of vnperformance of promises, my Lord Duke de Lesdi∣guieres is drawne to the Court, by perswading him that his mediation would be a great furtherance vnto the businesse, and all the Lords and persons of greatest note among vs are entertained with the same hopes. In the meane while Monsieur de Montmorenci is vp in armes against vs in Lan∣guedoc, and after many acts of hostilitie, sets vpon Ville∣neufue de Berg a Towne of ours in Viuarez. And because it was easie to be foreseene that this violence would mete with opposition, Monsieur de Reaux Lieutenant of the Kings Guard is sent from Court with apparent command to difarme all such as he should finde armed. Monsieur de Chastillon (whose prudence and affection to the Kings ser∣uice and countries peace had hitherto withheld the peoples impatience, desirous to repulse the violence offered them) being informed of the said Sieur de Reaux his charge by a yeoman of the Guard whom he had sent vnto him, con∣tinued to stay our peoples commotion: and as he expects more particular newes from the said Sieur de Reaux, and of Monsieur de Montmorencies obedience to the command he brought. Villeneufne de Berg hauing withstood two scaladoes and diuers assaults at the gate, yeelding presently at the Kings name to the said Sieur de Reaux, and submit∣ting it selfe vnto his protection and keeping, Monsieur de Montmorenci comming in, establisheth there a garison, which at the same instant committeth all kind of riots and outrages. Hereupon our men being induced to aime themselue for feare of the like frauds, and for the necessity of their owne defence. Monsieur de Reaux comming to Monsieur de Chastillon, and assuring him that Villeneufue de Berg should be restored, and vnder hope that according to the articles agreed vpon betweene them, all things should be reestablished in peace, hauing obtained that he should vnarme; whiles he was truly doing so, Monsieur de Montmorenci in stead of performing couenants, lodgeth fiue or sixe companies in Villeneufue de Berg, and pro∣claimes with a drum Monsieur de Perant Gouernor thereof;
and more ouer hauing dispatched diuers new commissions, dated the morow after Sieur de Reaux his ariuall there, he assiegeth Vals another place of ours in Viuarets, where e∣uen the said Sieur de Reaux himselfe, whiles Monsieur de Chastillon rested vpon his word, that Monsieur de Montmo∣renci should performe couenants, assisted in person, and was spectator of the battery. This little and weake place, without any defence but the inhabitants, hauing endured a hundred cannon shot, yeelding vpon honorable compo∣sition, directly contrary to the capitulation all manner of cruelties, violences and barbarismes haue bin there practi∣sed vpon an infinite company of poore innocent persons cruelly murthered or rauished. And againe, contrary to the said articles the like hath bin done at Valons a place neare vnto the other. These frauds and breaches of counterfeit contracts, do manifest vnto the world that the Kings word and apparent command, haue bin vsed but as a snare for our plaine meaning, and vnder a secret approbation of all that Monsieur de Montmorenci should doe to the contrary, to make vs lose those places. Moreouer at the same time Monsieur de Poyane hauing fortified himself in Bearn to beate out Monsieur de la Force, Monsieur de la Saladie is sent from the King to Monsieur de la Force to command him to dismisse those troupes that he kept by him for his owne safetie and to maintain the Kings authoritie in his charge of Gouernour of the country a∣gainst the violent enterprises of the said Sieur de Poyane. But the said Sieur de la Saladie in stead of carying backe Monsieur de la Forces answer to the King, as he seemed, went into Guyenne to Messieurs d'Espernon, de Vignoles, and diuers others to arme, so that in an instant all Guyenne was filled with troupes, besides those that were left there before. On the other side, at the same instant the troupes left in Poictou drew neare vnto this Citie and S. Iohn d'Angely. And by order from the Councell all Courts of Audit for Receits were remoued from all our places of safetie, where
they were established; a palpable argument that though the citie of Rochell onely was threatned, yet all the rest were aimed at, by a generall dessigne of warre against vs ready to be put in execution; this remouall being to no other end, then to take from vs the meanes of helping our selues with those profits in our owne defence when the persecution should come, which by consequent they inten∣ded against vs. Now as by these new alterations of our peace by these me∣naces, by the open oppression & persecution in so many pla∣ces, we did foresee well enough the storme yt hung ouer our heads and ready to fall, knowing besides yt our enemies puft vp with their successe in the rauage & desolation of Bearn, did stay for nothing but a fit season to continue our ruine by an open warre; which was too easie to be learnd by their open talke, vpon the returne from Bearn, of the siege of Rochell, of the meanes and facilitie of taking it. By the discourse which the King was hourely entertained with of the ruine of Huguenots: by the calumnies laid vpon vs for a pretext; by the threats that followed; and by the pre∣parations visibly made for that purpose. Neuerthelesse be∣cause there was some speech of the Kings good will to∣wards his subiects of the Religion, and the authoritie of his Edicts, our Deputies Generall (to whose charge the whole pursuite was referred) presented vnto his Maiestie a bill of complaints, requesting satisfaction for some of the most important grieuances, with a speedier execution for the peace and safetie of our Churches. But after many instances and delayes, after diuers sollici∣tations and supplications of all the chiefest among vs, euen of the Lord Duke de Lesdiguieres himself present at Court, our Deputies generall could neuer obtaine any answer. Onely Monsieur de Fabas one of them, and a Gentleman that came vnto vs from the Lord Duke de Lesdiguieres, ha∣uing giuen vs to vnderstand according to a writing of the said Lord de Lesdiguieres vnder his owne hand. That for all amends after so many complaints, my Lord Duke de Les∣diguieres
did perswade himselfe (for the King, howsoeuer our Churches were giuen to hope that he would maintaine his Edicts, did not here so much as passe his word, neither by mouth, nor by any Officer of State) that if we would first separate our selues, we should obtaine the retraite of troupes from all places where we did mistrust them. That the gouernment of the places in Dauphine should be sear∣ched and deliuered vs in six moneths if it could be found. That order should be taken for the paiment of such sums of mony as haue bin promised them of Bearn in lieu of their Ecclesiasticall reuenues. That Monsieur de la Force and his sonnes should still hold their places. And moreouer, that he was promised assuredly that nothing should be attemp∣ted during the time that should be requisite for the returne of our resolutions. But as we were about them, we were informed by Monsieur de Chalas the other of our Deputies generall, that the next day after, contrary to the said pro∣mises, our enemies had wrought the King to an absolute and open resolution of making warre against vs. That or∣der was giuen for the leuying of an armie of one and forty thousand foote and six thousand horse. And that the go∣uernment of Bearn was taken from Monsieur de la Force, and giuen to Monsieur the Marshall de Themines, and the office of Captaine of the Guard, which his sonne Monsieur be Marquis de la Force had, was giuen to the Marquis de Mauny, and that Monsieur de Manpauillan another of his sonnes was commanded to leaue the Court. At the same time, as our enemies hastened our persecu∣tion by all kind of meanes, as, seditious sermons, instructing of confessions dfamatory libels, calumnies and impostures against our fidelitie, impression of the Kingshae to our Religion, and their declarations of warre published against vs, which haue wrought these effects. It happened in the citie of Tours the 19 of April last, that one Martin le Noir, (not long afore conuerted to our Religion, for the which he suffered many iniuries and reproches, so farre, that the people hauing made an effigie of straw, and sometimes cal∣ling
it by his name, sometimes by the name of Martin Luther, did burne it publikly, and no iustice could euer be obtained for so outragious an insolence) died: and as he was caried to his graue, the people made a head, and after they had abused his corpse and those that accompanied it, after they had committed all sorts of indignities and in humani∣ties in the digging vp of his graue, seeking to do worse, stirred a more violent sedition. So that hauing broken down and razed a house neare the Church-yard, they run to the Church, being halfe a mile thence, they fire it, they enter the Sextons house, and they pill and ransacke it; and be∣ing increased to the number of a fearfull multitude, they continue three whole dayes together in firing and pulling downe our Church, without the Magistrates interposition, and comming too late he was not able to represse so raging a violence. From thence the example of this sedition pas∣seth presently vnto the Towne of Poictiers, where the people transported with like furie, haue razed to the very ground the walls of the Church-yard where they of the Religion bury their dead, broke and battered all the sepul∣chers, and had committed the like violence vpon the Church, if the more carefull Magistrate had not stopped their course. Now the order of our enemies counsels and actions hi∣therto, and chiefly these tragicall and horrid vprores, the great preparatiues for warre, the vniust and rigorous dea∣ling with Monsieur de la Force and his sonnes, contrary to the late assurance, with the croupes ready vnder Monsieur d'Espernons command for the inuasion of Bearn, witnessed and shewed sufficiently, that he houre of a generall perse∣cution was come, and that the dessigne of our ruine so long a hatching now appeared. Wherefore our enemies, that their perfidies might play their part and performe their vtmost, promise that the King will see iustice done vpon the sedition of Tours; and to take away all suspition else∣where, or to lull asleepe the more confident sort, they cause a declaration to be confirmed in all Courts of Parliament
the 27 of April, shewing that though the King would cha∣stise some of his subiects of the Religion (such as are ter∣med rebels and seditious) yet he meant and promised to keepe his Edicts with the rest as long as they should remain in their obedience, and that he would maintaine and pre∣serue their libertie and safetie according to the contents of the Edicts. And finally they assure Monsieur de la Force, that if he would leaue Bearn, he should no sooner send Monsieur d'Espernon word of it, but he should presently withdraw himselfe. Now we will shew what was the effect of these promises. We will begin with the last, which was first violated. After Monsieur de la Force had with drawne himselfe, and had certified Monsieur d'Espernon of his dis∣arming and retrait by the Baron d'Arros, presently Mon∣sieur d'Espernon entred the country with his armie, and sei∣sed all townes and places where they of our Religion were most in number, filled them with strong garisons, razed the Castle of Montanay, and brought the people to such a la∣mentable estate, that most of them, yea the chiefest haue bin forced to flie to quit their goods and country; diuers vnarmed and naked persons were murthered, and the rest remaine at this present restrained vnder a miserable serui∣tude, suffering all sorts of iniuries and cruelties. On the o∣ther side, the King setting forward for the execution of the menaces published against this Citie, after he had spred a∣broad his assurances, that he went not against his subiects of the Religion in generall, and made particular promises to the Gouernours of some of our places of safetie, that comming to them he would innouate nothing, passing by Tours, where the sedition being renewed and growne stronger, and the Commissarie sent to execute iustice, dri∣uen out of the Towne, the prisoners fetcht out of prison by violence, the houses of those of our Religion (who frighted with the first tumult had withdrawne themselues) pild and ransackt, onely the Kings reuerence violated, hath with much ado bin expiated by the execution of fiue poore beggerly rogues; (and that yet to entertaine their credulitie
whom our enemies would feed with hope that the keeping of Edicts should be continued.) His Maiestie came to Sau∣mur, where Monsieur du Plessis relying vpon the expresse promises made him, that nothing should be altered in the gouernment, and vpon the truth of the Declaration pub∣lished three weekes before, hauing opened the gates of the Citie and Castle to the King, experimented to our great dammage the frauds and perfidies of our enemies, who in∣duced the King to take away the gouernment from him, and to put a garison of foure hundred souldiers of his Gard in the Castle, and another in the Fauxbourg' of the greene Crosse, and by this meanes to make vs lose this place of safe∣tie. With what horror and indignation can all France see the enemies of her peace and the Kings seruice abuse thus perfidiously his name and word to commit these so detesta∣ble disloyalties? It is but ten moneths ago that by his Ma∣iesties expresse grant, the keeping of places of safetie was continued vnto vs for foure yeares. Of all others, the citie of Saumur was one of the most important for our safetie. It had bin in our custody euer since the late King being King of Nauarre, requested by Henrie the third, came accompa∣nied with those of our Religion to deliuer him from the captiuitie and tyrannie of the leagne. That Towne was gi∣uen him for his passage; and it remained thenceforth in our keeping, as a token of our good seruices and fidelitie to this Crowne. This place seated on the Loire was to serue vs, in the persecutions and confusions which the enemies of this Estate haue now stirred vp, for a retrait or commodious passage for so many poore distressed flocks, to saue them∣selues from the future furie of fire and sword. This Towne during the peace of these later yeares, was a nursery of the Church, and was the seate of a flourishing Vniuersitie. For these causes our enemies crueltie hath caused the King to begin this warre, in the which they carry him headlong a∣gainst vs, by this terrible blow, so great, that to giue it vs with greater facilitie, all the precedent calumnies, all the pretexts of disobedience and rebellion, all the particular
declarations against our Assembly and this Citie, all frau∣dulent declarations and promises made in fauour of such as should remaine in their obedience to the King haue bin set on foote. For can it be said, that Monsieur du Plessis, whose long and faithfull seruices done to the late King and his Maiestie now reigning, are knowne to all men, should haue committed any act of disobedience or rebel∣lion? Nay rather did he not passe all measure of confidence in the disloyaltie of our enemies, out of his respect to the Kings bare name? And hoping to auoide the storme that hung apparently ouer our heads, did he not himselfe pub∣lish the benefit of that deceitfull declaration; and to make the first triall of it, opened with such confidence the gates of the Towne and Castle to the King? Wherefore the de∣signe being thus vnmasked, our enemies were now pleased to manifest that it was intended against all in generall. For as soone as the King was at Saumur, newes came how that all the Protestants throughout all the principall cities of Normandie were disarmed. Were they also traitors? Or haue they since the Declaration committed any act of rebellion or disobedience? Besides all this, whiles the King was yet at Saumur, Monsieur Arnaut comes to S. Iohn d'Angely on Saturday the 15 of this moneth, to command the Lord Duke de Rohan and Monsieur de Soubize to come to the King, who desired their aduice for the taking vp of the present affaires. This was done to two ends: first, that vnder hope of iustice, the great ones and common people of our Religion might be withheld as they haue bin hitherto, whiles the preparatiues for warre against vs were euery where a hastening. Secondly and chiefly, that there might be the lesse suspition of the Kings troupes led by Monsieur d' Auriac, who the very next day entring the suburbes of S. Iohn with three thousand and fiue hundred men, assaul∣ted the towne and gates, and would haue gone further, and taken it, if he had not found resistance. Was this Towne al∣so guiltie of treason? Could the Towne be guiltie, and not the Lords of it? And yet the King writes to Monsieur the
Duke de Rohan, as to his faithfull and affectionate seruant and his Lieutenant Gouernour in the Prouince of Poictou, which surely he would not do to a rebell and traitor. What other crime then hath this Towne committed, to be thus assailed and threatned with a siege, and forced to expect be∣fore her wals the Kings cannon and armie, which maketh towards it with all diligence and speed? What crime also may the Towne of Iargeau (another place of safetie) haue committed, which was at the same time besieged, other then our enemies oath to haue no mercie? then the hate of our Religion, whose ruine they haue conspired? This is that which we lay downe before the eyes of all our Countrymen, and not of them alone, but of all Chri∣stians, whom we here appeale vnto to iudge of our inno∣cencie, and of the violent persecution that we vniustly suf∣fer. And though this true narration of our enemies procee∣dings against vs, and of ours towards our King, witnesseth sufficiently the calumnie of their accusation, by the which they proclaime vs rebels; yet that we may not leaue any shadow that might alienate from vs the fauour of good mens equitable iudgements, their compassion of our mise∣ries, and their helpe in our iust and necessary defence: we can easily shew that as in vs there is neither appearance nor suspition of the crime of rebellion which they lay vnto our charge. God forbid that any one should thinke that the complaints which violence and oppression doth extort from vs, do any way concerne our King, in whom we ac∣knowledge & reuerence with our hearts the image of God here on earth. But if laying vpon such as abuse his affections and conscience, the iniustice of the which we complaine, we would name who, and tell what they are that accuse vs, all France that groanes oppressed with the intollerable bur∣then of their tyrannie, would witnesse for vs that we should not speake it by way of recrimination nor calumnie. But it shall suffice our innocencie, that we onely purge our selues of the accusation. They accuse vs of rebellion and disobe∣dience, and say that we kicke against the Kings authoritie.
Thankes be to God, the Religion that we professe, and which we haue from time to time declared by a solemne confession presented to our Kings in witnesse of the puritie of our seruice to God, and the sinceritie of our obedience to them, hath long since acquitted vs of that imputation. We acknowledge no power on earth aboue our Kings. We sweare not to any other. We detest all doctrine that teach∣eth, that either directly or indirectly we may be freed from the allegiance we haue sworne vnto him. The holy profes∣sion of these principles, hath euer been the square and rule of all our fathers and our actions. When was it found that any of vs did bathe an execrable knife in the blood of our Kings? or ioyne swords with the great enemie to spill our countries intrailes? Or rather after so many wounds as France hath heretofore receiued from him, did not God vse our fathers armes to raise her euen from the graue? And now that the same conspiracie is newly reuiued, that they who haue sworne mortall hatred to our Religion, and with the like furie haue vowed the ruine and destruction of all the Estates of Christendome, and particularly of this Mo∣narchie, gouerning at their pleasure the Kings heart and wil by their suggestions to his conscience, do induce him to ha∣zard his State to vndo vs: we dare say, that time and expe∣rience will yet make him acknowledge that he hath not in all his kingdome a surer prop for his Crowne then our fide∣litie. And certainly there can be nothing more plaine to all such as looke vpon vs, then that the interest of our con∣seruation is vnseparably nailed to the peace and tranquilli∣tie of this kingdome, and strength of our Prince's authori∣tie. It is vndoubtedly true, that according to the humane meanes that God vseth for the aduancement of his worke, the conseruation and growth of our Religion in this coun∣try, do wholy depend on the libertie and safetie of the E∣dicts vnder which we liue; the maintaining of these Edicts, on the Kings absolute authoritie. Witnes the happie reigne of Henrie the Great, whom as God had raised in absolute power and authoritie higher then any other of the Kings
of Christendome, so also vnder that prosperitie and great∣nesse of this Monarchie, our Churches were seene to flou∣rish and replant themselues, and the Gospell to fructifie with so great successe, that our enemies bursting for spight, neuer left till they had perfidiously depriued France of this so absolute King. And though now for a pretext to inuade vs and stirre vp warre against our Religion, they haue ac∣cused vs of disobedience; haue we done any thing else then complaine of the infringing of the Kings authoritie and E∣dicts, and demand redresse? And is there in this any shadow of rebellion against our Prince? We assembled our selues to demand iustice of him. Had we not need and right to do so? We haue already iustified it by the estate of our cala∣mities, and the condition of the promises made vs. Haue we passed the limits of complaint? If being denied, we of∣ten returned, and diuers times endeuoured to lay downe our most humble petitions at our Kings feete; alas! who can distaste it, or blame vs, when we behaue our selues to∣wards our King. Gods image vpon earth, euen as God him selfe hath commanded vs? And because many Deputies out of all the Prouinces, desirous to carry backe from the Kings bountie and grace the effect of his good will towards vs, continued together; is it not a malignant and iniurious pettifoggerie, that to authorize a deniall of iustice, we should be accused of shadowing the Kings authoritie? And for a speciall president for the said deniall, our enemies al∣ledge that the Parliament after the presentation of their bils, breakes vp, and stayeth not for an answer. But what pro∣portion is there betweene vs and a Parliament? All our de∣mands are particular. We demand not that such rules be prescribed vnto the State, or such new lawes and orders, wherein certainly the Monarchicall authoritie would be disparaged and quartered if the Parliament should do more then aduice. But all that we demand, is, that our burnt Churches may be repaired; that the exercise of our Reli∣gion let and hindered vs, be re-established; That Townes giuen vs by the King, and taken from vs by violence, be re∣stored
vs; That officers may be admitted; That children ta∣ken by force out of their fathers armes be giuen them a∣gaine; and the like. Wherein should the Kings authoritie be disparaged, if he should command out of hand that in euery one of these points iustice should be done vs? If a priuate man to whom an iniury is done, may iustly com∣plaine of it, and expect iustice from the King; why, if the if the iniury be done out of hate to a generalitie, may not a generalitie do the same? Can there be then any greater iniustice then to accuse vs of rebellion and disobedience, because we complained and demanded iustice in this sort? any greater crueltie, then to persecute vs for this cause, and make warre vpon vs? But this is sufficient to shew that the far fetcht pretexts of our enemies are but coloured subtil∣ties, to execute the old designe of making warre vpon our Religion, and to plunge France in confusion and trouble. Wherefore considering the iustice & vrging need we had to haue recourse by our complaints vnto the Kings prote∣ction: The right and permission granted vs to reassemble our selues to that end in such expresse and solemne termes: the failing and breach of promises, caused by the fraud of our enemies. Their violence in hindring our accesse vnto our King, and in causing all our suites to be reiected. The iniustice of their accusation, and the slanderous crime of rebellion that they impose vpon vs. The disloyaltie of their proceedings cōsidered, whiles they temporize vpon the re∣fusall of doing vs iustice, that they might take from vs three Townes at once in Viuarez, by the fraud of a treatie and breaking their publike faith. The inuasion of the whole country of Bearn, contrary to such an expresse stipulation, and so fully performed on our side: And after that to com∣mit such bloodie and inhumane acts of hostilitie. And last∣ly, this infamous perfidie considered, that vnder the shadow of a Declaration authorized with the Kings sacred name, & confirmed in all the Courts of Parliament of France, pro∣mising libertie and safetie by maintaining the Edicts vnto all such as should remaine in their obedience; the Towne
of Saumur was seized on, where the gates were opened with so much obedience and respect vnder expresse and particular promises (besides the publicke faith of the De∣claration) that nothing should be innouated. That by a like fraud and trecherie the Towne of Iargeau was at the same time inuaded, S. Iohn d'Angely assaulted, and now is in ex∣pectation of a siege. All Protestants disarmed throughout all the chiefe Townes of Normandie, to prepare them, a∣las! for a more easie slaughter. If all these things, we say, be rightly considered together, we doubt not but it will easily appeare that we suffer this persecution for iustice sake, and by the hatred of our Religion, which a generall conspiracie throughout all Europe now threatneth to destroy. Wherefore being forced for the libertie of our conscien∣ces, and out of loue to our Country, to seeke in our selues, and towards the friends of our Religion and this State, a iust and necessary defence: we here yet againe present our selues with teares before our King, beseeching him in all humilitie to consider and beleeue, that the vowes and ar∣dent desires that we continually powre forth vnto God in our prayers, are for the prosperitie of his person and State. And that it would please him to remember that our fathers taught by their Religion the true obedience due vnto their King, haue neglected the sefetie of their owne liues, to fur∣ther and aduance the labours of Henrie the Great, in the re∣couery of his kingdome, perfidiously sold and exposed to the enemie, by the very same pretexts of hatred and perse∣cution against our Religion and vs. And that he would vn∣derstand, that we following our fathers steps, as heires of their affections, haue neuer forsaken the dutie we were borne to, nor refused the true obedience and ready seruice that our Religion teacheth vs to yeeld him. And would to God, Sir, that your Maiestie moued with the true interest of your greatnesse, and out of your, naturall generositie, would for the setling of your Crowne and diginitie of your kingdome, turne your armes vpon the enemies of your State, and vse our fidelitie in the defence of such a cause.
We will boldly say for our selues, that in so glorious an e∣mulation betweene your best subiects, we would cary away the prise from them all. But we say now with teares of blood, and in the bitternesse of grones that teare our in∣trals, that the enemies of your Crowne and person, Sir, ha∣uing induced you to draw your sword against vs, and to bathe it in the blood of your loyallest subiects, will vndo both your Crowne and person altogether. They are your vndoubted enemies, that kindle your hatred against vs, to fire your Estate, and burie you in the ruines. Who hauing cruelly murthered the greatest King of the world, your glorious father, because he would not hate vs, and that his goodnesse and iustice did protect vs as his trustie subiects; do now induce your Maiestie to hate and destroy vs, to o∣uerwhelme yourselfe with the fall of this Monarchie. And if in this tempest which they haue already stirred vp, and which we feele comming downe vpon vs, we are constrai∣ned for our owne defence and preseruation to betake our selues vnto naturall remedies, we here protest, Sir, before God, before you, and before all men, that our purpose is e∣uermore to preserue your authoritie and the respect of your obedience among vs; and that we will do our best ende∣uours to saue your sacred person and kingdome from pe∣rishing. God, who is the God of mercie and reuenge, and who according to the decrees of his counsell, sometimes hath powred out his wrath with diuers examples of horror on the heads of Kings and nations risen against him. Some∣times hath preserued and reconciled to himselfe the grea∣test persecutors of his Church, grant, according to our vowes, that your Maiestie secure from all dangers, may acknowledge the Religion and fidelitie of those persons whom you now hate and know not. In the meane while we call here by our most humble supplications all Kings, Princes and Estates interessed in the innocencie of good and faithfull subiects oppressed, but especially bound in conscience before God to defend the cause of his truth. And request them to prop with their
helpe and succour the weake defence that of necessitie we oppose to the many and puissant forces of our enemies, who hauing chosen this time of purpose, now that they haue set on fire the greatest part of the Estates from whence they imagine we might haue expected succour, hope to oppresse vs with greater facilitie. But our chiefest trust is in the arme of the Almightie, who ouerthroweth the dessignes of na∣tions, and blasts the enterprises of people conspiring against Israel. And since that for the glorie of his Name we are ha∣ted, and that to ouerthrow his truth our ruine is sought af∣ter, we assure our selues that he will make vs feele the same deliuerance that our fathers haue proued by his succour, which we call vpon from the bottome of our soules. Keepe not thou silence, O God; hold not thy peace, and be not still, O God. For lo thine enemies make a tumult: and they that hate thee, haue lift vp the head. This is the Declaration of the Reformed Churches of France and Soueraigntie of Bearn by their Deputies assembled at Ro∣chell. And in the name of all, Combort, President. Banage, Assistant. Rodil, Secretarie. Riffaut, Secretarie. COurteous Reader, I pray thee amend these few faults of moment, pag. 3. lin. 17. we, reade do. lin. 28. action, r. af∣fection. pag. 4. lin. 35. for, r. euen. pag. 7. li. 3. for, r. on. l. 32. thereof by, r. of the.
