1331.5 33143256 28334
A new Ballad intituled, I haue fresh Cheese and Creame. To a new Tune. IN London lately as I went, Along the streetes to try, Many a pretty Wench I saw, Along the streetes to try: But none so sweete, Which I there could meete, As there was a handsome Wench, That sang in Colman streete, I haue fresh Cheese and Creame, I haue fresh Cheese and Creame. Upon her backe she wore A Fustian wast coate white, Her Bodyes and her Stomacher, Were fastned very tite. Her Nckenger of Holland sure, Her voyce was shrill and very pure: Her Ware she opened straight To any that would buy. I haue fresh Cheese and Creame, I haue fresh Cheese and Creame. She pleased me full well, In singing of her noate; She sung not like an Oyster whore, That rtieth in the throat: Which made me to admier, And askt her name, but with the same, She cryed then more higher. I haue fresh Cheese and Creame, I haue, &c. With that I marked all the trades Were round about the Cittie, The cryes of youngmen, boyes, and maydes, And all their pleasant dittie: Ripe Cherrie, ripe ripe, Hotte Pippin-pies; they pipe: Hay'ny Boules or Trayes to mende? White young Radish, white. I haue fresh Cheese and Creame, I haue, &c. Will you buy any Aqua-viti? Sweepe Chimney sweepe: Buy any Writing pennes, or Incke? Will you buy any Milke? Will you buy Pippins fine, Or Lemmons for your Wine? Will you buy and Blacking, Twill make your shooes to shine? I haue fresh Cheese and Creame, I haue, &c. Old shooes; will you buy any Broomes? Will you buy a Siue? Hay'ny old Bellowes to mende? Hay'ny Wood to cleaue? Will you buy any suruy Grasse? Will you buy any Glasses? Ripe saint Thomas Onions. But then began this Lasse, I haue fresh Cheese and Creame, I haue fresh, &c. Buy a Matte for a Bedde. New Musles, Lilly white. Buy a fine Tinder box. What Kitchinstuffe hay ye Maydes? I haue white young Leekes. Hay'ny old Dublets? I haue ripe Cowcumbers ripe. Hay'ny Cornes ay'r feete. I haue fresh Cheese and Creame, I haue fresh, &c. I haue fine Pomegranuts. Hotte Codlings hotte. I haue ripe Strawberries. Dee lacke sir, what dee lacke, Bandes, Shirtes, or Ruffes, Handkerchers, or Cuffes: Garters, Kniues, or Purses, Or Muscoua silken Muffes? I haue fresh Cheese and Creame, I haue fresh, &c. By no meanes can I get, To know her dwelling place: She was so deckt with comlines, And bodyed with such grace. I would not care a rush, So might haue my wish, To haue her stay all night with me, which were a bettter dish, then her fresh Cheese and Creame, then her fresh Cheese and Creame. FINIS. Imprinted at London by W. W. 16
