1358 99840198 4674
AN ANTIDOTARIE Chyrurgicall, containing great varietie and choice of all sorts of medicines that commonly fal into the Chyrurgions vse: partlie taken out of Authors, olde and new, prin∣ted or written: partlie obtained by free gifte of sundrie worthie men of this Profession within this Land. BY Iohn Banester Master in Chirurgerie. Imprinted at London by Thomas Or∣win for Thomas Man. 1589.
To the right honorable, my very good Lord and Master, Ambrose Earle of War∣wicke, Baron Lisle, Knight of the most noble Order of the Garter, Generall of all the Queenes Maiesties Ordinance, and one of the Lords of her High∣nesse most honourable Pri∣uie Counsaile. AS my desire (right honoura∣ble) & so also my endeuor, hath to this day beene, both to profite my countrie, by a faithful vsage of my hand in healing manie members therof, in my life time; as also, by publique writings, to fur∣nish nūbers, to greter fitnes in that seruice; euen so likewise at this time, by this pre∣sent book, I haue continued my purpose. Heretofore I haue set foorth, first Anato∣mi, largly shewing the making, number, situation, office, and vtilitie of the parts of mans bodie, being and abiding according to the rule of nature. Then also I printed a general & perticular handling & order of healing such diseases as are incidēt to the same parts, subiect to the Chirurgiōs cure & administration. And now, lest for lacke
of choice of medicines in all those cases, the soile of this worthie Art should seeme to be barren, & not able to yeeld plentifull varietie, to satisfie euery reasonable inten∣tion of the Artist, in the most high & dif∣ficult cures; I haue gathered and published this manuall Antidotarie, furnished as a fruitful medow, with some things seruing to necessitie onelie, & other things affor∣ding delight besides: also as a faire forest which (besides the large scopes & delite∣some chases) conteineth trees likewise of all growths, and required vses: for in like maner, here are medicins, some of thē bit∣ter, biting & painful, seruing wher neither ease, nor delight of taste, but recouerie of health requireth to be cared for. Yea here are medicines, differing in groweth, mak∣ing, & strength: some of speedie, others of lōger preparation, some for new-grown, other for inueterat diseases; some for sim∣ple, others for malign & depraued affects; some to be chosen for the tender & deli∣cate, & others more fit for the rusticall or harder natured bodies. Againe, whereas mens liking of writings, and tasting of
wines, are things verie agreeable to bee brought into cōparison: (for one saith of new inuentions; these are of none aucto∣rity, the ancient deuises are better: another saith of the old, these are stale, the later are fitter for our times & bodies) I haue inde∣uored (as farre forth as I might) to satisfie both affections: for which cause I haue not onely collected out of the best written practises both of old & late yeres, & obtei¦ned of my frends, verie rare & tried medi∣cines, as many as I could, but also, haue (as it were) emptied my self of mine own pe∣culiar furniture, and deliuered of the verie secrets of my practise; lest any thing shuld be wanting, on my part, to the fulnesse of the work. Now if it shall please your Ho∣nor (my good Lord) to voutsafe it a place amōgst those things, that are graced with your worthie name & Patrocine, my en∣couragement shalbe much encreased. And my hope is the strōger herein; not only in respect of that free fauor which your Ho∣nor hath vouchsafed mee (in taking me in to the number of your seruants, & parta∣king vnto me your H. good countenance
and protection; but also in regard, that so necessary a professiō, as is this Art of Chi∣rurgerie, may by this book receiue much furtherance and enlargement: which is a thing that cannot fale of good affection frō your Honor, in so much that your no∣ble minde hath euer delighted in the pub∣lique profit of your countrie. Onelie this shalbe my humble sute with all, that these my present labors, may for this time serue vnto your Honor, & be acknowledged as a tru pledge, & assured signe, of that intire affection, & dutiful minde, which I keep readie to be shewed in whatsoeuer, euen far greter seruice, your H. shal employ me in; or els vntil by the multiplying blessing of the Lord, my selfe may bee able to offer some greter honor vnto your renowmed name. Mean time, rcōmending your H. in my dailie praiers vnto the L. of Lords, & labouring here, to auoid the tediousnes of a long tale, I humbly take my leaue: the 10. of August. 1589. Your . in all dutie, and seruiceable affection. Iohn Banester.
To his verie louing frend, and wor∣thie Brother in the Art of Chirurgerie, Iohn Banester: William Goodrus wi∣sheth all health and happi∣nesse. HE is counted a worthie Magistrate, who is seen a long time prudently & happelie to gouerne his charge; and he is repu∣ted for an excellent cap∣taine, that manie times returneth out of the field with victorie. But yet that Magi∣strate & Captaine shall far shine aboue the other in glorie, & vniuersal applause of al sorts, that beside performing of their own parts excellentlie, doo also by true and ex∣actlie digested precepts teach manie to be like them. So must I needes saie and con∣fesse, concerning you, (my good frend:) that albeit it might bee said by manie of vs of this profession, that there is much loue and fauour due vnto vs of our Countrie, for wel acquitting our callings in healing and releeuing manie pained & miserable persons, yet much more vnto such as you,
and aboue all the rest: seeing that ouer & besides the well accomplishing of your owne particular charge, you haue also by publique writings, (and heerein without all comparison excelling the rest of your countrimen) striuen to fill this flourishing Land with most cunning Chirurgions. It were a manifest malignitie not to impute it to your louing minde, and sincere affec∣tion to your Countrey: and so were it as detestable an ingratitude, not to render you like loue againe for it. For mine own part therefore, as I do vnfeinedlie & from my heart acknowledge all this that I haue said of you, and therefore haue reached vnto you the right hand of loue & friend∣ship to continue whilest we liue; so I ear∣nestlie wish and desire, that such as are not so minded towards you, maie either verie happelie change their mindes, as becom∣meth them: or els most vnhappelie faile of their seeking, as they are woorthie. What their malice hath been able to at∣chieue against you hethertoo, you haue good experience; it is not to be hoped of them, that time to come will bring more
prosperous windes for their sayling, al∣though they threaten, feare them not: A wise man said, Those that proudlie threaten others, doe eyther suppse them-selues to be Gods, or els thinke that those things which they threaten others with, cannot fall vpon them∣selues. They are but the Schollers of Me∣dius, one of Alexanders parasites, whose perswasion to his familiars euer was, that they shoulde neuer feare, nor make nice, what crime they laid vpon anie man, ha∣uing alwaies for his wicked precept, this proper reason: for howsoeuer (saith hee) the wound healeth againe, yet there alwaies re∣maineth some scarre: the Quaile is said to bee most delighted to feede on venimous seedes: and so is the euill tonged man in casting forth venimous speaches, thus en∣vie alwaies traceth vertue, and treadeth vpon her heeles. Arrogancie also feareth, lest euerie praise that another deserueth, diminisheth somewhat of theirs, and ob∣scureth their glorie: those therefore, that are sicke of this disease, will detract from you what they can; but this arrogancie commonlie springeth of ignorance, for as
the wheat eare, while it is greene and vn∣ripe: is most ful, swelling, and looketh hie; but whē it is replenished with ripe graine, then it is more shrunke in, and hangeth downe the head; euen so shall you see him that is emptiest of good gifts, or rawest in knoweledg, euer lift his crest higher, and beare the stouter shewe: but he contrari∣wise that is best laden, holdeth his head lower; hauing indeed the substance of graine, when he is trid. Plinie saith, the Camelaen hath verie great lunges, but no∣thing els within her bodie, so (saith hee) there be some, that beside their bosting & swelling ostentation, haue nothing to be found in them: these are a kind of men, that (I hope) you will not care for, if they will needs meddle with you, allow them but time, and their owne course will con∣found themselues; the Aspe were an ine∣vitable euill, if shee were not by nature dimme sighted: so I graunt, were your enemie, pestilentlie dangerous, if accor∣ding to their wicked desire, they had also other answerable partes, whereby they might approch you: but like as the herbe
Maidenhaire, though it bee sprinkled or dipped in water, wil neuertheles look still as though it were drie; no more shall re∣proch and infamie (though it be notablie attempted) cleaue or sticke vnto a good man. These thinges had I, (good Master Banester (at the publishing of your Antido∣tarie, to write as an Antidote vnto your selfe: desiring, that according to the nature of such medicines, which both expel poy∣sons alreadie receiued, and also keepe and preserue the heart, against all new infecti∣ons; so this may both ridde you of the pre∣sent perplexities, and likewise defend you from future, against all your enimies. Your louing and assured for euer, W. Goodrus.
Salutem in Christo Guliel∣mus Clowes. I Read that Seneca the wise Phi∣losopher demandeth, What man is he that would wish to liue in this transitorie worlde, so full of mischiefes, calamities and mise∣ries, without faithfull familiaritie and vnfeined friendship? It may be answered in a word, None, but the proud person, and the malici∣ous and enuious man, whose words and deedes discouer the euill that is hatched in his heart. So that no firme friend∣ship nor stedfast amitie can once so much as appeare in his life and conuersation: but frameth himselfe with euerie mocking Parasite to throw out the venime and poyson of his heart, to the discrediting of those that anie thing excell him, either in knowledge or practise. Such a vile person was one Antiphilos said to be, who professed great friend∣ship to Apelles, seeming both to reuerence him for his skill, and honour him for his Art: yet when he did see that he grew in fauor with all, so that his fame spred to the Court of Alexander, (who hearing of his skill in Painting, gaue foorth a commandement, that none should paint his Pic∣ture but onelie Apelles) this wicked Antiphilos (the verie shape of shame, and fellow to all dissemblers & flatterers) with forged & false accusations practised priuely to bring Apelles into displeasure and disgrace with King Ptolo∣meus, (who also deerelie loued Apelles, and had him in great estimation). Yet he could not bring to passe his pur∣posed practise: for the King through his deepe wisedome examined the thing by the rule of reason, and soone found out the secret purpose and vnhonest attempt of that peril∣lous Pick-thanke, which sought by vniust meanes to haue Apelles banished, and so to liue as a man defamed: there∣fore
vpon due consideration had of the innocencie of Apel∣les cause, the King neither satisfied the leaud xpectation of Antiphilos, nor winked at his iniurious and wrongfull accusations, but perceiuing the ilthie liqur that came forth of that stinking vessel, presently he tamed his tongue with the bridle of bondage, and beate downe his malicious proud heart with the sharpe scourge of continuall slauerie, condemning him iustlie, and commandng him straightlie to serue as a bondslaue to Apelles all the daies of his life In like manner, Master Banester my deee and louing friend it is not vnknowen vnto manie good men, how vnder the colour of faithful friendship you haue been as it were com∣passed about, and deepelie bitten with such like Antipholo∣ses, whom you haue nouseled in your bosome: whose ill be∣hauiour is such, that no good & wholsome lawes can bridle or tame their piercing tongues. And one chief cause of their great impatience is for publishing of such like workes as is this your Antidotarie, saying forsooth, that onely their meere practise is sufficient without so manie bookes: as if amongst blind-men he that hath but one eie might bee a King. But contrariwise, to the good liking of the learned, and men of iudgement, you haue performed and publshed this your Antidotarie to your great fame and commenda∣tion. It is most certaine that the thing of it selfe deserueth praise: for they that read it with consideration shal finde in it varitie, breuitie, sound iudgement and varietie, bee∣ing full fraught and suft with manie singular, good and approoued practises, so that you iustlie merit praise of al true and faithfull professors of this noble Arte of Chyrur∣gerie, yet you know full well, it will be hard for you to cast off the burthen and yoke of leawd reproaches. For no work can be so eloquentlie handled, but some Aristrachus or o∣ther (whose filthie stomackes, beeing inflamed with cho∣lar) will improue the same: either for the slendernesse of the argument, impropernesse of the phrase, heauie and obscure reasons, false ortographie, faultes escaped, incke-horne
tearmes, or some imperfection for want of know∣ledge in tongues: yet you for your parte haue preuented such vaine pratlings, and I haue good hope that this your Antidotarie will yeelde a sufficient medicine to cure that olde vlcered maladie, which hath so farre infected their mouthes, and tainted their tongues: insomuch, that if now they finde faults, you and all may thinke, that either it is the vaine humours of certaine scoffing spirites, or els too much frequenting the hot-house, hath sweat out all their wittes. Themistocles a renowmed Captaine of the Greekes, beeing vpon a time verie pensiue and heauie, there came vnto him a verie familiar friend of his, and in secret manner demaunded of him, what might bee the cause that he was at that time so sorrowfull and sad? If you will needes know (said he) the cause of this my present sadnesse, it is, for that manie yeeres being past since I was borne, I perceiue not that I haue as yet done anie good thing worthie of memorie for the benefite of my Countrey and Common weale, beeing (by this reason) heereunto perswaded, that I know no man in all Athens that hateth or beareth me enuie. Now sith such a famous and most valiant Captaine supposed it better to be enuied and ha∣ted of the malicious, than to liue in idlenesse of life, and basenesse of minde, without dooing of some good thing, (woorthie of memorie) for the profite and benefite of his Countrey and Common wealth wherein hee liued: then let none of our proclaimers of infamie, (which are desti∣tute of truth and godliesse) once dismaie you with their iniurious vexations, which are neither pleasant in the hearing, nor yet profitable in the answering: for it is not ther boorish or caluish bleatings, neither yet their impu∣dent facings vpon their rotten and confused Pamphlets, that so pleasantlie they sporte themselues withall, and which now shortlie shall come foorth like monsters with∣out perfect shape, (at least if they proceede according to their boasting) can hurt any: for they are lanternes
void of light, moued with malice and defame: and doo but decke their crowe with other birdes feathers. Although they counterfeit what they can, their long eares will discouer them to come of Midas progenie. And when their time ser∣ueth they will trie the dignitie of their wits therein: for they pretend we shal be shortle vtterlie drowned in an vn∣knowen whirlepoole. But let such idiots resemble them∣selues: it skilleth not, sith manie of our ancients haue ta∣sted of such slanderers furious rages. And therefore they shall walke with Antiphilos, as bondslaues all the daies of their life. And heere I protest my selfe an open enemie to all such your wicked aduersaries whatsoeuer: and I must confesse that I am bound manie waies so to doo, not onelie in respect of our olde acquaintance, or for that it hath plea∣sd God to prosper & blesse our labour, (being oftentmes called to diuers great and dangerous cures: but chifelie, for that we both do serue vnder the right Honorable Earle of Warwicke our verie good Lord & Master, whom God long preserue in health to his good will & pleasure. These causes aforesaid doo binde me in faithfull and vnfeined friendship vnto the vttermost of my power: the which I will performe, if it so please the Lord: who prosper al your lawfull proceedings in this our Arte of Chyrurgerie. A∣men. Yours: WILLIAM CLOVVES.
An Antidotarie of all sorts of Medicines, seruing to the Chi∣rurgions vse, gathered out of the best practises and Authors, whoe names are set to euerie Receipt. Balmes. A Balme for all tumors comming of cold and windie matter. REc. Olei aneti ℥.viij. olei laurini, ruta∣cei, spicae, & masticis, ana ℥.iij. olei communis, ℥.vj. absynthij, origani, calamenti, centaurij, agrimoniae, ana.m.ss. seminis anisi, faeniculi, carui-, cumini, ameos, gariophylorum, baccarum lauri, radicum gentianae, rubiae tinctorum, ana.ʒ.j.ss. aquae vitae ℥.iiij. croci ʒ.iij. seminis dauci ʒ.j. se∣minis petroselini, ℈.ij. Bruse the herbes and seede together, and mixe them all with the rest, and let them boyle as if it were in Balneo, & when it is colde, straine it strong∣lie, and distill it in a glasse bodie.
A Balme for greene wounds. Calmeteus.Rec. Terebinthinae lib.j. gummi elemi, galbani ana.℥.ij. gummi hederae, thuris, masticis, myrrhae, ana.℥.ij. aloes, xyloaloes, gariophylorum, galangae, cinamomi, nucis moscatae, cubebarum, ana.℥.j. aquae vitae.℥.iij. Powder those which are to be pow∣dred, and let them infuse together one daie and a night. Afterward distill them twice, and keepe the Oyle distilled as a pretious Balme. A Balme that in eight daies healeth any indifferent wound. Anderna∣cus.Rec. Terebinthinae purgatae lib. ij. olei de semine lini, lib.j. resinae pini ℥.vj. thuris, myrrhae, aloes, masticis, sarcocollae, ana.℥.ij macis, croci, ligni aloes, ana.ʒ.j.ss. Mixe them together, and put them into a narrow mouthed vessell, and distill them with an easie fire, till the water bee extracted: then make a stronger fire, till the oyle be also sub∣limated, and reserue it to your vse. A Balme for wounds. Rec. Resinae lariceae, ʒ.ij. Dissolue it in white wine,Anderna∣cus. and straine it through a cloath: after melte them on the fire together with
olei oliuarum lib.j. Then adde to them a∣moniaci, galbani, oppoponacis, ana.℥.j. gū∣mi AEthiopici, ℥.ij. Distill them with an ea∣sie fire till the Balme be extracted. A Balme that healeth wounds speedilie. Rec. Terebinthinae purgatae, lib.j. resinae purae, lib.ss. thuris masculi ℥.iiij. masticis, myrrhae, ana.℥.j. olibani ℥.j.ss. sarcocol.℥.j. gūmi elemi ℥.ss. aloes epaticae ʒ.j. euphor∣bij.ʒ.ij. ammoniaci ʒ.iij. galbani ℥.ss. aloes ℥.iiij. nucis moscatae ℥.j. galangae ʒ.j. macis.ʒ.ij. cinamomi ʒ.j.ss. laudani ʒ.j. croci ʒ.ij.ss. gariophylorum ℥.ss. spicaenardi ℈.j. cubeba∣rum ℈.ij. Iridis ℥.j saluiae virescentis contu∣sae, m.j. olei magistralis ℥.v. olei liliacei, lib. ss. olei communis ℥.xii. olei laurini, ℥.iiij.ss. olei lumbricorum ℥.ij. mellis ℥.iiij.ss. aquae cōpositae ℥.iij. Pouder those which are to be powdred, and infuse them altoge∣ther foure & twentie houres, separating the water from the oyle, distill them according to arte. A Balme to conglutinate wounds with speede. Rec. Terebinthinae lib.j. masticis ℥.j. o∣libani ℥.iiij. gummi hederae ℥.ij. sarcocollae
℥.iij. aloes epaticae ℥.ss. myrrhae ℥.ij. aloes cicatrinae, ℥.ss. galbani ℥.j.ss. gummi elemi, ℥.iiij. ammoniaci ℥.ss. nucis moscatae, ga∣langae, radic. gentianae, tormentillae & sym∣phiti maio. cubebarum, mummiae, ana.ʒ.ij. olei communis lib.ij. Powder what are to bee powdred, and dissolue the gummes in white wine: after mixe hem together and let them boyle in balneo mariae foure and twentie houres, then distill them in a Cop∣per Still, seperating the Water from the Oyle. A Balme to heale greene wounds very speedilie. Rec. Aquae vitae lib j. vini cretici lib.ss. terebinthinae venetiae lib. ij.ss. ammoniaci ℥.iij. sarcocollae ℥.iiij. masticis ℥.ij. olibani ℥.j. myrrhae ℥.ij.ss. laudani ʒ.j. belzoini, sty∣racis calamitae, aloes epat. ana.ʒ.iij. gummi elemi ℥.j. gummi hederae ℥.ss. resinae pini ℥.iij gummi arabic. dragaganti ana.ʒ.ij.ss. op∣poponacis ℥.j. nucis moscatae, gariophylo∣rum, macis, galangae, cinamomi, zedoariae, ana.℈.j.ss. mummiae ʒ.iij. cubebarum ℥.j. mellis puri lib. ss. croci ʒ.ij. symphiti ma. mi. & med. ana.℥.iij.ss. Bruse the herbes, powder that which is to bee powdred, dis∣solue
the gummes in aqua vitae, and infuse them altogether foure and twentie houres, then put them into a copper Still well lu∣ted, and let the Balme bee extracted: aug∣menting and diminishing the fire according to arte, till the Balme and Oyle be seueral∣lie sublimated. A yellowe Balme that healeth wounds with speede. Rec. Gummi elemi, ℥.iij. myrrhae ℥.ij. olibani, sarcocollae, ana.℥.j. Powder the myrrha & olibanum, and put them into a double glasse vessell, with twelue ounces of aqua vitae made with Malmesie, and let them stande in balneo mariae foure daies. After adde thereto oyle of Terebinthinae ℥.viij. olei balsami veri, ℥.v. croci, ℥.ss. So let them boyle againe in balneo mariae, vn∣till the aqua vitae bee wasted: and in the ende straine it and reserue it to your vse. A blacke Balme confectionated of singular operation to agglutinate wounds. Rec. Mummiae,Banester. ℥.iij. aloes epaticae ℥.ij. picis naualis ℥.ss. sarcocollae, gummi hede∣rae, masticis, myrrhae, ana.℥.j. Powder those which are to be powdred subtillie, and mixe them with twelue ounces of aqua vitae pre∣pared
for woundes. Let them boyle in a double glasse vessell in balneo mariae thrée daies: which done, adde thereto olei tere∣binthinae ℥.ix. balsami Banest. distillati, ℥.iiij. then boyle them againe till the aqua vitae be wasted, and reserue it to your vse. Balsamum Banesteri. Rec. Terebinthinae clarissimae lib. viij. vini nigri lib. ij. succi consolidae ma. lib.ss. cydoneorum minutissimè incisorum num∣ero x. prunellorum siluestrium lib.ss. rad. consolidae maioris ℥.iiij. gummi amoniaci, ℥.ij. olibani.℥.j. gummi elemi ℥.j.ss. masti∣cis, sarcocollae, ana.℥.ij. aloes epaticae, myr∣rhae, mummiae, ana.℥.ij.ss. cinamomi ℥.j.ss. cassiae ligneae ʒ.vj. sanguinis draconis ℥.j.ss. boli armeni ℥.j.ʒ.vj. malecorij ʒ.vj. balau∣stiorum ʒ.ij. hippocistidis, santalorum ru∣brorum, ana.ʒ.j.ss. nucis moscatae, cypressi, ana.ʒ.iij. myrtillorum ℥.ss. puluerizentur puluerizenda & in balneo mariae per bidu∣um macerata distillentur. Glanfields Balme. Glanfield.Rec. Terebinthinae venetae, gummi ele∣mij ana.℥.iiij. olei lumbricorum lib. ss. a∣quae vitae ℥.j. Boyle them to the consump∣tion of the aqua vitae, then straine them and
adde aloes epaticae, & cynnabrij opt. pulu. ana ʒ.j. Fiat Balsamum. Fowlers Balme, by him greatly vsed both in wounds and vlcers, to make iniections of, namely for the mouth and yard or otherwise. Rec. Mellis lib.ij. succi saniculae, ℥.viij. viridis aeris ʒ.iiij. Boyle thē according to art. An excellent Balme for wounds and cancerous vlcers. Rec. Terebint. clarae,Barnardus à Portu. olei lini opt. ana. lib.j. Boyle them at a gentle fire, & skumme it, then remoue it from the fire, & adde there∣to viridis aeris puri & purgati ʒ.j. Afterward let it sande againe vpon a gentle fire for a little space. Last of all straine it. The Plai∣ster belonging to this Balme, is to bée sought in his proper place. Balme of Hipericon. Rec. Ol. terebint. lib.iiij. aqu. vitae. lib.j. florum hyperici. lib. iij.ss. gummi elemi,Banester. rubiae tinctorum, ana ℥.iiij. croci ℥.j. myr∣rhae, gum. hederae, masticis, sarcocollae, ana ʒ.iij. vitellorum ouorum numero xxiiij. Incisis & contusis, fiat secundùm artem Balsamum.
A Balme that was giuen me for a great Iewell. Rec. Ol. com. lib.iij. terebint. lib.j. gum. karabae, ℥.vj. masticis, mirrhae, olibani, sar∣cocollae, ana ℥.ij. salis nitrae, ℥.ij.ss. aquae vi∣tae, lib.j. Powder those things that are to bee powdered, distill them at a gentle fire, and receiue the Water with a thinne Oyle swimming aloft: which separate apart by it self. But the thickest Oyle in the bottome seperate by straining: which is that excel∣lent Balme here mentioned. The Water quickeneth the eye-sight, and the Oyle is good against contraction and stiffnesse of members. Another. Rec. Gum. karabae, lib.j. masticis, oli∣bam, ana ℥.iiij. terebinthinae ℥.vj. olei com. lib.j.ss. aqua vitae, lib.j.ss. Powther those that are to bee powdered, séeth them toge∣ther to the consumption of the aqua vitae, after straine them. The golden Balme. Banester.Rec. Olei terebint. lib.iiij. myrrhae, ℥.ij.ss. masticis, ℥.j. sarcocollae, ℥.iiij. gummi ele∣mi, ℥.vj. gum. vel pinguedinis palmae, ℥.vij.
Mixe them together in a strong glasse, and infuse them in balneo mariae x. daies. After∣wards put too olei communis lib.j. terebin. puriss.℥.iiij. This will bee of a fine golden colour, but if you put some of it into a siluer bottle it will become as pure a gréene. A singular Balme for wounds made with Gun-shot. Rec. Visci herbae paeti & consolidae,Querceta∣nus. ana lib.ss. & terebinthinae lib.ij. florum hyperici & verbasci, ana m.iiij. pomorum vlmi, ℥.vj. acinorum populi arboris, lib.ss. spiritus vi∣ni, lib.iij. Let them digest in horse-dung, or let them stande in a stooue close stopped in a glasse vessell for a moneth, thē straine them: after adde to it, thuris, masticis, myrrhae, ana ℥iiij. sanguinis draconis.℥.j. mummiae, ℥.xij. terebinthinae, lib.i. benioni, ℥.ij. Let them circulate in a pellican eight daies: then at a moderate fire drawe foorth the sprites of wine, and there will remaine in the bottome a precious Balme. A Balme of Nicotian most fragrant and effectuall. Rec. Folia nicotianae q. voles.AEgidius E∣uerartus. Stampe them and straine foorth their iuyce, mixe it cum olei oliuarum aequa portione: stoppe
it and cere it vp in a glasse vessell verie close, and set it to the Sunne, or in balneo mariae, or in fimo equino, for xl. daies: (but renue your fimus as néede is). At the xl. daies ende, you shal finde a Balme (saith the Au∣thor) of no lesse force for all purposes, than the Quintessence of Nicotian. Another also of excellent note for wounds with gunshot, ceasing paine, and con∣cocting speedelie. Goodrus.Rec. Olei communis, lib.iiij. vermium terrestrium praeparatorum, lib.j. foliorum Nicotianae contusorum, lib.ij. Boile them in a double vessel according to Art; after set them in the Sunne xv. daies, then straine it through a thin strainer, and kéepe it. Balsameleum Clousium most excellent and approued in all wounds. Clowes.Rec. Agrimoniae, alchimillae, androsae∣mi, aschyri, betonicae, bifolij, prunellae, ca∣lendulae, capri folij, consolidae maioris, cru∣ciatae, hypericonis, aceae herbae, lauendulae, meliloti, millefolij, nummulariae, origani, perfoliatae, pilosellae, plantaginis, quinque neruiae, quinque folij, rosmarini, veronicae, violae nigrae, violae luteae, violae matronalis, ana m.j. Let these bée gathered each one in
his time and kinde, and let them be stamped with swéete oyle Oliue, and so kept euer as you get your herbes, from time to time, till at length all be gotten, and the whole quan∣titie of oyle bee come to a gallon. So let it stand the space of a moneth in a pot wel nea∣led, close couered & set in horse dung, meane time prepare these following. viz. Gummi ammoniaci, galbani, bdellij, masticis, myr∣rhae, olibani, oppoponacis, resinae pini, sar∣cocollae, sag apeni, styracis calamitae, thu∣ris, ana ℥.j. gariophylorum, maceris, nucis moscatae, cinamomi, ana ℥.j.ss. Powder those that are to bee powdered, dissolue the gummes in good white wine, then set your infusion vpon the fire in a faire brasen vessell to boyle, putting to it, vini maluat. lib.iiij. vermium terrestrium vino albo lotorum & depuratorum, lib.iij. Let it thus boile at a soft fire diligentlie stirring it till the wine and iuyce be wasted, and that the oyle haue a faire gréene colour of the hearbes: after straine it out strongly: last of al put in your gummes and spices, and thrée pints more of your muscadel or malmesey with terebinth. clariss.lib.j. Boile them till the wine be con∣sumed. This cureth wounds verie speede∣lie and effectuallie, it healeth scabbes and
wheales in the face and handes, and maketh those partes faire. It is verie excellent in wounds of the sinewes and ioynts, & staieth the muscilage and gléeting water. If you will distill this in a Stillatorie according to Art, you shall first haue a fine water, second∣ly a mot pure oyle, thirdly the balme, which is most excellent in all wounds, as also in vlcers of the fundament, &c. The oyle pre∣cious against all aches and goutes, the wa∣ter preserueth from venome and pestilence. Another. Rec. Terebinth. lib.j. gum. elemij, ℥.vj. olei laurini, ℥.iiij. myrrhae, aloes, olibani, masticis, ana ℥.j.ss. olei hyperici cum gum.℥.iij. vitellorum ouorum coctorum.℥.viij. croci, ʒ.ij. aqu. vitae, ℥.vj. Infuse these xxiiii. houres, and after boyle them in balneo ma∣riae till the aqua vitae bee consumed. Then take it of, and let it be stronglie strained, and reserue it to your vse. But if you will distill it according to Art, then must it bee done with an easie fire, separating the Water from the Balme, till the Balme be wholly extracted. A Balme decocted. Rec. Terebint. puriss. lib.ij. gumm. ele∣mi,
℥.iiij. boli Armeni, sang. draconis, ana ℥.j. olei hyperici descriptionis Iohannis de Vigo, ℥.iij. aqu. vitae, ℥.ij. ireos, aloes, masti∣cis, myrrhae, ana ʒ.j. Mixe them according to Art. A Balme for the palsey in woun∣ded persons. Rec. Rad. iridis & aristolochiae,Calmeteus ana ℥.ij. symphiti maioris, iuae areticae, herbae para∣lisis, pimpinellae, rutae, saluiae, ana m.j. bac∣carum lauri, & Iuniperi, ana ʒ.vj. florum staecados & anthos, ana p.j.ss. galangae, ze∣doariae, zinzibris, gariophilorū, nucis mos∣catae, cinamomi, ana ʒ.iij. ligni aloes, ℥.j. thuris, masticis, ana ʒ.x. myrrhae, aloes, bde∣lij, sarcocollae, galbani, ammoniaci, ana ℥.j.ss. castorei, ℥.ss. gummi elemi, ℥.ij. Diachy∣lonis iriati, ℥.iij. aquae vitae, ℥.iiij. Broose what are to be brused, and powder what are to be powdered, and cast them into a Lim∣becke to distill at an easie fire, till a certaine licour flowe foorth like vnto a Balme. A Balme for the palsie in wounds. Rec. Myrrhae, aloes epaticae,Liquor bal∣samites, Ihoannis Mesuae. spicae nar∣di, sanguinis draconis, thuris, mummiae, opobalsami, bdellij, carpobalsami, ammo∣niaci, sarcocollae, croci, masticis, gumm.
arab. styracis, calamitae, ana ʒ.ij. laudani e∣lecti, succi castorei, ana ʒ.ij.ss. mosci, ʒ.ss. te∣rebinthinae optimae ad pondus omnium. Powder what are to be powdered, and mixe them altogether with Terpentine, then put them into a Limbecke, and distill them at an easie fire, and when the liquor is sublima∣ted by distillation, reserue it in a strong ves∣sell. A Balme artificiall for wounds and vlcers. Anderna∣cus.Rec. myrrhae, aloes, spicae, sanguinis dra∣conis, thuris, mummiae, oppoponacis, am∣moniaci, carpobalsami, sarcocollae, croci orientalis, masticis, gum. arabic. styracis ca∣lamitae ana.℥.ij. laudani ℥.j.ss. resinae abie∣ctinae, lib.j. terebinthinae lib.viij. vini ge∣nerosi lib.ss. Put al these in a narrow mou∣thed vessell and distill them: and after it is distilled put into the liquor xv. graines of pure Muske. A Balme which will cicatrize and con∣solidate wounds and vlcers merueilouslie. Rec. Terebinthinae purg.℥.iij. myrrhae ℥.iiij. styracis, mummiae, sarcocollae ana.℥.j. masticis, thuris, ana.ʒ.iij. gummi hederae
ʒ.iij.ss. aloes lotae. aristolog. vtriusque, alu∣minis vsti, ana.℈.ij.ss. malicorij ℥.ss. hypo∣cist. balaustiorum, sanguinis draconis, nu∣cum cupressi ana.ʒ.ij. boracis, ʒ.iij. campho∣rae ʒ.ss. Powder that is to bee powdred, and let them all infuse together one night, and distill them through a glasse Still. A Balme for wounds giuen by sharpe poynted weapons. Rec. Terebinthinae lib.ss. aquae vitae lib.j. thuris ℥.j. sarcocollae, ℥.j.ss. myrrhae ℥.ij. ma∣sticis ʒ.vj. gummi hederae ℥.ss. euphorbij ʒ.ji. oppoponacis ʒ.iij. gummi elemi, ℥.j.ss. resinae pini, ℥.iij. succi symphiti vtriusque, ana.℥.ss. nucis moscatae, cinamomi ana.ʒij. croci ℈.ij. aloes epaticae, mummiae, ana.ʒ.j.ss Powder what are to bee powdred, and let them stande a while, then distill them in a copper still, vntill by sublimation the Wa∣ter be seperated from the Oyle. A Balme for the pricking of any sharpe poynted weapon. Rec. Terebinthinae lib. iij.ss. myrrhae ℥.iij. sarcocollae ℥.iiij. thuris ℥.ij. gummi ele∣mi ℥.ij.ss. masticis, olibani, ana.℥.iij. gummi arab. & dragagant. ana.℥.j. gummi hederae, euphorbij ana.℥.ss. aloes epat.℥.ss. croci ʒ.v.
malecorij, galangae, gariophylorum xylo∣aloes, cubebarum, nucis moscatae, cinamo∣mi, ana.ʒ.j. Powder what are to be powde∣red very finely, and infuse them xii. houres, then distill them through a glasse Still, and receiue the liquor. Another. Rec. Terebinth. larignae lib.ij. masticis, ℥.viij. aquae vitae ℥.vj. Powder that is to bée powdred, and drawe them through a cop∣per Still, augmenting and diminishing your fire, according to Arte, till the Water be seperated from the Balme. A Balme to heale wounds of the biting of venimous beastes. Rec. succi cardui benedicti, valerianae, saluiae, hyperici, ana.℥.iiij. olei com. lib.ij. terebinth. lib. j. myrrhae ℥.iiij. sarcocollae ℥.vj. euphorbij ℥.ss. olibani, masticis, ana.℥.j.ss. gummi elemi ℥.ij. aquae vitae lib.ss. Powder that is to bee powdered, and let them boyle in a vessell till the iuyces be con∣sumed: then put them all into a Copper Stil, and distill them first with an easie fire, after with a stronger, till the Water and the Oyle be seperated.
A Balme for the biting of venimous beastes: or otherwise it is necessarie for the Palsey, Crampe, Rumes, weakenesse of the memo∣rie, collicke, tooth-ach and wormes, and may be taken inwardly. Rec. Terebinthinae, lib. v. aquae vitae lib.ij. succi saluiae, draconcellae, scabiosae, cardui benedicti, hyperici, melissophili, ana.℥.ij. galbani, oppoponacis, ammoniaci, serapini, euphorbij, ana ʒ.iij. masticis, sar∣cocollae, myrrhae, aloes epaticae, laudani, belzoini, gummi hederae, ana.ʒij. rad. ze∣doariae, helenij, gentianae, iunci odorati, dictami, rubae tinctorū, angellicae, ana.ʒ.j. vermium terrestrium ℥.ij. baccarum lauri, iuniperi, & hederae, ana.℈.ij. cinamomi, ca∣siae ligneae, zinzibris, cardamomi, nucis moscatae, ana.ʒ.j. piperis, cubebarum, car∣pobalsami, xylobalsami, cort. citri, santali citrini, rhabarb. ana.℈.j. gra. vj. malecorij ℥ij. seminis anisi, feniculi, dauci, carui, cu∣mini, petroselini, saxifragiae, ana.ʒ.ij. balau∣stiorum ʒ.j.ss. Powder what is to be pow∣dred, and dissolue the gummes in aqua vi∣tae prepared for wounds, and in Malmsey: so let them infuse sixe daies, and after at an easie fire, seperating the Water from the Oyle, distill them through a Limbecke.
When you will vse it for any inward affect, take three droppes of the Oyle with sweete wine: when you vse the Water, take halfe a spoonefull with foure spoonefulles of some pleasant wine. And for the Palsey take ℥.ss. of the oyle with sixe drammes of oleum euphorbij; For debilitie of memorie, take three drammes of the Balme, with olei ca∣storei, ℥.ss. therewith annoynt the nape of the necke and hinder part of the head. Fi∣nallie, for wounds, take of the Balme ℥.j. olei lumbricorum ℥.j. olei rosarum ℥.ij. In other like affects vse it with discretion, but it is not to be vsed simplie, by reason of his heate. A Balme to agglutinate wounds, and defend from payne and inflammation. Balthrop.Rec. Boli armeniae, ℥ij. farinae volatilis ℥.j. sang. draconis, terrae sigillatae, ana.℥.j. te∣rebinthinae ℥.iij. Put all these in fine pow∣der into olei rosarum lib.iij. mingle them and warme them together ouer the fire a little. Put it vp in a pewter bottle: & when you vse it shake first the bottle, then put out your quantitie, warme it; and therein dippe both tents, pledgets, and linnen beds to lay vpon all, as also aboue the wound in stead
of a defensiue: so rowle it vp. Use this Balme but for the first dressing only. A greene decocted Balme. Rec. Olei rosac. lib.j. aquae vitae lib. ss.Balthrop. lumbricorum purgatorum ℥.iiij. Boyle these together vntill the aquae vitae bee in a manner consumed: straine it, and in the coo∣ling put to olei petrolei ℥.j. terebinthinae ve∣netae ℥.vj. floris aeris ℥.ss. Fiat. An excellent Balme of Earthwormes for the speedie curing of al maner of wounds, espe∣ciallie those of the ioynts, sinewes, tendons, and about the head. It cureth prickes ac∣cording to the first intention, and is profi∣table also against Palsies, Crampes, num∣nesse, and such like. Rec. Olei Terebinthinae lib. v. vermiumBanester. terrestriū praeparat. lib.ij.ss. myrrhae ℥.ij.ss. masticis, sarcocollae, olibani ℥.iij. galbani, gummi ammoniaci, ana.℥.j. bdellij, ℥.ij. gum. elemij, ℥.iij. gariophylor.℥.iij. olei cō∣munis, lib.ij. olei lumbricor. nostrae inuen∣tionis lib.j. terebinthinae puriss. lib.j. Put altogether, except the Oyle of wormes and common oyle, into the oyle of Terpentine, (but the gummes being first finely minced,
and the rest powdered, and so let them stand thirtie daies: then powre out by it selfe the clearer part; but the thicker part with all the grounds, put into your boyling vessell together with a pint of Malmsey or Sack, and the other two Oyles that before were excepted. Let these thus boyle together the space of three houres, alway stirring it least it burne to the bottome. At length when the thicke parts beginne to swimme aloft, take it from the fire, and put into it the oyle of Terpentine that before was cléered from it. Last of all straine it purely, and keepe it to your vse. A Balme for wounds in the ioynts. Paracelsus.Rec. Olei oliuarum lib.j. vini nigerrimi pontici, lib.iij. Distill them and adde to them olei hypericonis ℥.vj. liquoris de num∣mia ℥.iiij. Distill them againe according to Arte, and reserue it to your vse. A Balme of woundes in the ioynts, it is also good for the Crampe, Palsey, and paine in the ioynts. Rondele∣tius.Rec. Olei vermium terrestrium lib.j. olei hypericonis lib.ss. terebinthinae lib.j.ss. aquae vitae lib.ss. colophoniae lib.ss. euphorbij ℥.iij gummi hederae ℥.ij. gariophylorum, nucis
moscatae, cinamomi, cubebarum, galangae, xyloaloes, ana, ℥.j. masticis ℥.iiij. myrrhae, ℥.iij.ss. gummi elemi ℥.iij. galbani, olibani, ana.℥.ij. croci ʒ.ij. sanguinis draconis ʒ.iij. Powder what is to bee powdred, & dissolue what is to bee dissolued in the aqua vitae, and put them all mixed into a copper Still, and drawe out the Balme first with a gentle fire, and after with a stronger. A Balme artificiall for to cure wounds in the sinewes. Rec. terebinthinae opt. lib.j. olei laurini,Vesalius. ℥.iiij. galbani ℥.iij. gummi elemi ℥.iij.ss. thu∣ris, myrrhae, gummi hederae, gariophylo∣rum, symphiti minoris, cinamomi, nucis moscatae, zedoariae, zinziberis, dictami al∣bi, ana.℥.j. olei vermium terrestrium, ℥.ij. aquae vitae lib.vj. Powder what are to bée powdred, & infuse them altogether in aquae vitae sixe daies. Afterward with a slacke fire drawe them by a retort well luted, from whence you must receiue thrée liquors: whereof the first is very subtill, watrie and passing cleare: the second of a yellowe co∣lour and very subtill: the third is the artifi∣ciall Balme, which beareth a red and purple colour.
A Balme to heale and conglutinate woundes chiefly of the head, without paine. Fallopius.Rec. Terebinthinae lib.j. thuris, masti∣cis, myrrhae, sarcocollae ana.℥.j. aquae vitae ℥.viij. Put them all into a Retort well lu∣ted: distill them with hot ashes, seperating the Water from the Oyle. A Balme for wounds and vlcers, very comfortable. Rec. Terebinthinae lib. j.ss. aquae vitae, lib.ss. galbani, oppoponacis, ammoniaci, ana.℥.ss. gummi elemi ℥.j. cinamomi ℥.iiij. laudani ʒ.iij. olibani ℥.j. thuris ℥.j.ss. macis, ʒ.ij. resinae pini, ℥.ij. masticis, ℥.ss. myrrhae, ʒ.vj. mummiae, ʒ.ij. aloes ʒ.iij.ss. nucis mos∣catae, ℥.ss. gummi hederae, ʒ.v. galangae ʒ.iiij. boracis ʒ.iij. gariophylorum ʒ.iij.ss. sarco∣collae, ℥.ss. Infuse them together twelue houres, being grosely powdered, and distill them according to Art, seperating the Wa∣ter from the Balme. A greene Balme auaileable also for hollowe vlcers. Rec. Galbani ℥.iij.ss. oppoponacis, saga∣peni, ana.℥.j. masticis, thuris, ana.℥.j.ss. myrrhae, sarcocollae, ana.℥.ss. Powder what
is to bee powdered, and put altogether into a double glasse vessell with twelue ounces of aqua vitae for woundes, and let it stande three daies in balneo mariae: After adde thereto olei terebinthinae lib.ss. olei balsa∣mi veri ℥.iiij. Boyle them to the consump∣tion of the aqua vitae, then straine it, and adde thereto viridis aeris ℥.ss. in powder, and reserue it to your vse. A Balme very conuenient against the Gowt. Rec. Terebinthinae lib. iiij. masticis, myrrhae, thuris, oppoponacis, laudani, ana.ʒ.x. malecorij ℥.ss. cerae flauae ℥.ij. sagape∣ni, ammoniaci, ana.ʒ.ij.ss. mellis crudi ℥.i.ss gariophylorum ʒ.ij.ss. croci.℈.ij. aquae vitae, ℥.ij. cerusae ℥.j.ss. olei laurini ℥.ij.ss. olei lum∣bricorum, rosacei, ana.℥.ij.ss. vrinae pueri, ℥.ij. Mixe and distill them according to Art. A Balme for the gowt in any part. Rec. Saluiae, rutae, hyssopi, cinamomi, florum genistae, absynthij, ana.m.ss. Ireos, ℥.ij. olei rosarum lib.ss. olei cymini, olei laurini, ana.℥.ij. butyri recent.℥.iiij. medul∣lae crurum bouis lib.ss. auxungiae porcinae, ℥.vj. rad. altheae ℥.iiij. foenugraeci ℥.iij. tre∣binthinae
lib.j.ss. ammoniaci ℥.ij. galba∣ni ℥.iiij. oppoponacis, bdellij, ana.℥.j. vi∣ni sanguinei, lib.j. Bruse the herbes and mixe them all together, then boyle them in a close vessell twentie houres, foreseeing that in the cooling, the mouth of the pot bee not opened. Afterwarde in the strayning adde to it croci subtilliter triti ℥.iij. sulphu∣ris viui ℥.iiij. salis puri ℥.ij.opij ℈.iiij. Thus being mixed together put them into a glasse bodie well luted, and drawe the Oyle from the Water, and annoynt therwith the place affected (the bodie being duelie purged be∣fore) three or foure times in a day, a little quantitie at once. Note that the gummes which are to bee dissolued must dissolue in aquae vitae. A Balme for the Palsey in woun∣ded persons. Rec. Ligni aloes, oppoponacis, resinae pi∣ni, bdellij, galbani, myrrhae, masticis, sarco∣collae, ana.℥.ss. olei benedicti ℥.j.ss. laudani ℥.j. carpobalsami, xylobalsami, opobalsa∣mi, ana.℥.ss. olibani, sanguinis draconis, ca∣storei, spicae nardi, galangae, cubebarum, maceris, cinamomi, cardamomi, cort. citri. ana.℥.ss. olei terebinthinae ad pondus omni.
olei veteris lib.j.ss. Powder the gummes very subtillie, and put so much spirites of wine vpon them as will couer them. Then put them in balneo mariae, and suffer them three daies there to dissolue. Afterwarde adde to your other things which are to bée powdered in fine powder, and put to your Oyles. Let them dissolue in balneo mariae, or in horse dung againe xiiii. daies, in the ende distill them in hot embers with a slack fire till the Balme be sublimated. A Balme to resolue hardnesse of sinewes. Rec. Galbani lib.ss. gummi hederae ℥.iij.Anderna∣cus. Bruse, mixe and distill them, then take the liquor that is distilled, and put thereto tere∣binthinae lib.j. olei laurini, despica, ana.℥.j. Put them in a narrow mouthed vessell, and distill them till the Water and Oyle bee all distilled.
Bathes. A Bath for inflamation. Anderna∣cus.REc. Plantaginis, polygoni. foliorum ru∣bi, ana.m.iij. malecorij ℥.ij. Boyle them in sufficient water. A Bath for members inflamed. Anderna∣cus.Rec. Maluae domesticae, maluae siluati∣cae, meliloti, ana. m.ij. sem. lini ℥.iij. faenu∣graeci ℥.ij. With sufficient water make a Bath. A Bath for the Hemrhoydes. Vigo.Rec. Fol. maluarum, violarum, parieta∣riae, altheae, tapsibarbati cum radicis ana. m.ij. seminis cidoniorum ʒ.vj. hordei mun∣di m.j.ss. furfuris m.iij. seminis lini, foenu∣graeci, ana.℥.iiij. pomorū dulcium aliquan∣tulum confractorum nu.xij. linguae passe∣rinae, bursae pastoris, ana.m.j. Boyle them in sufficient quantitie of water, adding to them Chamomell, Melilote, and Dill, of each one a handfull and a halfe, and so boyle them to the consumption of the third part.
A Bath for a Rupture. Rec. Cort. granatorum, balaustiorum,Calmecus cupulorum glandium, sumac, ana, ℥.j. her∣bae herniosae, calcatrapae, & symphiti, ana. m.j. hypocistidos, gallarum, aluminis, ana.ʒ.ij. rosarum, chamaemeli, aneti, ana. p.ij. Boyle them in equall portions of red wine and Smithes water. With the decoction bathe the place affected. A Bath for the Itch and Scabbes. Rec. Fol. maluae, violarum, betae, elebo∣riVesalius. nigr. fumariae, ana. m.iij. hordei, m.vj. Mixe them and boyle them in sufficient wa∣ter for a Bath. A Bath for Scabbes and Itch. Rec. Rad. & fol. lapathi acuti m.iij. rad.Calmeteus. helenij, lib.ss. rad. acori & brioniae, ana. lib.j. maluarum, violarum, fumariae, scabiosae, sa∣ponariae, calaminthae, hederae, ana. m.ij. hordei integri, lupinorum, fabarum, len∣tium, ana. lib.j.ss. furfuris lib.j. elebori, m.ij. Boyle them in sufficient water for a Bath.
A Bath for Scabbes. Vigo.Rec. Maluarum, violarum, hordei, fur∣furis, capill. veneris, gallitrici, polytrici, fu∣mariae ana. m.j. pomorum acetosorum nu. x. fol. senniae, epithimi, ana.℥.ss. Boyle all (beside the epithimum and senna) in suffi∣cient water till the third part bee wasted, then put in the rest, and let them boyle a little more, and vse it. A Bath for Scabbes. Victor. Fa∣uentinus.Rec. Fol. lapathi aculi, fumariae, maluae, cum radicibus, boraginis ana.m.iij. Boyle them in sufficient quantitie of water, and af∣ter euacuation commaund the vse thereof. A Bath for Itch, Scabbes, and such like affects. Anderna∣cus.Rec. Rad. brioniae, oxylapathi, ari, ser∣pentariae, ana lib.j. rad. asphodeli, gentian. ana.℥.j. saponariae, parietariae, absynthij, sca∣biosae, boraginis, ana.m.j. florum centaurij ℥.iij. rosarum, p.ij. lupinorum, fabarum in∣tegrarum, ana. lib.ss. Boyle them all in suf∣ficient water for a Bath. A Bath for Itch and Scabbes. Rec. Aquae fontaneae lib.xl. aceti lib.iiij. aluminis lib.ss. sulphuris viui pulu.℥.vj. fol.
saluiae, rosmarini, scabiosae, hyssopi, hyos∣cyami, plantaginis, tanaceti siluatici, foeni∣culi, helenij, melissophili, ebuli, ana.m.iiij. tartari albi lib.j. Let them boyle all to tenne pound. A Bath for brannie scales in the head. Rec. Rad. lapathi acuti,Weckerus. enulae, ana.℥.iij. maluae, bismaluae, ciclae, parietariae, sapona∣riae, ana.m.iiij. lupinorum, fabarum integr. ana. lib.j. centaurij mino.p.iij. furfuris vel hordei integri p.iij. Mixxe them in water sufficient for a Bath. A Bath for brannie scales in the head. Rec. Rad. lapathi acuti, helenij,Rondele∣tius. ℥.iiij. maluae, cyclaminis, bismaluae, parietariae, saponariae, ana.m.iiij. lupinorum & faba∣rum integrarum, ana. lib.j. florum centaurij minoris p.iij. hordei integri p.iiij. Boyle them in sufficient quantitie of water, and vse it for a Bath. A Bath for the falling of the haire. Rec. Rad. brioniae, cucumeris agrestis,Rondele∣tius. ana. lib.ij. marrubij, abrotani, verbenacae,
ana. m.iij. herbarum capillarium, ana. m.j. lupinorū & fabarum integrarum, ana. lib.j. Boyle them according to art, and in the end adde thereto florum anthos. A Bath to be vsed in the cure of Alopecia Gallica. Vigo.Rec. Fumariae, rad. lapathi acuti, & fo∣liorum eius, ana.m.j. hordei, lentium, lupi∣norum, ana.m.ij. rad. helenij & ebuli, ana. lib. ss. elebori nigri triturati, ℥.ij. mellis. lib.j. sulphuris ʒ.iij. Boyle them all in suffi∣cient quantitie of water, till the third parte bee wasted. Let the patient therein sweate, and be washed in a stewe or hote-house. A Bath for Alopecia Gallica. Calmeteus.Rec. Rad. & foliorum helenij, lapathi acuti, altheae, maluae, scabiosae, fumariae, lu∣puli, rostri porcini, agrimoniae, buglossae, violarum ana.m.j. lentium, lupinorum, hor∣dei, ana.p.ij. all brused, elebori nigri triti, ℥.ij. sulphuris viui, ℥.j. Boyle them in suffi∣cient quantitie of water, wherein let the pa∣tient bathe himselfe long before supper, and sweate after it when he is in bed. A Bath for the falling of haire. Calmeteus.Rec. Rad. & fol. helenij, oxylapathi, al∣theae,
maluae, ana.m.ij. rad. lilioum, lib.ss. rad. ebuli, pedis columbini, ana, ʒ.iij. viola∣rum, brancae vrsinae, fumariae, scabiosae, ana. m.ij. seminis melonum, & raphani, ana.℥.j.ss. seminis lii, & foenugraeci, ana.℥.ij. flo∣rum chamaemeli, meliloti, violarum, rosa∣rum, nimphaeae, ana.p.j. Make a Bath with sufficient water. A Bath to be vsed in the lowsie disease. Rec. Ciclae, absynthij, marrubij,Weckerus betoni∣cae, ana.m.j. centaurij minoris, florum stoe∣chados, ana.p.ij. lupinorum p.iij. staphidis agriae, lib.j. aristolog. lib.ss. Mixe them and boyle them in Lée, and adde thereto salis lib.iiij. A Bath in the Leprosie. Rec. Fumariae, lapathi acuti, scabiosae,Guydo. chamaemeli, meliloti, staphidis agriae, sina∣pis, piperis longi, nucis moscatae, sulphuris nitri, aloes, auripigmenti, ana. q.s. Boyle them in water and viniger sufficient. A Bath for diseases in the legges called malum mortuum. Rec. Lapathi acuti, fumariae,Vigo. ana. m.ij.
nepitae, m.j. furfuris hordei, lupinorum ana. m.j.ss. violarū, maluarum, ana.m.ss. elebo∣ri albi & nigri, ana.℥.j.ss. mellis ℥.ij. Let them boyle in sufficient quantitie of water till the third part be wasted, and vse it. A Bath for vlcers in the legges. Rec. Vrinae pueri lib.iiij. seri lactis lib. viij. aquae pluuialis lib.vij. rad. lapathi acuti lib.j. fol. maluarum, quinque folij, plantag. chamameli absynthij, brioniae, helenij, ana. m.iij. mellis crudi lib.j. aluminis ℥.ij. furfu∣ris triticei m.ij. Boyle them to the consump∣tion of foure pound: then bathe the place affected therewith, before you applie any plaister thereto, and drie it well after. A Bath for the Crampe and hard∣nesse of sinewes. Rec. Rad. bismaluae, liliorum ana. lib.j. radic. iridis, lib.ss. maluae, bismaluae, ciclae, brancae vrsinae, geranij maio ana.m.iij. flo∣rum chamameli, meliloti, sambuci, ana. p.iiij. florum scoenanthi, anthos, ana.p.j. flo∣rum lini, foenugraeci ana. lib.ij. sem. bismal∣uae, anethi, sesami, ana.℥.j.ss. florum narcissi p.ij. Make a decoction in sufficient quanti∣tie of water and vse it.
A Bath for contracted or lame members. Rec. Cort. rad. altheae, vlmi, brioniae,Alfonsus Ferrius. cu∣cumeris asinini, enulae campanae, acori, vtri∣usque lilij, ana. lib.ss. foenugraeci sem. lini, pinguiū ficuum ac dactylor. ana. lib.j. pedes arietinos vel bubulos benè mundatos nu.x. intestinorum pinguium ac diligenter mun∣datorum ex arietinis vel bouillis lib. iiij. capita arietina ij. In sufficient water boyle them all in peeces: then straine it, and bathe the member therwith twice a day; rubbing, handling, and moouing it asmuch as it well may beare. After drie the member, and an∣noynt it with some oyntment for such pur∣pose. Amongst others, there is one amongst the liniments of Alfonsus Ferrius descrip∣tion, directly for this purpose. A Bath for hardnesse of sinewes. Rec. Chamaemli, meliloti, ana.m.j. rad. althaeae lib.j. sem. foenugraeci & lini, ana.℥.iiij Boyle them in sufficient water together with the head and feete of a Weather, vn∣till halfe be consumed.
A Bath for the debilitie of eye-sight. Vesalius.Rec. potentillae m.iij. parietariae, eupa∣torij, verbenae, chamaemeli, sabinae, ana.m.ij. Boyle them in sufficient quantitie of water. In this the legs must be bathed two houres in the morning, and three houres at night. In the mane while put into the patients eye the water of Fennell, with Pigeons bloud: taking after this powder following. Rec. radicum scabiosae, herbae henrici, ana.℥.j.ss. sem. rutae & foenug. ana.℥.j. rad. galan∣ge ʒ.iij. Make it in fine powder. A Bath for sweate of the arme-holes. Rec. Rosmarini m.j. maioranae, ozimi, gariophylorum, ana.m.j.ss. absynthij, ar∣themisiae, rosarum rub. ana.m.ij. myrtillo∣rum m.ss. squinanti, staechados arab. ana.ʒ.iij. nucum cupressi nu. vj. coriandri prae∣parati ℥.j. sem. maratri ℥.ss. mellis, ℥.vj. alu∣minis crudi ℥.ij.ss. salis ℥.ss. vini cretici, lib. iiij. aceti rosarum lib.ss. aqua pluuialis, lib. xiiij. Boyle them till the halfe bee consu∣med.
A Bath for the outward affects of Lue Venerea. Rec. Florum chamaemeli, meliloti, fumi∣terrae, anethi, lapathi acuti, rosarum rubr. iccatarum, herbae paralysis, absynthij, men∣thae, pulegij, chamaedryos, ana.m.iij.ss. foe∣nugraeci, sem. lini, ana.m.iij. nitri, aluminis, ana.℥.vj. sulphuris viui, ℥.iiij. Bruse the hearbes and seedes, powder the rest, and boyle them in sufficient quantitie of water to the halfe So vse it. A Bah for all Itch and Scabbes pro∣ceding ex lue Venerea. Rec. Rad. & foliorum lapatij acuti m.iij. rad. enulae campanae,Rennerus. lib. v. rad. acori. rad. brioniae, ana. lib.j. maluae, violariae, scabio∣sae, fumariae, chelidoniae, saponariae, hederae, calaminti, ana.m.ij. hordei integri, lupino∣rum, fabarum, lentium, ana. lib.j.s. furfuris, lib.j. hellebori m.ij. Boyle all these in wa∣ter sufficient to make a Bath.
Cataplasmes. A Cataplasme against Inflamations. Vesalius.REc. Cort. rad. althaeae, radic. erigeri, fol. maluae, ana.m.j. far. riticeae ℥.j.ss. farinae sem. lini, ℥.j. axungiae suillae recentis lib.ss. Boyle the hearbes and rootes in suffiient quantitie of water, and beate them with the rest in a morter according to Art. A Cataplasme for the beginning of an Inflamation. Anderna∣cus.Rec. Parietariae, attriplicis, lactucae, cu∣curbitae, maluae, ana. m.ss. semperuiui.m. tertiam partem, glaucij, ʒ.ij. cort. mali pu∣nici ℥.ss. farinae hordei ℥.ij. Boyle them in so much water as will ouer-couer them the thicknesse of two fingers, till they bee ten∣der, and so make it. Another for the same. Pareus.Rec. Plantaginis, solatri, hyoschiami, ana.m.ij. caudae equinae, tapsi barbati, cen∣tinodij, ana.m.j. Boyle them in water and vineger, stampe them and straine them. Af∣terwards adde myrtillorum, nucis cupressi, rosarum rubr. puluerizatarum, ana.ʒ.iij. fa∣rinae fabarum, ℥.ij. olei rosarum, olei cydo∣neorum,
ana.℥.j.ss. Fiat Cataplasma. A Cataplasme for an Inflamation in the augmentation. Rec. Rosarum rubr. p.ij. chamaemeli, me∣liloti,Anderna∣cus. ana.℥.ss. semperuiui, cucurbitae, lactu∣cae, parietariae, ana.m.j. cort. mali punici, su∣mac ana.℥.ss. farinae hordei p.ij. Boile them in water to the thicknesse of a Cataplasme. Another for the same. Rec. Fol. maluarum, absynthij, planta∣ginis,Pareus. ana.m.iij. Seeth them in water and vineger, and when they are stamped and strained put to them farinae fabar., & hordei ana.℥.j pulu. rosarum, & absynthij, ana.ʒ.ij. olei rosarum, & chamaemeli, ana.℥.j. Fiat. A Cataplasme to be vsed in oedema, or other cold tumors, from the beginning to the state. Rec. Nucum cupressi, squinanti,Calmeteu. farinae hordei & lupinorum, ana.℥.ss. blactae bi∣zantiae, aluminis, ana.ʒ.ij. sem. papaueris cornuti, ʒ.iij. aloes, myrrhae, ana.ʒ.j. croci, ℈.ss. succi brassicae & aceti, q.s. Mixe them well, and make a Cataplasme in good forme.
A Cataplasme for an Inflamation in the state. Pareus.Rec. Rad. althaeae, ℥.iiij. maluarum, pa∣rietariae, ana.m.ij. Rost them vnder the as∣shes, then adde farinae fabarum, & lentium, ana.℥.ij. pulueris chamaemeli, & meliloti, ana.℥.ss. olei rosarum, & chamaemeli ana.℥.j. axungiae gallinae ℥.ij. Fiat. A Cataplasme for an Inflamation in the declination. Calmeteus.Rec. Farinae seminis lini, fonugraeci, ana ℥.iij. farinae orobi, ℥.j. lorum chamaemeli, meliloti, sambuci, ana.p.ss. rosarum rubrarū ʒ.ij.fol. anti ℈.iiij. pulueris iridis floren∣tini ℥.ss. Boyle them in sufficient quantitie of pleasant wine, or the iuyce of smallage. After mixe them with three ounces of the dregges of oyle of Lillies, and two ounces of oyle of Lillies, and make it. A Cataplasme for an Inflamation in the declination. Anderna∣cus.Rec. Althaeae, maluae, ana. m.j. florum chamaemeli, meliloti, rosarum, ana.p.j. rad. liliorum, alb. althaeae, ana, ℥.j. seminis lini. foenugraeci, ana.℥.ss. ficum ping. num.x. fur∣furis farinae triticeae p.ij. Boyle the herbes
in water till they bee tender: then stampe them, and adde to the straining olei chamae∣meli, adipis suillae, ana.℥.ss. Make of them a Cataplasme. Another for the same. Rec. Rad. brioniae, & cucumeris agrestis,Pareus. ana.℥.ij. florum chamaemeli, & meliloti, ana.m.iij. Boyle them in honie and water, then adde seminis lini, & foenugraci, ana.℥.ij. olei anethi, axungiae anseris, & anatis, ana.℥.j. Fiat. A Cataplasme for an In∣flamation. Rec. Succi semperuiui, plantag. solani,Calmeteu aq. lenticulae, ana. quart.j. aceti ℥.j. olei rosa∣rum vel nymphaeae ℥.j.ss. farinae hordei ℥.ij. Boyle them to the forme of a Cataplasme. A Cataplasme for paine and Inflamation. Rec. Rad. althaeae ℥.iij. maluae cum radi∣cibus,Anderna∣cus. violarum, in puluerem redactorum, furfuris, ana.p.j. Boyle them in fat broath, or els adde to them axungiae porcinae lib.ss Stampe, straine and boyle them to a Cata∣plasme.
A Cataplasme to suppurate Tumors. ameus.Rec. Rad. liliorum & althaeae, ana.℥.iiij. fol. malu. violarum, brancae vrsinae, erigeri ana.m.iij.ss. caricarum pinguium, passula∣rum mundat. ana. par. viij. farinae triticeae ℥.iiij. farinae seminis lini ℥.ss. Boyle, stampe and straine them, adde thereto adipis suillae vel bubulini ℥.iij. olei liliorum, chamaeme∣li, ana.℥.iij. Fiat Cataplasma. A Cataplasme to suppurate a cold tumor or oedema. Calmeteus.Rec. Rad. althaeae, liliorum, ana.℥.iiij. rad. brioniae & cucumeris agrestis, ana.℥.iij. olei liliacei lib. ss. olei costini, ℥.iiij. vini ℥.ij. Boyle them vntill the wine bee consumed: and after it is strained, adde thereto farinae seminis lini, & foenugraeci, ana.℥.ij. fermen∣ti, ʒ.j.ss. ping. anseris, & anatis, ana.℥.iij. Mixe them to the forme of a Cataplasme. A Cataplasme for an oedematous or cold tumour. Parus,Rec. Farinae hordei, ℥.iiij. Seeth it in common Lee, adde thereto pulueris nucis cupressi, cort. granatorum, balaustiorum, ana.℥.j. myrrhae, aloes, aluminis, ana.℥.ss.
olei myrtillorum ℥.ij. Fiat Cataplasma. A Cataplasme to mollifie, dissolue, and as∣swage tumors proceeding of flegme and bloud, without in∣flamation. Rec. Fol. malu. althaeae, violarum,Anderna∣cus. ana.m.j.rad. althaeae, liliorum alb. & iridis, ana.℥.ss. florum chamaemeli, meliloti, anethi comae, ana.p.j. seminis lini, hordei, ana.℥.ss. cumini ℥.j. baccarum lauri, ʒ.ij. croci ℈.j. adipis ana∣tis, anseris, medullae crurium vituli, buyri recentis, olei irini, liliorum, ana.℥.ss. Or as much as is sufficient to make a Cata∣plasme. A Cataplasme to asswage paine in Tumors. Rec. Lactis vaccini lib.viij. medullae pa∣nis triteceae, lib.j.ss. rad. liliorum ℥.vj. fol. malu. violarum, arthemisiae, chamaemeli, ebuli, sambuci, ana.m.ss. seminis lini, & foe∣nugraeci, ana.℥.j. iridis ʒ.iij. pingued. capi, axungiae porcinae, butyri recentis, ana.℥.iij far. fabarum ℥.ij.ss. Boyle them to a thick∣nesse, in the ende adde too foure yolkes of Egges, and croci ℈.ij. Fiat.
A Cataplasme to asswage paine in a hot cause. Rec. Lactis vaccini lib.ij. seri lactis lib.ij medullae panis triticeae lib.j.ss. pulpae po∣morum dulcium lib.j. fol. maluarum, viola∣rum, ana.m.j. florum chamaemeli, meliloti, ana.p.iiij. Bruse the hearbes, and powder the flowers, then boyle them to a thicknesse, adding thereto olei violarum ℥.ss. butyri re∣centis ℥.j.ss. croci, ℈.ij. vitellos duos. So mixe them. A Cataplasme to ripen tumors pro∣ceeding of a hot matter. Rec. Maluae, violarum, mercurialis, al∣thaeae, solatri, chamaemeli, florum liliorum, sambuci, hyosciami, ana.m.j. Boyle them in sufficient water with the head of a Wea∣ther, till they bee tender, then cut them very small and boyle them in milke, adding ther∣to farinae fabarum ℥.iiij. farinae lini, & foe∣nugraeci, ana.℥.iij. olei aneti, chamaemeli, & meliloti, ana.℥.j. ping. capi & anseris, ana.℥.ij. axungiae suillae ℥.iiij. micarum panis triticeae ℥.iiij.ss. vitellos iij. Make them in forme of a Cataplasme.
A Cataplasme to asswage paine. Rec. Fol. maluarum, violarum, althaeae, sambuci, chamaemeli, ana. lib.ss. Boyle them in eight pintes of fountaine water till the third part be wasted, then straine them and adde thereto vng. rosati ℥.ij. ping. capi, & a∣natis, ana.℥.ss. olei rosarum, chamaemeli, ana.℥.j. farinae foenugraeci, & lini, ana.℥.ij. medullae panis triticeae ℥.ij. Boyle them all in milke, and adde thereto vitellos trium ouorum. A Cataplasme to asswage paine and suppurate tumors. Rec. Fol. maluae m.ij. erigeri m.j. Binde them in a linnen cloath, and boyle them in Ueale broath till they be tender, then stamp them very small, and adde thereto of newe Creame halfe a pound, micarum panis albi, ℥.vij. seui ouilis frustatim incisi, lib.ss. olei rosarum ℥.iiij. Boyle them till it be thicke, and in the cooling adde thereto vitellos duo∣rum ouorum. A maturatiue Cataplasme. Rec. Fol. maluarum, florum violarum, meliloti, chamaemeli, lactucae, ana. m.j. Boyle them in sufficient water till they bée
tender, and when they bee brused and strai∣ned, adde to the straining, farinae lentium, ritici, lini, & foenugraeci, ana.℥.j. medullae panis ℥.iij. axungiae porci, ping. capi, bu∣tyri recentis, ana.℥.iij.ss. Boyle them alto∣gether to the forme of a Cataplasme, stir∣ring it wel, and in the end adde to the yolkes of two Egges, and croci ℈.ij. A Cataplasme to maturate grosse and slimie matter in any part of the bodie. Rec. Fol. Mercurialis, maluarum, cha∣maemeli, bismaluae, betae, aneti, sambuci, e∣rigeri, ana.m.j.ss. Boyle them in salt broath till they bee tender, then stampe them and boyle them againe in Whey, adding there∣to micarum panis ℥.viij. farinae lini ℥.iij. fa∣rinae lupinorum ℥.j. farinae hordeaceae, ℥.iiij. axungiae suillae lib. ss. butyri recentis ℥.x. and mixing them well make a Cataplasme. A Cataplasme for a pestiferous Bubo or Carbuncle. Calmeteus.Rec. rad. lilij ℥.ij. maluae, bismaluae, vio∣larum, ana.m.j. farinae seminis lini, hordei & tritici, ana.℥.j. caricarum paria ij. florum chamaemeli, & violarum, ana.p.j. florum sambuci ℥.ss. Boyle them and straine them
through a cloath, adde thereto axungiae suillae, gallinae, et vituli, ana.℥.j.ss. olei amyg∣dalarum dulcium vel lilij, ana.℥.iij. croci, ʒ.ss. Make a Cataplasme. A Cataplasme for Anthrax or Carbuncles. Rec. Theriacae ʒ.i. axungiae suillae ʒ.ss.Idem. succi scabiosae, vel modicum symphiti vel symphytum cum sale & oui vitello. And to make the escar to fall away, Rec. maluae, al∣thaeae, violarum, ana.m.ss. farinae tritici & adipis suillae, ana.℥.ij. vitellos ij. Make a Cataplasme. A Cataplasme for tumors or swellings in womens breasts. Rec rad. althaeae ℥.iiij. maluae, violarum,Idem. ana. m.j. farinae tritici, & hordei, ana.℥.j. Boyle them in sufficient water, til the herbs bee tender, then stampe them and straine them, adding to them butyri salis experti ℥.iij. axungiae suillae ℥.ij. vitellos duorum ouorum. And so make it to Art. A Cataplasme to put away the tumors in womens breasts, proceeding of the coagulation of milke. Rec. Olei rosarum lib.j. olei seminis li∣ni,
℥.iij. olei chamaemeli, medullae crurium vaccarum ℥.iiij. pulu. cort. rad. althaeae, ℥.iij. seminis anisi ℥.ss. farinae fabarum ℥.vj. vini rubr.℥.vij. gum. arab. in vino dissoluti ℥.j. Mixe them to a Cataplasme. A Cataplasme for a swelling in the throte or necke. Valeriola.Rec. Fol. maluarum, althaeae, cum suis radicibus, ana. ij. fol. caulium rubr. violar. hyssopi, ana.m.j. caricarum pinguium, nu. xxx. florum chamaemeli, meliloti, ana.p.j. seminis lini & foenugraeci, ana.℥.ij. capitum liliorum alborum ℥.ij. furfuris p.j. Boyle them all in water sufficient, stampe them and straine them, and put to the straining, nidi hirundinis, (boyled before in oleo lilia∣ceo, and with the whole steeped in a morter, and after strained) ℥.iij. farinae seminis lini & foenugraeci, far. frumenti, ana.℥.j. Boyle the meales with oximell to a conuenient thicknesse, then adde thereto axungiae gal∣linae recentis, butyri recentis, ana.℥.j. croci ʒj olei liliacei ℥iij. Mixe them to a Cata∣plasme. A Cataplasme to bee vsed in Bronchocele, or the swelling in the throte. Calmetus.Rec. rad. liliorum, brioniae, cucumeris
agrestis,ana.℥.iij. ficuum maturarum paria vj. amydal. amararum ℥.ij. scyllae, ℥.j.ss. co∣locynthidis ℥.ss. Let them boyle in equall portions of Oyle and Malmsey, to the con∣sumption of the wine, then stampe & straine them, and adde to the straining farinae faba∣rum & orobi, ana.℥.ij.ss. farinae lini & foe∣nugraeci, medullae crurium bubuli, ana.℥.iiij olei nucum vel de piperibus, vel irini.q.s. Mixe them, and make them in forme of a Cataplasme. A Cataplasme for a swelling in the throte to be applyed to the outward part of the necke. Rec. Rad. althaeae, liliorum, & brioniae,Idem. ana.℥.iiij. maluae, violarum, & parietariae, ana.m.j.ss. Boyle them with a Swallowes neast in sufficient water: which being stam∣ped and strained, adde thereto axungiae suillae veteris salis expertis ℥iiij. axungiae gallinae & anseris, ana.℥.j. farinae foenugrae∣ci & lini, ana.℥.ss. fermenti acris ℥.j.ss. olei liliorum, chamaemeli, ana.℥.ij. Mixe them and make a Cataplasme to bee applyed twice a day.
A Cataplasme for the tumor and infla∣mation in the Coddes. Idem.Rec. Rad. althaeae ℥.iij. rad. liliorum ℥.ij. rad. cucumeris agrestis ℥.j.ss. maluae, viola∣rum, branchae vrsinae, rosarum, ana.m.j. su∣mitatum absynthij m.ss. florum violarum, p.ss. florum chamaemeli, meliloti, sambuci, ana.p.j. Boyle them in sufficient water, and stampe them, and adde to the strayning fa∣rinae hordei, & fabarum, ana.℥.ij. axungiae gallinae ℥.j.ss. olei chamaemeli, & rosarum, ana.℥.ij. croci ʒ.ss. Make a Cataplasme. A Cataplasme for a tumor in the fundament. Idem.Ric. Lentium p.iij. florum chamaemeli, sambuci, ana.p.ij. Boyle them and stampe them, then to the straining adde farinae se∣minis lini & foenugraeci, ana.℥.j. butyri re∣centis ℥.ij. ping. anseris ℥.j. cerebrum eius∣dem, vitellum oui, croci modicum. Mixe them and make a Cataplasme. A Cataplasme to maturate the tumor in the flanke called Bubo venereus. Anderna∣cus.Rec. Medullae panis ℥.j. vuarum passa∣rum enucleatarum ℥.j. butyri recentis, ax∣ungiae, ana.ʒ.vj. fermenti ℥.v. lactis vaccini
℥.ij. croci ℈.j. Make a Cataplasme to be ap∣plied twice  ay. A Caaplasme for a watrie tumor. Re. Farinae fabarum, orobi,Pareus. ana.℥.iij.  them in decocto pulegij, origani, ca∣aminthae, saluiae, and adde to it pulueris chamaemeli & meliloti, ana ℥.ss. sulphuris viui pulu.ʒ.ij. olei aneti, & chamaemeli, ana.℥.j.ss. Fiat. A Cataplasme for watrie tumors and hydropick bodies. Rec. Cerae citrinae lib.ij. fimi caprini,Plinius se∣cundus. se∣minis apij, ana.℥.iij. samsuci ℥.iiij. nitri, gummi ammoniaci puriss. ana.℥.ij. foenu∣graeci, baccarum lauri, ana.℥.iij. piperis albi ℥.ij. terebinthinae ℥.iiij. olei ciprini q.s. Fiat Cataplasma. A Cataplasme to asswage paine in wounds and to comfort them. Rec. Farinae fabarum hordei, lentium,Valeriola. & lupinorum, ana.℥.iij. farinae seminis lini, & foenugraeci, ana.℥.ij. farinae orobi ℥.j. cro∣ci, ʒ.ij. Boyle the meales with a little vine∣ger and honie to the consistence of a Cata∣plasme.
A Cataplasme for a coused and brused wound. Calmeteus.Rec. Rad. althaeae lib.ss. malum & vio∣larum, ana.m.j. Stampe, boyle and straine them, adding to the straining butyri, olei com. ana.℥.iij. tres ouorum vitellos, croc modicum, farinae tritici & hordei q.s. Make a Cataplasme. A Cataplasme for the biting of a mad Dogge. Valeriola.Rec. Caepas albas num iij. Make them a little hollow, fill vp the hollowe againe cum theriaca, and set on their couers againe, rost them vnder the coales vntill they bee soft: then stampe them and straine them through a Searce. After adde to pulu. vtriusque ari∣stolochiae, ana.ʒ.ij. galbani, bdellij, myrrhae, ana.℥.ss. pulu. cancrorum fluuial.ʒ.v. Mixe them together in forme of a Cataplasme. A Cataplasme for contused flesh, comming of some fall or stripe. Rec. absynthij virescentis m.j. olei rosa∣racei ℥.ij. lactis mulieris ℥.j. aquae rosarum, album. ouorum, ana.℥.j. Mixe them to a thicknesse.
A Cataplasme against vlcers in the yard. Rec. aquae vel succi plantag. aquae rosa∣rum,Andreas Lacuna. ana.℥.iiij. aceti rosati, ℥.ij. album. ouo∣rum duorum, pulu. boli armenij, sang. dra∣conis, coralli, rosarum, myrtillorum, cort. mali punici, That is terra lem∣nia. See Gal. simp. fac. lib. 9. terrae spragitidos ana.ʒ.ij. Labour them in a morter to the forme of a Cataplasme. A Cataplasme for vlcerations in in womens breasts. Rec. Maluae, absynthij, ana. lib.j.ss. Boyle them in water till they be tender, then bruse them finely, and adde to them axungiae su∣illae lib. j. vini maluat. lib.j. pul. centaurij, ℥.iij. helenij ℥.iiij. gariophylorum ℥.j. Boyle them vntill the wine bee wasted, then put in the herbes stirring them well. When all is cold put to it cumini in fine powder thrée ounces, and make it to Art. A Cataplasme to asswage paine. Rec. Micae panis in lacte vaccinae infusae lib.j.ss.Pareus. Let it heate vpon the fire, then adde olei violarum, & rosarum, ana.℥.iij. vitellos ouorum nu.iiij. pulueris rosarum rubr. cha∣maemeli, & meliloti, ana.℥.ij. farinae faba∣rum
& hordei, ana.℥.j. Fiat Cataplasma. A Cataplasme to appease paines in the ioynts, and cease inflamations. Clowes.Rec. Fol. maluarum, violarum, ana.m.ij. florum chamaemeli, meliloti, rosarum, ana m.j.ss. Boyle these in the broath of Ueale, Chicken or newe Milke, till the herbes bée tender, then stampe them and put to olei ro∣sac. amygdalini, ana.℥.j.ss. farinae fabarum, ℥.iij. farinae hordei ℥.ij. medullae panis q.s. croci ℈.ij. vitellorum ouorum nu. iij. And viii. ounces of this Muscilage: to wit, Rec. rad. althaeae m.ij. seminis lini & pylij, ana.℥.iij. foenugraeci ℥.i.ss. Infuse these in fayre water and white wine of each lib.j. for xii. houres, then boile it and straine it to a Mus∣cilage. Make a Cataplasme. A most effectuall Cataplasme for hydrocele. Banester.Rec. Stercoris vaccae lib.j. baccarum lau∣ri ℥.ij. myrrhae, ℥.j. cymini ℥.ss. sem. petrose∣lini, ℥.iij. ireos ʒ.ij. florum chamaemeli, me∣liloti, hypericonis, ana.p.ij. farinae lupino∣um ℥.j.ss. farinae fabarum, ℥.j. farinae orobi ℥.j. sulphuris ʒ.ij. lixiuij lib.ij. olei hyperi∣conis & chamaemeli, ana.q.s. Fia Cataplas∣ma. Adding to in the end Mithridati ℥.ij.
A Cataplasme for the asswaging of paine in inflamation of the eyes. Rec. Fol. papaueris albi sub cineribus co∣ctorum, carnis pomorum dulcium simili∣ter coctorum, ana.℥.ij. croci ʒ.j. farinae sem. foenugraeci ʒ.ss. lactis mulieris ℥.j.ss. olei ro∣sarum q.s. Fiat Cataplasma. A Cataplasme for Erisypelas where it is properly called the Shingles. Rec. fimi columbini,Ex anu∣scripto. recentis q.s. mis∣ceantur cum farina triticea. Applie it as a Pulteis; but colde, and couer it with a col∣wort leafe for thrée daies. Within three or foure dressings it cureth. A Cataplasme for a wrench or straine. Rec. Cepaeae, apij. senecionis, Ex manu∣scripo. ana.q.s. seui ouini as much as you iudge sufficient for the proportion of your herbes, chop them small together and boyle them in vrine, and so, hote, applie them vpon a blewe cloath (saith the Author). A Cataplasme for a Felon. Ex furfure & aceto,Carey. boyled together to a Pulteis and hot applied.
Another. Ex manu∣scripto.Rec. Acetosae, fol. calthae, ana. m.ss. rad. lillij albi ʒ.j. Stampe them a little together; lappe them in a Docke leafe, roste them vn∣der the embers, then take and binde them hote to the place. This will breake and heale it. An excellent Cataplasme for Bubo to drawe and suppurate. D Foster.Rec. Rad. brioniae lib.ss. cepam j. rad. al∣thaeae recentis ℥.iiij. fol. maluarum siccarum p.j. hydropiperis m.j. ficuum, passularum enucleatarum, ana.℥.j. Boyle them verie well, then stampe them, and adde fermenti, axungiae suillae insulsae, butyri recentis, ana.℥.ij. euphorbij pulu.ʒ.j. Mixe them accor∣ding to Art. A Cataplasme which you may haue alwaies readie to repell phlegmon and all fluxe of cholericke humors in the beginning. Balthrop.Rec. Oximel. simpl.℥.xiij. nucis cupressi ℥.ij. Powder the latter verie fine, and then boyle both together to the fourme of a Ca∣taplasme. Spread it somewhat thicke when you applie it.
Cataplasma ad strumas & scrofulas egregium. Rec. Lanceolatae, plantaginis, caprifo. ij,D. Foster. bursae pastoris, betonicae, graminis leucan∣themi, scabiosae, solani, agrimoniae, ana.m.iij. Beate them together in a morter, and straine out the iuyce. Take as much mel as of those iuyces, also as much succi apij as of all the rest, and againe as much mel as of that: boyle altogether, and put too as much farinae hordei as is sufficient to make it in it fourme.
Caustickes. A Ruptorie of great force to open an Apo∣steme, mortifie a Fistula, &c. Arnaldu.REc. Cineris fabarum two partes, calcis viuae pulu. partem tertiam. Put to them water and make a lée: which is neuer strong enough vntill it will beare vp an Egge, therefore strengthen and renewe your first order vntill you haue it fit for your purpose. When you haue your lee strong enough, resolue therin calcem viuam puluerizatam, auripigmentum, saponem saracenicum, as much of each as you see good, and mixe them all to the fourme of an Unguent. Another Causticke. A Doct. Fostero.Rec. Pulueris sublimati ʒ.ij. succi hyos∣ciami ℥.j. Mixe them and drie them toge∣ther: afterward make them into most fine powder. A most excellent Ruptorie. Balthrop.Rec. Calcis viui opt. lib.j. Burne the same againe in a fire of charre coales three or foure oures: after powder it finely. Put it in lixiuij barbitonsoris lib.ij. and boyle them together in a brasse pan vntill they bée
thicke. Hereof make tentes and Trochisces round, flat, and euery forme that may serue your purpose. When you wil occupie them, wet one side of them with spettle and lay it to the place, and in one houre it will pierce the thicknesse of halfe an inch. Kéepe them in a glasse close stopped. An excellent and proued Causticke that roo∣teth out all callous of Fistulaes and foule spongious growings of cancerous vlcers. Rec. Vitri antimonij,M. Ma∣thias. what quantitie you will, grinde it excéedingly fine, then put vpon it succi apij, & mellis rosacei, of each a little, proportionablie; grinde them so to∣gether, encreasing your liquid quantities still proportionablie, vntil you haue brought all to the fourme of a thinne Unguent. An Vnguent to cauterize a veyne that will not otherwise stay bleeding. Rec. Vng. populei, ℥.ss. vitrioli vsti, ʒ.ij. mercurij sublimati ʒ.iij. Fiat vnguentum. Another strong Ruptorie or deepe Causticke. Rec. Calcis non extinctae ℥.ix. cineremIncerto au∣ctore. de cerro (which Diers vse) on these powre as much water as will couer them, and two
fingers breadth aboue: steepe them so long till the ashes & calx haue yéelded their fore: then cléere out the water and put to it newe calx and cineres as before. Do thus eight times. Rec. capitelli istius cyathum j. olei cyathum j. and boyle them together to the wasting of the Lée at a gentle fire. Another Ruptorie more gentle. Rec. Lixiuij fortis lib.ij. vitrioli albi ℥.iiij. calcis viuae optimè combustae q.s. Mixe and boyle them at a gentle fire to the forme of an vnguent.
Cerotes. A Cerote that doth mundifie and resolue in the cure of Nodus. REc. Muscilag. althaeae, lini foenugraeci,Vigo. & ficuum siccarum ana. lib.j. olei chamae∣meli, liliorum & comynis, ana ℥.ij. ping. gallinae, anseris, & porci liquaefactae, tere∣binthinae, sepi castrati liquefacti, ana.℥.ij.ss. litharg. auri ℥.viij. Boyle them to the con∣sumption of the Muscilage, and with suffi∣cient white Waxe make a Cerote, first ad∣ding thereto, gummi ammoniaci, galbani, in aceto dissolutorum, ana.ʒ.j. iridis recen∣tis, subtilliter triturati ℥.j.ss. Boyle them to∣gether and reserue it to your vse. A Cerote to be vsed in the cure of Nodus. Rec. Rad. althaeae decoct. & cribellat.Vigo. ℥.iiij olei liliacei, chamaemeli & rosacei ana.℥.j. ping. gallinae, anseris, olei amygdalarum, ana.ʒ.vj. seui vitulini, medullae crurium vi∣tuli, ana.ʒ.x. terebinthinae ℥.j.ss. diachylonis albi sine gummi ℥.ij. litharg. auri & argenti ana.℥.ij.ss. Boyle them at the fire, stirring it well till it haue obtayned a blacke colour,
then put in white Waxe sufficient for a Ce∣rote. A most excellent Cerote to dissolue all manner of hard knottes and ganglious tumors. Banester.Rec. Gummi ammoniaci, ℥.vj. radicum althaeae & brioniae, ana.℥.j. turpeti minera∣lis, ℥.ss. butyri recentis ℥.j.ss. Dissolue the gumme in vineger, powder and searse the rootes: mixe altogether, and with cerae al∣bae ℥.j. make it a Cerote. A Cerote to be applied to nodes or knots proceeding ex lue Gallica. Rennerus.Rec. Rhabarb. electi ʒ.ij. aloes optimae, ℥.ss. bdellij, ammoniaci, ana.ʒ.j.ss. saponis vene.℥.vj. terebint.ʒ.ij.ss. Dissolue your gummes in vineger, your Sope in simple aqua vitae, beate the rest into powder, and so mixe them according to Art. When you wil vse it take a thin plate of leade, lay it in soke in strong vineger and salt, and lay it vpon the plaiter, shifting it twice a day during the space of a moneth. A Cerote for womens breastes not cancerated. Vigo.Rec. Diachylonis albi gummati ℥.ij. ping.
gallinae, medullae crurium vituli, & vacca∣rum, ana.ʒ.vj. olei amygdalarum dulcium, butyri recentis ana.ʒ.v. olei chamaemeli, a∣neti, & liliorum, ana.℥.ss. ping. anseris & a∣natis, ana.ʒ.vj.ss. muscilag. althaeae & sem. lini, ana. lib.ss. Boyle them to the consump∣tion of the Muscilages, straine them, and with white Waxe make a Cerote. A Crote for the tumor in the breast called Sephiros. Rec. Olei rosat. violarum, vng. Galeni,Vigo. ana ℥.ij pinguedinis vituli, anatis, olei amygda∣larum dulcium, ana.℥.j. muscilag. althaeae & psylij, ana.℥.ij. muscilag. sem. cytoniorum ʒ.iij. Boyle all to the consumption of the Muscilages, straine them, and adde too succi solatri & plantag. ana.℥.ij. Boyle them a∣gaine to the wasting of the iuyces, & straine them againe, adding white Waxe sufficient for a Cerote, and last of all litharg. auri & argenti, ana.℥.ij. tutiae alexandrinae ℥.j. cam∣phorae ad arrtem trituratae ʒ.j.ss. far. hor∣deaceae ℥.j.ss. Mixe them continually, stir∣ring them vntill it be cold. A Cerote for a Canker. Rec. Olei rosat. olei myrtini, ana. lib.ss. seui vituli & vaccae, ana.℥.iiij. succi plantag.
& solatri ana.℥.iij. Boyle them together to the consumption of the iuyces, and straine them, and adde to them litharg. auri & arg. ana.℥.ij. boli armenij, terrae sigillatae, ceru∣sae, minij, ana.℥.j. Set them on the fire a∣gaine, stirring them well, and so in the ende put too camphorae ʒ.j. Boyle them till it bée blacke. A Cerote for tumors in wo∣mens breastes. Calmeteus.Rec. Rad. althaeae, coct. lib.ss. ping. ana∣tis ℥.j. medullae crurium vituli & bouis, a∣na.ʒ.vj. seui vaccini ℥.iij olei rosarum ʒ.j. olei chamaemeli & aneti ana.℥.iij. olei lilio∣rum ℥.j.ss. Mixe them, and with sufficient white Waxe make a Cerote. A Cerote for swellings in wo∣mens breastes. Rec. Olei sem. lini ℥.viij. olei rosac.℥.iij. mellis despumati ℥.iiij. cerae albae ℥.ij. sari∣nae fabarū ℥.iiij. myrrhae ℥.ss. ammoniaci ℥.j. foenugraeci ℥.j.ss. lithargyrij ʒ.iij. saluiae si∣cae ℥.ss. Dissolue your gummes in vineger, and make your Cerote to Art.
A Cerote for hard tumrs in womens breastes. Rec. Olei sem. lini lib. ss. olei rosarum, chamaemeli, ana.℥.iiij. olei amygdalarum dulc. olei liliacei, ana.℥.j. vini albi, lib.ss. ax∣ungiae suillae, pingued. capi ana.℥.j. cerae ci∣trinae lib.j. ammoniaci ℥.j. bdelli ℥.ss. Dis∣solue the gummes and boyle them vntill the wine be wasted, and adde thereto farinae fa∣barum ℥.xij. iridis ℥.j. camphorae, ʒ.iij. flo∣rum chamaemeli & meliloti, ana.℥.ss. Pow∣der what is to be powdred and make a Ce∣rote in good fourme. A Cerote for Bubo venereus. Rec. Rad. althaeae lib.ss. capit. liliorum alborum ℥.ij.Vigo. Boyle them all with the broth of flesh, and stampe and straine them, then set them on the fire, & cum oleo chamaeme∣li ℥.iiij. olei rosarum ℥.j. ping. vituli diachy∣lonis alb. ana ℥.ij. and with sufficient Waxe make a Cerote. A Cerote to be vsed in the cure of a Rupture. Rec. Pulu. pro ramice,Vigo. per Iho. Vigonem descripti &  particula pul. introducti ℥.iij. symphiti vtrius{que} ʒ.x. terebinthinae claris∣simae
℥.ij.ss. olei mastic. olei omphac. ana.ʒ.iij. olei terebinthinae, myrtini ana.℥.ss. li∣tharg. auri & arg. ana.ʒ.vj. seui hircini ʒ.v. Boyle the Oyles and Litharge with a little vineger together (till the same vineger bée wasted) at a strong fire, then let them boyle a little with the iuyce of Comfrey: after adde too the Terebinthine, and boyle them at a gentle fire, stirring them well. Last of all with sufficient white Waxe, put in all the powders, and make a Cerote in good fourme. A Cerote for the Rupture. Rec. Litharg. auri, lapid. haematitis, sang. draconis, boli armenij, galbani, thuris, costi dulcis, sarcocollae, masticis, mummiae, am∣moniaci, ana.℥.j. vermium terrestr. picis naualis, colophoniae, propoleos ana ʒ.ij. te∣rebinthinae ʒ.iiij. rad. consol. ma. mi. & me∣diae, ana.ʒ.vj. rosarum rubrarum, myrrhae, aloes, ana.ʒ.ss. gallarum contusarum, balau∣stiorum, aristolog. rond. ana.℥.j.ss. visci quercini, ℥.ss. seui ouini lib.j. vini rubr. succi symphiti maio. ana.℥.iiij. Boyle the iuyces with the shéepes sewet and gummes to the consumption of the iuyces & wine, then adde to thē, being strained, al the rest in powder.
A Cerote for the Hemrhoydes. Rec. Chamaemeli,Vigo. anethi, seminis lini, ana.℥.iiij. olei de chrysomelis, & de amyg∣dalis dulcis, butyri ana.℥.j.ss. seui vaccini & vituli ana.℥.ij. ping. gallinae, anatis & anse∣ris, ana.℥.j. muscilag. sem. & rad. althaeae, psylij, lini, maluae & violarum, ana. lib.j.ss. litharg. auri ℥.iiij. Mixe them at the fire, and make a soft Cerote in good forme, adding thereto terebint. purg.℥.ij.ss. and reserue it to your vse. A Cerote for the Hemrhoydes. Rec. Succi violarum, maluarum, parie∣tariae, althaeae, tapsibarbati, chamaemeli, me∣liloti, ana.ʒ.iij. olei vitellorum ouorum ℥.ss. olei seminis lini ℥.ij. olei chamaemeli ℥.ss. olei amygdal. dulc. & aneti, ana.ʒ.iij. ping. anatis ℥.ij. ping. capi & anseris, muscilaginis althaeae & psylij, ana.ʒ.iij. carnium pomo∣rum dulc.℥.iij. seui bouini & vitulini, ana.℥.j. farinae fabarum ℥.j.ss. litharg. auri & arg. ana.℥.v. Boyle them to a true substance, adde to them terebint.℥.iij. A Cerote to be vsed in the cure of Vndimia. Rec. Fol. malu. violarum,Vigo. ana.m.j. rad.
linguae bouinae ℥.ij. rad. althaeae lib.ss. sem. cytoniorum ʒ.iiij. hordei mundi m.ij. Boile them all in sufficient water vntill the Bar∣ley bee broken: straine them well, adde to them olei rosac. myrtini & violacei, & cha∣maemeli, ana.℥.ij. vng. rosati, vng. Galeni, ana.ʒ.j. seui vituli, haedi at{que} caprini, ana.℥.j.ss. Boile al together a little, then with white Waxe sufficient make a Cerote, adding thereto farinae fabar. farinae hordie, ana.℥.j. A Ceote to maturate tumors. Rec. Cerae. rubr. lib.ss. resinae ʒ.iij. seui ceruini ℥.viij.ss. butyri recentis ℥.ij. ammo∣niaci, dragaganti, arabicae, ana.ʒ.ij. muscilag. althaeae ℥.iij. ping. capi & anseris, ana.ʒ.iij. terebinthinae, masticis, ana.ʒ.j.ss. olibani, ʒ.ss. olei rosarum, chamaemeli, meliloti, vio∣larum, ana.q.s. Make a Cerote with plea∣sant wine. A Cerote against inflamation. Rec. Cerae albae ℥.iiij. axungiae porcinae, in aqua plantag. lot.℥.iij. olei rosac.℥.iij.ss. seui ceruini ℥.ij. omnium santalorū, ana.℈.ij florū nymphaeae, ℈.ij.ss. coralli albi, & rubr. ana.ʒ.ss. spodij ʒ.ss. margaritarum ʒ.ss. cam∣phorae ℈.j. rosarum rubr.ʒ.j. Powder what
are to bee powdred, and make a Cerote in good forme. Another for an inflamation. Rec. Olei amygdalarum.℥.ij. cerae purae ℥.iiij. terebinthinae venetae in aqua plantag. lotae ℥.ss. lapid. calaminaris, tutie in vino al∣bo extinctae, ana.ʒ.ij. plumbi albi, cerusae, ana.℥.j. litharg. auri & arg. ana.℥.ss. Mixe them with the iuyce of houseléeke sufficient and make a Cerote. A Cerote to be vsed in Apostemes of the stomacke. Rec. Olei chamaemeli,Vigo. absynthij, de spi∣ca ana.ʒ.x. olei citri, & rosarum, ana.ʒ.vj. pingued gallinae, anatis, olei liliorum, ana.℥.ss. matricariae, m.ss. anthos, scaenanthi, ana. parū, calami aromatici, cinamomi, ana.ʒ.j. menthae romanae paululum. Boyle them altogether with sweete wine till it be consu∣med, then straine it, and with white Waxe sufficient make a Cerote, adding thereto croci ʒ.ss. A Cerote to be vsed in the cure of tu∣mors in the hands, fingers and feete. Rec. Rad. althaeae ℥.iiij. rad. iridis ℥.j.Vigo.
Boyle them in water vntill they be tender, stampe and straine them: put too diachylo∣nis alb. gummati ℥.iiij. ping. gallinae & ana∣tis, ana ℥.ss. olei chamaemeli & liliorum, ana.ʒ.vj. olei spicae & aneti, ana.ʒ.v. ceroti issopi gal.ʒ.x. Mixe them altogether on the fire, let them boyle a little, then with suffi∣cient Waxe make a Cerote. A Cerote of Betonie to heale in all out∣ward parts being mundified. Vesalius.Rec. Fol. pimpinellae, betonicae, pilosellae eupatorij, saluiae, pulegij, millefolij, conso∣lid. ma. mi. & mediae, caprifolij, ana.℥.vj. thuris masticis, ana.℥.ss. iridis, aristolog. ro∣tund. ana.℥.vj. cerae albae ℥.iiij. gummi ele∣mi ℥.ij. resinae pini ℥.v. terebint. olei aneti, ana.℥.vij. vini albi odorati q.s. Bruse the herbes and infuse altogether eight daies in wine, then boyle them at a gentle fire vntill two parts be wasted, stirring them well: af∣ter straine and coole it, then worke it with hands in water: and let it lye in foure pints of Milke, either of Goates or Shéepe, (first being made into roules) one whole day. Lastly, labour it well with hands, and re∣serue it to your vse.
A Cerote for wounds in the head or other parts. Rec. Terebint. lotae in vino cretico ℥.iiij. resinae pini ℥.iij. cerae citrinae ℥.iiij.ss. am∣moniaci ℥.ij. myrrhae ℥.j. masticis, huris, mummiae, ana.℥.ss. olei rosarum ℥.iij. succi betonicae lib.ss. olei rosac.℥.iij. Boyle the Waxe, Rosine, Oyle and iuyces together to the consumption of the iuyces, then adde too the ammoniacum dissolued in Malme∣sey, after that, the other powders, and last of all the Terebinthine. A Cerote to be vsed in wounds of the armes, hands or feete. Rec. Olei rosarum, violarum, chamae∣meli, ana.℥.ij. eui vituli lib. ss. axungiae su∣illae, ℥.ij. ping. gallinae, medullae crurium vi∣tuli, ana.ʒ.j. vermium terrest. lot. cum vino albo ℥.ij. butyri recentis ℥.j.ss. muscilag. al∣thaeae lib.j. Boyle all to the consumption of the Muscilages with an easie fire: then straine them through a strong canuas cloth, whereto adde, litharg. auri, & argent. ana.℥.ij.ss. minij ʒ.vj. With sufficient white Waxe make a Cerote at the fire in good or∣der, & put thereto terebint. abietinae ℥.ij.ss.
masticis ℥.j. Let them boyle a walme, and make the Cerote in good forme. A Cerote for contusions in the head. Rec. Sarcocollae, masticis, terebinthinae, ana.℥.j. gummi elemi ʒ.x. colophoniae, resi∣nae pini, ana.ʒ.ss. ammoniaci ʒ.ij. succi beto∣nicae, symphiti vtriusque, ana.℥.j. succi apij ʒ.vj. Boyle them in vini albi odoriferi lib. iiij. till the wine be wasted, straine it strong∣lie, adde to it cerae albae & olei mastichini q.s. So make a Cerote in good forme. A Cerote for the pricking of nerues and strokes of the ioynts. Rec. Cerae albae lib.ss farinae orobi, & lu∣pinorum, ana.℥.iiij. euphorbi.℥.ss. olibani ℥.j. vemium terresr. in pulu.℥.iij.ss. farinae fabarum ℥.ij. bdellij ʒ.iij. sarcocollae ℥.iij. sagapeni ℥.ij. matricariae, caudae aequinae, ana.℥.ss. succi florum chamaemeli ℥.j. cort. rad althaeae desiccat.℥.iiij. rad. lilior.℥.iiij. vini rubr.℥.vij. olei rosarum ℥.iiij. olei eu∣phorbij ℥.j olei lumbricorum ℥.iij. olei li∣liacei ℥.ij.ss. olei aneti & amygdalar. dulc. ana.℥.j.ss. mellis rosarum ℥.iiij. butyri recen∣tis ℥.iiij. Powder what is to be powdered,
dissolue the gummes in vineger, then boyle altogether vntill the wine be consumed, and so make it. A Cerote to clense bones, and cause flesh in vlcers. Rec. pulu. peucedani,Vesalius aristol. round. op∣poponacis, euphorbij, ana.ʒ.j. terebinthinae ℥.iij. cerae ℥.j. aceti ʒ.ij. Mixe and boyle them to the substance of a Cerote. A Cerote to restore broken bones. Rec. Sigilli salomonis ℥.iiij. rad. althaeae ʒ.viij. fol. plantag. m.ij.Vigo. Boyle them till they be tender, then stampe them, and with suffi∣cient white Waxe make a soft Cerote, ad∣ding thereto olei rosarum & myrtini, ana.℥.ij. terebint. clarae ℥.j.ss. vng. agrippae & dialthaeae, ana.℥.ss. boli armenij ʒ.vj. sang. draconis ʒ.iij. thuris ʒ.j. santal. omnium ʒ.ij. This Cerote may bee applyed after the vii. day, if need be. A Cerote for fractures. Rec. Rad. althaeae lib.j. pedūvituli num. ij.Vigo. Boyle them in water and pleasant wine, then straine the rootes, and to the straining add olei myrtini, omphacini, ana.℥.iiij. olei
mastichini ʒ.j.ss. terebint. clariss.ʒ.x. croci subt. triti ʒ.ss. sang. draconis, terrae sigillat. ana.℥.ss. thuris ʒ.ij. farinae fabarum ℥.j.ss. Mixe them, and with sufficient white Waxe make a Cerote in good consistence. A Cerote to comfort a fractured member. Vigo.Rec. Rad. enulae & sigilli salomonis de∣coctorum & cribellatorum, ana.℥.iij. rad. althaeae decoct. & crib.℥.ss. olei chamaemeli, aneti, myrt. ana.℥.j.ss. agrippae & dialthaeae, ana.ʒ.vj. olei mastichini ℥.ss. vermium ter∣restrium, lot. cum vino ℥.j.ss. chamaemeli, schananti, rosarum, absynthij, ana. parum, vini odoriferi, cyathumj. Boyle all till the wine be wasted, then being strained adde to them farinae fabarum, hordei, pulu. rubi, ana.ʒ.vj. sang. draconis, mummiae, ana.ʒ.iij. croci ʒ.j. sandal. omnium ana.ʒ.j.ss. terebint. clariss.℥.j. Boyle them with sufficient white Waxe, and the strainings of the rootes to the forme of a Cerote. A Cerote for fractures which doth not onely stoppe humors, but also consolidate. Rec. Olei rosarum lib.j. olei myrtini lib.j boli armeni ℥.ij.ss. sang. draconis ℥.j. mum∣miae ℥.ss. nucis cupressi, ʒ.iij. radic. symphiti¦ma.
ʒ.vj. gummi arab. dragaganti, thuris, masticis, sarcocollae, ana.ʒ.iij. farinae volat.℥.ss. farinae fabarum ʒ.iij.ss balaust. maleco∣rij, ana.ʒ.j.ss. terrae sigillat. lapid. calamina∣ris, litharg. auri & arg. ana.ʒ.ij. sandal. alb. & citrin. ana.ʒ.j. seui ceruini ℥.iiij. cerae albae, ℥.iij.ss. resinae ℥.iij. ros. rub. sicc.℥.ss. aceti ro∣sacei ℥.j. alb. ouorum ℥.iiij. Melt those which are to bee melted, then put too the powders, and when it is colde, put in the whites of Egges, and make a Cerote. A Cerote recouering members weakned for default of nourishment. Rec. Ping. capi, anatis. anseris & cygni, ana.℥.j. butyri recent.℥.ij. olei vulpini ℥.j. olei liliacei ℥.ss. olei myrt.℥.ij. olei sambuci & euphorbij, ana.℥.ss. picis nigri ℥.iiij. colo∣phoniae ℥.ij. resinae pini ℥.j.ss. ammoniaci ℥.ij.ss. tereb.℥.ij. saluiae, rosmarini, ana.m.j. Bruse the herbes, and boyle them to the con∣sumption of the iuyces, then straine it, and adde thereto cerae nouae ℥.j. A Cerote for a member consumed for lacke of nourishment. Rec. Olei vulpini, olei. mygdal. dul. & liliorum, ana.℥.j. olei chamaemeli & aneti, ana.℥.ss. olei euphorbij, olei saluiae, olei ros∣marini,
marini, ana.ʒ.ij. olei sambuci ʒ.vj. pingued. capi, anatis, & anseris, ana.℥.ss. succi dauci ℥.ss. picis nigri ℥.iij. colophoniae, resinae pini ana.℥.ij. myrrhae ℥.j. vini retici lib.j. Boyle them to the consumption of the wine to the forme of a Cerote. A Cerote for the Gowte. Weckerus.Rec. Succi rad. ebuli, ʒ.iij. resinae pini ℥.ss erebint.℥.ss. olei vulp. chamaemeli ana.℥.ij. cremoris seminis althaeae, cremoris seminis lini & foenugraeci, ana.ʒ.ij.ss. oppoponacis, sagapeni, ammoniaci, in aceto dissoluto∣rum, ana.℥.ss. croci ʒ.j. cerae q.s. Mixe them and make a Cerote in good forme. A Cerote to be vsed for paine in the ioynts. Vigo.Rec. Enulae in aqua decoctorum, pisto∣rum & cribellatorum lib.j. sigilli salomo∣nis, rad. ebuli, ana.℥.iiij. olei myrtini, cha∣maemeli, petroselini, ana.℥.j. olei tereb.℥.j.ss tereb. purg.℥.ij. olei vulpini, liliorum, spicae, laurini & sambuci, ana.ʒ.x. cerae albae.ʒ.j.ss. Boyle them to a soft Cerote, adding in the ende farinae fabarum, & cicerum, ana.℥.iiij.ss. styracis liquidae ʒ.j. thuris ʒ.iij. Mixe them well together, and make a Cerote in good order.
A Cerote very good against the Gowt or Sciatica. Rec. Cerae ℥.x. visci quercini ℥.j. tereb.℥.j.ss. ammoniaci, galbani, myrrhae, ana.℥.ss. picis naualis ℥.j. olei genistae, chamaemeli, anetini, rosac. ana.℥.ij. colophoniae ℥.j. succi plantag. succi amaraci, ana.℥.ij. vini odorati lib.ss. seui vitulini, caprini, ana.℥.j. Boile thē to the consumption of the wine, adding therto rosarum rubr.ʒ.ij. florum chamaeme∣li, meliloti & genistae, ana.℥.ss. croci ʒ.iij.ss. cassiae extractae ℥.iij. muscilag. sem. lini, foe∣nugraeci, & rad. althaeae, ana.ʒ.ij. muscilag. sem. lini, foenugraeci, & rad. althaeae, ana.ʒ.ij. muscilag. psyllij ʒ.j.ss. Dissolue the gums and powder what is to bee powdered, fra∣ming your Cerote according to Art. A Cerote to comfort the sinewes and asswage paine. Rec. Chamaemeli, meliloti, aneti, arthe∣misiae, ana.m.j. cremoris, rad. althaeae lib.ss. pulu. rad. althaeae ℥.v. medullae crurum vac∣carum ℥.iiij. pingued. capri et anatis, ana.℥.j ammoniaci dissoluti in vino maluaticae, ℥.iiij. buri recentis ℥.j.ss. olei aneti & lilio∣rū, ana.℥.iij. cerae ℥.vj. erebint.℥.iij. furfu∣ris tritici torrefacti lib.ss. Bruse the herbes
finely, and put to the branne, then melt the Waxe, Oyle, and fatts together, and make a Cerote in good forme. A Cerote to mollifie tumors and asswage paine in the gowt. Rec. Olei liliacei, anethini, ana.℥.iij. olei rosarum ℥.ij. olei chamaemeli ℥.j. gummi ammoniaci ℥.vj. bdellij dissolut. in oleo li∣liaceo ℥.ij.ss. cassiae extractae cum decoctio∣ne chamaemeli, maioranae & absynthij ℥.ij. opij ʒ.j. oesypi ℥.ij. micarum panis ℥.j. myr∣tillorum ℥.ss. croci ʒ.ij. cremoris psylij ℥.ss. medullae cruriū vaccarum ℥.ij.ss. pingued. capi, anatis, anseris, butyri recentis, ana.ʒ.iij. vini albi ℥.iiij. cerae albae ʒ.vij. terebint.℥.iiij Melt the Waxe, Oyle, Butter, and Mar∣rowe together: then put in the Cassia and bread crummes, and last of all the rest, so make a Cerote in good forme. A very good Cerote for cance∣rous vlcers. Banester.Rec. Emplastri diachalciteos lib.j. vng. hyoschiami, vng. populnei, vng. rosacei ana.℥.iij. plumbi vsti & loti ℥.j tutiae praeparatae ℥.ij. succi plantag. & solani, ana.℥.iiij. cam∣forae ℥j. Powder that which is to bee pow∣dred very finely, mixe them together at a
gentle fire, and at the ende put too asmuch Waxe as néedeth to make a Cerote. A very good Cerote for all inflamations, also to cease paine and take away the sharpe bi∣ting humor of virulent vlcers. Rec. Cerae citrinae, ceui ouini,Banester. ana. lib.ij. resinae lib.j. butyri recentis ℥.vj. lumbrico∣rum praeparat. lib.ss. opij inaceto dissoluti, ℥.j. croci ℥.ss. hyosciami m.iiij. aceti lib.j. Stampe the hearbes and boyle it with the rest (except the opium and crocus) to the wasting of the liquors: then adde the rest and make it according to Art. A Cerote to be vsed by order of sparadrap, and is notablie approued in all vlcers. Rec. Minij lib.j. cerussae lib.ss. saponis albi ℥.iiij. olei lib.ij. cerae ℥.ij.Imparted by W. Mar∣tin. Mixe them according to Art. Many haue béen healed hereby, with admiration. It doth mundifie, incarne, cease paine, and cicatrize: and re∣moueth the hard edges of vlcers. Obtained of a Doctor of the Chauncerie.
A Cerote that moderatly wipeth, but forcibly drieth and cicatrizeth both wounds and vlcers. Banester.Rec. Olei oliuarum ℥.xij. seui ouini vel ceruini, ℥.xij. seui hircini, ℥.iij succi prassij, ℥.xij. Boyle these to the consumption of the iuyce; then add cinabrij ℥.j. cerusae ℥.vj. litharg. auri ℥.iiij. Boyle them againe to a blacke colour, continually stirring them. Lastly, adde terebinthinae ℥.ij. cerae albae, ℥.xij. Fiat Ceratum molle. A Cerote to asswage paine of inflama∣tions, gowtes, or otherwise. Baker.Rec. Cerae albae ℥.j. croci ℈.j. opij ℈.iiij. olei rosac. q.s. Opiū & crocus in aceto ma∣cerentur: Then incorporate them with the Waxe and Oyle to a Cerote. Applie it to the place it selfe; and also for a good com∣passe about it. Shift it often.
Clisters. A Clister mollificatiue in the cure of Phlegmon. REc. Althaeae totius, maluae, attriplicis,Calmeteus. violarum, parietariae, branchae vrsinae, lactucae, ana.m.j. quatuor sem. frig. contuso∣rum, ana.℥.iij. sem. anisi, foeniculi, ana.ʒ.j. prunorum dulc. paria vj. florum violar. bu∣glossae, nymphaeae, ana.p.j. Boyle them and take of the decoction after it is strained one pound and a halfe, sacchari, mellis rosati colati, ana. quart. ss. olei violarum ℥.iij.ss. salis tantillum. Let this bée ministred long before meate. A Clister for the going forth of the nauell. Rec. Anisi, cymini, ameos,Weckerus. ana.ʒ.j. rutae m.j.ss. Boyle them in water sufficient, and take of the decoction ℥.x. put thereto olei rutacei, laurini, ana.℥.j.ss. salis indi, salis gemmae, ana.ʒ.ss. sacchari rubr.℥.j.ss. Make of them a Clister to bee ministred euery day before meate. A Clister for the inflamation of Vvula. Rec. Herbarum mollientium,Calmeteus. ana.m.j.
betonicae, melissae, ana.m.ss. florum chāmae∣meli, staechados, sambuci, ana.p.j. pruno∣rum & caricarum pinguium, ana. paria vj. seminis anisi & faeniculi, ana.℥.ij. sem. car∣tami contusi ℥.j. agarici trochisc.℥.iij. sem. lini & foenugraeci, ana.℥.ss. colocynthid.ʒ.j.ss. Boyle them in water sufficient, then in one pound and halfe of the strained decoc∣tion, dissolue cassiae cum zaccharo & catho∣lico, ana.℥.ss. elect. indi maioris vel benedi∣ctiz. vj. olei de lilijs ℥.iij. succi cyclaminis, mellis rosati colati, ana.ʒ.j.ss. vitellos duos ouorum, salis parum. Fiat Clister. A Clister for a fluxe of choler chauncing about wounds. Vesalius.Rec. Fol. mercurialis, betarum, caulium ana.q.s.sem. cartami fol. centaurij minoris violarum ana.℥.j. Boyle them in sufficient water: and take of the decoction one pound and a halfe, or one pound, hierae simpl. cas∣siae extractae, ana.℥.ij. mellis rosati colati, ℥.iiij. salis cochleare vnum, olei violei ℥.iij. Fiat. A Clister for the biting of a mad dogge. Valeriola.Rec. Maluae, althaeae amborum cum ra∣dicibus, matrum violarum, branchae vrsi∣nae,
mercurialis, melissophylli, ana.m.j. flo∣rum chamaemeli, meliloti & rosmarini, ana. p.j. epithymi ℥.ss. furfuris p.j. Boyle them all in the broath of a Weathers head, and fat guttes, sufficient vntill they come to the measure of a pint, then strained adde thereto catholici, ℥.j. confectionis hamech, ʒ.iij. olei violacei ℥.iiij. sacchari rub.℥.j. Fiat Clister. A Clister for wounds in the bellie and side. Rec. malu. althaeae, mercurialis, betae,Valeriola. cau∣lium rubrorum, ana. m.j. thymi m.ss. satu∣reiae tantundem, florum chamaemeli, et me∣liloti, ana. p.j. sem. lini, foenugraeci, anisi, a∣neti, ana.ʒ.iij. furfuris p.j. Boyle and straine them, dissolue in one pound of the straining catholici ℥.j. hierae picrae Gal.z.iij. olei vio∣lacei, ℥.iij. zacchari rubr.℥.j. Fiat. A Clister for erosion of the intrailles in the cure of Alopecia Gallica. Rec. Hordei integri lib.ss. maluarū,Calmeeus. vio∣larū, ana.m.ij. Make a decoction, in a pound thereof dissolue vitellorum ouorum nu.ij. olei violacei ℥.iij. ping. caprae, ℥.ij. olei rosa∣rum ℥.j.ss. Make the Clister, which must be put in warme, that the fat bee not colde, and
cast it in often if neede do require. A Clister to be vsed in the cure of the vlcers in the yard. Andreas Lacuna.Rec. Fol. maluarum, violarum, pariea∣riae, & lactucae, ana.m.j. hordei mundati, prunorum damascenorum, ana.p.j. Boyle them in sufficient water, adde to the strained decoction pulpae cassiae ℥.j. thodomelitis, olei violacei, ana.℥.ij. &c.
Colleries. A Collerie to comfort and stay th fluxe of humors in the eyes. REc. Boliarmenij, ℥.j. tutiae, sang. draco∣nis,Vesalius. dragaganti, gummi arab. ana.℥.ss. Grinde them with aquae rosaceae lib.j. which being mixed together, put them into a nar∣rowe mouthed viall of glasse well stopped: and let them boyle in balneo mariae the space of an houre: then remoue it from the fire, and put into the same vini granatorum ℥.ij. This done, straine it, and droppe it into the sore eye warme twice a day. A Collerie for the matter contained in the eyes betweene Cornea and Vuea. Rec. Aquae rosarum,Vigo. aquae myrtillorum vel plantag. ana.℥.j. aquae faeniculi, vini alb. ana.℥.ss. sarcoc. cum lacte mulieris nutritae, tutiae praeparatae ana.℈.ij. sacchari candi de syrupo rosarum ʒ.j. myrob. citrinorum ʒ.ss. sief albi sine opio, sief de thure, ana.ʒ.j.ss. Worke all together finely in a morter, and vse it. A Collerie for the eyes. Rec. Aquae faeniculi, rosarum,Vesaliu. euphra∣giae,
ana.℥.j. cremoris foenugraeci ʒ.ij. Wher∣with mixe tutiae optimae praepar.ʒ.ij. Make it, and vse it warme. Another. Vigo.Rec. Aquae rosarum, plantag. ana.℥.j. tu∣tiae praeparatae ʒ.j.ss. aqua florum myrtillo∣rum ℥.j.ss. fol. semperviui ʒ.x. album. ouo∣rum aliquantulum sub prunis decoctorum num.iij. sief. alb. sine opio ʒ.j.ss. camphorae gran.iij. Let them stand foure houres. Use it warme. A Collerie for rednesse and running of the eyes. Guydo.Rec. tutiae praeparatae ℥.j. aloes cicotrinae ℥.ss. camphorae ʒ.j. aquae rosac. lib.j.ss. vini granatorum lib.ss. Powder what is to bée powdred, mixe them with the rest, and seeth them a little on the coales, and straine it to your vse. A Collerie for Opthalmia in the state. Galen.Rec. Cerusae dilutae ʒ.viij. amyli ʒ.iiij. cadmiae vst. lot.ʒ.ij. gummi arab. olibani, ana.ʒ.j. opij ʒ.ss. Mixe them with raine wa∣ter sufficient for a Collerie. Collyrium album Rhasis. Rhazes.Rec. Cerusae ablutae ʒ.viij. amyli ʒ.iij. sarcocollae nutritae cum lacte asinino, gum∣mi
arab. dragaganti ana.ʒ.ij. opij ʒ.v. Mixe them with raine water, & make a Collerie. A Collerie for any bloudie suffusion in the eye. Rec. Haematitis ablutae ʒ.iij. aeris vsti ʒ.ij.Guydo. corallij, margarit perforatar. ana.ʒ.ss. gum∣mi arabic. & dragaganti, ana.ʒ.ij.ss. piperis, ʒ.ij. cerusae lotae ʒ.j. arsenici rubr. sang. dra∣conis, croci, carabae, ana.ʒ.ss. Mixe them with the bloud of a Henne, and vse it with womens milke that suckleth a maid child. A Collerie in the beginning of Opthalmia, if the matter be cold. Rec. Sarcocollae, ʒ.v. spicae ʒ.ij. rosarum,Mesuae. croci, ana.ʒ.ij. amyli, aloes, gummi arab. dragag. ana.ʒ.j. opij.ʒ.ss. Mixe them with raine water, and applye thereon a plaister of Mallowes and Dill sodden with wine. A Collerie for Opthalmia in his declination. Rec. Tutiae praeparatae,Montispe∣sul. ℥.ss. lapid. cala∣minaris praeparatae, ʒ.ij. gariophyllor. num.v mellis ℥.j. vini albi ℥.ij. aquae rosar. quart.j. camphorae ʒ.j. Mixe it to Art. A Collerie for wounds in or about the eyes. Rec. Aquae rosarum ℥.ij.ss. lactis mulie∣ris ℥.iiij. vini albi odoriferi ʒ.ij.ss. sarcocol∣lae,
myrrhae, aloes epaticae, zacchari candi, ana.℈.iiij.ss. tutiae praeparatae ℈.ij. mellis rosarū.ʒ.ij. sief. albi sine opio ℈.j. Dissolue the sief, Sugar, and Gumme, in womans milke with the rose-water and wine, then put in the sief with tutia finely powdered, but not before all the rest be strained. A Collerie for a Fistula. WeckerusRec. Aquae vitae ℥.ij. vini maluat.℥.j. mel∣lis rosati colat.ʒ.x. myrrhae, radicum peuce∣dani triti, ana.ʒ.ij. sarcocol. aloes, ana.ʒ.j.ss. Mixe them, and let them boyle one walme, vse it with a syringe. A Collerie to cicatrize an vlcer in the yard. Andreas Lacuna.Rec. Aquae plantag. & rosac. ana.℥.iiij. sacchari lapidiscentis, ℥.j. cerusae, argenti spumae, aluminis rochae, ana.ʒ.j.ss. campho∣rae ℈.ss. Make a Collerie. A Collerie for an vlcer in the yard. Idem.Rec. Rad. althaeae, sem. lini, foenugraeci, ana.ʒ.ij. Boyle them in three quarters of a pint of water, till the third part be wasted, then straine the muscilage through a cloath, and put thereto olei amygdal. dulc.℥.iij. and so make it. A Collerie to be vsed in an vlcer in the yard. Ide.Rec. Centauriae minoris, apij, caudae ae∣quinae,
ana.m.ss. hordei contus.℥.j. Boyle them in two pound of pure water till the halfe bee wasted, then straine it, and adde thereto rhodomelitis, vel mellis centauriae ℥.ij. Fiatque. A Collerie for vlcers in the eyes. Rec. Aquae rosar.℥.ij. aqu. caudae aequinae ℥.j.ss. sief de thure ʒ.ss.Vigo. Then straine it, and with the sief make a Collerie, adding there∣to vini odoriferi ℥.ss. A Collerie for vlcers about the huckle bone. Rec. Vini albi lib.j. aq. plantag. aq. rosar.Lanfrancus ana. quart.j. auripigmenti ʒ.ij. floris aeris ʒ.j Grind them finely, and mixe them with the rest, and make a Collerie to be administred by a syringe. A Collerie which doth mundifie and incar∣nate a rotten and filthie vlcer. Rec. Aquae vitae ℥.ij. myrrhae, aloes,Vigo. ana.ʒ.ij. thuris ʒ.j.ss. croci ℈.j. peucedani, sarco∣collae, ana.ʒ.j.ss. Mixe them and vse it. To clarifie the eye-sight. Rec. Fellis porci, fellis anguillae,Ex manu∣scripto. fellis galli gallinacei, ana euen portions: temper thē cum melle & aqua fontanea limpidis∣sima: so kéepe it in a brasen vessell, and put thereof into the eyes.
Decoctions, Diet, and wound drinkes. A Drinke to wast Scrophules and kernellie knots. Petrus His. Io. Lie∣bault.SVccus herbae sanctae mariae & agrimo∣niae, mixed cum vino rubro, and giuen euery day to drinke from the beginning of March to August. Another often proued. Petrus His. Io. Lieb.Succus agrimoniae, & serum lactis giuen on an emptie stomack for ix. daies together euery decreasing time of the Moone. A Decoction or Drinke to cure the Rupture. Rosa Ang∣licana.Rec. Plantag. rosarum, iaceae alb. & ni∣grae, consolidae ma. & mino. auentiae, (that is, gariophyllatae) valerianae, caudae equi∣nae, verbenae, ana.m.j. epatic. m.ij. cinamo∣mi, nucis moscatae, corallij albi & rubr. ana.℥.ss. zacchari vel mellis, ana. lib.ss. vel.q.s. Hereof make your decoction, and if there be added sumac. radix brusci, and quin{que} ner∣uia, it will be more auaileable.
A Drinke for greene wounds. Rec. Vini albi lib.viij. aquae com. lib.x.Clowes. zacchari albi lib.ij. consolidae vtrius{que}, fili∣cis aquaticae, calendulae, ophioglossi, cheli∣donij, polipodij quercini, nummulariae, lilij conuallij, sanamundae, diapensiae, veronicae, verbenacae, pimpinellae, ana.m.j. Boyle all these in balneo mariae fiue houres, and so let it rest till it bee cold. Let the patient drinke thereof thrée times a day, but especiallie morning and euening. A vulnerarie Drinke to be vsed the first seuen daies. Rec. Consolidae vtriusque, veronicae,Querceta∣nus. cy∣clamini, ana. m.j. astacos ex purgatos nu. iiij. vini albi. mensuras ij. Circulate them in balneo thrée daies, after that straine them, and hereof giue a spoonefull in the morning. Another. Rec. Oculorum cancri pulu.℥.ss. mum∣miae ʒ.ij. boli armeni, ʒ.j.ss. agrimoniae, o∣phioglossi, veronicae & cyclamini, ana.m.j. spermatis ceti ʒ.j. Let them mixe and ma∣cerate together with white wine all one night in balneo mariae. Hereof giue two spoonefuls morning, and euening also if néed
be. These driue away inflamations, and are conuenient where are burnings. A wound drinke to be vsed after those first seauen daies. Querceta∣nus.Rec. Macis, oculoru cancri, zedoariae, ana.ʒ.iij. mūmiae, galangae minoris, anaʒ.ij. nucis vomicae ʒ.j.ss. To these being grosse beaten and put into a glasse vessell, powre vpon them vini albi mens. j.ss. Macerate them in a most gentle heate two daies. The quantitie is one spoonfull morning and eue∣ning: the vertue cannot be sufficiently com∣mended. A wound drinke for poysoned shot. Querceta∣nus.Rec. Florum vincae, peruincae, lilij con∣uallij, ana. p.j. galangae, zedoariae, ana.ʒ.ij. boli armeniae verae, mūmiae, ana.ʒ.j. sperma∣tis cei ʒ.ss. vini albi mens.ij. Digest & cir∣culate them in bal. mariae foure daies. Use it one spoonefull at morning and euening. A wound drinke to be vsed where bones are fractured by gun-shot. Querceta∣nus.Rec. Aristolochiae, cyclaminis, serpenta∣riae, cōsolidae vtrius{que}, geranij ana.m.j. sabini m.ss. macis, zedoariae & oculorum cancri, ana.℥.ss. mūmiae, galangae minor. ana.ʒ.j.ss.
Shred and stampe the herbes finely, the rest make into grosse powder, boyle them in a double vessell foure houres cum vini albi mens. j. and vse it morning and euening. This (sayth the author) is better than all those splints wherewith some are sore tor∣mented. A wound drinke. Rec. Saniculae, sanamundae, rumicis,Gilbertus. ca∣nabis, sem. caulium rubr. consolidae mino∣ris, rubiae maioris, of each a quantitie: bruse them and boyle them in wine perfectly, and let them abide in the wine all one night af∣ter: in the morning straine it and giue part thereof. This cureth any wound laying a∣loft but a plantaine leafe. Another. Rec. Caulium rub. canabis, apij,Gilbertus. rubiae ma. ana. a like quantitie, and make it in ma∣ner aforesayd. Another. Which is to be made exapio,Gilbertus. arnoglos∣sa, lanceolata, sanamunda, consolida, vtra∣que rubia & caule. Another. Ex sanamunda, pimpinella, saluia,Gilbertus. carduo
benedicto, agrimonia, pede columbino, plantagine, centinodio, lingua auis, & sper∣gula. Another. Gilbertus.Ex sanamunda, betonica, saluia, hedera terrestri, agrimonia, pilosella, pimpinella, violaria, plantagine, melagine. Drawe out the iuyce of these herbes, and boyle it with your wine, then giue it to drine: but mark that you withdrawe daylie of the quantitie of your melag. which was added, least the wound should at first too sodainly close to∣gether. Another. Gilbert.Ex angellica, betonica, agrimonia, pilo∣sella, hedera terrestris, septem neruia, vio∣laria, but least of the angellica. Boyle them in wine, let the patient drinke of it thrice a day, and the ofter the sooner whole. Another. Gilbert.Rec. Betonicae, agrimoniae, fragariae, asa∣ri, violariae, linguae bouis, ambrosij, planta∣ginis, quinque folij, hyperici, spicae, linguae auis, pimpinellae, ana. m.j. Stampe them and boyle them in wine, straine them and put too honie, and a hundred graines of pepper, if the partie haue no feuer.
Another which he much commendeth. Is to be made ex caule rubr. & rubia,Gilbert. & teneritatibus rumicis & sem. canabis vel teneritate ipsius herbae & sanamunda, & consolida minore & sanicula, of each a like proportion, saue that you must take a dou∣ble portion of the rubia, stampe your herbs and seeth them in wine to the wasting of the third part. This may you also swéeten with honie or sugar for delicate persons, and giue thereof morning and euening. Certaine rules which the author obserued in the ordaining of the drinkes. 1 That if there were daunger of a feuer, then these drinkes were made with water and suger, and not with wine and honie. 2 That the patients diet should bee free from milke, chéese, egges, fruites, and flesh of vngelded beastes or foules, and that he should eate vnleauened bread. As for carnal copulation all other authors forbid. A more extraordinarie practise by wound∣drinkes, which the same author deliuereth. Rec. Succum pilosillae, giue to the pa∣tient
(that is wounded in what place soeuer) to drinke: if he cast it againe, he shall dye: if he retaine it, he shall liue, and then for the first day giue him to drinke plantaginem & fragariam, the second day giue him to drink those and gariophyllatae, the third day adde to those three pilosellam, and giue him so to the fift: the fift day put too the former hede∣ram terrestrem till the seauenth day. After which you shall in the same order begin to withdrawe, till you come to the herbes of the first day, wherewith you began. Another order which Gilbertus sheweth to haue been practised by some. First they wash the wound with warme water, next they applye the lard of Bacon stamped with wormewood for thrée daies: after that whites of Egges with flaxe for foure daies. In the meane time they giue also a drinke made ex vino vel ceruisia & medieate mellis, with which also is boyled succus consolidae mi. & saniculae, & absyn∣thij, & foeniculi, of which they gaue euery morning a full cuppe fasting, which would issue out by the wound and mitigate paine: then applied they to consolidate the wound when it was mundified. Rec. olibani, sarco∣collae,
ana. pares portiones, aloes quantum est medium istorum. Make these in fine powder, which then shall consolidate the wound in ii. daies, though it be very large. Also puluis cornu ceruini shutteth vp a wound, and taketh away the moyst dispo∣sition. A drinke to proue the curablenes of a wounded patient. Rec. De succo pimpinellae quantum te∣sta oui capit.Rosa Ang. Giue it to the wounded pa∣tient to drinke: if he cast it againe he shall dye; otherwise not, but it shall go all forth at the wound greene. Some drawe forth the iuyce with white wine, and so giue it to drinke. Another. Rec. Betonicae, leuistici, nepitae, prouen∣cae, ana.ʒ.j.Rosa Ang. Mixe them with a little honie and giue it: if it go forth by the wound he shall liue; if not, he shall dye. Another. Rec. Rubiae maioris,Rosa Ag. sumitatum canabis cum semine tanaceti siluestris & oleris ru∣bei, and giue it to drinke: if it go all forth by the wound e shall liue: if not, he shall dye.
A healing drinke. Rosa Angl.Rec. Pimpinellae, buglossae, sanamundae, agrimoniae, ana.m.ss. Pound them and mixe them with water, wine or ale, and so giue it. It will go forth by the wound & heale wel. Another. Rosa Angl.Rec. Sanamundae, fol. canabis, fol. caulis rub. pilosellae, buglossae, nardi celticae vel gallicae, aliuncae, ana.m.ss. seminis canabis ℥.j. Pound them in a morter with very good wine, and decoct them a little, and thereof giue thrée spoonefuls in the morning, and thrée a good while after dinner. Another. Rosa Angl.Rec. Pedis columbini cum radice sua. radic. consolidae, radicum osmundae, ozi∣mi, cardui benedicti, senationis, fabariae, su∣mitat. rubi, ana.q.s. Bruse them & put them into a pot, and powre vppon them white wine or ale, and giue it morning and eue∣ning for nine daies. It cureth any wound or rupture. Another. Rosa Angl.Rec. Plantag. gariophyllatae, sem. cana∣bis, ana.q.s. rubiae maioris plus. If there be a bone broken, adde conolidae minoris in
double quantitie. If the wound bee in the head, boyle them in water; if in the bulke of the bodie, boyle them in ale; and if the hurt bee beneath the nauell, then seeth them in wine. A wound drinke in case that nature nee∣deth releefe and strengthning. Rec. Zinzibris albi, galangae,Rosa Angl. cinamomi, cardamomi, ana.ʒ.j. piperis longi ℥.ss. gen∣tianae ʒ.ss. croci ʒ.j. Make your infusion in very good wine, and giue of it twice a day for thrée daies. The like is made. Ex vino optimo & cinamomo & spica,Rosa Angl. & zinzibre & cubebis, gariophyllis, nuce moscata, calamo aromatico & saluia. And it excellentlie comforteth and refresheth wounded persons. But in wounds of the breast put in his drinke, hyssope, liquorice, reasins and sugar: giue also diapenidion and diadragagantum. A wound drinke. Rec. Ceruisiae recent. coctae,Paracelsus. mensuras xx. succi herbae cornu cerui mensuram j. Let them purge, and fine together to bee drunke, thrée times a day.
Another chiefe one. Is, ex succo de cornibus cerui distillato. Another. Paracelsus.Rec. Rad. cyclaminis ℥.ss. diapensiae m.j. consolidae mediae m.ss. Boile them in lib.ss. vini to the consumption of the third part: to these may bee added in this sort for to giue, Rec. decocti ℥.iij. olei cariophyllorum di∣stillati ℈.j. Mixe them, and hereof giue thrée times a day to drinke. Another. Paracelsus.Rec. Saniculae, pyrolae, centaureae, beto∣nicae, ana.m.j. consolidae regalis, agrimoniae, ana.m.ij. Boyle them in old white wine in balneo mariae one houre or two so stopped as there be no breathing out. Another. Paracelsus.Rec. Ophioglossi m.iij. alchimillae m.ij. pirolae minoris m j. periclimeni m.j.ss. rha∣barbari ℥.j. reupontici ℥.iij. Boyle all toge∣ther in wine, in manner aforesayd. Another. Paracelsus.Rec. Angellicae ℥.ss. mummiae ℥.j. sper∣matis ceti ʒ.ij. glandium ℥.ij. consolidae mi∣noris m.ij. cyclaminis ℥.ij. pyrolae vtriusque
ana.m.ij. vini q.s. whereto you may adde a third part of water, or as you see good. Another. Rec. Baccarum iuniperi lib.ij. well bru∣sed with these following:Paracelsus. pyrolae vtriusque, periclimeni, saniculae alb. radic. ana.m.ss. o∣phioglossi, m.j.ss. consolidae ma. aristolo∣chiae, ana.℥.v. persicariae ℥.iiij. Distill them all together, and after in that water seeth what vulnerarie herbes you will; adding too baccas iuniperinas cum cinamomo. Another. Rec. Flor. spicae, m.j. hypericonis,Paracelsus. m.iiij. verbasci m.ij. betonicae, centaurij minoris, prunellae, ana.m.ss. Of these prepare your drinke in manner aforesayd. Another excellent wound drinke. Rec. Equiseti (that kind which is called Hippuris) filicis floridae,Iarre ana.m.j. musci cla∣uati, lychenis, ana.m.ss. centaurij maioris, prunellae, consolidae mediae, rubiaetincto∣rum, saniculae, cariophyllatae (both rootes and leaues) geranij cretici, betonicae, virgae aureae, ana.m.j. Stampe all these herbes,
and put them into an earthen po with vini albi lib.xij. and boyle them on a gentle fire to the consumption of the halfe, then straine it, and put to it mellis depurati & opt. lib. vj. Let it boyle a little, hereof giue ii. spoone∣fuls at morning, and as much at night in the distilled water of the greater Comfrey. Another excellent distilled wound drinke for delicate persons, whose taste and eye must both be satisfied. Banester.Rec. Hyperici m.ij. scabiosae, m.j. agri∣moniae, m.j.ss. consolidae ma. & mi. ana.m.ij.ss. saluiae, hyssopi, ana.m.j. polypodij ℥.iiij rad. consolidae ma.℥.ij. rad. helenij ℥.v. gly∣cyrrhizae ℥.vj. mellis despumati lib.ss. (vel zacchari) vini cretici lib.vj stillatitij liquo∣ris cardui benedicti & scabiosae, ana. lib.j. Simul contundantur & reponantur in vase figulino per 10. dies: Then with a glasse limbeck distill it at a gentle fire, & giue ther∣of ℥.iij. earely in the morning, as much be∣fore dinner, and againe as much before sup∣per one houre. Also vse the same for a fo∣mentation or iniection to the wound. A wound drinke for the head. Querceta∣nus.Rec. Florum lilij conuallij & betonicae, ana.p.j. galangae, macis, ana.ʒ.iij. persicariae,
chelidonij, vincae peruincae, veronicae, & centaurij, ana.m.ss. Macerate them, and vse them morning and euening. A wound drinke for the breast. Rec. Succi verbenae, betonicae,Querceta∣nus. veronicae ana.℥.ij. aquae cinamomi lib.j. Macerate them as before. Another for that purpose. Rec. Consolidae maioris & mediae,Schylan∣drus. sani∣ulae, betonicae, ana.m.j. ophioglossi, agri∣moniae, ana.m.ss. rhabarbari ℥.ss. mummiae sincerae ʒ.ij. spermatis ceti ʒ.j. Decoct them in a double vessell close stopped, giue tenne drammes at a draught morning and euen∣ing. A vulnerarie drinke for wounds in the bellie. Rec. Boli armeni ℥.ss. consolidae vtrius∣que,Querceta∣nus. ana.m.j. galangae, ʒ.ij. Temper them with wine as aforesayd. A decoction for wounds in the head. Rec. Passularum enucleatarum, glycyr∣rhizae, ana.℥.j. tamarindorum, iuiubarum, iridis, hyssopi ana.℥.ss. hordei ℥.ij. foenu∣graeci ʒ.ij. capillorum veneris ℥.s. Boyle
them in a pottle of raine water till halfe bee wasted, and kéepe it to your vse. Another. Rec. Hordei mundim.ij glycyrrhizae ra∣zae ℥.iij. sem. foeniculi ℥.j.ss. iuiubarum & sebesten, ana. nu.x. passularum enucleata∣rum ℥.j. sacchari candi ℥.iiij. hyssopi m.j. ca∣pillorum veneris ℥.j. sacchari rosarum ℥.j. Boyle them in sufficient quantitie of water till halfe bee consumed, then straine it and clarifie it with the white of an Egge, and in the ende adde thereto loch de pino ℥.j. and vse it. A wound drinke especially against fistulous dispositions of wounds in the breast. Alfonsus rrius.Rec. Pilosellae, pimpinellae cum radici∣bus gariophyllatae, rad. gentianae, atque ar∣themisiae, matrum violarum subrubentiū, brassicae veterum foliorum, cymarum ca∣nabis, senationum, rubiae, quae bene mun∣data sint, ana.m.j. cinamomi, galangae, car∣damomi, meligettae, gariophyllorum, ana.ʒ.ss. vini albi odorati lib.xx. When these haue boyled to the halfe straine them, and put too mellis despumati lib. ij. Againe, seeth them at a soft fire in a glasse vessell to
the wasting of a pint more. Hereof giue lib. ss. or ℥.iiij. in the morning foure houres be∣fore dinner. A drinke for the curing of vlcers. Rec. Vitrioli ℥.v.Paracelsus. Hang it in a vessell with twentie measures of wine: so let them worke, and fine together. Giue a spoonefull at a time. Another. Rec. Vini recentis mensuras xl.Paracelsus. Let it purge with liquoris tartari distillati lib.j. And hereof giue one spoonefull at a time. Another. Macerate the herbe centaurium in aqua ardente,Paracelsu. and after draw out his quintessence after the common manner. Of this extrac∣tion, giue x. graines in one spoonfull of some vulnerarie distilled water. Another. Seeth Esula, herbe,Paracelsus. roote and seede in se∣ro lactis, till you haue his substance, then straine it, and after seeth away all his liquor gently, and keepe the thicke remainder, whereof giue a little euery day in the mor∣ning to drinke.
A Fistula drinke of great commendation. Petrus His. Io Lie∣bault.Rec. Caulium rub. foeniculi, abrotani, tanaceti, fragariae, fol. rubiae maioris, herbae Roberti, plantaginis, apij, foliorum cana∣bis, ana like quantitie, artus muris. Boyle them in white wine, and adde too honie: hereof both giue to drinke, and iniect also into the vlcer. Another to be vsed in like sort, being of manifold experience. Petrus His. Io. Lieb.Rec. Rad. & fol. vel sem. sinapis, sumi∣tatum lapatij acuti, rad. althaeae, ma. pimpi∣nellae, fol. caulis rub. ana like quantitie, ta∣naceti q.s. Decoct them in wine, straine them and put in some honie. A decoction for a hydropike bodie that hath vlcers. Rec. Ligni sancti lib. j.ss. rad. chinae ℥.j. aquae fontanae lib. xvj. vini albi lib.ij. cui addas radicum asparagi, foeniculi, apij pe∣troselini, graminis, rusci, rubiae tinctorum, iridis recentis, ana.℥.ij. radicum azari, cort. rad. tormentillae, tamarisci, capparis, ana.℥.j agrimoniae, cychoriae, ceteracis, capill. ven. ana, m.j. soldanellae m.j.ss. anisorum, passu∣larum
enucleatarum num. xx. cinamomi electi ʒ.iij. cicerum rubr.p.ij. trium florum cordialiū, ana.p.ij. maratri, ameos, ana.ʒ.iij. sem. melonum contus.℥.j. bulliant ad con∣sum. vnius partis, deinde exprime & adde syr. de eupatorio ʒ.iij. Clarifie and make it sweete cum santalo citrino, cinamomo & iride, ana.℥.j. Make your decoction for foure daies. A great decoction to prouoke sweate, called syrupus Sancti Ambrosij. Rec. Milij excorticati p.j. aquae pluuia∣lis lib. j.ss.D. Foster. Boyle them till the seede doo breake, then put to them vini albi veteris lib.ss. then giue them a heate together, and after straine them. Hereof giue sixe ounces at a draught morning and euening after euacuation. This shall prouoke sweate, yet more stronglie if ramentum cornu taurini be boyled also cum milio. A decoction for such as are weake and ad∣dicted to melancholie, being affected with lues venerea. Rec. Ligni aloes ℈.ij. cinamomi ℈.j. co∣riandri praeparati ʒ.iij. sebesten,Matthiolus iuiubarum, ana.℥.j. glycyrrhizae razae ʒ.j. florum cordia∣lium m.j. haec omnia ex aquae lib.x. vsque
ad tertias concoquantur, inde colentur & addatur sacchari ℥.vj. A drinke or Almond milke for such as haue vlcers in the yard. Andreas Lacuna.Rec. Amygdalarum dulcium à pellicu∣lis mundatarum ℥.j. sem. frigidorum ma. recent. & mundat. ana.ʒ.ss. seminis papaue∣ris albi ʒ.j. Beate them together and steepe them in the decoction of liquorice, and after the milke is strained out and made indiffe∣rent warme, adde thereto sacchari clarissi∣mi ℥.j. to make it sweete, and so minister it. A decoction for a Fistula. Rosa Ang∣licana.Rec. Cardui benedicti, pedis columbi∣ni, ana.m.j. eupatorij, summitatū rubi ana. m.ss. Decoct them, and with honie make it as a syrupe, which giue the patient to drink, and lay vpon the Fistula the substance of the herbes. A drinke for the Fistula in the inner parts. Rosa Angl.Rec. Agrimoniae, tapsibarbati, sana∣mundae, chelidonij, absynthij, brioniae, fol. caulis rub. herbae Roberti, pedis columbi∣ni, summitatū rubi, pimpinellae, saluiae, car∣dui
benedicti, lanceolatae, hyssopi, planta∣ginis, gallitrici, abrotani, marrubij albi, millefolij, caprifolij, scolopendriae, ana. partes aequales, boyle them in water, wine, and honie, and giue it to drinke morning and euening. A drinke for the Fistula. Rec. Aquarum cyclaminis,Paracelsus. de folijs ser∣pentinae, sophiae, ana.℥.iiij. Mixe them for a draught, of such giue foure ounces for a quantitie morning and euening vnto the ende. Another. Rec. Aquarum de cornibus cerui,Paracelsus. cen∣taureae, consolidae aureae, ana.℥.iij. parthe∣nionis ℥.iiij.ss. To these adde rhabarbari, mannae electae, spermatis ceti, ana.℥.j. This mixture standing in a vessell must be often∣times stirred together, and giue thereof to drinke morning and euening one spooneful, and three spoonefulles of wine immediatlie vpon that. A drinke for the biting of a mad dogge. Rec. Rutae,Ex manu∣scripto. p.j. allij ʒ.ss. nucleorum nu∣cum
auellanarum m.j. Stampe them and straine them with stale ale, add thereto the∣riacae opt.℈.j. Giue it the patient warme, and the dregges strained from it applye to the sore. To tame and kill the Canker by inward cure. Ius cancrorum fluuialium ex lacte asi∣nino v. diebus exhibitus,Altimarus. ita vt totidem subinde diebus ipsimet cancri comedantur. Such a course (sayth the author) being sea∣uen times performed, maketh the Cancer in a woman most gentle and tractable, so as the rest may bee performed by the vse of simple epithemes.
Defensatiues. A Defensatiue to be vsed in the cure of Gangraena. REc. Olei rosarum, omphacini,Guydo. olei myr∣tini, violarum, ana.℥.j. aceti acerrimi ℥.ij succi plantag. solani, absynthij, scabiosae, consolidae minoris, ana.℥.j. Boyle all toge∣ther to the consumption of the iuyces, then adde thereto boli armenij, sang. draconis, omn. sandalorum, macis, cinamomi, squi∣nanti, ciperi, ana.ʒ.j. Mixe them together, and with Waxe sufficient make it in a good forme. Another for the same. Rec. Olei rosati, myrtini,Weckerus. ana.℥.iiij.ss. succi plantag. et solatri, ana.℥.ij. Boile them to the consumption of the iuyes, and adde to the straining cerae albae ℥.j.ss. farinae faba∣rum, hordei & lentium ana.℥.ss. sandalo∣rum omn. ana.ʒ.ij.ss boli armeni ℥.j pul∣ueris myrti, ʒ.j. Mixe them and make a de∣fensatiue to bee applyed round about the place. A defensatiue for wounds. Rec. Olei rosac. lib.j. olei cham.℥.iiij. bu∣tyri
recentis ℥.iiij. cerusae, terrae sigillatae, ana.℥.iiij. sandali alb. & citr. ana.℈.ij. lapid. tutiae ℥.j. quatuor sem. frigidorum maiorū, ana.ʒ.j. coralli albi ʒ.iij. albumin. ouorum nu. ij. aceti rosacei ℥.j. sang. draconis ʒ.iij. Powder which are to be powdred, and melt the rest with viniger: and after it is remo∣ued from the fire, put in the rest of the pow∣ders, stirring them well vntill they be cold. Another. Clowes.Rec. Empl. diachalciteos lib.j.ss. succi semperuiui, plantag. solani, ana.℥.j.ss. olei ros.℥.ij.ss. olei myrtini ℥j. albuminū ouor. nu.ij. aceti ros.℥.j. Misce. A Defensatiue to be vsed in wounds in the armes. Vigo.Rec. Olei rosati, olei myrtini, ana.℥.iij. olei chamaemeli, ℥.ij. farinae fabarum & hordei, ana.℥.j. boli armeni, terrae sigillatae, ana.ʒ.vj. sandalorum omnium, ana.ʒ.ij. ro∣sarum, myrtillor. ana.ʒ.j.ss. cerae albae.℥.j.ss. aceti rosac.ʒ.iij. succi plantag. succi solatri, & lactucae, ana.℥.ss. Melt the Waxe with the Oyle and the iuyces, and let them boyle one walme, and make it to the manner of a plaister. A Defensatiue for an vlcer. Valeriola.Rec. Vnguenti de bolo, ℥.vj. omn. sanda∣lorum
ʒ.j.ss. pulueris myrtillorum, & rosa∣rum, ana.ʒ.ij. olei rosac. et myrtini, ana.℥.j.ss aceti rosarum ℥.ij. albumen vnius oui. Mixe them well together, and vse it. A Defensatiue to be vsed when any of the vertebres are broken. Rec. Olei myrtini, olei rosarum,Vesaliu. ana.℥.iij. cerae albae ℥.j.ss. Melt the Waxe with the Oyles at a gentle fire, and before it bee cold add thereto boli armenij ℥.j. omnium san∣dalorum ʒ.j farinae fabaceae ʒ.x. farinae hor∣deaceae ℥.j.ss. Mixe them, and applie them in place of a Cerote. A Defensatiue to be applied in the taking of a member. Rec. Boli armenij ℥.iiij. terrae sigilla∣tae, plumbi vsti, ana.ʒ.iiij.ss. semperuiui, succi plantag. & absynthij, ana.ʒ.j. aceti ro∣sacei, albuminum ouorum, ana.q.s. A Defensatiue very comfortable. Rec. Olei myrtini ℥.ij.ss. olei rosarum ℥.ij. seui ceruini ʒ.iij. cinabrij.ʒ.j cerusae ʒ.j.ss. Mixe them and boyle them till they bee blacke, adding thereto cerae alb.℥.ss. cam∣phorae ʒ.iij. tutiae in aquae plantaginis prae∣paratae ʒ.ij. Stirre it well together till it be cold, and make a plaister.
A defensatiue for waring eyes. Ex manu∣scripto.Rec. Cineris lanae non lotae & cum al∣bumine oui, applye it as a plaister vpon the forhead and temples. It taketh away the fluxe and paine of the eyes. An excellent Defensiue in all wounds. Goodrus.Rec. Diapalmae ℥.viij. olei ros. succi sola∣ni, & plantag. ana.℥ij. vnguenti populeonis ℥.j.ss. Let these be boyled with a soft fire till the iuyce be consumed, putting in the iuyce by little and little, and last of all your Po∣puleon. A defensatiue to keepe backe all fluxe of humors flowing to any part. Renneus.Rec. Crassulae ma. & minoris, plantaginis maioris, solani, fol. hyosciami, semperviui, rostri ciconiae, ana.m.ij. Stampe all these together, then boyle them in three pound of oyle Oliue till all the liquor bee consumed. Straine it. Rec. olei huius lib.ij.ss. lapidis calaminaris praeparati, terrae sigillatae, ana.℥ij. cerussae ℥.iiij. lithargyrij ℥.iij. caphurae ℥.j. cerae albae, aceti rosacei, ana. lib.ss. Melt your waxe and oyle together, put in the rest made in very fine powder, and lastly the vi∣niger, labour them in a morter vntill it come to the forme of an vnguent.
Digestiues. A Digestiue for contused wounds. REc. Terebinthinae lotae ℥.ij. mellis rosa∣cei ℥.iiij. butyri recent.ʒ.vj. radic. iridis, aloes, sarcocollae, myrrhae, ana.ʒ.j.ss. aristo∣lochiae rotundae ʒ.ss. Powder which are to be powdred, and make it to Art. A Digestiue proper for wounds. Rec. Terebinthinae purgatae ℥.iij.ss. mel∣lis rosarum ℥.j. olei lumbricorum ℥.ss. vi∣tellos duos ouorum, olei rosarum ℥.ss. myr∣rhae ʒ.ij. masticis ʒ.j. sarcocollae ʒ.ss. farinae hordei ℥.ss. Powder which are to bee pow∣dred, and make it to Art. A Digestiue. Rec. Terebint lotae in aqua vitae,Clowes ℥.iiij. vitellos ouorum duos, vng. populei simpl.℥.ij. olei rosarum ℥.ss. mercurij praecipitati, ʒ.ij. croci ℈.j. Mixe them. A Digestiue for hollowe vlcers and Impostumes. Rec. Olei rosarum ℥.iiij. olei lumbrico∣rum & hypericonis, ana.℥.ij.ss. mellis rosa∣rum, ℥.v. cerae, resinae pini, resinae, butyri re∣centis,
ana.ʒ.iij. terebint. purae ℥.vj. succi a∣pij & plantaginis, ana.ʒ.iiij. Melt them at the fire, and adde thereto sarcocollae ℥.j. myrrhae ʒ.iij. croci ℈.ss. aloes epatic.ʒ.ss. Powder what is to bee powdred, and with the yolkes of foure Egges make it to Art. Another very good. Rec. Mellis Rosac.℥.viij. sarcocollae ℥.ss. myrrhae, thuris, ana.ʒ.iij. succi apij ℥.iij. olei rosarum ℥.j.ss. vitellos tres ouorum, tere∣bint.℥.j. farinae hordei ℥.ss. Mixe them to Art. A Digestiue to remoue an escar. Rec. Terebinthinae, ℥.iiij. vitellos ouo∣rum nu.ij. mellis rosacei ℥.ss. olei liliacei, o∣lei amygdalarum dulcium, pinguedinis ca∣pi, ana.ʒ.j.ss. butyri recent.ʒ.j. Make it to Art.
Electuaries. An Electuarie for the Canker not vlcerated. REc. Pulueris cancrorum ℥.iij. pulueris ranarum,Weckeru. pulueris de limacibus, ana.℥.ij. cort. citri conditi ℥.ss. rasurae eboris, ossis de corde cerui, ana.ʒ.iij. xylobalsami, ligni a∣loes, sandali moscat. coralli rubr. limaturae chalybis, ana.ʒ.ij. sem. acetosae, sem. citri & endiuiae, ana.ʒ.j. ambrae ʒ.ss. conseruae bora∣ginis, buglossae, & anthos, ana.℥.ij. Mixe them for an Electuarie, whereof you may giue any houre at your pleasure. Another. Rec. Confectionis de hyacintho ℥.j.ss. confectionis alchermes,Weckerus. ʒ.iij. conseru. rosa∣rum, conseru. radic. buglossae ana.℥.j. syrupi de pomis quant. sufficit. Fiat Electuarium. Wherof giue thrée times a wéeke ii. houres before meate the valew of a nut, drinking vpon it a little good wine delayed with bu∣glosse water. An Electuarie to be vsed in the cure of a rupture. Rec. Conseruae symphiti maioris,Calmeteus. & ro∣sarum
antiquae, corticum citri, saccharo con∣ditorum, ana.℥.j. figillae mariae, iaceae albae & nigrae, ana.ʒ.ij. boli armenij in aqua ro∣sarum loti, sanguinis draconis, ana.ʒ.ij.ss. a∣caciae, hypocistidos, ana.ʒ.j.ss. carnium cito∣niorum saccharo conditarum siue aroma∣tibus ℥.ij. limaturae chalybis, ℥.j. syrupi myr∣tini q.s. Make it an electuarie. An Electuarie to digest the humor in the cure of Bubo. Vesalius.Rec. Sanguinis siccati anatis masculi, a∣natis foemininae, sanguinis anseris & haedi, rutae siluestris, seminis foeniculi, cumini, a∣nethi, sem. naporum, ana.ʒ.iij. radicum gen∣tianae, trifolij, squinanti, thuris, rosarum rub. ana.ʒ.iiij. piperis albi & longi, phu, costi, ci∣namomi, anisi, ana.ʒ.ij. myrrhae electae, spi∣cae nardi, ana.ʒ.vj. asari, ammoniaci, ama∣raci, agarici, ana.ʒ.ij. carpobalsami gra.xx. iridis, croci, rhabarbari, gingibris, masticis, ana.ʒ.j. stoechados, ʒ.v. haec omnia misce & paretur puluis subtilissimus, & cum lib. iiij. mellis depumati optimi misceantur. And make it an Electuarie. An Electuarie for vomiting of bloud by reason of a bruse or otherwise. Rec. Conseruae rosarum, & symphiti ma∣ioris
ana..℥.j. boli armenij loti in aqua ro∣sarum, lapidis haematitis, ana.ʒ.j. coralli ru∣bri ʒ.ss. acaciae, baccarum myrti, ana.ʒ.j. pe∣nidiarum ℥.ss. zacchari ℥.iiij. Fiat Elect. dosis est ʒ.ss. with red wine in the morning or afore meate. An Electuarie for the palsie and crampe, hap∣pening to wounded patients, being void of learned counsaile. Rec. Diasatyrionis vel radicum eius con∣ditorum ʒ.j. radicum eryngij condit.℥.ss. diamosci dulcis ℈.j. specierum electuarij de gemmis ℈.j. dianisi ℈.ss. diagalangae, diatrion pipereon, ana.℥.ss. radicū acori & paeoniae, ana.℈.ss. mithridatij ʒ.ij. conseruae herbae paralysis ʒ.iij. conseruae anthos ʒ.ij. sacchari ℥.vj. cum aqua saluiae. Fiat Ele∣ctuarium. An Electuarie for one that is wounded and affected with the Crampe. Rec. Dianisi, diamoscu dulcis, dianthos, ana.℈.iiij. diagalangae ʒ.ss. mithridatij ʒ.iij. corticum citri ʒ.ss. radicum acori ℈.ij. folio∣rum saluiae siccae ℥.ss. conseruae anthos ℥.j. zacchari ℥.vj. cum aqua saluiae; Fiat Ele∣ctuarium.
An Electuarie verie excellent for the diseases of the stomacke happening after greene wounds or long vlcers. Rec. Capillorum veneris tussilaginis, pulegij, hyssopi, calaminthae, ana.ʒ.j. iuiub. & sebesten. ana. num.x. glycyrrhizae ℥.ij. iridis ʒ.ij. caricarum pinguium num.vj. se∣minis foeniculi ʒ.j. foenugraeci, ℈.ij. quatuor sem. frigidorum maiorum, ana.℈j. polypo∣dij quercini ℥.j.ss. Bulliant in lib.j.ss. aquae purissimae vsque ad ℥.vj. coletur & colatu∣rae addatur carnium passularum extract. cum decoctione predicta, penidiarū ℥.iiij. nucleorum pini ℥.ss. dia-ireos simplicis ℥.ij pulmonis vulpis praeparat.℥.ss. dadraga∣ganti frigid.℥.j.ss. dia calaminthae, ℈.ij. gly∣cyrrhizae ℥.ss. myrrhae ʒ.j. zinzibris albi ʒ.ij piperis longi ʒ.j. dia hyssopi ℈.j. zacchari candi ℈.vj. Misce. Dosis est ʒ.j. To take at any time. An Electuarie confortatiue for rebellious vl∣cers to be vsed after sweats, pur∣gations and such like. Rec. Letificantis Galeni ʒ.iij. diamosci dulcis ʒ.vj. gariophyllorum ʒ.j. electuarij regum ℈.iiij. elect. de gemmis ℈.ij. conser∣uae boraginis, buglossae, citoniorum, ana.℥.j. syrupi de pomis, as much as shall suffice for
an Electuarie, of which giue in a morning ʒ.ij. or one spoonefull. An Electuarie against vomiting and weake∣nesse of stomacke after the cure of vlcers. Rec. Succi citoniorum depurat. lib.j. vel eius loco miuae citoniorum, lib.ss. aceti ro∣sarum ℥.iiij. zacchari lib.ss. Bulliant ad spissitudinem, cui addas diacinamomi ℥.ij. aromatici rosati ʒ.j. diambrae, dianisi dulcis, ana.℈.j. diacoralli ℈.ss. zinzibris, galangae, piperis albi, ana.ʒ.ss. Misce & fiat mixtura, cuius dosis est ℥.ss. To bee taken on an emptie stomacke in the morning, or before meates, and after, ʒ.ij. at a time. An Electuarie to prouoke sleepe in dismem∣bring any part, but not without learned counsell. Rec. Decoctionis lactucae & portulacae vehementer expressae, ℥.ij. syrupi papaueris ℥.j. diamarg. frigid.ʒ.ij. dispermaton, ℈.ij. sem. papaueris albi ʒ.ij. croci ʒ.ss. opij ℈.iiij hyosciami ℈.ij. quatuor sem. frigidorum ma. ana.℈.j. succi glycyrrhizae ℥.ss. gum. ara∣bici, galangae, dragaganti, ana.ʒ.j. amyli ʒ.iij Boyle Sugar together with the decoction
and syrupe to the consistence of an Electua∣rie, or rather higher: then adde too the rest in fine powder, but last of all the crocus, mel, and opium, stirring them long time to∣gether. The doss. est ℈.j. An Electuarie to resist the malignitie of a festring and stinking Canker. Anton. Monta∣guana.Rec. Pulueris cancrorum fluuialium vel marinarum in lacte suffocatorum, & in cli∣bano ex siccatorum, ℥.iiij. pulueris cana∣rum, limaciarum, erinaceorum, ana.℥.j. cor∣ticum citri conditorum ℥.ij. rasurae eboris, ossis de corde cerui, ana.ʒ.iij. xylobalsami, xyloaloes, santalorum, corallorum, lima∣turae calybis praeparatae, ana.ʒ.ij. sem. acetos. citri, pulu. cardui benedicti, scordij, citrach ana.ʒ.j. ambrae, mosci, anagra.ij. conseruae boraginis, buglossi, acetosae, sonchi ana.ʒ.ij. syr. de pomis impl.q.s. Fiat Electuarium. Whereof let the patient take the quantitie of a Chesnut thrée houres before meate.
Embrocations. An Embrocation for the creeping Herpes. REc. Centinodij, plantaginis, solani,Weckerus. ana. m.j. cupulorum glandium, vel nucum cupressi, ana. paria.x. baccarum et foliorum myrthi, malicorij, balaustiorum, ana.℥.j. a∣caciae, hypocistid, ana.ʒ.vj. myrrhae, thuris, ana.ʒ.v. Boyle them in Smithes water, and wash the vlcer therewith and bathe it. An Embrocation for an oedematous or cold tumor. Rec. Cinerum sarmentorum vitis,Weckerus. ficus brassicae, tamarisci, ana.p.j. foliorum ebuli, tamarisci, ana.m.ss. boli armenij ℥.j.ss. aquae in qua ferrum fuerit extinctum lib.iij. aceti ℥.iiij. Boyle them till the third part bee wa∣sted, with the which you shall bathe the tu∣mor, and binde vpon a spunge wet therein. An Embrocation to maturate Impostumes. Rec. Radicum althaeae, capitum liliorū, ana. lib.j. ficuum siccarum nu.x. violarum, maluarum, ana.m.j. foenugraeci, seminis lini ana.℥.j. Boile them in sufficient quantitie of
water, with wheate meale, butter, and oyle of swéete Almonds, of each a small quanti∣tie, and make it vpon the fire. An Embrocation against windinesse. Rec. Chamaemeli meliloti, aneti, ana. m.j. sem. maratri, & anisi, ana.℥.ss. cumini ʒ.ij. furfuris ʒ.ij. farinae fabarum m.j.ss. milij solis m.ij. Boyle them together with lée and red wine as much as is sufficient. An Embrocation to be vsed for asswaging paine of the head in lue venerea. Augerius Ferrrius.Rec. Ramentorum tenuissimorum lig∣ni Indi ℥.ij. saluiae, staecados, ruthae, ana.m.j. vini antiqui flauescentis opt. lib.ss. olei an∣tiqui lib.j.ss. Decoct them to the consump∣tion of the halfe, and with the strained part make Embrocation.
Fomentations. A Fomentation for oedema. REc. Nucum cupressi, granorum sumach,Ambros. Pareus. balaustij, ana.℥.j. saluiae, origani, cala∣menti, hyssopi, melissae, ana.m.j. absynthij, plantag. caudae equinae, tapsi barbati, cen∣tinodij, ana. m.ss. aluminis, tartari & salis communis, ana.ʒ.j. Boyle them in lixiuio communi, and so vse it with spunges. A Fomentation for suffusion of the eyes. Rec. Foenugraeci loti ℥.ij. florum cha∣maemeli p.ss. sem. rutae ʒ.iij.Anderna∣cus. Boyle them in sufficient water and vse it. A Fomentation against the enlarging of the apple of the eye. Rec. Rosarum, myrtillorum,Vigo. ana. m.j. meliloti, anthos, ana.m.ss. nucum cupressi, nu.ij. vini nigri spissi lib.j.ss. aquae ros. aquae myrtillorum, ana.℥.iij. Bruse what is to be brused, and boyle them to the halfe of the wine and waters. Use it with a spunge.
A fomentation to be vsed with a spunge when Bubo lurketh in the flesh. Vesalius.Rec. Specierum cordialium temperata∣rum ℥.ss. mosci, ambrae, ana. gra.xx. cam∣phorae gra.j sandalorum omnium, ana.ʒ.ss. ligni aloes ℈.j. laudani ʒ.ij. vini maluatici, aquae rosarum, aquae florum myrti, aquae florum arantiorum, ana. q.s. aceti parum. Bruse the aforesayd things, and mixe them with the waters, wherein you shall dippe a spunge and applie it. A fomentation for the swelling in the bellie, or tumor in the flanke called Bubo venereus. Valeriola.Rec. Foliorum absynthij, maioranae, eu∣patorij veri, origani, pulegij, calaminthae, rutae, ana.m.ss. fol. ebuli, sambuci & cauliū rubr. ana.m.j. fol. querci, lentisci, rubi, & cu∣pressi, ana.m.ss. thymelaeae, soldanellae, ana. m.j. florum chamaemeli & meliloti, ana.p.j. sem. anisi, anethi, maratri, cumini conquas∣satorum, ana.℥.j. nucum cupressi, gallarum omnium contritarum, ana. paria iiij. alumi∣nis lib.ss. salis communis tantundem. Boile all in lée made of oke ashes and the stalkes of colewortes, then bathe the bellie with a spunge dipped therein.
A fomentation to be vsed in the cure of a rupture. Rec. Vini nigri stiptici,Vigo. lib.iiij. rosarum, balaustiorum, foliorum myrtillorum & granorum eius, sumach, fol. plantag. hype∣rici, matri siluae, ana.m.j. radicum, symphi∣ti vtriusque & foliorum eusdem, ana.m.ss. radicum althaeae ℥.ij. nucum cupressi nu.iij. hypocisthid.℥.ss. aluminis rochae ℥.ij. aceti rosarum ℥.ij.ss. lycij ℥.iij. myrrhae, thuris, ana.ʒ.v. glutinis piscium ℥.j. Boyle all toge∣ther in the aforesayd wine till halfe bee wa∣sted, then straine it, and with a spunge ap∣plie it. A fomentation for the windie rupture. Rec. Cumini,Weckerus. baccarum lauri, seselios, rutae, ana.℥.j. Boile them in sufficient gentle binding wine and lee, wherewith you shall bathe the place affected. A fomentation to dissolue winde in th windie rupture. Rec. Radicum bistortae, radic. symphiti vtriusque, ana.℥.j.ss. hyperici, polygoni, fo∣liorum rubi, ana.m.j. sem. cumini, anisi, ana ℥.j. nasturtij torrefacti ℥.ss. florum staecha∣dos,
anthos, & centaurij, ana.p.ij. Boyle them in sufficient raine water and wine, and vse it with spunges. A Fomentation for the cold apostume called vndimia in the armes and legges. Rec. Chamaemeli, meliloti, foliorum myrthi, ana.m.ij. absynthij. squinanti, stae∣chados, rosarum, matricariae, ana.m.j. cori∣andri, maratri, ana.m.j. mellis lib.ss. salis, a∣luminis rochae, ana.℥.ij.ss. Boyle them in water to the consumption of the third part and vse it. A fomentation for a watrie rupture. Rec. Lixiuij barbitonsoris, lib.iiij. in quo bulliant seminis cumini ℥.ij. semen petro∣selini & apij, ana.℥.ss. salis com. lib.j. And make a Foment. A fomentation for the hemrhoydes. Rec. Maluae, bismaluae, brancae vrsi∣nae, ana.m.ij. chamaemeli, staechados arabici & citrini, ana.m.j. Mixe them together and boyle them in water sufficient, and with a spunge foment the place affected.
A fomentation to dissolue, scatter, and vent forth contused bloud, making a bunch or knobbe in the flesh, the skinne being whole. Rec. Vini nigri lib.iij. lixiuij barbiton∣sorisVigo. lib.j.ss. nucum cupressi aliquantulum trituratarum nu.x. myrtillorum, rosarum, absynthij, ana.m.ss. aluminis rochae ℥.ss. co∣riandrorum, cymini, calami aromatici, ana.ʒ.ij. Boyle them all together to the wasting of a third part. A spunge wet herein warme must bee bound to the place, and daylie re∣newed. It resolueth (saith the author) mer∣ueilouslie. Another, which being applied at first, within two dressings (at furthest) dispatcheth the matter. Rec. Albumen oui vehementer agita∣tatum,Arccus. adde hereunto olei myrtini & pulu. myrtillorum, ana.℥.j. Stirre them well to∣gether, & with a linnen stuph first wet in vi∣neger and water equall portions, wrung out againe, applie this mixture to the place. A fomentation for wounds and vlcers, which doth comfort and heale. Rec. Seri lactis lib.iiij. vini sanguinei lib. iiij. vini maluatici, lib.j. rosarū rubrar.℥.iiij.
florum anthos, chamaemeli, betonicae, hy∣perici, meliloti, saluiae, valerianae, ana.p.iij. mellis rosarum ℥.iiij. rad. symphiti maioris ℥.ss. aloes epaticae ʒ.iiij. vermium terrestr.℥.j. aluminis ʒ.ij.ss. iridis ʒ.ij. cinamomi ʒ.iij thuris ℥.ij. Powder what is to be powdered and boyle them to the consumption of one pound. Then distill them, and with that li∣quor bath the wound or vlcer. A fomentation against vomiting in the cure of wounds and vlcers or bruses. Rec. Absynthij, musci odorati, rosarum rubrarum, ana.m.ss. cariophyllorum, ma∣sticis, macis, ana.ʒ.ij. cinamomi, nucis mosc. ciperi, ana.ʒ.j. Boyle them in red wine, and being warme moyst a spunge therein, and bathe the region of the ventricle therewith morning and euening. A fomentation against vomiting after the healing of old vlcers. Rec. Absynthij, menthae, rosarum rubr. ana.℥.j. galangae, cinamomi, ana.ʒ.iij calami odorati ʒ.j. masticis ʒ.iiij. squinanti ʒ.j.℈.j. florum chamaemeli ʒ.vj. florum anthos ʒ.iij. zedoariae, ℈.ij. mosci, ℈.j. First bruse the herbes, and then the rest, and put them in a
cloath, and boile them in ii. pound of malm∣sie, and rose-water three ounces, with the pulpe of one quince, till halfe be wasted, and with a spunge foment the region of your stomack indifferently warme; after that ap∣plie the herbes which were sodden, in man∣ner of a cushion, and when it beginneth to be cold, renew it warme, especially in the mor∣ning and before meales. A fomentation for virulent, corrosiue and rebellious vlcers. Rec. Aquae plantag. aquae rosarum,Vigo. ana.℥.iij. balaustiorum, myrtillorum, ana. parū, myrabolanorum citrinorum ʒ.ij. aluminis rochae, ʒ.ij.ss. terrae sigillatae, ʒ.iij. santalo∣rum omnium, ana.ʒ.j. aquae endiuiae, ℥.ij. mellis ros.℥j. Boyle them to the consump∣tion of the third part. Sraine it, and vse it. A fomentation to drie an vlcer, and to bring it to cicatrization. Rec. Foliorum plantag. m.ij.Valerila. absynthij m.ss. foliorum oliuae, lentisci, summitatum rubi, ana. m.j. foliorum betonicae m.ss. flo∣rum chamaemeli, meliloti, anthos, hyperi∣ci, staechados, rosarum rubrarum, foliorum ac granorum myrti, ana. m.j. Make your decoction in water sufficient, and in the ende
adde thereto vini rubri astringentis lib.iiij. and vse it. A fomentation for an vlcer in the yard. Andreas Lacuna.Rec. Foliorum mauarum m.j. radicum apij, althaeae, & foeniculi, ana.℥.iiij. sem. lini, citoniorum, & foenugraeci, ana.℥.j. florum chamaemeli, saechados, meliloti, pulegij, origani, ana.p.ij. caricarum pinguium ℥.j.ss. Boyle them together till the rootes bee ten∣der, and vse it. A fomentation to dissolue, mollifie, and driue away winde. Anderna∣cus.Rec. Maluarum cum radic. m.j. florum chamaemeli, meliloti, ana.p.j. sem. lini ℥.j. anisorum ℥.ss. ficus nu. xl. Boyle them in water, till the third part be wasted, and fill a bladder with the decoction, and applie it to the side affected once or twice. A fomentation for paine in the huckle bone. Weckerus.Rec. Radic. & foliorum ebuli, althaeae, ana.m.j. rutae, saluiae, sambuci, pulegij, ana. m.ss. chamaemeli, & meliloti, ana.p.j.ss. foe∣nugraeci p.j.ss. Boyle them in three parts
of Oyle, and one of Wine, and with a spunge moystened therein foment the place affected. A fomentation for the gowte in the hands. Rec. & faclixiuium ex cineribus quer∣cus,Calmeteus. ficus, sarmentorum, cort fabarum, in quo concoques, radicum ebuli, ℥.ij.ss. cau∣lium rubrorum m.iij. lupinorum, foenu∣graeci, ana.p.iij. florum sambuci & staecha∣dos, ana.p.ij. aluminis, sulphuris, ana.℥.ij. sa∣lis ℥.iiij. aceti ℥.v. And with this decoction foment the hands. An effectuall fomentation for cold tumors. Rec. Lixiuij ex cineribus Guiaci lib.Banester. viij. florum chamaemeli, m.j. florum meli∣loti & hyperici, ana. m.ss. fol. & rad. althaeae ana.m.j. rosarum rub.m.ss. sem. foenugraeci ʒ.iij. farinae lupinorum ʒ.ij. myrrhae ℥.j.ss. sulphuris viui ℥.j. Let all be somewhat bru∣sed, and boyle them together at a soft fire to the halfe, then put in vini albi lib.j.ss. After it is cold straine i
An excellent fomentation for Gangraena. Banester.Rec. Lixiuij lib.iiij. aquae vitae lib.j. oxy∣mel. simpl. lib.j. myrrhae ℥.ij. salis torrefacti ℥.j.ss. lupinorum ℥.j. ireos ℥.iiij. absynthij m.j. florum chamaemeli, hyperici, staechadis ana.℥.j. cymini ℥.ss. Powder them grosselie, and seeth all to the consuming of one pint. So straine it. An excellent fomentation for the beginning and augmentation of an inflamation. Victor Fa∣uentinus.Rec. Vrinae pueri masculi decimum an∣num non attingentis lib.j. albuminum ouo∣rum num.iij. aceti albi lib.ss. aquae ros.℥.ij. Mixe them, and warme, with clothes or flaxe, applie it. A fomentation for an Ache. Ex manu∣scripto.Rec. Apij, leuistici, solatri, ana.m.j. or ij. seui ouini, q.s. coquantur ex foecibus vini albi, vel aceti albi, vel ceruisiae bonae, Lappe them after in a cloath, and so foment and binde them to the part. A fomentation to remoue the extreame itch that happeneth in the purse of the Testicles. Balthrop.Rec. Lactis à cremore separati & aquae
ana partes aequales. florum rosarum m.j. Heate them together, and let them coole a∣gaine, wet clothes therein, and applie them colde, renewing them still as they drie for xxiiii. houres. A fomentation to mollifie the caruncle. Rec. Fol. & rad. maluarum,Frederick. fol. & rad. al∣thaeae, saponariae, parietariae, ana.m.j. radi∣cem lilij albi, caput veruecis cum pelle & lana, ficuum pinguium nu. xij. Boyle all these a good space, and let the patient sit ouer it and receiue the fume thereof, or with a spunge let it bee warme applied for seauen or eight daies.
Fumigations. A fume to cure vlcers proceeding of lues ve∣nerea, or Alopecia Gallica. Rondele∣tius.REc. Cinabrij ℥.j. belzoini, styracis, myr∣rhae, olibani, & oppoponacis, ana.℥.ss. masticis, thuris, ana.ʒ.ij. Mixe them with Turpentine, and make them vp in small balles. A fumigation to prouoke sweate. Rondele∣tius.Rc. Cinabrij ℥.j. styracis rubei & cala∣mitae, nucis moscatae, ana.ʒ.iij. belzoini ℥.ss. And with Terpentine make them in small balles of two drammes a péece. A fume to cleanse the bodie of foule and filthie skabbes proceeding of the pockes. Rec. Cinabrij ℥.j. merc. sublimati ʒ.j. myrrhae, masticis, thuris, styracis calam. ana.℈.v. gummi iuniperi, terebint. laudani ana.q.s. Fiant trochisci. Another for the same. Ioh Iar∣ret.Rec. Cinabrij, lapid. haematitis, ana. par∣tes aequales misceantur.
Another. Rec. Cinabrij ℥.j.ss. belzoini, styracis,Clowes. myrrhae, rad. ireos, florentiae, masticis, oli∣bani, ana.℥.ss. nucis mosc. maceris, ana.ʒ.iij. theriacae ℥.ij. accipiantur terebinthinae q.s. & fiant rochisci. A fume for the vlcers of the nose proceeding of Alopecia Gallica. Rec Cort. thuris, masticis, olibani, myr∣rhae, styracis, gummi iuniperi, ana.℥.ss. rosa∣rum rubrarum, sandalorum omnium, ana.ʒ.ij. auripigmenti rubri ʒ.iij. lapidis pyritis ʒ.ij. And with the muscilage of gum. draga∣gant. make them in Trochisces. A fume for contracted members. Rec. Olei oliuarum, olei iuniperi,Paracelsus. ana.℥.v masticis lib.ss. terebinthinae ℥.iiij.ss. Mixe them: the lame member, bee it legge or arme, must bée enclosed in a vessell of wood, large, and for that purpose, to bée shut close also that no fume go foorth. Underneath kindle this receipt of fume now described, and maintaine it so halfe a daie together. This vapour will thicken into a water,
as such things do in a lembecke, and pearce and warme the member, cherish the veines and humor of life, and bring againe the member to naturall liuelihood. This processe is to be held as long as the infirmitie endu∣reth. Another. Paracelsus.Rec. Taxi pinguedinis, olei oliuarum, adipis ranae minimae, viridis, calamites ap∣pellatae, ana lib.j. myrrhae, masticis, terebin∣thinae, ana. lib.ss. Use it as before.
Gargarismes. A Gargarisme for Squinantie in the augmentation. REc. Rosarum, sumach, ana.m.j. hordei,Vigo. passularum. ana.m.ss. ficuum siccarum num.vj. iuiubarum num.x. Boyle them all with sufficient water vntill the third part be wasted, adding thereto diamoron ℥.iiij. mellis rosarum ℥.j.ss. A Gargarisme for swelling in the throate in the augmentation. Rec. Balaustij ℥.j. caricas pinguesvj. da∣ctylos ij. sem. lini,Calmeteus. & foenugraeci, ana.℥.ss. Boyle them to one pounde, and dissolue therein, cassiae ℥.ss. myrrhae ʒ.ij. croci ʒ.ss. la∣ctis mulieris ℥.ij. A Gargarisme for Angina in his augmentation. Rec. Summitatū rubi, lentisci,Valeriola. & planta∣ginis, ana.m.j. glycyrrhizae rasae & contusae ℥.j. passularum enucleatarum ℥.j.ss. carica∣rum pinguium num.x. hordei cum cortice p.j. Boile them all together, & in one pound of the decoction dissolue diamoron ℥.j. mel∣lis
rosati colati, syrupi violati, ana.℥.ij. Mixe them for a Gargarisme. A Gargarisme for Angina or swelling in the throate in the aug∣mentation. Rondele∣tius.Rec. Rosarum rubrarum, foliorum myr∣thi, vel lentisci, ana. m.j. glycyrrhizae ℥.j. passularum mundatarum, ficuum, ana. nu. xx. hordei integri p.j. Boyle them, and in one pound dissolue mellis rosati, & diamo∣ronis, ana.℥.j. Mixe them, and make it accor∣ding to Art. A Gargarisme for Angina in his beginning. Valeriola.Rec. Diamoron ℥.iij. aceti rosati ℥.j. suc∣ci granatorm musorum ℥.ij. aquae planta∣ginis, solani, vel caprifolij, ana.℥.iiij. saccha∣ri candi albiss.℥.j. Make this Gargarisme, and vse it euery houre, as occasion serueth. A Gargarisme for the swelling of the throate in the beginning. Valeriola.Rec. Foliorum plantaginis, & myrthi, ana. m.ss. granorum sumach rubentium, lentium, ana.p.j. mali punici cum suo puta∣mine & granis internis contusi nu.j. hordei cum cortice p.j. Boyle them in water suffi∣cient
vntill there remaine but one pound: and after the straining dissolue therein dia∣moron ℥.iij. succi granatorum musorum, mellis rosarum ana.℥.ij. Make it in good order. A Gargarisme for Squinantia in the state. Rec. Radicum althaeae ℥.iiij.Vigo. ficuum sic∣carum nu.x. passularum ℥.ij. fururis m.ss. hordei m.j. glycyrrhizae ʒ.x. nidi hirundi∣nis lib.ss. pullorum hirundinis nu.iij. Boyle them all in broath of a Weather, vntill the third part be wasted, adding thereto after it be strained mellis rosati ℥.j. sacchari rubri ℥.j.ss. croci ℈.j. syrupi de duabus radici∣bus ʒ.x. A Gargarisme for Angina in his state. Rec. Hyssopi, calaminthae,Valriola. ana.m.ss. gly∣cyrrhizae rasae ℥.j. caricarum pinguium nu. xij. passularum exacinatarum, nu.xx. hor∣dei integri, p.j. Make your decoction, and in one pound dissolue mellis rosati, oxymeli∣tis simplicis, ana.℥.ij. sapae dulcis ℥.iij. dia∣nucum ℥.j. Make it according to Art. A Gargarisme for the Squinancie in the beginning. Rec. Rosarum rubrar. myrtillorū, passu∣larum
enucleatarum, ana.ʒ.ij. Boyle them in the waters of Endiue, Roses, and Plan∣taie of each thrée ounces, vntill the third part bee wasted, then straine it, and adde to the straining syrupi acidi simplicis, diamo∣ron, ana.℥.j.ss. Make a gargarisme. A Gargarisme for the swelling in the throte in the beginning. Rec. Diamoronis ℥.iij. aceti rosacei ℥.j. succi granatorum musorum, ℥.ij. aquarum plantaginis, solani, vel caprifolij, ana.℥.iiij. zacchari candi ℥.j. Make a Gargarisme. A Gargarisme for the inflamation of the mouth and throate. Rondele∣tius.Rec. Hordei integri p.j. glycyrrhizae ra∣sae ℥.j. passularum cum arillis contusarum paria xx. rosarum rubrarum p.j. Put them into cesterne water, and in one pound of the decoction, dissolue sapae, vel mellis rosarum, vel diamoron, ℥.iiij. So make a Garga∣risme for the encrease and state. A Gargarisme for the inflamation of Vvula. Calmeteus.Rec. Radicum acori, vel galangae crassae, iridis, ana.℥.j. verbenae, agrimoniae, brassi∣cae, ana.m.ss. foliorum oleastri, plantag. &
summitatū rubi, ana.m.j. serpilli & pulegij ana. tertiam partem m.j. baccarum myrti, ʒ.j.ss. rosarum rubrarum p.j. myrrhae, thuris, ana.ʒij. Make your decoction to one pound and a halfe, and in the straining dissolue sac∣chari rosacei, ℥.iij. mellis rosati ℥.ij.ss. Make a Gargarisme. A Gargarisme for Apostumes of the iawes. Rec. Ficuum siccarum, dactylorum,Vigo. ana nu. xij. passularum ℥.j. radic. althaeae ℥.iij. hordei mundi, furfuris, ana. m.j. sem. cito∣niorum, ʒ.iij. iuiubarum num.xx. Boyle them all in sufficient quantitie of the broath of a henne vntill two parts be wasted, then straine it, and adde to the straining sacchari ℥.iiij. mellis rosarum ℥.j.ss. Then let them boyle one walme, and vse it actuallie hot. A Gargarisme for them that be roofe fallen, commonly called the Vvula. Rec. Balaustiorum, gallarum, ana.ʒ.ss. gummi tragagant. thuris, masticis, ana.ʒ.j. Boyle them with water sufficit, and adde thereto, mellis rosati, diamoronis, & aceti, ana. q.s.
A Gargarisme to draw flegme out of the head, but not without counsell. Rec. Saluiae, hyssopi, ana.m.ss. pyrethri, zinzibris, gariophyllorum ana.ʒ.j. Boyle them vntill one part bee wasted, and adde thereto oxymelitis simplicis ℥.ij. Fiat Gar∣garisma. A Gargarisme to be vsed in the cure of Alopecia Callica. Vigo.Rec. Hordei mundi, rosarum, sumach, ana.m.j. aquae ferratae lib.vj. Boyle them together vntil two parts be wasted of thrée; then straine them, and adde thereto syrupi rosarum ℥.iij. mellis rosarum, ℥.ij. aluminis rochae ʒ.x. So boyle them a little againe, and reserue it to your vse. A Gargarisme for vlcers in the mouth pro∣ceeding of Alopecia Gallica. Calmeteus.Rec. Pilosellae, plantag. solani, caprifolij, agrimoniae, summitatum oleae, rubi, mori, caudae equinae, ana.m.j. fol. myrthi cum bac∣cis, ana.℥.j. licij ʒ.iij. nucū cupr. nu. iiij. len∣tiū p.j.ss. Me your decoction in Smithes water, then straine it, and in one pound and halfe of the straining, dissolue succi ci∣toniorum & rosarum, ana.℥.ij.ss. mellis ro∣sati,
vel diamoron ℥.ij. aluminis ℥.ss. Make this Gargarisme according to art. A Gargarisme for vlcers in the mouth, being caused with vnguents after sweating. Rec. Foliorum oleae, myrthi, lentisci,Rondele∣tius. ana m.j. plantag.m.ss. rosarum p.ss. hordei p.ij. Boyle them to two pound, and in the strai∣ning dissolue vini granat.℥.ij. syrupi laxa∣tiui rosati, & diamoron, ana.℥.j. Mixe them for a Gargarisme. A Gargarisme for an immoderate fuxe at the mouth after the vnction. Rec. Ceruisiae lactis suffocatae lib.j.ss.Banester. dianucum ℥.iiij. syr. de papauere nigro, ℥.iij syr. violarum ʒ.ij. Misceantur. Another for the same purpose more forcible. Rec. Aquae hordei, rosacei & caprifolij,Banester. ana. lib.ss. syr. violarum, ℥.ij. syr. rosarum siccarum, diamoron, ana.℥.j. zacchari chri∣stallini ℥.iiij. laudani Paracelsi gra.vj. Mixe them to a Gargarisme.
A Gargarisme for vlcers in the mouth of lues venerea. Calmeteus.Rec. Pilosellae, plantag. summitatū oleae, rubi, lentisci, ana.m.j. glycyrrhizae ℥.j. hor∣dei mundi p.j. Boyle them to one pound, and dissolue therein mellis rosati vel syrupi rosati, vel nimphaeae according to the great∣nesse of the affect ℥.iiij. succi mali punici ℥.ij Make this Gargarisme according to Art. A Gargarisme for vlcers in the mouth of lues venerea. Banester.Rec. Plantag caudae equinae, ana.m.j. ro∣sarum, balaustiorum, summitatum absyn∣thij & salicis, ana.p.j. hordei integri ℥.j. len∣ticularum, sumach, nucum cupressi, ana.ʒ.iij. Decoct them sufficientlie in tenne parts of water and one of vineger. In the strai∣ning dissolue mellis rosati, vini granatorum & diamori, ana.℥.j. Fiat Gargarisma. Another. Banester.Rec. Aquarum plantaginis, rosarum, ca∣prifolij, ana.℥.ij. aquae portulacae & diamo∣ri, ana.℥.j. rob. de Ribes, mellis rosac. om∣phacij, ana.℥.ss. Mixe them for a Garga∣risme.
A Gargarisme for all excoriations and vl∣cers in the mouth proceeding ex lue venerea. Rec. Plantag. consol. med. cynoglos. pru∣nellae, rutae, ana.m.v. balaustij ʒ.ij. nucum cupressi, gallarum, ana.℥.ss. nucleor. glan∣dium nu. vj. aquae fontanae lib. iiij. Bruse them all, and boyle them in the water to the halfe, then straine it, and adde rob. nucum, mellis rosati, ana.℥.j.ss. Make a Garga∣risme, and vse it. A Gargarisme for vlcers or excoria∣tions in the throate or mouth. Rec. Agrimoniae,Rennerus. fol. plantag. vtriusque, florum rosarum rubrar. ana.m.j. hordei ex∣corticati, corticum berberor. ana.m.ss. Mixe these, and boyle them in three pints of wa∣ter to the halfe, then straine it, and dissolue therein dyamoron, mellis rosati, ana.℥.j.ss. pulu. aluminis ʒ.ss. Make a Gargarisme, and so vse it. A Gargarisme for vlcers in the mouth by taking of poyson. Rec. Foliorū oxalydis,Valeriola. portulacae, plan∣taginis, centinodij, & lentisci, ana.m.ss. len∣tium,
rosarum rubrarum, ana.p.j. sem. su∣mach & plantag. ana.ʒ.j. hordei cum cor∣tice p.j. Boyle them all to one pound, and dissolue therein after it is strained, syrupi citoniorum, succi granatorum musorum, syrupi de berberis, ana.℥.ij. And make a Gargarisme. A Gargarisme for vlceration in the mouth called water Canker. Vigo.Rec. Vini granatorum, aquae plantagi∣nis, ana.℥.ij. fol. oliuarum aliquantulum contritarum m.ss. vng. AEgyptiaci ʒ.x. lycij ʒ.j. Boyle them till two parts of three bee wasted. So straine it. Another. Vigo.Rec. Hordei mund. sumach, balaustij, fol. oliuarum, cimarum rubi, fol. planta∣ginis, lentium, ana.m.ss. granatorum am∣borum numero ij. aquae rosarum, aquae plantaginis, lycii, diamoron, mellis rosacei, ana.℥.ij. aluminis rochae, ʒ.x. myrabol. ci∣trinorum ℥.ss. caudae equinae m.ss. Boyle them all to the consumption of a thirde part.
An excellent Gargarisme for vlcers in the mouth. Rec. Hordei integri p.ij. eupatorij,Iulius Pal∣marius. nico∣tiani, plantaginis, morsus gallinae, rosarum rub. ana. m.j. Boyle them in aquae lib. iiij. ad lib. iij. and straine it: adding thereto mellis rosarum, syrupi ros. siccarum, ana.℥.iij. aluminis vsti, chalcanti vsti, ana.ʒ.ss. Fiat.
Iniections. An Iniection for wounds made with gunshot. Valeriola.REc. Agrimonie, centaurij minoris, pim∣pinellae, absynthij, plantag. ana.m.ss. ra∣dicum aristolog. rotundae, ʒ.ij. iridis floren∣tini ʒ.iij. Boyle them all in strong and pure wine vnto one pound and a halfe, and in the cooling adde to the expression aloes epaticae ʒ.iij. mellis rosati ℥.ij. Boyle them againe one walme, and reserue it to your vse. An Iniection for wounds or vlcers. Rec. Aquae hordei ʒ.iij. aquae rosarum ʒ.ss. aquae plantag.ʒ.v. vini albi ℥.iij. mellis rosacei ʒ.iij.ss. aluminis crudi ʒ.iiij.ss. Boile them together, and vse it warme. An Iniection for hollowe wounds. Rec. Aquae fontanae lib. vij. acti lib.j. chelidonij, saluiae, hyperici, ana.m.ss. radi∣cum helenij ℥.iiij. Boyle them vntill the halfe be consumed, and adde thereto mellis despumati lib.j. aloes cicatrinae ℥.iiij. Pow∣der what is to bee powdered, and let them
boyle twentie walmes, after straine them and vse it. Another for the same. Rec. Aquae hordei lib. iiij. agrimoniae,Pareus. centaurij minoris, pimpinellae, absynthij, plantag. ana.m.ss. aristolochiae rotundae, ʒ.ss. Fiat decoctio ad lib.j. colatura dissolue aloes epaticae ʒ.iij. mellis rosacei ℥.ij. Boile them sufficiently, and so make it. An Iniection for hollowe and rotten wounds if neither abstersiues or incarnatiues will auaile in them. Rec. Lixiuij ℥.iiij. aquae pluuialis lib.ss. vini odoriferi lib.j. glycyrrhizae ℥.ij. hordei excorticati m.j. plantaginis, verbenae, agri∣moniae, symphiti vtriusque, cntaurij, mil∣lefolij, ana.m.ss. thuris, myrrhae, ana.ʒ.iij. sarcocollae ℥.j.ss. sacchari rubri ℥.ij. mellis rosati ℥.iij. Boyle them all together vntill the halfe be consumed, and keepe it to your vse. A stipticke Iniection to be vsed after that, mundifieng going before. Rec. Rosarum, balaustiorum, cimarum,Vigo. rubi, myrtillorum, sumach, ana.m.j. hypo∣cistid. myrabolanorū citrinorum, ana.ʒ.ij.
mellis rosarum ℥.ij. Boyle them with suf∣ficient plantaine water and wine of Pome∣granards, vntill the third bee wasted, and vse it. An Iniection for wounds in the throate. Vigo.Rec. Radicum gentianae ℥.ss. lupinorum, lentium, ana.ʒ.ij. plantag. agrimoniae, ana. m.ss. thuris, myrrhae, ana.ʒ.j. mellis rosarum parum. Boyle them with wine and make an Iniection. An Iniection to conglutinate wounds in the bellie. CalmeteusRec. Vini cidoniorum, thuris, & masti∣cis q.s. Boyle them and vse it. Item, aqua plantaginis cm hure & mastice plurimum auxiliatur. An Iniection for wounds in the bladder. Vigo.Rec. Aquae rosarum ℥.iiij. aquae plantag. lib. ss. aquae caudae equinae, lib. ij. hordei mundi, lentium, rosarum, ana.m.ss. myra∣bolanorum citrinorum, hypocistidis, ba∣laustiorum, myrtillorum, ana.ʒ.j. sumach, cinerum rubi, foliorum oleastri, symphiti maioris, ana.m.ss. glycyrrhizae mundae ʒ.x.
sacchari rubri ℥.ij. aloes epaticae, sanguinis draconis, boli armeni, terrae sigillatae, ana.ʒ.ij. Boyle them all together to the con∣sumption of the third part. An Iniection to mundifie vlcers. Rec. Foliorum plantaginis,Valeriola. & hederae re∣centis, ana.p.j. rosarum rubrarum, p.j. gra∣norum myrthi conquassati p.j.ss. foliorum & florum centaurij minoris p.j. aluminis rupini ℥.j. corticum granatorum ℥.j.ss. Boyle them in water, & make an Iniection. An Iniection for hollowe vlcers. Rec. Aquae plantaginis, aquae peculi ro∣rasarum,Weckerus. ana.℥.iiij. vini ℥.ij. aluminis vsti, ℥.ss. baccarum myrthi, aloes, ana.ʒ.j. Mixe them, and after they bee well boyled make an Iniection. Another for the same. Rec. Foliorum plantaginis m.ij. agri∣moniae,Valeriola. herbae roberti, foliorum pentaphyl∣li, ana.m.j. summitatum absynthij, num.iij. symphiti vtriusque, caudae equinae, cetrach, hyperici ana. m.ss. betonicae m.j. Boyle them in water, and in the ende adde
thereto vini rubri astringentis lib.ij. rosa∣rum rubrarum, foliorum myrthi, ana.p.ij. hordei integri p.ij. Take thrée pound of the decoction strained, and adde thereto farinae fabarum ℥.j. farinae orobi ℥.ss. thuris, masti∣cis, sarcocollae, resinae pini, ana.℥.j. myrrhae, aristolochiae rotundae, ana.ʒ.vj. iridis floren∣tini ℥.ss. mellis rosati colati ℥.iij. Make this according to art for an Iniection. An Iniection for venimous and rebellious vlcers. Rec. Decoctionis hordei lib.j. vini cre∣tici lib.ss. radicum gentianae ʒ.ij. lupinorū, lentium, ana.ʒ.j. plantag. caudae equinae, eu∣patorij, ana. m.ss. glycyrrhizae ʒ.ss. thuris masculi ʒ.j. myrrhae ʒj.ss. aloes epaticae ʒ.ij. mellis rosarum ℥.j. boracis ʒ.ss. Boye these vntill the halfe bee wasted, and reserue the rest to your vse. An Iniection for fistulated and hollowe vlcers. Rec. Mellis. lib.j. fellis bouis ℥.iiij. aquae viae ℥.iiij. succi plantaginis, linguae cani∣nae, absynhij, apij & vrinae pueri, ana.℥.iij. Boyle these almost to the substance of a sy∣rupe, adding thereto aluminis vsti ʒ.iij. sar∣cocollae ℥.j.ss.
An Iniection for cankerous and fistu∣lated vlcers. Rec. Aquae fontanae lib.iiij. vini albi lib. ij. guaiaci in puluerē redacti lib.j. aluminis ℥.ij. Boyle them vntill the halfe be wasted, then adde vnto ii. pound & a halfe of the de∣coction, succi saluiae, succi plantaginis, pedis columbini, tapsibarbati, linguae caninae, a∣pij & caprifolij, ana.℥.iiij. Depurentur, ad∣déque preterea, aquae vitae lib.ss. sarcocollae, masticis, aloes, ana.℥.ss. mellis despumati lib.ij.ss. Boyle them a little and vse it. An Iniection for hollowe vlcers. Rec. Hordei integri p.j.ss. cetrach, agri∣moniae,Weckerus. ana. m.j. centaurij maioris, absyn∣thij, ana.m.ss. Boyle them in sufficient ho∣nie and water for an Iniection. A Iulep to be vsed as an Iniection for vlcers. Rec. Lixiuij facti de cineribus foeniculi lib.j. mellis despumati lib.j.ss. succi planta∣ginis, absynthij, symphiti maioris & saluiae ana.℥.j. aquae vitae lib.ss. myrrhae ℥.ss. sarco∣collae ℥.j. masticis ʒ.ss. terebinthinae lib.ss. Boyle all together according to art.
An Iniection for wormes in the eares. Vesalius.Rec. Absynthij, centaurij, marubij, cala∣minthae montanae, ana.℥.j. aquae pluuialis q.s. Mixe and seeth them till halfe bee wa∣sted: straine it, and put too a pound of this decoction mellis lib.ss. and vse it. Another that killeth wormes in vl∣cers of the eares. Rec. Rad. ellebori albi, coticum cappa∣ris, gentianae, dictami albi, ana.℥.ss. aquae pluuialis, q.s. Boyle them according to art, and to one pound of the decoction strained adde vrinae humanae veteris, succi absynthij ana.℥.ij. vng. Aegypt.℥.j. & fiat. An Iniection for vlcers in the breast. Weckerus.Rec. Radicum asari, iridis, gentianae, ari∣stolochiae, ana.℥.j. agrimoniae, pentaphylli, pedis columbini, cetrach, centaurij mino∣ris, hyperici, ana. m.j. myrrhae ℥.ss. Boyle them in equall portions of wine and water sufficient, and in two pound of the straining dissolue, mellis rosarum ℥.vj. and vse it.
An Iniection for an vlcer in the yard. Rec. Plantag. & rosacei,Andreas Lacuna. ana.℥.iiij. seri la∣ctis caprilli, ℥.ij. cerusae ʒ.vj. aluminis rochae, marmoris candidissimi, spodij, crystalli, ana.ʒ.j.ss. caphurae ℈.j. Powder what is to bee powdered, very finely, and searce them through a fine cloath, and mixe them with the rest for an Iniection. An Iniection for vlcers in the mouth. Rec. Aquae hordei lib.iij. vini albi lib.ij. foliorum plantag. m.j. caprifolij m.ss. sal∣uiae, rosmarini, ana. p. ij. myrtillorum ℥.ss. nucum cupressi ℥.ss. malicorij ʒ.j. caudae e∣quinae, m.j.ss. mellis rosacei ℥.vj. aluminis ℥.ij. Boyle them vntill halfe be consumed, adding thereto diamoronis ℥.ij. Fiatque. An Iniection for vlcers in the yard, which will heale and asswage paine. Rec. Decoctionis hordei, in qua folia plantaginis, fragariae, violarum, symphiti mino. & foeniculi decocta fuerint lib. j. cui decoctioni, addas aluminis vsti, ʒ.iij.ss. zacchari rubri, ℥.ss. mellis rosarum, ℥.iiij.
camphorae ʒ.j. cassiae nouiter extract.ʒ.j.ss. Mixe them according to Art, and vse it as an Iniection. An Iniection for the burning of vrine. Rec. Aquae fontanae lib.iiij. passularum exacinatarū ℥.v. fol. plantag.m.j. quinque∣folij, fragariae, polygoni, rosarum rubr. ana. m.ss. quatuor sem. frigidorum maiorum mundatorum, ana.ʒ.j. aluminis ℥.iij. Boyle them, and adde thereto of the decoction two pound, mellis rosati colati ℥.vj. An Iniection to consume the Caruncle. Federick.Rec. Lithargirij auri & plumbi, aquae viridis (wherewith the Goldsmith hath se∣parated gold or siluer) ana.℥.j. argenti viui extincti & bene loti ʒ.ij. Put the water and argent. viuum into an earthen pan, and set it on a fire of coales, and stirre it with an earthen ladle or spatula, and when it begin∣neth to be hot, adde the rest of the powder, continuallie stirring it vntill it become of a sea colour, then beate it into fine powder, and take thereof ℥.j. aquae ros. aquae plan∣taginis, aquae solani, ana.℥.iiij. (stéele being quenched in the waters foure or fiue times)
adde also diamoron, syr. ex rosis siccis, mel∣lis rosati, ana.℥.j. Mixe all these togethe and kéepe it in a glasse close stopped, and in∣iect it vpon the caruncle through a hollowe instrument of siluer or leade. An Iniection to be vsed when the Caruncle is taken downe. Rec. Aquae fabrorum, plantaginis, sola∣tri,Frederick. rosati, ana. lib.j. psidiarum, balaustio∣rum, nucū cupressi, aloes, sumach, ana.℥.j.ss aluminis ʒ.ij. fol. ros. m.ss. floris aeris well prepared ℈.ij. croci martis ʒ.iiij. Boyle all these together a good space. Straine it, and let it settle, then powre off the cléerest, adde to it sacchari candi ℥.j. syr. ex rosis siccis ℥.ij. syr. absynthij, ℥.ss Fiat Iniectio. An Iniection for the Caruncle to coole, asswage paine, and cicatrize. Rec. Fol. rosarum siccarum p.j. sem. ca∣nabis,Frederick. maluarum, ana.℥.ss. sem. frig. ma. pa∣paueris albi, ana.ʒ.ij. sem. hyosciami ʒ.ss. gran. alchachengi nu.x. Boyle them in aquae fontanae lib. ij. to the halfe, adde to them trocischorum alcachengi ʒ.ij. sacchari candi ℥.j. caphurae ʒ.j. lactis mulieris ℥.iiij. aquae albuminis ouorum ℥.ij. syr. rosarum, mellis rosarum, ana.ʒ.vj. Fiat Iniectio.
Liniments. A Liniment for a Canker. Calmeteus. & Paulus AEgineta.REc. Testarum cancrorum fluuialium combustarum ℥.j. pulueris ranarū ʒ.iij. lithargyrij auri ℥.j. plumbi vsti & loti, tu∣tiae praeparatae, ana.ʒ.ij. cerusae in aqua ro∣sarum lotae ʒ.j.ss. succi bursae pastoris & ar∣noglossae, ana.℥.iij.ss. olei rosarum ompha∣cini, vel myrtini ℥.iiij. Labour these well in a leaden morter to the forme of a Lini∣ment. A Liniment for Warts. Weckerus.Rec. Floris aeris, chartae vstae, ana.ʒ.v. co∣locynthidis, boracis, ana.ʒ.vj. salis armo∣niaci ℥.ss. salis alkali, arsenici citrini, fellis vaccini, ana.ʒ.vj. vsneae persici ʒ.vij. Pow∣der what is to bee powdred, and with sope lée make this Liniment. A Liniment to be vsed in the beginning of Phlegmon or inflamation. Vesalius.Rec. Sadali albi & rubri, ana.ʒ.iij. glau∣cij, ʒ.ij. terrae chimoliae, boli armeni, ana.ʒ.j.ss. Make them all in very fine powder, and searce them, and after with the iuyce of
houseléeke, or purselaine, or lettice, sufficient to make a Liniment. A Liniment for an Oedematous tumor or swelling proceeding of cold matter. Rec. Succi ebuli,Weckeru sambuci, oxylapathi, succi leuistici, foeniculi, ana.℥.j. vnguenti dialthaeae ℥.iij. mellis ℥.j. olei chamaemeli ℥.ij. Boyle them to the consumption of the iuyces, and make a Liniment according to Art. A maturatiue liniment which will asswage paine in a tumor, or Impostume. Rec. Farinae hordei,Vesalius. pulueris florum cha∣maemeli, ana.℥.v. hyssopi humidi, ℥.iiij. olei rosacei, lumbricorum, & chamaemeli, ana.℥.j. sapae dulcis ℥.xx. Mixe them according to Art and make a Liniment. A Liniment for S. Anthonies fire. Rec. Olei rosarum ℥.iij. olei nymphaeae ℥.ij. sandali citrini & rubri,Weckeru. ana.ʒ.ij. tro∣chisc. de camphora ʒ.j. succi solatri, aceti, ana.℥.j. Make a Liniment according to art. Another for the same. Rec. Succi plantaginis,Idem ℥.j. rosacei ℥.iij.
lythargirij nutriti, ℥.j. cerusae lotae ʒ.iij. la∣ctis mulieris ℥.ss. Mixe them in a leaden morter, and incorporate them to the forme of a Liniment. A Liniment to mollifie all tumors or swellings. Rec. Seui ouini lib. j. colophoniae ℥.ij. ammoniaci, bdellij, oppoponacis, galbani, ana.ʒ.iij. pinguedinis capi, anseris, cygni, axungiae suillae, ana.℥.ss. oleorum anethi, chamaemeli, amygdalarum dulcium, ana.ʒ.iij.ss. medullae crurium vaccarum, ℥.ij. succi maluarum & mercurialis, ana.℥.iiij. Boyle them to the consumption of the iuy∣ces, and make a Liniment in good forme. A Liniment for red pimples in the face, proceeding of salt flegme. Vigo.Rec. Lapathi acuti, succi plantaginis, as∣phodelorum, ana.ʒj.ss. olei vitellorum o∣uorum ʒ.x. terebinthinae clarae, ℥.ss. succi li∣monum ʒ.iij. aluminis combusti ʒ.j. argenti viui extincti ℥.ss. olei myrthini, omphacini, ana.ʒ.v.ss. Mixe them in a morter of lead all together, saue only the argentum viuum, because that will cleaue to the leade, labou∣ring them two houres: afterward incorpo∣rate your argentum viuum.
A Liniment for pustules or spottes in the face, speciallie of lues venerea. Rec. Albumen vnius oui recentis,Augeius Ferrius. beate it perfectlie, then adde to it sublimati & camphorae, ana. gra. iiij. Stirre and mixe them together to the forme of a Liniment. A Liniment to cease paine in Erysipelas. Rec. Succi hyoschiami,Pareus. cicutae & solani, ana.℥.j. alb. ouorum nu.ij. aceti ℥.ss. opij, ca∣phurae, ana. gra. iiij. croci ℈.ss. muccaginis sem. psyllij & foenugraeci extractae in aqua rosarum & plantag. ana.℥.j. olei de papa∣uere ℥.ij. Make your Liniment, adding vn∣to it vnguenti refrigerantis Gal.q.s. A Liniment for a rupture. Rec. Foliorum consolidae maioris, mino∣ris & mediae, ana.m.j. arnoglossae, caudae e∣quinae, centinodiae, sigilli salamonis, ana. m.ss. radicum symphiti & valerianae, ana.ʒ.iij. vermium terrestrium ℥.j. aristolochiae vtriusque, ana.ʒ.j. florum citoniorum ℥.ij. vini nigri lib. j. axungiae porcinae lib. ij.ss. masticis, sarcocollae, ana.ʒ.ij. Bruse them small, and let them soke in a vessell, and in∣fuse them tenne daies, then boyle them
and straine them to your vse for a Lini∣ment. A Liniment for brusings and conusions. Rec. Olei masticis ℥.vij. theriacae opti∣mae ℥.ij. aquae vitae ℥.j.ss. Make this Lini∣ment according to Art. A Liniment for wounds in the eyes. Rondele∣tius.Rec. Myrrhae, sarcocollae nutritae in la∣cte mulieris, ana.℈.ss. tutiae praeparatae ℈.j. mellis parum: Mixe them and make a Li∣niment in good forme. But if the patient do complaine somewhat of the paine thereof, mixe therewith a little of the white of an Egge and Rose-water. A Liniment to be vsed in the cure of Alopecia gallica. Calmeteus.Rec. Radicum helenij & liliorum albo∣rum, ana.℥.j.ss. summitatum absynthij, lu∣puli, fumariae, scabiosae, ana.m.ss. cicerum, lentium, hordei, ana.p.j. florum chamaeme∣li, meliloti, sambuci, ana.p.j. Make your de∣coction in sufficient water, and of the decoc∣tion strained one pound and a halfe, adde too olei rosarum ℥.ij. olei masticis, & laurini,
ana.℥.iiij. butyri recent ℥.v. axungiae suillae salis expertis lib.ss. Boyle them together till the consumption of the decoction, & after mixe therewith thuris, masticis, myrrhae, ana.℥.j.ss. sarcocollae & cerusae, ana.℥.j. alu∣minis ʒ.vj. lithargyrij ℥.j.ss. terebinthinae, ℥.iij. styracis liquidae ʒ.x. argenti viui in succo limonum extincti ℥.iij. vel plus vel minus pro aegrotantis viribus. Labour them very well in a morter for a Liniment. A Liniment for the falling of haire. Rec. Succi myrthi,Heben Mesue. succi oliuae siluestris, ana.ʒ.ij. rosarum siccarum ℥.ss. absynthij ʒ.ij. Boyle them all in halfe a pound of vineger, vntill the halfe be wasted; then straine it, and infuse therein laudani ℥.ij. and let them stand two daies, then powre vpon them oleum myrtinum, & vinum stipticum, vntill it be brought vnto the substance of honie: after that make it sweete, adding thereto aliptae moscatae, galliae moscatae, ana.ʒ.j. and make a Liniment.
A Liniment for the same. Vigo.Rec. Succi apij, succ. foeniculi & petrose∣lini, ana.℥.j. succi enulae ʒ.vj. succi apij risi ʒ.ij. olei sambuci, terebinthinae, ana.ʒ.x. pi∣cis naualis ℥.j. picis graecae & liquidae, ana.ʒ.v. diachylonis gummati ℥.j.ss. matricariae, abrotani, aliquantulum contrit. rosmarini, capillorum veneris, subtiliter contrit. ana. tertiam partem m.j. vini odoriferi cyathū medium, aceti ℥.ij. Boyle them all together vntill the iuyces, vineger and wine bee wa∣sted, then straine them, and put thereto cerae nouae q.s. and make a Liniment, adding thereto croci ʒ.ss. iridis ʒ.j.ss. A Liniment for all skabbes and itch. Banester.Rec. Olei rosarum lib.ss. floris sulphuris ℥.iiij. mercurij sublimati gra.vj. camphorae ℈.ss. Labour these together by the space of two houres in an Alabaster or marble mor∣ter, and vse it both euening and morning af∣ter the bodie is purged. Another. Ex manu∣cipto.Rec. Picis liquidae, mellis depurati, & ceui ouini vel ceruini, of each a like quan∣titie. Fiat.
A Liniment for a Canker, or skald head. Rec. Olei rosarum ℥.ix. or els halfe so much;Apollonius put it into a leaden morter with a péece of leade; labour it therewith vntill it become thicke and blacke like vnto leade, then beate seuerallie Litharge and white leade, of each lib.j. or lib.ss. Mingle them with the oyle and frame your Liniment. A Liniment to delay paine in malignant cancerous vlcers. Rec. Cinerum cupressi,Theodorus lotorum & re∣siccatorum, plumbi albi combusti & lot succi rosarum, ana.℥.ss. Frame it with oyle of Roses to your vse. A iuyce contriued to the forme and vse of a Liniment, of wonderfull force to rote  a malitious, gnawing and fretting Cankr. Rec. Sumach,AEtius. vel rhu coriariorum lib.iij. pilul. cupressi, ℥.iij. gallarum imaturarum cassiae, ana.℥.j.ss. Beate them together, stéepe them in fiue pintes of olde red wine; after boyle them, continually stiri them with a Cipresse slice till the thir par be su∣med. This done, sraine  forth and  a∣way the drosse: bu  the iuy till it
of consistence like to honie, and so keepe it in a glasse. If in keeping this waxe thicke, you may put to it a little wine. A Liniment to be vsed in Alo∣pcia Gallica. Vigo.Rec. Pingued. porcinae liquefactae lib.j. olei chamaemeli & anethi, ana.℥.j. olei ma∣stichini & laurini, ana.℥.j. styracis liquidae ʒ.x. radicum helenij aliquantulum con∣quassatorum, radicum ebuli, ana.℥.iiij. squinanti, staechados, ana. parum, euphorbij pisti ℥.ss. vini odoriferi lib.j.ss. Boyle them together vntill the wine bee wasted; after straine them, and adde thereto lithargyrij auri ℥.vij. thuris, masticis, ana.ʒ.vj. resinae pini ℥.j.ss. terebinthinae clarae ℥.j. argenti vi∣ui extincti cum saliua ℥.iiij. cerae albae ℥.j.ss Melt the Oyles with the Waxe, and incor∣porate them together to a Liniment. A Liniment approued for baldnesse, to cause haire to growe in any part with speede. Leuinus Lemnius.Rec. Radicum canae, brioniae, betae, ra∣phani, ireos, cepae, ana.℥.iiij. ficus pingues numero vj. capillorum veneris, abrotani, anethi, ana.m.j. Bruse all these together
very small, and boyle them in malmesie suf∣ficient, vntill the wasting of the third part, then straine it very well, and adde thereto butyri recentis, mellis despumati, ana.℥.ij. olei amygdalarum dulcium & amararum, olei sesamini, ana.℥.j. farinae foenugraeci, farinae seminis lini, nigellae romanae pul∣uerizatae, ana.p.j. laudani ℥.j. Mixe them, and set them on the fire, stirring it conti∣nuallie, and let it boyle to the forme of a Liniment, vsing it according to Art after the bodie is euacuated. A Liniment for the falling of haire. Rec. Olei myrthini, olei amygdalarum dulcium, olei lini, ana.℥.j.ss. laudani ℥.j. eu∣phorbij ℥.ss. spumae marinae ʒ.iij. ellebori albi ℈.j. rutae siluestris ℈.j.ss. fimi columbi∣ni ℥.ss. sulphuris viui ℈.j.ss. amygdalarum amararū combustarum spicaenardi, cassiae ligneae, ana.℈.j. Boile them to the consump∣tion of the wine, and straine them, adding thereto mellis despumati ℥.j. And so mixing them together make a Liniment.
A Liniment for the falling of haire. Rec. Foliorum salicis, foliorum myrthi, seminum sumach, ana.℥.ij. rosarum rubra∣rum ℥.ss. myrabolanorum emblicorum, ℥.ij.ss. laudani ℥.j. mellis crudi ℥.ss. olei myr∣tillorum ℥.vj. vini nigri ℥.iij. Bruse which are to bee brused, mixe them together, and boyle them till the wine bee consumed in a close vessell, and after the straining vse it. A Liniment for the perfect restauration of the pannicles that couer the braine, after their blacknes bee remoued by vse of mel rosarum. Arceus.Rec. Syrupi rosati ex infusione ℥.j.ss. flo∣rum & fol. hypericonis, florum rosmarini, granae, ana parum, terebinthinae, vini odo∣riferi, ana.℥.ij. olei omphacini, ℥.iiij.ss. croci parum: Boyle all together, except the saf∣fron, which you shall make in fine powder, and adde to them in the ende. A Liniment for salt flegme and itch. Vigo.Rec. Succi lapathi acuti, succi plantagi∣nis, ana.℥.ss. pingued, porcinae liquefactae, vnguenti populeonis, ana.℥.ij. olei rosacei,
omphacini, olei myrtillorum, ana.℥.j. vitel∣lorum ouorum, ʒ.x. lithargyrij auri & ar∣genti, ana.℥.j.ss. tutiae ℥.ss. plumbi vsti ʒ.vj. cerusae ʒ.x. argenti viui ʒ.ix. Mixe them and make a Liniment according to Art. A Liniment for itch and scabbes. Rec. Sulphuris triti & ter ex aqua rosa∣rum abluti,Vesalius. ℥.j.ss. laridi saliti lib.j. Beate it diligentlie and wash it thrice with Rosewa∣ter, succi limonum ℥.ij. Mixe them for a Li∣niment. Another for the same. Rec. Lithargyrij,Constan∣tinus. aceti fortis, ana.℥.vj. o∣lei ros.℥.xij. argenti viui extinct. in aceto rosarum ℥.iij. Fiat Linimentum. A Liniment to be vsed in morbo pediculari. Rec. Olei amygdalarum amarum ℥.ij. o∣leiWeckerus. rutae ℥.j. staphidis agriae ℥.j. centaurij minoris ʒ.ij. myrrhae ʒ.iij. argenti viui ℥.ij. axungiae rancidae salitae ℥.iij. aceti parum: Mixe them and make a Liniment accor∣ding to Art.
A Liniment for burning and skalding. Rec. Foliorum maluarum, violarum, fragariae, consolidae mediae & radicum eius, quinque folij, plantaginis, foliorum sam∣buci, semperuiui, hederae terrestris, solatri ana.m.ss. Bruse them small, and infuse them tenne daies in foure poundes of Swines greace, olei seminis lini lib.ss. mellis lib.ss. resinae puluerizatae lib.j. Mixe them well, and put them in an earthen vessel close stop∣ped, and so keepe it to your vse. A Liniment to bee vsed in the cure of small brannie skales in the head. Vigo.Rec. Olei vitellorum ouorum ʒ.x. olei seminis lini ℥.ss. olei masticis, olei lauini, ana.℥.ss. lardi porcini liquefacti, pingued. vituli, ana.℥.iiij. terebinthinae clarae ℥.j.ss. foliorum plantag. oliuarum siluestrium, fumariae, lapathi acuti, mali granati integri acetosi, & caudae equinae, ana.m.j. foliorum hedrae m.ss. Bruse the herbes, and let them boyle with the oyle and greace, aforesayd, till the iuyce bee consumed, then straine them, and adde to the straining lithargy∣rij auri & argenti, ana.℥.ij. cerusae ʒ.x. cal∣cis
decies loti, aluminis combusti, ana.ʒ.vj. agenti viui extincti cum saliua hominis ʒ.v. Mixe them, and with white Waxe suf∣ficient make a Liniment. A Liniment for burning in the face. Rec. Corticum interiorum sambuci,Io. Baptista Montanus. o∣lei rosati, completi, ana.℥.ss. cerusae ℥.ss. Misce, & cum modico cerae, fiat Liniment. A Liniment to kill wormes in vl∣cers of the eares. Rec. Cerusae,Ex Archi∣gene. polij montani, ana.℥.ij. pi∣cis naualis liquidae quod sat est. Mixe them very well in a morter to the forme of a Li∣niment. A Liniment to be put into the eares that are pained. Rec. Olei amygdalarum dulcium ℥.ij. croci ℈.j. myrrhae ℈.ij. opij ʒ.ss. Miscean∣tur. A Liniment for the breaking out of childrens heads or elder folkes, commonly called a scaule. Rec. Aceti lib.j. radicum helenij, che∣lidonij, centaurij, ana.℥.ij. olei laurini lib. j. sulphuris lib. j. mellis lib. ss. aloes, floris aeris, olibani, ana.℥..iiij. Bruse which
are to be brused, and boyle them to the con∣sumption of the iuyces and vineger, then adde too the rest made in fine powder, and boyle them a little after, then straine them to your vse. But first you must wash the af∣fected head with the decoction of the rootes of enula campana, and the leaues of Cen∣taurie boyled in childs vrine before the place be annoynted. A Liniment for a member that is weakened by wounds. Io. Baptista Montanus.Rec. Olei amygdalarum dulcium, adi∣pis porcini recentis sine sale ℥.ij. bdellij, myrrhae, ana.ʒ.j. croci ℈.j. Dissolue the gummes in viniger, then mixe them toge∣ther and make a Liniment. A Liniment very good for a member that is whollie consumed, although it haue been so a long time. Rec. Vnguent. populeonis ℥.iiij. olei lau∣rini ℥.vj. vnguent. dialthaeae ℥.v.ss. picis ni∣grae ℥.iiij. olei communis lib.ss. pingued. ca∣pi, cygni, anseris & anatis, ana.℥.iii. butyri recentis ℥.v.j. axungiae porcinae lib.ss. olei de pedibus vaccinis ℥.iiij. maluarum, althaeae, meliloti, arthemisiae, tapsibarbati, valeria∣nae, & sambuci, ana.m.ss. Bruse the herbes,
and boyle them together till the iuyces bee wasted, and reserue it to your vse. A Liniment to asswage paine. Rec. Olei masticis lib.ss. aquae vitae ℥.iiij theriacae ℥.iij. Mixe them, and boyle them in a double vessell sixe houres, and straine them to your vse. A Liniment to mollifie and asswage paine. Rec. Maluarum, bismalu. althaeae, mer∣urialis, arthemisiae, meliloti, chamaemeli, sambuci, violarum, erigeri, hyosciami, ana. m.ss. pingued. capi & anseris, ana.℥.iiij. ax∣ungiae porcinae lib. j.ss. axungiae humanae, ℥.ij. Bruse them and infuse them together twentie daies, and after it is strained reserue it to your vse. A Liniment for paine proceeding of cold matter. Rec. Lardi porcini, lib.iiij. vini cretic. lib. j.ss. cariophyllorum ℥.iij. radicum helenij, ℥.iij. cardui benedicti ℥.iij. rosmarini, sal∣uiae, ana.℥.ij.ss. myrrhae ℥.v. theriacae lib.j. Bruse the herbes, straine them, and make the other in grosse powder, and boyle them together till the wasting of the wine, then
straine them, and make it to the forme of a Liniment. A Liniment for cold aches or paines. Rec. Saluiae, tanaceti, menthae, melissae, rutae, absynthij, abrotani, chamaemeli, ar∣themisiae, lauendulae, satureiae, nasturtij a∣quatici, foeniculi, foliorum pyrethri, cha∣maedryos, ana. m.ss. axungiae porcinae lib. iij. axungiae humanae lib.ss. vini cretici lib.j. seminis anisi ℥.iiij. Bruse them together, and infuse them tenne daies, then straine them and keepe it to your vse. A Liniment for paine of the ioynts pro∣ceeding of a cold cause. Rec. Pingued. humanae lib.j. pingued. capi, anseris, anatis, & cygni, ana.℥.iiij. vini cretici lib.ss. florum anthos lib.ij. vermium terrestrium preparatorum lib. ss. Bruse them, stampe them three houres together, and infuse them in a vessell well bound eight daies, then let thē boyle to the consumption of the wine & to the strength of the flowers, and adde to the straining olei terebinthinae ℥.vj. Make a Liniment in good forme.
A Liniment to asswage paine about wounds and vlcers. Rec. Pingued. capi ℥.iiij. medullae cru∣rium vaccarum ℥.iiij. terebinthinae ℥.iij.ss. olei rosarum ℥.iij. olei chamaemeli ℥.iiij. ver∣mium terrestrium praeparatorū ℥.iij. Mis∣ceantur & bulliant ad inuicem, & in fine adde cerae albae ℥.iiij. And make a Liniment to the precepts of Art. A Liniment to asswage paine of the head in lues venerea, to be annoynted on the inside of the armes, especiallie where vena Ce∣phalica runneth. Rec. Succi enulae, succi brioniae,Fracasto∣rius. styracis liquidae, terebinthinae, ana.℥.j. gummi ele∣mij ℥.ss. pingued. vrsi, anseris, butyri, ana.℥.j.ss. thuris, iridis, ana.ʒ.iij. olei irini q.s. ar∣genti viui the eight part. Misce, & fiat Li∣nimentum. To abate spongie flesh with ease. Rec. Aquarum solani, plantag. rosarum,Vesalius. ana.℥.iiij. opij℈.j. medullae panis optimae coctae, ℥.ij. argenti sublimati ℈.iiij. Grinde them vpon a marble stone, then mixe them, and boile them vntill the halfe be consumed, then straine it through a thinne cloath, and put in some scraped line, boyle them a
little together, then take them out & straine it, and so keepe it to your vse. A good Liniment for conuulsion of sinewes. Vesalius.Rec. Olei amygdalarum dulcium ping. gallinae, medullae crurium vituli, ana.ʒ.ix. olei violarum ℥.vj. pingued. haedi, & vituli, ana.℥.xv. Boyle them all together in the decoction of malu. rad. althaeae, & sem. cito∣niorum, as much as is sufficient, vntill they bee all consumed, then straine it, and make it to the forme of a Liniment. A Liniment against lamenes of the legges after the gowt. Valriola.Rec. Gummi ammoniaci, bdellij, in a∣quae vitae dissolut ana.℥.ij. axung. taxis, an∣seris, anatis, & vulpis, ana.℥.iij. pulueris iri∣dis ʒ.x. foliorum rutae, betonicae, herbae pa∣ralisis siccarum, ana.℥.j. florum staechados & rosmarini, ana. p.j. florum chamaemeli, & meliloti, ana. p.ss. styracis calamitae & benioin, ana.ʒ.ij. cariophyllorum, olibani, nucis moscatae, ana.ʒ.j. olei vulpini lumbri∣cati et de costo, ana.℥.iiij. faecis olei liliorum ℥.ij. cerae q.s. Make a Liniment in good forme.
A Liniment for paine of the ioynts. Rec. Pingued capi, anatis, anseris, & cyg∣ni, ana.℥.iiij. vini cretici lib.ss. florum an∣thos lib.j. Bruse the flowers and incorpo∣rate them together three houres, then let them stand in the Sunne twentie daies, and boyle them in a vessell well stopped to the consumption of the wine, and straine them to your vse. A Liniment for contracted or lame mem∣bers to be vsed after the Bath. Rec. Axungiae gallinae, anseris, anatis,Alfonsus Ferrius. suis, asini, muli, vrsi, gliris, vulturis, leonis, medullae crurum vituli, equi, asini, cer∣ui, butyri recentis, vtriusque lilij, olei vul∣pini compositi, amygdalarum dulcium, se∣samini, laurini, nucis indicae, muscelini, sty∣racis, benioini, mucilaginis rad althaeae, foe∣nugraeci, sem. lini, ana.℥.j croci tenuissimè triti ℥.ss. aquae vitae lib.ss. fiat Linimentum. After the annoynting lappe vp the member in a Foxe or Hares skinne. A Liniment against numnesse, palsies and re∣solutions of sinewes, with lamenes of mem∣bers that grow thereby. Rec. Radicis angelicae minoris lib.x.Turneisse∣rus. cut
it very small, and decoct it in vino generoso & forti to a viscous thicknes, then straine it out, and put to it saponis optimi lib.ij. resoluti in vino sublimato, in this manner: Your sope must bee made into very thinne and small péeces or shauings, then put sixe pints of your spirit of wine into an earthen pot well nealed, let it heate till it beginne to boyle, but not boyle outright: after put in your shauings of sope, and stirre all about vntil the sope be melted and vanished. This done, mixe them with the liquor strained from the roote aforesayd, and seeth them to the wasting of the halfe. Last of all, boyle it with olei communis recentis lib.ij. to an oyntment. A Liniment for Oedematous tumors, namely in scroto. Banester.Rec. Olei terebinthinae ℥.vj. caphurae pulu.℥.iij. Dissolue the Camfer in the oyle, adde olei myrtillorum & cydoniorum ana.ʒ.j.ss. olei laurini opt.℥.ij. olei succini, ʒ.iij. olei absynthij chymici ʒ.ss. cerae parum. Fiat Linimentum. A Liniment for inflammation and hardning in womens breasts by crudding of their milke. Banester.Rec. Olei lini ℥.iiij. olei rosacei ℥.iij.ss.
olei ouorum, ℥.ij. cerae citrinae ℥.j. Fiat Li∣nimentum. A Liniment of Swallowes for all manner of aches and straines. Rec. Hirundines xxiiij. fragariae with hisEx manu∣scripto. strings m.ij. rosmarini, fol. violariae, lauen∣dulae albae, spicae lauendulae, absynthij, ana. m.j. Stampe all these herbes and Swal∣lowes together till they be as one, put them into an earthen pot, and let them stand nine daies couered: then put vnto them butyri maialis lib. iiij. or lib.v. (set the herbes in the heate of the Sunne and neuer washed) boyle them very gently two houres toge∣ther, then let them stand from the fire two or three daies: after set it ouer the fire a∣gaine vntill it be readie to seeth, then straine it through a faire linnen cloath with great force. An Excellent Liniment for cold aches, shronk withered, and benummed members. Rec. Vng. Martiati, ℥.j.vng. dialthaeae,Martin ℥.iij. axungiae canis ℥.j. axungiae vulpis, olei vulpini, ana.℥.ij. olei nardini, olei chamae∣meli, ana.℥.j. olei petrolei ℥.ss. Mixe them according to Art.
Lotions. A Lotion for a tumor in Inguine, called Bubo venereus. Vigo.REc. Hordei mundi, rosarum, ana.m.j. fo∣liorum plantaginis, m.ij. sumach, len∣tium, ana.m.ss. sem. citoniorum ʒ.ss. Boyle them in sufficient water till halfe be wasted, and vse it often. A Lotion for wounds and vlcers. Rec. Vini albi ℥.ss. aquae vitae ℥.ij. mellis rosarum ℥.iij. aluminis vsti ʒ.ss. Mixe them and preserue it to your vse. A Lotion for falling of haire. Vigo.Rec. Fabarum, lupinorum, ana.m.j. pas∣sularum, ficuum siccarum, ana.℥.ij. radic. la∣pathi acuti lib.ss. fumiterrae, foliorum ebu∣li, capillorum veneris, ana.m.j.ss. pomorum acetosorum numero x. furfuris m.ij. hordei mundi ℥.iij. glycyrrhizae ℥.j.ss. Boyle them all together with as much Barbers lée as is sufficient, till the third part be wasted, ad∣ding thereto mellis rosarum ℥.iiij.
Another Lotion for the same purpose. Rec. myrtillorum, spicae nardi,Augerius Ferrerius. radicis as∣phodeli, corticis pini, ana.℥.j. laudani, sem. apij, fol. senae, cyperi, ana.℥.ss. sem. papaueris albi, corticis tamaricis, sem. absynthij, ros. alb. sem. hederae, ana.ʒ.iij. Let them infuse with astringent wine in a double vessell on the fire, and so vse it. A Lotion for hollowe vlcers and Cankers. Rec. mellis crudi lib.ij. aquae vitae lib.j. vini albi lib.ss. fellis boui ℥.iiij. aluminis ro∣chae ℥.iij. myrrhae, masticis, olibani, ana.℥.ss. sarcocollae ℥.ij. succi apij, & saluiae, ana.℥.iij. Powder the gummes and steepe them in a∣qua vitae, then seeth them foure houres, and keepe it to your vse. A Lotion for deepe and hollow vlcers. Rec. Aquae fontanae, vini rubri, ana. lib. ij.ss. rosarum rubrarum ℥.iiij. balaustiorum, malicorij, ana.℥.ij.ss. sem. sumach ℥.ij. saluiae m.j. symphiti vtriusque, ana.m.ss. aluminis lib.ss. sarcocollae, ℥.iij. olibani ℥.j. mastic.℥.ij mellis lib.j. aquae terebinthinae lib.j.ss. Bruse
which are to be brused, mixe them and distill them according to Art. A Lotion to cicatrize vlcers in the mouth, proceeding of Alopecia Gallica. Vigo.Rec. Aquae plantaginis lib.j. cimarum rubi, foliorum oiuarum siluestrium, cau∣dae equinae, ana.m.ss. aquae hordeaceae lib.j.ss. lycij.ʒ.ij. mellis rosarum ʒ.iij. aluminis ro∣chae ʒ.vj. Boyle them all till halfe be wasted, and keepe it to your vse. A Lotion for pustules on virga. Augerius Ferrerius.Rec. Tutiae cum aqua ros. praeparatae, ae∣ruginis, ana.ʒ.ij. anethi combusti, abrotani vsti, ana.ʒ.j. Boyle them in Rose and Plan∣taine waters one walme: afterward cleere it without expression. Another stronger in more maligne cases. Augerrius Ferrerius.Rec. aeruginis, aluminis, pulueris mercu∣rialis, ana.ʒ.j. vini albi ℥.ss. aquarum plan∣tag. & ros. ana.℥.j. Boyle them softly, and straine them not. A Lotion for a fracture. Vigo.Rc. Rosarum rubrarum, myrtillorum, granatorum & foliorum caprifolij, mille∣olij, ana.m.j. radic. fraxini & foliorum eius
ana.m.ij. nucum cupressi aliquantulū con∣tritarum, num. vj. radic. althaeae aliquant. contrit.℥.iij. chamaemeli, meliloti, absynthij ana.m.ss. mellis ℥.iiij. lycij ℥.ij. sarcocollae, myrrhae, thuris, ana.℥.ss. Boyle them all in sufficient water and thicke red wine, till the halfe be wasted, and bathe the member. A Lotion to resolue the stifnesse of the legges. Rec. Betonicae, sambuci, rutae, saluiae,Valeriola. sum∣mitatum lauri, ana.m.ij. florum chamaeme∣li, meliloti, rosmarini & staechados, ana.p.j. radic. ebuli & acori, ana.℥.ij. sulphuris ignē non experti ℥.iiij. salis ℥.iij. aluminis ℥.j. fur∣furis p.ij. cariophyllorum contusorum ℥.ss. Boyle them all in white wine and lée equall portions, and vse it.
Oyles. An Oyle for greene wounds. Calmeteus.Rec. Olei communis in quo fuerint ex∣tincti lateres recentes lib.ss. olei amygdala∣rum amararū ℥.ij. olei papaueris albi ℥.j.ss. thuris, masticis, ana.℥.j. ammoniaci, galbani in aceto dissolutorum ana.ʒ.ij. resinae ℥.ss. terebint.℥.ij. AEruginis rasilis ℈.ij. When the gummes bee dissolued, put them to the Oyle, Thus, and Masticke, & let them boile after a little, then adde too the resina, and af∣ter them the aerugo, at the last straine it, and kéepe it to your vse: wherewith you shall dresse the wound, and applie vpon it an ag∣glutinatiue plaister. Another oyle for greene wounds. Calmeteus.Rec. Olei com. lib.j. florum hyperici lib. ss. conijciantur in oleum, & aliquot dies sub dio macerentur, postea flores expriman∣tur, & alij in idem oleum inijciantur. Thus vse it foure or fiue times, then adde thereto, gummi elemi, ℥.iij. Then let it stand cer∣taine daies in the Sunne and vse it.
An Oleum Magistrale for wounds. Rec. Olei vitellorum ouorum ʒ.vj. olei rosarum,Vigo. omphacini, ʒ.ij. croci ℈.j. vini odo∣riferi ℥.j.ss. terebinthinae clarae ʒ.ij. seminis hypericonis, florum anthos, ana.m.j. masti∣cis ʒ.ij.ss. succi plantag.℥.j. lactis mulieris ℥.ss. seui vituli ʒ.x. olei sambuci ℥.ss. olei ro∣sacei completi ℥.j.ss. vermium terrestrium lotorum in vino ʒ.x. Boyle them all toge∣ther at a gentle fire till the consumption of the wine and iuyce, then straine them and vse it in the wound. A yellowe oyle which doth wonderfullie cause flesh in wounds, and doth mitigate paine, and causeth good matter. Rec. Olei com. lib.ij.ss. olei rosarum lib. ss. amygdalarum dulcium, olei liliorum, ana.℥.iiij. vini albi lib.ij. aquae vitae lib.ss. terebinthinae venetae lib.ij. sarcocollae lib.ss. myrrhae ℥.iiij. gummi elemi, ℥.vj. olibani, ℥.iij. masticis ℥.ij.ss. aloes epaticae, benioini, styracis calamitae, gummi hederae, ana.ʒ.iij. resinae pini ʒ.ij. nucis moscat.ʒ.ij. spicae ʒ.j. galangae ʒ.ss. croci ℥.ss. ammoniaci ℥.j. op∣poponacis ℥.ss. Powder which are to bee
powdred, and dissolue the gummes in wine, and put them together, letting them stand in the Sunne xx. daies, then boyle them at a gentle fire in a pot close stopped the space of xiiii. houres, and let it stand in the Sunne other twentie daies, and at the last straine it and keepe it as a secrete. An oyle for hollowe wounds and fistulaes. Rec. Olei communis lib.ij. galbani ℥.j. ammoniaci ℥.ss. terebinthinae ℥.vj. vini albi ℥.viij. succi apij & plantaginis, ana.℥.j. fellis bouis ℥.ij. aquae vitae ℥.ij.ss. resinae pini ℥.ss. masticis, sarcocollae, ana.ʒ.ij. aluminis vsti, ʒ.iij. Mixe them, and let them boyle to the consumption of the iuyces and wine, but first dissolue your gummes in aqua vitae, and boyle them in another vessell twelue houres, adding thereto in the end viridis ae∣ris ℥.ij. and make it according to Art. An oyle for greene wounds, much commended. Rec. Olei lumbricorum, olei masticis, olei hypericonis, ana.℥.iiij. olei communis lib.j.ss. sarcocollae lib.j. aquae vitae lib.ss. olei terebinthinae lib. j. florum anthos lib.ss.
Powder that is to bee powdred, and boyle them together in balneo mariae xii. houres, then set them in the Sunne fortie daies: af∣ter boyle them againe, and reserue the oyle to your vse. Another. Rec. Olei communis lib. ij. vini cretici, lib.j. radicum helenij ℥.iiij. in puluerem re∣dact. saluiae, hypericonis, ana m.j. masticis ℥.iiij. cariophyllorum ℥.iij. Mixe them, and boyle them in a vessell stronglie bound, to the consumption of the wine and iuyces, and after the straining kéepe it to your vse. Another. Rec. Olei lumbricorum, olei hyperico∣nis, ana.℥.xij. olei masticis ℥.iiij. olei com.℥.vj. aquae vitae lib.ss. vini maluatici ℥.iiij. sarcocollae lib.ss. mastic.℥.iij. myrrhae ℥.iij. florum chamaemeli ℥.ss. cariophyllorū ℥.ij. terebinthinae venetae ℥.iiij. Bruse what is to bee brused, and boyle them to the consump∣tion of the wine and water, and reserue the oyle strained out to your vse. An oyle to agglutinate wounds with speede. Rec. Boracis ℥.vij. sarcocollae ℥.vj. mastic.℥.iiij. cariophyllorū ℥.j. olibani ℥.ij. myrrhae ℥.ij.ss. Make them al in powder, & infuse thē
in aquae vitae ℥.xx. and adde thereto after the infusion olei hyperici, vel communis lib iiij. terebinthinae venetae lib.j.ss. succi sym∣phiti minoris lib.ss. vini nigri lib.j. huris ℥.j Boyle them at an easie fire twentie houres, then put in the infused gummes, and boyle them in a brasen vessell close stopped other xxiiii. houres, then as you remoue it from the fire, stirre it till it be cold, and put it into a glasse, adding thereto olei terebinthinae, lib.ss. masticis, sarcocollae, florum hyperico∣nis puluerizat. ana.℥.ij. Then let them stand in the Sunne, and reserue it to your vse. Another. Rec. Olei nardini ℥.iiij. olei hyperici ℥.vij olei com. lib.j. vini cretici lib.j. sarcocollae, ℥.vj. mastic.℥.ij. olibani ℥.iij.ss. myrrhae ℥.ss. terebinthinae purae ℥.vij. florum saluiae ℥.iiij florum rosmarini ℥.iij. florum hyperici ℥.vj cariophyllorum ℥.iiij. Powder what is to be powdred, and boyle the oyle, wine, flow∣ers and cloues in a vessell close stopped xii. houres; after that let them steepe in the same vessell xii. daies, which being done, adde to the rest, and boyle them together twentie houres, and last of al, let them stand in the Sunne twelue daies, and straine it to your vse.
An oyle of S. Iohns wort for wounds. Rec. Summitatum hyperici contusi lib. j.ss. vini maluat. lib.℥.iij.ss. olei oliuarum lib.iij. Mixe them, and set them in the sunne tenne daies, then boyle them in balneo ma∣riae twelue houres, and straine them, adding thereto florum hyperici lib.j. Infuse them other tenne daies, and last of all add to them terebinthinae venetae lib.ss. masticis ℥.j.ss. sarcocollae, cariophyllorū, ana.℥.ij. myrrhae ℥.j. macis ʒ.vj. vermium terrestrium ℥.iij. Powder what is to bee powdred, and boyle them to the consumption of the wine and iuyce of the herbes, and after the straining reserue it to your vse. Another very excellent. Rec. Olei oliuarum lib.iij. vini albi lib.ij. florum,Iohn I∣re. foliorum & sem. hyperici, lib.j. va∣lerianae graecae, saniculae guttatae, diapensiae, solidaginis saracenicae, prunellae, ana.m.ss. Stampe the herbes and infuse them in the wine and oyle xxiiii. houres, then boile them at a soft fire to the consumption of a great part of the wine and iuyce, then straine it, and put thereto terebinthinae venetae lib.j.ss
olei terebinthinae ℥.vj. olibani ℥.v. myrrhae ℥.iij. masticis ℥.j. sanguinis draconis ℥.j. rootes of Alkanet ℥.ss. (being first brused and infused in a little oyle ii. houres) When all is boyled together gently and sufficient∣ly, put it vp to your vse. It is the best that euer I found. Note. Wheras others put hereto earth wormes to amend the same, I haue found it by expe∣rience, that it will not worke so well with wormes as without them. An oyle for greene wounds. Rec. Olei communis lib.iiij. vini rubri, aquae vitae, ana. lib.j. terebinthinae lib.j. sar∣cocollae lib.ss. masticis ℥.j. olibani ℥.ij. con∣solidae maioris m.iiij. Bruse the herbes and mixe them with the oyle, wine, and aqua vi∣tae, and infuse them together twelue daies, then boyle them in balneo mariae sixtéene houres, and after they be cold put too conso∣lidae maioris recentis m.iij. letting them in∣fuse other tenne daies, then adde too the tur∣pentine, and boyle them together twentie daies, and when they be strained put too the sarcocolla and the rest made in fine pow∣der.
Another. Rec. Aquae vitae optimae lib.ij. sacchari albiss. lib.ss. olei com. puri lib.iiij. terebin∣thinae purae ℥.xx. sarcocollae ℥.viij. masticis, myrrhae, ana.℥j. Powder which are to bee powdred, mixe them, and put them in a pot with a narrowe mouth, letting them stand in balneo mariae xxiiij. houres, then set it in the Sunne tenne daies, which being done let them boyle againe twelue houres, and when it is colde and strained, reserue it to your vse. Oleum Hyperici with Gumines. Rec. Vini albi lib.ij. olei veteris lib.iiij. olei terebinthinae lib.ij. florum hyperici re∣centium cum semine q.s.Clowes. The flowers be∣ing brused, put them into a glasse with the oyles and wine, and set the glasse in the Sunne seauen daies, then boyle it sixe or seauen houres in balneo mariae, after straine it, and put too againe fresh flowers and seedes: sunne it seauen daies, and boyle them as before. Repeate this course so of∣ten till the oyle bee red and the wine consu∣med, then straine it, and put thereto aloes
hepaticae, myrrhae, masticis, mummiae, oli∣bani, ana.℥.j. gariophyllorum, macis, nucis moscatae, cinamomi, ana.℥.ss. croci ʒ.j. gra∣norum tinctorum ℥.ss. vermium terrestriū ℥.iiij. Let the wormes bee purely purged in white wine, then put all these together with the oyle into a double glasse, and set it in the Sunne a moneth. Last of all, boyle them a∣gaine in balneo twelue houres, the glasse being close stopped, then take it from the fire, and when it is almost colde, straine it, and put it vp to your vse. An oyle excellent for wounds and vlcers, espe∣ciallie when the vlcers be well mundified: it doth also incarnate, asswage paine, com∣fort, and speedilie conglutinate. Rec. Olei com. lib.iiij. vini albi lib.ij. aquae vitae lib.j.ss. saluiae m.ij. cardui benedicti, m.j.ss. valer. m.j. hyperici m.j.ss. melisso∣phylli m.ss. meliloti m.j. betonicae, centaurij, scabiosae, dictami, sambuci, ana.p.iij. Bruse the herbes and infuse them twentie daies, then straine them stronglie, and boyle them to the consumption of the wine and iuyce of the herbes, adding thereto terebinthinae purgatae lib.j.ss. masticis ℥.j. olibani ℥.ij. myrrhae, ℥.j. sarcocollae ℥.ij. euphorbij.ʒ.iij.
nucis moscatae ℥.ss. cariophyllorum, ʒ.vj. iridis ℥.j. resinae pini ℥.iij. oppoponacis ʒ.iij. croci, camphorae ana.ʒ.j. vermium terrestr.℥.ss. theriacae optimae ℥.j. florum hyperici ℥.iiij. rosarum rubr.℥.ij.ss. rubiae tinctorum ℥.ss. Powder what is to bee powdred, and boyle them together one houre, & put them in a vessell close stopped twentie daies, and put thereto the gummes dissolued in malm∣sey, then let them boyle at an easie fire alto∣gether foure or fiue houres, and in the ende straine them, and reserue it to your vse. An oyle to heale both greene wounds and old vlcers very well. Rec. Olei communis lib.j. vini cretici lib.j. terebint.℥.iiij.ss. bdellij ʒ.iij. myrrhae ʒ.iij.ss. sarcocollae ℥.j. thuris ʒ.iij.ss. masticis ℥.ss. Powder what is to bee powdred, mixe them, and boyle them vpon a cleere fire till the wine be consumed. Another of like nature. Rec. Olei mastichini lib.ss. olei com.lib.j. aquae vitae lib.ss. sarcocollae ℥.vj. sanguinis draconis ℥.ij. mastic.℥.iij. myrrhae ℥.ij. cina∣momi ℥.ss. nucis moscatae ℥.j. boracis ℥.ij. a∣loes epaticae ℥.ss. aquae caprifolij ℥.vj. succi
symphiti vtriusque, ana.℥.iij. aquae mellis ℥.iiij. Make it to your vse. An oyle for greene wounds. Rec. Olei communis lib.iiij. vini albi lib. ij. aquae vitae lib.j. succi absynthij, valerianae, pimpinellae, hyperici, cardui benedicti, sal∣uiae, apij, consolidae maioris, minoris & mediae, plantaginis, millefolij, ana.℥.ij.ss. Bruse the herbes, mixe them, and stéepe them twelue houres, then boyle them in a vessell close stopped, till the wine and iuyces bee wasted, adding thereto terebinthinae purgatae lib.j.ss. myrrhae ℥.iiij. sarcocollae, ℥.iiij.ss. olibani ℥.ij. masticis ℥.ij.ss. sangui∣nis draconis, thuris, ana.℥.iij. gummi elemi ℥.iij.ss. cariophyllorum ℥.j. nucis moscatae ℥.j.ss. cinamomi ℥.j.ss. galangae℥.ss. carpo∣balsami ʒ.j.ss. croci ℈.ss. Powder which are to bée powdered, and bruse what is to bee brused, boile them together foure and twen∣tie houres, and after it is strained kéepe it to your vse. An oyle to mollifie hardnesse in or about wounds. Rec. Terebinthinae lib. j.ss. styracis li∣quidae ℥.ss. styracis calamitae, benioini, ana.
ʒ.ij. thuris ʒ.j. nucis moscat.ʒ.ij. laudani ʒ.ss. galbani ʒ.ij. gummi elemi ℥.ss. ammoniaci ℥.ij oppoponacis, gummi hederae, sagapeni, ana.ʒ.ss. olei laurini ℥.iiij. resinae pini ℥.ij. aquae vitae lib.ss. Mixe them, and make an oyle in good forme. An oyle for wounds. Rec. Olei laurini ℥.ij. olei communis ℥.iij. olei lumbricorum ℥.ij.ss. olei hyperi∣conis ℥.ij. olei benedicti ℥.j. olei rosacei ℥.iij. terebinthinae lib. j. euphorbij ʒ.j. styracis calamitae ʒ.j.ss. resinae pini lib.ss. galbani ʒ.iij. sarcocollae ʒ.j. gummi ammoniaci, bdellij, oppoponacis gum. hederae, ana.ʒ.j.ss. laudani ʒ.ss. masticis ʒ.ij. olibani ʒ.iij. thuris ʒ.ij. nucis moscatae ℥.ij. mummiae ʒ.ss. ca∣riophyllorum ℥.ss. Powder what is to be powdered, and make an oyle in good forme. An oyle very good for wounds in any part of the bodie. Rec. Olei communis lib.j.ss. olei rosa∣rum lib.ss. vermium terrestrium ℥.iiij. flo∣rum hyperici ℥.iij. rosmarini ℥.j. terebin∣thinae venetae lib. ss. vini albi lib.ss. myr∣rhae, sarcocollae, ana.℥.ij. masticis ℥.j.ss.
euphorbij ʒ.j. iridis ʒ.j. Powder what is to be powdred, and boile them to the consump∣tion of the wine, then straine it to your vse. The true making of Oleum Aparitij, com∣monly called Oleum Magistrale, which hath been vntruly published heretofor by G. B. Ex libro Hispanico.Rec. Olei rosarum lib. iij. terebinthinae abietinae, lib.ij. myrrhae, thuris, ana.℥.iiij. ritici viridis m.ss. radicum vel foliorum valerianae, cardui benedicti, ana.℥.iiij. hy∣perici ℥.vj. vini albi (vnderstand) hispanici, lib.ij. Let the herbes and wheate be a little brused and put into a glasse with a narrowe mouth, powring vpon them your wine: so infuse them for foure houres, after that put too your oyle, and boile al together in a dou∣ble vessell till the wine be consumed. Lastly, adde your turpentine, myrrhe and incense, and so boyle and straine them. An oyle called Oleum Magistrale, to be vsed in wounds of the necke or throate. Vigo.Rec. Olei rosarum omphacini ℥.j. olei terebinthinae ℥.ss. terebinthinae clariss.ʒ.x. vermium terrestrium lotorum cum vino ℥.j.ss. masticis ʒ.iij. florum anthos m.ij. sem.
hypericonis m.j. centaurij vtriusque, mille∣folij, cynoglossae, ana. tertiam partem m.j. plantag.m.ss. croci ʒ.ss. vini odoriferi cya∣thum vnum. Boyle all together to the con∣sumption of the wine, then straine them through a thicke cloath, and adde thereto olei hypericonis ℥.j.ss. An oyle to be vsed in the wounds of the ankles and feete. Rec. Olei terebinthinae,Vigo. olei rosati om∣phac. ana.℥.ij. terebint. clarissimae ʒ.x. ver∣mium terrestrium ℥.j.ss. mastic.ʒ.vj. gum. elemi ʒ.iij. ammoniaci cum vino dissoluti ʒ.j.ss croci ℈.j. florum hypericonis m.j.ss. centaurij maioris m.j. olei seminis lini ʒ.vj. Boyle them all together a little, and straine them through a thicke canuas cloath, then let them stand in the Sunne one moneth, adding vnto them a little of the flowers of Hypericon, chaunging it from wéeke to wéeke. An oyle for conuulsion of nerues. Rec. Olei amygdalarum dulcium, olei liliorum, violarum, chamaemeli, ana.℥.vj. oppoponacis ℥.iij. ammoniaci ℥.iiij. myrrhae ʒ.ij. oesypi ℥.iij. olei pedum vaccarum ℥.v.
fellis bouis ʒ.iij. pingued. capi, anatis, aneris & cygni, medullae cruris aequini, ana.ʒ.j.ss. succi hyosciami ℥.ss. aqua vitae ℥.vj. butyri recentis, succi maluarum, brancae vrsinae, ana.℥.ij.ss. succi althaeae, sambuci, ana.ʒ.iij. Dissolue the gummes in aqua vitae, and boyle them all to the consumption of the iuyces, and reserue it to your vse. An oyle for pricking of sinewes. Rec. Olei hypericonis, sambuci, euphor∣bij, ana.℥.iij.ss. sulphuris ʒ.x. gummi am∣moniaci, bdellij, serapini, ana.ʒ.ij. aceti albi, cyathi medium, vermium terrestrium ℥.j.ss Make it according to Art. An oyle of Earth-wormes, which is good for wounds in the sinewes, or other places. Banester.Rec. Vermium terrestrium praeparat. lib.j olei communis lib.ij.ss. vini ℥.viij. eu∣phorbij ʒ.iij. terebinthinae venetae ℥.j. Make an oyle according to Art. An oyle to incarnate wounds, and to com∣fort the sinewes. Rec. Olei terebinthinae, rosarum, ana.℥.iiij.ss. olei lumbricorum, masticis, ana.℥.iij. olei seminis lini ℥.iij.ss. vermium ter∣restrium
ʒ.j. terebinthinae clarae ℥.iiij. masti∣cis, myrrhae, ana.℥.ss. gummi elemi, ammo∣niaci, ana.ʒ.ij.ss. sarcocollae ʒ.j. croci ℈.j. Dissolue the gummes in vineger, and adde thereto centaurij maioris m.j. Bruse the herbes and boyle all together in a double vessell, and when it is strained set it in the Sunne. An oyle very good for wounds in the sinewie parts or ioynts. Rec. Olei communis lib.ij. vini odori∣feri lib.j. rosmarini, m.ij. symphiti maioris, plantaginis, ana.m.j. aquae vitae ℥.vj. Bruse them small and straine it, and adde thereto terebinthinae venetae lib.j. sarcocollae lib.ss. masticis ℥.iiij. Let them boyle till the gummes bee well dissolued and the iuyces wasted, then straine it, and set it in the sunne twentie daies. An oyle of secret operation in vlcers, Cankers and Fistulaes. Rec. Apij, marrubij, millefolij, planta∣ginis, absynthij, saluiae, tapfibarbati, cheli∣doniae, valerianae, hyperici, ana. m.j. olei communis lib.ij. terebinthinae ℥.viij. gal∣bani ℥.ij. aluminis rochae ℥.j.ss. theriacae ℥.j.
viridis aeris ℥.ij. thuris ℥.j. gentianae, aristo∣lochiae rotundae, ana.℥.j. resinae pini ℥.xij. Powder what is to bée powdred, and boyle them together till the consumption of the iuyces of the herbes, and in the cooling adde thereto the viride aeris in fie powder, stir∣ring it stronglie. An oyle for hollowe vlcers. Rec. Olei oliuarum lib.ij. olei laurini lib. ss. galbani ℥.iiij. aquae vitae lib.j. myrrhae ℥.j. viridis aeris ℥.iiij. in puluerem subtiliss. re∣dact. Dissolue the galbanum in aqua vitae, and boyle it with the oyles tenne houres at an easie fire, and in the ende put too the vi∣ride aeris, incorporate them well together, and stirre them thrée houres, in the ende straie it, and reserue it to your vse. An excellent good oyle for hollow vlcers. Rec. Olei magisralis ℥.ij. olei lumbri∣corum ℥.j.ss. olei benedicti ℥.ss. olei tere∣binthinae ℥.iiij. olei rosarum ʒ.ij. terebinthi∣nae purgatae ℥.ij. masticis ʒ.ij. sarcocollae ʒ.iij myrrhae ℥.j. ammoniaci, galbani, ana.ʒ.j.ss. gummi elemi ʒ.iij.ss. resinae pini ℥.ss. succi plantag. solatri, apij, ana.℥.j. vini albi ℥.iij. Boyle them in a double vessell, well stop∣ped,
till the consumption of the wine and iuyces, then straine them stronglie, and re∣serue it to your vse. A greene oyle to mundifie vlcers. Rec. Olei magistralis ℥.ii.ss. olei com∣munis ℥.iij. succi plantag. apij, solani, ana.℥.j. olei lumbricorum ℥.j. olei benedicti ℥.ss. Boyle them to the consumption of the iuy∣ces, and adde thereto terebinthinae purgatae ℥.j.ss. sarcocollae ℥.ij. masticis ʒ.j. olibani ʒ.ij.ss. thuris ʒ.j. resinae pini ℥.ss. myrrhae, ʒ.j. gummi elemi ʒ.ij. croci ℈.ss. viridis aeris ℥.j. Mixe them together. An oyle for fistulated and can∣kered vlcers. Rec. Olei com. lib.ij. terebinthinae lib.ss. myrrhae ℥.iiij. sarcocollae ℥.iij. aquae vitae, a∣ceti op. ana.℥.iij. aluminis crud pulueri∣zat.℥.j.ss. vitrioli ℥.ss. boracis ℥.ss. Boyle them to the consumption of the vineger and aqua vitae, adding thereto viridis aeris in pulu.℥.j. Boyle it againe, straine it, and re∣serue it in a glasse vessell.
An oyle for the morphew and spots of the face. Valeriola.Rec. Olei abietis ℥.j.ss. thuris masculi ℥.j. succi limonum lib. j. Bruse the Incense, and mixe them with the rest, and let them infuse in balneo mariae twelue houres with an easie fire, then distill it, and kéepe the wa∣ter to wash the face, and the oyle to annoynt the same. A proued oyle against the Crampe, hap∣pening in a wound, or otherwise. Rec. Olei nardini ℥.ss. olei rutacei ℥.j.ss. olei masticis ℥.ij. olei terebinthinae ℥.j.ss. vini cretici, cochlear.iiij. aquae vitae, coch.ij. Mixe them, and boyle them to the consump∣ion of the liquors. An excellent good oyle for paine in the gowt. Rec. Olei communis lib.j.ss. olei rosati, chamaemeli, ana. lib.j. olei spicae, vulpini, hypericonis, ana.℥.ij. olei anethi ℥.j.ss. cha∣maemeli, absynthij, anthos, matricariae, ca∣laminthae, ana.m.j. squinanthi m.ss. seminis hypericonis m.j.ss. pingued. anatis & anse∣ris, ana.℥.iij. medullae crurium vituli, et vac∣carum, ana.ʒ.x. radicum ebuli & helenij, ana.℥.iiij. ranarumnu.viij. vermiū terrestr.
lotorum cum vino ℥.iiij. Bruse them all, and mixe them together with white wine, and infuse them xxiiii. houres, then boyle them at an easie fire till the wine be wasted, and after it is strained, adde thereto terebin∣thinae ℥.ij.ss. croci ℈.ij. cerae nouae ℥.ss. Mixe them according to Art. An oyle of great efficacie for paines in the ioynts of lues Venerea. Rec. xl. ouorum vitellos coctione indu∣ratos et dissipatos,Augerius Ferrerius. cum ℥.vj. pyrethri in pul∣uerem redacti, Mixe them, and distill them by a Retort, first with a gentle fire, and af∣terward with a stronger; the liquor that you so receiue mixe againe cum castorei ℥.j. and thuris albi ℥.ss. hermodactylorum ʒ.vj. and distill them. When you haue receiued that liquor, mingle it with the feces againe, put∣ting too lauri-baccas, and draw it out. This course if you repeate yet oftner, you shall make an oyle that shall bee incomparable in this case. An oyle to cure shrinking of the sinewes. Rec. Olei ex pedibus bouinis lib.ij.Ex manu∣scripto. fel∣lis
bouini, lib.j. aquae vitae, aquae rosac. ana. lib.ss. Put them in a brasse pan, with cam∣phoratae (wée call it lauender cotton) fol. lauri, ana.m.j. rosmarini, spicae lauendulae, fol. fragariae cum filamentis: the herbes be∣ing brused, boyle with the rest, and after straine it as Art requireth. A most proued oyle for the itch, and moyst or mattrie scabbe. Arnaldu.Rec. Succi oleandri lib.j. olei rosac. lib.ss. Mingle and boyle them gentlie, vntill the oyle only remaine, then straine it, and adde to it (if you will make it most effectuall) sul∣phuris puluerizati ℥.j. Oleum Hyosciami magistrale, of notable vse, both for wounds, vlcers, gowtes and other paines. Banester.Rec. Olei communis lib.viij. vini albi lib.ij. summitatum hyosciami & seminum eius viridium lib.iij.ss. vermium terrestr. gariophyllorum, ana.℥.iiij. croci ℥.j. opij ℥.ss Choppe and stampe the herbe very small: then mixe all the rest with it, and set them in the Sunne twelue daies: after boyle them to the consumption of the wine and iuyce, then straine it and kéepe it to your vse. For
painfull wounds or bruses vse it thus. Rec. olei hyosciami magistrale, ℥.iiij. olei hype∣rici ℥.j. olei lumbricorum ℥.ss. gummi ele∣mi ʒ.vj. terebinthinae lotae in lacte mulie∣ris ʒ.vij. Mixe them. If you would haue it in the forme of an Unguent, and vse it to painfull vlcers, Rec. olei hyosciami magi∣stralis ℥.iiij. resinae pini, resinae ana.ʒ.iij. vn∣guenti ros.ʒ.vj. cerae albae ℥.ss. Héereto also may bée added a little Myrrhe and a fewe droppes of oyle of Sulphur, or Antimonie, as the malignitie requireth. To make a soft plaister or sparadrap of it, do thus. Rec. olei hyosciami magistr.℥.vj. vnguenti hy∣osciami ℥.iiij. resinae ℥.ij. cerae citrinae ℥.iij. Mixe them. Oleum Antimonij, or sanguis Stibij, most excellent for creeping and maligne vlcers. Rec. Regulum antimonij (the manner of making whereof also followeth) grinde it most finely vpon a marble,Fallopiu. powring still vn∣to it a little distilled vineger. When it is perfectly grinded, put it into a Felt, and powre of your viniger vpon it, vntill it haue dissolued and carried through all the Anti∣monie into the vessell that standeth vnder to
receiue it: then put all that liquor into a Limbecke, and distill it out; the feces re∣maining in the bottome will bee red, which take and put in a cloath, hang the same in some moyst place, with a receiuer vnder it to droppe into, and that which so resolueth and droppeth downe is oleum antimonij: and because it is red, is called sanguis anti∣monij. Your Regulus is thus made. Take your stibium, and melt it, let it coole againe, then melt it and coole it againe, and being so done fiue or ixe times, it is cal∣led Regulus. An oyle intituled (of secret operation) for vl∣cers, and namely Cankers and Fistulaes. Incerto au∣cthore.Rec. apij, marrubij, millefolij, plantagi∣nis, absynthij, saluiae, tapsibarbati, chelido∣nij, valerianae, hyperici, ana.m.j. olei com∣munis lib.ij. terebinthinae lib.viij. galbani ℥.ij. aluminis ℥.j.ss. theriacae ℥.j. viridis aeris ʒ.ij. thuris ℥.j. gentianae, aristol. rotundae, ana.℥.j. vitrioli, tartari, ana.ʒ.ij. myrrhae, sar∣cocollae, ana.℥.j. resinae pini ℥.xij. Powder that which is to be powdred, and boyle them
together to the wating of the iuyces; put too your viride aeris in the cooling. An oyle to stay the stench of a Canker. Rec. Myrrhae, carpobalsami,Antonius Montagua∣na. nucis miri∣sticae, ana.℥.ss. olei hyperici, olei de terebin∣thinae, ana.℥.iij. mosc. gra.iiij. ambrae tan∣tundem, olei de lateribus ℥.vij. Boyle them in a double vessell, and therewith annoynt the place; if it bite, alay it cum olei rauino vel lacte.
Powders. A Powder to be vsed in the cure of a Rupture. Vigo.REc. Thuris, masticis, myrrhae, ana.ʒ.ij. aloes, sarcocollae, sanguinis draconis, mummiae, ana.ʒ.j.ss. boli armeni, terrae si∣gillatae, ana.ʒ.ij.ss. gum. tragaganti tritura∣ti, glutinis piscium, ana.ʒ.j.ss. balaustiorum, nucum cupressi, myrabolanorum critrino∣rum, hypocistidis, ana.℈.iiij. laudani ʒ.iij.ss. Make it in fine powder. Another. Rec. Radic. consolidae maioris ℥.j. vale∣rianae ℥.j. mummiae ʒ.j. coriandri praeparat.℥.ss. crassulae ma.ʒ.iij. zacchari ℥.iiij. Make them in fine powder, and take thereof euery morning as Art requireth. A Powder to be taken inwardly for the cure of the Rupture. Rosa Angl.Rec. Myrtillorum, cinamomi, nucis mos∣catae, ana.ʒ.ij. sanguinariae desiccatae, ʒ.iiij. sem. plantaginis, sem. portulacae ana ʒ.iij. sem. nasturtij hortulani, ʒ.j. corallorum rub.ʒ.j.ss. Fiat puluis. Adde thereunto Sugar as much as wil make it swéete: hereof giue
euery morning daylie, or at least euery other day the quantitie of ʒ.j. or ʒ.ss. in wine, and not in broath, because it is slipperie and hin∣dereth conslidation. A powder to be vsed in the cure of the carbunculous pustule. Rec. Aluminis combustae ℥.ss. rosarum,Vigo. myrtillorum, ana.ʒ.ij. hermodact.ʒ.j.ss. bo∣li armeni ʒ.vj. myrabolanorum citrinorum ʒ.iij. Make them in fine powder. A powder for the swelling of the throate. Rec. Satureiae, hyssopi, polij montani,Wekerus. pulegij, spicaenardi ana.ʒ.ij. cariophyllo∣rum, nucis moscatae, ana.℥.ss. cinamomi ʒ.iij. sem. apij, & petroselini, ana ʒ.ij.ss. pi∣peris longi, myrrhae, ana.ʒ.j.ss. Make them in fine powder, which must bee vsed thrée times a wéeke, one dramme at a time, thrée houres before meate, and the rather in win∣ter. A powder for hollowe wounds with losse of substance. Rec. Thuris, masticis, myrrhae,Weckerus. sarcocol∣lae, boli armeni, sanguinis draconis, farinae hordei ana. partem vnam. Make them in
fine powder, which you shall sprinkle vpon the wound. A powder to incarnate wounds. Vigo..Rec. Peucedani ℥.ss. iridis, ʒ.v. myrrhae, ʒ.iij. centaurij maio. & mino. ana ʒ.ij. aristo∣lochiae rotundae, tutiae, oppoponacis, farinae orobi, ana ʒ.ij.ss. Make them in fine pow∣der. Aother. Rec. Sarcocollae ℥.j. olibani ʒ.ij. aloes e∣pat.ʒ.iij. masticis ʒ.j. thuris ʒ.ij. sanguinis draconis ʒ.j.ss. balaustiorum ʒ.ss. Mixe them and make them in fine powder. Another. Rec. Terebint. venetae. puluerizatae ʒ.iij. boracis ʒ.ij. sarcocollae ℥.ss. masticis ʒ.iij.ss. tragaganti ʒ.ij.ss. myrrhae ʒ.iij.ss. colopho∣niae ℥ss. thuris ℥.j. aluminis vsti ʒ.ss. vitrioli adusti ℈.j. mercurij praecipitati ʒ.ij. Mixe them, and make powder to be applied with Mel rosarum. A powder to stanch blood. Calteus.Rec. Lapidis haematitis ℥.j. tutiae, masti∣cis, boli armeni, gallarum viridium, ranarū exiccatarum, gypsi, fuliginis, farinae vola∣tilis, telae araneae molendinariae ana ℥.ij. vi∣trioli combusti, calcis viuae, tragaganti ana
ʒ.iij. chartae papyraceae, pilorum leporis, & bombacis torrefactorum ana ʒ.j. stercoris a∣ini ℥.ss. Make it fine powder. Another. Rec. Boli armeni partem vnam,Galenus. sangui∣nis draconis partem ss. thuris, masticis, aloes cicatrinae, ana partam tertiam, pilorum le∣poris minutissime incisorum, partem quar∣tam. Make them in fine powder. Another. Rec. Boli armeni ʒ.vj. terrae sigillatae ℥.ij.Calmeteus. farinae volatilis ℥.iij. gypsi, calcis viuae, ana ℥.iij. thuris, aloes, ana ℥.j. Make a powder which you must applie with the white of an egge. Another. Rec. aloes epat. thuris, sarcocollae, ana ʒ.ij.Vigo. terrae sigillatae, boliarmeni, litharg. auri & argenti, ana ℈.ij. myrrhae ʒ.j. pilorum lepo∣ris minutissime incisorum ʒ.j.ss. farinae vo∣latilis, fabarum, lentium, & hordei, ana ʒ.ij. Mixe them, & make it in fine powder, which you must strew vpon it: and with a little of this incorporated with the white of an egge make a plageat, and applie aboue it.
Auother. Brunus.Rec. Calcis viuae, sanguinis draconis, gipsei, aloes, thuris, vitrioli, ana partes ae∣quales: Make them in powder, and incor∣porate them with albumen oui atque tela araniae, and applie it. Another. Rec. lapid. haematitis ℥.iij. coralli rubri ʒ.j. thuris ℥.ij. aloes epaticae ℥.ss. chartae pa∣pyraceae combustae ʒ.ij. sanguinis draconis ʒ.ij.ss. farinae volatilis ʒ.iij. masticis ʒ.ij. boli armeni ʒ.ij.ss. vitrioli combusti ʒ.ss. terrae sigillatae, ʒ.j.ss. Make them in fine powder, and when you applie it, let it not bee remo∣ued in thrée daies. Another. Rec. Calcis viuae ʒ.ij. boli armeni ʒ.iij. sanguinis draconis, mummae, lapid haema∣titis, masticis, olibani, sarcocollae, ana.ʒ.j.ss. aloes epaticae ʒ.iij.ss. terrae sigillatae ʒ.j thu∣ris ℥.ss. farinae volatilis ʒ.iij. Make them in fine powder and vse it. A powder consolidatiue for wounds. Henricus.Rec. Corticum pini, ℥.i. lithargyrij, ceru∣sae, ana.℥.ss. nucum cupressi, centaurij mi∣noris,
aristolochiae vstae, ana.ʒ.ij. Make them in fine powder. A powder to agglutinate wounds. Rec. Radicum consolidae maioris ʒ.iij. masticis ʒ.ij. olibani ʒ.ij.ss. mummiae, myr∣rhae, sarcocollae, aloes epaticae, colophoniae, ana.ʒ.ij. sanguinis draconis ʒ.j.ss. gummi tra∣gaganti, arabici, ana.ʒ.ij. Make them in fine powder and vse it. A powder for wounds in the head. Rec. Myrrhae ℥.ss. sem. rubiae tinctorum,Anderna∣cus. cyperi, iridis, sarcocollae, ana.ʒ.iij. Make these in powder, and you may well adde to them Saunders, and other drying things, for seeing the skinne of the head is hard and drie, it must be healed with like remedies. Another. Rec. Rad. aristolochiae,Weckerus. iridis florentini, cort. thuris, sarcocollae, sanguinis draconis, ana.ʒ.j. nucum cupressi ʒ.ss. myrtillorū ʒ.ss. centaurij minoris ℈.j. coralli ℈.ij. farinae o∣robi ʒ.j. Make them in very fine powder, which you must applie upon pleagets, and lay vpon them Emplastr. bethonicae vel de caprifolio.
Another. Rec. Sarcocollae, myrrhae, aloes epaticae, ana ʒ.iij. thuris, ʒ.j.ss. sanguinis draconis ℈.ij. croci. gr.xij. Make them in fine powder. A red powder agglutinatiue for wounds in the lips. Vesalius.Rec. Boli armeni, terrae sigillatae, ana ʒ.vj. thuris, masticis, sarcocollae, ana ʒ.ij.ss. myr∣rhae, aloes, ana ʒ.j.ss. tragaganti. sang. draco∣nis ana ʒ.j. farinae hordei & fabarum, ana ʒ.ss. Mixe them and make them in fine pow∣der, whereof you shal incorporate some with the white of an egge to your vse. A powder adstrictiue to be vsed in stitching of wounds. Rec. Farinae volatilis ʒ.iij. boli armeni, thuris, ana ℥.ss. olibani, masticis, myrrhae, a∣na ʒ.ij.ss. sanguinis draconis ʒ.iij.ss. lapidis haematitis ʒ.j. Make them in fine powder, which you shal vse with the white of an egg, and spread it vpon a cloath, and let it lie too one night, and on the morrow stitch the clo∣thes, whereby you may ioyne the edges of the wounds.
A powder to cicatrize wounds and vlcers. Rec. Corticum pini, nucum cupressi, ana ʒ.iij. masticis, thuris, sarcocollae, aloes epa∣ticae, mummiae, balaustiorum, malecorij, ana ʒ.ij. vitrioli combusti, aluminis vsti, a∣na ʒ.ij.ss. chartae papyraceae ʒ.iij. saluiae sic∣cae ʒ.ij. lapidis calaminaris, lithargyrij ar∣genti, cinabrij, sang. draconis ana ℈.ij. su∣macis ʒ.ij. centaurij minoris ʒ.j.ss. myrrhae, ʒ.j. coralli rubri ʒ.iij. tutiae ʒ.j plumbi vsti, ʒ.j.ss. Make them in fine pouder to your vse. A powder to staie great fluxes of blood after a legge or arme is cut off. Rec. Boli armeni ℥.iij. sanguinis dracon. aloes epaticae,Clowes. ana ℥.j. terrae sigillatae, masti∣cis, ana ℥.ss. croci martis ℥.ij. lapid. haema∣titis ℥.ss. calcis ex testis ouorum, mummiae, ana ℥.j. gypsi ʒ.vj. farinae volatil.℥.iiij. Bring all these to a fine powder, and for applying thereof, mixe of it with the whites of egges and Hares haires clipte so short as is possi∣ble, according to the quantitie you neede. A powder for wounds in the nose. Rec. Masticis,Vesalius. thuris, myrrhae, tragaganti,
gummi arabici, ana.ʒ.ij. farinae foenugraeci ℥.ss. Make a powder and vse it after good digestion, made with the yolke of an Egge and Turpentine. A powder to make trochisces to eate downe superfluous flesh in vlcers. Vesalius.Rec. Auripigmenti ʒ.xij. sandaracae ʒ.vj. calcis viuae ʒ.viij. chartae papyraceae com∣bustae, ʒ.j. Make them in fine powder, and with the iuyce or decoction of Myrtill forme your Trochisces. A corosiue powder for vlcers. Rec. Mercurij praecipitati, argenti sub∣limati ana.ʒ.ss. vitrioli combusti, aluminis, ana.℈.ij. floris aeris ℈.j. coralli rubr.ʒ.ss. ci∣nabrij ℈.ij. Make them in fine powder. A powder for a Fistula. Rec. Mercurij praecipitati ℥.ss. vitrioli combusti ʒ.iij. masticis, boli armeni, ana.ʒ.ij. Make them in fine powder, and vse it according to Art. Another for the same. Rec. Vitrioli combusti ℥.j. boli armeni ʒ.ij.ss. masticis, ʒ.j. Make them in fine pow∣der, and kéepe it to your vse.
A powder to abate proud flesh, and lay open a filthie vlcer. Rec. Mercurij sublimati ʒ.iij. boli arme∣ni ʒ.ij.ss. masticis ʒ.j. Fiat puluis subtiliss. A powder to remoue a scale of a corrupt bone. Rec. Salis agarici & tartari vini albi, ana partes aequales. Fiat puluis subtilissimus.Angelus Bologni∣nus. A powder to cause flesh in a hollowe vlcer. Rec. Aloes electae ʒ.ij. thuris & cort. e∣iusdem,Valcriola. myrrhae, sarcocollae, ana.ʒ.j. radicum iridis florentini ℈.iiij. Make them in fine powder. A powder exiccatiue for vlcers. Rec. Aloes,Galen. olibani, sang. draconis, sarco∣collae, ana.ʒ.iij. aristolochiae adustae, cerusae, corticum arboris spinae, centaurij minoris, ana.ʒ.j. gallarum, balaustiorum, ana.ʒ.ij. Make them in fine powder. A powder for drie vlcers. Rec. Cerusae,Galenus. rosarum, balaustiorum, ana.ʒ.viij. sem. rosarum aluminis, gallarū, ana.ʒ.iij. aristolochiae longae adustae, ʒ.iij. thuris ʒ.j. Make them in fine powder.
A powder to drie and cicatrize vlcers in moyst bodies. Rec. Thuris.℥.j. aloes ʒ.iij. sang. draconis ʒ.ij. sarcocollae ʒ.j. aristolochiae combust.ʒ.ij.ss. ossis humanae combustae, ʒ.iij. corti∣cum pini ʒ.ij. cerusae, gallarum, balaustio∣rum, ana.℈.iiij. aluminis vsti ʒ.vij. Mixe them and make them in fine powder. A powder for moyst and hol∣lowe vlcers. Rec. Thuris ʒ.iij. masticis ʒ.j. myrrhae ʒ.ij. sarcocollae ʒ.iiij. farinae orobi ʒ.ss. balau∣stiorum, malicorij, cinabrij, saluiae siccae, a∣ristolochiae rotund. ana.ʒ.ss. aluminis vsti ℈.iiij. vitrioli, combusti ʒ.iiij. Make them in fine powder. A powder to cicatrize and heale vlcers, which must be dissolued in water. Rec. Camphorae calcinatae ℥.j. vitrioli combusti ℥.j.ss. cinabrij, ʒ.iij. aluminis vsti ʒ.ij. praecipitati ʒ.vj. boli armeni ʒ.iij. masti∣cis ʒ.ij. thuris ℥.ss. sarcocollae ʒ.vj. Make them in fine powder, and when you will vse it, take Rose-water, white wine, and aqua vitae, of each halfe a pint, warme them at the fire, and put to them of the powder one ounce, so let them remaine ten houres, then straine it to your vse.
A powder to cicatrize vlcers. Rec. Cineris anethi, plumbi vsti, terrae si∣gillatae, ana.ʒ.ij. litharg. argenti ʒ.j. cinabrij, ʒ.iij. balaustiorum ʒ.j.ss. aluminis vsti ℈.j.ss cerusae ℈.ij. testarum cancrorum fluuia∣lium ʒ.ij. chartae nigrae exiccatae ʒ.j. Make all in fine powder. A cicatrizing powder to be vsed in vl∣cers of the yard. Rec. Lithargyrij auri & argenti,Vigo. ana.ʒ.j. tutiae ʒ.ss. boli armeni, terrae sigillatae, ana.ʒ.j.ss. myrabol. citrinorum, aluminis rochae combustae, ana.℈.j. Mixe them to your vse. A powder for vlcers in the priuities which doth exiccate, mundifie, incar∣nate, and agglutinate. Rec. Cort. thuris, aloes lotae, myrrhae,Weckerus. sar∣cocollae, gummi elemi, ana.ʒ.ss. aneti vsti ℈.j. corticum pini ℈.ij. tutiae praeparatae, an∣timonij, plumbi vsti, cerusae, ana.ʒ.j. sang. draconis ℈.ij. Make them in fine powder, and vse it. A Corosiue powder very easie and profitable. Rec. Merc. praecipitati ℥.ss. cinabrij ʒ.j.ss
vitrioli combust.℈.ij. masticis ʒ.ij. sarco∣collae ʒ.j.ss. vermium terrestrium ℈.ij.ss. Make them in fine powder. A corosiue powder very good and stronger. D. Foster.Rec. Merc. praecipitati ℥.ss. cinabrij ʒ.j. vitrioli combusti, ʒ.ss. aluminis vsti ʒ.j. ma∣sticis ℥.j. myrrhae ℥.ss. sarcocollae ʒ.j. croci ℈.ss. Make them in powder and kéepe it to your vse. Another corosiue powder. Rec. Mercurij praecipitati ℥.ss. masticis, ℥.ss. cinabrij ʒ.ij. sarcocollae ʒ.ij.ss. aluminis vsti ʒ.j. Make them all in fine powder, and mixe them together. A Causticke powder. Rec. Pulueris sublimati, ʒ.ij. succi hyos∣ciami, ℥.j. Mixe them together, and let them drie together: afterward make them to ve∣rie fine powder. A merueilous powder that by stoole spendet away scrofulous tumors. Arnaldus à magistro & Michaele Scoto.Rec. Ligni aloes, margaritarum perfora∣tarum, ossis de corde cerui, spicae nardi, blattae bizantiae, nucis moscatae, cariophyl∣lorum,
galangae, thuris, coriādri, nucis mos∣catae, piperis, diagredij in pomo cocti, ana.ʒ.j. ambrae gra.ij. euphorbij ʒ.j.ss. Grinde them all seuerally, and searse them finely, then mixe them, and hereof giue a nutshell full at once cum aqua frigida. It giueth fif∣téene or twentie stooles, and carrieth away the matter of scrofula. Another seruing in like manner for Botium or Bronchocele. Rec. Spongiae adustae,Ex manu∣scripto. gallae marinae ad∣ustae, bedeguar adust. corticis ouorum ad∣usti, limaturae martis praeparatae, prunicis, ossium sepiae, ana.ʒ.ss. sem. plantaginis, nu∣cis moscatae, gariophyllorum, cinamomi, ana.℈.j. piperis, zinziberis, salis gemmae, turpeti hermodactyllorum, ana.℈.j. aristo∣log long. & rotundae, ellebori alb. & nigri, ana.℈.ss. Fiat omnium puluis subtiliss. The Doss. is ʒ.j. morning and euening. A powder for preseruing and quickning of the eye-sight, to be vsed ordinarilie in the meates. Rec. Leuistici,Ex manu∣scripto. ameos, apij, sileris monta∣ni, cymini, saluiae, calamenti, anisi, carda∣momi, origani, aneti, carui, foeniculi, thy∣mi,
piperis, hyssopi, petroselini, ana ℈.j. ci∣namomi, gariophyllorum, galangae, croci, pulegei, ana.℥.j. Make all to most fine pow∣der. A powder to heale vlcers of hard cu∣ration in the tongue. Balthrop.Rec. Aluminis combusti, ʒ.ij. coccinei panni floccos, a pretie quantitie, drie, or ra∣ther parch them vpon a newe hot tile, vntill the color vade, then make both in fine pow∣der, and adde pulueris gariophyllorum gra. iiij. Grinde them finely together, and keepe it in a glasse, it will be of an ash color, applie it vpon a little lint wet in plantaine, or red rose-water, els rub the places therewith. A powder to take away warts in the secret parts. Balthrop.Rec. Auripigmenti, sabinae, ana ℥.j. Make them together in fine powder. Another. Baker.Rec. Sabinae siccatae ℥.j. hermodactylo∣rum torrefactorum, myrtillorum torrefact. ana ʒ.iij. vitrioli romani, aluminis, ana.ʒ.ij. auripigmenti rub.ʒ.j. Make these into most fine powder. If you adde opij ℈.j. it will worke without paine.
An excellent powder to stay any fluxe of bloud, and preseruing the stitches of a wound. Rec. Colophoniae, ℥.iiij. boli armeni ℥.ij.Baker. masticis, olibani, sanguinis draconis, ana.℥.ss. rad. consolidae ma. rosarum, ana.ʒ.ij. Fiat. I haue applied this powder with the haires of a Hare and whites of Egges: as also with whites of Egges alone. A merueilous powder to be giuen inward, and applied outward, to resist the malignitie of a Canker. Rec. Auri & argenti foliatorum,Antonius Montagna∣na. ana ℥.ss lapidis bezoar ℥.j. pulu. cancrorum marino∣rum ℥.j.ss. Mixe them to applie it, grinde thereof cum aqua scordij to the forme a Li∣niment, and applie it.
Purgations by Potions. A Potion for the Canker not vlcerated. Weckerus.REc. Fumariae m.j. senae, epithymi, ana.ʒ.iij. florum anthos p.ij. Infuse them in foure ounces of Whey, then straine them, and dissolue therein, rhabarbari in aqua bu∣glossae infusi ʒ.j. cinamomi gra.iiij. mannae ℥.j.ss. cassiae ʒ.vj. and so make your Potion. A Potion solutiue to be vsed in Erisi∣pelas phlegmonides. Vesalius.Rec. Rhabarbari electi ℈.iiij. florum vio∣larum & boraginis, ana.ʒ.j. decoctionis ta∣marindorum q.s. Infuse the flowers and rhewbarbe tenne houres, then straine them, and in the straining dissolue therein diaca∣tholici ʒ.iij. syrupi rosarum ℥.ij. And make a Potion according to Art. A Potion for the swelling in the throate. Weckerus.Rec. Agarici trochiscati in oxymelite simplici infusi & expressi, ℈.iiij. turbith ʒ.j salis gemmae gra.vj. zinzibris gra.vj. syrupi rosarum solut.℥.j.ss. aquarum betonicae & melissae ana.℥.ij. Mixe them, and make a Potion.
A potion for a virulent and co∣rosiue vlcer. Rec. Florū boraginis & violarū,Weckerus. ana p.j. rad. cychorij ℥.ss. passularū ℥.ss. polypodij glycyrrhizae, ana.ʒ.ij. prunorum paria.v. se∣besten ℥.ss. rhabarbari ʒ.iij. agarici ʒ.j.ss. sennae ʒ.x. spicae indicae ʒ.j. salis gemmae ʒ.ss. zinzibris ʒ.j. Boyle them in sufficient wa∣ter, and make a potion for two draughts, whereby you shall adde syrupi rosati laxa∣tiui, ℥.ij. A potion for such as haue vlcers in the yard. Rec. Prunorum damascenorum,Andreas Lacuna. glycyr∣rhizae razae, tamarindorum, hordei mun∣dati, ana.ʒ.iij. sem. frigid. maiorum mun∣dat. ana.ʒ.ij.ss. trium florum cordialium, ana.p.j. Boyle them together, and in the de∣coction dissolue pulpae cassiae recenter ex∣tractae, & diacatholici, ana.ʒ.v. syrupi solu∣tiui ex nona infusione rosarum ℥.v. pulueris electuarij trium sandalorum ℈.j. Make it according to Art. A gentle lenitiue potion for delicate persons in the cure of lues Venerea. Rec. Syrupi rosarum ℥.iij. mannae electae ℥.j.ss. aquae violarum ℥.ij. Fiat potio.Matthiolus
Another more purging in the like case. MatthiolusRec. Syr. rosarum solut. syr. cychorij com∣pos. mannae electae, ana ℥.j. electuarij leniti∣ui ʒ.iij. electuarij de succo rosarum ʒ.ij.ss. rhabarb. pulu. subtilis.ʒ.ss. spicae gra.ij. cum decoctione florum & fructuū cordialium. Fiat potio. A purging decoction for such as are infected with lues Venerea. Nicolaus Massa.Rec. Fol. sennae ℥.j.ss. fumiterrae ℥.j. capill. veneris ℥.ss. scolopendriae ℥.ss. epithymi, thy∣mi, ana ʒ.vj. glycyrrhizae, rasae ʒ.iij. colocin∣thidis ʒ.ij. hellebori nigri ʒ.j.ss. myrabol. in∣dorum ʒ.vij. prunorum damascenorum nu∣mero xij. sebesten. nu.x. Tamarindorū ℥.j. succi fumiterrae lib.j. aquae fumiterrae q.s. Make hereof a decoction according to Art, and filtre it, and giue it with appropriate sy∣rupes for the humors offending. A decoction of guiacum to be vsed in lue Venerea. Calmeeus.Rec. Ligni sancti lib.j. cort. eiusdem lib.ss. aquae puriss. lib.x. Infuse them and let them soke xxiiii. houres, and boyle them to the third part, then take radicum enulae campa∣nae, dactylorum ab ossibus separatorum,
ana lib.j.ss. senae orientalis ℥.j. Soke them in sixe pound of white wine xxiiii. houres vpon hot embers, so that the wine be almost readie to seeth, then straine it, and put the first decoction to this, and adde sacchari lib. ss. cinamomi ℥.j. and foure houres after let them runne through a strainer, and euery morning let the paient take fiue or sixe oun∣ces, and before supper, or when he goeth to bed asmuch, and put to the residents of the first decoction, aquae purissimae, lib.xv. and boyle them to the consumption of the third part, and put to as much Sugar and Cina∣mon as is sufficient to make them accep∣table. A decoction to be vsed of vlcerated bodies. Rad. Radicum helenij foliorum hederae ana ℥.iiij. succi anthos, capillorum venris, mentastri, pulegij, gallitrici, pollitrici, ma∣tricariae, ana m.j. rad. foeniculi, apij ana ℥.ij. rad. cychoriae ℥.iij. sennae ℥.j.ss. polypodij quercini, glycyrrhizae, ana ʒ.x. croci gra.iij. agaric. trochisc.℥.j.ss. Boyle them in tenne pound of raine water, & mellis puriss. lib.j. till two parts out of three be wasted, and let him take thereof sixe ounces in the morning and sweate after it.
A decoction to be vsed in the cure of lues Venerea. Rec. Radicum buglossae, capill. veneris, florum buglossae, ana.m.ss. polypodij, epi∣thymi, ana.ʒ.vj. myrabolanorum nigrorum & chebulorum, ana.℥.viij. rhabarbari electi ʒ.iij. folliculorum senae ℥.iij. agarici frusta∣tim incisi, chamaepyteos, chamaedryos, ana.℥.ss. zinzibris ʒ.j.ss. vuarum passarum, gly∣cyrrhizae, ana.℥.j. veratri nigri ʒ.j.ss. squi∣nanti ʒ.ss. fumariae, m.j. eupatorij ℥.j.ss. Boyle all but the epithimum and rhabarb. in fiue pound of Whey, till the halfe be wa∣sted, then put in the rest, and let them haue one walme, then straine them and clarifie it, and adde thereto oxymellitis simplicis & zacchari, ana.℥.j.ss. syrupi acetosi simplic. & composit. syrupi fumariae, ana.℥.ij.ss. Whereof he shall take euery morning fiue ounces at a time. A decoction for Palsies, Crampes, Rheumes, Scabbes and diseases proceeding of moysture. Rec. Ligni guaiaci ℥.vj. cort. eiusdem ℥.ij. sarsaeparillae ℥.ij.ss. chinae ℥.j. rad. lapathi a∣cuti ℥.j. rhabarbari, turpeti albi & gummo∣si, agarici, ana.℥.ss. polypodij ℥.iiij. medullae,
sem. cartami ℥.ss. cort. capparis ℥.j. rad. ape∣rientium, ana.℥.ss. saluiae m.iij. absynthij ro∣mani m.j.ss. anisorū ℥.ij. glycyrrhizae ℥.iiij. mellis lib.j. cinamomi ℥.vj. vini albi lib.iiij. aquae fontanae lib. xvj. Infuse them one night, and boyle them twentie houres, then straine it, and clarifie it, and reserue it to your vse in a vessell, of the which decoction he shall take euery morning fasting foure ounces, before dinner thrée ounces, and be∣fore supper three ounces; then boyle the re∣sidents againe with so much water as be∣fore, vini albi, & mellis rosarum, ana. lib.ij. for the patient to drink at his meales. This potion must be vsed thirtie daies, and let him sweate tenne daies by the space of an houre in a day; and if his bodie be not sufficiently purged, let him take thrée ounces of the first decoction, mannae electae ℥.j. syrupirosarum solutiui ℥.ss. confectionis hamech ʒ.ij. For one draught. A purging decoction, or (as the author calleth it) a soluble syrupe of very effectuall worke in strong vlcerate bodies, or such as are hard to worke vpon. Rec. Saluiae, rosmarini, absynthij,Phiorauan∣tius. cicho∣rij, cardui benedicti, vrticae, origani, ana.m.j
ficuum, passularum, dactylorum, amygda∣larum dulciū, salis gemmae ana ℥.iiij. colo∣quintidae, aloes hepat. cinamomi, myrabol. citrinorum, ana ℥.ij. mellis puriss. lib.ij. stampe all (besides the honie) in grosse: in∣fuse them in aquae font. lib.xviij. then boyle it to the halfe: after straine it, distill it by a filtre, adde to it aquae ros. opt. lib.j. and two carretes of Muske (saith the Author) but I wish some parte of it to be kept without the Muske, for that some will not abide the smell thereof. The quantitie (saith the Au∣thor) is from foure ounces to sixe, but you shal seldome need to go aboue thrée ounces.
Purgation by pilles. A purging pill for bodies infected with the pockes. REc. Myrabol. omnium,Matthiolus trochisc. colo∣cynthid. masticis, diagredij, hermoda∣ctylorum, turpeti, agarici praeparati, ana ʒ.j origani, cumini, ana ʒ.ss. rhabarbari ʒ.j.ss. spicaenardi, zinzibris, ana ℈, j. salis gemmi ℈.j.ss. hellebori nigri ℈.ij. polypodij quer∣cini ʒ.j. sem. ebuli ʒ.ij. pulueris hieraesym∣plic. diamoscu dulcis, ana ℈.ij. aloes lotae ℥.ij. theriacae ʒ.ij. Pulu. subtilissimè & cum syrupo fumiterrae q.s. fiat massa. Pilles to be vsed in the cure of Alo∣pecia Gallica. Rec. Rhabarbari, agarici,Rondele∣tius. ana ʒ.ij. aloes ℥.j argenti viui extincti in succo rosarum ʒ.iij. cinamomi, ambrae, ana ℈.j. myrrhae, masticis, ana ʒ.j. cum terebinthina excipi∣antur, & formentur pillulae octo pro ʒ.j. ca∣piat pro vna vice ℈.j. Deinde ʒ.j.ss. postre∣mo ℈.j. pro diuitibus adde limaturae auri, vel pannorum auri ℈.iiij.
Pilles for the same. Vigo.Rec. Myrabolanorum emblicorum, bel∣lericorum, indorum, ana.ʒ.ij.ss. specierum pillularum mastichinarum ℥.ss. staechados, folliculorum sennae, epithymi, croci, ana.ʒ.ss. gentianae, anisorum ana.ʒ.j. polypodij quer∣cini, ellebori nigri, ana.ʒ.ij. turpeti albi & gummosi ʒ.j.ss. diagredij ℈.iiij. zinzibris, serapini, cinamomi, nucis moscatae, ligni a∣loes, tormentillae, dictami; cardui benedi∣cti, colocinthidis, ana.℈.ij. agarici trochise rhabarbari electi, aloes lotae, ana.℥.ss. the∣riacae opt. galeni ʒ.vj. and with syrupo ace∣toso, make your masse. Doss est ʒ.j. Wher∣of make fiue pilles, and after them other fiue. Pilles for lues Venerea. Rondele∣tius.Rec. Laudani puri, hypocistidis, ana.ʒ.j. aloes ℥.j. ambrae, mosci, ana ℈.j. argenti vi∣ui loti in vino ʒ.ij. incorporentur simul cū syrupo rosato laxatiuo & fiant pillulae. Whereof the patient shall take euery mor∣ning one scruple, but these Pilles must not bée taken before the bodie bée euacua∣ted.
An effectuall pill to purge rusticall and foule vlcerated bodies. Rec. Pulpae colocinthidis ℥.v. aquae vi∣tae optimae lib.ij.Phiarouan∣tius & Ba∣nester. Let them stand to stéepe thrée daies, then straine them stronglie, and adde to the strained part aloes purissimae, veratri nigri. ana ℥.j hermodactillorum ℥.j. agarici ℥.ss. Let these in fine powder stande with the rest in a hote place till it be almost drie: then put to it croci, cinamomi, dia∣gredij, florum sulphuris, ana ℥. semis. Fiat∣que Mass. Pilles for paine in the ioynts procee∣ding of Alopecia Gallica, or Lues venerea. Rec. Aloes ℥.j. galangae, myrrhae, agari∣ci,Rondele∣tius. salis gemmae, ana ʒ.j. succi absynthij ʒ.j.ss. And with water of Wormwood make your Masse, whereof the Patient shall take in the morning when hee ariseth, one dram, twice or thrice in a wéeke. A prooued Pill that consumeth the tumor Scrofula awaie by Stoole. Accipiatur Talpa:Henricus Anglicus. boyle it sufficientlie,
then drie it in the Sunne, and bring it to a fine searsed powder: then mingle it well cū melle albo. Hereof make pilles of the big∣nesse of chiches, and giue euerie daie thrée or fiue with whey. It shall consume the mat∣ter of the scrofulaes downward. For inwarde medicines in this case see more among the powders and decoctions. Magistrall pilles of Turbith minerall of great vse against the French pockes, hard tumors, and rebellious vlcers. The first. Banester.Rec. Sagapeni in vino cretico dissoluti, ℥.ij. salis guaiaci, colocynthidis, diagredij. ana ℥.j. turpeti mineralis ʒ.x. mosci ℈.j. olei gariophyllorū gran. xij. Fiat Massa. Doss. from twelue graines to twentie. Another. Banester.Rec. Extracti colocinthidis ℈.iiij. ex∣tracti rhabarbari, extracti hermodactylo∣rum, ana ʒ.j. extracti veratri nigri ℈.ij. sa∣gapeni in aqua coelesti dissoluti ʒ.vj. mosci & ambrae odoratissimae, ana gran.xij. Fiat massa. Doss. a gran.x. ad gran.xvj. fortenne
daies togeather, or vntill the Patient fluxe sufficientlie at the mouth. The third sort most safe and acceptable, deuised and practised with great successe in the most delicate yong and tender per∣sons. Rec. Turpeti mineralis ℥.iij.ss. fol. auri & argenti,Banester. ana ℈.j. soluti perlarum gran. xxvj. terrae samiae, boli orientalis, ana ℈.ss. cornu monocerotis gra.xv. lapidis Bezoar∣dici ℈.ss. ossis de corde cerui, rasurae eboris, ana gr.xij. lapid. granati, rubentis, saphyri & smaragdi praeparatorum ana gr.viij. co∣ralli albi & rubri praeparat. ana gr.vj. mos∣ci gr.vij. ambrae odoratiss. gr.iiij. Fiat eorum omnium puluis subtillissimus. Rec. huius pulueris gr.xviij. diagredij gr.xxxviij. con∣seruae berberis as much as sufficeth to make your Masse. This quantitie diuide into sixe or twelue pilles (according as you iudge fit∣test for the strength and such like circum∣stances concerning your patient) and giue one euerie night when the partie goeth to bedde, so long vntill there bee flux at mouth, which in some will not be in twelue, or per∣haps in twentie daies.
An extraction, purging all corrupt humors proceeding ex lue Gallica. Rennerus.Rec. Colocynt.ʒ.vj.℈.ij. turbethi, stae∣chad. arab. ana.ʒ.x. diagredij ʒ.v. agarici al∣bi ℥.ss. rhabarbari electi ℥.ij.. cinamo.℈.iiij. azari, rosarum rubrarum, spicae indicae, masticis, ligni aloes, styracis liquidae, ana.℈.ij.ss. aloes cicatrini ʒ.xiij. Make it accor∣ding to Art.
Plaisters. A plaister to mollifie and resolue a schyrrous tumor. REc. Caricas pingues nu.xij.Calmeteus. Boyle them and stampe them, ammoniaci, bdellij, galbani, in aceto dissolutorum ana.℥.ij. sty∣racis liquidae ℥.j. muscilaginis althaeae, sem. lini & foenugraeci, ana.℥.ij. oesypi, butyri re∣centis, ana ℥.j. olei ricinini, vel sesamini, vel liliorum ℥.iij. cerae q.s. Make a plaister ac∣cording to Art. A plaister to be vsed in the cure of scirrhus exquisitus. Rec. Axungiae gallinae,Calmeteus, ℥.j.ss. taxi muli & asini ana.℥.ij. medullae crurium vituli & cerui, ana ℥.iij. oesypi, styracis calamit. bdel∣lij, ana. quart.ss. muscilag. sem. althaeae, lini & foenugraeci, ana.℥.ij. masticis, thuris, ana.℥.ss. olei amygdalarum dulcium, amureae, olei liliorum, ana ℥.iij.ss. cerae q.s. to make a plaister. A plaister to resolue hard tumors. Rec. Serapini ℥.iiij. ammoniaci ℥.iij. bdel∣lij ℥.j. euphorbij ℥.ij. galbani ℥.ss. Dissolue the gummes in malmesey, then adde there∣to
ol. liliorum & ol. amigdalarum dulcium, ana ℥.j. propoleos ℥.iiij.ss. Mixe them for a plaister. A plaister for a wenne. Calmeteus.Rec. Radic. brioniae, cyclaminis, cucu∣meris agrestis, althaeae, lilij coelestis ana ℥.ij. Boyle them perfectlie in white wine, & beat them; then adde theretoo ammoniaci in ace∣to scillitico dissoluti, bdellij & oppopona∣cis in oleo sesamino dissolutorum, ana ℥.j. stercoris columbini & caprini, ana ℥.j. sem. laudani, styracis calamitae, ana ℥.ss. picis na∣ualis quantum sufficit for a plaister. Another. Weckerus.Rec. Ol. liliorum vel laurini ℥.xij. pi∣cis siccae ℥.vj. laudani ℥.iij. lithargyrij ℥.xij. galbani ℥.iij. styracis ℥.ij. aeruginis ʒ.xij. Mixe them according to Arte, and make a plaister. A plaister maturatiue for wennes. Weckerus.Rec. Radicum althaeae, liliorum ana lib. ss. Boyle them in water, then stampe them, and straine them, and adde thereto alliorū sub prunis coctorum, caeparum coctarum ana ℥.iij. olei liliorum, butyri ana ℥.ij. pin∣gued.
suillae, anserinae, ana ℥.ij.ss. farinae tri∣ticeae, foenugreci, seminis lini, ana quantum sufficit, vitellos duos ouorum. Mixe them and make a plaister. A plaister for a wenne. Rec. Olei antiqui, vel liliorum,Calmeu. vel lau∣rini, ℥.xij. picis siccae ℥.vj. laudani ℥.iij. li∣thargyrij ℥.xij. galbani ℥.iij. styracis ℥.ij. Boyle the lytharge with the oyle till it be thicke: then adde too the pitch & other things being remoued from the fire, & make a plai∣ster. A plaister for nodes and glandu∣lous tumors. Rec. Stercoris vaccarum ℥.ij. radicū cau∣lium,Auicen. rad. capparis, squillae, ficuum pingui∣um ana ℥.ss. lupinorū, bdellij, ana ʒ.ij. mel∣lis, aceti, axungiae porcinae, amurcae, olei an∣tiqui, ana quod sufficit. Make a plaister in good forme. Another for the same. Rec. Cerae citrin. lib.j. ammoniaci ℥.xij.Banester. oppoponacis, galbani, ana ℥.j. butyri recen∣tis ℥.i.ss. pingued. caponis ℥.j. Dissolue the gummes in wine and make a plaister.
Another. Calmeteus.Rec. Radicum althaeae, & brioniae, co∣ctarum & pistarum, ana.℥.j. axungiae suillae recentis ℥.j.ss. pingued. gallinae, anseris & a∣natis, ana.℥.ss. medullae crurium vituli, ℥.ij. olei lumbricorum, liliorum & vitellorum ouorum, ana.℥.j. styracis calamitae ℥.j.ss. gummi arabici ℥.ij. bdellij, gummi hederae ana.℥.j.ss. terebinthinae ℥.iij. oesypi ʒ.vj. em∣plastri Io. de Vigo ℥.ij. emplastri de meli∣loto & diachylonis ireati, ana.℥.j. mercurij in saliua hominis ieiuni extincti ℥.ij. Mixe them together, and with your hands washed in aqua vitae: labour them well, and make them in rolles. A plaister for all knots. Rec. Olibani ℥.j.ss. masticis ℥.j. myrrhae, ℥.ss. thuris ℥.ij. cerae.℥.xij. resinae ℥.iij ss. eu∣phorbij.ʒ.iij. gummi ammoniaci ℥.j. galba∣ni, ℥.ss. gummi arabici, dragaganti, ana.ʒ.iij. aloes epaticae ʒ.ij. laudani ʒ.j.ss. sagapeni, bdellij, ana.ʒ.iij. báccarum lauri ʒ.ij.ss. vn∣guenti dialthaeae ℥.ij.ss. terebint.℥.j. aquae vi∣tae ʒ.iij.ss. olei spicae ʒ.iij. axungiae porcinae ℥.ij.ss. theriacae ℥.ss. rad. ireos ʒ.ij.ss. cinabrij, ℥.ij. argenti fugitiui mortificati ℥.ij.ss. Make a plaister to Art.
A notable plaister to resolue and spend away all nodes and knottie tumors, especiallie comming of the pockes, if they be ta∣ken in time before they be con∣firmed, and the bone foule. Rec. Mercurij ℥.viij. plumbi ℥.vj.Banester. Melte your plumbum first, and after a litle cooling put too the mercurie, and shake them wel to∣gether: put them so into cruciples, & when it is colde, take thereof ℥.vj. turpeti minera∣lis ℥.j. cinabrij ℥.iij. Labour them in a mor∣ter of yron the space of two houres, or vntill it be finelie powdred: then haue in readines gummi ammoniaci in aceto distillato dis∣soluti ℥.xxx. pingued. viperarum ℥.iiij. and (for delicate persons) mosci ℈.iiij. Mixe al∣together according to Art, and vse it to the places aforesaid. Or thus more simplie. Rec. Plumbi mercuriati (which is taughtBanester. in the receipt next before going) lib.j. turpe∣ti mineralis ℥.iiij. cinabrij.℥.ij. Grind them together verie fine, and with gummi am∣moniaci lib.ij. in aceto dissoluti fiat empla∣strum.
Another for wennes scrofulaes, and ganglious knottes. Banester.Rec. Gummi ammoniaci inaceto disso∣luti lib.ss. radic. brioniae pulu.℥.j. turp. mi∣neralis ℥.j. cinabrij ʒ.x. cerae ℥.ij. Fiat. Or thus no lesse effectuall. Banester.Rec. Gummi ammoniaci, ℥.vj. radic. bri∣oniae & althaeae, ana ℥.j. turpeti mineralis, ʒ.v. butyri recentis q.s. cerae albae ℥.j. Fiat emplastrum. Another verie excellent and of great proofe. H. de Ot∣then.Rec. Medullae radic. brioniae albae, per cocturam lixiuij extractae ℥.ij. casei anti∣quissimi in decocto pernae remolliti, ℥.j.ss. ammoniaci, galbani, sagapeni in aceto dis∣solutorum, ana ℥.ss. medullae crurium vitu∣li, axungiae humanae, ana ℥.ij. pyrethri, car∣damomi, ana ʒ.ij.ss. euphorbij ʒ.iij. lapidis gagatis ℥.ss. sulphuris viui ʒ.vj. marcasitae verae ʒ.x. argenti viui saliua ieiuni hominis extincti, ℥.ijss. Cum cera citrina fiat em∣plastrum. But before you applie it, annoint the place with this mixture following. Rec. medullae crurium vituli, olei petreolei, ana partes aequales. Mixe them.
A plaister for Ganglium. Rec. Gummi ammoniaci, sagapeni in a∣qua vitae dissoluti, ana ℥.j. Put too it (the a∣qua vitae vapored away) sulphuris viui sub∣tiliter pulv.℥.ss. And so make it a plaister. A plaister against nodes & paines in Lue venerea. Rec. Cerae citrinae lib.j. resinae pini ℥.iiij. axungiae humanae ℥.iij. ol. chamaemel.℥.iiij. medullae crurium vaccarum lib.ss. gummi elemi ℥.v. muccaginis rad. althaeae, & sem. lini, ana ℥.iiij. Mixe them and boyle them to the wasting of the muscilages: adde to the straining ammoniaci, galb. ana ℥.vj. bdellij, sagapeni in vino cret. dissolut. ana ℥.iiij. rad. brioniae ℥.j.ss. rad. enulae campanae ℥.ss. eu∣phorbij ʒ.iij. cinabrij ℥.vj. argenti viui ex∣tincti & incorporati cum terebinthina & styrace liquida ℥.viij. Fiat emplastrum. Another. Rec. Axungiae porcinae lib.ij. olei com∣munis lib.j.ss. radic. brioniae & althaeae, ana lib.ss. vini albi lib.j. Infuse them x. daies, then boyle them to the consumption of the liquor, so straine it: after put too lythargyrij auri ℥.xx. vitrioli.℥.iij. Boyle them to the forme of a Cerote: put too it galbani, ammo∣niaci, bdellij in aceto dissolutor. ana ℥.viij.
cerae citrinae lib.ss. cinabrij ℥.vj. terebinthi∣nae ℥.iij. euphorbij ʒ.ij. argenti viui extinc∣ti lib.ss. myrrhae ℥.ij. Fiat Emplastrum. A plaister to mitigate paine in the cure of a Carbuncle. Weckerus.Rec. Maluarum, violarum, ana mani.ij. Séeth them in water vntill they be tender, then stampe them, adding theretoo farinae hordeacae ℥.iij. butyri recentis, olei recentis, ana ℥.ij. vitellos duos ouorum. Mixe them well for a plaister. A plaister to mollifie the hardnesse of Phlegmon. Calmeteus.Rec. Radic. lilij & althaeae, ana ℥.j.ss. ra∣dicum brioniae, cyclaminis, cucumeris agre∣stis, ana ℥.ij. Boyle them in white wine, and beat them small: then put theretoo stercoris columbini & caprini, ana ℥.j.ss. gummi am∣moniaci in aceto dissoluti, bdellij & oppo∣ponacis in oleo sesamino dissolutorum, ana ℥.j. laudani & styracis liquidae, ana ℥.j. picis naualis q.s. Make a plaister in good forme. A plaister repercussiue and desiccatiue to be vsed in the cure of the cree∣ping Herpes. Weckerus.Rec. Succi plantaginis & solani, ana ℥.j. succi rad. lapathi ℥.ss. balaustiorum p.j. ro∣sarum
rubr.ʒ.j.ss. alum.ʒ.j. aceti ℥.ij. Boyle them till the iuices and vineger bee wasted, then grinde them in a leaden morter, & adde theretoo lithargyrij vtriusque ana ℥.ij. ceru∣sae ℥.j tutiae ʒ.ij. floris aeris ʒ.j. Make a plai∣ster in good order. A plaister for an Oedematous tumor.Weckerus. Rec. Fol. ebuli, sambuci, absynt. ana m.j. aluminis, sulphuris, salis, ana ℥.ss. Boyle thē and beat them small, adding theretoo dial∣thaeae ℥.ij.ss. axungiae suillae ℥.j.ss mellis ℥.j. Mixe them well for a plaister. A Plaister for a windie tumor. Rec. Propoleos lib.j.ss. micarum panis,Weckerus. lib.ss. rosarum rubrarum ℥.j. Boyle them in white wine, then straine them, & adde there∣too piperis, cariophyllorum, nucis moscatae, zinzibris, ana ʒ.ij. cumini, anis, foeniculi, sem. apij, ameos, ana ℥.ss. olei chamaemeli, a∣nethi, rutae, ana ℥.ij. Make a plaister & apply it warme, the place being first well scarrified in the toppe. A plister to be vsed in the begin∣ning of Phlegmon. Rec. Sandali albi & rub. ana ʒ.iij. boli ar∣meni,Vesalius. terrae sigillatae, ana ʒ.j.ss. ol. rosarum, ℥.ij. fol. plantag. lactucae, semperv. maioris, solani, ana q.s. puluer. sumach ℥.ss. Powder
what is to be powdred, and make a plaister. A plaister against inflamation. Vesalius.Rec. Maluae, parietariae, ana m.j. farinae volatilis, furfuris subtiliss. ana p.j. aneti, foe∣nugraeci, ana ℥.ss. ol. chamaemeli ℥.ij. Boyle them in wine, and worke them till they bee well incorporated. A plaister for Gangraena. Vsalius.Rec. Pulueris sem. sinapi ℥.j. gariophyl∣lorum ʒ.iij. ol. sem. lini, ol. nucum iuglandi∣um vetustiss. ana g.v. Mixe them in a mor∣ter, and make a plaister. A plaister maturatiue in cold causes. Rec. Radicum althaeae, capitum liliorum alborum, ana lib.ss. Boyle them in rain wa∣ter till they be perfectlie boyled, then stampe them, and adde theretoo farinae lini & foenu∣graeci, ana ℥.iiij. farinae triticeae ℥.ij. and with sufficient of the former decoction to incorpo∣rate them and the rest, make a softe plaister euer stirring them, and in the ende adding thereto butyri sine sale, pingued. porcinae, a∣na ℥.iij. vitellum vnius oui. So let thē boyl a little, and kéepe it to your vse. A plaister to mollifie & abate swellings. Rec. Cerae albae ℥.ij.ss. terebint.℥.j.ss. colo∣phoniae ℥.iiij. thuris ʒ.vij. masticis ℥.ss. myr∣rhae
ʒ.iij. seui ceruini ℥.iij. lapid. calamina∣ris in vino albo extinct.ʒ.x. lithargyrij auri ʒ.ij. lapid. tutiae ʒ.ij.ss. camphorae ʒ.ij. ceru∣sae ʒ.vj. Make it to a perfect Plaister or a Sparadrop. A plaister resolutiue against all swel∣lings and inflamations. Rec. Cerae citrinae lib.j. seui ouini ℥.vj. butyri recētis ℥.j. pingued. capi, anatis & an∣seris, ana ℥.j. ol. liliacei ℥.j.ss ol. chamaemeli, amygdalarum dulcium, ol. sem. lini, ana ℥.ss. ammoniaci, ℥.v. bdellij, ℥.iij. cremoris sem. lini ℥.vij. cremoris rad. althaeae lib.j. vi∣ni cretici lib.j.ss. resinae purae ℥.iiij. colopho∣niae ℥.vj. Mixe them together, & boyle them to the consumption of the iuices and wine: then straine them, and adde to the straining minij lib.ss. Incorporate them together, & make them in rolles. A plaister to be vsed for Her∣nia Intestinalis. Rec. Picis naualis ℥.v. coloph.℥.iij. lithar∣gyrij,Weckerus. gum. ammonia. oppoponacis, bdellij, masticis, terebint. ana ℥.j. boli armeni, thu∣ris, sang. draconis, sarcocollae, aloes, centau∣rij, symphiti, oxycāthae, pillul. cupressi, gal∣larum viridium, corticum mali punici, ver∣mium terrest. ana ʒ.ij. glutin. pellis taur nae
vel arietinae madefactae & dilutae in aqua chalybiata & aceto ℥.ij. Mixe them at an ea∣sie fire, and make a plaister according to art. A plaister to be vsed in impostumes in the eares. Vigo.Rec. Cepae albae sub prunis decoctae lib. ss. capitum liliorū alborum sub prunis de∣coctorum ℥.iiij. butyri recentis ℥.iij. olei a∣mygd. dulcium, ping. gallinae & anseris, ana ʒ.vj. vitel. tres ouorū. Then with the pow∣der of melilot, chamomill flowers and fenu∣gréek make a plaister vpon the fire with the decoction of althaea according to the precepts of Arte. A plaister for Hernia Intestinalis. Weckerus.Rec. Masticis, sarcocollae, sang. dracons, blattae bizantiae, cortic. thuris, aloes, boli ar∣meni, gypsi, gall. virid. ana ʒ.ij. icthyocollae, tauri collae, dissolutorum in aceto, ana ℥.ij. Labour them well, and make a plaister in good forme. A plaister to mollifie the hardnesse in womens breasts. Vigo.Rec. furfuris, m.ij. chamaemeli m.ss. meli∣loti m.j. farinae fabarum ℥.iiij ol. cham. aneti & rosar. ana ℥.j.ss. ping. gallinae, ol. violac. a∣na ʒ.x. Then with sufficēt swéet wine make a soft plaister, adding theretoo croci ʒ.ij.
A plaister resolutiue to be vsed in Hernia Humoralis. Rec. Foliorum caulium nigrorum,Vigo. radi∣um althaeae, chamaemeli, ana m.j. coriandri ℥.ss. Boyle them all in fat broath of flesh, then in the decoction with the powder of Beanes and Fitches make a soft plaister, adding thereto olei chamaemeli, & aneti, ana ℥.ij. rosarum ℥.j. croci ℈.j. cumini (if the plae be not much inflamed) ʒ.j.ss. and kéepe it to your vse. A plaister to maturate a Fellon. Rec. Radicum liliorum alborum ℥.vj.Weckerus. radic. buglossae, ℥.ij. maluae, violarum, ana m.j. Seeth them till they bee tender, then straine them, and adde thereto farinae triti∣caeae ℥.iij. butyri recētis, ℥.ij. olei dulcis ℥.iiij. axungiae porcinae ℥.ij.ss. vitellos duorum o∣uorum, croci ℈.j. Make a plaister to Art. A plaister to maturate in Hernia Humoralis. Rec. Foliorum maluarum, & violarum,Vigo. ana m.ij. radicum althaeae, capitum liliorum alborum, ana ℥.ij. Boyle them in water, then stamp them and straine them, and with Barley meale in the decoction, make a soft
plaister, adding therto butyri recentis ℥.iiij. vitellos duos ouorum, olei oliuarum dul∣cium, ℥.j.ss. Mixe them, and with the strai∣ning aboue named make a plaister. A plaister consolidatiue for a Fellon. Weckerus.Rec. Diachylonis albi sine gummis ℥.ij. terebinthinae clarae, pingued. porcinae, ana ℥.ii.ss. lithargyrij auri et argenti, ana ʒ.v. mi∣nij ʒ.v. cerusae ℥.j. olei rosacei ℥.j.ss. Mixe them vpon the fire, stirring them well, and in the ende put to as much white Waxe as is sufficient to make a plaister. A plaister for a Fellon. Calmeteus.Rec. Picis naualis ℥.j. adipis suilli expur∣gati ℥.v. adipis taurini vel oesypi, ana ℥.ij. resinae pini ℥.v. Melt them together, and adde thereto, cerae ℥.iij. A plaister to resolue the cold tumors of the Coddes. Vigo.Rec. Farinae fabarum lib.ss. medullae pa∣nis ℥.iij. cum decoctione althaeae, meliloti, anethi, & chamaemeli, ac paululo cumini. Make a plaister ouer the fire, adding thereto olei chamaemeli, aneti, pingued. anatis, ana ℥.j.ss. cumini ʒ.j.ss. Make it to your vse.
A maturatiue plaister for swelling in the Coddes, proceeding of a cold cause. Rec. Capitum liliorum alborum ℥.iij.Vigo. rad. althaeae ℥.iiij. foliorum caulium nigro∣rum m.j. maluarum tantundem. Boyle them all in water, and stampe them, and straine them in the decoction with wheate meale, linseed meale, and fenugréeke meale, of each equal portions: make a soft plaister, adding thereto butyri recentis ℥.iiij. A plaister to mitigate paine of the Hemrhoides. Rec. Boli armeni, gummi arabici,Galenu. san∣guinis draconis, masticis, ana ʒ.iij. myrrhae, balaustiorum, rosarum rubrarum sicca∣rum, ana ʒij. Make these in fine powder, and searce them, then take butyri ℥.j. olei rosarum ℥.iij. cerae ℥.ij. succi foliorum por∣rorum colati ℥.ij. Mixe them for a plaister. A plaister for Hernia aquosa. Rec. Rosarum, balaustiorum,Vigo. nucum cu∣pressi, ana m.j. farinae fabarum & orobi, ana ℥.iiij. stercoris caprini, ℥.iij. And with sweet wine and Barbers lée sufficient make a plaister at the fire.
A plaister to maturate tumors in wo∣mens breastes. Auicenna.Rec. Micarum panis ℥.iij. farinae faba∣rum, radicis malauisci, ana ℥.j.ss. farinae foenugraeci ℥.j. ouorum coctorum vitellos tres, adding thereto de croco, myrrha, & assa faelida, and make a plaister. A plaister for the Hemrhoides. Vigo.Rec. Rosarum, myrtillorum, foliorum plantaginis, linguae passerinae, ana m.j. Boile them all in Smiths water, then beate them, and straine them in the end with a little vi∣neger of Roses, and wine of Pomegranats make a plaister. A plaister to maturate Bubo Venereus. Weckerus.Rec. Foliorum maluae, violaceae, ana m.ij. radicum althaeae lib.ss. capitum liliorum alborū ℥.iiij. Boyle them in sufficient quan∣titie of water, and beate them small adding thereto farinae triticeae vel hordeaceae, ana q.s. olei communis, butyri, ana ℥.iij. ping. porcinae ℥.ij.ss vitellos duos ouorum. Mixe them for a plaister. Another. Vigo.Rec. Capitum lilij, radicum althaeae, ana
lib.j. decocta in aqua pistentur cum ℥.ij. fi∣cuum siccarum pinguium, nucleorum nu∣cum ℥.j.ss. axungiae porcinae lib.ss. Then ad∣ding thereto farinae lini, foenugraeci & tri∣tici, with some of the decoction make a plai∣ster, and in the end put to it, butyri ℥.iij. vi∣tellos duos ouorum bene conquassatos. A plaister for the swelling in the throte. Rec. Radicum Brioniae,Wecker. radic. cucumeris agrestis, ana ℥.iij. ficuum immaturarum pa∣ria vj. amygdalarum amararum ℥.ij. scillae ℥.j.ss. coloynthidis ℥.ss. Boyle them in e∣quall portions of olde oyle and malmesey, then stampe and straine them, adding there∣to farinae fabarum & orobi, ana ℥.ij.ss. fari∣nae seminis lini, & foenugraeci, ana ℥.j. croci ʒ.j.ss. Mixe them to a soft plaister in forme of a Cataplasme. A plaister for the swelling of the Coddes. Rec. Bdellij, oppoponacis, sagapeni in a∣ceto dissolutorum ana ℥.ss. muscilaginis al∣thaeae, lini & foenugraeci, ana ʒ.ij.ss. florum chamaemeli & meliloti, ana ʒ.iij. farinae fa∣barum ℥.iij. butyri ℥.ss. And with the decoc∣tion of figs and mallowes make a plaister.
A plaister against the going out of the fundament. Rec. Emplastri oxycrocei ℥.j.ss. bacca∣rum myrtillorum, gallarum, masticis, ana ʒ.j.ss. Mixe them and worke them with o∣leum costinum, adding thereto bedeguar puluerizati ʒ.ij. Make a plaister three fin∣gers long, which must be applied betwéene the reines and the fundament. A plaister for a Rupture. Rec. Sarcocollae, masticis, sanguinis dra∣conis, olibani, ichthyocollae, ana ℥.iij. radi∣cum symphiti maioris, & osmundae, ana ℥.ss. Dissolue the glew in vineger, and with oyle of Masticke or of Myrtilles make a plaister. Another. Rec. Masticis, sarcocollae, olibani, thuris, gummi dragaganti, ichthyocollae, ana ℥.j. lapidis haematitis ℥.iij. Dissolue the glewe and gummes in vineger, and make a plai∣ster. A plaister for a Rupture. Rosa Ang∣licana.Rec. Glutinis piscium, vel pellis arietinae decoct.℥.iiij. picis graecae, ℥.j. picis naualis, armoniaci, ana ℥.ij. aloes, masticis, thuris,
rosarum, boli armeni, sanguinis draconis, myrtillorum, ana ℥.ss. aristolochiae longae, & rotundae, consolidae maioris & minoris, ana ʒ.vj. gallarum, balaustiorum, psidia∣rum, olibani, pilorum leporis, ana ʒ.iij. san∣guinis humani lib.j. Mixe them altogether in water wherein a Ramme skinne hath boyled, wooll and all, and with a little Waxe make a plaister according to Art. Another more easie. Rec. Aloes,Rosa Ang. masticis, ros. olibani, ana ℥.ss. myrrhae, sanguinis draconis, boli armeni, picis naualis, colofoniae & graecae, ana ℥.ij. iacaeae nigrae, consolidae vtriusque, plantagi∣nis, balaustiorum, ematitis, fol. quercus, caudae equinae, ana ʒ.iij. cerae ℥.j.ss. Fiat cum laudano & terebinthina emplastrum opti∣mum. Applie it, the place being first an∣noynted cū oleo mastichino, rosaceo, myr∣tino & laudano. And vppon this, the trusse applied, without remoue thereof, saue from foure daies to foure daies. A plaister for hot Apostumes in womens breastes. Rec. Furfuris triticei m.ij. florum chamae∣meli p.iij. florum meliloti p.ij. farinae faba∣rum ℥.iiij. olei chamaemeli, anethi, rosa∣rum, ana ℥.j.ss. pingued. gallinae, olei vio∣larum,
ana.ʒ.x. Mixe them with sufficient sweete wine to make a plaister. A plaister to resolue cold and windie tumors in the ioynts and other parts. Clowes.Rec. Olei anethi lib.ss. resinae pini lib.ij. resinae lib.iij. cerae nouae lib.j. The powders of Cummin and Bayberies, of each one pound, relent that which is, to bee relented, and in the end straine it, and so straw in your powders. A plaister for the biting of a mad dogge. Valriola.Rec. Galbani, oppoponacis, sagapeni, ana ʒ.ss. euphorbij, iridis florentini, aristolochiae rotundae, radicum gentianae, ana ʒ.j. cancro∣rum fluuialium ʒ.ij. cerae q.s. terebinthinae ℥.ij. Mixe them, and make a plaister to your owne discretion. A plaister for a biting. Guydo.Rec. Galbani, serapini, oppoponacis, as∣sae fatidae, myrrhae, piperis, sulphuris, ana ℥.ss. calaminthae, mentastri, ana ℥.j. stercoris columbini, anatis, ana ℥.ij. Dissolue the gummes in white wine, and mixe them to∣gether with honie and old oyle sufficient for a plaister.
A plaister against all bitings. Rec. Spumae argenti,Vesalius. cerusae purae, ana lib.j. olei veteris lib.iij. cerae ℥.vij. ammo∣niaci ℥.iiij. galbani, tantundem. Boyle the Ceruse, Litharge and Oyle, till they leaue cleauing to your hands, then dissolue the gummes and put them to. A plaister against all poysoned wounds and biting, and stinging of Serpents. Rec. Farinae hordei & fabarum,Haliabbas. ana ʒ.x. glycyrrhizae, radic. althaeae, picis, ana ʒ.v. ce∣rae albae, adipis anserinae, ana ʒ.x. Incorpo∣rate them with old oyle and childs vrine of a maid child, sufficient for a plaister. A plaister to drawe out a thorne or a pricke in any place. Rec. Fermenti,Auicenna. mellis optimi aut aluea∣rū sorditiei quam propoleos nominant, ana lib.ss. visci quercini ℥.iij. ammoniaci ℥.j.ss. olei ℥.iij. Mixe them all and make a plaister, which you shall applie vpon the place. A plaister to draw out splints, thornes, and such like in any place. Rec. Fermenti lib.j. sorditiei oleorū lib. ss. succi centinodij,Democra∣tus. succi pulegij, aut eorun∣dem
puluerizatorum, ana ℥.iij. terebinthi∣nae lib.j. visci quercini, ammoniaci, galbani in vino dissolutorum, ana ℥.j. cerae ℥.iiij. Make a plaister according to Art. A plaister to draw out arrow heads, or thornes. Vigo.Rec. Succi radic. ari, diachylonis gum∣mati ℥.j. aristolochiae longae ʒ.ij. fermenti ʒ.x. terebinthinae ʒ.vj. galbani, ammoniaci, ana ʒ.iij. Dissolue the gummes in vineger, and mixe altogether for a plaister. A plaister of Betonie for wounds in the head, and to draw out spelles or bones, it will re∣couer loose flesh, it doth very much mundi∣fie, digest, and drie. Anderna∣cus.Rec. Betonicae viridis, pimpinellae, agri∣monij, saluiae, pulegij, millefolij, consolidae maioris, gallitrici, ana ℥.vj. thuris, masticis, ana ʒ.iij. ireos, aristolochiae rotundae, ana ʒ.vj. cerae albae, terebinthinae, ana ℥.viij. gummi oleae aethiopicae, ℥.ij. resinae pini ℥.vj. olei terebinthinae, vini albi, ana q.s. Bruse the herbes, and stéep them eight daies in white wine, stirre them often and boyle them, then straine it and boyle it againe till the third part be wasted, and put in the oyle of Turpentine, then the Waxe being well molten, after that the Rosine and gummes,
and last of all the Turpentine: then being somewhat colde put too the rest of the pow∣ders, and worke them wel with your hands till all the moysture bee out, then malaxe it in Goates milke, and make it in rolles. Emplastrum de gummo elemij for wounds in the head. Rec. Gunimi elemij ℥.iij. resinae pineaeArceus. purissimae, armoniaci, gummi hederacei puluerizati, cerae, ana ℥.ij. terebinthinae ℥.iij.ss. olei rosacei ʒ.j.ss. Boyle them all, except the armoniacke, in a quantitie of fragrant wine to the wasting thereof. Lastly put in the armoniacke, and worke it vp with wine and aqua vitae. A plaister for an equall wound. Rec. Lithargyrij. cerusae,Weckerus. ana ℥.vj. plumbi vsti, lapid. calaminaris, terrae sigillatae, ana ℥.iiij. colophoniae, picis naualis, resinae, ana ℥.ij. resinae crudae, sarcocollae, laudani, iridis, ana ℥.j.ss. camphorae ℥.ss. sem. porri ℥.ij. olei rosarum lib.j.ss. cerae albae ℥.iiij. Mixe them and make a plaister. A mundificatiue plaister for a wound. Rec. Mellis rosati colati ℥.j. myrrhae,Vesalius. thu∣ris, sarcocollae, ana ʒ.ss. farinae hordei, foenu∣graeci, quod sufsicit ad inspissandum, then make your plaister in good forme.
A plaister for a simple wound. Weckerus.Rec. Terebinthinae ℥.xij. resinae pini ℥.iij. gummi elemi ℥.v. aristolochiae longae ℥.j. sanguinis draconis ℥.j. cerae parum. Powder what is to bee powdred, and make a plaister according to Art. A plaister for the brused bloud vnder the skinne. Weckerus.Rec symphiti vtrius{que} ana lib.ss. florum chamaemeli, meliloti ana p.ij. croci ʒ.ss. fa∣rinae fabarum ℥.iiij. farinae foenugraeci ℥.v. butyri recentis ℥.j. Boyle them indifferent∣lie, whereto if you adde one ounce of the iuyce of Wormewood, it shall more resolue and drie: mixe them to Art for a plaister of good substance. A plaister consolidatiue both for wounds and vlcers approued. Frederick.Rec. Betonicae, verbenae, anagallidis, plan∣taginis, scabiosae, agrimoniae, ana m.j. rad. consolidae min.℥.iij. Stamp them together and boyle them in vini albi lib. viij. vntill halfe be consumed: straine it, and boyle it a∣gaine, and when it is boyling adde to it ceui ouini ℥.iiij. picis, resinae, cerae, ana lib.ss. Let it so boile a pretie while: in the cooling adde
olibani ℥.j. masticis, ℥.ij. Stirre them well together a good while: when it is colde e∣nough adde terebinthinae ℥.j. Stirre it still, and worke it well with womans milke: so make it vp in rolles. A plaister conglutinatiue for wounds. Rec. Terebinthinae purgatae lib.j. resinaeCalmeteus. pini ℥.vj. gum. elemi lib.ss. sarcocollae ℥.iiij. masticis ℥.iij. sanguinis draconis ℥.iij. aristo∣lochiae longae ℥.j. cerae albae ℥.iiij. cerusae ℥.ij. Make your plaister in good forme. A plaister for wounds in the head, or depres∣sion of the skull in yong children. Rec. Centaurij per noctem in vino alboVigo. infusi m.vj. Boyle them to the halfe, and af∣ter they bee strained, boyle them againe to the thicknesse of honie, take of this decoction three ounces, lactis mulieris ℥.ij. terebint. lib.j. resinae ℥.ss. thuris, masticis, gummi a∣rabici, ana ℥.j. cerae ℥.iij. Mixe them accor∣ding to Art, and make your plaister. A plaister to be vsed in contusions of childrens heads. Rec. Olei myrtini, olei rosarum, olei ab∣synthij, ana ℥.j. pulueris rubri restrictiui
ʒ.x. farinae fabarum ℥.j. furfuris benè tritu∣rati ℥.ss. nucum cupressi benè triturati, cala∣mi aromatici, ana ʒ.vj. chamaemeli absyn∣thij, myrtillorum, granorum & foliorum eius, ana m.ss. cumini ʒ.j.ss. cerae albae ℥.j.ss. Powder which are to be powdred, and with sufficient swéet wine make a plaister to Art. A plaister attractiue for the depression of the skull and chiefly in children. Weckerus.Rec. Propoleos, vel cerae nouae sordidae ℥.iij. mellis ℥.iij. lapidis magnetis ℥.ss. lapi∣dis pumicis ʒ.iij. absynthij, cumini, sulphu∣ris, ana.ʒ.ij. salis ℥.j. furfuris p.j. vini optimi ℥.iiij. Mixe them and make a plaister, which you must applie warme to the patients head after the haires be cut away. A notable plaister for prickes in sinewes. Vigo.Rec. Olei rosarum, violarum, chamae∣meli, ana ℥.j. sepi vituli ℥.iij. axungiae por∣cinae ℥.j. pinguedinis gallinae, medullae cru∣rium vituli, ana ℥.ss. lumbricorum lotorum in vino ℥.j. butyri recentis ʒ.vj. muscilaginis lib.ss. Boyle them at a soft fire to the wa∣sting of the Muscilages: after adde to the straining lithargyrij auri & argenti, ana ʒ.x. minij ʒ.iij. cum crae sufficienti fiat cero∣tum,
addendo in fine cocturae, resinae abie∣tis ʒ.x. masticis ℥.ss. After which boyle them againe one walme. An excellent plaister for a fracture in the skull where the skinne is whole, especiallie in children. Rec. Furfuris exiccati & triturati lib.ss.Vigo. farinae fabarum ℥.viij. rosarum, myrtillo∣rum, ana ℥.j. cham. meliloti, ana m.j. staech. scaenanthi, ana a third part of m.j. coriandri, anisi, ana ʒ.vj. betonicae, periclimeni, ane∣thi, ana m.ss. absynthij, m.ij. Al being braied and mixed with sufficient quantitie of cute, and a little malmesey, or in stéed therof some other odoriferous wine; boyle them vnto a solid thicknesse, putting to them in the ende olei chamaemelini, anethini, rosacei atque myrtini, ana ℥.ij.ss. cerae albae ℥.ij. croci ʒ.j.ss. Boyle them againe one walme; set it by, and stirre it vntill it be but warme; at which time put into it calami aromatici bene pul∣uerizati ʒ.x. And so make it vp. Another greatly extolled for the same purpose. Rec. Sordiciei aluearis apū,Arceus. or (if that can not be had) cerae nouae sordidae (that is soft & vnclered) q.s. to the forming of the plaister
mellis communis puluerizati ℥.j. lapidis hamatitis in puluerem redacti ℥.ss. pumicis lapidis, cymini, absynthij, furfuris commu∣nis, ana ʒ.ij. Mixe them all at the fire, and bring it to a plaister. This must bee applied two fingers bredth more compasse than the place depressed. The force of this plaister (saith the Author) is wonderfull, within twelue daies it lifteth vp the bones conused and beaten downe: so as he thinketh no me∣dicine to be more excellent. A plaister that proueth whether there be a fracture in the skull, yea or no. Arceus.Rec. Cerae nouae citr. thuris, santali, ana ℥.ij. terebinthinae, aceti fortiss. farinae faba∣ceae, ana ℥.j. Mixe them at the fire, and make a plaister, shaue the head, and applie this as a cappe to the hole: for where the fracture is, in that part shall you finde the plaister diminished and dried vp, and that will it shewe in thrée daies space: all other parts where no fracture is the plaister wil appeare equall and vniforme. And if the skull be all sound, so accordingly will the plaister shewe it selfe in all places like.
The two famous plaisters of Paracelsus, both for wounds and vlcers: this first ser∣uing yet more particularlie for the head. Rec. Cerae, lithargyrij, ana lib.j. calami∣naris, colophoniae, ana ℥.ij.ss. olei com∣munis lib.j.ss. Melt the waxe, colophonie & oyle together at an easie fier: afterput in by little and little the lytarge and calamina∣ris most finelie powdred. Boyle thē so with∣out burning, to the thicknesse of a plaister. Which done, adde oppoponacis, serapini, bdellij, ammoniaci, galbani, ana ℥.j. (But first let them bee prepared out of vineger as the manner is) next these put in corallorum alb. & rub. mūmiae, myrrhae, thuris, ana ℥.j, antimonij ℥.ss. croci martis ʒ.ij. Last of all, mixe with them a portion of terebinthine & masticke: so poure it foorth and malaxe or worke it vp cum oleo hypericonis & lum∣bricino, with the addition of halfe an ounce of campher. The other more cōmonlie bearing the name of Emplastrum sticticum, and vniuersal∣lie practised. Rec. Galbani, oppoponacis, ana ℥.ij. am∣moniaci, bdellij, ana ℥.iij. Break thē small,
and macerate them one daie and a night in strong wine vineger. After that decoct them at a gentle fier, so as the gummes by little & little may melt, and straine them forth clean from their foeces. Decoct them again in a fit vessell till the vineger bee vapored out: but stirre them continuallie so as the gummes maie not burne. Hauing these readie, pro∣céede to the making of your plaister thus: Rec. Cerae nouae lib.ss. olei oliuarum lib.ij. Melt them by little and little: then put in li∣thargyrij triti lib.j.ss. Stirre them together on the fire, till it looke of a pale red, or bright bay colour: at which time beginne to put in your gummes, which you must doo by the quantitie of a nut at a time, vntill all be mix∣ed in: (being warie in the meane time that they ouer-heate not, seeing otherwise the gummes are hot of their owne proper na∣ture). Lastlie adde aristolochiae vtriusque, calaminaris, myrrhae, thuris, ana ℥.j. tere∣binthinae purae ℥.iiij. Boyle them, stirring them together with great diligence. When it is come to a consistence, poure them into water, and worke it vp with oyle of chamo∣mill & roses thrée or foure houres together. It lasteth xl. yeares in full vertue.
A plaister to cause flesh in hollow vlcers. Rec. Lythargyrij auri ℥.vj. ol. rosac. om∣phacini lib.j.ss. aceti rosarum lib.ss.Valeriola. Boyle them together at an easie fire, stirring them continuallie vntill it waxe verie blacke, and make it in rolles. A plaister for filthie and rotten vlcers. Rec. Galbani, oppoponacis, bdellij,Weckerus. am∣moniaci, ana ℥.j. cerae nouae lib.j. ol. rosati lib. ij. resinae ℥.iij. lithargyrij auri lib.j.ss. oliba∣ni, myrrhae, aloes, thuris, masticis, aristolo∣chiae rotundae, ana ℥.j.ss. styracis calamitae ℥.ss. succi betonicae, succi verbenae, caprifolij, plantaginis, pimpinellae, cynoglosae, ana ℥.j. lapid. haematitis ʒ.ij. aeruginis rasilis ℥.j. Make a plaister according to Art. A plaister of willow leaues which will cure vlcers of hard curation and fistules. Rec. Mysos, aluminis rochae, chacitidis,Anderna∣cus. melantherij, aeruginis, aluminis scissilis, gal∣larum acerbarum, ana ℥.vj. cerusae, cerae, re∣sinae frictae, picis naualis, bituminis, ol. om∣phacini, foliorum salicis tenerorū, ana lib. ij. Boyle the leaues in strong viner, thē dry them, and make them in fine powder: melte the other, and straine them, and put in the
powders after it is colde. A plaister to incarnate as well plaine vlcers as wounds. Rec. Cerae albae ℥.viij. seui ceruini ℥.iiij ss. resinae, resinae pini, ana ℥.iiij. myrrhae, masticis, ana ℥.iiij. mellis ℥.vj. terebinthi∣nae ℥.viij. vini albi lib.j.ss. sanguinis draco∣nis lib.j. Boyle all but the sanguis draconis, and mixe them to the forme of a plaister. A plaister much preuailing against malignant vlcers. Rec. Colophoniae ℥.j. thuris, myrrhae ana ʒ.j.ss. masticis ʒ.j. terebint. lotae ℥.ss. alumi∣nis vsti ℥.ss. ol. hyosciami ℥.ss. olei sulphuris {pro}er campanam destillati ℥.j. cerae quantum sufficit. Fiat Emplastrum. A plaister for a cankerous vlcer. Pareus.Rec. Cerae albae, olei rosarum, ana ℥.ij.ss. succi granatorum & solani, ana ℥.ij. cerusae lotae ℥.j. plumbi vsti loti, & tutiae praeparatae, ana ℥.ss. thuris, masticis, ana ʒ.ij. Fiat emplastrum.
A plaister to be applied to the reynes, for him that hath an vlcer in the yard. Rec. Boli armeni, terrae sigillatae,Andreas Lacuna. sangui∣nis draconis, coralli rubri, rosarum rubra∣rum, electri, spodij, sandali citr. ana ʒ.ij. aca∣ciae, thuris, masticis, ana ℥.ss. picis naualis, colophoniae, ana ℥.j.ss. terebinthinae, cerae, ana ℥j. rob. myrtini ℥.ij. Make it in good order. A plaister vesiccatorie for Tinea Capitis. Rec. Ellebori albi ℥.ss. apij risi ℥.vj. lapa∣thiVigo. acuti ℥.j.ss. axung ℥.j.ss. butyri ʒ.x. alu∣minis saccharini ʒ.v. fermenti ℥.iiij. furfuris ʒ.vj.ss. Bruse what are to bee brused verie well: mixe them together, and applie them after the manner of a plaister. A plaister to restore a broken bone. Rec. Albumina trium ouorum,Vigo. olei ro∣sarum omphacini, olei rosarum completi, ana ʒ.x. olei myrtini ʒ.j.ss. farinae volatilis, farinae hordei ana ʒ.vj. boli armeni, sangui∣nis draconis ana ʒ.iij. Mixe them, and worke them together for a good formall plaister.
A plaister for a fracture. Vigo.Rec. Albumina ouorum num.iiij. tere∣bint. clarissimae ℥.ij. farinae volat.ʒ.x. pulv. myrtillorum, granorum & foliorum opti∣mè tritorum, farinae fabarum, ana ʒ.vj. pul∣ueris rubi ℥.j. croci ʒ.ss. mumiae, tragaganti pisti, ana ʒ.ij. Mixe them to your vse. A plaister for fractures and di∣slocations. Rec. Empl. oxycrocei ℥.viij. boli armeni ℥.j. farinae volatilis, lithargyrij auri & argē∣ti, ana ℥.ss. cerae citrinae ℥.iiij. ol. masticis ℥.j. ol. rosarum ℥.iiij. medullae cruris vituli ℥.iiij.ss. terebintinae ℥.j. resinae ℥.ss. ammonia∣ci ℥.j.ss. camphorae ʒ.iij. sarcocollae, bdellij, ana ʒ.iij. oesypi humidi ℥.ij. Make a plaister. A plaister to confirme luxations and dislocations. Rec. Olei rosarum, nymphaeae, myrtini, a∣na ℥.ij.ss. albumina ouorum v. boli armeni terrae sigillatae, ana ʒ.vij. farinae volatilis & hordei, ana ℥.j. sanguinis draconis ℥.ss. rosa∣rum rubrarum ʒ.iij. granorum myrtillorū, ʒ.v. succi symphiti minoris, aceti rosacei, a∣na ʒ.ij. terebinthinae ℥.j. cerae ℥.ss. resinae ʒ.iij.ss. mellis rosati ʒ.vj. Make a plaister ac∣cording as Art shall teach you.
A plaister resolutiue for contusions, lux∣ations, and excesse of paine. Rec. Cerae albae lib.j.ss. gūmi ammonia∣ci ʒ.x. oppoponacis ℥.iiij. resinae ℥.iiij. seui ceruini ℥.v. terebinthinae venetae ℥.iij.ss. bdellij ℥.ij. masticis ℥.j. olibani ℥.j.ss. ceru∣sae ℥.iij. cāphorae ʒ.ij. cremoris althaeae ℥.vj. Dissolue the gummes in vineger and make your plaister according to Art. A plaister for the fracture of the scull. Rec. Radicum althaeae lib.ss. florum cha∣maemeli, meliloti, ana m.j. rosarum rub.m.ss. Boyle them in sufficient water till halfe be wasted, then adding to the decoction fari∣nae hordei quantum sufficit, sarcocollae ℥.iij. ol. rosarum omphacini ℥.ij.ss. olei chamae∣meli, ℥.j.ss. croci ℈.j. vitellos duos ouorum. Make a plaister according to Art. A plaister for luxation of the foote. Rec. Olei myrtini, rosarum omphacini,Vesalius. ana ℥.ij. albumina ouorum nu.iij. quinque neruiae minutim incisae & trituratae m.ij. fa∣rinae volatilis, farinae hordei cribellatae, fari∣nae fabarum, ana ʒ.vj. Mixe them altogether and make a plaister.
A plaister to be vsed when as Coccix is broken. Vesalius.Rec. Albumina iiij. ouorum, olei myr∣tini, rosarum, ana ℥.ij. terebinthinae optimae ℥.j.ss. thuris ʒ.iij. masticis ʒ.j.ss. myrrhae, a∣loes, ana ʒ.ij. sanguinis draconis, boli arme∣ni ana ʒ.ss. farinae volatilis ℥.iij. Mixe them for a plaister. A plaister for the gowte. Guydo.Rec. Cerae, picis, diachylon, ana ℥.iij. ax∣ungiae asini ℥.j.ss. laudani, hyssopi humidi, galbani, oppoponacis, ammoniaci, bdellij, styracis calamitae, masticis, sarcocollae dis∣solut. in vino, ana ℥.j. axungiae vrsi, struthi∣onis, aquilae, anguillae, amurcae, olei liliacei, terebinthinae, ana ℥.ss. farinae foenugraeci & lini, croci, ana.℥.ij. Make a plaister to Art. Emplastrum de ranis. Vigo.Rec. Olei chamaemeli, spicae, & liliorū, ana ℥.ij. olei croci ℥.j. axungiae porcinae lib. j. seui vitulini lib.ss. euphorbij ʒ.v. thuris, ʒ.x. olei laurini ℥.j.ss. pingued. viperae, ℥.ij.ss. ranarum viuarum numero vj. vermium terrestrium in vino lotorum ℥.iij.ss. succi ra∣dicum ebuli & enulae campanae ana ℥.ij. squi∣nanti,
staechadis, matricariae, ana m.j. vini o∣doriferi lib.ij. Let them séeth altogether till the wine be consumed, then straine them: & put to the straining lithargyrij auri lib.j. te∣rebinthinae purae ℥.ij. Make a Cerote with sufficient white waxe, after the manner of a Sparadrop, adding in the end of the decoc∣tion styracis liquidae ℥.j.ss. Then take the Cerote from the fire, and stirre it till it bee luke warme: and afterward put thereunto argenti viui extincti cum saliua, ℥.iiij. and stirre it about well till the quick siluer be in∣corporate. This Cerote is of more noble o∣peration than Liniments, and more delecta∣ble to the Patients: but we ought to note, that before the administration of the Cerote and vnction, it is necessarie to mundifie the place from all malignitie, and euill flesh. A plaister to mollifie, heale and asswage paine. Rec. Olei communis lib.ij. plumbi albiBanester. lib.j. Let them boyle till they turne colour, and adde theretoo picis naualis ℥.xij. cerae ci∣trinae ℥.xiiij. Boyle them to the stifnesse of a plaister, and in the ende adde to them tere∣binthinae ℥.j. camphorae trituratae ℥.ss. La∣bour them well, and make them in rolles.
A Sparadrop plaister. Rec. Olei communis lib.j. cerae albae ℥.viij. plumbi albi ℥.viij. Powder the lead, and boyle it to the forme of a plaister. A plaister to mitigate paine. Rec. Olei communis lib.ij. galbani lib. ss. plumbi albi lib.j. cerae citrin. lib.ss. Boyle them to the substance of a plaister. A plaister stupefactiue against ex∣ceeding paines. Rec. Terebinthinae ℥.ss. vnguenti dia∣pompholygos ℥.j. cerae albae ℥.vj. axungiae porcinae bene lotae in aqua rosacea & nym∣phaea ℥.iiij. resinae ℥.ij. vnguenti populeo∣nis ʒ.iij. olei papaueris, olei menthae, ana ʒ.ij.ss. seminis papaueris albi, hyosciami, ana ʒ.j.ss. seminis lactucae & portulacae, ana ʒ.ss. quatuor seminum frigidorum maiorum ana ℈.ss. succi solatri, succi lactucae, ana ʒ.iij. cremoris psylij ℥.ss. Bruse the séedes, and melte the oyle, waxe and greace toge∣ther: then put too the other things in pow∣der, & last of all croci ʒ.iij. opijʒ.iiij. Mixe them all verie well, and make a plaister,
which you must malaxe with womans milk and vineger. A white muscilage plaister to as∣swage paine, and mollifie hardnesse. Rec. Cerae albae lib.j.ss. terebinthinae ℥.iij. gummi ammoniaci ℥.viij. oppoponacis ℥.ij.ss. masticis ℥.j. bdellij ℥.j.ss. gummi tra∣gaganti ℥.ss. cremoris radicum althaeae, psy∣lij, & seminis althaeae, ana ℥.j. pingued. capi, anatis & anseris, ana ℥.ss. medullae cur. vac∣cini ℥.iij. oesypi ℥.j.ss. olei amygdalarū dul∣cium, olei rosati, ana ℥.j.ss. Boyle them to the forme of a plaister, & stirre them strong∣lie till it wexe white: and in the ende adde theretoo cerusae quantum sufficit, campho∣rae ℥.ss. And make it to Art. A plaister to heale, cicatrize and asswage paine. Rec. Olei rosacei lib.j. cerusae, minij, ana ℥.ij. lithargyrij auri & argenti, sanguinis draconis, lapidis calaminaris, boli armeni, ana ℥.ss. camphorae, ʒ.iij. Powder which are to bee powdered, and with Cera alba make a plaister.
A plaister abstersiue and verie good to asswage paine. Rec. Lithargyrij auri subtiliter pulueri∣zati lib.j.ss. olei liliorum, chamaemeli & a∣mygdalarum dulcium, ana quantum suffi∣cit. Then worke them in a hote morter to a conuenient substance, then put thertoo am∣moniaci, bdellij, ana ℥.ss. oppoponacis ʒ.ij. galbani ʒ.j. myrrhae ʒ.ij.ss. Infuse the gums in wine and melt them, adding theretoo bac∣carum lauri ℥j. myrrhae ℥.ss. mellis despu∣mati ℥.iij. cerae rubrae lib.ss. terebinthinae ℥.ij.ss. radicum iridis ℥.j. In the end anoint your hands with oyle of lillies, and malaxe it to your vse. A plaister verie excellent for the Sciatica. Rec. Cerae flauae, resinae, resinae pini, ana lib.j. colophoniae lib.ss. masticis, thuris, ana ℥.ij. myrrhae ℥.j. seui arieini lib.ss. gary∣phyllorum, macis ana ℥.j. croci ℥.ss. galbani, oppoponacis, bdellij, ana ℥.j. vini rub. lib.ij. aq. currentis lib.j. camph.ʒ.iij. Make a plai∣ster to Art. A plaister against pain of the ioynts. Rec. Herbae arthriticae, herbae paraliticae,
pulegij, calamintae, samsuchi, chamaemeli, meliloti, ana m.j. oppoponacis, bdellij, am∣moniaci, serapini, ana ʒ.j. farinae foenugrae∣ci & lini, ana ʒ.j. Boyle the herbes in suffi∣cient quantitie of water till it bee perfectlie sodden: then stampe them, and with oyle of Bay, oyle of Lillies, and oyle of Turpen∣tine as much as is sufficient of euerie one, & adding the gumms dissolued in wine, make your plaister. A plaister spiced against paine of the ioynts of a colde cause. Rec. Gummi ammoniaci ℥.iiij. gummi hederae, oppoponacis, sarcocollae, galbani, resinae pini, ana ℥.j. bdellij ℥.j.ss. masticis, o∣libani, sandarachae, carabae, thuris, ana ℥.ss.ʒ.ij. macis, gariophyllorum, styracis calami∣tae, hermodactylorum, ana ʒ.v. adipis cor∣dis cerui ℥.iij. crae flauae ℥.ij.ss. cremoris fae∣nugraeci, lini, & caricarum pinguium extra∣cti cū decoctione chamaemeli & meliloti, ana q.s. terebint. parum. Make a plaister in good forme as Art shall lead you. A plaister for the gowte. Rec. Pulpae radicum helenij decoctorū
lib.j. sigilli salomonis, radicum ebuli, ana ℥.iiij. olei myrtini, chamaemeli, petrolaei, a∣na ℥.j.ss. olei terebinthinae ℥.j. colopho∣niae, terebinthinae, ana ℥.ij. olei vulpi∣ni, spicae, liliorum, lauri & sambuci, ana ʒ.x. cerae albae ℥.j.ss. With an easie fire make a soft Cerote, and adde theretoo farinae faba∣rum, & cicerum, ana ℥.iiij.ss. styracis liqui∣dae ʒ.v. thuris ʒ.iij. Another. Rec. Farinae fabarum, lentium, ana ℥.iiij. furfuris m.ij. chamaemeli, meliloti pistace∣orum, ana m.ss. absynthij, antiochiae, ana m. quart. rosarum ℥.j. Mixe them at the fire, & with sufficient swéet wine, & wine of pome∣granets make a plaister, adding theretoo ol. rosarum & aneti, ana ʒ.vj. ol. myrtini & ca∣maemeli, ana ℥.j. axungiae anseris, seui vitu∣lini, ana ʒ.v. cerae albae ʒ.vj. stercoris capri∣ni ℥.ij.ss. viniodoriferi ℥.ij. Make it to Arte in forme of a plaister. A plaister for the gowte, and paine in the huckle bone. Rec. Cort. rad. helenij lib.j. radic. althaeae lib.ss. Boyle them till they bee tender, then stampe them verie fine, & adde thereto ol. ca∣maemeli, liliorum, anethi, amygdalarū dul∣cium,
ana ℥.ij. seui hircini & vitulini, ana ℥.iij. ol. rosati ℥.ij.ss. cerae albae ℥.iij. Make a soft plaister, and adde therto farinae fabarum ℥.ij. hermodactylorū ℥.j.ss. croci ʒ.ss. florū chamaemeli & meliloti ana parum. A plaister for ach and paines of the shoul∣ders, armes, and other parts of the bodie. Rec. Cerae citrinae ℥.xij. resinae ℥.viij. pi∣cisClowes. naualis ℥.j.ss. olibani ℥.iiij. resin pini li. j. seui ceruini ℥.ij. croci ʒ.ij. masticis ℥.ss. ga∣ryophyllorum ℥.ss. vini rubri lib.ij. Make it according to Art. A red desiccatiue plaister. Rec. Lithargyrij auri ℥.iij. ol. rosacei,Anderna∣cus. ol. violacei, ana lib.ss. cerae ℥.xij. lapid. calami∣naris, terrae sigillatae, minij, ana ℥.iiij. cam∣phorae ℥.j. Make a plaister in a morter. A desiccatiue plaister. Rec. Lapid. calaminaris,I. H. ℥.viij terrae si∣gillatae ℥.iiij. cerusae ℥.iiij. lithargyrij auri, lithargyrij argenti, ana ℥.ij. boli armeni ori∣entalis ℥.j. lithargyrij plumbi ℥.ij. sanguinis draconis ℥.ss. terebinthinae ℥.vj. cerae, seui hyrcini, ℥.iiij. Fiat emplastrum.
Emplastrum de minio. Rec. Ol. communis lib.j. minij subtilis∣simè puluerizati lib.j. cerae albae ℥.x. resinae ℥.iiij. saeui ceruini ℥.iiij. Fiat emplastrum. Emplastrum alterum de minio. Banester.Rec. Ol. rosacei optimi lib.iiij. minij sub∣tilissimè pulu. lib.ij. cerae albae lib.ss. cam∣phorae ℥.iiij. Misce, & fiat emplastrum. A plaister to stop humors flow∣ing to the eyes. Rec. Zinzibris albi puluerizati ℥.iiij. vi∣ni cretici, aceti rosacei, aquae rosarum, albu∣minū ouorum, ana ℥.ss. Mixe them together and make a plaister, which must bee applied to the temples and forhead when you goe to bedde. A plaister for running of eies. Rec. Thuris ℥.ss. sanguinis draconis ʒ.ij. sarcocollae ʒ.j. Make them in fine powder & incorporate them with the white of an egge and a little vineger and rosewater to make a plaister. A plaister to consolidate and cicatrize. Rec. Gummi dragaganti, sang. drac. ana
ʒ.iij. olibani, masticis, myrrhae, ana ʒ.ij. boli armenij ℥.j.ss. farinae volatilis, ʒ.ss. with the whites of Egges make them to a plaister. A plaister which doth heale, draw, mundifie, and resolue, and must be applied three daies. Rec. Picis nigri ℥.viij. picis graeci lib.j. galbani, bdellij, oppoponacis, serapini, am∣moniaci, ana ℥.ss. resinae pini ℥.ij. cerae albae ℥.iiij. masticis, thuris, ana ℥.j. terebinthinae venetae, ℥.ij. olei cōmunis ℥.j. vini albi ℥.x. Dissolue the gummes in wine, and melt the Waxe, Pitch, Colophonie and oyle to∣gether, then adde thereto the gummes and turpentine, and the rest in powder. A plaister against all poyson and virulent malignitie, either in wounds or vlcers: yea that draweth the same out of the inward parts of the bodie, being outwardly applied. Rec. Radicis ferulae that was gathered in the newe of the moone,Turneisse∣rus. well dried and rasped small, lib.iij. aquae quae in destillatione te∣rebinthinae albicans secernitur, lib.ix. Stop them close in a vessell, and set them to decoct xxiiii. houres; straine it out, and cast away the thicke; the other part digest and vapour
away to the thicknes of honie: so done, adde vnto it resinae clarificatae, masticis eodem modo praeparatae, & camphorae dissolutae, ana ℥.ij. ceui ceruini ℥.x. adipis taxi, ℥.vj. cerae ℥.xiiij. Boyle them in a latten vessell to a perfect bodie. A mollificatiue plaister. Rec. Stercoris canis ℥.iiij. farinae lentium ℥.ij. farinae fabarum ℥.j. terrae sigillatae, boli armenij, ana ℥.j.ss. cerusae, lithargyrij auri, ana ℥.x. Mixe them with Goates milke, or with Cowes milke (in which hot yron hath béen quenched) sufficient for a plaister. A plaister resolutiue. Rec. Fabarum farinae ℥.iiij. farinae lini & foenugraeci, ana ℥.j. florum chamaemeli, & meliloti, ana ℥.ss. medullae panis ℥.iij. pulpae pomorum dulcium sub prunis decoctorū, ℥.ij. butyri recentis, olei chamaemeli, ana ℥.iiij. pinguedinis capi ℥.ij. mellis despuma∣ti ℥.iij. Make a plaister. A mollifying plaister. Rec. Cerae citrinae lib.j. pingued. capi, an∣seris, & cygni, olei chamaemeli, violacei, li∣liorum alborum & olei sem. lini, terebin∣thinae, ana ʒ.j.ss. muscilaginis althaeae & se∣minis maluae, ana ℥.ss. myrrhae ℥.j. Boyle
them to the consumption of the muscilages, and make a plaister. A white plaister mollificatiue. Rec. Propoleos lib.j. ammoniaci lib.ss. medullae crurium vaccarum, ℥.iiij. pingued. caponis ℥.iij. colophoniae ℥.j. masticis ℥.vj. gummi arabici & dragag. ana ℥iij. plumbi albi abluti & cerusae dilutae, ana ℥.ij. Make your plaister as Art shall leade you. Another plaister mollificatiue. Rec. Medullae bouinae ℥.v. diachylonis magni lib.iij. lithargyrij lib.iij. terebinthinae lib.j. ireos ℥.x. cerae ℥.vj. axungiae porcinae q.s. Make it according to Art. Emplastrum de Rhabarbaro. Rec. Rhabarbari electi ℥.ss. aloes hepati∣caeIoannes Manardus. ℥.j. lixiuij fortis lib.j. saponis veneti lib. ss. cerae ℥.ij. decoquantur ad duritiem iu∣stam, &c This doth drie, warme, dissolue, and spend out moyst matter. A plaister for hardnesse of sinewes. Rec. Serapini ℥.iij. castorij ℥.ij. euphorbij ℥.j.ss. bdellij,Galenus. ammoniaci, ana ʒ.iiij. Bruse the gummes, and dissolue them in warme water, adding thereto cerae albae ʒ.xv. olei sambuci ʒ.iij. And make a plaister according to Art.
A plaister for paine in the huckle bone. Weckerus.Rec. Vnguenti martiati, agrippae, ana ℥.j. olei rutacei ℥.ij. galbani in aceto dissoluti ʒ.ij. euphorbij ʒ.ss. pyrethri, staphidis agriae ana ʒ.j. resinae q.s. Mixe them and make a plaister in good forme. Empl. Hyosciami lutei. Clowes.Rec. Resinae lib.ij. cerae albae lib.j. adipis hyrcini ℥.iiij. gummi elemi lib.ss. aquae vitae lib.j. succi herbae lib.iiij. Mixe them accor∣ding to Art. A greene waxe to be vsed, as in thinne plates vpon vlcers with hard edges, and difficult to cicatrize: also to keepe open an issue, &c. Pareus.Rec. Cerae albae ℥.xij. viridis aeris ℥.iiij.ss. sublimati ℥.j. gummi elemij ℥.j. Mixe them. Emplastrum ad Hydrocelem. Banester.Rec. Empl. de baccis lauri, lib.ij. mithri∣dati ℥.iij. fimi columbini ℥.iiij. lupinorum ℥.iij. baccarum lauri ℥.ij. cymini ℥.j. absyn∣thij sicci ℥.ss. florum chamaemeli ℥.j. florum hyperici ʒ.iij. aquae vitae ℥.iiij. olei hyperici ℥.vj. Fiat Empl.
A most proued plaister for the Rupture. Rec. Aloes citr.℥.j.ss. sanguinis draconisGoodrus. ℥.j. myrrhae ℥.j. masticis, boli armeni, gum. dragaganti, ana ʒ.iij. Powder them all most subtillie, & cum viscositate limacum ru∣brarum. Fiat Emplastrum. A plaister of great vse for the asswaging of paine in any place, and dissol∣uing of tumors. Rec. Picis nigrae,Banester. colophoniae, resinae pi∣ni, cerae, terebinthinae, ana ℥.vj. galbani, am∣moniaci, sagapeni, ana ℥.iij. bdellij, oppo∣ponacis, ana ℥.ij. opij ℥.ij.ss. croci ℥.ij. myr∣rhae, thuris, sarcocollae, aloes, ana ℥.j..ss. sty∣racis calamitae, caphurae, ana ʒ.ij. spermatis ceti ℥.vj. sanguinis draconis, turpeti mine∣ralis, ana ℥.j.ss. croci martis ℥.ss. gummi e∣lemi ℥.j.ss. Dissolue the gummes in aceto hyosciami, and so make your plaister accor∣ding to Art. A plaister that doth notablie comfort and warme a weake member, dissolue or ripen Apostumes, and heale wounds or plaine vlcers. Rec. olei oliuarum lib.iiij. lithargyrij au∣ri,Banester.
lib.j.ss. lapidis calaminaris lib.ss. cerae ℥.xx. colophoniae ℥.x. ammoniaci in aceto dissol.lib.j. myrrhae ℥.ij. masticis, thuris. ana ℥.j. aristolochiae rotund. succini ana ʒ.vj. te∣rebinthinae, olei ex ouis, ana ℥.iiij. Melt the Oyle, Colophonie and Waxe together, then put in the Litharge and lapis calami∣naris, boyle them so to some consistence, af∣ter that put in the gummes, then the pow∣ders, and last of all the Terpentine and oyle of Egges. A white gumme plaister to resolue and spend away swellings. Banester.Rec. Gummi ammoniaci in aceto disso∣luti lib.j. olei chamaemeli ℥.ij. ireos opt. pul.ʒ.ij. cerae albae ℥.vj. Fiat Empl. Emplastrum sulphuratum for all malignant vlcers. Banester.Rec. Colophoniae ℥.ij. ammoniaci, gal∣bani, ana ʒ.iiij. masticis ʒ.iij. thuris, myrrhae, ana ʒ.iij. terebinthinae ℥.j. aluminis vsti ʒ.j. olei hyosciami ℥.j. olei sulphuris ℥.ij. olei o∣uorum ʒ.vi. cerae citrinae q.s. Fiat Empl. A plaister against deafnes. Ex manu∣scripto.Rec Succi radicum raphani, ℥.ss. succi porrorum ℥.j. olei nardini, anetini, amyg∣dalarum
amararum, ana ʒ.j.ss. interioris co∣loquintidae ʒ.j. aristolochiae rot. costi, rutae, ana ʒ.j. castorei, ʒ.ss. aphroni∣trum, or spuma nitri baurach ℈.ij. euphor∣bij ℈.j. Boyle them to the wasting of the iuy∣ces, and emplaster the eare therewith. A plaister for all putrifying, filthie, and stinking vlcers. Rec. Lithargyrij auri lib.j. olei ros. lib.ij. vini albi lib.j. aceti,Ex manu∣scripto. vrinae pueri ana lib.ss. Boyle them to the wasting of the liquors, putting them in by order, and the vrine last. When it draweth to a forme, put in cerae, olibani, myrrhae, ana ℥.j. So make it vp. Emplastrum flos vnguentorum. Rec. Cerae citrinae, resinae, resinae pini, ana lib.j. colophoniae, ceui ouini, ana lib.ss. ma∣sticis, olibani, myrrhae, ana ℥.ij. terebinthi∣nae ℥.iij. caphurae ℥.j. Powder those that are to be powdred, melt the rest (except the ter∣pentine) in vini albi lib.j. and boyle them to the wasting thereof, then add the powders, after that the terpentine; but last of all the camfer well grinded cum oleo rosaceo; powre it out into white wine, and worke it vp.
Vnguents. An vnguent to heale inflamations. Keble.REc. Vnguenti populeonis, vng. rosarum ana ℥.j.ss. in aqua rosacea & plantag. lo∣tae q.s. olei rosarum ℥.iiij. cerusae ʒ.ij. cerae albae q.s. terrae sigillatae ʒ.j.ss. camphorae ℈.ij opij ℈.j. Mingle all and make an oynt∣ment. An vnguent for the Hemrhoydes. Rec. Thuris ℥.ss. lycij, myrrhae, croci, ana ʒ.iij. opij ʒ.j. Séeth them in foure ounces of Goates milke, till the consumption of the third part, and then adde muscilaginis psy∣lij ℥.ss. olei rosacei ℥.iij. vitellum vnius oui. Mingle all and make an oyntment. An vnguent for venimous wounds. Querceta∣nus.Rec. Olei carabes, terebinthinae, ana ℥.j. iuniperi ʒ.ij. sem. vrticae, rad. gentianae, ana ʒ.ij. olei sulphuris, vitriolati, ana ʒ.j.ss. co∣ralli rubri ʒ.j. Fiat vnguentum. Another for the same purpose. Querceta∣nus.Rc. Lithargyrij ℥.ij. galbani ℥.ss. picis
graecae, terebinthinae, ana ℥.j. olei q.s. Fiat vnguentum. An excellent vnguent for wounds that hap∣pen in pockie persons. Rec. Mercurij ℥.ij. Let it first stand in newe milke thrée daies, euery houre shaking it together, then let it stand in aceto rosa∣rum three daies, then procéed taking tere∣binthinae purissimae ℥.vj. Herewith mingle all your Merurie vpon a marble stone ex∣actly, then keepe it to bee incorporated at length with this mixture following. Rec. Gummi elemij puriss.℥.vij. resinae pini ℥ iij. sepi castrati, ℥.iiij. pingued. porci ℥.iij.ss. olei hyperici ℥.iiij. gummi hederae, ℥.ij. masticis ℥.j.ss. mercurij praecipitati ʒ.viij. cerae albae ℥.j.ss. Melt first of these, those that are to be melted, and stamp them, then adde to the gum. hederae, masticis & praecipitate in fine powder; last of all ioyne this and the former mixture together. An vnguent for venimous bitings and wounds, of exceeding great praise. Rec. Olei panacis heraclij ʒ.ij. olei cerae,Turneisse∣rus. terebinthini albi, ana ʒ.ss. Cum fimo canino fiat vnguentum.
An vnguent that defendeth Dura mater from putrefaction. Rec. Aquae vitae ℥.ij.ss. croci ℈.ss. sarco∣collae ʒ.iij. resinae pini ʒ.ij.ss. mellis rosacei ℥.j.ss. succi apij & betonicae, ana ʒ.iij.ss. Boyle them till halfe bee consumed, adde thereunto, after it is strained, terebinthinae purgatae ʒ.iij.ss. olei vitellorum ouorum ʒ.iij. myrrhae ʒ.j. aloes ʒ.j.ss. And so make it. An vnguent for ouer moyst wounds, and gleeting humor of the tendons. Turneisse∣rus.Ex butyro maiali & pimpinella, the herbe chopped small and fried with the but∣ter till it become blacke; then after straine it and vse it for your vnguent. An oyntment for the Itch. Banester.Rec. Axungiae porcinae ℥.iiij. olei lauri∣ni ℥.ij. cerae albae ℥.ss. olibani, masticis, ana ʒ.iij. terebinthinae ʒ.ij.ss. salis grossi ℥.ij. li∣thargyrij auri ʒ.ij. succi lapathi acuti ℥.j.ss. argenti viui ℥.ij.ss. mortified with vineger of Squills. Powder that which is to be pow∣dred in very fine powder, and make hereof an oyntment according to Art. With this oyntment hath béen cured many extreame Itches, ouer al parts of the bodie dispersed,
annoynting only the hands and feet against a fire, or bath of Oates. Vnguentum fuscum much commended in wounds for the getting of good flesh and clensing putrefaction. Rec. Olei com. sepi arietini,Gilbertus. ana lib.j. pi∣cis naualis lib.ss. picis graecae ℥.iij. cerae (in sommer) ℥.ij. (in winter) ℥.j. masticis, oliba∣ni, galbani, ammoniaci, serapini, oppopo∣nacis, terebinthinae, ana ℥.ss. Melt the liquid things in oyle, and adde the rest finely pow∣dred, stirring them very well together on the fire, only adde the terpentine when the rest are sufficiently decocted, so straine and reserue it. An vnguent for the biting of a mad dogge, or other venimous creature. Rec. Galbani,Vesaliu. oppoponacis ana ʒ.j. am∣monicaci, terebinthinae, cerae, ana ʒ.j.ss. saga∣peni ʒ.ij. picis ʒ.ij.ss. Set them on a gentle fire, and in fit time put into them farinae fa∣barum a little quantitie, lithargyrij, croci, bdellij ana ʒ.j. myrrhae, olibani, ana ʒ.ss. masticis ℈.iiij. foenugraeci ℈.j. Boyle them all to a forme, then adde olei rosac. & sesa∣mini ana ʒ.ij. Make it vp according to Art.
An vnguent to drawe forth darts, wood, or other things infixed in any part of the bodie. Vesalius.Rec. Resinae pinae ℥.ij. galbani ℥.iij. lapi∣dis calamithae ℥.j. fellis bouini ℥.j.ss. terebin∣thinae ℥.iij. cerae nouae ℥.ij. First straine out the Rosine, Terpentin and Waxe: after∣ward mixe them cum felle, and last of all adde to the puluis lapidis calaminthae. Fiat vnguentum. Crtaine excellent vnguents of Para∣celsus for wounds. Rec. Mellis crudi lib.vj. *visci consoli∣dae maioris lib.ij. croci martis lib.ss. Mixe them to an vnguent. This same * viscus is an extract made of herbes or rootes in this sort. Stéepe the leaues and rootes of your herbes in white wine viii. daies, then let them seeth or stand in hot horse dung thrée daies. Afterwards straine them, and decoct the same strained li∣quor to the thicknes of honie. Another vnguent for vertue like Balme. Rec. Terebinthinae, olei lini, ana lib.iij. florum aeris, croci martis, *salis fusi, ana ℥.j. liquoris parthenionis ℥.iiij. Boyle them to sufficient thicknes.
This is common * salt, first parched and powdred, then set it in a calcining pot, and kept in a strong heate till it runne and melt as glasse, and be all a cléere cake, when it is cold. Another. Rec. Olei ouorum ℥.x. olei nucum lib.j. olei lini ℥.ss. carabies contusae ʒ.ij. Decoct them to a thicknes, adding visci consolidae ma. & lumbricorum, ana ℥.ss. An vnguent much praised for wounds in the sinewes incised. Rec. Centaurij mino. linguae canis,Tugalius lan∣ceolatae, pilosellae, consolidae ma. & mi. ana m.j. vermium terrestrium lib.ss. olei com. lib.j. picis nigrae, resinae, ana ℥.iij. gummi ammoniaci, galbani, oppoponacis in aceto dissolutorum, ana ʒ.v. Boyle them altoge∣ther at a moderate fire to the wasing of the wine and vineger: so straine them, when they are almost cold put too them erbin∣thinae ℥.j.ss. thuris, masticis, sarcocollae, ana ʒ.iij. croci ʒ.ij. Worke them together in a morter, and make an vnguent. Another to the same purpose. Rec. Pingued. vituli & vaccae,Marianus sanctus ex vigone. ana lib.ss. olei rosati lib.j. terebinthinae clarae ℥ iiij. pi∣cis naualis & graecae, resinae pini, ana ℥.ss. li∣thargyrij
argenti ℥.iij.ss. vini odoriferi cya∣thum j. lumbricorum ℥.ij. meliloti, hyperi∣ci, rubiae tinctorum, anthos, ana m.ss. Boyle altogether (except the minerals and terpen∣tine) to the wasting of the wie; Straine them, then bring them to the fire againe, and let them boyle with the litarge (stirring them well with a staffe) to a very blacke co∣lour. Lastly, adde to your terpentine and ce∣rae albae q.s. Fiat vnguentum. An excellent vnguent for wounds in the head, which the Author calleth his digestiue Balme. Arceus.Rec. Gummi elemij, terebinthinae abie∣tinae ana ℥.j.ss. sepi castrati antiqui & lique∣facti ℥.ij. pingued. porcinae antiquae lique∣factae, ℥.j. Mixe them at the fire and make it. Sometime the Author put in, in stead of the gummi elemij so much of the plaister de gummi elemi. Vnguentum Basilicum magistrale of mar∣ueilous proofe, for digesting, mundi∣fying, and swaging of paine. Vigo.Rec. Olei chamaemeli, olei rosati com∣pleti, ana ℥.ij. olei masticis, olei de terebin∣thinae olei de sem. lini ana ℥.j.ss. terebinthi∣nae clariss.℥.iiij. spi vituli, castrati, hyrcini,
ana ℥.ij.ss. rosmarini, betonicae, caudae equi∣nae, centaureae maioris ana m.j. vermium terrestrium washed in wine ℥.iij. rubiae tin∣ctorum somewhat brused ʒ.x. fol. & seminis hypericonis ana m.j. masticis, gummi elemi ana ʒ.x. picis naualis, resinae pini recentis ana ℥.j.ss. serapini, galbani, ammoniaci ana ʒ.iij. These thrée gummes being dissolued in vineger, and those things brused that are to be brused; mixe altogether with a cuppe of pleasant wine, and let them stand so by for foure and twentie houres; afterwards boyle them to the wasting of the wine, then straine them cléere, and adde too lithargyrij auri, & argenti, ana ℥.ij.ss. minij ℥.ij. Boyle them againe, but first at a gentle fire, stir∣ring them with a stafe, after that encrease the fire vntill it come to a blacke or such like colour. All which being done, with suffi∣cient newe Waxe make an vnguent in good forme. Vnguentum mirabile seruing both for vlcers and wounds, digesteth crude matter, and asswageth paine euen at once applying. Rec. Pingued. veruecis ℥.iij. pingued. taxiVesalius. ℥.ij. pingued. cerui ℥.j. pingued. muris mon∣tani ℥.j.ss. pingued. gallinae & cati siluestr.
ana ℥.ss. pingued. vrsi ℥.ij.ss. medullae boui∣nae, vng. dialthaeae & agrippae, ana ℥.j. dia∣quilonis, diapostoliconis, ana ʒ.vj. cerae albae ℥.vj. olei ℥.iiij. butyri ℥.ij. axungiae porci masculi ℥.v. resinae pini ℥.iij. terebinthinae ℥.ij. farinae foenugraeci, far. sem. lini, ana ℥.j. aeruginis ʒ.ij. lithargyrij ℥.j. succorum plan∣taginis, solani, violarum, betonicae, ana ʒ.ij. picis naualis ℥.ij. Make it an vnguent, mix∣ing firt your iuyces, then your fattes, and after that the rest. Vnguentum capitale for vlcers or wounds of the head, principallie where the bones are broken. Vesalius.Rec. Betonicae, matrisiluae, pimpinellae, perforatae, cariophyllatae, pilosellae, ana ℥.ij. Steepe them in vini stiptici lib.j.iii. daies, after decoct them to the third part, straine out the herbes and put to the liquor olei ro∣sacei ℥.iiij. Seeth them a little, then adde too resinae pineae, cerae nouae, ana ℥.ij. Last of all terebinthinae albae ℥.iij. Fiat vnguentum ac∣cording to Art. An vnguent for vlcrs of Lues Venerea. Paracelsus.Rec. Lithargyrij, minij, ana ℥.ss. olei myr∣tillorū ℥.iij. aloes ℥.j.ss. florū aris praepara∣torum
ʒ.iij. terebinthinae ʒ.ij. Decoct them to an vnguent. Another for the like case. Rec. Paracelsus.This I gather to bee Oleum axungiae humanae.Ol. de mūmia ℥.iij.ʒ.j. florum ae∣ris ʒ.ss. masticis, myrrhae, thuris, mummiae. ana ℥.ij.ss. aloes epaticae q.s. terebinthinae lotae ℥.iij.ss. Fiat vnguentum. An vnguent mundificatiue for vlcers Rec. Terebinthinae lib.j. ouorum vitel∣los num.xx.Paracelsus. Mixe them with much stirring together, and adde too mellis puri bonique as much in quantitie: stirre and séeth them together at a gentle fire to a duskie coloured vnguent, herewith dresse the vlcer twice a daie. An Addition heereunto for more efficacie when you see it good. Rec. Mixturae praescriptae lib.j. terebin∣thinae lotae lib.ss. Mixe them hote but not to boyle: also put in galbani, oppoponacis, ana ℥.j. (but let them first be prepared with vine∣ger as the manner of gums is) aristolochiae rotundae pulu.℥.ss. and so make it vp.
An excellent vnguent for vlcers new or olde, it consolidateth, hindreth the breed of euill flesh, and too much matter, cureth nerues or muscles wounded, maturateth, draweth out venime, also splints, yron or bones as much as is possible, &c. Vesalius.Rec. Pimpinellae, betonicae, verbenae, ana m.j. Stampe them and stéepe them in verie good aqua vitae a whole day, afterward strain them and in the strained liquor dissolue thu∣ris ℥.j. gumm. oliuae ℥.vij. masticis ℥.ss. re∣sinae ℥.vj. terebinthinae lib.j. cerae albae ℥.ss. lactis mulieris q.s. Fiat vnguentum. Vnguentum de Thutia for cancrous, coro∣siue and fraudulent vlcers, especiallie of the priuie parts. Vigo.Rec. Ol. ros. odoriferi, ol. omphacini, ana lib.ss. ol. myrtini, vnguenti Gal. vng. popu∣leonis, ana ℥.ij. fol. plantaginis & olatri, ana m.ij. Chop and stamp the hearbs, then min∣gle all together, & let them stand for a wéek: afterward boile them a little, so strain them, and adde too cerae albae q.s. To make it a sof vnguent take it from the fire, (stirring it al∣waies with a sticke, as long as it is warm) & lastlie put into it lithargyrij auri & argenti
bene triturati, ana ℥.iij. thutiae ʒ.j.ss. cerusae ʒ.x. pumbi vsti ʒ.vj. camphorae secundum artem trituratae ʒ.j. Misce: incorporate and labour them together in a leaden morter by the space of an houre. Another vng. de Thutia for cancrous vlcers, distempered with heate, and difficult of cure. Rec. Ol. ros. omphacini,Vigo. ol. ros. completi odoriferi, ana lib.ss. sepi hircini, sepi vituli, vng. rosati, vel vng. galeni, vng. populeonis, ana ℥.ij.ss. succorum plantaginis, solatri, a∣cetosae, acetosellae, ana ℥.j.ss. vini granato∣rum ℥.ij.ss. Boyle thē all at a softe ire to the wasting of the iuyces and wine, then straine them, and adde cerusae, lithargyrijauri & ar∣genti ana ʒ.ij.ss. plumbi vsti, antimonij, ana ʒ.x. thutiae alexandrinae ℥.j.ss. camphorae secundum artem trituratae ℥.j. cerae albae q.s. Melt the wax in the former strained liquor, after put in the mineralls, and worke it two houres in a leaden morter. An vnguent for the Canker. Rec. Succi tapsibarbati,Petrus His∣panus. boile it cum mel∣le (stil skimming it) vntil the iuice be almost consumed,Iohannes Liebaltius. thē put in pulu. de psydijs & my∣rabolanorum, and make it as an vnguent.
An vnguent that verie gentlie mun∣difieth and healeth. Martin.Rec. Cerae albae, picis, resinae, ammonia∣ci, ana ℥.j.ss. myrrhae, galbani, ana ℥.ss. oppo∣ponacis ʒ.ij. bdellij, aristolochiae longae, thu∣ris, ana ʒ.vj. lithargyrij ℥.j. floris aeris ℥.ss. olei lib.j. Make héereof an vnguent accor∣ding to Art. An oyntment for the Itch. Adolphus Occo.Rec. Styracis liquidae ℥.j. terebinthinae lotae, butyri loti, ana ℥.ij. succi limonum ℥.j.ss. cerusae lotae ℥.j. salis ℥.ij. Make héereof an oyntment as before. Another. Baker.Rec. Axungiae porcinae lib.j. ol. terebin∣thinae ℥.j argenti viui mortified with oyle of Bay ℥.j. boli armeni ℥.ss. ouorum vitello∣rum ouorum num.iiij. Let the yolkes of the egges be rosted verie hard, and then bea∣ten first in the oyle of turpentine, and after adde too the rest: beate all wel together, and so reserue it to your vse. Another. Baker.Rec. Butyri recentis ℥.vij. cerae albae ℥.ij. aceti vini albi lib.ss. sulphuris viui ℥.iij. aq. rosarum ℥.ij. gariophyllorum ʒ.ij. Misce∣antur,
& boile them (the cloues being whole) to the wasting of the vineger and rosewa∣ter: so straine it, and vse it by the fire three nights together. An vnguent or cerote for tettars, ringwormes & scabs. Rec. Argenti viui extincti in aceto vini albi ℥.iiij. succi saluiae ℥.iij. sepi castrati,Angelus Bologni∣nus. me∣dullae bouis, ana ℥.ss. thuris ℥.j.ss. Fiat. A magistrall vnguent for burnings. Rec. Ol. rosacei ℥.viij. olei ouorum ℥.ij.Weckerus. nitri albi puluerizati ℥.ij. cerae albae ℥.j.ss. corticis medij sambuci m.j. Make an oynt∣ment according to Art with a soft fire. This is a most singular oyntment. An vnguent for burning. Take alehoofe a good quantitie,Keble. plantain m.j. campaine leaues m.j. tutsan, selfeheale of each m.j. pimpernell m.ss. Bruse al these together groselie, and let them stande eight daies, putting in a quantitie of goose doong, and some waxe. Boyle al these till the herbs haue lost their colour and then make it into an oyntment. Note. With the leaues of Stramonium or Po∣mum
spinosum, may be made cum butyro, axungia porcina, or such like, (according to the common manner of hearbe vnguents) a most rare remedie, (& peraduenture aboue all others that men yet know) for all man∣ner of burnings, yea though it be the most pearcing and perillous kinde, which is by lightning. Whereof a verie famous Story was deliuered vnto my frend Master Iohn Iarret, who communicating the same also vnto me, was a means that for the publique vtilitie, the brute thereof might thus goe a∣broad vnto all the land. Vnguentum Apostolorum. Rec. Cerae albae, terebinthinae, resinae, am∣moniaci, ana ʒ.xiiij. aristolochiae long. thu∣ris, bdellij, ana ʒ.vj. myrrhae, galbani, ana ʒ.iiij. litharg.ʒ.viij. oppoponacis, aeruginis, a∣na ʒ.ij. olei communis lib.iij. Dissolue the gummes in white wine vineger, & boyle the oyle, waxe, rosin, and turpentine vnto the cō∣sumption of the vineger: then adde the other (being finelie powdered). It is effectuall a∣gainst dangerous wounds, vlcers, and fistu∣laes; it consumeth dead flesh & bréedeth new; it softneth hard flesh, and healeth wounds.
A mundifying vnguent for inue∣terate vlcers. Rec. Ammoniaci ℥.j.ss. galbani ℥.j. myr∣rhaeClowe. ℥.ss. oppoponacis ʒ.iij.ss. sarcocollae ℥.j. terebinthinae ℥.iiij.ss. resinae pini ʒ.vj. oliba∣ni ℥.j. masticis ℥.ss. cerae ℥.x. ol. hypericonis lib.ss. ol. lumbricorū ℥.iij. Let al the gums be dissolued in vineger, in the end adde ther∣too viridis aeris ℥.j. and so make an ointment. Vnguentum mundificatiuum magistrale. Rec. mellis rosati colati ℥.j.ss. terebinthi∣nae clarae ℥.iij. succi apij, succi prassij,Weckerus. ana ʒ.ss. succi absynthij ʒ.ij. Boyle them all toge∣ther, and then adde farinae hordei & fabarū, ana ʒ.vj. farinae lupinorum, orobi, ana ʒ.iij. sarcocollae, myrrhae, ana ʒ.j.ss. Make them in fine powder, and so make an oyntment. An vnguent to procure flesh in vlcers. Rec, Pulueris rad. arundinis,Wkerus. peucedani, ana ʒ.j.ss. thuris, masticis, myrrhae, ana ʒ.ij. pulu. iridis, pulu. aristolochiae, ana ʒ.j. corti∣cum pini ʒ.j.ss. vng. comitis ℥.iij. mellis ro∣sacei q.s. Mixe them according to Art An vnguent for a Canker vl∣cerate. Rec. Theriacae vet.℥.j. succi cancrorū ℥.ss.Ambros. Pareus.
succi lactucae, ol. rosac. ana ℥.j.ss. vitellorum ouorum sub cineribus coctorum num.ij. ca∣phurae ʒ.ss. Pistentur omni in mortario plumbeo: and make an vnguent. An vnguent most effectuall against the canker, and other maladies in the fundament. Textor.Rec. Lithargyrij ℥.vj. thuris, oesypi, a∣ungiae porc. recentis, butyri recentis, cerae, a∣na ℥.ij. ol. rosac.℥.iiij. Beat the lytarge with the iuice of garden suckerie, and mingle it with the rest melted together. Another more easie, especiallie for vl∣cers in the breast. Textor.Rec. Croci, succi papaueris albi, thuris, a∣na ʒ.j. litharg. plumbi combusti & loti, ana ʒ.ij. plumbi albi praeparati ℥.ss. cerae albae ℥.ij. pingued. anseris, butyri recentis, ana ℥.iij. ol. rosac. opt.℥.iiij. Beat the drie things with succo solatri, and mingle them with the o∣ther when they are melted. An vnguent to mundifie and heale wounds or vlcers. Rec. Butyri recentis lib. ij.ss. cerae citri∣nae, resinae pini, resinae puriss. gummi elemi, ana lib.ss. masticis ʒ.vij. mercurij praecipi∣tati
℥.iij. cinabrij ℥.ij. cum modico olei ro∣sarum. Fiat vnguentum. A corosiue vnguent to lay open an Impo∣stume or filthi vlcer where the bone is foule. Rec. Mercurij sublimati ʒ.v. vng.Nicolaus Massa. popu∣leonis ʒ.vj. opij gran.x. lapid. haematitis ℈.j Fiat vnguentum. An vnguent for Gangrena. Rec. Mellis ℥.ij. croci martis,Qurceta∣nus. croci ve∣neris ana ℥ ss. myrrhae, aristolochiae rotun∣dae, ana ʒ.j. caphurae ʒ.j.ss. phlegmatis vi∣trioli ℥.vj. Boyle them to the consistence of an vnguent, then adde mercurij praecipita∣ti ℥.ss. Fiat vng. Another. Rec. Butyri arsenici fixi,Querceta∣nus. ℥.ij. mercurij praecipitati ℥.ss. olei myrrhae ʒ.ij. Mixe them with honie, being first washed with succo chelidoniae. An vnguent for vlcers where the matter is thinne and subtill. Tec. Terebinthinae, cerae,Angelus Bologni∣nus. resinae ana ℥.iij. olei rosac.℥.iiij. pulu. aristoloch. rotundae, myrrhae, olibani, aloes, masticis ana ʒ.ij.ss. Fiat vnguentum.
An vnguent for a canker. Rec. Boli armeni ℥.iiij. aluminis rupei, lib.ss. mellis despumati q.s. Fiat Vnguen∣tum. An vnguent for burnings. Clowes.Rec. Axungiae porcinae lib.iiij. ol. semi∣nis lini lib.ij. ol. rosac. lib.j.ss. fol. maluarū, violariae, nymphaeae, plantag. prunellae, vm∣belici veneris, androsaemi, semperviui, ana m.j. haederae terrest.m.iiij. Infuse these sixe daies, thē boile it at gentle fire til the herbs be parched: then straine it, and put to them cerae albae lib.ss. nitri albi ℥.vj. And if you putte in whilest they boyle togeather, one pound of shoomakers peece greace, your vn∣guent will be the better. An vnguent for all manner of burnings. Is made ex succo dauci germanici (both hearbe and roote) mixed cum vernice, cera, medulla bubula, & aceto rosaceo, all in e∣quall weight to the consistence of an Un∣guent.
Vnguentum de Peto vel Nicotiano, for vlcers, scabbes, and scrofulaes. Rec. Fol. nicotianae lib.ij. axungiae por∣ci recentis vel diligenter lotae lib.j.Ioubertu. Bruse the hearbe, and stéep it one night in vino ru∣bro, in the morning boile it with axungia to the wasting of the wine: then straine them, and put to them succi nicotianae lib.ss. resi∣nae abietinae ℥.iiij. Boile them to the cōsump∣tion of the iuice, putting too in the ende radi∣cis aristolochiae rotundae puluerizatae ℥.ij. cerae nouae q.s. Fiatque vnguentum. Vnguentum Nicotiani most effectuall for wounds, cancrous vlcers, creeping tettars, and knobs in the face. Rec. Foliorū nicotianae, the fairest,AEgidius Euerardus. grea∣test, gréenest, most gummie, frée from dust, & all outwarde wet of raine and deawe lib.j. Stampe them in a marble or woodden mor∣ter, and hauing in readines axungiae lib.ss. most purelie prepared and melted in a brasse vessel, put this whole hearb and iuice into it, then boyle them ouer a triuet, at a little softe fire, or els in balneo mariae vntil the watrish part of the iuice be consumed, & the rest come to the consistence of an vnguent.
Orels. It may bee made by many infusions of the leaues of nicotian in oleo rosaceo, and after adde to the straining, succi eiusdem herbae, equall portion, and cerae as much as shall be sufficient. An vnguent for vlcers in the yard. Adreas Lacuna.Rec. Vng. rosacei & refrigerantis galeni ana ℥.j. olei violacei ℥.ss. pulu. rosarum ru∣brarum, santalorum citrinorum, spodij ana ʒ.j. caphurae gra.xv. Mixe them diligentlie, and sprinkle among them a fewe drops of Rose-vineger. An vnguent for vlcers about the secret parts. Benedict Victorius.Rec. Vng. albi ℥.iiij. aloes epaticae ℥.j. tu∣tiae praeparat.ʒ.iij. caphurae gra.vj. aluminis vsti ʒ.j.ss. viridis aeris ʒ.j. olei rosac.℥.ss. in mortareo plumbeo fiat. A drying vnguent for the Hemrhoides in case when they are to be staied. Galenus.Rec. Mellis ℥.iij. aceti ℥.ij. vitrioli vsti ʒ.j. tutiae praeparatae, lithargyrij, plumbi v∣sti ana ʒ.j.ss. Let the mel and acetum boyle together, mingle the rest with them in a morter of leade.
Vnguentum Rosarum. Rec. Axungiae porcinae lib.j. Wash it nine times in hot water,Mesuae. and as oft in cold, and stampe it with red Roses lib.j. or more, let them stand infused seauen daies, and then boyle all with a gentle fire, then sraine it, and put too as much red Rose leaues, and let it stand other seauen daies, and thus doo three or foure times, then adde too of the iuyce of red Roses sixe ounces, oyle of swéet Almonds fiue ounces, seeth altogether vp∣pon a gentle fire till the iuyce of Roses bée cleane wasted, then straine it, and reserue it to your vse: and if you put to this oyntment one dramme of opium, it is the better. It is a singular oyntment to coole heates. It is good to annoynt the backe, and cureth Her∣petes and Erisipelata. It is good for the ach of the head, and for the liuer and stomacke, being distempered with heate. Vnguentum populeon. Rec. Oculorum populei lib.j.ss. folio∣rum papaueris nigri, fol. mandragorae, sola∣ni, vermicularis, porri, bardanae, semper∣viui, vmbelici veneris, fol. violarum, ana ℥.iij. axungiae sine sale lib.iij. Stampe all these herbes small, and mixe them with ax∣ungia,
and make it in great balles, and lay them a rotting tenne daies, then adde there∣to a quart of white wine, and put it in a pan, and boyle altogether till the wine bée consu∣med, and then straine it. This oyntment ceaseth paines of great heate, stiffenesse, swellings of humors in the legges. An oyntment for cold aches. Keble.Rec. Olei chamaemeli, aneti, rutacei, me∣liloti, ana ℥.j. olei laurini ℥.ss. aquae vitae ℥.ij. olei nardini ʒ.vj. cerae citrinae ℥.iiij. vn∣guenti martiati ℥.vj. Melt all these toge∣ther, and when they bée meled straine them through a faire cloath, and so reserue it to your vse. An oyntment to mitigate paine. Rec. Olei liliorum alborum ℥.vj. olei aneti, chamaemeli, ana ℥.ij. oli amygdala∣rum dulcium ℥.j. pingued. anatis & galli∣nae, ana ℥.ij. cerae albae q.s. Make héereof an oyntment. Vnguentum mercuriatum cum theriaca. Adolphus Occo.Rec. Butyri ℥.ij. axungiae porcinae ℥.viij. theriacae, mythridati, ana ℥.ss. argenti vii mortified ℥.vij. lithargyrij, salis communis, ana ʒ.vj. croci ʒ.j. olei vermium terrestrium
aquae vitae, id est vini sublimati, ana ℥.j. mos∣chi gra.v. Mingle all and make an oynt∣ment. An vnguent for an ach. Rec. Saluiae mense Maio collectae,Ex manu∣scripto. ebu∣li, & menthae odoratissimae, ana m.j. being chopped boyle them in vini albi lib.iiij. to lib.ij. then straine it out; adde to that liquor olei oliuarum lib.ij. cerae ℥.iij. vel iiij. Boile them to the forme of an vnguent. Vnguentum Dulce that represseth the swel∣ling edges and distemperatnes about wounds. Rec. Ceui ouini, lib.iij. thuris lib.ss. alu∣minis roch.℥.vj. vini albi lib.ij.Balthrop. Boyle them till the wine be almost consumed; straine it, put too cerae albae, ℥.iiij. Stirre it till it bee cold. Another. Rec. Ceui ouini lib.iiij. ceui ceruini lib.ij.Clowe. aluminis rochae lib.j. resinae puluerizatae ℥.xij. vini albi lib.j. Fiat vnguentum. A fine mundificatiue for Fistulaes and soule vlcers, about ioynts. Rec. Mellis lib.ij. vitrioli albi ℥.iiij. succi caprifolij lib.iiij.Ex manu∣scripto. First boyle the honie and iuyce, and then the other with them, vnto the consistence of an vnguent.
Another mundificatiue for vlcers in the mouth, comming of scorbutum. Balthrop.Rec. Mellis lib.ij. succi cochleariae lib.iiij. vitrioli albi ℥.vj. Make it vp as the for∣mer vnguent. A greene incarnatiue and mundificatiue. Rec. Symphiti, violae flammeae vel trico∣loris dodonei (we call it hars ease,Balthrop. or pan∣ces) plantaginis, florum armeriae, (which wee call sweete williams) ana m.ij. Bruse these, and put them into ceui ceruini mol∣ten, & olei oliuarum ana lib.j. Let them boyle together vntill the strength of the herbes be receiued, then straine it, and in the cooling put too terebinthinae venetae lib.ss. So kéepe it. An vnguent which doth mitigate paine, de∣fendeth accidents, and consumeth tumors which happen in greene wounds. Rec. Seui ceruini lib.ij. seui ouini lib.iiij. aluminis rochi purissimi lib.j. resinae clarae ℥.xij. vini albi lib.j. Let all these bee boyled on the fire to the forme of an vnguent.
Vnguentum vulpinum verie good against a∣ches, and restoreth limmes and ioynts, la∣med through paines of the gowt, &c. Take a Foxe and draw out the entrailes,Clowes. then take sage, rosemarie, iuniper leaues and berries, dill, wild marioram of the gar∣den, lauender, chamomill, of each halfe a pound. Stampe these herbes in a morter of stone very finely, and cut the Foxe in péeces, and put the herbes with the Foxe into a vessell of eight gallons, and put too foure pints of oyle oliue, oyle of neates féete one pound, calues suet, déeres suet, goose grease, brockes grease, of each one pound & a halfe, of sea water three quarts, and as much of good malmesey. Set altogether on the ire, and boyle it till the wine and water be con∣sumed, and that the flesh and bones be sepa∣rated asunder, then let it bée taken from the fire, and strained, & pressed through a strong canuas cloath, and so reserue it to your vse, as a pretious oyntment. Vnguentum viride. Rec. Olei lib.ij. cerae citrinea lib.j. resinae, pini, ana lib.j. terebinthinae lib.j. viridis aeris ℥.j. Make hereof an oyntment according to Art.
Vnguentum mundificatiuum. Rec. Terebinthinae ℥.ij. mellis rosati ℥.j. farinae hordei, myrrhae, masticis, ana ʒ.ij. Mingle all and make an oyntment. Vnguentum AEgyptiacum. Guydo.Rec. Mellis lib.j. aceti optimi ℥.vj. viri∣dis aeris ℥.j. aluminis ʒ.v. Make héereof an oyntment according to Art. Another AEgyptiacum. Rec. Mellis lib.ij. aceti fortis lib.j. viri∣dis aeris ℥.iiij. aluminis ℥.iij. Boyle altoge∣ther till it come to a red colour: but first grinde your aeris viride and alome vnto ve∣rie fine powder, and then mixe altogether, and boyle it to the forme of an oyntment. It mundifieth vlcers and fistulaes, and a∣bateth spungerous flesh. Another. Mesuae.Rec. AEruginis ʒ.v. mellis ʒ.xiiij. aceti al∣bi ʒ.vij. Seeth all and stirre it till it bee red, then adde calcanthi vsti ℥.ij. olei rosati ℥.iij. cerae q.s. Make of all these an vnguent. It is good for old wounds, it closeth fistulaes, it helpeth against ranke flesh, and it drieth exceedingly. Another. Vigo.Rec. Aquae plantaginis, vini malorum
granatorum, mellis, ana ℥.ij. aluminis rupis, aeruginis, ana ʒ.x. Seeth it and stirre it till it be red. Vnguentum mundificatiuum. Rec. Plantag. arthemisiae, absynthij, plan∣taginis mino. gariophyllatae, caprifolij, bel∣lis, meliloti, ana m.j. hyosciami, violarum, ana m.ss. bardanae, trifolij, ana p.j. apij, as much as of all the rest. Iuyce all these, then take as much honie as iuyce, and mingle al∣together with a quart of wheate flower, and turpentine foure ounces. Set all these on the fire, and boyle it to the forme of an oynt∣ment: and if it clod in the boyling by rea∣son of the flower, then straine it. This oint∣ment mundifieth vlcers and fistulaes. Vnguentum incarnatiuum. Rec. Resinae ℥.iiij.ss. terebinthinae lib.ss. mellis ℥.iij. cerae flauae,Baker. ℥.v. thuris, masticis, myrrhae, sarcocollae, aloes, croci, ana ʒ.ij. Re∣lent that which is to bee relented, and in the cooling put in the powders. Another. Rec. Olei rosarum ℥.xii. resinae ℥.xij. ce∣rae citrinae ℥.vj. terebinthinae ℥.viij. masticis ℥.ij. olibani ℥.iiij. croci ʒ.j. Mingle all, and make an oyntment.
Another. Rec. Resinae, cerae, ana lib.ss. terebinthi∣nae ℥.iiij. olibani, masticis, ana ℥.j myrrhae, sarcocollae, ana ʒ.iij.ss. olei masticis, mellis rosati colati ana ℥.j. farinae hordei ℥.ij. Min∣gle all and make an oyntment. Vnguentum sanctorum Cosme & Damiani. D. Foster.Rec. Pimpinellae, verbenae, betonicae, ana m.j. Stampe them, and put to them vini al∣bi lib.ij.ss. Boyle them together in a tinned vessell to the wasting of thrée parts, then straine them, and set the strained part ouer the fire againe in a glased vessell, then Rec. terebinthinae bene colatae ℥.vj. resinae bene colatae, lib.j cerae nouae & albae ℥.iiij. when they are melted altogether in the same gla∣sed pot, adde to them masticis bene pulue∣rizati ℥.j. de lacte mulierum lactantium masculum & foeminum, ana ℥.ij. Boyle them to their perfect bodie. It auaileth for all wounds, and namely of the sinewes: also for Cankers Fistulaes, and S. Anthonies fire. A singuler secret for vlcers of the legges. D. Foster.Rec. Linteum lineum that hath béen thrée
times wet in lixiuio forti, and dried againe in the shade. Take a péece therof and spread vpon the one side of it vnguentum de ceru∣sa following, then applie the wrong side, namely, the vnspread side to the vlcer, and binde it too, and so shall it not cleaue to the vlcer, and yet cure it. Vnguentum magistrale de cerusa. Rec. Cerusae lotae,D. Foster. ℥.ij. lithargyrij ℥.ix. o∣lei ros. completi ℥.v. succi solani ℥.ij.ss. cerae albae ℥.j. thuris ℥.ij.ss. Let the cerusa, oleum & succus be perfectly wrought together n a morter, and afterward adde to the rest: Rec. huius vnguenti ℥.ij. infrigidantis gal.℥.ij. Mixe them to vse. This is good to defend from inflama∣tions, and drieth moderatly, but it must bee very newe not past two daies old, for other∣wise it will get a sowrenes and so hurt. A marueilous vnguent for bur∣ning with fire. Rec. Olei rosati ℥.viij. olei vitellorumD. Foster. ouorum ℥.ij. vitri albiss. subtiliss. triti & puluerizati ʒ.ij. cerae albae ℥.j.ss. corticis me∣dianae virgularum sambuci m.j. Boile them and straine them according to Art. Fiat vn∣guentum.
A very good vnguent for the curing of old and painfull vlcers. Banester.Rec. Resinae pini, resinae communis pu∣riss. colophoniae, terebinthinae, ceui ceruini, cerae citrinae, ana lib.ss. olei communis, olei seminis lini, ana ℥.xij. vini albi lib.ij. Boyle these altogether at a soft fire, vntill the wine be consumed, then take it from the fire, and put to it viridis aeris in most fine powder ℥.j. Stirre it well together, then straine it, and keepe it to your vse. An vnguent for pockie tettars and chinkes, or chappes of hands or feete. D. Foster.Rec. Sem. cardamomi, iuniperi, ana ʒ.ss. sulph. viui ℈.ij. argenti viui ℥.ss. succi hepa∣ticae ℥.j. vng. ros.℥.j.ss. Mixe them in a leaden morter thrée houres together. Fiat vnguen∣tum. An excellent and proued unguent, either for wounds, vlcers, or open apostemes. Giuen of Mistris Warren.Rec. Hyperici, cardui benedicti, bellidis siluestris oculorum populi arboris, planta∣ginis, lanceolatae, valerianae graecae, betoni∣cae, prunellae, cepaeae, semperviui, solani, ana m.iij. Choope them small, and stampe them very well with axungiae porci, lib.iiij. Let
them stande together in an earthen pot one whole moneth in a celler: (saith my copie, but in horse dung I would iudge to bee bet∣ter) at the moneths end (if it haue stoode in a celler) take off the vncleannes aboue, for it will moule ouer, then boyle it the space of two houres. Afterward straine it out, put it againe into your boyling pan, and with it cerae lib.j.ss. resinae, terebinthinae, ana lib.j. herbarum omnium praedictarum, ana m.j. Stampe and straine out all their iuyce, which when you haue put in, boyle altoge∣ther to the perfect bodie of an vnguent, stir∣ring them al the while: if it fall out to want waxe, you may add more according to your discretion. That which remaineth of one yéere may be refreshed with new herbes the next yere. Vnguentum viride for old wounds or vlcers, consuming the euill flesh and en∣gendring good. Rec. Celidonij, radicis alleluiae,Gilbertus. Arden ad∣deth Rue. foliorū centri galli, leuistici agrestis, scabiosae, ana m.j. cum sepi arietini & olei com. ana lib.j. Let them (being brused) bee set to infuse for nine daies, then boyle them vntill the herbs settle in the bottome, after straine them, and add vnto them cerae ℥.iiij. (in sommer
or ℥.ij. (in winter) which being melted, put in likewise olibani, masticis, viridis aeris, all in very fine powder, ana ℥.ss. When it is boyled to the proofe, and hath a gréene co∣lour, set it from the fire, and lastly adde vn∣to it aloes epaticae puluerizati ℥.ss. So straine the whole and kéepe it to your vse. An vnguent that maketh a firme founda∣tion of flesh in healing. Rosa Ang.Rec. Succi apij, betonicae, sanamundae, os∣mundae, summitatum rubi, plantaginis, ana quantum vis, mellis quod sufficit & resinae & cerae & olibani, & sanguinis draconis, & rosarum, ana part.ss. Make it an vnguent or cerote according to Art. An vnguent for a Fistula. Rosa Ang.Rec. Lactis tithimalli duas partes, ax∣ungiae veteris tertiam partem. First melt the axungia, and after put in your lac tithi∣malli, and boile them to the third part: when it is taken from the fire adde to it myrrhae a quantitie in fine powder when you will vse it: arme your tent therewith that it may go downe to the bottome. Vnguentum Basilicon. Rec. Resinae, terebinthinae, adipis vaccini,
picis naualis, thuris, ana lib.j. cerae, olei com∣munis ana lib.ij. Make hereof an oyntment. Tetrapharmacum Galeni. Rec. Picis nigrae, resinae, cerae, adipis vac∣cini, ana quantum sufficit. Make hereof an oyntment. This doth heae, moysten, cease paine, suppurateth and causeth matter. Vnguentum Fusoum. Rec. Olei lib.j.ss. cerae nouae ℥.iiij. picisNicolai. graecae, picis nigrae, ana ℥.ij. masticis, galba∣ni, thuris, ana ℥.j. Mingle and make an oynt∣ment. This doth both drawe and heale. A greene vnguent to clense and heale old vlcers. Rec. Reinae, resinae pini, colophoniae,Banester. te∣rebinthinae, ceui ceruini, cerae citrinae, ana lib.ss. olei com. olei lini, ana ℥.xij. vini albi lib.ij. viridis aeris ℥.j. bulliant ad consump∣tionem vini, fiat vng. Vnguentum Resinae. Rec. Mellis lib.j. resinae ℥.v. terebinthi∣nae lib.ss. myrrhae, sarcocollae ana ℥.j. seminis foenugraeci, seminis lini, ana ℥.j. Let the seedes lye infused foure and twentie houres in white wine, take of that muscilage foure ounces, boyle these to the consumption of
the muscilage, and in the cooling put in the myrrhe and sarcocoll, &c. This oyntment mundifieth wounds of the ioynts, & staieth the muscilage and gleeing humor that flo∣weth from the ioynts, &c. Vnguentum sanatiuum. Rec. Terrae sigillatae, lapidis calaminaris, lithargyrij auri, ana ℥.iiij. oyle oliue lib.vj. cerae ℥.xii. camphorae ʒ.ij. Mingle all and make an oyntment. This oyntment is good for hot vlcers of the legges, and defendeth euill humors in any part of the bodie. Another. Rec. Olei rosati lib.j. cerae ℥.vj. terebin∣thinae ℥.iiij. lapidis calaminaris lib.ss. boli armeni ℥.ij. Mingle these and make thereof an oyntment. Another. Rec. Olei rosati lib.j. cerae lib.ss. butyri maialis lib.ss. lapid. calaminaris lib.ss. make hereof an oyntment. Another. Rec. Lapid calaminaris lib.ss. seui cerui∣ni, cerae albae, ana lib.ss. olei rosati lib.j. cam∣phorae ℥.ss. Make an oyntment.
Another. Rec. Olei lib.j. resinae lib.j. cerae, seui oui∣ni, ana lib.ss. terebinthinae ℥.xij. lapid. cala∣minaris lib.j. This is good for vlcers in any part of the bodie. Vnguentum Diapompholygos. Rec. Olei rosac. cerae albae,Nicolaus. ana ℥.vj. succi solani q.s. cerusae, plumbi vsti & loti, pom∣pholygis, thuris puri, ana ℥.j. Mingle all ac∣cording to Art. Vnguentum defensiuum magistrale. Rec. Boli armeniaci, sanguinis draconis,Weckerus. terrae sigillatae, ana ℥.j. olei rosati ℥.vj. cerae ℥.j.ss. aceti ℥.iiij. Séeth the oyle, waxe, and vineger together, till the vineger bee consu∣med, then take it from the fire, and when it beginneth to waxe colde, adde the other things being beaten in small powder. Vnguentum Nutritum, for all inflama∣tions, excoriations and itching. Rec. Lithargyrij auri ℥.iiij. olei commu∣nisGoodrus. opt. lib.j.℥.iiij. aceti albi destillati ℥.xij. First make the litharge in fine powder: then first put to it two or thrée spoonefulles of your oyle, and worke it well together
till it waxe thicke, then put to it some vine∣ger, but lesse than you did of the oyle, la∣bour them well together. Againe, put in some oyle, and after also vineger, so conti∣nuing, by course mingling and working them, till al be perfectly mixed; which to do well will aske a whole daies labour: being well done, it is verie white, thicke, and in good forme. Note. A portion of this may be brought to the forme of a plaister, by continuall boyling and stirring of it at a soft fire to a blacke and perfect consistence, which for his shining co∣lour I call Emplastrum lucidum. Vnguentum rubrum, siue de minio camphoratum. Odulphus Occo.Rec. Olei rosai lib.j.ss. lithargyrij ℥.ij. minij ℥.iij. cerusae ℥.j.ss. tutiae, camphorae, ana ʒ.iij. cerae alb. aestate ℥.ij. hyeme ℥.j. melt the waxe with the oyle at a soft fire, mingle thē in a leaden morter with the other things most finely powdred. Vnguentum caphuratum album. Weckers.Rec. Olei rosati lib.j. cerusae ℥.xij. cerae albae ℥.iij. ouorum albumina, num.vj. cam∣phorae ʒ.ij. Being dissolued in Rose-water,
mingle al and make an oyntment according to Art. Vnguentum desiccatiuum. Rec. Lapid. calaminaris,Galenus. terrae sigillatae, lithargyrij auri, minij, ana ℥.iiij. cerae ℥.v. camphorae ʒ.j. olei rosac. olei violarum, ana ℥.v. oyle of water lillies one ounce, oliba∣num and mastick, of each one ounce, mingle all and make an oyntment. Vnguentum dialthaeae compositum. Rec. Radicum althaeae lib.ij. seminis lini,Nicolaus. foenugraeci, ana lib. j. pulpae scillae ℥.vj. olei lib.iiij. cerae lib.j. terebinthinae ℥.ij. resinae, picis graecae, ana ℥.vj. Make an oyntment of the former things, and then adde the gums following, being dissolued in viniger, and so mixe altogether. This oyntment swageth paines of the stomacke comming of cold, and doth dissolue and mollifie. A singuler vnguent for Lues Venerea. Rec Axungiae porcinae, lib.j. butyri re∣centis ℥.vj. olei laurini ℥.iiij. olei vulpini, hypericonis, terebinthinae ana ℥.v. styracis liquidae lotae cum aqua chamaemeli & vino cretici ℥.ij. olei sulphuris ℥.ss. cinabrij ℥.j.ss. mercurij extincti ℥.vj. sublimati ʒ.j. cerae q.s. Fiat vnguentum.
Another. MatthiolusRec. Vng. rosac. vng. tripharmaci in mor∣tario plumbeo ex oleo ros. & aceto rosac. prius subactorum ana lib.j. mercurij subli∣mati, ʒ.ij. caphurae ʒ.ss. argenti viui extincti ℥.vj. Fiat. Another. MatthiolusRec. Vnguenti rosarum Mesu. lib.j. butyri recentis ℥.vj. vng. tripharmaci ℥.iiij. cerati santalini ℥.ij. saponis nigri ℥.iij. olei amygdalarum dulcium ℥.ij. argenti viui extincti ℥.vij. sublimati ʒ.ij. succi brassicae, scabiosae, fumiterrae, ana ʒ.iiij. Fiat. A proued vnguent for the maligne and inueterated skabbe. Petrus His. Iohannes Liebaltius.Rec. Sulphuris, ellebori albi, argenti viui, cumini, ana ʒ.ij. staphidisagriae ʒ.ss. Incor∣porate them cum ℥.vj. axungiae porcinae that is very old. Another without mercurie. Petrus His. Io Lie∣bault.Rec. Succi summitatum raphani ℥.vj. a∣ceti, olei, ana ℥.iij. With some addition of aloes make it an oyntment. Likewise a plaister made de allijs a long time beaten cum axungia porci, taketh a∣way all scabbes.
An vnguent to mollifie hard con∣tracted sinewes. Rec. Meliloti ʒ.vj. floris chamaemeli,Vesali. foe∣nugraeci, lauri, althaeae, rad. absynthij ana ʒ.iiij. sinapi, agni casti, ireos, cyperi, carui, spi∣cae, cassiae ligneae, ameos, anisi, ana ʒ.v. tere∣binthinae ʒ.j. ficuum num.xij. adipis caprae q.s. Fiat vnguentum. An vnguent to strengthen the sinewes. Rec. Myrrhae, thuris,Vesalius. ana ʒ.viij. ireos ʒ.ij. muscilaginis rad. althaeae, sem. foenugraeci, axungiae gallinae & anseris, ana ʒ.j. aristo∣lochiae rotundae ʒ.ij.ss. oppoponacis, am∣moniaci, sem. rutae, ana ʒ.j. spicae ʒ.ij. styra∣cis liquidae ʒ.vj.ss. olei chamaemeli & cerae q.s. Fiat vnguentum. A most excellent vnguent for the pockes, whether vlcerate or otherwise. Rec. Axungiae porci lib.j. olei laurini ℥.vj. argenti viui extincti cum succo saluiae,Clowes. olei hyperici, irini, chamaemeli, lumbricorum, rosacei, & mastichini, ana ℥.j. theriacae opt.℥.ss. vng. martiati, & vulpini, ana ℥.ij. vng. hyrundmariae ℥.j.ss. vng. dialthaeae compos. vng. genistae, ana ℥.j. terebinthinae venetae ℥.j.ss. aquae vitae ℥.ij. lithargyrij auri ℥.iiij. cerusae ℥.ss. plumbi vsti ℥.j. masticis,
myrrhae, olibani, ana ℥.ss. nucis moscatae, maceris, cariophyllorum, ana ʒ.vj. mosci o∣doratiss.ʒ.ss. Fiat. A proued vnguent without mercurie for paines in the ioynts of Lues Venerea. Augerius Ferrerius.Rec. Vng. martiati, vng. resumptiui, vng. aragon, vng. dialthaeae, ana ℥.iij. pyrethri, hermodactylorum, nitri, zinzibris, ana ʒ.j. olei chamaemeli, vulpini, laurini, ana ℥.j. o∣lei de lateribus, de terebinthina, & aqua vitae, ana ℥.ss. petrolei ʒ.iij. aristoloch. rot.ʒ.j.ss. cerae q.s. Fiat vnguentum. Another generall vuguent for Lues Venerea. Martin.Rec. Axungiae porci lib.j.ss. vnguenti martiati ℥.ij. euphorbij ℥.j. staphidis agriae ℥.ij. lithargyrij auri, ℥.iij. argenti viui extin∣cti in succo limonum, ℥.iiij. Fiat vnctio. An vnguent for Lues Venerea, and for all skabbes, tetters, ringwormes, either proceeding of that venimous humor, or any like. Banester.Re Vng. rosarum lib.ss. vng. albi ℥.vj. vng. populeon.℥.iiij. olei laurini ℥.iij. salis
nitri ℥.ij. mercurij sublimati ʒ.ij. gum. Ka∣rabe, masticis, myrrhae, olibani ana ʒ.ij. li∣thargyrij auri ℥.j.ss. cerusae ℥.j. aluminis vsti, vitrioli combusti, ana ℈.ij. mercurij crudi extincti cum succo limonum ℥.v. cerae al∣bae ℥.ij.ss. Fiat vnguentum. An vnguent of the iuice of Ebulus for all paines of the ioynts proceeding ex morbo Gallico. Rec. Granorum ebuli nigror. & maturor.℥.iij. foliorum ebuli,Rennerus. fol. betonicae, ana m.iij. yuae artheticae, yuae muscatae, rorismarini, lumbricorum terrest. lotorum cum vino al∣bo lib. ss. terebinth. quinquies lotae cū aqua saliuae ℥.ij. radicum althaeae ℥.iiij. olei com∣munis lib.j.ss. vini optimi lib.iij. Bruse all your hearbs and wormes, and boile them in the wine and the rest, vntill the iuice & wine be consumed: then straine it, adding there∣too so much waxe as will make an oynt∣ment. An vnguent against etars and ring∣wormes proceeding ex Lue Gallica. Rec. Cepi ceruini ℥.ij. saponis veneti ol. amyd. amarar. olei de iuglandib. ana ℥.ss. te∣rebinthinae ℥.vj. salis communis,Rennerus. ellebori ni∣gri,
ana ʒ.j. lithargyrij praeparati, tartari, sul∣phuris praeparati, ana ʒ.ij. argenti sublimati ℥.j. Powder that which is to bee powdered verie fine, and mix them together according to Art. An vnguent to cauterize a veine, that will not otherwise stay bleeding. Angelus Bologni∣nus.Rec. Vngu. populei ℥.ss. vitrioli vsti ʒ.ij. mercurij sublimati ʒ.iij. Fiat vnguentum. An vnguent that doth coole, cease paine, and defend humors flowing to anie part. Angel. Bo∣logn.Rec. Cerati albi ℥.iiij. ol. rosac.℥.x. san∣tali alb. & rubr. rosarum rubr. myrrhae, oli∣bani, masticis, ana ʒ.ij. caphurae ʒ.ss. tere∣binthinae ℥.ij.ss. Fiat vnguentum. An vnguent that doth drie and heal. Angel. Bo∣logn.Rec. Olibani, masticis, aloes, ana ℥.ss. co∣lophoniae ℥.iij. aristolochiae longae torrefa∣ctae ʒ.iij. ol. rosac.℥.vj. terebinthinae, cerae al∣bae, ana ℥.iiij. Fiat vnguentum. An vnguent that doth mundifie where the matter is grose and slymie. Angel. Bo∣logn.Rec. terebinthinae venetae ℥.vj. mellis ro∣sacei
℥.iiij.ss. myrrhae, iridis, aristoloch. lon∣gae, ana ℥.ss. farinae hordei q.s. Fiat vnguen∣tum. An excellent vnguent for vl∣cers in the ioynts. Rec. Vini gypsati lib.ij. mellis rosati li.Banester. j. zacchari candi albiss. lib.j. myrrhae ℥.iiij. masticis ℥.ij. Powder those which are to be powdered, and mixe them. An vnguent with the vse of it to roote out the caruncle. Rec. Argenti viui ℥.iij. aquae fortis ℥.iiij. Set thē to stand together in a strong glasse vntill the mercurie be hardned (which is in thrée or foure daies) after breake the glasse, and take it foorth. Rec. etiam plumbi tenu∣issimè laminati, & in minimas particulas incisi lib.j. aquae fortiss. lib.j. set them toge∣ther, & bring it so to powder. These things being thus prepared, Rec. Mercurij supe∣rius praeparati ℥.j. plumbi praepar.℥.iij. pin∣gued. haedinae vel agninae ℥.vj. Boyle them softlie, & cum modico cereae virgineae fiat vnguentum. Applie hereof vnto the carun∣cle euerie daie once for thrée or foure daies;
and after that, but euerie third daie once vn∣to the end. Although it happē to bléed in the first daies, yet goe forward. An vnguent for wounds with burning. Banester.Rec. Ol. vel pingued. lardi ℥.iiij. ol. buty∣ri, vel pinguedinis cremoris per ignem se∣peratae, ol. ouorum, ana ℥.ij. ol. sambuci ℥.j.ss. ol. amydalarum dulc.℥.ij.ss. ol. papaueris & hyosciami, ana ℥.j. salis nitri ʒ.ij. cerae al∣bae ℥.ij. Fiat. An vnguent for filthie vlcers, that mundifieth and healeth excee∣ding well. Banester.Rec. Ol. rosarum, ℥.iiij. ol. ouorum ℥.ij. pinguedinis palmae ℥.iij. terebinthinae ℥.j.ss. ol. myrrhae ℥.j. masticis ℥.j.ss. cerusae ℥.ij.ss. picis graecae siue colophoniae ℥.ij. cerae citri∣nae ℥.j. or lesse of the waxe if you sée cause: so make an vnguent. Vnguentum hyosciami for all paines & inflamations of great vse. Banester.Rec. Axungiae suillae lib. viij. fol. & sum∣mitatum hyosciami lib. viij. Stampe the hearbe verie well, then mixe them together, and set your vessell in the heate of the sunne,
or in balneo mariae for ten daies: after boyle it to the consumption of the watrish iuyci∣nes: strain it, and put too lib.vj. more of fresh hearb. Sunne them, and boyle them as be∣fore: then straine it to kéepe. Vnguentum de Alabastro for wounds, defluxions and cataractes in the eies of great vse & commendation: with some correction in the making. Rec. Summitatum Rubi num. 50. rutae,Beneuenu∣tus Hiero∣solymita∣nus. m.j. alabastritae lib.ss. sem. foeniculi ℥.ss. ol. rosac. lib.j. florum chamaemeli ℥.iiij. vini al∣bi lib.ij. cerae ℥.j. albuminum ouorum nu. vj. With a newe and cleane sponge crush through the whites of egges till they bee as water, so kéepe them a part: your alabaster grinde on a marble stone with aqua rosacea or foeniculi till it be as fine as a painters co∣lour. Now to compound them, doo thus: Take your hearbes, flower and fenill séede, (being all well stamped) powre vpon them your oyle of roses and wine: boyle them to the wasting of the wine, after straine them cléerelie into another faire vessell, and set it on the fire againe: put in your alabaster so ground as I haue said before, and your wax.
Let it séeth againe softlie (but alwaies stir∣ring it) vntill the watrishnesse be gone out. Then take it from the fire to coole, but cease not stirring till it be vtterlie colde. When it is almost cold, put in your whites of egges. To some part of this would I also adde a little camfer, and reserue that by it selfe. An vnguent generallie good for all e∣uills of the eies. Ex manu∣scripto.Rec. Butyri recentis 9. times washed cū vino albo odorifero ℥.j. tutiae praeparatae & pulu.ʒ.j.ss. caphurae trituratae ℈.j. antimo∣nij ℈.ss. Mixe them al in a leaden morter ac∣cording to Arte. The vse is, to put a little thereof into the eyes when the patient goeth to bed. An vnguent of Nicotian, of verie great effect in healing wounds of gunshot, and others also. Goodrus.Rec. Balsami Nicotiani nostri lib.j.ss. ce∣rae citrinae, resinae pini, ceui ceruini ana ℥ iij. gummi elemi ℥.j.ss. succi Nicotianae ℥.iiij. pinguedinis porc.℥.ij. Mixe them according to Arte, and boyle them to the consumption of the iuyces.
Vnguentum Ophioglossi, a most excellent consolidatiue. Rec. Ophioglossi as much as a peck will containe,Iarre. meliloti, valerianae, ana m.j. soli∣daginis saracenicae m.ss. saniculae, prunellae, virgae aureae, Iacobaeae, ana m.ss. Stampe them in a stone morter, and put vnto them three quartes of oyle Oliue, so let it stande all night: in the morning boyle it gentlie vntill it haue an excent gréene colour. Straine it, and adde too cerae lib.j. ceui cer∣uini lib.ss. masticis ℥.j. olibani ℥.j. finelie powdred. In the cooling put in Terebinthi∣nae purae ℥.iiij. An vnguent to roote out the caruncle. Rec. Argenti viui,Frederick plumbi tenuissimè la∣minati, ana ℥.j. aquae fortis ℥.iiij. Let these stand in a strong glasse or pot close stopped 48. howers, vntill the arg. viuum become like yce, & the plumbum white. Then at an easie fire euaporate the water: beate the rest into fine powder, & wash it wel in plantaine or rose water vntil it be sweet. Hereto more ouer add virid aeris praep.℥.ss. sabinae pulue.ʒ.j. antimonij ʒ.iiij. caphurae ʒ.v. stercoris canis ℥.ij. Emplastri Finichini, ℥.ij. ceui caprini, terebinthinae Venetae, ana ℥.j.
siccati sanguinis columbarum ʒ.j.ss. Let all these be mixt in a leaden morter according to Art. Note. This Unguent must be applied vpon a hollow tent made of lawne and paper. An vnguent to asswage the paine, & sore∣nesse that maie happen by the corosiue applications to the Caruncle. Frederick.Rec. Vng. diapmpholigos ʒ.ij. infrigi∣dantis gal. vng. albi Rhasis ana ʒ.iij. vng. po∣mati, vng. populei, ana ʒ.j. opij ℈.j. Mixe all these in a leaden morter and pestell vntill it become of the colour of lead it selfe. An vnguent for all contused wounds verie excellent: it helpeth and quickeneth he natural heat in the part, appeaseth pain, staieth putrifaction, concocteth and se∣parateth that which is vnsound. Baker.Rec. Lupinorum ℥.ij. hyperici, centaurij minoris, ana m.j. aquae lib.j.ss. Decoct these to the wasting of lib.ss. Rec. huius decocti∣onis ℥.vj. mellis ros.℥.viij. myrrhae ℥.ss. bo∣racis ʒ.j.ss. viridis aeris, croci, ana ʒ.ss. Boyl all these to the consistence of honie to be ap∣plied with tent or seton. After the vse therof
a sufficient time, Rec. vng. praefati ℥.ij. tere∣binthinae venetae ℥.ss. ol. lumbricorum ʒ.ij. mercurij praecipitati ʒ.j. Mixe them, & this applie vnto the perfect digesting and mun∣difying. A rare vnguent for stiffenes of ioynts sinewes, gowtes, and all aches. Rec. Succi chamaepitheos,Baker. suc. saluiae, suc. rutae, ana lib.ss. decocti vini cū limatura cor∣nu ceruini lib.j.ss. ol. chamaemeli & liliacei, ana lib.j. Boyle these altogether to the con∣sumption of the wine, then adde cerae, saga∣peni, oppoponacis, bdellij, galbani, ana ℥.ij. The gummes that you cannot powder, dis∣solue in wine: and so make your vnguent according to Art. An vnguent to staie the stench of a Canker. Rec. Citri in vitro inclusi & balneo ma∣riae donec flaccescat cocti lib.ss.Antonius Montag∣nana. Stampe it fine, and adde theretoo boli armeni orienta∣lis, ℥.j. extracti vel succi vincetoxici ad mellis spissitudinem condensati ℥.iij. Mixe them.
A most fine and approoued vnguent to staie the gleeting humor of wounds in the ioynts. Balthrop.Rec. Myrrhae, aquae vitae, of each pro∣portionable parts: Grinde them togeather on a marble to a perfect appliable bodie, and if you will asswage paine also, adde succi ni∣cotiani tantillum.
VVaters. A prooued water for all manner heates and inflamations of the eies. REc. Aloes epaticae, zacchari puriss. lapi∣dis tutiae subt. pulu. ana ℥.j. aq. rosarum rubrarum, vini albi, ana lib.ij. In a double glasse set them in balneo mariae fiue or sixe daies, often shaking it about. A water to cleanse and drie filthie vlcers. Rec. Rosarum rubr. siccarum, fol. myrti,Nicolaus Massa. corticum granatorum, balaustij, tartari, vi∣ni albi, aluminis, hordei, sem. caulium, ana partes aequales, aq. plantag. q, s. Decoct them according to Art, and straine them, and to e∣uerie pound of the decoction put mellis rosa∣rum ℥.iij. A water for vlcers merueilouslie commen∣ded, to cleanse, drie and heale them; especiallie if they proceed from a pockie fountaine. Rec. Aq. seperationis auri ab argento ℥.ij.Nicholaus Massa. aq. rosarū ℥.vj. Mixe them & herewith touch the vlcers: which wil stay (saith the author) the maligne gadding, and the descending of humors.
A water to cicatrize plaine vlcers speedelie. Rec. Aq. fontanae lib.iiij. mercurij subli∣mati ℥.ss. vitrioli albi, album. oui, ana ʒ.vj. cinabrij ℥.j. lapid. haematitis ℥.ij. boli arme∣ni ʒ.x. masticis, olibani, sarcocollae, ana ʒ.iij. Powder those that are to bee powdred, and mixe and boyle them to the consumption of halfe. A water for a scalde head, proued. Rec. Aq. fontanae lib.viij. aluminis ℥.ss. mellis albi li.j. Let these boyle a pretie space skimming it verie cleane: then put too viri∣dis aeris pulu.ʒ.ij. and boyle it againe a little, then filtre it and vse it. Another. Rec. Lixiuij minimè fortis lib.ij. vini al∣bi lib.j. mercurij sublimati ʒ.j. salis nitri ℥.ij. Boyle them to the wasting of the halfe, then filtre it. A water for vlcered mouths in Lue Venerea. Augerius Ferrerius.Rec. Foecis vini, & foecis aceti, aerug. alu∣minis, nitri, ana ℈.j. Boile them in aq. rosar. & plantag. a walme or 2. cléere thē through a strainer, but without pressing, & with lynt dipped therein touch the vlcered places.
A water that excelleth in this case, is made, Ex theriaca cum aquae vitae & aceti part.Augerius Ferrerius. aequalibus stilled by a glasse gourd, and then hauing dissolued therein terram sigillatam or armeniam: then herewith gentlie touch the corroded parts. In want thereof this water maie be vsed. Rec. Aquarum rosarum,Aug. Ferre∣rius. plantaginis & prunellorum agrestium ana ℥.j. aceti, aquae vitae, ana ʒ.vj. diamori, mellis rosa. ana ʒ.iij. theriacae, boli armeni, aluminis ana ʒ.ij. Let them stand for certaine howers vppon hote coales (but without boyling): afterwarde straine them lightlie. A water for Pustules and spots in the face or whole bodie, especiallie of Lue Venerea. Rec. Masticis, olibani, dragaganthi,Aug. Ferr∣rius. lau∣dani, ana ʒ.j. succi limonum ℥.j. aquarum plantag. & rosarum ana ℥.ij. sumach, tarta∣ri rubri & coralli albi, boracis ana ʒ.ss. sub∣limati pulu. gr.iij. Boyle them in a glasse vessell at a gentle fire to the consumption of the fourth part, clarifie it, and aromatize it with some graines of Muske.
Aqua Cinnabaris for pustules of the French pockes, for an olde scall, and filthie break∣ings out about the fundament. D. Foster.Rec. Vini albi antiqui lib.j. aeruginis, au∣ripigmenti, aluminis, ana ℥.ss. cinnabaris ʒ.v. sublimati ʒ.ij. Powder the things that are to be powdered, and heate them all together for a washing water. A water of great force to cleanse a filthie cancrous vlcer. Banester.Rec. Aq. plantag. rosarum rub. ana lib.j. succi solatri, semperviui, & plantaginis, ana ℥.iiij. rosarum rub.m.ss. myrtillorum, nucū cupressi, ana ℥.ss. malecorij ʒ.iij. florum hy∣perici p.ij. florū verbasci p.j. masticis, myr∣rhae, thuris, ana ʒ.j. mellis rosacei lib.j.℥.iiij. Powder that which is to be powdered, and distill them altogether. Rec. aquae huius de∣stillatae lib.j. Therein dissolue conseruae ro∣sarum ℥.vj. & syr. rosarū siccarum ℥.j. cum ol. sulphuris gut.xij. and vse it. A speciall good water for chops or cleftes a∣bout the nailes, or other parts of the hands and feete. Goodrus.Rec. limaturae aeris tenuissimae ℥.j. aquae plantaginis lib.ss. Boyle them together vn∣till
halfe be consumed, then straine it: there∣in dippe linnen cloathes, and lay to the pla∣ces. It ceaseth the paine, & cureth presentlie. A water that cureth the French pockes. Rec. Cariophyllorum, pyrethri,H. de Ot∣then. ana ℥.ss. piperis nigri ʒ.ij. cardamomi ʒ.iij. cantari∣dum ʒ.v. aluminis, salis nitri, sulphuris, ce∣rusae, ana ℥.j. croci orient.ʒ.j. sublimati ℥.iij. theriacae Androm.℥.j. aquae ardentis lib.iij. Powder those that are to be powdered: let them all stande to macerate in a colde place for certaine daies. With this water by a spunge wet the principall ioynts of the bo∣die vntill they blister, or other accidents (as in the vnctions fall out. For the blisters vse no medicine, but abstaine from this a space. Returne to it eftsoones, and repeat the order till you be sure the disease is expelled. A blistering water where there is paines in the bones or ioynts proceeding ex lue gallica. Rec. Carioph. sal. nitri,Rennerus. sulphu. ana ℥.j. zin∣giberis. piper. lōg. pirethri, aloes epat. erucae, ana ℥.ss. croci or. eupho. an.ʒ.ij. alum.℥.ij.ss.
cantharidarum purgatarum ʒ.vj. aqu. vitae lib.ij.ss. Powder that which is to be pow∣dered, mixe them all together, and put them into a glasse: let it stand till the aqua vitae haue taken out the force. A water against spottes and markes, or scarres proceeding ex Lue Venerea. Rennerus.Rec. Tutiae praeparatae ʒ.j. sulphuris, alu∣minis vsti, ana ʒ.ij. acetirosacei ℥.j. aquae rosarum ℥.ij. Mixe them together. A water for heate and pimples procee∣ding ex Lue Venerea. Rennerus.Rec. Cerusae ℈.ij. mercurij sublimati gr. xij. olei tartari ℥.j. aquae rosarum alb.℥.v. Grinde your cerusa and mercurie very fine and mixe them together according to Art. A water verie effectuall for healing of vlcers. Banester.Rec. Plumbi albi puriss.℥.x. aluminis ro∣chae ℥.xij. vitrioli ℥.vj. minij ℥.v. Make thē in fine powder, and calcine them together exactlie. Take hereof ℥.ij.ss. and put it into aquae rosaceae lib.j. When it is made hote let them stande for a daie togeather, and so vse it.
A water to cicatrize and heale any plaine vlcer. Rec. Aq. chalib. lib.iiij. fol. plantag. cen∣tinodij,Banester bursae pastoris, ana m.ss. aluminis rochae ℥.j.ss. masticis ℥.j. thuris ℥.ij. vitrioli albi ʒ.ij. Boyle them to the consumption of the halfe, straine it, and vse it as Art doth require. A water that cicatrizeth notablie, and of excellent vse for wounds of the eyes. Rec. Albumina ouorum iiij. crush them through a cleane sponge,Goodrus. vntill they become as a cléere flowing water, vini albi, lactis recentis, ana lib.ss. lapidis calaminaris in vi∣no albo extincti ʒ.iij. masticis, myrrhae, oli∣bani, sarcocollae, ana ʒ.j. vitrioli albi crudi ʒ.ij. Powder these most finely, and mixe them with the liquors, & set them to sunne, or in horse dung for foure daies. After distill the liquor by a filtre and kéepe it. With ℥.iiij. of this water, and sublimati ℈.iiij. is made an excellent water for rednes of the face. Also with foure ounces of this water & zacchari candi albiss.℥.ij. cū aloes praeparatae ℥.ss. is made a notable collirie for affects of the eyes.
A water for the eyes that weareth away both webbe and spots, and sharp∣neth the sight. Ex manu∣scripto.Rec. Rutae, sclareae, plantaginis, foeniculi, rosarum, papaueris rub. verbenae, fol. celi∣doniae, ana ℥.j. aquae ros. lib.j. vini albi lib.j. tutiae praeparatae ʒ.j. aloes epat.℥.j.ss. gario∣phyllorum ℥.j. Powder, mixe & distill them according to Art, droppe it into the eye mor∣ning and night. A water for watring eyes. Ex manu∣scripto.Rec. Aquae rosac. & foeniculi, ana ℥.vj. vitrioli albi ʒ.ij. Mixe them, put a droppe in the eye euerie night when the partie goeth to bed, and in seauen or eight daies it shall take away the teares. A water for the Canker. Ex manu∣scripto.Rec. Aquae fontanae, vini albi, ana lib.iiij. radicum plantaginis, herbarum saluiae, ru∣tae, lauendulae, rosmarini, anam.j. caprifolij m.ij. Boyle these whole in the liquors to the quantitie of thrée pintes, straine them, and adde mellis clari ℥.iij. vel iiij. aluminis vsti ʒ.iij. So kéepe it to vse. A Lac virginis of great praise for skinning old vlcers, clensing the skinne, and killing creeping tettars. Idem.Rec. Aceti albi fortiss, lib.ij. lithargyrij
auri & tenuissimè triti lib.j. Infuse them together foure daies, stirring them euerie day twice. After let it settle a whole daie; powre off the cléerest and kéepe it in a glasse. Rec. aquae pluuialis lib.j. salis gemmae, ℥.ij. salis communis coch.j. Boyle these till the stalkes be dissolued, put of the cléerest into a glasse by it selfe. Now to make your milke. Rec. aquae prioris tres partes, aquae poste∣rioris two parts and a little more, put them together, and it will presently bee as milke or creame. A proued water much commended for filthie putrified vlcers, namely in the legges. Rec. Rutae,Ex manu∣scripto. saluiae, fol. nucis auellanae, pu∣legij, caprifolij (florum & foliorum) ana m.j. mellis cochl. v. ceruisiae praestantis lib.iiij. (according to ale measure) aluminis ℥.ij. First clarifie your ale, then put in your o∣ther stuffe, and boyle all to the wasting of one part out of thrée: straine it strongly, and keepe it. The elder the better. A red water to the same purpose. Rec. Lixiuij cort. mediae fraxini lib.viij.Idem.
aluminis rup. lib.ss. aquae infusionis corticis quercus (we call it Tanners ouse) coria non expertae, lib.viij. rubiae tinct. lib.ss. Boyle all these to the wasting of one part of foure, and vse it. Another water for vlcers, and namely of the mouth. Ex manu∣scripto.Rec. Florum & rad. bellidis minoris, m.j. caprifolij, aquilegiae, rosarum rub. viola∣rum, fol. nucis, sonchi, rubi, rosmarini, ana m.j. Boyle them in two gallons of foun∣taine water, almost to the halfe, then straine it, and adde aluminis rupini, ℥.ij.ss. boli ar∣meniae ℥.iiij. mellis depurati ℥.vij. vel x. Boyle them to lesse than a gallon, and so kéepe it. A water for watrie excoriations and itching vlcers. Balthrop.Rec. Vitrioli albi ℥.iij. caphurae ℥.ss. Burne them together, make them in fine powder cum boli armeniae ℥.iij. When you will vse it, mingle three spoonefulles hereof with a pottle of running water when it is readie to seeth. A water that drieth and skinneth any vlcer exceedingly. Frederick.Rec. Vini albi, aquae fontanae, ana lib.j.
ligni sancti ℥.iiij. Stéep these together foure and twentie houres, then add minij ℥.ss. alu∣minis ℥.ss. mellis albi cochl.iiij. gariophyl∣lorum num.xij. rosmarini, saluiae, siccata∣rum, ana parum. Boyle these together a pretie while. A Triacle water for Lues Venerea. Rec. Rasurae ligni sancti opt. lib.ss. vini albi dulcedinis expertis lib.ij. aquae defe∣catissimae lib. viij. aquarum fumariae,Calmeteus. cy∣chorij, chamaemeli, ana lib.j. polipodij quercini lib.ss. macerentur simul horas du∣odecem, adde epithymi ℥.ij. asplenij ℥.vj. sem. iuniperi ℥.ij. cort. citri ℥.j. conseruae ro∣sarum, cychorij, buglossae, & borag. ana lib.ss. conseru. enulae campanae & theriacae ve∣teris, ana quart.j. Distill them, afterwards adde zacchari & cinamomi, as much as will make it pleasant. Doss.℥.iij.iiij. vel v. according to the strength of the patient, and force of the disease. A water for straitnesse of the apple of the eye. Rec. Foeniculi dulc.ʒ.j. sang. columbini,Vigo. ℥.j. tutiae, antimonij, ana ʒ.ij. aquae rosarum, aquae myrtillorum, ana ℥.j.ss. myrabol. ci∣trin.
ʒ.ss. Misce & cum vase vitreo ad ar∣tem alembicetur. Weckerus.A water for Polypus. Rec. Vuarum immaturarum lib.iij. ma∣li granati, balaust. sumach, ana lib.ij. infun∣dantur in aceto, & distillentur, deinde ad∣de alum. lib.j. vitrioli ℥.iij. Distill them a∣gaine, and vse it according to Art. A water for skabbes. Victor. Fa∣uentinus.Rec. Aquae lapathi acuti lib.ij. succi plan∣taginis ℥.iiij. aquae rosarum ℥.iiij. succi li∣monum ℥.ij. litharg.℥.vj. cerusae ℥ss. subli∣mati ℥.j.ss. salis communis ℥.ss. sulphuris viui ʒ.iij. terend. terantur, and infuse them foure and twentie houres, and distill them according to Art. A water for a virulent and corosiue vlcer. Weckerus.Rec. Cerusae, lithargyrij, ana ℥.j. plumbi vsti ℥.ss. lapid. calaminar.℥.ss. boli armeni ℥.j.ss. sanguinis draconis, terrae sigillatae, ana ℥.j. aluminis combusti ℥.ss. callicum glan∣dium, gallarum viridium, baccarum myr∣thi, psydiae, balaustij, sumach ana m.j. cori∣andri, sem. plantaginis, ana ℥.ss. rosarum ru∣brarum, p.ij. bulliant in q.s. aquae chaly∣biatae, and vse it. You may adde hnie, be∣cause it is more abstersiue.
A drying water for a Cancer vlcerated. Rec. Succi solani, semperviui, acetosae,Wckerus. scabiosae, succi caprifolij, tapsibarbati, scro∣phulariae, succi phylopendulae, lumariae, & succi agrimoniae, ana lib.ss. succi omphacij lib.j. carnis limacum, carnis ranarum, car∣nis cancrorum, ana lib.ss. alb. ouorum num. vj. aluminis ℥.iij. caphurae ʒ.j.ss. Distill all in a leaden Limbecke, and bathe the place therewith. A water for an vlcer where the bone is corrupted. Rec. Rad. aristol. vtriusque, iridis,Weckerus. ana ℥.j.ss centaurij minoris, ℥.j.ss. agarici ℥.iij. sym∣phiti m.j. hyperici, ped. columb. ana m.j. herbae roberti m.j. cort. pini ℥.ij. rosarum rub.p.ss. anthos p.ss. mellis rosarum ℥.iij. Mixe them with white wine q.s. and distill them according to Art. A water for the rednesse and watrish∣nesse of the eyes. Rec. zacchari albi,Vesalius. aloes epat. ana ʒ.v. tu∣tiae praeparat.℈.ss. camphorae gra.ij. vini al∣bi clari, aquae rosarum & foeniculi, ana ℥.ss. Mixe them in a glasse viall, wherin let them infuse sixe houres at the least, and then vse it according to Art.
A water to clense filthie and hollowe vlcers. Banester.Rec. Vini albi lib.j.ss. aquae plantag. & rosarum, ana lib.j. mercurij sublimati ʒ.iij. boli armeni ℥.ss. aluminis vsti ℥.j.ss. vitrioli albi, boracis, ana ℥.ss. zacchari albi ℥.ij. ma∣stic. sarcocollae, ana ℥.j.ss. Powder what are to be powdred, and boyle them together till halfe be wasted, then filtre it, and adde aquae vitae opt. lib.j. and reserue it to your vse. A water for Gutta Rosacea. Rec. Aquae pluuialis lib.j. aquae ros. lib.j.ss. succi limonum, ℥.vj.ss. succi semperviui ℥.viij. vini albi lib.j. boracis ℥.ij. sublimati ʒ.iij. salis gemmae ℥.j zacchari candi ℥.ij. li∣tharg. auri ℥.iij. salis armeni ʒ.iij. sulphuris viui ʒ.ij. rad. lapathi acuti ℥.iij. rad. brioniae ℥.v. camphorae ℥.ss. Powder all that are to bee powdred very fine, and set all in balneo mariae, in a vessell close stopped, and so di∣still it at a gentle fire. A water for the affects of the eyes. Banester.Rec. Vini albi lib.iij. foeniculi frondentis m.ij. aluminis ℥.iiij. guaiaci lib.ss. zacchari albi candidi ℥ij.ss. vitrioli albi ℥.ij. chelido∣nij,
m.iij. rutae m.ss. saluiae, verbenae, ana m.j.ss. hederae terrest.m.ij. lap. calaminaris ℥.ij. lapid. tutiae ℥.j. camphorae ʒ.iij. mellis ℥.iij. Powder what is to be powdred, and distill it in a glasse Limbecke. A water to cicatrize vlcers in any part of the bodie. Rec. Vini nigri lib.ij. aquae plantag. lib.ss.Banester. aquae rosarum ℥.iiij. succi plantaginis, succi verbasci, bursae pastoris, centinodij, conso∣lid. maio. & mino. succi centaurij minoris, ana ℥.j. aluminis crudi, lib.j. nucum cupressi ℥.iij. balaust.℥.ss. malicorij ℥.iij. gallarum ℥.ss. sumach, cort. quercini, ana ℥.ss. cort. thuris ʒ.iij. terebinthinae ℥.iij. mellis crudi lib.ss. masticis, olibani, ana ʒ.x. sarcocollae ℥.ij. vitrioli combusti, plumbi vsti, ana ʒ.j. boli armeni ℥.iij. cassiae lignae ℥.ss. aristolo∣chiae rotundae ℥.iij. Powder what is to bee powdred, and mixe them altogether, and in∣fuse them, then distill the water, and the vl∣cers being dried reserue it to your vse. Another. Rec. Masticis, olibani, myrrhae,Banester. sarcocol∣lae, mummiae, ana ʒ.iij. thuris ℥.j. nucis mos∣cat. cinamomi, gariophyllorum, cubeba∣rum, ana ʒ.ij. nucis cupressi ℥.ss. balaustij,
malicorij, ana ʒ.j. boli armeni ℥.j. sanguinis draconis ℥.ss. rosarum rubr.ʒij.ss. aluminis rochae lib.j. vitrioli ʒ.vij. mellis dspumati ℥.j. aquae vitae lib. j.ss. vini albi lib.j. succi plantag. solani, consolid. maio. & mino. ana ℥.iij. aquae ferratae lib.iiij. Powder what is to be powdred, and infuse them all night in aqua vitae, in the morning drawe forth the water by a Limbecke, and keepe it to your vse. An excellent water for the exul∣ceration of the yard. Banester.Rec. Aquae ferratae lib.ij. rosarum rubr.℥.iiij. balaust. malicorij, ana ʒ.ij. plantaginis, semperviui ana ℥.iij.ss. mellis rosarum, te∣rebinthinae, ana lib.ss. aluminis ℥.vj. vitrioli albi ʒ.iij. Boyle them in a cleane vessell till halfe be wasted, then straine it, and adde vi∣ridis aeris ℥.iij. Boyle them againe, or if you will filtre it. A water for the eyes. Rec. Fol. euphras. pimpinellae, vilag. ci∣chorij, oculi christi, foeniculi fragariae, dra∣conc. consolid. mino. caprifolij, ana partes aequales. Distill them together, and adde so much camfer as is sufficient.
A water for vlcers. Rec. Vini albi lib.iiij. aquae plantaginisBanester. lib.ij. aluminis lib.ss. vitrioli albi ℥.v. mellis crudi lib.j. glycyrrhizae rasae lib.j. boli ar∣meni ℥.j camphorae ℥j.ss. mercurij subli∣mati ʒ.ij. Bruse them that are to be brused, and distill them through a Limbecke. A water for hollowe wounds. Rec. Aquae fontanae, vini rubri,Banester. ana lib. ij.ss. rosarum rubrarum ℥.iiij. balaust. ma∣lecorij, ana ℥.ij.ss. sumach ℥.ij. saluiae m.j. consolid. maio. & mino. ana m.ss. aluminis lib.ss. sarcocollae ℥.iij. masticis ℥.ij. olibani ℥.j. mellis lib.j. aquae terebinthinae lib.j.ss. Bruse them that are to bee brused, and put all into a glasse Limbecke, and drawe out all the liquor with a gentle fire, and reserue it to your vse. A water of wonderfull effect in bringing in of a cicatrize. Rec. Aquae ferrar. lib.iiij. aquae balsa∣miBanester. veri lib.iij. terebinthinae lib.j.ss. mellis crudi lib.j. aluminis ℥.x. vitrioli albi ℥.v. boli armeni ℥vij. mercurij sublimati ʒ.ss. fol. plantaginis, consolid. maio. mino. & me∣dae, saluiae, virgae pastoris, centinodij, hy∣perici,
ana m.j.ss. thuris ℥.ij. olibani ℥.ss. santali albi ℥.ss. rosarum rubr.m.j.ss. cassiae lignae, cinamomi, ana ʒ.iij. pro prima de∣stillatione. Deinde rec. terebinthinae lib.j. masticis ʒ.iij. thuris ℥.iij. resinae purae ℥.vj. cinamomi ʒ.ij. gariophyllorum ʒ.ij. male∣corij ℥.ss. nucis cupressi ℥.j.ss. vitrioli albi ℥.ij. aluminis ℥.iij. olib.℥.iiij. sanguinis dra∣conis ℥.j.ss. aquae balsami veri lib.j. pro se∣cunda destillatione. Postea rec. terebin∣thinae lib.ss. florum hyperic. saluiae, rosma∣rini, card. bened. centaurij, ana ℥.j. mastic. santali rubr. ana ʒ.iij. lig. aloes ℈.ij. cubeba∣rum ʒ.j. aquae vitae lib.ss. aluminis vsti ℥.ij.ss. tartari albi ℥.j.ss. myrrhae ℥.ss. lumbrico∣rum in puluere ʒ.j. cort. thuris ℥.iiij. cort. medij querc.℥.vj. cassiae lignae ʒ.iij. vitrioli albi ℥.j. malecorij ℥.ss. cinamomi ʒ.ij. ba∣laust.ʒ.j. guaiaci ℥.iiij. carpobalsami, xylo∣balsami ana ʒ.j. myrtillorum ʒ.ij. mummiae ʒ.ij. borac.℥.ss. gariophyllorum ʒ.ij. tormen∣tillae, gentianae, aristol. rot. ana ʒ.ij.ss. alu∣minis crudi ℥.ij.ss. This is for the third and last distillation, but yet after this distilla∣tion adde aluminis vsti ℥.ss. vitrioli albi ʒ.ij. mastic.℥.j. in fine powder and kéepe it. A water for the scabbes and Itch. Rec. Aquae plantag. aquae rosarum, ana
lib.ss. mercurij sublimati ʒ.ij. aluminis cru∣di ʒ.vj. Powder what is to bee powdred, mixe them and boyle them in a double ves∣sell at a soft fire by the space of an houre, then filtre it and vse it. A water drying vlcers, and to clense any sharpe vlcer, and to take away any proud flesh. Rec. Aluminis crudi ℥.ij. alb. ouorum crud. num.xv. succi portulac. plantag. sola∣ni,Iulius Pal∣marius Constant. semperviui, nicotianae, aquae vlmariae, la∣gopi & rosarum, ana ℥.iiij. Labour them well together, then put all into a glasse bot∣tell, and drawe foorth the water through a double vessell. A very good water to drie vp moysture in an vlcer, extinguish heate, and heale them. Rec. Aceti lib.j. aquae fontanae lib.j. li∣thargyrij auri & argenti,Martin. ana ℥.ij. cerusae ℥.j. aluminis ℥.ss. Powder that which is to bée powdred, boyle altogether a quarter of an houre, alway stirring it, then reserue it to your vse. When you will vse it, let thereof bee strained from the rest: then make it warme and applie it with steuphes.
A speciall good water for the preseruing and restoring of the eye-sight: tenne yeeres de∣cay will be recouered in fourtie daies, if it be possible. Ex manu∣scripto.Rec. Rosarum. rub. apij, rutae, verbenae, capillorum veneris, euphrasiae, endiuiae, semperviui, foeniculi, hilwort (saith my co∣pie, which name I haue not heard of, and perhappes it should be pilewort) chelidonij maioris, ana m.j. Steepe these in a pottle of white wine a whole day, then distil them. The first water will be like gold, the second like siluer, and the third like Balme. An excellent distilled water for iniection to hollowe wounds. Banester.Rec. Aquae fontanae, vinirub. ana lib.ij.ss. ros. rub.℥iiij. balaustiorum, malecorij, ana ℥.ij.ss. sumach, ℥.ij. saluiae m.j. consolidae v∣triusque, ana m.ss. aluminis lib.ss. sarcocol∣lae ℥.iij. masticis ℥.ij. olibani ℥.j. mellis lib.j. aquae terebinthinae lib.j.ss. Prepare the in∣gredients according to Art, and distill alto∣gether with a glasse Limbecke at a gentle fire.
Another excellent distilled water for vlcers or wounds. Rec. Calcis viu. extinctae in aqua fonta∣na,Banester. lib. viij. aquae plantag.℥.iiij. aquae ros. lib.ij. vini albi lib.j. Heate these together, afterward let them stand and cléere. Powre forth all the cléere into your Limbecke, and put too it mellis lib.ij. aluminis ℥.ij. boracis ℥.iij. masticis ℥.iij. olibani ℥.iiij. mediae corticis quercus desiccatae ℥.iij. Powder those that ought to be and distill them. FINIS.
The Table. A Aches. A Fomentation. 132 Aches colde. A Lini∣ment. 174, 179. See Paine. Alopecia Gallica. A Bath. 30. A Pil. 231, 232, 233. Alopecia Gallica. A Fume. 134. A Liniment 166. Alopecia Gallica. A Garga∣risme 141. Ancles wounded. An Oyle, 197. Angina. Gargarismes 137, 138, 139, 140. Anhonies fire. A Liniment 159. Anthrax. A Cataplasme, 45. Apostemes of the iawes. A Gargarisme 141. Apostemes in th eares. A Plaister 248. Apostemes in womēs breasts A plaister 255. Apostemes vpō the stomacke A Cerote 67 Apostemes colde in armes or legges. A fomentatiō 126 Apple of the eie enlarged. A Fomentation 123. Arme hoales or arme pits sweatie. A Bath 34. Armes, to wit, woundes in them. A Cerote 69. Astrictiue powder for stit∣ching of wounds. 214. Asswaging of paine in tu∣mors. A Cataplasme 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 51. See Paine. Augmentation of an infla∣mation. A fomentation 132. B Baldnes. A Liniment 166. Bellie wounded. A Clister 81. A Drinke 101. An Iniection 150. Biting. A Plaister 256, 257 Biting of venimous crea∣tures. Balmes 16, 17. An Vnguent 291. Biting of a mad dogge. A Cataplasme 50. A Cli∣ster 80. A Drink 107. A Plaister 256. Black balme of Banesters. 5 Bladder wounded. An Inie∣ction 150. Blood stanching. A Powder 210, 211, 212, 215, 223. Blood brused vnder the skin A Plaister 60. Bones foule to cleanse them,
A cerote 71. a water 351 Bones broken: a cerote 71. Bones broken by gun-shot: a wound drinke 90. Botium or Bronchocle: a powder inwardly to spend it away by stoole, 221. A Potion o purge 224. Brannie skales or skurfe in the head. A Bath 29. A Liniment 170. Breastes of women swelled. 45. vlcerated. A Cata∣plasme 51. For sephyros in them. A Cerote 60. See womens breastes. Breast woūded: a drink 101 Breast vlcerated. An Vn∣guent 304. Bruses. A Liniment. 162 Brused woundes. A Cata∣plasme 50 Bronchocele. 46, 47. Bubo venereus. A Cata∣plasme 48. A Cerote 63. A Lotion 180. A plaister to maturate 252. Bubo pestiferous. A Cata∣plasme 44, 54 Bubo, to digest the humor. An Elect 116. Bubo lurking. A Fomenta∣tion 24. Also when it appeareth. A Fomenta∣tion Ibid. Beginning of an inflamation. A Fo∣mentation 132 Burning A Liniment 170, 171. An vng. 301, 306, 317, 332. Burning of the vrine. An niection 156. C Cancers. A Cerote 61.76 Cancers. An inward cure 108.120. Cancers An oyle 199.201 Cancer. A Powder to be gi∣uen inwarde and out∣ward 223 Cancer. A Linim. 168.165 Cancer. An Vnguent 306. 337. A Water 346.351. Cancer not vlcerated. An Elect 115. A Potion 224 Cancerous vlcers: a Balme 7 A Plaister 268. vng 298. 299 303. 304. 307. A Water 342. Carbuncle. A catapl. 44.45. Carbuncles to mollifie them. A Fomentation 133. Carbunculous pustule. A Powder 209. Caruncle. An vng. 331.335 336. An Iniection 156. 157. Cataracts. Vng. de Alaba∣stro 333 Cauterise, a bleeding veyne potentially 57. Chinkes, or chappes in the hands.
An Vng 318. Cicatrizing: a Powder 214 218.219. A pl 275.280. Cicatrizing a wound or vl∣cer A Cerot 78 Cicatrizing of vlcers. A water 353.355. Clensing a wound or vlcer. A Cerote 78 Cliftes or chappes about the hands or fet: water 342 Clensing a foule bone. A Ce∣te 71 Coddes sweled: a catapl. 48 Coddes with tumors in them A Plaister 250.251. Cold Apostemes in armes or legges. A Foment 126. Cold and windie tumors. A Balme 1. A Catapl. 37. Cold tumors. An Embroca∣tion 121. A Catapl. 40.41. A Foment. 131 Choler flowing to a wounde. A Clister 80 Collicke. A Balme. 17 Comforting a painful woūd A Cataplasme 49 Comforting a fractured mē∣ber. A Cerote 72 Comforting the sinewes. A Cerote 75 Comforting nature after sweats & purgations 118 Comforting weake members A plaister. 285 Comforting contused woūds An vng. 336 Comfort wounds and vlcers in healing: a Fomen. 127 Consolidating. A Plaister. 260 261 Contracted mēbers A ath. 33. A Fume 135.136 Contusions. A Linimēt 162 Contusion in the head. A Cerote 70 Contusions in the flesh of fall or stripe: cataplasme 50 Contused wounds. A Cata∣plasme 50. A Digestiue 113. An vnguent 336 Contused bloud making a bunch in the flesh. A Fo∣mentation. 127 Cōuulsions: a Lin. 165.176. Corrosiue vlcers. A Fomen∣tation 129. A water 350. Corrosiue Vnuēts 305.330 Crampe. A Balme 17.19 A Bath 32. An oyle 202. A purging Decoction 228 Crampe in wounded persons Electuaries 117 D Deafnesse. A Plaister 286 Debilitie of the eye-sight. A Bath 34. Dislocations or luxations A Plaister 269.270 272. Dissoluing hard knots & gā¦glious tumors: a Cerot. 69
A Plaister 285. Dissoluing a contusion. A Fomentation 127. Dissoluing winde. A Fo∣mentation 130. Distemperatenes of wounds An Vng. 311. Dogges biting that is mad. A Catapl. 56. A Clister 80. A plaister 256. Drawing flegme out of the head. A Gargarsme 142 Drawing out splints, thorns or arrow heads. Plaisters 257, 258. Vng. 292, 298. Drying of an Vlcer. A Fo∣mentation 129. Drying, or Desiccating Plaisters 279, 280. Dura Mater to defende it from putrefaction. An Vnguent 290. E Eares wormie, or vlcerated. Iniections 154. A Lini∣ment 171. Eares pained. A Liniment 171. Eares impostumed. A Plai∣ster 248. Eating downe proud flesh or putrified. Corosiue pow∣der 216, 217, 219.220. Edges of wounds swelled & distēpered. An Vnguent 311. Eie sight debilitate or wea∣kened. A Bath 34. Eie sight to preserue it. A Powder to be eaten 221. Eies inflamed and painfull. A Cataplasme 53. A Water 339. Eies, to comfort and help them against fluxe of humors. A Collerie 83. An Vng. 333. Eies conteining mater be∣tweene Cornea & Vueae. A Collerie 83, 84. Eies redde and running. A Collerie 84. A Plaister 280. Eies Opthalmia in them. A Collerie 84. Eies hauing bloody suffusion in them. A Collerie 85. Eies being wounded. A Col∣lerie 85. An vng. de Ala∣bastro 333. A water 345 Eies, to cleere the sight. A Collerie 87. An vnguent 334. Eies that are watring. A Defensatiue 112. Eies that haue suffusion in them. A Fomentation 123. Eies that haue their apple ouer-much enlarged. 123
Eies diuerslie affected. Wa∣ter of all sorts 346, 349, 351, 352, 354, 358. Erisypelas. A Cataplasme 53. A Liniment 161. Erisypilas Phlegmonodes. A Potion to purge 224. Erosion, or fretting of the bowels, in cure of Alope∣cia Gallica. A Clister 81 Escars, to remooue them. A Digestiue 114. Excoriations in the mouth of Lues Venerea. A Gar∣gaisme 145. Excoriations. An vng 323. F Face that hath pustules or spots. A water 341. Face that hath morphew or spots. An oyle 202. Falling of haire. 29. A Li∣niment 163, 164, 167, 168. Fellon, a tumor so called. A Cataplasme 53, 54. A Plaister 249, 250. Feete, tumors in them A cerote 67. Wounds in thm A Cerote 69. An Oyle 197. Feete luxated. A Plaister 271. Filthie vlcers. A water 352. Fingers, tumors in them. A cerote 67. Fistulaes, to mortifie them. A ruptorie 56, 57. Fistulaes. A collerie 86. An vng. 311, 320. An oyle 186, 199, 201. A pl. 27. Fistulaes. Drinkes to cure them 104, 106, 107, Fistulous Dispositions of wounds in the breast. A Drinke 102. Flanke swelled: See Bubo Venereus. Flegme drawing out of the head. A gargarisme 141 Flesh, to increase it in vl∣cers: a cerote 71. Flesh, to rebate or take it a∣waie by corosiue pow∣ders 216, 217, 219, 220. Flesh that is proud or super∣fluous: a water 357. Flowing of humours to anie part: an vng. 330. Fluxe of choler to a wound: a lister 80. Fluxe of blood: a powder, 210, 211, 212, 21, 223. Fractures. Cerotes 71, 72. Fracture in Coccyx. A Plai∣ster 272. Fracture in the skull: a plai∣ster 263, 271. To prooue whether it be a fracture, or no: a plaister 264.
Fractured members to com∣fort them. A Cerote 72. A Lotion or Bath. 182. A plaister 269 270.271 French Pockes. Bathes 35 A water. 343. Fretting or erosion of the bo∣wels in the cure of Alope∣cia Gallica. 8 Fundament swelled. A Ca∣taplasme 48 Fundament slipped downe. A plaister. 254 Fundament sore of the pocks A water 342. G Ganglious tumors: Cerote. 60 a plaister. 242.243. Gangraea: a Deensatiue 109 a Fomentation 132 a plaister 246. an vng 305 Glandulous tumors: a plai∣ster 239.240. Gleeting humor of the ten∣dons: an vnguent. 290. Gleeting humor of woundes in ioynts. Vng. 338. Gunshot wounds: a Balme. 9.10. Iniections 148.149. 150. an vnguent 334 Gowt: a Balme 23. a Cerot. 74, 75, 76, 78. an vng. 337 an oyle. 202, 204. a Plai∣ster 272, 277, 278. Gowte in the hands: a Fo∣mentation 131 Gutta rosacea: a water 352 H Hands, tumors in them: a Cerote 67 Hands, wounds in them: a Cerote 69. Hard tumors: a plaister 237 244 Hard edged vlcers: a plai∣ster 284 Hardnesse of sinewes: A Balme 25. A Bath 22.33. a plaister 283. an vng. 327 Hardnesse about a wound. an Oyle. 194 Hardnesse in womēs breasts A plaister 248. Head, wounds therein: A Balme. 19.22. a plaister. 258.259.261. an vng. 296. a powder 213 214. Head contused: a plaister. 261.262. Head, wounds therein: a Ceote. 69 Head contused: a Cerote 70 Head wounds: a drinke 100 101.102. an vng. 294. Head pained in Lue Vene∣rea: an Embrcatiō 122 Haire that falleth. a Bath. 29 30. a Liniment 163.
164, 167, 168. A Lotion. 180. Haire to cause it to growe: a Liniment 166 Heate in an vlcer to extin∣guish it: a water 357 Hemrhoydes: a Bath 26 a Cerote. 65. an vng. 288. a Fomentation 126 Hemrhoydes, to mitigate their paine: a plaister 251 252. To staie them: an vnguent 308 Hernia intestinalis: a plai∣ster 247.248. Hernia Humoralis: a plai∣ster. 249 Hernia Aquosa: a plaister. 251.284 Hydrocele: Ibid. A Cata∣plasme. 52 Herpes creeping: An Em∣brocation. 121. A plai∣ster repercussiue and de∣siccatiue. 244 Hollowe wounds: a powder. 209. a water. 355.358 Hollowe vlcers: an oyle. 200 a water. 352. Huckle bone vlcerated: A Collerie 87 Huckle bone pained: a Fo∣mentation. 130. See Sa∣tica. Humors flowing to the eyes: a plaister. 280. I Iawes apostumated: a Gargarisme 141 Incarning or causing flesh in vlcers: a Cerote 71. A Collerie. 87. a powd 210 Inflamations: Cataplasmes 36, 37, 38, 39, 52 To pre∣uent it in a wounde: A Balme 18. Inflamation: a Bath. 26 a plaister. 246 an vnguent 288, 323, 332. Inflamation of the eyes to asswage their paine: a Cataplasme. 53 Inflamations, to repel them. A Cataplasme. 54 A Ce∣rote. 66 67 77 Inflamations in their begin∣ning, or augmentation: a Fomentation. 132.  a Liniment. 158. Inflamation of the throate and mouth: a Gag 140. Inflamation of Vvula: A Gargarisme Ibid. Inflamatiō in womēs breasts A Liniment. 178 Ioynts wounded: A Balme 19 20. A Cerote 70. An vnguent. 338. Ioynts pained: A Liniment. 177. An oyle. 203
Ioynts, vlcers in them: an vnguent 311, 331. Itch: a Bath 27.28. a Lini∣ment 164, 168, 169. an vnguent 290, 300, 323. Itching vlcers: a water 343, 349. Itch of Lues Venerea. Baths 35. Itch in the purse of the testi∣cles: a foment. 132. Itch, and mattrie scabs: an oyle 204. K Kernelly knots, to wast thē: a Drinke 88. Knobbes in the flesh: a Ce∣rote 60. Knobs in the face: an vng. 307. Knottes: a plaister 239, 240 241, 242, 243. L Lamenesse of members: a Bath 33. Lamenesse after the gowte: a Liniment 176. Lamenes by contraction & resolution of sinewes: a Li∣niment 177, 179. Leggs that are stiffe: a Lo∣tion 189. Leprosie: a Bath 31. Lippes wounded: a powder 214. Lowsie disease: a Bath 31. a Liniment 176. Lues venerea: Bathes 35. a water 343, 349. an vn∣guēt 325, 326, 327, 328. Lues Venerea: a lenitiue potion for delicate bo∣dies 225. Also purging potions and decoctions 226, 227, 228. Lues Venerea to purge by Pilles 231, 232, 233, 234, 235, 236. Luxations or dislocations: 269, 270, 271, 272. M Madde dogges biting: a ca∣taplasme 50. a Drinke 107. a Plaister 256. an vnguent 291. Maligniie of a canker, to correct it. 108.120. Malignant vlcers & woūds a plaister 268, 281, 286. Maligne scab: an vng. 326. Malum mortuum: a Bath 31. Maturating of tumors: a Cataplasme 43, 44, 48. a Cerote 66. Maturate Apostemes: an Embrocation 121. Maturatiue Liniment. 159 Maturating in a cold cause
a plaister 246. Maturating tumors in wo∣mens breasts: a plaister 246. Members lamed: a Bath 33 Members weake and consu∣ming: a Cerote 73. Mēbers contracted: a ume 135, 136. Members weake: a Lini∣ment 172, 177. a Plai∣ster 285. Members consumed: a Li∣niment 172, 177. Memorie that is weake: a Balme 17. Mollifying of tumors: a ce∣rote 76 a Liniment 160 Mollifying: a Clister 79. Mollifying a Carbuncle: a Foment 133. Mollifying harde tumours plaisters 237, 244, 246. 273, 275, 282, 283. Morphew and spots in the face: an oyle 202. Mortefie a Fistula: a rup∣torie 56, 57. Mouth vlcerated: a Balme 7. an vngu. 312. a water 340, 341, 348. Mouth inflamed: a Gaga∣risme 140. Mouth vlcerated: Garga∣rismes 142, 143. Iniecti∣iections 155. Mundifying in the cure of a a node: a cerote 59. Mundifie vlcers: a Collerie 87. an oyle 201. an vng. 297, &c. N Nauell going forth: a Cli∣ster 79. Necke swelled: a catapl. 46 Neck wounded: an oile 196 Nodes: a Cerote 59, 60. Plaisters 239, 240, 241, 242, 243. Nose wounded: a powder 215. Nose vlcerated by the pocks, a fume 135. Numnesse: a Balme 19. a Liniment 177, 179. O Oedema: Cataplasmes 37. a fomentation 123. Oedematous tumours: an Embrocation 121. a plai∣ster. 245. a Lininiment 159, 178. Openng of Apostemes: a Ruptorie 56. Liniments 159.178. Opthalmia: Colleries 84, 85.
P Palsie in wounded persons. Balmes 15, 17, 19, 24 an Electuarie. 117 Palsie in members. A Lini∣ment 177 Palsie. a purging Decoctiō 228 Pannicles of the braine to restore them after woun∣ding A Liniment 168 Paine, Cataplsmes. 39. A Liniment. 173, 174. A plaister. 274, 275, 276. an vng. 310, 311, 332. Paine, to preuent it in a wound. A Balme. 18 Paine in wounds, to asswage it. Cataplasmes. 49, 51, 52. A Liniment. 175. An oyle. 204. vng. 294, 312. Paine in the ioynts. A Ce∣rote. 74, 75, 76. Paine in vlcers. A Cerot 77 78. Liniments. 175, 165. a pl. 273. vng. 295.318. Paine of the head in lue ve∣nerea. An Embrocation. 122. a Liniment 175 Paine in the huckle bone: a Fomentation. 130 Paine in Erysipelas: a Lini∣ment 161 Paine in the eares: a Lini∣ment 171 Paine of luxations or bruses a plaister. 271 Paine in the ioynts: a Lini∣ment. 177. a plaister. 276 277, 278, 279. an vng. 313, 337. Paine in the ioynts of Lues Venerea: an oyle. 203. a plaister. 243, 272. an vn∣guent. 328.329 Paine in a Carbuncle: a plaister. 244 Paine in the huckle bone: a plaister. 284 Paine in any place: a plai∣ster 285 Paines of the pockes: a wa∣ter. 343 Phlegmon, to repell it: a Cataplasme 54 Phlegmon in the beginning. a Liniment. 158. a plai∣ster 245 Pimples in the face: a Lini∣ment. 160, 161 Polypus. a water. 350 Poysoned shot: a wounde drinke 90 Poysoned wounds: a plaister 257, 281 Prickes to heale them after the first intētion a balme. 19 Pricking of Nerues: a Ce∣rote. 70 Pricking of sinewes: an oyle 198. a plaister 262 Proud flesh, or spongie flesh:
a Liniment. 175. a wa∣ter. 350. Putrefaction of wounds, to clense it: an vnguent 291 Pustules of the pockes: Wa∣ter 341, 34, 343. Putrifying filthie and stin∣king vlcers: a plaister 287. an vnguent 336. R Regulus Antimonij. 206 Resoluing in the cure of a Node. a Cerote. 59 Resoluing any swelling: a plaister. 247, 282, 286. Rewmes: a Balm. 17. a pur∣ging decoction 228 Ringwormes, or Tettars: an vnguent 301.328.329. Ripening of tumors: cata∣plasmes 40, 42 43. Ruptures: a Bath. 27. a ce∣rote 63.64 Rupture, to cure them: a Drike. 88. Ruptures: an Electuarie. 114. a powder. 208 Ruptures: a Fomentation. 125, 126 Ruptures: a plaister 254, 255, 285. S Schyrrous tumors: a plaister to mollifie & resolue 237 a pill 233 Scorbutum in the mouth. an vnguent 312 Sciatica: a plaister 276, 278 284. a cerote 75 Scrofula: a plaister 342. an vnguent 307. a catapl. 55 Scrofulous tumors to spende them away by stoole: a powder 220 Skull wounded or depressed: a plaister. 261, 262, 263. Sephyros in the breastes: a cerote 61 Serpents stinging or biting: a plaister 27 Shingles: a cataplasme 53 Shrinking of sinews: an oyle 203 Sinewes stiffe or hard: a Bath 33. an vng. 327 Sinewes wounded: a balme. 19, 21, an oyle. 197, 198 199. Sinewes harned: a balme 25 a Bath 32 Sinewes, to asswage paine in them: a cerote 75 Sinewes pricked: a plaister 202. To strengthen them vnguent 327 Scabbes with matter: Oyle 204. a purging decoction 228. an vng. 300, 301, 326 Scabbes of Lues Venerea: Baths 27, 28, 35. vng. 328
Fume 134, 135. Skabbes: a Liniment 164, 169. a waer 350.356. Skad head: a Water 340, 342. Liniment 165-171 See Tinea. Skalding: a liniment 170. Skales or skurfe in the head 29. a Liniment 170. Sleepe, to prouoke it: an E∣lectuarie 119. Spongie flesh, to consume it: a causticke 57 Spongie flesh, to abate it: a Liniment 175. Spots in the face: an Oyle 202. Spots in the eies: a Water 346. Spots of lue venerea: a wa∣ter 341, 343. Squinantia: Gargarismes 137, 138, 139, 140. Stanching of blood: a pow∣der 210, 211, 212, 215. Stench of a Canker to staie it: an oyle 207. an vng. 337. Stitching of woūds: a pow∣der astrictiue 214, 223. Stifnes of legs: a lotion 183 Stifnesse of sinewes: an vn∣guent 337. Stomacke whereon is an A∣posteme: a cerote 67. Stomacke, diseased after greene wounds, or long vl∣cers 118, 119. Straines: a Cataplasme 53 a Liniment 179. Strengthning nature in the cure of a wound: a drink 97. Struma: a cataplasme 55. Suffusion in the eyes: a Fomentation 123. Suppurating of tumors: ca∣taplasmes 40. Sweat of the arme holes: a Bath 34. Swelling in the coddes of a colde cause: a plaister 251 Swelling in the throate: a powder 209. Syde wounded: a clister 81. T Tēdons woūded: a Balm 19. Tettars: an vng. 301, 307, 318, 328, 329. a Water or Lac virginis 346. Thorne or pricke: a plaister 257, 258 Throate swelled: a cataplasme 46, 47. a powder 209. a potion 224. Throate inflamed: a Gar∣garisme 140, 141. Throate wounded: an In∣iection 150. Tinea capitis: a plaister 269
Tongue vlcerated: a pow∣der 222. Toothach: a Balme 17. Tumors of colde and windie matter: a Balme 1. a plaister 256. Tumors colde: cataplasmes 37, 40. Tumors, to mollifie, dissolue, and asswage them: a ca∣taplasme 41. Tumors in womens breasts: a cataplasme 45. Plaisters 248, 252, 255. Tumors in the flanke. See Bubo Venereus. Tumors in the fundament: a cataplasme 45. Tmors in the cods: a plai∣ster 250, 251, 253. Tumor in the throate: a plaister 153. Tumors hapning in wounds an vnguent 312. V Veines that bleede: a cau∣stick 57. Venimous biting: a Balme 16. Venimous wounds: an Vn∣guent 288, 289. Vertebres broken: a defen∣satiue 111. Virulent vlcers: a fomen∣tation 129. Virulent and corrosiue Vl∣cers: a potion 225. a wa∣ter 350. Vlcers: Balmes 7, 14, 22. Vlcers in the leggs: a Bath 32. a Secret 316. Vlcers in the yard: a cata∣plasme 51. See Yard. Vlcers virulent: a cerote 77 Vlcers generally: a cerote 77, 78. Plaisters 265, 266 267, &c. Vlcers in the eyes: a colle∣ie 87. Vlcers of the huckle bone: a collerie 87. Vlcers, to mundifie and in∣carne them: a collerie 87 Vlcers, Decoctions or Diet drinkes 103, 104, 105, 106, 107, 108. Vlcerate foule bodies: a pur∣ging Decoction verie ef∣fectuall 229. a Pill 233, 234. Vlcers: Defensatiues 110. Vlcers of Lues Venerea: a Fume 134. an Vnguent 296, 297. Vlceed mouthes: Garga∣rismes 142, 143, 144, 145.146. Vlcers: Iniections 151. Lo∣tions 181, &c. Oyle 192, 193, 200, 201.205, 206.
Powder 218. Vlcers in the tongue: a pow∣der 222 Vndimia: a cerote 65. a Fo∣mentation 126 Vomiting bloud by reason of a bruse: an Electuary 116 Vomiting in wounded or vl∣cerate persons, to staie it: a Fomentation 128 Vvula fallen downe: a Gar∣garisme 141 Vvula inflamed: a clister 79 W Warts: a Liniment 158 Warts on the yard: a pow∣der 222 Watrie excoriations: a wa∣ter 348, 357 Watrie Rupture: a Fomen∣tation 126 Watrie tumor: a catapl. 49 Weakenesse or debilitie of the eye-sight: Bath 34 Weakenesse of memorie: a Balme 17 Weake & consuming mem∣bers: a cerote 73 Weakenesse of a member wounded: a Liniment 172. a plaister 285 Webbe in the eye: a Water 346 Weeping of the sinewes, as some cal it, or gleeting hu∣mor: an vnguent 290 Wennes: a plaister 238239 Windie tumors: a Balme. 1 a plaister 245.256 Windie Rupture: a fomen∣tation 125 Windinesse: an Embroca∣tion 122. a Foment 130 Womens breasts, swelling or ranckling: a cataplasme 405. vlcerated: a cata∣plasme 51. a cerot 60 an vng. 304. Womens breastes not can∣cerated: a cerote 60, 62, 63. For Sephyros in thē. 61 Womens breastes inflamed and hard by crudding of the milke: a Linimēt 178 Womens breastes hardned: a plaister 248 Wormes: a Balme 17 Wormes in the eares: an in∣iection. 184.171 Wounds: Balmes of wor∣thie choyce. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. Wounds in any part: a ce∣rote 68, 69 Wounds in the head: a ce∣rote 69 Wounds in the ioynts: a ce∣rote 70. an vng. 338 Woundes in the bellie and side: a clister 81. Woundes, to cure them by
drinkes. 88, 89, 90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96 To prooue whether they bee curable, or no. Drinke 95. Wounds: Deenatiues 109 110.111.112 Woundes by gunshot, or o∣therwise Iniections 148, 149, 150. See gunshot. Wounds: Lotions 181, &c. Oyles 184, &c. Woundes in the necke or throate: an Oyle 196 Woundes in the anckles and feete: an Oyle 197 Wounds in the sinewes and ioynts: an Oyle 197, 198, 199. Woundes: a powder 209, 210, 212, 213. Wounds in the head: a pow¦der. 213, 214. a plaister. 258, 259. Wounds in the nose: a pow∣der 215 Wounds poysoned: a plaister 257. an vng. 288, 289. Wounds in pockie persons: an vnguent 289 Woundes with burning: an vnguent 332 Wounds in the eyes: an vn∣guent de Alabastro 333 Wrenches: a cataplasme 53 Y Yard vlcerated: a Balme 7. a cataplasme 51. a clister. 82 a collerie 86 an almōd milke 106. a Fomenta∣tion. 130. an Iniectiō 155 a powder 219. Another that doth exiccate, incar∣nate, and agglutinate 219 a Potion 225. a plaister to bee applied to the reines. 269 an vnguent 298.308 a water 354. Yard that hath wartes: a powder 222 Yssues, to keepe thē open 284 FINIS. Faults escaped in this Booke. In the 2. page of Master Clowes his Epistle 26. line, varitie reade veritie. Page 59 linea 6. cymini. p. 63. lin. 25. & a me particula &c. p 259. lin. 6. gummi. Pag. 353-lin. 21.22. put out these words, the vlcers being dried. 354-lin. 22. viol. 357. lin. 13. glasse still. lin. 14. water by a &c.
