17527 99849485 14635
THE HISTORIE, AND LIVES, OF THE KINGS of England; From WILLIAM the CONQVEROR, vnto the end of the Raigne of King HENRIE the EIGHT. By WILLIAM MARTYN Esquire, Recorder of the Honorable Citie of EXETER. Frustra fit per plura, quod fieri potest per pauciora. LONDON, Printed for IOHN BILL, William Barret, and Henrie Fetherstone. 1615.
TO THE GENTRIE OF ENGLAND. WOrthie Gentlemen (omitting all elabo∣rated Eloquence, which oftentimes is vsed as a varnish, to couer vnprofitable labours; As cunning Goldsmithes doe en∣rich their basest Sil∣uer, when they Gilt it with their purest Gold) J purpose to render to you an accompt of two rea∣sons, which induced me to take this paine, and to publish this worke. 1. Jt is common among Phisitions; That though profound Learning, and frequent Expe∣rience, haue furnished them with abundant skill, in their Honourable profession: yet they doe still
striue to make their knowledge more perfect, in the discouerie of the imperfections of other mens bodies, then of their owne: Jn like sort it is the common custome of our times; that many hopefull Gentlemen (whom Nature and Arts haue beau∣tified, with the rich treasures of their bountie) do endeauour to be more exact and refined, in know∣ing the Religion, Lawes, Gouernment, Maners, Strength, and Sites of forraine Countries, then of that Kingdome wherein themselues were borne. But as that man is wise in vaine, who is not wise vnto himselfe; So it is a simple grace (nay to speake plainly, it is a foule disgrace) to a Gentle∣man (especially to such a one, as hath, or doth in∣tend to spend much time abroad to know the fashi∣ons of forraine Nations) to be ignorant in the State of his owne Countrie at home. The Histo∣rie of which, affordeth as much varietie and pro∣fitable instruction, to captiuate the Readers de∣light in the perusall, as the fairest Pictures doe contentment, when with their artificiall beauties, they doe allure mens eyes to looke and to gaze vp∣on them. To this end therefore, that hencefoorth such worthy Gentlemen as are purposed, in long tra∣ueling, to enlarge their experience, by the view of
foraine Countries, may first be furnished with a conuenient knowledge of their owne; J vnder∣tooke this labour, and doe present it vnto you, with this my first reason which induced me thereunto. 2. The second reason of my so doing, sprin∣geth out of mine owne conceit; which (as J con∣iecture) deceiues me not. For, in regard that the Histories of this Kingdome, are frequently in∣terrupted, yea blemished, by too too many inter∣uening Occurrences, and by a multitude of ex∣trauagant Obseruations (which doe much differ from the true Method, and Nature, of a well digested and composed Chronicle; and thereby doe extend it into a needlesse and an vnprofita∣ble length) J am resolued that the Readers ca∣pacitie (to obserue and to remember) is much weakned thereby: And that many yong Gentle∣men, who doe egerly striue to attaine to much knowledge in a short time, doe rather bend their Studies and their courses, to reade ouer the more narrowly contracted Histories of other Countries, then the voluminous Discourses of their owne. Wherefore to inlighten their knowledge much, by reading this little; J haue thrust forth into the World this short Historie, of the Raignes, Deeds, and Actions, of twentie of our English Kings; which J will neither praise, least J
wrong it by mine owne commendation; nor dis∣praise, least you (beleeuing mee on my word) should thinke your time ill spent, to read what I haue written. J know that such as are worthily descended, or who by learning are made worthy, will not only winke at some imperfections, because some know∣ledge is to be gained by the rest: but will also take in good part the presentment of a small gift; if it be deliuered with a friendly hand. To such only, and to none other (which are you) doe J dedicate these my labors: Being confidently assured, that they cannot want their expected reward, which is nothing, but your kinde acceptance, and grace∣full loue. Fare you well, from my house in Exeter the twentieth of Ianuarie. 1615. Your louing Friend. WILLIAM MARTYN.
TO MY MOST DEARE Father WILLIAM MARTYN Esquire. THough my vnpractis'd Muse might well conceale Her selfe from th'eye-reach of a publique view; Yet my devoted heart, stir'd on with zeale, And dutie (which are owing both to you) Feares not the spleene of Criticks, but shall beare Their heauiest censures; True loue orecomes feare. I will not speake of your vnwearied paine In gathring, and disposing: 'tis a treasure Well worth the Readers paines, when he may gaine, With little reading, profit mixt with pleasure. These ruder lines, your labors little neede, To winne the Readers liking: Let him reade. NICHOLAS MARTYN. To my most loued and dearest Father WILLIAM MARTYN ESQVIRE. I Could (deere Sir) haue spoke, with farre more ease, In copious Prose, than in strict Verse, your praise; But that I knew, your fame would farre out-goe All foote-lesse Prose; my Verse (not full so slow Hauing the helpe of feete) serues thus farre forth, Though not to Vsher, yet t'attend your worth. You neede not either, to inlarge your fame; The Booke it selfe doth Chronicle the same. WILLIAM MARTYN. To my most dearly loued Father WILLIAM MARTYN Esquire. WHil'st others send you Lines trickt out with Art, My Infant yeares shall onely send mine heart: Looke for no greater gift, from so small store; He that giues all he has, can giue no more. EDWARD MARTYN.
TO MY DEARLY HO∣NORD FATHER-IN-Law WILLIAM MARTYN Esquire. A Publique good, must quell your priuate feare. The profit of a Writers industrie, Should be imparted to a generall Eare; For good is better'd by communitie. Nor may detraction, or the injurie Of some mens censures, dash what he doth write: If, but what only pleaseth all mens sight, No worke should come to light, no worke should come to light. What though you gather'd haue the seuerall flowr's Of other Bookes, into this Historie? Distill'd to Spirit by you, they're wholly yours: So honie, suckt from the varietie Of flowr's, is yet the honie of the Bee. And though, in these dayes, Miracles are fled, Yet this shall of your Chronicle be read, It brings back Time that's past, and giues life to the Dead. Peter Beuys.
THE SVMMARIES OR ABBREVIATES, OF THE RAIGNES OF THE twentie Kings, mentioned (more largely) in this Discourse. King WILLIAM the Conqueror. AFTER the death of King Edward, Ha∣rold (contrarie to his promise & oath) refuseth to giue the possession of the Crowne and king∣dome of England to William, the seuenth Duke of the Normans: Wherefore (to preuent the effusion of much bloud) the Duke challen∣ged him to a single combate, which hee refused: whereupon the Duke landeth, and (being assisted by the Natiues of this Countrie) he ob∣tayneth the victorie,1066. and claymed this Crowne by conquest. Pag. 2. He is in danger, as he trauelleth towards Douer, and makes his peace. 3. His policies to suppresse the English Nation, and his cruelties towards them. 3, 4, 5, 6. He taxeth them beyond measure: they rebell twice, and are twice subdued. 6. He plucks downe Churches, Re∣ligious houses, and Townes, (for his pleasure in hunting) to make the New Forest; and enacteth ty∣rannicall Lawes, for the preseruing of his Game. 5. His eldest sonne Robert Cur∣thois rebelleth, and puts him to the worst in Normandie, but is re∣conciled. 7. He warreth in France successe∣fully. 7. He falleth sick, and repenteth of his crueltie to the English Nation, and dyeth, but his body can hardly obtayne a place to bee buried in. pag. 8.
King WILLIAM RVFVS. HIs crueltie to the English Na∣tion. 10. Hee flattereth them in his di∣stresse; but requiteth them vn∣thankfully, when his turne is ser∣ued. 10, 11. The Welshmen doe rebel. 11, 12. His valour. 13. Hee pilleth and pooleth the Church. 14, 15. He yeeldeth, when the Pope peremptorily commandeth. 15. He is fortunate in his warres in Normandie. 15. In the New-Forest, which his Father had made, by the ruine of many Churches, Religious houses, and Townes. 5. Hee was slaine, being mistaken for a Deere, as he hunted. 16. King HENRY the First. HIs policies and Lawes. 18. He yeeldeth to the Pope, and restoreth Church liuings, dig∣nities, and liberties; not for con∣science sake, but because Robert his eldest brother, troubled him for his Crowne. 18. He invadeth Normandie, and preuaileth; and plucketh out his brothers eyes. 20, 21. Hee curbeth and ransacketh the Church & Church-men, and makes them pay for enioying of wiues, whether they haue wiues or no. 20. Anselme and Thurstone ap∣peale against him to the Pope, and he yeeldeth. 20, 23. He is patient and very thanke∣full. 24. He is lasciuious, he surfetteth, and then dyeth. 24. King STEPHEN. HEe vsurpeth the Right of Mawld the Empresse, and breaketh his oath. 27. He is very liberall. 28. He refuseth and releaseth the paiment of Dane-gilt, and of all other taxes: he honoreth the Cler∣gie, and giues vnto them large restitution, and exempteth all Clergie men from the authoritie of the Temporall Magistrate. 28. Mawld the Empresse invadeth and taketh him prisoner: he is en∣larged for the Duke of Glocester. The Empresse is besieged in Ox∣ford, and escapeth by a policie in the snow. 29.
He is againe inuaded by Henrie Short-Mantell, the Sonne of Mawld the Empresse: Prince Eustace his sonne is drowned. They two compound, and King Stephen dyeth. 30, 31. King HENRY the Second. HIs great courage. 34. He refineth the Lawes, and deuiseth the Circuits, in which Ni∣si prius, and other law causes are decided. 34. He destroyeth Castles to preuent Rebellions. 35. He reseiseth things giuen by his Predecessors. 35. He exerciseth his people in mar∣tiall Discipline in times of Peace. 35. Hee Conquereth Ireland. 36. His children are rebellious, and punished by God. 36. His Riches. 37. His amorous affections to Ro∣samond. 37. He is vexed by Thomas Bec∣ket, who is slaine. 37. He is accursed. 40. He doth Penance: He is whipt; And dyeth. 42. King RICHARD the First. FOr his valour, hee is termed Cuer de Lyon. 44. His piety and compassion to his Mother, and to distressed priso∣ners. 44. His bountie. 45. Hee warreth gloriously in the holy Land. 45. He winneth Cyprus twice. pag. 46, 47. Iarres arise betwixt him, and the French King, and Leopold Archduke of Austria, wherupon they depart, and doe leaue him. 46, 47. He is stiled King of Ierusalem 47. By swimming he saueth his life, but is taken Prisoner: Ransometh himselfe, and returneth into Nor∣mandie from the holy Land: Hee warreth successefully against the French King in his owne Country, and returneth into England, 48. To pay his Ransome, and to re∣lieue his wants, he ransacketh Reli∣gious houses, and reseiseth such things as formerly he sold to get mony. 49. He besiegeth the Castle of Cha∣lons, and is reuengefully wounded to death: He taketh the Castle, Pardons the offendor, slaies all the rest, and then he dyeth. 49.
King IOHN. PHILIP the French King rai∣seth against him Arthur Plan∣tagenet, who demāds the crown. 51 The King goeth twice into Nor∣mandie, and puts the Frenchmen to flight. 52, 53. He looseth Normandie. 53. 1202.His quarrell and vnspeakeable troubles with the Pope. 53. Hee forbiddeth all appeales to Rome. 54. Foure of his owne Bishops doe interdict him, and he seiseth vpon their lands, and goods: Hee is ac∣cursed, and his kingdome is by the Pope giuen to Philip the French King: He taketh an Oath of Al∣legeance of his Subiects. He inua∣deth the Scots, and they doe submit themselues. 55, 56. Philip of France prouideth to inuade him, but looseth three hun∣dred ships. 56. King Iohn (without the know∣ledge of his Nobilitie or Counsell) submitteth himselfe on his knees to Pandulphus, the Popes Legate, and resigneth to him (to the Popes vse) his Kingdom and his Crown, and after a few daies receiues it as a gift. 56. His people doe despise and for∣sake him. 57. Lewys the Dolphin (in his Fa∣thers Right, by reason of the Popes donation) inuadeth England. The Pope accurseth him, and his father, and protecteth King Iohn, and his kingdome: Hee also accurseth such of the Nobilitie of England, as sided with the French, by rea∣son whereof the Commons robbe, rifle, and forage, both their goods and lands. Miserie makes them to submit themselues. 57. The Dolphin is expelled. 58. The King hath peace, and is poi∣soned by a Monke. 59. King HENRY the third. LEWYS the Dolphin disturbs him in England: The French attempt to inuade, but are ouer∣throwne at Sea. 63. They are accursed, absolued, and doe leaue this kingdome: The king restoreth the ancient Lawes. 63. He warreth in Angeou, and elsewhere. 63. And concludeth a Truce. 64. His Barons and he doe iarre, but are reconciled. 64. The league with France is bro∣ken. 64. King Henrie hath the worse in the new warres. 65, 66. Hee warreth with his Barons. 66. Insanum Parliamentum. 66. The commission of the twelue Peeres. 66. They exercise their Authoritie. 67.
It is confirmed, wherefore the King sayleth into France. 67. 1258.He releaseth his Title and his Right in Normandie, and is con∣firmed Duke of Guyan. 68. He procureth two Bulls from the Pope: The Lord chiefe Iustice is displaced. 68. He publisheth the Popes Bulls a∣gainst the twelue Peeres; and the Londoners take an Oath to assist him. 69. The Barons raise an Armie, and doe write vnto the King, and he answereth them. 69. The Barons Armie is ioyfully receaued into London. 70. The controuersie is referred to the French King, who is accused to be partiall. 70, 71. The Barons fight with the Prince, and doe ouerthrow him. 71. Richard King of the Romans (being wronged) is angrie. 71. 1262.The bataile of Lewis, in which the Barons tooke the two Kings, and Prince Edward prisoners, and more then twentie thousand men were slaine. 73. An agreement is made, and the Prince is one of the Hostages: The commission giuen to the 12. Peeres is confirmed, and the Ho∣stages are enlarged. 73. A discord betwixt the Earles of Leicester and Glocester. 73. Occasioned the ouerthrow of the Barons in the battaile of Euersham 74. 1263.The Barons are executed. 74. The Commission of the twelue Peeres, is by Parliament dissolued. And the King (for reuenge) re∣solued to haue burnt the Citie of London. 74. But it is redeemed by sute, and by money. 75. The Earle of Glocester, with the base off-skome of London, do much mischiefe. But by the Prince his entreatie all is pardoned. 76. The Earle of Glocester is by the King furnished to goe a warfare in the holy land. Hee giues it ouer: And Prince Edward vndertaketh it: he is trecherously wounded, but recouereth: The King dyeth; and he returneth with much honor into England. 77. King EDWARD the First. THe French King feareth his valour, and therefore inui∣teth Lluellen to rebell against him in Wales. 79. By promises, that hee shall marie with the Ladie Eleanor, the ba∣nished daughter of the banished Earle of Leicester; who for succour was his guest. 80. The King taketh her in her pas∣sage towards Wales: the King mar∣cheth towards Lluellens Armie, He submitteth himselfe, sweareth to be loyall, and is wiued. 80.
He rebelleth againe, and he and his brother are both beheaded. 81. King Edward is chosen (as so∣ueraigne Lord) to decide the con∣trouersie and debate, touching the Right to the Crowne of Scotland, which many Competitors do striue for. 81. That Kingdome is surrendred into his hand: and he decides the doubt, and conferres the Kingdom vpon Iohn Bayliol. 83. Hee strippeth the Church and Church-men, and is disliked of them, especially for enacting of the Statute against Mortmaine. 82. Iohn Bayliol (being vngrate∣full) inuadeth England. But King Edward winnes from him the Castle and Towne of Barwike, and slayeth 25000 of his Men. 83. He surrendreth Scotland, and King Edward gouernes it by a Lieutenant, and placeth all Officers of state therein. 84. The Scots rebell againe, and are subdued. 84. They rebell once more: Thirtie and two thousand of them are slaine. 85. They doe homage and fealtie to King Edward. 85. Iohn Bayliol (at the Popes re∣quest) is set at libertie: his subiects doe againe rebell against England: The King entreth into Scotland, and the Castle of Eastervlnie (in which the Scottish Nobilitie, for their safeguard inclosed them∣selues) being summoned, is yeel∣ded to King Edward. 85. Hee sweareth them to his obe∣dience, and (for a monument of his victories) he bringeth from thēce the Chaire in which their Kings were vsually Crowned. 86. Hee enquireth of the extortions done by his Officers, and correcteth them. 86. Prince Edward is committed to prison, and his vnthriftie Com∣panion Pierce Gaueston, is ba∣nished. 86. Wales and Cornwall are giuen to the Prince. 86. The Pope claymeth the soue∣raigntie of Scotland, but King Edward reiecteth and scorneth his claime. Robert le Bruze v∣surpeth in Scotland, so that King Edward, the fourth time, goeth in his owne person into Scotland. The Vsurper flyeth into Nor∣way, and King Edward dyeth. 86, 87. King EDWARD the Second. HE breakes his Oath, and recals Gaueston. Hee doateth on Gaueston: Makes him Earle of Cornwall, and hee doth all in all: whereat the Nobles are displeased. 89, 90. The King (through Gauestons wicked counsell) liueth lewdly, and forsaketh the Companie of the Queene. 90.
Gaueston hath the custodie of the Kings Iewels, and conueies many of them into Ireland. 90 The people murmur at Gaue∣stons authoritie and wicked cour∣ses. The King reiects good coun∣sell. Yet at last Gaueston is bani∣shed into Ireland. The King com∣forts him, and sends him money and Iewels. 91 The King is so sad for his depar∣ture, that at the request of the No∣bilitie (in hope of amendment) he is recalled. 92 By reason of his insolencie hee is againe banished into Flanders, but is recalled, and waxeth more scornefull then he was before. 92 The Lords (despairing of re∣dresse) doe strike off his head. 92 The King (to despight his No∣bilitie) entertaineth the two Spen∣cers, who are worse then Gaue∣ston, and doe perswade him to more leaud and vngratious cour∣ses. 92 The King and his Nobles doe not agree. Robert le Bruze (ta∣king aduantage by the Kings euill gouernment) vsurpeth in Scot∣land. He is againe crowned King, and ouerthroweth king Edward. 93 Iohn Poydras is discouered to be a counterfet, and is put to death. 93 Barwike is betraied to the Scots. 93 The Scots do ouerthrow King Edward the second time. 94 The King (being intreated) will not put the Spencers from him. 94 The Nobles in Parliament doe stand on their Guard. 95 The Spencers are banished for euer. 95 The Nobles complaine for the younger Spencers Piracies: but the King maketh sport at it, and re∣cals them from their exile. They scorne the Barons, who fight, but are ouerthrowen. 96 Twentie and two Barons are be∣headed. 97 The elder Spencer is made Earle of Winchester: and Sir Andrew Harkley (by whose principall seruice the Barons were ouerthrowen, and who was made Earle of Carlile) consorting with the Scots, who had almost taken the King, and enforced him to flie, lost his head. 98 The Queene (being oppressed by the Spencers) goeth into France, and carrieth the Prince with her. Shee is well entertained by the French King her brother. But he is bribed by the Spencers, and so is the Pope, who conspire her deli∣uerie to King Edward. And shee with her sonne doe flie into Ar∣thoys. 99 The Queene and Prince doe land in England. The Nobles re∣paire to her with an Armie, and the King is strangely taken priso∣ner. The Earles of Arundel and Winchester are beheaded. 100 And Hugh Spencer, the younger, being carried to Lon∣don, is disgraced, and cruelly exe∣cuted as a Traitor. 100 The King is committed, depo∣sed,
his sonne is crowned and the old King is murdered by the pra∣ctise of Sir Roger Mortimer, who was too familiar with the Queene. For which offence shee was honourably imprisoned thirtie yeares and more before shee died. 105 King EDVVARD the third. HE goeth with an Armie into Scotland, to correct them for their insolencie in his fathers daies. The Natiues flie into the woods, and the King returneth. 103 Hee concludeth a dishonourable peace with Scotland, by the coun∣sell of Sir Roger Mortimer, whom he createth Earle of March, and marieth his sister Iane to the King of Scots sonne named Da∣uid. He releaseth the Tenure, So∣ueraigntie, homage, and the fealtie of Scotland, and deliuereth vp the great Charter called Ragman, which testified their tenure of the Kings of England. 104 The Earle of March procureth the Kings vncle the Earle of Kent to be beheaded, and is himselfe ex∣ecuted as a Traitor. 104. 105 The King and the French King doe iarre about the Kings homage for the Duchie of Guyan. 105 The Kings title to the King∣dome of France was now first broached. 105 He recouereth Barwicke from the Scots, and maketh Edward Bayliol King. 106 In his owne person he settleth the gouernment of Scotland. 106 The King seekes aid of forraine Princes for his French wars. 107 And is (by fauour) made Vi∣car Generall of the Empire, and is thereby enabled to winne Iaques Dartuell, with the Flemings, and the Princes of Germanie, to ioine with him. 108 He filleth his coffers. 108 The French King staieth his Armie from going to the Holy Land, to fight with England. 108 King Edward transporteth his Armie into Flanders, and ioining with his consorts, he marcheth into France with 27000. men. The French King takes the field. 108 Iane Countesse of Henault (mother to the Queene of Eng∣land, and sister to the French King) parts the fray without blowes. 109 1339.King Edward quartereth the Armes of France, and coines his money with the like stampe. 109 Hee taxeth his people, and bor∣roweth much money. 109 As hee passed towards Sluce with his Armie, hee met with and ouerthrew the French Nauie. 110 Hee with his associates doe be∣siege Tournay. But the saide
Countesse procures a Truce. 111 The Scots doe rebell. The King marcheth against them. A truce is made, but they doe breake it. They doe inuade, and burne Durham. 111 The valiant exploit of Sir Wil∣liam Montague. The Castle of Ronsborough is besieged. The King marcheth against the Scots, and they flie. 112 He concludes a truce with them. Hee returnes, proclaimes a Feast, and martiall exercises and sports. 113 Subsidies are granted, but Com∣missioners are made to receiue and to imploy it. 114 1344.Hee deuiseth the noble Order of the Garter. 114 Iaques Dartuell is murdered because hee would haue disherited the Earle of Flanders to preferre the Blacke Prince. 114 By his death King Edward lost the Flemish aide. But hee is the more resolued in his attempts. 116 The French King besiegeth A∣guilon with 100000. men. The King takes Harflew, Louiers, Cane, and many other things, and harroweth and burneth in Nor∣mandie at his pleasure. 117 He passeth with his Armie ouer the Riuer of Some. 118 The battaile of Cressey. 119 1345.The numbers of slaine men and prisoners. 121 King Edward besiegeth Calice and the French K. with 200000. men could not releeue it. The King winnes it, and peopleth it with his owne Nation. 123 The Scots inuade England in the Kings absence, and King Da∣uid is taken prisoner. 123 The King himselfe surpriseth the Frenchmen, who came to re∣ceiue Calice. 124 The Calicians take Guyens. 125 The Blacke Prince winneth the battaile of Poyters, and brings King Iohn and his younger sonne prisoners into England. 126 The whole English Armie is made rich. 128 The Dolphin allowes not his fathers agreements with King Edward. 128 Hee is enforced to craue peace, which is granted vpon conditions. 129 The King relinquisheth the French title and right. 129 A taxe leuied by the Blacke Prince, and the not paying of his Souldiers, occasioned his great los∣ses in Guyan, Aquitaine, &c. 130. 131 Whereto ciuill dissention must be added. 132 The Earle of Pembroke is ta∣ken at Sea. 132 The Kings euill Officers. 133 The Blacke Prince dieth. 134 The King dieth. 134
King RICHARD the second. THe summarie of his euill go∣uernment. 135 Wat Tilars Rebellion. 137 Their insolencie and madnesse. 137 Their entertainment in Lon∣don. 138 They doe burne, rifle, and com∣mit Sacriledge. 138 Their behauiour at the Tower, and at Mile-end-greene. 139 Their Captaine is slaine. They prepare for reuenge, but doe flie. 140. 141 Fifteene hundred of them are executed. 141 The Kings euill Counsellors. 142 Fifteenes in a Parliament are denied. 142 The Lower House will depart except the King in person will come to them. 142 Michael de la Pole is displaced from his Chancellorship. 144 Commissioners are appointed to order the Kings Officers, and the King sweareth to obserue it. 144 The Commissioners are reputed to be Traitors. 145 The Scots and French doe make a bad voyage into Wales, and in the meane time the King with 68000. men spoileth Scotland. 145 The Frenchmen well rewarded by the Scots. 145 The French King prepares an Armie of 1200. Ships to inuade and to conquer England, and King Richard makes incredible preparations to confront him. 146 The French Armie vanisheth, and comes to nought. 147 The petition of the Nobilitie is de∣nied by the King. Wherefore they doe raise an Armie. 147 The King cannot get an Armie out of London. 148 On the Kings faire promises, the Armie is dismissed. Hee per∣formes nothing: so that a new Armie is leuied, and receiued into London. 149 The Duke of Ireland flieth, is slaine by a Bore, and is buried like a King. 149 The Kings fiue euill Counsel∣lors and some Iudges are condem∣ned as Traitors. 149 Iohn of Gaunts iourney, va∣lour, and fortunate successe in Spaine. 150 The King marieth the French Kings sister, and deliuers vp Brest, for which his Vncle the Duke of Glocester reproueth him: but his death is plotted, and hee is murde∣red. 151 The flattering Speaker of the Parliament grosly deifieth the King. 151 A strange Commission. 152 The King (in his vanitie) will be stiled Prince of Cheshire. 152 The Duke of Norfolke vntruly informeth the King against his co∣sen Henrie Bollingbroke Duke of Hartford, for which hee is chal∣lenged
to a single combat. 153. 154 They are both banished. 154 Iohn of Gaunt dieth, and his son Henrie Bollingbroke (now Duke of Lancaster) in the Kings absence in Ireland, landeth in En∣gland, and raiseth an Armie. The King returneth, and leuieth his forces. 155 But his people daily shrinke and steale away from him: by meanes whereof he submitteth himselfe to the Duke. 155 Articles are proposed against him for his euill gouernment, which are by him confessed vnder his hand in the Parliament. Hee resigneth his Kingdome, and is de∣posed. Henrie of Bollingbroke is crowned King. And King Richard (valiantly resisting) is wickedly murdered. 160 King HENRY the Fourth. IOHN Bishop of Carlile stoutly reproueth King Henries doing openly in the Parliament house. 163 The Crowne is entailed. 164 Treason at Oxford. 164 The Traitors flie, and are execu∣ted. 165 Owen Glendor rebelleth. 166 And taketh Roger Mortimer (the rightfull heire apparant to the Crowne) prisoner, and the King refuseth to ransome him. 166 The Scots rebelling, are ouer∣throwen by Henrie Hotspurre, who will not deliuer his prisoners to the King. 167. 168 The Frenchmen doe aide the Welsh Rebels in shew, but doe flie to their ships when the King com∣meth. 167. 168 The Percies doe ransome Ro∣ger Mortimer, and ioining with Owen Glendor, they intend to make him King. 169 They leuie an Armie, and doe publish Articles against K. Henry. The Scots doe aide them, but are all ouerthrowen. And in that bat∣taile the King himselfe slew six and thirtie men.1401. 171 Dowglas is enlarged without ransome. 171 Glendor is forsaken of his com∣panions, and is famished in the woods. 172 The Duke of Orleance his chal∣lenge is stoutly refused by King Henrie. 172 And disgraced. 173 The Duke of Britaine is com∣manded by the French King to a¦bandon the siege of Calice. 173 Diuers Lords doe practise a Treason, which is discouered, and most of them are put to death. 173 The King warreth againe pro∣sperously in Scotland. 173 Hee was in danger to bee taken on the Thames by French Pirates. 174 Sir Ralphe Roksbie, Sheriffe
of Northumberland, valiantly o∣uerthrew the Northerne Rebels, and chopt off their heads before the Kings comming thither. 174 He createth his younger sonnes Dukes, and prepareth to warre in the Holy Land, but falleth dange∣rously sicke. 174 His speech to the Prince his son when he seised on the Crowne. 174 He dieth. 175 King HENRY the Fifth. THis King was vnmeasurably wilde in his fathers daies, and was imprisoned and disgraced for striking the Lord Chiefe Iustice on the eare. 177 But being King, he enriched his loose companions, but banished them perpetually from his Court. 177 He chose the grauest, wisest, and best experienced men to be of his Counsell of Estate. 177 Hee reformeth the Clergie, and the Lay people, and erecteth Castles to curbe the Scots. 178 A motion was made in Parlia∣ment to dissolue religious houses. But the Clergie reuiuing the kings title to the kingdome of France, and being bountifully liberall, doe turne the streame into that chan∣nell. 178 The King demandeth that Crowne, but is scoffed by the Dol∣phin, whom he girdeth by a replie. 179 The King leuieth an Armie. The French King desireth peace. The King yeeldeth on certaine conditi∣ons, which are denied. 180 The Queene is made Regent. And as the King is ready to de∣part, his destruction is conspired. But the Treacherie was reuealed, and the Traitors were put to death 180 The King landeth in Norman∣die, and taketh Harflew. His Ar∣mie (being but 15000. men) fal∣leth sicke, and is oppressed with many wants. Yet the King resol∣ueth to march by land vnto Calice. 181 1414.He winneth the most famous and the most memorable Battaile of Agencourt. 182 The French prisoners were (vn∣willingly, yet miserably) slaine. 185 He giueth God publike thankes. 186 And returneth into England with his great prisoners. 186. 187 The new Constable of France is ouerthrowen. 187 The French doe besiege Harflew, and their Nauie of 500. ships is ouerthrowen. And Iohn Duke of Bedford raiseth the siege. 188 Ciuill dissention among the French Nobilitie doth further the successe of K. Henries wars. 189
Great summes of money, are chearfully giuen to the King, to maintayne his invasion. 189 Nine Carricks of Genoa, and Tonque, and Cane, are taken by the English. 191 Most Townes in Normandie doe become English. 192 Roan is besieged by the king. 192 A proud Roanist dareth him; he replies, and takes the Citie. 197 The French Nobles are outward∣ly reconciled, but not in heart. 198 1416Normandie is wonne by King Henrie. 198 He marieth the Lady Katherine sister to the French King; and is made Regent of France, 1519 & is pro∣claymed Heire apparant to that Crowne. 199, 200, 201, 202, 203, 204. The Kings brother the Duke of Clarence, Regent of Normandie, and France,1420 is betraied, and slaine in the battaile of Blangy. 205, 206 The Earle of Mortaigne succee∣deth in his charge. 207 The King warreth againe in France. 207 The Dolphin raiseth his siege from Chartiers, and flyeth feare∣fully from place to place. 208 The King falleth grieuously sick, exhorteth his Nobles to vnitie, and concord; and to bee especially carefull to retain the friendship and loue of Philip, Duke of Burgoine. 209 Hee commends vnto them his yong Infant, and their King; Di∣rects them for their proceedings in France: and then dieth. King HENRY the Sixth. FRance contemneth the infancie of King Henry. 211 Iohn Duke of Bedford is made Regent of France; and Humfrey, Duke of Glocester, is made Prote∣ctor of the Kings person, and of the Realme of England. 212 The Regent winneth Townes daily. 212 The Parisians are trecherous. 213 1424The battaile of Vernoile. 215 The Earle of Salisburies valour and name is feared. 216 A strange ouerthrow of the French. 216 They doe bragge and runne a∣way. 217 Townes and victories are daily wonne by the English. 218, 219 Orleance is besieged, and offered to Philip, Duke of Burgoine; but the Regent will not consent there∣to, and for that cause the said Duke reuolteth to the French King. 221 The battaile of Herings. 221 The siege of Orleance is abando∣ned. 222 The Duke of Alanson ouer∣throweth the English; slayeth the Earle of Salisbury; and taketh pri∣soners, the Earle of Suffolke, and
the Lords Talbot, Scales, and Hungerford, and many others. 222 Charles causeth himselfe to bee crowned King of France, and is sommoned to a battaile by the Re∣gent: hee flyeth cowardly; and is hunted from place to place, but all in vaine. 223 Diuers Nobles of France doe re∣volt from King Henrie. 224. The French King assaults Paris, and is well beaten. 224 The Parisians doe flatter, but are trecherous. 225 King Henrie is crowned King of France in Paris. 225 England is wondred at for her puissance. 225 Treason discouered. 226 A Rebellion in Normandie. 226 The noble Regent dieth. 228 And from the time of his death, the English gaine little, but doe loose much both in Normandie, and in France. Richard, Duke of Yorke, is made Regent. 229 Paris is reuolteth. 229 Calice is besieged by the Duke of Burgoine. 229 But he flyeth in the night. 230 The Earle of Warwick is made Regent. 231 The French King flyeth in the night. 233 Ponthois is taken by the English 234 A parley for peace: 234 The Articles proposed, are disli∣ked. 235 A cruell Armie, and a huge on the French part. 235 Much is gotten daily, and much is daily lost beyond the Seas. 235 A truce with France for eigh∣teene moneths. 237 An vnworthy marriage conclu∣ded for the King, by the Duke of Suffolke, without Commission. 237 Which was the Dukes ouerthrow 246 He will haue his Acts and Coun∣sels registred in Parliament. 238 The cause of the losses of France, 1466Normandie, Aquitaine, &c. 238 The descriptions of the King and Queene. 239 The good Duke of Glocester is re∣moued by the Queen from the Pro∣tectorship, and is murdered. 240 The French wars are neglected, and the Truce is broken on both parts. 240 Townes are lost, Roan yeeldeth to the French King. 241 The English are ouerthrowne in field. 242 Cane is yeelded to the French King. 243 The Duke of Suffolke is accused of treason, and banished. 244 But is taken at Sea and behea∣ded. 246 The policies of the Duke of York, to attaine vnto the Crowne. Iack Cade the Rebell flyeth, and is pro∣scribed and slaine. 247 A pacification, but fained, be∣twixt the King, and the Duke of Yorke. 248 The Duke is accused, & impriso∣ned for treason, but is enlarged. 248
Guyan and Aquitaine are yeelded to King Henrie, but are regained by the French. 249 The warres betwixt the King, and the Yorkists. 249 The King is ouerthrowne, and taken prisoner in the battaile of 1454S. Albons, and in Parliament the Duke of Yorke is made Prote∣ctor. 250 Marchant strangers are rifled in London. 251 A policie against the Yorkists, but it is discouered. 252 The King labours for peace; but each part dissembleth. 252 New Armies are raised. 254 The Lords doe flie in the night, and are proclaimed traitors. 255 The Kings ships, twice taken out of Sandwich by Iohn Dynham, and the Yorkists. 256 The battaile of1459 Northampton, in which the Queen is ouerthrown, and the King is taken prisoner. 257 The Duke of Yorks proceedings in Parliament against King Hen∣rie. 258 The Crowne is setled by Parlia∣ment. The Scots ouerthrow, and doe sley the Duke of Yorke in the 1460battaile of Wakefield. 259 The yong Duke of York winneth the field of Queene Margaret. 260 He is by the Queen ouerthrown, and the King is enlarged. 260 The Dukes newe Armie consi∣sting of 49000. men: the Queens new Armie consisting of 60000. men. The1460 Queene is ouerthrown in the battaile of Towton. 260 The King to winne fauour with the king of Scots, deliuereth to him the Castle, and the Towne of Bar∣wike: and the Duke of Yorke is crowned King. 261. King EDWARD the Fourth. IN Parliament hee repealeth all former Acts which attainted him, and his friends, of high trea∣son. 263 He is troubled by wars, raised a∣gainst him by Queene Margaret, in which he preuaileth. 265 He taketh especiall1462 care for the Common-weale. 266 King Henrie is taken prisoner. 266 The Earle of Warwick becomes his Enimie, because he wronged him, in the choice of his wife. 267 George, Duke of Clarence, ta∣keth part with Warwick against his brother King Edward. 268 The1467 Yorkshire-men doe rebell. 269 King Edward is taken prisoner and escapeth. 271 The discommodities of Warre. 272 A new1468 Rebellion, in which the Rebells were ouerthrowne. 273 Warwick and Clarence flie to Ca∣lice,
and finde bad entertainment. 274 Prince Edward (sonne to King Henrie the sixth) marieth the se∣cond daughter of the Earle of War∣wick. 275 Clarence (secretly) revolteth to King Edward his brother. 275 Warwick landeth in England, where his forces doe so encrease, that king Edward flieth, 277 King Henrie is enlarged, and by Parliament, the crowne is in∣tailed to him. 277 King Edward landeth in Eng∣land, and breaketh his oath, made to the citizens of Yorke. 278 Hee, and his Armie are ioyfully receiued into the citie of London. 280 Hee triumpheth victoriously at Barnet field. 280 The Queene Margaret leuieth another Armie, and is ouerthrown in the battaile of Tewkesbury. 282 King Henrie (being murdered) is brought open faced into S. Pauls Church. 283 King Edward hath new wars in France; and the Duke of Bur∣goine breaks promise with him. 285 A peace for nine yeares is con∣cluded, for which the Duke of Bur∣goine is angrie with the King, who cares not for it. 286 The bountie of the French King to the English Armie. 288 Henrie Earle of Richmond is by the Duke of Brittaine deliuered to King Edwards Ambassadours: but Peter Landoys freeth him. 289 The Duke of Clarence (being a prisoner) is murdered. 290 King Edward changeth the forme of his gouernment; and (by executing of penall statutes) he en∣richeth himselfe, but looseth his peoples loue. 290 He hath new warres with Scot∣land, but (on certaine conditions) he grants him peace. 291 The French King breaks all his Articles, annexed to the last con∣cluded peace; wherefore King Ed∣ward leuieth a new Armie, but fal∣leth sick, and dyeth. 292 The Description of King Ed∣ward. 297 King EDWARD the Fifth. HE was a child when his fa∣ther dyed. 297 His Vncle, Richard, Duke of Glocester, aimeth to haue his crown. 299 He practizeth mischiefe against the Queene Mothers kindred. 300 He betrayeth them, and berea∣ueth them of their liues. 301, 307 The Queene Mother with her
children taketh Sanctuarie. 302 The Duke of Glocester is made Protector. 302 By subtiltie he getteth the yong Duke of Yorke out of prison, and sends the King, and him, to the Tower, vnder pretence of greater safetie. 302 Hee with the Duke of Bucking∣ham practizeth their destru∣ction. 304, 305 His villany at the Tower. 306 His friend the Lord Hastings is beheaded, because hee will not consent to that murder. 307 Doctor Shawes flattering ser∣mon. 308 Richard Duke of Glocester is made King. 309 King RICHARD the third. KIng Richard (by base flatte∣rie) endeuoureth to make a bad matter good. 311 Doctor Morton, Bishop of Ely, is committed to the custodie of the Duke of Buckingham. 311 King Richard is despised by the French king. 312 The two young Princes (by the villanous procurement of King Richard) are murdred. 312 The reasons, which might haue disswaded him from that wicked∣nesse, are examined. 313 His only sonne by death is taken from him. 315 Doctor Morton (by flatterie) insinuateth himselfe into the in∣ward loue and familiaritie of the Duke of Buckingham, and hauing with him resolued on the destru∣ction of king Richard, hee esca∣peth, and flyeth into Flanders, from whence hee giues good intel∣ligence of all King Richards pro∣ceedings, to Henrie Earle of Rich∣mond. 315 Hee moueth him to marrie the Lady Elizabeth, eldest daughter to King Edward the Fourth, which hee protesteth to doe. 317 King Richard had almost got∣ten into his hands the Earle of Rich¦mond, but Peter Landoys freeth him. 317 The Duke of Buckingham and the K. do leuie two strong Armies, but the fight is deferred by a sodain floud: The Welshmen forsake the Duke: he flyeth: he is proscribed: he is betraied by his owne seruant, and looseth his head. 318 Peter Landoys would haue betrayed the Earle of Richmond to king Richard; but hee, and his, doe escape hardly into France, where they are comforted and ai∣ded. 320 King Richard by flatterie and
bribes gets King Edward the Fourth his children into his owne possession: and maketh loue to his owne Neece, the said Lady Eliza∣beth. 322 His owne wife sodainly dyeth, and he reviueth his incestuous sute to his said Neece, who wittily pro∣tracteth that businesse. 323 False newes from France, makes him secure. 323 The Earle of Richmond landeth in England, and the King, and he are with their Armies in Bosworth field. 323 King Richards people cleaue not to him. 324 Hee is desperate in fight: but is slaine by the Earle himselfe, and his body is vsed with great despight by the common people, 324, 325 Henrie, Earle of Richmond, is proclaimed, and crowned King by the souldiers, in the open field, wher his Enimie lay dead: And in the same place, Hee, with his whole Armie doe thanke GOD. 325 King HENRY the Seuenth. KIng Henrie the Seuenth (as he had sworne) vniteth the two diuided houses of Lancaster & Yorke, by his mariage with the La∣dy Elizabeth, King Edward the Fourth his eldest daughter. 327 He causeth the Crowne to be in∣tayled. 328 He maketh Yeomen of his Guard, and is thankfull to his friends. 327 He repaieth the French King, & the Duke of Britaigne. 328 He repealeth Acts of Attainders, makes good lawes, and granteth a generall Pardon. 328 He suppresseth Rebells. 329 Lambert, the counterfaited Earle of Warwick, by force and po∣licie is taken. 329, 330, 331 King Henrie the Seuenth, takes part with the Duke of Britaigne, a∣gainst the French King. 332, 333 The Earle of Northumberland (leuying of a Tax) is slaine by the people. 333, 334 The Rebells flie, and are punish∣ed. 334 Maximilian (being aided by King Henrie the Seuenth) comes not forth, yet King Henrie alone warreth against the French King. 335 The King demaunds a Benevo∣lence. 335 He besiegeth Bullein, and gran∣teth a peace. 336 Perkin Warbeck, the counter∣faited Duke of Yorke, vexeth king Henrie. 337 He is supported. 337, 338, 339 The King wisely discouers their intentions. 339, 340 The Mart is remoued to Calice 340 Sir William Stanley is behea∣ded, and Warbeck is discomfor∣ted
in Kent. 342 The Scots (vnder pretence to aid him) vexe England. 343 The Cornish Rebells are ouer∣throwne. 343, 344 And many of them are executed. 345 The Scots invade, and are wasted 346 The Mart is restored to the Fle∣mings. 346 Exeter is besieged, and defended valiantly. 342 King Henrie commeth to that Citie, and giues vnto it his sword. 348 The Rebells flie. 349 Perkin Warbeck, and the yong Earle of Warwick (son to George Duke of Clarence, the brother of King Edward the Fourth) seeking to escape, are preuented, and behea∣ded. 350 Two mariages with France and Scotland. 350 Empson and Dudley, doe exe∣cute penall lawes. 351 The King (in his death bed) doth repent it: and lends mony freely to his Marchants, and dieth. 359 King HENRY the Eighth. HE executeth Empson and Dudley. 355 And marieth his brothers wife. 355 He sideth with the Pope against France. 356 His Father-in-law Ferdinan∣do, vseth him ill. 357 And trecherously surpriseth the kingdome of Nauarre. 357 Edward Howard, Lord Ad∣mirall, is drowned. 359 King Henrie hath three armies in France. 360 Maximilian the Emperour ser∣ueth him in those warres. 361 Tyrwin and Tourney are wonne. 361 Iames the Fourth King of Scots is slaine in Flodden field. 361, 362 Peace is concluded with France. 364 Cardinall Wolseys deedes and actions, from pag. 364. vnto pag. 388. The Clergie feare the Premuni∣re, and therefore are liberall. 388 The king is acknowledged su∣preme head of the Church. 388, 403 He marieth Anne of Bullein. 389 And beheadeth her. 403 Euill May-day. 390 Tournay is deliuered vpon con∣dicions. 390 Which (by the French) were broken. 393 The Duke of Buckingham is at∣tainted and executed. 392 The King writes a booke against Martin Luther. 393 He maketh warres in France. 394, 395, 396, 397
Priuie seales being granted, are released by Parliament. 395 English souldiers doe returne vnlicenced out of France. 397 The Emperor, the Scots, and the French doe craue peace. 398, 399 The King is in danger to bee drowned. 400 He hath warres with the Empe∣rour. 401 He curbeth the Popes authority. 401 Fisher and Moore doe loose their heads. 402 Petit Religious houses are sup∣pressed. 403 All the rest are likewise suppres∣sed. 407 The holy maid of Kent. 402 The Lancashire-men doe rebell. 404 The King is passing stout. 404 Rebellion by the holy Pilgrimes, miraculously appeased. 405 An other Rebellion is suppres∣sed. 406 Cromwell is aduanced highly. 406 But is ouerthrowne by conclu∣ding a mariage for the King with Anne of Cleue, which the King disliked. 408, 409 That mariage is pronounced to be void. 409 The King marrieth the Lady Katherine Howard. 409 And beheaded her. 410 He is made King of Ireland. 410 The Scots invade and are mi∣serably ouerthrowne. 413 A mariage being motioned by the Scots. 413 Is concluded, but they breake their oathes, & the match too. 415 Scotland is wasted. 415 The King sendeth two Armies into France. 415 Bullein is wonne. 417 The King hath a Beneuolence. 417 The Frenchmen are ouerthrown 418 The Scots invade and are van∣quished. 419 The famous and renowned Earle of Surry is beheaded: And the King dyeth.
THE HISTORIE OF KING WILLIAM THE CONQƲEROR. AFTER the death of King Edward (who was the sonne of Egeldredus, and of Goditha his wife) Harold her brother, and second sonne to the Earle Godwin, vsurped this kingdom, and caused himselfe to be crowned King, the Crowne being formerly giuen by King Edward vnto William the seuenth Duke of the Normans, and base sonne to Robert their sixt Duke. To whose vse and behoofe, Harold had formerly sworne to keepe the same. Whereof, when Duke William was certainely enformed, Hee charged him (by his Letters, and by Messengers) with his promise, confirmed by his Oath; and required him (in friendly sort, and without blowes) to possesse him of his Crowne. But proud Ambition (arming him with a Resolution to remaine a King in despight of threats, or Fortune) made him, rather to quoine dishonorable excuses, then to giue satisfaction as hee had sworne: And for answere, to re∣turne, That promises, and vowes rashly made, and by compulsi∣on (as his was) especially for a Kingdome, wherevnto the State had giuen no free consent, were not (at all) to bee regarded. And therefore (seeing the Dukes Rule and Dominions were as ample,
and as large elsewhere, as Nature and Art had enabled him to manage, and to command) he wished him to bee contented with his owne, and not aduenture to claspe more within his hand, then he was well able to hold fast, Nor to couet that which hee should not enioy. As this answere bred Discontent: So rage began to resolue on Armes. For the Duke (assisted by his Martiall friends) leuied a strong Armie; and furnished it with all abiliments and necessa∣ries for the Warre: with which (through the assistance of some natiue Nobles, who adhered to his part) hee safely landed in Sussex: where (hauing prouidently sheltred himselfe, against all suddaine stormes) hee challenged Harold to a single Combat; thereby to decide the strife, without much bloud. But Harold entertained not the Challenge; but sent him word, That to gaine, or keepe a Kingdome, it required more blowes then two could giue.14. October. 1066. So that (within fewe dayes after) a fierce and cruell Battaile (of the continuance of one whole day) without intermission, or breathing, was fought betwixt them. But in the Euening, HAROLD, being deadly wounded with an Arrow, left both his Kingdome and his life: And Duke William (almost with equall losse of his men) became Victor in the field. The Saxons Raigne endedAnd thus ended the Saxons Raigne; which (from the first yeare of Hengistus, in the yeare of our Lord God foure hun∣dred seuentie and fiue, vntill the time of this Conquest in the yeare of our Lord God one thousand sixtie and sixe) had con∣tinued: (Sauing that now and then, it was interrupted by the Danes) the space of fiue hundred fourescore and eleuen yeares. The Duke (hauing thus slaine Harold, and gained his King∣dome) began to raigne as King: And (on Christmas day then next following) hee was crowned by Aldredus Archbishop of Yorke, by the enforced consents of the English Nobles: Who (with an outward applause, but with an inward griefe and sorrow) submitted themselues to be his subiects; the Kentish men excep∣ted. By whom (is hee trauailed to possesse himselfe of the strong Castle of Douer) he was preuented in his iourney, and compassed round about by valiant men of War, who (carying greene boughs in their hands, and resembling a moouing Wood) enuironed the King, and all his followers, ere they were aware therof; And prote∣sted manfully to die, rather then they would (by seruile basenesse) be depriued of those ancient Lawes and Customes, whereby their Countrie was then ruled. The King (perceiuing his owne danger,
and their resolution) hearkned to their demaunds; and not one∣ly granted their requests, but (for their bold and valorous attempt) hee honoured them with this preheminence; That euer after∣wards, the Kentish inhabitants should make the Vantgard of the Field. This gained hee that Countrie,The Conque∣rors Policies. and became sole Lord and So∣ueraigne of each whole Kingdome: and ruled it as a Conqueror, with more Policie than by profitable Lawes; and with more se∣ueritie than did become the Gracious disposition of a fauourable King. For first of all (because he presumed, that such as were conque∣red, did rather feare than loue, and would no longer obey, than the yoake lay heauie ouer their neckes) by receiuing Hostages of the best and dearest esteeme, hee secured the fidelities of such as were either honourable, or potent, and sent them into Normandie, be∣cause suddaine force and strength should not depriue him of so sure a meane of his safetie. Then (to depriue the English of all commaund, and to make  them feeble, and his Normans strong) he seized their chiefest Offi∣ces, both of Honour, and of Profit, into his owne hands, and con∣ferred them vpon strangers: Whereat the English grieued much, but found no remedie: for Weakenesse was enforced to yeeld to Power, and vsurping Policie tyrannized ouer the Oppressed, and bereaued them of their Right. And (because in those daies the Clergie was had in great reue∣rence  among the people; in regard, that their authoritie was not confined within the bounds of their Spirituall Iurisdictions) hee resolued to clip their wings, because they should no longer soare so high; and did ordaine, That from thenceforth they should not commaund with anie Temporall Authoritie whatsoeuer. He was not ignorant, that the hope of Libertie did oftentimes  incite such as vnwillingly were made seruile, to watch for oportu∣nitie to procure their Freedome: and therefore (to preuent such dangers as might otherwise ensue) he vtterly disarmed and diswea∣poned all the Natiues of the Land, turning their Hopes into Des∣paire; and preuenting their Expectations for Releasement, with the present Extremitie of their Bondage. Thus weakened he such as were truly valiant, and thus made he them to suffer much who (if they had beene at libertie) would haue beene able to repell great force. And (because the concourse of much people might giue them  some occasion, both to conferre of the estate which they were in,
and also to consult of the meanes of their deliuerance from their Thraldome) he debarred the English from frequent and common meetings, especially in the night: which to preuent, he caused a Bell in euerie Village, Towne, and Citie, to be rong at eight of the clocke in the euening; vpon the sound whereof, all English men were enjoyned to couer their fire, and to keepe themselues within their dores. And this ceremonie was, and is yet called, Couer le fiew, or the raking vp of the Fire. To diminish the Nobilitie, he vsed to transport them for his Warres beyond the Seas: and if they returned backe againe, then might they well perceiue, that he rather meant their destruction, than regarded their seruice: for no reward was giuen to them, though they were valiant, nor anie shew at all was made, that their forwardnesse was accepted by the King. And thus dealt he likewise with the vulgar sort; by whose man∣hood he fought his sharpest battailes in Normandie and in France: thereby lessening their numbers, and making his owne power more eminent among such, as he enforced to lament their owne misfortunes, and in vaine to meditate vpon their present woe. He also erected strong Forts and Castles in sundrie places of this Realme, which were commaunded by his followers; whose bit∣ternesse was such against the English Nation, as that they dared not to make shew, that they repined at any thing, which wickedly they did amisse. As long as the English abounded in Riches, and in Wealth, he knew they were not altogether heartlesse; and therefore he depri∣ued them of those comforts. And (to encrease his owne store) he practised subtile trickes on both estates: for he robbed the Clergie of all their best and richest Plate and Ornaments (which had been consecrated to holy vses) alledging, That Theeues and Traiterous Rebels had hid them there, to deceiue him of his forfeitures, and secretly to support themselues therewith, to his great hurt. He also enacted and established strait and seuere Lawes, and pub∣lished them in his owne Language; by meanes whereof, manie (who were of great estate, and of much worth) through ignorance did transgresse, and their smallest offences were great enough to en∣title the Conquerour to the Lands and Riches which they did possesse. All which he seized on, and tooke from them, without remorse. Then he disallowed the Patents, and the Graunts of former Kings, and published them to be meerely void; and hauing seque∣stred them into his owne hands, he sold them againe to the true
owners for great summes of money, if they could pay them: but otherwise he gaue them to his Normans, and to the French. He procured a generall view to be taken of his subiects Lands, and caused them to be justly measured, and their cattell to be num∣bred, and thereby he taxed them, according to such proportions as he pleased; and (by such vndue Exactions) he scraped and scrat∣ched together the Treasure of this Realme, little regarding the wants and pouertie of his conquered people, if (by anie meanes) he could augment his owne store. He erected sundrie Courts for the administration of his new  Lawes, and of Iustice; and least his Iudges should beare too great a sway, by reason of his absence, he caused them all to follow his Court vpon all remoues: Whereby he not onely curbed their dis∣positions, which incited them to be great, but also tyred out the English Nation with extraordinarie troubles, and excessiue charges in the prosecution of their Suites in Law. To open a wide dore, and to giue the more free accesse vnto the  French and Normans (if the English should happen to rebell) he rui∣nated all Churches, Chappels, Villages, and Townes, which stood within the compasse of manie myles in Hampshire, and made the New Forest there; vtterly dispeopling those places where God was formerly serued, and frugall Husbandrie maintained; making them an habitation for wilde and sauage Beasts: which act and deede he coloured with the pretence of fitnesse, and conueniencie for his re∣creation in Hunting, when great affaires and important businesse would giue him leaue. But God reuenged his owne cause by the vntimely death of Rufus his sonne, and successor; who (as he hun∣ted) was slaine with an arrow in the same Forest. Aboue all other pleasures he placed his chiefest delight in Hun∣ting: and for the furtherance thereof, when he had seized into his owne hands all the Chases and Forests of this Kingdome, then (to preserue his Game from disturbance, and from spoile) he made and executed most sharpe and bitter Lawes against such, as (vnlicenced) presumed to hunt in them; as the losse of eyes, limbes, and such like: But they were afterwards made more milde and gentle, by such as by succession wore his Crowne. He gaue large territories and spatious fields vnto his fauorites;  who did diuide them into Farmes, for their particular vses and ne∣cessities, and the residue of them they graunted or leased to their slaues and seruants; thereby creating Manors, and entitling them∣selues the Lords of them. The King also vpon those his gifts pro∣portioned those grounds, diuiding them into Hydes of Land, euery
Hyde containing twentie acres, and eight Hydes making a whole Knights fee. The Tenures which he reserued, were Knights seruice in capite: by meanes whereof, his Tenants were enioyned to doe him manie necessarie and honorable Seruices, either in his Warres, or to his Royall person. For the performance whereof, he tooke their Oathes in publike Courts, both of Homage and of Fealtie. And by reason of this kinde of Tenure, he disposed of the bodies of their Heires in marriage as he listed, and retayned in his custodie and Wardship, to his owne vse, their whole Inheritance, vntill they accomplished their age of one and twentie yeares. Which Tenures are continued at this day. And, by his example, others of great pos∣sessions did the like. And thus may we plainely see (as in a Mappe) the perfect Mo∣dell and Description of his rigorous and sharpe Gouernement; wherein he rather practised the licentious power of an insolent Conqueror, than the gratious kindnesse of an annointed King. By meanes whereof, many feared, few did loue him: and such as plea∣sed him best, were many times in great hazard (vpon small occasi∣ons) to be frowned on. ANNO. 2.In the second yeare of his raigne, by reason of his Taxes, which exceeded beyond measure, the inhabitants of Northumberland, and of Deuon,Taxes caused Rebellions. did rebell. But such was his valour and expedition, that (ere they were aware thereof) his forces (like a loftie Sea, or a whir∣ling Wind) rushed violently vpon them, and easily subdued them, to their paine. ANNO. 3.And not long after, Swanus then King of the Danes (being anima∣ted and set on edge by the daily perswasions and enticements of such English Nobles,The Danes inuade, and are put to flight. as to preuent their owne ruine and destruction were fled to him for succour) arriued with a strong Armie in the North: where the inhabitants (endeuoring the enjoyment of their former libertie) with bold courage assisted them in their inuasion. But the King almost no sooner saw them) than he compelled them vpon the loosing hand) to flye vnto their shippes. And (to reuenge the infidelitie of the English) he vtterly spoyled and harrowed their best and most fruitfull Lands,The English are plagued. lying betwixt Yorke and Durham. So that by reason thereof (for the space of nine yeares after) those grounds lay wast, and vnmanured; and great numbers of people, of all ages, died miserably, with famine, and with want. ANNO. 4.The next yeare after he summoned a generall Conuocation of his Clergie. In which (with much asperitie and bitternesse) he ac∣cused diuers and sundrie graue and learned Bishops, Abbots, Pri∣ors, and Religious Prelates, of many surmises, faults, and offences:
for which he vtterly deposed and depriued them, both of their Dignities, Goods, and Liuings: all which he conferred vpon such, as (either through his fauour, or for great summes of money) were able to procure them. These fearefull presidents of insufferable cruelties,Another Rebellion. prouoked Marcarus, and Edwyn, then Earles of Northumberland, and of Mer∣cia, together with Egilwynus, then Bishop of Durham, to rebell. But the King (like a Lyon encountring their weaker forces) draue Ed∣wyn into Scotland; where trecherously he was murdered. He tooke Marcarus, and imprisoned him in the Tower of London: where (manie yeares after) he remained, with little hope of his deliue∣rance. And the Bishop (being a prisoner in the Abbey of Abbing∣ton) was cruelly famished to death. At this time great strife, touching the Primacie, arose,ANNO. 7. The Prima∣cie of Can∣terburie. ANNO. 9. betwixt the Archbishops of Canterburie, and of Yorke: which continued almost two yeares. But at length, Thomas was adiudged to be subordinate to Lanfrank, then Archbishop of Canterburie, and the other submit∣ted himselfe accordingly. In the twelfth yeare of this Kings Raigne (at a great Synod hol∣den at Paules Church in London) some Bishopricks were translated from one place to another: as Selwy, vnto Chichester;ANNO 12. Bishoprickes translated. Kyrton vnto Exeter; Wells vnto Bath; Shirborne vnto Salisburie; Dorchester vnto Lincolne; and Lichfield vnto Chester. Oswald, Bishop of Salisburie,ANNO 13. Secundum vsum Sarum. was a most deuout and religious man: he deuised a certaine forme of Prayers to be daily vsed in his Church: which was so generally liked by the Clergie, that they were published in bookes, and vsed in other Churches. Whence proceeded the common saying of Secundum vsum Sarum. In the fifteenth yeare of this Kings Raigne (by the instigation,ANNO 15. and with the assistance of Philip the French King) Robert, his eldest sonne, rebelled in Normandie:A Rebellion in Norman∣die which occasioned his father to goe thither with an Armie. But he was so stiffely encountred in the field, that by his sonne he was vnhorsed, and in great perill of his life. But he rescued him againe, reconciled himselfe, receiued pardon, and the King (with much losse) returned againe into England. And within few yeares after,ANNO 20. to be reuenged of manie iniuries and wrongs to him done by the said Philip, from Normandie,The Conque∣ror inuadeth France. hee carried a puissant Armie into France: where (with fortunate suc∣cesse, and with abundance of crueltie) he slew burnt, spoyled, and ransacked his People Townes, and Countrey. But so much was he trauelled in those affaires, and so extreamely did he heate himselfe
in those eager conflicts, that presently he fell sicke, and within few daies after he died,The Conque∣ror falleth sicke, and dieth. after he had much sorrowed and lamented for the Tyrannies which he had exercised on the English Nation: and at last he was buried at Cane in Normandie, in the Abbey of S. Ste∣phen, which himselfe had builded. But his Funerals were interrup∣ted by a Norman Gentleman:This dead dogge could not bite. who would not permit him to be in∣terred there, vntill a satisfactorie recompence was vnto him gi∣uen for that soyle, which the Conquerour had vniustly taken from him. Thus this victorious Conquerour, whose minde was not to be confined with one Kingdome whilest he liued, could (being dead) hardly obtaine a place to be buried in. He left behinde him one daughter, named Adela, and three sonnes: Robert, to whome he gaue his Duchie of Normandie: Wil∣liam, surnamed Rufus, because his complexion was verie redde; and Henrie: both which successiuely were Kings. The descrip∣tion of the Conqueror.He was of an indifferent stature, strongly composed in his limbs, and comely in his behauiour; sterne of countenance, and of an vn∣daunted spirit: resolute in all his actions; quicke in his Expedi∣tions; wise, discreet, and politike in the managing of his affaires and businesse. He banqueted, and hunted verie much; coueted all; oppressed such as he subdued (to keepe them low) and alwaies held his deerest friends in an awfull regard of his loue.
THE HISTORIE OF KING WILLIAM RƲFƲS. WHEN William the Conqueror died, Robert his eldest sonne (being in Germanie) accom∣modated himselfe (with great sufficiencie) to those affaires and businesses wherewith his father had entrusted him: so that, by means of his absence, the Conquerors last Will and Testament, the furtherance by Lanfrank, then Archbishop of Canterburie (who, by rea∣son of his great learning, and singular vertues, was verie deere and reuerend in the peoples eyes) and by manie costlie gifts, enlarged with vnaccustomed bountie,9. Septemb. 1087. William (his younger brother) was crowned King. But not long after, Duke Robert (repining, that his right, by force and injustice, should be made a prey to him that did vsurpe;ANNO 2. Duke Robert warreth in England. and purposing to regaine by his presence that which by his absence he had lost) came into England, guarded with a braue Armie of vncon∣quered Normans, and manie French, whome Philip their King had waged for his aide: But such was the Dukes milde and flexible dis∣position (though he were passing valorous, and bold) that he rather enclined himselfe to a peaceable composition,A composition betwixt the two brothers. which was gently craued by his brother, than (by the effusion of much bloud) to possesse himselfe of this Crowne: so that (in the end) being fairely
promised, That if he suruiued, he should succeede; and accepting the graunt of three thousand marks by the yeare, he tooke a friend∣lie leaue, and returned, well pleased, and safelie vnto his owne Duchie. The King oppresseth the English Na∣tion by Taxes and other cruelties.The King (by these meanes) more strongly fixing his foote in the possession of this Kingdome, and being better assured of his establishment than he was before, began forthwith to tread in his fathers steppes, and (with like oppressions and seueritie) to humble the haughtie courage of the English: and finding by the Rules of Policie, That Plentie puffeth vp, and that Penurie robbeth such as are hardie of the chiefest Requisites which might enable them to resist, imposed on them manie vnusuall Payments, and intolerable Taxes; which by his greedie ministers and sawcie officers were le∣uied with such despight and crueltie, that thereby they might well perceiue, that he meant nothing more than to cut the nerues and sinewes of their strength. An old Bishop made a young Earle.About the same time, Odo his vncle, being Bishop of Bayon, re∣paired into England; where (by reason of the Kings regardfull af∣fection towards him) he found such welcome and friendly enter∣tainment, that he was created Earle of Kent. The old Bishop, and young Earle, presuming too much on his Nephewes loue, and mounting his conceits aboue the height of a conuenient pitch, tooke vpon him more authoritie to rule, than ei∣ther a stranger, or a subject, in wisedome should affect: which alte∣red the pleasantnesse of the Kings countenance into frownes, and made him much lesse esteemed, than otherwise he would haue beene. The Kings vncle rebel∣leth.The Bishop (whose heart was haughtie, and whose minde aspi∣red to more than ordinarie greatnesse) so inwardly grudged, that the Line of Soueraigne Majestie should tye him short, that openly he did rebell; and in such sort (by the helpe of the English Nor∣mans) distempered the soundnesse of the Commonweales Peace with manie turbulent and dangerous mutinies, in sundrie places of the Land, that the King (contrarie to his naturall disposition, and contrarie to the former Rules of his Policie) was compelled to strengthen his owne part by the English Nation;The King through ne∣cessitie flat∣tereth the English. whome (with better vsage, fairer speeches, releasement of injurious Taxes, and great gifts) he made so firme and faithfull to him, that (by their assistance) he more than well hoped to preuaile. And such was his new courtesie and kindnesse to manie of the reuolted Lords, that (leauing the Bishop and his associates) they adhered firmely vnto the King.
These fractions and these disorders in the publike State begot new conceits in Malcolyne King of Scots:The Scots rebell. who on the suddaine rai∣ling a faire Armie of aduenturous men of warre, inuaded the Nor∣thren parts of this Kingdome. The newes whereof appalled not the King, but rather it inspired him with a spirit of such inuincible courage, that marching first against the Bishop and his complices,The Bishop is ouerthrowne. with an high hand he obtained a quicke victorie, and enforced the vnwise Bishop, his vncle, to abiure the Land. And forthwith (being mounted aloft, vpon the wings of Furie,ANNO. 3. The Scots ouerthrowne. and scorning to be checked by resistance) he rushed with such man∣like violence vpon the hardie Scots, that the greatest numbers of them were quickly slaine in the field; and Malcolyne was not onely compelled to acknowledge his subiection,The Scots subiection. by renewing of his for∣mer Oath, but willingly he became a Pentioner to the King. In the sixt yeare of his Raigne his prosperitie was interrupted by the obstinate Rebellion of Rees, the last King of the Welchmen:ANNO. 6. The Welch∣men rebell, and are sub∣dued. who so infested him with broken warres, that, for many moneths together, being vrged to fight with Mountaines (to which vpon all enforcements they fled) in stead of combating with men, he could finde no rest. But such was his resolution, his valour, and vndaun∣ted courage, to withstand the strongest push of all extremities, that in the end he slew their King, and (by a glorious victorie) he better secured the subjection of the Welchmen, than any of his predeces∣sors had done before. Not long afterwards,The Scots re∣bell againe. Malcolyne the King of Scots (being vnkind∣ly and disgracefully denied accesse to the English Court, where he intended a friendly conference vpon many matters of great weight and consequence) returned into Scotland; and being infected with a million of discontents, the disease of his passions published it selfe, with much danger, to the Northren parts: which he inuaded with a strong Armie; spoyling, robbing, burning, wounding, and killing (without controlment) in all places, as he listed: vntill he besieged a strong Castle; which for manie daies was valiantly de∣fended by Robert Mowbray, then Earle of Northumberland: who at length seeming to yeeld to the frowardnesse of his disasterous for∣tune, and comming out of his Castle gate well mounted, with the keyes thereof fastened vnto his launce,The King of Scots slaine. and making low obeysance to the King in token of his submission, and dashing his spurres into his horse, he ranne vpon the King, and with his launce (in stead of tendering him the keyes) he pierced out his eye, and slew him on the place: Which hauing done, he escaped, flying like the winde, leauing the dismayed Scots behinde him, to lament their irrecupe∣rable
losse, and with much sorrow to returne into Scotland with their breathlesse King. As on the Sea-shore one waue succeedes another: so in humane affaires there is no end of troubles. No sooner was this businesse concluded, but another did begin. For Robert Duke of Normandie (conceiuing himselfe to be much wronged, by a supposed breach of the Kings former promises) resolued to transport a faire Armie into England, for the regayning of his Right: but the King (pur∣posing rather to aduenture offensiue Warres abroad,A good Po∣licie. than with as∣sured losse to defend himselfe at home) gathered a strong power of able and willing men of warre, with which he sayled into Norman∣die.The French strengthen Robert Duke of Normandie against the King. But Philip of France so friendly backed the Duke in those em∣ployments, that the English forces found themselues too weake to doe him any harme. So this vnexpected resistance compelled the King to cast his plot into a new mould, and by sleight and policie to effect that, which by open violence he could not doe. Wherefore (not making himselfe ouer-much beholding to long deliberation) he sent many of his chiefest Commanders into England; who (with more than ordinarie diligence and speede) in short time waged a strong Armie of twentie thousand men: who (being readie to be embarked) were vnexpectedly greeted with this faire offer,A politike and a pleasing Taxe. That such of them as would seuerally giue tenne shillings to the King, towards his leuying of new forces in Normandie, should be dismis∣sed from that journey. This demaund (in regard of each particu∣lar giuer) was not great: but the entire value thereof, when it was collected, amounted to a good summe; because there were few, or none, who by this payment procured not their discharge. And the French King (being secretly corrupted with the gift of the grea∣ter part of this money) made present choise rather to shrinke from his kinde friend,Quid non Regina pe∣cunia? than to assist him at his neede: so that the good Duke (being left alone, and yet accompanied with the sensible ap∣prehension of his owne defects, and making a vertue of his necessi∣ties) contented himselfe to subscribe to the commaund of his ad∣uerse fortune.A composition For, making an enforced Peace with his brother, and pawning to him his Duchie of Normandie for tenne thousand pounds; himselfe in person, with other Christian Princes, waged warres in the Holy Land. The Welch∣men rebell.As soone as the King was returned into England, the Rebels in Wales summoned him to a new Warre; which he vndertooke with great celeritie and with much valour. But the craggie Mountaines, the steepie Hils, the thicke Woods, and the watrie Marishes (vnto which the Welchmen vsed continually to flye vpon euerie feare of
danger) so toyled and tyred the English forces, that the King (to encrease his strength, and to furnish himselfe with more fitting meanes to subdue those Rebels) was compelled, without honour, to returne. But those his new preparations were interrupted by another Rebellion in the North:The Earle of Northum∣berland re∣belleth. which was occasioned and conducted by Robert Mowbray, Earle of Northumberland; who madly expressed the malecontentednes of his disordered passions, because the King (as he conceiued) had not requited his seruice done vpon Malco∣lyne, the King of Scots, with any worthie or condigne reward.A couragious King. But such was the haughtie spirit and courage of the King, that those vnexpected troubles, which benummed the senses of the vulgar, did set an edge vpon his valour, making him to scorne feare, and to entertaine hope; and animating him, with a setled resolution, to dare fortune to doe her worst. For he no sooner saw his reuolted subjects of the North,The Rebels subdued. but he loaded them in such sort with blowes and wounds, that such as fled not he made a prey vnto death, or made them miserable examples to their friends; who might be∣moane them, but could not release them, of their losse of Eares, Eyes, Hands, Noses, or Feete. Thus did the King beate downe their pride, and tooke the Earle as hee fled, and sent him to the Castle of Windsour, where hee was committed to a strong Prison. Then did the King (with new strength) march againe into Wales:The King could not subdue the Welchmen in two Expedi∣tions. but his former mishaps were presidents to his later successe. For al∣beit that Furie made him more aduenturous than Reason gaue him warrant, in regard that his magnanimous spirit could not di∣gest the counter-checks of such a scattered Rabble: yet (when hee had weakened his strength, and impaired his Armie, by the losse of manie valiant men, vpon the vast and desolate Mountaines, which affoorded him nothing but Repentance) he was enforced (farre against his will) the second time to returne, leauing the Welch Rebels vncorrected; and therefore exceedingly emboldened in their sinne. Whose insolencies bred in the King such a strong reso∣lution to reuenge, that foure yeares after (when they suspected not any approaching danger) he sent against them the two Earles of Shrewsburie, and of Chester, with a strong Power:The Welch∣men sodainely inuaded are ouerthrowne who finding them rioting in the Isle of Anglesey, set vpon them, slew diuers, wounded more, suffered few to escape; and such as were taken prisoners, were eyther executed with manie Torments, or dismembred, with such Depriuements, as happened to the Rebells in the North.
ANNO 10.Now when the King (by the helpe of the English Nation) had obtained many memorable victories against the Scots, Welchmen, and the Northren Rebels;An vngrate∣full King. and (by their assistance) had in such sort established his affaires, that all feare of future perils was quite bani∣she; imitating the example of some vnthankfull Mariners: who (by the goodnesse of a sound Ship) hauing escaped the boisterous rage of an hideous Tempest, will leaue her in the Roade, subject to the furie of the windes, and to the violence of the waters: Hee not onely forgot his honourable atchieuements by their meanes, but vnthankefully he requited them, who had freed him from ma∣nie vnspeakable dangers. For, as in former times, so now againe he dis-heartened them,The English Nation is miserably op∣pressed. by manie intollerable exactions, new impos∣sitions, and mercilesse oppressions: turning their longings after Li∣bertie into a seruile Bondage; their expectations for Fauour, into Despaire; and their Plentie into such Pouertie: that though those Times gaue them leaue sorrowfully to bewayle their griefes; yet Hope administred to them no comfort for Reliefe. Yea, such was his impietie,Extreame couetousnesse in a King. and such was his couetous desire, by all vnjust meanes to enrich himselfe; that impiously he sold for money the greatest and the best Promotions, both in Church, and in Commonweale: and did prohibite Anselme, then Archbishop of Canterburie, to as∣semble any Conuocations, or Synods, for the well ordering of the Clergie, or for the correcting of such as did offend; without his leaue and licence: by meanes whereof, he secretly filled his coffers with much Treasure. The Archbi∣shop of Can∣terburie rob∣bed, & rifled.These indignities, and these irreligious practises, were sharpely reprehended by Anselme: yet found he no reformation of those monstrous abuses. Wherefore (being vnable anie longer to sup∣port so ponderous a burthen, both to his Conscience, and also to his Estate) he resolued to forsake the Realme, and appeale to Pope Vrban the third;Appeale to Rome. though by the King he was prohibited so to doe. But in the beginning of his journey, as he passed towards Douer; himselfe,The King likely to haue been excom∣municated. and all his followers (by the Kings vncharitable appoint∣ment) were euilly entreated, and robbed of their chiefest wealth. Yet went he forth, and at Rome complained to the Pope: who forthwith would haue excummunicated the King; had hee not formerly pronounced that Sentence against the Emperour Henrie the fourth (who was the first Christian Prince Soueraigne that e∣uer was excommunicated by anie Bishop of Rome:The Emperor Henry the fourth was the first ex∣communica∣ted Christian Prince.) and by his Clergie he was aduised to see the end and effect of that Sentence; and should not heate anie more yrons, before he saw how the for∣mer would be quenched.
Manie Letters and sundrie Messengers were sent vnto the King;Commaunds from Pope Vrban the third. admonishing him not to intermeddle anie more with the inuesting of Bishops; by giuing to them the Crosse, Ring, and Pastorall Staffe: nor with the Temporalties of anie Ecclesiasticall Promo∣tions, either when they were vacant, or otherwise. Nor should pro∣hibite the assembling of anie Conuocations or Synods, touching the Churches affaires and businesse: Nor should prohibite the execution of anie Canons; albeit they were not by Regall au∣thoritie confirmed. But the King little respected those Commaunds,The King re∣gards not the Popes com∣maunds. and stoutly answered, That, touching them all, hee would still doe as hee pleased; and would not loose so faire a flower belonging vnto his Crowne. But whilest these businesses were thus acted, the King was often∣times sharpely rebuked by Ralph, the Bishop of Chichester,The King is reproued, and is the worse. for those vnjust grieuances and wrongs which were offered to the Archbi∣shop, and his followers, at the time of their departure towards Rome. But, like as a man, the deeper he is wounded, the more im∣patient he is to be soundly searched: so the King (knowing his of∣fence to be impious and vngodly) refused to be admonished: and, in stead of reforming of those things which had been done amisse, he heaped many disgracefull wrongs vpon the good Bishop, and his Diocesse; within which (of his own wilfull obstinacie, and because hee would proclaime his will to be a Law) hee suspended many Churches, and conuerted their Reuenewes to his owne vse. But his later meditations better informing him than his former neglect, and vnaduised passions:The King repenteth. he not onely receiued the Bishop into his extraordinarie grace and fauour; but enriched him and his See with many honourable Priuiledges and Princely gifts: Yet af∣terwards he banished him out of his Kingdome. It happened, that (as he hunted in the New-Forest) he was in∣formed, that the Frenchmen had compassed the Citie of Constancia in Normandie with a Siege, which was both strong, and dangerous. Whereupon (leauing his Sports, his Nobles,Wonderfull courage, and all his Companie) with great expedition he posted towards the Sea: and, without any preparations fitting for such a journey, he leapt into a Barke; and commaunded the Mariners to weigh their anchor, and to hoyse their Sayles. But such was the furious violence of a boysterous storme, that (not daring to doe what they were commanded) they refused to obey: Whereat the King was much enraged, and did enforce them to yeeld to his resolued humor; affirming, That they had neuer heard, that a King was drowned by the distemper
of anie winde. And such was his fortunate Passage in a time so dan∣gerous, and so much were the Frenchmen daunted with the vnex∣pected newes of his suddaine landing:Fortunate successe. that instantly they aban∣doned the Siege; and by their quicke departure preuented the ha∣zard which they much doubted. ANNO 13.And within two yeares after his returne into England, and in the thirteenth yeare of his Raigne (as he hunted in the said New-Fo∣rest,The King slaine as he hunted. which his Father had made, and which himselfe had enlarged, by depopulating of sundrie Townes, Villages, and Farmes, and with the vtter ruine of manie Churches, Chappels, and Religious houses) he was slaine with an arrow: which being shot vnto a Deere, vnfortunately glanced vpon him, as, not long before, his Nephew Richard, and Sonne vnto Duke Robert of Normandie, had beene there slaine. And thus ended the troublesome, yet victorious, Raigne of King William, third sonne to the Conqueror: who being of a wanton dis∣position, neglecting marriage, and daily solacing himselfe among his whores and concubines, died without any lawfull issue of his bodie. He was of a comely stature; firmely compacted in his limbes; very strong, actiue, and healthie; exceeding le∣cherous, and couetous; of an high courage, and nobly valorous; constant in his resolutions; scorning Fortune, and all Troubles. Thus he li∣ued, and thus he died; getting much, and suddainely leauing all.
THE HISTORIE OF KING HENRIE THE FIRST. WHEN King William the second died; Robert,ANNO 1100. his eldest brother (fortunate in all his procee∣dings, sauing onely in his Suc∣cession to this Crowne) war∣red victoriously (as manie o∣ther Christian Princes did) in the Holie Land: where (in re∣gard of his honourable deedes and heroicall actions) he refu∣sed to be made King of Ieru∣salem. By meanes of his absence, a fit oportunitie was offered vnto Henrie, his youngest brother, to sit as King in his Throne: whereunto (without labour, or difficultie) he ascended, through the fauourable affection of the Nobles and common People: whose hearts were the more firmely engaged to his seruice, because he was borne in England after his father was crowned King: and also, because his singular Wisdome, rare Lear∣ning, milde Disposition, and princely Vertues, were plaine and ap∣parant demonstrations, that his Gouernment would be accompa∣nied with honorable Atchieuements; gracefull, safe, and profitable both to the Church, and also to the Common-weale. No sooner was he crowned, and proclaimed King, but Wisdome
did informe him,A true vse of Riches. That it was expedient, that his Estate should strongly be supported against the hazards of future Time, and his  brothers Title. Wherefore (hauing seized vpon the plentifull heapes of the last kings Treasure) he dispersed them frankly into the hands of such,Good policies worthie of a noble King, and to be no∣ted. as vpon all occasions, and in all dangers, were able to affoord him their best counsell, and the best reliefe. Then hee dignified such as were great, with the greatest Offices; and with  ample Titles of much Honour: And mitigated the rigour of the  former new Lawes; and promised restitution of the old. His care  was great, that in Weights and in Measures there might be no de∣fect:  but that all, in all places, should be fewred by such Standards  as he had made. He also acquited the People from the Taxe of Dane-gelt; and from all other vnjust payments and demaunds im∣posed  vpon them by the two former kings. He gaue free libertie to the Nobles and Gentlemen of this Realme (for their pleasure,Flatterers banished the Court. and better recreation) to inclose Parkes for Deere, and free Warrens for their Conies, and such like Game. And as Traitors to his Vertues,  State, and kingly Gouernment, he exiled and banished from his  Court and Presence all base Flatterers; Nicenesse in Behauiour,  Luxuriousnesse in Conuersation; Sumptuousnesse in Apparell;  and Superfluitie in Dyet. He ordained punishments by death for all such as violently spoyled or robbed in the High wayes. With  indefatigable trauell and paine hee corrected and reformed the monstrous Pride, intolerable Couetousnesse, and secure Negligence  and Slouth of the Clergie. He recalled from Banishment Anselme, and restored him to his Archbishopricke of Canterburie: and gaue him full power to assemble Conuocations and Synods at his plea∣sure,The King leaueth the inuesture of Bishops to the Pope. for the amendment of such things as were vnsufferable in the Church. He left vnto the Pope his power and authoritie to inuest Bishops, by giuing to them the Ring, the Crosse, and the Pastorall Staffe. All such Ecclesiasticall Promotions and Dignities, as, by  the lewd aduice and counsell of Reynulph, Bishop of Durham, his  brother had seized into his owne hands, and conuerted to his owne vse; he voluntarily and freely conferred vpon Honest, Graue, Lear∣ned,  and Worthie Men: and committed the said Bishop a priso∣ner to the Tower of London;R bert Duke of Normandy inuadeth England. from whence he afterwards escaped, and eagerly incited Robert, Duke of Normandie, by the Sword to lay his clayme to this kingdome. Who thereupon (to maintaine his demaund in that behalfe) raysed a strong Armie; which he in∣tended, with all conuenient expedition, to transport into this Realme. But as king Henrie, by those precedent prouisions, had endeared himselfe in the Peoples loue: so had he the more con∣firmed
it, by taking to wife Mawlde, the sister of Edgar,King Hen∣ries title made stron∣ger by his marriage. King of Scots, and daughter vnto Malcolyne, by Margaret his wife, sister to Edgar Adelinge (who died without issue) and daughter to King Edward, the sonne of Edmund Iron-side, the victorious and valiant King of the Saxons. When Duke Robert, with his Armie, was arriued in England, the noyse of Trumpets, the sound of Drummes, and the swar∣ming multitudes of well-approued Souldiors, fit for the Warre, affoorded none other thing but a fearefull expectation of much trouble. But as a threatening lowring Cloud is sometimes disper∣sed by a fae shining Sunne: so these approaching conflicts (by the discreete mediation and counsell of worthie friends) were suddenly preuented; and a friendly peace,A peace con∣cluded be∣twixt the two brethren. betwixt the two bro∣thers, was louingly concluded, vpon such like conditions, as for∣merly had beene agreed on in William Rufus his daies: whereat the Norman Lords were much displeased, and returned discontented with their Lord. But such were the malignant spirits of the Enuious;The King in∣uadeth, and preuaileth in Normandie. or such was the greedie disposition of those who were Couetous; or so ea∣ger was the Kings appetite to enlarge his Dominion: that manie great quarrels, for small and trifling causes, began vpon the sud∣daine to present themselues vnto those two brethren. Insomuch, that King Henrie passed with a sufficient and a well-ordered Armie into Normandie: where he was assisted by manie of the Dukes dis∣contented Nobles. By meanes whereof,The Duke is forsaken by his Nobles and Gentrie. the King (in sundrie skir∣mishes and conflicts) so preuailed, that with little danger, and small resistance, hee chased the forsaken Duke from place to place; and wonne from him the Cities of Roan, Cane, Valoys, and manie others: and then hee returned into England with much honour. The Duke perceiuing that his Lords and Gentrie refused to giue him anie helpe; and that the Kings Estate, Strength, and Ri∣ches so encreased, that no hope of recouerie (by striuing and by strugling) was left vnto him, submitted himselfe to his two Ene∣mies, Time and Fortune, (the scornefull deluders of such as re∣pose their confidence vpon them) and came secretly and priuat∣ly into England; presented himselfe to the King his brother; and referred to his owne censure and will, both himselfe, his Duchie, and all Debates and Controuersies whatsoeuer. But the King (eyther because hee knew that the Duke was too vnconstant;The Dukes submission is scornefully despised. or for that some secret whisperers had prepared him to prejudicate his brothers Truth, and honest Meaning)
with an estranged countenance, and a disdainefull eye, departed vnkindly from the distressed and perplexed Duke; coyly refusing to accept of his submission, which in all humilitie by him was pro∣fered.The Duke returneth, and the King followeth. The Duke (being pierced to the heart, that his misfortunes should so much wrong him) returned with all expedition into his owne Countrey; resoluing, That in the open Field he would ra∣ther die as a valiant man, than thus be trampled on by Dishonour and by Disgrace. And the king (conjecturing rightly what he pre∣tended) followed him with many thousands of men: and so often he encountred the weake Duke with his great strength,The Duke is taken, and his eyes are put out. that within few dayes he tooke him, and brought him as a prisoner into Eng∣land: where (because he hearkened to Natures enticement; which persuaded him to seeke his libertie, and to practise his escape) both his eyes (by the kings commaundement) were plucked out. After which time he liued as a miserable and as a wretched captiue more than the space of twentie yeares. At length, being dead, in Glocester he was buried. A Rebellion by the Earles of Shrewsbu∣rie and of Mortaigne.About the same time Robert Belasme, Earle of Shrewsburie, tray∣terously did rebell: but wanting Wealth, Wit, Courage, and Strength (the foure Champions of the strongest Field) he was en∣forced to flye into Normandie. Where finding William, Earle of Mortaigne and of Cornwall, much displeased with the king, for that (as he surmised) he kept from him vnjustly the Earledome of Kent; he so much insinuated himselfe into his loue and coun∣sels, that easily he persuaded him to rebell. So both of them joy∣ning both their forces together, they made a goodly shew, as if they would work wonders.They are ta∣ken, and im∣prisoned. But small opposition enforced them to take a plaine view of their rash errors; and (leauing that which they had) to make hard shifts for the safegard of themselues. Wherein their ill successe was a just reward for their foule offence: for by the kings Power they were taken, and by him held as prisoners whilest they liued. New troubles betwixt the King and the Archbishop of Canterbu∣rie about the Temporalties of the Clergie and inuesture of Bishops.The king hauing now cast anchor, as he was resolued, in a safe harborow; and nothing fearing the blasts of any Fortune which might attempt to shake his settlement in this kingdome: and fin∣ding that manie inconueniences did daily presse him with much dishonor and disgrace; because he intermedled not with the Tem∣poralties of Bishoprickes when they were vacant; nor with the in∣uesture of Bishops, as his Ancestors had done: and being infor∣med, That those things were inseparable incidents vnto his Crowne; and that his neglect to vse them depriued him not of
his Right vnto them; resolued, That he would not any longer forbeare to chalenge, and to put in practise, those things which so justly did belong vnto him. Whereat Anselme, the Archbi∣shop of Canterburie, was much displeased; and did vtterly refuse to consecrate such new Bishops, as had receiued their Inuestures from the king. But Gerald, then Archbishop of Yorke, cheerefully performed that Ceremonie, vpon the kings commaund. This new quarrell transported Anselme the second time from England vnto Rome:Anselme go∣eth to Rome the second time, & com∣plaineth to Pope Pascal the second. The Archbi∣shop preuai∣leth. where he complayned to Pope Paschal the second of those, and of manie other, wrongs: all which were controuerted, and debated with the strongest oppositions on ei∣ther partie. But two yeares after, Anselme (with the licence and fauour of the king) returned: and in a Synod of the Clergie, hol∣den by him in London, by the Popes authoritie, it was enacted, That from thenceforth no Temporall man should giue Inuesture to any Bishop by the Crosse and Ring. Within three yeares after, Anselme died: and the Temporal∣ties of that Dignitie being seized into the kings hands,The King en∣treth vpon the Tempo∣ralties of the Archbishop of Canterbu∣rie. were (for the space of fiue yeares) taken, receiued, and conuerted to the kings vse. And if at anie time (as hee was often) hee were en∣treated by the Bishops to conferre that See vpon some other; his answere was, That he onely kept it for a sufficient and a wor∣thie man. In the yeare of our Lord one thousand one hundred and eight, hee erected the Bishopricke of Ely,The Bishop∣rick of Ely founded in Anno 1108. and endowed it with large and honourable Possessions: which wonne him much fa∣uour with the Pope, and procured him the loue of his owne Clergie. Thus, when the King (for a few yeares) had enjoyed the be∣nefite of an happie Peace,Normandie inuaded. and held all Normandie subject to his owne commaund; his tranquilitie and his pleasure were enuied by Lewis le Grosse, then king of France: who first of all procured Fulke, Earle of Angeou (vpon a weake pretence) to seize vpon the Countrey of Mayne; and then animated Baldwyne, Earle of Flan∣ders, to declare against the king in Armes, for the with-holding of a yearely pension of three hundred markes; which the Conque∣rour gaue onely vnto Baldwyne, the fifth Earle of Flanders, during his life. But the same had afterwards beene payd to his Sonne, and Nephew, by the courtesie of the succeeding kings; because the Conquerour had beene well assisted in his Warres with Eng∣land by the said Baldwyne the fifth. All these made strong pre∣parations to inuade the Kings Duchie of Normandie: But the
newes thereof rowsed the King from his bed of ease;The King sayleth into Normandie, & preuaileth filled him full with Princely resolutions; occasioned him to passe the Sea with an Armie of rough and tough Nobles, Gentrie, and com∣mon Souldiors. And shortly after his landing (loosing no time) he set vpon the Earle of Angeou and his associates: And after he had beaten him soundly on euerie side, he enforced him to saue himselfe by a shamefull flight. Another victorie.And neere vnto the Towne of Nice (which was surprized and holden by the King of France) King Henrie encountred the other two. This Battaile was made famous by the continuance of nine houres; and was on all parts fought with such eager and man∣like resolution, that albeit the King of England wonne the Field, and had the long chase of his flying enemies; yet he boldly and truly would confesse, that hee then fought not for victorie, but for his life. A peace is concluded.At length, when the heat of Anger was well quenched, and when manie lay cold on the floore of death, who in their life times had blowne the coales of contention betweene those foure Prin∣ces;A Mariage. they all were reconciled vnto peace: and the King married to his eldest sonne William the daughter of the said Fulke. But in their journey towards England, the said young Princes, Richard, and Marie Countesse of Perch, two others of the Kings children; his Neece Lucie,A great mis∣fortune. with her husband the Earle of Chesier; and more than an hundred and fourescore others, were vnfortunately drow∣ned by the carelesse folly of the drunken Mariners.Drunkennes. This vnexpected newes (being accompanied with manie milli∣ons of sorrowes, and of dolefull passions) much grieued the King: but made him not heartlesse, as most Princes would haue beene in the like case.The Kings admirable patience. For Wisdome had sufficiently instructed him, with patience to sustaine and beare those burthens, which could not by any meanes be shaken off. And likewise, the King was at that time affoorded but little leisure to fixe his cogitations on those mishaps, because the obstinate Rebellion of the Welchmen drew him vnwillingly into a new Warre. For when he saw and per∣ceiued, that though he were a King, yet vrgent necessitie com∣maunded him to Armes; and that Iustice did require him (by the Sword) to judge and to execute those lewd and gracelesse Malefactors:The Welch∣men rebell, and are sub∣dued. hee marched with a strong Power into Wales; when the Rebels (trusting ouer-much to their owne valour; which little, or nothing at all, helpeth in Treasonable Plots and Imployments) resolued to abide the vtmost push of their for∣tune:
which yeelded to the King a speedie and a successefull end of those Warres. For (with little danger, and as small a losse) he gaue them the ouerthrow, and permitted the wastfull deuou∣ring swords of his associates to surfet vpon the carkasses of those Rebels; whome neither gentle vsage, nor former executions of that nature, could persuade to performe those duties which good subjects doe owe vnto their Prince. Then returned the King, loaden with much honour,Maulde the kings daugh∣ter married to the Empe∣rour Henrie the fifth. and was joyfully receiued by all his people; especially by Mauld his daugh∣ter: whome he forthwith sent to be married vnto the Emperour Henrie the fifth, her affied husband, with a princely portion of Sil∣uer and of Gold; which (in the nature of a Taxe) was leuied vpon the common people of their Land; which he tooke for an ayde towards her marriage. And the same custome,Aid purfie marrier. for the marriage of the eldest daughter of the Kings of this Realme, hath beene and is continued vnto this day. At the same time he deuised and ordered the manner and fashi∣on of a Court in Parliament;Anno 1114. The High Court of Par∣liament ft established at Salisburie in April. appointing it to consist of the three Estates, of which himselfe was the Head: So that his Lawes, being made by the consents of all, were not disliked of anie. It chaunced, that about fiue yeares after the death of Anselme, Ralph, Bishop of Rochester,The King inuesteth the Archbishop of Canterburie. was by the King appointed to succeede him; and (notwithstanding all former Counsels, Decrees, Com∣maundements, Letters, and Threatenings from the Pope) he re∣ceiued his Inuesture from the King. Then died the Archbishop of Yorke: To which See Thurston, the kings Chapleine, should haue beene preferred.Pride. But Pride hauing a more large rule and do∣minion in him, than Lowlinesse and Humilitie; hee refused to sweare obedience to the See of Canterburie; which his predecessors had both sworne and performed. And because the king (disliking his obstinacie) would not inuest him; he appealed, and went to Rome: where (by the fauor of some Cardinals,Thurston in∣uested by the Pope. The King is highly dis∣pleased. Thurston pre∣uaileth, and the King yeeldeth. who had the Popes Censure at their commaund) he so preuailed, that the Pope not onely freed him of his said obedience and subjection▪ but also in∣uested him, and gaue him the Pale: whereat the king was extra∣ordinarily displeased, and prohibited his returne. But in the end (the Popes threatenings menacing nothing but Curses, Suspensi∣ons, Excommunications, and such like) he was permitted to re∣turne, and to enjoy the dignitie of his Place. In the seuen and twentieth yeare of his Raigne died the Empe∣rour Henrie the fifth, not hauing anie issue by Maulde the Kings
daughter and heire. At which time shee being aged about foure and twentie yeares,Mauld the Empresse married to Geoffrey Plantagenet. and being much sued vnto by most of the grea∣test Princes of the Christian World; the king (to strengthen his Realme against the kings of France) married her to Geoffrey Planta∣genet, the sonne and heire apparant of Fulke, then Earle of Angeou. By whome she had issue three sonnes: Henrie, who was (after Ste∣phen) king;Her issue. Geoffrey, and William. This faire off-spring enriched the king with the truest endow∣ment of good content; for that (as he conceiued) he saw in them the setled continuance of his Line in the Crowne of this Realme.An oath to maintaine the succession of the Crowne in the Kings Line. And (to make it the more sure) within the space of fiue yeares hee tooke three solemne Oathes of his Nobilitie and greatest Officers of his kingdome, That with their best aduice, and with the hazard of their goods, lands, liues, and fortune, they should support and maintaine the succession of his daughter, and of her heires. The King surfeteth and dieth.Finally, when he had raigned more than fiue and thirtie yeares, he surfetted on a Lamprey; of which he languished a few dayes, and died; and was honourably buried in the Abbey of Reading, which himselfe had founded. This king was Wise, Learned, Milde, Valiant, and Iust, beyond most of his Predecessors; more enclined to Peace than vnto Warre: so that hee made Warre his Champion stoutly to chalenge his Rights, and to reuenge his Wrongs. He neuer leuied but two Tax∣es vpon his People: the first was, to maintaine his Warres against the king of France: and the second was, to preferre his daughter in marriage with the Emperour. He waxed rich with his owne, and yet he was very liberall: but he onely extended his bountie to such as merited it by their publike Seruice; and hee confined his Gifts within the Limits of Thrift and of Measure. He established Lawes, which were profitable to such as were vertuous; but sharpe vnto malefactors who did transgresse: against whome he caused them to be put in execution with more Seueritie than Mercie: he being persuaded, that Pitie extended to such as were wicked, hardened them in their sinne, and too much encouraged such, as nothing but correction could either terrifie or reforme. To his friends he was a sure Pillar, whereunto in all necessities they might boldly leane: and to his enemies he was rough and stiffe, vntill time presented oc∣casion of more loue; and then he was verie flexible, and easie to be reconciled. And, as he would neuer forget good seruice done, nor anie good turnes performed for him: so would he seldome, or ne∣uer, take rest, vntill by some worthie gift, or correspondent requi∣tall, he had shewed himselfe thankfull to such as deserued well. He
was too lasciuious in his course of life; vsing manie concubines: by whome he had twelue knowne bastards. He erected the two Bi∣shoprickes of Ely, and of Carelyle; and founded the Monasteries of Circester, Reading, and Shyrborne; with the Priorie of Dunstable, and some others: all which he beautified with manie Priuiledges and Possessions, answerable to their Dignities and Charge. Yet did he not retaine the chiefest roome in the Clergies loue: because that (after the death of Anselme) hee rejected the Popes Decrees, to which he had formerly subjected himselfe: and inue∣sted Bishops; receiued Homage of Prelates; seized their Tempo∣raltie hen their Sees were vacant; gaue no allowance to any Ca∣nons of the Church, except they were ratified and confirmed by the King; compounded with Priests for annuall pensions, to keepe their wiues, or to take them (though vnto them the holy estate of Matrimonie was forbidden:) which pensions he enforced them to pay, whether they had wiues or no. Thus (in this King) ended the issues males of the Conquerour: and the Crowne of this Realme was deuolued to his generall Heires.
THE HISTORIE OF KING STE∣PHEN. THe experience of all Ages hath made sufficient proofe,Stephen v∣surpeth. that the eager ap∣petite which most Men haue to gaine Wealth and Riches, hath made them carelesse to performe those common Duties, which doe belong to Honestie and to Right. But if a Kingdome may be obtai∣ned (though with the breach of a most solemne Oath) no scruple is then made. For the desire of Soue∣raignetie, and to enjoy a Crowne, makes men play fast and loose, and to hazard the losse of their Soules, by the wilfull periurious violating of their Faith. This proued too true at this time: For albeit that Stephen Earle of Boloigne, the sonne and heire apparant of Stephen Earle of Bloys, and of Adela the Conquerours Daughter, was one of the chiefest,The former Oath is for∣gotten. whome king Henrie the first had obliged by manie solemne and publicke Oathes, to further the succession of Mauld the Empresse, being his Daughter; and of her children: yet (when the king was dead) hee finding, that all the Nobles (though sworne as himselfe was) applyed themselues to wait vpon his pleasure: he either vtterly forgot, or (at least) he cared not for the vowes of former times;  but caused himselfe to be crowned king.
And so well was hee instructed by the former examples of his Progenitors; that, as they did, so did hee endeuour (by Wis∣dome, and by Policie) to lay a sure Foundation to his Estate. And because Riches are the Synewes and the Strength of the  strongest Kings;Good policie. hee therefore (to enrich himselfe) seized vpon the Treasure of his vncle,The Kings liberalitie. the last deceased King: Which hee closed not vp in Chests, or in Bagges, as idle Archers doe their  Arrowes in their Quiuers, when (for their honest recreation) they should shoote: but with a large and an open hand hee bountifully disposed of them among such, as eyther by Armes, or by Counsell, were best likely to stand him in the greatest stead.  He also created sundrie Noblemen: and dignified manie others with the honourable Title of Knighthood; whose loue by those meanes he procured. And (because benefits receiued doe more please the vulgar and common sort of People, than Right or  Reason can doe) he therefore released vnto them the Dane-gelt, and all other extraordinarie Burthens and Exactions whatsoeuer: causing a large Charter thereof, and of the mitigation of the  Seueritie and Penalties of sundrie Lawes, to be made; and bound himselfe by a solemne Oath to keepe and to obserue the same.  He also renounced the future Seisures of all Ecclesiasticall Dig∣nities and Promotions,Priuiledges graunted to the Clergie. when they should become vacant. Hee gaue to the Church and Church-men such gracefull and profi∣table  Priuiledges and Immunities as they would demaund. And (among other things) he freely exempted them from the autho∣ritie of the Temporall Magistrate, for all offences whatsoeuer; except the Ordinarie should bee pleased, that hee should deale  therewith. Finally, he endeuoured to doe all things justly, and pleasing vnto all.Castles and Fortresses erected. To preuent suddaine Eruptions, Rebellions, and Incursions, tending to the generall disturbance of the com∣mon Peace; by hauing manie strong and fortified places for good  defence: himselfe erected manie Forts, Fortresses, Bulwarkes, and Castles; and licenced his Nobles, and his Gentrie, and Cler∣gie,  to doe the like. He gaue vnto Dauid the King of Scots, and vncle to Mauld the Empresse (because hee should not second her in her demaunds,The Scots flattered by the King. or warlike attempts) the whole Prouince of Cumberland; and created his eldest sonne Henrie Earle of Hun∣tingdon. Yet notwithstanding, not long after (in her quarrell) hee entred into the Northren parts of this Kingdome;The King of Scots ouer∣throwne by the Archbi∣shop of Yorke. which hee tormented with fire and sword. But in the end he was en∣countred by Thurston, then Archbishop of Yorke; who compelled him (being pursued with vnspeakable dangers) to flye into Scot∣land;
and to leaue behinde him, dead vpon the ground, more than tenne thousand men of his Armie. In the sixt yeare of his Raigne, Mauld the Empresse,Mauld the Empresse landeth in England. being accompanied with her base brother, Robert, Earle of Glocester, landed with an armie in England; and was quickly strengthened and emboldened in her Enterprise by the plentifull accesse of manie of the English, and of Raynulph Earle of Chester, with a lu∣stie crew of bold and forward Welchmen. Hereupon the King (imposing no confidence in delay; but Experience instructing him, that aduised Expedition is the chiefest enabler of good successe) leuied a strong armie; and marched with good reso∣lution against the Empresse, and her Forces: who greeted him with such Musicke as her warlike Troupes did gallantly present. So that a cruell and a bloudie Battaile (with equall hopes) for manie houres was fought betweene them. But at length,King Stephen ouerthrowne. the Kings common Souldiors (striuing faintly, and, as cowards, ra∣ther endeuouring to saue themselues by flight, than manfully to defend their King) did basely leaue the King: who, with his Nobles and Gentrie, scorning to turne their backes, maintained their part, with as much courage as manhood could affoord;King Stephen taken priso∣ner. till (in the end) the King was taken, and committed to the Castle of Bristoll: where hee remayned a prisoner about the space of three moneths; and was at the last deliuered,King Stephen is set at liber∣tie. to free the Earle of Glocester, who had beene taken, and was imprisoned by the Queene. After this victorie thus obtained, the Empresse (with manie honourable Triumphs and Solemnities) was receiued into the Cities of Circester, Oxford, Winchester, and London.The Londo∣ners attempt to surprize the Empresse But the Lon∣doners desiring the Restitution of King Edwards Lawes, and not obtaining their request) consulted to surprize the Empresse, and to deliuer her vnto the King. By meanes whereof, good coun∣sell aduised her to flye: which suddainely she did; and came vn∣to Oxford: Where (within few dayes, and vnexpectedly) shee was enuironed with a strong Siege: So that despaire of good successe dis-heartening her,The Empresse besieged in Oxford. and teaching her a readie meanes for her escape; taking the benefit of the Snow (which at that time lay thicke vpon the ground) she, with her chiefest compli∣ces, apparrelling themselues in white linnen, secretly issued forth;A politike flight. and posting with all speede towards the Sea, they embarked them∣selues, and sayled into Normandie. Manie yeares together, after these turmoyles, this Realme en∣joyed a blessed Peace: And in the seuenteenth yeare of this Kings
Raigne died the most valorous and hardie knight Raynulph Earle of Chester:Henry Short-Mantel heire apparant to the Empresse. and so did Geoffrey Plantagenet, husband to the Em∣presse. And Henrie, surnamed Short-Mantle, her eldest sonne, tooke to wife Elianor, the daughter and heire of the Earle of Poy∣tou: which Elianor not long before (for neerenesse in bloud, and after she had borne him two daughters) was diuorced from Lewis the seuenth, then King of France. So that Prince Henrie was now Duke of Normandie, in the right of his Mother; Earle of Angeou by descent from his Father; and Earle of Poytou in the right of his wife: by whome (not long after) he also had the Earledome of Tholouse. This worthie Prince (by manie of his friends and valiant men of Warre, who longed to haue employment in so faire a jour∣ney) was incited to leuie a strong armie, and to transport them into England; and by their helpe, and the assistance of other wel-willers, to attempt the recouerie of his Right: and the rather, for that king Stephen, and Eustace his onely sonne, did now begin to warre vpon manie of those, who held their Castles for the Prince his vse. His strong Expectation, and hope to be enthro∣ned in this Kingdome, through the fauour of diuers Lords and Commons of this Realme; easily persuaded him to lend a li∣stening eare to their whisperings: So that to giue vnto them good content, and to forward the attayning of his owne de∣sires,Henry Short-Mantel in∣uadeth Eng∣land. hee raysed a strong power of willing and able men of Warre. Which (beeing brauely conducted by noble Cap∣taines, well skilled in those Affaires) arriued safely in Eng∣land: where King Stephen and his sonne disdained to be idle; for they had prouided with an equall strength to encounter him. Both armies had daily newes the one from the other: they threatned much, did somewhat, but it was but little: Yet in those Expeditions, Eustace the kings sonne by misaduenture was vnfor∣tunately drowned;Prince Eu∣stace drowned which ouercame the king with infinite passi∣ons of sorrow and extreame griefe. But it made a quiet end of this quarrell. For now, the king (not hauing anie sonne which might succeed him) was well pleased to lend a listening eare to the faire proffer of a friendly Peace.The quarrell is compun∣ded & ended. And thereupon hee adop∣ted Prince Henrie for his Sonne; proclaymed him to bee the Heire apparant of his Crowne; gaue him manie honourable and kingly Gifts; assured him of his vnchangeable loue and friendship. And by these meanes all Armes were cast aside, and Peace
triumphed; hauing gotten a certaine and a sure Victorie with few blowes. And the Prince, with his followers, returned into Normandie: where they were with much honour and incredible joy receiued. And the next yeare after, king Stephen died,King Stephen dieth. The Saxons bloud restored to the Crowne of England. See the des∣cent in the Raigne of King Henrie the first. when hee had raigned almost nineteene yeares; and lyeth buried in the Ab∣bey of Feuersham in Kent, which himselfe had founded. And by the happie Succession of this Hen∣rie, the Saxon Bloud was againe re∣stored vnto the Imperiall Crowne of this Realme.
THE HISTORIE OF KING HENRIE THE SECOND. WHEN Henrie was returned in∣to Normandie; the French King (fearing least Time, and his Fortunes, would make him too puissant and too great for his bordering Neighbours; and intending to deale roughly with him, before he should be the ab∣solute Master and Comman∣der of his owne strength) very iniuriously seized vpon diuers of his Fortresses and Castles in Normandie, and elsewhere, which (questionlesse) ought to haue beene subiect to his Gouernment. But Henrie (being wise,Henry Short-Mantels va∣lour and cou∣rage. and full of courage and heroicall Magnimitie; and foreseeing, that if hee should shrinke as a coward, and not make himselfe knowne by his valour to the world, when the wrongs which were done vnto him were too apparant) raysed a faire Armie: and (for the regayning of one of those his Castles) he girded it round about with a strong Siege. And whilest he was thus em∣ployed to winne his right,He sayleth speedily into England: but first winneth the Castle which he had besieged. the newes of King Stephens death came freshly vnto his eares. And (to preuent such vsurpation, as oftentimes, in the absence of the lawfull Kings, depriueth them of their Crownes) he was by his neerest and dearest friends ad∣uised to abandon the Siege; and, without tarrying, to transport
himselfe into England. But his answere was full of discretion and true valour to this effect:A resolute speech. The Kingdome of England (quoth hee) shall henceforth be at my commaund, in despight of those who dare to crosse mee most: And so shall these intruding Frenchmen ere I goe hence. This Resolution redoubled his honour among his friends; and so it did among his enemies. For when the besieged were informed what he had said and determined (fearing the euent, if obstinately they should detaine him there too long) they sur∣rendred the Castle, and submitted themselues to his mercie: who receiued it and them with a fauourable and gracious ac∣ceptance. And then giuing such directions as both the time and occasions did require, and being accompanied with manie Lords and Gentlemen of the best and chiefest ranke; he sayled with a prosperous winde into England: where (not long after) hee was crowned King. The singular zeale and loue which he bare to the furtherance of Iustice, and to the execution thereof, appeared manifestly by two Actions of his,The King re∣formeth the Lawes. performed: the one in the beginning; and the other, towards the later end of his Raigne. For first hee made an especiall choise of certaine men, who were verie honest, vpright, and best learned in the Lawes of this Realme: by whose industrious labours and trauailes hee refined and refor∣med the common Lawes; making them to be more tolerable and profitable vnto his People.England di∣uided into Circuits: into which Iudges were sent, to ease the peo∣ple. And towards the end of his dayes hee diuided his whole Kingdome into six seuerall Cir∣cuits; and (for the administration of Iustice, and for the tryals of Causes betwixt men and men, for the better ease and com∣fort of his Subiects) hee appointed certaine Iudges twice in e∣uerie yeare to ride, and to trauaile through those Circuits: which course and order is carefully continued at this day. Strangers banished: and the cause whyHee also banished the greatest part of Strangers, who (in those dayes) by multitudes flocked hither; and by their ex∣traordinarie Sparing, and painefull Industrie, procured to them∣selues much Wealth, and beggered such as were Natiues borne. Oath-brea∣kers banished.Hee also exiled manie of the Nobles, who contrarie to their publike Oathes, Duties, and Consciences, had more than or∣dinarily adhered vnto King Stephen: beeing fully resolued, That the Cogitations of their owne Guiltinesse, in that be∣halfe, would neuer suffer them to be heartie and faithfull vnto him.
Hee differed much from the opinion of his last predecessor;Castles poli∣tikely razed, and ouer∣throwne. and affirmed, That strong Forts and Castles, erected and main∣tained in the Heart or Bodie of a Kingdome, did rather animate great men, vpon all displeasures, to reuolt, than in anie sort con∣taine them within the bounds and limits of their Obedience, and of their Dutie: wherefore he caused them to be rased (for the grea∣ter number) to the ground. Hee also seized into his owne hands such Territories, Manors,He seizeth on Crowne∣ands former∣ly giuen away Lordships, and Possessions, as his Predecessors had eyther gi∣uen, or sold, from the Crowne: holding it to be the dutie of euerie Subiect, to refuse the Gift or Purchase of such things, as doe so immediately concerne the Honour and Maintenance of the King.Nota. And the like he did in the Northren Parts; where many great Men, commaunding almost as they listed, had wrought them∣selues and their Posterities into manie Honors, Castles, and Ma∣nors (without title) which in truth and in deed appertained to the King. Hee also resumed into his owne hands the Prouinces of Cum∣berland, and of Northumberland, together with the Earledome of Huntingdon; which Dauid the King of Scots, and Henrie his sonne, had receiued as a gift from King Stephen, because they should not intermeddie in the furtherance of his mother Mauld the Empresse to her Right and Crowne. In the thirteenth yeare of his Raigne,Geoffrey the Kings yonger sonne is Duke of Britaine. he married Geoffrey (be∣ing one of his younger sonnes) vnto Constance, the daughter and heire apparant of Conaccus Duke of Britaine: who died not long af∣ter, and left vnto them that Duchie. He also affied his younger sonne Richard vnto Adela, one of the daughters of Lewis the King of France: and married his daughter Mauld vnto Henrie Duke of Saxonie.Mauld the Empresse di∣eth. And about the same time the Empresse his mother died. Hee loued Peace (though he were passing valiant) because hee found it to be pleasing and profitable:Peace prefer∣red before Warre. yet he willingly entred at all times into the Lists of Warre, when necessitie or good reason persuaded him to arme. When his estate was most quiet,The King exercised his souldiors in warlike nego∣tiations in the time of grea∣test peace. and freest from Warres a∣broad, or ciuill disturbances at home; hee would now and then, vpon the suddaine, raise an Armie, and transport them either into Normandie, or into Britaine, Angeou, or other places subiect to the Dominion of himselfe, or of his sonnes. And himselfe in per∣son vsed to goe with them. And in those places he exercised them
in fortifications, trainings, and lyings in the field, and with other Martiall discipline. By meanes whereof he setled those Countries in peace, and with good Gouernment made warlike businesses fa∣miliar to his Souldiers; and then returned without blowes into England.The commo∣ditie of his so doing. By these meanes, when troubles hapned, he little feared: because his men were aptly inured to those things, which most properly belong vnto the warres. 1174. Henry the se∣cond Conque∣reth Ireland.In the nineteenth yeare of his Raigne (because the Irish Nati∣on attempted to depriue him of certaine Territories in that Iland, which were left vnto him by his predecessors) hee sailed thither with a mightie Armie, and fought many victorious battailes, a∣gainst fiue Kings which at that time raigned there. All which he subdued, and made subiect vnto himselfe: and became the sole Lord of all that Countrie; and annexed that Title vnto the Title of his Crowne,The Kings sonne twice Crowned King in his fathers dayes. and returned honourably into England. Such was the surpassing loue of this worthie King to his eldest sonne Henrie, That he caused him, and his wife Margaret the daughter of the French King, to be twice solemnly Crowned in the presence of his people: (himselfe the second time, for that day, leauing the Title of a King, and seruing as a Sewer at his sonnes table) whereat his proud sonne made no wonder,A proud and an vnthank∣full Sonne. but publikely affirmed, That his father was nothing thereby dishonoured; For that he was onely the sonne of an Empresse: But he himselfe was the sonne both of a King, and also of a Queene. Warres be∣twixt Eng∣land and France.Many Iarres, and quarrels in his later dayes, arose betwixt King Henry the father and Lewys the French King: which at length were decided by sharpe and bloudy warres. In all which (most vn∣naturally) Henry, Geffrey and Iohn, the Kings sonnes: and (most vn∣dutifully) Robert Earle of Leicester,Vnnaturall children. and Hugh Earle of Chester, to∣gether with William then King of Scots, tooke part with the French against the King. In all which (notwithstanding) King Henry by noble valour and courage did preuaile; and vpon submission gran∣ted Pardon to his sonnes, and all the rest. Yet were his sonnes af∣ter grieuously punished by God.God plagued them. For Henry died before his father, in the prime and flower of his strength; And Iohn, his sonne, (who was after King) was poysoned by a Monke. Yet these vnnaturall Rebellions by his owne children, vnto whom he had extended (if wee may beleeue reports) more then the loue, and affection of a worthy father,King Henrie sorrowing for his childrens rebellions, dieth. so inwardly perplexed his minde; that surfeiting vpon bitter passions, occasioned by their reuolt, he fell into a dan∣gerous Feuer, which the more vexed him, because Richard his sonne had then raised an other broyle against him. And within
foure dayes after hee died in Normandie, when he had Raigned al∣most fiue and twentie yeares; and was buried at Founteuerard in France. The historie of this Kings Raigne,King Henries description. approueth him to haue been learned, wise, politicke, iust and valiant: And that (which not a little augmenteth the number of his praises) albeit hee were often∣times engaged in many businesses: Some of them concerning his warres in France, Normandie, Angeou, Ireland, and in other places:A rich King, who taxed not his people And some of them respecting his politicke rule, and Gouernment at home; yet he neuer imposed, nor leuied vpon his Subiects any extraordinarie taxe, or payment whatsoeuer. Yet left he vnto his successor more then nine hundred thousand pounds in siluer and in gold: besides his Plate, Iewels, Houshold-stuffe,900000. l. and prouision for the warre. And though in most things prosperitie made him happie:His vnhappi∣nesse. yet in three things, especially, he was most vnfortunate and vnhappie. The first was the vnnaturall disobedience, and rebellious reuolts  of his owne children. The second, was his inordinate fauour, and  vnquenchable lust, towards Rosamond his vnseparable Concubine:His inconti∣nencie, with the faire Ro∣samond his Concubine. who (being admirably faire, but wantonly conditioned) alienated, and estranged his best affections, and loue, wholly from the Lady Elianor his most renowned wife; and made his desires subiect, nay slauish, vnto her will. So that whilst shee liued, shee was seldome from his right-hand: And being dead, hee caused her, with great solemnitie and pompe, to bee sumptuously buried at Godstow be∣sides Oxford; Fixing on her Tombe this Epitaph.Rosamonds Epitaph. Hic iacet in Tumba Rosa Mundi: Non Rosa-munda: Non redolet, sed olet, quae redolere solet. And the third was, the irreconciliable dissension and strife,The Historie of the Kings troubles with Thomas Bec∣ket. which hapned betwixt himselfe and Thomas Becket, the proud and inso∣lent Archbishop of Canterburie. The which, beginning in the tenth yeare of his Raigne, was prosecuted seuen yeares after, with great asperitie and bitternesse, on either partie; as briefely it shall appeare. Theobald, Archbishop of Canterburie (for what desert few did know) in such sort fauoured Thomas Becket a Londoner, borne of ordinarie parentage, that he made him Archdeacon of his owne Church. And (beeing able to obtaine anie thing of the King, which he did reasonably craue) hee procured him to be remo∣ued from one Dignitie vnto another, vntill (at length) he was
made Lord Chancelor of the Realme.Thomas Bec∣ket made Lord Chan∣celor. This high honour so puf∣fed vp Thomas Becket with the winde of Pride and vaine-glorie, that now he thought few, or none, exceeded him for his honour and for his vertues. Yet did he carrie himselfe with such regard∣full obseruance and dutie to the King, that he augmented his E∣state with the gift of large Territories and Possessions: which dai∣ly made him the more confident of the continuance of his great fortunes. Thomas Bec∣ket is made Archbishop of Cāterbury. His vnthank∣fulnesse. He is inuested at Rome. He is made the Popes Legate. He proudly surrendreth his Chance∣lorship & the great Seale.At length Theobald died; and the King preferred Thomas Bec∣ket to succeed him. But he (being most vnthankfull, and resolued as it seemed to play his prankes) secretly, and without leaue, tra∣uelled vnto Rome: and was inuested by Pope Innocent the second; of whome hee receiued his Pale, and was made a Legate. And then he returned into England; and was in great disfauour with the King. But he (taking little notice of the Kings dislike) con∣trarie to the Kings pleasure, vpon the suddaine surrendred to the King his Chancelorship, and the great Seale. The King enqui∣red diligently for the cause why he so did. But such was his obsti∣nate follie and vnthankfulnesse, that he would not reueale it vnto anie. These jarres betweene the King and the Archbishop, embol∣dened the baser and the worser sort of the Clergie to commit ma∣nie great and horrible sinnes and offences; for which they recei∣ued small punishment, because (though their transgressions were Murthers, Manslaughters, Thefts, and Robberies) yet they, being to be tryed and adiudged by men of their owne profession, were too too much winked at. So that, by meanes of their carelesnesse, the Commonweale was much wronged.The Clergies temp rall of∣fences made subiect to be tried before the Temporall Iudge. Wherefore the King summoned and assembled his High Court of Parliament: In which, that Law, made by king Stephen, which exempted the au∣thoritie of the Temporall Iudge to meddle with anie Ecclesiasti∣call persons, for anie crime by them committed whatsoeuer, was abolished; and the ancient Lawes of this Realme, vsed in the times of Henrie the first, and of others the kings Progenitors, and (which were commonly called Auitae Leges) were reduced to their former validitie and force.Auitae Leges But in these proceedings the king was much crossed and inter∣rupted by the obstinate and bold frowardnesse of Thomas Becket, and of some few other Bishops; who vnaduisedly made them∣selues partakers of his Faction. But after manie Conferences, Dis∣putes, and Consultations, touching those businesses; all the Bi∣shops (Becket onely excepted) ratified and subscribed those newly
reuiued Lawes.Becket would not giue way to those Laws But Becket would not by anie meanes assent there∣unto, except hee might insert this Clause, Saluo ordine suo: Which words would clearely haue annihilated the life and substance of those Lawes.His Excepti∣on Saluo iure suo. This his follie made the king to bite his lippe, and to say lit∣tle: So that the other Bishops, much fearing to what end the kings extraordinarie displeasure and discontentment would tend, did priuately commune with the Archbishop; and prayed him (for the preuenting of future mischiefes) to submit himselfe: where∣unto he gaue his free consent;Becket is per∣suaded: and sweareth to those Lawes. and (as the rest had done) so did he take a solemne Oath, to giue allowance to those Lawes. The king forthwith altered the strangenesse of his countenance into plea∣sing and familiar lookes: he spake kindly vnto Becket; and assu∣red him of his former loue. And being wise and politike, and pur∣posing to assure the Peace of future times, whilest oportunitie did serue: hee caused a tripartite Instrument to be drawne betwixt himselfe and the two Archbishops, testifying this Submission, and this Oath: Two of which parts were forthwith subscribed by the King and by the Archbishop of Yorke. But Thomas Becket (falling into the relapse of his former follie) did not onely refuse to doe the like,Becket again withstandeth those Lawes. but expressed great Repentance for the former Oath which he had taken. And (not so contented) he secretly informed the Pope thereof; and of his inward sorrow for that sinne.Becket is ab∣solued by the Pope. The Pope not onely absolued him of that Oath, and enioyned him to some priuate Penance: but hee also required him, without yeel∣ding, stoutly to persist (with a strong Resolution) in his opi∣nion. Hereupon the kings anger towards Becket daily encreased more and more. And when this newes from Rome was diuulged,Beckets tem∣poralties sei∣zed by the King. He is called to an accompt for 30000 marks, and refuseth to accompt. his Majestie seized into his owne hands all such Temporall Lands and Promotions as hee had giuen in former times vnto Becket: and required him to render him an account for thirtie thousand Marks, which (to his vse) he had receiued when he was Chancelor of this Realme. But boldly hee affirmed, That the king had frankely and freely giuen it vnto him: and that therefore hee would not enter into anie such account. Whereupon the king, to satisfie himselfe,His mouables are seized. made a seizure of such moueable goods as apper∣tained to him. Thus, whilest the Wheele thus turned, Thomas Becket, without the kings Licence, transported himselfe secretly vnto Rome:Becket goeth to Rome. and the king (thereby perceiuing that Becket intended nothing more than to incense the Pope against him) sent his Embassadours and
Letters vnto Rome:The Pope de∣nieth the Kings re∣quest. and by them he signified vnto the Pope, how reasonable his owne demaunds were, and how peruersely Thomas Becket had refused to obey. And therefore he entreated the Pope, that he might be depriued of his Place and Dignitie: protesting, That he would prouide for him and his in some other kind.He threate∣neth the king But the Pope not onely denied his request, but with thundering termes he threatened to send two Legats into England, who should curse the King, and all his Realme; except, on their demaund, hee resto∣red the Archbishop both to his Place and Dignitie, and also to all such Lands and Mouables, as by the Kings commandement had beene taken from him. And in the meane time hee commended Becket to the Abbot of Pontinyack, where hee was gently receiued, and kindly entertained as a Monke. The Kings anger against Becket.But when the King perceiued into what corner the winde did blow, and that the Pope had filled Becket with the blasts of pride and vaine-glorie: he (being more and more exasperated) sent vnto the said Abbot, and required him to turne Becket out of his house, or otherwise he protested, he would not leaue one Monke of his Order in all France. The King forbiddeth accesse from the Pope into England.He also published certaine Iniunctions against the Pope, and all Cardinals, and Legates, which (without his Licence) should pre∣sume to enter into his kingdome. He also depriued Thomas Beckets nearest and choisest friends of all such Promotions, Lands, and Substance, as they did enioy; and banished them out of the Realme,Beckets friends are banished. because (with counsell and with money) they had joyned with him in this his obstinacie a∣gainst the king. This round and bitter course, more troubled Becket then all o∣ther precedent passages whatsoeuer. And, to encrease his griefe, the Abbot of Pontinyacke (fearing the euent of the Kings displea∣sure, if he submitted not himselfe to his command) gently perswa∣ded Becket to leaue his house.The French King vnder∣hand anima∣teth the Pope. Whereof when Lewis the French King heard; (albeit his daughter Margaret was married vnto Hen∣rie the yong King) yet he procured him better entertainment else∣where, and secretly wrote in his behalfe vnto the Pope. The King sayleth into France. He confer∣reth with Becket. His offer to Becket.King Henrie (desiring to see an end of these troubles, if by any meanes conueniently hee might) vpon the suddaine sailed into France. And (in the French Kings presence) hee conferred with Becket oftentimes; and made him this offer, That if (at last) hee would take the said Oath againe, and would subscribe the said In∣strument Tripartite (as himselfe, and the Archbishop of Yorke had done to the other two) He should then returne into England, Gra∣ced
with the Kings especiall fauour: and that hee should enioy his place and dignitie, and be (in ample sort) restored to all things ta∣ken from him, and whereof iustly hee had beene depriued: And that the like bountie should be extended to his exiled friends. But he proudly answered, that if the king would consent, that hee might so sweare and subscribe with this exception,Saluo hono∣re Dei. Salua honore Dei; he then would yeeld. But this exception displeased the King more then all the rest had done. For then hee perceiued plainely, that Becket intended thereby to expresse; That those Lawes ten∣ded to the dishonour of Almightie God: and that therefore hee had a purpose no longer to obey them (notwithstanding he should subscribe and sweare) then he should please.Beckets proud reso∣lution. But Becket told him proudly and plainely, That hee feared none but God: and that (sith those his Lawes were derogatorie to the auncient customes, and priuiledges of the Church, and robbed God of his honour) the King (in seeking to establish them) should not haue his owne will whilst he liued. The King, failing of his purpose, returned into England; and not long after, two Legates came to him from Rome,Two Legats sent to inter∣dict the king. to interdict him from comming to the Church, vntill he had in all things whatsoe∣uer restored Becket, according to the Popes commaunds. High dis∣pleasure transported the King into Normandy: where he conferred againe with Becket, but found him still the selfe-same man.He sayleth into Nor∣mandie, but finds no alte∣ration in Bec∣ket. The King is pleased that Becket shall returne into England. The King would faine haue Becket dispatched. And being desirous to set an end of those troubles: hee gaue him way, and consented to his returne; and came againe into England. And not long after Becket followed the King. But the King muttringly repined, that among all such as he had aduanced, there was not one who would endeuour to rid him of so dangerous and malapert an enemie. He also receiued a strange welcome of Henrie the young king, who exiled him from his Court, and confined him to his owne house in Canterburie: because (in his absence) the king in his Par∣liament desiring that his said sonne should be crowned King, the Bishop of London, and three other Bishops (vpon the kings com∣mandement) had performed those ceremoniall Solemnities, and were suspended by Becket, because they presumed so to doe with∣out his leaue; and could not be absolued by Becket, although he had beene entreated therein by both those kings. And within foure dayes after, Becket (by foure gracelesse male∣factors) was wickedly murdered in his owne Church:Thomas Bec∣ket murdred. whereof the king was accused by the Pope; but he denied it vpon his oath.The King accused. Yet in regard of his former muttering speeches (which by all con∣jecture
hastened his end) the king submitted himselfe to the Popes Censure:The Kings Penance. Who enjoyned him to warre three yeares in person in the Holie Land; which he redeemed by erecting three Houses of Religion. He was also enjoyned to goe from London to Canterbu∣rie bare-footed, to visit Beckets Shryne: which he did; and suffered himselfe to be scourged with roddes by euerie Monke there.He is whip∣ped. And thus the king had a bad end of all those Troubles.
THE HISTORIE OF KING RICHARD THE FIRST. RICHARD, the eldest sonne liuing of Henrie the second (being in Nor∣mandie when his Father died) suc∣ceeded in his Throne. And (be∣cause those Countries wanted set∣tlement, and required a longer time of his presence) aboue all other things he was most carefull for the enlargement of Queene Elianor his Mother:A good sonne but an euill husband. who by her deceased hus∣band was committed to strait Im∣prisonment, because shee loathed, and would not endure, his las∣ciuious course of liuing with his wanton Rosamond; but sharpe∣ly reproued him for the same. And because shee was euerie way vertuous, discreete, and wise;Queene E∣lianor is made Regent of England. hee committed the whole Gouern∣ment of this Realme, in his absence, to her care. And (because her owne Experience had informed her, what anguish and what sorrow poore helpelesse Captiues did endure) shee set at liber∣tie all such as were imprisoned for ordinarie offences,Non ignara mai, miseris succurete discit. or for small Debts, which her selfe did pay: and administred the Common-weales affaires with great Moderation, Integritie, and Iustice, vntill her sonne the king came home, and was with all Solem∣nitie and strange Triumphs annointed and crowned king. This king (imitating the milde disposition of his mother; and
commiserating the troubles of such as were afflicted) freed out of euerie Prison all such as were his Debtors,A mercifull King. or were enthralled for anie transgression which concerned himselfe; and whome, with∣out injustice done to others, he might acquite. And in the whole course of his Gouernment he so prouided, that Iustice with Mer∣cie should be extended vnto all. Too much ho∣nor elateth.He heaped manie Honors and profitable Promotions vpon his brother Iohn, whome he created Earle of Lancaster, and gaue vnto him the Prouinces of Nottingham, Deuonshire, and Cornwall: and married him to the sole and onely Daughter and Heire of the Earle of Glocester; from whome he receiued the Lordship of that Countrey. These great and kind fauors required, that he should be thank∣full. But oftentimes it happeneth, that as the addition of too much Oyle extinguisheth the Lampe, which otherwise would burne, and yeeld her light; and as the ouer-abundance of too much water, falling vpon a Wheele, maketh it the lesse seruiceable for the vse to which it is employed: So the conferring of too much Honor, and of too manie Titles of Dignitie, vpon such as are not capable of them all, altereth and changeth their milde and gentle dispositions, and maketh them altogether vnthankefull for those benefits which they haue receiued. And oftentimes they are in∣cited and prouoked thereby to affect things of higher consequence and moment than are fitting; and to conjecture, that the greatest fortunes are most agreeable to their Estates. So that they neuer cease to attempt great things: which in the end will rather be hurtfull to them, than doe them anie good. An vnthank∣full brother.This proued true betwixt the king and his brother Iohn. For when the king had powred on him plentifull showers of his boun∣tie and great abundance; and had aduanced him in Honor, and in Estate, aboue all others: his thoughts mounted aboue the Moone, and made him vnnaturally and vnthankfully to affect the Crowne; and to boast, That his endowments were sufficient, and fitting for a king. And though he wanted oportunitie, yet he resol∣ued to push hard for the Crowne, if Time and Fortune would pre∣sent it to him. This king (for his inuincible valour, and haughtie courage) was esteemed to be almost matchlesse in the Christian world: so that he was surnamed Cuer de Lyon,Cuer de Lyon. or the Lyons Heart. And (to say the truth) he was such a one, as (vpon good aduice and counsell) dared to attempt anie thing, if it were honourable to be atchieued, and possible to be done.
His fathers Treasure enriched him exceedingly with great store of Siluer and of Gold. And such was his contempt of Riches,A bountifull King. and such was his Bountie to such, as either deserued well, or left in him anie impression of Noble worth, that he bestowed on them great Gifts with such alacritie and cheerefulnesse, that in short time he vnbowelled all his Bagges and Chests; little foreseeing, that fu∣ture Businesses might require the expence of more than the great Plentie which was left vnto him: and that (when he wanted) he should be enforced to make hard shift to relieue himselfe. In the beginning of his Raigne,The King re∣solueth to warre in the Holy Land vpon the Popes motion the Pope sollicited him with strong perswasions, and manie promises of his Blessings, to wage Warre in his owne person against the Turkes in the Holie Land; and to attempt the winning of Ierusalem from the Infidels and vn∣beleeuing Men: who maliciously opposed themselues against the Incarnation, Passion, and Ascension of Christ Iesus. Which jour∣ney he vndertooke, because Frederick the Emperour,Frederick, Philip, Leopold. and Philip the second, surnamed Augustus, king of France, Leopoldus then Arch∣duke of Austria, and manie other Christian Princes, had engaged themselues (both with Men, Money, and all other Prouisions) to further those Attempts. And thereupon he entred into Couenants with the king of France, and the rest of that Vnion,Their Coue∣nants and Agreements. That their ge∣nerall meeting should be in Sicilia: and that such Wealth and Bootie, as GOD and good Fortune should make them Ow∣ners of, should equally be shared and diuided among them and theirs. These things being thus concluded (although the kings pro∣fuse Expences, and great Gifts exceeding measure, had made him bare and needie) yet would he not burthen his People with anie Taxe to supplie his wants.The King in his wants would not taxe his peo∣ple. But raysing great summes of Money out of his owne Estate; among other things, he sold his Castles of Barwick and of Rokesbrough to the king of Scots for tenne thousand pounds: and the Lordship and Earledome of Durham vnto Hugh then Bishop of that See, for much money.He leuieth money of his owne State. He also enriched him∣selfe with Siluer and with Gold, by the Sale of sundrie Honors, Lordships, Manors, Offices, Priuiledges, Royalties, and other things, vnto such as parsimonie and sparing had made Owners and Possessors of great plentie; and did protest,His willing∣nesse to vn∣dertake this voyage. That (for the perfor∣ming of so great and honorable a Seruice) he was not vnwilling to sell his Citie of London, if anie were of abilitie to buy it, rather than he would be chargeable vnto others. And thus the king hauing furnished himselfe with all prouisions fit and necessarie for his journey; and hauing leuied a strong Ar∣mie,
in which were manie Lords,William Longchamp made Regent of England. Knights, and Gentlemen, whose resolutions encreased his hopes of good successe: he committed the principall Gouernment of his Kingdome vnto William Long∣champe, then Bishop of Ely; who (not long after) was made the Popes Legate.The King departeth. And then he sayled with his whole Armie to the Isle of Cyprus: which (with braue courage) after manie hot and dangerous Encounters, hee wonne; and sold the same to the Knights Templars for thirtie thousand Marks.He winnes Cyprus: and sells it for 30000 marks And from thence (according to his former appointment) he transported his Armie into Sicilia; where he met with Philip the French king: and vpon their first enter-view, they pleased each other with manie passages of familiaritie and of loue. But this faire Sunne-shine was quickly vayled and couered with a cloud of skorne and discontentment.A iarre be∣tweene the King and Philip King of France. For when the French king was denyed to haue anie part or share with king Richard in his at∣chieuement of the Isle of Cyprus (both because hee was absent when it was taken; and also because it was affirmed by king Richard, That their Couenant extended onely to such things, as they should winne and gayne in the Holie Land) he waxed angrie, and vsed manie high and disdainefull tearmes, and made publike shew of inward discontent.King Richard neglected the French Kings anger. All which king Richard did set at nought; and told him to his face, That doe what he dared, he should not be a partner in that Bootie. It stood not with king Philips honour, to waxe cold so soone in this great Enterprize, whereon the eyes of all the Christian World were fixed; and dastardly to returne home. But how∣soeuer hee had disposed of himselfe, and of such Forces as hee commanded, yet king Richard was resolued to goe forth; so that (Necessitie enforcing them to some agreement) they proceeded in their Iourney.The Christian Princes doe preuaile. In which, they all, and their Confederates, per∣formed manie honourable and wonderfull deedes of Armes; terrifying and daily diminishing the Turkes Numbers and Forces with continuall slaughters, and giuing them but little leysure, or courage to resist. And (among manie other strong Townes, Forts, Castles, and Garrisons of great strength and importance, which they conque∣red) they wonne (after a long and a sharpe Siege) by maine Batteries and resolute Assaults,Acon won. the stoutly defended Citie of A∣con: Vpon the walls whereof a forward knight aduanced the Banner and the Colours of Leopold the Archduke of Austria.King Richard trampleth on Leopolds co∣lours. But king Richard, skorning that too much Grace and Honour should be done vnto the Duke, and his owne deserts be thereby
blemished, he hauing first of all entred into the Citie, ranne vp vn∣to the Wall; plucked downe that Banner, and those colours; and trampled them with his feete: Wherat the French King was much displeased, and gaue his tongue libertie to speake great things.The French King is an∣grie. But King Richard (neglecting his frownes; and laughing at his discon∣tent) affirmed, that in so doing hee had onely righted himselfe of those Iniuries which were done to him: And that, if any were dis∣posed to looke sower thereat, hee was carelesse of his anger,King Ri∣chards cou∣rage. and in the field would be ready to maintaine his doings against any. The French King swelling at the heart, to see King Richard thus carelesse, resolute, and bold:The forces of the Empire and of the French King and of Leo∣pold, do leaue K. Richard. And seeming to distrust least by some secret league, or other compact, betwixt King Richard and the Turkes, some danger might assaile him and his followers, Hee tooke an vnkind leaue, and carying away with him all such troupes as belonged to the Emperour, to Leopold, and to himselfe, hee left the King of England, and returned home. This his departure discomforted not King Richard: But with his owne Souldiours,King Ri∣chard pre∣uaileth. and with the forces of some other Christian Princes, who submitted themselues to his direction and Gouerne∣ment, hee persisted in those Warres, and prosecuted his attempts with such constancie, and heroicall magnanimitie, that he preuai∣led, and became Victorious, when the greatest dangers assaulted him most to make him feare. And (among many other things which boldly he attempted) hee returned vnto the Ile of Cyprus;He winneth Cyprus again and by force hee valiantly wonne it from the Knights Templers, vnto whom he had formerly sold it, and then exchanged it for the Citie of Ierusalem, with Guy of Lesingham the last Christian King; who held, and did possesse it. By meanes whereof,He is stiled King of Iaeru∣salem. King Richard was stiled King of Ierusalem; and so were many of his successours long after. Thus while he became victorious,England is badly Gouer∣ned. and daily triumphed ouer the Turkes miseries; his Kingdome of England was badly Gouerned at home by the Bishop of Ely; to whom hee had committed the charge thereof. For hee (being the Grand-child of a Ploughman, and the sonne of a Cow-heard in the North:Asperius ni∣hil est humi∣li. quam sur∣gere in altū. and being aduanced to that Bishoppricke, and made Lord Chancellour of England; Le∣gate to the Pope; and Protector of all this Realme) tyrannized, as himselfe listed, ouer all sortes of people; Exercised on them strange and vnusuall oppressions, both in the Church,A begger on horse-backe will ride. and also in the Com∣mon-weale; and was so infinitely ambitious and so proud, that he would neuer ride abroad for his pastime, and for his recreation, ex∣cept hee were attended and waited on by a thousand horse, and
more; and was serued by the sonnes of the greatest Nobles in this Land, vnto whom he gaue in marriage, with some portions, diuers of his base and rusticke kinne.The ambiti∣ous Bishops fall. But at length he grew to bee so con∣temptible, lothsome and vile, in all the peoples eyes, that (fearing what would be the sequell of his vnlimited insolencie and pride,) He resolued to forsake this Kingdome. And comming (for that purpose) into Douer,He disguiseth himselfe, and is dragged on the Sands. disguised in the habit of a woman, and hauing vnder his arme a piece of Country-cloth, which hee offered to the sale, hee was descried and discouered, and by the common people was furiously and shamefully dragged and drawne vpon the Sands, and was afterward sent vnto London: where the Lords and greatest Nobles committed him to the Tower; in which he remained vn∣till the kings returne,He is resto∣red. and then he was restored both to his libertie and Offices. But shortly after, as he trauelled towards Rome, he died;He dieth. whereat much joy was conceiued generally by the English∣men. Of these Affaires, and of his euill Gouernment, king Richard was informed in the Holie Land: as also of the great discontent∣ment of his brother Iohn,The causes which haste∣ned king Ri∣chards re∣turne. for that the Bishop of Ely, and not him∣selfe, was (in the kings absence) made Gouernor of this kingdome: and how that he had seized manie of the kings Townes, Forts, and Castles, into his hands; and onely wanted the peoples fauour to make himselfe a king. He likewise was informed, what Sallyes, Inrodes, and Inuasions, the French king (after his returne home) had made in Normandie, thereby to reuenge himselfe of those pretended iniuries and wrongs, which he supposed he had receiued from king Richard in the Holie Land. These Tidings thus concurring, and the good desire which king Richard had to preuent the ruine of his owne Estate; enforced him (when he possessed the greatest hopes of Conquest) to con∣clude a peace with the Turks for three yeares.King Richard saueth his life by swimming. He is taken prisoner, and sold to the Emperour Henry the sixt. He is ranso∣med. He reuengeth his iniuries vpon the French king. But in his returne, he was (by the violence of a raging storme) compelled after a dan∣gerous shipwrack to saue his life by Swimming, neere vnto Histria; which lyeth betweene Aquileia and Venice: and comming to the Territories of Leopold in Austria, he was taken prisoner; and by him sold to the Emperour Henrie the sixt, the sonne of Frederick, for threescore thousand Marks; who (taking of him good securitie for his Ransome, assessed vnto one hundred thousand pounds) did set him at libertie: So that with speedie journeyes he poasted vn∣till be came into Normandie; where he raysed a strong Armie, and marched furiously into France, and reuenged himselfe soundly of
all such iniuries and wrongs, as in his absence were done vnto him by the French king. And then he reduced to his subiection all such Peeres in Normandie, as by the Frenchmen, in his absence, had beene taken from him. Thus whilest the King was busied abroad; his brother Iohn,Duke Iohn submitteth himselfe to the King his brother, and is pardoned. Earle of Lancaster, repaired to him, and not onely submitted him∣selfe to his grace and mercie, but voluntarily surrendred to him all such Forts and Castles as he had seized into his hands: excusing himselfe, as being prouoked and enforced to disloyaltie by the ex∣traordinarie pride and insolent behauiour of William Longchampe Bishop of Ely; who vnworthily had disordered the gouernment of the whole Realme. Vpon which submission, and his contrition for his offence, he obtained not onely the kings pardon, but also his especiall grace and fauour. Then did they both come into England:He vseth vniust means to pay his Debts and Ransome. where the king (to make payment of his Ransome) ransacked the Treasures of diuers Re∣ligious Houses, and grieuously taxed the People; and summoned his High Court of Parliament, in which he caused himselfe to be againe crowned King.He is crow∣ned anew. And to augment his owne Estate, hee resu∣med into his hands all such Honors, Lordships, Manors, Castles, Offices, and Priuiledges,He resumeth the Lands which he sold, and payes nothing for them. as he had formerly sold to his owne sub∣jects for his supplyes; and enforced the Buyers to content them∣selues with such profits thereof, as they had taken. Then foure∣score thousand pounds of his Ransome were payd:Leopold is accused, and releaseth part of the Kings Ransome. but the resi∣due was discharged by Leopold; who was accursed by Pope Inno∣cent the third, for that hee had iniuriously made king Richard a prisoner, in his returne from his Warres in the Holie Land. Then the king raysed a new Armie, and transported it into France; and from that time forward he ceased not (with variable successe) to warre with the French king: vntill at length taking a priuate view of the besieged Castle of Chalons, neere to Lymoys,The King warreth in France. he was descried by a common souldior; who so grieuously wounded him with an arrow, that within three dayes after he died, when he had raigned almost nine yeares; and was buried at Founteuerard in France at his fathers feet.He is slaine. After hee was wounded, as is before mentioned, hee wonne the Castle by terrible assaults, and caused all such as he found therein to be slaine; except the malefactor: who being demanded by him how he dared to shoot vnto the person of a king, made answere, That in those Warres he had lost his father, and his brother,Vltio Diui∣na. and that he was exceeding glad that fortune had so assisted him in his reuenge. Then when he expected nothing but a present terrible
death,The King pardoneth him who slew him. the king gaue him his pardon; and caused him to be safely conducted out of his Armie. In the beginning of this Kings Raigne, certaine Out-lawes, to the number of one hundred and more, being resolued and desperat men (whose chiefest leaders were named Robin Hood and Little Iohn) robbed and spoyled in diuers places of this Land.Robin Hood and Little Iohn. They nei∣ther hurted, nor much wronged anie, except they would runne themselues into danger by resistance. They attempted against none,Honest Theeues. but against such, as being rich, gayned by vsurie; or gaue no entertainement by good Hospitalitie to their Neighbours, and to the poore. They spared all women, and were bountifull bene∣factors to such as stood in need. Thus they continued diuers moneths; vntill their chiefest Leader Robin Hood, by meanes of a sharpe sicknesse (being let bloud, and being betrayed) bled himselfe to death. And then the whole Rout of this theeuish Companie was dispersed, and the Malefactors secretly repaired home to their owne houses.
THE HISTORIE OF KING IOHN. IOHN PLANTAGENET (Earle of Lancaster in his owne Right, and Earle of Glocester in the right of his wife; and being the yongest sonne of King Henrie the second) succee∣ded, and was crowned king: albeit that Arthur Plantagenet his nephew,Arthur Plantagenet was lawfull heire. and sonne to Geoffrey his elder bro∣ther, was then liuing. The whole course of this Kings Gouernment was accompanied with continuall troubles: and his two Persecutors were Pope Innocent the third;The Kings two persecu∣tors. and Philip the second, then King of France. The French King feared the greatnesse of Englands strength, and the prosperitie of this Kingdome was hurtfull vnto his eyes:The French king taketh part with Arthur a∣gainst King Iohn. and glad he was, if (at anie time) the least occasion would offer him some seruice to further his designes against King Iohn. For proofe hereof, he protested a world of loue to the said Arthur; informed him of his Title to the Crowne of England, and of his vndoubted right to the Duchies of Normandie, and of Britaine; animated him to rayse his spirits, and to aduance his courage to winne them all. If he were destitute of Friends, which might aduise and counsell him; he and his Nobles would supplie that want: if he stood in need of Siluer and of Gold, to feede and to nourish the great bo∣die of that Warre; he should be supplyed with sufficient store:
And if he would haue valiant men to fight for him, and for those his Rights, hee would supplie him with manie thousands, who should aduenture to spend their best bloud in his Quarrels. These large and friendly proffers (which indeede proceeded rather from a jealousie which the French King had of himselfe, by reason of King Iohns Greatnesse, than from anie inward affe∣ction or heartie loue which hee bare vnto Arthur, the lawfull and the rightfull Heire of this Crowne) and the longing desire which made this young Gallant hopefull of those great atchieue∣ments; persuaded him verie easily, not onely to accept of the French Kings friendship, but also to vse his aide. So that partly by the helpe of the Normans, and partly by the French Kings meanes,Arthur Plantagenet leuieth an ar∣mie. hee leuied a puissant Armie; and wonne diuers places both of Worth and of Strength in Normandie. But the Kings Lieutenant, and his other Agents in that Duchie, defended themselues valiantly, persisted in their Duties, and fought it out diuers times;King Iohn goeth into Normandie with an Ar∣mie. vntill King Iohn himselfe came into that Countrey with a strong Armie, and fought manie cruell Battailes with his Nephew. But oftentimes it falleth out, that by Warre (which is the ene∣mie of Peace) Peace it selfe is procured. For when those two Princes had exchanged store of blowes, and when their Armies had made hauocke each of other; and death had drenched her selfe in their bloud: they entred into certaine Capitulations for Peace;A peace is concluded. which, for a short time, gaue them some respit of brea∣thing. But the same was againe interrupted by Philip the French King;The peace is broken by the French kings meanes. who promised Arthur a doubling of his strength, and fed him with much assurance of prosperous successe; and made him confident to renew those Warres. And hereupon the French King carried a faire Armie into Normandie; with which hee spoyled, ransacked, and depopulated manie places in that Duchie. But King Iohn (who wanted nothing but money to encounter with so peruerse an enemie) was warned by his Lords, Gentle∣men, and the inferiour sort of his common people, That shame would wait vpon him for his neglect, in suffering his Honour to be trampled on, and his Territories in such sort, without blowes, to be taken from him. And (to whet the dull edge of his cou∣rage,The English∣mens for∣wardnesse to buckle with the French. deiected by reason of his wants) they voluntarily and freely granted him a large Taxe to support his necessitie: and euerie lustie Ladde boldly proffered his seruice, to buckle strongly with the French.
By these meanes King Iohn was quickly furnished and streng∣thened both with Money and with Men;King Iohn passeth into Nrmandie the second time with an Armie. and with a strong Ar∣mie he landed in the Duchie of Normandie: where his numbers were euerie day augmented, by the repaire of manie thousands, who were well appointed, and did resolue with him to expect the same lot and the same fortune. And not long after, the two Ar∣mies met, and fought together with such desperate boldnesse,The two Ar∣mies fight. that each of them tooke pleasure to giue blowes, wounds, death. Each of them rejoyced in the ruine of the other; and those so∣lemne spectacles of sorrow which would haue made others sad, gaue them occasion of much mirth. But things which are violent cannot long endure. This feare∣full storme must bee changed into a pleasant calme.The French∣men flye. And so it was. For the Frenchmen were discouraged, and fled; and Ar∣thur, the Kings Nephew, and the rightfull Heire vnto his Crowne,Arthur is sent prisoner to Roan. He is drow∣ned. This Warre ended. was taken prisoner, and sent to the Castle of Roan: where (lea∣ping from the walls with an intent to escape) he was drowned in the Ditch. And thus ended his Life, his Title, and those Warres. But the next yeare following, the French King himselfe, pre∣tending Title to the said Duchie of Normandie, raysed an excee∣ding great power; and so sodainely, and with such furie,The French King sodenly weth all Normandie. did in∣uade it, that (wanting present meanes of resistance) the whole Du∣chie (to preuent vtter desolation and ruine) yeelded, and subiected it selfe to the French king. And now began the Kings other Enemie,The quarrell btwxt the King and the Pope. Pope Innocent the third, to play his part, and to vexe him more dangerously than Philip of France had done. And the occasion which he entertai∣ned to effect his purpose, was this. Hubert, the Archbishop of Canterburie, died: and the Monkes of Saint Augustines in that Citie (without the kings Licence, or knowledge and about midnight) elected Raynold (a brother of their owne) to succeed him; and tooke of him an Oath forthwith to tra∣uaile vnto Rome, and there to procure his inuesture, and to receiue his Pl from the Pope. The king being thereof informed by manifest shewes, made knowne his inward dislike of those their vnaduised doings: So that (vpon his motion, and to appease his wrath) they newly elected Iohn Gray, who was then Bishop of Norwich. And in∣continently, the king (vpon his owne charge) sent Letters and Embassadours vnto the Pope, entreating him to ratifie his last choice.
But in the meane time a new Schisme or Faction did appeare. For the Suffragan (because hee was not made acquainted, nor an actor in either of the said two Elections) made suit to the Pope to displace them both.Popes doe sel∣dome or neuer grant to any Kings their reasonable requests. But the Pope (imitating the proud example of his Predecessors, who coueted to swimme against the Streame, and seldome, or neuer, granted anie kings request, least they should in some sort be thought to be yeelding) neglected the kings en∣treatie, and confirmed him that was chosen first. The king stor∣med because he was so slenderly regarded. And diuers of those Monkes (to please the king) refused to receiue him that was by the Pope confirmed; contesting against their owne choice, be∣cause it was made in the night, and not in the open day. But the rest affirmed, That such a choice was not meerely voide, and in it selfe a Nullitie; but remayned good, vntill by Iudici∣all proceedings, and by a Sentence, it were pronounced to be void. At length, this question and this doubt was controuerted and disputed on in Rome: and thereupon, the Pope (making a colou∣rable shew to content the King, to please the Monkes, and to end this Schisme; but indeede to preferre Stephen Langton, the Cardi∣nall of Chrisogone, to that Dignitie) aduised the said Monkes to e∣lect the said Stephen. Stephen Langton is chosen Arch∣bishop of Can∣terburie on the Popes motion, and against the commande∣ment of the King.The King perceiuing well what was intended and meant there∣by; required the said Monkes not to proceed to the said Election, nor to deale anie further in that businesse. But verie vndutifully they neglected to content, or to obey the King; and with them the Papall Commandement tooke place: and Stephen Langton (a man plyant to the Popes humour) was elected Archbishop of Can∣terburie. This later choice so sharpely exasperated the king, that by his Letters to the Pope he protested plainely, That from thenceforth he would take a strict account of all such of his subjects whatso∣euer, as for anie matters concerning Right, or Iustice, should be gadding vnto Rome.The King forbiddeth Appeales to Rome. And did alledge, That he had Bishops, Pre∣lates, Nobles, and Magistrates of his owne, who could and should (according to the Lawes and Customes of his Kingdome) decide and determine all Controuersies and Doubts, which should arise either in the Church, or in the Commonweale. And that he would rather expose himselfe to a thousand deaths, then basely (as hee was required) make himselfe and his Kingdome seruile and sub∣ject to the Popes insolent and peremptorie Commands. The Pope (according to his custome and fashion) not onely
answered prowdly,The Popes prowd and peremptorie answer. Foure Bishops authorized to interdict the King. That the Election of the Cardinall should stand: but required the King, to giue him the quiet possession of his See; to recall such Monks from banishment as he had exild; and to restore to them their goods, on which hee had seized by reason of their last choice: and did authorize foure Bishops within this Land, to interdict and to curse the King, and his Realme, if hee re∣fused to doe as by the Pope he was enioyned. The King (perceiuing that those foure Bishops were much ela∣ted by reason of their new authoritie: and that they thought the time to be long, ere the King had replied and signified his intent and resolution) seized vpon their lands and goods;The King seizeth on the foure Bishops lands and goods. and did pro∣claime, That he resolued to take the like course with all such, as re∣ceiued any Promotions, Inuestitures, or Ecclesiastical degrees, from the said Cardinall; or went vnto Rome vpon any occasion without his license, or did appeale for any cause thither; or did attempt to put in execution any commaund from the Pope, within his Kingdome. The Pope (being aduertised hereof) sent into England his two Legats, Pandulphus and Durant (men of prowd spirits, and prone to put in practise al things as they should be required) These two per∣swaded the King to be reconciled to Stephen Langton;The Popes Legats curse the King and his ayders. to the foure Bishops; and to the Prior and the Monks of his Couent of S. Au∣stins; and to restore to them their Places, Lands, and Goods, that peace, and amitie, by meanes of his so doing, might be renewed be∣twixt the Pope and him. The King (fearing to be accursed, and being desirous to preuent future inconueniences) yeelded, and pro∣mised to perform all whatsoeuer was required, except it were to allow the said Election of the said Cardinall: and protested faith∣fully, That if another might be chosen, hee then would with all speed and expedition, preferre him to some other Bishoprique, or better place of Dignitie within his Realme. But the two Legats (in steed of gratifying the Kings request) pronounced the Popes curse; not only against him, but also against all such as gaue him at∣tendance, or things necessarie; or kept him company. They like∣wise absolued all his subiects from their oathes, dutie, and seruice towards him, and required all Christian Princes to make warre vp∣pon him, as vpon the arch and grand enemy of the Church of God.This King∣dom is giuen to the French King. The Pope also pronounced and published against him his sentence of depriuation, and gaue his Crown and his Kingdom to Philip the French King, if by any secret plot, or open violence and hostility, he could expell or murther him. These were the fruits of this vnholy holy Father, the Popes Re∣ligion
and Gouernment. And this vsurping arrogancie was a badge of his vnsufferable pride: in that he presumed to do what no earth∣ly creature can do, nor what a Christian ought to attempt to do, a∣gainst the Annointed of God; and against such a one, as the Al∣mightie hath placed in a Kingdom to gouerne and to rule his peo∣ple.The King confronteth the Pope and his Legats. The King was not (as yet) terrified with this Thunder, but was in good hope that all those Fulminations would quickly flash, and as soone vanish away, as the Lightning doth. And being tho∣roughly resolued to confront the Pope, and his busie Legats, in contemning them and their greatest power,He taketh an oath of his people. he took a solemne oath of his Subiects for his defence, and their faithfull seruice. And then with a strong Armie he entered into Scotland, against King Alex∣ander the second, because he had receiued, supported, and maintai∣ned diuers of his Clergie,He carrieth an Armie in∣to Scotland. and others: who (adhering to the Pope, and magnifying his vsurped authoritie within this kingdome) had forsaken the King; and (as Rebells, and Out-lawes) fled vnto him for succour.The Scots submit them∣selues. But the Scotish King (perceiuing that Fire and Sword gaped greedily to deuoure both him and his Countrie) submitted himselfe (with great humilitie and reuerence) to king Iohn; and without further trouble, hee was reconciled to his Grace and Fauour. The French king, hoping and endeuoring to possesse himselfe of the Popes gift (which was not his to giue) and gladding his owne heart that now he had gotten some colour to warre in England vp∣pon king Iohn;The French King prepa∣reth for Eng∣land. prouided a great Armie to inuade this Realme. But by the wisedome, valour, and circumspection of the king, and by Gods assistance,Three hun∣dred of his Ships are taken. three hundred of his Ships (being loaden with Corne, Victualls, and other requisits for the warre) were surprised, and by meanes thereof king Philip was at that time robbed of his vaine hope. King Iohn fainteth.The Pope (notwithstanding) ceased not, but euer and anon hee accursed the king againe, and againe: insomuch that he feared, lest vtter ruine and his ouerthrow did attend him. Wherfore (sudden∣ly,He asketh pardon, and resigneth his kingdom to the Pope. without the consent of his Nobles, or aduice of his Councell of Estate) vpon his knees, before Pandulphus the Legat, hee confessed his disobedience to the Pope; craued Pardon; and (by a publique Instrument in writing vnder his hand and seale) hee resigned his Crowne and his kingdom, to the Pope: which Pandulphus kept the space of foure daies to the Popes vse.The Pope re∣granteth. And then he gaue the King∣dome and the Crowne againe to King Iohn, and to his heires; re∣seruing a Tenure thereof to the Church of Rome, with an yeerely tribute of one thousand marks.
This base submission and subiection of his,The King is despised and forsaken. so alienated from him the deere affection of diuers of his Nobles, and men best skil∣led in Chiualrie, that they reuolted from his seruice, and fled vnto his enemie the French King; whose head was building of Castles in the aire, and who made new and large preparations and prouisions, to make Lewes his sonne the sole King and Monarch of this King∣dome. And when all things were in a readinesse,Prince Lewes of France in∣uadeth. the young Prince with a strong Armie came into England, and was oftentimes en∣countred with sharpe blowes, but yet he did much harme. And the Pope (being by his Legats informed in what case King Iohn and his Realme stood) required the French King, and Prince Lewes his sonne, and all others who adhered to their part, of what estate or condition soeuer they were, forthwith to desist and cease from all hostilitie and warre; because both King Iohn and his kingdome, were reconciled to his fauour, and to the Church, and the Crowne of his Realme was holden of the See of Rome:Contention between the Pope and the French King. So that (by consci∣ence, and by the lawes of God and of Men) he ought to be protect∣ed and defended by him, and by his authoritie and power. But the French refused to obey; affirming, That no king (without the free consent of his Nobles, Prelats, & common people) could giue vnto any other his kingdom, nor the protection of his Subiects, which were committed to him by God; and consequently,The Pope curseth. that this king∣dome was not holden of the Church of Rome, nor ought to be de∣fended or protected by her. This answere so startled the Pope (whose will may not willingly meet with the least resistance) that incontinently he sent Guallo the Cardinall of St. Martins, into this Realme: who accursed Philip the French king, and Prince Lewes his sonne, and such of the English Nobilitie as took part with them, and all their Complices and adherents. The wiser sort among them little respected what was done by the said Cardinall: but the common people,The effects of the said curs. and the ordinarie de∣gree of Souldiers (whose deuotions more depended vpon feare, then vpon their knowledge) were so amazed and daunted with those sharp and sudden curses, that (leauing their Leaders, and the Field) they returned home to their houses, and to their Ships.Robbery, stealth, and oppression. And the poore Natiues of this Realme (knowing that diuers great Lords were vnder the censure of this curse) entered into their hou∣ses, fields, and grounds, robbing and spoyling, and bearing and dri∣uing away, whatsoeuer they could find and take: they being so far off from doubting or disputing with their owne consciences, whe∣ther therein they did well or no,Popish blind∣nesse. that they supposed their so doing tended immediatly to the glorie of Almighty God, and that their
stealths and Robberies were meritorious and pleasing in his sight. The reuolted Lords are distressed.By these means, those Lords and Nobles were much perplexed and pinched with great distresse, and were likely to be starued to death; because they wanted all necessaries belonging vnto life, and knew not how to relieue their owne wants. Neither durst anie o∣ther (by reason of those Curses, and of their Treasons) to relieue them:They submit them elues. So that at length (when all friends, and when all other re∣medies did faile) Necessitie (which is the most imperious Com∣mander of all those, ouer whome she tyrannizeth) enforced them to prostrate themselues at the Kings feet; to confesse their vnduti∣full reuolt; and to craue his pardon. They are pardoned and receiued into fauor.The King (who by nature was gracious, and full of pitie; and being more willing to forgiue than to punish such, as in the highest measure had offended him, albeit he had, by their assistance giuen to his enemies, beene oppressed with infinite miseries, and had found more fidelitie and seruice in strangers borne, than in those his owne subjects) in milde and in gentle sort accepted of their sub∣mission, pardoned their transgressions, and restored them to their Honors, and to their Lands. Peace.And by these meanes this Realme was disburthened of the French Nation; and a quiet peace began to salute the King and his people: who now found some leysure to looke vp, and to refresh themselues; as Fishes doe in a faire calme, after they haue beene tumbled and tossed in the Waters by an vnquiet Storme. 1212. The Councell of Lateran.The Pope intending to make these his proceedings with King Iohn in England, a president vnto other Princes) assembled a gene∣rall Councell at Lateran: wherein hee published them all at large, together with the said kings Grant of his Kingdome to the Pope,Princes ex∣communica∣ted, and their Prouinces and King∣domes inter∣dicted. and his said regrant, and the Tenure thereof to be of the Church of Rome. And in the same Councell, Otho the Emperour, Peter king of Arragon, and Raymond Earle of Tholouse, and diuers other Princes, were excommunicated: and others were interdicted, to∣gether with their Kingdomes and their Prouinces (for Heresie, as it was pretended.A Popish Policie.) But the certaine scope of this craftie and cun∣ning packing tended to none other end, than onely to make tem∣porall Princes subiect to the Popes correction; and consequently to enrich himselfe and his successors,Auricular Confession. Transub∣stantiation. Damnation. with their spoyle. In the same Councell also, Auricular Confession, and Transubstantiation were established and decreed: and therein it was enacted, That such as spake euill of the Pope should be damned in Hell; and that no
man should be Emperour,Emperour. vntill he had sworne his Homage to the Pope, and had receiued his Crowne from him. And thus all these troubles (hauing had from the fourth yeare of King Iohns Raigne as long a continuance as the Troian Warres) were at last ended.Peace after tenne yeares warre. But the Clergie would in no sort bee hearti∣ly reconciled to the King. For such was their secret grudge and spleene towards him, that (vnder the colour of much seruice and dutie) as hee lay in the Abbey of Swansteede, not farre from Lincolne) hee was poysoned by a Monke of the Order of Saint Bernard: who, to make his match sure,King Iohn is poysoned. and to auoid jealou∣sie and suspition, first dranke vnto the King, and poysoned himselfe for companie. And thus died King Iohn, when he had raigned aboue seunteene yeares; and lyeth buried at Winche∣ster. In the seuenth yeare of his Raigne hee transported a puissant armie of valiant men of armes, and common souldiors,1205. into Ire∣land:Ireland. and with great resolution and courage he reduced that Na∣tion to their former obedience; from which (with insolent obsti∣nacie) they had reuolted. And in the ninth yeare, by a new Charter,1208. A Maior in London. hee enabled the Citizens of London to make their annuall choice of a Mai∣or, and of two Shirifes, for the better Gouernement of that Citie. And the yeare following,London Bridge. the Bridge of Stone was there built ouer the Riuer of Thames. This King was verie wise, politike, and wonderfull valiant:1209. not to be subdued but by Death;A descriptin of King Iohn nor wearied with anie Tra∣uaile; nor would be discouraged with more than ordinarie Dan∣gers. Hee fought manie successefull Battailes both at home and abroad; yet was hee not alwayes fortunate. For by meanes of the Popes quarrellings, Philip of France wonne from him the grea∣test part, yea almost his whole Duchie of Normandie, and vexed him exceedingly at home in his owne Kingdome. Hee was li∣berally bountifull and benigne to all Strangers; but sparing in his gifts to his owne subiects. And some reason hee had to be the more close-handed towards them, because the most of them (better louing France than their owne Countrey, and caring more for the French King than for him, who was their Soueraigne Lord and Master) gaue him little stomack and courage to aduance them; as otherwise (no doubt) hee would haue longed and desired to haue done. Hee left behinde him foure sonnes; viz. Henrie who succee∣ded
him; Richard, who was elected King of the Romans; William of Valentia; and Guido Disnay: and three daughters; viz. Isabell, married to Fredericke the Emperour; the second, to William Marshall Earle of Wor∣cester; and the third, to the Earle of Leice∣ster.
THE HISTORIE OF KING HENRIE THE THIRD. AFTER the death of King Iohn, Henrie his sonne (being of the age of nine yeares) was crowned King: and the Protection of him,A Protector. and of this Realme, was committed to the Earle of Glocester: who hauing mar∣ried one of the Kings aunts, and being well learned, politicke, and wise; temperate, and valiant; admi∣nistred the Lawes and Iustice vp∣rightly to the people. So deepe an impression had confidence made in the hearts of Philip of France, and of Prince Lewis his eldest sonne,The French King againe inuadeth England. that the Kings Minoritie, Traiterous friends, and their owne good fortune, would make them the Soueraigne Lords of this kingdome; that no former Commandements, or Curses from the Pope, preuailed, to make them vtterly to abandon and to forsake this kingdome. For their Hopes fed them with this conceit, that their new re∣paire hither, and the daily disturbance and trouble, which by their meanes should vnjoynt the Peace, and the good Gouern∣ment of this Commonweale, would and (in the end) should shake it with a continuall feauer; and make it hopelesse of all recoue∣rie or reliefe, sauing onely by their meanes. And vpon this Pro∣iect they landed fresh forces within this Land.
But the new Protector was not idle in his charge. For his Pre∣parations were expedited with great celeritie and judgement: and (with such forces as he had leuied) he manfully opposed him∣selfe against all Encounters of the French,The Welch∣men take part with the French. and of the Welch, which obstinately adhered to the French part. But the best successe by Warres (in a distempered and in a mutinous Estate) giues little cause of boasting to eyther part. For the slaughter of manie friends and kinsfolke (affoording the Victorie) cannot chuse but bring with it a sorrowfull remem∣brance of their vntimely end; and beget manie wishes, that (their vndutifull Errors hauing beene reformed) they were aliue againe. The Pope curseth againHonorius the Pope being truly informed, how obstinately the French and the Welch Nations (being assisted with some English) daily warred and spoyled within this Realme: not onely confir∣med the authoritie of Guallo the Legate; but by him he thundred more sharpe and terrible Curses against them all, than formerly hee or his predecessors had done. Whereunto hee added new Excommunications, Depriuations, and other bitter Censures of the Church of Rome. His curses are not cared for.Hereupon Prince Lewis, with his confederates, seemed to be peacefull for a while; and made an outward shw, as if hee onely waited for a fit oportunitie to depart. Yet in the meane time, king Philip his father (with great care and cost) prepared new Forces for his aide, and shipped them for this Realme. But Hugh de Burgh (being a man prouident,Hugh de Bergh pre∣uaileth on the sea. and truly valiant, and being chiefe Master of the fiue Ports) hauing fitted a strong Fleete of good Shippes, and furnished them to the proofe with choice Mari∣ners and expert men of Warre, encountred them brauely vp∣on the Sea: and with such hardie blowes so fiercely did as∣sayle them, that (beeing altogether vnable to resist him) they submitted themselues, and all their Shippes, vnto his mercie. The French are absolued, and doe re∣turne.This noble Exploit (being thus attended by Victorie) forth∣with drew Prince Lewis to a milde entreatie of Peace: So that (being absolued by Guallo, and receiuing good summes of mo∣ney to further his returne) he surrendred all such Forts, Castles, and Townes as hee had taken, and with his companies sayled into France; leauing his English friends (who had supported his Estate and part in all these Warres) to the censure of the Lawes, and to end their miserable dayes with sundrie executions and strange deaths.
The Common-weale being now suffered to breath,A Parlia∣ment. and ha∣uing found some leisure to prouide fitting medicines to cure such maladies as distempered her estate, required that a Parliament might be sommoned, which was graunted:King Ed∣wards lawes restored. and in it the ancient Lawes of King Edward were reduced and restored to their former vigor and strength. And the Grand Charter (in those dayes cal∣led Magna Charta, comprising sundry laws,Magna Charta. which were both ease∣full and commodious to the common people) was ratified and con∣firmed. And whereas the Wardships of the heires of such of the Kings tenants as died,Warships & marriages. Ann. 902. Ann. 1056. seized of any lands by them holden in Knights seruice, was graunted to King Edgar during their minori∣ties; and their marriages were afterwards granted to King Edward the Confessor. Those lawes (which a long time had lien asleepe) were now reuiued and awaked; and were restored to their former vse. In the same Parliament also, a voluntarie Taxe was frankely giuen to the King:A voluntarie Taxe. partly to discharge such debts as former warres had occasioned, and partly to leuie new forces, to be conducted by Richard the kings brother, for the recouering of Poyters and of Gas∣coyne; which of late yeers (most iniuriously, and with too much vio∣lence) had been vsurped and taken from King Henries predecessors, by the French King. The Parliament being ended; the said Taxe,An Armie transported into Gascoyne &c. with great celeri∣tie, and without contradiction by any, was soone leuied: so that the Kings Coffers were replenished with siluer, and with gold; and all requisits were carefully prouided, and a gallant Armie of couragi∣ous men of warre were assembled, and safely transported.Richard re∣couereth Poy∣ters and Gas∣coine. With which, Richard the Kings brother did (almost) wonders; subdu∣ing where he found resistance, and seizing vpon Lordships, Towns, Forts, Castles, and other defenced places, quietly, and without blowes, where no head was made against him. So that within few moneths (such was his valor and good fortune) he recouered both those Prouinces wholly for the king; and returned with much ho∣nor into England. But the kings absence from those places,The French King winneth Poyters, Pe∣rigot, &c. ministred opportunity to the French king to be vnfriendly, and daily to make wars, roads, incursions, and inuasions into those Prouinces, which (without co∣lour of right) he endeuored to subdue. So that hee (refusing no aduantage, which might in any sort further his desires) suddenly led a new Armie into Poyters, and quickly made himselfe the Lord thereof. And then he marched into Pierigot and Aluerne, and other places in Guian; where he did the like. But king Henry sent thither another Armie,A new Army transported. with which his brother Richard Earle of Cornwall
fought many cruell and sharpe battailes; and in the most of them, Fortune assisted him with good successe, and all things afforded him great hopes,A peace is concluded. that hee should recouer whatsoeuer (in his ab∣sence) had been lost. But in the height of all these broyles, a friend∣ly peace was concluded betwixt the two Kings; and Richard retur∣ned safely into England. The causes of dislike be∣twixt the K. and his Ba∣rons.These troubles being thus ended, and peace gladding the hearts of all such as had been tired with those warres: vnkinde iealousies began to breed much hart-burning, betwixt the King, and his own Barons; for that (as they conceiued) the King reposed little confi∣dence in their faith; neglected their seruice and societie; and ap∣plied himselfe, and his fauours, wholly vnto strangers; whom nei∣ther alliance, nor Countrie, bound to performe any dutie towards him, nor would be found trustie, when the hand of his bountie and liberalitie was closed vp,The King re∣concileth himself to his Barons. And the King (perceiuing their discon∣tent) entered into the secret closet of his owne breast, and tooke a strict examination of his owne dealings. And finding them to bee such, as iustly might displease he reformed his error; remoued the causes of those dislikes; and louingly reconciled himselfe to his Nobles. Iohn Scot Earle of Chester dieth.About this time, Iohn Scot Earl of Chester died, without issue male, hauing foure daughters & heirs. From them the king resumed into his own hands that Earledom, and all the Territories belonging thereunto: which he augmented with large additions of yearely reuennues; and many Regall Priuiledges, Liberties, and Honours. And for a recompence and by way of exchange, he gaue vnto those Ladies many Honors, Lordships, Castles, and Mannors, which ex∣ceeded their owne in true value. And hauing married Prince Ed∣ward,Chester and Wales annex∣ed to the Kings eldest sonnes. his sonne, to Elyanor sister vnto the King of Spain: he gaue vn∣to him the Prouince of Guyan; the Lordship of all Ireland; and cre∣ated him Earle of Chester, and Prince of Wales: which two later dig∣nities he then annexed to the eldest sonnes of the Kings of this Realme. The murde∣ring of the King is at∣tempted.And not long after, a Clerk dwelling in Oxford (counterfeiting a kind of madnesse) attempting to murther the King; for which purpose in the depth of the night, he crept in at the window of the Kings chamber, in which most commonly hee lodged. But (fai∣ling of his purpose, because the King lay not then there) hee was taken; examined; confessed his villanie; and by the course of law being condemned, he was put to a cruell death. The French King breaks the league.We haue heard before, that a peace was concluded between the Kings of England and of France; but the French kings were alwaies
secretly, or openly, malicious to the Kings of this Realme; because they had certaine Territories and Prouinces in France which bor∣dered on their Countries. And this malice made them little re∣spectiue of the sanctitie of such solemne Oathes and honest pro∣mises, as (more strongly than bonds of yron) should binde Kings. For no sooner was anie gappe open, into which they might thrust a foote; nor anie oportunitie (were it neuer so little) was offe∣red; but that they threw behind their backes the remembrance of all Truces, Leagues, and Conuentions of Peace whatsoeuer, and made all things to be lawfull, which either by sleight, or by violence, they could enterprise or doe. And as common experi∣ence oftentimes made it manifest; so did it now. For about the foure and twentieth yeare of King Henries Raigne, Lewis the ninth, with a deuouring Armie, entred into Guyan,Lewis the ninth inua∣deth Guyan. and spoyled and wasted that Countrey in all places where hee came. And King Henrie (intending their quicke reliefe; and purposing, if he might, to regaine all Normandie, and such other Prouinces as the kings of France vnjustly had detained from him) sayled thither with a puissant Armie;King Henrie carrieth an armie thither and oftentimes bickered with his ene∣mies: against whome sometimes he preuailed, and at other times had the worser hand. Yet his haughtie courage abandoned all feare; and no perils whatsoeuer could make him shrinke: for in all those skirmishes he performed stout resolution, and the noble va∣lour of a worthie king. But Fortune no further fauouring those his endeauours,He steppeth the French Kings cour∣ses, but beats him not back. than onely enabling him to stop the French Kings proceedings; hee re∣turned into England. But shortly before his departure, the French king married his brother Alphonsus vnto the daughter of the Earle of Tholouse; and gaue to him the Earledome of Poytiers, and all king Henrie: Territories in Aluerne: and plotted cunningly to haue procured the Earle of March to doe him homage for such Lands as hee affirmed he held of the said Earledome of Poytiers. But hee stoutly refused to yeeld vnto him anie such dutie or ser∣uice. And this his denyall so enraged the French king,The Earle∣dome of March is inuaded by the French. that he en∣tred with an Armie into the Earledome of March, and daily spoy∣led it without sparing. But king Henrie hauing carefully employed his labors to with∣stand this violence; and hauing raised a faire Armie, which himselfe conducted, transported it vnto Burdeaux. And not farre from thence (due preparations on all parts being made) both the Ar∣mies met; in which the bloud of the most valiant men of Warre was freely sold, and dearely payed for. But in the end, Fortune
extending more fauour to the French,King Henrie leaues the field. than to King Henrie; he was enforced (with the losse and slaughter of his best men) to leaue the Field. The Earle of March sub∣mits himselfeAnd the Earle of March grieuing at this mishap, and be∣ing loth that King Henrie should be engaged in a greater dan∣ger; submitted himselfe, and obtained Peace on faire conditions with the French King. And then King Henrie returned into Eng∣land; and married one of his sisters vnto Alexander then King of Scots, because hee would the better assure himselfe of his friend∣ship in time of neede. 41. 1256. The Barons Warre.And now began those mischieuous broyles and turmoyles within this Realme; which (vntill the kings death) daily, yea al∣most hourely, vexed and molested him and his whole kingdome. For the King (of later yeares) lending too pleasing an eare to manie lewd and euill Officers (whome, aboue all others, he best loued and fauored;The causes thereof. and by whose counsell and aduice both him∣selfe and his whole Estate was guided and directed) made little account and reckoning of the best of his subiects loue: and tooke from them (in diuers things) such libertie and freedome, as by the Lawes and Ordinances of this kingdome they justly claymed, and ought to haue enioyed. Hee also pinched his people with manie vnnecessarie Impositions and grieuous Taxes; which (by those lewd and bold Officers) were with much rigor and sharpenesse leuied, to their great dislike. And the king following their humours, assembled his High Court of Parliament in Oxford: In which, his designes were alto∣gether crossed: and the prosecution of businesses was so vnfor∣tunate to the whole Estate of this Realme, that (ab euentu) it was euer after named,Insanum Parliamen∣tum. Insanum Parliamentum, or the Madde Parlia∣ment. For when multitudes of such as were grieued, swarmed thither, and complained of manie iniuries and wrongs which dai∣ly did oppresse them; the Lords and the Commons (endeauou∣ring to redresse what was amisse) established manie things, pro∣fitable (as they intended them) for the Commonweale, but high∣ly derogating from the Prerogatiue of the king.The Kings Prerogatiue crossed. And to the end that those things which they had so contriued and concluded, should be inuiolably kept and obserued; choise was there made of twelue of the grauest and most worthie persons of this kingdome (whereof the Earles of Leicester and of Glocester were the chiefest) and they were stiled with the title of Les douze Piers,Les douze Piers. or the Twelue Peeres, to whom complete and absolute authoritie and power was largely giuen to support and to maintaine those Lawes. For which
cause they publikely receiued their Patent, and a solemne Oath. All which was sealed, and ratified by the King himselfe;The King ra∣tifieth their Commission. al∣though vnwillingly he did it. So that (the Parliament being en∣ded) the said Commissioners began (by strict execution) to giue life vnto those Ordinances and Lawes. For which purpose,The Commis∣sioners dis∣place the Kings Offi∣cers and At∣tendants. they first of all dismissed, and did clearely thrust from their Places, Offi∣ces, and Attendance, manie of the Kings meniall seruants; and appointed others in their stead. And this their doing was (aboue all other things) most dista∣sted and grudged at. For the King perceiuing, that such as wai∣ted on his person should rather be trusted by others than by him∣selfe; and that hee himselfe should be furthest off from chusing such as should be neerest vnto him: waxed infinitely melancho∣lie and sad. And hoping, that vpon further aduice and counsell hee should receiue better contentment, and be more kindly vsed;43. 1258. Another Parliament. hee assembled another Parliament: in which (with great griefe, and extraordinarie Passion) he complained of the hard measure which was offered to his owne Person by the Twelue Peeres: So that much labour was taken by his neerest friends,The King complaineth. not onely to a∣bolish their Authoritie and Power, but also to cancell and to make void those new Ordinances and Lawes. But such was the determinate resolution of the Lords in ge∣nerall, and of the Commons of that Assemblie,The former Lawes and Ordinances are confirmed that in stead of pleasing the King with Reformation answerable to his desires, they ratified and confirmed whatsoeuer was formerly concluded on: and by the Archbishop of Canterburie, and nine other Bishops of this Kingdome,A Curse. a solemne Curse was publikely denounced a∣gainst all such, as either by Direction, or by Armes, or otherwise, withstood or hindered the execution of those Lawes, or the Au∣thoritie of the Twelue Peeres. These new proceedings so much augmented the Kings furie and implacable discontent; that euen those things,The King is full of indig∣nation. which by his naturall disposition hee chiefely delighted in, were by him loa∣thed and detested most. And to the end that he might procure and purchase more contentment and joy abroad, than hee could finde at home; hee sayled into France,He sayleth into France. to visite King Lewis the ninth: by whome he was with all gentlenesse and courtesie re∣ceiued, and lodged in his owne Palace; where hee was feasted as a friend, and honoured with all accomplements appertaining to a great King. And at the same time hee concluded a Marriage betwixt Iohn Duke of Britaine, and one of his owne Daugh∣ters.
Normandie surrendred to the Kings of France by King HenrieThe French King also held a Grand Parliament of Estate: in which he protested publikely, That his conscience was much grie∣ued, for that (vnjustly, and without Title) hee detained from King Henrie his Duchie of Normandie, and such other Territories in France, as in right he ought to enioy. And on the other side, King Henrie (intending to conclude an inuiolable Peace with so deare a friend, and to remoue from him all future scruples of his consci∣ence in that behalfe) frankely and freely surrendred to him the said Duchie;King Henrie is made Duke of Guyan. together with the Lordships of Angeou, Poytiers, and Mayne. And in the same Parliament (with great solemnitie and honour) hee receiued againe to himselfe, and to his heires, the said three Lordships, with the style of the Duke of Guyan; for which he did his Homage in that Assemblie. Discord be∣tweene the Prince and the Duke of Glocester.Whilest these things thus proceeded in France, a publike Quar∣rell (vpon some secret displeasure conceiued by reason of the exe∣cution of those curbing Lawes) began to breake forth, betwixt Edward the young Prince, and the Duke of Gloucester; which by the Barons was stoutly suppressed, vntill the Kings returne: by whome they were not long after reconciled, and made friends. The King procureth two Bulls from Rome.The King being vexed at the heart, because his Regall Au∣thoritie was diminished by the Twelue Peeres: and not finding anie redresse thereof at home; endeauoured to procure some remedie thereof by his friends abroad. And for that purpose (with the great expence of much Coyne, and with rich and cost∣ly Gifts) hee (secretly) obtained two Bulls from Pope Alexan∣der the third: by both which, the King himselfe, and all others who had formerly sworne to obserue and to maintaine those new Ordinances and Lawes, and to support the Proceedings and the Authoritie of the twelue Peeres, were freely absolued from their Oathes. Yet the twelue Peeres (not hauing anie notice of those Bulls) ruled all: and were so busily employed about their charge, that the King had little or nothing at all to doe. They had but small leysure to recreate themselues with anie sports; but the King had time ynough to play: for hee was a King in name, but not in Au∣thoritie, nor in Power. The Lord chiefe Iustice displaced.Among others, Sir Hugh le Spencer being then Lord chiefe Iu∣stice of England, and an especiall fauourite with the King; admi∣nistred the Lawes of this Realme, not according to Equitie and Right, but after his owne fancie and will: and such was his indis∣creete carriage of most things which belonged vnto his Office and
to his place, that the Twelue Peers (farre against the Kings minde) remoued him, and supplied his roome by Sir Philip Basset (a man well learned, wise, vertuous, and discreet.) They also dismissed such Sherifs and Iustices errants, as the King had made, and bestowed those offices vpon others;Iustices er∣rants and Sherifs dis∣placed. The Popes Bulls are published by the King. so that the king (being vnable any longer to endure those indignities, and deepely repining to be euery houre disgraced and crossed by his owne sub∣iects) resolued presently to make vse of the Popes Bulls: for which purpose, he caused them with great solemnitie and reuerence to be proclaimed in sundry eminent places, in England, Ireland, and in Wales; and therewithall he commanded straighty, That all such (of what estate, condition,He counter∣mandeth the authority of the Twelue Peers. The Londo∣ners are sworne to obey and to aide him. and degree soeuer they were) as did from thenceforth by word or by deede, support and maintaine the said Ordinances and Lawes, or the authoritie of the said Twelue Peers, should be committed to strong prisons, and should not be enlarg∣ed but by his especiall notice and consent. He also took a solemne oath in the Citie of London, of all such as were twelue yeeres old or more, to be true, faithfull, and ayding to him and to his heires, and did perswade himselfe, that by this means he should from thence∣forth haue his owne will. But he was much deceiued therein; for such was the resolution of his Barons to the contrary, that they protested they would rather die then cease to vphold all those things which in so honorable an assembly they had solemnly sworn to maintaine. And some of them (coniecturing,The resoluti∣on of the Ba∣rons. and peraduenture not without good cause, that the King in priuat contriued som des∣perat plot,The Barons raise an Ar∣mie. to set himselfe at libertie by their ruine) repaired to the Marches of Wales, where they raised a strong Armie, and furnished it with all things needfull and conuenient for the warre. And standing thus vpon their Guard, yet resolued to abstaine from all violence,Their Let∣ter to the K. except necessitie (which obeyeth no King nor laws) should vrgently compell them to take a sharper course. They addressed their Letters (in most submissiue and humble sort) and sent them to the King; protesting with many oaths their dutie and their seruice to his Grace, and entreating his Highnesse, for the ho∣nour of Almightie God, for his owne soules health, and for the wel∣fare and happinesse of his people and Kingdome, vtterly to defie (except his Queene and Children) all such as either counsailed him,The King makes them no answer. or did themselues intend to suppresse the Ordinances and laws which were established at Oxford, or the authoritie and the po∣wer which (for the Common-weales prosperitie) was graunted to the Twelue Peeres. The King (hauing read those Letters) was much displeased, and
returned not any answer to the Barons;The Barons march to∣ward London wherfore they maintained a stout march towards London, vnder a Banner richly and beauti∣fully flourished with the Kings Armes. And as they passed by the houses, or possessions of such as fauoured the Popes Bulls, they robbed, spoyled, wasted, burnt and consumed them with fire, hol∣ding them for vndoubted enemies to the King and to his Crowne. And when they approached neere to the Citie of London, by their Letters they importuned the answer of the Mayor and Citizens thereof;Their Letter to the citie of London. whether they resolued to support the said Ordinances and Lawes, and the authoritie of the Twelue Peeres, or no? prote∣sting before God, and assuring them that they themselues meant not, nor intended any other thing. And that if any matters of sub∣stance contained in them were defectiue, or could iustly be con∣demned, it should receiue sound reformation with all conuenient speede. That Letter was sent by the citie to the King.These Letters (being thus receiued) were postingly sent vnto the King, who demaunded of the said Mayor and Citizens, whether they would support those lawes and the Twelue Peers, or no? who stoutly answerd, that they would, in regard that by the Kings con∣sent they had taken their oathes to that purpose.The cities answer to the King, and also to the Barons. They are ioy∣fully receiued into London. The Kings deuice faileth him. The King vn∣measurably stormed at this answer, but none other could hee get: and the same answer was by them sent vnto the Barons, who ther∣upon proceeded in their march, and were with much ioy and kind∣nesse receiued into the Citie. The King (plotting to defeat those Lords, and to dissolue their Companies by a slight) proclaimed, that himselfe, and the greater number of the Barons were agreed; and did require, that (in regard thereof) all Armes might be laid aside, that his peace might be pre∣serued, and no further feare or terror might amaze his people. But (this notwithstanding) the Barons marched with their whole Ar∣mie vnto the Kings Castle of Windsor, where they found many ali∣ans, whom the Prince had placed there in seuerall Offices and roomes:Officers re∣moued. those they rifled of their goods, and remoued them from thence; whereat the King was much displeased. And the Lords of his Councell (labouring to content him) ordered that those goods should be restored to those alians,The Councels order disobei∣ed. The contro∣uersie is re∣ferred to the French kings censure. and that from thence∣forth none (but the King himselfe) should presume to place, or to displace any of his meniall seruants. But the Barons vtterly refu∣sed to obey their order: yet (vpon the Kings motion) they gaue consent, that all those debates, controuersies, and sharp displeasures should be referred to the censure and iudgment of the French king, Lewis the ninth.
This conclusion sheathed all swords,The French Kings decree appeased (for the present time) all those Iarres, and gaue good contentment to eyther part; and as time gaue leaue, those businesses were controuerted before the said King, and reasons were vrged to the proofe on either side, vntil (at length) it was by him decreed that all the said Ordinances and Lawes should be anihilated and made voide, and that from thenceforth no authoritie or power should be left in the Twelue Peers. This sentence was so displeasing to the Barons,The French King is ac∣cused of par∣tialitie. His Decree is reiected. that they publikely accused the French King of grosse partialitie, and smoo∣thing with King Henrie; and so absolutely did they refuse to obey his order: and so strongly were they bent to maintaine whatsoeuer had been in Parliament established, that they repaired againe to the marches of Wales, and leuied a new Armie,The Barons leuie a new Armie. and (in their passage toward London) they robbed, spoyled, and burnt the houses, Lord∣ships and goods of Sir Roger Mortimer; who (aboue all others counsailed the King to withstand them) and the Prince (whose lu∣stie youth was furnished with much valour) leuied another Ar∣mie, with which hee marched towards the Barons:The Prince doth the like. and each of them so fitted and disposed their iournies, that those two Armies greeted each other with warlike salutations, and fought together without remorse or pittie; so that in the end,The Prince is ouerthrown. diuers of the Princes most potent friends and best souldiers being slaine, and his part dis∣comfited, they all were enforced to flight to saue their liues, and to leaue the Barons masters of the field. After this victorie, they marched forth and came to London, where they were receiued with as great kindnesse as before;The Barons are receiued into London. A mad tu∣mult. The two Captains cal∣led the two Constables of London. Richard king of the Ro∣mans being grossely wronged, is thereby made the Barons enemie. but some of the vnder sort of the inhabitants of the Citie (despising go∣uernment, and intending vnder the colour of these broiles to doe some mischiefe) elected two brain-sicke Captaines, and called them the Constables of the Citie, and did agree that (at the toling of the great Bell in Paules Church) as many as would partake with them should be in a readinesse to put into execution, whatsoeuer those Constables should command, and (though much paine and labour was taken to disswade them from their wicked purpose and intent) yet their longing desires after spoyles, and their resolution to bee lawlesse (vpon the touling of the said Bell) transported them furi∣ously eight miles Westward from London, to the house and posses∣sions of the Kings brother Richard King of the Romans, which they ruinated, and carried away with him all his moueable goods there found whatsoeuer. This insolent outrage thus wickedly committed by the headles multitude, furthered the succeeding warres. For whereas before
that time the vertuous and milde king Richard, king of the Romans, and brother to king Henrie (in regard of his neere alliance with Gil∣bert Clare Earle of Glocester) had (with all his power and best ende∣uours) mediated a peace betwixt the Barons and the King: now was he so exasperated and rowsed from his peacefull humor, that he became a professed enemie both to the Barons, and also to the Citie of London. And King Henrie hauing intelligence, that Sir Peter Mountfort had raysed a strong Armie at Northampton on the Barons behalfe;The King ob∣taineth a victorie. and being resolued to make some tryall of his fortunes, in regard of the apparant iniuries and wrongs which dai∣ly were practised to his disgrace: leuied a strong Armie, and mar∣ched thither; and by maine assaults he tooke the Towne, surpri∣zed Sir Peter Mountfort, and Symon the eldest sonne of the Earle of Leicester, and manie others; and sent them all to sundrie Prisons, to be disposed of as he should please. And on the other side, the Barons (who being exceeding strong, and nothing at all discouraged with this pranke of vncertaine for∣tune; but preferring the dutie of worthie subiects to their Soue∣raigne before their hopes, which expected fortunate successe) wrote their Letters to the King;The Barons Letter to the King. and with all humilitie and sub∣missiue protestations confirmed their fidelities, and assured him, That they intended nothing but the performance of their Oaths, by supporting those Ordinances and those Lawes which in Par∣liament had beene established at Oxford, for his Highnesse good, and for the welfare and profit of the Commonweale. But the King, his Brother, King Richard, and Edward the young Prince, beleeuing nothing what was written, and deepely disdai∣ning, that Subiects should rule and correct their Soueraigne Lord and Master, and determining to reuenge those disgraces, which their stomacks no longer could endure; proclaymed an vtter defi∣ance to the Barons: and with their Armie met them in Sussex, neere to the Towne called Lewys;The battaile of Lewis. where (betwixt them) was fought so fierce and so cruell a battaile, that the father spared not the sonne, nor the sonne the father. All kindred and alliance was there forgotten:47. 1262. the common Souldior held himselfe to be as good a man as the greatest Lord. Honour was there set at nought; and Manhood (being oppressed with Multitude) could make no shew. Hee who was most valiant, was soonest made breathlesse; and the Coward found no oportunitie to runne away. He who could strike deepest, wound manie, and kill most, obtained the chiefest praise. Pitie and Compassion were skorned and laugh∣ed at, and all remorse was vtterly exiled from them. None media∣ted
betwixt them but their swords, and their best Reconciler was death. Lamentable were the sighes and the groanes, the plunges, and the pangs of such, as (bleeding) breathed forth their liues: and euerie man fought with such an obstinate resolution, as if but one onely man at the last should be left aliue. At length the two kings,The two Kings and the Prince, with manie others, are taken priso∣ners. Prince Edward, and manie Knights and Gentlemen of choice ac∣count, and of the best worth, were taken prisoners, and more than twentie thousand men were slaine in this Battaile. And thus Furie (triumphing in bloud) was contented at length to hearken vnto Reason: and they who could scarcely set their feete vpon the ground, by reason of the multitude of dead car∣kasses, which as thicke as stones lay before them;20000 men are slaine. were now plea∣sed to take breath, and to conferre vpon conditions of Peace. And in the end it was agreed, That the King should (by new Articles,A new con∣clusion for Peace. and by the renewing of his Oath) confirme the authoritie graun∣ted to the Twelue Peeres; and all the said Ordinances and Lawes: with this Caution notwithstanding, That two Lords of the Spi∣ritualtie, and two Lords of the Temporaltie, should take a strait examination and view of them: and if in their judgements it were needfull, that anie of them should be reformed, full power to them was giuen, to alter and to change what they thought fit. And if they dissented in their opinions, it was then further orde∣red, that the Duke of Britaine (as Vmpier) should haue power to arbitrate and to end the doubt.The two Kings are set at libertie. Hstages gi∣uen, and the Prince was one. This being on both parts consen∣ted to and concluded, the two Kings left both their eldest sonnes for hostages with the Barons: who sent them to the Castle of Do∣uer; where they remained about nine moneths. Then did the King with all conuenient expedition summon his High Court of Parliament: In which, so strongly was the conti∣nuance of the said Lawes and Ordinances made at Oxford, vrged,A Parlia∣ment. that they were then againe ratified and confirmed: and the king (though much against his will) tooke an Oath to maintaine them and the authoritie of the Twelue Peeres,The former Lawes and Ordinances are againe confirmed. vntill (according to the said former referment) they should be reformed, if anie thing in them were found to be amisse. And all such as in those Warres, or otherwise, had in anie sort maintained them, receiued their pardon from the king. And hereupon the two yong Princes were enlarged.The Hostages are enlarged. But not long after, so great a variance touching those Ordinances grew betwixt the two Earles of Leicester and of Glocester (the two Generals of the Barons Faction) that nothing but mortall Warre had decided their controuersie,Discord be∣tweene the Earles of Leicester and of Glocester. if the King had not interposed his authoritie and mediation to make them friends.
A faire opor∣tunitie well watched and taken.But the young Prince Edward (taking much aduantage by rea∣son of this jarre) departed secretly from the Kings Court, consor∣ted to his companie the Earles of Glocester and Warreyne, Sir Roger Mortymer, and manie other renowned men for the Warre. And all these raysed a new Armie in Wales.The Prince rayseth an Armie. ANNO 48. 1263. The Barons doe the like. And the Earle of Leicester conceiuing that his surprisall and ruine was conspired (to preuent his owne danger and misfortune) did the like. And not long after the two Armies met, neere to Euersham in Worcestershire, and fought together so maliciously, and with such bloudie resolutions, that in short time manie thousands among them were slaine. For Death (taking part with both) spared neyther; but striuing to make her gaine by their losse,The battaile of Euersham. insulted proudly in the Armie, and bragged most, when she did most harme. But in the end the Barons were discomfited;The Barons are ouer∣throwne. and Symon Earle of Leicester, with his eldest sonne, and Sir Hugh le Spencer, and manie others of great account, were slaine, and the rest fled. The common souldiors that preuailed, despightfully mangled the dead carkasse of the Earle; cutting off both hands and feete, and sending them into diuers Shires to their friends, as Trophies of their Victorie. And others among them (being more inhumane and barbarous) cut off his head, and his priuie members, and placed them on eyther side of his nose. This ouerthrow did vtterly defeat the Barons, and depriued them of all their hopes: and it so reuiued the melancholie King, that now he began againe to be sensible of his owne strength, and resolued (with all speede possible) to breake those chaynes with which so lately hee was so strongly bound. And for the effecting thereof,A Parlia∣ment. hee assembled his High Court of Parliament: In which, no man dared to speake otherwise than as the King spake. So that those former Ordinances and Lawes, which were made at Oxford in the Madde Parliament,The former Decrees are all made void and the authoritie of the Twelue Peers, and all Patents, Commissions, and Instruments whatsoeuer (which tended to the establishing or ratifying of those affaires) were (by the Kings expresse commaundement) brought forth, and were publikely damned, cancelled, and made void. And thus King Hen∣rie regained his former libertie and power, to say and to doe in all things as he pleased. The King re∣solueth to burne the citie of Lon∣don.When this Parliament was ended, the King (perhaps by the in∣stigation of his brother Richard, King of the Romans; who was cru∣elly wronged by the baser sort of the inhabitants of London, with∣out anie cause by him giuen, as before it is mentioned) resolued vt∣terly to wast and to consume with fire his Citie of London: because
(as hee alledged) the Rulers and the Inhabitants thereof had al∣waies despised him, and taken part against him with the Barons in their Warres. Whereupon such of the Nobilitie (and others as were neere in fauour, and next about the person of the King) be∣sought him instantly to abstaine from so foule a deede; which would not onely much weaken his Estate and Kingdome, but also make him infamous through the World, and vnto all succeeding Ages. Their suite was earnest, and their reasons to persuade were vnanswerable: yet the King protested,No interces∣sion can pre∣uaile. That his determination should be vnchangeable; and that his Iustice vpon such rebellious Caitiues should be a president to terrifie all peruerse and obstinate Traitors and Rebels in future times. And this his resolution just∣ly occasioned the Citizens of London to quake at the indignation of their angrie King: so that they (perceiuing that his rage and fu∣rie could not be mitigated) caused an Instrument in writing to be made, and ratified it with their common Seale,The submissi∣on of the Londoners. by which they confessed their Rebellion, humbly craued pardon, and without a∣nie restraint, or exception, wholly submitted their Lands, their Goods, and their Liues, together with the whole Citie, to the kings Grace and Mercie. This Instrument they sent vnto Windsour by diuers of the chie∣fest and richest inhabitants of the Citie,The citizens committed to prison, and giuen away by the King. who were prepared with all humilitie to haue presented it vpon their knees. But so fierce was the Kings wroth towards them, and so implacable was his an∣ger, that he reputed none of those to be his friends, who interposed themselues as Mediators in their behalfes: Neither would hee vouchsafe to admit anie one of them to come into his presence; but caused them forthwith to be cast into prison: and fiue of the chie∣fest of them, together with all their Lands and their Goods, hee gaue vnto the Prince; and all the others he gaue to other of his at∣tendants, who burthened them with heauie seruitude and much miserie, and tooke from them what they pleased, leauing to them the least part of their owne. Thus when the King had a little auenged himselfe,The Prince procureth the Kings pardon and fauor. and time had cooled the heat of his passionate humour; he hearkened to the im∣portunate intercession of the Prince, and receiued the Citie and all the inhabitants thereof into fauor, and onely tooke of them a fine of one thousand marks; and restored them to all their Liberties and Customes, which for their transgression were seized into his hands. The King also, vpon the Princes entreatie,The fiue Ports are pardoned. pardoned the inha∣bitants of the fiue Ports: who finding Iustice to be fast asleepe, whilest the Barons warres outragiously disturbed the whole Estate
and Kingdome; robbed, rifled, and spoyled on the Seas both their owne neighbours and Countrey-men, and also all Nations whom they met, without any difference or respect. And lest the King should be too much troubled with the fre∣quent complaints of such as had beene wronged by them, or his Courts of Iustice pestred with the multitude of such sutors; the King commanded that none of the offenders should be impleaded elswhere, but onely in the Courts of those Ports: by meanes wher∣of there were but few that complained, because none of them had any hope to haue recompence or redresse there. And now, though those intestine troubles and ciuill warres (which like an outragious fire dispersed in the heart, and middest of a well compacted Citie, endangered the whole estate of this Kingdome and Common-weale) were thus appeased:The Earle of Glocester be∣ing vnrewar∣ded, thinketh on mischiefe. and although Gilbert Clare Earle of Glocester by his reuolt from the Barons, and by his adhering to the Prince and to his complices, had greatly furthered the good suc∣cesse, which had made the King to enioy a blessed peace; yet was the said Earle so little trusted, that he neither found fauour nor re∣ward; but the little respect which was had of him, and his cold en∣tertainment at the Court, made him desperate of all good fortunes, and inflamed his heart to work reuenge. The rascality of London do flock vnto him.This furie carried him headlong vnto the Citie of London, where no sooner was his discontented humour made known, but the rascall and the baser sort (forgetting the great calamitie which that famous Citie did endure, and the great fauours which so lately they had receiued from the King) flocked in troupes about him,They do mis∣chiefe. and boldly committed many grieuous outrages within the Citie. And then they went vnto the Kings Palace at Westminster, which they rifled, spoiled, and ransacked without meane or measure. This rude beginning prognosticated the sudden accesse of another ciuill warre: which might haue bred as much danger as any of the for∣mer had done;The Prince procureth a large pardon. but the Prince (againe) interposed himselfe an ear∣nest mediator betwixt the King and all the said offenders, and pro∣cured a large and a free pardon for the Earle. Thus this dangerous fire was soone quenched, and good preuen∣tion in due time did wisely cut off all occasions of future warre: and at the same time, and by the like meanes, the King pardoned many decaied and out-lawed Gentlemen, who (in the heat of those broiles) had committed many robberies and spoiles in diuers pla∣ces of this kingdome. The Earle of Glocesters request.And not long after, the Earle of Glocester (despairing of all in∣ward grace and fauour from the king, and being desirous, as it see∣med,
by deedes of Chiualrie to make himselfe famous among the enemies of Christ) requested that he might be sent with an Armie to make warre in the Holy-land. This motion (though it tended to much expence and great charge) yet it pleased the King excee∣dingly; because he knew that the Earles busie head and turbulent spirit would still be plotting and deuising of new broiles,An Armie raised to be conducted in∣to the Holy land by the Earle of Glocester. and hurly∣burlies at home: wherfore he caused a faire Armie to be raised, and furnished it with all necessaries fit and requisit for so long, and for so dangerous a iourney. But when all things were in a readinesse, the Earle fained many excuses which tended to ouer-much delay, which caused him to be lesse regarded by the King, and to bee in great dislike with all others. But Prince Edward (being full of youth and courage,The Earle is dismissed worthily from that charge. and long∣ing greedily to hoist his Sailes in the Sea of Honour, and by aduen∣trous deeds of Knight-hood, to equall his name with those who were accounted most valiant in the world) by his earnest suite and trauell, obtained the conducting of that Armie,The Prince vndertaketh it, and doth perform it. Their happie successe. and transported it into the Holy-land, where his sword wrought wonders: and his Armie bred such terror and admiration among the Turkes, that they would seldome or neuer aduenture themselues against the Christians in that quarter where the Prince serued. And to saue themselues from his furie vpon his comming thither, they raised their siege from the Citie of Acon,The siege of Acon raised. which (for a long time) they had continued with more then a hundred thousand men. And see∣ing that his death could not be hastened by force and violence in the open field,The Prince was villa∣nously woun∣ded. they attempted it by poysonings and other secret villanies, which tooke no effect. But at length a dogged Sarazen grieuously wounded him with an enuenomed Knife, yet (after much paine and great danger) hee escaped death. But in his ab∣sence his father King Henrie died, and was buried at Westminster,The King di∣eth. when he had raigned more then fiftie and six yeers; where∣of the Prince was quickly informed, and therfore (by great iournies) hee safely returned (with great honour) into ENGLAND.
THE HISTORIE OF KING EDVVARD THE FIRST. WHEN Edward, surnamed Long∣shankes, was informed of his fathers death, he made quick preparations for his returne from the Holie Land;The new King retur∣neth from the Holie Land. and by great journeyes trauailed vntill he came into England: where (with the generall ap∣plause, both of his Nobles and common People) hee was crowned King, when he was of the age of fiue and thirtie yeares. Wee haue heard how, when,The French kings practise against King Edward. and where Symon de Mountford Earle of Leicester, Henrie his eldest sonne, and sundrie other Barons were slaine in the last Battaile betweene them and the last King. And it is true, that after his ouerthrow, the Ladie Elianor his daughter, with manie others of his allies and kinsfolkes, were sen∣tenced to Exile; and departed into France: where they were cour∣teously receiued by the French king Philip the third, surnamed the Hardie; whose kind entertaining of them proceeded not so much from his owne bountie and naturall disposition to Liberalitie, as it did from an opinion which hee conceiued, That in so doing hee should gaine the loue and good liking of manie English Lords: who (being discontented with the last Kings Gouernment) were not
well pleased with his sonne, who had crossed them in most of those affaires. And moreouer, he knew the noble valour and courage of King Edward to be so eminent, that it was now high time to craue counsell of Wisdome and of Policie, how and by what meanes he might preuent him from making himselfe more great. And be∣cause Reason and common Experience taught him, That hee, whose owne house is on fire, will rather imploy his endeuours to quench that flame, than to set his enemies house on fire also: hee therefore practised secretly with Lluellen (the most valiant,Lluellen of Wales sueth to the French King to haue in marriage Elianor the exiled daugh∣ter of the late Earle of Lei∣cester. and greatest in dignitie among the Welchmen) that he, with those in∣habitants, would rebell, if at anie time anie Warres were but like∣ly to be attempted against the French Nation by King Edward. And this his plot was much furthered by the exile of the aforesaid La∣die Elianor: who being (by reason of her misfortunes) in the dispo∣sing and power of the French King, was (with great importunitie) desired in marriage by the said Lluellen: to whome (vpon those conclusions and agreements especially) shee was sent with honou∣rable attendance and rich gifts.She is sent towards Wales. But king Edward (being secretly informed both of the said purpose, and of her passage towards Wales) wisely preuented his owne danger, and intercepted her on the Sea,She is taken at Sea. and detained her as his prisoner. By meanes whereof, Lluellen (whose best Rhetoricke to persuade, was by open Warre and Rebellion) entred into the field with manie thousands;Lluellen re∣belleth. who were more readie to robbe and to steale, than to reclayme them∣selues, and to be mindfull of their dutie to their Prince. The King rayseth an Armie.The King likewise on his part (purposing to make his first voy∣age terrible to the Welchmen, for examples sake to that fickle Nati∣on) leuied so strong an Armie, that (by all conjectures) the Welch∣men were altogether vnable to resist him. And it seemed they thought so too: For their chiefest Captaine and Leader (partly for the loue which he bare to his longed-for Ladie, and partly to pre∣uent those fatall dangers which knocked at his dore) vnexpected∣ly submitted himselfe to the Kings Grace,Lluellen vo∣luntarily sub∣mitteth him∣selfe. and yeelded himselfe to be disposed of wholly and onely at the Kings pleasure; and vowed and protested with manie great and solemne Oathes, That his obedience should be constant,Lluellen voweth and sweareth loy∣altie. and his sword alwaies readie to serue the King, both against France and against all others in future time, if he might be made happie with the Kings fauour, and haue the enjoyment of his Ladie. Lluellen is pardoned fa∣uored, and wiued.The King, whose heart was euer enclined to mercie, and more desired by affabilitie to winne an enemie, than to conquer him by blowes; and supposing that his loue to his Mistresse would be a
stronger bond to strengthen his allegeance, than anie other thing; freely granted him his pardon, his fauour, and his wife. And thus those Warres (which menaced the death of manie thousands) were quietly ended, without the effusion of anie bloud. But within few yeares after, Lluellen,Lluellen re∣belleth. by the wicked persuasions and enticement of his brother Dauid (a man more contentious than prouident, and lesse valiant than mutinous; and yet one whome the King did extraordinarily loue and fauour) rebelled against the King; and fought with Sir Roger Mortymer manie sharpe and ad∣uantagious battailes.Lluellen and his brother are taken and beheaded. But at length (Gods judgements hastening Traytors to a shamefull end) both of them were taken; and their heads (as Trophies of the victorie) were sent vn the King: who caused them to be set vpon the Tower of London, for a terror vnto others; and there they remained long after. But (notwithstanding all this) yet the naturall disposition of the Welchmen so strongly preuailed, and so blind they were, and vnable to foresee their owne ruine,The Welch∣men rebell againe and againe. that within few moneths after they re∣belled twice; and by manie slaughters and strange executions they were subdued, and compelled to obey. And because their Warres were rather maintained and cherished by shiftings and by startings into the huge and vast Woods (which made those Rebels more disordered,They are subdued. and confident to saue themselues when greatest danger did approach) the King caused those Woods to be hewen downe,Their woods are burned. and to be consumed with fire: By meanes whereof, they were re∣duced to a more ciuill kinde of life;They become more ciuill. and began to practise diuers commendable Occupations, Arts, and Sciences, and tooke some pleasure (from thenceforth) to liue like honest men. In the eighteenth yeare of King Edwards Raigne,The King of Scots brea∣keth his necke Alexander the King of Scots (not hauing anie issue of his bodie) fell with his horse, and vnfortunately brake his necke. He had three sisters: the eldest of which was married vnto Iohn Baylyol, Lord of Galloway; the second vnto Robert le Bruze, Lord of Valley-Androw; and the third was mar∣ried into England to Iohn Hastings, Lord of Abergauenny.Contention about the Crowne of Scotland. Betwixt these three (each of them being backed with the best support of their most able friends) sharpe bickerings and ciuill warres occasio∣ned the deaths of manie worthie and valiant men, together with the ruine and destruction of some of their Houses and best For∣tunes:The title is referred to the censure of King Ed∣ward, as to the soueraign Lord thereof. and the Commonweale of that kingdome receiued manie desperate wounds and strange misaduentures, because each of them (in the right of his wife) attempted and hoped to be a king. Where∣upon king Edward (with great expedition) went into Scotland as their Soueraigne Lord, and endeuoured to compose this strife. But
such was their mutuall desire to raigne, that no persuasions preuai∣led to make anie one of them to yeeld. But in the end, more soun∣der aduice tooke place: so that they all (by a publike writing vnder their hands and seales) consented to referre themselues and their Titles to the censure and judgement of King Edward.Scotland is surrendred to king Edward And by the same Instrument they freely surrendered all Scotland, and that Crowne, into the Kings hands; to the end, that thereby they might enable him absolutely to possesse such a one of them in that King∣dome, as (in his judgement) ought to haue the same. Hee also re∣ceiued from them in writing their seuerall demands, and each mans proofes,A wise and a discreet King reasons and arguments to maintaine his Clayme. And thereupon King Edward elected and made choice of twentie of the most discreet, wise, and worthie men of his kingdome of England, and of twentie more of the kingdome of Scotland: and by their ad∣uice and counsell he informed himselfe truly of that businesse; and at length pronounced his Sentence for Iohn Baylyol,Iohn Bailiol is made King of the Scots. He doth ho∣mage for it to the King. who had mar∣ried the eldest of those three sisters: who receiued from him that Crowne and Countrey, and for it performed and did his homage to King Edward. The King, although he were earnestly employed in these and in other affaires at home; yet was he more troubled with greater bu∣sinesses abroad,The French King wrong∣eth King Edward. by reason that the French King daily wronged him in Gascoyne, Guyan, and elsewhere. And to maintaine those warres, the King (by the aduice and counsell of William Marchyan his chie∣fest Treasurer) seized into his hands the Plate, Iewels, and Treasure of the Churches and of the religious Houses within this kingdome,Eull counsell. and compelled the Clergie to giue vnto him the one halfe of one yeares value of all their Ecclesiasticall Dignities and Promotions.The King stppeth the Church. He is hated by Church∣men. This vnaccustomed Sacriledge made the King hatefull in Church∣mens eyes. But yet he seemed in some sort to content them with faire promises of Restitution, when his Treasures should by other meanes be encreased. But they little relying vpon that promise, and (by common experience in other things) being resolued, that the Kings Coffers would not be emptied to fill theirs (and yet feeding themselues with a vaine hope, that some other recompence might be made them) became humble sutors to the King,The Clergies ute denyed. That he would be pleased to reuoke and to annihilate the Statute, which in the fourth yeare of his Raigne was made against Mortmayne;Mortmayne. which prohibited the giuing and the conueying of anie Lands and Tene∣ments to anie Corporation whatsoeuer, without the Kings leaue. But as he neuer meant to gratifie them in anie sort whatsoeuer: so he made them answer, That it lay not in him, without the consent
of a Parliament, to reuoke and to frustrate anie Law. The Clergie (to their great griefe and sorrow) perceiued, that their Treasure was swept away, together with all hope of restitution or amends: and though it vexed them inwardly, yet durst they not to expresse anie outward tokens of dislike. Thus when the King had augmented his store by the Clergies plentie: he (by the directions of his said Treasurer) imposed a Taxe or Subsidie vpon euerie Sacke of Woolls,A new Tax. and vpon all Fells and Hydes which were to be transported out of this kingdome; and also required the tenth part of euerie mans moueable goods and substance to maintaine his Warres: which being granted, hee caused it to be leuied by manie payments within the spe of three yeares. He also compelled the Clergie to bring into his Coffers all such summes of mony as they had promised to pay vnto the Pope, towards the maintenance of the Christians Warre with the Turks in the Holie Land. He also tooke vp one hundred thousand Quarters of the best Wheat, and sent it to his Armies in Gascoyne and in Guy∣an: where they fought with much courage and valour, but with doubtfull successe; sometimes gaining what was lost, and sometimes loosing what they had wonne. In the fiue and twentieth yeare of King Edwards Raigne,25. 1296. Iohn Baylyol inuadeth England. Iohn Baylyol the King of Scots (partly by the secret procurement of the French King, and partly by the lewd aduice and counsell of factious and wicked persons) sent a Defiance (with a proud renunciation of his Fealtie and Homage) to the King; and with an Armie of braine-sicke Rebels entred into the Northerne parts of this king∣dome: where (with fire and sword) they oppressed such as could make no resistance, and (without pitie and compassion) slew such as were armed in the defence of their Countrey, and to saue them∣selues.The King with an army marcheth a∣gainst the Scots. Whereupon King Edward recounting his manifold fauors and great loue to the said reuolted King, and the high Honour wherewith (not manie yeares before) he had graced him; and be∣ing resolued to correct his vnthankfulnesse with sharpe reuenge, le∣uied a puissant Armie, and marched (in full strength) towards the Northerne parts: and found his fortune to be so fauourable,Barwike wonne. The Scots are ouerthrowne. 25000 Scots are slaine. that with much ease hee wonne the strong Castle of Barwike, with the slaughter of fiue and twentie thousand Scots. He also wonne the well-defended Castle of Donn-Barre: and (piercing into the sides of Scotland) hee tooke Edenburrough, and all other places of the best defence. And the King of Scots perceiuing the dangerous e∣state wherein hee stood, and reposing his last hopes in the Kings Grace; by the aduice of all his Nobles repaired in person to the
Kings presence,The King of Scots yeel∣deth himself, and surren∣dreth his Kingdome. He is sent to the Tower of London. humbly submitted himselfe, craued pardon, and solemnely surrendred his whole Kingdome into King Edwards hands: Who forthwith sent the said Scottish King with a strong Guard to the Tower of London; but gaue him large allowance both of Libertie and of Attendance, and of his Diet. And then he committed the Gouernment of that Kingdome vnto Iohn War∣rayne, Earle of Sussex and of Surrey; and made Sir Hugh Cressing∣ham his High Treasurer, and William Earnsley his chiefe Iustice of that Kingdome.The King placeth a Go∣uernour ouer Scotland. And hauing confined some of the Rebellious Peeres of Scotland within the Marches of England; hee returned triumphantly, and with great honour. And then King Edward vsing great expedition and much po∣licie for the refreshing and for the renewing of his Armie;King Ed∣ward sayleth into Flanders and assisteth the Earle thereof. trans∣ported it into the Territories of Guy, then Earle of Flanders: a∣gainst whome, Robert Earle of Arthois (by the procurement, and with the assistance of the French King) made sharpe warre. And the French King intending to hasten King Edwards returne into England, to saue himselfe and his owne Countrey; animated the Scots to rebell againe: And they (because they were factious, and readie to doe vnto France all seruice vpon all commaunds,The Scots rebell. though with the hazard of their liues, and of their lands) without anie feare, or fore-cast of their future miseries, did put themselues in Armes. But King Edward purposing to greete the French King and his Forces with a Souldiors welcome; appointed Henrie Percie Earle of Northumberland, and manie other Lords and Gentlemen of the best ranke,The Scots are subdued. for the repressing of that Rebellion: who so manfully banged the Scots, that they enforced them to flye out of the field, and pursued them with a mercilesse slaughter, and reduced the rest to their former dutie and obedience. The French King dared not to fight with King Edward.The French King perceiuing, that his practise with the Scots wanted his hoped successe; was not desirous to trie his strength with King Edward in the open field: but reposing more confidence in his wit than in his valour, hee proposed verie honourable con∣ditions of amitie and loue; which by King Edward were accepted: and then a generall Peace was proclaymed betwixt them all. And thus those Warres (by King Edwards meanes and assistance) recei∣ued a short end;A Peace is concluded. which made a shew of long continuance, with the expence of much bloud. London is restored to her liberties.After the Kings returne into England, hee restored to the Citi∣zens of London their Liberties; which (for manie vndutifull mis∣demeanors) had remained forfeited in his hands for the space of
twelue yeares.The Scots re∣bell againe. And forthwith hee ledde all his Forces into Scot∣land; where a new Rebellion madly raged, and could not be sup∣pressed without much strength. And being more willing, that the execution of Iustice vpon few (for examples sake) should rather reclayme the multitude, than that the Sword should wastfully con∣sume them; he required the deliuerie of their Leaders,A mercifull King. and offered his free pardon to the rest. But their froward dispositions (preparing them to much more miserie than as yet they had endured) animated them obstinately to arme themselues, and in warlike fashion to bid Battaile to the King: Insomuch, that his Highnesse finding his fauours to bee neglected, and perceiuing that all extremitie was to be vsed;The battaile of Fanrike. The Scots are ouerthrowne. 28. English∣men slaine. 32000. Scots are slaine. set vpon them with such furie and violence, that with the losse of eight and twentie of his followers, and with the slaughter of two and thirtie thousand of the Scots, hee enforced the rest to yeeld: and taking a new Oath for their Fealtie and Homage, he appeased that Countrey; and (to the great joy of all his people) he retur∣ned againe into England. Where (vpon the earnest entreatie and request of Pope Boniface the eight) hee enlarged Iohn Baylyol: Who trauailed into France,Iohn Baylyol set at libertie to take a view of his Lordships there; which (according to his owne name) were called Bayly∣ols Lands. King Edward had no sooner finished these Troubles;The Scots doe rebell againe. but the Scots were in Armes againe: So that the third time hee entred with a great Power into that Countrey; where none were so da∣ring, or so hardie, as to endure his presence.The King leadeth an Armie into Scotland. But the greater num∣ber of the Earles, Barons, and chiefest Gentlemen of that kingdome had withdrawne themselues into the strong Castle of Estryuelyne; which was by them so strengthened, that in their judgements it was impregnable. This Castle was long besieged by the King,Estryueline is besieged, in which the Nobles are. but to little purpose: and hee much doubted, least his continuance in that seruice would affoord him but little honor in the end. Where∣fore (to make a tryall how farre his Inuention would take place) he caused two paire of Gallowes to be set vp in the Castles view;The Kings Policie. and with the sound of a Trumpet did proclayme his free Pardon, if the besieged did yeeld themselues within three daies: but denoun∣ced death vnto them all, by hanging, without respect of Honor,A Procla∣mation. or of Person, if obstinately they enforced him to continue a longer Siege. And hereupon the besieged, although they were so strong∣ly immured, that they might boldly haue trusted vpon their strong defence; yet because they distrusted to be relieued,Estryuelyne is yeelded. they reposed their confidence in the Kings word, and submitted both the Castle
and themselues to his grace and mercie,The Scots do swear their obedience to K. Edward. whereof they had good proofe. For (taking new oaths for the performance of their obe∣dience, and dutie in future times) he set them free and at libertie: and the like oaths he tooke of all Iustices, Mayors, and other Offi∣cers of Townes, Cities, Castles, and Forts; and hauing disposed all things in a comely and in a peaceable order, for the good gouerne∣ment of that Kingdome,The Scottish chairn. hee returned into England, and brought with him (for a memoriall of his great victorie) a Chaire of stone, in which the Kings of Scotland by common custom receiued their Enstallment and their Crowne: which Chaire remaineth in the Kings Chappell at Westminster, among the faire Monuments of our famous Kings of this Realme. Assoone as King Edward was returned from his iourney, he cau∣sed a general enquirie (which was termed Troile Baston) to be made throughout his Kingdome,Troy-baston of the misdemeanours and oppressions of his Officers of all sorts;A memorable deed done by a worthie King. so that the number of the transgressors was such, and so great were their offences, and their fines so heauie, that with their money the King filled his emptie coffers to the brimme, discharged his old scores, which were very great by reason of his warres in Wales, Scotland, the Low Countries, Gascoyne, Guyan, and elsewhere, and then he displaced those corrupted Officers, and placed better in their steads.The Prince is committed to prison, and Pierce Gaue∣ston is banisht Cornwall and Wales giuen to the Prince. 29. 1300. Peace be∣twixt Eng∣land and Scotland. The Scots doe sweare obe∣dience. The Popes claime to be high Lord of Scotland, and his command to King Ed∣ward. About the same time Doctor Langton then Bishop of Chester, complained grieuously to the King vpon Edward the yong Prince, who (by the lewd aduice and instigation of Pierce Gaueston his loose and gracelesse companion) brake forcibly into his Parke, and made hauocke of his game; for which the Prince was committed to pri∣son, and Gaueston was banished the land, and required not to return on paine of death. And the next yeere after Edmund Earle of Cornwall, sonne to Richard King of the Romans, died without issue; so that that Earldome reuerted to the Crowne, which (together with the Principalitie of Wales) the King gaue vnto Prince Edward, his eldest sonne and heire apparant to his Crowne. In the three and thirtieth yeer of King Edwards raigne, a generall peace was proclaimed betweene England and Scotland, and Robert le Bruse, and many other knights, Lords, and Earles of that Country came into England, and voluntarily swore their fealtie and their homage to the king: yet before one yeare was fully expired, the said Lord Bruse and many others secretly procured from the Pope an instrument in writing, by which the Pope made claime to the kingdome of Scotland, as holden of his Church of Rome; and the king was thereby peremptorily required to surcease from all de∣mands
of Tenure, and of Soueraintie ouer it.The Kings message to the Pope. But the king (by the aduice of his Nobles) signified by his Embassadors to the Pope, That the Signiory and Lordship of the said kingdome of Scotland did only belong to the kings of England, and not vnto the See of Rome, nor vnto any other: and therefore he prayed him to reuoke his said Instrument and vniust claime; for that both hee and his Nobles were resolued to maintain his right and lawfull inheritance therein, with the vtmost expence of their goods, lands, and liues. But whilst those things were thus handling,Robert le Bruse doth vsurp in Scotland. The King in his owne per∣son the fourth time subdu∣eth the Scots. The vsurper flieth into Norway. The King dieth. Robert le Bruse (by the Popes consent) caused himself to be crowned king of that Realm: which occasioned king Edward the fourth time to enter into Scot∣land with a puissant Armie; where he so largely extended his valor, and with the sword so fiercely deuoured the Inhabitants which ioynd with their vsurping king, that they were compelled (with extraordinarie tokens of subiection and humilitie) to yeeld them∣selues to the kings mercie. And Robert le Bruse (finding no meanes to make good his false title to that Crown) secretly withdrew himselfe, and fled into Norway, where he remained vntill king Edwards death; which happe∣ned soone after, when hee had raigned victoriously al∣most thirty fiue yeeres.
THE HISTORIE OF KING EDVVARD THE SECOND. AFTER the Kings death, his sonne Ed∣ward succeeded, and was crowned King. His tall and comely Personage,An euill King. graced with outward Majestie, see∣med to promise manie blessings to ensue: But his Maners (being grosse∣ly corrupted by lewd and gracelesse companions) were so lasciuious, and vnbefitting the condition of a King, that he became burthensome to his Nobilitie; and (almost) a skorne to his inferior subjects. For hee neglected the societie and the counsell of such as were wise and graue, and consorted himselfe with his owne Minions: by meanes whereof, he put in practise euerie loathed thing, wherein hee could either take pleasure, or expresse his follie. So that his euill Gouern∣ment made his Kingdome to be vnfortunate, and himselfe a presi∣dent of wretchednesse to succeeding Ages: as in the discourse of his Historie it will more particularly appeare. No sooner was his head adorned with his Imperiall Crowne,Pierce Gaue∣ston. but his heart longed for Pierce Gaueston; the wicked corrupter of his youth, and the professed enemie of all honestie and vertue. For al∣beit that he was exiled by the last King;The King breakes his Oath to re∣call Gaueston who tooke an Oath of this his Successor, neuer to permit him (vnpunished) to come backe a∣gaine into England: yet the remembrance of his villanies (consor∣ting
with the Kings bad nature and euill disposition) was a quicke messenger for his returne.Pierce Gaue∣ston is all in all. And his arriuall so aboundantly reple∣nished the Kings conceits with extraordinarie joy, that nothing else (in comparison of it) gaue him anie contentment: Neither could anie man (besides him) expect for anie gracefull entertaine∣ment from the King. The Nobles tell the King of his Oath.The Noble men (who perfectly knew how wickedly this Gaue∣ston was enclined) perceiuing that the King doted on him, and that his affections towards him were vnlimited: being perplexed with inward griefe, and fearing the Ruine which (through his insolen∣cie) threatened the subuersion of the whole Realme; embolde∣ned themselues to put the King in minde of his oath. But as his conscience troubled him not for the breach thereof: So their disli∣king encreased his desires towards Gaueston, and to make him great. For Gaueston alone, and none but Gaueston, was likely to doe all in all: and (frowne hee that frowne would) the King cared not who was displeased; hee was resolued, that Gaueston should be great. And therefore hee first Lorded him with the Baronie of Walling∣ford:Gaueston is aduanced. and soone after, he created him Earle of Cornwall; and made him the sole and onely Commander ouer his Iewels and his Trea∣sure. In which Office, so absolute was his power, and so cunning was his craftie head, to prouide in the time of his prosperitie for aduerse fortune which might ensue; that secretly he conueyed be∣yond the Sea a faire Table and Tressels,He conueyes the Kings Iewels out of the Realme. all made of beaten gold, and manie rich and precious Ornaments and Iewels, to the great hurt and prejudice of the King and of this Realme. Hee also tooke much pleasure to feede the Kings fancies with great varietie of new delights;The King liueth loosely and lewdly. and by his example, hee enured him to Banquet, Drinke, and to Carowse beyond measure: And his dishonest persuasions and enticements made him carelesse of the Bed and of the societie and fellowship of Isabell his Religious and vertuous Queene, the daughter of the French King Philip the faire, and sister to his Successor Charles the fourth; and trayned him to the adulterous consortship of wanton Curtizans and shamelesse Whores. The Queene in vaine see∣keth to re∣claime the King.The Queene (who sorrowed hereat beyond measure) reposed all means for redresse of those her vnsufferable wrongs in her pray∣ers vnto God, and in her modest wooings for her Kings loue. But all her endeuours proued nothing at all: For the beames of her ex∣cellent vertues could not pierce the thicke clouds of his vanities; neither could her teares or her groanes mollifie his hard heart, which surfetted vpon too much plentie of loathsome sinnes.
The common people gaue large libertie to their Tongues,The people talke of the Kings euill life. to speake and to talke reproachfully, and to the Kings disgrace. Hee knew it well; he heard it; and cared not for it: but was resolued to perseuere in those vngodly courses, which by Pierce Gaueston were contriued and proposed vnto him. The Noblemen, and such as by reason of their Offices and Pla∣ces were of the Kings Councell; did (in their particulars) aduen∣ture manie times secretly to informe him of the lewdnesse of Pierce Gaueston; and that both strangers, and also his owne people, did strangely speake of him and of his Gouernment: which was alto∣gether eclipsed by the foule interposition of his vices betwixt him∣selfe and it. But their labour was quite lost,The King cares not for good counsell. and their fidelitie was requited with vnthankfull frownes; rather testifying his de∣termination to continue subject (though he were a King) to his follies, than in anie sort to amend anie thing which was amisse. When nothing could preuaile, either to reforme the King,A petition for Gauestons banishment. or to make him carelesse of Pierce Gaueston; the Lords and Barons of this Kingdome began seriously to consult and to take another course. For they preferred their generall Petition to the King: wherein they plainely discouered the foulenesse of his faults, and the sorrow of his best affected subjects, for that his Majestie (more than was fitting or comely) was guided and gouerned by Pierce Gaueston: and earnestly entreated him to be pleased (for the pre∣uenting of such mischiefes as were otherwise likely to ensue) to banish that lewd Companion both from his Court and King∣dome. The King perceiuing that his Nobles were resolued to vrge his consent vnto Pierce Gauestons Exile, agreed (though vnwilling∣ly) thereunto: yea, in such a displeased humor graunted he their request, that thereby they might well vnderstand,Gaueston is banished into Ireland. The King sends com∣fortable mes∣sages vnto Gaueston. Gaueston is made Gouer∣nour of Ire∣land. The King sends him Iewels and Money. that his heart subscribed not to their desires. But away he was sent into Ireland: Where he was no sooner arriued, but by messengers sent to him by the King, he was required to be jocund and chearefull in his banishment; for that his absence should in the end be recompen∣ced with greater honours and more gracefull fauors than hee had formerly receiued: And for a pledge thereof, the King appointed him to be the chiefe Gouernour and highest Commander in that Countrey; and sent him such store of Plate, Iewels, and Coyne, both of Siluer and of Gold, that he might well thinke, that his ba∣nishment was but an honorable Embassade, and an occasion there∣by presented by good fortune to the King, to make him the more potent and more rich.
The Nobles doe sue for his returne.And besides all this, the Kings discontented passions so swayed in him, and Gauestons absence so much perplexed him; that his No∣bles (being in hope of future amendment of all things which had beene done amisse,Gaueston is recalled. and to please the King) freely, and of their owne accords, moued the King for his returne. But when he came back againe,Gaueston is wicked and insolent. so strongly and so strangely was hee supported by the pub∣like fauors and vnremoueable loue of the King; that with greater insolencie and pride than before hee practised manie more notori∣ous villanies than euer he had done.Gaueston is banished a∣gaine. He is recal∣led. So that (by meanes of the in∣cessant importunitie of the Nobles) hee was againe banished into Flanders: where hee remained not long, but the king called him backe againe. Those his Exiles (thus procured by the Lords and Barons of this kingdome, and their consents to call him home againe) might haue reclaymed him from his foule and grosse errors, if wisdome and vertue had in anie sort beene entertained by him.Gaueston boasteth of his wicked courses. But in stead of changing his bad nature into good qualities; hee tooke an ex∣traordinarie delight to glorie in his owne sinne; and to boast, how he mis-led the king. He also skornefully despised the greatest No∣bles of this Land,He skornes the Nobles. and abused them at their faces: and by vntrue informations (which priuately and behind their backs he gaue vn∣to the king) he caused them to be frowned on; and did all things in such a disordered fashion, without controlment, that the Barons with one consent (being hopelesse of redresse,The Barons strike off Ga∣uestons head. and being vnable a∣nie longer to support such a despised burthen) besieged him, being in a strong Castle; which they wonne: and to redeeme the kings honour,The King is impatient for Gauestons death. and to procure their owne liberties, and the welfare of the Commonweale; they caused his head to be smitten off. But so highly was the king displeased thereat, that alwaies from thence∣forth he endeauoured nothing more, than by crueltie and by ty∣rannie to reuenge his death. The King fa∣uoreth the two Spencers.And then (to anger his Nobilitie) he entertained into his nearest familiaritie and counsailes the two Spencers, Sir Hugh the father, and Sir Hugh the sonne; men as gracelesse, and as odious to the Lords and common people,The Spencers are as bad as was Gaueston as the other was. Their aduice enclined the king to prosecute his lewd and wanton course of life among lasci∣uious and wanton Whores and Concubines, and to set at naught the sweet companie of his modest and vertuous Queene: which made him a skorne to forraine Princes, and batefull in the sight of all honest men.The fruits of euill gouern∣ment. Yet the king, in despight of his greatest Lords, supported the two Spencers in all things which they would take in hand.
But his euill gouernment, both of himselfe and of his kingdome,The King and his No∣bles are at variance. reuiued new discords betweene the king and his Barons: and by meanes thereof, the affaires and businesses of the Commonweale were ill managed; and such as lay in wait to aduance their Estates by reason of this dissention, had now gotten fit oportunitie to put in practise what they pleased. Among which, Robert le Bruce (re∣turning from Norway into Scotland) was joyfully receiued there,Robert le Bruse being recrowned, inuadeth England. 7. 1313. The Battaile of Estreuelyne and was the second time crowned king of that kingdome: And then he leuied a strong Armie, with which he entred into the Mar∣ches of England foure or fiue dayes journey; and with fire and sword miserably wasted and desolated those Countries, vntill hee was encountred by the king, and compelled to retyre. But king Edward fighting a Battaile with the Scotish power within the borders of their owne Countrey, receiued the ouer∣throw: and hauing seene the slaughter of manie thousands in his Armie (among which, were Gilbert de Clare Earle of Glocester,The King re∣ceiueth a great ouer∣throw. and two and fortie other Lords, and more than threescore knights and Baronets, besides two and twentie men of Name, who were taken prisoners) hee was compelled (for his owne safetie) shamefully to flye, and with dishonourable successe to returne againe into Eng∣land.The King flyeth. Where he was (eftsoones) perplexed and put to much trou∣ble by the vntrue and desperate attempt of one Iohn Poydras a Tan∣ners sonne dwelling in Exeter:Iohn Poydras discouered and executed who boldly affirmed himselfe to be the truly begotten sonne of the last king, and said, That he was changed in his Cradle by his Nurse for a Carters child; and of∣fered diuers colourable proofes for the same: and among the rest, he strongly instanced vpon the vnworthie and base conditions of the king; sorting to none so fitly, as vnto one of obscure and of common birth. This his clayme, and bold assertions, quickly abused the eares and the hearts of the vulgar, and drew manie of them (for want of wisdome and obedience) to flocke vnto him, as to their king. But at length he was apprehended; and hauing confessed his Treason and his folly, and being arraigned, conuicted, and condemned, hee was executed according to his deserts. At the same time also,Barwike be∣trayed to the Scots. the strong and almost impregnable Castle of Barwike was trecherously betrayed into the hands of Robert le Bruse, the vsurping king of Scots: and such a generall scarcitie of all sorts of Victuals, and such a Murreine of all kinds of Cattell so punished the people,A famine Theeues beare great sway. that the like before among them was neuer seene. And diuers notorious and bold Theeues, to the number of two hundred at the least (being cloathed in Friers weeds of gray)
without respect of person or of sexe,The Scots in∣uade Eng∣land. robbed and spoyled the Inha∣bitants of the North. But (in the end) they were taken, and, ac∣cording to their deserts, were put to death. The Scots also raised a new Armie, and with great violence and furie they entred Eng∣land;The Famine grieuously in∣creaseth. where (besides the great afflictions occasioned by that watre) the Inhabitants of those Countries were so pinched and plagued with famine, that in many places those who liued, scarcely sufficed to interre their dead: and the rest (to preserue their liues) were compelled to sustaine themselues in the great extremitie of their hunger, by eating of Rats, Mice, Cats, Dogges, Horses, and such like. The King is ouerthrown the second time by the Scots. A miserably distressed people.The King (intending to suppresse the Scots, and to correct them for their insolencie and folly) encountred them with his whole Armie, but receiued a notorious ouerthrow; and (being scornfully checked and disgraced by his bold and sawcie enemies) hee retur∣ned home again with great ignominie and shame, leauing his poore subiects in the North, so miserably distressed and vnrelieued, as e∣uer any people were forsaken by an vnworthie and a carelesse King. The vse of this History.Of these disgraces, and of these troubles, we make this profita∣ble vse: That as the heroicall vertues of excellent Princes are crowned with many blessings from aboue; so for the iniquitie and hainous transgressions of wicked and vngodly Kings, both them∣selues and their people likewise, are seuerely punished by God, before whom Princes must fall as well as the common subiects, ex∣cept their true and heartie repentance (being ioyned with the a∣mendment of their liues) doe (in season) procure his mercie and his fauour. The Nobles endeuour re∣formation.The Peeres and the Nobles of this Kingdome (perceiuing that the diseases of the Common-weale did daily encrease and growe more dangerous) determined (like good Physitians) narrowly to search out the causes of these maladies, and to finde some remedie to cure them before it were too late.They com∣plain on the two Spencers. The miserable examples of all kinds of wickednesse which presented themselues vnto their view, emboldned them to informe the King, That the two Spencers and their misguiding of the State (by whom only, and by none o∣ther the King was counsailed and directed) were the immediat oc∣casioners of all those mischiefes and calamities, which miserably af∣flicted and tormented the whole Kingdome. They plainly tolde him, That such was their interest in the Kings person, and in his go∣uernment of his people, that they were bound (in honour, and for conscience sake) to informe his Highnesse of all such misdemeanors
committed by any of his subiects as tended to the subuersion of the State, and the disturbing of the common peace therof: and then they became importunat sutors to his Maiestie, That he would be pleased to put from him the two Spencers, who corrupted him with monstrous vices, and made him altogether carelesse of those duties which by Almightie God were required at his hands. They told him likewise, That as subiection belonged to the people; so the King was bound to protect them, and that (vnconscionably and most dishonorably) he had left his Commons in the North, to the rage and rigor of the Scots,The resoluti∣on of the No∣bles touching the two Spen∣cers. and to all extremities of hunger and of o∣ther wants: and that if he pleased not (vpon their humble entreaty and request) to cassier those two gracelesse Counsailors, of their places and from his seruice; they then must and would presume to doe it, though it were with the hazard and perill of their owne liues. The king could not choose but hearken to this grieuous and true report. For as it was founded and grounded vpon conscience, and on duetie; so was it maintained with a constant resolution to re∣forme that which was amisse. He bit his lip thereat, and his coun∣tenance proclaimed his discontentment.The King frowneth on his Nobles. Inwardly he meditated and deuised how he might surprise those Noble-men, who (most of all) stomacked the two Spencers, whom so immoderatly hee did loue, yet inwardly his tongue gaue the Barons a pleasing answere; so that hee forthwith sommoned his high Court of Parliament:A Parlamēt. and pretending a reformation of all things that were conceiued to be amisse, he gladded the hearts of his Nobles and Commons ex∣ceedingly. But the Lords and Barons (although they reioiced much that the time would shortly come,The Nobles do stand vpon their guard. in which these matters should be substantially debated on) yet were they iealous, and suspected lest the king intended their surprisal in that solemn meeting: wher∣fore the greater numbers of them repaired vnto London, beeing strongly garded with a braue Armie of sufficient and gallant men, which were all cloathed in a like Liuerie; whereat the king was highly displeased: but most of all it grieued him, that hee knew the Barons would haue their owne wil by taking and separating from him the two Spencers (who were more deer to him then his Queen and children,How the king loued the two Spencers. The two Spencers are banished for euer. and all his friends beside) and in the end (among many other things) it was (by the whole Parliament) enacted, That they should bee exiled during their liues, and neuer bee licensed by the king to returne againe into England. This being thus concluded, the Barons (who longed to see the two Spencers vnder saile) caused certaine Ships to bee prepared, in
which they were embarked and sent away. So that now all men were well pleased except the King; whome their absence vexed at the heart:The King hateth his Barons. and in all things he endeuoured plainely to expresse his hatred and his anger towards the Barons, who had enforced him to consent vnto their banishment. And to expresse the same more fully; he was informed, that the younger Spencer had strengthe∣ned himselfe with a few good Shippes;The younger Spencer be∣comes a Py∣rate. and that he lay (as a Grand Pyrate) coasting vpon the Narrow Seas, robbing, ransacking, and spoyling the Marchants, and all Nations who passed by them; but especially, and chiefely, such as were of this Kingdome. And although great sute was made vnto the King, that a conuenient Fleet might be prepared for his surprizall; and that hee might be produced vnto judgement,The grieued Lords com∣plain, but the King laughs. and receiue such punishment as the Lawes of this Kingdome appointed for the cutting off of such a notorious Theefe: yet the King smyled, and was inwardly glad to heare this newes, and turned a deafe eare to their request; and was so farre off from prouiding to fetch him in, that (pardo∣ning all his offences,The Spencers are recalled, and honored. and to despight his Barons) hee recalled them both from their Banishment, and honoured them with more Dignities, Offices, and Authoritie, than euer he had done before. ANNO 13.This thing being thus strangely performed by the King, and the daily vnsufferable injuries and insolencie of the two Spencers (who skorned and derided the Nobles, as being vnable to controll them,The Spencers doe skorne and deride the Nobles. or to doe them anie harme) were sufficient warnings to the Barons to looke vnto themselues, and to prouide for their owne safetie, before it were too late. Wherefore, seeing that neither en∣treatie nor Law could right their wrongs; they raysed a strong Armie,The Barons doe rayse a strong armie. and boldly marched into the field: And the King, with the two Spencers, and some others of the Nobles, did the like. And after manie sharpe Bickerings and Encounters both their Armies met,The King doth the like. and fought on either part with such obstinate desire to re∣uenge, that he was supposed to be the most valiant man among them, who could and did drench his sword deepest in the most bloud.A cruell Battaile. The Noblemen now forgat, that vndutifully they fought against their Soueraigne Lord: and the King would not by anie meanes know, that his Tyrannie had compelled them to take Armes. Kindred, Alliance, Countrey, Religion, Neighbourhood, nor anie other respect now preuailed to winne fauour: but furie made them trust to their weapons, and death stickled the contro∣uersie betwixt them.The Barons are ouer∣throwne. In the end, when manie of the Barons, and thousands of their adherents were slaine; they fled, and were pur∣sued
by the King, who (obtaining the victorie) neuer ceased the pursuit vntill he had taken the Earles of Lancaster, Hereford, and ma∣nie other Lords, of which hee caused two and twentie to loose their heads in sundrie places of this Realme,Twentie and two Lords beheaded. to the great astonish∣ment of the rest, and to the terror of the vulgar sort. Thus when this hauock was made of the Nobilitie, and when this victorie had puffed vp the two Spencers with intollerable inso∣lencie and pride, they made no good vse of their good fortune,The two Spencers wax more insolent and proude. for the amendment of their liues, or better counsailing of the King, but (as tyrants) they now did all in all as they themselues listed; and their will was the best law. And then (presuming that all things should be ordered as they listed) they procured the King to holde his high Court of Parliament at Yorke;The Prince of Wales created. Sir Hugh Spencer the elder made an Earle. A great tax. in which hee created Ed∣ward his eldest sonne Prince of Wales and Duke of Aquitaine. He al∣so created Sir Hugh Spencer the Father, Earle of Winchester, and Sir Andrew Harkley (whose extraordinary seruice was a principall meanes of the Barons late ouerthrow) Earle of Care-Liele. He also exacted the sixt pennie of all Temporall mens goods and mouea∣ables, inhabiting in England, Wales, and in Ireland, to defray and to support his intended warres against the Scots:The people doe murmur. but the leuying ther∣of enforced the common people to grudge and to murmure; affir∣ming, That they were altogether impouerished by dearth and fa∣mine, and almost vndone by reason of the disordred gouernment of the King. The Scots (being secretly informed that King Edward was re∣solued to inuade their Countrey,ANNO 15. The Scots do inuade Ireland. The Scots are ouer∣thrown. and to reuenge those indignities and those wrongs, which by the incursions and inuasions of Robert le Bruse their vsurping King, he had receiued) endeuoured to diuert his purpose another way; so that they entred into Ireland with a copious Armie. But the king (who was not ignorant of their de∣termination) made such prouision against their landing there, that the greater number of those assailants were slaine, and the rest (be∣ing vtterly ouerthrowne) were compelled to flie vnto their Ships, and shamefully to returne into their owne Countrey.The King entereth into Scotland with an Ar∣mie. The king was now perswaded that scarcely any strength could withstand so great a power as hee had leuied, and that the Scots should now be called to a strict account for all their inroades, incur∣sions, inuasions, murthers, robberies, and spoyles. And for the ef∣fecting thereof, he conducted his Armie into Scotland, where the Nobles and the other inhabitants of that land (being armed well, and being in number many thousands) for many daies by continu∣all preparations, made a shew to giue battaile to king Edward, when
as (indeede) they meant nothing lesse.The Scots do retyre into the Woods & Mountaines. For when King Edward ap∣proached neere vnto them, they craftily, yet stoutly and strongly, retyred manie myles, and at length withdrew themselues into the Woods, Forests, and Mountaines: where they soone cloyed, wea∣ried, and wasted the English forces;The English Armie is ty∣red out. partly with the vneasinesse of those passages, and partly with such Stormes, Tempests, Raine, Hayle, Snow, Frosts, and other distempered weather, as vsually in those places were too bitter and too sharpe. The Kings Armie is af∣flicted.And besides all this, the want of victuals and other necessaries so grieuously afflicted the Kings Armie with mortalitie and death, that (not hauing performed anie thing worthie a Kings care and trauaile) he began to retyre: which when the Scots perceiued, they pursued and hunted him with much crueltie and violence: So that (finding his forces to be broken,The King is pursued, and flyeth. and his Armie scattered) the Scots gaue a bold onset vpon the King himselfe, and enforced him to saue his life by an ignominious flight, and to leaue behinde him his Treasure,The King loseth his Treasure and prouisions. Ordinance, and all his best prouisions, whereat they made great jolitie and mirth. This last disaster and this last danger (which King Edward by a shamefull flight escaped) was principally occasioned by Sir Andrew Harkley;Sir Andrew Harkley Earle of Car∣lile beheaded. whome the King had created Earle of Carlyle, for his great seruice in his behalfe against his Barons in their late ouerthrow: for hee (hauing secretly receiued from the Scots a great summe of money for a bribe) practised to betray the King: for which of∣fence he lost his head. The Queene flyeth into France, and carrieth the prince with her.The Queene (knowing that the two Spencers enuied her deepe∣ly at the heart, and that by their persuasions the King refused to keepe her companie, and solaced himselfe too too wantonly with lewd and lasciuious strumpets; and pitying the late slaughter and bloudie executions of verie manie of the Nobilitie, and perceiuing that the affaires and businesse of the Commonweale were made slauish and seruile to all misfortunes) taking with her the young Prince Edward her sonne, fled into France to her brother King Charles:She is kindly entertained by her brother the King. by whome shee was receiued louingly, and was recomfor∣ted by earnest promises and oaths, That by his assistance, and at his costs, her wrongs, and this whole Kingdomes ruines, should be re∣paired. And not long after, the Barons (by their letters) offered their best seruice to her and to the Prince her sonne;The Barons doe offer her their seruice. and did pro∣test, That if shee could returne strengthened onely with the helpe of one thousand valiant men at armes, they would thereto adde so great a strength as should suffice to make the two Spencers feele the smart of their vnsufferable follies.
This proffer exceedingly rejoyced the Queene,The Spen∣cers do bribe the French King with the Kings Money and Iewels. The French King chec∣keth the Queene his sister. The Pope and his Car∣dinals are bribed. Sir Robert Earle of Ar∣thois a friend to the Queen The Queene and Prince flye into the Empire. They are kindly enter∣tained by the Earle of He∣nault. The Queene and Prince doe land in England. ANNO 19. 1325. The Nobles & Commons doe repaire to the Queene and Prince. The Bishop of Exeter be∣headed by the Londoners. The King goeth toward Wales. The Londo∣ners take the Tower. and daily fedde her conceits with fresh hopes of fortunate successe at the last. But the two Spencers (greatly fearing the euent of her returne, if the French King should take her part, and making the Kings Coyne and his Treasure their best Aduocates to plead their case) so cor∣rupted King Charles and his Councell of Estate with vnvaluable presents of Gold, of Siluer, and of rich Iewels, that not onely all aide and succour was denyed to her by her owne brother; but in verie sharpe and in quicke manner shee was by him reproued and blamed, as being foolishly afraid of her owne shadow: and as ha∣uing vnwisely and vndutifully forsaken the companie of her Lord and kinde husband. The Pope likewise, and manie of his chiefest Cardinals (being by like rewards engaged by the two Spencers) re∣quired the French King (vpon the penaltie of Cursing) to send the Queene and the young Prince her sonne to King Edward. And doubtlesse shee had vnnaturally beene betrayed by her owne bro∣ther, if secretly and speedily her selfe and her young sonne had not been conueyed into the Empire by Sir Robert of Arthois, her neere and kinde cousin and friend: where they were with vnexpected and extraordinarie joy receiued and welcommed by the Earle of Henault, and by Sir Iohn of Henault, Lord Beaumont his brother; who (being accompanied with three hundred Knights and sele∣cted men of Armes) went with her and with her sonne into England. Vpon the first intelligence giuen of their landing, the Lords and Barons, with gladded hearts and lustie troupes of resolued Gal∣lants (who were soundly and at all points armed) repaired euerie day to the Queene and Prince, and hourely their forces were en∣creased. So that the King hauing notice of these new troubles, left the Gouernment of the Citie of London to his chiefest Trea∣surer Walter Stapleton then Bishop of Exeter (who was an inward friend to the two Spencers, and a professed enemie to the Queene, and hated generally by the inhabitants of that Citie) and the King hasted vnto the Marches of Wales for the present leuying of an Ar∣mie. But hee was no sooner on his journey, but the Londoners (skorning the Gouernment of their prowd and insolent Comman∣der) apprehended him; and without anie lawfull proceedings, or judiciall Sentence, caused his head to be smitten off at the Stan∣dard in Cheape: and then they suddenly, and with great violence, rushed into the Tower of London; where they slew all such as they found there: and kept both it and that Citie to the vse of the Queene and of the young Prince her sonne.
The King changeth his purpose. The King fortifieth Bristoll. The Queene winneth Bristoll. The King is besieged in the Castle. Est ineuita∣bile Fatum. A strange matter. The King and Sir Hugh Spencer the younger are taken. The Castle of Bristoll yeel∣deth. Sir Hugh Spencer the father, and the Earle of Arundell are beheaded. The Queene and Prince doe march to∣ward London. The younger Spencer is publikely de∣rided. He is cruelly executed.As soone as King Edward was resolued and informed of this Reuolt; hee desisted from his intended purpose, and posted vnto Bristow, and fortified it in the strongest manner that hee was able; and committed the defence thereof to the Earle of Arundell, and to Sir Hugh Spencer the father: and himselfe (with Sir Hugh the sonne) entred into the Castle there, and were determined to defend it with all their strength. But within few dayes after, the said Ci∣tie was besieged, assaulted, and wonne by the Queene and by the Barons: who (committing the two Earles, and diuers others of the chiefest note, vnto safe keeping) besieged the Castle in such sort, that the King and his Minion (distrusting the euent) stole away se∣cretly in the night, and put themselues into a little Fisher-boat. Yet such was the will and pleasure of GOD (to make them to know him by their future miseries) that euerie day, for a weeke and more, the same Boat (by reason of a contrarie winde) was driuen backe, neare to the said Castle: Which being at length perceiued and ob∣serued by the Lord Beaumont, hee chased the Fisher-boat with a small vessell, and boarded her, and found in her the King and Sir Hugh Spencer the sonne, whome they so much desired, and brought them to the Queene; who presented them before the Castles view: and vpon the sight of them, the besieged yeelded the pos∣session of their Fort into the Queenes hands. Then were the heads of Sir Hugh Spencer the father, Earle of Winchester, and of Iohn Earle of Arundell (whose daughter was married to the younger Spencer) smitten off. And the King being committed vnto hono∣rable and safe keeping; the Queene, with the young Prince her sonne, beeing accompanied with the Barons and a strong Ar∣mie, marched towards London; carrying with them Sir Hugh Spen∣cer the sonne as a slaue: before whom, certaine vnworthie and base Fidlers (vpon Pypes which they had made of Reedes) skornfully played, skipped, and sung, in euerie Towne which they passed through. And being come to the Citie of London, hee was fast bound vpon the top of an high Ladder; and (his priuie members and his heart being seuered from his bodie and burned) his head was forthwith cut off and set vpon London Bridge. A iust re∣ward for their wicked∣nesse.Thus GODS judgements pursued those two vngodly and am∣bitious caitiues: by whose lewd aduice and euill counsell the King forsooke the bed and companie of the Queene his wife; liued wic∣kedly; made hauocke of his Nobilitie; neglected his common People; permitted his Enemies (to his disgrace) to triumph and to insult ouer him; and gouerned more like a Tyrant than a King.
And thus those times of Trouble being now againe blessed with a happie Peace,Sir Iohn of Henault and his companie are feasted and rewar∣ded. the Queene bountifully feasted and rewarded Sir Iohn of Henault, Lord Beaumont, and all his associates: who taking leaue, departed; and were receiued into their Countrey with much joy and great honour. And then the Queene and the young Prince (to reforme such things as were amisse,A Parlia∣ment. and to settle a better course of Gouernment within this Land) assembled an High Court of Parliament at West∣minster. In which, the King, by a generall consent, was deposed:The King is deposed. Prince Ed∣ward crow∣ned King. and (being verie honourably respected and attended) he was com∣mitted to the Castle of Killingworth; and Prince Edward was crow∣ned King. And not long after, the King being remoued to the Castle of Corff, was wickedly assayled by his Kee∣pers: who through a Horne which they did put into his fundament, pierced his guts with a burning Spit, and murdered him;The old King is murdered. when hee had raigned al∣most nineteene yeres.
THE HISTORIE OF KING EDVVARD THE THIRD. EDVVARD the third, being of the age of fifteene yeares; and crowned King, whilest his deposed father li∣ued: was chiefely directed in his younger yeares by the aduice and counsell of Queene Isabell his mo∣ther, and of his vncle Edmund of Woodstock Earle of Kent, and of Sir Roger Mortymer:Sir Roger Mortymer wickedly pro∣cured the murder of the old King. which knight (to interesse himselfe more especially in the Queenes loue) traiterously con∣spired and procured the murder of the last king, by the monstrous villanie and barbarous crueltie before mentioned. In the second yeare of this kings Raigne, Robert le Bruse (the bu∣sie vsurping king of the Scots) denounced Warres against him and his kingdome: which occasioned the leuying of a strong Armie,King Edward inuadeth Scotland. which consisted of foure and fiftie thousand men; with which, the king himselfe (being accompanied with Sir Iohn of Henault, Lord Beaumont, and fiue hundred Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen stran∣gers his associates) marched into Scotland:The Scots flye into the Woods and Mountaines. Where he hunted and chased his enemies from Marish to Marish, from Wood to Wood, from Hill to Hill, and from Mountaine to Mountaine, for the space of one moneth and more: yet (by reason of the Scots cowardise, which made them to skulke and runne from place to place, tyring
out the English Armie.The King re∣turneth. The King marrieth Philip daughter to the Earle of Henault. A Parlia∣ment. Persons at∣tainted. A dishono∣rable peace with Scot∣land. Their tenure is released. The Charter called Rag∣man, deliue∣red vp. A marriage with Scot∣land. Sir Roger Mortimer created Earl of March. He is too fa∣miliar with Queen Isabel He procureth the Kings vncle to be beheaded. Articles a∣gainst Sir Roger Mor∣timer. The King with his whole companie (not hauing performed any memorable seruice) returned home; and shortly after, took to wife the Ladie Philip, yongest daughter to Wil∣liam Earle of Henault, his cousen german in the third degree, and as∣sembled his high Court of Parliament at Northampton: in which (among other passages) the two deceased Spencers and Walter Sta∣pleton the late Bishop of Exeter were attainted of high treason. And then the King (by the directions of his mother and of Sir Roger Mortimer) concluded a dishonorable peace with the Scots, and re∣leased to them their homage, fealtie, and seruices to him due for that Kingdome, and deliuered vp to them the Grand Instrument or Charter called Ragman, which vnder the hands and seales of their late King, and of the Nobilitie of Scotland, testified their tenure and subiection to the Kings of this Realme; and then hee married his sister Iane vnto Dauid the sonne and heire apparant of Robert le Bruse the vsurping Scottish King, and created Sir Roger Mortimer Earle of March, whereat his Nobles were exceedingly discontent. And such was this new Earles inward malice and hatred vnto the Kings vncle the Earle of Kent, and so powerfull was he with the King, by reason of his too much familiarity with his mother Queen Isabel; that he neuer desisted from his wicked and vngodly plottings, vn∣till he had bereaued him of his head. But God permitted not this wretched man to sway long in his vngodly courses. For within few moneths after he was accused by the State for these horrible and hainous crimes: 1. Imprimis, For that hee had wickedly plotted and procured the murther of the Kings father. 2. Item, For that (by his false accusations and sinister coun∣saile) he had caused the King to cut off the head of his said vncle, who was truly Noble, Religious, valiant, honest, and a strong pillar to the Common-weale. 3. Item, For that too too familiarly he conuersed with Queene Isabel the Kings mother, to her iust reproach and the disho∣nor of the King. 4. Item, for that hee receiued of the Scots a bribe of twentie thousand pounds, for which he procured the Kings retreat out of Scotland, and the releasement of his Signiorie and homage due for that Kingdom.
5. And lastly, because hee had deceitfully cousened and begui∣led the King of his Wards and Treasure, conuerting all to his owne vse. For these his wicked Treasons and horrible transgressions,Sir Roger Mortymer attainted and Executed. Queene Isa∣bel sequestred The Kings Homage for Guyan re∣quired. The King would not doe Homage in such sort as it was required. The French King is an∣grie, The Kings Homage a∣gaine requi∣red. It is sent vn∣der the Great Seale. The Nobles are offended. The Kings Title to France first broched. hee was condemned to die, in the same manner which he had deuised for the execution of Sir Hugh Spencer the yonger. And Queene I∣sabel (being most honourably prouided for, and attended on) was sequestred into a strong Castle, where shee liued more then thirtie yeares after and then died. In the fifth yeare of King Edwards Raigne, his personall appea∣rance (in kind and friendly sort) was required by Philip de Valoys king of France, and vncle to the yong Queen (that is to say) brother to Iane, Countesse of Henalt, who was mother to K. Edwards wife; together with his Homage & Fealtie for his Duchie of Guyan. For the performance whereof, he departed hence; and was with much triumph, & magnificence receiued, entertained, & feasted in France. But his homage, and his fealtie, he would, and did only confesse by words, and would not doe them in such solemne and submissiue fa∣shion as they were demanded; Whereat the French King was so inwardly moued, that King Edward (at his departure from the French Court) might well perceiue, that his welcome was more respected and honoured, then his going from thence. Assoone as the King came home, by new Embassadors his ho∣mage was againe required to be performed with all solemnitie and due rites. And therupon, (to giue some contentment to the French King) it was sent vnto him, in an instrument in writing, vnder the great seale. Whereat the Lords and Peeres repined much, affirming that the crowne of France, (in the right of Queene Isabel his mo∣ther) did belong to him: and that therefore hee might iustly haue refused, to haue done vnto him any homage at all. Not long after these businesses thus ended, King Edward by his Embassadors required Dauid the yong King of Scots,The King re∣quireth the Castle of Bar¦wicke to bee restored. It is denyed by the King of Scots, and his Homage denied also. being his bro∣ther-in-law, to restore vnto him his Castle of Barwick; and to doe him homage for his kingdome: But Dauid stoutly returned answer, that his father by conquest and by his sword wonne that Castle, and that he had receiued it, by discent from him; and therefore would hold and keep it as his owne. And touching the kings de∣mand of his homage for the kingdome of Scotland, his answer was that his Father neuer acknowledged any such seruice; & that king Edward had released it, if any had been due. And that therefore he would not confesse any tenure of king Edwards crowne.
The King warreth in Scotland. The King preuaileth. Barwicke is recouered.The high spirit of the King would not suffer him thus to bee slighted and shaken off, for he resolued to make himselfe the Lord of both. For which cause; he marched with a strong Armie into Scotland, and quickly subdued the better & the greater part of that kingdome, with small resistance. And hauing fortifyed for his own vse, the Castles and Townes of best defence, he returned, and came to Barwick, where the Towne (after a strong siege) was by compo∣sition surrendred into his hands:Edward Baylyol Cro∣wned King of Scotland. And then he crowned Sir Edward Baylyol king of Scotland, and committed the gouernment of the Towne of Barwick vnto his charge; and returned into England with much honour. The King in person setleth the Gouerne∣ment of Scot∣land.But before two yeares more were expired, he passed againe with an armie into Scotland, placed his new king in his throne; and recei∣ued his homage: and reinuested diuers English Lords, and gentle∣men, of such Lordships and Territories, as by reason of the kings dishonorable peace with the Scots, (when he first began to raigne) had been taken from them. Dauid flyeth into France.These disasters, and aduerse fortunes, which inseparably accom∣panied Dauid the deposed king, compelled him to flie into France, where (after two yeares continuance) his heart was cheered with faire promises, and his necessities were relieued plentifully, with large and ample supplies of all things needfull and conuenient:He returneth with an Ar∣mie into Scot¦land. he also obtained an Armie with which hee sailed into Scotland; his hopes fairely promising that ere long he should bee a king againe. But he was much deceiued. For king Edward hauing certain intelli∣gence of his & of the French kings endeuours, prouided effectually for the encounter;Dauid is o∣uerthrowne by King Ed∣ward. and marched into Scotland with a strong Armie, where hee fought often with fortunate successe, against Dauid and the French kings forces: and at length by battaile obtained an ho∣nourable victorie; and securing the gouernment of that kingdome, according to the rules of wisdome and of policie) he returned joy∣fully into England. Robert de Arthoys comes into England.In the tenth yeare of this kings raigne, Philip de Valoys then king of France, sentenced the Earledome of Arthoys from Robert De Ar∣thoys, vnto Maud Countesse of Burgondie, & Aunt to the said Robert; which censure so incensed the said Earle, that in his heat he vttered these wordes: By me was he made a King, and by me, he shalbe againe de∣posed. For which offence,The King re∣quites his former kind∣nesse. he was throughout all France proclaimed to be a traytor to the crowne, so that (to preserue his life) hee was compelled to flie into England; where (in regard of his fidelitie, and honourable seruice, performed to Queene Isabel, and to the king himselfe, when they were both in France) he was with all comple∣ments of kindnes and heartie loue receiued; and entertained by
king Edward: who (knowing him to be right valiant, hardie, & wise, and not forgetting to requite fauours extended to him in his di∣stresse) created him Earle of Richmond:He is Crea∣ted Earle of Richmond. and so entirely loued him, that whilest he liued, he neuer attempted anie great and important matter without his counsell and aduice. This noble Knight ceased not to informe the King of his Title to the Crowne of France, By Queene Isabel his mother, who was the daughter of Philip the Faire; which appeared to stand thus. Philip the Hardie, had issue two sonnes, Philip the Faire,King Ed∣wards title to the Crowne of France. and Char∣les de Valoys. Philip the Faire had issue three sonnes, (all which succes∣siuely were Kings and died without issue Male) that is to say, Lewes the tenth, Philip the fifth sirnamed the Long; & Charles the fourth. He had also one daughter which was named Isabel, Queene of Eng∣land, and married to the Kings Father named Edward the second. And Charles de Valoys (the second sonne of Philip the Hardie) was father vnto Philip de Valoys who raigned then in France;Charles de Valoys. and of this Charles it is noted that he was the sonne of a King, The brother of a King, The vncle of a King, and the father of a King, & that him∣selfe was no King. According to the Lawes of France, the Crowne was to descend to the Issue Male, and no woman could inherit the Crowne: but King Edward, (in regard that he was a Male, though the descent of the Males was interrupted by a Female, viz. by Queene Isabel his mother) pretended that in right the Crowne of France was his; and could not be depriued thereof by humane lawes. The state of this question standing thus, Sir Robert de Arthois Earle of Richmond daily whispered it into the Kings eare. and with such forcible reson and perswasions so vrged the same, that now the King beganne to thinke on nothing more, then how to attaine to the Crowne of France.Secrecie is the best far∣therer of great negoti∣ations. The Counsell of the Earle of Henalt is craued. Ade promi∣sed to the King. The King is made Vicar generall of the Empire. This busines as it was of extraordinarie waight and importance, so it required the best secrecie vntill it were plotted wel. For which purpose K. Edward (by priuate messengers & letters) craued the ad∣uice & counsel of the Earle of Henalt (his wifes father; and brother-in-law to the French King) and of Sir Iohn of Henalt Lord Beaumont his brother, and of sundrie other great States and Princes of the Empire; who not only counselled him by his sword to prosecute his right, but made him offers of their assistāce by their best means. They also procured King Edward by a solemne instrument in wri∣ting to bee created the Vicar Generall of the Empire, by reason whereof he had the power to command the Nobles and the com∣mon people of those Countries, to further his purpose and his do∣ings
ANNO 11.Whilest these things were thus contriuing in England, and whilst king Philip de Valoys little thought that his kingdome and Crowne were aimed at,The French King maketh incredible prouision to Warre in the Holy-land. or that his strength should bee tred with English warres; he (by the importunitie of Pope Benedict the eleuenth) pre∣pared such an Armie to haue made warres in the Holy-land, as ne∣uer before was conducted by anie Christian Prince. He also com∣mitted the gouernment of his kingdome vnto his eldest sonne Iohn Duke of Normandie: To whom (by reason of his youth) hee added (for assistance) a discreet, wise, and a graue Councell. And when he had thus prouided and setled all thinges needfull for his huge armie;The French King alter∣eth his pur∣pose. and for the maintenance therof for three yeares space: the reports of king Edwards claime and purpose, began as a sodaine storme to breake forth, and to be knowne: Wherupon, king Philip assuring himselfe, that (in his absence) the English Armie would very litle regard such forces as should be left behinde; and that his departure would encourage manie (who hunted after nouelties and change) rather to make offers of their seruice to his enemies,He prepareth against Eng∣land. then to performe that dutie which by subiects was due vnto their king: And knowing That it would be a ridiculous thing (by dan∣gerous attempts) to winne honour abroad, and to neglect the safe∣tie of his owne kingdome and estate at home; he desisted (on the so∣daine) from prosecuting his journie into the Holy land; and prepa∣red strongly to defend himselfe against king Edward,King Ed∣ward fils his Coffers. and his claime. And (on the other side) king Edward (to the ende that nothing might be wanting, when time should serue) By manie politike de∣uices leuied such inestimable summes of monie,Want of Mo∣ney in Eng∣land. That (for want of coyne among the common people) a fat Oxe was sold for a noble, a fat sheep for six pence, sixe Pigeons for a pennie; and a quarter of wheat for two shillings. When he had thus done, hee (with Queene Philip his wife) sai∣led into Flanders,The King and Queene doe saile into Flanders., where they remained all that winter, and (at Ant∣werp) The king oftentimes conferred, & at length concluded with the Princes, and States of Germanie, and of those Prouinces,He enleageth himselfe with the Germans and Belgicks vpon all things touching his said intended warre. So that, after his re∣turne, hee leuied a strong Armie,King Ed∣wards Armie which (with his assisting friends) consisted of seuen and twentie thousand chosen fighting men, with which strength he landed in France,King Ed∣ward landeth in France. when the Sommer was almost spent. The French King taketh the field.The French king, hauing an Armie which consisted of three∣score thousand souldiors, and being accompanied with the three kings of Behayne, Nauarre, and of Scotland, with fiue Dukes; Six and twentie Earles; and more then foure thousand Lords, and
knights; brauely entred into the field, where hee found king Ed∣ward sufficiently prouided to shew himselfe a valiant man. But whilest each Armie gazed on the other,A woman parteth a great affray. and expected manie houres, which part should giue the first stroke of the battaile: Be∣hold and wonder, and a strange wonder! For betwixt both those Kings (vpon the motion, and through the mediation of the Ladie Iane Countesse of Henalt, sister to King Philip, and mother to King Edwards wife) not a blow was giuen: but (on a sodaine) Both the Armies were dissolued, and King Edward with his friends, and No∣bles returned into England. In the fourteenth yeare of King Edwards Raigne,ANNO. 14 1339. The Ger∣mans incor∣porate them∣selues with King Ed∣ward in his Warres. Vpon what conditions the Flemings ioyned with King Ed∣ward. Hee quarters the Armes of France. The French doe burne in England. hee sayled into Flanders, where at Brusels he met with the greater number of the Princes of Germanie, who of their owne accords, with heartie loue and forwardnesse, incorporated themselues with king Edward in those his warres against France. And (at the instance of the king) the said Princes entreated the Flemmings to joyne with them in that Enterprize, and seruice: whereunto they seemed willing to condiscend, if king Edward would entitle himselfe king of France; and would quarter the Armes of France, with the Armes of England; and would (as king of France) release vnto them a bond of two millions of Flo∣reynes, wherein they stood obliged not to wage anie warre against the king of France. Whereunto the king yeelded, and did per∣forme all thinges, according to their desires. And thus hee consor∣ted to his part, the Germans and Flemmings in those affaires, by pro∣mises, oathes, and by a solemne instrument in writing vnder their hands and seales. Whilest king Edward was thus busied abroad, the French kings Nauie landed many thousand men at Southhampton, who ransacked the Towne and consumed it with fire: and the like outrage and crueltie they exercised in the Countries thereunto adioyning. The king (immediately vpon his returne out of Flanders) Summoned his high Court of Parliament: in which,A Parlia∣ment. that nothing needfull might be wanting, to furnish and to maintaine his warres with France; a Subsidie of the fifth part of all his Subiects moue∣able goods was granted to him, and the ninth part of their Corne,A great Taxe. Together with a large custome vpon Wolles, to bee paid two yeares before hand. The leuying of which Taxe, turned the prayers of the People into Curses,The King borroweth Money. because they were altoge∣ther vnwilling to pay the same. Hee also (by way of lone) bor∣rowed huge summes of money of his richest Subiects: and the Ci∣tie of London disbursed for him twentie thousand markes.
New coine with the French arms quartred. King Ed∣wards Fleet and Armie. The battell of Sluce.The King also coined great store of siluer and of gold, on which he quartered with his owne the Armes of France in the first place, and instamped him thereon King of England and of France. He al∣so prepared a fleet of two hundred Saile of Ships, and throughly appointed them to the proofe, and then he leuied an Armie often thousand selected men of warre; all which he embarqued: and pas∣sing with them towards Sluce, he fortunatly met with the French fleet, which (consisting of Frenchmen, Piccards, Genowayes, and of o∣ther Nations) amounted to the number of fortie thousand men;The Kings victory at Sea. a∣mong which were they who not only had robbed and rifled many English Marchants on the narrow Seas, but also had burned South∣hampton and the Countries thereabout (as lately you haue heard.) The King being full of magnanimitie and valour, resolute in his purposes, and reckoning of the French as of his subiects and inferi∣ours in Armes, especially vpon the Seas, and hopping by his good successe, not onely to winne honor among the Princes and States of his confederacie, and purposing, if hee might, to strike a terror in the French Nation concerning those warres, set vpon their whole Nauie with such an incomparable courage and bold spirit, that af∣ter a long, a fierce, and a bloudie fight, very few or none of the French Ships escaped, but were (by him) either taken or sunke into the Sea. King Ed∣ward landeth at Sluce.The King on his part hauing receiued but little losse, his priso∣ners he sent into England, but himselfe (the next day) landed at Sluce, where he was triumphantly receiued by the Inhabitants and Countrey, who (with great ioy and infinit commendations) con∣gratulated his happie and victorious successe. He rides to Gaunt.And from thence he rode to Gaunt where his Queene lay. And a∣bout the space of one moneth after, hee (being accompanied with seuen Earles, eight Bishops, eight and twentie Baronets, two hun∣dred Knights,A huge Armie. foure thousand men of Armes, and nine thousand Archers of his owne Nation, and with the Duke of Brabant, who commanded twentie thousand of his followers: and with Iaques Dartuell the famous Fleming,Iaques Dar∣tuell a fa∣mous Fle∣ming. who conducted threescore thousand men of those Prouinces: and with the Duke of Guelders, the Mar∣quesse of Muse, the Earles of Iullers, Mouns, Sauiens, and of Henault, the Lord Faulquemont, and many thousand Almaines: He strongly besieged the Citie Tournay, which was with great resolution and valor manfully defended for the space of tenne weeks;Tournay be∣sieged. in al which time the French King appeared not for their defence. But (by the importunat mediation of the aforenamed Iane de Valoys, mother to the Queen of England, & to the Duchesse of Iullers, and to the then
Earle of Henalt,A huge Armie was dis∣solued vpon the motion of a woman. and sister to the French King) a truce was conclu∣ded for one yeere: which was afterwards renewed for one yeare more. Thus was the siege broken vp: and euery one returned to his owne home. Now whilst the King had thus employed himselfe in the Low-countries: and in the Empire; and in France:The Scots reuolt from their King and from king Edward The Scots (disliking Edward Baylyol their King, because hee would not in any sort op∣pose himselfe against the King of England, who so highly had ad∣uanced him; and leauing to him onely the name, but no honour due to a King) rebelled against king Edward: And gained into their possessions almost all things whatsoeuer, which hee in his former Warres had wonne from them. But king Edward, scorning to bee checked by the lawlesse disobedience, and insolencie of the Scots,The King leadeth a huge Armie into Scotland leuied an Armie of sixe thousand horsemen, and fortie thousand on foote; with which he marched into Scotland; And those Inha∣bitants (hauing intelligence of these vnresistable preparations; and and being apprehensiue of their owne weaknesse) craued, and ob∣tained a Truce for foure Monethes, vpon condition to surrender to king Edward,A Truce. whatsoeuer in his absence they had taken from him: And also to submit themselues, if within that time Dauid their deposed King returned not out of France for their defence. But before the time of Truce was expired, Dauid returned secret∣ly: and being safely landed in Scotland,The Scots inuade Eng∣land. he raised an Armie of more then threescore thousand men; with which hee entred into Nor∣thumberland, spoyling, robbing, wasting, burning and killing (with∣out compassion) in all places whereon hee set his foote,New-Castle is besieged. vntill hee came to New-Castle vpon Tyen; which hee girded about with a strong siege. But in the depth of the night, two hundred resolued gallants issued foorth;A bold bra∣uado. And (vpon the suddaine) entred into the Earle of Murrayes Tent; which they ransacked, slewe many, and caried the said Earle a way with them, to the great amazement and terrour of the Scottish Campe. The day appearing, was their true informer of all things, which in the night had hapned.The siege is raised. And Dauid (purposing a bloudy reuenge for this dishonour done vnto him) caused the Castle to be continually assaulted. But the Scots were manfully repulsed by the defendants, whose vndaunted spirits had banished all feare: In so much that Dauid (being vnwilling to spend there too much time in vaine) raised his siege, and marched to the Citie of Durham;Durham ta∣ken & burnt. which he tooke, ransacked and burnt, and slew all the men, women and children, which did inhabite and were found there. From thence the Scottish Armie marched forth, and passed by
the strong Castle of Rowsbrough:A valiant exploit by Sir William Mountagew. which then belonged to the Earle of Salisburie who was a prisoner in France. In this Castle was his faire and admirably beautifull Lady, and it was kept by Sir William Mountagew (his brother) who for his wisedome, and for his va∣lour, was a most renowned Knight. When he had narrowly view∣ed the Scottish March, hee expected their vtmost furie in their re∣turne, and therefore hee determined to giue him a present taste of his man-hood. So that he issued forth with fortie Horsemen well appointed, and fell vpon their Rereward, and slew of them more then two hundred, and tooke from them one hundred and twen∣tie horses, which were loaden with the richest of those booties, which they had taken at Durham: and safely returned, and caried them into the Castle. The Castle of Rosbrough is besieged.Dauid (disdaining thus to bee beaten by so small a number) forth with retired, and with continuall assault so sharply oppressed the besieged for many dayes, that hee scarcely gaue them leasure to take breath. By meanes whereof they were almost tired, and so worne out, that small hope of long resistance was left vnto them, except they were (in due time) rescued and relieued by the King. To giue his Highnesse intelligence whereof, it was resolued; That one of them (in the depth of the night) must giue a desperate ad∣uenture through the Scottish Campe. This proiect seemed so full of imminent perill and danger,A braue at∣tempt with fortunate successe. that euery one of the inferiors refu∣sed the attempt: So that the braue Knight himselfe (considering aduisedly in what case the Castle stood: and pitying the distressed estate of the comfortlesse Countesse his sister, who expected no∣thing but villainous abuse if it were yeelded) with a setled reso∣lution vndertooke the iourney. And being gallantly mounted vp∣on a swift courser, he speedily posted through all the thousands of his enemies And in the morning, hee informed Dauid (by such passingers as hee did meete) that very quickely hee should heare newes of him againe. The Castle is brauely as∣saulted and defended. The siege is raised.The Scots (knowing that it was no time to linger; and yet being desirous, to reuenge the great disgrace which their Armie had re∣ceiued) againe, and againe furiously assaulted the Castle; and (in them) they performed many braue feates of Armes: which wit∣nessed their eager longing to haue wonne it, but they were still re∣pulsed; and beaten backe, with many incredible slaughters of their Souldiers;The King comes to late, for the Scots are gone. and were compelled to raise the siege, and with great speede to hasten into their owne Countrie. King Edward (the very day of their departure) had trauelled a long and wearie iourney, thinking to haue met them there. But
he failed of his purpose, for which hee was much grieued. Yet by the mediation of diuers Honourable personages,A Truce. a Truce was con∣cluded on for a few Moneths: But to be enlarged for two yeares; if the French King (without whose leaue the Scots could make no Peace) would consent thereto. The French King liked the motion well, and gaue freedome to the Earle of Salisburie: For whom the Earle of Morret was by ki Edward set at libertie. And though king Edward tooke but little pleasure in this Truce,The causes why the King consented to this Truce. yet he was the more easily drawne to consent thereto: because (at the same time) he had Warres in France, Gascoyne, Poyters, Paynton, Britaine and else where. All which daily consumed as much Trea∣sure as he could get. The king (when hee perceiued that the Scots were gone from the Castle; disarmed himselfe; and (with ten,The King makes loue to the Countesse of Salisburie. or twelue Lords and Knights) entred into the Castle, where the ex∣cellent beautie, and modest behauiour of the sweete Countesse of Salisburie so inflamed his heart, that by secret and amorous wooings he endeauoured to perswade her, to ease his passions with her loue. But the vertuous Lady (first with milde and kind intreaties,Shee cares not for it. and af∣terwards with quicke and nipping reprehensions) striued to make the king to see his owne errour. But such was his desire, and her denials were so peremptorie, and resolute; That discontentedly the King left her, cashired his Armie, and returned backe againe. And (hauing for many yeares together beene vexed,The King keepes a so∣lemne Feast. and toyled in sundrie Warres) hee intended to recreate himselfe, his Lords, his knights and chiefest Martialists, with such pastimes and sportings, as men of Warre tooke greatest pleasure in. Wherefore hee proclai∣med a solemne Feast to continue many dayes, and generally inui∣ted therunto, the valiant men of his owne, and of forraine Nations and Kingdomes; proposing the exercise of feates of Armes,Strangers re∣paire into England. at the appointed time. By meanes whereof, many Noblemen and such as were of best renowme for Chiualrie, repaired into England from many Countries (excepting France) and were (with all magnifi∣cence; courtesie, and loue) receiued, and entertained by the King,Martiall sportings. and by all his Court. But in those heroicall sportings (by an euill and an vnfortunate accident) Sir Iohn Lord Beamount,The Lord Beamount slaine. a valiant Knight of this Realme: (who formerly had taken the last King, and Sir Hugh Spencer the yonger in a fisher, before the Castle of Bristoll) was slaine. This Royall feast, and these warlike pastimes,ANNO. 18. A Parliamēt The Prince of Wales is Created. being thus fini∣shed: a Parliament was assembled at Westminster; wherein the king Created his eldest Sonne Edward Prince of Wales, and vnto him was
giuen by a free and generall consent,Commissio∣ners for the imployment of the Subsi∣die money. foure fifteenes by the Laitie, and three by the Clergie, but with this condition, that no part thereof should be conuerted vnto any other vse, then only to the furtherance of the warres of France. And certaine Lords and some others of principall note, were then selected, to whom the only care and charge of that imployment should belong. ANNO. 19The next yeare following, king Edward to increase vertue, and valour, in his Nobles, to enlarge his Amitie, and Friendshippe with the States and Princes of forraine Countries, deuised and establi∣shed a new order of knight-hood, confining the number of them to twentie and six, of which himselfe and his Successors were to be Presidents, and called them knights of the honourable Order of the Garter.The order of the Garter deuised, and established. The Rites and Ceremonies of which order, are euery yere solemnized with Princely magnificence in the kings Castle at Windsor, to Gods glorie, and the honour of all such as are digni∣fied with that degree. And thus king Edward hauing a while recreated himselfe, with such Princely delights as exercised his Martialists in feates of Armes, to the pleasure and good contentment of his people: He now beganne againe to thinke vpon his affaires with France, and to make his Forces better knowne to the Frenchmen, then formerly they had beene. An Armie sent into Gas∣coyne.For which purpose, he leuied a faire Armie; which by his Cou∣sin the Earle of Darby, was landed and directed in Gascoine, with such discretion, and with such valour, that hee not only acquited himselfe right nobly, by way of defence against Philip the French king, but daily wonne from him his Cities, Townes, Castles, and his Forts; and filled his hands so full, that whilest the said Earle remai∣ned there hee laboured in vaine to catch at anie thing, which be∣longed to king Edward. Iaques Dart∣uell.At the same time Iaques Dartuel (whom fortune from a low be∣ginning had raised to the greatest command that euer any man be∣fore him had in Flanders, notwithstanding that Loys their Earle then personally did liue among them; secretly purposed to dishe∣rite the said Earle, and to make Prince Edward of England the great Lord and master of those Countries:Malum con∣silium con∣sultori pessi∣mum. And to effect what therein hee did intend, hee called a generall Councell of the Lords, and great men of those Territories, and appointed the place of their meeting to bee at Sluce; where hee also procured the presence of king Edward, and of the Prince his sonne. To draw these States together, he proposed nothing publikely, but the necessitie of a sound conference touching their procee∣dings
with the King of England against France. And within the Hauen there, the place of Councel was in King Edwards great ship; called the Katharine. But (vnexpectedly to the Flemish Lords) Ia∣ques Dartuell discoursed boldly, and at large, of the great Honour, Prowes and valour of King Edward; and of the yong Prince his Sonne. And by many circumstances, and deuised arguments, hee endeauoured to extenuate the worth of their owne Earle, as being altogether vnfit, and vnable to be a Lord of so great a cōmand: and in the conclusion of his speech, hee strongly striued to perswade them all, to depose the Earle Loys and his posteritie: and to adde an inuincible strength to their Estates, by electing, and chusing the Prince of England to be their Master, and great Lord. The Nobles and the great men of Flanders (being now made eare witnesses of Iaques Dartuells attempt:Displeasing Counsell. And inwardly detesting to leaue vnto a future age a memoriall of such treacherous infidelitie and wrong) made answere, that albeit no people in the world, did more then they respect King Edward: Nor more affect the aduancement and the Honour of the Prince his Sonne: Yet this motion could not preuaile, except the Natiues and common peo∣ple of those Countries (who had as large an interest as they, in the deposing of the said Earle, and in the disposing of his Lordship and command) would willingly assent thereto. And (though in their heartes they intended and ment nothing lesse) yet (to make faire weather for the present time) They told the King, that they liked the motion exceeding well: and that they would foorthwith depart vnto the seuerall places of their habitations; and would informe the people of this proiect, and do their best en∣deauours to perswade, and to incourage them to consent thereun∣to. And (hauing promised the King, that at the end of one Mo∣neth they would returne againe, with their full answere to the said motion: And hauing mutually performed all complements requisite for a kind farewell) they departed thence. But when this newes was diuulged, and when it was publikely knowne what Ia∣ques Dartuell had proposed,No trusting to the peoples fauour. Iaques Dar∣tuell is hated and murdred both he and his practise were inwardly detested, and so hated, that he was not esteemed to be a true borne Fleming, who had the least inclination, to giue any furtherance thereunto. Yet notwithstanding, such was the great confidence, which this great Commaunder reposed in the fauour of the com∣mon people: and such was the resolution of him (whose authoritie before that time was vnlimited, and whose prosperitie was equall to the greatnesse of a potent King) that his presence would worke wonders; and change the minds of the common people. That to
make triall of his power in that behalfe, he came to Gaunt. But as he passed through the streetes, he might well perceiue that his en∣tertainment was nothing correspondent to his former wel-comes, and that the countenances of the Inhabitants bewrayed their in∣ward contempt, and loathing, both of him and of his despised mo∣tion. And no sooner was hee entred into his house, but by many thousands of mutenous and armed Swaggarers, it was compassed round about: and then was hee rayled on with the foulest words, and reuiled with the most bitter termes, that either their hearts could deuise, or their tongues vtter. So that hee perceiued that it auailed him not to looke bigge, nor to presume (by his authoritie) to appease their rage. Wherefore (at a great window of the house) hee began mildly, and with humble termes to pleade in his owne excuse, and promised to giue them a full satisfaction, vpon what grounds, points and reasons, he had vnaduisedly conceiued that motion. But the sight of him (whom in former times they loued and honoured as an Angell) was now so lothsome and so vile, and his words were so vnpleasing to them, that with dirt and stones they beate him from the window,King Ed∣ward looseth many power∣full friends. assaulted his house, brake it o∣pen, entred in, and slaughtered him with a thousand wounds: And thus died that great Commander of the Flemings, who (for his power and absolute authoritie among them) had neuer his equall in those Countries. And by these meanes, King Edward not onely lost a sound, and a potent friend; But euer after that time, the hearts of the Flemings more fauoured the French King, then they did him. At the same time also, his noble and worthy friend and vncle Sir Iohn of Henalt,Sir Iohn of Henalt re∣uolteth to the French. Lord Beamont, reuolted from him, and adhea∣red to the French King, because King Edward (vpon some priuate vnkindnesse conceiued) did with-hold and keepe from him a Pen∣sion, which (for his faithfull and good seruice) hee had formerly giuen, and duly paid vnto him. And though King Edward did daily growe more strong in his hopes,A valiant King. to possesse himselfe of the Crowne of France: yet the losse of some great friends, being his associates in those Warres, made him indeede more weake; yet, those his misfortunes so little auai∣led to discourage him, that it increased his magnanimitie and his resolutions, to maintaine those his Warres with the greater helpes of his owne strength.ANNO. 20 Aguillon is besieged by 100000. men. Now was the King informed, that Iohn the eldest Sonne of the French King, had strongly besieged the Castle of Aguillon in Gas∣coyne, wel-neere with an hundred thousand men (within which
were the Noble Earle of Pembroke, and the renowned Knight Sir Walter of Manny, and diuers others of especiall note and place.The King transporteth an Armie in∣to Normandy Whereupon King Edward leuied the number of fourteene thou∣sand men, which he and the Prince his Sonne, being accompanied with eight Earles, fifteene Barrons, and a great number of braue Knights and gallant Gentlemen, by the aduice and counsell of Sir Godfray Lord Harcourt, a French banished Noble man of great wis∣dome, and wonderfull valour in the Warre, caried into Normandie: and with them he besieged the rich and strong Towne of Harflew:Harflew is taken. but (because the English Armie seemed terrible in the sight of the Inhabitants) it was not defended, but the King tooke it without blowes, and gaue the spoyle thereof to his common Souldiers, so that he filed their Purses with Crownes, and thereby prepared them with the greater courage,Diuers towns and Castles are taken. and resolution for more dangerous attempts. So that within few dayes after, hee wonne, rifled and spoyled the rich Townes of Cheirbrough, Mount-brough and Qua∣renue, and the Castle there. Then King Edward marched foorth in great strength through that Countrie;Normandie harrowed by King Ed∣ward. being hedged in on the one side by his Marshall the Lord Harcourt, and fiue hundred chosen men of warre which hee commanded, and by his other Marshall on the other side with a like number: And with such seueritie, ransacked, spoiled, burned and haowed all places as he passed by:The English Armie is rich. The English Armie in∣creaseth. that euerie cōmon souldier was now a rich man, and the Kings Armie was encreased: and now consisted of nineteene thousand fighting men: with which he pit∣ched before the city of Cane (in which were the Earles of Tankeruile and of Ewe: Besides the Earle of Guyens, who being high Constable of France, had gathered and brought vnto that place manie braue and approued men at Armes, and made a flourishing shew as if hee meant to issue forth, and to giue battaile to the King. But feare possessing his heart, he made but a faint resistance,The Citie of Cane is taken and in short time and with litle losse, the Citie was taken, and ransacked by the En∣glish souldiers; who conueighed all their spoiles into England.Sir Thomas Holland. Loureys is taken. Why King Edward medled with no walled Townes, nor Castles in the Prouince of Eureux. In the yeelding vp of this Citie. First, the three Earles submitted their fortunes to Sir Thomas Holland, a valiant English Knight who had but one eye, of whom the King bought them for tenne thou∣sand markes in Gold: and receiuing them as prisoners into his Ar∣mie, hee marched to the Towne of Loures which hee quickly won, and then entred into the Prouince of Eureux all which he wa∣sted, spoiled and burned without pittie: (the walled Townes, Ci∣ties, and Castles only excepted) with none of which hee medled, east by them, his strength should bee deminished before hee met
with the French King, who had solemnely sworne and protested that King Edward should not returne into England before a battaile fought between them. Many towns wonne by the English.After this, King Edward in his march, wonne Gisours, Vernon, Saint Germans in Lay, Mountrell, Saint Clowde, Rely, and the whole Countrie about Roan, Pont de' Larch, Nants, Newlench, Robboys, Foun∣taine, Poys, and Vimew, in all which places he found but weake re∣sistance. King Philip of France, hauing true intelligence, that King Edward with al his Armie was within two leagues of Paris,The French King forsa∣keth the Pa∣risians. left that Citie, and went to S. Dennis where his Armie lay, perswading the Parisians that King Edward dared not to looke them in the face, but they beleeued him not, and feare made them greatly displeased with their king.Those of A∣myens are slaine, and taken. Neere about the same time Sir Godfrey Lord Har∣court being one of King Edwards Marshals, encountred with cer∣taine Burgesses of Amyens, whom the French king had appointed to come vnto Paris for the better defence therof, if neede should so require: and though they defended themselues with much valor, yet at length twelue hundred of them were slaine, and the rest be∣ing taken prisoners, were brought vnto the king. The English Ar∣mie so eagerly pursued the happinesse of their fortune, That they possessed the whole countrie through which they passed, yea euen to the gates of Aubeuile,The English Armie is in∣uironed on the suddaine. and of Saint Valary: yet were they vna∣wares enuironed with the Riuer of Some on the one side; and with the French Kings armie (consisting of more then an hundred thou∣sand men) on the other side. The place wherein he was, promised him no manner of aduantage, if he should fight: but many incon∣ueniencies presented themselues vnto him, So that hee consulted with his Prisoners, if anie of them could direct him to any Ford where he might transport his Armie, among whom, one who was named Gobyn of Grace,Gobyn of Grace. directed him to a conuenient passage. But when the King came thither, it was defended by twelue thousand of the French Kings Armie. Yet notwithstanding (when the Sea was ebbed) King Edward, with the Prince and the whole Armie, did put themselues into the water, and so did the French men on the other side,King Ed∣ward passeth through the riuer of Some and slaugh∣tereth the French. so that they all encountred pell mell in the midst of the Riuer, and fought with such desperate resolution on either part, that manie a man was striken downe, being slaine, or by that meane was drowned. But at length the Frenchmen being much wasted by the sword fled, and the Englishmen slaughtered them in the Chase a full league and more. And now approached the time, in which this journie made by king Edward and his sonne was to be blessed with much honor,
and happinesse, or to be vnfortunate,The famous and victori∣ous Battaile of Cressey. though hitherto it had pro∣ceeded well. For the French king (being resolued to bee reuenged without pitie, and in regard that his Armie contained in number more then six times as manie fighting men as king Edward had; and making no doubt,Great oddes. but that a triumphant victorie should preuent all future danger of Englands claime to the French Crown) marched with all his strength, in good order of battaile, against king Edward. Who (knowing that only the sword was then to decide the con∣trouersie, and to pronounce the judgement) entred into a spacious field neere vnto Cressey, where he did set his whole Armie in good order, and diuided it into three battailes. All which hee so impar∣ked behind with carriages and carts, that no man was easily able to interrupt or to endanger them in the Reareward.The Battaile of the Blacke Prince. And when the battaile should begin, the first Companies were conducted by the yong Prince, who was assisted by the Earles of Warwicke, and of Canford, and by the Lords of Harcourt, Stafford, Manny, De Lauarre, Chandoys, Clifford, and Bourchier, Sir Reynold Cobham, Sir Thomas Holland, Sir Roger Neuill, and manie other Lords, knights, and Gen∣tlemen of name. And in that battaile were eight hundred men at Armes, Two thousand Archers, and one thousand other lustie and good Souldiers. The second battaile was directed by the Earles of Northampton,The second Battaile of the English. and of Arondel, who were accompanied with the Lords Rose, Lygo, Willoughby, Basset, Saint Awbin, Myleton, and De La Sell; and by manie other Lords, knights, and Gentlemen. And in this battaile there were eight hundred men at Armes, and twelue hundred Archers. And the third and maine battaile (being placed betwixt the o∣ther two) was led by the king himselfe, who was assisted by many Earles, Lords, knights, Esquires, and Gentlemen of the best ranke.The Kings Battaile. And in that battaile there were seuen hundred men at Armes, Two thousand Archers, and tenne thousand other common soul∣diers, well approued and expert men of warre. The English Armie hauing exercised themselues in prayer vnto God, and moderatly refreshed themselus with som meat, and some drinke, laid themselues downe vpon the ground, thereby to com∣fort, and to ease themselues before they fought. But the Frenchmen (although they proudly bragged, and profferd manie shewes) yet for that day they wanted courage to beginne the fight.Fifteene thou¦sand Geno∣wayes ouer∣throwne. But the next morning, the French king commanded that fifteene thousand Genowayes, with their Crosbowes, should giue the first onset vpon the Prince his battaile. But eyther for want of skill, or else (in ma∣king
king more hast than good speed) their disorder was so foule, and so grosse, That by the English Archers the greater part of them were slaine;The maine Battaile of the French Armie is dis∣ordered. and the rest were soone defeated, and compelled to retire. In which (so violent was their hast and posting) that in rude heapes they rushed into the French kings maine battaile, and disordered it, but were by their owne friendes without mercie put vnto the sword. The Prince his Battaile receiueth the Frenchmen to their paineAnd though the French Armie (by reason of their disorder not to bee repaired) had little warrant for good successe: yet being emboldned by reason of their multituds, and being sharp set vpon reuenge, aduanced themselus, and charged gallantly vpon the Eng∣lish Armie; but bent their chiefest strength against the Prince his battel, who receiued them with such furie, and hardie blowes, that thousands of them (almost in a moment) were made Bond-slaues vnto death. The benefit of good order.For still: the Prince his battaile remained entire and vnbro∣ken. By meanes whereof hee made prodigall expence and ha∣uocke of the Frenchmen, who being first broken, could not obserue anie order at all, nor helpe themselues by any ingenious pollicie of Warre. And though they fell in great numbers before the Prince his battaile, yet their new, and copious supplies, which alwayes suc∣ceeded those who were slaine, gaue no leasure nor respit at all to the Prince, nor to his assistants, to take any breathing; Much lesse to refresh themselues. So that the braue Prince (though he were full of incomparable valour, and resolution, yet (being distressed for want of breath, and of some reliefe) hee sent to haue some helpe and succour from the King:The King would not relieue the Prince his Sonne. who inquired of the mes∣singer if he were aliue? who answered that he was: Then (quoth the King) report to him from me, that he expect no aide; For this shall be the day in which hee shall winne his spurres, or else shall loose his life. For in life, or in death, hee shall ingrosse to him∣selfe the whole honour and glorie of this day. When Prince Ed∣ward was informed what the King had said, (being vrged by sharp necessitie, and animated with fresh hopes of a famous Victorie) Hee, with his companions in Armes, renewed their strength, and redoubled their manlike courage: And (wholly reposing their trust,The French Armie is o∣uerthrowne. and confidence in Gods goodnesse, and in the edges of their hungrie swordes) they fought with such vndaunted spirits, that the Frenchmen beganne to flie: and were so eagerly pursued, That the greater part of their whole Armie lay breathlesse vpon the ground. And, in the Chace, the two Marshals of England en∣countred
with a multitude of the Inhabitants of Beuoys, Reignyer,An other French com∣panie is slain. Aubeuile, and of Roan, of whom seuen thousand were slaine, and the rest by flight had much adoe in sauing of themselues. And the next day the said Marshals were recharged by the Arch∣bishoppe of Roan, and by the Grand-Pryor of France,No misfor∣tune goeth alone. who con∣ducted a strong Armie to aide their king: They not knowing that the Battaile was alreadie fought, and the field lost by their friends. With these new forces the English men encountred and conten∣ded so proudly, that quickly they beganne to flie; and were almost all wasted by the sword.The number of Prisoners, and of such as were slaine So that within the compasse of those two dayes, there were slaine on the French part eleuen Princes, foure∣score Baron, twelue hundred knights, and more then thirtie thou∣sand souldiours of the common sort: And the French king himselfe by speedie flight, very hardly escaped with his life.The King giues away all the spoyles The whole bootie of this field, the king frankly bestowed vpon his Nobles, Gentrie, and on his whole armie: and caused the dead bodies of all such as were honorable and of note, to be taken vp,The Kings charitie. and caried them with him vnto Mountrell, where they were buried with much so∣lemnitie, and great honour. Now (when king Edward perceiued,King Ed∣ward besie∣geth Callice. that the French king made no preparation at all for a new supply to encounter him) hee mar∣ched towardes Callice; burning, spoiling, and rifling all places, as he passed by. The Towne, and Castle, hee intended not to assault. For as it would haue beene full of danger, so hee knew the strength thereof to bee such, that in assaulting it hee should both loose his labour, and his men. It therefore gaue him good content,Two hundred thousand men in the French Kings armie The French to gird and to compasse it round about with a strong siege: Which (when he had continued a full whole yeare) the French king, with a huge army of two hundred thousand men, marched towardes Callice. But finding euerie passage and way, in such warlike sort to bee garded, and defended, that he could not approach vnto the English armie: Hee challenged king Edward to maintaine his honour,Kings Chal∣lenge. by fighting with him a battaile in the Field. But king Edward (by rea∣son of his long siege hauing spent much Treasure; and the Towne and Castle of Callice wanting manie things, needfull,King Ed∣wards an∣swere. and necessary for their reliefe) made this answere: That his manie and great Victories in France, and elsewhere, sufficiently cleared him from the suspition of Cowardize: and that (seeing he had trauelled, and spent so much time, and monie, for the winning of Callice) the French king should open all passages by force, and then make
triall of his Strength before that Towne,The French Armie Ca∣shired. or (otherwise) might returne. Whereupon the French King (not finding any meanes how he might releeue Callice) cashired his Armie, and retired: lea∣uing poore distressed Callice to the mercie of King Edward) who daily expected when it should bee yeelded into his hands. The Scots inuade Eng∣land in the Kings ab∣sence. The Queene fights with them. Iohn Copland taketh the King of Scots are ouer∣throwne. Iohn Copland would not de∣liuer his Pri∣soner to the Queene.Now whilest the King thus lay before Callice, Dauid of Scotland, with an Armie of fiftie thousand men (by the procurement, and furtherance of the French King) entred into England, and did much harme. But the Queene (with her Armie, consisting only of twelue thousand valiant men) confronted him in the field, where was fought a long and a sharp battaile; vntill King Dauid (by an Esquire named Iohn Copland) was taken prisoner, and secretly con∣ueyed out of the armie. There were also (at that time) slaine of the Scots, diuers Earles, Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen, besides more then fifteene thousand souldiers of the common ranke. And the residue of them being defeated, returned by continuall flight into Scotland. The Queene much importuned Iohn Copland for the deli∣uerie of his Prisoner king Dauid. But hee (making challenge vnto him, as to his onely behoofe, by the Lawes of Armes) made answere, that hee would not deliuer him vnto any but to the King himselfe. So that the Queene (being highly dis∣pleased with him) certified the king both of her Victorie, and also in what sort Iohn Copland had answered her, touching the deliue∣rie of the Scottish king. Whereupon, Iohn Copland (being sent for) went vnto Callice,Iohn Copland is thanked, and rewarded where hee was graciously and louingly welcomed by the king, who thanked him hartily for his great seruice; and made him an Esquire of his owne bodie; and recompenced his trauailes,King Dauid and others are commit∣ted to the Tower. and his good fortune, with the gift in Fee simple of fiue hundred pounds by the yeare in good Land; and commanded him to deliuer his Prisoner to the Queene at his returne: which hee per∣formed accordingly. And then the Queene committed the said king and the Earle of Morret, and manie others, Prisoners to the Tower of London: where they remained long after. The Queene passeth ouer to Callice.And then the Queene (being accompanied with a faire troupe of faire Ladies, and beautifull Gentlewomen (whose husbands, fa∣thers, brothers, and kinsfolkes, had for a long time beene emploied in the French warres) came vnto the king, as he lay before Callice; and were by the king, and his whole armie receiued, and entertai∣ned with much joy.The Callici∣ans craue mercie. And now the distressed, and the besieged Towne of Callice (tra∣uelling with many wants, and being destitute of all hope to be re∣lieued,
because the French King not long before had cashired and dismissed his whole Armie) craued pardon,A hard con∣dition. and mercie of King Edward: Who (in regard of their peruerse and long continued ob∣stinacie, and for that they had spoyled and robbed many of his English Marchants vpon the Sea, before they were besieged) would in no sort hearken to their request and submission; except sixe of their worthiest Inhabitants did come vnto him, Bare-legged, Bare∣headed, in their Shirts, and with Halters about their neckes, to be corrected and disposed of as the king should please.Ingens te∣lum necessi∣tas. And though this condition was full of terrour and of bitternesse, yet necessitie compelled them to accomplish the kings demaund. So that they sent him the keyes both of the Towne, and Castle, by those sixe,A heauie sentence. who presented them to the king. The keyes he receiued; but forth∣with commanded that the said Townesmen should bee hanged. Whereupon, all such in the kings Armie,Intercession for the liues of the Calli∣cians. as were either Honoura∣ble by birth, or had for their seruice deserued well, or were graced by the kings especiall loue and fauour; became earnest Petitioners to the king for the Pardon of those distressed men. But such was the kings resolution, and full determination, to make them exam∣ples to the rest, for the iniuries, and for the wrongs which for∣merly they had done to the English Nation,The Queene only procureth their Pardon. that all their meanes was insufficient, and vnable to deliuer them from death. Which when the Queene perceiued (on bended knees, with Prayers and with Teares, and with importunate request) shee neuer ceased to vrge the king, vntill shee had procured their Pardon, and their in∣largement from that danger.Callice is yeelded to King Ed∣ward, in An. Dom. 1347. and in the 22. yeere of King Ed∣wards raigne A stranger made Cap∣taine of Cal∣lice. The King returneth in∣to England. Londoners are sent to dwell in Cal∣lice. The chiefe Captaine named Sir Guy of Vyen, and such knights and Gentlemen as were in the Towne, and in the Castle, were sent Prisoners into England; where they remained about sixe monethes, and were then ransomed by the French king. Thus when the king was quietly and fully possessed of Callice (the keye to France) and had (without sparing of any cost) in won∣derfull sort strengthned, and fortified it: He left none to remaine there, but Englishmen; the Captaine onely excepted: Who being a Lombard by birth, was named Sir Andrew de Pauye, an especiall fa∣uourite of the kings, whom the king (vpon the vndoubted trust, and confidence which hee reposed in him) placed chiefe Captaine, and Commander there. These things being thus setled in good order; the king with the Queene and all his troupes, returned into England; and were recei∣ued into London with extraordinarie Triumph, and great joy. And from thence hee sent sixe and thirtie rich, wise, and graue Cit∣tizens,
with ther Wiues and Families to Callice, to inhabite, and to trade and traffique there:Great priui∣ledges gran∣ted to the Callicians. and gaue to the said Towne and Ca∣stle such profitable and large immunites, priuiledges, liberties and franchesses; that they thought themselues to be very happy, whom the king would licence to dwell there. The Pope mediates a Truce.Pope Clement the sixt (hauing manie yeares laughed in his sleeue, to see these two potent and mightie kings, so busily to imploy themselues each against other in those bloudie Warres) at length mediated a Truce betwixt them: which (on his motion) was con∣cluded for two yeares. Callice should haue been betraiedAnd in the meane time, king Edward was informed, that Sir An∣drew de Pauie his chiefe Captaine of Callice, (for twentie thousand Crownes to him promised by the Lord Charney Captaine of Ar∣ras) had conspired to betray the Towne and Castle into his hands. Whereupon king Edward (to make a triall of this newes, and to surprise the said Lord,The King passeth se∣cretly vnto Callice. and all his Companie, if hee might, when hee should come to take the possession of Callice) departed secretly out of England with three hundred selected men at armes, and in the depth of the night landed at Callice, and was quickly receiued in: where hee sharply reprehended the Lombard, who, vnder the pretext of honest dealing for the king, excused himselfe of anie treacherous intent. But within a night or two after, the Lord Charney (at the appointed time) repaired thither with twelue hun∣dred armed men, to surprise both the Castle, and the Towne. The monie (in good Gold) was by the Captaine receiued at a po∣sterne gate of the Castle;The Money is receiued. and one hundred only of that Company were suffred to enter in. But they (finding quickly that they were beguiled, and betraied) without noyse, or resistance, yeelded them∣selues; and were closed vp in a strong Dungeon. And then the king himselfe,King Ed∣wards valour and courage. with three hundred men at armes, (vnder the Banner of Sir Walter of Mannie) brake forth out of the Castle, and furiously rushed vpon the Frenchmen; who attended for better newes. But when they did perceiue that they were deceiued; they resolued to acquit themselues like men; and, for an houre and more, so they did. But when manie of them were slaine, the rest fled; and were thus depriued, both of their manie, and of their hope. In this conflict the King himselfe encountred hand to hand with the Lord Eustace of Rybamount,Sir Eustace Lord Ryba∣mont. a right hardie and valiant knight; and was by him twice stooped on his knees: But skorning to yeeld to anie base conceit, or froward Fortune, hee aduanced himselfe so no∣bly,A noble King. and in such sort redoubled his courage and his strength, that in the end he tooke the said Sir Eustace prisoner with his own hand:
the said Lord not knowing with whom he had so sharply conten∣ded. But the King, making him to know all, released him without Ransome; promised him future fauours; and dismissed him with a Princely reward. About the same time, the French king Philip of Valoys died:The French King dieth. ANNO 24. Iohn is Crow¦ned King of France. The Kings Victorie at Sea. Guyens is yeelded to the Callicians ANNO. 25 ANNO. 27 A Duke of Lancaster Created. How Iohn of Gaunt be∣came Duke of Lancaster. A Combate appointed be∣tweene the Duke of Lan¦caster and the Duke of Brunswicke. A reconcili∣ation. The Marts for England remooued from the Fle∣mings. and his sonne was crowned King. In the beginning of his Raigne hee created Sir Charles a Noble man of Spaine, Earle of Angolesme; because he entred into the nar∣row Seas on the French behalfe with a powerfull Fleet, and mise∣rably spoiled, robbed, and rifled the English Marchants; and expo∣sed them to much crueltie. With him king Edward fought; and compelled him to flie hauing lost manie of his chiefest men, and two and twentie of his best ships. And about the same time, the Castle of Guyens was yeelded to the Kings people of Callice: and in the seuen and twentieth yeare of his Raigne, hee created his Cousin Henrie of Bullinbrooke (who was Earle of Darby) Duke of Lancaster: with whose daughter and heire, the kings sonne Iohn of Gaunt afterwards married; and was Duke of Lancaster in her right. He also created Sir Roger Stafford, Earle of Stafford. The said Duke (vpon some misinformation that hee should publish some disgracefull wordes of the Duke of Brunswicke) was by him challenged to a single Combate before king Iohn of France; whereof hee gladly accepted: and at the ap∣pointed time, they both being throughly fitted for that purpose, entred with hautie courage into the Lists, for the triall of their cause. But they both of them were reconciled by the French King, to the great contentment and honour of the Duke of Lancaster, notwithstanding that he was an Englishman and a subject to his E∣nemie. King Edward (during the time of the aforesaid Truce) had vsed all friendly meanes to reconcile the Flemmings, and to draw them from the French to his owne part: but finding that al his endeuours proued vaine, and that no courtesie could winne them, hee with∣drew from them all his Marts for Marchandizing, which Iaques Dartuell had procured for them. Which thing (in a short time) became exceeding hurtfull and prejudiciall to the Flemmings. And now (the time of the former Truce with France being long since ended) King Edward leuied a puissant Armie of his most ex∣pert and approued men of warre,The Blacke Prince lan∣deth in Gas∣coyne with an Armie. which hee committed to the charge and Gouernment of his sonne, the Noble and Valorous Prince of Wales, sirnamed the Blacke Prince: Who being accom∣panied with manie Earles, Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen of
name,He preuai∣leth. The French King luieth a huge armie. departed out of England, and landed in Gascoyne; where hee ransacked, spoiled, burnt, and consumed Villages, Townes, Cities, Forts, and Castles, in all places as hee passed by, without any resi∣stance or defence. But King Iohn of France, intending to op this Torrent: and making no doubt but that the multitude of his soul∣diers should giue him an easie Victorie ouer so small a Companie as the Prince conducted,Ten thou∣an men only  Eng∣lish Armie. which exceeded not tenne thousand men; Leuied a huge Armie, which hee assembled from all places subiect to his Dominion. And being accompanied with Philip his yonger sonne, and with the Flower of all the Chiualrie of France, He mar∣ched with great strength,ANNo. 30 1355. The Battaile of Poyters. against the Black Prince; whom he found neere vnto Poyters, readily prepared in the field to receiue him. The French armie was diuided into foure Battailes: who (as their turnes, or lots came) fought with much valour, but with little vse of their great skill. For the thicke shot of the English Archers, (galling vnmeasurably their great Horses) was the cause, that quickly they brake their order and their array: which suddenly bred such a totall disturbance in the whole armie,The French men are dis∣ordred. that themselues (as waues of water doe in a turbulent, and in a tempestuous Sea) ouerwhelmed each others; so that such as were downe, were troden to death by their owne friends who could not auoid them; such as would presse forward to make good proofe of their valour, were repressed by such as did retire; And such as did recoyle, were stop∣ped and hindred of their purpose, by those who could not choose but resist their comming backe. Notwithstanding, the French Kings owne Battaile (which was better ordered then all the rest) encountring with that Battaile of the English armie, in which the Prince of Wales was; performed most rare and wonderfull feates of Chiualrie,King Iohn is a most vali∣ant Prince. which (to the vtmost of their powers) they encrea∣sed; being extraordinarily animated thereunto by the matchlesse valour and fortitude of their King: who (like a worthie Knight for his surpassing valour and courage) exceeded all his Nobles for per∣formance of that day. The Braue valour, and resolution of the English.But the Blacke Prince, and his Battaile (whom no disorder trou∣bled) striuing almost beyond the abilities of men to winne honour, and to saue them selues; remained vndaunted spirits. And as dan∣gers pressed forth; so did they (with incomparable manhood) driue them backe againe, making the Frenchmen know by their mi∣serable experience, that they could not so much as dreame of any flight,The Blacke Prince his vow. nor of yeelding, but were so greedie of the best honour, that nothing but Death, or Victorie, could content them. The Prince himselfe vowed, that through the helpe of Almightie God
he would that day performe the part of a good Knight. And to say the truth, such were his vnmatchable deedes of armes, so hautie was his spirit, so pleasing was his example, and so cheerefull were his encouragements to his whole armie; that euery one among them (striuing to imitate his valour, and to winne his fauour,) re∣doubled his strength;The French Armie is o∣uerthrowne. and with such resolution fell vpon the Frenchmen, that they were compelled to giue backe, and were so violently pursued, that the battaile (in which their King fought) was now opened, and in such sort disordered, that the Englishmen entred into the midst of them; wounding and killing on euerie side with little or no losse, or danger to themselues. And at length;King Iohn, and his yon∣ger Sonne are taken Priso∣ners by Sir Dennis Mor∣becke. King Iohn (scorning to leaue the field) yeelded himself & his sonne Philip, prisoners vnto Sir Dennis Morbeck a Knight of Saint Omers: who for a murder forsooke his Countrie, and serued for wages with the Blacke Prince. In this battaile there were slaine verie ma∣nie great men of the Nobilitie, and Gentrie of France; and aboue ten thousand others. Too much desire of Honour, and too much couetousnesse;The French King is ill vsed. were the causes, that the French King (being thus taken) was ill v∣sed: For (by reason that more than ten Gentlemen laide seuerall claimes vnto him, as to their Prisoner) hee was vnciuilly drawne from one to another, not without some perill to his life: but telling them, that he was so great a Lord, that hee could make them all rich, they were better pleased, and brought him to the Prince: Who with great reuerence bowed himselfe before the King:How the Black Prince receiued and entertained the French King, and his Sonne. The Blacke Prince brin∣geth the French King and his Son: Prisoners in∣to England. Sir Dennis Morbecke. reui∣ued his heauie spirits, with cheerfull, and with comfortable words: feasted him and Phillip his yonger Sonne: attended duetifully at his Table; lodged him in his owne bed: Prouided for him most honourable attendance: Supplied all things about him which were wanting: and brought them both, from thence vnto Burdeaux, and from thence into England; where hee was ioyfully, and royally re∣ceiued, and wel-commed by the King and Queene, and by the Nobilitie of this Kingdome, and was entertained with as great magnificence and curtesie, as he could expect, or wish for. And vpon King Iohns owne confession, the honour of his taking was by King Edward adjudged to Sir Dennis Morbeck: who for his great and good seruice was much thanked: and bountifully rewarded by the King. In this Battaile (besides such as were slaine) There were taken prisoners seuenteene Earles, thrice as manie Barons,Prisoners. and so great a number of Knights, and Gentlemen of name, and of note: that e∣uerie English common souldier (who had fewest prisoners) had two:
all which,A bountifull Prince. together with the wohle spoiles of the field, the Prince frankely and freely gaue to his companies who valiantly had wonne them by their swords.The English Armie are made rich. So that there was not a poore man in the English armie, but euery one of them had as much Gold, and as much Siluer, Plate, and Iewels, as gaue him good con∣tentment for his paines. And such was their store, and such was their plentie of those thinges, that rich and costly Armours, and such like warlike prouisions, were not taken vp, nor cared for at all. How the French King was disposed of.The French King (for a while) liued at the Sauoy; which by King Edward was sumptuously furnished; and beautified, with all things necessary for so great a guest. And from thence, he was re∣mooued to the Castle of Windsor, where hee feasted, hunted, haw∣ked, and did all things according to his owne pleasure, and will, for the space of two yeares; the King, and the Blacke Prince, as often as anie leasure gaue them leaue repairing thither; and gladding him with their cheerefull and most friendly companie, and with the varietie of manie pleasing sports. By meanes whereof, true and heartie loue, and affection, did knit them fast together, so that they concluded a friendly Truce, to continue for the space of two yeares.The honou∣rable prospe∣ritie of King Edward, and of the Blacke Prince. And thus were King Edward, and the Noble Prince his sonne, honoured and blessed by Almightie God, with such trium∣phant successe in their warres, both in Scotland, and in France, (they then possessing for their Prisoners at one time, the Kings of those two Kingdomes, and Philip the French Kings younger sonne, and many Dukes, Earles, and Barons) as none other Princes in Chri∣stendome then were. King Dauid of Scotland is released.And Dauid the King of Scots after tenne yeares of imprisonment in England was enlarged for a ransome of one hundred thousand pounds, to be paid in fiue yeares: And (vpon his oath neuer againe to beare armes against England; and vpon his Homage, and Fealtie, done for that Kingdome;ANNO. 32 and vpon his faithfull promise to doe his best to procure the Nobilitie of Scotland to doe the like) he was en∣larged and set free. ANNO. 33 The Dalphin allowes not his Fathers conclusions. King Iohn of France com∣mitted to the Tower.Not long after, King Edward and the King of France, entred in∣to a parley for a longer time of Truce. But their conclusions and agreements were vtterly disliked by his eldest Sonne Charles then Regent of France, and Duke of Normandie; and by the whole Ba∣ronie of that Countie. Whereupon King Edward, with all expe∣dition and conuenient speed, made greater preparation to make Warre there, then hee had done at anie time before. And (hauing committed the French king, and his sonne Philip with honorable at∣tendance,
close prisoners to the Tower of London, himselfe, with the Blacke Prince his sonne, transported thither a puissant Armie;ANNO. 34. King Ed∣ward and the Black Prince doe land a puisant Ar∣mie at Callice The Regent Dolphin su∣eth for Pece. and landed at his Towne of Callice: and from thence hee marched strongly vnto Rhemes, where he besieged the Castle seuen weekes; but did not winne it in the end. From thence he marched towards Paris, and Chartres, wasting, burning, and killing in all places as he passed; so that hee compelled the Regent, and the Nobilitie of France, to become earnest petitioners vnto him for peace: which they obtained, vpon these Articles ensuing. 1. FIrst, that King IOHN should pay for his ransom,The Articles of the Peace. fiue hundred thousand Pounds of sterling money. 2. Secondly, That from thencefoorth, No King of France should aide, or assist,The Ransom any King of Scotland in any Warre or Rebellion against England: And that no King of England should from thencefoorth take part with the Flemings in any expedition, or Warre against France. 3. Thirdly, That the Kings of England should haue, and for euer enioy freely, without homage, and in their owne right, their Territories in Gascoyne, and in Guyan, with the Precincts, Castles, Forts, Townes and Cities of Poyters, and Perygrot; The Earledomes of Bygrot, Poy∣tiau, and Guyens, the Citie of Lymoges, Tharbes, Guaire, Agen, Angolesme, Agenoys, Rauerne, and Caours, The Lordship of Xantes, Caumesin, Hammes, Ouy, and Moun∣trell, with the Seigniories of Callice, Marguise, Sandgate, and Coloigne. 4. And lastly; That (in regard thereof) King EDWARD,The Title to the Crowne of France is relinquished. As well in the behalfe of himselfe, as of his Successours Kings of England, should vtterly renounce and leaue, both the name and title to the Kingdome of France. And for the performance of these Articles,ANNO. 34 How the ob∣seruation of this Peace was ratified. The King and Prince returne into England. Charles the Regent of France, and the Prince of Wales, in the presence of six Knights of either Nation, receiued the holy Sacrament at the high Altar, and then King Edward and his sonne returned into England, and were (with all complements of loue and kindnesse) entertained, and feasted at the Tower of London by the French King, who was con∣ueyed
from thence to Callis,The French King feasteth them. The two prin∣ces sweare. Hostages. where (according to agreement) he re∣mained foure moneths, and then King Edward repaired to him, and both of them (at a high Masse) solemnly swore to obserue, per∣forme, and keepe the said Articles and the peace. And King Iohn (for the hostages of his Ransome) deliuered to King Edward foure Dukes, seauen Earles, ten Barons, many Knights, and two of the worthiest Burgesses of euery great Citie in France, and tooke a most friendly leaue of the King, and of the Prince of Wales, and departed towards Boleine:King Iohn was a priso∣ner foure yeares. he hauing remained a prisoner more then foure yeares. And King Edward with his sonne returned into England, bringing with them their honorable Hostages, who were (with all humanitie and kindnesse) feasted and entertained by the King and by his Nobilitie, and were permitted freely to vse all sports, pa∣stimes, and exercises for pleasure and contentation, as they pleased. ANNO. 37 Three Kings doe visite King Ed∣ward. King Iohn dieth in Eng∣land. The Blacke Prince liueth in Burdeaux. ANNO. 40 The causes of King Ed∣wards future losses in those Countries. Peter King of Castile, is deposed by Henry the Bastard. King Charles the fifth ta∣keth part with Henrie the Bastard. The Blacke Prince being victorious re∣setleth Peter in his King∣dome.About two yeares after king Edward was at one time visited (for loue and kindnesse onely, and for no businesse at all) by three Kings, that is to say, by king Iohn of France, Dauid the king of Scots, and by the king of Cyprus, and were with all munificent bountie and liberalitie feasted, and honored by the King, but king Iohn fell sick, and dyed in the Sauoy, and his body was conuayd vnto S. Den∣nis in France, where (with great pomp, and princely ceremonies) it was buried. The next yeare following, the noble Prince of ales and his wife (being very gallantly attended, and prouided) went vnto Bur∣deaux, where he liued, and gouerned the kings Prouinces there∣about, and elsewhere in France, to the great contentment and good liking of the Nobles and commons of those Countries. In the fortith yeare of king Edwards raigne an vnfortunate busi∣nesse was taken in hand by the valiant Prince of Wales, which albeit it were performed with great resolution, and was rewarded with deserued honor, yet within few yeares, by reason of a future acci∣dent, it was the occasion that king Edward lost a great part of his ter∣ritories in France, and it was thus. Peter the true and lawfull king of Castile was in the field ouerthrowne, put to flight, and dispossessed of his Crowne by Henry his Bastard Brother, who was assisted by Charles the fifth, the sonne of Iohn the deceased king of France. This poore distressed king (in his wants and miserie) repaired to the Prince of Wales for ayd, who for his restoring, and vpon large and faithfull promises of liberall pay and great rewards, conducted an armie into Castile. And, albeit that the Spanish and the French for∣ces were in number four times more then the Princes were, yet in a bloudie battaile the most of them were slaine, and the rest were put
to flight. And king Peter was againe restored to his Crowne, and setled in his kingdome by the Prince, who returned againe to Bur∣deaux with great honor. But (not long after) Henry the Bastard,Henrie the Bastard ta∣keth, and slaieth Peter. Peters two heires marri∣ed to Iohn of Gant and Thomas of Woodstocke. The want of pay was the Prince his o∣uerthrow. This Taxe mard all. (being newly supplied with fresh forces) warred with such great furie and violence vpon king Peter, that he subdued him: and (to preuent all future claymes and troubles which he might make) he caused him to be put to death. But his two daughters and heires were after marryed vnto Iohn of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, and to Thomas of Woodstock, two of king Edwards sonnes. By reason of king Peters death; the Prince his souldiours (being hopelesse to receiue their promised pay, and large rewards) and be∣ing oppressed with many wants, daily petitioned the Prince to sup∣ply their need. But he (finding none other meanes to support their necessities, nor being stored with money to relieue their pouertie) imposed (contrary to the customes of those Countries) diuers Taxes vpon the inhabitants of Aquitaine: which so highly did dis∣please them, that the Lords thereof complained of this sharp no∣ueltie to the French king, who (flatly contrary to the Articles not long before concluded on for peace betwixt England and France) arrogated to himselfe the Soueraignty ouer the Prince,The French King breakes the League. and his Do∣minions in France; and sommoned him to appeare before him at Paris. So that the peace, and those agreed Articles were broken by the French king,The Prince sommoned to appeare at Paris. Warres pro∣claimed. Almost all do reuolt from the Prince. The mutabi∣litie of fortun An vnfortu∣nate yeare. and warres were againe proclaymed betweene England and France. But before the Prince of Wales could enable his forces for a strong defence: the inhabitants of those Countries for the most part reuolted from him, and dayly yeelded their Townes, Cities, Forts, and Castles, into the hands of the French king. So that king Edward (who for the space of forty yeares together was most honorable, and more fortunate then any other Christian Prince, by gayning of incredible victories vpon the Scots, and French Nation) within the compasse of one yeare, & without blowes, lost (almost) all his Commaund in those Prouinces, which by the said agree∣ment, and articles of peace, were allotted, and by solemne oath as∣sured vnto him. King Charles of France (forgetting what he had sworne,ANNO. 43 The French Name. and pleasing himselfe thus quietlie to be made the Lord of all those Countries which were assigned to king Edward) conceiued strong hope, not only to defeat him vtterly of all these Countries, but al∣so to vex him at home in his owne kingdome. And for that purpose he furnished a strong Nauie, with which he kept the Narrow Seas. But king Edward (to driue those forces back againe) sent his sonne
Iohn of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster,Iohn of Gant with an Ar∣mie, landeth at Callice, and mar∣cheth to Bur∣deaux. He beates the French King. ANNO. 44 An other Armie sent into France. The English doe preuaile. with an armie into Callice, who (to the terror and spoyle of the Frenchmen) marched from thence, vn∣till he came to Burdeaux to the Prince his Brother, without oppo∣sition, or resistance; wasting, and hauoking in all places as he pas∣sed by, sauing that he was once met with, and encountred by king Charles; who (being soundly beaten) was enforced to retire, and to giue free passage to the Duke. King Edward (as much as in him lay) though hee beganne to grow old, yet he was very carefull of those affaires. For as soone as his sonne Iohn of Gaunt was gone out of England: hee sent ano∣ther Armie vnto Saint Omers, which was conducted by Sir Robert Knowles; who (marching through those adiacent Countries) with fire and sword depopulated it, yea almost vntill he came to the Ci∣tie of Paris. And then hee marched into the Earledome of Angeou where hee wonne the strong Townes of Vaas, and Ruylly, and sun∣drie others thereabout. But the French king being informed, that there was great dissention in the English armie, betwixt Sir Robert Knowles and the Lords Fitz-water, and of Grauntson; rushed vpon them sodainly with an armie: and finding their mindes diuided, and their forces by great disorder broken,Dissention caused the Englishmens ouerthrow. preuailed against them, and slew about one thousand Englishmen. Whereupon the said Townes, which they had taken, were againe yeelded into the French kings hands. He also (following the good hap of his faw∣ning Fortune) sent another armie into the Prouince of Guyan:ANNO. 45 where the Prince was weakly assisted, and his Townes, and Castles daily reuolted from him. King Edward (being much perplexed with the common reports of his declining Fortune;ANNO. 46 and being resolued to doe his best to pre∣uent the worst) assembled his high Court of Parliament at West∣minster:A Parliamēt. wherein (to supply his wants, and to giue better strength and furtherance to his French Warres) the Temporaltie with much cheerefulnesse granted him a Subsidie of fifteene thousand pounds:A Subsidie granted. and the like summe hee requested of the Cleargie; who were contented to giue him faire words, but no monie. Whereat he was so much displeased,The Clergie will grant none. The Clergie disgraced. ANNO. 46 The Earle of Pembroke de∣feated, and taken at Sea. that wheras (at that time) the Bishops and the Cleargie men, were chiefly honoured with all Places and Offices of Honour, and of Profit; and of Commaund; disgrace∣fully hee depriued them, and dismissed them all, and placed more thankfull Subjects of the Laitie in their roomes. King Charles had now besieged the Towne of Rochell almost one whole yeare: For whose reliefe, and to remoue the siege, king Ed∣ward sent the Earle of Pembroke with an armie to the Sea; but hee
was encountred, fought with, and put vnto the worst, by Henrie the vsurper of Castile, who in fauour of the French king, and thankfully to requite his former loue, when hee assisted him against king Peter, kept the narrow Seas with a strong Fleet. In this fight, the Earle himselfe, and one hundred and threescore others, were taken Prisoners; manie men were slaine,The French King winnes Rochell, &c. and the rest who escaped returned altogether discomforted into England. And vpon the certaine report of this disaster, The Towne of Rochell, Angolesme, Xants, and Saint Iohns of Angley, and diuers other Prouinces, were giuen vp vnto the French king. Sir Iohn de Mountford Duke of Brittaine (perceiuing that good successe accompanied the French king in all his actions) beganne to feare,ANNO. 47Iohn of Gant and the Duke of Britaine, oppose them∣selues against the French King. They waste the Countrey. ANNO. 48 left (in the height of his prosperitie) he would attempt some quarrell against him. Wherefore Hee fortified his Countries, and then came into England, and offred his assistance to K. Edward: who forthwith leuied a strong armie, and commited it to the gouern∣ment of his sonne the Duke of Lancaster. Who (being accompa∣nied with the Duke of Brittaine) landed at Callice, and with sword and fire wasted the whole Countrie, vntill hee came to Burdeaux: where the Duke of Lancaster found his brother the Prince of Wales exceeding sicke; who made him Gouernour of all King Edwards Prouinces. And hauing scene all such Noble men, as hee could command,Iohn of Gant is made Go∣uernour. The sicke Prince com∣meth into England. ANNO. 49 ANNO. 50 to take their solemne oathes for the performance of their duties, and obedience to his brother the Duke; he sailed into England. After whose arriuall, three parles for peace betwixt Eng∣land and France were entertained, vpon the motion, and by the me∣diation of Pope Gregorie the eleuenth. But not one of them was made fruitfull with any fortunate successe. In the last yeare of King Edwards Raigne, in a Parliament hol∣den at Westminster, the King required a Subsidie from the Clear∣gie and from the Temporaltie of his Kingdome, towards the sup∣porting of his warres.The Lower house of the Parliment complaine vpon the K ng euill Officers. But the Lower house of that assembly com∣plained grieuously against the Lord Latimer, chiefe Chamberlaine to the King, and of manie other of his Officers; for that they not only misled the King in his old age, but also vnthriftily spent and consumed the Treasure of his Kingdome. Wherefore they refused to yeild vnto the kings demand, except those euill Officers might bee displaced, and better men setled in their roomes. Which being by the king through the important perswasions of the Prince consented vnto, he cheerefully obtained his demand. And now approched the ends of these two famous,.1376. and most worthie Princes the Father and the Sonne. For the Prince of
Wales died the eight day of Iune,The Blacke Prince dieth. in the yeare of our Lord God one thousand, three hundred, threescore and sixteene, when hee had liued fortie yeares; and lieth buried at Canterburie. The King restoreth his euill OfficersAnd no sooner was hee dead, but king Edward (verie vnaduised∣ly, to his great dishonour, and to the great discontentment of his people) remoued from him such new Officers, as in the late High Court of Parliament were established and placed neere about him: and restored the Lord Latimer,Richard is Created Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall and Earle of Chester. King Ed∣ward dieth. and all the rest, to their former Offices, and places. And finding himselfe exceeding weake (by reason of his sharp, and grieuous sicknesse) he created his Nephew Richard (Sonne to the Prince deceased) Prince of Wales, Earle of Chester, and Duke of Cornwall; and committed the Regencie of his kingdome to his son Iohn of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster: & died, when he had raigned fiftie yeares, and somewhat more.
THE HISTORIE OF KING RICHARD THE SECOND. RICHARD the second (being the Son and heire of the Blacke Prince,ANNO. 1. 1377. and aged eleuen yeares, and somewhat more) was crowned king of England in the yeare of our Lord God, one thousand three hundred and seuen∣tie seuen. In the whole course of his euill Gouernment,King Ri∣chards euill manners and bad Gouern∣ment. he neglected his No∣bilitie, and taxed his Subjects, to en∣able himselfe to giue prodigally vnto his ill deseruing Fauorites. Hee was too too resolute in his follies, and refused to bee reproued or reformed. He also despised the sage aduice, and good directions, of his wisest and best Counsel∣lors; and wholly plotted all his courses, by the wicked and grace∣lesse projects of his base companions, whom hee raised to more honourable Estates then befitted the meanes of their condition. So that they fell by their own weight; and he himselfe (in the end) was enforced to endure the extremitie of his hard fortune. For be∣ing first disgraced by his Cousin, Henrie of Bullingbrooke Duke of Lancaster, and sonne and heire to his Vncle Iohn of Gaunt; hee was at length by him (with the general consent of a whole Parliament) deposed from his Crowne, commited to Prison, and afterwardes
wickedly murdered, as in this discourse of his disordered Gouern∣ment, more amply it shall appeare. The French∣men burne diuers townes in England.In the first yeare of king Richards Raigne, Charles the French king (presuming much on his Minoritie, and being aided by the Spaniards) landed in the Southwest, and in the South-east parts of this kingdome, and ransacked, and burnt the Townes of Plymouth, Dartmouth, Portsmouth, Rye, and some other Townes and Villa∣ges, coasting vpon the Sea, and would haue done more mischiefe, if by the kings Vncle Edmund of Langly Earle of Cambridge, and by the Earles of Buckingham, and of Salisburie, they had not beene fought with, and beaten to their ships. Alexander Ramseyes desperate at∣tempt: and successe.At the same time also (by the instigation of the French king) one Alexander Ramsey, an approued Scottishman at armes, with fortie of his Company, in the depth of the night, suddenly and des∣perately scalled the wals of the Castle of Barwicke: and (finding the Captaine, and all his souldiers securely sleeping) he tooke it with∣out blowes; and intended also to haue surprised the Towne. But the inhabitants, (hearing an extraordinarie noyse and tumult in the Castle, and indeuouring to preuent a feared mischiefe) hewed away the stayes of the Draw-bridge, on the Townes side: so that when the Scots did let fall the Draw-bridge, the chaines brake, and the Bridge fell into the Castle Ditch. By meanes whereof the Scots could not issue out, but were imprisoned by their owne Vi∣ctorie. This necessitie enforced them (as well as they were able) to for∣tifie the Castle, which on the kings behalfe, was soone besieged, and assaulted by tenne thousand men: who after many feates of Armes performed brauely by the assailants, and after much valor, with high courage, shewed by that small number of valiant Scots, wonne the Castle, and receiued not one of them to mercie, but onely their Captaine Alexander Ramsey. The French¦men land in England.And not long after, the Frenchmen landed againe in England, and did much harme at Douer, Wynchelsay, Hastings, and at Grauesend; and returned with their booties into France: But to preuent like future mischiefes, and to reuenge those injuries done to the King and his Realme by the French King:ANNO. 3. A Parliamēt. This Taxe caused much trouble. An Armie sent into France. A Parliament was assembled at West∣minster. In which, a Subsidie of foure pence, for euery man, and for euery woman within this Kingdome (being aboue foureteene yeares of age) was granted to the King. The leuying whereof procured much heart-burning, which (not long after) brake forth, and endangered the whole State of the Common-weale. Yet with that monie great prouision was made, and an armie of eight thou∣sand
men was sent into France, vnder the command of Thomas of Woodstock the Kings Vncle: who passing ouer the faire and great Riuers of Soame, Oyse, and Marne, spoiled, and burnt all the Countries, and ransomed the inhabitants, vntill he came into Brit∣taine; where he was receiued by the Duke Iohn Mountford with all friendly entertainment, and much joy. And now began a Rebellion in England, which was exceeding hazardous to the whole kingdome. For Iohn Wall, a factious Priest,ANNO. 4. perceiuing that the inferior sort of the people much murmured and grudged at the payment of the aforesaid Subsidie;A great Re∣bellion in England. Iohn Wal was the beginner of this Rebel∣lion. His wicked course in per∣swading. by secret conferences in all places where he came, informed the Bondmen, Villaines, Slaues, and such others, as were pinched with penury, and with want, that, by descent and parentage from Adam, all men were of one condition, and of equall worth: and that the Lawes of this kingdome were iniurious, and vniust, which did set so great a difference betwixt men, as to make some of them great Peeres, Potentates, and Lords, and in geuing to some others large autho∣rity and commaund, and in enlarging of great possessions, and store of riches vnto some, and in commanding others to be base, seruile, beggars, and to enioy litle or nothing at all. And therefore (with traytrous reasons) he perswaded them, either by faire meanes, or by open insurrection and ciuill warre, to prouide for their owne liberties, and to releeue their owne wants. This lewd and damnable doctrine so infatuated and infected the Rusticks from Shire to Shire, that (at length) it was spread in the Citie of London, where the meanest, and the basest sort (being a multitude, who egerly enuyed the prosperitie of the more wor∣thie inhabitants, and greedily coueted to be enriched with their substance) were in great hope (by Rebellious mutening) to make vtter hauoke and spoyle of all things at their pleasure. And (to ef∣fect that which they intended) such as were most desperatlie incli∣ned among them, informed the headlesse multitude in th Coun∣tries round about them, that if they would come thither and ioyne with them, the whole Citie of London should be at their com∣mand. So that incredible numbers of brainsick, turbulent, and traytrous people prepared to flock thither, from Kent, Essex, Sussex, Bedfordshire, and from many other places. Of this rude and raskall rout,Watt Tyler, Iohn Wall, Iack Straw and Iack Shepheard, Captaines in this Rebellion Wat Tylar (who by his profession was a Taylor) was made Captaine, to command the rest: and the said Iohn Wall, Iack Straw, Iack Shepard, and some others, were made chiefe directors, and their leaders. And (Stiling themselues, The Kings men, and the seruants of the Common-weale of England,
they marched towards London, beating downe the houses, and rifling all the moueables of all such as were professors of the Law;How they passed to∣wards Lon∣don. and compelling all Knights and Gentlemen either to flye before their comming, or to be partakers in this vprore. They also sent vnto the King who then lay in the Tower, requiring him to come and to speake with them.The King went to speak with the Re∣bels, but da∣red not. Whereupon, the King (purposing, if hee might, to preuent all future mischiefes which were threatned by this disorder, and being accompanied with some of his wisest and discreetest Lords, and Counsellors) went by water to Grauesend. But when hee perceiued their vnruly madnesse, and their rage and furie, and that all their numbers consisted of the basest Swads, and of the Off-scumme of the People, hee feared to put himselfe into their hands; and returned backe againe to the Tower. They resolue to burn South warke. They enter into London. Their kind entertaine∣ment pleaseth them.The next day they all came to London. But finding the Gates to be shut against them, and the Bridge to bee strongly fortified: they intended first to kill all the inhabitants of South-warke; then to steale their goods; and last of al to consume it vtterly with fire. But (to preuent that mischiefe) a free entrance was giuen them into the Citie: where the greatest men made them the best cheere, and fed them with their chiefest dainties; and by liberall gifts (in some sort) pacified their furie and their rage. Then they entred into the Sauoy (which then belonged to Iohn of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster the Kings Vncle) which house they ri∣fled,The Sauoy burned. burnt, and wickedly murdered all his Officers whom they found there.The Innes of Court rifled. They also robbed all the Innes of Court; burnt their Law-bookes; and sacrilegiously they stole in all Churches, and in all Religious Houses;They com∣mit sacriledg. accounting their monstrous thefts to bee no sinne. They also released out of all Prisons all manner of offenders whatsoeuer.Prisoners en∣larged. Wat Tylars crueltie to his old master. Among sundrie other outrages which they then com∣mitted, Their chiefest Ring-leader Wat Tylar sent for his old Ma∣ster, named Richard Lion, a worthie and graue Citizen, from whom (during the time of his seruice) he had receiued for a foule offence some smal correction: and (for a reuenge) without other iudgment, according to his gracelesse command,All strangers are rifled. his head was striken off, and borne vpon a Launce before him in the streets. They also robbed and spoiled all Flemmings, Frenchmen, Lombards, and other Forrai∣ners inhabiting in or neere about the Citie of London.60000. The inciuili∣tie at Saint Katherines. And at length (their numbers being encreased to threescore thousand) they came to Saint Katherines, neere to the Kings lodging; where they remained that night. But such were their hideous, beastly, and confused howlings, roarings, whoopings, and out-cries, that
oftentimes the King and his Counsell feared greatly, least by trea∣cherie, and by treason, they had possessed themselues of the To∣wer, in which he lay. The next morning they sent againe to the King:The King goeth to Mile-end-Greene to speake with the Rebels. Wat Tylor entreth into the Tower. He robbeth the Kings Mother. He behead∣eth the Arch∣bishop of Can∣terburie. entreating him to speake with them at Mile-end-greene. But his Highnes was no sooner gone thither, then Wat Tilar, with fortie more of his wic∣ked and rascall companions, pressed in by violence at the Tower Gates, and robbed the Chambers and the lodgings there: not spa∣ring those which did belong to the Princesse of Wales the Kings mother; whose head Wat Tilar brake, and in such rude and beastly sort behaued himselfe towards her, that feare, and griefe encrea∣sed a sicknesse in her, which a long time after was dangerous to her life. They also apprehended there Simon, a learned and  famous Archbishop of Canterburie, and stroke off his head, because vpon the first notice of Iohn Wals traiterous perswasions to the base ras∣cals, hee had committed him to a short and to an easie imprison∣ment. The King (assoone as he came to Mile-end-greene) demaunded what it was that with such violence they required?Manumissi∣on is requi∣red and pro∣mised. They all with a mightie shout, and with a horrible confused crie, desired that they might be manumitted and set free: and that their posterities might not be Villaines, nor in bondage. The King graciously re∣plied that he would not only grant (in most ample and large man∣ner) their demand: and procure it to be established by a Parliament:The Kings Banners, and Pardon gi∣uen to the Rebels. but gaue vnto them his banners for their safe-conduct to returne into their Countries, and to their owne houses; and also pardoned them their rebellion and their offence. The greater part of this rude multitude,The greater number doe depart to their Houses. (who were not made acquainted with anie further mischiefe, which was secretly in∣tended by the rest) returned vnto London: where (with all con∣uenient speed) by instruments in writing, The King heerefully performed his promise: and thereupon great numbers of them, re∣turned to their owne homes. But Wat Tilar, and about twentie thousand more of his wicked and gracelesse consorts (determining, if it was possible,Twenty thou∣sand would not depart. Wat Tylor comes into Smithfield. The King commeth to the Rebels. first to ran∣sack, and then to burne, the Citie of London) kept manie of the Kings banners, and his pardons which were vnder the great seale; and came with all his remaining Rable into Smithfield. When the King heard that this vnruly assembly was not vtter∣ly dissolued (to preuent in time such mischiefe as they might doe) being garded but with a small strength hee presented himselfe be∣fore
the Rebels: and with all Princely courtesie, and kindnesse, be∣haued himselfe towards them: and perswaded them to deist from all violence, and from wrong; assuring them, that they should not only obtaine their libertie, and pardons, but should (vpon trial) find him to bee their good Lord, and gracious King. But the Arch-Traytour,Wat Tylar refuseth the Kings fauors Wat Tilar, with a frowning countenance, insolent beha∣uiour, and rough speech, refused to accept of the Kings fauour: and proudly told him, that all these Troupes, and manie more thousands, were readie at his beck, to doe and to execute whatsoe∣uer he would command:His proud speech to the King. and (to the end that his pride might want no manner of audacious boldnesse) he required the Kings Esquire (who bare the sword) to deliuer to him his dagger. But with a out answere,He requireth his Sword-bearers dag∣ger. and with a man-like courage hee refused so to doe, vntill he was by the King commanded to deliuer it. Now when the Traytor had thus gotten the dagger, he required to haue the sword also: but the Esquire told him plainly, that it was the Kings sword; and should not bee giuen to a Knaue. Whereat Wat Tilar was so extraordinarily incensed,He requireth to haue the Kings sword. The Esquires stout answere The vow of Wat Tylar. Wat Tylar slaine by the Maior of London. For this cause that Citie giues the Sword in her Armes. The Rebels prepare for reuenge. The Londo∣ners sent an Armie into Smithfield. The Kings Banners and Pardons are redeliuered. They are torne in the Rebels view. that (with an execrable and a vile oath) hee swore, that the Esquire should loose his head bfore he himselfe would either eat any meat, or drinke anie drinke. The Major of London (named Iohn Hadley) who then attended on the King, disdaining that a proud Traitor should so confront, and braue the King, drew forth his sword, and strake him so sound on the head, that he felled him to the ground: and (incontinently) he was slaine Whereat, some hope was sodenly conceiued, that the rest of the Rebels would haue gone away. But they (being despe∣ratly resolued to reuenge his death) according to their litle skil cast themselues in some order: so that now, euery minute of time threatned the destruction, and slaughter of manie men. The Citizens of London being informed what had hapned: and purposing with all speed to aide the King, and to free themselues and the Cie from ruine and from spoile; sent an Armie of eight thousand men well armed, and well appointed, to the King: all which were quickly marshalled and readie to giue the charge. But first the King required the Rebels to submit themselues, or else to deliuer vnto him such of his Banners, and Free Pardons, and Ma∣numissions, as they had gotten into their hands. But so farre off were they from being sorrie or repentant for their Treasons, that (in a proud brauerie, and in much scorne) they redeliuered them all vnto the King: Who caused them (in their open view) to be cancelled, and to bee torne in peeces. The doing whereof, so so∣dainely daunted and quailed the heartes and courages of those in∣solent
and gracelesse Rebels: that (when the King expected no∣thing but all violence to be executed by the sword) they coward∣ly dispersed themselues, and ranne away;The Rebels flye. euery man (without any order or staying) making all possible hast and shift to saue them∣selues. And thus vanished this cloud, which threatned an outra∣gious storme of much danger, and mischiefe, to the King and Com∣mon-weale. And the chiefest of those malefactors (a thing which neuer fai∣leth in such tumultuous rebellions) were by their owne compa∣nions (to insinuate grace and fauour with the King) deliuered in∣to the hands of Iustice: who afterwardes,The Cap∣taines deliue∣red to the King by the Rebels them∣selues. Fifteene hun∣dred Rebels Executed. with fifteene hundred more (of the principall agents in this businesse) were (vpon due enquiries, and iust conuictions, according to the Law) executed, and put to sundrie tortures and deaths, in diuers places of this Realme. The King hauing thus pacified this Rebellion, and Vproare;ANNO. 5. King Ri∣chard mar∣rieth. married the Ladie Anne (daughter to the deceased Emperour Charles the fourth: and sister vnto Wenceslaus the Emperour who then raigned) and was made happie, through much prosperi∣tie and peace, vntill the ninth Yeare of his Gouernment.ANNO. 9. 1385. A Parliamēt Two of the Kings Vncles were created Dukes of Yorke and Glocester. Henrie of Bullingbroke created Earle of Darby. Other Earles created. King Ri∣chards euill Counsellours. And then hee summoned, and held his High Court of Parliament at Westminster. In which he created his fifth and sixth Vncles, Ed∣mund of Langly (being then Earle of Cambridge) Duke of Yorke; and Thomas of Woodstock (who was then Earle of Buckingham) Duke of Glocester. He also created his Cousin Henrie of Bollingbrooke (sonne and heire apparant to his fourth Vncle Iohn of Gaunt Duke of Lan∣caster) Earle of Darbie; and his Cousin Edward Plantagenet, (the sonne and heire apparant of his said Vncle Edmund of Langley) he created Earle of Rutland; and Sir Iohn Holland (brother to the Earle of Kent) was made Earle of Huntingdon; and Thomas Lord Mowbray was made Earle of Nottingham. The King (whose affections were but greene, and who was ea∣sily seduced by such as hee best loued) was at this time wholy dire∣cted, and counselled into manie euill and vngodly courses, by his vnworthie fauourites, Michael De la Pole (his Chauncellor) whom he created Duke of Suffolck; and by Robert de Vere (Earle of Oxford, and Marquesse of Dublyn,) whom hee made Duke of Ireland;Affection without rea∣son. and would haue made him King of that Countrie, if his Nobili∣tie would haue consented thereunto. In the same Parliament,Roger Mor∣tymer Pro∣claimed heire Apparent. He caused his Cousin Sir Roger Morti∣mer Earle of March (who was the sonne and heire of Edmund Mor∣timer, and of Philip his wife; who was the Daughter and heire of
the Kings third Vncle,This Sir Ro∣ger Morti∣mer was slaine many yeares after. ANNO. 10 1386. The King neglecteth his Nobilitie and their Counsell. Michaell de la Poole. Robert de Ʋere. Alexander Archbishop of Yorke. Robert Tre∣silian. The King intendeth the surprisall of the Duke of Glocester, and of the Earles of Warwicke and of Arun∣dell. They come well garded to the Parlia∣ment. Foure Fif∣teenes de∣manded. It is denied. A Parliamēt may be held once a yeare. In what case the Knights and Bur∣gesses may depart. The Houses of Parlamēts demands. Lionel Duke of Clarence) to bee proclaimed heire apparant to his Crowne. But hee was long afterward slaine in Ireland, by such Rebels as he endeuored to suppresse. It is now to bee obserued, that from henceforth the King respe∣cted not the sage aduice and counsell of his grauest, and most expe∣rienced Lords: and that he began careleslely to neglect the Nobi∣litie, and his great Officers of his Kingdome: and that hee did all things preposterously, by the lewd and vnskilfull perswasions and directions of his two newly-created Dukes, of Suffolke, and of Ire∣land; and of Alexander then Archbishop of Yorke; and of Robert Tre∣silian his Chiefe Iustice. And as they all did lead him into many er∣ros: so did they especially exasperat him (without iust cause) against his renowned, and truly noble Vncle Thomas of Woodstocke, Duke of Glocester; and against the two Earles of Warwick, and of Arondel: which three hee intended to haue surprized at a Banquet in Lon∣don; if Nicholas Exton (then Major of that Citie) would haue con∣sented thereunto. But because his helpe then failed, and the King could not (at that time) obtaine his purpose: Hee resolued to ef∣fect it at a more solemne meeting. For which cause principally, He summoned his High Court of Parliament: but the said three Lords (vpon good information being jealous of such vnkindly entertain∣ment) repaired to the said assembly; being strongly garded by a multitude of valiant men at armes: by meanes whereof they se∣cured their own libertie; and the vngodly project of the King, and of his wicked Counsellors, came to nought. Now when this long Parliament produced nothing worthie to bee noted: Michael de la Pole (in the Kings behalfe) required a Tax of foure fifteenes, affirming that a lesser gift could not support his Estate, and maintaine such warres as hee was likely to vndertake. But the Lords, and the Lower House, not only refused to yeeld vn∣to this motion, but made a solemne declaration, That as the Kings of this Realme (for the better ordering, and preseruing of their E∣state, and Kingdome) might once in euery yeare assemble a Parlia∣ment: so by an ancient law, all the members of that great Coun∣sell might, without leaue, breake vp the same assembly, and de∣part to their owne houses, If the King absented himselfe from their companie for the space of fortie dayes together; and that they would not proceed in any businesse but depart, except the King would bee pleased personally to come among them, and to grace them with his presence; and would also remoue Michael de la Pole from his Chancelorship, and commit him to strait Prison, be∣cause he lewdly counselled the King to attempt manie thinges,
which were dishonourable to himselfe and hurtfull to the Com∣mon-weale. The King (as a Lion) being sterne, and scorning to yeeld vnto anie motion, although it tended to his owne safetie,The King de∣nies their suit and to the well-fare of his people; required, that fiftie selected men of that Assembly might be sent vnto him, with whom he would conferre and agree vpon such affaires, as they required to bee treated on.They will not yeeld to his command. But the two houses (denying to make anie conclusions priuatly, of such affaires, and businesses, as by a Parliament were to be disputed publickly, and publickly to be established) did send vnto him his said Vncle Thomas of Woodstocke, Duke of Glocester, and Thomas A∣rundell then Arch-bishop of Canterburie: and none others. And they two (by expresse commandement) told the King,Two, and no more are sent vnto the king that by his absence hee obscured the light of iustice, and hindred the negotia∣tions of the Common-weale, which (without his approbation and consent) could not receiue anie strength, or life: and that if he plea∣se not (vpon their humble intreatie) to come among them for the furthering,The King is told of his faults. and for the finishing of such waightie affaires as thn they had in hand; they would depart to their owne houses, because he had absented himselfe from them (to their dislike and discouragement) more than fortie dayes. They also craued with great submission and humilitie (as they were commaunded) to bee informed, by whom his Maiesties treasure,A reckoning is demaunded of the King. belonging to the com∣mon-weale, was prodigally wasted and consumed? and how it came to passe, that his large reuenewes could not suffice to main∣taine and to support his Estate and charge (seeing he had no wars) except his people must be taxed? This message, and these demands,The King threatens the two Houses of his Parla∣ment. so wonderfully incensed the King against both the houses of his Parlament, that in great chollar and indignation hee deeply swore, that if he had foreknowne the sacie boldnesse of his owne Subiects, (who as he supposed inten∣ded to rise in Armes against him) hee would more willingly haue submitted himselfe to the King of France, and haue relied vpon his protection and defence, then thus be baffled, and be made seruile and an vnderling to those, whom his Soueraigntie ought to command. The two Lords (with such wonderfull grauitie and temperate mildnesse) so effectually related to the King,A caueat to beware of France. the inueterated ma∣lice which the Kings of France had borne towards this Kingdome, and the kings which ruled it; and the loyall dutie, and obe∣dience, which both the Lords, and also all other inferiour subiects of this Realme, did beare vnto him, as vnto their most gracious
and good Lord, that (thereby) the greatest flame of his fire was much quenched:Wise Counsell appeaseth the Kings rage. The King commeth to the Parlamēt Michael de la Poole, ac∣cused, con∣demned, fined imprisoned, depriued, &c and the kings passions beganne to bee more mo∣derate and calme. So that he promised (within three dayes) to come among them; and did performe it accordingly, to the great ioy and contentment of all such, as meant and wished well. When they were all thus met together: Michael de la Pole was by the Lords accused, and found guiltie of manie notable and no∣torious cousonages, and deceats by him practised in the execution of his office; and for that he had purchased with the kings monie, in yearely reuenew, so much land as was worth one thousand pounds and more; and had purloined (in bribes from the kings Subiects for expeditions, and by such craftie and dishonest trickes) the summe of twentie thousand markes at the least: for which of∣fences all his lands were giuen to the king; together with a fine of twentie thousand Markes:Thomas A∣rundel Arch∣bishop of Can¦terburie is made Lord Chancellour. and himselfe (being depriued of his Office of Chancellorship; and of his libertie, was committed vnto straight Prison: and Thomas Arondell then Archbishop of Canter∣burie (who was a wise and great States-man, and did employ his best endeuours for the wellfare and prosperitie of the Common-weale, without anie respect to his friends, or profit to himselfe) was made Chancellor in his steed. In the same Parliament also thirteene persons were elected,Commissio∣ners chosen in the Parlia∣ment to ex∣amine the Kings Offi∣cers. The King sweareth to allow it. sworne, and authorised (aswell by the consents of the Lords spiritual and temporal, and by the Com∣mons, as also by the kings agreement thereunto published in wri∣ting vnder his great Seale) to examine all, or anie of his Maiesties officers, touching their behauiours, and their demeanors, in their se∣uerall roomes and places; and by whom, and how, both at home, and abroad, the kings treasure had beene purloined, or mispent; and to correct and punish all such, as for iust transgressions they should censure and condemne. And the king himselfe tooke a pub∣like oath, not to reuoke, nor to suppresse the said Commission, or their power, except a Parliament should ioyne with him therein. And furthermore it was then enacted for a Law, that if anie man should or did attempt,Disswaders to be punished. directly, or indirectly, to perswade or to encourage the king, to infringe his promise, and to make breach of his said oath, touching all, or anie of those matters; hee should for his first offence loose all his Lands and Goods; and, for his second offence, should receiue triall, iudgment, & execution, as a Traytor to the king,Halfe a fif∣teene condi∣tionally gran∣ted. and to his Crowne. And then a Subsidie of one halfe Fifteene was granted: If, by the said Commissioners, and vpon their view of the kings Estate, it should be thought needful for him to haue the same.
No sooner was this Parliament ended, but the king (by the per∣swasions of his euill Counsellors, and contrarie to his owne assent,ANNO. 11 The King breaketh his promise and his oath. Michael de la Pole is en∣larged. The Commis∣sioners are pronounced Traytors. Some Iudges doe ratifie the confirmation. promise, and oath) enlarged Michael de la Pole, and went with him, & Robert De Vere his Duke of Ireland, and with Tresilian his Chiefe Iu∣stice, & manie of his Iudges, vnto Nottingham: wher they pronoun∣ced the kings Vncle, Thomas of Woodstocke Duke of Glocester; and Thomas Arondel Archbishop of Canterbury; the said thirteene Com∣missioners; and manie others; to bee guiltie of High Treason: be∣cause they had compelled the king, against his will, and conscience, to ratifie the said Commission by his oath, and vnder his Great Seale. And then they went to Couentrie: where the said Iudges, by an instrument in writing vnder their hands and seales, declared and confirmed their opinions (touching those matters) to be a∣greeable, and consonant to the Lawes of this Realme. Now (for a while) must we leaue the king, and his Nobilitie, per∣plexed with manie euill conceits, each of the other, and studying vpon the future euents of those former conclusions: and will in∣forme the Reader, that the time of Truce, betwixt England and France, was more then fully ended:The French Lords, and Gentlemen, come to ani∣mate the Scots against England. Their course entertain∣ment. They inuade England. They make a troublesome iournie into Wales. King Richard with an army of 68000. men, entreth and spoileth Scotland. and that the French king (to beget more broyles at home) sent his Admirall into Scotland, with a thousand Lords, knights, and Gentlemen, compleatly armed, and furnished with armour and with weapons, sufficient for one thou∣sand more. But such was their course and homely entertainment, that (vpon their first arriuall) the Common people abandoned their companie, making no manner of reckoning or accompt of them, nor relieuing of their wants with any thing which was need∣full: but suffered them to be oppressed with as manie miseries, as strangers (being in a forraine, and in a poore Countrie) were able to endure; vntill they ioyned with the Scottish armie, which consi∣sted of thirtie thousand men. And with them, they entred into England, and did much harme. But when they were informed, that the king with eight thousand men at armes, and threescore thousand Archers, trauailed hard iournies to encounter with them: they then forsooke their ordinarie march, and passages, and went ouer the high and craggie Mountaines into Wales; where they committed manie vile, and wicked outrages, which turned little to their commoditie and gaine. But (in the meane time) king Richard with fire and sword entred into Scotland: where (being vnresisted) he rifled and burnt the Townes, and Cities of Eden-burgh,The French and Scots re∣turn into that wasted Coun∣trie. Saint Iohns, Estreuelinge, Dondée and manie others; and returned home. And the Scots and Frenchmen retyred themselues into Scotland: where (by reason of the late hauock, and ruines of that kingdome)
the French Gallants were worne out with more necessities than be∣fore.The great miserie of the Frenchmen. For neither could or would the Townes or Countrey affoord them anie helpe; and the apparant hazard of their liues, by the violence of the poore distressed Scots, did altogether terrifie them from foraging abroad:How the Scots abused and wronged them. And in the end (to adde vnto them greater affliction than all the rest) the Scots compelled their meanest Gen∣tlemen (without their horses, and vnarmed, and pennilesse) to re∣turne into France; but kept (as pledges, or as pawnes) the Admi∣rall, and such as were honourable and great, vntill a full reckoning and an amends were made vnto them for all such losse and dama∣ges, as (by the English armie) they had sustained: affirming, That the French king had engaged Scotland in those warres, not for them∣selues, but to serue his owne turne, and in his seruice. The King of France is en∣forced to re∣deeme his subiects.The French king (though angred at the heart to be thus abused, yet finding none other meanes to enlarge the Admirall, and such other great men as he had employed in those Warres) sent to the Scots as much money as was demanded: and thereupon, the French Admirall, Barons, and Gentry, were dismissed; and returned home, hauing small cause to bragge of their successe, or of their entertain∣ment in that journey. The French King drea∣meth to con∣quer EnglandBut the French king intending to relieue himselfe, and to wrecke his anger vpon England; resolued to transport into this kingdome such an Armie, as should make an absolute Conquest of this whole Land. And (to further his prouisions therein) he imposed manie grieuous and intolerable Taxes on his people; which were not le∣uied without much grudging, and great trouble. His whole Fleet consisted of more than twelue hundred saile of shippes.1200. shippes The num∣ber of his men was extraordinarie, and exceeding great: and such were his prouisions, that (among Christian Princes) the like before was seldome seene or heard of. The great Armie of the English.King Richard (who was verie valiant, and cared not for his ap∣proach) was readily prepared to giue him a welcome, with tenne thousand gallant men at armes, and with more than one hundred thousand fighting men: besides such as furnished his braue Nauie on the sea; and besides all such, as for the defence of Callice were sent thither. Homo ponit disponit au∣tem Deus.Experience teacheth vs, That the greatest preparations for anie Expedition whatsoeuer, are made in vaine, if the thing to which they are intended and directed be not seconded by GODS fauor; as by this example it shall appeare. For when the French souldiors were departed from their owne dwellings,The disorders of the French souldiors. and trauelled disorde∣redly towards the place where their shippes lay; they robbed and
spoyled in all Prouinces, and in all Countries, through which they passed, with greater furie, and with more violence, than commonly the English, or anie other forraine enemie, accustomed to doe.The men and the enterprise are accursed by the oppres∣sed people. So that the inhabitants of all places (subject to their crueltie and vn∣ciuill outrage) were not onely (in the highest degree) displeased and discontented; but, by solemne imprecations, they cursed both them and the action likewise which they had in hand. And when those loose companions came into the Low-Countries where the Fleet was:The French Armie are in great miserie. such were their wants of all things needfull to relieue them (by reason of their excessiue numbers, and by reason of the long absence of the Duke of Berrey, the French kings vncle; who hasted not thither, nor liked well of that journey, although it alto∣gether depended vpon his furtherance and presence) that first they sold their armor and their weapons; then their horses:They sell all. and last of all, their clothes, to prouide them meat. And when all those means failed them, then they daily, yea hourely,The Armie is dissolued. committed such vio∣lence and such outrages in those Countries without controlment, that they became hatefull and odious to the inhabitants:Parturiunt Montes, nascitur ri∣diculus Mus. and (at length) the King their master (being vtterly discouraged by his said vncle in this attempt) dissolued his whole Armie. And thus (at one instant almost) he lost both his honor and his hope, his money, and manie great things besides. And the end of those his great designes affoords vs libertie to returne againe to our highly displeased and discontented King:The historie of the Kings euill gouern∣ment at home is pursued. The petition of the Nobi∣litie. The Kings fiue euill Counsellors. whome his Lords (with all humilitie and submissiue modestie) pe∣titioned, and desired, Newly to ratifie and to confirme his former promise and his Oath; and to thrust from him Michael de la Pole, Robert de Vere, Alexander the lewd Archbishop of Yorke, Robert Treselian his chiefe Iustice, and Sir Nicholas Brembre of London (who were generally tearmed to be the Kings wicked counsellors) and to banish out of the Land all those soothing and flattering Iudges, who (to please the King) had subscribed to the Nullitie of the said Commission, and had censured all such as procured it, to be traitors to the King and to his Crowne. But the Kings affections were so strongly riueted and annexed vnto those fiue, and so confident was he, that both himselfe,The King de∣nyeth their petition. and they, and his said Iudges, had done well in their proceedings at Nottingham, and at Couentrie, that in plaine tearmes hee denyed them their request. And thereupon, the Lords (for their owne safetie and to support the peace, and to preuent the ruine and the destruction of the Commonweale) raysed a strong Armie of their friends, and of such as vtterly disliked those disorders in the King,The Nobili∣tie rayse an Armie.
and came to the Citie of London: being fully resolued, that they themselues would put in execution those things, which the King (vpon their reasonable and just request and petition) had refused to yeeld vnto. Wicked ad∣uice giuen by the fiue wic∣ked Counsel∣lors.But whe  fiue wicked Counsellors perceiued throughly what was p  and meant; they then endeuoured to persuade the King to ender Callice, and all his other Lordships and Terri∣tories in Bce, to the French King, and confidently to relye vpon his aide assuring him, That in so doing hee should obtaine two glorious and pleasing victories; the one, ouer all his Warres, by setling of his Estate in a perfect peace; and the other, ouer his No∣blemen, who striued (as lewdly they pretended) to make him sub∣ject and seruile to their wils. The King would not hearken to that counsell.And though, in all things besides, their counsels were his Ora∣cles; yet the King would not (at anie hand) hearken to this moti∣on: and yet he was determined (by one meanes or other) to curbe and to abridge the strength of his Nobilitie; who striued to reforme such things as were amisse. And (that his purpose might therein be effected) especially he enquired of the Maior of London,The King requireth an Armie from the London∣ners. How ma∣nie able armed men that Citie could conueniently set forth? who certified him, That fiftie thousand such might easily, and in a short time, be prepared and spared there. Whereupon the King com∣maunded him, with all expedition, to send him such an Armie: which forthwith he endeuoured to performe. The graue  Citizens o  London  resist the  vnwise M∣or.But when the grauest and the wisest Citizens had maturely con∣sidered of this businesse; they interrupted his proceedings, and told the King, That they might not be employed in warlike man∣ner against his Lords, who for his Majestie and Honor, and to pre∣serue his Kingdome from ruine and from destruction, had vsed all faithfull and good meanes to remoue from his Person those his wicked Counsellors; who onely (for their owne commoditie and aduancement) had hazarded the whole estate of his Kingdome, by aduising and by counselling of him to rule and to gouerne vnaduisedly, according to their pleasures, and after their lewd and lawlesse wills. The Kings gentle mes∣sage to the Lords.The King perceiuing by this Message, that his inferiour subjects would (in those Troubles) adhere vnto the Lords; seemed a little to restraine his violent affections: and did informe the Lords, That he would assemble his High Court of Parliament; in which, those fiue fauorites of his should be answerable to all Objections what∣soeuer, and should (if they were conuicted) receiue such punish∣ment, as should (by the publike censure of the House) be inflicted on them.
This vnexpected and good Message so throughly contented the Barons,The Lords doe casser their armie. The King performes not his promise. He licenceth the Duke of Ireland to raise 5000 men to defend himselfe. The Lords do renew their armie. The Duke swimmes on horsebacke ouer the Thames. He is slaine by a wilde Beare. How the King hono∣red his dead corps. that presently they disfurnished themselues of all their warlike Forces, and were most thankfull for it to the King. But as the Winde, so was he suddainely changed: For in stead of perfor∣ming what hee had promised; hee freely licenced Robert de Vere, Duke of Ireland, to leuie fiue thousand men for his owne particular guard and defence. And the Barons perceiuing thereby, that it was high time for them to looke vnto their owne safetie, with incredi∣ble celeritie and expedition renewed their strength; and (vpon the suddaine) so strongly enuironed the said Duke betwixt their ar∣mie and the Riuer of Thames, that they compelled him (for the preseruation of his life) by swimming on horsebacke, to passe ouer vnto the other side: from whence he presently fled into France; in which Kingdome (about fiue yeares after, as he hunted) hee was slaine by a wilde Boare. But such was the Kings affection towards him whilest he liued, that he caused his dead carkasse to be embalmed, and to be brought into England; and to be apparrelled in princely Ornaments and Robes: His necke to be compassed with a massie chayne of Gold, his fingers to be couered with Rings, and his Funerals to be solem∣nized with all magnificence and pompe. Now when the said Duke of Ireland was compelled by swim∣ming on horsebacke (as you haue heard) to saue himselfe, and was fled into France; the Barons executed some of his chiefest consorts for an example vnto others,Some of the said Dukes consorts exe∣cuted. The Barons armie is with ioy receiued into London. but suffered the multitude to disperse themselues, and required them (with all speed) to repaire to their owne houses. But the said Barons conducted their owne armie to London; where they were receiued with much joy. And such was the bountifull entertainment which they found there, that they might thereby assure themselues of their heartie welcome. The King (who kept his Court in the Tower of London) was well pleased to admit of a conference with the Lords. In which it was concluded, That a Parliament should be summoned:A Parlia∣ment. Which be∣ing orderly assembled, the Kings wicked Counsellors, and some of the aforesaid Iudges were required personally to appeare. But they came not thither:The fiue wic∣ked Counsel∣lors and the Iudges con∣demned as Traitors. yet were they (after great debating and dispu∣ting of that businesse) condemned of high Treason to the King and to the Commonweale. And not long after, Sir Iohn Earle of Salis∣burie, and Sir Nicholas Brembre lost their heads; and Robert Tresilian the chiefe Iustice was hanged at Tiborne: and the rest of those Iud∣ges had beene hanged in like sort,Execution. if (vpon the importunate and vn∣cessant request of the Queene) their liues had not beene redeemed
by their banishment.Banishment. And thus were the threatnings of ciuil wars, conuerted into some assurance of prosperitie and of peace. ANNO. 12 The Scots do inuade.But the next yeare following, the Scots inuaded this realme; and did much harme: against whom great preparations were made by the King; who resolued to recompence his owne damage, by iust and seuere reuenge. A Truce be∣twixt Eng∣land, France and Scotland for seuen yeares. ANNO. 13 Iohn of Gant goeth with an Armie into Spaine.But the wisdome and discretion of manie great Estates, were such, that a Truce was concluded to endure for three yeares, be∣twixt England, France and Scotland, which shortly after was enlar∣ged for foure yeares more. So that now, all matters betwixt those three Kingdomes, and their Kings, being blessed with tranquilitie, and with peace: the Kings fourth Vncle, Iohn of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, was suffered by the King to leuie a strong Armie, which hee transported into Spaine where he demanded his right to the Kingdome of Castile, in the behalfe of Constance his wife; who was the eldest daughter of Peter, the deposed and slaine king. ANNO. 14 How his bran attempts suc∣ceeded there. His two Daughters are married to the Kings of Spaine, and of Por∣tingall.In those Warres; the Duke and his Armie performed manie ho∣nourable seruices: and (with the assistance of the king of Portugale) so preuailed, that, to conclude a sued for peace, the king of Spaine married with Constance, the Dukes eldest daughter by his said wife; and gaue vnto him eight Waggons loaden with massie Gold; and secured him, and his wife, of the yearely payment of ten thousand Markes, during both their liues. And then the Duke went into Por∣tugale, where he married Anne his yonger daughter to the king of that Countrie; and then returned into England with great riches, and much honour. ANNO. 16 Lawes a∣gainst the Popes vsur∣ped Authori∣tie.This time of peace betwixt England, & other nations, bred some quarrelling betwixt the king and the Pope; who vsurped too too much authoritie and iurisdiction within this Realme. Wherefore (to preuent such mischiefes as this intolerable sufferance mght be∣get) in a Parliament (vpon graue and great aduise) it was enacted, That the Popes pretended authoritie within this kingdom should cease and be determined: and that no appeale for anie matter, or cause whatsoeuer, should from thenceforth bee made to the See of Rome; vpon the penaltie of a premunire, which did extend to perpe∣tuall imprisonment, and to the forfeiture of the Lands and goods of such, as (contrarie to that law) presumed to offend. ANNO. 17In the seuenteenth yeare of king Richards Raigne, his faire and vertuous Queene Anne died. ANNO. 19And about two yeares after, the king married the Ladie Isabel, daughter to the French king Charles the sixth. By reason whereof
a peace was concluded betwixt those two kings,King Ri∣chard mar∣rieth the French kings daughter. A Peace for thirtie yeares. Brest is yeelded vp. The Duke of Glocester re∣prooues the King for it. The death of the Duke of Glocester the Kings Vncle is plotted. A Macha∣uillian pollicie Ambition makes euill Princes con∣fident, that their Vertues doe deserue much. The King intendeth the destruction of his Barrons: being gulled with an vn∣true report. Certaine Lords sur∣prised. A Parliamēt A grosse flttering Speaker. The Archbi∣shop of Can∣terburie is accused of Treason. How the king wronged the Archbishop. to endure for thir∣tie yeares. And king Richard (being too kind, but too little adui∣sed) of his owne accord, and free will, surrendred and gaue vp to the Duke of Brittaine, the strong Towne and Castle of Brest: which verie much grieued and discontented his Nobilitie, especially his Vncle Thomas of Woodstocke Duke of Glocester; who told him plain∣ly, that it was not conuenient, that (without blowes with the said Duke of Brittaine) hee should haue departed with that strong Towne and Castle, which his ancestors had wonne with the ex∣pence of much bloud. Whereat the king was so much displeased, that in his heart hee causelessely vowed seuere reuenge: and in this his hastie passion he was abused, and furthered by such of his Fauourites as enuied the estate, the vertues, and honour of the Duke; causing strangers to informe the king (flateringly, and mali∣tiously) that diuers of the Princes Electors intended to haue made him Emperor, had not some others of them gainsaid it, and allead∣ged that he was altogether vnfit, to gouerne the dispersed Segni∣orie, and Dominions of the Empire; who could not rule and com∣mand his owne subiects at home. The greedie desire which king Richard had, to bee magnified, and made great, by being dignified with the name and power of the Empire: and his strong reliance vpon the vntrue report, which was suggested vnto him by such as only endeuoured to whet his anger against his Lords; armed him with subtletie, and with a heartie desire to circumuent his Barons; though it were done with the breach of his oath, and with the shipwracke of his honour. So that (pretending much loue and fauour towards them: but especially to the Duke of Glocester his Vncle, and to the two Earles of Arondell and Warwicke) hee caused them to be apprehended, when (as they imagined) they had least cause to feare. And hauing so done, he assembled his High Court of Parliament. In which, his basest and his grossest flatterer, the speaker of the Lower House, named Sir Iohn Bush, who was a man of a most proud, insolent, and aspiring spirit, irreligiously, profane∣ly, and dishonestly (in a formall and in a tedious speech) attribu∣ted vnto the King the highest titles of diuine honour: and there∣fore condemned (almost to Hell) all such, as traiterously had con∣spired against his Maiestie. Among whom hee particularly impea∣ched Thomas, Lord Archbishop of Canterburie, sitting next vnto the King: who made no answere at all thereto, because the King himselfe (vnder pretence of more then ordinarie loue and fauour) had priuatly enioyned him vnto silence, and vnto future absence from that Assembly: promising, and protesting, that nothing
should be attempted, or done against him by anie meanes. Yet not∣withstanding (for want of his presence, and of his answere to the said vntrue obiections) he was (with the Kings consent) banished this Realme.He is bani∣shed. Warwicke, and Arundell are condem∣ned as Tray∣tors. Arundell is beheaded. Salisburie is banished, and dieth misera∣bly. The Duke of Glocester murdered at Callice, by Thomas Mowbray Earle of No∣tingham. A weake par∣liament, to grant such an vnreasonable Commission. And the two Earles of Arundell, and of Warwicke, were also condemned of High Treason: and shortly after, the for∣mer of those two lost his head. And so had Thomas Beauchamp Earle of Warwicke, if (by his humble confession of thinges vntrue, and vpon his great submission steeped in teares, and much sorrow) he had not procured a mitigation of his punishment. For hee was confined into the Ile of Wight: where (contrarie to the Kings pro∣mise) hee endured such miserie, and was so grieuously oppressed, with the griefe which hee sustained by reason of his great wants; that he quickly died. But the good Duke of Glocester the Kings Vncle, (being vnsen∣tenced) was sent to Callice: where (according to the Kings directi∣ons) Thomas Mowbray Earle of Nottingham (betwixt two feather∣beds) caused him to be smothered to death; for which good ser∣uice, he was afterwards made a Duke. This being done, the King procured the Vpper and the Lower Houses of Parliament, to make an example, without precedent, by granting full and absolute authoritie vnto six or eight, such persons as he should nominate, finally to determine all such causes (and to enact them) as then remained vndiscussed; and not ended there. This act not only made him proud: but (to serue his present turnes) he nominated for that purpose, such, as (to please his hu∣mour) decreed manie thinges which were dishonourable to the King, and hurtfull to the Common-weale. The King will be called Prince of Cheshire.The King also, to please his Guard (who for the most part were Cheshire men of ordinarie parentage, and of base birth) caused him∣selfe (verie ridiculously) to bee stiled Prince of Cheshire: as if it had beene more honourable for him to be such a Prince, then to be the King and Monarch of the whole Realme. And (to adde more strength and liking vnto those thinges which then were done amisse) the King bestowed manie honora∣ble dignities vpon some of his best liked Noble-men. So that his Cousin Henrie of Bullingbrooke (sonne and heire ap∣parant to the Kings fourth Vncle Iohn of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, and who was at that time Earle of Darby) was by him created Duk of Hartford: his Cousin Edward Plantagenet, being Earle of Rut∣land,Creation of Noblemen. was created Duke of Aubemarle: and Thomas Mowbray, Earle of Nottingham, was made Marshall of England, and Duke of Norfolke: and the Earle of Kent, was created Duke of Surrie: and
Sir Iohn Holland his brother, being Earle of Huntington, was made Duke of Exeter: and the Earle of Somerset was created Marquesse Dorset: and the Lord Spencer, was made Earle of Glocester: the Lord Neuil Earle of Westmerland: the Lord William Scrope Earle of Wilshire: and the Lord Percie was created Earle of Worcester: and vpon all these, he bestowed many great Lordships, Mannors, and large re∣uenewes, which of late did belong to his murdred vncle Thomas of Woodstock, sometimes Duke of Glocester; and vnto the said two de∣ceased Earles of Arundell, and of Warwicke. He also granted his free pardon to all offendors whatsoeuer:A craftie Pardon, which inabled the King to much mis∣chiefe. fif∣teene only excepted whom he would not nominate. By which vn∣godly and craftie pollicie, hee hedged his Nobilitie ound about with continuall feare; and made them most seruile, and most base. For if anie one of them in anie high measure had offended him, hee would then pronounce him to bee one of those fifteene, who were excepted out of his free, and generall pardon; and then would put his life vpon triall, for supposed and surmised Trea∣son. It happned about this time,ANNO. 22 that Henrie Bullinbrooke Duke of Hartford, and Cousin to the King,The Kings Cousin, desi∣reth reforma∣tion in the King, by his friend Tho. Mowbray Duke of Nor∣folke, whom the King did fauour extra∣ordinarily. was much grieued daily to heare such slanderous reports, as were too commonly noysed of the King; partly vpon his too much libertie, which beyond the Lawes hee challenged in the course of his Gouernment; and partly by reason of his vniust, and vnskilfull managing of the weightie af∣faires, and businesses of his Kingdome. And though affection (by meanes of his neere consanguinitie with the King) moued him heartily to wish for, and to desire, a present reformation of those e∣uills: yet could hee not better deuise, how hee might effect that which hee so much craued, than by making vse of his great fami∣liaritie, and acquaintance with Thomas Mowbray Duke of Norfolke; who had an extraodinarie interest in the Kings fauour. Where∣vpon (very priuately, and in great secrecie, as vnto a most kind and louing friend) he imparted the causes of his griefe in that behalfe vnto the said Duke: and earnestly entreated him (vpon fit opportu∣nitie, and at his leasure, and as from himselfe) seriously to in∣forme the King of the said reports; and (withall) to entreate his Highnesse, to extend more grace, and more fauour, to those Lords, who (for his honour, and the Kingdomes good) had both incur∣red his displeasure, and also were (with too much extremitie) con∣demned of High Treason. But the Duke of Norfolke (who more respected his owne pre∣ferment, than the kings honour, and strongly presumed that hee
had now gotten fit meanes to advance himselfe, by his friends fall) related all his sayings to the King,A false, and an vnfaith∣full friend. in the rudest, and most vnciuill maner which he could deuise: and added manie things to his relati∣on, which were vntrue, and neuer spoken; thereby aggrauating an offence, which was not committed, and incensing the king with high indignation to vow reuenge and punishment, when the Duke of Hartfords fidelitie, and loyall seruice, deserued great thankes and a good reward. The King is angrie. The Duke of Hartford an∣swereth for himselfe.The king was so much vexed and enraged by meanes of these tidinges, that nothing could giue him anie contentment in anie thing: vntill his Cousin the Duke had made his answere there∣vnto. And, being sharply pressed thereunto by the king: Such things, as in that secret, and friendly manner, hee had desired might bee reformed, he both confessed and iustified. But the vn∣true suggestions, which falsly and malitiously were added; he de∣nied.The Combat challenged and accepted. And to cleare himselfe of them, hee challenged the Duke of Norfolke to a single Combate: which was by him accepted; and consented vnto by the king. But when the appointed day was come, and the two Dukes were within the Lists, readily prepa∣red, and aduanced themselues each toward the other, for the en∣counter: The King would not permit them to proceed; but ba∣nished the Duke of Norfolke for euer,Banishment. who shortly after died at Venice; and his Cousin, the Duke of Hartford, hee exiled for six yeares. King Charles the sixt.Whereupon Hee sayled into France; and was honourably re∣ceiued by King Charles the sixth, Father to the Queene of England, King Richards wife: who so effectually iustified him in his said a∣ctions and doings, and so highly affected his Descent, his Perso∣nage, his Wisdome, his Vertues, and his right Noble Conditions, that he would haue bestowed vpon him in marriage the Daughter of his Vncle, the Duke of Berrie, if his Sonne-in-law King Richard (by extraordinarie sollicitations, and by vnusuall meanes had not beene the hinderer thereof. Iohn of Gant dieth.Not long after this Dukes Banishment; his father Iohn of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster & Vncle to the king, died: the descent of which Dutchie, would haue made the said Duke a potent Prince. But the king (refreshing his humours with new practises of secret re∣uenge, and that hee might keepe him lowe) vniustly seized vpon all the Lordships,The King wrongeth Henrie the new Duke of Lancaster. and Possessions, belonging to that Dutchie, and vpon all the moueables of his said deceased Vncle, and shared and distributed them among his Sycophants, and wicked Counsel∣lours. Which tyrannous, and wrongful dealing, so much displeased
his vncle the Duke of Yorke, and his cousin the Duke of Aumarle,Edmund of Langley and Edward his sonne. More wicked Counsellors to the King. Scrope, Bushe, Bagt, Greee. The King farmeth his Kingme, and sayleth into Ireland. The Iourney cst h m s Crowne and his life. ANNO 23 The Duke of Lancasr landeth in England. His compa∣nies encrease to a strong Armie. He is rcei∣ued ito Lo. He  into the W. King Ri∣ retur∣. He . Three of the w ked Coun∣sellors wre beaded. The Kings  and  to the Duk. that presently they left the Kings Court, and retyred themselues to their owne houses. At this time King Richard was wholly mis-led, and lewdly dire∣cted in all his doings and negotiations by his principall fauourites, Sir William Scrope Earle of Wilshire, Sir Iohn Bushe, Sir Iames Bagot, and Sir Henrie Greene: by whose aduice (without the consent of his priuie Counsellors of Estate) he leuied a strong Armie; farmed to them, for certaine yeares, his whole Kingdome, and all his Reue∣nues belonging thereunto; and sayled into Ireland: where hee behaued himselfe so valiantly, that hee subdued that rebelling Nation; and by his seueritie, he compelled them to be willing to obey. But in his absence, his banished cousin, Henrie of Bullingbroke, Duke of Hartford and of Lancaster, together with his old friend and exiled companion, Thomas Archbishop of Canterburie; returned into England, to make clayme to his Duchie of Lancater. His first landing was in the North: where, such was the singular loue and the great affection of the Noblemen and of the common sort of people towards him, partly in regard of his noblenesse and vertues, and partly in regard of the Kings disordered courses in his gouern∣ment; that they all (with extraordinarie chearefulnesse and alacri∣tie) flocked vnto him, well armed, and in great troupes: So that within few dayes his companies were encreased to a strong Ar∣mie; with which hee marched peaceably, and in good order, vnto London, and was receiued, entertained, and feasted there, with much honour and great joy. And from thence he went into the Westerne parts of this Kingdome; the people (in all places where hee came) being heartily gladded, with much contentment, with his doings. But in the meane time, King Richard (who was returned, and had quickly leuied great forces, which hee conducted against the Duke) perceiuing that euerie day his subjects fled from him, and voluntarily offered their seruice to the Duke; and being certaine∣ly informed, that Sir William Scrope Earle of Wilshire, Sir Iohn Bushe, and Sir Henrie Greene (three of his wicked Counsellors, and vpon whome he most of all relyed) were taken, and had lost their heads: despairing of anie safetie to be gained by force and violence; of his owne accord hee came vnto his cousin the Duke of Lancaster, con∣fessed publikely his owne insufficiencie and weakenesse to rule and to gouerne well, praysed the Dukes rare and singular vertues, and his absolute worthinesse to be a King, and proffered to make him
an absolute Surrender of his whole Kingdome, if hee would ac∣cept thereof. A faint re∣fusall.But the Duke (though hee much affected the wearing of a Crowne; yet, because hee hoped, that the fauour of the Nobili∣tie, Gentrie, and of the common People, would freely cast that burthen and Dignitie vpon him, with greater safetie, and assurance of continuance) refused to accept thereof: and protesting (with manie pleasing speeches) That he onely desired to enioy his owne Patrimonie, and to reforme such things as were amisse; hee cau∣sed the King (with verie honourable and respectiue attendance) to be guarded to the Tower of London:The King is sent to the Tower. and then hee assembled a Parliament; in which (among sundrie other things) were pub∣likely proposed these ensuing Articles, concerning the euill Go∣uernment of the King.The Duke summoneth a Parliament Articles proposed in Parliament against the King. 1. INprimis, That hee would not permit the said Duke of Hartford (who was so much wronged for his good ad∣uice and counsell touching the Kings Gouernment) to fight the Combate against the falsely accusing Thomas Mowbray Duke of Norfolke, and yet banished him vniustly for six yeares. 2. Item, That albeit vnder the Great Seale of his Kingdome he had licenced the said Duke of Hartford, at his departure out of England, to make his Atturney to proceed for him in his causes of Law: yet (hee being gone) the King would not permit anie man to deale for him in his absence. 3. Item, That verie vncharitably he prohibited all his Nobi∣litie, and all others, to be sutors vnto him for the said Duke of Hartfords returne from his vniust banishment, vpon the forfeiture of their liues and goods. 4. Item, That after the death of Iohn of Gaunt, the Kings vncle, father to the said Duke, and Duke of Lancaster, hee had wrongfully seized into his hands all his moueables what∣soeuer,
and had diuided and shared them among his grace∣lesse, and wicked Counsellors, and had also (by like iniu∣stice) seized all the possessions of the said Duchie of Lan∣caster (which rightfully did belong to the said Duke of Hartford) into his owne hands, and kept the profits there∣of to his owne vse. 5. Item, that colourably, as a good friend to Thomas Arun∣dell Archbishop of Canterburie (who was falsly accused of high treason to the King, as he sat next to him in the higher house of Parliament) hee persuaded the said Archbishop to make no answer at all in defence of the said accusation; nor repaire anie more to the same house: protesting, that neither the said accusation, nor his silence, nor his absence, should be hurtfull or preiudiciall vnto him: and yet banished him out of the Realme; not hauing examined the said surmised treason. 6. Item, that whereas his Chancellour had refused (in an vn∣iust matter) to grant a prohibition vnder the great Seale of England; the King himselfe (to peruert the due course of Iustice and of right) granted the said prohibition vnder his priuie seale, and straitly required, that it should be exe∣cuted, and obeyed. 7. Item, that most vnnaturally and cruelly hee had procured Thomas Mowbray to smother to death, betwixt two fether∣beds, the Kings most noble and most renowned vncle Tho∣mas of Woodstock, Duke of Glocester, when (wrongfully, and without anie good cause) hee was a prisoner at Callice: and afterwards dignified the said murderer; first, with the Earldome of Nottingham; then, with the Office of the Mar∣shall generall of England: and last of all, made him Duke of Norfolk; he being altogether vnworthie of so great honor. 8. Item, that the King (to further his last Expedition for Ire∣land) without law & without iustice, tooke from the Clergie and many Religious houses, great store of monie, plate, iew∣els, and rich ornaments; not hauing the owners consent so to doe.
9 Item, that in the same iournie, without the approbation of his Counsell of Estate, hee carried with him into Ireland the plate, and rich iewels, belonging to the Crowne, which might haue tended to the great inpouerishment of this Realme. 10 Item, that in euerie Shire he had secret Intelligencers, vpon whose bare information that ane man had repined at the Kings bad gouernement, the partie so accused (without examination or triall) was enforced to procure his pardon by the payment of a grieuous fine. 11 Item, that by the lewd aduise of his wicked Counsellours, hee had deuised manie subtle and craftie Oathes; by meanes whereof manie of his honest Subiects had beene vndone. 12 Item, that by the like aduise, and counsell, he procured Ruf∣fians, and desperate companions, to accuse rich (but weake) men, of sundrie falsly-supposed crimes, and imagined offen∣ces, and by meanes thereof, enforced them to redeeme the combate with much monie. 13 Item, that he gaue large gifts vnto wicked and lewd com∣panions, who (malitiously to aduance their owne Estates) animated him against diuers of his Barons, who only desi∣red a good reformation of his euill gouernment; and im∣posed diuers Taxes vpon his people, to enrich them. 14 Item, that hee had procured such Records to bee cancelled, and imbeselled, as testified his extortions, and his oppressi∣ons vniustly imposed vpon his people. 15 Item, that he had oftentimes said, that the Lawes of his Kingdome were in his owne breast: and that (vpon this o∣pinion) hee had put to death manie of his noble men, and some of his inferiour subiects without iust cause. 16 Item, that most of his writings, and letters vnto foraigne Princes, and Estates, were so craftie, ambiguous, doubtfull, and vncertaine; that they could not relie confidently vpon anie thing which he had written.
17 Item, that in his Parliament holden in the one and twen∣tieth yeare of his Raigne, his Cheshire Guard (who onely were permitted and suffered to weare weapons) committed many Robberies, and Murders, and yet not one of them was punished or reproued for the same. 18 Item, that (to insinuate fauour with those loose, and lewd companions) the King had basely, and fondly, dishonoured his High Estate and Soueraigntie, by entitling himselfe The Prince of Cheshire. 19 Item, that whereas, in the same Parliament, sundrie great Lords intended liberally, and dutifully to haue spoken of such things as were not well ordered, to the end that they might haue beene reformed▪ the King in such sort threat∣ned them, that for feare of ensuing dangers they held them∣selues silent, and spake not at all. 20 Item, that hee exacted great fines from the wealthiest of his Subiects, for adhearing to the Barons; notwithstanding that in full Parliament he had before granted them his free pardon. 21 Item, that by himselfe, and his owne authoritie, he had dis∣placed diuers Burgesses of the Parliament; and had placed such other in their roomes, as would better fit, and serue his owne turne. 22 Item, that contrarie to his solemne Oath, and instrument in writing vnder the great Seale of his Kingdome, Hee had not only disallowed the Commission, granted in the same Parliament to the thirteene Lords, to enquire of, and to reforme the great abuses, and the apparant mis∣gouernment of the Common-Weale, But also had exiled, beheaded, and otherwise executed, diuers Noble Men, and others, who for the Kings honour, and for the safetie and welfare of the Common-Weale, had procured the said Commission, or had executed the said Authoritie, ac∣cording to the trust and confidence in them re∣posed.
23 Item, that whereas hee had caused certaine Lawes in the same Parliament to bee made for his owne gaine, and to serue his owne turne, hee procured the Popes Bulles to curse such as should withstand, or disobey them: which thing greatly tended to the derogation of his Crowne, and was done expressely against his owne law made against the Authoritie of the Pope within this Realme but seuen yeares before. 24 Item, that hee had displaced lawfull and good Shiriffes, and had elected others, whom he suffered to continue, and to hold the said Office, two yeares together and more, be∣cause their vniust oppressions augmented and encreased his gaine. King Ri∣chard confes∣seth all the Articles.The transcript of all these Articles and Obiections, were (by both the Houses of Parliament) authentically sent vnto the king: who not only confessed them to bee true, and acknowledged his owne insufficiencie to rule and to gouerne better; but also by a plaine,He resignes his Crowne. King Ri∣chard is de∣posed. Henrie Duke of Lancaster is made King. Thomas A∣rundell resto∣red to the Archbishop∣prick of Can∣terburie. and exact instrument in writing vnder his hand and Seale, hee resigned his Crowne and kingdome to his Cousin Henrie of Bullinbrooke Duke of Lancaster: which being read publikely, and beeing generally ratified, approoued and confirmed by the Lords Spirituall and Temporall, and by the Commons in the same Parliament assembled; they deposed king Richard, and made the said Duke king. And his true, and faithfull friend, and his com∣panion in Banishment, Thomas Arundell Archbishoppe of Can∣terburie (being then and there restored to his place, and digni∣tie) installed the said Henrie in the kingly Throne. And the late King Richard was sent to Pomfret Castle, there to bee safely kept, and with Princely honour to bee maintained: but verie shortly after (by the new kings direction and commaundement; who feared least his Estate might bee shaken, so long as Richard li∣ued) hee was wickedly and villanously assaulted in his Lodging,King Ri∣chard is cru∣elly murdered by Sir Pierce Exton, and eight other armed men: from one of which (with a Princely courage) hee wrested a browne-Bill, and therewith slewe foure of his Mischieuous and Vngodly Assai∣lants:He was very valiant. and (with admirable resolution) fought with all the rest; vntill comming by his owne Chaire (in which the base Co∣wardly Knight himselfe stood for his owne safetie) hee was by
him striken with a Polle-axe in the hinder part of his head:Though hee were an euill King, yet no religion war∣ranted those vniust pro∣ceedings. so that presently he fell downe and died. And thus was hee wic∣redly and treacherously murdered, and his bodie bu∣ried at Langley: but was (afterwardes) re∣moued vnto Westminster, where it now lieth.
THE HISTORIE OF KING HENRIE THE FOƲRTH. ALTHOVGH the Crowne of England,ANNO. 1. 1399. in right (if Richard the deposed king should die without issue) was by succession to descend vnto Edmund Mortimer Earle of March (the Son and heire of Edmund Mortimer, by Philip his wife, who was the daugh∣ter and heire of Lionel Duke of Cla∣rence, the third sonne of Edward the third: Yet his Cousin Henrie of Bullinbrooke Duke of Hartford, and sonne and heire vnto Iohn of Gaunt the yonger brother of the said Lionel, was elected and crowned king. And forthwith hee created his eldest sonne Henrie, Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Earle of Chester: and summoned his High Court of Parlia∣ment, in which an order was prescribed and set downe, for the safe keeping, and for the honourable attendance, and maintaining of Richard the late king. But his deposing, imprisonment, and all the former proceedings which were had against him,Iohn Bishop of Carleyl condemneth the former proceedings against King Richard. were in the same Assembly publikely condemned and reprooued by Iohn Bishop of Carlile, as hatefull vnto God, trayterous towardes the wronged king, and infamous among good men. For he auerred boldly, That if he were not a good king, yet more iniurie was done vnto him then ordinarily is done to Murderers, and to Theeues: because they are not (as he was) condemned, before they had made their
answere to the obiected crime, before Iudges which were indiffe∣rent,The Bishop of Carleyl is at∣tached. and pronounced their iudgement vpon good proofe. But assoone as hee had ended his speech: he was attached by the Earle Marshal; and committed to strait Prison in the Abbey of Saint Al∣bons. And then (among manie other things in the same Parlament done) the Crowne of England was entailed to King Henrie,The Crowne is Entayled. and to his heires for euer. Treason plot∣ted, to be act∣ed at Oxford.Assoone as this Parliament was ended, such of the greatest Lords, as made the fairest shew of publike applause and ioy, for the High dignitie which King Henrie did possesse; conspired by Treason to take away his life, at a solemne Iusts to be holden in the Citie of Oxford: whereunto the King was inuited; and promised to bee present, because hee conceiued, that the same Triumph was so appointed for his honour, and for his delight. This Treacherie was cunningly plotted and contriued by the Conspirators: who by Indentures vnder their handes and seales, had bound themselues each vnto other, both for secrecie, and also for the resolute effecting and performing thereof; all which they solemnly confirmed by their Oathes. The confede∣rates.The Confederates in this Treason, were the Kings Cousin German, Edward Plantagenet Duke of Aumarle, sonne and heire apparant to Edmund of Langley Duke of Yorke: Thomas Holland Duke of Surrie; and Iohn Holland his brother, Duke of Exeter, both which were halfe brothers to King Richard; Iohn Montague Earle of Salisburie; Hugh Spencer Earle of Glocester; Sir Thomas Blunt; and one Magdalen, who was sometimes a Chamber-wayter to the deposed King, and both in stature, and in countenance, and in his behauiour, was not much vnlike him. All these Conspirators (the Duke of Aumarle onely excep∣ted) met at Oxford, at the appointed time, being strongly guarded, and honourably attended,The Treason was strangely discouered. by lustie Archers, and other valiant men. But the absence of the said Duke, was (by his Associates) wondred at: for which their was good cause. For as hee sate at Table with the Duke his Father, one Labell of a part of the said Indentures appeared at his bosome: by which, the olde Duke drew forth the whole writing. And hauing read the same; hee caused his Horse to bee made readie, because hee intended (with all poasting speed) to make this newes knowne vnto the King. But his guiltie,The Duke of Aumarle confesseth all to the King. and perplexed Sonne (perceiuing that his Father would reueale this secret) and knowing that, now, the least delay might extraordinarily hasten his danger: being brauely mounted (with all celeritie) he out-rode his Father, and came to Windsor Castle to the
King (who was preparing for his said iournie) and without anie te∣dious discourse, or lingring ceremonies,He is pardo∣ned. hee reuealed to his Maie∣stie the whole conspired Treason; and freely obtained his owne pardon. It now behoued the King to change his course: and so hee did. For presently he rode to the Tower of London:The King raiseth an ar∣mie. where he tooke a present and a perfit view of all such thinges, as were behoofefull, and necessarie to an Armie. And then he leuied a strong power: purposing to defend him∣selfe, and to surprise those grand Traytours, if he might. But when the Conspirators were informed, that all their Plot and Treason was reuealed:Magdalen was King Ri∣chards coun∣terfeit. They caused the said Magdalen to bee attired in Royall Robes; and to faine, and affirme himselfe, to bee King Ri∣chard. And with him, and all their Troupes (which were verie warlike and strong) they marched towardes London: resoluing to oppose themselues in the field against the king. But king Henrie (knowing that those Lords, both in bloud, and for their power,The King marcheth to∣wards the Traytors. were more then ordinarily great) was not igno∣rant, that his best meanes to represse, and vanquish them, consisted in the quickest expedition and dispatch, which hee could make. Wherefore (with a bold and with a kingly courage) hee marched speedily towardes them, with twentie thousand wel-armed men. The newes of the kings approach being voiced among the com∣panies, which were conducted by the conspiratours; so perplexed,The Traiter∣ous Lords are left by their companions. and so amazed them, that verie cowardly they ranne away, and left those Lords comfortlesse, and destitute of all aide. So that the most of them were apprehended; and not long after were put to death, in sundrie places of this kingdome:The Lords fle and are taken and executed. and the rest (being sur∣charged, and ouer-burdned with feare, and sorrow) not long after dyed. Thus was king Henrie happily deliuered from this danger. And lest the like Treason for king Richards sake might at an other time bee attempted against his person: he caused him to bee murdered in the Castle of Pomfret;Charles the sixt, resol∣ueth to releue his Sonne in-law King Ri∣chard. as in the end of the discourse describing his Raigne, and Historie, more particularly it doth appeare. When the French King Charles the sixt, Father-in-law to king Richard, was truely informed what had beene done in England: hee was much grieued at the vnsufferable wrongs which were done vnto him; and did intend (as a faithful friend in his extremities) to relieue his lamentable Estate, and (to be pittied) miseries. And for that pur∣pose hee sent his letters of defiance to king Henrie: and brought an
Armie Royal into Piccardie, with which he resolued to make sharp Warre within this Realme. He desisteth when he hea∣reth of King Richards death. A French Armie. An English Armie.But when hee certainly knew, that the poore, distressed, and afflicted King, was dead, and that it was too late to doe him anie good: hee dissolued his Armie; and proceeded no further in that businesse. Yet to reuenge those wrongs; hee was verie hope∣full to surprise manie Townes, Cities, and Castles in Aquitaine, and in Guyan. And, to effect the same, not long after hee leuied o∣ther Forces; encreasing them to a great Armie. And King Henrie (to withstand him) did the like. But the English Armie (landing in those Countries before the French King was in a readinesse: and being boldly commanded and conducted by the Lord Percie, Earle of Worcester, vnto Sir Thomas Knowles the King of Englands Lieute∣nant there:The French King giueth ouer his en∣terprise. and they hauing taken the fealtie, and the homage, of the Lords of those Prouinces, for their obedience, and alleageance vnto King Henrie: caused the French King to change his mind, and dishonourably to disband all such companies as hee had leuied. Yet for all this, King Henrie (still distrusting the weakenesse of his vsurped title, and endeuouring to support it with a more sure foun∣dation, entreated the French King Charles the sixt, to giue in mar∣riage his daughter Isabel (sometime King Richards wife) vnto his eldest sonne Henrie,Marriages with France are seldome fortunate. Prince of Wales. But her father (obseruing that marriages betwixt England and France were but seldome fortunate) denied the kings request, whereupon, she was conueied into France with Princely attendance, and great honour. And not long after shee was married to her Cousin Charles, the eldest sonne of Lewes Duke of Orleance, her Vncle. The aforesaid Treason conspired against the king by the afore∣said Lords; and the late preparations of the French King, first to haue inuaded the Kingdome of England, and secondly, to haue wrought wonders in Aquitaine, and in Guyan: and the frequent speeches which euerie where were vttered touching the manner of the Kings attaining to the Crowne; animated the Welchmen, and the Scots, to shew themselues troublesome neighbours vnto the King. Owen Glen∣dor rebelleth.For in Wales, Owen Glendor (a bold Squire) with manie hundreds of his lawlesse and vnciuill companions, entred into Armes, and did much harme in the Marches which bordered neere vnto them. Against whom,Edmund Mortimer taken and sharply impri∣soned. the Lord Gray of Ruthen, and Edmund Mortimer (who was the true and rightfull Heire of the Crowne) conducted their Forces, and fought with him. But they both were taken Pri∣soners: and the said Edmond was by him kept close in a darke Dun∣geon,
which was both cold and vnhealthie; where hee was ouer∣burdened with daily wants, and much miserie. All which were with the greater extremitie laid vpon him, because king Henrie, his Cousin, should bee enforced the sooner to redeeme him with a great Ransome. Wherein (because the King was too too slacke and negligent) hee was entreated and vrged by his Lords,The King would not re∣deeme him. but es∣pecially by the distressed Earles kinsmen the Percies. But vnto them all he turned the deafe eare: rather desiring his destruction, then holding it safe for him to set him free. The Scots also inuaded the Northerne parts of this Kingdome:The Scots in∣uade. but King Henrie, with a puissant Armie, entred into their Coun∣trie; and reuenged his wrongs euerie where, with fire, and sword, at his owne pleasure.The king cur∣beth them. But (because the Winter was extraordinari∣ly wet, and cold) hee dissolued his Armie; and with great honour, victoriously he returned backe. But as soone as hee was gone, the angrie Scots (being in number twentie thousand at the least) entred with barbarous crueltie into England vpon the Northumbers,The Scots a∣gaine doe in∣uade. Henrie Hot∣spurre ouer∣throweth them. His great Prisoners. but were gallantly encountred by Sir Henrie Hot-spurre, the sonne and heire apparant of Henrie Per∣cie Earle of that Prouince: who (with tenne thousand lustie and braue men) gaue the Scots such a bloudie ouerthrow, that he slew of them more then tenne thousand in the field, and tooke aboue fiue hundred Prisoners; among whome Mordake Earle of Fyffe, Archibald Earle Douglasse, Thomas Earle of Murrey, and Robert Earle of Angus, were the chiefe. The next yeare following,ANNO. 1. The French∣men, spoyled by a storme at Sea. the French King sent for Wales (to as∣sist Owen Glendor in his rebellious enterprises) twelue hundered Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen of good accompt, that they might be leaders, and directors, to those disordered Traytors. But the winds (not being answerable to their desires) were so contrarie at the Sea, and a storme so violently encreased: that twelue of their greatest shippes, with all their men and furniture, were swallowed into the Sea; and the rest, with great difficultie, returned into France. This misfortune so animated the English Nation;The English doe deride the French. that they be∣ganne (euerie where) to talke of and to iest at the French King: be∣cause all his warlike expeditions had still beene vnfortunate and disastrous; and though they threatned much,Twelue thou∣sand French∣men sent into Wales. yet alwayes they va∣nished as a cloude. The report whereof so whetted and exaspera∣ted his resolutions, to doe some memorable seruice: that forth∣with hee sent vnto the said rebelling Welchmen, an armie of twelue thousand men; who safely landed, and ioyned with ten thousand of that Nation.
The King marched into Wales.This Armie occasioned King Henrie to prepare soundly for his safetie. For hee was well assured, that if anie neglect, or want of skill, or of courage, should giue them the least aduantage whatsoeuer: then his Crowne would be shaken; and manie mise∣ries would threaten his ouerthrow. Wherefore hee (in his owne person) marched with a strong and with a compleat Armie into Wales. But assoone as the Frenchmen had certaine notice of his com∣ming, they thought it was high time for them to aduise what course to take: perchance, not because they were distrustfull of their owne valour, and resolution, but because the inconstancie of that turbulent and fickle Nation, when danger did appeare, af∣frighted them fully with feares and with doubts, least they would flie into the Woods, and craggie Mountaines, and forsake them, when they should craue the best performance of their helpe.The French∣men flie to their ships. And so strongly did this doubtfull feare possesse them, that suddenly, like men amazed, and heartlesse, they ranne vnto their ships: and (not hauing performed anie manner of seruice whatsoeuer) dis∣gracefully, and cowardly, they returned into France. The King is victorious without blowes.Hereupon, the Welch Rebelles (desperatly shifting for them∣selues) fled, euerie man his owne way: so that king Henrie found those Traiterous multitudes dispersed, and quite vanished; and would not be fought with. Wherefore hee dissolued his great ar∣mie, and returned in peace, without blowes. The King marrieth the Dutches of Britaine. The King makes great friends a∣broad. ANNO. 3. The King re∣quireth the Percies to de∣liuer to him their Scotish Prisoners. They refuse it The Percies resolue to set Edmond Mortimer at libertie▪ and to restore him to the Crown.Afterwards, King Henrie tooke to wife, Iane the widdow of Iohn the deceased Duke of Brittaine; and gaue Blanch (his eldest daugh∣ter) in marriage vnto William Duke of Bauier, the sonne and heire apparant of the Emperor Lewes of Bauier. And (some few yeares after) hee matched Philip, his yongest daughter, with the King of Denmarke. For his daily troubles, and turmoiles at home, gaue him aduise, to make himselfe more strong by procuring of great friends abroad. In the third yeare of his Raigne, hee required Henrie Percie, Earle of Worcester; Henrie Percie Earle of Northumberland; and Hen∣rie Hot-spurre his sonne; to deliuer vnto him such Scottish Prisoners, as they had taken in those last warres. But they affirmed stoutly, that (by the Lawes of Armes, and Chiualrie) those Prisoners be∣longed vnto them: and thereupon they refused to deliuer them vnto the King. By meanes whereof, some vnkindnesse grew be∣twixt the king and them; which not long after was made appa∣rant to the World. For the Percies now beganne to resolue vpon the restoring of their inthralled Cousin, Edmund Mortimer Earle of March, both vnto his libertie, and also to his Crowne: and to de∣pose
King Henrie; if by anie meanes, and endeauours, they could bring their purposes to passe. Yet (for a time) they concealed their intent: and (making none other shew but of naturall kindnesse, and friendship, to the said Earle, in regard of their affinitie, and kin∣dred, earnestly praied the king to ransome him, and to set him free;They desire the King to Ransom him. because he was vnfortunately taken in his seruice; and was oppres∣sed with much miserie. But the king, not hearkning to their sute; nor (indeed) desiring that he should bee enlarged: made answere, and caused it to be proclaimed,The King wil not, but accu∣seth him. that the said Earle had voluntarily caused himselfe to bee taken prisoner, so that Rebels (hauing him in their custodie, and companie) might pretend some colour, ther∣with to varnish such Conspiracies, and Treasons, as secretly they had plotted, and contriued against his Crowne, and him: and that therefore his owne safetie, and his good discretion, gaue him aduise and counsel, not to hearken to their motion but to punish his offence. The Percies (hauing receiued this answere,ANNO. 4. Sir Edmond Mortymer is Ransomed by the Percies. and being much grieued with the said Proclamation: and being resolued no longer to delay and to deferre the enlargement of the said Earle) paid his Ransome to Owen Glendor, and redeemed him at their owne cost: and secretly entred into such a League of friendship and familiari∣tie with Owen Glendor,Owen Glen∣dor conspireth with the Per∣cies. that hee faithfully promised to sticke vnto them stoutly, whensoeuer they would attempt the deposing of king Henrie. And then the said Lords Percies, being (by reason of their Scot∣tish prisoners) assisted with a multitude of warlike Scots; ioyned vn∣to their part the Earle of Stafford, and Richard Scrope Archbishop of Yorke, brother to the beheaded Earle of Salisburie; and manie o∣thers; who encreased their numbers with Englishmen, and purpo∣sed to ioyne with Owen Glendor and his Welch Consorts, in the de∣posing of the king: against whom (by way of accusation) they fra∣med certaine Articles, which they published; and sent them to him in writing, to this effect. Articles against King HENRIE. 1. INprimis, That when hee came into England from his Banishment, he tooke an oath, only to challenge, and to recouer his inheritance, and his wiues; and not to inter∣medle
with the King, nor with the Crowne. By reason of which oath diuers loyall and good Subiects to King Ri∣chard, resorted vnto him, not hauing anie treasonable in∣tent. But when he perceiued that his strength was so much encreased, that he might doe what hee pleased; hee wickedly brake his oath, and without anie title, or right, procured himselfe to be made, and to be crowned King. 2 Item, that not only, as an Archtraitor, hee had imprisoned his naturall, and vndoubted Lord and Master, King Ri∣chard, but had caused him wickedly, and traiterously to be murdered: that with greater securitie, hee might enioy his Crowne, and his Kingdome. 3 Item, that, euer since the death of King Richard, hee had vniustly kept the Kingdome, and the Crowne, from his Cousin Edmund Mortimer Earle of March, who was the sonne and heire of Philip, the daughter and heire of Lio∣nel Duke of Clarence, elder brother to Iohn of Gaunt fa∣ther to the vsurping King. 4 Item, that when no want or need compelled him, hee had imposed diuers Subsidies, and taxes, vpon the people, to their great griefe, and discontentment: of which they wil∣lingly would, but dared not to complaine. 5 Item, that no iustice could be expected at his hand: because (contrarie to the oath which hee tooke when hee was crow∣ned) he had by letters, written, and sent into sundrie Shires, procured certaine Burgeships for the Parliament, all which hee bestowed vpon such as would not faile to serue his turne, when opportunitie did serue. 6 And lastly, that whereas in honour and for affinities sake, hee ought to haue ransomed, and redeemed his said Cousin the Earle of March, from his strait and loathsome impri∣sonment (and the rather for that hee was earnestly solicited so to doe) he not only denied the said request, but falsly, and vntruly published and proclaimed, that the Earle himselfe was of his owne accord become a voluntarie Prisoner, to
the end, that Traitors and Rebels ioyning with him, might haue somwhat wherewith they might colour such Treasons as they would conspire against him. For all which causes, and manie others more,The Percies doe defie the King. they vtterly defied him as a Traytor, and as a Vsurper; and (as an enemie) they vowed his destruction, and the restoring of the said Earle to his Right. The King perceiuing, that nothing but strong blowes could end this strife: and being persuaded,The King rayseth an Armie. that if hee became victorious in this Rebellion, he should bereaue all his enemies of all hope to pre∣uaile in the like attempts; had leuied a strong Armie: with which hee marched couragiously against those Lords; hoping to meet with them, before they should joyne their forces with the Welch∣men: and so great was his care,The battaile of Shrewsbu∣rie. that he failed not therein of his pur∣pose. For both their Armies met neare vnto Shrewsburie: and in their first encounter, the Scots gaue a braue onset vpon the King. But with such hardie violence he receiued them,The Scots are ouerthrowne. that (almost in a moment) the greatest part of them were slaine. Yet notwithstanding, the Lords and their Armie stoutly perfor∣med their taske; and fought with such admired courage and reso∣lution, that they persuaded themselues of good successe, vntill the King and the martiall Prince his sonne (determining by honoura∣ble death rather to be subdued,3. 1401. The Percies are ouer∣throwne. than to become the laughing stocks of aduerse and froward fortune) redoubled their strength and va∣lour, and by their particular examples each to the other, they so re∣newed the fight, that Sir Henrie Hotspurre, and some others of the principall Leaders of those companies, and manie thousands more, were slaine; and his vncle, the Earle of Worcester, was taken prisoner in the field, and the rest fled. And so the King, with the losse of six∣teene hundred of his souldiours,The King himselfe slew 36. Douglas is released by the King without ran∣some. hauing slaine more than six thou∣sand of his enemies (of which, thirtie and six fell by his own sword) obtained a famous victorie. And because the Earle Douglas, in a sin∣gle combate with the King himselfe, performed the part of an ap∣proued and of a worthie knight, the King granted him his libertie, without ransome. The next day following, the King and all his armie (with great deuotion and reuerence) gaue thankes vnto Almightie GOD for their good and honourable successe:Thanksgi∣uing vnto God. The Earle of Worcester is beheaded. and then he caused the Earle of Worcester to be beheaded; and manie others, being ring-leaders in that Rebellion, to be drawne, hanged, and quartered, and did set their heads vpon London Bridge.
The Prince marcheth in∣to Wales. Owen Glen∣dor forsaken by his compa∣nions. He is fami∣shed to death.And the King intending forthwith to pursue and prosecute his good fortunes, for the surer setling of his estate in future time; sent the Prince of Wales, and his whole armie, into Wales. But when hee came thither, his chiefest enemie Owen Glendor was vtterly forsaken by his whole companies, and shrowded himselfe in the Woods; and being compassed round about by the Princes forces (who ea∣gerly hunted to apprehend him) hee was miserably famished to death; and manie of his associates being taken, were put to death: and then the Prince returned joyfully to the King. The Earle of Northum∣berlands vo∣luntarie sub∣mission.Now, whilest the Prince was thus busied in Wales, Henrie Percie Earle of Northumberland, came (of his owne accord) and submit∣ted himselfe to the Kings mercie; protesting and swearing with manie oathes, That he was neuer made acquainted, nor intermed∣led in those Treasons. And though the King conceiued not the least thought which might excuse him, yet (for that time) hee entertained him with smooth words, and with a smiling counte∣nance, and suffered him to come and to goe at his pleasure; be∣cause he had in his possession the Castle of Barwike, and other places of great strength. A Chalenge sent by the Duke of Or∣leans to king Henrie.When all these Troubles had found an end, Lewis Duke of Or∣leance, brother to the French King (being prowd and vainglorious) sent a Chalenge to King Henrie; requiring him, with one hundred chosen men at armes of his Kingdome, in some indifferent and conuenient place, to fight with him, and with the like number of Frenchmen, for honours sake. But the King (with great discretion and wisdome) made him this answere,King Hen∣ries discreet answere. That his former actions, in warlike employments, could clearely acquite him from the infa∣mous name and title of a Coward: And that Kings ought not to be so carelesse of their Countries and of their people (whome GOD had committed vnto their charge and gouernment) as to fight for anie cause, except it were for the furtherance or for the maintenance of true Religion; or in defence of their Rights; or to defend their Kingdomes from forraine enemies; or to reuenge their wrongs; and for such like important causes: And also, that a Soueraigne and an annointed King (by the Lawes of Armes, and of Honor) was not bound to answere anie Chalenge in the field, except it were made vpon good cause, by his Equall in Dig∣nitie and in Office. And yet hee further added this, That hee would at all times be verie readie to repulse and to represse a∣nie violence or wrong, which the Duke should dare, rashly or vnaduisedly, at anie time to attempt against him, or anie of his people.
The Duke,A rash at∣tempt had a disgracefull end. being ouer-passionate when he receiued this discreet and mild answere, with all expedition besieged the Towne of Ver∣gie in Guian, and remained there for the space of three moneths, and somewhat more. In which time hee offered manie sharpe assaults, and much violence, but receiued as manie stout repulses as he could well endure. And in the end, hauing lost manie of his best men, and chiefest friends, he was compelled disgracefully to raise his siege, and to returne into France. The Duke of Burgoine also (supposing that the instabilitie of king Henries estate at home,The Duke of Burgoyne at∣tempteth the regaining of Callice. could not permit him to leaue his Kingdome and to warre abroad) obtained leaue of the French King to attempt the regaining of Callice to the French. For which purpose he pro∣cured a puissnt Armie, in which he had six thousand valiant men at armes, fifteene hundred crosbowes, and twelue thousand ordina∣rie Souldiers on foot. But when the French Kings Councell were informed, of the great preparations made in England by King Henrie to defeat them, and had maturely considered of the difficultie (yea almost of the impossibilitie) of this attempt: the said Duke was commanded to desist from his intended seruice:He is requi∣red to desist. whereat hee was much grieued, and did coniecture, that the proud Duke of Or∣leans, and some others, had discouraged the King in that businesse, because they were iealous, that by his valour hee would winne too much honour and renowne. Experience teacheth vs, that as the highest Trees are subiect most to bee hurted by a storme:ANNO. 6. A new Rebel∣lion secretly plotted but discouered. so the greatest Estates are in grea∣test danger to be shaken by Enuie. An euident poofe therof appea∣red plainly in the whole course of this Kings Raigne. For no sooner was hee freed from one mischiefe, but incontinently he was threat∣ned by another. And though he had now escaped the great dan∣gers of two former Treasons, and Rebellions, and had beene vi∣ctorious ouer the Scots, and the Welch Rebels, and had out-faced the French, who (if they had dared) would haue attempted high Atchieuements at Callice, and in Aquitaine, and in Guian: yet was he now againe in hazard to haue beene turmoiled with an other Ciuill Warre at home; which secretly was plotted, and con∣triued, by Henrie Percie Earle of Northumberland, Richard Scrope Archbishoppe of Yorke, Thomas Mowbray Earle Marshall, and by the Lords, Hstings, Faulconbridge, and Bardolf, and by diuers others. But as (in such like cases) it often falleth out,The King so∣dainely sur∣priseth the Traitours. so this Traiterous Conspiracie was secretly reuealed to the King: who came so vnex∣pectedly with an Armie into the North, that ere anie man repor∣ted
the newes of his comming, hee surprized the said Lords (the Earle of Northumberland, and the Lord Bardolf excepted) and strake off their heads. But the said Earle fled into France, from whence hee came afterwards into Scotland,The Prince warreth in Scotland pro∣sperously. where hee was promised to be aided against the King. But (to preuent such mischiefes as those intendements did threaten) the Prince of Wales was sent into Scot∣land with an Armie, where he burnt and spoiled (without control∣ment) at his owne will and pleasure; and recouered to the Kings vse, the Castles of Barwicke, and of Anwicke; and enforced the Scots to craue a truce, which was granted vnto them for a few monethes: and then the Prince returned to the King. The King in danger to be taken on the Thames by French Pi∣rates. The Lord of Camoys in trouble, clea∣reth himselfe. ANNO. 9. A valiant Sheriffe.And now it chanced, that as king Henrie passed ouer the Riuer of Thames, from Kent into Essex, vnder the conduct of the Lord of Camois, hee was almost taken by the French Pirats: for which cause the said Lord was suspected, and attached as a Traitour, and receiued his due triall, by his Peeres; but was clearely acquited of that offence, and receiued into fauour. In the ninth yeare of this kings Raigne, the Earle of Nothumber∣land, and the Lord Bardolfe (animating the Scots to a new war) en∣tred with them into Northumberland; and did much mischiefe: whereupon king Henrie leuied a strong armie, and by great iour∣nies) trauailed to encounter them. But (before his comming forth) they were fought with, and ouerthrowne by Sir Ralph Rokesby then Shirif of that Countie, who tooke the said Lords and manie others, and smote off their heads; and sent them (for pre∣sents) to the king. ANNO. 11 Thomas is made Duke of Clarence▪ Iohn Duke of Bedford. Humphrie Duke of Glo∣cester. The King prepareth to Warre in the Holy land. The King fal∣leth k. His Crowne is placed on his Pillow.In the eleuenth yeare of his raigne he assembled his high Court of Parliament: in which he created his three yonger sonnes, Tho∣mas, Duke of Clarence▪ Iohn, Duke of Bedford: and Humfrey Duke of Glocester: and enacted manie Lawes, which were helpefull, and profitable to this Common-weale. And from that time forth vntill hee died, hee enioyed a happie peace; and rested from all hostilitie, and warres, both at home and abroad. And to expresse his thankfulnesse to God for all his good∣nesse, and great bountie towards him: hee made great and costly preparations, of men, monie, victuals, and armour, and shippes, and all other thinges, requisite, and needfull; and purposed to haue waged warres with the Turkes in the Holy-land. But whilest he busily imploied himselfe in those affaires, hee was attached by a deadly apoplexie: and being neere vnto his last end, hee caused his Crowne to be placed by him vpon his pillow, least peraduen∣ture in his extremitie of sicknesse, it might bee deliuered to some
other, who had better right thereto then hee had. But when his attendants verily supposed, that he was dead: the yong Prince of Wales seized vpon his Crowne. Whereat the king started vp,The Prince seized on the Crowne. The Kings speech to the Prince. and raysing himselfe vpon his armes, he demanded who it was that had taken away his Crowne. The Prince answered, that it was he: and then he fell backe into his bed; and (fetching a deepe sigh, and sending forth manie pensiue groanes) My sonne (quoth he) my sonne, what right I had vnto this Crowne, and how I haue en∣joyed it, God knoweth, and the World hath seene. Comfort your selfe in God, good Father, said the Prince: The Crowne you haue, and if you die,The Prince has answere. The King dieth. I will haue it, and keepe it with my sword, as you haue done. And within a short time after, king Henrie died, in the six and fortieth yeare of his age, when he had raigned almost fourteene yeares. And his bodie was carried to Canterburie, where (with all Princely, and due requisites) it was buried.
THE HISTORIE OF KING HENRIE THE FIFTH. IT is well knowne, That King Henrie the fifth, whilest he was but a Prince, associated to himselfe diuers vnthrif∣tie and lewd companions;A wilde Prince, but a wise King. by whose instigation (among manie other vn∣worthie passages in his fathers dayes) hee smote the Lord chiefe Iustice of England in the face: for which of∣fence he was imprisoned and dismis∣sed of the Presidentship of the kings Councell; and (to his great griefe and disgrace) was succeeded therein by Thomas, Duke of Clarence, his younger brother. But when hee was crowned king, hee disposed himselfe into a new course, qualifying his behauiour with such he∣roicall vertues, as might beseeme both his Person and his Honour,He banisheth his loose com∣panions. and banished from his Court his loose and base consorts, after he had enabled them to liue by such gifts as were proportionable to their callings. He also elected for his Councell, and into places of Iustice and publike Gouernment, such as were wise, discreet,His good choice of good Gouernors. He refor∣meth the Clergie. He ruleth the Laitie. lear∣ned, and temperate; well able to rule themselues, and to command others. He painefully laboured to reforme Pride, Couetousnesse, and such other grosse abuses as were crept into the Church among the Clergie: and enjoined them strictly to frequent Praier & Prea∣ching, to Hospitalitie, and to the sincere seruing of Almightie GOD.
And (by the administration of his Lawes with moderate seueri∣tie) hee made the Laitie tractable in the performance of their du∣ties. And (to settle his Estate in peace and in tranquilitie at home; so that neyther the Scots nor the Welchmen should molest him, when hee was busied in his Warres abroad) hee erected diuers Castles,He erecteth Castles in the frontiers of Scotland and of Wales. Bulwarkes, and other Fortifications vpon their frontiers; and so disposed of them, that with manie thousands of able men, and skilfull Captaines to command them, he was still readie and powerfull, with great violence and force, to suppresse and qualifie such rebellious Insurrections as they might make. King Ri∣chards bodie remoued to Westminster.In the first yeare of his Raigne, with great pompe and solem∣nitie, hee brought the bodie of King Richard the second from Langley vnto Westminster, and buried it by Queene Anne, his first wife. 2. 1413. A motion in Parliament to suppresse Religious Houses.In the second yeare, hee held his High Court of Parliament at Leicester: in which, hee was importunately petitioned, to sup∣presse the Religious Houses of this Kingdome: because they be∣ing ill vsed, were made the Nurseries of Idlenesse, Gluttonie, Le∣cherie, and of Pride; and were the Cages of vncleane birds. The Reuenewes which belonged to those Houses, were proportioned to yeeld vnto the Kings Cossers the annuall Rent of twentie thou∣sand pounds: and would also (for the encrease of the Kings power and strength) maintaine fifteene Earles, fifteene hundred Knights, and more than six thousand men at Armes; besides, a great num∣ber of Almes-houses for the poores reliefe. The Clergies policie to quench this fire.To diuert this streame into another Channell, the fat Abbots, Priors, idle Monkes, wanton Friers, and the puling Nunnes, procu∣red Henrie Chichley, then Archbishop of Canterburie, in a verie lear∣ned and excellent Oration, to discouer to the King his Right and his Title to the Crowne of France;The Kings title to the Crowne of France set abroach. to refresh him with confident hopes of good successe; to direct him into a course answerable to his hopes; and (in the Clergies behalfe, and for the furtherance of those Warres) to offer vnto the King an incredible masse of money as their free and as their franke gift. The French businesse si∣lenceth all others.This motion and this businesse was so much applauded by the King, his Nobles, and the inferior sorts of his people: and the great summe of money which was offered, so well contented them all, that the said Petition was thereby lulled fast asleepe; and nothing was now debated and spoken of, but the meanes how England might recouer France. This Parliament being ended; the Duke of Exeter, vncle to the King, the Archbishop of Dublyn, the Lord Gray high Admirall
of England,Embassadors sent to require the Crowne of France. Charles the sixt. and the Bishop of Norwich (being attended with fiue hundred Horse) were sent Embassadours to the French king Charles the sixt. By these the King required the peaceable deliuerie of that Kingdome, together with the whole Duchies of Aquitaine, Normandie, and of Angeou; and the Counties of Poytou, and of Mayne: and made this offer, That if (without the effusion of their peoples bloud) the French King would yeeld to his demands; hee then would be pleased to take to his wife the Ladie Katherine his daughter, and would endow her with all the said Duchies and Pro∣uinces, and would be tractable to all things tending to the French kings honour and estate. But if hee refused to deliuer him his Pa∣trimonie and Inheritance without blowes; then hee assured him, That hee would attempt the gayning of them by his Sword: and would, in those Countries, afflict those people with such oppressi∣ons as were too too rife and common in the Warre. The vnexpected strangenesse of this motion and quicke message so amazed the French king and his Nobilitie,The French king craueth further time to make his answere. The Dolphin scoffeth the King. that (without sound and good deliberation) they were vnable to returne anie answere: but craued a longer time; with promise, shortly to send his Embas∣sadors, concerning that businesse, to the King. But the Dolphin des∣pising the youth of King Henrie, and holding him vnfit to attempt a matter of so high a consequence; sent vnto him (as a present) a Tonne of Tennis Balls: insinuating thereby, that it was more a∣greeable to his yeares to sport himselfe among nimble laddes in a Tennis Court, than to dreame of the winning of so potent a king∣dome as France was. The King, although otherwise he would haue beene persuaded by reason, kindly to haue censured of the French kings request,The Kings couragious speech. and of his promise: yet, because the Dolphin so basely skorned him, pro∣tested in his angrie moode, That ere manie moneths should be spent, he would (if GOD assisted him) tosse so manie balls of yron within that kingdome, that the strongest Rackets in France should be too weake to returne them. For this purpose, he leuied a strong and a puissant Armie: whereof,King Hen∣rie leuieth a great Armie. The Dolphins motion for peace. when the Dolphin had intelligence (because the charge of those affaires, by reason of the French kings weakenesse and infirmitie, was committed to his care and proui∣dence) he sent Embassadors to king Henrie, to informe him, That if hee would desist from his purpose, and would liue in amitie and in peace with that Nation, and would take his sister, the Ladie Ka∣therine, to his wife; hee then should haue and receiue with her a large summe of money, with some small Territories and Possessi∣ons in that kingdome.
King Hen∣ries answer.Those Embassadours were honourably receiued, kindly enter∣tained; and royallie feasted by the King, at his owne table. But for an answere he returned, That except the French King (with his said daughter) would giue vnto him the Dutchies of Aquitaine, Nor∣mandie, Angeow, and all other small Segniories, to him, and to his Crowne iustly appertaining, and belonging, hee would not dis∣band his armie, nor waue his title to the Crowne of France; but would attempt (by fire, and sword) to winne it if he might. King Hen∣rie forti∣fieth against the Scots. The Queene mother is made Regent of England. ANNO. 3. 1414. King Henrie defieth the K. of France. Treason a∣gainst King Henrie.Assoone as the French Embassadours were departed, The King (who proposed none other end to his endeuours, but an assured trust in God, and in a thousand hopes of conquest and of victorie) placed a strong power vpon the marches of Scotland, to keepe them in order in his absence. And, hauing throughly furnished himselfe and his armie, with all needfull preparations, and hauing made the Queene his mother the Regent of his Kingdome, and assisted her with a graue, and with a prudent Counsell, hee sent his letters of Defiance to the French King: and beganne with great alacritie, and courage, to proceed in this his royall iournie. But as greatest dangers are then most frequent, when securitie seemeth to banish all feare: so when King Henrie perswaded him∣selfe, that he was most sure, and safe, in the middest of his braue armie. euen then hee was in a greater hazard of his life, then if hee had beene in France, among the throngs of his mortall, and professed Enemies. For Richard Earle of Cambridge brother to the Duke of Yorke, and Henrie Lord Scrope, and Sir Thomas Gray (three of the most approued Captaines of this Kingdome) being treache∣rously engaged by great rewards, conferred on them by the Dol∣phin of France: conspired to deliuer him into the French Kings hands; or else to murder him in his owne Tent. The treason is discouered.Miraculously was this intended villanie reuealed to the King, who grieued the more thereat; because hee should want the aide∣full assistance of three such valiant men of Warre, as gaue him much assurance of good successe. But when they were apprehen∣ded, and brought into his presence, their open confession of that conspiracie,The traytors are executed. and treason (which otherwise would fully haue beene proued against them) hastned their publike sentence of death, and (as Traytors) they were executed the next day. The King landeth with his army in Normandie. Harflew be∣sieged, and taken.Assoone as the wind serued, the King transported his armie in an hundred and fortie shippes, and landed in Normandie before Hareflew, vpon the Riuer of Seyne, and besieged it on euerie part for the space of seuen and thirtie dayes. And though the French army, which was conducted by the Dolphin, made manie faire proffers
to raise the siege, yet durst they not come too neere. But the Towne hauing beene manie times sharply assaulted, was yeelded to King Henrie: who sacked it, and ransomed the inhabitants, and with great plentie of siluer, and of Gold, and manie costly thinges, he enriched all his owne Companies;Great sicknes in king Hen∣ries Armie. and (hauing placed as Cap∣taine there, his Vncle Thomas Duke of Exeter; and as his Lieuete∣nant Sir Iohn Fastolf, with fifteene hundred souldiers, and fiue and thirtie gallant Knights, he resolued to go vnto Callice by land; & to rest there, because the winter (being now more wet, & approching sooner at that time then vsually it was accustomed) infected manie of his men with gieuous fluxes, and strange feuers: and occasioned the death of the Earle of Stafford, of the Bishop of Norwich▪ and of the Lords of Molines, and of Burnel, and of more then fifteene hun∣dred men. And (notwithstanding,The French dare not to incounter with King Henrie in his March. Thirteene thousand men. Siluer and Gold id o pleasure to the English Armie. The Dolphin brggeth but doth not any thing. that sicknesse and manie wants afflicted his armie) yet king Henrie marched with great confidence and re∣solution through the bowels of those Countries, in despight of the French forces, who only made proud brags, and faire shewes of en∣counters: But (like vnto hunted, and affrighted Deere) gazed a farre off vpon the English armie, yet dared not by handie strokes, to make the least triall of their valour, albeit King Henries strength did then consist only of two thousand Horsemen, and of thirteene thou∣sand Archers, and no more. Manie of which number wanted health, meat, wood, and rest, and had not anie plentie of anie thing sauing only of Siluer, and of Gold, which could not (in that place) supply vnto them such thinges, as most of all they needed. The Dolphin of France to whom the mannaging of those wars was committed (hauing assembled more then thirtie thousand fighting men) saw that hee was much dishonoured by his owne cowardize, and lest he should be infamous among his own people, he determined to giue battaile to King Henrie: but his fainting ig∣noble heart, being terrified, and his courage passing in post out at his heeles▪ suffered him not to attempt anie thing, so that King Hen∣rie still marched on-wards, burning, and spoiling, and doing in his passage whatsoeuer himselfe best liked. The French king (who lay at Roan) was highly discontented,The French King taketh Counsell. for that the English armie (vnfought with) had proudly passed ouer the Riuer of Soame) wherefore hee entred into a serious consulta∣tion concerning those businesses, with fiue and thirtie of his dis∣creetest, and wisest Counsellors: and the question was;The question. Whether it were better to giue Battaile to the English Armie, or (for that time) to giue King Henrie a free march, without resistance, vnto Callice? By
thirtie of that number, it was aduised, and concluded on, that they should be fought with, but the other fiue vrged manie substantial reasons, and arguments, to maintaine the contrarie. But they were not hearkned vnto.The King is defied, and a Battaile pro∣mised. So the French king incontinently, by his He∣rald at Armes sent a defiance to K. Henrie, and promised that within few dayes, he would trie his best strength by handie strokes in the open field.King Hen∣ries discrete answere. King Henrie (with a Princely boldnesse and magnani∣mitie) returned him this answere, That because his armie was af∣flicted with much sicknes, and manie wants; he bended his course directly to his Towne of Callice, where hee would goe and refresh himselfe, and his companies, and would not therefore (at that time) seeke the French King. But if hee endeuoured, and dared to inter∣rupt him in his passage, he was of sufficient force and strength to repell all violence, which the French Nation should oppose against him. The Battaile of AgencourtWhen this answere was returned, the French King (by his Pro∣clamations) caused manie thousand men at armes, and valiant Souldiors, to repaire to the Constable of France, to fight for honor and for their Countrie with king Henrie: who being informed, that the day drew neere in which the Frenchmen intended to giue him battaile;  placed his Armie in good order and array, betwixt the Townes of Blangie, and of Agencourt, within the Countie of Saint Paul. This being done, the Constable of France, being brauely accom∣panied with diuers great and honourable personages,The number of the French Armie. well experi∣enced Captaines, and lustie men of warre, to the number of three∣score thousand on horsebacke; besides his Footmen, Pages, Wag∣goners, and other attendants; approched neere to the English armie; and placed them in good order of battaile, and in the night time they made great fires about their standard,How the French Ar∣mie passed the night. They recko∣ned without their Hoste. The English∣mens resolu∣tion. disposed themselues to extraordinarie mirth, and jollitie, and made such sure account of the Victorie on the next day (by reason of their great numbers, and for that the English forces were so small, so weake, and sickly) that they fell to the casting of lots for such prisoners as they would take. And on the other side, king Henrie and his people hauing hum∣bly reconciled themselues to God, and by repentance, and by pub∣like and priuate prayer, purchased the happie contentment of quiet consciences, sounded their trumpets and musicall instruments of all sorts, and were resolued to sell their liues deare, and to die like men, seeing that now they were vnable, by anie meanes (excep∣ting only by the sword) to worke vnto themselues any deliuerance from infamie, and from death.
Vpon friday being the fiue and twentieth day of October,The Lord Da∣labreth. the Lord Dalabreth High Constable of France, arranged all his compa∣nies into three battailes. 1. In the first, he placed eight thousand wel-armed Knights,The first Bat∣taile of the French. and Esquires; foure thousand Archers, and fifteene hundred Cros∣bowes: and strongly garded them with two wings. The one of them consisted of fifteene hundred men at armes; and the other, of eight hundred. And this battaile, and these wings, were com∣manded by himselfe, and by the Dukes of Orleance, and of Burbon, and by the Earles of Ewe, Richmond, and Vandosme, and by the Lord Dampter, Admirall of France, and by the Marshal Bouciqualt, and ma∣nie others. 2. In the middle battaile were placed more men at armes,The middle Battaile of the French. than in the former: and it was commaunded by the Dukes of Barre and of Alanson, and by the Earles of Vawdemont, Salings, Blamont, Grant-Preé, and Russie. 3. And the third battaile (being composed of all the remnant) was marshalled; and guided by the Earles of Marke, Damp-Martin,The Rere bat∣taile af the French. and of Fawlconbridge, and by the Lord Lurrey Captaine of the Towne of Arde. And on the other side the Vauntgard of King Henrie,King Hen∣ries vantgard which consisted of good Archers only, was conducted by the Duke of Yorke: who being right valiant, and of an hautie courage, by great entreatie obtained that place; and with him, were the Lords of Bea∣mond, Willoughby, and of Fanhope. The maine battaile was commanded by the King himselfe:King Hen∣ries maine Battaile. in which were his strongest bil-men, and some archers: and with him were the Duke of Glocester his brother, the Earle Marshall, Oxford, and of Suffolke. And the Reareward was directed by Thomas Duke of Exeter,The Kings Rereward. the Kings Vncle. And all the Horsemen (as wings) attended all these companies on both sides. And to preuent by pollicie such breaches,Stakes dri∣uen into the ground be∣hind the Eng∣lish Armie. as otherwise the French Horsemen might suddenly make vpon the English armie with their barred Steeds, whilest the archers were busily perfor∣ming their taske: king Henrie caused all his Footmen, to bee enui∣roned with stakes of fiue or sixe foot long; which being well head∣ded with sharp Iron at both ends, were thickly pitched into the Earth, and easily might (vpon euerie remoue) bee newly fast∣ned into the ground, by such as were appointed to attend them. King Henrie (vpon his trust in the mercifull aide and assistance
of Almightie God,This Ambush of Archers was a princi∣pall meanes of the victorie and vpon a strong hope which hee conceiued, of braue seruice to be performed that day) had secretly placed a lustie crew of good Archers within a new cast hedge, by which the French Horsemen were to make way towardes the English ar∣mie. And these were commanded to shoot wholly, and together, when a valiant and wel-experienced Knight, named Sir Walter Harpington, by the casting vp of his Gauntlet, should occasion the whole Armie of the Englishmen to shout with a mightie crie. And this direction was so well obserued, that when the French Horse∣men were passed within the danger of that ambush, and attemp∣ted to giue the first onset; vpon the said signe and shout, the said archers dimmed the aire with the thicknesse of their strong flying arrowes: and the French Horsmen by meanes of the height of the said banke, and depth of the ditch within it, were not able to come neere vnto them.Valiant and strong Ar∣chers. The first Bat∣taile of the Frenchmen is ouerthrowne. The English archers likewise, who serued in the Vauntgard, so strongly fixed their shot in the French Horses, that manie of them being wounded, and the arrowes shaking in their flesh, threw off their riders to the ground; and other some of them, with violence ranne vpon such as rode next vnto them; and the rest of them, in such disordered troupes, and plumps, so furiously and so madly re∣tired, that they thereby not only were disordered, but their foot∣men also; who were oppressed, wounded, and miserably slaine, and trodden to death by them. Which when the English armie well perceiued: the archers threw away their Bowes, and with Malls, Axes, Swords, Gleaues, and Bils, they made an incredible slaughter vpon the first battaile of the Frenchmen:The maine Battaile is assaulted by the English. which by them were vtterly discomforted, and put to flight. And (without brea∣thing, or the least delay) they ranne fiercely vpon the middle bat∣taile of the French armie: who fought with great courage, and re∣solution; and for a while acquited themselues as valiant men. The French Horsemen of that battaile, scorning that so small a number of their Enemies should worke such wonders: and in∣tending by sudden violence, to make quicke dispatch of them; be∣ganne to charge vpon them with great courage. The Englishmen (the better to saue themselues, and to traine the French Horsemen within the danger of their stakes) seemed faint. Yet in good order they retired, and quickly slipped behinde their stakes: so that the Frenchmen (who made more hast then good speede to ouer-throw the Englishmen) rushed ignorantly,The French Horses are goared on the stakes. and violently forwarde; not hurting their Enemies, but goring, spoyling, and killing of their Horses in great numbers. And thus was their maine battaile dimi∣shed,
and altogether put out of order, and good gouernment.The maine battaile of the French van∣quished. The Kings valour. Which when the Englishmen saw: they hautily aduanced their spi∣rits, and confidently redoubled their strength: and with rude and hardie blowes, they rushed forth so egarly vpon the Frenchmen, that they compelled them to flie. In this encounter, the King him∣selfe fought hand to hand, with the Duke of Alanson, and was by him, wel-neere taken Prisoner. But his high stomacke disdaining to stoop to fortune, and to loose the least iot of honour: he encoura∣ged himselfe with a more constant resolution. So that (in the end) he slew two of the Dukes neerest attendants with his owne hand;The Duke of Alanson slain. and felled him to the ground. But whilest the King passionately laboured and striued to saue his life; hee was vnaduisedly slaine by his Guard. Assoone as these two battailes were thus ouerthrowne, the king (abandoning all lingring and delay: and setling his hopes vpon the assurance of an honourable victorie) made offer, with his whole Companies, to enuiron the third and last battaile of the French∣men: In which were the greatest number, but the worst men.The third bat∣taile of the Frenchmen flie. But their courage was so cooled, that (like vnto Sheepe before the Wolfe) they cowardly ranne away, casting from them their ar∣mour and their weapons: and (being strangely amazed; and not knowing which waie to runne, to saue themselues) great numbers of them fell vpon their knees, and craued mercie, and the preserua∣tion of their liues; and were receiued as prisoners by the English armie, by the Kings consent. But whilest King Henrie was thus busied, and (to pursue the Chace) had left his owne Campe, and Tents,An vnfortu∣nate seruice for the French Prisoners. meanly and weakly garded, & defended, by Waggoners, and by Lackies only: Robinet of Bonuile, with six hundred of those Horsemen who first of all ac∣quited the field, entred into the Kings Campe; and rifled all things at their pleasure, and slew as manie of the weake Garders as they could: by meanes whereof, a strong outcrie was suddenly made there: which when the King heard, hee imagined, that fresh and new forces intended to giue him an other battaile, and to trie him with an other strength. This conceit, and this fearing doubt;The French prisoners are miserably slaine. occasioned him forthwith to proclaime, that (on paine of death) all ordinarie Prisoners should be slaine, least (in the new conflict) they should bee troublesome and dangerous to his armie. Then was there seene a sorrowfull spectacle of much vnexpected crueltie.Feare enfor∣ced this crueltie. For some of their throats were cut: the bellies of others were so lanced, that their guttes fell out: the braines of others were dashed abroad with Malls, and
Axes: others with Daggers were stabbed, and with Swords thrust through; and finally, almost all of them (vpon a sodaine) were (with much enforced crueltie) put to death; whereat the King con∣ceiued extraordinarie griefe, and sorrow, and lamented it with many teares, when he perfectly vnderstood, that no fresh army was prepared to assaile him. The King, though he perceiued well, and did perfectly know, that his Souldiers were much tired and wearied with the great tra∣uels of that victorious day:King Henries prouidence a∣gainst future danger. yet (doubting of the worst) hee arran∣ged his whole armie into a new battaile, because he was informed, that an other enterprise against him was taken in hand. And as∣soone as he was fitly prouided to defend himselfe; he was assailed by the Earles of Marle,Another vi∣ctorie did at∣tend him. and of Faulconbridge, and sixe hundred va∣liant men at armes; who had kept together, and had not fought one stroke that day. But as a small, and a weake vessell, is quickly swal∣lowed vp into a wrathfull Sea: so this poore handful was by and by crushed, and almost euerie one of them was slaine. Afterwardes, when King Henrie (by his Scoutes) recei∣ued certaine intelligence, that euerie Coast about him was cleare, and that such of his Enemies, as were couragious, and would fight lay dead vpon the ground,The King & his Armie giue thankes to God for their great victorie. and none were so hardie as to shew their faces: the king (about foure of the clocke in the afternoone of the same day) caused his whole armie (vpon their knees) to ioyne with him in heartie prayer, and in thankfulnesse vnto Almightie God; who only, and alone, by his powerfull aid and assistance, had giuen to him, and them, a most incredible and a glorious Victorie. This dutie being thus deuoutly accomplished;The spoiles. the common souldiours, had franke leaue and licence granted them, to rifle those whome they had slaine. By meanes whereof they not only waxed rich, but also stored themselus with al such necessaries, and prouisions as be∣fore they wanted: and then the King marched forward; and with much ioy, and great honour, was receiued into his strong towne of Callice. In this battaile,The French Noble were slaine. were slaine Charles Lord Delabreth high Con∣stable of France; Iaques of Chastilion Lord of Dampier High Admi∣rall of France, Iohn Duke of Alenson, Anthonie Duke of Brabant, Edward Duke of Barre; the Earles of Marle, Vawdemont, Blawmount, Grand-preé, Russey, Fawlconbridge, Foys, and Lastrake: twentie and fiue Lords; eight thousand Knights, and Esquires, and Gentlemen of armes, and name: and about sixteene hundred of the common sort: besides those who were taken,Prisoners ta∣ken. and remained prisoners: among whom these were the chief: Charles Duke of Orleance: Iohn Duke of Burbon: the lords of Donuart, Fosseux, Humiers, Roy, Cawny, Hamcourt,
Noell, Bonciqualt, and some others. And on the other part were slaine Edward Duke of Yorke, and the Earle of Suffolke;The slaine Englishmen. and of all others, not aboue six hundred persons. When King Henrie and his souldiours had a while refreshed themselues in Callice,The King with his ar∣mie arriue in England. they tooke shipping: and being enriched with Siluer, Gold, and braue and costly Armours, they all arriued safely in England; and the King was receiued into London triumphantly and with much joy. When the French king and the Dolphin were informed of the said great and insupportable ouerthrow; it is not to be wondered at, if melancholie passions and much griefe surcharged them to the ve∣rie heart, and made them doubtfull of the euent of this businesse. But the slaughter of the French prisoners, foolishly occasioned by the base attempt of Robynet of Bonuyle,Robynet of Bonuyle, and his complices, imprisoned. and of his companions, who cowardly ransacked the English Campe and the kings Tents in the heat and furie of the aforesaid Battaile, perplexed them more than all the rest: but especially the Dolphin; who impriso∣ned the Ringleaders of that follie, and would haue sentenced them to death, if suddainely himselfe had not after died:The Dolphin dieth. whose death much amazed the weake and much diseased French King. But making a vertue of necessitie, and intending by some proui∣dent course to preuent such mischiefes which future attempts did threaten;The Earle of Arminake is made High Constable of France. he made the Earle of Arminack (who was a stout and a warlike Captaine) High Constable of France, and placed in his other great martiall Offices none but such, as by their valour and good tryall had made best proofe of their sufficiencie to per∣forme them.New French Officers. These newly established Officers leuied manie com∣panies of the most able and stoutest men in sundrie places of that kingdome. And at the same time, the Kings vncle Thomas Duke of Exeter,Thomas duke of Exeter has gallant ser∣uice. and Captaine of Hareflew (intending to exercise his souldiors in feates of Warre, and by some suddaine seruice both to enrich them, to winne honour to himselfe, and to endamage his enemies) issued out of that Towne with three thousand men, well armed to the proofe, and marched through those Countries, burning, ri∣fling, and spoyling, vntill hee came almost to the Citie of Roan: where hee was encountred by the new Constable of France; who with fiue thousand horsemen (hauing a resolution in this exploit to winne his Spurres) so sharpely charged the Duke and his fol∣lowers, that hee compelled him (though in good order,The new Constable is ouerthrowne. and with little losse) to retyre. But the Frenchmen (determining their vtter ouerthrow) pursued them still with eager spirits, vntill they came
almost to the Barriers of Harflew: which when the rest of the En∣glishmen, who were within the Towne, perceiued, they issued forth in good order, joyned with the Dukes companies: and then they all, with their entire strength, so furiously opposed them∣selues against the Constable and his Associates, that (with the slaughter of manie of their horses and souldiors) they were enfor∣ced to flie away, and were chased by the English Victors more than two myles: and diuers of them, who were taken prisoners, could not obtaine their libertie, vntill they had procured it with large Ransomes. Sigismond the Emperor in vaine me∣diateth a peace.About this time, Sigismond the Emperour of Germanie came in∣to England, endeuouring to conclude a friendly peace betwixt Eng∣land and France. His heartie welcome and his great entertainment liberally sorted with the high calling of so great a Prince. But his motion was barren and fruitlesse of good speeding. In his depar∣ture, the King accompanied him to Callice; from whence hee re∣turned home. And thither (vpon honourable hostages) repaired to King Henrie▪ the Duke of Burgoine; and betwixt them a friendly peace,The Duke of Burgoine is suspected by the French King. concerning onely the Counties of Flanders and of Arthois, was concluded. For which matter, the Duke was had in great jealousie, and suspected to be a secret enemie to the Crowne of France. Not long after, the new Constable of France with a strong ar∣mie vpon the Land,4. 1415. Harflew be∣sieged by the French. and Iohn Vicount Narbon, Vice-admirall of France, with fiue hundred ships, at the mouth of the Riuer of Seyne besieged Harflew on euerie side; and made little doubt to winne it in few weekes▪ But when King Henrie was aduertized in what sort the Towne and his Subiects were distressed; with extraordinarie care and expedition hee leuied a powerfull armie,The English Nauie doe ouerthrow the French Fleet, consi∣sting of 500. shippes. and transported it thither in two hundred warlike and strong shippes: of these, hee made Generall his brother Iohn Duke of Bedford; and associated to him (in that expedition) the Earles of March, Oxford, Hunting∣don, Arondel, Salisburie, and Deuonshire, and manie Barons, Knights, and Gentlemen of great valour and much worth. Iohn Duke of Bedford ray∣seth the siege.The Duke (shortly after his departure) being happily conducted by a pleasing wind, fell vpon the French fleet, who in the view of the Towne of Harflew fought couragiously, as men resolued to winne honour. But being vnable to make good what they intended, they were at length vtterly vanquished and ouerthrowne, with an in∣credible slaughter of their men: and great numbers of them, being taken, were sent Prisoners into England. And thus was the Towne of Harflew happily rescued, and deliuered from the Frenchmen.
For when the Constable perceiued, that all their Sea-forces were defeated, and, in a manner, consumed; hee raysed his Siege, and (with a heauie heart) marched dishonorably vnto Paris: and the Duke of Bedford (hauing new victualled, manned, and fortified the Towne) returned with great applause, and much honor, into England. These disasterous misfortunes rushing euerie day vpon the French Nation,Secret quar∣rellings a∣mong the French No∣bilitie. rather animated the Nobilitie of France to seeke meanes to reuenge their priuate quarrels and grudges one against the other; then, as prouident and worthie Peeres, to vnite their forces for the defence and protection of their Countrey: by means whereof,King Henrie fares the bet∣ter. a wide Gappe was opened to King Henrie (with lesser danger) to attempt great matters against the Peace and Estate of that Kingdome. And (to further his designes in those Negotiati∣ons) hee assembled his High Court of Parliament at Westminster:A Parliamēt. In which, he himselfe pithily and effectually discouered his Right and Title to the Crowne of France;The Kings Speech. the often Injuries which the Frenchmen had done from time to time to the English Nation; his blessed and fortunate Successes in those Warres; the new Dissen∣tions and secret reuengefull Grudges which diuided the hearts and the strength of the Frenchmen; and his vndoubted hopes of win∣ning both honour and profit: if by the sufficient disbursement of Money and of Treasure his preparations might be furthered and supported with all speed. This Speech (being graciously and artificially contriued) was so plausible and pleasing,Great sums of monie quickly an are∣fully raised. and the Kings heroicall intendements were so well receiued and digested by all sorts of people, who were then present; that not onely a great summe of money (with franke and free consent) was granted to him; but the same was quickly leuied with great loue and much ease. The King (being much encouraged in his French businesse, by the forward bountie of his louing subjects) prepared a strong Fleet; furnished it with men and all things needfull; and embar∣ked therein a strong Armie of lustie experienced souldiors: but sent before him, to skowre the Seas, Iohn Earle of Huntingdon, sonne to that Duke of Exeter,Another vi∣ctorie at sea by Iohn Hol∣land Earle of Huntingdon. who was beheaded in the daies of King Henrie the fourth. This lustie Gallant being at all points readily prouided, met (luckily) with nine Carricks of Genoa, which (for money) were waged to serue the French King: with those he encountred, and fought stoutly, yet (for a while) with variable hopes of the successe: but in the end hee sunke into the Sea six of them, and tooke the other three, being stored with great store
of Money and much Treasure, and brought them, with his priso∣ners, to the King. The King with his Ar∣mie landed in NormandyThis argument of good speeding much encouraged King Hen∣rie; who with his copious Armie of gallant and lustie Lads depar∣ted out of England, and landed safely in Normandie, before the strong Castle of Tonque: which by him was besieged and wonne by strong assaults;Tonque is ta∣ken by assault and yet hee receiued the besiedged to his mercie. When the Normans knew that King Henrie was arriued in their Countrie,The Nor∣mans flye into the walled Townes. and of his taking of that Castle, they fled as men amazed (with bagge and baggage) into their walled Townes; and so did all the souldiors which were placed euerie where for the defence and protection of those Countries: so that (without resistance) King Henrie marched forth, and pitched before the Citie of Cane;The Citie of Cane is be∣sieged. which was exceedingly well manned, and throughly prouided of Victuals, Armour, and Munition of all sorts, for manie moneths. Diuers assaults were fiercely made, and the walls were oftentimes skaled, with desperate resolution, by the English; and the Normans with no lesse valour and stout courage defended the Towne, to the great damage of their enemies, vntill, at length, King Henrie (to saue the liues of manie valiant men, who otherwise must needes haue died in that Seruice) proclaimed Mercie to the besieged, if they would yeeld.The Citie re∣fuseth all compositions. But their hopes to bee relieued, and the trust which they reposed in their owne valour, persuaded them to re∣fuse all compositions whatsoeuer. Whereupon many terrible as∣saults were fiercely made, and repulsed: The walls of the Citie were in many places vndermyned; the Englishmen, with vndaun∣ted courage, rushed into the Towne, partly through the walls, and partly ouer them:Cane taken by assaults. so that in the end, although the Normans (to their continuall praise and commendation) performed the parts of worthie and faithfull souldiors: yet their Towne was wonne; and all of them forsaking their armour and their weapons, fell vp∣on their knees, and humbly craued mercie of the King. Which was not by and by granted to them, because they had obstinate∣ly refused it before; yet some refreshing words of comfort gladded their heauie hearts, so that they hoped the worst was past. Then the King caused all the Townesmens Armour to be hea∣ped together in the Market place, and to be defended by a strong Guard:Thanks giuen vnto God. which being done, with all the residue of his Armie hee entred, with great solemnitie and reuerence, into the chiefest Church, and on their knees, with true humilitie and deuotion,
they yeelded their heartie thanks vnto Almightie GOD for that Victorie. This dutie being thus performed,Townesmen executed. and strong Watches being placed in euerie quarter of the Citie; the King (vpon the next mor∣ning) assembled all the inhabitants at their Senate or Councell∣house; where, he censured the principals of such as obstinately re∣fused his fauour when it was offered, to sundrie deaths; fined and ransomed others▪ and diuided the riches and the best things which were found there, among his souldiors:The souldiors are enriched. who, in those assaults, had made sufficient triall of their vndaunted courage and bold valour. At this time the Earle of Arminack, High Constable of France,The Dolphin wanting mo∣ney, taketh it from the Queene his mother. together with Charles the Dolphin (who was much grieued for his troubled Countrey) proposed to themselues sundrie projects for the defeating of King Henrie: and finding the want of money to be their chiefest impediment, the Dolphin (by the Constables ad∣uise) tooke from the Queene, his mother, a great Masse of siluer and of gold, which for many yeares she had scraped, scratched, and hoorded vp together. This Act so inwardly vexed and enraged the Queene,She voweth deepe reuenge that in her heart she vowed to be reuenged vpon them both: and know∣ing that Iohn, the Duke of Burgoine, was their capitall and greatest enemie, especially to the Constable of France;She procureth Iohn Duke of Burgoine to be Regent & Protector. and because the king her husband, by much sicknesse, was weakened both in his bodie and in his vnderstanding; she procured him to be made and to be established the Protector of the Kings Person, and the Re∣gent of his whole kingdome. Now when the said Duke had obtained this authoritie and pow∣er,He intendeth reuengement on the Con∣stable. he forthwith resolued to reuenge his old displeasures vpon the said Constable, and afterwards to bend his whole strength against king Henrie. The Dolphin likewise and the Constable employed their chie∣fest care how they might enfeeble the new Regent and his adhe∣rents;The Dolphin and the Con∣stable arme their wits against the Regent. and to oppose themselues against the English forces, it was their smallest thought. So blind is Enuie, and so reuengefull is proud Ambition, that the Countries good is nothing at all respe∣cted, when men resolue to pursue their priuat hatred and conten∣tion: And hereby all men might plainely see, That these dissenti∣ons and these discords did more further the English Armie in their proceedings,This Discord furthered King Hen∣ries procee∣dings. than did their owne policie and their owne strength. For the Normans being vtterly dismayed and hopelesse to be assi∣sted, because the Malice which bare sway among the French Nobi∣litie
was too too great; fled as men amazed (and as not being the commanders of their owne wits) from place to place, from village to village, and from towne to towne: and, in the meane time, the English Armie commanded as it pleased. King Henrie beholding their feare, and seeking rather to winne their Castles, Townes, and Cities by Policie, than by the Sword, proclaymed in all places,King Hen∣ries procla∣mation. That such of them as would yeeld, and sweare to become his subjects, should not onely enjoy freely all their Lands, Goods, Liberties, and Liues, but should also bee protected and defended by his strength, and be receiued into his Princely loue. The greatest Townes in Normandie are yeelded to King Hen∣rie.This practise quickly procured the surrendring into his hands, without blowes, the strong Townes of Alanson, Argenton, Boy∣eux, Camboy, Conde, Crewly, Essay, Faloys, Thorygny, and Vermoyle: And vnto the kings brother, the Duke of Clarence, were quietly yeelded the Townes of Auellyers, Barney, Bethelvyn, Chambroys, Cowrton, Crevener, Fangermon, Freshney, Harcort, Lysoeux, and Ra∣gles. And into the hands of the kings other brother, the Duke of Glocester, were giuen vp and deliuered these Townes in the Coun∣tie of Constantine; that is to say, Auranclies, Briquevile, Cuven∣ton, Chiergurge, Constance, Hambery, Hay du Pays, Pontorson, Pont∣done, S. Sauior, S. Iames, S. Clow, Vire, and Valoignes: in all which, the king and his brothers placed valiant English Captaines & strong Garrisons to defend them,King Henrie fortifieth all those Townes. if the French should attempt to regaine them to his owne power. Cane is re∣paired and fortified.The Citie of Cane also was newly repaired, fortified, and inha∣bited by English souldiors and traders of all sorts, Sir Gilbert Vmfre∣uyle being made Captaine of the Castle, Sir Gilbert Talbot of the Towne, and Sir Iohn Popham was made Bailife there. 6 1417. Roan is wal∣led round.Whilest King Henrie and his companies were thus busied in Normandie; hee was informed, That the Citizens of Roan had compassed their Citie with a strong wall, and had strengthened it with extraordinarie Fortifications, Towers, Bulwarkes, and Dit∣ches, and that the whole Wealth and Treasure of a great part of the Countries round about it was brought thither.The countries treasure is brought into Roan. Whereupon he marched with his whole Armie towards that Citie: and in his passage, by strong assaults, he tooke Pontlarch, Louyers, and Eureux, and came before the strong Citie of Roan the last day of Iuly, and compassed it round about vpon the Land parts with a strong siege:Roan is besie∣ged by land and by water. And at Pontlarch he placed ouer the Riuer, vpon Pyles, a mightie Chayne of Iron and a Woodden Bridge, which prohibited all suc∣cours (by water) to come vnto the Citie.
And the Earle of Warwike hauing the command of an hundred gallant shippes, well manned, victualled,Cawdebeck giueth pas∣sage to the English fleet. and prouided for the Warre; entred into the Riuers mouth, and came before the Towne of Cawdebeck: and so fiercely pressed on it, that by way of composition they suffered him quietly to passe towards Roan, with faithfull promise to yeeld it into King Henries hands,Conditions. if hee fortu∣ned to winne Roan: but if hee did not; then to giue the said Earle and his whole Fleet a safe and a peaceable returne. And for the due performance thereof, they sent him sufficient hostages;Hostages. whom he receiued louingly, and carried them with him before Roan. Thus was this Citie girded round about on euerie part, so that no man could passe in or out. At this Siege, there repaired voluntarily to the King▪1600 Irish∣men repaire to the King, and doe him great seruice. the Lord of Kylmay of Ireland, with sixteene hundred tall, lustie, swift, and strong men of that Nation, they all beeing cloathed in Coats of Mayle, and armed with Darts, whom the King entertained cheere∣fully, and was extraordinarily furthered by their help and assistance in those his Expeditions. Daily the King gaue terrible assaults vnto the Citie,The Towne assaulted and defended. which with admirable resolution and manlike valour was brauely defended by the Normans. But when force and violence preuailed not, the king to spare his men (and because hee vnderstood,210000 souls in Roan. That there were a∣boue two hundred and tenne thousand men, women, and children within the Towne) determined, if he might, to gaine it by famine without blowes.The King in∣tends to win Roan by fa∣mine. For which purpose, he cast a deepe Ditch about the Land parts of the Citie,The Kings fortifications. and pitched it plentifully with sharpe stakes, and guarded them with his Archers; so that the inha∣bitants could not issue out, eyther to offend him, or to relieue themselues. Thus this Siege continued, from Lammas vntill the whole Christ∣mas was ended: during which time,A great Fa∣mine. the Famine so grieuously en∣creased, that the Citizens dranke nothing but vineger and water, and multitudes of them were enforced to prolong their liues, by eating of Rattes, Mice, Cattes, Dogges, Horses, and such like. Great numbers also of the poorer sort vncharitably were thrust out of the Citie,The poore are thrust forth, and die. because they spent their victuals, and could not fight: and because they were not suffered to passe through the English Armie, they miserably perished for want of food betwixt the Gates and the Trenches of their enemies. And vpon New-yeares day (after the Citie had beene long visited with this famine) there issued out at the Bridge-Gate certaine Commissioners,Commissio∣ners craue conference with the king who craued conference with some man of authoritie in the English Ar∣mie:
vnto whome, the Earle of Huntingdon (who was quartered in that part of the Citie) sent Sir Gilbert Vmfreuyle: their errand was, To procure speedie accesse and free returne from King Henrie. The commis∣sioners re∣paire to the King.The King was well pleased, that twelue of them should bee kindly entreated, if they came. So, the next morning, foure Knights, foure learned men, and foure of the choisest Burgesses of the Towne, being all clothed in blacke, repaired to the King; who beheld them, with a countenance beautified with extraordina∣rie Majestie and Grace: and vnto him one of them boldly spake as followeth: A proud Speech of a Frenchman to King HENRIE. REnowned and great Prince, the world is taught to know by good Experience, that Kings and Noble Captaines doe winne their chiefest Reputation for their valour and for their fortitude, by mastring and subduing of proud enemies and of valiant men by mar∣tiall violence, and with the Sword: and that it is, and euer hath beene, a notorious Badge of cowardly basenesse in a Prince, to make them ser∣uile by Famine, and by the scarsitie of food; in which kind of crueltie there is neither found Manhood to praise him, nor Wit, which may in anie sort commend him. To the end therefore, that your Highnesse may make your selfe equally famous with the greatest Princes for your generous disposition, in taming of vs, the Souldierie of this Citie, by the Sword; suffer (I pray you) the multitude of our diseased and sick folkes, and the weaker sort of our men, women, and Children, safely and chari∣tably to passe through your Armie; and then (if you dare) assault our Fortresses and our Walls: and if, by your valour, you fortune to become our Lord, you may vse vs at your pleasure, and make your self truly and heroically famous among great Men, who doe scorne all base attempts, and can rellish nothing but vnspotted honor. When the King (with a troubled mind) had heard and conside∣red of this bold bragge, he stoutly made this answere.
The KINGS discreete ANSVVERE. FAntasticall and fond Frenchmen, thinke you, that I am so weake a Scholer in the Art of Warre, that I haue not yet learned the Principles in that Science. Are not the Sword, Fire, and Fa∣mine, the three Instruments with which worthie and renowned Kings, Princes, and the best Captaines euer haue done and doe still endeuour to subdue their Enemies? Doe not all Histories accord in one, That the grea∣test Monarchs, and the Grand Commanders of the World, haue still at∣chieued their chiefest Conquests by those three? Is not either of them powerfull and able to torment and to afflict the proudest foes? And are they not (all three being ioyned together) of sufficient force to ouer∣come and to ouerthrow the greatest Nation in the world? It was my clemencie and gentlenesse to forbeare to assault your walls, because I would not willingly hasten the death of anie, except they would wilfully further their owne destruction: Neither doe I intend to consume so faire a Iewell, as this Citie is, in the fire, because I desire to preserue it, the same being mine owne Inheritance and my Right. If then I vse the mil∣dest of these three, namely Famine, to correct you, and to frame and fa∣shion you to my will, then may you redeeme your selues from her seue∣ritie, if you be so disposed, by surrendring of this mine owne Citie into my hands. Which thing if obstinately you refuse to doe, then would I haue you know, That Kings may not bee instructed in Martiall Poli∣cies by euerie bold companion, who dareth impudently to speake: Neither may they permit a Bookish vnexperienced souldior to read vnto them a Lecture of warlike proceedings, especially if he be their Enemie, as you are mine You desire, nay (sawcy) you require, That, with my leaue and fauour, your sick and starued people may passe into the Countrey through mine Armie; and that then I should (if I dared) by meane assaults at∣tempt the winning of your Towne. The world will wonder at your cruel∣tie; who haue barbarously and vncharitably thrust out of your Gates mul∣titudes of harmelesse, poore, and distressed People, beeing of your owne Bloud, Kindred, and Countrey, to the intent that I should mercilessely slay and consume them: yet such hath beene my clemencie and gentlenesse to∣wards them, that oftentimes I haue relieued them with mine owne store. But because I doe now finde, that your obstinacie is not yet qualified and corrected, I will from henceforth abstaine from giuing vnto them anie further comfort: and if they perish with extreame famine, as they needes must doe, their bloud will be required by GOD at your hands,
who doe most wickedly expose them to those calamities; and not at mine, who would willingly preserue them, if my fauors, in that behalfe, would not hinder mee from the recouering of my Right. Resolue your selues therefore, that seeing you remaine still froward, they shall not passe through mine Armie, but die at your Gates; except (your hearts beeing mollified) you will relieue them, and suffer them to spend some part of your victualls: And when I shall see cause, your Towne shall be assaulted to your paine. But your aduise and directions shall not appoint the time, for it shall be and rest wholly and only at my pleasure. And in the meane time I would haue you know, That he who dareth to enter into, and thus to passe through all your Countries; He who hath alreadie taken, though not as large, yet as strong Townes as this; and hee who, by the destru∣ction of your Nobles, Captaines, and brauest men at Armes, hath opened the way thus to besiege your Towne; dares also to assault it, and little doubts to winne it when he will. Thus when the King had spoken, and ended his Speech, he com∣manded, that those French Commissioners should dine among his great Officers of State, and with a frowning countenance hee de∣parted from them, and went into his chamber. They desire to speake with the King a∣gaine.When Dinner was fully ended, vpon a new consultation had betwixt themselues, the Frenchmen became humble Sutors to speake once more with the King; who gently admitted them to his presence: and then (with much submission and humilitie) they craued a stay from further violence, and a Truce for eight daies, that more deliberate aduise might instruct them to resolue what course was fittest for the Towne to take;A Truce granted for eight daies. the King (who loa∣thed all seueritie, if mildnesse might obtaine him victorie) granted their request: and then they departed (being thereby much com∣forted) into the Citie. Daily and hourely throughout those eight daies the Frenchmen resorted vnto the English Armie, and oftentimes consulted of those affaires with the Earles of Warwike and of Salisburie, and with other Commissioners appointed by the King. Much was de∣manded; nothing granted, nor concluded: and yet those eight daies were spent.The eight daies are spent. The Townesmen againe earnestly entreated, That the Truce might be prolonged one day more:One day more of Truce cra∣ued. which was frankly yeelded to them. The same day the Multitude and the baser sort of the peo∣ple within the Citie being informed, that nothing was agreed on, with hideous shouts,The commons doe mutinie in the Towne. and fearefull cryes and exclamations, accu∣sed their Magistrates, Captaines, and Commanders, and threatned
to cut their throats, because (as murderers of their countreymen and brethren) they suffered them to starue like dogges; thereby supporting the stoutnesse of their owne stomacks, and their owne particular estates. The Magistrates and the Captaines fearing the euill euent of this vnruly tumult, entreated all the Citizens to repaire into the Market place. Which when they did; they then required of them what they would haue: With one consent and with one voice they cryed out, That they were resolued to saue their owne liues, by yeelding of the Citie to King Henrie. Vpon this motion, a new Petition was sent vnto the King, cra∣uing the continuance of the Truce for foure daies more: Which request was granted to them: And in the fourth day, being about the nineteenth day of Ianuarie, all matters were so throughly con∣cluded and agreed on, That the strong and faire Citie of Roan,Roan is yeel∣ded to King Henries mer∣cie. the Inhabitants themselues, and all their goods and riches, were yeel∣ded to the Kings mercie. The rendring of this Citie, and of all the aforesaid Townes, and manie more, did much perplex and coole the courage of the Nor∣mans: and the Duke of Burgoine, who (with the discontentment of the Nobilitie) ruled both the King and his Countries,The Regent plotteth to make peace, and to be re∣uenged on his enemies. feared much least these disasters would be layed vnto his charge. Where∣fore, to preuent ensuing dangers, which (as hee suspected) did se∣cretly threaten his Estate; he resolued, by his best meanes and en∣deauours, first to reconcile the two kings, if possibly he could, and then to auenge himselfe vpon the Dolphin, vpon the Constable, and also vpon all such others, as he supposed were most likely to do him the greatest harme. Vpon the Dukes motion, king Henrie with his Nobles and grea∣test Commanders,Many par∣ties, but no∣thing conclu∣ded. and one thousand braue and gallant souldiors, and the French Queene (because the king was weake and vnable) the Ladie Katherine his daughter, and the said Duke, with some o∣ther Noblemen of France, accompanied with the like number, met oftentimes, and consulted much. But whatsoeuer king Henrie did demaund, all was denied, and all their trauailes sorted to no end. Whereat king Henrie was much displeased;King Henrie to angrie. and taking leaue, hee told the Duke, That hee would haue the kings daughter, the La∣die Katherine, for his Wife; with all such Seigniories, Prouin∣ces, and Countries as hee required: Or otherwise, hee would (ere long) driue both his Master and him also, out of that kingdome. The Duke replyed,The Dukes answere. That those words were spoken with great
ease; but that he must take much labour and toyle to make them good. Now, when this practise fayled, the Duke (vpon faire tearmes) reconciled himselfe to the Dolphin.The Dolphin and the Re∣gent outward∣ly reconciled. And this their new amitie and friendship was by publike Notaries reduced into a formall Instrument in writing, confirmed with both their Seales; and was proclaymed with great solemnitie in manie Townes in France: yet was it fained and vnfirme, as shortly after it appeared. But this outward Reconciliation contented not King Henrie; because hee was right well assured, That their discord and their brawlings would haue giuen an easie passage to his attempts in those Countries: yet (like an vndaunted Prince) hee resolued to trie his further Fortunes with them all.King Henrie createth Earles in France. Longeuyle, Tankeruyle, Ewe. And in hope of future ser∣uice to be honorably performed; he created Giscoyne de Foys, Earle of Longeuyle; Sir Iohn Gray, Earle of Tankeruyle; and Sir Iohn Bour∣chyer, Earle of Ewe. And then, in close and in secret manner, hee sent Captaine Bueff, brother to the said Earle of Longeuyle, with fif∣teene hundred approued men of Warre, to the strong Towne of Ponthoyse;Ponthoys ta∣ken. who (before the day appeared) with skaling Ladders resoluedly entred into the Towne, and possessed the Market place without blowes. Which when the Lord Lisleadame, the Captaine of the Towne, perceiued; he fled away, with eight thousand of the inhabitants: who were receiued into Paris. And the next day King Henries brother, the Duke of Clarence,The Duke of Clarence lay before Paris two daies. came vnto the same Towne, with fiue hundred gallant and well prepared men of Warre: and hauing fortified it, and diuided the chiefest of the Spoyles thereof among the braue attempters of this Exploit; he marched vnto Paris, and lay before it two daies. But being vnable with so small a number to assault, or much to trouble it, hee retur∣ned (vnfought with) vnto Ponthoyse. The Parisians are afraid.The winning of this Towne immoderately vexed and appal∣led the Parisians: because (now) the French King had not, in his possession, anie strong Towne betwixt them and the English Armie. All Norman∣die wonne by King Henry, except Mount S. Michael.The Duke of Clarence had also taken the strong Townes of Gy∣sors and of Gallyard: And within few dayes after, all the Townes; Cities, Castles, and Fortresses in Normandie (excepting Mount S. Michael onely, which neuer was besieged nor assaulted) were ei∣ther taken by force, or were voluntarily surrendred to King Henrie: who by GODS assistance, and his true valour, thus reduced the whole Dutchie of Normandie to his Crowne;7 1418. and did enjoy it, as his Inheritance and Right.
The foresaid Iohn,Iohn the proud Duke of Burgoine newly seeketh reconciliation with the Dol∣phin. Duke of Burgoine, surnamed the proud, per∣ceiuing that the Kingdome of France was too too weakely vnder∣propped, by reason that the friendship lately contracted betwixt himselfe and Charles the Dolphin, was but superficiall, and not heartie; determined, in a more submissiue manner, to humble himselfe vnto him, that thereby their loue taking the deeper root, might bring forth riper fruits of Vnitie and of Peace. But when they met, the Dolphin (whose malice was irreconcilable; and whom mistrustfull jealousie did stil persuade, that the Duke would not be faithfull) procured him treacherously to be murdered:The Duke is murdered. as the said Duke himselfe (vpon the like enterview, for friendship sake) had caused Lewis the Duke of Orleance to be slaine,A iust pu∣nishment. in the tenth yeare of the raigne of King Henrie the fourth. This horrible Accident for a while tormented with insupporta∣ble griefe Philip Earle of Carolois,8 1419. Philip Duke of Burgoine. the sonne and heire of the decea∣sed Duke: insomuch, as that (in his dumpish and melancholie pas∣sions, and in the heat of his furie) he once determined to seperate himselfe from the bed and companie of his guiltlesse wife, onely because she was sister to the Dolphin. But (being more grauely ad∣uised by his Counsellors) as his sorrowes waxed faint, so his af∣fection towards her encreased strength; and shee was entertained with his best loue. This new Duke of Burgoine, and Earle of Flanders,He attempts to conclude a Peace. being verie wise and politike, behaued himselfe courteously and friendly to King Henrie; and practised all means by which he might conclude a firme and a setled Peace betwixt the Kings of England and of France. And in those his endeuours he was the more powerfull: First, because his wife was daughter to the said French King.His means to further it. Secondly, because his wiues sister, the Ladie Katharine (who could doe all in all with Isabell the Queene her mother) passionate∣ly  longed to be espoused to King Henrie. Thirdly, for that the said Queene (who by the Dolphin was  depriued of all her Treasure, as formerly you haue heard) could not endure to heare of him, nor could abide his presence. Fourthly, because the Dolphin was more subtile, cunning, craf∣tie, and reuengefull, than politike, wise, and valiant. And lastly, because this late horrible and inhumane Murder  made him odious and infamous, yea to his owne friends. This Peace being againe and againe consulted and debated on, betwixt the Queene, the Duke, and diuers of the greatest Nobili∣tie in France vpon the one part, and the Embassadors of King Hen∣rie vpon the other part; and being brought to some maturitie and
ripenesse) it was resolued, That King Henrie should meete with Charles the sixt the French King, Queene Isabell his wife, and with the Ladie Katherine,An enter∣view. and their Nobilitie and Councell, at Troys in Champaine: which (with all expedition) hee did; being accompa∣nied with his two brothers, Thomas Duke of Clarence, and Humfrey Duke of Glocester, and with the Earles of Warwike, Salisburie, Hun∣tingdon, Longeuyle, Tankeruyle, and Ewe, and diuers other noble and great men. But to preuent the worse, and to foresee dangers be∣fore they happened;King Henrie is guarded by his Armie. A Peace is concluded. The King is married: and proclaymed Regent and Heire appa∣rant of Frāce. he was soundly guarded with fifteene thou∣sand men. And within few dayes after their enterview, a firme Peace was proclaymed: and the King (with honourable solemni∣tie and triumphant sportings) was married to the said Ladie Ka∣therine; and was published to be the onely Regent and Heire Ap∣parant to the Crowne of France, in both those Kingdomes. The chiefest Articles (in briefe) were these. The Articles on which the Peace was concluded. 1. FIrst, That the two Great, High, and Mightie Prin∣ces, King Charles and Queene Isabell, should be enti∣tled the Father and the Mother of King Henrie; and should be by him and by his wife honoured and respected with that reuerence, which such an alliance did require. 2. Item, That the said King Charles, during his life, should hold and enioy (quietly, and in peace} his Royall Digni∣tie, Crowne, and Reuenewes of all France: And that all Writs, Processes, Commissions, and all such like Procee∣dings, should passe vnder his Name and Seale as King: And that the said Queene Isabell (if she suruiued her hus∣band) should hold and enioy, during her life, her Title and Estate; and all such Lordships, Rents, and Reuenewes in France, as of late were holden and enioyed by Queene Blanch, sometimes the wife and Dowager of King Philip, great grandfather to King Charles. 3. Item, That Queene Katherine should haue in England a
Dower of twentie thousand markes by the yeare; vnto which she should be enabled and assured with all conueni∣ent speede. 4. Item, That during the life of King Charles, King Hen∣rie should not (in anie wise) be styled with the name and dignitie of the king of France; and that the French king, whilest hee liued, should write him and entitle him in French thus: Nostre trechier filz Henry, Roy Den∣gleterre, Heretere de France. And in Latine thus: praeclarissimus filius noster Henricus, Rex Angliae, & Haeres Franciae. 5. Item, That after the death of King Charles, the Crowne and kingdome of France should wholly and entirely come, he, and remaine, to king Henrie and to his Heires for euer▪ 6. Item, That in regard that king Charles (by reason of his manifold infirmities, occasioned by much sicknesse) was made vnapt and vnable to administer, by his owne di∣rections, the affaires and businesses of his kingdome, king Henrie should be Regent, and should rule and go∣uerne France as he pleased, for the kings honour, and for the profit and commoditie of that Region and Common-weale. 7. Item, That the Court of Parliament of France should be kept and bee ordered in like sort, and should bee suppor∣ted with the same Priuiledges, Customes, Estate, and Power, as in all former times had beene vsed and accu∣stomed. 8. Item, that king Henrie should carefully and faithfully doe his best endeuour to assist as well the Peeres as the peo∣ple, in the attayning and getting of all such things, as in right, and by the Lawes and Customes of that kingdome did belong vnto them: and should protect and defend all the Rights, Preheminencies, Lawes, and Possessions of the Clergie of the kingdome of France.
9. Item, That King Henrie should support and preserue all the subiects of France against all forraine Enemies; sup∣presse and beat downe all intestine and in-bred Quarrels, Debates, Insurrections, and Ciuill Warres; encrease the prosperitie and peace of France, and administer Iustice, without partialitie, vnto all sorts and degrees of people whatsoeuer. 10. Item, That King Henrie should place into the Roomes and Offices of Iustice, and of Receits, and of Gouern∣ment, such persons as shall be wise, discreet, faithfull, and sufficient to minister and to manage those things, which should be committed to their charge. 11. Item, That King Henrie should speedily endeuour, with his best helpes, to reduce the Dolphin and the Earle of Arminake, late Constable of France, to the obedience of King Charles; and all such others, as did with them re∣belliously maintaine ciuill Dissentions in the Common-weale. 12. Jtem, That King Henrie should cause all the Peeres, Nobles, Gentrie, Clergie, Townes, Cities, and Burgesses of France to take a corporall Oath for their obedience to King Charles during his life: And after his death, to King Henrie, and to his heires: And to admit none o∣ther Regent, or King; nor to conspire any thing against his or their Persons or Estates: but should reueale all mis∣chiefes which should be contriued and practised for his or their hurt or destruction. 13. Item, That such Possessions as King Henrie should winne from anie person disobedient to King Charles, (excepting onely in Normandie) should bee employed and conuerted vnto the onely vse and benefite of the French King. But if the offendours doe voluntarily and chearefully take the aforesaid oath, then the said Possessions to bee frankely and freely restored vnto them.
14. Item, That after the death of King Charles, the Duchie of Normandie, and all others conquered by King Henry, should be obedient and bow vnder the commaund of the Scepter and Crowne of France. 15. Item, That King Henrie should not burden the subiects of France with any Taxes or Jmpositions, but in cases of great and vrgent necessitie: and then onely the same to be assessed and leuied according to the custome and manner of France, and not otherwise. 16. Item, That after the death of King Charles, the two Kingdomes of France and of England should alwaies so∣ueraignely be ruled and commanded by one Man, and not by two Kings: and that neither of those kingdomes should be subiect the one to the other, but each of them should still retaine, vse, and enioy their particular Customes, Liber∣ties, Priuiledges, Preheminences, Immunities, and Lawes. 17. Item, That all care should bee taken, and all prouision made, that the subiects of each kingdome, as brethren and friends, should liue in mutuall loue, amitie, and peace; and each of them to procure, by their best meanes, the welfare and prosperitie of the other. 18. Item, That neither the said French king, nor king Henrie, should conclude any Peace, nor make any truce, with the falsely entitled Dolphin, except they both, and the said Philip Duke of Burgoine, did all three consent and agree in one so to doe. 19. Item, that none should be appointed to attend the Person of king Charles but Frenchmen, and such as himselfe or his owne Councell should make choise of: And that from time to time he should be resident and dwell at his pleasure in the most eminent places of his kingdome. 20. And lastly, that both the said kings vnder their Letters Patents, and all their Nobilitie, Clergie, Gentrie, Cities, and Comminalties, by Instruments in writing vnder their
hands and seales, should ratifie and confirme the said Ar∣ticles and Agreements: And that they all should solemnly sweare and vow to maintaine them in all points, to the vt∣termost of their abilitie and power. The Articles are proclay∣med in En∣gland and in France.These Articles and these Agreements being thus concluded, were ordered accordingly; and then, with all conuenient expedi∣tion, were proclaymed both in England and in France. The two Kings, and all their Nobles, and other subjects of account, were solemnely sworne to obserue and to maintaine them. And then they both,They are ra∣tified by so∣lemne Oaths. being accompanied with Iames the young, but valiant King of Scots, the Duke of Burgoine, the Prince of Orange, one and twentie Earles, fortie and fiue Barons, and a multitude of Knights, Gentlemen, and braue souldiors of France, of England, and of Ire∣land, wasted such Countries, and besieged and tooke such strong and well defenced Townes and Castles within the Duchie of Bur∣goine,The King warreth in Burgoine. as sided and sorted with the Dolphin: As first of all, the Towne of Seyne, after it had beene besieged fifteene dayes: and the Castle there, after it had held out six weekes: then Molyn, vp∣on the Riuer of Seyne; which they tooke, after they had enuiro∣ned it full seuen moneths: and in it were apprehended the Lord Barbason,The murde∣rers of Iohn Duke of Bur∣goine are exe∣cuted. the chiefe Commaunder there, and diuers others, who were agents and actors in the murdering of Iohn the Proud Duke of Burgoine: all which were by the French King sent from thence vnto Paris, vnder the guardship of Thomas Duke of Clarence; who was newly made chiefe Captaine of that Citie by King Charles.The Duke of Clarence is made Cap∣taine of Paris And within few dayes after, the said offendors were legally tryed, conuicted, sentenced, and put to death for the said Murder. Then the two Kings, with their two Queenes, and their Nobili∣tie and Companies, went vnto Paris;King Henrie is proclaymed Regent and Heire appa∣rant to the Crowne of France. where King Henrie was pro∣claymed Regent and Heire Apparant to the Crowne of France: and so was he, not long after, in London. In Paris the two Kings kept their Christmas. The French King (being verie sickly and weake) maintained small Hospitalitie. But King Henrie with such heroicall Magnificence, rich Plentie, and liberall Entertainment, so feasted the Nobles, Gentrie, and Citi∣zens of both the said Kingdomes, and was so open-handed to all sorts and degrees of people,King Henrie winneth the loue of the Frenchmen. that his State and Majestie was ad∣mired: and his Princely courtesie fast bound vnto him the hearts of the Frenchmen, to yeeld vnto him all manner of obedience and of seruice.
Whilest the two Kings thus remained in Paris,The Dolphin and the other murderers are banished. a great Assem∣bly (by their Authoritie) was conuocated thither: In which they both sate as Iudges; and before them, the Duchesse of Burgoine, late Wife to her slaine Husband, by her Aduocate appealed Charles the late Dolphin, and seuen others, as murderers of her Lord. But no defence was made for them. And not long af∣ter, a Court of Parliament was kept there: In which, a solemne Proces was awarded against the Dolphin, and the rest of the Accused, to appeare at the Marble Table in Paris at an appoin∣ted day. But they all fayled to obserue that commaund: And thereupon they were (by the said Court) banished the Realme, and all the Territories of France; and were also depriued of all Honors, Names, Titles, Dignities, Preheminences, and Possessions whatsoeuer. When the late Dolphin had intelligence thereof, hee went in∣to Languedock, and comforted himselfe with his old friend the Earle of Arminack,The Dolphin is aided by his old friend the Earle of Arminake. sometimes Constable of France: who not on∣ly assisted him (in his great distresse) with Money, Munition, and with Men; but also (in his owne person) did him all reuerence, and tooke his part against all such as professed themselues to bee his Enemies. These things being thus accomplished; the two Kings, their Queenes, and Nobles, sorrowfully departed each from other: And King Henrie,King Henrie th the state of Fr with his Queene, went vnto Roan; where hee receiued Homage of all his Nobles in the Duchie of Normandie: And (among others) of the Earle of Stafford; to whome hee had giuen the Earledome of Perch:The Duke of Clarence is made Lieute∣nant Generall of France and  Normandie. The King & the Queene came into England. The Queene  crowned. And of Arthur of Britaine; vpon whom hee had bestowed the Coun∣trey of Iurye. Hee also made his brother Thomas, Duke of Clarence, Lieu∣tenant Generall both of France and of Normandie: and of that Duchie, hee made the Earle of Salisburie Deputie to the said Duke: And then hee, with Queene Katherine his wife, depar∣ted vnto Amiens▪ and from thence to Callis, and so came into England: Where they were receiued and entertained with as much triumphant and true joy as could be by subiects expres∣sed towards their Prince. And in Februarie following, the Queene was crowned at Westminster,9 1420. The Duke of Clarence is betrayed by his friend, and is slaine. with great solemnitie and much honour. The noble and the valiant Duke of Clarence being aduertised, That the Duke of Alanson (entitling himselfe the Lieutenant Generall of the Dolphin) with diuers other Noblemen, had leuied
an Armie; assembled the greatest part of his garrisons in Norman∣die, and marched strongly into the Prouince of Angeou, and pitched not farre off from the Citie of Angiers, and spoyled and burnt the Countrey round about it. To performe this Enterprise with honour and with safetie; the Duke of Clarence had strengthened himselfe with sufficient Forces and Prouisions, if they had beene well and wisely orde∣red. But hauing in his Armie a false and a trayterous Lombard, named Andrew Forgusa,Andrew For∣gusa. whome hee too too much loued and tru∣sted; hee sent the said Lombard to discouer the preparations and the power with which hee was resolued to encounter: Who brought him word, That their number was but small, their pro∣uisions defectiue, and their order, orderlesse; and that the Duke of Alanson was altogether vnable and too too weake to contend with him. The Duke of Clarence firmely and strongly relying vpon the faith and the trust which hee reposed in this Traytor; and being desirous with a small number to winne the honour of that day: marched forward with his horsemen onely, leauing behinde him his lustie and his strong Archers. But when hee was entred within the secret ambushments, which purposely were placed to distresse him; and saw, that his enemies were in number foure for one, and were well prouided, well armed, and arranged in good order of battaile,The battaile of Blangy. and that no militarie discipline or art was wanting; and that himselfe was villanously abused and betrayed by the Lom∣bard whome hee trusted: hee could not flye, nor make any safe retreat; but was enforced to aduenture his fortunes, with too much inequalitie on his part. So the fight began: And though it was long maintained by the Englishmen, with as much constancie and resolute valour as any men liuing could performe: yet they being euerie minute oppressed with new supplyes and multitudes, which still came rushing in vpon them, tyring, oppressing, spoy∣ling, and hauocking of them wastfully on euerie side; they were at length ouer-mastred and ouerthrowne. The English∣men slain and taken priso∣ners.In this Battaile there were slaine on the French part more than twelue hundred of their choysest men: and of the English there were slaine the braue Duke of Clarence, the Earle of Tankeruyle, Sir Gilbert Vmfreuyle, Earle of Kent; a prudent man and a wor∣thie Commander; the Lord Rosse, and almost two thousand o∣thers: And there were taken prisoners, the Earles of Somer∣set, Suffolke, and Perch; the Lord Fitz-water, and manie o∣thers.
Sir Thomas Beauford, surnamed the bastard of Clarence (who had the direction of the Archers which were left behinde) be∣ing informed (but all too late) that the Duke of Clarence was betrayed; and that the numbers of the Frenchmen, and their Power, did farre exceede the Lombards report; and that the En∣glish were distressed: with incredible speede marched forth to succour them with his best helpes. But the Frenchmen perceiuing his approach, and contenting themselues with the honour of the day, and with their prisoners, as they had taken; with posting haste and speede fled and ranne away as fast as they were able;Cowardly Frenchmen▪ leauing the new Forces of the Englishmen to performe sad Exe∣quies for their slaine friends: the bodies of whome they buri∣ed. But the Duke of Clarence was carried into England, and ho∣nourably interred at Canterburie, by his father King Henrie the fourth. The heauie newes of this vnexpected ouerthrow,The Earle of Mortaigne succeedeth the Duke of Clarence. and especi∣ally the death of the Duke of Clarence (occasioned by the afore∣said Treacherie and Treason) much grieued the King his bro∣ther: Who purposing to reuenge himselfe, if hee might, vpon the Duke of Alanson, and the late Dolphin, and his adherents; sent into Normandie the Earle of Mortaigne, brother to the late taken Earle of Somerset, and gaue to him the same Authoritie and Place which the Duke of Clarence formerly had. He also as∣sembled his High Court of Parliament: In which hee substanti∣ally discouered in what sort the Estate of both his Kingdomes stood: and how conuenient; nay, how necessarie and how need∣full it was, that the Dolphin and his adherents should speedily be pursued. Hee likewise told them, That hee wanted neyther Men, Munition, nor Courage; but that Money was too scarce with him to vndertake that businesse. Whereupon the Tempo∣raltie, with all chearefulnesse and alacritie, gaue vnto him one Fif∣teene, and the Clergie gaue him two. And because much time would be spent before it could be leuied; therefore the Kings vn∣cle, the Bishop of Winchester, disbursed vnto him in readie coyne twentie thousand pounds; which hee receiued againe out of the said Fifteenes. The King hauing leuied a gallant Armie,Iohn Duke of Bedford car∣rieth an army into France. which consisted of foure thousand men at Armes, and of foure and twentie thou∣sand Archers; sent, and with all speede, prosperously landed them at his owne Towne of Callis, vnder the commaund of his worthie brother, Iohn Duke of Bedford: whome, himselfe (in his owne person) followed.The King followeth. And vnderstanding, that the Dolphin
with seuen thousand men, had besieged and much distressed the Citie of Chartieres, which was valiantly defended by the Bastard of Thyan; hee marched swiftly vnto Paris, and from thence to∣ward his Enemies: and in his journey he was met by his heartie and true friend, Philip Duke of Burgoine,He meeteth his friend Philip Duke of Burgoine. and Earle of Flanders; who brought vnto him foure thousand men, and diligently at∣tended him in that Negotiation and Seruice. The Dolphin raysed his siege.The King was now informed, That the Dolphin (distrusting his owne strength) had raysed his Siege, and was retyred vnto Tours into Towrayne: Wherefore (to represse the rage and vio∣lence of Sir Iaques Harcourt, who wasted the Countrey of Picar∣die) hee sent the Duke of Burgoine thither: And with other Forces hee caused the young and couragious Iames,Iames the King of Scots winneth Di∣rex. the King of the Scots, to lay siege vnto the Towne of Direx: which he per∣formed accordingly; and dayly with such violence and valour so assaulted it for the space of sixe weekes, that with mayne strength hee compelled it to be yeelded into his hands, to King Henries vse. The Dolphin flyeth from place to place.And whilest this Siege did thus continue, the King himselfe passed ouer the Riuer of Loyer, intending to haue encountred with the Dolphin. But hee (distrusting his owne strength) fled from Tours vnto Burgys in Berrye; and there expected a change of his frowning fortunes. The King perceiuing his flight from place to place to bee so quicke and hastie; hee thought it not conuenient, to tyre out his Armie to pursue him: Wherefore, hee returned o∣uer the Riuer of Loyre; and tooke, eyther by force, or by voluntarie yeelding, manie Townes and Castles, vnto his owne vse. P Henry is borne.About the same time, Queene Katherine was deliuered of a Sonne at Windsour, who was named Henrie: Of whose birth, as soone as the King had notice, he said vnto the Lord Fitz-Hugh his Chamberlaine:The Kings words. I HENRIE, borne at Monmouth, shall remaine but a short time, and gaine much; but HENRIE, borne at Windsour, shall raigne long, and lose all. The King, who (for manie weekes together) had besieged the well-defended Towne of Meux in Bry; enforced it to bee yeelded into his hands: and thereupon all the Townes and For∣tresses in the Isle of France, in Lanuoys, in Bry, and in Champaigne, did the like.The Dolphin entreth into the Duke of Burgoines countrey. When the Dolphin vnderstood, that the King, with his Ar∣mie, was departed farre away from him; hee raysed another Ar∣mie,
and entred into the Duke of Burgoines Countries, wasting and consuming it with Sword and with Fire: and straitly besieged the Citie of Cosney;Cosney is be∣sieged. which by composition was to be yeelded to him, if it were not rescued within tenne daies. Of this Agreement no∣tice was sent by the Duke of Burgoine to the King, with a request, That he would send a power conuenient for the remoue of the said Siege.The King goeth to re∣lieue Cosney. Whereupon the King in his owne person being ac∣companied with a gallant companie, marched towards that Citie to set it free. But as he trauelled on the way, he fell so sicke, that he was vnable to trauaile anie further.The King falleth sick. So the charge of that expe∣dition was committed to his brother Iohn Duke of Bedford: whose passage forth was noysed to the Dolphin to be with such an high courage and souldior-like resolution, that the Dolphin fearing to grapple with him, raysed his siege,The Dolphin sayeth. and most dishonourably rety∣red himselfe and his Armie into Berry. And thus was that Citie rescued and deliuered by the English. The King, by reason of his encreasing sicknesse, waxing more weake and feeble, was carried vnto Boys in Vyncennes; where, with∣in few dayes, he was summoned by Death to depart into another world. But before he died,The Kings Speech before he died. he called vnto him his two brothers, Iohn Duke of Bedford, and Humfrey Duke of Glocester: the former, hee made Lieutenant Generall of Normandie, and Regent of the king∣dome of France; and the other, he made Protector of England, and of his sonnes owne person. Hee embraced his approaching end comfortably; in regard, that though his time had been but short, yet it was beautified with matchlesse fame and honour, which lon∣ger continuance (being the professed enemie of stabilitie) might haue changed. He exhorted them and his Nobles, who then were present, to maintaine true and heartie loue and friendship with his noble and faithfull friend Philip Duke of Burgoine, and neuer to be at variance with him. Hee persuaded them to nourish and to che∣rish an vnseparable vnitie and faithfull friendship among them∣selues: to be faithfull and louing to his young infant sonne, and their succeeding king Henrie; and by all meanes to bee helpefull, ayding, and assisting to his most sad, dolorous, and mournefull Queene: to preserue and to maintaine by Wisdome, Policie, and Armes, those things which he by valour and GODS furtherance had honourably wonne and gotten: Neuer to conclude any peace or amitie with the late Dolphin and Duke of Alanson, vntill they were enforced to submit themselues to his sonnes grace and mer∣cie. Finally, he thanked Almightie GOD, who had made him Reli∣gious,
Vertuous, Honest, and Victorious:The King died. and died the last day of August, in the yeare of our LORD GOD 1422. in the eight and thirtieth yeare of his Age; when hee had raigned but nine yeares, fiue moneths, and foure and twentie dayes: And his bodie being conueyed into England, was buried among his noble Progenitors at Westminster, with extraordinarie solemnitie and great pompe.
THE HISTORIE OF KING HENRIE THE SIXT. KIng Henrie the fifth died when his sonne Henrie was but nine months old:1422. 1 A yong king, but well go∣uerned. Yet was hee so fortunate in his beginning, that his Youth and Gouernment were worthily sup∣ported by his three vncles; Humfrey Duke of Glocester, who (when the King was crowned) was made Pro∣tector both of his Person and also of his Realme: Iohn Duke of Bed∣ford, who was established Regent of France: and Thomas Duke of Exeter, who graced all his actions with much wisdome and great valour. Needfull it was, that the new Protector and the Regent should make the vtmost tryall of their sufficiencies to the World. For whereas, in the end of the Kings fathers dayes,France is vn∣willing to re∣main English. the Nobilitie of France incorporated themselues to the English Nation, and hearti∣ly enuied the Dolphin: King Charles about this time died: and the vnconstant Frenchmen began to play an Irish game. For, on a suddaine, manie of those dissembling and fained friends renoun∣ced their duties and obedience to King Henrie, and (vtterly neg∣lecting the performance of Oathes of Allegeance made vnto him) they reuolted, and not onely adhered to Charles their new King, but by all sinister practises and meanes they endeuoured to extirpe the English Nation among them, if they might.
The Regents Policies.The Protector at home (by the aduise and counsell of the Sta∣tists) plotted manie Proiects for the retayning of the Kings in∣heritance in Normandie and in France: and for that purpose he furnished the Regent with store of Souldiours, Siluer, and of Gold. The Regent also leuied a strong Armie in Normandie among his choysest and chiefest friends: whome (by substantiall arguments and sound reasons) hee persuaded to perseuere and to continue loyall to his Master; and not to be wearied with anie labour, or daunted with anie danger, because a peacefull and a blessed con∣clusion should make them rich and fortunate, and winne to them the loue and fauour of their young King, as hee encreased in wise∣dome and in yeares. And on the other side, Charles (the new King) spared not anie paines; but did the like: insomuch, that nothing but tyrannizing Warre, and the vnchristian effusion of much bloud, was thought vpon. And to begin those Troubles, the French King sent the Lord Grandeuyle,Pont-Me∣lance taken. with a selected companie, to Pont-Melance, which standeth on the Riuer of Seyne; which hee surprized, and slew the most part of them, whom he found there, before anie notice of his approach gaue anie warning to the English garrison to de∣fend it. The Earle of Salisburie a famous man.Thomas Montacute, the Earle of Salisburie, for his admired cou∣rage and expert managing of martiall actions, was (at that time) more fitly to be compared to a choise Roman, than to anie other who liued in his dayes. To this Earle, the Regent commended the regayning of that Towne: in the siege whereof, hee spent three moneths;Pont-Me∣lance regai∣ned. but (at length) it was yeelded into his hands: and the Lord Grandeuyle (by a solemne Oath) promised his faith∣full and perpetuall seruice to King Henrie; but reuolted as soone as he was set at large. Sens is taken.From thence, the said Earle marched into Champaigne, besieged and tooke the Towne of Sens, and deuoured the surprized souldi∣ors with the Sword. The Parisians craue prote∣ction.The vnconstant Parisians (more coueting to make an outward shew of their fidelitie to the English, than to be true indeede) sent diuers of their greatest and grauest Citizens into England, to craue protection and defence against King Charles: Who were recei∣ued, not onely with a chearefull welcome, heartie thankes, and bountifull entertainement; but also were promised the fruiti∣on of much happinesse, if they persisted loyall vnto King Henrie.
About that time, the Regent meeting at Amiens with the Dukes of Burgoine and of Britaine,1423. 2 A League renewed. The Regent marrieth. renewed the League formerly concluded betweene them: And to make it the more firme and sure, hee married the Ladie Anne of Burgoine, sister vnto the Duke. The triumphant Shewes and Pastimes which were prepared to augment the honour of this Match,The Parisians are vnfaith∣full, and con∣spire with the French king. persuaded the Parisians in his absence, that the Regent attended nothing but Iolitie and Mirth: Which conceit of theirs made them (trecherously) to in∣uite their longed for King Charles to come vnto them, and to re∣ceiue that Citie into his hands. This newes brought comfort to his soule:The trecherie discouered. So that hee appoin∣ted the day, when his desire should bee effected in that businesse. But, as it euer falleth out, where many are of counsell, nothing can be secret: so, some of those Conspirators acquainted the Regent with euerie particular of this Plot: Who (with his Armie) posted vnto Paris, with greater expedition than may well be credited, and entred into the Citie gates before anie notice was giuen of his re∣paire thither. For this Conspiracie; manie of the chiefest confe∣derates were executed publikely with sundrie kinds of death. And from thenceforth he mastred the Parisians with English Garrisons,The Regent curbeth the Parisians. and replenished their Castle, Towers, Fortresses, and Places of Defence and Strength, with such English Souldiors, as solaced themselues in being froward Commanders and imperious Rulers of the inhabitants of that Citie. And likewise (by strong Assaults, and enforced Composi∣tions) hee wonne the two Castles of Pacy and Coursay,Pacy and Coursay wonne by the English. which were not farre from it; both which hee strengthened in like manner. Whilest these things were thus acted, the Lord William Steward, Constable of Scotland; the Earle of Ventadore,The siege of Crauant is raysed. and ma∣nie others, with a strong Armie, besieged the strong Towne of Crauant, within the Territories of Burgoigne. But the Earle of Salisburie, with an Armie of fifteene thousand men, rushed fierce∣ly vpon the besiegers; and with the losse of one and twentie hundred of his companies, and with the slaughter of eight thou∣sand of his enemies, hee raysed the Siege, and gayned libertie to the Towne. The Earle, vpon his returne to Paris, was substituted vice-Regent of the Countries of France, Bry, & Champaigne: and Sir Iohn Fastolfe (an approued Knight in Arms) was appointed to be Deputie in the Duchie of Normandie. Which worthie Captaines performed such
noble deedes of Chiualrie, and obtayned such vnexpected victo∣ries, as made them famous, their Followers rich, and their Coun∣trey renowned in all Kingdomes. In the meane time, whilest the Protector prouidently endeuo∣ring to preuent the encreasing strength of the Kings enemies in France, and to secure the tranquilitie and peace of this Common-weale at home;The King of Scots ranso∣med. for a small ransome hee enlarged Iames the young and martiall King of Scots; who for manie yeares had beene a pri∣soner: And receiuing of him, in the Kings behalfe, his homage and his fealtie for Scotland;He doth ho∣mage for Scotland. hee gaue to him in marriage (by the con∣sent of all the English Nobilitie) the Ladie Iane, daughter to the de∣ceased Earle of Somerset, and cousin german to the King. He is an ex∣cellent Prince, but vnfaith∣full and vn∣thankefull.This gallant Prince, by meanes of his excellent Learning and Education in feats of Armes, vnder the last King Henrie, was better enabled to rule a Kingdome than any of his progenitors did be∣fore him. In so much, that making the best vse of those heroicall vertues with which he was adorned, he reduced that Realme into extraordinarie Ciuilitie; made his souldiors expert in warlike dis∣cipline; and his Nation more learned than euer they had been be∣fore his dayes. Yet was he altogether vnfaithfull and vnthankfull to England, his nearest and his dearest friend. Prouision & an Armie sent into France.The Protector (who was wise and industrious) neuer suffered the Regent in France to complaine of any want. For, as in former times, so now he sent vnto him an Armie of tenne thousand men, with much Treasure. The Regent and his assistants daily wonne Townes, Cities, Castles, and Forts, with prouident policie and true valour. But the French King, by grosse Flatterie, cunning Deuises, secret Treacherie,Valour was encountred by trecherie. and couert Dealings (among others) possessed himselfe of the strong Townes of Crotoy, and some others, which were suddainely regayned: for true Manhood was encountred with Subtletie, and approued Valour with Treacherie and Craft. The Duke of Britaine and his brother doe reuolt.The Duke of Britaine fearing least the Regent (growing strong) would at length be Lord of his Countrey, basely and perfidiously reuolted to the French King. And so did his brother Arthur, Earle of Richmond; who by King Henrie the fifth was created Earle of Yurye in Normandie,Yury in Nor∣mandie besie∣ged. and made Gouernor of that Towne. Where∣upon the Regent besieged it; and with many secret Mynes, violent Batteries, and fierce Assaults, made it so subject to apparant dan∣gers that the besieged concluded to yeeld it vp, if at an appointed day they were not relieued by the French King.The Regents resolution. For the Regent being throughly resolued to purchase his peace with a short and with a sharpe warre, determined to abide battel, what force soeuer
should be sent to relieue the miseries of that distressed Towne. And to further his purpose in that behalfe, hee freely permitted messengers to be sent vnto his enemies, to informe them of the conclusion which he had made. Within few dayes after, the Duke of Alanson, with sixteene thousand Frenchmen, approched neare to the English Campe;A cowardly French Ar∣mie. who did put themselues into a readinesse to receiue him. But (accor∣ding to the French fashion) he made manie bragging shewes to per∣forme much: but (on a suddain) he cowardly quited the place,Vernoyle be∣sieged and wonne by a false report. not giuing any one blow; and pitched with his whole strength before the Towne of Vernoyle in the prouince of Perch: where he falsely informed the inhabitants, That at Yurye hee had fought with the Regent, defeated his Armie, slaine thousands,Policie. taken many priso∣ners, freed that Towne, and had compelled him (by swift riding) to prouide for the safetie of his owne life. This false report soone made the Duke owner of that Towne,Yury wonne. and his Retreat made the Regent Lord of Yurye: and as soone as sound prouisions were made to strengthen it, the Regent with his whole Armie marched vnto Vernoyle; where (meeting with the French cowards, and with diuers Scots who did assist them) hee compelled them to engage their fortunes by a bloudie battaile in a pitched field. The fight was cruelly maintained for the space of three houres. But in the end, the Englishmen,The battaile of Vernoyle. with the losse of one and twentie hundred of their common souldiors, wonne the ho∣nour of that day, and slew of their enemies fiue Earles, two Vi∣counts, one and twentie Barons, and more than seuen thousand o∣ther men; besides two thousand and seuen hundred Scots, who were sent thither by their King. But the Duke of Alanson him∣selfe, with many Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen of Name,The French∣men are ouer∣throwne. were taken prisoners. And the Towne of Vernoyle (without Assault or Batterie) was surrendred into the Regents hands:Vernoyle is regayned. who (hauing fortified it with a strong Garrison, commanded by their worthie Captaine Sir Philip Hall) marched to the Citie of Roan; where hee was receiued with many triumphant Shewes. And from thence he came to Paris; where his kinde entertainment proclaymed his welcome and his honour. This ouerthrow so weakened the French King, that none other Prouinces or Territories, but onely Burbon, Aluerne, Berry,The English doe preuaile. Poy∣tou, Towrayne, part of Angeou and Languedoc, could giue vnto his Royall Person anie warrant of safetie and assurance. Yet (least he should want the true honors belonging to a King) in the Citie of Poytiers hee established his High Court of Parliament, and his
Chancerie;The French King labou∣reth his owne establishment. with the publike vse of his broad Scale: and of all o∣ther things needfull and requisite for the due administration of his Lawes, and the distribution of Iustice. The Earle of Salisburie winneth many Townes.The Regent taking the aduantage of his late victorie, sent into the Countrey of Mayne an Armie of tenne thousand men: which (with great resolution) were brauely conducted by the valorous and prudent Earle of Salisburie: who quickly wonne the strong Citie of Mauns, and the Townes of Saint Susan, le Fort Saint Bar∣nard, and manie others. And from thence he went into Angeou: where (with the Sword) hee performed such and so manie won∣ders,His name is feared. that the verie Name of Salisburie became terrible in all France. 1425. 4The perfidious Earle of Richmond (whome King Charles had newly made High Constable of France) intending to make him∣selfe famous in the minoritie of his Gouernment, raised an Armie of fortie thousand men; which consisted of Britons, French, and Scots:The Siege of Saint Iames. with which he besieged the strong Towne of Saint Iames in Beuyon; which was defended only by six hundred Englishmen: who hauing resolutely endured many sharpe assaults and hard bicke∣rings,A miraculous ouerthrow. vpon a suddaine issued boldly out of the Towne, and pro∣claymed their approach with an hideous shout of Saint George, Sa∣lisburie; Saint George, Salisburie; and fell vpon the multitude of their enemies like a storme. This terrible crie, and the inconsolable feare and terror, which made them thinke that the Earle of Salisburie, with his Armie, had secretly conueyed himselfe into the Towne for their rescue; so amazed and daunted the faint-hearted multi∣tude, that (casting away their Armour, abandoning all Order, and entertaining nothing but Despaire) they leapt headlong into the Riuer: In which, many of them were drowned; more were slaine: some were taken prisoners: and the rest, who ranne away, left vnto this little handfull all their Tents, foureteene Peeces of Ordnance, fortie barrels of Powder, three hundred Pypes of Wine, two hun∣dred Pypes of Bisket and of Flower, and two hundred Peeces of Raisins and Figges, fiue hundred Barrels of Herrings, much Ar∣mour, and manie other things. A poore re∣uenge.The New Constable intending to redeeme his honour with some better fortune, recollected and furnished his Armie: with which hee marched into the Countrey of Angeou; where (with∣out resistance) hee burnt a few of the smallest, poorest, and most vnworthie Villages of that Prouince. This childish Seruice puft him vp with much pride, and made him to imagine, that he was now a warlike man, though his owne
Nation, and all others, did publikely mocke and scoffe at his grosse follie. Whilest thus the Regent and his Captaines daily triumphed in France; a dangerous and an vnkind jarre brake forth at home,Variance be∣tweene the Protector and his vncle the Bishop of Winchester. be∣twixt the Protector and his vncle Henrie, Bishop of Winchester, and Lord Chancelor of England: which threatened the breach of the Peace and Tranquilitie of this Kingdome and Commonweale. For the appeasing whereof, the Regent hauing made the Earle of Warwike his Lieutenant Generall, and hauing set his affaires and businesse in good order; came into England: Where (in a Court of Parliament) the differences betwixt them were discouered, arbi∣trated, and the quarrell ended, to the great comfort and content∣ment of their friends. In honour whereof,It is appeased. the King kept a so∣lemne Feast; in which, the Regent dubbed the King a Knight.The King is dubbed Knight. The King also inuested manie of his Great subjects with the same Dignitie; and created his cousin Richard, sonne to Richard late Earle of Cambridge, Duke of Yorke; and restored Iohn Mowbray (who was Earle Marshall) to his fathers Duchie of Norfolke.Creation of Lords. And in this meane time, the Earle of Warwike approued himselfe to be a worthie Commander ouer his great charge, and conquered manie things in Mayne; and prepared to fight a set battaile, where∣unto he was challenged by the French. But their threatnings were but brags, and their courage fell downe into their heeles: For,A French bragge. a little before the appointed time, they basely and cowardly ranne away. When all things were thus quieted at home; the noble Regent (being accompanied with his vncle the Bishop of Winchester retur∣ned into France: And (vpon the request of his brother in law,1426. 5 The Duke of Alanson is ransomed. the Duke of Burgoine) hee set at libertie the Duke of Alanson for the ransome of two hundred thousand crownes: The most part of which money he would haue giuen backe againe,A worthie Duke. if the said Duke would haue sworne his homage to King Henrie: which he refused to doe; and did affirme, That the whole world should not alie∣nate his faith from King Charles, nor his dutie from his owne coun∣trey. At this time, the rich and proud Bishop of Winchester (being at Callice) according to his ambitious desires,Winchester is made a Car∣dinall. He heapeth great trea∣sure together. was inuested with the Hat, Habite, and Dignitie of a Cardinall; and receiued from the Pope a Bull: which gaue him meanes (in a short time) to heape to∣gether a great part of the Treasure of this Land: so that all men wondered at him for his Wealth, but no man had cause to com∣mend him for his Learning, or to respect him for his Vertue.
After the Regents returne into France, the Lord Rustian, Mar∣shall of Britaine (hauing strongly fortified Pontorson) pitched with his Armie before the Towne of Auranches, in the Prouince of Constantine,A notable victorie. within the Duchie of Normandie; purposing to haue besieged it. But such was the resolute valour of the English Garri∣son there, that (like vnto Lyons greedie of their prey) they issued suddainely out of the Towne, and set vpon the Marshall so suc∣cessefully, that he was taken prisoner; and the greater part of his followers, as they fled, were slaine. Pontorson be∣sieged by the English.This victorie gaue fresh hopes of Good-speeding elsewhere: So that the Earle of Warwike and the Lord Scales being sent with seuen thousand men to Pontorson, besieged it a long time: where (being much enfeebled through manie wants) the Lord Scales (for the reliefe of their necessities) taking with him three thousand of their companies, grieuously foraged the Countries of his enemies. But in his returne with plentie of Prouisions, hee was encountred by sundrie French Lords,The Lord Scales de∣feateth the Frenchmen. and six thousand other fighting men: a∣gainst whome, so luckily he preuayled, that most of those Nobles, and a thousand more, were taken prisoners, many hundreds were slaine, and the rest, by a quicke flight, procured their owne safetie. Ramfort ta∣ken.The Garrison also at Saint Susan made such a suddaine roade into Angeou, that they surprized the Castle of Ramfort, before any newes gaue notice of their comming. But they no sooner posses∣sed it, but that they were besieged by twentie thousand men; who were appointed to rayse the siege at Pontorson. To these the Ca∣stle yeelded vpon composition:Ramfort re∣gained. so that the Frenchmen (beeing much elated with this poore conquest) imagined, that they were braue men, and that they had done seruice sufficient for that time. And this conceit made them altogether carelesse to relieue the di∣stressed estate of Pontorson: Whereupon it was yeelded to the Earle of Warwike;Pontorson w nne by the English. who fortified it with good Prouisions, and with a strong Garrison; and came (with great honour) to the Regent. Mouns is betrayed.Whilest things were thus in handling, some of the Clergie, and some of the Magistrates of the Citie of Mouns (knowing, that the Duke of Britaine was reuolted, and that his brother, the Earle of Richmond, now wholly adhered to the French King) offered, by treacherie, to yeeld it to King Charles, if a conuenient and an able Force might be sent thither to worke that feat. This Citie was eagerly longed for on the French part. Wherefore, that it might be gotten, the Lords Dalabreth and Fayet, Marshals of France, with
sundrie moe Barons, Captaines, Gentlemen, and old souldiors, to the number of fiue hundred, came (in the depth of the night) to the Castle walls;Crueltie. and then the conspirators within (without anie compassion, or manlike pitie) massacred all such English Guarders as then maintained the first Watch: and setting wide open all the Gates, the Surprizors (armed with barbarous crueltie) entred in∣to the Citie, murdering and killing their enemies as they pressed forth. Lamentable was the fearefull crie, which so suddainely a∣mazed the English Garrisoners within the Citie. And it was the more full of terror, for that the cause thereof was not vnto them perfitly knowne. The Earle of Suffolke, who was chiefe Gouernor of the Towne, and the greatest part of the English souldiors, entred into the Ca∣stle, and were (betimes in the morning) sharpely assaulted by the Frenchmen. And though they were altogether vnprouided of all necessaries for a long defence, yet their lustie courage (againe, and againe) gaue their enemies the repulse: who making no doubt, but through Famine, or by violence, to be owners of the Castle; care∣lesly disposed themselues to all ease, jolitie, and mirth. Whereof when the Lord Talbot was aduertised, he forthwith marched thi∣ther in the night with seuen hundred men.Mouns is re∣couered by the Lord Talbot. The Earle of Suffolke (to whome secret intelligence was giuen of his comming) left the Castle, and with his companies (vnlooked for, and vnthought vp∣on) rushed into the Towne, lustily crying and showting,Policie. Saint George, Talbot, Saint George, Talbot. Which vnexpected noyse so wonderfully amazed the lazie, sleepie, and drunken Frenchmen, that some of them, vnclothed in their shirts, leapt ouer the Towne walls to saue their liues, but lost them: So that (within and with∣out the Towne) foure hundred Gentlemen being slaine and taken prisoners, and the rascall pesants being enlarged; thirtie Citizens,Execution. twentie Priests, and fifteene Friers (by whose conspiracie the Towne had beene treacherously betrayed) were, as Traytors,1427. 6 tor∣tured with miserable deaths. And thus was the Citie of Mouns brauely regayned to King Henrie. Not long before this time died the Tutor of the Kings Royall Person, the right Noble Thomas, Duke of Exeter: So that the Earle of Warwike was sent for into England, to vndergoe that charge. And in his stead, the renowned and most valiant Cap∣taine Thomas Mountacute,A new Ar∣mie sent into France. Earle of Salisburie (whose former Ser∣uices so appalled and daunted the hearts and courages of the Frenchmen, that they feared no man more) was sent into France with fiue thousand men. To which number, as manie more were
added.Orleance is besieged by the Earle of Salisburie. And with them all, the said Earle marched to besiege the strong and warlike Citie of Orleance, which standeth vpon the Ri∣uer of Loyer. This Citie was newly fortified, and incredibly strengthned, by the Bastard, and by the Bishop of that place, with Towers, Bulwarkes and Forts: and the Suburbes, together with twelue other Parish Churches, foure Abbies, and all Houses and Vines, being within fiue leagues of the Towne, they caused to be ruinated, defaced, and cut downe; because they should not afford any helpe, sustenance, or succour to the Englishmen. When this siedge was strongly planted,The Bastard of Orleance defeated. the Bastard of Orleance, intending to make famous his hautie courage to his enemies; brauely issued out of a strong Bulwarke, which was erected vpon the Bridge. But (being vnable to maintaine his bold challenge) hee was com∣pelled (with the losse of that Fort, and with the slaughter of the greater number of his Souldiers) to flie into the Towne. Within this Bulwarke there was raised an high Tower, with a window in it; at which the Englishmen vsually pried into the Towne, tak∣ing the view of the greater part of the Citie: And thereby (from time to time) did informe themselues,The valiant Earle of Sa∣lisburie slaine in what case, and in what plight the Townesmen stoode. And at the same window (about two Monethes after the first besiedging of the Citie,) the Noble Earle of Salisburie, looking into the Towne, was with a great shot vnfortunately slaine; and with his death, the Triumphs of the English Nation in France waxed more thinne; and the Frenchmen became more victorious then they had beene. The Earle of Suffolke maintayneth the siege.He being dead, the Earle of Suffolke was made Generall in that siedge: who finding that all prouisions waxed exceeding scant, sent Sir Iohn Fastolfe to the Regēt for new supplies, who furnished him at the full; and dispatched him and his companies with all speede. But in his returne towards the siege, the Lord Dela∣breth, with sundrie other Barons, Knights and common Souldi∣ers,The French∣men are de∣feated. Policie. to the number of nine thousand at the least, intending their o∣uerthrow, presented themselues vnto their view: who (placing their Cartes and Carriadges furthest backe, their Horses next, and themselues before, and pitching their Stakes behind their Ar∣chers, vpon the first encounter retyred behinde their stakes; On which the Frenchmen on horse-back were receiued, goared and miserably slaine. And by these meanes; their Armie (being dis∣ordered) began to flie: So that in the fight, and in the chace, The Lord Dalabreth, and the Lord William Steward Constable of France, with two thousand and fiue hundred men were slaine, and eleuen hundred were taken prisoners: with whom and with rich supplies,
the valiant Knight and his companions repayred honorably vnto the siege.The Battaile of Herrings. And this battaile was by the Frenchmen called the Bat∣taile of Herrings, because the chiefest prouisions which those En∣glishmen then had, were Lenten stuffes. When the besieged heard of this newes, and were hopelesse of any succours to be sent for their reliefe from the French King,Orleance is offered to the Duke of Burgoine. by letters they entreated the Duke of Burgoine to receiue them into his protection, as his owne; who made them answere, That hee would so doe, if the Regent would thereunto agree. This moti∣on pleased manie of the Regents friends and counsellors, because thereby the Dolphin, surnamed the French King, should not onely be dispossessed of so rich and of so strong a Citie, but also because it should be enjoyed by their chiefest friend. But the Regent himselfe, and some others,The Regent will not con∣sent thereto. were of another minde, and returned this answere to the Duke, That seeing (for so long a time) such great expences and charges had beene consumed by King Henrie, to bring that Citie into such extremities, as that the besieged became wearie anie longer to be troubled; it would sound much to his dishonour and disgrace, if any Prince besides him should enjoy the Lordship and the Siegnorie thereof. This Answere pierced the Duke of Burgoine at the heart:The Duke of Burgoine falleth from the English. so that from thenceforth his affections dayly waxed cold, and occa∣sioned him, in secret, to become a well-willer vnto the French King. When this Project was reuealed, and became fruitlesse,The Duke of Alanson re∣lieueth Or∣leance. the Ci∣tizens of Orleance craued present succours from the Duke of A∣lanson; who did his best to inspire a new spirit of courage into the French King. And so sensible was he of their extremities, and so readie to releiue them; and so extreamely negligent was the En∣glish Armie to attend their Watches in the night,The fond se∣curitie of the English. because they dayly expected the surrendring of the Citie; that (in the depth and darknesse of the night) he conueyed many thousand men, and store of all sorts of prouisions, into the Towne. And within few daies after, the besieged issued forth, being brauely resolued to at∣tempt much:The French∣men preuaile, and are bea∣ten. These men with strong blowes wonne the Bul∣warke at the Bridges end, and one more, and slew six hundred men whom they found there. They also assaulted the Bastyle, wherein the Lord Talbot was. But with such a wonderfull courage and re∣solution he issued out vpon them, that he massacred their compa∣nies on euerie side, and enforced them to flye like Sheepe before the Wolfe: so that with much losses they hardly recouered into the Towne.
The siege of Orleance a∣bandoned.But the next day, the Earle of Suffolke quited the Siege, seuered his Armie, and sent each companie to his owne Garrison. And in their returne, the Lord Talbot (by maine assault) wonne the strong Castle and Towne of Lauall. And thus was the faire and the strong Citie of Orleance deliuered from a long and from a sharpe Siege. And within few dayes after, the Duke of Alanson besieged and wonne the Towne of Iargeaux: wherein (among others) he tooke prisoner the Earle of Suffolke,The Earle of Suffolke ta∣ken prisoner. and one of his brothers, and slew Sir Alexander Pole, another of his brethren: All which prisoners (except the former two) were slaine by the Frenchmen; who contended among themselues, to whome those prisoners did in right belong. 1428. 7 The English∣men are ouer∣throwne.To the Dukes Armie (which consisted of three and twentie thousand men) there repaired Arthur of Britaine, the Earle of Van∣dosme, and sundrie other Noblemen, with great and strong troups. All these fortuned to meet with the Lords Talbot, Scales, and Hun∣gerford, who conducted fiue thousand men to fortifie the Towne of Meum. Betwixt them there were exchanged manie bloudie blowes: so that in the end the said three English Lords were ta∣ken prisoners,Prisoners. twelue hundred of their companies were slayne, and the rest, which escaped, hasted vnto Meum, and reple∣nished that Towne with abilitie of Strength to resist future Dangers. This vnfortunate disaster was accompanied with another mis∣chiefe. For no sooner was it published and knowne abroad, but that diuers Cities,Reuolts to the French King. Townes, Castles, and strong Holds treache∣rously fell off and submitted themselues to the French king: whom these vnexpected good chances not onely elated and made proud, but also augmented his good hopes of a speedie end of all his trou∣bles;English pri∣soners. especially, because the Earle of Salisburie was slaine, and the Earle of Suffolke, and the Lords Talbot, Scales, Hungerford, and ma∣nie other valiant English Captaines, were then his prisoners, and could not assist the Regents part. The French King being thus stomacked and put in heart, would not anie longer retayne anie meane or base thoughts: but in stead of them, he now consulted and deuised how he might recouer the Citie of Rhemes;Rhemes. that in it hee might (with all Solemnities and Prince-like Requisites) be crowned King, according to the man∣ner and custome of his Ancestors, Kings of that Kingdome. And to effect those his desires with all conuenient speede, he forthwith passed into Champaigne with a great Armie: where hee besieged,
and by composition wonne Troys, the chiefest Citie in that Pro∣uince. And the inhabitants of Challons being thereof informed,Troys wonne. Challons, Rhemes, &c. yeelded. perfidiously did rebell, and compelled their Captaine to yeeld the Towne. By which example, the Citizens of Rhemes being indu∣ced, did the like. And thus King Charles obtayned his hearts de∣sire, and was crowned there.Charles is crowned King of France, and is therby furthered in his future attempts. And as by that high Title hee was chiefely dignified, so was hee thereby exceedingly furthered in all his future attempts: For vpon the first report that he was crow∣ned King, it cannot easily winne credit, how manie Forts, Cities, Townes, and Castles, were (without blowes) deliuered into his hands. The Regent perceiuing that his proceedings would bee but vaine, except he speedily checked this good fortune; resolued,The Regents braue resolu∣tion. that a pitched Field should make him prosperous or vnhappie. For which purpose, hee marched with a strong Armie from Paris to∣wards the new King: and by his heralds hee proclaymed Charles to be an Vsurper and a counterfeit King and an arch-Traytour to King Henrie, and summoned him to a battaile,The Regent summoneth the French King to a pitched field. that thereby hee might receiue punishments agreeable to his deserts. The French King not acknowledging any such offence, seemed willingly to accept of this Chalenge: yet (for a while) hee trifled and lingered vp and downe; and in the end diuerted his course, and marched another way. But the Regent so closely followed after him, that (to defend him selfe) hee was enforced to marshall his companies, and to make bragging shewes of resistance.The French King depar∣teth and is pursued. But outward apparances of valour were his best performances for two dayes space: For in the depth of the night (with great silence) he raysed his Campe, and ranne away. But when the morning had discouered this his cowardly departure,He runneth from the Re∣gent. the Regent (with much trauaile and great paine) endeauoured to enforce him to looke backe. But because he alwaies fled, and would not aduenture the exchange of blowes, therefore he returned to the Citie of Paris,The Regent hunteth him, but in vaine. to shew himselfe carefull of his charge there: And so much the ra∣ther, because those Citizens were euer vnconstant, variable, waue∣ring, perfidious, and vntrue. Daily (after the Regents returne) his cares were filled with fresh reports of trayterous Reuolts, which made him (once more) to attempt to make his estate more stable and more sure, by exposing of himselfe and his vnto some present danger. For which cause,The French King once more runneth away. he marched againe towards the French King with an Armie of ten thousand gallant men: who met him with more than that double number. But when all outward appearance presented good assu∣rance
of a deadly fight,King Henrie is crowned. 1429. 8 the French King did (once more) shame∣fully runne away. And neere about the same time, King Hen∣rie (with all Princely Honour and Solemnitie) was crowned King. Reuolts to the French King.And albeit, that daily experience made it manifest, that King Charles was a dastardly and a fearefull coward: yet the Townes of Champaigne, Senlys, Beauois, Gaylard, and manie others, trecherously yeelded themselues into his hand. Whereupon the Regent resol∣ued to cast his anchor in Normandie, and to secure the fidelitie and loue of the inhabitants of that Prouince, howsoeuer the game should chance to runne elsewhere. For which purpose hee went thither,The Regent establisheth Normandie. and in an honourable and full Parliament he related arti∣ficially the Lineall Discent of his Lord and Master King Henrie the sixt, from Rollo the Hardie; who was the first Duke of that Coun∣trey. He also minded them of those miseries, which too too com∣monly, and with ouer-much seueritie, had beene inflicted on their Nation by the Natiues of the Kingdome of France. And remem∣bred them of those Immunities and Royall Priuiledges, which (vnder the English Gouernment) they had long and liberally en∣joyed, by which they were made fortunate and rich: Whereof he promised them, not onely a sure and a firme continuance, but also a daily enlatgement, with all fauor. Thus, and by these means, he confirmed and ratified to King Henrie, and to himselfe, the affecti∣ons and friendship of that people. The French King woeth the Duke of Burgoine.But whilest the Regent thus busily employed himselfe in Nor∣mandie; the French King attempted (by all subtile and cunning meanes) to lessen and to weaken his power. For the effecting whereof, first of all he endeauoured to dissolue that knot of Loue and Amitie which conjoyned the Regent and the Duke of Bur∣goine in an indifferent liking of each other; by excusing himselfe to the said Duke touching the murdering of his Father: and (by solemne Promises and Oathes) vowing to giue vnto him moun∣taines of Wealth, manie Honours, and his inward fauour, if hee would be firmely reconciled, and become his friend. And albeit, that the Duke was not well pleased, for that the Regent would not consent,The French King assaul∣teth Paris, and is beaten. that the Citie of Orleance (when it was besieged and grieuously distressed) should be yeelded into his hands: yet in a friendly manner hee acquainted the Regent with this cunning Plot. So, when King Charles perceiued, that this deuise was fruit∣lesse; he brought his whole Armie before the Citie of Paris: of whose reuolt (if the Multitude had dared) the Regent had beene right well assured. But when hee perceiued, that nothing but
blowes could make him hopefull of good successe: Hee battered and scaled the walls, and assaulted the Citizens with sharpe furie: But (by the braue valour and courage of the English Garrisons, which were well assisted by such of the Townsmen as were faith∣full to King Henrie) he was repulsed many times with great losse, and slaughter of his men; and at last, was compelled shamefully to depart from thence. The Regent (at his returne) thanked, and praised them excee∣dingly: but especially such of the Parisians, as had well testified their faith and loyaltie to King Henrie, in his absence. Whereat they seemed publikely to take so much ioy, that (hypocritically) they stiled themselues, thus; Friends to the English, and friends to the Parisians; Enemies to the English, and enemies to the Parisians:The Parisi∣ans flatter, and are tre∣cherous. yet were they trecherous, and vnconstant; as in this future discourse it shall manifestly appeare. It will be to tedious, to make an ample Relation of euery light skirmish that was made, and of euery Reuolt, and Martiall gay∣ning; which strengthned the English in some places, and weakned them in others: Wherefore, it shall suffice, that we be well infor∣med, that either part did sometimes winne, and sometimes loose. But to say the truth, The English forces and strength in France did not encrease; because such was the inconstant leuitie of the French Nation. That they gladded their hearts at euery oppor∣tunities, which enabled them to reuolt, and yeeld to King Charles. By meanes whereof King Henrie (as hee was coun∣selled) sayled with a puisant Armie from Douer,1431. 10 King Henrie crowned in Paris. and arriued at Calice: And taking Roan in his way, Hee marched vnto Pa∣ris, where hee was (with all beseeming requisities) annointed and crowned King of France, and receiued homage and fealtie vpon the Othes of the Nobles, Gentlemen, and common People of that Citie. These French warres were famous in all the Westerne parts of the world. And the more were they spoken off, because men ge∣nerally did wonder, how it was possible, that so small an Iland,England ad∣mired at. as England was, should (for so many yeares together) so grieuously torment and scourge so large, so populous, and so potent a King∣dome, as France was, and put it to the worst. At length, and after frequent mediations, vsed by Eugenius the Fourth, then Pope of Rome, and by many other Christian Princes. Such great hopes, as made the fairest shew of an happie Peace,An vnperfect Truce. vanished quite, and came to nothing: sauing that an vnperfect Truce for sixe yeares was consented vnto, which lasted but
a while: For shortly after King Henries returne into England, Vnfortunately it hapned, that the Ladie Anne, wife vnto the Re∣gent,The Regents wife dyeth. and sister to the Duke of Burgoine, died: And not long after, hee married the faire and fresh Ladie Iaquet, daughter vnto Peter, Earle of S. Paul,The Regent newly maried and thereby allied himselfe to the ancient and ho∣norable Familie and house of Luxenbourgh, and from thenceforth the great loue,The Regent looseth a good friend. which for many yeares had made the Regent and his brother in law, the Duke of Burgoin, fortunate & happie, waxed faint and feeble: by meanes whereof the Duke won nothing, and the Regent became lesse powerfull then he had beene in former times. 1432. 11 The Truce broken.The solemnities of this mariage were no sooner finished, but that the six yeares truce, which was so lately concluded, was quite broken, and warre began to threaten the effusion of much bloud: For the aduerse part (by secret vnderminings and trecherous per∣swasions) possessed it selfe daily of many of the Regents Castles and Townes; and iustified that manner of proceeding, by affir∣ming; That politike gainings without blowes, infringed not any Truce: and so farre off were the Frenchmen, from restoring those things, which by those subtleties they had gained; that to procure more,Treason dis∣couered. they secretly conuaied two hundred Souldiers into the Ca∣stle of Roan, hoping to haue surprized it, but the treason was reuea∣led, and the Conspirators were (with maine strength) beaten into the Dungeon: From whence they were sentenced, some to the Gallowes; others to death by cruell torments; others to sharpe imprisonment; and such of them as sped best, were (for great ran∣somes, and summes of money) set at large. 1433. 12 Talbots name was terrible in France.These coales quickly kindled the fire of rage, in so much that ei∣ther partie made it selfe strong, by the speedie supply of a new Ar∣mie. And the Regents forces were much augmented, by Iohn Lord Talbot, who was of late redeemed out of prison, who though hee brought with him out of England but only eight hundred chosen men at Armes, yet his name and his presence more terrified the Frenchmen,The French∣men would not fight. then halfe the English Armie besides. Oftentimes the two Armies by their neare approch, striued to out-face and to daunt each other: And twice the Regent boldly challenged the Frenchmen to entertaine the fight: but they only made faire shewes to performe much, and seemed as if they thirsted to make them∣selues famous by their manhood: yet in two seuerall places, and at two times, they fled in the night, and would not (in any sort) ha∣zard their Fortunes in the field. Now,A Rebellion in Normandy whilest the Regent was thus carefully employed abroad,
the Rustickes of Normandie treacherously attempting to shake off the English yoke (which was neuer burthensome vnto them) rude∣ly armed themselues, and marched towards Cane; exercising much violence and crueltie in all places where they did preuaile.The Rebels are subdued. But they were speedily encountred and ouerthrowne by the Earle of Arun∣dell and the Lord Willoughby; who slew more than a thousand of them, and tormented their rebellious Leaders and Captaines with sundry sorts of deaths, but permitted the baser sort to return home.The Earle of Arundell slaine. This noble and couragious Earle purposing to reseise for King Henrie the Towne of Rue, which grieuously punished the Coun∣tries of Ponthew, Arthois, and Bolenois; perceiued (as hee marched) that an old decayed Castle, called Gerbory, neere vnto Beauois, was newly reedified and made strong. This Castle hee assaulted with great courage: but being mortally wounded on the ancle with the shot of a Culuerine, hee was taken prisoner from the ground, but within few daies after he died. About the same time, the Duke of Burbon, who about eighteene yeares before was taken prisoner at the battaile fought at Agen∣court, paied his ransome of eighteene thousand pounds,The Duke of Bourbon is ransomed, and dieth. but died in London the same day, in which hee intended to set forwards to∣wards France. In the end of the raigne of King Henrie the Fifth,The Regent and the Duke of Burgoine haue stout stomacks. we may reuiew or remember, what a precise charge and command that King gaue to his Brethren, and to his Nobles, neuer to loose the amitie and friendship of Philip Duke of Burgoine; and this Historie maketh mention how carefull they haue beene euer since, to obserue his counsell in that behalfe: but the busie tongues of Tell-tales, and of foisting Flatterers, obtayning credit where reprehension was more fitting, preuailed in such sort, That the said Duke causelesly waxed iealous, and his loue was cold towards the Regent;Tale-bearers or Tale-tel∣lers. yet through the perswasions, and by the mediation of their honorable friends, an enteruiew to reuiue their friendship was procured, and S. Omers was the place appointed for that purpose. But when they both had made their entrance into that Towne: The Duke of Bed∣ford, because he was Regent, and the sonne, brother, and Vncle vnto Kings, expected the prioritie of visitation by the Duke: but he, because he was the Lord and Soueraigne of that Towne, sup∣posed that he should be checked for dishonorable basenesse, if hee should first repaire to the Regents lodging. These conceits touch∣ing their preheminence and superioritie, were very likely to di∣stemper their humors, more then formerly they had beene. For the preuenting whereof, their friends endeuoured to perswade
them both to meete together in some indifferent place. But the Regent refused to yeeld thereunto. So they departed, and left the Towne;The Duke of Burgoine forsakes the Regent. beeing both displeased and discontented with each o∣thers haughtinesse of spirit and great stomacke. And forthwith the Duke of Burgoine entred into league and friendship with the French King, who had before murdered his Father. Which fal∣ling off from the English, aduantaged not him, nor sounded to his honour. 1434. 13 Saint Dennis trecherously betrayed.About the same time, the Towne of Saint Dennys (neere vnto Paris) was treasonably yeelded to the French King, by the secret practise of the Bastard of Orleance; who was surnamed the Earle of Dumoys. But the Lord Talbot, and some other Lords, accom∣panied with fiue thousand men, compassed it round about with a strong Siege. Whereof when the Earle of Dumoys was informed; to remoue the Siege, he collected a strong power of chosen horse∣men. But ere he came thither, the Towne (by composition) was surrendred;Saint Dennis is recouered. and the Walls and Towers thereof were beaten to the ground. And though in this place the English gayned; yet the inhabitants of Ponthoys (which standeth on the Riuer betwixt Normandie and Paris) did rebell,Ponthois re∣uolteth. and thrust the English Garrison out of the Towne: which from that time forward animated the inhabitants of Paris to thinke on nothing more, than how they might (by Treason, or by Violence) reduce themselues to the sub∣jection of the French King. But behold; a greater mishap than the losse of manie Townes and Cities, did (vnexpectedly) weaken King Henries part. For now the most renowned,The Regent dieth. wise, politike, and worthie Regent of France, died; and was (with all Princely Ceremonies and Solemnities) buried in a stately Monument, which was erected for him in our Ladie Church,He was buri∣ed in Roan. within the Citie of Roan. Whereat the mutable and vnconstant Nobilitie of the Duchie of Normandie (who had receiued from him manie benefits and fauors) much repined. And within few yeares after, they instantly requested the French King Lewis the eleuenth (who was the sonne of King Charles the se∣uenth) to plucke it downe,His Sepul∣cher enuied. and to cast the Regents carkasse into the open fields; alledging, That it was much dishonourable, and a great disgrace for them, to suffer such an enemie (as hee was to them and to the Kings of France) to be so richly interred within the Metropolitan Citie of that Prouince. But King Lewis (who worthily withstood their base attempt) affirmed, & did publikely protest,A Kingly Speech. That a more sumptuous Sepulcher was too too bad to co∣uer the dead corps of him, who in his life time scorned (vpon anie
occasion whatsoeuer) to step one foot backe for all the power and souldierie of France: and who, in all his proceedings, and in all his Gouernment, had approued himselfe to be so wise, politike, faith∣full, and hardie, that all heroicall and generous spirits should ra∣ther endeuour to immortalize his Fame, and with the Trumpet of Honor to proclaime his manlike acts, than (in the least measure) labour to shadow or to eclipse them with Enuie or Disgrace. And that there was no stronger an argument or proofe of basenesse and of cowardise, than to insult ouer the dead bodie of him; who (whilest he liued) was amiable and courteous in time of Peace,1435. 14 Richard Duke of Yorke made Regent. but bold and terrible in Armes. The death of this renowned Prince was the cause of infinite alterations and changes within the Kingdome of France, and else∣where. For after his death, Richard Duke of Yorke was made Re∣gent, against the liking and good will of Edmund Duke of Somerset, cousin to the King; who (for himselfe) inwardly affected that au∣thoritie and place. The treacherous Citie of Paris also, and manie other Townes,Paris reuol∣teth, and is cruell to the English. Castles, and Forts, rebelliously yeelded themselues, and wholly became French. And not onely so: but villanously they murdred, taunted, and scoffed the English Nation; whom (in outward shew, and with faire words) they seemed, not long before, to honor, and extraordinarily to respect. The Normans also reuolted, and tyrannized ouer the English∣men; whome with the Sword, and by a thousand meanes,The rebelli∣ous Normans are subdued. they consumed, vntill (by the slaughter of fiue thousand of their com∣panies) they were subdued by the Lord Talbot, the Lord Scales, Sir Thomas Kyriel, and by some others. When Paris, Saint Dennys, Saint Germans in Ley, and manie more Cities and Townes were lost; the new Regent,Priuate enuie hindered the publike good. with eight thousand souldiors, landed at Harflew; and from thence came to the Citie of Roan: where his Presidents for Iustice were much admired and commended. But in the whole course of his Go∣uernment he effected nothing else to be wondered at; by reason that the Duke of Somersets secret grudgings hindered those Ex∣peditions, which might haue made him famous, and his Countrey fortunate and happie. The reuolted Duke of Burgoine (who not long before had falsified his Oath and Promise to King Henrie,The Duke of Burgoine be∣siegeth Calice and to his Fa∣ther) pretending a rightfull Title vnto the Towne of Callice; besieged it with an Armie, which consisted of fortie thousand men.
This Towne was newly strengthened with manie hundreds of braue souldiors; who by Henrie, Earle of Mortayne, and by the Lord of Cammoys, from England were brought thither. The Duke attempted to winne the Towne by three terrible assaults: but he was a great loser by them all: And the incredible strength of the place, and of his enemies, depriued him vtterly of all hope to winne it by any other meanes, than onely by Famine and scarsitie of foode. But that course he was not able to pursue; because the English Nauie was Master of the Sea. But yet to shut vp the Ha∣uen, and then for a while to attempt what might bee done; hee prepared foure great Hulkes, and filled them with square and mas∣sie stones, semented and joyned close together with Iron and with Lead, because they should (as a Rock) remayne together, and not be beaten in sunder by the Sea. But so vnskilfull were they, who had the charge to sinke them, that they missed the Channell: So that when the water was at an ebbe, the shippes lay drie, and were by the Callicians torne all abroad: and the Stones and Timber be∣ing taken in, serued for the prouision and fortifications of the Towne. The Dukes Bastyle taken by the EnglishThe Duke also built a strong Bastyle, which he furnished with foure hundred fighting men: Which, though for a few dayes it prejudiced the besieged, yet it did them no memorable harme. For (not long after it was erected) certaine Troupes of horsemen issued out of the Towne, who fought proudly with the Dukes Forces: and in the mean time the Bastyle was assaulted and wonne by others; who tooke all such prisoners as were not slaine there∣in, burned the Fort, and returned (with verie little losse) into the Towne. The Duke of Burgoine fly∣eth in the night.The Duke of Burgoine (who seemed much to rejoyce, because the Protector had promised to attempt the raysing of the Siege within few dayes) made great preparations to withstand it. But being surprized with a suddaine feare, to be swallowed vp betwixt the English Armie and the Towne, he remoued from thence in the night; leauing to the Protector (who landed with his companies the day before) all his Tents, Ordnance, Armour, and Prouisions, being of great worth. The Protector (who brought with him thither fiue and twentie thousand men) entred into the Dukes Countries of Flanders and Arthois: where he slew, burnt, ransacked, and wonne rich booties at his owne pleasure. And (without resistance) he returned vnto Callice; and (with such superfluities as he had gotten) abundantly and plentifully he supplyed it with all things which they wanted:
and then hee returned into England; where hee found the State much troubled. For Iames the first, being King of Scots (forgetting quite the manifold fauors and Princely education, which,Rosbrough besieged by the Scots. being a prisoner, he found within the Kingdome of England) with thirtie thousand men had (for manie weekes) besieged the Castle of Ros∣borough: which was valiantly defended by Sir Ralph Grey. But the Earle of Northumberland (as hee was appointed) prepared to giue him battaile, and to remoue the Siege. Whereof when notice was giuen to the Scottish Armie, they remoued,The Scots flye. and fled with extra∣ordinarie speede into their owne Countrey. About the same time died Queene Katherine, mother to the King: who, after her husbands death (fancying more her owne pleasure and contentment, than the supporting of her high and honorable estate) married a goodly Gentleman, named Owen Tu∣thar: who (though his meanes were but small) yet was he discen∣ded from Cadwallader, the last King of the Britons: And by her hee had issue two sonnes, halfe brothers to the King; that is to say, Edmund, and Iaspar. This Edmund was (by King Henrie) created Earle of Richmond; and tooke to wife the Ladie Margaret, sole Daughter and Heire vnto Iohn Duke of Somerset; and begot on her King Henrie the seuenth. And Iaspar was created Earle of Pembroke. Likewise, the Ladie Iaquet (sister vnto the Earle of Saint Paule, and Duchesse Dowager to Iohn Duke of Bedford, the late Regent of France) contrarie to her friends liking (yet to please her selfe) married a gallant Gentleman (who was much inferiour to her e∣state) named Sir Richard Wooduyle:Sir Richard Wooduyle made Baron Ryuers: and afterwards Earle Ryuers whome (afterwards) the King made Baron Ryuers, and then Earle Ryuers: And by him (among manie other children) she had issue Elizabeth; who was (after) the wife of King Edward the fourth; and was mother to the Ladie Elizabeth, whome King Henrie the seuenth espoused and tooke to wife. It pleased the Kings Councell of this Realme to discharge Ri∣chard, Duke of Yorke, of his Regencie in France;The Earle of Warwike is made Regent 1437. 16 and to establish the Earle of Warwike in his place. Who embarked himselfe seuen times, before he could set one foot in Normandie. But (at last) his arriuall was fortunate and happie. And hauing intelligence, that the Duke of Burgoine, with tenne thousand men, lay strongly en∣trenched before Crotoy; hee sent the Lords Talbot and Fawcon∣bridge, Sir Thomas Kyriell, and manie other valiant Captaines,Crotoy is besieged. with fiue thousand Englishmen, to rayse that Siege. But the Duke (fea∣ring with his double number to encounter with his enemies) fled
with his whole Armie vnto Abbeuyle. From whence hee being eagerly pursued, and hourely dared to make a stand, and to play the man;The Duke of Burgoine will not fight. he posted vnto Amiens: where the Englishmen (who dai∣ly hunted after him) found him and his companies strongly en∣closed within the walls. But because he played the coward, and would not fight, the Lord Talbot entred into Picardie and Arthois: where (vnresisted) he wasted and consumed the whole Countrey (the walled Townes, Castles, and Forts onely excepted) and en∣riched all his Armie with Cattell, Money, Plate, and many other things of great worth and value. Sir Thomas Kyriels valorSir Thomas Kyriel also surprized the Dukes Carriages and his Ordnance: all which booties were brought vnto Crotoy, with as much victuals as would maintaine six hundred men for one whole yeare. And all the residue of those spoyles he sent to the Earle of Warwike; which abundantly supplyed his great wants. Periurie pu∣nished.The Earle of Mortayne, sonne to Edmund Duke of Somerset, by violent assaults tooke the Castle of Saint Auyan in Mayne, and slew therein three hundred Scots, and hanged all the Frenchmen whom he found there; because (hauing once beene sworne to King Hen∣rie) they reuolted, and became French. Thus Fortune euerie day turned her Wheele, making him who yesterday wonne much, to day to lose all; and suddainely aduancing those to great honour, whome former disasters had made miserable and bare.The French King winneth by trecherie, not by valour. But the Frenchmens Treasons and Tre∣cheries daily betrayed more Cities, Townes, and Castles, to the French King, than either the Englishmen could hold by Policie, or gaine by Strength. The Dolphin rebelleth a∣gainst his fa∣ther.And albeit that by reason thereof he comforted himselfe; and prosperous successe accompanied most of his Attempts: yet was he (on a suddaine) checked by the open Rebellion of his eldest sonne, the Dolphin of Vyen: Who (being assisted by the Dukes of Alanson and of Burbon) vsurped the Gouernment of France; and by publike Edicts diuulged the insufficiencie of his Father to rule that Kingdome. The Rebellion is appeased.This Clowd threatened a shrewd storme; and begat this Que∣stion in his Father and in his Councellors of State: Whether it were better to attempt the curing of this Maladie by Ciuill Warre, and by let∣ting of Bloud; or by Discretion and by Policie, without blowes? The later Project being entertained publike Proclamations were made in the French Kings Name; by which he prohibited all his subiects (vpon the paines of death) to yeeld anie subiection to the Dol∣phins Commands, and pardoned all such, as (by his persuasions)
had deuoted themselues to his seruice. And moreouer, sundrie Letters were written, diuers Messengers were sent, and manie powerfull Mediators so preuayled, that the Dolphin, with his con∣federates, were quickly reconciled, and joyfully receiued into the Kings fauour. Whilest these vnnaturall broyles breathed fresh hopes into the English Nation, that Paris might bee regayned;The regay∣ning of Paris attempted. they prepared a great Armie for that purpose. But by meanes of the said Recon∣ciliation and Agreement, those their designes were strangled in their birth: their Armie was dissolued; and beeing enforced to sayle by a smaller Compas, they endeuoured to effect such things as were proportionable to their strength,Ponthois sur∣prized. and to win those things which were within their reach. About the same time (the ground being couered with a thicke Snow, which was much hardened by a suddaine Frost) Iohn Lord Clifford (clothing himselfe and his followers all in white) passed in the night season ouer the Ditches of Ponthois (which not long be∣fore was treacherously yeelded to the French King:Policie.) the Walls they scaled; entred in; slew the Watch; wonne the Towne; kil∣led the greater part of all the men found there; and tooke manie prisoners, which yeelded them good ransomes in a short time. This bold Attempt so passionately vexed the French King,The French King besie∣geth Ponthois that (in his owne Person) he came before the Towne with a great Ar∣mie: with which, and with manie Trenches, Bastyles, Forts, and Rampiers, hee compassed it round about, and gaue vnto it manie fierce assaults. In all which he lost much, and was scorned by the besieged. And whilest he thus lay before the Towne, Richard Beauchampe, Earle of Warwike, and Regent of France, died; and Richard,A new Re∣gent. Duke of Yorke, was the second time made Regent of that Kingdome. Who (being accompanied with the Earle of Oxford, the Lord Bour∣chier Earle of Ewe, the Lord Talbot, and manie others) raysed a great Armie, repayred to the Siege, and dared the French King in∣to the field. Which he refused: and leauing his Ordnance in the strongest Bastyle of Saint Martyn, which he had erected;He runneth away in the night. he ray∣sed his Siege in the middest of the night, and went vnto Poysy. But in the morning, when the English Armie perceiued, that their enemies had fearefully abandoned the place, and had left their Tents behinde them; they possessed them with much joy, and found much riches, and store of all prouisions, with which they comforted themselues and the Towne. And leauing there Sir Geruase Clifton, with a thousand valiant men, to defend it, and
neglecting the Bastyle, which neither could without much losse be suddenly gotten, nor was able to doe any harme: The Regent, with all his Companies, directed his iourney towards Poysie: and being come thither, he set his Armie in a warlike maner; nothing doubting,He is dared, yet playes the Coward. but that the French King (whose strength was much in∣creased, by the repaire of the chiefest Lords, and gallantrie of France) would haue answered him, in the open field; but hee kept himselfe close within the Towne. In so much that when the Re∣gent perceiued that no bold bragging, nor scornefull tauntings, could moue his patience, nor make him valiant: Hee left him there, and by easie Marches he came to Roan. Ponthoys be∣sieged the se∣cond time.The French King, as soone as hee heard that the English Armie was so farre off; entred into a serious consideration of his estate. And (being mindfull that the Parisians, by often scandals, had reproued his faint heart) and that the Towne of Ponthoys was an euill enemie to that Citie: To regaine his reputation and Ho∣nor, by winning of that Towne, he vsed extraordinarie expediti∣on,It is valiant∣ly defended. and with a puisant Armie hee besieged it round about: And (because hee feared, least small delayes might depriue him of his hopes) he assaulted it, almost euery houre, and lost before it aboue three thousand men.It is taken. But in the end he wonne the Towne, and slaughtered foure hundred Englishmen; the rest of them were ta∣ken Prisoners, and ordered according to the French Kings will. And when he had thus preuailed, diuers other Cities and townes (greedily embracing all reportes of their Kings valour) treacher∣ously reuolted, and became French. Naturalists haue taught vs, that when two Lions haue by Com∣bate tired themselues, they doe depart proudly each from the o∣ther, neither of them seeming to yeeld; and both of them expres∣sing many signes of much triumph.A Parley. And our Histories doe report, that both King Henrie, and King Charles, being wearied with the infinite vexation of their Warres, and with their daily trauailes, seemed both of them to be Conquerours: yet were they both ea∣sily perswaded to harken to such indifferent motions for a Truce; as were proposed by their friends. For this conference, Callice was appointed the place to meete in, which Towne was chosen before any other, because Charles the noble Duke of Orleance (who euer since the Battaile of Agencourt, had continued a Prisoner in England) was to bee conueied ouer, that (for his Ransome of three hundred thousand Crownes if it could be gotten) he might be enlarged and set free. The Ambassadours which met there a∣bout this businesse, consulted often times, but at length they ad∣iourned
those negotiations vntill some other time,King Hen∣ries demands. because the de∣mands of King Henrie were thought to bee vnreasonable in three points. FJrst, in regard of the ouer-great summe of Money, which was demanded for the Dukes Ransome. Secondly, for that the peaceable, and the quiet posse∣ssion of the whole and entire Dutchies of Aquitaine, and of Normandie, was required, and to bee inioyed freely, without any acknowledgement of Homage, or of Soueraigntie of the Crowne of France. And thirdly, because the surrendring and yeelding vp in∣to King Henries hands, was vrged of all such Cities, townes, Castles, Forts and Territories in France,The Parley is dissolued. as the English Na∣tion had enioyed, at any time within the space of thirtie yeares then last past. Yet (not long after this meeting was dissolued) Philip Duke of Burgoine, pitying the enthrals estate of the Duke of Orleance,The Duke of Orleance is Ransomed. and remembring Iohn his father, had cruelly murdered Lewys the fa∣ther of the said Duke: paide his Ransome, and (at his own charge) transported him, with honourable attendance into France. And now the Regent (purposing to preuent the Frenchmans Warres,1440. with which they intended to disturbe the Peace of the  Duchie of Normandie) diuided all his Companies into foure Troopes, which were seuerally commanded by himselfe,Cruell Warres by the Duke of Sommerset, by Robert Lord Willoughby, and by Iohn Lord Talbot. All these (in seuerall places) inuaded the Territories of France and of Britaine; and preuailed euery where: sauing at the Towne of Deepe, which though they long besieged, yet was it cleared in the end. And in the meane time the French King with his Sonne the Dolphin of Vyen, with the Bastard of Orleance,A huge Ar∣mie. surna∣med the Lord Dumoys, entred into Aquitaine and Guyan, with an Armie of threescore thousand men, and receiued many Castles, Townes and Cities into their bands: which voluntarily, and with∣out blowes were yeelded vnto them, but they were not long in∣ioyed. For the French Armie (being very great;Much is got∣ten and lst againe. and pinched with extreame Famine and diuers wants) was broken vp. And imme∣diatly after their departure into France, the Englishmen recouered whatsoeuer was formerly gotten by the French King.
About the same time, the good Duke of Glocester, Protector of the Kings person, and of this kingdome. Disliked much the vn∣due proceedings of his Vncle,Dissention betweene the Protector and the Cardinal. No redresse. the rich Cardinal of Winchester, and of the Archbishop of Yorke: Who (without his consent; or the Kings Warrant) attempted, and did many publike things for their owne profit and priuate gaine. For the reformation whereof, hee pre∣ferred vnto the King, certaine Articles against them: The consi∣deration of which, was referred to the Priuie Counsell. But be∣cause the most of them were Clergie-men, they afforded no man∣ner of redresse; where at the Protector was much displeased. But to requite him with more vexation, and a greater trouble, they caused the Lady Eleanor his wife,The Prote∣ctors wife condemned for witch∣craft. to be accused, and conuicted for conspiring of the Kings death with Witches: and such like grace∣lesse people, for which shee was inforced three times to doe pub∣like Penance in the Citie of London, and afterwards shee was com∣mitted to perpetuall Imprisonment. But diuers of her condem∣ned associates were Executed, and put to sundrie kinds of death. And now to returne to the French Warres: King Henrie (in re∣gard of former seruices, and of future hopes of the like perfor∣mance) Created the Lord Iohn Talbot Earle of Shrewsburie,Iohn, created Earle of Shrewsbury. A worthy Captaine. and sent him into Normandie, with three thousand selected men, for the better securing of that Duchie. In which expedition, hee worthily demeaned himselfe, and wonne much Honour. This yeare the Countesse of Coming in Guyen, died without issue: and her inheritance was claimed by the French King. And likewise the Earle of Arminacke pretended himselfe to be her next heire.A mariage offered to King Henrie And to strengthen himselfe the better to gaine his right, he offered his Daughter in marriage to King Henrie, with the gift of much money, and with the surrendring into his hands, of all such Territories and possessions within the Duchie of Aquitaine; and Guyen as (either by Conquest, or by discent) did belong vnto him. The King is offered to the Earle of Ar∣minaks daughter.This offer was willingly hearkned vnto, and accepted by the King, who (by his Ambassadors) was publikly offered to the said Lady. But the French King, minding rather to preuent dangers before they come, then to remooue them after they were hap∣ned) so suddenly inuaded the said Earles Countries and Domini∣ons with an Armie: that (with small or no resistance) hee quickly made himselfe the Owner of them all.The King re∣fuseth her. The newes whereof, so altered and changed the minde, and the affections of King Henrie towards his offered Lady, that he would neuer after be perswaded to hearken vnto; or to thinke vpon that match. The grieued compassion, which forraine Princes tooke vpon
the lamentable distresse of poore France, because the bloud of Christians was so vnmeasurably and so vnmercifully shed in those warres, incited them to mediate both these Kings to make a friendly peace: which was not effected according to their ende∣uours and desires,A truce for eighteene moneths. The Earle of Suffolke solli∣citeth ano∣ther mariage for King Henry, with∣out authority giuen to him. A dishonora∣ble match propounded and conclu∣ded. Reasons why this match was disliked. but a truce only was concluded for eighteene moneths: In the handling whereof, the Earle of Suffolke (not war∣ranted by his Commission, nor making his associates acquainted with his purpose) sollicited a mariage betwixt his Lord and ma∣ster King Henry, and the Lady Margaret cosen to the French King, and daughter vnto Reyner Duke of Angeow, being the titularie King of Sicilie, Naples, and Ierusalem. With her hee made no de∣mand for any money, because her father was but poore; nay, (which was much worse) hee consented, that if the said mariage might be effected, King Henry should freely and frankly release vnto her father all his right and title to the said Dutchie of An∣geow, and to the Country of Mayne. The Lords of France were quickly wonne to hearken to this motion, and King Henry was glad at the heart that he should haue for his wife such a faire and fresh Lady, as the Earle of Suffolke could neuer praise enough. But the Protector strongly opposed himselfe against this match, terming her descent to be but Titula∣rie, and vrging much the pouertie of her father; and told the King, that his honour and reputation would receiue many scandals, if  he should reiect the Earle of Arminaks daughter, vnto whom with  all due ceremonies he was publikely affied: and also, that his losse  would be lamentable, if he released his lawfull and iust title to the Dutchie of Angeow, and to the Country of Mayne, according to the Earle of Suffolkes vnaduised offer. But all his reasons (as fri∣uolous) were reiected, and his counsell was not cared for. But the King, to gratifie and to please such of his Noble-men as therein enclined themselues to his humour,Creation of Lords. bestowed on them new Dig∣nities and honours. For Iohn Lord Holland (Earle of Huntingdon) was created Duke of Exeter, as his father had beene: Humfrey Earle of Stafford was made Duke of Buckingham: Henry Earle of Warwicke was made Duke of Warwicke, and the said Earle of Suf∣folke was created Marques of Suffolke. Which Marques (being very honourably accompanied with great troupes of Lords,The new Marquesse fetcheth the yong Queen. The King is maried. La∣dies, and other personages of great worth and honour) went richly prouided into France, and according to his condition, receiued the Lady Margaret from the French King, and from Reyner her fa∣ther, and conueied her with great pompe and princely magnifi∣cence into England, where (within few daies after) she was maried
to the King, and crowned Queene. Now as the prefixed time for the truce drew towards an end; so King Henry perceiued, that this his new alliance with the French King promised him not any certaintie that it should be enlarged, or that he should haue peace. For in France fresh supplies were hourely prouided to reuiue the former warre, and euery day offered euident demonstrations, that nothing was more to be expected then blowes. Wherefore to encounter those preparations with the like prouisions, the King assembled his high Court of Parlament:A Parlia∣ment. The Mar∣quesse of Suf∣folks oration. His motion. in which the Marques of Suffolke (in a powerfull, glozing, and tedious Oration) extolled his owne deserts aboue the skies, as well in his seruice in the French warres, as also in mouing and in concluding the late truce, and the Kings mariage. He also admonished his Highnesse, and the two houses there assembled, what preparations for warre were made in France, and how behoouefull it was for the King to doe the like. And vpon this motion (proceeding from his haughtie pride and ambitious minde) the whole assemblie became humble suters to his Maiestie,A Record made of his acts. that not only his said admonition and aduice, but also all his said former seruices and doings, might in most ample sort be registred among the Rolles of Parliament, for the perpetu∣allizing of his honour and of his name: which with wonderfull applause was consented vnto; and shortly after he was created Duke of Suffolke.He is made a Duke. Yet for all this, before many yeares were expi∣red, he was in the same place accused, conuicted, and condemned for sundrie treasons,Humana ca∣duca. misprisions, and offences; for which he was exiled, taken, and without law put to death, as hereafter wee shall see. Such is the continuall vncertaintie, and the assured instabilitie of worldly glorie, and the vanitie thereof; that when men doe imagine, that they doe securely sleepe on the bed of honour, then is their rest most diseasefull, and their soundest sleepe is but an vn∣quiet slumber, troubled with fearefull and strange dreames; rather informing them of approching dangers, then assertaining them of the long continuance of that supposed felicitie, which so vnmea∣surably they doe desire. It will be worthie of our labour, in this place to obserue, that from henceforth the affaires of France proceeded worse & worse: so that within few yeares that whole kingdome,The causes of the losse of France, Nor∣mandie, and Aquitaine. with the Duchies of Aquitaine and Normandie, were vtterly lost. The causes of which misfortunes are principally noted to be these. 1. The first was, the releasement of Lewys the noble Duke of Orleance for his ransome. For his wisdome instructed the weake
Counsell of France. His perswasions reconciled all such iarres as were too too common among the Nobilitie of France: and his va∣lour was put into execution with such excellencie of discretion, that by his example the French cowards became valiant. 2. The second was this vnhappie and this vnfortunate mari∣age betwixt the King and his Queene: for by meanes thereof the Earle of Arminake, his kinsmen, and his friends, became mortall enemies to the English Nation, hating them for their Kings sake, because he had vnfaithfully forsaken his affied wife. And besides that, the King had not one penny with the Queene for her mari∣age portion; but spent on her many thousand pounds before hee enioyed her as his wife. And by this match also the King did not strengthen himselfe with any new friends: for her fa∣thers penurie and wants enforced him to liue almost as a priuate man. 3. Thirdly, the releasement of King Henries right to his Du∣chie of Angeow, and to the Country of Mayne, which bordered vpon Normandie, so weakned the Kings Army in that Prouince, that shortly after he was driuen out and expulsed from that Du∣chie, and all Aquitaine by reason thereof was quite lost. 4. The fourth was the guiltlesse death and murder of the most noble and good Duke of Glocester, whose aduice and counsell were the sinewes of those warres. 5. To these also may bee added the diuers dispositions and qualities of the King and of the Queene.The descrip∣tion of King Henry. For King Henry was ex∣ceeding milde, courteous, and gentle, patient in all aduersities, mo∣derate in prosperitie, a despiser of couetousnesse, an hater of op∣pression, a louer of quietnesse and of peace. Hee loathed warres, and the toile and troubles of the world: hee spent much time in his priuate studies, and in his religious exercises vnto God. Hee was not desirous to meddle much with publike affaires, nor with the gouernment of his kingdome. He desired not to reuenge any wrong which was done vnto him. He was more mercifull to such as transgressed, then willing to extend the rigour of iustice against such as had offended his lawes: yea, so little respectfull was hee of his owne greatnesse, and of his knightly dignitie and honour, (in regard of his soules health) that hee loued rather to be ruled then to gouerne as a King. But the young Queene (who was faire and beautifull,The descrip∣tion of Queen Margaret. strong and lustie, proud and haughtie, stout and reuengefull, craftie and politicke) was not well pleased with the soft nature and flexible disposition of the King: neither could her ambitious spirit endure,
that he being more then of full yeares, should (as a pupill) be ruled and directed by another man. Being therefore clearely resolued to dismisse the Duke of Glocester of his Protectorship and com∣mand,The Queene dismisseth the Protector of his office and charge. and making a publike shew of her inward intention to sup∣plie his place, shee was encouraged and furthered therein by her trustie friends the Duke of Buckingham and the Duke of Suffolke, who (by the secret instigation of the rich Cardinall of Winchester, and of the Archbishop of Yorke, who mortally hated the Prote∣ctor) not only remoued him from his place, but called him to a strict account for the expence of the treasure of this kingdome: which iustly and honestly was disbursed by him, for the mainte∣nance and furthering of the French warres. And when they perceiued that they were vnable by that course and practise to attaine vnto their purpose, they procured the Queene (in the Kings name) to assemble his high Court of Parlia∣ment at Burye, where the said Duke (surnamed for his surpassing and heroicall vertues,He is called the good Duke of Glocester. He is mur∣dered. with which he was adorned, The good Duke of Glocester) was attached, and aested for high treason, and com∣mitted vnto prison: and the next day he was found dead & breath∣lesse in his bed, being cruelly and inhumanely murdered, without doubt. Assoone as he was thus dispatched out of the way, Richard Duke of Yorke secretly conspired with his great allies and trustie friends, to set on foot his title to the Crowne. And likewise the Duke of Suffolke (who with the Queene ruled all the rost) respe∣cted more his owne profit, then the benefit of the common-weale, and vsed sundrie deuises and cunning practises to oppresse the people,The French warres are neglected. that with their coine he might fill vp his owne purse. By meanes whereof, no prouision of money was made for the sup∣porting of the Kings warres in France; no Armie was newly raised to assist such as were then abroad;A weake Counsell. no wages were paid to souldi∣ers, or vnto Captaines: which made them discontentedly to mur∣mure. Neither was the Kings Counsell of Estate sufficiently able to rule and to direct as was needfull and necessarie for the Kings profit at home, or for his honour or aduantage abroad. The truce is broken.Before the last prefixed time of truce was ended, Sir Francis Sur∣rayne (an Arragonoys, but a Captaine ouer some English troupes) by a sudden surprisall in the night,Fongyers is taken. tooke the Towne of Fongyers, which standing in the frontier of Normandie, belonged to the Duke of Britaine, where hee slew the inhabitants, and rifled all at his pleasure: for which no recompence was yeelded to the Duke; for hee was answered, that the fact was committed by a priuate Captaine, without the consent of the King, or of the
Duke of Somerset, who was then Regent or Lieu-tenant of the Duchy of Normandy, in which the said Surrayne at that time liued. The Frenchmen likewise, by the subtile policie of a Waggoner, (who with his Cart stopped the Draw-bridge vntill they were en∣tred with their Companies) tooke from the Englinshmen the town of Pont-larch, which is distant from Roan about twelue miles,Pont-larch taken. and is the kay of entrance from France ouer the Riuer of Some into Normandie, where the Englishmen were slain without pitie or com∣passion: and the goods and substance of the Inhabitants was taken away in like sort, as it was done at Fongyers. Thus was the Truce violated on both Parts: And thus were those bloudie warres renewed, which were daily fed with the slaughters of the brauest, and of the most valiant men. The French King (perceiuing that the Englishmen were not now as puisant in those Countries, as they had beene in former times:The French King preuai∣leth. and being minded to hold fast his good Fortune, which drew him by the hand into great hope of prosperous successe) diuided his huge Ar∣mie into three parts, with which in few daies he tooke the townes of Louyers, Gerbory, and Vernoyle. The Inhabitants also of Con∣stance, Gysours, Castle, Gayllard, Ponteau-du mere, S. Loy, Fesampe, and many others in Normandie, and in Guyan, who were swayed by their Garrisons, surrendred themselues into his hands.Roan is yeel∣ded to the French King The Duke of Sommerset likewise, and the Earle of Shrewesbury (being there∣vnto violently enforced by the Roanists, by composition yeelded vnto him that Citie, and departed with all their goods & substance to the Citie of Cane, vpon Hostages left behinde them; that sun∣drie other Castles and Townes (according to their agreement and promise) should also bee giuen vp without blowes to the French King. So that within few dayes,Har-slew is yeelded. the Castle and Towne of Har-flew, and many others, became French. The vnhappie newes of daily losses in Normandie, and in Aqui∣taine, much appaled King Henrie, and troubled his Counsell,A Rebellion in Ireland. who (being vnable to direct, as they had done, whilst the good Duke of Glocester liued, and did assist them) knew not what course was best to be taken, and they were the more perplexed in those affaires, by meanes of a lewd and dangerous Rebellion, which (at the same time) hapned in Ireland. For the speedie suppressing whereof, King Henrie was constrained to transport the Duke of Yorke with an Armie thither. In which seruice he so successefully preuailed,The Duke of Yorke appea∣seth it. that hee not only appeased that tumult, but (by his wisedome, courtesie, and valour) wonne the fauour, and the heartie loue of that Nation.
This Expedition much hindred the Kings preparations for the defence of his Duchie of Normandie; yet he sent thither Sir Tho∣mas Kyriel, a prudent, and a valiant man, accompanied with four∣teene hundred Souldiers, who (with so small a handfull) did as much as could in reason bee expected. For hee recouered diuers Townes and Castles, which had beene lost: And (had his strength consisted of a greater number) hee would assuredly by his valour, haue performed much more. This worthie Captaine, finding himselfe to be too weake, to encounter many thousands of his Enemies, Vnited his forces with Matthew Gough,Cane is besie∣ged. Sir Henrie Norbery, Sir Robert Vere, and some others: So that their Armie consisted of fiue thousand approued valiant men, all which (with haughtie courage and resolued minds to winne honour) encountred with an Armie of seuen thousand of their Enemies, as they marched strongly to the siege of the Ci∣tie of Cane. In the beginning of this fight the Englishmen preuai∣led according to their hearts desire:The English are ouer∣throwne. But in the middest of all their hopes, they were deceiued. For being grieuously oppressed by Arthur Earle of Richmont, high Constable of France, Iames of Luxenburgh Earle of Laualt, and by many other Noble men of France, (who trauailed with many Cornets of Horsemen towards the same siege) and finding their Countrie-men beaten downe, fainting, and on the point to runne out of the field, relieued them with their fresh supplies, and so furiously assaulted the tyred En∣glish Armie,The first vi∣ctorie in open field which the French in many yeares obtayned. that it was quickly ouerthrowen, foure thousand of them beieg slaine, Sir Thomas Kyriel, Sir Robert Norbery, with eight hundred more were taken prisoners: but Matthew Gough, and Sir Robert Vere, and the suruiuors of their Companies, saued them∣selues by flight. Thus were the Englishmen ouerthrowen and miserably wasted: and this was the first Battaile in open field, which the Frenchmen wonne of the English in many yeares before, whereof their Histo∣rians doe not a little bragge.Cane is bt∣tred, assaul∣ted, & stly defended. This victorie being thus obtayned, the Citie of Cane in Normandie was closely besieged by the French King: and oftentimes her walls were aduenterously scaled: The assaylants made many braue and bold attempts, but were manful∣ly repulsed and beaten back, with the losse of their limbs, and of their liues: Then were the walls daily battered, and the French∣men eagerly endeuoured to enter in: but their presumption was sharply checked by the besieged, who did cast them off as fast as they enterprized to come in. Thus euery man contended to buy Honour, but none other pament for it (but bloud) was currant
in that place. The Duke of Somerset (being daily importuned by the fearfull exclamations of his wife and children to surrender the towne) debated thereof seriously with Sir Dauid Hall,The Duke of Somerset would sur∣render Canc. Sir Dauid Hall will not suffer it. A valiant Knight. who was ap∣pointed to be the chiefe Captaine and Commander of that Citie, by the Duke of Yorke, whose Towne it was. But the couragious Knight would not in any sort consent to the Dukes will, whereat he was much displeased, and demanded whether the Kings Lieu∣tenant Generall of that Dutchie had not sufficient authoritie and power of himselfe (without his leaue) to dispose of the Townes and Castles of that Prouince? No, quoth the Knight, the Kings Lieu-tenant here may not, nor can sell, or yeeld vp any mans right, but his only, whose person he doth represent: and this Citie be∣ing my Lord the Duke of Yorkes, quoth he,A Mutinie you haue no power to surrender it to the French King, nor shall, on any composition whatsoeuer. The Duke being highly displeased with this bold and peremptorie answere, informed the inferiour Captaines, common souldiers, and the poorer sort of the Inhabitants, of the approching dangers, which would vndoubtedly be the destructi∣on of them all: and aduised them, not to be depriued of their liues, and of their liberties, through the desperate follie and wilful∣nesse of their obstinate and indiscreet Captaine. This caueat made them clamorous, and this counsell so hardned their hearts against Sir Dauid Hall, that they resolued (in despight of him) to yeeld the Citie (vpon composition) to the French King.Cane is lst. Thus was the peoples obedience seuered and diuided from him: and thus was their courage conuerted into feare: and on a sudden (vpon cer∣taine Articles agreed on) the Citie was abandoned, and became French:All Norman∣die is lst, and so is France. so that Roan and Cane (being the chiefest Cities of the Dut∣chie of Normandie) being lost, all the whole Dutchie (in a short time after) reuolted from King Henry, and was lost likewise. The noble Captaine Sir Dauid Hall, being thus wronged and disgraced, forsooke Normandie, and sailed into Ireland, where hee informed the Duke of Yorke what the Duke of Somerset had done; whereat he was so highly displeased,The Duke of Yorke mali∣ceth the Duke of So∣merset. that he neuer ceased priuatly and openly to practise, vntill the said Duke of Somerset deseruedly had lost his head. For this insupportable and vnfortunate losse of the Dutchie of Normandie, the Queene and the Duke of Suffolke were first secretly blamed by the whispering common people of this kingdome, who afterwards by open slanders, and with pub∣like reprochfull speeches, exclaimed, and accused the said Duke of many notable trecheries and grosse treasons,1450. which chiefly consi∣sted of these particulars.
Treasons obiected against the Duke of SVFFOLKE. FIrst, That by his wicked and vngodly meanes, the Duke of Glocester was depriued both of his Protectorship and of his life. 2 Item, that by his appointment such Counsellors of State were placed about the King and Queene, as aduised all things for their gaine, and not for the profit of the Com∣mon-weale. 3 Item, that the Queene and the said Duke ruled the whole kingdome as they listed: so that (by reason thereof) all things succeeded ill and hurtfull to this kingdome. 4 Item, that the said Duke was the meanes and occasion that the Kings right to Aquitanie and Guyan were yeel∣ded vp, which weakned, and at length lost all the Duchies of Aquitanie and of Normandie. 5 Item, that he had maried his sonne Iohn to the Lady Mar∣garet, sole daughter and generall heire to Iohn Duke of Somerset; and had reported, that she was the next heire to the Crowne of England, if King Henry hapned to die without issue. 6 Jtem, that he had perswaded the Earle of Dumoys, and other great Lords and Officers of France, to transport an Armie into this Realme, to destroy the King, and conse∣quently to make his said sonne Iohn successor to this Crown and kingdome. 7 Item, that he procured the Duke of Orleance to be set at libertie for a ransome, contrary to the commandement and the last Will and Testament of King Henry the fifth: by whose means after wards the affaires of France were made more powerfull and fortunate then formerly they had been, and King Henries forces were daily enfeebled, and made more weake thereby in those Countries. 8 Item, that he had counselled the said Duke (before his de∣parture
out of England) to perswade the French King to augment and to increase his armie, and to make sharper warres both in Normandie and in France against King Henry; who so did: by which meanes the King lost all his possessions in those Countries. 9 Item, that assoone as he came Ambassador into France, he secretly informed King Charles of the chiefe points of his Commission, and instructions: by meanes whereof he grew obstinate, and refused to conclude any peace. 10 Item, that the said Duke (at his last being in France) re∣uealed to the French king the weaknesse of King Henries prouisions to withstand him: by meanes wherof the French∣men became more bold and hardie in those warres. 11 Item, that boastingly and foolishly he had reported, in the presence of many noble and honourable personages, that he had as high a place in the Counsell house of France as bee had in England, and that by reason of his especiall interest in the French Kings loue, hee could dispossesse the neerest and the greatest of the French Kings Counsellours, if hee were disposed so to doe. 12 Item, that when men, money, and munitions were in a rea∣dinesse to be transported into France, to aide and to assist King Henries forces there, the said Duke (being wicked∣ly corrupted, and being a secret friend to the kings enemies) caused them to be kept at home, by meanes whereof the kings armies in those Countries wanting due and necessary supplies, were vanquished both in Normandie and in France. 13 And lastly, that by meanes of his great fauour with the Queene, he had deceitfully and fraudulently enriched him∣selfe with the kings lands and treasures, and had procured to himselfe a monopolie of all the greatest offices for his owne gaine. These and many more foule and treasonable Articles were (in full Parliament) publikely obiected against him, and laid vnto his
charge: all which hee faintly denied, but could scarce cleare him∣selfe of one of them. The Queens pollicie to helpe the Duke of Suffolke.The Queene (to preuent the Duke of Suffolkes further perill and danger, because she entirely loued him) caused him to be commit∣ted to the Tower, where hee had libertie at his owne will: and then concluding the Parliament vpon a sudden, shee not onely en∣larged him, but restored him into high fauour with the King; so that he proudly ietted and swaggered, as formerly he had done. The Com∣mons are dis∣pleased. A rebellion, but appeased.The common people repined much thereat, and spake scanda∣lously and reprochfully of the Queene, and of her gouernment: and some of them wickedly rebelled, making a turbulent mate (nick-named Blew-beard) their chiefest Captaine. But this insur∣rection was quickly nipped in the budde: their ring-leaders were put to death, and the rest of them receiued friendly admonition, and the Kings gratious pardon. The King and Queene intending to reconcile all discords, and to giue some better contentment to the Commons, held a Parlia∣ment at Leicester.The Parlia∣ments request But their purpose failed them: for the lower house instantly importuned the King that iustice might be done vpon the Duke of Suffolke, and also vpon his associating Conspira∣tors, Iames Fynes Lord Say and Lord Treasurer of England, Iohn Bishop of Salisburie, and vpon some others. The King (to pacifie this broile, and to weaken their importu∣nitie, by doing of something wherewith hee thought hee should please them) exiled the said Duke for fiue yeares.The Duke is exiled. He is taken at Sea, and beheaded. But as he sailed towards France, he was taken by an English man of warre, who lan∣ded him vpon Douer Sands, and chopt off his head on a boats side. And thus was the guiltlesse bloud of Humfrey the good Duke of Glocester in some measure reuenged: and the rest of those delin∣quents were sequestred from their Offices, and imprisoned by the King. The Duke of Yorke in∣tendeth to claime the Crowne. His practi∣ses to fur∣ther it.Whilest these things were thus in handling, the Duke of Yorke (albeit resiant in Ireland) sollicited and procured his allies & friends in England (by some secret plottings, pretending some other ends) to set on foot his claime and title to the Crowne; hee being line∣ally descended from Philip the daughter and heire of George Duke of Clarence, who was the elder brother of Iohn of Gaunt, great grand∣father to King Henry the sixth. And first of all it was whispered,  & priuately reported, that the Kings wits were weake, the Queens  heart ambitious, the Kings Counsellors of State not wise enough  to rule: and that all France, Normandie, and Aquitaine were lost, be∣cause  God blessed not the vsurped succession of King Henry.
Vpon these speeches, too too commonly diuulged,A Rebellion in Kent. Iacke Cade. a Kentish Rebell named Iacke Cade, but falsly nominating himselfe Iohn Mortimer, made an Insurrection in that Countrey, and with his rudely-armed crew, and banners displayed, he marched towards the King, who was then at Greenwich.His message to the King. But before hee came vnto him, by messengers he informed him, that hee intended not any hurt against his Royall Person, but would displace and punish some of his euill Counsellors, who were his flatterers, and partiall to their owne friends, bitter to their enemies, enrichers of them∣selues, oppressors of the common people, greedie of too much honour, and who for rewards corruptly ordered (or rather disor∣dered) all things as they pleased. When the King and his Counsell had maturely considered of this vndutifull and insolent message, he was aduised to encounter them, not with faire words, which might breed further contempt, but with the Sword, for ensamples sake, that others might (by their punishment) afterwards take better heede.The Kings Armie pur∣sueth the Rebels. And thereupon a strong Armie was suddenly prepared; of which when the Re∣bels were informed, (to gaine aduantage by their valour, vnder a false pretence of cowardly feare) they retired many miles. The Queene (who was resolued that this retreat rather proceeded from basenesse, then from pollicie and wit) sent after them Sir Humfrey Stafford, and William Stafford his brother, they being ac∣companied with many lustie Gentlemen and braue Souldiers.Some of the Kings forces are ouer∣throwen. But most of them were quickly slaine by the Rebels, who boldly and couragiously confronted them when opportunitie and place gaue them good aduantage to returne. This victorie being thus obtained,The Rebellion is appeased. Iacke Cade (to whom multi∣tudes of rude and gracelesse people from many shires daily resor∣ted) pressed forth againe, and boldly came into Blacke Heath, and from thence to London, where they did much harme. But at length the Kings Generall Pardon was proclaimed by the Arch∣bishop of Canterburie, and by the Bishop of Winchester,A good po∣licie. to all such as were not the Ring-leaders of that vngodly rebellion: by means whereof the inconstant and fearfull multitude left their Captains, and returned home. Then was Iacke Cade proscribed by the King, and proclamation was made, by which a reward by the gift of one thousand markes was promised to him that could take him aliue or dead. The hope of this paiment occasioned very many to make good inquiries and narrow searches after him:Iacke Cade is prescribed and slaine. so that in the end being found he was slaine as he fought desperately for his life, and his head was presented to the King, who willingly paid the re∣ward
which was promised. Thus was this caitiffe destroied, and thus was this commotion appeased, which threatned destruction to the King and Common-weale. Such of the Nobilitie, and such of the Commons, as could no longer endure or digest the euill gouernment of the Queene, and of her adherents,The Duke of Yorke com∣meth into England. aduertised the Duke of Yorke (who remained in Ireland) that a Parliament was neere at hand, and praied him to consider what was fittest to be done for the redresse thereof, and for his owne good. Whereupon he left his deputation in Ireland, and returned home, and openly conferred with his best friends, Iohn Duke of Norfolke, Thomas Courtney Earle of Deuonshire, Ri∣chard Earle of Salisburie, Richard Neuill his sonne Earle of War∣wicke, Edward Brooke Lord Cobham, and with diuers others, how and by what meanes he might soberly, without vsurpation, or trea∣son, set forth his right and title to the Crowne. The causes for which he leuied an Armie.After this matter had beene long debated, it was concluded, that the Duke of Yorke should raise an Armie, vnder pretence to remoue the Duke of Somerset from the King and Queene, because he ruled them both, and the Common-weale too: and against  him it was publikely alleged, that he was an oppressor of the peo∣ple,  a deceiuer of the King, a secret friend to his enemies, a princi∣pall  occasion that England had lost France, Normandie, and Aqui∣taine,  and had (by his manifold treacheries and treasons) deserued  ill of the Prince, and of his Countrey. The King raiseth an Armie.The King also (fearing the worst) raised another Armie; but being certified from the Duke of Yorke, that he intended nothing against his royall person, nor against his State, but onely craued that in a Parliament the Duke of Somerset might receiue his triall, he committed the said Duke (for a shew only) to the Tower: and thereupon the Duke of Yorke (expecting fitter opportunitie) dis∣solued his Armie,A dissembled pacification. and priuately repaired to the King, where (con∣trary to his expectation) hee met with the Duke of Somerset, who accused him of treason,The Duke of Somerset ac∣cuseth the Duke of Yorke of high Treason. He is impri∣soned, and enlarged. for that (without the Kings leaue or com∣mandement) he had raised an Armie, with which he intended to haue murdered the King, and to make himselfe the inheritor and possessor of his Crowne. And though the Kings iealousie (being grounded vpon strong presumptions that it was true) caused the King to detaine and keepe the Duke of Yorke as a prisoner, yet within few daies after he was enlarged, because it seemed vnlikely to the Kings Counsell, that his aime was directed to the Crowne, seeing that (without compulsion) he had dissolued his Armie vp∣on the Duke of Somersets commitment vnto prison, when he was
strong enough to haue made his partie good against the King by force of Armes in the open field. This businesse was the more easily passed ouer by the King, be∣cause that in the middest of those disturbances the Lords of Aqui∣taine (vpon whose fidelities,Guyan and Aquitaine yeelded to King Henry, but regained by the French King. the French King being departed into France, King Henry much relied) by secret messengers had made offer to surrender al that Duchie againe into his hands, if he would speedily send vnto them a conuenient Armie to defend and keepe it as his owne. And thereupon the Lord Talbot, Earle of Shrewes∣burie, was sent thither with three thousand selected and valiant men, who receiued that Duchie to the Kings vse, as it was promi∣sed. But assoone as the French King had notice of this Reuolt, hee marched thither with an Armie of two and twentie thousand men, fought with the English,Iohn Earle of Shrewesburie slaine. slew the most renowned and braue Earle, and almost all his followers, and in few daies regained all Aquitaine, and almost all Guyen into his owne hands. The Queene was now deliuered of a faire sonne,Prince Ed∣ward borne. who was after∣wards named Edward, and liued vntill almost hee came to a mans estate.Creation of Lords. And neere about the same time King Henry created his two brothers by the mothers side, Edmund Tuthar, who was father to King Henry the Seuenth, Earle of Richmond, and Iaspar Tuthar Earle of Pembroke, but he died without issue. France, Normandie, and Aquitaine being all lost, and no warres now busying the Nobilitie of this Realme, franke and free libertie was thereby giuen to the Duke of Yorke,The Yorkish Conspiracie. grieuously to complaine to diuers Lords of the greatest power, of the manifold trecheries and treasons of the Duke of Somerset, as formerly he had done. And at the same time Richard Earle of Salisburie, being the second sonne of Rafe Neuil Earle of Westmerland, whose daughter the Duke of Yorke had maried, and Richard his sonne, who hauing maried Anne the sister and heire of Henry Beauchampe, first Earle, and afterwards Duke of Warwicke, and in whose right he was created Earle, were men of prime honour, and of great power, and for their valour and their vertues were especially obserued and regarded both of the Nobles and also of the Commons of this Kingdome: but chiefly Richard the sonne, Earle of Warwicke, whose courtesie, wisdome, and true manhood, had gained him much loue. These two Earles (among others) faithfully ioined themselues and their fortunes with the Duke of Yorke and his: and chiefly by their meanes and good assistance he preuailed, as in the sequell of this Historie it shall appeare. When the Duke of Yorke had thus strengthned himselfe with
these noble and powerfull friends, he caused the Duke of Somerset to be arrested of high treason in the Queens great Chamber, from whence he was drawen and conueied to the Tower:The Duke of Somerset is arrested for treason. and shortly after in the Parliament the Duke of Yorke accused him of all those treasons which are formerly mentioned. But because the King indeed fell sicke, or fained himselfe (for the Dukes good) to be diseased,The Parlia∣ment brea∣keth off sud∣denly. The Duke of Somerset is enlarged and made Cap∣taine of Ca∣lice. the Parliament was suddenly adiour∣ned, and the King by many protestations faithfully promised, that he should answer those accusations at some other time. But with∣in few daies after hee was not onely by the Queene set at libertie, but was graced with the Kings especiall and publike fauour, and was made chiefe Captaine of the Towne and Castle of Calice, whereat the Nobilitie & the common people grudged much, and exclaimed vpon the vniust proceedings of the King and Queene. The Duke of Yorke and his associates supposing that their pro∣iect would still be crossed if they remained quiet, & expected faire proceedings against the Duke of Somerset by the ordinarie course of Law;The Duke of Yorke leuieth an Armie. resolued once againe to shew themselues with an Armie in the field, and by open warre not only to reuenge themselues vp∣on their enemies, but also to settle the Crowne vpon the Duke of Yorkes head. For which purpose they raised a puissant Armie with∣in the Marches of Wales, and confidently directed their march to∣wards the Citie of London. The King meeteth him with an Ar∣mie. The battaile of S. Albons. The King is ouerthrowen.The King and his Counsell fearing lest the Duke of Yorke and his complices would finde too many friends if they came thither, met them with another Armie at S. Albons: and betwixt them a doubtfull and a bloudie battaile was fought, from which the Duke of Buckingham, and Iames Butler Earle of Ormond and of Wilshire, fled: and Edmund Duke of Somerset, Henry the second Earle of Northumberland, Humfrey Earle of Stafford, sonne and heire to the Duke of Buckingham, Iohn Lord Clifford, and more then eight thou∣sand Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, and common souldiers, were slaine on the Kings part,He is taken prisoner. and the King himselfe was taken prisoner and brought to the Duke of Yorke. The King is vsed reue∣rently. A Parlia∣ment. The Duke of Yorke is made Pro∣tector.And albeit hee might then haue put him to death, and by that meanes might quietly haue possessed himselfe of the Crowne, yet because his rising in Armes pretended none other thing but the reforming of some great abuses in the Common-weale, hee reue∣renced him with all dutie, & brought him with great honour vnto London, where he praied him to assemble his high Court of Parlia∣ment; which he did, & by that great Counsell & honorable estate the Duke of Yorke was made Protector of the Kings royall person,
and of his Realme,The Earle of Salisburie is made Chan∣celor. The Earle of Warwicke is made Cap∣taine of Ca∣lice. Their good gouernment. the Earle of Salisburie was made Lord Chance∣lor of England, and his sonne the Earle of Warwicke was made Cap∣taine of Calice. And thus all the regiment of the ciuill estate of this Common-weale was settled in those former two, and the disposing of war∣like affaires and businesse was conferred on the third. In the admi∣nistration of which Offices, they shewed no iniustice, vsed no briberie, oppressed no man, were indifferent to the poore and rich, and ordered all things in a most commendable and praisefull fashi∣on, to the good contentment of most of the Nobilitie, Gentrie, and Commons of this Realme. But Humfrey Duke of Buckingham, who in the battaile at S. Al∣bons had lost his eldest sonne; and Henry Beauford the new Duke of Somerset, who then also lost his father; with reuengefull mindes and inraged spirits informed the Queene, that this faire and glozing shew was vsed but as a subtill meane to set the Crowne of England vpon the Duke of Yorkes head: That the Kings life and his sonnes was secretly conspired: That her vn∣fortunate miseries approched neere vnto her: And that all would bee starke naught, except the subtiltie and cunning of those three Lords were wittily preuented, and their haughtie and am∣bitious stomackes were with force and violence subdued and bea∣ten downe. Hereupon the Queene and they assembled a great Counsell at Greenwich,The Duke of Yorke and the Earle of Salisburie are remoued by the Queen Aspoile on the Mer∣chant stran∣gers in Lon∣don. by the authoritie whereof the Duke of Yorke and the Earle of Salisburie were remoued from their gouernment. This sudden alteration bred many broiles in the Common-weale. For the English Merchants in London perceiuing that the Common-weales gouernment was vnsettled, quarrelled with the Venetians and Italians who dwelt among them, and by their trading in mer∣chandizing, and by their parsimonie and sparing waxed rich, and depriued them of their chiefest meanes to liue. Those strangers they rifled and robbed: for which offence (not without much trouble and difficultie) the principall offenders were corrected or put to death. The Frenchmen also being diuided into many warlike Fleetes, landed,The French∣men land and burne. The Scots in∣uade. They flie home. robbed and burnt some Frontier Townes within this Realme. And the Scots (being conducted by Iames their King) did much harme to the Duke of Yorkes Countries in the North. Against whom the Duke himselfe marched with a braue Armie. But the Scots (fearing the sequell of their vnaduised inuasion) sud∣denly fled, and returned into their owne Countrey.
The Queene dissembleth with the Yor∣kish Faction.The Queene (who now ruled the King and almost all other things at her pleasure) could not be contented vntill the said three great Lords (either by strength or policie) were cut off: yet out∣wardly she seemed in some measure to affect them, and with her cheerefull countenance and smoothing words shee made them a little to be credulous of her loue. A subtill po∣licie, but dis∣couered.But to effect what earnestly she intended, she caused the King (for recreation, and for his healths sake) to make his progresse to∣wards the North, hunting, hauking, & vsing many other pastimes and delightfull sports: in the middest of all which (pretending bu∣sinesses of great import) shee caused letters to be written to those three Lords, requiring them to come to a speedie conference with the King: whereupon those Lords (not suspecting any guilefull treacherie to be conspired against them) did as they were com∣manded, and were with all cheerefull familiaritie receiued by the King and Queene. But being secretly informed by their friends, that their destruction was neere at hand, the Duke of Yorke fled from thence into Wales, the Earle of Salisburie to his owne Coun∣trey, and his sonne (the Earle of Warwicke) vnto Callice: and yet by their daily messengers and letters sent mutually the one to the other. New proiects were deuised and put in practise shortly after. The King being aduised by his Counsellors, that these mor∣tall iarres at home would incite his enemies abroad to attempt much mischiefe against him and his kingdome,The King la∣boureth for vnitie and peace. How both the Factions met at Lon∣don. endeuoured by gentle perswasions to reconcile his discontented Nobles, and to vnite their hearts in true friendship and in loue. For this purpose hee appointed a generall meeting of all his Lords at London, whither they resorted, but were attended on by multitudes of their meniall seruants, and by such as for that time were desirous and willing to strengthen them with their best ser∣uice. The Lancastrian Faction lodged themselues in the Suburbes, and consulted daily what course was best for them to take. The Yorkish Confederates soiourned within the walles of the Citie, and met daily, and aduised themselues how all things should be orde∣red in this businesse. But neither of the aduerse parties came neere vnto the other. And the Citizens of London being Neuters, and fearing the euent of blowes, furnished euery street with armed men both by day and night, to maintaine and to preserue the Kings peace. Thus whilest euery houre bred much suspicion, and when iea∣lousie
among the Noble-men made the hearts of the Commons to be vnstable; the Arch-bishop of Canterburie, and sundrie other Clergie-men (by fitting perswasions, and arguments of great force and consequence) so preuailed, that the King, the Queene, and all the Lords were pleased,A dissembled friendship. in friendly and in kinde sort to meet and to entertaine each other; and all iarres and discontented humours were outwardly in words, but not inwardly in heart reconciled: and instruments in writing (for future amitie and loue) were mu∣tually subscribed, sealed, and deliuered. And for the greater so∣lemnitie of this new friendship, a religious procession was made thorow the Citie of London; in which the Kings head was ador∣ned with the Imperiall Crowne, and whereon the Duke of Yorke often times looked with a scornefull eie. And one Lord of either Faction marched together hand in hand. The Duke of Yorke lead the Queene, and with great familiaritie and gracefull honour seemed to be highly respected and esteemed by her. The King likewise reioiced much at this Vnion: the Lords made shewes of much applauding: and the multitude being ignorant that secret rancour was dawbed ouer with counterfeited dissimulation, skip∣ped, leaped, and gaue great shouts for ioy. But within few daies after it hapned, that vpon a sudden debate and falling out betwixt one of the Kings seruants and a gentleman belonging to the Earle of Warwicke,A dangerous affray. an affray was made neere vnto the Kings Court, in which the Kings seruant was grieuously wounded, and the other fled. Hereupon the Yeomen of the Kings Gard with Holberds and Swords, and the skullerie with Spits and Forkes,The Erle of Wrwie  assaulted. assaulted the Earle and his followers as he came from the Counsell Boord to take his Barge. Betwixt them many a rude blow was giuen, much bloud was shed, but no man slaine. The Queene, who was forward to picke a quarrell to the Earle vpon any small occasion, and knowing that in a whirrie he was pas∣sed into London, gaue strait command for his apprehension and commitment to the Tower. But by reason that his secret friends had forewarned him to looke vnto himselfe, hee poasted with all expedition into Yorkeshire,He posteth into Yorke∣shire. where hee discouered to his father and to the Duke of Yorke, the great iniurie and wrong which was done vnto him by the Kings seruants, and the intention of the Queene, notwithstanding the late reconcilement and friendship which was concluded with great protestations and much solemnitie betwixt them. And lest some Carpet fauourite might expulse him for his place of trust and Captainship of Calice,He saileth vnto Calice. hee forthwith sailed thi∣ther:
and assoone as he was gone, his father the Earle of Salisburie marched towards the Kings Court with an Armie of fiue thou∣sand men,An Armie raised. to complaine vnto his Highnesse, not onely of the vio∣lence and wrong which his meniall seruants had done vnto his sonne, but also of the sugered and secret dissimulation of the Queene. But when the Queene had certaine notice of his resol∣ued purpose, she commanded the Lord Awdley to encounter him on his way with ten thousand men which she had leuied: and per∣emptorily she required him to bring vnto her the said Earle quick or dead.Bloar-heath field. Her selfe also with another Armie came after him, and in Shropshire in Bloar-heath the said Earle and the Lord Awdley met each other; where the one fought for honour, but the Earle for his life, neither of them intending to yeeld, or to steppe backe. But at length the Earle & his followers (being in despaire of good successe, or pardon if they maintained not the encounter with bold hearts and strong armes) fought with such resolution and vn∣conquerable stomackes,The Lord Awdley is ouerthrowen by the Earle of Salisburie. that the Lord Awdley, with foure and twentie hundred of his souldiers and associates, were slaine: the rest fled, and the Earle of Salisburie was Lord and master of the field. By these practises the Duke of Yorke perceiued plainly, that the liues of him and of his Complices were secretly hunted for:The Duke of Yorke raiseth an Armie, and claimes the Crowne. and therefore he now determined no longer to hide and couer his pur∣pose, as formerly he had done, but by armes in the open field to maintaine his claime and title to the Crowne. And therefore him∣selfe with the Earle of Salisburie marched into Wales, and thither the Earle of Warwicke repaired to them, and brought with him for their assistance, Andrew Trollop and Iohn Blunt, two of the most ap∣proued English Captaines which then liued, and had beene best exercised in the warres of France. And when they had plentifully increased their Armie, partly in Wales and in the Marches thereof, and partly by such companies as resorted daily out of the North vnto them,The Kings armie. they set onwards, and came vnto a little Towne called Lud low, where the King and diuers of his Nobilitie presented a strong Armie to the view of the Yorkish Faction, so that they lay not farre asunder that night. But in the euening the two braue Captaines (Trollop and Blunt) surueying the Kings forces,Andrew Tro∣lop and Iohn Blunt flie in∣to the Kings armie, and discouer all. espied a certaine way and meanes to endanger the King and all his; so that it was resolued by the Duke and Earles, that their aduice & coun∣sell should fiercely be executed the next morning before the King should be able to set his Armie in a readinesse to fight. But in the first watch those two Captaines (making it a matter burdensome
to their consciences, not onely to fight against their Soueraigne Lord and King, but also to betray him into the hands of his owne subiects) secretly fled, and came vnto the King, to whom they plainly discouered the proiect and the intention of his enemies, and aduised him of the best and chiefest meanes, how not onely they might be resisted, but driuen to the worst. And for this ser∣uice they were gently receiued, and pardoned, and rewarded by the King. The Duke and Earles being certified of their Reuolts, beganne to be diffident of their good successe: and not daring to set vp their rest on the next daies fight, they determined to expect another time, which might affoord them more suretie and better hopes. And taking aduantage by the darknesse of the night,The Lords flie in the night. they depar∣ted from their Armie into seuerall places: for the Duke with his younger sonne Edmund Earle of Rutland, retired into Wales, and from thence they sailed into Ireland. The other two (with Edward Earle of March, eldest sonne to the Duke of Yorke) came into De∣uonshire, and being safely shipped in Ex-mouth Hauen, by the fa∣uour and procurement of a worthy Gentleman named Iohn Dyn∣ham, they sailed to Calice, where (notwithstanding their misfor∣tunes) they were receiued with much ioy. The King (who reioiced much at their departure) coasted the Countries with multitudes of Horsemen to ouertake them: but all their labours were in vaine. For the present feare which alwaies remained with them, gaue them wings to flie. He also pardoned the ordinarie souldiers of the Yorkish Faction, which were forsa∣ken by their chiefest guides, and as sheepe were exposed to a slaughter. But their Captaines who were deliuered vp into the Kings hands, were executed in sundry places within this Realme. Hee also proclaimed the said Lords to be Arch-traitors to him and to his Kingdome, confiscated their goods, offices,The Lords are proclai∣med Trai∣tors. and their lands, committed the gouernment of the Northerne parts to the Earle of Northumberland, & to the Lord Clifford, his trusty friends, and made Henry the young Duke of Somerset Captaine and chiefe Commander of his Towne and Castle of Calice,Henry Duke of Somerset is made Cap∣taine of Ca∣lice. Hee was coursly en∣tertained. and of the Mar∣ches thereof; who sailing thither with a purpose to take possession of his new charge, and not suspecting that his enemies were there, was on his first arriuall well beaten and battered with the great shot and ordinance which from the Castle plaied on him, and by those meanes he was compelled to retire and to keepe off. The Queene hauing intelligence of this rude and vnkinde en∣tertainment of her new Captaine and great fauourite, resolued to
send vnto him fresh and new supplies: for which purpose some ships of the Nauie Royall were made ready within the Hauen of Sandwich.Iohn Dyn∣ham taketh some of the Kings ships. But the before-named Iohn Dynham disposing himselfe to all seruices which might support the Yorkish Faction, and being furthered by the Mariners, who highly fauoured and inwardly loued the young and lustie Prince Edward Earle of March, and be∣ing accompanied with many gallant spirits, and braue men, boor∣ded the said ships as they lay there at anchor, took the Lord Ryuers, who was appointed Admirall to conduct them, and carried him and those ships to Calice, from whence the Earle of Warwicke sailed in them into Ireland,The Earle of Warwicke saileth into Ireland. and conferred largely with the Duke of Yorke concerning those affaires. But in his returne the Duke of Exeter being Admirall of the Seas, and hauing vnder his charge a warlike and a strong Fleet, making no doubt to haue taken him, was much deceiued: for his owne Mariners more adhered to the Yorkish fa∣ction then to the Kings, and shewed themselues to bee exceeding cold and sparing in the performance of their duties,He returneth to Calice. when neede required their seruice; so that the Earle of Warwicke returned back againe safely vnto Calice. And now the King vpon good aduice assembled his high Court of Parliament,A Parli¦ment. Attainders for Treason. Preparations against the laing of the Lords. in which hee caused all the Lords of the Yorkish Conspiracie to bee attainted of High Treason. And lest this Realme might be disturbed by their inuasion or secret entrance, diuers Captaines with their companies were lodged in all Townes and Ports which neare adioined to the Sea, and were the best likely places for their landing. Sir Simon Mountfort likewise, who was a right worthie and a valiant Knight, hauing vnder his charge diuers of the Kings ships, was appointed to keepe and to defend the Cinque-ports. But nothing was done in the Kings Chamber, or in any other place of greatest secrecie or counsell, whereof the said Earles had not certaine and quicke intelligence at Calice: wherefore they pro∣uided, furnished, and strongly manned such of the Kings ships as formerly by the said Iohn Dynham had beene brought thither,The Kings Fleet taken in Sandwich. in which they sailed and safely arriued within the Hauen of Sand∣wich, and suddenly they tooke Sir Simon Mountfort prisoner, van∣quished the towne, and caried away with them such of the Kings ships as they found there. And hauing receiued good intelligence from their friends, that nothing was more expected then their re∣turne into England,The Lords doe land at Sandwich. they prepared for their iourney, and arriued the second time at Sandwich, and were within few daies assisted by the Lord Cobham, and by many Gentlemen and braue souldiers,
insomuch that their Armie consisted of more then fiue and twenty thousand men, with which they marched towards London.Their Army. But the Lord Scales was sent against them with a small companie to that Citie, to defend it, and to secure the King of the fidelitie of the Inhabitants thereof when time should serue. But the Lord Maior refused to receiue them,The Londo∣ners refuse to receiue the Lord Scales. and told the Lord Scales that hee was able enough (without his helpe or counsell) to keepe that Ci∣tie, which by the King was committed vnto his charge; whereat he was much displeased, and went to the Tower, from which hee much wronged and damnified the inhabitants of London. The King, to defend himselfe,The King marcheth towards the Lords. and to master his rebellious ene∣mies, being accompanied with the Dukes of Somerset and of Buc∣kingham, and many other Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, and a strong Armie, marched towards them. And though the King himselfe (for necessities sake) was personally present, yet his minde and cogitations were more religiously bent to his praiers, and his de∣sires affected nothing more then quietnesse and peace. But the Queene (whose heart was manly,The Queene encourageth and threat∣neth. and whose anger threatned death) with souldier-like termes and speeches cheared vp her followers, debased their enemies, promised rewards if they deserued well, and the seuerest of all punishments to such as fled. At length neere vnto the Towne of Northampton the two Ar∣mies met: the Earle of March being very frolicke,The Armies doe meet. The battaile of Northam∣pton. and in the heat and flower of his youth, by the aduice and counsell of the Earle of Warwicke, ordered his Armie for the battaile. The Queene and her adherents did the like. The fight quickly beganne, and fiercely continued somewhat more then two houres: but at length the Earles became victors,The King is ouerthrowen. Ten thousand men slaine. Slaughter. slew more then ten thousand men on the kings part, among which were Humfrey Duke of Buckingham, Iohn Talbot Earle of Shrewesbu∣rie, Thomas Lord Egremont, Iohn Viscount Beamond, and many o∣thers. The Queene, with the Duke of Somerset and diuers others,Flight. ta∣king with them the young Prince, fled into the Bishopricke of Dur∣ham, where they hoped to raise a new Armie, or resolued (in de∣fault thereof) to goe into Scotland, and to remaine there vntill fortune and their friends should inable them to recouer what they had lost.The King taken pri∣soner. The Tower is deliuered to the Lords. The King (who was left behinde) was taken prisoner, and con∣ueied by the Earles with great pompe and much honour, vnto London, and at their comming thither the Tower was deliuered into their possession by the souldiers, against the liking and good
will of the Lord Scales, who attempted to flie from thence disgui∣sed in a Whirrie. But being discouered by the Water-men, he was by them taken,The Lord Scales be∣headed by the Water-men. Tho. Thorpe taken and imprisoned. The Duke of Yorke com∣meth into England. A Parlia∣ment. What the Duke of Yorke did and said in the Parlia∣ment house. The Duke of Yorkes title. and made shorter by the head, and his body was negligently left vpon the sands. And Thomas Thorpe, the second Baron of the Exchequer, who mortally hated the house of Yorke, purposing in the habit of a Monke with a shauen Crowne, to flie vnto the Queene, was taken, and brought to the Earle of War∣wicke, who sent him to the Tower, where hee remained long after. The Duke of Yorke being speedily informed of this victorie, left Ireland, and came to London, and procured a Parliament to be as∣sembled in the Kings name: and in the presence of all the Lords in the Vpper House, hee sate himselfe downe in the Imperiall Seat, and in an eloquent and powerfull Oration hee discouered to the Nobles his rightfull claime and title to the Crowne; he being the sonne and heire of Anne the daughter and heire of Roger Mortimer Earle of March, sonne and heire to Philip the sole daughter and heire of Lionel Duke of Clarence, the third sonne of King Edward the Third, and elder brother to Iohn of Gaunt, who was father to the Vsurper King Henry the Fourth, who was father to King Henry the Fifth, who was father to the King who was vntruly na∣med King Henry the Sixth. Englands plagues.He also related vnto them, that because God blessed not his vn∣lawfull gouernment, therefore the Common-weale of England had beene plagued with many mischiefes: As first, by the murde∣ring  and by the executing of many honourable and great Lords.  Secondly, by the slaughter of thousands of the common people  in France, Normandie, and elsewhere. Thirdly, by ciuill and blou∣die  warres at home. Fourthly, by the losse of all Territories be∣yond the Sea belonging to the Crowne of England, excepting Ca∣lice  and the Marches thereof. Fifthly, by sudden incursions made  by the Frenchmen and by the Scots. And lastly, by all manner of violence,1460. extortion, and oppression practised vpon the poorer sort.  And in his conclusion hee craued no fauour, vnlesse that iustice gaue them warrant;The title to the Crowne settled by act of Parlia∣ment. nor quiet possession of the Crowne, except they found his descent and title to be infallibly true. When the Lords and the Commons there assembled had with mature deliberation and good aduice debated soundly of this im∣portant businesse, it was by them all enacted, that King Henry  should so long as he liued retaine the name and honour of a King,  and that the Duke of Yorke should be proclaimed to be the heire  apparant of the Crowne, and should be the Lord Protector both
of the Kings person, and also of his dominions and countries; and that the said Duke should haue the present possession of the Crowne of this Realme deliuered vnto him, if at any time King  Henry or his friends, allies, or fauourites, in his behalfe attempted the infringing of the said Acts, which were agreed and confirmed by their oathes. The Duke of Yorke hauing by these meanes gotten the gouern∣ment of the Kings person, and of all his dominions into his hands,The Lords in Scotland re∣fuse to come to the Duke of Yorke. dispatched his letters into Scotland in the Kings name, requiring the Queene, the Dukes of Somerset and of Exeter, the Earle of De∣monshire, the Lords Clifford and Rosse, and such other great men as were fled, and remained in that Kingdome, to repaire with all ex∣pedition to the Kings presence.They come on with a great Armie. But they all not onely refused to obey this peremptorie command, but with an Armie of eigh∣teene thousand Englishmen & Scots they marched boldly towards the Kings Court. Whereupon the Duke of Yorke, with his younger sonne the Earle of Rutland, and the Earle of Salisburie, leauing the King in the custodie of the Duke of Norfolke, and of the Earle of Warwicke, and being accompanied with no more then fiue thousand men, di∣rected his iourney towards the Queene,They are en∣countred. The battaile of Wakefield. Haste made waste. The Duke of Yorke ouer∣throwen and slaine. A bludie fact. and met her neere to the Towne of Wakefield, where no perswasions or good aduice could preuaile, but the Duke of Yorke, who euery houre expected the approch of Edward Earle of March, his eldest sonne, with a strong Armie, would forth with fight; which vnfortunately he did: for in lesser time then the space of one houre, himselfe, with almost three thousand of his companie were slaine; and his younger sonne, Edmund Earle of Rutland, being but twelue yeares old, knee∣ling vpon his knees, and desiring mercie, was cruelly and wickedly stabbed to the heart by the Lord Clifford, who horribly did sweare, that by that act he would be reuenged for his fathers death. And the rest of that small Armie being discomforted, confusedly ranne away and saued themselues by flight. The Queene, who had taken the Earle of Salisburie prisoner, caused his head to be stricken off, and executed many others,The Earle of Salisburie beheaded. all whose heads (to despight the Yorkish Faction) she caused to be set vpon the walles of the Citie of Yorke. Which reuengefull deede not long after was requited by the ruine and destruction of the King, the Queene, the young Prince, and of the greater number of such as fauoured and assisted the house of Lancaster, and oppo∣sed themselues against the rightfull and iust claime of the Duke of Yorke, as hereafter we shall heare.
The new and braue Duke of Yorke being informed of this ouer∣throw,The new Duke of Yorkes vi∣ctorie. and of his fathers death, augmented his Armie, which was but small, and consisted only of three thousand men, with which hee fought with the Kings halfe-brother Iaspar Earle of Pembroke, Owen Tuthar his father, Iames Butler Earle of Ormond and of Wilt∣shire, and their companies. And almost at their first encounter those two Earles fled, foure thousand of their friends were slaine, many others were taken prisoners,Owen Tu∣thar behea∣ded. The Queenes Armie pre∣uailed. The King is enlarged. and among them Owen Tuthar (father in law to King Henry) was one, who with some others were incontinently put to death. But the Queenes Armie neere about that time hauing fought with the Duke of Norfolke and all his for∣ces, compelled them to flie, & to leaue King Henry behinde them, whereat she conceiued much ioy. This victorie at the first made her insolent and proud: but when she vnderstood how well the young Duke of Yorke had pre∣uailed, and that his Armie was now winged with the Earle of War∣wickes Regiments and Companies, shee with her adherents retired backe into the Northerne parts of this Realme, and raised a huge Armie of threescore thousand men:The Queenes Armie of 60000. men. The Duke of Yorkes Army of 49000. men. Towton field. 36000. En∣glishmen slaine. The Dukes victorie. and neere vnto a Towne cal∣led Towton, Edward Duke of Yorke, the noble and victorious Richard Earle of Warwicke, and almost nine and fortie thousand men, met with the Queenes Armie, where they fought a cruell and a fierce battaile, in which more then six and thirtie thousand Englishmen were slaine; among which were the Earles of Northumberland and of Westmerland, the Lords Dacres, Welles, and Clifford, Sir Iohn Ne∣uil, Andrew Trollop, and many others. The two Dukes of Somerset and of Exeter saued themselues by flight: but the Earle of Deuon∣shire with sundrie moe were taken prisoners. The King and the Queene, with Prince Edward their onely sonne, fled to the Castle of Barwicke, and from thence into Scotland, where they were courteously receiued and friendly entertained by the young King. In recompence of which fauours, and in hope of future assi∣stance,Barwicke de∣liuered to the King of Scots. King Henry deliuered vnto him the Castle and Towne of Barwicke, which the Scots not only much desired, but with excee∣ding great losse and detriment had oftentimes (but still in vaine) attempted to make their owne. This victorie being thus happily obtained, the Duke of Yorke rod triumphantly to the Citie of Yorke, from whose walles hee tooke the heads of his deceased father, and of his friends: and cau∣sing the Earle of Deuonshire and some others to be executed,Execution. hee set vp their heads in the same places.
King Henry being hopelesse of all other helpe and assistance,The Duke of Yorke com∣meth trium∣phantly into London. sent the Queene his wife, and the young Prince their sonne, to her fa∣ther Reyner, the Titularie King of Sicilia, Naples, and of Ierusalem, praying to vse his best endeuours and diligence to procure him aide and succour from the French King. And in the meane time he himselfe remained in Scotland, patiently expecting the euent of his future Fortunes.
THE HISTORIE OF KING EDVVARD THE FOVRTH. EDVVARD Duke of Yorke hauing ouerthrowen the King & Queen, and hauing slaine and executed many of his greatest enemies at Towton Field,Edward the Fourth pro∣claimed and crowned King. returned trium∣phantly to the Citie of London, and was proclaimed King of this Realme the fourth day of March, and was crowned the nineteenth day of Iune then next following. In the beginning of his Raigne he remoued from all Offices all such as were voiced to be the op∣pressors of his people, and carefully prouided that all things might be ordered well for their commoditie and profit. And in his high Court of Parliament many things were established and enacted for the peace and welfare of the Common-weale.A Parlia∣ment. And all former Statutes which had beene made by the last King,Acts for treasons re∣pealed. and conuicted him and his adherents of High Treason, were defaced, cancelled, and made void. The Earle of Oxford, and Sir Awbrey Vere his son, and some other Counsellors to King Henry the Sixth,Execution. being attain∣ted of sundrie treasonable practises, lost their heads. And to strengthen his part with powerfull and with faithfull friends, he created his two brothers, George, Duke of Clarence,Lords crea∣ted. and Richard, Duke of Glocester: and Sir Iohn Neuil, brother to the Earle
of Warwicke, he created Lord Montacute: and Henry Bourchier (who had maried the Ladie Elizabeth, Aunt vnto the King, and was brother vnto Thomas Bourchier Archbishop of Canterburie) was created Earle of Essex: and William Lord Fawconbridge was made Earle of Kent. The Duke of Somerset, Sir Ralphe Percie, and diuers others, be∣ing the Kings inueterated enemies, perceiuing this settlement of the State,Some of the Kings ene∣mies submit themselues, but after∣wards doe reuolt. and finding no hope for reliefe, but onely in the Kings grace and mercie, voluntarily and humbly submitted themselues to his Highnesse; whereupon they receiued his pardon, and were entertained with his loue. Queene Margaret (who with the Prince her sonne was abiding in France) by her fathers meanes procured from the French King certaine ships, and an aide of fiue hundred men,The Queene landeth, and flieth into Scotland. with which she arriued safely in England at Tyne in the North Country. But her successe was vnfortunate: for by the Kings friends foure hundred of them were taken prisoners, and ranso∣med, and the rest were slaine: and the Queene her selfe fled, and with much difficultie went into Scotland, where shee found such fauour and such friendship, that many a lustie Scot accompanied her, the King, and the Prince their sonne, to the Castle of Barwicke, where she left her sonne,The Queene raiseth a new Armie. and with the King began once more to le∣uie a strong Armie in Northumberland, and in the Bishopricke of Durham; whereof when the Kings reconciled enemies, the Duke of Somerset, Sir Ralphe Percie, and some others had intelligence, they treacherously slunke away, and came vnto the Queenes aide. Now when King Edward perceiued, that neither his estate nor his succession could be established without bloud,The Kings resolution. he sent a gallant and a strong Fleet of ships well furnished into the Northern Seas: and raising a puissant Armie, hee sent the Lord Montacute with some part thereof before him, and with the rest hee himselfe spee∣dily followed after.The Lord. Montacutes braue victory The said Lord boldly seeking aduentures, and longing much to make himselfe famous by his valour, couragi∣ously did set vpon the Lords Hungerford and Roos, and vpon Sir Ralphe Percie and their troupes. These Nobles (in the beginning of the fight) fearing their owne shadowes, quickly ran away: but Sir Ralphe Percie and some others (preferring an honourable death before a cowardly and a shamefull flight) disdained to turne their backes,The Lord Montacute sette on the Queenes Armie. fought stoutly, and were slaine like valiant men of warre. From this victorie the Lord Montacute (with much confidence and true magnanimitie) marched towards the King and Queenes Armie,Exhamfld. and met with them in Exhamshire. Many prouocations he
vsed to dare them to the fight, whereof they seemed to take no no∣tice: whereupon he furiously pressed them in their owne Campe, so that despaire depriuing them of all good hope, except they fought like men, they confronted their assailants with such cou∣rage, that nothing (for a while) was more vncertaine, then vnto whom the honour and victorie of that day would fall. But in the end the Lord Montacute determining to enlarge his fame with the hazard of his life, before King Edward should enter into the field to succour him, rushed with such violence into the Kings battaile, that he disordered it wholly in a moment. Then blowes were exchanged (with desperate resolution) on both sides; and either partie fought in bloud.The King and Queene are ouer∣throwen. Great Priso∣ners taken. But in the end the Kings Armie was discomforted and ouerthrowen, and such as were vnslaine, fled. But in the pursuit there were taken these pri∣soners, Henry Duke of Somerset, William Taylboys (who enstiled himselfe Earle of Kent) the Lords Roos, Molynes, and Hungerford, Sir Henry Neuil, Sir Thomas Wentworth, and Sir Richard Tunstal: all which were beheaded in sundrie places,A terrible execution. and seuen and twentie others suffred the like executions shortly after. But King Henry with fast riding escaped into Scotland: so did his halfe-brother Ia∣spar Earle of Pembroke, Sir Ralphe Grey, and some others. And King Edward when he came forth with his Armie, and vnderstood per∣fectly what was done, humbly thanked Almightie God, and then praised the Lord Montacute and all his followers for this honoura∣ble and great victorie: and with part of his Armie he sent the Earle of Warwicke and the Lords Montacute, Fawconbridge,An Armie sent into the North. and Scrope into Northumberland, for the recouerie of such Forts and Castles as were detained and kept from him: where they wonne the Castles of Alnewike and Dunstanburgh, with the Castle of Bambrough, in which was Captaine Sir Ralphe Grey, who had formerly sworne his ser∣uice to King Edward. Him they beheaded,Sir Ralphe Grey degra∣ded and exe∣cuted. when they had degra∣ded him from the honour of Knighthood, by hewing off his spurs, renting in peeces of his Coat of Armes, and breaking his sword ouer his head. The King, to despight the Earle of Northumber∣land, who fought against him, dignified the Lord Montacute with his Title, and gaue the Earledome of Pembroke from Iaspar Tuther vnto William Lord Harbert. But within few daies after, the said late Earle of Northumberland in all submissiue manner reconciled himselfe to the Kings fauour, and was by him restored to his possessions and estate. And lest hee should disgrace and wrong the Lord Montacute, by taking from him so quickly that digni∣tie which so lately for his great seruice he had bestowed on him,
he created him Marquesse Montacute,The Lord Montacute is created Marquesse Montacute. and gaue him full content∣ment in that behalfe. After this victorie was thus obtained, the King bestowed many rich and princely gifts vpon his Lords and Gentlemen, which ser∣ued him faithfully and valiantly in his warres: and with such fami∣liaritie and kindnesse demeaned himselfe among them, that they were confidently assured of his loue.Captaines and souldiers rewarded. The Kings care of his Common-weale. He pardo∣neth offen∣ders. He fortifieth. Hee also shared and diuided the lands and goods of his slaine enemies among his souldiers, and wonne their hearts by his great bountie. He augmented some of his coines of siluer, and of gold; and with new stampes and in∣scriptions he minted others. Hee published sundrie proiects, and effected them for the commoditie and welfare of his people. Hee pardoned such as had borne armes against him in the field, or else∣where, vpon their humble submission and contrition for their of∣fence. He builded strong Forts, Castles, Rampiers, and Bulwarkes, vpon the Sea-coasts, to prohibite his enemies landing within this Kingdome. And on the maine land hee did the like, to hinder all traiterous Rebels from collecting of new forces to do him harme. And whilest King Edward was thus disposing of his affaires, and ordering the businesses of the Common-weale,King Henry is taken and imprisoned. King Henry, who in a disguised fashion (for some secret purpose) was trauelling to∣wards London, was taken in the North, and brought vnto King Ed∣ward, who committed him to a strait imprisonment within the Tower of London. And when he had settled and ordered his estate and kingdome,The King in∣tendeth to mrte. because hee was young and lustie, about the age of foure and twentie yeares, hee was intreated by his Counsell and Nobilitie, to consider of his succession, and to take a wife, where∣unto he willingly gaue consent. There were nominated vnto him the Ladie Margaret, sister to the King of Scots, and Elizabeth the sister and heire apparant to Henry King of Castile. But the former of those two was thought to be vnfit, because she was continually diseased and infirme. The latter also was not liked, because shee was not seuen yeares old. But the Ladie Bona, daughter to Lewys. Duke of Sauoy, and sister to Queene Carlot, the wife of King Lewys the eleuenth of France, was most of all desired. And for that pur∣pose the Kings best friend,The Earle of Warwicke obtaineth the Duke of Sa∣uoyes daugh∣ter. Richard Neuil Earle of Warwicke, was sent Ambassadour into France, with an honourable traine, where (in the behalfe of the King) he wonne his sute, and with much ioy on all parts obtained his request. But in his absence, the King (as hee hunted in Wich-wood neere to Stony-Stratford) came (for his re∣pose) into the Lordship and Manour of Grafton, where the Ladie Iaquet (daughter to Peter of Luxenburgh, late Earle of S. Paul, and
sometimes the widow of Iohn the renowned Duke of Bedford, and wife to Sir Richard Wooduile Lord Ryuers) then lay: vpon whom there attended her daughter, the faire and fresh Ladie Elizabeth, the widow of Sir Iohn Grey, who was slaine as hee fought for King Henry at S. Albons in the last yeare of his raigne.The King in his absence marieth the Lady Eliza∣beth Grey. This Lady was on the sudden so liked, so loued, so fawned and doated on by the lu∣stie and young King, that (for dalliance sake) hee resolued to make her his wanton play-fellow if he might. But her constant modestie and amorous denials repulsing him from his vnchaste hopes, he (to obtaine the fruits of his desires) without any further delay, aduice, or counsell, tooke her to his wife; and created the Lord Ryuers,Creation of Lords. her father, Earle Ryuers, and made him high Constable of England. Her brother Anthony (whom he had made Lord Anthony) was by his procurement maried to the sole and only daughter and heire of Thomas Lord Scales, and was in her right dignified with that ho∣nour. Her sonne, Sir Thomas Grey, was created Marquesse Dorset, and was (by the Kings motion) maried to the Ladie Cicilia, the on∣ly daughter and heire to the Lord Bonuyle and of Harrington. And though this his mariage with the Queene were pleasing for a time, yet was it most vnhappie and vnfortunate in the end.Euill effects of the Kings mariage. For it occasioned his expulsion out of this Realme. Secondly, the deaths of his true friend Richard the most eminent and valorous  Earle of Warwicke, and of the Marquesse Montacute, his brother. Thirdly, the slaughter and execution, and the murdering of many  Nobles, Gentlemen, and braue souldiers. Fourthly, the destructi∣on  of the Kings two sonnes, and almost the vtter ruine and destru∣ction  of the Queenes kindred, and of her bloud, as hereafter in this Historie it shall appeare. When the sudden newes of King Edwards hastie mariage was published in France,1464. 4 euery person whom it concerned was highly displeased at this frumpe which thereby hee gaue to his worthiest and dearest friend the Earle of Warwicke:The Earle of Warwicke hateth the King. and the Earle himselfe (by reason thereof) conceiued such an inward hatred against the King, that in his heart he resolued (when time should serue) to de∣pose him if he might: yet notwithstanding he made faire weather,He dissem∣bleth for a time. and at his returne seemed rather to make sport at his own disgrace, then to take any discontented notice of it. The King also (who chiefly by this Earle was seated and setled in his Throne) endeuoured secretly to abridge him of his autho∣ritie and power, because hee feared lest his greatnesse might doe him harme. And the Earle, although hee staied a while at the Court after his returne out of France, yet as long as hee remained
there, he imagined that he stood on thornes. Wherefore hee as∣ked leaue of the King to depart vnto his Castle of Warwicke for his repose, and for recreations sake: But being come thither, his head was busied with new proiects, and all his thoughts were imploy∣ed, how, and by what meanes hee might subdue and depose the King.The Lady E∣lizabeth borne. And at this time was borne the Lady Elizabeth: who was afterwards the wife of King Henrie the seuenth, and mother vnto king Henrie the eight. The King (purposing to gaine the loue of forraine Princes, that by meanes thereof, he might with the more securitie defend him∣selfe against Lewis the French King,A truce with the Scots. who threatned to bee reuen∣ged for the iniurie which by King Edwards marriage was done to him, and to the sister of his Queene) concluded a Truce for fifteene yeares with the King of Scots: Notwithstanding that (by the deliuerie of the Queene Margaret) hee detained from him his strong Castle of Barwicke. He also sent vnto Henrie King of Castiell, and vnto Iohn King of Arragon many Cotshall Sheepe,English sheep sent to the Kings of Ca∣stiell, and of Arragon. which ne∣uer before vpon any entreatie, or request, they, nor any other Prince could obtaine. From which Sheepe, such a multitude haue increased, that it hath since turned to the vnspeakable pre∣iudice, and hurt of this kingdome and Common-weale. The King also (contrarie to the opinion, and good liking of the Earle of Warwicke) contracted and afterwards married his Sister the Lady Margaret vnto Charles the Duke of Burgoine,The Duke of Burgoine marrieth the Kings Sister. as former∣ly he had done two other of his Sisters, to the Dukes of Exeter and of Suffolke. The Earle of Warwicke (who secretly thirsted for reuenge; and thought the time to be long before hee had restored king Henrie the sixt to his libertie, and Crowne) by faire promises, and insinuating perswasions, wonne his two brothers, the Arch∣bishop of Yorke,The Mar∣ques of Mon∣tacute, was still a secret friend to king Edward. and the Marques Montacute, to take his part. But the Marques (who was exceeding hardly induced to giue his consent to so ill an intended action) performed all things with an vnwilling minde: which in the end turned to his owne ruine, and to the destruction of his brethren. The Earle likewise (being right wel assured, that the Kings brother George Duke of Clarence secretly enuied the King, because he had preferred Anthonie the Queenes brother in marriage with the sole daughter and heire of the Lord Scales;The Duke of Clarence ioy∣neth with the Earle of War∣wicke against his brother the King. and Sir Thomas Gray her Sonne, in marriage with the sole daughter and heire of the Lord Bonuile and Harrington; and the Lord Hastings, to the sole daughter and heire of the Lord Hongerford; & was carelesse of his aduancement by such a match) watched a fit opportunitie to complaine to the Duke of Clarence
of the Kings sullen vngratefulnesse towards him. Why, quoth the Duke, can you (my Lord) thinke that the King will be thank∣full to his friend, who is too too vnkind to his owne brethren? Thinke you that friendship or good deserts, can worke in him more vertuous effects, then nature hath afforded him? Is hee not now so highly mounted, that hee vouchsafeth not to cast downe an eye vpon such as are of his owne bloud? Nay, who lay in his owne Mothers wombe? Are not the allies and kinsfolkes of his Wife preferred by him to all Promotions, Dignities, Offices and good places? And are not his owne brothers, and his truest friends (who haue fought in many assaults, skirmishes and battailes, to make him a Soueraigne King) neglected? vnrewarded? and vn∣courteously shaken off? Were my brother of Glocester of mine hu∣mour and disposition (my Lord) we would (with your assistance and aide) make him to know himselfe better, and to set a diffe∣rence betwixt his auncient and truely dignified Nobilitie, and such new Gentlemen, as vnworthily doe rule and gouerne all, to our dishonour and reproach. The Earle of Warwicke (finding the Duke of Clarence thus tra∣ctable;The plot is strengthened by a mariage. and inclining to his humour) consulted with him often∣times, touching this businesse. And to tie him vnto himselfe by a fast bond of friendship and of loue, He offered to him in marriage one of his daughters, who was named Isabel, with halfe the inheri∣tance of his wife. Whereof the Duke in all kindly and friendly sort accepted. And thereupon the plot was contriued thus.The plot a∣gainst King Edward. The Earle him∣selfe, with the Duke of Clarence would goe vnto Calice, where the yong Lady (who was there) should bee married. And (in their absence) as if it hapned without their knowledge or consent; the Earles two brothers, the Archbishop of Yorke, and the Mar∣ques Montacute, were appointed with their friends, to raise a Re∣bellion in the Countie of Yorke. And this proiect was put into Ex∣ecution in this maner. The Husbandmen of Yorke-shire (by an ancient custome) in the end of Haruest,The cause of the Rebellion vsed yearely to giue a certaine quantie of Corne and Graine, towards the maintenance and reliefe of diuers poore people, who liued in the Hospitall of Saint Leonard within the Ci∣tie of Yorke. Now, the Earles friends, scandalously, and falsely reported in the Countrie thereabout: That the said poore people were not relieued by the said Almes, but that the Gouernour and Priests of the said Hospitall, enriched and fatted themselues there∣with. So (when the Proctors, according to their wonted fashion,
came abroad, to collect the peoples deuotion in that kind, they were shrewdly beaten by the Rustickes; and misused beyond measure. Hereupon, many Religious and well disposed people tooke part with the Proctors; and with rough words and some blowes, they requited the iniurie which was done vnto them. From this beginning, sprang forth a dangerous Insurrection: So that (within few dayes) there were vp in Armes, more then fif∣teene thousand men.This was done by him, in fauour of the King: as it seemes after∣wards. Who (with their ring-leaders) came proud∣ly before the Citie of Yorke, and (with vnciuile and rude tearmes) they threatned the ruine and destruction of it. But (in the darke∣nesse of the night) the Marques Montacute, being accompanied with many lustie and braue men, set vpon the Rebels, slew many hundreds of them: and strake off the Captaines head; and strong∣ly fortified that Citie. When the King (who was truely informed of this Rebellion) was told this newes, hee rested doubtfull whether his old friend the Marques had done this seruice, to make an amends for his re∣uolt,Sir Iohn Conyers cap∣taine of the Rebels. or else to colour his ill intendements thereby. The Rebels (who still increased) perceiuing that they should loose their la∣bour to linger about the Towne, left the Citie, and marched to∣wards London, being then conducted by Sir Iohn Conyors, a wor∣thie and a valiant Knight. The King (being hereof aduertised) commanded the Lord William Herbert Earle of Pembroke, and Humphrie Lord Stafford of Southweeke (who was nominated in hope of future good seruice, but not indeed created, Earle of Deuonshire) to leauie a strong pow∣er in Wales, and with all expedition to fight with the Rebels: And hee himselfe promised to assist them with a faire Armie. The Lord Stafford o∣uerthrowne.These Lords, with eight or nine thousand men, right well or∣dered and apointed, marched towards these Rebels: And (as they drew neere to Northampton) they vnderstood that they were not farre off. Whereupon the Lord Stafford, and Sir Richard Herbert (a valiant Knight, and brother to the Earle of Pembroke) taking with them out of the whole Armie, two thousand strong & skilful Archers, plotted a secret Ambush, to take a view of the Northren Rebels as they passed by, but as soone as they were gone beyond them, these Archers rushed violently vpon their Rereward. But the Rebels (who were nimble, and well ordered by their carefull Generall) turned about, stuck to their tacklings, and with their greater numbers, slew most of those Welchmen, and the rest fled hastily to their owne Campe. An vnfortu∣nate dissentiōAnd the next night by reason of an vnkind diuision which hap∣ned
betwixt the Lord Stafford and the Earle of Pembroke, who at Banburie remoued him from a common Inne, where hee vsed to lodge with an vnchaste Queane, the Lord Stafford with his Ar∣chers departed from the Armie, and left them to their fortunes among their foes. This froward slinking away nothing at all dismaied the noble Earle, though (as he had iust cause) he were much displeased there∣at:Banburie field. but made him to resolue with the more alacritie and courage to set vpon the Rebels, with whom hee fought the next day, and with his Welshmen saw many tokens of victorie neere at hand. But suddenly a Gentleman named Iohn Clapham, and seruant to the Earle of Warwicke, hauing his masters Banner with the white Beare, trouped towards the battaile with fiue hundred men, who were by him collected of the off-skumme of the rascall and basest sort of the inhabitants of the Towne of Northampton, and of the villages thereabout. All these presenting themselues afarre off, and aduancing their Standard, and crying, A Warwicke, A Warwicke,A policie. so incredibly daunted and confounded the Welshmen, who supposed that the Earle of Warwicke was come thither with another Armie,The Kings forces are ouerthrowen. 5000. men slaine. that they began to flie, and were on the sudden ouerthrowen, and more then fiue thousand of them were slaine. And Sir Richard Harbert and eight others being taken prisoners, were beheaded at Banburie by the Rebels. This fortunate successe animated sundrie leaud and ill disposed people of Northamptonshire to enter into new broiles, insomuch that they (making a notorious Rascall, named Robin of Riddisdale,The Queenes father is be∣headed by the Rebels their Captaine) entred into the Manour of Grafton, where they ap∣prehended the Earle Ryuers, whom they loued not, and Sir Iohn his sonne, caried them to Northampton, and without questioning with them, or any legall proceeding, smote off their heads.The Lord Stafford beheaded. The King marcheth towards the Rebels. The Duke of Clarence and the Earle of Warwicke doe some with the Re∣bels. And the Lord Stafford, being by the Kings directions taken at Brent∣marsh in Somersetshire, was caried to Bridgewater, and was there ex∣ecuted, because hee trecherously departed with his companies from the Earle of Pembroke, as formerly we haue heard. The King (notwithstanding these troubles) was so full of cou∣rage and heroicall magnanimitie, that hee was not any thing at all dismaied with any crosse or ill newes, but marched confidently with his Armie against the Northerne Rebels, to whom the Earle of Warwicke had ioined himselfe with a great power; and likewise the Duke of Clarence brought all his forces to the Earle: so that now a fearfull expectation of vnchristian crueltie disquieted the vast and great body of the Common-weale. But to preuent that
mischiefe, manie of the Nobilitie endeuoured day, and night, to mediate,A parly for peace. and to conclude a Peace: so that Letters were written from the one part, to the other: Heralds of Armes were sent, and the word of Peace was so pleasing to them all, that euerie circum∣stance seemed to giue warrant that all things should bee qualified, and set in tune. This parly made the King too se∣cure. The King is taken in his Bed.By meanes of this parlie, King Edward became more carelesse of himselfe, and of his charge then was fitting. VVhereof, when the Earle of Warwick was informed; hee resolued (though disloyally, and dishonestly) to make an aduantage thereby vnto himselfe: so that in the midst of the Night, when securitie suspected none euil, the said Earle, being accompanied with manie of his friends, well armed, and thorowly appointed, rushed into the Kings Campe, slew his Watches,He is sent Prisoner to the Archbi∣shop of Yorke. and tooke him in his Bed, and (as secretly as hee could) he sent him as a Prisoner to the Castle of Middleham in York∣shire, there to be safely kept by the Archbishop his brother; who either repenting what hee had done against the King, or being wonne by large promises of great fauour, and good rewardes, suf∣fered him (with his Garders) to hunt and to hawke at his pleasure.The King es∣capeth. By meanes whereof, fit opportunitie for a rescue was giuen to Sir William Stanley, Sir Thomas Burgh, and some others of his faithfull friends, who not only did set him free, but also by their carefull helpe,The King commeth to London. and assistance, conueighed him from place to place, vntill the Earle of Warwick was certainly informed, that hee was within the Citie of London. This his deliuerance much encumbred the said Earle, the Duke of Clarence and their Confederates, with new troubles, and daily consultations, what course was fittest for them to take. For they had dissolued their Armie, and permitted the kings to depart from them vntouched, when he was taken, supposing that by his Cap∣tiuitie there had beene a finall end of all those Ciuill wars. But at length, they resolued to rayse another Armie vnder co∣lour of some Rebellion in the North, and the King (on his part) was determined by one meanes or other, to make them better minded, and more dutifull: or else to roote them and their Poste∣ritie out of the Land. Thus, whilest all things were in a Combustion, and nothing but Ciuill war was threatned in euerie place: The Common Lawes were neglected, Iustice was laid a sleepe, Robberies and oppressi∣ons were too too rife: and open violence (without correction) was practized vpon the weaker sort. The Lords and Great men of the Land, once more endeuoured to preuent this future mischeif: and
and vpon solemne oathes receiued for a quiet and friendly enter∣uiew,An enter∣uiew. the King and the confederated Lords met kindly in the great Hall at Westminster, where the obiections of good deserts and of vnthankfull requitals, were with such proud and bitter words repeated, and maintained by the Earle of Warwicke, that in a great furie they all departed one from another.The parley broken off. An Armie raised by the Lords. Whereupon the King went to Canterburie, and the confederated Lords into Lincolnshire, where they raised an Armie, of which they made Captaine Sir Robert Welles, sonne and heire apparant to the Lord Welles, because hee was a man right valiant, and of good direction and iudgement in the Art of warre.An Armie raised by the King. The King (who was inwardly vexed with this new preparation) was by necessitie enforced to leuie another Armie; which when he had done, he sent for the Lord Welles, who with his brother in law Sir Thomas Dymocke, comming towards the King, tooke Sanctuarie at Westminster, because their hearts fai∣led them to goe forward,A crul aced for that they heard that the King was exceeding angrie. But vpon the Kings solemne word and promise that no wrong should be done vnto them, they came into his pre∣sence, and were by him required to command the Knight to desist from his rebellious purpose, and to repaire to the Kings Armie for his seruice: and they accordingly tooke much paine and tra∣uell to that purpose. But as the King marched forth towards the Rebels, he was informed, that the said Sir Robert Welles was resol∣ued to perseuere in that action: whereat the King was so excee∣dingly enraged, and so forgetfull of his princely promise, that in his vnaduised furie he caused the heads of the said Lord & Knight to be smitten off; for which crueltie hee was euilly spoken of by many Nobles and inferiour men, who otherwise wished him good successe in all his affaires and actions. When both these Armies had pitched themselues neere to each other,The battaile of  Sir Robert Willes for a while doubted whether he should be∣gin the fight, or stay till the repaire of the confederated Lords, who were within a daies iourney of him with an Armie. But in the end, deepe hatred to reuenge his Fathers and his Vncles deaths, and an ardent desire which inflamed his heart, with a small num∣ber to win much honour, bred in him a constant resolution to be∣gin the fight; which forthwith hee did, and for a long time main∣tained it with great discretion and true valour. But the Kings numbers being farre the greater, so tired out the Rebels by their fresh supplies, that they began to flie, and the King by violent pur∣suit followed after, vntill he clearly won the honour of that day.The Rebels ouethrowen. This meeting was called the battaile of Loose-coats, because the
Rebels threw off their coats, that they might therby make them∣selues more actiue and more nimble to run away. In this battaile were slaine aboue 10000. men.10000. men slaine. Execution. And Sir Robert Welles, with some others of good account, being taken prisoners, lost their heads. The Duke of Clarence and the Earle of Warwicke being informed of this mishap, although they were guarded with a huge Armie of desperate and wilful people, yet fearing left this ouerthrow would make them faint-hearted,Clarence and Warwicke de flie from their Armie, and come be∣fre Calice. mutable, and vnconstant, they left their charge, and secretly fled to the Citie of Exeter, and from thence to Dartmouth, where they shipped themselues, and came before Ca∣lice with their friends. The King was much grieued, because they had not been slaine, or taken; but especially the safetie of the Earle of Warwicke perplexed his minde, because he knew him to be ex∣ceeding gratious and in much fauour with the common people,Warwicke is exceedingly beleued by the common people. who indeed were perswaded, that the Sunne shined not cleare any where, but where he was; and that they could not miscarrie in any danger if he himselfe were present. Now to preuent his future landing in England with a forraine power, the King by his letters intreated his brother in law Charles Duke of Burgoine, to prohibit his subiects and his friends from gi∣uing to the said Earle any aide,Warwicke is enuied by the Duke of Burgoine. helpe or succour, and with a Nauie to surprise him. The Duke willingly consented to the Kings re∣quest: First, because the said Earle opposed himselfe against his  mariage with the Ladie Margaret the Kings sister. Secondly, be∣cause  the said Earle loued Lewys the French King, whom the Duke  mortally hated. And lastly, because the Earle was so generally beloued of the English Nation, that when he was at home, he clip∣ped the wings of the Kings authoritie in his owne Kingdome. When the Duke of Clarence and the Earle of Warwicke came be∣fore Calice,Clarence and Warwicke eatea at Calice. The Duchesse deliuered  a  the . Mnsieur de Vawcler made Cptaine of Calice. A pein is giuen him. hauing their wiues and many other Ladies and Gentle∣women with them, in stead of friendly entertainment, the Earles vnkinde Deputie, Monsieur de Vawcler, kept their ships off with the great Ordinance of the Castle. And though the Duchesse was in ship boord deliuered of a sonne, yet would hee not permit that it should be landed or Christned there; neither would hee affoord any thing needfull and necessarie in that extremitie to the said di∣stressed Ladie. The King tooke so much ioy to heare of this good newes, that forthwith by his Letters Patents, hee granted the chiefe Captainship of that place to the said Deputie. And the Duke of Burgoine so thanked him that he gaue him an yearely pen∣sion of one thousand Crownes. Yet for all this, Monsieur de Vawcler was so vncertaine in all his dealings towards the King, that hee ad∣uised
the said Earle to direct his course to the King of France, and promised to yeeeld vnto him a good account for Calice, when time and opportunitie should it require. This counsell gaue some hope and contentment to the Earle, who intending to do as he directed, lanched his ships into the sea,The Earle of Warwicke ta∣keth the Duke of Burgoines subiects at Sea. The French King is gra∣tious to the Lords. where hee met with diuers of the Duke of Burgoines subiects, fully loaden with great varietie of rich merchandises of all sorts, all which he rifled and tooke away, and landed at the Towne of Deepe: and from thence (by the French Kings inuitation) they came to the Castle of Amboys, which stan∣deth vpon the riuer of Loyer, where hee met them, receiued them cheerefully, feasted them with great bountie, supplied their pre∣sent wants, and faithfully promised to aid and to assist them (when time should serue) with his best meanes: all which hee did, not in regard of any grounded loue towards them, but because he knew that they were enemies to his enemies, King Edward & the Duke of Burgoine. Queene Margaret and Prince Edward her son, together with Iaspar sometimes Earle of Pembroke, & some others, who with him had broken prison in England, & were fled into France, vnder∣standing that the Duke of Clarence, the Earle of Warwick, and others of their friends, were friendly entertained in the French Court, re∣paired to them,New plot∣ting against K. Edward. where they entred into new conferences and com∣munications for the restoring of K. Henry to his Crowne & King∣dome, and solemnly tooke their oathes, neuer voluntarily to leaue each other, vntill they had done their best to effect the same. And the Earle of Warwicke (to make his own part the stronger) gaue his second daughter in mariage to Prince Edward,Prince Ed∣ward maried to Warwicks second daughter. This mri∣age mketh Clarence a secret enemie to Warwicke. whereof when the Duke of Clarence had deliberately considered, and thought what might be the sequell of this businesse, hee euidently foresaw, that this mariage and their newly intended warres would be the vtter confusion of him and of the whole familie and house of Yorke. For Kings doe alwaies looke with a iealous eie vpon all such as by any possibilitie may lay any leuell towards their Crowne. This con∣sideration (not without good cause) made him very distrustfull of his own fortunes. And to preuent a great mischiefe, which (as hee thought) began to threaten him and his estate, his loue & his heart began secretly to forsake the Earle of Warwicke and that Faction, insomuch that hee gaue priuate intelligence to his brother King Edward,Clarence his mssage to the King. that at their landing within the Kingdome of England he would be but a faint and a weake enemie in those affaires. Thus when those Lords had concluded to returne,The Lrds pr frth for England. they were with all expedition well furnished with men, munition, money, ships, and all things fitting, by the French King.
But being in a readinesse to passe out of the Riuer of Seyne, the Burgundians met them with a strong Fleet at the mouth of that Ri∣uer, and purposed to defeat them if they might. But an euening storme approching with vnwonted rage and furie,The Burgun∣dians drow∣ned. compelled the Burgundians to runne into the Sea, where many of them were drowned, some were driuen into Scotland, and the rest, being all dispersed, laboured and toiled hardly to saue themselues. The Earle of Warwicke, who by letters some few daies before receiued from his friends, was certified that his landing was hourely expected, and sufficient strength prouided to backe him and his, although they came destitute of all other helpes and suc∣cours, determined to loose no time: but making a present benefit to himselfe and his of the Burgundians mishap and hard fortune. and leauing the Queene and the Prince her sonne behinde him, the next morning entred into the Sea, and with much speed and safetie he landed with all his companies and friends at Dartmouth in Deuonshire;The Lords doe land at Dartmouth. The King was too se∣cure. from whence hee gaue speedie notice of his arriuall to his dearest and nearest friends. The King so much relied vpon the bold seruice intended by the Burgundians Fleet, and not knowing what shipwracke and dam∣mage it had receiued, made no preparation at all, either to with∣stand their arriuall, or to encounter them after they were landed: but hauked, hunted, and solaced himselfe (according to his hu∣mour and wonted fashion) in the societie and companie of young Ladies and faire maidens, to whom his affections were more ob∣liged then to the warres. Warwickes Proclama∣tion.But the Earle of Warwicke marshalled his small companie in good order, and by publike Proclamations which he made in King Henries name, he required all men to repaire vnto his aide, with money, victuall, armour, and all things needfull for that purpose, and valiantly to fight against the Duke of Yorke, who (as hee affir∣med) by meere vsurpation and bloudie tyrannie, vntruly and falsly called himselfe King.He hath a uge Armie. This politicke practise within few daies in∣creased his small companies to a huge Armie, with which they marched towards London. And such were the quicke endeuours, and so industrious was King Edward, (who was compelled by necessitie to make prouisi∣on for his owne safetie) that hee leuied a strong Armie, and went forth with an high courage, and with princely valour, against the Rebels of his Countrie. But being informed, that all the Coun∣tries, Cities, Townes, and places thorow which his enemies pas∣sed, were aiders to their fortunes, and hearing them oftentimes
with loud voices to crie, King Henry, King Henry, A Warwicke, A Warwicke, and distrusting vtterly the inconstant mindes and dispo∣sitions of his owne souldiers, his heart failed him,The King fli∣eth in the night. so that in secret manner, and in the night, with eight hundred of his best friends, he left his Armie, and posted into Lincolnshire: and when all his hopes of helpe and succour there, were spent in vaine, they being altogether destitute of money, and other prouisions needfull for a iourney into a forraine Countrey, tooke shipping, and sailed into Holland, purposing to remaine with the Duke of Burgoine, vntill they might haue good meanes for their returne, and to be reuen∣ged on the Earle of Warwicke, and of all other their mortall ene∣mies. As soone as it was certainly knowen that King Edward was fled, a rude multitude of factious Kentishmen (delighting tumultuously and in a braine-sicke manner to fish in troubled waters) came to the Gates of the Citie of London, and would haue entred it:A rebellion in Kent. but being resisted in their purpose, they rifled and robbed the Sub∣urbes, burnt diuers houses, murdered many people, and at Rad∣cliffe and Lime-house they did the like.Warwicke subdueth them. But by the Earle of War∣wickes power and endeuours, they were quickly ouerthrowen, and punished sharply for their offence, which wonne him much fa∣uour and loue among the better sort of the common people. The Earle afterwards came to the Tower,King Henry is enlarged. where he not onely enlarged the deposed King Henry, but in most triumphant fashion conducted him thorow the Citie of London to Pauls Church. And when he had concluded his deuotions, and performed his offrings, as the Kings of this Realme haue beene accustomed to doe, hee was brought to the Bishops Palace, where he kept his Court with great magnificence and much bountie. Hee also assembled his high Court of Parliament at Westminster,A Parlia∣ment. Ataindors. in which the late King Edward the Fourth and all his principall adherents were attainted of High Treason, and all their goods and possessions were confiscate and giuen to the King. The Duke of Clarence was by the same authoritie published to be the next heire of the deceased Richard, late Duke of Yorke,The Duke of Clarence aduanced. his fa∣ther. And albeit that hee was but his second sonne, yet all that Duchie was settled in him and in his heires.The Crowne entailed. The Crowne also was entailed to King Henry, and to the heires males of his bodie: and for default of such issue, to the said Duke of Clarence, and to his heires. Iaspar Earle of Pembroke was also restored to his honour and his lands, and so was Iohn Earle of Oxford, and many others. And the Earle of Warwicke, and the Duke of Clarence, who were
enstiled friends to the King, and friends to the Common-weale) were established and made chiefe rulers in all things vnder the King. The Queene dares not to put into the Sea.When these affaires were thus ordered, Queene Margaret with the Prince her sonne, and their whole traine, shipped themselues. But so violent were the raging stormes, and so furious was the troubled sea, that albeit many profers were made, yet durst they not to aduenture for that time. Whereupon the common people of this Realme (of whom the Queene was not beloued) murmu∣red and muttered, saying, that God was not pleased that such a woman as had occasioned so many battailes, and such slaughters and executions in England, should returne thither to plot more tre∣cherie, and to deuise more mischiefe. The Duke of Burgoine furnisheth King Ed∣ward with money, men, munition, and ships.The Duke of Burgoine, although he entreated King Edward and his friends kindly, yet because hee himselfe had warred with France, and feared lest the Earle of Warwicke would busie him with a new warre, sent word to King Henry, that hee would not in any sort assist his enemie for his returne into England. Yet not long after, when he vnderstood that King Edwards friends by daily messengers and by letters importunated his returne, and had by their faire promise strengthned him with good hopes of fortunate successe, hee deliuered to him fiftie thousand Floreines of gold, and furnished him with eighteene tall and warlike ships, in which he had only two thousand souldiers for seruice on the land. 1470.With these small forces hee sailed into England, and landed at Rauen-spurre in the Countie of Yorke, where his expectation failed him very much.King Ed∣ward landeth in England. A small hope. For few or none resorted to him for his helpe; but all men there acknowledged themselues to be the friends and subiects of King Henrie. This checke, though it much trou∣bled him, yet was hee not vtterly dismaied thereby: for meere necessitie and danger enforced him to march to the Citie of Yorke. And in his passage thither,He only clai∣meth his Du∣chie of Yorke. he published to the people, and to the inhabitants of that Citie, that he came not to lay any claime or to make any challenge to the Crowne, but intended only to possesse himselfe of his Duchie of Yorke, of which vniustly hee was depri∣ued: wherein he affirmed, hee ought by the lawes of equitie and right, to be assisted and succoured by them, and by all good men. He sweareth it to the Citi∣zens of Yorke They receiue him, and re∣leeue him.The Citizens at his first repaire denied his entrance: but by reason of a solemne oath which he tooke before them, that he only intended the regaining of his Duchie, and would remaine a true, faithfull, and an obedient subiect to King Henry, he was receiued, entertained, and monied at his owne will. But when he had staied
in that Citie a day or two, hee forgat the oath which so lately hee had sworne: for hee placed a strong Garrison within the Towne,He breaketh his oath. He getteth money, and wogeth soul∣diers. He had neuer risen by all likelihood, if he had beene defeated by the Mar∣quesse. and enforced the inhabitants to furnish him with many requisites and prouisions for an Armie. And then leauing the Citie (which was by strength reserued to his vse) he hired souldiers euery where for money as he passed by towards London. And in his march, he came within foure miles of the Marquesse Montacute, his old fami∣liar and trustie friend, who being accompanied with braue troupes and companies of valiant men of warre to encounter him, gaue vn∣to him free passage (without resistance) to march forth; so that by easie iournies hee came to Nottingham, where diuers Nobles and Gentlemen (who fauoured his proceedings) made him liberall of∣fers and tenders of their seruice, if he would resoluedly take vpon him the stile and title of the King, which he then did.He stileth himselfe King. He hath a powerfull Armie. And thus as a riuer by running farre is still augmented by the accesse of other brookes and streames which fall into it; so King Edwards small forces still increased as he marched forwards, vntill they were in∣deed a strong Armie. The Earle of Warwicke (hauing in his companie the Earle of Ox∣ford, many other Nobles, and a puissant Armie) came to the Ci∣tie of Warwicke, and intending to giue battaile to King Edward, di∣rected and sent his letters and messengers with all speede to the Duke of Clarence, certifying him of his purpose,Clarence fai∣leth War∣wicke in his neede. and praying him quickly to come forward with his forces, and to ioine with him. Yet for all this the Duke passed on with a lingring pace, so that the Earle (suspecting his fidelitie) went with his Armie into the Citie of Couentrie, and King Edward with all his Companies came before the Towne, and dared the Earle into the field.Warwicke keepeth close in Couentrie with all his Armie. The King and his bro∣ther & their Armies are made friends. But because hee purposed to make some triall what the Duke of Clarence would doe, he therefore kept close within the walles. The King perceiuing that he would not fight, bent his course towards his brother the Duke of Clarence, who (with his Armie) did the like towards the King; so that a great shew was made be∣twixt them, that many blowes should be giuen. But the Duke of Glocester being brother to them both, became an earnest mediator to reconcile them each to other: wherein he so well preuailed, that (being vnarmed) they courteously met, and publikely proclai∣med, that they and their Armies were good friends. The three brothers hauing thus combined themselues,Warwicke wil not be allu∣red to loue by faire promises. made triall whether they could by any faire meanes and liberall promi∣ses, allure the Earle of Warwicke to their loue. But he (who with many curses and disgracefull speeches published the Dukes periu∣rie,
in forsaking his Confederates,His answere. and friends, returned them an∣swere; That he would rather die like himselfe, then cease to make ciuill warre, vntill hee had confounded them, as his mortall E∣nemies. The King (who knew well enough that the Earle was as vali∣ant as he himselfe was resolute) feared not his power, but wisely considered,The causes why London receiued King Edward. That the daily encreasing of his owne strength, would be his best meanes, to winne the victorie: Wherefore he departed from Couentrey, and marched towards London, where (for a time) hee was kept out: But when the Citizens had duly considered of  the Rightfulnesse of his Title to the Crowne, Of his skill, and no∣ble  courage in feats of warre; Of his discretion, which enabled him (of himselfe) to rule wisely; And of his puisant Armie, which he  then commanded: And on the other side, when they had medi∣tated  vpon the soft Nature of King Henrie, his small reach, shal∣low  wit, insufficiency to raign, and of the continuall dangers which  would still assault them, if the Lancastrian faction were maintained;  They opened their gates; ranne out in troupes to meet him; Sa∣luted  him for their King, and brought him triumphantly into the Citie;Inconstant Multitude. King Henrie againe is im∣prisoned. where he seized againe vpon King Henrie, and committed him to the Tower. Thus may we see, vpon what vnsure founda∣tion they build, who doe relie vpon the Peoples loue, and that no∣thing is more variable and vnconstant then the Multitude, who (like vnto Weather-cocks) are turned about with euery winde. Warwicks last resoluti∣on.The Earle of Warwick, when hee perceiued, that King Edward was gone from Couentrey, followed after him with his Armie, pur∣posing to haue set vpon him, before hee should haue recouered London. But when hee perceiued that his intendments were pre∣uented, he resolued to set his whole fortunes vpon one Battaile. For which purpose he marched fourth vntill he came to the towne of Barnet, which by an equall distance of ten miles, lyeth betwixt London and S. Albons; there hee stayed, rested, and refreshed his Armie for a while. The Kings resolution.The King also (being perswaded, that nothing could better procure his future right, and safetie, then once more to trie his manhood in the field, and taking King Henrie with him) marched with his armie (which by the Citie of London was frankely fur∣nished with all things needfull) vnto Barnet,Barnet field. and encamped him selfe neare to the Earle all that night: and early in the morning the Earle of Warwick diuided his forces into three parts: The right wing was commanded by his Brother the Marques Montacute, (whom by necessitie he was enforced to trust) and by the Earle of
Oxford. The left wing was directed by himselfe, and by the Duke of Exeter. And his maine battaile was led by the Duke of Somer∣set and some others. All these the Earle manfully encouraged,The Earles encourage∣ments to his Armie. by telling them, that they were to fight for their soueraigne and law∣full King, for a good man, and for their natiue Countrey, against an Vsurper, a Tyrant, a mercilesse and an vngodly wretch, whom  neither respect of Conscience, Iustice, Obedience, nor Honestie  could reclaime; and against such a one, as (if hee liued) would be the confounder and the destroier of them all. The King (on his part) made the Duke of Glocester chiefe lea∣der  of his Vant-guard: himselfe and the Duke of Clarence ordered  the Maine Battaile, in which King Henry the Sixth was: and the  Rereward was conducted by the Lord Hastings, Chamberlaine to the King. What the King said by way of encouragement to his souldiers, we may easily coniecture: for as hee had a wit and a tongue which neuer did deceiue him; so he wanted not matter nor arguments to maintaine his quarrell to be good. The Fight (after it was begunne) was so desperately continued on either part for the space of fiue or six houres,The victorie was vncer∣taine. that no man could coniecture to whom the victorie would incline: so that some of those horsemen who were lookers on, and fought not, gallopped amaine to the Citie of London, and affirmed that King Edward was ouerthrowen. But among them by and by some others posted with countermanding reports, and assured the Citizens, that the Earle of Warwicke had lost the Field. And thus many men (in few houres) related what they wished for: and in the meane time, such as were most valiant, soonest lost their liues, and the best men lay breathlesse vpon the ground. But when the Earle perceiued, that fresh supplies continually oppressed and pressed vpon his wearied and tired friends and souldiers, who would not yeeld because he could not then be safe,The Earle of Warwicke is slaine. So is the Mrquesse his brother, whm King Edward lo∣ued. The King hath the victorie. hee dismounted himselfe quickly from his horse, and making an incredible slaughter of his enemies, he pres∣sed so farre into their battaile to be reuenged on his chiefest aduer∣saries, that hauing no power nor meanes to returne againe, he was slaine: and the Marquesse Montacute (who euer honoured King Edward, and was his secret friend) rushing into King Edwards Ar∣mie, not to doe it any harme, but to rescue and to releeue his bro∣ther, met with the like fortune. Thus both of them being dead, their whole Armie ran away, and King Edward was master of the Field. And in the afternoone of the same day (carrying with him King Henry as his prisoner) hee returned triumphantly like a Con∣querour
into the Citie of London; and in Pauls Church hee offred vp his Standard,A thankesgi∣uing to God. 10000. men slaine. Sir Humfrey Bourchier. and rendred thankes to Almightie God for his victorie thus happily obtained. In this battaile there were slaine at the least ten thousand men: but none other of any noted name, sauing only on the Kings part Sir Humfrey Bourchier, sonne to the Lord Barnes, who was a right valiant and an approued man in Armes. The King sorrowed much, and was greeued exceedingly at the death of the Marquesse Montacute, because hee had lost a faithfull and a deare friend. Yet to assure the people that those two bro∣thers were dead indeed,The dead bo∣dies of the two brethren laid open in Pauls Church. Queene Margaret landeth too late. Noble men doe repaire to her. he caused them to be brought into Lon∣don in one coffin, and for the space of three daies to lie open faced in Pauls Church: and then among their honourable Ancestors in the Priorie of Bissam they were both buried in one graue. Queene Margaret (not hearing of this newes, but intending to bring some succours to the Earle) landed at Waymouth, where these tidings appalled her sences, and depriued her of all future good hope or good hap. Wherefore in the Abbey of Beawly in Hamp∣shire shee with the Prince her sonne tooke Sanctuarie: and thither repaired to her the Duke of Somerset, Iaspar Earle of Pembroke, Tho∣mas Courtney Earle of Deuonshire, Iohn Lord Wenloke, and diuers others. And when the Queene and they had thorowly debated what course was fittest to be taken,They raise a new Armie. they resolued, once more to aduenture their fortunes in the Field: for which purpose, euery one of those Noblemen resorted into their own Countries, where they prepared such men and furnitures for the war as they could get. The Queene and the Duke of Somerset leuied an Armie about Bristow and Glocester, and from thence they endeuoured to goe in∣to Wales, to ioine their forces with such companies as the Earle of Pembroke had raised there. The King preuenteth them.The King, who was more strong then they, purposed to pre∣uent their meeting if he might, and so closely followed them, that though the Queene and most of her associates supposed it to bee best to flie disordered into Wales, yet the Duke of Somerset would not consent thereunto;The Duke of Somersets resolution to fight. Tewkesburie field. by reason whereof, both those Armies met neere vnto Tewkesburie in Glocestershire, and after a long fight, which with a small companie the Duke of Somerset had maintai∣ned against the Duke of Glocesters battaile, he (not being seconded by the Lord Wenloke, by whom their middle Ward was comman∣ded) retired towards the said Lord, and with cursed words hee bitterly reuiled him for his base cowardlinesse, and with his Pole∣axe he suddenly strake out his braines. But within one houre af∣ter,
King Edward ouerthrew them all,The King getteth the victorie. hauing slaine aboue three thousand of them; among whom were the Earle of Deuonshire, the Lord Iohn, brother to the Duke of Somerset, Sir Iohn Lewknor, Sir Iohn Delues, and many others.Great Pri∣soners. There were also taken prisoners the Queene, the Duke, the Prior of S. Iohns of Ierusalem, Sir Ger∣uase Cifton, Sir Thomas Tresham, and twelue others of eminencie and of note: all which (Queene Margaret only excepted) were be∣headed the next day.Execution. Prince Ed∣ward cruelly murdered. And the young Prince Edward (who was taken prisoner by Sir Richard Crofts) was presented to the King: and because he answered him stoutly to some questions which he demanded of him, hee was slightly stricken by the King, and sud∣denly murdered by the Dukes of Clarence and of Glocester,Queene Margaret is a prisoner. and by Thomas Marquesse Dorset, and the Lord Hastings. And this was the last Ciuill Battaile which was fought in England in King Edwards daies. When the King had thus obtained this victorie, hee returned to London, carrying with him Queene Margaret as his prisoner, and was with triumphant ioy receiued into the Citie, from whence he sent one Roger Vaughan, a powerfull Gentleman, into his Countrey of Wales, requiring him, by some secret traine or other to entrap the Earle of Pembroke, and to behead him if he could.Rg Vaugan is  and ba∣ded. But the Earle being informed of his comming, and of his errand, caused him sud∣denly to bee apprehended and put to death. And then the said Earle, with his nephew Henry the young Earle of Richmond, who was but ten yeares old, sailed into Britaine, and were courteously receiued, and louingly entertained by Francis the Duke of that Prouince. Not long after, Reyner the Titularie King of Naples, Sicilie,Queene Margaret is ransomed. and of Ierusalem, with the sale of the Kingdomes of Naples and of Sicilie for money, ransomed Queene Margaret his daughter: and vpon that Title, and none other, Charles the Eighth, King of France, conquered Naples, as in the Historie of those warres it appeareth.King Henry is found dead in the Tower. The Duke of Glocester murdered him. King Henry brought open faced into Pauls Church. Now when no man (by reason of King Edwards peace and pro∣speritie) thought of any euill tidings, suddenly it was noised tho∣rowout the Citie of London, that King Henry was found dead in his chamber within the Tower; and so he was indeed, being cruelly and wickedly murdered and stabbed with a dagger, by Richard Duke of Glocester, brother to King Edward, as the report common∣ly went. And his bodie was brought into Pauls Church, where his face lay vncouered one whole day, that thereby the people might bee assured that he was dead. And thus was King Edward freed from his great enemies. But his two brothers, of Clarence and of
Glocester, being for their periuries, murders, and euill courses, pu∣nished by Almightie God, embrewed their hands in their owne bloud not long after. When King Edward for two or three yeares had enioied an hap∣pie peace, his brother in law, Charles Duke of Burgoine, heartily de∣testing the French King,The Duke of Burgoine animateth K. Edward to worre for his title to France. Reasons mo∣uing the King so to doe. and secretly intending to worke him some despight, perswaded King Edward to renew his French warres, for the recouering of his right and title to that Crowne and King∣dome. The King and his Counsell thereupon quickly resolued to vn∣dertake that businesse, principally for these reasons. 1. First, because the Crowne of France was not ambitiously, but iustly desired by the King, who thought hee had good right and title thereunto. 2. Secondly, because French warres enriched English souldiers. 3. Thirdly, because those warres kept them at home, and gaue them not any libertie to inuade this Realme. 4. Fourthly, because the French King had assisted Queene Margaret, the Earle of Warwicke, and their Complices, against King Edward in the late Ciuill Warres. 5. And fifthly, because the said French King made warres vpon the Duke of Burgoine, who had formerly aided King Edward for the regaining of his Crowne and Kingdome. A beneuo∣lence craued by King Edward.But because money wanted for the defraying of so great a charge, King Edward (without a Parliament) craued a beneuolence to be freely enlarged to him by his Subiects, who gaue him some money, but with an euill will. Yet among others, a rich, yet a spa∣ring and a nigardly widow, did cheerefully giue vnto him twentie pounds.A mery iest. The King himselfe (who was present, but to her vn∣knowen) perceiuing that vnexpectedly shee had bestowed vpon him so good a summe, did not only giue her thankes, but merily came and kissed her, telling her, that for her money shee should kisse a King. The old woman was so much gladded with that courtesie, that shee told the King his kisse was worth more mo∣ney, and therefore she added twentie pounds more to the former summe. The King hauing in a readinesse before Douer a Fleet of fiue hundred ships and boats, and hauing a puissant and a compleat Armie of fifteene hundred men at Armes on horsebacke,The King transporteth an Armie for France. and fif∣teene thousand tall Archers, besides all such as attended for other needfull seruices, departed from England, and landed safely at Calice, where hee was receiued with great honour and state. But
he was much greeued, because the Duke of Burgoine (vpon whose motion, and at whose entreatie and promise to be met by him at Calice with two thousand men at Armes,The Duke of Burgoine breaketh pro∣mise, and aids him not. hee came thither) trifled with his whole Armie in the siege of Nuyce, which he was not like∣ly to winne, and at length (after much time spent in vaine) had sent all his forces to Berroys in Lorrayne, to be reuenged vpon Reyner, Queene Margarets father, Duke of that Prouince, for that hee had vsed foule and vnseemely words towards him, when he lay at the siege of Nuyce; whereas if the said Duke of Burgoine had ioined with King Edward against the French King, and with the Duke of Britaine, who sided with King Edward, they would haue put into hazard of winning the whole kingdome of France. Yet King Edward with his owne Companies marched by Bollen to Perone, into the Duke of Burgoines Countrey,He breakes his promise againe. where the said Duke had not made any manner of prouision for the refreshing of the English Armie, according to his promise, but suffred them to lie without his Townes in the cold and in the open fields, where∣at they were all displeased. From thence king Edward (with the said Duke) marched towards S. Quintens, which was secretly pro∣mised to be deliuered to him, by Lewys of Luxenburgh,Hee was Earle of S. Paul, and Constable of France. The King is kept out of S. Quintens. great Vncle to king Edwards wife. But when they came before it, their entrie was not only denied, but sallies were made vpon them, and the great Ordinance plaied from the Towne vpon the kings Armie, so that plainly he perceiued, that nothing was to be obtained there without blowes. To these breaches of promise was added one vnkindnesse more by the Duke of Burgoine, who to visit his Armie,A peace is concluded for nine yeares. which then lay in Berroys in Lorrayne, vnexpectedly left king Edward, and rode thi∣ther, leauing word behinde, that hee would come vnto him with his whole Armie as soone as he should be able. The French king being politicke and wise, and knowing that if  all those his enemies should ioine their strengths against him, they would put him in hazard of his estate, and being informed that  king Edward was highly discontented, by reason of the Duke of Burgoines vnfaithfull vsage, and knowing that he beganne to feele  the extremities of a winter warre, mediated a friendly conference  and a firme peace, which by their Commissioners was effected for nine yeares, in this sort.
The Articles of peace. FIrst it was agreed, that the French King should forth∣with pay to King Edward towards his forepassed char∣ges, threescore and fifteene thousand Crownes: and also the summe of fiftie thousand more for an yearly pension so long as King Edward liued. 2. Secondly, that the French King within one yeare should send for the King of Englands daughter, the Ladie Eli∣zabeth into France, and marie her to the Dolphin, for whose maintenance the French King should for nine years space pay yearly to them fiftie thousand Crownes, and at the end of those yeares should deliuer to them the quiet and peaceable possession of the whole Duchie of Guyen. 3. And thirdly, that the Lord Haward, and Sir Iohn Cheney master of the Horses, should staie (as hostages) with the French King, vntill the whole Armie had quited France, and were landed in the Kingdome of England. Reasons mo∣uing King Edward to conclude this peace.To these propositions King Edward and his Counsell consen∣ted for these reasons. 1. First, as the Duke of Burgoines promises were seldome or neuer honestly performed, so with the King (whom hee had drawen into those Countries, and into those warres) hee did but gloze and faine. 2. Secondly, because the Earle of S. Paul, Constable of France, did but dissemble when hee protested to deliuer to King Edward the Towne of S. Quintens, which he did not, but offered violence to his Armie in stead thereof. 3. Thirdly, because the winter (which approched sharply) would haue enforced him for that time to haue returned disho∣nourably into England. 4. And last of all, because the late Ciuill Warres had consu∣med most of his best souldiers and chiefest Leaders, and the grea∣test part of his treasure; so that King Edward was hardly able to maintaine a great Armie any long time. But the Duke of Glocester and his friends (who mortally hated
the French King) striued much to disswade King Edward from these conclusions, but all in vaine: for those Articles were scaled and published, the money was paid, both the Kings in a familiar and kinde enteruiew, by their solemne oathes had sworne to obserue and keepe them, and hostage: were deliuered accordingly. It is to be noted,The Duke of Burgoine stormeth at this peace. that within this peace the Dukes of Burgoine and of Britaine were included, if they would consent thereunto. But when this newes was told to the Duke of Burgoine, he with all celeritie and speed possible hasted to King Edward, and in his me∣lancholie mood he told him,His obiecti∣ons. that it was in a high measure disho∣nourable for him, to returne into England, not hauing burnt in France one poore cottage, nor hauing slaine as much as a flie with his whole Armie. He told him also, that his Ancestors, King Ed∣ward the Third, and King Henry the fifth, neuer passed into France to demand their right, but that they obtained and won it victori∣ously with their swords; and swore, that King Edward had lost more glorie and honour by his infamous peace made with France, then he had won by all his victories in nine battailes which he had fought; and that he himselfe so scorned the French Kings malice and his power, that he would and did absolutely refuse to be inclu∣ded in the said dishonourable league, vntill six moneths were fully ended after King Edwards Armie was landed againe in England. The King seeing the vnfaithfull Duke so angrie,The Kings answere. made him this replie: That King Edward the Third and King Henry the Fifth entred into France with their Armies of their owne accord, to gaine their inheritance, and not otherwise, nor for any other purpose, which they performed with true valour and wisdome: And that hee himselfe would neuer haue departed out of that Kingdome, vntill he had done the like, if hee had come thither in that manner of his owne accord. But (quoth hee) I vndertooke this iourney vpon your request, for your aide, and to assist you and your Terri∣tories, by plucking downe the pride of France: and the claime which I made to that kingdome, was at this time only published, to giue mee some colour to helpe you. And albeit you vaunt much of your owne strength, and doe seeme little to regard the French King and his anger, yet me thinkes you cannot well forget, how by his strength and power he hath wonne from you the faire Citie of Amyens, and the strong pile of S. Quintens, and other Ca∣stles and Townes within your dominions; which (notwithstan∣ding all your crakes and brags) you neither dare to attempt, nor can againe winne. You know likewise, that your selfe and mine Vncle of Luxenburgh (to traine mee into France) promised to mee
mountaines of gold, but they quickly changed into snow, and are now dissolued into water. If your faith, your offers, and your pro∣mises had beene honestly performed, I would sooner haue lost my life, and haue aduentured for you my Crowne and Kingdome, ra∣ther then I would haue beene found vnfaithfull or vnthankfull to you. But if any thing be amisse, you your selues haue beene the occasioners thereof, and therefore you may thanke none others. And so farewell. Hereupon the angrie Duke in a pelting chafe, tooke his horse, and rode away. And from that time forward they neither loued nor saw one another. The French Kings boun∣tie to the English Ar∣mie.After the aforesaid Articles were concluded and sealed, and a little before the enteruiew betweene the two Kings, the French King (of his owne bountie) sent into the English Armie one hun∣dred Wagons loaden with the best wines which he could procure, and licenced the souldiers for the space of three or foure daies to disport and recreate themselues within the Citie of Amyens: and at their comming thither they found many Tables thorowout both sides of the streets richly and plentifully furnished with great store of costly dishes both of flesh and fish, and many Gallants and Bon-companions of purpose were chosen to make them mirth, and to attend them; so that nine thousand English armed men were within the same Citie at one time. But when the French King was informed how great a number of them were within the walles of so strong a Towne, hee re∣proued and condemned his owne kindnesse, and feared lest hee might loose it by reason of his great loue, and by that meanes might occasion more iarres betwixt England and his Kingdome of France. But the Englishmen disdaining to be found false or vnthankfull, merily passed away the time with the Frenchmen; and hauing suf∣ficiently solaced and refreshed themselues, they departed out of the Citie, and quietly returned to their owne Campe. And the French King being well pleased with this their honest and plaine dealing,The French Kings boun∣tie to the En∣glish Cap∣taines. The King ar∣riueth in En∣gland. sent vnto the English Captaines rich presents in plate and in coined siluer and gold. And then King Edward with his whole Armie returned to Calice, and from thence into England, where hee was cheerefully receiued with much ioy. And thereupon the aforesaid Hostages (receiuing great gifts and honourable vsage) were set at libertie, and returned home. The French King (if hee might) would faine haue excluded the Duke of Britaine out of the former league. But in regard that the
young Earle of Richmond was in his possession, and whose returne into England to make challenge to the Crowne King Edward euer feared, he would not in any sort agree thereunto. And not long after,Henry Earle of Richmond deliuered by the Duke of Britaine to K. Edwards Ambassadors King Edward (by his Ambassadours) with much entreatie, rich gifts, and vpon solemne protestation that he only intended to marie one of his owne daughters to the said Earle, obtained his deliuerie to those messengers, who being glad at the heart that they had obtained what King Edward so instantly desired, tooke their leaue of the Duke of Britaine, and brought the young Earle of Richmond to S. Malloes, where they were enfor∣ced to stay, expecting a faire and a good winde. But in the meane time,Good counsell the Duke being informed by Iohn Che∣uelet his true and faithfull seruant, that the said mariage was but colourably pretended, to get the young Earle into King Edwards hands, and that his death was certainly pretended if hee could bee brought home; and being also told, that his honour would per∣petually be obscured by so foule a deede: the said Duke could ne∣uer be at rest, vntill Peter Landoys, his chiefest Treasurer, attemp∣ted the repossessing of him with the said young Earle. Whereup∣on the said Peter repaired to S. Malloes,Peter Lan∣doys recoue∣reth the Earle of Richmond into the Duke of Bri∣taines posses∣sion. and pretended much loue and familiaritie with the English Ambassadours, with whom hee pleasantly conuersed and spent his time. But in the meane season the seruants of the said Peter (being thorowly instructed for that purpose) conueied the said Earle into a Sanctuarie, whose priui∣ledges might not by any meanes be infringed. The Englishmen vnderstanding what had hapned, were much displeased, and con∣demned the said Treasurer for this vnfriendly practise and too much skill. But hee (on the other side) assigned the whole fault to their owne negligence and follie. And by this meane, the harmelesse and sillie Sheepe was deliuered from the Woolfe. And thus was King Edward defrauded and beguiled of his money and of his hopes. But vpon the Dukes faithfull promise that the said Earle should euer remaine with him as a prisoner, the King was somewhat pacified, and neuer after attempted to haue him in his owne power. King Edward being now at ease, and enioying a blessed peace both at home and abroad with all forraine Princes, did many things which highly aduanced his honour,The Duke of Burgoine is thrice in one yeare ouer∣throwen. and were very pro∣fitable to the Common-weale. But the Duke of Burgoine (who by nature was vnconstant, hastie, turbulent, and wholly addicted to the warre) was in this yeare ouerthrowen in three seuerall bat∣tailes which he fought against the Susses.
1. In the first at Granson, where hee lost his honour and his wealth. 2. In the second at Morrat, where hee lost his honour and his men. 3. And in the third at Nancie, where he lost his honour, his ri∣ches, his men, and his owne life. About this time, the Duke of Clarence, brother to King Edward, was suspected, accused, and condemned of high Treason, for that he (with many others) had secretly contriued the Kings death:The Duke of Clarence im∣prisoned and murdered. and thereupon hee was returned a prisoner to the Tower. But within few daies after, hee was wickedly drowned in a Butte of Malmesie, not without the Kings notice, as most men did suppose. Hee left behinde him but two children, Edward and Margaret, which Edward was created Earle of Warwicke, and was executed for High Treason in the raigne of King Henry the Seuenth. And Mar∣garet, who being wife and Dowager to Richard de la Pole, Earle of Salisburie, was put to death for Treason in the raigne of King Henry the Eighth. The King in the fiue last yeares of his raigne vtterly changed his former humours. For whereas before that time he had beene bountifull and liberall,The King changeth his forme of go∣uernment of the Common-weale. Penall lawes. He lost the loue of his Subiects. loued magnificence and honourable hospi∣talitie; he now began to be so wretched, couetous, and miserable, that to get money, and to augment his treasure, hee extraordina∣rily vexed and troubled his subiects, by inflicting vpon them the execution of penall lawes; by meanes whereof, hee as quickly ex∣tinguished and quenched their heartie loue and good affection to∣wards him, as water doth the fire. In the twentieth yeare of his raigne, hee much desired that the mariage which the French King had promised, betwixt the Dol∣phin and his daughter,1480. 20 might be consummate: for which purpose he sent an honourable Ambassage into France, willing them to tell the French King, that he had broken his promise and his oath, for that hee had not sent for the said Ladie into France within one yeare after the concluding of the said former Articles.Lewys the eleuenth. But Lewys the French King returned friuolous excuses, and promised very shortly to send for her, when as indeed hee meant nothing lesse. For such was his nature, and such were his euill qualities, that where he might procure any benefit or aduantage to himselfe, he would pleasantly flatter, plentifully reward, and assuredly deceiue. A mariage intended with Scot∣land.About this time, Iames the Third, King of Scots, seeming ear∣nestly to desire that the Ladie Cicilia (one of the Kings daughters) might be giuen in mariage to Iames his eldest sonne, sent his Am∣bassadours
into England. And King Edward (supposing that hee had meant plainly, and knowing that by such an alliance his owne estate would be the better secured) did not only grant his request, but forthwith (to supplie his present wants) hee disbursed to him great summes of money for part of his said daughters portion,Money is conditionally disbursed. but yet vpon this condition, that the same should be repaied if after∣wards king Edward disliked, and would dissolue that match. When all those things were concluded, securitie giuen, and the money paid, the king of Scots (very treacherously) sent an Armie into the Northerne parts of this kingdome, which burnt, spoiled,The Scots in∣uade the Northerne parts. Glocester marcheth with an Ar∣mie against the Scots. The Castle of Barwicke is besieged. Glocester en∣treth Scot∣land, and spoileth at his owne will. Peace is granted on certaine con∣ditions. and slew in euery place as it passed by: whereupon king Edward (as well to represse his furie, as also to correct his infidelitie and follie) sent against him the Duke of Glocester with a strong Armie of one and twentie thousand men, who first of all by force entred into the Towne of Barwicke, and then besieged the Castle, which was valiantly kept and defended by the Earle Bothwel. The Duke (not purposing to imploy his whole strength in that place) left the Lord Stanley there with foure thousand men, and with the residue of his forces hee entred into Scotland, whither the Scottish king was for feare retired, killing, burning, and spoili n all places at his pleasure, and compelling the king to hide himfe in the strong Castle of Maydens within the Citie of Edenburgh. The Nobilitie of Scotland perceiuing the miserable estate of their wasted and poore Countrey, sent vnto the Duke, and craued peace; which he granted vpon these foure conditions. 1. First, that full amends and restitution might be made and giuen to king Edwards subiects for all such dammage, iniurie, and wrongs, as by their last incursions they had sustained. 2. Secondly, that the Scottish king would againe restore his owne brother the Duke of Albanie (who was in the English Armie) vnto his especiall fauour, and to all his honours, dignities, offices, and possessions in that kingdome. 3. Thirdly, that the Castle of Barwicke should be yeelded vp, or not rescued from the siege wherewith it was then compassed. 4. And lastly, that repaiment might be made of all such sums of money as king Iames had receiued of king Edward vpon the mo∣tion for mariage with his daughter to the son and heire apparant of the king of Scots: or that good securitie might be giuen by the Prouost and Citizens of Edenburgh for the said repaiment, if (be∣fore a prefixed day) king Edward did giue them notice that there should not be any further prosecution concerning the said ma∣riage.
The Nobilitie of Scotland, knowing the state of that kingdome to be vnable to performe the first demand, to pacifie the Duke of Glocester, and to preuent the ruine and destruction of their natiue kingdome, yeelded vnto the latter three. And for the due obser∣uing of them, they sent vnto him such an Instrument, sealed and subscribed by the King and them, as he had required. And to the Duke of Albanie was sent a free pardon, and restitution was made vnto him of all things accordingly as the Duke of Glocester had de∣sired. Whereupon the said two Dukes, taking a friendly farewell each of other, departed, the one into Scotland, and the other vnto Barwicke, where the Earle of Athol (being of nothing more assu∣red, then that by his King and Countrimen he should neuer be re∣leeued) by composition surrendred the Castle into the Dukes hand,The Castle of Barwicke is deliuered to the Duke of Glocester. who making the Lord Stanley the chiefest Captaine and Commander thereof, returned ioifully with his whole Armie, and was much praised and thanked by the King. This good newes from Scotland was quickly checked with a bad out of France.The French King brea∣keth all the Articles of Peace. For the French King not only refused to pay vn∣to King Edward the foresaid tribute of fiftie thousand Crownes by the yeare, which was granted to him during his life, but also mari∣ed his sonne the Dolphin to the Ladie Margaret, daughter to Maxi∣milian the sonne of Fredericke the Emperour, thereby breaking his oath, and infringing those Articles which (vpon the last conclusion of peace) he had sworne solemnly to obserue and keepe. Whereat King Edward iustly conceiued such an high displeasure and hatred  against King Lewys, that (after long and serious consultation with his Counsell,K. Edward resolueth to goe with an Armie into France. Nobilitie, Clergie, and Commons) he did resolue to passe againe with a royall Armie into France, and to reuenge him∣selfe of all those iniuries and wrongs. But whilest those preparations made manifest to the world the Kings intention to make warre, hee being either surcharged with deepe melancholie, or with some surfet, (for excesse of diet and of pleasure did oftentimes disquiet him) waxed exceeding sicke,He sickneth. He dieth. and shortly after died, when he had raig∣ned more then two and twen∣tie yeares.
Profitable Notes extracted out of the trou∣blesome raignes of King HENRIE the Sixth, and of King EDVVARD the Fourth. THe whole Kingdome of France was lost in the seuen and twentieth yeare of King Henry the Sixth.27. H. 6. And the next yeare after all Normandie was lost.28. H. 6. 31. H. 6. And in the one and thirtieth yeare of his raigne the Duchie of Aquitaine was quite taken from him. It is likewise to be obserued, that whilest hee gouerned and en∣ioied Normandie and France, these heroicall Nobles lost their liues there: that is to say, Thomas Montacute Earle of Salisburie,6. H. 6. 12. H. 6. 14. H. 6. 18. H. 6. 31. H. 6. who was slaine at the siege of Orleance; Iohn Earle of Arundel, who was slaine at the siege of Rue; the noble and renowned Lord Iohn Duke of Bedford and Regent of France, and Richard Beauchampe Earle of Warwicke, both which died of a greeuous sicknesse, and Iohn Lord Talbot Earle of Shrewesburie, who was slaine at the battaile of Cha∣stilion. Besides many braue skirmishes and strong encounters, there were fought during his raigne, betwixt the two factions and Con∣federates of the houses of Lancaster and of Yorke, fiue cruell and fierce battailes. 1. The first was called the battaile of S. Albons,34. H. 6. wherein the Yorkish did preuaile; and (among others) Edmund Duke of Somer∣set, Henry the second Earle of Northumberland, Humfrey Earle of Stafford, and Iohn Lord Clifford, were then slaine. 2. The second was termed the battaile of Bloarheath,37. H. 6. in which the confederated Lords wonne the victorie, in which the Queenes Generall the Lord Awdley was slaine. 3. The third was the battaile of Northampton,38. H. 6. in which King Henry was ouerthrowen. In this battaile there died aboue tenne thousand men, among which were these Nobles, Humfrey Duke of Buckingham, Iohn Earle of Shrewesburie, Thomas Lord Egremont, Iohn Viscount Beamount, and the Lord Scales was beheaded.
39. H. 6.4. The fourth was the battaile of Wakefield, in which the King was victorious. In this battaile there were slaine almost three thousand men, among which was the renowned and most valiant Richard Duke of Yorke, and many others. And certaine prisoners were then taken, and lost their heads, among which Richard Neuil Earle of Salisburie, and father to Richard Earle of Warwicke, was the chiefe. And at the end of that battaile, the young Earle of Rut∣land, named Edmund, being of the age of twelue yeares, and second sonne to the slaine Duke of Yorke, was cruelly murdered by the Lord Clifford. 39. H. 6.5. The fifth battaile was called the battaile of Towton, in which the new Duke of Yorke preuailed: and in the same there were slaine almost 37000. Englishmen, among which were the Earle of Westmerland, Henry Earle of Northumberland, the Lords Dacres and Welles, and many worthie Gentlemen and Knights. And the Earle of Deuonshire, with some of his Complices, being taken prisoners, lost their heads. 29. H. 6.Whilest this King liued, there were also executed for diuers Treasons touching the said two Factions, William de la Pole Duke of Suffolke, and Iames Fynes Lord Say, High Treasurer of England. And Humfrey,25. H. 6. surnamed The good Duke of Glocester, being Vncle and Protector to the King, and being vniustly committed to the Tower, for surmised, but not for approued Treasons, was cruelly murdered in his chamber. King EDVVARD the Fourth. IN the raigne of King Edward the Fourth there were principally fought fiue battailes betwixt the houses of Lancaster and Yorke. 2. E. 4.1. The first was the battaile of Exham in the North, in which King Edward obtained the victorie, and tooke these prisoners among many others, Henry Duke of So∣merset, William Taylboys, who named himselfe Earle of Kent, the Lords Roos, Molynes, and Hungerford, all which were within few daies after put to death. 8. E. 4.2. The second was called Banburie Field, in which were slaine aboue 8000. men. 8. E. 4.3. The third was called the battaile of Loose-coats, because the
souldiers threw off their coats to run away the faster. And in it aboue ten thousand men lost their liues. 4. The fourth was Barnet field,10. E. 4. in which more then ten thou∣sand died, among which were the most renowned Richard Neuil Earle of Warwicke, Iohn Marquesse Montacute his brother, whom King Edward entirely loued. And on King Edwards part there was slaine a noble and a valiant Gentleman, named Sir Humfrey Bour∣chier, sonne to the Lord Barnes. 5. And the fifth was called Tewkesburie Field, in which 3000.10. E. 4. Englishmen were slaine, among which were the Duke of Somerset, and the Lord Iohn his brother, and the Earle of Deuonshire. In this Kings raigne there were beheaded the Lord Stafford,8. E. 4. who left the Earle of Pembroke (vpon a priuate falling out) in the Field, and caried from him part of the Kings Armie. The Lord Welles, and Sir Thomas Dymocke,8. E. 4. without any offence at all by them done. Richard Wooduile Earle Ryuers, and father to Queene Elizabeth,8. E. 4. King Edward; wife, was taken by the Rebels, and lost his head. And the Lord Wenloke was murdered by the Duke of Somerset,10. E. 4. because he came not to his rescue with his Companies in the field. The young Prince Edward, eldest sonne to King Henry the sixth,10. E. 4. (to please King Edward) was cruelly murdered by the two Dukes of Clarence and of Glocester, and by some others. King Henry the sixth was himselfe stabbed with a dagger,10. E. 4. and slain in the Tower of London by the said Richard Duke of Glocester. And not long after,10. E. 4. the Duke of Clarence was found dead in his bed, he hauing beene drowned in a Butte of Malmesie, not with∣out the Kings consent, as it was supposed. And thus open and ciuill warres by the sword, and the com∣mon Executioner with his axe, and inueterated enuie and malice, with bloudie hands, bereaued and tooke away the liues of the greater number of the most renowned and valiant No∣blemen, Captaines, and Gentlemen of this Realme.
THE HISTORIE OF KING EDVVARD THE FIFTH. IF our memories be pleased to take a reuiew of the life and actions of  the late deceased King Edward the Fourth, Edward the Fourth de∣scribed. wee may thereon make this pretie abbreuiate and short collection: That hee was of a goodly personage, and of a kingly presence: That he was very strong, and passing valiant, not proud in prosperitie, nor deiected with ad∣uerse fortune: That hee was mo∣derately pleasant and merie: That he was pleasing to his Nobles, familiar with his souldiers, and amiable to his inferiour subiects: That he was mercifull to offenders, and fauoured all such as did well: That he was very wise, discreet, prouident, and soundly ad∣uised in all his actions. Yet was he somewhat too credulous, and too wanton, and in his latter daies more couetous then formerly he had beene. By many worthy endeuours he expressed how much hee lon∣ged for his peoples loue:His affabi∣litie. and by one action hee more particularly declared it, then by all the rest. For in the next Summer before he died, hee required the Lord Maior of London and his brethren to repaire to his Castle of Windsour, where hee then lay. And when they expected some extraordinarie imploiment in State affaires,
because so many of them were called thither, not troubling them with any businesse, either great or small, priuate or publike, nor requiring of them any supplies from their plentie, hee royally fea∣sted, banqueted, and entertained them, not only with the choisest, best, and most costly delicates that could bee gotten, but also hee gladded them vnspeakably with his owne presence and compani∣on-like behauiour. Hee afterwards carried them into his Parke, where the thicke fall of fat Deere (besides many other things) gaue them warrant of their kinde welcome. And at their departing from him, he sent such great store of venison into the Citie, for the friendly feasting of their neighbours there, that nothing euer won him more heartie loue among his subiects of that place. He left behinde him two sonnes; Edward, who being of the age of thirteene yeares, vnfortunately succeeded him in this King∣dome; and Richard Duke of Yorke, who was two yeares younger; and fiue daughters, namely Elizabeth, who afterwards maried King Henry the seuenth, and was mother to King Henry the eighth, and Cicilie, Bridget, and Katherine, whose fortunes seldome laughed, and Anne, who maried Thomas Lord Haward, who after was created Earle of Surrey. Richard Duke of Glocester described.The said noble King (when he died) left behinde him but one brother, namely Richard Duke of Glocester, who was (by common report) a monster in nature. For he had many teeth when he was borne. He was exceedingly deformed in the composure of his bodie: for of stature he was but low, crooke-backed; his left shoul∣der was much higher then the other: his visage was vncomely, his complexion swart and browne: he was exceeding strong, yet much withered in his left arme: he was violent, fierce, and blou∣dily cruell; a good souldier, discreet to order well, and politicke to rule. Hee was very hastie and forward in great expeditions and weightie actions; yet wise, and well aduised before hee would at∣tempt to fight. He was ambitious beyond measure, and his desires for soueraigntie had no bounds. What he contriued, were it good or bad, hee would by one meanes or by another assuredly effect it. Hee made his conscience in all things to serue his will, though his will could not bee obtained without the effusion of guiltlesse bloud. He would oftentimes make himselfe poore by his lauish bountie to such as wickedly serued his turne: and would againe quickly enrich himselfe by pilling and by polling of ciuill and of honest men. Hee was so cunning a dissembler, that hee would ac∣companie most familiarly and iest pleasantly with such as hee in∣wardly hated in his heart. Hee spared no mans death, whose life
resisted his vngodly purposes; nor punished any man for any of∣fence, if his wickednesse might be applied to his seruice. This am∣bitious, this fierce, and this cruell man, in his brother King Ed∣wards daies (as wise men did coniecture) directed his aime to make himselfe a King.10. E. 4. For he with others murdered Prince Edward the eldest sonne of King Henry the Sixth:10. E. 4. and with his owne hand hee slew the same King when he was a prisoner in the Tower; and was consenting (as the world blabbed) to the death and destruction of his elder brother, George Duke of Clarence, in the same place.10. E. 4. King Edwards death, and the minoritie of his two sonnes,Richard ai∣meth to the Crowne. gaue him fit opportunitie to worke mischiefe, which first of all he resol∣ued to prosecute by the reuiuing of olde grudges betwixt the Queenes kindred and the Kings, although the last King in his death-bed had reconciled them, and made them all friends. For he knew, that where malice and hatred are of counsell, there no good action or sound conclusion can be expected. And by this practise he endeuoured first to make him selfe equall with the best, and then to be the best of all. Wee must also now obserue, that at the time of King Edwards death the young Prince in his owne person kept his residence and Court at Ludlow in the dominion of Wales, that by his presence he might restraine the Welshmen from such outragious enterprises as oftentimes their licentious and bad manners incited them to com∣mit. And the protection of his person was by the last King appoin∣ted to Anthonie Earle Ryuers the Queenes brother, and by the mo∣thers side Vncle to the said Prince. And her allies and her kins∣folkes did now possesse all roomes and offices of honour and of profit about him, hee being King: which the Duke of Glocester much maligned, and so scorned it, that in his conceits he contriued how he might thrust them all out of those places. For which pur∣pose hee oftentimes secretly and seriously conferred with Edward Duke of Buckingham, and Richard Lord Hastings, who was Cham∣berlaine to the last King. To them hee discouered the meane de∣scent of the Queene, and of her kinsfolkes in respect of theirs, and told them plainly, that if those Vpstarts remained so neere vnto the King in his youth, they would (through his fauour) be so pow∣erfull when he came to his full age, that all their honours, their possessions, and their liues, would be in danger to be made subiect to their willes. And therefore he aduised them to ioine with him for their remoue, and to diuide and share betwixt themselues all such benefits as by those meanes should be atchieued. These faire perswasions, and their owne ambitious humours,
quickly wrought the said two great Lords,His practise against the Queenes kindred. not onely to hearken willingly to this discourse, but also to bee confederates with the Duke of Glocester in that practise, which quickly was attempted in this manner. The Queene with the Earle Ryuers her brother, and with her sonne Richard Lord Grey, and with her other friends, being guar∣ded with a strong power of armed men and souldiers, intended to bring the young King from Wales towards London to be crowned. And the Duke of Glocester knowing that if his feat were not wrought before that time, it could not easily be effected after; and considering likewise, that if he with his confederates should come armed against the King to meet him, and by open violence attempt to get the Kings person into their possession, their said enterprise would be censured and adiudged to be a rebellious action, and no lesse then Treason. Wherefore he cunningly directed and sent his letters to the Queene, and called to her remembrance the heartie loue and friendship which the late King her deceased hus∣band in his death-bed had ratified and confirmed betwixt the Lords of his owne bloud and alliance, and the kinsfolkes of the Queene. He likewise informed her, that it was commonly repor∣ted, that her brother and her friends which were neere about the Kings person, intended with a strong power and with many ar∣med men to conduct his Maiestie (for his Coronation) from Wales to the Citie of London. He protested and swore vnto her, that his humble dutie to his Soueraigne, and his vnfained loue to her and to her kinsfolkes and children, incited him seriously and earnestly to aduise and counsell her and them, to dismisse those companies of armed men, for that he feared much lest the gathering of them together would be the occasion of new broiles, and of ciuill wars. For seeing (quoth he) that many former battailes triumphing in bloud, haue now made peace, and seeing that the state of the whole Kingdome hateth Armes, and seeing that the King hath no Competitor for his Crowne, and that loue and friendship hath vnited and knit together the mindes and the hearts of all his No∣bles, and seeing that perfect tranquillitie and a secure reconcilia∣tion hath quieted and gladded all the people, certainly the Kings comming towards the Citie of London with an armed traine, will make the Lords of the deceased Kings bloud, and many others, exceeding iealous of their intention, and to be fearfull lest some se∣cret plot be cunningly contriued to surprise them, when in dutie and for seruice they shall make their accesse vnto the King; and that such feare and iealousie will occasion them (for their defence
and safetie) to raise the like forces, whereof might ensue much danger, discontentment, and perhaps blowes. The Queene and her friends (who meant none ill) taking much comfort in this aduice,The Kings strength is sent away. because she supposed it sprang from heartie loue, and also because the Duke of Glocester had at the same time with all respectiue dutie and reuerence likewise written vnto the King, and louingly to the Earle Ryuers her brother, and vnto Ri∣chard Lord Grey her sonne, caused all such strength of armed men as was prouided for the Kings conduction towards London, to bee dismissed and sent away. And the said Earle, and Lord, and some others of their friends, brought the King forth in his iourney to the Citie of Northampton, and the next day to Stony Stratford, be∣ing ten miles from thence. And because that little Towne was not capable of the whole traine, the Earle Ryuers and his priuate fol∣lowers remained that night in Northampton.The Queens kindred is betraied. But on the sudden and vnlooked for, the Dukes of Glocester and of Buckingham (being strongly accompanied with great store of resolute attendants) dis¦mounted themselues in the Earles Inne, and with all complements of loue and friendship they passed the time with him; and by rea∣son of their extraordinarie familiaritie, he secured himselfe of their heartie and vnfained loue. But assoone as their companies were in their beds, the two Dukes seised vpon all the keies of the same Inne, and caused all the waies betwixt those two Townes so to be watched and warded, that no person (of what degree or qualitie soeuer he were) could haue any passage there. And they reuea∣lead, that the pretence of their so doing was because no man be∣fore them should in the morning preuent them for diligence to at∣tend vpon the King. Whereof when the Earle Ryuers had intelli∣gence, necessitie compelled him to dissemble, and to seeme as if he suspected none euill, although he knew that by the Dukes policie and craftie cunning he was ouertaken and beguiled. Yet in friendly and in a iocund manner he came vnto the two Dukes, and asked them why they had so done. But suddenly they entred into a needlesse and causelesse quarrell with the said Earle,They are im∣prisoned. surprised his person, and committed him to safe keeping. And then in good and quiet manner the two Dukes rode to Stony Stratford, and humbly presented their duties and their seruice to the King, who being al∣together ignorant of that which so newly had hapned, receiued them with a cheerfull countenance and with much ioy. But pre∣sently they also seised vpon Richard Lord Grey, the Kings halfe∣brother, and vpon Sir Thomas Vaughan, and some others, all which they sent (vnder a strong Guard) to the Castle of Pomfret in the
North, where without any iudiciall sentence or legall proceeding against them, they were beheaded vpon the same day that the Lord Hastings Lord Chamberlaine (who conspired in that action with the two Dukes) did lose his head. The Kings seruants are remoued.The two Dukes also and the Lord Chamberlaine remoued from the King all his other Officers, and most of his meniall ser∣uants, informing all men which attended the King, or expected the sequell of this businesse, that the said Earle, Lord, and Knight, with some others, had resolued to destroy all the Lords of King Edwards bloud, and to rule both the King and Common-weale ac∣cording to their owne will. The Queene with her chil∣dren take Sanctuarie.When the Queene (who at that time lay, with the Kings bro∣ther, the young Duke of Yorke, and with her fiue daughters, at Westminster) heard of these tumults, and what had hapned to her brother, sonne, and friends, it repented her much that she had ad∣uised them (vpon the Duke of Glocesters cunning letters) to dismisse and to discharge their souldiers and men of warre. And because she had good cause to feare the euent thereof, shee with her chil∣dren entred into the Sanctuarie there. The young King also mour∣ned grecuously to see the wofull tragedie wherein his friends mis∣fortunes were so vnexpectedly acted. But the two Dukes recom∣forted him with the expression of their humble duties and seruice, and with a thousand protestations of their fidelitie and troth to∣wards his Highnesse during their liues:The King is brought to London. and then they brought him with great honour neere to the Citie of London, where he was met by the Lord Maior, and fiue hundred graue Citizens more, in whose presence the Duke of Glocester vsed such humble dutie and reuerence to the King, and so discreetly demeaned himselfe to∣wards him, that none of them suspected that any thing was done but for the Kings preseruation, and for his good: yea the Nobilitie and Counsellors of Estate were so inwardly perswaded to rest in the same beleefe, that (by their generall consent) they forthwith made him the Protector both of the Kings royall person,The Duke of Glocester is made Pro∣tector. and of his Kingdome. When the Duke of Glocester had procured and obtained this high place which his heart infinitely desired, (the same being an office of greatest honour,He possesseth himselfe of the Kings brother the Duke of Yorke. of confidence, and of trust) hee made no doubt but that his purpose would quickly (though wickedly) bee brought to passe as himselfe wished, if he could also get the young Duke of Yorke into his hands. And to the end that his desires might not remaine fruitlesse, hee greeuously complained to the Kings Counsell of the froward obstinacie of the Queene, who detained
the said young Duke dishonourably in the Sanctuarie as an offen∣der, and in prison, causing thereby the gouernment of the whole Kingdome, and the Nobles and officers thereof, to be exceedingly blamed and taxed, not only at home, but also in all other Christian Prouinces and Kingdomes. He vrged also, that his Grand-master the young King was infinitely wronged and disheartened, for that he was not permitted to enioy the societie and the companie of his owne and only brother, whom aboue all other creatures in the world he respected and longed for. The Lords hauing considered of the Dukes motion, resolued that he had spoken well, and that it was fitting it should be heark∣ned vnto. And thereupon, they made especiall choice of the Car∣dinall Archbishop of Yorke (vpon whose fidelitie and loue, the Queene did not a little relie) to goe to her, and to pray her (with∣out further trouble) to send the yong Duke her Sonne to the king his brother: That he might be comforted with his sight, and bee made merrie and iocund with his companie. And withall they re∣quired him to tell her, that for many reasons the young Duke might not be detained there. 1. First,Reasons why the young Duke ought not to be in the Sanctu∣arie. because the whole estate of this Kingdome would be slandered at home and among forraine Nations, if it should permit so young a childe, by birth so noble, so neere vnto the King, and so innocent, to liue in prison: (for euery Sanctuarie is a prison.) 2. Secondly, because none could claime the benefit of such a place, but he whose conscience did accuse him of some offence, for which he feared to be punished by the law. But the conscience of this young Duke cannot be so burdened, because his infancie and his innocencie doe excuse him of any such fault, and therefore hee needed no protection there. 3. Thirdly, that none might enioy the priuilege of a Sanctu∣arie, but such a one as is enabled by true discretion to demand it. But the young Duke (by reason of his infancie) hath not sufficient discretion to require it, and therefore hee is not capable of it, nor may enioy it. 4. And last of all, hee was required to assure her, that any per∣son might be taken out of a Sanctuarie, if it bee for his good and welfare, and not to his hurt, or to punish him: and that there∣fore if the Queene did obstinately refuse to deliuer him, it was resolued and determined, that hee should be taken from thence, and from her without her leaue; and the rather, for that great suspition and feare was iustly conceiued, that her frowardnesse or her iealousie would perswade her to send him beyond the Sea, as
if hee should bee more safe there then in his brother the Kings Court. When this round message was done vnto the Queene, though it so nipped her at the heart, that willingly she would not let him goe, alleadging that none but his owne mother was more fit to tu∣tor him, or to attend him, hee being so young, sickly, and very weake; and that each of those two brethren was the others safetie so long as they were kept asunder, and that the life of the one was maintained in the bodie of the other, and that if one of them did well, the other was in no perill or danger, and that nothing was more hazardous then to keepe them both in one place together: yet when shee perceiued which way the game went, and that it was resolued by the Protector, and by his friends, that arguments should not preuaile, shee embraced the louely young Duke in her armes, she kissed him many times, she wept bitterly, and praying Almightie God to preserue and to defend him from all iniurie and dangers, she deliuered him to the Arch-bishop, telling him, that shee would require that poore and innocent childe at his hands. And thus vnwillingly and sorrowfully she did let him goe. A monstrous dissembler.When the harmelesse infant was by the Arch bishop deliuered into the Protectors hands, who with many other Lords attended the Queenes answere in the Starre-chamber, he tooke him (before the whole assemblie) in his armes, he hugged and embraced him, and kissed him once and twice, and againe and againe, protesting vpon his soule, that no worldly thing (his Maiestie only excepted) was so deare vnto him as that young childe, when as indeede hee meant nothing more then the destruction and ruine of them both. And hauing brought him to the King, who was infinitely ioied with his presence and companie, hee conueied them (within few daies after) with princely pompe and attendance thorow the Citie of London to the Tower,The King and his bro∣ther sent to the Tower. vnder the pretence of an especiall care and prouidence that they should in safetie remaine there vntill the Common-weales troubles were thorowly quieted and appeased, whereas in truth and in deede nothing was out of frame, nothing was ill ordered, but by himselfe, and by some other great Lords who wholly applied themselues to his will. A bloudie conspiracie.When the Protector had thus couped vp those two young Prin∣ces, he then beganne more seriously to determine how hee might speedily make himselfe a King. And though for a while he stagge∣red whether or no hee might make the Duke of Buckingham ac∣quainted with his purpose, yet in regard that hee stood assured of his loue, and knew that his proiect could not be effected without
his priuitie and assistance, because he was so mightie and so pow∣erfull, therefore hee found a fit time and a secret place to conferre with him about that businesse: and with small perswasions, and by the offer of his daughter to the Dukes sonne in mariage, with the gift of the whole Earldome of Hartford, whereunto the Duke pretended a rightfull title, but neuer could obtaine it from King Edward the Fourth, and by the diuiding and sharing of the grea∣ter part of the Kings treasure among themselues, hee wonne him not only to consent vnto his villanie, but also to assist him in that plot. The Lord Hastings (whom the Protector for old acquaintance,The Lord Hastings could not be wonne. friendship, and loue, had newly settled in the office of Chamber∣laine to the young King) was euer faithfull and trustie to King Ed∣ward the Fourth, and had vowed his heart to the seruice of his new master, insomuch that the Protector was not assured whether he might attempt to winne him to ioine with himselfe and with the Duke of Buckingham in his conspiracie, or no. But in the end hee fearing lest he could not doe that mischiefe safely, except the said Lord were either wonne or destroied, hee resolued vpon one of them. Wherefore first of all by liberall gifts, and by large promi∣ses of extraordinarie aduancement and preferment, hee wonne to his will one Catesbie, who was both wittie, and well learned in the Lawes of this Realme, and was the most inward of all others with the said Lord Hastings, from whom hee had receiued his best for∣tunes, and his chiefest meanes to gaine. Him the Protector im∣ploied and instructed, that by darke speeches and by some mysti∣call propositions, hee should afarre off feele and vndermine the in∣clination of the said Lord his dearest friend touching that matter. Which when he treacherously and craftily had done, he informed the Protector that there was no possibilitie euer to winne him thereunto. Hereupon the Protector resoluing to cut him short,A plot full of villanie. called a Grand Counsell of the Lords at the Tower of London, proposing to them for their taske the consideration of all fitting preparations for the speedie Coronation of the King, when as indeed hee inten∣ded no such thing. The Lords being assembled, and set downe in their places, and all of them long expecting the repaire of the Protector, who staied long, at length he came in, tooke his chaire, saluted them all kind∣ly, excused his long absence, merily iested with some of them, and was more then ordinarily pleasant with them all. But assoone as he had proposed some method to their present conference he told
Doctor Morton, Bishop of Elie, whom he loued not, that hee was informed that he had store of Straberies in his Garden in Holborne, and intreated him to send for some, which with all expedition he did, being much gladded that he found the Protector (as hee con∣ceiued) so kinde towards him. But (behold) vnexpectedly and vpon a sudden the Protector (faining some necessitie of a short ab∣sence) rose vp, and requested the Lords to proceed in the matter which then they had in hand, and promised to make a quicke re∣turne, which within one houre after hee performed accordingly. But being placed in his chaire, the Lords perceiued that some things were amisse: for he bent his browes, bit his lippe, cast his eies vpon the ground, wrung his fists, looked fiercely, sighed deepely, and by euery vnpleasing gesture he openly expressed the disquieted passions of a troubled minde. The Lords (who loo∣ked on him sadly, and were perplexed with sudden perturbations) wondred much at this sudden change, but knew not what it meant. And when a profound silence had prepared them all to hearken what would be said, the Protector by way of questioning proposed what they deserued who wickedly had intended and practised his destruction, hee being Vncle and Protector to the King? The Lords (who were all free and absolutely guiltlesse of any such crime) sate still as men amazed, and not one of them spake a word. But at length the Lord Hastings (who by reason of his great familiaritie with the Protector, imagined that hee was highest in his fauour) answered thus: My Lord, such as haue so transgressed the Law, deserue the seuerest punishments which by the Law may be inflicted vpon them, and all the Lords assented thereunto.A likely matter. Then quoth the Protector, that Sorceresse (meaning the Queene) and that Strumpet Shores wife, haue conspired to∣gether by witchcraft to depriue me of my life: and that you may be right well assured that it is true, behold (I pray you) and see how their villanie hath alreadie seised vpon my bodie. For by it my left arme is alreadie wasted and consumed, and therewithall hee stroke vp his sleeue, and shewed his arme naked before them  all. Thus dared hee to doe, albeit that all such as were there pre∣sent were well assured that his arme had neuer beene otherwise  from his mothers wombe. And moreouer, no man was so full of follie to beleeue that if the Queene had intended such a mis∣chiefe,Shores wife was King Edwards Concubine. shee would haue consorted with Shores wife aboue all o∣ther women, because shee was the Concubine of King Edward her deceased husband. And besides all this, they all knew that the  Queene was religious, temperate, milde, charitable, and vertuous
in all her actions, hating to reuenge although meanes and oppor∣tunitie were offered vnto her to doe mischiefe. The Lord Hastings (who after King Edwards death,The Lord Hastings pu∣nished for his whoredome. conuersed with Shores wife; vsing her as his Concubine; and but the same Morning leauing her in his owne bed) being desirous (if he might) to appease the Protectors rage towards her: And (in some sort) be∣ing willing to excuse her, Replied thus, My Lord, if the Queene and shee haue so done, and therewithall the Protectors indignati∣on (waxing intemperate) interrupted him, thus: Thou Traitor (quoth hee) tellest thou me of Iffs and Ands; I tell thee they haue done it, and as he spake those words with a lowd voice, hee clapt his hand rudely vpon the Table board;Armed men. vpon the noyse whereof, the whole Chamber was suddenly stuffed and filled with Armed men. And one of them (at his first entrance) strake with his Holbard at the Lord Stanleys head: who preuenting the vio∣lence, but not all the blow, to saue his life fell vnder the Table but did loose much bloud. The Protector himselfe arrested the said Lord Hastings, and accused him (by generall tearmes) of high Treason:The Lord Hastings be∣headed. and forthwith without any other proceeding or Iudge∣ment, caused him to be carried out into the Greene, and his Head vpon a Logge to be chopped off. And it is to be noted, that this Execution was thus done on him the same day, and at the same hower, that the Earle Ryuers, the Lord Richard Gray, Sir Thomas Vaughan, and their other friends, were executed without legall proceeding in the Castle of Pomfret:Murder pu∣nished. which Execution was appointed by the Protector, by the Duke of Buckingham, and by the said Lord Hastings, who litle dreamed that he should in the like maner haue died at the same time. This Execution being thus dispatched, the Protector caused those Armed to seise vpon the Cardinall Archbishop of Yorke: and vpon the Bishop of Elie, and vpon the Lord Stanley, and some others, all which were seuerally committed to seuerall Prisons in that place. And presently the Protector and the Duke of Buckingham,A had shift. thrusting themselues into vile and vncomely harnesse, as if ne∣cessitie had compelled them to shift themselues into the first and worst that came vnto their hands: They sent for diuers wor∣thie Citizens of London and required them with all posting speed to repaire thither, which they did. And vnto them the Prote∣ctor passionately related, that his death was conspired, and that his life should haue beene taken from him as he sate that morning in Counsell with the Lords, by the Lord Hastings, and by his wic∣ked
complices, if by sudden force and violence he had not preuen∣ted that mischiefe: and so much they were required to tell their friends, that they might haue true notice of the cause of this sud∣den broile and execution in the Tower. And within two houres after that the Lord Hastings was depriued of his head, a solemne and a long Proclamation written with a faire hand in parchment, and being vnder the Great Seale of England, was brought into the Citie, and with great solemnitie proclaimed there by an Herald of Armes. But by all circumstances it was coniectured by all wise men, that the same was indited, written, and sealed some daies before. Doctor Shaas Sermon.Thus when the wicked Protector had impiously cut off the heads of those Lords, who would still haue kept him backe from doing of too much mischiefe if they had liued, hee caused Doctor Shaa (a man more learned then vertuous, and as wicked in practi∣ses as the Protector was, who did instruct him) in a Sermon the Sunday following at Pauls Crosse, to blazon the honourable birth and parentage of the Protector, to relate his vertues, to commend his valour, to weaken the fame and honour of the deceased King Edward by reason of his lasciuious wantonnesse with Shores wife, and with many others, to bastardize all his children, as being borne in adulterie, and out of lawfull mariage, for that King Ed∣ward was solemnly contracted (as he affirmed) vnto the Ladie Eli∣zabeth Lucie (whom he begat with childe) before such time as hee maried with the Ladie Elizabeth Grey; and also because hee was in the person of Richard the great Earle of Warwicke (before his said mariage) affied vnto the Ladie Bona, sister to Carlot the wife of the French King. He also accused the Protectors owne mother of great inconti∣nencie, when King Edward and George Duke of Clarence (his two elder brothers) were begotten. And thus he striued to make euery one crooked besides himselfe, who was most crooked of all. And (in conclusion) the Doctor applying his speech to the worthinesse and goodnesse of the Protector, he supposed that the people could not chuse but receiue him for their vndoubted soueraigne Lord and King, and therefore hee striued to prepare the multitude to haue shouted out when the King came in, and to haue cried, King Richard, King Richard: but he failed of his purpose; for euery man was silent, and more surprised with wonder then with applause, to see and to perceiue how cowardly, how vnnaturally, and how wic∣kedly these affaires and businesses were carried, not to continue the Protector to be a subiect any longer, but to be a King.
And the next day in the Guildhall of London the Duke of Buc∣kingham by like arguments endeuoured to make the Protector the rightfull and vndoubted heire and inheritor of the Crowne.The Duke is now King Richard. And albeit that the Townesmen tooke no contentment in this mes∣sage, nor did by their voices assent to that which to them was de∣liuered, yet (against their willes) the Duke of Buckingham procured them the next day to goe with him and with many other Lords to Baynards Castle to the Protector, where they offred to receiue him for their lawfull King, and praied him to vndergoe that burden. But oftentimes he refused to grant them their request. But at last he granted it. And thus he gained and wonne (by their per∣swasions) his hearts desire.
THE HISTORIE OF KING RICHARD THE THIRD. WHen King Richard had taken vpon him the gouerne∣ment  of this Kingdome, and was crowned, instead of noble and prince like courtesie,Cowardly dis∣simulation. be applied him∣selfe to all basenesse, stri∣uing thereby (but all in vaine) to winne the loue and fauour of his people. And not seeming to take any notice that the Lord Strange, son and heire ap∣parant to the Lord Stan∣ley, intended to raise an Armie in the North, because his father had beene wronged, and was then imprisoned by the King, but pretending that he loued him when he might punish him, hee did not only set him at libertie, but also made him the Steward of his owne house. He also enlarged the Archbishop of Yorke,D. Morton committed. but committed Do∣ctor Morton Bishop of Elie as a prisoner to the Duke of Buckingham, who was afterwards a principall meanes of his confusion, and of
King Richards destruction, as in the sequell of this Historie more particularly it shall appeare. Nobles crea∣ted.The King, to make himselfe strong, by conferring of great ho∣nours vpon others, created his onely childe Edward (who was of the age of ten yeares) Prince of Wales: and Iohn Howard (who was both valiant in the field, and wise in counsell) was by him created Duke of Norfolke. And Sir Thomas Howard (his eldest sonne) was made Earle of Surrey. The Lord William Barkley was aduanced to the Earledome of Nottingham. And Francis Lord Louel (whom he entirely loued) was made Viscount Louel. The French King despi∣seth King Richard.And when hee had (as hee imagined) so surely settled his estate, that froward fortune could not change it, by his Ambassadors he made offer to Lewys the French King to conclude a peace. But Lewys so much detested his bloudie cruelties and his murders, that hee would not vouchsafe to see the Ambassadors which hee sent, nor to heare the message which they brought. This frumpe and some others so pinched him at the heart, and the Deuill tooke such an aduantage of him, by reason of his ambi∣tious and wicked minde, that he supposed he could neuer be repu∣ted and truly honoured as a King, so long as his two harmelesse and poore nephewes drew any breath, as though so horrible and so execrable and bloudie a murder could winne him loue and re∣putation among his discontented people.The two yong Princes are murdered. Thus whilest his head forged this vile and villanous conceit, he made his progresse towards the Citie of Glocester, as if hee only in∣tended by his presence to honour that place from whence his for∣mer title of dignitie was deriued, strongly perswading himselfe, that if this vngodly and hainous fact were committed in his ab∣sence, no man would then repute him to bee guiltie of that mis∣chiefe. Sir Robert Brackenbu∣rie.Wee must be informed here, that because from a meane estate hee had raised Sir Robert Brackenburie to the dignitie of Knight∣hood, and had made him Lieu-tenant of the Tower, hee conie∣ctured that those his fauours, and many more which hee might hope for, would haue incited him (for his sake) to haue commit∣ted any villanie whatsoeuer. But the loue which this vertuous and good Knight bare to vertue, and the great care which hee had to keepe a quiet and a guiltlesse conscience, made him to refuse to perpetrate that murder, which by the Kings letters hee was per∣emptorily enioined and commanded to performe. Iames Ter∣ril.Whereat when the King had stormed, sworne, and cursed like a Fiend, hee called to his remembrance, that in the Tower there
lodged one Iames Terril, a man who was needie both in vertue, and of good meanes, to support his haughtie and his ambitious minde, and who was likely (for rewards and promotions sake) to kill his owne father and his friend. To him the King by his letters disclosed the earnestnesse of his desires, and promised larger re∣compence if the fact were done; then such a hellish seruice could deserue. Thus when he had made him pliant to his will, he then by his letters required the Lieu-tenant to deliuer to him the keies of the Tower, which he forthwith did. And thus euery thing being fit∣ted according to his desires, the next night Iames Terril sent Miles Forest, Iohn Dighton, and two other gracelesse and cruell Executi∣oners, into the poore childrens chamber, where they wickedly smoothered them in their beds, and buried them at the staires foot, from whence they were remoued, and obscurely bestowed in an vnknowen place. The newes which proclaimed that the two young Princes were vnfortunately found dead in their bed, so amazed the Nobles and the common people of this Kingdome, and so inwardly perplexed the dying Queene, that euery place returned Ecchoes of lamen∣tations and of sorrow, and euery mans eies sent forth streames of teares in token of their griefe. Only the Tyrant and his Confede∣rates, for a few moneths, solaced themselues in this, that Richard was now a compleat King, and with admired policie had surely settled him selfe and his posteritie in this Kingdome. But wicked and bloudie Tyrant, let such as hate thy vices, de∣mand of thee some questions; and then thou shalt plainly see, and be thine owne Iudge, whether this land did euer breed a more vn¦godly monster then thy selfe. 1. Could not the infancie and the imbecillitie of those tender and sweet babes (who were vnable to resist or to doe thee harme) perswade thee to suffer them to liue? 2. Could not their innocencie incline thine heart to pitie and to take compassion on them? 3. Could not their proximitie of bloud with thine induce thee to spare theirs? 4. Could not the confidence which by the Common-weale was reposed in thee, make thee faithfull, being trusted? 5. How came it to passe, that thou (by violence and by vil∣lanie) shouldest dare to take away the life of thy Master, nay of thy soueraigne Lord and King, the annointed of the Lord? 6. Could not the shame which the world would spot thee
with, when thou haddest done it, deterre thee from consenting to it? 7. Diddest thou not foresee how hatefull thy selfe, nay how odious thy name would be vnto all good men, when thy wicked∣nesse should be reuealed? 8. By Gods Commandement thou wert prohibited to doe murder. What then made thee so to neglect and to contemne the precept of thy God, that (in despight of him and of his Law) thou committedst this execrable murder? 9. Could not the gastly examples of Gods seuere iudgements, wrathfully poured downe vpon such murderers, make thee afraid to kill thine owne kinsmen? 10. Why should the Deuill and boundlesse ambition carie thee headlong into such a Sea of wickednesse, to thine owne ruine and destruction? 11. What couldest thou desire to haue, which thou haddest not? 12. Diddest thou want riches? Why, the whole treasure of the Kingdome was to be disposed of as thou listedst. 13. Diddest thou want lands and liuings? Thou couldest not haue wished for any that the King had, but with a word thou mightest haue had thy share therein. 14. Diddest thou want authoritie to command, and to make thee great? No, thou diddest not: for thou swaiedst the Kings per∣son and his whole Kingdome at thy will and pleasure. 15. No, no. But thou wast destitute of the grace of God, which made thee emptie of all goodnesse. From henceforth when thou art named, the paper, the tongue, and the care shall sharply accuse thee of innocent bloud, yea thine owne conscience shall condemne thee, and (as a hangman) torment and torture thee with paines and punishments which shall not quickly end. The punish∣ment of a murderer.Euery man already seeth, and reioiceth to see, how thou art per∣plexed, and canst not be in rest. Thou fearest lest thine enemies will subdue thee. Thou distrustest thy friends, lest they will be∣tray  thee. Thou eatest little, because nothing can doe thee any  good. Thou sleepest vnquietly in thy bed, because visions, fanta∣sies,  and fearfull dreames doe tell thee, that (except thou speedily  doe repent) thou must expect vengeance for the guiltlesse bloud  which (like a monster) thou hast spilt. Thou art vnpatient with  all men, because thine owne heart is still troubled. Thou bitest thy lippe, because thou deuisest how thou maiest doe greater mis∣chiefes.  Thou settest thine hand furiously vpon thy dagger, pur∣posing
to kill other, because thou art surprised with continuall feare lest euery man will kill thee. Thou bendest thy browes, and  lookest sullenly, because no good mans endeuours can content thee. What shall wee more say? The shortnesse of thy life, thy  sorrowes whilest thou breathest, and the assurance of thy shame∣full  death, doe tell vs, that these bloudie facts of thine doe make  the earth loth and vnwilling to sustaine so heauie and so bad a bur∣den. And therefore to Gods mercie we must leaue thee, but can∣not leaue (as yet) to speake of thee, vntill the bloud of thy two innocent Nephewes, and of all others whom vniustly thou hast slaine, be reuenged in this world by thy shamefull death. Now when King Richards progresse was ended,Good fruits from an euill tree. and hee retur∣ned vnto London, he endeuoured by the making of good Lawes, and by executing of them with fauour and with mercie, and by his bounteous liberalitie to the poorer sort, and by his humilitie, gen∣tlenesse, and courtesie, to insinuate himselfe into the loue and fa∣uour of his people. But God (who would not suffer him long to enioy his worldly dignitie and honour without crosses) depriued him of his only childe, the young Prince of Wales,K. Richard is made chil∣lesse. for whom hee was much greeued. Now must wee know, that as Doctor Morton Bishop of Elie,1484. 2 was singularly well learned, so was he exceeding wittie, politicke, and cunning. And of all those his qualities hee made such vse,Doctor Morton. that in the end he obtained his libertie, occasioned the Duke of Bucking∣hams ouerthrow, procured the destruction of King Richard, con∣ioined (by mariage) the two Houses of Lancaster and Yorke, aduan∣ced the Earle of Richmond to the Crowne, and also preferred him∣selfe to great honour, as hereafter it shall appeare. The Duke of Buckingham (to whom he was a prisoner) was not only great in regard of his high dignitie and large possessions,He applieth himselfe to the Dukes humour. but by his learning and much applauded courtesie hee also wonne the extraordinarie loue and fauour of all sorts and degrees of people in this Kingdome. But his wittie prisoner perceiuing that hee was ambitious, and greedie of his owne praise and commendation, as commonly great men are, insinuated himselfe into his especiall loue and fauour, by applying his talke and conference to those hu∣mours,They beginne to be inward∣ly familiar. insomuch that within a short time the Dukes heart concei∣ued nothing which his tongue reuealed not to the Bishop, yea they began to speake their mindes freely each to other touching the bloudie villanies and tyrannie of the King. This craftie Bishop likewise, to prouoke the Duke not onely to a further detestation of those cruelties,Morton rai∣leth on the Vsurper. but also to a resolued pur∣pose
to depose him, first of all recounted how slenderly the Vsur∣per had rewarded the Duke himselfe, without whose aide and countenance he could neuer haue aduanced himselfe (ar he did) to  the Crowne. Then he minded him of the instabilitie of the Kings word, who restored not to the Duke, nor to his sonne, the Earle∣dome  of Hartford, according to his promise in that behalfe. Now vnto that he remembred him of the iealousie which the King con∣ceiued of the Dukes greatnesse, so that he rather diminished, then  in any sort graced or augmented his authoritie & power. Fourth∣ly, the vilifying of the honour and reputation of his owne mother, making her vnchafte, and such a woman as prostituted her bodie vnto strangers, in the conception of his two elder brothers, King Edward and the Duke of Clarence, to make himselfe more legiti∣mate  then they. Fifthly, his vnlawfull and bloudie executing of Anthonie Lord Ryuers, Richard Lord Gray, Sir Thomas Vaughan, and of the Lord Hastings, chiefe Chamberlaine to the two last Kings.  Sixthly, his horrible murdering of Prince Edward, the eldest sonne of King Henry the Sixth, and of the same King, and of the Duke of Clarence his owne brother. And last of all, and the worst of all, the bastardizing, deposing, and murdering of his poore, innocent, and guiltlesse nephewes, which gaue him (by wicked vsurpation) his passage to the Crowne and Scepter of this Kingdome. Mortons mo∣tiues.All these things when the Bishop had recounted, then (for a full conclusion to all that had beene spoken) he aduised the Duke of Buckingham, for the safetie of his owne life, and for the preser∣uation of his Countrey, either to make vse of his owne vertues and greatnesse, and of the extraordinarie fauour and loue which all the people bare him, and to make himselfe their King; or other∣wise, to further the vniting of the two houses of Lancaster and of Yorke, by marying of King Edwards eldest daughter, the Ladie Eli∣zabeth, with the Earle of Richmond, the sonne and heire apparant of Margaret Countesse of Richmond, daughter and heire to the Duke of Buckinghams great Vncle Iohn Duke of Somerset, sonne to Iohn of Gaunt the fourth sonne of King Edward the Third; and so to make the said Earle a true and a lawfull King, by means where∣of the Crowne of this kingdome should not only be settled where iustly it ought to be, but also all future occasions of Factions and of Ciuill warres would bee taken cleane away, and the world should be quited of such a Monster, who was loathed and hated by all good men. Buckinghams resolution.The Duke of Buckingham, although he were ambitious beyond measure, and liked well to be stiled by the great name of a King,
yet because vsurpation must needs haue beene his best title, (and Vsurpers neuer wanted enuie) hee therefore imploied his wits to conclude that match, and to make the Earle King. When the Bishop (by often disputes) had thorowly confirmed the Duke in this his resolution,Morton would faine be a libertie. hee made him a solemne protesta∣tion, that if he would permit him to goe into his Ile of Elie, he then would quickly furnish the said Duke with store of money and of men. But the Duke was most desirous of his companie for two reasons. First, because his escape would vndoubtedly be laid vnto  his charge, and reuenged, if that proiect were not supported with sufficient strength. And secondly, because by his absence he should  be depriued of such a friend, as was right well able to aduise and counsell him at his neede. The Bishop knowing that whilest he was a prisoner,Morton e∣scapeth. his head was subiect to King Richards command, and that his great familia∣ritie with the Duke cleared him of all suspition vnmannerly to de∣part, watched his fittest time of opportunitie, and being disguise∣fully apparrelled in base clothes, he secretly stole away, and came to Elie, where hee furnished himselfe among his friends with store of money and other necessaries,He flieth into Flanders. and then (without lingring) hee sailed into Flanders, where by his counsell and best meanes he ani∣mated the Earle of Richmond, who was in Britaine,His motion and encou∣ragement to the Earle of Richmond and to others. to returne into England, to take to wife the Ladie Elizabeth, King Edwards eldest daughter, to depose the Tyrant, and to make himselfe a true and a lawfull King. He also sollicited by his letters, and by secret mes∣sengers, diuers Noblemen and Gentlemen of this Realme, to bee aiding and assisting to the said Earle at his returne. And the Earle himselfe so preuailed with Francis Duke of Britaine, that albeit King Richard by his Ambassadors had striued by the disburse∣ment and gift of much money, rich iewels,K. Richard practiseth to get the Earle of Richmond. and by franke promi∣ses, to make him a new Prisoner, and consequently to depriue him of all good hope, yet the Duke of Britaine (as his faithfull and con∣stant friend) began to succour him with his best helpes. And albeit that this plot (deuised by Morton) was exceeding se∣cret, as all the Conspirators did imagine, yet was King Richard ac∣quainted therewith as well as they. And therefore,K. Richard knoweth Mortons plot. Buckingham refuseth to come to tha Court. to cut off the Duke of Buckingham from that Faction by violence, or else to win him by faire promises to take his part, he courteously importuned his companie at the Court. But he hauing a guiltie conscience, and knowing that King Richard was not niggardly in shedding of bloud, nor vsed to spare any man of whom hee doubted or feared, submissiuely and with humble tearmes excused his not comming,
by reason of his indisposition to trauell, occasioned by the infir∣mitie of his weake bodie. The King (who could skilfully cast his water) perceiued that he was not sicke in bodie, but in minde to∣wards him: wherefore by letters and sharpe threatnings, hee per∣emptorily commanded and required him to come. But the Duke rather desiring to haue a publike enemie then a dissembling friend, boldly returned him this answere, that hee reputed him to bee a monster, a tyrant, a murderer, his enemie, and an vnlawfull King, and therefore that he would not come vnto him.Armies are raised. And knowing that his life was neere ended, except he could maintaine what hee had said by strength of armes in open field, hee went hastily into Wales, and raised a powerfull Armie: and in Deuonshire, and in Corn∣wall, Sir Edward Courtney, and Peter Courtney his brother, being Bi∣shop of Exeter, did the like. So did Sir Richard Guilford, and some other Gentlemen in Kent. And Thomas Grey Marquesse Dorset, who forsaking the Sanctuarie rode into Yorkshire, leuied there much people. Wherefore King Richard (to support his owne e∣state, and to preserue his life, and to vanquish his stout and bold enemies) raised another Armie. These preparations being thus made, King Richard marched a∣gainst the Duke, because he accounted him to be the head of this conspiracie, and did perswade himselfe that hee should bee quited of all feare, if hee could vanquish him before he ioined his forces with his friends. The Duke perceiuing the Kings intention, resolued brauely to confront him, and to dare him face to face, for which purpose he determined to lead his whole armie thorow the Riuer of Seuerne at a low foord not far from the Citie of Glocester.This floud hastned the Dukes death, who consen∣ted to the murder of the two young Princes. But in the night before he should passe ouer, such an incredible abundance of raine fell, and the showres so mainly poured downe for ten daies follow∣ing, that not only the Riuer was made vnpassable, but also the whole Countrey thereabout was surrounded with an excessiue floud, insomuch that grounds, villages, townes, and people were drowned or carried away, to the great hurt and preiudice of the inhabitants, who greeuously bewailed and sorrowed for their losse. This enforced lingring, together with the Dukes wants of vi∣ctuall, money, and of other necessaries, so discomforted the waue∣ring and vnconstant Welshmen, that when he thought himselfe sure of their helpe, they then ran away, and left him alone: and he him∣selfe (by perillous and hard shifting) was enforced to harbour him∣selfe neere vnto Shrewesburie in the house of one Humfrey Banaster,
who was his seruant, and whom from a low degree hee had raised to a faire estate, authoritie, and worship. And the rest of the Dukes friends in other Prouinces (when they heard the certaintie of the Dukes ill speeding) vpon a sudden dispersed all their companies, and euery one of them carefully shifted for himselfe, and many of them (by meanes of their diligence and good fortune) entred into the Sea, and arriued safely in the Duchie of Britaine, among whom were Sir Edward Courtney, Peter Courtney his brother, Bishop of Exeter, Thomas Marquesse Dorset, Iohn Lord Welles, Sir Iohn Bour∣chier, Sir Edmund Wooduile the old Queenes brother, Sir Robert Willoughby, Sir Giles Dawbney, Sir Thomas Arundel, Sir Iohn Cheney, his two brethren, Sir William Barkley, Sir William Brandon, Sir Ri∣chard Edgecombe, and some others. The King hauing dispersed this cloud,The Duke is proscribed. which threatned a terri∣ble storme, proscribed the Duke of Buckingham, and proposed the gift of a thousand pounds to him that should be the meane to take him: whereupon his faithlesse, treacherous,His seruant betraieth him. and vnthankfull ser∣uant Humfrey Banaster betraied him to Iohn Mitton Sheriffe of Shropshire, who with a strong Guard of armed men conueied him to Shrewesburie to the King, who being examined, confessed all in hope of fauour,He is behea∣ded. but forthwith and without any legall proceedings or iudgement he lost his head. In the meane time, whilest these things were in doing,Richmond saith for England. the Earle of Richmond (who neither beard of this misfortune, nor of the ar∣riuall of his worthie friends, who flying out of England came into Britaine) hauing in his companie almost fiue thousand men, en∣tred into the Sea, and directed his course for this Realme. But in the euening after his departure out of Britaine,A storme ta∣keth him, and he returneth. hee was so cruelly beaten with an hideous storme which so suddenly assailed him and his, that some of his ships were driuen backe to the place from whence they came, others into Normandie, and only one of them (besides that in which himselfe was) remained at the Sea. The next day as the Earle came before Pole, he perceiued that all the Coasts and hilles adioining were thickly sprinkled with armed men, who eagerly attended his arriuall by the commandement of King Richard: and diuers practises were vsed to traine him in. But because he feared the worst, as hee had good cause, taking the be∣nefit of a faire winde, he returned, and landed safely within the Duchie of Normandie,Hee is relee∣ued by the French King from whence he sent to the new and young King of France, Charles the Eighth, desiring that by his free leaue and licence hee might safely passe thorow that Prouince into Bri∣taine; who not only granted his request, but also (pitying his wants
and euill fortune) releeued and furnished him with much money. So he hauing collected his dispersed ships, sent them into Britaine, and himselfe by land went thither, where (to his exceeding com∣fort and great ioy) hee met with his distressed friends, all which were valiant men, and great Commanders in the times of warre. With these Captaines hee entred into new consultations, and gi∣uing to them his solemne oath to take to his wife the Ladie Eliza∣beth,He taketh an oath. eldest daughter to King Edward the Fourth, if his successe were fortunate, they all became his subiects, and honoured him as their King: and all of them (by the Duke of Britaines aide and suc∣cours) endeuoured to make readie a new Fleet, and such souldi∣ers as they could get, for his returne. In the meane time King Ri∣chard by sundrie executions shortned the number of the Earles friends, and procured him and his associates by an Act of Parlia∣ment to be attainted of High Treason,He is attain∣ted of trea∣son. and thereby hee enabled himselfe to seize vpon all their lands and moueables which hee could finde. But his cruelties were so inhumane and barbarous, that they were condemned in the opinions of all his people, who sharply accused Sir Richard Ratcliffe, Sir William Catesbie, and the Viscount Louel, his three minions, and wicked counsellors, as fur∣therers and abettors in those mischiefes: so that (among others) one Collingborne was executed as a Traitor for making and disper∣sing of this short ryme:Collingborne executed. Richard gaue a Hogge for his SupporterThe Rat, the Cat, and Louel the Dogge, Rule all England vnder the Hogge. Now though the Duke of Buckingham could not hurt King Ri∣chard, (for a dead dogge biteth not) yet he resolued by new friend∣ship and alliance to make himselfe more strong, for which purpose he not only concluded a peace with Iames then King of Scots, but also a mariage betweene a neece of his, named the Ladie Anne, and the Prince of Rothsay, the eldest sonne of the said King. Hee also attempted once more (by lauish prodigalitie) to get into his hands the worthie and braue Earle of Richmond,He attemp∣teth to get Richmond into his hands. and for that purpose he sent his Ambassadors into Britaine to the Duke, to offer to him great store of siluer and of gold, and all the Rents and the Reue∣nues of the said Earle and of his Confederates, if he would be plea∣sed to giue him the quiet and the safe possession of him. The Duke at that time was exceeding sicke, so that his High Treasu∣rer Peter Landoys (who at S. Maloes had freed the said Earle from the Ambassadors of King Edward the fourth,Peter Lan∣doys abase slaue. as formerly we haue heard) ordered and disposed of all the affaires and businesses of that Countrey: wherefore those bribes and promises were made
and tendred vnto him, and hee (being greedie of so great a prey) did vndertake with great expedition to effect all things according to their desire. But notwithstanding all this secret practising and cunning iuggling, this mischieuous plot and intended villanie was by secret messengers reuealed to Doctor Morton Bishop of Elie, he being in Flanders,D. Morton discouereth the danger. and he with all celeritie and posting speed aduer∣tised the Earle of the danger which he was in, by meanes whereof, and to saue themselues, he with his chiefest friends and followers as priuately as they could departed from Vannes; and passing tho∣row the Countrey of Britaine in great haste, they came into France,Richmond and his friends escape narrowly. and presented themselues to the French King, who not onely re∣ceiued them ioifully as his friends, but promised sufficient aid and succour to the Earle for his releefe. But in the meane time Peter Landoys (supposing that the Earle of Richmond and his associates had left Vannes but for a few daies to visit some inward friends) prepared certaine troupes of resolued souldiers well armed at all points, pretending in outward shew that they were by him proui∣ded to goe into England for the Earles aid; but (to say the truth) they were only fitted to haue surprised him and his Confederates, and to haue transported them all to King Richard. But when hee was certainly informed of their escape into France, hee was sore troubled and vexed at the heart, because he was discouered to be so treacherous, and yet could not effect the mischiefe which by him was intended. Now when it was voiced abroad, that the young French King and his Counsell would assist the Earle in his enterprise to gaine the Imperiall Crowne of this Realme, Sir Iames Blunt Captaine of the Castle of Hammes, and Sir Iohn Fortescue Porter of the Towne of Calice, and Iohn Vere Earle of Oxford, who was a prisoner with the said Sir Iames, secretly repaired to the Earle, who (because they were valiant men at armes, and skilled much in martiall discipline) receiued them courteously, and with much ioy. When King Richard was by his owne Ambassadors truly assu∣red in what strange manner the Earle of Richmond and his friends had saued them selues, by flying into France, and that he was pre¦paring of new forces to trie his fortune when he should land, and that the French King and his Nobles both fauoured and assisted him, and that the Earle of Oxford, with the other two, were with him, his continuall feare gaue him no rest,Another vil∣lanous pra∣ctise of King Richards. vntill hee had (in some sort) pleased himselfe by a new deuice. And his plot was thus: By subtill and craftie messengers he made large profers of massie siluer and of gold, besides his earnest promise of much aduance∣ment
and especiall fauour to the mother Queene, conditionally, that shee would commit vnto his custodie and keeping her fiue daughters, so that by meanes thereof the Earle of Richmond might vtterly be depriued of all hope to match with the Ladie Elizabeth as he intended: for hee strongly perswaded himselfe, that if that mariage were by craft and subtiltie preuented, few men would then engage themselues to depose him and make the Earle King. The olde Queens follie and couetous∣nesse.The vnconstant and the vnprouident Queene, whom coue∣tousnesse and ambition had made credulous, and willing to be∣leeue him, who in the field had formerly slaine Sir Iohn Gray her first husband, vniustly had executed her brother and her sonne, and who had not only bastardized her two other sonnes,K. Richard is possessed of K. Edwards fiue daugh∣ters. but had wickedly and villanously caused them both to bee murdered in the Tower, accepted of those his gifts and promises, and deliue∣red vnto him her fiue daughters. And no sooner had hee gotten them into his custodie, but (to make his title to the Crowne more sure) he longed in his heart in∣cestuously to marie with his owne brothers daughter,His incestu∣ous purpose. the said La∣die Elizabeth. But the life of Queene Anne his wife, who was the daughter of Richard Earle of Warwicke, and the former wife of Prince Edward the sonne and heire of King Henry the Sixth, and whom himselfe and his brother the Duke of Clarence had murde∣red in King Edwards presence, was the onely impediment to that match. The Queene suddenly died.It must now be diligently obserued, that suddenly vncertaine Authors made report that Queene Anne (who was not sicke) was dead: and moreouer, King Richard himselfe forsooke her compa∣nie and her bed, pretending much discontentment and great dis∣like because she was barren, and not likely to haue any more chil∣dren to establish his succession in the Crowne. The Queene (who shrewdly ghessed at the wicked intention of her gracelesse hus∣band) much greeued and vexed her selfe thereat: and whether her priuate conceits that her death was conspired, or whether any poison (as many did imagine) shortned her daies or no, it was vn∣certaine; but within few daies after she was suddenly found dead indeed. He maketh loue to his owne Neece.The King so little regarded the death of his said Queene, that presently he began to make loue to the Ladie Elizabeth his owne Neece, who being discreet and modest, and hating his detested villanies, and well considering what perill and danger her selfe and all her sisters were in,She makes him hopefull. if the Tyrant should rashly be reiected, tem∣pered her denials with tempting and alluring lookes, and prettily
fed his fancie with the musicke of her sweet tongue, and instantly requested him, not to vrge his sute with too much loue, vntill he had defeated the Earle of Richmond of all his hopes, and had fini∣shed his owne troubles, and that he would with carefull diligence make good prouision to defend himselfe. Thus liuing in hope of her liking, and pleasing himselfe by yeelding to her request, hee disposed himselfe wholly in making all needfull preparations to resist. But whilest he was thus busied, hee was informed by such Flatterers as neuer ceased to abuse him, that his Arch-enemie the Earle of Richmond and his coadiutors receiued such small comfort of the French King, that all their hopes were vanished, and that they were so infinitely oppressed with many wants, that hee nee∣ded not to feare any opposition which they could make. This newes was by him so quickly credited,False newes makes him secure. that too much se∣curitie made him carelesse to proceed; nay, he discharged all his Garrisons, which formerly (with great charge and trauaile) he had placed neere vnto the Sea-coasts: so that we may by the way make this profitable vse thereof,A note. that such is the strength of Gods iudge∣ments and iustice, that wicked and vngodly men are euermore least heedfull and vigilant for their own safetie and good, when punish∣ments are neerest at hand to correct them for their greeuous of∣fences and transgressions against God. Whilest these things were thus acting in England, the Earle of Richmond was informed that his Ladie and her sisters were by their mother deliuered into King Richards hands, that his own Queen was suddenly found dead, and that the old Lecherer made loue and daliance to the Ladie Eliza∣beth, who was the anchor and the stay of all his hopes.Richmond saileth into England, be∣ing aided by the French King. Wherefore it is not to be wondred at, that now (with more then wonted im∣portunitie) he sollicited the young French King and his Counsell for present aid. And (to say the truth) so gratiously was he fauou∣red by them all, that he obtained a quicke supplie of money, ships, armour, artillerie, and two thousand men, to make triall if his for∣tune had determined that he should weare a Crowne. With this little (but resolued) companie hee arriued and landed at Milford Hauen in Waies, when he was least thought on,He landeth. where hee saw no great appearance of such succours as he hoped for. But when the Welshmen were put in minde, that (being the sonne of Owen Tuthar) hee was of their owne bloud,The Welsh∣men do sticke vnto him. and would bee an especiall fauourer of them all, and that his mariage with the Ladie Elizabeth would settle the whole estate of this Kingdome in per∣fect vnitie and in peace, they flocked vnto him, and thronged about him with resolued mindes and willing hearts, vnder their skilfull
and hardie Captaines, among which Iohn Sauage, Arnold Butler, Richard Griffith, Iohn Morgan, and Rice A Thomas, were the chiefe. To him also repaired Sir George Stanley,More aid. who conducted the pow∣er and strength of the young Earle of Shrewesburie, (he being then in ward) which consisted of two thousand men. Sir Walter Hunger∣ford and Sir Thomas Bourchier (two valiant and worthie Leaders of many a lustie man) presented vnto him their seruice: so did Tho∣mas Lord Stanley, father in law to the said Earle of Richmond, who was accompanied with fiue thousand fighting men.K. Richards people reuolt. All these forces were first leuied and prouided for King Richards aide: but God (who purposed to correct and punish him for his fore passed wicked deeds) conuerted their hearts, made them to reuolt from a Tyrant, and to submit themselues to a more lawfull power; whereat King Richard greeued and tormented him selfe in vaine. Yet hauing leuied an Armie of more then twentie thousand, (few of which, besides his true friend Iohn Duke of Norfolke and his fol∣lowers, remained firme and faithfull) he marched against his ene∣mies, fully resoluing to cast all his fortunes in the aduenture of one battaile,K Richard is deperate. thereby to establish himselfe without further feare in his Kingdome, or else (by his death in the open field) to conclude the wofull tragedie of his wicked life. Iohn Duke of Norfolke.And albeit that many practises were daily vsed to haue with∣drawen the Duke of Norfolke from King Richards seruice, yet none of them preuailed. Wherefore to make him iealous and dif∣fident of the case wherein he stood, the night before the two Ar∣mies ioined, this ryme was fixed vpon his chamber doore: Iacke of Norfolke be not too bold, For Dickon thy master is bought and sold. Yet for all this he persisted loyall vntill his death: and the next morrow, being the two and twentieth day of August, and in the third yeare of King Richards raigne,Bosworth field. at Bosworth in Lecestershire the two Armies met and encountred each other, and fought for the space of two houres. But when King Richard perceiued that the smallest number of his souldiers contended to winne the victorie, and that the residue of them either cowardly left the field, or reuolted to his enemie, or stood as Neuters, intending to ioine with him who was best likely to ouercome, despairing of his fortune, and knowing that death was readily prepared to attache him,K. Richard is valiant. he left his owne Armie, and dashing his spurres into his horses sides, he rushed furiously into
the Earles battaile, and with his sword he desperately made him∣selfe a free passage, vntill he was strongly encountred by Sir Willi∣am Brandon, who was Standard-bearer to the Earle: him he slew valiantly. And then singling out Sir Iohn Cheyney, a right hardie man in armes, by meere courage and fine strength he tumbled him to the ground, and came to the Earle of Richmond,The Earle of Richmond staieth King Richard. with whom he fought with desperate resolution hand to hand, vntill hee was by him slaine. And thus by his death this mortall quarrell ended, the Earle hauing lost in this battaile not aboue one hundred men, and King Richard about one thousand, among which the Duke of Nor∣folke was the chiefe. When King Richard was thus slaine, his carrion carcase being found starke naked in the field,His bodie rudely vsed. and being wounded and filthily polluted with dirt and goarie bloud, was cast vpon a horse backe behinde a Pursuiuant at Armes,Gods iudge∣ment on a wicked mur∣derer. to bee carried to the Towne of Lecester, his head and his hands hanging downe on the one side, and his legges on the other side like a calfe: and there it was interred with as base a funerall as was bestowed vpon his two Nephewes in the Tower. His Crowne being found among the spoiles and dead men in the field,The Earle of Richmond is crowned in the field. was brought to the Earle of Richmond by his father in law the Lord Stanley, who with the generall acclamations of the people, who shouted for ioy, and cried King Henrie, King Henrie, crowned him therewith in the open field. And then the Earle with all his Armie in the field gaue heartie and humble thankes to Almightie God for this great victorie:He thanketh and praiseth God. and (with promises of large rewards) the whole Armie was dissol∣ued, and the Earle and his Nobles departed to their rest. Thus liued and thus died King Richard, when he had raigned as a Tyrant two yeares, two moneths, and one day.
THE HISTORIE OF KING HENRIE THE SEVENTH. AS after a sharpe winter men doe re∣ceiue the sweet comforts of a plea∣sant  Spring, and like as Aduersitie is fully recompenced with more ioifull tidings when abundance of Prosperitie doth follow; so the hearts of all such as were sad and heauie by reason of the ciuill wars, were now cheered and made io∣cund by the happie peace and con∣cord which at this instant blessed all England in the succession of King Henrie,The King marieth he Ladie Eli∣zabeth. who being crowned King, according to his oath and promise, maried the faire and ver∣tuous Ladie Elizabeth, eldest daughter to King Edward the fourth, ioining thereby in one the two great Families of Lancaster and of Yorke, betwixt whom (for Principalitie and for the Crowne) infi∣nite contentions and mortall warres had formerly consumed and destroied many thousands of braue and valiant men. Now that the state of this Kingdome might be confirmed in its happinesse, by the safetie of the Kings person,The King chuseth a Guard. and by other requi∣sites, King Henrie (taking his President and ensample from the Kings of France) selected a certaine number of warlike men in all places to attend vpon him,Rewards giuen. Noblemen created. whom he termed the Yeomen of his Crowne. He also rewarded with great bountie all such as for his sake had beene eminent in his seruice; and created his vncle, Iaspar
Earle of Pembroke, Duke of Bedford. His father in law, Thomas Lord Stanley, was made Earle of Darbie. He also made his faithfull and firme friend and fauourite, the Lord Chandew of Britaine, Earle of Bath. Sir Giles Dawbeney was made Lord Dawbeney, Sir Robert Wil∣loughbie Lord Brooke, and Edward Stafford the eldest sonne of Hum∣frey Duke of Buckingham (who in his quarrell lost his head) was by him restored to his fathers dignitie and possessions. A Parlia∣ment. Acts repea∣led. The Crowne is intailed. New Lawes. His Pardons.Then hee assembled his High Court of Parliament at Westmin∣ster, in which hee frustrated, cancelled, and made void all former Acts which conuicted him and his adherents as guiltie of High Treason. The Crowne of this Kingdome was entailed to him and to the heires of his bodie. Hee also caused such Lawes and such Statutes to bee made, as were behoouefull and beneficiall to this Common-weale. Hee pardoned all such as (hauing conspired or borne armes against him) submissiuely by their oathes acknow∣ledged and receiued him for their true and lawfull King. His Coun∣sellors.Hee elected the most noble, graue, and wise men of this King∣dome, to be of his Priuie Counsell, by whose direction and aduice the gouernment of this Realme was established in prosperitie and in peace.The Duke of Britaine is recompenced. Hee bountifully recompenced the Duke of Britaine for all his former courtesies towards him, and also paid vnto him all such summes of money as at any time hee had disbursed for his maintenance and releefe.So is the French king. The like he did to the French King, and thereby redeemed his two Hostages, the Lord Marquesse Dorset, and Sir Iohn Bourchier, whom he left there. 1486. 2Thus whilest King Henry was carefull, willing, and endeuoured to please all men, and by his vertuous imploiments laboured to settle things in peace,A Rebellion. the malignant spirits of such as tormented themselues at his happinesse, and placed their owne hope for pre∣ferment in rebellious attempts and seditious courses, would not permit him to liue at rest, and quietly to performe the duties of a gratious King. For Francis Lord Louel, Humfrey Stafford, and Tho∣mas his brother, leauing the Sanctuarie at Colchester, which for their safetie they had taken, seduced and animated much people in the North against King Henry, and caused them (vpon vntrue surmises) rashly and without aduice or counsell to put themselues in armes. The King (who was not farre away from them) being some∣what troubled with this newes,The Kings celeritie in raising an Armie. began to raise an Armie to with∣stand them; and such was his strange and wonderfull celeritie and expedition to preuent the increase of their further strength, that hastily he sent against them his Vncle the Duke of Bedford with
three thousand men, whose breast-plates were made of tanned leather, for want of other armour: and he himselfe trauailed day and night to second his souldiers with a better strength. But when the Lord Louel and his associates perceiued that King Henry resol∣ued to make them fight before they were sufficiently prepared, and that fresh forces would giue them a second onset, if at the first they should happen to bee victorious, their courage failed,The Rebels flie. their hearts fainted, so that in the darknesse of the night they fled, and left their vnarmed Armie to the mercie of King Henry, the two Staffords taking Sanctuarie in the Abbie of Culnham, not farre from Oxford, and the Lord Louel being shrowded by Sir Thomas Brough∣ton in the North. The next day the poore distressed Rebels (being destitute of their Leaders) humbly submitted themselues to the Kings mer∣cie, and receiued his free pardon. But because no Sanctuarie could protect malefactors in cases of High Treason, therefore the two Staffords were by violence seized on, and the said Humfrey (being indicted, arraigned, found guiltie,Humfrey Stafford is executed. and condemned) was put to death: but his younger brother was preserued by the Kings fa∣uour, because it was conceiued that his transgression was not hat∣ched by his owne malice, but by the peacelesse instigation of his brother. No sooner was this flame quenched, but a greater fire was presently kindled by a Priest, whose name was Sir Richard Symond, a man very leaud, but well learned, and in all his actions vniust,Richard Sy∣monds conspi∣racie against K. Henry. craftie, and too too cunning. Hee knowing that Edward Plantage∣net Earle of Warwicke, and sonne and heire vnto George Duke of Clarence, brother to King Edward the Fourth, being now of the age of seuenteene yeares, had from his infancie beene kept as a Pri∣soner by the two last Kings in the Castle of Sherry-hutton in the Countie of Yorke, and that King Henry had secretly remoued him to the Tower, got into his tutorship a young boy,Lambert the counterfet Duke of Yorke. prettie and wit∣tie, yet borne of a base parentage and stocke, whose name was Lambert. Him hee instructed with as much varietie of learning, Court-like complements, and Gentleman-like behauiour, as his yeares would suffer him to comprehend; and then hee informed him, that by his birth and linage hee was not onely noble, but de∣scended of the royall bloud: that hee was the onely sonne of the Duke of Clarence, and the first heire male of the house of Yorke, and therefore inheritable to the Crowne. This lesson, with the daily repetitions of his heroicall Pedegree, hee so inculcated into his young Scholar, that hee was as able and as ready to discourse
thereof, as if by inspiration that knowledge had beene infused to him from aboue. The Irish were too cre∣dulous.Thus when this subtill Priest had prepared his Pupill for his purpose, he transported him into Ireland, where hee first vented and spred abroad this false and vntrue noueltie, among the wilder and more barbarous sort of that fickle and busie Nation, who (be∣ing too too credulous and flexible to any change) gaue to the youth all honour and reuerence, as vnto their soueraigne and liege Lord. And within few daies after, diuers of the Nobilitie of that Countrey were taken in the same net of follie, and beleeued as the Commons did, among whom the Lord Chancellor, Sir Thomas Gerandine, was the chiefe, who hauing had much familiar confe∣rence with the young counterfet, and finding his amiable aspect, the trimme composure of his bodie, his princely presence, his pre∣gnancie of wit, his sufficient learning, his ingenious capacitie, his quicke spirit, his discreet speech, and seemely complements, to be answerable and fitting to a Prince, not onely censured him to bee the true and the vndoubted sonne and heire of the Duke of Cla∣rence, and pitied his estate, but (endeuouring to doe him good) disbursed vnto him for the enlargement of his expenses, traine, and honour, diuers and sundrie great summes of money, and per∣swaded many other great Lords of Ireland to doe the like. He also with great speed and secrecie informed the Ladie Margaret,The malice of Margaret Duchesse Dwager of Burgoine to K. Henry. sister to King Edward the Fourth, and Duchesse Dowager vnto Charles the deceased Duke of Burgoine, and the supposed Aunt of this counterfet, of his being there. And albeit that shee was well assu∣red that this newes was false, yet because (being of the house of Yorke) shee mortally hated and enuied King Henry, who was the head and the chiefe of the Familie of Lancaster, she not only glad∣ded her heart to heare thereof, but also pleased her conceits with infinite delectation, that now an opportunitie was presented to her to execute her furie vpon King Henry, and that shee might by this plot (if it succeeded well) enlarge her true Nephew the young  Earle of Warwicke, and make him King. First of all therefore shee caused the false report of this young counterfet to bee noised tho∣rowout England, that thereby shee might vnsettle the mindes of such as were credulous, and might be inclined to take his part. She  also published, that the Irish Nobilitie and Nation had not onely receiued him for their Lord and Soueraigne, and would take his  part, but also that shee her selfe would strengthen his attempts with money, men, and armes to the vttermost of her power. These vaine and fabulous reports carried vnto her into Flanders
Francis Lord Louel, and her nephew the Earle of Lincolne, sonne and heire to Iohn de la Pole Duke of Suffolke, and of Elizabeth one other of the sisters of King Edward the Fourth,The Traitors land in En∣gland. Sir Thomas Brough∣ton, and some others: and after many speeches and much confe∣rence touching those affaires and businesses, the Duchesse caused to be leuied in her Country about two thousand men, which were conducted by Martin Sward an approued Captaine of great reso∣lution and much skill. All these (with quicke expedition) sailed into Ireland, and ioined with Sir Thomas Gerardine the Chancellor, who was in a readinesse with more then two thousand men of his owne Nation: and they all determined to transport themselues into England with all speed. Wee may not imagine that King Henry (who was valiant, pro∣uident, and wise) was secure, carelesse, or negligent in these af∣faires and weightie businesses.A politicke act. For (to the end that certainly it might bee knowen that Lambert was but a counterfet) hee caused Edward the young Earle of Warwicke to be publikely brought tho∣row the streets of London from the Tower vnto Pauls Church, where infinite numbers of the Nobilitie, Gentrie, and Commons of this Kingdome had the sight and view of him, and many of them spent some time in conferring with him.The King prepareth against Lambert. Lambert landeth in England. He also made great preparations to repell and to subdue all such as (in Lamberts aide) should either attempt any ciuill warre, or inuade his land. And thus (when he had ordered all things well) these forraine powers arriued neere vnto Lincolne, where they expected more succour then they found, or were in any possibilitie to haue. But when the King was informed that they were come, he marched towards them with a constant resolution to trie the vtmost of his fortune in the field, insomuch that it was now too late for those Inuaders to step backe: for vrgent necessitie did require,The battaile of Stoke. that either they must flie, fight, or yeeld. But the truth is, though they were not strong, yet they were no cowards. The Irish people were strangely actiue, and passing valiant, but they wanted Armes: and their braue resolution so animated their courage, that with haughtie stomackes and Lions hearts they ioined in battaile with the King. But within lesse space then one houre,Lambert is ouerthrowen. the vnprouided and vnfur∣nished Irish with their Captaines, the Earle of Lincolne, Francis Lord Louel, Sir Thomas Gerardine, Martin Sward,Lambert is made a Skul∣lian, and then the Kings Faulcone. and Sir Thomas Broughton, were all slaine, and the rest submitted themselues to the King, who pardoned their offence, and committed the Priest, Sir Richard Symond, vnto perpetuall imprisonment: and his coun∣terfeited Pupill (being first abased in the Skullerie) was within
few yeares after chiefe Faulconer to the King. Then was the Kings wife with all honour and princely solemnities crowned Queene,The Queene is crowned. D. Morton made Arch∣bishop of Canterburie, and Lord Chancellor, and a Cardi∣nall. and Thomas Bourchier Archbishop of Canterburie died, and was succeeded by Iohn Morton Bishop of Elie, who was also made Lord Chancellor of this Kingdome: and not long after hee was dignified with the Hat and habit of a Cardinall by Pope Ale∣xander the Sixth. Now though King Henry (through the benefit of a generall peace at home) was made fortunate and happie, yet forraine iarres among his neighbours prouoked him to new imploiments, vpon this occasion. The French King quar∣relleth with the Duke of Britaine.Charles the French King hauing warred successefully against Ma∣ximilian King of the Romans, complained that he was much wron∣ged by Lewys Duke of Orleance, who had married the Ladie Iane his sister, and was his next heire apparant to the French Crowne, for that hee with some others tooke part against him with his ene∣mie. But in the end when King Charles had affied himselfe to the Ladie Margaret, daughter to Maximilian, and had concluded a peace betweene themselues, the said Duke of Orleance and his complices fled into Britaine to Duke Francis, who gaue them cour∣teous entertainment, and kindly supplied all their wants. The French King (apprehending this as a fit occasion offred to him to quarrell with the Duke of Britaine, because hee longed to possesse his Countrey) without any parley or conference touching that matter, proclaimed warres against him. And before it was notified that he had raised an Armie, he entred into Britaine, and planted a strong siege before the strong and faire Citie of Nantz. And by his Ambassadors hee importuned King Henry either to  take his part, or (as a Neuter) to giue aime vnto them both. But King Henry being at the first doubtfull what course to take,King Henry mediateth a peace. because hee had receiued much comfort and many courtesies from them both, resolued at the last to requite some part of both their loues, by mediating of a friendly peace, which (with his vtmost ende∣uours) he laboured to effect. The French King (who was both wittie and craftie) made an outward shew as if he seemed heartily to desire it, and was thank∣full for it, although in truth and in deede hee intended nothing lesse. But the Duke of Britaine (following the directions of his French guests) refused plainly to consent vnto that motion. And within few daies after,Some English doe aide the Duke. Edward Lord Wooduile, Captaine of the Ile of Wight, and vncle to the Queene, without the Kings knowledge or licence, being accompanied with foure hundred of his most ex∣pert
and skilfull souldiers, sailed into Britaine for the Dukes aide. And soone after his arriuall, and neere vnto Fongiers, a battaile was appointed to bee fought betweene King Charles and the Britons. And (the more to haue terrified the French) seuenteene hundred Britons, being clad in coats with red crosses, as if they had beene Englishmen, were ioined to the Lord Wooduiles companies, and were subiected to his command. But the contrarie was to the Frenchmen too well knowen. Then (at the appointed time and place) the two Armies met together,The Britons are ouer∣throwen. The Lord Wooduile is slaine. and fought fiercely for a sea∣son. But in the end the poore Britons being found counterfets as they were, and their whole Armie being vnable to resist so great a puissance as encountred them, were slaine together with the Lord Wooduile, and the greater number of his associates, and the vi∣ctorie fell to the French part. Within few daies after,K. Henry ai∣deth the Bri∣tons against the French King. in England it was concluded by Parlia∣ment, that albeit King Henry had louingly beene aided by the French King for the recouerie of his Crowne, yet in regard that the Duke of Britaine for many yeares together had in all friendly, gen∣tle, and liberall sort, entertained, protected, and maintained him when he was vnable to releeue himselfe, and likewise because it was considered, that if King Charles should winne and annex that Duchie to the Crowne of France, himselfe and his posteritie might and were likely to proue bad neighbours to this Kingdome, King Henry should take part with the Dude of Britaine. This businesse being so determined,An armie is sent into Bri∣taine. the King sent into that Prouince an Armie which consisted of eight thousand men, vnder the conduct of the Lord Brooke. And for the maintenance of those warres,A Taxe which occa∣sioneth a Re∣bellion. a taxe (by the same Parliament) of the tenth pennie of the value of all the moueable goods and chattels of the Subiects was granted to the King. No sooner was the English Armie arriued in Britaine, but the Duke (who had beene long sickly) died:A sudden peace is con∣cluded. and therefore (vpon a composition made betwixt his Nobles and King Charles) hee was affied to the Ladie Anne, the sole daughter and heire to the decea∣sed Duke, who was formerly betrothed to Maximilian King of the Romans, and so was the said French King likewise assured to the La∣die Margaret daughter to Maximilian. And thus the British warres were at an end: and the Englishmen hauing only seene thar Coun∣trey, and done nothing, returned safely into England. Now must we vnderstand, that the Rustickes and rurall Swads of the Countie of Yorke, and of the Bishopricke of Durham,A Rebellion. not onely refused peremptorily to pay any part of the Taxe which
was granted to King Henry for the maintenance of the British wars, but also that in a most rebellious fashion they boldly rushed vpon and cruelly murdered Henry the fourth Earle of Northumberland,The Earle of Northum∣berland is murdered. who by the King was appointed to cause the extracts of that Sub∣sidie to be leuied by distresse vpon the goods of all such as he found slacke or obstinate in those paiments: which when they had done, trusting to their owne strength and numbers, they beganne a ciuill warre, so that as they passed thorow those Countries, they forci∣bly compelled Gentlemen and others to take their parts. The King (to represse and punish the Ring-leaders of this tu∣multuous insurrection) sent against them a strong and a well pro∣uided Armie, vnder the especiall command of Thomas Earle of Surrey, who hauing beene taken prisoner as hee fought for King Richard at Bosworth field, was now enlarged, and deliuered out of prison, and receiued into the Kings fauour: and the King himselfe in his owne person followed after him. But the foolish Rebels (as men amazed,The Rebels flie. witlesse, and wanting counsell to direct their actions, and cowardly distrusting their owne power and abilitie to resist) threw off their armour, shifted hardly to saue themselues, and fled euery man to his owne home. But the King (who resolued by seuere executions to terrifie such others as otherwise were likely to contemne him,They are pu∣nished. and to despise his gouernment) by exquisite and sharpe enquiries, found out and apprehended the chiefest au∣thors of this mischiefe, who (in sundrie places of this Realme) were punished by death. But the multitude and the baser sort obtained the Kings gratious fauour. 1490.The British Nobles calling to minde that their young Duchesse  was espoused first vnto Maximilian King of the Romans, and se∣condly to Charles the French King, and perceiuing (vpon more sound consideration) that the French King would alwaies beare a heauie hand ouer them, if indeed he were once maried to her, be∣gan to reuolt from their promise, and to resist his intention and de∣sire by strength of armes. But the Frenchmen (according to their custome) being more vi∣ctorious by their prodigall gifts then by their true valour, corrup∣ted the British Nobilitie, and such Matrons as daily attended vpon their young Duchesse, in such sort, that King Charles got her into his possession. And then he published, that his owne former con∣tract with the Ladie Margaret, daughter to Maximilian King of the Romans, and also that the other contract made by the said Maximi∣lian with the said Duchesse of Britaine, were nullities, void, and frustrate in the Law, for that the said two Ladies (at the times of
those affiances made) were too young, and wanted good discre∣tion to make their choice. And thereupon King Charles returned the said Ladie Margaret to her father, and was forthwith maried to the said Duchesse: and by this meane he ioined that Prouince to the Crowne of France. The King of the Romans (scorning and disdaining thus to bee disgraced,The King of the Romans craueth aide, and obtai∣neth it of King Henry. and that his daughter should so vnkindly bee sent home) seemed eager, and resolued to reuenge those iniuries and wrongs: and finding his owne strength to bee too weake for so great an enterprise, sollicited King Henry (by his Ambassadors) to assist him in those warres. Whereupon King Henry (partly in re∣gard of the loue which he bare to the said King Maximilian, and partly because hee saw that the French King was not only become Lord of Britaine, but attempted likewise to bring the Low Coun∣tries vnder his subiection) concluded so to doe, by the generall assent of his Nobilitie and Commons in full Parliament at West∣minster assembled. And because the poorer and the inferiour sort should not be greeued with any taxe to support those warres, the King sollicited his Nobles, Gentrie, and rich men only, by way of a Beneuolence to enlarge their bountie towards that charge,A Benevo∣lence. as formerly (in the like case) they had done to his Predecessour King Edward the Fourth. By this motion and deuice he gathered much money, but lost more loue: for many men gaue somewhat with their hands, whose hearts were vnwilling, and repined to de∣part with such gifts. The King (for the expediting of this waightie businesse) cau∣sed a gallant Fleet of warlike ships to bee apparrelled, and furni∣shed them with all things needfull for the transporting of his Armie which hee had raised,Maximilian is vnable to performe his promise. and committed them to the ge∣nerall command of his Vncle Iaspar Duke of Bedford, and of Iohn Earle of Oxford. But when all things were prepared, and the Armie readie to be imbarked, the King (by his owne Ambassadors which were in Flanders) was informed, that Maximilian was altogether vnproui∣ded of armour, men, money, munition, victuals, and of all o∣ther things requisite for the warre, and that King Henry might not depend to be aided by him with one man. This newes vexed and perplexed him at the heart: for wisely hee considered, that if suddenly hee should desist from his en∣terprise, and dismisse his Armie, then these inconueniences would ensue. First, his enemies (being elated thereby) would deride, mocke,
and scorne him, and perhaps endeuour to brand him with the in∣famous title of a coward. And secondly, because his owne people might thereby imagine and suppose, that by a cunning shift, and by a craftie tricke (vnder a fained pretence to make warre, which by him was not intended) he had picked their coine out of their purses to enrich himselfe. King Henry saileth with an Armie in∣to France.These cogitations perswaded him to take sound aduice of his Nobles in this businesse, and to purge himselfe, which in such a fashion, and with such a martiall resolution he did, that in the end (according to his owne hearts desire) it was concluded by a Parlia∣ment, that hee alone, with his owne Nation, should warre vpon the French King, to reuenge many disgracefull wrongs which of latter times he had offred to King Henry. When this newes was diuulged, and publikely knowen, and the valorous determination of the King by certaine demonstrati¦ons notified to his people, they not onely applauded his cou∣rage, and reioiced in it, but (by the readie and voluntarie profers of their best seruice) they much increased his Armie, with which King Henry himselfe landed safely at his Towne of Calice. And (to set his Armie in an order answerable to his minde) hee marshalled his whole numbers into foure battailes, and mar∣ched from thence vntill hee came before Bulloigne,K. Henry besiegeth Bulen. which he gir∣ded about with a strong siege, and daily battered and assaulted it without ceasing. Wee must now know, that the French King, though hee were the absolute Lord of the Duchie of Britaine by his late mariage, yet the Nobles and the Commons of that Prouince disliked and grudged at many things which he attempted (against their willes) to innouate among them, because they tended much to their dis∣honour,K. Charles desireth peace. detriment, and wrong, insomuch that King Charles feared lest they (ioining with King Henry) might shake off his yoke, and set vp another Duke. Wherefore by his Ambassadors he propo∣sed to King Henry certaine Articles of peace, which were both ho∣nourable and also profitable vnto him. An honoura∣ble peace con∣cluded.This vnexpected newes crossed the humours of most men in the English Armie, whose hopes were confident that the French warres would make them rich. But when King Henry had tho∣rowly considered that the right to the Duchie of Britaine was so inseparably vnited and knit by the said mariage to the Crowne of France, and that no possibilitie appeared to diuide them, and that in regard that hee alone had vndertaken those warres chiefly for the preseruation of his name and honour, he should immortalize
his fame, if vpon kinde intreaties, and termes of credit and of gaine, he should returne, hee not onely hearkened attentiuely to that motion, but within few daies after he concluded a peace with the French King, to continue during both their ioint liues, and re∣ceiued (to defray his charge) seuen hundred fortie and fiue thou∣sand Ducats, which in our sterling mony amounteth to the summe of one hundred fourescore and six thousand and two hundred pounds, or thereabout, besides an yearely pension of fiue and twentie thousand Crownes, which were alwaies duly paid so long as King Henry liued. Thus the King (hauing concluded all things for his honour and profit, and to his owne good liking and contentment) raised his siege, returned to Calice, and safely from thence into England. About the time in which King Henry assumed to take part with Maximilian against the French King, the Ladie Margaret,A new pra∣ctise by the Duchesse Dowager of Britaine a∣gainst King Henry. Du∣chesse of Burgoine, his ancient enemie, as wee haue heard, neuer ceasing to contriue hurtfull and malicious practises against King Henry, not for any wrong or iniurie which euer hee had done her, but onely because hee was the highest of the house of Lancaster, which was opposite to her linage, had gotten into her possession a young Dutch boy, who was very comely, learned, and wittie, but descended from base and vnworthie parentage. His true name was Peter Warbecke,Perkin War∣becke. but hee was nicke named in scorne by the English, who called him Parkin, which in the Dutch Tongue signifieth weaknesse, or such a one as is vnable, impotent, or in∣firme. This youngling did perfectly speake the English tongue, and was by this Ladie receiued into great fauour, and not onely in∣structed by her prouision in literature and good manners, but hee was also diligently and carefully trained vp in the imitation of all princely entertainment, complements, and behauiour, so that all such as beheld him and his Heroicall Qualities, pro∣nounced their sentence, that bee was descended of a Noble Fa∣milie, and that some extraordinarie Fortune was at hand, and attended to make him more happie then a thousand others. Thus when this Ladie had procured her counterfeited Idoll to bee adored and wondered at, by reason of his maiesticall car∣riage and behauiour, she informed him, that vnder the name of Richard Duke of Yorke, second sonne to King Edward the Fourth her brother, shee intended to aduance him to the Crowne of En∣gland, and to make him King, which that she might with the more ease and facilitie effect, shee secretly and so substantially taught
him in the whole Pedigrees of the Houses of Lancaster and Yorke, that within few daies no Englishman was more expert and cunning therein then he. Perkin is ai∣ded by the Irishmen.When shee had thus furnished him according to her will, shee caused him to be transported into Ireland, where he made himselfe knowen among those Nobles to bee by his birth a great Prince; and therin he so artificially demeaned himselfe, that by the whole Nation of the Irish he was receiued, reuerenced, and maintained as their soueraigne and rightfull Lord. The French King sendeth for Perkin Warbecke.About the same time the French King (who daily expected the landing of an English Armie within his Duchie of Britaine, or in some other place subiect to his dominion, as formerly wee haue heard) intended to disturbe the intention and purpose of King Henry, by setting vp of another King in this Realme; for which purpose hee sent for Perkin Warbecke into France, and promised with all kinde of friendly entertainment to receiue, helpe, releeue and succour him, vntill hee had inuested him into his right and Kingdome. No sooner was this mocke-prince come to the French Court, but such was the generall applause of the Frenchmen, and so extraor∣dinarie was their madnesse and braine-sicke ioy, that the poore Swad could in no wise chuse but imagine strongly that hee was borne to be a King. But in the middest of his flattering, vaine, and foolish hopes, the aforesaid peace betwixt the two Kings of En∣gland and of France was concluded, and this young Nouice (fea∣ring lest he should be deliuered to King Henry) ran secretly away,Perkin flieth out of France The Du∣chesse honou∣reth and maintaineth him. and came to his Titularie Aunt the Duchesse of Burgoine, who re∣ceiued him with great ioy and much honour, giuing vnto him princely entertainment, filling his purse with gold, clothing his bodie with costly and with rich apparell, and appointing thirtie gentlemen of worth and qualitie (as his Guard) to giue their daily attendance vpon his fantasticall person. Her practise for assistance in England.Then shee caused it newly to be published in England, that her Nephew Richard Duke of Yorke was yet aliue, and liued in her Court, and that he (according to his right and title to the Crowne of England, as being the heire male of the House of Yorke) expe∣cted the assistance of all his true and louing subiects towards his attaining thereof. Perkin is fa∣uoured in England.No sooner did this newes wax common among the Vulgar, but it was generally beleeued by them, and also by diuers others of better ranke and fashion, insomuch that many for malice onely,  and for grudge which they conceiued against the House of Lanca∣ster,
others because they deemed themselues not to be sufficiently  rewarded for their aduentures in King Henries warres against King Richard, others because they were ambitious, and saw none other  meanes to raise their fortunes, others because their fancies were  easily deluded by nouelties and deuised newes, and others because  they delighted to fish in troubled waters, determined to take his  part. And vpon that resolution the Conspirators (by secret com∣bination) sent Sir Robert Clifford, a man of much valour, wisdome,Sir Robert Clifford. and great discretion, into Flanders, to enquire and to search out the truth of the conception, birth, and parentage of this new-found Duke. This Knight, after his arriuall, and when hee had conferred againe and againe with the busie-headed Duchesse of Burgoine touching this businesse, and with an obseruing eie had beheld the young counterfet, and had communed oftentimes with him, per∣swaded himselfe that he was the very true, naturall, and yongest sonne of King Edward the Fourth, and so he certified his friends in England by his letters, and by meanes thereof, euery day fresh re∣ports gat greater strength and credit among such as were willing to be partakers in his fortunes.King Hen∣ries prepara∣tions against Perkins in∣uasion. Wherefore as a sharpe Feuer suffreth not the Patient to take any rest, so this fantasticall dreame and vaine imagination troubled King Henry aboue measure: and wise∣dome made him prouident to prepare for future stormes, so that he strongly guarded and fortified all places which bordered vpon the Sea, and by his letters hee informed the Burgundians and Fle∣mings of the vanitie and falsitie of this deuised foolerie, and of this fained King, vsing his best meanes both to preuent all ciuill wars, and also to withstand all inuasions which might bee attempted a∣gainst his Crowne and Kingdome. And to make himselfe more strong,1493. 9 hee selected and appointed diuers men of wisdome and of worth, secretly to flie out of En∣gland into Flanders to the Duchesse, and to this fained Duke,A wittie po∣licie. that by their meanes and endeuours bee might haue true intelligence of such as (being of name and qualitie) conspired to ioine with this ignoble counterfet; vpon whose information, and after legall trials, the chiefest actors in that businesse (as Traitors) were put to death. King Henry also recounting how that by the late breach of pro∣mise Maximilian the King of the Romans failed to assist him in his warres against Charles the French King, and finding that his sonne Philip, Arch duke of Austria, and Duke of Burgoine, secretly fauou∣uoured the attempts of the Ladie Margaret concerning Perkin
Warbeckes conspiracie,The English Mart is re∣moued from Flanders to Calice. A restraint of wares and merchandi∣zes. remoued his Mart of English merchandizing from Flanders to his owne Towne of Calice, and also he prohibited all men whatsoeuer to bring any Flemish commodities or wares in∣to this Kingdome. This restraint notwithstanding, the bribing Easterlings were vnder hand permitted to bring into England what they would. And likewise King Maximilian and his sonne by strong Edicts forbade and published the confiscation of all English commodities, as leather, tallow, woolles, lead, tinne, and such like, if they were brought into those Countries. An assault on the Flemings in London.This restraining of the Kings owne subiects, and that libertie which was allowed to those strangers, vexed and greeued the En∣glish  Merchants at the heart, and so it did many others: for by meanes thereof a great part of their trade (which in former times supported their charge, and maintained their houses and families)  was taken from them. And thereby they were also disabled to en∣tertaine such and so many Iourney-men, couenant seruants, and  apprentices as they had formerly done. Neither could or would they giue to such as they had, such large and liberall wages, pen∣sions, and rewards, as was expected by them for their paines and seruice. These extremities occasioned multitudes of Apprentices and of Iourney men (without the procurement or allowance of their Masters) to runne with great violence and furie to the Stilliard in London, where they brake vp and robbed many Ware-houses and shops, and rifled whatsoeuer did come athwart their hands. And besides all this, they offred much violence (in a strange manner) to the Easterlings, being the owners of those commodities and wares, vntill the comming thither of the Lord Maior with a band of armed men both terrified them, and also made them flie. Of these malefactors some were taken and imprisoned in the Tower, and (due examination being taken of them, and of their offence) the principall Ring leaders among them (being in number about fourescore) were continued prisoners for many weekes. But in the end they all were freed, and receiued the Kings Pardon. About the same time the before named Sir Robert Clifford (vp∣on his repentant motion,Sir Robert Clifford for∣sakth Per∣kin War∣becke. A notable policie. and by the mediation of his friends at home) procured leaue for his returne, and pardon for his offence, so that when notice was giuen of his landing, the King appointed him to meet him at the Tower, that there before him and his No∣bilitie hee might discouer plainly and at large the whole practise, deuice and purpose of the Ladie Margaret, and of her base nephew Perkin Warbecke, and of all other the Conspirators in that businesse.
And this place of meeting (aboue all others) the King in policie appointed, because if any of his Lords or great ones were by the said Sir Robert Clifford accused as being guiltie of that offence, they might (without blowes or ciuill warres) be apprehended and com∣mitted in the same place. The Knight (at his first appearance in the Kings presence) hum∣bly kneeled downe, confessed his transgression, expressed many true signes of heartie and vnfained repentance, and receiued the Kings fauour. Among the great men attending on the King,Sir William Stanley is ac∣cused by Sir Robert Clif∣ford. he onely accused Sir William Stanley, whereat the King much maruelled, because he not only entirely loued him, but also had by his bounteous libera∣litie increased his possessions, made him honourable, and Lord Chamberlaine to his owne person. This fault was so plainly and so particularly discouered before the King, that the accused Gentleman (not being able to excuse himselfe) was forthwith committed to prison,Sir William Stanley is beheaded. and within few daies after, being by the due course of Law condemned, (for ex∣amples sake vnto others) he lost his head. Yet for all this, so desirous were many of nouelties, others of spoiles, some of reuenge, and others of ciuill warres, that they be∣gan to speake contumeliously, despightfully, and too too leaudly against the King. But for this maladie he quickly prouided a dou∣ble remedie: First, by making of himselfe strong with such Forces as he had leuied, and secondly by taking of a strait account, and by seuere punishing of some of those, whose tongues (as Rasours) had deepely wounded his honour and his good name. And by their ensamples hee reduced the rest to more conformitie, and compelled them to obey. He also sent an Armie into Ireland, vnder the command of Sir Edward Ponings, to correct and punish with great seueritie such of the Irish Nation,An armie is transported into Ireland. as two yeares before had giuen and assi∣stance to Perkin Warbecke. But the offenders being for the most part wilde, rude barbarous, and sauage people, delighting in war, and being neuer better contented, then when they were tumultu∣ous, and in horrid actions, assembled themselues in great multi∣tudes, and (according to their vse and fashion) they ranne into the woods, mountaines, and bogges, whom the Knight was the more vnable to pursue, because the Nobilitie of that Iland (who promi∣sed to send him much aid) performed nothing, which carelesnesse he imputed to Gerald Earle of Kyldare, who as he was a man by his birth, possessions, and friends, most powerfull among the Irish, so
was he chiefe Deputie of that Countrey to the King. Him (vpon the false and slanderous accusations of his malignant enemies) the Knight apprehended as a Traitor, and brought him into England. But (before the King) his fidelitie and his innocencie freely deli∣uered him from further trouble and danger: so that being graced, thanked, and rewarded for his true and honourable seruice, he was not only enlarged, but obtained the continuance of his Deputa∣tion as before. Perkin War∣becke lan∣deth some of his men in Kent.In this meane time Perkin Warbecke (being by the Ladie Marga∣ret furnished with a Fleet of ships, and being accompanied with Roagues, Vacabonds, Slaues, Theeues, Robbers, Murderers, Banke-rupts, seditious Varlats, and with the off-scumme of many Nations) came vpon the Kentish Coast, where they cast Anchors, and landed some of those Vassals, who endeuoured to informe themselues whether the people determined to follow poore Per∣kin Warbecke or no. The answer made by the multitude (who be∣gan to rise in armes) gaue good contentment: for outwardly they firmely promised (vntill death) to support and to maintaine him and his quarrell against the King. But when (by faire words and soothing speeches) they had trained those Rascals vp into the land,His men are slaine and executed. they fiercely set vpon them, slew many, and tooke one hun∣dred and threescore prisoners, whom they deliuered into the cu∣stodie of Sir Iohn Peachy high Sheriffe of that Prouince, who railed them in ropes (like vnto horses drawing carts) and conueied them in that fashion to the Citie of London, where they receiued their trials, and were executed in sundrie places of this Realme. And the counterfeited Duke of Yorke (expecting better fortune at ano∣ther time) returned into Flanders to his pensiue and carefull Aunt,He returneth into Flanders where (because he supposed that delaies would proue dangerous, and that much lingring would be vnprofitable for him) he speedi∣ly collected such numbers of base and vnworthie Pesants, as by necessitie were compelled to enter into his seruice: which being done,He landeth in Ireland. he embarked them, hoised his Anchors, and sailed into Ire∣land, purposing with those wilde and sauage men to augment his numbers, and then to land in the Westerne parts of this King∣dome. But when experience assured him that hee might haue men e∣now,He commeth into Scotland but little armes, hee then resolued, not to make warre by the helpe of such as were naked: wherefore he left them, and came into Scotland, and presented both himselfe and his cause to Iames the Fourth who at that time was very young, and swaied the Sce∣pter of that Kingdome.
The Scots, although they knew that Perkin was a counterfet,The Scots in∣uade En∣gland, vnder a colour to aide Perkin Warbecke. yet they reioiced that opportunitie had offred them that occasion to inuade England; not to make a conquest thereof, nor to helpe Warbecke, but only by valuable booties and large spoiles to enrich themselues. Whereupon the young King, being accompanied with his foolish guest, and many thousands of lustie and tall men, marched forth, and entred into Northumberland, where they ex∣ercised all kinde of rigour, violence, and wrong, burning, robbing,Their cruel∣tie. rifling, stealing, and spoiling in all places, and destroying with the sword both young and old, strong and feeble, healthie and in∣firme, rich and poore, with such barbarous inhumanitie, and strange crueltie, as neuer was committed before by that Nation. And as soone as they had almost desolated all that Prouince, fin∣ding no helpe nor succour from the English to assist their new King, they returned into Scotland, and neglected to giue vnto him any more aide. King Henry vnderstanding what rapine, spoile, and violence was done by the Scots vnto his people, and being sicke vntill hee had requited those wrongs with seuere and sharpe reuenge,A puissant Armie is le∣uied to goe into Scotland summo∣ned his High Court of Parliament, in which it was concluded, that forthwith an Armie should be sent against those enemies, lest per∣haps long forbearance might encourage them at another time to doe the like mischiefe. And for the maintenance of those warres a small taxe or subsidie was granted to the King,A Taxe which occa∣sioned a re∣bellion. which occasioned him much trouble. The King (who vsed great expedition in this businesse) raised a puissant Armie, which hee committed to the charge and gouernment of his Chamberlaine Giles Lord Dawbeney, who was a wise and a valiant man. But no sooner was this Armie on foot marching towards the North, but suddenly it was recalled to withstand as great a mischiefe, which otherwise might giue a deadly blow to the state of this Kingdome and Common-weale. For the Cornishmen (who were strong, stout, and couragious,The Cornish∣men rebell. yet poore, and oppressed with many wants) not onely refused to pay the said Subsidie and taxe, but in a braine-sicke and sullen humour they accused Iohn Morton Archbishop of Canterburie, and Sir Rei∣nold Bray, (who were two of the grauest, wisest, and most honest Counsellors aboue others to the King) that they (as enemies to their Countrey) oppressed the inferiour sort, and were prollers, pillers and pollers for their priuate commoditie and gaine: And that they seduced the King by leaud aduice and bad directions, and were the Authors of much euill: And that therefore they would take it on themselues, not onely to remoue them from the
King, but also to correct and punish them as euill doers, and as foes and enemies to their Natiue Countrey and Common-weale. And pleasing their vnaduised passions with this fantasticall and vntruly grounded resolution, they (by the prouokement and incitation of Michael Ioseph a sturdie Blacke-smith, and of Thomas Flamocke, a man learned in the Law, yet factious, and of a tumultuous dispo∣sition) put themselues in Armes, and determined to effect their purpose, though with violence, yea in the presence of the King. Wherefore hauing augmented their numbers, and hoping that as they marched a long iourney, so their forces would daily bee in∣creased; and nothing doubting but that (according to the common voice and fame) the Kentishmen would bee partakers with them in their Rebellion,They march towards London. The Lord Audley is their chiefe Captaine. they pressed and passed forth towards London, and in their iourney were much comforted by Iames Twichet Lord Audley, who (with many others being his adherents) ioined with those Rebels, and gained from them the chiefest authoritie to command. In this meane while the King perceiuing their intentions, and hauing recalled his Armie which was trauelling towards the North, handled this businesse with such policie, that hee would not suffer one man to moue one foot towards the West, for these  especiall reasons. First, because that on better termes hee should encounter with them when they had wasted their best strength, and tired out themselues with a wearisome and with a tedious  iourney. And secondly, because those Rebels (being so farre off from home) should bee altogether destitute of kinsfolkes and of friends to releeue them, and of conuenient places of Retrait, if ne∣cessitie should compell them thereunto. The Kentish∣men are a∣gainst them.The Cornishmen after much labour and paine, comming into Kent, not onely failed of their expected aide, but also found the Kentishmen armed, resolued to withstand their force, and by their best endeuours to subdue them. Yet were not the audacious and bold Cornishmen affrighted with this checke, but retired strongly to Blacke-heath,Black-heath field. not many miles from London, intending there to abide the vtmost of their fortune, and either like men to be victo∣rious, or at a deare price to sell their liues. The King with his Armie drawing neere towards them diui∣ded it into three parts. Two of them hee placed vpon the sides of the Rebels, and those were commanded and directed by Iohn Earle of Oxford, Henry Bourchier Earle of Essex, Edmund de la Pole Earle of Suffolke, Sir Rice ap Thomas, Sir Humfrey Stanley, and diuers others. The King himselfe led the third, and brauely charged the
Rebels in the face, and the residue did the like on eyther side,The Rebels are ouer∣throwne. and though the poore sturdie and stout Cornishmen, were oppressed with multitudes on euerie part, yet they fainted not, but fought like men for a long time, stil pressing forth and making no staie, but as they were compelled by the sword. The Lord Dawbenie was at length taken prisoner by them, but they enlarged him incontinent∣ly of their owne accord, thinking by his meanes to find some mer∣cie. This fight and battaile was couragiously maintained for some houres, during which space, there were slaine on the Kings part about three hundred, and of the Rebels more then two thousand. Their chiefest Captaines, and manie hundreds besides were taken Prisoners: the rest fledde, and King Henrie wonne the field. And within few dayes after,Traitors heads and quarters set vp in Cities & in townes. the Ring-leaders of that rebel∣lious insurrection, were in sundrie places of this Realme execu∣ted as Traitors, and their heads and quarters were sent, and dis∣posed in sundrie Townes, Cities, and Castles of this Realme, for a terrour to all such as should attempt the like enormious offence against their Soueraigne. Now must we be informed, that though the King had recalled the Lord Dawbenie, and his Armie to withstand these Rebels, yet hee knew that the young King of Scots (in the meane time ex∣pecting punishment, except he could by force of Armes auoid it) made great prouision and daily preparations to defend himselfe. Which forces would againe inuade the Northerne parts of this Kingdome, assoone as they were informed of King Henries im∣ploiment against his owne Subiects:Prouision a∣gainst the Scots. wherefore (to preuent that emminent and like danger) he by his letters required Thomas Lord Howard, Earle of Surrey, and Richard Fox, sometimes Bishoppe of Exeter, and then promoted to the See of Durham, to raise a strong Armie: and to withstand the Scots (if they endeauoured to at∣tempt any such thing) vntill he sent another power to aid and to assist them, which thing should with all celeritie and diligence be performed, assoone as hee had vanquished the Cornishmen who so desperately opposed themselues against him. Now as the King imagined, so fell it out true indeede.The Scots in∣uade England For the Scots (proudly insulting at his troubles, and expecting the worst that hee could doe when hee should bee in peace at home) resolued, by anticipating warre, to enrich themselues with new Rapines, and Spoiles, and to make hauocke vpon the Bor∣derers: that by meanes thereof they might the more wea∣ken him, and the better enable themselues, to make resi∣stance
when time and opportunitie should serue. With the same resolution, the King of Scots and his Armie a∣gaine entred vpon the English Pale. But ere they could proceede farre, or doe much harme, the aforesaid Earle, and Bishoppe, and manie other Nobles, Knights, and Gentlemen of the North) assembled themselues and their friends, to the number of twentie thousand fighting men, and marched boldly towardes the Scot∣tish Armie: vnto which when they drew neare, their King (vpon good occasion being timerous and feareful) retired hastily,The Scots flie. and fled into his owne Countrie. But the English forces with braue courage and manly resolution entred into his Kingdome,The English Armie haua∣keth in Scot∣land. and bat∣tered, assaulted, wonne, and razed to the ground many of his strongest Townes, Castles, and Holds, and were not resisted, al∣beit the Scottish King with all his Armie was not distant from them aboue one mile. Only hee challenged the field the next daie, which was accepted, but in the night before hee raised his Armie, and dispersed them, who ranne into the Woods, and high Mountaines, and were to no purpose pursued and hunted by the Englishmen, six or seuen daies. But so barren was that Countrie, and so poore and destitute of all good things, and so vnseasonable was the weather there, which abounded with continuall Raine, Wind, Snow, Haile, Thunder, and Hideous stormes, and tempests, that the Earle and the Bishop returning brake vp their Armies, and themselues went to Barwick, where they attended directions from the King. Whilest these thinges were thus in action, Peter Hyalus, who was sent Embassador from Ferdinando King of Castile, to mediate a peace betwixt the kings of England and of Scotland,A truce with Scotland. Perkin War∣beck is sent out of Scot∣land. The peace with France newly rati∣fied. could not effect that businesse according to his mind. Yet a Truce was concluded betwixt them, to endure for certaine yeares, conditionally that Perkin Warbecke were forthwith banished and exiled out of that Countrie. The French King also, at the same time sent his Embassadors into England, to ratifie the former peace established betwixt the King and him, which was performed with much honour, and so∣lemnitie; to the great contentment, and ioy, of all the People of both those Kingdomes. The English trade is resto∣red to the fle∣mings, and their ioy thereas.Likewise, Philip the Arch-Duke of Austria, and Duke of Bur∣goine, sonne to Maximilian, King of the Romans, by his Embassa∣dors importuned the restitution of the English trade, and the re∣turne of the Marchants into his Countrie of Flanders, because his subiects were exceedingly impouerished, by them & did obtain his sute:
whereat such comfort was conceiued, that when the Englishmen were for trade returned againe vnto Antwerpe: they were receiued into the Citie with solemne Processions, Princely Triumphs, Sumptuous Feastings, Rare Banquettings, and with the expressi∣on of great loue, and of much ioy. And thus was King Henrie (at this time) made fortunate, and happie: for he enioyed peace, and friendship, both at home and a∣broade, sauing only with Perkin Warbeck;Perkin War∣beck saileth into Cornwal. who ceased not to vexe and trouble him for a while, to his owne ouerthrow and destru∣ction. For being compelled to forsake Scotland, and vnderstan∣ding that though the Cornishmen had lately been ouerthrowne, yet were they not pacified or appeased, he with foure ships only, and with sixe score ragged landing Souldiers, and no more, sailed into Cornwall; where hee was receiued by the rusticke,The Cornish men rebell, and doe take Perkin War∣becks part. Exeter is be∣fieged. and mea∣nest sort of the Inhabitants of that Prouince, with ioyfull accla∣mations, and with good welcome. And within few dayes after, they aided him with three thousand men. With these, and with some others he marched Eastwards, and came as farre as the Citie of Exeter, where hee vsed manie persua∣siue and rethoricall arguments, and speeches, to incite the Inhabi∣tants, voluntarily to become his subiects, and to surrender the Ci∣tie into his hands. But finding that the fidelitie of the Cittizens was constant and vnremoueable from their King: And that their resolutions (to indure extremities, if otherwise they could not be auoided) was strongly setled and vnchangeable, they besieged the Citie round about. And because they wanted artillerie, and great Ordinance to make batteries vpon their walles: therefore (with Ladders, Crookes, Ropes, and other Engines,) they desperately attempted to scale them in manie places, at one instant. But still and euery where (with manlike Courage and with approoued Valour) they were repulsed, ouerborne, and tumbled into the Dit∣ches, and deepe Trenches, with which that Citie is enuironed on all parts. So that (in those assaults) many of those Rebels with great obstinacie lost their liues. Now when they perceiued,Fire encoun∣tred by fire. that those their attempts daily fai∣led, and succeded not: they desperately approached, vnto the Citie gates, which they endeuored by manie slights to open, or to ouer∣throw. But when none of their practises, could preuaile, then they caused great fires to be kindled against thē: so that by consuming of them they might make an easie passage, & entrance into the Citie. This stratagem of warre (because it was vnusuall) did at the first somewhat abash the Cittizens. But they (considering with
themselues, that base cowardlinesse was the betraier of true man∣hood, and that perfect valour despaired not in any danger) assu∣med the hearts of vndaunted men, and by their endeuourous at∣tempts and imploiments, they ceased not to prouide for their owne present safetie: insomuch that with fire they encountred fire, and made greater fires within their Gates then the Rebels did without, which they maintained by adding store of matter and of fewell for a long time, vntill that with rampiers, bankes, bulwarks, and other defensiue fortifications, they had secured those places from the entrie of their enemies. When this their practise auailed not, then they againe busied the Citizens with daily scalings and climings against their walles. But the inhabitants so confidently persisted to defend themselues, that poore Perkin began to hang downe his head; and being trou∣bled with melancholicke passions, filled the aire with sighes and groanes, and was perplexed at the heart, being weary of his match. The King commeth into the West Countrey with an Armie.The King, who had beene speedily informed how violently that Citie was enuironed, and how couragiously the Rebels were resisted, so carefully regarded it, and the inhabitants thereof, that with a faire Armie he himselfe (in his owne person) marched to∣wards the Rebels with all speede. But before hee could come neere vnto them, Edward Courtney Earle of Deuonshire, and the Lord William his sonne, Sir Wymond Carew, Sir Thomas Trenchard, Sir William Courtney, Sir Thomas Fulford, Sir Iohn Halwell, Sir Iohn Crocker, Walter Courtney, Peter Edgecombe, and their lustie follow∣ers, repaired to the said Citie of Exeter, and intended to giue such good helpe and assistance to the inhabitants thereof, that the Re∣bels (leauing the siege) marched into Somersetshire,The siege of Exetr is ed. Perkin W∣be e∣g Tawn∣ton. where they be∣sieged the Towne of Tawnton. But the King vnderstanding that they were remoued from the Citie, and where they then were, di∣rected his course towards Tawnton, he hauing with him in his Ar∣mie Edward the young Duke of Buckingham, who was a Prince of haughtie courage, and of a gallant resolution, Giles Lord Dawbeney his chiefest Chamberlaine, Robert Lord Brooke, Lord Steward of his house, Sir Alexander Baynam, Sir Maurice Barkley, Sir Robert Tame, Sir Iohn Guise, Sir Robert Poynts, Sir Henry Vernon, Sir Iohn Mormer, Sir Thomas Tremaile, Sir Edward Sutton, Sir Amias Paulet, Sir Iohn Sapcots, Sir Hugh Lutterel, Sir Francis Cheyney, and sundrie other Knights and Gentlemen of great place and valour. Perkin and the Rebels site.But when Perkin Warbecke and his fellow Captaines heard of the Kings approche, they fled with threescore horse vnto Beauly neere to South-hampton, where poore Perkin and most of those his com∣panions
entred into the Sanctuarie, and registred their names there: but the residue of them were taken prisoners by the Kings light horsemen, and being brought into the Kings Armie (for ex∣amples sake vnto others) they were ordered and executed by the martiall law in sundrie places in the Westerne parts. But the rude rabble which were left behinde (perceiuing that their Ring-lea∣ders had left them,The common sort of Re∣bels are par∣doned. and were run away) fell downe vpon their knees, craued mercie, promised faith and loyaltie in future times, and not only receiued the Kings pardon, but were reuiued by his expressing of much fauour and grae towards them. This victory being thus obtained without blowes, the King,King Henry commeth to the Citie of Exeter. with his greatest Lords, and the brauest Gallants in his trayne; came to the City of Exceter; and was lodged in it certaine daies, where he commended and thanked the inhabitants, for their faith∣full and valiant seruice, promised them the fulnesse of his fauour,The King giues his Sword to the Citie of Ex∣eter. and (for an addition of Honour to that City) gaue vnto them his sword from his owne side, and commaunded that in future times and in all publike places within that Citie, it should bee borne be∣fore the Maior, as formerly and for the like purpose his noble pre∣decessor King Edward the fourth had done. Then the King (intending to make a finall end of these ciuill warres) sent some of his chosen Captaines,Perkin War∣becke is brought to the King. with certaine bands of armed men, to apprehend poore Perkin, who compassed the Sanctuarie at Bewly round about, so that he (recounting with him∣selfe his sundrie mishaps, and his hopelesse fortunes to be a King) yeelded himselfe, and was brought vnto the King, who carried him as his prisoner vnto London: where albeit hee was closely kept, and narrowly watched by diuers of the Kings Guard, yet hee escaped. But being daily and hourely searched for,Perkin esca∣peth, and is taken againe. hee voluntarily committed himselfe to the Abbot of Shene, neere to the Kings Palace of Richmond, intreating him to haue compas∣sion on him, and to procure for him the Kings pardon,He is stocked He is com∣mitted to the Tower. which hee did. Then was hee brought to the Kings Court at Whitehall, where all his base descent and ignoble pedegree being in a paper fully written, and pinned vpon his backe, hee was stocked one whole day: so was he the next morning vpon a high scaffold in Cheape-side within the Citie of London, from whence hee was committed a close prisoner to the Tower.He practi∣seth to escape and to conuey away the young Earle of Warwicke. Hee being in prison there, corrupted (by infinite promises of honourable aduancement) the seruants of Sir Iohn Digbie Lieu∣tenant of the Tower, to suffer him and Edward the young Farle of Warwicke (who had been a prisoner from his infancie) to escape.
But this plot being discouered, Perkin Warbecke was shortly after by the due course of Law condemned for High Treason,Perkin War∣becke behea∣ded. and was executed at Tyburne within two daies after: and the young Earle of Warwicke, who consented to haue escaped likewise, being alto∣gether innocent of all crime, and onely affecting libertie, which men, beasts, birds, and fishes doe naturally desire, was indicted, arraigned, conuicted, and adiudged guiltie of the like offence, and was executed on a Scaffold at the Tower Hill.The young Earle of Warwicke is beheaded. His death much blemished the fame and reputation of King Henry, who being mercifull and compassionate by nature, and hauing extended it oftentimes vnto notorious malefactors, now (to worke his owne securitie, and without any iust offence) would not pardon him who all his life time had beene so secret a prisoner, restrained from all companie, and from the view of this vaine and transitorie world, that he scarcely knew a Capon from a Goose, nor euer attempted any thing which might offend the King, sauing only to set himselfe at large. 1500.As soone as these businesses were thus ended, Arthur the no∣ble  Prince of Wales, being of the age of fifteene yeares, was by an honourable deputation betrothed to the Ladie Katherine daugh∣ter to Ferdinando King of Spaine,Prince Ar∣thur marieth Katherine daughter to Ferdinando King of A∣ragon. shee being of the age of eighteene yeares; and the next yeare after with triumphant ioy and princely entertainment he receiued her into England, and was maried to her in Pauls Church within the Citie of London. And not long after, Iames the Fourth, King of the Scots, vsed the mediation of Richard Fox,1501. then Bishop of Durham, but shortly af∣ter  translated vnto Winchester, that hee might haue to wife the Ladie Margaret the eldest daughter of King Henry the Seuenth.The Kings eldest daugh∣ter affied and after maried to Iames the fourth, King of Scots. And though the King (for many important reasons) might haue bestowed her vpon the greatest and most honorable Kings or Po∣tentates in the Christian world, yet for these good respects hee cheerefully consented to his request. First, because (by all likeli∣hood and probable coniecture) this mariage would establish a per∣petuall  peace betwixt those two Kingdomes. And secondly, be∣cause  if issues males and females failed of the bodies of his two sonnes, then the Kingdome and the Crowne of this Realme de∣scending to the said Ladie Margaret, and to her issue, would draw the Scottish King into England, as vnto an estate of greater power, magnificence, honour, and riches; whereas if she were ioined to a Prince equall, or exceeding her father in those respects, this King∣dome would then wait vpon the greater and more worthie, and so might be guided, gouerned, directed, and commanded by a
Deputie, or a Substitute, which would bee derogatorie from the maiestie of such a Monarchie and Common-weale. These Halcyon daies,Prince Ar∣thur dieth. which made King Henry fortunate and happie, were suddenly exchanged into daies of heauinesse and of sorrow: for Prince Arthur, within fiue moneths after he was ma∣ried, departed out of this troublesome and transitorie vale of mi∣serie, and was buried with great pompe and incredible lamenta∣tion both of the Nobles, Gentlemen, and common people, in the Cathedrall Church within the Citie of Winchester: by whose de∣cease without issue, his brother Henry Duke of Yorke (without Creation) was Prince of Wales,1502. as vnto him (of right) that dignitie did belong and appertaine: and the next yeare after he was created  Earle of Chester by his Father. The King not long after (by an honorable attendance of Lords, Knights, Ladies, and men and women of especiall note and qua∣litie) sent his eldest daughter, the Ladie Margaret, into Scotland, to her espoused husband Iames the Fourth, who receiued her vpon the limits of his owne Kingdome, from the Earles of Surrey and Northumberland, and was the next day maried to her in his Citie of Edenburgh,1503. to the great reioicing of the people of both those Nations. Now when King Henry had thus ouercome his enemies and the Rebels, and had settled himselfe in peace,1504. hee determined to  plucke downe the high stomackes and stout courage of his people,The King taketh ad∣uantage of forfeitures vpon Penall Lawes. supposing that their wealth and riches occasioned their rebellions, and was the cause that many enormous insolencies were done and committed in the Common-weale. And by that meane hee also intended to enrich himselfe. And the plot whereby he inten∣ded to effect it, was, by taking of the aduantage of the breach of Penall Lawes.Empson and Dudley. And the principall charge of that polling businesse hee committed to Sir Richard Empson and Edmund Dudley, men learned in the Law, but ready enough to execute the Kings com∣mands in a worser matter, if occasion did so require. These two being attended by troupes of base Informers, Pro∣moters, Catch-poles, Cheaters, Knaues, and cousening Rascals,Many are vndone. prosecuted and persecuted many of the Kings good Subiects, to their vtter ruine and ouerthrow; insomuch that many people in euery Shire of this Kingdome (by their oppressions) waxed poore, and were vtterly decaied in their estates. But the Kings Coffers were filled, his Bagges were stuffed, and those two gracelesse and cruell Cormorants got to themselues the Deuill and all. But no remedie there was to cure this maladie: for the King authorized
them: and they so rigorously, and so vnconscionably executed their tyrannie, that no man could assure himselfe, that hee was free, and without the danger of their lash. 1605.In the 21. yeare of K. Henries raigne, Elizabeth Q. of Castile, & wife  to Ferdinando K. of Aragon and Spain, died without issue male of her bodie, so that her Kingdom not being deuidable among sisters (ac∣cording to the custome of that Countrie) discended to her eldest daughter the Ladie Iane,The King and Queene of Castile doe come into En∣gland by a storme. wife to Philip Arch-Duke of Austria, and Duke of Burgoine, so that hee (being King of Castile in her right) prepared a Nauie of strong, and well appointed ships, and entred into the Sea, purposing to take the possession of his new Kingdome. But (by the violence of an outragious storme) him∣selfe with his Queene was driuen into Waymouth in Dorset shire: where (at his landing) hee was receiued by Sir Thomas Trenchard a worthie,Sir Thomas Trenchard entertaineth them at his house. and a compleate Knight who instantly importuned the King to accept of the entertainment of his house, vntill King Henrie were certified of his being there, which courteously he did. Whereof when he had louingly accepted hee was conducted thi∣ther, and feasted like (as hee was) a King. The Knight forthwith sent diuers Posters to King Henrie, who (being much gladded by this newes) because the said King, and he were vnfained and faith∣full friends,They are en∣tertained by the King. forthwith sent for his better direction, and atten∣dance, the Earle of Arundell and some others, who inuited him and his Queene, and their Companie to the Kings Court, which was then at his Castle of Windsor, of which great courtesie he accepted with a kind hart: and as he came within fiue miles of the Castle; he was met by the Noble Henrie Prince of Wales, who was accompa∣nied by diuers Earles, Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen of choice reckoning aad account: and within halfe a mile of his iournies end, the King himselfe with the greatest part of his Nobilitie, Ladies, and Personages of great worth and honour (being richly appar∣relled, and brauely mounted) met him likewise, where kind salu∣tations, and friendly greetings proceeded from the heart; and were performed with most exquisite complements of loue, that by any could be imagined. From the Kings Castle of Windsor. the King conducted him and his Queene to the Citie of London: where nothing was omit∣ted, that anie deuise, or cost, could make sumptuous: thereby to expresse the heartie welcome of such beloued guests. And thus when (with great contentment, mirth, and pastime) the King and he had spent some dayes, they renewed the League which was betwixt them, and taking kind farewels, each of other, the said
King and Queene, imbarked themselues againe, lanched into the Sea, and safety arriued according to their owne wils. But not long after, King Philip and his wife died, and that Kingdome discended to Charles his eldest sonne. From this time forwards King Henrie waxed sickly, weake,1506. and infirme, and by meanes thereof, the two scourgers of the Com∣mon-weale  Empson, and Dudley, tooke larger libertie to extend their villanies, then was giuen to them, and did oppresse, torment, and vex the People of this land. But when the King perceiued that his time was short,1507. hee depri∣ued them of their authoritie: remitted and pardoned all offences, committed against his penall Lawes, and enlarged all prisoners,The King waxeth sickly. His deeds of charitie. which were in durance for any offence (treason and murder excep∣ted only) he also paid the debts of all such, as for trifling and smal summes, were prisoners in any Ward, and gaue certaine summes of monie vnto some poore folkes, who had beene vnconscionably deuoured, robbed, and spoiled,He repenteth of his exacti∣ons by the pe∣nall lawes. by those two gracelesse and vn∣godly Cormorants. He also was exceeding penitent and sorrow∣full for those wrongs and iniuries which (with too much seueritie) they had done vnto many:1508. and hee disbursed by way of loane freely, and without reward, diuers great summes of monie to his Merchants.A notable policie. By meanes whereof their gaines and his custome were  mightily encreased. Finally, when hee had raigned twentie and three yeares and some moneths, and when hee had liued fiftie and two yeeres, he died,The King dieth. and was buried with great solemnitie and honor by Queene Elizabeth his wife, in his owne Chap∣pell at Westminster: which he had with great cost and skill founded, and caused to be built not long be∣fore.
THE HISTORIE OF KING HENRIE THE EIGHT. KIng HENRIE the Eight,1509. The King marieth his brothers wife. being of the Age of eighteene yeares, began to Raigne the two and twentieth day of Aprill, in the yeare of our Lord God 1509. And being dispen∣ced with by Pope Iuly the second, hee maried the Ladie Katherine, daughter to Ferdinando King of A∣ragon, Aunt to Prince Charles of Ca∣stile, who afterwards was Emperor; when as not long before shee had beene his brother Prince Arthures wife: by which match, much trouble afterwards ensued, as in this discourse of his gouernement it will appeare. In his first beginnings he seemed tenderly to affect his peoples loue, and to execute his Lawes with mercie, and with compassion.The King is gratious to such as wre oppressed by Empon and Dudley. And whereas oppression (in the end of his Fathers dayes) had much vexed and grieued the Subiects of this Land, Hee (by open Proclamations) made it knowne, that he would not only heare the lamentable complaints of such as by the Tyrannous Rapine, and greedie Couetousnesse of Empson and Dudley, and of some o∣ther tormenting Promoters had beene vndone; but would also redresse and recompence their wrongs. By meanes whereof great throngs of People daily resorted, flocked, and rushed into the Kings Court: Among whom many complained most who had least cause, but they receiued sharpe punishment for their impu∣dencie and boldnesse; and, to the rest, the King gaue liberall resti∣tution and amends. And the more frankely and freely to content
such as had beene iustly offended by those extremities, after all legall proceedings finished, hee caused the heads of those two de∣uouring Caterpillers to be striken off at the Tower hill:Empson and Dudley put to death. and the rest of that rascall rabble were disgracefully corrected by the stocks and pillories in sundrie places of this Realme. 1511. 3Thus when the King had well busied himselfe in the settlement of his Kingdome the first two yeares of his raigne, hee was by his wiues father,Ferdinando craueth and obtaineth aid, but did nothing. Ferdinando King of Aragon, entreated to enter into more turbulent actions, by aiding and assisting him against the Moores, which willingly he did. But by reason of a cessation of those iarres, the Englishmen returned out of Spaine, hauing beene rudely entertained, and spent all. The French King war∣reth on the Pope.About the same time the French King Lewys the twelfth (by reason of some priuate quarrellings betwixt himselfe and Pope Iuly the second) transported an Armie into Italie, and by strength and violence (as a Conquerour) hee possessed himselfe of the faire and rich Citie of Bologna la Grassa, and insolently did much harme. Whereupon King Henry (in fauour to the Pope, because he dis∣pensed with his late mariage, and was vnited vnto him by more then by the ordinarie bonds of friendship and of loue, and because the Pope himselfe was vnable to resist,King Henry mediateth a peace, but he is neglected. Warres be∣twixt King Henry and Lewys the twelfth. or to maintaine his owne quarrell) interposed himselfe as an indifferent mediator, and as an intercessor for amitie and for peace. But the French King (tasting the pleasant and the profitable fruits of his successefull fortune, and longing to extend his go∣uernment into so rich a Countrey) turned the deafe eare, and would not hearken to this motion. Whereupon King Henrie (whose bodie was young and lustie, and whose high heart was re∣plenished with true fortitude, magnanimitie, and valour) made it knowen to the Christian world, that as hee scorned to be neglected in so good a suit, so he loathed to be idle, and a looker on, in a time of such negotiation and imploiment, and therefore would attempt by his best meanes to withdraw the French Kings warres from the Popes Countries. Vpon which resolution, forthwith, by his Am∣bassadors hee required the French King to giue vnto him the full and peaceable possession of his two Duchies of Guyen and of Nor∣mandie, together with his ancient inheritance of Angeow and of Mayne, which wrongfully was kept and deteined from his Ance∣stors and from him. The small acquaintance which at that time the French King had with King Henry, and the contempt of his youthfull yeeres, made
him to returne a scornefull deniall to his demand; insomuch that King Henrie proclaimed warre against him, and prepared daily to send a puissant Armie into Guyan. Vpon which occa∣sion, and others,Defender of the faith. and in regard that those broiles were chiefly vn∣dertaken to releeue the Pope, King Henry was by him enstiled with this addition to his kingly Title, Defender of the Faith. This resolution being notified to his father in law Ferdinando King of Aragon, (who was craftie, and cunningly intended,Ferinando promiseth aid to King Henry. vn∣der the colour of much friendship, to vsurpe, and treacherously to winne vnto himselfe the Kingdome of Nauarre, for which im∣moderately his ambitious heart did thirst) hee made vnto King Henry a large profer of great assistance and helpe, with horses, tents, carriages, ordinance, and sundrie other things needfull and expe∣dient for those warres, if hee would land his Armie within his Countrey of Biskey, and march from thence into Guyan. The King (who dreamt not of any fraud,The Kings Armie lan∣deth in Bis∣key. but was perswaded of good performance of more then had beene offred) most thank∣fully accepted of this great courtesie, and sent (for the aforesaid purpose) ten thousand men into Biskey, vnder the principall com∣mand of Thomas Gray Marquesse Dorset, who was their Generall in that warre. But Ferdinando (whose owne plot touching the surprisall of Nauarre was not fully perfected,Ferdinando yeels no helpe. and who intended nothing lesse then according to his promise to aid the English Armie) by flatte∣ring messages to the Marquesse maintained his hopes, but yet suf∣fered both him and his (without imploiment or succour) to lie idle, to their great dishonour and reproch. In the end he prepared a strong Armie,The King∣dome of Na∣uarre taken and conque∣red by the Spaniards. which was conducted by the Duke D'Alva, and outwardly pretended to vnite them to the English forces. But as a Riuer growing outragious by the abun∣dance of much raine, ouerfloweth the low adiacent grounds, so this Armie with great violence and strength vnexpectedly rushed into the vnprouided Territories of Nauarre, surprised the Citie of Pampalona, and treacherously (without blowes or resistance) sub∣dued the greatest part of that Kingdome, which (without right or title) the Spaniards doe hold and enioy at this day. And although that King Ferdinando (by this vniust and deceit∣full practise) had easily attained to the height of his ambitious de∣sires concerning that conquest,Ferdinando ars no helpe or assistance at last. yet did hee continue false and vn∣kinde to the English Armie, whom he assisted not at the last, but suffred them for the space of foure moneths to be oppressed with a thousand wants, and to be consumed by the flux and other cala∣mities
in the open field: by meanes whereof, the common souldi∣ers (being heartlesse,The English∣men returne home without leaue. and hopelesse of better vsage from the King of Aragon) forsooke the field, and (without the licence of their Generall) returned straglingly into England. And thus was K. Henry grosly abused and wronged by his father in law the second time. Whilest the English Armie was thus vnkindly deluded in Bis∣key, the right valiant Knight Sir Edward Howard (Lord Admirall of England,Sir Edward Howard plagueth the Brittons. and a younger sonne to the Earle of Surrey) with a well appointed Fleet of ships (which were well furnished with braue and lustie men) kept and commanded the Narrow Seas, daily tooke the French Merchants, oftentimes landed in sundrie places within the Duchie of Britaine, forraged their Fields, ransacked their Villages and their Townes, set them on fire, and enriched his companies with great spoiles. The Brittons dare him, but run away.The Brittons (being hourely endammaged, and knowing that no better fortune would attend them, except by true valour and manhood they encountred the English assailants) braggingly dared the Admirall into the Field; of which challenge he ioifully accep∣ted, although that with six and twentie hundred (and no more) he was to fight against more then ten thousand men. And incon∣tinently with martiall skill and policie hee ordered his battaile in the open field. But when the Brittons approched neere, and with iudicious eies beheld the order and the courage of the English soul∣diers, their hearts fainted, their Leaders retired, their common souldiers fled, and would not once looke on an English face. The King sendeth him more aid.The King being aduertised of the valour of his Admirall, and of the haughty courage of his men, & intending to giue them strength which should bee answerable to their desires, did send vnto them some of his ships royall, & many others, which were well ordinan∣ced, and plentifully manned, both for the Sea, & also for the Land. When the Admirall was thus prouided, and had reduced all his ships into one Fleet,He fighteth at Sea with the French Fleet. within few daies after he met and fought with the French Nauie; at which time death was despised, in regard that euery man sought by bloud to purchase honour and renowne: vntill the Regent of England, and in her Sir Iohn Carew of Deuon∣shire, and Sir Thomas Knyuet, with seuen hundred more, and the great Carricke of Brest, and in her Sir Pierce Morgan, and nine hun∣dred men of warre, (both those ships being fast grapped together) were vnfortunately burnt,The Regent and the Car∣ricke are burned. slaine, and drowned in the Sea. The view whereof being vnusuall, was so terrible, that whilest men fearfully looked on, the fight ceased, and the Frenchmen (scatte∣ring themselues) returned into the Sea.
The French King (to make his match the better with the En∣glish Nauie) augmented the number of his ships and men,The French Fleet entreth into the Hauen of Brest. and sent them thorowly prouided with ordinance, powder, shot, and other necessaries, into the Hauen of Brest. And King Henry (who scor∣ned that his Admirall should be oppressed with a greater strength then he should be well able to resist) rigged vp the most part of his Royall Fleet, and some others,King Henry augmenteth his Fleet. which safely arriued in Bartram Bay within the Duchie of Britaine. With these, and with all the rest, the braue Admirall attempted to assaile the French Bottoms as they lay at ancors within the Hauen of Brest. But as he was en∣tring in, the foremost ship, which Arthur Plantagenet did com∣mand, was splitted in sunder vpon a rocke, which made the rest doubtfull to proceed, except with better guidance they might safely enter in. The French Captaines perceiuing the Englishmens intent,The French∣men doe fortifie the Hauen. an∣coured as neere to the Castle of Brest as they were able, and placed foure and twentie old Flemish Hulkes towards the mouth of the Hauen, betwixt themselues and the English Fleet, which they ap∣pointed to bee set on fire, and to bee vnmoared when the ships of England did approch towards them, that by them they might bee endangered. They also raised and fortified diuers Rampiers and Bulwarkes vpon the entrance of the Hauen, from which their great Ordinance might play vpon their enemies. The Lord Admirall of England (doubting lest the Hauen of Brest was too shallow to support his ships of greatest strength and  burden, The Admi∣rall in Boats entreth into the Hauen. and finding that the French cowards meant nothing lesse then to expresse their manhood by a resolute encounter) resol∣ued with oared Barges to be rowed into the Harbrough, and there to doe some memorable exploit vpon his enemies ships. With this determination (which more manfully then aduisedly he did put in practise) hee with such an haughtie courage and with such violence assailed the three great Gallies of the Rhoads,He taketh the three Gallies of the Rhoads. which were brought thither by a gallant Knight, named Prior Iohn, that hee wonne them quickly, and possessed them as his owne. But when the Frenchmen perceiued that the English Barges were gone out of the Hauen, and were returned to their owne Fleet, they then with great numbers of well armed men rushed into the said Gallies, where the braue Admirall with that small remnant which were with him, defended themselues a long time with great cou∣rage. But being ouer-mastered, and too much wearied with fresh supplies, which euery minute did assaile them,He is drow∣ned. the greater part of his men were slaine, the Admirall with a pike was violently borne
ouer boord, and drowned in the Sea, and the rest of them were taken prisoners by their enemies. And thus were they ouer∣throwen, who (if they had beene more prouident, and better counselled) might haue triumphed in their victories. And within few daies after, the Lord Thomas Howard, the eldest brother of the said deceased Knight,His brother is made Lord Admirall. was by the King made Admirall, who with all the extremitie of warre became a cruell reuenger of his bro∣thers death. The King (not minding any longer to trifle or to dallie with the French King) leuied two Armies.Two Armies sent into France. In the one of them were eight thousand men, and in the other six thousand. The former of them was commanded by George Lord Talbot Earle of Shrewes∣burie, and the other by Sir Charles Somerset, Lord Harbert, Cham∣berlaine to the King. These two Generals with their companies (departing from Portsmouth) arriued safely at Calice, from whence they marched to the strong Citie of Tyrwyn,Tyrwyn is besieged. and besieged it on euery side. And within few weekes after, the King himselfe (ha∣uing first committed the gouernment of this Kingdome to the generall charge of the Queene his wife, and the particular prote∣ction of the Northerne parts vnto the noble and worthie Lord Thomas Howard Earle of Surrey,The King with a third Armie com∣meth before Tyrwyn. if peraduenture the Scots, accor∣ding to their custome, should in his absence beyond the Seas, enter into those Countries) being accompanied with many of his No∣bles and Gentrie, and hauing an Armie of eleuen thousand lustie and gallant men, departed out of England, came to his Towne of Calice, and marched forth in warlike order, vntill hee had ioined himselfe with all his other force, which lay strongly encamped before Tyrwyn. Now whilest King Henry thus lay in this siege, the inhabitants oftentimes sallied out of their gates, and with great resolution skirmished with their enemies, but were alwaies loosers in their Retreats. The French Armie at∣tempteth to raise the siege.By the Englishmen likewise daily batteries and hourely assaults were made, and manfully resisted by the Citizens, vntill the French King (to raise the siege) caused a huge Armie to be leuied, which appeared, and approched neere to the English Campe, and made many a boasting and a proud bragge, as if they were determined to doe much: but still and still they trifled, not doing any thing which might merit praise. But in the end (they being prouoked more by the taunting reproches of their owne Nation, and by the daily scornes which for their want of courage they receiued from the sharpe tongues of their daring enemies, then by their owne
valour) they attempted to raise the siege by strong blowes: In so much, that the two Armies met together, fought stoutly, and on either part performed many braue deedes of Chiualrie, with great courage: But the presence of King Henrie, and his example of good Knighthood, so animated his men of Warre, that with vndaunted spirits, they redoubled their strength, in times and in places of greatest neede and extremities, so that at the last,The French Armie is o∣uerthrowne. Tyrwyn is yeeled and burnt. the Frenchmen be∣ing dissolued into many heaps of breathlesse carkasses, and many of their Nobles and Gentrie being taken prisoners, the rest fled; and within few dayes after, the Citie of Tyrwin (by composition) was yeelded to King Henrie, who (only preseruing the Bishops Pa∣lace, in which hee lodged, and the Cathedrall Church) razed the Walls, Towers, Bulwarks, and Fortresses thereof to the ground: and consumed the rest of that Citie with fire. In this siege Maximilian the Emperour,The Emperor ruel vn∣der King Henrie. with thirtie approued men at Armes, repaired to the Kings camp; and (after his great welcome, amply expressed by his Princely entertainement) hee with them were al enrolled into the Kings pay. This victorie, and the said Citie, being thus wonne,Torray is be∣sged and yeeled. King Henry (with all conuenient expedition) besieged the strong and the war∣like Citie of Tournay, which (for a while) was by the Inhabitants manfully defended and preserued: But (after many bitter and sharpe assaults, and bloudie skirmishes) when they perceiued that their hopes for succour and helpe were frustrated and in vaine: they then, by composition, yeelded themselues to the Kings mercie; who, for the summe of ten thousand pounds, gratiously receiued them as his owne subiects, and by his Almoner, Thomas Wolsey, tooke the oathes of their fidelitie and alleageance, as to their soueraigne Lord and King. And then King Henrie (leauing there a strong Garrison) hee committed the gouernement and safetie of that Citie to Sir Edward Poynings, who was valiant,King Henrie rene in∣to England. The Lord Admirall vexet the Freh nation. Iames the 4. Kng of Sts (in the ab∣ o his brother, kng Henrie) ri∣vieth Eng∣land. and a worthie Knight. And (dissoluing his Armie, because the cold winter was vnfit for the continuance of warlike imployments) he safely retur∣ned to England, where he was receiued by his subiects with louely acclamation and great ioy. Now must we vnderstand, that whilst the king was thus busied in France, the Lord Thomas Howard, his chiefest Admirall, intolle∣rably tormented, vexed, and daily grieued the French Nation, both by Sea and Land. And likewise at the same time, Iames the Fourth, king of the Scots (although he had maried with the Ladie Margaret, the eldest sister of king Henrie) made open warre, and wilfull breach of his Pro∣mise,
and of the Peace, which had been confirmed by his solemne Oath; and beganne vniustly to pick quarrels against the King. In so much, that (vpon notice giuen to the Earle of Surrey, that in Scotland daily preparations and prouisions were made for warre) He commanded Sir William Bulmer,Sir William Bulmer, a valiant Knight. a valiant Knight, with two hun∣dred lustie and tall Archers, to harbour in some Towne, or Village, neare to the Scottish Pale; to the intent, that hee might not only giue speedie notice and intelligence how things passed, but also might doe his best, to withstand and to resist their power. Within few dayes after, the Lord Humes, Chamberlaine to the King of Scots, entred with an Armie of eight thousand men into the Kingdome of England: slew the Inhabitants, burned their houses, ransacked their goods, and foraged their fields: And ha∣uing enriched himselfe and his souldiers with money, and great spoyles, he returned securely, not thinking that any reckoning was to bee made for his good speeding. But on a sodaine, and vnexpe∣ctedly hee was encountred by Sir William Bulmer, who with one thousand Archers, and no more, so thickly showred arrowes vpon the Scots, and with their swords in such a desperate and strange manner assailed, and assaulted them, that quickly they were ouer∣throwen: and fiue hundred of them being slaine, and foure hun∣dred at the least taken prisoners, the rest fled, leauing their spoiles and their booties behinde them, and so returned beggerly into Scotland. The King of Scots (who not only meant to reuenge this disgrace, but also to worke wonders, if hee might, in the absence of King Henrie) entred into this Realme with an Armie, in which were more then one hundred thousand fighting men;100000. fighting men. and besieged the strong Castle of Norham, which (through the Captaines prodigall expence, of all his powder and shot, to little, or no purpose) hee tooke, and kept it as his owne. The Earle of Surrey mar∣cheth against the King of Scots.The valiant and renowmed Earle of Surrey, was no idle person in this businesse: But (being aided and assisted by his eldest sonne the Admirall, who vnderstanding of his Fathers preparations for those warres, came from the Sea to New-castle, and brought with him one thousand Mariners, and lustie fighting men) and by the Lords Dacres, Clifford, Conyers, Latymer, Scrope, Ogel, and Lomley, and by Sir Edward Stanley, Sir William Bulmer, Sir Nicholas Apple-yard, Sir William Sydney, Sir Stephen Bull, Sir Iohn Everningham, Sir Henrie Sherborne, Sir Thomas Metham, Sir Marmaduke Constable, Sir William Percy, Sir Christopher Ward, Sir Philip Tylney, Sir William Gas∣coyne, Sir Thomas Barkeby, Sir Walter Griffeth, Sir George Darcy,
Sir Christopher Pickering, Sir Thomas Butler, Sir Guy Dawney, Sir Iohn Booth, Sir Iohn Rowcliffe, Sir Iohn Stanley, Sir Iohn Normauile, Sir Lionel Percie, Sir Iohn Willoughby, Sir Edward Echingham, and Sir Brian Stapleton, Knights; and by Ralfe Brearton, Iohn Laurence, Brian Tunstall, Richard Bold, Iohn Donne, Iohn Bygod, Iohn Claruis, Thomas Fitz-Williams, Brian Stapleton, Robert Warcop, and Richard Cholmley, Esquires, and by many other Gentlemen or worthie re∣putation and great valour.26000. figh∣ting men. And hauing in his Armie six and twentie thousand men, able and fit for warre, he marched towards the King of Scots: and vpon the ninth day of September, in the yeare of our Lord God 1513. in a Field which was called Flodden,Flodden field both the Armies came in view each of other. The English forces (being marshalled in good order) made two maine battailes, both which were politickly and strongly guarded by their wings. And the Scottish Armie was diuided into foure battailes.The Scots are ouer∣throwen, All these (af∣ter some few skirmishes, and the expence of much shot, both small and great) ioined together pell mell, and fell to handie strokes, and made such an incredible expression of their manhood, by the in∣different exchange of blowes and wounds, that many a strong and lustie man was quickly depriued of his life. Nobilitie and Gentrie were no priuiledges to protect any man from danger, nay from death; insomuch that King Iames himselfe fighting couragiously among his people as a common souldier,The King of Scots is slaine. triumphed ouer the dead carcases or such as (by his sword) hee had prepared for the graue. But in the end he himselfe was also slaine, and so were two Bishops, twelue Earles, fourteene Lords, and twelue thousand Knights, Esquires, Gentlemen, and common souldiers of the Scot∣tish Nation. And on the English part, fifteene hundred and no more were slaine. Thus was this Field wonne by the blessing of Almightie God, and by the victorious courage and true manhood of the Earle of Surrey, and of his sonne, and of such Nobles, Knights, Gentlemen, and braue souldiers, as in that battaile ap∣proued themselues hardie and strong in Armes. And the surui∣uing Scots (finding their chiefest helpe and safetie to consist in the agilitie and nimblenesse of their light heeles) forsooke the Field, and with more then posting speede they fled, and returned with heauie hearts into their owne Countrey. King Henry (after his returne into England) bountifully rewar∣ded such as in France, and against the Scots in England,Noblemen created. had done him the best seruice, and some of them he aduanced to higher pla∣ces, by giuing to them an increase of dignitie and of honour. For he created Thomas Howard (who was then Earle of Surrey) Duke
of Norfolke, and the Admirall his sonne was made Earle of Surrey. Sir Charles Brandon (being Viscount Lysle) was made Duke of Suf∣folke. Sir Charles Somerset (being then Lord Harbert, and Cham∣berlaine to the King) was created Earle of Worcester. Sir Edward Stanley was made Lord Mountegle. And the Kings Almoner Tho∣mas Wolsey was created Bishop of Lincolne, which fauour hee vn∣thankfully requited,The enclo∣sures about London throwen downe. to his owne ruine, as hereafter wee shall see. In the end of this yeare, the inhabitants of Islington, Hoxston, Shordich, and of other Townes and Villages bordering neere to the Citie of London, inclosed their Champion Fields (in which the Citizens were accustomed, for their recreation and pastimes sake, to walke, runne, shoot, leape, and to vse such like sports at their willes and pleasures) with high hedges, and wide ditches, because they would more priuately appropriate the commodities of those grounds vnto themselues. But multitudes of the meaner sort of the Citizens issued forth with mattockes, spades, shouels, and such like tooles of husbandrie, with which they ouerthrew the said hedges, filled vp those ditches, and leuelled the said grounds, vsing in them their former exercises and pastimes, and so they are enioied at this day. 1514. 6Not long after the Kings returne into England, the before na∣med Prior Iohn, with his Gallies, and some Foists, being well man∣ned and prouided,Prior Iohn landeth, but is well beaten. arriued in Sussex, and landed in the night, and burnt a poore Village named Brigh-helmston. But being disco∣uered, himselfe wounded in the face with an arrow, and diuers of his men slaine, he with the rest were compelled to runne into the Sea, out of which, being drawen into their vessels, they returned with small gaine. Spoiles in Normandie by Sir Iohn Wallop.But to requite their boldnesse, the Lord Admirall of England, with some few ships, and eight hundred souldiers besides the Ma∣riners, sent Sir Iohn Wallop to the Sea, whose often landing in Nor∣mandie was very preiudiciall to the inhabitants: for he burnt one and twentie of their Villages and Townes, and many boats and ships which were ancoured in Traport, and in other Hauens, ran∣sacked the Countrey, and slew much people. And much won∣dring there was, how with so small a number he could land so of∣ten, and performe such great things. A peace con∣cluded. The French king marieth with the Kings sister.The old French King Lewys the twelfth (vnderstanding that the Flemings would not, according to their former agreements, receaue into their Countrie, the goodly, faire, and vertuous Ladie Marie, sister to King Henrie, to be espoused vnto Charles, the yong Prince of Castile, because the Spaniards had not consented to that match;
by his Embassadors craued peace: and became an earnest suter to the King, that shee might be his wife: whereupon (to settle loue and amitie betwixt those two Kings, and their kingdomes: and to make the said Lady so great a Queene, and that shee might be en∣dowed with an yearely pension of ten thousand marks during her  life, and might againe returne into England if the French King died) The King, and the said Ladie consented and yeelded to his re∣quest: And therupon the Duke of Longvyle, and such other French∣men, as had beene taken at the battaile of Tyrwyn, were now relea∣sed and set free. And within few dayes after, the said Ladie (be∣ing by the King and Queen accompanied to Douer, and there ship∣ped, and attended on by Thomas Duke of Norfolke, Thomas Mar∣ques Dorset, and his foure brethren, the Earle of Surrey, the Lords De la ware, Barnes, and Mountegle, Sir Mawrice Barkley, Sir Iohn Peche, Sir William Sandes, Sir Thomas Bulleyn, Sir Iohn Carre, and by many other Knights, Gentlemen, and Ladies of great worth: Shee landed at Bollen, where (with great magnificence and honor) shee was receiued by the Dolphin, and by many Lords of France, who brought her to Abuyle, where shee met with, and was married to the King: And (within few dayes after) at Paris,The French King dyeth. Francis the First. The French Queen re∣turneth into England. The peace with France renewed. shee was crowned Queene; The French Nation thinking their King and Countrie to bee happie, who to their Queene had the fairest Ladie in the world. And at her Coronation, the Dolphin (vpon a generall challenge formerly made by himselfe, Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolke, Thomas Gray Marques Dorset, his foure brethren, and two others, against all commers) erected many honorable and martiall games, as the lusts, Turnay, Barriers, and such like: All which were per∣formed with great valour, and to the great pleasure of the King and Queen. But within twelue weeks after the said mariage, King Lewys dyed, and Francis the first succeeded him in that kingdome. And by the Duke of Suffolke the said Queene Mary was brought againe into England, where he won her loue,All the deeds and actions of Cardinall Wolsey, touch¦ing this storie are here set together, be∣cause the dis∣course of the rest would otherwise by them be too much inter∣rupted. and maried her with the Kings consent. In the seuenth yeare of King Henries raigne, the former peace betwixt him and King Lewys the twelfth, was renewed and con∣firmed with King Francis the first, and great amitie and loue was exchanged betweene those two kings. It now so chanced that Thomas Wolsey (who was borne of base Parentage in the Towne of Ipswich, and was first made the Kings Almoner; then Bishop of Lincolne, and then of the Priuie Coun∣sell) succeeded the Archbishop and Cardinall of Yorke, who was named Doctor Benbrike, in the said Archbishoprick. And not long
after hee was made Cardinall of Yorke, by the mediation and pro∣curement of those two Kings. And now, because the Kings affections towards him were ex∣traordinarie: His authoritie aboue all others eminent; his coue∣tousnesse insatiable, and his excessiue Pride and Ambition bound∣lesse and vnlimitted, which made him bold and peremptorie, to doe all in all; From henceforth (for many years) all things were cōmanded and gouerned, according to his directions & will, vntill his monstrous oppressions and sawcie practizes brought him to ruine, and to destruction. And least his deedes and his actions by often interviewing should interrupt the other discourse of other occurrences and negotiations, hapning in this Kings Raigne: We haue therefore thought it conuenient, yea necessarie, to prosecute the Historie of his proceedings to a conclusion, before wee inter∣medle much with the Narration of other passages and things. He inter∣medles in other mens offices.This prowd Cardinall, so egerly hunted after authoritie and power, to rule and to command all others: that (not contenting himselfe with his owne offices, though they were great) Hee in∣truded malepertly into the Enquirie and determining of such things, as properly belonged vnto others, but especially into the Chancelorship of this Realme. He is made Lord Chan∣celor.The Archbishop of Canterbury, vnto whom it appertayned, was much troubled with those his intermedlings. But (being old and perceiuing that the Kings affections were fast bound to his hu∣mours: and that to crosse with him, it was the readie way to crosse himselfe) he therefore deliuered vp the Great Seale into the Kings hands, who no sooner accepted of it, but hee bestowed it vpon Wolsey: which fauour and dignitie might well haue satisfied his prowd humour, but nothing could. For now he (being an Arch∣bishop, a counsailor of Estate, a Cardinall, Chancelor of England, and the Kings especial Fauourite) directed all, commanded all, and did all. He being thus imperiously great, Required an accompt of the Captaines, Treasurors, and other Officers of the kings warres: so that some of them (who by the Kings conniuence had gotten much) by excessiue Bribes excusing themselues,He demands accompts and enriched him selfe thereby. Hee erecteth new Courts. Inriched him, and left themselues poore. Others whose Estates were more power∣full, to please him, shared that which vniustly they had gotten. And some others, who had deceiued the King, and had prodigally spent all, had nothing left, and therefore were punished publikely, and exposed to open shame. He also erected sundrie Courts of equitie (which might more
truly be termed Courts of Iniquitie) vnder a colour and pretence to heare and to determine the cases of distressed and poore people: By meanes whereof the seates of Iustice, belonging to the cōmon Lawes, were little frequented for a while, and by them he gained a masse of treasure to himselfe, vntill the people (perceiuing that by them hee waxed rich, and they poore; and that the Sentences and Iudgements of those Courts were not finall, but controlable, They (of their owne accord) forsooke them, and commended their Controuersies to the censure of the common Lawes. In the ninth yeare of King Henries raigne,1517. 9 Pope Leo sent vnto him Cardinall Campeius as his Legate, to solicite him (as likewise he had done to the Kings of France & Spain,By subtiltie he is made a Legate. and the Princes of Ger∣manie) to make warre vpon the Turks. But so outragious was the ocean of Wolseys pride, that (because he knew that Campeius, in re∣gard of his power Legantine, was to haue the Precedency of place when they two met) hee cunningly informed him by certaine Bi∣shops (who went vnto him to Calice, vnder a fained colour to visite him) that his iourney would not be successefull, but come to none effect, except Wolsey were ioyned in equall authoritie with him in that businesse: wherevpon Campeius (with all expedition) dispat∣ched Messengers vnto Rome, by whom within fortie dayes hee re∣ceiued a new Commission; by which Wolsey was also made the Popes Legate and Commissioner as well as he.Cardinall Campeius. Then was Campei∣us admitted to come into this Realme, and both those two Le∣gates (within few dayes after) repayred to the Kings Court at Greenwich (hauing two siluer Crosses, and two Pillars of the same mettel, two Axes gilted with fine gold, & two imbrodered Cushi∣ons borne before them: But the Cardinall of Yorke preferred his elder brother to the inferiour place. And by an eloquent Oration (which by an Italian was made vnto the King) he was informed of the substance of their message; But to make answere therevnto, The King desired respit for a few dayes, in which he might be ad∣vised and counselled in that matter.The Court Legantine. Then did Wolsey (by his au∣thoritie Legantine) erect an honorable Court, without the Kings notice or licence, and called it the Legantine Court. By the autho∣ritie whereof, he visited all Bishops and their Diocesses, and other Clergie men; punishing such as were poore and vnable to giue bribes, but enriching himselfe by the enforced bountie of such as had store of money, and of faults. By the same authoritie,Wolseys intol∣lerable pride. hee also sequestred vnto himselfe the probate of all Wils and Testaments: and such was his intollerable pride, by reason of his Legantine authoritie, that when (before
and after meat) he washed his greasie fists, he was at his Lauatorie attended and serued by Dukes and Earles, for that purpose. This his example of hawtinesse, made the Clergie of this Land so prowd and insolent, that their industrious labours, which for∣merly they applyed to the studies of morall Vertues, and of Diui∣nitie, were now imployed to deuise curious fashions in their beha∣uiour, in their apparell, and in their dyet. 1520.King Henrie and his Queene, in the twelfth yeare of his Raigne,  resolued to trauaile into France, for loue and friendships sake, to glad themselues with the societie of the French King,King Henrie and his queen goe into France. Francis the first, and of his Queene. For which iourney, it cannot well bee re∣ported what cost in apparell, what prouision for attendance, what furniture for horses, what charges for iewells, and what prepara∣tions for rare banquetings, and Princely gifts, were made both in England, and in France. And when the appointed time drew neare, the King and the Queene (being accompanied with the Cardinall of Yorke, and with many Dukes, Earles, Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, and faire La∣dies of principall reckoning and accompt, sayled from Douer, and safely came to Calice, and the French King and his Queene, with their Royall and goodly traine, came to Arde. And (because it was intended, that the peace which was betwixt the two Kings, should be inlarged and confirmed) King Henrie ap∣pointed the Cardinall to goe before him to the French King, and to conferre with him touching that matter. For which purpose, hee gaue vnto him (by his Letters Patents,Two large commissions. vnder the great Seale of his Kingdome of England) full power and absolute authoritie, in all points, to doe therein as he himselfe listed. The Cardinal going to the French king.The Cardinall (being infinitely prided by reason of this vnrea∣sonable, and vnlimited authoritie and power, which hee had got∣ten) tooke his iourney towards Arde, being attended on by some hundreds of Lords, Knights, Esquires, and Gentlemen: all which were clothed in crimson Veluet, and ware chaines of gold; and with as many Yeomen and Groomes, whose apparell was made of rich Skarlet. Now, when he came vnto Arde, hee was Royally entertayned by the French King, and also by all the Nobilitie of his Court, who gaue their attendance on the King. But when the French Counsell had viewed his Commission, and the vnlimited extent thereof: The French King (by their aduise and counsell) graunted to him the like authoritie and commission,A Princely meeting. in all respects, vnder the great Scale of France: which hee dissemblingly refused, vntill hee was
licenced by King Henry to accept thereof. After this great honour vnto him done, both the said Kings and their Queenes met to∣gether diuers daies in the Valley of Andren, where they feasted, banqueted, cheered, and gladded each other, and with great boun∣tie communicating their rich gifts each one to the other, and to the great men and Ladies of each others Nation, they tooke an vn∣willing and a friendly leaue, and King Henry, with his Queene and honorable traine, returned to Calice, and from thence into England, where they were receiued with much ioy. But in the meane time the Cardinall so earnestly gaped after honour, and the reuerence of the people, that hee did little or nothing touching the said peace. Now must wee vnderstand, that all places and all Countries were filled with the frequent reports of warre to be made betwixt the Emperour and the French King,The Cardi∣nals are Commission. with both which Princes King Henry was in league; by meanes whereof, King Henry solli∣cited amitie and peace. Whereupon it was concluded, that the Commissioners of those three great Princes should meet together at Calice, where that matter should be debated and concluded, if possibly it might be. King Henry, the more to honour and to exalt his Cardinall, gaue vnto him, and to the Earle of Worcester, and to the Lords S. Iohn, Ferrers, and Harbert, and to the Bishops of Durham and Elie, and to Sir Thomas Bulleine, Sir Iohn Peche, Sir Iohn Hussey, Sir Richard yng∣field, and Sir Henry Guilford Knights, and vnto such others as hee made Commissioners for that purpose, as large and as ample pow∣er and authoritie touching that businesse, as by any meanes could be deuised, or by any words be vttered: and then (being fully fur∣nished and prouided) this proud Cardinall with his Colleagues (whom hee respected as his vnderlings) passed to the Tower Wharfe thorow the Citie of London,The Car∣na is o∣red. and in his passage was met by the Lord Maior, Aldermen, and by the Companies in their se∣uerall Liueries, who did vnto him all honour and reuerence; and then proceeding forwards, he with the rest of the Commissioners and their Attendants tooke their Barges, landed at Grauesend, and comming to the Citie of Canterburie, the Arch-bishop,The Cardi∣nal is recei∣ed with Prssin. The King  he should bee honoured. and the prime ones of the Clergie of England, met the proud Cardinall without the Cities Gates, with a solemne Procession, and magnifi∣ed him as a King. Then being shipped at Dour, he with his com∣panie safely arriued at Calice, where hee was too much elated, and made too arrogantly proud, by receiuing of too much reuerence and honour: yet all was done by the Kings command. Thither
also resorted the other Ambassadors, and betwixt them often con∣ferences were had. But the Commissioners of the Emperour were stiffe, and the French were stout. The Cardi∣nall goeth to the Empe∣rors Court.The proud Cardinall (not contenting himselfe with such ho∣nors as formerly had beene giuen to him) would needs proclaime and publish his greatnesse in the Emperour Maximilians Court at Brudges, where hee hoped to receiue the greater esteeme, because hee had with him the Great Seale of the Kingdome of England,He had the great Seale of England with him. which neuer before that time any Chancellor dared to transport beyond the Seas out of this Realme. For this purpose hee entrea∣ted some few daies absence of the Commissioners of the two other Princes, that in the meane time he might visit the Emperour: for hee pretended that their personall presence and conference might greatly further and expedite that businesse. Wherefore being ac∣companied with foure hundred and threescore horse, hee passed by Graueling,His great state. The Emperor meeteth him. Dunkerke, Newport, and by Odenburgh, and was euery where met and saluted by the Noblemen and Gentrie of those Countries. And comming towards Brudges, hee was met one mile out of the Towne by the Emperour himselfe, and by the Prime and Flower of all his Court: where the Emperour did him the more reuerence principally for two causes: First, because hee was informed of the large extent of his commission, granted by King Henry. And secondly, because the great seale of the Kingdome of England was in those Countries borne with great state before him, which seemed to be the chiefest marke and badge by which King Henry would expresse the extraordinarie trust & confidence which he reposed in him; when as in truth and indeed hee foolishly and vnaduisedly caried the said Seale with him for his owne glorie, without the Kings leaue: so that in his absence no Sherifs could be made, nor any Writs, Commissions, or Patents could bee sealed, which wronged many particular men, and was very preiudiciall to the present estate of the whole Kingdome. His Oration.Within a day or two after the Cardinals comming to Brudges, the Emperour with his Counsell, and Wolsey with his Associates, seriously disputed and debated of the causes of the iarres and wars intended betwixt his Maiestie and the French King. But when the Cardinall perceiued that the Emperour (without restitution vnto him made of such of his Castles, Forts, Townes, Cities, and Ter∣ritories, as by the French King were detained from him) would not incline to any peace, hee then (like a learned and like a wittie Oratour) discoursed largely of the happinesse of peace, and of the vnspeakable and insupportable miseries of bloudy war, and forgat
not to shew vnto the Emperour the kingly strength and puissance of his Soueraigne, both in men, and also in horses, ships, armour, ordinance, and all other materials for the warre. And further ad∣ding, that in regard of the league which was betwixt those two Kings, his Lord and master should be vrged to take part with the French King, if any violence by any other Prince should be offered to him. The Emperour,The Empe∣rors answer. acknowledging all to bee true whatsoeuer the Cardinall had spoken touching the benefits of peace, & the incom∣modities of warre, answered, that God, who had giuen honors and possessions vnto Emperors & Kings, had (includedly in the same gifts) appropriated such an inheritable right in them vnto those to whom they were so giuen, that he doubted not but (with the plea∣sure of Almightie God) they might not onely defend and keepe them with the sword from all Vsurpers and Intruders, but might also by force and violence regaine them, if iniuriously and besides right they were kept and detained. And seeing that all Kings and Princes were bounden to support right, and to suppresse al iniuries & wrongs, he said he doubted little of his vncle King Henries helpe and comfort, if betwixt himselfe & the French King there were no peace to be made without blowes.The Empe∣rors gree∣uances. He also informed the English Commissioners, that when his forces (hee being at that time but Arch-duke of Austria) had ouerthrowen the Armie of K. Charles the eighth at Gingate, then the said King (to procure his peace) de∣sired and espoused the Lady Margaret his daughter (now wife to the Duke of Sauoy) and vpon the same conclusion of the said ma∣riage, hee gaue with her to the said French King a good portion in  money, with diuers Townes and Castles in Piccardie, which were still detained and kept from him, notwithstanding that the said King Charles perfidiously refused afterwards to marie her, and sent her home. He told them likewise, that he himselfe being lawfully betroth∣ed  vnto the Lady Iane, the yong Duches of Britaigne; hee treche∣rously gate her from him, and tooke her to his owne wife. He shewed them also, that whereas the Duke of Gueders was  his Subiect, and ought to liue vnder his homage and obedience, he (by the procurement of the now French King) stood out as a Re∣bell, Refusing to be reformed without blowes. Hee complained also that the French King trecherously surpri∣zed  from the house of Castile the Realme of Naples, but should re∣store it againe by friendship or by warre. Thus when the Emperour had discoursed, and had made an
end of speaking: the Cardinall replyed little, leauing him to his owne will; and taking a friendly and a kinde farewell, hee retur∣ned to Calice: where hee againe (but more coldly then before) de∣bated with those Embassadours vpon the conclusions of a peace: But when he perceaued that no such matter could be effected, hee tooke his leaue and returned into England, and was gratiously wel∣commed as a friend, and liberally feasted as a stranger, by the King. In the fifteenth, sixteenth, and seuenteenth yeares of King Hen∣ries Raigne: this prowd Cardinall (vnder the colour of the Kings partaking with the Emperor in his warres against the French king) of his owne authoritie, and without the Kings commandement, granted forth Commissions vnder the great Scale of England, into euery Shire and Prouince of the Kingdome, and directed them to the principall and chiefest men,He granteth strange com∣missions for taxes. and gaue vnto them priuate instru∣ctions, how, and in what sort, they should proceed, and demeane themselues in the execution of that businesse. And by the same Commissions, euery man was required to depose the certaine and true value of his Estate: And then, Of euery fiftie pounds and vp∣ward, there was demanded foure shillings the pound; And for e∣uery pound, aboue twentie, and vnder fiftie, two shillings; And for euery pound, aboue twentie shillings, & vnder twentie pounds, twelue pence. The payment thereof to bee in money, or in plate. And in London, hee made himselfe the chiefe Commissioner: In which he behaued himselfe insolently as a Tyrant, not so much to enrich the King, as to stuffe vp his owne purse. The like Commis∣sions he granted forth against all the Clergie of this Land, of whom he demanded foure shillings the pound of all their liuings. The commons will not obey.These vniust proceedings grieued the Clergie, and common People at the heart; and generally they refused to submit them∣selues in that busines. Their reasons1. First, because those Commissions were not established, nor were grounded vpon the Lawes of this Kingdome and common∣weale. 2. Secondly, because the execution of them would be a dange∣rous president against the libertie and freedome of this kingdome, in time to come. 3. Thirdly, because many mens credits exceeded their estates; and to discouer their inabilities, either vpon their oathes or other∣wise; it might, and would tend to the subuersion and vtter ouer∣throw, both of them, and of their Families. 4. And lastly, because the thing demanded and required to be
paid was so much, That not one man (among ten generally) had that value in money, or in plate, though hee were worth much more: And therefore if the King, by force of these Commissions, should get into his hands all his Subiects plate and money; they then should for necessities sake be constrayned to barter, and to ex∣change and chop Lead for Clothes, Tinne for Bread, and Cloth for Cheese. But these reasons preuailed not with the Cardinall: but con∣trariwise, he (being by a generall Petition entreated to perswade the King, to deist from that course, and by the Lawes to deuise some other: made this froward and sullen answer: That he would rather haue his tongue plucked out of his mouth with pinsers,His tyrannie. then hee would moue any such matter; and that the said summes de∣manded should bee paid, or leuied, whether they would or no. And in Hampshire, the common people so much repyned and grudged at these demands, That the Lord Viscount Lysle, and Sir Richard Weston, and the other Commissioners for that businesse, greatly doubted, what would ensue thereof. Wherefore (to pa∣cifie the people) Hee, by his letters, most humbly entreated the Cardinall, that the twelfth peny, proportioned with the summes before demanded, might suffice, that thereby future dangers and troubles might bee auoided. But when the Cardinall with malig∣nant eyes had pervsed the Viscounts letters, he deeply swore, that they should cost him his head; because in them his presumption did manifestly appeare, taking to himselfe leaue and libertie, to dif∣fer from those instructions which were giuen him. Thus was hee requited and recompenced for his good seruice to the King: And for his dutious desire to preserue the peace and quietnesse of his Countrie, and of this commonweale. The Cardinall perceiuing,New com∣missions. that the People would not support this heauy burden, recalled those Commissions, and sent forth o∣thers; whereby a sixt part of their substance was demanded, ac∣cording to the aforesaid rates,The Cardi∣nallis cursed. wherto hee doubted not but wil∣lingly they would yeeld: but they refused not only to submit themselues therein, but in euery Shire they cursed the Cardinall to the pit of Hell; and were so incensed, that much trouble among them was likely to ensue. The King, who was informed in what strange sort, and fashion, his people were vsed:The commis∣sions are re∣called. and vnderstanding that euery place was filled with clamors, with discontentment, and with danger, grieued thereat exceedingly. And being resolued to reforme what was amisse: with all expedition, he (by his let∣ters, which were directed into euery Countie within his kingdom)
commanded a present cessation of all executions of the said Com∣missions, and protested that they were granted forth without his knowledge or consent, and that he would not (but by the course of Law) require any thing from his people, though his wants were great to maintaine his warres.A Beneuo∣lence. But if by way of a Beneuolence they would of their owne accord enlarge themselues towards him, he then would accept thereof, and take it as an infallible proofe of their loue and dutie towards their King. The Cardi∣nals base flatterie.The ambitious Cardinall priuately grudging that the King in his Letters had includedly laid the fault on him, and intending to robbe his Maiestie of his peoples good affections towards him, and practising to winne it vnto himselfe, required the Lord Maior and Aldermen of London to come before him, to whom by a subtill and a cunning speech he protested, that because hee saw and per∣ceiued that those Taxes were too heauie for them to beare, and because in his heart he loued them, hee therefore had kneeled to the King, and had perswaded him to reuoke the said Commissi∣ons, and wholly to relie vpon their free beneuolence and good will. Wherefore hee courteously aduised them to be voluntarily bountifull and liberall of their owne accord. Then with great ex∣pedition he dispatched his Letters to that effect into euery Shire and Countie of this Kingdome. But in regard that the King in his Letters had protested his ignorance touching the said former tax∣es, therefore the proud Cardinall was still condemned, and mor∣tally hated by the people. Commissions for the Bene∣uolence.Then forthwith (by the incitation of the Cardinall) new Com∣missions for the said beneuolence were made. And in the execu∣tion of them some of the Commissioners endeuoured fairely to perswade, but others of them by rough and vnkinde speeches pro∣cured men to giue largely, whether they would or no. Yet they preuailed little: for the greatest part of the people refused to giue any thing, some of them alledging the Statute which was made against the demanding of Beneuolences in the first yeare of the raigne of King Richard the Third, and some others alledging for their excuse, their pouertie and their want. The Cardi∣nall suppres∣seth some Re∣ligious Hou∣ses.It is now seriously to be obserued, that the Cardinall hauing newly erected two Colledges, the one in Ipswich, where hee was borne, and the other in Oxford, and intending to make their pos∣sessions faire and great, as their foundations were wide and large, procured a licence from the Pope, by vertue whereof (as hee was authorized) he plucked downe certaine small Abbies,Note this. Frieries, and Religious Houses, to appropriate their Lands and Reuenues to
those Colledges: which example and president first moued the King, for other respects, within few yeares after to plucke downe all such Religious Houses. For if it were religious in the Pope and Cardinall so to doe, the King little doubted (seeing the grosse enormities and euill life of most of those men) but it was likewise lawfull for him to plucke them downe. And because the busie head of the Cardinall could not be idle,He refor∣meth the Kings hous∣hold. therefore he made the King to beleeue, that the estate and condi∣tion of his owne house was vnprofitably disordered, and out of tune. Whereupon, for the reformation thereof, hee remoued di∣uers of the Kings menial seruants and houshold officers from their places, and bestowed them vpon others, whom hee more fancied, although they deserued worse. Hee also bestowed his Manour of Hampton Court,Hampton Court. with all such costly buildings as hee had erected there, vpon the King; in regard whereof, the King gaue him leaue to keepe his Court in his Palace of Richmond, wherein King Henry the Seuenth did extraordinarily delight. These his two actions made him hatefull to the Commons, who mutteringly repined, saying that the King and they were much abused, so to be vsed by a Butchers Dogge. At this time the French King became an earnest suter to King Henry, to haue in mariage for the Dolphin, the Ladie Mary, the Kings only daughter, and heire apparant to the Crowne.The Kings mariage called into question. But the said motion was crossed by a double encounter. The first was, the dislike which the States-men and the Commons of this Realme had conceiued touching that match, which publikely they decla∣red  by their solemne protestations, and frequent speeches, that if King Henry should die without issue male of his bodie lawfully begotten, as he then had none, they would not receiue a French∣man to be their King, because he possessing a greater estate and Kingdome, would make this but a seruant and an attendant vpon that. The second was a scruple cast in the way (as most men  thought, vpon the secret intimation of the Cardinall, in displea∣sure to the Emperour, because by strength hee had not made him Pope) by the President of Paris, who made it questionable, whe∣ther or no the Ladie Mary were legitimate, and borne in lawfull matrimonie, because the King had begotten her vpon the bodie of the Ladie Katherine, Aunt to the Emperour, and who had some∣times beene his brother Prince Arthurs wife. And from this doubt and from this scruple (which before that time was not thought on) infinite vexation and trouble did ensue, as in this discourse it shall appeare. For thereupon the Kings Confessor, Doctor Long∣land,
Bishop of Lincolne, and many other profound Diuines, infor∣med the King, that almost twentie yeares hee had liued incestu∣ously with the Queene, and that now (for his conscience sake) he ought truly and heartily to repent for that great sinne, and to leaue her bed. The Cardi∣nallis Am∣bassador for France.The Cardinall, who (as hee thought) had a long time laien la∣zily at home, would now be gadding into France, in an Ambassage to the French King, the substance whereof was only knowen to the King and him. And at his departure, the King (in the presence of all his Lords) embraced him as his familiar friend.He is made proud. And at that time such was his great estate, that passing thorow the Citie of London, he was attended by twelue hundred horse. And when he came to Calice, hee was receiued with as much honour as by the Towne and Garrison could be presented vnto him. And at Bul∣leine (among many other deuices to magnifie his greatnesse) hee was entertained with two ridiculous Pageants. Two ridicu∣lous Page∣ants.1. In the one of them there was a Nunne (called the holy Church) vnto whose person and chastitie three Spaniards and three Amaines attempted to offer violence, but by a Cardinall she was rescued and deliuered from them all. 2. And in the other there was represented a Pope lying on the ground, and an Emperour sitting in an Imperiall Throne; but a Cardinall plucked him from his seat, raised the Pope, and placed him therein. The French king meeteth him.From Bolleine as he came towards Amyens, he was met vpon the way by the Prouost and the most substantiall Citizens on horse∣backe, and by them he was saluted and reuerenced as a King. And when he came within halfe a mile of the Citie, the King himselfe with his Nobles met him, cheerefully embraced him, and in a wonderfull and magnificent pompe conducted him to his lodging, on the gates whereof was written in large and faire letters, Cardi∣nalis pacificus, The peaceable Cardinall, or The Cardinall of peace. And at their departure the proud Cardinall would haue vouchsafed to haue brought the King to his Court, but the King would not suf∣fer him so to doe. Thus Kings, Nobles, Times and Places con∣spired (if it had beene possible) to haue made him more proud, whose heart was so haughtie, that he supposed he could neuer be humbled and brought low. Then daily almost for the space of three weekes together, the French King, his Counsell, and the Cardinall (with his Associates, who were obscured by his greatnesse,He concludes a peace. as the Moone is by the di∣rect opposition of the Sunne) conferred seriously: and in the end
he concluded a peace betwixt the two Kings, in the honour where∣of, and of the proud Cardinall, the instrument in which the Arti∣cles of the said peace were contained, was sealed with a seale pur∣posely made of fine gold, whereof he boastingly bragged the next Terme in the Starre-chamber, affirming before the whole Assem∣blie, that the peace which by him was concluded, was such an ab∣solute, perfect, and sound peace, that it would continue in secula seculorum, world without end. But the people mutteringly repi∣ned thereat, saying that England neuer long enioied any benefit by any peace which was concluded with the French, whose propertie it was (for their aduantage, without cause) to start aside from any thing which they had said, and sworne to performe. They also said, that to enter into a fained league with the French King, the Emperour and his friendship was abandoned, and that old ene∣mies were entertained, and old friends were vnaduisedly (by the Cardinals meanes) cast off. And therein they spake truly: for by the Cardinals enticement, and secret perswasions, the King (with∣out good cause) shewed himselfe an enemie to the Emperour, and to the Flemings, and vnto others of his people, although the Em∣perour by all fitting and beseeming meanes had wooed him to ob∣taine and to keepe his loue. By these iarres, thus cunningly broached by the Cardinall, in fauour of the Pope, and of the French King, the question touching the lawfulnesse or nullitie of the Kings mariage was smoothered for a while. But not long after,The mariage in question. such as seemed to bee tender ouer the Kings conscience, and prouident to establish the true succession of this Kingdome in a lawfull heire, reuiued the scruple, and there∣withall so busied the Kings cogitations and thoughts, that a religi∣ous sorrow began to seise vpon him. And (to auoid the continu∣ance in that incestuous sinne, vntill by a iudiciall sentence the doubts were cleared) hee refrained from the Queenes bed. And the Cardinall (to make himselfe more great then he was) procu∣red a commission from the Pope, to bee directed to him,A power Legantine is granted. and vnto his ancient brother Campeius, that before them, as supreme Iudges, that question (by legall processes and proceedings) might bee heard, debated on, and censured, according to the Lawes of God and the Lawes of man. These two Legates (hauing receiued this commission) infor∣med the Queene of their authoritie and power:Wolsey is accused. and shee (in some passion) accused Wolsey as the principall brocher of that doubt, and the maintainer of that contention, partly to bee reuenged thereby vpon her Nephew the Emperour, because he would not make him
Pope (as secretly he had requested him) and partly, because often times in a most secret, louing, and gentle fashion, shee had admo∣nished and warned him of his couetousnesse and tyrannie; of his extortions and oppressions, and of his pride and lecherie: But hee excused himselfe, as if he had beene an honest man. The Queene chooseth Counselors.The King (pretending nothing in this businesse, but Truth, sin∣ceritie and iustice, according to the Lawes of God and Man) was well contented, that the Queene should make choise of the grea∣test Clerkes, and of the best learned men within his Kingdome, to defend and to maintayne her cause: Whereupon hee elected Wil∣liam Warham Archbishop of Canterburie, And Nicholas West Bishop of Ely, who were Doctors of the Lawes; and Iohn Fisher Bishop of Rochester, and Henrie Standish Bishop of Alssaph, who were Doctors of Diuinitie, and some others: And they (as occasions did require) did for her asmuch therein, as by wit and learning could be done. Now for the prosecuting of this businesse, the two Legates cau∣sed a stately Court to be erected at the Black-fryers in the great Hal, In which (for them) were placed two Chaires and two great Cu∣shions,The King and Queene are summo∣ned. couered ouer with cloth of gold: And (at the appointed day) the two Legates tooke their places; but the Cardinal of Yorke (as his custome was) preferred his elder brother Campeius to the left hand: and then, hauing caused their commission publikely to bee read, the King and the Queene were cited in their owne per∣sons, or by their Proctors to appeare. The King by his Pro∣ctors submitted himselfe to the Apostolical authoritie and power, which by the Pope to the two Legates was giuen. But the Queen her selfe (being accompanied with many Lords,The Queene appealeth. Knights, Gentle∣men, Ladies, and Gentlewomen, and hauing first done great reue∣rence to the Legates) appealed from them (as from Iudges which were not competent, and indifferent to determine betwixt the Queene and King) to the Court at Rome. This appeale they al∣lowed not: but in the same Court they sate weekely. And before them many learned and subtile disputations touching the lawfull∣nesse, and also concerning the insufficiencie of that mariage, were daily made before them. But the King (perceiuing, that no quick dispatch was vsed, though oftentimes deliberately they consulted) came with the Queene into the said Court,The Kings protestation. where his Maiestie solemnely prote∣sted his infinite loue towards her; acknowledging her to bee the most amiable, louing, kinde, dutious, modest, and sweetest wife, that (he thought) was in the whole world; And that therefore hee should not take so much ioy and comfort, in any thing else
whatsoeuer, as hee should doe in her, if by the lawes of God and Man shee might remayne his wife: and therefore, for the deter∣mining of that question, and for the quieting of his troubled con∣science, he instantly importuned a quick dispatch and a finall end.He desireth a quick end. Then was the Queen demanded, whether shee would stick to her appeale or no? who answered yea: yet (for all that) the Court proceeded weekly (though safely) as before. Within few dayes after, the King being informed,The King is delaied. that after the last day of that moneth of Iuly, the Legates would not sit any more, vntill the fourth day of October, Hee was thereat vexed and troubled aboue measure: Wherefore (at the next sitting) hee sent the Dukes of Norfolke, and of Suffolke, with some other Lords to the Legates; requesting them to dispatch their iudiciall sentence one way or other, that long delayes might not augment the an∣guish of his troubled conscience. The Dukes, in a reuerent, and in an earnest manner deliuered their message in the open Court. But by Campeius it was answered, That there was yearly, and of custom a cessation in the Court of Rome, betwixt the aforesaid dayes, from all Legall proceedings whatsoeuer: And that, if any sentence in the Interim were giuen, it was vtterly void in Law and of no force at all: And therefore, seeing that their Court was a branch of the Court of Rome, they could not (vntill the prefixed day) intermedle any further in that businesse. This answere so much offended Charles the Duke of Suffolke,The Duke of Suffolke is angrie. that (striking his fist vpon the board) he swore, that the old saying was too too true: That neuer Cardinall or Legate did any good in England, and therewithall the offended Lords departed, and so did almost the whole companie, leauing the two Legates to looke one vpon the other. The King being thus troubled with an enforced delay,Campeius is bound for Rome. conten∣ted himselfe as patiently as he was able, hoping that in October that businesse would haue an end. But within few dayes after, He was informed, that Campeius (being sent for by the Pope) made great preparations for his returne to Rome:Two craftie mates. Wherby he perceiued plain∣ly, that the two Legates had grosly dissembled with him; and that they had secretly plotted these delayes; that the matter should not bee definitiuely censured and sentenced by them. But in the Court at Rome, where infinite costs and charges would bee expen∣ded: The businesse would be lingred on with arguments, and long disputes, and that his conscience should bee vnsetled in the meane time. And for this cause, from this time forward,The King hateth Wol∣sey. the King in his heart hated and maligned his vnthankfull & dissembling creature base Wolsey, whom (from a contemptible birth and estate) hee had
preferred, and made Abbot of S. Albons, his Almoner, a Counsai∣lor of Estate, Bishop of Winchester, and of Durham, Archbishop of Yorke, an Embassador to Kings and Princes, his Chancelor, and a Cardinall. And thus, this businesse which bee plotted, to make himselfe gratious with the King, eminent aboue others, and to bee reuen∣ged vpon his enemies, turned to his owne ruine and vtter destru∣ction in the end. Articles against Wol∣sey.For the Kings Counsell and the Nobles of this Land (perceiuing that the Kings heart was changed from him) were not a little glad, because generally he was hated. And (to presse him downe in his falling) they framed against him diuers Articles, some demonstra∣ting his excessiue pride, others his insulting tyrannie, others his greeuous oppressions, others his monstrous iniustice, others his insatiable couetousnesse, others his abominable lecherie, others his eager and sharpe courses to reuenge, and others his secret and his cunning dealing betwixt the Pope and him, whereby his Maie∣sties regall authoritie and his prerogatiue royall in all things tou∣ching the Clergie and Church, was made void. And thereupon they concluded that he was guiltie of the Premunire,Premunire. and conse∣quently bad forfeited all his promotions, lands, goods, chattels, and his libertie to the King. These Articles being reduced into good forme, and fit order, were by the Nobilitie ingrossed into a booke, subscribed with their hands, and then it was deliuered to the King, who concealed it for a few dayes. Campeius taketh his leaue.The two Legates (not knowing what had passed) came to Woodstock to the King, where Campeius tooke his leaue to goe to Rome: and Wolsey (who purposed to haue left him, and to haue re∣mayned with the King) was frowningly commanded to accompa∣nie his honest brother vnto London, where he should be further in∣formed of the Kings minde. When they were come thether, and from thence were iournying towards the Sea coasts: By order and direction from the Councell,His chests are broken. Campeius his truncks and chests were broken vp, and a diligent search was made, to finde such letters, as they coniectured were by Wolsey sent to Rome: But none were found: For by a Post, they were sent a way a day or two before. The Cardinal is indicted.The next Terme, the King caused his Atturney Generall, na∣med Sir Christopher Hales, to preferre into the Kings Bench, an in∣ditement vpon the Statute of Premunire, against the Cardinall, vp∣on the aforesaid Articles, which hee performed accordingly: And by the Grand Iurie,The great Seale is taken from him. it was found against the Cardinall. Then forthwith the Dukes of Norfolke, and of Suffolke, were required to
take from him the great Seale,His goods are seazed. which the King bestowed vpon Sir Thomas Moore: he also caused Sir William Fitz-Williams, Knight of the Garter, and Treasurer of his Maiesties houshold, and Doctor Stephen Gardiner his new Secretarie, so to gard, and so to watch his House and Palace at Westminster, that none of his moueables, whatsoeuer, might bee imbeaseled, or purloined, or carried away from thence. And the Cardinall himselfe being confined to Asher,He is confi∣ned. not farre from Kingston, and most of his Attendants being displa∣ced, and remoued from him: a small allowance of things needfull was appointed to him for his necessarie vse, whereat hee infinitely greiued. Then was he required by the King,He confesseth this indict∣ment. His dignities taken from him. to plead to the said indict∣ment: but by his Atturnie (sufficiently authorized vnder his hand and seale) he confessed euery materiall point thereof. Then the king conferred the Abbie of Saint Albones vpon the Prior of Norwich, the Bishoprick of Durham vpon Doctor Tonstall, and the Chancellorship was ratified to Sir Thomas Moore. But the king (of his gentlenesse, and in regard of his former fauours to∣wards the Cardinall) left vnto him the Arch bishoprick of Yorke: and the Bishoprick of Winchester, and sent vnto him much plate, housholdstuffe, and many other things (part of that which had bin taken from him) to a great value. Yet in his heart, he remained vn∣thankfull, grudging, and malitious towards the king. The king (in former times) had intermedled very litle with the gouernment of this Common-weale, for hee was almost altogether ruled and directed by the Cardinall, and by the Cleargie of this Land. But he now began to be sensible of that errour, and to cast a∣way that yoke: so that he tooke the raines into his owne hand. And (first of all) he assembled his high Court of Parliament, in which the Commons of the Lower house sharply complained of the mis∣demeanors of the Cleargie: But especially in these six things. Articles against the Cleargie. FIrst, because (with great extremitie) they exacted vnrea∣sonable summes of monie, as due fees, for the Probate of mens last Wills, and Testaments. 2 Secondly, Because they were excessiuely couetous, and cruell, in demanding for Mortuaries, especiall of such poore
people, as skarsly left two kine, for the maintenance of their wiues and children. 3 Thirdly, Because their full purses made them to become Farmors of great Granges, Bartons, and temporall farmes, taking them in lease in euery Shire, and become Husband∣men and Graziers, to the preiudice and hurt of such as were trained and brought vp only to be husbandmen. 4 Fourthly, Because many of them kept Tanning houses for their priuate gaine, and were Brokers, Buyers, and Jn∣grossers of Wooll, Cloth, and other marchandizes, snatching vp all, and enforcing tradesmen, and clothiers to buy those commodities at the second, or third hand, and at vnreaso∣nable prices. 5 Fiftly, Because such Clergie men as had the best, and the greatest Spirituall liuings, did (with great extremitie) take the vtmost of their rights: And yet they liued in the Court, or in the houses of Noblemen, and Bishops; so that they spent nothing in Hospitalitie among their Neigh∣bours, Nor did feede their flocke with the milke of Gods most holy and sacred Word. 6 And last of all, Because diuers ignorant men among them, held and enioyed eight, ten, twelue, yea more Benefices and Spirituall promotions to themselues seuerally; and yet li∣ued not vpon any one of them: but kept great Schollars and learned men, at a short commons, in one of the Vni∣versities, who were better able to doe more good then they. Doctor Fish∣er wrongeth the lower house of Par∣liament.The Bishops perceiuing that these matters much concerned them, and the whole Clergie of this Land, strongly opposed themselues against such as exhibited the same complaints. In so much that Doctor Fisher Bishop of Rochester (being more earnest, then well aduised) desired the Lords to remember well, and to consider, that when the Bohemians abused the estate and dignitie of their Cler∣gie, they then ruinated and destroyed their Kingdome, and Com∣mon weale: Wherefore hee instantly requested them, to bee well aduised, before they entertained these obiections: For (quoth he) they are not religious, nor doe proceed from Faith.
When the Commons had vnderstood what the Bishop of Roche∣ster had spoken: Then by Thomas Audley their speaker, and by thir∣tie others of the house, They informed the King of the said iniu∣rie and wrong: Alleaging that if the lower house of Parliament were reputed to want Faith, then they were esteemed to bee He∣retikes, and consequently, that all such Bills as they preferred, or did passe, should bee preferred and concluded on by Panims, Pa∣gans, and Faithlesse men, and so were vnlawfull, and vnfit to rule, and to gouerne Christians, and such as truly, and sincerely hono∣red, and adored God. The King (who was much offended,They com∣plaine to the King. and grieued at the Bishops speech) gaue them this gentle answere; That hee would vnder∣stand his meaning, concerning those wordes, and that (with all convenient expedition) hee would informe them of his answere. And within a day or two after, the said Bishop and six others were sent for, and the Bishop of Rochester was reprehended by the King. But with many solemne protestations, hee assured the King, that he referred those wordes. They proceeded not from faith; to the doing deedes and actions of the Bohemians, and not to the doings of the lower House, which likewise was affirmed by the rest. This his excuse was by the King sent to the Commons; who spake libe∣rally of the Bishop, and repaied their debt with vnseeming termes.A bad . In so much, that at a Committee (in which the Bishops strongly persisted, to maintayne, and to iustifie, the taking of their Fees for probates of Testaments, to be lawfull) because the same paiments had beene of a long time vsed; a Gentleman of the lower House replyed to the Archbishop of Canterbury, That Theeues on Shoo∣ters Hill vsed to take purses there: Ergo, it was lawfull. This speech pleased the Commons well: For they thought, That they had now angred the Bishops, as the Bishop of Rochester had angred them. Then were the matters aforesaid comprised in the same complaint, reduced into formall Bill: which (being long, and sub∣stantially disputed on, and in some points qualified) were assen∣ted vnto by both the Houses, and afterwards (for Lawes) esta∣blished by the King. The Booke also, which contayned the Articles,The articles against Wolsey which were drawne against the Cardinall, was sent by the Lords to the lower House. In which (among diuers other things) he was principally accused of these great faults. 1 FIrst, That by dishonest and cunning reasons, hee had de∣ceitfully induced the King, to consent that hee should bee
made a Legate to the Pope, which authoritie did (indeede and in effect) frustrate and make void, all the authoritie and iurisdiction of all other Bishops and Clergie men with∣in this Kingdome, and also the authoritie of the King in Ecclesiasticall things and causes. 2 Item, That in all his letters, and other passages to forren Estates and Princes, his phrase in writing was, Ego, & Rex meus; I, and my King: as if the kings Maiestie had beene his inferior, and at his command. 3 Item, That (to induce the Pope to giue vnto him a power legantine) he in his letters for that purpose had this phrase: ecclesia Anglicana facta est in reprobum sensum, The Church of England is become reprobate: whereby hee vn∣christianly disgraced and abominably slandred the Church of England, as being faithlesse. And that therefore necessi∣ty did instantly vrge and require, that by a power Legan∣tine, to be granted vnto him, it might be reduced to a right beliefe. 4 Item, That when hee was sent an Ambassador to Calice, there to conferre with the Ambassadors of the Emperor, and of the French king, Hee carried with him, without the kings leaue, the great Seale of this kingdome: and from thence he also caried it into Flanders to the Emperors court for his owne honor, and vaine glorie. 5 Item, That without the kings knowledge or consent, he had sent a commission sealed with the great Seale of England, to Sir Gregorie de Cassado, authorizing him thereby in the kings name, to conclude a peace betwixt the Duke of Fer∣rara, and the kings Maiestie. 6 Item, that he, being filthily powdred with the french pocks, by reason of his excessiue lecherie, and dishonest life, did of∣tentimes presume to talke with, and to cast his vnholsome breath into the kings face. 7 Item, That to magnifie his owne power both at home, and with forren Nations, he caused a Cardinals hat to be stam∣ped
on some of the the Kings coine, without his Maiesties ap∣pointment or consent. 8. Item, that hee would not suffer the Kings Clerke of the market to execute his office in S. Albons, because the same Towne was parcell of his Abbey. 9. Jtem, that (to obtaine his dignities, and to continue the loue and fauour of the Pope and of his Cardinals towards him) hee had in sixteene barrels conueied to Pope Clement the seuenth, and to his Cardinals toward their redemp∣tion out of prison, wherein after the sacking of Rome they were kept by the Emperour Charles the fifth, and to the French king in the Popes behalfe, to make warres vpon the Emperour, so much gold as did amount to the summe of two hundred and fortie thousand pounds at one time, and incredible summes of other money at other times, to the great impouerishing of this kingdome and Common-weale: and to enrich the king againe, had of his owne ac∣cord sent out such Commissions into all Shires within this kingdome, for the exacting of infinite summes of money, as quenched the peoples loue towards the king, and made them rebelliously to disturbe the peace of this kingdome in Norfolke and elsewhere. These Articles and many more being comprised in the said booke,Wolsey con∣fesseth the Articles. the Cardinall by a subscription written with his owne hand, frankly and freely confessed, and submitted himselfe to the Kings mercie. About the same time the King (for honourable and good ser∣uice) created Sir Thomas Bulleine (who was Viscount Rochford) Earle of Wilshire,Noblemen created. and Viscount Fitz-water was made Earle of Sus∣sex, and the Lord Hastings was created Earle of Huntingdon. The King (because he was informed that the Emperour and the Pope were together in Bononie) sent thither (as Ambassadors) the said Earle of Wilshire and some others,An ambas∣sage. protesting that the que∣stion touching his mariage was not begotten nor motioned by him, nor by his consent, but first by the President of Paris, who receiued it (as he affirmed) from the Counsell of Spaine, and since by the grauest and the best learned Diuines within his Kingdome,
and not vpon any dislike which he conceiued against his Queene, nor for any desire to change: and therefore hee earnestly intreated them,The King craueth a sentence. that for the clearing of his troubled conscience, the same matter might one way or other receiue a speedie and a finall end by a sentence or iudgement declaratorie in the Consistorie of Rome. The Emperour said little, but onely answered, that the iudgement of the Law should content and satisfie him in that point. And the Pope said, that when he came to Rome, the matter should receiue an end; but yet hee meant nothing lesse: for hee knew right well, that if he pronounced sentence against the dispen∣sation granted by Pope Iulie his predecessor, although hee knew well that it was flatly against the Law of God, then the Popes fu∣ture dispensations would be little or nothing at all respected or re∣garded. And hee likewise knew, that by giuing of sentence against the Queene, he should againe make the Emperour his enemie, who was now newly become his friend. Thus this vnthankfull Pope flattered and dallied with the Kings Ambassadors, making them hopefull, but in vaine; yet with this answer they returned to the King, who (fearing lest the Pope and his Cardinals would indeede by long delaies abuse and dallie with him) imploied diuers Lords, and the greatest Diuines within his Kingdome, at his exceeding great costs and charges, to trauell into all the Vniuersities in the Christian world, and there to be resolued of their opinions touch∣ing the validitie or nullitie of his said mariage. And when they all returned, they brought with them twelue Instruments, sealed with the publike Seales of so many Vniuersities, and also the opi∣nions of sundrie great and famous learned men,The opinion of Vniuersities by all which it ap∣peared that they agreed and consented in one, that the Kings ma∣riage with his brothers wife was vtterly void, and contrary to the Lawes of God and man, notwithstanding the dispensation of the Pope. Wolsey is li∣censed to goe to Yorke.The King at this time (by the aduice of his Counsell) licensed Wolsey to liue within his Diocesse of Yorke, for which cause he went thither. But diuers of his seruants (by their friends meanes) got into the Kings seruice; among whom Thomas Cromwell (being a wise and a discreet man) was one, whom the King entertained with publike demonstration of his good affections towards him, and of his fauour. The Cardi∣nals Colleges.Now though such of the Cardinals lands as he intended to haue bestowed vpon his two Colledges were clearely forfetted vnto the King, yet his Maiestie in regard of his great loue which he bare to learning, and vnto learned men, bestowed the same wholly vpon
his Colledge founded in Oxford, called the Cardinals Colledge, but then newly named the Kings Colledge, but now it is called Christs Church. And the other of his Colledges (founded at Ipswich) the King destroied, as being vnprofitable, and seruing to no purpose. The King being secretly informed that the Cardinall had got∣ten a Bull from Rome, to curse him,1530. except hee would restore him  to all his goods, lands, and dignities,A Bull from the Pope. A proclama∣tion. and that none but hee (no not the King himselfe) should for any offence whatsoeuer correct or punish any Clergie man, proclaimed that all prouisions, appeales, and instruments, within the space of one yeare next before that time procured, or which at any time from thenceforth should be procured from the See of Rome, whereby the authoritie royall and prerogatiue of the King might in any iot be lessened or dimi∣nished, should be vtterly void and frustrate in all respects, and that the procurers of them should be punished at the Kings will. The proud Cardinall,Wolsey writes to Rome. scorning to bee humbled and trodden downe, and purposing to set new broiles and disturbances in the Common-weale, to molest the King, wrote secret letters to the Pope and to his Cardinals, to animate and to exasperate them against the King. And they (vnderstanding in what a disgracefull plight the Cardinall then stood) encouraged him not to faint,The answere. nor to shew himselfe a coward, and a heartlesse man, by yeelding to the peruersnesse of his present fortune, promising his restauration, and that (for his sake) the King should be effectually crossed in his weightie businesse betwixt the Queene and him. Hereupon the Cardinall began to take heart:His pride. and nothing doubting but that hee should againe bee aduanced, if not by the Kings consent, yet volens nolens, and against his will, made great preparation for his enstalment into his Archbishopricke at Yorke, which hee intended to solemnize with such magnificence and pompe, as the like before had neuer beene seene in that place. For which purpose he erected in that Cathedrall Church a stately seat, of an extraordinarie height, not much vnlike to a Kings Throne. He also wrote to the Nobles, Knights, and chiefest Gentlemen in the North, many fawning, flattering, and kinde letters, entreating and inuiting them at a prefixed day to accompanie him (at his In∣stalment) to the Citie of Yorke, where he prouided for them great cheere, not sparing any cost. The King (who was aduertised what he had written to Rome, and what answer was made thereunto, and perceiuing that he in∣tended with extraordinarie pompe and state to be installed, for which his doings hee had no licence from his Maiestie) imagined
(and therein hee was not deceiued) that those great preparations were made of purpose, and in an out-facing fashion, to confront him. Wolsey is ar∣rested.Wherefore, to preuent his said instalment, he sent a commission vnder his great Seale of England, whereby he required Henrie the sixt Earle of Northumberland, to attach and to arrest the body of the said Cardinall, to bring him to the Castle of Sheffield, and there to deliuer him to the safe custodie and keeping of the Earle of Shrewsbury, which he did: Although the Cardinall prowdly chec∣ked him, and told him that hee was a member of the College of Cardinals in Rome, and that neither the King, nor any other tem∣porall Prince vnder heauen could, or ought to intermedle with him for any cause, or matter whatsoeuer. Yet for all this (assoone as he was gone) all his plate,His goods are attached. goods, horses, and houshold stuffe were seised on to the Kings vse: his Officers were discharged, and his Phisitian Doctor Augustine, was by Sir Walter Welsh, one of the Kings chamber, convayed to the Tower. Assoone as the King was informed of the executing of his com∣mission, he sent Sir William Kingston, the Captaine of his Gard, and Constable of the Tower, with certaine Yeomen of his Gard, to fetch the Cardinall to that prison. The sight of this Messenger more danted and appaled the Car∣dinall then all the rest: For now he was right well assured, that his head was in great danger. This feare made him to fall into a sud∣den sicknesse, so that (purposely, as it was coniectured, to dispatch himselfe out of this life) hee tooke a purgation, which was more strong,He dyeth. then the weaknesse of his nature could controll, by reason whereof he dyed two nights after. Thus liued, and thus died this Cardinall, who was Prowd and Ambitious, Wanton and Lecherous, Rich and Couetous, a Lyar and a Flatterer,His descrip∣tion. a Tyrant and Mercilesse: Forgetfull of his begin∣nings, Disdainefull in his prosperitie, and wretched in his end: Whose death made the King ioyfull, his Nobles iocund, and the People glad. The Clergie feared the Premunire.Hee being thus dead, the King by his Councell was informed, that all the Clergie of England were guiltie of the Premunire; be∣cause (in all things) they had supported and maintayned the au∣thoritie,100000 pounds. The Kings Supremacie acknowled∣ged. and power Legantine of the Cardinall: Wherefore (to preuent a mischiefe before it fell vpon them) They gaue to the King for their redemption, and for their pardon, the summe of one hundred thousand pounds: And by a publike instrument in wri∣ting, subscribed, and scaled by all the Bishops and Fathers of the
Church, they plainly, voluntarily, and willingly acknowledged the King (within his owne Kingdomes and Dominions) to be the supreme Head of the Church, as well in all matters Ecclesiasticall, as in all Temporall things and cases whatsoeuer. Yet not long after the King diminished their number and their strength, as hereafter it shall appeare. The Cardinall being thus gone,Opinions shewed. the King intending nothing lesse then to dance attendance in the Court at Rome, caused the said instruments procured from so many Vniuersities, together with the opinions of so many learned men, and of his two Vniuer∣sities of Oxford and of Cambridge, publikely to be shewed in both the houses of his Parliament: which being done by diuers honou∣rable Lords, both spirituall and temporall, he caused them to bee shewed to the Queene, and the question to bee demanded of her, whether she would relinquish her appeale to the See of Rome, and referre her selfe and her cause to any Nobles and Bishops within this Kingdome? whose answere was, that she would not: where∣upon the King resoluing in his conscience,The King marieth Anne Bullen. that his said mariage was void in Law, began to bend his loue and kinde affections to a goodly, faire, and beautifull Ladie in his Court, named Anne Bul∣len. Her hee created a Marchionesse of Pembroke, and after tooke her to his wife. And some few moneths after,The King is diuorced from Queene Katherine. the Arch-bishop of Canterburie (being accompanied with the Bishops of London, Bath, Lincolne, and some others, together with diuers Doctors, Aduo∣cates, Proctors, and Officers of the Ecclesiasticall Court) repaired to Dunstable, where the Princesse Dowager (for so shee was then called) lay. Her the Arch-bishop peremptorily ascited personally to appeare before him in a case of matrimonie:The Author returneth to the historie, which is in∣terrupted by the relation & connecting together of the deeds and actions of Cardinall Wolsey. and the like he did for fifteene daies together. And then vpon the default and contu∣macie of the said Princesse, the Arch-bishop pronounced the said mariage (being against the Law of God) to be meerely and vtterly void, the Popes dispensation notwithstanding. Hauing discoursed of all things memorable which were done by Thomas Wolsey Cardinall of Yorke, and concluded the conten∣tion touching the mariage of King Henry with Ladie Katherine his brothers wife, it will be very expedient and fitting that wee now returne to the narration of such other things as are worthie to bee comprised in this Storie, and which were done whilest King Henry liued. First therefore we may vnderstand,A riot on Merchant strangers. that in the end of the eighth yeare, and in the beginning of the ninth yeare of his raigne, the Citizens of London heartily hated such Merchant strangers and
strangers Artificers as dwelt among them; partly because by their great wealth and extraordinarie labour and industrie they tooke from them the greatest meanes whereby they were to liue, and partly because their riches made them so proud, that in derision and in scorne, priuately and publikely, they would depraue and abuse the Citizens with many mockes and frumpes: so that they (being resolued no longer to endure or to beare them) vpon May day many hundreds of them riotously assembled themselues to∣gether,Euill May day. and with great outrage and violence rifled, robbed, and ransacked the houses and the shops of all strangers, and intended to haue done more mischiefe, if the prouident care and industrie of the Lord Maior and chiefest Citizens had not suppressed them. For some of the malefactors (by flying) shifted for themselues, and many (who were most of all notoriously faultie) were committed to seuerall Gaoles and prisons;Treason. and being afterwards indicted, ar∣raigned, and found guiltie, were condemned of high Treason, be∣cause their iniurie and wrong tended to the breach of the League which was betwixt the King and their Soueraignes. Wherefore some of them were executed as Traitors, according to their iudge∣ment; and the residue of them (being about foure hundred) were pardoned by the King, who in his owne person sate in the Guild-hall of London. And then all things were againe setled in prospe∣ritie and in peace. The French King now longed to be againe owner of the faire Citie of Tourney, which by conquest was possessed by King Henry. Wherefore by his Ambassadors he not only desired the ratificati∣on of the peace which was betwixt the King and him,A peace with the French King. Tourney is deliuered vp by composi∣tion. but also a restitution of the said Citie, for money to be vnto him paid. The King so louingly accepted of this message, that forthwith the peace was confirmed, and further it was concluded, that for 60000. Crownes to be paid for the Towne, and for 400000. Crownes more to be paid for the Castle, which by King Henry was erected, and almost finished, and for 24000. pounds sterling to bee paid in discharge of a debt due and owing by the Citizens for the pre∣seruation and redemption of their Liberties, according to the composition and their owne agreement, the Towne and Castle should be surrendred vp into the hands of the French King. Where∣upon foure great hostages (for the true paiment of the said summes of money at the appointed daies) were sent ouer,Hostages. and accepted by the King. And then the Earle of Worcester, Sir Edward Belknap, and some others, were sent ouer, who deliuered the Towne and Castle (according to both the said Kings Commissions) to Mon∣sieur
Chastilion, who was not suffered to make his entrie with Ban∣ners displaied, but rolled vp, because it was not wonne, nor con∣quered, but yeelded vp by composition. The surrendring of this Citie was much disliked by many wise and prudent men for two reasons. First, because that the holding  thereof was a curbe and a bridle to the French Nation. And se∣condly, because the Garrison of that place was a very profitable Nurserie for the training vp of Gentlemen and younger brothers in feats of Armes, and in Martiall Discipline. About the same time the Emperor Maximilian died,Maximilian dieth. Charles is elected Em∣perour. He commeth into England and Charles King of Castile (Nephew to Queene Katherine) was elected in his stead; who shortly after comming out of Spaine towards the Citie of Acon, where he was to receiue his first Crowne, came into En∣gland, and was with all pompe and princely magnificence welcom∣med and entertained by the King and Queene, to his good liking and contentment. The Lords of the Counsell of Estate perceiuing that certaine Gentlemen of the Kings Priuie Chamber (who were the Kings  Minions) were so much Frenchified, A rare ex∣ample. that they were scoffed and derided by all wise men, and that they were ouer bold, saucie, and malapertly familiar with the King, to his great disgrace, besought his Maiestie to reforme them and himselfe therein.A wise King. The King not only thanked them heartily for this their friendly admonition and fatherly care of his well-doing, but also referred to them the abso∣lute ordering and disposing of those metamorphized Gentlemen. Wherefore they banished them from the Court, and placed in their roomes Sir Richard Wingfield, Sir Richard Ierningham, Sir Ri∣chard Weston, and Sir William Kingston, who were discreet, tempe∣rate, and valiant men, of whom the King graciously accepted, and receiued them into his extraordinarie fauour. The King and Queene hauing made large and costly prouision for the meeting of the French King and Queene,1520. according to pro∣mise, neere vnto Arde, shipped themselues at Douer,The King and Queene saile into France. and with their stately and honourable traine they landed at Calice, and afterwards effected their iourney in princely fashion, as formerly in this dis∣course it is more particularly set downe. Within few daies after the King and Queenes returne from Arde vnto Calice,The King visiteth the Emperour. he with an honourable traine rode to the Towne of Graueling in the Low Countries, to see and to visit the Empe∣rour, and his great Aunt the Ladie Margaret Duchesse of Sauoy, by whom he was receiued with great familiaritie and bountie,They come to Calice. and was by them both brought backe againe to Calice, where their
welcome, cheere, and entertainment farre exceeded measure and their owne desires and expectation. But this exchange of loue and of kindnesse greeued the French King at the heart,The French King is an∣grie. who was in∣wardly displeased and reuengefull, because he practised, but could not be elected Emperour according to his hopes. Yet because he could flatter and dissemble, therefore he sent vnto them the Lord de la Roch, not only to congratulate for former courtesies receiued, but also to conclude a peace betwixt them three,A peace. which for his part he neuer intended to obserue. But the peace was fully agreed vnto,A condition. with this condition, that he who first made breach thereof, should be warred on by the other two. Not long after the Kings returne into England, he was secretly informed (and it was true) that by a Monke the haughtie and am∣bitious Duke of Buckingham was much abused in this,The Duke of Bucking∣hams ouer∣throw. that hee was by him perswaded, and did beleeue, that he should be the King of this Realme, which could not be, but by vsurpation, and the con∣fusion of the Kings royall person. And this conceit so pleased him, that he now and then would babble and reueale it to some of his inward and familiar friends, and some of them discouered it, to his destruction and vtter ouerthrow. Likewise this hope framed him to a more ambitious course in his cariage, and made him neg∣ligent of his seruice and dutie to the King; insomuch that his Ma∣iestie, by his Letters, required him with all conuenient expedition (priuately) to repaire vnto the Court. But as he was in his Barge vpon the Thames, hee was by Sir Henry Marney Captaine of the Kings Guard (who had with him an hundred of the Kings Yeo∣men subiect to his command) attached and arrested of high trea∣son, and as a prisoner conueied to the Tower. And being after∣wards legally and according to the due forme of Law indicted by sundrie Knights and Gentlemen, for that (as much as in him lay) he had conspired and contriued the Kings death, to make himselfe his successour, hee was brought to a Barre at Westminster Hall, be∣fore the Duke of Norfolke, high Steward of England, and his chie∣fest Iudge. And hauing holden vp his hand, he was arraigned of treason vpon the said indictment, and pleaded thereunto that hee was not guiltie, and did referre himselfe for his triall to God and to his Peeres, who were these, the Duke of Suffolke, the Marquesse Dorset, the Earles of Oxford, Deuon, Darbie, Shrewesburie, Essex, Worcester, and Kent, and the Lords De la Ware, Fitz-Warren, Wil∣loughbie, Harbert, Cobham, Brooke, and Morley. These Noble men, in the presence of the Prisoner, had witnesses face to face, (who were all prisoners for concealments of the same offence) and depo∣sition
in writing; which when they had done, they arose from the Bench, retired into a priuate roome, and after a short absence re∣turned againe to their places: and the Duke of Buckingham being againe brought vnto the Barre, the said Lords, one by one, prote∣sted with great solemnitie, and protestations on their honour, that they thought him to bee guiltie, according to the indictment. And thereupon the Lord high Steward, with many teares, pro∣nounced against him that iudgement which against meaner offen∣ders in that nature is giuen. Whereupon hee was taken from the Barre, and hauing an Axe borne before him, with the edge there∣of turned towards him, because he had his iudgement to die, he was conueied by water to the Temple staires, and was there recei∣ued on land by Sir Nicholas Vaux and Sir William Sands, both Baro∣nets, who conducted him thorow the Citie of London to the Tower: and within two or three daies after he was beheaded on a Scaffold at the Tower Hill. About the same time the King himselfe wrote and published in the Latine tongue a booke against Martin Luthers Assertions,The King writeth a∣gainst Mar∣tin Luther. Disputes, and Arguments, touching Indulgences and the Sacra∣ments of the Church; for which cause he was by the Pope enstiled Defensor Fidei, Defender of the Faith. Yet some doe affirme that he was so entituled in requitall of the aide and succour which by the gift of excessiue summes of money (when he and his Cardi∣nals were prisoners to the Emperour) was extended to him and them.Defensor Fidei. We haue alreadie heard, how that Cardinall Wolsey, being sent to Calice, to ratifie, and to confirme the Peace, which not long be∣fore was concluded there betwixt the Emperor & the two Kings,The French King first breaketh the peace. did therein little good. And wee must now know, that the first breach of that peace was made by the French King, who began to warre sharply on the Emperor, both by Sea and Land: And be∣cause he suspected that King Henrie (partly for affinities sake, and partly by reason of the condition of part-taking, annexed to the said peace) did secretly side with the Emperor against him, there∣fore he dealt thus vnkindly with King Henrie. 1 First of all (contrarie to his faith and promise) hee sent Iohn Duke of Albanie into Scotland, to raise new warres,The French King wrong∣eth King Henry. and many mis∣chiefs against this Realme, to the end, that the King might not haue any leisure to ioyne with the Emperour, and to make warre vpon him. 2 Secondly, he detayned and kept from the King, that yearely Tribute, which for Normandie, Aquitaine, and other the Kings in∣heritance
in those Countries, was due and payable by the Kings of France. 3 Thirdly, contrarie to his promise, and safe conduct giuen to the Marchants of England, no warre betwixt the two Kings being proclaimed, he seised on all their wares, and marchandizes in Bur∣deaux, and committed them to prison. 4 Fourthly, vpon the Seas he riffled, robbed, and spoiled the Marchants of England daily; and vpon complaints promised li∣berall restitution, but made none. 5 Fiftly, he refused to pay to Queen Mary, Dowager of France, her yearly pension, contrarie to the agreement made betwixt king Henrie, and the whole estate of France. 6 And last of all (neglecting his Hostages, and making a wilfull breach of his promise) he would not pay those summes of money which were concluded to be paid, for the surrendring and yeelding vp of the Citie and Castle of Tourney into his hands. King Hen∣ries course for requitall.These iniuries and wrongs, first of all procured the King to make generall Musters through his whole kingdome, and then to appa∣rell, prouide, and furnish his Nauie Royall, and to commit them to the charge and gouernment of the Earle of Surrey, his high Ad∣mirall, the scourger of the French King for all his faults. To him hee gaue ample and large commission to vexe, and to annoy the French King, and his Subiects, both by Sea and Land. He also restrained the French Embassador of his libertie, not per∣mitting him to goe abroad without his leaue. He also caused the marchandizes, wares, goods, and money of all Frenchmen within his kingdome (not being Denizens) to be at∣tached to his owne vse. Also hee committed their bodies to Gaoles, and Prisons, vsing them in the like sort, as his Subiects, and Marchants, were misvsed in France. A French Armie va∣nisheth.King Henrie (being informed that the French King hauing leui∣ed an Armie, houered vp and downe, neare vnto the marches of Calice) to preuent danger, and to meet with him at all assaies, sent many thousands of gallant, and braue Souldiers, to the Sea, which were by the Admirall receiued into his Fleet, so that (vpon any occasion or neede) they might quickly bee set on land. But when they perceiued that Calice was not in any hazard, for that the French Armie was vanished and dissolued: then the Admirall (because he loathed to be idle) landed many of his men vpon the coast of Brittaine,Morleys ta∣ken & burnt. and with great confidence and resolution, con∣ducted them to Morleys, where (a principall gate of the Citie be∣ing
battered and beaten open with some great shot) the braue En∣glish men boldly entred in, riffled, ransacked, and spoiled the town, and by the cōmandement of the Admirall, they consumed it with fire, & razed it to the ground. This seruice was by diuers Gentle∣men so gallantly performed, that in honour thereof the Admirall dignified with the honour of Knighthood, these worthy Gentle∣men, Francis Brian, Iohn Russel, Anthonie Browne, Iohn Rainsford, George Cobham, Giles Hussey, Richard Cornwal, Iohn Cornwallis, Tho∣mas Moore, and some others. And daily other braue and warlike exploits, were still made and performed in Brittaine, neare vnto the Sea coasts: Of which it will be too tedious to make particular rela∣tion, neither will wee much busie our selues with the discourse of such things as hapned betwixt the Emperour, and the French king, in their warres; because they doe not properly belong to the Hi∣storie of this kingdome. The King (who was informed that the Duke of Albanie inten∣ded to invade the Northren marches of his Realme) commanded the Lord Roos.The Scots are troublesome. and the Lord Dacres of the South (by an anticipa∣ting warre) to enter into the Borders of Scotland, with a slight Ar∣mie, which they did, and burnt fourescore Hamblets, Villages, and Townes, razed, and destroyed diuers Castles, Bulwarkes, and Towers; forraged their fields, and without any encounter retur∣ned into England. The King likewise made the Earle of Shrewsbury Lieftenant generall of the North, whose charge was, to make strong prouision, to withstand all sodaine invasions, which the Scots should attempt to make. And likewise, hee leuied an Armie of twelue thousand men,Another Ar∣mie sent into France. which hee commended to the Gouernement of the Admirall, for the supply and maintenance of his warres in France. Thus the King, being daily imployed, and wanting money to defray his charge; by way of loan vpon priuie Seales,Priuie seales. hee bor∣rowed of the Citie of London twentie thousand pounds. And of many others great summes of money; In all Shires and Prouinces within his kingdome, whereat his Subiects much grieued: But af∣terwards they were much more displeased thereat, because the said loanes by an Act of Parliament,They are released. were clearely released to the King. And yet for all this, Wolsey (by strange commissions, and by other vnlawfull meanes, without the Kings consent or notice) endeuoured to raise, and to leauie more money, as formerly wee haue heard. The Admirall, who (maugre his Enemies,Braue seruice in France. hauing lan∣ded his Armie at Callice) Marched from thence, and
passed in good order of Battaile ouer Newnam Bridge, wasting, spoiling, burning, and ransacking sundrie Townes, Villages, Ca∣stles, and Forts; as namely Selloys, Brunbridge, Senkerke, Frynge, Blanioy, Dorlans, and other places as they passed by) so terrified the people, that they would not abide his sight. And in those ser∣uices these Gentlemen (as chiefe Captaines,Chiefe Gen∣tlemen of seruice. and worthie of the best praise) are principally to be noted, Sir William Sands, Sir Willi∣am Fitz-William, Sir Maurice Barkley, Sir Iohn Wallop, Sir Richard Ier∣ningham, Captaine Coo, and Captaine Thwayts. The three former of them (among other imploiments) were by the Admirall sent with three thousand men to the strong Towne of Marquison, which was newly builded, fortified, and well defended for a while. But at length they tooke it, ransacked it, and vtterly consumed it with fire. The like they did at the Townes of S. Iohns Rhode, and Temple,A great boo∣tie. and with great spoiles returned to their Generall. Then all the Armie being collected, the Admirall marched vnto Calice, and brought thither with him 14000. Sheepe, 1400. Oxen and Kine, 1300. Hogges, and 700. Horses, Geldings, and Mares. And then hee commended and rewarded his souldiers, dissolued his Armie, and with great honour, and in the especiall fauour of his Soueraigne, he returned into England. The Scots inuade.Whilest these things were thus ordered in France, the Kings professed enemie, Iohn Duke of Albanie, Protector to the young King, and of his Realme, by the procurement of the French King, leuied a great Armie, purposing with fire and sword to haue en∣tred into the West Marches of England. But the Lord Dacres, and the Lord Roos, and many other Knights and Gentlemen, hauing carefully prouided and wel furnished an Armie of eight and twen∣tie thousand men,They will not fight. to make head against him; and likewise the Earle of Shrewesburie hauing leuied another Armie of great strength, and appearing boldly into the Scots sight, the Scots began wisely to doubt of their successe, and the rather because the most of them knew not the cause or ground of that quarrell, and there∣fore would not fight, but (leauing to assist their Captaine) they re∣turned home, and were not pursued by the English, who by their Commission were not authorized to inuade, but to defend them∣selues. The Duke of Suffolke warreth in France. Bell Castle.The next yeare, Charles Brandon, Duke of Suffolke, was sent to Ca∣lice with an Armie of thirteene thousand men, with which he mar∣ched forth, burning, spoiling, & foraging without compassion, vn∣till he came to the strong Castle of Bell, which (after many gallant and braue assaults) was yeelded, and razed to the ground.
Thither repaired to the Dukes Armie,Aide from the Emperor. as seruants to the Em∣perour, three thousand footmen, and fiue hundred horsemen, being Burgundians, Flemings, and of their neighbouring Nations: all which besieged the strong Towne of Bray,Bray. which was well for∣tified, and furnished with goodly Ordinance, and with two thou∣sand men. This Towne they tooke, not by composition, but by assault. But because the Frenchmen themselues had first fired it, and were runne away, the Englishmen and their friends (besides the winning of it) receiued small commoditie thereby. Then with vndaunted courage they passed ouer the Riuer of Some into France:Roy. and to them (vpon seuerall summons) were yeelded vp the Townes of Roy and Lyhome.Lyhome. Mount de∣dyer. But they were com∣pelled to besiege the warlike Towne of Mount dedyer, in which were two thousand men, and fiue hundred horse. This Towne they daily battered with the continuall shot of their great Ordi∣nance, so that it was made assaultable, and then the Frenchmen (vpon composition to depart with bagge, baggage, and with their Armes) yeelded the Towne to the Dukes forces, in which there was exceeding plentie of costly linnen, arras, tapestrie, bedding, and of choice houshold stuffe. Afterwards they tooke the Castle of Boghan,Boghan. which (had not the Marishes beene excessiuely hardned by a continuall frost) was not accessable, nor pregnable by any strength. This Castle they razed to the ground, because it was not commodious to their seruice. These atchieuements being thus manfully and honourably per∣formed, the English souldiers (by reason of the extremitie of the weather, and the sharpnesse of the Winter,English soul∣diers returne without leaue of the Gene∣rall. long nights, and short daies) were altogether vnwilling to proceed any further at that time, and the rather for these two other causes: First, for that the Duke of Burbon (who was reuolted from the French King to the  Emperour) came not (according to his promise) to the Dukes Ar∣mie with ten thousand men, but applied them about Marcelles, and by them they had no helpe. And secondly, because the Burgun∣dians, Flemings, and their companions, hauing Carts, Waggons, and other carriages, and being neere vnto their owne Countries, tooke and were able to carrie away the greater and the better part of all their spoiles, and yet they would seldome fight, as the En∣glishmen were compelled and enforced to doe. The Duke (not knowing what allowance the King would giue to the dissoluing of the Armie without his consent) sent the Lord Sands and Sir Ri∣chard Ierningham to the King, to informe him of the state of his Armie, and also to know his pleasure touching the breaking of it
vp. But the King would not in any sort assent to their returne, but prepared the Lord Mountioy with an Armie of 6000. men, money, and store of victuals, and of other necessaries, to hasten vnto their aide. But before the returne of those two messengers, the souldi∣ers (without the Dukes leaue) wilfully departed home thorow Burgundie and Flanders. And because the greater number of them had so done,The Armie is dissolued. therefore the Duke was compelled to breake vp his whole Armie; whereat the King was highly displeased for a while: but at length (finding the Duke and chiefest Captaines faultlesse) they returned home, and were by his Maiestie receiued into his especiall grace and fauour. The Scots are againe busie.Whilest the Duke of Suffolke was thus busied in France, the Duke of Albanie raised another Armie of 80000. men. But to resist and to fight with them, the Lord Admirall and Treasurer of England marched forth with an Armie of fortie thousand. But the Scots (not well enduring the sight of such powerfull and well appointed enemies) presently ran away, and would not strike one stroke. And had the Earles commission beene enlarged, and giuen them leaue to haue followed them into their owne Countrie, vndoubtedly the Scots had receiued a fatall blow at that time: but by quicke message,A truce. the Queene of Scots (who was the Kings eldest sister) a∣gaine obtained a truce: so that in the meane time a triall might be made, whether a peace woulde be concluded, and agreed on, or no. Betwixt the Marches of Bulleyn, and of Calice, diuers feats of Armes were euermore valiantly performed for honors sake: in which, sometimes the vanquished were againe victors, and such as preuailed now, were by and by ouercome. The Duke of Albanie perceiuing, that the Nobilitie of Scotland would no longer endure, that hee (being a Frenchman borne, and (next to the King) the inheritor of that Crowne) should haue the rule and gouernement of their King and Countrie:The Duke of Albanie forsaketh Scotland. Feared, least any mischiefe might befall him, or least by some deuise, he should be deliuered to the King: Wherefore hee secretly fled into France, vpon whose departure, much peace and quietnesse ensued betwixt the King and that kingdome. For the Queene and Nobles of the Realme of Scotland,The Scots de∣sire peace. by their Embassadors desired Peace: And that the Ladie Marie (who was then the only daughter of King Hen∣rie, and Heire apparant to his Crowne) might be giuen in mariage to Iames their yong King. To this motion, it was answered: that touching the said Peace (if honorable and fit conditions might be proposed and concluded) the King would willingly assent thereto: But concerning the other point of their demaund, hee said: That
hee was not yet resolued how to dispose of his said daughter, for that shee was but yong: yet in the end a peace was assented vnto, and proclaymed in both those Realmes. Likewise the Ladie Margaret, Duches of Sauoy,The Empe∣rours Regent craueth peace. and great Aunt to the Emperour, and (in his absence) the Gouernour of the Low Countries, by her Embassadours, proposed to his Maiestie these requests. First, that the Lady Marie, his daughter, might bee giuen in  mariage to the Emperour, who longed for her with his best affe∣ctions, and respected her with his heartie loue. Secondly, that (because the Emperour intended to giue vnto  her for her Dowrie, the Provinces of the Low Countries) his de∣sire was, that forthwith shee might be sent thether to officiate the Protectorship of them in his absence. Thirdly, that such summes of money as the King intended to  giue vnto her as her mariage portion, might presently bee disbur∣sed for the maintenance of the Emperors warres. And last of all, that the King himselfe would be pleased (in his  owne person) the next spring to enter with a Royall Armie into France, vpon the territories of the French King, who (in contempt of them both) did diuers iniuries and wrongs vnto their Subiects, and had made the first breach of the Peace, which was concluded, and by their oathes confirmed betwixt them three. But, because King Henrie was secretly displeased with the Em∣peror, for that he (by the raising and enhauncing of the prices and value of this gold, and other coines, within the Prouinces of the Low Countries) had politikely drawne the greatest part of his mo∣ney out of this Realme, and in some other things, had not respe∣cted him, as his inleagued friend, therefore hee only returned thanks for a fashions sake: but made answere, That his daughter was too yong to be maried to the Emperour, and was (as yet) vn∣fit to be coupled with any Prince. At the same time also, the French King, by his Embassadours,The French desire to re∣new the peace desired, that the said Ladie might bee espoused to his sonne the Dolphin. And that the former peace (betwixt the King and him) might be renewed, and reviued, during both their liues. These his motions (to speake truly) were best receiued and di∣gested, and were most likely to haue taken place, if the French king him selfe, and his children, had not (shortly after) beene taken pri∣soners, by the Duke of Burbons Armie, and by the Marques of Pes∣carie, as he lay at the siege of Paura, where he lost fourteen thousand men, and was defeated: although he had then in his Armie almost fiftie thousand men.
The King in danger of death.Among these friendly motions for peace and mariages, an euill chance hapned to the King. For one day, as he hawked for his re∣creation and delight, hee offered to leap ouer a wide and a watrie ditch, but his staffe brake in sunder, and his head pitched fast into the clay; so that hee had assuredly dyed there, if a footman of his owne, named Edmund Moody, had not quickly plucked his head out of the dirt. About this time dyed the most Noble, and Victorious, Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolke, and was honourably buried at Thetford in his owne Countrie. The King (who for a long time had wantonly conversed with a beautifull, and a lasciuious Gentlewoman of his Court, named Elizabeth Blunt) begate on her a sonne,Noble men created. who by the King was called Henrie Fitz Roy: This yong Gentleman (being now of the age of sixe yeares) was by the King created Earle of Nottingham, and forthwith Duke of Richmond. And at the same time the Lord Henrie Courtney, Cosen german to the King, was made Marques of Exeter: the Lord Henrie Brandon, the eldest sonne of the Duke of Suffolke, and of the French Queene Marie his wife (being but two yeares old) was created Earle of Lincolne. Sir Thomas Manners Lord Roos, was made Earle of Rutland: and Sir Henrie Clifford was created Earle of Cumberland: and Sir Robert Ratclife, Lord Fitz Water, was made Earle of Sussex: and Sir Thomas Bullein, the Trea∣surer of the Kings houshold, was made Lord Rochford: And thus, in regard of great seruices honorably performed, the king requited them with such honours, as were answerable to their deserts and callings. The French were humble to serue their owne turnes.The Queene Regent of France (foreseeing what present misery was likely to ruinate that Estate and Kingdome, if in time by care∣full prouidence it were not preuented) sent Monsieur de Bryond, chiefe President of Paris, and some other Lords, Ambassadors in∣to England: who not only (according to their commission) in a most submissiue and an humble sort confessed the iniuries, and the wrongs done by the French Nation, to King Henry, and to his sub∣iects, both by sea and land, in the absence of King Francis, but (for a requitall and satisfaction thereof) and for the arrerage of his tri∣bute, they made offer to pay vnto the King the summe of twenty hundred thousand crownes, whereof fiftie thousand pounds ster∣ling should be paid in hand, and fitting securitie should bee giuen for the rest: they also promised the continuance of the said tri∣bute, and assumed to pay Queene Marie her dowrie, and all the ar∣rerages thereof, if the King would grant them peace, and receiue them into his loue and fauour.
The King and his Counsel hauing seriously considered of these motions and large offers (for many important causes) assented to their requests,Peace con∣cluded. and caused those his conclusions and agreements to be proclaimed solemnely, both in England and in France, and re∣ceiued both money and good securitie accordingly. But betwixt King Henrie and his nephew the Emperour (by the subtill practises and craftie jugglings of Thomas Wolsey, Cardi∣nall of Yorke) warres were denounced with euill termes,Warres be∣tweene the Emperor and King Henry but little or nothing was done thereon, sauing that in England, Spaine, and in the Low-Countries, the Merchants of either Nation, and their goods and substance were attached, to the infinite losse and da∣mage of them all: but vpon seuerall truces oftentimes concluded, and againe broken, they were released, and againe arrested;Merchants vexed. wher∣by the ancient saying of the Poet was truly verified: Quicquid Delirant Reges, Plectuntur Achiui: When Princes iarre, and for reuenge doe seeke, The meaner sort must pay for their dislike. But in this place we must now obserue, That in regard of those of∣ten concluded truces, and in regard of the peace which vnited the kingdomes of England, France and Scotland in one minde; little or nothing worthie of our discourse (more then hath formerly beene written) hapned in sixe of the next ensuing yeares, for the greater part of that time was spent and consumed in debatings, enqui∣rings, ordering, handling, and disposing of the businesse of the Kings marriage with the Ladie Katherine of Spaine, sometime his brothers wife. And now the King (who in a manner was wholly guided and directed by the priuate aduice and counsell of his chiefe fauorite, Thomas Cromwel (somtimes seruant to Cardinall Wolsey) whom he had made a Baron, and a Counseller of State,The Popes authoritie curbed. proceeded daily more and more to diminish, nay (by succeeding degrees) clearely and absolutely to abrogate, and to make voide the claimed power and authoritie of the Pope within this Realme. In so much, that in his Parliament he procured it to be enacted for a law, That the penaltie of the Premunire should bee inflicted vpon the bodies, lands and goods of euery such person, as for any matter, thing, or cause whatsoeuer, appealed to the See of Rome, or did procure from thence any Processe, Citation, Inhibition, Suspension, Sen∣tence, or Iudgement whatsoeuer. And in the next Session of the same Parliament (to please, and
to content him) the whole Clergie of this kingdom freely submit∣ted themselues to the King, touching their Spirituall and Ecclesi∣asticall affaires and busines: and the Pope was vtterly depriued of all Annates and first fruits; which formerly for Bishoprickes, and other spirituall promotions and dignities, had vsually been payed vnto him: and likewise to establish and to confirme the lawfulnes of his marriage with Queene Anne, and to settle the inheritance of his Crowne vpon her issue: he procured it by Parliament to bee enacted, That his former mariage with his brothers wife was ab∣solutely void,The Kings marriage made voide. The Crowne entailed. and of none effect in Law, because it was contrarie to the Law of God, and that the Popes dispensation had none ef∣fect or power to make it good: and by the same Act, the Crowne of this kingdome was entailed to the King, and to his heires of his bodie (out of which the Ladie Marie was inclusiuely excluded) and to this Act all the Lords & Burgesses there present, were par∣ticularly sworne,B. Fisher. sauing Doctor Fisher Bishop of Rochester, and Sir Thomas Moore Knight (sometimes Chancellor of England) who some few yeares before disliking the Kings proceeding against Queene Katherine,Sir Thomas Moore. and against the authoritie and iurisdiction of the Pope, had deliuered vp the great Seale of England into the kings hands. These two not only refused to sweare, as the rest did; but publikely contested, and protested, against the said Act of Par∣liament, which nullified the kings said first mariage, by reason of the Popes dispensation giuen to inable the same, and to make it lawfull. For which causes the said Bishop, and Knight, were sent vnto the Tower, where they remayned, vntill (as Traitors) they lost their heads,They are be∣headed. for denying of the kings Supremacie in Ecclesiasti∣call things and causes, and attributing it to the Pope of Rome: of which the kings supremacie a Statute was made in Parliament the next yeare after. About this time, diuers treasonable practizes (by malicious and lewd Conspirators) were surmised and intimated to haue beene intended, and contriued, against the kings person, by the Lord Da∣cres of the North.The Lord Dacres. And thereupon he was Indicted and arraigned; but the guiltlesse and well affected Lord (with such a temperate boldnesse, and with such a modest courage) so discreetly, and so wisely defended his innocencie, against those false suggesters, that he was freely acquited, and discharged, from all suspition, and from all blame. But (by the whole Parliament) Elizabeth Burton (nick¦named the holy maid of Kent) and her Companions in mischiefe (who vnder an hipocriticall shew and shadow of Religious deuo∣tion,The holy maid of Kent and of holinesse, had conspired the Kings death) being at∣tainted
and condemned, were executed as Traitors according to their deserts. The next yeare the King in Parliament was made and acknow∣ledged to be the supreme head of the Church within all his Coun∣tries  and Dominions, The Supre∣macie of the King. in all Spirituall and Ecclesiasticall things and causes: and the Popes Bulles, Pardons, Indulgences, and other Instruments of the like nature, were vtterly banished, frustrated, made void, and of none effect, validitie, or force, concerning the King and his Subiects. And likewise the First Fruits and Tenths of all Benefices and Ecclesiasticall dignities and promotions were in the same Parliament giuen and granted to the King, and to his heires and successors for euer. And not long after, Queene Anne (sometimes the Kings dea∣rest wife) was beheaded; yet innocently, as at her death shee reli∣giously protested, and as all men present did beleeue,Queen Anne Bulleine be∣headed. for that it was vniustly surmised, and falsly testified, that she had incestuously conuersed with and prostituted her bodie to the Lord Rochford, her owne brother,Execution. who likewise (with some others) receiued the like sentence, and were put to death. This Tragedie being thus ended,The King marieth. the King (within twentie daies after) maried a vertuous and a faire Gentlewoman, whose name was Iane, the daughter of Sir Iohn Seymor Knight, who bare vnto him a goodly Prince, named Edward, who succeeded, and was King. But within few daies after his birth the good Queene died. We haue formerly heard, that Iames the Fourth, King of Scots, was slaine at Flodden Field. And wee must now know, that Queene Margaret his wife, being the eldest sister of King Henry, was maried afterwards vnto Archibald Douglas Earle of Angus, who by her had a daughter named Margaret. This Ladie, the Lord Howard (without the Kings notice or consent) tooke to wife;The Lord Th. Howard is beheaded. for which vnaduised boldnesse and offence (she being of the bloud royall) he was condemned as a Traitor, and lost his head. The King, who within his owne Territories and Dominions daily furthered his owne intentions to abrogate the authoritie, power, and iurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome,The 32. Com∣missioners. procured it by Par∣liament to be enacted, that thirtie and two such persons spirituall and temporall as his Maiestie should vnder his great Seale nomi∣nate and appoint, should haue authoritie and power to make and establish Lawes and Ordinances Ecclesiasticall, which should binde the Subiects of this Kingdome And by the same Parliament all religious houses,Petit houses of Religion suppressed. whose possessions in yearly reuenue exceeded not the summe of two hundred pounds, were suppressed and dis∣solued,
and all their scites and possessions whatsoeuer were giuen for euer to the King. The booke of Articles.The Clergie also (at the same time, of their owne accord, and to insinuate themselues into grace and fauour with the King) com∣posed and published in printed bookes, certaine Articles for the ordering and gouerning of the Church, in which mention was made of three Sacraments only: and the rest of them (which for∣mer times superstitiously receiued and did maintaine) were left out of the said bookes. A rebellion in Lincoln∣shire.These proceedings of the King and Clergie against the Pope and holy Church, were so generally disliked by the rude, ignorant, and wilfull people, that in many places their lauish tongues were witnesses of their inward griefe and discontent, so that they pub∣likely affirmed, that the Kings Counsell irreligiously and absurdly aduised and directed him amisse, and that the soothing, smooth∣ing, and temporizing Clergie of this Land, prophanely and wic∣kedly practised by all meanes possible to extinguish all deuotion, and vtterly to subuert the ancient rites, ceremonies, and commen∣dable gouernment of the Church. And in madde humour, and franticke fashion, the rude and vnrulie people in Lincolnshire, to the number of 20000. assembled themselues in armes, taking vpon themselues to frame and to deuise better orders for the gouerning of the Church and Common-weale. The King marcheth against the Rebels.The King (who scorned to be thus checked by his owne Vas∣sals, and loathing to proue himselfe a coward at home, seeing that forraine Nations had found him to be valiant and full of courage) leuied a strong and a puissant Armie, with which (in his owne person) he marched with princely magnanimitie against those re∣bellious people,The Rebels petition. who (as he drew towards them) by their petition craued a reformation of those things which lately had beene done and concluded against Religious Houses, and against the former and ancient gouernment of the Church; which things being con∣sented and yeelded to, they solemnly protested their humble dutie and seruice to the King. The King is stout.But hee (who highly disdained that such plaine Swads and ru∣sticke people should presume to giue instructions vnto him, and vnto his whole Clergie and Court of Parliament, in matters so farre aboue their vnderstanding and capacitie) reiected their peti∣tion, and resolued (by an exemplarie course of iustice, to be by the sword martially vsed in the open Field) to punish and to correct them, except one hundred of those their chiefest Conspirators might be sent and deliuered absolutely into his hands. This reso∣lution
and quicke demand so appalled the fainting hearts of the rude and headlesse multitude, that they (suspecting each other of being to be sent vnto the King) forsooke the Field,The Rebels flie. Captaine Cobler. Execution. and with all speed resorted to their owne houses. But Captaine Cobler (their chiefest Ring-leader being indeed Doctor Makarell) with some o∣thers, were shortly after apprehended, and executed according to their merits and deserts. The King (who now supposed that all things had beene settled in a sure and in a firme peace) was suddenly informed of another Insurrection in the North,A rebellion in the North. and that their greeuance was grounded vpon the same points, and that the number of those Rebels excee∣ded the number of 40000. men,The holy Pil∣grims. who termed themselues the Holy Pilgrims, who intended nothing but the establishing of true Reli∣gion, and the reformation of great abuses, which defaced the go∣uernment of the Church. To encounter these men,The Kings Armie. and to correct their braine-sicke hu∣mour and foolish madnesse, the King appointed the two Dukes of Norfolke and of Suffolke, and some other Lords, with a strong and well appointed Armie, to march against them with all speed. And the Rebels (expressing much ioy because they were to fight) came neere vnto the Dukes Armie, and before them expressed many signes and tokens of vndaunted courage and desperate boldnesse. But in the night before the two Armies intended to haue ioined together in handie strokes,A strange accident. a little brooke which ranne betwixt them, and which with a drie foot might the day before haue beene passed ouer, grew so outragiously great and violent, by the fall of immoderate and continuall showres of raine, that the Ar∣mies could not meet as they determined. This miraculous pitie, and this mercifull compassion, which by Almightie God himselfe was immediately extended towards his people for the preserua∣tion of their liues, so effectually wrought in the hearts and mindes of the two Armies, that (vpon the faithfull promise of the two Dukes,The Rebels quietly doe depart home. that the Kings free and ample pardon should remit and ac∣quite them all) the Rebels left the Field, and quietly departed to their owne houses. And thus was this Kingdome and Common-weale deliuered the second time without blowes, from as great danger and perill as at any time before had threatned the ruine and destruction of the people of this Land. By meanes whereof the King waxed more absolute and more strong in his gouern∣ment then he was in former times, especially concerning his Cler∣gie, and the ordering of the Church, wherein hee disposed of all things (vncontrolled) according to his owne will.
A third re∣bellion.Yet as a lightning, so on a sudden in Westmerland Thomas Tilbie and Nicholas Musgraue, with some others, (for the onely causes a∣boue mentioned, and for none other) brake forth into an open Re∣bellion, with eight thousand men, against the King. But by the Duke of Norfolke many of them were slaine,The Rebels ouerthrowen. the rest were ouer∣throwen, and threescore and fourteene of their Commanders and chiefest Actors in that Rebellion, were (as Traitors) by Martiall Law and Iudgement executed in sundrie places in the North.Execution. At this time (before Henry Courtney, Earle of Deuonshire, Mar∣quesse of Exeter, cosen german to the King, and Lord High Stew∣ard for that day) were brought,The Lord Darcy. The Lord Hussey. Execution touching the Supremacie. arraigned, found guiltie, and con∣demned, the Lord Darcy, and the Lord Hussey, and both of them were executed accordingly; the former for a Murder, and the lat∣ter for High Treason. Likewise Sir Robert Constable, Sir Thomas Percie, Sir Francis Bigot, Sir Steuen Hambleton, and Sir Iohn Bulmer, Knights, William Lomley, Nicholas Tempest, Robert Aske, two Ab∣bots, and some others, being condemned as Traitors for denying of the Kings Supremacie, were executed in diuers places of this Realme:Frier Forest. and Frier Forest for the same matter, and also for main∣taining certaine Heresies with an obstinate and vnrepentant reso∣lution, receiued the iudgement of a Traitor, and of an Hereticke, and (being hanged in irons vpon a Gibbet) he was burnt. Noblemen created.The King being gratious to some whom he much fauoured, and who had deserued well, bestowed Titles of Honour on them. For the Viscount Beauchampe was created Earle of Hartford, Sir William Fitz-William, high Admirall of England, was made Earle of South-hampton, Sir William Paulet, Treasurer of the Kings houshold, was made Lord S. Iohn,The Lord Cromwell is made Vicege∣rent in Eccle∣siasticall mat∣ters and things. Sir Iohn Russel Knight was made Lord Russel, and Sir Thomas Cromwel, a Counsellor of Estate, Knight of the Garter, Lord Priuie Scale, Lord Cromwel, was made the Kings Vice-gerent in all cases and matters Ecclesiasticall and Spirituall, by vertue whereof, both in Parliament and elsewhere, he had the precedence of the Arch-bishop of Canterburie, and (almost in all things) did all in all: so that (by reason of that authoritie) hee vt∣terly defaced, burnt, and destroied all senselesse and dumme Ima∣ges and Shrines, to whom any thing was superstitiously offred, or vnto whom Praiers,Images and Shrines are suppressed. Inuocations, or Pilgrimages, were fantasti∣cally and foolishly made. Hee also suppressed the Orders of Beg∣ging and Craftie Friers, and Puling Nunnes, whose houses and possessions came vnto the King. And about the same time, the Marquesse of Exeter,Attainders Henry Poole, Lord Montagne, and Sir Nicholas Carew of Beddington in the Countie of Surrey, Knight of the Gar∣ter,
and master of the Kings horses, were attainted and executed for high Treasons, especially because that with Cardinall Foole (brother to the Lord Montagne) they endeuoured to procure for∣raine Princes (in the Popes aide) to inuade this Land, and to re∣forme the businesses of the Church by the Apostolicall authoritie of the See of Rome. For this offence the said Cardinall (being be∣yond the Seas) was by Parliament attainted: and within a few moneths after, his mother, the Ladie Margaret Countesse of Sa∣lisburie, (who was the last of the princely line of the Plantagenets, the said Cardinall only excepted; for shee was the daughter of George the last Duke of Clarence) together with Gerthrude the wi∣dow of the late Marquesse of Exeter, Sir Adrian Foskew, and diuers others, were also attainted of high Treason for the same Conspi∣racie: and so were the Abbots of Reading, Colchester, and Glasten∣burie, with many Monkes, Friers, and religious men, because they obstinately denied the Kings Supremacie, and confidently at∣tributed it vnto the Pope. And all these (except the Cardinall, who came not home whilest the King liued) were afterwards ex∣ecuted in sundrie places of this Realme. Many others also (for the same offence) suffered the like deaths, whose names (by reason of their meane estate, and vndignified qualities) may not (in this our Historie) challenge a place of particular remem∣brance. Whilest the King was thus busily imploied in cutting off his Sub∣iects heads, the great Oneyle and Odoneyle, with a rude rabble of sauage Out-lawes, wilde Kernes, and desperate Irishmen,A rebellion in Ireland. entred more then twentie miles within the English Pale, and did much mischiefe. But by the Lord Deputie (being the Lord Leonard Gray, brother to the Marquesse Dorset) they were so well fought with in the open field, that he obtained the victorie. But such was the nimblenesse of those Rebels, that when by blowes they failed to maintaine their match, then (according to their common vse and custome) they swiftly ran ouer the bogges and marshes into the woods and rockes, vnto which the more sober and well orde∣red Englishmen could not approch, without apparant hazard and danger to their liues. The King (who in a manner was wholly directed and gouerned by the Lord Cromwel now Earle of Essex,Religious houses sup∣pressed. and made high Cham∣berlaine of England) pretended many quarrels against the fat Ab∣bots, Priors, Monkes, Friers, Nunnes, and Cloisterers of this King∣dome. for many exorbitant misdemeanours daily by them com∣mitted and done, especially because they were abominably leche∣rous,
and vnmeasurably idle, and slow-bellies, fruges consumere nati, vnprofitable, yea a burden to the Church and Common-weale. Those faults the King endeuoured not (like a good Magistrate) by correction to amend, but he resolued, with the deluge of his displeasure to wash them cleane away. And so he did indeed. For his high Court of Parliament (which was then holden at West∣minster) vtterly dissolued and cleerely suppressed all Abbies, Mo∣nasteries, Priories, and other religious houses, (some few being only excepted) and gaue their houses, scites, Lordships, and pos∣sessions (which in yearely reuenue amounted to more then two hundred thousand pounds) vnto the King, who with his worldly policie (to the intent that future posteritie should not bee enabled to restore them backe againe to their former vses) exchanged them liberally for other lands,Policie. with his Nobles and Gentrie of his Kingdome, many of whose Estates at this day doe wholly consist of possessions of that nature, or else are greatly aduanced by those lands. This hauocke thus made on Churchmen, and of their possessi∣ons, proceeded not (as most men thought) from the loue which the King bare vnto the reformation of Religion, out of extraordi∣narie deuotion, nor from the puritie of his minde, desiring the extirpation of that wickednesse and sinne, which indeede abun∣dantly raigned and ruled among those irreligious religious men, but from the couetous humour of his Nobles, and from the secret grudge and vnreconcileable hatred which he bare vnto the Pope. But thus the world then fared, and thus was the Church pared, and pruned, and made a prey, euery bird being desirous to beauti∣fie her selfe with her faire feathers. Cromwels match for the King with Anne of Cleue.When the Lord Cromwel had thus effected that great businesse, then he vndertooke another, which in the end brake his owne necke. For vpon his perswasiue motions, strengthened by the view of flattering pictures, and of vnmerited immoderate commendati∣ons, the King tooke to wife the Ladie Anne of Cleue, who was ex∣ceeding religious, and replenished with many vertues: but in her person and countenance, she was neither well composed, faire, nor louely. The King likes not his match.Her religion and her vertues were not much respected by the King. For when he first saw her, he liked her not; insomuch that albeit he were maried vnto her foure moneths and somwhat more, yet his amorous appetite towards her was so amated, and so insen∣sible was he of wanton passions when he was priuate in her com∣panie, that he neuer did nor could know her as his wife.
Whereupon the Bishops and Clergie of this Land (who for feare of after-claps, were well pleased to daunce after the Kings pipe) in their solemne Conuocation,His mariage is dissolued. published an authenticall Instrument in writing, vnder the Scales of the two Arch-bishops, by which they made it knowen to the Christian world, that the Kings mariage with the said Ladie Anne of Clene, was a nullitie, void, frustrate, and of none effect, because the said Ladie (vnder her owne hand) had (vpon due examination) confessed, that the king neuer had nor could performe to her that beneuolence which by a husband was due vnto his wife. The like sentence was enacted, pronounced, and published by the Parliament, with these additions, that it was lawfull for his Maiestie, whensoeuer and with whomsoeuer, to marie and to take another wife, according to the Ecclesiasticall Lawe of this Realme: and likewise that it was lawfull for the said Ladie Anne of Cleue, to marie and take another husband when shee should please, according to the Lawes of the holy Church.Treason. And further it was then enacted, that all such as (by writing, printing, speaking, or by any other ouert act) did expresse or maintaine the contrary, should be guiltie of Treason, and receiue punishment accordingly. The King (who was thus enlarged and freed from his bonds of discontented matrimonie) tooke to wife (within twentie daies af∣ter) Katherine Howard, the daughter of the Lord Edmund Howard,The King marieth againe. The King frowneth on Cromwel. brother to the Duke of Norfolke: and from thenceforth he began to alter the copie of his countenance, and looked discontentedly vpon his great fauourite and inward Counsellor the Lord Crom∣wel, who had fettered him in those his former troubles. And be∣cause this alteration in the King was quickly perceiued by many, who longed for his ruine and his downefall, a long and a tedious Bill (by some of them) was vnexpectedly preferred against him into the Parliament,Cromwels downefall. in which (rather in a generalitie then by ma∣ny particulars) hee was accused of sundrie Treasons, Misprisions, and of Heresie. And among other obiections laid vnto his charge, it was suggested, that (ioining with the last Queene Anne) hee fa∣uoured the Lutherans aboue measure, and so strongly supported them against the Catholike Priests and Prelates of this Kingdome, that when by some of the Clergie hee was told, that they doubted not but that the King would shortly curbe their boldnesse and presumption, the said Lord Cromwell did replie, that the King should allow of their Religion whether he would or no. But how true or how false soeuer these surmises were, the said bill was found. Yet was hee not called to make his answere or defence
thereto; so that being by the said Parliament attainted of Heresie and of Treason: He with the Lord Hungerford was beheaded on a scaffold, on the Tower hill, whereat his enemies did reioyce: some of them attributing the cause to his haughtinesse, and pride; and some of them affirming, that it was Gods reuenge and punishment for his hatefull defacing and wasting of the Church. The Lord Leonard Gray execu∣ted.And neare about the same time, the Lord Leonard Gray (who not long before had beene the kings deputie in Ireland) was condem∣ned for many treasons, by him committed in that Countrie, du∣ring the time of his Gouernement: especially, for that secretly he had once procured the Irish Rebels, to enter into, and to make ha∣vock within the English Pale; all which hee (of his owne accord) confessed to bee true: wherefore hee receaued his iudgement, and lost his head. The King (who was but newly married to Queene Katherine) was now informed by some who presumed that they knew it wel, that before her mariage with the King,Queene Ka∣therine be∣headed. shee had liued a licentious, and an euill life, with a Gentleman named Francis Dyrham: And furthermore, it was much presumed and suspected, that since shee was the Kings wife,Francis Dyr∣ham, Thomas Culpeper, The Lady Rochford. shee had vnchastly conversed with another Gentleman, whose name was Thomas Culpeper, for it was fully proued, that in her last Progresse, the said Thomas was secretly brought by the Ladie Rochford into the Queenes chamber, at ele∣uen of the clock in the night, and that hee remayned there almost fiue hours: And that (at his departure) he was gifted with a chaine of gold, and a rich wrought cap. For these offences, the said two Gentlemen, at Tyborne suffered death. And not long after, the Queene by Parliament was attainted, and so was the Lady Roch∣ford, and some others, and lost their heads for the said offence. And in the same Parliament,King of Ireland. The King marieth againe. the King was proclaimed King of Ireland, which Title his Predecessors neuer had. The King likewise, tooke to wife the Lady Katherine Parre, si∣ster to the Marques of Northampton, and sometimes the wife of the Lord Lattimer: who in the latter end of the Kings raigne, was in a faire possibilitie to haue lost her head, if her owne vertue, mo∣destie, and the Kings sodaine sicknesse and death, had not reserued her for a better fortune. At this time Eustace the Great Oneyl, and Matthias his sonne, repaired to the Kings Court, and (with all submissiue, and humble contrition) they confessed their late rebellion,Earle of Tyron. and treasons; and so gratious was the King vnto them both, that hee not only gaue them his free pardon, but (in hope of future seruice according to
their promise) he created him Earle of Tyron, and made his sonne Lord of Duncan. The Scots (who for a long time had beene quiet) did now be∣ginne to swagger, and by sodaine invasions, to hurt,Contention with the Sco∣tish King. and damnifie the Subiects of this Land; which occasioned the King. 1 To require of their king Iames the Fifth, and Nephew to the king, these things. First, That the said king Iames, should doe his homage, and his fealtie, to king Henrie, for his kingdom of Scot∣land, as his Auncestors in former times had often done: But the Scottish king (with great obstinacie, and with froward messages) refused to yeeld thereunto. 2 King Henrie likewise required the deliuerie of some small, and triffling Territories, bordering close vpon the inheritance of the said Scottish king. And for the proofe of his rightfull Title therevnto: Hee caused certaine auncient and old euidences to bee shewed forth: But the Scottish Commissioners (with taunts and skornes) reiected them: Saying, that they were written and sealed by Englishmen, who (for their owne profit and gaine) might write and seale what they listed. 3 Vpon these, and some other grieuances, king Henrie (who rather desired a friendly reconciliation, betwixt himselfe and his Nephew, then by the dint of sword to shed Christian bloud) con∣cluded to meet, and to conferre with king Iames in kinde manner, vpon the borders of either kingdome: For which purpose, king Henrie made his Progresse vnto Yorke; and was there certified, that the Scottish king intended not (according to his promise) to meet with him: But would (by Commission) authorize some of his Counsellors of estate, to conferre, and to conclude with his Maie∣sties Commissioners of England, touching the matters, then in dif∣ference betwixt them two. 4 The king (though he were thus deluded) yet did he not ex∣presse any touch of impacience for that wrong, but (authorizing certaine Commissioners in that behalfe) hee ended his Progresse and returned home. All these Commissioners met; but whilest they were in Parlee, two notorious and great despights were offe∣red to king Henrie. 5 For though the Commissioners daily communed of vnitie, and of peace, yet at the same time the Scots invaded the Westerne marches of this Realme, burnt, slue, spoiled, and riffled, beyond charitie and reason; and yet no warre was then denounced be∣twixt the said two kings. For this iniurie, and for this wrong, suf∣ficient, and liberall amends, and recompence was promised, by the
said Commissioners, but no manner of restitution, or satisfaction, was made in that behalfe. 6 And lastly, although the King of Scots commission was ve∣ry large and ample, and authorized those his Agents, to doe (al∣most) whatsoeuer they themselues pleased, yet did the said Com∣missioners so strictly stand vpon sundrie points (which were too too much vnreasonable, and dishonorable for king Henrie to yeeld vnto) that by the English Commissioners (who had throughly viewed and pervsed their authoritie and power) they were con∣demned as enemies to the peace, and to their owne Countrie: For that (by the meanes of their frowardnesse) there would be warres. Whereupon, the Scottish Commissioners (to cleare themselues of this blame, imputed to their obstinacie and follie) shewed forth their priuate instructions from their King, which (for feare of death) they dared not to exceede: By which instructions it appea∣red plainly, that their authority, expressed in their said Commissi∣on, was (in all things) curbed, and made of little, or of no force; except the said English Commissioners would yeeld to such de∣mands, as were vnprofitable, and dishonourable, to their king. Warres in Scotland.These notorious iniuries and wrongs, and this daliance, and craftie dissimulation, enforced King Henrie, to send an Armie of twentie thousand men into Scotland, vnder the command of the Duke of Northfolk, who was accompanied by the Earles of Shrews∣burie, Darby, Cumberland, Surrey, Hertford, Angus, and Rutland, and with the greatest part of the Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen of the North: All these marched on their iourney, and for eight daies space (being vnresisted, and vnfought with) they killed, riffled, burned, forraged, and spoiled the Scottish Townes, Castles, For∣tresses, Houses, and Fields, with as much crueltie, violence, and fu∣rie,The English Armie re∣turneth. as the extremitie of warres could execute in so short a time: Which when they had done, the Armie retyred, was dissolued, and euery man repaired (loaden with spoiles) to his owne home. The Scots inuade Eng∣land.With this deserued and seuere reuenge, the King of Scots was infinitely grieued, and perplexed, at the heart; In so much, that he caused (with all expedition) to be raised an Armie of fifteene thousand men, which was sent into the West marches of this king∣dome; where they began to spoile, and did much mischiefe. But Thomas, the Bastard Dacres; William Musgraue, and the Lord Tho∣mas Wharton (hauing at a short warning collected a small number of approued,A notable ouerthrow. and valiant men at armes) taking with them some part thereof, and leauing the rest for a secret stale, or ambush, to annoy their enemies, when time should serue, encountred vnex∣pectedly
with the Scots, vpon whom in the Rereward, the said am∣bush, valiantly issued; which did so terrifie and affright them, that they supposed verily, the Duke of Norfolke, with a great Armie did fall on them, wherefore (to saue themselues) they fled; and in the pursuite there were taken prisoners, the Earles of Cassels,Prisoners. and Glan∣carne; the Lords Maxwel, Fleming, Sommerwel, Oliphant, Gray, and Oragy, and the Lord Carre of Gredon; two hundred Gentlemen, and about eight hundred common Souldiers; so that euery En∣glish man had two or three prisoners, to recompence their adven∣terous paines, and trauaile: The Englishmen also tooke, & brought away, foure and twentie peeces of Ordinance, and foure Carts loa∣den with Speares: this ouerthrow, many men then imputed (and peraduenture truly) to the Scottish Kings vnaduised and indiscreet direction,Disdaine. who made so meane a Springall the Generall in that ar∣mie, in which so many Lords, Earles, and worthy Captaines were, who scorned to be commanded by such an Vnderling; and there∣fore hazarded their owne liues, by a willing flight, rather then (by obtayning the Victorie) to lay on him such honour as they knew, he was not able to deserue. Of these prisoners, foure and twentie of the chiefest, were sent to the Tower of London; from whence (after two dayes) they were remoued, and committed to the care and custodie of diuers Noblemen, Knights, and Gentlemen of worth: at whose hands, they receiued such kinde welcome, and bountifull entertainment, that (with multiplyed wordes of extraordinary praise and com∣mendation) they ceased not to extoll their friendly, and good v∣sage, to the skies. This vnexpected, strange,The King of Scots dieth. and vnfortunate ouerthrow of so faire an Armie, with so small a handfull: so much disturbed the patient disposition of the Scottish King, that (with melancholy, and inward griefe) he dyed within few weekes after.Marie queen of Scots. Leauing behinde him (as to succeed) his only daughter and heire Queene Marie; a child who was then but newly borne. When the newes of this Kings death was voiced to the Scottish Prisoners, it is not to be maruailed at, if pensiue sorrow and anguish much appaled them for a while: But at length (making a vertue of necessitie, and recomforting themselues with some hope which they conceaued of future happinesse) they counsailed king Henrie to procure their said yong Queene, to be by the State of Scotland,A motion for mariage. giuen in mariage vnto Prince Edward his son: For the furtherance whereof, they all protested, swore, and promised, to imploy their best trauailes, and their chiefest friends.
Scottish pri∣soners relea∣sed.The King so thankfully entertayned this their motion, and pro∣fered seruice for the furtherance thereof, that he not only enlarged them all without ransoms; but also gaue vnto them rich and great gifts, for which they were exceeding thankfull; and departed ioy∣fully into their owne Countrie. The French men breake the peace.Now must we know, that as the Scots without cause, had made breach of the former peace; so did the French King: who suffered his subiects (vpon the Seas) to robbe and spoile the Marchants of this kingdome. And thereupon King Henrie permitted his sub∣iects to doe the like. Diuers complaints for these iniuries and wrongs,The Mar∣chants are vexed. were first made vnto the French King; because his subiects had first transgressed: but he neither afforded answere, redresse, or recompence therein. And by reason of this debate and variance betwixt the two Kings, the Marchants of either Nation were arrested and imprisoned, and their goods, and marchandizes were attached, and seised on in each Kingdome. Likewise the French and English Embassadors, were (for a time) restrayned of their li∣berties, but were quickly set at large againe: yet still, the poore Marchants on either part, were compelled to pay the reckoning, although they fared ill, and were enforced to sustaine punishment for the faults of other men. Such was the iniquitie of those times, wherein Warre and Rapine did beare the chiefest sway,Vnthankefull Frenchmen. and such were the miseries which harmelesse men sustayned: because Peace and Iustice were not suffered to moderate, betwixt Right and Wrong. For the French King did vtterly forget, in what a despe∣rate case his kingdome stood, when King Henrie (vpon the humble supplication of the Queene Regent, and of his Nobles, when he, and his children were prisoners in Italie) gaue vnto him peace. Wherefore, to correct his monsterous ingratitude, and to be reuen∣ged of daily wrongs, The King (to defie him) sent his Heralds towards France. But the French King would not in any sort per∣mit them,An Armie sent into France. to come into his kingdome: Whereupon King Henrie (vnder the principall command of Sir Iohn Wallop, Sir Thomas Sey∣mour, and Sir Richard Cromwel) transported a strong Armie, who (presently vpon their landing) besieged the Towne of Landersey,Landersey besieged. and by continuall battries, and fierce assaults, brought it into some necessities, and danger: but the French king knowing well the di∣stressed estate in which the Towne then stood; in his owne per∣son, with a huge Armie, came to releeue it: by meanes whereof, the English Generals raised the siege,The siege abandoned. and made themselues strong, and ready to encounter the French King in battaile: of which, hee made great brags. This expectation of a bloudy skirmish, caused
the English Armie (who would not then disorder nor incumber themselues with other imploiments) to suffer the said Towne to be newly victualled and releeued. But in the middest of the night before it was intended by the English Armie that this battaile should haue beene fought, the French King (being shrowded in the darke) ran away, and all his companies returned with speede vnto their owne Countries; insomuch that for that time no more was done, but (by command) the English Armie returned into England. In this meane while,A mariage concluded with Scot∣land. the aforesaid motion concerning the ma∣riage of the young Prince with the Infant Queene of Scotland, was so well applauded and entertained by the Scots, that in their Parlia∣ment it was first concluded, and then confirmed by an Instrument in writing, vnder the hands and seales of their Nobilitie, and rati∣fied by their oathes, that the said intended match should bee effe∣cted, and that their young Queene (for that purpose) should bee conueied into England. But within few moneths after, by the se∣cret and cunning plots and practises of the French King, the Nobi∣litie of Scotland neglected their Law, their promise, and their oath, which occasioned King Henry with all speed to make new and vn∣wonted preparations and prouisions,The Scots doe breake their oath. not onely to inuade that Countrey, but also to make warre vpon his enemie the King of France. And to effect his purpose in that behalfe, first he sent a puissant Armie (which was transported in two hundred warlike ships) into Scotland,An Armie spoileth Scot∣land. vnder the generall command (by Sea) of his high Admi∣rall the Viscount Lisle, and vnder the generall command (by land) of the noble and right valiant Earle of Hartford. All these ships safely entred into the Fryth, where they tooke many good Vessels, which were exceeding seruiceable to their proceedings. And then was the whole Armie set on land: and being well ordered into three battailes, and marching towards Leyth, they first tooke view of six thousand Scottish horsemen, with whom they encountred for a while. But when the Scots perceiued that the Englishmen tooke more delight to fight with courage, then to dallie, as being fearefull of their liues, they made a quicke re∣trait, and suddenly fled away, leauing their Artillerie and that Towne to their enemies, who appropriated to themselues euery good thing which they found there, and then consumed the towne with fire. From thence they marched towards Edenborough, the principall Citie of that Kingdome. But on the way the Prouost and some of the chiefest Burgesses of that Towne, made offer to
the Earle of Hartford (Generall of the Field) to deliuer to him the keies, conditionally that he would preserue it from fire, and suffer the souldiers and the Inhabitants thereof with bagge and baggage to depart. But the Generall made answere thus: That hee was sent into that Countrey to take reuenge vpon that Nation, because their Nobilitie (with one consent) by the peruerse and vnfriendly insti∣gation of the French King, had violated their owne Law, their pro∣mise, and their oath, touching the mariage agreed on, to be solem∣nized betweene Prince Edward and their young Queene. And therefore if all the Souldiers and all the Inhabitants of that Citie would come disarmed into the open Field, and yeeld their sub∣stance and their liues to bee ordered according to his pleasure and will, he then would doe as he thought good: but if they refused so to doe, he then protested to visit the Towne and them with all the extremities which were incident to such a warre. This quicke answere so little pleased the Townesmen, that they returned, purposing to resist: and so they did. But by strong batteries and fierce assaults, their gates and their walles were bea∣ten downe and entred, so that many thousands of the Scots were slaine, their riches were possessed by the English Armie, and a great part of that Citie was consumed by fire. Now whilest the Armie was thus busied, there came vnto them from the King foure thou∣sand English horsemen: so that when the spoiles and booties were by the souldiers imbarked, and by water sent into England, the En∣glish Armie coasted thorow a great part of those Countries, vn∣fought with, burning, killing, and foraging in all places, as they pleased: so that they hauing taken, ransacked, and burnt a good part of the Citie of Edenborough, Holy-rood house, and the Kings Palace there, and hauing rifled and defaced the Townes of Leyth, Haddington, Dumbarre, Dyrlaw, Broughton, Dudiston, Beuerton, Mar∣kle, Hatherwike, Bowland, Blackborne, West-Crage, Chester-fels, Stone-house, Trauent, Trapren, Belton, Butterden, Raunto, Enderleigh, Craw∣enden, Shenston, the Fycket, East-barne, Kyrklandhill, Quickwood, part of Muskelborough, and many other Villages, besides Abbies, Mo∣nasteries, and Religious Houses, (which particularly wee cannot name) they returned powerfully, with rich booties, and with the only losse of fortie men, into England. Two Armies sent into France.And thus did King Henry in some sharpe measure correct and punish the vnstable dealings of the Scots. Which troubles when he had finished, hee then forthwith made such plentifull prepara∣tions to inuade France, that he sent vnto the French Kings Domini∣ons
two strong Armies, of which the one was commanded by the Duke of Norfolke, and by the gentle Lord Russel, who was then newly made Lord Priuie Seale, who therewithall besieged the strong Towne of Muttrell, where they lost much time,Muttrell be∣sieged and abandoned. and much labour, and were enforced to leaue it in the end. And the other of the said two Armies was commanded by the Duke of Suffolke, with which the said former Armie inbodied it selfe: and then they all encamped about the strong and warlike Citie of Bulleine,Bulleine is besieged. and after many sharpe conflicts and hot skirmishes, they first tooke the Old man, and shortly after base Bulleine. To this siege King Henry himselfe (being attended by many a worthie man) repaired, and after his comming thither,The King commeth to Bulleine. so long as the light gaue leaue, for the space of one whole moneth together, he caused the walles of the Towne and Castle so cruelly to be bat∣tered, and the Towne it selfe to be so beaten, and the breaches and the trenches to be so furiously assulted, that the walles in many places lay almost leuell with the ground. No house escaped vnhurted: and the Inhabitants with continuall labour, vexation,Bulleine is yeelded. and trauell, were almost tired and worne out: so that at length, vpon composition that all the Souldiers and Inhabitants should safely depart with bagge and baggage, the strong and stately Towne and Castle of Bulleine was deliuered into the Kings hands: out of which issued (vpon the said agreement) threescore and seuen horsemen, fifteene hundred, threescore and three footmen, eight hundred Gunners, fourescore and seuen men who were hurt, and nineteene hundred twentie and seuen men, women, and children, they all being in number 4444. soules. But many (who by reason of their greeuous wounds could not depart) were found, and well cherished and releeued in the Towne. Now whilest the King thus lay at the siege of Bulleine,King Henry returneth. the Em∣perour (without the Kings knowledge or consent) secretly con∣cluded a peace with the French King; whereat King Henry much greeued: so that (after hee had taken an exact order for the repai∣ring and fortifying of that Towne and Castle) bee dismissed his Armie, and with great ioy, honour, and triumph, he returned into England. And because his daily warres (which required continuall sup∣plies) had wasted and consumed his treasure,Iohn Stow. 993. which (for the pre∣uenting of future mischiefes, and in especiall such as were daily of∣fred vnto him by the Scots) he endeuoured to augment, hee there∣fore demanded a Beneuolence of all his Subiects both Spirituall and Temporall. For which purpose Sir Thomas Wryothesley,A Beneuo∣lence. Lord
Chancellor of England, the Duke of Suffolke, and others of his Ma∣iesties Counsell of Estate, (sitting as Commissioners in Bainards Castle in London) taxed the Citizens and Inhabitants according to their wisdomes and discretions. And because one Alderman (whose name was Richard Read) refused to pay what they had or∣dered,Alderman Read. he was therefore by them required (on a great paine) per∣sonally to serue the King in his warres against the Scots; which cheerefully be performed, and was (with many others) taken pri∣soner and detained by his enemies, vntill that for his ransome hee was enlarged and set free. The Dolphins successe.After the King was departed home, the Dolphin (taking the benefit to a darke night) came with a great power so suddenly into Base Bulleine, that he tooke it. But such as fled, and had saued their liues, being aided by the souldiers of the vpper Towne and Castle, came fiercely on the Dolphin, and so manfully assailed him, that (to saue himselfe and his) he in all the haste departed, and left the Towne with his great losse. The French are ouer∣throwen.Within few daies after, Monsieur de Bees came on the other side of the water before the Towne, with an Armie of fifteene thou∣sand men, and began to erect a Fortresse there. But by the valiant Earle of Hartford, the Viscount Lisle, the Lord Gray, and diuers o∣thers, they were assailed, fought with, and shamefully put to flight, and were compelled to leaue behinde them their Ordi∣nance, Tents, and other good prouisions, to their great ignominie and reproch. The French King (intending to worke wonders in England, by way of a reuenge, for that his strong Towne of Bulleine was lost) sent to the Sea a mightie Fleet,The French Kings Nauie doth nothing. of two hundred tall ships, and seuen and twentie strong Gallies, all which were stuffed (as it was repor∣ted) with threescore thousand men. All these came in good order, and ancoured before the Isle of Wight, and were oftentimes beaten with the great Ordinance which the Admirall of England liberally bestowed on them. But as the English Fleet passed out of the Ha∣uen of Portsmouth into the Sea, a stately, strong, and a goodly ship, named the Marie Rose,The Marie Rose drowned belonging to the King, (in which was Cap∣taine Sir George Carew Knight, with more then foure hundred men besides) was drowned almost in an instant, by the grosse follie of the Gunners, and of the Mariners, the former of them hauing left their Ordinance vntrigged, and the latter hauing left the vnder port holes open, by meanes whereof when the ship turned, the Ordinance ran backe to the one side, and bare the port holes vnder water, so that the sea violently and abundantly flowed in, and in a
moment swallowed vp both ship, Captaine, Men, Ordinance, and all other things there to the great griefe and sorrow of the King himselfe, and of all such as were present, and beheld it. The Lord Dambalt, high Admirall of France, being by certaine poore Fishermen, whom he had taken, informed, that the King in his owne person, being accompanied with an infinite number of valiant men of warre; expected and longed to be made victorious and rich by their landing, feared to hazard all his fortunes in so de∣sperate and hot a seruice: Wherefore be hoised Ancors, and with∣out Fame or Honor, returned basely into France. Now must wee know,The Scots invade Eng∣land. that no sooner was King Henrie departed out of England to the siege of Bullein (as wee haue heard) but the Scottish Nation (obseruing their old custome) entred, riffled, spoi∣led, and burnt many Houses, Villages, and small Townes, in the marches of England, without pitty: Wherefore, King Henrie (after his returne) resolued to correct their madnesse, and their folly, and to take reuenge for those iniuries and wrongs: And for that pur∣pose, he sent the Noble Earle of Hartford into that Kingdome,An Armie sent into Scotland. with an Armie of twelue thousand men, where hee hauoked Men, Townes, Castles, and the Countrie, in such a furious and fierce manner, that the Scots were extremely damnified thereby; and thousands of them were vtterly vndone. About the same time, the valiant Lord Lisle, Lord high Admi∣rall of England,Treport. entred into and landed within the Hauen of Tre∣port, and burnt the suburbs of that towne, and many other houses, Villages, and Townes, which bordered vpon the Sea coasts: And at his returne from thence (as a rich prey) he caried with him ma∣ny Ships, Barges, Boats, and Vessels, which he found there. Now (like as after many ruffe and boisterous stormes, a sweet, and a delectable calme doth follow: so after these busie conflicts, and martiall contentions,The Duke of Northfolke and the Earle of Surrey committed. whereof wee haue already taken a per∣fect view: A peace was louingly concluded, and ioyfully proclay∣med, betweene the two kingdomes of England and of France. But this joy (as in humane affaires it often hapneth) was quickly checked with an other sorrow: for the most victorious, faithfull, and euer to be honored Captaine, the Duke of Northfolke, and his sonne, the most illustrious Earle of Surrey (both which, in this Kings raigne, performed many memorable, and braue seruices, in Scotland, England, and in France) were sodainely apprehended, and sent vnto the Tower; For none other thing, but because they quartered, and bare in their Escoucheon certaine Armes, which were pretended, properly, and only to belong vnto the King and
Prince (which Armes notwithstanding, they and their Auncesters timeout of minde had so borne without controlment, reproofe, or check. For this offence, the said Earle was indicted of high Treason, arraigned thereon, and tryed by a Iurie of Knights, and Gentlemen,The Earle of Surrey behea¦ded. (and not by his peeres) because he was no Lord of the Parliament) by whom he was found guiltie, and then receiued his iudgement, and lost his head, to the great griefe and sorrow of many thousands, who lamented the causelesse death of such a worthy man, as had so well deserued of the King, and of the com∣mon weale. The King dieth.But the Duke his father (by reason of the Kings sicknesse, and death, which followed shortly after) was preserued by God from that danger, for better fortunes. He is descri∣bed.The Presence of this King was amiable, and Princely: for hee was somewhat more then ordinarie tall, strongly limmed, pro∣portionably composed, faire in his complexion, nimble, and full of agilitie in his yonger yeares; and alwaies as resolutely valiant as a man might bee: Hee had a pregnant and a sharpe wit, and was generally held to bee well learned, because hee could, and vsed to speake well: He was exceeding humble, and passing stout; apply∣ing the former to gentle spirits; and opposing the latter against prowd, insolent, and rough Mates: He was bountifull, and magni∣ficently liberall (if occasion so required) Yet in regard that hee was a man: He was not free from all faults; For he was too too much familiar and conversant with wanton and light women: And de∣lighted too much in varietie, and in change, as most men did conie∣cture, because he had sixe wiues. From two of them he was seue∣red, because his mariages were held to be void, frustrate, and of no force: other two of them (for the obiected crime of incontinencie) lost their heads: A fifth died in her child-bed: and the sixt escaped fairely by his death. Finally, hee (oftentimes) much pleased him∣selfe, to be ouer-familiar in the swaggering companie of loose Fel∣lowes; yet in most respects, he was a famous, a worthie, and a most noble King: Thus ended he his life; and thus doe I conclude this Historie of these twentie Kings; hoping that some other (who shall be better able) will (with more sufficiencie) write the rest. FINIS.
THE SVCCES∣SIONS OF THE DVKES AND EARLES OF THIS KINGDOME OF ENGLAND: FROM THE CONQVEST vntill the twelfth yeare of the famous Raigne of the mightie Monarch King IAMES THE FIRST. THOV SHALT LABOR FOR PEACE PLENTIE printer's or publisher's device LONDON, Printed by W. Stansby for Henrie Fetherstone. 1615.
Princes of VVales since the Con∣quest.Iohn Speede 97 1 EDward Caer-Nervon, sonne to King Edward the First, afterwards king Edward the Second. 2 Edward of Windsour, sonne to king Edward the Second, afterwards king Edward the Third. 3 Edward the Black Prince, sonne to king Ed∣ward the Third. 4 Richard of Bordeaux, sonne to the Black Prince, afterwards king Richard the Second. 5 Henrie of Monmoth, sonne to king Henrie the Fourth, after∣wards king Henrie the Fifth. 6 Henrie of Windsour, sonne to king Henrie the Fifth, afterwards king Henrie the Sixth. 7 Edward of Westminster, sonne to king Henrie the Sixth. 8 Edward of Westminster, sonne to king Edward the Fourth, after∣wards king Edward the Fifth. 9 Edward Plantagenet, sonne to king Richard the Third. 10 Arthur Tuther, sonne to king Henrie the Seuenth. 11 Henrie Tuther, sonne to king Henrie the Seuenth, afterwards king Henrie the Eighth. 12 Edward, the sonne of king Henrie the Eighth, afterwards king Edward the Sixth. 13 Henrie, the sonne of king Iames. 14 Charles, the sonne of king Iames.
THE SVCCESSIONS OF THE DVKES AND EARLES OF THIS KING∣DOME OF ENGLAND. From the Conquest vntill the twelfth yeare of the famous Raigne of the mightie Monarch King IAMES the First. Albemarle and Holdernes. EVDO (Sonne to the Earle of Cham∣pagne) married one of the Conque∣rours sisters,Conq. and was by him crea∣ted Earle of Albemarle, and of Hol∣dernes. Stephen, their sonne, succeeded, and was Earle of Albemarle, and of Holdernes. William surnamed Le Grose (be∣ing his sonne) succeeded,K. Steph. and was Earle of Albemarle and of Holdernes. William de Fortibus, maried Hawse or Avice, the daughter and heire of the aforenamed Stephen, and was in her right created Earle of Albemarle, and of Holdernes, by King Stephen. William de Fortibus, their sonne succeeded, and was Earle of Al∣bemarle and of Holdernesse. William de Fortibus, his sonne, was Earle of Albemarle and Holder∣nes, and dyed without issue Male.
R. 2.Thomas Plantagenet, otherwise called Thomas of Woodstock, a yon∣ger sonne of King Edward the Third, was by his Nephew King Ri∣chard the Second, created Earle of Albemarle, Holdernes, Darby, Lan∣caster, and Leicester. Henrie Plantagenet his sonne, was Earle of Albemarle, Holdernes, Darby, Lancaster, and of Leicester. R. 2.Edmund Plantagenet, the sonne of Edmund of Langley, another of the yonger sonnes of King Edward the Third, and Duke of Yorke, was by king Richard the Second, his Cosen, created Earle of Rut∣land, and Duke of Albemarle. Thomas Plantagenet, Duke of Clarence, and sonne to King Henrie the Fourth, was by him created Earle of Warwick, and of Albemarle. Arundell. Conq.ROger Mountgomery, was by William the Conquerour, created Earle of Arundell, and of Shrewsbury. Hugh Mountgomery, his sonne, succeeded him, and died without issue. Robert Mountgomery, his brother, (being Earle of Belesme) suc∣ceeded, and dyed without issue. Wiliam de Albeney, was by Mawld the Empresse created Earle of Arundell,Mauld. and Sussex, because he tooke her part against King Ste∣phen, he maried Adeliza, the widdow of King Henrie the First, and was confirmed in his honors,H. 2. by king Henrie the Second. William de Albeney, his sonne, succeeded in those honors: R. 1.William de Albeney, his sonne, was by King Richard the First, re∣stored to the said Earledomes, which for displeasure had been kept from him by Henrie the Second. William de Albeney, his sonne, succeeded in those Earledomes. Hugh de Albeney, was Earle after his brother, and dyed without issue. H. 3.William de Albenetto, was created Earle of Arundell, by king Henrie the Third, and dyed without issue. E. 1.Richard Fitz-Alen, maried Isabel, (who was one of the daughters of the last Earle William) and was by king Edward the First, created Earle of Arundell, hee was (before that time) Lord of Clun, and Oswaldstry. Edmund Fitz-Alen, their sonne, was Lord of Clun and Oswaldstry, and succeeded in the Earledome of Arundell; but was beheaded
on displeasure, and by the commandement of Queene Isabel, the wife of king Edward the second. Richard Fitz-Alen, his sonne, succeeded in all those honors, hee was also Earle of Warren, and of Surrey. Richard Fitz-Alen, his sonne, was Lord of Clun and Oswaldstry, and Earle of Arundell, Warren, and of Surrey: hee was also Lord of Bromfield, and Yale; and was beheaded at Bristow, whilst king Ri∣chard the second liued. Thomas Fitz-Alen, his sonne, was Lord of Clun, Oswaldstry, Brom∣flet, and Yale, and Earle of Arundell, Warren, and of Surrey, and died without issue Male. Iohn Fitz-Alen, and Lord Maltrauers,H. 6. being the next heire Male to the said Thomas, was by King Henrie the sixt created Earle of A∣rundell, and Duke of Torayne. Humfrey Fitz-Alen, his sonne, was Earle of Arundell, and dyed without issue. William Fitz-Alen, his Vncle, and brother to the last Earle Iohn, was Lord of Clun, and Maltrauers, and Earle of Arundell. Thomas Fitz-Alen, his sonne, succeeded, and was Lord of Clun, and Maltrauers, and Earle of Arundell. William Fitz-Alen, his sonne, was Lord of Clun, and Maltrauers, and Earle of Arundell. Henrie Fitz-Alen, his sonne, was Lord of Clun, and Maltrauers, and Earle of Arundell, and dyed without issue Male. Thomas Howard Earle of Surrey, and the fourth and last Duke of Northfolke, maried Marie, one of the daughters and coheires of the said Henrie Fitz-Alen, and was in her right Lord Maltrauers, and Earle of Arundell. The other moytie descended to the Lord Barkley. Philip Howard, his sonne, was Lord Maltrauers, and Earle of A∣rundell, and of Surrey. Thomas Arundell, his sonne, is Lord Maltrauers,K. Ia. and Earle of A∣rundell: to which honours hee was restored by the mightie Prince King Iames. Bathe. PHilbert de Chandew, a Britton borne,H. 1. was by King Henrie the first created Earle of Bath: he dyed without issue Male. Iohn Bourchier, Lord Fitz-Warren of Towstock in Deuon, being the
sonne of Foulke Bourchier, Lord Fitz-Warren, who was the sonne of William Bourchier, Lord Fitz-Warren, who was the yonger sonne of William Bourchier,H. 8. Earle of Ewe in Normandie; who was the yonger brother of Henry the first Earle of Ewe, was by king Henry the eight, created Earle of Bath. Iohn Bourchier, his sonne, was Lord Fitz-Warren of Towstock, and Earle of Bath. William Bourchier, the sonne of Iohn Bourchier, who was the sonne of the said Iohn, last Earle of Bath, is now Lord Fitz-Warren of Tow∣stock, and hath issue one sonne only, who is named Edward, Lord Fitz-Warren of Towstock. Bedford. E. 3.INgram, Lord Concy, a Frenchman borne, maried Isabel, the daugh∣ter of king Edward the third: and being by him created Earle of Bedford, he dyed without issue Male. Iohn Plantagenet, the third sonne of king Henrie the fourth, was (by his father) created Duke of Bedford;H. 4. and whilst king Henrie the sixt liued (to whom he was Vncle) he was Regent of France, Ruled it with great wisedome, and valour; and dyed without issue. George Neuil, was by king Edward the fourth, created Duke of Bedford,E. 4. and dyed without issue. Iaspar Tuthar, surnamed Iaspar of Hatfield, sonne to Owen Tuthar, and of Queene Katherine, the widdow of king Henrie the fifth, was (by his halfe brother, king Henrie the sixt) created Earle of Pem∣broke,H. 7. and was after (by his Nephew, king Henrie the seuenth) created Duke of Bedford, and dyed without issue. Iohn Russel, was by king Henrie the eight, made Lord Russel, and by king Edward the sixt,E. 6. he was created Earle of Bedford. Francis, Lord Russel, his sonne, succeeded, and was Earle of Bedford. Edward, Lord Russel, his sonnes sonne, viz. the sonne of Francis third sonne to the said Earle Francis, is now Earle of Bedford.
Bridgewater. GIles Dawbeney was by king Henrie the Seuenth made Lord Dawbeney,H. 8. and his sonne Henrie was (after his fathers death) created Earle of Bridgewater by king Henrie the Eighth, and died without issue. But Alice his sister and heire was maried to Iohn Bourchier, Lord Fitz-Warren of Towstocke in Deuon, from whom William Lord Fitz-Warren of Towstocke and Earle of Bath is descen∣ded. Buckingham. WAlter Gifford, Earle of Longuile in Normandie,Conq. and cosen to the Conquerour, was by him created Earle of Buckingham and Pembroke. Walter Gifford his sonne succeeded, and died without issue. Thomas Plantagenet, surnamed Thomas of Woodstocke, the sixth sonne of King Edward the Third, was by his nephew King Richard the Second created Earle of Buckingham, Northampton, and Essex:R. 2. and afterwards he made him Duke of Glocester. And for his good counsell to the same King, he was sent prisoner to Calice, and there murdered. Humfrey Plantagenet, his sonne, was Earle of Buckingham, North∣hampton, and Essex, and died without issue. Humfrey Stafford, Lord of Brecknocke and Holdernes,H. 6. and being Earle of Stafford, was by King Henrie the Sixth created the first Duke of Buckingham. Henrie Stafford his sonne, being Lord of Brecknocke and Holder∣nes, was Earle of Stafford, and Duke of Buckingham, and was behea∣ded by King Richard the Third. Edward Stafford his sonne, being Lord of Brecknocke and Holder∣nes, and Earle of Stafford, by restitution from King Henrie the eight, was the third and last Duke of Buckingham,H. 7. and was beheaded whilest King Henrie the Eighth raigned.
Cambridge. E. 3.IOhn of Henault, brother to William Earle of Henault, and vncle to Queene Philip the wife of King Edward the Third, was by him created Earle of Cambridge. But hee reuolted to the French King, and thereby lost his honour. E. 3.William Marquesse of Iulier, Bergen, and Cleueland, was by King Edward the Third created Earle of Cambridge. E. 3.Edmund Plantagenet, surnamed Edmund of Langley, being the fifth sonne of King Edward the Third, and Duke of Yorke, was by his father created Earle of Cambridge. Edward Plantagenet his sonne, was Duke of Yorke and Albemarle, Earle of Rutland and of Cambridge, and being slaine in the battaile of Edgingcourt, he died without issue. Richard Plantagenet, his brother, was Earle of Cambridge, and had issue, Richard. Richard Plantagenet was Lord of Clare, and of Wigmore, Duke of Yorke, and Earle of Vlster, March, and Cambridge, and was slaine in his warres against King Henrie the Sixth. Edward Plantegenet his sonne succeeded him in all those honou∣rable dignities, and was afterwards King Edward the Fourth. Chester. Conq.HVgo Lupus, Viscount of Aurenges in Normandie, nephew to the Conquerour, was by him created Earle Palatine of Chester. Richard Lupus his sonne succeeded, and died without issue. Ralphe Meschynes (being the sonne of Margaret the sister and heire of Hugo Lupus) was by King Henrie the First created Earle of Chester.H. 1. Ralphe Meschynes his sonne succeeded, and was Earle of Chester. Hugh Meschynes, surnamed Keuelitocke, because hee was there borne, succeeded his father in the Earledome of Chester. Ralphe Meschynes, surnamed Blundeuile, his sonne, being Lord of Little Britaine, was Earle of Chester, Lincolne, and of Richmond. K. Iohn.Iohn, surnamed Scot, was by King Iohn created Earle of Chester, and died without issue male. Edmund Plantagenet, surnamed Crowch-backe, the second sonne
of king Henrie the Third, and brother to king Edward the First,H. 3. was by his father created Earle Palatine of Chester. Edward the Prince, sonne and heire apparant to king Edward the First, was by his father created Earle Palatine of Chester,E. 1. Duke of Cornwall, and Prince of Wales. He was afterwards king Edward the Second. Edward the Third was in his fathers daies created Earle Palatine of Chester, Duke of Cornwall, and Prince of Wales,E. 2. and was afterwards king Edward the Third. Edward Plantagenet, surnamed The Blacke Prince, the eldest sonne of king Edward the Third, was in Parliament created Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Earle Palatine of Chester. Richard Plantagenet, sonne to the Blacke Prince, was Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Earle Palatine of Chester, and was after that king Richard the Second. Henrie Plantagenet, the eldest sonne of king Henrie the Fourth, was Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Earle Palatine of Che∣ster, vntill he was king Henrie the Fifth. Edward the sonne of king Henrie the Sixth, was Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Earle Palatine of Chester, vntill hee was shamefully murdered. Edward Plantagenet, the sonne of king Richard the Third, was Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Earle Palatine of Chester, and died without issue. Arthur Tuther, the eldest sonne of king Henrie the Seuenth, was Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Earle Palatine of Chester, and died without issue. Henrie Tuther, the second sonne of king Henrie the Seuenth, was Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Earle Palatine of Chester, vn∣till he was king Henrie the Eighth. Edward Tuther, his sonne, was Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Earle Palatine of Chester, vntill he was king Edward the Sixth. He died without issue. Henrie Stewart, the eldest sonne of the illustrious Prince, King Iames the First, was Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Earle Palatine of Chester, and died without issue. Charles Stewart, his brother, is Prince of Wales, Duke of Yorke, Cornwall, and Rossay, and Earle Palatine of Chester.
Clarence. K. Steph.GIlbert de Clare was by king Stephen created Earle of Clarence. Roger de Clare, his brother, succeeded, and was Earle of Clare. Richard de Clare, his sonne, succeeded, and was Earle of Clare. E. 3.Lionel Plantagenet, the third sonne of king Edward the Third, was by his father created Duke of Clarence. He had no issue male: but his daughter and heire Philip was maried to Edmund Mortimer Earle of March, from whom the Familie of Yorke did lineally de∣scend. H. 4.Thomas Plantagenet, the second sonne of king Henrie the Fourth, was by his father created Earle of Albemarle, and Duke of Cla∣rence. George Plantagenet, the third sonne of Richard Duke of Yorke, and brother to king Edward the Fourth, was by him created Duke of Clarence, and was murdered in the Tower. Cornwall. CAndor a Briton was Earle of Cornwall at the time of the Con∣quest, and did homage to the Conquerour for the same. Candor his sonne was the second Earle of Cornwall. Conq.Robert Earle of Mortaigne in Normandie was by the Conquerour created Earle of Cornwall. William his sonne, being Earle of Mortaigne, was also Earle of Cornwall. K. Steph.Reynold the base sonne of king Henrie the First, was by king Ste∣uen created Earle of Cornwall. H. 2.Iohn the second sonne of king Henrie the Second, was by his fa∣ther created Earle of Cornwall. He was afterwards king Iohn. H. 3.Richard, the second sonne of king Iohn, was by his brother king Henrie the Third created Earle of Cornwall. Hee was also king of the Romans. Henrie Plantagenet his sonne succeeded, and was Earle of Corn∣wall, and died without issue. E. 1.Edward Plantagenet, the eldest sonne of king Edward the First, was by his father created Prince of Wales, Earle Palatine of Chester, and Duke of Cornwall, and hee was afterwards king Edward the Second.
Pierce Gaueston, a Gascoigne borne,E. 2. was by king Edward the Se∣cond created Lord of Wallingfold, and Earle of Cornwall and Gloce∣ster. He was beheaded by the Barons, because hee misse-lead the king. He died without issue. Iohn Plantagenet, second sonne to king Edward the second,E. 2. was by his father created Earle of Cornwall. He died without issue. Edward Plantagenet, the eldest sonne of king Edward the Second,E. 2. was by his father created Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Earle of Chester, which hee enioied vntill hee was king Edward the Third. Edward Plantagenet, surnamed The Blacke Prince,E. 3. was by his fa∣ther king Edward the Third in Parliament created Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Earle Palatine of Chester. Richard Plantagenet, sonne to the blacke Prince,E. 3. was by his Grandfather king Edward the Third created Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Earle Palatine of Chester, which hee enioied vntill he was King Richard the Second. Henry Plantagenet, the eldest sonne of king Henry the Fourth, was Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Earle Palatine of Chester, vntill he was king Henry the Fifth. Edward, the sonne of king Henry the Sixth, was Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Earle Palatine of Chester, and was murdered. Edward, the sonne and heire apparant of King Richard the third, was Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Earle Palatine of Chester, and died without issue. Arthur Tuther, the eldest sonne of king Henry the Seuenth, was Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Earle Palatine of Chester, and died without issue. Henry Tuther, his brother, enioied the Principalitie of Wales, the Duchie of Cornwall, and the Earledome of the Palatinate of Che∣ster, vntill he was king Henry the Eighth. Edward Tuther, the sonne of king Henry the Eighth, was Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Earle Palatine of Chester, vntill hee was King Edward the Sixth. Henry Stewart, the eldest sonne of King Iames the First, was Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Earle Palatine of Chester, vntill hee died without issue. Charles Stewart, his brother, is Earle Palatine of Chester, Duke of Rossay, Yorke, and Cornwall, and Prince of Wales.
Cumberland. Conq.RAlphe Meschynes, a Norman, was by the Conquerour created Earle of Cumberland and Carlile. H. 8.Henry, Lord Clifford, Bromflet, and Vessey, was by King Henry the Eighth created Earle of Cumberland. George, Lord Clifford, Bromflet, and Vessey, being his sonne, was Earle of Cumberland, and died without issue male. Francis, Lord Clifford, his brother, is Earle of Cumberland. Darbie. Conq.WIlliam Peuerell, base sonne to the Conquerour, was by him created Earle of Darbie and of Nottingham. William Peuerell, his sonne, succeeded in those Earledomes. K. Steph.Robert de Ferrers, Lord of Tedburie, and Earle of Ferrers and of Nottingham, was also Earle of Darbie. William de Ferrers succeeded his father in those honours. William de Ferrers, his sonne, was Lord of Tedburie, Chartley, and Groby, and Earle of Ferrers, Nottingham, and of Darbie. Robert de Ferrers, his sonne, possessed his fathers dignities. Hee was disherited, because he sided with the Barons against King Hen∣rie the Third. Edmund Plantagenet, surnamed Crowch-backe, being Earle of Lancaster, second sonne to King Henry the Third, and brother to king Edward the First,H. 3. was by his said father created Earle of Lece∣ster and of Darbie. Thomas Plantagenet, his sonne, being Earle of Lancaster, Lecester, Lincolne, and Salisburie, was by descent Earle of Darbie, and died without issue. Henry Plantagenet, his brother, was dignified with all those ho∣nours. Henry Plantagenet, his sonne, enioying those Earledomes, toge∣ther with the Earledomes of Albemarle and Holdernes, was by king Edward the Third created Duke of Lancaster.E. 3. And his daughter and heire, named Blanch, was maried to Iohn of Gaunt, the fourth sonne of the same King. Iohn Plantagenet, surnamed Iohn of Gaunt, being Duke of Lanca∣ster,
Earle of Leicester, Lincolne, and Salisbury, was also Earle of Darby. Henrie Plantagenet, surnamed Bullingbroke, being his sonne, was Duke of Lancaster, and Hereford, and Earle of Leicester, Lincolne, and of Salisbury; he was likewise Earle of Darby, and was king, by the name of king Henrie the Fourth. Thomas Stanley, Lord Stanley, (whose Father Thomas was by king Henrie the Sixth, made Lord Stanley) was by king Henrie the Seuenth, created Earle of Darby.H. 7. Thomas Stanley, his Grand-child, viz. the sonne of his sonne Henrie, who married Ione, the daughter and heire of Iohn, Lord Strange, and Knoking; being Lord Stanley, and Strange, was also Earle of Darby. Edward, Lord Stanley, Strange, and Knoking, being his sonne, suc∣ceeded, and was Earle of Darby. Henrie, Lord Stanley, Strange, and Knoking, being his sonne, was Earle of Darby. Ferdinando, Lord Stanley, Strange, and Knoking, being his sonne, was Earle of Darby, and dyed without issue Male. William, Lord Stanley, Strange, and Knoking, his brother, is now Earle of Darby. Deuonshire. RIchard de Bruer, surnamed Richard of the Heath, being a Norman, was by the Conqueror created Earle of Deuonshire,Conq. hee dyed without issue. Adela de Bruer, his sister and heire,Conq. was by the Conqueror crea∣ted Viscountesse of Deuonshire. Baldwine de Riuers, being Earle of Exeter,H. 2. was by King Henrie the second created Earle of Deuonshire. Richard Riuers, his sonne, succeeded in those honors. Baldwine Riuers, his sonne, was Earle after him, and dyed with∣out issue. Richard Riuers, his brother, was Earle, and dyed without issue. William Riuers, surnamed de Valentia, was their Nephew, and heire, was after them Earle of Deuonshire. Baldwine Riuers, his sonne, was Earle of Deuon. Iohn Riuers, his sonne, being Earle, dyed without issue. Isabel Riuers, surnamed de Fortibus, being the Generall heire of
the Earles of Deuonshire, did enioy the said Earledome. Shee mar∣ried one who was named William de Fortibus, Earle of Albemarle and Lord of Holdernes; by whom shee had a plentifull issue. But King Edward the Third would not permit them to enioy the said Earledome of Deuonshire. Hugh Courtney Knight, who was descended from the before na∣med Earles of Deuonshire,E. 3. was by King Edward the Third created Earle of Deuonshire. Hugh Courtney, his sonne, was Earle after him. Edward Courtney, surnamed the Blinde, (who was the sonne of Edward, the sonne of the last Hugh Courtney) was Earle of Deuon∣shire. Hugh Courtney, his sonne, was Earle of Deuonshire. Thomas Courtney, his sonne, being Lord of Okehampt, in Deuon, was also Earle of Deuonshire. Hee tooke part in the warres with King Henrie the sixt, and being taken prisoner at the battaile of Towton in Yorkeshire, he lost his head. E. 4.Humfrey Stafford Esquire, was by King Edward the Fourth, first made Lord Stafford of Southweeke, and afterward Earle of Deuon∣shire: and because he cowardly left the field at Banbury in the ciuill warres; at Bridgewater hee was beheaded by the commandement of the said King. Edward Courtney, Lord of Hackham, being Cosen and heire to the said Thomas Courtney,H. 7. was by king Henry the seuenth created Earle of Deuonshire. William Courtney, his sonne, married the Lady Katherine (one of the daughters of king Edward the Fourth) and was Earle of De∣vonshire. Henrie Courtney, his sonne, was Earle of Deuonshire, and by his Cosen German king Henrie the Eight,H. 8. hee was created Marques of Exeter, but lost his head. Q. Ma.Edward Courtney, his sonne, was by Queene Marie restored to the Earledome of Deuonshire, but dyed at Padua without issue. K. Ia.Charles Blunt, Lord Mountioy, was by King Iames the First created Earle of Deuon; he dyed without issue. Dorset. Conq.OSmond a Norman, being by the Conquerour created Earle of Dorset, dyed without issue.
Thomas Beauford, the sonne of Iohn of Gaunt,Iohn of Gaunt called all his Children by that Wife, by the name of Beau∣fords. by Katherine Swins∣ford, his third wife, was by king Richard the Second created Earle of Somerset, and Marques Dorset, which latter dignitie was taken from him in Parliament, in An. 1. H. 4. Iohn Beauford, his brother, was Earle of Somerset only, and was afterward by king Henrie the Fourth created Marques Dorset,H 4. and by king Henrie the Sixt hee was created Duke of Somerset. His daughter and heire named Margaret, was married to Edmund Tu∣ther, Earle of Richmond; and they two had issue king Henrie the seuenth. Edmund Beauford, his brother, was Earle of Somerset, and by king Henrie the Fifth hee was created Earle of Mortoigne in Nor∣mandie, and by king Henrie the Sixt, Marques Dorset,H. 6. and Duke of Somerset. Henrie Beauford, his sonne, was Earle of Mortaigne, Marques Dor∣set, and Duke of Somerset, and dyed without issue. Thomas Grey, the sonne of Sir Iohn Grey knight, and of the Lady Elizabeth his wife, and widdow; who was afterwards married to king Edward the Fourth,E. 4. was by the same king created Marques Dorset: he was also Lord of Groby, Astley, Bonduile, and Harrington. Thomas Grey, succeeded his Father in those honors. Henrie Grey, his sonne, being Lord Ferrers of Groby, Lord Har∣rington, Bonduile, and Astley, was after his fathers death Marques Dorset, and by king Edward the Sixt, he was created Duke of Suf∣folke, and was executed in Queene Maries raigne. Thomas Sackvile, Lord Buckhurst, and Lord Treasuror of England, was by king Iames created Earle of Dorset.K. Ia. Robert Sackvile, his sonne, was Lord Buckhurst, and Earle of Dorset. Richard Sackvile, his sonne, is Lord Buckhurst, and Earle of Dorset. Essex. GEoffrey de Magna Villa, otherwise Mandevile,K. Steph. was by king Ste∣phen created Earle of Essex. Geoffrey, his sonne, was Earle of Essex, and dyed without issue. William, his brother, was Earle of Essex, and dyed without issue. Geoffrey Fitz-Pearce, otherwise Ludgarshall, married Beatrice the heire of the said William Mandevile,K. Ioh. and was by king Iohn created
Earle of Essex, shee had by him two sonnes, Geoffrey and William, whom (at his wiues request) hee named Mandeviles, according to the name of their Grand-father. Geoffrey Mandevile, their sonne, was Earle, and dyed without issue. William Mandevile, his brother, was Earle, and died without issue H. 3.Humfrey Bohun, was by King Henrie the Third, created Earle of Essex, and of Hereford. Humfrey Bohun, his sonne, succeeded in those honors. Humfrey Bohun, his sonne, was Earle after him. Humfrey Bohun, his sonne, was Earle of Essex and of Hereford. Iohn Bohun, his sonne, was Earle, and dyed without issue. Humfrey Bohun, the sonne of William Bohun, who was the sonne of the last Humfrey, was Earle of Essex, Hereford, and Northampton, and died without issue Male. And Eleanor, his eldest sister, was ma∣ried vnto Thomas of Woodstock, one of the sonnes of king Edward the Third. E. 3.Thomas of Woodstock, the sixt sonne of King Edward the Third, was by his father created Earle of Essex, Buckingham, Hereford, and Northampton, and by his Nephew king Richard the Second, he was created Duke of Glocester, and murdred in prison at Calice, because he had warned the king friendly of his faults. Humfrey Plantagenet, his sonne, succeeded in those Earledomes, and dyed without issue Male. Henrie de Bargo Caro, otherwise Bourchier, being Earle of Ewe in Normandie, who was the sonne of William Bourchier, who by king Henrie the Fift, was at Maunt in Normandie, created Earle of Ewe, was by king Edward the Fourth,E. 4. created Viscount Bourchier, and Earle of Essex, his sonne William had issue Henrie, and dyed whilest his father liued. Henrie Bourchier, was Viscount, and Earle, and died without issue. H. 8.Thomas Cromwel, was by King Henrie the eighth, made Lord Cromwel, and was by him created Earle of Essex, but lost his head. H. 8.William Parre, was by king Henrie the eighth, made Lord Parre of Kendall, and Earle of Essex; and by king Edward the Sixt, he was made Marques of Northampton, and dyed without issue. Walter Deuereux, Lord Ferrers of Chartly, and Viscount Hereford, was by Queene Elizabeth,Q. Eliz. created Earle of Essex. Robert Deuereux, his sonne, was Lord Ferrers of Chartly, Viscount Hereford, and Earle of Essex. Robert Deuereux, his sonne, was restored to all his fathers honors, by king Iames the First,K. Ia. and now liueth.
Exeter. Iohn Holland, halfe-brother to King Richard the Second,R. 2. was by him created Earle of Huntington, and Duke of Exeter. Hee was executed because he conspired against King Henrie the Fourth. Thomas Beauford, one of the sonnes of Iohn of Gaunt,H. 4. by his third wife, Katherine Swinford, was by his brother K. Henry the Fourth created Earle of Dorset, and Duke of Exeter. He died without issue. Iohn Holland, the sonne of the aforenamed Iohn,H. 6. was by King Henrie the Fifth restored to his Earledome of Huntington, and by King Henrie the Sixth to his Duchie of Exeter. Henry Holland, his sonne, was attainted when King Edward the Fourth raigned, and was drowned on Calice Sands. Henry Courtney, Earle of Deuonshire,H. 8. was by king Henrie the Eighth created Marquesse of Exeter, and lost his head. Thomas Cecil, Lord Burleigh,K. Iames. was by King Iames the First created Earle of Exeter, and yet liueth. Glocester. WIlliam Fitz-Eustace,Conq. being by the Conquerour created Earle of Glocester, died without issue. Robert Fitz-Hamon, Lord of Astreuile in Normandie,Conq. was by the Conquerour created Earle of Glocester. William Fitz-Hamon, his sonne, was Earle of Glocester. Robert de Millent, base sonne to king Henry the First,H. 1. was by him created Earle of Glocester. He died without issue.H. 2. Iohn Plantagenet, the sonne of king Henry the Second, was by his father created Duke of Glocester. But hee was afterwards King of England. Geoffrey Mandeuile, the last of that name, Earle of Essex,K. Iohn. was by King Iohn created Earle of Glocester, and died without issue. Almericus, Earle of Eureux,K. Iohn. was by King Iohn created Earle of Glocester, and died without issue. Gilbert de Clare, being Earle of Hartford,H. 3. was created Earle of Glocester by King Henry the Third. Richard, his sonne, was Earle of Clare, and Glocester, and Hartford. Gilbert de Clare, his sonne, had those three Earledomes. Gilbert de Clare, his sonne, was Earle of Hartford, Clare, and Glocester, and died without issue male.
E. 1.Ralphe Mounthermer, who maried Ione of Acres, one of the daugh∣ters of King Edward the First, and who was widow to the last Gil∣bert de Clare, was by the same King created Earle of Hartford and Glocester, and died without issue. E. 2.Pierce Gaueston, a Gascoigne borne, was by King Edward the Se∣cond, created Lord of Wallingford, Earle of Cornwall and Glocester, and died without issue, being executed by the Barons. Hugh Spencer, the younger, was by King Edward the Second cre∣ated Earle of Glocester, and was executed at London. E. 3.Hugh Awdley, Lord Awdley of Helie Castle, was by King Edward the Third created Earle of Glocester, and died without issue. R. 2.Thomas Plantagenet, surnamed Thomas of Woodstocke, the sixth sonne of King Edward the Third, was by his father created Earle of Essex, Buckingham, and Northampton, and by King Richard the Second, his nephew, hee was created Duke of Glocester: but was murdered at Calice in prison for reprouing the King friendly of his faults. R. 2.Thomas Lord Spencer, the grand-childe of the aforenamed Hugh Spencer, was by King Richard the Second created Earle of Glocester, and died without issue male. H. 4.Humfrey Plantagenet, the fourth sonne of king Henrie the Fourth, being Earle of Pembroke, was by his father created Duke of Gloce∣ster, and died without issue. E. 4.Richard Plantagenet, the sonne of Richard Plantagenet Duke of Yorke, and brother to King Edward the Fourth, was by the same King created Duke of Glocester. Hee was also King Richard the Third, and died without issue. Hartford. H. 2.ROger de Clare, Earle of Clarence, was by King Henrie the Second created Earle of Hartford. Richard de Clare, his sonne, enioied both those Earledomes. Gilbert de Clare, his sonne, was Earle of Clare, Hartford, and of Glocester. Richard de Clare, his sonne, enioied those three Earledomes. Gilbert de Clare, his sonne, succeeded in those honours. Gilbert de Clare, his sonne, succeeded, and died without issue male. Ralphe de Mounthermer, who maried Ione of Acres, one of the
daughters of king Edward the First,E. 1. was by him created Earle of Glocester, and of Hartford, he dyed without issue. Edward Saint-Maure, alias Seymour,H. 8. was by king Henrie the Eight made Viscount Beauchamp, and Earle of Hartford; hee was Vncle and Protector to king Edward the Sixt, by whom hee was created Duke of Somerset, and lost his head. Edward Saint-Maure, alias Seymour, his sonne,Q. Eliz. was by Queene E∣lizabeth created Viscount Beauchamp, and Earle of Hartford, and he now liueth. Hereford. WIlliam Fitz Osborne,Conq. who first perswaded the Conqueror to vndertake that weightie businesse, was by him created Earle of Hereford, and Lord of the Isle of Waight; because he made the first Conquest thereof. Roger Fitz-Osborne, his sonne, who succeeded, was attainted of Treason, and dyed a prisoner without issue. Miles Fitz-Water, was by King Henrie the First,H. 1. created Earle of Hereford. Roger Fitz-Water, his sonne, succeeded, and dyed without issue. Walter Fitz-Water, his brother, was Earle, and dyed without issue. Henrie Fitz-Water, his brother, succeeded, and dyed without issue. Humfrey Bohun, was by king Henrie the Third,H. 3. created Earle of Hereford, and of Essex. Humfrey Bohun, succeeded his father in those Earledomes. Humfrey Bohun, his sonne, was Earle after him. Humfrey Bohun, his sonne, was his successour in those Dignities. Iohn Bohun, his sonne, was Earle, and dyed without issue. Hurmfrey Bohun, his Nephew, viz. the sonne of William, brother to the said Iohn, was Earle of Hereford, Essex, and Northampton, and dyed without issue Male. Thomas of Woodstock, the sixt sonne of king Edward the Third,E. 3. married Eleanor, the eldest sister of the said Humfrey, and was by his Father created Earle of Hereford, Essex, Buckingham, and Northamp∣ton: he was afterwards by his Nephew, king Richard the Second, created Duke of Glocester, and was murdred in prison at Calice, be∣cause he informed the king friendly of his faults.
Humfrey Plantagenet, his sonne, was Earle, and dyed without is∣sue Male. Henrie Plantagenet, surnamed Bullingbroke, the sonne and heire apparant of Iohn of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, being Earle of Darby, was by his Cosen,R. 2. king Richard the Second, created Duke of Here∣ford, and was afterwards king Henry the Fourth. Humfrey Stafford, was Earle of Stafford, Northampton, and Here∣ford, and was by king Henrie the Sixt, created Duke of Buckingham, but he lost his head. Huntington. Conq.WAldolf a Saxon, married Iudith, the Conquerors Neece, and was by him created Earle of Huntington; hee dyed without issue Male. Simon de S. Lize, otherwise Saint-Leger, married Mawld, one of the daughters of Waldolf,Rufus. and was by William Rufus, created Earle of Huntington, and Northompton: and (hauing issue Simon) hee dyed. Dauid, Prince of Scotland, and sonne to Malcolme the Third, be∣ing Earle of Northumberland,Steph. and Cumberland, was by king Stephen made Earle of Huntington, for Simon was but a child, and vniustly kept from his Inheritance. Henrie, Prince of Wales, (assoone as Dauid his father was king of Scotland) enioyed the Earledomes of Northumberland, Cumberland, and Huntington. After the death of King Stephen, the said Simon (being sonne to the said Simon) entred into his Earledomes of Huntington and Nort∣hampton, and enioyed the same in peace, during his life. Malcolme, Prince of Scotland, and sonne to the before named Henrie (because the rightfull Earle of Huntington was in his mino∣ritie) was by king Henrie the Second,H. 2. made Earle of Huntington, as he was Earle of Northumberland, and of Camberland. William, his brother, being Prince of Scotland, and Earle of Nor∣thumberland, Cumberland, and of Huntington, made warres vpon King Henrie the Second, after he was king of the Scots, and was ta∣ken prisoner in the field, ransomed, and lost those honors. Simon de S. Lize, otherwise Saint-Leger, the third of that name, was by king Henrie the Second, restored to his Earledome of Hun∣tington, and was also Earle of Northampton, and died without issue.
Dauid, the brother of the aforenamed William, was by the fauour of king Richard the Second restored to the Earledome of Hunting∣ton.R. 1. Iohn, his sonne, succeeded, and was Earle of Huntington, and di∣ed without issue male. He was surnamed Scot. William Clinton was by king Edward the Third created Earle of Huntington, and died without issue.E. 3. Guischard, a Gascoigne borne in Angolesme,R. 2. was by king Richard the Second created Earle of Huntington, and died without issue. Iohn Holland, halfe-brother to King Richard the Second,R. 2. was by him created Earle of Huntington, and Duke of Exeter, and lost his head for conspiring against king Henrie the Fourth. Iohn Holland, his sonne, was restored to his Earledome by King Henrie the Fifth,H. 5. and by king Henrie the Sixth to his Duchie of Exeter. Henry Holland, his sonne, was attainted when king Edward the Fourth raigned, and was drowned on the coast of Calice. Thomas Grey, sonne in Law to king Edward the Fourth, was by him created Marquesse Dorset, and Earle of Huntington. Thomas Grey, his sonne, succeeded in those honours. William Herbert, the eldest sonne of William Herbert, whom king Edward the Fourth had made Earle of Pembroke,E. 4. was by the same King made Earle of Huntington. George Hastings, Lord Hastings, Botreaux, and Molines, was by king Henrie the Eighth created Earle of Huntington.H. 8. Francis Hastings, his sonne, succeeded in those honours. Henry Hastings, his sonne, being Lord Hastings, Hungerford, Botre∣aux, Molines, and Moeles, was also Earle of Huntington. George Hastings, his brother, succeeded, and died without issue. Henry Hastings, the sonne of Francis Hastings, who was the sonne of the said George, now liueth, and doth enioy the said Lordships, and Earledome of Huntington. Kendall. GAscoigne de Fois, a Gascoigne borne, was at Maunt in Norman∣die created by king Henrie the Fifth Earle of Longuile and Ken∣dall. He reuolted, and became French.H. 5. Iohn de Foys, his sonne, maried the Neece of William de la Pole
Duke of Suffolke,H. 6. by whose mediation he was by king Henrie the Sixth restored. But he became French. H. 6.Capdaw de Beuffs was by king Henry the Sixth created Earle of Kendall. But he reuolted to the French King. Kent. WIlnotus (at the Conquest being brother to King Harold) was Earle of Kent. But (for feare) he fled into Denmarke, and died without issue. Conq.Odo, Bishop of Bayon, and halfe-brother to the Conquerour, was by him created Earle of Kent, and he died without issue. K. Steph.William de Ipre, Earle of Flanders, was by King Stephen created Earle of Kent, and died without issue. Hubert de Burgh, being Lord chiefe Iustice of England, was by king Henrie the Third created Earle of Kent,H. 3. and died without issue male. Edmund Plantagenet, surnamed Edmund of Woodstocke, being sonne to king Edward the First,E. 2. and brother to king Edward the Second, was by his brother created Earle of Kent, but lost his head in the raigne of his nephew king Edward the Third. R. 2.Thomas Holland, halfe-brother to King Richard the Second, was by him created Earle of Kent, and Duke of Surrey. Thomas Holland, his sonne, was Earle of Kent, and Duke of Sur∣rey, and died without issue. Edmund Holland, brother to the said Thomas, was Earle of Kent, and Duke of Surrey, and died without issue. William Neuil, Lord Fawconbridge, a younger brother to Ralphe Neuil,E. 4. the first of that Familie, Earle of Westmorland, was by king Edward the Fourth created Earle of Kent, and died without issue male. Edmund Grey, Lord Grey of Ruthen, was by king Edward the Fourth created Earle of Kent.E. 4. Richard Grey, his sonne, succeeded, and died without issue. Reynold Grey, who was descended lineally from the said Ed∣mund,Q. Eliz. was restored to the Earledome of Kent by Queene Elizabeth, and died without issue. Henry Grey, his brother, is now Earle of Kent.
Lancaster. IOhn Plantagenet, brother to king Richard the First,R. 1. was by him created Earle of Lancaster, Lecester, and Darbie. Hee was after∣wards King of England. Edmund Plantagenet, surnamed Crowch-backe, the second sonne of king Henry the Third, was by his father created Earle of Lancaster,H. 3. Lecester, and Darbie. He maried Blanch the Queene of Nauarre, and had issue by her, Thomas and Henry. Thomas Plantagenet, his sonne, was Earle of Lancaster, Lecester, Lincolne, Salisburie, and Dorset, and died without issue. Henry Plantagenet, his brother, was dignified with all those ho∣nours. Henry Plantagenet, his sonne, enioying all those Earledomes, to∣gether with the Earledomes of Albemarle and Holdernes, was by king Edward the Third created Duke of Lancaster.E. 3. His daughter and heire, named Blanch, maried Iohn of Gaunt, the fourth sonne of king Edward the Third. Iohn Plantagenet, surnamed Iohn of Gaunt, enioied all those Earledomes, and was Duke of Lancaster. Henry Plantagenet, his sonne, surnamed Bolingbroke, held all those Earledomes, and was Duke of Lancaster and Hereford, and was king Henry the Fourth, by deposing of king Richard the Se∣cond. Lecester. LEofrick was Earle of Lecester when Edward the Confessor liued. Algarus, his sonne, succeeded in that Earledome. Edwin, his sonne, was Earle at the Conquest. Robert de Beamont was created Earle of Lecester by king Henrie the First.H. 1. Robert de Beamont, his sonne, was Earle after him. Robert, his sonne, surnamed Blanch-Maynes, was his successor. Robert, his sonne, was Earle, and died without issue. Simon de Mountfort was by king Iohn created Earle of Lecester,K. Iohn. and was slaine at the siege of Tholouse. Simon de Mountfort was Earle of Lecester. He tooke king Henrie the Third prisoner in the Barons warres. But the young Prince
Edward, set his Father at libertie, and slue this Simon, with many more, at the battaile of Eversham, and his possessions were confis∣cate to the king. Edmund Plantagenet, surnamed Crowchback, second sonne to king Henrie the Third, was by his Father created Earle of Lecester, Lan∣caster. &c. Thomas Plantagenet, his sonne, succeeded, and died without issue. Henrie Planagenet, his brother, possessed all those honors. Henrie Plantagenet, his sonne, was Earle of Lecester, &c. and was by King Edward the Third,E. 3. created Duke of Lancaster; his daugh∣ter and heire, named Blanch, was married to Iohn of Gaunt. Iohn Plantagenet, surnamed Iohn of Gaunt, the fourth sonne of king Edward the Third, married Blanch, and was Earle of Lecester, &c. and Duke of Lancaster. Henrie of Bullingbroke, his sonne, was Earle of Lecester, &c. and Duke of Lancaster, and of Hereford, and was afterwards king Henry the Fourth. Robert Sutton, otherwise Dudley, a yonger sonne to Iohn Duke of Northumberland, was by Queene Elizabeth, created Earle of Lece∣ster, and dyed without any lawfull issue. Lincolne. MArcarus, being Earle of Lincolne, and Northumberland, at the time of the Conquest, rebelled, and dyed in prison without issue. Rufus.William de Romara, was by King William Rufus created Earle of Lincolne, and died without issue. Steph.Gilbert de Gaunt, was in the right of Avis, his wife created Earle of Lincolne, and died without issue Male. Lewis.Gilbert de Gaunt, in the troublesome times of King Iohn, was created Earle of Lincolne, by the Dolphin Lewes, son to the French King. Ralf de Meschynes, surnamed Blundevile, being the sixt Earle of Chester,H. 3. was by king Henrie the Third, created Earle of Lincolne, and of Richmond, because he tooke his part against the Barons: he dyed without issue. Iohn Lacy, Baron of Haulton, was by king Henrie the Third, crea∣ted Earle of Lincolne.
Henrie Lacy, the sonne of Edmund Lacy, sonne to the said Iohn, succeeded, and was Earle of Lincolne. Thomas Plantagenet, the sonne of Edmund Crowchback, was Earle of Lancaster, Leicester, Darby, and Salisbury: Hee married Alice the daughter and heire of Henrie Lacy, and was (in her right) Earle of Lincolne, and died without issue. Iohn de la Pole, the sonne of Iohn de la Pole, the second of that name, Duke of Suffolke, was created Earle of Lincolne,E. 4. by king Ed∣ward the Fourth, and dyed without issue. Henrie Brandon, the sonne and heire apparant of Charles Brandon, Duke of Suffolke, was by his Vncle king Henrie the eighth,H. 8. created Earle of Lincolne, he dyed a child without issue. Edward Fines, Lord Clinton, was by Queene Elizabeth,Q. Eliz. created Earle of Lincolne. Henrie Fines, Lord Clinton, the sonne of the said Edward, was Earle of Lincolne after his Father, and yet liueth. March. EDwin a Saxon, at the time of the Conquest, was Earle of March; hee with Marcarus and Swardus, kept the Isle of Waight, against the Conqueror, and was banished. Roger Mortimer, Lord Mortimer of Wigmore,E. 3. was by king Ed∣ward the Third, created Earle of March, and was executed for Treason. Roger Mortimer, the sonne of Edmund Mortimer, who was the sonne of the said Earle Roger,E. 3. was by the same king restored to the Baronie of Wigmore, and to the Earledome of March. Edmund Mortimer, his sonne, married Philip, the daughter and heire of Lionel, Duke of Clarence, the third sonne of king Edward the Third, and was Earle of March, and from them two, did des∣cend the heires of the Familie of Yorke. Roger Mortimer, their sonne, was Earle of March, and of Vlster in Ireland, and by king Richard the Second, was proclaimed heire ap∣parant to the Crowne of England, and was slaine long after in Ire∣land. Edmund Mortimer, his sonne, was Earle of March, and after one and twentie yeares imprisonment in Wales, and elsewhere: he died without issue. Richard Plantagenet, Earle of Cambridge, was the sonne of Ed∣mund
of Langley, Duke of Yorke, the fift sonne of King Edward the third) hee maried Anne. the sister and heire of the said Edmund, & daughter to the said last Earle Roger, and in her right, he was Earle of March, and they two had issue, Richard Duke of Yorke, who was father to King Edward the fourth. Richard Plantagenet, sonne to Richard Earle of Cambridge, was Earle of March, and Duke of Yorke, and had issue Edward the fourth. Edward his sonne was first, Earle of March, then by his Fathers death, he was Duke of Yorke, and by his victorie at Barnet field hee attained the Kingdome of England, and was King Edward the fourth. Mountgomery. K. Ia.SIr Philip Herbert Knight, the second sonne of Henry late Earle of Pembroke, and younger brother to William Lord Herbert now Earle of Pembroke, was by K. Iames created Earle of Mountgomery. Northfolke. RAlph Waer, at the time of the Conquest, was Earle of Norfolke, and Suffolke, and fled for treason. Conq.Ralph Bygot, President of the East Angles, was by the Conqueror, created Earle of Northfolke, but hee was disherited for conspiring against him. H. 1.Hugh Bygot, was by King Henry the first, created Earle of North∣folke, Roger Bygot, his sonne was Earle after him. Hugh Bygot, his sonne, was Earle of Northfolke. Roger Bygot, his sonne, succeeded in that Earledome. Roger Bygot, (his Nephew, vizt. the sonne of his brother Ro∣bert) was Earle of Northfolke, and dyed without issue. E. 2.Thomas Plantagenet surnamed Brotherton, who was a yonger son to King Edward the first, and brother to King Edward the second, was by his brother created Earle of Northfolk, he had one daugh∣ter and heire; who was named Margaret.
Iohn Lord Segraue maried the said Margaret, & they two had is∣sue Margaret,R. 2. which Margaret was by King Richard the second crea∣ted Duchesse of Northfolke after her husbands death, and then she maried Iohn Lord Mowbray. Thomas Lord Mowbray, their sonne,R. 2. was by King Richard the se∣cond created Earle of Nottingham, Marshall of England, and Duke of Norfolke, hee dyed without issue. Hee complained of Henry of Bullinbrooke to King Richard the second, and should haue fought a combate with him, but died at Venice in his banishment. Thomas Lord Mowbray, his sonne, was neuer Duke of Northfolk, but was in his fathers life time only Earle of Nottingham, and was executed for treason with Richard Scroop Archbishop of Yorke by King Henry the fourth, and his brother Iohn succeeded their father and was Marshall of England, Earle of Nottingham, and Duke of Northfolke. Iohn Lord Mowbray, his sonne, was Earle of Nottingham, Warren, and Surrey, High Marshall of England, and Duke of Northfolke. Iohn Lord Mowbray, his sonne, succeeded his father in all those honourable Dignities, he died, and had issue Anne. Richard Plantagenet, Duke of Yorke, and second sonne to King Ed∣ward the fourth, was maried in his childhood to the said Anne, and was in her right possessor of all those honors. But he was murdred by his Vncle King Richard the third, and died without issue. The said Anne also died without issue, whereby all the Lordshippes of the Mowbrays, by course of inheritance was devolued to Iohn Lord Howard, and to William Lord Barkley. Iohn Lord Howard, who by his mothers side,R. 3. was discended from the before named Mowbrayes, was by King Richard the third created Duke of Northfolke, and lost his life in the said Kings quarell at Bosworth field.H. 8. Thomas Howard, his sonne, who by King Richard the third was made Earle of Surrey, was created Duke of Northfolke, by King Henry the eighth. Thomas Howard, his son, succeeded and was Duke of Northfolk. Thomas Howard, (the sonne of Henry, who was the sonne of the last Thomas Duke of Northfolke) was Duke of Northfolke, and Earle Marshall of England. He was also (in the right of his wife Marie the eldest daughter of Henry Fitz-Allen) Earle of Arundell.
Northumberland. MArcarus, at the time of the Conquest, was Earle of Northum∣berland and Lincolne, he with others kept the Ile of Wighte a∣gainst the Conqueror, and was taken, dyed in prison, and had no issue. Conq.Robert de Cumine, was by the Conqueror created Earle of Nor∣thumberland, but was slaine by the Northumbers. Conq.Gospatrick, was created Earle of Northumberland by the Conque∣ror, but he tooke it from him againe. Conq.Waldrofe, was by the Conqueror created Earle of Northumber∣land, but lost his head for treason. Conq.Walcher, Bishop of Durham, bought the Earledome of Northum∣berland of the Conqueror, and died without issue. Conq.Robert de Mowbray, was by the Conqueror created Earle of Nor∣thumberland, but he rebelled, and lost it. Steph.Dauid, Prince of Scotland, sonne to King Malcolme the third, was Earle of Northumberland, Cumberland, and Huntington. Henrie, his sonne (assoone as his father was King) enioyed all those Earledomes. Malcolme, his son, was Earle of Northumberland, and of Cumber∣land, and Huntington. William, his brother, succeeded him in his Kingdome, and was Earle of Northumberland, Cumberland, and Huntington, he warred a∣gainst King Henry the second, was taken Prisoner, ransomed, and lost those honors. R. 1Hugh de Puddsey, Bishop of Durham, was by King Richard the first created Earle of Northumberland, and died without issue. R. 2.Henry Percy, was by King Richard the second, created Earle of Northumberland, hee was father to Henry surnamed Hotspurre, who was slaine in their rebellion against King Henry the fourth. H. 5.Henry, the sonne of Henry Hotspur, was by King Henry the fifth restored to the Earledome of Northumberland. Henry Percy his sonne, was Earle of Northumberland. Hee and his son Henry tooke part with King Henry the sixt, and in his quar∣rell he was slaine at Towton field, but Henrie his sonne fled with the king into Scotland. Iohn, Lord Mountacute, brother to Richard Earle of Warwick, was by king Edward the fourth created Earle of Northumberland,E. 4. but the said Henry Percy obtained the kings fauour, by his friends me∣diation, so that Iohn Lord Mountacute surrendred his Patent to
the King, And was created Marques Mountacute. Henry Percy, was by King Edward the fourth,E. 4. restored to the Earledome of Northumberland, and was slaine by the Common People there, because he leuied a tax for the King which much dis∣pleased them. Henry Percy, Lord Percy, Crockermouth, Petworth, Poynings, Fitz-Payne, and Brian, his sonne succeeded and was Earle of Northum∣berland. Henry Percy, his sonne, enioyed all those honorable titles and possessions, and died without issue. Iohn Dudley, Earle of Warwick, and Viscount Lissle, Lord Basset & Tyes, was created Duke of Northumberland by King Edward the sixt, and lost his head in the raigne of Queene Mary. Thomas Percy, being the heire male of the house of the Earles Percies was restored by Queene Mary,Q. Ma. to the Earledome of Nor∣thumberland, and for default of issue male of his bodie, it was en∣tayled to his Brother Henry Percy, and to the heires males of his body. And whilest Queene Elizabeth raigned, the said Thomas died without issue male. Henry Percy, his brother (according to the aforesaid entaile∣ment) was Earle of Northumberland and died. Henry Percy, his sonne, is now Lord of Petworth, Crockermouth, Poynings, Fitz-Paine, and Brian, and Earle of Northumberland. Nottingham, VVIlliam Peuerel, base sonne to the Conqueror,Conq. was by him created Earle of Nottingham, and of Darby. William Peuerel, his sonne, was Earle of Nottingham, and Darby. Robert, Earle of Ferrers in Normandie,K. Steph. and Lord of Tedbery in Staffordshire, was by King Stephen created Earle of Nottingham. William his sonne, was Earle of Nottingham, and by King Iohn, he was also created Earle of Darby. Iohn de Mowbray, was by King Richard the second,R. 2. created Earle of Nottingham, and died without issue. Thomas de Mowbray, his brother, was by K. Richard the second,R. 2. first created Earle of Nottingham, and then Duke of Northfolk: hee was challenged by Henry of Bullingbroke, Duke of Hereford, to a single combate, for his false reports to the King, and was banished, and died in his exile.
Thomas Mowbray, his sonne, was Earle of Nottingham, and exe∣cuted for treason with Richard Scroop, Archbishop of Yorke, In the Raigne of King Henry the fourth. Iohn Mowbray, his brother, was by King Henry the sixt, created Earle of Nottingham,H. 6. and Duke of Northfolke. Iohn Mowbray, his sonne, was Earle of Nottingham, Warren, and Surrey, and Duke of Northfolke. Iohn Mowbray, his sonne, enioyed all those honours, and died without issue male. R. 3.William, Lord Barkley, being one of his Generall heires, was by King Edward the fourth, made Viscount Barkley, and by King Ri∣chard the third, he was created Earle of Nottingham, and by King Henry the seuenth, Marques Barkley. Henry Fitz-Roy, the base sonne of King Henry the eighth, and of Elizabeth Blount, was by the same King created Earle of Notting∣ham,H. 8. and Duke of Richmond, and died without issue. Charles Lord Howard, of Effingham, was by King Iames, created Earle of Nottingham. Oxford. EDgar Atheling, (the sonne of Edward the Out-law, who was the sonne of Edmund Ironside) was at the Conquest Earle of Ox∣ford, and was by the Conqueror depriued of that honour. Mauld.Awbrey de Vere, was by Mauld the Empresse created, and by her sonne King Henry the second, confirmed Lord High Chamber∣laine of England in feee and Earle of Oxford. Awbrey de Vere, his sonne enioyed those honors, and dyed in the dayes of King Iohn, without issue. Robert de Vere, his brother was High Chamberlaine of England, and Earle of Oxford, and sided with the Barons in their warres, a∣gainst King Iohn, when they tooke part with the Dolphin of France, by reason of the Popes Curse. Hugh de Vere, his sonne, was high Chamberlaine of England, and Earle of Oxford; he was Viscount Bolbeck, and Lord Samford. Robert de Vere, his sonne, succeeded in those Honors. Robert de Vere, his sonne, enioyed the same, and dyed without issue. Iohn de Vere, the sonne of Alphonsus de Vere, brother to the last
Robert, was Lord Samford, Vicount Bolbeck, High Chamberlaine of England, and Earle of Oxford. Thomas de Vere, his sonne, held all those honorable dignities. Robert de Vere, his sonne, being Lord Samford, Viscount Bolbeck, Earle of Oxford, and high Chamberlaine of England, was by king Richard the Second, created Marques of Dublin, and Duke of Ire∣land: he died without issue. Awbrey de Vere, his Vncle, was Lord Samford, Viscount Bolbeck, and Earle of Oxford: But the inheritance of his high Chamber∣lainship of England, hee voluntarily surrendred to king Richard the Second, who gaue it to his halfe brother, Iohn Holland, Duke of Exeter. Richard de Vere, his sonne, was Lord Samford, Viscount Bolbeck, and Earle of Oxferd. Iohn de Vere, his sonne, enioyed those Honors: He and his eldest sonne Awbrey de Vere, were attainted, and executed in the time of king Edward the Fourth. Iohn de Vere, his sonne, was by King Henry the Seuenth,H. 7. restored to the honors of Bolbeck, Samford, and Scales, was made high Cham∣berlaine of England, and Earle of Oxford. Iohn de Vere, his Nephew, by George his brother, succeeded him in all those Honors: and dyed without issue. Iohn de Vere, the sonne of Iohn de Vere, who was the sonne of Ro∣bert de Vere, who was brother to Iohn de Vere, the twelfth Earle of Oxford, of that name, who was Father to the before named George, enioyed all those dignities. Iohn de Vere, being the heire male of that Familie, was the sixth Earle of that Christian name: He was also Lord Samford, and Ba∣dilsmere, Viscount Bolbeck, and high Chamberlaine of England. Edward de Vere, his sonne, enioyed all those Honors. Henrie de Vere, his sonne, is Lord Samford, and Badilsmere, Vis∣count Bolbeck, High Chamberlaine of Engl d, and Earle of Oxford. Pembroke. WAlter Gifford, was by the Conquerour,Conq. created Earle of Pembroke, and Buckingham. Walter Gifford, his sonne, succeeded and died without issue.
Gilbert de Clare was by King Stephen created Earle of Pembroke. Richard de Clare, surnamed Strongbow, being his sonne, was Earle of Pembroke, and died without issue male. K. Iohn.William Marshall, Earle Marshall of England, was by King Iohn created Earle of Pembroke. William Marshall, his sonne, enioied all those honours, and died without issue. Richard Marshall, his brother, succeeded him, and was slaine, and died in Ireland without issue. Gilbert Marshall, his brother, was Earle Marshall, and of Pembroke, and died without issue. Walter Marshall, his brother, was Earle Marshall, and of Pembroke, and died without issue. William de Valentia, the sonne of King Iohns wife Isabel, and of her second husband Hugh de Brun,H. 3. was by his halfe-brother King Hen∣rie the Third created Earle of Pembroke. Aymer de Valentia, his sonne, was Earle of Pembroke, and was by King Edward the First made Vice-roy of Scotland, and died with∣out issue. Laurence, Lord Hastings, was by King Edward the Third created Lord of Abergauenny and Earle of Pembroke. Iohn Lord Hastings and Abergauenny, was Earle of Pembroke. Iohn his sonne succeeded, and died without issue. Humfrey Plantagenet, the youngest sonne of King Henry the Fourth,H. 5. and brother to King Henry the Fifth, was by his brother created Earle of Pembroke, and Duke of Glocester. He was also Pro∣tector to his Nephew King Henrie the Sixth, and died without issue. H. 6.William de la Pole was by King Henry the Sixth created Earle of Pembroke, Earle, Marquesse, and Duke of Suffolke. Iaspar of Hatfield, the second sonne of Owen Tuthar, and of Queene Katherine his wife (widow to King Henry the Fifth) and being halfe-brother to King Henry the Sixth,H. 6. was by him created Earle of Pembroke, and by King Henry the Seuenth Duke of Bedford. He died without issue. E. 4.William Herbert was by King Edward the Fourth made Lord of Cardisse, and Earle of Pembroke, and was slaine at Banbarie field. William Herbert, his sonne, succeeded, and resigned the said Earle∣dome to King Edward the Fourth. Edward the Prince, being sonne and heire apparant to King Ed∣ward the fourth,E 4. was by his father created Earle of Pembroke, Flint, and March. He was King Edward the Fifth.
Anne Bullen,H. 8. who was afterwards maried to King Henry the Eighth, was by him created Marchionesse of Pembroke, and lost her head. William Lord Herbert, sonne to Richard Herbert, who was bro∣ther to the last Earle William,E. 6. was by King Edward the Sixth crea∣ted Earle of Pembroke. Henry Lord Herbert, his sonne, succeeded in those honours. Williom Lord Herbert, his sonne, is Lord of Cardiffe, Fitz-Hugh, Marmion, and S. Quintens, and Earle of Pembroke. Richmond. EVdo was by the Conqueror made Lord of Middleham and Earle of Richmond.Conq. Allen Fergaunt, surnamed The Red, being his sonne, was Lord of Middleham, and Earle of Britaine, and of Richmond. He died with∣out issue. Allen, surnamed The Blacke, being his brother, succeeded him, and died without issue. Stephen, his brother, possessed all those honours. Allen, his sonne, by descent enioied the said dignities. Conan, his sonne, succeeded him, and had issue, Constance. Geoffrey Plantagenet, the third sonne of King Henry the Second, maried the said Constance, and was in her right Earle of Richmond. Arthur Plantagenet, his sonne, was Earle of Richmond, and died without issue. Ralphe Blundeuile, being Count Palatine of Chester,K. Iohn. was by King Iohn created Earle of Richmond. Peter Earle of Sauoy, who built the Sauoy,H. 3. was by King Henrie the Third created Earle of Richmond. Iohn de Dreux, Duke of Britaine, sonne to Iohn the first Duke of Britaine, was by King Edward the First created Earle of Richmond.E. 1. Iohn de Dreux, his sonne, was Earle of Richmond. Iohn de Dreux, his sonne, succeeded, and died without issue. Robert de Arthoys, sometimes Earle of Arthoys, but disinherited by Philip de Valoys the French King,E. 3. was by King Edward the Third created Earle of Richmond. Iohn Plantagenet, the sonne of King Edward the Third, being sur∣named Iohn of Gaunt, being Duke of Lancaster,E. 3. was by his father created Earle of Richmond.
Henry of Bollingbroke, his sonne, was Duke of Lancaster and Here∣ford, and Earle of Richmond, vntill he was King Henry the Fourth. Ralphe Lord Neuil of Rabie Castle, the first Earle of Westmorland, was by King Henry the Fourth created Earle of Pembroke for his life only.H. 4. Iohn Plantagenet, Duke of Bedford, and brother to King Henry the Fifth,H. 4. was by his father created Earle of Richmond. He died with∣out issue. H. 6.Edmund of Hadham, called Edmund Tuthar, the eldest sonne of Owen Tuthar, and of Queene Katherine his wife, the widow of King Henry the Fifth, and daughter to Charles the Sixth of France, and halfe brother to King Henry the Sixth, was by him created Earle of Richmond. He maried Margaret the daughter and heire of Iohn Beauford, Marquesse Dorset, and Duke of Somerset, who was the sonne of Iohn Beauford, who was the sonne of Iohn of Gaunt, by Ka∣therine Swinsford his third wife, and had issue Henry, who was king Henry the Seuenth. Henry Tuthar, their sonne, was Earle of Richmond, vntill hee ob∣tained the Crowne, and was King Henry the Seuenth. H. 8.Henry Fitz-Roy, base sonne to King Henry the Eighth, was by him created Earle of Nottingham, and Duke of Richmond, and died without issue in the sixteenth yeare of his age. Rutland. EDward Plantagenet, the sonne of Edmund of Langley, the fifth sonne of King Edward the Third, and Duke of Yorke, was by his cosen King Richard the Second created Earle of Rutland,R. 2. and Duke of Albemarle. After his fathers death he was Duke of Yorke, and was slaine at Agencourt field. Edmund Plantagenet, brother to Edward, who was afterward King Edward the Fourth, was Earle of Rutland, and died in his childhood, without issue, being slaine. H. 8.Thomas Mannors, Lord Roos of Hamlake, Beluoyr, and Trusbut, was created Earle of Rutland by King Henry the Eighth. Henry Mannors, his sonne, succeeded his said father. Edward Mannors, his sonne, enioied those honours, and died without issue male. Iohn Mannors, his brother, succeeded him.
Roger Mannors, his sonne, enioied those honours, and died without issue. Sir Francis Mannors, his brother, is now Lord Roos, Hamlake, and Trusbote, and Earle of Rutland. Ryuers. RIchard Wooduile of Grafton, Knight, maried Iaquet the widow of Iohn Duke of Bedford, Regent of France, and daughter to Peter of Luxenburgh, Earle of S. Paul. He was by King Henry the sixth made Lord Ryuers. Afterwards king Edward the Fourth maried his daughter, the Ladie Elizabeth Grey, the widow of Sir Iohn Grey deceased, by whom he was made Lord Treasurer of England, and Earle Ryuers. He and his sonne Iohn were slaine by the Commons in an vprore. Anthonie Wooduile, his sonne, being Lord Scales, and Earle Ry∣uers, was by King Richard the Third beheaded vniustly at Pomfret Castle, and died withour issue. Richard Wooduile, his brother, succeeded him in that Earledome, and died without issue. Salisburie. STephen Patrick of Eureux was by the Conquerour created Earle of Salisburie.Conq. William, his sonne, was Earle of Salisburie, and died without issue male. William Longspée, the base sonne of King Henry the Second, by the faire Rosamond Clifford his Concubine,R. 1. was by King Richard the First, his halfe-brother, created Earle of Salisburie. William Longspee, his sonne, was Earle of Salisburie after his fa∣ther, and was slaine in the warres in the Holy Land. Henry Lacy was by King Henrie the Third created Earle of Sa∣lisburie,H. 3. and died without issue. Thomas Plantagenet, the sonne of Edmund Crowch-backe, being Earle of Lancaster, was also Earle of Salisburie, Lecester, and Lincolne, and died without issue.
Henry Plantagenet, his brother, was Earle of Salisburie, Lecester, Lincolne, and Lancaster. Henry Plantagenet, his sonne, was created Duke of Lancaster. He was also inheritor to all those Earledomes. His daughter and heire, called Blanch, was maried to Iohn of Gaunt: and from them descended the house of the Lancastrians. E. 4.William Mountague, Lord of the Ile of Man, was by King Ed∣ward the Fourth created Earle of Salisburie. William Mountague, his sonne, being Lord of the Ile of Man, and Lord Mounthermer, was also Earle of Salisburie, and died with∣out issue. Iohn Mountague, sonne to Sir Iohn Mountague, brother to the said William, was Lord Mounthermer, and Earle of Salisburie. Hee with others conspired the death of King Edward the Fourth at Ox∣ford, and was slaine. Thomas Mountague, his sonne, was Lord Mounthermer, and Earle of Salisburie. Richard Neuil, the second sonne of Ralphe Neuil, who was the first Earle of Westmorland,H. 6. maried Alice the eldest daughter and co∣heire of the said Thomas, and was by King Henry the Sixth created Earle of Salisburie. He was taken prisoner in the battaile of Wake∣field, by Queene Margaret, wife to King Henry the Sixth, and lost his head. Richard Neuil, his sonne, was Earle of Salisburie, and of Warwicke also in the right of Anne his wife, who was the daughter and heire of William Beauchampe Earle of Warwicke. This was that great Earle of Warwicke, who deposed and raised King Henry the Sixth, and was slaine at Barnet Field by King Edward the Fourth. Richard Pole, a Knight of Wales, maried Margaret Plantagenet, the daughter of George Duke of Clarence, brother to King Edward the Fourth, which the said George begot on Isabel the eldest daughter and coheire of the last Richard Earle of Warwicke and Salisburie. She was by Parliament in the fifth yeare of King Henry the Eighth re∣stored to those Earledomes:H. 8. but in Parliament in the one and thirtieth yeare of King Henry the Eighth, shee with Gerthrude the widow of Henry Courtney, Marquesse of Exeter, Reynold Pole Car∣dinall, being her sonne, and others, were attainted of treason, and she lost her head. She was the last of the name and royall stocke of the Familie of the Plantagenets, out of which had issued succes∣siuely fourteene Kings of England. Robert Cecil, the second sonne of William Cecil, Lord Burleigh, and Treasurer of England, was by King Iames created Lord Cecil
of Essendeu, in Rutlandshire, Viscount Cranborne, in Dorsetshire, and Earle of Salisbury. William Cecil, his sonne is now Lord of Essenden, Viscount Cran∣borne, and Earle of Salisbury. Shrewsburie. EDrick, a Saxon sirnamed the wilde, being Earle of Shrewsbury, was by the Conqueror dishinherited. Roger de Mountgomery, Earle of Belesme, in Normandy,Conq. was by the Conqueror made Earle of Arundel, and of Shrewsbury. Hugh de Mountgomery, his sonne, succeeded, and died without issue. Robert Mountgomery, his brother, being Earle of Shrewsbury, and of Arundel, was taken by king Henry the first, and depriued of his eyes. Iohn, Lord Talbot, Strange, Blackmore, Furnivall, and Verdon,H. 6. was by Henry the sixth, created Earle of Shrewsbury. Iohn Talbot, his sonne succeeded in those honors. Iohn Talbot, his sonne, was Lord, &c and Earle of Shrewsbury. George Talbot, his sonne, was Lord, &c. and Earle of Shrewsbury. Francis Talbot, his sonne, was Lord, &c. and Earle of Salisbury. George, Lord Talbot, his sonne, succeeded in those honors. Gilbert, Lord Talbot, his sonne, is Lord Talbot, Strange, Blackmore, Furnival, and Verdon, and Earle of Shrewsbury. Somerset. OSmond, Bishop of Salisbury, was by the Conqueror,Conq. made earle of Somerset. William de Mohun, was by King Henry the first,H. 1 created Earle of Somerset. Reynold de Mohun, in King Iohns time,K. Ioh. receiued the inheritance of his Grandfather Earle William, and was created Earle of Somer∣set, he was disinherited by King Henry the third, because he tooke part against him with the Barons in their warres. Iohn Beauford, the sonne of Iohn of Gaunt, by Katherine Swins∣ford
his thitd wife, was by King Richard the second, created Earle of Somerset, and Marques Dorset, but the latter of those two, hee voluntarily did renounce. H. 5.Henry Beauford, his sonne, was Earle after him. Iohn Beauford, his brother, was created Earle of Somerset, by K. Henry the fifth. H. 6.Edmund Beauford, his brother, was Earle of Somerset, and by king Henry the sixt, was created Marques Dorset, and Duke of Somerset, and was slaine at Saint Albons by Richard Duke of Yorke. Henry Beauford, his sonne, was Duke of Somerset, hee revolted from King H. the sixth, to King Edward the fourth, and afterward from King Edward the fourth, to King H. the sixth, and was by the Yorkish faction, taken Prisoner at Hexhamfield, and lost his head. Edmund Beauford, his brother, was Duke of Somerset, and being taken prisoner at Tewkisbery-field by king Edward the fourth, he lost his head, and had no issue. H. 7.Edmund Tuther, a yonger sonne to king Henry the seuenth, was at fiue yeares of his age, created Duke of Somerset, and died without issue at that age. Henry Fitz-Roy, base son to king H. the eight, was created earle of Nottingham, and Duke of Somerset, and Richmond, and died without issue. Edward Seymour, Earle of Hartford, was by his Nephew King Ed∣ward the sixth, created Duke of Somerset, and lost his head. Sir Robert Carre, was by king Iames created Viscount Rochester, & Earle of Somerset. Southampton. BEavoys, was (at the Conquest) Earle of Southampton. E. 1. H. 8.William Gobion, was by Kng Edward the first, created Earle of Southampton, and died without issue male. William Fitz-William, was by King Henry the eight, created Earle of Southampton, and died without issue male. E. 6.Thomas Wryothesley, Lord Chancelor of England, was by King Henry the eighth, created Baron of Tichfield in Hamshire, and by King Edward the sixt, hee was created Earle of Southampton. Henry Wryothesley, his sonne, was Lord Tichfield, and Earle of Southampton.
Henry Wryothesley, his sonne, is Lord Tichfield, and Earle of Sout∣hamton. Stafford. RAlph Stafford, was by King Edward the third,E. 3. created Earle of Stafford. Hugh Stafford, his sonne succeeded in that Earledome. Thomas Stafford, his Grandchild, by Ralph his sonne, was Earle of Stafford. William Stafford, his brother, was Earle of Stafford after him. Edmund Stafford, his brother, was Earle and died without issue. Humfrey Stafford, his sonne, was Earle, and by king Henry the sixt, he was created Duke of Buckingham, and was slaine in Yorkeshire, in the said kings quarrell. Humfrey Stafford, his son, was dignified with those honors. Humfrey Stafford, his sonne,H. 7. succeeded and was beheaded by king Richard the third. Edward Stafford, his son, was restored by king Henry the seuenth, and lost his head in the raigne of king Henry the eighth. Suffolke. RAlph Glandvile, Lord of Bromhelme,H. 2. was by king Henry the se∣cond, created Earle of Suffolke. William Glandvile, his sonne, being Lord of Bromhelme was Earle of Suffolke. Gilbert Glandvile, his sonne, enioyed those Honors. Ralph Glandvile, his son, was Lord Bromhelme, and Earle of Suf∣folke, and died without issue. William de Vessey, who maried Mauld his Daughter and Heire,E. 2. was by King Edward the second, created Earle of Suffolke. Robert de Vfford who married Sarah daughter and heire of the said William, was by King Edward the third,E. 3. created Earle of Suf∣olke. William de Vfford, his son, being Lord of Eay, and Framlingham, was Earle of Suffolke. Michael de la Poole, a man more rich then honorably discended,R. 2.
was Chancelor to king Richard the second,R. 2. and by him created Earle of Suffolke, and was banished as a corrupter of him, by his lewd counsell, he died with griefe at Paris. Michael de la Poole, his son, was Lord Wingfield, and Earle of Suf∣folke, and dyed at the siege of Harflew. Michael de l Poole, his son, succeeded his father, but died within one moneth after. H. 6.William de la Poole, his brother was Lord Wingfield, and Earle of Suffolke, he was by king Henry the sixt, created Earle of Pembrooke, then Marques of Suffolke, and last of all Duke of Suffolke, hee was banished, taken at Sea, and lost his head on a boats side. Iohn de la Poole, his sonne, was Lord Wingfield, Earle of Pembrooke, and Duke of Suffolke. Edmund de la Poole, his sonne was of a turbulent disposition, & in the fifth yeare of Henry the eighth, he was executed for treason. H. 7.Charles Brandon, the sonne of Sir William Brandon, knight (who was Standard-bearer to the Earle of Richmond, in Bosworth field, & was slaine by king Richard the third) was by Henry the seuenth, made Viscount Lisle,H. 8. and hauing maried king Henry the eight his second sister Mary Queen Dowager of France, he was by Henry the eight created Duke of Suffolke. Henry Brandon, his sonne, was Earle of Lincolne, and Duke of Suffolke, and died without issue. Henry Grey, Lord Ferrers of Groby, Lord of Astley, Harington, & Bonvile, being also Marques Dorset, and hauing maried Francis who was one of the Daughters and Coheires of Charles Brandon,E 6. was by king Edward the sixth, created Duke of Suffolke, and was attainted of treason whilest Queene Mary raigned: their daughter was the Lady Iane, who maried Guilford Dudley the fourth son of the Earle of Northumberland,K. Ia. who lost her head. Thomas Lord Howard, of Walden, second sonne to Thomas the last Duke of Northfolke, was by king Iames created Earle of Suffolke. Surrey. Rufus.William Warren, Earle of Warren in Normandie, maried one of the Conquerors daughters named Goundred, and was by king William Rufus, created Earle of Surrey. William Warren, his sonne, succeeded and was Earle of Surrey.
William Warren, his sonne, was Earle, and dyed without issue male. William de Blois, sonne to king Stephen, being Earle of Mortaigne, Bolloigne, and Eagle, and being Lord of Lancaster, maried Isabel the daughter and heire of the last Earle William, and was in her right Earle of Surrey, and died without issue, Hamlyn Plantagenet, brother to king Henry the second, maried the said Ladie Isabel, and was in her right Earle of Surrey, and king Henry the second created him Earle of Warwick. William Plantagenet, their sonne, was Earle of Surrey, and of War∣wicke. Iohn Flantagenet, his sonne, was Earle of Surrey, Warren, and Sus∣sex, and died without issue male. Iohn Flantagenet, his brother succeeded him in those Earledomes and died without issue. Edmund Fitz-allen, Earle of Arundel, maried Alice the daugh∣ter of the aforesaid William, and was in her right Earle of Surrey, and of Warren. Richard Fitz-allen, their sonne was earle of Arundel, Surrey, and Sussex. Richard Fitz-allen, his sonne, was earle of Arundel, Surrey, and Sussex. Thomas Fitz-allen, his sonne, was earle of Surrey, Arundel, and Sus∣sex, and died without issue. Thomas Holland,R. 2. halfe brother to king Richard the second was by him created earle of Kent, and Duke of Surrey. Edmund Holland, his sonne, was earle and Duke. Iohn, Lord Mowbray, sonne to the Duke of Northfolke, was dis∣cended from the earles of Warren and Surrey,H. 6. and was by king Hen∣ry the sixth, dignified with those honors, and also after his fathers death, he was Duke of Northfolke. Thomas Howard, the sonne of Iohn Howard,R. 3. whome King Richard the third had created Duke of Northfolke, was by the same King created earle of Surrey, and by king Henry the eighth, Duke of Northfolke. Thomas Howard, his sonne,E. 4. by Anne daughter to king Edward the fourth, was by the same King created earle Marshal of England, and earle of Surrey. Henry Howard, earle of Surrey, was in his fathers life time, attain∣ted and executed and had issue Thomas. Thomas Howard, his sonne was Duke of Northfolke,Q. Ma. and earle of Surrey, after his Grandfathers death, being restored by Q. Mary.
Philip Howard, his sonne, was Earle of Surrey, and of Arundel. Thomas Howard, his sonne, is Earle of Arundel, and of Surrey. Sussex. H. 2.VVIlliam de Albaney, was Earle of Sussex, and of Arundel, by his mariage with Queene Adeliza, the widdow of king H. the first, which Earledomes were her joynture, and those honours were giuen to him by king Henry the second. William de Albaney, their sonne succeeded and was Earle. VVilliam de Albaney, his sonne, was Earle of Sussex, and of A∣rundel. William de Albaney, his sonne, succeeded his father. Hugh de Albaney, his brother enioyed those Earledomes, and died without issue. Iohn Plantagenet, the seuenth Earle of Surrey, was Earle of Sussex, and died without issue male. Iohn Plantagenet, his brother enioyed those honours, and died without issue. H. 8.Robert Ratclife Lord Fitzwater, Egremount and Burnel, was by King Henry the eighth, created Viscount Fitzwater, and Earle of Sussex. Henry Ratclife, his sonne, enioyed all those honors. Thomas Ratclife, his son, was Lord, Viscount, and Earle, and died without issue. Henry Ratclife, his brother succeeded in those dignities. Robert Ratclife, his sonne, is Lord Egremount and Burnel, Viscount Fitz-water, and Earle of Sussex. Warwicke. TArquinius, a Saxon, was Earle of Warwick at the Conquest, hee was banished and died without issue. Conq.Henry Beamount, alias Newburgh (brother to Robert Earle of Mil∣lent, and of Leicester) was by the Conqueror created Earle of Warwick. Roger Beamount, alias Newburgh his sonne was Earle of Warwick. William Beamont, alias Newburgh, his sonne, was Earle of Warwick.
Walteran Beamount, alias Newburgh, his brother, was Earle of Warwicke after him. Henry Beamount, alias Newburgh, his sonne, was Earle of Warwicke. Thomas Beamount, alias Newburgh, his sonne, succeeded his fa∣ther. Iohn Marshall maried Margerie the sister and heire of the said Tho∣mas, and was Earle of Warwicke in her right, but died without issue. Iohn de Plessetis, the second husband of the said Margerie, was in her right Earle of Warwicke. Hugh de Plessetis, their sonne, succeeded, and died without issue. William Maledoctus, otherwise Manduyt, Lord of Hanslop, cosen and heire to the said Margerie, Countesse of Warwicke, was Earle of Warwicke, and died without issue. William de Beauchampe maried Isabel, sister and heire to the said William, and had issue, William. William Beauchampe, their sonne, was Earle of Warwicke. Guido de Beauchampe, his sonne, succeeded his father. Thomas de Beauchampe, his sonne, was Earle of Warwicke. Thomas de Beauchampe, his sonne, was Earle of Warwicke. Richard de Beauchampe, his sonne, was Earle of Warwicke. He was Lieu-tenant of Munster in Ireland, and a great Warriour in France in the daies of King Henry the Fifth, and King Henry the Sixth. Henry Beauchampe, his sonne, was Earle of Warwicke, and by King Henry the Sixth he was created Duke of Warwicke.H. 6. Hee died with∣out issue male. Richard Neuil, the eldest sonne of Richard Neuil Earle of Salis∣burie, maried Anne the daughter and heire of Richard Beauchampe, and was (in her right) Earle of Warwicke. Hee is termed, The great Earle of Warwicke: for he was so powerfull, that he aduanced King Edward the Fourth, deposed King Henry the Sixth, and made him King againe; but was at last slaine by King Edward the Fourth at Barnet Field. George Plantagenet, Duke of Clarence, and brother to King Edward the Fourth, maried Isabel, the eldest daughter of the said Earle Ri∣chard, and was (in her right) Earle of Warwicke. They had issue, Edward, who was beheaded by King Henry the Seuenth, and Mar∣garet, maried to Sir Richard Pole. She lost her head in the one and thirtieth yeare of the raigne of King Henry the Eighth. Edward Plantagenet, their sonne, was Earle of Warwicke. He liued a prisoner from his infancie, and was beheaded by King Henry the Seuenth, because he sought to escape with Perkin Warbecke out of the Tower: and died without issue.
Iohn Dudley, Lord Somery, Basset, and Tays, and Viscount Lisle, was by King Edward the Sixth created Earle of Warwicke,E. 6. and Duke of Northumberland. But in Queene Maries daies hee lost his head. Iohn Dudley, his sonne, died in his fathers life time, but was Earle of Warwicke, and had issue, Ambrose. Ambrose Dudley, his sonne, was Lord Somery, Basset, and Tays, and Earle of Warwicke, and died without issue. Westmorland. RAlphe Neuil, Lord Neuil of Rabie Castle, Standrop, and Brans∣peth, was by King Richard the Second created Earle of West∣morland. Ralphe Neuil, his grand-childe, viz. the sonne of Sir Iohn Neuil, was Lord Neuil of Rabie, Standrop, Branspeth, Warkworth, and Sher∣rie-hutton, and was Earle of Warwicke. Ralphe Neuil, his Nephew, by Sir Iohn Neuil his brother, succee∣ded his vncle in all those honours. Ralphe Neuil, his grand-childe, by Ralphe Lord Neuil his sonne, enioied those Lordships, and was the fourth Earle of Westmorland. Henry Neuil, his sonne, was Lord Neuil of Rabie, Standrop, Brans∣peth, Warkley, Sherrie-hutton, and Middleham, and Earle of West∣morland. Charles Neuil, his sonne, succeeded in all those honours, and was in the raigne of Queene Elizabeth attainted of Treason (by Parlia∣ment) with others. Wilshire. R. 2.WIlliam le Scrope was an euill Counsellor to King Richard the Second, and was by him created Earle of Wilshire. But hee lost his head. Aymer Butler, the sonne and heire apparant of Iames Butler, the fourth Earle of Ormond in Ireland,H. 6. was by King Henry the Sixth created Earle of Wilshire. He died without issue. Iohn Stafford, the younger sonne of Humfrey the first Duke of
Buckingham, was by K. Edward the Fourth created Earle of Wilshire.E. 4. Edward Stafford, his sonne, was Earle after him, and died with∣out issue. Henry Stafford, of the house of Buckingham,H. 8. was by King Henry the Eighth created Earle of Wilshire. Thomas Bullen was by King Henry the Eighth made Viscount Bullen, and Earle of Wilshire.H. 8. Hee was father to Queene Anne Bul∣len, and grandfather to Queene Elizabeth. William Pawlet was by King Henry the Eighth made Lord S. Iohn of Basing,E. 6. and by King Edward the Sixth he was created Earle of Wilshire, and Marquesse of Winchester. Iohn Lord S. Iohn, his sonne, enioied all those honours. William Pawlet, his sonne, succeeded his father, and was Lord S. Iohn of Basing, Earle of Wilshire, and Marquesse of Winchester. William Pawlet, his sonne, is Lord S. Iohn of Basing, Earle of Wil∣shire, and Marquesse of Winchester. Winchester. CLyton, a Saxon, was at the Conquest Earle of Winchester, and was banished, and died without issue. Saer de Quincy, Lord Quincy of Groby,K. Iohn. was by King Iohn created Earle of Winchester. Ralphe Quincy, his sonne, was Earle after him, and died without issue male. Hugh, Lord le Despencer,E. 2. was by King Edward the Second crea∣ted Earle of Winchester, and died without issue, being beheaded. Lewys de Burgh, a Burgundian, and Lord of Granthouse, was by King Edward the Fourth in Parliament created Earle of Winchester,E. 4. because hee had highly fauoured and releeued King Edward when he fled from the great Earle of Warwicke, and from King Henry the Sixth. This Earledome he afterwards surrendred to King Henry the Seuenth. William Pawlet was by King Henry the eighth made Lord S. Iohn of Basing, and by King Edward the Sixth Earle of Wilshire,E. 6. and Marquesse of Winchester. Iohn Pawlet, his sonne, succeeded in those honours. William Pawlet succeeded, and was Lord, Earle, and Marquesse. William Pawlet, his sonne, is Lord S. Iohn of Basing, Earle of Wil∣shire, and Marquesse of Winchester.
Worcester. Rufus.VRsus de Abtot was by King William Rufus created Earle of Worcester. Walteran de Beamount, Earle of Millent in Normandie, was by King Stephen created Earle of Worcester.K. Steph. Thomas Percie, brother to Henrie, the first Earle of Northum∣berland,R. 2. was by King Richard the Second created Earle of Worcester. Hee conspired with his Nephew, Henry Hotspurre, against King Henry the Fourth, and lost his head. H. 5.Richard Beauchampe was by King Henry the Fifth created Earle of Worcester, and died without issue male. H. 6.Iohn, Lord Tiptost, was by King Henrie the Sixth created first Viscount, and then Earle of Worcester, but was beheaded for taking part against the said King, with Edward Earle of March, who was afterwards king Edward the Fourth. E. 4.Edward Tiptost, his sonne, was by King Edward the Fourth re∣stored to his Viscountship, and to the Earledome of Worcester, and died without issue. H. 8.Charles Somerset, Lord Herbert and Gower, was by King Henrie the eighth created Earle of Worcester. Henry Somerset, his sonne, was Lord Herbert, Chepstow, Ragland, and Gower, and was also Earle of Worcester. William Somerset, his sonne, succeeded in all those honours. Edward Somerset, his sonne, is Lord Herbert, Chepstow, Gower, and Ragland, and Earle of Worcester. Yorke. EDrick, a Saxon, was Earle of Yorke at the Conquest. He lost his eies, and died a prisoner. H. 1.Robert Escouyle was by King Henry the First created Viscount of Yorke. Robert Escouyle, his sonne, was Viscount of Yorke. Edmund Plantagenet, otherwise Edmund of Langley, the fifth sonne of King Edward the Third,R. 2. was by his father created Earle of Cambridge: and by his Nephew, King Richard the Second, he was made Duke of Yorke.
Edward Plantagenet, his sonne, was Earle of Rutland, and Duke of Albemarle, and of Yorke, and was slaine at Agincourt Field. Richard Plantagenet, his brother, another of the sonnes of the said Edmund, was Earle of Cambridge, March, and Clare. Richard Plantagenet, his brother, was Duke of Yorke, &c. and was father to King Edward the Fourth, and was slaine in the warres against King Henry the Sixth. Edward, his sonne, was Earle of March and Vlster, and Duke of Yorke. He deposed King Henry the Sixth, and was himselfe King Edward the Fourth. Richard Plantagenet, his younger sonne, was Duke of Yorke,E. 4. and was with his brother King Edward the Fifth murdered in the Tower by king Richard the Third. Henry Tuthar, the second sonne of King Henry the Seuenth,H. 7. was by his father created Duke of Yorke, and himselfe was King Henry the Eighth. Charles Stewart, the only sonne, and heire apparant of the illustri∣ous Prince, King Iames the First, is now Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, Yorke, and Rossay, and Earle Palatine of Chester. The Nobilitie of ENGLAND, ranked ac∣cording to their degrees and creations. THe Marquesse of Winche∣ster. EARLES. 1 EArle of Arundell. 2 Earle of Oxford. 3 Earle of Northumberland. 4 Earle of Shrewesburie. 5 Earle of Kent. 6 Earle of Darbie. 7 Earle of Worcester. 8 Earle of Rutland. 9 Earle of Cumberland. 10 Earle of Sussex. 11 Earle of Huntington. 12 Earle of Bathe. 13 Earle of Southampton. 14 Earle of Bedsord. 15 Earle of Penbroke. 16 Earle of Hartford. 17 Earle of Essex. 18 Earle of Lincolne. 19 Earle of Nottingham. 20 Earle of Suffolke. 21 Earle of Northampton. 22 Earle of Dorset. 23 Earle of Salisburie. 24 Earle of Exeter. 25 Earle of Mountgomerie.
VICECOVNTS. 1 VIcecount Mountague. 2 Vicecount Lisley. 3 Vicecount Rochester. 4 Vicecount Cramborne. BARONS. 1 LOrd Abergauennie. 2 Lord Audeley. 3 Lord Zouch. 4 Lord Willoughbie of Eres∣bie. 5 Lord Laware. 6 Lord Barkley. 7 Lord Morley. 8 Lord Stafford. 9 Lord Scroope. 10 Lord Dudley. 11 Lord Sturton. 12 Lord Herbert of Chepstow. 13 Lord Darcy of the North. 14 Lord Mounteagle. 15 Lord Sands. 16 Lord Vaux. 17 Lord Wyndsor. 18 Lord Wentworth. 19 Lord Mordant. 20 Lord Cromwell. 21 Lord Euers. 22 Lord Wharton. 23 Lord Rich. 24 Lord Willoughbie of Par∣ham. 25 Lord Sheffield. 26 Lord Paget. 27 Lord Darcy of Chiche. 28 Lord Howard of Effing∣ham. 29 Lord North. 30 Lord Chandos. 31 Lord Hunsdon. 32 Lord S. Iohn of Bletsho. 33 Lord Burleigh. 34 Lord Compton. 35 Lord Norris. 36 Lord Howard of Walden. 37 Lord Knowles. 38 Lord Wotton. 39 Lord Elsmer, Lord Chan∣celor of England. 40 Lord Russell. 41 Lord Grey of Groby. 42 Lord Peter. 43 Lord Harrington. 44 Lord Danvers. 45 Lord Gerard. 46 Lord Spencer. 47 Lord Say and Sele. 48 Lord Denny. 49 Lord Stanhope. 50 Lord Carew. 51 Lord Arundell of War∣den. 52 Lord Cauendish. 53 Lord Knyuet. 54 Lord Clifton.
The names of Baronets made by his Maiestie at seuerall times, as followeth. 1 SIr Nicholas Bacon, of Redgraue, in the Countie of Suff. Knight. 2 Sir Richard Molleneux, of Sefton, in the Countie of Lancaster, knight. 3 Sir Thomas Manucel, of Margan, in the Countie of Clamorgan, knight. 4 George Sherley, of Staunton, in the Countie of Leicester, Esquire. 5 Sir Iohn Stradling, of S. Donats, in the Countie of Clamorgan, knight. 6 Sir Francis Leake, of Sutton, in the Countie of Darby, knight. 7 Thomas Pelham, of Laughton, in the Countie of Sussex, Esquire. 8 Sir Thomas Howghton, of Howghton Towre in the Countie of Lancaster, knight. 9 Sir Henry Hobart, of Intwod, in the Countie of Northfolk, knight. 10 Sir George Booth, of Dunham Massie, in the Countie of Chester, knight. 11 Sir Iohn Payton, of Iselham, in the Countie of Cambridge knight. 12 Lyonel Talmach, of Helmingham, in the Countie of Suffolke, Esquire. 13 Sir Gervase Clifton, of Clifton in the Countie of Notting knight. 14 Sir Thomas Gerard, of Bryn, in the Countie of Lancaster, knight. 15 Sir Walter Aston, of Tyxhal, in the Countie of Stafford, knight. 16 Sir George Trenchard, of Woluton in the Countie of Dors. knig. 17 Philip Knevit, of Buckinham, in the Countie of Northfolk, Esquire. 18 Sir Iohn Strangewayes of Melbury, in the Countie of—knight. 19 Sir Iohn S. Iohn of Lydeard Tregos, in the Countie of Wiltesh. kt. 20 Iohn Shelley, of Michelgroue, in the Countie of Sussex, Esquire. 1 SIr Iohn Sauage, of Rock-Sauage, in the Countie of Chest. knight. 2 Sir Francis Barrington, of Barrington Hall in Essex, Knight. 3 Henry Barkley, of Wymondham, in the Countie of Leicest. Esquire. 4 William Wentworth, of Wentworth Woodhouse, in the Countie of Yorke Esquire. 5 Sir Richard Musgraue, of Hartley Castle in the Countie of West∣merland, knight. 6 Edward Seymor of Bury Castle, in the Countie of Devon. Esquire. 7 Sir Moyle Fince, of Castwel, in the Countie of Kent, knight. 8 Sir Anthony Coap, of Hanwel, in the Countie of Oxford, knight.
9 Sir Thomas Vavasor, of Skellingthorp, in the Countie of Lincolne, knight. 10 George Greysley, of Drakelow, in the Countie of Darby, Esquire. 11 Paul Tracy, of Stanway, in the Countie of Gloster, Esquire. 12 Sir Iohn Wentworth, of Gosfield, in the Countie of Essex, knight. 13 Sir Henry Bellasis, of Newborough, in the Countie of Yorke, Knight. 14 William Constable, of Flamborough, in the Countie of York, Esquire. 15 Sir Thomas Leigh, of Stoneley, in the Countie of Warw. knight. 16 Sir Edward Noel, of Brooke, in the Countie of Rutland, knight. 17 Sir Robert Cotton, of Cunnington, in the Countie of Huntington, Knight. 18 Sir Robert Cholmondleigh, of Cholmondleigh, in the Countie of Chester, knight. 19 Iohn Molleneux of Teuershalt, in the Countie of Notting. Esquire. 20 Sir Francis Wortley, of Wortley, in the Countie of York, knight. 21 Sir George Sauile, the elder of Thornhil, in the Countie of Yorke, knight. 22 William Knyneton, of Myrraston, in the Countie of Darb. Esquire: 23 Sir Philip Woodhouse, of Kemberley Hall, in the Countie of North∣folke, knight. 24 Sir William Pope, of Wilcot, in the Countie of Oxford, knight. 25 Sir Iames Harington, of Ridlington, in the Countie of Rutl. knight. 26 Sir Henry Sauile, of Metherley, in the Countie of Yorke, knight. 27 Henry Willoughby, of Ryseley, in the Countie of Darby, Esquire. 28 Sir Robert Dormer, of Wing, in the Countie of Bucking. knight. 29 Lodwick Tresham, of Rushton, in the Countie of Northampton. Esq. 30 Thomas Blundeuel of Dene, in the Countie of Northampt. Esquire. 31 Sir George Saint Paul of Snacrefford in the Countie of Lincolne, knight. 32 Sir Philip Tirwhite of Stamesfield, in the Countie of Linc. knight. 33 Sir Roger Dallison, of Lawghton, in the Countie of Linc. knight. 34 Sir Edward Carre, of Slesford, in the Countie of Lincolne, knight. 35 Sir Edward Hussey, of Hommington, in the Countie of Lincolne, knight 36 Le Strange Mordont, of Massingham parua, in the Countie of Northfolke, Esquire. 37 Thomas Bendish, of Steeple Bamsteed, in the Countie of Essex, Esq 38 Sir Iohn Winne, of Guidder, in the Countie of Carnaruon, knight. 39 Sir William Throgmorton, of Tortworth, in the Countie of Glou∣cester, knight. 40 Sir Richard Worsley, of Appl. dorcombe, in the Countie of Sout∣hampton, knight.
41 Iohn Reade of Mitton in the Countie of Worcester, Esquire. 42 Richard Fleetwood, of Calwish, in the Countie of Stafford, Esquire. 43 Thomas Spencer, of Yngton, in the Countie of Oxford, Esq 44 Sir Iohn Tuffton, of Hothefield, in the Countie of Kent knight. 45 Sir amuel Payton, of Knowleton in, the Countie of Kent knight. 46 Sir Charles Morrison, of Coshiobury, in the Countie of Hertford, knight. 47 Sir Henry Baker, of Sissingburst, in the Countie of Kent knight. 48 Roger Appleton, of Southbemflete, in the Countie of Essex Esquire. 49 Sir William Sidley, of Alisford, in the Countie of Kent knight. 50 Sir William Twisden, of East Peckham, in the Countie of Kent, Knight. 51 Sir Edward Hales, of Woodchurch, in the Countie of Kent, knight. 52 William Monings, of Walwarcher, in the Countie of Kent, Esquire. 53 Thomas Mildemay, of Masham, in the Countie of Essex, Esquire. 54 Sir Will. Mainard, of Easton parua, in the Countie of Essex, knight. 55 Henry Lee, of Quarrendam, in the Countie of Bucking. Esquire. 1 IOhn Portman, of Orchard, in the Countie of Somerset, Esquire. 2 Sir Nicholas Saunderson, of Saxby, in the Countie of Lin. knight. 3 Sir Miles Sands of Willerton, in the Ile of Elie. 4 William Goswick, of Willington, in the Countie of Bedf. Esquire, 5 Thomas Puckering of Weston, in the Countie of Hartford, Esquire. 6 Iohn Way, of Glentworth, in the Countie of Lincolne, Esquire. 7 Sir William Ayloffe, of Braxsteed magna in the Countie of Essex, Knight. 8 Sir Marmaduke Wyuell, of Constable Burton, in the Countie of York, Knight. 9 Iohn Peshall, of Horsley in the Countie of Stafford, Esquire. 10 Francis Inglefield of Wotton Basset, in the Countie of Wilt. Esquire. 11 Sir Thomas Ridgway of Torre, in the Countie of Deuon. Knight. 12 William Essex, of Beaucot, in the Countie of Berk. Esquire. 13 Sir Edward Gorges, of Langford, in the Countie of Wilt. Knight. 14 Edward Deuereux, of Castle Bramwide, in the Countie of Warwick, Esquire. 15 Sir Reynold Methum, of Buckconnock, in the Countie of Cornwal, Knight. 16 Sir Thomas Holte, of Aston, neere Brimingham, in the Countie of Warwick Knight. 17 Sir Harbotle Grimston, of  in the Countie of Essex, Knight. Honor virtutis praemium.
Iohn Speed, 5.Bishopricks. Counties subiect to their seuerall Iu∣risdictions. Parishes in each seuerall Bi∣shoprick. Canterbury Arch. Bish. Kent. 257 Rochester. 98 London. Essex, Middlesex, Hertfordshire part 623 Lincolne. Lincolneshire, Leicestershire, Huntington, Bedfordshire, Buckinghamshire, Hertfordshire part. 1255 Chichester. Hertfordshire part, Sussex. 250 Winchester. Hamshire, Surrey, Weight Isle, Gernsey Isle, Iersey Isle. 362 Salisbury. Wilshire, Barkshire. 248 Exeter. Devon, Cornwall, Exeter Citie. 623 Bath and Wells. Somerset. 388 Glocester. Glocestershire. 267 Worcester. Worcestershire, Warwickshire part 241 Lichfield and Couen∣trey. Warwickshire part Staffordshire, Darbyshire, Shropshire part. 557
Hereford. Shropshire part. Herefordshire. 313 Ely. Cambridgeshire, Ely Isle. 141 Norwich. Northfolke, Suffolke. 1121 Oxford. Oxfordshire. 195 Peterborough Northamptonshire Rutlandshire. 293 Bristow. Dorsetshire, Bristow. 236 Landaff. Glamorganshire, Monmothshire, Brecknockshire, Radnorshire. 177 S. Dauid. Pembrokeshire, Caermardenshire. 308 Bangor. Caernervonshire, Anglesey Isle, Merioneth, and Denbighshire part. 107 S. Assaph. Denbighshire part. Flintshire part. 121 Yorke Province. Bishopricks. Counties subiect to their seuerall Iu∣risdictions. Parishes in each seuerall Bi∣shoprick.
Yorke Archbish. Yorkeshire, Nottinghamshire. 581 Chester. Chesshire, Richmondshire, Cumberland part, Lancashire, Flintshire part. 256 Carelyell. Cumberlandshire part. Westmerland. 93 Durham. Durham, Northumberland, Man Isle, 135 Bishopricks in Eng∣land and Wales Shires in England and in Wales Parishes in England and in Wales 26. 63. 8083. Iohn Speed, 801.At the time of the first dissoluing of Religious houses in England, there were Archbishopricks and Bishopricks, 21. Deanries, 11. Arch-deaconries, 60. Dignities and Prebends in Cathed: Churches, 364. Benefices, 8803. Religious Houses, 65: Hospitals, 110. Colleges, 96. Chauntries and free-Chappells, 2374. Their Rates were per annum 320180.
A Table contayning the prouisions of the Spanish Armado, against England, in Anno Domini 1588. & Anno ELIZ. REG. 30. Leaders Prouin∣ces ay∣ding. Gallias∣ses and gallions Ships and Hulks. Pinaces and Caruels Great Ordi∣nance. Saylors. Soul∣diers. Galley slaues.Iohn Speed, 858. Richard Hakluyt. D. Medina Sidonia. Portu∣gal. 10 2   300 1300 3300   Diego de Mandrana. Portu∣gal. 4     20 360   888 Ioh. Martynes de Richaldes. Biscai, 10   4 250 700 2000   Michael de Oquendo, Guipu∣sco, 10   4 310 700 2000   Pedro de Valdez, Ando∣lozia. 10   1 280 800 2400   Martin de Vertendona, Italy, 10     310 800 2000   Diego Floris de Valdez, Cstile 14   2 380 1700 2400   Iohn Lopez de Medina, Medi∣na,   23   400 700 3200   Hugo de Moncado. Naples 4     200 460 870 1200 Antonio Buc∣cado. Men∣doza.   22   193 574 488   Shires in England. BArkeshire. Bedfordshire. Buckinghamshire. Cambridgeshire. Cheshire. Cornwall. Cumberlandshire. Darbyshire. Deuonshire. Dorsetshire. Durham, B. Essex. Gloucester. Hampshire. Herefordshire. Hertfordshire. Huntingtonshire. Kent. Lancaster. Leistershire. Lincolneshire Middlesex. Northamptonshire. Northfolke. Northumberland. Nottinghamshire. Oxfordshire. Rutlandshire. Shropshire. Somersetshire. Staffordshire. Suffolke. Surrey. Sussex. Warwick. Westmerland. Wilshire. Worcestershire. Yorkeshire. Shires in Wales. ANglesey. Brecknock. Carmarden. Carnaruon. Cardigan. Denbigh. Flint. Clamorgan. Merioneth. Monmoth. Mountgomery. Pembroke. Radnor.
The battaile betwixt the Conquerour,1. Conq. and King Harold, was stricken the 14 of October 1066. in which were slaine about 68000 English men. Speed, 415- and almost aboue 6000. Stow. 128. 48 H. 3. Lewis. 1263 49 H. 3. Euersham. 1264 25 Edw. 1. Barwick. 1296 7 Edw. 2. Estriuelin. 1313 13 Edw. 2. Burgh-bridge. 1320 27 Edw. 2. Fanrike. 1298 20 Edw. 3. Cressey. 1345 30 Edw. 3. Poyters. 1355 3 H. 4 Shrewsbury. 1401 3 H. 5. Agencourt. 1414 9 H. 5. Blangy. 1420 3 H. 6. Vernoyle. 1423 6 H. 6. Herings. 1427 34 H. 6. Saint Albons. 1456 37 H. 6. Bloar-heath. 1459 38 H. 6. Northampton. 1460 39 H. 6. Wakefield. 1460 39 H. 6. Saint Albons. 1460 39 H. 6. Towton 1460 in which were 109000. Englishmen and of them were slaine 37000. men. 2 Edw. 4. Exham. 1462 8 Edw. 4. Banbery. 1468 8 Edw. 4. Looscotes. 1468 in it 10000 men were slaine. 10 Edw. 4. Barnet. 1470 in it were slaine 10000. men. 10 Edw. 4. Tewksbury. 1470 3 Rich. 3. Bosworth. 1485 3 H. 7. Stoke. 1487 5 H. 7. Fongiers. 1488 12 H. 7. Black-heath. 1496 5 H. 8. Flodden. 1513 34 H. 8. Solemne Masse. 1542
Especiall notes worthy of ob∣seruation. 13 H. 1. The first parliament was in Anno 1112 19 H. 2. Ireland was conquered in Anno 1172 4 Iohannis, Normandy was lost by King Iohn 1202 43 H. 3. and the title thereto released 1258 11 E. 1. Wales was subdued Anno 1283 25 E. 1. Scotland surrndred to King E. the third as to the supreame Lord thereof. 1296 19 E. 3 The order of the Garter deuised 1344 14 E. 3. England first quartred the armes of France 1339 21 E. 3. Calice was wonne in Anno 1346 5 Mariae. Calice was lost in Anno 1557 34 E. 3. The French title on Composition was released 1359 5 H. 5 Normandy was wonne in Anno 1416 8 H. 5 King H. the fifth was proclaimed heire apparant and Regent of France in Anno 1419 10 H. 6. Henry the sixth was crowned King of France in the Citie of Paris. 1431 27 H. 6. France was lost in Anno 1449 28 H. 6. Normandy was lost in Anno 1449 31 H. 6. Aquitaine, &c. were lost in Anno 1453 4 R. 2. Wat Tylors rebellion 1380 29 H. 6. Iack Cades Rebellion 1450 4 H. 8. Nauarre surprized by the Spaniards 1512
A TABLE FOR THE READY finding of all the materiall things which are con∣tained in the Histories of the before named TWENTIE KINGS. A ADela. 8 Affabilitie. 297 Agencourt. 182 Aid pur file marrier. 23 Albanie Duke forsakes Scotland. 398 Alexander King of Scots. 81 Ambush. 184 Anne Bullen. 389. 403 Anne of Cleue. 408 Anselmus. 14. 15. 20 Appeales to Rome. 14. 54 Appleyard. 362 Archb. striue. 7 Archers. 184 Armes of France. 109 Armes of London. 140 Armies great. 182. 235. 260. 145 Armies. 3. in France. 361 Armies afflicted. 98 Armies two in France. 416 Arthur Plantagenet. 51 He is drowned. 53 Articles of peace. 129. 200. 286 335 Articles against King Ri∣chard the Second. 156 Articles against King Henry the Fourth. 169 Articles against the Duke of Somerset. 244 Articles against the Cler∣gie. 381. 404 Articles against Wolsey. 383 Arundell beheaded. 100 Arundell Archb. 144 Aske. Robert. 406 Assifes. 34 Auricular confession. 58 Awdley. 254 B BAgot. 155 Bailiol. 82. 83 Banishment. 86. 91 95. 152. 150 154. 157. 246 Bardolph. 173. 365 Barkley. 362. 365. 396 Barons wars. 66. Distres∣sed, 58. Ouerthrowen, 72. 74. 96. Executed, 97 Barnes. Lord. 365 Basset. 69 Battailes of The Conquerour, in which were slaine of the En∣glish 67974. and of the Normans 6013. Iohn Stow, pag. 128. Nice. 22 Lewys. 72. 74 Euersham. 74 Fanrike. 85 Estryulin. 93 Cressey. 119 Poyters. 126 Shrewesburie. 191 Agencourt. 182 Blangy. 206 Vernoyle. 215 Herings. 221 S. Albons. 250 Bloar-heath. 254 Wakefield. 259
Northampton. 257 Exham. 264 Banburie. 271 Loose-coats. 273 Barnet. 280 Tewkesburie. 283 Bosworth. 324 Stoke. 331 Blackheath. 344 Flodden. 363 Beauchampe. 231. 233 Beauchamp Duke of War∣wicke. 237 Beamount. 183. 257 Becket, and his doings. 37. &c. Belasme. 20 Beneuolence. 284. 335. 374. 417. Betraied. 301 Bishop made an Earle. 10 Blunt. 254 Body of King Edward the Fourth. 178 Bold. 363 Bolleyn, 336. taken. 417 Bolleyn. Anne. 389. 403 Bolleyn. Sir Tho. 365 Bolleyn. Lord Rochford. 400 Bollingbroke in Armes. 155 Boothe. 363 Bootie, rich. 396 Borrowing. 109 Bountie. 45. 18. 121. 128 186. 288 Bourchier. 198. 282. 233 363. 344. 392 Brandon. 325. 365 Is valiant in France. 396 Brandon, Henry Earle of Lincolne. 400 Brest yeelded vp. 151 Brearton. 363 Brembere. 147. 149 Briberie. 99 Bristow. 100 Britaine. Brooke, Lo. Cobham. 248 256. Lo. Brooke. 392 Buckingham Duke. 257 Buckingham Duke behea∣ded. 393 Buildings of Forts. 4. 28 Bulles from Rome. 68. 69 387 Bull, Sir Stephen. 362 Bulmer. 362. 406 Burbon ransomed. 227 Burgh, Lord. 62 Burgoine, 285. is angrie, 286 Buriall denied. 8 Buriall maligned. 228 Burnell, Lord. 181 Burning. 358 Butler. 324. 363 Bygot, Sir Fra. 406 C CAde Iacke. 247 Calice. 121. 123. 124 173. 230 Cambridge, Richard. 180 Camoys, Lord. 174 Campeius, 367. &c. 379 380 Cane. 190. 243 Captaine Cobler. 405 Carre. 365 Cardinall of Winchester. 217. 218 Cardinall Wolsey. 365. &c. Cardinall Poole. 406. 407 Carew, Sir Iohn. 358 Carew, Sir Nicholas. 406 Carew, Sir George. 418 Castles builded. 28. 178 Castles razed. 35 Challenges. 173. 223 Charles is Emperour. 391 Charters. 208 Chayre of Scotland. 86 Chester Palatine. 64 Children disobedient. 36 Cholmley. 363 Churches robbed, and wronged. 4. 14. 49. 80. 138 Circuits. 34 Clare, Gilbert. 76 Clarence. 268. 275. 290 Clarvys. 363 Clergie articled. 381 Clergie feare the Premu∣nire. 388. and are libe∣rall. 388 Clifford. 138. 260. 281. 339. 340 Clifford Earle of Cumber∣land. 400 Clifton, Sir Geruase. 233 282 Colledges, of Wolsey. 386 Combats. 125. 154 Commission de les douz pyers. 67. &c. Commissioners Traitors. 145. 368 Commissioners. 114. 152 32.
32 Commissioners, 403 Compassion, 44 Complaint of the Parlia∣ment, 133 Coniers, 270 Constable, 262. 406 Constable of London, 71 Constancie, 279 Contention with the Scots 411 Coo, 396 Copland, 122 Cornwall, 89 Cornish Rebels, 345 Couer le fiew, 4 Counsell receiued, 91. 391 Counterfeits, Poydras, 93 Magdalen, 165. Lam∣bert, 234. Warbecke, 333. &c. Courtney, E. of Devō. 392 Courtesie. 297 Cowardize. 84 Courage. 171. 223. 233 234 Croffts 289 Crowne. 164. 225. 258. 277. 328. 402 Crowned twice. 49 Crowne resigned. 156 Crowne on the pillow. 174 Cornwall. 406. 407. 409 Crueltie. 138. 13. 343 Cuer de Lyon. 44 Culpepper. 410 Cumberland Scottish. 28 Curse. 41. 55. 57. 62 67 107 Curthose rebelleth. 7. in∣vadeth and compoun∣deth. 9. He rebelleth & compoundeth. 12. 19 He is subdued. 19. and dis-eyed. 20 Cyprus. 46. 47 D DAcres acquitted, 402 Dacres. 412 Damnation. 58 Danes. 6 Dane gelt. 18. 28 Dacres. 260 Darcie. 262 Dartmouth. 136. 276 Dartwell. 110. 114 115 Dawney. 363 Defensor fidei. 357. 393 Degrading. 265 Delawarre, Lord 392 Delues. 283 Demaunds. 235. 411 Depopulation. 5 Deposed. 101. 160 Derby. E. 392 Descriptions. 8. 59. 239 297 298. 420 Deuorce. 389 Disarming. 3 Discipline Warlike. 35 Discord. 73. 132 Disdained. 413 Disobedient children. 36 Disobedience punished. 36 49 Dissention. 89. 128 189 191. 229 Distrust. 64 Dolphin scoffeth. 179 Donn. 363 Dorset Marques 392 Douglas mariage 430 Douz Pyers. 66. 69 Drunkennesse. 22 Drowned. 22. 30. 53. 359 H. 8. almost drowned. 400. Mary Rose. 118 Dudly. 351. 356 Duglas 171 Duke of Guyan. 68 Duke of Ireland. 149 Durant. 55 Durham burnt. 111 Dyet moderate. 18. 28 Dymock. 273 Dynham. 256 Dyrham executed. 410 E EAarnesly, 84 Echinham. 363 Egremount. 257 Elianor Queene 43 Emperor debased 59. and excommunicated. 14 Emperor Charles. 391 Empson. 351. 356 England giuen to the Pope 56 England is admired. 225 Englishmen oppressed. 6 10. 14 Enclosures 364 Enlargement. 73. 85. 128 277 Enteruiew. 200 227. 273 Escape. 272 Escape of Morton. 317 Escape of King Edward the fourth, pag. 271 Escape of Wrbeck 350 Escape of Edward E. of W. 350 Estrevlin. 85
Eueringham 362 Excommunication. 14. 58 Execution of Lluellin. 81 Arundel. 100. 152 Spencers. 100 Gaueston. 91 Poydras. 93 Warbeck, 350 Edward Earle of Warw. 350 Two and twentie Barons. 92 Harkley, Earle of Carlyel. 98 Stapleton, D. of Exeter, 99 Earle of Kent. 104 Mortimer. 104. 105 Fifteene hundred Rebels, 141 Brembre, 149 Trefilian, 149 Greene, 155 Bush, 155 Scroop, Earle of Wilshire, 155 Earle of Worcester, 171 Scroop Archbishop of York 173 Mowbrey D. of Norfolk, 173 Percy Earle of Northum. 171. 174 Hastings Lord. 173 Fawconbridge, 173 Bardolf, 174 Rich. Earle of Cambridge, 180 Henry Lord Scroop, 180 Sir Thomas Grey, 18 Inhabitants of Cane, 191 At Montz. 219 Frr Periury, 232 Michael de la Poole, 246 Lord Scales, 258 Rich. Neuil, Earle of Salis∣bury, 259 Owen Tuthar, 260 Courtney, Earle of Devon. 260 Suffolke, 244 Earle of Oxford, 263 Sir Awbrey de Vere, 263 Hen. D. of Somerset, 265 Tayboys, 265 Roos, 265 Molines, 265 Hungerford, 265. 410 Henry Neuil, 265 Wentworth, 265 Tunstall, 265 Sir Ralph Grey, 265 Earle Riuers, 271 Humfrey Lord Stafford, 171 Lord Wels, 273 Sir Thomas Dymock, 273 Sir Robert Wells, 274 Sir Henry Stafford, 529 L. Hastings in the Tower, 307 Earle Riuers, 307 Richard Lord Grey, 307 Sir Thomas Vaughan, 307 Duke of Buckingham, 317 393 Sir William Stanley, 341 Humfrey Stafford, 329 Empson, 356 Dudly, 356 Sir Thomas Moore, 402 Fisher Bishop of Rochester 402 Queen Anne Bullen, 403 and Queene Katherine Howard, 410 Lord Howard for his ma∣riage, 403 Execution of Rebels, 406 Marques of Exeter, 406 Lord Dacres, 406 Lord Hussey, 406 Fryar Forest, 406 Carew, Sir Nich. 406 Margaret Countesse of Salisbury, 407 Gerthrude Marchiones of Exeter, 407 Leonard Lord Grey, 410 Cromwel, 410 Francis Dyrham, & Tho∣mas Culpeper, 410 Lady Rochford. 410 Thomas Earle of Surrey, 420 Exeter, 349. 347 Exeter Marquesse, 400 Exton, Sir Nich. 142 Extortion, 86 F FAlse friend, 153 Famine, 172. 94. 193 Fanhope 183 Fastolfe, 183 Fawconbridge, 165. 173 131. 164 Feast solemne, 113 Ferdinando, 357 Fisher wrongs the Par∣liament, 382 Fifteenes denied, 142
Fifteenes conditionall. 144 Fitz-William. 161. 196. 406 Fitz-Warren. 192 Fitz-Water. 112. 206 Flatterers. 18 Flatterie. 151 Flight. 277 Flodden Field. 161 Forgusa. 206 French title. 105. 178 Frenchmen in Wales. 167 French faint-harted. 181 French vnthankfull. 414 Friar Forest. 406 Funerals. 178 G GArd, Yeomen. 327 Gascoine recouered. 63 Gascoine, Sir William. 362 Gauelkind. 3 Gaueston. 86. 89. 90. 91. 92 Glendor. 166. 172 Glocesters practises. 299 Glocester murdred. 240 Glottenry. 18 Gouernment changed. 290 Gough. 242 Greene. 155 Grey degraded. 265 Grey, Sir Thomas. 180 Grey, Lord Richard. 307 Grey, Lord Leonard. 407 410 Griffith. 324. 362 Grobyn of Grace. 118 H HAll, Sir Philip, 215 Hall, Sir Dauid, 243 Hampton Court. 375 Harflew. 241 Harkley. 98 Harold. 1. 2 Hartford Earle. 406 415 Hastings. 173. 307 Hastings, Lord. 305 Hastings Earles of Hun∣tington. 385 Henalt reuolteth. 156 Henry Hotspurre. 167. 169 Henry Fitz-Roy. 400 Herbert, Earle of Pem∣broke. 270 Herbert, Lord. 392 Herings. 221 Holland, Sir Thomas, 117 153. 164. 181 Holland, Sir Iohn. Holy Land. 45. 77. 108. 174. 141. 153. 164. 189 Holy Pilgrims. 405 Hongerford. 222. 265 Hostages. 3. 73. 130. 390 Howard, Sir Edw. 358 359 Howard, Sir Tho. Earle of Surrey. 360. 361. 394. He dieth. 400 Howard, Lord, executed for marying, &c. 403 Hunters. 5. 6. 16 Hunting. 5 I IAcke Cade. 247 Iane, Countesse of He∣nalt. 109. 111 Iaques Dartuell. 110. 114 115 Ierningham. 396. 397 Ierusalem. 17. 47 Iest. 284 Iewels. 90 Images defaced. 406 Iohn of Gaunt. 132. 150 Ingratitude. 14. 44 Insanum Parliamentū. 66 Interdiction. 55. 58 Inuesture of Bishop. 22. 23 Ireland conquered. 36. re∣belleth. 407. King of Ireland. 410 Iudges followed the Court. 5 Iudges and Iustices. 355 Iudges banished. 150 K KEntishmen. 3 Holy maid of Kent. 402 King Henry the Eighth stout. 404 Keryell. 232. 242 King Knighted. 217 King Richard the Second
called to a reckoning. 143 King of Castile entertai∣ned. 352 King of Ireland. 410 Knights Fees. 6 Knowles. 132. 166 Knyuet, Sir Thomas. 358 L LAmbert. 324 Landoys. 289. 317 Langton. 54 Lanfrank. 9 Laterane. 58 Lawes seuere. 4 Lawes mitigated. 18 Lawes restored. 18. 63 Lawes against robbers. 18 Lawes refined. 34 Lawrence. 363 League broken. 64. 213 Legates. 38 41. 55 Lewknor. 283 Liberalitie. 18. 45. 121 128. 186. 288 Little Iohn. 50 Lluellen. 80 Lomley. 406 London against Mauld the Empresse. 29 London with the Barons, 70. 149 Londoners submit them∣selues. 75 London should haue been burnt. 74 A rebellion in London. 71. 76 Londons liberties resto∣red. 85 London pleaseth the Re∣bels. 138 Londons Armes. 140 Constables of London. 71 London receiues King Ed∣ward the Fourth. 280 London. 84. 140. 148. 180 Londoners graced by king Edward the Fourth. 297 Londons Maior. 59 London bridge. 59 Longchampe. 46. 47. 48 Louell, Lord. 329 331 Luther. 393 Lion, Richard. 138 M MAgistrates ouer Priests. 28. 38 Magna Charta. 63 Malcolme slaine. 11 Manners Earle of Rut∣land. 400 Manors. 5 Manny, Sir Walter. 124 Marchants, 353. vexed, 401. 414 Marchant strangers. 34 251. 389. 489 Marquesse Dorset. 357 Mariages of Wards. 63 Mariage of K. Henry the Seuenth. 327 Mariage of K. Edward the Fourth. 267 Mariage of Prince Ar∣thur. 350 King Henry the Eighth his widow. 355 Mariage with Scotland, 351 Mariage with Anne of Cleue. 404 Mariage with Lewys the 12. of France. 364 Mariage with Scotland broken off. 415 Mart in Flanders. 125 340. 346 Marney, Sir Henrie. 392 Martiall feats. 103 Martin Sward, 331 Mary Rose drowned. 418 Mauld marieth Planta∣genet. 24 Mauld the Empresse. 19 23. 24. 29 Measures. 18 Mercie. 44 Metham. 362 Miracle. 405 Michael de la Pole. 142 144 Molynes. 181. 265 Money scarce. 108 Money borrowed. 109 Morbeck. 127 Morgan. 324 Morley, Lord. 392 Morleys taken and burnt. 393 Morton, 332. 311. 315. 317. 331 Mortimer, Sir Roger. 71 103 Mortimer beheaded. 105
Mortimer proclaimed, 141 Mortmaine, 82 Mountague, or Mounta∣cute, 216. 220 216 265. 266 Mountford, 72 Mountioy, 398 Murders of. Becket, 41 Edward the second, pag. 101. 105 Iaques Dartwell, 114 Richard the second, pag. 160 Ho. D. of Glocester, 240 158 Lord Scales, 258 Archbishop of Canterbu∣rie, 139 Iohn Duke of Burgoine, 199 Henry the sixth pag. 283 George Duke of Clarence, 290. 295 Lord Wenlock, 295 Prince Edward, 293 Edward the fift, and Ri∣chard Duke of Yorke, 312 Rutland, 281 Murder by the Lord Dar∣cy, 406 Murder reuenged, 307 318. 328 Musgraue William, 412 N NAuarre taken, 357 Neck broken, 8. 81 Neuill Sir Iohn, 260 New Forrest, 5 Nobles created, 152 240. 363. 267. 327. 385 400. 406 Nobilitie despised, 142 Nobilitie wasted, 497 Mowbray, 242 Normandy, 53. 68. 117 Normandy lost 53. wonne 168. lost 238 Normauile, 363 Northfolk Duke High Ste∣ward, 392 Notes especiall, 293 Nicenesse banished, 18 O Oath to the succession, and of fidelitie, 24 56. 69 Oath to obserue &c, 24 Oath broken, 27. 145. 279 34 Oath of the Scots, 86 Oath touching Gaveston, 89 Obstinacie, 41 Odo, 10 Officers examined in Par∣liament, 144 Officers euill, 133 Officers displaced, 144 170 Opinion of the Vniuersi∣ties, 386. 389 Ouerthrowes of Harold, 2 Rebels, 6. 7. 273 Scots, 11. 83. 171 Welshmen, 11. 12 13 Robert Mowbray, 13 Barons, 20. 96 Prince Edwnrd, 71 King Stephen, 29 Fifteene thousand Geno∣wayes, 119 French, 58. 371. 120. 187 King Edward 2, pag 93 94 Percies, 171 English, 206. 222. 242 Miraculous, 216 King H. 6. pag. 250. 257 266. 280 Duke of Yorke, 259 Iames the fourth King of Scots, 362 Frenchmen, 418 Owen Glendor, 166. fami∣shed, 172 Owen Tuthar, 260 Earle of Oxford, 133 Duke of Burgundie thrice
ouerthrowne in one yeare. 289 Iohn Earle of Oxford, 144 Oxford Earle, P PAgeants, 376 Pandulphus. 55. 56 Partialitie, 71 Pardon craftie, 153 Parents honored, 43 Paris is English, 204. and reuolteth, 229 Parliament and the King striue, 142. 143 Parliament the first, 23 Parliament once a yeare, 142 Parliament complaines, 133 Parliament threatned 143 Parliament makes a King, 160 Parliamentum insanum, 60 Parliament breakes vppe suddenly, 256 Parliament wronged by Bishop Fisher 382 Pawlet made Lord Saint Iohn, 406 Peace, 52. 64. 285. 333 336. 364. 392 Penall lawes, 290. 351 Penance, 42 People wasted, 14 Percies, 171. 362. 363 Percies will not deliuer Scottish Prisoners, 67 Percies doe ransome Edmund Mortimer, 169 Percie Sir Thomas, 406 Periury, 232 Perkin Werbeck, 337. &c. Peter Landoys, 289. 315 Petition of the Rebelles, 404 Pickering, 363 Pilgrims holy, 405 Piracie, 96 Pitie, 44 Plantagenet Geoffry, 24 Plantagenet Arthur, 51 53 Plimouth, 136 Poydras, 93 Pollicies, 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 12. 18 23. 29. 35. 82. 117. 140 212. 215. 233. 246. 250 299. 331. 339. 340 408. Pollicies touching War∣beck, 339. 340. 341 Pollicies touching Lam∣bert, 331 Pollicie touching Cade, 247 Pollicie by fire, 347 Pomfret, 301 Pontlarch, 241 Popham, Sir Iohn, 113 Pope, 14. 15. 18. 53. 150 curbed, 401 Popish blindnesse, 57 Popish pride, 54 Poynings, 341. 361 Poysoned, 59 Poyters, 63 Practises of Richard Duke of Glocester, 299. &c. Premunire, 380. feared by the Cleargy, 388 Prerogatiue crossed, 66 Presumption, 140 Prey rich, 395 Pride, 396 Pride of Longchamp, 46 47. 48 Primacie, 7 Prince of Chester. Prince imprisoned, 86 177 Prince of Wales, 114 Prince reclaimed, 177 Prior Iohn, 364 Prisoners: Marcarus, 7 Edwinus, 7 Egelwinus, 7 Mowbray, 13 Curthose, 20 Belesme, 20 King Stephen, 29 Queene Elianor, 43 King Richard the first, p. 48 Bayliol, 84 The Prince, 86. 177 Queene Isabel, 105 King Dauid, 122 King Iohn of France, 127 Earle of Pembroke, 132 King Richard the second pag. 156 Edmund Mortimer, 166 French Pris. slaine, 185 Lord Talbot, 222 Lord Scales, 222
Lord Hongerford, 222 Duke of Suffolke, 222 King Henry the Sixth, 257. 266. 281 King Edward the fourth, 271 Duke of Burbon, 277 Duke of Orleance, 235 Scottish prisoners, 413 Mordack Earle of Fife, 167 Archibald Douglas, 167 Earle Murrey, 167 Priuie Seales, 397. 398 Proclamations, 192. 276 387 Proclaimed heire of Fra. 141. 200. 204 Proscribed, 248. 319 Protector, 61. 251 Protector displaced, 240 Q QVartered, 345 Queen Anne behea∣ded, 403 Queene Katherine behea∣ded, 410 R RAgman, 104 Ramsey, 136 King Richard the First ransomed, 48 Douglas ransomelesse, 171 King of Scots ransomed, 214 Duke of Burbon ranso∣med, 227 Duke of Orleance ranso∣med, 235 Edmund Mortimer ran∣somed, 164 Queene Margaret ranso∣med. 283 Raine, 405 Rebellions, 6. 7. 10. 11. 12 13. 20. 22. In London, 71. 76. Lluellen, 80 Wat Tilar, 137. In Kent, 277. Owen Glen∣dor, 166. Percies, 170 171. In Ireland, 241. Iacke Cade, 247. 264. 273. 328. 334 Cor∣nishmen, 345. 347. 349. In Yorkshire, 269. In Lincolnshire, 404. In the North, 405. In Ireland, 407 Rebels flie, 405. quietly depart, 405 Reconcilement, 64. 279 Reformation, 66. 69. 64 153 Regents, 43. 201 Regent dieth, 228 Regent drowned, 358 Religious houses, 178. 374 403. 403 Repayment, 327 Repeales, 4. 263. 328 Repentance, 8. 353 Reprofe, 167 Reseisure, 35. 34 Resolution 15. 34. 95 Restitution, 18 Returne vnlicenced, 358 359 Reuenge, 49 Reuolt, 214. 242. 244 Renulph, 81 Ribamont, 124 Riceap Thomas, 344 King Richard the First valiant, 46 47 Rich Souldiers, 191 King Henry the Second Rich, 37 Richmond Earle in dan∣ger, 289. 317. swea∣reth, 320. landeth, 323 and is victorious, 325 Rifling, 389 Roan, 192. 193. 197. 241 Robberies, 14. 18. 33 Robin Hood, 50 Robinet of Bonuile, 187 Rochford, 400. 410. 411 Bolloigne, Viscount Roch∣ford, 385 Rokesbie, 174 Rosamond Clifford, 37 Rosbrough, 112. 130 Rowclif, 363 Rufus staine, 16 Russell, Lord, 406 Rutland murdered, 281 Rutland Earle, 400 Ryuers, 256 S SAnctuarie, 302. 303 304 Saluo honore Dei, 41 Sands, 365. 396. 397
Sarum secundum vsum 7 Sauadge, 324 Scales, 218. 222. 257. 258 Scot, Earle of Chester, 64 Scottish homage, 11. 214 Scots, 25000. slaine, 83 Scots sweare obedience. 86 Scots ouerthrowne in Ire∣land, 97 Scots ouerthrow K. Edw. the Second, 93 94 Scots inuade England, 11 28. 111. 122. 167. 171. 251. 291. 361. their crueltie, 343. They in∣uade, 345. and are slaine, 346. 412 Scots misuse the French, 147 Scots aide Warbecke, 342 345 Scottish King slaine, 363 Scotland surrendred, 81 82. 84 Scotland gouerned by En∣gland, 84 Scotland wasted, 346 Scotland inuaded, 97. 103 306. 111 147. 174. 412. 415. 416. 419 Scotland disposed by King Edward the Third. 106 Scotland claimed by the Pope, 86 Scottish King ransomed, 214 Scottish tenure released, 106 Scottish chaire, 86 Scottish prisoners, 413 Scroope, 155. 173. 180. 265 Sea victories, 62. 110. 125 188. 189 Seales Priuie, 394 Secrecie, 107 Secundum vsum Sa∣rum, 7 Securitie, 221. 271 Seisure, 3. 35 Seymour, Earle of Hart∣ford, 406. 415 Seymor, Sir Iohn, and La∣die Iane, 403 Shawes Sermon, 408 Shepard Iacke, 137 Sherborne, Sir Henrie, 361 Ships, 300. taken, 56 500. Ships, 188 1200. Ships, 146 Ships in Sandwitch, 256 Sheepe, 268 Sheriffe of Northumber∣land, 174 Shoreswife, 309 Shrewesburie, Earle, 392 Shrines destroied, 406 Sicknesse, 181 Slaine, King William Rufus. 5. 16 Malcolme. 11 King Edward the Second. 101 King Richard the first. 50 King Richard the second. 160 Simon Montfort. 74 Lord Beamont. 113 Peter of Castile. 131 Wat Tilar. 140 Vere, Duke of Ireland. 149 Prisoners, French. 185 Thirtie six slaine by King Henry the Fourth. 171 Edward Duke of Yorke. 187 Richard Duke of Yorke. 259 Duke of Suffolke. 187 Iohn Earle of Shrewesbu∣rie. 249 Earle of Salisburie. 220 Clarence. 206 Earle of Warwicke. 281 Arundell. 226 Marquesse Montacute. 281 Courtney, Earle of De∣uon. 283 Wooduile. 333 Iames the Fourth, King of Scots. 362 Stafford. 329 Humfrey Duke of Buc∣kingham. 257 Thomas, Lo. Egremount. 257 Iohn, Viscount Beamont. 257 Northumberland. 260 Westmorland. 260 Lord Dacres. 260 Lord Welles. 260 Lord Clifford. 260 Somerset, Sir Charles. 360 Spencers. 92. 94. 96. 99 Northumberland. 334 Spencer, chiefe Iustice. 74. 68 Speeches. 194 195. 209
Spencers executed. 100 Souldiers vnlicensed re∣turne. 358. 397 Sonnes disobedient. 36 Southampton Earle. 406 Stafford Earle. 181 Stakes. 183 Stanley. 341. 344 Stapleton B. of Exeter. 99 Stapleton. 363 Stoutnesse of K. H. 8. 404 Strangers Marchants. 34 251. 138 Subiects dutie. 35 Submissiō of K. Io 56. 66 Submission of the Barons. 58 Submission of King Ri∣chard the Second. 155 Submission of Londo∣ners. 75 Submission of Lluellen. 80 Supremacie. 403 Duke of Suffolke. 237. 238. 244. 392. 418 Duke of Suffolke warreth valantly in France. 396 Surfet. 24 Surrey beheaded. 420 Surprisall. 173 Sussex, Earle. 385 Swanus. 6 Swimming. 48 149 Sword giuen to Exeter. 349 Sydney. 362 T TAle-bearers. 227 Talbots name terri∣ble. 226 Talbot. 106. 324 Talbot slaine. 220 Talbot, Gilbert. 192 Talbot, Lord George. 360 Taxes. 5. 10. 97. 109 Taxes causing rebellions: 6. 7. 136. 333. 335. 343 Taxes lost Aquitaine, &c. 130 Taxes pleasing. 12. 52. 189 Taxes released. 18. 28 Taxes not demanded. 37 45 Tax on Wools and Hides. 83 Tempest, Nicholas. 406 Temporalties. 20. 21 Terryll. 312 Terwyn. 360. 361 Thankfulnesse. 24. 297 Thanksgiuing. 171. 186 190. 282. 325 Theeues. 50. 93 Thorp. 258 Thwaits. 396 Title to France, 105. 107 relinquished. 129 Title, King of Ireland. 410 Title, Defensor Fidei. 357. 393 Tournay taken. 361. re∣deliuered. 380 Trade restored. 346 Translation. 7 Transubstantiation. 58 Traitor, Archb. of Cant. 151 Treasons. 64. 164. 180 226 Treason to speake, &c. 409 Treason at Oxford. 164 Traitors. 145. 173 Trecherie. 152. 213 252 Trenchard. 352 Treport. 364 Tresham. 283 Tresilian. 147. 149 Troyl-Baston. 86 Tuthar. 260. 249 Tylar, Wat. 137 Tylney. 362 Tyron, Earle. 410 Tyrwyn taken and burnt. 361 V VAlour. 33. 46. 47. 124 Vaughan. 283. 307 Vere. 142. 149. 242 Vernoyle. 205 Vicar generall. 107 Victorie in Castile. 130 King Edward the Fourth victorious. 281 Victorie without blowes. 168 Victorie miraculous. 216 Victorie ouer the Percies. 171 Victories at Sea. 62. 110 125. 188. 189 Vicegerent Cromwell 406 Victuals cheape. 108 Visited by three Kings. 130 Vmfreuyle. 192. 206
Vniuersitie opinions. 386 Vnthankfulnesse. 14. 44 Vnthankfull Frenchmen. 414 Vsurpers. Rufus, 9 Henricus Primus, 17 Stephanus, 27 Edwardus Tertius, 101 Henricus Quartus, 160 Henricus Quintus. 177 Henricus Sextus, 211 Richardus Tertius, 311 W WAights, 18 Wales, 86. Prince, 114 Wallop, 364. 396 Warres in the Holy Land, 45. &c. 77 Wars with Arthur Plan∣tagenet, 51 Hee is drowned, 53 Wars incommodious, 272 Wars with Charles the Emperour. 401 Ward, Sir Christopher, 362 Wardships, 63 Warbeck, 337. &c. Warlike discipline, 35 Warwicke Protector, 251 Warwicke slaine, 281 Warrens, 18 Watermen, 258 Welles, 260. 273 Welshmen rebell, 11. 12. 13. 22. 80. 81. 83. 84. 85 166 Wenlocke, 283 Wharton, Lord, 412 Whipped, 42 Wife, a good one, 43 Willoughbie, 363. 183. 392 Witchcraft, 236 Wiues paid for, 24 Wooduile, 231. 333 Woods in Wales burnt, 81 Woolsey, 365. &c. vntill pag. 388 Wounding, 77 Worcester Earle, 392 Wryothesley, 417 Errata. PAg. 305. lin. 4. for daughter to the Dukes son, reade son to the Dukes daughter. Pag. 324. lin. 3. for George Stanley reade George Talbot.
