18055 99840010 4478
✚A short treatyse of certayne thinges abused In the Popysh Church, longe vsed: But now abolyshed, to our consolation, And Gods word auaunced, the lyght of our saluation. Matthew. vii. Euery tree that bringeth not forth good frute shalbe hewen downe & cast into ye fyre Psalm. cxxiii Our soule is escaped euen as a byrd out of the snare of the foular / the snare is brokē and we are delyuered. Mat. xv. All plantes yt my heauenly father hathe not planted, shall be plucked vp by the rofes Psal. cxviii. It is tyme (O Lorde) to laye to thyne hande, for they haue destroyed thy lawe. Cum Priuilegio ad Imprimendum solum.
Preserue me (O god) for. in the do I truste. Psalm. xv. GRace whiche is the mercy fauor and acceptation.Apoc. i. Of God our heauenly father, be geuen to this audience Peace, from Iesu Christ, our helth and satisfaction Whiche is the true tranquilite, of a quiet conscience Be ministred vnto you with a more relyced sentence Than all tonges be able to make declaration My intente is to declare, yf a while ye will kepe scilence How goddes worde is florisshed, the light of our saluatiō We haue bene drowned with dreames, as our forefathers haue benePs. 106 Lyuinge in wilfull ignorance, not searching for ye verite Beleuing to haue syght, whan we haue not sene But heapinge synne vpon synne, committing iniquite For lacke of godly knowledge, brought into captiuiteEccl. 21. So yt ye blind leade ye blind, as Christ maketh demonstratiōMat. 15 And bothe fell in ye lake, of vtter darkenes or tenebre But now goddes word is florisshed, ye light of our saluation The shepeheardes that should fede the flocke, as Ezechiel doth sayEze. 34. And hath famysshed them for fode, wo vnto them all That thus suffereth ye shepe to perisshe, going a stray From ye handes of suche blind guydes ye lord doth vs call The sicke haue they not healed, ye weake haue they let fall But chuclishly and cruellye, be they had in estimation Come away good people, from their doctrine diabolicallApo. 18.
For now goddes word is florisshed, ye light of our saluatiō A gret colour of holines in ye Popes church hath ben vsed The which is playne wickednes, as goddes word proueth ryghte 4. re. 17.To mainteyn the old customes, of most men now refused The verite cleane banisshed, & truth put to flight yf god had not bene mercyfull, all men had lost the light Blynde was the cerimony, for all the sainctification But now it is euident, to euery christen wight How goddes word is florisshed, the light of our saluation In ye stede of goddes word we had holy bread & water Holy palmes holy asshes, holy candles holy fyer Holy bones holy stones, holy crewittes at the aulter Holy censars holy bannars, holy crosses holy atyer Holy wax holy pax, holy smoke holy smyer Holy oyle holy creame, holy wyne for veneration Holy coope holy canepy, holy reliques in ye quier Thus gods word could not florissh ye light of our saluatiō We haue had belles christened, vestimentes consecrated Chalices anointed, high altares wasshed and halowed Images tabernacled, dead mens bones shryned Coniured Crosses censed, spittled and spattled With turne and half turne, the people was deceyued Seist me or seist me not, and moche more abhominacion Feattes of legerdemayne, by these iugglers inuented That goddes worde shulde not florysshe, the lyght of oure saluacion. Upon the high holy euennes, as they do them call, They range all the belles a solempne noys to heare There had we euensong: complyne, & salue wt all Of yt was song or sayd, them selues were neuer the nere 1. cor. 14For it was in a foren tonge, as it doth well apere
Nother to them nor vs, was there edification For it was all lippe labor, song they neuer so cleareEsa. 29. Syldome preache they christ, to be the light of our saluatiō The nexte day folowing we had matynes, with prime and howres holy Many a deus in adiutorium, all in the latten tonge Coniuring of holy water, folowed then immediatly Procession after ydolles, all the churche yarde long Hygh masse with deuout sensinges, ruffling it in priksong Then ranne we to take holy bread, withoute signification These plantes be pluct vp, be they neuer so strongeMat, 15 They were not graffed on goddes worde, the light of our saluation With these old customes & such lyke, god is displeased sore As in the first of Esay, ther is demaunded playne Who required these of you, suche thinges I do abhorEsai. 2 your Sabothes and your solempne dayes, your fastinges are in vayne Newe holydayes & fastinges, from my hart I do disdayne God saith he is wery both of you and your oblacion He byddeth you labour in his vyne yarde, and therin take payne To teach the people Gods word, the light of our saluacion Sone it is sene what paynes, in this vyneyarde they dyd take For euery quicke sprynge that brought forthe, the frute of Gods verite They cryed out on him heretike, burne him at a stake He speaketh againste oure Ceremonyes, and therfore shall he dye Throwe suche wretches in prison, and let the caytyfes lye And yf they be not willinge, to make their recantation Famysh them for fode, or murther them pryuely
Papi∣stes ma∣ke tradi¦tions yt light of their sal¦uation.They speake agaynste tradycions the lyght of oure salua∣cion. Than scourged they the simple soules / with their whyp of correction And there on hanged .vi. strynges, surely fastened with a lawe This whyp was very mete, for their pestilent complection For thorow suche tyranny, the peoples hartes were rawe, Thus many faithfull membres, frome the truth dyd draw Untyll our noble kynge, of his mercy and compassion Psa. 123Brake this cruell whyp, that kept the people in awe And hath aduaunced Goddes worde, the lyght of our sal∣uacion. Bewayle doth our Balamytes, disclosynge their owne nature Euen as vnshamefaste shauelynges, threteninge Christes pore shepe Saynge, yf the sworde were on our sydes, be ye sure As it hath bene before, than wolde ye not ones pepe But now that ye thinke all good ordre, is layde downe to slepe ye make a braggynge and a boastinge of your exaltation Now who but ye gospellers, that Christes flocke dothe keape ye teache the people gods worde, the lyght of our saluatiō Thus was their handes defyled with bloud, their fingers with vnrightuousenes Deuouringe vp the gospellers, in euery towne and citye From their lyppes proceded lyes, their tongues aduaun∣ced wyckednesse Without respecte to the trewth, they iudge nothing treuly Esa. 57Thei hatched Coccatrice egges, as we haue sene it plainly And weaued spyders webbes, by their cruell consultatiō.
Now he that eateth of their egges, shal not escape but dye Or be an ennemy to the truthe / the light of our saluacion. The chiefest thinge they set by / is almost fallen awaye I meane their masking Masse, by so many Popes deuysed For thorow it the Lordes supper, hath bene in great decay And the right institution, blasphemously blemysshed Thus in the Popysh churche, it hath bene longe abused But now verite will haue the matter, in examinacion He saith playnly suche abusion, shall no more be vsed It shal be tryed by Gods worde, the light of our saluacion This Masse as they supposed, was alone sufficient To pacify Goddes wrathe, for our wretched mysery Free forgyuenes of synnes, beinge neuer so vnpenitent Myght be receyued at the Masse, this was their doctrine dayely No smale tyme were we blynded, with suche Popysshe peltry Makinge vs to paye, for the holy consecration Lyke theues that were vnsaciat, they robbed soule & body Without the feare of Goddes worde, the lyght of our sal∣uacion. Christ held not the bread ouer his head, it is not in the Scripture. But brake it and deuyded it, to his Apostels allMar. 14 Christ bad them not knele to it, of this ye may be sure yf ye do searche the Scriptures fynde it so ye shall Christ willed them to reseeue it, in the memoriall1. Cor. 11 That his body for our synnes, suffred payne and passion To pacify the fathers wrath, when we in synne do fal Thus was he offred ones for all, the light of our saluacionHe. 7.1. Marke how blyndly we were fed, wt our popysh gētylinen Marke how wt false doctrine, they haue bleared our eyes.
Mat. 16Marke how craftely we were fedde wt Phariseys leauen Marke also how they repyne, ye gods worde sholde aryse Marke what deuylish doctrine, these dreamers did deuise Marke how cruell they haue bene, to Christes cōgregatiō 2. Ti. 4.Marke howe moche they haue maynteyned, phantasyes and lyes Nothing regarding gods word, the light of our saluation Of longe tyme haue they caused vs, cōmyt abhominatiō Robbyng god of the honor, which to hym is dewe, . 7.17By inuenting false goddes, of their Imagination Makyng therof a sacrifice, and yf they proue this trewe They must confesse thei crucify, gods sonne againe a newe For yf their bread be Christe, by transubstanciation Than offre they in sacrifice, this muste nedes insewe God and man fleshe and bloude, the lyght of our saluation Mat. 16Doth not scripture say, into heauen Christ ascended Actes. 7And dwellyng not in temples, made with mannes hande Heb. 10.But sat him downe for euer / vntyll the worlde be ended Makinge intercession, both for free and bonde That vnto his godly promyse, faithfully do stonde This shoulde be to the Idolatres an honest reformation To driue them from Idolatry, for feare they be fonde Enemyes vnto gods worde the lyght of our saluation Ihon. 6Christ is the bread of lyfe which descended from ye deite yf any tate of that bread he shall lyue euermore Ihon. 8Christ alone the sonne of God maketh vs free Matt. 1.And from all our synnes, clearely doth vs restore Christ for all penytent hartes, hath layd vp mercy in store Rom. 4Christ dyed for our synnes, and rose for our iustification We beleue to fynde hym a mercyfull sauiour For god hath chosen hym to be the light of our saluation Now seing we haue Christe to be our onely aduocate
In whom God the father, hath a speciall delight Let vs heare him, for he alone doth inuocateMat. And of our synnes cleane forgyuenes, we haue in Goddes syght2. Pet. 1 What nede we than to seke helpe, at any other wyght But euen onely in the merites, of Iesu Christes passionEph. 1. Bewaylinge our great mysery, desyringe daye and night To fynde him a mercyfull God, the light of our saluacion.Heb. 1. All we haue offended, and haue nede of Goddes gloryRom. No man is founde righteous, and pure in his presence yet thorow his sonne Christ, we be forgyuen frely For he hath made a sacrifice, for our synnes and offenceHeb. 7. He is our reconciler, peace maker, and defence He it is that shed his bloud, onely for our redemption And wolde haue all men saued, this is his pretence Thus are we cleansed by Christ, the light of our saluaciou No small cause haue we to reioyce, yf we do consyder How our mercyfull God, hath for his flocke prouyded Replenyshinge vs with meat, that endureth for euer I meane his eternall word frome which we were deuidedIhon. 6 By waye of persecution abhorred and deryded But thankes be to the lyuinge God, whiche for our conso∣lacion Hath ouerthrowen the ennemyes, that thus enterprysedAct. 9. To persecute the Gospell, the light of our saluacion. And where we lyued in feare, to confesse the veritemat. 25. By hydinge our talent, as seruauntes vnprofytable Now is that yoock broken, and we set at libertiePsa. 113 Plenteously to publyshe, the truth without fable Let vs therfore beware, we be not founde variable But laye a sure holde to the ploughe, with harte and cogi∣tationLuke. 9 Continuinge vnto the ende, stronge stedfaste and stable1. Cor. 15
In no wyse to renounce the truthe, the lighte of oure sal∣uacion. Apo. 17Forsake the whore of Babylon, and the marke of the beast Forsake her marchantes all, for they be most pestelent Apo. 18.Forsake the wares that she solde, frome the mooste to the least Forsake her holy holynes, that she estemed excellent Forsake the deuelysh doctrine, that she dyd inuent Apo. 17.Forsake and flee vtterly, from her abhominacion Apo. 18.For Kynges and Princes were disceyued, that to her dyd consent Persecuting Gods worde, the light of our saluacion. Let vs forsake all ceremonies, that to Scripture be not consonaunt Psal. Tradicions of forefathers, wherin we haue ben lead And with the lyuely worde of God, let vs now be conuer∣saunt For therin shall we se, with what baggage we were fead Wanderinge in the Popes lawes / forsakinge Christ oure head 2. Pe. 2.Heapinge vpon our selues, the more greatter damnacion Thus were Tradicions and Ceremonies, maintayned in the stede Of Gods true and syncere worde, the light of our saluaciō Let vs earnestly therfore desire, wt an harte vnfayned Tim. 1.That in all thinge we do, God may haue the glory yea, and imbrace this heauenly worde, whiche we haue re∣ceyued Not in talke / nor to receyue it as a carnall liberty But to bringe forth the frutes of the spirit, so that therby It maye apeare manifest, in our Godly conuersacion To be a light vnto the worlde / forsakinge all iniquite
And to perseuer in the truth, the light of our saluacion. And doubte not all that the heauenly father hathe not planted He will plucke vp by the rotes, they shall no more endureMat. 15 This in his eternall worde, he hath it promysed Therfore be not vnfaithfull, for his couenaunt is full sure Heauen and earth shall perysh, this is without recureLuk. 16. But his worde shall neuer passe, by no determination Untyll all thinge be ended, therfore I you allure To trust wholy in his worde, the light of our saluacion Honger and thurst for righteousnesse, than shall ye be satisfyedMat. 5. Mortify the flesh, with the dedes therof also Let no fylthye communication, oute of youre mouthes procedeEphe. 4 But as it becometh sayntes, euen so loke ye do Blessed be he to whom synne, is not imputed toPsal. 31. Neither in his spirite is there founde dissimulacion Suche shall inioye the heauenly ioyes, knowinge no kynd of woo But haue the fruicion of Goddes sight, the lyghte of oure saluacion And aboue all thinge to imbrace, Gods eternall veritie Which vnto a Christen man, there is nothing so acceptable For as moche as in it / is contayned syncerely The dewtie of all persons, a doctrine most profytable And in especiall to this, we must be agreable To loue God aboue all thinge, this is the chief foundacion And oure neygbours as our selfe, thus shall we withoute fable Receyue at the hande of God, the lyght of our saluacion.
Let vs be thankefull to our God, for his etern verite With which he hath moste plenteously endewed our noble Kynge So that amonge all his affaires, he maye setforth goddes glorye With no lesse zeale than he hathe done, sence his firste be∣gynninge I meane, Edward the sixt, ouer vs now rayninge Right Inheritour by dissent, of this realme or dominion That oute of his Princely harte, there maye dystyll and springe Gods power and lyuely worde, the light of our saluacion. Also for those good ladyes, of the same stock and lynage Mary and Elyzabeth, systers vnto his grace The heauenly Lorde endewe them, vnto their last age Euen as their noble father dyd, all Popery to deface And Gods eternall Testament, alway to embrace For there in shall they learne, by the heauenly instigation To folow the frute of the spirite, and thereby to purchace The Celestiall kyngdome, the lyght of our saluacion. For the most honorable Councell, with my Lorde Pro¦tector Which stryueth strongely with the enemyes of God night and daye In his procedynges and doynges, the Lorde be his di∣rector With his holy spirite also / to rule their hartes alwaye That thorowe their spirituall laboure / all Poperye maye decaye And vtterly banyshed the lande / with Godly reformacion Suppressinge all false doctrine / and to set suche a staye That Goddes worde maye increace / the lyght of our sal∣uacion.
And that it may please the (O God) to illumine the spi¦ritualtie As Bysshoppes and all ministers / with knowledge and vn¦derstandinge Of thy most blessed worde / to set it forth with synceritie And vnfaynedly folowe / both in doctrine and lyuinge Fedinge Christes flocke / with the worde euerlastinge Not compelled thervnto / nor for hope of promocion1. Pet. 5 But for fauour which they beare to it aboue all thinge And thus shall Goddes worde florysshe / the lyght of oure saluacion. Let Christ be preached the sauyour / wherein we maye trust Rebuke euery synne / beware of Deuelysh Doctrine1. Ti. 4. Double tongued men / in no wyse be they must Not gyuen to fylthy lucre / nor to moche wyne1. Tim. 3 But hauynge the mysterye of Faythe / in conscyence pure and cleane And or they presume to minister in the congregacion They ought to be well proued, this doth sainte Paule de∣termyne And then to fede vs with the truthe, the lyghte of our sal∣uacion. And euen as it is their dewtie, to rebuke synne So is it our partes also, to ceace frome synne alwaye Consyderinge Sathan was the fyrste / that dyd it begyn Therfore be they our watchemen, as Ezechiell doth sayeEze. Now, yf we haue a warninge, and will fully decaye Oure owne bloude vpon oure headdes, this is withoute negacion Rede the texte and more playnly, se it there ye maye Thus God wolde haue all men saued, the light of our sal∣uacion.
And for vs pore communs also, the Lorde be our ouer sear That aboue all we maye desyre, peace and quiet rest Both of soule and body, for that do we require So shall we prosper in all goodnes, and God pleased best And at the last to be with Christ, this is our request Whiche is the head of the faithfull and Christian congre∣gation receyuinge there a kyngdome, euer to haue rest In ioye and blysse withoute ende, there to haue oure sal∣uacion. AMEN. Iames. i. ✚Euery good gyft / and euerye perfyt gyfte is frome aboue, and commeth downe frome the father of light. Prouerb. ii. For it is the Lorde that gyueth wysdome / out of his mouthe commeth knowledge and vnderstandinge. Psalm. cxv. Not vnto vs (O Lord) not vnto vs, but vnto thy name gyue the prayse. Timothee. i. ✚ To God onely / gyue the glory. Quod, Peter Moone
✚ Imprinted at Ippys¦wyche by me Ihon Oswen. Cum Priuilegio ad Imprimendum solum. 1548
