20579.5 99848198 13277
TO THE READER. THrough two fieldes, Christian Reader, the way is directed: the one full of Briers, hath the perfest Path to Saluation, the other (more pleasant to the vi∣cious minde) leades to endlesse misorie: church with aduice, and shun with discretion. And to me thy vnknown frtend, lend (I pray thee) us friendly iudg∣ment, as I shall wish for thy prosporous estate: farewell.
Januarie hath 31. daies. The Moone 30. The day is 10. houres. The night is 14. houres. 1 A ¶ The Cyrcumcision of Christ. 2 b On which day Noe being in the Arke vpon the wa∣ters, began to see the tops of the high Mountaines. 3 c 4 d 5 e 6 f ¶ The Epiphany. 7 g The 10. day, Nabuchado∣nozor, assieged noce againe Ierusalem, 2. King. 15. 8 A 9 b 10 c The 11. day, Noe, fortie dayes after he had seene the toppes of the Mountaines, sent out the Rauen, and after that the Doue, which retur∣ned, Gen. 8. 11 d 12 e 13 f 14 g 15 A 16 b Ezechias, in his extreme
sicknes, was healed by God, his life was prolonged by 15. yeares. 17 c 18 d 19 e 20 f The Sunne to the wonder of all the world, returned his course backward by 10. de∣grees. 4. King. 20. Esd. 38. 21 g 22 A 23 b 24 c ¶ The midde vvinter. 25 d The conuersion of S. Paul. 26 e Iacob fled frō his brother Esau, & wēt to his vnckle La∣ban, where after 7. yeares, he maried Lea and Rachel, & by them, and their handmayds had the 12. Patriarks. Gen. 29 27 f 28 g 29 A 30 b 31 c
Februarie hath 28. daies. The Moone 29: The day is 10. houres. The night is 14. houres. 1 d   2 e ¶ The purification of Mary. 3 f   4 g   5 A   6 b The holy man Iohn the Baptist, being sent of God as a messenger, or tidings brin∣ger of our health and salua∣tion, began to prepare the way, against the comming of Christ. Mark. 1. 7 c 8 d 9 e 10 f 11 g 12 A 13 b Our Sauiour and redee∣mer Iesus Christ, after he was Baptised of Iohn in Ior∣dan, began to preach, and
spread abroade the king∣dome of God. Mark. 1. 14 c 15 d 16 e 17 f 18 g 19 A The 18. day, Noe put out once again the Doue, which brought an Olyue branch. 20 b 21 c 22 d   23 e   24 f ¶ S. Matthy Apos̄tle. 25 g   26 A The Doue was sent the third time, and returned no more to Noe. 27 b 28 c
March hath 31. dayes. The Moone 30. The day is 12. houres. The night is 12. houres. 1 d   2 e   3 f The third day, the temple of lerusalem was wholy fini∣shed, & consecrated. 1. Esd. 6. And that was 500. and 15. yeares before the birth of our Lord, 4 g 5 A 6 b 7 c 8 d 9 e   10 f The tenth day, Christ was on the other side of Iordan, where he was aduertised of Lazarus sicknesse. 11 g 12 A 13 b 14 c The 13. day, the Fast of He∣ster was celebrated, because that day was appointed, to
pat the lewes to death. He∣ster. 3. 15 d 16 e 17 f 18 g 19 A The 16. day, Lazarus was raysed vp againe. Iohn. 11. 20 b 21 c The 20. day, Christ made his entrance into Ierusalem. 22 d 23 e The 24. day, he made his Supper, and was taken. 24 f 25 g ¶ The annunciation of Mary. 26 A The 25. day, was crucified 27 b The 26. day, he rested in the Sepulchre. 28 c 29 d The 27. day, he rose again from death. 30 e 31 f  
Aprill hath 30. dayes. The Moone 29. The day is 13. houres. The night is 11. houres. 1 g Noe vncouered ye Ark. Gē. 8 2 A The Tabernacle was pre∣pared by Moses Exod. 40. 3 b 4 c Iesus Christ, the 8. day af∣ter his resurrection, appea∣red againe to the Apostles, which were affembled where S. Thomas was present. 5 d 6 e 7 f 8 g 9 A The 10. the people of Is∣rael went ouer Iordan drie footed. Ios 34. 10 b 11 c 12 d The 13. day, Assuerus gaue out proclamation, 10 put all the lewes within his king∣dome to death. Hester. 3. 13 e 14 f 15 g 16 A The 14. day, was the ce∣lebration
of the Passeouer. 17 b 18 c The 15. day, the people came our of Aegypt. Exo. 12. 19 d 20 e The 18. day, the people went ouer the red Sea drye footed, and Pharao was drowned with all his hoast. 21 f 22 g 23 A 24 b   25 c ¶ S. Marke Euangelist. 26 d The 22. day, the people came to Mara, the waters wherof of they could not drink, wherefore they murmured. Exod. 5. 27 e 28 f 29 g 30 A
May hath 31. dayes. The Moone 30. The day is 16. houres. The night is 8. houres. 1 b ¶ Philip and Jacob. 2 c The Ascension of Christ in∣to heauen, fortie dayes after his resurrection. Matth. 16. 3 d 4 e 5 f God commaunded Noe to carrie victuals into the Arke, Gen. 6. 6 g 7 A 8 b ¶ Terme beginneth. 9 c They which haue not ce∣lebrated the Passcouer in the first moneth, did cele∣brate the 14. day, Num. 19. 10 d 11 e 12 f 13 g The 14. Ezechias did first ce∣lebtate the Passeouer. Par. 30 14 A 15 b The 15. the Children of Is∣rael murmured after flesh, &
God sent thē plēty of quailes This was the 30 day after the departure frō Aegypt. Exo. 16 16 c 17 d 18 e 19 f 20 g The 16. God made Man∣na to raine downe. Exo. 16. 21 A 22 b The 17. day, Noe entred into the Arke, Gen. 7. 23 c 24 d The 20. day, the people departed from mount Sina. Numb. 9. 25 e 26 f 27 g The 22. day, fire from a∣boue, consumed a part of the hoast of Israel. Num. 12. 28 A 29 b 30 c The 27. day, Noe came forth of the Arke. 31 d
June hath 30. dayes. The Moone 30. The day is 16. houres. The night is 8. houres. 1 e This day this children of Israel came to mount Sina, and went thence the third moneth, where they taried almost a yeare. Exod. 9. 2 f 3 g 4 A 5 b 6 c The 6. day, the temple of Diana in Ephesus was bur∣ned, the yeare before Iesus Christ, 54. which temple was accounted the most ex∣cellent of all the heathen Churches. 7 d 8 e 9 f 10 g 11 A 12 b 13 c   14 d   15 e   16 f  
17 g The 23. day of the mo∣neth, King Assuerus gaue out Proclamation in fa∣uour of the Iewes, against Haman and his conspiracie. Hester. 8. 18 A 19 b 20 c 21 d 22 e 23 f   24 g ¶ S. John Baptist. 25 A   26 b The Arke of Noe was lif∣ted vp this day by the waters of the flood. Gen. 8. 27 c 28 d 29 e ¶ S. Peter the Apostle. 30 f  
July hath 31. dayes. The Moone 30. The day is 15. houres. The night is 9. houres. 1 g The 9. of this moneth, the citie of lerusalem was assie∣ged by the space of 18, mo∣neths, was finally takē by the King of Babylon. Ierem. 39. 2 A 3 b 4 c 5 d 6 e   7 f ¶ Dogge dayes beginneth. 8 g The 50. day, after that the Israelites were thus departed and were come to the mount of Sinay, the lawe of the ten Cōmandements was to thē giuen by almighty God, with a great and terrible magnifi∣cence, at which time also God gaue to them certaine
polnike gouernande, & a spe∣ciall kingdome, in which no∣thing wanted, that appertai ned to the true worshipping. 9 A 10 b 11 c 12 d 13 e 14 f 15 g 16 A 17 b 18 c 19 d 20 e 21 f ¶ Mary Magdalen. 22 g   23 A   24 b ¶ S. Iames the Apostle. 25 c Of God and of whō Christ in time to come should be borne. So that among his people alway remayned the Church, and the true word of God, vntill after Christ had suffered. Exod. 19. & 20. 26 d 27 e 28 f 29 g 30 A 31 b
August hath 31. dayes. The Moone 30. The day is 14. houres. The night is 10. houres. 1 c Aaron dyed in the moun∣raine of Hor, being 1 2 3. yeares olde, 40. yeares after the comming out of Aegypt. Numb. 20. and 33.38.39. 2 d 3 e 4 f 5 g 6 A The same day Esdras en∣tred into lerusalem, with a compame of lewes, and was receiued by those, which 80. yeares before, hee went vp thither with Zorobal el, the yeare before the comming of lesus Christ. 457. Esd. 7. 7 b 8 c 9 d 10 e 11 f 12 g 13 A 14 b The 10. day, the Pemple of Ierusalem was set on fire by the Souldiers of Titus,
and hath not since bin buil∣ded againe, Iosephus lib. 6. chap. 26. 15 c 16 d 17 e 18 f 19 g 20 A ¶ Dogge dayes end. 21 b   22 c   23 d   24 e ¶ Bartholmevv Apostle. 25 f   26 g   27 A Religion as on this day was reformed, according to Gods expresse truth in the most renoumed citie of Ge∣neua. 1535. 28 b 29 c 30 d 31 e
September hath 30. dayes. The Moone 29. The day is 12. houres. The night is 12. houres. 1 f Susanna the most chaste matron of the Hebrues, by two false Priests, was accu∣sed of adulterie, but by the possicie of young Daniel, she was purged, and the Priests cōmitted to the fire. Dan. 13. 2 g 3 A 4 b 5 c 6 d 7 e 8 f   9 g The ninth day of this mo∣neth, lerusalem was put to fire and sworde, and wholy oucrthrowne, as Christ fore∣told them fortie yeares be∣fore Iosephus. lib. 7. cap. 26. 10 A 11 b 12 c 13 d 14 e 15 f Chrisostome being cha∣sed out of his Church of
Constantinople, as vpon this day dyed. 16 g 17 A 18 b 19 c   20 d   21 e ¶ Saint Matthevv. 22 f   23 g   24 A The 25. Nehemias did fi∣nish the repayring the wals of Ierusalem. Anno 300. be∣fore the Natiuitie of Christ. Nehem. 6. 25 b 26 c 27 d 28 e 29 f ¶ Saint Michael. 30 g  
October hath 31. dayes. The Moone 30. The day is 10. houres. The night is 14. houres. 1 A The Feast of Trumpets, commaunded to the Iewes. Leuit. 23. 2 b 3 c 4 d The Iewes fasted & wept for Gedaliah, Ierem. 47. 5 e 6 f   7 g   8 A   9 b   10 c ¶ Terme beginneth. 11 d The 10. day, was the feast of reconciliation, which was the onely day that God or∣dained to fast. 12 e 13 f 14 g 15 A The 15. day, the feast of Tabernacles began, and la∣sted
seuen dayes. Leuit. 22. 16 b 17 c 18 d ¶ S. Luke Euangelist. 19 e The 18. day, which was the 150, after the beginning of the flood, the Arke rested vpon the Mountaine of A∣rarat in Armenia. Gen. 8. 20 f 21 g 22 A 23 b 24 c The 24. day, Titus gaue forth 3000. Iewes to the wild beasts. Anno. 73. 25 d 26 e 27 f   28 g ¶ Simon and Jude. 29 A   30 b   31 c  
Nouember hath 30. dayes. The Moone 29. The day is 9. houres. The night is 15. houres. 1 d ¶ All Saints. 2 e The Emperour Constan∣tinus, sonne of Constantine, dyed this day 364, after the Natiuitie of Iesus Christ. 3 f 4 g 5 A 6 b The 10. day happened the wofull slaughter of Verna, where Ladissan king of Hun∣gary was slaine by the Turk, ann. 1445. Also as vpon this daye. Martin Luther was borne. 7 c 8 d 9 e 10 f 11 g 12 A 13 b The 15. day was the coun∣terfeite Feast by Ieroboam, after he had withdrawn the ten tribes of Israel, from the
obedience of Roboam their lawfull King, which he or∣dained in Dan and Bethel, after he had set vp the gol¦den Calues, to the intent the people should goe no more to worship in Ierusa∣lem. 3. King. 22. 14 c 15 d 16 e 17 f 18 g 19 A 20 b 21 c 22 d 23 e 24 f 25 g The 17. day of this mo∣neth, Queene Elizabeth be∣gan her raigne. 26 A 27 b 28 c ¶ Terme endeth. 29 d   30 e ¶ S Andevv Apostle.
December hath 31. dayes. The Moone 30. The day is 8. houres. The night is 16. houres. 1 f   2 g   3 A   4 b   5 c   6 d   7 e   8 f   9 g   10 A   11 b ¶ Shortest day. 12 c The 15. the yeare before ye natiuity of Christ, 145. An∣tiochus the great, set vp an idoll vpon the Altar of the Lord in Ierusalem. 1. Mach. 1 13 d 14 e 15 f 16 g
17 A   18 b   19 c   20 d   21 e ¶ Saint Thomas Apostle. 22 f Saint Iohn Euangelist died in Ephesus, being of the age of 89. yeares, vnder Traian 23 g 24 A 25 b ¶ The Natiuitie of Christ. 26 c ¶ Saint Stephen Martyr. 27 d ¶ Saint John Euangelis̄t. 28 e ¶ Jnnocents day. 29 f the Emperour, about thirtie yeares after the destruction of Ierusalem. 30 g 31 A
A rule to knowe, when the Termes beginneth and endeth. Hillarie Terme beginneth the 23. day of Januarie, if it be not Sunday, then the next day after: and endeth the 12. of Februarie. Easter Terme beginneth 18. daies after Easter, and endeth foure dayes after the Ascention day. Trinitie Terme beginneth the next day after Corpus Christy day, and endeth the vvednesday, foure∣teene dayes after. Michaelmasse Terme beginneth the 10. day of October, if it be not Sunday, and endeth the 28. day of Nouember.
The degrees of Mariage. con. No man may marrie his Grandmother. af. Grandfathers wife. af. Wiues grandmother. con. Fathers sister. con. Mothers sister. af. Fathers brothers wife. af. Mothers brothers wife. af. Wiues fathers sister. af. Wiues mothers sister. con. Mother. con. Stepmother. af. Wiues mother. con. Daughter. af. Wiues daughter. af. Sonnes wife.
con. No woman ought to mar∣rie her Grandfather. af. Grandmothers husband. af. Husbands grandfather. con. Fathers brother. con Mothers brother. af. Fathers sisters husband. af. Mothers sisters husband. af. Husbands fathers brother. af. Husbands mothers brother. con Father. con. Stepsather. 1 Husbands father. con Sonne. af. Husbands sonne. af. Daughters husband.
con. No man may marrie his Sister. af. Wiues sister. af. Brothers wife. con. Sonnes daughter. con. Daughters daughter. af. Sonnes sonnes wife. af. Daughters sonnes wife. af. Wines sonnes daughter. af. Wines daughters daughter. con. Brothers daughter. con Bisters daughter. af. Brothers sonnes wife. af. Sisters sonnes wife. af. Wines brothers daughter. af. Wiues sisters daughter.
con. No woman ought to mar∣rie her brother. af. Husbands brother. af. Sisters husband. con. Daughters sonne. con Sonnes sonne. af. Daughters sonne. af. Sonnes daughters husband. af. Daughter daughters husbād. af. Husbands sonnes sonne. af. Husbands daughters sonne. con. Brothers sonne. con. Sisters sonne. af. Brothers daughters husband af. Sisters daughters husband. af. Husbands daughters sonne. af. Brothers sisters sonne.
How a man shall behaue himselfe in the Morning when he riseth. When thou risest in the morning, looke that thou with all humble∣nes of mind, kneele downe, and lif∣ting vp thy hart. thy hands, & thine eyes into heauen, vnto God the fa∣ther almighty, pray on this maner. A Prayer for the Mcrning. OAlmghty and most grntle God, wre thanke thee for that sweet sleepe and comfortable rest that thou hast gruen vs this night. And forasnitich as thou hast commanded by thy
holy word, that no mā should he idle, but alwaies occupied in vertuous exercises, euery man according to his callin.g We most humblie beseech thee, that thine eyes may at∣tend vpon vs, daily defend vs in forrow, succour vs, che∣resh, comfort, and gouerne all our counsailes, studies, and labours. In such wise, that we may so spend this day, ac∣cording to thy most blessed will, without hurting of our neighbour, that we may dili∣gently
and warely eschue, and audide all things that should displease thee, se thtem al∣waies before our eyes, liue in thy feare, and euer worke that that may be found accep∣table before thy diuine Ma∣iestie, vnto the praise of thy holy name, through Iesus Christ our Lord. So be it. After thou hast prayed on this maner (seeing that we be all sin∣nerse) it shall be expedient (if thou hast conuenient leisure thereun∣to) to confesse thy selfe on this maner, vnto God the father.
The confession of our sinnes vnto God the father. O Almighty God, and he a∣uenly Father, and ma∣ker of heauen & earth I con∣fesse my selfe vnto thee, euen from the very hart, that I am a milerable, wretched and abominable sinner. And haue wickedly transgressed all thy holy commandements, & the druine precepts of thy godlie will. The sins (alas) which I haue committed in my flesh against thee, are so great, and
so exceedingly increased, that they are no lesse innumerable thē the sands of the Sea: and they thrust me down, euen as an intollerable burthen. In these wicked sinnes (oh Lord God) haue I hitherto wal∣ked according to ye will of the Prince of this world, whiles I did that was pleasant to the fleshand ill lusts, through baine thoughts, the blindnes of the heart, the outward pre∣tence of godlines, and fayned faith. This came to passe (oh
wretch that I am) because that I did neuer earnestlie striue against the suggestions of Sathan, nor the concupis∣cences or desires of the world, nor yet the lustes of the flesh. But filthily obeyed them a thousand times more then the motions of thy holy Spi∣rite, O Lorde my God. It came to passe also, that I did set naught by thy godly coun∣saile, despised thy holy name, and feaed thy bengeance and heauy vispleasure nothing at
all. But whatsoeuer I haue in this behalfe offended thy most godly maiestie, it sore repenteth me, and the fault grieueth me, euen vnto the very hart. And if it were not (O most mercifull Father) that thou hadst layd vp mer∣cie in the bowels, blood, and wounds of Iesus Christ thy Sonne, and or Lord, for so many as vnfeinedly repent, and truely beleeue, be their sins neuer so great & many, I should see no other way,
but throwe my selfe downe headlong through despecati∣on, into the bottomeies pit of hell. But forasmuch as thou hast set thy welbeloned Son Iesus Christ, to be our Me∣diator and mercie stocke and hast promised grace, mercie, and forgiuenesse of sins, to as many as aske it in his name, through faith in his bloood. Therefore, in this time of grace & mercy, I miserable sinner come now vnto thee, and desire thee my Lord God,
that thou wilt graund mee through that our Lord Iesus Christ, a right & true saith. And for his lake forgiue me all my sins, and make me to walke daily more and more in a newe heart, and in the fruits of the holy Ghost, tha I may vtterl despise all the vngodly lustes of this world, and that I may be found con∣ent, pure of liuing, tem∣perate, good, righteous, bo∣nest, diligent in all goodnesse, meeke, mercifull, modest,
humble, and ready to forgiue such as offend me euen from the very hart. And so liue all the daies of my life, accor∣ding to thy diuine will, and true feare: that I may dye to the world, to all sinne, and to my selfe. And with a good confience, and merrie heart, looke for the comming of the Lord and my Sauiour, Ie∣sus Christ. To whom with thee and the holy Ghost, be all honour and glorie, for euer and euer. So be it.
Thou maist (if thou wilt) after thy confession, say the Lordes prayer. And so commending thy selfe vnto God, fall to some ho∣nest and vertuous exercise, accor∣ding to thy calling, but whatso∣euer thou doet, doe it with pure∣nesse of heart, and with single∣nesse of eye. Yea, so doe it, as though God were present and looked vpon thee, as vndoubtedly he doth. VVhen thou goest to thy labour or vvorke. O Most kinde and gentle heauenly Father, thou knowest and hast also taught
vs, how great the weakenesse of man is, so that no man (without thy good helpe) can do any thing. Thus bouchsafe to send vs thy holy spirit, that he may strengthen, , and moue our vnderstanding and reason in all things, that we this day outwardly shall goe about and take in hand, or of that we inwardly shal thinke or haue in minde, to the in∣tent that it may all be done to his glorie, and to the profite of our neighbour. Amen.
A Prayer for the Euening. O Lord God, Father euer lasting and full of pittie, wee acknowledge and con∣fesse, that we be not worthie to lift vp our eyes to heauen, much lesse to present our selues before thy diuine Ma∣testie with confidence that thou wilt heare our prayers and graunt one requests, if we consider our owne deser∣aings. For our consciences doe accuse vs, and our sinnes witnesse against vs, and we
know that thou art an vp∣right Iudge, which doest not iustifie the sinnerse & wicked men, but punishest the faults of all such as transgresse thy commandements. Yet most mercifull father, since it hath pleased thee to command vs to call vpon thee in all our troubles and aduersities, pro∣mising euen then to helpe vs, when we feele our selues, as it were swal owed vp of death and desperation: we vtterly renounce all worldly
confidence, and flee to thy so∣ueraigne goodnesse, as our onely stay and refuge, besee∣ching thee not to cal to remē∣berance our mauifold sinnes and wickednes, whereby we cōtinually prouoke thy wrath and indignation against vs: neither our negligence and wickednesse, which haue nei∣ther worthely esteemed, nor in our liues sufficiently ex∣pressed the sweete comfort of the Gospell reuealed vnto vs: but rather to accept the
obedience and death of thy Sonne Iesus Christ, who by offering vp his body in sacri∣fiee once for all, hath made a sufficient recompence for all our sins. Haue mercie there∣fore vpon vs. O Lord, & for∣giue vs our offences. & each vs by the oly spirit, that we may rightly weigh them, and earnestly repent for the same: and so much the rather, O Lord, because that the repro∣bate and such as thou hast forsaken, cannot praise thee,
nor call vpon thy name, but the repenting heart, the sor∣rowfull mind, the conscience oppressed, hungring and thir∣sting for thy grace shall euer set forth thy praise and glory. And albeit we be but worms & dust, yet thou art our Crea∣tor, and we be the workes of thy hands: yea, thou art our redeemer, and we be the peo∣ple whom thou hast bought: thou art our God, and we thine inheritance. Correct vs not therefore in thine anger
O Lord) neither according to our desarts punish vs, but mercifully chastise vs with a fatherly affection, that all the world may knowe, that at what time so euer a Sinner doth repent him of his sinne from the bottome of his hart, thou wilt put away all his wickednes out of thy remem∣brance as thou hast promised by thy holy Prophets. Finally, forasmuch as it hath pleased thée, to make the night for man to rest in, as
thou hast ordeyned him the day to trauaile: graunt (O deare Father) that we may so take our bodily rest, that our soules may continuallie watch for the time, that our Lord Iesus Christ shall ap∣peare for our deliuerance out of this mortall life, and in the me and season, that we be not ouercome by any sautasies, dreames, or other temptati∣ons, but fully set our mindes vpon thee, loue thee, seare thee, and rest in thee, in such
sorte that our very sleepe also may be to the glorie of thy name. Furthermore, that our sleepe be not excesssiue or ouer much after the insatiable desire of the flesh: but one∣ly sufficient to content our weake nature, that we may be better be disposed to liue in all godly conuersation, to the glorie of thy holy name, and profite of our Brethren, thorow Iesus Christ our Lorde, in whose name we make our humble petitions
vnto thee, as he hath taught vs, saying: Our father which art in Heauen, &c. Almighty and euerlasting God, vouchsafe we beseech thee to grant vs perfect con∣tinuance in thy liuely faith, augmenting and increasing the sme in vs daylie, vntill me grow to the full measure of our persectiotn in Christ: whereof we make our confes∣sion, saying: I beleene in God the Father almightie &c. The Lorde blesse vs and
saue vs: the Lord make his face to shine vpon vs: and be mercifull vnto vs: the Lord turne his fauourable counte∣nance towards vs, and grant vs his peace. The grace of our Lord Iesus Christ, the loue of God, and the commu∣nion of the holy Ghost be with vs and remaine with vs for euer. So be it. VVhen a man is bound to vvarde any iourney. THis our life most merci∣full Lord, is nothing els
but a pilgrimage & through∣fare: for we haue here no abi∣ding or dwelling place. We are come from thee, and we must returne againe vnto thee. But amongst or be∣tweene all the traps assaults, pits, and snares which the Diuell hath layde out, and spread abroad for vs, blinded in sinne: Vouchsafe thou, O Lord Iesus Christ, to leade vs with thy right hand, for thou art a true, trustie, and a sure friend. Open our
eyes to the intent that we misse not the way, which thou thy selfe art, but leade vs through, and by thy selfe, vnto thy Father, to the intent that all we may be made one with thee and him, euen like as hou art one with him. O most mercifull Lorde, like as thou doest send thine holy Angels to be defenders of as many as serue & please thee with a simple, innocent and pure heart, by the which they be led like as young chil∣dren,
oren, are lead of them which are elder and stronger than they. And like as thou did∣dest vouchsafe to send thine Angell Raphal to be a guide vnto the Sonne of that roue∣rent man Toby: Vouchsafe euen so (O Lord) to send vs the same Angell, (although we are not so worthie as the same Toby was) that he may encourage and leade vs tho∣row that way, which is not pleasant vnto vs, but vnto thee. So be it.
A Prayer for a Christian life. MOst mercifull & migh∣tie God, take away from vs all euill counsell, and then our sinnes: suffer vs not to run into an vngodlie and wicked life, and sinally, kéepe our minds far from the con∣tempt of godlinesse, and scor∣ning of vertue, and in the stead of those euils, graunt that we may continuallie be occupied in thy law and sa∣cred Scriptures, that we be
not caried about like the wir∣ked, as light dust, and fruit∣les chaffe, with euery blast of affection and Docirine, but rather that we as trees plan∣ted by the water brookes, in∣dud with the life of the spi∣rite and faith, may also bring foorth the fruites of good workes: and that whatsoe∣uer we take in hand may prosper, and tende to thy praise, and glorie of thy name and furtherance of our saluation: and at the last,
when the wicked shall all a∣way in thy iudgement, we may stedfasily stand and be made perfect, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. A Prayer in distresse. SEeing that (O almightie God) our wretch eduesh and pouertie is right great∣therefore haue we very much neede of thy saiuation, for se long as we now flee vnto the to the intent thou shouldst be our speedie succour and assu∣red defence, we call to re∣memberance
our most grie∣uous sinnes, corrupt life, and leaud behauiour, which nei∣ther we wil hide, or yet if we were willing thereto, could keep the same secret frō thee. Thou right well perceiuest al our naughtines, which we truly acknowledge and con∣fesse vnto thy diuine maiestie: we haue grieuouslie sinned, we haue done greatly amisse, we haue bin marueilous dis∣obedient, very stubborne, and exceeding wilful against thee,
who deserue farre more hey∣nous displeasures, then these, which we now feele and suf∣fer. But bowe thou downe thy fauourable looke (O ex∣cellent father) and giue care vnto our feruent Prayerse, haue compassion vpon vs, that crie out daily vnto thee, and lift vp our sorrowfull eyes, and heauie mindes to∣wards thy most excellent mercies seate, hauing this as∣sured confidence, that thou art ready to forgiue, rich in
louing kindnes towards such as call vpon thee, and excee∣ding mightie in thy works, a∣boue all Gods, wilt not de∣spise vs in so great distresse, and tribulation. Thou art most puissat, thou shewest wonderfull things, & thou art God alone. Teach vs therfore thy perfect waies, cause vs to walke in thy blessed truth: cal backe our wandring hart vn∣to thee, that it may stand greatly in feare of thy holy name. Thou verely hast nobly
made vs partakerse of thy ex∣cellent merey, but for asmuch as we were very vngrate∣full, the hostes of the vngodly are risen vp against vs, and the forefrone of cursed mens battailes haue aaulted vs, who neither regare thee at all, nor make any account o thy most blessed name & pure doctrine, indeuoucing al only by their most lewd practises, thorow the same meane to destroy at one push both the true worshinping of thee,
and our Soules also. Seeing that therefore thou art a very mercifull God, long suffering, of great loue, and truth to trust vnto, haue an especiall regarde vnto the childrē of thy louing promise, be fauorable, strengthen and defende them, aduaunce thy banner to our saluation, so that the cruel aduersaries may be confouded, and that all may right well see and e∣uidently perceiue thee onely to be our most good and lo∣uing
God, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. A Prayer for the prosperous successe of Christs kingdome against the enemies thereof. OVR daily petition is (O Almightie God) that the kingdome of our Lorde Iesus Christ may be aug∣mented, & appeare at length to bee most perfect, which thing we now also desire ve∣rie instantlie in our heartie praters and humble suppli∣cations. Be alwaies mind∣full
thereof (O good God) of his fat and most pleasant ob∣sation, which he made for vs vpon the altar of the Crosse, and graunt, that by the tri∣umph of his most perfect vic∣torie and conquest, we may take both Saluation and de∣lightfull pleasure. Although we deny not, but that the same shal come to passe with∣out our desarts, who haue (through our manifold wic∣kednesse) offended thee very many and infinite waies: yet
for (thy tender louing mer∣cies sake) put them to shame and confusion, that repose all their trust in Charets, horse, and worldly power: but raise and lift vp to saluation such as are wholy bent to depend vppon thee, and bowe downe thy mercifull and fauourable eares, to heare the feruent prayers and petitions which we make vnto thy diuine maiestie, for the mightie en∣larging of our Lord Iesus Christs kingdome, through
the same Iesus Christ our Lord. So be it. A Prayer for comfort in persecution. WEe perceiue most mercifull & mighty God, that not onely Anti∣christ, but also the power and strength of the whole world conspireth against thee and against thy Christ: which thinke thy Gospell, and the redification of thy Church to be an intollerable bondage and hard yoke. Wherefore
they labor by all meanes pos∣sible to breake asunder the so∣cieties and congregations of the faithful, and cast away all discipline. But for asmuch as thou sittest in heauen, and art not ignorant what the diuell and wicked flesh goeth about, laugh thou to scorne their vaine counsels, & bring their purposes to naught, let them feele thine anger to be kind∣led against them, and make them astonied at the fierce∣nesse of thine indignation, so
that they may not be able to destroy thy Church, ouer whom thou hast appointed Iesus Christ our onely Sa∣uiour, that in it he might raigne by the word and Spi∣rit, with inuinsible might and power. Wherfore grant vn∣to vs, although vnworthie and shrinking children, such faith and constancie, that we may find him, & also confesse him, to be our onely King, and that we may nothing doubt but that wee bee his
nation, people and heritage, being most assured of this, that he is of such strength and power, that with his word, more strong then yron, he is able to destroy whom he wil, and breake them in peeces like earthen pots. Therefore (O God) turne the Kings and Princes of the world vnto thee, that they may be wise and vnderstand, wherby they may vnfeinedly acknowledg, imbrace, and kisse the Sonne, least when his anger shall
once be kindled, they perish and be destroied for euer. And when it shall bee thy good pleasure, make them blessed for euermore, which commit thēselues to thy gouernance  protection. So be it. A Prayer for a true Subiect. AS it is thy godly ap∣pointment (O Lorde God) that some should beare rule in this world, to see thy glory set forth, & the common peace kept: so it is thy plea∣sure againe, that some should
be subiects, and inferiours to other, in their vocation, al∣though before thée there is no respect of persons. And foras∣much as it is thy godlie will and pleasure, to appoint and set me in the number of sub∣iects: I beseech thee to giue me a faithfull & boedient hart vnto the higher powers, that there may be found in me no disobedience, no vnfaith ful∣nesse, no treasons, no false∣hood, no dissimulation, no insurrection, no commotion nor
conspiracie, nor any kinde of rebellion in word or deed, a∣gainst the ciuil Magistrates, but al faithful obedience, qui∣etnesse, subiection, humilitie, and whatsoeuer else becom∣meth a subiect: that I liuing here in all lowlines of mind, may at the last day, through thy fauor, be lifted vp into e∣uerlasting glory, where thou most mermcifull Father, with the Son and the holy Ghost, liuest, and raignest very God for euer and euer. Amen.
For Fathers and Mothers. THe fruite of the wombe, and the multitude of children is thy gift and bles∣sing, O Lord God, giuen to this end, that they may liue to thy glorie, and to the com∣moditie of their neighbours. Forasmuch therefore as thou of thy goodues hast giuen me children: I beseech thee giue me also grace to traiue them vp euen from their cradles in thy nurture, and doctrine, in thy holy lawes and blessed
ordinances, that frō their ve∣ry young age they may know thee, beleeue in thee, feare, loue, and obey thee, and dili\gently walke in thy comman∣dements all the daies of their life, vnto the praise of thy glo∣rious name: through Iesus Christ our Lord. So be it. Of Children. THou hast giuen a com∣mandement in thy lawe (O heauenly Father) that Children should honor their Fatherse and Mothers: I
most humblie beseech thee therefore, to breath thy holie spirit into my breast, that I may reuerence and honor my Father and Mother, not only with outward iestures of my bodie, but also with the vnfei∣ned affections of my heart, loue them, obey them, map for them, help them, and doe for them both in word & déed, whatsoeuer lieth in my po∣wer, that thou seeing my vn∣feined hartygoodwil towards my parents, maist become
my louing heauenly Father, and number me among those thy children, whom from e∣uerlasting thou hast appoin∣ted to be heires of thy glori∣ous kingdome: through thy welbeloued Sonne our Lord Iesus Christ. Amen. Of Householders. TO haue children and ser∣uants is thy blessing, O Lord, but not to order them according to thy word, de∣serueth thy dreadfull curse. Graunt therefore, that as
thou hast blessed me with an household, so I may diligent∣ly watch, that nothing be commited of the same that might offend thy father lie goodnesse, and be an occasion of turning thy blessing into cursing, but that so many as thou hast committed to my charge, may eschue all vice, imbrace all vertue, liue in thy feare, call vpon thy holie name, learne thy blessed com∣mandements, heare thy ho∣ly word, and auoiding idle∣nesse.
diligentlie exercise themselues, euerie one in his office, according to their vo∣cation and calling, vnto the glorie of thy most honorable name. Amen. Of all Christians. ALbeit, O Heauenly FA∣ther, all we that vnfei∣nedly professe thy holy reli∣gion, and faithfullie call on thy blessed name, are thy sonnes and heires of euerla∣sting glorie, yet as all the members of a body haue not
one office, so likewise we be∣ing manx, and making one bodie, whereof thy dearely beloued Sonne is the head, haue not all one gift, neither are we all called to one of∣fice, but as it hath pleased thee to distribute, so receiue we: we therefore most hūbly praythee, to send the Spirit of loue and concord among vs, that without any disorder or debate, euery of vs may be conent with our calling, quietly liue in the same, stu∣die
to doe good vnto all men, by the true and diligent exer∣cise therof, without too much séeking of our priuat gaine, and so order our selues in all poynts, according to thy godlie will, that by well∣doing wee may stoppe the mouthes of such foolish and ignorant people, as reporte vs to be euill dooers, and cause them through our good workes, to glorifie thee our Lord God, in the ay of visi∣tation. Amen.
A Prayer meete for all men, and to besaid at all times. O Most mercifull Father, grant me to couer with an ardent mind, those things which may please thee, to search them wisely, to know them truly, and to fulfil them perfectly, to the laud and glo∣ry of thy name, Order my li∣uing so, that I may doe that∣which thou requirest of me, and giue me grace, so that I may know it, and haue will and power to doe it, and that
I may obtaine those things which be most connenient to my soule. Cacious Lord make my way sure & streight to thee, so that I fall not be∣tween prosperitie and aduer∣sirie, but that in prosperous things, I may giue thee thankes, and in aduersitie be patient, so that I be not lift vp with the one, nor oppressed with the other. And that I may reioyce in nothing but that which moueth mee to thee, nor to be sorie for any
thing, but for those things which draw me from thee, de∣siring to please no bodie, nor fearing to displease any be∣sids thee: most louing father, let all worldly things be vile vnto me for thee, and be thou my most speciall comfort a∣boue al. Let me not be merie with the ioy that is without thee. And let me desire no∣thing besides thee: let all la∣bour delight me which is for thee, and let all the rest wea∣rie we, which is not in thee.
Make me to lift vp my hart oftentimes to thee: and when I fall, make me to thinke on thee, and be sorie, with a sted∣fast purpose of amendement. Louing Lord, make me hum∣ble without faining, merrie without lightnesse, sad with∣out mistrust, sober without dulnes, true without double∣nes, fearing thee without de∣speratiō, trusting in thee with out presumption, telling my neighbors their faults meek∣ly without dissimmulatiō, tea∣ching
them with words and examples, without any moc∣king, obedient without argu∣ing, patient without grudg∣ing, and pure without cor∣ruption: giue me also I be∣seech thee, a waking spirite, that no curious thought with draw me from thee. Let it be so strong, that no filthie affection dram me backward, so stable, that no tribulation breake it: graunt me also to knowe thee, diligentlie to learne a godlie conuersation
to please thee: and finallie, hope to imbrace thee, for the precious blood sake of that immaculate Lambe, our on∣lie Sauiour Iesus Christ. To whom with thee, O Fa∣ther and the holy Ghost, thrée persons and one God, be all honor and glory, world with∣out end. Amen. A Prayer for the obtaining of saith. O Mercifull God, & deare Father of our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ, in
whom as thou art well plea∣sed, so hast thou commanded vs to heare him, forasmuch as he often biddeth vs to aske of thee, and thereto promi∣seth that thou wilt heare vs, and graunt vs that, which in his name wee shall aske of thee. Loe gracious Father, I am bold to beg of thy mer∣cie, through thy Sonne Ie∣sus Christ, one sparkle of true faith, and certaine per∣swasion of thy goodnesse and loue towards me in Christ,
where through, I being as∣sured of the pardon of all my sinnes, by the mercies of Christ thy Sonne, may be thankfull to thee, loue thee, and serue thee, in holinesse and righteousnesse, all the dayes of my life. So be it. A Prayer for repentance. MOst gracious God, and mercifull father of our Sauiour Iesus Christ, be∣cause I haue sinned and done wickedlie, and thorough
thy goodnesse haue receiued a desire of repentance, where∣to this long suffering doth draw my hard hart: I beseech thee for thy great mercies sake in Christ, to worke the same repentance in me, and by thy Spirite, power and grace, to humble, mortifie and teare my conscience for my sinnes to saluation, that in thy good time, thou maist comfort and quicken me, tho∣row Iesus Christ thy dearly beloued Sonne. Amen.
A Prayer for remission of sinnes, and for the comfort and true feeling of Gods sauor and mercie. OH Lord God and deare Father, what shall I say that feele all things to be in maner with me, as in the wie∣ked? Blindis my mind, croo∣ked is my will, and peruerse concupiscener is in me, as a spring or stincking puddie. Oh how faine is saith in me? How little is my loue to thée, or thy people? How great is selfe-loue? How hard is my
heart, by the reason whereof I am moued to doubt of thy goodnesse towards me, whe∣ther thou art my mercifufll father, and whether I be thy childe or no? Indeede wor∣thilie might I doubt, if that the hauing of these were the cause, and not the fruite ra∣ther of thy Children. The cause, and not the fruite ra∣ther of thy Children. The cause why thou art my Fa∣ther, is the mercy, goodnesse, grace and trueth in Christ Iesus, the which cannot but remaine for euer. In respect
whereof, thou hast borne me this good wil, to bring me in∣to thy Church by Baptisme, and to accept me into ye num∣ber of thy Children, that I might be holy, faithfull, obe∣dient and innocent, and to cal me diuers times by the mi∣nistring of thy word, into thy kingdome, besides the innu∣merable other benefits, al∣waies hether to powred vpon me; all which thou hast done of this thy good will, that thou of thine owne mercie,
bearest to me in Christ, and for Christ, before the world was made. The which thing as thou requirest streightly, that I should beléeue with∣out doubting, so wouldest thou that in all my deedes, I should come vnto thee, as to a father, and make my mone without distrust of being heard in thy good time, as most shall make to my com∣fort. Loe therefore to thee déere father, I come through thy Sonue our Lord, Media∣tor
& aduocate Iesus Christ, who sitteth on the right hand making intercession for me, and pray thee of thy great goodnesse and mercy in Christ to be mercifull vnto me, that I may feele in deed thy sweet mercie as thy Childe. The time. O deere father I ap∣poynt not, but I pray thee, that I may with hope, still expect and looke for thy help. I hope that, as for a little while thou hast left me, thou wilt come and visite me, and
that in thy great mercie, whereof I haue need, by rea∣son of my great misery. Thou art wont for a little season in thine anger to hide thy face from them whom thou lo∣uest but surely, oh redermer in eternall mercies, thou wilt shew thy compassion. For when thou leauest vs, oh Lord thou doest not leane vs very long neither doest thou leaue vs to our owne losse, but to our Iuere and aduan∣tage: Euen that for holy
spirit, with bigger portion of thy power and vertue, may lighten and theere vs, that the want of feeling to our sorrow, may be recom∣pensed plentifully with the linely since of hauing thee to our eternal ioy: and therefore thou swearest, that in thine e∣uer lasting mercie, thou wilt haue compassion on vs Or which thing to the ende we might be most assured, thine oth is to be marked, for thou saist, as I haue sworne, that
I will neuer bring any more the Waters to drowne the world. so haue I sworne, that I will neuer more be angrie with thee, nor reprooue thee. The Mountaines shall re∣mooue, and the Hils shall fall downe, but my louing kind∣nesse shall not mooue, and the band of my peace shallnot faile thee: Thou saiest, thou the Lord our mercifull redee∣mer. Déere Father, therfore I pray thée remember, euen for thine own truth and mer∣cies
sake, this promise and e∣uerlasting couenant, which in thy god time, I pray thee to write in my hart, that I may know thee to be the only true God and Iesus Christ whom thou hast sent, that I may loue thee with all my heart for euer: that I may loue thy people for thy sake: that I may bee holy in thy sight, through Christ, that I may alwaies, not only striue against sinne, but also ouer∣come the same, dailie more
and more as thy children doe, aboue all things desiring the sanctification of thy name, the comming of thy King∣dome, the doing of thy will here on earth, as it is in heauen, &c. through Iesus Christ our redeemer, Medi∣atour and Aduocate. Amen. A Prayer for delinerance from sinne, and to be restored to Gods grace and fauour againe. O Almightie and euerla∣sting Lord God, which hast made heauen and earth,
and all things therein con∣tained: Ourcomprehensible vnitie: O alwaies to be wor∣shiped most buissed Trmi∣tie: I humbly beseeth thee and praye thee, by the as∣sumption, and crucified hu∣mane of our I orde Irius Christ, that thou wouldest inclide and howe downe the great depth of thy deitie, to the bottomelesse priormy v∣riticie. Driue from me all kinde of vice, wlikeduesse and sinne, and make in
me a cleane heart, and renew in me a right spirice, for thy holy names sake. O Lord Ie∣sus, I beseech thy goodnesse, for that exceeding great loue which drew thee out of thy Fathers bosome, into the wombe of the holy Virgine, and for the assumption of mans nature, wherein it hath pleased thee to saue me, and to deliuer me from eternall death, that thou wouldest draw me out of my selfe, into thee my Lorde God, and
grant this my loue mya reco∣uer again to me thy grace, to increase and make perfect in me that which is wanting, to raise vp in me that which is fallen, to restore to me, that which I haue lost, and to quicken in me, that which is dead and should liue, that so I may become can ormable vnto thee in all my life and conuersation, thou dwelling in mee, and I in thee, my heart being soupled with thy grae, and setled in thy faith
for euer. O thou my God ooe nd set at libertie my spirice from al inferiour things: go∣uerne my soul, and so work, that both in soule and bodie, I may be haly and liue to thy glorite, world without ende. Amen. A Prayer necessart to be sayd at all times. O Bountifull Lord Iesu O sweete Sauiour. O Christ the soune of God, haue vittie vpon me, mercifullie heare mee and despise not
my prayerse. Thou hast crea∣ted me of nothing, thou hast redcemed me from the hon∣dage of sinne, death, and hell, neither with gold nor siur, but with thy most preus oote once offed vpon the Crosse, and th owne blood shed once for all, for my ran∣some: therefore cast me not away, wham thou by thy great wisdome hast made: bespise mee not, whome thou hast redeemed with such a precious treasure,
nor let my wickednesse de∣stroy that which thy good∣nesse hath builded: now whi∣lest I liue, O Iesus, haue mercie on me: for if I dye out of thy fauour, it will be too late afterward to call for thy mercie: whilest I haue time to repent, looke vpon me with thy mercifull eyes, as thou diddest vouchsafe to looke vpon Peter thine A∣postle, that I may bewail∣my sinfull life, and obtaine thy fauour, and dye therein:
I reknowledge that if thou shouldest deale with me ac∣cording to very iustice, I haue deserued euerlasting death. Therefore I appeale to thy high throne of mercie, trusting to obtaine Gods fa∣uour, not for my merttes, but for thy merites, O Iesu, who hast giuen thy selfe an accep∣table sacrifice to the Father, to appease his wrath, and to bring all sinners truly repen∣ting and amending their euil life, into his fauour againe.
Accept me (O Lord) among the number of them that shall be saued, forgiue me my sinnes, giue mee grace to leade a godlie and innocent life: graunt me thy heauen∣ly wisdome, inspire my hart with faith hope, and charitie, giue me grace to be humble in prosperitie, patient in d∣uersitie, obedient to my ru∣lers, faithfull vnto them tha trust me, dealing truel with all men: to liue chaste in wedlocke, to abhorre adul∣terie,
formcation, and all vn∣cleannesse, to doe good after my poer to all men, to hurt no man, that thy name may be glorified in me, during this present life, and that I after ward may obtaine ener∣iusting life: through the mer∣cie and merites of thy passi∣on. So be it. A Prayer for the vvrote congre∣gation of Christ. SHew thy selfe goutle and gracious (O Almightie God) towards thy beloued
Church, for thy exceeding great glories sake, and mer∣cie most magnificent, that we may be miraculously deliue∣red from the horrible fardle and cruell bondage of our deadly sinnes: who haue he∣therto been bondslaues to the flesh, and wretched prisoners of the Diuell, and yet thou vouchsafest to release and for∣giue vs the whole number of our deadly iniquities, and couered all haynous offen∣ces. Notwithstanding there∣fore,
we are now also very vngratefull, and such as be not worthie of thy graci∣ous benefits, our earnest re∣quest is, that thou wouldest withould thy selfe from thy wrathful indignation. Sure∣ly thou art iustly angry with vs, but (for the glorie of thy name) represse this furie which is stirred vp by reason of our grieuous sinnes, and lead vs into the siraite way of perfice health for as much as it appertaineth not to thy
louing kindnes, to be alwaies offended with thy faithfull seruants, or to contiuue thy heauie wrath, and sierce in∣dignation, vnto many gene∣rations. Deale with vs after thy olde accustomed maner, & not according to our leand deserts, scatter abroade our cruell enemies, and put them to flight whome thou (being prouoked through our great default) wouldest that wée should feele. Thou which in thy great wrath dost kill and
being pacified, quickened a∣gain: shew thy mercie and sa∣uing health, like as thou hast set destructiō before our eles, to the intrut thou wouldest both terrifie and chastice vs. Graunt that we (which haue heretofore been maruellous rebellions and very stub∣borne, may euer hereafter, giue obedient care to these ngs which thou pakest, and willest vs to doe Let thy nspeakeable louing mercie and famous truth be linked
in vs together, and vouchsafe that peace and righteousnesse may with an vndissoluble band sticke fast in our hearts, that when as thou hast deli∣uered vs from the hands of the most outragious Anti∣christ, and his cruell champi∣ons, we may yeeld vnto thee the plentifull fruites of holi∣nesse: through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. A Prayer vpo the xiij. Psalme. O Lord, how long wilt thou forget me for euer?
O good God how long wilt thou hide thy gracious coun∣tenance from me? How long shall I be carried and tossed about, with heause and trouble some cogitations and thoughts? How long shall my heart wither and drie vp with sorrowe? But now O my Lord God, consider me, regarde me with the eyes of thy mercie, he are mee O Lord, lighten mine eyes, and my vnderstanding, O my God, least I be blinded with
the reprobate, and superish in my sins. I beseech thee most humbly, let not my enemies glorie and triumph among themselues, as though they had wonne the victorie: let them not rise vp against me as if I were vanquished grant me Lord, that my hart may or to thy saluation so that with own voyce. I may sing praises and render thankes to thee, for that through thy helpe, A aut re∣deemed and brought againt
into ioye after my gricuous transgressions and sorrows. Amen. A Prayer vpon the xiiij Psalme. O Lord delier me from al impietie and vnrighte∣ousness: deliuer me from my blind ignorance, that I may earnestly séeke th, for we be al generally borne in calami∣e and forgetfulnesse, and there is not one man, which can vnshackle or deliuer him selfe by his owne propper strength and vertue, there is
no help but only by thy grace and power. O Lord, graunt that I may call vpon thee with an vnfained hart when∣soeuer I shall be tempted by these aduersaries. Let sted∣fastnesse of faith alwaies goe before me: let me not be trou∣bled with feare of any thing, saue only of thy iudgements, let all my trust, defence and fortresse be in thee, O Lord, Send, O good God, from thy celestiall Syon, that only protector, which shall deliuer
thy people from the horrible captiuitie of a troublesome conscience, so that we may reidyce in him without cea∣sing. So be it. A Prayer vpon the xv. Psalme. O Lord purge me againe, and iustifie me through faith from mine offences, that I may dwell in thy a∣beruacle, and continue bles∣sed in thy holy Mountaine. Graunt me (O Lord) this benefit, that I may confesse thy truth without hypocrisie,
with an vpright hart. Grant me that I deceiue no person, neither by wrong to circum∣uent any creature, Keepe me from flattering the peruerle and wicked men, that I may loue and obey those which loue God in renerence, what∣soeuer occasion the wicked take thereby to slaunder me: let me not be trouble some or burdenous to any man, but that I may serue all with vnfained affection, to edifie my brethren thorow faith in
Iesus Christ. Amen. A moditarion vpon the Lords Prayer. OVr Father which art in heauen. We being glo∣riously formed vnto ye image of thy diuine maiestie, & crea∣ted by thy gracious goodnes, to most high honor: how beit through sin, dissigured with vilenes, deseruing damnatiē, and yet by Christs death re∣deemed and restored vnto grace, to be Citizens with saints of the samilie of God,
now altogether in Christian vnitie, as members of one bodie, we pray, desire, and trust to obtaine of thee our heauenlie father, according vnto thy gracious goodnesse mightie power and faithfull promise vnto vs that aske a∣bundance of thy grace. That thy name may be halowed. That thy diuine power and glorious maiesty may be certainly known, and reuerently honoured. That the hearts of vs men, by thy
word and praier may be san∣ctified from all sin and vani∣tie, so that we with all that we haue, seruing thee in ho∣linesse and righteousnesse, may so shine afore men vpon earth, that they may thereby be occasioned to honour thee our Father, which art in heauen. Thy kingdome come. That thy worde may be so fruitfullie preached amongst vs thy people, that we may be throughly instructed, and
taught to bridel our sensuall appetites by natural reason, and to submit our s and reasons vnto a godly spirite, and to trie our spirits by the true Scriptures. So that within vs may raigue the kingdome of God, which is neither meate nor drinke: which is neither superstici∣ous ceremoutes, voluptuons pleasures, nor vaiur glorie, but righteousnesse, peace and comfort in the holy Ghost, by the which we now tasting of
thy heauenlie ioyes, may be made from henceforth wea∣rie of all worldlie vanities, continuallie looking & pray∣ing for the appearance and comming of thy eternall and euerlasting kingdome. Thy will be done in earth as it is in Heauen. In Heauen the Angels of reuerent loue do thy will and commounde∣ment, with comfortable cou∣rage, and ioyfull pleasure. In hell the wicked Spirits thorowe malice and enuie,
repining and grudging, doe torment and vexe themselues whatsoeuer they bee doing. And vpon earth, men being subiect vnto sinne, doe thinke it is a labour and paine to be occupied in any thing that is good and godly. Wherefore we pray thee, that the grace of thy heauenly spirit may so worke in our earthly bodies, that wee being deliuered from sinne and vanitie, may freelie delight and take plea∣sure to doe thy will and com∣mandement
here on earth, as thy glorious Angels doe in heauen. Giue vs this day our dailie bread. We hauing great néed and not able of our selues to deserue any thing, beseech thee of thy fatherly goodnes, to giue freely vnto vs all, so that none be hurt nor hinde∣red this day, when we crie vnto thee, constrained by pre∣sent neede, not greedilie cra∣uing (through vaine care a∣gainst to morrow) our dailie
Bread, our daily and necessa∣rie foode and reliefe, both bo∣dily and ghostlie: and espei∣allie, so that the spirituall foode of Christs flesh, and his blood, by dailie preaching of thy Gospell, and the mini∣stration of the Sacraments, may replenish our heart, and mindes, with continuall re∣membrance of his death and passion, dailie to be vsed for our necessarie and spirituall consolation. Forgiue vs our trespasses, as
we forgiue them that trespasse against vs. We feeling and knowing our own sinifulnes, doe desire thy mercifull for∣giuenes of our faultes and trespasses, which we haue committed against thee, so that we freely forgiuing al other that haue offended vs in any thing, whatsoeuer it be, may be sure that mercie springing in thee, hath pro∣ceded vnto vs, & being gra∣ciously offered of thee, hath bin thankfully receiued of vs,
and being charitably vsed of vs towards other, shall most certainly bee confirmed and enlarged of thée towards vs: so that by free mercie spring∣ing & procéeding from thee, all faults may be freely for∣giuen. Euen as those which other haue committed a∣gainst vs, so likewise those which we haue done against thee. And leade vs not into temptation. Suffer not the Deuill, by the abuse of thy
benefites, to leade vs Cap\tiues into deceitful and dam∣nable temptation, drawing vs by daintie meates vnto greedie Gluetonie, by money and rithes vnto vnsatiable couetousnes, and by wealth and prosperity vnto pride and vaine-glorie, and by all thy godly and gracious gifts, vnto euery diuelish and abo∣minable sinne. But deliuer vs from euill. Deliuer our goods from a∣buse, our bodies from corrup∣tion,
our soules from dam∣nation. Deliuer vs by Christ Iesu from the bondage of sinne, vnto the libertie of the Gospell: so that from the danger of the diuell, and all his temptation, traming and inticing towards danmati∣on, we being deliuered, may serue thee in holinesse and righteousnesse all the daies of our life. For thine is the kingdome, the power and glory, for euer and euer, Amen. For such is
thy riches and regiment, power and authoritie, praise and excellencie, that whatso∣euer treasures, lands, and possessions, might, wisdome, and superioritie, dignitie, honour and maieslie hath been, is, or shall be in any persons, times and places, the same of equitie, dutie, and necessitie, begin, conti∣nue, and ende, so as the E∣ternitie, Veritie, and Ma∣iestie of thy onely kingdome, power and glorie may best
appeare and be knowne, to be far past all creatures ability, vnderstanding, or capacitie in thee onely Lorde God of truth, without beginning, change, or decay eternally: yea, euery other kingdome, power and glory, be but slen∣der shadowes and shewes, seruing for this transitoric time, to make vs more mind∣full, and desirous of thy eter∣nall kingdome, power and glorie. By reason whereof out hope and the promise of
eternall saluation, and glo∣rie in Christ be, Amen: that is to say, most certaine. So be it. ALmightie and euerli∣ning God, vouchsafe we beseech thée to graunt vs perfect continuance in thy liuely faith, augmen∣ting the same in vs daylie, till wée growe to the full measure of our perfection in Christ, whereof wée make our coufession, saying.
The Crede of the Apostles. I Beleeue in God the father Almightie, maker of hea∣uen and earth. And in Iesus Christ his onely Sonne our Lord. Who was conceiued by the holy Ghost, borne of the Virgin Mary. Suffered vnder Ponce Pilate, was crucified, dead and buried. He descended into hell. The third day he rose again from death. He ascended into hea∣uen. And sitteth on the right hand of God the Father Al∣mightie.
From thence shall he come to iudge the quicke and the dead. I beléeue in the holy Ghost. The holy eathe∣like Church. The commu∣nion of Saints. The forgiue∣nesse of sinnes. The resurrec∣tion of the bodie. And the life euerlasting. Amen. The Confession of the Chri∣stian faith. I Beleeue and confesse my Lord God eternall, infi∣nite, vnmeasurable, incom∣prehensible, and inuincible,
one in substance, three in per∣son: Father, Sonne, and ho∣ly Ghost, who by his almigh∣tie power and wisdome, hath not onely of nothing created heauen, earth, and all things therein contained, and man after his own Image, that he might in him be glorified, but also by his Fatherly proui∣dence, gouerneth, maintai∣neth, & preserueth the same, according to the purpose of his will: I beléeue also and confesse Iesus Christ the only
Sauiour and Messias, who being equall with God, made himselfe of no reputation, but tooke on him the shape of a seruant, and became man in all things like vnto vs (sinne except) to assure vs of mercy and forgiuenesse. For when through our Father Adams transgression we were be∣come Children of perdition: there was no meanes to bring vs from that yoke of sin, and damnation, but onely Iesus Christ our Lord, who giuing
vs that by grace, which was his by nature, made vs (tho∣row faith) the Children of God, who when the fulnesse of time was come, was con∣ceiued by the power of the holy Ghost, borne of the Vir∣gine Mary (according to the flesh) and preached on earth the Gospell of saluation, till at length by tyrannie of the Priests, he was giltlesse con∣demned vnder Pontinus Pi∣laie, then President of Iurie, and most slaunderously han∣ged
on the Crosse betwixt two theeues, as a notorious trespasser, where taking vp∣on him the punishment of our sinnes, he deliuered vs from the curse of the lawe. And for as much as he being onely God, could not feele death, neither being only man could ouercome death, hee ioyned both together, and suf∣fered his humanitie to be punished with most cruell death: feeling in himselfe an∣ger and seuere iudgement of
God, euen as if he had been in the extreame torments of hell, and therefore cried with a loude voyce: My God, my God, why hast thou for saken me: Thus of his free mercie without compulsion, he offe∣red vp himselfe as the onely sacrifice, to purge the sins of all the world, so that all other sacrifices for sin are blasphe∣mous, and derogate from the sufficiency hereof. The which death, albeit it did sufficient∣ly reconcile vs to God, yet
the scriptures commonly do artribute our regeneration to his resurrection: for as by rising again from the graue the third day, he conquered death: euen so the victorie of our faith standeth in his re∣surrection, and therefore without the one, we cannot feele the benefite of the other. For as by death sinne was taken away, so our righte∣ousnesse was restored by his resurrection. And because he would accomplish al things,
and take possession for vs in his kingdome, he ascended into heauen, to enlarge the same kingdome, by the a∣boundant power of his spirit: by whom we are most assu∣red of his continuall inter∣cession towards God the Fa∣ther for vs. And although he be in heauen, as touching his corporall presence, where the father hath now set him on his right hand, commit∣ting vnto him the admini∣stration of all things, as well
in Heauen aboue, as in the Earth beneath, yet is he pre∣sent with vs his members, euen to the end of the world, ini preseruing and gouerning vs, with is effectuall power and grace, who (when all things are fulfilled, which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his Prophetes since the world began) will come in the same visible forme, in the which he ascen∣ded with an vnspeakable ma∣testie, power and companie,
to separate the Lambes from the Goates, the Elect from the reprobate. So that none, whether he be aliue then, or dead before, shall escape his iudgement. Moreouer, I be∣leeue and confesse the holy Ghost, God equall with the Father and the Sonne, who regenerateth and sanctifieth vs, ruleth and guideth vs in all truth, perswading most assuredly in our consciences, that we be the Children of God, Brethren to Iesus
Christ, and tellowe heires with him in life euerlasting. Yet notwithstanding it is not sufficient to beleeue, that God is omnipotent and mer∣cifull: that Christ hath made satisfaction; or that the holy Ghost hath his power and ef∣fect: except we doe applie the same benefites to our selues, which are Gods Elect. I be∣leeue therefore, and confesse one holy Church, which (as members of Iesus Christ, the only head thereof) consent
in faith, hope, and charitie, vsing the giftes of God: whe∣ther they be temporall, orspi∣rituall, to the profit and fur∣therance of the same. Which church is not séene to mans eye, but only known to God, who of the lost Sons of Adam hath ordained some as bessels of wrath to dam∣nation: and hath chosen o∣thers, as vessels of his mercy to be saued: the which also in due time he calleth to inte∣gritie of life, and godly con∣uersation.
to make them a glorious church to himselfe. But that church which is vi∣sible and séene to the eye, hath thrée tokens or marks wher∣by it may be discedice. First, the word of God contained in the old and new Testament, which as it is aboue the au∣thoritie of the same Church, and only sufficient to instruct vs in all things concerning saluation, so it is left for all degrees of men to reade and vnderstand. For without this
word, neither Church, coun∣sel or decree can establish any poynt touching Saluation. The second, is the holy Sa∣craments, to wit, of Bap∣tisme and the Lords Sup∣per: which Sacraments Christ hath left vnto vs as holy signes and seales of Gods promises: for as by Baptisme once receiued, is signified that we (as well in∣fants as others of age and discretion) being strangers from God by originall sinne,
are receiued into his familie and congregation, with full assurance, that although this roote of sin lye hid in vs, yet to the elect it shall not be im∣pured. So the Supper de∣clareth, that God as a most prouident Father, doth not only feede our bodies, but al∣so spiritually nourisheth our Soules, with the graces and benefites of Iesus Christ, (which the Scripture cal∣leth eating of his flesh, and drinking of his bloud) nei∣ther
must we in the admini∣stration of these Sacra∣ments, followe mans phanta∣sie, but as Christ himselfe hath ordained, so must they be ministred: and by such as by ordmarie vocation bee thereunto called. Therefore, whesoeuer reserueth or wor∣shippeth these Sacraments, or contrarywise contemneth them in time and place, pro∣cureth to himselfe damnati∣on. The third marke of this
Church, is Ecclesiasticall discipline: which standeth in admonition and correction of faults. The finiall end where∣of is excommunication by the consent of the Church, deter∣mined, if the offender be ob∣stinate. And besides this Ec∣clesiasticall censure: I ac∣knowledge to belong to this Church, a politicall Magi∣strate: who ministreth to e∣uery man Iustice, desending the good, and punishing the euill, to whom we must ren∣der
honour and obedience in all things, which are not con∣trary to the word of God. And as Moses, Ezechias, Iosias, and other godly ru∣lers, purged the Church of God, from Superstition and Idolatrie: so the defence of Christs Church appertei∣neth to the Christian Magi∣stractes, against al Idolaters and Heretikes, wherein stan∣deth only remission of sinnes purchased by Christs bloud, to al them that beleeue, whe∣ther
they be Iewes or Gen∣tiles, and leades vs to vayne confidence in Creatures, and trust in our own imaginati∣ons. The punishment where∣of, although God oftentimes deferreth in this life: yet af∣ter the general resurrection, when our soules and bodies shall arise againe to immor∣talitie, they shall be damned to vnqueachable sire, and then we, which haue forsaken all mans wisdome, to cleaue vnto Christ, shall heare that
ioyfull voyce. Come ye bles∣sed of my Father, inherice ye the kingdome prepared for you, from the beginning of the world, and so shall goe triumphing with him in bo∣die and soule, to remaine e∣uerlastingly in glory, where we shall see God face to face, and shall no more need one to instruct another, for we shall all know him, from the high∣est to the lowest: To whom with the Father, the Sonne and holy Ghost, be all praise
honor, and glorie, now and for euer. So be it. The Commandements of God giuen by Moses, and expounded by Christ. The first Table. THou shalt haue none o∣ther Gods bt me. Exo. 20. Deut. 6. I am the Lord thy God, which haue brought thee out of the land of AEgypt, out of the house of bondage. Christ. Mat. 6. Heare Israel, Our Lord God is one Lord,
and thou shalt loue thy Lord God with all thy heart, and with all thy soule, and with all thy mind, and with all thy strength. Matth. 4. Thou shalt wor∣ship thy Lord God, and him onely shalt thou serue. ij. Thou shalt not make to thy selfe any grauen image, nor the likenesse of any thing that is in heauen aboue, or in the earth beneath, nor in the water vnder the earth, thou shalt not bowe downe to
them, nor worship them. For I the Lord thy God am a ie∣lous God, and visit the sinnes of the Father vpon the chil∣dren, vnto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me, and shewe mercie vnto thousands in t hem that loue me, and keepe my comman∣dements. Iohn. 1. No man hath séene God at any time. The only begotten Sonne, which is in the bosome of the Fa∣ther, hath declared him
Christ. Iohn. 4. God is a Spirit, and they that wor∣ship him, must worship him in spirit and truth. Acts 18. For as much as we are the generation of God, wee ought not to thinke, that the Godhead is like vnto Gold, Siluer or Stone, grauen by craft, or imagination of man. 1. Iob. 5. Babes, kéepe you from Images. Sap. 14. Cursed is the I dol that is made with hands: yea, both it, and he that made
it, because it was called God, whereas it is but a fraile thing. For the vngodly and his vngodlines are both like abhominable vnto God. iij. Thon shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vaine. For the Lord will not hold him guiltles, that taketh his name in vaine. Christ, Mattth. 5. Ye haue heard how it was sayd vnto them of olde tyme: Thou shalt not forsweare thy selfe, but shalt perfourme thyne
othes to the Lord. But I say vnto you, Sweare not at all, neither by heauen, for it is Gods seate, nor yet by the earth, for it is his footestoole, neither by Ierusalem, for it is the ciite of the great King: neither shalt thou sweare by thy head, because thou caust not make one white hayre. or a blacke. But let your com∣munication be yea, yea, and nay, nay: for whatsoeuer is more then that, commeth of euill. Eccl. 24. The man that
vseth much swearing, shall be filled with iniquitie, and the plague shall not be out of his house. Zachar. 5. The Pro∣phet saith, that the curse of God shall rest in the house of fhim that sweareth falsty, and consume it with the Timber and stones thereof. iiij. Remember that thou keepe holy the Sabbath day, sixe dayes shalt thou labour and doe all that thou hast to doe, but the seuenth day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God,
in it thou shalt doe no maner of worke, thou, thy sonne, and thy daughter, thy man ser∣uant, and thy mayd seruant, thy cattell, and the straunger that is within thy gates, for in sixe daies the Lord made hea∣uen and earth, the Sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seuenth day: wherefore the Lord blessed the seuenth day and hallowed it. Christ, Matth. 12. It is lawfull to doe a good déede on the Sabboth day. Matth. 2.
For the sonne of man is Lord euen of the Sabboth day. The Lord saith by his Pro∣phet Esay, Esay 26.58. he∣brewes 4. That his Sabboth is hallowed and kept: when we rest and cease to doe our owne wayes: when we in word, thought and déede ful∣fill his wil, and not ours: and when we suffer him to do his workes in vs. That at the last wee may come to that Sabboth and true rest, euen eternall life, which Christ
the Lord of the Sabbath hath obtained for vs by his blood. The second Table. v. Honour thy Father and thy Mother, that thy daies may be long in the land which the Lord thy God giueth thee. Christ, Matth. 15. Honor thy Father and Mother: that is the first Commande∣ment that hath any promise, that thou maiest be in good estate and liue long on the Earth. By this Comman∣dement
Christ teacheth vs not only to haue our Father and Mother in reuerence, and to obey them, as he him∣selfe was so subiect vnto his mother, he Virgine Mary. But also to minister vnto their necessities. Match. 15. Marke 7. Eccles. 3. He that feareth the Lord, honoureth his Father and Mother, and doth them seruice, as it were vnto the Lord himselfe, Ho∣nor thy Father in deede and word, and in all patience, that
thou mayst haue Gods bles∣sing, and his blessing shall a∣byde with thee at the last. The blessing of the Father buyldeth vp the houses of the children: But the mothers curse, rooteth the foundati∣on, &c. vj. Thou shalt doe no mur∣ther. Christ. Math. 5. Ye haue heard how it was said vnto them of the old time. Thou shalt not kill. Whosoeuer killeth, shall be in daunger of iudgement. But I say vn∣to
you: whosoeuer is an∣grie with his Brother, shall be in dauger of iudgement: Whosoeuer sayth to his brother, Racha, shall bee in daunger of a Counsell. But whosoeuer sayth, thou foole, shall bee daunger of hell fire. Item, yee haue heard how it is sayd, thou shalt loue thy neighbours and hate thyne enemies: But I say vnto you, loue yor enemies, blesse them that curse you, doe good
to them that hate you, pray for them that doe you wrong, and persecute you: that ye may be the children of your Father which is in Heauen. For he maketh the Sonne arise on the euill, and on the good, and sendeth his rame on the iust and on the vniust. vij. Thou shalt not commit adulterie. Christ, Matth. 5. Ye haue heard how it was said to them of the olde time: Thou shalt not commit adulterie. But I
say vnto you: that whosoeuer looketh on a wife, lusting af∣ter her hath committed a∣dultlerie with her alreadie in his heart. 1. Cor. 6. knowe yee not that your bodies are the members of Christ: Shall I now take the mem∣bers of Christ, and make them the members of an Harlot? God forbid. Doe you not know that he which coupleth himselfe with an Harlot, is become one body? For they (saith he) shall be
two in one flesh. But he that is ioyned vnto the Lord is one spirit. Flee fornication: Euery sinne that a man doth is without the bodie, but he that is a fornicatour, sinneth against his owne bodie. Ei∣ther knowe ye not, how that your bodies are the tempses of the holy Ghost, which dwelleth in you, whom you haue of God, and how that you are not your owne? For ye are dearely bought, there∣fore glorifie God in your bo∣dies
and in your Spirites, which are Gods. Hebr. 13. Let wedlocke be had in price in all poynts, and let the Chamber be vndefileld: for whoremongers and adulte∣rers God will iudge. viij. Thou shalt not steale. Christ, Matth. 10. Steale not. Detraude no man. Matth. 5. If any man wil sue thee at the law, and take thy coate from thee, let him haue thy cloake also. Giue to him that asketh, and from
him that would borrow, turne not away. 1. Corin. 6. Now is there vtterly a faulte a∣mong you, because ye goe to lawe one with another. Why rather suffer ye not wrong? Why rather suffer yee not your selues to be robbed? Nay, yee your selues doe wrong and robbe, and that the brethren. Ephes. 4. Let him that did steale, steale no more, but let him rather la∣bour with his hands same good thing, that he may haue
to giue him that needeth. jx. Thou shalt not beare false witnesse against thy neigh∣bour. Christ, Mark. 10. Beare no false witnesse. Matth. 13. I say vnto you, that of euery idle worde which men shall haue spoken, they shall giue accounts at the day of Iudg∣ment. Ephes. 4. Wherefore put away lying, and speake euery man the truth to his neighbour: for as much as we are members one of ano∣ther.
Let no filthie commu∣nication proceede out of your mouthes: but that which is good, to edifie with all when neede is, that it may haue fa∣uour with the hearerse. Let al bitternesse, fiercenesse, and wrath, roaring and cursed speaking, be put away from you. Ephe. 5. Let not frithi∣nesse, foolish talking, nor ie∣sting (which are not comely) be once named among you: but rather giuing of thanks. x. Thou shalt nor desire thy
neighbours house: thou shalt not desire thy neighbours wife, nor his mayde, nor his Oxe, nor his Asse, nor any thing that is thy neighbours. Christ, Math. 7. Whatso∣euer ye would men should do to you, euen so do ye to them. Marke. 7. To loue a mans neighbour as himselfe, is a greater thing then all burnt Offerings and Sacrifices. Matth. 14. Be not ouer∣come with iust, for the care of this world, and the deceitful∣nesse
of riches choke the word, Hebrewes. 13. Let your con∣uersation be without coue∣tousnesse, and bee content with that ye haue alreadie. 1. Tim. 6. Godlinesse is great riches, so a man be content with that he hath. For we brought nothing into the world, and it is a plaine case, that we carrie nothing out. When we haue food and rai∣ment, let vs therewith be content. They that will be rich, fall into temptations
and suares, and into many foolish and noyseme lustes, which drowne men in perdi∣tion and destrucion. For Co∣uetousnisse is the roote of all euil, which while some lusted after, they erred form the faith, and tangled them∣selues with many sorrowes. Deut. 6. These words which I commaunde thee this day shall be in thyne heart, and thou shalt whet them in thy Children, and shalt talke of them, when thou art at home
in thine house, and as thou walkest by the way, and whē thou liest downe, and when thou risest vp, and thou shalt binde them for a signe vpon thine head. And they shall be papers of remembraunce be∣tweene thine eyes, and thou shalt write them vpon the posses of thy house and vpon thy gaies. Deut. 3. Take heede and heare all these words which I commaund thee, that it may go wel with thee, and with thy Children
after thee for euer, when thou doest that which is good and right in the sight of the Lord thy God. Deut. 6. See thou do that which is right, and in the sight of the Lord, that thou mayst pros∣per. Deut. 12. He shal not de after al these things that we do here this day, euery man what see moth him good in his owne eyes, but whatsoeuer I commaund you, take hée∣e do, and put nought there∣to, nor take ought thereirō.
Deuter. 27. Curied bee he that maintaynech not all the words of the law to do them. Galat. 3. Christ hath deliue∣red vs from the curse of the law, in as much as he was made accursed for vs (for it is written: Cursed is euery one that hangeth on trée) that the blessings of Abraham might come on the Gentiles, through Iesus Christ, that we might receiue the pro∣mise of the Spirit through faith. Ierem. 31. This is the
Testament that that I wil make with the house of Israel. Af∣ter those dayes (say the Lord) I will put my Lawes in their minds, and in their hearts I wil write them, and their sinnes and iniquities I wil no more remember. And I will be with my people. The svveete and louing promises of almightie God in such as keepe his Commaundements. Deut. xxviij. IF thou hearken diligently vnto the voyce of the Lord
thy God to obserue and doe all his Commaundements: Blessed shalt thou be in the towne, and blessed in the fields. Blessed shall be the fruite of thy bodie, the fruite of the ground, and the fruite of thy Cattell, the fruite of thyne Oxen, and the flockes of sheepe. Blessed shall thy Barnes be and thy siore, bles∣sed shalt thou be both when thou goest out, and blessed when thou commest in.
The Oration of Iob in his most grieuous aduersitie and losse of goodes. Iob. 1. NAked came I out of my mothers wombe, and naked shall I turne againe, and the Lord hath taken a∣way, as it hath pleased the Lord, so is it done, now bles∣sed be the name of the Lord. A Prayer in prosperitie. I Giue thee thankes O God Aloughtie, which not on∣ty hast indued me with the
giftes of nature, as reason, power, and strength, but also hast plentifully giuen me the substance of this world. I ac∣knowledge (O Lord) that these are thy gifts, and con∣fesse with holy Saint Iames that there is no perfect nor good gift, but it commeth from thee (O Father of light) which giuest freely & castest no man in the teeth, I acknowledge with the Pro∣phet Agge, that gold is thine and Siluer is thine, and to
whome it pleaseth thee thou giuest it, to the godly, that they may be the disposers and distributers thereof, and to the vngodly, to heape vp their damnation with all. Wherefore my most merci∣full God. I humbly beseech and desire thee, to frame in me with the holy Spirit, a faithfull heart and readie hand, to distribuce these thy good gifts accoding to thy will and pleasure, that I treasure not vp heere where
theeues may rob, and moths corrupt: but to treasure vp thy heauenly kingdome, where neither Theefe may steale, nor moth defile, to myne owne comfort (whom of thy mercie thou hast pro∣mised to reward therfore) to the good example of the hum∣ble and meeke of the Congre∣gation, and to the glorie of thy name. To whome with thy Sonne, and holy Ghost be al honor and praise, world without end. Amen.
A godly prayer to be sayd in thy aduersitie and trouble. O Lord GOD, without whose will and pleasure a Sparrowe doth not fall on the ground, saeing it is thy will and permission that I should be in this miserie and aduersitie, and séeing also thou doest punish mee with aduersitie and trouble not to destroye mée, and cast me a∣way: but to call me to repen∣taunce, and saue mee: for whom thou doest loue, him
doest thou chasten. Further∣more, seeing afflictions and aduersitie worketh patience, and who so patiently beareth tribulation, is made like vn∣to our Sauiour Christ the head: Finally, seeing that in all tribulation and aduersity, I am in assurance of comfort at thy gracious hands, for thou commaundest me to call vpo thee in time of tribula∣tion, and hast promised to heare and succour me: grant me therefore, O almightie
God and mercifull Father, in all trouble and aduersitie to be quiet, without impati∣ence, and mururing, with∣out discouraging and despe∣ration to praise and magnifie thee, to put my whole trust and confidence in thee, for thou neuer forsakest them that trust in thee, but workest all for the best to them that loue thee, and seeke the glorie of thy name. Tot hee he glo∣cie for euer: So be it.
A prayer to be sayd before the re∣ceiuing of the Communion. O Father of mercie and God of all consolation, seeing all creatures doe knowledge and confesse thee to be their gouernour and Lord, it becommeth vs the workemanship of thine owne handes, at all times to reue∣rence and magnifie thy godly Maiesti.e First, for that thou hast created vs to thine owne Image and similitude, but chiefly, because thou hast de∣liuered
vs from that euer∣lasting death and damnati∣on, into the which Sathan drewe mankinde by the meanes of sinne: from the bondage whereof neither man nor Angell was able to make vs free: but thou (O Lord) rich in mercie, and in∣finite in goodnesse hast pro∣uided our redemption, to stand in thine onely and wel∣beloued sonne, whom of very loue, thou diddest giue to be made man, like vnto vs in all
things, sine xcepted, that in his bodie, he might receiue the punishment of transgres∣sion by his death, to make sa∣tisfaction to thy iustice, and by his resurrection to de∣stroy him that was the au∣thor of death, so to bring a∣gaine life to the world, from which the whole spring of A∣dam was most iustly exiled. O Lord, we acknowledge that no creature was ble to comprehend the length and the breadth, the deepenesse,
and heigot of that most exces∣sent loue, which moued thee to shew mercie, where none was deserued, to promise and giue life, where death had gotten the victorie, to receiue vs into thy grace when we could do nothing, but rebel a∣gainst thy maiestie, O Lord, the blind dulnesse of our cor∣rupt nature, will nto suffer vs sufficiently to weigh these thy most ample benefites: yet neuerthelesse, at the commaundement of Iesus
Christ our Lord, we present our selues to this thy Table (which hee hath left to bee vsed in remembrance of his death, vntill his comming againe) to declare and wit∣nesse before the world, that by him alone we haue receiued libertie and life: that by him alone thou doest acknow∣ledge vs to be thy children and heires: that by him alone wee haue entraunce to the trone of thy grace: that by him alone, we are possessed
in our Spiritual kingdome, to eate and drinke at his Ta∣ble, with whom we haue our conuersation present in Hea∣uen, and by whom our bo∣dies shall be raised vp againe from the dust, and shall be placed with him in that end∣lesse ioy, which thou (O fa∣ther of mercie) hast prepared for thine elect before the foun∣dation of the world was laid. And these most inest ima∣ble benefits, we acknowledge and confesse to haue receiued
of thy free mercie and grace, by chine onely beloued sonne Iesus Christ. For the which therefore we thy congrega∣tion, moued by the holy Spirice: render to thee all thankes, praise and glo∣rie, for euer and euer. A∣men. ¶ A thankes giuing after the re∣ceiuing of the holy Com∣munion. MOst mercifull father, we render to thee all praise, thankes, honour, and
glorie, for that it hath plea∣sed thee of thy great mercy to graunt vs miserable sin∣ners, so excellent a gift and treasure, as to receiue vs into the fellowship and companie of thy deare sonne Iesus Christ our Lord, whom thou hast deliuered to death for vs, and hast giuen him vnto vs, as a necessarie foode and nourishmēt vnto euerlasting life. And now we beséech thée also (O heauenly father) to graunt vs this request, that
thou neuer suffer vs to be∣come so vnkind, as to forget so worthie benefites, but ra∣ther imprint and fasten them sure in our hearts, that we may grow and inicrease dayly more and more in true faith which continually is exerci∣sed in all manner of good workes: and so much the ra∣ther (O Lord) confirme vs in these perillous dayes and rages of Sathan: that we may constantly stand and continue in the confession of
the same, to the aduaunce∣ment of thy glorie, which art God ouer all things blessed for euer. Amen. A comfortable Prayer. O Lord God almigbtie, and Father most mer∣cifull, there is none like thee in heauen or in earth, which workest all things, for the glorie of thy name, and the comfort of thine elect. Thou diddest once make man ruler ouer all thy creatures, and placed him in the garden of
all pleasure, but how soone (alas) did he in his felicitie, forget thy good∣nesse. Thy people Israel also in their wealth, did euermore run a∣stray, abusing thy manisld mercies: like as all flesh con∣timually rageth, when it hath gotten libertie, and externall prosperitie. But such is thy wisedome adioyned to thy mercies (deare Father) that thou seekest all meanes pos∣sible to bring thy children to the sure sence, and liuely fee∣ling
of thy fatherly fauour. And therefore, when prospe∣ritie will not serue, then sen∣dest thou aduersitie, graci∣ously correcting all thy Chil∣dren whom thou receiuest into thy houshold. Wherfore I wretched and miserable sinner, render vnto thee most humble and heartie thankes, that it hath pleased thee to call me home to thy folde, by thy fatherly correction at this present, whereas in presperlite and aduersitie,
I did neglect thy greace offe∣red vnto me. For the which negligence and many other grieuous sinnes, where of I now accuse my selfe before thee, thou mightest most iust∣ly haue giuen me vp into a re∣probate minde, and indurati∣on of hart, as thou hast done others. But such is thy good∣nesse (O Lorod) that thou sée∣mest5 to forget al my offences, and hast called me of thy good pleasure from all idolatrie, to professe thy name, and to
suffer some Crosse amongst thy people for thy truth, and Gospel sake, and so to be thy witnesse with the Prophets and Aposties, yea with thy dearely beloued sonne Iesus Christ our head, to whom thou doest, being heere, fashi∣on me like: that in his glorie, I may also be like him when he shall appeare. O Lord God what am I vpon whom thou shouldest shewe this great mercie? O most lo∣uing Lord forgiue me my
vnthankefulnesse, and all my sinnes, for Iesus Christes sake. O heauenly Father, increase thy holy Spirit in me, to teach my heart to crye Abba, deare Father, assure me of thy eternall election in Christ, to reueale thy will more and more towards me, to confirme mee so in thy trueth, that I may liue and dye therein, and that by the power of the same Spirite, I may boldlie giue an account of my faith
to all men, with humblenesse and meekenesse, to the glo∣rie of thy most holy name. Thorowe Iesus Christ our Lor and onely Sauiour. So be it. A meditation for a vvoman vvith childe, and specially vvhen she entreth in to trauell. O Almightie and merci∣full Father, which of thy bountifull goodnesse hast fructified my wombe, and of thy gracious blessing hath created mee a reasonable
creature, I most heartily thanke thee, not only for this thy gracious gift, but also for that thou hast at all times, since I conceiued, preserued me from all perils, both of soule and bodie, and hast so moderated all my nips, pin∣ches, throwes, and pangs, that I haue hetherto right well escaped them, I ac∣knowledge (O Lord) iustly for our sinfull transgression of thy commaundements, thou saidst vnto the first wo∣man,
and in her to vs all: I will increase thy sorrowe when thou art with childe: with paine shalt thou bring forth thy children. And our paines therefore that we suf∣fer in this behalfe, are none other thing but a worthie Crosse layde vpon vs, by thy godly ordinance, to the which with heart and minde, I humbly submit me, trusting surely, and being fully per∣swaded in my faith, that thou callest none into perrill and
daunger, but both thou canit and wilt at conuenient sea∣son deliuer them. Thou (most gracious GOD) hast commaunded vs in all our trouble to call vpon thee for ayde and helpe: and not only hast commaunded vs, but al∣so of thy mercifull goodnesse hast promised to vs good de∣liuerance, saying: Call vpon mee in the time of trouble, and I will deliuer thee. O good Lord, how greatly doe these words comfort my hart,
and sustaine my sillie soule? Who would not greatly reioyce, that knoweth cer∣tainely almighty God to be present with him in his trouble? Saith not God thus: Or euer they cal (saith he) I shall aunswere them, while they are yet but thinking how to speake, I shal beare them, and in the Psalme, I am with him, saith God, in his trouble, out of which I will deliuer them. What a comfortable
Lord is this? He is more readie to help, then we to call for help. He is more readie to giue grace, then we to aske it. There was neuer a∣ny yet, that with a sure faith asked grace of this Lord, but he had it. Christ saith, aske and ye shall haue. Euery one the ex∣centeth none. Verely, verely, I say vnto you (saith Christ) whatsoeuer you shal aske my Father in my name, he shall giue it you. Our Sauiour
Christ saith this, and he is God. And shall not I hear∣ken to my Lord God his com∣mandements and promiss? Verely, I will sticke surely to it. For sure I am, that soo∣ner shall heauen and earth perish, then Gods promis. be vnpersourmep. For albeit e∣uery man naturally is a lyar and deceiver, yet God is al∣waies true and iust in all his words and promises. I will therefore make my suite vnto him, whom I neede not goe
farre to seeke, for he is eue∣ry where present iwth his e∣lect, and is nigh vnto al them that call vpon him faithful∣ly. And thus I will pray vn∣to him. A prayer of a vvoman vvith Child. FAther of mercy, and God of comfort and consola∣tion, I thy poore handmaid, humbly beseech thee, for Christ Iesus sake, and in his blessed and holy name that thou wilt vouchsafe
to torgiue me all my sinnes and trespasses, that I haue heretofore offended thy holy Maiestie, either in thought, consent, delectation, word or deede and that thou wilt hereafter during my life, mercifully preserue me from transgressing of thy Com∣maundements, and dayly in∣crease in me perfect repen∣tance for my sinnes, a sure purpose of amendment of life, a diligent studie to walke in thy commaundementes,
increase in me also a liuely faith, a sure hope, and and ar∣dent charitie. Ingreffe in me humblenesse of heart, meeke∣nesse of minde, cleannesse of Conscience. Graunt me, that I may be wise, sad, sober, discreete, cir∣cumspect, and well aduised in all my sayings. And that I may strongly ouercome all the temptations of mine ene∣mies the Deuill, the world, and the flesh. And that whe∣ther by sleeping, waking, ea∣ting,
drinking, or whatsoeuer I doetall may be to thine ho∣nour and glorie. Graunt me also that I may humbly reuerence, and faith∣fully loue mine Husband, and be obedient to all his ho∣nest, lawfull, and godly re∣quests. And chiefly of all, graunt me (O Lord) that I may feare and dread thee. For well assured I am, that look how high the heauen is, in comparison of the Earth, and so great is Gods mercie
towards thē that feare him. Looke how wide the East is from the West, so farre hath he set our sinnes from vs, Yea, like as a Father piti∣eth his owne children, euen so is the Lord mercifull to them that feare him. And as touching my deliuerance of this burthen and thy graci∣ous gift, I am right well as∣sured, that vnlesse thou pros∣per my trauell, all womens help, & all phificke is in vaine: but my full trust is, that like
as thou hast created this child in me, and hast breathed into it the spirit of life, so at such time, as shall be seene most meete to thy godly Ma∣iestie, thou both caust, and wilt prosper the childs birth and my deliuerance. In con∣sideration whereof, I humb∣lie beseech thee of thy fa∣therly pittie, so streng then me in this my daungerous labour and trauell: and so sustaine mee, that I may patientlie beare all the
throwes and pangs, and ac∣cording to thy promise, suffer me not to be tempted aboue my strength, but in the mid∣dest of my temptation, make a way to come out, that I may beare it. Increase my faith, O most mercifull Sa∣uiour Christ, that I may constantly beleeue thy word, which saiest, ye shall be sor∣rowfull, but your sorrowe shall be turned into ioy. A woman when she trauaileth hath sorrowe, for her hower
is not come, but when she is deliuered of the childe, she thinketh no more of the an∣guish for ioy that a man childe is borne into the world. I beseech thee the re∣fore, in the daungerous time of my crauell, graunt me speedie deliuerance, and ioy∣full beholding of my childe, that I being a merrie mo∣ther, may render vnto thee honor, laude, praise and thankes, for thine aboundant mercie, and gracious giftes
and benefites. And finally, a∣boue all things, I beseech thy gracious goodnes, to en∣due my child with grace, that it may be one of the number of thine elect, Babtized, and regenerated in the holy Ghost. And that at the yéeres of discretion, it may learne to know thee, and knowing thee, may trust surely in thy mercy, and trusting in thy mercie, may heartile loue thee, louing thee, may feare to displease thee, and fea∣ring
to displease thee, may walke and continue in the o∣bedience of thy Commande∣ments. And finally attaine uerlasting ioy and felicitie. Through ur Lord Iesus Christ, which liueth and igneth with thee, and the holy Ghost, world without . So be it. she is deliuered. O My Lord GOD, I thanke thee with all my heart, wit, vnderstan∣ding,
and power, for that thou hast vouchsafed to deli∣uer me out of the perill of this most dangerous trauel, and hast sent into this world, out of my wofull wombe this childe a creature of thine owne fashioning, forming, and shape, like vnto the rest of the Children of thy creati∣on, for which I am not able worthely enough of my owne faile nature, to giue to thee condigne thankes, praise, honour, and glorie, for thy so
great benefites shewed vnto me, in pulling me out from the pittes brincke of death, easing and releeuing all my wofull sorrowes, laborious panges, and most grieuous throwes, bitter anguishes, and vnspeakeable paynes, which I could neuer haue ascaped, without thy most singular ayde, helpe, reliefe, and succour: wherefore, I thy most humble hande∣maide, with stedfast and pure heart and handes, doe powre
our before thee my Lorde God and onely Sauiour, these my simple prayers of thankes-giuing (the fruite of my faith, hope, trust, cha∣ritie, and assured confidence) which I haue in thee as cer∣teining my selfe, that now thou hast preserued me for a further tryall of my nocati∣on and seruice towards thee, in this vaile of tranūcorie life, wherein I may haue time, by thy diuine permis∣sion and sufferance, to direct
all my steppes in thy wayes, and to honour and glorifie thee in my soule, and bodie, with condigne thankes in reioycing in thy holy name, according to thy most blessed word, wherein thou hast de∣clared, that a woman as long as shee is in trauell of her childe bearing, shee is for∣rowfull, heauie, and full of anguish, and intollerable pames, but as soone as the chile is borne, she learneth straighe wayes to forget all
her paynes, not remembring them any longer, and begin∣neth to reioyce, for that she hath brought foorth a childe into the world. Euen so O Lord fareth in with me, thy poore, humble, and obedient seruant, now reioysing, in that it hath pleased thee, to make me a glad mother, in bringing foorth this childe, whom now I doe present be∣fore the face of thy diuine maiestie, with an earnest zeale of a godly spirit, and
most pure affection, praying and beseeching thee euerla∣sting God, here to preserue this child, according to thy most holy will, that it may enioy the benefites, of all thy heauenly Sacraments, to liue, and serue thee in pure∣nesse of life, as a faithfull member of the Christian congregation, wherein thy name by it may be glorified, honoured, and praysed world without end. So be it.
A prayer vvhen a man commet home from his labour. THere is nothing, O Lord, more like to thy holy nature, then a quiet minde. Thou hast called vs out of the troublesome, dis∣quietnesse of the world, into that thy quiet rest and peace which the world cannot giue, being such a peace, that pas∣seth all mens vnderstanding. Houses be ordained for vs, that thereby we might be de∣fended from the inurie of
weather,  oyles of the . O gracious father, graunt that through thy great mer∣cy my bo may ier into this house, from outward actions, but so that it may become luxome, and obedient to the soule, and make no re∣sistance against the same, that in soule and bodie, I may haue a godly quiet∣nesse and peace, to praise
thy holy name. So be it. Peace bee in this house, and to all that dwell in the same. Thinke what a returne, and how merrie a returne it will be, to come to our eter∣nall, most quiet, and most happie home. Then will all griefe and sorrowe cease. Whatsoeuer here is plea∣sant and ioyfull, the same is nothing but a very shadowe in comparison of that which is to come.
A prayer for the sicke. O LORD looke downe from heauen, behold, visite, and relieue this thy seruant: looke vpon him with the eyes of thy mercie, giue him comfort and sure confi∣dence in thee, defend him from the daunger of the ene∣mie, and keepe him in per∣petuall peace and safetie: through Iesus our Lord. A∣men.
¶ Another prayer for the sicke HEare vs  ghty and most ifull GOD and Sauiour, entend thy ac∣customed goodnesse to this thy Seruant, which is grie∣ued with sicknesse, visite him (O Lord) as thou diddest Peters wiues mother, and the Captaines seruant. Re∣store vnto this ficke person his former health (if it be thy will) or els giue him grace to take thy visitation, that
after this payuefull life en∣ded, he may dwell with thee in life euerlasting. Amen. Another prater for the sicke. O Lord Iesu Christ thou only Sonne of the hea∣uenly Father, ou aone Re∣deemer and omnifficient Sauiour, we most humbly beseech thee, deliuer this sicke and weake person, now being in great paines, and at the poyne to depart out of this world, from all vglisome
and terrible assaults and temptations of the Deuill, sinne, and Hel. Deliuer him (O Lord) as thou deliue∣redst Noe from the raging waues of the Sea. Lot from the distruction of Sodome. Abraham from the feare of the Chaldees. The Children of Israell, from the tyrannie of Pharao, Dauid from the hand of Goliah, the three men from the violence of the fierie Fornace in Babilon. Daniell from the mouth of
the Lyons, Ionas from the bellie of the Whalefish, and Peter from the prison of He∣rode. Euen so, O gracious Lord, deliuer the soule of this person, both now and whensoeuer he shall departe hence, from all perrilland daunger. Open vnto him at the hower of death, the doore of Paradise, the gates of hea∣uen, and the entrie of euer∣lasting life. O Lord Iesus Christ, forgiue him all his sinnes, and leade him with
ioy, into the kingdome of thy heauenly father, euen vnto the bosome of Abraham, and appoynt him vnto euerla∣sting rest, that he may re∣iayce with thee, and with all the elect Children of God, in euerlasting life. A∣men. The sticke mans Prayer. LOrd hearken vnto my prayer, and giue eare to my most humble requestes. O most mercifull God: O father of all mercies, the fa∣ther
of our Lord and sam∣our Iesus Christ, be merci∣full to me a sruner. Haue pietie on me, and quickly helpe me noore wretch, for the most better passion, and most precious death of Ie∣sus Christ thy onely beget∣ten Sonne, and our alone redeemer, and Sauiour. Enter not into iudgement with thy setuant, O Lord, Haudle me not according to my deserts and merites, nei∣there reward me afeer mine
iniquities, but for thine in∣fi¦nite and vnmeasurable boun∣tie and exceeding great mer∣cie, receiue me, and take me into thy fauour. I miserable and weake creature, am in thy hand, I am thy boud ser∣uant and thy debter, O most gentle God, O most fauou∣rable Father, forsake me not, cast mee not away, poore wretch that I am. For I am thine with all there euer I can make. No man is able to strengthen mee, no man is
able to deliuer me, no man is able to helpe me, but thou alone. Thou art the true helper in aduersitie. Thou art the most sure and present comforter of all necessitie. Thou alone art our helper, our Bulwarke, our For∣tresse, and our most mightie and strongly defended tower. Thou, O God, art our re∣iuge, thou art our helper in all our tribulations. In thee O Lord, doe I trust, let me not be confounded. Let
me neuer be put to shame, let me not be deceiued of my hope, but preserue me, for thy righteousnesse sake. Bowe downe thine eare vnto me, make haste to deliuer me. Be my befender, O God, and my strong hold, thou shat mayest saue me. For thou art my strength, and my re∣fuge, yea, thou art my God, and my deies are in thy hands. Lighten thy countenance vpon thy seruant, and saue
me for thy mercies sake, O Lord. And forasmuch (O sooecte father) as it is thy godlie y• as, to call me now from this miserable life and wretched morld, I most ntirely beseech thee to de∣fend me, in this agonie of death, that neither Sathan nor his Ministers preuaile against me, but that I con∣e faithfull and constant vnto the ende, in the confes∣sion of thy holy name, loo∣king for full remission of all
my sinnes, in the precious blood of thy weldeloued Sonne and my onely Sa∣uiour Iesus Chrst, and that I departing in this faith, and perfect trust, may bee placed among thy blessed saints and heauenly Spi∣rites, and so for euer and euer remaine with thee in glorie. Graunt this, O most merci∣full Father, for thy deare Sonnes sake, Iesus Christ our alone mediatour and ad∣uocate. Amen.
My Testament. THis I make my Testa∣ment and last Will, in the name of the eternall li∣uing God, the Father, the Sonne, and the holy Ghost, in whose name I was baptized. In whom onely I hope and beleeue to be saued. Amen. First I bequeath my soule into thy hands, O God, Fa∣ther, Sonne, and holy Ghost. Thou hast first made me, and thou hast giuen thy Sonne to become man, and
dyed for my sinnes, and for the sinnes of the people. O father for thy sonnes sake haue mereie vpon me. O Lord Iesu Christ, thou Sonne of God, thou hast bought me with thy precious blood by one oblation, suffi∣ciently for all that beleeue in thee. O Christ, God and man, which are in Heauen, haue mercie vpon me, and be thou my mercifull mediator for me vnto thy Father, that I may be saued.
O holy Ghost, God conqual with the father & the sonne, haue mercie vpon me, worke thy diume power in me tho∣row thy gracious mipirati∣on. Drame me vnto Iesus Christ, that I may finde fa∣nour, and be saued. Amen. The second part. As concerning my bodie: that I bequeathe vnto the earth, from whence it came. My Consission. I Knowledge and confese with all my heart, that I
am a sinner, yea, such a sinner as hath neede of the grace, mercie, and fauour of God. My faith ioyned with hope. I beleeue that the Lord will haue mercie vpon me, for he hath first made me, and if it shall please him, he may saue me: This I beleeue, whe∣ther I liue or dye, I am the Lords. My hope. I Hope that I shall find both grace and mercie for my sinnes of God the Father, e∣uen
for Iesus Christes sake, in him I beleeue, he is my re¦deemer, he liueth for euer and euer: He maketh inter∣cession for sinnes. So this I know, that now I am a corruptible body, but I hope through Christ to rise an vncorruptible body. Now a mortall bodie, but through Christ and his merites, I hope to haue, though now an earthly bodie, then an hea∣uenly bodie. For as many as shall be saued, shall shine
in the kingdome of God, as bright as the Sunne. This my faith and hope I lay vp in my minde, the mind of my Soule, trusting onely to be saued, thorowe the merites of Iesus Christ, God and man, which is in Heauen. From whence we looke a∣gaine, the which shall change our vile bodie, and make it like his owne most glorious bodie, whereby he is ablel to subdue all things vnto him∣selfe. O Christ haue mercie
vpon mee, thou hast redee∣med mee, O Christ saue me. A Prayer for the Sicke. OH how sicke am I? My weakenesse increa∣seth more and more. Lord be mercifull vnto me, and giue mee grace pacientlie and thankefullie to beare the crosse, and in the middest of this my sickenesse, alwaies to say: Thy will O heauen∣ly Father bee done, and not mine.
Another Prayer for the Sicke. O Lorde Iesus Christ, which art the onely health of all men liuing, and the euerlasting life of them which dye in thy faith: I wretched sinner, giue & sub∣mic my selfe wholy to thy most blessed will. And I be∣ing sure, that the thing cannot perish which is committed vnto thy mercie, most hum∣bly beseech thee (O Lord) to giue me grace, that I may
now willinglie leaue this fraile & wicked flesh, in hope of the resurrection, which in better wise shall restore it to me againe: I beseech thee (O most mercifull Iesu Christ) that thou wilt by thy grace make strong my soule, a∣gainst all temptations, and that thou wilt couer and de∣fend my with the Buckler of thy mercie, against all the as∣saults of the Diuell. I see and acknowledge, that there is in my selfe, no helpe of
life and fasuation,  my considence, hope, and trust, i in thy most mercifull good∣nesse. I haue no merites  good workes which I may alleage before thée. Of sinnes and euill works, (alas) I see a grace heape, but through thy mercie I trust to be of the number of them to whom thou wilt not impute their sinnes, but take and accept me for righteous and iust, and to be the inheritour of e∣uerlasting glorie. Thou (O
most mercifull Lord) waste borne for my sake. Thou did∣dest suffer both hunger and thirst for my sake. Thou did∣dest preach, and teach, thou diddest pray and fast for my sake. Thou didest all good woorkes and deedes for my sake. Thou sufferedst most greeuous paynes and tor∣ments for my sake. And fi∣nally, thou gauest thy most precious body to dye, and thy most blessed blood to be shed on the Crosse for my sake.
Now most mercifull Sa∣uiour, let all these things profite me, which thou freely hast giuen me, which hast giuen thy selfe for me: let thy blood cleanse and wash away the spottes and foule∣nesse of my sinnes. Let thy righteousnes hide and couer my vnrighteousnesse. Let the merites of thy passion, and blood, be the satisfaction for my sinnes. Giue me Lord thy grace, that my faith, and perswasion in thy blood wa∣uer
not in me, but euer be firme and constant, that the hope of thy mercie, and life euerlasting neuer decay in me, that Charitie waxe not colde in me: finally, that the weakenesse of my flesh, be not ouercome with the feare of death. Graunt me also (O most mercifull Sauiour) that when death hath shut vp the eyes of my bodie: yet the eyes of my Soule may still behold and looke vnon thee, and that when death hath
taken away the vse of my tongue and speech yet that my heart may crye, and say vnto thee, O Lord, into thy hands I giue and commit my soule. Lord Iesu take my Spirit. A thankes giuing to God for the de∣parture of the faithfull out of this vvorld. O How can we (most lo∣uing Father) render vnto thee sufficient thankes for thine inestimable good∣nesse toward thy faithfull
seruants? Whom thou cal∣ling out of this wetched world, vouchsafe to place in thy heauenly Ringdome a∣mong the glorious companie of thy holy Angels, and bles∣sed Saints. O full precious is the death of the faithfull, in thy sight. Blessed are the dead that dye in the Lord. For they are at rest from their painfull trauels and labour. The soules of the righteous, are in thy hand, O God, and the paine of
death shall not touch them. In the sight of the vnwise they appeare to dye, but they are in peace. They shine as the sparkes, that runne through the red bush. They glister as the shyning hea∣uen. They are as the starres, world without end. They are as the Angels of God, They are clad with white garments, and haue golden Crownes vpon their heads. Tey doe seruice day and night before the glorious
Throne of thy Diuine Ma∣iestie. They neither hunger, nor thirst any more, neither doth the Sunne, or any heate fall vpon them, for the Lambe, which is in the mid∣dest of the Throne, gouer∣neth them, and leadeth them vnto the liuing fountaine of waters. They followe the Lambe, whithersoeuer he goeth. They haue such ioyes, as eye hath not seene, nor eare hath heard, neither is there any heart able to
thinke them, infinite and vn∣speakeable are thy treasures (O Lord) which thou hast layde vp for them, that de∣part in thy faith. For these thy fatherly benefites to∣ward the soule of the faith∣full, and for that it hath plea∣sed thee, to call this our Christian brother, from this vale of miserie, vnto thy hea∣uenly kingdome we giue vn∣to thee most heartie thankes, humbly beseeching thee, that thou wilt take like care for
vs, and so gouerne vs, with thy holy Spirit both in sick∣nesse, and in health, that we may liue a good and godly life in this present world, and whensoeuer it shall be thy good pleasure to call vs hence, we may with strong faith in thee, and in thy sonne Christ Iesu our Lord, com∣mend both our bodies, and soules into thy mercifull hands, and through thy good∣nesse be placed in thy glori∣ous kingdome, among thy
faithfull chosen people, and so for euer and euer, praise and magnifie thee our hea∣uenly Father, to whom with thy dearly beloued Sonne, Iesu Christ our Lord, and Sauiour, and the holy Ghost that most sweete com∣forter, bee all glorie and ho∣nour, world without end. A∣men.
A Prayer of the comming of Christ to iudgement, and of the reward both of the faithfull and vnfaithfull. OH Lord Iesus Christ, the Sonne of the euer∣liuing God, by whom all things were made, are ruled and gouerned, as of thy loue for our redemption, thou diddest nto disdaine to be our mediacour, and to take vp∣on thee our nature, in the wombe of a Virgin purely, and without sinne, by the
operation of the holy spirit, that both thou mightest in thine owne person, woonder∣fully beautifie, and exalt our nature and worke the same in vs also: first aboli∣shing the giltinesse of sinne, by remission, then sinne it selfe by death, and last of all, death, by raysing vp againe these our bodies, that they may be like vnto thine owne glorious, and immortall bo∣die, according to the power, wherewith thou art able to
subiect all things vnto thee: as (I say) of the loue for our redemption, thou becamest man and that most poore, and afflicted vpon earth, by the space of three and thirtie yeeres at the least, in most humilitie, and paydest the brice of our ransome, by thy most bitter death and pas∣sion, for the which I most hartely giue thankes to thee: so of the same by loue to∣wardes vs in thy good time, thou wilt come againe in the
cloudes of Heauen, with po∣wer and great glorie, with flaming fire, with thousands of Saints, with Angelles of thy power, with a mightie crie, shoure of an Archangel, and blast of a Trumpe, sud∣denly as a lightning, which shmeth from the East, &c. when men thinke least, euen as a Theefe in the night, when men be asleepe, thou wilt so come, I say, thus sud∣denly in the twinekling of an eye, all men that euer haue
been, be, and shall be, with women and Children ap∣pearing before thy tribunall iudgement seate, to render account of all things, which they haue thought, spoken, and done against thy lawe, openly, and before all An∣gels, Saints, and Deuils, and so to receiue the iust re∣ward of thy vengeance if that they haue not repented, and obeyed thy Gospell, and so depart from thee to the Deuill and his Angels, and
all the wicked, which euer haue been or shall be, into Hell fire, which is vnquench∣able and of paynes intolle ra∣ble, easellesse, endlesse, hope∣lesse, euen from the face of thy glorious and mightie power: but if they haue re∣pented and beleeued thy Gospell: If they be found watching with their Lamps and Dyle in their hands: if they be found readie appa∣relled, with the wedding garment of innocencie; if
they haue not hardned their harts, and hoorded vp the Treasure of thy vengrance, in the day of wrath, to be re∣uealed, but haue vsed the time of grace, the acceptable time, the time of saluation, that is, the time of this life, in the which thou stretchest out thy hand, and spreadest thine armes, calling and cry∣ing vnto vs, to come vnto thee, which art meeke in hart, and lowly, for thou wilt ease all that labour and are
heauie ioden. If they hane visited the sicke, and priso∣ners, comforted the comfort∣lesse, fed the hungrie, clothed the naked, lodged the har∣bourlesse. if they haue not laden their hearts with Gluttonie and surfetting, and carefulnesse of this life. If they haue not digged and hid their Talent in the ground doing no good there∣with, but haue been faithfull to occupie thy giftes to thy glorie, and here washed their
garments in thy blood by heartie repentance, then shall the Angels gather them to∣gether, not as the wicked, which shall be collected as Faggoctes, and cast into thy fire, but as the good wheate that is gathered into thy Barne: then shall they be caught vp to meete thee in the Cloudes: then shal their corruptible bodie, put on in∣corruption: then shall they be indued with immortalitte and glorie: then shall they be
with thee, and goe whither thou goest. Then shall they heare: Come ye blessed of my Father, possesse the king∣dome prepared for you from the beginning. Then shall they be set on Seates of Maiestie, iudg∣ing the whole world, then shall they reigne with thee for euer, then shall God be all in al with them, and to them, then shall they enter and in∣herite heauenly Ierusalem, and the glorious restfull
land of Canaan, where it is alwayes day and neuer night, where is no maner of weeping, teares, infirmitie, hunger, colde, sickenesse, en∣uie, malice nor sinne: but all wayes ioye without sorrow, mirth without measure, plea∣sure without paine, heauen∣ly harmonie, most pleasant melodie, saying and singing: Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of hosts, &c. Finally, the eye hath not seene, the eare hath not heard, neither hath it
entred into the heart of man, that they shall then inherite and most surely inio, al∣though here they be tormen∣ted, prisoned, burned, solici∣ted of Sathan, tempted of the flesh, and intangled with the world, where through they are inforced to crye: Thy kingdome come Lord Iesus, &c. How amiable are thy Tabernacles. Like as the Hart desireth the water brookes, &c. Now, let thy Seruants departe in
peace: I desire to be dissol∣ued, and to be with Christ: we mourne to our selues, wating for the deliuerance of our bodies, &c. O graci∣ous Lord, when shall I finde such mercie with thee, that I may repent, beleeue, hope, and looke for these things, with the fruition of those he auenly ioyes, which thou hast prepared for all them that feare thee, and to rest with thee for euer more.
A prayer concerning life euerlasting, the place vvhere it is, and the in∣comparable ioyes thereof. THat there is an euerla∣sting life none will de∣nie, but such as will denie God. For if he be true and iust (which he must needes be, or els he is not God) then can there not be but an eter∣nall life. That he hath both spoken it, and promised it in Matth. 25.1. Cor. 16. Hebr. 4.11. and 13.1. Peter. 1. it plainly appeareth, and els
where in very many places. So that to deny an euerla∣sting life, is to deny God, to deny Christ, and all that euer he did: also to denie all due∣tie and religion, to condemne of foolishnesse all good men, Martyrs, Confessours, E∣uangelists, Prophets, Pa∣triarkes. Finally, the denyal of eternal life, is nothing els but a denyall of the immor∣talitie of the Soule, and so a playne making of man no∣thing better then beasts. If
it so be, let vs then cate and drinke, for to morrowe we shall dye. Lord preserue vs from the saduciall and Epi∣curiall impietie, and graunt vs for thy mercies sake (deare God) that we may be assuredly perswaded, that there is in deede an eternall life, and blisse with thee, for them that put their trust in thee: amongst whom, ac∣count me for thy mercies sake. Againe, this eternall life
and the place appoynted for them that be thy seruants, all men doe graunt to be with thee, because thou art euery where: therefore eter∣nall life is euery where. For they by thy word doe knowe, that in almuch as no man can see thee and liue, this eternall life and thy blessed presence is most plea∣sant, and had in fruition after in an other world, whereun∣to by corporall death, they dodepart, and are translated
to a place aboue them, where thou dwellest in a light, whereunto no man can ap∣proach. Abrahams bosome (they reade) was aboue, as the place of the wicked was alowe and beneath. Helias was caught vp into Heauen, and thy Sonne our deare Sauiour prayed, that where he is, those also might be, which thou haddest giuen him, and might see his glo∣rie. Now here (deare Fa∣tehr) we learne by thy ppirit
was ascended and taken vp in his very bodie into hea∣uen, whether Stephen loo∣king vp and saw thy Christ standing on thy right hand: to whom he prayed. Oh Lord Iesus receiue my spi∣rite. Graunt, I beseech thee gracious God and Father, that I may haue a cleane heart, more and more to see thee, and so in spirit to see and looke often vpon this place, whither bring me at
the length in bodie also I humbly pray thee. Now, what a thing this euerlasting life is, no man is able to conceiue, much lesse able to vtter. For the peace of God which is eternall life, passeth all vnderstan∣ding. The eye hath not seene, the eare hath not heard, nei∣ther can mans heart con∣ceiue those things, which thou (deare God) hast prepa∣red for them that loue thee. Whatsoeuer therefore can
be spoken or imagined of the kingdome, of the clearnesse, ioy and felicitie of the same, is nothing in comparison, as we may see by the Prophets, which because they could not otherwise, vnder corporall things haue shadowed the same: so that the confidence of eternall life what a thing it is, can in no wise be tolde. Howbeit somewhat we may be brought into some sight of it, by earthly things, to thinke on this sort.
If God hath giuen heere so many things, in a strange place, how many are the great good things that be at home? If in a prison are so many mercies how many are they in the Palace? If the wicked haue so many bene∣fites, what is the siore, pre∣pared for thy seruants, Oh Lord? If thy Children finde such comforts in the day of teares and mourning, what shall they finde in the day of the Marriage? If which
beastes men being, haue the vse of innumerable bles∣sings, Oh how many are the blessings which they shall enioy with thy Angels and with thee thy selfe (O deare God) when they shall see thee, and haue the fruition of thee, in whom is fulnesse without lothing of all good and faire things, so that no∣thing can be more desired, and that for euermore? This thy children doe not see, as they now beleeue it: I say,
that euen in their bodies, they shall see it for euer, as Iob said. They beleeue that they shall see thee, and their owne eyes behold thee, when these our corporall eyes, our bodies being raysed shall doe their duties. Such a know∣ledge of thee, they beleeue to haue, as shall not be onely intellectuall, and by faith, as now it is: but euen a full sight, and fruition, yea a coniunction, and fellowship with thee. Now they see but
in a glasse, euen in a darke speaking: but then they shall see face to face. For faith, though it be the substance of things hoped for, and a cer∣taine darke sight of thee: yet it may not be compared to the reward of faith and glo∣rious sight, which we shall see in the life to come, when faith and hope shall cease. Now thy children knowe that they be thy Sonnes, though it yet appeare not what they shal be. We know
(say they) that when our Christ, God, and man shall appeare, then shall we be like vnto him, for we shall see him, euen as he is. Oh great prerogatiue, to see Christ is he is. Which is not to be considered so much for the manhood, as for the godhead it selfe: as Paule doth also write, that when all things are subiect vnto the sonne, then shall he be subiect vnto thee (deare Fa∣ther also) so that God may
be all in all. And therefore Christ our Sauiour prayed for vs, that we might knowe thee, the only true God: not that our Christ thy Sonne is not with thee, the true co∣equall and substantiall God, but that we might knowe how that after the iudge∣ment, such a mysterie of his mediatorship, shall not be in heauen, as it is now in earth. Then thou blessed Trinitie, God the Father, God the Sonne, and God the holy
Ghost, shall be all in all: thou shalt be the ende of our de∣sires: thou shalt be looked vpon with out ende, thou shalt be loued without loa∣thing, thou shalt be praised without wearinesse. Al∣though lothsomnes be wont to followe fulnesse, yet our fulnesse in the contemplation of thy pleasures, shall bring with it, now kynd at all of loth∣somnesse. Societie of ioyes shall be in the beholding of thee. Pleasures are on thy
right hand for euer. We shal be satisfted, when we arise after thine Image, I meane in the resurrection. Oh deare father, show thy selfe vnto vs, and we aske no more. Oh graunt vs with thy Saints in euerlasting life to praise with perpetuall praises, thy holy name. Happie then, and happie againe were we, if that day were come, that we might sing with thy Angels, Elders, and innumerable thousands, a newe song, and
say, thou Christ Iesus, which wast staine, art worthie to receiue power and riches, and wisedome, and strength, and honour, and glorie, and blessing. In this blessed life all kind of maladies, griefes, sorrowes and euils, be sarre away, and all full of all kind of myrth, ioy and pleasure. Oh that we might see now, a little with Saiut Iohn, that holy Citie, nowe Ieru∣salem, descending from Hea∣uan, prepared of God as a
Bride trimmed for her hus∣band. Oh that we might now something heare the great voyce speaking out of the throne, behold the Ta∣bernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and he shall be vnto them their God, he wil wipe away all teares from their eyes, and death shall be no more, nor weeping, nor cry∣ing, nor sorrowe, for the for∣mer things are gone.
A prayer of death, and the com∣moditie it bringeth. WHat other thing do wee daylie in this present life, then heape sinne vpon sinne, and hoorde vp trespasse vpon trespasse. So that this day is worse al∣wayes then yesterday, by in∣creasing of dayes so sinnes, and therefore thy indignati∣on, good Lord, against vs, but when we shall be let goe out of the prison of this bo∣die, and so taken into thy
blessed companie, then shall we be in most safetie of im∣mortalitie, and saluation, then shall come vnto vs, no sickenesse, no neede, no payne, no kinde of euill to soule or bodie, but whatso∣euer good we can wish, that shall we haue, and whatso∣euer we loath, shall be farre from vs. O deare Father, that we had faith to behold these things accordingly. Oh that our hearts were per∣swaded thereof, and our af∣fections
inflamed with the desire of them. Then should we liue in longing for that which now we must lothe. O helpe vs, and graunt that we being ignorant of things to come, and of the time of our death, which to thee is certaine, may so liue, and finish our iourney here, that we may be readie, and then depart when our departing may make most to thy glorie and our comfort, through Christ. What is this life,
but a smoke, a vapor, a sha∣dow, a warfare, a bubble of water, a word, grasse, a flo∣wer? That thou shalt dye it is most certaine, but the time, no man can tell when. The longer in this life thou doest remaine, the more thou sinnest, which will turne to thy more paine. By cogitati∣on of death, our mynds be often (in a manner) oppressed with darkenesse, because we doe but remember the light of the bodie, forgetting the
light of the minde, and for thy resurrection. Hereto re∣member the good things, that after this life shall en∣sue, without wauering in certeintie of faith, and so shall the passage of death be more desired. It is like a sayling ouer the Sea, to thy home and countrie. It is like a me∣dicine, or purgation to the health of soule and bodie: it is the best Phisition: it is like to a womans trauaile. For as the childe being deli∣uered,
commeth into a more large place then the wombe, wherein it did lye before, so mysoule being deliuered out of the bodie, commeth into a much more larger and fayrer place, euen into hea∣uen. A deuout prayer to be said daylie. O Almightie and eternal God, which vouch∣safest that we as it were hea∣ueuly Children, should euery one of vs call thee our hea∣uenly
Father. Graunt that among vs be purenesse and example of innocent life, thy most holy name may be sanc∣tified, that all other Nations beholding our goodnesse and vertuous deedes, that thou workest in vs, may be stirred to hallowe and glorifie thee. Graunt (O Lord) that the kingdome of thy grace and mercie, may reigne continu∣ally in our hearts, so that we may be worthie to be par∣takers of the Realme of
glorie and maiestie. Graunt that vnto the very death, we refuse not to followe thy di∣uine will, and that we, accor∣ding to the example of the celestiall Citizens, agreeing together quietly vnited in spirite, all controuersie in opinions layd apart, the lustes of the flesh being sub∣dued, and the flattering as∣saultes of the world and the Deuill ouercome, neuer wrastle against thy most holy will, but obey it in al things.
Graunt (O Lord) for our bodie needefull sustenaunce, that we may the more freely serue thee. Giue vs (we be∣seech thee O mercifull Fa∣ther) that Hearuenly bread, the bodie of thy Sonne Ie∣sus Christ, the very foode and health of our soules: giue vs the bread of thy di∣uine precepts, that we may truely walke, and liue after them. Giue vs the bread of thy heauenly word, which is the
strong fortresse and sure de∣fence of our Soules, that we being well fed and silled with this foode, may wor∣thily runne to the celestiall feast, where as is no hun∣ger. Graunt (O Lord) that we paciently beare and sus∣fer our enemies, and such as hurt vs, and willingly to for∣giue the offences committed against vs, that so we may finde the Lord in forgiuing vs our trespasses, milde and mercifull. Graunt (O Lord)
that we be not vtterly led in∣to temptation, that there by we should be lost. But in all perilles of temptation and in the middest of the stormie tempests and tribulations, let vs thy children, perceiue and feele thy fatherly suc∣cour, readie to helpe vs, least that we be (ouercome with the naughtie craftes, and de∣ceites of the tempter) should be drawne into euerlasting destruction, but when we be well assayed, approoued, and
purged with the fire of temp∣tation, then let vs finish our course, and so well and vali∣antly fight, that we may for euermore liue with thee in that heauenly Citie, where and against the which, no manner temptation canpre∣uaile. Finally, graunt most mercifull Father, that we through thy benigne good∣nesse, may be deliuered from all euils present and to come both in bodie and soule, and that at the last, that yoke of
that foule feend being shaken off, we may possesse the heri∣tage of the heauenly king∣dome, which thy Sonne with his precious blood bought for vs thy children: and there fore euer to haue the fruition of celestiall de∣lectations, accompanied with Angels and blessed Saints, through the helpe, benigni∣tie, and grace of our Saui∣our Iesus Christ, to whom, and to thee our father, and to the holy Ghost, be all glo∣rie
and honour, now and e∣uer. Amen. Another Prayer. O Heauenly father God almightie, I pray and beseech thy mercie beningly to behold me thy vnworthy seruant, that I may by thy gift of thy holy Spirit, fer∣uently desire thy kingdome, that I may knowne thy will and worke thereafter. Giue me O Lord wisdome. Make me constant, patient and strong in thee. Keepe me
Lord from the sleightie inua∣sion of the olde wilie Ser∣pent. Defend me from the counsailes and cursings of e∣uill tongues, let thy mightie arme be my shield against all the malignitie of the wicked world. Remember not O Lord myne offences: in∣struct, prepare me to repent and to be sorie for my sinnes. Make me to loue iustice, and hate wrong, to doe good, and abstaine from all euils, that I may be worthie to be cal∣led
thy child. To thee be ho∣nour and glorie, for euer and euer. Amen. A deuout Prayer. LORD hearken to my wordes, consider the thought of my heart. Be∣hold how lowde I crye vnto thee, let my iust prayer enter into thy cares, which vnfeig∣nedly commeth from my heart. Heare me Lord, for I am poore and destitute of mans helpe. Take care for my Soule, saue me thy Ser∣uant
which wholy trust in thee, haue mercie vpon me (O Lord) for I will neuer cease crying to thee for helpe For thou art milde and more mercifull then any tongue can expresse, as often as ad∣uersitie assayleth me, I will crye and call for helpe vnto thee, I will call vpon thee in the day time, and in the night my cry shall not be hid from thee, O thou God of the hea∣uens, and maker of the wa∣ters, and Lord of all crea∣tures,
heare me a poore sin∣ner calling vpon thee and putting my whole trust in thy mercie. Haue mercie vp∣on me for thy manifold mer∣cies sake, forgiue me al myne offences. Amen. The Letanie. O God the father of hea∣uen haue mercie vpon vs miserable sinners. O God the father, &c. O God the sonne, redee∣mer of the world, haue mer∣cie vpō vs miserable sinners.
O God the sonne, &c.
spare vs good Lord, spare thy people, whom thou hast redeemed with thy most pre∣cious blood, and be not angry with vs for euer. Spare vs good Lord. From all euill and mis∣chiefe, from sinne, from the crafts and assaults of the Deuill, from thy wrath, and from euerlasting damnati∣on. Good Lord deliuer vs. From all blindnesse of heart, from pride, vaineglo∣rie,
and hypocrisie, from en∣uie, hatred and malice, and al vucharitablenesse. Good Lord deliuer vs. From fornication, and all other deadly sinne, and from all the deceits of the world, the flesh and the deuill. Good Lord beliner vs. From lightning and tem∣pest, from Plague, Pesti∣lence and Famine, from bat∣taile, and murder, and from sudden death. Good Lord deliuer vs.
From all sedition and pri∣uie conspiracie, from all false doctrien and heresie, from hardnesse of heart, and con∣tempt of thy word, and com∣maundement. Good Lord deliuer vs. By the misterie of thy ho∣ly incarnation, by thy holy natiuitie and circumcision, by thy Baptisme, fasting and temptation. Good Lord deliuer vs. By thine agonie and bloody sweat, by thy Crosse
and Passion, by thy precious death and buriall, by thy glo∣rious resurrection and ascen∣tion, and by the comming of the holy Ghost. Good Lord deliuer vs. In all time of our tribu∣lation, in all time of our wealth, in the hower of death, and in the daye of iudgement. Good Lord deliuer vs. We sinners doe beseech thee to heare vs (O Lord God) and that it may please
thee to rule and gouerne thy holy Church vniuersally in the true worshipping of thée, in righteousnesse and holi∣nesse of life, thy seruant Eli∣zabeth our most gracious Queene and gouernour. We beseech thee, &c. That it may please thee to rule her heart in thy faith, feare, and loue and that
she may euermore haue ar∣fiance in thee, and euer leeke thy honour and glorie. We beseech thee, &c. That it may please thee to be her defender and kee∣per, giuing her the victorie ouer all her enemies. We beseech thee, &c. That it may please thee to illuminate all Bishops, Pastors, and Ministers of the Church, with true knowledge and vnderstan∣ding of thy word, and that
both by their preaching and liuing they may set it forth, and shew it accordingly. We beseech thee, &c. That it may please thee to indue the Lords of the Counsell, and all the Nobi∣litie, with grace, wisedome, and vnderstanding. We beseech thee, &c. That it may please thee to blesse and keepe the Ma∣gistrates, giuing them grace to execute iustice, and to maintaine truth.
We beseech thee, &c. That it may please thee to blesse and keepe all thy people. We beseech thee, &c. That it may please thee to giue to all nations, vni∣tie, peace, and concord. We beseech thee, &c. That it may please thee to giue vs an heart to loue and dread thee, and diligent∣ly to liue after thy comman∣dements. We beseech thee, &c.
That it may please thee to giue all thy people in∣crease of grace, to heare meekely thy word, and to re∣ceiue it with pure affretion, and to bring foorth the fruites of the spirit. We beseech thee, &c. That it may please thee to bring into the way of truth, all such as haue erred and are deceiued. We beseech thee, &c. That it may please thee to strengthen such as doe
stand, and to comfort and helpe the weake hearted, and to raise vp them that fall, and finally to beate downe Sa∣than vnder our feete. We beseech thee, &c. That it may please thee to succour, helpe, and com∣fort all that be in daunger, necessitie, and tribulation. We beseech thee, &c. That it may please thee to preserue all that trauaile by land, or by water, all wo∣men labouring of childe,
all sicke persons, and young children, and to shew thy pit∣tie vpon all prisoners and captiues. We beseech thee, &c. That it may please thee to defend and prouide for the fatherlesse children and wi∣dowes, and all that be deso∣late and oppressed. We beseech thee &c. That it may please thee to haue mercie vpon all men. We beseech thee, &c.
That it may please thee to giue and preserue to our vse, the kindlie fruites of the earth, so that in due time we may inioy them. We beseech thee, &c. That it may please thee, to giue vs true repentance, to forgiue vs all our sinnes, negligences and ignorances and to indue vs with the grace of thy holy spirite, to amend our liues according to thy holy word. We beseech thee, &c.
Sonne of God, we beseech thee to heare vs. Sonne of God, &c. O Lambe of God, that ta∣kest away the sinnes of the world. Graunt vs thy peace. O Lambe of God that ta∣kest away the sinnes of the world. Haue mercy vpon vs. O Christ heare vs. O Christ heare vs. Lord haue mercy vpon vs. Lord haue mercy vpon vs.
Christ haue mercy vpon vs. Christ haue mercy vpon vs. Lord haue mercie vpon vs. Lord haue mercy vpon vs. Our father which art in heauen, &c. And leade vs not into temptation. But deliuer vs from euill. Amen. The versicle. O Lord deale not with vs after our sinnes. The Answere. Neither reward vs after our iniquities.
Let vs pray. O God mercifull father, that despisest not the sighing of a contrite heart, nor the desire of such as be sorrowfull, mercifully assist our prayers that we make before thee in all our trou∣bles and aduersities, when∣soeuer they oppresse vs, and graciouslie heare vs, that those euils which the craft and subteltie of the diuell, or man worketh against vs, be brought to naught, and by
the prouidence of thy good∣nesse, they may be dispearsed, that we thy seruants being hurt by no persecution, may euermore giue thankes to thee in thy holy Church, through Iesus Christ our Lord. O Lorde arise, helpe vs, and deliuer vs for thy name sake. O God we haue heard with our eares, and our fa∣thers haue derlared vnto vs, the noble workes that thou
diddest in their dayes, and in the olde time before them. O Lord arise, helpe vs, and deliuer vs for thine honour. Glorie be to the father, &c. As it was in the begin∣ning, &c. From our enemies de∣fend vs O Christ. Graciously looke vpon our afflictions. Pitifully beholde the sor∣rowes of our hearts. Mercifullie forgiue the sins of thy people.
Fauourable with  heare our prayers. O Sonne of Dauid haue mercie vpon vs. Both now & euer vouch∣safe to heare vs, O Christ. Graciouslie heare vs, O Christ graciously heare vs, O Lord Christ. The versicle. O Lord let thy mercie be shewed vpon vs. The Answere. As we do put our trust in thee.
Let vs pray. WE humbly beseech thee, O Father mercifully to looke vpon our infirmities, and for the glory of thy name sake turne from vs those euils that we most righteouslie haue deserued: And graunt that in all out troubles we may put our whole trust and confidence in thy mercie, and euermore serue thee in holinesse, and purenesse of liuing, to thy honour and glorie, through
our onely Mediatour and Aduocate, Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. A prayer for the Queenes Maiestie. O Lord our heauenly Fa∣ther, high and mightie, King of Kings, Lorde of Lords, the onely ruler of Princes, which doest from thy throne, behold all the dwellers vpon earth, most hartily we beseech thee with
thy fauour, to beholde our most gracious Soueraigne Ladie Queene Elizabeth, and so replenish her with the grace of thy holy Spirite, that she may alway incline to thy will, and walke in thy way, indue her plentifullie with heauenly gifts, graunt her in health and wealth long to liue, strength her, that she may vanquish and ouercome all her enemins. Adn finally after this life, she may attaine euerlasting
ioy and felicitie: through Iesus Christ our Lorde. A∣men. A prayer for Pastors and Ministers of the Church. ALmightie and euerla∣sting God, which onely workest great meruailes, send downe vpon our Bi∣shops and Curates, and all Congregations committed to their charge, the health∣full
spirit of thy grace: and that they may truely pleas, thee, powre vpon them the continuall dewe of thy bles∣sing. Graunt this, O Lord, for the honour of our Aduo∣cate, and meditatour Iesus Christ. Amen. A prayer of Chryso∣stome. ALmightie God, which hast giuen vs grace at this time with one accorde,
to make our common sup∣plication vnto thee, and dost promise that when two or three be gatheren together in thy name, thou wilt grant their requestes: fulfill now, O Lord, the desires and pe∣titions of thy seruants, as may be most expedient for them, graunting vs in this worlde knowledge of thy trueth, and in the worlde to come life euerlasting. A∣men.
A prayer necessarie for all persons. O Mercifull GOD, I a wretched sinner re∣knowledge my selfe bound to keepe thy holy commaunde∣ments, but yet vnable to per∣forme them, and to be accep∣ted for iust, without the righ∣teousnesse of Iesu Christ thy onely Sonne, who hath per∣fectly fulfilled the Lawe, to iustifie all them that beleeue
and trust in him. Therefore graunt me grace, I beseech thee, to be occupied in doing of good workes which thou commaundest in holy Scrip∣ture, all the dayes of my life to thy glorie, and yet to trust onely in thy mercie, and in Christs merites, to be pur∣ged from my sinnes, and not in my good workes, be they neuer so many. Giue mee grace to loue thy holy word feruently, to search the scrip∣tures diligentlie, to reade
them humbly, to vnderstand them truly, to liue after them effectuallie. Order my life so, O Lord, that it be alway acceptable vnto thee. Giue me grace, not to reioyce in any thing that displeaseth thee, but euermore to de∣light in those things that please thee, be they neuer so contrarie to my desires. Teach me so to pray, that my petitions may be graci∣ouslie heard of thee. Keepe me vpright among diuersitie
of opinions and iudgements in the worlde, that I ne∣uer swarue from thy truth taught in holy Scripture. In prosperitie, O Lorde, saue me, that I waxe not proude. In aduersitie helpe mee, that I neither dis∣paire, nor blaspheme thy bo∣ly Name, but taking it pa∣tiently, to giue thee thanks, and trust to be deliuered af∣ter thy pleasure. When I happen to fall into sinne through frailtie, I beseech
thee to worke true repen∣tance in my heart, that I may be sory without despe∣ration, trust in thy mercie without presumption, that I may amend my life, and become truly religious with∣out hypocrisie, lowly in hart without fayning, faithfull and trustie without deceite, merie without lightnesse, sad without mistrust, sober without slothfulnesse, con∣tent with mine owne with∣out couetousnesse, to tell my
neighbour his faultes cha∣ritably without dissimula∣tion, to instruct my house∣holde in thy Lawes truely, to obey our Queene and all gouernours vnder her vn∣fainedlie, to receiue all lawes and common ordinan∣ces (which disagree not from thy holy word) obedientlie, to pay euery man that which I owe vnto him truely, to backebite no man, nor slaun∣der my neitghbour secretly, and to abhorre all vice, lo∣uing
all goodnesse earnsly. O Lord, graunt me thus to to doe, for the glory of thy holy Name, Amen. GOd preserue our Quéene Elizabeth, God destroy all her enemies, God pre∣serue her most honourable Counsellors. God ayde te Clergie in fetting forth of his trueth. God preserue the Nobilitie of this Realme, and all the Commons of the same.
God defend the fauourers of the Gospell,. God chaunge the hearts of our enemies, and send them a better mind. The power f God destroye Autichrist with all his wic∣ked kingdome. God send the Gospell a ioyfull and free passage through the whole world. God send vnto all de∣grees such grace that they may walke worthilie in their vocation and calling. Amen. FINIS.
