21486 99851523 16799
BRITAINES BƲSSE. OR A COMPVTATION aswell of the Charge of a Busse or Her∣ring-Fishing Ship. As also of the gaine and profit thereby. With the States Proclamation Annexed vnto the same, as concerning Herring-Fishing. By E. S. LONDON, Printed by William Iaggard for Nicholas Bourne, and are to be sold at his shop at the South entry of the Royal Exchange. 1615.
Britaines Busse. DIuers Treatises haue bene published heere in England, some long since, some very late∣ly, all of them inviting to the building and employing of Eng∣lish Fishing shippes, such as our neighbour Hollanders call Busses, Principally to fish for Herrings, with which kinde of Fish (Almighty GOD of his rich bounty, blessed be his name therefore) hath abundant∣ly stored his Maiesties Streames, on the coasts of Eng∣land, Scotland, and Ireland, aboue all the knowne parts of the world. Foure Bookes I haue seene of this Subiect. One called the Brittish Monarchy, written An. Dom. 1576. which is nere 40 yeares past. The second intituled Hitchcocks New-yeares gift, prin∣ted about 30 yeares since. The third, named Englands way to win wealth, and to encrease Ships and Marriners, published within these 2. yeares, whose Author▪ (I haue heard) was trained vppe from his youth: and very expert both in Nauigation and Fishing. The fourth styled the Trades Increase, now newly come abroad.
In all which foure Bookes, but especially in the two last, the Necessity, Faculty, Profit, and Vse of that Fish∣ing trade is proponed and handled. After I had read three of the former Bookes, and be∣fore the fourth and last came to light, I was much affec∣ted with the businesse. And the more I consider it, the more is my affection confirmed and encreased. And out of vehement desire to see this worke, which I con∣ceiue to tend so much to Gods glory: To the honour of our noble King: To the generall strength, safety, and commodity of all his Maiesties large Kingdomes and Dominions: And to the priuate and peculiar benefite and aduancement of euery priuate Vndertaker therein. I say out of vehement desire to see this worke in hand, & the prosperity thereof, I enquired as often (as conueni∣ently I could) what Busses or Fishing Ships were in buil∣ding on our Coasts, or were bought or vsed by any En∣glish. At length I was informed (and that very truely) that one Roger Godsdue Esquire, of Bucknam Ferry in Nor∣folke, had begun to apply himselfe to this worthy work, and had on the Stockes at Yarmoth fiue Busses; whereof I vnderstand one is since that time launched, and that the other foure are in good forwardnesse. But when vpon enquiry after the Gentleman, I heard him to be a man of such vndoubted honesty and integrity, besides his other vertues and worth, Methought I did see God beginning this good businesse in a good hand. Soone after I heard that another worthy gentleman, namely Sir William Haruie Knight had on the Stockes at Lyme-house in the yard of M. Steuens, Shipwright, a∣nother very faire large Busse neere as big as any Flemish Busse: which Busse I did after see my selfe when she was
in launching; and she is now in the Thames before Rad∣cliffe. But beside these two Gentlemen, I haue not yet heard of any English that haue yet applyed themselues that way. Now because after many considerations of that mat∣ter, I perceiued that none of the foure Treatises before mentioned, had set downe in very plaine particulars the exact charge of Building, Manning, Victualling, and furnishing of such a Busse; and of the gaine or profite, which by Gods blessing in probability may redounde yearely to the particular Owner and Aduenturer of such a Shippe. And conceiuing Hope that the publication of such particulars, might be some furtherance of the Action. I resolued to bestow my best labours to get such Par∣ticulars; and to that end I trauailed and conferred with such both Ship-wrights, Marriners, Fishermen, Net∣makers, and others, as I thought to bee able to informe me in the Premisses, that so I also might bring Straw or Morter to that noble Building. Or that I might picke or teaze Occam, or do somwhat, that am not able to do much. And for that vpon conference with some experienced in this Herring Fishing, I am informed that a Busse of thirty fiue Last, that is, of seauenty Tunne, is of a very good and meete size or scantling, wherewith in a foure months fishing yearely to make the gaine or profite by Herring onely; Heereafter in particular set downe, be∣sides her imployment yearely also Cod-fishing, &c.
I haue therefore here imparted such Instructions as I could attaine vnto. 1. FIrst, of the precise dimentions or proportions of such a Busse of 35 Last. That is of 70 Tun. 2. Secondly, the vttermost Charges of such a Busse, and the particular of all her Mastes, Yardes, Sailes, Flagges, Pullies, Shiuers, Tackling, Cables and An∣chors, together also with her cock-boat and oares. 3. Thirdly, the particulars of her Carpenters store, and of her Stewards store, and of her weapons, and the charge of them all. 4. Fourthly, the particulars of her Herring Nets, and of the VVarropes and other Ropes, Cords and lines, Corke, Pynbols or Buyes belonging to those Nets, with the particular charges of them all. 5. Fiftly, the particular Tooles and Implements vsed in dressing and packing of the saide Herrings, and their particular prizes. 6. Sixtly, the charge of one hundred Last of Herring Caskes or Barrels, and of Salt needefull for the pack∣ing of C. Last of Herrings. 7. Seuenthly, the particular charge of foure months vi∣ctuals for 16 persons to serue in the saide Busse: and the particular charge of Physicke and Chirurgerie helpes for those xvi. persons. 8. Eightly, the particular vtmost wages of the saide xvi. persons for the saide foure months. 9. Lastly, the gaine or profit (by Gods blessing) hoped for, by such a foure months Herring-fishing.
Afterwards is also set downe the yearely Charges of repayring the saide Busse: and of her apparrell and Fur∣niture. And also of the said Nets, &c. Together with the rest of the second yeares Charge and Gaine. By which second yeares Charge and Gaine, you shall see the charge and gaine of euery year following so long as the Busse lasteth: which (by Gods blessing and good v∣sage) may well be twenty yeares at least. HE that will giue a probable estimate of any Charge, must tye himselfe to some particular proportions, which hee must admit as the very iust allowances. But I would haue none to imagine that I intend these particulars to be such as may not be varied. If any be so vaine to make scornfull constructions, I holdsuch fellowes not worth the thinking on.
A Busse of 35 Last, that is of 70 Tunnes, must be on the Keele in length 50 foot And on the Maine beame 17 And her Rake on the Stem forward 16 And her Rake on the Sterne-post Eastward on 7 And her wast from her lower edge of her Deckledges vnto her Ceelings 13   li s d Such a Busse with her Cabins, Cook-roome and other roomes fitted for the sea, and to this fishing seruice, together with her Ruther, Ironwork, bolts Chaine▪bolts, Shroud-chaines, Nailes, &c. and her Cockboat and Oares will cost at most 260. li     All her masts and yards will cost at most 8 0 0 The making and fitting her said masts and yards 2 0 0 Her pullies and Shiuers at most 2 0 0 Her rigging or Tackling ropes of the fittest sizes or scantlings, will come to at most 8 C. wai. of ropes which will cost at most 30 s a C. which comes to 12 0 2 Her Maine-saile and two Bonnets must bee 11. yards deep and 16 cloaths broad of Ipswitch Pole∣dauis, which comes vnto 176 yardes of poledauis, which at ix d. a yard will cost 6 12 0 Her Maine top saile must be 8. yards deepe, and eight cloaths broad at the yarde, and sixteene cloathes broad at the Clewes, which takes 96. yards of Bungy Canuas, which at eight pence a yard will cost 3 4 0. Her foresaile, the Course, & two Bonnets must be x. yards deepe and 12 cloaths broad, taking vp 120 yards of Ipswitch Poledauis, which at ix. d. a yard comes to 4 10 0. Her Mizen or Backsaile must be 4 cloaths broad and 5 yards deepe, which takes 20 yards of Bun∣gy cloth, which at 8 d. a yard comes to 0 13 4▪ So as all the Sailes take 420 yardes of Saile-cloth of both sorts, which 420 yards (at 28 yardes to a bolt) make almost 15 bolts of cloth. And the Sailemaker will haue for his work  s. a bolt which comes to 3 15 0 Boltropes for all the saide Sailes. And Twine &c to make the said: Sailes withall, will cost at most 1 15 8 304 10   0
  li. s. d Two flagges or Fannes to obserue the winde by with their Staues, at ii. s. a piece 0 4 0. Two or three hand pikes of Ash at most 0 2 0 Two Waterskeits to wet the Sailes at xviii. d. a peece 0 3 0 Two Water-buckets at vi: d. 0 1 0 Six Maps to clense the Busse vvithal, at vi. d 0 3 0 Compasses and boxes 2. at x s. a piece at most 1 0 0 Houre-glasses 3 or 4 at most at xviii, d 0 6 0 A Lanthorne for the poope 0 10 0 Two other lanthornes at xviii d. a piece 0 3 0 Fenders or long poles 4. at ii. 0 8 0 Long Oares vi. at iii s. iiii d 1 0 0 An Iron Crow of 15 li. at iiii d 0 5 0 Cables. 4. One Cable of 9 Inches about, & C fa∣dome, that is CC yardes long, will waigh about xviii. C 81. 0. 0 A second Cable 8 Inches ½ about, and of the length abouesaid will waigh about xv. C. A third Cable 7 Inches ½ about, and of like length will weigh xi. C. The fourth Cable 7 Inches about, & of like length, will weigh x. C.   So all the foure Cables wil weigh a∣bout 54 C waight, which 54 C. waight of Cables at 30 s. C will cost   Ancors 4 One Anchor to waigh about iiii. C 18 0 0 A second to waigh about iii. C ½ A third to waight about ii. C. ½ A fourth to waigh about ii C Foure Ancor stockes and the fitting of them at x s. a peece ii l.   So all the 4. Ancors waighing xii. C waight at xxvi s. viij d a C. will cost xvi. li.   And so the 4 Anchors and their foure stockes will come to  
  li. s. d. stewards store. Short Iron pothangers two at 12 d 0 2 0 pothookes 2 paire at x. d 0 1 8 A large Iron peaze pot of 5 or 6 Gallons 0 10 0 A large copper fish kettle about 32 li. wa. at xv. d per li. 2 0 0 A wodden scummer or two 0 0 4 Wodden Ladles 2 or 3   0 4 A Gridyron at most, 0 2 6 A frying pan 0 2 6 Pipkin two or three, 0 0 6 A Chasing dish of Iron 0 2 0 A small fire shouell and a paire of Tongs 0 2 6 A paire of Bellowes 0 0 8 Trayes 2 at xv d. a peece 0 2 6 Trugs 2 at ix d. a peece 0 1 6 Wodden platters 12 at iiii. d 0 4 0 Wodden Pottagers 24 0 2 0 Trenchers 4 dozen at iii. d 0 1 0 Baskets for Mes-bread 6. at 4. d 0 2 0 Beere-cans bigger and lesser 12 0 6 0 Taps and Fawcets 4 or 5. 0 0 2 wodden Butter-seales a paire 0 1 0 Leaden waights, 4 li—2 li—1 li—½ li—q li—at ii d 0 1 4 Tinder-boxes 2. furnished well 0 2 6 Candles at most for 16 weekes xxx li. at iiii d 0 10 0 Candlestickes with Iron wyers 6. at 8 d 0 4 0 A Candlebox with locke and key at most 0 5 0 5 8 0.  
  li. s. d Carpen∣ters store Iron Essles to mend the Shrowd-chaines withal if any should chance to breake-10-of 1 li. a peece at 4 d. a pound 0 3 4 Fids or Hammers two at 12 d 0 2 0 Orlup Nailes 3 C. at xvi d. a C. 0 4 0 Scupper nailes ii C. at vi. d. 0 1 0 Spikes v li. at 4 d. a pound 0 1 8 Six peny nailes iii C 0 1 6 Foure peny nailes  C 0 1 0 pumpe nailes 3 C. at ii d. a C 0 0 6 A Sawe 0 3 0 Summe 0 18 0 Weapons, &c. Halfe pikes 10 at ii. s 1 0 0 Muskets with Bandaleers, Rests and Molds 6 6 0 0 Gunpowder 6 li. at x d. 0 5 0 Leaden bullets 6 li. at iii d 0 1 6   7 6 6
The Busse aforesaid must haue fifty Nets.   li. s. d Nettes with the Appurte∣nances. EAch Net must be 30 yards, that is 15 fathom long vpon the rope. 3 1 3 Each net must also hang full and not stretched on the rope. Therefore each net before it come to be fastned to the rope (being stretched out) must be 35 yards long. Each Net must be in depth 7 deepings. Each deeping must be a fathom, that is two yards deepe. So as each nette of 7 deepings, takes 7 times 35 yards of Lint or netting (of 60 Masks or ma∣shes or holes deepe) which comes to iust 245 yards of Lint or netting, of a fathom breadth or depth. Which 345 yards of Lint or netting (ready made or knit) will cost iii d. a yarde, vvhich comes to for one net—3 li. 1 s. 3 d. Each net must haue a net-rope on the top of the net. So each net much haue 15 fathom of net-rope. 0 2 0 This net-rope must not be a stiffe tarred rope but lithe and gentle, and is best made of old ropes. This 15. fathome of net rope for each net will cost, ii s. Round about the head and two sides of each net (but not on the bottome) must bee set a small cord about the bignes of a Bow-string which is called head-roping or nostelling. 0 0 9. So each net takes 15 fathom, and 7 fathom and 7 fathom, vvhich comes to 29 fathom of head-roping. There is twenty fathome of this headroping in a pound waight of it. So each net takes al∣most a pound and ½ of this head roping, which is sold for 6 d. a pound. So the pound & ½ co∣steth,
The 7 deepinges of each net are to be sowed each to other altogether with a small thred cal∣led Twine Masking. 0 0 6. Each net takes a pounde of this Twyne-mas∣king, which is sold for Each net is to be fastned to her ropes with short peeces of Cords or lines of two foote long a peece called Nozzels. 0 1 0. These Nozzels are tied very thicke, viz. at 4. mashes or holes asunder. So each net takes 150. Nozzels. These Nozzels are sold ready cut out for viii. d. C. So 150 nozzels cost Each net must haue a rope 5 or 6 Fathom long and an Inch through, that is 3 Inches and better about called a Seazing to fasten the net vnto the Warroape. This Rope will cost iiii. d. a fathome. So for the saide six fathome 0 2 0. The seaming or sowing together of the saide seuen deepings of each net, and the head roping of each net as aforesaid, And the bringing of each net to the rope or setting on the Nozzels, Al this I say, is vsually done by a woman working it at 4 d. a day meat and drinke, or x d. a day at most finding her selfe, which woman will so dispatch at least two or three nets in a day. So each net so finishing, will cost at most 0 0 5. Euery net must be tanned in a Tanfat which will cost at most 0 0 10.
  li. s. d Nets: Warropes &c. All the said 50. Nets being finished must be han∣ged al arow vpon a strong large rope called a War∣rope, which must be in bignesse 4. inches about. 0 18 2 This Warrope must be as long as all the said 50. Nets, that is fifty times 15. fathome long, that is, 750. fathome of Warrope. So each Net taketh vp 15. fathome of Warrope. An C. waight, that is, 112. li. of this rope is sold for at most 30. s. that is almost iii. d. q a pound. An C▪ fathome of this rope will waigh neere CCCC. waight. At which rate each fathome will waigh almost iiij. li. ½ which at iii. d. q a pound will cost xiiij. d. ob. a fathome. So for each Net 15 fathome at xiiij. d, ob. wil cost Each Net must haue halfe a pound of Legorne Corke placed all along the Net at halfe a yard asun∣der: At which distance each Net takes 60. Corkes, or 60. halfe pounds of Corke, that is, 30. pound of Corke at ii. d. ob. a pound, that is 23. s. 4. d. a C. will cost 0 6 3 Those 60. Corkes must haue 60 Corke-bands to tye them to the Net: each Corkeband must be a fa∣thome long. 0 1 6 These Corke-bands are made of the aforesaide head-roping line, whereof 20. fathomes waigh a pound as aforesaid. So the said 60 fathomes will waigh 3. pound, which at vi. d. per pound wil cost For euery two Nets there must be a Pynboll or Bwy hooped, which will cost viii. d. So to each Net allow for halfe a Pynboll or Bwy 0 0 4 Each Pynboll or Bwy must haue a Rope of a yard long, to fastē it to the Warrope, which yard of rope will cost at most vi. d. So to each Net allow for halfe such a rope 0 0 3   li. s. d. So it appeares by the particulars aforesaid, that each Net with Warropes and all other her appurtennces, will cost, 4, 15, 3, 238. 2. 6. And o h said o Nets at 4. 15. 3, a peece will cost in all
  li. s. d. Tooles and Implements vsed indringe and packing of Herring. Gipping or Gilling kniues 14 at 4 d. 0 8 0 Roaring baskets or scuttles 24 at vi d 0 12 0 Addesses for Coopers worke 6. at ii. s 0 12 0 Drifts to beat downe hoops 12. at i d 0 1 0 Irons to pull vp barrels heads 6. at 4 d 0 2 0 Iron pipes to blow and trie Caskes, whether they be tight or no 3. at 8 d. 0 2 0. Bended hoopes to supply such as shall chance to breake or flye off, for an C Last, that is of 12 C barrels 24 C of hoopes at ii. s. a C 2 8 0. Iron markes or letters to brand the barrels with∣al, viz. A B. for the best, S for the second, W. for▪ the worst, at 8 d. a peece at most, 0 2 0. 4 7 0   Caske. Herring barrels, an hundred Last, that is twelue hundred barrels, which containeth two and thirty Gallons a peece, will cost fifteene shil∣lings a Last, that is xv d. a peece, which com∣meth to 75 0 0 Salt. A water Bushell, that is 5 peckes of Spanish salt, will salt a barrell of Herrings. 60 0 0 So to salt the said Clast, or 12 C. barels of Her∣rings, must be 12 C bushels of salt, that is at 40. bushels of salt to a waigh) iust 30 waigh of salt, with at 40 s. a waigh, that is xii d. a bushel, wil cost▪
Memorandum. A Flemish Busse doth often take seauen or eight Last of Herringes in a day. But if God giue a Busse one day with another but two last of Herringes a day, that is, twelue Last of Herrings in a weeke. Then at that rate a Busse may take, dresse, and packe the said whole proportion of an C last of Herrings (pro∣pounded to be hoped for) in eight weekes and two daies. And yet is heerein allowance made for victualles and wages for xvi. weekes, as after followeth. Of which 16 weekes time if there be spent in rigging & furnishing the saide Busse to sea, and in sayling from her port to her fishing place; if these businesses I say spend two weekes of the time, and that other two weekes bee also spent in returning to her port after her fishing sea∣son and in vnrigging and laying vp the Busse. Then I say (of the xvi. weekes aboue allowed for) there wil bee xii. weekes to spend onely in fishing the Herring.
Victuall and Fuell for xvi. Men and Boyes, seruing in the Busse aforesaid, for the Herring-fishing time, and the time of her setting out: and of her returne home, viz. from the 24 of May, vntill the 21. of September, which is 112. dayes, that is xvi. weekes, that is foure months.   li. s. d Beere. TO allow for euery Man and Boy a gallon of Beere a day (which is the allowance made in the Kings ships) that is for the saide 16 persons, 16 Gallons, that is iust halfe a Herring Barrell full a day, that is, for the whole voyage or xvi. weekes, or C xii. dayes, 56 such barrels of Beere, Seuen of these herring barrels containe a Tun of Beere: so as the saide 56 herring barrelles full of beere, do make iust 8 Tun of beere, which at 40. s a Tun comes to 16 0 0. Bisket. To alow for euery man and boy (as in his ma∣iest. ships) a pound of Bisket a day, that is for eue∣ry man and boy for the saide 4 moneths or 112. daies, an C waight of bisket, that is for the saide 16 persons, 16 C waight of bisket, which at 13 s 4 d. a C. will come to 10 13 4 Oatmeale or Peaze To allow amongst the said 16. persons a gallon a day, that is halfe a pint a peece euery day, that is 112. gallons for them al, for the said 112 daies or 4 months, which comes to iust 14 bushelles, which at 4. s. a bushell will cost 2 16 0 Bacon. To alow also for each Man and boy 2 li. of Ba∣con for 4 meales in a weeke, that is for each per∣son for the said 16. weekes 32 li. that is 4 stone of bacon, and so for the saide xvi. persons 64. stone of bacon, which at 2. s. 2 d. a stone, will come to 6 18 8. Freshfish. They may take daily out of the Sea, as much fresh-fish as they can eate, 0 0 0. Butter. To allow euery Man and boy (to butter their fish or otherwise to eate as they like) a quarter of a pound of butter a day, that is, for each person  8 li. of butter, that is halfe a firkin of Suffolkbut∣ter, and so for the sayd 16. men 8. firkins of butter at 20 s. the firkin 8 0 0. 44 8 0.  
  li. s. d Cheese. To allow euery of the said 16 men and boyes, halfe a pound of Holland Cheese a day, that is, for each persō 56. pound, that is, halfe a C. waight of Cheese. And so for the said 16. persons to allow viii. C. waight of Holland Cheese, which at ii. d. ob. the pound that is, 23 s. 4. d. the hundred will cost 9 6 8 Vineger. To allow amongst the said 16. persons three pintes of Vinegar a day, that is for the said 112. dayes, 42 Gallones, that is a Teirce of Vinegar, which at vi. li. a Tunne, Caske and all will cost 1 0 0 Fuell. To allow for the dressing and boyling of their victuall, viii. C. of Kentish Faggots, that is seauen Faggots a day, and 16. Faggots ouer in the whole time, which viii. C. of Faggots at viii. s. a C. coms to 3 4 0 13 10 8     li. s. d. Summe of all the said 4. months victuall is 57 18 8 I am informed that the Dutch Busses haue not halfe so much allowance of Victualles: But take almost al theirs out of the Sea.
  li. s. d Phisick and Sur∣gery helps Sperma Caeti and a boxe for it 0 3 4 Stone pitch and a boxe for it 0 1 4 Aquauita 16 quarts is 4 gallons, at iii. s. 0 12 0 Zant-oyle 16 pintes is 2 gallons, at vi. s. 0 12 0 Honny, 16 pintes is 2 gallons, at v. s. 0 10 0 Sugar 4 pound, at i. s. 0 4 0 Nutmegges a quarterne of a pound 0 1 0 Ginger ½ a pound 0 0 6 Pepper 16 oz. that is a pound 0 2 0 Wages to the six∣teen men Balsome and other Salues and old Linnen 0 10 0 Syzers a paire 0 0 6 A Steele Pleget to spread playsters 0 1 4 A Chest with partitions for all these things 0 12 0 3 10 0   To a Maister for the said 4. months at v. li. a month that is, i. li, 5, s. o a week, or 4, s. ii. d. a day for 6 daies or iii. s. ob, q a day for seauen dayes. 20 0 0 To two Mates at 24 s, a month a peece 9 12 0 To sixe other men at 20 s. a peece per month 24 0 0 To sixe other men at 16 s, a peece per month 19 4 0 To a boy at 6 s, a month 1 4 0 74 0 0   Summe of all the Stocke and charge of one intire Busse, &c. the first yeare will be a∣bout 935 5 8.
The difference or oddes between Charge & Aduenture. IT appeares before in particulars, That a New Busse with her Nets and other appurtenances, together with all the first yeares Charge of Salt, Caske, Victuals, Wages, &c. wil come to—934-5-8       But it is to be obserued, that the owner & Aduenturer of such a Busse, shall not be out of purse, nor Aduenture so much money the said first yeare, by—171—10—0       For the Wages aforesaide is neuer paide till the returne of the Ship or busse; which if it should neuer return (as God forbid) then is no wages paid. So wages is parte of the Charge, but no part of the Aduenture. And so the wages is spared from Aduenture, which comes to as before in particulars 74 0 0. Also it is to be obserued, that the busse can conueniently stow at once but 34 Last of Cask, which is but the thirde part of her said C. last of Caske in Charge, and so is also spared from Aduenture two third parts of her cask, which is 66. last of Caske, which at xv. s. comes to 49 10 0 Likewise the Busse cannot conueniently stow at once aboue tenne waighe of Salt, which is but a thirde part of her Salt in charge. And so is also spared from Aduen∣ture ⅔ of her saide Salt, which is 20 waight of Salt, which at 40 s. a waigh comes to 40 0 0. Neither can the busse conueniently stow at once aboue  her saide 8 Tunnes of beere in Charge. And so also is spared from Aduenture the one halfe of her saide beere, which is foure Tun, which at forty shillings a Tun comes to 8 0 0. Totall spared from Aduenture 171 li 10 0. Which 171 li-10 s-0-being deducted out of the said Charge of 934-5-8. There resteth to bee ad∣uentured the first yeare onely 762 15 8.
The first yeares gayne in hope and likelyhood. ABout a month after the Busses are gone out to sea, a Yagar which is a Caruell or a Merchants ship (em∣ployed to seeke out the said Herring-Busses, and to buy of them their Herrings vpon the first packing.) This Yagar I say (whereof are diuers so employed) comes to the sayde Busse (amongst others) and buyes all such Herrings as she hath barrelled (which barrels vppon the first packing are called Sticks.) And in part of payment for her saide Her∣ring Stickes, deliuers such Salt, Caske, Hoopes, Nettes, Beere, and other Necessaries as the busse shal then want; (wherewith the saide Yagar comes alwayes furnished) the rest the said Yagar payes in ready mony to the Busseman. In this maner comes the Yagar to the busses two or three times or oftner in a Summer-Herring-fishing time. So as the sayd Yagar buies of the saide Busse (if God giue them to the busse) all her said C Last of herring Stickes. 1000. li. For which said C. last of Herring-stickes, if the Yagar do pay but after the rate of x li. a Last, that is xvi. s. viii. d. a barrell, then are the saide hundred last of Herringsticks sold for iust So (by the grace and blessing of God) the very first yeares herrings only, may bring in to the Aduenturer or owner all his whole both Stocke and Charges of—934—5—8. aforesaid. And also—65—14—4—ouer and aboue. And so the said Aduenturer or Busse maister, is like by Gods blessing, to gaine clearely the very first yeare.—The Busse aforesayde with all her apparrell and furniture, to∣gether with her Nets, &c. And—065 li—14 s—4 d. in mony ouer and aboue, towards the vse or Intrest of the said—762—15—8—which the saide Aduenturer dis∣burseth the first yeare out of Purse, Which is almost—9 li—0—0. in the hundred also for vse.
The second yeares Charge.   li. s. d. Calking or carrying the said Busse yearely wil cost about 5 0 0 Repairing the Tacklings (which cost at first xii li. as before) 6 0 0 Repairing the Sayles which cost at first xx li, x s 10 0 0 Repairing the pullies Shiuers and other petty things about 1 0 0 Repairing the Cables (which cost at first 81 li.) about 24 0 0 Towards the reparations of the Anchors (which cost at first 18 li,) allow 3 0 0 Repairing the Carpenters store (which cost at first 15 s.) about 0 12 0 Repairing the Stewards store (which cost at first 5 li, 8 s. 0) about at most 2 8 0 Renewing shot and powder, and scowring the Muskets &c, about 0 10 0 Repairing of Nets with the appurtenances, with 50 new deepings, and a C fathome of War∣rope, &c. 77 0 0 (Which cost first as before in particulars, 238-2-6) the third part whereof is iust 79-7-6.       Renewing of Tooles to dresse and packe Her∣rings with all, (which cost at first 4-5-0 2 0 0 Renewing the whole C Last of Cask at xv s. 75 0 0 Renewing the whole 30 waighes of Salt at 40 s. 60 0 0 Renewing the whole proportion of victualles a∣foresaid 57 18 8 Renewing part of the Phisick and Surgery helpes (which cost at first 3-10-0) 1 11 4 Wages as at the first 74 0 0
  li. s. d Sum. Tot. of the Charge of the second years Her∣ring Fishing will be as appeares about 400 0 0 But the second yeares Aduenture and Disburse∣ment, will be lesse then the saide Charge, (as it was for the first yeare) by 171. 10. 0 And so the Second yeares Aduenture will be onely about—228—10—0.       Towards which aduenture and Charge, there is before accompted to be gotten in money by the first yeares Her∣ring fishing as before appeares—65—14—4. So then the second yeares Charge, besides the sayde 65—14—4. before gained, will be but 334—5—8. But the said second yeares Aduenture, besides the sayde gaine, will be but 162—15—8. So it appeares, That if the busse be onely imployed in fi∣shing the Herring, and in that but onely one foure monthes in euery yeare: and that the Busse lye still in her owne port all the rest of the yeare: that is nine moneths in euerie yeare idle, yet she gaines clearly euery yeare in that foure monthes (onely) the sum of 600. li—o s—o d. If God giue her in that time, but the said C. Last of Herrings, which being solde but at ten pound a Last, yeeld 1000. li.—o s—o d. Out of which deducting the saide second yeares Charge of 400. li. aforesaid, there resteth as gained cleerely—600 li.—o—o yearly by the saide Busse.
Memorandum, If the Aduenturer of such a Busse will also hire a Yagar by the Last, to take in his Herrings, and carry them into Danske-Meluyn, Sweathland, France, or elsewhere: Then the Charge and gaine of that course, will be as followeth, or therea∣bouts, viz:   li. s. d. YOu may hire a Caruill or other Merchants shippe for a Yagar to cary your Heings from the Busse into Dansk, Meluyn, &c. and to stay there for re-lading 14 or 20 daies, and then to bring backe to London such Wares or Mer∣chandize as you shall there fraught her withall, for which fraught outward and stay there, and fraught home backe againe, the said ship wil haue at most—2—10—0 a last, that is 25 s. a Tun in and out. So the fraught of C Last of Herrings into Danske, and fraught of another C Last of Pitch, Hempe, Flax or Corne, &c. backe again to London will cost at most at—2 li—10 s—o d. 250 0 0. Toll at Elsanor will cost out and in about 3 0 0. I thinke no Custome is paide for Herringes in the East∣country, yet suppose for Custome iiii s. a last, that is 4. d. a barrell, at which rate the C. Last of Stickes comes to 20 0 0. For Cranage, there allow at most is. a Last, which for the said Clast of Herrings is 5 0 0. For Wharfage there allow also after the rate of 12. d. a Last, 5 0 0 For Warehouse-roome there till the Herrings be solde allow at most 2 0 0. The repacking of the Herrings by the sworne Coopers of that place, and for new hooping 75 Last of cask, which will be filled with the said C Last of Herring sticks, alow∣ing 25. Last that is a fourth part of the Clast to be shrunk away, that 75 last repacking and hooping at most at viii. s. a Last will cost 30 0 0. Sum—315 li.—o s—o d. which neuer goes out of purse, but is paide when the Herrings are solde.      
  li. s. d So if the saide C. Last of Herring so sent from the Busse to Danske do shrinke a fourth part, then will rest to be solde in Danske, Meluyn, &c. 75. Last of full re∣packed Herrings, which 75. Last will bee there solde for at least 18 li. 12. s. o. d. a Last, that is 31. s. a Barrell, which is iiii. s. i. d. a C. which is more then 2. Herrings and ½ a peny, by 7. Herringes in a hundred. And so the 72. Last of Herrings will be sold for 1395. 0. 0 Which is for the Herrings 1000 0 d Besides there may wel be gai∣ned by the return of 139. li. worth of corn or other Mer∣chandize, at least 120. more. & for the fraught in & out, 315 0 d And so is gained outwards only 80 0 d
Besides, the said Herring-fishing which is performed in foure months as aforesaide, the same Busse may be al∣so employed the same yeare (presently after the said her∣ring season) in fishing for Cod and Ling. For the Herring fishing being begun yearly as before is shewed (about the 24. of May, and the Busse being re∣turned home againe about the 21 of September, which is 16. weekes after: then the saide Busse and her men may rest in Port about 10. weekes, viz. from the 21. of September, vntill S. Andrewes tide, or the first of De∣cember after; and then set saile againe furnished with Hookes, Lines, Salt, caske, and all other things (heere∣after particularly mentioned) needefull for the VVinter Codfishing, which may by Gods blessing bee dispatched and the Busse at home againe in her owne port by the first of March, which is thirteene weekes after, that is, in 91. dayes. And so betweene the saide first of March and the 24. of May, which is iust eight weekes, the saide Busse may be carined or calked, and repaired and victualled & pro∣uided of all things against the second or next years Her∣ring-fishing. And so is the whole yeare ended & spent as aforesaide.
Now the Charges of the saide first Codfishing in the Busse afore∣saide, with the 16 Men and Boyes aforesaid during the afore∣saide time of 13. weekes or 91. daies will be as followeth, viz. Tooles & Imple∣ments. EAch man fishing for Codde and Ling, vseth at once 2 Kip-hooks, so 16 men may vse at once 32 of those hookes: but because they lose their Hookes sometimes, therefore allow for euery of the men a dozen of hookes, that is 16 dozen of Kip-hooks, which at most wil cost 12 d. a dozen▪ that is, 0 16 0 Stringes for each Man sixe, that is, for the 16 men eight dozen of stringes, euery string must be fifty fathome long & about the bignesse of an Iackline, and it must be tanned. Euery such string will cost about 12 d. and so the said eight dozen of strings will cost 4 16 0 Chopstickes for euery man foure, is in all 64 Chopstickes. A Chopsticke is an Iron about the bignesse of a Curtaine Rod, and a yard long, and vpon this Iron is an hollow pipe of Leade 8 or 9. Inches long, and waighes about 4 pounde, and the Iron waighes about a pound, which Iron and leade will cost about 12 d. a peece, so 64. Chop∣stickes at 12 d. will cost 3 4 0. For euery man two Garfangle-hookes. Totall two and thirtie Garfangle hookes. This Gar∣fangle hooke is an Ashen-plant 6 or 8 Foote long with an Iron hooke like a Boat-hook at the end of it, one of these Garfangle hookes will cost 6 d. So the 32 Garfangle hookes will cost 0 16 0
Foure Heading kniues like Chopping kniues at xii. d. 0 4 0 Foure spliting kniues like mincing kniues at 12 d 0 4 0 Sixe gutting kniues at 4. d 0 2 0 A Grindstone and Trough 0 5 0 Whetstones two or three 0 3 0 Some of the old Herring Nets, to get Herringes to baite their Hooks. Or else to buy a Hogshead full of Lam∣prils which is the best baite for Cod and Ling. There is store of Lamprils to be had at Woolwitch, Norwitch, and Hull, which may cost about 2 10 0 Baskets some of those before bought and vsed for the dressing of Herring and 12. other great Baskets at ii. s. 6. d a peece 1 10 0 14 10 0  
  li, s. d Caske. For barrelled Cod to prouide 35. Last of Bar∣rels, which are the very same euery way, with the Herring barrels aforesaide, so the saide 35. Last of Caske, at xv. s. a Last, will cost 26. li—5. s. As for the Linges (in hope) there is no Caske vsed for them, but they are onely salted and packed one vpon another in the ships hold. And if they take any Ling, then they must bring home the lesse Cod, and then also they saue some of the saide Caske 26 5 0. Salt. Each barrell of Cod will take a bushell of Salt vpon salt. So 35. Last of Cod aforesaide takes iust 420. Bushels of Salt vpon salt, that is, 10 waighes and a halfe of salt, which at 3. li. a waigh, that is 1. d. a bushell will cost 31. 10. 0 Physicke and Chyrurgerie helpes. To allowe as before is allowed for the Her∣ring-fishing time, which (besides the Chest) will cost as before in particulars 2 18 0. Stew store Carp store The Stewards store and Carpenters store afor∣said, will serue this voyage. So for them needeth no allowance 0 0 0. 60 13 0.  
Victuall and Fuell for 16. Men and Boyes, to serne in the said Busse for the said Cod fishing time, and the time of set∣ting out, and Returne home, viz. from about the first of December, vnto the first of March, which is iust 13. weekes, that is, 91 dayes.   li. s. d Beere. TO allowe euery person a gallon of beere a day (as in the Kings ships) that is for the said 16 persons 16. gallons, that is iust halfe a Her∣ring-barrell a day, that is for the whole voyage, 91. halfe barrels, that is almost 46. of those Her∣ring barrels full of beere. Seuen of these herring barrels containe a Tun of beere: so as the said 46. barrels contain six Tun and a half of beere, which at 40. s. a Tun will cost 13 0 0. Bisket. To allowe for euery person (as in his Maiest. ships) a pound of Bisket a day, that is for all the saide 16. persons 112. li. that is an C. waight of Bisket a weeke, that is for the saide 13. weeks 13 C. of Bisket, which at xiii. s.—4. d— C. will cost 8 13 4. Peaze. To alow for euery person halfe a pint of peaze a day (to bee watered and eaten with butter or else with bacon) that is a Gallon a day amongest them all, that is in all 91. gallons, that is 11 bu∣shels and a pecke and a halfe of Peaze, which at 4. s. a bushell, will cost 2 5 6. Bacon. To allow for euery person 2. li. of Bacon a week for 4. meales in euery weeke, that is for the saide 16. persons 32. li. that is 4. stone of Bacon a week amongst them all, that is for the said 13. weeks, 52 stone of bacon, which at 2. s. 2. d. a stone, wil cost 5 12 8. Freshfish. Fresh-fish they may take daily out of the Sea asmuch as they can eate 0 0 0.
  li. s. d Butter. To allow euery person a quarter of a pound a Butter a day, that is, 4 li. of Butter a day amon∣gest them all. So for the saide 13. weekes or 91. dayes must be 364 li. of Butter, that is iust six fir∣kins and ½ of Suffolke Butter, which at xx. s. a fir∣kin will cost 6 10 0. Cheese. To allow euery person halfe a pound of Hol∣land cheese a day, that is 8 li. a day among them all. So for the said 13 weeks or 91 daies, 728 li. of cheese, that is 6 C ½ waight of Holland cheese  at 2 d. ob. a li. that is 1 li. 3 s. 4 d. C. will cost 7 11 8. Vineger. To allow amongst them all three pints of Vi∣neger a day, that is, for the saide 91. daies almost 34. Gallons, allow a Teirce, which at 6 li. a Tun Caske and all, will cost 1 0 0 Fuell. To allow also 8. Kentish Faggots a day, which for the said 91 daies will come to 7. C. and a quar∣terne of Faggots, which at 8. s. a C. will cost 2. 18. 0   li. s. d. Sum of all the saide 13 weekes victuals and fuel, will come to as appeares 47. 11. 2
Wages. To a Maister for these 13. weekes at 5. li. a month that is 25. s. a weeke a peece, is for both 16 5 0. To two Mates at 24. s. a moneth, that is vi. s. a week a peece, is for both 7 16 0 To six other men at 20. s. a peece per month, is 5. s. a weeke a peece 19 10 0 To six other men at 16. s. a peece per moneth, is 4. s. a weeke a peece 15 12 0 To the Boy at 6. s. a month, that is xviii. d a weeke. 0 19 6 60 2 6.   Sum of all the Charge of the first winters Cod-fisning, will bee as before in particulars about 182 16 8   li. s. d But heere is to be remembred that the wa∣ges is no part of the Aduenture (though it be part of the Charge. 122. 14. 2 at most. And so the Aduenturer shal be out of purse for this first Codfishing voyage, but only   Now if it please God in this voyage to afford vnto this Busse the filling of her said Cask, that is 35. Last of Cod only, that Cod will yeeld at least 20. s. a barrell, that is but 12. li. a Last: So the said 35 Last, will yeeld at least, 420. li—o s—o d. Of the Lyuors of those 35. Last of fish, may well bee made 5. Tun of Traine oyle, worth at least 12. li. a Tun, that is but 12. d. a gallon, at which rate 5. Tun of oyle wil yeeld 60. li. So by the blessing of God this Codfish∣ing may bring in to the Aduenturer, as before in particulars iust 480 0 0   li. s. d Out of which 480. li. deduct the Charge abouesaid of 182-16-8, and then re∣steth to be cleered yearly by the said Cod-fishing 297 3 4 And so it appeares that there may bee gained yearly by one Herring Fishing and one Cod Fishing in such a Busse yearly, the sum of 837-3-4. all Charges borne, and without any stocke after the first yeare 897. li. 3 s 4. d
BY that which is before set downe, it appeareth, that one Aduenturer or diuers Partners, buying or building and furnishing such a Busse, and aduenturing her to sea as afore∣said, shall disburse before and in the first Herring voyage, the sum of 762—15—8. out of purse. And that the same 762—15—8. is clearly inned againe, together with all other charges, and 65—14—4. ouer and aboue within lesse then a yeare, & so the Busse with her Nets and furniture, and the saide 65—14—4. in money is gayned clearly the first voyage. And that if the Busse do also that yeare make a Cod-fish∣ing voyage as aforesaide, then I say, within the space of the said first yeare, the Aduenturer or the said Partners shal haue all their stocks into their purse againe as aforesaide, and shall also haue in purse gained cleerly the said first year 362-17-8 which gaine is more then is to be disbursed the second yeare in repayring the said Busse, with her appurtenances, &c. And also in furnishing her with new Herring Cask, Salt, Victual, &c. for the second yeares Herring fishing. And that the said Aduenturer or Partners, after the saide first yeare, shall neuer be out of purse any money at all. But that the first yeares cleare gaine will stocke him or them so sufficiently for the vse of this Busse, as by the same they may get cleerely after the saide first yeare, by two such voyages in that busse, yearly ouer and aboue all charges. li. s. d. 897 3 4. And that if the said Aduenturer or Partners will make but onely one Herring voyage yearely, then by that one onely Herring voyage yearely, the saide busse may get cleerely per annum, as is before declared. 600 0 0 Ouer and aboue all charges.
I Confesse the priuate gaine to euery Vndertaker before propounded, may seeme too great to be hoped for: but be∣fore any conclude so, let them read the Proclamation con∣cerning this businesse, made by those thriuing-States of the vnited prouinces of the Low Countries, and let them consi∣der what should mooue those States in that publique procla∣mation, to call this Herring fishing, the Chiefest-Trade, and Principall Gold-Mine of those vnited prouinces, and to shew such Iealousie, and prouide so very carefully for the preserua∣tion thereof, If the gaine thereby were not exceeding great and extraordinary. That Proclamation translated out of Dutch into English, is affixed to the end of the Booke before mentioned, called Englands way to win wealth: and is here also againe annexed to these presents, as a thing to be often seene and considered of vs. And for my selfe, I say that I know, that No man may doe euill, that good may come of it: Therefore I would not deuise a lye to perswade any to a worke how good soeuer; nor com∣mend that to others, which my owne heart were not first strongly perswaded to be commendable: yet as I denye not but that I may erre in some of so many particulars: so I dis∣daine not, but rather desire to see such errors, honestly and fairely corrected by any that out of more skill, and desire of perfecting and furthering this good worke, shall finde out a∣ny such errors. And whether this Fishery be Necessary for this Common∣wealth or no, let the present condition and estate of our ship∣ping and Mariners, and Sea Townes, and Coastes, which (as the meanes) should be the wals and strength of this Ilandish Monarchy; I say let them speake. I will say no more to this poynt, as well for other reasons, as also because this matter is but for a fewe alas: namely for those onely that preferre the Common wealth to their owne priuate: and they are wise, and a word is enough to such. If any be so weake to thinke this Mechanicall Fisher-Trade not feasible by the English people: to them I may say with Salomon Goe to the Pismire looke vpon the Dutch thou sluggard, learne of them, they do it daily in the sight of all men at our owne doores, vpon our owne coastes. But some will needs feare a Lion in euerie way, because they will imploy their Tallents no way, but lie vnprofitable at home alwaies.
The difficulties that Vnwillingnes hath obiected, Consists in want of Men, of Nets, of Caske, of Timber, and Plank, of Vtterance or Sale, and of the feare of Pyrats, of euerie of which a word or two. THE 16. Men and boyes before admitted to serue in the saide Busse, may bee these: (viz.) A Mayster, a Mate, foure ordinary Sailors, and foure Fisher-men, there is ten, and then six Land-men and boyes to bee trained vp by the former Ten men in the Art of Sayling, and Craft of Fishery. By which meanes euery Busse shall be a Seminary of Saylors and Fishers also, for so shall euery busse breede and make sixe new Marriners: and so euery 100. busses breede 600. new marriners to serue in such other busses as shall be after builded, which is also no small addition to the strength of this state. Marri∣ners. Now if there were 100. busses presently to bee buil∣ded, I would make no doubt (as hard as the world goes) but before they could be fitted for the Sea, there may be gathered vp about the Coast-Townes of his maiesties Dominions at least an C. able Maisters to take Charge of them. And another C. of Marriners to goe with them as their Mates: and foure C. Saylors to serue vn∣der the saide C. Maisters, that is in all but 600. Marri∣ners and Saylors. For I finde in the 35. page of Englands way to win wealth (the Author whereof was a Yarmouth man) that the last winter but one, There were in that one Towne of Yarmouth 300. idle men that could get nothing to do, liuing poore for lacke of employment, vvho most gladly vvould haue gone to Sea in Pinkes, if there had beene any for them to goe in. I haue reported his owne words.
Fisher∣men. And for the foure hundred Fishermen to serue in the C. Busses, they would soone be furnished out of those poore Fishers in Small boates, as Traules, Cobbles, &c. which fish all about the Coastes, which poore men by those small vessels can hardly get their bread, and there∣fore would holde it great preferment to bee called into such Busses where they may haue meat, drinke, and wa∣ges as before is liberally propounded for such. Besides, which if neede be there are too too many of those per∣nitious Trinker-men, who with Trinker-boates destroye the Riuer of Thames, by killing the Fry and small Fish there, euen all that comes to Net, before it bee eyther meate or Marketable. Which Trinkermen (if they will not offer themselues) may by order and authoriry of our State be compelled to giue ouer that Euil, and to follow this good Trade. Landme for a Se∣minary. But for the saide 6. C. Land-men to serue in these C Busses we neede not study where to finde them; if such shoulde not seeke for seruice in these Busses, the verie streets of London and the Subburbs will soone shew & afford them, if it were so many thousand I thinke. Idle Vagrants so extreamely swarme there as all knowe. So much for men. Nets. Nettes will be the hardest matter to prouide at the first; yet I vnderstand that the before named Knight, Sir William Haruey, had in few weekes or moneths prouided all his Nets for his great Busse. And my selfe was offe∣red Nettes for halfe a dozen Busses, if I would haue had them the last Sommer: and if there were now 100. Bus∣ses in building, I am informed of one that will vndertake to furnish them all with Nets. And after these Busses shall once be seene, many for their owne gaine will pro∣uide for Hemp, twine, & all necessaries to the making of
Nets enough. And doubtles Scotland and Ireland will presently afford good helpe in this behalfe. Caske. Caske will be plentifully serued by Scotland and Ire∣land, though we should make none of English Timber. Timber & Plank. And for all the great and pittifull waste of our Eng∣lish VVoods, yet will England afford Timber & Plank enough for many Busses: but (to spare England a while) Ireland will yeeld vs Busses enough besides many other good Shippes, if need be; and Scotland will help vs with Masts, but if we would spare so neare home, we may help our selues out of Virginia and Sommer-Islands. I wis the Dutch who haue no Materials in any Dominions of their owne, haue made harder and deerer shifts for their multitudes of Ships of all sorts: If they had shifted off the building of Ships, because they had no Timber or o∣ther shipping stuffe of their owne in their owne Lands, what a poore, naked, seruile people, had that free peo∣ple beene ere this day? Touching Vtterance and Sale of Herrings when we Vtterāce or Sale.shall haue them: I am informed that there is yearely vt∣tered and spent in his Maiesties owne Dominions, at least ten thousand Last of Herrings, which being serued by our selues, will keep in the Land aboundance of Tre∣sure, which the Dutch yearely carry out for the Herrings which they catch on our own coasts, and sell to vs. Now, if such a Busse as aforesaide get yearely C. Last of Her∣rings, as aforesaid: then an hundred Busses taking yeare∣ly C. Last a peece, doe take in all ten thousand Last of Herrings. So then his Maiesties owne Dominions wil vtter all the Herrings which C. Busses shal take in a year. And then if wee shall haue 500. Busses more, I am per∣swaded we may in France, and in Danske, & in other for∣raigne parts, haue as good and ready sale for them, as the
Dutch haue for theirs; for I heare that the Dutch could yearely vtter double so many as they doe sell if they had them. But if that should not bee so, surely it were too great pouerty for English mindes (like Horses that know not their owne strength) to feare to set foote by the Dutch, or by any other people vnder Heauen, or to feare to speede woorse in any Market or place then they: and yet not be driuen to beat down the Markets neither, ex∣cept the Dutch should prooue more froward and food then I can yet mistrust: but if they should, I will not bee perswaded to thinke, but that the worser part would fall out to their share at last. If there will bee imployment but for 1000. Busses, me thinke they should thanke vs, (as for many other be∣nefits, so for this,) that wee will bee contented that they share with vs, by vsing onely 500. Busses, & to fish frend∣ly in consort, as it were with other 500. Busses of ours. But if they should alleadge, that they now hauing a thou∣sand, shall haue (in that case) imployment for the other 500: why then perhappes wee may in friendly manner cope with them, and buy of them the other 500. of the said Busses. I thanke God I neither hate nor enuy the Dutch; nay (for good and due respects) I preferre them to all other forraigne Nations in my loue; and they acknowledging vs as they ought, wee shall I hope doe them no wrong, and they must doe vs right. I haue herein bin longer then I meant, onely because there came euen now to my minde some reports that I haue heard, (but doe not beleeue) of very foule and in∣solent dealing of their Busse-men with our poore weake Fisher-men vppon our Coastes. But if it were true, as I doubt it at least; yet I would not hate nor speak euill of
a whole State for the sawcie presumptions of a particu∣lar man, or of a few men, and those perhappes prouoked thereto, by our owne Double-Beere of England. Pirats & Enemies. It is too true that all seas are too full of Pirats, and that amongst them (which wee haue great cause to lament) our English abound, who are too ready to iustifie their lewd errors with the want of imployment. It is true al∣so, that men are not to get their liuing by sinful▪ violent, and vnlawfull courses; yet I would they were stript of that colour and pretence, (which a good fleete of Busses would doe:) Beside, such a fleet of Busses will (by Gods grace be soone able to maintaine about them a guard of strong warlike ships wel appointed to defend them. And in time of neede also to serue his Maiesty, and offend his enemies: and such a guard will be very requisite, althogh God hath so laid and placed the Herrings, as our Busses shall seldome need to lie or to labour out of the sight of our owne shores. So much of the facility. Lastly, touching the vse of this famous Fisher-trade, I will onely commend vnto your considerations, that which is written thereof in all the foure Bookes before mentioned: namely, in the Brittish Monarchy, and Hitch∣cocks New-yeares-guift, and in Englands way to win wealth &c. and in the Trades increase. The Dutch haue there∣by as by their onely or chiefe meanes curbed and bear∣ded their aduersaries; what then may wee doe by it, if God please, we I say to whome he hath vouchsafed mul∣titudes of other helpes (which Dutch▪land hath not) to second this; this trade sets awarke all their idle, it keeps their gold & siluer in their dominions and multiplies it. And I see not why the same trade should not bee of the same vse to vs.
1. NOw Aboord our Busses again, which once wel established and followed, will in short time I hope by Gods blessing set many Ploughmen heere on worke, to sowe Hemp & Flax, both in England, Scotland & Ireland. 2. And wil conuert our Idle bellies, our Beggers, our vagabonds and Sharkes into lusty Hempbeaters, spinners, Carders, Rope-ma∣kers, Net-makers, Coopers, Smiths, Shipwrights, Calkers, Sawyers, Saylers, Fishermen, Bisket-bakers, weauers of Pole-dauis, Sayle-makers, and other good labouring Members. 3. And will more warrant and incourage our Magistrates to punnish the Idle, the sturdy begger, and the Theese, when these Busses shall finde imployment for them that wil worke. 4. And will be a meanes that the True, poore, aged, and im∣potent shal be better and more plentifully, yet more easily and with lesse charges releeued, when onely such shall stand at de∣uotion, and no valiant Rogues shall share in the Almes of the charitable as now they do. 5. And will helpe to bring euery one to eate their own bread. 6. Yea, and will supply his Maiest. Armies and Garrisons in time of neede with many lusty able men insteede of our Bare∣breeched Beggers and nasty Sharkes, that are as vnskilfull and as vnwilling to fight as to worke. 7. And will keepe and bring in abundance of Gold and Siluer. I know and confesse that it is not in Man to promise these or any of them peremptorily, but all these are the euident effects of this Fishery amongst the Dutch. And therefore I may conclude, That we are to hope for like blessing, by our like lawfull and honest en∣deuors in this trade of fishery which almighty God hath brought home to our doores to imploy vs in, whereby he also giues vs a comfortable calling to the worke.
TO begin withall, if but some of our Noblemen▪ and some of our Gentry▪ and some Cittizens and others of ability, each man for himselfe, would speedily prouide and imploy at least one Busse a peece, so as some good store of Busses may (amongest them in that manner bee speedily prouided and imployed, to ioyne with Sir Wil∣liam Haruey, who is already entred the field alone. No doubt but his Maiesty will bee pleased (at their humble suite) to encourage and incorporate them with priuile∣ges, immunities, and authority; and so they may choose amongst themselues, some meet officers and ouerseers, and make meete lawes and orders for the due and sea∣sonable taking, curing, packing, and selling of the saide Herrings, &c. As the French and Straights Merchants who being so incorporated, yet haue euery man his own ship, or the ship hee hiers: and each man by himselfe or by his Factor, goes out, returnes, buyes & sels, not trans∣gressing the priuate lawes and orders of their respectiue companies. But if at the first entrance there will not bee any com∣petent number of Busses so prouided, and Aduentured as abouesaid. If his Maiesty will be pleased so to incor∣porate some fit for this worke; and (out of that corpora∣tion) a sufficient Treasurer, and other needefull officers be here chosen & made known; then may all that please, (of whatsoeuer honest condition) bring in (by a day to be assigned) what sum of money any shal like to Aduen∣ture herein, from 5. pound, vpwards. And when there shall be brought in 70. or 80. thou∣sand pounds, then presently the said Officers to prouide an hundred Busses, which with that money will be roy∣ally built and furnished, and all their first yeares charge defrayed.
And as more stocke shal come in, so also more Bus∣ses to be so prouided and added to those former, &c. All which may bee (as in the now East India company) the ioynt stocke and Busses of the company. Of which Ioynt stocke and Busses, euery aduenturer according to the proportion of his said Aduenture, may yearely know, giue, and receiue his proportion, as it shal please God to dispose of the whole fleete and businesse. But whereas in the said East India company, and others such like, as haue a common Treasury, whereinto euery Aduenture is promiscuously put, the saide Aduentures once brought in, are there still continued in banke, and often additions cald for. In this Fishing company, eue∣ry Aduenturer shall but onely (as it were) lend the mony he aduentureth for one yeare or there abouts, as before is shewed. Now for the good gouernment and sincere disposi∣tion of this Ioynt stocke, &c. It would be specially pro∣uided (amongest other ordinances and prouisions) that all Officers be only annuall; and that those be freely cho∣sen and yearely changed by the more voats of the com∣pany, yearely to be assembled for that purpose. And that whatsoeuer gratuities, or rewards, or fees, shall be yearly giuen to such Officers, may (not onely in grosse, but) in particular be distributed or set down by the more part of voyces of the company so assembled; and not one grosse sum giuen, bee deuided or distributed by any one man▪ for so may the company with their owne money arme and enable one man, (first thereby made proud) to ouer-rule and keep vnder themselues, by binding his fel∣low officers to himselfe, to the neglect of the generality, whose proper gifts they be, though by that ill meanes it be not acknowledged, besides many other mischiefes &
inconueniences, which may come by the ouerweening of one or fewe men, whilest others of better deserts per∣haps are neglected and not looked on, to the mouing of much offence, murmur, and enuy in some; and of pride, insolency and arrogancy in others. By this last mentioned promiscuous course of Ioynt∣stocke, after the rate of Aduenture and charge & gaine, before in particulars set downe, it appeares: That Euery Aduenturer of C li. may gaine clearly per annum. 75 0 0 Euery Aduenturer of xl li may gaine clearly per annum 30 0 0 Euery Aduenturer of xx. li may gaine clearly per annum. 15 0 0 & euery Aduenturer of v. li. may gaine clearly per annum 3 15 0 Surely I hope this famous Citty (euer forward for the kingdomes good) will for their part prouide and fur∣nish the first C. of Busses at the least, and thereby accor∣ding to their former noble examples, (as the cresset of the kingdome) giue light to the rest of the land to follow them by. And I thinke the East India company will liberally further this worke: for that thereby some of their grea∣test wants are like to be supplied. I speake as I thinke without insinuation, which I hate as much as rayling. And I neither hope for, nor desire any other gaine hereby, then my share in the common good that all this land shall by Gods blessing reape by this businesse, and the proportionable gaine of mine Aduenture therein.
THE States Proclamation transla∣ted out of Dutch THE States generall of the Vnited Pro∣uinces of the Low countries vnto al those that shall see or heare these presents gree∣ting. Wee let to weet, that whereas it is well knowne, that the great fishing and catching of Herrings, is the chiefest Trade and principal Gold▪mine of these Vnited Countries, vvhereby many thousands of Housholds, Families, Handi-crafts trades and Occupations are set on worke, well maintained and prosper, especially the Sailing and Nauigation, as vvell within as without these Countries, is kept in great esti∣on. Moreouer, many Returnes of Money, with the encrease of the Meanes, Conuoyes, Customes, & Re∣uennues of these Countries are augmented thereby and prosper: and forasmuch as there is made from time to time many good Orders, concerning the catching, sal∣ting, and beneficiall vttering of the said Herrings to the end, to preserue and maintaine the said chiefe Trade in the Vnited Prouinces; which Trade, by diuers encoun∣ters of some that seeke their owne Gaine, is enuyed, in respect of the great good it bringeth to the vnited coun∣tries. And VVee a informed, that a newe deuice is put in practise to the preiudice of the Trade, to Trans∣port
out of the Vnited Countries into other countryes, Staues for Herring-barrels made heere, and halfe Her∣ring-barrels, put into other Barrels and Nets, to crosse the good Orders and Policy heere intended to them of these Countries, for the catching, salting, and selling the Herrings, dressed in other countries, after the order of these Countries, whereby this chiefe Trade should bee decayed heere, and the Inhabitants of these Countryes damnified, if that we make not prouision in time against such practises. Therefore Wee, after mature Iudge∣ment and deliberation, haue forbidden and interdicted, and by these Presents doe forbid and interdict, all, and euery one, as well Home-borne and Inhabitantes, as strangers frequenting these parts, to take vp any Her∣ring-barrels, or halfe ones prepared, or any kind of nets in any Ship, Towne, or Hauen of the vnited Prouinces, to be sent into other Countries or Places, vpon paine of confiscation of the same, and the ship also wherein they shalbe found, besides a penalty of 200. of Netherlandish siluer Royals for the first time, and for the second time aboue confiscation of Ship and Goods, and 400. of the saide Royals of siluer, and for the third time, aboue con∣fiscation of ship and goods, and 600. of the saide Roy∣als of siluer▪ and corporall punishment: all which confis∣cations and penalties shall be distributed, one third part to the profit of the Plaintife, one third part to the poor, and one third part to the Officers where the saide con∣fiscation shall be demanded: and not onely they shal in∣curre this penalty, which after shall be taken vvith the deed, but they also, that within one yeare after the deed shall bee conuicted: and that none may pretend igno∣rance, and that this order may be in all places duely ob∣serued, and the offenders punished according to iustice:
Wee will and require, our deere and well-beloued E∣states, Gouernors, Deputies of the councell, and the E∣states of the respectiue Prouinces of Gilderland, and the county of Satfill in Holland, West-Freesland, Zeland, Vtricts, Freesland, Merizel, the Towne of Groyning, and the circumiacent places: and to all Iustices and officers, that they cause to be published in all places, and proclai∣med where the vsuall Proclamation and Publication is made: VVe do charge also the Chancellors and Prouin∣ciall councell, and the councell of the Admiralty, the Aduocatisticall and the Procurators generall, and all o∣ther Officers, Iudges, and Iustices of these Vnited Pro∣uinces, and to all generall Colonies, Admiralles and Vice-admirals, Captaines, Officers and Commanders, to performe, and cause to be performed, this order and commandement, and to proceede and cause to be pro∣ceeded against the Offenders, without grace, fauour, dis∣simulation or composition; because we haue founde it necessary for the good and benefite of the saide vnited Prouinces. Dated in Hage this 19. of Iuly. FINIS. Gentle Reader, correct these few escapes with thy pen. In the 4. page of A. lin. 2. for Faculty r Facility, for Godsdue r. Godsalue, ibid. p. 8. for Eastward r. Aftward. Pag. 3. B. for Essle s r. Esses. C. p. 7. l. . car∣rying, r. carryning. In the Marg. of the 7. p. of B. For dringe r. dresing.
