22439 99852536 17861
A CONTENTION FOR HONOVR AND RICHES. By J. S. —ubi quid datur oti, illudo chartis.— LONDON, Printed by E. A. for William Cooke, and are to be sold at his shop neere Furnivals Inne gate in Holborne. 1633.
TO THE RIGHT VVORSHIP∣full and his honoured friend, EDVVARD GOLDING of Colston in Nottingham-shire Esquire. WHere there is a will to be gratefull, the acknowledgement supplies the defect of action, reddit enim beneficium qui libenter debet. Although this hold no force in the common and municipall lawes, where men doe no benefit, before they ac∣count to receive; it is allowed a Canon in moralitie, where many good deeds are to be lost, that wee may place one well. No man can dye in debt, that hath an honest remembrance of his obligation, since death is to bee reckoned from the first day of our ingrati∣tude. In this confidence I appeare, and being neither guilty of desert, or power to reward, I must present the memory of your owne act and vertue to pay your selfe. That which waiteth upon my thankes, is this handfull of paper imaginations, though below your
study, not beneath your vertue to accept, and smile upon; they were meant for innocent mirth, and can bee no prejudice, if they onely serve to set off your Nobler Contemplations. Read when you will di∣spence with halfe an houre, and continue your fa∣vour to him, whose ambition is to write himselfe Your Servant, James Shirley.
The Speakers. Ingenuity a Scholler. Courtier. Soldier. Clod a Country-man. Gettings a Citizen. Women. Honour. Riches. Mutes. Honesty. No-pay. Long-vacation. Foule-weather-in-harvest.
A CONTENTION FOR HONOR AND RICHES. Enter Riches, and Ingenuity a Scholler. Ing. MY Lady desires to speake with you. Ric. Your Lady? who's your Lady? Ing. The Lady Honor. Rich. Let Honor come to Riches, it will not Disparage her, my friend. Ing. She is not well. Ri. Honor is seldom sound, what ailes her Ladiship? Ing. She had a fall lately. Ric. A fall? Ing. And spraind Her foot. Ric. Teach her to clime; shee's so ambitious. In. Please you to do her the favour, she will waite Vpon your Ladi-ship another time.
Ric. I cannot come Ing. Good Madam. Ric. I ha the goue Ing. You may command a Coach. Ric. Riches I know May command any thing but I doe not use To come to every one desires my company Beside, my servants are abroad, and it Becomes me not to goe so unattended. Ing. I shall be fortunate, if you accept My service. Ric. Is that state enough for me? Although it be in fashion with your Lord, To amble with his foot man and Page, I use to have more followers. Ing. Great Ladies Have no such traine, many are held supersuous, The Gentleman Vsher now a dayes is thought Sufficient for a Countesse, nay, for two Take him by turnes, & yet he may be courteous To the waiting Gentlewoman. Ric. You assume, me thinkes, Much liberty in talking, wha'ts your name▪ In. They which know me, call me Ingenuity. Ric. Ingenuity? Out upon! thee I suspect,
Your are a Scholler. Ing. I have studyed Arts. Ri. Defend me from his witchcraft had thy Mistris: None but a Scholler to employ upon Her complements to me, one whose profession I hate, whose memory is my disease, And conversation death? how ranck he smells Of Aristotle, and the musty Tribe Of worme-eaten Philosophers? get from me, I will endure the Beares, and their provision, Lie in an Hospitall, or French-footmen, feed With prisoners, or be rack'd at Westminster, Nay, die, & make poore orphants my Executors, Ere be confind to heare thy learned nonsence. Ing. Why should you be such enemy to Schollers? They waste Mineraes precious dew, their sweat, To gaine your favour, and would thinke themselves Blest, when your golden beames but shine upon'em. Ric. Tis not your flattery can win upon me. Goe, and declame against me, good Diogenes, Admire a vertuous poverty, and nakednesse, Call Fortune whore, and write whole volumes in The praise of hunger and your lowsie wardrobe, Yes, teach the world, Riches is growne a monster, And that she dotes on ignorance: these are Your vulgar doctrines, and I pray pursue'em,
My most immortall begger, and get ame With some twice sodden pamphle, till you make Submission to my foole, in hope of the Reversion of his Groomes bare livery: Your Theses, and your Syllogismes, will No doubt convert the Beadle, and the dog-whip. Ing. Be pleas'd to heare me speake— Ri. What impudence Does this appeare, you should desire that favour? Have I not given testimony to the world Sufficiently, I doe not love a Scholler? Ing. Indure me for my Mistresse Lady Honor. Ric. I wonder what she meant to entertain thee! Away, dispute no further, if you move me To more impatience, Riches will finde wayes To curbe your infolence s not your pretence To Honors service, can protect you from My anger, I have kindred, and acquaintance Shall with their breath blow thee beyond the Sea; Or if I should be mercifull, and let thee Injoy thy Country, never hope to arrive at Above a pension, that will find you woollen A Pedant, or a Vicaridge preement, Gelded sufficiently by the improper Parson, Is all your wit must hope for; and take heed That you be modest then, no coate, nor Casscke
Can charme you▪ if I offer to complaine, I shall put your Divinity to silence. Ing. I despie Thy womanish threats, and shall account my selfe Happy without thy favour. O Philosophy, Assist thy poore admirer, and infuse A noble fortitude to scorne her malice: I have no thought, but has a triumph'ore Thy base conspiracy. Welcome my deare Bookes, And contemplation, that shall feed my soule To immortality: let Puppes dote Vpon thy gifts, and sell their priviledge, For gaudy clothes and Epicureanurfets, Lust, and a Catalogue of Rich mens sinnes, That shall like plummets hang upon their heart: When wings are most required, keepe thy resolve, And be attenemy to Learning still, That when we find a Scholler, by thee favord, We may suspect him counterfeit and a dunce Honor will be my Mistris, whoe least smile I value above all thy pride, or treasures, And she will scorne thee too. Farewell, gay Madam, A painted tombe! though glorious to the eye. Corruption dwells within thee. Exit. Ric. Foule mouth Satyre, But tis some punishment to let him waste
His spirits with his railing, let him fret, It may consume him without more diseases, Let him die any way, men of his quality Are living but unprofitable burdens To the earth, as they were borne to consume fruits, And talke of needlesse Sciences. Who are these? My ancient sutors, Clod the Country-man, And Gettings the rich Citizen? Enter Clod and Gettings. Get. She'es here. Good morrow to the star of my delight, Whose beames more glorious doe eclipse the Sunne, And cast a richer warm'th about the world. Ric. How? turn'd Poet? Get. Feare me not, Lady, I am none of those were borne too't, I had rather Be a Iew then christned in Parnassus Pompe, I have nothing but the knuckles and the rumpes Of Poetry. Ric. Take heed in time, lest you become infected With wit, I doe not love poeticke fancies, Nor any thing that trenches on the Muses, They were baggages, and Phoebus their protector, Deserv'd the whipping post. Get. I have-read, he was A common Piper, and those Nine were Gipsies,
That liv'd by cheating Palmistry. Ric. I like it, When you doe raile at Learning, I allow you To read a Ballad, and ridiculous Pamphlets, Writ on the strength of Beere, or some dull liquor: But if you smell profane Sacke in a Poeme, Come not within a league of understanding, As you respect my favour. Get. I am instructed. Ric. But why does Clod stand all this while so mute? Clo. Either I am John a Noakes, or I am not John a Noakes. Ric. Hee's dreaming of his horses. Clod. Gee, sweete Lady, I am all to be mired in your beauty, the horses of my imagination are foun∣dred in the high-way of your perfections, for I am deepe in love with your Lady-ship, though I doe not weare such fine clothes as Master Gettings here, and so much out of fashion: for if I commend my dou∣blet, I must speake sustian, yet my heart is cut and flash'd, and I defie any man that has a better stomack to youin the way of Matrimony. Get. No comparison, Master Clod. Clod. Let him be odious, that names comparison, for my part, I soorne 'em all and the degrees.
Get. Y'are very positive. Clod. Dost thou positive me? And my Mistresse were not here, thou shouldest find Clod is made of an other gesse mold, then to endure thy affronts. Ric. And you quarrell, I am gone. Ge. Nay, nay, sweet Lady we shall be friends agen. Ric. I hope it wonot stretch to a duell. Exit. Get. Duell? You wonot provoke me, Clod, Will you? if you doe, Clod. Clod. I will provoke any man living in the way of love. Get. How? Clod. He that shall goe a wooing to my Mistris, I will provoke him, and he were my father. Get. Y'are a durty fellow, Clod, and if I had met thee that yeere I was Scavenger, I would have had thee carted. Clod. Mee carted, Cart thy Bawdes, there bee enow within the walls, do'st tell me of a Scaven∣ger? a fart for thy office, I am a better man in the coun∣try then the Constable himselfe, and doe tell thee to thy face, though I am plaine Clod, I care not a beane∣stalke for the best What lacke you on you all, no not the next day after Simon and Jude; when you goe a seasting to Westminster with you Gllyoist and your pot-guns, to the very terror of the Papet-whales,
when you land in sholes, and make the understan∣ders in Cheapside, wonder to see ships swimme upon mens shoulders, when the Fencers flourish, and make the Kings liege people fall downe and Worship the Devill and Saint Dustan, when your whifflers are hangd in chaines, and Hercules Club spit fire about the Pageans, though the poore chil∣dren catch cold▪ that shew like painted cloth, and are onely kept alive with sugar plummes, with whom, when the word is given, you march to Guild-hall, with every man his spoone in his pocket, where you looke upon the Giants, and feed like Sarazens, till you have no stomacke to Pauls in the afternoone: I have seene your Processions, and heard your Lions and Camels make speeches, in stead of Grace before and after dinner: I have heard songs too, or some∣thing like e'm: but the Porters have had the burden, who were kept sober at the City charge, two dayes before, to keepe time and tune with their feet, for bragge what you will of your charge, all your pompe lies upon their backe. Get. So, so. Clo. Must this dayes pride so blow you up, that a Country-mans tale may not be heard? Get. That dayes pride? Clo. Or what ist make you Gamboll so?
Get. Why, anger ha's made you witty Country-man. Clo. Thou lyest, and I am none of thy Country-man, I was borne out of the sound of your Pancake∣bell, I cannot abide to see a proud fellow: and it were not for us in the Country, you would have but a leane City, wee maintaine your Charter, and your Chamber too, you would ha but ill markets, and we should forsweare to furnish e'm, where were your hides, hornes and plenty of other provision? your, wives could not doe as they doe, with your short yard and your false light, and the Country should not come in upon them. Come, you can∣not live without us, you may be cald a body Po∣liticke, but the Country is the soule, and therefore subscribe and give way to me. Get. The high-way, but not the wall in London, doe you know where you are, and what you have talk't all this while? an Informer would squeeze your truncke hose for this, and teach you to know your Termes and your Artornies. Clo. Ile have as good Law for my money, as the best on you, I know what belongs to't, I have al∣most broke the Parson of the Parish already, about his Tithe-egges. Get. Why, thou lumpe of ignorance, leather and
husbandry ill compounded, thou that hast beene so long a dung-hill, till the weedes have overgrowne thee, and a farre off hast cozend a horse, thou that dost whistle out thy prayers, and wo-not change thy durty soyle, for so many acres in Paradise, nor leave thy share o'the plough, for Saint Peters patri∣mony, thou that were begot upon a hay-mow, bred in thy fathers stable, and out-dung'd his Cat∣tell, thou, that at one and twenty, wert onely able to write a sheeps marke in Tarre, and read thy owne capitall letter, like a gallous upon a cowes buttocke; you that allow no Scripture Canonicall, but an Al∣manacke, which makes you weather-wise, and puts you in hope of a deare yeere: let the Country starve, and the poore grind provender, so the market rise: let your soule fall to the Devill among the Corne∣cutters, I am ashamed to hold discourse any longer with thee; onely one word, I would advise you to let your action of love fall, and be content to marry with Malkin, in the Country, shee can churme well, and humble her selfe behind a hedge, for this Lady is no lettice for your lips, goe goe, meddle with your jades, and exercise a whip, among your bread and cheese eaters. Clo. Sirra Cit, I doe challenge thee. Get. What weapon?
Clo. The next  shall furnish us both if thou hast any morall, let us try before we part who is the better man. Get, If thou hast any ambition to be beaten to dust, Clod, thanke your selfe. Clo. I will flash hy skin like a Summer dou∣blet, come thy wayes. Enter a Courter and a Souldier  Honor Ingenuity. Cour. Looke this way, Lady, and in me behold Your truest servant. Sol. Tis but  Court-ship That he professes, looke upon the Lady That can be active in your service. I. Tis The Courtier and the  pleading their Affection to my mistresse Lady donor, I wo'not interrupt them yet, I cannot Find by  that she enclines to either Col. Blesse me but with one smile if you did know With what devotion my soule lookes on you, How next to my religion I have placede, If not above How long since I first vowed my selfe your , That eye would Sol. I have
No stocke of soft and melting words to  you, Such silken language we are strangers to, We are us'd to other Dialect, and imitate the Drum, Bold Artillery: can you love me? When I have marched upon the dreadfull Cannon, My heart was fixt on Honor nor could death In all her shapes of horror temp one thought To base retire, when no voyce could be heard, But thunder, and no object seene but lightning, Which seem'd to have bin struck frō the first Cho, So great a darkenesse had eclips'd the Snne, Yet then I thought on Honor, and Their lives that  about me, every body I trod upon, (for now the dead had The earth) gave me addition Where, in my imagination I saw Thee charioted, and dropping downe a Gland. Ho. No more there are but compl of wars, Perhaps some studied speech But am not taught with these Hyperbol Honor's not won with words No paint of often That has the greatest  not The greatest danger. Ing. She has  his Culvering, And now he's swearing out some prayers▪
Cour. Shee's mine. Thus lookt the moone, when with her virgin fires She went in progresse to the mountaine Latmos, To visit her Endimion, yet I injure Your beauty, to compare it to her orbe Of silver light, the Sun from which, she borrowes That makes her up the nightly Lamp of heaven, Has in his stock of beams not halfe your luster, Enrich the earth still with your sacred presence, Vpon each object throw a glorious starre, Created by your sight, that when the learn'd Astronomer comes forth to examine heaven, He may find two, and be himselfe devided, Which he should first contemplate. Ho. You both love me. Cour. But I the best. Sol. How sir, the best? Cou. Ere since I knew the Court, I had no other study but to advance My selfe to Honor, all my suites have beene Directed to this one, that Honor would Fixe me among those other Constellations That shine about the King, tis in thy love To plant a Coronet here: and then I dare Iustle the proudest Heroe and be inscrib'd A demy god, frowne dead the humble mortall,
And with my breath call backe their soules agen. What cannot Honor doe? Ho. Not that you boast. True Honor makes not proud, not takes delight I'th ruine of poore vertue. So. Sir, you said you lov'd her best. Co. And will maintaine it. So. You cannot, dare not. Co. Dare not? Ho. So peremptory, Honor may in time Find wayes to tame the insolent Lady Riches, But leave her to her pride. Ing. The Courtier, and The Souldier looke as they would quarrell. Ho. Let 'em. You see how they pursue me still, but Honor Is not so easily obtain'd. Ing. They are Gay creatures, and conspicuous in the world. Ho. But no such miracles: Gentlement, you promise Some spirit in you, ther's no way to make Me confident of your worth but by your action: In briefe, if you be ambitious of Honor, You must fight for me, and as fame shall give me Your character, I shall distinguish you, And cherish worth: meane time I take my leave.
Come, , you and I must have Some private conference, I dare trust your bosome With some thing of more weight. Ing. I am then happy, When you command me service. Ho. And I keepe A Register of all, and though delayd, Forget not the reward. Exeunt Honor, Ing. So. Hark, Master Cringe, How d'ee like her sentence? If you meane To have Honor you must fight for  speeches, Nor crinckling in the hammes will carry her, You have worne a sword thus long, to shew the hlt, Now let the blade appeare. Co. Good Captaine Voyce, It shall, and reach you manners, I have yet No Ague, I can looke upon your buffe, And punto beard, and call for no strong waters, I am no Taverne gull, that wants protection, Whom you with oathes doe use to mortifie, And sweare into the paiments of all reckonings, Vpon whose credit you weare belt and feather, Top and top gallant, and can make him seale At mid-night to your Taylor, goe invite Young Gentlemen to dinner, and then pawne 'em, Or valiantly with some of your owne file,
Conspire a Sconce, or to a bawdy house March with your Regiment, and kicke the Leverets, Make cullice o'the Bawdes, yet be made friends, Before the Constable be sent for, and Run to'the ticket for the pox, these services, I doe presume, you are acquainted with. So. Musk-Cat. Co. Or wert thou what thou seem'st, a Soldier, For so much good I wish thee for my honor, When I have kil'd thee. So. Sirra Civet-box. Co. Let me aske your Souldier ship but one cold question, If Lady Honor, whom you have presum'd Without good manners to affect, should possibly Descend to marry thee, prethee what joynture Couldst thou make her? So. Ioynture? Co. Ile admit for arguments sake, Thou art a Souldier, perhaps You will give her a Catalogue of Townes, Or Leaguers, the names of bridges broken downe, Your nose in time may make another, you will tel her Of onslaughts, Bulwarks, Barricado, Forts, Of Cannon, Culvering, Sacres, and a rabble Of your Artillery, which you have cond by heart,
A role of Captaines names, perhaps you have In ready wounds, some twenty idle, admit it, And in diseases can assure her forty, This wo'not doe, she cannot eate a Snapsacke, Nor carry baggage, lie in your foule Hut, And rost your pullen, for whose precious theft, You and the Gibbet feare to bee acquainted, If you returne into your wholesome Country, Vpon your honorable woodden legs. The houses of correction are no Palaces, And Passes must be had, or else the Beadles Will not be satisfied, the Treasurers name And twelve-pence for your service i'th Low countries, And spending of your blood for doughty Dutchmen, That would have hāg'd you there, but in their charity You were reserv'd for begggery at home, Is no inheritance I take it sir. So. Have you done yet? Co. I have not much more to say. So. It does appeare by all this prattle then, You doe not know me, and have ta 'ne too much On trust to talke of Souldier, a name Tha'st not deserv'd to mention, because Some fellowes here, have brag'd, and perhaps beaten You, and some other of your satten Tribe, Into beliefe that they have seene the warres,
That perhaps mustered at Mile-end, Or Finesbury. Must the true sonnes of courage, Be thus dishonor'd, and their character Defac'd by such prodigious breath? must we, We that for Honor and your safeties suffer, What in the repetition would fright Your pale soules from you, when perhaps you foot A jigge at home, and revell with your Lady, Be thus rewarded! Happy they that dyed Their Country sacrifice, to prevent the shame Of living with such popular drones, but I Should wrong our glorious profession By any Arguments, to make thee sensible Of what we are: it shall suffice to publish What is not now in ignorant supposition. But truth, of your gay quality and vertues, You are a Courtier. Co. Very good. So. Not so. If such there be, I talke not to them now, But to thee Phantasme, of whom men doe doubt Whether thou hast a soule, thou that dost thinke it The better and more gratefull part of thy Religion, to we are good clothes, and suffer More paines at buttoning of thy gawdy doublet, Then thou durst take for heaven, thou hast devided
Thy flattery into severall articles, And hast so often called your great men goods, That tis become thy Creed, and thou dost now Beleeve no other, thou w'ot take a bribe, To undoe a Nation, and sell thy Country-men To as many persecutions as the Devill: thou art beholding to thy pride, it has Made thee thy owne selfe-lover, for without it, None else affecting thee I doe now see, What else could keep thee from despaire & drowning? Thy wantonnesse has made thy body poore, But not in shew, for though thy back have payd for't, It weares rich trappings; Art may helpe your legs, But cannot cure your dancing: that and pepper, Avoid with like discretion, one betrayes you At dinner, and the other betweene meales. Goe purchase lands and a faire house, which must When thou livest in it be an Hospitall, And owe no other body for diseases. Co. Pray come, and take a chamber. So. Thou hastignorance And impudence enough for twenty Alchymists. Co. Ile heare no more. So. A little, Ile intreat you, You shall be beaten afterward, ne're feare it. Co. Dar'st thou blaspheme the Court?
So. I honour it, And all the Noble ornaments of State, That like Pomegranats in old Aarons coate, Adorne the Prince that wears 'em, but such Courtiers That coozen us like Glow-wormes in the night, Or rotten wood, I hate, and in their number For this time be content I list your worship. Co. How do you know what I am, or what title Perhaps I weare? So. I know thee by the wrong To Souldiers. Co. I speake of such as thou wert, and I dare Maintaine, and write as much in thy owne blood. Enter Honestie. Co. Dost thou not see, Honestie? So. Honestie? what hast thou to do with Honesty? Co. I never could endure her, she appeares More terrible then a ghost, I ha no stomacke To fight, my blood is frozen in my veines, She is a thousand punishments at once: Now would I give my Office to be at peace With mine owne conscience, ha, she do's pursue me? So. These are idle imaginations, collect Your selfe, good Courtier, and remember what Wee are to doe, or I shall, ha.
Enter No-pay. Co. Whats the matter, more terror? So. I am cold too. Co. Another apparition. So. You may know him by a jaw-faln, tis No-pay. And what a comfort No-pay's to a Souldier, I appeale to a Councell of warre, the Devill is not So full of horror, No-pay? Ile not fight A stroke, though I were sure to cleare the Empire. Exeunt. Enter Citizen and Country-man arm'd. Get. Our weapons length are even, but youle find There is such ods betwixt us, nought but death Can reconcile our difference. Clod. Deny your major. I thinke I heard a Schol∣ler use that word against Bellarmine. I, Ile stand too't: for if nought but death, can reconcile our difference, we must be both kild: no, prepare thy selfe, I hope to send thee to heaven, and be farre enough off ere Sun∣set: if thou hast made thy Will, let them prove it when thou art dead, and bury thee accordingly, thy wife will have cause to thanke me, it will be a good hearing to the poore of the Parish: happy man by his dole, besides, the Blue-coates can but comfort thy kindred with singing and rejoycing at thy Funerall. Come on thy wayes.
Get. Y'are very round, Clod, I doe not thinke you have practis'd Fencing of late, this is a weapon you are not us'd to, a Pitch-forke were more convenient for you to manage. Clo. A Pitch-forke? Thou shalt know thy destiny by this, though it have but one point I know where thy heart lies, I desire no more, and lesse would sa∣tisfie me, unlesse thou wilt eate thy words, and con∣fesse thou hast wrong'd me, out it shall, I have a sto∣macke to cut thee up, and my sword has a pretty edge of it selfe, and my greatest griefe is, that I owe thee nothing, to discharge all together, but tis no matter, I can but kill thee. Get. You cannot, sure: for ought I see in your coun∣tenance, you are not long-lyv'd your selfe, you have but a tallow complexion, doe you know what ground you stand upon, Clod? Col. Ground? Get. You may tread upon your grave now, for all this blustering. Clod. Thou liest, there's more to provoke thee: no, I came not hither to dye, and I  be buryed at any mans discretion, my father was buryed Country, and my grand-father, and his father before him, and if I live Ile bee buried there my selfe: but what doe we lose time? looke to thy head, for I will
make an even reckoning with thy shoulders pre∣sently. Enter Foule-Weather-in-Harvest. Ha, hold, alas, I wo'not fight, I ha no heart to lift up a weapon. Ge. You were fie and tow but 'een now. Clo. But here's water Dost not see? I shall be un∣done. Get. Who is this? Clo. Why, tis Foule-Weather-in-Harvest, all spoil'd, I wo'not have thy heart now, and thou wouldst gee'tme. Get. Tis well, something will coole you, after so much thunder, but it wo'not quench the fire of my anger. I doe not use to put up these things, when I am drawne too't, your Foule weather is nothing to the businesse in hand, therefore submit thy necke to my execution, or— Clo. Kill me: Ile forgive thee, I shall have no Har∣vest to yeere. Enter Long-Vacation. Get. And thou hadst as many heads as Hydra—Ha, Ile not hurt a Hare, I am frighted this is my heart, you had not so wet, but we are like to have as dry a time on't, I stood upon tees before, this is Long-Vacation.
Clo. Long-Vacation? Get. I dream'd of a dry Summer, he will con∣sume me, it will be a thousand yeeres till Michael∣masse. Prethee let's be friends, for my part I have no hope of Riches. Clo. And I but little, and this weather hold. Enter Riches. Here she comes. Ric. Where be these friends of mine? Alas, what Meane you? I am faint with seeking you to stay your fury: For I was told your bloody resolutions. You should be a man of government, are these The ensignes of the City? will you give Without the Herald in your Armes, a Sword To the old City Dagger? you weare a Gowne Embleme of peace, will you defile your gravity With Basket-hilt and Bilboe? And you bold Yeoman, That like a Rieke of hay, hath stood the shocke Of Winter, and grew white with snow of age, Is this an instrument for you? But I am confident that you will say, tis love Of me hath brought you to the field, and therefore To prevent future mischiefe, I determine Here to declare my selfe: but first conjoyne Your loving hands, and vow a constant friendship,
Then one of you Ile choose my husband. Get. By our seven gates that doe let in Every day no little sin, By the sword which we aduance, And the Cap of Maintenance: By the Shrieves post, and the hall Yeleped Guild, and London wall, By our Royall Change which yeelds Gentile ware, and by More-fields, By our thrice burnt famous Steeple, That doth over-looke the people, Cheapeside Crosse, and loud Bow-bell, And by all that wish it well: I am friends with him till he dies, And love him like my liberties: So helpe me Riches, what I speake: The Citizen will never breake. Ric. What say you? Clo. By my Cart, and by my Plough, My dun Mare, and best red Cow, By my Barne, and fattest Weather, My grounds, and all my state together, In thy love I over-take thee, Else my whistling quite forsake me, And let me ever lye, which worse is, At racke and manger with the horses.
Ric. Then Master Clod.— Clo. Ha, ha, with all my heart, am I the man? Ric. The man. I must intreate to have some patience. I doe imagine you affect me dearely, And would make much of Riches. Clo. There's no Lady That shal out-shine my Darling: tis no matter, though I be in Russet all the weeke, Riches shal live like a La∣dy, have perfum'd linnen, costly Gownes, and Pe∣ticoats worth taking up, and as the fashion is; I will put thee into a bagge. Ric. This wo'not, sir, agree with your condition, To keepe me brave: the Country Cut must be Observ'd. Clo. Hang Country Cuts! Doe but marry me.— Ric. But this is not my exception; there is more That interdicts our marriage: for though you Are willing to conceale it, Master Clod, Yet you and I are kindred, at least cousins. Clo. Why, is not your name Riches? Ric. Though my name Be Riches, yet my mother was a Clod, She married rich earth of America, Where I was borne, a durty family, But many matches have refined us now, And we are called Riches.
Clo. If you were borne in America, wee are but kindred a farre off. Ric. Let us not confound our Genealogies. Clo. I would be loth to marry an Infidell borne, and yet I like your complexion so well, that— Ric. No, I am reserv'd for thee, And here I plant my best affection. Get. Welcome to my heart. How I doe love thee, Riches! O my soule, We'le marry straight. Ric. And thus much for your comfort. Nay, droope not, Clod, though I be wife to him, Yet if I bury Gettings, Ile be thine, And carry London with us into th' Country. Clo. After this rate you are my wife in Law. Well: give you joy. Get. Me thinkes I fumble my gold chaine already. But who are these? Enter Courtier and Souldier. Co. No Honor to be found. So. Let us inquire Of these. Did any see the Lady Honor? Get. What care we for Honor, so we have Riches? Co. Ha? I have beene acquainted with this Lady. Ric. I was at Court the last weeke, sir. Cour. I remember.
Sol. I ha seene her some-where too. Ric. I ha beene a Traveller. So. Were you never taken by the Hollander? Ric. I was in the Plate-fleete. So. Baser los manos Signiora. Ric. I have almost forgot my Spanish, but after a little practice I may recover it. Clo. I know not Honor if I see her, I have heard of such a Lady: ten to one, but Riches can direct you to her. Ric. I apprehend your desires, sir, & will direct you. Co. I am your servant, Lady. Ri. But first, Mr. Gettings, know these Gentlemen. Ge. They are in my books already, pray Gentlemen, Know my Commodities, when I ha married Riches, I shall be better able to furnish you Co. We wish you joy. So. And shall remaine your debtors. Get. I make no doubt. Co. But here's the Lady whom we enquire for. So. She has musicke to attend her. Musicke. Enter Honor and Ingenuity. Ha! the Scholler? The case is alterd. Is not that Ingenuity? Co. How familiar they are! I hope they'r not married.
Cl. Is this Madam Honor? Co. So, Lady. Ho. Gentlemen, I come to reconcile your difference, I did foresee you desperate in love, And prompted, I confesse your swelling valours To fight for me, but upon second thoughts. I canceld that opinion, and devis'd A way to settle all things without danger This Gentleman late my servant, Ingenuity, Hath remov'd all occasion of your further Courtship, and now won me for his Bride. Co. Married the Scholler? despis'd. So. Affronted. Ho. You are passionate. You could not both possesse me, yet in him Your excellencies meet, and I enjoy e'm. He can be Courtier and a Soldier When the occasion presents it selfe. He that hath learn'd to obey well, can command. Nay, be not sad, if you lov'd me, expresse it In your Congratulations. Here I fixe My selfe, and vow my best affection. If in the number of my friends, I may Write you, be confident you sha'not lose By your respect to Honor. Lady Riches,
I hope there is no Antipathy in your nature, But you may smile upon a Scholler now Married to Honor. Rich. Since you have so advanc'd him, He shall not want my favour. Ing. Now I am confident. Co. We must obey our destiny. Since Fate Meant me not so much happinesse, to be The husband, let me still be humble servant To Honor. So. My desires have the same ambition. Co. and So. Ioyes crowne your marriage Ing. Now you both denide me. But in this Empire I can brooke no Rivall. Be all my honor'd guests, and with one feast And revels celebrate our double marriage. Co. And here our love unites. Pardon what language My passion threw upon thee acknowledge A Soldiers worth above the reach of malice. So. My heart shall spread to embrace the noble Courtier. Clod. Here's nothing but complement. you should bring up a fashion to kisse one another. Get. Tis such a dry Clod! Ing. Correct your passions, sir, I am inform'd You have beene guilty this day of abuse,
Against the noble Citizens, and traduc'd Their yeerely Triumph. Get. 'Twas his ignorance, But we are friends agen. Ing. Then I ha done. Now Gentlemen and Ladies, In the assurance all are pleas'd, lus Ioyne in dance. Such mirth becomes a wedding. Strike up some nimble aire. They dance. Ing. Thus all have eene how Providence imparts Wealth to the City, Honor to the Arts. Exeunt. FINIS.
