22994 99838056 2413
NEVVES FROM SPAYNE AND HOLLAND CONTEYNING. An information of Inglish affayres in Spayne vvith a conferrence made theruppon in Am∣sterdame of Holland. VVritten by a Gentleman trauelour borne in the lovv countryes, and brought vp from a child in Ingland, vnto a Gentle∣man his frend and Oste in London. Anno, M. D. XCIII.
TO THE IN∣DIFFERENT AND DISCRETE READER. I RECEAVED great content∣ment, and thoughte my self exceedingly gratified by an espetiall freind of myne, vvhen as (of late) it pleased him to cō∣municate vvith me the ensuing discours, concerning the estate, residence, & exercises of the English nation in Spaine, vvith other matter thereon de∣pending, together vvith a fami∣liar conference had at Amster∣dam, vvhich also concerned En∣glish affaires. But beeing in vvritten hand, & only intended by one freind vnto an other, I vvas fory that so notable matter
as is therein deliuered, could not so redely be imparted to many, & therefore I haue pre∣sumed to put the same in print, the thing (in my opinion) right vvoorthely deseruing thesame, & I vvish that thy acceptance thereof may be ansvverable to my good meaning, vvhereby I may the sooner be enduced for thy further satisfaction, to put foorth in print also the other discours, promised in the end of this, vvhereof I do very shortly expect to haue a copy, and thus I leaue the to God, & this trea∣tise (in the meane tyme) to thy considerate regard.
TO THE RIGHT WOORSHIPFVL M. N. MY GOOD OSTE AND DEARE FREND ABIDING IN GRACIOVS STREAT IN LONDON. IF I haue byn somwhat lon∣ger then you expected (my good oste and deare frende) in performance of my promi∣se made vnto you at my de∣partur from London, to retur∣ne you spedilie aduises from flaunders and Spaine, of the affaires so much desired and recommended vnto me, no feare ha∣ue I in the world but that my pardō shal easily be obteyned at your hades who know my good wil both to you and your country (which for di∣uers causes also I may wel cal myne) and more thē this, by your own experience you may easilie imagyn the letts & difficulties which trauelers and traffiquers are wout to finde in forrayne countries, for dispaching their busines with in the compasse of their own designments. True it is, that after my departing from you (which was on Michelmas day (if I forget not) my passage was with good speede to Holland, and thence also with no lesse opportunitie to
Spaine, for that finding good occasion of imbar∣cation my haste, was the greater and so I ariued in Calliz of Andaluzia, by the end of Nouēber, from whence passing within two or three dayes to the porte of S. Maries (which is but one or tvvo howers sayling by water as you know) I had fitt occasion to informe my selfe very particularlie of the first pointe whereof we had hard so much in Ingland, and I promised to write you the truth to witt of the publique re∣conciling of so many Inglish Soldiars to the Catholique Romaine faith, as were at that tyme detayned prisoners in the Gallies of Spayne, which gallies commonly for the winter tyme doe reside in this porte of S. Maries as fittest of all Spayne for that purpose to resist the incursion of the moores. And for that this was the first matter wherof you and I talked and disputed so much in Ingland vppon the vncertaine relations that Souldiers brought vs thither from Spayne, you suspecting the matter to be feigned and I thinking the contrary; I shal first assure you in this that the whole hapned as we were informed, to witt, that aboue nyntie Inglish, partlie cap∣teines, Nynty In∣glis men reconci∣led in Spayne. and officers and partlie marchaunts and commō Souldiers, who had byn very resolute a long tyme in their religion, and had oftentymes affirmed to the Adelantado their general and other Captaynes and frendes which dealt with them in that behalf, that they would rather dye then relent therin, yet afterwardes vppon three or foure dayes cōference with an Inglish father
or two of this side, they offered al most willingly to chainge their opinions and become catholi∣ques, and that at such a tyme, when as they saw themselues out of al dainger if they would haue continued in the contrary, for that they had now this kings warrāt, both for their liues and liberties, and that the inquisition should in no wise touch them for their religiō, which I doe ad to the end you may not thinke parchāce that they did it for feare, but rather of their owne free vvil and electiō, professing themselues with teares and extended handes (as heer most cre∣diblie it vvas tould me) that theyvvere, all most fullie satisfied, persuaded & conuinced, & conse∣quently desired with, earnest request to be recō∣ciled to the Catholicke Romaine fayth and church; and so they were, euery one being first confessed of all his life past, and afterward al to∣gether in solemne procession vvere caried to the great church of the port, & there hard masse to∣gether, vvith extraordinary shew of contrition and repentance for the tyme past, & masse being ended, they al receaued the holy Sacrament of the aulter most deuoutly, & the Adelātado with diuers other noble men kinghts and Captaines were communicated with them, for their com∣fort and deuotion: & that ended, the Adelantado (vvho is a most noble and honorable gentleman and affected excedingly to the Catholiques of your nation) had them all home to his owne house, & gaue them a ryall dinner himselfe ser∣uing A dinnet made to the In∣glish cō∣uetted. them at the table, with Don Iuau de Padilla
his eldest sonne, and heir, the marques of Mon∣tes Claros his nephew, Don Iuan de Porto Carera brother to the Earle of Palma his other nephew, Don Iuan de Robles, Don Pedro de Acumnia, & many other great men, vvho al did this honot to your nation that day, for ioy to see them so wilingly made Catholiques, and I assure you that this day is one of the most memorablest that euer your nation hath had in these partes, and vvilbe remembred in the porte of S. Maries and places there about, for long tyme. By al which you may see, if you wil (my good Sir) that it is true vvhich so offen I haue vrged A consi∣deration vppon the former cō uersion. vnto you and others not greatly learned, who are so determinate in your opinions without knowing the groundes wheron you stād, or at least not those vvherin others doe founde them selues, or vvhat truly may be said vvithout heate of cōtentiō, for the one or agaynst the other, so if (I saie) you would be content but only to heare and examine the matter and confer with some learned of the other side vvith indifferent desire to know the truth & to acknowledge it when in conscience you should discouer the same; it vveare an easie matter to come to that vnion so much desired, as many haue dōne, which sincer∣ly and vvith christian disposition before mē∣tioned haue bine content to treate of this affai∣re. but others as your selfe and some friends of ours ther with you are vvont to apprehend so vehementlie euery new opinon that you fall on, as ther is no reason or argument, may be hard to
the contrary & so no maruaile though you re∣maine still with your owne perswasions. And so much by this occasion against you good Sir, and novv to the course of my narration againe. From the porte of S. Maries I vvent to Siuil agaynst Christmas and in the vvay I passed by The In∣glish hou se and Church of S. George in S. Lu∣cars. S. Lucars vvher I founde the Inglish Church of S. George appartayning in tymes past vnto the Inglish marchantes (vvhich is an other poynte also vvher of you desired to be informed) deliuered vp into the handes of Inglish Semi∣nary priests, together vvith all the houses, groundes, and other emoluments belonging therunto, and it seemeth that the place hath gotten much by this chainge, for that the same church (which I knevv some yeares ago while it was in your marchāts handes) much in decay, is now very vvel repaired and kept in good or∣der, and fayre habitation is in buylding about it, vvhich they say shal serue, not only for the priestes to lye therin, but also for the marchan∣tes of the Inglish nation, to make ther assembly vvhen occasion is offred, and to these buvldings and reparations not only the Duke of Medina Sidonia Lord of the towne, and the Cardinal of Siuil metropolitan of the place, doe giue their fauours and assistāce for the recouery of all such commodityes as euer belonged to that Church and house, but the King also himselfe who be∣sides other fauours gaue them two thousand Crownes in money tovvards the said buylding this yeare past, and so it is like to be one of the
fayrest houses and churches that is in the vvhole city of S. Lucars. This house is to serue principally for a resi∣dence Residèces of Inglish Priests in Libon & in the por te of S. Maries. of Inglish Priests as I haue said, and there is a Doctor of diuinity of your nation prouost therof at this present, and there end is as I am informed not only to keepe vp and serue that house and Church, but also to intertaine such Inglish, as passe in and out to the Seminaries. For vvhich cause also the Duke of Medina Celi lord of the porte of S. Maries is about to erect au other residēce like to this in that his tovvne; and an other ther is alredy erected in Lisbone, & an Inglish graue Priest. Superiour therof vvith great probability to haue a Seminary also and colledge of Inglish students in that city short∣ly; as al ready ther is one of Irishmen and an other of the same nation in Salamanca stirred vp therunto by the example of the Inglish. But to passe forwards in my iourney I arriued The In∣glish hou se and Seminary in Siuill. about Christmas at Siuil vvher I found a good∣ly Inglish Seminarie newly begone & brought to such perfection as in two monethes only ther weare almost fiftie persons in the same, and the said Colledg is placed in the middest and best situation of all the towne, and so vvel setled and prouided for euery vvay as if they had byn ther many yeares: for that the good vvil and affection of the people toward them, is exceeding greate, and they seeme to be rauished as it vvere vvith a kinde of admiration of them, to see so many Inglish tender youthes, al bred and borne in
this Queenes reigne, and yet so forvvard and feruent in this their religion, as to offer them∣selues to al kinde of difficulties, afflictions and perils for the same: for such is the profession cō∣monly of al these youthes, and to confesse the truth it gaue me also incredible admiration to talke with them in that point, and surely it seemeth a spirit different from al other nations and men in thes dayes, and must needes procede of an higher influence then flesh and blood or vvordlie pollecy or perswasion, if I be not de∣ceaued. I vvas present at certanie feastes and excerci∣ses of learning vvhich these yong men made vp∣pon certaine daies in this their new colledge be∣fore, Don Rodrigo de Castro, the Cardinal & Arch∣bishop of that citie, vvho estemeth himself & his house (vvhich is very honorable and of the most auncientest Grandes of Spayne) to be discended of your old Dukes of Lācaster, as also before the vvhole vniuersity and cleargie of Siuil, and be∣fore the Gouernour and noble men of the same, vvho flocked thither in so great numbers vppon the brute of Catholique Inglishmen, as it vvas of force to hold the said excercises in the greater court of the said colledge, but yet adorned very decētly for that purpose, & suerlie the excercises seemed to be done vvith general approbation or rather admiration of al men. The one Dayes excercise vvere disputations before and after dinner, vppon Conclusions drawne out of al diuinity, the learnedest men of
al that city and vniuersity repayring thither to dispute vvith the Inglish priestes that defended the conclusions. An other day vvas the feast of S. Thomas of Excerci∣ses of ler∣ning by the In∣glish in Siuil. Canterbery celebrated vvith great solemnity & exceding much concourse of al principal people of that city, the Cardinal and some other great personages vvere intertayned vvith orations and speches in Latine, at their first entrance, vntil the masse began, the church and court therunto ad∣ioned, vvere addressed and hanged vvith greate store of rich clothes, & thereppon mnch variety of poemes and learned inuentions in Latin, Greeke, Hebrue, Frēch, Spanish, Italian, & other languages vvherein these students seme to haue much vse and skil, some in the one, and some in the other. The masse vvas songe with great solē∣nity, by one Don Alonso de Columna, brother to the general of the Kings galleons. Two Sermonos vvere made bv two Inglish scollers, the one in Latine, towards the midle of masse, after the gospel which indured about au houre, the other in spanish after the masse vvas done, which Was somvvhat shorter, but I can assure you that both the preachers acquitted théselues in such order, as they gaue vvonderful contentement & drew many teares from the hearers, as I can be witnes, and I must nedes confesse, also that al beit I be not harde to persuade my selfe vvel of Inglish men as you may gesse yet easely should I not haue beleued that your countrymé could so vvel haue framed themselues, to giue satisfa∣ction
in other countryes if I had not seene and hard this my selfe, though alwaies I haue knowne Inglish mens talents and abilityes to be great, vvherunto soeuer they list to apply themselues. Thus passed that day vvhich vvas the 29. of December and fift day of Christmas, vvherin S. Tho∣mas of Cāterbu∣ry his feast in Siuil. S. Thomas vvas slayn in his owne Church of cāterbury, as you know, King Henry the secōd being then in Normandy, but yet he vvas pre∣sumed to be the cause and occasion of this fact, though him selfe denied his intentiō thereunto al his life after. but the vniuersal Church of Christendome condemned him therin, and be∣gan presently to celebrate this feast, euery yeare by publique authority, as of a martyr, and ap∣poynted the gospel for the masse of thys day, to be taken out of the 10. of S. Iohn, vvher Christ setteth downe the difference betwene the good shepheard & the bad, for that the bad shepheard and hireling runeth avvay vvhen he seeth the vvolfe comming to deuoure his sheep, but the true shepheard stayeth & sticketh to the defen∣ce of his sheep, and offreth his life for the same if need be, as our Sauiour sayeth in thes wordes. Bonus Pastor animam suam dat pro ouibus suis the good Pastor giueth his life for his sheep. These vvordes the first of the tvvo scollers that preached in Latin, tooke for his theame, & applyed them to the present feast of S. Thomas, vvhich he said did appertaine to euery seueral sort and degree of people there present, and that
for diuers perticular reasons vvhich he touched in his preface, vvhich preface for that it setteth foorth the great variety of honorable personages that vvere at his sermon, I shall not omit to put it downe here vvord for vvord as it vvas vttred & that also in Latine, although you be no great Latinist, but I shal take payn also to put the same in Inglish. Thus then he began vvith as much commelynes, grace of speach, and feruour of spirit, as euer I remembre to haue hard any man in my life before. THE BEGINNING OF the Latine Sermon. DIcturus hodie de praeclarissimo Ecclesiae Catholica lumine diuo Thoma Cantuariensi (Illustrissime Cardinalis, clarissimique auditores) illud saepe mecum ad solatium cogitare soleo, nihil me dicturum in hac tanta frequētia, quod ad omnes ferè non pertineat; cum nemo fortasse sit ex vniuersa hac nobilissimaque hominum co∣rona, qui aliquid suum in gloriosissimo hoc Dei seruo nō agnoscat. Dicturus enim sum de ciue apud ciues, de se∣natore apud senatores, de iudice apud iudices, de regni cancellario apud conciliorum praesides; de religiouis asser∣tore, apud religionis vindices, de Pastore vigilantissimo, apud animarum duces: de regularis vitae professore, apud regularis vitae obseruātissimos: de Archiepiscopo apud ar∣chipraesulem: de vniuersi regni primate apud vniuersalis Ecclesiae purpuratum antistitem: de martyre denique, apud martyrij cupidos, si Dominus eos dignos inuenertt.
Itaque cum omnium partes in praesenti celebritate repe∣riantur, quid ni omnium quoque votis, omniumque pre∣cibus ad commanem omnium Dominum recurramus, vt dicentem me hodierno die, vel narrantem, vel perorantem vel supplicantem, vel lamentantem etiam, & comploran∣tem, (si id vel temporum vel rerum Anglicanarum ne∣cessitas postulabit) diuina sua gratia comitari dignetur? & in primis beatissimam eius matrem (quam summa semper religione Archiepiscopus Thomas venerabatur) onini contentione imploremus, vt dexteram pòrrigat di∣centi, & fluentem orationis meae cursum ad filij sui glo∣riam plentissime dirigaet. In Inglish thus. Hauing to speake this day (most excellent & renowmed Cardinall, and you the rest most ho∣norable auditors) of that right famous and no∣ble light of Christs catholique church S. Tho∣mas of Canterbury one point am I well to re∣member for my comfort that I shall speak nothing this day in this noble audience which in some sorte pertayneth not to all that are pre∣sent, seing there is scarse any man in my opinion in this most ample & honorable assembly which may not acknowledge some parte of his estate calling or condition, to be resembled in this most glorious seruant of our Sauiour. For if you consider vvel, my speech must be 1. Citi∣zens. of a citizen vnto cityzens, of a Senator vnto se∣nators, 2. Coūce∣lours. of a iudge vnto iudges, of a head and Chancelor of a kingdome vnto the heades and 3. Iudges. presidents of honorable counsels, of a defendor 4. Presi∣dentes of concelles.
of religion, vnto them that by office do protect 5. Iquisi∣tores. religion; of a vigilant pastor vnto those that are Captaines in guyding soules, of him that 6. Pastors & prea∣chers. professed reguler life, vnto such as are most ob∣seruant of regular austerity, of an archbishop 7. monkes & fryers. to an archprelate, of the primate of an vni∣uersal 8. Arch∣bishopes Cardina∣les. kingdome, to a Cardinal of Christs vni∣uersal church, and finally of a martyr to them that are desirous of martyrdome, if god shal 9. Inglish schollers dedicated to mar∣tyrdom. finde them worthy of so great a dignity, wher∣fore seing al that are present haue there parts in this holy celebrity; what remayneth but that with the prayers of al we make recourse to him, that is master and Lord of al, bese∣ching his diuine maiestie to accompany me this day vvith his holy grace, while I in this sermon shal recount, declare, persuade, im∣plore, cry out, complaine or weepe in your presence, according as the consideration of these tymes or the most afflicted state of our deso∣late country shal enforce me to do. And first of al, let vs begin with our humble recourse vnto his glorious mother the blessed virgin Marie, whom S. Thomas euer honored with special deuotion, desiring her vvith al instance to assist me in this action for the directing the course of this my spech, vnto the honor & glory of her sonne, our Sauiour. This vvas the entrance vnto his sermon which he prosecuted after with such feruour of spirit, choise of good vvords and tender matter, as no man I thinke passed vvithout
his part of teares, as before I tould you, and suerly if it were not ouer louge I would send you the whole sermon, as perhaps I may when it cometh forth in print, as I think it wil, for I haue hard diuers say they would procure it, but for me at this tyme it shalbe enough to haue repeted this beginning, and to adioyn therunto (for that it semeth to me very ex∣cellent and effectuous) the very last part and conclusion of al which he added in few wor∣des, about the martyrdom of sainct Thomas, after he had vttred many notable thinges of his life, and especially of his great austerity in fasting, praying, vvearing of heare cloth, chastening of his body, and other such af∣flictions of his flesh, which this blessed ser∣uant of god (by testimony of them that li∣ued with him, and haue vvritten his life) did vse, both at home and in his banishment. After al which this preacher brought in this cō∣clusion, turning his spech to the rest of his fel∣loes the Inglish schollers there present. THE CONCLV∣SION OF THE SERMON. ATque haec dicta sint, vt hinc etiā intelligamus (fra∣tres mei charissimi) quae vita martyrium antece∣dere debeat; quantoque disciplinae ac sanctitatis studio,
hoc summum in terris bonum, à Domino sit comparan∣dum. Thomae verò pro hac singulari vitae praestantia, non est mirum si singulare quoque genus martyrij conssumce fuerit; de quo cum iam mihi ingrediendum esset, vt pro rei dignitate nonnulla diterem; video me exclusum tem∣pore, vt ne facti quidem narr andi locus detur. Sit igitur satis vno quasi verbo summatim quae sequūtur perstrin∣xisse: Henricum scilicet, ficta pace Thomam in Angliam post septem annorum exilium reuocasse: quo cum venis∣set, & sedi suae restitutus fuisset, nouas calumnias statim excogitatas, veteres inimicitias resuscitatas esse: Regi in Normandia degenti, verba quaedam per iracundiam ex∣cidisse, quibus gratum ei putabatur fore, si vir Dei de medio tolleretur: aduolasse statim in Angliam aulicos quosdam è regia familia, qui his ipsis festis naetalitijs saluatoris, Cantuariam ruentes, virum Dei, nec fugien∣tem, nec repugnantem, nec se defendentem cum posset, nec fores claudi sinentem, sed or antem & ante altare in genua procumbentem, gladijs nefandis (proh facinus) transuerberasse. Testis est qui adfuit qui vidit, qui histo∣riam scripsit, qui martyrem Christi rlnis amplexus, bra∣chium in certamine amisit, amputatum ab homicidis: testis (inquam est) Thomam in martyrio ne gemitum quidem edidisse, nec in quatuor gladiorum ictibus qui ca∣piti eius inferebantur, vnquam manus aut brachia sit∣stulisse, (quod homines naturae ductu & consuetudine facere solent) vt caput tuerctur, sed haec tantum verba altquoties ingeminasse: Pro Christo Domino & ec∣clesia libenter morior. O virum admirabilem, ô vo∣cem diuinam: vidcte (fratres met) ducem praestantissimū viae vitaeque nostrae, videte magistrum intuemini praecur∣sorem. Pro Christo Domino (inquit) & Ecclesia
libenter morior. quae vox fortior? qnae sanctior? quae praesule Christiano dignior? quae vox Deo ad gloriam, Angelis ad laetitiam, inimicis ad confusionem, daemonibus ad terrorem, nobis ad imitationem, omnibus ad exemplū, ipsi martyri ad triumphum cogitari potuit illustrior? li∣benter (inquit) morior: & quidni libenter Thoma, cum mors pro Christo sumpta, non sit mors, sed initium potius vitae, arrha regni, sigillum gloriae, porta aeternitatis, & beatitudinis complementum? ô sanguinem benè im∣pensum qui pro Christo impenditur. quidni excitemur (fratrcs mei) quid ni animemur hoc exemplo? vidimus la∣bores huius martyris, breues illos quidem: sed glorians sempiternam, & gloriam quidem, quae vera gloria est, qua ille iam plus quam quadringentis annis in caelis frui∣tur nondum vidimus. has vmbras gloriae, quae in terris habentur vidimus Thomae mirabiliter multiplicatas, glo∣riā nimirū miraculorū, gloriā sepulchri, gloriā deuotio∣nis, & concursus omnium gentiū; sed inter caetera omnia, nihil ei tam gloriosum in hoc mundo accidit, quàm quod persecutorem suum Henricum, virtute caelesli ad tantam poenitentiae humilitatem adegerit, vt nudis pedi bus gemi∣bundus ad sepulshrum eius venerit & infinitis effusis la∣chrymis, gemitus, suspiria, & lamenta ediderit; humi etiā prostratus, veni am petierit a sancto Martyre, & poeniten∣tiam ab episcopo pro delicto: denique post integram noctē vigilijs, & verberibus trāsactam, humo nuda residens, omnes ad sui commiserationem, tanto spectaculo commo∣uit. Quae maior gloria? Quae martyris vis diuinior? O Domine Iesu, vita virtusque martyrum, vtinam placitum esset in oculis tuis, hanc gratiam persecutoribus quoque nostris Anglicanis facere, vt ad te conuertantur, & quod Henrico concessisti vnius Thomae martyris exo∣raetus
precibus, id Henrici filiae concedas, plusquam centum testium tuorum ab illa occisorum placatus in∣tercessione. O quàm laeti ageremus tibi gratias de hoc beneficio? quam sollicite laudes tuas vbique decan∣taremus? verum si iustitiae tuae seueritas hoc forte non permittat, hamiliter tamen te obsecramus, vt vires saltem nobis tribuas ad praeliandum praelia tua in hoc agone quem nobis proposuisti, it a vt ne∣que vitae cupiditas à certamine, neque metus à pericu∣lis, ueque ignauia à labore nos vnquam retardet: sed omnia impendentes in tuam gloriam, patriaeque salu∣tem, superimpendamus etiam nosmetipsos si opus fue∣rit, vt sic aliquo modo respondeamus vocationi no∣strae & infinitis beneficijs à te acceptis: de quibus glo∣ria tibi & gratulatio & gratiarum actio in aeter∣num. Thus was his ending, which in your language may thus I thinke in parte be expressed though not perhaps al thing so effectually as in the lati∣ne it runeth. These things of S. Thomas his great austeriti A good life is needfull before martyrdō. in life, I haue recoūted (deare brethern & coun∣trimen) to the end that therby also we may vn∣derstand partly, what manner of life, ought to goe before martyrdome, and with how great indenour of discipline and holynes, this su∣preme benifit and priuilege to be a martyre is to be procured at Gods handes here vppon earth: and for that S. Thomas did excell in this kynde of holynes, (as now I haue declared) no mar∣uail if according to the excellency of life, so excellent a kind of death vvas graunted him
also. Of which sacred death and martyrdom, wheras now I would begin to say somvvhat, I see my selfe so strayghtned in tyme, as there is not space to recount the very fact, wherfore let it be sufficient to touch the rest that follo∣weth in one worde, to witt that king Henry after al these troobles, made feigned peace with the good Archbishop, and restored him to his country and Sea of Caunterbury agayne, after he had bine seuen yeares abroad in ba∣nishment; vvhere he was no sooner aryved, but presently nevv quarels and calumniations vvere deuised and raysed agaynst him agayne; and thervppon the king being then in Nor∣mandy incensed with coller, spake in his ra∣ge, certaine doubtfull woords, vvherby it vvas conceaued that it should be gratful vnto him, if the archbishop by violence vvere made away: by which conce at, certayn wicked cour∣tiors of his owne family, departing from thence and rushing into Canterbury, euen in this fe∣stiual dayes of holy Christmas good hearers, set vppon this seruant of god, who nether fled nor resisted, nor defended himselfe as he might, The man ner of S. Tho∣mas mar∣tyrdom. nor suffred the dores of the Church to be shutt: but praying and casting himselfe befo∣re the high alter, on his knees, suffred him∣selfe most innocently to be ssaine by wicked taytifes. Witnes wherof, is he among others, that vvas present when the act vvas done, he that savv it vvith owne eyes, he that vvrote the story, he that held the blessed martyr in his
armes, vvhile he vvas slayne, and had his ovvne arme cutt of by the murtherers for his la∣bour. This man I saie is witnesse vnder his owne hand vvriting, how that S. Thomas in al his martydome, neuer gaue out so much as one grone or sigh, nor in fower blovves stryken at his head, wherby his braynes were beaten on the pauement, he neuer so much as lifted vp his handes or armes to defend his head (as men by natural instinct in such cases are wont to doe) but only repeated once or tvvise these wordes, I dye most willingly for Christ and for his Church. O admirable man, o heauenly speach, behold heere (my louing brethren of this col∣ledg) behold here a most excellent Captaine of this our life and course that we are to follow: behold our master, behold our forerrunner, what spech more valiant, what voice more holy? what wordes more vvorthy of a Christian pre∣lat? what sentence more excellent can be ima∣gined, eyther to the glory of god, or to the ioy of angels, or to the terror of diuels, or to the con∣fusion of his enymies, or for our imitation, or for the example of al posterity, or for the edifi∣cation of the vniuersal world, or for the endles triumph of this martyr himselfe. I die moste willingly (sayeth he) for Christ and his Church o holy martyr, o blessed Thomas, thow hast great reason to die willingly in such a cau∣se, for that death suffred for Christ thy master, is no death at al, but rather a beginning of a lōger
life, an earnest peny of an euerlasting kingdom, a seale of glory, a gate of eternity, & the very com∣plement of al felicity. O blood vvel spent that is spent for Christ, why should not vve stir vp our selues (deare bretheren) why should not we be animated and inflamed vvith this example? vve haue seene the labores and toyles of this mar∣tyr, though great, yet short and sone ended, but his glory is euerlasting. And yet the true glory which he hath enioyed novv aboue foure hun∣dreth yeares in heauen, which only indeede is to be called glory, vve haue not yet seene. These shadovves only of glory, vvhich on earth are to be seene, we haue beheld most wonderfuly mul∣tiplied vnto S. Thomas: I meane (good hearers) the glory vppon earth of his infinite miracles, the glory of his Sepulcre, throughout al Chri∣stendom, the glory of the vniuersal concourse and deuotion of al nations vnto him. but among al other glories and glorious accidents happned vnto him, no one thing was euer more glorious or admirable, then that soone after his death, by vertue from heauen, he procured to King Henry his persecutor such grace and humility of repentance, as that he came barefooted vvith many sighes and sobbes vnto his tombe, and ther prostrating himselfe vppon the ground vvith fluds of teares, asked pardō of the blessed martyr and penance of the Bishop for his offences, and so after a vvhole night spent in vvatching prayer and beating of him selfe, and lying vppon the bare ground he departed, leauing al the lokers
on most deeply moued with his harty repen∣tance, what greater glory, what more heauenly force of a Christian martyr then this? O Lord Iesu, vvhich arte the life and vertue of al martyrs would it might please thy diuine maiestie and infinite mercy to giue this gra∣ce also to our Inglish persecutors, vvherby they vvould repent and turne vnto thee: and that vvhich thow didest graunt vnto king Henry by the only prayer of thy martyr sainct Thomas, that his sinnes might be forgiuen, thow wouldest graunt the same vnto king Hen∣ryes daughter at the intercession of aboue an hundreth of thy glorious martyrs whom she hath slayne, that she might not perish: O how ioyful should we render thankes vnto thee, for this so singuler and desired a benefite! oh how chearefull should we singe euery where thy prayses for the same, But if perhaps the seuerity of thy iustice, do not permitt this, yet most hum∣bly we do besech thee, to giue vnto vs thy vnworthy children, here present, so much strenght and heuenly fortitude, as to fight man∣fully and hold out chearfully in this combat which thow hast prepared for vs, so as neyther desire of life, may stay vs from this batail, not feare of death from perill, nor slouth from labour in this thy cause, but that we besto∣wing our selues wholy vnto thy glory and to the saluation of our owne selues, and of our country, we may giue our soules vp also, and pay our blood in this holyvvork, if need re∣quire,
and therby in some sort be answerable vnto our vocation, and to the infinite benifits which of thee we haue receaued, for vvhich both praise glory gratulation and thankes gi∣uing be vnto thee for al eternity. A men. This was the end of his speach, & by this you may imagine of what tenor the residue vvas. The effect of the se∣cond ser∣mon in Spanish. The other sermon made after masse in Spanish I vvil not repeat, for breuity sake, and for that by this you may easely gesse the effect therof for it vvas to giue the people a reason of so ma∣ny Inglish mens comming forth of Ingland in these dayes, what were the true causes and ne∣cessities therof, what ther vsage was at home, what their end abroade, and what particuler purpose and profession these youthes that cam for study sake to Siuil had before their eyes: In al which as there were many things of edifi∣cation, compassion and tendernes in the behalfe of these youthes, so were ther also diuers poyn∣tes (though vttered truly with great modestie) which pinched to the quick, and to heare them ould not but giue me exceding grief for the many causes I haue to houour and loue your. Country as you know. and truly I imagine that if the Queene or some of her counsayl had bine present, it would haue moued them much, and that perhaps to a far other sense & meaning thē you conceaue, but now things grow to further breach and exasperation euery day, and god only knoweth what wilbe the ende of al. I had almost forgotten to tel you of a certaine
fayre paper set vp this day in the Inglish Col∣ledge Poemes ane deui∣ses of learning. emongst other poemes, and lerned deuises of the schollers, which paper did represent the antithesis or contrary procedinges of tvvo King Henries of England, to witt, king Henry the second before mentioned, vvho persecuted S. Thomas of Canterbury in his life, but after repented as hath bin shewed, and king Henry the eight vvho fower hundred yeares after his death cited and condemned him and destroyed his sepulere which the other had built vp and many kinges after him richly adorned: The de∣uise was witty and the paper pleasant to behold, being large and fayrely paynted to the eye, and it drew many to looke vppon it, and to take out coppyes therof and by this tyme I thinck it to be engraued and printed, and therfore in this place I wil repeate the same vnto you briefly as it stoode. THE REPRESENTA∣tion of the tvvo persecutions by the tvvo King Henryes of Ingland agaynst S. Thomas of Canterbury. IN the topp of the paper vvas vvitten this title Triumphus Sancti Thomae Cantuariensis de duobus Henricis Angliae regibus, which is, the triumph of S. Thomas of cāterbury ouer tvvo king Henryes ofIngland. Vnder the title are placed the tvvo king The first ranke.
Henryes to witt, king Henry the second on the right hand armed and angry and striking at S. Thomas that was paynted before him, flying away and fallyng downe on his knees, and ouer the kings head is written Henricus Secundus Angliae Rex, and betwene him and S. Thomas was writ∣ten, Persequitur viuum & fugieniem, he pursueth him in his life flying from him: On the left side is paynted king Henry the eight very fatt and furious and S. Thomas lying before him vvith the ensignes of glory, and ouer the king is writ∣ten, Henricus octauus Angliae Rex, and betwene them is written, Persequitur mortuum & regnantem. He pursueth him dead and rayning in heauen, and this is the first ranck, conteyning fovver pictures as you see the tvvo kings and S. Thomas tvvise put in the middle, once aliue and then deade & glorious. In the second ranck are set the afore said two The se∣cōd ranek kinges agayne and in the middle the tombe and sepulcre of S. Thomas as it was in Caunterbury, very rich & sumptuous, but the kings, are payn∣ted in different manner, for king Henry the se∣cond is paynted lee and repentant, barefooted kneeling on his knees, and whipping himselfe seuerly before the said sepulcre, as in truth the matter passed, and it is written betwene the se∣pulcre and him. Ad sepulcrum martyris poenitentiam agit, he did penance at the martyres tombe; but on thother side king Henry the eight is paynted more fatt and monstrous them before sweating and chaffing and in great fury digging downe
the sepulcre with a pickaxe and the writing is: Sepulcrum martyris demolitur, & cineres dissipat: he breaketh downe the martyrs tombe and casteth abroad his as hes into the ayer. In the third ranke are paynted vnder king Henry the second, many angels with garlands & The third ranck. crownes in their handes expecting him to glory and saluation, for his penance and harty a mend∣ment, and ouer ther heades is written: Inuitat ad gloriam, they doe inuite him to glory, and vnder king heury the eigh are paynted as many diuels with instruments of torments in their handes, and ouer their heades is written. Expectant ad pe∣nam, they expect him to punishment & be∣twene both, these in the midle is paynted Quee∣ne Elizabeth beholding sadly the one and the other example, & ouer her head is written Eli∣zabetha Henricorum filia, for that she is discended of both these Henryes, and the sentēce written beneth is E duobus elige, choose which you wil of thes two. In the fourth, rāck are placed two Inglish stu∣dents in their Colledg garments, one on the one The 4. tanck. side of the paper and the other on the other, hol∣ding vp the said paper, and oming each of them six verses in Latin to Queene Elizabeth for ex∣plication of their meaning in this representa∣tion, and ouer the verses is written this title.
AD ELIZABETHAM Angliae Reginam Alumni Collegij An∣glicani Hispalensis: The first Scholler sayeth thus. REgibus Henricis atauis proauis que Britaunis Edita, & hoc ipso nomine, nata patre: Cerne quid acciderit, bellum est vtrisque nefandum Cum Thoma, at dispar finis vtrique fuit. Hic gemitu vitam tulit, iste furore gehennam, Quid speres, timeas, quidque sequaris habes. The second Scholler in effect vttereth the same sence but in other words as followeth. Concipit Henricus scelus impium atroxque secundus, At scelus octauus aggrauat octagies. In Christi famulum fremit is, furit alter, at iste Tetrius, hoc vitae finis vtrique probat. vtinam iusto perpendas pondere vtrumque: Et spectes atauum, non imitere patrem. It shal not neede that I expounde thes verses vnto you, & much lesse that I put them into In∣glish poesie seing my skill and vse therin is not great: the somme is that they doe propone vnto er maiestie, the acts and endes of both thes ings hir progenitors, wishing her rather to ollow the example of king Henry the second, hat repented his sinnes, then king Henry the ight that died in the same. I doe not remēber any other thing that I haue, o write vnto you about this colledg in Syuil
except I should tel you how these schollers seme to shroude themselues very peculiarly vnder the protectiō of our blessed ladye the Queene of heauen, agaynst the persecution of your Queene of Ingland. For to this ende it semeth there cu∣stome is to meete at the church, euery day after dynner to say our ladyes letanies, besides the common letanies of the church which they vse to say after supper; and to the like énde it semeth the puting vp of our ladies picture serueth ouer there gate at the very entrance of their first cour∣te, where two scollers are paynted kneeling be∣fore her with these fowre verses betwene them for explication of these wordes written aboue. ANGLIA DOS MARIAE. INgland is the Dowry of our ladye: the reason of which woordes these schollers doe yeeld in these verses saying. Prima dedit sceptrum conuersa Britannia nato Virginis; hinc dicta est Anglia, dos Mariae. Ergo tuam repetas mater sanctissima dotem, Quique tuo repetunt iure, tuere pia. The sence of which verses is, that for so much as Britanie now called Inglande, was the firs kingdome that wholy togeather gaue it self and submitted her kingly-scepter vnto Chris Iesus the sonne and spouse of our lady; therefor by a certayne deuout kinde of speach, oul Inglish authors did say Ingland to be th Dowry of our ladye, which being so, these sco in consideration that her and al other sain
honor, is excluded from thence they do be∣sech hir to recouer agayne this her au ncient dowrye, and so assist them that goe in her sonnes name and hers to negotiat the matter, by prea∣ching and teaching and offring their blood for regayning the same. Further doth ther not come to my remembrance, any other newes at this ty∣me to writ you out of thes pattes, of Spayne, ex∣cept I should tel you of the sundry bookes that Diuers bookes vvritten against the last Inglish proclams tion. I haue seene here printed of late, in diuers coun∣tries against the last proclamation published in Ingland, vppon the 29. of Nouember the yeare past of 91. agaynst Catholiques and for their searching out and apprehension, which procla∣mation is set abroade in many languages and many bookes written agaynst the same, printed as I haue said in dyuers nations, which doe make both the thing and manner of proceeding of your cōmon wealth in this behalfe, very odious. Three bookes in Latine haue I seene, besides sundry in Inglish which I name not, the first was set forth by one Ioānes Pernius in Germany, Ioannes Preuius. and dedicated vnto your Lord Treasorer whom he scowreth in particuler, and by a larg and sharpe discours refuteth the saide proclama∣tiō, & setteth downe the inconueniences of this your proceeding. The second author that I haue seene is of Andreas Philopa∣trus. Rome and calleth himselfe Philopatrus wherby it may perhapps be presumed that he would si∣gnifie himselfe to be alouer of his country and he setteth downe the whole proclamation at
large word for word, in fiue partes or sections, & aunswereth to euery particuler thinge spoken in the same, as namely touching the pope, the kinges of Spaine, & fraunce, the Seminaries, and Inglish seminarie priestes both abrode and at home, & the like, shewing al my L Tresorers accusations and asseuerations, touching thes poynts to be euidently false and founded com∣monly in layne lying, and this not only in mat∣ters of religion, but also in al other publique af∣fayres and negotiations, which is a sore blemish to so publique a person for the which I can as∣sure you this man giueth him many wayes such rough hewing and vttereth so many particulers of the present state of Ingland, and vseth so often your owne lawes stories, and cronicles to proue it, as it maketh all sortes of straungers wonderfully desirous to reade it. The third author which I haue seene wrotte in flaunders as it semeth, and is named Dydimus Veridicus as a man would say Thomas tell truth, Dydimus veridicus. vvho being a subiect of this kinge as he preten∣deth, and both witty and eloquent and taking vppon him principally to defend the king his masters procedings towards Ingland, and to refute the particuler accusations, layed agaynst him in the proclamation, he waxeth very shar∣pe many tymes not only agaynst my lord Trea∣sorer as philopater doth, but also agaynst the whole state vvhich greaueth me to reade. As for example, at the begining in the 9. page of his booke, for that my Lord Burley semed to
bragg in his proclamation of the most quiet state and gouerment of your common vvealth for 33. yeares togeather, while other common wealthes rounde about you haue lyued in broy∣les; this man taketh in hand, not only to proue that all thes broyles haue bin procured by In∣gland, but also that Ingland it selfe is far of from al condition and nature of a true quiet common vvealth and thus he begineth. The peace and tranquility of a kingdome or common wealth, is not troobled only by armes The vvor∣des of Dy dimus, and open vvar of the publique enemie abroad or at home, but principally and most daunge∣rously of al other, by the disorder and disagre∣ment at home of her parts and members among themselues, and by the violent proceeding of such as manage the same, vvhich three exam∣ples that ensew shal declare. That house cannot in very truth be said to be  in peace (though yet neyther vvith their ovvne people within, nor vvith their, neyboures with∣out they be not at buffets) vvhere the master liueth in suspition of his seruants the officers doe beat and vex the houshould, vvher some runne avvay, some hide themselues, some cry out, some scould, other complayne, vvher al is ful of contention, and disputes, noe obedience but only for feare, no respect but only perforce, vvher honest men doe starue for hunger, inno∣cent men are afflicted, quiet men vvhipped, se∣ditious & trooble some heades doe commaunde and exact by terror there most iniust and violent
commandements. Secondly that Shipp cannot  be sayd to hold a good peaceable course though the sea be calme and vvinde in the deck, vvhere the master from the mariners, and shipmen from the passingers do disagree, are reuiled, be∣ten and spoyled the one by the other, ther mar∣chandize taken, away themselues eyther oppte∣sed or stong into the sea, the cables, sayles, an∣kers and other tackling broken, or putt into cō∣fusion, the ship defiled with blood, and loden vvith dead carcases, and nothing founding within, but sighes, and sorrowe and desolation of such as miserably liue vvounded in her. And  last of al, that cytie cannot be sayd to be in peace or in any security, (though it be infested yet vvith no enemye from a broad) vvhose go∣uernours do giue, themselues vvholy to terror and crueltie, do multiply prisons, fetters, gar∣des and spies, do make new penal lawes & abo∣lish the olde and do inuent new taxes and im∣positions euery day, do seeke all occasions to pole ther people at home, & inforce them forth to be theeues abroad, do kepe fayth with none, do cast in prison, banish, spoyle, and consume the better sort, pull downe the nobility, oppres∣se the cleargy & finally do put al there hope in the feare of the people and none in ther good wil, thus sayeth Didimus agaynst that first poynt of your L. Tresorers proclamation. And after he hath persued many particulari∣tyes of the afflicted and dangerous present state of Ingland, by reason of the diuision in religion,
disuinon and hatred betwene protestants, Ca∣tholiques, and puritans, complaints and discon∣tentments on euery side, incertainty of succes∣sion vnto the crowne, pouerty of the people for lack of trafique, breaking of marchants for the same cause, burden of vnnecessary and vnpro∣fitable warres, dayly multiplying of intolerable tributes, pestering the realme with innumerable renegat and rebellious straingers, liberty of theeues by so long permission of piracy, vniust vvarres, diffidence & distrust in the one towards the other, and open domestical dissention in eue∣ry towne parish and particuler house ouer all the land, for one cause or other, After al this I say he passeth on to compare the estate of Ingland with other kingdomes & common vvealthes abroade shewing the great hatred & obloquie which your country is in for styrring vvarres and rebellions on euery side, but for no one thing more, thē for so opē dealing with the Turke the publique enemye of al christian pro∣fessiō, Dealing of Englād vvith the Turck. inuitinge & styrring him to turne his for∣ces vppon Christendome therby to hurt the king of Spayne, which this mā anoucheth to be euidēt, not only by the oftē embassages letters & presēts sent vnto this professed enemye of Christs name, from Inglād thes later yeares: but also by a playne letter written by the Turk himselfe about three or fowers yeares agone, to the Queene about this matter soone after the defeat of the spanish Armada, which letter being intercepted in Germany & printed ther both in the Latin &
germane tonges, was afterwards published agayne, and inserted into an History of our ty∣mes, set forth by on Ionson Doccom of frise∣lande, and now agayne laid abroad, by this Didimus and the letter is vvord for vvord as followeth, for that I suppose you vvilbe desirous to see it, thus then goeth the title. HONORATAE A DO∣mino The title of the Turkes lettre. legis christianae matronae, culmini castitatis, inter castissimas faemi∣nas populorum, qui seruiunt Iesu, &c. In Inglish thus. TO the honorable matron, honored by the lord of Christian lavv: to her that is the hight and topp of chastity among the most chast women of al people that serue lesus: to her that is adorned with the glory of domination & gouernment, ladie of many kingdomes, reputed of greatest, power & prayse among the nation of Nazarens, to witt, Elizabeth Queene of Inglād to whom we wish a most happy and prospe∣rous ende. You shal vnderstand by thes our high and emperiall lettres, directed vnto you, that your embassador residing in this our high and noble court, did present vnto the throne of our great∣nes, a certayne writing of yours which in∣formed
vs, how that for thes foure yeares past you haue made warr vppon the king of Spaine, Informa∣tions ge∣uen to the Turck agaynst the kof Spayne. therby to breake and diminish his forces, by which he is become dreadful vnto the rest of Christian Princes, & hath determyned to make himselfe lord ouer al, & monarch of the whole world besides: more ouer the said lettre doth shew how that the selfe same king of Spayne, hath by violēce taken away the kingdō of Por∣tugall from Don Antonio the lawful king therof, lawfully created: moreouer that your intention is to lett hereafter the nauigation of this king vnto the Indians, wherby he is wont to bring home euery yeare into spayne great store of gold and siluer, spices and precious stones, worth ma∣ny millions, by which he is become so rich, as he hath commodity to molest and indanger al other Princes and if he should be let a lone he would grow to be so powerable that at lenght it would be hard to resist him. Vppon which considerations your said Em∣bassador, did make humble supplication vnto The peti∣tion of the In∣glish Am bassador VVilliam Harborn. our greatnes, that we should vouch safe in the beginning of this next spring to send our impe∣rial nauy vppon the said King, assuring vs that he would not be able to resist the same, for the great ouer throw and damage which he hath receaued by your nauy of late: and seing he is scarse able to resist your forces alone, no doubt but that he would be ouercome if of many sides he be innaded at one tyme which would be greatly (as you say) to the commodity of al
Christiā Princes, as also of this our high courte, to which it appartayneth to take the protectiō of such as fly vnto the same for succour (as Don An∣tonio doth, being driuen out of his kingdome by the said kinge of Spaine) and therfore, that we should giue him help & succour, according to the custome of our noble auncetours & prede∣cessors of happy memory, (whose sepulcres God almightie lighten) who were wōt alwayes to giue royal assistance to such as were oppressed and came for ayde to their imperial highneses. These thinges and many other did your said The Tur∣kes an∣svvere. embassador declare at large before our roiall throne, al vvhich vve haue vnderstood and layd vp dilligently in our myndes, and for the present our answere is, that vvher as we haue had vvarr now many yeares in Persia with intention to gayne that kingdom, and to ioyne it, to the rest of our auncient Dominions, and to reueng our selues vppon that accursed heretical Persian, that holdeth the same: now by the grace of our great God, and by the helpe of our most holy prophet Mahomet, we are very nere to obteyne our purpose, according to our de∣sire, which being once done, al necessary proui∣sion shalbe made out of hand for performance of thes thinges which you desire & demaunde, assuring you, that if you doe cōtinew this league of frenship puerly and sincerly, vvith this our high court, you shall finde no refuge more se∣cure, nor any hauē of loue & good wil more fir∣me & sure then this of owrs, by which no doubt
all your warrs vvith the spaniards shal succede vnto you according vnto your desire, vnder the shadow & protection of this our happy throne, and seing the king of Spayne hath gotten by fraude & violēce, al that he possesseth, no doubt, but by the grace of god, al such fraudulent de∣ceauers shal quickly be destroyed. In the meane space we do exhort you to lese no tyme nor occasion to do him hurt, but The Tur∣kes exhor¦tation to the Q. to be watchful and diligent, and according to the couenaunts alredy made betwene vs, that you shew your selfe a frend to our frendes, and an enimye to our enimyes, and that you signifie from tyme to tyme vnto this our high court, vvhat new warres soeuer be taken in hāde in those partes, and what you can vnderstand, To be his spie. concerning the King of Spaine to our and your commodity, furthermore I am, to aduertise you, that this your embassador hauing done his Commen¦dation of the In∣glish em∣babassa∣dour by the Tur∣ke. duety, and fulfilled the function of his embassie with great care & diligēce, & hauing left here in his place for his cōmissary & agent, Edward Bar∣don he departeth now with our licence towards your kingdome, who for his faythful seruice Edvv. Bar∣don. here performed deserueth no doubt to be much esteemed honored & exalted aboue others, and when he hath gotten all those honores & pre∣heminenses of you, which he deserueth, let him returne agayne presently with your letters, or so∣me other principal man in his place, to be your embassador here, and to continew this office of frendship betwene vs in this our high court,
and thus much we thought good to aduertise you, by our owne soueraigne lettres and seale, which you shal giue intire credit vnto. Giuen this fiftenth of Benedicti Rhamaram. Hitherto is the lettre of the greate Turke vnto your Queene, that is to say, of that greate proude and barbarous enemy of Christes holy name and religion, wheruppon this Dydimus doth deduce dyuers considerations of importance & consequence, as namly first of al, about religiō, Conside∣rations vppon the Turkes letter. and cōscience, saying who would haue thought when Inglād vppō pretence of purer seruing of Christ, did first seperate it selfe in religiō frō the rest of Christian kingdomes, that it would haue come in so few yeares, to that passe, as to make recourse to Christes open enemye & persecutor, & that agaynst Christians? as also that for the ha∣tred of some one Christian Prince, to seke to put into Christes enemyes handes, so many millions of his subiects as are in Spayne? and to put in hazard al Christendome besides. The second consideration is of wisdome and pollicy tēporal, for what wisdome or pollicy in the world can ther be in this, sayeth he (though we set a side al feare of God and religion) to call so potent an enemye as the Turk is, into Spayne, or to thinke that he would be a better frend to the state and subiects of Ingland, that are Chri∣stians, then the king of Spayne, that is a Chri∣stian, or to imagin that when Spayne should be lost, Ingland could be safe, or when this ambi∣cious tyrant should haue enthralled the spai∣nards,
he would suffer the Inglish to liue at their liberty? was not Constantinople? was not Africa and many other realmes lost from Christianity by this most diuelish and miserable enuy, of one realme and Prince agaynst a nother. A third consideration is of honour and repu∣tation, which seemeth excedingly to be touched and distayned by many poyntes in this lettre discouered, for what a thing is it sayeth he, that Ingland which was wont to be a kingdome of so great honour, nobility, and valor in kingly proceding, should now come to make such a narratiō to the great Turke, as here is set doune, by the tyrants owne letter, to witt, that the kinge of Spayne meant to make him selfe lord of al Christedome, and monarch of al the world; that he hath taken Portugal by violence from Don Autonio the lawful king, & lawfully created, vvheras al the world knoweth that the Kings title to Portugal was decided by the lawes of that kingdom it selfe, and by the approbation of the last king Cardinal of the same, vvho also pronounced Don Antonio for an open knowne bastard, vvhom all the nobility afterwards re∣fused and no man euer created him king, but only a few of his owne seruants and some other of the baser vulgar people sollicited by them in Lisbone and other partes neare ther about: and yet that Ingland to the Turke should aduoutch him playnly for a lawful king and put out by violence, exhort the Turke to restore him by his forces according to the custome of his noble
auncestors vvho are knowne to haue deuoured so infinite christian bloode and haue destroyed so inumerable christian estates wherein our Sa∣uiour vvas longe honored and now Mahomet is adored: that Ingland should offer concurran∣ce in this diuelish action, and should take a cō∣mission from the Turck (as in this his letter is gi∣uen) to be a spie agaynst the rest of christianity, and to aduertiz him of al new vvarres & affayres Great in∣dignitye to Inglād. that passe amonge Christian Princes, & finally to be a frend to al his frendes, and enimy to al his enimyes, vvhich is the highest infamye that euer could fal vppon any state realme or kingdome that beareth the name ensigne or profession of Christian religion. Thes and other contemplations hath this au∣thor vppon this matter, vvhich I passe ouer and do come to tel you that besides thes bookes and tretises vvritten in Latine, I haue also seene di∣uers pamphlets vvritten in Inglish agaynst this proclamation no lesse stinging then the other in Latin, and al of them both of the one and the other sorte, translated commonly into other vulgar tonges also, as Spanish Italian french and flemish, which do make the commō subiect of ordinary talke in thes dayes to be of your affay∣res in euery countrey. And last of al, here hath come forth a booke Father Ribade∣neyra agaynst the procli amation and nevv statuts. in Spanish vvritten by one father Pedro Ribade∣neyra a man of very great reputation in thes kingdomes both for his learning grauity and eloquence in this language, and this booke
conteyneth the storye of Inglish affayres from the yeare eightie and eight (vntil vvhich time he had set forth the said story in Spanish before according to the latin story of the Inglishe Schisme vvritten by D. Sanders and Riston and other aduertisments) and novv he continu∣eth this, euen vnto this yeare 93. And in this said story he layeth forth also the said proclama∣tion at large, and afterwarde writeth diuers large chapters for explication of the same, wher of the one is, (as I remember) that this procla∣mation  is most impious and contrary to al di∣uine & humane lavves receaued in any christian common vvelth, especially in Ingland from her first conuersion. An other chapter is, that this  proclamation is not only impious, but also folish and indiscret, against all good pollicy and mature wisdome. A third is, that it is im∣pudent  and vvritten vvithout all respect of shame, honor, or reputation of your estar and nation, auontching lye vppon lye, that al the vvorld knoweth to be lyes, vvith diuers other such chapters which he proueth at large, & with many particulers, & in fyne concludeth, that the penner of this proclamation would be sharply punished in any orderly and graue common wealth for penning it in such man∣ner, and for auoutching so many open imper∣tinent lyes, and euident slaunders vnder the name of his soueraigne, though the chiefe matter it selfe therin set downe, vvere allo∣vved and agreed vppon by publique authority,
as it is supposed that this was by your Queene and councel there. Moreouer this spanish book layeth forth two The tvvo last Statu∣tes. new statutes made about religion in your last parliament ended the 10. of Aprill of this pre∣sent yeare, which seeme to haue come to the au∣thors handes euen vvhiles the former parte of this booke vvas a printing, the one is intituled an Act to retayne the Queenes subiects in their due obe∣dience: and the other for restrayning of popish recusants to certayne places of aboade, by the which tvvo sta∣tutes and the strange prouisions made therein, as also, by the sundry bookes set out by authori∣ty at this very tyme agaynst the puritans, vvith the enditmēts arraynments and strange answe∣res of Barrow, Greenwod, Studly, Billet and other Brownists: by al thes thinges layd toge∣ther (I say) and by the acte of three entyre sub∣sides, and six fifteenes, and tenthes exacted and graunted, at one clapp in this parliament, for maynteyning of warres abroade and your estate at home, this writter concludeth, that neuer common welth vvas in more miserable and dangerous plight for al kinde of miseries that can fal to a common wealth, then Ingland is at this day: and consequently most far of from that condicion of peace, tranquility and security vvhich your lord Treasorer in this late procla∣mation would make men to beleeue, vvheras himselfe must needes (sayeth this man) see and know the contrary; as al men also abroade do, that are of iudgment or experience, and moreo∣uer
doe discouer his desperat deuise of remeding the matter by massacring and murthing al the principall catholiques vppon the sudden vvhen soeuer he shal see no other shift, for that to this end play nely semeth to tend this last statute of bynding al the better and richer sort of them to reside in certayne knowne places and not to de∣parte thence further then fiue miles vnder payne of forfeting vvhat-soeuer they haue in this vvorld, vvhich is to fill Ingland full of prisons and chaynes, as the flemish Didimus before in∣sinuated: a diuise so strange vppon so great a multitude as neuer was hard of before in any free common vvealth, nor practised (sayeth this man) eyther by Phalaris or any other most fa∣mous tyrant. Wherunto if vve add the second part of the statute vvherby the poorer sorte of catholiques are appoynted to be thrust our of the realme, spovled and ransaked, of al that they haue, it maketh the barbarous desigment more euident (sayeth he) to vvitt, that thes shalbe driuen to statue abroad and the others be kept for the slaughter at home, vvhen the tyme shall serue, but god turueth lightly (sayeth he) all such cruell and bloody intentions vppon the heades of the entendors and their posterity, and so doth he thinke that it vvill fall out vvith your lord Treasorer and his ofspring and this is all that I can vvrite vnto you from thes partes.
THE SECOND PARTE of this letter, conteyning certaine conside∣rations of State vppon the former relation. THis that goeth before I hadd vvritten in Spayne to send to you from thence, but af∣terward ther being offred a good passage by sea, to returne to Holland vvith certayne company that vvould needs haue me go vvith them out of hand, I took my papers and came hither, wher meeting vvith diuers gentlemen, captaynes, schollers, and others, as wel Inglish, Scottish, Irish, & Frēch, as also some Italians & Dutch mē both of this country and high Germany (for al sortes you know do meete here now) vve fel by chaunce into talk of Ingland, and of Inglish affayres vppon occasion of the former bookes published in al natiōs, as hath bene said, against the present procedinge of your state, & namely agaynst your last proclamation and statutes, nevvly made about religion, by which occasion also I tould them vvhat I had seene, and hard in Spayne and read vnto them the former letter & narrarion vvhich I had made redy to seale vp & send avvay presently vnto you by the post, but aftervvardes hearing diuers politique and im∣portant discourses (as to me they semed) vvhich some of these men made vppon this narration of myne, and some considerations also of state as they termed them, vvorthy the noting:
thought good to stay the letter by me for some dayes to the end I might send you also thervvith the principal pointes vvhich I hard debated, and so now I doe. The chiefe subiect or argnment of al their speech for diuers dayes meeting at an ordinary table, vvas vvhether the present gouerment of Inglish affayres, setting a side al regard of par∣tiality to religion: vvere in it selfe and according The chie∣fe subiect of the cō∣ference. to reason, experience and law of pollicy, to be accounted, vvise and prudent, and consequently vvhether such as chiefly managed the same, and namely the lord Burley, were in truth a vvise má or no? in vvhich particuler though some of the company for affection to his religion, did for a tyme stand much in his defence, yet so many were the argumēts of the other side, as in the end they semed greatly to yeild, & to vvish nothing so much, as that the said lord had bin present but for one houre, if it had bin possible, or some other that vvere priuy to his councelles, to yeild reason of diuers points there called in question, vvhich semed scarse defensable, not only for lack of iustice or cōscience (for that therof they said they vvould take no regard) but that euen in nature of humane vvisdome and pollycy set downe by Machauel him selfe, or by any other of lesse conscience then he, they seemed er∣ronions and of thes are such as hereafter do ensue. First some of them said (though not al) that The first considera tiō about chang of religion. supposing that nether the Queene nor Sir Wil∣liam
Cecil, at the death of Queene Mary had any great repugnance of conscience to follovv and continew on the religion then setled in the realme, as both of them (but especially Sir Williā Cecil) had oftentymes protested & euer shewed by deedes during that reigne: it semed a great ouersight in reason of state to make so vniuersal a change of religion (vvhich hath bin the cause of al difficulties and daungers since) seing that vvithout this change the Queene and he might haue brought about, vvith much more security, vvhatsoeuer they pretended by this other mea∣nes, and hereuppon, vvere brought agayne into consideratiō, al those reasons and arguments of state vvhich at that tyme Sir William Cecil & M. Bacon did or could lay before the Queene, to moue her to this change against both her owne inclination, and the opinious of the rest of her principal councellors vvhich reasons concer∣ning especially (as is supposed and knowne) her Maiesties affayres vvith the pope, about her fa∣thers mariage, and her legitimation, vvere foun∣de by euery mans censure here present, to be but playne illusions, for that much easier should her Maiesty haue bin able to compound those affay∣res vvith the pope, if she had continewed in his religion, then by breaking from him, and for all other temporal matters, both for her owne per∣son & the realme they had proceded (no doubt) most prosperously, and neuer come into thes bra∣kes & breaches vvherin now the vvhole world seeth them to be. And as for M. Cecil and Ba∣cons
owne particuler aduancements (vvhich is persupposed vvere principally respected in this persuasion) there vvould not haue wanted occa∣sions enough to furder the same also in a catho∣lique estate, as vve see by so many aduaunced & set vp by catholique Kinges of our country in former ages, and the two late minions Ioyous and Pernon, exalted in our dayes to so great di∣gnityes by the last King of fiance. And Rigouez of a page made a Prince, and two of his sonnes Dukes vvith diuers others to like preferments aduanced by the king of Spayne that novvis, & that vvith much lesse enuy, hatred and abhomi∣nation, and vvith much more security of Conti∣nuance to their families, then the greatnes of Cecil and Bacō is like to finde, say these men, that vvas procured by so great a conunlsion of the vvhole common vvealth, and therfore in this first poynte and entrance to al the rest, they are thought to haue byn neyther vvise nor lucky, as one day their posterity vvil testify to the world, & this is the first point that was discour∣sed of. The second ensewing on this first, vvas, that The 1. cō∣sideratiō of chang of religiō to a diffe∣rent from all others. supposing that change of religion had byn the best, and surest vvay for those intents that vvere designed, to vvitt of her Maiesties state and thes mens preferments, yet sayd most of this our con∣ference, it had bin a matter of farr more wis∣dome and pollicy (seing pollicy vvas their foun∣dation) to haue made this change to some other religiō receaued in the vvorld abroad, and therby
to haue ioyned vvith some other party, or to the communion of some other people or prince, when they brake from that of the Catholique, so strong and general ouer al Christendome, ra∣ther then to set vp a party alone, agreeing vvith no other vvhat soeuer. As for example, if they had councelled her Maiesty to admitt Luthers doctrine and religion as it lyeth, and is practised by the followers therof they had consequently ioyned vvith some Princes of Germany, as nam ly vvith the Duke of Saxony, King of Denmarck and others that make profession of that religion. Or if they had persuaded her grace to haue im∣braced the religion of Caluin plainly and inti∣rely as he taught and exercised thesame, then had they entred therby into communion and frenship vvith Geneua and diuers others states of Swizerland, as also vvith the Princes of the religion, called the reformed in France Flanders and Scotland, and by thes meanes, at least had they gayned some new party to be assured to our realme, by this band and vnion of religiō, which is the strongest and most durable of al other. But novv for them to put downe the old state of religion that was so vniuersal and so vvel bac∣ked, and in place therof to put vp a nevv of their owne only deuise, that hath no stay or trusty frend at al, out of your owne realme, for that it agreeth vvith no state, people, natiō or common vvealth christian besides your selues: vvas such a peece of work (say thes men) as a man may rather wonder at the boldnes of the deuisers
then any way commend their iudgments con∣sidering the incōueniences that dayly do ensew therof and must doe euery day more and more, and is impossible in mans reason, that it can con∣tinew. And albeit in Ingland simple people are often told and many do beleue, that al new religions No reli∣gion this day agre∣eth vvith Ingland. sprong vp in thes dayes both in Germany, france, Scotland, flaunders & at home, if they be against the Catholiques, and namely those of Lutherās, Caluinistes, and protestants are but one religion in effect, for that they al doe ioyne in league and frendship for the present, to resist the stronger, yet that is as playne an error, and deception as if vve should say, that the Turk, Persian, Iew and Infidels, which do ioyne easily against the Chri∣stians when and wher they see him the stronger, are al of one religion, or not enemyes among themselues vvhen they see their owne state free from danger of the other. Euen so, fareth it in this cause proposed, the Lutheran, puritan, & protestant that haue taken ech one his parte of the dominion which the Catholique possessed, and yet seing him left so strong and potent in Christendom, that euery day he hopeth and seketh to recouer agayne the possession that he hath lost, no maruaile though they ioyne togeather, and wil seeme one for the resisting of so vniuersal and dangerous an aduer∣sary: but if you would see, how thes men would agree or be frendes together, if once the Catho∣liques vvere extinguished, consider not only
their difference in doctrine, wherby the one part The lu∣trans and Caluini∣stes & pu ritās great enimyes. doth censure the others religiō for heretical and damnable: but much more marke their manner of proceding in gouerment, where eyther part hath authority at wil: as for example, in thos parts of Germany wher Luthers religion is esta∣blished, is ther any vse of Caluins religion per∣mitted? no truly, nor the professois therof so much as tollerated to liue in that estate or to be buryed in the same churches or church-yeards with them, but are cast out euen into the com∣mon feilds, as people accursed, and excommuni∣cated, vvherof in particuler your Inglish mar∣chants that lyue and trafique in Hambrough or ány other townes vnder Lutheran gouermēt can wel beare witnes. Or if contrary-wise in In∣gland or Geneua at this day, any company of people would put vp the exercise of the Lutherā masse, defende the real presence in the Sacramēt, bring in the vse of paynted or carued images in their churches, practise confession, hold three or fower sacramēts as the Lutherās do: should they not (think you) be pursued and punished? yes no doubt, and that with reason, seing the state of Ingland alloweth not this doctrine, nor practi∣se of germayne religion, wherby we may gather what true accord and frenship ther is or may be, betvvene thes professions, or how thes people would or could long liue together in vnity if they had no common aduersary. And this of the Lutheran and reformed reli∣giō so called in those parts of Germany, wher it
is receaued: But if we consider the other party of reformed or new religiō planted by Caluin and Beza in Geneua, France, Flaunders and Scotland, albeit the state of Inglād do follow more points therof in doctrin then of the other before na∣med Lutheran: yet how many and great irrecō∣ciliable differences ther be, is abundantly set forth in the multitude of bookes written of late the one agaynst the other, & especially by that set out now presently by order and authority of the bishops intituled. A suruay of the pre∣tended The lyke  holy discipline, wherin the puritans or sin∣cere Caluinists doctrine is detested discredited and made heretical, and seditions, yea Caluin and Beza themselues much disgraced and impu∣gned. Wherunto, if we do add the blood of such as lately they haue put to death in Ingland, for  Penry. defending of this doctrine, & the others resolu∣tion to suffer the same: we may easely see what would become of thes two partes if things went to their owne willes, to witt, that eyther the puritan had so ful power to reuenge himselfe of the protestant by sword, as he defyeth him in worde, or that the protestant were so free from suspition and danger of the catholique, as he had leasure to extirpat the putitan as he de∣sireth. By this then do we see euidently sayed thes mē, that the particuler choise & forme of religiō which Sir William Cecil & M. Bacō mad & per∣suaded the Queen vnto at the beginning, was no wise or considerate choise: for albeit it semed
at that tyme, to serue fitly their turnes for to put downe the old, and bring al matters into their owne handes, to place new bishops, Deanes, Atchdeacons and other like dignityes vnder the name of the Queene: yet was it most dangerous and preiudicial to the weal publique, in that it was peculiar, solitary and differét from al other, as hath bin declared, and consequently must needs expect a perpetual warr and contradictiō, and that, not only at the catholiques handes, but much more and sharper at the other two parties aboue named, if the catholique party could be extinguished, so as the laberinth of Inglish state and religion, seemeth hereby to be inextricable, and much approued was the saying of S. Christo∣pher S. Christo phor Hat∣tōs saying. Hatton late chauncelor, to a certayne secret frende of his a lyttle before his death, that the clew tyned vp by thes deuises in Ingland, was so Intanged, as no man possibly could vntwist the same but by breaking al in peces, which he spake to the great grief both of himselfe and him that heard it. A third consideration was of the manner of A third considera¦tiō of the manner of procee∣ding by cōplo in matters of religiō. proceding to hould vp and sett forwards this forme of religion, chosen for Ingland: in which poynte also thes men founde much defect of fore sight and pollicy in thes that were the first stters vp therof: for if her maiesty had bin per∣swaded at the begining, to haue followed the course of Germayne states and Princes, which was to giue liberty of conscience to al, and to presse none by violent meanes, to be of their re∣ligion,
but only to inuite them with rewards of preferment: it is very like that matters had pas∣sed as quietly this day in Ingland as they do in Germany, where al are quiet, and the princes safe, and little contradictions or falling out for such affayres. And seing that Inglish men do come of Germayne race, it may be they would haue followed them in this poynt also, but how∣soeuer that be, most likely it is that matters had neuer come to those open broyles, hatreds and mortal enimyties that now they are come vnto in Ingland: for men being not pressed, many would haue had little care of being zelous or heddy on eyther part: & preferment only would haue moued infinite people to follow that wher∣by they might haue profited: and others not stinged or compelled to the cōtrary, would haue remayned doubtful, but yet quiet in their con∣sultations, what way to follow, and so should her Maiesty haue bin serued of al, and hated of none, and aduauncments sufficient would haue remayned for al such as would haue bin fotward in that her Maiesty had most fauored. But now by this other course, that hath bin taken, of tormoyling, tormenting, and beating men to their religion, the state is growne to be both odious a broad, and dangerous at home, and not durable. First, for that as the poet saveth. Nitimur inuetitum semper, mans natural inclina∣tion, is to esteeme and desire that which is de∣nyed him, and to reiect that, which is thrust vppon him by violēce. But yet in no one thinge
so much is this seene, as in matters of religion, which of al other affayres, is the poynt that most requireth liberty, both of iudgment and will, & least beareth the force of strayning: and so we see by experience, that her Maiesty at the beginning, entering and raigning for some yeares with mildnes, found no difficulty, (to speak of) on any part though at her entrāce the whole real∣me was, settled in an other religiō. but now after twenty yeares pressing men with restraints, im∣prisonments, losse of goodes and liues, the num∣ber is founde euery day more greater of them, that openly make resistance, and do lesse respect and reuerence both prince law and gouuermēt: and so euery day wilbe more and more, both of Catholiques and puritans for the reasons afore said. Which thing certayne pollitick councel∣lors of, Iulian the Emperor surnamed the Apo∣stata obseruing by experiēce of al the rigorous courses of former Emperors before hym, they persuaded him to change that course of forcing, into alluring, and so he did, and wrought more effect in few yeares by that meanes, then the other had done by the contrary in many, and would (no doubt) haue done much more, if his life and reigne had not bin so short. To this discourse said one of the company, if An obie∣ction. this be so, how then do catholiques vse rigor in punishing them that are not of there religion, and do preuaile therin, as we see by experience of Spayne and other countryes, wheroftē tymes thes new religions beginning to budd vp haue
bin kept downe and vtterly extinguished by pu∣nishment. To this answered an other saying, they wil The an∣svvere. saye that the cause of this is the truth of their religion, and the falshood of the other, & that it is peculiar to their religion, by promise of Christ, to endure for euer, and triumph ouer al sects: but for that this is not graunted by al but remayneth in dispute, (I wil quoth he) yeald an euident difference heerof in pollicy and reason, which is, that Catholique Princes which by for∣ce and punishment, haue extinguished other religions, and sects that began to spting vp in there realmes, did take thos new blossomes at the begining whiles they were yet grene, and not wel setled and their followers not many, & so I do confesse that all religions may be rooted out, sauing only the trew which Christ himselfe defendeth, and so many do thinke that if Char∣les the Emperor had apprehended Luther at his first seing him in Augusta, (as many of his counsel perswaded him) he had crushed perhapps his doctrine in the very kyrnel, and the like may be said of Caluin and Beza, as also perchaunce of the puritans in Ingland if rigor had bin vsed to∣wards them at their first rising: though this last of the Puritans be very doubt ful, for that their foundation being (as after shalbe shewed) the very doctrine it self that by publique authority is set forth, taught, and maynteyned now in In∣gland: it must needes continually rise out of the same, as the heate frō the fyer so as it is impossi∣ble
to nourish the one & extinguish the other. As for the Catholiques in Ingland, the reason Catholi∣ques not easely ex∣tinguis∣hed. is far different, for they being no new beginers but old possessors of the realme, they vvere so many at her Maiestyes first entraunce to the crowne, as they could not wel be al extinguished together, except the land should haue bin left wast, nor can be easely at this day extinguished by force in any reason of state or probability that I can see: for I do not comprehende those only by this name, which are recusants and dis∣couer thēselues vnto the world (for those might easely perhapps be made away as many do su∣spect is meant by the late statute of restrayning them to certayne places) but much more do I vnderstād by this people those also, who goe not so far forwardes as to discouer their religion (at least wise to put themselues within danger of lawes) and yet in mynde, wil, and iudgement, are they nothing behinde the rest, yea so much the more feruent inwardly, agaynst the state, by how much more they are forced by feare to dis∣semble outwardly their iudgements, and keep in their affections, and thes are also of two sortes, the one knowne or suspected, though nothing cā be layed agaynst thē by law, but the other not knowne nor suspected at al, but of good autho∣rity in the realme, and so much the more dange∣rous when occasion shalbe offred. Agaynst, al thes then, what doth the course of seuerity preuayle? those few that are knowne re∣cusants may be vexed and tossed, as they haue
bin thes later yeares, and some particuler cour∣tyer may be aduanced by begging their goodes and landes, but vvhat is this to the common wealth? none or few of them are conuerted, ther number groweth euery day rather then demi∣nisheth, and if any do or shal yeald to goe to the church, what is gayned therby? they change not in iudgment, nor come vvith their hartes, but vvith their bodyes or tong only, their in∣ward auersion is so much the more increased towards the state, by how much more violent this outward compulsion is: and in the meane space their frendes and kynred are more exaspe∣rated, their fellow catholiques not yet recusants alienated: the people seing their afflictions more moued to compassion towards them, forrayne princes more egged to take their partes, what then in the end is like to come of this. And if you put thē to death or driue thē out of Inconue∣niences by put∣ting so many mē to death for reli∣gion. the realme, as many haue bin thes latter yeares, vvhat profitt also is ther like to come of this? let vs gesse of the tyme to come by that which is past: those hūdreths that haue bine put to death, haue they done the state good or hurte? abroad we see thē published for martyres, in al bookes, tables, pictures and storyes that are vvritten, and no one thinge euer moued strangers so much to admire, Inglād as the sight & knowledge of this. At home their estimation and parties do in∣crease hereby, seing ther is none that eyther is banished or put to death for this cause, but is eyther estemed as a martyr or cōfessor, by them,
& so eyther in respect of his holynes or in hope he may returne agayne to do them good one day, or for desire of reuenge for his hard vsage, ther is no father, brother, sonne, nephew, kins∣man, frende or acquaintance of his left in In∣gland which by this is not made a mortal eni∣mye to his persecutors, and how far this may reatch and extend it selfe in such an Iland as In∣gland is, or what effects it may worke in tyme to come, I leaue it (sayeth this man) to your wiser considerations. Moreouer (sayeth he) I would haue you to The in∣crease of semina∣ries. consider that before order vvas giuen in Inglish vniuersities at home, to examine schollers and presse them to othes, the Inglish scholler vvas scarse hard of in forrayne scholes and vniuersy∣tyes, neyther vvas there mention of Inglish se∣minaryes to be erected in straynge countries, but after that vppon molestation at home, schol∣lers began to repayre ouer to Doway, and then vppon the practise from Ingland to driue them from thence, they fledd to Rhemes and increa∣sed greatly in number (though al left not Do∣way but for one remayned two places of recour∣se) and then agayne vppon dealing with the king of france for their expulsion from Rhemes an other Seminary also was erected by the pope in Rome, and after that agayne when this vvas pursued from Ingland by many edictes, an other vvas erected in Valhodolid in Spayne, and after an other proclamation set out agaynst that, an other Seminary presently vvas set vp in Seuil, as
before in the narration hath bin touched, and out of thes haue and do come euery yeare into Ingland Priestes in such abundance, as my Lord Tresorer himselfe confesseth that for one that came into Ingland before, ther commeth now seuen, and perhapps he might haue said seuen∣teene, and albeit aboue a hundreth of them haue bine put to death, yet more hundreths grow of them euery day, and in the meane space her Maiesty waxeth old, the realme groweth to more dissention and confusion in religion, the Puritans become very hoat and heady, the people wearyed and amazed, whith thes manner of procedings, what thē shalbe thee end at lēght of this course think you? Truely quoth one of the company for this poynt of the Catholiques, I know not vvhat to saye, the euent being doubtful, for the causes & experience which you haue now alleaged: but for the puritans I haue hard some men of dis∣course auouch in Ingland, that they will cer∣tainly be extinguished, if the Queenes Maiestie liue any number of yeares for that the whol councell semeth fully bent therunto, & were it not for my L. Treasorer vvho is thought to fa∣uour them in secret, men iudge that it would very quickly be brought to passe. Tush, you are deceaued said the other, nay VVhe∣ther the Puritans may be rooted ont or not in In∣gland. much more possible & likely it is that the puri∣tan shal ouercome the protestant then the con∣trary: for that the puritan buyldeth directly vp∣pon the protestants first groundes in religion, &
deduceth therof clearly and by ordinary conse∣quence al his conclusions, which the protestant cannot deny by divinity, but only by pollicy & humane ordination, or by turning to catholique answers contrary to ther owne principles: and therfore it is hard for any man sincerly to be a protestant, but that he wil easily passe on also more or lesse to be a puritan: and only they in effect wilbe agaynst them, who are interessed in the other side, as Archbishopes, Bishopes, Arch∣deacons, chanons, notaryes, registers, ciuil la∣wers & the like, for not leesing their cōmodityes, and some few councellors also perhaps for not offending the Queene, who aboue al others is interessed in this affayre, and yet al these, being but the lesser number in respect of the multitu∣de (though of most power for there present au∣thority) it shalbe impossible to extinguish the Puritans, except they extinguish first the principles and foundations of protestants religion, vp∣pon which puritans do grounde. Which thing my L. Barley I vvarrant you vvel vnderstandeth (sayeth he) and for that cau∣se secketh now to hould so great a hand with them, whom he contemned for some yeares past, vvhen they vvere vveaker. And albeit in this last parliament, to content the Queene, my L. of Canterbury, and some others of the councel that fauour them not, and to get others to stick the lesse at yelding to the statute agaynst catho∣liques, he vvas content also to let passe an acte agaynst the puritans: yet is it so qualified vvith
fauorable clauses in their behalfe (put in diuers of them by his honor as is thought after the parliament ended) as is easily discouered that he wisheth them vvel, and the very last clause of al the act, wherin it is sayd, that the vvhole act shal indure no longer then vntil the next session of parliament, playnely declareth the great feare which the whole state hath of them, and that the councel vvalketh on thornes and standeth doubtful as yet vvhat the euent vvilbe, & how this first act agaynst the puritanes vvilbe taken and digested by them, and according to this, as∣sure your selfe the execution of the statute shal∣be, and consequently feare you not, the extin∣ction of the puritans, but rather lett the prote∣stants loke vvel to themselues vvho haue by this proceding of my L. Tresorer brought both puritans and catholiques on their backes. And vvittely spake Sargeant Owin of late in my Sargeant Ovvins speech of late. opinion, at the Barr agaynst Barrow and Gre∣newode, that vvere araygned and executed, that puritanes and papists vvere like dangerous pio∣ners, that began to digg at the two endes, and would inclose at the length the protestant in the middle, and meete at the very hart of the realme, vnderminyng the same before it could be remedied: vvhich no doubt by al humane reason of state and common wealth, must be so. and cannot long hould out in this course, that now it followeth and consequently they vvere no great vvise men that began the same. To this discourse al held their peace for a
vvhile, looking the one vppon the other who should answere, vntil at length one sayde. As for the puritans (Sir quoth he) I am fully of your The pro∣bilities that puri∣tanes vvill preuaile. opinion, that it wilbe a hard peece of vvork to roote them out, but rather that they are like to ouercome in the end, both protestants and papi∣stes: the protestants, for the reasons you now haue giuen, that they do buyld vppon the very first groundes of al Inglish protestants, that fol∣low Caluins doctrine, and do seme to pretend but only the perfection and true vse therof, and consequently that reason of yours hath much fitted my vnderstanding, that their can scarce be a zelous Inglish protestant (for I meddle not vvith Lutherans in Germany) but that he vvil passe easily to be a puritan, if some particuler in∣terest do not hinder him, which cannot be pre∣sumed of the maior part, and so in tyme if this religion hold in Ingland, it must needes be, that this partye also of the Puritan vvil certaynly forward in like manner, and preuaile agaynst the other, but especially if once a Prince should enter that did fauour them indede, as easely may be imagined, that any other protestāt Prin∣ce lightely vvil do, after her Maiesty, vvho shal not be so setled in this manner of gouerment as her Maiesty is, nor so perswaded agaynst thes men as this Queene is, and hath bin hitherto by al her councellors, and by none more per∣happs in tyme past, then by my L. Tresorer who now being of an other mynde and designement (as is presumed) though he dare not vtter it per∣chance
to this Queene, yet vvil he easely finde reasons to perswade the same to an other Prin∣ce, that shal come after, if he liue to that day as perhapps he may hope to doe, alleaging and Reasons for the puritan religion. laying before him that now tymes causes and circumstances are altered, and seing the puritans now so strong it may be dangerous to resist them, and that their religion is not to take any thing from the Prince, but rather to bring vnto him, for as the protestants religion brought abbyes, Nunryes, and other religious houses to the temporal Prince, so this wil bring Arch∣bishop rikes, As landes also of colleges in tyme. Bishoprickes, Deanryes, Arch∣deaconryes with other semblable good mor∣sels of welth, by which reasons it vvil not be hard, to perswade any other Prince, that hath not the auersion imprinted in him as this Queene hath, to enkendle his zeal to be a puri∣tan. And this is the likelyhoode that I concea∣ue that puritans wil preuaile in tyme against the protestants: and this tyme I beleeue is not so far of as that you shal euer see this act now made agaynst them continued, or renued, in any other parliament & so it is likely that those of their partye wel vnderstoode it vvhen they lett this statute passe in this parliament, rather to awaken the puritans therby in deed then to seeke their redresse or conformitye in religion. For what? doe you thinke that any Puritan in the world wil euer be forced to make that for∣me of recantation and humiliation to the pro∣testant, which is set downe in the statute? to
vvit, that I do humbly confesse and acknowledge that I haue greuously offended god in vsing and frequenting disordered and vnlawfull conuenticles vnder pretence & colour of exercise of religion, &c. Nay I thinke ve∣ryly the protestant shal first make him eate his communion booke which he so much dere∣steth) before he shall driue him to make this recantation. It may chance driue him to buckle with the protestant de summarei, somewhat soo∣ner then he had thought before, therby to try which of them shall haue the vpper hand to force the other to recat, but him I thinke, verely they shal neuer bring vnder, but rather by eg∣ging of him put him sooner vp, vvho first or last wil rise aboue the other, at leastvvise this is my iudgment of the matter take it as you wil. And as for the papist, me thinke the difficul∣ty of victory is much lesse agaynst him, eyther for putitan or protestāt that wilbe ridd of him, seing that now by this act of parliament (as hath bin sayde) they haue him by the legg and so tyed vp & limited, as they may eyther ruine or weary him at their pleasure, whensoeuer oc∣casion or need shal require. To this an other replyed, that as the puritans An other opinion that puri∣tans shal not so easily pre∣uaile. had great opportunity to grow and go forvvard vvhile the Queene and councel were occupied in repressing papistes, so did not he thinke not∣withstanding that their victory vvas so suer or easie on eyther side, that is to say, eyther agaynst protestants or papistes, as this man made it, for
as for the state present (sayeth he) it is certayne that authoritie is so bent agaynst them, for seing the ruyne that by them is iminent, as it is like, they vvil neuer cease to pursue them: & wheras you say, that ther is neuer a protestant of zeale but vvil easely passe on to be a puritan, except he be stayed by interest, it may be so in many, vvho do only runne forwards from poynt to poynte of new doctrines and religions, with such heate and greedines, as they neuer looke further but to that which is before them, but in many others it may breed perhapps a contrary effect, to witt that they vvil rather draw back∣vvards agayne, considering ther is no stay, not ende, nor certanty in running so much for∣warde, as we haue seene in our dayes, from pa∣pists to Lutherans, from Lutherans to Svvin∣glians, from Swinglians to Caluinists, from Caluinists to puritans, and now last of al from puritans agayne of a mylder sort, vnto heddy Brownists, & this effect it is thought this con∣sideration may vvorke, especially in diuers of the priuy councel it self, who being men of wis∣dom and ryper discourse wil soner fal into such an accompt. And this for the state present of Ingland: but as for any other Prince protestant that may suc∣ceade Of the Prince that shal follovv. hereafter, the matter is vncertayne how he vvould be inclined in such a case, and the reason which you alleaged, that the puritan re∣ligion wil take nothing from him, but add much vnto him, as bishoprickes deanryes and
the like, it is very doubtful, with me how it would synck into him, and to his councel. For first it is euidēt, that the puritan religion taketh from the Prince al his primacy and authority ecclesiastical, which in a protestant gouerment is one of the chiefest pillars and foundations of al the rest. The Brownists also do take away his authority to make lawes, appoynt orders, & subiecteth him to the excommunications and censures of vulgar ministeres and mutinous cō∣gregations, and the practise therof we se partly in Scotland where the king is tossed and tum∣bled by troblesome people as it pleaseth the mi∣nisters vvithout heades, to blow into their ea∣res, so as neyther he nor they haue any certain∣ty of stay at all. The reason also of adding bishoprickes and other ecclesiastical liuings to the crowne is very doubtful and ambiguous with me, for seing they are alredy at the Princes disposition, I see not vvhat great gift or additiō it can be to him, if any man wil pul them downe to his handes: nay it is now by experience of some yeares brought in question, vvhether it vvere profita∣ble euē for temporal respects vnto king Henry the eight, to pul downe the monasteryes altoge∣ther and distribute there possessiōs to particular men as he did, or to haue permitted them to stand, and now and then to haue fleezed them of ther wealth, seing many are of opinion (and so am I also) that it is more gayne ful to sheer euery yeare a sheepe & now and then to pul of
frute from a tree, then to take at one tyme the woll and flesh of the one, or the frute & vvood together of the other, and this for the prote∣stant. In like manner I do not think the puritans victory agaynst the papist is like to be so easy as The Ca∣tholiques not so ea∣sie to be extingui∣shed. you imagin, for as for the massacre (if any such thing should be mtended as I vvould thinke ra∣ther no) at least it is not probable that it vvilbe suffred in this Queenes dayes; first for the tro∣ble and peril that such an act might bring vnto the common vvealth: and secondly for that therby the puritan should be strengthned and much armed to oppresse also the protestant, if once this coūterpoyze of the papist vvere cut of. And as for after her Maiesties death, vntrl an other Prince be setled, of the many that are like to pretende it may be thought, that the Ca∣tholique vvil prouide sufficiently for himselfe, not to be oppressed by any sudden violence; which the more easily he shalbe able to do, for that it is impossible any such matter to be exe∣cuted generally without some former desigmēts conferences and consultations, seing that many must be the executioners therof, and as impossi∣ble it is, to haue any such consultations or desi∣gments, but that some, notice vvil come to the catholiques before hande, seing ther is no coure councel, campe, or company lightly in Ingland, but that it hath some or other, eyther by con∣science, religion, kindred, allyance, frenship, obligation or affection deuoted to some of
them, yea the very partyes themselues that must be executioners of this act in euery shire, if it be done, let them be as forward other vvise in any religion as they vvil, yet is it impossible but for some of the afore sayd causes they wil shew some frenship, as it is easely sene in al the sear∣ches that commonly are commaunded, vvhich being concluded neuer so secretly, are yet com∣monly fore knowne more or lesse by the Catho∣liques, and much more wilbe so bloody & boy sterous an actiō as a massacre or general slaugh∣ter vvould be: and therfore my opinon is, The con∣clusion. that thes three partyes and factions of prote∣stants, puritans, and papistes, vvil buckle toge∣ther longer yet, then you do imagin, and which part shal haue the vpper hand in the ende, God only knoweth: and therfore if my L. Burley or Sir Nicholas Bacon, might haue anoyded this garboyle in the begining (as some here haue affirmed and it seemeth euident) or might haue tempered the same sithence, vvith a more mylde manner of proceeding vvithout bringing the matter into this disperate conten∣tion, or the state into so euident dainger: no doubt but (as you say) they nether vvere nor are to be accoumpted men of grear vvisdome, or gouerment: as some haue esteemed them, thus much vvas spoken of thes affayres. Sundry other poyntes of gouerment came Other poynts touching the Lord Burly. in question at this tyme, and vvere disputed to and fro, and my L. Tresorers prudence therin discussed, as namely and among other thinges
his proceding vvith the nobilitye, vvhether it were true policy or no to procede so vvith the nobility as he hath done, pulling downe the principal and holding the rest out of gouermēt, and doings, vvhich was the fal and ruyne of Crumwell, as also the holding so many chiefe offices together in his owne handes, vvhich must needes be a most odious poynte, from which in pollicy an ambitious man hath to fly for better establishing of that vvhich he get∣teth, but in thes things ther were so many rea∣sons alleaged on the one side & the other, as it was hard to giue iudgment vvhich vvas to be preferred in Filijs huius Saeculi. Other poyntes ther semed of more impor∣tance Other cō∣sider ations. and consequence as the open breaking with al the old leagues of Ingland, the spending of so infinite treasure in forrayne and vnneces∣sary warres, for which any Prince that shal follow must needes by al probabilyty cal him or his vnto accompt. The authorising of so open and ordinary piracy by vvhich the honor, substance, and subiects of the realme are so no∣toriously damaged, the multitude of straingers drawne into the realme which deuour and im∣pouerish the natural inhabitants: the many bookes pamphletts and proclamations which he hath put forth with out consideration, which haue giuen aduantage vnto the enemye: al thes thinges (I say) though diuers reasons and consi∣derations were alleaged to defend or excuse
them: yet inclined the maior part of this confe∣rence, to note them rather of some vvant of iudgment then otherwise. But of al other thinges the matter of successiō The Queenes not mar∣rying. and her Maiestyes not marrying, vvas thought by al mens verdicts to make demonstration of grear and notable vvants in Sir William Cecil and M. Nicholas Bacon at the begynninge, not only of mature fore sight and wisdome, but also of true loue and respect towards their countrey and fidelity tovvards her Maiesty, for that seing their only ende in this great affayte to perswade her Maiesty not to marry, vnder presence of mo∣re fiedome and liberty, and lesse subiectiō to her person, could be no other in truth, but only for their owne greater power and hand ouer her, (vvhich they vvel saw could not hold so abso∣lute if she had euer taken a husband) this con∣sideratiō ought not to haue preuayled so much with them, eyther in conscience, reason, or pol∣licy, but that they should haue looked to the euent which now draweth on, to wit the peril of vniuersal distruction to their countrey, wher∣in them selues, their children, and posterity (for whose aduauncement they committed this er∣ror) are also conteyned. Truth it is (sayd one of the company) that The L. Burlyes gaine by the Quee∣nes not marrying. they two men and especially my L. Burley, hath had as long and large and vniforme a reigne vnder this Queene as euet lightly councellor or courtyer or fauorite had vnder any prince, and
perhapps the like is scarse to be read of, espe∣cially so vniforme (as I haue said) that is, so constant and like it selfe, and stil vvith increase without ebbes and flowes, rysings and fallyngs as other wise is accustomed to happen: and cer∣tayne it is that the chiefest grownde of al this, hath bin the Queenes being a sole woman, who therby hath bin enforced to giue her selfe wholy into his handes, and any husband that she might baue had must needes haue a bridged much of this absolute sway, by taking into his owne handes or to his frendes, some part of the gouerment, which this man now hath posses∣sed wholy, hauing bin to the Queene both hus∣band, and master, counceller, and gouernour thes many yeares. Bnt yet seing that the con∣tinuation and confirmation of thes things, and namely the conseruation of titles, honors, and riches by thes meanes gotten to his posterity, dependeth vvholy of the succession of the crowne (seing her Maiesty cannot liue euer) it cānot be thought wisdome in my L. Burley that for the respect of his present particuler sway, he should suffer the publique (and ther vvith also his owne for the tyme to come) to fal into such desperat termes of open peril as now we see them in, by occasion of her Maiesties not marrying. To this one of the conference sayde that he could not imagin that this matter of succession A bont the suc∣cession. remayned so doubtful and dangerous in the
iudgment of my L. Tresorer, as it seemed to vs & other men abroade, but that he had some secret and sure designement and plot contriued in his owne head, to put in execution so sone as God shal take her Maiesty frō vs, as the Dukes of Northumberland and Suffolk had in tyme of King Edward the sixte, though other men knew not therof, and especially when they saw the King, not like to liue long, and so when all men looked for a Mary Queene, they came forth with a Queene Iane, and so may this man sayeth he with some Arbella Queene or the like, when least it is expected. No doubt (sayed another) if his designmēt may take place, the lort shal fal vppon some woman or childe, whom he may gouerne as he hath done hitherto, for vnder any male Prin∣ce of age, he wil neuer willingly liue, seing hither to he hath bin master of wardes, both to the realme, Queene, and councel for so many yeares together, and for that ther be so many pretenders now to the crowne as men do saye (for the fame goeth there wanteth not three or fowre at the least) his Lord ship shal not want store to make his choise of. And that is our misery said a Gētleman law∣yer newly come forth of Ingland, that ther be so many pretenders to this garland, which only one can weare: and wheras you say that ther be three or fower, I can auoutch vnto you that ther be more then three tymes three which by
interest of succession may pretend therunto & stand in hope to get the same. You meane (said an other) by order of suc∣cession The mul∣titude of compiti∣tors to the crovvne. in longe tyme to come; nay sayeth he, I meane immediatly next after the Queene that now is, and in the first degree. For albeit ther be among them (as of necessity ther must) di∣ners and different degrees of discent; yet euery one of them hath particuler reasons to per∣swade himselfe and others, that he ought to be next in possession, and iustly may stand not only in hope, but also in defence therof by the sword if he be able, or otherwise by negotiatiō of his frendes, and the more part of them are in such case, as they must neades take armes for tryal of their title, though they vvould forgo it, for that no security of peace can be made by them with their fellow competitors, but vvith armes in their handes, and then imagin you (quoth he) when so many of the blood royall shall at∣me themselues, what shal become of Ingland and Inglish men. To this speach of the Gentleman, al that were present stoode very attentiue, marueling much to heare him name so great a number of competitors to the crowne, affirming that they had neuer hard that ther we are so many, or so resolute euery man to make good and set for∣warde his particuler title. Some said that in In∣gland they had hard in tymes past, that the Queene of Scots had a title, which men vnder∣stood
commonly, was cut of by her late at∣tainder: some talke also there had bin of the Earle of hertfords children, and now lately of one Arbella whom men saye that the Earle of Licester vvent about to haue marryed her to his sonne, and so to haue made her Queene, some speech ther hath bin also of an old title of the Earle of Huntington, which commonly men thought was litle to the putpose: but of so great a numher as this man speaketh of, and that euery parte should hould so pregnant hope of preuayling, they saide they neuer imagined: and desired the Gentleman very earnestly to im∣parte with them more in particuler what he knew in that affaire, and so did especially a cer∣tayne Ciuilian Lawyer newly come from Italy Spayne and France, wher he had both trauayled and stndyed as also he had donne in some partes of Germany, and semed much giuen to matter of state, and therfore made instance to the Gentleman to say some what of this argument, and subiect, offering also to adioyne his verdicte vvhere any thing should offer it selfe within the compasse of his profession reading or ex∣perience. To vvhich the Gentelman answered, this is a matter (quoth) he that I haue studied diuers yeares and conferred in Ingland with men of diuers factions and affections in this behalfe, who though the statute forbid treating of these poynts, yet in secret do they discourse very lar∣gely
therof with men whom they dare trust, and notable packing and negotiation ther is vnder hand about this busines in secret, euery parte for his prince pretended, and nyne or ten plotts I haue hard of, for so many persons that do or may pretend it, all which for that you request me sayeth he, and do promise to say your oppinions also as occasion shalbe offered, and we are now fallen into that matter, & the the tyme serueth conuenient enough, I shall here very willingly impart vvith you by vvay of discourse, not fearing the statute of treason for determinyng any mans right in succession to the crowne, both for that this place is out of Ingland, as also for that I meane to determyne nothing at all, bur rather to follow the Acade∣mical Philosophers in this affayre whose pro∣fession was to argue and dispute on euery side, and to conclude nothing: nay my very purpose shalbe (said he) to shew you that I do not know what to conclude, and that the matter is so doubtful ambiguous, and disputable, on euery side, as God only and the sword must make the conclusion, and this in my opinion, is the cheifest and most certayne and very vvorst poynt of al other in this great busines. If this be so, (said one of the company) why is ther not order taken by parliament for so great an inconuenience, and how commeth it to passe that we heare out of Ingland that some were committed to prison this last parliament
for offering to treate in this affayre? No mar∣uaile VVhy it is for bid∣den in In∣gland to treate of the suc∣cession. said the Gētleman, for that to treat of this matter now, when ther is none to succed that may be presumed by the neernes of bloode to desire more the Queenes safty then ther owne commodity, (as it would be if she had children of her owne) weare to put her Maiestyes state & person in no smale danger, vvhich she pru∣dently foreseing hath for bidden to haue the question debated in her dayes. Wherin no doubt (sayeth he) she hath great reason in allawe of pollicy: for that she hauing no kynred so neer in bloode as obligatiō of nature may assure her Maiesty of ther fidelity, it were a perilous poynt to make determination of her succession now, for it were to put vp aulter agaynst aulter, and a rising sonne agaynst a falling sonne: It were to fill mens heades with new discourses hopes and designmēts, to moue passions feares enuies hatreds Ielozies & ambicions, it were to breed new practises negotiations and canuasses, and to fill the realme with vnquiet humors. And for her Maiesty, it were to gyue her matter of perpetual care, sollicitude and danger for it were in deade to treat of her burial whiles she is yet in health, and to deuide her patrimony whiles she is yet in possessiō, vvhervnto I mar∣uayle not yf she be vnwilling to yeeld. To this may be added also for iustifying of her Maiesties proceeding in this poynt, so highly mislyked by dyuers sortes of men, that
it is not probable that this prouisiō if it should be made by parliament, for the next successor, and at this tyme, and as things now stande, would be greatly auaylable eyther to the real∣me, or to the party in whose fauour it should be made, not to the realme, for that vvee see by many experiences of actes of parliaments made for succession both in King Henry the eight his tyme, and much more before, in tyme of controuersy betwene the two houses of Lan∣caster and York, as also before that agayne in King Richard the first his dayes, for the succes∣sion of Artur the Duke of Britany, and other the like, actes, that they were neuer obserued or respected afterwards, when a stronger preten∣dor came to plead his cause, so as those actes serued for nothing els but to exasperate more the competitor agaynst vvhom they vvere made. To the partye also for whom they should be made, they do sealdom any good at al, but ra∣ther do put him in far greater dainger then be∣fore; and namely they would do so now in In∣gland, things standing ther as they do, to witt, the Prince in possession being so far of in kyn∣dred as she must needes liue in Ielosy of that party, and the other competitors being so ma∣ny, strong and apparent in ther pretences, as they may be egged heerby to work the distru∣ction both of the one & the other: for al which respects and many other that may be alleaged,
I thinke this order taken in Ingland, not only needful, but reasonable also and commodious, said this Gentleman. No doubt said the Ciuilian, but it is com∣modious yf you respect the present only, for that it doth eschu both garboyles to the realme and cares and periles to both partyes as you haue said, I meane both to the Queene and her heyre apparent that should be declared, who must needes be a mortal enimye vnto her Maiesty the very first hower that he is declared, for that his next desire after such declaration once obteyned must needs be, that her Maiesty were quickly dead, and he or she in her place; and for that her Maiesty must needs know and feare this, & the other must needs imagine, that she knowing and fearing it, would seeke to preuent the same, betwene thes feares I say and hopes, thes hatreds and suspitions, thes ambi∣tioris and Ielosyes, no peace frenship or long endurance could be expected. And for that the Note this poynt. hopes and hartes of men, are set commonly much more vppon the Prince that is to come o rising, then vppō him that is in fading, the grea∣ter dainger were like to fall vppon the present possessor, wherof I could gyue (you said he) if neede weere, diuers examples out of storye of our profession, I meane pertayning to th study of our emperial lawes, by which is mad most euident, that more Caesars (vvho vver heyres apparent to the empire as you know
haue put downe Emperors, then Emperors ha∣ue byn able to restrayne Caesars albeit them sel∣ues were able to make them, so as to the Prince in present possession it is (no doubt) very secure and commodious to haue this prohibition, and that the right of succession do hange obscure and doubtfull, and no lesse profitable is it also in my opinion to al the competitors, for that by this meanes they haue tyme euery man to pre∣pare his frendes & worke his cause vnderhand, wheras if any should be declared the rest should be iniured & therby also exasperated & him selfe putt in place of enuy and dainger without power of defence, as hath byn said, but after her Maiestyes death, if he put vp him selfe, it is like he wil haue a party to stick by him to enable his demaund. And this is for the present during her Maie∣ties life: but as for the future tyme it must nee∣des be a terrible threatening of extreme calami∣ye to the common wealth to haue so many lye n wait to assayle her, as you haue signified do retend the crowne, which truly I confesse sayeth he) with the residew here (though omevvhat perhaps I haue studyed and read more then euery one of this company) that I euer estemed to be so many in number, and much lesse of such consideration for their titles, s you seeme to hold them, and therfore I pray ou defer no longer to begynne the discourse which you haue promised and we al desyre.
The Gentleman answered that he was con∣tent, and so began presently, and for more per∣specuitye sake he reduced al the present preten∣ders to the crowne after the Queene that now is, to three principal heades or branches, to wit to the house of lancaster a part, to the house o Yorck a part, and to the last coniunction of A diuisiō of the pretēders to the crovvne. both houses in Kyng Henry the seuenth, assig∣ning three compeditors of the first branch, and three of the second, and fower of the last, of a whose titles he discoursed largely at diueres me∣tings for three or fower dayes one after an o∣ther, and the Ciuilian also said his parte, & som others put in their verdicts as occasion vva offred, but the two former spake most and shewed great reading, and had not the Gentle∣man shewed himselfe somewhat to partial som tymes agaynst the Catholique in matters of re∣ligion as one that had byn brought vp only i Ingland he had fitted greatly my humor, bu yours he vvould haue fitted the more for thi but in truth his speach in this matter of th succession was very pithy, and founded in grea reason and authority without partiality to an party, and I assure my selfe that you would haue liked it extremly well if you had hard it, and presuppose that some of the company hath ta∣ken it in paper though I know not vvell yet, nor haue I now any tyme to enquire th truth, for that the post is vppon his departure and I will not keepe this letter by me any lo∣ger
and now it groweth to some bigger buick also then at the' beginyng I had intended it, wherfore I shall here make an ende, and if I can gett the other discourse hereaster concer∣ning the succession you may perhapps haue A dis∣course of the suc∣cession promised. a sight therof also, for I know it wil yeld you very great contentment. God keepe you, at Amsterdam in Holland this first of September 1593. FIN.
