23617.5 23297336 26533
A TABLE GATHERED OVVT OF A BOOKE NAMED A Treatise of treasons against Q. Elizabeth, and the Croune of England. latelie com∣piled by a stranger and sent owt of France, Printed in the yeare of our Lord 1572. The didicatorie epistle to her heighnesse. MADAM this table of trea∣sons doth your heighnes to witt of à booke called, A treatise of treasons against you and the Croune of En∣gland. That treatise is ad∣dressed of gratefull affection borne to yow, nd discovereth hidden treasons, which each to the danger of your person, of your ate and life. That treatise discovereth the ransposing of the crowne, the extincting of your line, and the hazarding of the Re∣lme. It openeth vnto yow the contrivers of those treasons to be a couple of com∣panions
of base parentes borne: first callid to Court, thone from booke, thother from butterie: which two be now more then Barons by office and dignitie, more then Earles by possessions and wealth, more then Dukes in authoritie: which two be now your cosoning Counsaillors, though sett vppe by your good fauour in the chei∣fest places of the Realme, whereby they haue made them selues mightie in money, mariages and allies, and be the two cap∣taine cōspiratours, that haue in their owne power and in the handes of their confede∣rates, all the offices, all the portes, all the fortresses, your treasour, your armour, yea your selfe, your succession and the whole realme to dispose at their will: They be the two captaine conspiratours, that haue beset yow rownde abowte with feares, and dangers prepared by them selues and by sondrie fine deuises remoued from yow all defenses of faithfull frindes at home and a broade, deuided the realme into factions, abused your authoritie, imploied your trea∣sours to the danger of your state, to the in∣famie of your person, and to your final ouerthrow by death or depriuation ere it be long. Thus that treatise discouereth those two traiterous Counsaillours: who to worke
more subtilly their mischeuous intentions, and to kepe yow from espying their terri∣ble treasons, haue misleaden yow by a false show of other treasons, wich were neuer intended, and abused yow vndre title of dutie, pretence of seruice, and colour of se∣curitie to hold them vnsuspected. In that treatise also your heighnes shal see the vnbuckling and lifting vpp of their sardes and veiles, that wold walke vn∣eene, and still couertlie circumuent yow by their fine fetches whiles they freelie fi∣nish their determined treasons against your person and state. That treatise of treasons is abridged in∣to this table, which showeth forth but in reife maner, vvhat in the same is at full enlarged. It is therefore passing necessarie, that auing good regarde of your owne per∣on, the preseruation of the realme and the ightfull succession of the same, yow call or that treatise, yow reade that treatise, s wel for the more full and better vnder∣standing of the conspiratours practises fi∣allie ment: as for their mischeuous meanes sed to bring their practises to passe. And t is more then high time to vnderstand the mpudent falsehood, the fatall malice, the desperat deuises of the conspiratours
against your line, your life and Succession if by speedie meanes and good aduise, they be not prevented. The author of the treatise, and the abrid∣ger of the same beare good affectiō to yow and to the realme: and therefore doe disco∣uer vnto you the present perills that now hang over both: which when yow shal by survew perceave and vnderstand, God giue yow grace, to consider and preuent. And Madam for that it cannot be doub∣ted but that those two Conspiratours doe watchfullie care and politickly provide, how to kepe frō yow alletters, bookes and treatesies, which they feare may let or disco∣uer their final purpose: It hath ben thought neccessarie to invent and find owt all good meanes whereby the said treatise or at least the Table of the same, might by some more faithful seruant of yours, be addressed to your owne handes: for the which respect it hath bene by meanes conveighed to the sight of your trustie servant Mr. Hatton (and others) who of dewtie and alleage∣ance hath bene thought the most fitt in∣strument to present yow the same. where∣in he shal showe your heighnes, more love dutie and faithful obediece, then those of your Counsaillors, that so many mo∣nethes sithence, haue had the treatise it selfe
in their handes and concealed the same, ei∣ther of doubt their practises might be vn∣timelie discouered and preuēted, or in dee∣de for lack of love towardes your heighnes person: which standeth in greater perill then yow can beleeve. God geve yow grace to sorsee and avoide the same. Your heighnes dailie Orator. G. T.
A BRIEFE TA∣BLE GATHERED OVVT of a booke, callid a treatise of treasons, against Q. Elizabeth, and the Crowne of England, &c. Treasons in general. THE cōspiratours final trea∣sons. 106. be, to extinct the how∣ses, and lines, of King Hen∣rie the 8. and of his Sister, Queene Margarite of Scotl. Thone resting presentlie in the Q. that now is, and thother, in the Q. of Scotl. and to bring the Crowne vntime∣lie vnto the third howse, the howse of Suf∣folke, vnto the which them selues are vni∣ted, and their children incorporated. Treasons in particular against the Queenes per∣son, the realme and right succession. THE conspiratours induced the Q. to. 107. 109. 125. holde her selfe vnmaried: whereby the howse of England might consume in it selfe, and that whole line finishe in, and with her person.
They haue preuented, that none be de∣clared,Fo. 110. nor accepted as heyre by lawe: and by pretence of lawe haue compassed that the Q. haue no heire iudiciallie. They meane by pretence of lawe to im∣peacheFo. 111. al interestes and titles to the crowne that the trial thereof maie come to the swoard, the principal force whereof resteth in the conspiratours handes. They haue by spetial lawe prouided vn∣derFi. 112. paine of treason that their be no know∣en heire in succession established, and that the knowen heire be made not knowen. They haue circumuented the QueeneFo. 114. 125. to extinct her owne line, and made her an instrument to remoue the Queene of Scotl. whose depriuation they haue alreadie pro∣cured. The keping of the Queene of ScotlandFo. 115. in prison, is a plaine promise of their in∣dempnitie, for murdering the Queene her selfe. They gouerne tirannically, whereby toFo. 163. bring the Q. in hatred, an to kendle in the hartes of the people à wearines of her sub∣iection: that they may be the gladder to embrace such mutation as they intend and will attempt, when they shal think the time ripe by death or depriuation to remoue her.
They haue deuided the realme into fa∣ctionsFo. 167. for the Crowne, by preferring vn∣timelie the third howse before the se∣cond. They haue made the Q. a warde atFo. 94. 64. 173. 40. yeres age, and her suertie lesse by the halfe: and made her an instrument to vn∣doe her selfe, and do leade her to her owne destruction. Their last new law taking his effect, lea∣uethFi. 167. the Crowne without proprietarie to claime it. They haue compassed the extincting ofFo. 115. the howse and line of Englād, and brought it euen to the brink, to be finallie ended, when them selues list. Their traitrous practises threaten ma∣nifestlieFol. 15. the Q. speedie ruine. They haue made halfe an execution ofFo. 164. the Q. removing, whiles the Q. of Scot∣land is in their handes, that rule all. They take frome the Q. her principallFo. 113. defences and faithful frindes: The Duke of Northf. faithfullie affectioned: the Q. of Scotl. nere in bloud, and next in law to sccede: Sir Nicolas Throgmorton faithful to his prince, of deepe foresight, and of coū∣sel inventiue. They abuse the Q. authoritie,  for∣cesFo. 33. and treasures, to the danger of her
state, to the dishonours and infamie of her erson. They abuse the Q. name to sowe sedi∣on,Fo. 100. to raise rebellion in the prouinces ad∣yning. They impouerish the subiectes byFo. 101. onsumption of treasures caried owt of the lme, for wageing forrein rebelles, deui∣g new exactions, collections and lotte∣s. They make them selues mightie in mo∣yFo. 96. and armour: they acquire honour, rchasses, offices, titles, stiles, and au∣oritie over the nobilitie: whereby they ue the sweete and the Queene the wer. They vnite them selues, and incorporatFo. 106. eir children to the third howse of Suf∣ke, wherevnto their finall treason is to ing the Crowne by prevention. They prevent by their owne force, andFo. 107. ndes, to be hable to geue the Crowne to hom they list. They applie the Q. consent to whatFo. 96. ey list they geve, they take, they dispose, ey deny, they place and displace, they  and distroie whom they list. They abused the name of the Q. to theFi. 28. ying of sondrie exactiōs over the people, there with to corrupt the noblest subiectes
of france, Flanders and Scotl. to leuie ar∣mes against their soueraignes. The chiefe Conspiratour aspireth to go∣uernFo. 129. still, to leaue his succession cosins to the crowne, annombred among the noblest and what more noman yet knoweth. Particular Treasons of the Conspirators against the Queene of Scotl. the Realme and the Prince. THe Conspiratours procured the Q. ofFo. 23. 36. 114. Scotl. depriuation, with the slaugh∣ter of her husbond and Secretarie. They procured, that her person was im∣prisonedFo. 117. first emōg her owne traiterousie, and then in England vnnaturallie. They made new deuises to raise rebel∣lionsFo. 117. 23. 36. 69. in Scotl. money and pentions se∣cretlie promised, and the rebelles succou∣red: the several slaughters of the secretarie and king contriued by the aduise of the go∣uernour of Barwick, the direction and plott whereof was solicited by some english men, yea directed from some of the Coun∣saile at london. They made sondrie attempts vnto theFi. 115. Queene, to cutt of the line of Scotland by parliament.
They compassed the Q. to extinctFo. 107.  owne line, and to be the instrument of  extirpation of her fathers line, by re∣ouing the Q. of Scotl. from the crowne  parliament. They kepe her prisoner by force andFo. 107. olence: they remoue from her all defen∣s, all faithfull frinds and seruants. Vnder the cover of the Q. fauour,Fo. 155.  good affection towards her, by degrees ey wonn her to the state she is now in: whereby they laye on her all possible op∣essions. They prepare that the yong Prince ofFo. 114. Scotl. come neuer to full age, and hope  make him awaie. Vnder their Q. name they vsed cor∣ptions,Fi. 23. feined lettres, frequent forces, anifest violences towards the nobilitie of Scotl. to enforce them from the alle∣geance of their Q. The Cōspiratours set vpp Iames, Lineux,Fo. 30. 23. 79. Marre, and Morton to be Regents of Scotl. with large pentiōs and mainteyning them with forces. The conspiratours do free with fauourFi. 127. and thanckes any thing spoken or written in the preference of the howse of Suff. and cleane barre anie saying or writing in the right of the elder howse.
TREASON TO BOTH the Crowns of England and Scotl. fol. 118. 125. &c. VVhere yow shal finde. xi. politicque and abondant prouisions made for the establishment of the third line, the howse of Suff. whereunto the Capitaine conspiratours haue vni∣ted them selues, and incorporated their children. The fine fraudulent arts, the plats practises and polices which the Conspiratours vsed, to compasse their treasons with the Queene. FIrst the Q. receaued the crowne withFo. 88. great securitie, without colour or sha∣dow of mistrust of pope, prince, or any papistical subiect of her owne, without murmour grudge or want of satisfaction in the people.Fo. 87. Then Fleck intruding him selfe, brought in his Mate the most knowen briber of the yle of britany to sitt in the heighest place of Iustice. They then suggested to the Q. thatFo. 90. Card. Poole with diuers of the old coun∣saile, had to foretime confered abowte her depriuation which was neuer thought. They suggested to the Q. certaine falseFo. 87. 91.
feares and suspicions against the old coun∣ail, perswading herito hold them al suspe∣cted, only to retaine a few of the Noblest to countenance them selfes. They perswaded her against the aduiceFo. 88. of her Nobilitie and cōsent of all the Clear∣gie to the change of religion and to the set∣ting vpp of a party protestant. They perswaded the Q. that the Catho∣icquesFi. 90. 108. were not to be trusted, and that the ing of Spaine aspired to her crowne. They persuaded her to intrude her selfeFol. 91. nto the ecclesiastical gouernment, assuring her that all the princes her neighbours would follow her therein. They persuaded the Q. to ratefie a newFo. 91. forme of religion and to establish the Schi∣me by parliament, pretending no cōstraint of conscience to any Catholicque. They pretended title of dutie, seruiceFo. 85. nd affection. They pretended care and ialozie of theFo. 31. Q. state and securitie. They drew the Nobilitie into suspition.Fo. 33. They perswaded the Q. that the matcheFi. 41. betwene the Q. of Scot. and the Duke was dangerous to her state and to the Realme. They made the Q. beleene, that othersFo. 47. had conspired to do the same thing, wich them selues performed.
They spred abroade false surmises, for∣gedFo. 71. fables notorious lies published by au∣ctoritie. Fowle malicious impudent lies againstFo. 13. 55. the Duke of Norf. Shameles, vile, traiterousFo. 14. 15. 18. 19. 21. 14. 54. 56. doble, scoganishe, craftie, cunning, lowde, lewde, shaunderous lies against the Queene of Scotland, wicked and spiritishe lies a∣gainst both. Traiterous lies against the Realme.Fo. 18. Grosse lies against the subiects.Fo. 44. Plaine false lies against the king of Spain.Fo. 62. Lies repugnant and contradictorie.Fo. 80. 49. 54. Sicilian lies.Fo. 70. Colourlesse lies, seducing from God andFo. 135. all true religion. Circumuenting lies to abuse the QueeneFo. 83. 133. and to blinde the people: whiles they worke their horrible outrages. Sicilian trickes and policies tending to the con∣spiratours final pourposes and treasons. TO speake worst of the honestest sort,Fo. . and best of the worst sort. To hide and oppresse truth.Fo. 10. To serue the apperites of the euill dis∣posed.Fo. 10. To charge the Innocēt with the deadesFi. 16. of the guiltie.
To plant seditions, to creat Ciuil rebel∣ons,Fo. 19. to move a sea of blouddie tragedies. To flatter aucthoritie, smothlie to dis∣mble,Fo. 10. 31. humblie to crowtche. To vse doble dealings.Fo. 36. To write to one pourpose openlie andFo. 34. cretlie to an other. To charge and defame Noble persona∣es.Fo. 47. To displace all such persons as be impe∣imentsFo. 84. to his final treasons. To slander Catholicques, to belie Prin∣esFo. 99. to occupie the people with lies and va∣ities. To cosin the Queene by weeping andFi. 15. hining to her face, by feyning sicknes for orrow till she relent to his lustes. VVith a brazen face to owtface all thePref. world and his owne Prince also with lies pon lies each one lowder and lewder en other. Falselie to accuse, subtillie to subourne,Pref. hereby wrongfullie to condempne Noble d notable personnages. To depose Princes, to transpose states, toPref. urpe kingdomes for the thirst of heresie d ambition. To preferr his ambition before his Prin∣esPref. honor, his posteritie before hers, his fa∣ilie before her kinred, to plaie the Queene
him selfe in essence and substance of go∣uernment. To ligue him selfe with Rebelles, toFi. 104. harborough pirats, and of their thyeuerie to share owt his partlargelie. To punish honest Citisens by pillerieFo. 6. for saying the troth. To sett forth pilde pamfletes contey∣ningFol. 6. rayling reportes. To tearme that treason to the Q. whichFo. 13. impugneth his final treason. To plaie Scoggan with a Queene.Fol. 1. To alienat peoples hartes and affectionsFo. 19. from the rightfull heire. To fill the Realme with more thē fortieFo. 29. 47. thousand strangers rascals vnder pretence of religion to serue his tourn at a day. To make a treason of no trespasse.Fo. 65. VVhat detrimentes and preiudices haue ensued to the Q. and to the Realme: and what en∣crease of strength and aduancement to the Conspiratours and their needie faction, by their circumuentions tending to their final pourpose and treasons. FIrst the separation of the Q. from theFo. 91. Catholicque Church from the vnitie and amitie of the See Apostolicque.
A confusion of the two obediences,Fo. 91. thone to God, thother to the Queene. A forsaking the seruice of all the bishopsFo. 92. and principal Cleargie. A lack of the seruice of the greatest ofFo. 92. the Nobilitie and anciēt Gentlemen: with  supplie of officers and iustices, greadie and hongrie of liuing. A general change of the whole face ofFo. 93. e commen wealth. A religion that changeth his hew likeFi. 139. he Camelion, and at xiiij. yeres end, is not yet knowen which secte shal preuaile. A diuision from al other princes by anFo. 92. other law, then the Q. progenitours were wont. Infamie, dishonour, reprochfull termes,Fo. 93. ermes of Schisme and heresie, termes of a he head, a breachlesse head, a domme head of the Church. The reuiuing the buried question andFo. 140. ruple of her mothers mariage which time ad put to silence euerie where: her fathers ife and maners, her mothers mariage and eath, her owne birth and conuersation made the matter of much secret talke at ome, and more open penning euerie where abroade. The setting vpp of a partie prote∣stant,Fo. 15▪ 94. (the professed poison of kinglie re∣giment)
that obey no longer, then their partie be of strength: and now showe a litle obedience to the Q. as to the Pope. The Queene for assured forrain frind∣shippe,Fo. 147. 94. brought to stand poste alone, and constreyned to leane wholie to the capi∣taine conspirators. Infinit vexations of the subiectes for re∣ligion:Fo. 94. 168. yet making show in their lettres t princes that the Catholiques may live af their conscience, and none impeached , religion or faith. Field preachings, secret lectures, diffe∣rencesFo. 95. of sectes and seruices of religion, in∣ciuilitie, vnbrideled loosenes of conscienc barbarous maners. For ancient entire amitie with Catho∣liqueFo. 96. Princes, confederacie with Hugo∣nots, Gues and protestant rebelles. Of two Q. the one remoued from heFo. 158. seat, thother abiding but the deuotion o them that in woard and deede repine a womens regiment. Suppressing of truthe, supporting of fal∣sehood:Fo. 99. a lying and Macheulian regimēt▪ A yelding to the Conspiratours, thFo. 98. substance and effect of Kinglie dominion. The consumption of ancient NobilitieFo 102. the setting vppe of a base and needie sort that make them selues Noble.
The violation of the ancient league be∣tweneFo. 101. the Q. and the howse of Spaine and Bourgundie: the laying handes vpon the king of Spaines money for paiment of forrein rebelles. Great charges lost much care cast awayFol. 159. 160. english blood spilt, dishonour gained, a seade of qwarell sowen, a roote of reuenge planted and laide vpp in the deck, which wilbe demanded when time serueth. The weakening of the Q. strength andFo. 102. 101. state, the preiudicing her amitie with the mightiest and sincerest frind that he had vpon earth: so proued by 13. yeres expe∣rience. The refusing of the Q. safetie, by con∣tempningFo 102. sondrie frindlie motions of Em∣perours, and kings, for her reuniting to the Church. England verified to be a harlott theFi. 104. urce of al euills, accompted the neast and enne of theeves rebels and pirates: in dā∣ger to answer the spoiles of Nations by re∣stitution, or waie of reuenge at one time or other. The deliuerie of the Q. and the RealmeFo. 149. 155. wholie, into the handes of the two conspi∣atours, who be the kinges of the Realme  effect, the Q. onlie bearing the name f Q.
The Q. circumuented, her state indan∣gered,Fo. 84. her honour stained, the Conspira∣tours aduanced, the Nobilitie abased, the people oppressed, the realme impoue∣rished: and the Q. made a compagnion of148. an vnfortunat felowshipp. A declaratorie sentence of Excommuni∣catiō,Fo. 93. 103. a discharge of the subiectes obediēce: the weight whereof to be pondered by the presidentes of time past, euen confessed by the startling storming and rageing thereat, of those that to her presence seeme most to make light of it. Violation of common Iustice: and priuat Iniu∣stice vsed to the furtherance of their final pourpose. FIrst the Conspiratours vsed a sclande∣rousFi. 79. 66. forme of proceeding against the Duke and Q. of Scotl. and where they be iudges, all is treason that they will haue so. They vse manie waies of corrupt pro∣ceading,Fo. 81. and arts to slander and intrapp the guiltlesse. They saue harmelesse all their owneFo. 105. frindes, with the iniurie of any third, that will not with money bye his iust sentence.
The Iustice of the Realm is prostibula∣tedFi. 149. to be sold or hyred for money, by ma∣lice or affection. By the ministerie of Rob. Beale in theFo. 126. yeare 1563. the conspiratours haue pro∣cured that the doubtfull wedlocke betwen therle of Harford and the ladie Cather. in their frindes opinions, by the seales and firmes of certaine forrein learned men, is cleared againe, which the conspiratours re∣serue in secret to serue a tourne when the daie commithe. They procured that the statute madeFi. 152. for the Oth of the womanish Primacie should binde the inferiour multitude vnto that, wherein it leaueth the Nobilitie free. They ordeined the penaltie of an otherFo. 152. statut to take place from xiiij. yeres before the crime or any offence committed. The Q. is weakened, the Nobilitie ab∣based,Fo. 153. the people pillaged, them selues en∣riched, their confederates strengthened. The B. of Rosse diffamed because hisFo. 53. seruice tended to preuent the conspiratours hidden treasons. Charles Bailie a stranger afflicted andFo. 36. imprisoned without colour of cawse other then for seeking to publish a pamflett in the defence of the Q. of Scotl.
The Q. of Scotl. could never obtein toFo. 24. come to the sight, presence, nor speach of the Q. to pleade her innocencie: could never obtaine sentence to be geuen for her or against her iudiciallie: could never ob∣tein to come to the Parliament, there to ac∣knowledge and confirme the Q. estate, though she importunatlie laboured the same. The Q. of Scotlāds overtures, to wit, thatFo. 25. she would geve the person of the yong Prince with the persons of iiij. Noble men or their eldest sonnes as pleadges for xiiii. yeres &c. and to procure the handes and seales of the Kinges of Spaine and France for the performance &c. could not be ad∣mitted. The principal conspiratour executed hisFo. 44. 52. privat malice and reuēge against the Duke, for that he had charged him at Greenewich with robbing the realm, dishonouring the Q. and mainteyninge rebells: and would haue remoued him from the Q. A description of the English Sinon. OF base parentage, ambitions minde,Pref. of subtil witte, of smoth tongue, of shamelesse face, of little honestie, of no cō∣science:
ennemie to the old blood Royal: Intollerablie insolent in authoritie: vile and abiect in aduersitie. Sinons Credo. vnder King H. ca¦tholique, vnder King E. protestāt vnder Q. M. acre∣per to the crosse. vnder Qu. E. first a Lutheran, then a Caluenist, then a puritaine, no we a Macheuelian if not an Anabaptist &c. fol. 97. Sinons sophistrie.Fo. 60. Sinons falsehood in fe∣lowshippe.Fo. 31. 38. Sinons table talke.Fo. 97. Sinons badgies.Fo. 117. Sinons similitude.Fo. 101. Sinons bone to gnawFo. 168. vppon. Sinons prouisionsFo. 126. Sinons Tenants to doFo. 102. him seruice. Sinons Text to writeFo. 64. vppon. Sinons Cockerel.Fo. 106. Sinons horse.Fo. 149. Dispersed Notes in the booke worth the consideration. A Glasse presented to the Q. whereinFo. 131. she may plainlie see her owne estate present, and by things done and past, de∣vine what is to come. A trew Annatomie of the new Reli∣gion.Fo. 141. The great differēce betwene the englishFo. 37.
Churche and al other Churches. At Hanborough is preached publikelie,Fo 137. who so lodgeth any man of an english re∣ligion, is an Ost to Sathan, and lodgith a deuill in his howse. Impossible to extinct the partie Catho∣liqueFo. 168. in England, whiles France, Flandres, Spaine, Italy, Ireland and others can not be induced to admitt any other religion. King H. 8. after much hanging, heddingFo. 86. and wasting his Nobilitie, sought his re∣conciliation, and had obtained it if death had not prevented him. The Q. of Scotl. seeth the best of herFo. 130. 115. state as long as the conspiratours sitt at the stearn of the English government: the end of whose life is the beginning of the Q. death. A frindlie Alarme. Beware yow Shrowsburie. Darby.Fo. 123. 153. Sussex. Huntington. Beford. Leycestre and the rest: yow that are yet muche made of, lulled and culled in Catelins armes, some sooner, some later, and the most of yow, must drinck of the drags, that Nor∣folke hath lefte in the cuppe, and yow soo∣nest that be accompted wisest, stoutest and least likelie to be wonne to the vntimely setting vppe of the family of Suff.
A rable of names with their several acti∣onsFo. 37. and practises, the copies of manie mon∣strouse horrible letters promised shalbe published, which the writers thinke are not to be seene. The conclusion of the Treatise propo∣neth.Fo. 172. 7. waies to her heighnes, whereby to restore her selfe to her pristinat securitie, in which she shal finde trew quietnes both forrein and domesticque, trew honour be∣fore God and man. vnfeigned amitie ab∣roade. hartie obedience at home. faithfull love and reverē of her cosins and heires▪ and al loyaltie of her Nobilitie. by which she shall ioye in her reigne, and end it with the quiet that she began it. And so God graunt it. G. T.
A COPIE OF A LETTRE ADDRESSED from Antwerp the xxvi. of Iune to Mr. Hatton and deliured vnto him at Spaw the 5. of Iulie. 1573. SIR yow maie not finde strange sith God hath ge∣uen to eche man a charge and care of his Neighbour (as it is in holie writ) if some one that wissheth yow  do geue this aduenture in few  to pu yow in remembrance of God, your oule, your prince and contrey. The st being mattre that ought to be most deee vnto yow, is most to be considered: as that yow were first baptized in the faith Catholicque, your continuance for manie yeres therein, and the danger in for∣saking the same: the weight whereof no worldlie treasors or dignities can counter∣uaille: the one being eternall, the other temporall, brittle and fraile, as ouer manie of your condition haue tried, finding their experience powdered with bitter repen∣tance. But your Naturall good inclination
giueth forth bettre hope that yow will in time embrase the best, wherevnto itsee∣meth God moueth yow, by laying his hea∣uie hand louinglie vppon yow, that yow might for errors past, endeuour timely satis∣faction, and thereto hath brought yow to a safe porte, if yow list therein to repose and quiet your selfe▪ where doubtlesse yow shal finde more trew comfort and peace of conscience, then if yow would (delighting still in vanities) retourn againe to the place that floweth and abondeth with the tem∣pestes of wordlie temptations. And for that yow be knowen to be in the good fauour and grace of your Prince and to tendre mattres that appertaine to her securitie, and would what in yow lieth aduance to her knowlege, whatsoeuer threatneth her perill, her state, and the cut∣ting of, the rightful Succession of the same: as also to be readie to ministre her the occa∣sion whereby her heighnes may in time repaire her dishonors and infamies procu∣red by such as she accompted her most faith full subiectes, this inclosed being a table of Treasons collected owt of a booke latelie come owt of Frāce is addressed vnto yow, that you should thereof make speedie con∣veye, in sort that the same may not faile to passe directlie to her heighnes handes. in
dutie whereof it is hoped yow wil not faile, for that it is irder intended that the said Table shal also be consigned to others of your qualitie, and shortlie come to print, and be published so, as both her highnes and the world may be wittnes that some one that loueth her and wanteth other rea∣die meanes for the conveye thereof, hath by laying the same vpon yow and others, discharged his band and dutie in that re∣spect. Thus wisshing yow as much grace and comfort as to my selfe, doe harte∣lie recōmend yow to the mer∣cies of almightie God. From Antwerp. the 26. of Iune 1573. By yours to his power. G. T.
CERTAIN IM∣PORTANT POINTS added by the Abridger of the Treatise, after the deliuery of the Table to Mr. Hattons handes, implying vehement demonstrations of the present peril of your Heighnes life and person. ALBEIT your Heighnes great wisedom cānot but easily finde in this table and treatise the great dāger and peril that imminent∣ly dependeth vpon your person and life, if the practise of these Cō∣spiratours be not prevented before it take their desired end: Tyme yet (being the trewest discoverer of all hiddē mischeiffes) having daily more and more revealed the same by sondrie new argumentes since the treatise was finished (which hath byn con∣cealed by the Cōspiratours frō your heigh∣nes knowlege) your gratious, and benigne Nature, will not disdaine (I trust) the sim∣ple oblation of this my poore myte, ad∣ded and cast into the copius heape of Tal∣lentes presented vnto yow by the Author of the booke before me: who for my part intende breiflie to yelde yow euident de∣monstrations of the present peril your per∣son standeth in.
FIrst therefore let it like your Heigh. a litleI. to obserue that policie of theirs lately put in vre (since they vndrestood by the edition of that treatise, that their mischeuons machination was eyed and smelled,) by which they haue for a yeres time almost pretended, and by brute suffred toSinō tour∣nithe over a nevv leafe. be geuen out, that they deeme now the Prince of Scotland most fitly and rightfully to be decla∣red by your Heigh. and the Realm, next heire apparant in Success. And marck yow how by this sweete bayte they haue alluered and ena∣moured (as it were) the Scottish nation to consent to the deliuery of this lambe into the woulfes handes: Behold I saie how lately and sud∣dain this change commeth, euen now hotly and warmly, when they haue for 12. or ▪ yeres space before, by forging of lies, by falsefying of old lawes, by forcing of new, by libelles, by preachers in al pulpettes and printed bookes, traueiled and laboured by all possible meanes to depriue and declare both him and his Mother vncapable of that Crowne in Success. And looke yow a litle into it, vnto what other end this is done, but only by hooke or by crooke, by one way or other to winne and wreast the person of the Infant into their handes. Remembre what huge sommes of money haue byn offered for the possession of his person: what dishonourable, attemptes by cor∣ruption to cause his Nobilitie to consent to his deliuerie. And why is that so gredelie sought and
in suche hast, with what cost soeuer? Let all sto∣ries be sought, and one example showed, where an Infant Prince was by such corrupt meanes violently wreasted into the custodie of them that helde his parētes in prison, other then to his bane, ruyne, and confusion. The consideration whereof implieth manifestlie that they intend by waie of preuention to warrant them selfes from being callid to anie accompt of what soeuer they haue done or shall doe, when they haue cut of the three impediments that lye betweene the Crow∣ne and the lyne of Suff. which be, your selfe the principal, with the Mother and childe. NOw that they haue brought both yow andII. your Realm so deeplie into the infamy of the world, by iniurying all Catholicque Princes for supporting their own priuat ambition with heresie and rebellion euerie where: And finding your nature repugnant to those odious iniuries of your neighbours, and your wisedom not flexibleThe Q. ovvn pole∣cie more secure, then Sinons fine fetches. to consume your treasure and Realme so effuselie as they wold poure it owt in this quarell, and their partie thereby not so stronglie supported in France and Flandres as they desire, they haue therefore no better remedie, then to get that Childe into their handes, whose name and autho∣rity they maie vse to remoue yow, for the better aduancement of their faction abroade.
LIke as the Conspiratours polecie requi∣rethIII. your safetie whiles the Mother and Sonne of Scotl. be owt of their handes: euen so is it aboue all most necessarie for their prin∣cipall end, hauing once fingered the Childe (as they haue alreadie the mother,) to make an end of yow and your Cosin the Queene of Scotland, whether the Child shal liue or not: since vndre him they are sure for a tyme whereas vndre neither of yow both, they finde them selues in the securitie they desire (lookeing howrelie when yow would charge them for stayning your honour, indangering your state, intangeling your realme with so manie forrain qwarrels of iniurie and reuenge) and not indu∣ring the feare and danger of being charged there∣with, doe prouide for their owne securitie, and finde no waie assured but your death or depriua∣tion when they haue once that Child in their handes. NOw that they haue brought to passe,IIII. that the religion is in debate, your person in contempt among the protestantes and hated of the puritaines, the Crowne in question, the people deuided, and the realme answerable for infinite iniuries done to nations adioyning: they must dispatche your heighnes by preuen∣tion, least yow might in good time charge them, (if God so moue yow, or your deerest frin∣des
aduise yow) vpon so iuste and important causes. NOw that they haue brought to passe byV. pretense of parlement, that Titles of succession must no more be questioned, the time is nowe ripe, by remouing the present possessor, to intrude their newe Succession, whiche they cannot establishe whiles yow suruiue. VVHere as thir ambition is to reigne,VI. and ambition abideth not her due tyme nor the feare of falling: and they alrea∣die haue for their priuat aduancement not on∣lie contriued the diuerting of the Crowne from that course in whiche the lawes haue establis∣hed it, but also circumuented yow, indangered your state, steined your honour, oppressed your people, impouerished your realme, and procured infinite perilles to depend ouer all: who maie doubt but that they make their accompt that it is nowe timelie furder to procede, and to satisfie their ambition by your death or depri∣uation. HAuing brought your Heighnesse to this,VII. that neither by Child of your owne bo∣die, nor by any heire knowne they stand inThe Q. of Scotl. D. of Norf. S. N. Throgm. feare of any Successor: and hauing also plucked of, your principall feathers by taking from yow
your trustie defences, and deerest frindes, there lieth now nothing in their waie, but when they list they maie make yow awaie, that by setting vp whome thei liste, they maie raigne securelie. NOw that they see the world doth perceaueVIII. the deepe discontentation they haue in their hartes of the maner of your gouernement, for which they terme yow willfull, vnruly, and in matters of most weight wote not where to haue yow▪ which by passions blustered owt in secret by them to some frindes, are now diuulgued to the realm: fearing at your handes due correctiō for such traiterous ingratitude, they think it high time to assure themselues of yow, and ac∣compt it consciēce to bannish womens regiment, and a necessarie polecie to sett vpp a Child, vndre whom their deuises (be they neuer so wicked) maie haue more quick and speedie execution. which childe is moste likely to be first the yong Prince of Scotl. though not to raigne for any long tyme, but only that vnder that colour, the Crowne may in the eyes and iugements of the world, descende more colourablely vppon that other childe the issue of Suff. for, the La. Marg. Lineux iuste interest, they will not acknoledge. HAuing vndre your fauour climed to theIX. toppe of worldlie felicitie, atteyned to in∣finit treasures by pilling, polling and lottering
your subiectes and Realm, by briberie, piracie and iniustice euerie waie, it can not now possiblie stand with their security nor final purpose, to lend yow long life or to suffre yow to ouer liue them selfes. And being they both of good yeres and the one so owglie and deformed that he hath alreadie one foote in his graue, your Heigh. maie easelie make accompt of the short tearme of life that your selfe holdeth by: which may in no condition be longer then theirs, least their going awaie before yow and the leauing vnperfited the final execution of their dessignmentes: the prouision for their posteritie and the deriuing the Crowne to the yssue of Suff. might by your conuersion and reconciliation to the Church and Princes your neighbours (which they feare merueylouslie in your Nature and wisedom) might I saie all fall to the grownd, and their corrupt gaines come to answerre in parte, the detriments done to yow and your Realme: as of some of their Comperes in France and Flandres, they haue seene allready come to passe. NOw that they haue drawen vpon yow theX. terrible sentence of Excommunication, brought yow to iniurye all the Princes of the world, and with three of the chiefest to haue implacable quarell: and thereby inuolued both yow and your Realm in manifest danger of for∣rein inuasion: their shrewd heds perceaue, yow
haue no better remedie nor redier shift, then toThe Q. of Scotl. the principall piller of the Q. securi∣tie. reconcile vnto your fauour the Qu. of Scotl. a∣gaine: and consequentlie by a reformation in reli∣gion to satisfie your neighbours abroad. which to preuent, they haue resolued first her death, and shortlie after your owne: least yow might be the reuenger of hers, whom they can not induce yow to hate, so deepely as they would. NOw that they haue brought both yow andXI. the realm into the perils aforesaid, and so long dalied yow forth from bestowing your, selfe in mariage, and so often mocked the Princes abroad, that such kinde of offres be now con∣tempned, they haue for them selfes no bettre shift now lefte, then (when they be suer of the Prince of Scotl.) first to dispatch both yow and your Cosin his Mother: and setting the Crowne vpon one of the children, then by a treatie for mariage with one of the great kinges, to make their owne peace, and to winn them the amitie of the one or the other. TO cōclude Madā: Now that they haue hea∣pedXII. vpon yow and your Realm those huge heapes of dangers and quarrells, importable for any of both to sustaine: they finde none so suer nor speedie remedie for their owne securitie, as to worke your death or depriuation, that those quarells maie die and be buried with your per∣son,
and them selfes become free from all deser∣ued punishment, by charging yow with their wicked gouernment  making their suer recke∣ning, by sending of yow to your graue, they lapp vpp in your shrowding sheete, the principall subiect of all forrein quarrells, and by your death to yeald satisfaction of all forrein desire of re∣uenge. ABuse not your selfe for gods loue, with the fallible opinion and decea∣ueable confidence in these mens honesties, because yow haue made them of naught, but resort yow to the examples, yea rather to the experience of the insolencie, contēpt and odious ingratitude of base persons ex∣cessiuely benefited: and make not your selfe to be annombred among the infortunat, whom, others perils could not make warie. This time nor place admitteth not the alle∣gation of manie: let these few examples therefore suffise, which our vnhappie daies haue brought to light, and finished with in the time of your owne memorie. Yf in France ambition made the late Ad∣mirall not only to determine, but by words also to threaten the vtter ruine of the whole howse of Valloyes (which had so la∣tely exalted his familie from naught) for not satisfying his appetite in the support
of his faction: if in Scotl. the force of the same dyd drawe the Earle Bothwell, not onlie from his dutiful fidelitie largelie testi∣fied to the Q. and her Mother in their seue∣rall distresses, but also so farr forced him: as not contayning him selfe within the limits of common crimes, drew him to excede in such horror of treason, as the hart nor face of anie reasonable creature (other then of a verie spirite incarnat) could euer haue in∣dured to conceaue, or once to sustaine the dissembled countenāce of so vyle a minde: if there also, the insatiable appetit of that humour, and the impatient feare of falling: dyd draw the Earle of murrey from all bonds of nature, honour, and gratuitie to∣wardes his souereigne and Sister, and to contriue such terrible treasons against her, as time hath now reuealed, to haue bene so deepe, and so diuelishlie compassed, as pas∣sed almost all humane invention: yea if also the violence of that pestiferus humor hath bene such, as in some other place hath drawen the soon, to forget all regarde of nature, dutie, or other bond towardes his owne Father: if your Heigh. I saie haue seene these experiences in euerie contrey adioygning with in the late yeres of your owne reigne; shall not these suffise to ad∣monish one of your wisedom to beware
of that partial and blinde affection, where∣with it seemeth yow are bewitched (as it were) to hold and accompt the verie con∣triuers of your confusion, for persons priui∣leged and exempted from the common in∣fection that hath corrupted all their confe∣derates in euerie contrey befides? namely where the principal of these. 2. your con∣spirators smacked so deepely therof many yeres agoe, that he ioyned him selfe full vngratefully with the aduersaries, to the ouerthrow of his own master, his maker and aduancer? And where euerie free and vnaffected sight doth alreadie manifestlie discouer the selfe qualities and like hu∣mors of inordinat ambition, impatient feare of declining, grutching murmour, and mislike of your fainte supporting their faction, and a generall repininge werinesse of your yooke and regiment to haue of a good time rancklie possessed the hartes of these Coniurators against yow, and your howse: how blinde must he be that dis∣cernith lesse to depend iminentlie ouer iow, and to be nighe hand to fall grea∣uouslie vpon yow, then is alreadie seen by your mens mates to haue bene con∣triued and intended against all the Princes of the contreys about yow. which, if after this Gods gratiouse admonition, and faith
full frindes counsell, yow shall not yet preuent and prouide for, but suffre to fall on yow, yow shall with the destruction of your body, burie also your fame of all prouidence and wisedom; and remaine condempned among the infortunat, and forsaken by God as wanting all grace, and power to heare, or to see that towardes your selfe, which euerie man beheld, and yow were forwarned of. Your Heigh. is of deeper consideration then to iudge that this so open a detection of their treasons against you and the crow∣ne, coulde lacke sufficient proofes, if tyme dyd serue to plead their persons guiltie. And their wisdomes can smell owt, that their secret dealinges could not thus farre come to light, but by somme whiche some tymes sit at their elbowes, and for feare of personall perill, smothelie sooth their mischeuous meaninges for the tyme, and after, for dutye to their contrey, and loue to your person, discouer them to o∣thers that be in saffer place to publishe the same. Yf they be not guiltie of contriued treasons against your H. why then by such fearefull and frawdulent meanes, keepe
they from your knowledge the Treatise and Table of treasons which long sithens came to their handes by moe wayes then one? Yf they can cleere them selfes to be trewe men to the Crowne, why then doe they by al possible meanes imbarre the comming to sight of suche bookes whiche set forth to the worlde the next most lawfull and right heire apparant the Queene of Scotl. but because they be guil∣tie of the one, and can not cleare them selfes in the other, their beste securitie and assurance (as yow haue herde) muste be, to make yow sewre, and to gett your heires into their handes: against the pole∣cie and presidentes of all Princes secu∣ritie. It is an historicall obseruation that there is no suretie in suspected frindshippe, nor truste in conceaued treason. Yf these trai∣tors lacked either witt, will, or power to bring to passe their deuised pourpos, yow might the lesse feare their fatale ma∣lice. VVhat vngratious wits they haue, their former plats so coninglie caste, de∣clare. And who may thincke that traite∣rous myndes aspiring to the heighest, can want ready willes, to finishe their forward attemptes?
As for power (take awaye that they be not absolute) it is sufficient to doe whatsoeuer. For be they not mightie in moneys, trea∣sures and allies? sit they not at the sterne? be they not in place to pen their own Commissions? haue they not all in their own haudes that may aduance their in∣tended attemptes? what lacke they but that they looke when tyme will so tem∣pre, as to set forward their terrible trage∣dies wich muste ende with the Dispatche of 3. Princes, the Q. of Scotl. her Soon, and your selfe, to the vttre con∣fusion and ruine of a flo∣rishing Realme.
