24018 99853588 18978
¶The historie of Italie, a boke excedyng profitable to be redde: Because it in∣treateth of the astate of many and diuers common weales, how thei haue ben, & now be gouer∣ned. ANNO DOMI∣NI. M. D. XLIX. TB.
The contentes of this boke. THe descripcion of Italie. ¶Of the astate of Italie in generall. ¶Abbrigement of the astate of Italie, from the beginnyng vntill the Romaine empire was vtterly diuided. ¶The descripcion of Rome, and of the meruailouse an∣tiquitees there. ¶Of the present astate of Rome. ¶Abbrigement of the liues of the Romaine bishoppes. ¶The Uenetian astate: and the order of their common weale. ¶The descripcion of Naples. ¶The Historie of Naples. ¶The descripcion of Florence. ¶The astate of Florence. ¶The descripcion of Genoa. ¶The astate of Genoa. ¶The descripcion of Millayne. ¶The astate of Millayne. ¶The astate of Mantua. ¶The astate of Ferrara. ¶The astate of Placentia and Parma. ¶The astate of Urbine.
¶To the right honourable and mine especiall good lorde, Iohn̄ Erle of Warrewike, Uisconte Lisle, knight of the most noble ordre of the Gar∣ter, lorde great chambrelaine, and highe admyrall of Englande. THough many wise and lerned men haue so sub∣stancially set foorth the in∣finite cōmodities that grow of the readyng of histories, that my wittes can not at∣teigne to a small part of the due commendacion therof: Yet seeyng my trauaile at this present hath been to publishe vnto our owne nacion in our mother tounge the dooynges of straungers, and specially of the Italian nacion, whiche semeth to flou∣risshe in ciuilitee moste of all other at this daie: me thought I coulde no lesse dooe for the incourageyng of theim that shall take this boke in hande, than partely reherse what profite thei maie gather by trauailyng therin. First thei shall see, vpon what little beginnyng many great astates haue risen, and how thei that haue had the power to rule, by vsyng their auctoritees well and prudently, haue merited immortall fame of honour and preise: and by vsyng tyrannie and ill gouernaunce, haue contrariwise borne eternall sklaunder and shame. It encourageth the vertuouse men, by the exaumples that thei reade, to encreace in vertue and nobilitee: and
sheweth the viciouse, what the fruite of their abuses are, and how naughtie dooynges haue moste commonly naughtie endyng. It moueth the noble prince to main∣teigne peace and iustice: and sheweth the tyrane, what plagues folow of warre and crueltee: and that though his tyrannie passe vnplagued in this worlde (whiche hapneth seldome) yet shall his name be hated and cur∣sed in all ages and amongest all nacions, as Nero, He∣liogabalus and suche other princes be. It sheweth also, howe mutable fortune is, and howe that, whiche hath been gotten with extreeme peines, vnmeasurable expences, and vnreasonable effusion of bloudde, hath ben loste in a moment: and that commonly he that hath conquered most in warre, at the beste is yet a loser: and finally, that of diuision, either amongest the nobilitee or the commons, there ensueth vtter destruction of real∣mes, and subuercion of common wealthes: Wherun∣to there is none so great a minister as the alteracion of auncient lawes and customes. ¶All these thynges, with infinite moe, histories dooe so set foorth to the eies of princes (if thei reade theim well) that their hertes shalbe more enclined with peace and iustice to enriche their subiectes, and therby procure theim selfes glorie, than by murtheryng of innocentes, rauishyng of honest wiues and maidens, burnyng, spoi∣lyng and destruction of countreis (whiche are the effe∣ctes of warre) to make theim selfes conquerours of that thei can not longe enioie. For surely, more preise shall that prince deserue, that leaueth his realme quiete and welthie vnto his successour, than he that for the con∣quest of other countreis enpouerissheth and disturbeth his owne.
¶And because this little woorke declareth bothe these extremitees, as well what a numbre of beautifull citees haue been edified, and what great countreis haue been enriched by peace and concorde, as also how many good∣ly thynges and wonderfull regions haue been destroied by striefe and warre: Therfore woulde I wishe all noble men to reade it, to the ende thei maie hereof take occasion so honourablie to spende their life time, that after their death, thei maie shine in fame for euer. ¶And knowyng your lordshippe for your excellent fea∣tes of chiualrie, bothe by sea and lande, to be suche a one as is hable to iudge, whether mine opinion be good or not, like as your wonderfull knowlage in ciuile or∣ders hath made you woorthie to be no lesse esteemed ex∣cellent in counsaile, than as you haue been tried a moste valiaunt capitaine in the warres: I therfore coulde finde none, to whom I might so woorthily dedicate my little trauaile as to you: Most humblie bese∣chyng your lordeship to accepte it at my poore handes, as the giefte of him that wisheth you all health and honour. At Lon∣don the .xx. daie of Septem∣ber. 1549. Your good lordeshippes most hum∣ble at commaundement, William Thomas.
¶The descripcion of Italie. ITalie conteigneth in length from Augusta Pre∣toria vnto Otranto .1020. miles: and in breadth from the riuer Varo in Prouance, to the riuer Arsia in Friuli (whiche is the brodest place) 410. miles: and in the na∣rowe places, as frome the mouthe of Pescara to the mouthe of Tyber .126. miles.The circuit of Italie. So that to compasse it by sea from Varo to Arsia, are .3038. miles, whiche with the .410. miles by lande, maketh the whole circuite to be .3448. miles. Thus it appeareth, that it is al∣most an ilande, closed on the east side with the sea Adri∣aticum, and on the southe and weast with the sea Tir∣rhenum, whiche is a parte of the great sea Mediterra∣neum. And from the North it hath the mightiest moun∣taines of all Europe called Alpes, whiche diuideth it from all other regions. ¶The facion (as Plinie descriueth it) is like vnto an oken leefe with the stalke:The facion of Italie. but it endeth in maner of the Amazones targatte. ¶It hath a verie temperate and wholesome ayre,Tempera∣ture of I∣talie. fer∣tile fieldes, pleasaunt hilles, batfull pastures, shadow∣yng wooddes, plentie of all kinde of trees and groues, haboundaunce of corne, vines, and oliues: good wouli{is},
fayre cattaile, and so many springes, fountaines, lakes, riuers, and hauens, that it is an open lappe to receiue the trade of all countreys: and as it were to offre all men helpe it semeth willingly to put it selfe into the sea. ¶It lieth betwene the .vi. houre and the first of the winter in maner halfe waie betweene the Equinoctiall and the Pole:The site of Italie. betwene (I saie) the heate of the sonne and the colde of the northe. For the citee of Bono∣nia (where the great resorte of scholers from all naci∣ons is wonte to be) standeth almost in the hert of Ita∣lie, and hath in his eleuacion .44. degrees: so that di∣uidyng the quarter from the Equinoctiall to the Se∣ptentrion into .90. accordyng to the rule of Cosmogra∣phie, and takyng the one halfe therof, whiche is .45. the difference is little, to proue that Italie is in the middest betwene the extremitees of heate and colde. And seyng than, that temperature is it that most of all other com∣forteth, nourissheth and mainteineth nature: it must ne∣des folow, that this beyng one of the moste indifferent regions, must be verie pleasant delicate and aboundant. ¶This little discourse I haue made to the entent the wise maie the better vnderstande the cause of those thin∣ges, that to my purpose I must hereafter treate vpon. ¶The commoditees of Italie. IF I shoulde goe about to descriue vnto you perticu∣lerly how commodious the countrey is, aswell to the trafficque of theim that liue by merchaundise, as to the good liefe of theim that loue theyr rest, it should be
enough alone to occupie an whole volume, but because I woulde seeme no more tediouse in this, than I couet to dooe in all the reste, I saie: ¶Fyrst for merchaundise,Merchan∣dise. Italie as an hert or knotte of these partes on our halfe of the world, is the principall place of recourse of all nacions that occupie any thyng of importaunce farre from home. For like as with vs in Englande the most merchauntes of the realme resort to London, to vtter theyr owne wares, and to bie suche other as make for theyr purposes: euen so thei of Frāce, of Spaine, of Germanie, and of all other westerlie pla∣ces, that couet the merchaundise of Soria, Aegypt, Cy∣prus, Candia, Constantinopol', and those other easterly partes, as iewell{is}, drugges, spices, perfumes, silkes, cotton, suger, malmeseis, and other lyke: resorte moste commonly into Italie with theyr woulles, clothes, lin∣nen, leather, metalles and suche other, to Genoa, My∣laine, Venice, Ancona, Missena, Naples, or to some of those places, whereas trafficque is vsed: and there metyng with Iewes, Turkes, Grekes, Moores and o∣ther easterly merchauntes, sellyng the tone thei bie the other. ¶Than for pleasure, he that hath meane to paie for that he taketh,Pleasures▪ shall haue in Italie what he can reaso∣nablie desire: fine breadde, singler good wynes bothe stronge and small, flesshe of all sortes bothe wilde and tame, foule of all kindes bothe of water and lande, fishe as well of the sea as of the fresshe water, but specially suche plentie of delicate fruites, as would make a man leaue flesshe, foule and fisshe to eate theim: namely in the sommer. I meane the Melons, Pepons, Pomegra∣nett{is},
Orenges, Lymmans, Citrous, and sweete grapes: besides theyr figges, apples, peares, peaches, plom∣mes and oliues, with a thousande other of that sorte. And it is not to be meruailed at, though (as the ame goeth) the Italian be a small eater of flesshe. For though here before I haue commended the temperature of Italy to be comparable with any other countrei: yet must you vnderstand,Feedyng in Italie. that in sommer the sonne is some∣what feruent, and in tyme of that heate, the lightnesse of those sweete fresshe fruites is better to be digested, than the heauinesse of flesshe or fisshe, whiche woulde not there be so lightly digested. As I my selfe haue proued, that before time could in maner brooke no fruite, and yet after I had been a while in Italie. I fell so in loue withall▪ that as longe as I was there, I desyred no meate more: because me thought nothyng more whole∣some, specially in sommer. And all be it, the heate be (as I haue saied) somewhat feruent, yet it excedeth not so muche of the hotest, as the winter colde is tempe∣rate at the coldest. For at the most the colde there en∣dureth not .iii. monethes of the .xii and some yeres in maner you shall feele no winter at all. ¶These rehersed commoditees, with infinite other, to longe here to treate of,Resort of straungers into Italy. together with the louyng com∣panie of the Italians (who in maner make more of straungers than of their owne) dooe cause the infinite resorte of all nacions that continually is seen there. And I thinke verilie, that in one region of all the worlde againe, are not halfe so many straungers as in Italie: specially of gentilmen, whose resorte thither is princi∣pallie vnder pretence of studie. For there are diuerse
famouse citees, that be priuileged with great libertees for all scholers that come: as Padoa, Bononia, Pauia, Ferrara, Pisa, and others: in euery one of the whiche, are excellente learned men, waged for the readyng of philosophie, of the ciuile lawes, and of all the liberall sciences. Besid{is} excellent maisters of musicke to syng and plaie on all maner of instrumentes, and the beste maisters of fence at all weapons that can be founde. So that all kyndes of vertue maie there be learned: and therfore are those places accordyngly furnisshed: not of suche studentes alone, as moste commonly are brought vp in our vniuersitees (meane mens children set to schole in hoe to liue vpon hyred learnyng) but for the more parte of noble mens sonnes, and of the best gentilmen: that studie more for knowlage and pleasure, than for curiositee or luker. For lightly there passeth no shrof∣tide without rennyng at the tilte, tourneiyng, fighting at the barriers, and other like feates of armes, handled and furnisshed after the best sorte: the greatest dooers wherof are scholers. ¶This last wynter liyng in Padoa, with diligent ser∣che I learned, that the noumbre of scholers there was little lesse than fiftene hundreth: wherof I dare saie, a thousande at the lest were gentilmen. Of the Italian customes and nature. THe inheritaunce of landes in Italie goeth by Ga∣uell kinde, that is to wete, one brother as good parte as an other. So that if a Conte, (whiche
is as muche to saie as an Erle) haue .xx. sonnes, euery one of theim is called Conte, and the youngest hath as good parte in his fathers landes and goodes, as the eldest: vnlesse it be in the astates of princes, as of Man∣tua, Ferrara, Vrbino, and suche others, whiche theldest euermore enioyeth. And by this meane it is come to passe, that in processe of time, with chaunge from welth to pouertee, there be diuers Erles and Marqueses with out lande or goodes, reteignyng neuerthelesse the glorie of that name to theim and theirs for euer. Gentilmen¶But to speake of the gentilmen, that haue whereof woorshipfully to liue (whiche for the moste parte dooe commonly professe armes) me seemeth, that none other nacion is lyke theim in maiestee. ¶Fyrst, to reherse the conformitee of speeche that is a∣mongest theim selfes (consideryng what a noumbre of diuersitees they haue in theyr tounge) it is a merualle, that in maner all gentilmen dooe speake the courtisane. For notwithstandyng that betwene the Florentine and Uenetian is great diuersitee in speeche, as with vs be∣twene a Londoner and a Yorkeshyreman, and likewyse betwene the Mylainese and the Romaine, the Napoli∣tane and the Genouese: yet by the tounge you shall not lyghtlie discerne of what parte of the countreye any gentilman is, because that beeyng children they are brought vp in the courtisane onely. And generally (a few citees excepted) in maners and condicions they are no lesse agreable than in theyr speeche: so honourable, so courteise, so prudente, and so graue withall, that it oulde seeme eche one of theim to haue had a princely bringyng vp. To his superiour obedient, to his e∣quall
humble, and to his inferiour gentill and courteise, amiable to a straunger, and desyrous with courtesie to winne his loue. ¶I graunt, that in the expense or loe of his money for a straunger he is ware, and woull be at no more cost than he is sure either to saue by, or to haue thanke for: wherin I rather can commende hym than otherwise. But this is out of doubt, a straunger can not be better entreteigned, nor more honourablie entreated than a∣mongest the Italians. ¶Thei are very modest in their apparaile, fine in trim∣myng of theyr houses, and excedyng nete at theyr table. But aboue all other they are sobre of speeche, enemies of ill reporte, and so tendre ouer their owne good name (whiche they call theyr honour) that who so euer spea∣keth ill of one of theim, shall die for it, if the partie sklaundered maie know it, and finde tyme and place to doe it. Wherof there is a vse growen amongest theim, that few gentilmen goe abroade vnarmed. And though some in this case dooe discommende theim, yet mine o∣pinion dooeth rather allow than blame theim. For the feare of suche daungers maketh men so ware of theyr tounges, that a man maie goe .xx. yeres through Ita∣lie without findyng reproche or villanie, vnlesse he pro∣uoke it hym selfe. ¶And if one gentilman happen to defame an other, many tymes the defamed maketh his defiaunce by a writte called Cartello, and openly chalengeth the de∣famer to fight in campe: so that there are seen some∣tyme woorthy trialles betwene theim. ¶And it is true, that many yeres agoe, suche contenci∣on
hath growen amongest theim, that almost the whole nacion hath been diuided into parttakynges, as Guelfi and Ghibellini: imperiall and frenche, with other lyke: whiche hath been occasion of muche manslaughter, and consequentlie of theyr foresaied continuall vse in wea∣ryng of armure. But at this daie those open conten∣cions are wonderfully abated, whether it procede of werinesse or of wysedome I can not tell. ¶Finally in one thyng I can singlerly commend them, that they woull not lightly meddle with other mens mattiers, and that whan they heare ill report, thei doe theyr best to couer the sklaunder, saiyng that no man li∣ueth without fault: or with some other suche reason. But like as I coulde recken in the Italians commenda∣cion many thynges more than are here rehersed▪ euen so on the other side if I were disposed to speake of vice, I might happen to finde a noumbre as ill as in any other men: whiche are better vntouched than spoken of. For wheras temperance, modestie, and other ciuile vertues excell in the numbre of the Italian nobilitee, more than in the nobilitee of any other nacion that I knowe: so vndoubtedly the fleshely appetite with vnnaturall heate and other thynges in theim that be viciouse, dooe passe all the termes of reason or honestie. ¶And yet it is not to be forgotten, that these gentilmen generally professe three thynges: the fyrst is armes, to mainteigne withall his honour: the seconde is loue, to shew him selfe gentill and not cruell of nature: and the thyrde is learnyng, to be hable to know, to vnderstand, and to vtter his opinion in mattiers of weight. Merchan∣tes.¶The principall merchaunt{is} are for the most part gen∣tilmen.
For whan there be of one house .iii. or .iiii. bretherne: lightly one or two of theim dispose them sel∣fes to merchaundise. And if they happen not to diuide theyr fathers patrimonie and substaunce (as many ty∣mes thei dooe not) than dooe the merchauntes trauaile aswell for the wealth of theyr bretherne as theyr owne: for all renneth in common, be it gaine or losse. In deede theyr outwarde profession agreeth not with the gentilmen before rehersed. For they carie nother wea∣pon nor armure, but dooe what thei can to liue in peace: not onely serching the trades of all countreis with their merchaundise, but also occupiyng at home the most sub∣stanciall fermes and possessions by theyr factours, as hereafter more plainely it foloweth. And because these merchauntes haue nothyng the lesse reputacion of nobi∣litee, for theyr trade of merchaundise, therfore it folow∣eth that there be suche numbres of wealthy men in that countrei, as the like is not to be founde any other where. For in diuerse citees of Italie it is no meruaile to see .xx. persones in a citee woorthe .100000. crownes a peece and vpward{is}. ¶As for the artificers I haue nothyng to saie:Artificers. sauyng that for the most part thei are the finest woorkemen and best inuentours of all other, and are so well paied for it, that many of theim liue as well as they that haue stan∣dyng liuinges: and grow sometimes vnto great wealth and richesse, but not lightly in two or thre descentes vn∣to any reputacion of nobilitee. ¶The housbandmen are of all handes oppressed.Husband∣men. For in the countrey there dwelleth no man of substaunce. All the gentilmen and other that are wealthy, dwell in
the walled citees and townes: leauyng the villaiges, fieldes and pastures in theyr tenauntes handes, not to ferme at certaine rent as we dooe in Englande, but to the halfes, or to the thyrde of all graine and fruite as the grounde is fertile or baraine. And the poore te∣naunt is bounde to till, sow and housbande the ground at his owne cost and charge. So that the landelord{is} parte cometh clere without disbursyng of a penie. And at the haruest and vintaige the landelorde sendeth a man of his for his parte, who fyrste taketh his choise of the graine, wine, oyle, and fruite: and than leaueth the reste to the tenaunt as his parte ariseth to. And many tymes if the landelorde be cruell, whan he can not sell his thynges at his owne price, than forceth he his tenaunt to vtter it for hym: and to paie for it, not as he can sell it, but as the landelorde woull. By reason wherof the poore man is brought so low, that he is not hable sometyme to finde breade of Zorgo (a verie vile graine) to feede his poore children withall. ¶And because I haue here named Zorgo, me thinketh it meete to tell, that in Italie groweth many sortes of graine, as this Zorgo, Meglio, Segala, and .xx. suche other, whiche can not be expressed by any englishe na∣mes, because in Englande there is no kynde of suche graine. All whiche serue to make course breadde for the poore people, and also for the staple of vitailes in stronge holdes. For the breadde made therof (speci∣ally of Meglio) woull endure a noumbre of yeres vn∣corrupted. And in like maner thei haue certaine kin∣des of other graine, that in generall are called Legumi (as we were wonte to call peasen, lenten stuffe) wher∣of
they vse all the yere longe to make theyr potages. ¶Finally in the villages are many faire houses made onely for the owners passetime against the heate of the sommer. For than dooe thei habandon the citees and goe vnto those houses for a moneth two or three, where vnder the fresshe herbers, hedges and boowes, amongest the delicate fruites they triumph in as muche pleasure as maie be imagined. And for the most parte eche man hath his make: with some instrument{is} of musicke, and suche other thynges as serue for his recreacion. And if euer the tenaunt haue good daie, than lycketh he his lippes of his maisters leauynges. As for the women,Women. Some be wonders gaie, And some goe as they maie. Some at libertee dooe swymme a flot, And some woulde faine but they can not. Some be meerie, I wote well why, And some begile the housbande, with finger in the eie. Some be maried against theyr will, And therfore some abyde MAIDENS still. In effect they are women all, Euer haue been and euer shall. ¶But in good earnest the gentilwomen generally, for gorgeouse atyre, apparaile and iewelles, excede (I thynke) all other women of our knowen worlde. I meane as well the courtisanes as the maried women. For in some places of Italie, speciallie where churche∣men doe reigne: you shall finde of that sorte of women in riche apparaill, in furniture of householde, in seruice, in horse and hackeney, and in all thynges that apper∣teyne
to a delicate Ladie, so well furnisshed, that to see one of theim vnknowynglie, he shoulde seeme rather of the qualitee of a princesse, than of a common woman. But because I haue to speake hereafter in perticuler, I woull forbeare to treate any further of theym in this place. Of the states of Italie. THe greatest prince of dominion there at this pre∣sent is Charles the .v. emperour of Almaine, who for his part hath the realme of Naples and the Duchie of Mylaine: whiche realme is diuided into .8. regions, and to the entent the readers maie the better be satisfied, I haue set foorth as well the auncient names of those regions, as the present. The realme of Naples. ¶The present names. ¶The auncient. Parte of Campagnia di Roma Maremma. Latium. Terra di Lauoro. Campania. Principato. Picentini. Basilicata. Lucania. Calabria Brutij. Grecia magna. Puglia. terra d'otranto Salentini. Calabria antiqua. Iapigia. Mesapia. Puglia. Apulia Peucetia. Aetholia. Apulia Daunia.
Abruzzo Frentani. Peligni. Marrucini. Vestini. Precutij. Marsi. Valle Beneuentana. Samnites. As for that parte of the Duchie of Mylaine that the emperour hath, it lieth in Lumbardie aunciently called Gallia Cisalpina, for the most part on that side of the ri∣uer Pò, that was called Transpadana. The bisshop of Rome hath for his parte, the citee of Rome, with these countreys folowyng. ¶The present names. ¶The auncient. Parte of Campagnia. Maremma. Latium. Parte of Tuscane. Hetruria. The Duchie of Sposeti. Vmbria. Marca D' Ancona. Piceni. Romagnia. Flaminia. Emilia. The citee of Bononia.   The Uenetians for theyr parte haue the Citee of Ue∣nice with those townes in and about their marishe called La Contrada di Venetia, La Marca Triuigiana, and a great part of Lumbardy, aunciently called Gallia Cisal∣pina on the same side of the Pò, that was called Trans∣padana.
And parte of the countrey of Istria. The common wealthe of Genoa, haue the countrey about theim nowe called, Jf Genouesato and auncientlie Liguria. Tuscane, auncientlie called, Hetruria, is diuided into diuers dominions, wherof a small parte the bisshop of Rome hath, but the greatest is the Duke of Florence, who hath .vii. citees vnder him: And than there be two common wealthes, Siena and Lucca, whose territories are not great. The Duke of Ferrare hath parte of Romagnia, and parte of Lumbardie. The Duke of Mantua is all in Lumbardie. And the Duke of Urbine is betweene Marca d' An∣cona and Tuscane, whose people are called of Plinie Metaurensi. The Citees of Parma and Placentia in Lumbardie haue ben of late transposed from the churche vnto the astate of a Duchie, but nowe it is diuided agayne: as hereafter you shall perceiue. ¶Now here is to be noted, that euery perticuler prince and common wealthe of Italie, within his owne do∣minion, accompteth him selfe absolute lorde and kyng, and lyueth vpon the customes, taxes and tallaiges that he raiseth of his subiectes. For lightlie they haue littell or no landes at all of theyr owne. And gene∣rallie they procede all together by the ciuile lawes, and are so diligent in the administracion of iustice, specially against murderers and theues, that I thynke no coun∣trey more quiete than it: the realme of Naples, and some part of the Romaine territorie excepted, where ma∣ny
tymes happeneth muche robbyng by the waies. ¶An abbridgement of the state of I∣talie, from the beginnyng vntill the Ro∣maine empyre was vtterly diuided. AFter the generall floudde remaigned no moe but Noe, his .iii. soonnes and theyr wifes, betweene whom it shoulde seeme the whole worlde was diuided. Sem toke the easte parte, Cham, the southe, and Ia∣fet the weast. Some write, that Iafet was the same Ia∣nus that fyrst reigned in Italie, and some that Ianus was Iafettes soonne. But whether so it be, this Ianus was euer taken for father of the gods, and was peinted with two faces, either because he was father of two na∣cions, the Greekes and Italians, orels because the mo∣neth of Ianuarie (whiche hath two respect{is}, one to the beginnyng, and an other to the ende of the yeere) toke name of hym. While this Ianus reigned in Italie, Saturne beyng chased out of the realme of Candia by his soonne Iupiter, came in a maner naked vnto hym: and Ianus not onely receiued hym: But also gaue him the halfe of his dominion. For memorie wherof either of theim builded a citee to his owne name, that is to wete Ianicula and Saturnia, from Ianus vnto Nu∣mitor
were .xxi. kyng{is} of the latines, whose names, with the yeres of theyr reigne, hereafter folow. Ianus. Saturnus. Picus, beyng a great talker, was therfore feigned of the poetes to be conuerted into a pie. Faunus, was after woorshipped for a God of the wooddes. Latinus chaunged the name of his people from Lau∣rentini to Latini, and gaue his daughter Lauinia to E∣neas the Troiane, promised before vnto Turnus, sonne of kyng Daunus. These .v. kynges reigned about .200. yeres. Eneas maried the daughter of Latinus, and after his death, reigned .iii. yeres, and builded the citee La∣uinia. Ascanius, sonne of Eneas and of Creusa, kyng Pri∣amus  daughter, reigned .38. yeeres, and builded Alba longa, to the whiche he brought his fathers idoll{is} cal∣led the gods Penates, but they of theim selfes tourned, iii. tymes backe againe to Lauinia. Siluius Posthumius seconde son of Eneas, and be∣gotten on Lauinia, reigned .xxix. yeres. Of whom all the latine kynges afterwardes surnamed theim selfes Siluij: and after some authours he was father to Brutus, that first named this realme Britaine, and that slewe his owne father by mischaunce: whiche thyng Polido∣rus Virgilius doeth not graut. Eneas Siluius reigned .31. yeres. Latinus Siluius reigned .50. yeres. Alba Siluius, reigned .39 yeres, and builded Alba,
whiche he made his royall citee: but after it was de∣stroyed by Tullus Hostilius. Of that citee descended those that to this daie are called Albanesi, though they of their owne originall holde diuers opinions. Athis or Egyptus Siluius, reigned .24. yeres. Capi Siluius reigned .28. yeres. and builded the ci∣tee  of Capua. Carpentus reigned .13. yeres. Tyberinus reigned .9. yeres: of whom the riuer that renneth through Rome was first named Tyber: by rea∣son  he was drowned in the same: for before it was cal∣led Albula. Agrippa reigned .40. yeres. Remulus reigned .19. yeres, and was slaine with a  thunderbolte. Auentinus, reygned .38. yeres, and was slaine in  battaile on the hill Auentine, and buried there: wherof that hill toke his name, though Varro saieth that the ame proceded of the sight of certaine birdes. Proca reigned .23. yeres, and ordeined by testament, that of his two sonnes the one shoulde haue his realme, and the other his treasure, so that theldest toke the trea∣sure, and the yongest the dominion. Amulius reigned .24. yeres, and chased his elder bro∣ther  Numitor out of his realme, because he had learned by diuinacion, that one of his brothers descent shoulde expell him out of his astate. Wherefore he slewe his nephewe Sergistus, and put his neece Rhea into a religi∣on of virgines called Vestales, where at the ende of .vii. yere she was gotten with childe by an vnknowen man, and brought foorth at one burden two sonnes Romulus
and Remus with the whiche Amulius was so offended, that he not onely caused the mother to be buried quicke, accordyng to the law, but also commaunded the two children to be throwen into Tyber, so that thei were left on the banke, and there fed by a she woulfe (as the poe∣es feigne) but the trouth of the historie is, that they were founde by a shepherde, whose wife (for hir beauty and licenciouse liuing) was called Lupa: and so taken and nourished till thei grew vnto suche yeres, that they reuenged theim selfes, slew Amulius, and made theyr graundefather Numitor kyng. ¶Numitor reigned not fully one yere til Romulus and Remus together founde the meane to slea him, and than builded the citee of Rome.The edifi∣cacion of Rome. Before whiche tyme these Latine kynges had reigned in all about .620. yeres. ¶After the citee was builded, the two bretherne so contended for geuyng the name, and for the dominion, that Remus was slaine. ROmulus than reigned .38. yeres, and created .100. senatours for the rule of the common wealth.The fyrste king of the Romains. And within .4. yeres after the edificaciō of the citee, be∣cause the inhabitaunt{is} (beyng men assembled of diuers nacions) had no women to mainteine succession, he de∣uised sacrifices and plaies, to the whiche the Sabines aswell men as women resorted. So that by ordre of Romulus all the Sabine maydens, that came to the feast, were taken and maried amonge the Romaines. Whervpon the Sabines made warre against Romulus, and procured diuers other of theyr neighbours to dooe the like: but the Romaine preuailed against theim all. Finally as he perused his souldiers on a daie in a great
tempest, he was stricken with a thunderbolte: and be∣cause he could neuer more be hearde of, the Romaines i∣magined, he was ascended to heauen: and therfore wor∣shipped hym as a God. ¶Numa Pompilius reigned .41. yeres, and kepte the  citee in peace: and because the people thoroughe theyr passed continuall warres were become in maner wilde, he therfore entroduced religion and Gods among them: and so brought theym to ciuilitee. ¶Tullus Hostilius reigned .33. yeres, and conquered the  citee of Alba, whiche he rased to the earthe, and at last bothe he and his house were burned with thundre. ¶Ancus Martius reigned .xxiiii. yeres, and subdued  the Latines, with diuers other people about Rome. ¶Tarquinus Priscus reigned .37. yeeres, he doubled  the noumbre of senatours, and after he had vanquisshed the Sabines, entred triumphauntly into Rome: but at last he was slaine by the sonnes of Ancus Martius. ¶Seruius Tullius reigned .34. yeres, he ordeined first  the paiment of taxes, and therby founde that he had at that tyme in Rome fourescore and foure thousande per∣sons: and was slaine at last by the procurement of his sonne in law Tarquine the proude. ¶Lucius Tarquinius reigned .35. yeeres, he was the  fyrst that inuented prisons and tourmentes, and by rea∣son of the odious acte that his sonne didde in enforsyng the chast Lucretia, wife of Collatinus (who therefore slew hir selfe) he and all his were exiled out of Rome,The ende of the Ro∣maine kin∣ges. and the astate chaunged from kynges to Consules, after that the kynges had reigned aboue .230. yeres.Consules. ¶Than did the Romains ordeine two Consules remo∣ueable
from yere to yere. The fyrst were Lucius Iu∣nius Brutus, and Lucius Tarquinius Collatinus, hous∣bande to the dead Lucretia: vnder whiche ordre of Con∣sules (a few chaunges excepted) the Romaines main∣teigned theyr common wealth, well nere .500. yeres: and so preuailed in conquest{is} ouer the worlde, that none other monarchie is to be compared vnto theyrs: nor al∣most so many other woorthy men to be read of in all the histories written, as were founde in that citee for the time: as he that readeth Liuie shall see. But because the onely writyng of their names wold occupie a great∣ter part of my boke than should be requisite to my pur∣pose, I shall beseche all gentill readers to be contented that I referre theim ouer vnto the Romaine histories, whiche are common to the whole worlde. ¶Finally, about .700. yeres after the edificacion of Rome, and .47. before the comyng of Christ, the liber∣tee of the Romaine common wealth ceased, by reason that Iulius Caesar,The firste emperour. after the death of Pompeius, ha∣uyng quieted the ciuile contencions, tooke on hym by force the whole empyre, and had at his commaunde∣ment the greatest part of all the worlde. From whom vnto the tyme of Constantine the fyrste, there reigned, 38. emperours, as by theyr names hereafter it appea∣reth, and they all kepte theyr principall seate in Rome, as the head citee of theyr monarchie. IUlius Caesar, reigned in all not fullie .v. yeres. for Brutus and Cassius, with diuers other senatours con∣spired against him, and slew him in the senate house. ¶Octauianus Augustus reigned .56. yeres, and .vi. monethes, but the fyrst .xii. yeres he had Marcus Anto∣nius
& Lepidus as parteners of the empire, till by force, with consente of the senate, he subdued them bothe: and because he was happie in his enterprises, the senatours surnamed him Augustus. In the .42. yere of his reigne, our Sauiour Christe was borne. ¶Tyberius, son in lawe vnto Octauian, reigned .xxiii. yeres. In the .xviii. yere wherof Christe suffred his passion, and Pilate wrote vnto Tyberius of the miracles that he had doen, wherfore Tyberius commaunded he shoulde be woorshipped as a God: but the senatours woulde not graunte vnto it, because he had proclaymed it without theyr consentes. ¶Caius Caligula reigned .iii. yeres and .x. monethes. A  man of so yll liuyng, that he shamed not to companie flesshely with his owne sisters, and was flayne by his owne souldiours. ¶Claudius reigned .xiii. yeres and .viii. monethes, and  was poysoned. Some write, that the seconde yere of Claudius reigne, Peter the apostle came to Rome, and there continued .xxv. yeres after. Whiche other some doe disallow, groundyng them vpon Peters age, that reckenyng the time it was impossible Peter should liue so longe after Christes passion. ¶Neroe reigned .xiiii. yeres and .vii. monethes, whose  customes were odiouse to the whole worlde. He killed his mother, his wife, his maister Seneca, and dyuers other excellent men: so that his owne souldiers rebelled agaynste hym, and the whole Senate condemned him: wherfore he fledde, and because he coulde not escape, desperately slewe him selfe. ¶Galba Sergius reigned but .vii. monethes, by reason
that his next successour laie in waite for hym, and slew hym in the baines. ¶Otho Lucius reigned scarsely .iii. monethes, till he was ouercome by his nexte successour, so that throughe despayre he slew hym selfe. ¶Uitellius reigned but .vii. monethes. For the Ro∣maine armie, that than was in the east parties, elected Uespasian emperour. so that in despite therof Vitelli∣us chased Sabinus Uespasians brother with dyuers in∣to the capitoll, and there set fyre on theim. Wherfore Uespasian came streight to Rome, toke Vitellius, made hym to be drawen through the stretes, & hewen to peec{is}. ¶Uespasianus reigned .x, yeres, and reduced the custo∣mes and lawes into a better ordre amonge the people, whiche by Nero and the other emperours after hym were muche corrupted, and beganne the Amphitheater, now called Colliseo. And this was he that destroied Ierusalem in fulfillyng of Christes prophecie. ¶Titus, sonne to Uespasianus, reigned .ii. yeres and ii. monethes after his father, and was a verie graciouse prince. ¶Domitianus reigned .xv. yeres & .v. monethes. he was brother vnto Titus, but lyke Nero in condicions: for he delited in vnnatural vices, and in cruel death of men▪ so that he slew diuers senatours, persecuted lerned men and Christians, had ill successe in his warres, and final∣ly through conspiracie was slaine. ¶Nerua reigned one yere and .iiii. monethes, and was the fyrst straunger (that is to wete no Romaine borne) that euer was made emperour. ¶Traianus adopted son vnto Nerua and a Spaniarde
borne, reigned .xix. yeres and .vi. monethes: so benigne and courteise a prince, that for a prouerbe, men vsed to saie: God make the happier than August, and better than Trai∣ane. For beyng sometime aduertised of his friend{is}, that he vsed hym selfe to muche familiarly, he aunsweared, that a prince ought to be vnto his subiectes suche as thei should be to hym: and geuyng the swoorde to a Pretor, that he had newly made, he saied, vse this against mine enemies, but see the cause be iust: and if I deale vniust∣ly, than spare not me: He prospered muche in his war∣res, and greatly augmented the Romaine empyre. ¶Adrianus reigned .xxi. yeres, the most part in peace, for that was his studie. He was well learned, and yere∣ly wrote a pronosticacion: he builded a notable sepul∣chre: whervpon Castell. S. Angelo now standeth. And in his tyme there rose vppe a false Messias amonge the Iewes, whiche Adrian ouercame with muche a dooe. ¶Antonius Pius adopted sonne vnto Adrian reigned  xxiii. yeres, so gentill a prince, that all the worlde loued hym. For he was wont to saie: he had rather preserue one of his citesins, than destroie a .1000. of his enemies. ¶Marcus Aurelius Antonius reigned .xix. yeres and  one moueth. At the first his brother Lucius Verus was ioigned with him: but he liued not longe. This Mar∣cus was an excellent philosopher, wrote dyuers good bokes, & prospered in the warres, where finallie he died. ¶Commodus, son to Marcus Aurelius reigned .13. yeres  more lyke in condicions vnto Nero, than to his father: so that at last he was both poysoned and strangled. ¶Helius was surnamed Pertinax, because he toke the  empire on him in maner against his will, and reigned not
vi. monethes, but that his nexte successour caused hym to be slaine. ¶Didius Iulianus reigned not fully .vii. monethes: for his next successour came against hym, discoumfited his armie, toke hym, and caused hym to be beheaded. ¶Seuerus reigned .xviii. yeres, and restored muche the  Romaine empyre from the decaie that it was fallen in by his predecessours tyme, prospered muche in his war∣res, and died in the citee of Yorke: where (it is writ∣ten) he made a diche with a walle full of toures and bastilions from one sea to the other .132. miles of length. ¶Antonius Caracalla reigned .vi. yeres. he caused his brother Geta to be slayne, maried his stepmother Iulia, vsed muche tyrannie, and was at laste slaine by one of his owne souldiours. ¶Macrinus with his son reigned one yere, and were bothe slaine. ¶Uarius Heliogabalus reigned .iiii. yeres. so abhomi∣nable a man of liuyng, that after he had tried all the waies of carnall vice, he caused his owne membres to be cut of, in hope to chaunge his kynd. Wherfore his owne souldiours slewe him, drewe his carcasse a longe the stretes, tied a stoue about his necke, and so threw him into Tyber. ¶Alexander Seuerus reigned .xiii. yeres, full of vertue and good gouernaunce: but because he was seuere in punysshyng his souldyours offences, they rebelled a∣gaynst him, and slewe him. ¶Maximinus reigned .iii. yeres, and because he was created of the armie, without the Senatours consente, therfore did the senate ordeine newe Emperours against
hym, so that his owne souldiours slewe him. ¶Gordianus reigned .vi. yeres, and prospered muche in  his warres, but at last for lacke of vittayles, the armie rebelled against him, and elected his next successour em∣perour, by whose order Gordianus was slaine. ¶Iulius Philippus with his sonne reigned .vii. yeres  and were both christened. but finally they were slayne by procurement of theyr next successour. ¶Decius with his sonne reigned .ii. yeres and .iii. mo∣nethes, a great persecutour of the Christian religion. In his time the Gothes first assailed the Romayne empyre, and passed the riuer of Danubie, where Decius and his sonne mette with theym, and in the battayle were bothe slaine. ¶Uirius Gallus with his sonne reigned .ii, yeres and were slaine bothe of theyr owne army, as they were go∣yng  against Emilianus, that than woulde haue vsurped the empyre. ¶Ualerianus with his sonne Galienus, reigned .xv. ye∣res. But Valerian in the .v. yere was taken in battaile against Sapor kyng of Persia, who put out his eies, and vsed hym alwaies for his foote stoole whan he went to horsebacke: and Galienus became so viciouse, that he was faine to flee from Rome, and finally was slaine of his owne men. ¶Claudius elected by the senate, reigned one yere and ix. monethes, fought against the Gothes and Germai∣nes, and discoumfited bothe theyr powers: but he sicke∣ned shortly and died: Whervpon the armie elected his brother Quintilianus emperour, who within .xvii. daies after was slaine.
¶Aurelianus reigned .v. yeres and .vi. monethes, reco∣uered a noumbre of regions that his predecessours had lost, and was so prosperouse in the warres, that Eutro∣pius compareth hym vnto Alexander the great, or Cae∣sar. But at last he was slaine through crafte of one of his owne souldiours. ¶Tacitus reigned not fully .vi. monethes, but died of the feuer. And than was his brother Florianus elected, but he liued little more than .ii. monethes. ¶Probus reigned .vi. yeres .iiii. monethes, he reco∣uered  France, ouercame Saturninus and Proculus, that had made theim selfes emperoures, and finallie was slaine of his owne souldiours. ¶Carus with his two sonnes reigned .ii. yeres, and achieued diuers worthy enterprises. But his son Cari∣nus became so great a tyranne, and so viciouse withall, that he was compared to Nero, and at last slaine of his owne souldiours. ¶Dioclesianus reigned .xx. yeres, a great persecutour  of the Christian religion, because reason persuaded him, that whereas diuersitee of opinions continued, there coulde be no peace, but perill of commocions. And because he thought not him selfe able to rule the whole empire alone, he ioygned Maximianus with him: and either of theim made a deputie, Dioclesianus toke Ga∣lerius, and Maximianus toke Constantius. Finally whan thei had brought the empire to a good staie, Dio∣clesian and Maximian both renounced their astates and became priuate, though Maximian woulde gladly haue taken it vpon him again, to haue exalted his son Maxen∣tius. Wherfore his son in law Constantine caused him
to be slaine. ¶Galerius with Constantius reigned together .ii. ye∣res, and deuided the empire betwene theym: Galerius had the east parte, and Constantius the west. Constan∣tius, husbande to the Queene Eleyn, died in Yorke: and Galerius, beyng fallen sicke, slew him selfe. Neuer∣thelesse er he dyed Maxentius had gotten the Romaine souldiours called Pretoriani on his parte, and so vsur∣ped the name of emperour. Against whom Galerius first sent his capitaine Seuerus, and afterwardes Lici∣nius, but thei preuailed not, for Maxentius continued til the comyng of Constantine to Rome, who fought with him, and so discomfited him, that in fleing he was drow∣ned in Tyber. CONSTANTINVS the first, reduced the Ro∣maine astate to tranquillitee, and toke Licinius as compagnion in the empire: to whom he gaue his  owne syster in mariage. But as discorde is common amonge princes, so it happened, that Licinius rebelled against Constantine, and beyng ouercome, was deposed, and (as some write) slaine. So that Constantine rei∣gned alone, the tyme of whose reigne in all was .xxx. yeres and .x. monethes. He was conuerted to the Chri∣stian faieth by bisshoppe Siluester, vnto whom (as the  clergie holde opinion) he gaue his roiall seate in Rome, with auctoritee to vse all the imperiall rites and ho∣nours, and made him head of the Christian churche: and thervpon remoued his imperiall seate from Rome to Constantinople: whiche citee he than had newly reedifi∣ed. And though authours agree that he in deede buil∣ded Constantinople, and chaunged it from the auncient
name, which was Bizantium, yet many allow not Con∣stantines donacion to Siluester to be true: but saie, that some one of those bisshops of Rome longe after Silue∣ster, that vsurped the name of Peters successour, to en∣large theyr creadite and auctoritee, and to mainteigne theyr pompe,Donacion of Constā∣tine. inuented this donacion. So that though Constantine or his successours remoued theyr dwellyng from Rome to Constantinople, yet did thei neuerthelesse reteigne continually bothe the dominion of Rome and also the name of the Romaine empyre, vntill the takyng of Rome by Alaricus kynge of the Gothes, betweene whose comyng and the reigne of Constantine were these ix. emperours folowyng. COnstantinus, Constantius, and Constans sons of  the first Constantine, and had the empire deuided betwene thē. But Constantine, not contented with  his part, moued warre to Constans, and was slaine, and Constans at length was also slain by treason of one of his owne capitaines named Magnentius: who vsurped the empire, and after many battailes, beyng ouercome by Conctantius, at last slew him selfe. So that Con∣stantius remaigned emperour alone: the time of whose reigne, with his brethern togethers, was .xxiiii. yeres. ¶Iulianus surnamed Apostata, because beyng borne a  Christian he became a painem, reigned .ii. yeres. First he rebelled agaynste his vncle Constantius, that had made hym Caesar, and after his death (beyng made em∣perour) he persecuted cruelly the Christian religion, and at length was slaine in battaille against the Persians. ¶Imnus reigned .vii. monethes, restored the faieth  of Christe, and was constreigned of necessitee to graunt
vnto the kyng of Persia a great parte of Mesopotamia. Whiche was the fyrst tyme that euer the Romaines or any emperour consented to diminisshe the Romaine do∣minion. ¶Ualentinianus reigned .xii. yeres, and was a good  Christian. ¶Ualens reigned .iiii. yeres, fauoured muche the Ar∣tian  secte, and makyng warre agaynst the Gothes in  Thracia, was discoumfited, besieged, and burned. ¶Gratianus reigned .vi. yeres, and he with his sonne  were bothe slaine by treason of Maximus and Arboga∣stus theyr owne capitaynes. ¶Theodosius reigned .xi. yeres, subdued the Gothes, and discoumfited the traitours Maximus and Arboga∣stus, that vsurped the empyre: the fyrst of theim was slaine in the fielde, the other for despayre slewe hym selfe: and so he reuenged his predecessours death. ¶Archadius and Honorius reigned together .xiii. ye∣res, and than died Archadius. ¶Honorius after his brothers death reigned .xv. yeres. in whose time Alaric{us}, beforenamed king of the Gothes, prouoked through treason of Stillicon themperours ca∣pitaine a Uandale borne, tourned his armie, that than was goyng into Fraunce, against the emperour: and so ouerrennyng all Italie, at length besieged Rome, and  toke it rather by famine than force. And here beganne the manifest decaie of the Romaine empyre. For from this daie forward those Septentrinall nacions,Gothes. Uandales▪ Hunes Lumbar∣des. that is to wete, the Gothes, the Vandales, the Hunes and Lum∣bardes, with dyuers others, triumphed not onely ouer Italy, but also ouer Fraunce, Spaine and part of Af∣frike,
in suche wyse, that though many of theyr armies were discoumfited by dyuers of the emperours capitai∣nes and others: yet in processe of tyme they myngled theim selfes so with the other nacions, that they were no more knowen for strangers, but became Italians, Spa∣niardes, Frenchemen, and so foorth. ¶After this first destruction of Italy, with the takyng and spoylyng of Rome, the common people beganne to crie out, saiyng: that syns they lefte the woorshippyng of theyr auncient gods, and had embraced the new faith of Christ, all these afflictions through vengeance of the gods were fallen on theim: so that many doubted whe∣ther it were good to beleue or not. But surely, the remo∣uyng of the imperiall seate from Rome to Constantino∣ple, was the greatest occasion of the Romaine empyres decaie. For whan the emperours beganne to dwell in Greece,Diuidyng of the em∣pyre. and to leaue Italy, now and than diuidyng the empyre, one to rule in the orient, and an other in the oc∣cident, theyr auncient reputacion declined so muche, that theyr owne priuate capitaines enterprised many tymes not onely to rebell, but also to vsurpe the name of empe∣rours▪ By reason wherof it came to passe, that with∣in the space of .0. yeres there entred .vii. straunge kin∣ges into Italie, with so puissaunt armies, that thei put eyther the whole countrey, or at least a great part ther∣of to swoorde and fyre. FYrst Alaricus, kyng of the Gothes before named, after he had gotten Rome by suche famine, that ma∣ny  mothers did eate theyr owne children, ouerranne all Campaigne, the realme of Naples, and the lande of Brutij, and finally died in the citee of Cosenza.
¶After whom succeded his kynsman Athaulfus, that maried Placidia sister of the emperour Honorius, taken amonge the prisoners of Rome, so wise a woman, that whan hir husbande folowyng the trade of Alaricus, de∣termined to goe to Rome, and to rase it to the earthe, she with faire wordes dissuaded hym, and brought hym to accorde with hir brother, in suche wise that throughe the emperours procuremente, he with all his nacion of Gothes lefte Italie, and wente to conquere Spayne, where in the citee of Barcelona he was of his owne folke traiterously slaye. ¶The seconde was Attila kyng of the Hunes, who with  an infinite numbre of people entred into Italy, and put∣tyng  all to fyre and swoorde, passed ouer the countrey now called Lumbardie vnto the Appenine hill{is}, and as farre as Florence, which he rased to the erth, not with∣standyng it was yelded vnto hym without resistence. But finallie as he was goyng to Rome, entendyng to do likewise there: Leo the first, than bishop of the same, met him by the way, and so entreated him, that ceasyng from further crueltee, he withdrewe hym and all his into Hungarie, where not longe after he died of a so∣deine death. ¶Thirdlie Gensericus entred into Italie with a great  numbre of Vandales through this occasion, Theodosius the .ii. assigned his cousen Valentinian to rule the weast parte of the empire, who died within few yeres: so that Maximianus a Romayne, by force toke on him the occidentall empie, and maried Eudossa late wife of the same Valentinian: who disdeigning this Maximian, practised secretly with Gensericus then rei∣gning
in Affrica, and did so much, that he came to Rome, toke it by force, slewe Maximian, spoyled and burned the citee, and finallie for a worthy rewarde, led Eudossa and hir doughter prisoners with hym at his retourne into Affrike. ¶The fourthe was Biorgus kyng of the Alani, after∣wardes called Alemani, who entred into Italie by the  way of Trent, and ouerran all Istria, La Marca Triuisa∣na, and a great parte of Lumbardie, till at last by Seue∣rianus one of the emperours capitaines, he was fought withall, slaine and his host discomfited. ¶The .v. was Odoacrus kyng of the Eruli, that some∣time  were of the countrey of Valachia beyonde the riuer of Danubie, who with an infinite numbre of men twise in .xiiii. yere ouerran all Italie, callyng him selfe kyng therof, till the emperour Zenon sent Theodoricus kyng of the Gothes against him, who fought with him, dis∣comfited all his hoste, and finally slewe him. ¶The .vi. was this Theodoricus him selfe, who by the emperour Zenon was inuested kynge of Italie, in  the title wherof he caused muche slaughter and destru∣ction er euer he vanquisshed Odoacrus, but at laste he establisshed his royall seate in Rauenna, where he rei∣gned .25. yeres, and died of the fluxe, leauyng behynde hym a perpetuall fame of his worthynesse and vertue. ¶The .vii. was Gundebalde kynge of Gorgoyne, who with a great multytude passed the Alpes, ouerranne a  great parte of Lumbardie, and with an infinite numbre of prisoners, and a wonderfull pray of richesse returned into his owne countrey. ¶Nowe ye shall vnderstande, that after Theodoriche
was made kyng of Italy by the emperours consent, his doughter Amalasuntha folowed in succession of the do∣minion, who after the deathe of hir owne son Atalari∣cus, accepted hir cousin Theodatus for companion in hir kyngdome, but he rendryng yll for good, founde meanes not onely to exile hir, but also to make hir die: to the entent he myght reigne alone. Whiche vnkynde dea∣lyng so muche offended his owne Gothish nacion, that they elected an other kynge in Rome, named Vitigius, who shortlie caused Theodatus to be slaine by treason, and yet he hym selfe prospered not longe after. For er he had fullie reigned .v. yeres, Bellisarius, a capitaine sent by the emperour Iustinian, recouered all Italie, be∣sieged Vitigius in Rauenna, and finallie toke hym pri∣soner, and so led him to Constantinople. ¶Whan the Gothes had a litel renewed their strength, they made Totila theyr kyng, ouerranne all Italie, and  twise toke the citee of Rome by force, reignyng ouer the whole countrey .ix. yeres, till Narses, an other of the emperours capitaines came puissantly into Lumbardy, and in a sore foughten battaile slew Totila, with a great numbre of his nacion. ¶Notwithstandyng that discoumfiture the Gothes a  fresshe chose theim an other kyng, called Teia, a veraie valiaunt man, that wonderfully defended his domini∣on against the power of Narses: but finally in plaine battaile Narses slew hym, and so discoumfited his ar∣mie, that the Gothes were constreigned to submitte theim selfes vnto the emperours obeisaunce, and from that tyme foorthe (beyng borne of two or three descen∣es in Italy) they were no more knowen for Gothes,
but taken for Italians, and there ended the Gothishe name: Whiche from the comyng of Theodoricus, be∣fore named, had reigned in Italy the space of .72. yeres. ¶A meruailouse mattier to see the instabilitee of these worldely thynges: that the Romaine empyre, whiche so many yeres before had triumphed in richesse & welth ouer the whole worlde, should now be subiecte vnto all calamitee and affliction. Rome it selfe .iiii. tymes taken by force within the space of .140. yeres,Rome de∣stroied .iiii. tymes. the wal∣les in many places throwen to the earth, the inestimable goodly buildynges of temples and palaices burned and spoyled, the infinite treasures of money, iewelles, and other ornament{is} put to sacke, or hidde vnder the ground by the owners, where it could neuer be founde: neither man woman nor childe spared of the enemies furiouse swoorde, and finally brought to that case, that it was more than an whole yere desolate without any creature to dwell in it, other than the wilde beastes. And not Rome alone, but also the most parte of all the notable citees of Italie were thus afflicted for the tyme. ¶But whan the Gothish nacion was thus subdued, I∣talie returned to the obedience of the empyre: and was gouerned by the forenamed Narses, by the space of .17. yeres: till after the death of the emperour Iustinian, Iu∣stine the secounde of that name succeded, whose wyfe Sophia, thorough instigacion of some gentilmen of the  court (that enuied the vertue and glory of Narses) kend∣led hir housband the emperour so muche, that he reuo∣ked Narses from the rule of Italy, with iniurious wor∣des of the empresse, that had bosted, she would set hym a¦mongest hir women to spinne and to make clothe, whi∣che
she saied was meeter for hym than to rule suche a countrey. But the noble hert of Narses conceiued so great an vnkyndnesse of this, that (after he had an∣sweared hir) he woulde spinne suche a clothe, as nother she nor hir vile housbande should be hable to weare out, he secrely sent into Pannonia to Alboinus kyng of the Longobardi, now called Lumbardes, exhortyng him to come into Italie: how be it, ere he came, Narses repen∣ted hym, and did what he coulde to haue leted it: but as he trauailed therin (being come to Rome) with Iohn̄ the thyrde bisshop of the same, hauyng now delaied the Lumbard{is} coming a few yeres, he died, had his body ca∣ried to Constantinople, and there was honorably buried. ¶This Narses with Bellisarius before named, were two of the noblest capitaines that euer serued the Ro∣mayne Emperours. ¶Incontinently after the death of Narses, the forena∣med Alboinus, with an infinite numbre of men women and childern, entred into Italie, and occupied all the countrey betwene the Alpes and the Appenine hilles, naming it after theyr name Lumbardie. And not with∣standyng that the emperours for the space of .180. yeres, made continuall warres agaynste theym by theyr gene∣ralles, whom thei called Exarkes, yet coulde they neuer so abate and vanquishe the glorie of those Lumbardes, but that sometimes they wolde right well be reuenged: so that in effecte they reigned ouer Lumbardie aboue, 200. yeres, till the comyng of Charlemaine, who in fa∣uour of the Romayne bishops,Deside∣rius. warred agaynst Deside∣rius last kyng of the saied Lumbardes, toke and ledde him prisoner into Fraunce.
¶In all whiche tyme of the Lumbardes prosperytee, there reigned amongest theym .23. kynges, whose names hereafter folow. ALboinus, slaine by procuremente of his wife Ro∣samunda. ¶Dapho, slayne of his owne people for his ty∣rannie. After whose death the Lumbardes wolde haue no kyng, but in maner of a common wealthe elected .30. Dukes, who occupied all Italie, Rome and Naples ex∣cepted, and so contynued the space of .xii. yeres, till the Lumbardes, beyng weery of theyr gouernaunce, retur∣ned againe to the election of a kyng. ¶Antharis surnamed Flauius, toke to wyfe Theodo∣linda, the kynges doughter of Bauarie, a woman that by persuasion of Gregorie the fyrst, bisshop of Rome, se∣cretly embraced the Christian faieth, and after conuer∣ted hir nexte housdande to the same. ¶Agilulphus Duke of Turine, maried Theodolinda af∣ter the death of hir other housbande, and so beyng made kyng, through his wifes procurement, he became a Chri∣stian. ¶Adoaldus, sonne of Agilulphus, beyng very younge, reigned about .x. yeres, vnder the gouernaunce of his mother Theodolinda, and after hir death, was driuen out of his realme. ¶Arioldus, of whom I fynde nothyng notable. ¶Rotharius, a valiaunt warriour, and so well learned  withall, that he prescribed lawes vnto the Lumbardes, who from theyr coming into Italy till that time (whi∣che was about .70. yeres) had no written law. ¶Rodoaldus sonne of Rotharius was slain by one that
founde hym in adoultrie with his wife. ¶Arithpertus, through feigned flight obteyned a no∣table  victorie against the frenchemen. ¶Gundibertus, sonne vnto Arithpertus, contended so  longe with his brother for the dominion, that at last thei were bothe chased awaie. ¶Grimoaldus, toke the astate from the children of A∣rithpert, and helde longe warre with the emperour Con∣stantine the thyrd, and so ouercame Theodorus the Ex∣rke, that the emperour in a great rage came hym selfe with a myghty armie into Italie, and after he had o∣uerranne the countrey of Puglia, and taken the citee of Luceria, whiche he put to fyre and swoorde, at laste he besieged Beneuento, where hapned one notable thyng woorthy the rehersall. ¶Romoaldus sonne to the king Grimoaldus was than within Beneuento, and aliauntly defended the citee a∣gainst the Greekes, sendyng woorde by a foster father of his named Gensualdus, nto his father, that vnlesse he wolde shortly sende succours, the citee must needes be taken. Gensualde did his message, and retournyng with answeare was taken of the enemies, and brought before the emperour. Where beyng straightly exami∣ned, he confessed, that Grimoalde withall the power of Lumbardie was departed from Pauia, and came to reise the siege: and that he hym selfe was the messenger of his comyng. Wherfore the emperour hopyng incon∣tinently to haue the towne, and so to departe before the comyng of Grimoalde, partely with thretenyng, and partly with fayre offers, persuaded Gensualde, that be∣yng brought before the towne, he should shewe Romo∣alde,
how his father through other businesse of impor∣taunce coulde not than succour hym. Gensualde promisyng so to dooe, was brought to the walles, and called for Romoalde, who foorthwith appeared. Ro∣moalde (saied he) thy father is here at hand, with a pu∣issaunt armie to succour the. I lefte hym passyng the riuer of Sanguine: be good to my wife and children, for I am but dead, and so it proued▪ for his head was stri∣ken of, and for despite with an engine throwen into the towne. ¶Whervpon Constantine with his ar∣mie retyred to Naples, and from thense to Rome, where he was most honourablie receiued of bishop Vitellian, withall the clergie and nobilitee. But he in recompence of that honour, fell to robbyng and spoylyng of all the goodly thynges that he founde there, aswell marble, brasse and peinture, as other richesse, insomuche that he toke the tile of brasse, wherwith the temple of Panthe∣on was couered, and shipped all that he gotte. So that Rome in a maner suffered more hurt and spoyle in .vii. daies that he remaigned there, than it did by any ouer∣throw from the fyrst comyng of the Lumbardes. And yet he enioyed not, for retournyng toward{is} Greece he was slaine by his owne men in the citee of Syracusa: and all those preciouse thynges taken afterwardes by the Sarasines, and caried to Alexandria in Aegypt: where many of theim maie be seen at this daie. But to retourne vnto my purpose. Grimoaldus died of to muche streignyng his arme after he had been letten bloudde. ¶Garmaldus, sonne of Grimoaldus, reigned .iii. mo∣nethes onely and died.
¶Partharus, soonne of Arithpert before named, that  from his youthe had been in continuall exile, retourned home, and was restored to the kyngdome. ¶Iunipertus or Compertus, sonne of Partharus succe∣ded  after the death of his father. ¶Laimpertus, or Luitpertus, sonne of Iunipertus, be∣yng  a childe, had not reigned vnder the tuicion of A∣sprandus fully .viii. monethes, but that Raimpertus Duke of Turine rebelled, and in plaine battaile ouer∣came Asprandus, and so vsurped the kyngdome. ¶Raimpertus reigned not fully a yere. ¶Arithpertus, son of Raimpertus, was muche distur∣bed  by the forenamed Luitpertus, but at laste he slew him in plaine battaile, and in maner destroyed the whole house of Asprandus. Neuerthelesse in the .xi. yere of his reigne Asprandus, with helpe of the kyng of Baua∣rie, retourned puissantly vnto Italy, fought with Arith∣pert, and so discomfited him, that in his flight passyng the riuer of Tesino, he was drowned, by reason he had ouerladen him selfe with gold. ¶Asprandus reigned but .iii. monethes and died. ¶Luitprandus, son of Asprandus, was a great warri∣our, insomuche that after he had gotten Rauenna, and many other citees from the emperours Exarke, at laste he besieged Rome. Neuerthelesse at the intercession of his gossippe the frenche kyng, he leauied his siege, and restored to the Romains those castels and townes that he before had taken from theim. ¶Aldeprandus, nephewe of Luitprandus, liued not  fully .v. monethes, and died without issue. ¶Rachis or Lachis, as some call him, Duke of Turine,
was next kynge, who after manie gyftes made to the churche of Rome, whan he had reigned .vi. yeres, lefte his crowne, and became a monke. ¶Aristolphus, brother to Rachis, contrarie to his bro∣thers maners, made so sharpe warre to the churche of Rome, that Stephen then bishop, called Pepine the Fren∣che kyng twise into Italy against him, and constreigned him to obey the Romayne See, and at last beyng on a day a huntyng, he died sodeinely of an appoplexi. ¶Desiderius laste kyng of the Lumbardes, prospered longe tyme in his warres, and specially agaynste the churche of Rome, which he so constreigned, that Adrian the first than bishop there, was faine to call kyng Char∣lemaine  of Fraunce into Italie to succour hym: who at his comyng not onelie restored vnto the churche all those citees that were taken awaie, but also led Deside∣rius, his wife and children prysoners with hym into Fraunce, furnyshyng the whole regyon of Lumbardie with officers and rulers of his owne nacion. The ende of the Lum¦bardes rei∣gne.¶Thus ended the reigne of the Lumbardes, which had continued more than .200. yeres. ¶It is nowe to be vnderstanded, that shortly vpon the comyng of Alboinus into Italy, diuers citees & prouin∣ces of the same (as theyr strength and tyme dyd serue theim) vsed theyr owne libertees, and leauyng the im∣periall lawes, made newe orders and officers amongest them selfes. Wherfore the emperour Iustinus sent a generall of his into Italie, named Longinus, ordeinyng him to be called Exarke, whiche shoulde be chiefe ouer all other officers. ¶This Exarke passyng by Rome, came to Rauenna, and
there kept his astate, appoynctyng the gouernaunce of Rome to a Duke: so that many yeres after there were no mo Consulles made: whiche office together with the most parte of all the other Romayne magistrates, kept theyr auncient forme vnto that tyme, not withstandyng that the emperours had taken from theym all maner of auctoritee, except the onely gouernaunce of the citee. ¶From Longinus vnto the comyng of kynge Pepine into Italie, the emperours helde in maner contynuall warre with the kinges of Lumbardy by theyr Exarkes: but after Pepine had ouercome the kyng Aristolphe (who before had subdued the Exarke of Rauenna) he gaue the landes of that Exarcate to the churche: A great part wherof the bishoppe of Rome holdeth to this day. ¶And because that from the tyme of Honorius hither∣wardes I can not finde that any emperour had quiete dominion ouer Italy, or was at any time resident there, I therfore omitte to reherse the emperours names that haue reigned syns, and woull conclude, how by Charle∣maines time, the empire that before had none other title than of Rome, (wherof it toke originall) was vtterlie diuided in two, Oriental and Occidentall, the occasion wherof was this. ¶Leo the .iii. successour vnto Adrian bishop of Rome, was chased awaie by the Romaines, and fledde to kyng Charlemaine for succour, who not onely restored hym to his bishopriche, but also for a more terrour to the Ro∣maines, with a great power came to Rome in his owne person: where on Christmas daie, for a rewarde of his trauaile, the bishoppe and clergie proclaimed hym em∣perour.
¶Some write, that Charlemaine was very loth to take it vpon him, till he had practised first with Hirena, than Empresse of Constantinople, and after with Niceforus nexte emperour folowyng, and obteygned bothe theyr consentes. ¶In effect Charlemaine was crowned, toke on him the empyre: and his son Pepine was entitled king of Italy. And after they had attempted to chase the grekes cleane out of the same, they accorded with Niceforus to diuide the easte empire from the weast, limittyng the Duchi of Beneuento to be as a confyne or bounde betwene theim both. ¶And thus, sens Charlemaine, the occidentall empyre continued vnder the Frenche dominion,Elecion of the empe∣rour. till Gregorie the .v. bishop of Rome transported the election of the emperour vnto the princes of Germanie, whi∣che to this dai endureth. Like as on the other syde the Orientall empyre continued in Constantinople in the hand{is} of Christians, till Ma∣chome the second of that name emperour of the Turkes, toke the citee by force, slew the em∣perour Sigismonde, and consequently enioyed the whole Greekish em∣pyre, as his successours dooe vnto this daie.
¶The descripcion of Rome. THynkyng to finde a great contentacion in the sight of Rome, be∣cause that amōgest al the citees of the worlde none hath been more famous than it, I disposed my selfe to goe thither. But whan I came there, and behelde the wonderfull maiestee of buildynges that the onely rootes therof doe yet represent, the huge tem∣ples, the infinite great palaices, the vnmeasurable pil∣lers, moste parte of one peece, fine marble, and well wrought, the goodly arches of triumphe, the baines, the cunductes of water, the images as well of brasse as of marble, the Obeliskes, and a noumbre of other lyke thynges, not to be founde againe thoroughout an whole worlde: imaginyng withall, what maiestee the citee myghte be of, whan all these thynges flourished, Than didde it greeue me to see the onelie iewell, myr∣rour, maistres, and beautie of this worlde, that neuer had hir lyke, nor (as I thynke) neuer shall, lie so de∣solate and disfigured, that there is no lamentable case to be harde, or lothesome thyng to be seen, that maie be compared to a small parte of it. Neuerthe∣lesse whan I remembred againe the occasions, wherof these gloriouse thynges haue growen, what noumbres of warres the Romaynes haue mainteygned, with in∣finite bloudsheddyng, destructions of whole countreys, rauishmentes of chast women, sacke, spoyle, tributes, op∣pression
of common welthes, and a thousande other ty∣rannies, without the whiche the Romaines could neuer haue achieued the perfection of so many wonders as mine eye dyd there beholde: Than perceiued I, howe iust the iudgement of god is, that hath made those anti∣quitees to remayne as a foule spoyle of the Romaine pride, and for a witnesse to the worldes ende of their tyranny. So that I wote not whether of these two is greater either the glorie of that fame, that the Romai∣nes purchased with theyr wonderfull conquestes: or their present miserable astate, with the deformitee of theyr antiquities. ¶Of the riuer of Tyber. THE riuer of Tyber, whiche renneth throughe Rome, diuideth Tuscane and Champaigne, so that Transtyberim, and the Vaticane, wherin standeth S. Peters churche, with the bishops palaice and castell Saint Angelo, are in Tuscane: and the rest on the other syde of the water, whiche is verie Rome in deede, is in Champaigne. ¶The distance betwene the citee and the sea called Ma∣re Tirrhenum, is .xv. myles. And all be it, the riuer be great, deepe, and large enoughe for an hauen, from the sea to Rome, yet most commonly the ships can come no neerer than Ostia, whiche is .xii. myles from Rome, partly by reason of the streame that reuneth very swift, and partely by reason of the wonderfull quantitee of mudde, that being brought downe with the swift course of the water, lieth commonly at the mouth of the hauen.
So that all the merchandise, vittails, and other thynges that come by shippe, ar discharged at Ostia into certain small vessels, and so brought to Rome: either drawen by corde, or rowed vp by force of ores. ¶The head or fyrst spryng of Tyber is in the Appenine hilles,The head of Tyber, somewhat higher than the heade of the riuer Ar∣no, that renneth through Florence, and er euer it come at Rome, it receyueth .42. other riuers: So that it is no meruaile, though it be depe, specially in Rome and to the seawardes, where it appeareth, that the naturall bredth of it is restreigned: and by force of stronge bankes made muche narower than his auncient course hath ben. Of the bridges. VPon this riuer of Tyber in Rome be .iiii. bridges, the first and fairest is it that passeth from the citee vnto castell. S. Angelo,Ponte di S▪ Angelo. Ponte del Castello. Ponte Sisto Ponte rotto vnder the whiche the riuer comyng from the Northe towardes the South, entreth into the citee. And is commonly called Ponte di Sant' Angelo, or del Castello. ¶The seconde is Ponte Sisto otherwyse called Ponte rotto, a very goodly bridge, that leadeth from the strete now called Iulia, vnto the foote of the hylle aunciently called Ianiculus in Transtyberim. ¶The thirde is called Ponte de Pisola,Ponte de Pisona. Ponte di S. Bertho¦lomeo, Ponte di quatuor Capora. Ponte di S. Maria▪ Ponte di San Bar∣tholomeo, or Ponte di quatuor Capora, whiche passeth from the herte of the citee throughe the ilande Tyberina into Transtyberim. ¶The fourth next to the goyng foorth of the riuer out of the citee at the South is called Ponte di Santa Maria.
¶But to satisfie theim that be learned, I thynke mete to reherse here the names of the .viii. bridges, Sublici∣us, Palatinus, Fabricius, Cestius, Ianuclensis, Vatica∣nus, Elius and Miluius: and to declare where thei stode. Sublicius.¶Fyrst Sublicius, whiche Horatius alone defended in the warres of Porsena, was at the foote of the hill A∣uentine, where now is no bridge at all, and fyrst it was made of tymber, afterwardes of stone by Emilius Lepi∣dus, for the whiche he was surnamed Lapideus, but fi∣nally it was made of marble by Antonius Pius, & now decaied to the foundacions: wherof part are yet to be seen. Palatinus. Fabricius. Cestius.¶The seconde Palatinus, is now called di Santa Maria. ¶The thyrde and fourthe, Fabricius nexte the citee side, and Cestius, on the side of Transtyberim, ar the two bridges that passe through the ilande Tyberina. Januclensis Vaticanus.¶The .v. Ianuclensis, is now called Ponte Sisto. ¶The .vi. Vaticanus, is decaied to the foundacion, part wherof is seen against the hospitall di San Spirito. ¶The .vii. Elius, is now called del Castello. Elius. Miluius.¶The .viii. Miluius, is .ii. mile northwardes out at the gate called del popolo, in the waie to Tuscane: and is called at this daie Ponte Molle. Of the walles. THe circuite of the citee about by the wall{is}, as Pli∣nie writeth, was in his tyme .xx. miles: and Fla∣uius Vopiscus saieth, that the emperour Aureli∣us .200. yeres before the comyng of the Gothes, enlar∣ged the circuite of Rome to .50. miles: whether these
authours included the suburbes I can not tell: but ones there can be seen no signe or token of any walles, that shuld conteigne so muche compasse: nor yet of the wall{is} that Liuie mencioneth, shoulde be made of square stone▪ For the wall{is} now about Rome are of bricke, and in my iudgement passe not .xiiii. miles in compasse. Nor I can not perceiue, either by mine owne eie, or by wri∣tyng of authours, or yet by report, that euer the walles were of greater circuite than they be at this present. It is euident, that many partes of the same wall haue been throwen to the earth by diuers enemies, and repai∣red againe. For notwithstandyng it be builded of bricke, yet dooeth it shew suche an antike maiestee (ha∣uyng .365. towres agreable with the noumbre of daies in the yere) that he who seeth it, must needes confesse, it could neuer be builded but in tyme of the Romaines glorie. Perchaunce some will meruaile, how bricke shoulde so longe continue: but theyr bricke, whether it be longe of good makyng, or of the heate of the soonne that drieth muche better than with vs, is wonderfull durable. For there be many buildynges in Rome of bricke, that haue continued these .1000. yeres and more: and yet to this houre are nothyng worne or decaied. In deede many gates of the citee are of square stone, wrought after the most antike facion: so that it is not incredible, as Liuie writeth, that the walles haue been of square stone, but it should not seeme so, because that in makyng of a newe wall in the same place, it is to be supposed, the builders would haue vsed the olde square stone, rather than bricke.
Of the gates. PLinie writeth, that in his tyme were .xxx. gates o∣pen, and .vii. closed, but because he hath not writ∣ten theyr names, I woull not trauaile to trie what they were. For I can finde but .xvi. that are vsed: Of whiche .iiii. are in the Vaticane, that many yeres after Plinie, was walled by Leo the .4. bishop of Rome, for defence of his owne palaice and of saincte Peters churche. Porta de popolo. flu tuentana. Flaminia. P. Pincia∣na. Collatina. P. Sala∣ria. Quiri∣nalis. Aegonalis. P. di sant' Agnese. Uiminalis. Figulensis Numenta∣na. P. di San Lorenzo. Tiburtina Exquilina. P. Maggi ore Neuia. Labicana. Prenestina P. di. San Hioanni. Celimōta∣na. Asinaria. P. Latina▪ P. di S. sebastiano. Appia. Capena. Trium∣phalis. P. di San Paolo. Trigemi∣na. P. Portese di Ripa. P. di. S. Pancratio Aurelia. P. del Tor¦rione. P. Portu∣sa. P. di Bel¦uedere. di San Piero. del Giar∣dino. di. S. Pe∣regrino. P. del Castello. Posterula¶Fyrst nexte vnto the comyng downe of Tyber on the northsyde, is the gate called Porta del popolo, whiche aun∣ciently hath had diuers names, as Flumentana and Fla∣minia of the waie Flaminia that went out therat. ¶Than comyng about towardes the East, the next gate is called Pinciana, sometime Collatina. ¶The .iii. Salaria, anciently called Quirinalis, or Aego∣nalis. ¶The .iiii. Porta di Sant' Agnese, sometime Viminalis, Figulensis and Numentana. ¶The v. Porta di San Lorenzo, sometyme called Tiburtina after some authours, and after other Exquilina, though Andreas Fuluius affirmeth plainely Exquilina to be be∣twene this and the nexte gate. ¶The .vi. Porta maggiore was somtyme called Neuia, La∣bicana and Prenestina. ¶The .vii. Porta di San Hioanni hath ben called Celimon∣tana, and Asinaria, by reason it lieth towardes the reame of Naples, that bredeth many asses. ¶The .viii. Porta Latina hath not chaunged name, or if it be chaunged, the aunciente name can not be knowen nowe,
¶The .ix. Porta di San Sebastiano, was somtyme called Appia and Capena, and after moste opinions was also called Triumphalis. ¶The .x. Porta di San Paolo, was sometime called Tri∣gemina. All whiche .x. gates are on the Cham∣paigne side of the riuer. ¶The .xi. Porta portese, or Porta di Ripa. ¶The .xii. Porta di San Pancratio, sometyme called Au∣relia. ¶The .xiii. Porta del Torrione. ¶The .xiiii. Porta portusa, on the toppe of the hill be∣hynde sainct Peters. ¶The .xv. hath dyuers names, as Porta di Beluedere, di San Piero, del Giardino, or di Santo Peregrino, and is hard vnder the bishops palaice. ¶The .xvi. Porta del Castello, sometyme Posterula, lyeth vnder Castel Sant' Angelo, and serueth to goe into the me∣dowes. As for those auncient names, Carmentalis Pandana, Mugonia, Queruetulana, Iauernalis, Ruduscu∣lana, Rhuttumena, Carthularia, and diuers others, whi∣che as I suppose were olde gates, that lost theyr places as the wall{is} were enlarged: I could neuer learne where they shoulde be, and therfore dooe beleue thei haue ben conuerted to the vse of other buildynges. ¶These gates and walles about Rome are not stronge, nor yet fortified with rampiers of earth or otherwise to defende shotte of artillerie, and in many places are so decaied, that to assaute there nedeth not muche batte∣rie. Many of the gates haue ben excedyng fayre, but lyke as most notable thynges there be decaied: so are these rather a figure of theyr antiquitee, thanne anie
thyng elles. Of the .vii. hilles. THe .vii. hilles, wheron Rome standeth, are but of a small height, standyng a rewe vpon the riuer side. Auentinus.¶The greatest of theim Eastwardes is called A∣uentinus, wherin was the caue of Cacus the giaunt that Hercules slewe: and the fountaine, where the goddes Picus and Faunus were taken by the policie of Numa, who geuyng theim wine in stede of water, made theym drunke, and so toke theim a slepe. And albeit, that on this hill haue ben many goodly edifices, as the temples of Matuta, Diana, Minerua, Lucina, Liberta, with diuers others, yet at this day there is nothyng to be seen, not so muche as a token of Claudius notable conducte, that Frontinus and Cassiodorus treate so much vpon. For there is nowe none other buildyng, but the monasteries of Santa Sabina, and Sant' Alesso, with a fewe other litle churches. The rest is either couered with rubbell, or occupied with vines. Capitolinus¶The next hille, fyrste called Tarpeius, after Capitoli∣nus, and now Campidoglio, was the principall place of the citee, suche as for example the yelde haul is in Lon∣don. For thither came all they that happened to be receyued with triumphe: and amongest all the buildyn∣ges of the worlde Capitolium was compted the goodly∣est. For Cassiodorus saieth, It is a great wonder to beholde the market place of Traiane: But to clymbe vp into the capitoll, O there is the excellencie of all hu∣mayne wittes to be regarded. Cicero calleth it in
many places the habitacion of the goddes: and Virgile the golden Capitoline. Wherof at this daie remay∣neth no more but an olde house called the Senate, and the churche of Araceli. They saie, that the temple of Iu∣piter optimus maximus was there, where the churche of San Saluator in massimi is now: and the temple of Ianus custos, where the prisons be now called La Can∣cellaria. But of theyr antiquitee appeareth at this daie not so muche as the bare foundacions. ¶Next vnto Campidoglio is the hill Palatinus,Palatinus. on the whiche the emperours, kyng{is}, consuls, and other chiefe officers had theyr palaices, besides many famous tem∣ples that haue been built there, wherof remaineth none other now but the olde ruines, and a churche of saincte Nicolas not yet finisshed. ¶Here is to be noted, that these .iii. hilles Auentinus, Capitolinus, and Palatinus were onely closed with wal∣les by Romulus: so that Rome was nothyng so great in circuite at the fyrst as it is now. But as the people multiplied, so the other hilles were taken in: as he that readeth Liuie shall well perceiue. In effecte, settyng the rubbell and olde monstruouse foundacions aparte, Rome (as touchyng these .iii. hilles) is retourned de∣serte, pasture, and vineyardes, as it was before the fyrst foundacion. ¶Next is the hill Celius, wherin is seen vnto this daie a part of the auncient Romaine maiestee,Celius. by the meruai∣louse buildynges that yet remaigne, not whole, but so that the magnificence therof maie be comprehended: as the Amphitheatrum, now called Colliseo, the con∣duites and baines, the great palaice, and a noumbre of
fayre churches, translated from olde temples. ¶Next vnto this is Exquilius, whiche as Varro sayth, are two hilles,Exquilius. but they seme not so to me. In this parte are Therme Dioclesiani, the piller of Adrian, the toure de i Conti, Trosei de Caio Mario, the gardeyn and toure of Mecenaes so muche renoumed, with diuers o∣ther thynges, and is well enhabited. Viminalis. Quirinalis¶Finallie the hilles, Viminalis and Quirinalis, lie so together, that I coulde not diuide theim: But by esti∣macion and reporte they begin at the gate of S. Agnes, and stretche downe by Monte Cauallo vnto Tyber, In whiche are fewe notable thynges to be seene, except Monte Cauallo, Therme Constantiniane, Torre delle militie, and a fewe others. ¶Nowe that parte of the citee that is called Transty∣berim,Transty∣berim. is diuided in two, that is to wete the Vaticane and Ianiculum. ¶The Uaticane was walled about by Leo the .iiii. bi∣shop,Vaticane. and called Citta Leonina after his owne name, and is well knowen from Ianiculum, because that going from the one to the other,Porta Sep∣timiana. Subtus Ja∣num. Fontinalis. Janiculum. it behoueth to passe through the gate called Septimiana, sometimes called Subtus Ia∣num, or Fontinalis: Wherby it is euident, that the Va∣ticane or Borgo San Piero (as they nowe call it) was ne∣uer any parte of Rome vntill Leos time. But Iani∣culum in Transtyberim was iuigned vnto Rome by An∣cus Martius .iiii. kyng of the Romaines, and is affyr∣med to be the same citee, that the god Ianus builded and dwelled in, like as many write Saturnia, that Saturne builded, was against it on the other side of the water, in the place that we call nowe Campidoglio: thoughe
some holde opinion it shoulde be at Sutri. Of the conduites of water. FRontinus writeth, that for the space of .441. yeres after the edificacion of Rome, the Romaynes vsed none other but the water of Tyber, or of such welles and sprynges as were founde within the citee. But from the tyme of Appius Claudius they haue had so muche water brought by conduites vpon arches, through the mountaynes, and some vnder grounde, that no citee of all the worlde coulde be better serued. And the maner was this. Whan they had taken a spryng, and had brought the water of it to the citee, than was there a place made to receiue it, closed about with walles like a castell: from the whiche, pipes were laied to serue as∣well the common people in the open stretes, as also the nobilitie, and suche as were hable to haue water in their owne houses. And so (as Strabo writeth) it semed that riuers ranne haboundauntly through the citee, and al∣most euery house had chanelles and conduites with ce∣sternes to preserue the water. For Marcus Agrippa in one yere caused .700. pondes .105. fountaignes, and 130. castell{is} to be made, besides a numbre of other good∣ly edifices for the maintenaunce of these freshe waters: amongest whiche I shall recite the principallest. ¶Fyrste the water called Appia was conueyghed v∣pon high arches of stone out of the Lucullane territory the space of .viii. miles,Aqua Ap∣pia. and brought in betwene the hill Auentine and the hill Celius: but now there remaineth nothyng of theim that can be seen.
Aqua Mar∣tia. Anfeia. Traiana.¶An other, Aqua Martia, sometyme called Anfeia, last∣ly Traiana, came out of the lake Fucinus, and serued prin∣cipally to drinke, where most part of the rest serued for other vses: and this was brought by myne through the mountaines and by arches aboue grounde .xxiii. miles. Claudia.¶Aqua Claudia was brought .35. miles from .ii. foun∣taines Ceruleus, and Curtius, parte of the waie vpon wonderfull arches of square stone, whiche are yet to be seene bothe within and many miles without the citee. Plinie saieth,Pli. li. 36. nat. histor. that the conueighaunce of this water did cost .555. thousande sextertia, whiche make aboue .lx. thousande talent{is}, and rekenyng euery talent at .130.li. sterlyng (whiche I thynke was the least) the summe a∣mounteth to .vii. millions and .viii. hundred thousand poundes of our money: whiche as it seemeth a summe impossible to be gathered together, and more incredible to be spent in one worke, so is the maiestee of that buil∣dyng wonderfull, that in maner I am abasshed to write the trouth therof: for I woulde not haue beleued it my selfe, if I had not seene it. And Frontinus writeth, that these arches in some places were .109. foote high. ¶Than was there the olde and the new Auiena, the one wherof was brought .xlii. miles of,Auiena. and at length ioy∣gneth with the water Claudia, and is receiued vppon those arches before mencioned. ¶Diuers other waters there were, to longe here to rec∣ken, because of all these waters that were wont to come to Rome, can be founde no moe at this daie but one, cal∣led Triuiana, and aunciently named Virginia, whiche renneth vnder the ground by the gate Pinciana,Triuiana. Virginia. and sour∣geth vnder the hill called Monte degli hortuli: frō whense
it is conueighed abrode to serue al part{is} of the citee, be∣cause in Rome there is none other good water to drinke. ¶Of the decaie not onely of these conduites,Opinions of the decai of the anti∣quitees. but also of the other antiquitees be dyuers opinions. Some af∣fyrme, that the Gothes, the Vandales, and the other barbarouse nacions, that so often destroied Rome, were causers and doers of it. Some other ascribe the fault to tyme, mother and consumer of all thyng{is}. Other saie, that nother the barbarouse nacions, nor yet tyme ought to be blamed for it, but rather the greedie beastli∣nesse of theim, that bothe within the citee and without, regarded not to spoyle those noble antiquitees, to gar∣nisshe and beautifie therwith theyr priuate buildyng{is}. ¶Of the Thermes. YOu shall vnderstande, that the Romaines vsed oftentimes to bathe theim selfes, wherfore at the first, priuate men made them stewfes or hotehous{is} of theyr owne: But afterwardes (as a thyng necessary for the common wealthe) The emperours gaue theim selfes to the makyng of these Thermae. Of whiche Blondus rekeneth .xii. and Fuluius saieth .xviii. namyng theym Agrippine, Neroniane, Alexandrine, Titiane, Dioclesiane, and the reste. These were not onelie common baines for washyng, but also sumptuouse hau∣les, goodly chaumbres, faire walkyng places, and euery other gallaunt buildyng, that might serue for the com∣moditee of theym that thither resorted. The paue∣mentes were of fyne marble wrought in colours, the vaultes susteigned on riche pillers of porfirie and finest
marble of one peece, A noumbre of hotehouses in euerie Therme, some seueral, and some common, with lodging{is} accordyng, and offices assigned for the seruice of theim that would eate there, besides all other pleasures that were to be imagined. Insomuche that the emperours theim selfes many tymes woulde come thither openlie, and be wasshed in the common houses. For it is wri∣ten that the emperour Adrian entred on a daie into one of the baynes, and findyng an olde souldiour there rub∣bing him selfe against the marble stones, asked him why he dyd so: The souldiour aunswered, because he had no seruaunt.Adrians curtesie, and wise∣dome. This aunsweare so muche pleased the emperour, that streyght waie he not onely gaue this souldiour a seruaunte, but also honestlie wherwith to mainteigne him. Through the fame wherof the nexte day whan the emperour came to the same bayne, diuers olde men were gotten in before, and were lykewise rub∣byng theim selfes: who beyng demaunded why thei did so, aunsweared, because they had no seruauntes. But Adrian perceiuyng theyr entente, called theym to hym, and shewed them how thei might well enough one rubbe an other. ¶Of all these goodlie Thermes, there remayneth none other but the broken walles, and the olde monstruouse ruines, speciallie of those two that were the greatest, Antoniane, and Dioclesiane, whose hugenesse maie be reckened as a wonder amongeste the buildynges of the worlde.
Of the Naumachie. THere were certaine pondes of water called Nau∣machiae, made of purpose so large, that small ship∣pes myghte mete in theym. For lyke as the Ro∣maynes were diligent in bryngyng vp theyr youthe in feates of cheualrie, So also they exercised theim in pra∣ctise of the water, to make theym no lesse experte by sea than by lande. For the which these Naumachie were made, speciallie for the triumphyng daies, whan they vsed to fight ship with ship: and whan also on the lande the horsemen shoulde be prouyng of theyr strengthes. So that in one spectacle you shoulde beholde the feates of armes bothe by sea and lande, as moste commonly in Circulo maximo it was wont to be. But at this daie there scarcely appeareth any signe or token of those pon∣des, saue that euery man there can tell where some of them haue ben: as that before the froute of Palazzo mag∣giore, an other vnder Monte de glihortuli, and one of Ne∣ros in the Uaticane. For now thorough lacke of wa∣ter, sens the decaie of the conduites, they are become drie grounde, and conuerted into gardeins, pastures, and other vses. Of the arches of tri∣umphe. THe Romaines vsed to edifie certaine arches, and to dedicate theim vnto the names and memorie of suche as had conquered straunge countreis, or re∣tourned victoriously from daungerouse battailes.
For the whiche they were receiued triumphantly into the citee, sittyng on a riche chariote, drawen with .iiii. white steedes, and theyr notable prisoners and spoyle be∣fore theim, with goodly representacions of the gotten citees, townes, countreis and other thyng{is}: and so pas∣syng through the citee, shoulde ride vnto the temple of Iupiter in Capitolio. ¶There haue been many of these arches, but at this daie .iiii. onely are to be knowen, that is to wete of Con∣stantine, of Titus, of Seuerus, and of Domitian. Arcus Con∣stantini.¶The first of Constantine standeth on the corner of the hill Palatinus, a little besides Coliseo, and is yet mee∣ly fayre to beholde, were it not that the fine carued fi∣gures on bothe sides wrought in the harde marble, are battered, and almost defaced by the weather. Arcus Titi.¶The next of Titus and Vespasianus, is in the middest of the waie called Sacra, wherin maie be seene the re∣presentacion of the chariotte of triumphe, with the ▪xii. sergeauntes on the one syde, and on the other the spoiles of Ierusalem, that is to wete the golden candeltricke of seuen braunches, the two tables of Moyses, the gol∣den table▪ and vessell of the temple, with dyuers other thynges: whiche as Ioseph writeth, were laied vppe in the temple of peace. Arcus Se∣eri.¶The arche of Septimius Seuerus standeth in the olde market place, now called Piazza Romana, at the foote of Campidoglio: and this is the fayrest of all the o∣ther, hauyng finely grauen on bothe sides the represen∣tacions of his battailes and victories, aswell by sea, as by lande, with the title in fayre Romaine letters, to whom it was dedicated.
¶Finally in the waie Flaminia,Arcus Do∣mitiani. harde by the churche of saincte Laurence in Lucina, is the arche of Domitian as they saie: and is now called L'arco di Tripoli, no∣thyng of beautie comparable to any of the rest. ¶These arches are as it were gatehouses to passe tho∣rough, but the finesse of the marble, and curiouse worke∣manshippe sheweth well, that they were excedyng sum∣ptuouse, and more beautifull than any other kynde of buildyng. ¶Of Theatres. LIke as the Romaines in theyr warres, triumphes, and buildynges exceded all other nacions of the worlde, euen so did thei in their feastes and specta∣cles: that is to wete in their plaies and sightes deuised for pleasure and recreacion. ¶One while they recited comedies, an other while thei vsed diuers soundes of instrument{is} to the Pandomimo, who was one that with signes woulde counterfayte all maner of men, and declare his conceite as euidently, as if he should haue spoken. Sometyme they had a num∣bre of wilde beastes brought in, as Elephantes, Lyons, Tygres, and other lyke, against whom, men that were either condemned to death, taken in the warr{is}, or foole∣hardie felowes thervnto hyred, shoulde be put to fighte: and toren to peeces, vnlesse their chaunce were wonder∣full. Sometyme againe the maisters of fence with theyr scholers, and many tymes the souldiours, would entre with theyr sharpe swoordes, and there kyll one an∣other, to trie theim selfes valiaunt. Sometyme they
wrastled, sometime they iusted, and sometime thei fought as it were in playne battayle, aswell by water as by lande, with other lyke pastymes to longe here to re∣herse. ¶To beholde these thynges, at the begynnyng euerie man toke suche place as he could get, but in processe of yeres whan theyr common wealth flourished, than they deuised certayn skaffoldes of borde, with grices or step∣pes one aboue an other, and fastened theim on great bea∣mes made after the forme of an halfe circle, for the com∣moditee of the more numbre of people to sit vpō. Wher∣of Plinie saieth thus: Beholde the people Conquerour of other countreis, and lorde of all the worlde, they that ouerthrowe realmes and nacions, geue lawe to straun∣gers, and be as it were a certayn diuine thyng amongest the humayne generacyon, stande here neuerthelesse dangerouslie on an engine, reioysyng whyle they be in peryll. Theatrum.¶This engine of tymbre was called Theatre, and the first that euer made any in Rome was Marcus Scaurus, whose Theatre receyued fourescore thousande persones, and serued for .30. daies onely. But to ease the great charges that the buyldyng of suche Theatres required from tyme to tyme, Pompeius buylded one of square stone, sufficient for .80. thousand persons: whiche Thea∣tre Nero at the receiuyng of Tiridates kynge of Arme∣nie, caused to be gilte cleane ouer in a daie. ¶Many of these Theatres haue ben in Rome, but the moste notable were these .iii. of Pompeius, or Marcellus and of Cornelius Balbus: of whiche there remaigneth so litle memorie at this day, that almost no man can tell
where they stode. ¶Finallie the Amphitheatre, now called Coliseo,Amphithe∣atrum. Coliseo. is yet standyng, one of the perfectest to be seen amongeste all the antiquitees of Rome, and may in deede be accompted one of the wonders of the worlde. For though part of it be alreadie fallen downe, and the reste decaiyng daily, yet is it not so defaced, but that you maie see per∣fectelie, what it hath been, aswell for the meruaylouse height, great circuite, and fayre stone: as also for the excellent workemanship and proporcion. It is rounde bothe without and within, from the grounde within vp∣wardes, it ryseth vniformely one steppe aboue an other staierwise to a very great height: so that to beholde the shewe in the bottome, whiche I thynke is aboue .300. yardes in compasse, there myght sitte an hundred thou∣sande persons at theyr ease. And because they vsed to grauell the grounde, whan any great pastyme shoulde be, therfore in the latine tounge some aucthours haue called it Arena:Arena. notwithstandyng they haue knowen the name to be Amphitheatrum, whiche signifieth two Theatres ioygned togethers, and after moste opinions this Amphitheatre was builded by Vespasian and his sonne Titus. ¶There is also an other Amphitheatre yet to be seen, edified by Statilius Taurus: but it is so decaied, that it scarcely deserueth to be spoken of. Of the cercles. AS for the cercles,Circu. whiche serued to lyke purposes of spectacles, because there is none of theim at
this daie, that hath any similitude of theyr auncient be∣yng: I can saie nothyng to theim. Of the porches. OF the solemne and sumptuouse porches or vaul∣tes, that many aucthours write, were made tho∣rough all the principall stretes of Rome, to couer the people from sonne and raine, there be none now any thyng lyke, neither for the pillers, nor yet for the pro∣porcion. Where is the porche of Nero, that Tranquil∣lus writeth, extended foorthright .iii. thousande paces? Where be the porches of Liuia, or Octauius, and of his syster Octauia, of Pompeius, of Seuerus, and of many others? Amongest all of that sorte there is but one re∣maignyng, whiche standeth before the dore of the tem∣ple Pantheon, situate on .xvi. wonderfull fayre pil∣lers, set in .iii. rowes. Of temples. THe temple of Pantheon is the perfectest of all the antiquitees,Pantheon. and standeth whole vnto this daie. It is rounde, and hath but one gate to entre in at: the doores wherof are of brasse, verie great and antike. The circuite within foorth is verie large, and the height proporcionable. The roofe is all vaulted like the halfe of an egge, of so great compasse, that it is a wonder to beholde: and in the verie toppe is a great rounde hole, through whiche the temple receiueth lyght. For other wyndow it hath none, and yet is the light so muche, that
if all the sides were made in wyndowes, it coulde giue no more: vnder the which in middest of the floore is su∣che holow prouision made, that the raine passeth awaie without offendyng the eie or the place. Finally the walles are furnisshed rounde about with faire marble, and a noumbre of goodly pillers: so that the temple be∣yng old,S. Maria Rotonda. is yet thought goodlier than any new buildyng that can be founde, and is now called Santa Maria Ro∣tonda. ¶Manie other temples haue ben in Rome, that for the most part are likewise conuerted into churches, whiche to descriue shoulde be an endlesse worke. But because of the alteracion and ruyne that tyme hath wroughte, theyr trewe antiquitee can not be declared: Wherfore I will shew where some stode, and into what churches some other haue ben conuerted. ¶The auncient temple of Romulus is nowe called San Cosmoe Damiano,Templuni Romuli. not muche vnlike the buildyng of Pan∣theon, with the porche before, and the gates likewise of brasse. ¶The ruine of the temple of peace,T. Pais. whiche was the beautifullest and richest of al the world, is yet to be seen betwene Palazzo and Exquilie. ¶The temple of Ianus,T. Jani. whiche was neuer open but in time of warre, was nere vnto the churche now called San Georgio in Velabro. ¶The temple of Isis is nowe called,T. Iidis. Santa Maria in A∣quiro. ¶The temple of Minerua is nowe a house of friers called Santa Maria Sopra la Minerua.T. Mi∣nerue. ¶And the temple of Pallas was in the place before theT. Palla∣dis▪
porche of Faustina, now called Pallara. ¶As for the temples of Fortune and Concorde, whiche were manie, besides a noumbre of temples dedicated to the other goddes and goddesses, there is none nowe worthie to be seen. Of the pyllers. IT shalbe necessarie to declare, that there be .iii. kynde of pyllers, rounde, square, and stryped. These are alwaies of one peece, and the chapiter of the piller called in latine Epistylium, is the stone that standeth on the toppe of the pyller, like as the base called basis in latine, is the stone that the piller standeth on. Of whiche bases there be .iiii. sundrie facions, Ionici, Dorici, Italici, and Corinthij, or Tusculani, as Vitruuius writeth. These kyndes of pyllers were so common amongeste the Romaynes, that almost he was no man, that had not a numbre of pyllers in his house, of white, red, or diuers coloured marble, or of porphyrie, or other like riche stone: for the graie is not accoumpted marble in Italie, but graie stone. So that to consider the in∣finite numbre of these pyllers that were in Rome, and that yet amongeste the olde ruines are to bee seene, it seemeth a wonder where they should be had, and what a treasure they coste. For I haue seene diuers almoste two fathome about, and aboue .40. foote highe. And nothyng more earnestly desyred I, than to see some of those wonderfull temples or edifices vpon pyllers in theyr olde facion, with the presence of some of those auncient Romaines, that with their naked maiestee durst
passe through the power of theyr victoriouse ennemies, as Liuie writeth, that Caius Fabius did, whan the fren∣chemen had gotten Rome, and besieged the Capitol. But to my purpose. ¶Besydes these pillers of one stone they vsed in Rome certayne pyllers called Structiles,Structiles▪ that were made of di∣uers stones. These were dedicated to the perpetuall memorie of the woorthie emperours, as the two that yet stande dooe well witnesse. ¶The tone is called the piller of Traiane,Columna Traiani. whiche is 123. foote hyghe, and hath a staier of .195. steppes with∣infoorth, wherby I haue gone to the toppe. It hath 45. little wyndowes that geue light inwarde, and is all of white marble, so well and finely grauen, with the stories of all Traians warres and victories, that it shuld seeme impossible to peincte a thyng better. ¶The other piller dedicate vnto Antoninus Pius,Piazza Colonna. mu∣che after the same sorte, hath his warres and dooynges set foorth in figures grauen, and is .63. foote higher, but muche more decaied than Traianes piller: for it is clefte almost from the toppe to the base, so that if it be not looked vnto the sooner (as I thynke it shall not) it must needes fall. ¶There was suche an other piller made all of porphi∣rie, whiche Constantine toke downe, and caried to Con∣stantinople. Besydes diuers other pillers, as one of Caesar, an other called Milliarium aureum, Moenia, and Lactaria, and many moe, wherof no parte remaigneth now that can be knowen.
Of Obeliskes. OBeliscus is a stone, that beyng broade and square at the foote, ascendeth proporcionally to a sharpe poincte. Of whiche sorte of stones, there be but viii. now to be seene in Rome: notwithstandyng that Fuluius affyrmeth, there haue ben .vi. great & .42. small. ¶These Obeliskes were fyrst inuented by the Aegypti∣ans, and dedicated to the son, not onely because it hath the likenesse of the sonne beame, but also because thei vsed by the shadow therof to trie diuers conclusions of Astronomie, and specially the houres of the daie: as by diuers caractes and figures that are yet seene in some of theim, it dooeth euidently appeare. ¶And a wonder it is to thynke, what an vnreasonable entreprise it was to digge one of theim out of the moun∣taine, seeyng it coulde not be had but by cuttyng awaie all the grounde and rocke about it. ¶In effecte there is but one of theim standyng, whiche is in the Vaticane, on the southsyde of saincte Peters church,La Guglia called La Guglia, being .72. foote high of the very stone it selfe, besides the base and .iiii. great Lyons of marble that it is set vpon: and hath on the toppe a great ball of brasse gilte, with the asshes of Caesar in it, as some holde opinion. ¶Octauian August brought two verie great ones from Heliopoli in Aegypt, the one wherof beyng .122. foote hygh, brake in two peeces, as they woulde haue erected it, and the other of .110. foote lieth in Campo Mario. ¶There lieth one in Girulo, that sometyme was Salu∣tus gardeine, and two other lie besides the churche of
saincte Roke, the one of theim in the high waie. ¶The other two are but small, and seeme rather peeces than whole stones, the one is in the gardeine of Araceli in the Capitoll: and the other is in the strete of San Macutio. ¶Of Pyramides. THere is no more Pyramides in Rome but one, whiche the common people take to be the sepulchre of Remus, but the letters grauē therin witnesse it to be the sepulchre of Caius Cestius, one of the .vii. men that was ordeyned ouer the feastes of the solemne sacri∣fices. And wheras Liuie writeth, that Remus was buried in the hill Auentine, wherof it was named Re∣muria, it is manifest, that this Pyramides was not his sepulchre, for it standeth in the playne, and in the verie wall of the citee, betwene the gate of San Paolo, and the hill Testacchio. The facion of it is like vnto a pointed dyamante, and is made of square stone, so great at the foote, that ascendyng vniformely to the top, it is higher than any towre of the wall. ¶In the high waies wihout the citee specially Flami∣nia, Salaria, and Appia be manie like seene of muche lesse quantitee: But for the most parte they are either decaied or decaiyng. Like as the Cimiteri, whiche were vaultes vnder earthe, that serued of later tyme for Christian se∣pultures, whiche with other like kind of buildynges, by processe of yeres are woren and come to naught.
Of Colosses and images. COlossus signifieth an vnreasonable great image, suche as that of Apollo, that was brought out of Apollonia in Ponto, and set in the Capitoll, whose height was .xxx. cubites. Or that of Iupiter in Cam∣po Martio, commonly called Pompeianus. But aboue all that euer were, the Collose at Rodes exceded. For it was .70. cubites high, and so proporcionate to that heighte, that liyng on the earthe (after it was shaken downe by an earthquake) fewe men coulde embrace one of the fingers, and many of the holowe places in the iointes, seemed valeis or deepe bottomes: so that it is written, the Sarasines after thei had gotten Rodes, la∣ded aboue .900. Camelles with the brasse that they piked out of that Collose. ¶Nero caused one to be made of .120. foote hygh to his owne likenesse, and sette it in the porche of his golden house, whiche afterwardes was remoued thense vnto the Amphitheatre, and therof it is thought it tooke the name of Coliseo. ¶Finally I can find no more of these Colossi whole at this daie but one head, one hand, and a foote, that lie be∣fore the dores of the Conseruatori in the Capitoll. ¶It is true that in many plac{is} of Rome are seene won∣derfull peeces of marble, that should seeme to haue been membres of those Colossi: but thei are in maner cleane defaced. ¶Likewyse of the excellent images, bothe of brasse and marble, aswell of men as of horse, many peeces yet re∣maigne: though scarcely woorth the name of good i∣mages,
as they appeare now. ¶Fuluius writeth, that there were in Rome .24. horses of brasse gilte, and .114. of Iuorie, besydes a numbre of mens images on horsbacke and on foote of marble and other mattier. But of all these there are nowe none to be seene, sauyng one of brasse on horsebacke at Saint Iohn Lateranes, whiche some ascribe vnto Marcus Aure∣lius Antonin{us}, some to Lucius Verus, and some to Seue∣rus: and an other there is in the Capitoll called, Jl gran Villano. ¶In deede there be diuers bodyes without heades, I thinke because some straungers delityng in those anti∣quitees, haue broken of the heades to carie them awaie. ¶Amongest all other Constantius, sonne of Constan∣tine, beyng come out of Greece to see Rome: and arri∣uyng in the strete called Forum Traiani, rested all a∣mased to beholde the wonderfull beautie therof: and despayryng with hym selfe to be hable to bringe to passe any of those thynges that were before his eies, saied, he woulde see, whether he could make suche an other horse of brasse as was there vnder Traiane in the middest of the markette place. Whervnto one of his skilfull men present, named Ormisda, aunsweared, that he were best fyrst to make suche an other stable to put his horse in. And if emperours theim selfes haue meruailed at these thynges, why shoulde not other men wonder at theim? Of the hill Testacchio. IF the common reporte be true, this hill is one of the notablest thinges amongest the antiquitees of
Rome: because (as they saie) the Romaines ordeined, that all tributes, whiche were brought yerely to Rome, shoulde be laied in pottes made of the earth of the coun∣treys from whens it came, whiche pottes after the mo∣ney was paied, shuld be brought to the place where this ill lieth, there to be broken and remaigne on an heape for a perpetuall memorie of the Romaine empyre. And beyng well considered, it shall appeare, that there can be no deuise lyke vnto this, to haue a thyng endure for e∣uer. For if the hill had been made of any matter worth the cariyng awaie, it should haue been spoyled longe er this time: but because there is nothyng to be gotten, sa∣uyng potshardes, therfore it remaigneth whole as none other antiquitee dooeth. And although learned men allow not this vulgare opinion, thinking it hath growen rather of the broken pottes, that haue been throwen out of the .vii. colledge of potters, founded by Numa Pom∣pilius, yet beholdyng aduisedly the place, whereon it standeth, beyng the fayrest plaine within the walles of Rome, me seemeth it halfe incredible, that the Romains would suffre so fayre a ground to be occupied with pot∣shardes: vnlesse there were some further purpose in it, than I can imagine. For the hill is little lacke of halfe a mile compasse, hygher a great deale than any toure in the towne wall, and so easie to get vp on euery side, that I haue ridden vp at the one end, and downe at the other: and yet is the earth of it so thynne, that diggyng .iii. ynches deepe, you shall finde potshardes.
De Hippodromo. BEtwene this Testacchio and the hill Auentine is a faire grene aunciently called Hippodromus, where some yeres at shroftide, the Romaynes vse to this daie, to tourney on horsbacke, and among other pastimes, they tie two bulles to the tayle of a carte, and so driue the carte from the toppe of Testacchio downe into the plaine, and he that fyrste can take the carte and bulles, shall haue theim: But if the bulles breake lose, as many times they dooe, they make foule worke amongest the people er they be taken, so that sometimes they are faine to kyll theym. Some holde opinion, that this plaie was firste deuised by Tarquinius Priscus, to bee cele∣brated in Februarie in honour of the infernall gods. Of Graners and Arsenales. ON the other syde betwene Testacchio and Tyber haue ben .140. graners for corne, longe and large, as by some of the olde foundacions it dooeth yet appeare. And somewhat neer the foote of the hyll Auentine, were the sellers and aultes for saulte, and all maner of merchaundise: with the Arsenales, where their shippes and galleys were made: of whiche at this daie is scarce any signe to be perceiued. ¶Finallie it were to tediouse a matter for me to speake of euerie notable thyng in Rome. For if Blondus, nor yet Fuluius Italians borne, dwellyng in Rome, and well learned men, haue trauayled therin, and wolde not yet vndertake fullie to descriue those antiquitees, shoulde I
a straunger, that taried there but a small time, enterprise to do it? And yet amongest all other I had almost for∣gotten the sepulchre of Bacchus, that lieth in a little old temple besides the churche of Saint Agnes without the walles,Sepulchrū Bcchi. more notable for the value of the stone than for the woorkemanship. For it is of fine redde porphirie, plaine and square lyke a cheste, and so great, that the onely couer woull requyre a great force to lifte it vp: so that my guide saied meriely, if I had company suffici∣ent to raise vp this stone, I woulde one night see what were within: meanyng that the god Bacchus could not be buried there without some treasure. ¶And to the entent that generally men maie the better vnderstande the sortes of marble, and maners of buil∣dyng, wherwith the citee hath been aunciently beauti∣fied, I shall here reherse one saiyng of Fuluius. The sai∣yng of Fuluius. ¶The aunciente great buildynges, aswell publike as priuate, for the moste parte were founded vpon great square stones, to the ende that the waight and substance of the buyldyng shoulde be the more stedfast, euery stone so ioigned to other with yron claspes, that thei neded no morter. And than the wall from the foundacion vp∣wardes was made of stones, that weighed not paste a pounde weight a peece, laied together proporcionallie chekerwise. The fronte of the buyldyng was most commonly wrought after the maner of a net, or perget∣ted either with a faire white mixture, or elles with Iesse, and some couered finelie with thin marble, or with cer∣taine plates of laten gilte. The vaultes and roofes of the chaumbres were trymmed eyther with glasse, with leade, with Iesse, orels with very fine pein∣tyng{is}:
and the floores vnder foote made some of glasse and some of the finest marble, or other pleasaunt deuises of diuers makyng. ¶They had many kyndes of straunge marble,Kyndes of Marbles. as white marble of the Ile of Paro and of Carrara, and that whiche cometh from Laconia the pleasauntest of all. The redde marble not vnlike the masarde, with certaine white spottes, whiche thei call porphirie. The bloud∣die marble that groweth in Troade. The blacke mar∣ble called Luculleus. The spotted marble called Serpentine. The Onichite brought out of Arabie. The alabaster, and some marble transparent, that is to be seene through, as the Fengite, with diuers others. ¶Of the present astate of Rome. OF the ground conteigned within the wall{is} scarce∣ly the thyrdde parte is now inhabited, and that not where the beautie of Rome hath been, but for the most part on the plaine to the water side, and in the Uaticane: because that sens the bisshoppes beganne to reigne, euery man hath coueted to builde as neere the courte as myght be. Neuerthelesse those streetes and buildynges that are there at this time are so fayre, that I thynke no citee dooeth excell it, by reason they haue had the beautifullest thynges of the antiquitees before rehersed to garnishe theyr houses withall. Specially the bishop, his Cardinalles, prelates and other membres of his churche, who haue all at theyr commaundement. For though the Romains haue in theyr hertes vnto this
daie a certaine memorie of theyr auncient libertee, whi∣che they haue attempted many tymes to recouer: yet doeth the bishop kepe them in suche subiection, that thei dare not ones steerre for their liues, but speake thei maie what thei list, so it be no treason: and therfore many ti∣mes you shall here theim raile on the bishop and his of∣ficers that it is a wonder. In effect the present astate of Rome in comparison of the auncient astate deserueth not to be spoken of, and yet I beleue, that in the Romai∣nes most glorie, there was neuer halfe so muche pompe vsed as now. O what a worlde it is to see the pride and abhominacion, that the Churchemen there main∣teigne? What is a kynge? wha is an emperour in his maiestee? Any thyng lyke to the Romaine bishop? No surely, nor I would not wisshe theim so to be. And to the entent you maie the better perceiue it, you shall vnderstand, that on Christmas daie, the yere of our lord 1547. Paule the thyrde beyng bishop, I noted his co∣ming to church, because it was a principall feast celebra∣ted in Pontificalibus. Wherfore early in the mornyng I resorted to the palaice, and there waited the comyng of the Cardinalles, that for the most parte lie in the ci∣tee, and to come to sainct Peters, must passe Ponte Sant' Angelo, where is an olde ordre, that whan so euer any Cardinall passeth the bridge, there is a peece of ordi∣naunce shotte of in the castell: for an honour that the bishop is bounde to obserue towardes his bretherne. ¶I had not ben longe in the palaice, but I harde two peeces shotte of at ones, wherby I knew that two Car∣dinalles were comyng, and therefore resorted to the gate to see theim and their traine.
¶From Castell Sant' Angelo to Saint Peters staiers, there is an excedyng faire strete, streight and leuell more than a quarter of a myle longe, called Borgo San Piero, in the further ende wherof I saw these Cardinalles come, and therwith out of the bisshops palaice came his garde of Suizzers all in white harueis, and there alongest be∣fore the gate made a laue halfe on one syde and halfe on the other, with their .ii. drummes and a fife before theim. And assoone as the Cardinall{is} approched, the drummes and fife beganne to plaie, and so continued till the Car∣dinalles were well entred amongest the garde. Than the trumpettes blewe vp an other while, till the Cardi∣nalles were almost at the gate, and as they should enter, the shalmes began to plaie, and ceased not tyll they were alighted, and mounted vp the stayers to the bisshoppes lodgeyng. ¶The lyke cerymonies were vsed vnto all the Cardi∣nalles that came, whether one came alone or many to∣gethers. And there taried more than .ii. houres har∣kenyng to this gunneshot and mery pipyng, and rekened aboue .40. Cardinalles that came thus rydyng, sometime one alone, and sometime .iii. or .iiii. together. ¶There was no Cardinall that came without a great traine of gentilmen and prelates, well horsed and apoin∣ted, some had .40. some .50. and some .60. or mo, and next before euerie of theim rode .ii. henchemen, the one cari∣yng a coushin and a riche clothe, and the other a piller of syluer, and the Cardinalles theym selfes aparayled in robes of crymsen chamlet, with redde hattes on theyr heades, rode on moyles. ¶Whan they were all come to the palaice, and had
waited awhile in the chaumbre of presence, the bysshop him selfe with the .iii. crowned miter full of iewelles, in a veraie riche cope, with shoes of crimsen veluette, secte with preciouse stones, and in all his other pontifi∣cal apparaile, came foorth, and at the chambre dore sate him downe in a chaier of crymsen veluet, through the whiche reuneth two staues couered with the same. Thus beyng sette, the prelates and clergy, with the other offycers passed on afore hym. Whiche are suche a numbre, as were able to make the muster of a battail, if they were well ordred in the field, Dataries, Threasorers, Clerkes of the Chambre, Penitentiaries, Prebendaries, Nota∣ries, Protonotaries, and a thousande mo, eche order of theim in his diuers deuise of parliamente robes, all in skarlet, and for the moste parte finely furred. Than came the double crosse, the swoorde and the imperiall hatte, and after that the Cardinall{is} by two and two, and betwene euery two a great route of gentilmen. Than came the ambassadours, and next theim the bishop hym selfe blessyng all the waie, and caried in his chayre by .viii. men clothed in longe robes of skarlet: and on either side of hym wente his garde makynge Rome, and criyng abasso abasso, for they that woull not willyngly kneele, shalbe made kneele by force. And I thynke verily the foremost of this ordre was distant from the hindermost more than a quarter of a myle. ¶Thus whan he came into the middest of the churche against the sacrament of the aulter, he turned hym selfe towardes it, and bowyng his heade a little, seemed to make a certaine familiare reuerence. ¶Than was he caried into the chapell, brought behind
the aulter (for the aulter standeth in the middest open e∣uerie waie) and there in a trone of wonderfull maiestee was set vp as a god. ¶The Cardinall{is} then bestowed them selfes after their auncientees in certaine stalles, somewhat lower about the queere. Than sate the Ambassadours, and o∣ther prelates at theyr feete. And so whan they were set, the chapell beganne the offitorie of the masse, and sange so sweetely, that me thought I neuer heard the lyke. At the communion of the masse the Cardinall that celebrated, brake the host in .iii. peeces, wherof he eate one hym selfe, and the other two he deliuered vpon the paten to a Cardinall appoincted, that brought it to the bishop, and in his presence (for feare of poysonyng) toke assaie of the seconde peece: and deliuered hym the thyrde. ¶Whan the masse was finisshed, the bishop gaue his benediction, with many yeres of pardon, and than retur∣ned to the palaice in lyke ordre as he came. ¶As for the pompe he vseth whan he rideth abroade, I nede not to speake of it, consideryng what I haue saied, sauyng that you shall vnderstande, how Corpus domi∣ni is alwaies caried in a tabernacle before hym on a white hackeney, that is taught to kneele both at the set∣tyng vp, and also at the takyng downe of it. ¶In dede the bishop for his owne ordinarie kepeth no great house, but his traine excedeth all that I haue seen. For euery Cardinall and prelate kepeth house accordyng to his habilitee, and some of theim are so precise, that if one of theyr retinewe be myssyng, whan they goe out of theyr dores, be it gentilman or other, he forfeiteth a cer∣tain
peece of money, which he is constreigned forthwith to paie. And lightlie there is none of theym without iii. or .iiii. paiges trymmed like yonge prynces, for what purpose I wolde be loth to tell. ¶If I shoulde saie, that vnder theyr longe robes they hyde the greattest pride of the worlde, it might happen some men wolde beleue it, but that thei are the vaynest men of all other, theyr owne acres doe well declare. For theyr ordinarie pastime is to disguise them selfes, to go laugh at the Courtisanes houses, and in the shrouyng tyme, to ryde maskyng about with theym, whiche is the occasion that Rome wanteth no iolie dames, speciallie the strete called Iulia, whiche is more than halfe a myle longe, fayre buylded on both sydes, in maner inhabited with none other but Courtisanes, some woorthe .x. and some woorthe .xx. thousande crownes more or lesse as theyr reputacion is. And many tymes you shall see a Courtisane ride into the countrey, with .x. or .xii. horse waityng on hir. ¶Briefelie by reporte, Rome is not without .40000. har∣lottes mainteigned for the moste parte by the clergy and theyr folowers. So that the Romaines theim selfes suffer theyr wifes to goe seldome abrode, either to chur∣che or other place, and some of theym scarcelie to looke out at a lattise wyndow, wherof theyr prouerbe saieth, Jn Roma vale piu la putana, che la moglie Romana, that is to saie, In Rome the harlotte hath a better life, than she that is a Romaines wife. ¶In theyr apparaile thei are as gorgeouse as maie be, and haue in theyr goyng suche a solemne pace, as I ne∣uer sawe. In conclusion to liue in Rome is more costly
than in any other place, but he that hath money maie haue there what him liketh. But now remaigneth to speake of the new buildynges. Of saincte Peters churche. THe churche of saincte Peter standeth somewhat alofte on the hill Vaticane, and hath before it a verie fayre and large roume, as it were a market place: in the middest wherof is a goodly fountaine of marble, that gussheth out water of a great height. ¶From this place vp to the churche are about .30. step∣pes or grices of square stone, the solemnest that I haue seene. For they are almost .30. paces longe. At the toppe of this staire, ouer the middest of a goodly porche, is a great image of sainct Peter of fine marble. With∣in that is a large courte paued with fine marble, in the middest wherof is an antike pineaple of brasse of a won∣derfull biggenesse, and so many images, pillers and o∣ther riche stones, that haue been gathered out of the an∣tiquitees, and brought thither to furnishe the new buil∣dynges withall, that it should be an endelesse woorke to descriue theim. Out of this courte is the entrie into the churche, whiche hath .iii. great gates of brasse, wher∣in the stories of the actes of Eugenie the .iiii. are finely grauen. ¶This churche within is nothyng faire to the eie, but it hath in it manie beautyfull and fine thynges, as the ta∣bernacle of marble, where (they saie) Christes sudarie, and one of the .iii. nayles lieth, the goodly brasen sepul∣ture of Sixtus the .iiii. the brasen images of sainct Peter
and Paule, a numbre of goodly pillers, and diuers other thynges. ¶But aboue all the newe buildyng, if it were finished, wolde be the goodliest thyng of this worlde, not onelie for the antike pillers that haue been taken out of the an∣tiquitees, and bestowed there, but also for the greatnesse and excellent good proporcion that it hath. Neuer∣thelesse it hath been so many yeres adoyng, and is yet so vnperfect, that most men stand in dout, whether euer it shalbe finished or no. ¶In the middest of this newe buildyng is a preaty cha∣pell, wherin the bisshop, with all his Cardinalles and clergie, vse to celebrate theyr solemne cerimonies. Of the bishops palaice with Beluedere. THe bishops palaice ioigneth to the churche, which to myne eie seemeth muche greatter than goodlie: notwithstandyng the lodgynges within foorth are faire, but I can moste commende the staier, that goeth downe from the palaice to the churche, almost a quarter of a myle about, so fayre paued and playne, that a man may easily ride vp and downe. ¶About .iii. quarters of a myle from the palaice is the bisshops bankettyng house, called Beluedere, one of the finest buildynges that is to be seen, so ryche, so plesant, and of so goodlie a prospecte, that it seemeth almoste an other paradyse. The garden walled rounde about, is full of faire oringe trees, and hath in the middest a good∣lie fountaine with perfeite plottes in molde of the riuer
of Nile in Aegypt, and of Tyber, that renneth through Rome. Besides the images of fine marble of Romu∣lus and Remus plaiyng with a woulfes teates, of A∣pollo with his bowe and arowes, of Laocoonte, with his .ii. children wrapped about with serpentes, of Ve∣nus beholdyng little Cupido, of the sorowfull Cleo∣patra, liyng by the riuer side, and of diuers other to long to reherse. ¶Of Castell Sant' Angelo. THis Castell is no lesse notable than some of the rest. It standeth on the banke of Tyber in maner cleane without the towne, and hath .iii. wardes, one within an other: excellently wel builded and strong, and after most mens opinions is impregnable, vnlesse it be by famine. The two inner wardes stande vpon the sepulchre of the emperour Adrian, whiche is a cer∣taine blacke masse of earth of a great heyght, compoun∣ded of certain mixtures, which being dried, is harder and more durable than stone it selfe. Upon this foundacion Adrian made his tombe, and decked it with suche orna∣mentes of marble and other sumptuouse thynges, as made it seeme one of the rarest thynges of the worlde. But after it came to the bishops hand{is}, consideryng the force of the place and stronge foundacion, thei conuerted it to a fortresse, and haue edified many goodly lodgeyn∣ges vpon it: so that oftentymes the bishop hym selfe li∣eth in it, and kepeth his courte there.
Of buildynges in generall. FYnally there be a noumbre of as fayre palaices in Rome as in any other place of the worlde, wherof it should be to longe here to make perticuler menci∣on: but specially the palaice that Paule now bisshoppe there hath builded, by the place called Campo di fiore, where Pompeius house stode in the olde time, deserueth not to be forgotten. For he hath rooted out of the rui∣nes of the antiquitees suche goodly marble pillers and other fine stone, whiche he hath bestowed on that house, that if he finisshe it, as it is begunne, it woull be the ga∣launtest thyng olde or new, that shall be founde againe in all Europe, and he hath called it after his owne name Palazzo Farnese. Abbridgement of the liues of the Romaine Bishoppes. BEcause my principal pur∣pose tendeth to descriue the astates of Italie, I neede not to vse muche cir∣cumstance, either in mattiers of reli∣gion, or yet in writyng all the liues of the bishops of Rome. Wherfore entendyng to beginne at Siluester, the fyrst bishop there that had any thing in perpetuitee, I haue thought good to declare the diuers opinions of theyr originall. Peter the postle.¶Some auncient authours affirme, that Peter one of
Christes Apostles, after that he had sufficientlie confir∣med the churche in Asia, and confuted the errour of those Christians that allowed circumsicion, came to Rome the seconde yere of Claudius Empire, and there was recei∣ued of the congregacion as bishop. In whiche office he ministred .25. yeres, and at last was crucified with the heade downewardes, the same daie that Paule the apo∣stle was beheaded, the laste yere of Neros reigne, and the 37. yere after Christes death. ¶Contrariwyse manie learned men at these daies are of opinion, that Peter neuer came in Rome, groundyng them selfes vpon diuers reasons, as this. If Peter had commen thither, it coulde not haue been vnwriten in the holie scriptures, either by Luke in the actes of the apo∣stelles, or elles by Paule in some of his epistelles. Or if Peter were of that age, that it shoulde seme he was at Christ{is} death, and after continued in Antioche and other places so manie yeres as is to be proued, it semeth im∣possyble he shoulde come to Rome, and there liue .25. ye∣res. Wherfore they saie, the ambiciouse bishops of Rome, to couer theyr vsurped auctoritee, haue feygned this comyng of Peter thither. ¶But this is clere, that from Peter to Siluester they recken .33. bishops: whiche for the moste parte were per∣secuted, and many of theym martyred by the emperours officers. So that in maner they alwaies kept theim selfes out of sight, preachyng and ministryng secretlie without pompe astate or solemne ceremonie. But from the tyme of Siluester hitherwardes, as they grewe in wealthe, so encreased theyr worldely maiestee and ambi∣cion, as hereafter more plainely appeareth.
¶As for the bisshops names, the tyme of theyr reygne, and the date of our Lorde, because that in a table I haue put theim all togethers, I neede not perticulerly to re∣herse euery one of theim, but suche as the occasion of my purpose shall necessarily requyre. Siluester .1SIluester the fyrst of that name, after he had been a certaine space in the hill Soratto, now called Monte di San Siluestro, where for feare of persecucion, he hydde hym selfe, hearyng of the good inclinacion that the emperour Constantine the fyrst was of, towardes Christian religion, came to Rome, and so discretely be∣haued him selfe that the emperour was conuerted to the right faieth, and baptised. ¶Some write, that the occasion therof proceded of a myracle doen on Constantine, in recoueryng his health from the leaprie. But Platina thynketh that to be a fable, and in maner proueth it, thynkyng rather it proceded of the signe of the crosse, that Constantine did see in the firmament, vnder whiche he was promysed victorie, and so cariyng a redde crosse in his standarde before hym, he ouercame his enemie Maxentius, where∣vpon he gaue eare to Siluesters preachyng, and was con∣uerted. But what so euer the occasion was, it is agreed, that Siluester baptised Constantine, who being christened, turned many of the gentiles temples to Christian chur∣ches: enduyng theim with ornamentes and possessions. ¶Not longe after, leauyng Rome to Siluester and his successours, as the clergie saie, Constantine wente to dwell at Bizantium, whiche he had than newly reedifi∣ed, callyng it Constantinople after his owne name. So that from thensfoorth the Christian faieth began to
flourishe ouer all the worlde: and therfore most part of all Christian churches sent to the bishops of Rome to learne of them the cerimonies and ordres necessary to be vsed in the churche, by reason wherof the emperours beyng residente elswhere, the Romayne bishops grewe in such reputacion, that at lengthe they became empe∣rours theym selfes. ¶And there is an auncient writyng in the Vaticane li∣brarie, called the Donacion of Constantine,The dona∣cion of Constan∣tine. whiche is so vehement liberall, that it shoulde seeme the emperour spoyled him selfe of all his glorie and honour, and of a great part of his dominion, to geue theim to the churche of Rome: by aucthoritee wherof the Romaine bishops haue taken vpon theim the imperiall vestementes, maie∣stee, commaundementes and dominion ouer some coun∣treys. ¶In deede Laurentius Valla, an excellent learned man,Ualla a∣gainste the donacion▪ and a Romaine borne, hath written a boke to confound this Donacion of Constantine, and proueth by so many rea∣sons, that it hath been feigned by some bishop of later tyme than Siluester, that I am persuaded rather to be∣leue hym than the Donacion. In effect this Siluester was the fyrst that prescribed a direct ordre of ministers in the churche, and how they shoulde be knowen in theyr degrees from the highest to the lowest: by whose tyme there spronge dyuers sectes amongest the Christians, as the Arrianes, Photines, Sabellianes, and others: for whose reformacion the Nicene counsaile was called,Nicene counsaile, but for all that those errours ceased not many yeeres after. ¶Next vnto Siluester Marke succeded,Marcus, who made his
clergie like vnto a common wealth, exemptyng the same from all temporall iurisdiction, and further established a certaine ordre for the solemne consecracion of the Ro∣maine bishops, that before vsed no pompe at all. Iulius.¶Iulie the fyrst contended with the churche of the O∣rient, partely for the Arrian sect, but most of all for the supremacie of the churche. For this Iulie was the fyrst that claimed the inheritaunce of Peters keyes, for the whiche Constantius, the sonne of Constantine, banished hym out of Rome. But ere he had fully been awaie .x. monethes the emperour died, and than retourned he from exile. Liberius.¶Liberius the first was bishop after him, who by the power of the Arrianes, after the counsaile holden at Myllaine, was banished, and Felix the second chosen in his place. But at length through the emperours dis∣pleasure,Felix .2. Felix was deposed, and Liberius restored, who from that time forwarde fauoured the Arrianes, and or∣deyned that euery bishop should be resident on his bene∣fice, and applie him selfe to fede his flocke. Damasus.¶Damasus succeded Liberius, who contented with Vr∣cisin{us}, one of the decons of the church, that was likewise elected vnto the bishoprike. For the Romayns at that tyme were diuided into sectes, so that a numbre of either side were slaine, but finally Damasus preuailed: and Vrcisinus was confyned to Naples. ¶This Damasus was afterward{is} accused of adultery: and therfore called .40. bishops together, and cleryng him selfe of the cryme, not onelie punished his accusers, but also made a decree, Sub poena tallionis, that none of the clergie from thensefoorth shuld be accused: whiche
Poena tallionis condemneth the accuser to the payne of the accusacion, in case he prouet it not. ¶At this tyme lyued sainct Hierome,Hierome. that than hadde newelie translated the bible out of Hebrue into the la∣tine tonge, and had set it foorth to the edificacion of the churche, whiche before had none other but the .70. inter∣pretours. ¶Syritius was next bishop, in whose tyme,Syritius, the secte of the Manichees encreased muche: of all other most pe∣stilent to our Christian religion. It beganne thorough one Maneph, a Persian borne, who named hym selfe Christ, chose vnto him .12. apostles, reproued the olde te∣stament, folowed the new, and saied, that Christ had but a fantasticall and a feigned body: and with wonders gate hym suche creadite, that in maner all the east par∣tees were corrupted with his heresies. ¶Finally Syritius, to refourme this and other lyke se∣ctes, called a generall counsaile in Constantinople of 1350. bishoppes, where these opinions were vniuersally condemned: though they could not be clerely extingui∣shed many yeres after. ¶But because it apperteygneth not to my purpose, to write of sectes and opinions, seyng that till the time of Gregorie the seconde, about the yere of our lorde .720. the Romaine bishops trauailed most in mattiers of reli∣gion, beyng alwaies obedient and ruled by the empe∣rours without peculier dominion: I woull passe theim ouer for that space. ¶True it is, that in the tyme of Phoca the emperour, vppon controuersie moued betweene the Patriarke of Constantinople and the bishop of Rome, for the supre∣macie
of the churche,Suprema∣cie of the churche. Boniface the .iii. obteined a pri∣uilege of the emperour, that he and his successours from thensefoorth shoulde be taken for Primates and chiefe of all Christian bishops. By reason of whiche pre∣ferrement not longe after the Romaine bishops, not one∣ly toke on theim the direction of all other bishops, with grauntyng of Dispensacions, Iubilees, and Pardons, but also wold put foorth their feete to be kissed of prin∣ces: yea and of emperours theim selfes, as appeareth by the example of the emperour Iustinian, who kissed the feete of bishop Constantine the fyrst, as Platina affir∣meth: like as other emperours sens haue accustomed to dooe. But for all that I fynde not, that any bishop o∣penly contended with the emperours till the time of this Gregorie the seconde. Gredori∣s .2. Images put out of churches.¶Leo the .iii. emperour commaunded throughout his dominion, that all maner of images shoulde be cleane had out of the churches for auoydyng of Idolatry, but the most parte of the people disalowed this ordinaunce. Through comfort wherof this Gregorie so contended a∣gainst it, that in most partes of Italie, the emperours of∣ficers executyng their princ{is} commandement in this be∣halfe, were hewē to peces: as the exarke of Rauenna with his son, Marinus Spatarius duke of Rome with his son, and diuers other. Insomuche that Gregorie not onely sequestred from the emperour the customes and taxes due vnto hym out of Rome and manie other citees in I∣talie, but also called a counsaile, and excomunicated the emperour as an heritike, and leauyng the churche in that astate died. Blondus saieth, that the doer hereof was Stephen the secounde, who was bishop before this Gre∣gorie:
but by agreement of most authours it shoulde not seeme to be so. ¶Than succeded Gregorie the .iii. who folowyng the example of his predecessour,Gregori∣us. . called a counsaile in Rome of a .1000. bishops, wherin the emperour was not onely excomunicate againe, but also by decree depriued of his imperiall title and iurisdiction, and the Italian nacion procured to rebell against him. ¶By reason whereof whan Luitprandus kynge of the Lumbardes, had besieged the citee of Rome, the bishop could not for shame requyre succours of the emperour, but was faine to sende to Charles Martell,Charles Martell▪ than beyng chiefe ruler in Fraunce: by whose fayre meane and en∣treatie, the Lumbarde withdrew his siege, the rather because Charles Martell had made hym his gossippe. And here beganne the fyrst amitee betweene the kynges of Fraunce and the Romaine churche. ¶Zacharie succeded Gregorie,Zacharias▪ who to encrease the re∣putacion of the Romaine churche, at the intercession of Pepine, sonne vnto Charles Martell, than great mai∣ster of the frenche kyng{is} house,Chilperike deposed. deposed Chilperike than beyng kyng, and made hym a monke closed vp in a cloy∣ster, and afterwardes inuested Pepine kyng of Fraunce. For whiche acte the heyres of Pepine were euer after earnest friendes to the Romaine See. ¶This Zacharie vppon occasion wente to Narnia to Luitprandus kyng of Lumbardes, and there partly with makyng a sermon, and partly with his hūble behauiour, entred in suche grace with the kyng, that he gaue to the churche of Rome .iii. citees, Narnia, Ancona, and Huma∣na, with a great valey in Sutri: whiche were the fyrste
notable possessions that the churche of Rome obteined. For vntill this tyme if the churche had any temporal∣tees, thei were so small, that they serued scarcely to the necessarie findyng of the ornamentes and ministers. But after this they encreased so muche, that they passed princely astates. Stepha∣nus .2.¶After Zacharie folowed Stephen the secounde, in whose tyme Aristolfus or Aistolfus, kynge of Lum∣bardes, troubled all the astates of Italie, by reason he had gotten Rauenna, with diuers other citees, and was like to haue subdued the reste. Wherfore the bishop, that than had taken vpon hym to rule the Romaines, sent for ayde vnto Constantine the .v. than emperour. From whom he receiued so small coumfort, that for his last refuge, he repayred to Pepine kyng of France, and procured hym to come into Italie. ¶Pepine to gratifie the Romaine churche, vsed all his power, and two seuerall times passed the Alpes against Aristolfe. At the first he besieged Pauia, and there constreigned Aristolfe to promise more than he perfour∣med in deede: and at the secounde tyme, for breache of that promyse, to forgoe the exarkate of Rauenna, whi∣che he had before taken by force from the emperours ex∣arke there: so that Pepine at his last viage gaue vnto the Romaines, although the bishop vnder that name re∣ceiued it as his owne, all the territorie of Pentapoli and Aemilia, from Placentia to Pesaro, liyng betwene the Appenine hill{is}, the Po, and the Adriatike sea: whiche are at the least .xi. or .xii. citees, with the countreis a∣bout theim. Through the gifte wherof the Romaine bishoprike encreased no lesse in power than before tyme
it had dooen in aucthoritee. ¶True it is, that the emperour sent his ambassadours vnto Pepine, to claime this exarkate, wherof he and his predecessours had ben in possession .170. yeres: but those ambassadours could not be heard. ¶Blondus saieth, that these thynges happened in the time of bishop Gregorie the .iii. ¶Of this Paule I finde nothyng notable,Paulus. sauyng he did his beste to dissuade Constantine the .v. emperour from the defacyng and hurlyng of images out of the christian churches: but Constantine, folowyng the ex∣aumple of his father Leo,Images. not onelie extirped the ima∣ges, but also put diuers to deathe that wente about to resist it. ¶After the death of Paule, Desiderius, king of the Lum∣bardes made Constantine bishop by force,Constanti∣nus .2. but within a yere, the clergie of Rome deposed him, and elected Ste∣phen the .iii. in his place,Stepha∣nus .3. in whose tyme happened no no∣table thyng in the churche, sauyng that he with all the clergie immediatly after his election, in token of humi∣litee, wente barefoote in procession from the Laterane churche to Saint Peters. ¶This Adrian was so haulte of courage,Adrianus. that whan Desiderius the kyng sent ambassadours to congratulate his election, and to enter in amitee with him, he answea∣red theim, howe maie I trust him, that so ofte hath bro∣ken his faith? wherwith Desiderius toke suche displea∣sure, that he inuaded the churches dominion, and tooke by force Faenza, Ferrara, Comacchio, Montefeltro, Vr∣bino, Senegalia, and was come as farre as Spoleti, en∣tendyng to goe to Rome, had not .iii. bishops mette hym
there with an excomunicacion: for feare wherof he re∣tourned to Pauia without anie more adoe. But because he helde still in possession the foresaied citees, the bishop of Rome procured Charlemaigne, than frenche kyng, to come into Italie, who with a mightie power besieged Pauia, tooke Desiderius with his wife and children pri∣soners, restored to the churche all that his father Pe∣pine had geuen, with more, and reserued vnto him selfe the dominion of Lumbardie. ¶In this bishops time Tyber rose so high, that Rome was in maner cleane drowned. Leo .3.¶After Adrian succeded Leo the .iii. who because the Romaines conspyred against him, fledde vnto Charle∣maigne, and by hym was restored with great pompe into his astate, & for pacifiyng this Romayn furie against the bishop, Charlemaigne him selfe with a great army came to Rome, where for the high seruice he had doen to holie churche, the Romaine bishop annointed and proclaimed him emperour August:Thempire diuided. and his sonne Pepine kyng of Italie. So that from this time forewardes the em∣perours of Constantinople were no more reputed Ro∣mayne emperours: but emperours of Greece. For Charlemaigne did so muche, that at lengthe the empires were deuided by confines, and the Greeke Emperours consented to suffer the Frenchemen in quyette bothe with the name and dominion of the Occidentall empire. ¶After the death of Charlemaigne and of Pepine, this Leo remembryng the olde conspiracie made against him, caused many of the chiefe Romaines his enemies to be put to death. For the whiche at laste he was faine to withdrawe him from Rome, and liyng at Blera, the Ro∣maynes
in a sodayne rage spoyled and rased to the earth all the buildynges that he had made or procured to be made in Rome. And because the bishop died shortelie thervpon, Lewys the frenche kynge and emperour, sent his cousin Bernarde as kyng into Italie, to be a staie against the inconueniences that of this furie might haue folowed: whiche Bernarde within few yeres after re∣belled, but at last he was constreigned to yelde him selfe, and so beyng brought into Fraunce, was beheaded. ¶This Stephen went into Fraunce,Stepha∣nus .4. and there crowned the forenamed Lewys emperour, who for his great cur∣tesie and gentilnesse was called Lewys the meeke: and at his retourne to Rome, this bishop brought many Ro∣mains home with him, that his predecessour had exiled. ¶After Stephen succeded Pascall,Pascalis▪ who crowned Lo∣tharius, sonne of Lewys the meeke, kyng of Italie, and successour to his father in the empyre: and with faire persuasions obteined of Lewys the election or confyr∣macion of all bishops, whiche before that time depended onely vpon the emperours pleasure. And further pro∣cured the confines and limites of the churches dominion to be made certaine, and that with the largest. ¶But Gregorie the .iiii. woulde not take vpon hym the bishoprike,Gregori∣us .4. till he had receiued his confyrmacion from the emperour Lewys before named. ¶In his tyme, the Sarasines in great noumbre landed in Italie, besieged Rome, toke it, spoyled it, and all the countrey about: but at last they were repulsed by the Marques Guido of Lumbardie, with helpe of the fren∣chemen. ¶Sergius the secounde,Sergius▪  fyrst gaue president to all his
successours to change theyr names: by reason that his owne name Bocca di porco that is to saie, swynes∣mouth, was so vnseemely, that he thought it not agrea∣ble to his dignitee. He repayred the walles of the Va∣ticane, and builded Castel Sant' Angelo vpon the tombe of Adrian. Iohannes .8.¶Iohan the .viii. was an englishe woman, that in hir youthe disguised in a boies apparaile was brought to Athenes in Greece, where she profited so muche in lear∣nyng, that whan she returned to Rome, for hir good be∣hauiour and singler reputacion she was elected bishop: and so continued more than two yeres, till at last goyng in procession towardes sainct Iohn Lateranes, she fell in trauaile of childe in the high waie, and there died. For whiche cause the bishops to this daie dooe forsake that waie, and (as they saie) whan any new bishop is e∣lected, he is brought to sainct Iohn Lateranes, and there set in a chayre with an hole, that the eldest Deacon of the Cardinalles maie feele vtrum habet testiculos. Adrianus .2.¶Adrian the seconde was elected and establisshed bi∣shop without the emperours consent, wherwith the em∣perours ambassadours, than resident in Rome, beganne somewhat to be moued: but at length the emperour him selfe was so contented withall, that from thensefoorth the clergie in maner esteemed not the emperours. Iohan∣nes .9.¶Iohn the .ix. succeded Adrian, and willyng to crowne Lodouicus Balbus frenche kynge emperour: the Ro∣maines (that fauoured more Charles the .iii. kynge of Germanie, who than was entred into Italy with an ar∣mie) put the bishoppe in prison: but he was shortly con∣ueighed out, and fledde into Fraunce, where he annoin∣ted
the kyng emperour. Neuerthelesse within a while after the frenche kyng dyed, and than was the bishop re∣consiled to the foresaied kyng Charles, whom he after∣warde crowned emperour. ¶Adrian the .iii. bishop made a law,Adrianus  that from thens∣foorth the emperours shoulde haue naught to dooe with his successours elections. ¶Stephen the .vi. bearyng malice in his hert against his predecessour Formosus,Stepha∣nus .6. caused hym to be taken out of his graue, to be spoyled of his pontificall vestemen∣tes, his fingers to be cut of, and his body to be throwen into Tyber, as an excomunicate and damned person. For whiche act there grewe heynous contencion amon∣gest the Romains, that ceased not many yeres after. ¶At this place Platina began to lament the tyranny of the Romaine bishops, because from hense foorthf there reigned no more humilitee, temperance, religion, trouth nor charitee amonge theim: but in stede therof ambici∣on, disdeygne, auaryce, falshead, and tyrannie. For shortly after Leo the .v. was by force deposed, and put in prison by Christofer the fyrste, one of his owne bryn∣gyng vp: who continued scarcely .vii. monethes, but was likewyse serued by Sergius the .iii. ¶Here, I haue thought good to make a litle digression, because of the notable chaunge of the empire. ¶About this time began the contencion betwene Lewis the Frenche kyng, and Berengarius Duke of Friuli for the empire and dominion of Lumbardie. ¶The Italians wolde not, that the bishops of Rome shoulde crowne any other emperour than one of theyr owne nacion, wherupon Berengarius tooke on hym the
name of emperour and kyng of Italie, and in that qua∣rell fought twise with Lewys. The first battaile he lost, but the second he wan: in the which Lewys was ta∣ken prisoner, and one of his eies put out. And thus ended the empire in Charlemaignes descent,Chaunge of the empire. for the which was no smal contencion awhile betwene the .iii. nacions, Ita∣lian, Frenche and Douche. Berenga∣rius .1.¶Fyrste this Berengarius reygned with the name of emperour .iiii. yeres, and had no small warres, speciallie with the Conte Guido di Spoleti: who at the laste was discomfited and slayne in the fielde. And as some write, the bishop Lando gaue Berengarius the crowne. Berenga∣rius .2.¶After him reigned Berengarius the secound .vii. yeres, who suffred the Hungariens to passe into Italie, vpon condicion they shoulde not offende his subiectes: but they kepte not theyr couenaunt with him. Raulfe Duke of Burgoyne▪¶And than came Raulfe Duke of Burgoyne, and draue him out of Italie: whiche he ruled for the space of .iii. yeres, till Berengarius, with helpe of the Hungariens recouered it againe. Hugo Cn¦te d' Arli.¶Than came Hugh, Conte d' Arli, and reigned after Be∣rengarius .x. yeres askyng of Italie. Berenga∣rius .3.¶The last of the Italians was Berengarius the .iii. who reigned about .xi. yeres, and was expulsed, as you shall here afterwardes. Iohan∣nes .11.¶Iohn the .xi. (a better warriour than churchman) with the helpe of Alberico Marques of Tuscane, gathered an armie, and fought with the Sarasines, that than had ouerronne Puglia and Calabria, and were comyng to Rome, and in effecte so discomfited theim, that they fled to Monte Gargano, where thei fortified them selfes, and
did muche hurte afterwardes in the realme of Naples. Finally he fell at variaunce with the forenamed Mar∣ques, who therfore called the Hungarians into Italie, and scourged the whole nacion, aswell his owne subie∣ctes as others: So that the Romains to be auenged toke Alberico and beheaded hym, and the souldiours tooke the bishop and strangeled hym. ¶Agapet the seconde,Agapi∣tus .2. seeyng the puissance of Berenga∣rius the .iii. and fearyng to come vnder his subiection, with consent of the Romains procured Otho, than new∣ly chosen emperour in Germanie,Otho. with a great armie to come into Italie. Where he fought twyse with Be∣rengarius, and at either tyme toke hym and his soonne Albert prisoners. The fyrst tyme he restored hym to the astate of Lumbardie vpon condicions. But the se∣counde tyme he and his sonne bothe were ledde awaie, and confined the one to Bamborough in Almaigne, and the other to Constantinople: where thei died miserably. ¶Iohn the .xii. not by free election, but by the power of his father Alberico than chiefe of the Romaines,Iohan∣nes .12. was made bishop. For though the bishops had longe time continued like kynges, I meane for theyr astate and temporall possessions: yet for all that the Romaines created yerely certaine Consules and other officers af∣ter theyr olde facion, and had belongyng to theyr com∣mon wealth diuers townes neere vnto Tuscane, betwene Vrbeuentano, and Tudertino, and all that is betwene Naples, Marsi, Riete, and Rome, so that the chiefe Ro∣maines bare a great stroke in the bisshops elections. ¶This bishop crowned Otho beforenamed fyrst empe∣rour of the Germaines. For neither Henrie Duke of
Saxonie last emperour before him, nor yet Conrade suc∣cessour to Lewys before named of Charlemaignes de∣scent, were euer crowned: though they bothe toke vpon theim the imperiall aucthoritee. ¶This Iohn was a man of so ill liuyng, that two of his Cardinalles complained on hym to the emperour: besechyng hym to see a reformacion for an exaumple to the worlde. But the bishop hearyng of this, was soone euin with theim. For he cutte of the ones nose, and the others handes: and afterwardes receiued the emperour with so good a countinance, that he seemed nothing gil∣tie, till the clergie with one voyce accused hym, where∣vpon he fledde into the mountaines and hidde him selfe: so that the emperour with consent of the clergie chose Leo the .viii. But assoone as the emperour retourned home, Iohn by force of his friendes expulsed Leo, re∣couered his bishoprike, and so continued till he died. ¶Some write, that this was Iohn the .xiii. For amon∣gest the aucthours is some confusion in the numbre of these Iohns, specially because some recken the english Iohan for one, and some recken hir not: but how so euer it be, this Iohn succeded Agapet the secounde: and as some write, was taken in adoulterie and slaine by the womans housbande. Iohannes .13¶Iohn the .xiii. elected by the clergie against the Ro∣maines will, was taken by Geffroie Conte di Campania and exiled, till this Geffroie and his sonne were slaine by an other lorde of Campania. Insomuche that the emperour Otho, hearyng of this bishops exile, made an armie, and came to Rome, where after a solemne en∣trey, he toke all the senatours and put theim in prison,
sent the Consules prisoners into Almaigne: and one Peter that had been chiefe of the conspiracie against Iohn, was drawen througe the stretes, whipped naked, hanged by the heare of the head, and finally in maner halfe dead sent prisoner into Germanie, where he fini∣shed his daies. For whiche courtesie this Iohn crow∣ned Otho the secounde (sonne of this fyrst Otho) em∣perour, by the fathers consent, and his wyfe Theophi∣la empresse. ¶Benedict the .vi. was taken by Cinthio,Benedi∣ctus .6. a noble man of Rome, and beyng laied in prison in Castel Sant' Ange∣lo, was either strangled or famished to death. ¶Boniface the .vii. beyng constreyned to forsake Rome,Bonifati∣us .7. toke all the richesse of S. Peters churche with hym to Constantinople, and there solde it: and at length retour∣ned to Rome, where after he was well receiued, he put out one of his Cardinalles eies. ¶Gregorie the .v. by reason of a commocion in Rome,Gregori∣us .5. fled first into Tuscane, and afterwardes into Germanie, because he wolde not consente to crowne Crescentius emperour: who beyng the noblest amongest the Romai∣nes, was prouoked by the Italians to take the empyre vpon hym. So that whan Gregorie was fledde, they made one that had been bishop of Placentia bishop of Rome, and named him Iohn the .17. but Otho the .iii. than emperour, with a puisant armie came to Rome, and wolde haue besieged it, had not the Romayns receiued him, so that Crescentius and the bishop Iohn both fled into Castel Sant' Angelo, and there helde them till thei had so faire offres made on themperours behalfe, that vpon trust therof they came foorthe and submitted theim sel∣fes.
But for all that they were both turmented, and at last put to death. Wherupon it folowed, that this Gregorie, who was a Saxon borne, transferred the electi∣on of emperours vnto .vii. princis of his owne nacion, that is to wete, The kyng of Boeme, cupbearer, the Marques of Brandenburgh chamberlayne,Electours of the empire. the Conte Palatine sewer, and the Duke of Saxonie swoordbearer, with .iii. Archebishops of Mentes, Treuee, and Coleyn. And ordeyned further, that from the emperours election to his coronacion, he shoulde be called none other but Caesar and kyng of Romayns,Cesar. and after that the bishop of Rome had crowned him, he shoulde be called Empe∣rour and August,Augustus. whiche order by consent of the forena∣med Otho, was established about .200. yeres after Char∣lemaignes coronacion. Bene∣dictus .8.¶Benedicte the .viii. crowned Henrie the secounde, em∣perour: who was the fyrste that accordyng to the order of Gregorie the .v. was elected by the princis of Germa∣nie. Some call him Henrie the fyrste, because Henrie Duke of Saxonie, that succeded Conrade, neuer came to Rome to be crowned. Bene∣dictus .9.¶Benedict the .ix. for his naughtie behauiour was ex∣pulsed, and Siluester the .iii. placed in his roume, who helde it .40. daies, and than was Benedict restored. Neuerthelesse Benedict mistrustyng that he coulde not kepe it longe, solde his iurisdiction vnto Gregorie the vi. but the emperour,Shiftyng and poy∣sonyng of Romayne bishops. Henrie the .iii. came to Rome, depo∣sed these .iii. bishops, and created Clement the seconde, who liued not fullie .x. monethes, by reason that his next successour Damasus the seconde founde meane to poyson him, beyng after so serued him selfe the .23. daie nexte
folowyng his election. ¶Leo the .ix. beyng sent as bishop to Rome,Leo .9▪ at the Ro∣maines request, that desired the emperour to sende theim a good man, mette with .ii. monkes by the waie, who per∣suaded him so muche, that he put of his pontificall ha∣bite, and priuatelie came to Rome, saiyng that he repen∣ted hym to haue taken of the emperour, that whiche ap∣perteined to the clergies free election. For whiche humilitee the clergie embraced him, and neuerthelesse made him their bishop. ¶He made an armie against the Normains, than rei∣gnyng in the realme of Naples, to recouer Beneuento, that they had wonne from the churche, where his army was discoumfited, and he with diuers of his Cardinal∣les taken prisoners. But the Normaines freely deli∣uered hym, and honourablie sent hym home. ¶In his time was the counsaile of Vercelli called a∣gainst the opinion of Berengarius for the sacrament of communion. ¶Stephen the .ix. brought the churche of Myllaine to the obedience of the churche of Rome,Stepha∣nus .9. whiche for .200. yeres before would neuer knowlage Rome for hir supe∣riour. ¶Nicolas the .ii. after the clergie had deposed Bene∣dicte the .x. was elected, who made a decree,Nicola∣us, 2. that from thensefoorth the Cardinalles onely shoulde choose the bishoppe. ¶He created Robert Guiscarde Duke of Calabria and Puglia, and made hym lieutenaunt of the churche, by whose power he subdued to the churches dominion the Prenestini, Tusculani, and Numentani: with diuers o∣ther
territories about Rome. Alexandre .2.¶Alexandre the .ii. in the beginnyng of his astate was disturbed by Gadolo bishop of Parma: for the whiche they fought two battailes, but finally Alexandre pre∣uailed, by reason that at a counsaile holden in Mantua, where the emperour was present, the whole clergie a∣greed vppon Alexander, and exempted from all empe∣rours the aucthoritee of confyrmacion of the Romaine bishops: whiche afterwardes was occasion of many in∣conueniences. Gregori∣us .7.¶Gregorie the .vii. incontinently vpon his election beganne to proue maistries with the emperour Henrie the .iii. Fyrst he woulde not be confyrmed of the em∣perour, and afterwardes, where the emperour before tyme had vsed to geue bishoprikes, Gregorie would geue theim hym selfe. So that whan a bishop died, the emperour woulde name one, and Gregorie an other. Wherof folowed excomunicacions as thicke as hayle, so that at laste the emperour hym selfe was not onely excomunicate, but also by the ecclesiasticall power de∣posed of the empyre. And yet had religion so muche power in hym, that whan he was come into Italie, and had besieged his enemie Gregorie within the towne of Canosso, the emperour hym selfe went barefooted to the towne gates in the harde frost and snow, to aske for∣geuenesse of the bishop: who for all that stode styfe .iii. or .iiii. daies ere he woulde assoyle hym. At lengthe they agreed vpon condicion, that the emperour shoulde obey the bishops commaundementes. ¶But the bishop not yet contented, within a whyle af∣ter so offended the emperour againe, that he came to
Rome, and was there receiued of the Romaines. Wherfore Gregorie fled into Castel Angelo, and there kepte hym, till he was rescued by Robert Guiscarde, for feare of whose comyng the emperour retyred into Ger∣manie. Where by the bishops procurement the princes had elected Radulphus de Sueuia emperour, betweene whom and Henry were many blouddy battailes fough∣ten, and not onely Radulphus him selfe slaine at length, but also the emperours owne sonne so suborned, that he warred against his naturall father, and besieged hym in the towne of Mentz. Neuerthelesse (muche against the bishops will) nature and friendes wrought a peace betwene theim at last. ¶And though Guiscarde deliuered this bishop out of themperours hand{is}, yet he was so hated of the Romai∣nes, that he durst not abide in Rome, but went with Gu∣iscarde into the realme of Naples, and there died. ¶Some write,Priestes mariage. that this Gregorie was the fyrste that prohibited matrimonie vnto priestes. ¶Uictor the .iii. was poysoned by the emperours pro∣curemente, as some write,Uictor .3. but some holde that he died of a naturall infirmitee. ¶Pascall the .ii. fell at varyaunce with the familie of Colonna in Rome, by reason wherof,Pascalis▪ whiles he was at the gettyng of Beneuento (which by the helpe of Roger Duke of Puglia he obteined) the Colonesi by force toke the towne of Caua apperteinyng to the churche. But the bishop at his retourne both recouered Caua, and also toke from them Zagarolo, and Colonna their owne en∣heritaunce. Wherupon folowed so muche busynesse, that almoste no man coulde passe in quiete anie where
through Campania. ¶This Pascall went into Fraunce to reforme the disor∣dinate life of the clergie there. ¶After his retourne into Italie, he condemned the do∣ynges of Henry the .iiii. emperour, so that whan the em∣perour him selfe was come as far as Sutri, with a great armie, the bishop forbade hym the comyng to Rome, till he had promised not to medle with the churche matters: and further to cause those bishops that he had made, to renounce their bishoprikes. ¶But whan the emperour had kyssed the bishops foote at the heade of S. Peters staiers, and was receiued with solemne procession into the churche, than he requyred Pascall to confirme his bishops, who refusyng so to doe, he with diuers of his cardinals and prelat{is}, were taken, spoyled of their myters and copes, and so ledde into the armie that laie without the citee, and from thense into a stronge holde, till the bishop so consented to the empe∣rours will, that he not onely crowned him there, but also confyrmed his bishops. How be it, shortlie after the emperours retourne into Germanie, Pascall called a counsaile in Laterano, and reuoked all his doynges to the emperour, because they had ben doen through com∣pulsion and not of free will. Wherfore the emperour with a puisaunt armie retourned to Rome, and findyng that Pascall was withdrawen into Puglia, for feare of displeasure, he caused him selfe to be crowned a newe by the archebishop of Barcare, of whom he also toke aucto∣ritee to dispose the bishoprikes at his pleasure. Matilda.¶Aboute this tyme died the Countesse Matilda, that gaue vnto the churche of Rome all the territorie from
the riuer Pissea and San Quirico vpon the Senese, vnto Ceperano betwene the Appenine hilles and the sea, with the Feodariship of Ferrara. ¶And in this bishops tyme was the great viage made of the Christians into the holy lande,Uage into the holy lande, where Hierusa∣lem was wonne, and Godfrey of Boloigne crowned kynge. ¶Gelasius the .ii. succeded Pascall by the clergies e∣lection, but the familie of Frangipani in Rome,Gelasius .2 which were of the imperiall faction, toke hym by force: and put hym the fyrst nyght in prison, but there was suche a commocion of the people the nexte mornyng, that the chiefe of his enemies was faine to kysse his feete, and to let hym goe. Wherfore shortly after the emperour came so soddeinly to Rome, that no man knew thereof, till he was in sainct Peters churche, so that the bishop in∣continently fledde, and by boote escaped downe Tyber vnto Ostia, and so into Fraunce, where he died. Af∣ter whose departure, the emperour created the abouena∣med bishoppe of Bracare in his place, callyng hym Cle∣ment: and so committyng hym to the protection of the Frangipani, retourned into Almaigne. ¶Calixt the seconde, before archebishop of Vienna,Calixtus.  was elected successour vnto Gelasius by the Cardinall{is} that than were resident in Fraunce: how be it, he would not take the dignitee vpon hym: till he had woorde from Rome, that the clergie there were contented withall. Upon good aduertisement wherof he repayred thither: and findyng the imperiall bishop to be fledde, settled his astate there: sendyng to the emperour for peace and fa∣uour, whiche he easilie obteined.
¶And hearyng that the imperiall bishop was gone to Sutri, and there had fortified, he made an armie, went thither, besieged Sutri, toke his aduersarie, brought hym to Rome, made hym ride about the stretes on a ca∣mell, with the taile in his hande: and at last closed him vp in an abbey. He trauailed muche for William Duke of Puglia in the defence of his countrey against Roger Erle of Sicile, but it auailed not. ¶Innocent the seconde immediately after his corona∣cion,Innocen∣ius .2. sodeinly reised an army, and went against the fore∣named Roger that than wrote him selfe kyng of Sicile: whom he founde so vnprouided, that he made hym flee to Castell Galuzzo, and there besieged him: till his son William with a great power came to the rescue, fought with the bishops armie, and toke the bishop withall his Cardinalles prisoners. Neuerthelesse they were af∣terwardes courtesly let goe, and accompanied toward{is} Rome, where in the meane season was a newe bishoppe made, named Anaclete. And this new bishoppe vsyng the iewelles of sainct Peters as his owne, made so ma∣ny friend{is}, that Innocent was faine to flee from thense to Pisa, from Pisa to Genoa, and so into Fraunce. Fi∣nally he went vnto Lotharius the .iii. than elected Cae∣sar, and by his meanes was restored to his bishoprike a∣gaine. For the whiche he rewarded Lotharius with the imperiall crowne as the custome was, causyng hym afterwardes so to inuade the realme of Naples, that Roger, who than called hym selfe kyng therof, forsoke Italie cleane for a tyme. ¶The emperour was no sooner retourned into Germa∣nie, but the bishop, thinkyng hym selfe in peace, fell at
variaunce with the Romains for chosyng of senatours, because somewhat before that tyme the other bishops his predicessours, had taken all temporall power clere∣ly from the citesins, and vsed it priuately as theyr own. In the heate of whiche contencion Innocence died. ¶Eugenius the .iii. incontinently vpon his election for∣soke Rome,Eugenius .3. because the Romains were resolutely deter∣myned to mainteigne theyr Senatours: and he to the contrarie, vsyng his vttermost power, constreigned them to crie him mercie, and to committe the ordre of all ma∣gistrates vnto him. Neuerthelesse after his retourne, the people (that coulde not brooke the losse of theyr ly∣bertees) so rebelled agaynste him, that he was faine to flee, and went into Fraunce: where declaryng his case vnto Lewys the kyng, he obteined suche succours, that in maner by force he retourned to Rome, and had his owne will. ¶Adrian the .iiii. an englishman borne,Adrianus▪ 4. constreigned the Consulles and Senatours of Rome to depose theym selfes, and to committe all theyr rule vnto the churche. He crowned Frederike Barbarossa emperour, thoughe afterwardes he did excommunicate hym. He also graunted the title of kyng to William the third, descen∣ded of the Normaine bloud, beyng than lorde of Sicile, and of the realme of Naples. He encreased not a litle the Churches territorie, but he was muche hated of the Romains for takyng awaie of their libertees. Finally before his death he repented the excōmunicacion of the emperour, saiyng, that there coulde be none so mi∣serable an astate, as the Romaine bishoprike gotten with bloudde.
Alexan∣der. .¶Alexander the .iii. had vnto his election the voyces of 22. Cardinalles, and Octauian had but .iii. as moste au∣thours agree. Neuerthelesse betwene theim two grewe so great a Schisme, that the emperour Frederike was faine to call diuers counsayles for the mattyer: cityng both the parties there to appeare, that the mattier might be rightuously iudged. Octauian came at the emperours callyng, but Alexander wolde neuer appeare. Wherfore the emperour became so muche his ennemie, that he was fayne to flee from Rome into Fraunce and other regions, to procure helpe of other princes. So that there happened much bloudde, fyre, and destruction for this mattier manie yeres together. ¶Some write, that Alexander was so pursued of the emperour, that in a cookes apparayle he was fayne to flee vnknowen, from place to place, till at laste he came to Uenice, and there in a monastarie toke a gardeyners wages, and serued in the kitchin. Where he was dis∣couered by a pilgrime, and therupon apparailed, and brought in Pontificalibus with procession to S. Markes churche, remaignyng there honorably enterteigned, till after fore feight by sea, betwene the emperour and the Uenecians, Otho the emperours son was taken prisoner, by whose meanes a peace was made betwene Alexander and the emperour. Some writers make no mencion of this historie: but saie, that by appointment Alexander came honorablie to Uenice, to mete the emperour for a treatie of peace, wherby the other historie of the cookish apparaile shoulde seeme vntrewe. In effect howe so euer it were there they mette, and the emperour in pre∣sence of all the people kneled downe to kisse the bishops
foote. At whiche kissyng, some affyrme, that the bi∣shop vsed these woordes: Super aspidem et Basiliscum ambulabis et conculcabis leonem et draconem: And the emperour aunsweared, Non tibi sed Petro. wherunto the bishop replied: et Petro et mihi. Neuerthelesse there they concluded suche a peace, that the bishop retourned to Rome and enioyed his place. Immediately wher∣vpon he called a counsaile in Laterano, in the whiche iiii. bishops (that sens his fyrst election had been crea∣ted by the emperour) were condemned body and soule. ¶In his tyme Thomas Beckette,Thomas Beckette▪ bishop of Caunter∣burie, was slaine. And the kynge of Englande (as some write) sent ambassadours to this Alexandre, pro∣testyng the same to be doen vnknowyng to hym. But the bishoppe not credityng the ambassadours, sent two Cardinalles into Englande to examine the trouth: who compelled the kyng to sweare, that he was not giltie of Beckettes death: and neuerthelesse they enioigned him in penaunce, to sende .200. souldiours to serue an whole yere in Hierusalem: and within the terme of .iii. yeres to goe against the infidelles hym selfe, to mainteine all the libertees of the churche, and to permitte mattiers to be appealed to the courte of Rome. ¶Lucie the .iii. would haue depriued the Romaine Con∣sules of theyr dignitee, but the people so resisted,Lucius .3▪ that he was faine to flee, and as many as were taken of his partie, had theyr eies put out. Wherefore the bishop went to Verona, called a counsaile, and there died. ¶Celestine the .iii. enuiyng the succession of Tancredi,Celesti∣nus▪ 3▪ bastarde sonne of Roger, brother to the good kyng Wil∣liam of Sicile, called into Italie Henrie the .vi. than
elected Caesar▪ And after he had crowned him empe∣rour in Rome, toke Constantia a Nonne out of hir cloy∣ser: and because of the Normanes royall bloud, ma∣ried hir to this emperour: endowyng him and hir bothe with the titles of the realmes of Naples and Sicile: and so transferred the Napolitane astate from the Nor∣man succession to the Germains, wherof there folow∣ed great bloudshedyng. Innocen∣ius .3.¶Innocence the .iii. because Philip Duke of Sueuia, sonne vnto Barbarossa, was chosen emperour against his will, not onely excommunicated him, but also caused Otho the .iiii. to be elected, and crowned hym in Rome. ¶This bishop contendyng with the forenamed Philip was wont to saie, either shall Philip take from me my myter, or I from hym his crowne. ¶Otho had not longe enioyed the crowne, but the bi∣shop with his excōmunicacions made his princes to for∣sake hym, and he the emperour hym selfe to forsake I∣talie: because he had moued warres against the church, and gotten Montefiascone and Radicofano, entendyng also to inuade the realme of Naples, than belongyng to younge Frederike sonne of Henry the .vi. who by his parentes was committed to the bishops protection. ¶Finally he deposed Otho, and named this Frederike emperour. Wherof there folowed so sharpe warres, that at length, whan Frederike had afterwardes recei∣ued the crowne of Honorius the .iii. the Romaine bi∣shops persecuted Frederike, and he them. ¶This Innocence beeyng of the familie of Conti in Rome, builded a notable fayre toure of bricke there, whiche yet is to be seen, called La torre d' i Conti.
¶Honorius the .iii. crowned Frederike the .ii. empe∣rour, and after excōmunicated him,Honorius .3. for what cause I can not tell. ¶Gregory the .ix. did likewise excōmunicate the empe∣rour,Gregorius 9. because he wolde not at his appoinctment goe into Asia againste the infidelles. Afterwardes he assyled him vpon his humble submission at Anagnia, for .120. thousand ounces of golde payed by the emperour. ¶Than fell he in contencion with the Romayns for the tribute of the territories about the citie, whiche the Ro∣mayns alledged that the bishops vsurped vpon theyr cō∣mon wealth. And because Frederike fauoured the Ro∣mains cause, the bishop did excommunicate him againe, wherof folowed cruell warres betwene the emperour and the confederate citees of Lumbardie, with the bat∣tail besides Corte noua, where the Mylanese and Lum∣bardes were so miserablie slaine, and theyr Caroccio taken. ¶Than began also the ciuile sedicion of the two par∣ties in Italie, Guelfi and Ghibellini, that caused so muche mischiefe. ¶The Romayns after they had ben ones by force sub∣dued of this bishop, began to rebell agayn: For the pa∣cifiyng wherof the bishop caryed about saincte Peters and Paules heades in procession, and so quyeted the people. ¶Finallie beyng hardly handled by the emperour Fre∣derike, who had taken diuers legates, cardinalles, and prelates prisoners, in theyr comyng to Rome, he died for sorowe. ¶Innocence the, iiii, before he was elected bishop,Innocen∣tius .4. was
verie friende to the emperour Frederike, but after he became so mortall enemy vnto him, that they ceased not the one to persecute the other as longe as they liued: not withstandyng that principally for respecte of his olde amitee with the emperour, Innocence was elected bi∣shop. And the emperour againste this election set at libertee diuers cardinalles, that he had taken prisoners in the warres, betwene hym and Gregorie the .ix. ¶This Innocence was occasion of the great discomfi∣ture that Frederike had before Parma, and yet was the auctoritie of the Romains so great in his later dais, that he durst not come in Rome. Cardinall hattes.¶He firste ordeined the Cardinalles to ryde with redde hattes: and went to the citee of Naples, entendyng to haue conquered the realme, where trauaylyng to sette foorthe an armie he died. Urba∣nus .4.¶Urbane the .iiii. seyng the armie prepared of Inno∣cence, discomfited by Manfredo, than gouernour of the realme of Naples, and him selfe vnhable to resist bothe Manfredos power and the Romayns also,Manfre∣do. that newelie had recouered theyr libertee, practised with the Frenche kyng, that Charles Duke of Angiowe might come to con∣quere Naples and Sicile: but he died er his purpose coulde take effect. Clemens 4¶Clement the .iiii. folowyng the practise of Vrbane, re∣ceiued the forenamed Duke Charles, that came with .30. galeys from Marsiles to Rome, and there created hym Senatour. Whiche office he exercised for a tyme. Afterwardes he inuested him kyng of Naples and of Sicile, vpon condicion, he should holde it of the churche in fee, paiyng tribute yerelie .40000. ducketes: and by
this meane broughte the Frenchemen to warre agaynste Manfredo. In whiche warres Charles preuayled, and the Germaine bloud ceased: not onely by the deathe of Manfredo slayne in the fielde, but also by the death of Corradino the ryght heyre, who beeyng taken pri∣soner, through this bishops counsayle was beheaded. ¶After longe contencion amongest the Cardinalles, and two yeres vacacion of the see,Gregorius 1▪ Gregory the .x. was elected bishop. He incontinently pacified the warres betwene the Uenetians and Genowaies, and called a counsayle in Lyons, vnto the whiche the emperour of Greece came with a noble companie: and amongest other certaine in∣fidell Tartares, who there receiued baptisme. ¶He confyrmed Radulphus Erle of Holsatia emperour, though he came not to Rome to receiue the crowne. ¶Nicolas the .iii. depriued Charles kyng of Naples of the vicarage of the empyre,Nicolaus .3. that Clement the .iiii. had geuen hym in Tuscane: and toke from him also the Senatourship of Rome, takyng the vse of that office in∣to his owne handes: and made a lawe, that no prince from thensfoorth shoulde be Senatour of Rome. He repulsed the Uenetian ambassadours with foule woor∣des, because of the siege that they had laied to the citee of Ancona. He toke many citees in Flaminia by force and practise, and brought theim from obedience of the emperour to the churches subiection. He went about to make two of his owne kynne of the house of Vrsina in Rome kynges, the one in Tuscane, and the other in Lumbardie: but he coulde not bringe it to passe. ¶Finally he procured Peter kyng of Aragon, to cha∣lenge the realmes of Naples and Sicile, as the inheri∣taunce
of his wyfe Constantia, doughter to the kynge Manfredo. Wherof there folowed sharpe warres. ¶Martine the .iiii. a frencheman borne, after longe con∣tencion amongest the Cardinalles was elected bishop,Martin{us} .4. who incontinently restored vnto Charles than kynge of Naples, the office of Senatour of Rome, against the Ro∣maines will. For the whiche there hapned muche bloud∣sheedyng: But at last the frenchemen so preuailed, that Richarde Hanniball, chiefe of the Romaines, was faine to come with an halter about his necke to aske pardon at the bishops feete. Wherupon the bishop made two new Senatours, and so ruled Rome at his will. ¶He excommunicated king Peter of Aragone, and cried the croisie against him, because he had preuailed in win∣nyng of the realme of Sicile against kynge Charles of Naples: and the excommunicacion was suche, that all men myght lawfully take his landes and goodes, where or how so euer they could come by them. But this let∣ted not kyng Peter of his purpose. Honorius .4.¶Honorius the .iiii. confyrmed the excommunicacion of Martine against king Peter: entitlyng the Frenche king to the realme of Aragone, and the Erle of Arras, the Frenche kynges sonne, to the realme of Sicile. Whi∣che bothe with seuerall powers enforced theim selfes to occupie bothe those realmes, accordyng to the bishoppes gifte: but in effect they preuailed not. Celestinus 5.¶After longe contencion, at length the Cardinals chose Celestine the .v. beyng an hermite, who was so simple a man, continuyng still the olde maner of his abstinent life, that the Cardinalles could not well supporte hym. ¶Wherfore the Cardinall Benedicte Gaietane beganne
a new practise, and fell at composicion with his bre∣therne, that if he could make Celestine resigne, thei shuld electe hym. So he made one with a caue thorough a wall crie to Celestine in the night, as he laie in his bed: that God commanded hym to resigne his bishoprike vn∣to Benedict. Whervpon this simple man, beleuyng the voyce to come from heauen, gaue ouer his dignitee, and caused Benedict to be chosen in his place, namyng hym Boniface the .viii. who for rewarde, fearyng least Celestines life myght be a trouble to his glorie, caused the poore man to be taken by the waie as he retourned towardes his heremitage, and laied in prison in Castel Fumone: where shortly after he was famished to death. ¶Boniface the .viii. cleauyng earnestlie to the Guelfe part,Bonifai∣us .8. persecuted cruelly two Cardinalles of the house of Colonna, that than were chiefe of the Ghibellines: and did so muche hurt to that family, that after he had rased theyr townes and houses to the earthe, none of theym durst appeare. For Sarra Colonna, chiefe of that house, fled so muche the persecucion of this bishop, that after he had liued a certain space in the wodd{is} poorely amon∣gest the sheeppeherdes, at last he was taken of Pirates vpon the sea costes, and made a slaue to the ore in the galeys. ¶This bishop giuing asshes on ashewednesday to Por∣chetto archebishop of Genoa, saied to him in latine, re∣membre man that thou arte a Ghibelline, and with the Ghibellines shalt retourne into asshes, and therwithall threwe the asshes in his eies. ¶He also was the firste that ordeyned the yere of Iu∣biley amongest the Christians,yere of Iu∣bili. which caused wonderfull
resorte from all parties to Rome. ¶He excommunicated Phiip the frenche kyng, because he wolde not goe into the holy lande at his appointment, and deposed him of his crowne, entitlyng Albert Duke of Austriche to the same. To the entent the Almaines might auenge his quarell agaynste the Frenchemen. But at length Sarra Colonna happened to arriue in the porte of Marsicles in Fraunce, where disclosyng hym selfe, he was taken out of the galey, had to the frenche court, and finally sent so strongely into Italy with .200▪ men of armes, that he came sodeynlie on a nyghte to Anagnia, toke the bishop in his bed, and led him to Rome prisoner: where within lesse than .24. daies he died for sorow. So that there folowed a saiyng of hym: he entred like a foxe, reigned like a woulfe, and died as a dogge. Benedict{us} .11.¶Benedict the .xi. assoyled the frenche kyng, reconsi∣led the two Cardinalles of the house of Colonna, and condemnyng the actes of his predecessour, did neuerthe∣lesse excommunicate the authours of his death. ¶Clement the .v. a Gascoygne borne, and bishoppe of Burdeux,Clemens .5 was after .xii. monethes contencion amon∣gest the Cardinalles elected bishop of Rome: who for affection to his countrey, transferred the see of Rome to Lyons in France: and called all the Cardinals thyther to his consecracion. Wherat the frenche kyng, with ma∣ny other princes was present: and the Duke of Britaine, and diuers other slaine, with the fallyng of a wall. For feare wherof Clement fell from his horse, and lost a carboncle of his myter: esteemed to be woorthe .vi. thousande duckates.
¶Than incontinently he made .xii. frenche Cardinal∣lee, three of the whiche he sent to Rome, with senatours aucthoritee, to rule the citee and all Italie. He op∣pressed the secte called Fraticlli: that were than newly risen in Lumbardie, who woulde haue had all thynges in common, without magistrates or rulers. ¶He interdited the Uenetians, because they succoured the house of Este against the churche. ¶The Cardinall Orsino, than legate in Tuscane, excū∣municated the citees of Florence and Luke, because they woulde not be ordered by hym, but the Florentines pro∣uided a speedie remedie. For they laied suche taxes on the spirituall men, that the bishoppe, for his membres sake, was glad to assoyle theim. ¶The Frenche kynge practised with the bishop, to re∣duce the imperiall astate vnto hym: but at length they agreed so ill, that Clement caused the Germaines to ∣lecte emperour Henry the .vii. of Luxemburgh, who by the bishops procurement passed into Italie with a migh∣tie armie, streigned sore the Italians, was crowned of the Cardinalles in Rome, and finally waxed so great, that the bishop, mistrustyng his power, threatned to ex∣communicate hym, if he departed not the rather out of Italie. Wherfore the emperour fortified hym selfe and his armie in the Theatres and Thermes of Rome, resistyng the bishops fauters, and specially theim of the house of Orsina: but at length for lacke of victualles, he was faine to forsake Rome, and to retyre into Tus∣cane: where beyng at Arezzo, he somoned Robert king of Naples, to appeare before hym, and for lacke of ap∣paraunce deposed hym of his realme by imperiall sen∣tence,
whiche was by Clement disanulled. ¶Finally the emperour by meanes of the bishoppes le∣gate was poysoned in receiuyng the sacrament of com∣munion, in the towne of Bonconuento. After whose death the bishop hym selfe liued not longe. ¶Whan Iohn̄ the .xxii. had receiued the myter in Ly∣ons,Iohannes .22. he went streigthe to Auignion and there created viii. Cardinalles, of the whiche two onely were Ita∣lians. ¶Shortly after he degraded a frenche bishop, and put hym cruelly to death for a conspiracie that he was accu∣sed of. ¶In this tyme the electours of Germanie, not agree∣yng togethers, chose two emperours, Lewys of Baua∣rie, and Frederike of Austriche: eche of theim hauyng iii. voices: but the bishop allowyng Frederike, did ex∣communicate Lewys. Wherfore Lewys after he had fought and taken Frederike prisoner, wente with a po∣wer into Italie, and receiued in Rome the imperiall crowne at the handes of the Cardinall Colonna, bothe by assent of all the clergie there, and of the Romaines: who than had recouered to theim selfes a maner of li∣bertee, to chose theyr owne officers, and vsed yerely to take for theyr rulers two presidentes of theyr owne no∣bilitee, namyng theim vicars of the empyre. And be∣cause the emperour had dyuers waies sought to the bi∣shop for his absolution, and could not obteine it: ther∣fore immediately after his coronacion he created a new bishop in Rome, namyng hym Nicolas the .vii. who toke it vpon hym, gaue bishoprikes, and graunted dispensaci∣ons, till after the emperours departure out of Italie,
he was taken by the Conte Bonifacio of Pisa, and sent prisoner to the bishop Iohn̄ in Auignion, where he was laied in a stinkyng prison, and miserablie died. ¶This Iohn̄ condemned theim as haeretikes, that wold haue had the churchemen liue poorely, as Christes disci∣ples did, and burned diuers of the .iii. ordre of saincte Fraunces, that than folowed this profession. ¶Finally he died in Auignion, leauyng to his friendes muche more treasure, than euer any of his predecessours had dooen. ¶Benedict the .xii. confyrmed the excommunicacion a∣gainst the emperour Lewys of Bauarie,Benedi∣ctus▪ 12▪ not of his owne will (as some write) but in maner by constreinct of the kynges of Fraunce and Naples. And the better to mainteine his quarell, he assoyled all the astates of Ita∣lie of theyr feaultie to the empyre, confyrmyng theim free princes in the same as vicars of the churche. So that euer sens, the Dukes of Mylaine, with the houses of Este, of Gonzaga, and the common wealthes, of Florence, Lucca, and others esteemed themperours lesse than they did before. ¶Besydes this he made the Senatours of Rome con∣fesse theim selfes subiectes to the churche onely, and not to any other power.Frauncis Petrarke▪ And by his tyme Frauncis Pe∣trarke, as a Laureate poete was crowned with Laurell in the Capitoll of Rome, by Orso Erle of Anguillara than Senatour there. ¶Finally this bishop died verie riche in Auignion, and lefte his gooddes to the churche. ¶Clement the .vi. chaunged the Iubiley,Clemens Iubiley▪ that was first ordeined to be but ones euerie hundreth yeres to be kept
euerie .50. yere, and to holde the astates of Italie in a∣mitee with him, he confyrmed eche lorde as vicare of the churche in his owne astate, Visconti in Mylaine, Ma∣latesta in Rimino, Pesro, and Fano, Feltrano in Vrbi∣no, and a noumbre of other. ¶In his tyme the Romains recouered theyr libertee againe, and created theyr officers without the bishops consent: so that one Nicolas Renzo, a Romaine, be∣yng entred into a wonderfull fauour and credite with the people, toke vpon hym the name and aucthoritee of emperour, writyng hym selfe Nicolaus Seuerus et Cle∣mens, Tribunus libertatis pacis et iustitiae, et liberator illustris sacrae reipublicae Romanae. At whose begin∣nyng all Italie was in suche admiracion, that euerie prince sent to salute him as emperour: thinking he shuld restore the Romaine empyre to his auncient astate. But his owne folie destroied hym. For he toke part with one of the factions that were than in Rome: so that where before he had no man against hym, now had he a great noumbre, whiche brought hym at last into suche a feare, that sodeinly he disguised hym selfe, and fledde from Rome to Charles the .iiii. than emperour in Al∣maine, who toke hym as a lewde person, and for a pre∣sent sent hym to bishoppe Clement to Auignion: and he cast him in prison, sendyng certaine Cardinall{is} to Rome to settle the astate there: whiche by meanes aforesaied had been a certaine space disobedient. Iubiley.¶In this bishops tyme fell the yere of Iubiley, whi∣che caused great noumbres of people from all countreis to resorte to Rome,Plague of pestilence, by reason wherof there fell suche a plague of pestilence, as the like hath not been heard of.
For (as some aucthours affyrme) it endured continual∣ly the space of three yeres throughout all Italie, and in most partes of the whole worlde, so vehemently, that of euery hundred there remaigned not .x. persons aliue: and in many countreys not .x. of a thousande. Some write, that this plague began in the east partes of Asia. ¶Finally this Clement procured the restitucion of the realme of Naples to Queene Iohan the fyrst. For the whiche, and for his other good practises at hir be∣yng with hym in Auignion, she solde the citee of Aui∣gnion with the dominion apperteignyng to the same, to the churche: and was contented to accept for paiement therof, the arrerages of suche tributes, as the bishoppe pretended, that she and hir predecessours did owe vnto the churche, for the realme of Naples: wherof they claimed to be lordes in chiefe. ¶Innocence the .vi. was more geuen to religion than diuers of his predecessours.Innocen∣tius .6. For he reformed the court∣ly pompe that the Cardinals and prelates before tyme vsed, and commanded spirituall men to be resident vpon theyr benefices, with diuers other good ordres, whiche toke litle effecte. ¶The Romaines in his time toke on theim theyr liber∣tee: creatyng a Senatour of theyr owne: so that the bi∣shop, to recouer his astate, deliuered Nicolas Renzo out of prison, and sent hym to Rome, where on the bi∣shops behalfe he preuailed. But through parttakyng he was againe constreigned to flee disguised, and beyng mette, was knowen and slaine. ¶This Innocence trauailed muche to haue appeased our kyng Edwarde the .iii. with the frenche kyng Iohn̄
in the tyme of the sharpe warres betwene theim, trust∣yng alwaies to haue brought theim to some good ende: till he hearde that kyng Iohn̄ was taken and ledde pri∣soner into Englande. ¶He caused Charles the .iiii. to be crowned emperour in Rome, and woulde haue quieted the Christian princ{is} and powers, and vnited them in an enterprise against the Turkes: but his purpose could not take place. Urbanus. ▪¶Urbane the .v. sent Giles a Spaniarde, as his legate into Italie, whiche Giles, with helpe of the other Ita∣lian princes, so sore oppressed the house of Visconti, that it was lyke to haue been destroied, had not the kin∣ges of Englande, Fraunce, and Cypres by theyr ambas∣sadours procured a peace. ¶This Urbane withal his court went to Rome, where after longe serche (as they write) he founde the heades of saincte Peter and Paule. ¶Finally returnyng into Fraunce, he died by the waie, of poyson as some thynke. Gregorius 11.¶Gregorie the .xi. remoued the seate of his bishoprike from Auignion to Rome, after it hadde been holden in Fraunce .70. yeres.176. Some saie he did it because of the cruell warres that were amonge the princ{is} and lor∣des of Italie: whiche was ascribed to the bishoppe of Romes absence: for theyr residence there staied the I∣talian nacion in peace. ¶Some saie he did it vpon a checke geuen hym by a bi∣shop, that was his familiare: whom he asked, why he was not resident vpon his bishoprike, as the Canon la∣wes commaunded? Wherunto the bishop answeared: And why holy father are not you resident vpon yours?
But what so euer the occasion was, he conueighed hym selfe with all his court from Auignion to Rome: where of the Romaines and clergie, he was receiued with Iu∣bilate. ¶After whan he had pacified most parte of the Italian princ{is}, because the Florentines would neither be entrea∣ted, nor refourmed by excommunicacion, he made warre against theim: and duryng the same died of the stone. ¶In his tyme Iohn̄ Acton,Sir Iohn Acton▪ with .v. or .vi. thousande englishe horsemen, sought the aduenture of the warres in Italie, and fyrst serued the citesins of Pisa against the Florennes, than the Visconti against the churche, in whiche seruice he was taken prisoner, but afterwar∣des the bishop of Rome made him his generall, whilest the bishop laie in Fraunce. And than did Iohn̄ Acton gette the townes of Faenza and Bagnacauallo, wherof he sold one to the Marques of Este for .20000. crownes, and the other he kept to hym selfe. But whan the bi∣shop was come to Rome, and had not so rewarded hym as he deserued, he forsoke the bishop, and was made ge∣nerall of the Florentines. Under whom he serued ve∣rie honourablie, with suche a numbre of our nacion, both horsemen and footemen, that all Italie feared him: and glad was that prince that myght reteigne hym. For in all his enterprises he behaued hym selfe so woorthy∣ly, that the Florentines after his death buried hym ho∣nourablie in theyr cathedrall churche, as a singuler de∣fender of theyr common wealth. ¶Urbane the .vi. was elected by .xvii. Cardinalles,Urbanus .6. wherof .xiii. were frenchemen, that would faine haue chosen a bishop of theyr owne nacion. But for feare
of the people that cried a Romaine or an Italian, they consented to this election: and did honour Urbane the space of .iii. monethes and more. ¶The season than waxyng hote, they desyred licence to goe abroade into the realme of Naples: where by maintenaunce of Queene Iohan .viii. of the frenche Cardinalles elected a new bishop of their owne nacion, namyng hym Clement the .vii. wherof folowed a great Schisme. For Germanie, Italie, and Hungarie, held with Urbane, and the other realmes with Clement. So that Urbane, beyng of nature a cruell man, to make his partie the stronger, called Charles Durace out of Hungarie to conquere Naples from Queene Iohan. ¶This Clement vpon displeasure depriued Charles, & gaue the title of the realme of Naples to Lewys Duke of Agiowe, who with a puissant armie of frenchemen entred into Italie, purposyng not onely to expell Char∣les, but also to take Peters mantel from Urbane: but he prospered not. For after he had made warre in Puglia about .xii. monethes, at last he was slaine in battaile. Wherof Urbane waxed so proude, that because Charles kyng of Naples wolde not consent to make his nephiew prince of Campania, he did excommunicate hym, and if his power had been equall to his will, had deposed him of his crowne. But Charles handled the bishop so streictely, that he was faine to flee to Genoa: In whi∣che iourney he sacked .v. of his Cardinalles, and threw theim into the sea,Cardinals sacked and baked. and caused two other to be baken to poudre: cariyng theyr asshes in sackes vpon moyles be∣fore hym for a terrour to the rest. ¶After this Charles death, he retourned to Rome, and
did as muche as in him laie to destroie Charles children. Wherin he preuailed not: but rather procured him selfe a great daunger, if he had not preuented his mischiefe with creatyng of .xxix. Cardinalles, wherof .xxvi. were Napolitanes. And finally by most opinions he was poysoned and died in Rome, to the peoples great con∣tentacion, that for his crueltee muche abhorred hym. ¶Boniface the .ix. of .xxx. yeres of age succeded him, whiche had not ben seen before.Bonifa∣us .9. And because he woulde bridle the Romaines from the libertee that the people had vsed many yeres in chosyng of theyr officers, he ab∣sented him selfe with his courte from Rome, and laie at Ascisa: so that whan the yere of Iubiley came, the Ro∣mains could by no meane get him to Rome, till thei had promised to renounce theyr libertees vnto hym, whiche sens that time thei could neuer recouer. For incontinent∣ly as he was entred into the citee, he made Castel Sant' Angelo so strong, that it hath ben and shalbe a continuall bridle to the people: and a great staie against emperours. ¶This bishop ordeyned the Annates, that all spirituall promocions shoulde paie to the churche of Rome,Annates. halfe a yeres value at euery chaunge: whiche decre toke place in all realmes, sauyng in Englande. For the kynge and his barons woulde suffre none other but bishops to be bounde to this Annates. ¶In his tyme the yere before the Iubiley, a certaine priest passed the mountaines into Italie clothed in lyn∣nen, who drew a worlde of people after hym, called the white company: persuadyng them, that a certaine cru∣cifixe, whiche he caried before theim, did many tymes weepe. All the daie longe they shoulde trauaile on
theyr iourney, and at nyght lyke beast{is} lie theim downe, wheras the daie light failed theim. But the bishoppe, fearyng this multitude, as they were comyng toward{is} Rome, sent men of warre against theim, dispersed the company, and brought the priest to Rome: where for his abusion he was burned. After whose death partely through this fonde assemblie, and partely throughe the great resorte of people to Rome for the Iubiley, there folowed a wonderfull great pestilence ouer all Italy. ¶About this tyme Crisolora a Constantinopolitane, reuiued the Greeke letters in Italie, where thei had not been vsed .500. yeres before. ¶And like as this Boniface succeded Urbane in Rome, euen so did one Peter Luna succede Clement in Auigni∣on, and was called Benedict the .xiii. ¶Innocence gouerned the Romaines with so muche ti∣rannie,Innocen∣tius .7. that they openly murmured against hym, and at length sent .xi. of theyr chiefe citesins to requyre theyr libertee, with the fortresses that he helde, as Campidogli∣o, Castel Sant' Angelo, and Ponte Molle, but all in vaine. For he kendled with yre thoroughe the message, caused those .xi. citesins to be put to death, and throwen out at the wyndowes of his nephiewes house. So that the Romaines assembled, and not onely caused the bishop to flee to Viterbo, but also sacked and spoyled the hou∣ses and richesses of all his prelates and Courtisanes, and the Capitoll with Ponte Molle, and woulde haue gotten Castel Sant' Angelo, had it not been impregnable. ¶Than called they Ladislaus kyng of Naples to ayde theim, but Paulo Orsino, with the bishops power, dis∣coumfited Ladislaus, and so constreigned the Romains
to aske mercie, to receiue theyr bishop home againe, and to obey hym as he woulde. Whervpon the bishoppe made his nephiew Lewys Marques of Ancona, and prince of Fermo, and so died. ¶Gregorie the .xii. was than chosen vpon condicion,Gregorius 12. that if Bennet the .xiii. than resident in Auignion, for the vnion of the churche, woulde consent to be deposed, he also shoulde depose hym selfe. Whervpon a coun∣saile was called at Pisa, in the whiche they two were deposed, and Alexander the .v. elected. But for all that the Schisme ceased not till the counsaile of Constance. ¶Whilest this Gregorie was absent, Ladislaus kynge of Naples came to Rome, and there was receiued of the Romains as their soueraigne lorde. But he enioyed it not longe. For Paolo Orsino fought with hym to so muche aduauntage, that Ladislaus was faine to retyre into his owne realme: and diuers of the princi∣pall Romaines were for this cause beheaded. ¶Alexandre the .v. gaue the title of the realme of Na∣ples to Lewys Duke of Angiowe,Alexandre .5. and by his ecclesia∣sticall aucthoritee deposed Ladislaus, and did what he coulde in helpyng Lewys to subdue hym: but it preuai∣led not. ¶Iohn̄ the .xxiii. succeded Alexandre,Iohannes .23. more by force than by free election, by reason that he, beyng legate in Bo∣nonia, where Alexander died, and hauyng the men of warre at his commaundement, threatened so the Cardi∣nalles, that they durst chose none other. ¶He in deede resembled more a man of warre than a prelate. ¶He moued warre against the kynge Ladislaus, but at
lengthe he was repulsed, and constreigned to forsakē Rome. And beyng by the whole consent of the asta∣tes of Christendome called to the counsaile of Constance, where diuers crimes were laied vnto hym, he fledde a∣waie thense: was taken, laied in prison: and finally he with Gregorie the .xii. and Benedict the .xiii. all three than liuyng, deposed of theyr pontificalitee, and Mar∣tine the .v. elected in theyr place. Martinus 5.¶Martine the .v. rested .xii. monethes after his ele∣ction at the counsaile in Constance, the better to establish his owne aucthoritee, and than went into Italie, where he pacified the warres betwene the Duke of Mylaine and the Uenetians. By force he constreigned Braccio di Montone, a notable man of warre, to humble hym selfe at his feete: and to restore certaine townes that he before had taken from the churche: and finally so be∣haued hym selfe, that he was ouer all quietely accep∣ted for supreame bishoppe: so that the Schismes, that had so longe continued ceased. And comyng to Rome, whiche was greatly decayed, he so disposed hym selfe to the repayryng of it, that in shorte tyme it became in∣different fayre and pleasaunt. ¶Eugenie the .iiii. had so great prease of people at his consecration,Eugenius .4. that the bishop of Senegalia was styfled to death. And shortly after, beyng persuaded, that his predecessour Martine, had lefte a great treasure hydde, he caused Oddo Poccio, that had been Martines vice-chambrelaine, to be sent for, by his capitain Stephen Co∣lonna: who onely of the house of Colonnesi fauoured the bishop. And because the seruauntes of this Ste∣phen sacked Oddos goodes, and brought hym like a
theefe to the bishop, wheras he commaunded no violence to be vsed: therfore the bishop fell out with Stephen: so that Stephen fledde to Preneste to the prince Co∣lonna, enformyng hym, that Eugenie purposed the de∣struction of theyr whole name and familie. Where∣vpon the Colonnesi made an armie, came to Rome, en∣tred in at the gate called Appia, and goyng foorthe as farre as sainct Markes without hurt doyng, mette there with the bishops power: and fought a sore battaile: so that at length, contrary to all mens expectacion the Ro∣maines toke the bishops part, and constreigned the Co∣lonnesi to withdraw. In whiche retyryng they toke prisoners and praies as in open warre: and after that vsed suche practises for poysonyng of the bishop, and betraiyng of Costel Sant' Angelo, with other lyke feat{is}, that Eugenie was glad to entreate them for peace: whi∣che he easily obteined. ¶Than came Edmonde sonne of Charles the .iiii. em∣perour to Rome, and there with great solenmitee and pompe receiued the imperiall crowne of Eugenie, and retourned into his countrey without attemptyng any thyng of importaunce. ¶Not longe after the Duke of Mylaine made warre against the bishop, and sent Nicolas Fortebraccio with a great noumbre of chosen men to Rome: who arriued there with so muche diligence, that he passed Ponte Molle, and came to the gate Flaminia, ere euer the bi∣shop was ware of hym. ¶This Nicolas Fortebraccio had serued the bishoppe before in a certaine enterprise that was made at Vetra∣la and Ciuita Vecchia: and because he had gotten there
many fayre booties, therfore at his retourne the bishop refused to paie hym his wages, saiyng, that his fayre gayue ought to suffise hym. For the whiche Nicolas departed: and now retournyng vnder the Duke of My∣laine, with helpe of the Colonnesi, encouraged the Ro∣maines so to chalenge theyr libertee, that Eugenie was faine to disguise hym selfe in a monkes habite, and to take his bote towardes Ostia. And yet ere he were farre onwardes on his waie, the people hearyng of his departure folowed hym downe the riuer, with hurlyng of stones and shotte of arrowes: and than created new magistrates after theyr owne maner, deposyng and cha∣syng awaie all suche as had ought to doe in the bishops name: and laied siege vnto Castel Sant' Angelo, whiche was all theyr vndooyng. For the capitaine therof wrought this policy, he sent his mē foorth daily to skyr∣mishe, and ordeined certaine of them to suffre them self{is} to be taken: who for theyr libertee and money withall, shoulde promyse to slea theyr capitaine, and to betraie the castell. It came to passe as it was deuised, so that after theyr returne to the castell,A wittie policie. thei shewed out a dead mans head, and requyryng theyr money offered to deli∣uer vp the castell. Whervpon certaine of the principall Romaines entred, and so beyng taken, were occasion that within the space of .v. monethes after the Romai∣nes returned to theyr former obedience: the bishop than beyng at Florence. ¶This meane while the princ{is} and prelates of all Chri∣stendome beganne to assemble for kepyng of the generall counsaile at Basile: and by one agreement cited .iii. ti∣mes Eugenie to come thither, with his Cardinalles.
And because he came not, they threatned to depose hym. Wherfore he sent his apostolicall bulles thyther with certaine Cardinalles to confyrme all thynges there de∣termined. ¶Than sent he the Patriarke Vitelesco to Rome, who there vsed many cruell tourmentes and deathes against the enemies of Eugenie: and after went into the realme of Naples: pretendyng title therunto in the churches right. In whiche quarell he fought with the prince of Taranto, and toke hym prisoner with two thousand horse: and missed little of takyng the kyng Alfonse vn∣der colour of truese. ¶In his retourne to Rome he vtterly destroied Prene∣ste, the chiefe towne belongyng to the house of Colon∣na: but at last his chaunce was to be betraied and slain hym selfe. ¶After this Eugenie called a counsaile in Ferrara, wherunto Iohn Paleologo emperour of Constantino∣ple, with the principall of the greeke churche came, and disputed certaine articles of religion, whiche were a∣greed vpon in the counsaile folowyng at Florence. And all be it, that Eugenie had great assemblies at both these counsailes, yet were there a noumbre of bishops, that sate still at Basile, alwaies sommonyng Eugenie to repayre thither: and at last for lacke of apparance (part∣ly through instaunce of Philip Duke of Mylaine, than enemie to Eugenie) the counsaile of Basile deposed him, and created in his place one Amideus, than beyng an heremite, that before had been Duke of Sauoie: na∣myng hym Felix. By reason whereof Christendome was diuided into .iii. partes: Two helde with these .ii.
bishops, and the .iii. with nother of bothe. ¶Than retourned Eugenie vnto Rome, where he was ioyfully receiued of the people, and lodged the fyrste night at the gate Flaminia: but the seconde daie, as he went in Pontificalibus towarde sainct Peters, because the custome of the citee was reysed double, the people beganne to crie, downe with the customes, and with the inuentours of theim: so that the bishop was faine to promyse theim it should be no more leuied. ¶Shortly after he made warre in the Marke of Anco∣na, and recouered it out of the handes of Francesco Sforza: and finally prouoked Charles than Dolphin of Fraunce, by plaine force to driue awaie the bishops that helde the counsaile at Basile: and so remaigned in his a∣state till he died. Nicolaus .5. Amideus.¶Nicolas the .v. succeded Eugenie, vnto whom Ami∣deus renounced his title by compulsion of the emperour Frederike. For whiche renunciacion Nicolas created hym Cardinall and legate in Germanie. He crowned the same Frederike and his wyfe with the imperiall crownes in Rome, and trauailed muche, partly by fayre meanes, and partly by threatning{is} to appease the warre betweene the princes and states of Italie: but his ex∣communicacions could not rule theim. Calixtus .3¶Calixt the .iii. incontinently after his election prepa∣red an armie against the Turkes, armed .xvi. galeys of his owne, and vnder the leadyng of the patriarke of A∣quileia sent theim into the Leuant seas: and ceased not to persuade all Christian princes, as muche as in hym laie,Alfonse. to that expedicion. Amongest whom Alfonse kyng of Naples, and Lewys Duke of Burgoyne, toke
ones the crosse on theim towardes that viage: but tho∣rough some occasions they chaunged purpose. ¶Not longe after the kynge Alfonse died. Wherv∣pon Calixt, vnder pretence of title to the realme of Na∣ples, made great preparacion of warre against Ferdi∣nando sonne to Alfonse: but beyng preuented by death, bothe the rumour and feare therof ceased. ¶Whan he died, he lefte .150. thousande dukates in his coffers, whiche he saied he had prepared for the warres against the Turke. ¶Pius the secounde,Pius .2 shortly after his election called a counsaile in Mantua: Unto the whiche came ambassa∣dours from all Christen princes. And all be it, that through the bishops persuasion, who was hym selfe an excellent Oratour, it was there concluded, that to the expedicion against the Turkes, at the bishops deuise, euery prince and astate shoulde be contributour, as well for sendyng of men and municion, as also for mainte∣nance with money, yet whan it came to the poinct there was nothyng dooen. ¶Duryng this counsaile, manie rumours were reised in Tuscane, yea and in Rome: that one Tiburtio, sonne of Angelo Massiano with certaine companions, had taken the temple of Pantheon, and there fortifiyng him, disturbed the whole citee. ¶The partie called Auersana, enemies to the bishop, had also taken Viterbo: whiche the bishoppe at his re∣tourne recouered. ¶All whiche thynges, with a noumbre of commocions in the Marke of Ancona, in Vmbria, and in the confi∣nes there, at length the bishop appesed either by policie or by force.
¶He caused Lewys the frenche kynge to renounce cer∣taine exactions, granted him of the churche in the coun∣saile at Basile: and defended Ferdinando kyng of Na∣ples against Iohn̄ sonne to Raynolde Duke of Angiow. ¶Finally disposyng hym selfe altogether to the enter∣prise against the Turkes, and beyng arriued in Ancona, to meete with the Uenetian galeys and capitaine, na∣med Christofer Moro, for the same purpose, he died of a continuall feuer. ¶And leauyng behynd hym .40000. dukates, with cer∣taine ships and galeys prepared for that viage: the Car∣dinalles deliuered bothe the one and other to the Uene∣tian capitaine. The money to be sent to the kynge of Hungarie, to relieue his neede, and the shippes to serue on the seas with the Uenetian armie. Paulus .2.¶Paule the secounde so muche abhorred learned men, that he accoumpted all theim that were of Platos Aca∣demie, to be heretikes: and depriued a noumbre of ver∣tuouse and learned men of suche offices and promoci∣ons as his predecessours had called theim to: amongest whom was Platina. And beyng entreated to be more graciouse vnto theim, consideryng thei were olde men, had folowed the courte all theyr daies, and many also had bought theyr liuynges deere, so that neither by law, nor yet by reason, he ought to depriue theim: he aun∣sweared, that forasmuche as the law and reason rested in his brest, to allow or disallow what he thought good: his will being so, it was bothe sufficient law and reason. ¶Than picked he a quarell to the familie of Auersa, and with helpe of certaine men of warre, sent to him by Ferdinando kynge of Naples, he assaulted theim, and
toke .9. of theyr castels. Of the whiche ame were so stronge, that they seemed impossible to be wonne. And because the bishop, through the kynges helpe, had atteined these fortresses and possessions, the kyng requi∣red certaine small benefites at his handes: but the vn∣courteyse bishop would graunt nothyng: wherfore thei squared a little: and than agreed againe. ¶After this, the bishop gaue hym selfe to idlenesse and plaies, and in the shrouyng tyme deuised a noumbre of games & prices to be won, and distributed muche money amongest boies, the better to mainteine his pastyme. In the ende wherof hapned hym suche a feare, that he wist not what to dooe. For it was tolde hym, that certaine younge men had conspyred against hym by the procure∣ment of one Calimaco a simple man. And further, that one Luca Totio a banished Romaine had ben seen with a noumbre of banisshed men in the wooddes there by. Upon whiche enformacions he caused diuers men of reputacion to be taken, aswell courtiers as o∣ther, and without any matter or good grounde of suspi∣cion, put theim to suche terrible tourment{is}, that it wold greeue and gentill hert to heare it. ¶He attempted the winnyng of Tolfa, fyrst by trea∣son, than by siege, and lastly, whan he could not so get it, he purchased it for .7000. dukates. ¶Likewyse he assaulted the citee of Rimino, to haue taken it from the familie of Malaesta, but he failed of that enterprise. ¶He vsed verie great Symonie: and whan any bishop∣rike fell, he would translate the bishops from one see to an other for the gaine of theyr fyrst fruites: by reason
wherof he gathered a great treasure, and delited verie muche in iewelles. ¶Finally he persuaded all men to kepe their children at schole till thei could write and reade: and no longer: and died sodeinly. Sixtus .4.¶Sixtus the .iiii. was bothe learned and eloquent, and contrarie to his predecessours nature delited in learned men. ¶He did his beste to succour the princes that were driuen out of theyr countreis by the Turke, as the quene of Bossina, the Paleologi, the Despoti, and diuers o∣ther. And yet did he vniustly bothe reise warres him selfe, and also cause other princes to dooe the lyke. ¶Fyrst he beganne with the Florentines, because they had emprisoned his nephiew a Cardinall, and had han∣ged the archebishop of Pisa for killyng of Iuliano di Medici. ¶He made warre to Ferdinando kyng of Naples, be∣cause he had not ayded the Duke of Ferrara against the Uenetians. ¶He made warre also to the Uenetians, and gathered all the astates of Italie into a leage against theim: lea∣uyng theim excommunicate whan he died. ¶He leuied many dismes and subsidies of the clergie through all Christendome, and was verie beneficiall to his owne kynne and friendes. ¶Finally by his tyme Macomet the .ii. emperour of the Turkes had taken Otronto in Puglia: and prepa∣red hym selfe to the conquest of Italie. Wherfore the bishop made hym readie to flee into France, and had fledde in deede, if God by preuentyng of that enterprise
had not set a staie to the Turkisshe furie with Maco∣metes death. ¶Innocence the .iiii. assoyled the Uenetians, and tra∣uailed muche to agree the Christian princes together.Innocen∣tius .4. Neuerthelesse because his last predecessour had released to the kyng of Naples certaine pretended duties of the churche: therfore, procuryng fyrste certaine astates of the realme to rebell, he moued warre against Ferdinan∣do, and at length constreigned him to agree at his owne appoinctment. ¶He pacified also a great contencion betweene the fa∣milies of Colonna and Orsina, whose variaunce had been cause of no small fyre, bloudde, and spoyle. He had a sonne and a daughter, whom he left verie riche: and was neuerthelesse reputed bothe liberall & pitifull. ¶Alexander the .vi. was a Spaniarde borne,Alexander .6. and a great philosophier. He entred in league with Alfonse king of Naples against Charles the .viii. Frenche kynge, who than prepared hym selfe to come into Italie. Neuerthelesse Charles power was suche, that the bi∣shop not onely gaue hym passage, but also receiued hym in Rome honourablie. And yet mistrustyng the fren∣che kynges hygh courage, seyng he feared but little the ecclesiasticall power, the bishop withdrew hym selfe in∣to Castel Sant' Angelo, though by fayre entreatie he came out againe, and yelded all his dominion at the kynges will: and besides that deliuered hym Zizimo, brother to the great Turke, that before was the bishoppes pri∣soner. ¶But ere euer Charles retourned out of the realme of Naples, which was within lesse than halfe a yere after,
the bishop had wrought a new league against him, wher∣in the emperour Maximilian, the kyng of Aragone, the Uenetians, and the Duke of Mylaine were his colleg{is}. So that Charles in his retourne towardes France was fought withall, and sore handled. ¶Finally Charles beyng thus departed, this bishop be∣ganne to waxe hygh, and imaginyng how to extoll his owne name, he created his son Valentino Borgia Duke, causyng hym fyrst to renounce his cardinall hatte, whi∣che at his fathers creacion was geuen hym, and than made he hym capitaine of an armie sent into Romagni∣a: where fyrst he warred against Katherine ladie of I∣mola and Furli, and not onely toke hir iust possessions from hir, but also sent hir prisoner to Rome: and than proceded further against the other lordes theraboutes. So that hauyng chased awaie the families of Manfre∣di, Ordelaffi, Malateste, Feltrani, Veranei, and diuers other, in maner of no lesse astate than princes, he gatte into his possession the countreis of Romagnia, and Mar∣ca d' Ancona, with the dukedomes of Vrbino, Came∣rino, and Spoleti. Of all the whiche his father en∣titled hym Duke, and entred into so great a pride with his sonnes prosperitee, that he woulde saie to hym, ey∣ther a Caesar or nothyng. ¶Through coumfort wherof, beyng geuen to ouermu∣che couetousenesse, in hope of empyre, he poysoned di∣uers riche Cardinall{is} to haue theyr goodes: and amon∣gest his other practises he appoincted poysoned coum∣fettes for a Cardinall that dined with his father, but the father hym selfe was serued of the wronge boxe and died. And the sonne not longe after slaine in the mid∣dest
of all his glorie: notwithstandyng that by his fa∣thers tyme he was coupled in mariage with the daugh∣ter of the Duke of Ferrara. ¶Pius the .iii. died within a moneth,Pius .3. not without sus∣picion of venim. ¶Iulie the .ii. beyng a man more geuen to armes than to praier, more like Iulius Caesar, than Symon Peter,Iulius .2▪ was wont to saie, that Maximilian had been meete to be bishop, and he emperour. ¶Fyrst he procured suche a league against the Ueneti∣ans, that they had neuer a foote of grounde lefte theim on the maine lande: so that he had for his parte Rauen∣na, with the other citees of Romagnia. ¶He destroied the familie of Borgia: and quieted mu∣che the ciuile sedicion, that had longe time reigned in the Romaine nobilitee. ¶He made warre against the Bentiuogli, that thā were lordes of Bononia, and hauyng chased theim awaie, en∣tred into that citee with lyke triumph, as the auncient Romaine conquerours were wont to dooe into Rome. ¶Many tymes he woulde goe armed hym selfe, speci∣ally in the enterprise against Lodouicus Picus of Mi∣randula. ¶Finally fearyng the frenche kyng{is} to muche prospe∣ritee, he entred in league with the Uenetians, and the kyng of Spaine against the Frenche kyng, whiche was occasion of the notable battaile of Rauenna, fought on Easter daie: where on bothe sides were slaine aboute 30000. men. For as I haue been crediblie enformed, whā both battail{is} were ioigned, Spaniardes on the one syde, and frenchemen on the other, the Duke of Ferrara
that came on the frenche parte, shotte of his artillerie amongest the thickest, and slewe a multitude aswell of his friendes as enemies: but thei were all straungers to hym. ¶In conclusion the Frenchemen toke Rauenna, with diuers other citees of the bishops, whiche they enioyed not longe. For the bishop immediately gatte into his league the emperour, the kyng of England, the Germai∣nes, and the Suizers. So that the Frenche kynge, beyng vexed on all sides, was easily constreigned to for∣goe his conquestes and dominions in Italie: specially through force of the Suizers, that vnder the leadyng of theyr Cardinall Sedunese, came in great numbre to the bishops seruice: who rewarded theim with the title of defendours of the churche, and gaue them a gilt sword, and an hatte of maintenaunce. ¶Somewhat before his death he established his cousin Francesco Maria Duke of Vrbine. Leo .10.¶Leo the .x. of the house of Medici, a Florentine borne, was a pleasant man of nature, and gaue him selfe more to humanitee and pleasures of this life, than either to religion, or to encrease of dominion. ¶He encreased muche the reputacion of his house, but because he expulsed by force Francesco Maria, Duke of Urbine out of his astate, and placed in the same, fyrst his brother Iulian, and after his nephiew Laurence, the worlde accused hym of tyrannie. For he attempted to dooe the lyke vnto the Duke of Ferrare, but he preuai∣led not. ¶Some ill was suspected of hym for his to muche de∣licatenesse in bringyng vp of children, and for his opini∣on
of immortalitee. ¶Adrian the .vii. by contencion amongest the Cardi∣nalles happened to be elected,Adrian .7. reputed of theim for an ignoraunt man, though some other had a good opinion bothe of his vertue and learnyng. But because his life was nothyng courtely, or agreable to the Cardinalles, either through gods visitacion, or (as most men thinke) thoroughe theyr poyson practises, he was soone dis∣patched. ¶Clement the .vii. brother,Clemes▪ 7▪ vnto Leo the .x. immediately after his election, toke parte with the Frenche kyng a∣gainst the emperour. So that, whan the frenche king was taken before Pauia, the family of Colonna, which hath ben alwaies imperiall, through helpe of Don Hu∣go Moncada, beganne to warre with the bishop: and after diuers subtill practises and persuasions, so hand∣led the mattier, that they entred into Rome, and missed but a little to haue taken the bishop: who hearyng the rumour, sodeinly fled to Castel Sant' Angelo. Wher∣fore after the bishop had drawen Don Hugo Monca∣da to his parte, the Colonnesi endured cruell warre to theyr great domage. ¶Than came the Duke of Bourbone, who was slaine with the shotte of an handgun from the wall{is} of Rome▪ but the emperours armie, wherof he was capitaine, toke the citee by assault, sacked, spoyled, and burned it: and for the space of .xv. daies vsed suche triumph, that for theyr passetyme thei woulde make suche Cardinall{is} and prelates as were theyr prisoners, ride scornefully about the towne vpon asses, with theyr faces to the tayle: and so streictly besieged Clement, that he was faine to geue
theim .400000. dukates for his raunsome, and to yeld the castell into the emperours handes. ¶But within lesse than .iii. yeres after, the emperour came him selfe into Italie, and hauing made peace with the bishop, receiued of hym the imperiall crowne in Bo∣nonia, with so great triumph and pompe, that the like hath not been hearde of in our daies. Duryng the whiche there came ambassadours to Clement with let∣ters from Preter Iohn̄ of great commendacions, desyre of amitee, and vnion of religion. ¶Before theyr departure from Bononia, the emperour graunted the bishop his armie against the Florentines, and concluded the mariage of his bastarde daughter to Clementes nephiew, Alexander di Medici, that after∣wardes was Duke of Florence. But ere the Floren∣tines would lose theyr libertees, they susteigned a nota∣ble warre for the space of .xii. monethes. ¶And lyke as by force he oppressed the Florentines, so by treason he subdued Ancona. For vnder pretence of amitee and counsaile, persuadyng them that the Tur∣kes armie by sea, was comyng against theim, he sent a capitaine of his, called Bernardin, who with certaine men of warre was receiued into the citee, and so vsur∣ped the dominion for the churche. ¶In this bishops tyme happened suche a sodeine rage of water in Rome, that the high toures were drowned, and a great numbre of people, with infinite richesse lost: so that the bishop hym selfe had muche adooe to escape it: whiche maie well be thought a plage of god, sent for the abhominacion that reigneth there. ¶Finally Clement mette with the frenche kynge at
Marseiles in Prouaunce, and there concluded the ma∣riage that folowed betwene Katherine Clement{is} neece, and Henrie now frenche kyng, than but secounde sonne to the frenche kynge. Shortly after whose mariage Clement died. ¶Paule the .iii. that now is bishop,Paulus .3. before the tyme of his election, helde hym selfe so indifferent betwene the factions imperiall and frenche, that no man could know to whether part he was most inclined. ¶In the beginnyng of his tyme he procured all Chri∣stian princes to warre against the Turke, so that the em∣perour, that Uenetians, and he made an armie by sea vn∣der the leadyng of Andrea Doria, who mette with Bar∣barossa besydes Corfu, but they foughte no battaile, though the Christians were more in noumbre and better furnisshed than the Turkes: whether Andrea Doria were blame woorthy I can not tell. But ones the Ue∣netian Galeon, a notable shippe, was lefte alone in the middest of the Turkishe nauie, that assaulted hir .iiii. or v. houres, and yet at length came cleane awaie in des∣pite of theim all. ¶This bishop went to Nisa in Prouaunce, where by his procurement the emperour and frenche kyng mette, and concluded a peace, whiche dured not longe. ¶Than died the Duke of Urbine. Incontinently v∣pon whose death, the bishop made warre to the younge Duke Guido Vbaldo for the state of Camerino, and constreigned him for a little summe of money to geue o∣uer the astate. In in whiche the bishoppe establisshed his owne sonne Pietro Aluigi Duke. ¶After this vppon a light occasion the bishoppe made
warre to Ascanio Colonna, thiefe of that familie: and Peter Aluigi, beyng generall of the bishops army, handled Ascanio Colonna and his adherentes so cru∣elly, that they were faine to abandone theyr owne tow∣nes and castelles, and to liue in exile as banished men, till by the emperours meanes they were restored to the bishops fauour and absolucion. ¶This Paule, to exalte his owne bloudde, by consent of his Cardinalles exchaunged the Duchie of Cameri∣no with the churche, for the citees and territories of Placentia and Parma. Wherof he inuested his fore∣named son as Duke: whose behauiour was suche, that he continued not fully two yeres: for the nobilitee of the same, detestyng his wicked life and tyrannie, con∣spyred against hym, and slew hym in his owne house in Placentia: yeldyng that citee the next daie into the em∣perours handes. ¶The bishop sent a fayre armie bothe of horsemen and footemen, to succcour the emperour in his enterprise a∣gainst the Germaines: and made his sonnes sonne, cal∣led the Duke Ottauio generall. ¶Finally he is a great astronomer, and so olde a man, that (as thei saie) for the most part he is nourished with the sucke of a womans breast{is}: and to helpe his colde nature, hath two younge girles to lie by hym in his bedde a night{is}.
Anno do. Nūbre of b. Names. Yeres. Moneth{is}. 33 1 Petrus. 25 7 70 2 Linus. 11 3 81 3 Cletus. 11 1 92 4 Clemens. 9 2 101 5 Anacletus. 9 2 110 6 Euaristus. 9 10 119 7 Alexander. 10 7 129 8 Sixtus. 10 3 139 9 Thelesforus. 11   143 10 Iginius. 4 3 147 11 Pius. 12   159 12 Anicetus. 9 4 168 13 Sotherus. 9 3 177 14 Eleutherius. 21 6 198 15 Uictor. 10 3 208 16 Zeferinus. 9 2 217 17 Calixtus. 5 2 222 18 Urbanus. 8 2 230 19 Pontianus. 5 2 239 20 Antherus. 3 1 242 21 Fabianus. 14   255 22 Cornelius. 3   258 23 Lucius. 3 2 261 24 Stephanus. 3 2 264 25 Sixtus .2. 2 9 266 26 Dyonisius. 6   272 27 Phelix. 4 3 276 28 Eutitianus. 8 10 284 29 Caius. 11 4 295 30 Marcellinus. 9 4 304 31 Marcellus. 5 6 309 32 Eusebius. 2 7 311 33 Melchiades. 4 7 315 34 Siluester. 21   336 35 Marcus. 2 8 338 36 Iulius. 16 4 354 37 Liberius. 16 7 370 38 Phelix .2. 1 4 371 39 Damasus. 18 2 389 40 Siritius. 15 11 404 41 Anastasius. 3   408 42 Innocentius. 15 2 424 43 Zosimus. 1 8 425 44 Bonifatius. 3 4
428 45 Celestinus. 8   436 46 Sixtus .3. 8   444 47 Leo. 21 1 465 48 Hilarius. 6 3 471 49 Simplicius. 15 1 486 50 Phelix .3. 8 11 494 51 Gelasius. 4 8 498 52 Anastasius .2. 1 10 499 53 Symacus. 15 6 514 54 Hormisda. 9   523 55 Iohannes. 2 8 525 56 Phelix .4. 4 2 529 57 Bonifatius .2. 2 1 531 58 Iohannes .2. 2 4 533 59 Agapitus. 1   534 60 Siluerius. 1 5 535 61 Uigilius. 17 6 552 62 Pelagius. 11   563 63 Iohannes .3. 13   576 64 Benedictus. 4 1 580 65 Pelagius .2. 10 2 590 66 Gregorius. 13 6 603 67 Sabinianus. 1   605 68 Bonifatius .3.   8 606 69 Bonifatius .4. 6 8 613 70 Deodatus. 4   617 71 Bonifatius .5. 5   622 72 Honorius. 12 11 634 73 Seuerinus. 1   635 74 Iohannes .4. 1 9 636 75 Theodorus. 6 5 643 76 Martinus. 6 1 650 77 Eugenius. 3   653 78 Uitellianus. 14 6 667 79 Adeodatus. 4 7 672 80 Donus. 1 2 673 81 Agatho. 2 6 676 82 Leo .2.   10 677 83 Benedictus .2.   10 679 84 Iohannes .5. 1 11 682 85 Conon.     684 86 Sergius. 14 8 698 87 Iohannes .6. 3 3 701 88 Iohannes .7. 2 7
707 89 Sisimus.   20. daies. 713 90 Constantinus. 7   729 91 Gregorius .2. 2 9 740 92 Gregorius .3. 10 8 752 93 Zacharias. 10 2 757 94 Stephanus .2. 5 1 768 95 Paulus.   10 769 96 Constantinus .2 10 1 772 97 Stephanus .3. 1 5 796 98 Adrianus. 3 10 817 99 Leo .3. 23 5 820 100 Stephanus .4. 20 7 827 101 Paschalis. 3 3 830 102 Eugenius .2. 7   831 103 Ualentinus. 4 40. daies 846 104 Gregorius .4. 16   848 105 Sergius .2. 2 3 858 106 Leo .4. 2 5 860 106 Iohannes. foe .7 2 5 863 107 Benedictus .3. 9 2 871 108 Nicolaus .9 5 9 877 109 Adrianus .2. 10   887 110 Iohannes .8. 1 5 888 111 Martinus .2. 1 3 890 112 Adrianus .3. 6   896 113 Stephanus .5. 5 6 901 114 Formosus.   15. daies. 901 115 Bonifatius .6. 1 3 902 116 Stephanus .6.   3 902 117 Romanus.   20. daies. 902 118 Theodorus .2. 2   904 119 Iohannes .9. 3 4 907 120 Benedictus .4.   40. daies 907 121 Leo .5.   7 907 122 Christopherus.   3 914 123 Sergius .3. 7 2 916 124 Anastasius .3. 2 6 917 125 Lando.     930 126 Iohannes .10. 13 2 930 127 Leo .6.   6 933 128 Stephanus .7. 2 1 937 129 Iohannes .11. 4 10 941 130 Leo .7. 3 6   131 Stephanus .8. 3 4
944 132 Martinus .3. 3 6 948 133 Agapitus .2. 9 7 958 134 Iohannes .12. 4 10 962 135 Benedictus .5.   2 962 136 Leo .8. 1 4 963 137 Iohannes .13. 6 11 969 138 Benedictus .6. 1 6 971 139 Donus .2. 1 6 971 140 Bonifatius .7.   6 973 141 Benedictus .7. 8 5 981 142 Iohannes .14.   8 932 143 Iohannes .15.   4 982 144 Iohannes .16. 10 6 992 145 Gregorius .5. 2 5 994 146 Iohannes .17.   10 995 147 Siluester .2. 4 1 999 148 Iohannes .18.   5 1000 149 Iohannes .19. 4 4 1004 350 Sergius .4. 2 6 1006 151 Benedictus .8. 11 11 1018 152 Iohannes .20. 9   1027 153 Benedictus .9. 10 4 1038 154 Siluester .3.   2 1038 155 Gregorius .6. 2 3 1040 156 Clemens .2.   9 1040 157 Damasus .2.   1 1040 158 Leo .9. 13 2 1053 159 Uictor .3. 1 3 1055 160 Stephanus .9.   4 1060 161 Benedictus .10.   8 1061 162 Nicolaus .2. 3 6 1063 163 Alexander .2. 11 6 1073 164 Gregorius .7. 12 1 1085 165 Uictor .3. 1 4 1086 166 Urbanus .2. 12 4 1100 167 Paschalis .2. 18 3 1118 168 Gelasius .2. 1 5 1120 169 Calixtus .2. 5 10 1126 170 Honorius .2. 5 5 1131 171 Innocentius .2. 14 8 1145 172 Celestinus .2.   5 1146 173 Lucius .2.   11 1147 174 Eugenius .3. 8 7 1155 175 Anastasius .4. 2 4
1158 176 Adrianus .4. 4 10 1161 177 Alexander .3. 21   1181 178 Lucius .3. 4 2 1185 179 Urbanus .3. 1 11 1186 180 Gregorius .8.   2 1186 181 Clemens .3. 2   1188 182 Celestinus .3. 6 7 1195 183 Innocentius .3. 18 4 1214 184 Honorius .3. 10 7 1225 185 Gregorius .9. 14 3 1240 186 Celestinus .4.   18. daies. 1242 187 Innocentius .4. 11 6 1254 188 Alexander .4. 6 6 1262 189 Urbanus .4. 3 1 1265 190 Clemens .4. 3 9 1271 191 Gregorius .10. 1 2 1273 192 Innocentius .5.   5 1273 193 Adrianus .5.   40. daies 1273 194 Iohannes .21.   8 1276 195 Nicolaus .3. 3 8 1280 196 Martinus .4. 4 1 1284 197 Honorius .4. 2 1 1286 198 Nicolaus .4. 4 1 1290 199 Celestinus .5.   5 1291 200 Bonifatius .8. 8 9 1300 201 Benedictus .11.   9 1302 202 Clemens .5. 8 10 1317 203 Iohannes .22. 19 3 1336 204 Benedictus .12. 7 3 1343 205 Clemens .6. 10 8 1353 206 Innocentius .6. 10   1362 207 Urbanus .5. 8 5 1371 208 Gregorius .11.   8 1379 209 Urbanus .6. 11 8 1380 210 Bonifatius .9. 14 9 1390 211 Celestinus .6. 15   1399 212 Benedictus .13. 21   1404 213 Innocentius .7. 2   1407 214 Gregorius .12. 2 7 1409 215 Alexander .5.   8 1410 216 Iohannes .23. 4 10 1415 217 Martinus .5. 14 3 1430 218 Eugenius .4. 15   1438 219 Phelix .5. 9  
1447 220 Nicolaus .5. 8   1455 221 Calixtus .3. 3 3 1458 222 Pius .2. 5 11 1464 223 Paulus .3. 6   1471 224 Sixtus .4. 13   1484 225 Innocentius .8. 5 11 1492 226 Alexander .6. 11   1503 227 Pius .3.   1 1503 228 Iulius .2. 9 4 1513 229 Leo .10. 9 3 1522 230 Adrianus .6. 1 7 1523 231 Clemens .7. 11   1535 232 Paulus .3. 14   ¶Authours dooe varie somewhat in the times of these bishoppes, but I haue agreed the best togethers, and so haue set it foorthe.
¶The Uenetian astate. BEcause the meruailouse Situacion of the citee of Uenice, a∣mongest other thynges seemeth vnto me moste notable, I therefore haue thought good fyrst to treate therof: and than consequently to procede vn∣to the declaracion of the Uenetians astate, theyr custo∣mes and procedynges. ¶Of the meruailouse Site. Whan I consider what thinges necessitee causeth (hauyng an earnest proufe for my parte therof) I nothyng meruaile, to see the wonders that it wor∣keth. For he that beholdeth the place, where Uenice standeth, and would imagine it to be without any buil∣dyng or habitacion, shoulde saie it were the rudest, vn∣meerest, and vnholsomest place to builde vpon or to en∣habite, that wre againe to be founde thoroughout an whole worlde: It standeth open vpon the maine sea, foure miles from the neerest maine lande, in suche a ma∣rishe, as at euery low water leaueth the muddy ground vncouered, and at euery full sea drowneth it cleane. And yet men (constreigned of necessitee) haue brought this marishe to suche a passe, that it is now not onely excedyng full of people, and riche of treasure and buil∣dynges: but so holesome withall (throughe the muche haunte of people and the great noumbre of continuall fyres) that I thynke none other citee hable to shewe so
many olde men. But were it not, that as it seemeth nature hath of purpose made a banke two or thre miles of, betwene it and the sea, it were impossible to be enha∣bited: Because the citee standyng equall with the wa∣ter, the floudde by reason should passe through the hou∣ses at euery full sea. But this banke, that beginneth at Chiozza, and stretcheth toward{is} the citee of Con∣cordia, 60. myles of length, dooeth so defende the wa∣ter floudde, that within those marishes it hath nothyng the lyke force as on the other sea costes. For it is a great mattier whan the sea swelleth in Uenice .iiii. or v. foote aboue the lowe water marke: Notwithstan∣dyng that the citee seemeth to be rather in a part of the sea, than in a marisshe. For euerie chanell (as who woulde saie euery streete) is full of water, and the cha∣nels are so many, that you maie row through all partes of the citee: though there be waies also, to goe on land if you list. Whiche streetes for the most parte are verie narow, and the houses nothyng so faire as on the wa∣ter side. And in the marisshe, betwene the citee and the maine lande, whan the water is low, the most parte of the chanels are so shalow, that the botes haue muche a dooe to passe to and fro. For the mudde encreaseth daiely, by reason of the lande flouddes, that a noumbre of riuers fallyng into the same, dooe carie with theim. And a wonderfull treasure the Uenetians spend in con∣tinuall diggyng and cariyng awaie of that mudde, to preserue theyr foresaied chanelles, and to defende, that theyr citee ioygne not to the maine lande. ¶The banke before rehersed, is broken in .vii. places, through the whiche botes maie come in: but no shippe
can passe to Uenice, sauyng at the porte of Malamoco, or at the two Castelles of Lio. The entrie wherof is so daungerous (by reason the sand{is} are mouable here & there) that whan any shippe cometh in, she taketh fyrst pilottes to sounde the waie: whiche in effect is reputed to be one of the greatest sureties, that the Uenetians haue for defence of theyr citee, against all ennemies by sea: and than by lande it is impossible to hurt or besiege it, vnlesse the enemie were hable to occupie .150. myle compasse with his armie. Of buildynges. NExte vnto the situacion, the maner of theyr buil∣dyng is most to be meruailed at. For almost e∣uery man that buildeth an house, maketh his foun∣dacion lower than the water: and er euer he set in hand withall, is constreigned to make suche a stronge pale of pyles and mudde betwene his buildyng and the water, as shall be hable to defende his woorke, whan (after he hath closed it well) the water and mudde that resteth within, is clensed and emptied out. Than causeth he stronge pyles of timber of a great length, to be driuen in, and therupon with stone and grauell beginneth his foundacion. So that whan he hath brought it to the full sea marke, he rekenneth to haue furnished one halfe of his buildyng: notwithstandyng that aboue water I thynke no place of all Europe, hable at this daie to compare with that citee for numbre of sumptuouse hou∣ses, specially for theyr frontes. For he that woull rowe throughe the Canale grande, and marke well the
frontes of the houses on bothe sydes, shall see theim, more lyke the doynges of princes than priuate men. And I haue been with good reason persuaded, that in Uenice be aboue .200. palaices able to lodge any kyng. ¶But now to the particuler of theyr notable buildyn∣ges: The new Castell, at the mouthe of the hauen Lio, for strengthe and beautie is one of the rarest thynges dooen in these daies. ¶The churche of S. Marke is a verie antike thyng, furnisshed with goodly pillers of fine marble, to the noumbre of .900. (as they saie) besides the floore vn∣der foote of small marble stones, wrought in knottes of diuers colours, and foure faire brasen horses ouer the fronte. ¶The Dukes palaice is a verie sumptuouse buildyng, and not yet finished. ¶The streete called, La Piazza di San Marco, is ve∣rie fayre and large, and the one syde is built of harde stone, all vniformely with faire glasen wyndowes, and the streete by low, paued ouer with bricke. ¶Saincte Markes steeple is a veraie hyghe and fayre toure of bricke, so well built, that within foorth an horse maie be ledde vp vnto the bellfroy. ¶The Rialto is a goodly place in the hert of the citee, where the merchauntes twyse a daie assemble. ¶The schooles of S. Rocke and S. Marke, are two notable thynges: the frontes wherof are the fayrest and costliest that euer I haue seen. ¶Finally, the Arsenale in myne eie excedeth all the rest: For there they haue well neere two hundred ga∣leys in suche an ordre, that vpon a verie small warnyng
they maie be furnisshed out vnto the sea. Besydes, that for euerie daie in the yere (whan they woulde goe to the cost) they shoulde be hable to make a new galey: hauyng suche a staple of tymber (whiche in the water within Th'arsenale hath lien a seasonyng, some .20. yere, some .40. some an .100. and some I wote not how longe) that it is a wonder to see it. And euery of these galeys hath his coueryng or house by hym selfe on the drie lande: so that the longe liyng vnoccupied can not hurt theim. Their mastes, cables, sailes, ankers, roo∣ders, ores, and euery other thyng are redy in houses of offices by theim selfes, that vnseen it is almost incredi∣ble: with suche a quantitee of artillerie, bothe for sea and lande, as made me to wonder, besides the harneyse and weapons, that suffise (as they saie) to arme an 00000. men. Finally the noumbre of woorkemen waged for terme of life about those exercises, is won∣derfull. For by all that I could learne, theyr ordinarie is neuer lesse than .600. woorkyng in the Arsenale, be it peace or warre. And because thei haue suche a num∣bre of botemen, that continually liue by gaine vpon the water within the citee: they neede not to seeke further for mariners to furnishe their galeys withall. For it was crediblie tolde me, that there are no lesse than 12000. botes daiely seruyng in those theyr chanelles: and almost no bote rowed, but of a sufficient mariner. So that if the Uenetians had ben men, as the Romains were, geuen as well vnto chiualrie by lande, as vnto the exercise on the water: no doubt thei might many yeres agoen haue subdued the worlde. But sure theyr power hath been more warely gouerned, than valiantly enlar∣ged.
For sens Constantinople was gotten by the Tur∣kes, theyr dominion hath decreased, bothe by reason (as the ame gothe) they rather practise with money, to bie and sell countreys, peace and warre: than to exercise deedes of armes: and for that moste Uenetians are at these daies become better merchauntes than men of warre. ¶And now methynketh it conuenient to speake in this place, of the armorie that is in an hall of the Dukes pa∣laice, called La Sala del Consiglio d'i dieci, whiche sure∣ly is a verie notable thyng. ¶There be (as thei recken) a thousande cotes of plate, parte couered with clothe of golde and veluette, with gilte nayles so fayre, that princes myght weare theim: besides diuers other fayre harneyses made of late, whi∣che are bestowed in so fayre an ordre, with theyr dyuers kyndes of weapons, furnisshed of the beste sorte, that a great while lookyng on, could not satisfie me. This hall is diuided into diuers seuerall porcions, as the hous dooeth geue it, and euery porcion hath his sorte by him selfe verie handsomely. ¶Finally for prouision of fresshe water it is a wonder to see theyr noumbre of costly welles, made onely to re∣ceiue the raine that falleth from the houses. I call theim costly, because fyrst euery well hath his bottome as low as the salt water, and must therfore be so surely walled and stopped with sande on the vtter syde, that it defende the salte water from sokyng in. And on the inner side it must haue his vent to receiue the water, that falleth from the houses, grauell within to passe tho∣rough, and last of all a fayre pauyng of bricke or stone
in the bottome closed about lyke a cestere, to preserue the purged water. ¶And though they haue a great noumbre of those wel∣les, and plentie of raine, yet the poore men, that dwell in the countrey, doe gaine yerely aboue .20000. crow∣nes, by bringyng theyr botes laden with fresshe water from the riuers to Uenice. Yet all this notwithstan∣dyng, you shall many tymes heare muche lamentacion amonge the poore folke for lacke of water. Of the dominion. BEsides all those townes and habitacions that are in theyr marishes, and on that longe banke betwene theim and the sea, as Murano, Mazzorbo, Tor∣cello, Malamoco, Chiozza, and others, they haue on the maine lande the countrey of Friuli, anciently called Forum Iulij, the citees of Treuiso, Padoa, Vicenza, Verona, Bressa, Bergamo, and Crema, with theyr ap∣purtenaunces. ¶The most part of the countrey of Istria, and vpon the costes of Dalmatia (now called Schlauonia) they haue Zara and Zebenico: In the mouthe of the Adriatike sea the ile of Corfu: and in the Leuant seas, otherwise called Mare Mediterraneum, the notable ilandes of Candia and Cyprus. So that if the grounde that thei be lordes of, were in one mans handes, he should be no lesse woorthie to be called a kyng, than most kynges that are knowen at these daies. For not longe agoen Cy∣prus (a parte of this) hath had a kynge alone. And how and whan they gotte these thynges, this briefe hi∣storie, hereafter folowyng particulerly declareth.
Of reuenue. AS I haue been crediblie enformed by some gen∣tilmen Uenetians, that haue had to dooe therin, they leauey of theyr subiectes little lesse than .4. millions of golde by the yeere, whiche (after our olde reckenyng) amounteth to the summe of tenne hundred thousande poundes sterlyng. A thyng rather to be won∣dred at than beleeued, consideryng they reyse it not v∣pon landes, but vpon customes after so extreme a sorte, that it would make any honest herte sorowfull to heare it. For there is not a graine of corne, a spoonefull of wine, a corne of salte, egge, byrde, beast, foule, or fisshe bought or solde, that paieth not a certaine custome. And in Uenice specially the customers part in many thyng{is}, is more than the owners. And if any thyng be taken by the waie vncustomed, be it merchaundise or other, ne∣uer so great or small, it is forfeited. For those custo∣mers kepe suche a sorte of prollers to serche all thyng{is} as they come to and fro, that I thynke Cerberus was neuer so greedie at the gates of hell as they be in the chanelles about Uenice. And though thei in serchyng a bote, finde no forfeiture, yet woull they not departe without drinkyng money. And many times the mea∣nest labourer or craftesman throughout all theyr domi∣nion, paieth a rate for the Poll by the moneth. Inso∣muche that a Candiote my friende (one that had dwel∣led in Constantinople) sware to me by his faieth, the Christians liued a great deale better vnder the Turke, than vnder the Uenetians. It is almost incredible, what gaine the Uenetians receiue by the vsurie of the Iewes, bothe priuately and in common. For in euery
citee the Iewes kepe open shops of vsurie, takyng gai∣ges of ordinarie for .xv. in the hundred by the yeere: and if at the yeres ende, the gaige be not redemed, it is forfeite, or at the least dooen awaie to a great disaduan∣tage: by reason wherof the Iewes are out of measure wealthie in those parties. Of dignitees and offices. THei haue a Duke called after theyr maner, Doge, who onely (amongest all the rest of the nobilitee) hath his office immutable for terme of life: with a certaine yerely prouision of .4000. duckates or ther∣aboutes. But that is so appoincted vnto him for cer∣taine ordinarie feastes, and other lyke charges, that his owne aduauntage therof can be but small. And though in apparaunce he seemeth of great astate, yet in veraie deede his power is but small. He kepeth no house, li∣ueth priuately, and is in so muche seruitude, that I haue hearde some of the Uenetians theim selfes call hym an honourable slaue: For he can not goe a mile out of the towne without the counsailes licence, nor in the towne departe extraordinarily out of the palaice, but priuately and secretely: And in his apparaile he is prescribed an ordre: so that in effect, he hath no maner of preeminence but the bare honour, the gifte of a few small offices, and the libertee, Di mettere vna parte, whiche is no more, but to propounde vnto any of the counsailes his opinion, touchyng the ordre, reformacion, or correction of any thyng: and that opinion euery counsaile is bounde tac∣cepte into a triall of theyr sentences by Ballot: (the ma∣ner
of whiche ballottyng shall hereafter appeare) and this priuilege, to haue his onely opinion ballotted, no man hath but he. And wheras many haue reported, that the Duke in ballottyng shoulde haue two voices, it is nothyng so: for in geuyng his voice he hath but one ballot, as all others haue. ¶Next vnto the Duke are three called the Signori Ca∣pi, or Cai, whiche outwardly seeme inferiour to the Duke, and yet are of more auctoritee than he. For theyr power is so absolute, that if there happen cause why, they maie arrest the Duke. And all suche procla∣macions as concerne the maiestee of theyr cōmon welth, goe foorth alwaies vnder theyr name: Lyke as we vse to saie in the kynges name, so saie they, Da parte de i Signori Cai. Two of whiche Cai, or one of theim, with one of the Auogadori, haue power, Di metter v∣na parte, suche as is before rehersed of the Duke. ¶Than haue they .vi. counsaillours of the most woor∣thy amonge theim, who are ioygned with the Duke to sitte in the college for audience of ambassadours, and other mattiers of importaunce: and these specially are called La Signoria. For notwithstandyng there be diuers ioygned in the same college with them, as, Gli auij della terra ferma, and other moe: yet those .vi. counsaillours are of most reputacion in that place: and accordyngly go alwaies apparailled in skarlet or crim∣sen silkes. ¶In deede, La Signoria, is cōmonly vsed as the name of theyr whole maiestee, and principally it doeth include the Duke, with the reste of the chiefe officers or sena∣tours (to the numbre of three score) that accompanieth
him, whan in his solemnitee he cometh to churche, or goeth vnto any of the ordinarie ceremonies abroade in the citee. ¶Now of suche as haue auctoritee to consulte vpon mattiers of importaunce (as we shoulde saie, the kyng{is} maiestees priuie counsaile) they haue .xvii. persons ap∣poincted, called Il Consiglio di dieci: Of whiche the Duke, the three Cai, and the .vi. counsailours are part. ¶For mattiers of conclusion of peace, of warre, of a∣state, or of other lyke greatest importaunce, they haue a counsaile called, Pregadi, into the whiche entreth the Duke, with the Consiglio de dieci, and of the other principall officers, to the numbre of .200. or therabout{is}. ¶For mattiers of iustice, there be dyuers other offices, as Il Consiglio di Quaranta, Il Consiglio di trenta, gl' auogadori,  Signori di notte, gl' Auditori uec∣chie nuoui, and many moe: whiche haue theyr degrees and orders so appoincted, that not one of theim woulle meddle with an others office: byng a thyng no lesse fearefull vnto theim than poyson. For theyr princi∣pall profession is libertee: and he that shoulde vsurpe vpon an other, shuld incontinently be reputed a tyranne: whiche name of all thynges they can not abyde. For whan a subiect of theyrs saieth: sir, you are my lorde, you are my maister, he taketh it for the greatest villanie of the worlde. ¶The Signor della Sanita hath the charge to see the citee kept cleane, and the sicke prouided for. And as for other particuler officers, that haue the ouersight of all maner prouisions and assise of vittailes, it shall suf∣fise to saie, that there cometh nothyng vnto theyr citee,
but it is viewed, and an ordinarie price appoincted vnto the seller, to the entent the bier be not deceiued. Of the great counsaile. NOwe it behoueth me to saie somewhat of theyr great counsaile, whiche seemeth to be the whole staie of theyr common wealth. ¶There be about .200. families of name, as Conta∣rini, Morosini, Donati, Badoeri, Foscari, and suche o∣thers: of whiche families be welneere the noumbre of 2500. gentilmen. And all they that are of the age of 25. and vpwardes, dooe entre into the great counsaile: the ordre of whose admission into the same is: Whan a gentilman is growen vnto .20. yeere olde, his father or friendes dooe present him vnto the Auogadori, who taketh his name, and with other names of the same sort, putteth it into a boxe, vntill the .iiii. of Decembre: beyng the daie appoincted, that all they of that age re∣sorte vnto the Duke, vnto whom (besides this boxe) there is brought an other boxe, with so many balles, as the names amount vnto: of whiche euery fifte ball is golde, and all the rest siluer. Than taketh the Duke a bill out of one boxe, and a ball out of an other, and if the bill meete with a golden ball, than is that gentilman allowed: and if he meete not, than must he abide a bet∣ter chaunce the next yere, orels the age of .25. ¶This foresaied great counsaile maie be lykened to our parliament: For vnto it manie mattiers of impor∣taunce are appealed, and that that it dooeth, is vnrefor∣mable. By it all offices are geuen. And into it en∣treth
the Duke, and all the other officers. And final∣ly there passe so many thyng{is} through that great coun∣saile (specially offices) that ordinarily euerie holidaie, and many times the worken daies, the same sitteth from diner till nyght. The ordre beyng this. ¶Thei haue an hall verie fayre and large, in the prin∣cipall parte wherof, at the tone ende, sitteth the Duke with certaine counsailours. And ouer against hym at the other ende the Cai: and on the sides the Auogado∣ri, with the other magistrates. Than in the body of the hall there be tenne longe benches from the one ende therof vnto the other, and so made, that the gentilmen maie sitte by two rewes on a benche backe to backe. And so euery man beyng set, in what place it shal please him to take at his comyng in, the doores are shutte: and the chauncellour standeth vp, and readeth the office that is voide, with the names of theim that desyre it: and he that in the election hath most ballottes (so that they passe the halfe noumbre) is admitted officer. If there be none that hath more than halfe the voices as of a 1000. to haue .501: than is the election put ouer till an other daie. This maner of geuyng theyr voices by ballotte, is one of the laudablest thynges vsed amongest theim. For there is no man can knowe what an o∣ther dooeth. ¶The boxes are made with an holow place at the top, that a man maie put in his hand, and at the ende of that place hange .ii. or .iii. boxes, into whiche he will, he maie let fall his ballot, that no man can perceiue hym. If there be but two boxes (as commonly it is in electi∣on) the one saieth yea, and the other saieth naie: And
if there be .iii. boxes (whiche for the most part hapneth in cases of iudgement) the one saieth yea, thother saith naie, and the thyrde saieth nothyng: and they are all well enough knowen by theyr dyuers colours. By this ordre of ballottyng they procede in iudgement tho∣rough all offices, vpon all maner of causes: beyng re∣puted a soueraigne preseruacion of iustice. For often∣tymes the iudges maie graunt theyr voyces, and neuer∣thelesse (whan thei come to the hearyng of the mattier) dooe as theyr consciences shall leade theim: aunswea∣ryng afterwardes, that thei did theyr best, but thei could not preuaile. ¶Finally in the disposyng of theyr offices thei vse this ordre: that all offices of preeminence, as of the Signo∣ria, that are before rehersed, or the beeyng Potestate, Capitaine, or Gouernour of any citee, castell, towne, or countrey, maie be geuen to none other, but vnto gen∣tilmen Uenetians. All offices, that be vnder comman∣dement, as chauncellour, secretaries, and suche others, are bestowed amongest theyr best knowen citesins. For though there be many of those offices of commaunde∣ment verie profitable, yet can no gentilman haue the be∣nefite therof. Either because they woull mainteyne in theyr personages a certeine maiestee, with theyr ly∣bertee, or els because they woull aduoide the inconueni∣ences that maie growe of perpetuitee. For all maner of gentilmens offices, from the highest to the lowest (the Dukes dignitee onely excepted) ar remouable, some frō yere to yere, some euery .ix. monethes, some more, some lesse (for no gentilman maie longe enioie one office): So all offices, that appertaine vnto theyr citesins, are dura∣ble
for terme of liue without any chaunge. ¶Amongest all other, this notable ordre thei haue, that two gentilmen of one familie can not be in one magi∣strate or hygh office together at ones. By reason wherof those gentilmen, that of one name are fewest in numbre, grow a great deale sooner and oftner to autho¦ritee, than they that be of the most: whiche is thought a wonderfull helpe of their vnitee and concorde. For if many of one name shoulde rule at ones, they might happen so to agree, that it should be an vndoyng of their common wealthe. ¶Of the proctours and treasure. THere be certeine principall officers, whiche shulde seeme exempted from theyr common wealth, and be neuerthelesse head{is} of the same, that is to were xii. of the principallest called Procuratori di San Marco, out of whiche numbre the Duke is alwaie chosen: and those haue theyr offices for terme of life, with a certeine stipende of an hundreth dukates a yere, or there about. Theyr charge is, seme to gouerne the reuenewes and treasure of the common wealth, and some the rentes and treasure of saincte Markes churche. ¶As for the treasure of theyr common wealth I could neuer fynde the meane to see it: but I haue been credi∣blie enformed, that it is a great summe of readie money locked vp in chestes, (that no man maie come at) whiche is sometyme more and sometyme lesse, as theyr wealth or charges encrease. And thoughe theyr reuenewe be
verie great, yet consideryng the often warres that they haue, the great wages that the senatours and officers receiue, the noumbre of straunge capitaines that they wage for terme of life, the noumbre of castels and for∣tresses that they maintaine, fortified with watche and warde, theyr continuall costly buildynges, and finally the vnreasonable charge of theyr Arsenale, and of their galeys abrode, I thynke they can not laie vp any great some at the yeres ende. ¶The other treasure of sainct Markes churche, I haue seen: the principall thing wherof is a table on the high aulter, plated ouer with siluer, grauen and enameled, and set full of preciouse stones of all sortes. And than in a little stronge corner on the southsyde of the churche are certeine plates of golde muche lyke womens parte∣lettes set full of riche stones, a goodly imperiall crowne for theyr Duke, two fayre vnicornes hornes, and diuers other thynges, the value wherof consisteth onely in the preciouse stones: For the golde that is about theim is but small in quantitee, but the stones are many in num∣bre, excellent great and fayre, and almost inestimable of price. ¶Finally to retourne vnto the Proctours, theyr repu∣tacion is the greatest next the Dukes, and there is none can clymbe vnto that dignitee, but either he must be so woorthy, auncient and notable a man, as fewe lyke are to be founde amongest theim: or els so riche, that in time of neede he hath before his election releaued the com∣mon wealth with the lone of a notable summe of mo∣ney. Whiche seconde sort of election is also commen vppe of late, sens money (as some saie) hath entred in more reputacion than vertue.
¶Of lawes. THeyr aduocates (as we shoulde saie our men of law) studie principally the ciuile lawes, and besy∣des that the statutes and customes of the citee: whiche are so many, that in maner they suffise of theim selfes. But he that substancially considereth the ma∣ner of theyr procedynges, shall plainly see, that all mat∣tiers are determined by the iudges consciences, and not by the ciuile, nor yet by theyr owne lawes. For in e∣uery office there be dyuers iudges, and that parte that hath most ballottes, preuaileth euer: be it in mattier of debt, of title of lande, vpon life and death, or otherwise. And in euery triall of thefte, murder, or suche other, the partie hym selfe is neuer suffred to speake. But there be certeine aduocates waged of the common reuenewe, whiche with no lesse studie pleade in their defence, than the Auogadori, in the contrarie. One daie the Auo∣gador cometh into the courte, and laieth against the fe∣lon that, that either by examinacion, by torture, or by witnesse hath been proued: And an other daie cometh in th'aduocate, and defendeth the felon with the best aun∣sweare he can deuise: so that many tymes the prisoner tarieth .ii.iii. and sometyme .iiii. yeres, er euer he come vnto his triall of life and death. ¶This ordre they obserue in Uenice onely. For out of Uenice the gentilman Uenetian, that is Potestate of the citee, towne, or place, hath absolute power to iudge vpon all mattiers hym selfe alone: how be it euery of theim, hath a counsaile of learned men, to aduise hym what the law commaundeth. Besides that, euery .v.
yeres there be certaine inquisitours, called Sindici, sent foorth to refourme extorcions, and all other thyng{is} that they finde amisse, throughout theyr whole dominion. ¶Finally there is a law in Uenice, that no gentilman Uenetian maie speake with any ambassadour, without licence of the Signoria, for feare of intelligence, or of daungerouse practise. And because they feare, least ciuile sedicion might be the destruction of their common wealth, as of dyuers other it hath been, therefore thei haue prouided an ordre, that whan any two gentilmen happen to fall out, either they dooe so dissemble it, that theyr malice neuer appeareth to the worlde, or els they agree within theim selfes. For if it come to the Si∣gnorias knowlage, it can not be chosen, but he that is most faultie receiueth a great rebuke, and many tymes in those cases diuers are banished, or sharpely punished. As for theyr other lawes, though I were sufficiently ex∣pert in theim, yet partly for briefenesse, and partly be∣cause thei are not so muche necessarie to my purpose, I passe theim ouer. But this is cleere, there can be no better ordre of Iustice in a common wealth than theirs, if it were duely obserued. How be it corrupcion (by the aduocates meanes) is so crept in amongest the iud∣ges, that poore men many times can want no delaies in the processe of theyr mattiers. Of warre. I Finde two sortes of warre, one by sea, an other by lande. ¶By sea the Uenetians theim selfes gouerne the
whole, and by lande they are serued of straungers, both for generall, for capitaines, and for all other men of warre: because theyr lawe permitteth not any Ueneti∣an to be capitaine ouer an armie by lande. (Fearyng I thynke Caesars example) Neuerthelesse with theyr ar∣mie by lande, they sende foorthe dyuers of theyr gentil∣men, some as legates, some as paiemaisters. So that theyr generall, (what noble man so euer he be) hath al∣waies a counsaile of the Uenetians about him: by whō in maner all thynges are dooen. ¶And by sea euery Galey hath one gentilman Ueneti∣an for capitaine, by the name of Sopracomito: and o∣uer a noumbre of galeys one Legate (as it were an ad∣myrall) that maie hange and punisshe at his pleasure. This is ordinarie both in peace and warre. For though the peace be neuer so sure and quiet, yet faile thei not to send forth yerely certaine armed galeis to kepe the seas against Corsales, and Pyrates: not onely because their merchaundise maie passe saufely to and fro, but also for the honour that they claime in the dominion therof. For yerely on the ascension daie, the Duke, with the se∣nate, in theyr best araie vse to goe into the hauen at Lio, and there by throwyng a rynge into the water, to take the sea as theyr espouse. ¶Finally whan they happe to haue any daungerouse warre by sea or lande, they create a Proueditore, who (out of Uenice) is of no lesse authoritee, than the Dicta∣tour was wont to be in Rome: specially by sea. And lightly they neuer make a Proueditore, but either thei be in great feare, or perill. And throughout all theyr do∣minion, within any citee or walled towne, no man maie
carie weapon without a speciall licence. Of common prouision, and charitable deedes. THeyr diligente vse in prouision for graine is nota∣ble. For be it deare or good cheape theyr com∣mon graner (whiche is a myghtie great house) is in maner alwaies furnisshed. So that lyghtly in the citee can be no great dearth, because many tymes of their owne common purse, they are contented to lose for the poore peoples reliefe (though an other tyme they paie theim selfes the double). ¶They haue also certaine schooles or felowships ga∣thered together for deuocion, as one of sainct Marke, an other of sainct Rooke, one of this sainct, an other of that: which (beyng for the most part substanciall men) dooe releeue a noumbre of the poore after this sorte. Poore peo¦ple.¶They geue theim ones a yere a course liuerey, with a certaine small stipende, for the whiche the poore man is bounde to carie a taper at one of the bretherne or sisters buriall, and besides that to attende certeine holidaies at the schoole, where the principall bretherne assemble, to dispose vnto the mariage of poore younge women and in other good woorkes, that part of money that theyr rate for the time dooeth allow: and afterwardes (with theyr priest{is} and clerkes) goe a procession a certaine cir∣cuite, in the whiche the poore men lykewyse carie their tapers before theim. Hospitals.¶Furthermore there are certaine hospitalles, some for the sicke and diseased, and some for poore orphanes, in
whiche they are nourished vp till thei come vnto yeres of seruice: and than is the man childe put vnto a craft, and the maidens kept till they be maried. If she be fayre, she is soone had, and little money geuen with hir: if she be foule, they auaunce hir with a better porcion of money. ¶For the plague, there is an house of many lodgeyng{is}, two miles from Uenice, called the Lazaretto, vnto the whiche all they of that house, wherin one hath been in∣fected of the plague, are incontinently sent, and a lodge∣yng sufficiente appoincted for theim till the infection ceasse, that they maie retourne. ¶Finally for prisoners they haue this ordre:Prisoner Twyse a yere, at Christmas, and Easter, the Auditori dooe vi∣site all the prisones in Uenice, and there geue audience vnto all creaditours that haue any debtour in prison for the summe of .50. duckates and vnder. If the partie be hable to paie, daies are geuen, and sureties founde: and if the debt be desperate, than dooe thei theim selfes agree with the partie for more or lesse, as the likelyhode is, and paie hym of the common purse. So that ere euer they depart, they emptie the prisones of all theim that lie for that summe. Of customes in their lyuyng. TO speake of the gentilman Uenetians priuate life and customes, I wote not whether it be best to fo∣low the common reporte: or to dissemble the mat∣tier. And yet me seemeth I can not dooe more indif∣ferently
than recite what is vsed to be said on both sid{is}. ¶If any man woulde saie, there were no woorthy men amongest the Uenetians, he shoulde greatly erre. For (as I beleue) there be some, and specially of those olde fatherly men, as wyse, as honest, as faiethfull, as ho∣norable, and as vertuous, as in any place can be found. Lykewise some of the younge men, as gentill, as libe∣rall, as valiaunt, as well learned, as full of good qua∣litees, as maie be. But to speake of the greatter num∣bre, straungers vse to reporte, that the gentilman Uene∣tian is proude, disdeinfull, couetouse, a great nygarde, a more leachour, spare of liuyng, tyranne to his tenant, finally neuer satisfied with hourdyng vp of money. For though (saie they) he haue .viii.ix. or .x. thousand duckates of yeerely reuenew, yet woull he kepe no moe persones in his house, but his wife and children, with ii. or .iii. women seruauntes, and one man, or two at the most, to row his Gondola. He woull goe to the market hym selfe, and spende so miserablie, that many a meane man shall fare better than he. Of his .10000. duckates a yere, if he spend three or .iiii.C. in his house, he estemeth it a wonderfull charge. Besides all this, he hath .ii. or .iii. Iewes, that choppe and chaunge with him daiely: by whose vsurie he gaineth out of measure. And yet woull be rather see a poore man statue, than re∣lieue hym with a penie. It is true, he woul haue his wife goe gaie and sumptuously apparailed, and on his woman besides, if he be a louer (as in maner thei be all) he woull sticke for no coste. To the mariage of his daughter .30.40. or .50. thousande duckates is no meruaile. Finally his greatest triumphe is, whan
saincte Marke hath neede (for vnder that name is com∣prehended theyr common welth) to be hable to disburse an huge summe of money in lone, to receiue yerely till he be repaied .10.12. or .15. of the .hundreth. ¶This kynde of prest the Signoria vseth to take (bo∣rowyng of all them that are hable to lende) whan thei happen to haue warres. And they that maie, doe the more willyngly lende: because they are not onely well paied againe with the vsurie, but also the more honou∣red and fauoured as long as theyr money is out of their handes. ¶This is theyr trade, saieth the straunger. But the Uenetian to the contrary defendeth hym selfe on this wyse. ¶Admitte (saieth he) that this report were true, If I be proude, I haue good cause, for I am a prince and no subiecte. If I be spare of liuyng, it is because my com∣mon wealth alloweth no pompe, and measure is hole∣some. If I kepe few seruantes, it is because I nede no moe. If I bie my meate my selfe, it is because, I woul eate that, that I loue, & that (hauing little a do) I woul exercise my selfe withall. As for my tenaunt, he li∣ueth by me, and I am no tyranne for husbandyng myne owne. If I gaine, I gaine vpon my money, and hide not my talent in the grounde. If I loue, I hate not: if she be fayre, I am the more woorthie. If I spende little, I haue the more in my purse. If I spend large∣ly with my daughter, it is because I woull bestow hir on a gentilman Uenetian, to encrease the nobilitee of myne owne bloudde, and by meane of suche aliaunce to atteine more habilitee to rule and reigne in my com∣mon
wealth: Besydes that, my money: if hir hous∣bande die, is hirs and no mans els. If my wyfe goe gaie, it is to please myne eie, and to satisfie hir. In kepyng my money to lende vnto sainct Marke, it is both an helpe to my common wealth, and a profite vnto my selfe. ¶And thus defendeth the Uenetian it, that in maner all the worlde laieth vnto his charge. ¶But surely many of theim trade and bringe vp theyr children in so muche libertee, that one is no sooner out of the shell, but he is hayle felow with father and friend, and by that time he cometh to .xx. yeres of age, he know∣eth as muche lewdnesse as is possible to be imagined. For his greatest exercise is to goe amongest his compa∣nions, to this good womans house and that. Of whi∣che in Uenice are many thousandes of ordinarie, lesse than honest. And no meruaile of the multitude of theyr common women, for among the gentilmen is a cer∣teine vse, that if there be diuers brethern, lightly but one of theim dooeth marie: because the numbre of gen∣tilmen shoulde not so encrease, that at length their com∣mon wealth myght waxe vile: wherfore the rest of the brethern dooe kepe Courtisanes, to the entent they maie haue no laufull children. And the bastardes that they begette become most commonly monkes, friers, or nun∣nes: who by theyr friendes meanes are preferred to the offices of most profite, as abbott{is}, priours, and so foorth. But specially those Courtisanes are so riche, that in a maske, or at the feast of a mariage, or in the shrouyng tyme: you shall see theim decked with iewelles, as thei were Queenes. So that it is thought no one citee a∣gaine
hable to compare with Uenice, for the numbre of gorgeouse dames. As for theyr beaultie of face, though they be fayre in deede, I woull not highly commende theim, because there is in maner none, olde or yonge vn∣peincted. In deede of theyr stature they are for the most parte veraie goodly and bygge women, well made and stronge. ¶The libertee of straungers. AL men, specially strangers, haue so muche liber∣tee there, that though they speake verie ill by the Uenetians, so they attempt nothyng in effecte a∣gainst theyr astate, no man shall controll theim for it. And in theyr Carnouale time (whiche we call shroftide) you shall see maskers disguise theim selfes in the Uene∣tians habite, and come vnto theyr owne noses in derisi∣on of theyr customes, theyr habite, and miserie. ¶Further, he that dwelleth in Uenice, maie recken him selfe exempt from subiection. For no man there mar∣keth an others dooynges, or that meddleth with an o∣ther mans liuyng. If thou be a papist, there shalt thou want no kinde of supersticion to feede vpon. If thou be a gospeller, no man shall aske why thou comest not to churche. If thou be a Iewe, a Turke, or beleeuest in the diuell (so thou spreade not thyne opinions abroade) thou arte free from all controllement. To lyue mari∣ed or vnmaried, no man shall aske the why. For eating of flesshe in thyne owne house, what daie so euer it be, it maketh no mattier. And generally of all other thin∣ges, so thou offende no man priuately, no man shall of∣fende
the: whiche vndoubtedly is one principall cause, that draweth so many straungers thither. An abbridgement of the Uenetian histories from the edificacion of the citee vnto this daie. OMittyng the diuers opi∣nions of many men, touchyng the be∣ginning of the Uenetian name, I will recite that whiche most writers agree vpon, (that is to saie) either they are descended of certaine people called Heneti, (whiche after the destruction of Troie came with Anthenor into Italie: and landyng in those mari∣shes of the Adriatike sea, enhabited the countrey ther∣aboutes) orels of certaine Britons called Veneti, parte of those Frenchemen that fyrst passed the mountaines, whose habitacion in Britaine, at that time called Vene∣ti, is supposed to be now called Vanes. So that whe∣ther it be of Heneti, or of Veneti, at length they were called Venetiani. ¶Now to come to the foundacion of theyr citee, I find, that betwene the yeeres of grace .422. and .456. (a∣bout the tyme that Attila plaged the whole region of Italie) the gentilmen and citesins, principally of Pa∣doa, and generally of all the countrey about, betwene the Alpes and the Uenetian Goolfe (to flee the furie of the Hunni, that with fyre and swoorde consumed all
thynges before theim) resorted with theyr gooddes and richesse into the marishes, where Uenice, with hir other membres now standeth: and perceiuyng what a com∣moditee or sauegarde those marisshes were against the enemies rage (Italie beyng so ofte scourged with war∣res at that tyme) they vpon agreement begane the e∣dificacion of that citee, in the place Riuo alto, now cal∣led Rialto: where was builded the churche of saincte Iames, that yet vnto this daie remaineth. And all be it, that before this tyme the bankes within those mari∣shes had been occupied and enhabited: yet because the inhabitauntes were poore fisshermen: the place merited not to be writen of or mencioned, vntill suche tyme as those gentilmen and citesins resorted thither. Wher∣fore I saie, that the Padoanes (moste of auctoritee a∣mongest the rest) after this fyrste buildyng of the citee, ordeined certaine consules for the gouernyng thereof: who for a few yeres, now one, now other ruled the same: vntill the citee beganne to waxe great and populous: and that (because the situacion of the places in the wa∣ter, woulde not suffre the citee to be one whole thyng to∣gether, but diuided into diuers ilandes, as the water did geue) they were faine to appoincte yerely ouer euery i∣lande one Tribune to gouerne theim: and for mattiers concernyng the whole cōmon wealth, thei ordeined a ge∣nerall counsaile, wherunto all the Tribunes, with cer∣teine of the chosen citesins, should repayre. And so vn∣der these Tribunes beganne theyr common welth to en∣crease, theyr citesins to make shippes, as well of warre as of merchandise, and so to trafficque abrode the world. But principally the diligence of theyr fisshers yelded
theim no small gayne, by reason that theyr saltfishe, ca∣ried into other places, was bought as a speciall mer∣chaundise. So that in processe of tyme theyr repu∣tacion, wealth and force began so muche to grow: that in the defence of Italie, and fauour of the emperour Iustinian (whose capitaine Bellisario had besieged the Gottishe kyng Uitige in Rauenna) they made out cer∣taine ships and botes, and vpon the riuer of Pò, mette with parte of the Gottisshe armie, fought with theim, and discomfited them. Againe, in company of Valeria∣no, gouernour of Rauenna, thei were part of those .40. ships, that discomfited other .40. saile of the kyng Toti∣la before Aucona: taking and drowning the most part of them. For the whiche doynges they were both embraced of themperour, & also much honored of his capitains: in so muche that the famous Narses, being sent of the em∣perour to defend Italy against the foresaid Gotes, what to thanke the Uenetians, and to see the maner of theyr citee, went in person vnto Uenice, where he commended muche the diligence of theyr goodly buildyng: and in that meane while sent his armie by lande to Rauenna: in whiche iourney at the passage of the Pò, the Uene∣tian shippes did hym great seruice. ¶Thus whyle Narses was in the Rialto of Uenice, the Padoanes sent ambassadours vnto hym, complai∣nyng, how the Uenetians had vsurped vpon theim those maishes, whiche tyme out of mynde had been theirs: together with the hauen of the riuer of Brent. Wher∣vnto the Tribune of the Rialto made suche an answere: that Narses curtesely tolde theim, the mattier required longer debatyng, than his hastie iourney wolde as than
permitte: wherfore exhorting the Padanes to take pa∣cience for the tyme, he desired theim, in the defence and fortifiyng of their countrey, to shew like diligence, loue, and faieth towardes the empyre, as the Uenetians had dooen: and than so muche the more should he be gladde to aduaunce theim. ¶And so vnder the fauour of diuers emperours those ilandes of Uenice, as Grado, Eraclea, Equilo, and Ma∣lamoco were gouerned of priuate Tribunes, & by a ge∣nerall counsaile for the space of .200. yeres and more, without any great incident, woorthie to be mencioned: excepte that betwene the bishoppes (afterwarde made Patriarkes) of Aquileia, whiche standeth in the maine lande: and of Grado, that lieth in the marisshes, there was muche warre, strife, and feyghtyng for the interest of theyr iurisdictions. ¶Finally in the tyme of Constantine the .iiii. after I∣talie through diuers warres had been sore afflicted, and that from all partes the persones that were of power (for theyr sauegarde) fledde thither: Uenice encreased so muche, that Luipandro, Duke of Friuli, either for enui, or for feare of their towardnesse, prouoked cer∣teine of his neighbours to oppresse Uenice. And se∣cretly on a night made out a certeine noumbre of botes downe the water, and sodeinely assaulted Grado, Era∣clea, and Rialto: where they toke certeine shippes, la∣ded with merchaundise, lately commn out of the easte partes. But incontinently as the rumour was reysed, these assaulters fledde, and were so pursued, that many of theim were slaine, many hurt, and the most parte of theyr praie recouered. Neuerthelesse the noyse of the
people continued, and specially the lamentacion of them that had lost theyr friendes or goodes. Wherfore in Eraclea they called a counsaile, and muche adooe there was through diuersitee of opinions: because the people laied all the fault in the ill gouernaunce of the officers. But at last the Patriarke of Grado, an ancient learned man, of auctoritee, was praied to saie his minde. Who with a longe oracion persuaded, that without concorde it was impossible to liue surely or quiet, and that wher∣as were dyuers heades, there coulde be no concorde. Wherfore his opinion was, that they should chose them one onely prince, to gouerne theyr common wealth, and preserue theyr vnitee. For where any astate (saied he) is not gouerned with one consent and will, there nother haboundaunce of money, strength of place, noumbre of people, woorthinesse of capitaines, nor helpe of friend{is} or neighbours can auaile. So the whole counsaile a∣greeyng to his opinion, resolued vpon the election of a Duke: that shoulde haue auctoritee and charge ouer all mattiers of importaunce, to call the counsaile, and to haue priuate thynges referred vnto hym by the Tribu∣nes: that the counsaile of the clergie shoulde not assem∣ble, but by licence of the Duke: and that the benefices geuen by the people and clergie, should be confyrmed by hym. ¶To whiche dignitee they fyrst elected a woorthy cite∣sin Paolo Lucio of Eraclea,Paolo. Lucio. geuyng hym an othe for the administracion of iustice, and for the quiete rule o∣uer theim without tyrannie. ¶Thus whan Paolo had taken the gouernaunce into his handes, he beganne to agree those persons, that be∣fore
contended: whiche was so muche the more easie to dooe, by as muche as at that time there was almost con∣tinuall warres betwene the Lumbardes, and some of the Dukes, either of Friuli, Spóleti, or Beneuento: that in maner all theyr neighbours were in armes. ¶Whan he had thus well quieted his citesins, he ordei∣ned watche and warde to be kept at the mouthes of the riuers: fortifiyng some of theim with castles, as tyme and place would serue hym. ¶He commaunded euery towne to haue a certaine num∣bre of botes in a readinesse, whan the Duke shoulde geue theim any token: and restored the Uenetian dominion vnto his olde lymites, now called La piaue Secca. ¶He maynteined amitee with the kynge Ariperto, and made peace with Luipandro, with condicions of ad∣vauntage. But amongeste all his other doynges the worthiest of memory, was, that he refourmed the lawes,Lawes. and broughte theim into suche a playne and briefe order, that eche man mighte be his owne lawyer: Affirmyng, that nothyng can more hynder a man, than the folow∣yng of longe suites and greedy lawyers. Wherfore in those daies they vsed none imperiall lawes: but be∣sides those theyr fewe lawes written, if there happened any doubte, incontinentely they resorted vnto the lawe of nature, chosyng that, whiche semed vnto theim moste iust and honest. ¶After Paolo, an other citesin of Eraclea,Marcello. named Mar∣cello, a very sobre and wise man, was elected Duke, but in diligence he was nothyng comparable vnto Paolo. ¶In the tyme of this Marcello (except the stryfe and contencion betwene the patriark{is} of Aquileia and Gra∣do,
whiche I esteme not woorth the writyng) I fynde no worthy mattier of memorie. Orso.¶Nexte hym succeded Orso, a man not onely noble of bloudde, but also worthie of dedes. ¶He firste vsed to bryng vp the youthe of Uenice in the exercise of armes. He augmented the numbre of soul∣diours in the shippes of warre, and thorough his valy∣auntnesse restored Paolo, one of the Grekish emperours capitaines, vnto the astate of Rauenna. In whiche enterprise Perendio, Duke of Vicenza was slayne, and Ildepandro, nephew of Luipandro taken prysoner: who by commission of the same Luipandro, had (by syege) gotten the saied citee from the foresaied Paolo. ¶This victorie was one notable thyng that firste exal∣ted the Uenetian name. ¶Finally vpon contencion spronge betweene the Era∣cleani and Equilesi, for the lymites of theyr confynes, for the whiche was dayly feightyng betwene theim the space of two yeres: This Duke Orso supposed to be the authour of that sedicion, in a tumulte of the people was slayne. ¶Surelie a lamentable ende, of the gloriouse and hap∣pie begynnyng of so worthie a man. The more be∣cause of an other inconuenience that folowed, that the Patriarke of Aquileia toke from the Uenetians the townes of Mossone and Centenara: though afterwar∣des thorough the menaces of Gregorie, bishop of Rome, he restored Mossone, whan he had vtterlye destroyed Centenara. 737¶After the death of Orso, there beganne a new rumour for chosyng of the Duke, and many grudged, that Era∣clea
alone had so longe tyme enioyed the honour therof. Wherfore now bothe the seate and election was trans∣lated vnto Malamoco, whiche at that tyme was verie muche encreased bothe in people and richesse. Neuer∣thelesse the counsaile in this election coulde not agree amongest them selfes, and therfore at length concluded, to chose a newe maner of officer, namyng him, Maister of the souldiours, whose authoritee was remoueable from yere to yere. ¶The firste was Domenico Leone, and succedyng hym was Felice Cornacchino, the .iii. Deodato sonne of the Duke Orso, who continued in that office, as some saie, two yeres. The fourth Iuliano Ipato, and the v. Giouanni Fabritiaco, who before the end of his yere, was put out of his office, and lost bothe his eies. In whiche meane tyme the olde strife, betwene the Equi∣lesi and Eracleani, renewed, in so muche that meetyng together, neere vnto the chanell, now called dell'arco, so many on both sides were slain, that almost thei came to naughtes. ¶The Uenetians (weried with these and suche other businesses) retourned to theyr olde gouernance,Deodato .737. electing the forenamed Deodato to theyr Duke: who finallie beeyng occupied aboutes the fortifiyng of Brondolo, was assaulted by Galla, a citisin of Malamoco, and be∣yng taken prisoner, had his eies put out. The naugh∣tie dooyng wherof so muche offended the Uenetians, that ere the yere passed, thei toke Galla, put out his eies, depriued him of his vsurped astate, and at last toke from hym his life: chosyng Domenico Menicaccio or Mo∣nagario, in his place.
Domenico Menicac∣cio .747.¶This Domenico had not so great auctoritee as his predecessours, for to abate the power of their Duke, whi∣che by the passed experience the Uenetians thought to be ouerlarge, they ioygned in company with hym two of theyr Tribunes: whiche so muche offended this Do∣menico, that at length he openly contended, to recouer the wnte absolute power. And therfore was not one∣ly depriued of his dignitee, but also for a punisshement his eies put out. Mauritio .72.¶And than in his place was created a woorthie riche man called Mauritio of Eraclea: who in his tyme pa∣cified muche bothe the secrete grudges, and also the o∣pen contencions betwene his priuate citesins: and ob∣teined the see of a bishop to be placed in Uenice, in the churche of sainct Peter. Whiche bishop was after∣wardes exalted vnto the degree of a Patriarke, by Ni∣colas the .v. bishop of Rome. ¶Duryng the rule of this Mauritio the Uenetians (after great debating of the mattier in counsaile to and fro) graunted to ayde kynge Charlemaine with .xxv. vesselles well armed and paueysed, whiche did Charle∣maine great seruice in the assaulte of Pauia, whan he toke Desiderio kyng of Lumbardie prisoner. ¶Finally Mauritio obteining of the Uenetians to haue his sonne Giouanni, ioygned in the astate with hym, and hauyng ruled .xi. yeres alone, and .vii. yeres ioynct∣ly with his sonne, he died. Giouanni .768.¶Giouanni likewyse ruled alone a certaine space: and obteined his sonne Mauritio to be ioygned with hym: who bothe togethers bare them selfes verie ill towar∣des theyr citisins. And amongest other thynges Mau∣ritio,
beyng sent of his father vnto Grado, caused the Patriarke of that place to be throwen downe out of a toure: because he was wont to warne bothe the father and sonne of theyr ill behauiours. Wherfore thei be∣came hatefull to their citisins: so that a conspiracy was wrought against theim, the chiefe wherof was named Obelerio, that before tyme had been Tribune of Ma∣lamoco. ¶This conspiracie came so to passe, that the people pro∣claimed Obelerio Duke: and the rumour was such, that Giouanni, with his sonne, and one Christofer a bishop theyr friende, fledde all thre vnto Mantua. ¶Than was Obelerio placed in the astate,Obelerio▪ 78. who shorte∣ly obteined his brother Beato to be ioigned with him. In theyr tyme the auncient malice betwene the Eraclea∣ni and the Equilesi renewed, in suche wyse that it made a fowle slaughter amongest theim. Wherfore it was finally concluded, that bothe the one and other towne shoulde be destroied, and the inhabitauntes reduced vnto Malamoco and Rialto. And so was it quickely done, the rather because euen than kynge Pepine, sonne of Charlemaine was determined to assayle the countrey and hauens of Dalmatia, against the Grekish emperour Niceforo: towardes whiche enterprise Pepine requi∣red passage and vitailes of the Uenetians. But they wolde not consente therto though Obelerio their Duke fauoured the frenche parte. For in consultyng vpon this matter were great disputacions, and many reasons laied bothe for the one parte and the other: but finally this opinion of Agnolo (a woorthie citesin of Eraclea) was best allowed: that for the neweltee of kynge Pe∣pine,
they shoulde not shewe theim selfes vnconstaunt to breake theyr auncient amitee with the Grekysh em∣perour: not withstandyng that Pepine by reason of the hauen of Rauenna, might in maner vndooe their traffic∣que by sea. ¶So Pepine to be auenged, made an armie at Rauen∣na, and costyng towardes Uenice, toke Brondolo, Chi∣ozza, Pelestrina, Albiola, and came so neere, that he con∣streigned the Duke and senatours of Malamoco, to flee vnto Rialto with theyr richesse and children. Finally Pepine was discomfited by the imperiall capitaine Ni∣cea, sent as well to succour the Uenetians, as also to de∣fende Dalmatia: so that incontinently there folowed a peace betwene all three, that is to saie, the imperiall ar∣mie, kyng Pepine, and the Uenetians, to their great con∣tentacion. For if Pepine in that voyage had preuay∣led, thei had bene in a daungerouse case. ¶This meane while the Uenetians had banished Obe∣lerio and Beato as parciall of the frenche parte: and elected to theyr Duke Angelo Particiaco,Angelo▪ Particia∣co .792. that before had dissuaded theim from Pepines amitee. Who ob∣teined of the Frenche kyng a confirmacion of the passed peace: and after reedified the towne of Eraclea, where he was borne, callyng it Citta nuoua, and in it beganne the palaice of the Signoria, that the Dukes hitherto vse to dwell in. And obteinyng his sonne Giustiniano to be ioigned with him (after he had builded dyuers fayre churches, and doen many good deedes) he died. Giustini∣ano .810.¶Giustiniano thus confyrmed Duke, incontinentelie called home his brother Giouanni, that for his yll be∣hauiour had been before banisshed, and toke hym as his
companion in the astate. In whose time at the instance of the Greekishe Emperour, the Uenetians sente an ar∣mie by sea against the Turkes, to defende Sicilia. And certaine merchauntes of Uenice comyng from A∣lexandria in Aegypt, brought with theim (as thei saie) the bodie of. S. Marke, vnto whose honour the saied Giustiniano began the churche of Sainct Marke before rehersed: and the whole citee euer sens haue taken him for their aduocate. ¶Finally, vpon his death bedde, he toke an order for the continuance of that buyldyng and died,Giouanni▪ 813. Leauyng his brother Giouanni alone in the astate, who ioygned the churche of Sainte Marke vnto the Dukes palaice: and founde prouision for priestes to synge and serue in the same. And the warre beyng begunne betwene the Ue∣netians and the Narentani, he made an armie, and wente vnto Veglia in the Ile of Corcia, and toke it with Obe∣lerio before named in it: who had begunne a prepara∣cion there to recouer his olde astate. Wherfore Gio∣uanni caused hym to lose his head, and afterward{is} bur∣ned Malamoco, because certeine of Obelerio his olde friendes fledde thither for refuge. ¶Finally this Duke Giouanni had two conspiracies made against hym: the fyrst was occasion that he fledde into Fraunce: the secounde (after he was reconsiled o∣nes againe vnto his astate) made hym to forsake the worlde, and become a friere in Grado, where he died. ¶After Giouanni succeded Peter Gradenico,Pietro Gradenico▪ 82, who ioi∣gned his sonne Giouanni in the astate with hym: and at the request of the Greekishe emperour sent .60. sayle armed, against the Moores, that were than newly lan∣ded
besides Rome. Whiche .60. saile were all taken or drowned. In folowyng the victorie the same Moo∣res scoured all the Adriatike seas euin to Caorle: and in eyr waie toke certaine Uenetian shippes, laden with merchaundise, comyng out of Soria. So that whether it were for this ill lucke, or through sedicion that than reigned in the citee, a conspyracy was made against this Pietro, and was finally slaine in the churche of saincte Zacheria, hearyng of euensong. Whiche sodeine death troubled not a little the citee, and caused the office of the thre Auogadori to be made,Auogadori to pursue the triall of man∣slaughters and murders. An office vnto this daie of no small auctoritee amongest the Uenetians. Orso Particia∣co. 65.¶Than was Orso Particiaco made Duke: who with helpe of his sonne Giouanni, discoumfited the Sarasi∣nes, that a little before had gotten Candia, robbed alon∣gest all the costes of Dalmaria, and had ronne euen vn∣to Grado. For the worthie and valiant dooyng wher∣of the Greekish emperour Basilio rewarded Orso with muche honour: who for his parte againe not to seeme vncurteyse,Belles. sent .xii. brasen belles vnto the emperour for a present: beyng (as they saie) the fyrst belles that euer were vsed amongest the Greekes. Giouanni. 84.¶After Orso, his son Giouanni as well for his fathers merites, as for his owne woorthinesse, was confirmed Duke. In whose tyme the Rauennates receyued ex∣treeme damages by the Uenetians, and the citee of Comacchio was gotten. Finally this man beyng fal∣len sycke, and hauyng his brother ioigned with hym in the astate (a man not the meest to rule suche a common wealth) deposed both him selfe and his brother, remit∣tyng
the counsaile to the election of a newe Duke. An acte surely not onely rare and meruailouse, but also worthie of high commendacion. ¶Than Pietro Candiano was elected,Pietro. Landiano 890. who proued so worthy in armes, that twyse he fought with the Schla∣uone armies, and ouercame theim, althoughe in the last battaile he was slayne. ¶After whose deathe Giouanni Particiaco, before na∣med, was ones again called vnto the dignitee, and con∣tinued in the same till the Schlauone warres were ful∣ly quieted, and than agayne was contented that Pietro Tribuno shoulde be chosen in his place. ¶This Pietro discomfited the Hungariens,Pietro Tribuno .893. that before had ouercomen themperour Berengario, and ouerranne all Lumbardie, & approched so nere to Uenice, that thei wanne Eraclea, Equilo, and Capo d'aggere, and were mynded to passe vnto the Rialto: geuyng suche cause of feare to the Uenetians, as afterwardes both doubled the glorie of Peters victorie, and exalted highly the Uene∣netian name. ¶Some write, that after this enterprise Pietro fortified the citee with a wall from Santa Maria in Zubenico, vn∣to the Rio del Castello, and that he cast chaines of yron o∣uerthwart the Canale grande, but at this daie there re∣maineth no memory therof. ¶After Pietro folowed Orso Baduaro,Orso Baduaro .915▪ that fyrste coy∣gned money in Uenice, a man so muche geuen to religion that at length, renouncyng his astate, he became a frier, and so died. ¶Than succeded Pietro Candiano,Pietro Candiano 938. who conquered ma∣ny townes of Istria, and other places: and ouercame
Alberto sonne of the emperour Berengario, which beyng lorde of Rauenna, vsed to spoyle and take the Uenetian shippes in their passage. ¶He recouered certain gorgeous damselles rauished by the Schlauons at a feaste in the churche. S. Peter Di Castello, and for memorie of that victory ordeyned yerely certeine plaies, called Le Marie. And (as some write) in his time the Schlauons were made tributaries to the Uenetians, to paie theim yerely an hundreth barelles of wyne. Pietro. Baduaro .956.¶After his deathe folowed Pietro Baduaro, In whose tyme no notable thyng happened. Pietro. Candiano .958.¶Than was Pietro Candiano, sonne of the other Pie∣tro, reuoked from exile: whiche for his naughty lyfe was before banished by his father. And albeit that in the helpe of Alberto di Rauenna he had shewed him self enemie to his owne countrey (the vnkyndenesse wherof was cause of his fathers deathe) yet did the Uenetians create hym their Duke. But finally his procedyn∣ges were suche, that the people rose againste hym, sette fyre on the palaice: and as he fledde with his sonne in his armes they slewe hym. Wherwith theyr furie was sooner appeased than the kendeled fyre quenched. For ere it ceased, it burnte a great parte of the churche of. S. Marke, with two other churches, and aboue three hundreth houses. Pietro. Orseolo .973.¶This rumour beyng pacified, Pietro Orseolo, a man muche geuen to religion, was elected Duke. The no∣tablest thyng in his tyme was, that the Uenetians suc∣coured the citee of Bari, than besieged of the Sarasines. Finally, after he had dooen many charitable deedes in
Uenice, he was persuaded by a pilgrimme monke of Gascoygne to forsake the worlde. And so habandonyng wife, children, and friend{is} stae awaie: and died a frier in Gascoygne. ¶Than folowed Vitale Candiano, who fallyng sicke,Uitale Candiano .97 renounced the astate, became a friere, and so died. ¶After whom Tribuno Memmo succeded,Tribuno Memmo▪ 975. whiche ei∣ther for feare of the emperour Ottone, or throughe the great debate betwene the families of Morosini, and Ca∣loprini (than the chiefe of Uenice) forsoke the digni∣tee, became a friere, and within .vi. daies after sicke∣ned, and died for sorow. ¶Than folowed Pietro Orseolo,Pietro Orseolo .97. who conquered Dal∣maia, with the ilandes ioygnyng therunto. And ther∣fore obteined the fyrste title of Duke of Dalmatia and Venetia. ¶The emperours Basilio and Alesso graunted hym free passage for the Uenetians throughe theyr domini∣ons, without custome paiyng. And the emperour Ot∣tone helde his sonne at the crisme, and for his sake gran∣ted many libertees vnto Uenice. ¶After whose death,Ottone Orseolo .1007. as a recompense of the fathers merite, Ottone Orseolo his sonne, of the age of .18. yeres, was elected Duke, who ouercame the Adrianesi, with the kyng of Coruatia: and so retournyng victori∣ousely out of Dalmatia, fell into the handes of Dome∣nico Fabenio, with others, that had conspyred against him, who shaud his bearde for despite, and finally con∣fined hym into Greece: where shortly after he died. ¶Than folowes Pietro Barbolano,Pietro Barbola∣no .1026. who endeuoured hym selfe to pacifie the rumour of the people, offended
for the oultrage dooen vnto Ottone: but all in vaine. For at length, by meane of Orso Patriarke of Grado, brother vnto Ottone, Barbolano was taken, his beard cutte of, clothed in a friers weede, and banisshed. Orso Orseolo .1030.¶And because the death of Ottone was than vnkno∣wen, the Patriarke Orso supplied the place as his liue∣tenaunte. But incontinently vpon knowlage of his death, the Patriarke called a counsaile, and after a long Oracion, lamentyng the iniurie dooen vnto his brother, surrendred the astate. Domenico Orseolo .1031.¶Wherupon craftily and in maner by force, Domeni∣co Orseolo toke the dignitee vpon hym. But finally beyng expused of the people, he fledde vnto Rauenna, and there miserablie died. Domenico Flabenico 1031.¶Than succeded Domenico Flabenico, who made a a law, that from thensfoorthe no Duke shoulde take a companion to hym. He was the principall cause of Ottones exile, as it well appeared after. For he found the meane, that the familie of Orseoli was clerely put besydes the counsaile. And finally, hauyng well paci∣fied and refourmed all thynges, he died. Domenico Contarini .1042.¶After whom succeded Domenico Contarini, that in his tyme recouered Zara, whiche before rebelled, by returnyng vnto the obedience of the kyng of Coruatia. He ouercame Roberto Guistardo in Puglia, and ree∣dified the citee of Grado, that was halfe destroyed by Pepo Patriarke of Aquileia: and after died. Domenico Siluio .1068.¶Than was chosen Domenico Siluio the greatest man of reputacion that thitherto had ruled Uenice. He maried the syster of the emperour Niceforo, and at his requeste sente an armie vnto Durazo, against Roberte
Duke of Puglia and Calabria: whiche armie fyrst pre∣uailed, but at length was so discoumfited, that Dome∣nico was therfore deposed. Though some write that he died in the astate. His wife was so delicate a woman, that she woulde haue dewe gathered to make hir vaine withall, with many other curiouse perfumes and trickes, to longe here to reherse: and yet ere she di∣ed, hir fleshe did rotte, that no creature could abide hir. ¶Domenico beyng thus deposed Vitale Falero was e∣lected, who in fauour of Alesso, the Greekish emperour,Uitale Falero .108. renewed an armie against the forenamed Duke Robert: whiche armie was also discoumfited. Neuertherlesse he caused the Uenetians to be called lordes of Dalma∣tia, because he valiauntly conquered the same bothe by sea and lande. ¶After whose death succeded Vitale Michele,Uitale Michele .1095. a worthy warriour on the sea, in whose tyme the Uenetian nauie was rekened .200. saile armed of shippes and galleis. whiche beyng sent into Asia, with Michele his sonne, fell out with the Pisani a littell besydes Rodes, and fought with theim, and toke .22. of their galleis. ¶After whiche victorie he and many other Christians, went against the Infidels, and gatte Smirna, Soria, and Ierusalem. ¶Finally this armie beyng retourned vnto Uenice, was agayne sente out into Puglia, and there toke Brundizi, and ouerranne all those seas about, and so retourned lo∣ded with glorie and riche praie. ¶After hym Ordelaffo Falero was created Duke.Ordelaffo▪ Falero .1098. In whose tyme the Uenetians sent an other armie into Soria to succour Bawdewyne kynge of Ierusalem to
gette Ptholemaido, otherwise called Acres. ¶About the same seasone the emperour Henrie the .iiii. agreed the Uenetians and Padoanes togither for theyr confines: after the Padoanes with great slaughter had ben ones discomfited. ¶There chaunced also a fyre, begun in the house of one Henry Zeno, that burned a great parte of Uenice. Whiche fyre was no soner ceased, but newes came, that Calonano, kynge of Hungarie, had passed the mountai∣nes of Coroatia, and constreigned the citee of Zara to rebell. Wherfore an armie was made out, vnder the leading of Ordelaffo, who not onely recouered Zara, but also passed the mountaynes, and conquered the countrey of Coruatia, and so victoryously retourned to Uenice: where he rested not longe, but woorde came, that the Hungariens were commn againe before Zara. To the succour wherof he sped hym, and there in the fighte was slayne with a darte, and his armie discomfited, so that the Uenetians were fayne to sue to the Hunga∣riens for truce, whiche for .v. yeres (with muche adoe) they obteyned. Domenico Michele .1115.¶Nexte folowed Domenico Michele, who at the inter∣cession of Calixto bishop of Rome, with .200. sayle toke his waie into Soria▪ to rescue Ioppe, that tyme besie∣ged with .700. saile of Infidelles: againste whom he obteined the victorie. And folowyng the same, went vnto Tyro, toke it, and gaue it vnto Ualmondo Patri∣arke of Ierusalem. ¶The prosperouse successe of whyche victories was occasion, that Emanuell emperour of the Greekes sent and forbdde him, to procde any further. But he beyng
offended with that commaundemente, bent him selfe against the emperour, and by force toke from hym the ylandes of Sco, Rodes, Samo, Metellino, and Andro, and so with great honour retourned to Uenice, where he died. ¶Than was Pietro Polano chosen his successour,Pietro Polano .1130. who broughte the citee of Fano vnder the Uenetian obedi∣ence, and fought first with the Pisani, and after with the Padoani, bothe whose armies he ouercame: so that of the Padoani he brought .35. prisoners vnto Uenice, and after released theim without raunsome. ¶This Duke fauouryng the parte of the emperoure Emanuell against Rogier Duke of Puglia, wente in his owne person vnto that enterprise, recouered Corfu, and ouerronne and sacked all Sicilia. And thorough his great trauayle syckened and died, was broughte to Ue∣nice and buried. ¶After hym Domenico Morosini entred into thastate,Domenico Morosini▪ 1147. who besieged Pola, because the inhabitauntes had hin∣dered the Uenetian passingers: and at laste vpon agre∣ment, ordeyned, that in maner of a trybute the Polani shoulde yerely paie to the churche of Sainte Marke a thousande weight of oyle. The like wherof he con∣streined theim of Patenzo to doe. Finally, hauyng made a leage with William kynge of Sicilia successour vnto the forenamed Rogier, of whom he obteined diuers priuileges for the Uenetian merchauntes commoditee, he died. ¶Than entred Vitale Michele:Uitale Michele, 14▪ by whose daies the Verosi, Ferraresi, and Padoani, through prouocaci∣on of the emperour Federico Barbarsa, did no small
domage to the Uenetians. For the reuengeyng wher∣of they made out an armie, and toke the Patriarke of Aquileia, with .xii. of his canons (of the imperiall fa∣ction) prisoners: who were after set at libertee, vpon couenaunt to paie yerely tribute vnto the Uenetians at shroftyde, a fatie bull, and .xii. hogges. ¶This meane whyle the emperour Emanuell, entryng secretly into affinitee with kynge William of Sicile, toke Spalato, Trau, and Raugia from the Uenetians. Wherfore thei armed, and Vitale in person went foorth: recouered Trau, threw it to the earth, with part of the walles of Raugia, and so went to Negroponte: where by counsail of the gouernour, he concluded a peace with the emperour. Notwithstandyng, the emperour had a little before taken Scio. For concludyng of whiche peace, and for the pestilence that his infected souldiours brought home with them, the Uenetians at his retourne slew hym. ¶Muche adooe was made for his death, but nothyng to effect: saue a certeine noumbre were than appoincted vnto the election of the Duke: some write .x. and some xl. but how so euer it were Orio Malipiero was cho∣sen, who refusyng it, preferred Sebastian Ziani, for his auncientee, richesse, and wysedome. So his refu∣sall was accepted, his modestie highly commended, and Sebastiano accordyngly elected. Sebastian Ziani▪ 1171▪¶This Sebastian erected the two notable pillers of marble, that are yet seen in the markette place of sainct Marke: whiche with an other greatter than either of them, were brought out of Candia: but the biggest fell into the water (and for his vnmeasurable weight) can
not be gotten vp againe. ¶The emperour Emanuell, who secretely hated the Uenetians,Emanuel▪ constreigned Henry Dandolo their ambas∣sadour, to stande so longe daryng in an hotte basen,Crueltee, that he lost his sight. For what cause he wrought this, I finde not. And though it muche offended the Ueneti∣ans, yet the tyme serued not to reuenge it. For they had taken part with Alexandre bishop of Rome against the emperour Federike Barbarossa: and with an armie by sea Sebastian in person toke Ottone the emperours sonne, with certaine galeis, and brought him prisoner to Uenice. So that through the practise of Ottone there folowed a peace betwene Federike, the bishop, and the Uenetians. And the Duke was rewarded of the saied bishop with licence for hym and his successours to seale in leade, to haue a canopie borne ouer hym, a wae ta∣per before hym, with trumpettes and standardes, and fi∣nally ones a yere to espouse the sea, with throwyng a golde ringe into it. All whiche ceremonies the Uene∣tian Dukes vse vnto this daie. ¶After the deathe of Sebastian the forenamed Orio Malipiero was created Duke,Orio Malipiero 1180, who went vnto the enter∣prise of Zara, that lately had rebelled. ¶He also sent an armie into the holy lande, that reco∣uered the citee of Ptholemaida, with those other plac{is}, that the Uenetians before tyme had gotten there. Fi∣nally he became a frier, and so died. ¶Than succeded Henry Dandolo,Arrigo Dandolo▪ 1194, who banished the Veronesi from the trade of Uenice, so that the Verone∣si for theyr parte wolde suffer nothyng to passe downe the ryuer of Adice▪ But at length they were faine to
agre with the Uenetians, and to restore certaine goodes that they before had taken. ¶The Pisani also enuiyng the Uenetian glorie, made an armie against them, and gatte Pola, whiche by the Ue∣netian army was incōtinently recouered, the wll{is} ra∣sed to therth, and the enemies ships burned: and before Modone they toke two other Pisane ships, laden with merchandise: and made Trieste and all Istria, tributors. ¶After this they recouered Zara also, and semblablie rased the walles therof to the earthe, in so muche that many of the inhabitantes (beyng fled before) with the helpe of the Hungariens, renewed an armie, and ouer∣ron all Dalmatia. But at lengthe they were constreig∣ned to make peace with the Uenetians, geuyng theyr children in ostaige, submittyng theyr churche vnto the Patriarke of Grado, and bindyng theim selfes to geue yerelie three thousande conie skinnes to the Duke for a present. ¶This meane while came Alesso, sonne of themperour Isaac (than lately expulsed out of Constantinople) vnto Uenice for succours: who obteined, that the Duke with an armie, ioignyng hym selfe with an other armie of Frenchemen, wente to Constantinople, and after manie prosperouse successes by the waie, toke it, and restored bothe Isaac and his sonne vnto the empire. But the emperour liued not longe after: and his sonne, couetyng to kepe his promyse with the Uenetians, was betraied and strangled by Mirtillo or Murcifone one brought vp by his father from lowe degre, vnto so great reputaci∣on, that after he had murdered Alesso, he toke the empire vpon hym. Wherfore the Uenetians and Frenchemen
abhorryng this vnnaturall crueltee, enforced theyr po∣wers of new, reuenged the death of Alesso, toke Con∣stantinople by assaulte, and diuided the dominion be∣twene theim: so that of the Frenche part Baldewine a Flemmyng was made capitaine or emperour, and of the Uenetians, Thomas Morosini was made Patriarke: adioignyng vnto the Uenetian dominion the ile of Can∣dia, with the other ilandes of the seas Ionium and E∣geum. ¶So whan they had recouered Raugia, and established the Greekishe empyre, this Duke Dandolo died. And was buried in Constantinople. ¶The Uenetians beyng thus entred into an empyre, be∣ganne to contende amongest theim selfes, whether they were better to remoue theyr common wealth to Constan∣tinople, for the encrease of theyr name and power: or to remaine still in Uenice. But finally it was conclu∣ded, that better it was to trust to the perpetuitee of the Site of Uenice, than to the brittell chaunge of Constan∣tinoples glorie. ¶Than was Peter Ziani elected Duke in Uenice,Pietro Ziani .1203. and the armie in Greece on the other syde elected Mario Ziani Potestate of Constantinople: on condicion that he shoulde receiue his confirmacion from Uenice. ¶This Peter proued an excellent man: he encreased the armie in Greece: by meane wherof Corfu, Modon, Coron, Galipoli, Nasso, Paro, Molo, Erma, and An∣dro were gotten: Negroponte was made tributarie▪ and the Genowaies armie fought withall, and discom∣fited. ¶He sent also a Colonia of Uenetians to enhabite
Candia, with officers accordyng: whiche many tymes after rebelled. ¶He ouercame the Padoanes, and brought .400. of theim prisoners to Uenice: Finally he waxyng veraie religiouse, renounced the astate, and withdrew him selfe into the monasterie of sainct George, where he died. Iames Tiepolo .1225.¶After hym succeded Iames Tiepolo, who with the helpe of Marke Samuto, rescued Candia, than molested by the Greekishe Corsales. ¶Twyse he reysed the siege of Constantinople (Teofi∣lo Ziani beyng Potestate there) and gatte many of the enemies shippes. And after makyng truce with the Genowaies, in the fauour of Gregorie the .ix. bishop of Rome, he sent an armie against Federike Barbarossa, gatte Terma, Campo Marino, and Bestice: and in the hauen Manfredonia, burned the Cetea: a notable shippe that the emperour had made for his owne person, and there slew a thousand men of warre. ¶About this tyme Ezelino di Romano gatte Padoa from the Uenetians, and entred into the Uenetian ma∣rishe as farre as saincte Ellero and the Bebbe. ¶This Duke vnder the gouernance of his owne sonne, sent .60. galleis to Durazo to succour the Genowaies against the emperour and the Pisani: who in his returne recouered Pola and Zara, and than peace was made with the kynge of Hungarie, vpon condicion, that from thensfoorth he should neuer pretende title to Zara. Marino Morosini .1247.¶Nexte this Iames folowed Marino Morosini, who was chosen of the counsaill called Pregadi, and beyng prouoked by the Romish legate, made warre vnto the forenamed Ezelino, and recouered Padoa, wherof Ause∣dino,
nephew of Ezelino was capitaine, whilest Ezeli∣no laie at siege before Mantua. For whiche losse and for his labour spente in vaine before Mantua, Ezelino retournyng to Uerona, fell in suche a rage, that he cau∣sed .12000. Padoanes, part of his armie, to be hewen to peeces. Suche a crueltee as hath not ben heard of,Crueltee, sens the tyme of Silla, who did the like vnto .12000. pre∣nestines, friendes of his ennemie Marius. ¶Of this name Ezelino were foure, one after an other, that caused no small trouble in Italie. ¶The fyrste Ezelino, a Doucheman borne, came into Italie with the emperour Otho, the thirde, and by hym was made Conte di Onara, a towne of the Marca Tri∣uigiana. But afterward{is} he gate him selfe the lordship of Bassano vpon the riuer of Brent, with maine faire ter∣ritories theraboutes, and so became great, both of domi∣nion and also of aliance by mariages. ¶His sonne was called Ezelino Balbo, and the .iii. Eze∣lino Monaco, all three crowell men of nature. But the .iiii. Ezelino di Romano passed all thother, and died rather for choler and despite of the discomfiture,Ezelino di Romano. geuen hym by the Vicentines, than for the hurte that he recei∣ued in his legge. Whom Peter Gerardo a Padoan writer, descriueth thus: He was harde of fauour, terri∣ble in worde and dede, scarce of laughter or speche, full of despite, suspiciouse, takyng euerie thyng to the worse, daungerouse to enterprise, prompte to all euill, cruell to all personnes, and out of measure delited in their death and tourmentes, prisons, yron, hunger, corde, fyre, and other suche. So that to extirpe the whole stocke of so uell a generacion, after his death there was no crea∣ture
of his bloud suffered to lyue. Rinieri Zeno .120.¶After the deathe of Marino succeded Rinieri Zeno, who sent an armie into Soria againste the Genowaies, that discomfited them betwene Ptholemaida and Tyro: besides .vi. other Genowaie shippes, that were loste in Candia, and nere vnto Tyro in the secounde and .iii. bat∣tayle. ¶In this meane tyme Baldewyne the capitaine, and Pantaleon Iustiniano patriarke of Constantinople, were betraied of the Grekes, and constreigned to flee to Ne∣groponte, leauing the citee & empire vnto Mighell Pa∣leologo, that afterwardes through helpe of the Geno∣waies, gatte many Ilandes: trauailyng to extende his dominion vnto Morea. Wherevpon the Uenetians made foorth moe galeys by .30. at a tyme, to encrease their armie, that than was commen out of Soria, in hope to finde theyr enemies about Sicilia: But all in vayne, wherfore retournyng into Soria, they toke the Cetea of the Genowaies, and began to assaulte Tyro. In which businesse, the Uenetians loste a notable shippe, called Castell forte, with .x. others laden with merchaundise. Neuerthelesse renewyng their armie with parte of their staple, that laie in Candia and Dalmatia, they mette a∣gaine with the Genowaies in Sicilia, where after a longe fight, they toke .24. Genowaie galleis, burned the reste, slew aboue .1200. men, toke, 1500. prisoners, and drowned all the reste. ¶This notable victorie brought the emperour Paleo∣logo in suche feare, that he sued for truce to the Ueneti∣ans: and obteined it for .v. yeres. ¶This meane while was a great mutteryng in Uenice
for the treasure spent, because the chambre was founde emptie, and that for the maintenaunce of those warres, thei were about to leuey subsidies. So that the peo∣ple assembled, and furiousely assaulted the Dukes pa∣laice, hurlyng stones at the wyndowes, with other de∣spitefull deedes. ¶Finally the armie was renewed, and in an other con∣flict with the Genowaies, they toke .v. of theyr shippes▪ About whiche tyme Rinieri died. ¶Than folowed Lorenzo Tiepolo,Lorenzo Tiepolo .1267. in whose tyme happened a wonderfull dearth of corne in Uenice: by reason theyr neyghbours, for enuie of theyr prosperitee, woulde suffre no corne to come to theim. For remedy wherof the Uenetians made a law, that all merchaunt∣shippes, passyng betweene the Goolfe of Fano, and the mouthe of the ryuer Pò, shoulde paie theim custome af∣ter a certaine rate of theyr merchandise. Wherby to their great gaine, they reuenged theim selfes vpon their ennemies. But the Bologniese moste of all others, being offended with this law, made out an army against the Uenetians, and were ouercomen, constreigned to aske peace, to ouerthrowe a castell that they had made at Primano on the Pò, and to graunt the Uenetians free entrie into theyr riuers at all tymes. ¶About this time, by meane of Philip the frenche king, who trauailed to succour the Christians in Soria against the infidelles, the Uenetians, Genowaies, and Pisani made a league together for .v. yeres. ¶After Tiepolo, Iacopo Contarini was Duke,Iacopo Contarini▪ 1275. in whose tyme the warre was well neere renued betwene the Uenetians and Genowaies, for certeine goodes that
the Genowaies had taken: whiche beyng restored, the armie prepared for them, turned against Istria, that than newly rebelled, through the prouocacion of the Patri∣arke of Aquileia: who by force were reduced to theyr wonted obedience. ¶They of Ancona beyng offended with the foresaied law of custome paiyng for theyr merchaundise, beganne to robbe and spoyle alongest the costes of Istria: so that the Uenetians, to correcte theim, besieged the citee of Ancona: whiche dured not longe: for the bishoppe of Rome entreated the Uenetians, to agree with theim, and breake vp theyr siege. ¶Finally this Contarini perceiuyng hym selfe veraie sickely and vnapte to rule the astate, did willyngly re∣nounce it. Giouanni Dandolo .1281.¶Than succeded Iohn Dandolo, in whose tyme the water in Uenice swelled so hygh, that in maner the citee was drowned: and after that folowed a wonderfull earthquake. ¶He also fyrst coygned duckates of golde. And at the request of Nicolas, than bishop of Rome, prepared a new armie to saile into Soria: but it went not foorth: so that the kyng of Babylone in Aegypt, toke and sac∣ked Ptholomaida, and after rased it to the earth. Piet Gradeni∣go .1290.¶After Dandolo, Peter Gradenigo was elected Duke. At whose entryng the truce with the Genowaies expi∣red: so that a new armie, vnder the leadyng of Roger Morosini proueditore, was sent into the east partes: Where thei toke Pera, and Castello delle foglie vecchie: and abode there so longe, that the yere folowyng Iohn Zoranzo, with .25. fresshe galleis, was sent thither:
who toke the citee of Cafa in Chersonesso. ¶The Genowaies this meane while prepared an army of .70. galeys, and vnder their capitaine Lampado d' oria, entred into the Adriatike seas, entendyng to come to Uenice. But the Uenetian armie (beyng the greatest that euer they made) caused them to retyre: yet metyng together vpon the coste of Dalmatia, they foughte, and the Uenetians were discomfited, and Andrea Dandolo Proueditore taken prisoner, who so muche despaired, that beatyng his head against the galey bordes, he slewe him selfe. And albeit that the losse of this armie was of great importaunce and peryll vnto the Uenetians, yet incontinently they renforced theyr power, and in the streict of Gallipoli, sometime called Hellespontus, mette with the Genowaies againe, and were there again ouer∣comen. But the Genowaies for all their victories were so weried, that they graunted the Uenetians peace, and laied warre aside for a season. ¶Thus the thynges ferre of, beyng appeased, their bu∣sinesse at home beganne to awake. For one Marino Bocconio conspired against the Duke and Senate, whi∣che beyng discouered, he and dyuers of his complices, were put to death betweene the pillers of. S. Marke. ¶The Padoanes began than also to fortifie at a certain place, betwene Chiozza, and Albano, called Petabubula, whiche was no littell trouble vnto the Uenetians, for the tyme, howe beit at length they remedied it. ¶After this they made out an other armie by sea vnder Belletto Iustiniano, who prospered muche in Greece. For after he had ouerronne all those costes, he returned home with .15000. prisoners, and with a great summe of
money recouered of the Greekish emperour, that before tyme the Uenetians had lente him. Whiche was no small coumforte to the common wealth that longe time had suffered. ¶Shortely after Clement bishop of Rome excommuni∣cated the Uenetians, for aydyng of Azo da Este vnto the astate of Ferrara, and wrote his letters thoroughout all Europe, condemnyng theim as enemies of the churche, and geuyng their gooddes as a laufull praie vnto all men, whiche caused theim to susteine great losse. ¶Besides this, Baiamonte Tiepolo, their owne citesin, entendyng to make him selfe lorde of Uenice, enterprised to assaulte the Duke and Senate in the palaice, where after muche bloud shed, at laste he was slayne, and his parttakers accordynglie punysshed, parte in Uenice, and part at a place there besides, called Malpasso. ¶Zara about this tyme rebelled againe, and shortelie after this Duke died. Marino Giorgio .1312.¶After whom succeded Marino Giorgio, that lyued but .x. monethes, in whose tyme an armie was made out to besiege Zara. ¶Than folowed Iohn Soranzo, who recouered Zara, and brought Noua,Iohn. Soranzo .1313. Spalato, Trau, and Sibenzani, townes of Dalmatia, vnder the Uenetian dominion. ¶This meane tyme Fraunces Dandalo, ambassadour with bishop Clemente, vsed suche humilitee, that Uenice was not onely assoiled, but also priuileged to be no more on that wise accursed. ¶These thynges finished, they sente out .50. galleys against the Genowaies, because they had taken the Ue∣netians goodes. But after thei had besieged Pera,
and were promised amendes and restitucion of theyr goodes, the armie retourned without other expedicion. ¶Than was Iustiniano, that had been capitaine therof, sent Proueditore into Candia, where with his wyse∣dome he quieted the countrey, that beganne to rebell. ¶Finally, after the Uenetians had preserued the Pa∣doanes from the furie of Mastino della Scala, that wold haue oppressed theim, this Duke Soranzo died. ¶After hym entred Fraunces Dandolo,Fraunces Dandolo .1329. in whose time hapned a great dearth of corne in Uenice: whiche was reliued afterwardes with prouision brought out of Si∣cilia by Nicolas Falero: for that purpose sent thither. ¶This Duke accepted the Polani and Valesi vnder the Uenetian dominion: and euer after defended them from the power of the Patriarke of Aquileia. ¶He caused Thomas Viaro Proueditore of the armie against the Genowaies, to die in prison: because he had not borne hym selfe prudently in that enterprise. ¶He sent Peter Zeno with an armie against the Tur∣kes, that than had newly chased the Christians out of Soria. Whiche Turkes were foughten with, and fi∣nally discoumfited. ¶Than beganne the warres against the Signori della Scala, the chiefe wherof was Mastino before named: who chasyng the Rossi from Parma, gotte Feltro, Bel∣luno, and Ceneda, before tyme taken by the saied Rossi from kyng Iohn̄ of Boeme. This Mastino thus growyng great, attempted to trouble the Uenetians with buildyng of fortresses and bastilions about Peta∣bubula. Wherfore the Uenetians entred in league with the kynge of Boeme, and with the most parte of all the
states of Italie, specially with the Florentins, against this Mastino: and made Per Rosso generall of that league: who (assemblyng an armie, of the Uenetians, Florentines, Bologniese, Ferrarese, and other theyr col∣leges) after many skyrmyshes, takyng of fortresses and townes: finally did discomfite Mastino in two seuerall battailes, and brought hym by force to requyre peace: whiche was graunted on this wise, that he should leaue Feltro, Ciuidale di Belluno, and Ceneda vnto Char∣les sonne of the kyng of Boeme: Bergamo and Bres∣sa vnto the Visconti of Myllaine: Treuiso, with the appurtenaunces, Castelbaldo, and Bassano, to the Ue∣netians: and .iiii. castelles to the Florentines. ¶After the happie successe of these warres, Dandolo dyed. Bartholo∣meo Gradeni∣go .1340.¶Than Bartholomeo Grandenigo, succeded, in whose tyme, the water in Uenice for the space of three daies, did swell foure yardes higher than his wonted course: so that they thought to haue been all drowned: but at laste sainct Nicolas, sainct George, and sainct Marke came into a poore fisshers bote, and in the mouthe of the hauen drowned a shippe of diuels that wrought all this mischiefe. For proufe wherof, this poore fissher the next mornyng after the water ceased, presented vnto the Duke and senate a golde rynge that sainct Marke had geuen hym. This was taken there for a myracle, though I thinke no man woulde beleeue it. ¶The feare of this water was no sooner ceased, but newes came, that the Candians rebelled. Wherfore a power sent thither, assaulted theim on three sydes, and with the correction of the principall rebelles, reduced
theim to their former obedience. ¶Shortely after happened a great dearth of corne, and Gradenigo died. ¶Than folowed Andrea Dandolo,Andrea Dandolo▪ 1343. a man for his wise∣dome and ciuilitee muche commended of Petrarcha. In whose time Peter Zeno (in company of other Chri∣stian princes) was sent with an armie againste the Tur∣kes, whom at the firste they discomfited, and toke Smir∣na: but afterwardes the Turkes assembled againe, and with great slaughter ouercame the Uenetians, the Cy∣priotes, and the Rodianes. ¶This Duke procured licence of the kynge of Baby∣lone, that Uenetian merchauntes might freely traffic∣que in Aegypt, and sent an army vnto Zara▪ than yelded vnto the kynge of Hungarie, who beyng come thither with .120000. men, was fought with by the Uenetians discomfited, and Zara recouered. ¶This duke ordeined the office of the three Auditours, for the better expedicion of matters, because the Auo∣gadori had to muche charge on theim to dispatche well: and he him selfe wrote a worthie historie of the Ueneti∣an astate and lawes for the tyme than passed. ¶He sente .vi. shippes into Sicilia for corne, wherof two peerished by the waie, the other .iiii. releeued the citee in their great dearth. After folowed such an earthquake, that .iii. or .iiii. steples, with diuers other buildynges in Uenice were shaken to the earth: and than suche a pesti∣lence that in maner Uenice became voyde. Neuer∣thelesse a newe armie was made out against the Geno∣waies, that fought with theim at Caristo besides Ne∣groponte, where firste the Genowaies were discomfi∣ted,
than the Uenetians, and thirdelie in Sardegna the Genowaies againe: and therby brought so lowe, that they became subiectes to Iohn Visconti, archebishop and Duke of Myllaine, who sente the famouse Petrarcha ambassadour to Uenice, to obteine peace for him and the Genowaies. But the Uenetians wolde not graunte it. Wherfore the Visconti sente his armie into Dalmatia, sacked the townes of Faro and Corfu, toke Parenzo in Istria, and spoiled a Uenetian shippe, goyng into Candia, of value (by reporte) of .800000. duckates. ¶Thus while the Uenetians for ease of this trouble were makyng a leage with the kyng of Boeme, to bryng him against the Uisconti, this Duke Dandolo died. Marino. Falerio .1354.¶Marino Falerio succeded him, in whose daies the com∣mon wealth lacked littell of vtter vndoyng. First their armie was sore discomfited by the Genowaies, Pagano Doria beyng capitaine, at the Ile of Sapientia, besides Morea. After this, the Duke him selfe conspired a∣gainste the citees libertee, entendyng to make him selfe absolute lorde therof, by puttyng the nobilitee and se∣nate to death. But his purpose was discouered by Bel∣trame a skinner, one of the confederat{is}, so that the Duke was beheaded, and diuers other punyshed, besydes a noumbre that fledde, and were banished. ¶Finallie this Beltrame for his rewarde, was made a gentilman of Uenice, with a thousand ducates of yerely reuenew. But after a certaine space, thinkyng his re∣warde ouer littell in respecte of so great a seruice, he la∣mented him selfe vnto the senate, and was so importu∣nate, that they not onelie toke from him his foresaied reuenew, but also depriued hym of the gentilmans dig∣nitee,
and made hym a skinner againe, as he was before. ¶After this Marco Cornaro as Vice Doge, ruled for a certeine space. ¶Than Iohn Gradenico was elected Duke,Iohn Gra¦denico .1355. who sen∣dyng out .vii. galleis against the Genowaies, was oc∣casion of the peace, that immediately folowed betwene theim. ¶In his time Lewis kyng of Hungarie entred in leage with certeine princes and nobles of Lumbardie against the Uenetians: so that after he had been before Zara, Spalato, Trau, and Nona, with other places in Dalma∣tia: he besieged Treuiso: duryng whiche siege Grade∣nico died. ¶Than Iohn Delfino was chosen,Iohn Del∣fino .1356. who being that time besieged within Treuiso, and aduertised of his electi∣on, requyred the kynges saueconducte to passe: whiche woulde not be graunted. Wherfore at last in compa∣ny of certeine men of armes, he secretly departed, and came to Uenice: and was no sooner in the auctoritee, but he reuoked the Potestate of Padoa, and toke from the Padoanes the trade of salte. A mattier vnto them of great importance. This did he to be reuenged on Carraro, a principall of the Padoanes, who was entred into intelligence with the Hungariens. ¶Finally this king prospered so muche against the Ue∣netians, that thei were constreigned for a peace to grant hym all Dalmatia, from the goolfe Fanatico, to Dura∣zo, with certeine other townes about Ceneda and Tre∣uiso, that he had than newly gotten. ¶To this peace the Uenetians at that tyme, were glad to agree, for eschewyng of more daunger. And not
longe after this Delfino died. ¶Whom Lorenzo Celso, than capitaine of the army vpon the goolfe,Lorenzo Celso .130. was elected, who being aduertised ther∣of, incontinently repayred vnto Uenice: where he was receiued with suche pompe as the Uenetians vse. But his owne father, woulde in no wyse goe against hym: thinkyng it vnmeete, that the father should vse any re∣uerence to his sonne. ¶In his time, fyrst the Duke of Austriche, and after the kynge of Cyprus came to see Uenice for theyr passetime, where they were receiued and honoured accordyngly. ¶Than of new Candia rebelled, for the great taxes that the Uenetians leuied of theim. Wherfore fyrst one, and than an other army was sent thither: whiche with muche adooe (by reason of the Greekes defence) at last recouered it: and so with triumph retourned to Uenice. ¶About this tyme the kyng of Cyprus toke and sacked Alexandria in Aegypt, from whens he retourned laden with a wonderfull praie. And not longe after this Duke Celso died. Marco Cornaro .1365.¶His successour was Marco Cornaro, who foorthwith had worde that Candia again rebelled. Against whom a newe armie was prepared, with priuilege obteined of the bishop of Rome, of clere pardon and remission of synnes, for all theim that shoulde beare armes in that enterprise. ¶Finally the Candiottes were so oppressed, that they were constreigned to aske peace, and with sharpe puny∣shementes were broughte to their wonted obedience. ¶The businesse of Candia beyng thus well quieted and reformed, Cornaro lyued not longe after.
¶Than entred Andrea Contarini,Andrea Contarini▪ 1367. notwithstandyng that he oftentymes refused the dignitee, perchaunce through foresighte of thynges to come. For fyrste they of Trieste through succour of the Duke of Austria, rebelled, and beyng in a sharpe battaill ouercommen, were con∣streigned to retourne to the Uenetian obedience. ¶Than beganne a new bickeryng betwene the Carrari, lordes of Padoa, and the Uenetians, for the interest of certeine confines, betwene whom were many skirmishes with variable fortune on both sides. But the Uene∣tians had euer the better, vntill the Carrari had gotten in leage the kynge of Hungarie, the Duke of Austria, the Genowaies, and the Patriarke of Aquileia, who on all sides by lande and sea, oppressed the Uenetians sore. For notwithstandyng that in this meane while, with helpe of the kyng of Cyprus on the one side, they fyrste discomfited Andronico sonne of the emperour Caloi∣anni with the Greekes in the Ile of Tenedo, and after that diuers of the Genowaies by sea. And than on the tother side with the helpe of Bernabo Visconti, by lande discomfited the Carraro on the Padoan territorie, with gettyng of some townes: yet fortune tourned so against theim, that at Pola they lost .xv. galleis at one tyme, and by littell and littell loste Vmago, Grado, Caorle, Chiozza, Loreo, Le Bebbe, Capo d'aggere, Malamo∣co, and Pouiglia: lokyng euerie foote, whan they shuld be assaulted in Uenice. Insomuche, that they sent a blanke Charter vnto Peter Doria, than capitaine of the Genowaies armie, besechyng him to prescribe them what condicions he woulde, and they gladly would ac∣cept them: but as it hapneth commonly in prosperitee,
men are not contented with reasonable aduauntage: he woulde not haue theim but at his owne descrecion. And so droue foorth the tyme till Carlo Zeno, with the Uenetian armie, scoured all the leuaunte seas, toke many riche shippes, of theyr ennemies: and with the slaughter of .300. Genowaies, restored the fortresse of Constantinople vnto Caloianni emperour of Greece, be∣sieged Pera, and finally after many woorthy victories in those parties (aduertised of the perill that Uenice was in) retyred homewardes: ioigned with Vettorio Pisani capitaine of the rest of the Uenetian armie, and neere vnto Brondolo, Chiozza, and thse other pla∣ces theraboutes, fought diuers tymes with theim, with dyuers fortune, and at last slew theyr capitaine before∣named, recouered Chiozza through famine, and toke 0. Padoan botes, with .19. Genowaie galleis, besides certeine shippes laden with salte, and a noumbre of pri∣soners. ¶This great victorie thus obteined by Vettorio Pisani and Carlo zeno, was not yet enough to ende this warre: For the rest of the Genowaies armie discoumfited at Chiozza, departed to Trieste, causyng it to rebell. And than leauyng Istria in gouernaunce of the Patri∣arke of Aquileia, retourned againe to attempte the get∣tyng of Brondolo and Chiozza. But findyng the passages closed against theim, they made towardes Pi∣rano and Parenzo, dooyng theyr best to gette theim: wherin thei preuailed not, and so at last withdrew them into the hauen of Marano. ¶This meane while the Uenetians endeuoured theim selfes to recouer againe Bebbe, and the other plac{is} nere
about theim. All whiche they obteined, Capo d'agge∣re onely except, that was holden by the Carraro. ¶Than came newes, that Pola was taken, and that the Genowaies, renuyng theyr armie, had also taken Arbe in the ile of Scardona. Wherfore a new power was made out, which passing into Istria, sacked Iustinopoli, and besieged Zara. In whiche enterprise Vettorio Pi∣sani died, so that Carlo Zeno rested capitaine alone: who with .viii. galleis of new, scoured all the costes of Dalmatia, toke .xii. Schlauon shippes, and went foorth into the riuer of Genoa, where he wrought wonders: whilest the Genowaies and theyr colleges on the other syde sacked Capo d' Istria, toke Conigliano, Nouale and Treuiso before yelded to the Duke of Austria: be∣sides .xiiii. Uenetian shippes, that the Genowaies toke in the porte of Pesaro. ¶And so longe contended they thus warryng one vpon an other, that at laste both parties were weried, and by meane of the Duke of Sauoie, accorded. In the conclu∣dyng of whiche peace the Uenetians rendred the Ile of Tenedo vnto the Genowaies (that by the meane of the emperour Caloianni, came before to their handes.) ¶Finally, after the Carraro of Padoa had gotten Tre∣uiso by force from the Duke of Austria (the kynge of Hungarie beyng dead) this Duke Contarini finished his life. ¶Than folowed Michele Morosini,Michele Morosini .1383. that liuyng but .4. monethes, made a newe lawe for the triall of murders and manslaughters. ¶Next succeded Antonio Veniero, a pleasaunt wise man, that in the gouernaunce of Tenedo,Antonio Ueniero▪ 138. had behaued
him selfe prudently. ¶He bare so earnest a zeale to Iustice, that hearyng a complainte against his owne sonne, for certain dishonest partes plaied about a gentilmans dore, of whose wife he was enmoured, caused hym to be laied in pryson, where he miserablie died of the plage. And though he knewe, that the infection was entered into that prison, yet wolde he not at no friendes intercession remoue his sonne into any other. Whiche acte one waie semeth commendable▪ an other waie vnnaturall and cruell. ¶About this tyme the Uenetans entred in leage with Giangaleazo Visconti, Duke of Myllaine, and with the marchese Da Este of Ferrara, against Carraro of Pa∣doa: so that betwene these three the territorie of Car∣raro was diuided. ¶Fyrste the Uenetians had Treuiso, the marchese of Este had certain calles, that he had before lost, and the Visconti had Padoa, Feltro, and Ciuidale di Belluno: which with Vicenza and Verona, that he had also got∣ten a littell before, sette the Uisconti of Myllaine on such a height, that immediately he moued warre against the Bologniese and Florentines, whereby he began to be had in Ialousie and mistruste, of all the other astates, about him. Wherfore the Uenetians, with those other two beforenamed, the Manroan, the Ferrarese, Carlo Maatesta, and Robert Duke of Bauiera (vnto whom the yonge Nouello Carraro was fled for succours) entred all into a leage against him: by reason wherof Verona was sacked, Padoa besieged, and the Visconti at length in suche wise discomfited, that he was faine to requyre peace, whiche was graunted for .x. yeres folowyng.
¶After the death of Veniero succeded Michele Steno,Michele Steno .1400. in whose tyme .iiii. Uenetian galleis, laden with mer∣chaundise were loste in the Arcipelago. ¶Than Zeno, with .xi. galleis was sent out against the Genowaies: who had been in Soria, sacked Baruti, and taken certeine Uenetian shippes. But in theyr re∣tourne, betweene Modone, and Giunchio, Zeno dis∣coumfited theim: notwithstandyng that in maner they were double as many. ¶This meane tyme the younge Carraro beyng (part∣ly through the Uenetians fauour) restored vnto the do∣minion of Padoa, besieged Vicenza, and streigned it so sore, that in despite of hym they yelded theim selfes to the Uenetians: who toke occasion of vnkyndnesse to∣wardes Carraro, because he had ben the principall mo∣uer of the Genowaies against theim: and that also he had counsailed william Scala to take on hym the domi∣nion of Verona. Insomuche that the Uenetians ar∣med, and fyrst chastised Alberto da Este of Ferraa for parttakyng with Carraro, and finally by plaine force, gattebothe Pada and Verona: and ledde this Nouel∣lo Carraro, with his two sonnes prisoners to Uenice, where by nyght they were all three straungled. ¶And albeit, that the Uenetians were esteemed to haue spent in those Padoane warres better than two milly∣ons of golde: yet this victorie ouer theyr approued ene∣mie was so gratefull vnto them, that forgettyng all ex∣pences, they triumphed with feastes and bonfiers so longe, that they sette the toppe of saincte Markes ste∣ple on fyre: whiche afterwardes (to theyr coste) was made vp againe and cleane gilte ouer.
¶Thus the Uenetians rested not longe, but that Ladis∣lao, kynge of Naples and of Hungarie, warred on them in Dalmatia, and toke Zara: whiche they redeemed of hym for the summe of an .100000. duckates, takyng al∣so truce with hym for .v. yeres. And than died Steno. Thomas Mocenigo 1413.¶Next folowed Thomas Mocenigo, that reformed certaine offices in the Rialto. ¶He also recouered certaine townes in Friuli, that one Pippo, a capitaine of the kynges of Hungarie had in the last warres before taken from theim. And was authour also of the renewyng of the palaice of Sainct Marke, for the mocionyng wherof, he willyngly paied a thousande duckates, forfaited by an ancient law made against him that shoulde firste mocion the alteracion of that palaice from his olde facion. Fraunces Foscaro .144.¶Whan Mocenigo was deade, Fraunces Foscaro en∣tered into the astate▪ who beyng praied thervnto, entred in league with the Florentines, againste Philip Duke of Myllaine: and sente Carmignuola theyr capitaine to Bressa, whiche by meane of intelligence was soone got∣ten: though the forteresse helde a certeine space. On the other syde the Florentines toke Nicolos da Este, mar∣chese of Ferrara for their capitaine, and sente hym into the territorie of the Genowaies, where was gotten no small booties. So that Duke Phillip thus troubled, fearyng leaste the countrey of Romagnia shoulde re∣turne to the Florentines dominion, yelded vp the fame to the vse of the churche of Rome, into the handes of the legate of Bononia, and for aduoidyng of further incon∣uenience, caused the same legate to procure him a peace, whiche was sooner obteined than well obserued. For
Phillip encouraged with the money and large offers of the Mylanese, wolde not suffer the articles to be ob∣serued▪ and inuadyng the Mantuane territorie, prouoked his ennemies the colleges, to renewe their power, with whiche, and by the power of the generall Carmignuola, the Duke receiued such a discomfiture, besides Terenti∣ano, with losse of his cariage, plate and money, that if Carmignuola had folowed the victorie, he had ben lyke enough to haue driuen Phillip out of his Duchie. ¶Finally after sundrie conclusions and breaches, at last a full peace was concluded, that Bergamo and Bres∣sa, with their apportenaunces, shoulde remaine to the Uenetians, Cremona, with his territory should be geuen to Sforza for the dower of his wife Bianca, doughter to Phillip Romaningo, with the fortresses of Gieradadda to be restored to Phillip by the Uenetians (Pschiera and Lanado onely excepted) that Conzaga shoulde haue the reste of the Mantuane confines, and that in those quarters Legniago, Porto, Riua, Torboli, Penetra, and Rauenna, shoulde remaine to the Uenetians. That within the terme of two yeres Nicolas Piccinino should restore Bononia to the churche. That Astorre di Fa∣enza shuld deliuer vnto the Florentines their fortresses, and finallie that Phillip shoulde no more meddle with the Genowaies. ¶This peace satisfied, all the colleges (the bishop of Romes legate onely excepted) whose parte in Bononia semed nothyng honourable in this behalfe. ¶Duryng these businesses in Lumbardie, the Turkes assaulted Thessalonica, a citee of the Uenetians in Ma∣cedonia, and by force toke it▪ with Iames Dandolo, and
Andrea Donato, gouernours of the same. ¶Not longe after Andrea Dandolo was sent ambas∣sodour vnto the Soldan of Aegypt, to excuse the senate of Uenice, for the takyng of certaine of his vesselles, without theyr consent. ¶In this time the water in maner drowned all Uenice, so that whan the floudde was past, the hurt that it had doen, was esteemed aboue a myllion of golde. ¶The daughter of the kynge of Arragon, wife of Lio∣nello da Este of Ferrara, came to see Uenice: and the furie of the people was so great to see hir, that they brake the bridge of the Rialto: in the fall wherof .xx. men were slaine, besides a noumbre maimed and hurte. ¶Eugenius the bishop of Rome, impacient that Picci∣nino shoulde so longe kepe Bononia, entred in league with Alfonso kyng of Naples, and with Duke Philip, against Sforza: and so renuyng the warres in Italie, the Bologniese, thorough helpe of the Uenetians and Florentines, recouered theyr libertee, and for aduaun∣tage, gatte diuers of theyr enemies castels. By meane wherof Phillip fell in hand againe with the Uenetians and Florentines, that came to theyr succour: so that theyr capitaine Michelle Attendulo fought with hym besides Casale Maggiore, put hym to flight, toke foure thousande horse of his, ranne to the gates of Myllaine, and brought Phillip so low, that besides Myllaine he had no more lefte, but Crema and Lodi. Wherfore he sought peace of new: but it woulde not be graunted hym. ¶This meane time Iames Foscaro, son vnto the Duke, for certeine his ill demeanours, was twise confined into
Candia, and there died. ¶Than Sforza takyng parte with Duke Phillip loste Casale Maggiore, and the Marca d' Ancona, that the bi∣shop of Rome toke from him, but finally Phillip disea∣sed bothe with a feuer and the fluxe, died. ¶Incontinently vpon whose death Lodi and Vicenza, submitted theim selfes to the Uenetians. Wherfore Sforza, capitaine of the Milanese, came with an army to Vicenza, toke it, and sacked it. And Atendulo on the other syde wasted a great part of the Milanese, vn∣till suche tyme as Sforza agreed hym with the Uene∣tians, to haue .4000. men, and .13000. duckates of ye∣rely prouision, vntill he myght gette the state of Myl∣laine: promisyng theim, whan he were Duke, he would be contented to renounce to theim all that, that Phillip had gotten on that syde the riuer of Adda. So that whan Sforza obteined the state of Myllaine (whiche happened shortly after) he obserued his promyse, and peace folowed. ¶About this tyme a certaine Greeke, called Stamato, robbed the treaure of sainct Markes churche, after he had been two yeres in cuttyng an hole through a verie myghtie stone wall: but beyng bewraied through a tai∣lour, that he trusted, the treasure was recouered, the Greeke taken, and for his longe pacience and woorthie thefte, hanged with a golden halter. ¶Than came newes out of Sicilia, that Loredano, capitaine of the Uenetian armie, had foughten with the Genowaies and Sicilians: and had burned .47. of their shippes. After whiche victorie a generall peace folow∣ed for a tyme.
¶The kyng of Bossina sent for a present to the Uene∣tians certaine vesselles of siluer .iiii. goodly horses, and many Faulcones. Liberalitee¶Federike the emperour, retournyng from his coro∣nacion at Rome towardes Almaine, passed by Uenice, where the Senate presented to the Empresse a ryche crowne, sette with iewelles, wherof some one stone was estemed at .3000. duckates, and besides that gaue hir two couerynges for a cradell, richely embrodered with stone and perle: because she was at that time great with childe. ¶A newe leage made betwene the Uenetians, and the Senesi, the Duke of Sauoie, the marques of Monferra∣to, and the lordes of Correggio, againste Sforza, than newly made Duke of Myllaine. For defence wherof Sforza had secret helpe of the Florentines: so that the Uenetians, with their colleges, procured Alfonse kyng of Naples, against the Florentines: who after made warre vpon them in Tuscane, whilest the gentill Leone∣sio, capitaine of the leage on the tother side, toke Lodi, Gotolengo, Manerbio, Pontoglio, and ranne euen to the gates of Myllaine. ¶About this tyme the Turke wonne Constantinople, in the takyng wherof the emperour of Grece, with diuers gentilmen Uenetians, valiauntelie resistyng their enne∣mies, both by sea and lande, were slaine, besides a num∣bre of others taken prisoners, with the lose of theyr nauie and substaunce. Wherfore the bishop of Rome toke vpon him the appeasyng of the Italian warres: agreyng the parties on this wise: that Sforza shoulde restore vnto the Uenetians all that that he had taken
from them in those warres (the castelles of Gieradadda onely excepted) that the kynge of Naples shoulde do the like to the Florentines (Castiglione excepted) and the Florentines to doe the lyke to the Senese. And that whan anie controuersy shoulde happen of newe betwene them, the bishop of Rome should order the mattier with∣out any businesse of warre. ¶The Genowaies were left out of this peace, by meane of the kyng of Naples. ¶Federike emperour of Almaine requyred ambassa∣dours from all the princes of Europe, to make a newe league against the Turke. ¶But this meane whyle Bartholomeo Marcello re∣tourned from Constantinople with an ambassadour of the Turkes, that brought certeine articles of agreement to the senate, whiche the Uenetians accepted: and ther∣vpon was confyrmed amitee betweene the Turke and theim. ¶After the death of Foscaro succeded Pasquale Mali∣piero, of whom I fynde nothyng of importaunce,Pasquale Malipiero 147. sa∣uyng that in his time hapned the terrible earthquake in Italie, that specially in the realme of Naples did so muche hurte: and that emprintyng was than fyrste in∣uented. ¶After him succeded Christofero Moro,Christofero Moro .142. in whose time the Turkes wanne by force, and rased to the earth the Uenetian walle, made vpon Istmus of Morea, and after didde in maner what they woulde thoroughout all that region. ¶This Morea, aunciently called Peloponnessu,Morea. is the chiefe parte of Greece, a verie riche countrey, com∣passed
about with the sea, except in one narow place, that it seemeth racked vnto the maine lande: in whiche place beyng about sixe myle ouer, was suche a walle made, as with reasonable furniture had been sufficient to resiste a wonderfull power. But the Uenetians (be∣cause they fyrste of Christian princes, entred in amitee with those infidelles) trustyng to muche in theyr newe friendship, attended more to the vndoyng of theyr neigh∣bours at home, than to the earnest prouision that so wor∣thie a countrey, agaynst so puissaunte an ennemie, the Turke, requyred. So that shortly after the losse of that wall, thei were shamefully discoumfited at Patras∣so: Iames Barbarico beyng theyr Proueditore. And than also they loste Negroponte, where was suche a slaughter of Christians, as woulde make any Christian herte wepe to heare it. Besides a huge summe of mo∣ney, that they were constreigned to geue to the kyng of Hungarie, to resist the Turkes passage, that with an o∣ther armie by lande was than comyng towardes Dal∣matia. ¶Than succeded Nicolo Trono, who was cause of the establishemēt of Ercole da Este in the duchie of Ferrara.Nicolo Trono .1471. ¶He entred in league with Vsnucassan kyng of Persia (whose successour is nowe called Sophie) against the Turke. ¶In his tyme the Uenetians gatte the realme of Cy∣prus by this meane. Iames, last kyng of the same, for the great amitee betweene his forefathers and the Uenetians, came vnto Uenice, and requyred the Signo∣ria to adopte one of theyr daughters, as daughter of theyr common wealth: and than woulde he be conten∣ted
to accepte hir vnto his wyfe. ¶This large offer was soone accepted, and Katheryn Cornaro, a goodly yonge gentilwoman espowsed to the kynge, who therupon retourned into his realme conti∣nuyng in peace the tyme of his life. At his deathe, (leauyng his wife great with childe) he ordeined, that she and hir childe not yet borne, shoulde enioy the realme▪ But the childe after the birth liued not longe. Assoone as the Uenetians hearde of the kynges death,Cyprus wonne. they ar∣med certaine galleis, and sent them with Georgio Cor∣naro, brother to the Quene into Cyprus, to comforte hir on the Signorias behalfe: with this wile, that whan Cornaro shoulde arriue before Famagosta (the princi∣pall citee of Cyprus) he should feigne him selfe so sicke, that he might not goe out of the shippe, and whan his sister the Quene, with hir barons shoulde come to visite hym, than shoulde he kepe theim sure from retournyng, and sodeinelye entre the citee, subduyng it with the whole realme, vnto the Uenetian obedience. As it was deuised, so it happened from poinct to poinct, albeit that the Quene was counsailed not to go abourde the galey, and that some businesse was made after for it, yet in ef∣fect the Uenetians preuailed, & the Quene was brought to Uenice, where she passed the rest of hir yeres. ¶Some esteme this doing treason, but many men allow it for a good policie. ¶After Trono folowed Nicolas Marcello, in whose tyme happened no notable thyng,Nicolo Marcello 147. other than the victori∣ouse defence of the towne of Scodra in Albania against an infinite numbre of Turkes. ¶Next hym succeded Peter Mocenigo,Pietro Mocen¦go .1474. whiche at the
tyme of his election, was capitaine of an armie by sea, wherwith he had in Cyprus quieed a great rebellyon, preserued Scodra from the Turkes furie, and restored the kynge of Carramania to his astate. ¶For these woorthie deedes, and for his other vertues was in his absence first made Proctour of. S. Marke, and than (as I saied) created Duke. And beyng called home from the armie, to gouerne the dominion, Antonio Loredano was sent foorth in his stede: who deliuered Lepanto frm the Turkes siege, and vsed great dili∣gence in the conseruacion of the countrey of Morea. Andrea Vendra∣mino .1476.¶After Mocenigo, Andrea Vendramino was elected Duke. In whose tyme the Turkes retournyng into Al∣bania, came fyrste before Croa, and after ouerran all the countreis betwene that and the riuer of Tagliamento in Friuli: so that the Uenetians were faine to call backe the capitaine Carlo Montone, who not long before put out of wages was than gone into Tuscane. ¶This Duke attempted a peace with the Turkes, but his purpose was interrupted by meanes of the kynge of Hungarie and of Naples. Iohn Mocenigo 1478.¶After Vendramino folowed Iohn Mocenigo, brother to Peter beforenamed. ¶This man agreed with the Turke, after they had warred with him .17. yeres. The articles of accorde were, that the Uenetians shoulde yelde into the Turkes handes Scodra, the principall citee of Albania, with the ilandes of Corfu, Tenaro, and Lemno, and besides that shoulde paie him .8000. duckates a yere. In conside∣racion wherof the Turke for his parte graunted theim safe passage for trafficque of merchaundise into the sea
nowe called Mare Maggiore, and auncientlie named Pontus Euxinus: and that the Uenetians shoulde haue power to sende an officer of theirs vnder the name of Bailo to Constantinople, to iudge and order all their mer∣chauntes businesse. ¶Not longe after this agreement, the Ile of Corritta in Dalmatia, was broughte vnder the Uenetian domi∣nion. ¶And in the .iiii. yere of this mans rule, warre was moued against Ercole Duke of Ferrara, for the breache of certeine articles betwene hym and the Uenetians. ¶After that Robert of. S. Seuerino was sente with an armie against Ferrando kyng of Naples, in whiche en∣terprise the Uenetians discomfited Alfonse Duke of Calabria, sonne of the foresaied kynge. But those warres, by meane of the other Princes of Italie, were soone appeased, whan the Duke of Ferrara (besides the losse of Comacchio) had susteined verie great damage, for his parte takyng. ¶Nexte to Vendramino succeded, Marco Barbarico,Marco Barbarico 1485. who neuer seking to be auenged on his enemie, woulde saie, It suffised a discreate prince, to haue power to reuenge, wherby his ennemie shoulde haue cause to feare him. Ther∣fore he vsed seueritee against the transgressours of the common wealth, and not against theim that priuately offended hym. In his daies hapned littell adoe. ¶The contrarie wherof folowed in the tyme of his successour Agostino Barbarico.Agostino Barbarico 1486. ¶Firste by reason of the warres with Edmonde Duke of Austriche, for the interest of certain mynes of yron: in whiche enterprise the Uenetian capitaine Robert of. S.
Seuerino died: than thoroughe the comyng of Charles the .viii. Frenche kynge into Italie, who at lengthe, partely through the Uenetian force was constreigned to retyre into Fraunce: but most of all they were troubled with the Turkes, who fell out with theim, oueranne all their countreis as farre as Tagliomento, slew aboue. 7000. persons of the Uenetian parte, and toke from theim Lepanto, Modone, Corone, and Durazo. Neuerthelesse this meane whyle the Uenetians gatte Cremona, and diuers other townes in Italie, whiche is rather a reproche to thē, than an honor that wolde lieffer warre vpon their christen neighbours, than bende their power to resist the Turkes. ¶After Barbarico, Leonardo Loredano was elected to the astate:Leonardo Loredano .151. in whose tyme all Christian princes about the Uenetians, conspyred by one accorde vtterly to de∣stroie theim. And the league was suche, that in one selfe tyme the emperour Maximilian, Lewys the .xii. Frenche kynge, Ferrando kyng of Spaine and of Na∣ples, Iulius bishop of Rome, with the Dukes of Man∣tua and Ferrara, should warre vpon theim, beginnyng a∣bout the yere of grace .1509. So partly by force, af∣ter many discoumfitures of the Uenetians power, part∣ly by accorde: in maner all the Uenetian dominion with in the maine lande was diuided amongest these princes. The frenche kyng had Bressa, Bergamo, Cremona, and Crema: the emperour Maximilian, Verona, Vicenza, Padoa, and parte of Friuli: The kyng of Spaine, the citees and portes in Puglia, that the Uenetians before had gotten: The bishop of Rome, Arimino, Faenza, Ra∣uenna, and Ceruia, with the rest of Romagnia: and the
Duke of Ferrara the Pollisene di Rouigo. So that the Uenetians had so little dominion lefte on the maine lande▪ that the emperour Maximilian came to Maestie: v. little myles from Uenice, as neere as the sea would suffre hym to approche: and there for a triumphe or de∣spite, shotte of his artillerie to Uenicewardes: though he coulde dooe it no hurt. Wherfore the Uenetians, prouoked in maner by despayre, and through an oracion made by theyr Duke, that encouraged theim rather to die lyke men, than to suffre theim selfes thus vilie to be eaten by and despysed, renued an armie by lande, reco∣uered Padoa, than negligently kept, fortified it and Treuiso, fought dyuers tymes with variable fortune a∣gainst theyr enemies, fought to be reuenged on the Duke of Ferrara, against whom they sent .xvii. galleis and 400. botes to assaile the Ferrarese dominion by the ri∣uer of Pò: and finally behaued theim selfes so man∣fully, that the kyng of Spaine, and the bishop of Rome, made a new leage with them against the frenche kyng: who at that tyme, besydes the state of Myllaine, had gotten Bononia, and was become so great in Italy, that they were all afearde of hym. Upon conclusion of whiche league the citesins of Bressa retourned to the Uenetian obedience, so that for defence of that citee a∣gainst the Frenchemen, Andrea Grtti, with certeine o∣ther noble Uenetians and capitaines, and a conuenient noumbre of souldiours, were sent thither: where after a sore conflict with the Frenchemen, they were all dis∣coumfited, slaine or taken, and the principall prisoners sent to Myllaine to Mounser du Foys, than gouernour there, who snt Andrea Gritti, as a singuler presente,
prisoner to the Frenche kyng. ¶The Uenetians not a little troubled for this losse, cau∣sed the campe of the league, that than laie before Bono∣nia to draw towardes Ferrara: and in succour of that campe, made a new armie by water, wherwith they sac∣ked Argenta, toke Mirandula, and did muche hurte to the Ferrarese dominion, till at laste the Vice Roy, of Spaine generall of the saied campe, came before Bono∣nia, and from thense to Rauenna for feare of the Fren∣che host, that from Myllaine pursued him. Unto whi∣che Frenche armie the Duke of Ferrara vnited his po∣wer, and so together folowed the armie of the league to Rauenna: where on Easterdaie in the mornyng was fought the blouddiest battaile betwene theim, that hath ben heard of in our daies: and so many thousand{is} slaine on bothe sydes, that it coulde scarcely be iudged who had the better: Sauyng that the Frenchemen obtei∣ned the victorie, toke Rauenna, put it to sacke, and af∣ter gatte diuers other townes in Romagnia. Douche∣mens hall in Uenice.¶Whilest these thynges were doyng, the Douchemens hall in Uenice, called il fondago di Tedeschi, was reedi∣fied: a very faire and great house: and of a meruailouse rent. For they affyrme, that it yeldeth to the Uene∣tians aboue .100. duckates a daie: whiche after our old reckenyng amounteth aboue .7000. pounde sterlyng by the yere. Antonio Gimani.¶After Loredano succeded Antonio Grimani, who be∣yng in exile, was called home, made proctour of sainct Marke, and finally Duke. Andrea Gritti.¶Than Andrea Gritti, before named, newly retourned out of Fraunce, was elected Duke: by whose meanes
the Uenetians entred in league with the frenche kyng: and so recouered Bressa, redeemed Verona for a great summe of money, and ayded the Frenchemen to recouer Myllaine, and to doe many feates in the realme of Na∣ples: how be it, the frenchemen not longe after, lost all againe through theyr ill gouernaunce and tyrannie. ¶Finally practisyng now with Fraunce, now with the emperour, now with the bishop of Rome, as best serued for the common wealth: this Duke left it in good ordre, tranquillitee and peace, and so died, greatly bewailed of his citesins. ¶Than folowed Peter Lando, in whose daies the Turke made warre to the Uenetians,Petro Lando. because they ioi∣gned with the emperour against him: so that thei to ob∣teine peace, were faine to geue hym the stronge and no∣table citees in Napoli, and Maluagia in Greece: and be∣side that the summe of .300000. duckates. ¶It was thought, that the Turke woulde haue been appeased with a muche lesse gifte, but beyng secretely aduertised by the Frenche ambassadour, how the Uene∣tians had geuen theyr Bailo or ambassadour commissi∣on, that rather than the warre should continue to make this offer: he woulde none other wise agree with them. ¶This knowlage came through intelligence, that the frenche ambassadour had with one of the Uenetian Se∣cretaries, who through corrupcion of money, disclosed all the procedynges of the priuie counsaile: whiche at length beyng discouered, the same Secretarie fledde in∣to Fraunce, and .ii. other Uenetians of his confedera∣cie were taken and hanged. ¶By this mans time Andrea Doria, with a great nauie
of the emperours, of the bishop of Romes, and of the Uenetians together, enterprised a iourney against Bar∣barossa, admirall of the Turkish nauie: and yet metyng with him at great aduauntage, both of power, and place, Doria retyred: for what cause no man can tell. He lefte the Uenetian Galeon, the notablesse vessell of the worlde, in the middest of the Turkes nauie. And yet after she had been assayled .v. houers on all sydes, she came hir waies safe, in despite of theim all, leauyng an infinite numbre of hir shotte in the Turkish beten ship∣pes and galleis. Francesco Donato.¶After Lando Francesco Donato was elected vnto the astate, about two yeres and an halfe before the writyng hereof. And because in his tyme hitherto hath not hapned anie woorthie thyng to the Uenetians, I woull referre the reste to theim that hereafter shall finde occa∣sion to write.
The descripcion of Naples. THe citee of Naples (some time called Parthenope) is one of the fayrest citees of the worlde, for good∣ly streetes and beautifull buildyng of temples and houses,Castell Nouo. specially the Ca∣stell Nouo, wherin the kynges were wonte (as the Uicere now is) to be moste commonly re∣sident: beyng one of the rarest buildyng{is} for greatnesse and strength, that any where is lightly to be founde. The countrey about is so pleasant, that in maner eue∣rie village deserueth to be spoken of, aswell for sumptu∣ouse buildynges and noumbre of commoditees, namely haboundaunce of delicate fruites, as also for the hole∣some ayre. For in most places it semeth alwaies (yea at the deadest of the winter) to be continuall springe time.Tempera∣ture of Naples. In deede the heate of sommer doeth somewhat greeue them, but they are so prouided of large and open buildynges, that it dooeth not muche annoye theim. ¶And one thyng amongest all the rest is to be meruai∣led at, wherof it shoulde procede, that many tymes the fyre breaketh out of the earth in dyuers places vpon the sea costes, like to the flambes of Mongibello, auncient∣ly called Ethna in Sicile, as in the fyrst yere of the em∣perour Titus, it hapned besides Naples in the hill Ve∣seuio, now called Summi,Plinies death. where Plinie the same tyme (seekyng the cause therof) ended his life, not by violence of the fyre (for he approched not so nere) but by the ve∣hement opilacion of the sulfure, that stopped his breath. It is true,Hotte baynes. that the naturall hote baines (wherof there
be many in Italy, and namely, in the realme of Naples) come of the naturall heate that is in the sulfure, tho∣rough the veynes wherof the water maketh his course: but what shuld be cause of this flambe, that (as it were against nature) ascendeth out of the cold earth? almost no man can make any reason. In deede, the best opi∣nion that I gather,Fire brea∣kyng out of the erth. is, that the veyne of sulfure in the earth, receiuyng sometymes through the extreme heate of the sonne, a certaine kynde of fyre, kendleth: and as the veine is great or small, so worketh it the effect. If it be nere the vpper part of thearth, and haue vent, it brea∣keth out in fyre or smoke: if it be so deepe, that for the great weyght of the earth, it can not issue, than dooeth it cause thearth to quake: as in those parties (most sub∣iect to the sonne) earthquak{is} are common, and sometime whole townes and countreys ar destroied withall. Fertilitee of Naples¶Some thinke the fertilitee of the realme shoulde pro∣cede muche of the heate that this sulfure geueth the ground (seyng there is more plenty than elswhere) but whereof so euer it cometh the countrey is surely reple∣nished of all thynges necessary for mans life, and so ple∣saunt withall, that Pandolfo Collenuccio (a notable writer of the Neapolitane histories) thinketh, the won∣derfull mutacious that haue happened in the same, to procede of the desire that men had vnto the pleasers and commoditees of the countrey. And further speakyng of the inconstancie of the people, he saieth these woordes: It seemeth, that the realme of Naples is predestinate to haue in it continuall tyrannies, sedicions, falshead, rebellions, warres, destruction of citees, rauishementes, and flambe, with all the other calamitees that of aua∣rice
and ambicion (true mothers of suche plages) maie grow. And allegeyng the auctoritee of diuers aunci∣ente writers, affirmeth, that the prouinces of the realme, whiche he calleth Regnicoli, doe perseuer without re∣bellion as longe as thei finde none to rebell against. Neuerthelesse Titus Liuius, and the auncient Romaine histories shewe, that Naples it selfe was of all other citees moste constante in their faieth towardes the Ro∣maines, aswell in tyme of daunger as of prosperitee. And for the space of these .30. yeres and more they haue perseuered in quiete obedience vnder their princes. Neuerthelesse in this the abbridgemente of their histo∣ries ye shall see, that sens the decaie of the Romain em∣pire, no realme in al the worlde hath ben so much subiect to alteracions and warres, principally through occasion of the inhabitauntes theim selfes, who alwaies were diuided in partetakynges to their owne confusion. And you shall yet to this houre see, that the Neapolita∣nes are scarcely trusted on their wordes. Not that I thynke thei deserue lesse credite than other men, but because the wonted generall ill opinion of their vnsted∣fastnesse, is not taken out of mens hertes. Yet is the Neapolitane for his good enterteimente reckened to be the varaie courtesie of the worlde, thoughe moste men repute him to be a great flatterer and full of crafte. What woll you more? Thei are riche, for almost euery gentilman is lorde and kynge within hym selfe, they haue veray fayre women, and the worlde at will, in so muche as Naples contendeth with Uenice, whether shoulde be preferred for sumptuouse dames. Finally the court about the Vicere, was wont to be very prince∣ly,
and greatter than that of Myllaine for trayne of gentilmen: but now it is somewhat diminished as you shall perceiue in the ende of this history. ¶The saiyng (of theim that best can gesse) is, that it yeldeth the emperour .iii. millions of golde by the yere, whiche after our reckenyng is about .700000. pounde. A great parte wherof is consumed in mainteignyng the Uiceres astate, and keping of many fortresses, and in the wages of .300. men of armes, continuallie mainteigned there, that muste kepe euerie one his .iii. horse, for the whiche he hath as good as .50. pounde stipende yerelie, and many of theim haue more. And one great faute there is, for almost no straunger can trauaile the realme vnrobbed, speciallie betwene Rome and Naples. It is in maner closed about with the sea, except .150. myle, that is cutte ouer from the mouth of the riuer of Vfen∣te nowe called Maseno, vnto the mouth of Tronto, and is of compasse in all, measuryng it by the banke, about .1400. miles, hauyng vpon the sea costes suche a numbre of hauens and good townes, as fewe realmes christened haue the like. ¶The historie of Naples. AFter Charlemaine had taken on him the occidentall empire, and agreed with Niceforo emperour of Constantinople for their confines, leuing (as I saied before) the Duchy of Beneuēto for a mere betwene both, wherein he placed Grymoalde a noble man descended
of the Lumbardes nacion, the realme of Naples rested in peace aboutes the space of .27. yeres, till the comyng of the Sarasines into Italie,829. who landed at Ciuita Vecchia, rased it to the earth, went to Rome, spoylyng and burnyng there what they wolde,The fyrste comyng of the Sara∣sines into Italie. passed by Monte Casino and by the monastary of. S. Bennet, destroiyng all before theim, and laded with wonderfull rychesse, re∣tourned to their nauie in the riuer Garigliano, and so passed home into their owne countrey againe. ¶Not longe after the Sarasines vnder their Capitaine Sabba, retourned into the realme, and besieged Taranto,845. to the succours wherof the Greekish emperour sente his capitaine Theodosius, with a great army by sea, of the whiche .60. saile were Uenetians, who metyng with the Sarasines, fought with theim, were discoumfited, many taken, slaine, and drowned: and finally Theodo∣ius hym selfe put to flight. ¶Than the Sarasines toke the ile of Candia,864. and the more parte of them arriuyng in Italie, toke all the tow∣nes on the sea costes from Ancona to Otranto, and so about to Taranto, spoylyng and burnyng ouer all, vn∣till at laste, the Uenetian armie mette with theim, dis∣coumfited theim, and droue theim cleane awaie. ¶Within a while after Constantine a childe, sonne vnto Leo late emperour of Constantinople, was depriued of his astate by one Romano, generall of his fathers . And this Romano (beyng also a Romaine bore  condicion) vsurped the empyre by force▪ whiche  muche rufflyng, & namely the  Puglia rebelled against hym.  on theim, caused the Sarasines
who not onely ouerronne those two countreys, but also all the rest of the realme of Naples, and Campaine almost to Rome: entendyng to assaulte and sacke it, had not Iohn the .x. than bishop of the same made a great armie, that so fought with, and discoumfited them, that they were faine to flee vnto the mount of Gargano, now called sainct Angelo: where they fortified theim selfes and dwelled many yeres, rennyng now here now there through the realme, burnyng, spoylyng, and killyng in suche wyse that whan they came before any towne, and promised, not to kyll the people nor to burne the houses, incontinently the inhabitantes woulde yelde them self{is}: because they had been so often beten, that they thought resistence naught auayleable. ¶And thus triumphed the Sarasines in one parte and an other of the realme, but most in Calabria and Pugli∣a,Otho the firste. till the comyng of Otho, the fyrst of that name, em∣perour of Almaine, into Italie. Who beyng arriued at Rome (for pacifiyng of certaine rumours moued a∣gainst Iohn the .xiii. than bishop there) was persuaded by Pandolfe, prince of Capua, to sende the armie he had brought out of Germanie into the realme: it shoulde be an easie mattier for hym to driue all the Sarasines a∣waie. And so it proued: for the emperour had no soo∣ner sent his sonne (also named Otho) with his power into those partes, but incontinently the Sarasens made what they coulde to carie with theim,964. and so departed. By reason whereof,Otho the ii. this Otho the secounde, helde the realme as his owne certeine yeres, till the Greekish em∣perour Basilio, sent a mighty armie of Greekes and Sa∣rasines into Puglia, and there discomfited Otho in su∣che
wyse, that if the Greekes had knowen how to haue vsed theyr victorie, they myght easily haue recouered Rome and all Italie. But thei contented with the re∣couerey of Calabria and Puglia, fortified the same and kepte it, not without warre, sometime of one prince, sometyme of an other, and many tymes of the Sarasi∣nes, that (still enioiyng the ile of Sicilia) wold by stelth, here and there, be doyng mischiefe against their Christi∣an neyghbours. ¶Finally Henrie the fyrst emperour of Almaine, Mi∣ghell Catalaico emperour of Constantinople,100. and Ser∣gius the .iiii. bishop of Rome, the realme of Naples stode thus diuided into sundrie dominions, Calabria and Puglia (as I haue saied) was in possession of the Gree∣kes: the Romaines some here, some there in Campaine and therabout{is}, had theyr partes, and some other vnder the name of princes, occupied the rest. ¶Than one Tanredi, Conte d' alta villa,Tanered the Nor∣main. a Normain borne, came into Italie, who hauyng .xii. sonnes of his owne, and a certaine noumbre of other Normaines be∣sydes, toke wages of Pandolfe prince of Capua, to serue in his warres against Guaimaro prince of Salerne: in whiche warres the Normains serued so well, that Pan∣dolfe preuailed as he would wishe him selfe. But be∣cause he seemed to set little by those Normaines, after he had obteined his purpose, therfore whan the tyme of theyr appoinctment was expired, they lefte Pandolfe, and wente to serue Guaimato, whose astate by theyr helpe was shortly after muche encreased. ¶Finallie Tancredi beyng dead, his sonne Guglielmo Ferrabach, was made generall ouer the Normains,Guglielmo Ferrabach that
were than a great noumbre: insomuche that the empe∣rour of Constantinople determinyng vtterly to dryue awaie the Sarasines, that than occupied the ile of Si∣cile, required his helpe, promisyng for his rewarde, the iiii. parte of all that shoulde be gotten. But whan the Sarasines were all dryuen awaie, Molocco the empe∣rours capitaine, toke the whole realme of Sicile into his owne handes to the emperours vse, and wolde assygne no parte therof to the Normains. Whiche wronge Ferrabach dissembled for the time, and so withdrew him withall his into Puglia, takyng the moste parte of the countrey by force, and entryng into Melfi (a veraie stronge place before fortified by the Normans, for safe∣garde of their goodes, wifes and children) he prepared all thynges necessarie for the warre. And taried till the forenamed Molocco came to besiege him with a no∣table armie, and than (as an expert capitaine) conside∣ryng the Grekes to be werie of their great trauaile from Sicile thither, incontinently yssued out againste theim, and discomfited Molocco, slewe the moste parte of his armie, and draue hym in maner cleane out of Puglia, takyng the possession of it into his owne hand{is}, and na∣ming him selfe Erle of Puglia, and so continued the rest of his life, whiche was not longe. ¶This Guglielmo Ferrabach than beyng deade, his brother Drogone,Drogone. succeded in the dominion of Puglia, who had diuers conflictes with the Grekish armies, and diuers fortune withall, but finally in a great battile, be∣twene the ryuer Ofanto and the castell Oliueo, the Grekes were ouerthrowen, and from that tyme foorth, the Normains enioyed the whole countrey of Puglia, as
their owne quiete possession. ¶After the deth of Drogone,Hunfredo. folowed his brother Hun∣fredo, who continued .vii. yeres in the astate without any notable thyng that happened in his tyme. ¶Than succeded Godfrey an other brother,Godfrey. in whose tyme the prince of Salern happened to be slayne of his owne men, and Gisulfo a Normaine made prince in his place. This Gisulfo had diuers tymes attempted the gettyng of Beneuento, and now of newe made prepera∣cion for the same, wherfore Leo the .ix. than bishop of Rome, required succours of Henry the .ii. emperour of Almaine than beyng in Rome. So the emperour sent for his Germaines, that laie at Uercelly in Lumbardie, and deliuered theim to the bishop, that in his owne per∣son, with the reste of those Italians he coulde make, en∣tred into the realme, entendyng vtterly to expulse the Normans. But Gisulfo, heryng of his comyng, hasted to Beneuento, toke and fortified it, and afterwardes a∣byd the bishoppes armie at a place called Ciuita, where in conclusion was stricken a sore battayle, but the Nor∣mains gatte the victorie, takyng the bishop with certain of his Cardinalles prysoners, whom (after veray gen∣till intreatyng they lette goe without raunsome. For rewarde of whiche courtesie, the byshop afterwardes confirmed vnto the Normaines, all that they helde in Italy, to be their laufull possessions. ¶Not longe after this died Godfrey, and left the Erle∣dome of Puglia to his sonne Bagelardo.Bagelar∣do. Wherwith Roberte (surnamed Guiscardo) brother vnto Godfrey, was so muche offended, that by force he chased his ne∣phew out of the astate, and than occupied both the coun∣treys
of Puglia and Calabria, adioignyng also vnto it, the citee of Troia, whyche vnto that daie perteined to the Romaines. Robert Guiscardo¶This Robert was a man strong, hardy, and wise, who perceiuyng the great contencion betwene the Romaines and Nicolas the secounde their bishop (the better to esta∣blisshe his dominion) he sente his ambassadours to the bishop, who in company of those ambassadours came to the citee Aquila, and there mette with Robert: and had suche communicacion to gethers, that Robert was con∣tented to restore to the bishop, the citees of Beneuento and Troia, with those other landes, that he before had taken from the churche,Roberte created Duke. for the whiche the bishop crea∣ted him laufull Duke of Puglia and Calabria, and in∣uested him in the same duchy, with gifte of the standarde of the churche, so that Robert became liege man and vassaile of the Romain see, and by the bishops commaun∣dement broughte his armie to Rome, where he so chasti∣sed the Romaines, that they gladlie obeied theyr holie Romaine father. ¶Not longe after, leauyng his brother Guglielmo in Puglia, he passed into Calabria, and fortified the towne of S. Marke, and departyng thense encamped besides the riuer Moccato, nere to the baynes, and shortly after gatte Cosenza and Martirano. Than went he to Squil∣laci and so a long the sea costes to Reggio: whiche he be∣sieged, and finally did so much, that he gatte whole Pu∣glia and Calabria, the lande of Brutij, and the reste of the whole realme of Naples, geuyng vnto certaine of his brethern suche part as pleased hym. By reson wherof the same bretherne (who a little before had ben his con∣traries)
consented wholy to call him from thensfoorth Duke of Calabria and Puglia. ¶And though I couet to be briefe, yet I woull not passe ouer one thyng that happened in the tyme of this Ro∣berte. ¶There was found in Puglia a certeine image of mar∣ble, with a cercle of brasse in maner of a garlande about his heade, in whiche were written these wordes Kalen∣dis Maijs Oriente Sole aureum caput habebo, the ex∣posicion or meanyng of this sentence was diligentlie sought for by Robert, but none coulde declare it, tyll at last a Sarasine, learned in artemagike came foorth, and (beyng prysoner) required his libertee for the intrepre∣ting of it, which beyng graunted, incontinently he saied: The first daie of the kalendes of Maie, at the risyng of the son, marke where the end of the shadow of this head shalbe, and diggyng there, you shall know the meanyng of these wordes, whiche time was obserued, and ere thei had dygged depe, they founde a wonderfull treasure▪Treasure founde vnder grounde. that afterwarde did no small seruice vnto Roberte in his warres. ¶Than was the realme of Sicile vnder the Moores, whose prince Bestauetto, made one Bettimino his ad∣myrall or chiefe capitaine ouer the same. This Bet∣timino came secretely into Puglia to Roger, Duke Ro∣bertes brother, and shewed hym, how Sicile was in poincte to rebell, so that for a rewarde and other agree∣mentes betwene theim, he finally opened to Roger the meanes, how he might get it. Whiche Roger by the helpe of his brother Robert, immediatly enterprised, and passyng with a power into Sicile, the fyrste towne he
toke was Messina, and at length chased awaie all the Sarasines, conquered by the Normains the whole ilande became subiecte vnto hym and his brother, so that for a token of this victorie, Ro∣ger sent vnto Alexandre the secounde: than bishoppe of Rome .iiii. camelles laden with part of the praie of the Sarasines, for a present. And wonder it was to see the speede of these victories, for Robert Guiscardo and his brethren, had brought all these dominions before re∣hersed vnder theim within the space of .xviii. yeres. ¶Not longe after, Gregorie the .vii. bishop of Rome, fyrste fell out with Robert, but afterwarde beeyng sore persecuted by Henrie the .iii. emperour of Almaine, he agreed with Roberte, and receiuyng of hym onely the marke of Ancona, he confyrmed to him all that Nicolas the .ii. had before graunted with rather more. For the whiche, whan the same Gregorie was after besieged in the castell. S. Angelo at Rome, by the forenamed em∣perour,Bishoppe of Rome besieged. Robert Guiscardo came thither with an armie, and reysed the siege, leadyng the bishop (who was mu∣che hated of the Romaines) with him to Salerno for his more suretie, where he shortly after died. ¶Thus Robert, after many woorthie feates dooen in Italie and Sicile, by occasion at last minded to driue A∣lessio, emperour of Constantinople out of his astate, and to be emperour hym selfe, so that he passed the sea with an huge armie, conquered Durazo, Valona, and dyuerse other citees in Dalmatia, Albania and Gre∣tia: fought by sea with the Greekishe and Uenetian ar∣mies bothe, and ouercame theim: and was lyke to haue preuailed in his enterprise, had not death preuented him. ¶Finally as he was goyng into Greece at Cassiopoli,
in the ile of Corfu, he sickened and died,108. ledyng a glo∣riouse and victoriouse lyfe .60. yeres. ¶Than succeded him in the duchie of Calabria and pu∣glia Roger his yonger son,Roger. who in the coūsail holden at Melfi, was confyrmed by Urbane the seconde bishop of Rome. But Boemonde the elder brother (who euer had folowed the father, and at that tyme remained ca∣pitaine ouer the armie in Grece) heryng that no part of the dominion in Italie was reserued for him, waxed so wrothe withall, that (habandonyng all his fathers en∣terprise) passed the sea with his armie, to driue his bro∣ther out of the astate: and did so muche, that after mu∣che feyghtyng, by agreement parte of Puglia was assi∣gned vnto hym, though he enioied it not longe. For immediatly after folowed the great viage into the holy lande vpon the conclusion of the counsaile made in Chi∣aramone d' aluerina in Fraunce.1094. In whiche viage a∣mongest the other princes, Boemonde hym selfe woulde nedes goe, and so woorthily behaued him, that by assent of all men he was made prince of Antioche, and so con∣tinued honorablie till his laste daie. By reson wherof his brother Roger remained quietely Duke of Puglia and Calabria, from the beginnyng of his reigne aboute xxv. yeres. ¶Next hym succeded his sonne Guglielmo,Gugliel∣mo .2. that thyn∣kyng to marie one of the daughters of Alessio emperour of Constantinople, oke shippyng to goe thither: and commended his astate to the protection of Calixt the se∣conde than bishop of Rome. But while Guglielmo was absent, Roger than Erle of Sicil, sonne vnto Ro∣ger brother of Robert Guiscardo, without any regarde
of the bishop, assaulted Calabria, and gotte the better parte ere euer Calixt coulde succour it. And albeit the bishop reised suche an armie as the hastie tyme woulde serue, and came foorth as farre as Beneuento, sendyng a Cardinall before with exhortacions and excommuni∣cacions, yet wolde Roger nothyng decline from his pur∣pose: but was rather more hotte in his enterprise, and fortune so muche fauoured hym, that after a noumbre of the bishoppes armie were fallen sicke, and many of his deere friend{is} dead, the bishop him selfe sickened so sore that he was caried in a horselitter backe to Rome, and all his people desperpled. By reason wherof Roger in maner without resistence, in short time gatte all Pu∣glia and Calabria into his owne possession, and so kepte it, that whan Guglielmo retourned, deceiued of his pre∣tended mariage (findyng him selfe also spoyled of his dominion) he was fayne to repayred to his cousen the prince of Saern, where not longe after he died, leauing none issue. Roger .2.¶So Roger remaignyng successour by inheritaunce, woulde no more be called Duke, but entitled hym selfe kynge of Italie, whiche Calixt and Honorius (next bi∣shop after him) dissembled, because thei could not chose: but Innocence the seconde, theyr next successour would not abyde that name, and therefore moued of disdeine without measuryng his force, sodenlely assembled suche people as he coulde make, and went against Roger with so great a furie, that ere euer Roger coulde make any preparacion, he draue hym from. S. Germaines, and out of all the abbey laudes (where Roger thought to
haue defended hym selfe) and finally constreigned hym to flee into the castell Galuzzo, and there besieged hym, till William Duke of Calabria, sonne of Roger, coming with an army to succour his father, discoumfited the bi∣shops power, & finally toke the bishop him selfe, withall his Cardinals prisoners: whō Roger the father entrea∣ted very courtesly, and at last licenced them to depart at theyr pleasure. In consideracion wherof the bishop graunted Roger all his owne requestes, the title of kyng onely excepted:The citi of Naples gotten by the Nor∣mains. and amongest other thinges the citee of Naples, whiche till that tyme had alwaies ben the em∣perours. For ioye wherof Roger at his entrie made an hundreth and fiftie knightes. But Innocence retur∣nyng to Rome, founde a new bishop made in his absence, one Peter, sonne of Pierleone, and was called Anacle∣tus. Wherfore Innocence fledde with certaine ship∣pes of Pisa, into Fraunce.Roger en∣titled kyng of Sicile▪ The meane whyle Roger visityng this other bishop Anaclete, obteined of him the title of kyng of bothe the Siciles, on this syde and be∣yonde the Faro. But within three yeres after, Inno∣cence by helpe of the Pisani returned, and brought with hym Lothayre Duke of Saxonie, whom he crowned em∣perour. After whiche Coronacion they bothe with a puissaunt armie went against Roger, and toke from him all that he had gotten in Italie, as farre as the Faro di Messina, but within fewe yeeres, whan Innocent was dead, Roger recouered againe all that they toke from hym, and did afterwarde many notable feates against Emanuell emperour of Constantinople, whose ilandes and townes he toke by force, as Corfu, Corinthe, Te∣bes, and Negroponte, and burned the suburbes of Con∣stantinople,
assaulted the emperours palaice, and for a memorie of his beyng there, gathered apples in his Or∣charde. ¶He also fought with the Sarasines and rescued Le∣wys the .vii. Frenche kynge out of their handes, taken by theim by the waie,119. goyng into the holie lande. And so reigning .24. yeres lorde of Sicile, he died in the citee of Palermo. Guglielmo iii.¶Than succeded his sonne William before named, who immediately ouerran the churche landes, and was ther∣fore excommunicated, insomuche that many of his owne barons conspired with Adrian bishop of Rome againste him. But finally after muche a doe he humbled him selfe to the bishop, of whom he was assoiled, and inuested kynge of ewe in the dominion of bothe the Siciles. And after that made an armie into Barbarie, where by force he toke and sacked the citee of Tunyse: In his re∣tourne from thense he vanquished the Grekish armie by sea, though they were manie moe in numbre than he. But because he waxed afterward{is} somewhat couetouse, and burdeined the people with taxes and subsidies, his barons rebelled, toke him in his palaice at Palermo, and put him in prison. Than toke they his eldest sonne Ro∣ger, and made him ryde through the streetes. After whom the people went criyng:William deposed. Life to kynge Roger, and death to the tiranne kyng William. ¶But the inconstante people repentyng theim of their errour, or fearyng leste Roger woulde reuenge the in∣iurie done to his father, retourned to the palaice with a new rumour, and findyng it closed, began to assaulte it, so that Roger thinkyng to appease them, came to a win∣dow,
and as he wolde haue spoken, was shotte in to the heade with an arrowe, wherof he died. ¶Than was William taken out of prison and restored to his kyngdome,William restored. wherin after he had reigned in all .21. yeres. he died, euyng his sonne also named William in the astate. ¶This William for his good and peasible gouernance was surnamed, The good kynge William.Guglielmo iiii. For in 26. yeres reigne, he neuer had warre with any christian prince, excepte that littell, that (moued onelie of a noble courage) he made againste Andronico, who beyng lefte tutour to Emanuell the seconde, a childe, vsurped his em∣pire of Constantinople. But the Constantinopolitans theim selfes arose against him, and hewed him to peeces, creatyng Isaac emperour in his place. ¶Manie worthy feates did this William with his gal∣leis against the infidelles:1191. specially in the vage that the two kynges Phillip of France, and Richard of Eng∣lande made into the holy lande. Duryng whose beyng at the siege of Acres, the good kynge William died in Palermo, without issue of his body. ¶Than the barons fearyng the bishop of Rome should subdue theim (whose subiectes thei wolde in no wise be) incontinently elected Tancredi (bastarde soonne of the last Roger before named) to be their kyng.Tancred▪ But short∣lie Celestine the .iii. bishop of Rome, founde meane to trouble him on this wise. ¶He crowned Henry the .vi. emperour on condycion, that he at his owne charges should conquere the realme of both Siciles, to hold it in fee of the churche, restoryng certain citees, and paiyng a certaine tribute. And to
make his mattier the better, he secretlie toke out of the monastarie of Palermo Constance a nunne, doughter of the forenamed Roger, and (dispensyng withall) gaue hir in mariage to this emperour Henrie, crownyng them both with the title of the foresaied realme. And so folowyng that title the emperour besieged Naples,1191. but by reason of a great plage in his armie, he was faine to leaue his siege and retourne into Almaine. Before whose retourne (whiche was .iiii. yeres after) Tancre∣di dyed, not reignyng fully .ix. yeres. ¶Immediately after, his wife Sibile caused William their sonne to be crowned.Gugliel∣mo .5. But the forenamed empe∣rour (pretendyng title in the right of his wyfe) with a puissaunt army entred the realme,1195. and in maner without resistence obteined the whole, driuing the Quene and hir son William from place to place so long, that at length he besieged theim in a stronge holde, where fallyng to composicion, it was agreed, that William should enioie the principate of Taranto, with the Erledome of Leccio, yeldyng therefore due obedience to the emperour, who was sworen to obserue this couenaunt. But contrary to his promyse the emperour assoone as he had the mo∣ther and sonne in his handes, sent theim bothe into Al∣maine, and made William to be gelded, to the entente there should folow no more issue of that bloudde. And so ended that noble house of the Normaines miserablie,End of the house of Normains that about the space of .200. yeres had prospered, and at length reigned in Italy & Sicile, as you haue heard. Henrico .6 Imperato∣e.¶After Henrie the .vi. emperour of Almaine (borne of the house of Sueuia) had thus extinguisshed the domi∣nion and power of the Normaine bloudde in Italie, he
obteined the realme of Naples and Sicile, and reigned ouer them well neere .iiii. yeres, and died.119 Leauyng the realme by testament vnto his sonne Federike, whom his wife Constance bare after she was .50. yeres olde: whi∣che being but a baabe, he committed to the protection of his mother Constance, of Innocent the .iii. than bishop of Rome, and of his brother Phillip Duke of Sueuia. ¶So Federike not fully .iii. yeres olde was crowned kyng in Palermo:Federike▪ shortly after whose Coronacion his mother Constance died, commendyng the tuicion of the astate wholly to the bishop of Rome, that accordyngly mainteigned the same to his power: notwithstandyng that duryng the noeage of Federike, diuers businesses hapned in the realme. Fyrst by Marquarde an Almain, made Marques of Ancona: by Henry the .vi. after by Gualtiero di Brenna a Frencheman, who in the right of his wyfe, one of the systers of the last kyng William the Normain, pretended title to the realme. Finally by Ottho Duke of Saxonie, whiche after he had obtei∣ned the imperiall crowne at Rome, disposed hym selfe wholly to conquere Naples and Sicile: till the forena∣med Innocent by waie of excommunicacion had made so many of his nobles and prelates to forsake hym, that he was faine to leaue his enterprise. At last Federike beyng grewen sufficiently in yeres, was called into Al∣maine, and there elected emperour after the deathe of Ottho, so that returnyng to Rome, he was triumphant∣ly crowned by Honorius the .iii. than bishop:122▪ in recom∣pence wherof he gaue the Erledome of Fondi, with cer∣taine other landes to the churche: but shortly after Ho∣norius excommunicated Federike, the cause why I find
not: so that Federike to annoy the landes of the church, gathered together a noumbre of disperpled Sarasines, placyng theim in Luceria: and did so muche hurte, that neither Honorius, nor yet Gregorie the .ix. that was bishop after hym .xiiii. yeres, had in maner any good daies rest. Some holde opinion, that Gregorie died onely for sorow. Neuerthelesse this Federike was a woorthy man. He had .iii. wyfes, the fyrst named Constance, syster to the kyng of Castile, by whom he had a sonne named Henry, that afterwardes for rebellyng a∣gainst his father died in prison: the seconde was Iolante, daughter of Iohn di Brenna,the kynges of Naples entitled kynges of Ierusalem kyng of Ierusalem, with whose maryage the tytle of the realme of Ierusalem was geuen him, whiche title all the Napolitane kynges haue kepte euer sens, as the emperour doth at this daie: the thyrde was Isabell, daughter to the kynge of Eng∣lande. This Federike went into the holy lande with a puissaunt armie, and there behaued hym selfe so vali∣auntly, that the Soldane sued to hym for truce, and vpon agrement deliuered to him the citee of Ierusalem, with the whole realme thereunto belongyng (a fewe small fortresses onely excepted) insomuche, that in the myddest of Lent,1229. he was in Ierusalem crowned, and be∣fore his retourne reedified the citee of Ioppa, now cal∣led Zaffo. And after a notable victorie had againste the Milanese, with other their confederates of Lum∣bardie, he entred into Cremona in maner of a triumphe, leadyng after hym a noumbre of prisoners with theyr Carroccio, on the whiche Piero Tiepolo Potestate of Myllaine was hanged by one of the armes with an hal∣ter about his necke.Carroccio. This Carroccio was a carte dra∣wen
by certeine oxen, trimmed about with greeces or steppes in maner of a kyngly seate, and decked with or∣namentes of tapestrie and silkes of the beste sorte, with the standardes and baners of all the confederate citees and nobles. Unto whiche as to the principall place of iudgement or of audience all men vsed to resort. And whan so euer the Carroccio, in any battaile was loste, than was the fielde wonne, for about it was alwaies the strength of the battaile. ¶Of this battaile and triumph one wrote these wordes, Hae occisis non sufficiunt sepulturae, nec Cremonae pala∣tia multitudinem non capiunt captiuorum, whiche is as much to saie, To theim that are slaine sepultures suf∣fise not, nor the palaices of Cremona are not able to re∣ceiue the multitude of prisoners. ¶Than Gregorie lette crie the Croisie against him, and so muche prouoked hym, that all the priestes he toke, he caused their shauen crownes to be cutte a crosse, with a number of other despites. And beyng at siege before the citee of Faenza (whiche he toke at last by compositi∣on) wantyng money to paie his souldiours,eather oygned for money▪ he coygned leather, and valewed it, whiche for the tyme serued as well as siluer or golde. Afterwardes beyng returned into the realme, he receiued the lether and gaue the va∣lewe in golde for it again. ¶Entio kyng of Sardegna, and sonne of this emperour Federike, by his fathers commaundement, fought with the Genowaies by sea, and ouercame .40. saile of theim, in whiche .iii. of the bishop of Romes legates, with a numbre of other prelates (goyng to the counsayle at Rome made against Federike) were taken prisoners.
And Entio writing to his father, to know what he should doe with theim, was aunswered thus in two verses. Omnes praelati papmandante vocati, Et tres legati Veniant huc vs{que} ligati. Whiche is as muche to saie, Sende me those prelates called by the pope, With their .iii. legates bounde in a rope. ¶Finally Gregory the .ix. (as I sayd before) seyng he coulde by no meane preuaile against Federike, sickened for sorowe and died. ¶Than succeded Innocent the .iiii. who before beyng a Cardinall, was faste friende to the emperour. But assoone as he was bishop he became his mortall enemy: as Federike him selfe saied, whan the newes of his ele∣ction was brought hym: nowe of a good friende shall I haue an ennemie. For in dede Innocent all his daies ceased not to woorke against Federike all the mischiefe he coulde imagine. He fledde into Fraunce: and cal∣led a generall counsaile in Lyons, where Federike was double accursed: but he esteemed it not, answearyng al∣waies, that as longe as the bishop went about tempo∣rall persecucion, he would defend him selfe temporally. ¶Finally after many notable battailes and victories, he finisshed his life in Fiorentino,1250▪ a little towne of Pu∣glia, leauyng generall heyre of the realme of Naples, his sonne Conrado, borne of his seconde wyfe Iolante, who by election of the princes of Germanie, succeded his father in the empyre. One other laufull childe he had named Henry borne of Isabell his .iii. wyfe, to whom he assigned the ilande of Sicile from the Faro di Messina forewardes. Than of bastardes he had
Entio beforenamed, kynge of Sardegna, Manfredo prince of Taranto, and Federike Prince of Antioche, with diuers others not so notable. ¶As soone as Conrade beyng in Almaine,Conrade. heard of his fathers deathe, he came with a great armie, fyrste into Lumbardie, where he recouered many citees that newly had rebelled: and after passed into the realme, reducyng also vnto his obedience those townes that before his co∣myng were in a rumour, of whiche some he destroied and put to sacke, as Capua and Aquino, and so finally besie∣ged Naples, whiche at length he toke by famine: ouer∣throwing the walles and principall houses therof, with banisshement of diuers of the nobles. Thus whan he had gotte Naples, the whole realme was clerely his owne: so after he gaue him selfe altogether to huntyng and hakyng with other lyke pastymes. And beyng so in peace, his mother Isabell sent his brother Henry, than tendre of yeres, to dooe reuerence vnto him, whom Conrade caused secretely to be murdered by the waie. A childe in witte and beautie very towarde.Crueltee▪ But the crueltee was not longe vnpunished. For Conrade him selfe, by procurement of his bastarde brother Manfre∣do (as it was saied) was poysoned within .v. mone∣thes after. ¶Now it is to be vnderstanded, that Henry the eldest sonne of themperour Federike,Corradino neri heire vnto Conrade. who (as I saied before) died in prison, had a laufull sonne named Corradino, to whom after the death of Conrade all the dominion of Federike descended. But Innocent the .iiii. yet liuyng, and cōsidering Corradino being but a child in Almaine, made an armie, and withall speede wente to Naples,
where he was receiued, and (as it was thought) had in short space obteined the realme,1254▪ had he not died imme∣diately. Manfredo¶By reason of whose death, Manfredo by title of tu∣tour of the younge Corradino (yet still in Germanie) sodeynely assaulted and discoumfited the bishops army, and within very short space brought the whole realme to obedience, ere the ryght tutours of Corradino in Al∣maine, knew of this victorie. ¶Than craftily he hyred certaine Almaines to feigne, that thei came streight out of their countrei with newes of Corradines death: wherfore Manfredo with all his, clothed in blacke seemed greatly to lamente the thyng, insomuch that he caused the funeralles honorably to be executed. ¶Not longe after appered him selfe in kyngelie habite, and was saluted and called kyng. Wherwith Alex∣ander the .iiii. than bishop of Rome was sore offended, excommunicated Manfredo, and sente an armie againste him, whiche was discomfited. For Manfredo gathe∣ring into his handes the treasures of his predecessours, waged so many Sarasynes, and banisshed men of the Florentines and Lumbardes, that he was alwaies to stronge for the bishop. ¶After Alexander succeded Urbane the .iiii. who to ouercome Manfredo lette crie a Croysie, vnder colour to expulse the Sarasines out of Italie and Sicile. But the armie of that Croysie was not sufficient to fur∣nish the enterprise. So that Urbane of newe began to deuise a better waie, callyng Charles Duke of Angio and erle of Prouance, brother vnto Lewys the .x. French
kynge vnto Rome, where firste he made him Senatour, and after crowned hym kynge of Sicile and of Ierusa∣lem, vpon condicion, that he shoulde paie yerelie to the churche .48000. duckates. Pursuyng the title, Charles with his frenche armie inuaded the realme, and at laste in plaine battaill fought with Manfredo besides Bene∣uent, where Manfredo was slaine,1265. and his power dis∣comfited, so that Charles findyng after in maner no re∣sistence, gatte the dominion ouer the whole realme,Ende of the house of Sueuia in the do∣minion of Naples. Carlo Du∣ca d' An∣gio. and at lengthe toke the wife and sonne of Manfredo pryso∣ners, whiche sonne bad his eies put out, and after died miserablie in prison in the castell De Louo. ¶Than went Charles royally to Naples, where he founde an infinite treasure that Manfredo had gathe∣red, the thirde part wherof he destributed amongest his souldiours: and waxed so great, that Clemente the .iiii. who succeded Urbane, made him vicare of the empire in Italie: so that at his pleasure he rode about to Utterbo and into Tuscane vntill the comyng of Corradino be∣forenamed, righte heire by title of the house of Sueuia vnto the crowne of Naples, who hauyng certaine intel∣ligence in Italie, came with a mightie power out of Al∣maine to recouer his enheritaunce. But Charles ouer∣came him more by policie than strength in the plaine of Palenta.1268. ¶And albeit Corradino and his cousen the Duke of Austriche veray yonge men,Corradino beheaded▪ fledde in the discomfiture of the battail, and did disguise them selfes in vile apparal, trustyng to escape: yet their yll fortune at last disco∣uered them, so that they were taken, brought to Naples, and there after a yeres imprisonment (against all law of
armes or reason) openly beheaded: some saie, through counsaille of the bishop of Rome. For whan Charles had asked counsaile of the bishop, what he shoulde doe with Corradino, he aunswered these wordes, Vita Cor∣radini mors Caroli, mors Corradini uia Caroli. ¶But surely Peter, than kynge of Aragone, iustly re∣proued this crueltee in a letter written to Charles with these wordes,Crueltee. Tu Nerone Neronior, et Sarracenis cru∣delior, that is to saie, thou arte more Nero than Nero him selfe, and more crewell than the Sarasines. For in dede Charles wente into the holy lande with his bro∣ther Lewys the Frenche kynge, and there beyng taken prisoners of the Sarasines, were courteisly entreated and sette to theyr raunsome. Whiche thyng gentil∣nesse and reason wolde he shoulde haue vsed towardes Corradino. ¶But see what folowed. The frenche officers and souldiours in Sicile, behaued them selfe to proudly with a certaine kynde of tyrannie, as well against women as men, that the Sicilians conspyred against them, through the instigacion of one Iohn di Procida, sometyme phi∣sicion to the kyng Manfredo, who after he had obteined promyse of maintenaunce by kynge Peter of Aragone, wrought this conspiracie the space of .xviii. monethes (a wonder it coulde so longe be kept secrete) and so well it came to passe, that at the daie appoincted, with the fyrst ringyng of a bell to euensonge, the Sicilians be∣yng armed, slew all the frenchemen, where so euer thei founde them,Rebellion in Sicile. Slaughter of French∣men. they left not in all Sicile one frencheman on liue, nor one woman that was knowen to be with childe of a frencheman. Wherof yet vnto this daie, the
Sicilians euensonge, is vsed as a prouerbe in Italie. ¶And than by accorde came the kynge of Aragone and receiued Sicile vnto his dominion,Peter kynge of Aragone. the rather because he had a certaine title thervnto, as in the right of his wyfe Constance, daughter to the late kyng Manfredo. Un∣to whom also the bishop of Rome graunted his consent, and in deede inuested hym kyng therof by his ecclesiasti∣call power. ¶Many thynges happened betwene kyng Charles and kyng Peter, & amongest other a defiance to feight hand to hand with the place appoincted at Burdeaux, before our prince Edwarde, than ruler of Gascoygne: where bothe kynges kepte theyr daie: but nother mette, nor fought. And ere euer kynge Charles retourned, Ro∣ger di Loria, admyrall to kyng Peter, had foughten by sea with Charles prince of Salrn, onely sonne of king Charles, before Naples, and taken hym prisoner,Charles sonne take prisoner. with a numbre of the Neapolitane barons and gentilmen, that were all sent (except Charles with .ix. of the chiefest) into Sicile,Crueltee. and there for a reuengement of Corradinos death .200. of those nobles and gentilmen were behea∣ded on a daie. ¶Finally kyng Charles vpon his reiourne, made exce∣dyng great preparacion to inuade Sicile, but er he could bringe it to passe, he died for anger and melancolie,1274. after he had reigned .xix. yeres. ¶And for as muche as some holde opinion, that this Charles was the fyrst Neapolitane kyng,Title of the kyng∣dome of Ierusalem 1276. that obteined the title of kynge of Ierusalem, it is necessarie to de∣clare, by what meane. ¶The ladie Marie, doughter of the prince of Antioche,
resigned into the handes of this kynge Charles all hir tytle to the realme of Ierusalem, whervpon be caused him selfe to be crowned kynge of Ierusalem, and with helpe of the Uenetians, sente Roger Di San Seuerino to be gouernour, to receiue feaultee and homage of the christen barons there. Thus and not by the interest of Federike, the kynges of Naples vsed the title of Ieru∣salem: though I fynde not who was Maries father, by name, nor yet by what reason that realme shoulde ap∣perteine to hir. ¶Whan kynge Charles was deade, his onely soonne and heire,Carlo 2. Charles prince of Salerne remained prisoner in Sicile, vnder the kepyng of quene Constance, wife to kyng Peter of Aragone: and was by consente of the ba∣rons condemned to die, as it were for a full reuengement of Corradinos death: but the noble hert of Constance, woulde not suffre it: Excusyng the mattier, that before she knew hir housbandes mynde, she would not attempt so great a thyng. Wherefore she sent hym into Ara∣gone,Prince Edwarde of Eng∣lande. where he continued prisoner till kyng Peter died: and than by procurement of prince Edwarde, lorde of Gascoygne, he was deliuered and restored to his realme of Naples. Who was raunsomed at .30000. markes: and for perfourmance of couenauntes .iii. of his sonnes, and .100. gentilmen laie in hostage. ¶Here is to be noted, that within the space of one yere died .iii. kynges and a bishop of Rome, that is to wee, Phillip kyng of Fraunce, Charles kyng of Naples, Pe∣ter kyng of Aragon, and Martine the .4. bishop of Rome. ¶After Peter succeded in the realme of Aragon his el∣dest sonne Aufus, in Sicile his sonne Iames, that helde
in prison the forenamed Charles the secounde. ¶Finallie Aufus the elder brother beyng dead, Iames, to haue the kyngdome of Aragon in peace (sore vexed at that time by the Frenche kyng) fell at composicion with Charles, to renounce Sicile vnto hym, and so did. But Federike yonger brother to Iames,Federike kyng of Sicile. assoone as he heard therof, gotte a certain power, went into Sicile, and gatte it to hym selfe: by reason wherof betwene Charles and Federike was continuall warre manie yeres, till at last Charles to haue Calabria in peace (the most parte wher∣of Federike had gotten by force) consented, that Fede∣rike duryng his life, shoulde quetlie enioy Sicile. ¶So Charles bringing all his thinges to a quiet,1309. reig∣ned .24. yeres, and died, leauyng issue by his wife (Mary doughter of kyng Stephen of Hungarie) ix. sonnes and v. doughters. The eldeste named Charles Martell, afterwardes kynge of Hungarie by the mothers title, Lewis the secounde sonne bishop of Tolouse in Spaine, Robert the thirde sonne kynge of Naples. As for the reste, though they were princes, Quenes and princesses, yet I passe theim ouer, and will onely speake of Lewys Duke of Durazzo, because Charles Da Durazzo (who was next kyng after the firste quene Iohan) descended of him. ¶At the death of Charles,Robert. Robert his .iii. sonne beyng in Auignion, was called from thens to the dominion of Naples, and confirmed kyng by Clemente the .v. than bishop of Rome, howebeit not longe after Caronumber∣to kynge of Hungarie, and sonne of his elder brother Charles, pretended title thervnto: but after longe deba∣tyng therof, the lawiers finallie determined, that Ro∣bert
shoulde continue, and Caronumberto shoulde con∣tente hym with the realme of Hungarie. And though Robert was muche troubled by the comyng of the em∣perour Henry the .vii. into Italie, yet (after the empe∣rour was poisoned by a blacke frier, in ministryng hym the sacrament of communion at Bonconuento besides Siena, by order (as thei saie) of the Romish legate, king Robert prospered so well in Italie (by reason he was taken as heade of the Guelfi) that he subdued Genoa: and the Florentines with their whole astate submitted them selfes vnto him, and accepted his sonne Carlo sen∣za terra to be their lorde. Whiche Charles not longe after his establishment in that dominion, retourned to Naples and died. ¶Finally Robert hym selfe sickened and died, without heyres males.1342. And so the inheritance remained in the iii. daughters of his forenamed sonne Charles. Un∣to the eldest named Iohan, he by his testament lefte the realme, vpon condicion, that she shoulde marie with his nephew Andrew, younger son of the abouenamed Caro∣numberto. In whose tyme liued Petrarcha and Boc∣chacio,Petrarcha Bocchaci{us} the one for verse, and the other for prose, fa∣mouse in theyr Italian tongue: and for theyr vertues muche cherisshed of this kynge Robert. ¶Accordyng to the testament of kyng Robert, his ne∣phiew Andrew came out of Hungarie,Giouanna prima. Quene Iohans. Husbande strangled. and maried Que∣ne Iohan, with whom he reigned scarcely .iii. yeeres: but that she caused hym to bee hanged out at hir cham∣bre wyndow, because (as the same wente) he was not cockie enough to satisfie hir appetite. ¶Than maried she Lewys prince of Taranto, an excel∣lent
beautifull man. But Lewys kyng of Hungarie, elder brother to Andrew, to reuenge his brothers deathe, came with a puissaunt armie into the realme, insomuch that the Queene and hir husband bothe fledde to Auig∣nion in Prouance, leauyng Charles da Durazzo, sonne of Lewys da Durazzo beforenamed, theyr lieuetenant to defende: but the Hungarien so muche prospered, that in short space he gatte the whole realme, and toke this Charles da Durazzo, with his son Charles prisoners. The father was beheaded, as giltie of the death of An∣drew, being of secrete faction in armes with the Quene: the sonne was ledde prisoner into Hungarie. Finally kynge Lewys, after he had been .iii. monethes in the realme, leauyng a stronge garrison of Hungariens at Naples, retourned into his countrey. ¶Than Clement the .v. bishoppe of Rome entreated a peace betweene kyng Lewys and the Queene, in suche wyse, that Iohan retourned into hir state, with coue∣naunt, that hir housband shoulde in no wyse beare the title of kyng. But what auailed that: for she was no sooner in possession of the realme againe, but she by fa∣uour of Clement, caused hir husband to be crowned king in Naples, and by Clement{is} procurement,135. gotte the con∣sent of the kynge of Hungarie therunto. For the whi∣che she gaue to the bishop the citee of Auignion, that the churche euer sens hath kepte. But Lewys couetyng to satisfie hir flesshely appetite, fell in a consumpcion, and died, within .iii. yeres after. ¶Than she marid Iames of Taracone, a young gen∣tilman borne in Maiorica, than reputed the goodliest fe∣low in the worlde: But to hym she graunted not the ti∣tle
of kynge. Within fewe yeres he died: some saie by naturall infyrmitee: other saie, she caused his head to be stricken of, for companiyng with an other woman. ¶After she maried Ottho, Duke of Brainswich in Sax∣onie▪ who than at that time serued in the warres of Ita∣ly, reteigned with the bishop of Rome. ¶Finally, Queene Iohan, who fauoured not Urbane the .vi. elected bishop, immediately procured certain Car∣dinalles to electe one of the Frenche faction: so they elected Clement the .vii. by reason wherof grew a great schisme in the churche. For Italy, Hungarie and Al∣maine fauored Urbane: Fraunce & Spaine fauored Cle∣mnie. And Urbane to be reuenged on the quene, made an armie, and did so muche, that he constreigned bothe Clement and the quene, to flee from Naples to Auigni∣on: where the quene consideryng she had no chylde, ad∣opted Lewys Luke of Angio secounde sonne to kynge Iohn of Fraunce to be hir heire of the realmes of Na∣ples and Sicile,itle of the se∣conde lyne of the house of Angio. and therof made sufficiente writyng: whervpon the secounde line of the house of Angio haue euer sens mainteigned their tytle that they haue to the realme. ¶Shortly after the quene retourned to Naples. But Urbane this meane while, had inuested Charles da Du∣razzo (who as you haue herde before, was ledde priso∣ner into Hungarie) kynge of Naples, and wroughte so well, that Charles by helpe of the kynge of Hungarie (that than fauored him muche) broughte a great armie with him, and inconclusion toke Naples and the quene with hir husbande prisoners.11. ¶The husbande Ottho was sette at libertee vpon con∣dicion
he shoulde departe out of the realme. But the quene by sentence of the kyng of Hungary,Quene Iohan hanged. was hanged at the same wyndowe, where she caused hir firste hus∣bande to be hanged. Hir sister Marie (of hir coun∣saill in that mattier) was beheaded. ¶This Marie was she,Marie. of whom Boccace was ena∣moured, and for whose sake he wrote the two bokes, F∣ammea and Filocolo. And amongest other verses writen of this quene Iohan, I finde .ii. veraie notable. Regna regunt vuluae, gens tota clamat simul, oh, veh, Interitus regni est à muliere regi, Whiche in english are of this effect, Helas crien the people all, A womans shappe weareth the crowne, Womans rulyng the wealth turne shall, Of realmes, quite vpside downe. ¶Quene Iohan beyng thus dyspatched,Carlo .3. Charles re∣meigned peasablie in possession of the realme, till Lewis Duke of Angio beforenamed (heire adopted) came with a gret armie out of Fraunce to recouer the realme as his enheritaunce: and by the helpe of certaine princes of Italy, passed through Lumbardy, La Romagnia, and La Marca, and so entred into Puglia, where many townes yelded vnto hym: continuyng so a yere and more, and to strengthe his armie, Mounser de Couci was sent after him with .12000. hrsemen from the Frenche kyng. But he not folowyng the Duke, passed through Tuscane, and besiegeyng the Castell of Arezzo taried so longe, that er ur he coulde come to the succours, the Coe Alberico, genrall of the kynges armie, had discomfited the frenche armie, and slayne the Duke in the fielde.
For whose death Charles withall his courte, mourned in blacke a moneth, Mounser de Couci hearyng of the Dukes death, solde the towne of Arezzo to the Floren∣tines for .40000. duckaes, and immediately retourned into Fraunce: so Charles had the realme in peace, till Urbane the bishop, who called him vnto the realme, fell out with him, because Charles wold not cōsent to make Butillo the bishops nephew, borne of a vile stocke, prince of Capua. Upon which breache Urbane cursed him: and because he had not power to reuēge him vpon Char∣les, he tourned his wrath vpon .vii. Cardinalles that he suspected. Of whom he put .v. into sackes, and threw theim into the sea, and the other two he putte to deathe at Genoa, and dried their bodies in a furneise, cariyng theim afterwardes on moyles before hym for an exam∣ple to the reste. ¶Finallie kynge Lewys of Hungarie deceasyng with∣out heire male, the barons of the realme called kynge Charles to the dominion therof, who at laste wente thi∣ther, and was crowned in Alba, but afterwardes goyng to Buda, he was frendely called to a supper by the olde quene and hir doughter,Murder. 136. and there traitelously slaine at the table. ¶This Charles had geuen to hym to wife by Lewys kynge of Hungarie, Margarete yongest sister of quene Iohan before mencioned, on whom e begatte two chil∣dren, Ladislaus and Iohan. But assoone as the Napo∣litanes hearde of Charles death, they toke their owne libertee vpon theim, so that quene Margarete, with hir children, was faine to flee to Gaeta, where she remai∣ned in muche care and trouble .iiii. yeres, why lest the
whole realme was tourned and tossed: firste by Ottho late husbande to quene Iohan, who gatte a great parte therof, and died at Foggia, than by Lewys the secounde Duke of Angio, who folowyng his fathers title, sente certain galles to Naples to mainteigne those Napoli∣nes that toke his parte. ¶Finallie Boniface the .ix. than bishop of Rome, admit∣ted the excommunicacion made againste Charles:Ladislaus▪ 1370. and caused Ladislaus to be crowned kyng at Gaetta. And albeit the forenamed Lewys of Angio, came to Naples with an armie by sea, and was there receiued: yet Ladis∣laus by littell and littell so allured the barons to hym, that he not onely constreigned Lewys to withdraw him into Prouance, but also brougte Naples and the reste of the realme obediente to hym. Thries he attemted the gettyng of Rome, whiche the fourth tyme he obteigned,Rome gotten .1408. insomuche that entryng tryumphantly, the Romain no∣bilitee did him homage. But what folowed? Alexan∣der the .v. beyng made bishop of Rome in the counsaill at Pisa, receiued the forenamed Lewys of Angio that than was newely comen thither to doe hym honour. For the which he obteigned of Alexander the inuestiture of the realme of Naples, and prouision was made for recouerey of Rome and thother landes of the churche, whiche within shorte time was broughte to passe. ¶Finally Lewys conducted an army out of France, and augmentyng it with the Florentine and bishop of Romes powers, entred the realme: where in plaine battaile he so discomfited Ladislaus, that if Lewys had knowen howe to vse his victorie, he mighte haue had Ladislaus in his handes, and also the whole realme: as Ladislaus,
talkyng of this battaile was wonte to saie, the firste daie (saied Ladislaus) if thei had folowed it, thei might haue been lordes bothe of my realme and person, the se∣conde daie of the realme, but not of my person, and the thyrde daie nother of my realme nor person. For the leysure that Ladislaus had after this discomfiture, ser∣ued hym so to fortifie the passages, that Lewys not∣withstandyng his victorie, was faine to retyre to Rome, and so backe into Fraunce. By reason wherof, Ladis∣laus remainyng quiete in his astate,Rome the secounde tyme gottē by Ladis∣laus. disposed him selfe of new, to recouer Rome, and partly by intelligence, part¦ly by force did so: puttyng to sacke onely the Florenti∣nes gooddes, that he founde there. And at last sickened in Perugia, some saie of a feuer, some saie of poyson: so that he died,1414. whan he had reigned .29. yeres. And leuyng none issue of his owne body, the realme descen∣ded to his sister Iohan Da Durazzo. Giouanna .¶Thue Iohan, late Duchesse of Sterlich, atteined the realme, without impediment, by reason of .xvi. thousand horsemen that serued hir brother at his deathe, with good capitains, as Sforza da Corigniola, gli Aendo∣li, lacopuccio, and diuers others. But becase she was somewhat noted for keepyng companie with a goodly yonge man named Pandolfello, whom she made hir chā∣berlaine, hir barons persuaded hir to marie: so that she toke to husbande Iames of Nerbona in Proance, than Erle de La Marca in Italie, vppon condicion, that he shuld in no wyse take on hym the title of kyng. But he was not longe maried till by comfort of the barons: he toke the kyngly name vpon hym, and caused Pandolfel∣lo to lose his head: vsyng Sforza vraie hardly, and
all thoroughe the instigacion of Iulio Caesar da Capua who therfore by the quenes policie lost his heade. ¶And thoughe the Erle Iames (suspectyng his wyfes courage) woulde not suffre hir to goe out of the Castell where thei laie: yet at last with lowly behauiour, grow∣yng out of suspicion with hir housbande, she had liber∣tee to goe so often abroade into the towne of Naples, that finally she made a conspyracie against him, and gat hym into prison: reignyng afterwardes hir selfe alone. Than toke the Iohn Caracciolo to be hir hygh steward, whom she loued more than enough: so that by hym all thynges were gouerned. And vpon contencion betwene hym and Sforza (who was in maner as a generall a∣mongest the men of warre) the Queene defied Sforza. Muche a dooe there was, but at length Sforza was re∣consiled, and the stewarde banished. And partly tho∣rough the bishoppe of Romes intercession, the Erle Ia∣mes was deliuered out of prison, & restored to the Que∣nes fauour. But for all that, not long after the Erle Ia∣mes beganne to worke against Sforza, who (perceiuing it) founde the meane to bringe the steward home againe, and therby not onely purchased the Quenes fauour, but also brought the mattier so to passe, that the Erle Ia∣mes fledde into Fraunce,141▪ became an heremite and there died. After whose departure, by commission of the bi∣shop of Rome, Queene Iohan was crowned in Naples: but er the yere was ended, the Queene loste the bishops fauour and banished Sforza: who by the bishops pro∣curement, became capitaine vnder Lewis, the .iii. Duke of Angio, than newly entitled kynge of Naples) and reysyng an armie, camped before Naples, abydyng the
comyng of Duke Lewys: who with an other armie arri∣ued there. ¶This meane whyle, Queene Iohan (seeyng the power of hir enemy Duke Lewis,Alfonse adopted heire to Quene Iohan. to be to stronge for hir alone) practised with kyng Alfonse of Aragone, to accepte hym as hir sonne, to enherite the realme after hir: and ther∣of made sufficient writing, with deliuerey of two strong Castelles in Naples, Castell Nouo, and Castell di Lo∣uo, that in king Alfonse name were receiued as a pledge of possession. Whervpon kyng Alfonse in person, with a great armie by sea came to Naples, and thre fought with the Duke Lewys and his Capitaine Sforza. And though fortune for a tyme was fauourable to Duke Le∣wys, yet at length through practise and lacke of money, Sforza became the Queenes man: so that Lewys was fayne to leaue the enterprise, and drawe to Rome: by reason wherof the Queene with Alfonse remained in peace:Discorde till discorde fell betweene theim. The fyrst oc∣casion was because the proclamacions were made in the Quenes name, without any mencion of Alfonse: which moued the barons of Aragone to conceiue a great disho∣nour, that a kyng of suche reputacion, shoulde lie there in that astate. So muche grew this mattier, that at last kyng Alfonse toke the Quenes best beloued steward prisoner, and besieged the Queene. How be it, Sfor∣za hauyng receiued hir letters, came streight to Naples, fought with Alfonse power, had the better hand, entred into Naples, and conueighed the Queene awaie with hym: Wherfore kyng Alfonse augmented his power, and after harde feight with Sforza, recouered Naples, streignyng the realme so muche, that by counsaile of
Sforza, the Queene finally agreed with Duke Lewys, and adopted hym for hir soonne and heyre: by whose meanes Naples was recouered againe to the Queenes vse. And so .x. yeres after,1424. the Quene and Duke Le∣wys reigned in peace, and than died bothe.1434. The queene by hir testament,Ende of the house of Du∣razzo. Alfonse. lefte the realme to Raynolde Duke of Lorraine, brother to the foresaied Lewys. Thus ended the successiō of Charles of Angio first king of that hous. ¶Whether the Queenes testamente were feygned or true, it was vncerteine: For incontinently vppon hir death, the citee of Naples, ordeined amonge theim a common wealth, and made no mencion of any testament, vntill they saw plainely, that the bishop of Rome went about to bringe theim vnder hym. Than they not one∣ly publisshed Raynolde to be theyr kynge, but also sent for him, to come and receiue the possession of the realme. ¶This meane while in the warres betwene Englande and Fraunce, Raynolde hapned to be taken prisoner: so that he coulde not come to Naples. Than kynge Al∣fonse came into the realme through intelligence that he had with many of the nobles, and besiegeyng the towne of Gaerra (than defended by certaine Genowaies, sent thither by Duke Filippo Maria of Myllaine) at last fought with the Genowaies army by sea,Kyng Alphonse taken pri∣soner. in whiche con∣flicte were slaine of the kynges part, about .5000. and the kynge hym selfe, with his .ii. brethren, the maister of sainct Iames in Galice, dyuers of the greatest prin∣ces and barons of Spaine, and of knyghtes to the num∣bre of .200. taken prisoners: and all brought to the fore∣named Duke Phillip to Myllaine: who after very gen∣till enterteinment, deliuered theim without raunsome.
So Alfonse beyng restored to libertee, & wayng strong through the amitee of the Duke of Myllaine, disposed hym selfe to recouer the realme, and came thither im∣mediately with his power, obteined Gaietta, and wente to Capua, whiche had been alwaies kept for him: how be it, during the time of his imprisonment, the Neapoli∣tanes seeyng they coulde not haue Raynolde, fette his wyfe Isabell Duchesse of Angio vnto Naples, and did theyr best by waie of assaulte to winne Capua. But now that kyng Alfonse was reiourned, the parte of An∣gio so muche declined, that Isabell was faine to resort for helpe to Eugenio than bishop of Rome, who sent the Patriarke Vitellesco to Naples. ¶This Patriarke was a stoute man, meter for the fielde than for the churche.Patriarke Uitelesco. For firste he discomfited the armie of the prince of Taranto, and toke the prince him selfe prisoner, and longe tyme valiauntely bare him selfe in the warres againste Alphonse, one while with force, an other while with policie, so that beyng fallen with his armie in the daunger of the kyng (through be∣settyng of the streictes and lacke of vittaile) he handled him selfe so humbly, that the kyng (embracyng his faire offers) graunted hym truce, and vnder coloure of the same truce, he (beeyng armed, and the kynge vnarmed) came to Villa Giuliana, and so narowly besette it, that with muche adoe the kynge escaped his handes. Lea∣uyng all his baggage and cariage for a praie to the Pa∣triarke. Finally Raynolde beforenamed, beyng putte to his raunsome,Rainoldes comyng to Naples. came with .xii. Genowaie galleys to Naples, where with kyngely honours he was tryum∣phantlye receiued: and so muche encreaced his power,
that it was doubted, whether of the two partes were the better. Raynolde defied Alfonse bodie to bodie, whiche Alfonse refused not. Howbeit at the daie and place of battaill appointed, Raynolde appeared not. And albeit that Raynolde for a time prospered and gatte into his handes the castell Nouo, and castell Di Loo, that kynge Alfonse had alwaies kept sens he receiued theim at quene Iohans handes, till that tyme, yet at last (after the death of Iacomo Caldora, one of the princi∣pallest of the Angioyne parte) Alfonses power so muche encreased, what by battaile, and change of diuers of the barons affections (who leauyng the Angioyne parte be∣came Aragonese) that he recouered Naples and all the whole realme: entryng into the citee in maner of tri∣umphe: where for a perpetuall memorie of his victory, the Napolitanes before the castell gate, erected a nota∣ble faire arche of marble. ¶Thus Alfonse, obteignyng the quiet possession of the realme▪ vsed newe meanes of amitee with Eugenio than bishop of Rome: and did so muche, that Eugenio confir∣med him in the astate, and inuested his bastarde sonne Ferdinando successour to the crowne. For whiche in∣uestiture, kynge Alfonse vpon couenaunte inuaded the countrey De La Marca, and takyg it by force from Francesco Sforza (afterwardes Duke of Myllayne) restored it to the churche. And than in recompence of the great courtesie receiued of Phillip Duke of Mil∣laine, he made warre in his fauour againste the Floren∣tines, and atchieued manie worthie enterprises, beyng in maner the onelie staie of Duke Phillip in his later daies: so that the Duke by his testament made hym his
heire of the astate of Myllaine, but he enioyed it not, as in the history of Myllaine appereth. ¶Finallie, after a generall leage made in Naples be∣twene all the astates of Italie, excepte the Genowaies, Alfonse made an armie, and besieged Genoa for breache of certaine articles concluded longe before at the making of a peace betwene theim: whiche the Genowaies were bounde to geue to the kynge yerely in maner of a tribute a bason of golde, and the cause of their witholdyng, was for that the kynge woulde neuer receyue it otherwyse than sittyng in his maiestee, as thoughe he triumphed o∣uer theim. ¶The prouision made for the continuance of that siege was so great, that by common opinion the citee muste nedes haue ben his,145. had he not died, the .66. yere of his age, and the .22. yere of his reigne in Naples. Leauyng for successours in the realme of Aragone and Sicile his brother Iohn, and in the realme of Naples his sonne the forenamed Fernando. ¶Of this kynge Alfonse ae written manie great prai∣ses, for his valiauntnesse his temperaunce his learnyng, his liberalitee and other like vertues. ¶Ferdinando, bastarde sonne to kynge Alphonse, succe∣ded his father,Ferdinan∣do. in the beginning of whose reigne Calisto, than bishop of Rome, preendyng the title of the realme to be fallen to the churche for lacke of laufull heires, excommunicated Fernando: and made great preparacion to inuade: but deathe preuented hym. So that Fer∣nando (warned therby) vsed suche meanes of frendship with Pio his nexte successour, that he was not onelie confirmed in the astate, but also crowned by certaine
Cardinalles sente to Naples for the purpose. ¶Newe assoone as the newes of Alphonse deathe was knowen, Duke Iohn, sonne of the forenamed Raynolde (in hope of mutacion in the realme) made an armie by sea, with helpe of the Genowaies, and landyng within the territorie of the Duke of Sessa, oueranne diuers pro∣uinces, and gotte daielie townes and friendes, so that Fernando was like to be put to the worse, had not the bi∣shop of Rome and the Duke of Millaine taken his parte: by whose helpe Duke Iohn at length was by force con∣streigned to leaue his enterprise, and most parte of those barons that toke his parte came and submitted theim selfes vnto Ferdinando, who graciously pardoned them, and restored theim to their astates. ¶Than died Pio, and Paule the secounde succeded, who oftentimes troubled the realme. ¶After the death of kyng Iohn of Cyprus, Ferdinando coueityng to conquere that realme, was reisted by the Uenetians: betwene whom happened crewell warre, so that the Uenetians toke truce with the Turke,The Turke in Italie. and (as the fame wente) were occasyon that he assaulted and toke Otronto in Puglia by force: whiche shoulde haue caused greater mischiefe in Italie, had not the Turke (than Mahomet the .ii) died. ¶Immediately vpon whose deathe kynge Ferdinando sente his eldest sonne Alfonse Duke of Calabria, to con∣quere Otronto, whiche after longe siege and sore feight, was (for lacke of succours) recouered. ¶Next Paule the secounde, succeded Sixte the .iiii. bi∣shop of Rome, and after hym Innocence the .iiii. who both wonderfull inconstantly one while were friendes,
and an other while foes to the kynge. ¶Finallie this Ferdinando was noted to be veray coue∣touse.Couetous∣nesse .1489. For, callyng a counsaile of his barons in the ci∣tee of Chieti, he wolde haue encreased his subsidies and taxes. And because diuers of his nobles dissuaded him from it, he put some of them to death, & some he impriso∣ned: from some he toke their goodes, and some willyng∣ly rebelled against hym: in which trauaile and tirannie he continued till he died,1494. leauyng issue males .ii. sonnes, Alphons and Federike. Alfonse .2.¶After the deathe of Ferdinando, his sonne Alphonse, than Duke of Calabria, with consente of all the barons and nobles, was admitted kynge, and sendyng to Rome to Alexander than bishop, for his confirmacion, the Car∣dinall Borgia, with a numbre of prelates was sente to Naples, where by auctoritee of the Romish bulles, he inuested and crowned the kyng. ¶Than the kyng fell at variance with Lodouico Sfor∣za, Duke of Myllaine, because he vsurped the astate that of right apperteined to his nephiewe Giangaleaz∣zo, sonne in law to kyng Alfonse, so that Lodouico (mi∣strustyng the kynges power, that in deede was bent a∣gainst hym) founde the meane to bringe Charles the viii. Frenche kynge, into Italie, who pretendyng to goe against the Turk{is}, founde no resistence: by reason wher∣of he not onely ouerronne Tuscane and toke thastate of Rome from the bishoppe, but also conquered the whole realme of Naples: although he enioyed it not long: For all the princes of Italie immediately so colleged theim selfes against hym: that he was faine to retyre with spede, and was neuerthelesse ouertaken and fought
with besides Parma, where he lost the greatest parte of his ctages, and dyuers of his nobilitee were taken prisoners. ¶Now assoone as kyng Alfonse heard, that the frenche kynge was arriued in Lumbardy, consideryng him selfe to be hated of his barons, and his son Ferrandino con∣trariwise welbeloued, incontinently renounced the astate vnto his soonne, toke his treasure with hym, and say∣led into Sicile, where for the tyme of his shorte life (that dured scarce one yere) he disposed hym selfe to studie, solitarinesse, and religion. ¶Than Ferrandino was embraced of all men,Ferrandi∣no. in suche wyse that he was thought hable to resist the Frenche kyng. Yet notwithstandyng that the streictes and pas∣sages were kept, and the Neapolitanes armie great in the fielde, the frenche men preuailed not onely in the con∣quest of the realme,Morb Gallicus. but also in the gettyng of that dis∣ease, that for euer shall be a memorie vnto theyr name. ¶In effect kyng Ferrandino, seeyng his owne debilitee in respecte of Charles force, determined with pacience to ouercome his aduerse fortune: and so with .vii. gal∣leis departed out of the realme, and went into the ile of Procida, where he remained till he heard of the Frenche kynges departure, and than beyng reuoked by the Nea∣politanes, not onely Naples, but also diuers other ci∣tees theraboutes expulsed the Frenchemen,1496. and raysed theyr owne kynges standardes. ¶Upon this, Ferrandino sent for succours to the Uene∣cians, offeryng theim Brundusio, and .iii. other hauen townes in Puglia, to helpe hym to expell the Frenche∣men out of the realme. Whiche offer was accepted,
and Frauncesco Gonzaga, Marques of Mantua, with an armie sent thither: who together with the Neapoli∣tane power, within the space of one yere, draue the fren∣chemen cleane awaie. Not longe after recouerey of his whole astate, Ferrandino (without issue) died of the fluxe: Leauyng his vncle Federike inheritour to the realme. ¶Note here, that within the space of .xvi. monethes were .iiii▪ seueralle kynges of Naples, that is to wete, Ferdinando, Alphonso, Ferrandino, and Charles. Federike.¶Finally Federike, brother to the laste Alfonse, succe∣ded to the crowne, but er he had fully reigned .iiii. yeres, hearyng of the Frenche kynges comyng Lewys the .xii. and consideryng hym selfe destitute of money, friend∣ship, and abilitee to resist, he solde his armures and mu∣nicion for .30000. duckates to the Duke Valentino Borgia, sonne to the bishop of Rome: and with the rest of his treasure and implementes, went into France, and there yelded bothe hym selfe and his realme into the Frenche kynges handes: who receiued hym, and ap∣poinctyng hym an honourable prouision,Ende of the house of Ara∣gone in Naples. Lewys the .12. of Fraunce. kepte hym in Fraunce till he died. And thus ended the reigne of the house of Aragone in the realme of Naples. ¶And though vpon the surrendre of this Federike (whō many charge with cowardise for the vile submittyng of him selfe, without any proufe of force) the frenche king obteined the whole realme:1501. yet he died, not lōge enioiyng it, either by reason of the intollerable proude behauiour of the Frenche gouernours, or els through the inconstant nature of the Neapolitanes, Ferdinando king of Spaine (commonly called Il Re Catholico) coumforted there∣vnto
vnto by many of the barons, and specially by the cite∣sins of Naples, sent a puissaunt armie into the realme against the Frenchemen: Who within lesse than two yeres, partly by force and partly by treatie, were cleane expulsed: so that in fine, the realme rested wholly in pea∣sable possession of the Spanishe kyng. ¶Ferdinando the .v. of that name, kynge of Spaine,Kynge Ferdinan∣do of Spaigne. chasyng awaie the Frenchemen, enioyed quietely the realme of Naples vnto his death: and easily recouered of the Uenetians the foure portes in Puglia, that Fer∣randino had geuen theim. By reason that whan all the Christian princes were entred into a league at Cam∣bray against the Uenetians, thei at that time made none offer of resistence: but rather consented vnto the rende∣ryng of theim: lyke as in hope of peace they graunted vnto all the other princes what they woulde axe, Uenice onely excepted. ¶Finally Ferdinando deceasyng,Charles the .v. Emperour 1515. Charles the .v. now emperour of Almaine (sonne and heyre of Phillip Duke of Burgoyne, and of Iohan his wyfe, eldest daughter and heyre of the forenamed kyng Ferdinando) suceeded in the realme of Naples, as he did in all the other real∣mes and dominions that Ferdinando had: and hitherto enioyeth the same. ¶It is true,1528. that the Frenche kynge sente Mounser de Lautrech his generall, with a puissaunte armie to con∣quere the realme. Where betwene the parties Frenche and Spanish were done manie worthy deedes of armes, Naples it selfe was besieged by sea and lande, vntill An∣drea Doria, generall of the frenche kynges armie by sea, reuolted from the Frenche kyng to the seruice of the em∣perour.
From whiche tyme the hope of the Frenche armies prosperitee began to abate: and fortune so much to goe againste theim, that what through extreme plage, and through the hardinesse of the imperialles, that be∣gan to take courage, the Frenchemen were constreigned to reise their assige, Mounser de Lautrech, with many other of the best Frenche capitaines beyng deade, some of the plage, and some of the sworde: so that of .60000. whiche vnder the Frenche standarde came thither to the siege, escaped not fullie .2000. on liue. From whiche tyme hitherwardes the emperour hath had no notable trouble there,1547. sauyng that now of late is begonne a little striefe betwene the Vicere Don Diego di Tolledo, and the barons of the realme, for makyng of certain lawes, and some bicketing and slaughter hath hapned betwene the Spaniardes and theim, and manie gentilmen are fledde to Rome and other places for feare of punish∣mente. But because the thyng is not of suche impor∣taunce as should seeme to moue warre, I shall not nede to make further rehersall.
The descripcion of Florence. Florence, an excellent faire citee, standeth at the foote of the Ap∣penine hilles, in a little valey named Arno of the riuer Arno, that renneth through it. Comyng to it (excepted by the riuer syde) the descendyng is suche, that a man maie easily beholde euery part of the citee: without the whiche, downe alonge bothe sides of the valey are so many fayre palaices and sumptuouse houses, that for the space of .viii. or .x. myles it see∣meth in maner but one towne. ¶The citee it selfe is estemed to be .vii. myles in com∣passe,The circuit of the citee. walled with square stone in maner as harde as flynte, and of a great heighte, with a numbre of goodlie toures after the auncient buildyng, stronge enoughe to defende, but nothyng apte for artillerie to offende after the maner of these daies: For they were builded before the inuencion of gunnes. ¶Ouer the riuer within the citee are .iiii. verie fayre bridges of square stone, on the furthest downe the riuer,Bridges, hath ben a little marble image of Mars, which was sette there by an astronomer about the firste buildyng of the citee, in suche a coniunction of the celestiall bodies, that it promised prosperitee to the citee aslonge as that image should stande: thretnyng the decaie of the same, assoone as it were gone. And as I haue ben credibly enformed, within lesse than these .20. yeres, it fell, and is gone no man can tell howe. Shortelie wherupon the empe∣perours armie besieged the Florentines, and toke their
libertee from theim. Arno.¶The riuer Arno is not lightlie bigge, but ones a yere, whan the sonne hath power to dissolue the snow on the mountaines, it swelleth so, that it maie in maner be com∣pared to Thames at London, sauyng it serueth not for vessell to come from the sea: by reason of the swyfte streame. Wherfore the Florentines are faine for the most parte to fetche their merchandise that come by sea, from Pisa .40. miles of by lande. Edifices.¶Within the citee are manie goodlie temples and other edefices, amongest the whiche the cathedrall churche is an excellent faire buildyng. For the walles without are all couered with fine white and blacke marble, won∣derfullie well wrought, and ouer the queere is an whole vaulte called Cupola, facioned like the halfe of an egge, risyng betwene .iii. iles and the body of the churche: so artificially made, that almost it semeth a miracle. For it is so high, that the pomell on the toppe beyng able to conteigne .vii. persons, seemeth a verie small thyng to theim that stande by lowe. And the compasse of it by the base, is about .160. paces. Besides that the floore vnder this vaulte rounde aboute the quiere is laide with fine marble of diuers colours so faire, that it yeldeth a delite to theim that walke vpon it. ¶The steple standyng besides the churche, is likewyse of fine marble a verie faire and square tower, equall in height to the circute of the base, with diuers stories and thynges grauen in it, so artificiall and costlie, that it de∣serueth singuler praise. ¶The temple of. S. Iohn, called Il Battesimo, is lyke∣wie of fine marble bothe within and without, hauyng a
numbre of goodly pillers and .iii. rasen gates very sum∣piuouse and faire. Manie other goodlie churches there be, whiche should be to longe here to reherse. ¶The Dukes palaice, with the place before it, repre∣senteth a verie stately and aunciente maiestee.Wilde beastes, On the backeside therof, is the house, wherein the wilde beastes are kepte, as lions, tigers, beares, wolfes, apes, egles, grypes, and suche other, wherof there be not a fewe. ¶The .ii. principall houses of Strozzi and Medici seeme rather the buildynges of princes than of priuate men. And generally the citesins houses for their beautie are worthy of muche praise. Howbeit, thei may make them good cheape, because thei haue marble and stone plentie in the mountains there by, insomuche that all their stre∣tes: whiche are verie faire, large and streight, are paue with flatte stone. But amongest all other thei haue diuers goodlie hospitallles,Hospi∣talles▪ for relieue of the sicke and poore, and one verie faire, so well ordred, that it receiueth a great number of men and women, but into seuerall houses: where they are applied with good phisicke, and their beddes, their shetes, and euerie other thyng so cleane, that manie tymes righte honest men and women be not ashamed to seke their health there. For that hos∣pitall alone maie dispende yerelie aboue .20000. crow∣nes: by reason wherof they haue excellente phisicions, good poticaries, dilygente ministers, and euerie other thyng necessarie. ¶Finallie there is a verie faire and stronge casll, cal∣led Citadella, more than a mile and halfe in compasse, builded by the laste Duke Alexander, for a bridell to the Florentines, because he had than newelie taken their
liberties from theym: they beyng for the moste parte so variable and inconstant, that the other Italians haue v∣sed to call thē Bizzari, whiche signifieth wilde headed. ¶Thre myles without the citee, the Duke hath made a gardein at a little house that was his fathers. Wher∣in is a laberinth or mase of boxe full of Cypre trees, ha∣uing in the middest one the fairest cōduite of white mar∣ble, that euer I sawe: besides that it hath dyuers other conduites, and suche conueighances, that in maner euery flowre is serued with renning water: and al the chanels are of white marble so fayre, that it is in my iudgement at this presente, one of the excellentest thynges in all Europe. ¶The Florentines customes. THe common opinion is, that the Florentines are commonly great talkers, couetouse, and spare of liuyng: but they be fine and clenly. ¶In deede he that bieth at the shambles more meate than theyr maner there aloweth, is incontinently noted and spoken of. But for all the lacke that is laied to theim as a reproche, yet didde I neuer see it so scarce, that a reasonable man ought to finde faulte withall. And if men generally in other places coulde folowe it, the riche shoulde liue more healthfully: and the poore fynde more plentie. ¶I continued there a certain space at mine owne char∣ges, and laie a good while with Maister Bartholomew Panciatico, one of the notablest citesins: where I ne∣uer saw the fare so sklendre, but any honest gentilman
woulde haue been right well contented withall. And yet I dare auowe, he exeded not the ordinarie. Be∣sydes that the fine seruice, the sweetenesse of the hou∣ses, the good ordre of all thynges, and the familiar con∣uersacion of those men, were enough to feede a man: if without meate men might be fedde. I woull not de∣nie, but many of theim vse muche talke, whiche I thinke procedeth of the desyre they haue to seeme eloquent. For he is not reputed a man amonge theim, that can not plaie the Oratour in his tale, as well in gesture as in woorde.The Aca∣demie. And therfore I suppose theyr Academie was fyrst ordeined: whiche is one of the goodliest ordres that I haue sene. ¶A certaine numbre of the chiefe of theim, beyng well learned, are drawen into a companie, wherof the Duke hym selfe is one. These euerie holidaie at .iii. of the clocke at after noone, assemble in an halle appoincted, where one of them mounteth into a place called the Ha∣range, a little hygher than the rest, and in his owne mo∣ther tounge maketh an Oracion of an houre longe, of what mattier so euer he thinketh best hym selfe. This Oratour hath warnyng so to dooe by an officer a great space before his daie. For thei chose euery halfe yere a Consull, who appoincteth a sundrie man to the Ha∣range for euery holidaie. And whan the houre of as∣semblie approcheth, the moste parte of the company re∣payre to the Consull, and so bringe him honourablie to the place: where he sitteth hyghest, thoughe the Duke him selfe be present. And for my part I neuer heard re∣der in schole, nor preacher in pulpitte handle theim sel∣fes better, than I haue heard some of these in the Ha∣range.
Women.¶The Florentines wyfes are nothyng so gaie as the Uenetians. For thei loue a modestie in theyr womens apparaile: and specially if she passe the age of .xl. light∣ly she weareth but plaine blacke clothe. And thei kepe theyr maidens so streict, that in maner no stranger maie see theim. ¶The common people are verie religiouse, and for the most part full of supersticion: but thei that are reckened wysest, beleue muche with Plinie. And where they haue been muche burdeined with Sodomie in tyme past. I can not perceiue there is any suche thyng now. ¶Of the Dukes dominion and reuenew. BEsydes Florence, the Duke hath vnder his domini∣on .vi. citees, Pisa, Volterra, Pistoia, Arezzo, Cortona, and Borgo, with diuers other good tow∣nes, and the greattest part of Tuscane, and maie dis∣pende better than .500000. crownes of yerely reuenue: the greatest part wherof riseth vpon the .x. that is paied hym of all the landes within his dominion.
Of the edificacion and successe of the citee of Florence. COnferryng the discourse of diuers authours togethers, touche∣yng the Florentine histories, and fin∣dyng the effectes of theim all gathe∣red in one by Nicolas Macchiauegli, a notable learned man, and secretarie of late daies to the common wealthe there: I determi∣ned to take hym for myne onely auctour in that behalfe. ¶It is manifest, that from the auncient citee of Fieso∣le (the olde rewines wherof are yet to be seen, on the toppe of an hill two myles from Florence) the citee of Florence had hir beginnyng principally. For by reason Fiesole slode hyghe, and was painefull for mer∣chantmen to bringe theyr cariage vnto, the citesins kept their market on the side of the riuer Arno in the plaine, where Florence now standeth: and buildyng there shop∣pes for theyr wares, from shoppes thei grew to houses, and from a fewe to many, so that at lengthe it became a towne, whiche encreased muche through certaine Colo∣nies of the Romains sent thither fyrst by Sylla, and af∣ter by those three Romaines, whiche after the death of Caesar diuided the empire betwene theim. ¶And albeit, that some haue contended vpon the name, affyrmyng, that it was fyrst called Fluentia, and after corrupted Florentia: yet myne opinion agreeyng with Macchiauegli, is, that from the beginnyng it was called Florentia. Under the Romaine empyre, and about the beginnyng of themperours, it semeth to take fyrst name
and reputacion. For whan the empyre beganne to be afflicted of barbarouse nacions (as the Italians calle theim) than was Florence also destroied by Totila king of the east Gotes .250. yeres after it was reedified by Charlemaine,Florence destroied and reedi∣fied. and so continued as one of the principall citees of Italie, vnto the yere of our lorde .1215. alwaies as subiectes, fyrst to the succession of Charlemaine, af∣ter to Berengarii, & lastly to themperours of Almaine, by whiche tyme the Florentines coulde dooe nothyng woorthy of memorie, for the power of them whose sub∣iectes they were: Neuerthelesse in the yere .1010. they toke Fiesole and destroied it vtterly, either by the empe∣rours consent, orels betwene the death of the one empe∣rour and the election of the other. ¶But whan the bishoppes of Rome beganne to growe great, and the emperour littell, moste parte of the citees of Italie ganne to gouerne theim selfes with smalle regarde towardes their prince:1080. so that in the tyme of the emperour Henrie the .iii. all Italie was deuided be∣twene him and the churche. Notwithstandyng the Florentines in all those troubles kept them selfes vni∣ted togethers, and obeied the strongeste. Untill the yere .1215. But lyke as after longe health sickenesse is more perillouse, so the longer Florence forbare to folow the sectes of Italie, the more affliction they suf∣fered, whan they fell to diuision amonge theim selfes. The firste occasion wherof was. ¶Amonges their noble families were two principall, Bondelmonti, and Vberti, next them were Amidei and Donati. In the familie of Donati was a ryche wy∣dowe, that had a wonderfull faire doughter: which she
purposed to bestowe on a yonge knyght, chiefe of the fa∣milie of Bondelmonti. But he, not knowyng either the faire doughter or the wydowes purpose, was be∣trouthed to a maide of the house of Amidei. Wher∣with the wydow was wonderfully offended. And thin∣kyng with the beautie of hir doughter to breake that mariage, on a daie as the gentilman passed alone by hir doore, she called him, and hauing hir doughter with hir, saied: I reioyse at your good marige, notwithstandyng I haue a great while kepte my doughter here for you. At whose beautie the gentilman beyng astonied, and con∣sideryng hir dower shoulde be greatter than the others, without respecte to his trought geuen, or to the inconue∣niences that might folow for the breache therof, foorth∣with aunswered, that syns she had kepte hir for hym he shoulde be muche vnkynde to refure hir, and so inconti∣nentlie maried hir. Whiche iniurie the fami∣lie of Amidei, with helpe of the Vberti, determined to reuenge. So waityng their tyme on Easter daie in the mornyng at the foote of the brydge Ponte Vecchi∣o, as maister Bondelmonti was ridyng to churche, they slewe hym.Diuision. Whereupon the whole citee was deuided in two partes, the one with Bondelmonti, and the other with Vberti. And because these two fami∣milies had manie stronge houses and towers, speciallie in the countrei, thei warred togithers many yeres with diuers fortunes. And although they neuer concluded a full peace, yet manie times thei toke truce: In which astate Florence continued vntill the tyme of the empe∣rour Federike the .ii. who beyng kynge of Naples, and at variaunce with the churche of Rome, to make hym
selfe the stronger in Tuscane, toke parte with the Vber∣ti: by reason whereof the Ubertine parte preuailed, and chased cleane out of the citee the Bondelmonti. Guelfi and Ghibelli∣nes faction¶Here is to be noted, that in the cōtencion betwene the emperour and the bishop of Rome, the whole Italian nacion was so diuided in two partes, that in many hou∣ses you should haue the father against the sonne, brother against brother, and commonlie one neighbour and one house against an other. And to encrese the mischiefe, ii. brethern Dowchemen dwellyng in Pistoia (20. miles from Florence) fell out for this matter, and oftentimes openlie fought in maintenaunce of their diuision. Wherupon it folowed, that all the imperiall named theim selfes Ghibellini, after the name of Ghibell, one of those brethern, and the churche part Guelfi, after the name of Guelfe the other brother. So that the parte of Bondelmonti were Guelfi parte: and they that were with Vberti were Ghibellines. Betwene whom not onely the nobilitee of Florence, but also the moste parte of the commons were deuided. Thus by the emperours fauoure the Guelfes were chased out of Florence, and lyued in theyr fortresses and castelles in the vale of Arno, defendyng them selfes as well as they coulde against their ennemies, vntill Federike died: and than by meane of certayne of the citee that were new∣ters, both parties were reconsiled, and the Ghibellines brought home to Florence. Where (laiyng all suspi∣cion aparte) they framed theim selfes to procure a li∣bertee vnto their citee, ere the newe emperour shoulde haue power to oppresse theim.Florētines common wealthe constituted And so deuided the citee into .vi. partes, appointyng .xii. citesins (ii. vnto
euerie parte) to gouerne the same, namyng theim Anti∣ani: chaungeable euerie yere. And to eschew occasi∣on of variaunce, that might happen betwene the parties for iudgment geuyng, they chose two straunge iudges, one named capitaine of the people, and the other named Potestate, to iudge all mattiers bothe ciuile and crymi∣nall. And because there is no certaine order, where no defendour is, they ordeyned .20. standardes or ban∣des in the citee: and .76. in the countie, wherein were written all the youthe and able men to be readie in his appoincted kynde of armure whan so euer they shoulde be called, either of the capitaine, or of the Antiani. And the better to establishe the thynge, they deuised a carte drawen of two oxen. to carie their baners and ensignes, couered with white: vnto whiche, as to the maiestee of their common wealthe, or as it were to the generall of their armie, the men of warre shoulde alwaies resorte. For whan so euer thei set forth any army into the field, than was this carte or chariote drawen foorthe into the strete called Mercato Nouo, and there by the people committed to the charge of the chiefe gouernours of the armie. Besides that they had a bell called La Mar∣tinella, whiche before the settyng foorthe of anie armie shoulde rynge a monethe, to the intente their ennemies mighte prepare to defende theim selfes. This bell did thei also carie into the fielde with theim, to set their watche, and to call the souldiours together. ¶Theyr procedynges herein were so commendable and so well handled, that in short space they grew to a won∣derfull auctoritee, so that Florence became the head of all Tuscane: and had (no doubte of it) atteined suche
reputacion, that it myght haue been well compared to the notable citees of the world, if the new and often di∣uisions within theim selfes had not hyndered theyr pro∣speritee. ¶After this maner they endured .x. yeres, in whiche tyme they enforced the citesins of Pistoria, Arezzo and Siena to entre in league with theim: and in the re∣tourne of theyr campe from before Siena, thei toke Vol∣terra, and destroyed certaine other Castelles, the inha∣bitauntes wherof they caried with theim to Florence. All this was dooen throughe counsaile of the Guelfes, whiche were of greater power in Florence than the Ghi∣bellines, as well because the Ghibellines through theyr proude and ill gouernaunce had prouoked the hate of the people, whan they ruled in tyme of the emperour Fe∣derike: as also because the commons fauoured more the churche parte than the imperiall, trustyng with the helpe therof to haue theyr libertee mainteined, whiche at the emperours handes they feared to lose. ¶Wherfore the Ghibellines, seeyng theyr reputacion decaied, disposed them selfes to recouer it, thinking their occasion to be good: whan Manfredi sonne of Federike: had taken the realme of Naples vpon him, and had sore troubled the churches power. Than practised they secretly with hym, to recouer theyr libertee. But their practises were discouered to the Antiani, who inconti∣nently sent for the Vberti to appeare before them: and they not onely disobeied, but also fortified theim selfes in theyr houses, and so prouoked the furie of the people, that at laste the commons arose, and with helpe of the Guelfes chased the Ghibellines out of Florence, and cō∣streigned
theim to withdraw to Siena. From whense they sent to kynge Manfredi for succours, and through the diligence of Maister Farinara delli Vberti obteined suche ayde, that the Guelfes shortly after were discom∣fited vpon the riuer of Albia: with so great a losse, that they whiche escaped, fledde not to Florence (thynkyng it to be lost) but vnto Lucca. The generall of the kin∣ges men in this iourney was one Conte Iordano, a man in armes muche renoumed, who folowyng his victorie wene streight to Florence, and reduced it to the obedi∣ence of the kynge Manfredi, adnullyng all magistrates and lawes, with euerie other thyng that semed to serue the citees libertee: the iniury wherof bredde double ma∣lice agaynst the Ghibellines in the hertes of the com∣mons, and was occasion of theyr vndoyng, as after shall appeare. ¶The Conte Iordano setlyng Florence after his owne facion, was reuoked by the kynge to the seruice of the realme: and therfore appoincted as lieuetenaunt gene∣rall there, the Conte Guido Nouello, lorde of Casen∣tino, who immediatelie called a counsaile of Ghibelli∣nes at Empoli, and there concluded, that (to mainteine theyr parte in Tuscane) it was necessary to destroy Flo∣rence: but Maister Farinata Delli Vberti principall of the Ghibellines, onely amongest all the reste withstode this opinion, allegeyng the perilles that he had suffered were in hope to enioy his countrey, and thinkyng hym selfe no lesse hable to defende it than to gette it, as he had dooen, he professed openly to become no lesse enemy to theim that shoulde take the contrary, than he was al∣ready to the Guelfes: and so with his onely reason and
auctoritee dissuaded the rest from theyr purpose. ¶This meane while the Guelfes, whiche were fledde to Lucca, were commaunded thense by the citesins, who feared sore the thretnynges of the Conte: and so went to Bolognia, and from thense vnto Parma to helpe the Guelfes of Lumbardie against the Ghibellines there. Where after dyuers victories, they grewe to so muche wealth and reputacion, that the bishoppe of Rome toke theim as his, and gaue theim the ensigne of the churche, whiche they vse in Florence to this daie. ¶Than went the Guelfes with Charles of Angio a∣gainst Manfredi, and were partetakers of the victorie, whyche soo muche encreased theyr reputacion that the Conte, with the reste of the Ghibellines, that than ruled Florence, deuised how to gratifie the commons, to gette theyr fauour (whiche before they had vtterly lost) and therfore diuided the citee into artes, appoinctyng officers of the commons vnto euerie arte, so that in all there were .36. citesins called to rule againe, and to make new lawes as before. And where the Conte with the Ghibellines thoughte by these meanes to drawe the peoples fauour towardes theim, the contrarie immedi∣ately folowed. For whan the Conte Guido had set a taxe vpon the people, for paiement of his souldiours, they not onely refused the paiement, but also withstode his force and the Ghibellines bothe, in suche wise, that with losse of dyuers men slaine in the bickeryng, the Conte with the Ghibellines (through cowardise of the Conte) forsoke the citee, and went to Prato: and wil∣lyng to retourne, was more easily kepte foorth, than he coulde haue been expelled, in case he had fortified hym
selfe whyle he was within. Thus the people recoue∣red libertee vnto theyr citee, and (in hope to make all thynges well) reuoked aswell the Ghibellines againe as the Guelfes. But all in vaine, for the Ghibellines rested still in the auncient mortall hate of the Guelfes, for dyuers iniuries, and the people loued theim not, as ofte as they remembred theyr passed tyrannie: besydes that the Ghibellines, whan they heard of the puissaunt comyng of Corradino out of Almaigne, to winne the realme of Naples, began to deuise how to recouer theyr astate againe. Wherfore the Guelfes sent to the forena∣med Charl{is} than king of Naples for helpe to defend thē selfes, whilest Corradino shuld passe. And vpon the co∣myng of ayde from the kyng, the Ghibellines .ii. daies before fled. And so had the Guelfes libertie to make new lawes and new magistrat{is}, which thei did immediatly. Fyrst deuidyng the Ghibellines goodes in .iii. partes, one to the cōmon wealth, an other to the chiefe magistrates, and the .iii. to theim selfes, in recompence of theyr owne hurtes. And the bishop of Rome the better to main∣teine Tuscane Guelfe, made kyng Charles imperiall vi∣care of Tuscane. ¶After this Gregorie the .x. passyng through Florence towardes Fraunce, deuised with the Guelfes for recon∣siliacion of the Ghibellines, and did so muche, that cer∣taine men for the Ghibelline parte came into the citee, and after longe communicacion agreed therupon. But because the thing toke no effect, therfore Gregory excom∣municated the citee. Whiche Innocent the .v. his next successour assoyled againe. ¶Thus the Guelfes forgettyng theim selfes in theyr
prosperitee, became so proude, that they regarded ney∣ther magistrate nor people, but for euery lyght occasion woulde feyght, and many tymes kyll without abidyng any iustice: whiche moued the people to murmour, and gaue occasion to the bishop of Romes legate to practise the reuocacion of the Ghibellines vnder pretence of v∣nitee, and brought it to passe in deede: and than was there new orders of magistrates appoincted, and the ci∣tesins so vnited, that for verie werinesse of longe striefe bothe abroade and at home, the names of diuision began to decaie, so that Ghibellines and Guelfes were almost forgotten, whan there beganne a new diuision, betwene the nobilitee and the commons, in suche wyse that they armed them selfes, and had tried the mattier with the swoorde, if certaine religiouse and other indifferent men had not taken vp the mattier. ¶In effecte the pride of the nobilitee was abated, and parte of the commons will bridled, so that they agreed again, and were quiet a while. ¶There were two notable families in Florence Cerchi and Donati, betwene whome had ben an olde grudge, but no fightyng of a longe tyme. In Pistoia also two yonge gentilmen Lore and Geri at plaie fell out and foughte: so that Lore hurte Geri. The father of Lore beyng offended therwith, and thinkyng to pacifie the mattier gentillie, sent his sonne to the father of Ge∣ri, to submitte him selfe and aske forgeuenesse: But the father of Geri toke hym and cutte of his hande, saiyng, that wound{is} were healed with yron, and not with wor∣des. This mattier so grew, that the whole citee of Pistoia was deuided in two partes, the one callyng them
selfes Bianchi, that is to saie, the white, and the other Neri, that is to saie the blacke. After longe strife within them selfes being weried, the blacke bande went to Florence, and fell in fauour with the Donati: the like wherof did the white bande with the Cerchi: so that the aunciente grudge betwene those two families en∣creased, and at laste vpon a lighte occasion fell out and foughte in Florence. By reason whereof the whole citee aswell nobles as commons were deuided, and of∣tentimes armed, so that the rulers (as newters) were faine to streigne their power, and partely by force, parte∣ly by auctoritee, causyng the parties to vnarme theim selfes, they banished certaine of the chiefe, speciallie of the Neri: whiche beyng exiled, resorted to the bishoppe of Rome: and obteined of hym that Charles of Ualois, brother to the Frenche kynge (than beyng in Rome for certaine practises of the realme of Naples) shoulde be sent to Florence: by whose meane the Neri recouered the citee, and by force expulsed the Bianchi. And like as the Neri were firste by the bishops meanes restored, so also the Bianchi at the bishops intercession were re∣ceiued home, but not to rule: whiche greued theim so muche, that vpon newe contencion (their intente beyng discouered) they were vtterly expulsed. ¶Thus Charles of Ualois (atcheiuyng his purpose in Florence) departed thense, leauyng the Neri in quiete possession. But it endured not longe: for Corso Do∣nai, chiefe of that parte (thinkyng his astate very small to remeigne as a priuate man, of the common wealthe) moued businesse in the citee, in hope to haue all the rule him selfe. Wherin he preuailed not, for the commons
sente for the Lucchese to succour theym, and by theyr helpe did so ouermatche Corso and his partetakers, that thei remaigned still in their libertee: and procured a le∣gate from Rome, to stablishe an order amongeste theim. Who in stede of order (thinkyng to brynge certain pur∣poses to passe) sette theim further out than euer they were, and departyng in great anger excōmunicated the citee. ¶Thus as the Florentines were daylie at stryfe and warre within them selfes, there chanced so great a fyre, that it burned .1300. of theyr houses: so that what through the wonderfull blouddeshed, and great losse of the fire, for veray werinesse thei laied downe their wea∣pons, and though the legate had craftely gotten .xii. of the chiefe citesins to Rome, in whose absence he so com∣forted the Ghibellines and Bianchi (that than were in exile) that folowyng his aduise, they sodeinelie entred the citee. Yet the commons so resisted them, that thei were repulsed. Not longe after perceiuyng the pur∣pose of Corso prepensed against their libertee assaultes his house, put hym to flighte: and in fleyng toke and slewe hym.1308. ¶After that the Florentines lyued in quiet tyll the co∣myng of Henrie the emperour, who comyng from Rome (where he was crowned) besieged Florence on the one side, and at length departed without doyng muche hurt, the rather because the Florentines had receiued suc∣cours from Robert kyng of Naples, to whom they had submitted their citee for .v. yeres. ¶Not longe after Vguicione della Faggiola, with helpe of the Ghibellines, became lorde of Pisa and of Lucca, so
that the Florentines for dread of hym, requyred kynge Robert of Naples to sende his brother Peter to succour theim. Betwene whom and Vguicione was a battaill stricken in Vale di Nieuole, where the Florentines were discomfited, loste .2000. men, and the kynges brother slaine in the fielde. ¶And though the kynge did his beste to succour theim, yet of their naturall inconstancie, thei beganne a newe diuision amonge theim selfes, parte with and parte a∣gainst the kynge. And for lacke of other the kynges aduersaries gatte one Lando d' Agobio to be theyr ca∣pitaine, who with the multitude folowyng hym, wolde kyll and murder as he wente by the stretes suche as the people appointed: so that the citee was no lesse afflicted with bloudshedde within, than scourched without by Vguicione, that euen than ouerranne all the countrey about. ¶Net longe after Castruccio Castracani, a citesin of Lucca, gatte the dominion of Lucca and of Pisa, and be∣came so great, that he was made chief capitain of al the Ghibellines in Tuscane, so that folowyng his good for∣tune, he attempted to gette Prato, which the Florentines prepared theim selfes to defende, so makynge out an armie, and promisyng reconsilement to their banished men, Castruccio retired to Lucca: wherof folowed two inconueniences: one, the commons and rulers were de∣uided▪ for the people woulde haue pursued the ennemie, but the rulers wolde not: the other, by reason their en∣terprise toke small effecte, they refused their promyse concernyng their banished men, who therfore diuers tymes attempted by force, to haue their promise kepte.
¶Finallie makyng out a newe armie against Castruc∣cio vnder the leadyng of Raimondo da Cardona, the Florentines a little besides Alto Pastio were discomfi∣ted, and Raimondo slaine: in suche wise that the Flo∣rentines were no more able to holde vp their heades, but suffered Castruccio to ouerronne all their countrey, spoilyng and burnyng what he wolde. Wherfore the Florentines were faine to sue to king Robert of Naples for helpe: who enforced them to take his sonne Charles, Duke of Calabria, to be their lorde, and consequentelie sent the Duke of Athens, as his liuetenaunt to gouerne the citee,326. vntill the comyng of Charles. ¶And like as the coming of Charles was a stay against Castruccio: euen so it was in maner as painefull to the citesins. For within lesse than a yere, he leuied of the citee .400000. Florines, notwithstandyng he had coue∣nanted before, not to take of them aboue .200000. besi∣des that, after thei had gotten Pistoia, Castruccio laied siege therunto, so longe, that at last he gatte it from the Florentines: how be it, he immediately therupon died. and about the same tyme, the forenamed Charles, lorde of Florence died also. So that the citee was at ones deliuered bothe of the tyranne (as they call hym) and of the enemie: and therupon recoueryng theyr libertee, thei retourned to a new ordre of theyr common wealth. ¶Not longe after themperour returnyng from Rome, and passyng towardes Lumbardie .800. horsemen of his retinue taried behind him, and sodeinly toke Lucca, whiche they offred to sell to the Florentines for .20000. Florines, and beyng refused, solde it to a Genowaie for 0000. pounde, wherwith the Florentines were so of∣fended,
that they made open warre to gette it, but all in vaine, though they spent yet a great quantitee of money more than the summe that quietely they might haue had it for. ¶As for ciuile contencion within the citee hapned none from the death of Castruccio,1328. vntill the yere .1340. ¶Certaine of the chiefe of the citee, the better to main∣teine theyr owne auctoritee, called strangers to gouerne some offices, whiche apperteined to the election of the commons. Amongest all other one Iacomo Gabriel da Gobbi was made capitaine of a warde, and did dy∣uers iniuries, namely to some of the nobilitee, as to Pie∣tro Bardi, and Bardo Frescobaldi. So that they (not well supportyng the wronge, specially at a straungers hand) conspyred with dyuers other against the rulers: mindyng not onely to be reuenged, but also to reforme the astate of the whole citee. And as it hapneth moste commonly, the deferryng of the mattier was occasion, that some fearefull conspiratour disclosed it: so that the larme bell being ronge, and the people armed assem∣blyng in the markette place, the houses of Bardi and Frescobaldi were assaulted in such wise, that thei (with the moste parte of theyr friendes) forsoke the citee, and were banished: some that remained were taken and be∣headed. ¶Not longe after the Florentines and Pisani practised with Mastino della Scala for the purchase of Lucca, that than was in his possession: so that the Pisani (seing theyr bargaine ouerdeere through the offers of the Flo∣rentines) disposed theim selfes, with helpe of Visconti than lorde of Myllaine, to gette it by force, and so laied
siege to it. That notwithstandyng the Florentines went foorth with theyr bargaine, and bought it duryng the siege. Wherin the Pisani perseuered with suche force, that in despite of all the Florentines succours, at last they gatte it: so that the Florentines not onely lost theyr money, but also purchased theim selfes dishonour. ¶This meane while the Florentines, seyng theyr owne debilitee and ill fortune, procured succours of the kyng of Naples, who sent the Duke of Athenes to be theyr capitaine. But he in steede of a capitaine that should defende and preserue theyr common wealth, contrary∣wyse to get into fauour with the commons, and by dis∣pleasyng and persecutyng of the nobilitee, toke vppon hym selfe the absolute power, and vsed the whole as his owne. He prohibited the rulers any more to assemble in the palaice, toke the ensignes from the Gonfaloners, brake the orders of iustice, deliuered all prisoners, re∣consiled them that were exiled, ordeined new taxes, and waged straungers, so that the citee was full of Fren∣chemen, who forbare not to violate all sortes of wo∣men. ¶Thus he continued .x. monethes, encreasyng daiely in tyrannie, to the hygh offence of the chiefe, and great hate of the people (who before fauoured hym) that at last the whole citee in .iii. dyuers partes, nobles, peo∣ple, and artificers conspyred against hym, and in conclu∣sion assaulted and discoumfited his men, and besieged hym in the palaice. Out of the whiche they enforced him to sende Guglielmo da Scesi and his sonne. Whom they hewed and gnawed to peces in the market place. ¶Finally the Duke fell to accorde, and renouncyng his
astate and title to the dominion, departed with bagge and baggage. Whervpon not onely Florence but al∣so Arezzo, Volterra, Pistoia, and other citees therabou∣tes toke on theim theyr libertees: though they within short space after, yelded to Florence theyr wonted obe∣dience. Than the citesins deuised a new ordre in their common wealth, wherin the nobles had so great aucto∣ritee, that they vsed theyr libertee in all thynges ouer the people: but that endured not longe: for the people rebelled, and by force depriued theim, erectyng magi∣strates of theim selfes. And though the nobles openly practised with theyr frendes abroade for succours, and fortified theyr houses withinfoorth, in suche wise, that Florence was full of armes: whervpon thei attempted to recouer theyr astate. Yet at length after many skyrmi∣shes, muche bloudsheed, and fyre, the people preuailed, and brought the nobilitee so low,Nobilitee suppressed. that they neuer durst arme theim selfes more, but became in maner vile and abiecte: so that from that tyme foorth Florence decaied bothe in courtesie and chiualrie. ¶Thus they rested in quiete, till the yere .1353. In whiche tyme happened that notable plague, that Iohn Boccaccio so pitifully mencioneth in the beginnyng of his Decamerone, thoroughe whiche died in Florence 96000. persones. And thoughe the nobilitee was than oppressed, yet fortune wanted not meane to reyse new discencion amongest theim againe. ¶Two families in Florence, Albizi and Ricci, fell at variaunce, betwene whom the whole citee was no lesse deuided, than it was firste betwene Bondelmonti and Vberti: or betwene Donati and Cerchi. And where
as longe before this time the names of Guelfe and Ghi∣belline was in maner extincted and forgotten, Vguici∣one de Ricci (thynkyng to abate the reputacion of the Albizi) renued the olde law,1357. that no Ghibelline should enioie magistrate within the citee. But the purpose of Ricci was cleane disapoincted. For where he thought to proue the Albizi to be Ghibellines, they contrary wise not onely proued them selues Guelfes, but chiefe of the Guelfes: and became so great in the citee, that at length they determined to vsurpe the dominion, whiche beyng discouered to the people, was occasion, that their hou∣ses were sacked, and some burned, and they for the moste parte fledde: and those lawes, that the Guelfes had made before in preiudice of the other citesins, were re∣uoked. So that those whiche were noted for Ghibel∣lines, findyng them selfes recouered in credite, not con∣tented to be partetakers, but rather desiryng to rule their whole common wealthe, practised a newe meane, howe by force they myghte achieue their enterprise: and persuadyng the multitude to rebell against the lor∣des, they did so muche, that (notwithstandyng the con∣spiracy was discouered before) yet the people so assem∣bled out of all order, rennyng vp and downe here and there, spoilyng and burnyng, where as liked theim beste, that the power of the rulers coulde not refourme the mattier, and at length it grew to so great inconuenience, that the lord{is} wer constreigned not onely to habandone the palaice, but also the whole dominion vnto the peopl{is} furie, so that Michell di Lando a carder of woull, bare legged and all to torne, mounted vppe in to the hall of the palaice, with the standarde in his hande, and findyng
no man there, tourned hym towardes the people, saie∣yng: Now you see this palayce, with the whole citee at your commaundement, what woull you due? wherunto the multitude aunswered, they wolde haue hym theyr Gonfalonere and lorde: whiche incontinentlie he toke vpon him: and disposyng him selfe to quiet the rumour, to finde the people occupied, he sente theym straighte to seke one Nuto, that had been minister of iustice before: whom he caused to be hanged by the legge in the market place, and there torne to peeces: and consequentelie proceded to other reformacions and lawes, as it seemed beste to him. But because the commons perceiued, that he preferred the chiefe men to dignitees and offices, and dyd not so muche regarde the commons as they lo∣ked for, thei rebelled againe against him, and drew them together to the churche of Santa Maria di Nouella, where they beganne to erecte newe officers, and to make newe lawes after their owne maner. The meane while Michell makyng him selfe stronge, departed out of the palaice to mete theym: but missyng one an other by a wronge waie, Michell at his retourne founde theym in the high streete: assaultyng of the palaice. Where he sette on theim, and so discomfited them, that part he constreigned to flee out of the citee, and part to caste a∣waie their weapons. And (notwithstandyng his vile birthe) he was a man him selfe of a righte good nature, wise, and able to gouerne, yet coulde not his auctoritee so muche bridell the communaltee, but that thei deuided theim selfes in partes, the one of men of estimacion, whiche called theim selfes the people, and the other of the meane craftes, whiche called theim selfes the com∣mons.
¶Thus as thei liued fightyng and braulyng togethers, newes came to the counsaill, that Giannozo da Salerno (a capitaine of Charles of Duras, than bente to con∣quere Naples) liyng at Boloigne, determined, with helpe of the banished men, to assaulte the citee beyng promised by theim of the citee to haue a gate deliuered vnto theim. Wherupon diuers were accused, amongest whom Piero, the chiefe of the Albizi was taken and put to execucion, and Charles Strozi fledde. ¶The Florentines the better to mainteine theim selfes, reteigned Iohn Sharpe (surnamed Acuto by them) an english capitaine,Iohn Sharpe. than abidyng in Italie with a great retinewe, whose reputacion was suche, that well was that prince in Italie, that mighte haue his seruice in tyme of neede. For his power was so great, that whan he was out of wages, he woulde take one citee or an other, and vse it as his owne for the tyme, till occasion of seruice happened againe, and than wolde he sell it to that prince or common wealthe, that wolde geue moste for it. ¶About this tyme two the chiefest citesins in Florence, George Scali and Thomas Strozzi, with their auctho∣ritee and credite amongest the people, dyd what they wolde righte or wronge, so that whan the capitaine of iustice wolde haue put to execucion a certaine offender their friende, they by force assaulted and sacked the ca∣pitaines palaice, and deliuered the giltie: whiche acte offended not the capitaine alonelie, but also the ma∣gistrates, so that George Scali was therfore taken, and against the common opinion (notwithstandyng the great auour of the people,Common people. whiche euermore proueth incon∣stante)
was beheaded: and diuers of his deerest frien∣des with him. Upon occasion of whose death moste parte of the citee was armed to strengthe the iustice. But whan he was deade, thei were not so soone vnarmed again. For the parties betwene the people of reputa∣cion and the commons did so kendle, that for the space of a whole yere, there was daielie fightyng betwene theim: in suche wyse that at lengthe by agreement of bothe partes, the Guelfes were reconsiled and restored to their wonted honour and rule ouer the citee,138. and the other magistrates and rulers were deposed, amongest whom Michell Lando before named, was one, whose vertues and merites (beyng so notable as they were) coulde not yet saue hym from the peoples fury. ¶Thus the Guelfes being in auctoritee, and fearing no man but Benedetto d' Alberti (a good man, riche, and of great auctoritee) because he was not of their secte, they found the meane to banish hym, and dyuers others that they thoughte contrarie to theim: and so settled the common wealth after their maner, and kepte it in quiet till the yere .1387. At whiche time Giangalcazo Vis∣conti, Duke of Millaine toke his vncle Bernabo priso∣ner, and made sharpe warres to the Florentines,1390▪ so that (notwithstandyng their valiaunte resistence) gettyng all the countreis about, as Bolognia, Pisa, Perugia, and Siena, he was in so great towardenesse to winne Florence, that he caused a crowne of golde to be made, to the intente to crowne him selfe kyng of Italy, and had done it in dede, if death had not preuented him. ¶Not longe after the commons vpon light occasion, re∣belled of new, and in great noumbre ranne to the house
of Veri di Medici, offeryng hym the rule of the astate: but he leadyng theim with hym to the high streete, and leauyng theim there, ascended into the palaice amongest the lordes, excusyng him selfe, that the people made him to come by force, and so with thankes of theim returned to the people, and persuaded them, that thei should haue theyr willes, so that thei woulde laie downe theyr wea∣pons. Whiche at his request they did. Immediat∣ly wherupon the rulers secretely armed theyr power, and establisshyng the ordre of the citee, putte dyuers of those commons to death, that had been causers of this disorder. ¶Not longe after certaine of theim that were banished, beyng at Bolognia, determined vpon hope of the peo∣ples inconstancie, to attempt the recouerie of theyr coun∣trey, and to alter the astate of theyr citee: and so tho∣roughe coumforte of one Piggiello, and of Barroccio Cauiccili, than dwellyng in Florence, secretly thei en∣tred the towne, and slewe one or two: to the rumour wherof the people beyng assembled, they declared, how theyr comyng was to deliuer theyr countrey from the ti∣rannie of theim that ruled. &c. But for all that, there was none that woulde assist theim. Wherfore they withdrew into a churche, and there some in the ta∣kyng were slaine, and the rest taken, examined and put to execucion. ¶Besides this the Duke of Myllaine, whilest he war∣red with the citee, practised secretly by meane of the ba∣nished men, to winne it, but the thyng beyng discouered, was occasion of the banishement of a noumbre of cite∣sins,1400. and than within two yeres died Giangaleazzo, af∣ter
he had warred with the Florentines .xii. yeres. So that the Florentines being peaced outwardely, and in∣different quiete within theim selfes, made out theyr po∣wer against Pisa, and valiauntly gatte it.1409. ¶Than had they warre with Ladislaus kynge of Na∣ples about the citee of Cortona, whiche the Florenti∣nes had before purchased. And that warre was so pe∣rillouse, that (as most writers affyrme) they procured a phisicion of the kynges to poyson hym. By reason of whose death, they recouered her,1414▪ beyng before in maner desperate of the astate of theyr common wealth: because the kynge hauyng already taken Rome, Siena, La Mar∣ca, and Romagnia, wanted no more but Florence onely to make his full waie into Lumbardie. Where he de∣termined with his power to proue his fortune. So that the death of these two princes, the Duke of Myl∣laine and the kynge of Naples, was more auailable to the Florentines, than theyr owne force. But they (whose nature coulde not well beare any rest) liued not fully .viii. yeres in peace, but that not onely the par∣ties within them selfes renued theyr wonted contencion againe, but also the citee attempted warre against Phi∣lip, than Duke of Myllaine: in whiche warre theyr ar∣mie at Zagonara was discoumfited, and consequently all theyr holdes in Romagnia lost, Castracaro and Mo∣digliana excepted. Whervpon they made suite to the Uenetians, and obteined them in leage against the Duke. By whose meane at length they recouered theyr townes in Romagnia: notwithstandyng the charges of that warre had ben so great (amountyng to the sūme of thre millions and .500000. duckates) and that the Floren∣tines
fell out amongest theim selfes about the paiement thereof, whiche they called Catasto: and the citee of Uolterra rebelled against theim, though thei were soone brought to obedience againe.1428. ¶After this beganne the Florentines to make warre a∣gainst the towne of Lucca, whiche endured .iii. yeeres with wonderfull domage on bothe sides: specially on the Florentines, whose armie was discomfited by Nico∣lo Piccinino, sent by the Duke of Myllaine to succour the Lucchese. ¶Than beganne contencion within the citee betweene Cosmo de Medici and Rinaldo degli Albizi. Not that Cosmo (who was a iuste and a vertuouse man) gaue any occasion thereof. But vpon a consaite that Ri∣naldo suspected: seeyng that Cosmo with his liberali∣tee and vertue had gotten the loue of the people, he ima∣gined streight waie, that he went about to be lorde of al. Wherfore he so conspyred, and wrought against hym, that Cosmo was taken, laied in prison, and in daunger of death. But finally he was confined vnto Padoa: where he remaigned the space of a .xii. moneth, till by meane of his friendes he was reconsiled home, and his enemies some put to death, and the reste banisshed, and finally the whole astate of the common wealth refour∣med after his owne maner. Duryng whose tyme the Florentines endeuoured theim selfes muche to conquere the citee of Lucca, to the entreprise wherof they enter∣teined Francesco Sforza (that afterwardes was Duke of Myllaine) to be theyr generall. But because he than practised mariage with the daughter of Myllaine (whose father Duke Philip was enemie to the Floren∣tine
astate) he so coldly proceded, that whan it came to passe, that he myght haue streigned Lucca, he neuer∣thelesse was occasion of peace bewene the Florentines and the Lucchese,1432. in suche wyse that Lucca still remai∣ned in theyr libertee. ¶Not longe after folowed the counsaile of Florence: at whiche the emperour of Greece, with the chiefe of the Greekishe churche assembled, and agreed with the Ro∣maine churche, though they stode not by it longe. ¶Than arose Nicolo Piccinino, and without any iuste grounde moued warre to the Florentines, wherin he did theim no small displeasures. But finally he was discoumfited at Anghiari: and immediately after the Conte di Poppi (who before had assisted Piccinino) was besieged in his owne towne: and his whole astate, with the towne of Poppi taken from hym by the Flo∣rentines. ¶And though the warre, whiche Piccinino made, was as well against the churche as the Florentines, so that the bishop of Rome, of the victorie of Anghiari, enioied as well his parte as the Florentines: yet the charge be∣fore, and the cost that the bishop was at in pursuyng the victorie, was suche, that for verie neede of money: he solde Borgo san Sepolchro, vnto the Florentines for 25000. duckates. All this whyle were the Florenti∣nes in league with the Uenetians against the Duke of Myllaine, in suche wyse that the better to disburdeine his owne charge, the Duke steered kyng Alfonse of Na∣ples against the Florentines, who entred vpon Tuscane and did theim muche hurt, though at last laiyng siege to the towne of Piombino (through sickenesse that fell in
his armie) he was constreigned to remoue his siege, and vtterly to habandone his enterprise. But after Duke Phillip of Millaine was deade, and Francesco Sforza in possession of the astate, the Florentines (by meane of Cosmo di Medici) did enter in amitee with hym: for whiche occasion, whan the Uenetians were out with Francesco, they procured kyng Alfonse to warre of new on the Florentines, whiche warre was not so sharpe, but that the Florentines at length did passe it ouer with out any great losse. ¶Than died Cosmo di Medici, whan he had gouerned the citee about .31. yeres.1464. Cosmo di Medici. He in his tyme was one of the notablest men of the worlde, the richeste priuate man that hath ben hearde of manie yeres, and so lyberall withall, that he relieued a number of his citesins, not onely with loe, but also with the gifte of large summes of money: and many times he wolde him selfe consider who had neede, and helpe them vndesired. His wise∣dome was suche (and was vnlearned) that he ruled the vnruliest citee of the worlde in peace without ciuile se∣dicion, whiche before his tyme was neuer in quiete. And though he might haue taken on him selfe the abso∣lute power without difficultee, beyng in suche auctori∣tee, yet ledde he still a priuate life: nor for all his great richesse, neuer soughte other mariage for his doughters, than amongest his owne citesins. He builded .v. prince∣ly houses, one within the cite, and .iiii. without, besides iiii. monastaries .ii. churches, and dyuers chappelles: so that he that well considerith his doynges, shall iudge theim rather mightie kynges than citesins. ¶Finally his factions were suche in Uenice, in Naples,
in Rome, and in other chiefe citees of trafficque, that whan he was so disposed, he wolde make them all bare of money: so that with his onely reputacion many times he wroughte suche quietnesse and commoditee to his citee, that all the Florentine power was not able to doe. ¶The rule that he bare was not grounded on force or tirannie, but vpon suche a loue to the people, that whan he died, the commons bewailed hym as a father of the countrey. The profe wherof was well seen, what tyme through the yll procuremente of Diotisalui (one that he helde as his dere and secrete friende) a conspi∣racie was made against his sonne Peter. ¶Whan the olde Duke Francesco Sforza was deade, and his sonne Galeazo established in the astate, the am∣bassadours of Millaine came to the Florentines for con∣firmacion of their former amitee, which Peter the sonne of Cosmo, persuaded, was necessary to be mainteigned. In debatyng of whiche mattier Peter beganne to per∣ceiue the intente of his aduersaries, and at length fully ascertained therof, he wrought so, that all the citee ar∣med theim selfes in his fauour, in suche wise that beyng verie weake of bodie, and sicke on his bedde, the chiefe magistrates of the citee were faine to resorte to hym, and to offer theim selfes at his pleasure. Wherupon it folowed, that the pryncipall of his ennemies were some banished and some slaine, and his reputacion suche, that (though he ruled not in office him selfe) yet might be at all times commaunde and doe what he wolde, and folowyng alwaies the steppes of his father in the same reputacyon died. ¶After whose deathe Italy happened to be deuided,
betwene the kynge of Naples and the bishop of Rome on the one parte, the Uenetians, the Duke of Millaine, and the Florentines on the other parte: and amongest all the reste the bishop of Rome hated the Florentines, speciallie the house of Medici, whereof two vertuouse yonge men, Iulian and Laurence, sonnes of the forena∣med Peter, were than rulers, and in maner (though thei liued priuately) princes of Florence, and this hate was not secret, for the bishop openlie in Rome fauoured the Pazi, and hindered the Medici, so that after the death of Phillip D' i Medici, archebishop of Pisa, the bishop of Rome placed in his steede Francesco Saluiati, a mortall ennemie to the house of Medici, who notwithstandyng the Romish election, coulde not be receiued of the Flo∣rentines.Practise of a pre∣late. Wherfore with the holy fathers consente this newe archebishop beganne a practise, to alter the astate of Florence, and consultyng on the mattier with diuers of his friendes, speciallie of the families of Sal∣uiati and Pazi, concluded, that without the deathe of Iulian and Laurence D' i Medici, it was impossible to bryng the mattier to passe. Wherfore they procured the Cardinall of saincte George (nephewe vnto the bi∣shop of Rome) to come to Florence, to the intente that in visityng of him, they mighte haue bothe the brethern to∣gethers, and so slea theim. Of this their purposed in∣tente twise they missed. The therde tyme they deuised a solemne masse to be songe before the Cardinall, vnto the which bothe the brethern came, and at the eleuacion tyme Iulian was slaine, and Laurence hurte, but he es∣caped. ¶This meane while the archebishop crately gotte into
the palaice with certaine men with him, priuily armed, in hope that whan the rumour shoulde ryse he mighte haue not onely the palaice but also all the chiefe rulers of the citee in his handes: but his purpose beyng espied er he coulde atchieue it, he with certaine of his compli∣ces were immediately hanged and throwen out at the wyndowes of the palaice. This foule ende had theyr cursed conspiracie: for whan Iulian was slayne, and Laurence returned to his house, it was a wonder to se howe soone the people were armed, rennyng vp and downe the stretes, and criyng, Medici Medici, killyng and drawyng as many as they coulde know of the con∣trarie parte. And almost there was no citesin of any reputacion, that came not vnto the house of Laurence, to offer him selfe and his goodes to succour him, in case he neded. ¶Finallie the tumulte beeynge quieted, as manie as coulde be founde of the Saluiati and Pazi, and of the other conspiratours, were put to execucion: and the rest that fledde, were banished. ¶But for all this theyr trouble ceased not. For whan the bishop of Rome sawe that this pryuie treason toke not effect in alteracion of the astate, he attempted open∣ly the destruction of the citee, not vnder pretence of hate to the Florentines, but to the house of Medici onely. Fyrst he excōmunicated the citie, and after sent an army of his owne againste theim, and procured the kynge of Naples to inuade them with an other armie: protestyng alwaies, that he desired no more, but to haue Laurence D' i Medici in his handes; whiche done, he offered to be at peace. Wherfore Laurence, to be the better assured
of his citesins, called .300. of the best of them togethers, and resonyng the mattier with theim, founde theim wholy bent to his defence, and therupon made prouision of resistence, doyng all Italie to vnderstande, that the bishop of a shepherde, became a wolfe, and not onelie practised this secrete treason, but also openly mayntei∣gned it. ¶These warres continued so longe, that the Florenti∣nes beeyng destitute of all succour, and werie of theyr great charge and losse of men, determined to fall into the armes of the tone of theyr enemies, and esteemyng the kynges amitee more auailable and more durable of the bothe, Laurence Di Medici went hym selfe to Na∣ples, and so behaued him towardes the kyng, that where most men suspected, he should neuer retourne, he not one∣ly retourned, but also brought a perfite conclusion of peace with hym. Wherat the bishoppe of Rome was out measure wroth, but at last the Florentines sent their ambassadours to hym. Who beyng brought to audi∣ence in Pontificalibus, at length obteined his absoluci∣on. The rather because euin than newly the Turke had assaulted and taken Otronto in Puglia, and mynded to conquere Italie: whiche occasion caused all the princes of Italie to vnite theim selfes together, more for feare than loue, as afterwardes did well appeare. For the Turke was no sooner dead, and the feare of his inuasi∣on paste, but they fell out againe as farre as euer they were. For betwene the bishop and the kynge grew hote warres, and the Florentines in helpe of the kynge as∣saulted the bishop on the other side, and besides that the came of the league was lyke to haue taken from the
Uenetians all theyr dominion in Lumbardie: so that I∣talie was full of warre,1486. vntill by procurement of the kynge of Spaines ambassadours, a generall peace tho∣rough all the astates of Italie was concluded (the Ge∣nowaies excepted). By meane wherof the Florentines with theyr more ease warred vpon the Genowaies, and gatte Pietra Santa, with other townes from theim, and gaue them a notable discoumfiture besides Serezana. ¶Finally the moste renoumed priuate man of his tyme Laurence D' i Medici died,Laurence d' i Me∣dici▪ leauyng one of his sonnes a Cardinall (who was called therunto beyng not fullie 13. yeres old) and his eldest sonne Peter in great repu∣tacion, and his doughters also verie well maried. ¶He fauoured cunnyng men, specially theim that were learned: he was eloquente in reasonyng, quicke of in∣vention, wise in determinyng, and hardie in doyng. Be∣sides the conspiracy wrought against hym, whan his brother was slayne, he was twyse in peryll of death by treason, and yet preuented theim bothe to the confusion of the conspiratours. All the princes of Italy honou∣red hym, the kynge Mathew of Hungarie shewed hym great signes of loue, the Soldan of Aegypt sent hym presentes and ambassadours, the Turke deliuered Ber∣nardo Bandini, that slewe his brother Iulian, into his handes: and his owne citesins so muche loued him, that I thynke of his tyme died no man happier than he. Contrary wise his sonne Peter di Medici, who notwith∣standyng his gentle enterteigment of all men at the be∣ginnyng (whiche made the worlde to hope well of him) did at length proue so ambiciouse, so wilfull and so vn∣discrete in his procedynges, that neither the magistrat∣tes,
the citesins, nor yet the people could well beare him, to the encrease wherof,1495. whan Charles the .viii. Fren∣che kynge, passed by Florence towardes Naples, Peter mette hym on the waie, and saied to him, that his father commaunded hym .iii. thynges, the fyrst to honour God, the secounde to worship the frenche kyng, and the thyrd to defende his countrey. So that Charles seeyng hym thus well disposed, entreated hym so fayre, that he de∣liuered into his handes Serezana, Pietra Santa, and fi∣nally sette Pisa at libertee, whiche was so great a hin∣deraunce to the Florentine astate, that the magistrates and commons, moued of iuste disdeigne, draue him out of the citee, toke his goodes and patrimonie as forfaicte, and condemned him to perpetuall exile, with a noumber of his friendes and partetakers: and the furie of the people was suche, that they brake and defaced all the armes that coulde be founde of the Medicies in Flo∣rence. ¶And albeit that he attempted manie waies to recouer his countrey, yet was his fortune so yll, that the more he sturred, the more was he hated, whiche at lengthe was the vndoyng both of him selfe, and of a great many mo as well of his adherentes, as of his aduersaries. ¶Thus the familie of Medici loste reputacion and cre∣dite for the tyme: so that the astate of Florence retour∣ned vnto the common rule of the magistrates and cite∣sins,1495. that endured till the tyme that Leo the .x. of the fa∣milie of Medici was made bishop of Rome, who though he restored not his house vnto the full rule they had be∣fore in the citee, did neuerthelesse so muche, partely with auctoritee, and partely by friendship, that diuers of that
name were receiued and made partetakers of the com∣mon wealth: whiche by little and little so encreased a∣gaine, that in the tyme of bishop Clement the .vii. who also was of the Medici, whan the Duke of Burbon pas∣sed by Florence to Romewardes, the commons of the ci∣tee made a commocion against Hippolito di Medici, then gouernour of the same: he than beyng departed out of the citee in companie of the Cardinall of Cortona, to goe visite the Duke of Urbine. But assoone as he re∣tourned, he did so muche, that they yelded theim selfes againe vnto hym, vpon couenant he should hurt no man for that mattier. ¶Than bishop Clement made this Hippolito a Cardi∣nall, whervpon he lefte the administracion of the com∣mon wealth, and so was the citee at libertee againe. But Clement beeyng determined to make it perpetuall subiect to his owne famili, handled hym selfe so well towardes the emperour at his coronacion at Boloigne, that he obteigned the imperiall power to the oppression of his owne naturall countrei, and brought to passe, that the prince of Orenge,1530. with the emperours army besieged Florence. ¶This siege, endured a whole yere, which for the many enterprises and battailes fought on bothe partes, maie be compared to the best Troiane, Greekish or Romaine warres, namely because the common wealth alone, with out helpe of any other prince or state, susteigned the vio∣lence of two so mightie powers as the emperours and the bishops of Rome, vntill famine and not force ouer∣came theim. ¶Finally the prince of Orenge, and dyuers other no∣table
capitaines beyng slaine in the often battailes and skyrmisshes, at last the Florentines for lacke of vittail∣les, were faine to fall to composicion, and yelded vpon these condicions, that the citee should continue in hir li∣bertee, referryng the reformacion of thastate to the em∣perour, who within the terme of .iiii. monethes should thervpon declare his pleasure. That all banished men should be reconciled without remembraunce of any in∣iurie before passed. That the Medici should be resto∣red to theyr goodes taken from theim by violence of the magistrates. That the citee shoulde paie .80000▪ crownes to the dispatche of the armie, with other coue∣nauntes of lesse moment. Upon whiche accorde Bar∣tholomew Valori, commissarie for the bishop of Rome, entred with dyuers of the imperiall capitains, and there behaued theim selfes so stoutely, that (notwithstandyng the couenauntes of peace) they founde the meane with∣in lesse than a moneth to behead .vi. of the chiefest cite∣sins, and to confine .150. besides a noumbre of others that habandoned and fledde the citee of them selfes: so that theyr promysed libertee was tourned into a moste cruell seruitude. ¶Shortely after came Alexander Di Medici, nephew to bishop Clement, sente by the emperour out of Flaun∣ders, who at his first comyng made a shew of sobrietee, in goyng priuately vnto his house, and receiuyng the ci∣tesins amiably: but yet at lengthe by little and little he vsurped the offices and magistrates, and finally dispo∣sed theim all at his pleasure,1532. causyng him selfe openlie to be called Duke. 1534.¶Than died Clemente the Bishop, whervpon the Car∣dinalles
Di Medici and Saluiati, with the principall of the other banished Florentines (couetyng the recouerie of their citees libertee) sent ambassadours to the empe∣rour, besechyng hym to consider the tyrannie of Duke Alexandre (who than newly had builded the Cittadella) and to regarde the condicions of peace. Whiche am∣bassadours arriued at Barcelona euen as the emperour was takyng shippe towardes the enterprise of Tunise: so that beyng returned to Rome, the Cardinall Hippo∣lito di Medici disposed hym selfe to goe vnto Tunise therfore. And takyng his iourney towardes Naples died at Itri by the waie: poysoned (as the voice wente) by procurement of Duke Alexander. ¶This Duke Alexander was yet but yonge, who by bi∣shop Clementes procurement had maried the emperours bastarde doughter, he was so stoute, that without any respecte he wolde haue his will in all thynges, and namely in feates of loue and chaunge of women was his speciall delite. And amongest all other he delited more in the company of Laurence di Medici (that should suc∣cede him in the astate) than of any other man. But Laurence in steede of that loue hated the Duke, and had longe time determined to slea him, whan he might finde occasion, whether he did it in hope the rather to atteigne to the dominion him selfe, or to restore to the citee hir auncient libertee, be diuers opinions. ¶In effecte without makyng any man priuie to his en∣tent, other than a seruante of his owne, the Duke beyng on a nighte all alone in Laurences house, and slepyng on a bedde, Laurence and his man slewe him: and ther∣vpon counsailyng with certayne of his friendes, and
seeyng no man disposed to stande with him in pursuyng of his purpose, the selfe same nighte he fledde, and went straight to Uenice, where in company of the Sozzi he liued, till of lae certaine persons, in hope of the Taglia (a reward prclaimed for the kyllyng of notable offen∣ders) he was also slayne ¶Immediately vpon knowlage of the death of Duke Alexander, the three Florentine Cardinalles, that were than in Rome, departed thense, and makyng all the men they coulde by the waie, come with an armie towarde Florence. Wherfore the Medici, with their friendes in Florence (to make their party good, that the banished men shoulde not preuayle to their destruction) elcted Cosmo di Medici to be their Duke, a yonge man of .20. yeres of age, whse father Iohn Di Medici had ben a man righte valiaunt in armes. And therupon sene to the Cardinalles, praiyng theim to state their armie by the waie, and to come them selfes priuately to Florence, where they shoulde finde so muche reason offered them, that they shoulde neede to vse no force. So thei staied their power besides Cortona, and beyng come to Flo∣rence were entreated with so faire promises, that thei licenced theyr men to depart. By reason wherof the Duke that nwe is, with his friendes had time to make theim selfes stronge, and than wolde consent to nothing that the Cardinalles loked for: so that with a playne mocke they departed, lamentyng their folie: that they had chaunged the suretee of their force, for the vnsure∣tee of fayre wordes. ¶This chaunge in Florence, and the mocke that the Cardinalles receiued, so muche encreased their malice,
that they with the helpe of Phillip Strozzi and Bar∣tholomew Valori, assembled and waged the number of 4000. men: whiche by Peter Strozzi (that yet liueth and serueth the Frenche kynge) shoulde haue be con∣ducted to Monte Murlo, and from thense to Florence, had not Phillip and Bartholomew (who with a smalle companie came before to Monte Murlo) ben sette vpon by Alexander Vitelli, taken and ledde awaie prsoners to Florence, where the whole conspiracy of those confe∣derates, that were in the towne was discouered, and di∣uers taken and put to execucion: and so the whole en∣terprise broken and destroied. Amongest the rest onely Phillip Strozzi was preserued from deathe: notwith∣standyng he was kepte in prysn in the Cittadella, and there died. Some saie he killed him selfe rather than he woe vndoe his children by paiyng the raunsome that was required of him, beyng in dede one of the ry∣chest priuate men that was in his time, as it dothe well appeare by the wealth of his sonne Peter, and of his other children, whiche beyng banished men, and hauyng nothyng in their owne countrey, doe neuerthelesse lyue abroade in so muche reaputacion, that fewe brethern of christendome vnder the degree of prynces doe the like. ¶I haue spoken before of Cittadella buylded by Duke Alexander for the more suretee of his dominion,Cittadella. whiche at his deathe remaigned in the kepynge of one of the Dukes capitaines. But assoone as Alexander Vitelli (one that had serued well the emperour in his warres) hearde of the Dukes deathe, he came to Florence, and entred into the castell to speake with the capitaine, where he handled the matter so well, that he excluded
the capitaine and kepte it him selfe. And thoughe he made many faire promises to Duke Cosmo, yet at length he deliuered it to the emperour: who therfore rewarded hym with fayre possessions in the realme of Naples. ¶This Duke Cosmo sued first to marrie with the wife of Duke Alexander the emperours doughter, but the bi∣shop of Rome that nowe is, purchaced hir (to his no small coste) for his sonnes sonne, Duke Octauio. For the whiche there hath ben mortall hate betwene Duke Cosmo and the bishop. And beyng thus preuented, the Duke to obteigne the more stay towardes the emperour, maried the doughter of Don Diego di Tolledo, Uice Re of Naples, by whose meane he hath redeemed the Cittadella of the emperour for the summe of .400000. duckates, and is nowe absolute lorde and kynge within him selfe. ¶He hath diuers faier children by his wyfe, and loueth hir so well, that in maner he neuer goeth abrode (vnlesse it be to churche) without hir, and is reputed to be a very chaste man.Duke Cosmo▪ He is learned and wyse, he vseth fewe wordes, and is neuerthelesse in his owne tounge elo∣quente. In the administracion of iustice he is so sin∣cere, that syns the tyme of his reigne, whiche is nowe aboue .x. yeres, I haue not hearde, that he hath pardo∣ned any person condemned to die. He hath restreigned the Uice of Sodomie (which heretofore reigned more in Florence than elswhere in Italy) with paine of death: and hath broughte his astate to suche quietnesse, as it hath not ben this .300. yeres past: so that Florence may well saie, that in hym she hath founde hir longe desired libertee. For though he absolutely hath the whole reue∣newes
to his owne vse, yet the suretee that the Floren∣tynes haue in their owne thynges (whiche heretofore they neuer had) is muche more worthe to theym, than the common reuenew was beneficiall to the citee. ¶Finally the vertue of this Duke Cosmo, besides the woorthinesse of his dominion, hath brought hym in suche reputacion, that he is now numbred as one of the rarest princes of our tyme, and fea∣red also, as one in whom there be hydde thynges of greatter moment than the rule of that onely astate.
¶The state of Genoa. GEnoa standeth in maner betweene the Alpes and Appenine hilles, and hath his prospecte toward the southe. For it hangeth so on the descent of the hyll, that beyng in the sea vnderneth, a man maie almost dis∣cerne euery part of the citee. It hath no plaine coun∣trey neere it, but on the one side hilles and mountaines, and the sea Mediterraneum on the other. And yet those hilles that renne alonge the sea costes, bringe forth many kyndes of pleasaunt fruite, with muche wine and oyle, for the moste parte not thoroughe fertilitee of the grounde, but thoroughe the inhabitauntes peinefull di∣ligence. ¶The circuite of Genoa is little lesse than .v. myles, the walles about are very new, fayre and stronge: spe∣cially the .ii. gates Di San Thomaso and Del L'arco are so large, that they seeme almost .ii. fortresses. ¶The hauen that cometh into it, is excedyng fayre and bigge enough to receiue any nauie, beyng forced some∣what narowe at the mouthe, with a wonderfull costely piee of stone made out into the sea: at the ende wherof is a stronge toure, called Il Mole: Wherby the hauen is defended from all wyndes, the southweast excepted. ¶Within this hauen they haue an Arsenale, hable to receiue .xviii. or .xx. galleys. ¶Theyr churches are verie fayre and sumptuouse, spe∣cially the Cathedrall churche of. S. Laurence, whose fronte of white and blacke marble seemeth a verie rare peece of woorke.
¶Their houses are excedyng fayre, the frontes two stories hygh, for the most part of fine marble curiousely wrought: For theyr law alloweth none to decke his house any higher with that kynde of worke, (vnlesse it be in respecte of some notable seruice) because it would requyre an infinite charge to garnishe theim of that sort to the toppe, their houses beyng for the most part .vi.vii. and some .viii. stores hygh. And yet are they so faire, that I wote not vnto what citee I maie compare theyr buildynges. And not onely within the citee, but all a¦longe the sea costes, called La Riuiera, euerie village is so furnished with gallaunt and sumptuouse houses, that it is a worlde to beholde. ¶Amongest all other the palaice of Andrea Doria, with out the gate of. S. Thomas, is a notable thyng, verie fayre, sumptuouse and large: And aboue his house (a thyng wonderfull) he hath made his slaues to hew out of the hard rockie mountaine, as muche space, as hath made .vi. gardeins one aboue an other: and hath cau∣sed so muche earth to be caried vppe, as suffiseth for the growth of all maner fruites and herbes, verie pleasant to beholde. ¶Lykewyse within the towne, Andrea Doria hath the goodliest house that any priuate man hath builded in our daies. ¶But the stretes of the citee for the most part are so na∣row, that it is a great defacyng to the rest. Whiche I thynke the stipe descent of the hill causeth, that they haue not roome enough to make theyr stretes large. ¶Halfe a myle without the towne Weastwardes, thei haue a verie fayre watche toure, called Torre della Lu∣minaria,
wherin nightly burneth a great lyght: for a marke to theim that be on the sea, because it maie be dis∣cerned verie farre of. ¶Finally thei haue a very fayre conduite of water con∣ueighed on arches, muche after the auncient Romaine facion, for the space of .v. myles or more, out of the va∣ley of Bisagnio: notwithstandyng that thei haue diuers fayre springes, and one specially that can not be drawen drie. ¶Of their dominion and gouernaunce. THeyr dominion is not very great, is passeth not the boundes of Lyguria, whiche is scarcely .80. my∣les in length, and nothyng so muche in breadth. And maie dispende in publike reuenew not fullie .400000. crownes by the yere: as I haue been enfour∣med. In deede in tyme past they had muche greater dominion: So that the common rent hath been veraie great: but the Turkes prosperitee hath muche abated that: Neuerthelesse it is thought, the priuate citesins were neuer more wealthie than they be at this present. Of theyr trade and customes. ALl the Genowaies in maner are merchaunt men, and verie great trauailers of straunge countreys. For I haue ben reasonablie persuaded, that there be .5. or .6. thousande of them continually abroade, either merchauntes or factours: so that they leaue few places
of the worlde vnsought: where any gaine is to be had. For the merchaundise that they bringe home hath spedie dispatche, by reason theyr citee is as a keye vnto all the trade of Lumbardie, and to a great part of Italie. They at home make suche a noumbre of silkes and vel∣uettes, as are hable to serue many countreys: whiche is the chiefe merchaundise that they sende foorth. In deede they are commonly noted to be great vsurers. ¶One thyng I am sure of, that if Ouide were nowe a∣lyue, there be in Genoa, that coulde teache him a dousen poinctes De Arre Amandi. For if Semiramis were euer celebrated amongest the Assirians, Venus amongest the Greekes, Circes amonge the Italians, sure there be dames in Genoa that deserue to be celebrated and chro∣nicled for their excellent practise in loue. And trulie the Genowaies theim selfes deserue that their wyfes should be praised, because I saw in no place where wo∣men haue so muche libertee. For it is laufull there openly to talke of loue, with what wife so euer she be. insomuche that I haue seene yonge men of reputacion standyng in the strete talke of loue with yong mistresses beyng in theyr wyndowes aboue: and openlie reherse verses that they had made one to the other. And in the churches, specially at euensong, they make none o∣ther praiers. So that he that is not a louer there, is meete for none honest companie. Manie men esteme this as a reproche to the Genowaies, but they vse it as a policie: thynkyng that their wifes through this liber∣tee of open speache, are ridde of the rage that maketh other women to trauaile so muche in secret. ¶In dede the women there ar excedyng faire and beste
apparailed to my fantasie of all other. For thoughe their vppermost garment be but plaine clothe, by reason of a law, yet vnderneth they weare the finest silkes that may be had, and are so finely hosed and shoed, as I ne∣uer sawe the like, open faced, and for the most parte bare headed, with the heare so finely trussed and curled, that it passeth rehersall. So that in myne opinion the su∣preame courte of loue is no where to be soughte, out of Genoa. ¶But like as the women are excellente in this, euen so doe the men excede all other in supersticion. For there be within the citee .20. scholes or companies of discipli∣nauntes otherwise called Battuti, whose maner is whan they are called to deuocion, as euery good fridaie, or in the middest of a plage, of famine, of warre, or of other like occasion, that requireth or rogacions suche processi∣ons, thei assemble and clothe them selfes in sacke, linnen or buckeramme: with their backes naked, and their fa∣ces couered, sauyng littell holes to loke out at. And hauyng certaine skourges or whippes (some of wyer) in their handes, they goe about the towne whyppyng theim selfes, that the bloud shall renne from the backe downe to the heeles, so painefully, that it moueth the poore people to compassion. For whan this is done, thei thinke God must nedes fulfill their praier. The lyke wherof is vsed in all other places of Italie, but be∣cause I thynke no two citees are able to matche Genoa in the number of these Battuti, I thought good to make mencion of theim here. ¶Finally, the astate is holden by a Duke, chaungeable euery .ii. yere: who with .viii. gouernours and .viii.
proctours assigned vnto hym, ruleth the whole for the tyme. Neuerthelesse Andrea Doria the emperours admyrall for the myddell seas, vseth all at his will in mattiers of peace or warre, and almoste in euerie other thyng. The buildyng of Genoa. OF the edificacion of Genoa be dyuers opinions but because no certaintee is written therof, I will omitte theyr saiynges that ascribe it to Ianus, or to Genuus the sonne of Saturne: and agreeyng with the opinion of the bishop of Nebio (that perticularly wrote the Chronicle therof) I thīke it to be of suche an∣tiquitee, that neither the tyme of foundacion, nor yet the authour therof can well be knowen. As for the name, it is not vnlyke, but that (because it is the veraie entrie from the seas vnto Lumbardie) it was fyrste called Ia∣nua (a gate or dore) and afterwardes corruptely Ge∣noa. But how or whan it was builded, or for what cause it was so named, this is cleere, that in the Ro∣maines tyme, almost .300. yeres before the comyng of Christ, this citee ruled the countrey about it, as appea∣reth bothe by a table of brasse lately founde in the vale of Poceuera, and also by the mencion that Liuie maketh of the destruction of it by Mago Anniballes brother, and of the repairyng of it againe by the Romaine Con∣sule Lucretius Spurius. ¶From whiche tyme to the comyng of Charlemaine into Italie, I find nothyng notable of Genoa, saue that it was one of the fyrst citees, that openly professed the
Christian feith. But after Charlemaine was crow∣ned emperour, and his sonne Pepine made kynge of I∣talie, Ademaro, a baron of Fraunce, was sent thither so be capitaine: who by commaundement of kynge Pe∣pine, fought by sea with the Sarasines: and though he was taken prisoner in the battaile, yet the Genowaies ouercame theyr enemies, toke .xiii. Sarasine shippes, and the ile of Corsica, whiche in maner euer sens hath remained vnder the Genowaies dominion: and so con∣tinued Genoa obedient to the emperours capitaines the space of .100. yeres. ¶In the yere .936. there happened in a little strete than called Fontanella, and now Bordigoto, nere to the piere of the hauen, a littell spryng in stede of water cast foorth bloud, and ranne so a whole daie, to the great wonder of the people:Wonder. wherupon folowed, that the Sarasines armie came sodeinely vpon the towne, and takyng it by force, sacked and rifled it, sette it on fyre, and caried a∣waie the people, men women and children, in suche wise, that thei left the towne as a plaine wildernesse. But the Genowaies armie, whiche was than abrode, mette with these Sarasines on the sea about Sardegnia, where they foughte with theim, cutte theim in peces, and reco∣uered their prisoners with double praie, and so restored their citee.58. ¶After this the emperour Berengario graunted theim certaine priuileges, with full dominion ouer the townes that they than possessed. By reason wherof thei short∣ly encreased, not onely in welth but also in suche power, that in the voiage made into the holy lande by Godfrey of Boloigne and other princes,199. the Genowaies armie
was one of the notablest of that company, firste at the wynnyng of Antioche, and after at the gettyng of Ieru∣salem, in comyng to whiche secounde enterprise the Ge∣nowaies were faine to drowne theyr owne ships in the hauen of Iaffo: because they were not able to resist the Soldanes armie, that came vpon theim:Policy. thought better to drowne them, than to encrese the enemies power with their losse and shame both: how be it thei firste dischar∣ged all thynges that mighte be had out of them, whiche they caried with them vnto the siege of Ierusalem, and there behaued them selfes so worthily, that almost none other company of the christian armie was comparable to theim.1100▪ ¶After this they armed .27. galleis and .vi. shippes, and sente theim into Soria in ayde of Boemonde than kyng of Ierusalem, where they gatte the citee of Cae∣sarea in Palestina, and leauyng it in possession of the christians, retourned home with great tryumphe and praie. ¶Finally within the space of .13. yeres the Genowaies sent .vii. seuerall armies into Soria, by whose meanes the principall townes from the golfe of Laiacia southe∣wardes, to the golfe of Rissa, that is to wete Malinistra, Solino, Antioche, Laodicia, Tortosa, Tripoli, Baruti, Ac∣con, sometyme called Ptholemaida, Acres, Ghibelleto, Caesaria, Assur, Iaffo, Acaron, and Ascalon, were gotten out of the Turkes handes▪ For whiche great seruice Bauldewyn than kynge of Ierusalem nexte after Boe∣monde, gaue to the Genowaies diuers notable priuile∣ges through all his dominion, whiche thei enioied longe tyme.
¶After these manie victoryes retournyng to Genoa, the warre that ceased so farre of, sprange vp nerer home. For the Pisani contended with the Genowaies for con∣secracion of the bishop of Corsica, and for the ile of Sar∣degnia. Wherupon folowed sharpe warres betwene them, for the moste parte to the disauauntage of the Pi∣sani: so that at last beyng plainely ouercomen, the Ge∣nowaies entred into Pisa by force,1127. and rased all the hou∣ses therof downe to the fyrst floore. 1146.¶Thus finishyng those warres, and wantyng occasion where to be occupied, thei made out an army against the Sarasines, and first ouerranne the ile of Minorica, and after assaulted the citees of Almeria and Tortosa, in the confines of Granata, whiche thei toke by force, with the slaughter of an infinite noumbre of Moores, besides 10000. slaues that they caried with them to Genoa, and suche a quantitee of treasure and booties, as fewe lyke had ben seen in those daies: diuidyng the dominion that was gotten into three partes, the Erle of Barcelona (chiefe of this enterprise) had two to hym selfe, and the Genowaies the thyrde. ¶The glorie and wealth of whiche victories were such to the Genowaies, that for many yeres after thei enter∣prised no great mattier farre from home, but suche sedi∣cion fell amonge them selfes, that theyr owne brauling{is} many times gaue courage to forein princes to woorke a∣gainst theim. For the emperour Federike the fyrst (af∣ter he had conquered Lumbardie) thought also to sub∣due theim: and made open preparacion for it. Whiche was cause of theyr vnion againe. For whan thei per∣ceiued an outwarde ennemie, than were they inwardly
soone agreed: and assoone as they were sure of peace abroade, incontinently thei warred againe within them selfes. Neuerthelesse thei vsed the emperour so well with giftes and fayre woordes, that he not onely suffred theim to continue in theyr libertee, but also encreased theyr common wealth with a noumbre of priuileges: and was occasion, that after long contencion with them of Pisa, the Genowaies at length enioied quietely the one halfe of Sardegnia, whiche before the Pisani had wholly to theim selfes. ¶About this tyme the Souldan of Aegypt gotte Ieru∣salem,1190. and dyuers other citees in Soria out of the Chri∣stians handes.Richarde kynge of England. Wherfore kynge Richarde of Eng∣lande, and kynge Phillip of Fraunce made their viage into those parties, and kynge Richarde arriued at Ge∣noa with .xv. galleys, where he taried but one daie. After whom the Genowaies sente .80. saile, with men and municion to the assiege of Acon or Ptholemaida. To the succours of whiche citie the Souldan sent a ship charged with vittaill{is} and armure, and amongest other a cage full of fleeyng serpentes, purposely sent to be se foorth in the Christian army, that with theyr venim thei might plage it. But it was mette by the englishe na∣uie and taken. And the emperour Federike comyng to∣wardes the same enterprise, beyng alreadie entred into Soria, by mishappe was drowned in a riuer. ¶After whose death his sonne Henrie nexte emperour came to Genoa in his owne person,1194. requiring their helpe to the conquest of Sicilia, promisyng theim the profite, so that he myght haue the honour. Whiche so muche enflambed the hertes of the people, that they made out
a great number of galleis and other vesselles, and dyd so muche seruice, that the emperour (in maner by their power) gatte the whole ile of Sicilia: whiche he vn∣thankefully considered. For whan they had done theyr best for hym, he rewarded theim with all the spite he coulde, threatnyng to oppresse their libertee, and to make theim his subiectes: insomuche that the Pisani, through coumforte thereof, molested the Genowaies of newe, and fortifiyng Poggio di Bonifacio, fell to spoi∣lyng and rilyng of the Genowaies goodes by sea. But at length the losse tourned to theim selfes. For the Genowaies armed theim, and takyng Bonifacio by force, not onely sacked and munited it for theim selfes, but also toke a number of Pisane shippes, as thei coulde finde theim. Wherupon it folowed, that the Pisani made out their power: and so fought diuers times with the Genowaies with diuers fortune. 1201.¶The inhabitauntes of Vintimiglia breakyng the ar∣ticles of accorde betweene the Genowaies and theim, were faine to come barefoote with crosses in theyr han∣des to Genoa and aske pardon, for feare of the prepara∣cion that the citee made against theim. And the yeere folowyng, the Genowaies purchased the dominion of Gaui, of the enheritours therof: and the inhabitauntes of the vale of Arocia submitted their countrey to the Genowaies dominion. 1204.¶And because the Pisani prepared to assayle certaine Genowaie ships, comyng out of Soria, laded with riche merchandise, the citee armed certain galleis and shippes to conducte theim safely: whiche metyng togethers in the mouthe of the Adriatike sea, determined to attempt
to wynne the citee of Saragosa in Sicile lately gotten by the Pisani. In the enterprise wherof they take cer∣taine Pisane shippes: and without great feight wonne the citee, leauyng it fortified and gouerned for the com∣mon welth of Genoa. Than the Pisani made out a newe armie and besieged it, and of lykelyhod shoulde haue put it to great afterdele, if Henry erle of Malea in Greece, with certayne galleys of his owne, and other shippes of the Genowaies, that came from be easte, had not comen to the succours: who fought with the Pisa∣ne armie, and with helpe of theim that were within the towne, obteined the victory, to the great slaughter and losse of theim of Pisa. ¶And because the erle Henrie of Malea had done the Genowaies great seruice diuers waies,120. therfore they aided hym to their great charge, with galleis, shippes, men, and horses to defende Candia, whiche he had vsur∣ped vpon the Uenetians: so that the Uenetians beyng therwith agreued, immediatelie publyshed the Ge∣nowaies to be their ennemies, wherupon folowed sharpe warres betwene theim many yeres after. ¶Here is to be vnderstand,1216. that frō the yere .1080. vnto the yere .1190. the citee was gouerned freely by the cite∣sins vnder the name of Consulles without entermedling of straunge rulers, and so in maner to this tyme, though for the space of .26. yeres some straungers had ben now and than brought in as Potestates (the consules neuer∣thelesse remainyng after the olde maner) but from this tyme forewarde the Consulles ceased, and straunge Po∣testates bare the rule a great tyme after. ¶The generall armie of the Christians liyng at the122▪
siege of Damiata in Aegypte was relieued with .10. galleis sente by the Genowaies: through whose helpe the citee was gotten, with wonderfull richesse and an infinite number of slaues, besides the multitude of in∣fidelles that were slaine: howbeit the christians kepte not the citee longe, for the yere folowyng the Sarasines recouered it againe. 1222.¶Thei of Vintimiglia reelled against the Genowaies, so that after many light bickering{is}, at last an army was sente out against them, whiche laie longe at siege before the towne, and could not preuaile: so that the Potestate to be assured of that enterprise, edified an other towne betwene theim and the sea, and with a garryson helde theim so streight, that at last thei yelded: wherupon the towne beyng recouered, the Genowaies builded there two fortresses for the more suretee of the same. 1227.¶In lyke maner thei of Sauona and of Albenga rebel∣led, and were to their despite reduced to theyr former o∣bedience. But the warre that happened betwene A∣lexandria in Lumbardy, and Genoa, for the dominion of Capriata and other townes in the confynes betwene them, was not so sone appeased: though in effect the Geno∣waies at length preuailed. ¶Gregorie the .ix. bishop of Rome trauailyng to sende an armie into the holy lande,1238. agreed the Uenetians and Genowaies togethers for .ix. yeres, and bounde theim to kepe peace on payne of cursyng. But lyke as his enterprise came to naughte: so his curse coulde not kepe those two astates from renewyng of their malyce, as by their ofte fightyng with variable fortune appered after. And beyng than in contencion with the emperour Fede∣rike,
and calling a counsail in Rome against themperour, he sente to the Genowaies, praiyng theim to conueyghe in saufetee the legates and prelates that came out of the west partes towardes that counsaill. Wherfore they armed .27. galleis, and receiuyng two Cardinalles, and other prelates to the numbre of .40. at Niza in Prouance, broughte theim solemnely to Genoa, and goyng from thense with theim towardes Rome, mette with Ansaldo admirall of the emperours nauie: who foughte with them, and toke .22. of those galleis, withall those good∣ly prelates, and diuers of the chiefe of the Genowaies: and after vexed the common wealth sore in diuers partes of their dominion. And because the emperour had intelligence with diuers of the citesyns, who withstode the maintenaunce of bishop Gregorie: therefore were they for the moste parte banished, and manie of theyr houses raced to the earth: and as banished men procured many displeasures to their countrey dyuers waies. And though the most part of the imperialles were thus banished, yet diuers of that affection remained in the citee closely: insomuche that the commons deuided them openly by name, callyng the imperialles Mastarati, and the Papistes Rampini: whiche names continued till the comyng vp of Guelfi and Ghibellini, that deuided the whole Italian nacion, as is mencioned in the Florentine historie. ¶Than died the bishop Gregorie,1243. and Celestine his suc∣cessour liued but .18. daies, after whom succeded Inno∣cence the .iiii. a Genowaie borne. He folowyng the trade of his predecessours contendyng with the empe∣rour, and beyng in his daunger at Sutri in the realme of
Naples, wroughte so with the Genowaies, that they priuily made out certaine galleys, whiche came to Ci∣uita Vecchia besides Rome, to receiue the bishop, who as secretly as he coulde came thither, and toke shippyng to Genoa, where he was receiued with Gloria in exce∣sis, as reason wolde: not a little to the emperours dis∣pleasure, that before accompted him selfe in maner sure of hym. And Innocence restyng hym selfe a certayne space in Genoa, he departed towardes Lions in Fraunce, and there helde a generall counsaill agaynst the empe∣rour Federike, duryng whose life he durste not retourne into Italy: but immediately after the emperours death he came backe againe by Genoa, and was there no lesse triumphantly receiued, than he was the first tyme. 1251.¶Upon the death of this emperour the Genowaies al∣so recouered Saona and dyuers other townes, that by the emperours tyme rebelled against theim, and had dooen theim notable displeasures, as well by sea as by lande. And bishop Innocence beyng departed from Genoa to Milaine wrought so, that the banished Masta∣rati were restored to theyr countrey againe: and .10000. poundes paied theim of the comminaltee in recompence of theyr goodes taken awaie before. 157.¶And not longe after the people made a commocion a∣gainst the office of the Potestate, so that the rumour cea∣syng, they elected Guglielmo Bocanigra, a citesin, to be theyr capitaine and superiour vnto the Potestate, and all other magistrates, who beyng placed in that office for .x. yeres, by little and little vsurped the dominion ouer the whole, and so prouoked the chiefe citesins to conspyre against hym. And though he beyng aduer∣tised
of the fyrst conspiracie preuented his fall, by bani∣shyng of dyuers of the conspyratours, and by reconci∣lyng of the rest: Yet his tyrannie so muche increased: that at length, not the chiefe citesins alone, but also the commons openly rebelled, and deposed hym: reducyng the citee to the former ordre of thyr straunge Potestate. ¶In his time the citee happened to haue great warres specially with the Uenetians,1258. who hauyng lyke priuile∣ges in the citee of Acon, and in other partes of Soria, as the Genowaies had, vpon a lyght occasion brake the peace, that bishop Gregorie before had made betweene theim: so that bothe the Uenetians and the Genowaies made out notable armies into Soria, either of theim to mainteine his partie there, and after diuers skyrmisshes and light bickerynges, at last the armies mette & fought before Acon, where the Genowaies were discomfited, & xxv. of theyr galleis taken. So that those Genowaies, that than were in Acon, were constreigned to flee: And thervpon the Uenetians toke, sacked and rased their houses to the earth: and for a more despite, rooted vp a verie fayre toure of the Genowaies, and made a ponde of that place, and settyng botes thervpon, wolde saie in scorne: See where the Genowaies toure swymmeth. ¶This ouerthrowe caused the Genowaies to entre in leage with Michael Paleologo emperour of Constanti∣nople, than enemie to the Uenetians:1261▪ who gaue to the Genowaies the citee of Lesmirre, and the ile of Sio, as some affyrme. ¶Either of those common wealthes yerely made out a noumbre of galleis, whiche most commonly mette toge∣thers and fought: but the notablest conflict of all was
before Sicilia,1266. betwene Trapani and Mazara, where the Uenetians toke .xxvii. Genowaie galleis, withall the bootie and prisoners that were in theim. ¶And thoughe the Genowaies manie times gotte from the Uenetians dyuers of theyr armed galleis, and many of theyr merchaunt shippes richely laden: yet all thyn∣ges reckened, the Uenetians had the better, whether I shuld ascribe it to fortune or force, I can not well iudge. 170.¶Lewys the Frenche kynge waged a certaine noumbre of galleis and shippes, with .10000. men of the Geno∣waies, whiche serued him in his entreprise made to Tu∣nise in Afrike, where the kynge hym selfe, one of his sonnes, and dyuers other princes and a numbre of soul∣diours died of the plague: so that Charles kyng of Na∣ples, than left chiefe of the armie, fell to composicion with the kynge of Tunise, and vpon the receipte of cer∣taine money, with promyse of other thynges, dissolued the armie, and retourned homewardes without any no∣table acte: in whiche retourne he mette with Edwarde our prince, that with a goodly company was departed out of Gascoyne towardes the ayde of that enterprise, and offered hym part of the money gotten towardes his charges: but the prince refused it. Wherfor the rest of the armie, (that were sore tourmented with a great tempest, in whiche a noumbre of shippes and men were lost) seeyng the englishe armie cleere, and safe without losse: affyrmed, that it was onely because they woulde take no parte of the money receiued of the infidelles. ¶And thoughe the Genowaies bothe for shippes and noumbre of men deserued moste in this viage: yet had kyng Charles so little respecte to theim, that those that
remained, retourned to Genoa not onely without gaine or rewarde, but gladde with theyr great losse to be at home againe. ¶About this tyme, by reason of the Guelfe and Ghibel∣line parties, that corrupted all Italie (as in the Floren∣tine historie appeareth, dyuers of the chiefe houses of Genoa likewyse diuided theim selfes into those sectes: insomuche that they of the houses of Doria and Spi∣noli, with helpe of theyr partetakers, by force expulsed the Flischi and Grimaldi out of the citee, and banished those two families, with a numbre of others, which ba∣nished men, with helpe of a Cardinall of the Flischi, pro∣uoked Charles than kynge of Naples, to make warre against the Genowaies, whiche endured not longe. For Oberto Spinola, and Oberto Doria, that toke vpon theim the absolute power, and ruled the citee certaine yeres, kepyng theyr aduersaries out, were by faire mea∣nes so entreated of Innocence the .v. than bishoppe of Rome,1376. that the banished men were quietely reconciled and called home: the gouernaunce of the citee neuer∣thelesse remainyng in the handes of the Oberti as it did before. ¶And than the common wealth bought of Nicolas De Flischo certaine townes and territories to the value of 25000. pounde, whiche thei well and truely paied him. But the Flischi and Grimaldi continued scarcely .xii. monethes at home, but thei were accused of conspiracie against the astate, and so banished of new. ¶And though kynge Phillip of France had before this tyme made peace for a season betweene the Uenetians and Genowaies, in hope of an enterprise that he enten∣ded
toward{is} the holie lande: yet the auncient hate was suche betweene theim, that the one coulde scarce meete with the other on the sea, but that they would fight to∣gethers, and take that aduauntage that they wolde doe in warre. 1282. Giudice.¶Than began Giudice di Ginercha in Corsica to trou∣ble the Genowaie vessels, and at lengthe to declare him selfe open ennemie to theim. Wherefore they made out a power againste hym, and expulsed hym out of his astate. But by theim of Pisa he was by force restored againe: for the whiche the warre renewed betwene the Genowaies and the Pisani, one of the blouddiest warr{is} and greattest by sea that hath lightly ben hearde of be∣twene two common wealthes. For within the space of three yeres their armies foughte .iiii. battailes, and theyr diligence was suche, that whan the one army was discomfited (whiche for the moste parte hapi to the Pi∣sani) thei wolde within a moneth or .vi. weekes repaire their number of galleis as stronge as at the fyrste, not of olde galleis, but of newe timber. And it wolde seeme incredible to hym that knoweth those two citees, that thei should be able (hauyng so little dominion) to make suche powers one against an other, as by their chronicles appereth they did. 1284.¶For the Genowaies vppon a sodeine tidynges of the Pisanes landyng in Porto Venere, armed .70. galleys in lesse than .iii. daies, and sette them foorthe to the sea, and in the same yere was .58. galleis, and .viii. Pamphili (whiche be boares of .140. or .160. ores) made readie in Genoa in a daie: whiche with the reste of the armie, to the number of .88. galleis, besides other ves∣selles,
sailed foorth before the hauen of Pisa, where af∣ter a cruell and blouddie battaill the Genowaies had the victorie, toke .28. Pisane galleis, boulged seuen, put the reste to flight, and ledde with theim .9272. prisoners, whose raunsome yelded vnto the Genowaies no small summes of money: and though this ouerthrow shoulde seeme almoste sufficient to be the destruction of a great prince, yet did that one citie of Pisa so beare it, that after a little dissembled peace they declared and contynued enemies a longe while after againste the Genowaies, and fought many battailes by sea with diuers fortune. ¶The nobilitee of Genoa conspired against the gouer∣nours and people, to take from theim the rule,1289. because the citee was gouerned more after the commons will, than the gentilmens. And this conspiracy was so close kept (notwithstandyng that in maner all the chiefe fa∣milies, as Grimaldi, Flischi, Negri, Malloni, Salatici, Embriaci, & others were confederates in it) that it was neuer knowen, till they were in the streetes armed on horsebacke and on foote, and had taken the churche of saincte Laurence: But folowyng to the Abbotes house (for so was the chiefe ruler called) the people assem∣bled and resisted the conspiratours in suche wise, that the nobilitee was faine to laie downe their weapons, v∣pon promise to be pardoned of life and goodes. By reason wherof the commocion ceased, and certaine of the principall causes were banished for a time. ¶Upon examinacion,1290. what power the Genowais were able to make by sea in tyme of nede, it was founde they had .120. galleis, furnished with their owne chosen men. Wherof .40. were immediatly sent foorth against Pisa.
whiche entred the hauen, destroied the great toure that the Pisanes had made there for theyr defence, toke the towne of Ligorno, and raced it to the earth: and finally brake the great chaine that crossed the water, a great parte wherof they broughte with theim to Genoa, and there openly hanged it vp for a perpetuall memory of their victories. ¶Where as the commons the yere before had defended their rulers from the conspiracie of the nobilitee, now they them selfes beganne to moue and to make rumours against theim: so that the capitaines of their owne ac∣corde gaue vp their offices to the people, wherevpon a newe order was taken, that they shoulde haue a straun∣ger to be their capitaine, and the reste of all the offi∣cers, as the counsaylours, the Antiani, and suche other, should be made halfe of the gentilmen, and halfe of the people. 12.¶Not longe after vppon a lighte occasion, the truce was broken betwene the Genowaies and the Uenetians, and either of theim armed a certaine number of galleis to the sea, and in the Leuaunte seas before the hauen of Giacia meite and foughte, where the lesse number,  Genowaies ouercame the greater number, and take .25. of their galleis.1294. ¶Here it is to be noted, that within the space of .vii. yeres, from the beginnyng of the laste warres againste Pisa, it appereth, that the Genowaies at sundrie tymes had armed .627. saile, besides the merchaunt shippes and galeis, that yerely amounted to .70. or moe. And the custome of comers and goers, with the taxe of salte, yelded yerely vnto the comminaltee aboue an .140000.
poundes (euery pounde of theirs beyng two of ours, or theraboutes) whiche semeth a thyng incredible. ¶Than were the Mascharati and Rampini of the citee (whiche were also as Guelfi and Ghibellini) made at one,1295. after they had contended as ennemies more than 50. yeres. Whervpon (hearyng of a great preparaci∣on that the Uenetians made to reuenge theyr losse the yere before) the Genowaies armed .165. galleis wherof 105. were new, in the whiche thei had .45000. feightyng men, all of their owne subiectes, vnder the leadyng of Oberto d' Oria, admirall for that vyage: who wente into Sicile, thinkyng there to mete the Uenetians, but thei mette not, so that the army returned without doyng any feae: and their wealthe was suche, that .8000. men of that armie were cloathed in clothe of golde and silkes. ¶The olde enuie betwene the Guelfi and Ghibellini renewed, so that the citee was deuided, that is to wete,1296. the families of Spinola, and Doria, with their folowers on the one parte, and Flischi and Grimaldi, with theyr secte on the other parte: so that they foughte from the later ende of December, vnto the .vii. of February daie by daie, and burned diuers goodlie houses: but at laste Spinola and Doria preuailed, and the other were driuen out of the towne and banished. By reason wherof .ii. capitaines of those .ii. houses were elected to the rule of the citee after the olde maner, and the straunge capi∣taine, with the Potestate discharged. ¶Lamba d' Oria,12▪ beyng one of the capitaines of the towne, and admyrall of the armie by sea, entred the Uenetian golfe, fought with the Uenetian army, burned
77. galleis, and brought .18. with .7400 prisoners to Genoa, and neuerthelesse shortly after made peace with the Uenetians, and graunted truce to theim of Pisa for 27. yeres. For the whiche the Pisani, yelded to the Genowaies the ile of Corsica, and the citee of Saffari in Sardegnia, with .135000. poundes in money. 1304.¶The emperour Adronico Paleologo of Constantino∣ple, for the great amitee betweene hym and the Geno∣waies, gaue theim the grounde, wheron Pera standeth, a myle distant from Constantinople, where all the Chri∣stians now dwell, fyrst builded by the Genowaies. 1306.¶Within two yeres after beganne the discorde, that caused so muche mischiefe betwene the houses of Spine∣la and Doria, (whiche before tyme had been stedfast friendes together) and endured the space of .xv. yeres with muche bloudshedyng, till the comyng of the empe∣rour Henrie the .vi. to Genoa, who agreed bothe parties, and so behaued hym, that the citesins bounde theim sel∣fes by feaultee vnto his obedience for terme of .xx. ye∣res:112. whiche was the fyrst tyme that the citee submitted hir selfe to the dominion of any straunger. Notwith∣standyng whan the emperour was departed, those two parties Spinola and Doria fought openly in the citee, so that at length the Spinoli (beyng the weaker) were driuen out with well nere all their partetakers,1315. and yet the warre continued betwene them the space of .24. ye∣res, aswell within as without the citee, to the great do∣mage, and almost destruction of the common wealth. For many tymes the banished men by meane of friendes were reconciled againe: and whan thei were ones retur∣ned, than did they worse than euer they did before.
¶This discension was not onely betwene those two fa∣milies of Spinola and Doria, but also betwene the se∣ctes of Guelfes and Ghibellines: into whiche parties the whole citee was lykewyse diuided:1318▪ so that the Ghi∣bellines, whiche than were banisshed by helpe of the Visconti of Myllaine, and of other Ghibellines, made a great armie: and vnder the leadyng of Marke, sonne to Mathewe Visconti, came before Genoa, toke the suburbes, and streigned the citee so sore, that if it had not been succoured by kyng Robert of Naples (who in his owne person, with .25. galleis entred the hauen) the Ghibellines had been lyke to haue taken it. Wherfore they of the citee, to make theim selfes stronge, yelded the dominion into the handes of the bishop of Rome, and of the foresaied kynge of Naples, for the space of .x. yeres: in whiche tyme were so many ciuile battailes stricken, so muche bloudshedde, so many townes and houses de∣stroyed and burned, so many galleis and shippes broken drowned and lost, and so great summes of money spent, that it seemeth a wonder how so little a countrey shuld bringe foorth so great furniture, and all to mischiefe. ¶Finally kynge Robert (to whom the rule of the citee was prolonged for .vi. yeres) called the ambassadours,133. aswell of the Ghibellines as of the Guelfes, to Na∣ples: and there made theim to conclude a peace, so that the Ghibellines were reconciled home, where thei liued not longe in quiete, as hereafter shall appeare. ¶In the time of this warre one notable policie was v∣sed by sea. The yere before conclusion of this peace,Policie. Federike Marabotto, capitaine of .ix. galleis of the Gu∣elfes (wherof .ii. were drowned in Sardegnia) was
chased by Aitono Doria, capitaine of .xiiii. of the Ghi∣belline galleis, and came so neere with the nyght, that they were within a flight shotte together: so that Fede∣rike coulde by no meane escape: Wherfore in the darke of the nyght, he set foorth a little emptie vessell, with a burnyng lanterne in it, and caused all the lyghtes of his galleys to be put out. This dooen he lette the little vessell lose: whiche the wawes of the sea by little and little draue towardes the lande: so that Aitono thyn∣kyng it to be the galleis that he had in chace, folowed, and by that meane was so farre from Federike er it was daie, that Federike easily escaped the daunger. 1332.¶Than beganne the Catalaines to make warre to the Genowaies vpon a veraie light occasion, whiche conti∣nued a great while, with many notable battailes by sea, more to the losse of the Catalaines than of the Geno∣waies: though the better of bothe had no cause to tri∣umphe.1335. But those forein warres were nothing so hurt∣full to the citee, as theyr owne ciuile sedicion, whiche shortly after renued betwene the Guelfes and Ghibel∣lines: so that within the citee they fought a certaine space with variable fortune, till at length the Ghibelli∣nes preuailed, and chased awaie the Guelfes: and so an other while toke the rule vpon theim. Wherfore the Guelfes fortified theim selfes at Monaco, and made out dyuers armies by sea: whiche were dyuers tymes mette withall, by the contrary parte, thoughe in effecte there happened no notable battaile betwene theim. 1338.¶Not longe after the Frenche kynge warryng with Englande, hyred .40. galleis of the Genowaies: wher∣of .xx. were of the Ghibellines in Genoa, and .xx. of
the Guelfes in Monaco: whiche whan they had ser∣ued hym a yere, retourned not well contented with their paiement, so that the mariners and other meane souldi∣ours toke the rule of the galleis from theyr capitaines: and were growen to suche a courage,1339. that whan they landed, they moued the commons to rebell against the rule of the common wealth, and subuertyng the citee of Sauona, with most part of the countrey theraboutes, the commons of Genoa toke courage therupon to arme them selfes, and to renne to the palaice criyng, that thei wold haue an Abbotte made of the people, and would no more be ruled by the capitaines. Wherfore the nobles (see∣yng theyr power inferiour to the peoples furie) assem∣bled together, and fell to counsaile for chosyng of this new Abbotte, in whiche counsaile they taried so longe within, that the people without were werie, and vp start a poore wyredrawer or a goldsmith (to geue him the bet∣ter name) and asked the people, whether they would be ruled by hym? Whervnto many answeared: yea, well (quod he) and than shall Simonine Bocanegra be our lorde and ruler. Be it (quod one) and be it quod an o∣ther: so that the people with an whole voyce cried, Ab∣botte Bocanegra. But he (who was a good man) did what he coulde to refuse it: and they seyng that, amen∣ded the mattier with criyng not Abbotte but Duke: so that in conclusion, whether he woulde or no, the abso∣lute power was put in his hande, and he called Duke: beyng the fyrst that euer had that title in Genoa. Than was a law made, that none should be called to any rule or office of the common wealthe, vnlesse he were a Ghi∣belline.
1340.¶The Turke at this tyme waxed great, and had cer∣taine galleis goyng vpon the sea called Mare Maggiore (otherwise Pontus Euxinus) which had robbed certaine merchaunt shippes of the Genowaies, wherfore they ar∣med theim selfes in Caffa, and meetyng, fought with the Turk{is} army, and recouered not onely their owne good{is}, but also toke .x. Turkish galleis and a shippe with great bootie. 1344.¶Likewise the emperour of the Tartares made warre on the Genowaies, and besieged them in Caffa (a towne situate in the confines of Tartarie) out of the whiche the Genowaies issuyng by night, burned the Tartares engines, and slewe .5000. men: so that their emperour sent to Genoa for peace, and vnder colour therof (ob∣teignyng it) did them muche more hurte by treason than he had done in open warre. For he spoiled them at one time of .200000. poundes. ¶The Nobilitee of Genoa (that than were banished) seeyng the astate ruled all by the people, assembled theyr powers, and came before the citee, so that Bocanegra (seeyng also the nobilitee and people within the citee in maner at an open contencion for the same) deposed hym selfe of his dignitee, and departed out of the citee: In whose place Iohn di Morta was by the people elected,1345. and the nobilitee kepte out, till by the awarde of Lucchi∣no Visconti, lorde of Millaine (to whose iudgement the mattier was committed) they were restored to the citee, and to parte of their goodes, the rule remaignyng neuer∣thelesse at the peoples will. 1346.¶All this while, thei of Monacho mainteigned warre against Genoa, and had newly armed .34. galleis wher∣fore
they of Genoa armed also .29. so that because they wolde not meete togethers, thei of Monaco went to serue Phillip the Frenche kynge against our kynge Edwarde the .iii. in whiche warres they had so good successe, that one galley of theim neuer retourned home agayne: but the other army of Genoa, vnder the leadyng of Si∣monde Vignioso prospered veray muche. For after diuers enterprises atchieued in the realme of Naples, he entred into the Archipelago (otherwise called Mare E∣geum) and there gatte the ile of Sio, whiche in processe of tyme hath been occasion of wonderfull gayne and wealth to the Genowaies: and besides that at the same tyme he gatte the two citees called Foglie Vecchie. ¶Than renewed the warre betwene the Uenetians and the Genowaies, wherin were diuers battailles stricken,1350. one before Constantinople, where the Uenetians were discomfited, with the losse of .30. galleis: an other in Sardegnia, where the Genowaies were discomfited, with the losse of .41. galleis, and an other at the ile of Sapien∣tia, where the Uenetians lost .40. saile, besides dyuers others of lesse importaunce. ¶And though it seeme,135. that the Genowaies gotte moste in these last warres with the Uenetians: yet their gaine was so blouddie & costly, that in maner of necessitee thei submitted theim selfes to Iohn than archebishop and lorde of Millaine.1356. Under whom it continued scarce∣ly .iii. yeres, but that the people (beyng offended with the taxes that he bishop required of theim) restored Si∣monde Bocanegra to the astate of Duke: wherof he had deposed him selfe before: and he in recompence therof, deposed all the nobilitee, and gaue the offices amongest
the people. For whiche were dyuers conspiracies wroughte against him: and (as some holde opinion) at length he was poysoned at a bankette made to the kyng of Cyprus, as he passed that waie into Fraunce. 1363.¶Gabriell Adorno was made Duke nexte after hym, who continued the space of .v. yeres, till the people mis∣liked his rule, and by force deposyng him, created Do∣menyke Di Campo Fregoso in his roome. In whose tyme happened the businesse in Cyprus betwene the Ue∣netians and Genowaies for goyng on the vpper hande,1370.1372. whiche afterwardes was occasion of cruell warres. ¶It happened vpon the death of kyng Peter of Cyprus (who in the nighte was slayne by his brethern) that as his sonne Peter shoulde goe to the cerimony of his coro∣nacion, the Uenetians and Genowaies than presente, contended veray ernestly for the vpper hande, whiche at length by order of the kynges counsaill was geuen to the Uenetians, so that the Genowaies, preparyng theim selfes to be reuenged, were discouered, taken, and slayne, that of as many as wer in Cyprus, there escaped but one to bryng home newes of this mattier: whiche at length caused the destruction of that lande. ¶For the Genowaies made out an armie, and the same daie .xii. monethes,1373. that thei were beaten, thei entred by force into Famagosta (the chiefe citee of Cyprus) and toke all the nobilitee of the realme .iii. of the chiefe they put to death, because they had been their enemies, and hauynge all the realme at theyr disposicion, they restored it to the yonge kyng Peter, reseruing Famagosta to theim selfes, with a trybute of .40000. Florines: whiche they enioyed vnto the yere of our lorde .1464.
and besides that thei brought diuers noble men and gen∣tilmen of the Cipriottes prisoners vnto Genoa, amongest whom was the kynges vncle Iames Lusigniano, who beyng kept in the tower Capo di Faro, begatte a sonne called Iano, and was afterwardes kyng him selfe. ¶And albeit that Domenyke di Campo Fregoso (who for the space of .viii. yeres had been Duke) ruled the astate so well, that no man coulde iustly reproue him,1378. yet the inconstant multitude, with a little steryng of some that were great, made a commocion against him, and not onely deposed hym, and put hym and his brother Peter (generall of the enterprise of Cyprus) in prison, but also banished all theim of the house of Fregoso: who for a great space had ben notable ministers of the common wealth. ¶But this ingratitude of the people can be no wonder to theim that haue redde histories.Ingrati∣tude of people. For it is almost or∣dinarie with the people to render yll for good. ¶Than was Nicolas di Guarco elected Duke: By whose tyme happened that notable warre betwene the Genowaies and Uenetians, wherin after dyuers fortu∣nes and victories on bothe partes, the Uenetians loked to be beaten out of theyr houses. For the Genowaies with helpe of theyr colleges so sore oppressed theyr po∣wer by sea, that they were driuen into theyr owne ha∣uen, and Peter Doria came with the armie before the two castelles at Lio, within two mile of Uenice, so that if the Site of the place made not the citee imprenable: of likelihode the Uenetians had been subdued. For they sent their ambassadours to Peter Doria to require peace with large condicions, who (not beyng contented
to haue the honour with a reasonable aduantage) wold needes thei should yelde theim selfes and theyr citee to be at his discreacion. The extremitee of whiche aunswere made the Uenetians so desperate, that strai∣nyng their vttermoste powers togethers, at length they discoumfited the Genowaies army, slew Peter Doria, toke .xix. galleis, and more than .4000. prisoners: and so recouered Chiozza, withall theyr other places about theyr marisshes, that were before taken from theim. And than encreased their courage so muche, that Carlo Zeno, with certaine Uenetian galleis, entred the riuer of Genoa, and helde the Genowaies short, till by meane of the Duke of Sauoie the peace was made betweene theim.1381. 1383.¶Than died kynge Peter of Cyprus, whom to succede the barons elected his vncle Iames, then prisoner in Ge∣noa: who vpon aduertisement therof was not onely put at libertee, but also (after great feastes and honor) sent home with .x. galleis of the common wealthes: fyrste binding him selfe to certaine articles aswell for the pai∣ment of a yerely tribute, as also for the citee of Famago∣sta, whiche remained in the Genowaies possession. ¶About this tyme were so many commocions in the ci∣tee, for chosing of theyr Dukes, that I thinke there was neuer so muche alteracion of rulers in one cōmon welth for the tyme. And because the rehersall therof wolde occupie a greatter roume than my purpose dooeth here allow: it shall suffise to saie, that as longe as the rule of the common wealth consisted in the wil of the multitude, neuer was so inconstant an astate as that of Genoa: For amongest other in the chaunge betwene Domenyke
di Campo Fregoso and Nicolas Guarco were .iii. Dukes in a daie: Fregoso deposed in the mornyng, and Adorno incontinently made, and at after noone Ador∣no deposed, and Guarco made. Wherfore as super∣fluouse to treate of all the Dukes elections, I woulle hensfoorth speake no more of theyr chaunges, without great cause. ¶The Moores of Barbarie in this tyme scoured all the middle seas,1389. robbyng and spoilyng all that euer thei coulde take. Wherfore the Genowaies with dyuers others made suite vnto the Frenche kynge for an enter∣prise to be made against the kynge of Tunise. Whiche the Frenche kyng graunted, and sent the Duke of Bour∣bon as generall, not onely with a greatte power of Frāce, but also with aide that was sent him out of Eng∣lande, in whose company the Genowaies sent .40. gal∣leis, and .xx. shippes of theirs, vnder the leadyng of Iohn Centurione. And theyr Chronicle maketh men∣cion, how our Englishe archers behaued them selfes at theyr landyng in Barbarie so wel, that the Moores gaue theim plae: wheras without theim the armie shoulde haue had muche adooe to lande. The ende of whi∣che iourney was, that the kynge of Tunise released all Christian slaues, wherof there wer a noumbre in his realme, and paied the Christians .10000. duckates, with promyse to trouble the seas no more. ¶From the yere .1390. till .1396. was so muche adooe for makyng and deposyng of Dukes,1396. that Antoniotto Adorno had been .iiii. tymes Duke, besides .viii. or ix. others, that had been put in and out the meane tyme, with so muche bloudshed, burnyng, and spoilyng, that
at length for veraie desperacion the citee sent ambassa∣dours to Charles the .vi. Frenche kyng, besechyng hym to take the dominion therof into his handes. Who at theyr request sent the Counte of sainct Paule, and the bishop of Meaux to be rulers there, and to receiue the fortresses into his possession:1397. whiche immediately were deliuered to them, & feaultie sworne by all the subiectes. ¶The Frenche Gouernour had not been there fully a yere, but the sectes of Guelfes and Ghibellines renued so sore,1398. that after muche burnyng, spoilyng and kyllyng in the countrey theraboutes, the Ghibellines entred into the citee, and from the .xvi. of Iulie, to the .v. of Se∣ptember fought daie by daie with the Guelfes, and for∣tifiyng the one halfe of the citee, against the other, they neuer ceased, till bothe parties were tyred with the fury of theyr owne bloudde and flambe. For amongest their feightyng it was a common matter to set one an others house on fyre: so that the losse that the common wealth susteigned in this rage, was esteemed muche more than a myllion of golde. ¶The bishoppe of Meaulx, than gouernour of the citee, for feare of his owne life, fledde in the middest of this furie.1399. So that whan it was past, the Frenche kynge sent thither in his steede one Collarde, a counsailour of his, who by the Genowaies was honourably receiued. He gouerned not muche more than a yere, but by meane of a new secte, called La Scorzola, he was faine to ha∣bandone the citee,1400. leauyng theim together by the eares after theyr old maner, feightyng and burnyng amongest theim selfes daie by daie:1401. whiche ceased not, till the co∣myng of Bouciquart marshall of Fraunce, who beyng
the kynges lieuetenant, entred into Genoa with a thou∣sand souldiours, and incontinently proceded against the steerrers of the common wealthe, causyng two of the chiefe of the citee Battista Boccanegra, and Battista de Frauchi, to be taken & brought to the palaice, and behea∣ded Boccanegra: vpon whose death the people beganne suche a crie, that they whiche had the other in kepyng: lette hym go: so that whan the rumour was past, Bou∣ciquart in a great rage, caused the chiefe officer of the wardes head to be stricken of, because through his mens negligence, happened the escape. ¶Than did Bouciquart also fortifie the little castell,1402. now called Castelletto, and put a garrison into it: and whan he had taken aswell from the men of the countrei as of the towne, all kynde of armure (theyr swordes ex∣cepted) than spared he none of theim: But for euerie occasion of any importaunce, woulde behead the offen∣dour without any respect to his qualitee or kinne: And his procedynges were suche, that the Frenche kyng con∣fyrmed hym in that office for terme of life: to the great contentacion of the citesins, who in his rigorous iustice founde greater ease, than in the softe procedynges of the other gouernours: whose gentilnesse gaue libertee to the presumptuouse multitude to doe what thei wolde, whiche was theyr owne destruction. ¶Than Iano kynge of Cyprus (who had been borne, bredde vp,1403. & well intreated in Genoa) laied siege to the citee of Famagosta, intendyng to gette it from the Geno∣waies: but an armie of .18. sae was incontinently made thither, vnder the leading of Bouciquart, who not onely raysed the siege, but also constreigned the kynge to paie
their charges, and atchieued diuers other enterprises on the costes of Soria: neuerthelesse in his retourne the Uenetians mette with hym, and puttyng him to flight, toke .iii. of his galeis: and yet was the mattier so hand∣led, that the warre betweene the Uenetians and Geno∣waies ceassed for this time. In dede Bouciquart in his owne quarell defied the Duke of Uenice, and Carlo Zeno, capitaine of the Uenetian galleis, to feight either hande to hande, or number for number: but he was not aunswered. Bouci∣quart.¶This Bouciquart, for the space of .viii. yeres ruled the common wealth of Genoa: by whiche tyme the citee of Serezana, with the countee about came to the obedience of the Genowaies. Because they were of them selfes no more able to resiste the Florentines: and Bouciquart solde to the common wealthe, the Porte of Ligorno be∣sides Pisa for .26000. duckates. ¶By his tyme also Benedict the .xii. Scismatike bishop of Rome, came to Genoa, and was there triumphantly receiued. And the office of. S. George was than deui∣sed, whiche endureth to this day. ¶The Siotes also rebelled, in so muche that Bouci∣quart, with .vi. galleis went thither, and reduced them to their former obedience. ¶Finally couetyng to haue the rule of the astate of Mil∣laine, he made an armie of .6000. footemen, and .5000. horsmen, and (not mistrustyng any alteracion in Genoa) passed the reicte into Lumbardie.1409. But the meane while the people murmored aginst him, and at last rebel∣led and slew all the Frenchemen thei coulde finde with∣in the dominion, and thau receyued the Marques of
Monferrato, with a certaine power of men into the citee, who was made capitaine and president there, with a sti∣pende of .15000. pounde by the yere. So that whan Bouciquart wolde retourne, it was to late. For than the Genowaies woulde bee no longer subiectes to the Frenche kynge. ¶The Marques continued not fully .iiii. yeres,1413. but they rebelled, and expulsed hym out of theyr dominion, partly by force and partly by agreement. For thei gaue hym .24500. duckates for the restitucion of those tow∣nes and fortresses that he had of theyrs in his handes. And than fell they to a newe ordre with the election of a Duke muche after their olde maner: so that George Adorno was made Duke for that time. ¶And albeit there coulde no faute be founde in him, for he was a good iusticer, and a man endued with muche hu∣manite, yet was he scarcely .ii. yeers in that office, but Battista Montaldo conspired against him.1415. Whereof folowed so muche ciuile warre betwene parties in the citee, that there were aboue .100. men slaine, and that manie of the best sorte, and .146. houses burned, spoiled and destroied: and so muche hurte done besides, that it were to lamentable to tell. ¶Finally bothe parties weeried, they fell to agrement: so that George Adorno willingly renounced the astate of Duke: and Barnabas di Goano was elected in his steede. Who within the space of a yere was also depo∣sed, and Thomas Di Campo Fregoso made Duke in his place. ¶This man immediately after his election,1416. to gette the loue of the people, disbursed .60000. duckates of his
owne, to the reliefe of the common wealthe: whiche at that time was farre in debte. And yet for all that the common wealth was brought to suche pouertee, by their owne ciuile sedicion, and resisting Duke Phillip of Mil∣laine, who than made sharpe warre vpon theim, that for veray necessitee they solde the porte of Ligorno to the Florentines for .120000. duckates. ¶And to encrease their calamitee kyng Alfonse of Ara∣gone (goyng out of Spaine to gete the realme of Na∣ples) landed in Corsica vpon the Genowaies dominion, and there besiegeyng Bonifacio put theim to no smalle charge in the rescue thereof: wherin surely the Geno∣waies bare theim selfes wonderfull valiauntely, not∣withstandyng that by their continuall warres specially againste the Duke of Millaine, they were broughte to suche pouertee, that they were fayne at last to submitte them selfes to the Duke of Millaine,1421. and in recompence of the deposyng of their owne Duke, gaue hym .30000. Florines, with the lordeship of Serezana. Than was capitaine Carmigniola made ruler of the citee for the Duke,1422. in whose tyme an armie was made out into the realme of Naples against kynge Alfonse, vnder the lea∣dyng of Guido Torello, who by composicion toke the cities of Gaetta and Naples, and did so muche, that the Spaniardes forsoke the realme, and so had the Duke of Millaine his purpose there, though he vsed it but easely: for by faire entreatie he restored to Queene Iohan, all that the Genowaies had gotten from hir. Besides that the Duke suffered the common wealth to decay, by reason that diuers (partely by his appoynctmente, and partly by his consent) occupied certain townes and pos∣sessions
to their owne vses, whiche before belonged to the comminaltee. Wherwith the Genowaies were muche offended, thoughe for that tyme they duse not surre. ¶And Albeit that the Genowaies serued hym notablie in his warres againste the Uenetians,1437. speciallie in the conflicte betwene theim on the riuer of Pò, nere to Cre∣mona, where the Uenetians receiued a great discomfi∣ture: yet whan the Uenetians made warre agayne vpon the Genowaies, onely to be reuenged of their losse on the Pò, Duke Phillip nothyng ayded the Genowaies: so that the Uenetians discomfited their army before the churche of saincte Fruttuoso: where the Uenetians toke viii. galleis: and pursuyng their victorie, seeyng the Ge∣nowaies scarce able to arme theim, and the ile of Sio vndefended, made thither: and gaue diuers assaultes to the citee, thinkyng to gette it. But the Sotes, with helpe of a few Genowaies that thei had there, defended theim selfes so valiauntlie, that the Uenetians were faine to retire with great losse of their men. ¶Than retourned kynge Alfonse of Aragone into the realme of Naples, and besieged Gaetta,1434. to the rescue wherof Blasio d' Asseretto was sent, with .xv. saile, and not fully .3000. men: who mette and fought with the kyng, the sorest battaile that hapned in those daies, for so small a noumbre. For the kynge set on the Ge∣nowaies armie with double the noumbre of men, and with great aduauntage of shippes and galleis: yet did the Genowaies so obstinately feight it out, that of the kynges parte thei slew aboue .5000. and toke the kyng with his .ii. bretherne, a noumbre of Dukes and Erles,
and aboue .200. knightes prisoners: with so muche spoile of golde, siluer, iewelles, and other treasure, that the lyke bootie hath not lightly been heard of: All whiche they brought in saufetee to Genoa: sauyng the kynges person, whiche by the Duke of Myllaines commaunde∣ment was had to Sauona, and from thense to Millaine: where he was not entreated as a prisoner, but at length not onely without raunsome, but also with great presen∣tes set at libertee, and that without the Genowaies con∣sent: whiche with diuers other vnkyndnesses and iniu∣ries dooen to theim by the Duke, caused the Genowaies to retourne to theyr owne wonted willes: so that tho∣rough procurement of Frances Spinola, the whole citee was in armes:1436. and expulsing and sleayng all the Du∣kes ministers, toke on them theyr old libertie, and made Thomas Di Campo Fregoso Duke againe: who con∣tinued in the same about .vi. yeres. In whiche time Raynolde Duke of Angio (that claimed the realme of Naples) came to Genoa, and was not onely well re∣ceiued there, but also aided with certaine armed galleis towardes his enterprise, and Nicolas Fregoso sent for capitaine with him: by whose helpe he gatte the Castell Nouo in Naples, and so muche prospered otherwaies, that it was a great whyle doubted, who shoulde enioye the realme, either Raynolde, or kynge Alfonse. But at last Raynolde for lacke of men and money was faine to leaue the entreprise, so that the Genowaies retourned without any recompence of their great charg{is} susteigned in that quarel.1442. And than was king Alfonse in theyr taile by sea: so that they were no sooner vnarmed, but that he ouerranne all the Genowaie costes. The like wher∣of
did the Duke of Myllaine by lande: and so was the common wealth in maner besieged on bothe sydes. ¶In the middest wherof beganne a conspiracie against the Duke,1443, 1444▪ who was deposed and Rafaell Adorno settled in his place. Than peace was obteined of kynge Al∣fonse vpon certaine condicions, as the necessitee of the time would allow: amongest whiche one was, that the Genowaies shoulde yerely sende hym a basen of golde as a present, or rather as a tribute, as he toke it. ¶Rafaell Adorno beyng persuaded,1447. that the common wealth should amende, if he renounced the Duchie, lefte it willyngly. Whervpon Barnabas Adorno toke vpon hym: but Ianus Di Campo Fregoso entred by nyght into the citee, and deposyng Barnabas by force: toke the astate vpon hym, and died within two yeres. ¶After whom succeded Lewys Fregoso, and after him Peter Fregoso. In whose tyme the dominion of Cor∣sica, with the profittes comyng out of Caffa, and out of the other places, subiecte to the Genowaies in the easte, were all conuerted to the magistrate of saincte George: and the citee of Pera against Constantinople (whiche apperteined before to the Genowaies) was yelded to the Turke, whan Constantinople was gotten.1454. ¶Iohn Duke of Angio,1458. sonne to the forenamed Ray∣nolde, came this yere vnto Genoa, where by accorde of the citesins, he receiued the citee into the dominion of the Frenche kyng, and therupon toke their feaultee. But than came kyng Alfonse before the hauen with a notable army, and so sore streigned the citee by siege, that if death had not taken hym the rather out of the waie, he muste needes haue gotten it. Wheras his death vnloked for,
caused the whole armie to skatter here and there: by reason whereof the Genowaies were delyuered, euen whan they despaired of all mercy, knowyng how muche the kynge was bent to their destruction. ¶Than incontinently thei made out an army in fauour of Duke Iohn̄ towardes the recouerie of the realme of Naples, whiche did hym notable seruice, though in ef∣fecte his purpose proued not. 1459.¶This meane while Peter Fregoso, that had been Duke, seeyng the power of the citee well abated by sen∣dyng out of this armie, made a power, and imagenyng howe he myghte recouer his astate, entred the citee by nyght. But this Duke Iohn with the citesins resisted, fought with hym all nyght and a part of the daie, and at last repulsyng his men, by chaunce locked hym with a few moe within the gates: where at last he was slaine: and some of his alies and confederates taken and be∣headed. 1490.¶But Duke Iohn̄ after this victorie rested not longe, till the commons beganne to contende for paiement of taxes, and findyng faulte with the burdein that was laied vpon theim, toke their weapons in hande, and con∣streigned the Duke with all his frenchemen to flee into the Castell. Where they besieged him: and than made Prospero Adorno theyr Duke: so that Raynolde, fa∣ther vnto the besieged Duke (with helpe of the frenche kynge) made a great armie by sea and lande, and came to Genoa, where he was well fought withall, discoum∣fited, and lost .2500. men: so that the Genowaies re∣mained in theyr libertee: and yet were the ennemies no sooner retyred, but ciuile sedicion sprange vp amongest
theim within the citee. For the Duke Adorno could not be contented to suffre the Fregosi to tarie within the citee, whervpon either of theim made what power they coulde: And the Fregosi hauyng the better hande, ex∣pulsed Adorno, & made one of theyr owne name Duke. ¶This ouerthrow was so displeasaunt to the Frenche kynge,1462. that kepyng Sauona a certaine space in his han∣des, and seeyng the maintenaunce therof ouerchargea∣ble for hym, gaue it vnto Fraunces Sforza than Duke of Myllaine, withall his right vnto the astate of Ge∣noa. Whervpon Sforza sent an armie thither vnder the leadyng of Gasparo di Vicomercato,1464. and easely ob∣teined the dominion of the citee, by reason that Paule Fregoso, than bothe Duke and archebishop of Genoa, fledde without makyng any resistence, knowing that the people hated hym for his great tyrannie. ¶Thus Gasparo beyng in the Dukes name placed in the rule of the citee, the Genowaies sent .xxiiii. of their chiefest citesins in ambassade to Myllaine, to gratifie the Duke: that amiably receiued them. And glad were the Genowaies, that thei had gottē him to be theyr lorde because the good gouernaunce of his owne subiectes made them to hope for lyke wealth and rest: as it proued in deede. But he lyued not fully .ii. yeres after.1466. ¶Than succeded his sonne Galeazzo: In whose time the Turke gatte the citee of Caffa, with dyuers other townes in the easte parties,1475. apperteinyng to the Geno∣waies: Whiche was not onely a great hyndraunce to theyr wealth, but also to theyr reputacion. ¶And because this Galeazzo shewed hym selfe some what vnthankefull to the Genowaies (beyng in deede a wilfull yonge man) therfore the people murmoured a∣gainst
him, and ones rebelled by procurement of Ierome Gentile:1476. whiche neuerthelesse without muche a doe was pacifid: so that Galeazzo continued lorde thereof tyll he was slayne in Millaine through a conspiracie made againste hym. As in the Milanese historie appereth. 1477.¶But incontinently vpon his death the commons arose again, and expulsyng the gouernour there for the Duke, toke a newe order for the rule of their common wealth. Wherfore incontinently a great armie was sente from Millaine, whiche by the helpe of the Adorni, with theyr parttakers discomfited Obietto di Flisco, with the com∣minaltee, and so beyng entred into the citee, Prospero Adorno was established, as the Duke of Millains liue∣tenaunte there. But he continued scarcely one yere, till by meane of new practises, that he helde with Ferdi∣nando kynge of Naples,1478. he was had in suspicion to the Milanese: who willyng to depose hym, raised a newe commocion of the people: so that where he was before the Dukes liuetenaunte, nowe he was made gouernour absolutely of the common wealth. Wherupon a new armie was sente from Millaine to Genoa, and there foughte withall, and so discomfited, that of .15000. men, whiche departed from Millaine, retourned not fully 3000. the rest, some were slaine, but the most parte taken. This battaill beyng thus atchieued, the Genowaies had no rather recouered their libertee, but that their olde ci∣uile sedicion renewed. For the Fregosi coulde not suffer the Adorni to rule, wherfore within the citee they fell together by the eares. And albeit that for a season the Adorni preuailed, yet at length they were oppressed and constreigned to flee, and Battista Fregoso made Duke
after their olde maner: who the .iiii. yere after his ele∣ction was deposed by the procurement of Cardinall Fre∣goso, and the Cardinall made Duke in his steede:14. by whose tyme the Florentines made warre againste the Genowaies, and gatte from theim the townes of Sereza∣na and Pietra Santa, whiche with the countreis aboute theym, were of notable importaunce to the common wealth. But it is no meruaile, though the Florentines preuailed:1487. For the Genowaies were at that time haban∣doned of all the astates about them. Wheras the Flo∣rentines were in leage with the bishop of Rome, with the Uenetians, and diuers others. ¶Than were the commons so wery of the Cardinalles rule, that Obietto Flisco, vpon compforte therof, entred by night into the citee, and after muche fighte and longe contencion, made the Cardinall to renounce:1488. so that the citesins (remembryng how thei were best in quiet, whan they were subiectes to the Duke of Millaine) returned of newe to be vnder the Milanese dominion: and than was Antony Adorno made gouernour of the citee for the Duke. By whose time truce was taken with the Flo∣rentines, to the Genowaies disaduauntage: and Charles the .viii. Frenche kynge was ayded by the Genowaies towardes the winnyng of the realme of Naples:149. but in his retourne thense, they not onely discomfited a good parte of his army by lande, but also toke .x. galleis, and a great gallion, that were retournyng into Fraunce from the kynges saied enterprise of Naples. Whervpon diuers townes that before rebelled againste the common wealth, retourned than vnto theim, as Vintimiglia with others.149. And Serezana was bought of the Castellane
there for .25000. duckates. ¶The emperour Maximilian came also to Genoa and was there honourablie receiued. 149.¶This tyme was Lewys, surnamed Moro, Duke of Millaine, and sins the last submission of the astate of Ge∣noa vnto the Duke, the house of Adorni had borne all the rule. And because they had persuaded the common wealth to aide the Duke against the frenche kyng with 1000. men paied for .iii. monethes, therefore whan the Frenche kyng had chaced the Duke from Millaine, the citesins toke occasion to expulse the Adorni, and sent ambassadours to kyng Lewys the .xi. than beyng at Mil∣laine to offer them selfes to him: who amiably receiued theim: and made his cousen Philip of Cleues their go∣uernour: who with .xviii. saile Frenche and Genowaies together,1501. toke his viage towardes the enterprise of Me∣teline, to the whiche the Uenetians also sent .34. galleis, But thei returned all without atchieuing their purpose. 1502.¶Than came kynge Lewys to sporte him at Genoa, and makyng great preparacion to receiue hym, the nobles contended with the auncientes of the commons, who shoulde goe before, whiche for that tyme was iudged by Rocabertino,1506. lieuetenaunt for the gouernour, that they should goe by age, and nother by bloudde nor dignitee. ¶And albeit that this contencion was appeased for that time, yet for this and other light causes there grew suche hate betwene the nobilite and commons, that at length the multitude arose, and constreignyng the gentilmen to flee out of the citee, spoyled and robbed diuers of theyr houses. ¶Upon knowlage of whiche rumour, the Frenche kyng
sente the gouernour thither. Who with .150. horse and 750. footemen entred the citee, thinkyng with his pre∣sence and power to oppresse the peoples fury. ¶Than Aloise di Flisco, with most parte of the nobilite, had assembled a power, and were come to Quarto, in hope by the gouernours meanes to be reconsiled. But than beganne the Artisanes, with the rascall of the citee (whiche for their pouertee were called Capette) to as∣semble together in companies, some of our ladie, and some of saincte Iohn Baptist, with other like, and so to enne about doyng infinite harmes: that the gouernour durst no more offer to beare any auctoritee. For they made them .viii. rulers by the name of tribunes: against whom no man mighte speake: so that the gouernour, seeyng his auctoritee cleane taken from hym, departed. ¶A little before whose departure kynge Ferdinando of Spaine, with .x. galleis and .vii. foystes entred the ha∣uen, and tariyng there a daie, departed on his waie to Naples. ¶Than did they of the citee sende .iiii. ambassadours to the Frenche kynge, who scarcely woulde loke vpon theim: beyng determined by force to chastise theim, and therfore sente commission to the Castellane that kepte the Castelletto, to domage the citee all that he coulde: who therupon secretly made an issue (whan he knew he shoulde finde the chiefest in the churche of. S. Fraunces) and toke a number, and ledde theim prisoners in to the castell, where for their raunsomes the capitaine gatte aboue .10000. duckates. But that letted him not from the execucion of his maisters commaundement: for he neuer ceased, but shotte of all maner of artillery into the
citee and into the hauen, to the great terrour and annoy∣aunce of the people. ¶Yet for all that these rascall Capette were so obsti∣nate in theyr rebellion, that with helpe of theyr new tri∣bunes they made them a Duke, one Paule Da Noue a dier of silke. ¶And though that the Cardinall Finaro, with dyuers of the best citesins,1507. did what they could by counsaile to cause the people to submitte theim selfes to the frenche kynge (who than newly was entred with an armie into Lumbardie) yet would they neuer stowpe, till the fren∣che kynge with his owne armie, and with suche power as the nobilitee of Genoa could make, came before the citee: where the commons made a little resistence, but at length he entred in armes, made his armie to passe thoroughe the citee, putte dyuers of the principall of∣fenders to deathe, receiued homage of the citesins sit∣tyng in his magistee, placed the nobilitie in their accu∣stomed dignitees, burned the bokes of couenauntes, in steede whereof he graunted them some priuileges, made theim paie .200000. crownes for his costes, and .40000. to the buildyng of a fortresse at Capo di Faro, encrea∣sed the garrison with .200. souldiours, and finally bound theim to kepe .iii. galleis continually armed at theyr cost and charge. And thus (to his seemyng) establis∣shyng all thynges, retourned towardes Fraunce. And at Sauona was ouertaken by the kyng of Spaine, who in his retourne from Naples landed there to visite and salute the frenche kynge: that lykewyse receiued hym with solemne cheere. 15.¶After this the Genowaies rested scarcely .ii. yeres in
quiete vnder the Frenche kynges dominion (Radolfo de La Noi beyng gouernour) but there spronge vp a com∣pany in the citee called the felowship of the toūne: whi∣che betokened, that as the barell staues of the toūn were perfectly ioyned, so were they knitte togethers in one will. And these waxed so soute, that they sente ambassadours to the Frenche kynge, requiryng (amon∣gest other thynges) a change of theyr gouernour, whom they reputed to be an extorcioner and a tyranne. But they spedde not of theyr purpose. ¶The meane whyle the bishop of Rome tempted and al∣teracion of the astate,1512. in so muche that the bishoppe of Vintimiglia came to the citee, to the entent to slea the gouernour, and to make a commocion. And though he myst of his purpose, yet did the great bishoppes purpose proue at length. For Iano Fregoso, with a certaine noumbre of men sent from the bishoppes campe, entred the citee, without any resistence thoroughe the gouer∣nours cowardely flight. And beyng made Duke, forced the castell so sore, that the Castellaine for .12000. ducka∣tes yelded it. Neuerthelesse the Castell of the Lan∣terne helde still frenche, and was besieged of the Fre∣gosi. But the Adorni rescued it: and by coumforte of the frenche kynges armie by sea, entred the citee:1513. Whervpon the Fregosi fledde, so that the astate retur∣ned Frenche, and Antoniotto Adorno, by the kynges speciall commission was made gouernour. ¶In whiche office he continued but .22. daies. For assoone as the Frenche nauie was departed (whiche by reason of the great discoumfiture that the frenche kyng had at Nouara, could tarie no longer) the Fregosi, with
ayde of the kyng of Spaine, came so strongely to Ge∣noa, that the Adorni with theyr parteners were faine to geue place: and than was Octauian Fregoso made Duke: so that within the space of one yere, the astate of Genoa altered .iiii. tymes. 1514.¶This new Duke paied the Spaniardes, that had ay∣ded hym .80000. crownes out of the common treasure: and made Andrea Doria capitaine of .iiii. galleis: and than besieged the Castell of the Lanterne, whiche for the quantitee was excellent fayre and stronge. Neuerthe∣lesse assoone as he had gotten it (by composicion paiyng 22000. duckates to the capitaine) incontinently he ra∣sed it to the earth. 1515.¶The Adorni, with the Flischi than conspyred against the Duke, and with a certaine noumbre of men sodeine∣ly entred into the citee: Where they were not onely foughten with, and theyr men repulsed, but also they theim selfes taken prisoners. Whervpon the Duke, seeyng the instabilitee of his astate, to eschew further inconuenience, sent ambassadours to the frenche kynge, and yelded the citee to hym: and sent hym .2000. foote∣men, whiche did him no small seruice in the battaile be∣sides Marigniano. ¶After the notable victorie wherof, this Octauian (beyng from Duke chaunged to gouernour) with .viii o∣ther of the chiefest citesins, went to visite the frenche kynge at Myllaine, and there lent hym .80000. crow∣nes towardes his charges. 1516.¶About this tyme Cortogoli a Turke, scoured the seas, and did muche hurte to the Christians, wherfore an armie was made out against hym, vnder the leadyng
of the archebishop Fregoso, with Andrea Doria, and others: who sailed into the cost{is} of Barbarie, and found xv. foystes, and certaine galleis of Cortogolies vnar∣med before Biserti, whiche they myght haue burned or brought awaie, if they had not tended to muche to the spoyle. For that by reason of a sodeine tempest they were driuen to forsake the costes, and returne home with out ought dooyng. ¶The Cardinall Sauli (a Genowaie borne) was vpon suspicion emprisoned by Leo than bishop of Rome,1517. and by his parentes raunsomed at .25000. duckates: and yet for all that (it was thought) that determinate poy∣son was geuen hym in prison.Poyson that wor∣keth not till a time. For within a certaine space after his deliuerance he sickened, and in lesse than a yere died. ¶The Moores of newe troubled the seas.1519. Agaynst whom Andrea Doria went out with .vi. galleis, gaue the onset on .ix. saile of theyrs, whiche he discoumfited with sore feight, and toke .vi. of theim. ¶All this while the faction of Fregosi ruled the citee vnder the frenche kynge.1521. Wherfore the Adorni (who were than as banished men) armed .ix. galleis, thinkyng secretely to entre the citee, and to subuerte the astate. But they missed of theyr purpose. Neuerthelesse thei ceased not to prouoke the emperour against Genoa, pro∣misyng him large succours of theyr part: So that tho∣rough theyr procurement, immediatly after the battaile of Bicocke (where the frenche campe was discomfited) the Duke of Myllaine, the Marques of Pescara,1522. the Signior Prospero Colonna, and the other imperiall capitaines, with .20000. men came before Genoa, and
by force wanne and sacked it, and takyng the gouernour Octauian, with dyuers others (whom thei kept as pri∣soners) after the departure of the armie, Antoniotto Adorno was made Duke. And so the citee remained imperiall. Adrian the .vi. elected bishop passed that waie towardes Rome:1524. and the Duke of Burbone with his bande came through to Genoa as he wente to rescue Millaine than besieged of the frenche men. ¶But the Frenche kynge shortly after passed the moun∣taines in his owne person: and not onely recouered all that he had loste in Lumbardy, Pauia excepted, but also gatte Sauona and Varagine in the ryuer of Genoa. Wherfore Don Hugo Da Moncada (afterward{is} Vice Re of Naples) issued out of Genoa with .xv. saile,1525. and sette .4000. men of the Genowaies on lande, thinkyng to gette Varagine, where he was mette with by Iocante Corso capitaine of the Frenchemen, and the Genowaies beyng discomfited, him selfe the Vice Re was taken pri∣soner. Shortely whervpon folowed the takyng of the Frenche kyng at the battaile of Pauia, who in Maie after his taking was brought to Genoa, and from thense conueighed into Spaine. 1526.¶Than the bishop of Rome with the Uenetians entred in leage with the Frenche kyng againste the emperour. And because the citee rested imperiall, therfore was an armie of .37. galleis made, that besieged Genoa by sea, to the rescue whereof the emperour sent the Vice Re of Naples out of Spaine with .xxii. saile: who encountred with .vi. galleis of Andrea Doria (that than serued the leage againste the emperour) and foughte together, in whiche feight Andrew and his men behaued them selfes
so valiauntly, that they sparpled the imperiall armie a∣brode, and toke .ii. of their shippes. For whiche vali∣aunte acte the emperour made him admirall of his army, and knight of his order: and shortly after in Porto fino he toke .vii. galleis .iiii. of the citee, and .iii. of Spaine, so that the siege continewyng still,1527. the citee suffered ex∣treme famine. Wherfore partly by force Caesar Frego∣so, with a bande of Frenche men by lande was receiued into the towne, and the citee deliuered vnto hym in the kynges name, without bloudde or spoyle (the Duke An∣toniotto Adorno beyng fledde into the castell) and than was Theodore Triulci Milanese made gouernour ther∣of.1528. By whose time the Union beganne amongest the citesins, for there had ben diuision of parties, fyrste the Guelfes and Ghibellines, than the nobles and commons, and the commons deuided in two, merchauntes and ar∣tificers, and laste of all were the factions Adorni and Fregosi. So that as longe as these parties reigned, it was impossible the citee should prospere, seeyng them daiely fall together by the eares as they did. ¶Finallie they all agreed to extynguish these diuisions, and elected .28. families to be all nobles, amongest whom the offices should renne in common and chaunge without naming and partie, and so were thei brought to accorde, that so many yeres before had continually contended. ¶Than the Frenche kyng sente a notable armie vnder the leadyng of Mounser Lautrech, to the siege of Na∣ples, and because it should be besieged by sea and lande: therfore Andrea Doria armed .vii. galleis, whereof he made his cousen Philippino Doria capitaine, and sente him to Naples, where the Uice Re, with .vi. galleis is∣sued
out and fought with him, but Doria preuailed, and the Uice Re was slaine, and the Marques of Vasco, with diuers others taken prisoners. ¶Whervpon it seemed that the Frenche kynge waxed vnkynde as well to the common wealth as vnto Andrea Doria. For first he suffred the citee of Sauona to be exempt from the subiection of Genoa, and furthermore to haue all maner of priuileges that Genoa had with the custome of alte and other thynges, whiche at lengthe woulde be the destruction of Genoa. ¶And though the Genoways made diuers complaintes herevpon, yet (as thoughe thei were not regarded) no reformacion was had. ¶Than the Frenche kyng had taken from Andrea Do∣ria diuers of his prisoners, and amongest all others the prince of Orenge, and besides that had paied hym his wages but verie homely: so that whan Andrew began to murmour against this, the kynge wrought meanes to haue had him slaine: whiche comyng to his knowlage, caused hym to dispose hym selfe otherwaies: so that whan the tyme of his wages was expired, he bare a white baner, declaryng that he was at libertee to serue whom he wolde: and than after certaine practises with his prisoners, the Marques of Vasco and Ascanio Co∣lonna, he became the emperours man, and was made prince of Melfi, by reason wherof the citee beganne also to be moued against the kynge, remembryng his ingrati∣tude. So that finally by meanes of Andrea Doria the Frenche kyng{is} officers were licenced, his galleis by sea put to flight, and some taken, and the citee restored to hir ancient libertee. Notwithstandyng that many thought Andrea Doria wolde haue taken the rule of it vnto him selfe.
¶Hereupon a counsaile was called, a new reformacion established, a Duke .viii. gouernours and .viii. proctours chosen accordyng to the order that yet remaineth: and the citee euer sens continued in peace, with increase of so much wealth and quietnesse, that at this howre she maie be reckened one of the happiest and richest cities of Eu∣rope. ¶And albeit that some sterrynges haue ben sens that time for alteracion of the astate, as the assaulte that the Conte Guido Rangone made with .10000. men of the Frenche kynges brought out of Lumbardy,1536. and the conspiracy that the Conte Di Flischo made now of late (in the which he him selfe was drowned,1546, and Iannetine Do∣ria slaine) yet hath the citee perseuered now these .20. yeres in one astate, much through the great wisedome of Andrea Doria, who (refusyng the dominion of it,Andrea Doria. whan he might without difficultee haue taken it vppon hym) hath not onely restored it to the perfect libertee of a cō∣mon welth, but also with his notable seruice in thempe∣rours affaires (as in his viages to Tunise and Algier, in the rescue of Coron besieged of the Turkes, in defence of Barbarossa his armies the yeres .37. and .38. and in oppressyng of the great Corsales or pirattes by sea) hath so mainteigned the imperyall fauour towardes the Ge∣nowaies, that no man is able to hurte them at this day. For though in dede thei be not the emperours subiectes: yet whan any astate shoulde happen to moue warre a∣gainst them, it should well appere, that he tendreth them no lesse than as the deerest subiectes he hath. For the whiche they likewise at all times haue and yet doe serue him for his money to the vttermost of their powers.
The description of Myllaine. AMongest other perticuler astates of Italie, the Duchie of Myl∣laine hath been one the most notable. ¶For while the hous of Visconti rei∣gned, the same valiauntly maintened warres of great importaunce against most puissaunt princes and powers. And for the in∣terest therof, the notablest warr{is} of our daies haue hap∣ned betwene the emperour and the Frenche kyng: inso∣muche that Fraunces the fyrst of that name, feightyng before Pauia against the imperiall armie (ledde by the Marques of Pescara, and the Duke of Bourbone) was taken prisoner, and conueighed into Spaine: where for his raunsome, after a yeres imprisonment, he was faine to pledge his two sonnes, and consequently to marie the emperours syster, with other couenauntes to longe to reherse. ¶And no meruaile, though these two most mighty prin∣ces of Christendome so muche contented for his onely astate. For though in name (beyng but a Duchie) it shoulde not seeme great: yet in very deede bothe for the wealth of the countrey, and for the quantitee, the thyng hath been of as great reputacion as some realmes of Europe. Out of doubt there haue been some Dukes of Myllaine muche greatter in territorie, wealthier in reuenewes and treasure, more puissaunt in warres, and finally more honourable in peace, than diuers of theim that had kyngly titles. ¶As for the richesse and beautie of the countrey, I am
afearde to speake of, least to hym that neuer saw it, I shoulde seeme ouerlarge in the due praisyng of it: and least vnto hym againe that hath practised there, I shuld seeme vnwise to treate of that, that my knowlage is not hable woorthily to set foorth, Neuerthelesse betwene feare and shame this muche woull I saie, that suche an other peece of ground for beautifull citees and townes, for goodly riuers, fieldes and pastures, and for plentie of fleshe, foule, freshewaterfishe, graine, wine and frui∣tes, is not to be found againe in all our familiar regions. ¶I thinke the emperour, that now is lord therof, woull confesse, that he draweth more money yerely to his purse ut of that onely astate, than out of some of his real∣mes. And yet his Mylanese dominion is not halfe so muche at this present, as that that diuers Duk{is} of My∣laine haue had. For wheras the emperour, besides the citee of Myllaine hath now .vii. or .viii. citees, as Pa∣uia, Lodi, Cremona, Alexandria, Vercelli, Nouara, and Como: Dukes of Myllaine haue had, some .xx. and some .xxx. citees, and vpwardes. Yea and some so great, that they haue aspyred to the dominion ouer all Italie: as in the briefe historie folowyng more plainely appeareth. Neuerthelesse he that now shall happen to see the company of noble men and gentilmen, that ar in maner continually attendaunt on themperours lieue∣tenaunt or deputie in Myllaine, shall saie, that the same representeth rather the courte of some puissaunt kynge, than the traine of a deputie. ¶And I thynke verily, that Don Ferrando Gonzaga, now lieuetenaunt there, rideth many times more honou∣rably accompanied, and with a greatter presence of ma∣gistee,
than the emperour him selfe dooeth in Germanie. Wiues of Millaine.¶The like wherof with rather the more is to be saied of the Mylanese gentilwomen, who in sumptuouse ap∣paraile maie compare with the best: specially in the or∣namentes of theyr Chariottes, with coueringes of cloth of golde, of veluettes, of silkes, and a thousande sortes of embroderies. There is almost no craftesmans wife in Myllaine, that hath not hir gowne of silke, and hir chaine of golde. A thyng that shoulde seeme rather meruailouse than credible. But the craftesmen there are so excellent in theyr dooynges, and the women so ex∣perte in silke workes, that it is no wonder though their gaine grow to the biyng of gaie geare. ¶Finally the citee of Myllaine standyng in the herte of the pleasauntest and fayrest plaine of all Christendome,Millaine Sate. is serued of all delectable and necessarie thynges that are to be desyred for mans sustentacion. Honourable for the courte, gallaunt for gentilmen, herborough for souldiours, delicate for dames, riche for merchauntes, and wealthy for artificers. But for notable or sum∣ptuouse buildynges, it maie not be compared with Ue∣nice, Rome, or Florence. For all be it, the houses be great and fayre within, yet outwardely it is nothyng of that beautie and pompe, that those other citees be: by reason that for the most parte the Mylanese buildyng is all of bricke, because harde stone and marble is not to be had by a great waie of. ¶Neuerthelesse the Domo of Myllaine (beyng theyr Cathedrall churche) is one of the rarest woorkes of our tyme: built all of fine marble, so well grauen and cutte, that the woorkemanship is a wonder. But it is of so
vnmeasurable greatnesse, that most men doubt, whether euer it woull be finished or not: thoughe it haue many thousande duckates of yerely reuenew in good land to∣wardes the continuaunce, and a noumbre of woorkemen daiely labouryng theron. ¶But what speake I of the churche,Castell of Millaine. the castell of My∣laine being so neere? whiche in mine opinion is the wor∣thiest and strongest of all Europe. For it hath warde within warde: fortresse diuided from fortresse, that one maie holde against an other, walles of endlesse strength and large dyches well watered, as fayre built ouer all as nedeth to be, and so well fortified, that without fa∣mine it is impregnable. And this concernyng the countrey, citee and people of Myllaine in generall, shall suffice. ¶The beginnyng and successe of the State of Myllaine. AS Liuie and diuers other authors write, the yere before the comyng of Christ .259. from the edi∣ficacion of Rome .460. and from the beginnyng of the worlde .4860. in the tyme of Assuee, otherwise called Cirus and Longimanus, sonne of Xerses, and nephew to Dario kynges of Persie: The citee of My∣laine was rather augmented than newly built by cer∣taine frenchemen called Senoni or Iusubrij, people of low Britaine, now called Semans, where likewyse is a towne called Myllaine. These were the frenchemen that fyrst passed the mountaines, and settled them selfes in Lumbardie, and that afterwardes went vnder the lea∣dyng
of Brenne to Rome, burned the citee, and besieged the Campidoglio, though at last they were discomfited. ¶Finally in processe of tyme beeyng becomen Myla∣nese, and made subiectes to the Romaines, Amilcare the Affricane at his comyng into Italy, persuaded theim to rebell: wherfore they were foughten with and twise ouerthrowen: firste by Furio the Pretor, and after by Claudio Marcello, who in the later conflict slew Mago brother of Hanniball, with .37000. Affricanes and My∣lanese together: and therfore at his returne vnto Rome was receyued with triumphe. Millaines ame.¶Nowe wherfore it was called Millaine be two opi∣nions, the one is, that it toke that name of the other Mil∣laine in Brittaine: the other, by reason the forme of a farowyng sowe halfe couered with woulle (signifiyng fattenesse) was founde at the diggyng of the foundacion, they called it Milana, as who shoulde saie halfe woulle. But howe so euer the occasion therof proceded, I finde that it had diuers names, as Subria, Mesopia, Paucentia, Alba, and Ercolea of Ercole, Massimino, that furnished it with houses, and closed it with walles: and also builded a temple in it to the honour of Hercules, whiche is nowe conuerted to be the churche of. S. Laurence. ¶Thus after the tryumphe of Claudio Marcello, Mil∣laine encreased more and more, and rested in peace about 500. yeres, beyng in maner the chiefe markette of all Italy. Insomuche that many Romaines came thither to dwell, and many tymes the selfe emperours came thither to solace. But at length, in the time of saincte Ambrose bishop there, whan the secte of Arrians began, it was somewhat troubled: and shortly after destroied
by kynge Attila, called of the Italians Flagellum Dei.Attila. ¶And albeit that it was after reedified, yet by Totila and the emperour Iustinians capitaines, it was for the more parte again and again destroied. And by the Lum∣bardes also it was many tymes sore vexed. But laste of all Galuano,1161. (who beyng taken prisoner by the em∣perour Barbarossa, by escape was retourned) seeyng af∣terwardes the same Federico occupied with the Frenche warres, reedified it of new, and diyng without issue, left it to his citesins: who (with fauour of their neighbours) gouerned the same as a common wealth, the space of .52. yeres, tyll Giouanni Torrigiani,Giouanni Torrigi∣ani. a principall citesin v∣surped the dominion by force. ¶This Torrigiani (as he that was cruell and desy∣rouse to make his astate durable) feigned daiely newe crimes and offences against his citesins,Tiranny. and specially a∣gainst the Visconti, to rydde theim out of the waie. And though he cloked his crueltee with the beste colour of iustice that he coulde imagine outwardesly, so that no man for feare durste withstande hym: yet God takyng vengeaunce suffered hym to be discomfited, and slayne before Parma, where he had ben two yeres generall of the emperours army against the bishop of Rome. ¶Now vpon the death of Torrigiani, the Mlanese be∣ganne to contende amongest theim selfes, so longe, that at laste Martino Turrigiani toke the dominion vpon him,Martino Torrigi∣ani. and kepte it two yeres, in whiche time beyng aduertised, that Ezelino, lorde of Uerona, with many banished My∣lanese cae in armes against him, he issued out into the fielde with his power, fought with Ezelino, hurt, and toke hym prisoner, and so beeyng victoriouse, and of the
age of .80. yeres, died at Souzino. Philippo Torrig.¶After hym succeded his sonne Philippo, who beyng but weake herted and grosse witted, made neuerthelesse warre againste the Cremonese, sacked Como, toke Ber∣gamo and Nouara, and finally expulsed the familie of Tornielli. After whiche enterprises he died, leauyng the astate to his sonne Napoleone,Napole∣one. that after happened to be slaine. Unto whom succeded his sonne named Philippo, that by meane of the archebishop Ottone Vis∣conti was afterwardes expulsed. Uisconti▪¶It is to be vnderstand, that before the time of Giouan∣ni Torrigiani, the house of Visconti was equall with the beste of Millaine: beyng descended of the Erles of An∣giera, that before tyme had ben lordes of Millaine: for the name of Visconti, was taken of Ottone sonne of Eli∣pandro, who by reason he was lorde both of Angiera and of Millaine called him selfe Bisconte, as who should say, twise Erle. Ottone.¶This Ottone being gone in a croisy with other princ{is} to conquere the holy lande, foughte there with a Sara∣sine hande to hande, and ouercame him: and because the Sarasine for his enseigne caried on his crest an adder, with a littell childe in his mouthe, Ottone as a perpe∣tuall memory of his victorie, vsed the same euer after in his armes. ¶But nowe to come to the purpose, aboute the yere of grace .1262. there remained .iiii. bretherne of the house of visconti on liue, that is to wete, Ottone before named, Vberto, Iacopo, and Gasparo, sonnes of Vberto de Vis∣conti. Ottone Uisconti.¶This Ottone (the archebishop beyng than a banished
man) through helpe of his kinsman Gregorie bishop of Rome, by force expulsed out of Millaine the foresaied Philippo Torrigiani, sonne of Napoleone, and finally became lorde therof: beyng afterwardes confyrmed in the same as vicare of the empire. ¶Within two yeres after Ramondo Torrigiani bishop of Como, and Patriarke of Aquileia, retourned with a great armie to dryue Ottone out, and did muche hurte in the Milanese territory. But at laste he receiued a sore discomfiture by Ottone, through helpe of the families of Duarosi and Palauisini, whiche houses, together with those of Lampugnani (descended of the Goti) and those of Pietrasanta (comen out of Tuscane) those of Porri, of Caimi, of Bossi, of Marliani, and of Triulsi, were all at that time most noble and puissaunte in Millaine. ¶After the death of Ottone,Matteo Magno. his brother Iacopo hauyng a sonne named Tibaldo, and Tibaldo, a sonne named Matteo (who for his lusty courage and deedes was sur∣named Magno) the reputacion and state of the Vis∣conti beganne to grow more and more. For this Mat∣teo gatte Alexandria, Pauia, Tortona, and manie other townes. ¶Finally this Matteo puttyng Pietro Visconti in pry∣son (whom after he deliuered) beyng aduertised, howe the same Pietro conspyred with the chiefe of the Tor∣rigiani, to driue him out of his astate, and mistrustyng his owne power to defend the same, committed the whole to Alberto Scoto, lorde of Piacenza: and fledde hym selfe into the marishes of the lake of Garda, where he lyued longe time of his onely labour of fishyng. He had .iiii. soonnes by his wife Bona Cosa, the fyrste named Gale∣azo
(so called because in the nighte of his birthe the cockes crowed more than thei were wonte) the secounde Giouanni, the .iii. Stefano, and the .iiii. Lucchino. Galeazo.¶This Galeazo succeded his father, and goyng after∣wardes with Henrie the emperour to Rome, was there made capitaine of the light horsemen: and about that tyme begatte two sonnes, the one called Azone, and the other Marco. His courage was so great, that whan the emperour Lodouico di Bauiera requyred a certaine summe of money of the Mylanese, Galeazo withstode it. Upon displeasure wherof Lodouico toke hym pri∣soner, and banished his sonnes Azone and Marco. But at length, at the instaunce of Castruccio Lucchese, Galeazo was deliuered. And finally beyng in company of the same Castruccio at the siege of Pistoia, sickened and died in the towne of Pestia. ene.¶After whose death Azone and Marco (for a certaine summe of money paied before hand) obteined of the em∣perour Lodouico the restitucion of the state of Myl∣laine. And so Azone as elder brother hauyng the do∣minion, Marco in his name gatte the citee of Lucca, and his vncle Lucchino the citees of Bergamo, Bressa, and Pauia: wherby Azone became great, and so high of stomacke, that remembryng the iniuries doen to hym by the emperour Lodouico: whan he wold haue passed through Myllaine (as lorde of all Italy) he closed the gates against hym: refusyng to accepte him for his bet∣ter. Therfore not without good cause was he bothe feared and esteemed, specially for his approued vali∣autnesse: for beyng sent of his father to helpe Castruc∣cio, he fought with the Florentines neere to Fucecchio,
discomfited, and pursued theim euin to the gates of Flo∣rence: and laiyng siege to the citee, remaigned there i∣dell certaine daies, for no man durst issue out to meddle with hym. Whiche was the fyrst enterprise of the Vis∣conti against the Florentines. ¶After whiche Azone, through helpe of Castruccio, became lorde of the Alco Pascio, and of Bologna: and as some saie, beyng in campe on a daie, after he had bro∣ken his fast: puttyng his sallette on his head (whiche before had lien on the earth) there issued out an adder, that glyded downe alongest his face, without dooyng hym any hurte: wherof it folowed, that the Visconti vsed the adder in theyr armes: And thoughe it so maie well be true, yet this seconde opinion of the adder dooeth not so muche satisfie me as the fyrst. ¶Finally Azone diyng without issue,Lucchino. his vncles Luc∣chino and Giouanni rested in his place, and were confir∣med in the astate by Benedetto the .xi. bishop of Rome, as vicares of the churche: with condicion, that after the death of the emperour Lodouico di Bauiera, the state of Myllaine shoulde be holden of the dominion of the churche. ¶Lucchino as elder brother, toke vpon hym to gouerne, and proued a veray rightuous and mercifull man. He granted reconcilement vnto many of the citesins before tyme confyned by Azone: and builded many deuoute places in Myllaine. He gatte many townes part by force and part with loue: and in maner renued the wal∣les of Bergamo at his owne coste. He reformed many thynges in Bressa, and so finally died. ¶After him his brother Giouanni succeded,Giouanni. who incon∣tinently
called home Matteo, Bernabo, and Galeazo, sonnes of his brother Stefano, before time banisshed by Lucchino. ¶And all be it, that this Giouanni was an archebishop: yet beyng more geuen to armes than to the churche, tho∣rough the valiantnesse of Galeazo he gatte Parma, Lo∣di, Cremona, Bergamo, Genoua, Sauona, and many o∣ther townes: and finally died, leauyng his astate diui∣ded betwene Bernabo and Galeazo. Bernabo.¶This Bernabo helde warre longe tyme with the bi∣shoppe of Rome for the citee of Bologna, that together with Genoua had rebelled against hym: and finally toke for Bologna a great summe of money, and forbare Genoa, because it had been before redeemed at his han∣des for the summe of .600000. duckates. But some saie, he was enforced to lette it alone, by reason that in one selfe tyme he was troubled of the Romish legate, of Philippino di Gonzaga, and of Cane della Scala for the thynges of Bressa, where he had been ones discoum∣fited. ¶He had to wyfe one of the daughters of Mastino del∣la Scala, a woman that for hir vnreasonable pride was surnamed, La Reina, the Queene, And had by hir .14. children, wherof .iiii. were sonnes. To Lodo∣uico the eldest he gaue the citee of Cremona: To Car∣lo, Parma: To Ridolfo, Bergamo, and to Mastino, Lodi. ¶The rest beyng daughters he maried on this wyse. La Verde, vnto Lepoldo Duke of Austria, graund∣father to the emperour Federico the thyrde. La Taddea, to the Duke of Bauiera.
La Valentina, to Peter kyng of Cyprus. La Catherina, to Giangaleazo Visconti his nephew. L' Antonia, to Federico kynge of Sicilia. La Maddalena, to the Duke of Bauiera againe. L' Agnesa, to Francesco Gonzaga. La Lisabetta, to Ernesco Duke of Monaco in Ba∣uiera. L' Angiolella, to Federico the younger: And La Lucia to Lodouico Duke of Angiers, eldest sonne to the Frenche kynge, And after to Baldasar Marques of Misna, and finally to Edmonde, Erle of Kent, sonne to the kynge of Englande. And with the mariage of e∣uerie of these daughters he paied all .100000. duckat{is}. ¶Besides these he had .iiii. bastarde daughters, Ber∣narda, Ricciarda, Lisaberta, and Margherita. And fiue bastarde sonnes, Ambrosio, Nestore, Lancilotto, Gale∣otto, and Sagramoro. ¶On the other syde Galeazo begatte on his wyfe Bi∣anca, daughter of Amone Duke of Sauoie,Galeazo. a sonne na∣med Giangaleazo, and a daughter named La Violante, whiche afterwardes was maried to Lionell Duke of Clarence, and sonne to the kynge of Englande. At the sumptuouse feaste of whose mariage Petrarcha hap∣ned to be present. How be it, some haue written, that she was maried to the Frenche kynges sonne, with the dower of an .100000. crownes. But how so euer it were, hir husbande lyued not passyng fiue monethes af∣ter the mariage: and shortly thervpon the father Ga∣leazo also died. ¶After whose death his sonne Giangaleazo growen toGianga∣leazo. sufficient yeres diuided the state with his vncle Bernabo
on this maner. He kept to hym selfe Pauia, Tortona, Alexandria, Nouara, and the other townes neere vnto the Alpes, with the one halfe of Myllaine: and gaue vnto Bernabo Parma, Paccuza, Cremona, Lodi, Cre∣ma, Bergam, Como, and the other halfe of Myllaine, with this aduauntage: that for as muche as Bernabo was the more aunciente, he should dwell in Myllaine, and Giangaleazo in Pauia. Thus beyng agreed af∣ter a certaine tyme Giangaleazo was aduertised by his wife, howe Bernabo hir father and his vncle, had diuers tymes sought his death, to ridde hym out of the state: so that Giangaleazo incontinentely determined to pre∣uente hym: and goyng vnto Millaine vnder pretence of pastyme or of some other busynesse, Bernabo (to honour hym the more) issued out against him: and so was taken, died in prison, and parte of his sonnes slayne, parte ba∣nished. Whiche acte onely excepted (though it was not yet all against reason) this Giangaleazo in all his doynges was accompted so worthy, noble, and valiaunt a prince, that of the people he was called II Conte di Vir∣tu, that is to say, The Ele of vertue. For he was not onely beautifull of personage, but also lerned, eloquent, wise, hardy, and lyberall. And was the fyrst that euer was inuested Duke of Millaine, paiyng therfore to the emperour Vinceslao an .10000. duckates. After the obteinyng of this honour he encreased his astate by the gettyng of Verona, Vicenza, Padoa, and Bologna. ¶He discomfited the armies of the leage made betwene the Florentines and Bologniese with other their confe∣derates at Casalecchio, and broughte the Florentines at length to that takyng, that had he not died the rather,
they muste nedes haue yelded to benne his subiectes. ¶He ouercame Antonio della Scala, and buylded the fayre palayce in Pauia, with that goodly librarie, that yet is seen there, walled the parke about, beyng of a great circuite, and edified the Charterhouse, that to this houre amongest the beautifull buildynges of the worlde, may be rekened one of the rarest. ¶He brought Italy into suche feare, that the Pisani, the Senesi, the Perugini, the Ascesiani, and the Lucchesi wil∣lyngly became his men: so that he founde him selfe lorde ouer .29. citees, and thought to haue ben kynge of Italy, if death had not so soone taken him. ¶He had two wifes, the one called Lisabetta, doughter to the kynge of Boeme, by whom he had a doughter na∣med La Valentina, maried afterwardes to the Duke of Orliens, with the dower of the Erledome of Aste, that hath ben cause of no small trouble in Italie: and the other wife named Caterina de Visconti, by whom he had two sonnes Giouanni, and Philippo Maria. ¶He had one bastarde called Gabriello, who after∣wardes solde Pisa to the Florentines. ¶Finally this notable prince at Marignano died:1402. and accordyng to his owne order was from thense caried to the saied Charterhouse besides Pauia, and there buried. ¶Than succeded in the astate Giamaa the eldest sonne,Giouann Maria. whose dealynges were so greuouse to the Milanese, without any their deseruyng, that hearyng masse on a daie in the churche, through the fury of the people and of his owne men together he was slayne: firste causyng his mother to die in prison, for ofte warnyng him of that that happened in dede.
¶He was wonte to say many times (in excusyng of his errours) that in a great house it was necessary there shoulde growe men of diuers sortes, and that he therfore vsed the contrary of his fathers doinges, so that through his crueltee and his death together, many citees rebel∣led, in suche wie that the Milanese were constreigned to call the sonnes of Bernabo to the Douchy, who enioied the same vntill that Philippo maria recouered the domi∣nion,1433. and driuing them out mette with one of them called Nestore in a skirmish, and slew him. Philippo Maria.¶This Philippo was first lorde of Pauia, and had ma∣ried Beatrice the doughter, or (as other say) sometime wife of Fazino Cane della Scala: for none intente but because she was enheritour of many fayre lordeshippes beyonde the Pò, and had also verie muche money. By meane wherof sleayng Crabrino lorde of Verona he gatte that citee to him selfe. ¶He was constreigned to yelde Bologna, Furli, and Imola to the bishop of Rome. Neuerthelesse he gatte Genoa, though afterwardes he loste it againe. ¶He lykewyse toke Bressa, whyche beyng recouered a∣gainst him by the Uenetians, caused betwene them verie longe and cruell warre. Wherin on the Uenetian side were capitaines Francesco Carmignuola, Giouanni Ma∣lauolta, Gianfrancesco Gonzaga, and Nanni Strozzi, a Florentine knight. And on the side of Philippo against the Uenetians were Francesco Sforza, Agnola da Per∣goletto, the one and other Nicolo Guerriero and Picci∣nino, and one Fierauante da Perugia: with the helpe also of Alfonso kynge of Naples, who beyng before tyme brought prisoner to Philippo by the Genowaies, and by
hym restored to libertee: lyke a faythfull friende (for a great whyle after) succoured hym in all his businesse. ¶Thus whan Philippo had finyshed the enterprise a∣gainste the Uenetians, and by meane of those his capi∣taines gotten Piacenza, Como and Lodi, he made the Marques of Monferrato so afearde of hym, that wyl∣lyngly he yelded vnto Philippo's hand{is} Vercelli, Alex∣andria, and Aste. And Nicolo da Este of Ferrara, came to visite hym, renderyng Parma, that before had ben ta∣ken from Ottone, and knowlageyng hym selfe to holde the citee of Reggio in fee of Philippo. ¶The citeee of Florence fearyng the power of this man, entred in leage with the Uenetians, whose two armies vnited togethers were foughten withall by certaine of Philippo's capitaines, in the Countie of Faenza, and there ouercomen. ¶Notwithstanding that the same victory was of much lesse importaunce, than that whiche the noble Florentine Cosmo di Medici obteigned in the plaine of Anghiari against the army of Philippo, ledde by Nicolo Piccini∣no, towardes the Florentine damage: for the whiche victory Cosmo at his retourne to Florence was called father of his countrey. ¶But for all that those warres had neuer ende as long as Philippo liued: who finally fell out with the fore∣named Alfonse kyng of Naples, and by force restored the Queene Giouanna to hir possession. ¶He receiued into Myllaine Martine the .v. bishoppe of Rome, as he retourned from the counsaile of Con∣stance: and maried his daughter Bianca vnto Francesco Sforza.
¶Finally findyng hym selfe fallen in great aduersitee, what thoroughe blindenesse that toke hym in his age, what through the losse of Genoa, and what through the discoumfiture of his armie at Casale Maggiore: In folowyng the victorie wherof the Uenetians had alrea∣die passed the riuer of Adda, and scoured the countrey euen to the gates of Myllaine: he at last a little before his deathe, bequethed his astate by testamente vnto the kynge Alfonso, as to one the deerest friende he had. Philippo Maria descriued.¶This Philippo had ben a prince of a subtill nature, wittie, a louer of trauaile, couetouse to learne and to haue, and yet liberall in geuyng, easie of pardonyng, but suspiciouse out of measure, and so light of credence, that many tymes he wrongefully ridde out of the waie the deerest friendes he had. Wherof it folowed, that in his most businesse he founde him selfe vtterly habando∣ned: leauyng the state of Myllaine in maner naked. For the Duke of Orliens in the right of his wyfe Va∣lentina, daughter of Giangaleazo, enforced hym selfe to atteine the possession, whiche the emperour Federico for his parte in titell of the empyre denyed. But Francesco Sforza, as soonne in lawe of the deade Philippo, withstode theim bothe: insomuche that tho∣rough this rumour the Mylanese rent the testament in peeces,Testament oken. and toke on theim theyr libertee, electyng .xii. men to diuise order for the gouernaunce of theyr citees: whervnto they had the helpe of Carlo Gonzaga, who beyng lately departed from the campe of Sforza, was present in Mylaine the same time. And so the new offi∣cers beyng ordeined, there were many of those nobles slaine, that were knowen fauourable to the part of Fran∣cesco,
whose power & courage the Mylanese feared mu∣che more than the puissance of France, or of themperour. ¶The father of this Francesco, named Mutio,Francesco Sforza. Mutio fa∣ther to Fraunces Sforza. was borne besydes the castell of Cotignuola: and folowyng the warres fyrst serued the souldiours with cariyng of woodde and water. Than gettyng a little with sackyng here and there, became so stronge and hardie, that many tymes he would by force take the bootie from his owne companions, and therfore was called Sforza. ¶From whiche base condicion he beganne to waxe an aduenturer, and to feight on horsbacke, so that finally he became a capitaine: and in short space was iudged e∣quall vnto Braccio Montone, the valiauntest and ho∣nourablest generall of those daies. ¶But at last (after he had long time serued the Queene Giouanna against kyng Alfonse in the realme of Na∣ples, and in other places dooen many notable enterpri∣ses) couetyng to saue a lakey in the riuer of Pescara, he was drowned hym selfe, and coulde neuer after be founde nor heard of. ¶Than was this Francesco his sonne fyrst waged of the forenamed Queene, and after of the Uenetians, than of Philippo, and after Philippo of the Mylanese a∣gainst the Uenetians, and lastely of the Uenetians a∣gainst the Mylanese. In all whiche doynges as well in the realme, as in Lumbardie, he euermore shewed great prouffes of his worthinesse: and at last with helpe of the Uenetians came against Myllaine and besieged it. Insomuche that after longe resistence, constreigned with hunger, and deceiued of theyr promised helpe from the Uenetians, the Mylanese (fyrst sleayng the Uene∣tian
ambassadour) accepted Francesco for theyr prince. Who not longe after (stablishyng the thynges of My∣laine at his pleasure) made warre to kynge Alfonso, and to the Uenetians bothe: in whiche warres he was ser∣ued of these valiaunt capitaines, Tiberio Brandolino, Nicolo Guerriero, Dolce dell' Anguillara, Carlo di Cā∣po Basso, and Iacopo Piccinino: whiche Iacopo was promysed to haue to wyfe his daughter Drusiana, be∣fore tyme maried vnto Iano Fregoso Duke of Genoa. How be it, the Duke Francesco afterwardes for suspi∣cion caused this Iacopo to be slaine. ¶Aboutes the same tyme, whylest Eugenio bishoppe of Rome was occupied at the counsaile of Basile, Frances∣co (as his enemie) attempted to take the state of Marca from hym. And there kept warre longe tyme with kynge Alfonso, whom the saied bishop had sent thither against hym: where they saie Francesco was defied by Nicolo Piccinino, and beyng chalenged to feight hande to hande, would in no wyse accept it. That notwith∣standyng he was vndoubtedly a worthie man of armes, the most happie and valiaunt of all other in his tyme. For in those .xvi. yeres, that he reigned Duke, he in maner extinguisshed the sedicion of the parties of Guel∣i and Ghibellini: insomuche that the Genowaies fal∣len in discorde amongest theim selfes, seeyng the good gouernaunce of this Duke Francesco, with the louyng enterteinement of his subiectes, willingly embraced him for theyr lorde. He loued muche Cosmo di Medici of Florence, by whose helpe and counsaile it is thought he prospered not a little in the beginnyng of his astate: se∣yng that Cosmo (assoone as he was made Duke) sent
ambassadours vnto hym, reioysyng at his prosperitee. For the friendship wherof Francesco afterwardes suc∣coured Piero di Medici in the coniuracion made against hym by Luca Pitti, whom Borso Duke of Ferrara fa∣uoured. ¶This Duke Francesco reedified the little Forte in the Castell of Myllaine, called Gioue, and builded many deuoute places. Neuerthelesse in his age he was some∣what blamed for his disordinate loue to women, more than his astate, his age, and his passed vertues did al∣lowe. ¶Finally finisshyng the course of this life, he lefte (by his wife Bianca) .v. sons Galeazo, Lodouico, surnamed Moro, Ascanio, Philippo, Otauiano, and a daughter named Hippolita Maria that afterwardes, was maried to Alfonso Duke of Calabria. ¶Whan Galeazo beyng in the warres in France with kynge Lewys, heard of his fathers death,Galeazo▪ he retourned to Myllaine: where he was receiued as Duke. And all be it, he was expert in armes, yet did he neuer shew any honourable prouffe thereof: as he that entred in∣to an astate ouermuche wealthie and quiete. And because he had so muche felicitee, that he thought it im∣possible euer to decaie, he set so little by men and by ver∣tue, that many of his owne citesins and seruauntes ha∣ted him. And thei whom he fauoured most conspyred his death and slew hym. The principall wherof was oe Gianandrea Lampugnano, that with his owne han∣des fyrst strake hym, in the churche of saincte Stephen, whan Galeazo had his garde of Halberders rounde a∣bout hym. Whiche Halberders incontinently slewe
the same Giauandrea (that fleeyng through the women happened to be tangled by the spurre) muche after the maner as he was serued, that slew Asdruball in Spaine. ¶And albeit that this Galeazo through his delicate or wanton life, became odiouse and vnworthy to theim that delited in chieualry: and also hated of them that had the fairest wifes and doughters, with whom he wolde be fa∣miliar (as the fame went) yet the commons lamented hym a great deale more than many of his predecessours: because that duryng his life thei remaigned in peace. For in peace whan the souldiour doeth begge, the plow prospereth: and in warre whan the plow man is fledde, the souldiour plaieth the swyne. ¶These thynges beyng thus happened, Giouanni, the sonne of Galeazo,Giouanni. than but a childe, succeded in the astate, vnder the gouernaunce of his mother Bona, and of one Cecco, that longe tyme had ben broughte vp in that house. ¶This Cecco was borne in Calabria of verie lowe de∣gree. But through his wisedome he became noble and of so good credite with Francesco Sforza, that he gouer∣ned most thynges in Millaine. ¶Finally, whan Galeazo was deade, to the entente that Giouanni might the more quietly enioy the dominion he sente away his other brethern into exile. But at length Lodouico Moro, vncle to Giouanni was reuoked by the people: and ineontinently vpon his retourne Cecco be∣headed, and Bianca the mother exiled. ¶After whiche time Giouanni remayned in the astate aboutes .xii. yeres. But his proufe was so simple, that in maner by force he committed the rule of all thynges
to Lodouico. By whose meanes (as he that was not yet contented) some say Giouanni at length was poiso∣ned, and died in Pauia, leauyng issue, a sonne called Fran∣cesco Sforza begotten on his wife Isabella doughter of Alfonso kyng of Naples. ¶Now incontinently as Giouanni was deade,Lodouico Moro. this Lo∣douico Moro bothe of the people, and also by consent of the emperour Maximilian was proclaymed Duke, and shortely after maried his neece Bianca, doughter of his brother Galeazo vnto the same Maximilian, takyng also vpon him the protection of his nephew the yonge Fran∣cesco Sforza, and of his mother Isabella. ¶Than maried he Beatrice the doughter of Ercole Duke of Ferrara, and begatte on hir Francesco Sforza, with a secounde sonne, in whose birth the mother died. ¶This Moro was a wittie man, of veray gooo disposi∣cion, and one that delited muche in the administracion of iustice, in peintyng, and in cunnyng men. ¶In the beginnyng of his astate he entred in amytee with the Florentines, the Senese, the Bologniese, with Ercole da Este, with the Marques of Mantua, with Lewis kyng of Fraunce, and with Alfonso kyng of Na∣ples. But lyke as he was easy to enter into frende∣ship, so for a trifle wolde he sodeinly breake with the best of theim. ¶He helped Charles Duke of Sauoy against Lodouico Marques of Saluzzo, and confined his brother the Car∣dinall Ascanio, because in Ferrara he had practised di∣uers new thynges against him. ¶He toke Boccalino by siege, that had rebelled against the Romayne churche, and therby gratyfied the bishop of Rome.
¶With his great policie he recouered Genoa, that be∣fore had rebelled against him. He founde the meanes to bryng Charles the .viii. Frenche kyng into Italy, to expulse kyng Alfonso out of Naples: because he had be∣fore taken him for his ennemie, for sekyng to mainteigne the astate of Giouanni the sonne of Galeazo, againste him. ¶This comyng of the Frenche kynge not onely annoied Alfonso, but also troubled all Italy. ¶Finally he made warre against the Uenetians, which dured till that after the death of kynge Charles, Lewys succeded in the realme of Fraunce: who hated so muche this Duke Moro, that beyng entred in leage with the Uenetians: Moro was constreigned to flee into Al∣maine, where he remained whilest the Frenchemen toke Millaine, and the Uenetians Cremona and Gieradadda. How be it not longe after the Frenchemen through their yll gouernaunce were driuen from Millaine, and Lodo∣uico reuoked home out of Douchelande, who after his arriuall, takyng Neuara, and trauaylyng to chace the Frenche men out of Italy, was betraied of the Douche∣men, and bothe he and Ascanio taken and ledde into Fraunce, where finally he died. ¶This Lodouico reignyng in his dominion, vsed to an∣swere them that counsailed him to encrease his treasure with taxes and tallages, that the office of a good shepe∣herde was to shere his sheepe, and not to flaie theim. ¶Thus Lodouico Moro taken and deade, as is be∣foresaied,Francesco his sonne Francesco shortely after the battaill of Rauenna, beyng than but tender of yeres, was astabli∣shed Duke of Millaine by the emperours meanes, and
continued in the astate till the comyng of Fraunces the Frenche kynge into Italy: who with the helpe of the Uenetians chaced him away, and gatte the state of Mil∣laine by force: leauyng Mounser de Lautrech gouer∣nour of the same: so that Francesco Sforza withdrew him to Trent, and there remained till the Frenche men through their tyranny and yll gouernaunce, became so hated of the Milanese, that at length they were chased away, and Francesco reuoked home: though in effect he enioyed it not longe. For the Frenche kynge shortly after with a great power came in his owne person into Italy, and so chaced Francesco againe out of the state of Millaine, and prospered muche in his warres there, vn∣till the iourney of Pauia, where he with many of his no∣bles were taken prisoners. After whiche discomfiture Francesco Sforza, by the emperours fauour was ones a∣gain restored to the Douchie of Millaine, and continued in the same till through enuy and malyce of some pie∣thankes, the emperour was vniustly persuaded, that the saied Francesco was not so faithfull towardes his ma∣iestee, as his goodnesse had merited: so that the empe∣rour conceiuyng an vnkyndenesse and a mistrust in hym, constreigned him by force not onely to habandone Mil∣laine: but also for his saufegarde to flee into the castell, whiche after a verie longe siege he yelded vnto the impe∣rialles, to departe freely with bagge and baggage. ¶And so (beyng letted of the imperialles from goyng to Como, where he entended to sodgiourne, tyll he might cleere his innocency towardes the emperour) in mane halfe desperate, he agreed with the Frenche men: & drew to the campe of the leage, that than was made against
the emperour. ¶Finally he went vnto Cremona, till after the taking of sainct Polo, the Frenchemens dooynges in Italie went all to wracke. Wherfore seeyng the emperour Charles the .v. that nowe is come to Bologna to bee crowned, he went simplie thither vnto hym: and there submittyng hym selfe with iust excuses, recouered his magistees fauour, with restitucion of the astate of Myl∣laine, vpon these condicions folowyng: That the Duke shoulde marie the emperours neece, daughter of the kynge of Denmarke and of the emperours syster: that he shoulde paie the emperour nine hundreth thousande duckates in tenne yeres by equall porcions: And final∣ly, that diyng without issue, he should leaue his astate of inheritaunce to the emperour. ¶Incontinently vpon which agrement Alexandro Ben∣tiuogli, as vice Duke, with diuers other officers, were sent to Myllaine, to leauey the fyrste paiemente of this money: whiche was easily gathered vp. For the My∣lanese couetyng the retourne of theyr Duke (whom for his gentill and temperate gouernance in tymes past thei hertilie loued) sticked not to streigne them selfes for his reliefe, in suche wyse, that thoughe theyr customes and taxes were doubled by reason of these paiementes: yet theyr hope of better life to come vnder their Duke, made theim not to esteeme theyr present charges. ¶Than came themperours neece, the daughter of Den∣marke, to Myllaine, and there was most solemnely re∣ceiued with infinite triumphes: and finally maried to the Duke in presence of the Cardinall of Mantua, with suche feastes and plaies afterwardes, as so great a ma∣riage
requyred. ¶But ere a yere went about, the Duke (through great infyrmitee, blinded of one eye) died without issue: lea∣uyng the astate of Myllaine wholly to the emperour, who euer sens hath gouerned the same by his lieuete∣nauntes. The fyrst wherof was named Antonio di Leua, so lame a man of his limmes, that he vsed to be caried on mens shoulders: but on the other side so pru∣dent and ware a capitaine in his doyng{is}, as in his daies was not lyghtly to be founde againe. ¶Next vnto whom folowed the Marques of Vasco, a verie honourable and courtly man, but not altogether man, but not altogether so happie in his procedinges as suche noble men couette to be. ¶Finally after his death the emperour hath placed there the famouse Don Ferrando Gonzaga, vncle to the Duke of Mantua: whose prosperitee hath not one∣ly been great in feates of warre, but also wonderfull in purchasyng of fame, through the sincere and rare ad∣ministracion of iustice, that he vseth. ¶I call it not rare for other cause, than for the rare correction he hath vsed against the offendours: wherby he hath wonne the hertes of theim that loue iustice. ¶As for the progresse of the thynges happened in the state of Myllaine, sens the death of Francesco Sforza (in whom it semeth the house of Visconti to haue taken his ende) I shall not neede here to make any rehersall, because on the one syde the dooynges of the same haue not been verie great: and on the other side they are pre∣sent and fimiliare.
¶Of the astate of Mantua. THe citee of it selfe is very fayre and stronge, and standeth riche∣ly, by reason the countreis about are plaine, and no lesse plentiful than the other partes of Lumbardie be. It is stronge, because the riuer of Mel∣tio (or Mentio as some call it) fallyng out of the lake of Garda thoroughe the towne of Peschiera, passeth to the Pò by Mantua, and maketh about it suche a poole, that thre part{is} of the citee are defended with the bredth of a quarter of a myle of water euery waie: whiche in some places is deepe, and in some shalow, that it can not be passed with botes. And than in the necessarie pla∣ces suche bulwarkes are made to defende, that it semeth impossible to be wonne by assaulte on that side. ¶And for the .iiii. parte, whiche is towarde the weast, it is verie well fortified with stronge wall{is} and bulwar∣kes, and a large byche well watered: besides that the grounde on that side is in maner all marisshe, or at the least so ranke, that in the driest of the sommer there can none artillerie passe: so that the citee is vndoubtedly one of the strongest that I haue seen. ¶The dominion that the Duke hath is not great, ney∣ther of circuite nor of reuenew. For at the best (as I haue ben enformed) the rentes neuer passed an .100000. duckates a yere, and many times it hath ben much lesse, by reason it is not standyng, but riseth of customes and casualtees. ¶It is true, that the state is muche encreased by reason
of Monferrato, that the last Duke had by the mariage of his wyfe, so that now the Duke of Mantoa's rentes by estimacion are reckened at .130000. duckates or ther∣aboutes. ¶And as for notable buildinges in Mantua, other than suche as be vniuersall in the goodly citees of Italie, I finde none, sauyng certaine propre lodgeynges that the Duke Federico deceased, hath made on the southe part of his palaice: whiche vndoubtedly are galaunt and ri∣che. Wherfore procedyng now to the originall of the citesins and citee, with the successe therof hitherward{is}. ¶The Originall of Mantua. BY agreement of most aucthours I fynde, that the people of Mantua are descended of those auncient Tuscanes, that before the siege of Troie departed out of Lydia in Asia, and vnder the leadyng of theyr prince Tirreno, came and enhabited the region of I∣talie. Part of whiche Tuscanes, chosyng afterwar∣des the place of Mantua for theyr habitacion, builded the citee, before the comyng of Eneas into Italie, and before the edificacion of Rome, more than .300. yeres. The capitaine of which people at that time was named Ogno, a verie expert man in Astronomie, or in the sci∣ence of diuinacion. For his vertue in whiche science, folowyng the Greeke woorde Mantia, he named the ci∣tee Mantua. How be it, Dante (speakyng therof) re∣ferreth the beginnyng of Mantua to Manto, daughter of Tiresia, kynge of Thebes: whom the poetes feigne, lost his sight for iudgeyng betwene Iupiter and Iuno,
that the woman in the vse of nature had more pleasure than the man: taken for iudge in this mattier, because (through the killyng of certayne serpentes) he before tyme had ben chaunged from a man to a woman, and had vsed in bothe kyndes. So that Iupiter in recompence of his sight (that Iuno had taken from him) gaue hym the science of diuinacion, and he hauyng a doughter afterward{is}, according to that science named hir Manto: who comyng into Italy was aucthour bothe of the be∣ginnyng and also of the name of Mantua. But howe so euer it were, I finde, that ones it was destroied by At∣tila kyng of the Goti, and after by Agilulfo kynge of the Lumbardes, thyrdely by Cacciano kyng of Bauiera, and lastly by the Hungariens.1063. And than beyng reedified Nicolas the secounde bishop of Rome helde a generall counsaill there, in the which these holy Pilates (I wold say Prelates) decreed, that from thense forth the bishops of Rome shulde be elected by the college of Cardinalles, to the intent the emperours shoulde haue no more to doe withall. At the tyme o whiche counsaill Matilda doughter of the Conte Bonifacio, was ladie of Mantua. ¶This Conte Bonifacio was lorde of the citees of Lu∣ca, Parma, Reggio, Mantua, and Ferrara: called altoge∣thers at that tyme Il Patrimonio: and was so great a man, that he obteigned vnto wife Beatrice, sister of Hen∣ry the secounde emperour of Almaine. Whiche Beatrice after hir husbandes death gouerned the whole dominion 15. yeres, and was finally buried in Pisa: leuyng hir doughter Matilda before named with an husbande na∣med Godfrey in the astate. Matilda.¶Matilda after the death of hir husbande Godfrey ma∣ried
againe, and at length founde meane to be diuorsed: insomuche that diyng without issue she lefte hir whole astate vnto the churche of Rome, and was buried in the abbey of. S. Benette di Bondeno besides Mantua. ¶After whose death the citee of Mantua was gouerned by Romaine vicares and legates, vntill aboutes the yere of grace .1220. one Sordello founde the meanes to be prin∣cipall gouernour therof:Sordello. the mightiest man of body and strength that was in those daies: insomuche that beyng prouoked many tymes to feighte, he alwaies remained vanquisher. Through the notable fame wherof the Frenche kynge sente for hym, and beyng arriued in his presence, merily saied vnto him: he belieued not that he shoulde be Sordello: wherwith Sordello beyng offended, incontinently tourned his backe without speakyng any worde: and beyng called againe, was demaunded by the Frenche kyng, what he meaned so sodeinly to tourne his backe, he aunswered: I wolde haue retourned to Man∣tua to bryng witnesse, that I am Sordello. ¶He maried one of the doughters of Ezelino da Ro∣mano, who first beyng enamoured on him, vsed secretly to departe from hir fathers house, and goe to Mantua vnto him. Wherof Ezelino at length hauyng know∣lage, tempted by meane of his doughter, that Sordello shoulde haue betraied the Mantuanes into his handes: but Sordello wolde neuer consent therunto: insomuche that at laste Ezelino came him selfe and besieged Man∣tua, hopyng to gette it by force. But all in vayne, for after he had lien before it certaine daies, he finally was constreigned to raise his siege, and not longe after died. So that the Mantuanes prouoked through that example,
immediately endeuored them selfes to fortify their citee with diches and water, to the ende that in tyme to come their vittailes might not easily be cutte from theim. And in shorte space after fell in contencion with the Cre∣monese for the possession of the ryuer of Oglio. In whiche time the notablest families of Mantua were the Poledroni (that had chaced awaie the Crabrosi) and next theim were the Arloi, the Caccialodi, the Grasso∣lani, and the Agnelli, but at length the Buona Colsi be∣came most puissaunte of all the rest: the heade of whiche house was named Pinamonte, who beyng conspired a∣gainst by all the other forenamed families, founde the meane to ouercome all their forces. And beyng elected with an other named Ottonello, vnto the chiefest office of iudgement vpon life and death for terme of .vi. mo∣nethes, he founde the meane also to slea his colleage, and to vsurpe the dominion ouer the citee by force. Pinamon∣te.¶Neuerthelesse afterwardes he behaued hym selfe so well, that throughe his gentile and iuste dealynges, he gatte the citesins fauour, and continued in the astate .18. yeres. After whom succeded Bardelaio, yll beloued of all men: and nexte him Botticello indifferently well be∣loued on the other side. But last of all Passerino en∣ioied the dominion,Passerino. whose sonne named Francesco, caused the destruction of his father, of him selfe, and of their other kynne and friendes by this meane. ¶Amongest his many friendes Philippino, sonne of Lui∣gi Gonzaga was one. Of whom this Francesco be∣ganne to conceiue a ialousy touchyng his wife: and so muche encreased this suspicion, that beyng on a day (as he maner is) greeted by Philippino, he churlishly aun∣swered,
that he wolde be euen with him, by forsyng his wife again openly in the markette place. The ar∣rogancy of whiche aunswere so muche enflambed the innocent hert of Philippino, that incontinently he began to imagine how to be auenged: not on Francesco alone, but also on the father Passerino considering that the one coulde not be well done without the other. And so, de∣claryng the terrible wordes of Francesco, lamented the case vnto his brother Guido Gonzaga, and to diuers o∣ther of his friendes and kynne: who all togethers with the helpe of Cane lorde of Scala, determined to dispatche Passerino. And at the daie appoyncted assemdled in armes in the markette place, and there slewe Passerino, as he fledde towardes his owne house to haue saued hym selfe. So that whan Passerino was slayne, the house of Gonzaga toke on it the dominion, banished di∣uers of the contrary part, beheaded Francesco, and ther∣with ceased from further crueltee against their enemies: by commaundement of the forenamed Luigi Gonzaga, that firste of that name was lorde of Mantua. ¶This familie of Gonzaga had his beginnyng of one Luigi Tedesco an Almaine of royall bloudde,Gonzaga. who (in the tyme that all Italie was in armes, and so many ar∣mies about Robicone) had taken place for hym and all his familie at Mantua.Luigi. Gonzaga. Of whom afterwardes descen∣ded this Luigi Gonzaga before named, that aboutes the yere of grace .1328. beganne his dominion ouer Man∣tua, and gouerned the same afterwardes the space of 53. yeres. He had three wifes, and by euery wife three sonnes. By the fyrst he had Guido, Philippino, and Feltrino. By the seconde Currado, Alberto, and Fe∣derico.
And by the thyrde, Azo, Iacopo, and Giouan∣ni. Insomuche that there hapned in Mantua three no∣table mariag{is} of that house in one time, Luigi him selfe to his last wife of the house of Malespini: Currado his son to the sister of Mastino della Scala, and Vgolino his sons son borne of Guido, vnto a little girle of Becacci da Pauia. At whiche mariag{is} there assembled a wonderful nūbre of people: insomuche that Luigi him selfe gaue a∣way amongest nobles & gentilmen .120. goodly horses. ¶After the successe of these thynges whylest Philippi∣no was folowyng the warres, in seruice of the kynge of Hungarie against the kynge of Naples, there hapned a mischaunce vnto the house of Gonzaga. ¶Isabell wyfe of Lucchino Visconti, lorde of Myl∣laine, a verie fayre woman, feigned to hir husbande, that she had made a vow to goe in pylgrimage vnto Uenice: and vnder that colour, obteignyng licence, she toke Man∣tua in hir waie, where she lodged in the house of Gon∣zaghi, auncient friendes vnto hir husbande. And af∣ter she hadde supped, secretely sent for Vgolino, vnto whom she declared, that for the feruent loue she bare to hym, she had taken on hir that iourney: praiyng hym therfore to kepe hir company vnto Uenice. ¶This thyng came to the eares of Lucchino, who pro∣uoked therby, laied siege to Mantua. Neuerthelesse findyng the friendes of Vgolino innocent of the fault, and that Guido the father did his best to correcte hym, Lucchino, through intercession leueied the siege: And shortly after Luigi Gonzaga, of the age of .93. died, ha∣uing ledde an happie life, to see so many forewarde per∣sones to the .iii. and fourthe degree of his owne gene∣racion.
¶After whom Guido his eldest sonne entred into the astate, and whilest the empyre was vacant,Guido. by the helpe of his brother Philippino, gatte Lamporeggio, and contended longe tyme in armes with Obizone Mar∣ques of Ferrara: who at length was ouercomen by Phi∣lippino: and with great losse constreigned to withdraw hym home vnto Ferrara. ¶This Guido had .iii. soonnes, Vgolino, Francesco, and Luigi. And because the two younger perceiued, that the father fououred more the eldest, they takyng counsaile together, determined to ridde hym out of the waie: and so biddyng hym to supper on an euenyng, slew hym. ¶This vnnaturall part of the sonnes was supported of the dolorouse father as well as nature woulde suffre it. But because the correction therof shoulde haue drawen more bloudde of his owne, he therfore sought to abate his passion with the new mariage of his sonne Frances∣co vnto the doughter of Guido Polenta, lorde of Ra∣uenna. Neuerthelesse Bernabo Visconti, vncle to the wife of Vgolino, to auenge Vgolino's death (after he had first fette awaie his neece) laied siege to Mantua: by reason wherof Guido was constreigned to sue for helpe to the emperour Charles, that than warred in I∣talie: who before time goyng towardes his coronacion, and passyng through Mantua, had been there most ho∣nourablie receiued, by Luigi father of Guido: so that by the emperours meanes the mattier was remedied: and within shorte space after died Guido and his sonne Francesco bothe. ¶And than came the astate clerely to Luigi,Luigi. who buil∣ded
the palaice, wherin all his successours to this daie haue dwelled. He begatte on his wife Alda, a sonne named Francesco, whom he maried verie yonge vnto Agnesa, doughter of Bernabo Visconti, and at last beyng knowen openly to haue committed auoutrie, the people arose and cruelly slew hym. ¶After whose death the astate descended to his sonne Francesco,Francesco than beyng of the age of .xiiii. yeres. But growen afterwardes to more tyme, he so muche loued peace, that he refused to entre in confederacion with Giangaleazo Duke of Myllaine. And vpon displea∣sure therfore folowyng betwene theim, Francesco cau∣sed the adder (that for the great amitee and aliaunce be∣twene those two houses had in tyme past been ioygned to the armes of Mantua) to be cleane taken out ther∣of. For whiche despite Giangaleazo besieged Man∣tua, and laie before the same an whole yere: in whiche meane tyme there perisshed many notable men on bothe sydes: and specially of the house of Gonzaga .4. that is to wete, Guido, Torello, Bartolino, and Galeazo. Whiche Galeazo Gonzaga amongest all other was re∣puted the strongest and hardiest man of his daies, hauing fought oftentymes bodie to bodie, and remained euer∣more vainquisher: namely against Buccialdo a notable stronge man than gouernour for the Frenche kynge in Genoa. These businesses at length beeyng pacified, and Francesco somewhat awakened in armes, he enter∣prised warre in the name of Giangaleazo against the Bologniese, and against Giouanni Bentiuogli: in the thicke wherof he toke Iacopo Carraro of Padoa pri∣soner, and ledde hym to Mantua, geuyng him suche cur∣teyse
libertee there, that yeldyng vnkyndnesse for kynd∣nesse Iacopo escaped awaie: wherof folowed muche a dooe afterwardes. For assoone as the Duke of Myl∣laine was dead, the Uenetians (consideryng the prouo∣ked displeasure before rehersed) elected the saied Fran∣cesco to be their generall in thenterprise against the Car∣rari, and were so well serued of hym, that after he had chased the Carrari out of Padoa and Verona, he redu∣ced bothe those citees to the Uenetian obedience: And so after a gloriouse life died.1407. ¶Leauyng after hym his sonne Gianfrancesco in the dominion, of the age of .14. yeeres,Gianfran∣cesco. who by his wyfe Paola, daughter of Malatesta, lorde of Rimini, had .4. sonnes, Luigi, Carlo, Lucido, and Alexandro. To the fyrst wherof he obteined for wyfe Barbera daugh∣ter of the Marques of Brandenburgh, and kynneswo∣man vnto the emperour Edmonde, who at his comyng into Italie, and passyng through Mantua, was there ho∣nourablie receiued by Gianfrancesco, insomuche that before his departure he made hym Marques, and gaue hym in his armes the ensigne of the empyre. ¶After the atteignyng of whiche honours he was thre seuerall tymes made generall of the Uenetians, and in euery enterprise gatte the vpper hand. And at last for∣sakyng theim, he was waged against theim by Philippo Duke of Myllaine: and in that seruice in company of Niccolo Piccinino was parte of the occasion, that the Uenetians than lost the citee of Verona: with many o∣ther townes of the Bressane and Uicentine: & so he died:144. leauyng his dominion diuided in .iiii. partes vnto his foure sonnes. To Luigi (as eldest) the citee of Mantua,
with those other townes that he had about Verona: to Carlo (who was an excedyng stronge man) Lucea, with the reste of those landes that he helde on the Cremonese territorie. To Lucido (yll shapen and weake of person) Capriana, La Volta, and Ciregiaia: and finally to Alex∣andro (who was crokebacked, and becomen religiouse) Canneto, with that lande that he hadde on the Bres∣sane. Luigi.¶Thus Luigi the eldest toke the astate vpon hym, and continued not longe in the same vnuexed of his brother Carlo, whose mightinesse and force of body was coupled with suche an haultenesse of minde, that for desire of at∣teignyng his elder brothers astate, he coulde not be con∣tented to liue in peace. ¶And albeit that in the warres betwene Francesco Sfor∣za, and the Milanese he fledde from one part to an other and backe again: yet by his brothers meanes he recoue∣red the fauour of Sforza, at whose handes he receiued diuers benefites. But Luigi, seeyng now the yll dis∣posicion of his vnquiete mynde, finally toke from hym all the landes that his father lefte hym: so that Carlo fledde to the Uenetians, and became their captaine, so longe till at lengthe through their helpe he assembled a power of men, wente againste his brother, and foughte with him to the ieopardy of the losse of the Mantuan astate. But in conclusion the right of Luigi preuailed againste the force of Carlo, who beyng discomfited and fledde, died afterwardes verie poorely in exile. ¶This enterpryse beeynge thus ouercomen, and the thynges of the astate quieted, Luigi triumphantly re∣ceiued the emperour Federico the thyrde, as he passed
through Mantua to Rome, and beyng than a wydower by the death of his first wife, maried Margarite dough∣ter of the Duke of Bauiera, and cousen to the forenamed emperour. ¶He was so great of body that he was commonly called the Turke, so well exercysed in armes, and so beloued specially of the Dukes of Millaine, that Duke Philippo called him sonne, Francesco called him brother, and Ga∣leazo called him father. ¶He was noble of courage, fine of witte, and some∣what learned, whiche thinges together with his liberall and courteise life, made him beloued of all men. ¶Finally through some disorder in liuyng, as he that loued to liue in pleasure, he died somewhat before the full course of his naturall terme. Leauyng by his first wife Barbara .v. sonnes, Federico, Francesco made Car∣dinall, Luigi, Gianfrancesco, and Rodolfo, all notable and vertuouse persons. ¶Federico as eldest, succeded in the astate,Federico. and was af∣terwardes generall to the Duke of Millaine, and mari∣ed La Margerita Tedesca, on whom he begatte a sonne named Francesco: and in the Uenetian warres againste the Duke of Ferrara, hauyng gotten Asola, whiche after∣wardes he was constreigned by force to restore, sickened for sorow and died. ¶By reason wherof his sonne Francesco, of the age of 18. yeres, entred into the astate,Francesco. and at the age of .38. was made generall of the Uenetians, in whose seruice he did wonders: specially againste Charles the eighte Frenche kyng, nere vnto the riuer of Taro besides Parma, as the same kynge retournyng from the conquest of the realme
of Naples, laden with great richesse, was goyng into Fraunce. In whiche enterprise Francesco so behaued him selfe, that he ledde many noble men prisoners with hym at his retourne, insomuche that the Frenche kynge made verie great offers to haue had his seruice, but all in vaine. For continuyng his ennemie he afterwardes fought with the Frenche men in Puglia, and so discom∣fited theim, that he restored the kynge Ferrandino vnto his astate. And leauyng three sonnes by his wife Bea∣trice, doughter of Ercole, Duke of Ferrara, that is to wete, Federico that next succeded him, Ercole made Car∣dinall, and Don Ferrando that nowe is the emperours generall at Millaine, finally he died. Federico. 520.¶After whose death, Federico toke the astate vpon him, and was made general of the Romaine churche by bishop Lyon the .x. confirmed by Adrian the .vi. and continued also vnder Clement the .vii. And as the emperour (that now is) retourned from his coronacion at Bologna, pas∣syng through Mantua (where he was most honourably receiued) his maiestee, for the vertue, worthinesse, and nobilitee knowen in this Federico, called hym from the degree of Marques, and created hym Duke. ¶He maried Margerite doughter and heire of the lorde Guglielmo Paleologo, Marques of Monferrato, in whose righte by fauour of the emperours maiestee, he obteigned hir fathers astate, that is to saie, the dominion of Monferrato. And so notably fortifiyng the citee of Mantua,1539▪ he died, leauyng .iiii. sons, Francesco Gugliel∣mo, Lodouico, and Federico. Francesco¶Francesco after his fathers deathe entred into the do∣minion, but because he was than of verie tender yeres,
and passeth not yet the age of .14. his father by testament committed the gouernaunce of hym vnto his wife, with the helpe and counsaill of his brother Ercole the Cardi∣nall, vntill the yonge Duke shall be growen to sufficient yeres: who by the parentes consente, and by the empe∣rours procurement, hath ben contracted vnto one of kyng Ferdinando's doughters, and shall marie hir verie short∣ly, as the saiyng is. ¶Of the astate of Ferrara. FErrara is one of the no∣tablest citees of Lumbardie, aswell for the beautie and greatnesse, as al∣so for the stronge site & fortificacion. ¶Fyrst for beautie, if that part, that is called La terra nuoua, had ben tho∣roughly finished: as it was deuised, it shoulde haue ben woorthie for faire stretes, to haue been preferred before any other citee that I haue seen. And now as it is, I thynke it no lesse woorthy. For you shall finde aboue a dousen streetes so iust and euenly sete foorthe, that I warrant you there is not so muche as the corner of a house to let a man of his full sight from the tone ende to the tother. Some of whiche streetes lacke little of a myle longe, with the goodly houses and buildynges on bothe sides so fayre and vniforme, that it seemeth all dooen at one tyme and by one agreement, as no doubte the most part hath been in deede. And than in the mid∣dest
it hath a verie fayre greene, appoincted out for the markette place. But the Duke that now is, hath had no mynde to folow it, although his father Alfonso be∣stowed the most trauaile of all his daies about it, to his wonderful charge: as he that shall see it maie wel con∣sider. So that the most habitacion of people resteth still in the olde parte of the citee, whiche is also indifferent fayre: but nothyng comparable to the new. Than as touchyng the greatnesse, I thynke the circuite by the walles be little lesse than .v. myles. And finally for strength it hath the goodliest and strongest wall, and the largest diche, well watered, that I haue seen: specially for three partes to the lande warde. And as for the fourth part, though the wall be not so stronge, yet is it reputed of no lesse force on that side, than on the other: by reason that within .20. yardes of the wall, the great riuer of Pò, hath his course downe towardes the sea: whiche renneth so swifte, and is so broade and deepe, that it is not to be passed of any enemie to geue assaulte to the towne. ¶The Duke hath vnder his dominion two other citees, that is to wete, Modona, and Reggio, with a good parte of the low countreys of Romagna, and maie dis∣pende yerely by estimacion betwene .200. and .250000. duckates: and is esteemed verie riche, because he hath had no warre, nor other charge of importaunce, for the space of .xiii. yeres or more, that he hath gouerned the astate.
The Originall and successe of the citee. LYke as of other places be diuers opinions: euen so is there of the beginnyng, and name of Ferrara. Some woull, that the name therof hath growen of a certaine quantitee of yron, that the same citee yelded for a tribute vnto the lorde of Rauenna: as Argenta, and Aureolo haue also dooen of the paiement of siluer and golde. Some other woull, that it be so called of the mynes of yron that haue been founde there: whiche opinion is most sensible, consideryng that Ferrara (af∣ter the vse of the latine tounge) signifieth none other but the place where yron is digged foorth, as Caesare in his commentaries, the .viii. boke of the Frenche war∣res, and as Liuie in the fourthe of the Macedonicall warres dooe affyrme. ¶But to passe ouer these antiquitees, and come nerer to our purpose, I finde,700. that the saied citee of Ferrara was firste closed with walles by one Smeraldo, capitaine for the Greekish emperour in Rauenna: and longe time af∣ter (beyng a certaine space vnder the obedience of Henry the secounde emperour of Almaine) it was recouered by the counteise Matilda, doughter of the Conte Bonefacio,1020▪ as hir right enheritaunce, through helpe of the Ueneti∣ans, and of the lordes of Rauenna, out of the handes of Henry the thirde than emperour: whiche Countesse at hir death, with other hir possessions, lefte it vnto the vse of the Romaine churche: insomuche that longe tyme it was gouerned of vicares and of legates, vntill the house of Este gatte the rule therof. Who firste obteigned is
vnder condicion, that thei shoulde for euer holde it in fee of the churche of Rome. ¶And to resite the beginnyng of that house, some thinke the same is descended of those aunciente Troianes, that came with Anthenor into Italy: and some other woull, that their socke shoulde be of a certayne towne called Este, now vnder the Uenetian dominion, liyng .xv. miles from Padoa, on the southeside of the Padoan hilles. From whiche towne (thei saie) this family of Este came to dwell in Ferrara. But how so euer it be, the fyrst notable man of that house, that ruled Ferrara, was na∣med Azo,Azo 1. Aldobran∣dino. who at his death lefte issue two sonnes, Al∣dobrandino, and Azo: the fyrste entred in possession, and liuyng but a short space, lefte the astate vnto Azo the seconde his younger brother.Azo .2. ¶This Azo was driuen out of it by Federike the em∣perour, and one Salinguerra put there in his place: in∣somuche that Azo for succour resorted vnto a certaine Ferrarese named Gregorio Montelungo, beyng at that tyme Romysh legate in the citee of Bologna: by whose meanes, with helpe of the Uenetians, of the Mantua∣nes, and of Ezelino, than lorde of Verona, brother in lawe vnto this Azo: Salinguerra was by force expul∣sed, and Azo restored vnto his astate: vpon condicion that he shoulde holde it for euer as vicare of the church, and none otherwyse. ¶Now this Azo the seconde hauyng by his fyrst wife a soonne, named Fresco, maried agayne the secounde daughter of the kyng of Naples,Crueltee. named Beatrice: whi∣che mariage so muche offended his sonne Fresco (as he that was desirouse to reigne) that prisonyng his father
put hym vnto death, and after with helpe of the Uene∣tians toke on hym the astate. ¶But his owne citesins, abhorryng so great a crueltee,Fresco. procured so muche the Romysh legate Palagurra to the vengeaunce of Fresco, that bothe Fresco and the Uene∣tians were excommunicated, and warre moued against theim: the generall wherof was named Diego Catela∣no a Spaniarde. ¶Now Fresco waxyng more cruell through these bu∣sinesses than before,Crueltee. put to death all those of his subie∣ctes, that were contrarie to hym, and after burned the one halfe of the citee, purposyng to destroie the whole. But the furie of the people was so moued therby, that takyng weapon in harde, they sought hym, and as he woulde haue fledde out at the Lyon gate, slew hym. And Rinaldo his brother (to whom of right the astate ought to haue descended) was also dead in prison. ¶So than Obizone, sonne of Rinaldo, toke on hym the astate:Obizone. and was the first that beganne to enlarge his dominion through the gettyng of Modena and Reggio. ¶And after Obizone succeded Azo his sonne,Azo .3. the .iii. of that name, who delited muche in armes: many times attemptyng to conquere Parma and Bologna: and at length  without issue. ¶Leauyng his astate vnto his nephewes Rinaldo and Niccolo, sonnes of his brother Aldobrandino.Rinaldo. ¶This Rinaldo desirouse to encrease his dominion, with the helpe of Passerino Buona Colsi, than lorde of Man∣tua, obteined Argenta, & after ioignyng his power with an armie of the lordes of Scala, laied siege to the towne of San felice on the Modenese. Whiche towne the kyng
Manfredi, together with .30. other townes, had lefte in custodie of Charles sonne to the kyng of Boeme: so that the same Charles, with Manfredi, and with Beltrame the bishop of Romes generall (vnityng their campes to∣gether) assaulted Rinaldo, and discomfited him, takyng parte of his men, amongest whom Nicolo brother vnto Rinaldo rested prisoner: insomuche that the Romish le∣gate, waxyng immoderately proude of this victory ad∣dressed his power towardes Ferrara, and besieged it. But at laste Rinaldo issued out and discomfited him, ta∣kyng prysoners Galeotto da Rimini, Francesco de gl' Ordelaffi, Ricciardo Manfredi di Faenza, and Astagio da Polenta, whom he deliuered in exchaunge for his brother Nicolo, and after lette the reste goe freely vpon theyr othes, that they shoulde no more be against hym. ¶Finally this Rinaldo was so muche persuaded by his owne citesins, that he restored Argenta to the byshop of Rome, wherby he recouered the bishoppes blessyng, and so at length died without issue. Obizone .2¶Leauyng his astate vnto his nephewe Obizone the secounde of that name, sonne vnto his brother Nicolo. ¶This Obizone (through fauour of the legate) was the first that was made generall of the churche, and had therfore .10000. duckates of yerely prouision assygned vnto hym. And shortely after was Parma also geuen into his handes by Azo da Correggio, not withstan∣dyng that it appertaigned vnto Mastino della Scala, and that the same Azo also had before offered to sell it vnto the Florentines for .50000. duckates. ¶Not longe after there grewe a controuersy betwene Obizone and Philippino di Gonzaga for the citee of
Reggio: wherof there folowed so sharpe warre betwene them, that Obizone, mistrustyng his owne power, yelded the citee of Parma into the handes of Lucchino Viscon∣ti, and finally leauyng issue two sonnes, Nicolo and Al∣berto, died. ¶After whom Nicolo the eldest succeded,Nicolo. beyng alwaies fast friende to the Romaine bishoppes, in whose fauour many tymes he fought with Bernabo Visconti, and had the better, specially in that notable iourney that happe∣ned betwene theim on the Bressane territory nere to the hill Morlano. ¶He purchased also of Giouanni Aguto, an English ca∣pitaine, the citee of Faenza for .20000. duckates, and bought also the towne of Baguacauallo, though he kepte it not longe: for Astorgio Manfredi gatte it from him by treason. ¶Finally he did muche for his citesins, and greately augmented Ferrara. ¶He was eloquente, mercifull and learned, constante bothe of nature and of countenaunce, and so liberall, that he neuer repulsed person that soughte benefite at his handes. At laste diyng without issue, he lefte his astate vnto his brother Alberto, who also at his deathe,Alberto▪ hauyng no laufull childe, left it vnto Nicolo his bastard sonne, than beyng but a childe. ¶Nowe was there one Azo of the house of Este,Nicolo. that seyng Nicolo yet tender of yeres, vnder the gouerne of tutours, and vnapte to rule, did as muche as he coulde to preuaile him selfe. But with the helpe of the Ueneti∣ans, of the Florentines, and of the Bologniese, Nicolo was not onely mainteined in the astate, but Azo for his
presumpcion confined also into Candia. And after∣wardes beyng growen vnto age, this Nicolo became so mortall ennemie vnto Ottone, lorde of Parma, that feignyng at lengthe to mete with hym for a treatie of peace, caused him secretly to beslayne by the waie, by meane of Sforza Cotignola, and so recouered the citees of Reggio and Parma, that Ottone before had occupied. ¶After the whiche, beyng all geuen vnto the commodi∣tee of Ferrara, he builded the great palaice or castell in the herte of the citee, wherin the Dukes euer sens haue dwelled: and besides that the palaices of Ficcarolo, and of Bellosguardo, and toke vnto wife the doughter of Francesco Vecchio da Carrara. By reason wherof he became enemie to the Uenetians, and prouoked against hym selfe a daungerouse warre. ¶But finally in feates of armes he became excellent, and in the gouernyng of his astate verie prudent, and of suche reputacion, that he caused the generall counsaile of that tyme to be kepte in Ferrara. At the whiche the emperour of Grece happened to be present: and not longe after he died, leauyng two bastarde sonnes, Lionello and Borso, and two laufull sonnes by his secounde wife, of the bloudde of the Marqueses of Saluzo, named Ercole, and Gismondo. Lionello.¶Of whom, Lionello beyng the eldest succeded in the astate, by what reason I can not tell, but that the father wolde so. ¶This Lionello was a verie wise man, and in his tyme made of new the wall of Ferrara on the side of the Pò, and amended the houses and stretes on that parte of the citee. And because his sonne Nicolo, whom he had be∣gotten
gotten on the doughter of Gianfrancesco Gonzaga, was a verie childe at the time of his death, on his death edde he committed his astate to his brother Borso, besechyng him, that whan his sonne Nicolo shulde be growen vnto sufficient age, he wold vouchesafe to restore it vnto him. ¶Thus entred Borso into the dominion, and inconti∣nently reuoked his brethern Ercole & Gismondo,Borso. whom Lionello had before confined into the realme of Naples, and to the entent there should grow none enuy betwene them, he alwaies nourished theim together a like. ¶He fortified Ferrara with stronge walles, and builded the Chatterhouse of the same: and was of so good a na∣ture, that he wolde offer no man wronge, but rather for∣gettyng those that were done vnto him, he was wonte to saie: That sooner and with more ease should a man ouer∣come his enemy by benefites and curtesie than by sword or vengeaunce. ¶He delited muche in cunnyng men, and kept diuers a∣bout him, as well of learned as of others. And finally was so worthy a man, that the emperour Federico pas∣syng through his dominion, of his owne mocion created him Duke. ¶After the death of Borso, Nicolo the sonne of Lionello,Nicolo. accordyng to the couenaunt made betwene Borso and his father, succeded in the astate. ¶He ruled not longe, but the right heyre Ercole,Ercole. be∣fore named, with helpe of the Uenetians, by force ex∣pulsed hym, in suchewyse that for succour he ledde to his vncle to Mantua, where after the terme of thre ye∣res, assemblyng about an .800. banished men, he attem∣pted to recouer Ferrara: and watchyng his time whilest
Ercole was foorth of the citee, by night skaled the wall{is}▪ and came to the market place, criyng Vela, Vela (which was his enseigne) but there was none of his friendes so hardy, as to aryse to succour him: so that Gismondo, brother to Ercole (seeyng the weakenesse of Niccolo's succours) gathered together suche power as that hastie rumour allowed, and not onely discoumfited Niccolo's companie: but also toke hym, with .xx. of his men pri∣soners, and brought hym vnto Lionora the wife of Er∣cole doughter to Ferrando kynge of Naples: who sent for the Duke vnto Bellosguardo. And so within .iii. daies after (the Duke beyng retourned vnto Ferrara) Nicolo lost his head, and was neuerthelesse honourablie buried amongest his auncestours. ¶Not longe after the Florentines (at that tyme trou∣bled by the bishop of Rome, and the kynge of Naples) elected this Duke Ercole for theyr generall, who accor∣dyngly serued theim verie honourablie. ¶Finally fallyng out with the Uenetians for the brea∣che of certaine articles betwene them, what with warre, and with hunger he was so oppressed, that had he not obteyned the bishop of Romes fauour, he myght easily haue lost his astate. After whiche enterprises, beyng generall of the Uenetians, and of the Mylanese bothe, and vtterly suppressing his aduersaries the Erles of saincte Bonifacio, at last he disposed hym selfe alto∣gethers to religiouse woorkes: and amongest all other with his owne handes he daiely distributed to .13. poore men for goddes sake, two poundes of flesshe, a measure of wyne, three loues of bread, and a little peece of mo∣ney, vnto euery one of theim, and than died.
¶Leauyng his astate vnto his sonne Alfonso,Alfonso, who pro∣ued so woorthy a man, that notwithstandyng he had ma∣ried Lucretia, daughter of Alexandro bishop of Rome, yet whan the same bishoppe by force offeed to take from hym the countrey of Romagna: he resisted so valiant∣ly, that the bishop was faine to forgoe his enterprise. ¶The lyke wherof he did vnto bishop Leon the .x. that purposed to haue taken Ferrara from hym. ¶And thus hauyng by Lucretia his fyrste wyfe three sonnes, Ercole, Hippolito now Cardinall, and Don Francesco: and by Laura his secounde wyfe two son∣nes, Alfonso and Alfonsino, he died. ¶After whose death Ercole as eldest sonne,Ercole▪ entred in∣to the astate, and at this daie enioyeth the same. ¶And albeit, that hitherto there hath happened no no∣table occasion to trie his woorthinesse, yet can he not chose, but proue well. For he is a goodly man of perso∣nage, hygh of stature, stronge and well proporcionate in all his membres, balde on the crowne of the head, and amiable enough of countenance. He hath a good witte, and is somewhat learned, and indifferent in the admini∣stracion of iustice. And one thyng speciall I remembre of hym, worthy to be recited. Themperour at his beyng in Italie borowed money of all handes. And demaun∣dyng amongest the rest .100000. crownes in loe, of this Duke, he brought hym a bagge of .50000. crownes: ex∣cusyng hym selfe, that to lende .100000. crownes he was not hable, but to geue his maiestee those .50000. he could be contended with all his hert: and by this shifte kepte the other .50000. crownes in his purse. ¶Finally of religion he is no more earnest than moste
princes are, and in his life he foloweth the court of loue, to lose no tyme of pleasure. ¶He is friendly to faire women, and cherisheth change. By his fathers daies he maried madame Renea daugh∣ter vnto Lewys the .xii. frenche kyng, a verie graciouse ladie. By whom he hath two sonnes, Alfonso and Lui∣gi. Hitherto he hath mainteined his dominion in peace, and is therfore thought (as I haue saied) to be very ri∣che, He is well furnisshed of artillerie and municion: and of deuocion is altogether Frenche. So that if there should happen any businesse in Italie betwene the emperour and frenche kyng, his part is like to be therin. The astate of Placentia and Parma. ¶PLacentia and Parma ar two notable citees of Lumbardie, li∣yng betwene the Appepine hilles and the riuer of Pò: whose territory and pastures are so fatte and sweete, that it is thought no place of all Europe hable to compare with it for the excellent cheeses it ma∣keth, which by the name of Parmesanes are right well knowen ouer all. ¶These two citees of late apperteined vnto the chur∣che of Rome. But Paule the thyrde, now bishop of the same▪ a Romaine of nacion, of the house of Farnesi,
to encrease his owne familie, founde the meane to sepa∣rate these two citees with theyr territories from the churches dominion: and to geue it vnto his owne sonne named Peter Aluigi, creatyng hym Duke therof. And in recompence annexed vnto the churche the Duchie of Camerino, that he before had taken by force from the Duke of Urbine. ¶This Pietro Aluigi, beeyng the yeere of our lorde 1546. entred into the astate, beganne to beare hym selfe ouerstoutely against the nobilitie of the same, and spe∣cially toward{is} the Signor Ieronimo Pallauicini di Cor∣te Maggiore, who rather disdeigning then enuiyng this mans dominion, was faine at last to flee, and to haban∣done wyfe and children, gooddes and landes. Insomu∣che that this new Duke toke all vnto him selfe, and fur∣nished the castell of Corte maggiore (beyng a veraie stronge holde) with his owne men, toke all the rentes (beyng .12000. duckates a yere) to his owne purse: excepte a small porcion assigned to the ladie wife of Ie∣ronimo, for hir liuyng: with condicion neuerthelesse, that if she reliued hir husbande with any part therof, she should lose the whole. Besides this, he oppressed his subiectes, causyng theim to bie harneis, and to furnishe them selfes for the warre on theyr owne cost. But most of all he occupied a great noumbre of labourers in his woorkes, beginnyng the foundacion of a stronge castell, in the place where the Abbey of S. Bennettes in Pla∣centia stode. The monkes wherof he appoincted vnto a spittle hous, called sainct Lazares in Champaine. And these labourers were taken vp by force from all partes of the Parmesane and Placentine: of whiche there pe∣rished
at one time, with the fall of an holow banke aboue 50. persons: so that what with one thyng, and what with an other (beyng also a man knowen full of abho∣minacion in all kinde of vices, and specially in the vnna∣turall) in conclusion he became hated of all men: inso∣muche that the Conte Giouanni Aguzzolo, and the Conte Augustino di Pallauicini, with certaine of theyr kynne and friendes, conspired against hym, and at theyr tyme appoincted, findyng hym with a small garde in his owne hous in Plancense, slew him, hangyng afterward{is} the deade body out at a window for a spectacle vnto the people. ¶Finally these gentilmen (foreseeyng the daunger that for this doyng might folowe vnto them, in case the state shoulde continue of the churche) practised before with Don Ferrando Gonzaga, to see whether he wolde backe them, by receiuyng the stronge citee of Placense vnto the emperours behoufe: so that beyng at a poinct with him, the mattier was so handled, that the nexte night after the Dukes death, there were secretly receiued into the towne .800. of the emperours men, and so the citee wonne without stroke strickyng. ¶All the money, plate, iewelles and stuffe that coulde be founde of the Dukes, to the value of .30000. crownes and vpwardes, were diuided amongest the confederates, and the Conte Giouanni Aguzzolo, who kylled the Duke his owne handes, allowed by the emperour .20. men for his garde. ¶Finally the bishop of Rome (being hereof aduertised) incontinently caused Parma to be fortified, and furni∣shed with men of warre, and tempted by corrupcion of
money to haue had one of the gates of Placense deliue∣red hym by nighte: but his practise was discouered, and certaine Spaniardes therfore taken and hanged. And euer sens for more than this halfe yere, the emperours power vpon the Placentine, and the bishoppes on the Parmesane haue kept diligent watche and warde, loking euery houre for open warre. What it woull proue to, he best knoweth that gouerneth all. ¶Of the astate of Urbine. THe citee of Urbine stan∣deth almoste on the toppe of the Ap∣peyne hylles, in maner betwene the marke of Ancona & Tuscane, the peo∣ple wherof (as Plinie writeth) haue ben surnamed Metaurensi, and it see∣meth to haue taken name of Vrbes Binae, two townes. For who that well considereth the proporcion of it, shall iudge by the miter facion therof, that it hath been two townes ioigned together, and the middell, whiche is a holow descent betwene two hill{is}, is the sklenderest part of the citee. ¶The Dukes palaice is a verie faire house, but not so excellent as the Conte Baldasar in his Courtisane doeth commende it. ¶The Dukes dominion is two citees, Vrbine and Pe∣saro: his reuenew passeth not .60000. crownes by the yere. But his auncestours for the most parte serued o∣ther astates, as the Duke that now is also doth: wher∣by
they kepte muche greatter portes than their owne habilitee wolde beare. ¶Amongest other this Dukes father builded an house within a mile of Pesaro, called Imperiale, whiche in mine opinion is one of the best deuised litle thynges that may lightly be founde. It standeth on the syde of an hyll, and hath prospect bothe to the citee and to all the valey, it hath many fine little chambers, goodly open vaultes, and excellent faire fountaines. But that whiche most of all pleased myne eye, was that being of a great height, you may out of the highest gardeine yde about on the toppe of the house, which is very faire paued with bricke, and railed on bothe sides with fine pillers and railes of white marble. ¶As for the edificacion of Urbine, or other notable me∣mory before the yere .1345, I finde nothyng mete to be written. At whiche time (by reason of the variaunce betwene bishop Clement of Rome, and the emperour Lewis of Bauarie, who to make their parties stronge, made diuers new lordes in Italy) Galasso di Montefel∣tro was made vicare for the emperour in the citees of Urbine and Eugenio,Galasso di Montefel∣tro .1345. against the bishop of Rome and his adherentes: in whiche his succession continued enheri∣tours vnto the yere .1444. that Federike, after made Duke,Conte Guido .1428. obteigned the astate. The occasion wherof was, that Guido Conte di Vrbino, hauyng no heire male by his firste wife, feigned, that he had gotten a Concubine with childe, and so secretly toke the sonne of his nere kinnesman Bernardino della Corda, whiche euen than was newly borne, and namyng it Federike, caused it to be nourished as his owne.
¶Not longe after his wife died, and mariyng agayne, engendred a sonne named Oddo,Oddo .1440. who in deede succeded the father in his astate. But he was so viciouse of li∣uyng, and so busie with gentilmens wifes, that in a so∣dein rumour of the people, he was slaine, and a Protono∣tary, called Carpesiano with him. ¶Wherupon this Federike the putatiue sonne,Federico▪ 1444. by the whole voice of the people was elected their prince: who in his youthe had ben verie well brought vp, specially in feates of armes, in the exercise wherof he loste one of his eyes. ¶This Federike was not onely valiaunte, but also verie well learned, and so happie a man, that in his tyme he was generall of .viii. seuerall armies, and died capitaine of the Uenetians armie in the fielde before Ferrara. ¶The bishop of Rome for his worthinesse made hym Duke, the kyng of Englande not onely gaue him money, but also made hym of the Garter. For whiche curtesy all Englishe men haue a certaine priuilege of freedome in his dominion, and the Frenche kyng made him also of his order. Besides that, there was none astate in Italy, but that at one tyme or other presented hym with some worthy gifte. ¶And aboue all the rest his fidelitee seemeth to me most worthy of commendacion. For whan Francesco Sforza, was forsaken of all his other friendes, and pursued with 20000. men, he onely receiued him, and therby putte him selfe and his whole astate in ieopardy, which he determi∣ned rather to lose, than to seeme an vnfaithfull friende, and in effecte mainteigned Sforza till time serued him to recouer.
Guido. Ubaldo .142.¶After the death of Federike, his sonne Guido Vbal∣do, of the age of .xii. yeres succeded, who reigned quiet∣ly about .xxi. yeres, till the comyng of Valentino Bor∣gia, sonne of Alexandre the .vi. bishop of Rome: that fyrst by suche crafte gatte the astate into his hand{is}, that Guido Vbaldo was faine to flee disguised in plow∣mans clothyng. Neuerthelesse through the good will of his subiectes he recouered his astate in shorte tyme a∣gaine. But Ualentines force was suche, that at length this Duke toke suche treasure as he had, and fledde to the Marques of Mantua, whose sister he had maried: & there diyng without issue, ended the house of Montefel∣tro, that had reigned in Urbine the space of .157. yeres. Ualentino Borgia .1503.¶Valentino Borgia helde it but a verie smalle space, for shortly after his fathers death, Iulie the seconde bi∣shop of Rome persecuted him, and brought the house of Borgia to naughtes: and thervpon gaue the astate of Urbine to his nephiew Francesco Maria Prefettino del∣la Rouere:Francesco Maria .1504. whom he created Duke there. ¶This Francesco Maria was a verie wise and valiant prince, nothing inferiour to Federike beforenamed: who reigned not fully .x. yeres, but Leo the x. that suc∣ceded Iulie the .ii. made a puissaunt armie, and expul∣sed him out of his astate,1514. and rased the walles of the ci∣tee euen to the earth. Whervpon he established his nephiew Iuliano di Medici Duke in his place,Iulianio di Medici Laurence di Medici. and af∣ter his death (for he liued but a while) his brother Lau∣rence di Medici: who continued in the same, till Adri∣an the .vi. that succeded Leo,1522. expulsed him, and restored the astate vnto Francesco Maria, that enioyed it till he died, the space of .xvi. yeres in so great reputacion, that
all princes and astates of Italie loued and honored him: and the greatest of them were glad to enterteine hym for their generall in the warres. Wherin he gatte infinite summes of money. But he was so great a builder and so liberall vnto his souldiours, that whan he died, he lefte no kynde of money in his coffers. ¶By his life tyme he builded the palaice besides Pesa∣ro, called Imperiale, and fortified the citee of Pesaro, and the castel there, with diuers other goodly buildyng{is}: and gatte Katherine daughter and heyre to the Duke of Camerine to be maried vnto his sonne Guido Vbaldo, that now liueth. In whose right he enioyed that astate duryng the fathers lyfe. ¶Assoone as Francesco Maria was dead,Guido Ubaldo .2. 1538. Paule the iii. now bishop of Rome, seyng this Duke that now ly∣ueth a younge man, without money or great friendes, made so great a power against him, that for feare to lose the whole, he was contente for a little money and some other small recompences, to yelde to the bishoppe the a∣state of Camerine: whiche the bishop hitherto enioyeth. And yet for all this, the same bishoppe hath founde the meanes to marie his neece to the same Duke:1547▪ wherat many men meruaile not a little. ¶Finally this Duke Guido Vbaldo is generall ouer all the Uenetians landes, townes, and fortresses, and hath of theim .10000. crownes annuitee. But hitherto he hath had none occasion of triall in the warres. He is meane of strature, hard of fauour, and very graue in coun∣tinaunce. And though he be well learned, his wysedome hath had no great triall as yet, but men trust he woll proue as vertuouse as his predecessours.
¶The conclusion. ¶THere be dyuers other astates in Italy, specially the common wealthes of Siena and Lucca, the by∣shoprike of Trent called Tridentum in latine, Pi∣ombino, Mirandula, Castell Geffroie, and suche like, but because they are not of suche reputacion either for domi∣nion, power, or continuaunce of yeres, that they shoulde be numbred amongest the principall, I haue forborne to speake particulerly of theim: though some in deede de∣serue notable praise: besechyng all gentill readers to ac∣cept my trauaile and deligence, vsed in this behalfe, as a thyng done for their commoditees. And thoughe I want learnyng and eloquence to accomplishe so high an enterprise, as to descriue pithily the astates of countreis and commom wealthes, yet sens I spared no paine, nor labour to doe profite, I wolde at the leaste wise for my rewarde craue good report. JMPRINTED AT LONDON IN FLETESTRETE IN THE HOVSE OF THO∣mas Berthelet. Cum priuilegio as imprimen∣dum solum. ANNO. M. D. XLIX.
¶The table of this present boke by letter. AEbrigement of the astate of Italy, frō the begyn∣nyng vntill the Romain empire was vtterly diuided. folo. 8. Abbrigement of the lyues of the Romaine bishops fo. 41. Abbrigement of the Uenecian histories from the edificaci∣on of the citee to this daie. 85. Academie in Florence. 139. Adoaldus. 18. Adrianus. 12. Agilulphus. 18. Agostino Barbarico. 110. Agrippa. 9. Alaricus kyng of Gothes. 15. Alba Siluius. 8. Alboinus 18. Alberto. 210. Aldeprandus. 20. Aldobrandino. 208. Alfonse kyng of Naples. 66. Alfons adopted heire to quene Iohan. 131. Alfonse the seconde. 134. Alfonso. 212. Alexander Seuerus. 12. Amalasuntha. 17. Amulius. 9. Ancus Martius. 10. Andrea Dandolo. 102. Andrea Contarini. 104. Andrea Uendramino. 109. Andrea ritti. 111. Andrea oria. 185.186.187. Angelo Particiaco. 90. Annates. 63. Antonio Ueniero. 105. Antonio Grimani. 111. Antonio di Leua. 200. Antonius Pius. 12▪ Antonius Caracalla. 12. Antharis Flauius. 18. Arches of Triumphe. 29. Archadius. 14. Arrigo Dandolo. 96. Arno the riuer. 137. Artificers of Italie. 5. Arioldus. 18. Aristolphus. 20. Arithpertus. 19.20. Ascanius. 8. Asprandus. 20. Astate of Mantua. 200. Astate of Ferrara. 207. Astate of Placentia & Par∣ma. 212. Athalphus. 16. Athis or Egyptus Siluius. 9 Attila. 10. and 190. Auentinus. 9. Augustus. 50. Auogadori. 91. Aurelianus. 13. Azone. 191. Azo the fyrste and secounde. 208. Azo the .iii. 209. B. BAgelardo. 117. Bartholomeo Grade∣nico. 101. Beginning and successe
of the astate of Myllaine. 189. Belles. 91. Berengarius. 48. Bernabo. 191. Bishoppes palaice, with Bel∣uedere. 4. Bishoppe of Rome besieged. 118. Biorgus. 16. Boccatius. 127. Borso. 211. Bouiquart. 177. Bridges in Rome. 23. Brdges in Florence. 137. Buildynges in Rome. 41. Buildynges of Uenice. 74. Buildyng of Genoa. 163. C. Caesar. fol. 50. Cains Caligula. 11. Caesar Fregoso. 188. Capi Siluins. 9. Cardinall hattes. 56. Cardinalles sacked and ba∣ked. 62. Cardinall Sauli. 185. Carlo duca de Angio. 125. Carlo. ii. 126. Carlo. iii. 129. Carpentus. 9. Carus. 13. Castell Cant Angelo. 41. Castell ouo. 113. Caroccio. 122. Castell of Millaine. 189. Cercles. 31. Charles Martell. 45. Charles sonne taken prisoner 126. Charles the .v. emperour. 136. Chilperike deposed. 45. Christoforo Moro. 108. Circuite of Italie. 1. Citee of Florence. 137. Citee of Naples gotten by the Normaines. 120. Citee of Urbine. 214. Citta della. 159. Claudius. 11.13. Colosses and images. 34. Comodus. 12. Commoditees of Italie. 1. Common prouision and cha∣ritable deedes in Uenice. 82. Common people. 149. Conrade. 124. Constantius. 14. Constantinus. eodem. Consules. 10. Conduites of water in Rome 27. Counsaile of Uenice. 78. Corradino .124. beheaded. 125 Cortogo. 184. Cosino di Medici. 152. Couetousnesse. 134. Crueltee. 96.98.124.125.12.208.209. Customes in theyr liuyng in Uenice. 8. Cyprus wonne. 109. D. DApho. fol. 18. Decius. 13. Dedato. 89. Descripciō of Italy. 1. Descripcion of Rome. 22. Descripcion of Naples. 11. Descripcion of Florence. 137 Descripcion of Millaine. 187 Desyderius. 18.20. Didius Iulius. 12. Dignitees and offyces in Uenice. 77.
Dioclesianus. 11. Diuidyng of the empire. 15. Diuision. 141. Discorde. 131. Dominion of Uenice 7. Domenico one. 89. Domenico Menicaccio. eo. Domenico Orseolo. 9. Domenico Flabenico. eodem. Domenico Contarini. eod. Domenico Siluo. eod. Domenico Michele. 94. Domenico Morosini. 45. Dominion and gouernaunce of Genoa. 161. Domitianus. 11. Don Ferrando Gonzaga. 188.200.213. Donacion of Constantine. 14.43. Douchemens haull in Uenice 111. Drogone. 116. Duke of Florence dominion and reuenew. 139. Duke Cosmo. 159. E. EDificacion of Rome. 9. Edificacion and successe of the citee of Florence 140. Edifices in Florence. 137. Election of the emperour, whan and by whom it was ordeined. 21. Electours of the empire. 50. Empire deuided. 15.46. Empire chaunged. 48. Ende of the Romaine kinges 10. Ende of the Lumbardes reigne. 20. Ende of the house of Nor∣mans in Sicilie. 121. Ende of the house of ueia in the dominion of Naples. 125. Ende of the hous of Durazza 132. Ende of the house of Arragon in Naples. 135. Emanuel emperour. 96. Eaas 8. Eneas Siluius. eod. Ercole. 211.212. Ezelino di Romano. 98. F. Facion of Italy. fol. 1. Faunus. 8. Federico. 206.215. Federike .122. kynge of Sicilie. 127.135. Feedyng in Italy. 2. Ferdinando. 133. Ferdinando kyng of Spaine 136. Ferrandino. 135. Fertilitee of Naples. 11. Fier breaking out of the earth 113. Florence destroied and reedi∣fied. 140. Florentines customes. 18. Florentines common wealth constituted. 141. Francesco Maria. 215. Francesco. 204.206. Francesco Donato. 112. Francis Petrarcha. 60.127. Francis Dandolo. 101. Francis Foscaro. 106. Francis Sforza. 181.196.198. Fresco. 209.
GAlba Sergius. 11. Galeasso di Montefel∣tro. 214. Galeazzo. 181.191.193.197. Galerius. 14. Galienus. 13. Garmaldus. 19. Gasparo di Uicomercato. 181. Gates of Rome. 24. Gensericus. 16. Gensualdus. 19. Gentilmen of Italie. 3. Gianfrancesco. 205. Giangaleazo. 193. Giouanni. 89.91. Giouanni Dandolo. 99. Giouanna prima. 127. Giouanna. ii. 130. Giouanni Torrigiani. 90. Giouanni. 192.197. Giouanni Maria. 194. Giustiniano. 90. Giudice di Ginarcha. 169. Godfrey. 117. Gonzaga. 203. Gordianus. 13. Gothes. 15. Graners and Arsenales. 36. Gratianus. 14. Grimoaldus. 19. Guelfes and Ghibelines fa∣ction. 141. Guglielmo Ferrabach. 116. Guglielmo. 119.120.121.123. Guido. 204. Guido Conte di Urbino. 214. Guido Ubaldo. 215.216. Gundebalde. 16. Gundibertus. 19. HEad of Tyber. 23. Helius Pertinax. 12. Henrico imperatore. 121. Hilles in Rome. 25. Hill Testacchio. 35. Hippodromus. 36. Historie of Naples. 114. Honorius. 14. Hospitalles in Uenice. 82. Hospitalles in Florence. 138. Hotte baines. 113. Hugo Conte d' Arli. 48. Hunes. fol. 15. Hunfredo. 117. Husbandmen of Italie. fol. 5. I. IAcopo Contarini. 99. Iames Tiopolo. 97. Iano king of Cyprus 177. Iano Fregoso. 184. Ianus. 8. Images put out of churches. 44.46. Ingratitude of people. 175. Iohn Acton. 62. Iohn Soranzo. 100. Iohn Gradenico. 103. Iohn Delfino. eodem. Iohn Mocenigo. 109. Iohn Sharpe. 149.210. Iouinianus. 14. Italian customes and nature folio. 3. Iubilie. 58.60. Iulius Cesar fyrst emperour. 10. Iuliano di Medici. 215. Iulius Phillippus. 13.
Iulianus Apostata. 14. Iunipertus. 20. K. KYndes of marble. fo. 37 Kynges of Naples in∣titled kynges of Ie∣rusalem. 122. Kyng Alfonse taken prisoner. 132. L. LAwes of Uenice. 81.88. Ladislaus. 130. Laurence di Medici. 155 215. Latinus. 8. Latinus Siluius. 8. Laimpertus. 20. Lewis the .12. kyng of France 135. Leather coined for money. 110. Leonardo Loredano. 110. Libertee of straungers in Ue∣nice. 85. Liberalitee. 107. Lionello. 210. Lodouico Moro. 198. Lorenzo Tiepolo. 99. Lorenzo Ceso. 103. Lucchino. 192. Lucius Tarquinius. 10. Luigi Gonzaga. 103. Luigi. 204.205. Luitprandus. 20. Lumbardes. fol. 15. M. MAnfredo. 56.124▪ Macrinus. 12▪ Marcello. 88▪ Marino Morosini. 97. Marino Giorgio. 100. Marino Falerio. 102. Marco Cornario. 103. Marco Barbarico. 110. Marie. 129. Marcus Aurelius Antonius. 12. Martino Torrigiani. 190. Matilda. 52.201. Mattea Magno. 191. Mauritio. 89. Maximus. 12. Maximianus. 16. Merchandise of Italie. fol. 2. Merchantes of Italie. 4▪ Michele Morosini. 105. Michele Steno. 106. Millayne situate. 188. Millaynes name. 189. Morea. 108. Morbus Gallicus. 135. Murder. 129. Mutio, father to Frauncis Sforza. 196. N. NApoleone. 190. Narses. 17. Naumachiae. fol. 29. Nero. 11. Nerua. 11. Nicene counsaile. 43. Nicolo Trono. 108. Nicolo Marcello. 109. Nicolo. 210.211. Nobilitee suppressed. 149. Numitor. 9. Numa Pompilius. 10.
OBeliskes. folio. 33. Obelerio. 90. Obierto Flisco. 182. Obizone. 209. Octauianus Augustus. 10. Oddo. 215. Odoacrus. 16. Ordelaffo Falero. 94. Orso. 88.91. Orso Baduaro. 92. Orso Orseolo. 93. Orio Malipiero. 96. Originall of Mantua. 201. Originall and successe of the citee of Ferrara. 208. Otho the fyrst. 115. Otho the .ii. eodem. Otho Lucius. 11. Ottone Orseolo. 93. Ottone. 190. Ottone Uisconti. eodem. P. PAolo Lucio. 87. Passerino. 202. Pasquale Malipiero. 108. Patriarke Uitellesco. 132. Partharus. 20. Peter kynge of Aragon. 126. Peter Fregoso. 180. Philippo Torrig. 190. Philippo Maria .194. de∣scriued. 195. Pietro Gradenico. 91.99. Pietro Candiano. 92. Pietro Tribuno. eodem. Pietro Baduaro. 92. Pietro Orseolo. eodem. 93. Pietro Barbolano. 93. Pietro olano. 95. Pietro Ziani. 97. Pietro Mocenigo. 109. Pietro Lando. 112. Pietro Aluigi. 213. Picus. 8. Pinamonte. 202. Plague of pestilence. 60. Pleasures of Italie. folio. 2. Plinies death. 113. Policie. 65.164. Porches in Rome. 31. Poore people. 82. Poyson that worketh not till a tyme. 185. Practise of a prelate. 153. Present astate of Rome. 37. Priestes mariage. 52. Prince Edward of England 126. Prisoners in Uenice. 83. Probus. 13. Proca. 9. Proctours and treasure of Uenice. 80. Pyllers in Rome. 32. Pyramides. 34. Q. QUeene Iohans hous∣band strangled. 127. Queene Iohan han∣ged. 129. R. RAchis or Lachis. 20. Rafael Adorno. 180. Raimpertus. 20. Rainoldes comyng to Naples. 132. Raufe Duke of Burgoyne. 48. Rebellion in Sicile. 125. Realme of Naples. 6. Renulus. 9.
Resort of straungers into I∣taly. 2. Reuenew of Uenice. 76. Richarde kyng of Englande. 165. Rinaldo. 209. Rineri Zeno. 98. Riuer of Tyber. 22. Robert. 127. Roberto Guiscardo created Duke. 117. Rodoaldus. 19. Roger .119. intitled kyng of Sicile. 120. Rome destroied .iiii. times. 17. Rome gotten. 130. Romoaldus. 19. Romulus. 9. Romulus, first kynge of Ro∣maines. 9. Rotharius. 18. S. SAincte Peters churche. 40. Saiyng of Fuluius. eod. Sarasines comyng into Italie first. 11. Saturnus. 8. Sebastian Ziani. 95. Sepulchrum Bachi. 36. Seruius Tullius. 10. Seuerus. 12. Sicile conquered by the Nor∣maines. 118. Siluius Posthumius. 8. Site of Italy. fol 1. Site of Uenice. 73. Sordello. 22. Sophia. 17. Supremitee of the churche. 44. Shiftyng and poysonyng of Romaine bishoppes. 50. Slaughter of Frenchmen. 125 States of Italie. 6. State of Genoa. 160. T. TAcitus. 13. Tancredi the Normain 116. Tancredi. 123. Tarquinus Priscus. 10. Teia. 17. Temperature of Italy. fol. 1. Temperature of Naples. 113. Temple in Rome. 31. Testament broken. 195. Theatres. 30. Thermes in Rome. 28. Theodolinda. 18. Theodoricus. 16. Theodorius. 14.16. Thomas Beckette. 55. Thomas Mocenico. 106. Title of the kyngdome of Ie∣rusalem. 126. Title of the seconde line of the house of Angio. 128. Titus. 11. Tullus ostelius. 10. Turke conquered in Italie. 14. Trade and customes of Ge∣noa. 161. Traanus. 11. Treasure founde vnder the grounde. 118. Tribuno Memmo. 9. Tyberinus. 9. Tyberius. 11. Tyrannie. 190.
U. VIlla. 43. Ualentino Borgia. 215 Ualentinianus. 14. Ualens. 14. Ualerianus. 13. Uandales. fol. 15. Uarius Heliogabalus. 12. Uenetian astate. 73. Uespasianus. 11. Uiage into the holy lande. 53. Uitale Candiano. 93. Uitale Falero. 94. Uitale Michaele. eodem. 95. Uirius Gallus. 13. Uisconti. 190. Uitellius. 11. Walles of Rome. 23. Warres of Uenice. 81. Wild beastes in Florence. 138 Wiues of Florence. 139. Wiues of Myllaine. 188. Women of Italie. fol. 6. Wounder. 163. ¶Thus endeth the ta∣ble of this present boke sette out by letter.
