24144 S100748 99836577 858
THE Exercise of the faithfull soule: That is to say, Prayers & Meditations for one to com∣fort himselfe in all maner of afflictions, and specially to strengthen himselfe in faith: Set in order according to the Articles of our faith, By Daniell Toussain, Minister of the worde of God: With a comfortable Preface of the Author, vnto the poore remnant of the Church of Orlians; con∣taining a short recitall of extreme and great afflictions which the said Church hath suffered. PSAL. 90. Turne thee againe (O Lord) at the last: How long? & be gracious vnto thy seruants. Comfort vs againe after the time that thou hast plagued vs and for the yeeres wherein we haue suffered aduersitie. Englished out of the French, almost word for word, by Ferdenando Filding. Imprinted at London by Henrie Middleton for Henrie Denham. 1583.
To the right worshipfull and his especiall good master, Walter Raleigh esquier. RIght woorshipfull, the great and good affection, which I haue borne to you euer since J was first acquainted with you, hath alwaies bin a stir∣ring mee forward to bewray the force of my inward good will, by some outward shew: and now at length it hath compassed that which it co∣ueted of long, and offereth vnto you in value more than great, first written in French
by a woorthie man, whose name and profession it bea∣reth, now denized in En∣glish, almost word for word, by a well willer of yours, though scant able to reach to the originall depth of the natiue writer. Yet J thought it good rather to hazard my owne credite, with some note of infirmitie, than to haue this argument vnharboured in English, with the infinite losse of so great a commodity. For what is more profitable to a Christian man, than to haue his soule continually
exercised in the traine and practise of a liuely faith? the performance whereof, this treatise vndertaketh, whose recommendation I will not meddle with, least by saying either too too little, or too too base, J impaire that which will commend it selfe beyond comparison. To the En∣glish Christian I discharge my selfe, by vttering that in zeale which J conceiue to be most profitable for eche his soule. To your worship I recommende my labour, as the true signe of a trustie
mynde: wherein, if it shall please you to bestowe some, though the least time, I dare assure you of great profite for the comfort of your consci∣ence, and beautifying of your soule. Almightie God pro∣sper you in all your good and vertuous attempts, and send you that good, which both J wish you, and this booke pre∣tendeth. London, the 14. of Iune, 1583. Your obedient seruant Ferdenando Filding.
PRINCIPALL matters conteined in this booke. 1 A Preface brieflie reciting the ca∣lamities of the Church of Orlians, and the comfortes that wee ought to oppose against the same euill. 2 The principall Creedes and confes∣sion of the vniuersall Church. 3 Manie notable places of the olde & newe testament fitly applied to eue∣rie article of our faith: inriched with considerations, meditations, and praiers. 4 A comfortable discourse of death. 5 Praiers for diuers necessities. 6 A Treatise of S. Cyprian concer∣ning praier. FINIS.
❧ VNTO THE poore remnaunt of the Church of Orlians, which are scattered here and there, groning with true faith after the Lord: grace, health, comfort, and peace, from and through our Lorde Iesus Christ. ABout tenne yeares past, when the Church of Orlians was in her flowers, and I then hauing this ho∣nour to be one of the Mini∣sters thereof, then I set forth certaine Prayers and Meditations vppon cer∣taine notable places of the scripture, which I had gathered out and laid aside for mine owne priuate vse: yet notwithstanding, being re∣quested of sundrie good and godlie men, I was content, that manie others should inioy the same. And that they might be pricked for∣wardes to ardent prayer, and to all holie and Christianlike Meditations, who were accu∣stomed to waxe cold, or at least but leuke∣warme, in time of prosperitie: foreseeing likewise, that all the rest, wherewith the Church doeth glad her selfe in this world, was but a truse and small respit: and that
it behooued them,2. Timo. 3. ver. 12. The late M. Caluin in his pre∣face vpon Daniel. 61. truelie ad∣uertised the Chur∣ches, that they should haue as yet great fightes. Psal. 66.27. Psal. 42. The said Churche was of number a seuen thowsand persons in time past. Iames 5. which were determined to serue God purelie, to make their account, that they must suffer great persecutiōs, during which, prayer is the verie stay and com∣fort to the faithfull soule. As alas long since, wee haue well prooued, when that all the billowes and stormes of the Lord, sith these x. yeares haue passed, not alonelie gene∣rallie through out all Fraunce, but particu∣larlie vppon this poore Church of Orlians, which in times past wee haue seene a gar∣den of great pleasure, a retraite to manie good men, and of all sortes and conditions: to bee short, it was as the repaire and fould of the Lordes sheep, in the middest of all Fraūce, Now wee doe see it turned into dust and ashes, and to become the dwelling place of Dragons and Scorpions: we I say, vnto whome God hath giuen this grace, to escape so manie blouddie Alaroms: yea so manie fearefull deathes, that we haue perceiued of what force earnest prai∣ers be, and what satisfying & contentation, the faithfull soule hath with God, when as all other thinges doe seeme to faile him, in such sort as we haue matter to say with the Prophet Da∣uid in the 119. Psal. verse 92. Had it not bin that thy lawe was my delight, I had euen then perished in my afflictions. Now as the true ser∣uantes of God haue a zeale vnto the ashes, and
ruines of Sion, when it is turned into dust,Psal. 10 9. and forsaken of all the world: So cannot I (so long as the soule panteth within me) cease euer with a burning desire to pray vnto God, or to haue care of this so desolate a Church of Orlians, willing truelie to say with the prophet Esaiah, in the 62. Chap. For the loue of Sion, I will not keepe silence, and as cōcerning Ierusalem, I will not cease vntill her righteousnesse shine out as the light, & that her saluation be kind∣led as a Lampe: in such sort as setting before my eies that at no time praiers were euer more necessarie than in these dayes, being on euerie side full of calamitie, neither yet the vse there∣of better vnderstood of the true faithful, than whē as men are in their true schoole, that is to say vnder the Crosse. And being likewise since the decease of this second Iosias & so Christiā a prince, as the late my Lord Elector Palatine Federick (vnder whom I haue had this honor to preach the word of God, more thā 4. yeares) being as it were into mine owne wildernesse a part drawen to meditate & lamēt the miseries of our time: I tooke againe into my handes these prayers, that heretofore I had set forth & brought to light, & dedicated to the Church of Orliās, as wel to put thē together againe, & so to disgest thē, by a better order, as also to seeme not to haue lost the remēbrāce of that Church,
which of good right amongst other I haue al∣wayes loued and honored, hauing serued there, the space of eight yeares, and receaued verie much credit and friendship of manie good men: or, least I should seeme to haue lost all hope to see it againe reestablished, or at the least somewhat gathered together after so ma∣nie and fearefull stormes. Nowe concerning the order which I haue held in this booke, it shall be spoken hereof in the end of this Pre∣face. But now, I will lay out the causes which haue made me yet to hope, that this good God will not altogether forsake this poore flocke. And therefore it maketh me yet againe to direct this little booke vnto the residue as vn∣to a small corner of the fould: to the end to sorte out, and call back the rest of the flocke vnto a true faith, hope, and calling vppon the name of God. It is a thing certaine, that in these later daies the diuell is come downe in great anger, knowing that he hath but a small time. And in this is fulfilled all that which the Lorde foretold thereof in the 12. of the Apoc. & as the miseries foretold are fulfilled, in like maner the promised deliuerance shal be accomplished, and alwaies this goodly sentence shall remaine true that is in the 76. Psalme: That the anger of the vngodly shall returne
vnto the praise of the Lorde, and that hee will restraine the rest of their furies. And that which S. Peter speaketh in the 3. Chap. of his first Epistle, Who shall hurt you,The fa∣uours that Orlians hath re∣ceiued at other times of the Lorde. if you followe goodnesse? O but some man will say, in times past Orlians hath founde such fauour at Gods handes, as in the time of Atila, when all the countrey being couered ouer with rude people, the citie was kept by the praiers of good folke, or when it was in times past, (as some say) miraculously kept, rather than by a∣nie helpe of man from the siege of the Eng∣lishmen: or if we must come vnto the thinges more certaine and fresh in memorie, when as in the yeare of our Lorde 1560. in the time of king Frauncis the seconde of that name, the most furious force that might be in mans re∣mēbraunce was in the citie, & the preparation most cruell against so many notable and singu∣lar men of name, who had as they say the knife set to the throte, many good and honorable ci∣tizens wandering vp and downe from one place to an other: when I say, the Lorde in a mo∣ment turned the sorrowe of his Church into gladnesse, and their captiuitie into freedome. And againe in the yeare 1563.Orlians beseeged. at the be∣ginning of the spring time the citie enuironed with a victorious armie consisting of French∣men, Swyssardes, and Spaniardes, it was at
vnawares, and by a happe vnlooked for, not on∣ly deliuered of the siege,The peace of the Va∣lins with Orlians. but honoured with a peace, which was made with the Orlians, and indured for a certaine time, leauing the citie for some yeares in a tollerable estate. Since the saide peace, certaine massacres, treasons, and conspiracies, which then were had there, both on the right hande, and on the left, as in the countrey of Mans,Orlians stripped againe. at Tours, at Blois, and in manie other places of Fraunce, it being alto∣gether stripped, as it was in the yeare 64. and for the most part a bootie vnto tyrantes, & being in time of neede the place for those of the Church to come vnto, it was then maintained in good rest, and in the exercise of the pure re∣ligion,The secōd troubles. whatsoeuer contrarie gouernours were there being in garison, vntill the yeare 1567. in which time, toward Michaelmas, the seconde troubles began againe, and a strange coniuration being made, as well in Fraunce, as in the lowe countries against the faithful, not∣withstanding the enimies were in great num∣ber and well armed within the citie, awayting but the watch worde, to cut the throtes of all the faithfull. The foresaid citie, together with the citidell, was by a speciall fauour of God kept and defended with a handfull of men, the most part of the Church not knowing any thing
thereof, euen against so manie aduersaries and subtil deuises, and to the ende it might serue for the seconde time,The peace at Char∣tres. for a place of rest and re∣tire, which out of all partes of Fraunce placed themselues there, by reason of the crueltie which was then through all exercised against the Christians. And in this behalfe ought a man to keepe secret the fauour, which the Church of Orli∣ans prooued by the God of hostes? When as this miserable peace made at Chartres, being made in the yeare of our Lorde 1568. in the mo∣neth of March, the citie was deliuered into the handes of the aduersaries, foming with rage a∣gainst a citie, which at two sundrie times had made resistance and was the refuge of Princes, Lordes, and other, bearing as then armes for the common wealth: when I say with a gouer∣nour enimie of the reformed religion, there were brought into the saide citie,The regi∣ment of countie Brissakes. ten ensignes of the brauest and skilfull souldiers, that could be chosen, to swallowe vp as it were in a moment the saide Church: but God in the meane season did shewe this fauour to my fellowes and mee, euen there to preach in a goodlie assemblie euen in the sight of the souldiers, for the space of fiue monethes,
amongest a thowsand and a thowsand dangers, mutenies, and harquebusers, and infinite di∣stresses: the citie being in this time kept, that no citizen man or woman of the religion, could passe out of the gates, without a thow∣sand dangers: when our houses were dailie o∣uerthrowen, the gates of our assemblies enui∣roned by troupes of the enemies souldiers: And that for presidents, (as a man would say) wee had in our consistories Captaines, renouncers of God, & other such people as it pleased those go∣uerners to send thither: Then in trueth wee felt such an assistance of the almightie, not∣withstanding that men walke in the shadow of death, & when they burned in good houre the Temple, with the streete of Illiers, and as ma∣nie may well remember there, the souldiers of the garrison, seeing the patience and constan∣cie of the Church, as it were touched at the heart, & tamed, in part being without compa∣rison more fauorable, and gratious vnto those of the Church, than were the citizen papists, who hauing beene at the foresaid warres for the most part assisted and hid, as it were in our bosome in their daungers, and all as it were rendering a verie ill reward to their ci∣tizens of the religion. During this time, some one will say the Church of Orlians hath felt, yea the great fa∣uors
of God:Psal. 120. in such sort as oftentimes it hath beene said of them: God worketh woonders vn∣to them: and sundrie and manie times haue they song & song againe in a godlie assemblie, whereof I cannot remember my selfe without teares, the Psal. 124.The Psalme of ye Church of Orli∣ans. For Israel may now well say &c. Which Psal. the Church of Orlians esteemed as her particular Psalme, for the aforesaid deliuerances. But alas will some aunswere, since the xv. of September, in they yeare 1568. euen vntill now, what other thing hath a man seene, but calamitie vppon calamitie distilled vpon the said Church, and so sharpe and violent affliction, as it is hard to thinke thereof without a mans haire standing & staring for feare & horror on his head? For from that day which was vppon a Sunday:The first Massacar at Orlians in the yeare 1568. I hauing preached at vi. a clocke in the Estape, which place then onelie rested to vs, and ha∣uing greatlie to the purpose (alas in this last preaching,) expounded the text of the xvi. of S. Marke vpon the historie of the passion:The last preaching made within Orlians. My God my God, why hast thou forsaken me? For euen iust thithertow as I come in the ex∣position of S. Marke: Maister De Gal∣lars, then also Minister of the said Church, hauing made his Sermon at eight of the clock in the same place, and following the order of Psalmes which they did sing, hauing song this
funeral and lamentable Psalme, which fel out to the verie purpose, without anie special choise made thereof, to wit, the Psal. 88. which is the last that was sung in Orlians in the assem∣blie of the Church, where amongest other thinges it is said, I am free among the dead like vnto them that bee wounded and lie in the graue. Also, Thine indignation lyeth hard vppon me, and thou hast vexed me with all thy stormes. As the second preaching was ended, and the Psalme aforenamed sung, behold certaine stones throwen against the assemblie, and a Mutenie of people, which then did accompa∣nie a procession, that was made all for the nonce, who rushed vppon the assemblie, which was a godlie assemblie, with an extreme fu∣rie, and had knocked downe all the troupe, if so be this good God had not raised vp some of the strange souldiers, (which did shew themselues more gentle than the Citizens, thirsting for the bloud of their fellow Citizens,) if they I say, had not couered a great part of the assem∣blie, whereof notwithstanding there were seuenscore slaine and hurt. After dinner, the
people not being satisfied with this crueltie, did set fire on the Church of Estape at noone day with all kind of insolēcie, & disorder▪ threa∣tening the night following, to make a sack of all the Protestantes houses, during which stormes God did amongest other wonderfullie preserue the Ministers which were fiue in number: and namelie the two, who had preached that day as it was said before. Vntil this time the Mini∣sters notwithstanding the dangers that they had found, couragioslie & by the aduice of the consistorie, and of all the chiefe of the Church, continued in their charge. But this furie being so kindled, and all the Church out of order, & the warres flaming throughout all Fraunce, and Anguleme besieged: Then with great dif∣ficultnesse were the Ministers of the said Church drawen out from this furnace, and conducted in safetie. The gates were straitlie kept, and ambushes laid throughout all the waies, and namelie in the crosse streetes: as in deed some of my brethren,Ministers impriso∣ned. and chiefe & faith∣fullest Ministers of the said Church, M. Ro∣bert Mason, otherwise named Fountane, M. Matthew Berold, Professor of the Hebrew tongue, and I: wee fell into the handes of our enemies, and there wee remained with most imminent daungers from the 26. day of September, vntill the 15. of October,
euen vntill that some notable and well affe∣cted persons of the Church, seeing that the people were daily about to drowne or murther vs, and that we had yeelded vnto them faith∣full seruice euen to the vttermost, redeemed vs out of the souldiers handes. Now synce this time, truely this poore Church of Orlians was ouerwhelmed with so manie calamities, that a man can not easilie finde the like examples of crueltie, as those which haue beene exerci∣sed against the saide Church, although that in Fraunce there hath beene a long time great persecutions,Persecuti∣ons in Fraunce vnder An∣tonius Ve∣rus. namely at Lyons, as from the yeare 170. vnder the Empire of Antonius Verus: as may be seene in the fifth historie of Eusebius the 1.2. and 3. Chap. by the Epistle that the faithfull of Lyons wrote thereof vn∣to the brethren of Asia and Phrygia: and since these troubles of Fraunce, the saide citie of Lyons hath suffered as much as any other ci∣tie, especially from the time of these horrible massakers in the yeare of our Lorde 1572. But that which is happened vnto the faithfull of Orlians, and hath continued a long time, doth rightly followe that which was song in the last assemblie, as it was saide before in the 88. Psal. Lorde, thine indignations lie harde vpon mee. For since this first massaker, doone on the fifth of Septēber in the yeare 1568. they haue not
ceased as well in the streats, as in the houses to slay some of the faithfull, to spoyle their hou∣ses, and to drawe them with ropes through the streates, not suffering them neither to passe in the citie, nor to liue in the same citie.The bur∣ninges of houses in 4. places, and of ma∣dame de Boiblan∣din. Such cruelties I say, did continue euen vnto the yeare 1569. vntill the moneth of Iulie, that they did set fire on two houses at noone day, where they had imprisoned more than seuen score of all sortes of qualities and ages, which continued constant in calling vppon the name of God, and in the puritie of his seruice: they I say (alas what spectacle) in presence of this furious inraged people, notwithstanding that prisons ought not to haue bin forced, notwith∣standing likewise the cries of their wiues, their parentes, and their children,The hor∣rible and vnnaturall murther of cer∣taine faith∣full ones being in prison. were burned all quicke, and if so be the flame had spared any of them, then the bloudie handes of the madde people, or of the souldiers with their holbardes, partisans and kniues would not haue spared them. And as concerning an other troupe of foure score of the faithfull, the most part being citizens of the same citie, which hauing beene locked vp in a great tower of the citie, were cer∣taine monethes afterwardes (when as they fayned in a morning to bring them forth to iu∣stice) stabbed in with daggers one after an o∣ther. O that I could recite these things, with∣out
saying with the Prophet Ieremie in the 9. Chap. O, if I had my head full of water, & that mine eies were a fountaine of teares, to the end that I might lament day and night, the slaine of the daughter of my people. But what? The peace being concluded for the third time: (O peace more cruell than any warre,) the yeare 1570. in the moneth of August, the faithfull of the Church of Orlians thinking to inioy and vse the benefite of the saide peace, were daily threatened, beaten, robbed, and were for the most part euen for the space of one yeare let & hindered, both to inioy the greatest part of their goods, as also to gather the Church together, vntill the yeare of our Lord 1571. in the month of Septēber, by the friendly soliciting, that the late Lord Chatilliō Lord admiral, & through the great zeale & goodwill that he had vnto these vertuous and notable men, of name, the late maister Baylife of Orlians,The esta∣blishment of the Church of Orlians in the Isle. maister Ie∣rome Groslot Lord of the Isle, with certaine other notable citizens of the saide citie, the Church began to gather together, as the pee∣ces of a broken ship, in a great sheepwracke, vn∣to the saide place of the Isle a two small miles from Orlians, where I was called thither a∣gaine to exercise the ministry, and to beginne to reare vp this poore tabernacle, which was so desolate. But as our Lorde Iesus Christ, being
scarce borne, and lodged in a little place at Bethelem, forthwith had such kickings and assaults, that he was constrained to retire him∣selfe into Egypt: euen so the saide Church of Orlians, as a man would say being but about to be borne againe, and a litle to gather it selfe together, that shee might knowe her selfe, felt right soone the encountringes and forces of the enemie, the exercise being broken off in the same place for a time through extorted cōman∣dements and wrasted proclamations, such as we reade to haue beene in the fourth of Nehemie, when for a time the building of the Tēple was hindered by one Sanbulat and his complices. Nowe God graunting grace to this litle flocke, to ouerpasse such lets, and stops, & the exercise being a new agreed vpon in the saide place: the furie and the slaughter of these papisticall peo∣ple was no whit appeased: in such sort, that in steede of taking pitie of v. or vi. hundred per∣sons (which went out ordinarily euery sunday to heare the preaching and exhortation, as wo∣men, children, young and old, and that often in vnseasonable times,Cruelty a∣gainst those, which re∣turned frō the prea∣ching in the Isle. and by verie long iourney) they commonly receiued them with flinging of stones, with myer and durt, cast in their faces with iniuries, outrages, & all kinde of scornings and derisions, which the poore faithfull ones yea the women patiently did beare, praising
God, who hadde giuen them this honour, to suffer any thing for Iesus Christs sake,The day of S. Bar∣tholmewe. vntill that that glowning, fearfull, and blouddie day, of the 24. of August in the yeare 1572. was come, on which day I made the last Ser∣mon in the said place of the Isley: There fol∣lowed a generall deluge of Christian bloud, through out all Fraunce, and that which might stint euen one of the fairest and flou∣rishingest Churches in all Fraunce, to wit, a 700. and more, as some say Bourgeses, Inha∣bitantes, Counselars, Aduocates, Doctors, and men of all qualities and conditions were cruellie slaughtered and Massacred, amongst other, there was slaine Monsieur de Cham∣peaux: the ancientest Counseller and next in place vnto the President, one of the most cour∣teous of all the citie,The mur∣ther done at Orle∣ans. Doctor Taillebois, the aduocate Patas, maister Iohn Baudet, and Gilles le Boiteux, two of the most honorable and best affected citizens, and so many others, without sparing one of the most worshipful and ancient olde men of the citie, who all his life long had beene honored amongest the chiefest bourgeses, and beloued for his liberalitie, and integritie, to wit, Monsieur Framberge, Lorde of Bretache, who drawen through the fieldes where he was in a waggen, was cruelly striken downe in the suburbes of Portereau,
& he who had all this yeare with great zeale, and to his great charges, lodged the Church, to wit, the Lord of the Isle,The Mas∣sacre of the Lord of the Ile being Bai∣life of Or∣lians. of whom mention was made before, and who was there at the wedding of the king of Nauarre among the most auntient seruantes of his house, this man was partlie shot in with Harquebusiers, and partlie stricken downe by Halbardes within the citie of Paris. Now who seeth not will some man say, that yet this wound bleedeth, and that ruine drop∣peth downe without ceasing vpon the desolate, as was said in the destruction of Ierusalem, in the 9. Chap. of Daniel. Lord where are thy former mercies whereon wee doe waite?Psal. 89. Where is the zeale & the strength of the Lord, and the compassion of his bowels, which are so dull, that the Churches of long time in Fraunce bee as though God ruled not in the middest of them?Esai. 63. Lament. . Yea who seemeth to haue deliuered his people so into the hands of them, of them (I say) out of which they cannot be recouered and stand vp. What hope is then there, will some say, or what are these remnantes of the Church, seeing that the greatest part hath beene lead as it were vnto a butcherie or to slaughter: the remnant for the most part forced by impati∣ence, is in such sort turned and falne away
from the trueth, that it seemeth, there is no trace or path of a Church left, or that e∣uer there had beene anie reformation had at Orlians, or in the most part of the other cities? These are (O alas) the thinges that are most true, and that which hath bin recited, is not the thowsand part of the outrages, violences and miseries which haue come to the said Church. For what tongue can expresse, or what speach can vtter and set forth, so manie lamētable cries as well of women, as of childrē, seeing slaine cruellie before their eyes their husbandes and fathers, as well by enforce∣mentes of their bodies, as of their conscien∣ces, and other such like outrages, that would make the posteritie euen by onelie thinking of it to quake and tremble, and now maketh vs as it were beside our selues, when we doe but by the way make anie mention thereof: as for example, this preface can not bee a full laying out, of such lamentable Tragedies: neither is it my meaning at this time, leauing those to intreate of this argu∣ment more at large, that can doe it better, & with an higher stile, and that are better in∣formed of all the particularities, than I can be. But this is to the end that wee may now see, and as it were put into the ballance, on the one side the afflictions and miseries
of the said Church: And againe on the other part, may see the consolations wherewith the scriptures haue furnished vs, to the end we should know whether we haue occasion alto∣gether to droupe and to lose our courage, as alas to my great sorrow, I see that manie haue done: and not rather euen to stirre vp through our prayers those mercies and bowels of com∣passion in the diuine Maiestie. For wee must well remember in this behalfe, the place, that is in the 14. Chap. of the Prophet Osee, Who is wise, & shall vnderstand these things? and prudent, and shall know thē?A conso∣lation a∣gainst the extreme miseries where∣with God doeth ex∣ercise his children. For the waies of the Lord are right: and the iust also shall walke in them: But the vngodlie shall fall therein. By which wordes it is shewed vnto vs, that it is a great wisedome, rightlie to marke the proceedings of our God, and to vnderstand the end of them, as well in his promises, as in his threateninges: for they be alwayes iust and right, and there are none but Infidels and wicked men, which stumble and fall in them. But men commonlie offend, in this that they measure the thoughtes of God, according to the thoughtes of men, & doe perswade them∣selues, that thinges ought to goe, and to take such course, as they imagine in their vnderstan∣ding, the which is altogether contrarie to the Scripture. For my thoughtes (saith the Lord)
are not your thoughtes,Esai. 55.8. neither my wayes your waies. For as the heauens are higher than the earth, so bee my wayes higher than your wayes, and my thoughtes aboue your thoughtes. Nowe wee know that the thoughtes of our God are not to destroy his Church,Mat. 16. against which the gates of hell can haue no power, and for this cause we are com∣maunded to beleeue the Church, howsoeuer she seeme not to appeare in the world: as faith is not of thinges which bee apparant vnto carnall eyes. Although then that sometimes, stormes, tempestes and calamities bee so extreme as it seemeth, that there is no more face neither anie tract or footing of a Church on the earth, and moreouer that GOD hath left his house, and as it were altogether forsaken his heritage, and as it might be, leauing the welbeloued of his soule, in the handes of his enemies: (Loe the verie wordes, that the Lord vseth in the 12. of Ie∣remie:) yet will hee dailie haue as it is said in the 6. Chap. of Esaiah) a tenth part: And the Church shal bee made bare as a Birch, or as an Oke when they shall cast their leaues, and yet there shall be substance within, euen so shall bee the substance of the Church, a holie seede. So that euen then when she shall walke in the middest of aduersitie,Psal. 138. the Lorde
shall quicken her,The mea∣ning of the Lorde in sending calami∣ties. and shall not leaue the worke of his handes: I say hee shall quicken her, no otherwise, than if of dead and drye bones, being inspired with a new soule and strength, they should bee gathered together and liue: as it is said in the 37. Chap. of the Prophet Ezechiel. And as concerning the Lordes purpose, when hee sendeth such deluges and floudes to come among vs, it is partlie to the end to shewe forth vnto the whole world, his power, prouidence, goodnesse, and righte∣ousnesse: partlie to the end, that wee should learne to walke by faith, to renounce our selues, and in this so fraile and miserable a life, to aspire vnto that which is euerla∣sting. Hee sheweth his power, when hee vp∣holdeth his Church, in the middest of so manie euils and diseases: when as hee shall raise it vp as it were from the dead:Psal. 68.2. when as in a moment hee shall make his enemies to vanish as a heape of smoke. Hee testifieth his prouidence, when as hee maketh the determined season come, to deliuer his: And contrariewise,Psal. 102. when hee bringeth the appoin∣ted day vpon his aduersaries, as it is said in the lamentation of the Prophet Ieremie the 1. Chapter. Hee likewise sheweth his proui∣dence, in that of euill, hee can drawe forth
good,Rom. 8.28. and make all thinges to worke to the good and saluation of his: drawing out of affli∣ctions, remedies, and profitable medicines for his Church. Hee sheweth also his goodnesse, first in that hee tempereth his corrections, and in the middest of the greatest fiers, hee comforteth and sustaineth his children, as it is said in the 94. Psalme: When I had ma∣nie thoughtes in my selfe thy comfortes haue recreated my soule. His goodnesse shineth al∣so in that he hath appeased his owne wrath, putting an end to all calamities, as it is said in the 30. Chap of Esaiah. Therefore doth the Lorde put off, to the end that hee may haue mercie vppon you, and likewise that he may bee exalted, when hee doeth pardon vs. Hee maketh his righteousnesse appeare, when as hee spareth not, no not his owne children: making his iudgementes to beginne at his owne house: euen as S. Peter saith in his first Epistle and 4. Chap. But in asmuch as hee hath established a couenant with his Church, the which is not grounded vpon our workes or woorthinesse, but vppon his welbeloued sonne Iesus Christ, in whom hee hath cho∣sen vs, loued, and blessed vs: this couenant is euerlasting:Ephes. 1. And for the loue thereof he turneth himselfe towardes his people, and he maketh them this goodlie & certaine promise,
that is in the 89. Psalme: I will visite their offences with a rod, and their sinne with scour∣ges: But I will not vtterlie take my louing-kindnesse from him: nor suffer my faith to faile him. And in the 54. Chap. of Esaiah: Although the mountaines shall remoue, and the hilles shall fall downe: yet my louing kindnesse shall not moue, and the couenant of my peace shall not fall downe from thee, saith the Lord, who hath compassion of thee. Behold thou poore vexed & despised without anie consolation: I will make thy walles of pretious stones, and thy foundation of Sa∣phires &c. Nowe the whole is that wee a∣waite for him, as it is said in the 30. of E∣saiah: Blessed are all they that waite for him. But man is of a nature, first,The im∣perfecti∣ons of man. Lib. De pa∣tientia. Rom. 8. verie impati∣ent, so as Tertullian hath not said without cause, that impatiencie is the cause of all euils. Secōdlie man is of this nature, that he will not beleeue but that which he seeth: a thing alto∣gether contrarie vnto faith. For that faith and hope which ground thēselues vpon that which is seene, are properlie neither faith nor hope. Thirdlie, man is so corrupted, as S. Chryso∣stome saith verie well in his 4. Homilie vn∣to the people of Antioch, that he feareth that, that he ought not to feare: & feareth not that which hee ought most to feare. Men feare
death and miseries that in deede bee no∣thing, for they cannnot separate vs from the grace of God, and they are so farre off from being able,The vse of affli∣ctions. saith Chrysostome, to sepa∣rate vs, that if thou haue manie vices, af∣flictions will tame them: if thou haue ver∣tues, afflictions will make them shine, and appeare. But men feare not sinne which maketh a diuision betwixt God and vs: and the reward thereof, bee all afflictions, pouer∣tie, and ruines, which wee doe see fall out in the compasse of the whole worlde. Men complaine enough of their losses, of their sor∣rowes, and pouerties: but how fewe are there that frame their complaintes against their vices, against their falshood & infidelitie, against their impatiēce, against their couetous∣nesse, against their ambition, & such like wic∣kednesse? To bee short, all, saith S. Augu∣stine, complaine of the miseries of this life, and yet the most part set their heartes vppon it, and are more affected to it, than to the euerlasting and heauenlie life. How would it bee then, if this life were left vnto vs altogether quiet, sweete and delectable? Who would remember the kingdome of heauen? Who would euer aspire vnto Christ, and vnto the glorious and euerlasting life? Go to then, let vs acknowledge the vanitie of
our thoughtes, and in steede of vexing our selues and fainting, let vs woonder at the diuine prouidence: acknowledging that then his helpes are more neere at hand, when it seemeth that GOD is farthest off from vs. As Philo the Iewe once answered his fel∣low citizens, when as he had an ill answere of the Emperor Caius, towards whom hee had bin sent, to intreate for the Iewes.Eusebius 2. booke & 5. Chap. The obie∣ction that hath beene a long time awaited. It must needes be nowe, sayth hee, that the vnfallible succours of God bee verie neere, syth that all succour from man faileth vs. Yea but some man will say, with the Iewes in the 8. Chap. of Ieremie: We haue looked for peace, and we fare not the better: The time of health, and lo, here is nothing but trouble.  I answere to this: That in awayting we must take heede that we giue God leaue to appoint the time, for it is enough for vs that he will come, and that he will come to the purpose, and to the point, e∣uen then to helpe vs, when he seeth it best for vs. But if we must speake of our goodly waiting, Alas how do we waite or howe haue we waited for him? Surely some for the most part looke ra∣ther to men, & to the helpes of men, thā to the Lord God of Hostes, of whom a man may say that which is spoken in the 4. of the lamenta∣tion of Ieremie the prophet, that their eies are consumed with waiting for a vaine helpe, & for
looking after an emptie hope, for looking for a nation that neither would, nor could saue thē. But it is saide in the 3. of Sophonie, I will cause a poore & an afflicted people, to remaine in the middest of thee, and they shall trust in the name of the Lorde. See him, on whō we must looke, with true faith, amending so great cor∣ruptions, that are in the midst of the Churches, by feruent & cōstant calling on his holy name. Moreouer others in steede of awaiting on the Lorde, and in place of taking aduersities, as a warning from the diuine maiestie, these were (& that alas, in great nūber) stronglie throwne downe into the puddle of Idolatrie with the Pa∣pistes,Reuolt or turning backe. throwen downe say I, yea and rushed in, euen as a furious horse rusheth into a battaile: so that they carie there all the sway, & in whō there is founde greater eagernesse after Idola∣trie, and towardes all kinde of iniquitie, than in those old Idolaters, who all their life long haue beene nourished vp therein. I speake it with teares & in deepe sorrowe of heart, to be most true: for I did see those which were of the same troupe and band, which did goe with vs vnto the holy assemblies, to whom God had alrea∣die giuen fauour to ouercome manie assaultes, nowe to bee so wandering and giuen ouer to a spirit of darke vnderstanding. O what other thing then are all men liuing but va∣nitie!
O how true is this which is spoken in the 17. of Ieremie: That the heart of man is false and full of deceite, and as it is saide in the fifth Chap. of the same prophet: O Lorde, are not thy eies on the trueth? Thou hast striken them, and they haue not sorrowed: Thou hast consumed them, but they haue refused to receiue thy di∣scipline: They haue made their faces more har∣der than a stone, and they haue refused to re∣turne vnto thee. Feare ye not me, (sayth the Lorde)? Or will ye not be afraid at my pre∣sence? O howe much more happie were they which passed into the foure cornerd house, and into other places, as it were true golde through the fire, constantlie calling vppon the Lorde, than those which burned them quicke, see∣king after Idolatrie, and the vanitie of the worlde, taking the way to that fire, that ne∣uer shall be quenched. But what? As it is saide in the 8. Chapter of Ieremie, Shall he which is fallen not rise againe? Or hee which is turned awaie, shall hee not turne a∣gaine? Ah my brethren, I hope yet there will manie be founde, who will say: What haue we doone? And there shall be of those of whome S. Cyprian speaketh in his trea∣tise cōcerning those which are fallen, whose bo∣dies were rather ouercome than their heart. Although that this saying of Tertulliā is more
true,In his book de corona militis. that is to say, that in the matter of faith, and religion, this excuse of necessitie & of force can haue no place: as if of necessitie one might be compelled to do any thing against his religiō.Nonecessi∣tie to euill. For no necessitie ought to be pretended to doe e∣uill, forasmuch as there is (saieth he) but one necessity that ought to cōmand vs, & which is simplie necessary, to wit, to obey our God. If there be any thing therfore that should feare man, or should lay any necessity by enforcemēt vpō him, it is the greatnesse and terrour of that which is most great and terrible, that is to say: of the liuing and euerlasting God. If there were any allurement, pleasure or commoditie, that ought to drawe a man, it is the riuer of the Lords de∣light, they be the promises of euerlasting trea∣sures, and of the life to come: which if we tasted were it neuer so litle, all the world with her de∣light should be nothing vnto vs. And so like∣wise a faithfull man is greater and more excel∣lent, than this worlde, being the childe of God and an inheritour of him & a coheire with Ie∣sus Christ. See wherfore such a one desireth no∣thing of the worlde, but his whole life is a re∣nouncing and forsaking of the world. If the que∣stion be of punishments, banishments, or other penalties: they are not miserable which dy or be in banishment for the name of Christ: but they who, howsoeuer they yet liue, and are in their
pallaces in the middest of all their delightes, are iudged and condemned by the word of God, and by the lawes thereof: being guiltie and worthie of a thousand deathes, & of a thousand banish∣ments, as for example these murtherers, ydola∣ters, and other such like are, who haue their handes embrued in the bloud of our brethren. A citie is not vnhappie to be vnwalled, spoyled,A city whē he is vn∣happie. robbed, and outwardly ruined, and sacked: but if it be depriued of the fauor of God, if it be fil∣led full of ydolatrie, with vanitie, with theft, bloud, and with pride. Furthermore, if we doe feele our selues verie weake, to sustaine the as∣saults, threateninges and feares amongest cru∣ell Idolaters: why doe we tempt God, in dwel∣ling amongest them?Heb. 13. Why doe wee not come out of our tentes, to beare the rebuke of Christ? Why goe we not out of Babylon, to the ende we be not partakers of her sinnes, and that wee receiue not of her plagues? Howe many meanes might a man haue had since this fiue yeares, to haue retired himselfe from amongest these fleshlie people, so thirstie after the bloud of the faithfull? Who is he that would abide one night amongest Scorpions? Who is hee which would not quickelie vnharbour himselfe,Dwelling amongest Idolaters, verie dan∣gerous. see∣ing his house on a fire, how deere soeuer it were vnto him? Who is hee which would remaine in the fairest citie of the world, in which hee
could haue no bread? What order then is there, that they shoulde soiourne amongest them so long time,Dwelling amongest Idolaters is verie daunge∣rous. amongest whom there can be founde no true bread, and amongest whom there is neither faith, nor loue, nor yet re∣spect of anie person? We are in this worlde to knowe and serue God: and the time of our life being so short, ought we not to enforce our selues to the vttermost to bestowe that as well as is possible? For as S. Cyprian hath verie well sayde in his treatise of twofoulde Martyr∣dome, All the life of man ought to giue witnesse to GOD: not that he hath any neede or maketh much reckoning of our Martyrdome or witnessing of him, but that it pleaseth him, that his glorie should be thus aduaunced, and declared amongest men, by men. Nowe my brethren,Whence infirmi∣ties pro∣ceede. considering that these great infirmi∣ties, which are at this day founde in many, pro∣ceede from no other thing, but onely through default of not being well grounded and rooted in the faith, and also because we pray not vnto God,Mark. 9.23. so often and so earnestlie as were requi∣site: (For all thinges are possible to the belee∣uer: and the beleeuer also hath this aduaun∣tage, that God heareth and fulfilleth his de∣sires) I haue thought to comfort, and to stren∣then more and more those which through the
grace of GOD remaine firme and constant vntill this present:Psal. 145. The pur∣pose of the Au∣thor in this booke as also to giue courage againe vnto them which haue lost it, and suf∣fer themselues willinglie to be borne with the tempest of Idolatrie, that there is nothing more fitte and to the purpose, than to set before your eies the Articles of our faith, with short me∣ditations and prayers, that shall giue vnto you a briefe knowledge and vnderstanding thereof, being as it were the verie iuice and substance: to the ende also, that this may shortly put you in remembraunce of the pure doctrine which was preached vnto you. For this is our glorie,2. Cor. 1. euen of vs all which haue beene your Pastors, the testimonie of our conscience, that in simplicitie and godlie purenesse wee haue beene conuersant amongest you, preaching vnto you the word of God. And wee are not ignorant, in meane while that this is an aun∣tient subtiltie and craft of the Diuel, and of the wicked,The slaū∣ders of the aduersa∣ries. in the middest of their greatest wickednesse, to slaunder good men, and the trueth. So was Elias slaundered by Achab, as a seditious person, so was Iesus Christ char∣ged with faultes. So did that abhominable Nero, who hauing set the citie of Rome on fire, layd all the fault vpon the poore Chri∣stians. Wee doe not doubt at all, but a man
may finde some of our renegates, which to re∣ceiue the seruice to the contrarie side, and to reape the benefite of a flattering tongue, both haue and doe straine themselues to misuse vs in speach: and not onely with the like speach falselie to misuse vs, but also to make odious euen the whole doctrine of the holie Gospell. But he whome we doe serue knoweth vs, and we call none other but the conscience of those who haue hard vs, and haue seene our behaui∣ours in witnesse of our affection towards you, & of our chearefulnesse and readines, wherewith all we haue beene alway accōpanied, preaching vnto you the pure word of God, so much as was possible for vs, and that you could be suffered to heare the same. The worlde hath also seene & knowen of long time the impieties of this seat of Rome: many Emperours, yea and many kinges of Fraunce, haue prooued their insolencie, and crueltie. Fraunce, alas, seeth at this day the detestable vntrustinesse, treasons, violences, and murthers, the like not hearde, which that Apostaticall Romish seate hath bredde and brought forth vnto vs, and for the which they haue many times made bonfires, yea and great triumph: but all in vaine: wee shall weepe and the worlde shall laugh: in the meane time our heauinesse shall one way bee turned into ioy which the world shall not be able to spoile vs of.
And how much better shall it bee to weepe in this world than in the other, and to reioyce in the life to come, than in this vale of miseries? The order then that wee keepe in this booke is,The order kept in this booke, that wee drawe to the Articles of the faith, as close as is possible, certaine places of the holie scripture which serue best to explane them, and make them cleare, with prayers and me∣ditations to that purpose, to the end that as faith and prayer ought to be ioyned together, so euerie one might bee resolued in the faith, & be pricked forward to prayer. True it is that in that which tyed me to those prayers and me∣ditations which were before imprinted, I haue not altogether kept such order as I desired: neuerthelesse, these prayers nowe are brought into a better order, than those that were be∣fore, and are augmented with manie good∣lie places. And this booke will serue as a Chri∣stian Manuel, to the end to teach euerie one to see euerie houre of the day, and euerie Moneth of the yeare, that is to say continu∣allie what hee ought to beleeue and meditate vpon: as also, what was the whole Catechisme or maner of instruction of youth vsed by the an∣cient fathers, like as Augustine witnesseth in his Enchiridion, that is to say, in his Manuel, that it contained the meaning and exposition of the Creede and the Lordes prayer. Where∣fore
I hope that this little treatise so reuiewed and digested into such order, will serue not onelie to direct vs, how to make our prayers, for all kinde of necessities and wantes, but also for an instruction, more and more to confirme those that are the true faithfull, in the princi∣pal pointes of our saluation, whereby the true Church of God is discerned from that false and bastard Church, which wanteth both true faith,Ephe. 3.14 & true inuocatiō. Now I bowe the knees of my soule to the Father of our Lorde Iesus Christ, to the end that according to the riches of his glorie,The Pa∣stors of ye Church of Orlians that were preserued. M. Gallars M. Anton. Chanor∣rier. M. Robert Mason. M. Pet. Ba∣ron. Daniel Toussain. he will graunt vs, that wee may be strengthened by his spirit: that Christ may dwell in you through faith, through the which you may be rooted and grounded in all true knowledge of his will. And as it hath pleased him in the middest of so manie floudes miracu∣louslie to keepe the Pastors of your Church, whom God be praised, he employed alwayes to his seruice: that it will please him to shewe you this fauour, raysing vp your estate as from death, to haue strength to reioyce againe and that quicklie: to the end that we may altoge∣ther, as it were created anew, sing vnto him a newe song, to his honor, vnder the protectiō of the shadow of his winges. Frō S. Lābert, with∣in the coūtie Palatine this 20. of Iuly. 1578. Daniel Toussain.
THE FOVNDATION and spring of all holy prayers and christian meditatiōs ought to be faith. Behold where fore we shall set heere in the entrie, the ar∣ticles of our faith, which some call the sym∣bole of the Apostles, as in deede they con∣teine a summarie of the Apostles doctrin, as is to be sene of that which is written in the 15. Chap. of the 1. vnto the Cor. vers. 3. & elswhere: & it is to be seene by the writings of the elders (as by the cathechisme of Cy∣rill, and the treatise of S. Ambrose, of Cayne and Abell, and in the 8. Chap. of S. Augustines booke named Enchiridion that is to say Manuel) that these Articles of the faith were holden amongest them as the true beginninges, and foundation of Christian religion. I Beleeue in God the Fa∣ther almightie, maker of heauen and earth. And in Iesus Christ his onelie
sonne our Lord. Which was concei∣ued by the Holie Ghost, borne of the virgine Marie. Suffered vnder Ponce Pilate, was crucified, dead & buried, he descended into hell. The thirde day he rose againe from the dead. He ascended into heauen, and sitteth on the right hand of God the Father Al∣mightie. From thence shall he come to iudge the quicke and the dead. I beleeue in the Holie Ghost. The ho∣lie Catholike Church. The commu∣nion of Saints. The forgiuenesse of sinnes. The resurrection of the bo∣die. And the life euerlasting. Amen. IN the yeare of our Lord 273. in the Synode of Antioch, was condemned the heresie of Samosatenus, who would not auowe Iesus Christ to be the worde subsisting: but made thereof a sound or decree of God, not a seconde person of his diuinity: in such sort as against his errours was published a confession by George Neocoefariensis, as is to be seene in the 3. booke of Eusebius.
IN the yeare of our Lord about 332.1. Synode called vni∣uersall. was vn∣der Constantine the Great assembled a Synode, or Councel, to the assisting whereof there were 328. Bishoppes at Nice a citie in Bythinia, there where was chieflie con∣demned the heresie of Arrius: who dinied the true sonne of God equall with the fa∣ther, and of the same substance. In this Sy∣node were made plaine and cleare against Arrius the Articles of faith which con∣cerne Iesus Christ by a confession as follow∣eth. 1 I Beleeue in one God,The Sym∣bol of Nice. the Father Almightie, ma∣ker of heauen and earth, and of all things visible and inuisible. 2 And in one Lorde Iesu Christ, the onely begotten sonne of God, be∣gotten of his Father before all worldes. 3 God of God, light of light, verie God of verie God: begotten, not made, beeing of one substance with the Father, by whome all thinges were made.
4 Who for vs men, and for our sal∣uation, came downe from heauen. 5 And was incarnate by the Holie Ghost, of the virgin Marie, and was made man. 6 And was crucified also for vs, vn∣der Poncius Pilate, he suffered and was buried. 7 And the thirde day he arose againe according to the Scriptures, and ascended into heauen, and sitteth at the right hand of the Father. 8 And he shal come againe with glo∣ry, to iudge both the quicke and the dead, whose kingdome shall haue none ende. 9 And I beleeue in the holie Ghost, the Lorde and giuer of life, who proceedeth from the Father and the Sonne, who with the Father and the Sonne together, is wor∣shipped and glorified, who spake by the Prophets. 10 And I beleeue one Catholike and Apostolike Church. 11 I acknowledge one Baptisme, for
the remission of sinnes. 12 And I looke for the resurrection of the dead, & the life of the world to come. Amen. IN the yeare of our Lorde 386.Seconde Councell. there assem∣bled at Constantinople the second Synode called vniuersall, which confirmed and ratified the confession made at Nice, ad∣ding onely that which followeth against the heretike Macedonius, who denied the true diuinitie of the holie Ghost: We beleeue in the holy Ghost Lorde and giuer of life, proceeding from the fa∣ther and the sonne, who with the fa∣ther & the sonne together is worship∣ped and glorified. HEere followeth the Symbole or confession of Athanasius Bishoppe of Alexandria, being chosen fiue monthes after the Coun∣cell held at Niece, who hath abiden great combats for the pure doctrine of the sonne of God against the Arrians.
WHosoeuer will be saued: before all things it is ne∣cessarie that he holde the Catholike faith. Which faith except euerie one doe keepe holy and vnde∣filed: without doubt hee shall perish euerlastingly. And the Catholike faith is this: that we worship one God in Trinitie, and Trinitie in vnitie. Neither confounding the persons: nor diuiding the substance. For there is one person of the Fa∣ther, another of the Sonne: and ano∣ther of the Holie Ghost. But the Godhead of the Father, of the Sonne, and of the Holie Ghost is all one: the glorie equall, and the ma∣iestie coeternall. Such as the Father is, such is the Sonne: and such is the Holie Ghost. The Father vncreate, the Sonne vncreate: and the Holie Ghost vn∣create.
The Father incomprehensible, the  Sonne incomprehensible: and the Holie Ghost incomprehensible. The Father eternall, the Sonne  eternall: and the Holie Ghost eter∣nall. And yet they are not three eter∣nalles:  but one eternall. As also there bee not three incom∣prehensibles,  nor three vncreated: but one vncreated, and one incom∣prehensible. So likewise the Father is almigh∣tie,  the Sonne almightie: and the ho∣lie Ghost almightie. And yet they are not three almigh∣ties:  but one almightie. So the Father is God, the Sonne  is God: and the Holie Ghost is God. And yet are they not three Gods:  but one God. So likewise the Father is Lord, the  Sonne Lorde: and the Holie Ghost Lorde. And yet not three Lordes: but one
Lorde. For like as wee be compelled by the Christian veritie, to acknowledge euerie person by him selfe, to be God and Lorde: So are wee forbidden by the Catholike religion to say there be three Gods or three Lords. The Father is made of none: nei∣ther created nor begotten. The Sonne is of the Father alone: not made nor created, but begotten. The Holie Ghost is of the Father and of the Sonne: neither made, nor created, nor begotten, but procee∣ding. So there is one Father, not three fathers: one Sonne, not three sonnes: one Holie Ghost, not three holy Ghostes. And in this Trinitie, none is afore or after other: none is greater, nor lesse than another. But the whole three persons bee coeternall together and coequall. So that in al things, as is aforesaid:
the vnitie in Trinitie, and the Trinitie in vnitie, is to be worshipped. He therefore that will bee saued,  must thus thinke of the Trinitie. Furthermore, it is necessarie to  euerlasting saluation: that hee also beleeue rightly in the incarnation of our Lord Iesu Christ. For the right faith is, that wee be∣leeue  and confesse, that our Lord Ie∣sus Christ, the sonne of God, is God and man. God of the substance of the father,  begotten before the worldes: and man of the substance of his mother, borne in the world. Perfect God, and perfect man: of  a reasonable soule: and humane flesh subsisting. Equall to the Father, as touching  his Godhead: and inferiour to the fa∣ther, touching his manhoode. Who although he be God & man,  yet he is not two, but one Christ. One, not by conuersion of the
Godhead into flesh: but by taking of the manhoode into God. One altogether, not by confusion of substance, but by vnitie of person. For as the reasonable soule & flesh is one man: so God and man is one Christ. Who suffered for our saluation, descended into hell, rose againe the third day from the dead. He ascended into heauen, he sit∣teth on the right hande of the father, God almightie. From whence hee shall come to iudge the quicke & the dead. At whose comming all men shall rise againe with their bodies. And shall giue account for their owne workes. And they that haue done good, shal goe into life euerlasting: and they yt haue done euil, into euerlasting fire. This is the Catholike faith, which except a man beleeue faithfully, hee cannot be saued.
IN the thirde generall Councell which was assembled at Ephesus vnder the Emperour Theodosius the younger about the yeare of our Lorde Iesus Christ 450.The third counsell. was refu∣ted and condemned the errour of the here∣tike Nestorius: the which would not ac∣knowledge with the Christian Church, whē as the worde became flesh, that the two na∣turs diuine & humane were knit in one per∣son or substance, and that vnseparablie: But did teach howe they were onely knit by an assistaunce or dwelling together: whereof he would not auowe that the virgin hadde borne the sonne of God, or that the sonne of God had suffered for vs. That which was to make nothing euen all the mysterie of our redemption: if he which was borne of a virgin, and hath suffered for vs, had not beene true God: hauing personally knit vnto himselfe our nature, after the which hee was borne of the virgin and hath suffe∣red on the crosse. In the fourth generall Councell, in which did the Emperour Martianus assist at Chal∣cedon: was condemned the heresie of Eu∣tiches the monke: the which monke fell in∣to another extreme errour contrarie vn∣to that of Nestorius: in such sort knit∣ting
the two natures in Christ as hee con∣foundeth them, and in place of a person, he leaueth as it were but a nature: Where∣of the Fathers of the councell to make cleare this matter, did set out the confes∣sion which followeth. Wee confesse and acknowledge one one∣lie Iesus Christ our Lorde: perfect in diuinitie and also in humanitie, verie God, and verie man, of a reasonable bodie and soule: equall to the Father as touching his Godhead, and coe∣quall with vs as touching his man∣hoode, and like vnto vs in all thinges sinne excepted: begotten of the Fa∣ther before the worldes according to his Diuinitie, and in the latter dayes begotten of the virgine Marie mo∣ther of the Lord, for our sakes and for our saluation as concerning his huma∣nitie: One onelie and also Sauiour in two natures, without confusion, con∣uersion, diuision, and separation: The differēce of natures be not takē away through the vnion, but rather the pro∣pertie of both natures being kept con∣curring in one person or substance: not to diuide them into two persons, but
to the end that hee alone might be our onelie Sauiour: as the Prophetes haue prophesied thereof, and he hath taught vs, and the Symboles of the Fathers confesse him. It is to bee noted that although the said Symbols and confessions are amongest the pa∣pistes, yet notwithstanding they cease not to persecute to the vttermost those which with all their heartes beleeue the alone comprised Doctrine: Wherein is to bee seene that they haue not those confessions but vpon the paper, for they doe not beleeue in them: and that in¦stead to be the true Catholikes, they persecute them. For as wee see in the Code of Iusti∣nian and in the 9. booke of his tripartite histo∣rie the 7. Chap. The Gretian Emperours, Valentinian and Theodosius made an Edict and declaration, that they would hold those for good Christians and good Catholikes, which followed the Doctrine that was taught by S. Peter, and did beleeue in the Trinitie and of Iesus Christ according as it is here be∣fore said. Nowe men doe not hold them for Catholikes, vnlesse one beleeue the blasphe∣mies of the Pope and of his traine, who sitteth in the Temple of God, as a God, making lawes at his pleasure, and profaning the pure ser∣uice of the Lorde.
Here follovveth the consideration of the first Article of our faith, conteining manie goodlie Do∣ctrines. Of Faith. Of the Trinitie. Of the Creation. Of the Prouidence.
Meditations and Praiers vpon the Articles of the Faith. I beleeue in God. Of Faith. CONSIDERATION. ALL and euerie Science hath his rule and their principles:Ruffin vpon the Symbole. but the true foundati∣on of Christian religi∣on, is to beleeue. For after that man by distrust,The prin∣ciple of Christian Religion. and through curiousnesse had sinned and was fallen, it was the coun∣sell of God that by faith he should bee saued: And willing as it were to be too ouer-wise,Gen. 3. 1. Cor. 1.2 and so to knowe good from euill, hee straied out of the way, that through the preaching of the crosse of Christ, that is reputed for follie in the worlde, he might be guided to saluation.In the Booke of the pre∣scriptiō of heretickes▪ Let therefore saith Tertullian curiousnes now giue place vnto faith: and let faith bee no more aucthorised by men or by
the people: But let all people and men be tryed and prooued by faith, and then approoued onelie, when they shall be∣leeue. For it is also neuer spoken or said in the Scripture, thy great skill or know∣ledge,Matt. 9.22. Ioh. 20.31. thy great riches, or thy great preheminence saueth thee: but, Thy faith hath saued thee.Where∣fore was the Bible. And behold wherefore all the Bible is written, to wit, that wee might beleeue howe Iesus Christ is the Sonne of God, and that beleeuing there∣in we might haue euerlasting life. O therefore howe much is the doctrine of the Gospell necessarie and fit for vs, see∣ing that it is as Paule saieth in the 10. to the Romanes, the woorde of Faith, whereby the Lorde kindleth and main∣taineth faith in our hearts! O how great also is the vnspeakeable goodnes of this mightie God, which giueth vs blessed∣nes and euerlasting life for nothing: and requireth no other thing of vs but that we put our trust in him, and that we doe beleeue in his worde! O blessed we, for whose sake he hath so louinglie spoken, yea sworne and made an othe, that hee would be vnto vs a father and sauiour: But woe & more than accursed are those that beleeue not in the Lorde, who
hath confirmed and ratified so manie goodlie and solemne promises by oth, yea, by the precious bloud of our Saui∣our.What Faith is. For Christian faith is not an opinion or light beleefe of all that a man might set before vs, but it is the gift of God, Ephes. 3. and a worke of God, Iohn 6. by which gift, and woorke of the Lord, wee are brought vnto a certeine know∣ledge of his will, by the meanes of his ho∣lie promises made in his woorde, as S. Peter, in the sixt of S. Iohn, saieth, Wee haue beleeued and doe knowe, that thou art Christ: and S. Paule in the first of the second to Timothie, He hath giuen vs a spirite of a sounde minde: and wee knowe verie well, in whome wee haue beleeued, and wee are persuaded, that hee is able to keepe that gage, &c.Rom. 4.2. And therefore we giue glorie vnto God, beleeuing in the promises of our God, being certeine and fullie assured, that that which hee hath promised vnto vs, hee will and can doe it, to wit, to forgiue vs our sinnes,The ef∣fects of Faith. and e∣uerlasting life, through Iesus Christ, who was deliuered to death for our sinnes, and rose againe for our iustification: by whom also wee haue peace with God, and haue accesse through faith vnto his
grace, wherein we stand and reioice vn∣der the hope of the glorie of GOD to come: calling also vpon his name in all our needes and necessities, as it is said in the Psalme 116. I haue beleeued, and therefore haue I spoken: and in the tenth of the Rom. Let vs call on him, in whom we doe beleeue. Things contrarie vnto faith.By this it appeareth, that there are three things, which cheeflie are contrarie vnto faith. First, the despising of Gods word, and of the preaching of the Gospell: seeing that the Lord inspireth our harts by this meane, and giueth vs also faith: not wil∣ling that our beliefe and saluation should bee builded vpon mans discourse, or fleshlie wisedome, but vpon him alone. Secondlie, the doubts & distrusts are contrarie vnto faith: if a man doe not resolue himselfe in GOD: if a man walke in vncertaintie:Double errours in the Papal∣tie, in the maner of Faith. if a man doe not assure himselfe of his saluation as it is seene in the Papistes, howe they in this behalfe doe commit a double fault. In the first place, as it is to be seene in the sixt session of that goodlie councel of Trent, 9. Chapter. They taught how it was a vaine trust, when as men did fullie
assure themselues of Gods grace, and that none could knowe an assurednesse by faith, that he had the grace of God. O how bare, weake and vnable of pow∣er should our consolation bee against sinne, the diuell and hell, namelie in the article of death, if this doctrine tooke place! For that which they say, howe man because of his infirmitie, can∣not so assure him in his God: The aun∣swere is easie, to wit, that the certaintie of faith, is of God and of his word, and not of our strength and merites or deser∣uings: and therefore it ouercommeth all our weakenesse. For we be also saued not after the greatnesse and weakenesse of our beliefe: but through the excellen∣cie and mightinesse of him, in whom we doe beleeue, that is to wit, Iesus Christ: in such sort as weake faith leaueth not off to be a faith to saluation, because it apprehendeth the euerlasting sonne of God. The other errour of the Papists is, that not fullie trusting in the Lord, they cal vpon Saints of both kindes, not con∣sidering, how that we do beleeue in one onelie God, and we must also call vpon God alone: For we doe call vpon him, in whom we doe beleeue and fully put
our assurance, Rom. 10. as also in the 44. Psalme: The Church protesteth not to haue lifted vp hir handes to a strange God. To be short, there is nothing more contrarie vnto faith, than the distrust of the goodnesse, fauour, and assistance of our God, or to think yt he hath not heard our praiers: seeing that it is his proper∣tie to heare them, as Dauid saith in the 65. Psalme, All creatures shall come vnto thee, because thou hearest their prayers. They sinne there also against the na∣ture of faith, which do not beleeue that which they doe see, and so soone as they see no succour, prosperitie, and riches, they are discouraged and leaue religion. And as it is said in the eleuenth Chapter to the Hebrues, & there prooued by ma∣nie goodlie examples; that faith is the rest or stay of the thing a man hopeth for, & a shew of things a man seeth not. For S. Augustine saith, Man belee∣ueth with the heart, not by the hand vn∣to righteousnes: so as diuers beleeue not that which they doe touch with the hand, or doe see with the fleshlie eie. Thirdlie, this of all other is contrarie vnto faith, to purpose or to set foorth, or to establish anie other thing than Christ
the sonne of God,Rom. 10. vpon whom we ought to trust, be they our works, riches, or men: for establishing vs vpon our selues; we doe ouerthrowe so much as lieth in vs the righteousnes of God. And so we deceiue our selues, because that there is none other name, but the name of Iesus,Acts. 4. by whom wee shall haue life, prosperi∣tie, saluation, and in summe, all maner of blessings. A Praier vnto God to obtaine true Faith and encrease therein. OVR Lorde God, Father of light, from whom proceedeth euerie good and perfect gift,S. Iames. 1.17. which hast promised to powre vpon thy seruaunts the spirite of grace, and of prayer:Zach. 12.10 we most humblie beseeche thee,Ephes. 1. that for the loue of thy sonne Iesus by whom it hath pleased thee to choose vs, and to blesse vs in all spirituall blessing, let it please thee also to giue vs a truenesse of faith, by the which wee may comprehend this large∣nesse, depth, length, and height of thy delight towards vs, to trust and comfort our selues in thee all the daies of our life, & to bring forth ye fruites to thy honour
and glorie, and to the comfort of our neighbours: Let this faith bee a liue∣lie faith,Galat. 5, 6. a speaking faith that may call vppon the name of thy Sonne onelie, a woorking faith through Charitie, a faith pacient in aduersitie, a faith ouer∣comming the worlde,1. Iohn. 5. by the meane of thy inuincible strength, and that thou hast a desire to be ours. O Lorde this is thy commaundement that wee doe be∣leeue in the name of thy sonne Iesus Christ,1. Iohn. 3. and that wee loue one another. But alas, we doe knowe that faith is not giuen to all men,2. Thes. 3.2 & how that it is an old complaint of the Prophets and also of the Apostles which say,Esai. 53.1. Lord who hath giuen credit or beliefe vnto our prea∣ching?Rom. 10. O God and Father, there are of the other side so many false Prophets and deceiuers of the worlde, that set forth their dreames & wordes in steade of thy holie and vnfallible worde, and that knowe in the meane time to trans∣forme themselues into Angels of light,2. Cor. 11. so many are the assaultes of miseries and persecutions, which make men wilde or fearce: to be short, so great is the vani∣tie and weakenesse of our nature, that it suffereth vs to be easilie caried away, if
thou (most mercifull Father and mightie GOD) diddest not woorke in vs that which thou doest commaund vs,Iohn. 6. Ephes. 3. and if thou thy selfe diddest not bring vs to thy Sonne, we could not come vnto him,Iohn. 16. and vnlesse he did giue vs leaue to come vnto thy throne of grace,Rom. 8. we could not approch thereunto: & if thy spirit did not guide vs into all trueth, and yeeld vnto our heartes this witnesse, how thou art our Father, we could not crie Abba Father. Therefore wilt thou graunt vnto vs O thou onelie true God, three persons in one substance,Actes. 1. God the Fa∣ther, the Sonne and the holy Ghost, ac∣cording vnto thy promises, to purifie my heart through faith, making thy abode in thy poore creature, keepe my spirit from all temptation of error,Iohn. 14.23. my heart from delighting in anie other thing, than in thy good pleasure, and in thy woord: and my will to desire none other than thy selfe, that art the soueraigne goodnesse, which art my all, my por∣tion, and that hauing thee and louing thee, I may despise this world, and for∣sake all vanities, to tast, and to sauour the delightes of thy dwelling place, lo∣uing nothing but thee: and for the loue
of thee,2. Cor. 5. to awaite the blessed houre when as I shall no more by faith,Ephes. 4. but by sight, and that dailie so increasing in faith,2. Timot. 4. I may come vnto the measure and fulnesse of perfect stature, one day to receiue the incorruptible crowne of glorie, hauing fought the good fight of faith, and in the beholding of thy face at thy right hand to feele the true fulnesse of ioy and gladnesse.Psalme. 16 So be it. There is set downe vnto vs a goodlie exam∣ple and pourtraict of Iacobs wrestling, and of the faithfuls victorie in the 32. of Genesis. Then there wrestled a man with Iacob vnto the breaking of the daie, and when he sawe that he could not preuaile against him, he touched therefore the holow of his thigh, so that the holow of Iacobs thigh was loosed as he wrest∣led with him, and he said, Let me goe, for the Morning appeareth: who aunswe∣red, I will not let thee goe except thou blesse me. Then said he vnto him, what is thy name? And he said, Iacob. Then said he, thy name shall not be called Ia∣cob anie more: but Israel: because thou
hast had power with God, thou shalt also preuaile with men. A MEDITATION vpon the said text. MAns life, to be compared vnto the trueth, is but a continuall combate vppon the earth: and namelie the life of the faithful: yea, and whosoeuer dooth truelie beleeue, ought to make his ac∣count, that he must suffer manie assaults. Now the temptations are not of one kinde, wherewith it pleaseth this grati∣ous God to stirre vp those with warfare, to whome he hath bestowed anie of his graces.Gene. 12. Abraham going forth out of his countrie, was tryed and prooued by dearth, and not long after, through warres which he had vpon his arme or hand: and then, vnto the measure as he did warfare,Gene. 14. he was yet further prooued with a stronger temptation, when it was commaunded him to offer his onelie sonne Izaac in sacrifice.Gene. 22. Iacob the good Patriarch, had truelie his part of temp∣tations with Laban, and also of the be∣halfe of his brother Esau. But the fight was verie rude and hard, when as the
Lord himselfe sought against him. For it appeareth that the match was verie ill made, when that the Euerlasting should wrestle against a creature which was not but like stubble, or as dust in his pre∣sence. But this was the fight that did get vnto him also the greatest honor, and hath richlie beawtified him with this name Israel, as if that he had beene the ruler of the Lord. Behold, howe the greater that the assaultes are which doe ariue or come vnto the faithfull, so much the more is the victorie glorious. Therefore let vs not finde it strange, neither be discou∣raged if men doe wrestle against vs at a∣nie time, for God himselfe also will so doe, when as it seemeth that he will nei∣ther cōfort nor heare vs. So wrestled he with Dauid, when as he said in the 77. Psalme. My soule refused comfort. I did thinke vppon God, and was troubled. I prayed,Matth. 15. & my soule was full of anguish. So wrestled Iesus Christ with the womā of Cana, and as it seemed to repulse her altogether. But how had she the victo∣rie? Euen through faith and perseue∣rance, in such sort, as the Lord suffering himselfe to be ouercome, said vnto her,
O woman, great is thy faith, be it to thee as thou desirest. See howe the vn∣uincible Lord suffereth himselfe to be o∣uercome by our faith, and also by our prayers. For first of all, hee doth not as∣saie and prooue all his strength against vs. Secondly, he himselfe furnisheth vs with armour and weapon, in such sort as wee be (as S. Paule speaketh in the 6. to the Ephesians) strengthened in the Lorde, and in the power of his might & force, and clothed with all the armours from God. Therefore it is not with out some checke mate, and without also re∣ceiuing some litle wounde, as Iacob had a certaine crush in his thigh. For hee wil make vs truely feele how we be but men, and that we should walke in hum∣blenesse. What braue souldier is he, that would not haue his Thigh crushed in peeces, or else receiue some other sore wounde, so that hee might haue the vi∣ctorie? Are not these the markes of the valiant souldiers, wherof they vant and bost, to wit their skarres and maimes, to shewe how they haue beene the first at the medley or fight? Therefore let vs not be greeued, if we doe receiue in this world some losse, beatinges and skarres
for Christes sake, and let vs not thinke to be ouercome, what euill so euer hap∣peneth, but to be ouercommers, so long as by faith we doe surely hold ourselues in the Lorde. An other goodlie example taken out of the 13. Chapter of Iob to bee vsed in the middest of the greatest Temptations. Lo though he slay me, yet wil I put my trust in him, and will reprooue my wayes in his sight. He shalbe my saluation also, for the Hypocrite shall not come before him, &c. CONSIDERATION. BEcause of the doubtfulnesse of this worde Loe, in the Hebrewe tongue, some reade this Text thus: See, he will slaie me, and I will not awaite or looke for any more, as if he should say, I haue nothing else to awaite after. Neuerthe∣lesse, this is the meaning and intent of Iob, to say, Albeit that God kill me, and that there is not herein anie apparaunce after my death, to looke for any more good of the Lorde: yet so it is, that I will not leaue off from acknowledging my selfe a sinner, reproouing my waies, and
to holde him for the God of my saluati∣on, who also quickeneth dead thinges, as by the deawe of the spirite, he causeth to spring foorth those things that seeme as dead: euen as it is sayde in the 26. of Esaie. 5.19. Therefore it is the propertie of Faith not to limite any thing to God, but to suffer him, yea if he would kill vs, or bring vs to dust. And in the 78. Psalme the Iewes are reproued in tempting God and to limite the holie one of Israell. Contrariwise, the faithfull say: My soule keepeth silence vnto God. Euen as it is sayde in the 62. Psalm. ver. 1. and pati∣ently abideth in the Lorde and suffering him that knoweth to draw out of darke∣nesse light, and out of death, life: and who also declareth his Power, Strength, and Vertue in our weakenesse 2. to the Cor. 12. Wherefore doe not we remem∣ber this infinite power of the euerlasting Lorde, in the middest of our Anguishes? Why doe not we beholde the Prince of life, in the middest of the shadowe of death: and also vnto him who through his death hath giuen vs life? And whose goodnesse is better than life it selfe? As it is sayd in the 63. Psalm, O that we had truely the excellent greatnesse of his
power before our eies done to vs which do beleeue through his force & strength, whereby hee hath wrought it in Christ, when he raised him vp from the dead, and made him to sit at his right hand, ac∣cording as S. Paule speaketh in the 5. Chap. of his Epistle to the Ephesians. Howe much more of courage would we be, when namely we should receiue it as the sentence of death in our selues: if we do come againe to consider thereof,Philip. 1.21. how Christ liueth in vs, and that to die in him, is life and aduauntage? To bee short, in place to murmure against God in our anguishes, we should reproue & blame our waies, and our sinnes, with Iob: for our only sinnes are they that do destroy mankinde. Certaine notable sentences touching Faith taken out of the Psalmes, and an assu∣rance of the true faithfull. Out of the 27. Psalme. Hope in the Lord and be strong, & he shal comfort thine heart, and trust in the Lorde. Though that my Father and my Mother should forsake me yet the Lord will gather me vp.
The 36. Psalme. How excellent is thy mercie O God: and therefore the children of men trust vnder the shadowe of thy winges. They shalbe satisfied with the fatnesse of thine house, and thou shalt giue them drinke out of the ryuer of thy pleasures. For with thee is the well of life, and in thy light shall we see light. The 40. Psalme. Blessed is the man that maketh the Lorde his trust,From a heartie Faith, pro∣ceedeth ye confession of the mouth. and regardeth nor the proude, nor such as turne aside to lies. I haue not hid thy righteousnesse with∣in mine heart, but I haue declared thy trueth and thy saluation. I haue not con∣cealed thy mercie and thy trueth from the great congregation. Withdrawe not thou thy tender mercie from me, O lord, let thy mercie and thy trueth alwaies preserue me. The 50. Psalme. Call vppon me in the day of trouble, so will I deliuer thee and thou shalt glo∣rifie me. The 55. Psalme. Cast thy burthen vpon the Lord, and he shall nourish thee: hee will not suffer the righteous to fall for euer.
The 62. Psalme. In God onely is my trust, in God on∣ly is my saluation: he is my rocke, my castle, and my defence: therefore I shall not be moued. Yet my soule keepe thou silence vn∣to God, for my hope is in him: in God is my saluation and my glory. Trust in him alway ye people, powre out your heartes before him: for God is our hope. Yet the children of men are vanitie: the chiefe men are lies. Trust not in oppression nor in roberie, bee not vaine: if riches increase, set not your heartes thereon. The 63. Psalme. Because thou hast beene my helper, therfore vnder the shadow of thy wings will I reioyce. My soule cleaueth vnto thee: for thy right hande vpholdeth me. The 71. Psalme. In thee O Lorde I trust, let me neuer be ashamed. For thou art mine hope O Lorde GOD, euen my trust from my youth. Vpon thee haue I beene stayed from the wombe: thou art he that tooke mee
out of my mothers bowelles: my praise shalbe alwaies of thee. Cast me not off in the time of age: for∣sake mee not when my strength faileth me. The 73. Psalme. Whome haue I in Heauen but thee? And I haue desired none in the Earth with thee. My flesh faileth and mine heart also: but God is the strength of mine heart and my portion for euer. For loe, they that withdrawe themselues from thee, shall perish. As for me, it is good for me to drawe neere vnto God: therefore I haue put my trust in the Lord God that I may declare all thy workes. The 84. Psalme. Blessed are they that dwell in thine house: they will euer praise thee. Blessed is the man whose strength is in thee. I had rather be a doore keeper in the house of my God, than to dwell in the Tabernacles of wickednesse. For the Lorde God is the sunne and the shielde vnto vs, the Lorde will giue grace and glorie, and no good thing wil he withholde from them that walke vp∣rightlie.
O Lorde of Hostes blessed is the man that trusteth in thee. The 91. Psalme. Thou hast sayd, the Lord is my hope: thou hast set the most high for thy refuge there shall none euill come vnto thee. For hee shall giue his Angelles charge ouer thee to keepe thee in all thy waies. Because hee hath loued mee, therefore will I deliuer him. I will exalt him be∣cause he hath knowen my name. When he calleth vppon mee, I will heare him. I will bee with him in trouble, I will de∣liuer him and glorifie him, with long life will I satisfie him and shew him my saluation. The 118. Psalme. The Lorde is with mee, therefore I will not feare what man can do vnto me. The Lorde is with me among them that helpe me, therefore I shall see my desire vpon mine enemies. It is better to trust in the Lord than to haue any confidence in man. I shall not die but liue and de∣clare the workes of the Lord. The Lord hath chastened me sore, but he hath not deliuered me to death. Thou art my god and I wil praise thee, euen my God; ther∣fore
will I exalt thee. The 125. Psalme. They that trust in the Lord, shalbe as mount Sion which cannot bee remoued, but remaineth for euer. As the moun∣taines are about Ierusalem, so is the Lord about his people, from hence foorth for euer. A MEDITATION & PRAIER as con∣cerning Faith, and inuocation drawen out of certaine Psalmes. SAint Paule in the 3. Chap. to the Rom. sayth: That all haue sinned, & are de∣priued of the glorie of God. But because that by faith wee doe put on vs Christ, who dwelleth in our heartes, wee bee so pleasing vnto him as his wisdome, as it is saide in the 8. Chap. of the Prouerbs: and tooke his delight in the childrē of men. Therefore are young and olde, great and litle, bidden to praise the Lorde euen as we doe see in the 148. Psalme. O what an honour is this vnto vs, that God will be praised by vs! Who is he sayth S. Chry∣sostom, that to be honored and praised by the wormes doth much care for it? We be such, yet notwithstanding hee will
haue vs praise and glorifie him. From whence commeth this honor, ex∣cept it be by faith which yeeldeth vs pleasing and setteth vs in honor? Yea so pleasing,Psal. 145. as the Lord offereth himselfe to worke the desires of those that call vppon him in trueth. What is it to call vppon him in trueth, vnlesse to pray in Faith, and to confirme our requestes and desires, vnto the word of GOD which is the onelie trueth? Wherefore soundeth not out thē the whole world, the praises of the Lord? Why then goe so manie people roming after strange Gods, that cannot saue them? What iniquitie haue men found in the liuing God, that they digge pittes, where there is no water,Ieremie. 2. and forsake the fountaine of life? Is not our helpe in the name of the Lord,Psal. 124. who hath made both heauen and earth? Is this he, who hath giuē vs occa∣sion and assurance to trust in him, euen from the time that we sucked our mo∣thers pappes? And though that he cha∣stice vs, holdeth he not dailie the affe∣ction of a Father, when as in chasticing vs, he correcteth vs: and in correcting vs, aduaunceth our saluation, in such sort, as Dauid himselfe confesseth, that
it was good for him to be chasticed,Psal. 11. to learne the iudgementes of the Lorde? Yea, and albeit, that death should be before our eyes,Psal. 68. is it not he that hath the issues of death in his hand? O Lord suffer vs not to be led away by them that goe farre from thee:A prayer. Nei∣ther yet let vs at anie time communi∣cate with the bloudie Sacrifices of I∣dolaters.Psal. 125. Psal. 16. Rather graunt mercie vnto the poore, bringing them with vs vnto thy sheepefold. Make strong the weake: and keepe vs from being too presump∣tuous,Rom. 11. seeing that it is by faith and by grace that we stand fast. Keepe vs O good Father standing that wee doe not fall.1. Cor. 10. Let vs prooue our selues, if we be in faith, and let this faith increase, that it may shine as gold in the middest of afflictions, that it be also stir∣red vp in vs without ceasing, and streng∣thened by a dailie hearing of thy word, meditating of thy bounties, and by sup∣plications and prayers, that in this fraile and olde ruinous age of ye world,Psal. 62.. (since yt the infidels are as an old tottering wall,) we may be strong, sure, & constant, dai∣lie leaning vpon this strong tower and rocke thy sonne Iesus Christ. So be it.
A consideration vppon this which is spoken of the vse of Gods word, taken out of the 30. Chap. of the Prouerbes. EVerie word of the Lorde is purged, and is as a bucklar vnto those that haue proofe in the same. Dauid spea∣keth almost the same in the 12. Psalme. Now for a trueth the wordes of the Lord are pure wordes as the siluer: be it that we behold his subiect, for it interpreteth not of worldlie vanitie, as dooth other doctrine: but of holie and heauenlie thinges: be it that a man consider his ef∣fectes. And they which doe receaue it by faith, feele by it their heartes purged of earthlie thoughtes, be it, that a man respect the Author of this word, which is pure, and faithfull in his holy promi∣ses, more purer than anie fined siluer. But as concerning mankinde there is in them no assurance, nor no faith: as it is said in the first of Esai. Thy siluer is be∣come drosse: in short, there is nothing in men, but corruption and deceite. And if a man would behold the mani∣fold fires & persecutions, wherethrough the word of the Lord hath passed, it should be seene, how much shee hath
made triall, in that it can consume no∣thing, nor hinder the course of Gods word. Great a doe haue they that striue or storme against the word of GOD: when they shal persecute it, it will shine so much the more, and will be alwayes a bucklar vnto the children of God, a∣gainst all manner of temptations, euen as Iesus Christ hath shewed vs a godlie example in the 4. Chap. of S. Matthew: when he was tempted of the Diuill, how we must be holpen with this bucklar. Certaine godlie textes taken out of the Prophetes: concerning Faith, and the assurance that we ought to haue in God. The 7. of Esai. ver. 9. IF you beleeue not,Iames. 1. sure you shall not be established. For he that wauereth, is like a waue of the Sea, tost and caried away of the winde. The 12. of Esai. The faithfull feeling their deliuerāce by Christ, shall say, Lord, I giue vnto thee thankes, and albeit thou hast bin angrie with me, thy wrath is turned a∣way,
and thou hast comforted me. Be∣hold, God is my saluation, I wil trust and will not feare: for the Lord God is my strength, and song: he also is become my Saluation. Therefore with ioy shall you drawe waters out of the welles of saluation. The 25. of Esai. The manner of the faithfuls thankes∣giuing. O Lord thou art my God, I will ex∣alt thee, I will praise thy name, for thou hast doone woonderfull thinges, according to the counsels of olde with a stable trueth. For thou hast beene a strength vnto the poore, euen a strength vnto the nee∣die in his trouble, a refuge against the tempest, a shadow against the heate: for the blast of ye mightie is like a storme against the walk. Thou shalt beate downe the noyse of the strangers as the heate in a drie place. And he will destroy the couering that couereth all people, and the veile that is spred vppon all Nations. He will destroy death for euer, and
the Lord GOD shall wipe away the teares from all faces: and the rebuke of his people will he take away out of all the earth, for the Lord hath spoken it. And in that day shall men say, Lo this is our God, we haue waited for him: and he will saue vs. This is the Lord, we haue awaited for him: we will reioyce and be ioyfull in his saluation. The 30. of Esai. Your strength shall be in silence, and in hope. The 41. of Esai. For I the Lord thy God will hold thy right hand, saying vnto thee, Feare not, I will helpe thee. Feare not thou worme Iacob, and ye men of Israel, I will helpe thee saith the Lord, and thy redeemer the holy one of Israel. The 42. of Esai. I am the Lord, this is my name, and my glorie will not I giue vnto an other, neither my prayses to grauen Images. And I will bring the blinde by a way that they know not, and leade them by pathes that they haue not knowen. I will make darknesse light before them, & crooked thinges straight. These thinges wil I doe vnto them and not for∣sake
them. They shall be turned backe that trust in grauen Images, they shall be greatlie ashamed. The 50. of Esai. The Lord God is my helper, there∣fore shall not I be confounded. There∣fore haue I set my face like a flint, and I know that I shall not be ashamed. He is neere that iustifieth me. Let vs stand to∣gether: who is my aduersarie? Let him come neere to me. Beholde the Lorde God will helpe me: who is he that can condemne me? The 51. of Esai. I, euen I, am he, that comforteth you. Who art thou that thou shouldest feare a mortall man, and the sonne of man which shal be made as grasse? And so for∣gettest thy Lorde thy maker, who hath spread out the heauens, and layd the foundations of the earth: for the hea∣uens shall vanish away like smoke, and the earth shall waxe olde like a garment: and they that dwell therein shall perish in like manner. But my saluation shalbe for euer, and my righteousnes shal neuer be abolished. A complaint of the vnbeliefe and Apostasie of men.
The 2. of Ieremie. THus sayth the Lorde, What iniqui∣tie haue your fathers founde in mee, that they are gone farre from mee, and haue walked after vanitie, & are become vaine, and haue not sayde where is the Lorde: where is the Lorde that brought vs out of the Lande of Egypt? And lead vs through the lande of Wildernesse, through a desert and wast land, through a drie land, and by the shadow of death, by a lande that no man passed through, and where no man dwelt, and I brought you into a plentifull countrie, &c. O ye Heauens be astonied at this, be afraide and vtterly confounded sayeth the Lorde. For my people haue com∣mitted two euils: they haue forsaken me the fountaine of liuing waters, to digge them pittes, euen broken pittes that can holde no water. The 9. Chap. of Ieremie. Thus saith the lord: Let not the wise man glorie in his wisdome, nor the strong man glorie in his strength, nei∣ther the rich man glorie in his riches: but let him that glorieth, glorie in this, that he vnderstandeth and knoweth me: for I am the Lord, which shew mercie,
iudgement, and righteousnesse in the earth: for in these thinges I delight saith the Lord. The 17. of Ieremie. Thus saith the Lord, Cursed be the man, that trusteth in man and maketh flesh his arme, and which draweth his heart from the Lord: for he shall be like the heath in the wildernesse, and shall not see when anie good commeth, but shall inhabit the parched places in the wildernesse. Blessed is the man that trusteth in the Lord, & whose hope the Lord is: for he shall be as a tree that is planted by the water, which spreadeth out her rootes by the riuer, and shall not feele when the heate commeth: but her leafe shall be greene, and shall not care for the yeare of drought, neither shall cease from yeelding fruite. O Lord the hope of Israel, all that forsake thee shall be confounded: They that depart from thee shall be written in the earth, because they haue forsaken the Lord, the fountaine of liuing waters. A godlie example of the three compani∣ons of Daniell and of their constancie
and faith, taken out of the 3. Chap. of the Prophet Daniel. ver. 16. SHadrach, Meshach and Abednego aun∣swered and said vnto the king, O Na∣buchadnezar, we are not carefull to aun∣swere thee in this matter. Behold our God whome we serue, is able to deli∣uer vs from the hote fierie fornace, and hee will deliuer vs out of thy hand O king. But if not, be it knowen to thee O king, that we will not serue thy Gods, nor woorship the golden Image which thou hast set vp. An obseruation vpon the said place. NOte ye that first these good men did verie well see that in partaking ne∣uer so little in the seruice of Idols it was to serue the diuels,To par∣take with the Idola∣ters is to serue the diuels. as it is said in the 106. Psalme ver. 37. and also in the 1. to the Corinth. 10. Chap. ver. 20. As God threatneth also to roote out all those that shal sweare by the Lord or by Mel∣chon in the 1. Chap. of Sophonie. For as one Marcus Arethusius aun∣swered,Marcus Arethu∣sius. in the historie of Theodoret. When men would not bestowe but
one Tournois, vnto a wicked act: then did euerie man contribute. And as on a day the Christians aunswered according as it is written in the same Theodoret, in the 4. booke and 20. Chap. When as the tyrantes fumed yet more with rage & furie than before they were woont: we could not denie nor start frō the trueth, seeing that in the world,Renoun∣cing of the trueth. there could not be found a greater torment, than to re∣nounce the truth. There is also a goodly historie in the 4. booke of Eusebe and the 13. Chap. When there was mention made of the Edict, that Anthonius the Emperor proclaimed, forbidding to per∣secute the Christians: for said he, You shall make them victorious, through their persecutions, in that they loue bet∣ter to die than to obey you. An expo∣sitiō of the text which is in the 5. chapter 2. booke of Kinges.That which some men to couer their wickednesse and ydolatrie doe alleage the place of the soconde booke of the Kinges the 5. Chap. and the 18. ver. when Naaman the king of Syreas Connestable saide vnto Eliseus: The Lorde be merciful vnto the seruant, that when my maister goeth into the house of Rimmon, to wor∣shippe there, and leaneth on my hande, and I bowe my selfe in the house of Rim∣mon:
the Lorde be mercifull vnto thy ser∣uant in this point, when I doe bowe downe my selfe in the house of Rimmon: to whō he sayde, Go in peace. They haue this obiection in this text. We aunswere that first this fauoreth no whit at al these Apostats and Time-seruers, who do par∣take with ydolatrie against their consci∣ence. For the question is not of that which a good man ought to doe, or may doe, whether hee may in safe consci∣ence bee partaker with the Idolaters: But it is a demaunde of a particular, that is onely founded vppon a seruice, which hee pretendeth to owe vnto his king, by the occasion of his charge: for in the former verse, hee protesteth no more to sacrifise vnto strange Gods, but onely vnto the Lord. Secondly, in asking forgiuenesse of the Prophet, he without noyse confesseth a fault, and that he found therein a bur∣then in his conscience. Thirdly a particular example cannot be taken for a rule, seeing that for a rule, wee haue the commandementes of our Lord God, wherein euerie one is bound to looke vnto. Furthermore that the an∣swere of Eliseus, Go in peace, may be as
soone taken for a leaue that he gaue vn∣to him to goe away, or a sending away of him, then a counsell or any resoluti∣on, wheron a man may make a ground-worke. The 2. Chap. of Habacue ver. 4. Beholde he that lifteth vp himselfe, his minde is not vpright in him, but the iust shall liue by his faith, yea in deede, the proude man is as hee that transgres∣seth by wine, therefore shall he not en∣dure. A consideration of the excel∣lencie of Faith. If those thinges be recommended vn∣to vs, either for their beginning, or for their excellent subiect, or for their great effects: what thing is more recommen∣dable than faith, because it cōmeth from the Lorde, which doeth inspire it by his holy spirite, seeing that it is founded vp∣on the infallible, euerlasting, and most mightie worde of God,Cor 4. which is migh∣tie to saluation to all beleeuers,Rom. 1. and that it maketh the soule to liue, who through the perceiuing of her sinnes, and the wrath of God, would die a thousande times a day: who also should be in con∣tinuall vnquietnesse, hauing no peace,
neither yet rest, if it were not assured and bounde to quiet faith, who reposeth it selfe in God, and suffereth him to doe his will being assured of his wisedome and goodnesse, and that all miseries are but as cloudes passing away: as the He∣brewes haue a worde greatly signifying, which is in the 18. Psalme and 19. ver. E D, which signifieth Calamitie, either a mist or a cloude? As a good olde man sayde in the time of the great persecutor Iulian the Apostata, That it was but as a cloude which would quickely vanish or passe away. Therefore let vs holde fast the ancre of our hope,Heb. 6. ca. 19 staying vs vp∣on the Lorde. For as the Harcubuziers neuer shoote a good shot, neither can well aime at their marke, if they shake their Harcubuzes heere and there with∣out stay or rest: euen so likewise, we doe nothing that is woorth, neither at any time shoote at a true marke if we do not beholde God aright, constantly awai∣ting of him the promise of deliuerance. A consideration vpon the Temptations of the faithfull, taken out of the 4. Chap. of S. Matthewe vpon the Temptations of Iesus Christ.
THe Lorde hath truely borne our mi∣series, and was tempted in all things, sinne excepted: but in this sort, as he o∣uercame the temptor. And as we see the maisters of fence, will play themselues and skirmish before their scholars, to teach them the nimblenesse and readi∣nesse in drawing their blowes: euen so Christ was willing to be tempted in this worlde, that we might consider by this temptation, how we must ouercome Sa∣than, and that being truly exercised, we may not cower down or bend to temp∣tations. For there be many particularities that must bee noted vppon this deede. Christ was tēpted a litle after Baptisme. Euen so often shall those bee assaulted with many & diuers temptations, which shall receiue the guiftes of God, or that shalbe receiued into the Church. First, because that the graces which God gi∣ueth vs are to strengthen vs: then after, temptations are giuen vnto vs, to holde ourselues in modestie, that wee should not lift vp our selues aboue the guiftes of the Lorde:2. Cor. 12. Thirdly to make knowen, how we haue truely forsaken Sathan, & that we be made strong through his di∣uine strength.
True it is, that wee ought not to put vpon our selues temptations: So was our Lorde lead by the spirite into the wilder∣nesse: Therefore when God bringeth vs thither, then is it that wee should lay a∣broade our faith. But I pray you, let vs marke howe willingly the diuell temp∣teth the faith of man,Temptati∣on by the bellie. by foode and by the bellie. Euen so Eue was tempted. For although it was through pride and presumption, yet was the occasion ta∣ken by the sight of a delectable fruit. Therefore this is a warning to vs, to haue for suspect the counsels of the bel∣lie, and so not to be subiect to the foode or diet, because that God will destroie both the meat and the bellie. In like ma∣ner let vs consider,1. Cor. 6.13. how that the diuell a∣waiteth vpon vs with afflictions, especi∣ally, where neede is, and then when hee presupposeth to flatter vs with manie thinges. For sometimes it seemeth, that the children of GOD doe lose their la∣bour and paines in seruing of God, as it is saide in Malachie,Malac. 3. v. 14. representing heere this tēptation, how that for great things, the worlde giueth cleane contrarie. But let vs remember, that the worlde is as a smoke, and all the goods of the
earth, as a shadowe: and that onely God is our all, and mans true wealth. Then let vs not hunger after earthly goods, neither worldly honors: but let vs hun∣ger and thirst after righteousnesse: for so are we exhorted in the 5. of S. Matthew: for it is that which is most necessarie for vs poore sinners. Nowe this true righ∣teousnesse is reueiled vnto vs in the gos∣pell. For what purpose serued those goods or riches vnto the euill rich man, with his great prouision, seeing that in the ende, his want grewe greater: for did not he esteeme much more a droppe of water if hee might haue got it, to haue cooled his thirst? Let vs acknowledge that our life, our foode, and that of our children, dependeth not of the worlde, but of the grace and fauour of God: and to withstand the diuell and all his temp∣tations,The ar∣mour of Christians. let vs daily arme vs, with this true bucklar of Gods woorde, as Iesus Christ did: neither let vs goe into fight without armour. Let vs exercise, and stirre vp our selues in the scriptures that wee may be able to incounter and make head against the diuel: for he him∣selfe doth alleage the scripture, and ther∣fore if we be not well seene or exercised
therein, he will trouble and ouercome vs. Let vs also pray this good God, that he will giue vs his holy spirite, which is the true teacher and expounder of the scripture: the which the deuill in not being able to haue, hath nothing but the barcke of the scripture, and is easie to be vanquished and ouercome, by those which are caried by the spirite of God. Of prayer, which is one of the effectes of Faith. 7. Chap. of S. Matthewe Aske, and it shalbe giuen you: seeke, and you shall finde: knocke, and it shall be opened. PRAYER. O Lorde GOD, seeing that thou thy selfe doest offer thy selfe vnto vs with so great kindenesse and sweetenes, suffer vs not, that we be negligent in cal∣ling vpon thee, neither permit, that we become restiffe in asking, when as thou art readie to giue. And to this effect, graunt vs grace to feele howe much thy helpe is necessarie for vs, euen for vs poore creatures, which haue not, neither possesse we any thing, but of thy fauour
and grace: and yet neither that which we haue, can prosper without thy blessing. We therefore, namely do acknowledge the great wantes and defectes which are in vs, in respect of those heauenly things. For neither faith, hope, nor charitie, can be in vs, vnlesse thou doe store vs with thy light,S. Iames. 1. and helpe our infirmities. For all good guiftes doe come from aboue, from thee thou father of light. Where∣fore should we not then call vpon thee, hauing thy promises? Or wherfore shold wee goe elsewhere, synce that in thee is all aboundance and sufficiencie? Giue vs grace O good God, not onely to pray to thee, but also to knocke at thy gate. It seemeth that it is somtimes shut against vs, and that thou hast no care ouer vs: as in verie deede the gates of grace were shut vp against vs because of sinne. But we haue our mediator Iesus Christ, at thy right hande, who hath promised to open it vnto vs. Open therefore vnto thy children that knocke: thou which hast giuen thy deere sonne for vs, giue vs faith that may bring vs vnto thee, and also hope, which may entertaine vs in faith, and giue vs in summe that which thou knowest farre better than we, to be
necessarie for vs, for thy sonne Iesus Christes sake. A notable sentence, to hold the faithfull in a true confession of Gods name, taken out of the 10. Chap. of S. Matthew. FEare ye not them which kil the bodie, but are not able to kill the soule: But rather feare him, which is able to de∣stroy both the Soule and bodie in hell. Whosoeuer therefore shall confesse me before men, him will I confesse also before my father which is in heauen. But whosoeuer shal denie me before men, I will denie him before my father which is in heauen. MEDITATION. THe feare of death is the thing that dooth most turne away men from our Lorde,The feare of death. and from the imbracing of his worde. For Iesus Christ shew∣eth what the follie of man is in this: we feare death, for feare of losing life. But man cannot take away life, where∣fore are they then afraid? For life is in the hand of God, who hath giuen it.
But if it be a question of sorrowes and tormentes, then death is no more it that we feare:Iob. 5. for they are the sorrowes wherein we be borne, as the bird to flie, and those which we ought patientlie to beare, euen as a valiant souldier beareth certaine woundes, to be after crowned. As concerning the bodie, that is put in the graue, we doe not thinke it lost, because that nothing is lost but the in∣fection and corruption, the which wee doe desire to loose. And our bodies shall rise againe glorious bodies. For it is euē as when a man melteth a great masse or lumpe of Copper to make a faire I∣mage of. Truelie then is not the cop∣per lost, but fined and set in honour. Moreouer, as a good martyr named Simeon said, (of whome is spoken in the Ecclesiasticall historie, of Sozomene in his second booke and 10. Chap.) Seeing that of nature we be alreadie mortall: wherefore should we not account this for a great honor, when we die for Iesus Christ? But our Lord dooth yet vse an other Argument. If we feare death, then wee must feare the great danger that is euerlasting. And that is, wherein God may cast those downe headlong that of∣fend
him. This is the secōd death where∣of is spoken in the Apocalyps in the 21. Chap. ver. 8. Blessed are they that feare God more than men. Alas, he asketh no great thing of vs: to be short, he requi∣reth, but that we trust in him, and that we confesse his name. The Elementes,Psal. 16. the earth, the trees, and the riuers doe declare his glorie:Psal. 148. so doe ye byrdes on the braunches. Wherefore is it, that man which is created vnto his like∣nesse will not praise the Lord? And when we doe confesse him, it dooth serue him but for little: marrie it dooth bring much vnto vs, that he confesseth vs in his glorie, and that hee acknowledgeth vs to bee his. Now, what pitie is it, when so manie men shew themselues so slacke, and vnfaithfull vnto the Lord, some forsaking him and openlie blas∣pheming him, other some being asha∣med of him, hauing the knowledge of the trueth hidden and shut vp in them? Moreouer,Titus. 1.16. how manie be there which confesse him by their tongues, and denie him in their heartes and wic∣ked life? O Lord therefore open our lippes, and make cleane our heartes, so as wee
may beleeue with the heart, and con∣fesse with the mouth, that we be not confounded in this great comming of thy sonne Iesus Christ: but rather that we may haue his honor, to be reknow∣ledged, and also declared thy children, and heires of thy kingdome. That through faith we goe vnto Christ, and what the yoke of the faithful is, 11. Chap. of S. Matthew. COme vnto me all ye that are wearie & laden, and I will ease you. Take my yoke vppon you, and learne of me, that I am meeke and lowlie in heart, and yee shall finde rest vnto your soules, for my yoke is easie, and my burthen is light. A consideration vppon the said text. BLessed are those saith Dauid, in the 119. Psalme that are vpright in their way, and walke in the lawe of the Lord. But what? Where is the man that wal∣keth vprightlie? For they are all gone out of the way, taking damnable pathes: as it is said in the 14. Psalme: and in such sort through infidelitie and disobedience
are men turned away from the Lord, and walke after vanitie: they are turned a∣gaine into their course, saith Ieremie in the 8. Chap. as the horse that rusheth in∣to the battell. Now see the sonne of God, who so gratiouslie dooth call you againe, and bid you to come againe vnto him. For so is there none other meane to finde salua∣tion & life: Or whither shall we goe els∣where? He hath the wordes of euerla∣sting life, as S. Peter saith in the 6. Chap. of S. Iohn. But it is not with the feete of the bodie that we goe to him: it is the soule that ought to march forwardes, and to drawe neere to him by faith, who dooth approch so neere vnto him, that it ioyneth and buindeth vs with him: yea, it dooth graft vs in him euen as the branches are grafted in a vine stock,Iohn. 15.2. that in him wee might haue good conscien∣ces, & bring forth fruites agreeable or pleasing vnto God. So might we then well say: O Lord, thou which doost call vs,Peter drawe vs if it please thee, vnto thee: drawe & turne our spirites & willes vnto thee. Be thou thy selfe ye Adamāt,Rom. 9. which drawest our heartes, more harder than
iron.Rom. 9. For alas, it is not in him that wil∣leth, nor in him that runneth, but in thee O God, that shewest mercie. And be∣cause thou pitiest not the proud & high-minded that feele not ye charge of their sinnes,Zacha. 3. which are more heauie than a great lumpe of lead; but shewest mer∣cie to the broken, contrite, and sorow∣full soule, and beholdest all those that doe grone vnder the burthen of their so∣rowfull sinnes: giue vs grace to humble our selues, that we may be exalted, and to feele our death, that thou maist quic∣ken and make vs a liue, & that O Lord, wee doe not despise or refuse thy yoke, seeing that it is an easie yoke, when as by thy spirit thou wilt guide vs, and by thy word gouern vs, giuing vs a daugh∣terly spirit, which is the spirit of adop∣tion, seeing also that to serue thee, is to raigne; to obay thee, is to rule and so to triumph ouer the diuell & sinne. This is not the fearefull yoke of the law, that threatened condemnation to all those which did not fulfill it. This is not the damnable yoke, wherewithall the sinners are wrapped in: whereof is spo∣ken in the 1. Chap. of Ieremies Lament. The yoke of my transgressions is bound
vppon my hand: they are wrapped and come vp vppon my necke: But Lord, who would refuse thy yoke, which is so easie, seeing it giueth rest vnto the soule, seeing it vnbindeth and riddeth vs out of the diuels yoke, and from the op∣pression, as it is said in thy Prophet Esai, 9. Chap. Therefore receaue againe vnto thee thy poore creatures, and bring vs O Lord, and gather vs together, as the poore straying sheepe, vnto that great shepheard Iesus Christ. Of the continuaunce which is required in the Christians, taken out of the 24. of S. Matthewe. IEsus aunswered and sayde vnto them, Take heede that no man deceiue you, for many shal come in my name, saying, I am Christ, & shall deceiue manie. And ye shal heare of wars & rumors of wars, see yt you be not troubled: for all these thinges must come to passe, but ye end is not yet. For Nation shal rise against Na∣tion, & Realme against Realme, & there shalbe pestilēce, & famin, & earthquakes in diuers places: and all these are but the beginninges of sorrowes. Then shall they deliuer you vp to be afflicted, and
shall kill you, and ye shalbe hated of all nations for my name sake. And then shal many be offended, and shall betraie one another. Furthermore manie false pro∣phetes shal arise and shall deceiue many, and because iniquitie shall be increased, the loue of many shall wax colde: but he that endureth to the ende, hee shall be saued. A MEDITATION vpon the same Text or place. The verie same we doe see in worldly affaires, that it is nothing to beginne, ex∣cept a man guide his enterprise vnto the full. And when a man freeth him∣selfe of one leape, he looketh not vnto the difficulties, but he resolueth to passe further. So sayth S. Cyprian in the 5. Epi∣stle of his first booke: Faith saueth vs not,Ad Furiam. to be receiued only once, but to be kept. For as S. Ierome writeth: Men seeke not the beginning of Christians, but the ende. S. Paule had ill begunne, but he ended well. Contrariwise, Iudas had a good beginning, but his ende was verie euill. Therefore it is a speciall gift of God to be able to holde out, and in
such sort to runne in this race,1. Cor. 9. as wee may be able to get the wager. For heere wee must beware of presumption: and in all humblenesse to aske of God, that he will make vs strong. Men doe see how S. Peter did make himselfe resolute: yet did the voyce of a chamber mayde astonie him. Beholde, what our weakenesse is. Besides that, it offereth vnto vs, fightings without, and feares within, as S. Paul declareth in the 7. Chap. of the 2. to the Corinthians, in such sort as there is no occasion to thinke well of ourselues,Philip. 4. and to resolue vs against such difficulties, & distrusting of ourselues,Rom. 16.20. vn∣lesse wee take courage and boldenesse in him, by whom wee may doe all, and that will also treade downe Sathan vnder our feete. Nowe to the ende that all may bee prepared to fight the good fight, and that to a holy perseueraunce, Iesus Christ hath foretolde vnto vs the Allarmes that wee shall haue: namely in the later daies, wher∣in the backeslidinges, reuoltinges and most daungerous temptations shall be seene. Hee foretelleth of the one side, that there shall be seducers, that shall haue faire out∣warde shewe, but will shewe themselues in the end robbers of the Church, preten∣ding reformation: as is seene howe the
Anabaptistes and Schwencfeldiens lamen∣ted the corruptions,Anabap∣tistes. maners, and offences which were in the Church, and of the mis∣using of those which did abuse the Gos∣pell, and therewith did not onely hatch vp in them an intollerable pride & presump∣tion: but also, strong errours, ouerthrow∣ing the foundations of faith and all policie. All this ought to make vs practise that, which is sayde in the 4. Chap. of the 1. Epi∣stle of S. Iohn: Deerely beloued, beleeue not euerie spirit, but trie the spirites, whe∣ther they are of God: for many false pro∣phets are gone out into the worlde. More∣ouer, good heede must bee taken therein, because that besides the manifest ydola∣ters, as the Papistes are, besides open here∣tikes, and blasphemers as the Arrians be, denying the true diuinitie of the sonne of God, and other like that are founde in the middest of the Church, which daily shall make diuisions, and will preferre their dis∣courses, as Oracles, willing yt men should beleeue them, as Gods word, and will de∣fend frowardly & obstinately their good∣lie interpretations, that rather than they will yeelde, they would set before the olde heresies, euen as it is to be seene in many, who stubbornely willing to defende the
opinion of Luther in the point of the sup∣per, which is altogether builded vpon the doctrine of Pope Nicolas, as Luther con∣fesseth it, in his great confession, haue in∣uented this strange doctrine of the vbiqui∣tie or the Alpresence of Christes bodie;Of the v∣biquitie. at∣tributing a bodie vnto Christ, which is through all, and inuisible, that is to say, which is not a bodie. Nowe many seeing these diuisions, would blame the doctrine of the Gospel, and take an occasion to mi∣stast the same. But hath not the Lorde fore∣tolde it? Were there not also diuisions a∣mongst ye Apostles? Ought this to keepe vs from going forwarde? No: for our faith is not builded vpon men: and further, when a man looketh neere thereunto, it is easie to trie the spirites, and we must praise the Doctors of the Church, which haue in them, those guiftes: and likewise acknow∣ledge their imperfections, and reade them with iudgement. As Luther himselfe;A warning by M. Lu∣ther. in the preface of his first Tome of his Latine workes, besought that men would reade his workes with pitie, iudgement, and discretion: and that men should remem∣ber him to bee an inraged Papist here∣tofore, and a poore Moonke, which could not see, and perfectlie comprehend
forthwith, all the pointes of religion. Also when one seeth the Church of God so assaulted within, by diuisions and here∣sies: without, with so cruell persecutions: it were enough to shake him, if he be not wel setled, & to make him thinke whether it were possible that this companie, which we call the Church, being so contempti∣ble and so subiect to great offences, be the Church of GOD or no: or at least, whether it bee possible yt God dooth loue it, laying it open to so manie euils. These are in deede the violent assaultes, which the faithfull dailie doe proue in this wret∣ched world, wherein one may see so ma∣nie contentions, and affections boyling with ambition, and pride, and so manie heartes more than frosen in matter of zeale and charitie. Wherefore if there be anie sentence now at this day to be consi∣dered, this is it: that he which shall con∣tinue to the end, shall be saued. For as Ie∣sus Christ speaketh in the 11. of S. Mat∣thew, Those that suffer once, and continue in their zeale, shall carie away the king∣dome of heauen. Therefore let vs not be fleeting children, and caried hither and thither by euerie puffe of doctrine through mans deceite; but followers of the trueth
with charitie, growing in Christ with loue, and aboue all other thinges holding sure our Catechisme, and the Articles of our Faith. Suffering afflictions patientlie,2. Timo. 2. see∣ing this word is certaine, that if we doe suffer with Christ, we shall raigne with him: considering also that this world wax∣eth olde as dooth a garment,2. Pet. 3. and that the Elementes shall melt with heate, and the earth shall be dissolued, let vs aspire vnto the kingdome which cannot be shaken, holding grace fast, by the which we may serue God, in reuerence, feare, and assu∣red hope, awaiting the great day of Christs comming. Other godlie places speaking of Faith. The 3. of S. Iohn. GOd hath so loued the world, that hee hath giuen his onelie Sonne, that who∣soeuer beleeueth in him should not pe∣rish, but haue euerlasting life. And he that beleeueth in him, shall not bee condem∣ned: but he that beleeueth not in him, is condemned alreadie, because he belee∣ued not in the name of the onelie sonne of God. The faithfull ought not to seeke but the glorie of God.
The 5. of S. Iohn the 44. ver. How can yee beleeue which receaue honor one of an other, and seeke not the honor that commeth of God alone? Places taken out of the Epistles of S. Paul out of the 1. Chap. of the Epistle to the Ephe∣sians. ver. 13. YEe are in Christ, hauing heard the word of trueth, euen the Gospell of your saluation, wherein also, after that ye be∣leeued, yee were sealed with the holie spirit of promise which is the earnest of our inheritance, vntill the redemption of the possession purchased vnto the praise of his glorie. Therefore also after that I heard of the faith, which yee haue in the Lorde Iesus, and loue towardes all the Saintes, I cease not to giue thankes for you in my prayers. The 1. of the Thessal. 1. Chap. Wee giue GOD thankes alwayes for you all, remembring your effectuall faith, and diligent loue, and of the patience of your hope in our Lord Iesus Christ, in the sight of God our Father, knowing beloued brethren, that ye are elect of God. For our
Gospell was not vnto you in word onely, but also in power and in the holy ghost, and in much assurance. The 2. to the Thessal. 1. Chap. Wee pray alwayes for you, that our God may make you woorthie of his cal∣ling, and fulfill all the good pleasures of his goodnesse, and the woorke of faith with power, that the name of our Lord Ie∣sus Christ may be glorified in you, and ye to him, according to the grace of our God, and of our Lord Iesus Christ. The 1. Epistle of S. Peter. 1. Chap. You are kept by the power of GOD through faith vnto saluation, which is pre∣pared to be shewed in the last time where∣in ye reioyce, though now for a season (if neede require) ye are in heauinesse, through manifold temptations: that the triall of your faith, being much more pre∣tious than Gold that perisheth, (though it be tryed with fire) might be found vnto your praise, and honor, and glorie at the appearing of Iesus Christ, whome you haue not seene and yet loue him. I beleeue in God. Heere followe certaine Meditations, and
prayers of one onelie true God, and of three persons in one substance or essence. CONSIDERATION. AS it is said in Athanasius Creede, the generall faith is that wee worship one God in one Trinitie, and one Trinitie in one vnitie. Let vs not confound the per∣sons, nor diuide the substance. For we must know God, as he reuealeth himselfe otherwise we should but woorship a fan∣tasie, in place of knowing and woorship∣ping the true God. Now the true God, in whome we doe onelie beleeue,Iohn. 7. and that is mans soueraigne good, (for this is life eternall that we know him) hath thus de∣clared himselfe in his word, and in his most excellent workes, that is to say, in that hee is one onelie true God in sub∣stance, as it is said in the 6. Chap. of the 5. booke of Moses, and in the 4. of the Ephesians, but in this one substance wee do acknowledge three persons subsisting, that is to say,1. Tim. 1. this onelie true God, which is the king of worldes, immortall, inuisi∣ble, wise onelie, onelie good, who ma∣nifesteth himselfe so, as we doe see one God maker of heauen and earth. And yet
all this, by his word, which word is not a sound in the aire, or a thing hauing be∣ginning: but was from the beginning with God, and was God, of whome is spoken in the 33. Psalme, and also in the first Chap. of S. Iohn. And afterward the holy spirit spread and mooued himselfe a∣boue the waters. For the spirit cannot sig∣nifie in this place the aire, or the winde, that was not yet created but is taken for a person subsistent. Afterwardes in the 1. Chap. of S. Marke, we doe see the sonne, which was baptised, the father bearing witnesse of the sonne: and the holy ghost comming downe vppon him. As it is also commaunded in the 28. of S. Matthew to baptise in the name of the father, the sonne, and the holy ghost. Now thinke it not to be a small thing, to acknowledge three persons in one diuine Essence. First of all, the Christians faith is so discerned from that of the Turkes, Iewes, and Pai∣nims, which doe not woorship the true God, not acknowledging him as he hath manifested himselfe. Secondlie, this know∣ledge guideth vs in our prayer and ser∣ueth vs as a great direction, because that we call vppon GOD, by Iesus Christ, in the partaking of the holy Ghost. Third∣lie
by this distinction of persons, wee doe euidētlie see the principall benefites of our God, beholding how the father, the sonne, and the holy ghost, haue wrought in our creation, and also how they doe worke in our redemption. The father sen∣deth the sonne, the sonne taketh humane nature, the holy Ghost is he through whose operation he is conceaued in the wombe of the virgin: This is he that is the comforter, which inspireth and sea∣leth in our heartes, the promises of God. Wherefore although that all people doe vaunt of the knowledge of God, yet so it is that there is not but the true Church, that knoweth God truelie euen as hee ma∣nifested himselfe. As it is said in the Psalme 147. He hath declared his wordes vnto Ia∣cob, and his statutes and iudgementes vn∣to Israel: Hee hath not so dealt with all Nations, neither hath he giuen vnto them to know his iudgementes. A praier concerning the Trinitie drawen out of S. Augustine his Booke of the priuate Meditatiō of the soule with God. 37. Chap. O Three Persons coequal, & coeternal, one God and true God, the father, the
sonne and the holy Ghost, which dwellest a lone in eternitie, and in the light not able to be come vnto: which hast laide the earth by thy power, and gouernest the worlde, by thy wisedome: Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God of Hostes, terrible and strong, iust and mercifull, wonderfull and louing, one onely GOD, and three persons, one sub∣stance and goodnesse: open vnto mee crying, the gates of righteousnesse, that being entered therein, I may praise thee O Lorde. O houshould father, great & rich, I poore begger doe knocke at thy gates: open vnto him that knocketh, thou that hast promised to open vnto those which will knocke. For O most mercifull father, the desires of my entrailes hungering after thy grace, do knocke at thy gates. All my desire is before thee, and my groning is not hid from thee. And thou O Lord turne not away thy face any more from me, nei∣ther in thine anger drawe thy selfe backe from thy seruant. Father of mercie heare the groning of thy pupill, and stretch forth vnto me thy helping hande to plucke mee out of the deepe waters, out of the lake of miserie, and out of the stinking puddle and myer, that I perish not in the sight of thy mercies and beholding the bowels of
thy clemencie: but that rather I may come euen vnto thee which art my God, to see the riches of thy kingdome, and to behold thy face, and to sing praises of thy holy name, vnto thee O God that doest woon∣ders, that from this time forwardes my heart may reioyce, through the onely re∣membraunce of thee, who lightnest my youth: despise not also mine olde age, but giue ioie vnto my bones, to make my yeeres reuiue, as those of an Aegle, that I may praise thee for euermore. A prayer vpon the same Argument. Euerlasting God, thou which with thy onely sonne, & the holy ghost art one on∣ly true GOD, and onely Lorde, seeing that it hath pleased thee to make knowen the secret of this glorious Trinitie vnto vs thy seruantes: giue vs grace, that alwaies acknowledging through one true and in∣tire confession, the propertie of the three persons, the vnitie of the substaunce, and the equalitie of the maiestie in one onely true God, wee may for euer worship, thee and that by this sure faith, wee may be de∣fended against all temptations. And as the Angels praise thee, & the powers do wor∣ship
thee, and all the armies of heauen doe magnifie thee, let vs thy poore creatures, haue this honour to be able to ioyne our songes, and our agreementes which this heauenly companie, to be agreeable and pleasing vnto thee. A prayer of S. Augustine out of the 32. Chap. of his Meditations. O God hee that would liue, it behoo∣ueth him to know thee: and he that would rule, he must first serue thee: he who would haue gladnesse in his heart, it behooueth him to praise thee. Wherefore, my Lorde I praise and worship thee with my lippes, with my soule, and with all the power that is within me. I also thanke thy clemencie and bountie, for all the goods that thou hast stored me withall. Vnto thee Lorde, that art the holie of holies, do I sing songs of praise: O Lorde, I will call vppon thee which art in three persons but one onely, and alone substance, beseeching thee, that it will please thee, to come vnto me and to make me a temple of thy glorie. I pray the father by the sonne: I pray the sonne: I pray the holy Ghost: that all vices may be farre off from me, and that all holy vertues
may be planted in me. O infinite God, of whom and by whom all thinges are visible and inuisible, that doest compasse thy workes without, and fillest them within; that couerest them from aboue, and bea∣rest them belowe; keepe mee that am the worke of thy handes which trust in thee, and haue none other confidence, but in thy mercie. Keepe me, before and behinde, heere and euerie where, nowe and euer, within and without, aboue and beneath: to be short, on all sides, that neither taken at vnwares, nor by ambushment of my e∣nemie I may be endamaged. Thou art the almightie God, the protector and defen∣der of all those that trust in thee, without whom nothing is sure, neither free from daunger. Thou art the true God, and there is none other God but thou alone, neither in heauen aboue, neither in the earth be∣lowe. Thou doest wonders without num∣ber. Therefore vnto thee doth appertaine praise, honour, and thankesgiuing. The Angels praise thee, the heauens also doe honour thee, as the creature is bounde to honour his maker, and the seruant his mai∣ster: euen so ought all flesh, and all soules to praise the holy and inseparable Tri∣nitie.
A prayer of S. Augustine out of the 33. Chap. of his Meditations. GEue me grace O Lorde, so long as I shalbe compassed about with this fraile bodie, that my soule may praise thee, that my tongue may blesse thee, and that all my bones may agree to speake of thee. Lorde, who is like vnto thee? Thou art the almightie God, whom we doe worshippe in three persons, and one diuine substance: the father, that neuer was begotten: the onely sonne of the father, and the holy Ghost, proceeding from both, the holie & inseparable trinitie: one almightie God: Thou Lorde, hast made vs strong and mightie, when as we were not: and when wee were lost through our offence, thou hast restored vs miraculously, through thy goodnesse. Therefore neuer suffer vs O Lorde, that we shew our selues vnthanke∣full, and to yeelde vs vnworthy of so many thy mercies: graunt rather good GOD to increase in vs faith, hope, and charitie. So by this thine accustomed grace, make that we may be stedfast in faith, apt to all good workes, that by thee we may come vnto euerlasting life, & that one day Lord seeing thy glorie such as it is, wee may
worship thy maiestie, singing vnto thee this song, Glorie be to the father, which hath created vs: glorie bee to the sonne, that hath redeemed vs: glorie bee to the holy ghost, that hath sanctified vs: glorie be vnto the most high and inseparable Trinitie, whose workes are inseparable and Empire euerlasting. Here followeth to the Articles of the Faith, The father almightie maker of heauen and earth. Of Gods almightie power. Of the making of all thinges, and of his diuine prouidence. Of Gods almightie power. TO the end that the knowledge of our God bee not acknowledged in the aire: and that we may see also, that they are good tokens, that wee should put our trust in him: it is written in these Articles of our faith, that in his word he is reuea∣led euen as well as by his workes, that we
might also so much the more discerne our selues from the people that doe not know him aright and truelie. Thererefore this is the verie proper gift of the Church, to know God such as he is, to wit in sub∣stance, and therewithall these three per∣sons, the Father, the Sonne, and the holy Ghost. And he who knoweth not the Fa∣ther, knoweth not the Sonne,Iohn. 14.11. and he that knoweth not the Sonne, knoweth not the Father. Now albeit that hee is also our Father, as we doe call him in the Lordes prayer: yet, be wee not, but the children of adoption, receaued and adopted,Psal.  for the loue of his onelie sonne, euerlasting, and eternallie engendred of the Father: in whome he taketh his good pleasure. Be∣hold, how God is here called Father: to shew vnto vs, that our onelie faith is buil∣ded on God alone. But this verie God, whome the Church woorshippeth, and in whome it beleeueth, is the Father,How God is manife∣sted. the sonne, and the holie ghost: the which God hath truelie shewed himselfe in the world by foure diuine workes, & most ex∣cellent aboue all, by the creation, by the redemption made of mankinde, by the as∣semblie and conseruation of the Church, and by the woonderfull giftes that God
did partake vnto this Church, giuing vn∣to her forgiuenesse of sinnes, and euer∣lasting life, in that she confessed the true God, so as by the meanes of this know∣ledge,Rom. 15. wee might say as S. Paul did in the 3.1. Cor. 3. Chap. of the first Epistle to the Corinth. that all thinges are ours, because that we be vnto Christ, as Christ is vnto God, who is the father of our Lord Iesus Christ, as S. Paul manie times calleth him. Now is he called also Almightie, and thus lifted vp aboue all creatures, and a∣boue the Gods of the Gentiles, and their Idols,Psal. 115. that haue handes and cannot touch, Eyes and cannot see: But our God that hath his throne in heauen, dooth what him pleaseth. And as concerning vs poore creatures, we know not to make, alas, one slippe of grasse, and there is none that with all his care & industrie can adde one cubite vnto his stature or height.Mat. 6. This is then for you, to woorship and to feare the almightie, that hath power ouer heauen, ouer earth, ouer bodies, ouer soules, goods, children, and ouer all that which is vnto vs,Psal. 149. ouer kinges, ouer the prowdest prin∣ces, yea to buind them in chaines, when it shall please him to vse his iudgementes, and to bring them to nothing. Lift not vp
your hornes on high, saith Dauid, in the 75. Psalme, for it is GOD that is your Iudge, who lifteth vp, and setteth downe as it pleaseth him. How was it that hee tamed Pharao? How did he put downe Nabuchadonozer, whome he made to feede with beastes for seuen yeeres space? And this it is, as Iob speaketh in the 21. Chap. Against the wicked shall griefe of minde and trouble be strengthened, because hee hath stretched forth his hand against the Almightie.Esai. 33. And how should man helpe himselfe before his face, that is as a con∣suming fire? Who is he, that would abide in conti∣nuall burninges? See wee not the moun∣taines leape and tremble before him, as it is said, in the 19. of Exodus, and in the 68. Psalme? But what say I, the mountaines? Yea, the verie diuels are constrained to tremble,Iames. 2.19 knowing and feeling that there is a God. Therefore, what blockishnesse is this, what hardnesse, what mischiefe, that man shall sometimes be so froward, and presumptuous, that hee, as it were, would spite the Lord? Euen as men may see enough therein, who despise his threat∣ninges, and doe sooner feare earthlie man, that is with all his glorie, but as a
flower and grasse, than the Almightie, before whose face the fearce and foming Sea, the hard rockes, and the earth al∣so doe quake and tremble: as wee doe reade in the 114. Psalme. Wherefore let vs remember, euen all the daies of our life, that which was spoken vnto Abra∣ham in the 17. of Genesis: I am the God al∣mightie, walke thou before mee. And I pray you, what better Maister could we finde, than him who hath all abundance in himselfe, and yt may doe all yt he will? For his power is ioyned with trueth & righte∣ousnesse. He can doe that which he will, but hee will not anie thing sauing that which is agreeable to his trueth and righ∣teousnesse.Iohn. 10. Wee ought to haue remem∣brance, namelie in our afflictions, of this Almightinesse of the Lord, and that none can take away his hand frō vs: When God nourisheth, sustaineth, and preserueth his, not onelie by ordinarie meanes, but also, by woonderfull meanes, when it pleaseth him, as he shewed, when he di∣uided the Sea, to make his people to passe through: conducting them with a clow∣die Pillar, yea & a fierie Pillar, giuing thē Manna, and so manie other his woonder∣ful benefites,1. Cor. 2. and singular woorkes as one
may yet dailie marke. Therefore blessed are we, whose faith is not builded on the wisedome of man, but on the power of GOD. But Owe thrise yea foure times vnhappie, if wee doe not trust in the almighty, but doubt in his pro∣mises. For that which is harde before our eies shall it therefore bee harde before the eies, of the euerlasting himselfe? Like as he speaketh in the 8. Chap. of the prophet Za∣charie, and as it is also saide in the 18. Chap. of S. Luke, Those thinges that are vnpossi∣ble to men, are possible, yea, and verie ea∣sie vnto our God: For as Dauid sayth in the 33. Psalme, That which he spake, is; and that which he commandeth is established: he scattereth the counsell of the people,Esay. 2.22. his counsell remaineth fast, and sure. O then sayth he the people are blessed, whose God is the Lorde: and the people whome hee hath chosen for his heritage. Cease therefore from man that is nothing, neither let vs be affraide of them so much, which are but a vapour and whose breath is in the nostrels, in such sort as stop their no∣strels, and they die. And let vs worshippe and reuerence that almightie God, putting all our trust and confidence in him.
Maker of heauen and earth. Of the creation and prouidence of God. CONSIDERATION. Amongest other titles that are attributed vnto the Lorde our God to knowe him, and to discerne him from false Gods, this is, that he is the Creator, as we see. Esaie 40. Chapter. WHo hath measured the waters in his fist, and counted heauen with a spanne, and comprehended the dust of the earth in a measure, and weighed the mountaines in a weight, and the hilles in a ballance? Who hath instructed the spirite of the Lorde, or was his counseller, or taught him? All nations before him are no∣thing. To whom nowe will ye liken mee, that I should be like him sayeth the holie one? Lift vp your eies on hie, and beholde who hath created these thinges and bring∣eth out their armies by number, & calleth them all by names? By the greatnesse of his power and mightie strength, nothing faileth. Why sayest thou O Iacob, and spea∣kest thou O Israell, My way is hid from the Lorde, and my iudgement is passed ouer
of my God? Knowest thou not, and hast thou not hard that the euerlasting GOD hath created the endes of the earth? Hee neither fainteth, nor is wearie: there is no searching of his vnderstanding. And in the 10. of Ieremie, it is written in the Chaldie tongue, that the superstitious Chal∣dies might vnderstande it. Thus shal you say vnto them, the Gods that haue not made the heauens and the earth, shall perish from the earth, & from vnder these heauens. This is he who hath made the earth by his power, and established the worlde by his wisedome, and hath stretched out the heauen by his discretion. He giueth by his voice the multitude of waters in heauen, & causeth the cloudes to ascende from the endes of the earth: he turneth lightninges to raine, and bringeth foorth the winde out of his treasures. Euerie man is a beast, by his owne knowledge. Euerie founder is confoun∣ded by the grauen Image: for his melting is but falsehoode, and there is no breath in him. They are vanitie and workes of errors,
in the time of their visitation they shall pe∣rish. The portion of Iacob is not like vnto them: for he is the maker of all thinges. To create.This therefore is proper to our God, to create, that is to say, to giue to all thinges beginning, and to make to be, that which was not: and to bring foorth of nothing, some thing. Euen as S. Paule sayeth in the 4. Chap. to the Romanes, Hee giueth life vnto the dead, and calleth those thinges which be not as though they were, And in the 11. of the same Epistle: For of him, through him, and for him, are all thinges: to him be glorie for euer and euer.Creation a worke of the Trini∣tie. And because, the creation is a worke of all the Trinitie as heere before it was alreadie de∣clared, it is saide in the 1. Chap. to the Co∣lossi. that in Christ all thinges were created, to wit, by him and for him. For that which is called in the 15. vers. the first borne of all creatures, is not as if the euerlasting sonne of God, had beginning, and were numbred amongst the creatures. For ac∣cording as it is after sayd in the 17. vers. he is before all thinges, and through him all thinges consist: But he is called first borne, not as if we should say that he was created, but to shewe his prerogatiue and domina∣tion,
howe he is the beginning and head of all thinges. Nowe must we not heere giue place to the curious speculations of the flesh,That the worlde hath had a beginning. and of the Philosophers, amongst whom, some of them haue thought that the worlde was eternall as theThese Philoso∣phers had ye name of studying as they went about or walked. Peripaticiens, and others haue thought that it was made by chaunce or aduenture, as the Epicurians: the one sort disputing, how it was possible that of no∣thing all thinges should haue beene made, indeuouring to measure the infinite power of the deuinitie, according to their idle dis∣course, through wāt of knowing his force, and the strength and vertue of his worde. Therefore we must with faith beleeue that which the vnderstanding cannot compre∣hende, as it is saide in the 21. Chap. of the Epistle to the Hebrewes: Through faith we vnderstande, that the worlde was ordained by the word of God: so that the thinges which we see, are not made of thinges which did appeare. For wee haue verie plaine places of the creation in the scrip∣ture: as also there is no historie so antient from the first beginning of all thinges, as that which we haue in the first booke of Moses: there say I, doe wee reade in the first Chap. That in the beginning God cre∣ated
heauen and the earth,Genes. 1. the sea and all things that are in them. He created by his word Of nothing, The spreading out or fir∣mamēt which he calleth the heauen & the earth. Of the earth, The beastes and after∣wardes man. The waters, Which hee maketh to bring forth fishes. Out of mans bodie, he tooke and created the woman. It is likewise spoken in the 33. Psalme, and in the 16. of the Prouerbs of the creati∣on; The Lorde hath made all thinges for himselfe, yea the wicked for the day of ca∣lamitie: not that God hath made the euill, for as it is saide in the 1. of Genes. All that he had made was verie good. But hee would shewe the wisedome of the Lorde, which turned the malice of the wicked vnto his glorie. Also in the 89. Psalme. O Lorde God of hostes who is like vn∣to
thee, which art a mightie Lorde, and thy trueth is about thee? Thou rulest the raging of the sea; when the waues thereof arise, thou stillest them. The heauens are thine, the earth is thine also, thou hast laide the foundation of the worlde and all that therein is. Thou hast created the north and the south. And in the 45. of Esay. I haue made the earth and created man vpon it. I whose handes haue spread out the heauens, and haue euen commaunded all their armies. Also in the 1. Chap. of S. Paules Epistles vn∣to the Colossians. By him were all thinges created, which are in heauen & which are in earth, thinges visible and thinges vnuisible, whether they be Thrones, or Dominions, or Principali∣ties, or Powers. It appeareth by this place, that when it was spoken in the 1. ver. and the 1. Chap. of Genes. howe God created heauen and earth,Creation of Angels. we must comprehende there also the creations of the Angelles. But as Athanasius sayeth in his questions vnto Antiochus: Moses wold not willingly speake much of Angels in the beginning
of his historie, then knowing the supersti∣tion and curiousnesse of the Iewes, where of after (the Church being more aduaun∣ced) was spoken of by the prophetes and Apostles. Also mention is made in the first of the Hebrewes of the creatiō: by the sonne hath God made the worldes. Thou Lorde in the beginning hast established the earth, and the heauens are the worke of thine handes. The crea∣tures of God are good.Nowe must we knowe, that God is not the onely creator of all thinges: but also all that which he hath created as it procee∣ded from him, is good, as it is saide in the 1. Chap. of Genes. and in the 4. Chap. of the 1. Epistle to Timoth. But the creatures in part are turned away from God, as the wic∣ked Angelles that haue not kept their be∣ginning, as it is sayde in the Epistle of Iude. And in speaking lies they spake of their ve∣rie owne, not according to their first crea∣tion: man was also lead away, by the olde serpent, which is the Diuell, as wee doe reade in the 3. of Genes. and in the 12. of the Apocalyps. The creatures which in part had beene created for man, hauing sinned, were subiect to vanitie, as it is saide in the 8. to the Romanes: and the earth was cur∣sed,
as may be seene in the third of Genes. Men also greatlie abused the creatures,Abuse of the crea∣tures. of Iron, and steele to murther: of wine, and of other meates, and foode, & so of manie o∣ther creatures, the which wee ought to haue receaued as Gods giftes,1. Cor. 10. and to vse them with all reuerence and vnto the glorie of the creator. For so ought the creature be vnto vs as a booke, as a cer∣taine Aegiptiā Eremit named Anthonie, of whome is spoken in the 8. booke of the tripartite historie and the 1. Chap. saith, that the Cloister of this whole world was a goodlie booke, wherein there is as many leaues as there are creatures, and wherein a man might with great pleasure reade, yea and dailie reade againe and learne to know God, who sheweth his name great and woonderfull in this great and large world as Dauid singeth in the 8. Psalme, & S. Augustine in the 21. Chap. of his priuate Meditation. O Lorde how great and woonderfull shall the riches be,S. Augu∣stines prayer. which thou preparest for those that loue thee, in the true coun∣trie and euerlasting kingdome, when as we shall see thee face to face? For if thou doost vnto vs so manie good turnes in this world which is but a prison, and doost
shew vs so manie excellent thinges: what wilt thou doe then, when wee shall bee in thy Pallace? Graunt vnto vs there∣fore grace O Lord to aspire vnto this hap∣pinesse, that eye hath not seene, neither eare heard, and that mans tongue cannot expresse. But the wise man dooth well exhort vs in the 12. Chap. of Eccles. to remember our maker, before the dayes of aduersitie come. In the meane time, men for the most part care not at all, as the Lord complay∣neth in the 5. Chap. of Ieremie: Feare ye not me saith the Lord? Or will yee not be a∣fraid at my presence, which haue placed the sand for the boundes of the Sea, by the perpetuall decree that it cannot passe it: and though the waues thereof rage, yet can they not preuaile: though they roare, yet cannot they passe ouer it? But this people hath an vnfaithfull and a rebellious heart, they are departed and gone. For they haue not said in their heart, Let vs now feare the Lorde our GOD, that giueth raine, both earlie and late in due season, hee reserueth vnto vs the appointed weekes of the Haruest.Gene. 6. Notwithstanding it appeareth, that the world was not created for the wicked:
for so soone as all fleshe had corrupted his way, God sent a floud vpon the earth. And as Dauid saith in the 37: Psalme. That the wicked and vngodlie shall bee roo∣ted out, and the godly shall inherit the land. For they shall possesse all thinges in God. The Philosophers, and others haue true∣lie considered the creatures of God, and haue commended them: yet notwithstan∣ding they haue strayed to all vanitie, more woorshipping the creatures,Rom. 1.25. than the creator, not seeing how these visible signes ought to guide vs vnto a conside∣ration of inuisible thinges. For when wee doe see anie faire peece of worke: this maketh vs to inquire after the woorke∣man that wrought it: euen so ought a man to inquire after the Lord. Furthermore, this world, how faire soeuer it is, is a bondman, and sigheth awaiting the deli∣uerance of the sonnes of God. How much more ought we to aspire vnto heauenlie thinges, because that wee tread the earth vnder our feete, to shew vnto vs how that man ought to make but little ac∣count of earthlie thinges, but ought ra∣ther to haue his conuersation in heauen,Philip. 3.20. where as our head is preparing a place
for vs. Of Gods prouidence. NOw, if God had onelie created the world, and that hee did not gouerne it, dispose and maintaine it, with all her partes, he should not bee the almightie, but a halfe God. This is because, when as one speaketh of the creation. It is ne∣cessarie alwayes to ioyne dailie the do∣ctrine of the prouidence of God, as also the Scripture dooth, with the woonder∣full disposition of all thinges which are in this whole world. For hauing made his woorke, especial∣lie man, which is as the head of his worke, he did not there set him and leaue him: but wrought with the Sonne, and the ho∣lie Ghost, dailie blessing, multiplying, preseruing, restoring, and disposing all thinges to his glorie, and the saluation of his elect, as it dooth appeare by these pla∣ces and examples that follow. The 28. of Iob. God daily woorketh. The windes, the raine, The thū∣ders.God beholdeth the endes of the world, and seeth all that is vnder heauen: To make the waight of the windes, and to weigh the waters by measure: To make a decree for the raine, and a
way for the lightnings of the thunders. The 37. of Iob. God thundereth maruelouslie with his voyce: he worketh great thinges which we know not. For hee saith to the Snow,The snow. be thou vp∣pon the earth: likewise vnto the small raine, and to the great raine of his power with the force thereof hee shutteth vp e∣uerie man,Men. that all men may know his woorke. At the breath of God the frost is giuē,Frost. and the bredth of the waters is made nar∣rowe. The brightnesse commeth out of the North:Brightnes. the praise thereof is to God which is terrible. The 22. Psalme. It is thou that diddest drawe me out of the wombe, and thou giuest me hope euen at my Mothers brestes. I was cast vppon thee, euen from the wombe, thou art my God, from my mo∣thers bellie. All the 107. Psalme is full of testimonies of his diuine prouidence, where amongest all o∣ther thinges it is said,
Seamen.And those that goe downe into the sea in shippes, and occupie by the great wa∣ters: they see the woorkes of the Lord, & his woonders in the deepe. For he commaundeth and raiseth stor∣mie winde, and it lifteth vp the waues thereof. Whē they crie vnto the Lord in their trouble, he turneth the storme to calme, so that the waues thereof be still. When they are quieted they are glad, and hee bringeth them vnto the hauen where they would be. He turneth the floudes into a wilder∣nesse,Wilder∣nesse. and the springes of water into drie∣nesse, And a fruitfull land into barrennesse, for the wickednesse of them that dwell therein. Againe, he turneth the wildernesse into pooles of water, & the drie land into wa∣ter springes: And there he placeth the hungrie, and they build a citie to dwell in, Fieldes. Vines.And sowe the fieldes, and plant vine∣yardes, which bring forth fruitful in∣crease: For he blesseth them and they multi∣plie exceedinglie, and he diminisheth not
their Cattell.Cattel. Againe men are diminished, & brought lowe by oppression, euill and sorrowe. He powreth contempt vppon princes,Princes. and causeth them to erre in desert places out of the way. Yet he raiseth vp the poore out of mi∣serie,The poore and maketh them families like a flock of sheepe. The righteous shall see it, and reioyce, and all iniquitie shall stop her mouth. Who is wise, that he may obserue these thinges? For they shall vnderstand the lo∣uing kindenesse of the Lorde. Out of the Psal. 147. Great is our Lorde and great is his power: his wisedome is infinite. The Lord relieueth the meeke, and a∣baseth the wicked to the ground. Sing vnto the Lord with praise: sing vppon the Harpe vnto our God which co∣uereth the heauen with clowdes, and pre∣pareth raine for the earth, and maketh the grasse to growe on the mountaines. He giueth to beastes their foode,The yong Rauens. and to ye yong Rauens that crie. O Ierusalē praise the Lord: praise thy God O Sion: for hee
hath made the barres of thy gates strong, and hath blessed thy children within thee. Peace.He setteth peace in thy borders, and sa∣tisfieth thee with the flower of wheate. The 21. of the Prouerbes. The heart of kinges.The kings heart is in ye hand of the Lord, as the riuers of waters: he turneth it whi∣ther soeuer it pleaseth him. Euerie way of man is right in his owne eyes: but the Lord pondereth the heartes. The 45. of Esai. God hath not alone∣ly created but dispo∣seth also.Behold what the Lord saith (that crea∣ted heauen, God himselfe that formed the earth, and made it: he that prepared it he created it not in vaine: hee formed it to be inhabited) I am the Lord, and there is not other. I am the Lord, and there is none other. I forme the light, and create darknes: I make peace, and create euill: I the Lord doe all these thinges. Yee heauens send the dewe from a∣boue, and let the clowdes droppe downe righteousnesse: Let the earth open, and let saluation and iustice growe forth: Let it bring thē forth together, I the Lord haue created them. Wo be vnto him that striueth with his
maker: the Potsheard with the Pot∣sherdes of the earth: shall the clay say vn∣to him that fashioneth it: What makest thou? Or thy woorke hath no handes. Wo vnto him that saith vnto his fa∣ther: What hast thou begotten? Or to his Mother, What hast thou brought forth? Thus saith the Lorde GOD, The holie one of Israell: and his maker Aske me of thinges to come concerning my sonnes, and concerning the woorkes of mine handes. Commaund you me, I haue made the earth and created man vp∣pon it: I, whose handes haue spread out the heauens: I haue euen commaunded all their armie. The 54. of Esai. Behold I haue created the Smith that bloweth the coles in the fire,Wherfore the armies of the eni∣mies are not to bee feared. and him that bringeth forth an instrumēt for his worke. I haue created the destroyer to destroy. But all the weapons that are made against thee shall not prosper. The 3. of Amos. A trumpet shall be blowen in the citie, and the people shall not be afraid.Aduersity. O what euill shalbe in the citie and the Lorde hath not doone it, to visite their sinnes: for ad∣uersities are great paines, to punish the
euill and guiltie man and the faultes of men. The 6. Chap. of S. Matthewe. The fouls.Beholde the foules of the heauen: for they sowe not, neither reape, nor carie in∣to barnes: yet your heauenly father feedeth them. Are ye not much better than they? Which of you by taking care is able to ad one cubite vnto his stature? And why care ye for rayment?The lilies of the fields. Learne howe the lilies of the fielde doe growe: they labour not, nei∣ther spinne. Yet I say vnto you, that euen Salomon in al his glorie was not arayed like one of these. Wherefore if God so cloth the grasse of the fielde which is to day, and to mo∣rowe is cast into the ouen: shall hee not much more doe vnto you, O yee of litle faith? The 10. Chap. of S. Matthewe. Sparowes.Are not two Sparowes solde for a far∣thing, and one of them shall not fall on the ground without your father? Yea and all the hayres of your heades are numbred. Feare ye not therfore, ye are of more value than many Sparowes. Our steps, our going, and com∣ming.The 4. Chap. of the Epistle of S. Iames. Go to nowe yee that say, to day or to morowe, we will goe into such a citie, and
continue there a yeare, and buy and sell & get gaine, and yet you cannot tell what shalbe to morowe. For what is your life? It is euen a vapour that appeareth for a li∣tle time, and afterwarde vanisheth away. For that we ought to say, if the Lord will, and if we liue, we will do this or that. Certaine prayers taken out of the Scripture grounded vpon the doctrine of the proui∣dence of God: taken out of the 93. Psalme, and digested in forme and manner of a prayer. OVr Lorde and God: although it see∣meth that the diuell ruleth at his plea∣sure in this wretched worlde, and that the wicked and vngodly doe those thinges, that vnto them seeme to bee good: yet so it is, that we doe acknowledge and con∣fesse thee to be the true raygning God and king of all kinges, who hast made fast the worlde by thy power, and hast clothed it with an inuincible strength. And so is it as easie for thee to appease and make calme the raging of the sea, and the most greatest riuers, to whom thou hast also giuen their boundes: so shall it be as easie, when it shall please thee to still and appease the
stormes and tempestes that we do behold in these daies, and to tame the furie of the enemies. But graunt vs grace O heauenly father, that among so many stormes wee may stay ourselues vpon thy holy and vn∣doubted witnesses, that wee haue in thy worde, that we may remaine constant in all thy seruices and in thy house, vntill that thou hast drawen vs out of the waues of this worlde, to guide vs vnto the blessed and happie life, and vnto the hauen of sal∣uation. So be it. A prayer grounded vpon Gods prouidence. O Lorde our God, thou God of ven∣geance, and iudge of the earth, if euer it were time, that thou shouldest shewe thy selfe clearely displaying thy iudgementes vpon thine aduersaries, and vpon thy peo∣ple thy mercies, nowe it is O Lorde, that thy children of so long time haue beene, and are oppressed by the conspirators of Antichrist, yea massakers and murtherers, yea with more horrible disloyaltie and crueltie, than euer man sawe: in such sort O Lorde, as it maketh the wicked to lift vp themselues and waxe proude, as if wee were vtterly vndone, and as if there were
no God in heauen that cared for his poore Church. And moreouer O God, the long time and the greatnesse of these afflictions, would make vs a thousande thousande times lose courage, were it not, that wee should be more than brutish, if we did not assure ourselues that thou seest our mise∣ries, and vnderstandest our sorowes and mourneful complaintes: thou Lord, which hast made the eye, and planted the eare of man: yea thou great God, by whom wee liue, and haue our mouing and being: to be short, thou which hast gouerned this whole worlde, by thy so great wisedome, from the beginning of the worlde, chastice these people and make them know and see thy iudgementes. It is the remembraunce of thy so great workes, and of thy proui∣dence, which comforteth vs, and causeth vs to haue patience in our afflictions: see∣ing that it is certaine, that thou shuttest vp our teares in thy barrels, & keepest all our bones that not one of thē is broken. There∣fore O Lorde, thou shalt be our defence, for thy helping hande hath gathered vs to∣gether, euer since we came forth of our mo∣thers wombe, and shalt be the rocke of our trust for euer more, who knowest well to rewarde both in place and time vnto our
enemies, their outrage, & to destroy them through their owne malice. A prayer taken out of the 26. of Esaie vpon the same matter concerning the prouidence of God. TRust ye in the Lorde for euer more: for the Lorde is strong for euer: for he will bring downe them that dwell on high the high citie hee will abase, euen vnto the grounde will he cast it downe, and bring it vnto dust. The foote shal tread it downe, euen the feete of the poore, and the steps of the needie. The way of the iust is righte∣ousnesse: thou wilt make equall the righ∣teous path of the iust. Also wee O Lorde haue awaited for thee in the way of thy iudgementes, the desire of our soule is in thy name, and to the remembrance of thee, with my soule haue I desired thee in the night, and in my spirite within mee will I seeke thee in the morning: for seeing thy iudgementes are in the earth, the inhabi∣tance of the worlde shall learne righteous∣nesse. But yet, let mercy bee shewed vnto the wicked, and he will not learne righte∣ousnesse: in the lande of vprightnesse, will he doe wickedly, and will not beholde the
maiestie of our Lorde. O Lorde they will not consider thy hie hande: but they shall see it, and be confounded with the zeale of the people, and the fire of thine enemies shall deuour them. Lord vnto vs thou wilt ordaine Peace, for thou also hast wrought all our workes for vs. Goodly warninges grounded vpon Gods proui∣dence, that the mother made vnto her se∣uen sonnes executed by Antiochus, taken out of the 2. Booke of the Machabees and the 7. Chap. THe mother did valiantly exhort euerie one of her seuen sonnes, saying: I can not tell howe you came into my wombe: for I neither gaue you breath nor life. It is not I that set in order the members of your bodie but doubtlesse the creator, of the worlde, which formed the birth of man, and founde out the beginning of all thinges, will also of his owne mercie giue you breath and life againe, as ye nowe re∣garde not your owne selues for his name sake. The Apostles prayer vpon the same matter out of the 4. Chap. of the Actes.
O Lorde thou art the God which hast made the heauen and the earth, the sea and all thinges that are in them, which by the mouth of thy seruant Dauid hast sayd, why did the Gentiles rage, and the people ima∣gine vaine thinges? The Kings of the earth assembled, and the rulers came together a∣gainst the Lorde, and against his Christ. For doubtlesse against thine holy sonne Ie∣sus, whom thou haddest annointed, both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gen∣tiles and the people of Israell gathered thē selues together, to doe whatsoeuer thine hande and thy counsel had determined be∣fore to be done. And nowe O Lorde, be∣holde their threatninges, and graunt vnto thy seruantes with all boldenes to speake thy worde. Certaine goodly examples of Gods prouidence, turning away the enterprises of the wicked & helping his, taken forth of Gene. the 50. Chap. IOseph being solde by his brethren: and seeing thē to haue some remorse of con∣science after his fathers death, sayde thus vnto them. Feare not, for am not I vnder God? whē
ye thought euill against me, God disposed it to good, that hee might bring to passe, as it is this day, and saue much people aliue. Behold how in one selfesame thing the worke of man is euill and that of Gods both good and holie: the disloyaltie of Iosephes Brethren was euill and to bee re∣proued. But as S. Augustine saith, our God is so mightie and good, that hee would ne∣uer suffer euill to happen, if he were not the almightie, and that hee cannot turne it vnto good. And let vs marke therefore, what S. Augustine saith elsewhere of the same, that is to wit, that the iudgementes of God may well sometimes be hidden, but the vniust neuer. An other example taken out of the 1. Chap. of Exodus. ANd Pharao said vnto his people, Let vs worke wiselie against the children of Israel, least they multiplie, & it come to passe, that if there bee warre, they ioyne themselues altogether vnto our enemies, and fight against vs and get them out of the land.
A Prayer or Meditation. O euerliuing and almightie God, who is he therefore that shall feare mans enter∣prises? Pharao wrought well: and his people did agree with him. They be∣stowed & imploied all their wisdomes to∣gether. And wherewith was it, that they had so great a feare? What was it, that gaue so many torments vnto their mindes & spirites? It was, O mightie God, these poore people that were captiue: certainely thou art great in the middest of thy peo∣ple. For thy children all together poore and litle, that be in the world, are terrible vnto the wicked, because that they leane and stay vndoutedlie vpon thy strength: Herode trembled hearing of a childe that was borne at Bethelem. Therefore a mise∣rable man, a miserable people, a miserable kingdome which hath none other strēgth, but vpon his owne arme and vpon their owne counsell. The wicked haue great∣craft to consult subtilitie to woorke de∣ceites, and are subtle and presumptu∣ous: But all this O Lord, is nothing be∣fore thy face, but a great heape of smoke, the which, the higher it ascendeth, the more it vanisheth away. On the other
part, thy people walking in their simpli∣citie, are afflicted, and lie open to manie wronges. But thou redressest them by thy mightie hand, euen in such sort, that as the seede dying in the earth bringeth forth greater abundance of fruite: euen so dooth thy Church increase and waxe fruitfull vnder the crosse: by meanes of the deawe of thy grace: In such manner, as neither the hote sonne, nor ye cold moone, nor any other difficulties can bee hurtfull vnto thy children. Seeing then O eternall God, yt against thee there is no power nor, deceipt, & that in thee we haue our strēgth and wisedome: graunt vs grace that wee feare nothing but thee: neither put our trust in any but in thee: and that wee bost not ourselues but in thee, through thy son Iesus Christ. So be it. An other example of Gods fatherly care of his people in their neede, out of Exodus the 3. Chap. ANd the Lorde sayde vnto them, I haue surely seene the trouble of my people, which are in Egypt, and haue heard their crie, because of their taske-maisters: for I knowe their sorowe, and am come downe
to deliuer them out of the hande of the Egyptians. A prayer necessarie in these daies. O Lord how great wrong haue we, when as we doe not thinke that thou doest see vs in all our afflictions, and that thou art farre from vs, as the world is perswa∣ded, that thou hast no care or keepe ouer vs. For albeit, thou be great, yet despise thou not thy little ones: And although that thou art a glorious God, yet cast not away those that are in affliction and sor∣row: And albeit that thou art a spirituall substance, yet thou hast eyes to see, that is to say, a woonderfull prouidence, the which dooth not alonelie beholde, but dooth gouerne also the whole world. Thou hast thy eares open of mercie and pitie, to vnderstand the prayers and cry∣inges of thy people. Thou hast thy handes of strength and might to helpe vs. Thou hast the feete to come downe swift∣lie: that is to witte, the readinesse of thy force and good will, which thou in neede makest vs to know. Now if thou hast had anie pitie of thy people Israel in AEgypt: yea, if the great exaction and violence,
which was doone vnto them hath mooued thee to prouide for them: it is now surelie time, that thou helpe thy Church. Their malice, vnfaithfulnes, extortion, and ty∣rannie, are they not come vnto their ful∣nesse? Was AEgypt then more cruell than those which rise vp in these daies a∣gainst thy people? Was Pharao more har∣dened in heart, than our aduersaries? No Lord, for he strae to driue away Moses: But these thirst without ceasing after our bloud, & doe dailie inuent new torments and cruelties. O God almightie, where∣fore wilt thou (who hast the heartes of kinges in thy handes) not bend them, as thou hast doone Manasses, and that of Nabuchadonezer, and therein doe thy iust iudgementes, and shewe thy glorie & thy power against the tyrantes, as thou hast doone in times past against Pha∣rao? And as concerning thy people, O Lord, draw them out of AEgypt, & out of this harder bondage, than to make Brick: since that it is seruile vnto Antichrist and Idolatrie. Make soft their heartes that are reuolted: giue them grace to knowe the horrible captiuitie, where they be vn∣der Antichrist, that neither the Garlick, nor the Onyons, neither anie other stinc∣king
pleasures of the flesh and world, doe let them or stay them, to come out of AEgypt to seeke out the places, wherein thou art both purelie serued and honored, to call vppon thee in purenesse and since∣ritie of faith, and in rest and peace of con∣science through our Lord thy Sonne Ie∣sus Christ. A consideration of this place, which is in the 13. of Exodus, of the Clowdie Pillar in the day, and of the fierie Pillar by night, that departed not from the people. O How blessed are the people of whom GOD is the Lorde: for as hee is the creator and Lord ouer all things, so dooth he make all his creatures, to serue as a cō∣moditie vnto his chosen. May it be possi∣ble to see a more greater care, prouidēce, & louingnesse, than that which the Lorde hath shewed vnto his people, who did not alonelie withdrawe thē from a wret∣ched and hard bondage that was too much, but was also a guide, and an assi∣stant, and companion likewise, with his signes and witnesses so woonderfull of his fauour? Where then are they, which alwaies are afraid to want, and to bee de∣stitute,
if they passe out of AEgypt, and giue ouer their idolatrie and therefore looke dailie backe, as Lots wife did? Yea, but some will say, wee doe see no more these signes, neither the fierie Pil∣lar, nor the cloudie pillar. Truelie they cannot bee seene to them whose eyes the brightnesse of worldlie honors doe lighten, and that haue no more sight than the back, or mouldiwarpe. But the children of GOD doe sufficientlie ac∣knowledge the most certaine testimo∣nies of Gods presence. For haue they neede of the clowdie pillar? The holie Ghost shall refresh them, and yeelde them contented, and strengthen them in the middest of temptations. GOD is also their fierie wall, which dailie kinde∣leth in them faith, and other giftes most excellent: In summe,The pil∣lars which doe guide and com∣fort vs in world. the children of God doe not require more fairer and goodlier Pillars, to guide them and comfort them in the pilgrimage of this vaile of mise∣rie, than the pure Ministerie of Gods word and the pure administration of his holie Sacramentes. Hauing this Pillar of trueth, they are certaine to bee surelie grounded, to bee well guided, and to be well directed in all
their liues: when as the people of the world shall be drowned in the puddle of Idolatrie, with Pharao, and with the plea∣sures of this present world that shall pe∣rish. Why should we then be so vnhap∣pie, to forsake the pure seruice of our God, and to doe seruice vnto strange Gods, euē like as it is said in the 32. of Deuteronomie, that we would recompence the Lord? Is he not our father? our possessour? hath he not made and fashioned vs? Let vs consi∣der saith hee in the same place, the yeares of so manie generations, and how his peo∣ple are the portion of the Lord, hee hath found them in the wildernesse and hath guided them, he hath giuen them vnder∣standing and hath kept them as the apple of his eye: and as the Egle soaring ouer his little ones, and beareth them. The Lord alone hath led them, and with him there was no strange God. An other example of Gods prouidence in the historie of Manna, that is written in the 16. Chap. of Exodus. ANd the children of Israel said, O that we had dyed by the hand of the Lord,
in the land of AEgypt when wee sate by the flesh pots, whē we did eate bread our bellies full: For ye haue brought vs out in∣to this wildernesse to kill this whole cōpa∣nie with Famine. Then said the Lord vnto Moses, Behold, I will cause bread to raine from heauen to you, and the people shall goe out and gather that that is suf∣ficient for euerie day, that I may prooue them, whether they will walke in my wayes or no. But the sixt day they shall prepare that which they shal bring home, and it shall bee twise as much as they ga∣ther dailie. Also out of the 8. Chap. of Deuteronomie. THe Lord humbled thee,Where∣fore Man∣na was gi∣uen. and made thee hungrie, & fed thee with Manna which thou knewest not, neither did thy fathers know it, that he might teach thee ye man liueth not by bread onelie, but by euerie word that proceedeth out of the mouth of the Lord dooth a man liue. Thy raiment waxed not olde vppon thee, neither did thy foote swell these 40. yeares. Know therefore in thine heart, that as a man nurtureth his Sonne, so the Lorde
thy God nurtureth thee. Beware that thou forget not the Lorde thy God, not keeping his commaunde∣mentes, and his lawes, and his ordinan∣ces, which I commaund thee this day: Least when thou hast eaten and filled thy selfe, and hast built goodlie houses, and dwelt therein, And thy beastes and thy sheepe are increased, and thy siluer and thy gold is multiplied, and all that thou hast is increa∣sed: then thine heart bee lifted vp. Be∣ware thou say not in thy heart, my power and the strength of mine owne hand, hath prepared me this abundance. But remember the Lord thy God: For it is hee which giueth thee power to get substance, &c. A Meditation vppon the aforesaid places. IF there bee anie thing that greeueth man in the worlde, it is the care of those thinges which doe concerne the bellie, which is ye God of manie, as S. Paul in the 3. to the Philip. dooth witnesse: and not∣withstanding, wee doe see, that it is Gods blessing, which dooth nourish vs, and not the bread: Forasmuch as earth could
not bring forth, but thornes and thistles, vnlesse that GOD did put thereunto his blessing. And although the earth should bring forth and carie the best fruites of the world. What is it, if GOD did not giue thereunto his strength and his propertie to nourish vs? As men doe see, when that the Lord is angrie, he breaketh the staffe of bread, and causeth that a man is not satis∣fied, yea although hee doe eate much. Moreouer wee doe see that this almightie God is not tyed vnto mans meanes: But that he can helpe his extraordinarilie, and sustaine them, against all meanes. For God would surelie,Second causes. that man should bee holpen of the second causes, but not that man should rest therein, and wholie to de∣pend of them. Seeing then that we can∣not tell what to doe, therefore wee bee bound to lift vp our eyes vnto the Lord, euen as did this good king Iosaphat: as we doe reade in the 20. Chap. of the 2. booke of the Chronicles. A PRAYER. LOrd GOD and father: because that our nourishment dependeth not of meates, but of thy pure grace and espe∣ciall prouidence, and that thou hast so
manie woonderfull meanes to helpe vs:Psal. 24. Graunt vs grace, that wee may rest our selues vppon thy prouidence, and good∣nesse,Psal. 23. of the which thou art the God, vn∣to whome dooth appertaine the earth, and the contentes thereof, who art also our true shepheard, that alone feedest the soule and the bodie, in such wise, as the great and mightie Lyons of the world, being hungrie and thirstie, as it is said in the 34. Psalme. Thou giuest vn∣to thy children foode, and fillest them. As also those that gathered vp store of Man∣na, had no more than they which gathe∣red but little. Nowe as they did the sixt day gather the double of Manna, for the day of rest, graunt vs grace in this last age, which is, as the fixt day, to prepare our selues vnto this great and last day of rest, that wee may gather vp a good quantitie of this spiri∣tuall Manna, and that thou wouldest so furnish vs,. Kinges. 19 for the euerlasting life, where∣with, wee being sustained as Elias was in times past, by the foode which was presented vnto him by the Angell, wee may come vnto thy holy mountaine, and vnto thy blessed rest.
A conclusion vppon the Article of the Creation. A PRAYER. O Lord euerlasting and almightie God, that hast made mee when I was no∣thing, and canst bring me againe to no∣thing, when it pleaseth thee: graunt vnto me thy poore creature grace truelie to ac∣knowledge my maker, and rightlie to vse those creatures, whome thou hast subie∣cted, and giuen vnto men, to reuerence thee as my Lorde, and to depend vppon thy prouidence, & assure me in thy power:Esai. 45. And as thou hast taken vs from our Mo∣thers wombe,Rom. 8. so graunt to beare vs also in our old age, and to maintaine vs,Prouer. 3. Hebr. 12. being a father and sauiour vnto vs for euermore. And furthermore O good God, because that all thinges doe helpe to good to those that loue thee,Psal. 73. Psal. 37. and whome thou doest cherish thou doost fatherlie correct: giue me grace patientlie to beare thy correcti∣ons, and voutsafe to giue me vnderstan∣ding in the sanctuarie of thy holy word, to comprehend and vnderstand the wret∣ched issue, that the wicked shall haue, to the end I may neuer beare malice vnto them. Graunt me therefore the patience
and constancie that Dauid had, when as Semei cursed him: that I may acknow∣ledge in summe, that there happeneth ne∣uer anie thing without thy ordinance: and that which thou doost appoint, is for the wealth and health of thy children. Moreouer, O Lord, forsomuch as we are not fit and apt of our selues, to thinke any good thing:2. Cor. 3. inspire me thy poore crea∣ture dailie, direct and guide my steps, my thoughtes, speaches and dooinges: and aboue all suffer not that I doe forget thee, thou that art my creator:Galen. de vsu. par∣tium. for as much as the heathens themselues, onelie seeing & acknowledging the wonderfull worke, whereof our bodies are made, and the vse of all the partes of the same, yea, the least whereof haue beene constrained to praise and magnifie thy mightie name. Therefore vnto thee O God bee eternall praise and glorie for euermore. So be it. Errors contrarie vnto this Article. The Epicures, and all those which thinke that this world is gouerned by ad∣uenture. The Manichees, and others which doe establish more beginninges than one.
They which doe not acknowledge Gods prouidence in all thinges, & in the verie same thinges which seeme strange and little. They which put their trust in anie o∣ther, than in one onelie God. They which thinke how GOD hath created some thing to ill purpose, and thinke to make it more perfect than God. They which abuse the creatures of God, not vsing them to his glorie, and with thankesgiuing. And in Iesus Christ his onelie sonne our Lord. CONSIDERATION. THe creation of the whole world, to∣gether ioyned with a prouidence, iustice and woonderfull wisdome, is the first witnesse, that the Articles of our beleefe doe set downe vnto
vs of our GOD, to the end to reuerence him, and to trust in him. Yet followeth there an other more wonderfull witnesse, and that presenteth together vnto vs a passing goodnesse and infinite power, that is to say the worke of our redemption. For to redeeme, and to quicken the creature that was lost, and to buie him of such a price, to wit, with the pretious bloud of Gods euerlasting sonne, and not to deliuer him onelie from bon∣dage, and death, but also to communi∣cate with him euerlasting life, this is so great a woorke, and so singular a bene∣fite, as no tongue can expresse, nor heart can sufficientlie comprehend it. Hence it is that God hath so loued the world, that hee hath giuen his onelie sonne, to the end that all those which beleeue in him, shall not perish, but haue euerlasting life. Man was therefore created, good & perfect as it is said in the 7. Chap. of Ec∣clesiastes: But he taried not in this happie estate: But following his owne inuen∣tions, and discourses, with the euill counsell of the Diuell, hee was so tur∣ned from his GOD and by this meanes cast headlong into destruction, as hee made himselfe and his posteritie guiltie of
death and euerlasting perdition.Rom. 6. For death, and all the thinges belonging vn∣to death, as are all kindes of aduersities, be the reward of sinne.Oseas. 13. Euen so commeth our destruction of our selues: For asmuch as man abusing his freewill, yeelded him∣selfe a slaue vnto the diuell, and by this meanes drew vppon him the iust ven∣geance of the euerlasting God. O What a change and pitious alteration was this: when as the Image of God was so defaced in man, and that of so noble a creature, hee was become vile, miserable, and full of sinne and filth? For albeit, that man was fashioned of the dust of the earth, yet so was it that the spirit of God, if hee had not sinned, had swallowed vp that which was of the earth, corruptible, and had freed man of his weakenesse and putrefa∣ction. But hauing chased away from him, Gods good spirit,Gene. 6. hee remaineth a foule lumpe of flesh, and is not now of his na∣ture but dust and clay, and his heart from his infancie altogether froward. For although that there is but one GOD, in whome wee doe beleeue,Iesus Christ the matter that our faith one∣lie loo∣keth on as S. Ierome verie well saith vppon the 4. of the Ephe. Yet so is it that the sonne, which is the second person of the diuinitie, who
is one substance is the true obiect and foundation of our faith, and not with∣out cause.Iohn. 14.9. For first in beleeuing in him, we doe beleeue in God: because that hee is God blessed for euermore, as S. Paul saith in the 9. of the Romans. Secondlie, hee it is, of whome Moses, the Prophetes, and the Psalmes haue spo∣ken, and vnto whome they haue directed vs: as it is also said in the 24. of S. Luke. Thirdlie, it is hee that the father like∣wise willeth that wee heare, and that is the subsisting Image of the inuisible GOD,Colos. 1. Hebr. 1. the brightnesse of his glorie, and the ingraued signe and marke of his person: by whome also, the father hath spoken and doone all thinges. Lastlie, this is the person that hath taken our nature: and hee who is called Imma∣nuel, God with vs, and GOD mani∣fested in the flesh. So that this is the cause why S. Paul saith, that no man can lay anie other foundation, than that which is laid, to wit, Iesus Christ, and that hee woulde not know anie thing saue Christ: Not that hee would not likewise know and vnderstand the Father and the holie Ghost, but be∣cause that in him man knoweth all,1. Cor. 3.
both the Father and the holie Ghost as it is said in the first Epistle to the Corinthians and second Chapter,1. Cor.  And that without him, wee can, neither know the Father, neither haue accesse vnto this light not able to bee come vnto, vnlesse the Sonne giue vs both assurance and accesse: Euen as Saint Paul teacheth vs in the 2.Encridion▪ 5. Chap. Chap. to the Ephesians. ver. 18. And as Saint Au∣gustine yet teacheth, how manie here∣tiques doe speake of Iesus Christ, vaun∣ting them of his knowledge: yet so it is, that when a man dooth neerelie looke therein it is found, that they haue onelie but the name, and that they are but woordes without trueth and effect. For where as they will neither speake, neither yet vnderstand, or teach as it behooueth concerning his Per∣son: or teach anie euill concerning his Office: So is this a proper gift vnto the Christian Church, to knowe with a wholesome knowledge, the eternall and liuing GOD, that is to say,Iohn. 17. to know him in Iesus Christ, and to call vppon him, through him, holding Christ for verie God and verie man, & the onelie mediator betweene God and man.
That which thing neither the Turkes, nei∣ther the Iewes, neither Papistes, nor ma∣nie heretickes doe, as in deede the diuell dooth labour to raise vp false Prophetes in all times, to darken, and vtterlie to o∣uerthrowe the knowledge of Iesus Christ on the earth, who is as a signe or a marke, against which euerie man gainsayeth, euen as Simeon did speake in the 2. of S. Luke. But against such kinde of people, wee must retaine these Maximes or rules.Maximes. First, that such a mediatour and sauiour, is necessarie for vs to haue, which was ve∣rie God, and verie man, and who parta∣keth to the end, (to bee a meane) with the natures of those that were at strife, in such sort as hee might ouercome sinne, death, and the diuell, and giue men ac∣cesse vnto the light not able to be come vnto.Ephe. 1. It was necessarie, that hee should bee stronger than all creatures, to witte, God, and the welbeloued of the Father, vnto whome wee might be fit and agree∣able: As of the other side, it was meete that the same flesh which had bin ouer∣come,Rom. 8. Esai 53. should haue the victorie, and that the flesh which had sinned might beare the paine the which also hee hath char∣ged vppon him: in short that to the end
to haue pitie on vs,Hebr. 2. he might partake with our flesh, & with our miseries, to the end to make vs his brethren, & so to carrie into heauen, our nature, as ye gage of our hope, euen as hee hath giuen vnto vs a counter∣pledge, that is to say, the holie Ghost: as Tertullian hath written verie well, spea∣king of the resurrection and of the flesh of Christ. When therefore we say, that we doe beleeue in Iesus Christ, it is not, as if we had manie kindes of faith. For there is but one God, and one faith:Ephe. 4. and the father and the sonne are one, as it is said in 10. of S. Iohn.To be∣leeue in Iesus Christ. But this is that wee beleeue in God according as he hath shewed him∣selfe, in the making of heauen and earth, as also in his holie word, that beareth re∣cord vnto vs, how that the euerlasting Sonne of God Iesus Christ, taking our nature in the fulnesse of time, to bee the mediator of the couenant of our God, the two natures diuine and humane being knitte together, hee hath reconciled vs to God his father, when by his merite, and obedience, and through his strength and incomprehensible goodnesse hee hath by his death and passion made satisfaction for our sinnes, and by his resurrection ouercome death and hell, and is ascen∣ded
into heauē, to make intercessiō for vs, so as for ye loue of him, god loueth vs, & his righteousnes is imputed to vs as if it were our owne. God holdeth vs for righteous, & so be we sure yt neither ye law hath power to condemne vs, against which we doe set this perfect righteousnes of Iesus Christ: neither death nor ye diuel shall astonie vs, for seeing ye Christ for vs hath ouercome ye world, death & all yt which was feareful. In summe, we doe beleeue, not onelie the historie of ye birth, passion, death, resurre∣ction & ascensiō of Iesus Christ: But euerie faithful persō dooth apply all ye benefits yt he hath gotten for vs, assuring & comfor∣ting thēselues, in his holie & louelie pro∣mises, & doe lay hold vppon him as ye true Iesus, sauing & blessing vs, & hauing pre∣pared an euerlasting saluation and a most blessed life by his pretious blould. For what we shall be, dooth not yet appeare: but we doe know yt when he shal appeare,V;s;e. 13. we shal be like vnto him, & shall see him as he is. And whosoeuer hath this hope in him is purified, as he is also pure. This say I is ye first Maxime, & first foundation, yt we doe set against the heretikes, and others, which know not Iesus Christ true God & true man. It is ye wonderful coūsel of God,
which hath prouided for vs such a media∣tor and sauiour as did behooue vs to haue. Secondlie, we doe set against them the a∣greemēt of ye old & new Testamēt, cōcer∣ning Iesus Christ: where wee see how yt which ye ceremonies of the law had figu∣red, was fulfilled in Christ: as it is said in ye Epistle to ye Hebrewes:1. Iohn. 3. for so dooth S. Paul witnesse & proue, how Christ was the end of ye law. Lastlie we doe set against thē the effects of this healthful knowledge, which giueth peace, & rest of minde vnto ye faith∣ful: So as manie haue suffered death with great ioy, for ye name of Iesus. Now on the other part, ye issue of those who haue blas∣phemed, as Cerinthus, Manes, Arrius, and others, were alwayes miserable. And how soeuer it were, yt manie times ye heresies of those which haue striuen, either cōcerning ye true diuine nature; or cōcerning ye veri∣tie of Christs human nature, were for a sea∣son maintained by violence & impudēcie, God in this giuing place vnto his iudge∣ments, & prouing ye constācie of his owne: yet, it is cleare by the Ecclesiasticall Hi∣stories, how the Lord hath made his trueth dailie to triumph, yea & that manie times by weake Organes, & hath confounded ye wise men of ye world, preseruing his trueth, & the Articles of our faith, euen vnto
our time: whereof wee ought to thanke this good God, without ceasing, and to beseech him, yt he will likewise haue pitie also of our posteritie, & suffer them to in∣ioy this wholesome treasure, not suffering that for our vnthankfulnesse, and by the damnable, and ambitious contentions of certaine wicked members, that at this day doe trouble the Churches: the trueth should be darkened, and this good Sauiour Iesus, true GOD and true man should bee misknowne to the world. Now to the end, that euerie faithfull man might so much the better tast and learne, what this sonne of God is, and what foundation wee haue to beleeue in him, and to hold him for our mediator: the holie scripture dooth attribute two names chieflie vnto him:Iesus Christ. whereof the one is Iesus, and the other is Christ: to the end that wee may note and marke in the first, what is the person of the sonne of God, to witte, that he is God the saui∣our, and the word of life, manifested in the flesh: In the second his Office: because that Christ dooth signifie as much as Mes∣sias: that is to say, Annointed, which was annointed for vs, destined and ordained of the father, and dwelling in him in all
fulnesse, that hee should bee our king, our sacrificer, and our Prophet and Doctor. As concerning ye first name, which is Ie∣sus, it was giuen to ye Lord, not by aduen∣ture: but by a heauēlie Oracle declared by ye Angel vnto Ioseph, as wee doe reade in the 1. Chap. of S. Matthew: Thou shalt call his name Iesus: For hee shall saue his people from their sinnes. The like was said vnto Marie, euen as wee doe reade in the first Chap. of S. Luke: Thou shalt beare a sonne, and thou shalt call his name Iesus: Hee shall be great, and shall bee called the sonne of the most highest, and the Lorde God shall giue vnto him the Throne of his father Dauid, and the An∣gell speaking vnto the shepheardes in the 2. Chap. of S. Luke, interpreting this word of Iesus, said: Behold, I bring you tidings of great ioy, that shall be to all the people: That is, that vnto you is borne this day in the Citie of Dauid a sauiour which is Christ the Lord. Moreouer, Irenaeus, a right auncient Doctor in the second booke against the heresies of Valentinus, witnesseth, that the Greekes called him Soter, that which the scripture called Iesus, that is to say, Sa∣uiour.
The which Iesus Christ was in deed, straightway declared himselfe so to bee healing the sicke, and raising vp the dead. Especiallie by this euerlasting saluation, and that saluation of the soules which hee hath gotten for vs: who is the true salua∣tion, of whome we ought to make recken∣ning of:8. Pet. 1.5. as S. Peter saith, that he should be fullie reuealed in the latter dayes. Now such a Sauiour was not Iosua how braue a Captaine soeuer hee was, ha∣uing this honour to conduct the people into the promised lande: Neither like∣wise Iehosuach the Sonne of Iosedec the high Priest, of whome the Prophet Za∣charie speaketh, that were but sim∣ple men, and haue doone nothing, but through borrowed strength: neither also were they other, but the shadowes of this great Iosua, and mightie Sauiour, that is Iesus Christ, the onelie true and euerla∣sting Sauiour, so as there is none other name, by the which a man may haue the grace of God,Actes. 4. or obtaine anie thing of him: or to come to ye most blessed life. It is this name, or rather this vertue and power, before whome, all knees ought to bowe, that are in heauen and on the earth. To be short, this is he, whome all tongues shall
confesse to be the Lord,Iesus Christ. vnto the glorie of God. Hee is the Lorde, because that the father hath brought all thinges in sub∣iection vnder him, to this person, I say,Hebr. 2. which is verie God and verie man. For hee is particularlie our Lord, because that he hath purchased vs vnto him, through his pretious bloudshedding, so as we be not vnto our selues,1. Cor. 6. but vnto him that hath bought vs. Therefore, he whome the Iewes haue crucified for enuie, him hath God raised and lifted vp, and hath made him Lord and Christ as it is said in the 2. Chap. of the Actes.Psal. 2. Col. 1. Let vs then re∣ioyce of such a Lord, who is the Lord and sauiour. Let vs willinglie doe seruice vnto such a Maister, who hath gotten vs by his pretious bloud, and deliuered vs from the power of darknesse, and euen so hath in deede made vs free. In him,Iohn. 8. it is easie for vs to ouercome the world, for he is greater than the world:Iohn 4. Yea in him is Sathan trod∣den vnder our feete, euen as S. Paul spea∣keth in the 16. of the Romans. Wherefore, let vs say with Esai in his 26. Chap. How∣soeuer it be O Lord yt other Lords besides thee haue ruled vs: yet wil we remember thee dailie, and thy name. For there is but one God and sauiour that is properlie
Iesus Christ: of whome is spoken in the 9. Chap. of Zacharie, and 9. ver. and in the 1. Chap. of the Epistle of S. Paul vnto Ti∣tus, ver. 3. and 4. O how happie are they, that doe put their trust in him, as it is said in the 2. Psalme, and that doe imbrace the sonne which is Christ, that is to say, the annointed of the liuing God, and doe not onelie acknowledge him with the mouth, but doe likewise suffer him to raigne in them by his word, and through his spirit, and seeking none other oblation than the euerlasting oblation,Heb. 10. which is of a perpe∣tuall efficacie and strength which he hath offered vnto his father on the Crosse once for all, as a perfect and euerlasting priest. But alas, whereto serueth this goodlie title of a Christian, if vice doe raigne in thee: if the flesh and the world maister thee: if thy soule will not suffer it to bee commaunded by the annointed Christ, and consecrated to raigne in vs here below by his grace, vntill such time as hee shall bring vs vnto the kingdome of his glorie? And whereto serueth it, to sing, to crie, & to roare out the Apostles Creed, as was doone in the Papacie, fince they seeke for other Maisters than Christ, and other sacrifices than his, persecuting with all ex∣tremitie,
those that doe hope and trust in him alone.Iesuites. But what shall we say of those which are ashamed at these daies to bee called Christians,Actes. 11. which is the auncient name of the disciples of Iesus Christ: and are not thus contented to haue part in the Lordes annointing, that he promised vnto vs by the holie spirit; but will also bouldlie sease vpon that name,1. Iohn. 2.20 that dooth belong to him onelie, inasmuch as hee is the alone sauiour, calling themselues Ie∣suites, as though they would outface all the rest of Christendome. A prayer to haue and to retaine the true knowledge of Iesus Christ. O Lord our God and father:Iohn. 17. forsomuch as this is eternall life, that wee doe know thee, and to know thee we cannot but in thy ingraued Image, and in thy sonne which was declared in the flesh: may it please thee to leade vs by thy holy spirit vnto the true knowledge of thy sonne, likewise giuing vnto vs such a re∣solution, as that wee may esteeme all things as dung,Philip. 3. in respect of the excellent knowledge of Iesus Christ. First of all, giue vs grace, O God, rightlie to feele and
vnderstand our necessitie, to wit, that wee ought to haue such a soueraine high priest as should be holy,Heb. 7. innocent, without spot, separated from sinner, which was very God and true man. Moreouer, O heauenly father, print liuely in our hearts, the know∣ledge & acknowledging of this thy woon∣derful charity, yea a loue & fauor so great, which thou hast shewed vnto vs poore sinners,Titus. 2. Titus. 3.5 making thy wholsome grace to ap∣peare in thy sonne Iesus Christ, and sauing vs, not through the workes that we should haue done, but by the onelie merit of the death, & passion of thy sonne Iesus Christ. O Lord: what grace, O what fauour, O what humblenesse is this, that the eternal sonne of the liuing God hath taken the forme of a seruant, & hath humbled him∣selfe, euen to die for vs miserable wret∣ches?Ephe 4.20. But aboue all, giue vs grace, to learn Christ aright, and not to be like vnto thē that liue vnorderlie, & doe abuse through a fleshlie libertie, this blessed & wholsome knowledge, which should rather drawe vs to follow his aime, to witte, yt by the same we might be humbled, & so cōfoun∣ded in our selues, in seeing how horrible and great our sinnes haue bin, as it beho∣ued vs to haue them bought againe by
so great a price, to the end wee should not esteeme and magnifie anie thing but thy bountie, and that all our ioie and glo∣rie might be in thee: In summe, that wee should cast our eyes vpon this good Iesus, in all our aduersities and miseries, aspiring vnto, eternall saluatiō, that he hath prepa∣red for vs, forsaking our selues, to liue vnto the praise of him who hath redeemed vs. O God doe not suffer poore Christen∣dome to bee brought backe againe into a bottomles pitte of darknes, and to be de∣priued from so wholsome a knoweledge, by this damnable sect of Arrians, the which, alas, would spring vp a fresh in the world, and who haue denyed the true diuinitie of Iesus: or through this mise∣rable heresie of the Martionites, Euti∣chians, and others, blotting out and vt∣terly frustrating the proprieties of the humane nature of the same thy deare sonne as much as lieth in them, shrowding them selues notwithstanding with the name of Euangelicall Doctors, O Lorde for the loue of thy name, and of our poore posterities, maintaine the trueth of these articles of our faith. Preserue and keepe the relieuers of thy Church, and giue vnto thē victorie against all assaultes of enimies,
for this great sauiour Iesus Christ his sake. So be it. Certaine notable places concerning Iesus Christ, drawen out of the scripture. Out of the 3. Chap. of Genesis. The Ser∣pent.After the fall of Adam and Eue, the Lord spake vnto Sathan, which is the auncient serpent, leading or tempting the world, as it is said in the 12. of the Apo∣calyps: I will put enmitie betweene thee and the woman, and betweene thy seede and her seede: Hee shall breake thine head, and thou shalt bruse his heele. The Chal∣die translatiō, or rather Paraphrase in stead of seede, putteth thy sonne, and her sonne: meaning by the sonne of the Ser∣pent, Antichrist: and by the sonne of the woman, the promised seede: By the same were the fathers comforted: and namelie S. Paul saith in the 3. to the Galat. that the promised seede was Christ. Out of the 49. of Genesis. The seed.The scepter shal not depart from Iudah, not a lawgiuer from betweene his feete,
vntill Shiloh come, and the people shal be gathered vnto him. Now the Chaldey Paraphrase, and the Targum Ierosolomite doe not onelie ex∣pound it of the Messias: but also the most learned of the Hebrewes are constrained so to doe. And in the same Chap. and the 18. ver. the good Patriarch Iacob saith: O Lorde I haue waited for thy salua∣tion. Thereupon writeth ye Targū of Ierusa∣lem: I doe not awaite for a saluation, saith Iacob, or a deliuerance from a Gedeon or from a Sampson, whose deliueraunces were temporall: But I doe awaite for that which the Messias shall bring. Out of the 18. Chap. of Deuteronomie. I wil raise vp vnto them saith the Lord vnto Moses a prophet, from among their brethren like vnto thee, and will put my wordes in his mouth, and hee shall speake vnto them all that I shall commaund him. This place cannot bee vnderstoode but of Christ: as also it is said by this occasion
in the 1. of S. Iohn and the 45. ver. how Moses hath written of Christ. And in the 3. of the Actes. S. Peter dooth also in the 22. ver. apply there this place vnto Iesus Christ. For albeit that GOD hath rai∣sed vp manie Prophets: Yet so it is, as it is said in the last Chap. of Deuteronomie, There arose not a Prophet in Israel like vn∣to Moses. So as a man cannot vnderstād the said place, but of Iesus Christ the lea∣der of his people, and true Prophet, by whome God hath spoken vnto them in these last times, as it is said in the 1. Chap. to the Hebrewes. Out of the 19. Chap. of Iob. I knowe well that my redeemer li∣ueth, & he shall stand the last on the earth. Out of the 2. Psalme. Why doe the Princes assemble toge∣ther against the Lorde and against his Christ? I haue ordained him king vppon Sion mine holie mountaine. I wil declare ye decree, that is, the Lord hath said vnto me, Thou art my sonne, this day haue I begot∣ten thee. Aske of me, and I shall giue thee the nations for thine inheritance, and the endes of the earth for thy possession. Now that this Psalme is properlie re∣ferred vnto Christ a man may plainelie see
it. First, because that he called him his e∣uerlasting begotten sonne, as it is expoun∣ded in the 1. of the Hebrewes: secondlie in the 11. ver. the same sonne is called Iehoua, and the kinges of the earth are exhorted to reuerence and imbrace him. Thirdlie yt his kingdome spreadeth forth it selfe euen vn∣to ye endes of ye earth, yt which a man can∣not vnderstand of ye kingdome of Dauid. Last of all, it is said, how they are blessed which haue their hope & trust in him: For as S. Paul speaketh in the 10. to ye Romans, such shall not bee confounded. Therefore the Apostes had reason to apply in the 2. of the Actes, this Psalme. vnto Christ. Out of the 8. Psalme. What is man that thou art so mindeful of him? & the sonne of man yt thou visitest him? For thou hast made him a little lower than God, & hast crowned him with glorie & honor. Thou hast made him to haue do∣minion ouer the workes of thine handes. Thou hast put all thinges vnder his feete. Howsoeuer it be that this place setteth out ye dignitie & excellēcie of ye first Adam: yet we see by ye 12. Chap. to ye Hebrewes, how this is applyed vnto the secōd Adam, yt is to say vnto Christ in whom our wret∣ched nature, yt was fallen frō his first glory,
was restored againe to honor in such sort as God hath no lesse shewed his woonder∣full goodnesse euen with aduantage in the restoring of man againe, as hee hath doone in the first creation. And as touching the Psalmes, we haue verie manie goodlie te∣stimonies of Iesus Christ: as of his death and passion in the 22. and 69. the which are alledged in the 27. of S. Matthew and in the 1. of the Actes, ver. 20. of the re∣surrection in the 16. Psalme, the which is alledged in the 2. of the Actes. Of his Ascensiō in the 68. Psalme that is alledged in the 4. Chap. to the Ephes. Of his Priesthood, in the 110. which is alledged in the 22. of S. Matthew: to prooue that hee is the sonne and Lorde of Dauid altogether, and in the 5. Chap. to the Hebrewes. Of the calling of the Gentiles, by the preaching of the Gospell, in the 19. Psal. and 72. which are alledged in the 10. of the Romans. Of the kingdome of Christ in the 2. and 67. Psalme. Out of the Prophet Isaie, who is by manie called the Euangelicall Prophet: And there∣fore S. Ambrose did exhort S. Augustine
before his conuersion, to read him diligent∣lie, thereby to giue vnto him taste of the grace of God, like as S Augustine doeth witnesse in the 9 booke of his Confessions. Out of the 7. of Isaiah. The Lorde himselfe will giue you a signe: beholde a virgine shall conceiue and beare a sonne, and shee shall call his name Immanuell. Of this it is spoken in the first of S. Matthew verse. 23. Out of the 9. of Isaiah. Vnto vs a childe is borne, & vnto vs a sonne is giuen: and the gouernement vp∣on his shoulders, and he shal call his name wonderfull, counseller, the mightie God, the euerlasting father, the prince of peace. His gouernement shalbe inlarged, and peace shall haue none ende there: he shall sit vpon the throne of Dauid and vp∣on his kingdome to order it,Luke. 1. and to sta∣blish it with iudgement. Thus is Iesus Christ described vnto vs ye sonne of Dauid,Rom. 1. according to the fleshe
in the 11. of Isaiah, and this is alledged in 13 of the Actes, and the 23. verse. There shall a twig come forth of the stocke of Iessay, and a branche shall in∣crease out from his roote, and the spirite of the Lorde shall rest vpon him, the spi∣rite of wisedome, and of vnderstanding, the spirite of counsell and of strength, &c. 2. Thes. 2.He shall iudge the poore in righteous∣nes, and reproue them in equitie, to main∣taine the afflicted on the earth, and will smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, & shal slay the wicked by the breath of his lyps: the which cannot be vnderstoode but of Iesus Christ, and of the power of his Gospell. The 53. Chap. of Isaiah is altogether Euangelicall & is very often times aledg∣ed in the new testament, how Christ hath borne our stripes: See ye 8. Chap. of S Ma∣thew, the 1. to the Corinth. and the 15. Chap. Actes. 8. Chap. ver. 37. The 61. of Isaiah the 1. ver. and 2. is aledged in the 4. Chap. of S Luke, of the office of Iesus Christ, who is sent to bring the good tidinges vnto the afflicted, and to heale the broken hearted, & to preach deliuerance vnto the Captiues, and to publish the acceptable yeare of our Lord.
Out of the 23. Chap. of Ieremiah, verse 5. & 6. Behold the dayes come saith the Lord, that I will raise vnto Dauid a righteous braunch, and a king shall raigne and pros∣per, and shall execute iudgement and iu∣stice in the earth. In those dayes Israel shal be saued, and Israel shall dwell safelie & his. And behold, the name whereby they shal call him: The Lord our righteousnes. Out of the 34. Chap. of Ezechiel, ver. 22. I will saue my sheepe, and they shall no more be spoyled, and I will iudge be∣tweene sheepe and sheepe. And I wil set vp a shepheard ouer thē, and hee shall feede them, euen my seruant Dauid. Note ye that Christ is called Da∣uid. First, because that according to the flesh, he is descended of him. Secondlie, in that the kingdome of Dauid was a figure of the Messias. Thirdlie, for that he ought to sit on the throne of Dauid, and to con∣firme it, being established eternall king. It followeth in Ezechiel, he shal feede thē, and hee himselfe will be their shepheard, and I will make with them a couenaunt
of peace, &c. Out of the 9. of Daniel. There are in this Chapter amongest o∣thers, two notable places of Iesus Christ. The first in the 17. verse: Heare O our God the prayer of thy seruant, and his supplica∣tions, for the Lordes sake. The other place is in the ver. 26. and 27. After threescore and two weekes, shall Messiah be slaine. But hee shall confirme the couenant for one weeke, And hee shall cause the sacrifice and the offering to cease. In this Chap. is foretold the time of Christ his comming, his death spoken of before, and his office. Out of the 5. Chap of Micheas. And thou Beth-leem Ephrathah, Out of thee shall hee come forth vnto me, that shall be the ruler in Israel, whose goinges forth haue beene from the begin∣ning, and from euerlasting. Out of the 9. of Zacharie. Reioyce greatlie O daughter Zion: shout for ioy O daughter Ierusalem: Be∣hold thy king commeth vnto thee: hee is iust, and thy Sauiour. Malachie the 4. Chap. and 2. ver.
Vnto you that feare my name shall the sunne of righteousnesse arise, and health shall bee vnder his winges. There are manie other places: But be∣hold the chiefe out of the old Testament. They of the new are innumerable, for all the new Testament beareth witnesse of Iesus Christ, and diuers haue beene al∣readie alledged in that consideration out of the 16. Chap. of S. Matthew. Who say you I am? Simon Peter aunswered, and said, Thou art Christ the sonne of the li∣uing God. Out of the song of Zacharie: that is in the 1. Chap. of S Luke. Blessed bee the Lord God of Israel, be∣cause hee hath visited and redeemed his people. And hath raised vp the horne of salua∣tion vnto vs in the house of his seruaunt Dauid, as hee spake by the mouth of his holie Prophetes which were since the world began, that wee should bee saued from our enemies, &c. Out of the 2. Chap. of S. Luke, being the song of Simeon.
Lord, now lettest thou thy seruant depart in peace according to thy word. For mine eyes haue seene thy saluation, which thou hast prepared before the face of all thy people, a light to be reuealed vnto the Gentiles, & the glorie of thy people Israel. Out of the 1. of S. Iohn. The Lawe was giuen by Moses: but grace and trueth came by Iesus Christ. This is the Lambe of God, that taketh away the sinnes of the world. Simon said, we haue found the Messias, that is as much to say, as Christ. A Meditation out of Chrysostome vppon this place of the 1. of S. Iohn: All wee of his fulnesse haue receiued grace for grace. WIthout Iesus Christ wee can finde no grace: and if we doe thinke to drawe anie thing without him, those are as it were dead Cysternes: But behold a good spring, & a flowing fountaine, to wit, our Lord Iesus Christ. For yt he hath, he hath it not by loue or by participation, as other creatures haue: but he hath it as the spring and fulnesse of all good thinges. O what comfort is it, in that this fulnesse is not
shut vp, or hid for Christ onelie, but that it is opened vnto vs, to the end that out of the same may bee powred vppon vs all those graces which for vs are neces∣sarie. And yet there is much more. For let vs drawe from hence so much as wee will: yet, all plentie and ful∣nesse dailie remaineth in Christ, and hee dooth neuer lessen anie whit his abun∣dance in giuing vnto vs: and thus hee dooth euen fill vs againe with the floudes of his graces. For the Prophetes and A∣postles haue all drawen of this fountaine: To be short: Man hath nothing except that which proceedeth from this fulnesse. O Lord blessed are those which haue this good happe to participate of this. For thou Lorde art not nigardlie in thy giftes. Thou giuest vnto vs grace vppon grace. Thy blessinges are manifoldlie heaped vp, and they are soueraigne. As soone as thou giuest vs forgiuenesse of our sinnes, so soone thou doost bestowe vppon vs e∣uerlasting life. So that one grace follow∣eth vppon an other. For as much then O heauenlie father as thou doost store vs with so excellēt riches, giue vnto vs grace, O good God, to honor thee: & also to des∣pise the world, that hath not this fulnesse of
grace, that wee may for euermore depend vppon thy great mercie. Ʋppon this place out of first Chap. of S. Iohn. No man hath seene God at anie time, the onelie begotten sonne, which is in the bosome of his father, hee hath declared him. CONSIDERATION. WHat maketh this for vs, will some say, if yee doe assure you to beleeue that out of the diuine fulnesse, all aboun∣dance of grace is giuen vnto vs? Who is hee that hath seene God? Who was his counseller?Esaiah. 6. It is the sonne who hath re∣uealed him to vs, who was with the Fa∣ther from euerlasting. Now as touching vs, we alas neuer sawe God.Exod. 33. For the ve∣rie Angels doe hide their faces before him. And man vnlesse that hee died could neuer see his maiestie: yea, man such as he is on the earth, a sinner and mortall. But oh, happie and blessed shall that daie be,1. Iohn. 3. and this houre ought to be desired of vs, when as wee shall see this great God,
such as he is: with a soul altogether cleane, and a glorified bodie. The knowledge of God from hencefoorth is vnto vs, as Na∣zianzen saith, in respect of the spirit, as the sunne is vnto the bodie. This is a light well liking vnto vs, but happie is the soule that shall see him face to face, and in see∣ing him, shall liue for euermore. In the meane-while, let vs put our trust in the sonne, who speaketh in his Gospell of that which hee hath seene, and hath par∣taken his secretes vnto vs,Iohn. 15. as vnto his friendes and louers. Vppon the 3. Chap. of S. Iohn. God so loued the world, that hee hath giuen his onely begotten sonne, that who∣soeuer beleeueth in him, should not pe∣rish, but haue euerlasting life. MEDITATION. S. Paul oftentimes saith, how he would not boast but in Iesus, and the same crucified. And in deede if man would con∣sider these thinges at leasure, which are contained in this sentence of S. Iohn, hee would easilie agree with that which S.
Paul speaketh, and should finde, that there is no knowledge in the world, that giueth so much contentation, as the knowledge of Gods loue through Iesus Christ, in such sort as this sen∣tence of S. Iohn ought to be as a pre∣tious, owel, which a man dailie weareth about his necke: euen so ought wee to imprint in our heartes, this excellent witnesse of Gods loue. For what are men, that GOD loueth them? What cause hath the immortall, to loue the poore woormes of the earth? The righ∣teous, to loue sinners? The Maister, the ingrate, and vnfaithfull seruauntes? Are wee not of nature the children of wrath? Ought hee not without ceasing, rather to represent vnto vs the hatred and the iust anger of this mightie God, and that because of our corruption? And moreouer, if GOD had beene affecti∣oned to some iust or excellent men, yet say I, this should bee greatlie to debase him. But O diuine loue: Oh woon∣derfull diuinitie. Thou hast loued the world, without considering anie cer∣taine world, anie Sexe, anie Qualitie: yea, all the creatures which are come
of the earth since Adam and Eue, men and women, great and little, poore and rich, fooles & wisemen. And all the cause and occasion that thou hast had to fa∣uour them, was not for their beau∣tifull eyes, but it was euen thy great and extreme bountie. All their righ∣teousnesse is as an vncleane cloth be∣fore him.Esaiah 64. And their excellencie is but as a flower,Esaiah. 40. which withereth and fadeth from day to day. Therefore, it hath pleased thee O God to loue man. But what, say I to loue? What tongue shall not iudge himselfe vnsufficient: yea, what heart shall not bee vnable, to deduct or comprehend this so great a loue, which hath brought thee to giue one onelie and innocent sonne to death, and that to giue life vnto those crea∣tures that are so vnthankfull and so cor∣rupted? Where is it, that one shall finde a man in this world, that will pledge himselfe, euen to suffer death for an other, were hee his friend, and an honest man? Truelie it is verie rare. But what? O Lord, thou hast doone true∣lie more: For thou hast not giuen an An∣gell, or an Archangell, but thou hast
giuen thy onelie sonne vnto a sorrowfull and most shamefull death, for to redeeme thy enemies, that were reuolted from thee: but alas, wherefore is not this friendship alike? Wherefore doe wee not loue thee with a burning desire, as thou hast loued vs? Wherefore complaine wee of a little earth lost in thy Seruice: and thou hast not cōplayned at all of the death of thy welbeloued sonne of thy delight, when the question was of our redemption? When a prince dooth not giue vs his good countenance and fauour, then we are sore troubled and greeued: and yet in respect thereof we make, ah alas, but small rec∣kenning of thy loue, which art the king of kinges, and the eternall God. There∣fore that which wee doe want, is, that we doe not sufficientlie tast how much the Lord is good and sweete. Seeing now O Lord that thy loue is endlesse, graunt vs heartes, that may comprehend his infinite goodnesse, and that wee may forthwith feele therein an endlesse comfort, which may swallow vp all the sorrowes of this wretched life. So be it. Out of the 6. of S. Iohn. Simon Peter answered Iesus, Maister, to whome shall we goe?
Thou hast the wordes of eternall life. And wee beleeue and know that thou art the Christ the sonne of the liuing God. Out of the 3. Chap. of the first to Timothie. Without all gainsaying, great is the my∣sterie of godlinesse, to witte, that God is manifested in the flesh, iustified in the spi∣rit, seene of Angels, preached vnto the Gentiles, beleeued on in the world, and ascended vp in glorie. Out of the 4. Chap. of the first Epistle of S. Iohn. Hereby know yee the spirit of God. Euerie spirit, that confesseth that Ie∣sus Christ is come in the flesh, is of God. And euerie spirit which confesseth not, that Iesus Christ is come in the flesh, is not of God: but this is the spirit of Antichrist, of whome you haue heard how that hee should come, and now alreadie he is in the world. And wee haue seene and doe testifie,
that the father sent the sonne to bee the Sauiour of the world. Whosoeuer confesseth that Iesus is the sonne of God, in him dwelleth God, and he in God. And wee haue knowen and beleeued the loue that GOD hath in vs. Here followeth: VVhich vvas conceiued by the ho∣lie Ghost, borne of the virgin Marie. CONSIDERATION. THis is not vnto vs, as saith S. Basyl, in a Sermon which hee made of Iesus Christes humane nature, neither for vs, much to inquire, how Christ is come downe here below: And wherefore God is serued with such a meane rather than with anie other: For thou man (saith hee) thou wast lost, and so recoiledst backe from the face of thy God, that thou coul∣dest not come neere thereunto. Sith now that he is so humbled and brought low to come vnto thee, wouldest thou dispute much thereuppon? Rather acknowledge in all humblenesse, this blessing of ye sonne
of God, yea and with as great affection as thou canst or maist: who is according to the euerlasting diuine nature ingendred by the Father, not made, nor created, as it is said in Athanasius Creede, both without Mother and without beginning: but is ac∣cording to the humane nature a like vnto vs, sinne excepted, begotten of a woman, and the sonne of Dauid: In such manner as Sedulius saith in a Hymme, The creator of the world hath taken shape of a ser∣uant, to the end that hee might redeeme our flesh through his flesh, and that those should not perish whom hee had created. Therefore, behold two natures, but knit together in such sort, as there is but one onelie Sauiour: euen as the soule and the bodie are gathered together in one onely man, in the meane time keeping their pro∣prieties as it is knowne, that some proprie∣ties are of the bodie, & others of the soule: but let a man marke thē, & put a differēce betweene those proprieties, yet dooth hee not therefore separate the bodie from the soule. The scriptures then, and also the aunciēt Doctors, speaking of Iesus Christ, haue sometimes respect vnto ye proprietie of the natures: And then it is said: that Christ knew not ye hower of Iudgement,
when hee was wrapped vp in swadling bandes, when hee did increase in all wis∣dome: and had respect but vnto the hu∣mane nature. Some-times that he is the Image and brightnesse of his father, that hee will bee with vs euen vnto the end of the world:1. Cor. 2. hauing respect vnto his nature and diuine Maiestie. And sometimes the scripture dooth consider these two na∣tures of Christ knit together. When it is said, that the Lord of glorie was crucified. Wherefore? Because that Christ hath yet suffered in the flesh. Yet so it is, that hee who hath suffered, was the Lord of glorie. For this flesh is knit with the eternal word of the personall vnion. So it is said, that God hath redeemed vs by his bloud:Actes. 20. be∣cause that this bloud is the bloud of this bodie, which is knitte with the sonne of God. As wee doe say for the vnion of the bodie with the soule, when a man is dead, albeit that there is but the least part dead, to witte, the bodie, the soule being as we know immortal.From whence heresies doe pro∣ceede. This is to be noted: because ye most part of heresies doe come forth in that, whereas either a man con∣foundes the natures of Christ, or that one sundereth the natures, and they leaue not this ground or this foundation that wee
haue in the scripture, to wit, that there is but one Christ. And that this Christ is as mediatour knit vnto two natures, and to acknowledge them, it is necessarie that the proprieties do remain. For how should we knowe the humane nature, if it were inuisible, and in all places as some dreame? What God should Iesus be, if he were cre∣ated, euen as Arritus did blaspheme? The humane nature therefore of Christ hath reciued great prerogatiues,Preroga∣tiues of Christs hu∣mane na∣ture. as to be san∣ctified from the beginning by the holy Ghost, to be knit with the diuine nature, and to abide in the same: so as of this man, it is sayde, that he is the sonne of God: as in hauing all fulnesse of grace, all treasures of wisedome in the eternall worde, which is declared and laide abroade in ye humane nature, and so farre forth as was needeful, and might bring to him. To be short, we must holde that as the humane nature ta∣ken to the sonne of God, hath not weake∣ned the diuinitie: So hath not the diuini∣tie swallowed vp the deity, nor consumed the humanitie, as the Schuencfeldians thought. For our sauiour is true God, and man, and not a man deified. Moreouer, we must haue daily remembraunce of our re∣ligion, which is faith, whereunto all curio∣sities
are contrarie: These mysteries as this is the greatest of all, and the true se∣cret of God, hauing ordeined that his e∣uerlasting sonne should take vppon him humane nature, that in our flesh he might make satisfaction for our sinnes. These my∣steries I say, we doe beleeue them, when as all humane reason, all discourse, and all the worlde woulde say or thinke to the contrarie. And in thus beleeuing, wee are not lead by opinion, or ill groun∣ded, but assured of a most certaine know∣ledge, that is more surer than all the sci∣ences of the world, because that it procee∣deth from the shewe of the spirite of God. Heere followe certaine goodly places of the conception and birth of Iesus Christ, out of the 1. Chap. of S. Luke. THe Angell sayde vnto Marie: Lo, thou shalt conceiue in thy wombe, and beare a sonne, and shalt call his name Iesus. He shall be great, and shalbe called the sonne of the most high: and the Lorde God shall giue vnto him, the throne of his father Dauid. And hee shall reigne ouer the house of Iacob for euer, and of his kingdome shall be none ende.
Then sayd Marie vnto the Angell: how shall this be, seeing I know not man? The Angell aunswered and sayde vnto her, the holy Ghost shall come vpon thee, and the power of the most high shal ouer∣shadowe thee, therefore also that holie thing which shall be borne of thee, shalbe called the sonne of God. Therefore beholde three great prero∣gatiues in this childe that is giuen vnto vs. First, this person is the sonne of God. Secondly, eternall king, & established for Messias, and true restorer of the throne of Dauid, and of the Church, head and chiefe thereof, that which a man cannot speake of anie creature. Thirdly, he is the holy, as many times he is so called in the prophets, and hath in such sort taken our nature, as he hath made it holy frō his mothers wombe. This con∣ception therefore by the holy Ghost, is not that the spirite had beene as the father, or as if his body were of a spiritual substance: But the Angell sayth, that which seemed vnpossible that a virgin should conceiue, shalbe done by the vertue of Gods spirit, to whome nothing is harde, and the same spirite shall make, the virgine not alonely to conceiue and beare a sonne: but also to
conceiue and beare him, which shall be holy, and making holy all mankinde, ma∣king holy the natiuitie and conception of all those that are of his faithfull & chosen.Wherfore Christ was baptised. For that that he was baptised, and circum∣cised, was not in the respect of him that he had neede of it, he who washed and cir∣cumcised our heartes: but because that he had brought himselfe vnder the lawe in our name, and being made our pledge, had charged vpon him our sinnes, to make vs learne, in what reuerence wee ought to haue the Sacramentes. Out of the 1. of S. Iohn, ver. 14. This worde was made flesh, and dwelt among vs, and we sawe the glorie thereof: I say the glorie, as of the onely begotten sonne of the father, full of grace and truth. Out of the 1. Chap. of the Epistle of S. Paule to the Romanes. God which had promised heeretofore the Gospell, concerning his sonne, which was made of the seede of Dauid, according to the flesh, and declared mightilie to be the sonne of God, touching the spirite of sanctification and by the resurrection from the dead, that is to say, our sauiour Iesus
Christ. Out of the 16. Chap. of the Romanes. To him nowe that is of power to esta∣blish you according to my Gospell and preaching of Iesus Christ, by the reuelati∣on of the mysterie, which was kept secret since the worlde beganne: But nowe is opened and published a∣mong all nations by the scriptures of the prophets at the commandement of the e∣uerlasting God, for the obedience of faith: To God I say only wise, be praise for euer. Out of the 4. Chap. of the Epistle to the Ga∣lathians. When the fulnesse of time was come, God sent foorth his sonne made of a wo∣man, and made vnder the Lawe, that hee might redeeme them which were vnder the lawe, that we might receiue the adop∣tion of the sonnes. Out of the 2. Chap. of the Epistle to the Phi∣lippians. Let the same minde be in you that was euen in Christ Iesus, who beeing in the forme of God, thought it no robberie to be equall with God. But he made him∣selfe
of no reputation, and tooke on him the forme of a seruaunt, and was made like vnto man, and was found in shape as a man. He humbled himselfe, and became obedient vnto the death, euen the death of the crosse. Out of the seconde Chap. of the Epistle to the Hebrewes. For as much then as the children were partakers of flesh and bloud, he also him selfe likewise tooke part with them, that he might destroy through death him that had the power of death, that is the diuell. And that he might deliuer all them, which for feare of death, were all their life time subiect to bondage. For he in no sort tooke the Angels, but he tooke the seede of Abraham. Where∣fore in all things it became him to be made like vnto his brethren, that hee might bee mercifull, & a faithfull high priest in things cōcerning God, to the end he might make reconciliation for the sinnes of the people. Borne of the virgin Marie. The historie of the Lordes Natiuitie we haue
it with all the circumstances thereof in the 2. Chap. of S. Luke. Howe hee was borne vnder Octauian Augustus the Emperour. Borne in Beth-le∣hem the citie of Dauid, was wrapped in swadling clothes, and layde in a cratch: for he became poore, to make vs rich. 2. Cor. 8. Chap. This birth was by the Angels declared to the sheepeheardes. Moreouer the wise men of the East were guided by a starre vnto Beth-lehem. 2. of S. Matthew. A MEDITATION vpon the conception and birth of Iesus Christ after the flesh. WHo is he that would not desire to be∣holde with all reuerence, and with great wonder, this mightie mysterie of our God, concerning the incarnation of Iesus Christ, and our redemption: seeing that the verie Angels, desire to looke thereon, as S. Peter speaketh, in his 1. Chap. 1. Epistle? For it is the Gospel that doeth declare and re∣ueile this hidden secret,Rom. 16. at all times figu∣red through diuers ceremonies, and trulie fulfilled in the latter dayes. O that so many kings, patriarks & prophets haue desired to see him: but now men make litle account
of this so great a secret. O how beautifull are the feete of them that do declare vnto vs this Gospel of peace. O and how much are the heretikes to be abhorred, yt would turne away from vs the knowledge of this Christ, true God and man: who hath not doone this honour vnto the Angelles, to take vpon him their nature, & to redeeme them which were fallen: but hath shewed this fauour vnto vs poor wormes of the earth,Psal. 51. as to take on him our nature. Wee, alas, are conceiued in sinne, and in iniqui∣tie: But the holy of the Lorde, which was conceiued by the working of the holy spi∣rite, is come into the worlde, to sanctifie & saue vs.Ephes. 2. We are borne the childrē of wrath: But the welbeloued of the heauenly fa∣ther, was giuen for vs: and now is our na∣ture in honour and grace, because that the euerlasting word was made flesh: not lea∣uing that which it was, but taking vnto him that, that he was not, that is to say, our nature.. Iohn. 1. O what an excellent word: consi∣dering that is spoken of it, that it was and did alwaies rest with God, as the seconde person of the diuinitie: but if a man haue respect vnto his essence, it was, and is God as S. Iohn sayth in the same place. And that it is so, all thinges haue beene made by it,
the life, the light, and all fulnesse is in it. By it hath the Lorde spoken, and reueiled the secrets of Paradise. But what is it, that this hath taken & knit with him this word? Our flesh. And what is our flesh?Flesh. When as ye scripture would speake of our poore∣nesse, it calleth vs flesh, as in the 78. Psalme: And the Lord remembred that they were but flesh. Howsoeuer that Iesus had taken vpon him all our nature, that is to say, the bodie and the soule, as he is the redeemer of all mankinde: yet so it is, that we be but flesh, and rottennesse. He hath not there∣fore taken this flesh, which was sinfull, or the affection and passions of the flesh: but the substance, the weakenesses, and the al∣terations, that are in the flesh, here withall did he charge himselfe. He was not then ashamed of vs, as ye Schuencfeldians thinke yt it should be to debase him too much, if it were sayd, yt he had bin made flesh. For the scripture sayth the same, that he was made flesh, that is yet a more vile word, than the worde creature. But as S. Bernarde sayth. The more that thou considerest the humi∣litie of Christ, so much the more seest thou thy glorie, and the honour that God hath doone vnto thee, how also God hath exal∣ted thee, and hath giuen thee a name a∣boue
all names: in such sort, as they that forsake and despise thee, shal one day feele that they shall haue to doe, not with anie poore creature, but with the king of kings, and with the iudge of this worlde. A praier of S. Ierome, concerning the incar∣nation of Iesus Christ. O Lorde Iesus thou art my God, and my sauiour that hast suffered for mee. And although thou wert true God, before all ages, begotten euerlastingly of the father, & of an vnserchable generatiō: yet wouldst thou to bee conceiued in the wombe of a virgin, and to be made man like vnto me: and in such manner, as thou art true God and true man. For thou hast in such sort ta∣ken humane nature in the virgins wombe, as thou art God and man, so as the diuinity is not the humanitie, neither the humanity the diuinitie. Thy two natures are not con∣founded, and yet doe they make one & the selfe same person. O eternall worde, that was made flesh to become our brother. Thou hast had hunger and thirst. Thou hast taken our weakenesse vppon thee, sinne excepted,
which did neuer enter in thee, as we bare it euen from our mothers wombe. Nowe in thee O Lorde dwelleth bodily all ful∣nesse of grace and diuinitie. Thou art made lesse than the father, if a man doe respect thy humanitie. And if one doe consider thy diuinitie, thou art equall vnto him: and now, that thou hast debased thy selfe, he doeth acknowledge thee for his welbeloued sonne. O good sauiour haue mercie on thy brethren: come vnto them and dwell in them. A prayer concerning Iesus Christ, for to know him rightly. O Lord my God, seeing thou hast pro∣uided for vs so precious a gift, giuing vnto vs thy sonne Iesus, fill my soule with the feeling of his bountie: kindle in me a true desire of thy deere sonne, and of his grace: quench in me all euill affections: neither suffer that my soule be vexed by worldlie cares, but lift it vppe O Lorde, and drawe it vnto a perpetuall meditating of thy sonne my redeemer. Let his name be in my mouth: let his mercie be shed in my heart, to run through all my bones & ma∣rowe:
and that I may neuer tast any other thing, than this good sauiour, that is dead for me. Grant me also grace, to correct my manners, and take away from mee that which displeaseth thee, for to giue me that which is agreeable and pleasing vnto thee. Alas, who shall make man cleane that is conceiued in vncleannesse, if he be not washed and made righteous by thy sonne Iesus? My health lyeth in thee good GOD, and my weakenesse is be∣fore thee. Heale this, and by thy grace graunt vnto me the other. For it is thou that healest the infirmities, and keepest them that are healed, and all through thy mercie. An other prayer on the same matter. O Lorde, if our eyes be so tender and weake, that they bee not able to beare the light of the sunne: howe can we (a∣las) beholde thee, if thou haddest not de∣clared thy selfe in thy sonne, which is the eternall worde, and brightnesse of thy glorie? O woonderfull secret, that is not vn∣derstoode by mans wisedome, the which is come out of the heauenly closet. This
is it that GOD was made man: the e∣uerlasting is made mortall: hee that was not subiecte to suffer, was made sub∣iect to suffer: the maister to abide the death for his seruauntes: and he which ought nothing hath payed the debt, to set vs poore sinners free. O the great goodnesse of our sauiour, to abide and suffer so much for vs: O great power of our Lord Iesus Christ, to ouercome death. Hell had thought to haue swallowed him vp: but it is hee that hath ouercome hell. And in such manner it is come to passe therein, as vnto fishes, the which are taken when they thinke to take the baite: euen so death taking our redeemer was himselfe taken. And nowe Lorde, who is he that will not trust in thee, seeing that thy sonne is risen againe on the thirde daie, so gloriously and tryumphauntly: seeing that hee is ascended aboue all the highest heauens, and hath deliuered man from his captiuitie, to make him way e∣uen vnto the heauenlie dwelling place? It is there where hee sitteth on thy right hande, and where wee doe worshippe him with thee the father, and with the holie Ghost the comforter of the af∣flicted.
This is thy sonne our Lorde who is our life, and our resurrection. This is the hope, and trust of the afflicted: this is our light in our darkenesse: this is the dewe of our thirstie soules. This is he that doeth strengthen vs in our weakenesses: and that healeth our woundes. Wee are sinners, but our sinne is not so great and mightie as is his mercie. We be wanderers in this worlde, but he is our shephearde, and we doe awaite vpon him with a most earnest desire, that our bodies may be alike vnto his glorious bodie, and that wee may O mightie God beholde thy face. A prayer and meditation vppon the birth of Iesus Christ, taken out of the 15. Chap. of the Meditations of S. Augustine. O Exceeding goodnesse, O inestimable loue of thee my God, who hast giuen thy sonne to redeeme thy seruaunt. God was made man, that man being lost, should be redeemed out of the diuels pawes. It must be O Lorde true, that thy sonne Ie∣sus hath right tenderly loued mankinde, seeing yt he hath not alonely brought him
selfe so lowe, to bee willing to become man, and to bee borne of a virgine: but did willingly yeelde himselfe, vnto the punishment of the crosse, and that for our saluation. The good sauiour is come vnto vs: he by his goodnesse is come, to seeke out that which was lost: hee hath sought out the lost sheepe, and hauing founde him, he hath taken him vppon his shoul∣ders, to carie him vnto the sheepe folde. O good Lorde: O true shephearde: O woonderfull charitie. And who is he that may heare these thinges, without beeing astonied from the bowelles of this mercie? Who will not marueile thereat, or rather reioyce therein, in that thou hast so much loued vs? Lorde, thou hast sent thy sonne in the likenesse of a sinnefull man, that he who was without sinne, might ouercome sinne, and that we might of thy righteous∣nesse reioyce in him. For hee it is that is the true Lambe without spotte, and that hath taken away the sinnes of the worlde, and that in dying hath destroyed death, and in rysing againe hath brought life. But alas, O Lorde what shall I yeelde vnto thee, for these so excellent be∣nefites? What prayses, what thankes∣giuing shall I giue vnto thee O Lorde?
Although wee shoulde be indewed with the knowledge of Angelles, yea, though all our members shoulde bee turned into tongues, yet shoulde we be vnsufficient, and vnwoorthy to praise so great a louing kindenesse: for thy inestimable charitie, that thou hast shewed vnto vs poore and vnworthie creatures, dooth ouercome all knowledge: Because that thy sonne hath not taken the seede of Angelles, but of Abraham beeing made like vnto vs, sinne excepted. Therefore, hauing ta∣ken humane nature, and glorifying it, and through his resurrection decking it with immortalitie, he hath lifted vp him selfe aboue all heauens, and hath placed him at thy right hande: where hee is, hee that is thy sonne, worshipped and feared of Angelles. Nowe beholde my comfort and my hope, and wee all haue a portion in his flesh. And since that he, that hath taken our flesh raigneth with it, I doe be∣leeue that I shall raigne: because that my flesh is glorified in the person of Christ, we shalbe also glorified. Albeit that my sinnes may let mee therein, yet will this coniunction that I haue with Christ take away the lettes. My God is not so rigo∣rous and seuere, to despise man, seeing
hee hath carried man and the humane na∣ture vp on high. How should hee forget that that hee hath with him? Truelie this good Lorde is gentle and louing, and lo∣ueth his flesh. And if the Father loue his sonne, as in deede hee loueth him, hee also loueth all ye which dooth appertaine vn∣to him, so that from henceforth, we be as raised vp in Christ. Wee be alreadie seated in the kingdome of God: since that the humane nature is gone vp thither with Christ. No man hath euer hated his owne flesh. We be bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh. Oh that this is a great se∣crete saith the Apostle, this of Christ and of his Church. O woonderfull thing, that the coniunction of humane nature is made with ye diuine, without changing of natures, & also without anie confusion of persons therein. For Christ hath so knit the natures together, as hee both God and man, is in diuine substance but one person, with the father and the holie ghost. O strange thing: wee were not woorthie to be seruauntes, and now wee be chil∣dren and coheires with Christ. And now I pray thee good God, graunt mee grace in good ernest, to acknowledge thy ver∣tue that I may with a burning desire loue
thee all the daies and time of my life, and that my faith, be stayed on my redeemer, who was seene in the world, and was lif∣ted vp into glorie. It Followeth: Suffered vnder Ponce Pilate, was crucified dead and buried, hee descended into hell. CONSIDERATION. YEe neede not to maruaile, that in this Article of our faith, wee doe passe from his natiuitie vnto his death. For first, all his life was a preparatiue vnto death, & a perpetuall passion. Secondlie, the death and passion of Iesus was the true wit∣nesse of his obedience, and then was en∣ded this true Sacrifice, that hath aboli∣shed sinne and death. Euen as the aun∣cient high Priestes did take of the people that which they had to sacrifice: so hath hee also taken of vs our nature, and this bodie, which hee hath sacrificed on the crosse, being the sacrifice and the sacrifi∣cer. Therefore, hee had will to suffer true∣lie
in our flesh, and to die, that in him we might haue life: And that wee may liue and die in him, dailie dying to the world & to vice, to liue vnto all righteousnesse, and to his glorie who hath redeemed vs. Death, the graue, & hell, are verie terrible thinges, yea more than terrible: But Ie∣sus Christ hath triumphed ouer death, and arising againe, hee hath sanctified our graues, and hath by his vertue ouercome the sorrowes of hell, and hath broken all the boltes and chaines, to make free, and to set in safetie all his elect, so as there is no condemnation vnto those that doe be∣leeue in him.Rom. 8. Away with these sacrifices of these popish Priestes, seeing that this true sacrifice made with the shedding of the bloud of the Lambe without spot,Iohn. 1. taketh away all the sinnes of the world. Places of the holie scripture, testifying the death and passion of Iesus Christ. Out of the Prophecie of Dauid, 22. Psalme. For Dogges haue compassed me & the
assemblie of the wicked haue inclosed me, they pearced my handes and my feete. I may tell all my bones: yet they be∣hold and looke vppon me. Accor∣ding to the exposition of some: as if the should haue said: he shal not be ouer∣whelmed with trou∣bles and sorrowes. For he is the euer∣liuing sonne of of God, & of an euer∣lasting ge∣neration. But this is for our sinnes and by the counsel of God that it should happen vnto him.They part my garments among them, and cast lottes vppon my vesture. Out of the 69. Psalme. I was constrained to restore that which I tooke not. They gaue me gall in my meate: and in my thirst they gaue me vineger to drinke. A prophesie of the death and passion of Iesus Christ. Out of the 53. Chap. of Esaiah. Surelie hee hath borne our infirmities, and carried our sorrowes: yet did wee iudge him as plagued, and smitten of God. But hee was wounded for our transgres∣sions, hee was broken for our iniquities, the chasticement of our peace was vppon him, and with his stripes are wee healed. All wee lyke Sheepe haue gone astray: wee haue turned euerie one to his owne way: and the Lorde hath laid vppon him the iniquitie of vs all. He was oppressed, and hee was affli∣cted,
yet did hee not open his mouth: he is brought as a sheepe vnto the slaughter, & as a sheep before her shearer is dumme, so hee openeth not his mouth. He was ta∣ken out from prison and from iudgement. And who shall declare his age? For hee was cut out of the land of the liuing, and for the transgression of my people was he plagued. And hee made his graue with the wicked, and with the riche in his death, though hee had doone no wickednes,Vnto the rich, neither was anie deceite in his mouth. Yet the Lord would breake him and make him subiect to manie infirmities,This was Ioseph of Arimathe. when hee shall make his soule an offering for sinne, hee shall see his seede and shall prolong his dayes, and the will of the Lord shall prosper in his hand. Of the abasing of Iesus Christ in this world, Daniel also hath prophesied in the 9. Chap. and 26. verse. ANd after threescore and two weekes, shall Christ bee slaine, and shall haue nothing, and some doe translate, there shall none remaine to helpe him, or hee shall bee altogether made of none effect. This death of Christ was figured by
the offering of weathers and Lambes, and likewise by the offering that Abra∣ham made of his sonne Isaac in the 22. of Genesis:The bra∣sen ser∣pent. and by the brasen serpent set vp in the wildernesse, whome those that did behold, were deliuered from the venemous bitings of serpentes: as it is written in the 21. Chapter of Nom∣bers. This brasen serpent did signifie, that Christ should take the forme of a sinner, and should bee notwithstan∣ding without sinne. That which was set vp on a tree, did signifie that Ie∣sus Christ should bee lifted vp vppon a crosse: as wee doe reade it in the 3. of Saint Iohn: As Moses lifted vp the Serpent in the wildernesse: so must the sonne of man be lifted vp: That whoso∣euer beleeueth in him, shall not perish, but haue eternall life. And to shew in deede that it was not in the brasen serpent, that had anie ver∣tue annexed to it, but that wee ought to looke more high: King Ezechias see∣ing how the people did goe a whoring after this Serpent,. King. 1 hee brake it in peeces, and named it Nehustan, that is to say, a vile thing, and woorth no∣thing.
The historie of the passion and death of Iesus Christ, wee haue drawen out by the foure Euangelistes, especiallie in the 22. & 23. of S. Luke. THe causes of the passion and death of Iesus Christ,The cau∣ses of Christes death. were first the vnchange∣able counsell and prouidence of GOD: as it is said in the second of the Actes and the 23. verse, Hee was deliuered by the determinate counsel of God. And againe the loue of God towardes mankind: God so loued the world, that hee hath giuen his onelie begotten sonne as saith S. Iohn in the 3. Chapter. And wee doe reade in the 5. Chap. to the Ephesians and the 25. verse, how hee also loued vs, and gaue himselfe willinglie for vs. If wee must come vnto other outward causes of this death, and which bee inferiour: there is the hatred of the diuell, and the enmitie, whereof it is spoken in the 3. Chap. of Ge∣nesis, betweene the serpent and the seede of the woman. There is likewise the en∣uie of the Scribes and Pharisies: as it is written in the 27. Chap. of S. Matthew and 18. verse. There is the crueltie of the Iewes and the treason of Iudas,
as S. Steeuen reprocheth them in the 7. Chap. of the Actes, that they were trai∣tors, and murtherers of the iust. Notwith∣standing, these were our sinnes that cau∣sed this death, as it is said in the 4. Chap. to the Romans. For our sinnes was he de∣liuered to the death. The fruites and effectes of the death and pas∣sion of Iesus Christ. Out of the 12. Chap. of S. Iohn, Iesus aunswered them saying, the houre is come, that the sonne of man must be glo∣rified. Verilie, verilie I say vnto you, ex∣cept the wheate corne fall into the ground and die it bideth alone: but if it die, it bringeth forth much fruite. Out of the 3. Chap. to the Romans. The righteousnesse of GOD is made manifest, by the faith of Iesus Christ, vn∣to all and vppon all that doe beleeue. For there is no difference, for all haue sinned, and are depriued of the glorie of God:Iustifica∣tion in the bloud of Iesus. And are iustified freelie by his grace, through the redemption that is in Christ Iesus, Whom God hath set forth to be a re∣conciliation through faith in his bloud.
Out of the 6. Chap. to the Romans. If we be grafted with him to the simili∣tude of his death, euen so shall wee be to the similitude of his resurrection, knowing this that our olde man is crucified with him,To die vnto sinne that the bodie of sinne might be de∣stroyed, that henceforth wee should not serue sinne. For he that is dead, is freed from sinne: wherefore if wee be dead with Christ, wee beleeue that wee shall liue al∣so with him. Out of the 8. Chap. to the Romans. What shal we then say to these things? if God be on our side, who can bee against vs? Who spared not his owne sonne, but gaue him for vs all to death. How shall he not with him, giue vs all thinges also? Out of the first to the Corinthians 6. Chap. Yee are bought for a price: therefore glorifie God in your bodie, and in your spirit: for they are Gods. Out of the 2. to the Corinthians. 5. Chap. God was in Christ, and reconciled the
world to himselfe, not imputing their sinnes vnto them, and hath committed to vs the word of reconciliation. And he hath made him to bee sinne for vs, which knew no sinne, (to witte because that our sinnes were imputed vnto him, and for them was made a sacrifice) that we should bee made the righteousnesse of God in him: that which came also by imputation. Out of the 2 Chap. of the Epistle to the Galathians. For I through the lawe am dead to the lawe: and that I might liue vnto GOD I am crucified with Iesus Christ. Thus I liue yet: not I now, but Christ liueth in me: And in that that I now liue in the flesh, I liue in the faith by the sonne of God, who hath loued mee and giuen him∣selfe for me. Out of the 5. Chap. to the Galat. They that are Christes, haue crucified the flesh with the affections & the lustes. Out of the 6. Chap. of the Ga∣lathians. The crosse of Christ.God forbid that I should reioyce, but in the crosse of our Lorde Iesus Christ, whereby the world is crucified vnto me.
Out of the 5. Chap. to the Ephesians. Walke in loue euen as Christ hath lo∣ued vs, and hath giuen himselfe for vs, to bee an offering and a sacrifice of a sweete smelling sauour to God. Out of the 5. Chap. to the Ephe∣sians, verse 25. Christ loued the Church and gaue himselfe for it, that hee might sanctifie it, and cleanse it by the washing of water through the word: that hee might make it to himselfe a glorious Church, &c. Out of the first Chap. of the Epistle to the Colos. verse 19. It pleased the Father that in him should all fulnesse dwell. And by him to reconcile all thinges vnto himselfe, and to set at peace through the bloud of his Crosse both the thinges in earth and the thinges in heauen. And you which were in times past strangers & enemies, because your mindes were set on euill workes: he hath now al∣so reconciled in the bodie of his flesh through death, to make you holie and vnblameable, & without fault in his sight, if ye continue grounded and stablished in the faith.
Out of the 2. Chap. to the Colossians. Hee hath quickened you together with him, forgiuing you all your trespasses: in putting out the handwriting of ordinan∣ces that were against vs: hee euen tooke it out of the way and fastened it vppon the crosse. Wherefore if yee bee dead with Christ, from the ordinances of the world, why, as though yee liued in the world, are ye burdened with traditions? As touch not, taste not, handle not. Out of the first Epistle to the Thessa∣lonians 2. Chap. Yee are become followers of the Churches of God which in Iudea are in Christ Iesus: because ye haue also suffe∣red the same thinges of your owne coun∣triemen, euen as they haue of the Iewes who haue likewise killed the Lord Iesus. Out of the first of Timothie 6. Chap. I charge thee in the sight of God, who quickeneth all thinges: and before Iesus Christ, which vnder Pontius Pilate wit∣nessed a good confession: that thou keepe this commaundement without spot and vnrebukeable, vntill the appearing of our Lord Iesus Christ.
Out of the second of Timothie 2. Chap. This saying is true, if wee bee dead with him, we also shall liue with him. If wee suffer, we shall also reigne with him: if we denie him, hee also will denie vs. Out of the 9. Chap. of the Epistle to the Hebrewes. Christ being come a high Priest of good thinges to come, by a greater and more perfect Tabernacle not made with handes, that is not of this building, nei∣ther by the bloud of Goates, and Calues: But by his owne bloud entered he in once vnto the holy place, and obtained eter∣nall redemption for vs. For if the bloud of Bulles & of Goates, and the ashes of an Heifer sprinckeling them that are vn∣cleane, sanctifieth as touching the puri∣fying of the flesh: how much more shall the bloud of Christ which through the e∣ternall spirit offered himselfe without spot vnto God, purge your consciences from dead woorkes, to serue the liuing God? And for this cause is he ye mediatour of the new Testament, that through death,
which was for the redemption of the trans∣gressions that were in the former Testa∣ment, they which were called might re∣ceiue the promise of eternall inheritance. And in the 24. verse. Iesus is not entered into the holie pla∣ces that are made with handes, which are similitudes of the true sanctuarie: But is entered into verie heauen, to appeare now in the sight of God for vs, not that hee should offer himselfe often, as the high Priest entered into the holie place euerie yeare with other bloud (for then must he haue often offered since the foundation of the world:) but now in the end of the world hath hee appeared once to put a∣way sinne by the sacrifice of himselfe. So was hee once offered to take away the sinnes of manie, &c. Out of the 10. to the Hebrewes For with one offering hath hee conse∣crated for euer them that are sanctified. Out of the first Epistle of S. Peter, the 3. Chap. It is better (if the will of God bee so,) that yee suffer for well dooing, than for euill doing.
For Christ once hath suffered for sins, the iust for the vniust, that he might bring vs to God: and was put to death con∣cerning the flesh, but was quickened in the spirit. Out of the 4 Chap. of the first of S. Peter. Forasmuch then as Christ hath suffered for vs in the flesh, arme your selues like∣wise with the same minde, which is, that hee who suffered in the flesh hath ceased from sinne, that he henceforward should liue (as much time, as remaineth in the flesh) not after the lustes of men, but af∣ter the will of God. Also in the 13. verse. Reioyce inasmuch as ye are partakers of Christes suffering, that when his glorie shall appeare, ye may be glad & reioyce. A prayer on the death and passion of Iesus Christ. O Lord my God, since that this faire and goodlie Image according to which man was created, was thus through sinne disfigured, drawe mee neere vnto thy sonne Iesus, in whome thou hast created
vs as it were anewe. Acknowledge in me thy worke, and blot out that which is not thine. Behold not that which is from me, or from Satan: Looke O Lorde vp∣pon the humanitie of thy sonne, to take pitie on mine infirmities: Consider the punishment of the redeemer, and forgiue him his sinnes, whome hee hath bought againe. Wherefore was it, that hee who was so obedient, should suffer punish∣ment of disobedience, vnlesse it were to saue vs? This is he, who is the good shep∣heard, who hath brought home the stray∣ing sheepe, and hath presented before thy face those that were straglers and runa∣gates, by meanes of their sinnes. O good God, therefore looke vppon thy deere sonne spread abroad vppon the crosse, bow downe thy head to see thy poore creatures, for the loue of whome, thy welbeloued yeelded vp his spirit vpon the crosse, and hath bowed downe his head. Behold his wounded handes, and for∣giue the offences of our handes. See his innocent side, whereout ran bloud and water in the day of his passion. Alas good God, wilt not thou content thy selfe with so pretious and deere a paiment, as was payed for our offences? Behold the feete
pearsed with nailes, which neuer walked but in thy lawes, and in thy obedience, and haue compassion vpon vs, which haue walked in the way of sinners: O glorious passion, that hast slaine our enimie Sathan, and hast purchased for vs so great a friend euen the eternall God. O what an ex∣change is made, through this blessed and happie Passion, when as euerlasting life is offered vnto vs, in stead of eternall tor∣ment. Thy sonne went downe to hell,His desce∣ding into hell. and hath felt the horrour and wrath that wee had deserued, to exalt vs into heauen. O death where is thy strength? O hell where is thy dread and feare, syth Christ hath re∣deemed vs from both? O good God grant me grace nowe, that as thy sonne hath suf∣fered for my sake, so manie tormentes and rebukes, that I also may patiently abide punishment for his name. And as hee was stripped out of his garmentes, to goe to the crosse, so let me be vnclothed of these worldly cares, and vncouered of my flesh∣ly affections, yea and aboue all, of pride & of presumption, to be arayed with a true faith, and with pitifull and heartie affecti∣ons towardes my neighbours. And euen as the same Iesus Christ did make a free confession before Ponce Pilate, so likewise
before all the iudges of the world, yea, be∣fore all men, let me also confesse him, when I shall haue neede. Pilate the vniust, O my God hath condemned the iust: But thou iust Lorde, haue mercie on me vniust, for thy sonnes sake vniustly condemned: who was hanged on a tree, and made accursed, that I might be blessed in him and by him, granting me grace daily to die to sinne and to liue to righteousnes. So be it. Errors contrarie vnto the afore saide Article of Iesus Christes death. They that thinke, howe he hath made a shewe to suffer, and hath not truely suf∣fered in the flesh. 1. Pet. 3.18.Item the Schuencfeldians that thinke, that the diuine nature hath suffered: be∣cause that the sonne of God hath suffered in the flesh, the diuinitie being vnsuffera∣ble. They that seeke other sacrifices and of∣feringes for sinne, than the onely sacrifice of Christ once suffered on the crosse for all. Philip. 3.They whose bellies is their God, which are enimies to the crosse of Christ, and would haue a vellot Gospell. They that liue in all worldly wanton∣nesse
not hauing anie mortification. They that doe worshippe crosses of wood, stone or of siluer, in steede to wor∣shippe and honour him, that was crucified, and in place to beare the true crosse, which they doe cause the poore martyrs to carie. To be short, these heere tread vnder their feete the bloud of the couenaunt, as it is sayde in the 10. Chap. to the Hebrewes, that hauing the knowledge of the trueth, doe willingly sinne, neither will they amende their liues. The thirde daie hee rose from the dead. A prayer and meditation vppon the Lordes rising againe. NOw praysed be God, since that which was esteemed most to be feared of the worlde, verie death, is now ouercome and destroyed. Praysed be the Lorde, by whom death hath lost her sting, and that there is no more condemnation for vs. Nowe it is that sinne is ouercome,
sith that Christ is risen. For seeing that he was our pledge, if death had yet anie power against vs, it had kept our pledge. But for somuch as hee is risen and was not kept in the graue, wee see how hee hath destroyed death, and hath brought life and immortalitie vnto light through the Gospell.2. Tim. 1. Our righteousnesse is now manifested: for if the righteousnesse of Christ that was giuen and imputed vnto vs, had not beene perfect, hee had still beene kept by death and hell: For death is ye reward of sinne.Romans. 6. Let vs therefore, reioyce for such a sauiour,Rom. 4. yt was dead for our sins, and is risen againe for our Iustification. This is the cause why the Euangelists and the Apostles haue made thereof so of∣ten mention, as is to bee seene in the 2. Chap. of the Actes, and in the 15. Chap. of the first to the Corinth. O Lord giue vs al∣so grace, that we bee not drawen away, in the desire of earthlie thinges, neither yet to bee buried in worldlie cares, but that being risen againe with thy sonne Iesus, wee may seeke the thinges from aboue,Colos. 3. euen vntill such time as our bodies bee raised also, at the last comming of Iesus Christ. The historie of the resurrection, is right dili∣gently
brought foorth by the Euangelistes,Matth. 27. to shewe the follie of the Scribes and Pha∣risees, who hauing rowled a great stone on the tombe, thought to let this rising againe and moreouer to hide it: afterwardes they gaue money that they should say how he was taken vp by his disciples. THis was the cause wherefore hee was yet conuersant in the worlde 40.Christs ap¦pearinges. daies after his resurrection: and appeared vnto his, diuerse times shewing them his hands, feete, and woundes. S. Marke maketh mention that hee appeared three sundrie times, and that the Angell declared his ri∣sing. First he did appeare to Marie Mag∣dalene: the seconde time he did appeare vnto two that were in the way going into the fieldes: the third time, vnto the ele∣uen, that were sitting at a table. Likewise S. Iohn 20. Chapter, S. Luke. 24. doe make mention of three appearinges, and S. Mat∣thewe in the 28. of two appearings. S. Paul in the 15. Chap. 1. Epistle to the Corinth. reciteth many appearings, & how he was likewise seene to mo than 500. brethren. But specially hee appeared vnto S. Peter, that had denied him, as we reade in the 24.
of S. Luke. and in the 15. of the first Epistle to the Corinthians. The fruites and effectes of Iesus Christ his re∣surrection. Out of the 2. Chap. of the Actes. Psalm. 16.Whom God hath raised vp, and loosed the sorrowes of death, because it was vn∣possible that he should be holden of it: for Dauid speaketh of him. I haue set the Lorde alwaies before me: for he is at my right hand, therefore I shall not slide. Wherefore my heart is glad and my tongue reioyceth: my flesh also doeth rest in hope. For thou wilt not leaue my soule in the graue, neither wilt thou suffer thy holie one to see corruption. Thou wilt shewe me the path of life, in thy presence is the fulnesse of ioy. Men and brethren, I may boldly speake vnto you, of the patriarke Dauid, that hee is both dead and buried and his sepulchre remaineth with vs vnto this day. Therefore seeing he was a prophet, and knew yt God had sworne with an oth to him, that of the fruit of his loines, he should raise vp Christ concerning the flesh to set him vppon his throne: He knowing this before, spake this
of the resurrection of Christ, that his soule should not be left in graue, neither his flesh to see corruption. This Iesus hath God rai∣sed vp, whereof we all are witnesses. Out of the 5. Chap. of the Acts, 30. vers. The God of our fathers hath raised vp Iesus, whom ye slewe, and hanged on a tree. Him hath God lift vp with his right hande, to be a prince and a sauiour, to giue repentaunce to Israell, and forgiuenesse of sins: And we are his witnesses concerning these thinges which wee say: yea and the holy Ghost, who God hath giuen to them that obey him. Out of the 14. Chap. to the Romanes. Whether wee liue, wee liue vnto the Lorde, or whether we die, we die vnto the Lorde: whether we liue or die wee are the Lordes. For Christ therefore died and rose againe, and reuiued, that he might be Lorde both of the dead and the quicke. Out of the 6. Chap. of the first Epistle to the Corinthians. God hath also raised vp the Lorde, and shall raise vs vp by his power. Out of the 15. Chap. and the first Epistle to the Corinthians. Now if it be preached, that Christ is ri∣sen frō the dead, how say some among you,
that there is no resurrection of the dead? For if there bee no resurrection of the dead, then is Christ not risen. And if Christ be not risen then is our preaching vaine, and your faith is also vaine. Out of the 4. Chap. of the 2. to the Corinthians. We know that he which hath raised vp the Lord Iesus, shall raise vs vp also by Iesus, and shall set vs with you. Out of the 1. Chap. to the Ephes. The Lord giue vnto you the spirit of reue∣lation to vnderstand the exceeding great∣nesse of his power which he wrought in Christ, whē he raised him from ye dead, &c. Out of the 3. Chap. to the Colossians. If yee then be risen with Christ, seeke those thinges which are aboue, where Christ sitteth at ye right hand of God. Set your affectiōs on things which are aboue, and not on thinges which are on the earth. Out of the 2. Chap. of the Second to Timothie. Remember that Iesus Christ made of the seede of Dauid, was raised againe from the dead according to my Gospel: where∣in I suffer trouble as an euill dooer euen vnto bondes. S. Peter in the 3. Chap. of his first Epistle
saith that we haue witnessed with a good conscience before God, by the resurrectiō of Iesus Christ. He ascended into heauen. CONSIDERATION. HOwe is it, that death should bee ouer∣come, if we had not an other life, or an other hope, than in this vale of miserie? And that we should heere daily crawle in this dwelling place of serpentes and dra∣gons? What is it to come forth of ye graue, if a man did not but enter into the worlde, which is but a gulfe and bottomlesse pitte of all euils? What had this beene, if the children of Israel had gone out of Aegypt, and if they had not beene guided into the promised lande flowing with milke and honnie? To the ende therefore that our deliueraunce might not be vnperfect and maimed, and that we may knowe where∣at wee must aime or leuell aright: to bee short, that we may see that our heritage is out of the power of ye prince of this world, & from all the children of the world: this Iesus our Lorde would ascende into hea∣uen, and that in the sight of all his Apo∣stles,
making his bodie to tryumphe, that a litle before was crucified, taking againe the full possession of that glorie, which was not lost,Iohn. 17. but as it were hidden, when as he did abase himselfe to present vnto God this clensing Sacrifice for our sins. O Lord, what are we, that thou goest vp on high to prepare for vs a place? Alas, wee bee not worthy to liue on the earth.Iohn. 17. As our fathers in deede were driuen out of the gardein, wherin thou haddest placed them: so doest thou nowe giue vnto vs farre better than that garden of Edon, out of the which was Adam & Eue driuen, when as in our name and with our nature, thou takest possessi∣on of the most high heauens, and of the manner house of thy glorie, to inuest vs thy children therin: to the end that where thou art, they may bee there also. Alas Lorde, is this reason, that thy seruauntes should be as well as their maisters? But al∣so good God thou hast doone vnto vs this honour, to call vs thy friendes to whome thou hast communicated thy secretes: to call vs (O Lorde Iesus) thy brethren as we doe read in the 15. of S. Iohn. I will say no more seruantes: for the seruaunt knoweth not what his maister doeth: But I haue cal∣led you friendes: for all thinges that I haue
heard of my father, haue I made knowen to you. And in the 20. of S. Iohn, where it is sayde vnto Marie Magdalene: Go vnto my brethren, and tell them that I am gone vp vnto my father, and vnto your father, vnto my God, and vnto your GOD. O Lord, who shall comprehende sufficiently, & praise thy goodnesse? For yt truly which thou hast prepared to thine, are thinges that the eie hath not seene,1. Corinth. neither eare hath heard, neither came into mans heart. Giue therefore vnto vs thy holy spirit, the which soundeth all thinges, to the ende that we may vnderstande and knowe those thinges that thou hast giuen vs, and that in knowing them, wee may account thereof, to forsake the earth and aspire vnto heauen, where our head is, and where there is true fulnesse of ioie and comfort. So be it. The historie of Iesus Christ his ascending is described vnto vs in the 16. Chap. of S. Marke and 19. vers. After that the Lorde had spoken vnto them, hee was receiued into heauen, and sate on the right hande of God. In the 24. of S. Luke the 50. vers. After he lead them out into Bethania, and lift vp his hande and blessed them,
And it came to passe that as hee blessed them, he departed from them, and was ca∣ried vp into heauen. And they worship∣ped him and returned to Ierusalem with great ioie. In the first Chap. of the Acts, ver. 9. And when he had spoken these things, while they behelde he was taken vp: for a cloud tooke him vp out of their sight. And while they looked stedfastly towarde hea∣uen, as he went, beholde two men stoode by them in white apparel, which also said: Yee men of Galile, why stande ye gasing into heauen? This Iesus which is taken vp from you into heauen so shall come as you haue seene him goe into heauen. Out of the 3. of the Acts, ver. 21. Whom the heauen must containe, vn∣till the time that all thinges must be resto∣red which God had spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophetes. Out of the 10. to the Romanes, ver. 6. That righteousnesse which is by faith, speaketh thus: Say not in thy heart, who shal ascende into heauen? (that is to bring Christ from aboue) or who shall descende into the deepe? (that is to bring Christ a∣gaine from the dead). But what say∣eth it? The worde is neere thee, euen
in thy mouth and in thine heart: this is the worde of faith which wee preach. As if he sayde, that all doubts are taken away by faith: and that the faithfull are assured by Iesus Christ to goe vp into heauen, and to enter into euerlasting life. Out of the 4. Chap. to the Ephesians, ver. 7. Vnto euerie one of vs is giuen grace, according to the measure of the gift of Christ: wherefore he sayth, when he ascen∣ded vp on high, he lead captiuitie captiue, and gaue giftes vnto men. Nowe in that he is ascended, what is it, but yt he had also descended first into the lowest parts of the earth? He that descended is euen the same that ascended, farre aboue all heauens, that he might fill all thinges. A Meditation vpon the saide Text. And although the benefites of our sa∣uiour Iesus Christ shall truely be felt, e∣uen now againe in the life to come: Yet so it is that from henceforth wee be alreadie quickened by faith and are as it were sette with him in heauenly places: as it is saide in the 2. Chapter to the Ephesians, vers. 8.
Moreouer, I pray you howe great is this consolation, that wee haue not onely our pleadge alreadie in heauen: but also our high priest, that maketh intercession with∣out ceasing for vs, euen as it is written in the 7. Chapter to the Hebrewes. Further∣more S. Paule in this text out of the 4. Chap. to the Ephesians, where in wee bee greatly comforted, when he sayth that our enimies, the worlde, the flesh, and the de∣uill, were lead away in tryumphe, when as Christ ascended vp into heauen. Wher∣fore should we then feare them? And this tryumph was figured by the tryumphes and victories, wherofare spoken in the 68. Psalme. But yet that we may not be depri∣ued from the presence of our sauiour, and that he is not retyred from vs in such sort, as we should no more reioyce in him: S. Paule declareth vnto vs, howe it was expedient, according as Christ had sayde in the 16. of S. Iohn, that I goe away, and no more bodilie to bee conuersant in the world. Because he had obtained for vs ma∣nie graces, wherof he storeth and decketh his Churches, and is present with vs, as it is declared afterwards by the ministers of his word,Howe Christ is present with vs. both the vertue and efficacie that he therein giueth: to be short, he is present
with vs, according as his spirituall king∣dom beareth him: & he being our head, he doth gouerne and guide vs by his holy spi∣rite, drawing vs vnto him that wee forsa∣king more and more, the worlde, and the earth, we may be made citizens in ye king∣dome of heauen, where he is & frō whence we do awaite for him to be our ful deliue∣rance. S. Augustin therfore sayth very well, in the 50. treatise o S. Iohn, & in the booke of faith vnto Peter, the 2. Chapter, If anie man aske, howe I shall holde Christ now, which is absent: Sende vnto him (saieth he) thy faith, and thou shalt holde him. For our predecessours which were in his time, haue seene him and layde holde of him in the flesh: holde thou him in thine heart. He truely hath set his bodie in hea∣uen: but he hath not withdrawen his ma∣iestie from the worlde. And hee woulde as touching his bodie be absent from vs: to the ende that our faith might be edified, which could not be truely faith, if it did bodily see, and holde Christ heere. A prayer. O Lorde our God, vouchsafe through thy goodnesse and mercie to fill vs heere
full of thy graces, and ioyne vs together, through faith with thy sonne Iesus, vntill that we be partakers of the fulnesse of thy glory,1. Thes. 4. when we shalbe gathered together to be daily with the Lorde. And sitteth on the right hande of God the Father almightie. CONSIDERATION IN these Articles of our faith, there is no∣thing superfluous. For the article going before doth shewe vnto vs, that hee was truely receiued into heauen: which is the throne of God,Matth. 5. and the abode of the bles∣sed: so that to ascende into heauen, is not a vanishing away: or as some doe interprete it by a figure, to ascende into honour and high degree: but Christ is in heauen, from whence he shall come to iudge the quicke and the dead: and there where the place is for all the elect.Lib. de fide & Symbolo. Insomuch as S. Augu∣stine sayeth: As it is a curiousnesse to aske how, or in what sort Christ is in heauen: so must we faithfullie beleeue yt he is there. But in the meane while, he is not there simplie, as Henoche who was lifted vppe,
or Helie that was ascended thither:Gene 5. 2. Kinge. 2. or as the other his faithfull members: but he is there as Head, and he is there as he that is set on the right hande of his father. For Iesus Christ, as the sonne of God, hath had trulie alwayes all power in heauen, and in earth. And now this Iesus, who hath ta∣ken humane nature, this person that is true God, and true man, gouerneth all thinges and hath a glorie and empire aboue all creatures, whereof it doth not followe, as some railers thinke, that this his humane nature is in al places and euerie where. For although that the right hande of God, and his mightinesse is infinite, yet is it not said, that he is made the right hande of God, or that ye bodie of Christ is become the right hande of God: but that hee is set at his right hande. Nowe to sit at the right hande of God, is not to spreade his bodie throughout all, but to gouerne all with the father. And likewise that which is spoken of the whole person, cannot be particularly and simplie vnderstoode of his humane nature, which keepeth alwaies his properties. Further∣more, the scripture by this sitting at the right hande of God, doth not conclude, that the bodie of Christ is throughout all:
but that he is in heauen as it may appeare by the places following. Out of the 26. of S. Matthew, verse 64. Hereafter shal ye see the sonne of man, sitting on the right hand of the power of God, and come in the cloudes of heauen. Out of the 16. of Marke. Iesus was carried vp into heauen, and sitteth on the right hand of God. Out of the 2. Chap. of the Actes, verse 33. To wit as Christ and by his might. For hee was laid in the graue a∣waiting the resur∣rection. How Christ sit∣teth at the right hand of God.Since then that hee by the right hand of God hath bin exalted, and hath recei∣ued of his father the promise of the holie Ghost, hee hath shewed forth this, which ye now see and heare. For Dauid is not as∣cended into heauen, but hee saith, the Lord said vnto my Lord, sit at my right hand, vntil I make thine enemies thy foot∣stoole. Therefore let all the house of Israel know for a suretie that God hath made him both Lord and Christ, this Iesus I say whom yee haue crucified. Out of the 5. of the Actes, verse 30.31. The God of our Fathers hath raised vp Iesus whome yee slew and hanged on a tree.
Him hath God lifte vp with his right hand, to bee a Prince and a Lorde, to giue repentaunce to Israel & forgiuenesse of sinnes. Out of the 7. of the Actes, and 55. verse. S. Steuen being full of the holie ghost looked stedfastlie into heauen, and sawe the glorie of God and Iesus standing at the right hand of God. Out of the 8. Chap. to the Romans, verse. 34. Who shal condemne? it is Christ which is dead, yea, or rather which is risen a∣gaine, who is also at the right hand of God, and maketh request also for vs. Out of the 1. Chap. to the Ephes. verse. 20. According to ye woorking of his mighty power, which is wrought in Christ, when hee raised him vp from the dead, & set him at his right hand in the heauenlie places farre aboue all principalitie and power, & might, and domination, and euerie name that is named not in this world onelie, but also in that that is to come. And hath
made all thinges subiect vnder his feete, and hath appointed him ouer all thinges, to be the head to the Church. Out of the 3. Chap. to the Colos. verse 1. Seeke those thinges which are aboue, where Christ sitteth a the right hand of God. Out of the first Chap. and the 3. verse to the Hebrewes. The sonne hath by himselfe purged our sinnes and sitteth at the right hand of the maiestie in the highest places. In the 13. verse. Vnto which also of the Angels said hee at anie time, sit at my right hand, til I make thine enemies thy footestoole? Out of the 8. Chap. to the Hebrewes, verse 1. Wee haue such an high priest, that sit∣teth at the right hand of the throne of the maiestie in heauen, and is a Minister of the sanctuarie and of the true Tabernacle.
Out of the 10. to the Hebrewes, verse 12. This man after hee had offered one sa∣crifice for sinnes, sitteth for euer on the right hand of God. And from henceforth tarieth, till his enemies be made his footestoole. Out of the 12. to the Hebrewes, ver. 2. Looking vnto Iesus the Author & fini∣sher of our faith, who for the ioy that was set before him, endured the crosse, and despised the shame, and is set at the right hand of the Throne of God. Out of the 3. Chap. and first Epistle of S. Peter, verse 22. Christ is at the right hand of God, gone into heauen, to whome the Angels and powers, and might are subiect. A prayer. O Lorde my God, giue me grace, ne∣uer to be ashamed of the Crosse of Christ, seeing that he is exalted at thy right hand, and that hee is the Lord of all creatures: And seeing that thou hast so much hono∣red our nature, let me despise all rebukes for thy name, and patientlie awaite the
hower, in the which all thy enemies shall be made thy footestoole. From thence shall he come to iudge the quicke and the dead. MEDITATION. OH the woonderfull counsell of God, that hee who was wickedlie iudged vnder Ponce Pilate, is established, not onelie a mediatour and Sauiour, but also iudge of the quicke and the dead: O Iudge truelie to be feared of all vnbelee∣uers:Iohn. 3. For hee that dooth not beleeue in thee, is condemned, and subiect alreadie to perdition,Rom. 8. how proude and gallant so∣euer he be: But yet to bee desired, and a∣waited of all the faithfull, to whome there is no condemnation, for so much as they are grafted in thee. Oh that diuers and manie times, do the faithfull lift vp their heades amongst these vniust and most tyrannous going forewardes of these wic∣ked Iudges, in so manie tormentes and persecutions, dailie looking for such a Iudge, who will iudge the causes of his little ones, and those that the world trea∣deth
vnder foote.Psal. 12. It is from heauen and not on the earth, that wee must awaite for such a Iudge, who shall bring the hidden thinges, and shall doe this honor vnto his seruantes, that they shall bee as his ben∣chars, counsellers, and companions in iudgement, as it is said in the 6. Chap. of the 1. vnto the Corinthians: That the Saintes shall iudge the world, and in the 19. of S. Matthew: That the Apostles shall iudge the tribes of Israel: insomuch as their glo∣rie, shall bee the condemnation of the world, who did oppresse them and per∣secute them. O Lord come quicklie to iudgement, that all eyes may see thee, yea those, who haue pearced thee,Apoca. 1. and doe dailie make warres to thee in thy mēbers. Witnesses out of the scripture concerning the iudgement. In the 25. of S. Matthew, verse 31. When the sonne of man commeth in his glorie, and all the holie Angels with him, then shall he sit vppon the throne of his glorie, and before him shall be ga∣thered all nations, and hee shall separate them one from an other, as a shep∣heard separateth the sheepe from the Goates. And shall set the sheepe on his
right hand, and the Goates on the left. Then shall the king say to them on his right hand: Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit yee the kingdome prepared for you, from the foundation of the world. And vnto those that shall bee on the left hand: Depart from mee yee cursed into euerlasting fire, which is prepared for the Diuell and his Angels. Out of the 5. Chap. of S. Iohn, verse 22. The Father iudgeth no man but hath committed all iudgement vnto the Sonne, because that all men should honor the sonne, as they honor the father. As the Father hath life in himselfe, so likewise hath hee giuen vnto his sonne, to haue life in himselfe, and hath giuen him power also to execute iudgement, in that hee is the sonne of man. As if hee should say, although the father the sonne and the holie Ghost doe worke, Iudge, and gouerne together, yet wil the Lord that wee should cast our eyes vppon the sonne of man, by whom we are gui∣ded, and through whome God hath de∣clared himselfe. Out of the 17. of the Actes, verse 30. And the time of his ignorance God re∣garded
not, but now hee admonisheth all men euerie where to repent, because hee hath appointed a day, in the which he wil iudge the world in righteousnesse by that man whom he hath appointed, whereof hee hath giuen an assurance to all men, in that he hath raised him from the dead. Out of the 5. Chap. 2. to the Corinth. Wee couet that both dwelling at home, and remouing from home, wee may bee acceptable to him. For wee must all ap∣peare before the iudgemēt seate of Christ, that euerie man may receaue the thinges, which are doone in his bodie, according vnto that hee hath doone, whether it bee good or euill. Out of the 4. Chap. and 1. Epistle to the Thessalonians. For the Lorde himselfe shall descend from heauen with a shoute, and with the voyce of the Archangell and with the Trumpet of God: and the dead in Christ shall arise first: then shall wee which liue and remaine bee caught vp with them also in the cloudes, to meete the Lord in the Aire, and so shall wee euer bee with the Lord. Wherefore comfort your selues one an other with these wordes.
Out of the 2. Epistle of S. Paul to the Thes. the first Chapter. For it is a righteous thing with God, to recompence tribulation to them that trouble you, & to you which are troubled, rest with vs when the Lord Iesus shal shew himselfe from heauen with his mightie Angels, in flaming fire, rendring ven∣geance vnto them, that doe not know God, and which obay not vnto the Gos∣pell of our Lord Iesus Christ: which shall bee punished with euerlasting perdition, from the presence of the Lord, and from the glorie of his power. When hee shall come to bee glorified in his Saintes and to bee made maruelous in all them that be∣leeue, &c. Out of the 3. Chap. 2. Epistle of to S. Peter. Against scorners or moc∣kers.There shal come in the last dayes moc∣kers, which will walke after their lustes, and say. Where is the promise of his com∣ming? For since the Fathers died, all thinges continue alike from the beginning of the creation. For this they willinglie know not, that the heauens were of old, and the earth that was of the water and by
the water, by the word of God. But the day of the Lord will come as a theefe in the night, &c. I beleeue in the holie Ghost. CONSIDERATION. AS it was said frō the beginning, the Fa∣ther, the Sonne and the holie Ghost are but one onelie true God, and this one∣lie true God is in such sorte declared to the world, that the Father is named ma∣ker, the Sonne redeemer, and the holie ghost our Doctor and sanctifier. For al∣beit, that this Trinitie worketh together, yet notwithstanding, for our great com∣fort, it is in such manner manifested, that we may acknowledge how all these three persons doe woorke together in all things that doe appertaine vnto our saluation. Now as the sonne is euerlastinglie begot∣ten of the Father, so likewise dooth the holie Ghost proceede euerlastinglie from the Father and the Sonne. So then be∣leeuing in the holie Ghost, wee doe not beleeue that the holie Ghost is onelie some moouing or inspiration: But chiefelie we doe beleeue, against the
Macedonians ancient Heritikes, that he is verie true God, of the same substance that the father and the sonne is: see then where∣fore we doe beleeue in him. And wee bee also baptised in his name, as of the father and of the sonne, he is an eternall spirite, as it is said in the 9. Chap. of the Hebrewes: and from him also commeth grace and peace as it sayde in the 1. Chap. of the He∣brewes: Beeing the temple of the holie Ghost it is sayde that we be the temple of God. To be short, the father, the worde, and the holy Ghost are all one: as it is saide in the first Chapter of the first Epistle of S. Iohn. Then doe we beleeue, that for the loue and in the name of Iesus Christ, the holy Ghost doth comfort, wash, and san∣ctifie vs, and that by the inspiration of him the holie Prophetes, and the Apostles haue spoken, and it is called the gift of God: and in the 2. of the Actes: because that he, who is but one in himselfe hath brought foorth diuerse operations in vs, of ye which it is spoken in the 12. Chap. of the 1. to ye Corinthians. And as S. Bernarde sayeth vppon the Canticles we were dead in sinne, and as stinking creatures, but Iesus did embawlme vs with his holie spi∣rite, and hath annointed vs therewith, to
the ende wee might knowe, taste, and feele his mercie. This is the heate of the Sunne which warmeth vs. This is the goodly and faire water of the heauenly ryuers, which doeth refresh and water vs. It is the Bawlme that embalmeth vs, it is the Oyle, which doeth strengthen and make vs glad. Nowe what tongue is it that can ex∣presse this goodnesse of God towardes vs, of the Father that hath created vs, vn∣to his image, of the Worde who hath bought vs againe with his bloude, of the Holie Ghost, that hath sanctified vs by his power. Therefore let vs giue place vnto this Holie Ghost,Ephe. 4. and let vs not sorrowe for our vncleannesse, filth, and sinne, that hee may bring vs into all trueth, and that hee may sanctifie and strengthen vs vnto the ende, comfor∣ting vs in this Article of death, praying,Rom. 8. and sighing for vs with gronings that can∣not be expressed. Witnesses out of the holie Scripture concer∣ning the Holie Ghost.
Out of the 12. of Zacharie, verse 10. I will powre vppon the house of Da∣uid, and vppon the inhabitantes of Ieru∣salem the spirit of grace and of compas∣sion, and they shal looke vpon me whom they haue pearced. MEDITATION. BY the first Adam, alas, wee become barraine and vnprofitable, & were shut out of the grace of God, but the Lorde promising the establishmēt of his Church againe by Christ, promised to poure out his giftes and graces in great abundance. For although, that in our fathers dayes, God had wrought great fauour vnto the people, yet so it is, that this is proper vnto Christ, to giue vnto vs the spirit of grace, mercie, and inuocation. And this is the richest gift that GOD could impart vnto vs, for so much as it is said in the 8. Chapter to the Romans: That wee could not knowe how wee were Christes, and the children of GOD,
without this spirit: For hee was woon∣derfullie and extraordinarilie giuen in the day of Pentecost: But yet dooth hee dailie ioyne together his woorking with the preaching of the Gospell, and woor∣keth in vs, that wee doe call vppon God with full assurance. Oh that this spirit of grace is to bee desired.1. Sam. 18. It is not this euill spirit, which was giuen vnto Saul, that vexed and troubled him, but it is the spirit of grace and of com∣passion. This is the Lord, that we must woorship in spirit and trueth. Out of the 4. Chap. of the Euangelist S. Iohn. Iesus said vnto the Samaritane: Who∣soeuer drinketh of this water shall thirst againe: But the water that I shall giue him, shall bee in him a well of water, springing vp into euerlasting life. A MEDITATION. OH how hath Dauid truelie felt the ver∣tues of these liuing waters, when as
he said in the 42. Psalme. Like as the thir∣stie Hart runneth with swift course vn∣to the riuers of water: euen so dooth my soule also long and pant after thy di∣uine grace. For what is it likewise, to in∣ioie all the pleasures of the world, since that they take not away his thirst, neither yet quench this alteration, but doe in∣crease and make the people like vnto men filled with dropsies, which the more they drinke, the more thirstie they are. But be∣hold, two thinges, that this water dooth greatlie recommend vnto vs, whereof Ie∣sus Christ talked with the Samaritane. It is that they which drinke thereof, are no more tormented with thirst: feeling in them a well of liuing water, that springeth vp alwayes without ceasing and cannot be drawen drie. Besides, this water that man feeleth in his soule, and that runneth about his heart, dooth neuer forsake vs: but quickeneth vs vnto euerlasting life. Therefore, blessed are they, which doe feele in their soules such a running water, which dooth not for a trueth spring out of the vaines of the earth, but from the hiest heauens, and out of the true heauen∣lie paradise. Now as S. Chrysostome saith: This water is the strength and woorking
of the spirit of God, working by the word of the Gospell. For it behooueth that we take heede of the errour of the Massalians and Scuencfieldians:Against ye Massalians who doe separate the spirite from the worde, and doe dreame; in the reuelations of the spirite. But S. Paule teacheth vs in the 3. to the Galathians, That we receiue the spirite, through the preach∣ing of faith: and in the second Chap. of the 2. Epistle to the Thessalonians hee ioyneth together the sanctification of the spirite, and the faith of trueth. Moreouer, this spi∣rite hath diuers effectes, and is by this oc∣casion some times called fire,Matth. 3. because that it purifieth and consumeth our euill affe∣ctions; and kindleth in vs a zeale, as in the disciples going to Emaus,Luke. 24. whose heartes burned within themselues hearing Iesus speake. Nowe it is also called water, tho∣rough his working, because that this holy spirite refresheth vs against the burning heat of temptations, and also doeth wash and serue to quench the firie dartes of Sa∣than: let it then neuer come to passe,Ephes. 6. for vs to doe as the ydolaters, of whom God complaineth in the 2. Chap. of Ieremiah: Who forsaking the fountaine of liuing water, digged to themselues dead pittes and drie cesterns, that can hold no water.
Out of the 7. Chap. of S. Iohn, vers. 38. Ioel. 2.He that beleeueth in me, as sayeth the scripture, out of his belly shall flowe riuers of water of life. Nowe this spake he of the spirit, which they that beleeued in him should receiue. Out of the 15. of S. Iohn. A witnesse of the spi∣rite, and of the prea∣ching ioy∣ned toge∣ther.When the comforter shal come, whom I will sende vnto you from the father, euen the spirite of trueth which proceedeth of the father, hee shall testifie of me and yee shall witnesse also because ye haue beene with me from the beginning. Out of the 16. of S. Iohn. When he is come which is the spirit of trueth, hee will leade you into all trueth: for hee shall not speake of himselfe, but whatsoeuer he shall heare, shall he speake. Out of the 8. Chap. of the Epistle to the Ro∣manes. For if you liue after the flesh, yee shall die: but if ye mortifie the deedes of the bodie by the spirite, yee shall liue. For as many as are lead by the spirit of God, they are the sonnes of God. S. Paule prayeth by the spirite.Out of the 15. Chap. to the Romans, vers. 30. I beseech you for our Lorde Iesus
Christs sake, and for the loue of the spirite, that ye would striue with me by praiers. Out of the 3. Chapter of the 1. to the Corinth. Knowe ye not that ye are the temple of God, and that the spirite of God dwelleth in you? Out of the 12. to the Corinth. 1. Epistle. There are diuersities of giftes, but the same spirite: and there are diuersities of administration, but the same Lorde: and there are diuersities of operation, but God is the same, which worketh all in all. But the manifestation of the spirite, is giuen to euery man to profite withall. Out of the 13. Chap. of the 2. to the Corinth. and 13. vers. The grace of our Lorde Iesus Christ, and the loue of God, and the communion of the holy Ghost be with you all. Out of the 4. Epistle to the Ephesians, vers. 30. Griue not the spirite of God, by whom ye are sealed vnto the day of redemption. Out of the 5. Chap. and the 1. to the Thes. Quench not the spirite. Despise not prophesying. Out of the 1. of S. Iohn. 2. Chap.
The annointing which yee receiued of me dwelleth in you: and ye neede not that any man teache you, for the same annoin∣ting teacheth you. Hee would not simplie say, that they haue no neede of instruction: but that they being kindled by the holy spirite, might not suffer themselues to bee deceiued by Antichrist a people altogether rude and ignorant. A prayer out of the 51. Psalme. Create in me a cleane heart O God, and renue a right spirite within me. Cast mee not away from thy presence, and take not thine holy spirite from me. Restore in me the ioie of thy saluation, and stablish mee with thy free spirite. I beleeue the holy Catholike Church. A consideration vpon this Article. AS there is but one onely true and verie God, to wit, these three persons, the father, the sonne, and the holy Ghost: euen so there is but one faith, whereof it was spoken in the former Articles. Wee doe
therefore protest now, that we do beleeue the Catholike Church: for we say not as before time, I beleeue in the Church: but it is God in whom we do put all our whole trust: it is he as wee doe reade in the first Chap. of the Apocalips that is α & ω that is to say, the beginning and the end. And as it is written in the 43. Chap. of Esaiah: Be∣fore mee there was no God that was the maker of the worlde, neither shall there be after me. I euen I am the eternall, and be∣side me there is no sauiour. What is it then to beleeue the Catholike Church? First it is to beleeue that whatsoeuer corruptions, ydolatries, persecutions, and disorders there haue beene in the worlde, that this great God, creator,1. Peter. 2. redeemer and sanctifier, hath gotten out his chosen peo∣ple, whom he hath called out of darkenes into his wonderful light,Psal. 147. vnto whom he is reueiled through his holy testimonies, ye he hath washed and sanctified,1. Tim. 3. and that is his Church, and the house of the liuing God, builded vppon the pillar of trueth,Matth. 16. & vpon this corner stone which is Christ, so that the gates of hell shall not preuaile any thing against it because that all things helpe vnto the profite and wealth of the children of GOD,Rom. 8. 2. Tim. 2. and that this
foundation resteth sure, howe God know∣eth those which are his, as in the times of Eliah he reserued to himselfe seuen thou∣sande men,1. Kings. 19. which hadde not bowed their knees vnto Baal. Secondly, we doe witnesse, protest, and beleeue by this article of our faith, that we be members of this true Church,Heb. 10. and doe ioyne our selues to it to be good & faithful citizens therein,Heb. 10. following the holy assem∣blies, and making that profession and con∣fession of the name of God, that all true faithfull ought to doe. Thirdly, by this article we doe beleeue and also doe protest, that wee doe not ac∣knowledge all assemblies indifferently, for the Church of God, but that as it is decla∣red in the symbole of Nice, that which is Apostolike: that is to say, which doeth holde it selfe vnto the doctrine of the Apo∣stoles, and is not tyed vnto anie certaine place or citie but is vniuersall, gathered together by the preaching of the Gospell and through the vse of the holy sacra∣mentes,Ephes. 1. Colos. 1. in all the partes of the worlde, vnder this onely heade, that is Iesus Christ,1. Colos. 12. in whom is grounded this com∣munion of the saintes, which in him are made members of one and the selfe same
bodie,Actes. 2. partakers of one and the selfe same spirite, of the same Gospell, of the same sacramentes, howe so euer the outwarde ceremonies be not altogether alike, yet are they knit by the same bonde of peace, and ioyned through the true loue, calling vppon one and the same sauiour, and the awayting as brethren, for one and the same heritage which is the blessed life. For these be the offeringes, that God ma∣keth vnto his Church, which he hath pur∣chased for himselfe, to wit, the forgiue∣nesse of sinnes, and the life euerlasting, which a man can not finde out of the true Church. Whereupon, it is to be noted, that the faithfull are called holy, yea in earth, not that they should be perfect and voide of sinne, as some do imagine a per∣fection to be: for so should they haue no more neede of the forgiuenesse of sinnes: But they are called holy, because they are sanctified & because of their calling which is holy and to all holinesse whereunto they doe aspire without ceasing: not that they haue alreadie apprehended all, but because they doe followe after, see∣king to learne drawing towardes the marke in respect of that heauenly calling
as S. Paule sayth in the 3. Chap. to the Phi∣lippians. Figures of the Church. Noes Arke. In the 7. Chap. of Genesis. By the floud euery thing in whose no∣strels breathed life, died: Noah only remai∣ned, and they that were with him in the Arke. And S. Ierome writing vnto Damasus sayth: that there is no saluation without the Churche: and as there is but one Arke, euen so there is but one Church: and as he himselfe writeth vnto Euander, we ought not to thinke, that the Church of Rome is any other, than that which is in other places of the worlde, where that Iesus is worshipped, be it in Fraunce or in Englande, or else where. There is the Church, where it is bounde in Christ and knit together by the bande of loue. But if we must speake of authoritie, the autori∣tie of the worlde is greater than the auto∣ritie of a citie, & the autoritie of Churches spread throughout the world greater than that which is in one place. A Prayer. O Lorde our God and father, although
that thy ordinance is,Genes. 8. that thou wilt not smite anie more the whole world with the floud of waters, and that from hence for∣warde the seede time and haruest, and cold and heate, and summer and winter, and day and night, shall not cease, and that so long as the earth remaineth, in confirmation whereof, thou hast established the hea∣uenly arke for a signe: Notwithstanding, O my God, what is this poore life, but a floud of euilles? But in this, my soule is comforted, then when as namely in thy wrath, thou diddest powre out the ouer∣flowinges of waters vpon the lande, then, at that time, O God, thou diddest powre out by thy fauour, thy grace, and prote∣ction vpon the Arke of Noah. For why was it that he did not perish with the rest? Did he see the same floude? Was hee couered with the same waters? Yes truely. But in his Arke he had thy promise. He had thy grace which did defende him, in such sort as thousandes fell at his right hande, and thousandes at his left hande, hee was sure vnder thy wing. So Lorde, although that in this worlde a like floud of euilles doth fall both vpon the good and the euil,Eccle. 3. and that both the one and the other dies: yet we knowe, that thou wilt saue those
which are in the Arke of thy Church, and that haue thy worde, and thy promises, and with whome thou art reconciled: as thou hast promised by thy prophet Esaiah:Esay 54. That although for a time thou hidest thy face away from thine: yet neuerthelesse thou hast sworne as in the daies of Noah, that thou wouldest no more suffer the wa∣ters to ouerflowe the earth: so also hast thou sworne, that thou wilt be mercifull vnto thy people.1. Peter. 3. Whereof thou giuest vnto vs assuraunce in the sacrament of Baptisme, in which thou shewest vnto vs, both life and death: as vnto Noah, death in the waters, and life in the arke. Our sinnes O Lorde are (the meanes of thy wrath) sufficient to drowne vs: but in receiuing vs into thine Arke, which is thy Church, and graffing vs in thy sonne Ie∣sus, whereto thou giuest vs a visible signe and testimonie in baptisme, wee be saued and quickened. Albeit therefore though the faithfull be in small number, as was also the fami∣lie of Noah, made onely of eight persons, yet suffer not that I turne away for this from thy Church: or that euer O my God this desperate spite take me, to drowne and destroy my selfe with the multitude.
But O heauenly father giue mee rather grace to watch, and to continue, that I bee not ouerwhelmed, and sette vp∣on, by thy iudgementes: euen as they were in Noahs time, which sported them∣selues and gaue themselues ouer to their delightes:Matth. 24. but rather that I may be found watching, and awayting patiently, and constantly the comming of my good mai∣ster Iesus Christ. So be it. Ierusalem was also a figure of the Church of God. For as it is sayde in the 122. Psalme: Ierusalem is builded as a citie, that is com∣pact together in it selfe: whereunto the Tribes, euen the Tribes of the Lorde goe vp, (according to the testimonie of Isra∣ell,) to praise the name of the Lorde: It is called the house of the Lorde, in the which the brethren are set in order. In the 56.7 of Esaiah the temple shall bee called the house of prayer for all people. The tabernacle that was also so welbe∣loued, for the testimonies that God gaue therein of his presence,Psalm. 84. and that there
they did seeke the Lorde as it is saide in the 33. of Exodus, was a figure of the Church, where is the meeting and con∣gregation of the Lorde. The Church in the 10. Chap. of S. Iohn is compared vnto a sheepefolde, where∣of Iesus is the sheepehearde, and in the which the sheepe doe heare and vnder∣stande the voice of the sheepheard. In the 5. Chapter of the Epistle of S. Paule to the Ephesians, as also often times in the prophetes, the Church is compa∣red vnto a welbeloued spouse, in whom the Lorde taketh his pleasure, and of whom he is the heade, as the husbande of his wife, whom he maketh much of, and for whome hee hath giuen himselfe. So then the true Church is compared in the scripture vnto a heauenly Ierusalem,Heb. 12.22. and hath most excellent titles, when as man doth respect the chosen of God, and the companie of the true faithfull, which the Lorde knoweth and approueth. But when the scripture beholdeth this visible Church, and considereth it at once and outwardly, then is it compared vn∣to a great fielde, that yeeldeth manie∣folde and sundrie kinde of graines, where amongest, and in which there is great
store of Darnell: or else like vnto a nette,Matth. 13. that hath taken all manner of fishes. For all they which are outwardly Iewes, as S. Paul saith in the 2. to the Romanes, be not therefore very Iewes in deede. So likewise all they that say, Lorde, Lorde,Matth. 7. shall not enter into the kingdome of heauen. But God doth alwaies reserue some seede, in the middest of these corruptions: and without that, wee had as Esaiah sayeth, euen a good while agone beene as Sodom and Gomorra. Certaine places of the scripture, concerning the Church of God, and the profite of his worde. Out of the 93. Psalme, vers. 5. Thy testimonies are verie sure O Lord: holinesse becommeth thy house for euer. Out of the 94. Psalme, vers. 12. Blessed is the man, whom thou chaste∣nest O Lorde, and teachest him thy lawe, that thou maiest giue him rest from the daies of euill whiles the pit is digged for the wicked. Out of the 119. Psalme, vers. 32.
I will runne the way of thy commaun∣dementes when thou shalt inlarge mine heart. A prayer. O Lorde my God because that the way of thy saluation is declared vnto vs in thy worde, and that by so many testi∣monies of the prophets and Apostles, wee do vnderstande what is the true and right way, suffer me not to lose my selfe, wan∣dering through the large way of the world and going in the counsell of the wicked: or following the traditions of men.Psalm. 73. Make me to knowe that all they which trust not in thee are in daungerous and slipperie places. And suffer me not O good God, that in this faire way wherein thou hast set me, I waxe feeble, or slowly walke, but that rather I may runne out this holie course euen vnto the ende, and that I may re∣maine constant in thy obedience: and that I may by a true faith ouercome the of∣fences and lettes, that Sathan offereth vn∣to them which doe runne vnto thee. Alas O Lorde I truely knowe that the best run∣ners
are some times subiect to stumble, but keepe me from falling: and if I fall, let thy holie hande relieue mee and soone set me vpright, that so Lorde feeling thy goodnesse, and sweetenesse, that I serue thee not vnwillingly and grudgingly, but where as in times past I ranne after vani∣ties and ydolatrie, I may nowe runne O my God in the way that thy worde doeth appoint vs: and to the ende I may runne, set my heart at libertie,Psalm. 32. for our spirites are naturally so much let with worldly cares, that we are become more duller and re∣stiue than oxe or mule. But it is thy vertue wherein I so hope and trust: it is thy aide that I call for, that by thy mighty spirite, my weake spirite may be vnswathed and vnroled, there may be nothing to stay me from walking in thy feare, to the ende I may vowe my selfe in thy seruice. O Lord blessed are they which be in thy schoole, where thy worde soundeth and thy spirite gouerneth, which comforteth and stren∣theneth vs against all afflictions, name∣ly against death:1. Cor. 9. declaring vnto vs that wee runne not in vaine, but for the vn∣corruptible crowne of glorie. O Lorde giue mee grace so to runne, that I may learne him and come euen vnto thee.
We doe require as Dauid sayeth,Psalm. 119. in this worlde, they face in thy Church: But we doe not see as yet thy face vncouered: we see thee in thy worde, and in part. But O happie are we, when as wee shall see thy glorie, and that we shall see thee such as thou art, without sacrament or figure: in∣ioying the trueth and presence of thy ma∣iestie. O God thou art my treasure, grant me grace to haue my heart there, where my treasure is, and to meditate night and day in thy worde, which is the light that guideth my steppes, and is in tribulation more sweete vnto my heart, than honny is vnto the mouth. The reason of man was truely O Lorde a goodly lampe, that thou haddest giuen vnto man: but as it is dark∣ned, it cannot shewe the way, which lea∣deth man from sinne to righteousnes, and from death to life: and they which other∣waies are not lightened but by the same, doe perish as beastes.Psalm. 49. Nowe since it plea∣seth thee to haue a Church on the earth, which thou hast gathered together tho∣rowe the preaching of thy worde, in∣lighten my eies to beholde and see the spirituall state and magnificence of this house, to the ende I may loue it, and delight my selfe therein. And because
that I am a stranger in the land, inligh∣ten me in such sorte, that seeing the way of euerlasting life in thy word, I may fol∣low it, vntill I come vnto the true coun∣trie which is in heauen. Out of the 59. Chap. of Esaiah, verse 21. Beholde my couenaunt with them faith the Lorde: my spirit that is vppon thee, and my wordes which I haue put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seede, nor out of the mouth of the seede of thy seede, saith the Lorde, from henceforth euen for euer. CONSIDERATION. THese wordes doe declare vnto vs, that the onelie people which haue the word of GOD, and the purenesse of the Do∣ctrine, are auouched the true people of the Lord. For with this word, God wor∣keth, and vnfoldeth the force of his spi∣rit:Rom. 1. as by this occasion is the Gospell al∣so so called the power of God, to saluation to all beleeuers: to bee short, by the
meane of this word,2. Cor. 5. and through the ministrie of reconciliation, God hath esta∣blished his couenant amongest vs, being fauorable vnto vs, and forgiuing vs our sinnes: Therefore, this Church is not go∣uerned by swords or by Crosses, but by the spirit and by the word of God: And because that this word, is euerlasting, it is not in the power of the world to stop the course thereof. But God, to punish our vnthankfulnesse, draweth it backe some∣times from vs, and in the meane while, it is in such sorte, as hee maketh it to waxe fruitefull elsewhere, and that which wee doe not see, our posteritie shal see it, with whom the Lord hath also his couenant. O the follie of mankinde, which hea∣reth not wisedome crie out in the streets and biddeth vs come vnto her.Prou. 1. Therefore of good right doeth she laugh at the de∣struction of all those which despise her. A Prayer vppon this place. Out of the 15. Chap. of S. Matthew. EVerie plant, which mine heauenlie Fa∣ther hath not planted,Prou. 0. shall bee rooted vp. O Lord my God, because that thine onelie word is pure, cleane, and a buck∣ler
vnto all those that trust in thee, giue me grace to loue thee, and since that thou thy selfe inuitest vs vnto ye wholsome wa∣ters, that thou giuest for nothing, guide me vnto those running brookes: keepe my soule from being led away by this enemie, which soweth Cockle, and euill hearbes in the world:1. Iohn. 4. Giue mee the spirit of dis∣cretion to proue the spirites, and suffer me not to bee lead with euerie winde of Do∣ctrine,2. Tim. 1. but dailie to holde the true patterne of thy wholsome word,1. Cor. 11. which is in faith and loue in Iesus Christ. And albeit to proue thine, thou doest suffer manie times the euill plantes to increase, and permittest heresies as is to bee seene of olde, when as the blasphemie of the Arrians tooke roote as it were in all the East, and in our dayes popish Idolatrie hath doone in the West.2. Thes. 2. So in likewise haue wee also seene how thou hast vnrooted them, and manifested the dreames of men, so that there is none nowe deceaued but those, whome despise the trueth, and loue the Epicures life, yeelding them∣selues woorthie to bee led away by the spirit of blindnesse and errour. In the meane while O GOD beate downe them which make Sectes, Partialities,Rom. 16.
and Scandals a part, against the pure Doctrine: graunt power and might to the Ministrie of thy holie Gospell, that all heresies and errors may bee roo∣ted out of mens heartes, and that in quiet peace and concorde wee may praise thy name all the dayes of our life. Also shew thy fauour vnto vs, and now that it is so late, in the end of our time, yea and that it seemeth, O Lorde, that this faire sunne of trueth would goe to rest, whome thou hast shewed in the world,Mat. 28. may re∣maine with vs, and strengthen vs in thy knowledge, following this thy promise, that thou hast made to bee with vs euen vnto the end of the world. So be it. Of the hearing of the word of God. Out of the 11. of S. Luke. Blessed are they that heare the word of God and keepe it. MEDITATION. BLessed are they then, not that heare much, know much, and speake much of the word of God: But that keepe it in
obedience of faith. For whereto serueth the seede throwne into the ground, if it tooke not roote there to increase and bring forth fruite? Whereunto serueth as saith Iesus Christ in the 7. Chap. of S. Matthew, to make a high building, if vp∣pon the blowing of the first windes, the house fall? They loue me, saith Christ in the 14. of S. Iohn, that doe not onlie heare, but also keepe my commaundementes. For how shall wee heare, if hee doe not pearce our eares,Psal. 40. and open our vnder∣standinges, because, that it is nothing to heare outwardlie, vnlesse that God doe speake vnto vs inwardlie, and if it be not heard within vs. Men truelie haue eares: But they haue not all eares to heare, and to make their profit of the word of God. Now since that they are vndoubtedlie ac∣cursed, which neither heare, nor keepe this word, and doe loue better to heare worldlie songes, or foolish follies: Let vs pray without ceasing, this God, that hee will open the heartes to vnderstand his word, as hee did vnto this Lydia, a seller of purple, of whome mention is made in the 16. Chap. of the Actes. And that wee doe not take it of the Lord in ill part, when hee shall punish vs, because that in so do∣ing
hee doth open our eares, to receaue instruction, euen as it is said in the 36. of Iob and the 10. verse. A prayer vppon the same matter. O Most gratious and mercifull GOD: thou hast declared by thy dearelie be∣loued sonne Iesus Christ, that they which heare thy word, and keepe it are blessed. Doeth it not rather belong vnto vs O Lord, to acknowledge and to maruaile at thy blessednesse, and felicitie? It is for vs to speake of thine, and thou doest vnto vs this honor, to speake of ours. Thou pronouncest by thy sonne, that wee are blessed, in hearing thy word: and that when wee haue it, and heare it, that doeth not come of our selues, but through thy great mercie. It is thou thy selfe, which openest and stoppest our eares. Oh heauē∣lie Father, how great is thy mercie? But wo vnto this damnable vnthankfulnesse of them that laugh and gaude thereat, in place of hearing it. Wo vnto this our sluggishnesse, that hindereth vs to pray, and to demaund none other thing, but that thy word might haue his course,. Thes. 3. Ephe. 6. and might be glorified, and that thou raise vp good
shepheardes, to whome thy word may be giuen, that with open mouth, and with boldnesse of heart,1. Sam. 3. the secretes of the Gos∣pel may be made knowen: And yt it hap∣pen not vnto vs that thy word bee take a∣way for our vnthankfulnesse,Ephe. 3. as wee doe reade that in the time of Eli it was rare in the request, and there was little to be had of anie manifest vision. Now vnto him, which by his power may doe all in all a∣bundance, more than wee doe aske or thinke: vnto him be glorie in the Church, in Iesus, and in all ages. So be it. Out of the 5. Chap. of the Gospell of S. Iohn. Search the scriptures:Of the profit in the true vnderstā∣ding of the scrip∣tures. for in them yee thinke to haue eternall life, and they are they which testifie of me. MEDITATION. MEn haue a naturall desire to the euer∣lasting life. But where is it, that they doe seeke it? In themselues or in mens tra∣ditions. And in so dooing, they goe far off, in place to drawe neere to it. For it hath pleased this good God, to comfort and quicken the people, giuing vnto
them his scriptures, which is called the word of life: in such sort as it is a woon∣derfull benefit that God bestoweth on a people, when hee giueth vnto them his word.Luke. 10. And as it was said vnto Martha, that it was needefull for vs to labour with care after so manie things. But there is one thing yt is truelie & in euerie respect necessarie:Iohn 6.27. To labour after the heeuenlie foode. All the rest is, but as an accessa∣rie. Let vs therefore trauaile and labour after the foode that shall neuer perish. For there is no question to labour much, the sonne of God presenteth it to vs. Let vs seeke into it. Let vs here applie our studies, and there let vs imbrace it, and let vs choose as Marie did the better part. Wee must not heare make readie, neither armes, teeth, nor mouth, to la∣bour after this heauenlie meate. We must beleeue as S. Augustine saith in the 25. treatise vpon S. Iohn. But what? manie doe reade the word of God, but as it were to runne from it, so that this is as a booke closed vp, and out of the which they bring no profit. For it behooueth to inquire thereof, truelie to sound, weigh, and con∣ferre the one with the other, with calling vppon it in the name of God. All euen as they doe, which digge for the treasure of
the earth, they must imploy their labour, and trie with all diligence the mettales: For if they doe but scratch the earth a∣boue, they shall neuer finde out the Ore or Mettall. Other some doe reade it, as the Iewes, but it is with a veile, and with∣out seeking him there, who is the end of the lawe, to wit, Iesus Christ. The heri∣tickes doe reade and read againe the scrip∣tures, as the Anabaptistes, and others:In what manner the heri∣tiques doe alledge the scrip∣ture. But as faith Clement Alexādrine in his 7. booke Stromat: Although the heretickes doe in deede alledge the scriptures, yet may a man by and by see their deceite: for either they doe not conferre the scripture with scripture, or they doe alledge it by peece meale, and by little and little morsels, and not wholie: or else they will not acknow∣ledge the phrase or manner of speaking of the scripture, neither the scope or end of it. And as an other verie auncient Do∣ctor named Irenaeus saith in his third booke and 15. Chapter against heresies: The heritickes to the end they might not bee discouered, doe alledge the scrip∣ture well at the beginning, to drawe on the people vnto them: But so soone as they haue gotten scholers, they wrest the scrip∣tures to their owne side, and make men
beleeue that their rauing or raylinges bee the scripture, and doe scorne at all the good Doctors,Of corre∣ction. Donat. falselie accusing and slaun∣dering them. Now the Lord (saith S. Au∣gustine) suffereth heritickes to be, that our faith and loue might be tried together: Our faith, whether we doe suffer our selues to be led away: Our loue, when as wee seeke to reforme & instruct them. There∣fore, let vs beware of such a companie of scoffers, which say, What haue we to doe to torment our selues, after the reading of the scriptures? One cannot know at these dayes, what to beleeue: some ex∣pound it thus, othersome so. Euerie heri∣ticke doeth alledge the scripture. It is true. But as it is said: if wee be deceaued, it is for that wee will be beguiled, because we will not truelie seeke out the scriptures. Is it not easie enough to discerne the Spider from the Bee? The one turneth all into poyson: The other into honie. Such is the difference betweene the heretickes and the true faithfull.How the scripture ought to be read. Now the faithfull reading the scripture, will reade it with prayer, that God may open his vnderstanding, to know the woonders of his Lawe: such prayers Dauid made in the 119. Psalme: Then hee will reade it, not to bee turned
away from the preaching of the word: But rather so much the more to knowe and vnderstand the doctrine which is preached. Thirdlie, hee will not reade the scripture to halues, but will compare the old and the newe Testament together. Lastlie, hee will not seeke out there in subtilties nor curiosities, but hee will seeke there Iesus Christ, for whose loue all was written, as wee doe reade in the 20. Chap. of S. Iohn: And therefore will he reade the scripture to strengthen him in the faith, alwayes hauing before his eyes the Articles of our faith, as a guide, to which hee will referre that which hee readeth as vnto certaine cōmon places. Therefore, Christ is the end of the lawe, and of sacrifices, Christ is hee to whome the Prophetes haue yeelded witnesse: and this is the scripture that reuealeth it vnto vs, and not Philosophie or humane reason. Of the true ofspring of sectes and heresies. Out of the 8. Chap. of S. Iohn, verse 44.
The diuel hath beene a Murtherer from the beginning & abode not in the trueth, for the trueth is not in him. If anie keepe my word saith Iesus Christ, hee shall ne∣uer tast of death. CONSIDERATION. THey who haue knowen Martin Lu∣ther, that seruant of God in his time, write, how hee hauing long experience, and amongest manie temptations, learned the deceites of the Diuell, oftentimes said, that one day he would put hand to penne, to write a great volume against Satan, to discouer his wiles and craftes, and all the kindes of temptations, wherewith hee was accustomed to fight against vs. Be∣sides this hee did dailie aduertise the peo∣ple, both priuatelie and openlie, that it was not a thing so light as men thought it, to haue dailie Satan at our heeles, and an enemie so craftie, that spied out but the occasion to sift vs, and to destroy vs. Now on a time Luther being requested (by a good man, who suffered manie tēp∣tations and other vnquietnesse) for some comfort: Hee wrote this vnto him that followeth, in a booke brieflie expounding
this sentence of S. Iohn set downe before. Satan from the beginning of the world was a lyar, and through lyes hath a desire to tempt mankinde. Behold how Adam and Eue our first parentes were ouertaken and caught, which were created vnto the Image of God: For hauing beguiled them through lies, hee was therein also a mur∣therer, in that that of the immortall, they became mortall. Not long after, hee set Caine against his Brother Abel, and did thrust forward the brother to imbrue his handes with the bloud of his brother. And this is the manner and guise of all Satans kingdome. Hee began through lying to seduce men: afterward hee ceaseth not, to stirre vp persecutions, against the true faithfull, which would not cleaue vnto his lies. In the meane while, hee bringeth his maintainers to dispaire, as it is to be seene of Caine, Iudas, and others. Therefore it is for vs to beware of so cruell and craftie an enemie. Let vs also beware and take good heede of his false and dreaming do∣ctrines which commeth forth out of his shoppe, the end whereof is vtter destru∣ction. To be short, let vs take heede of lying and crueltie, seeing both the one and the other commeth of the Diuell.
Moreouer, let vs marke, that our com∣fort is, that Iesus Christ was giuen vnto vs, who appeared to ouerthrow and de∣stroy the workes of the diuell. And in deede, hee was found the stronger, that did buind his enemie Satan, and draue a∣way the Prince of the world. Against his leinges, he hath armed vs with the trueth of his Gospell. Against death, hee gaue vs life, giuing himselfe to bee our Ema∣nuel, that is to say, God with vs. What greater comfort should wee know to de∣sire? For if a man would say, yea: but Christ is in heauen. Behold, that which Iesus saith: If anie man keepe my word, hee shall not perish. The doctrine of the lawe accuseth vs, and setteth downe before vs our condemnation: But the Gospell is the word of life and power of GOD to saluation. O miserable and wretched world, that forsaketh this pre∣tious word. The auncient Fathers haue woondred at a hearbe called Panacea, which as some say healed all maner of diseases. And see∣ing manie times we doe see, that men e∣steeme more of some little experience of Phisicke, that they shall haue against anie sicknes: Why then doe they not com∣mend
and praise aboue all, the doctrine of the Gospell, which healeth vs against death? Is it because that the world is so earthlie, and lustfull, which is not other∣wise guided, but by fleshlie considera∣tions, and neither trusteth in God nor in his promises? But wee must feare the iudgementes of God. For as they, which doe keepe this word shall not feare death: So contrariwise, they that keepe it not, shall see the first and the second death. And howsoeuer it seeme vnto men, yt they passe away with eies closed vp vnto death, yet neuerthelesse, they doe see death, whē the bitternesse thereof, and the wrath of God, present themselues before their eyes. Now concerning the children of GOD, they see them dailie dying, and themselues also doe die: But because their soules learne the word of GOD, they see not death. For hee teacheth them, euen as those that doe goe into darke pla∣ces by the light, who see not the darknesse which is ouercome by the light. So a faithfull man, which possesseth Gods grace, doeth not behold death in his na∣ture, and as Gods iudgement, but as a sweete sleepe, whereby wee doe passe
into heauenlie rest: and how much the more wee beleeue, so much the more are wee assured and certaine against death. But the more wee be negligent to heare the word of God, so much the more wee lie open to terrours and feares. O how strong is therefore the faithfull man, who is a member of the Church which staieth himselfe vppon the word of God. The great warriers Alexander, Iulius Cae∣sar and others hauing braued in the world, haue beene famous for their onlie prowes: they are dead, and those commonlie are the most astonied when death commeth: as it is read of Adrian the Emperour,The Sor∣rowes of Adrian the Em∣perour. who at the point of death made such like mournings. O poore soule, naked, and a vacabond, into what place goest thou now to yeelde thy selfe? Alas, what shall become of thee thou companion and ghest of my bodie? Thou from hence forewardes shalt haue no more pastime. Loe this is the vnquiet∣nesse, and vnsetlednesse of the people of this world. Let vs pray therefore as in the 90 Psalme, that God will giue vs grace to consider the shortnesse of our dayes, to the ende we may applie our heartes vnto wisedome.
A prayer vpon this place. Out of the 14. of S. Iohn. If any man loue me, he will keepe my worde and my father will loue him, and we will come vnto him, and will dwell with him. O Lord, who is he which will not loue thee, syth that thou hast so loued vs, to haue giuen thy sonne for vs? Nowe be∣cause that thou discernest those which do loue thee in deede, from hypocrites, when as they loue and keepe thy worde, giue me grace, yea vnto mee, that naturally loue but vice and vanitie, to loue thy word: vnto me that can doe nothing but in thee, and by thee, to keepe thy worde, and to yeelde obedience vnto thee. For what a benefite is it to haue thy companie, yea this sweete companie of thee, and of thy sonne Iesus, and of thy holie spirite, which thou hast promised to them, that wil yeeld themselues affectionated vnto thy worde? What greater mischiefe could happen than to be thrust backe and depriued of such a companie? For whosoeuer is not with thee, it behoueth that hee be with Sathan, that is to say with all euill. Because yt in as much as thou giuest peace, felicitie,
and life vnto them, with whome thou dwellest: euen so also is sathan the authour of all euill, and of all mischiefe. Therefore O Lorde, giue me grace to abide in thee, as the braunch in the vine, to bring foorth the fruites of thy glorie, to liue in thee, and vnto thee, to feele thee daily with all the comfortes that thou giuest vnto thine. Let thy good spirite succour mee in my weakenesse,Rom. 8. that that which is an offence vnto the worlde,1. Cor. 1. to wit, the Gospell of the crosse, may bee my comfort and my treasure, that I may feele the vertue, power, and strength of this thy woorde, euen in all the partes of my soule, from this time foorth and for euer more. So be it. Of the vse of the holie Scripture. Out of the 3. Chap. of the 2. Epistle of S. Paul vnto Timothee. The whole scripture is geuen by the inspiration of God, and is profitable to teach, to correct, and to instruct in righte∣ousnesse: that the man of God may be ab∣solute, being made perfect vnto all good workes. The first vse of the scripture is to teach
vs: for where is it, that a man shall finde in other bookes, the secretes that the scrip∣ture teacheth vs? It learneth vs on the earth a science which shall remaine in heauen, as S. Ierome sayth it teacheth vs to knowe Christ, and in him the life euerlasting. The Angelles doe woonder at this same do∣ctrine, as it is sayde in the 1. Chap. of the 1. Epistle of S. Peter. We ought therefore to bring our children vnto this schoole, and the eldest also haue to learne in this science all the daies of their liues. The scripture is also giuen to confute the gaine sayers, to & ouercome heretiks, to correct vices, and to hew them downe as it is sayde in Hosea:Hoseah. 6. for in teaching that which is good, it turneth vs from euill. It is also fitte to instruct vs, and to giue manie aduertisementes for the gouerne∣ment of our liues, towardes magistrates, fa∣thers of houshouldes, and vnto other par∣ticular persons. A meditation vpon the holy supper, whereby we do grow in the Church, and doe streng∣then our faith, drawen for the most part out of S. Cyprian.
WHen as this good sauiour went to take the cuppe and drinke so bitter of his death and passion, his pleasure was to ordaine and offer vnto vs the sweete & wholesome lyquor of his bloud, with the partaking of his body. He raised vp Laza∣rus going to death, and appointed the sup∣per to make our soules to liue. Hee then that gaue life vnto others, could he not well defende himselfe against death, could it haue beene any other than a willing obedience, whereby hee would so fulfill our redemption? O howe great was the prouidence of this good sauiour, which hath giuen vnto vs the partaking of his body before his death, to shewe vn∣to vs that by death, hee should not be de∣stroyed, and that he would neuer leaue his Church. But how? What banquet is this heere, to eate the flesh of the Lorde and to drinke his bloud? Truely, it is a woon∣derfull thing, as we doe see in the 6. Chap. of S. Iohn, that the Capernaits coulde not comprehende. But beholde the secret, Ie∣sus Christ spake of his flesh: notwithstan∣ding, he did not speake fleshlie: he spake to eate, but it was not for our teeth, nei∣ther for our bellies, concerning the sub∣stance of this sacrament: his wordes are
spirite and life. So as these sacred meates, be of none other tast, nor of any other sa∣uour vnto a carnall and sensuall man. But whereas humane sense cannot pearce through, there can faith enter: and the ma∣ner of speaking, which seemeth harde vn∣to vs at the first sight, we shall finde them fitly applyed, if wee doe vnderstande the language of the scripture. Therefore the worde of God sometimees calleth this sa∣crament bread, and sometimes bodie, and flesh, that by the helpe of these knowen thinges and visible, we may comprehende the thinges that are inuisible and spirituall. For as the bread nourisheth the bodie, e∣uen so doth Christ nourish the soule. As the flesh is a substance, so is it not by ima∣gination, that our soules are nourished, but the sonne of GOD incarnate, is the cause of this so substantiall a foode of our soules, because that he was crucified for vs. As the life is in the bloud, so Christ al∣so by his bloud hath giuen vnto vs life, and is our life, our fleshe, our bloud, and our life was of a wretched condition: but by Christ, all the partes of our life are resto∣red. But from whence commeth this newe commaundement to partake with the bloud of Christ? Was it not forbidden in
the lawe, to eate the bloud of any beast, because that the life was in the bloud? Be∣holde also, the vndefiled Lambe. The bloud of beastes did shewe vnto vs, that our life ought not to be brutish, or that we should be giuen to crueltie. And the bloud of Christ which wee are commaunded to drinke, teacheth vs, howe our liues ought to be Christian like and pure: that wee might say with S. Paul in the 2. Chap. to the Galathians, It is not I that liue, but Christ liueth in me. Therefore this communion is not a consubstantiation with the Trinitie, for there is but the father, the sonne and the holy Ghost which are consubstantiall. It is not a confusion of persons in Christ: but it is an vnion of the heade, with the members, it is an vnion of affections, and of willes, a partaking together of the euerla∣sting riches, and in the life of Christ. This is a warning to be short, that we must not liue vnto our selues, but vnto God. And as they that haue eaten some excellent meate, that hath in it some good sauour, doe feele there in a good nourishment and sweetenesse of breath: euen so must it be that they which are sedde with this sacred meate, and wherein Christ dwel∣leth, that in all their wordes and deedes,
a man may feele a good smell, and that may increase to edification: and that all that which they doe, may bee vnto the glorie of this great GOD. And so we doe see, that it is not the teeth which wee doe sharpen comming vnto this holy ban∣quet, but that we do bring hither faith, to distinguish the sacramēt from the thing of the sacrament: the earthly element, from that which is diuine and heauenly: and so to consider in one onely Christ, the vnion of two natures diuine and humane. For altogether like as in the person of Christ,Note this compari∣son of S. Cyprian. the humane nature was seene here belowe, and the diuinitie was not seene, yet did it not leaue to worke great thinges without the chaunging of one nature into another: so in the sup∣per, we doe see bread and wine: but the bodie of Christ, we doe not see: yet doth it not leaue to worke in vs, nowe that he is ascended into heauen. And as the bo∣die of the light which is on high, is intire in himselfe, howe so euer it be spreade a∣broade heare beneath: So is Christ intire there on high, and yet leaueth hee not to partake himselfe fully to euery one of vs, without lessening himselfe, when as hee
giueth himselfe vnto vs which be weake, without being inclosed in the bread, whē as he is notwithstanding receiued by vs, without darkening his maiestie, when hee entereth into our small tabernacle, and when he will that our heartes bee as his temple. O right blessed are they that thus doe eate the flesh of the Lorde, hauing a desire to remaine with him, and to obey him. The bodie of Christ set foorth in his worde is our foode. The meane and way to eate him is faith that doth stay vpon his promises, and is ioyned vnto him. On earth, we do communicate with Christ by the helpe of his worde, and sacramentes: but on hie in heauen we shal eate this hea∣uenly bread, without anie outwarde helpe, and shall drinke this holy drinke, feeling effectually his presence & the ioie of that glorious life. O happy time so much desi∣red in the which we shall eate with the ho∣ly Angels, at the table of the Lorde, in his kingdome: O we now very happie & bles∣sed from hence forth, seeing we sauour al∣ready the sweetenesse of the life to come in Christ. O howe easily may we despise the rich mens tables, and their iounket and delicate meates, to partake the bloude of Christ in the Church of God. Yea, this
bloud, yea this is our victorie and glorie, this is it that we ought to take chearefully in the supper, and so to beare with Christ all afflictions in this life: although the ban∣ket of the crosse seeme verie thinne and troublesome, vnto the beastly & ignorant worlde. But they which do possesse Christ care not to possesse the world: and they yt haue drunke of the Lordes cup, care not, they are at a point to powre out their bloud for the name of Christ: for their liues are most assured in their sauiour. Reioyce thou thē flocke of the Lorde, seeing thou hast so liberall a sheepeheard, which feedeth thee with his bloud, that thou maiest liue by his life. For they that liue not but of the infe∣cted bloud of Adam, and of the carnall and sensuall life, are more wretched than the beastes. To this feast are not onely bidden the sacrificers and priestes of Leui, but all ye Church. But aboue all, let vs take heede that this gift of God be vnto vs a whole∣some gift, and that we partake not therein to our condemnation. Let vs therfore take on the wedding garment, and make cleane our vessels, to receiue so excellent a gift. Let vs also beware of hauing therein any profanation, in steede of deuotion. Let vs keepe our selues from communicating in
darkenesse, when we doe come neere vn∣to this light. And as S. Ierome sayeth writing vnto Theophilus, When we drawe neere to Christ, let vs not giue him a Iu∣das kisse. Let vs knowe, that these are the poore in spirite, that shall finde comfort in that banquet. These are not the world∣linges, nor the high in degree, neither the ouerweening and brablesome persons. For if Christ declare that euerie oblation dis∣pleaseth GOD, without reconciliation, howe should he make an offering vnto vs, of a thing so singular, if wee haue not peaceable heartes? And if we be not knit together with our brethren, howe would we that he shoulde knit himselfe with vs? A prayer concerning the holy supper. O Lorde God the heauen of heauens cannot comprehende thee, and yet thou doest vnto vs this honour to haue fel∣lowshippe with vs. Alas who are wee, that thou shouldest take pleasure to bee with vs yea in vs? Neuerthelesse, wee doe thanke thee in that through thy mer∣cie
thou makest vs able to receiue thy graces, whereof,Psalm. 36. of our owne corrupt nature, we were altogether vnwoorthie. For in trueth, they onely are blessed, that doe not depart from thee, and they that doe partake with the bodie of thy sonne on earth, beginne alreadie to liue in hea∣uen. The Israelites haue eaten manna in the desert: but the most part in the meane while are dead in the wildernesse without seeing the lande of promise. But they that eate of this sacred foode, are assured to come to the euerlasting heri∣tage. O what comfort is this vnto vs, in this vale of miserie, to bee refreshed with such a pasture. O woonderfull pa∣sture, which seemeth to bee eaten with teeth, in so much as the signes doe beare his name, and yet in the meane space, is neuer consumed, but nourisheth the soule with great vertue. That which Adam and Eue did eate in the earthly gardein by the temptation of Sathan, caused them to die. But O Lorde, this meate that we do eate by thy appointment bringeth vnto vs life. Now Lorde, seeing it hath pleased thee to ioine the earthly with the heauen∣ly by this sacrament, the humane creatures with the celestiall, graunt vs grace truely
to consider these so hie mysteries, and to vse them withal innocencie and reuerence. For Lord,Iob. 14. who is he that shall make cleane that which is vncleane? O father, who hast redeemed vs, by the bloude of thy sonne, thou canst only wash and sanctifie vs by thy spirite. And as the fulnesse of ioie and gladnesse is to see thy face, and to feele thy presence: So let our soules feele effectually the sweetenesse of thy son Iesus, let vs feele the increase of strength and of faith, by the meanes of this holie sacrament, and suffer vs not to followe the example of Esau, who for a messe of pottage lost his birthright: but rather, that wee doe not forsake thee, for any worldlie thing: But that all our consola∣tion may rest in thee. Graunt vs O Lorde, that thou keepe that assurance, which thou hast promised: & likewise as thou wilt that wee keepe a remembraunce of thy sonne and of his death, so haue thou daily re∣mēbrance of vs: and as he was giuen for vs, so let vs yeelde ourselues louing vnto our neighbours through christian loue: and that aboue all, our heartes may be lifted vp, where our head Iesus Christ is in thy glorie. Further more, for so much O Lord as we doe eate at thy table, as thy children
and familie of thy house, let vs also walke in all goodnesse as it is becomming those, which doe belong vnto such a Lorde. And for so much O God, as this sacred meate beseemeth not an irkesome and full sto∣macke: Graunt vs grace that we may haue a true and a right hunger yea and a holie appetite vnto these graces: that we may sauourly tast these meats of thine, and well degest thē: tasting how gratious & sweete, thou art, & also how bitter all the delights of the worlde are, in comparison of the sweetenesse of Iesus Christ, So be it. Another prayer concerning the supper. What tongue, O Lorde, can expresse, and what heart can comprehend thy won∣derfull loue towardes vs, for that to re∣deeme a wretched creature, thou wouldst that thy sonne should suffer so many la∣bours and sorrowes, euen to bee sacrificed on the crosse? And howsoeuer it be that thou doest not content thy selfe with all these things that are alreadie done: but to the end that the remembrance of thy loue should not be blotted-out of our heartes, or that our faith should flite, or be shaken, syth that thy sonne is ascended vp to thy
right hande, thou leauest not yet to nou∣rish our soules, and hast left vnto vs a∣mongest others the sacrament of the sup∣per, that we should be assured, howe his life doeth flowe into vs. O what a refre∣shing is this to vs in this our pilgrimage, yea to them that feele and laie holde of such like graces? By the presse men doe drawe foorth out of the grapes, the ly∣quor of wine. And thou O Lorde, thou hast put thy sonne vpon the presse of the crosse, to make vs drinke of this holy ly∣quor. But nowe O Lorde my God, to the ende that I doe not vnworthily pre∣sent my selfe vnto this holie table and foode, which is marueled at, and honou∣red by the Angelles: purifie and cleanse my heart by thy holie spirite. Powre foorth thy loue, through all the partes of my soule, that I may take increase in all vertue, and holinesse: and that I may so continue, in this blessed fellowshippe of the bodie of thy sonne, that I may drawe out of him, strength and life, as the branch out of the vine stocke: and that beeing knitte with thy sonne Iesus, I may be one with thee, that I may liue to thee: vntill the time I doe come euen vnto thee. So be it.
A giuing of thankes after the supper. O Lord, I giue thee thankes for thy in∣estimable loue, for that not onely I haue this benefitte of my beeing and mouing in thee: but chiefly in that it hath pleased thee, to make mee to liue for euer in thy kingdome, redeeming mee from euerla∣sting damnation, which I had deserued through my sinnes. But good God I be∣seech thee that this precious bloud be not shedde in vaine for me: but daily nourish my soule, by the partaking of the flesh of thy sonne. Quicken mee in his bloud, that I may be of the number of thy chil∣dren, and a member of the bodie of thy Church: that I be not so vnhappie, to abuse these sacred meates which haue cost so deere a price of thy deere beloued sonne Iesus, to prepare them for vs: that I be not also like vnto the dogges, which returne vnto their vomittes, and swine that goe backe againe vnto their puddle. Alas Lorde, make me that I neuer for∣sake thy holie couenaunt, for any thing in the worlde. For whither is it that I shoulde goe, but vnto thee
that hast the wordes of euerlasting life? Let it not be a daie onely, that the remem∣brance of thy sonnes passion bee before my eies: But that I may for euermore ho∣nour this good sauiour which hath left vnto vs so faire an heritage, by his testa∣ment, and hath giuen vs thereof so goodly an earnest in the supper. Now to thee, O God my creator, to thee Christ my redeemer, to thee holie Ghost, my comforter, who worketh this holie coniunction of men with GOD, and of earth with heauen, vnto thee one alone true God, be honour and glorie. I poore creature doe recommende my selfe vnto thee glorious God: being well determi∣ned, through thy grace to goe in peace, and in ioy to death, when the houre shall come since that Christ is my life. Auaunt from me all delightes and earth∣ly meates, which doe turne into doung: syth that I haue a foode which turneth me to immortalitie, the bread of Angelles, the breade which wee shall eate, with∣out signes and sacramentes, when as we shall inioye that felicitie beeing in hea∣uen.
Prayers for the Church. A Prayer against the aduersaries of the Church. ALmightie God, since that thou seest thine aduersaries so proud, yea with a diuelish rage, to force against thy Church, cause that wee may feele how thou art the verie same, whome all thy faithful haue prooued in times past in all ages, to wit, that thou hast the care of the saluation of those that call vppon thee with a pure heart, yea, and seeke thee in extreme di∣stresse and necessitie: that although thou stretchest forth thy hand at this day, and repressest this rage which thou seest to be kindeled against all thy seruauntes and children, to the end that last of all, the reprobates may feele and vnderstand, and that to their destruction, how they haue not vndertaken warres against a mi∣serable people, corrupted, stripped, and naked of all ayd: but against thine vnesti∣mable vertue: that being confounded, albeit they haue no shame, & rore out ye more against thee and against thy power: yet they may serue notwithstanding for
an example, and bee for a manifest instru∣ction, that thou art not onelie faithfull, in all thy promises: But also furnished and garnished, with such vertue, that thou canst execute and fulfill all that which thou hast promised for the safe keeping of thy Church, vntill such time as thou hast fullie deliuered vs out of our enemies hand. An other prayer vppon the same matter. ALmightie GOD, forasmuch as thou seest, how wee be at this day compas∣sed about on all sides, with so manie ene∣mies, who practise continuallie our ouer∣throwe, and that we are so weake and feeble: make vs learne to looke vnto thee, and that our faith may so rest vppon thee, that into whatsoeuer daungers wee be put, and howsoeuer our flesh saith, wee may neuer doubt, but that thou art stored with a mightie power, to make all our e∣nemies afraid, yt amongest the daungers of this life, wee may liue in rest of spirit, and that wee cease not from calling vppon thee, as thou hast promised to be a faith∣full protector of those that call on thee in
Iesus Christ his name. So be it. A prayer to perseuere in the doctrine of the Gospel. ALmightie God, seeing we be so much inclined vnto corruption, that with great hardnesse wee doe enter into the listes, so lightlie wee retire our selues from the course: & being well instructed, yet we fall off and doe easilie degenerate: graunt that being by thy spirit furnished with constancie, we may perseuere to the end, in that same right way, that thou hast shewed vnto vs by thy word. Further∣more, though that manie are cast into di∣uers errors, yet that wee maie take plea∣sure to call and to withdrawe them backe againe, yea if wee doe not profite anie whit therein, yet at the least, that wee be not allured after them: but that wee may remaine constant in faithfull obedience, vntill such time as hauing atchieued all our Combates, we may be gathered to∣gether to that blessed rest, which is kept for vs by our captaine and sauiour Iesus Christ in the heauens. A Prayer to bee constant in Religion against all lettes or withstandinges. Almightie God, sith that Satan set∣teth
before vs at these dayes manie feares, and dreades, which might altogether cast vs downe, and make vs lose courage as in deed wee bee but feeble and weake: graunt, that wee hauing our eies lifted vp to heauen, wee may consider this inuin∣cible power, wherewith thou art furni∣shed, to make vs ouercome all lettes. Be∣sides, although nothing doe appeare in this world, but that which is contempti∣ble, which may confirme or maintaine our faith: yet notwithstanding, graunt that wee may pearce by the eyes of our faith into this secret vertue: and so wee may not doubt, but that thou in the end wilt worke that, which the world thinketh otherwise at this day to bee impossible: and therefore doe mock thereat: And that wee may constantlie continue in this trust, that euerie one of vs doe bestow our la∣bours of thee, and studie to the end, and that wee lose no courage to aduaunce the spirituall building, vntill wee bee gathe∣red together with the Angels, when thy sonne shall appeare to bee wonderfull to his chosen, placing vs with him in his e∣uerlasting glorie. I beleeue the forgiuenesse of sinnes.
THe Church then, was neuer in this world so cleane, but that it had and hath occasion to demaund of God: Lord forgiue vs our sinnes. For wee doe pro∣test in this Article, that wee doe beleeue by the word of God, who doeth witnes it, that our sinnes are freelie forgiuen vs for Iesus Christes sake. Thus this Article,The con∣fession of our sinnes. first representeth before our eyes our sinnes: the which are such, as there is no humane satisfaction, that can absolue vs therein: But we must humble our selues, and bow∣ing downe our head, throw our selues at the feete of Iesus Christ, as Dauid saith in the 32. Psalme. I acknowledged my sinne vnto thee, neither hid I mine iniquitie: I thought I will confesse against my selfe my wicked∣nesse vnto the Lord, and thou forgauest the punishment of my sinne. Therefore shall euerie one that is godlie make his prayer vnto thee.
And S. Iohn in the 1. Chap. of his first Epistle: If wee say wee haue no sinne, we deceaue ourselues, and there is no trueth in vs. But if wee acknowledge our sinnes, hee is faithfull and iust, to forgiue vs our sinnes, and to cleanse vs from all vnrigh∣teousnesse. If wee say wee haue not sin∣ned, wee make him a lyer, and his word is not in vs. Now insomuch as it is against God that wee sinne, as it is said in the 51. Psal. It is also vnto him, that wee doe confesse our sinnes, wee must note, that wee doe not buy, neither doe we deserue the for∣giuenesse of our sinnes: but wee doe be∣leeue it, that is to say, wee doe hold it of the pure grace of God. Simon the Magi∣cian was reproued in the 8. Chap. of the Actes, who thought that the gift of God might bee bought for monie. Let vs come then without siluer, and haue recourse vnto the throne of grace, where wee shall finde forgiuenesse, not of one sinne, but of all. For there is nothing condemnable to the children of God: And as all sinnes are deadlie vnto the repro∣bate: euen so are all sinnes venial vnto the faithfull for Iesus Christes sake, who is the aduocate for all our sinnes, as S. Iohn saith in the 2. Chap. of his first Epistle: And for this cause hath he established in the world, the Ministerie of reconciliation, to the end that in his name there might bee preached vnto vs the forgiuenesse of sinnes.2. Cor. 5.19. Chap. O horrible Idolatrie, and Simonie of the Papistes: that make trafique of par∣dons,
and cause that to bee sought for in the bowels of the Pope, which the sonne of God hath purchased for vs by his pre∣tious bloud. For it is hee that hath de∣clared vnto vs the true Iubile, and yeare of redemption and grace, bringing vnto vs good newes,Esaiah. 61.1. graunting to the captiues de∣liuerance, and healing the heartes of the desolate. This is hee of whome Ieremie speaketh in the 31. Chap. who ought to set his law in our heartes, forgiuing vs our sinnes, without hauing anie more remem∣brance thereof. A confession out of the Psal. 51.4. AGainst thee, against thee onelie haue I sinned and done euill in thy sight, that thou maist be knowen iust when thou speakest, and pure when thou iudgest. Behold, I was borne in iniquitie, and in sinne hath my mother conceaued me. Thou shalt purge my sinnes with Hisop, and I shall bee cleane. Make me to vnder∣stand ioy and gladnes. Create in mee a cleane heart, and renue a right spirit with∣in mee, &c.
A prayer. O Lord our God, forsomuch as thou are not merciful, but vnto those that feele their sinnes, and acknowledge them, be∣holding with thy merciful eye the sorrow∣full and broken heartes: I doe fall downe before thy face, confessing and acknow∣ledging that I haue offended thee, not onlie in this that I am conceaued in sinne, and a poore child of Adams, but also through so manie vaine thoughtes, di∣strustes, so manie euill mouinges and de∣sires, that fight against thy word and holie will: so that if all the men in the world would absolue mee: I know, that I haue to doe with thee, because it is thou that triest the heartes: it is also against thy lawe, that wee poore creatures sinne. Thou therefore art alwayes iust: and I am vniust. Thou art pure and vncleane, and I am defiled frō my mothers wombe, and my sinne maketh mee abominable. But cleanse me Lord, thou that art ye God, and none the like, which onelie art God the sauiour, farre passing aboue our sinnes, and purging it with this sweete Hisop of the bloud of thy sonne Iesus Christ. Now for somuch Lorde as the totall
summe lyeth in the feeling, as it is fit: graunt mee grace to feele in good earnest not onelie my wretchednesse, and to bee touched therein to the quick, to humble my selfe before thee: But also giue me fee∣ling, and true assurance of thy grace, and of the forgiuenesse of my sinnes, by thy holie spirit, that my sorrowfull soule may reioyce in thee, that this free and sonnelike spirit may driue away from me, the seruile feare and horror of thy iudgementes, and that thus being comforted, I may declare thy blessinges, and prayse thy mercies for euer. A thankesgiuing for the remission of sinnes. Out of the 103. Psalme. My soule, praise thou the Lord, and for∣get not all his benefites, which forgiueth all thine iniquities and healeth all thine in∣firmities: which redeemeth thy life from the graue, and crowneth thee with mercie and compassions: Which satisfieth thy mouth with good thinges: And thy youth is renued like the Eagles. MEDITATION. THe Prophet reciteth here sixe great blessinges of God, for the which, all
Christians are truelie bound to praise thsi good God with all their heartes. The first benefit is, that all our sinnes are forgiuen vs, through his diuine cle∣mencie. That commeth to passe, because that Christ charging vppon him our mise∣ries, by the oblation of his verie pretious selfe, hath reconciled vs, and is our true mediator and sacrificer. The second benefit is, that the infirmi∣ties, which remaine in vs, namelie since this reconciliation, be it of bodie or of spi∣rit, are healed: because that our sinnes are not imputed vnto vs: And that in our infirmities God sheweth his strength and power in sustaining vs. The third is, hee redeemeth vs dailie from manie mischifes & dangers of death. For this nature is so fraile, as wee should fall euerie moment into the graue, if God did not hold vs vp. The fourth is, that hee doeth couer vs with his graces, and with his mercie hee doeth crowne vs, making vs there to feele it mightilie: And by the same, doeth blesse and exalt vs, in stead of destroy∣ing vs. The fifth is, that hee dooth satisfie vs, and giueth vs that that is sufficient, a thing
that is speciall vnto the children of God. For God is not a niggard in his giftes: But as concerning vs, the most part are neuer contented. So that contentation is one of the great blessinges of the Lord. The sixt benefit is this, Renewing, and this commeth vnto vs by Christ, in whom wee bee made newe creatures, and in whom we shall receaue a new and lasting life. O how then hath the soule which fee∣leth such benefites good cause to blesse & praise the Lord. A confession and prayer out of the 9. Chap. of the Prophet Daniel. WE pray thee O Lord our God, which art great and fearefull, and keepest couenant & mercie towardes thē that loue & keepe thy cōmaundementes, haue mer∣cie on vs: For we haue sinned, & haue cō∣mitted iniquitie, & haue done wickedlie, yea, we haue rebelled, and haue departed frō thy preceptes & frō thy iudgementes. For wee would not obay thy seruants the Prophets, which spake in thy name to our kings, to our princes, & to our fathers, & to all ye people of ye land. O Lord, righteous∣nesse belongeth vnto thee, & vnto vs open
shame, as appeareth this day, vnto the man of Iudah, and to the inhabitantes of Ierusalem, because of their offences, that they haue committed against thee. O Lord vnto vs appertaineth open shame, to our kinges, to our princes, and to our fathers, because wee haue sinned against thee. Yet compassion and forgiuenesse is in the Lord our God, albeit wee haue rebelled against him, and haue not harkened vnto the voyce of the Lorde our GOD, to walke in his lawes which hee had layd before vs by the ministerie of his ser∣uauntes the Prophetes. Yea, all Israel haue transgressed thy lawe, & are turned backe, that they might not heare thy voyce: therefore the curse is powred vppon vs, that is written in the booke of Moses the seruant of God,Dan. 27. because wee haue sinned against him. The Lorde hath made the plague to come vppon vs, for the Lorde is righteous in all his workes which hee dooth: But we would not obaie his voice. And now O Lorde our GOD, that hast brought thy people out of the land of E∣gypt, with a mightie hand, and hast gotten thee renoume, as appeareth this day, wee haue sinned, wee haue doone wickedlie. O Lord according to all thy righteousnes,
I beseech thee let thine anger and thy wrath bee turned away, from thy citie Ie∣rusalem. Heare now O God, the prayer of thy seruant, and cause thy face to shine vppon thy sanctuarie, that lyeth wast for the Lordes sake. O my God incline thine eare and heare: Open thine eyes, and be∣hold our desolations, and the citie where∣vppon thy name is called: For wee doe not present our supplications before thee, for our owne righteousnesse, but for thy great tender mercies. O Lorde heare, O Lord forgiue vs, O Lord consider and doe it: deferre not for thine owne sake, for thy name is called vppon thy citie, and vpon thy people. A Prophecie of the forgiuenesse of sinne: which is giuen to the Church by Christ. Out of the 13. Chap, of Zacharie, verse 1. In that day there shall bee a fountaine opened to the house of Dauid, and to the inhabitantes of Ierusalem, for sinne and for vncleanesse.
This is it that S. Paul speaketh of in the 3. Chap. to Titus. Wee our selues also were in times past disobedient, seruing to diuers desires: but when the bountifulnesse, and loue of God our sauiour towardes man appeared, he saued vs. Not by the workes of righteousnesse, which wee haue done, but according to his mercie, by the wa∣shing of the new birth and the renewing of the holie Ghost: which hee shed on vs aboundantlie through Iesus: that wee being iustified by his grace, should bee heires according to the hope of eternall life. That Iesus Christ hath power to forgiue sins. Out of the 9. Chap. of S. Matthew. IEsus said vnto the sicke of the palsie: Sonne, be of good comfort: thy sinnes are forgiuen thee: And that ye may know, that the sonne of man hath authoritie in earth to forgiue sinnes: then hee said vnto the sicke of the palsie, arise, take vp thy bed, &c. MEDITATION. THe greatest aduersitie to the man sicke of the palsie, was not his outward pal∣sie:
for as Iesus Christ did heale the sick∣nesse of the bodie, so would hee shew, that it was hee which did take away the diseases from the soule, which are the most daungerous, howsoeuer men care not for thē so much as for the bodilie sicknesses. Health is therefore nothing: and it is no∣thing to be deliuered out of a sicknesse: if we be lying vnder ye wrath of God: if sinne be not forgiuē, which is the cause of death, and of all tormentes. Now, when the que∣stion is of the forgiuenesse and healing of their sinnes, men are ordinarilie much di∣stract: or when they doe not consider how necessarie it is: or rather, when they doe seeke such a benefit there where it is not: But the Lord teacheth vs, what is the true Purgatorie.Purgato∣rie. A materiall fire cannot purge the soule, and nothing can make cleane sinne but God onelie, which is the soue∣raigne cleanesse as Micheah in the 7. Chap. of his prophesie: and Dauid in the 130. Psalme doe attribute that vnto God as his own, to tread down sinne, & to yeeld grace & mercie to poore sinners. And to the end, we should be assured thereof, the sonne of God is come into ye world, & by his bloud hath reconciled vs. Hee therefore hath power to forgiue sinnes, for hee is verie
God. He hath also right to pardon vs, for he hath satisfied for vs. Now if anie would charge vs againe for our sinnes: We, I say, which doe beleeue in Iesus, it behoueth vs to cleaue vnto him, forasmuch as hee is our warrant. Therefore there is neither Angell, nor anie other creature, which hath this power, but hee which is God, and who hath fullie paied for our sinnes: O how rightlie is his doctrine called the Gospel, that is to say glad tidinges: Seeing that it giueth boldnesse and comfort vnto poore sinners: for so much as it calleth vs his children, and considering that it de∣clareth vnto vs the forgiuenesse of our of∣fences, which would binde vs to eternal death, and all through the bloud of the Lambe, that taketh away the sinnes of the world, not taking them away in such sort, as there is no more sinne remaining, but that it might not bee imputed,Iohn. 1.29. Sinne how it is taken away. that it might not raigne, and to bee short, that it might bee forgiuen? Let vs therefore take heede of the Diuels temptations, which is an accuser that accuseth vs, and without ceasing lyeth in waite for nothing more than to throw vs downe headlong into dispaire, and to make doubtful this Article, for the forgiuenesse of our sinnes,
to the ende to trouble our poore consci∣ences. Let vs holde I say this for an vn∣doubted article, as it is saide in the 10. of the Actes: that all the prophetes doe giue this testimonie of Iesus, that through his name, all that beleeue in him, without ex∣ception of persons, shall receiue remission of sinnes. We haue indeede strongly to wrestle, and we feele yet the lawe of our members, which kicketh against the spirit:Rom. 7.23. neither also doe we beleeue an vtter put∣ting off of our sinnes, but the forgiuenesse of our sinnes, and therefore wee crie out with S. Paule: Alas wretched man that I am, who shall deliuer me, from the bodie of this death? I thanke God through Iesus Christ our Lorde, who as it is saide in the 4. Chap. to the Romans, is ordained an oblation for the forgiuenesse of our sinnes. Prayers and meditations to dispose a man to the acknowledgement of his sinnes. A prayer of S. Augustine out of the 11. and 24. of his priuate meditation of the soule with God. O Lorde, I thy poore creature will yet haue hope in the shadowe of thy
winges, all sinnefull that I am, hauing re∣membraunce of this thy goodnesse, accor∣ding to the which thou hast created mee. Helpe therefore thy creature, that thy goodnesse would frame, and suffer not that he whō thy mercie hath made, be destroi∣ed through my malice. For if I O Lord re∣turne to dust, whereto shall thy creature serue thee? It was not my deseruinges, nei∣ther the grace that was in me, then when I was but dust, which could leade thee to create me: let then this clemencie which moued thee to create me, let the same lead thee to keepe me. Whereto shall it serue thee, that I was made, if thy right hande holde me not vp? Alas my God, I verie wel knowe; that thy hande is not shortened that it cannot saue me, neither is thy eare likewise stopped, that it cannot heare. But I truely feele, that they are my sinnes which haue made the diuision betweene thee and mee, betweene darkenesse and light, betweene death and life, betweene vanitie and veritie, betweene this daylie life, and the euerlasting life. Notwithstan∣ding, O mightie God, I that am the worke of thy handes, I will call vppon thee, yea I will crie vpon thy name O Lorde. For it is not in my selfe, neither in my strength
that I haue set my hope. It is thy arme that shall saue me, it is the light of thy coue∣naunt that shall make me glad. Otherwise alas if thou weart not my hope, I shoulde despaire. But thou art my maker, which neuer leauest them that trust in thee. Thou art a great God louing, sweete, pa∣cient, disposing all things with an vnmea∣surable mildenesse. True it is, that we are as a withered leae, or as a litle flower, and all our life is but vanitie, and a winde that passeth away. For this cause wee beseech thee also that thou proceede not against vs in thy wrath, yea seeing that we be thy litle children, that thou hast made of the earth: alas wouldest thou trie thy strength against a leafe, or against strawe and stub∣ble? We haue hearde so much praise of thy mercie, in that thou desirest not the death of vs poore sinners. There∣fore suffer not death, whome thou hast not created, to rule ouer thy creature. I desire O Lorde to be saued, but in hauing a will thereto, I haue not the power thereof: to be short, I can doe nothing vnlesse thy power comfort me, I doe not knowe to will and desire that I ought, vnlesse thou graunt mee grace, that thy will be doone in mee, as it is in heauen.
Thou art the Lorde of the whole worlde, and the prince of all fleshe. That which doth like thee, thou doest fulfill in heauen, in earth, and in the depthes. Let then thy will be done in vs, on whom thy name is called vpon: and that thy creature, whom thou hast created to thy likenesse perish not. A prayer vpon the same matter. O Lorde howe dare I name thee my fa∣ther, and esteeme my selfe thy childe, see∣ing that in me there is no obedience? How dare I lift vp my eies to heauen, seeing I am vnworthie that the earth should beare me? For death is the rewarde of sinners, and my iniquities are before mee, which set thine anger in my sight▪ I haue alas so often offended, and my sinnes haue fought against thy mercie. Thou hast giuen mee vnderstanding to knowe thee, and a heart to honour thee. Thou hast giuen me eies to beholde thy workes, and handes to stretch foorth to the comfort of my neigh∣bour: to be short, thou hast fashioned mee to thy glorie. But O God, I haue turned backe: my spirite doeth applie it selfe to iniquitie. My heart hath serued this wret∣ched
bodie, which is but a vessell of dung, and must be a pray for wormes. My soule hath not loued thee, with all her strength, neither hath meditated in thy worde. My eies haue beene fixed on the grounde. I haue stretched out my handes to doe soo∣ner euill than good. My feete haue walked in the way of the worlde, and not in thy pathes. And in such sort O Lorde, as if thou shouldest goe forwardes against mee in thine anger, I could not awaite for anie other thing at my departure out of this worlde, than to make my abode in hell. I cannot awaite but for thy iudgement, and this horrible sentence, that shall flash and lighten vpon the wicked, when they shall be sent vnto euerlasting fire. But O good God, I haue yet my trust in thee: for it is not the assurance of my workes whereon I rest, it is in thy great mercie, it is in thy sonne Iesus, which is flesh of my flesh, and bones of my bones, according to his hu∣manitie. Beholde then his precious bloud which was shedde for me. Forgiue thy sin∣full seruant, for thy innocent sonnes sake. Wipe away that tract that Sathan hath made in me: and graue in my heart thy commandementes. Quench vice in mee, and there kindle faith, and true godlinesse.
Take from me a stony heart, and giue me a heart apt to be taught, which may loue thee, honour thee, and delight in thy worde: and that so I may haue part in thy kingdome. Another confession of sinnes. O Lorde my God, I haue sinned against thy maiestie, I haue prouoked thy wrath against me, and also my soule is in sorrow. For it feeleth the condemnation that it hath deserued, and hath no satisfaction that may content thee. What then O Lord, shall I perish in mine iniquitie, must I in steede of breathing againe, despaire in my selfe? It had beene much better that I neuer had beene borne in the world than to be here without thy grace. Where∣to doth this life serue me if thou which art life dost not fauour me? Alas my God, by my sinne I haue lost thy fauour: but thou neuer loosest thy goodnesse: therefore looke not vpon me a sinner, in thy righte∣ousnesse: beholde rather thy creature in thy louing kindenesse. Thou hast bidden vs come vnto thee, then whē as we sought thee not: and thou hast saued vs, when we were thine enemies. Cast not therfore now
away them which seeke thee, and with all humblenesse call vpon thee. For that that I make my selfe strong with thy clemencie, is not through presumption, but because of thy promises that doe assure vs of thee, thou wilt not the death of sinners, but their conuersion and life. And to make them liue, which were dead, thou hast caused thy only begotten sonne to die, and woul∣dest also, that he should beare the name of a sauiour. Wherefore shall I distrust then of grace? Wherefore should my soule liue in sorrow, syth yt it findeth in thee so great a sweetenes? O Lorde my God, I remēber the poore Publican, who humbling his eies to the ground, groning vnder the burthen of his sins, and requiring thy mercie, went down into his house iustified. I remember the poore thiefe, who confessing his fault and acknowledging thy sonne Iesus vpon the crosse, whereon he was hanged, went to paradise. I consider also the example of thine Apostle, who hauing forsakē his mai∣ster three times, was not put out of his fa∣uour, nor out of his Apostleship, because ye weeping bitterly he was cōuerted to thee. But God grant me ye Publicans hūblenes, the confession of him yt was hanged with Christ, & the repentance of thy Apostle, ye
holding on the way which they haue held, I may with them inioy thy fauour and en∣ter into thy glorie. A prayer vpon the same matter. O Lorde what man is he yt dare speake vnto God? Howe dare we aske thee life, seeing we haue deserued death? Frō whēce commeth this boldnesse, to haue our re∣course vnto thee, whom wee haue offen∣ded? Is it not thy great mercie, that is so noted throughout the worlde? Was it not because that thou art slowe to anger, and of great clemencie? But if thou wouldest enter into iudgement with vs, no man li∣uing could be iustified before thy face. I pray and beseech thee therefore O Lorde, that thou wouldest vnderstande my gro∣nings, and hearken vnto my praiers. I was, Alas, conceiued and borne in sinne: and my iniquities are so great in number, that I can not knowe them by the one halfe: so as O Lorde, this burthen would ouer∣whelme me, if thy mercie did not comfort me. But I pray thee chastise me not in thy wrath, neither assay thy might against me: otherwise I were vtterly vndoone, and in the twinckling of an eie, thou couldest destroy me in thine anger. Chaunge rather
my heart, that I may be an organe of thy glorie: and a vessel of honour in thy house. Imprint in my soule all righteousnesse and godlinesse, that I may serue and honour thy maiestie. I haue wandered like a poore sheepe, but bring me againe into thy fold, and be thou my sheepheard for euer. For Lorde when thou hast brought me to no∣thing, and confounded me: Alas I shal not any more blesse and praise thee. But if thou be mercifull vnto me, I shall render vnto thee thankes giuing: I shall vowe my selfe to thy seruice, and I will remaine in thy holy temple to worship thee. A prayer to aske of God true repentance. Almightie God, seeing that our sinnes continually crie vnto heauen, and when one of them is ouercome, an other forth∣with springeth vp, so that ambition being ouercome, couetousnesse doeth tempt vs, and couetousnesse being vanquished, pre∣sumption doth solicite vs, or some other greedie desire: graunt vs grace carefully to walke, and to fight this good fight a∣gainst our selues, truely to examine and to sound our selues, and so we cōdemning our selues, may preuent thy iudgement,
stirring vp one another, to true repentance and amendment of life, to the ende that it bee not in vaine that thy healthfull grace may appeare vnto vs, and that wee make not sad thy holy spirite, and that so O God walking in thy feare we may be made true partakers of the forgiuenesse of sinnes, that thy son hath purchased for vs, by his bloud shedding, that we might growe vp accor∣ding to the new man, and make the olde man to die, vntill that we being vnclothed of this mortall bodie, we might come vnto that perfection, then O Lorde, when as thou shalt be all in all; and that beeing ga∣thered together in thee, wee shall be∣holde thy glorie in thy kingdome. So be it. I beleeue the rising againe of the bodie. TErtullian, an ancient Doctor verie well saith, in the booke which he hath writ∣ten of the resurrection: that this article is proper to Christians, and is their speciall comfort, to beleeue that this flesh shal rise againe at the last day, wherof the philoso∣phers, & Sadduces did but make a mocke.
But hee who hath giuen vs these bodies, can verie well bring to passe that they shal liue againe out of ye dust, as we do protest yt we beleeue, not heere giuing place to any thing but vnto faith: no not to the specu∣lations of reason. Christ is also risen againe being made as it were the first fruites and the honorable head of all those which are risen, or heereafter shall bee raised againe. For this was through his only vertue. This also is the reason, that that body which did suffer so much, should be likewise parta∣ker of life & glorie. For Christ hath who∣lie redeemed mankinde, and without this trust we should be miserable, we which do suffer so many tormentes in our bodies, for the name of Iesus. Nowe to comfort and resolue vs more & more in this article, we must consider of these witnesses folowing. Out of the 19. Chap. of Iob. I am sure that my redeemer liueth, and he shall stande vp the last of the earth. And though after my skinne, wormes destroy this bodie, yet shall I see God in my flesh, whome I my selfe shall see, and mine eies shall beholde. Out of the 26. of Esaiah.
The dead shall liue, euen with my bo∣die shall they rise. Awake and sing, ye that dwell in dust: for thy deaw is as the deawe of hearbes, and the earth shall cast out the dead. Out of the 13. Chap. of the prophet Hosea. I will redeeme them from the power of the graue, I will deliuer them from death. O death, I will be thy death: O graue, I will be thy destruction. A meditation of OEcolampadius. The Lorde sheweth by this place, that if the people had repented, they should haue beene deliuered, though they hadde bin as it were in the graue alreadie. The Hebrewe word signifieth Hel, or ye graue, and is often times taken in the scripture, for some great and extreeme daunger: as also by the worde of the plague, is vnder∣stood a great destruction. S. Paul in the 1.5. Chap. of the 1. Epistle to ye Corinthians, when he intreateth of the resurrection, he alled∣geth this place according to the greeke translation of the 70. interpreters rather than after the Hebrewe text, and thus ta∣keth it: Where is thy sting? As preparing
himselfe against death, and shewing that she had no more power, sith that Christ is risen againe. Nowe will some say: howe doth this place agree with S, Paule? Wee must consider the thinges more neerer. It was sayde, that if the people had turned to God, he had deliuered them through his diuine mercie. But forasmuch as there was nothing in vs but sinne, and so likewise death, it behoueth vs to looke vpon Christ, who hath ouercome death, and vanqui∣shed Hell, in such sort, as they cannot hurt the children of God. For being graffed in Christ, we feare nothing. Wherefore S. Paule, who reioyceth himselfe in Christ, and in his righteousnesse, and who con∣sidereth that through him saluation is gi∣uen vnto vs, doth with good right dispite and tryumph ouer death: and as concer∣ning him, he doth not recite the wordes of the prophet worde for word, but he hath a respect to the intent and meaning of them. By Christ then are we quickened, & there∣fore haue we sure hope of the resurrection, so as that which the righteousnesse of the lawe could not do is fulfilled and wrought through Christ, in whome wee feare not death. Thus by faith we are deliuered from the whole curse.
Out of the 22. Chap. of S. Matthew. Iesus disputing of the resurrection a∣gainst the Sadduces, sayde: And concerning the resurrection of the dead, haue ye not read what is spoken vn∣to you of God, saying: I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaae, and the God of Iacob? God is not the God of the dead, but of the liuing. Out of the 5. of S. Iohn. The houre shall come in the which all that are in the graues, shal heare the voice of the sonne of man. And they shall come foorth, that haue doone good vnto the resurrection of life: but they that haue doone euill vnto the re∣surrection of condemnation. Excellent witnesses of the resurrection out of the 15. Chapter of the first Epistle to the Corinthians. If there be no resurrection of the dead, then is Christ not risen: But Christ is risen & was seene of ma∣nie: Then is there a resurrection of the dead.
If we haue our only hope in this life: we shall be most miserable of all mankinde. But our faith is not in vaine, neither the witnesse, that the holy Ghost doth yeelde vnto our heartes, that wee be the children of God. Then is there another entire life of man, and consequently a resurrection. The seconde Adam is truly as mightie at the least, as the first. Nowe all these die which are borne of Adam: it followeth then, yt they which be borne againe in the seconde Adam, which is Christ, are also made liuing after the bodie and soule. The sacrament of Baptisme is vnto vs also a sacrament, which doth represent vn∣to vs our mortification, our life and resur∣rection, when the people were drawen through the water. The saintes and faithfull neither fought, nor suffered in vaine. For if there were not another life, in vaine should they suffer e∣uen vnto death. We haue likewise saith S. Paul, an example of the resurrection in the graine of corne, and in other seedes, which die in the grounde, and in dying doe in the spring time rise againe more fairer: wherefore is it that that should not so like∣wise happen vnto our bodies?
Out of the 3. Chap. of the Epistle of S. Paule to the Philippians. Our conuersation is in heauen, from whence also we looke for the sauiour, e∣uen the Lorde Iesus Christ, who shall change our vile bodie, that it may be fa∣shioned like vnto his glorious bodie, ac∣cording to the working, whereby he is a∣ble to subdue all thinges vnto himselfe. Out of the 2. Chapter of the 2. Epistle to Ti∣mothie. S. Paule reproueth Hymeneus and Phi∣letus which haue erred from the truth, say∣ing that the resurrection is past alreadie, and doe destroy the faith of certaine. I beleeue the life euerlasting. Euerlasting saluation is the ende of our faith, as sayeth S. Peter in the 1. E∣pistle and 1. Chap. This is truely the glorie of God, which ought to be our ende, and that whereunto wee doe aspire, euen the price which is promised to this militant Church, that is life euerlasting. The soule of Lazarus separated from the bodie,Luke. 16.22.
was receaued to euerlasting rest. It was said vnto the good thiefe (as he is called) which confessed Christ with repentance▪ To day shalt thou bee with me in para∣dise. Now who is hee which could expresse the blessednes of the life euerlasting? For this word Life comprehendeth all ioy, peace, glorie and honor, as S. Paul saith in the 2. Chap. to the Romans: Vnto those which with patience are giuē to goodnes, shall bee giuen, Glorie, honor, immor∣talitie, and life euerlasting: And they shall shine as the sunne in the kingdome of their father: as it is said in the 13. of S. Matthew. Contrariwise the Infidels shall bee cast out from the face of the Lorde, with anger, with euerlasting tormentes, where shall bee weeping and gnashing of teeth. Behold, what is the auncient faith, that the Apostles haue held, and S. Peter hath preached, for the which our Churches are persecuted, and wee are called heri∣tikes. But what? Wee oftentimes call to remembrance that goodlie admonition that S. Paul made to Timothie in the 6. Chap. of his first Epistle: Fight the good fight of faith: Lay hold of eternall life:
whereunto thou art also called, and of that which Dauid speaketh in the 138. Psalme. Lorde though I walke in the middest of trouble, yet wilt thou reuiue me. And of this goodlie place, which is in the 25. of Esai: The Lorde will destroy death for euer, and will wipe away the teares from all faces, and the rebuke of his peo∣ple wil he take away out of all the earth. And in that day shall men say, Lo this is our God: wee haue awaited for him, and hee will also saue vs. This is the Lorde, wee haue awaited for him: wee will al∣so bee ioyfull and reioyce in his saluation. And though wee bee deliuered to death, for the name of Iesus: yet doe wee know that his life shall bee manifested in our mortall flesh, as it is said in the 4. Chap. of the 2. to the Corinth. But the fearefull and vnbeleeuing, the abominable, and murtherers, and whoremongers, and sor∣cerers, Idolaters and lyers, shall haue their part in the lake, which burneth with fire and brimstone which is the second death.Apoca. 21.8.
Comfortes against death taken out of manie auncient Doctors. IT is not without great reason, that the great philosopher Plato saith, that the life of a wise man ought to passe in a con∣tinuall meditation of death. For wee shall in deede auoid a number of offences, if we haue in remembrance our end, and the e∣state of this life, which is so short, as it is said in the 7. of Ecclesiast: Nowe it is a strange thing to consider the blockish∣nesse of men in this case, which by dailie experience well see that they must die. They see well, that our bodies bee not made of iron nor of steele, but of a weake and variable substance. And yet neuer∣thelesse, they dispose not themselues vnto their end, neither make anie prouision for those thinges which concerne the time to come. The beastes herein doe passe vs, as Ieremie sheweth in the 8. of his prophesie. For by the skie, the Storke knoweth the season of the yeare, and the Turtle, and the Crane doe marke what time is fittest for their comming, and all these byrdes doe well knowe, howe that it is not alwayes Summer, and that Win∣ter will come.
But men marke not the iudgementes of God, but sleepe in the world, as if they should neuer remoue. It is a thing verie certaine, that wee must all die: seeing that wee be all sinners, and that death is the reward of sinne, as S. Paul writeth in the 6. to the Romans. True it is that the scrip∣ture setteth downe vnto vs three kindes of death. The one is the sundering of the soul from the bodie, with making nothing of the bodie, vntill the resurrection. An other is, the death of sinne, as it is often said: that men which are nourished in their sinnes, are dead. And Iesus Christ speaking of those which knew not God, said, Let the dead burie the dead. The third is called in the Apocalyps, the second death, sometimes the eternall death, whereunto the wicked shall bee condemned in the last iudgement. Now albeit that the Painimes sometimes seeme to haue spoken pretilie of death: Yet so it is that two thinges haue made them vn∣certaine in this matter and vnprouided of sound consolation. The first is, that they neuer well vnder∣stoode the cause of death, neither the re∣medie thereof: The one whereof was by the fall of Adam: the other giuen by Iesus
Christ. Moreouer, they neuer vnderstoode the spring of true life that lyeth in God, and in the beholding of his face, where of the children of God shall after the resurrectiō be the beholders both in soule and bo∣die. Although then that Adam before his sinne, was created according to the bo∣die of the dust of the earth: yet in deed, so it is that if hee had not sinned, the diuine vertue and Image of God had swallowed vp in him all corruption, and defended him against death: in such sort as without griefe, when it had pleased God, he should passe into heauenlie life. But his wilfull transgressing made him with his posteri∣tie seruile vnto death, so as hee had recea∣ued for him and for his, a most blessed condition, if hee had not sinned. And as concerning that the death of Adam did not follow for his sinne all at one time: it was not but through the mercie of our good God whose will is to preserue man∣kinde: in the meane time punishing sinne, in that that Adam and all his rase haue bin and are of one mortall condition, full of labor and miserie. Wee doe also see the pitifull entrie that wee doe make into the world: casting forth a thowsand gronings
and sighes from our first ariuall into the world. Furthermore euerie one will easilie cō∣fesse, that death is a thing most fearefull that can happen vnto man: because that it doeth represent vnto vs at one time the wrath of God, and a miserable vndoing of our life, whereof naturallie wee are so desirous. Behold wherefore wise men are manie times giuen to search out cōforts, wherewith to sweeten for vs the soure∣nesse of death. But those that haue not tasted of the word of GOD, haue no∣thing to stay vppon, not finding anie re∣solution, but that wee must beare that which is ordained for vs by an irreuo∣cable arrest. Manie of ye Heathens being indued with a knowledge somewhat higher than the rest, and affirming the immortalitie of the soule, hold this for a resolution, that in the other life, the state of good men shall bee happie: seeing that here belowe they be ordinarilie subiect to manie miseries. And in deede wee must come to this point, yt by the temporall and present e∣state, one cānot iudge of mens happinesse: as also contrariwise, they that most doe prosper in this world in earthlie things, die
oftentimes as brute beastes hauing a soule buried in earthlie things: albeit that there is a difference betwixt man and beast, because euerlasting death is reserued for the wicked: and because the end crow∣neth ye worke. Though that in this world a man receaued great giftes of God, yet the continuance, and all the vertues doe declare and shew themselues chieflie in the Agonies of death. Therefore euen as one wretched nature hath brought vs vnto one lyke condition of death, so doeth the grace of God make the difference, that the one, to wit, the vngodlie, die to their destruction: And the other, which bee the children of God, guided by his spirit, and by his word,Psal. 116. doe die for to liue more happilie, so that their death is preti∣ous before GOD. Then let vs say that which is said in the 23. of Numbers: I pray God I may die the iust mens death: which are assured as Iob saith in the 19. Chapter, that one day they shall see GOD in their flesh. This was the cause that men were customed to burie the dead with a certaine speciall care. For as men locke vp their apparell in a chest, meaning to weare them againe: euen so
are the dead bodies buried in full hope of a certaine rising againe. Truelie wee ought well to wish this time where as Christ saith in the 22. of S. Matthew, when wee shall bee like vnto Angels, in happinesse and in pure conuer∣sation, and thoughtes. Then shall this be the true fulfilling of our redemption, whē as we shal be gathered together on high, where there is neither cold nor heate,Apoca. 7. hunger nor thirst: but a lasting blessednesse. But to whome is death pleasant, but to those that doe labour? The poore day-laborer is glad that he hath done his dayes labour. So is death sweete vnto the affli∣cted, and the remembrance thereof is bit∣ter to those that rest themselues in world∣lie thinges. The chiefe point is, let vs la∣bor whilest it is day, and let vs learne to know God so long as we be in this world, seeing that in the knowledge of him lyeth our saluation. Oh what a comfort dooth a faithfull soule inde, in that that Iesus hath spoken in the 17. Chap. of S. Iohn: My Father, I will that where I am, those may be there also which thou hast giuen me? So then when as wee doe meditate of these thinges in good time, death will be sweete vnto vs. And thereuppon it
commeth to passe, euen as to those whose discourses and thoughtes haue bin sweete vnto them all day long, that likewise their dreames bee all the night verie pleasant and quiet. But the troublesome men and busie trotters vp and downe, haue their dreames commonlie full of vnquietnesse. Such like shall the death of those bee that doe incomber themselues with worldlie thinges. And as S. Augustine saith, What is this but death? This is the leauing of the earthlie bodie, and a heauie burden: pro∣uided alway that an other burden more daungerous, which is sinne, doe not ouer∣charge vs: or (as saith S. Paul in the third Chap. to the Thessalontans) wee must then let our conuersation from henceforth be in heauen, whence we doe await after our Sauiour Iesus Christ, who shal transforme our bodies and make them conformable vnto his glorious bodie. Oh wonderfull mercie of this great God, that presenteth life vnto vs not deserued: & putteth death farre from vs that wee haue merited. Oh what light is this word of God, that giueth vs light in the graue, and in the middest of death maketh vs to see? Therefore now the children of God doe no whit feare death: But as S. Cyprian writeth in a letter
which he sent vnto ye Confessors & Mar∣tyrs of Iesus Christ: Hee that hath once o∣uercome death in his person dailie beateth it downe in his mēbers. So as we haue Iesus Christ not onlie a beholder of our com∣bates, but an assistant & wrestler with vs. And as this good Doctor writeth in a treatise which he made of the mortalitie, the onlie way for a man yt wil not come to Iesus Christ, is to feare death: And not to be willing to come to him, is as much to say, as not to bee willing to raigne with him. What trauailer is he, which drawing neere vnto his home, reioyceth not, hauing passed through manie dangerous waies? And who is he yt wil not willinglie runne out of a house that is readie to fall downe about his eares? What pleasure haue we in this world which approcheth dailie to his end, and wherein wee buy the pleasures so derely which we receiue in this life? What other thing is it but a continuall battaile, and a sharp medley, wherein we be woun∣ded, sometime with enuie, sometime with one thing, sometime with an other, besides the alaromes which doe giue vs in our bo∣dies a nūber of diseases? Why shal we not say then with S. Paul in the first Chapter to the Philippians, I desire to be loosed, & to
be with Christ. Wherfore we praie dailie, Let thy kingdome come, but only for ye desire yt we haue to see ye accomplishmēt thereof in an other life. For as S. Ierom doth large∣lie declare in ye funeral Sermon of Nepotian vnto Heliodor, if ye Panims haue oftētimes cōquered their mourninges, loosing their friends, by ye simple knowledge yt they had yt they were mortal: Wherefore do we so∣row & grone with so many sighs & teares, ye death of Gods childrē, whom we know to be blessed? Iesus Christ wept vpō Laza∣rus: And S. Paul to ye Thes. doeth not alto∣gether forbid mourning: yet is it for vs to behaue our selues more vertuouslie than ye Painims, & not to shewe so great a mour∣ning for men, as it were a disparing in vs of Gods mercies. And as Saint Cyprian saith, VVherfore do we put on our black mour∣ning weedes, when as our brethren goe to doe on their white garments to rest with ye Lorde? Let vs sorow for them rather as absent, than dead: & not as people that we haue lost, but yt we a wait for to see againe. Alas yt which is to be wailed for, it is that which men doe see in this worlde. VVe reade of Xerxes the great Lord and gene∣rall, howe that hee had a desire one day to viewe his whole armie, which was of a
maruelous number of people from the top of a mountaine: and seeing so manie peo∣ple began to weepe, cōsidering that with∣in one hundreth yeare after there should not be one of thē left aliue. But if anie one could not get vp vppon such a mountaine whence he might discouer so manie sinnes as be in the world, so manie murthers as be committed so manie cities and realmes as be ruined: so manie deceites & cousina∣ges as be practised: so much pouertie and infirmitie as is euerie where: Alas hee should haue great occasion to fetch manie a sad sigh, and to shead manie a whotte teare. Wee see not in our selues the changes that happen vnto our persons, first in our infancie, then in our youth, then in our full age, last of all in our old age, and so manie crosses the rest of our daies, where∣by wee must passe. Then that which wee ought to doe, is so to mislyke of this life, which is but a vapour and a shadow of a true life, a traueling and a fraile life, that we suffer Christ to raigne and liue in vs, to the end that by him wee may haue euer∣lasting life, the which onelie deserueth to bee esteemed and called a life.
A Prayer. O Lord my God, if thou hast aduerti∣sed the king Ezechias by the Prophet Esai,Esay. 38. to dispose of his affaires when hee should die: much more thy will is, that wee going to death, should haue regard to the disposition of our soules: to pre∣sent our selues before thee. For alas, death is certaine, but his houre is vncer∣taine: and there is nothing more dange∣rous than to leaue the soule in this fight doubtfull and vncertaine.The sen∣tence of S. Barnard O Lord what a Porter hast thou giuen vs, at our passage from this world, which will not suffer vs to carie away anie thing with vs? But as wee came naked into this world, euen so death causeth vs to passe out of the same state. Wherefore should wee then tor∣mēt our selues so much in worldlie things? O Lord, what is it, that I should dispose of my selfe? It is in thee, to dispose of vs: it is in thee to commaund, and in vs to obay. Beare vp our weakenesse through thy mercie. For how is it, that wee should not bee afraid of death, sith the horror thereof hath made thy sonne Iesus to sweate water and bloud?Mar. 14. Esai. 53. But seeing that it is euen hee, who hath also borne our
sorrowes, and that was wounded for our iniquities, what gaine or aduaun∣tage should death haue ouer vs, syth that thy sonne Iesus hath saued vs? And if thou be for vs who is he that can be against vs? Yea man borne of a woman is thraled to many miseries and vanisheth a∣way as a shadowe, or flower of the fielde. But yet O good God, we doe knowe how thou desirest not the death of vs sinners:Ezech. 18. thou rather wouldest that we should turne and liue. We doe shed heere many teares, but thou wilt, euen at once make drie all my teares by calling me vnto thee. Nowe O Lorde strike heere belowe, so long as thou wilt, hurt, wounde, seeing that thou art mercifull and fauourable vnto vs in the euerlasting & life to come.A sen∣tence out of S. Au∣gustine. Rom. 8. What sor∣rowe or affliction should we feare, synce that all thinges turne to thy children for their good? Alas who would take much pleasure in this life, sith that man liuing in it can not see thee, and that all that is in it is but transitorie, and miserable? Graunt me therefore grace, patientlie to awaite thy will, that I may bee founde a watching faithfull seruaunt. And as the prince of this worlde, comming to∣wardes thy sonne Iesus,Iohn. 14. founde nothing
what to bite vpon him: so also the same enemie may not haue any thing against me, seeing that I doe belong to thy sonne Iesus. By faith O Lorde, haue our fa∣thers ouercome kingdomes, and closed the mouthes of the Lyons. Therefore O Lorde graunt me grace, that I may also ouercome by faith all tentations, vntill that this faith being ended I may enter in∣to thy euerlasting est. A prayer against the sorrowes of Death. O Lorde GOD my father, who weart willing that thy sonne Iesus should yeelde vppe his spirite to saue me, graunt mee grace that I may beare in my heart the remembrance of his bitter sorrowes and passion: and that I may forthwith remember the sweete & tender affection that thou bearest vnto vs poore sinners, sauing them with so pretious a price, that of one part I may with a true sor∣rowe die vnto sinne, and forsake all mine iniquities, and of the other part,
the remembrance of thy grace may make my soule liue: let thy mercie O good God be vnto me a lampe and light to lighten me in the darkenesse of death, vntill that I come vnto thee. O Lorde, if thou weart vnto me so good a father in life, be also the same vnto me in death. Leaue me not then when as my strengthes shall faile me. And euen then namely when my mouth shalbe no more able to speake, leaue not off Lord to heare my desires, vnto the last breath of my life. Comfort againe thy weake crea∣ture, and receiue my soule into thy glorie, who yeeldeth vp to thee. Thou O Lorde hast saued mee: into thy handes I recom∣mende my spirit. Grant me the last words of thy sonne Iesus in his voice vppon his crosse, that they may be my last wordes in this life. Behold the earthly abode of this bodie, which dissolueth it, to yeelde my selfe ioiful of this tabernacle most blessed, which is not made with mans hands. This great prophet Elias, when hee was taken vp into heauen, let fall his cloke: so wil∣lingly would I also leaue this garment both earthly and corruptible, to bee clo∣thed with immortalitie. Heeretofore I was a wayfarer, nowe am I come into my true countrey. Euen vntill this time was I
in fight, & now go I to triumph with our head Iesus Christ. I begin to see alreadie this hauen, which I haue so long desired, hulling amongst the tempests of the world. To be short, I ioyfullie passe out of dark∣nesse into light, from daungers of this world to a place of assurance, out of a la∣mentable case into a blessed state, from battaile to victorie, & from an earthlie to an euerlasting life. Here am I blind, and there shall I receiue light. In this place was I hacked with manie woundes, and there shall I receaue healing. O wretched life. O fraile and life vncertaine in this world, howe deceitfull and yrksome art thou? The more thou thinkest or belee∣uest, the more thou distrustest and misbe∣leeuest. The more one goeth in this world, the more is hee charged with faintnesse and miseries. Blessed is hee which know∣eth the vanitie of this world: yet more blessed; that dooth not set his affection therein: and most blessed, which is with∣drawen from thence, to bee with thee Oh my God and my sauiour. A prayer vppon the same Argument. Alas, when shall I come before the
face of my God, and when shall I haue my abiding in his house? How long shall I bee in this exile, whereunto for sinne we were banished? But how shall a sinner stand before this great God? How shall this poore flesh get vp into euerlasting paradise? But praised bee my God, who hath giuen vnto vs so good an assurance in his holie word. Blessed bee GOD, which hath ordained for vs this good ladder, by the which wee ascend vp into heauen, to wit, Iesus Christ: so that which was vnto vs impossible, is possible to the beleeuer. Therefore looke not O Lord into the manifold sinnes that are within me: But rather remember that I am thy creature and the worke of thy handes. I am vnworthie to bee called thy childe: but it hath pleased thee to bee my father. Thy will was that thy sonne Iesus should come downe here below to vs, to make vs ascend vp to thee. I feare not then death, seeing I haue life with me. Thy son hath destroyed death for all those which doe beleeue in him: And albeit that this bodie be gnawen with wormes, yet the soul goeth forthwith into rest, & the body awaiteth the resurrection. I do desire ther∣fore to die, to beholde thy face, and wil∣linglie
leaue this life to be with Christ. Oh my God, if the simple sound of thy worde which I heare on earth doth cause my soule to liue alreadie, what life & what countenance shall I haue there on high, whē as I shall receiue it in my heart, seeing thy glorie, & being in so blessed a compa∣nie? Open vnto me then O Lorde the gate of thy kingdome. Make mee to heare this sweete voice, which was prepared for the poore thiefe on the crosse: To day shalt thou be with me in Paradise. Alas Lorde, I am vnworthy thereof: yet thy mercie gi∣ueth me assurance. Grant me also O father, strēgth to perseuere, giue me daily this de∣sire of the life to come: for if we be so much affectioned to this earthly life, that is but for a day & ful of miseries, with what wish ought I to desire that glorious life, which thy sonne Iesus hath purchased for vs? Other short praiers for certaine necessities of the Churches. To demand perseuerance. Almightie God, seeing we be knit to∣gether by the guide and counsell of thy sonne to this bodie of the Church, which was so often scatered and dispersed: graunt that we may abide in this vnitie of faith, and that wee may constantly fight
against all temptation of this worlde, and that wee may not turne away from a true and right intent though it come to passe that troubles vppon troubles doe happen, offences vpon offences: seeing our faith is not builded vpon the holinesse of man, or vpon their persons, but vppon thee O true and almightie God. And whatsoeuer euilles or deathes, that shalbe offered vn∣to vs, we may not be possessed with such feare, as may plucke away our hope out of our heartes: but that we may rather learne to lift vp our eies, yea our vnderstanding & all our wittes vnto this thy power, by the which thou quicknest the dead & raisest vp that which was of nothing, that our spi∣rites may alwaies aspire vnto euerlasting rest: albeit it behooued vs daily to die, vntill at the last, yu shalt shewe, how thou art the true fountaine of life, granting vn∣to vs the immortalitie through thy sonne Iesus Christ. A prayer to haue stedfastnesse and constan∣cie. EVerlasting and almightie God, al good and mercifull, seeing we be heere sub∣iect to so great aduersities, and of so many
sortes, which lift themselues vp like sud∣daine tempestes: graunt that wee hauing our heartes directed vp to heauen, may neuerthelesse repose our selues vppon thy secret prouidence, and what so euer trou∣bles there be in our senses, wee may rest assured in this principall, and holde it as certaine, that is, that thou art he, that will be our father, and gouerne vs by thy wise∣dome, to the ende that in all our troubles, we may alwaies acknowledge thy hande, and thy counsel, full of righteousnesse, and of great and singular wisdome and iustice, that we may call euermore vpon thee, and saue our selues at this hauen, that is to wit, that although we be driuen and tossed hi∣ther and thither, yet thou holdest vs vp by thy hande, vntill we be receiued into thy rest. A prayer to obtaine victorie by Iesus Christ. Almightie God, forasmuch as wee be filled full of so many desires, which might defile the pure and holy giftes of the spi∣rite: graunt that we may receiue in good woorth the chastisementes which thou doest sende vnto vs, to tame the saide de∣sires, and that acknowledging thee for
our sheepeheard, we may suffer our selues to be gouerned by ye hooke of thy sheepe∣heardes staffe, daily profiting vnder thy corrections and tasting thy goodnesse in thy displeasure, we may not lose courage, but as walking through blame & dishonor, yea in the middest of death, for thy names sake, we may reioyce in thee, esteeming all thinges losse, in cōparison of the know∣ledge of thy sonne. Let therfore that same spirit, which hath sanctified vs strengthen vs also, that being partakers of this annoin∣ting of the holy Ghost, we may be likewise partakers of the victorie of thy sonne Iesus Christ. A prayer paciently to abide pouerty when God shall sende it. Lorde God and father, since it hath pleased thee to abase thy selfe, euen to take care ouer vs, namely for ye respect of this life, & to promise vs daily bread, gran∣ting vs wherwith to passe on our way here beneath: graunt that we may learne to rest our selues peaceably vpon thee, who art our God, and of our children, & hast had care of vs, when as we were nothing: that so resting vs vpon thy blessing, we may be∣haue our selues, not onely from all theftes
and vnlawfull meanes, to plucke away o∣ther mens goods: but also from all coue∣tousnesse and impatience, as we O Lord may content our selues vnder thy feare, and that we may learne so to beare pouer∣tie on the earth, that being satisfied with the riches, which thou hast offered vnto vs by thy Gospell, and whereof we be alrea∣die partakers through faith, we may chere∣fully bende to the fulnesse thereof, and vn∣to this perfect coniunction with thy sonne Iesus Christ in his kingdome. A prayer for the morning. O Lorde God and father, I poore cre∣ature, which am naturally swathed in dark∣nesse, durst not lift vp my eies vnto thee, that dwellest in a light not able to be come vnto, were it not that thy deere sonne Ie∣sus Christ, which is the brightnesse of thy glorie, hath made me way vnto the throne of thy grace, through the shedding of his most precious bloud. So nowe my God, I doe acknowledge howe that it is a great benefit, that I which am vnworthy to liue vpon the earth, and that haue deserued through my sins, to be cast into vtter dark∣nesse for euer more, I haue this blessing
to see the light of the day, & of the sunne, and to beholde the workes of thy handes, with the inioying of the earthly riches, that thou hast stored vs with all. And for so much as O God, that thy sunne shineth as well vpon the wicked, as on the good, and that this outwarde light is not but to guide our bodies: graunt O God, to shine vpon vs the brightnes of thy face, in bles∣sing me, and in lightning my vnderstan∣ding, begetting and sanctifying me a new, that I may walke in the way of thy com∣maundements, and that I may behaue my selfe in my calling in such sort, as all my thoughtes, wordes and deedes, may be to thy honour and glorie, and the edifying of my neighbours. Thou hast O Lord with∣drawen me, from the darkenesse of ydola∣trie and ignoraunce, and thou hast taken from before mine eies the bende of super∣stition. Thou hast also in our time made shine, or as it were lightened againe the faire lampe of the preaching of thy Gos∣pell. But suffer me not, that hauing eies I see no whit: inlighten O Lord, all the parts of my soule, and cause all that is in me, to be employed to render vnto thee all ho∣nour and obedience, and that in my calling thy feare be before mine eies. And because
thou esteemest not to bee beloued of vs, vnlesse we loue our neighbours: imprint in me a faith working by charitie, in such sort as with hope I may haue a good con∣science, not dooing to any, but that I would to be doone vnto my selfe, that I may haue a mercifull hart, and louing, that my entrailes be not shut vp in the behalfe of the poore and needie: To be short, that seeing how the figure of this worlde pas∣seth, I may vse the worlde as passing tho∣row it, remēbring my selfe alwaies, yt hea∣uen is the place of my corporation. Grant me peace amongst my familie, giue bles∣sing to my labour, contentment to my spi∣rite, rest and comfort to the poore affli∣cted, and full deliuerance to thy Church, by thy sonne Iesus Christ. So be it. A praier for the Euening. O Lord God, thy people Israell did pre∣sent to thee the morning and euening sacrifices, in token of confessing thee, how that thou keepest vs both euening and morning. But what more liking sacrifice can we offer nowe, than our sorowefull heartes, and our tongues, that doe praise and blesse thee? Wherefore (O Lorde) I
present my selfe in all humilitie and reue∣rence before thy face, beseeching thee, that thou wouldest not enter into an ac∣count, neither into iudgement with me thy poore creature. For be it that thou looke into the first or the seconde table of thy commandementes, thou shalt finde that I haue offended thee many waies. Notwith∣standing, like as the childe hath alwaies his recourse vnto his father: euen so haue I my refuge and my retire to thee O Lorde that art not lightly angry but of great mer∣cie, beseeching thee, that by thy goodnes, thou couer my faultes, euen as all thinges are couered by the darkenesse spread forth ouer the earth. Alas my God, I knowe that sathan goeth about as a roaring lyon: and I doe knowe that he is the gouernour of darkenesse, and prince of this worlde: but if thou be for me, who shall be against me? It is thou that hast thousandes of Angels, which are incamped about vs: it is thou that hast created the hotte sonne, and the shattering cold moone: it is thou that go∣uernest the whole world, and doest neuer slumber. Grant me therefore grace, to rest this night in peace, and not to sleepe in earthly thinges, but more and more to ac∣knowledge thy goodnesse, vntill thou call
me vnto this so desired a rest, which thou hast prepared for vs. O how sweete & lo∣uing shall this awaking be, when as in our graues we shall heare the voice of thy son to raise vs vp againe, in a glorious immor∣talitie? Yet while wee doe awaite for this last comming we recommende our selues vnto thee, O heauenly father, the peace and preseruation of thy Church, superiors magistrates, & all those which haue neede of thy succour: beseeching thee, that in this oldenesse of the worlde wherein all kingdoms of the worlde do shake, yt thou wouldest be the stay of thy poore people, and in steede of so many sorowefull daies and yeares, as we haue seene, we may be∣hold some rest in ye middest of thy Church. Raise vp daily O Lord some softer father, and also some retiring place for thy chil∣dren, yt no violent oppression ouerwhelme them, and that for thy sonnes sake, in whom I trust, and vppon whom I rest my selfe. So be it. Heere followeth a litle Paraphrase and short exposition of the Lordes praier, taken out of S. Cyprian almost worde by worde.
THe doctrine contained in the Gospell, is no other thing than the ordinance of our maister God, the grounde whereon to builde our hope and to strengthen our faith, the foode wherewith to nourish our soule, the pylates whereby to guide our shippe in this nauigation, the helpes by whom we come to saluation, in such sort as when the faithfull heart yeeldeth it selfe to be trainable heere in earth, it is a meane to bring it vp vnto heauen. It hath pleased God that many thinges were often spoken by the prophetes and heard by them. But how much more excellent ought that to be reputed which the father hath sayd and pronounced by his sonne, than that which he hath sayde by his seruantes? For in them spake the spirite of Christ, and he himselfe hath spoken in the later time in his owne voice. He doth not now commaund, that men prepare the way vnto him that com∣meth, because that he himself is come, and discouereth the true way, that wee which goe wandering, and groping in the dark∣nesse of death, may be by the light of his wisedome directed in the way of life. Now amongest so many good lessons as he hath left vs for our saluation,The forme of praier. hee hath chieflie giuen vnto vs the right forme of prayer,
he that hath made vs to liue, hath taught vs also to pray, yea he hath done it after his grace & goodnesse wherethrough he hath stored vs with all thinges, and wrought it vnto the ende yt his father might the more willinger heare vs, when wee praie vnto him, in that praier that his son hath taught vs. He did foretell howe that the houre should come, wherein the true woorship∣pers should worshippe him in spirite, and trueth. He hath also fulfilled that, which he had promised, giuing vs his spirite to worshippe him.The Lords praier. What praier may be now more spirituall, than that which hath bin giuen vnto vs by Iesus Christ, by whome also the holy spirite hath beene sent vnto vs? What praier shalbe more true and per∣fect before God, than that which cōmeth from the sonne, who is the trueth of Gods owne mouth? In manner as otherwise to pray, concerning the substance then hee hath taught vs, is not alonely an igno∣rance, but also a blockish fault: as he re∣buketh the Iewes elsewhere, how they did despise Gods commaundement, to set vp their traditions. Let vs therefore pray my brethren, euen as hee which is both our God and maister hath taught vs. That prayer is agreeable vnto God, when one
praieth with a praier that is his, and when we make the wordes of his sonne to mount vp vnto his eares. The father doth acknow∣ledge his sonnes language: when wee doe pray, let him that dwelleth in our heart be also in our voice & vpon our tongue. And seeing that the sonne is our aduocate, as often as we doe demaund forgiuenesse for our sinnes, let vs take in our mouthes the wordes of our aduocate. For seeing that he sayth how all that we shall aske of the fa∣ther in his name, it shalbe granted vnto vs, whē shal our praiers haue greatest strēgth, but then when we shall call vppon him by the peculiar praier which he hath made? It behoueth those which pray to keepe a cer∣taine forme in their speach, with a staied manner, and full of all reuerence & hum∣blenesse. Let vs remember that it is before Gods face that we presēt our selues. Let vs therefore seeke to please him, as wel in the behauiour of our bodies, as in the conuei∣ance of our voice. It is an ill fauored thing and a signe of impudencie, to vse much crying out in praier, and there is nothing that doeth set it out more than modestie. To be short, wee doe see that the Lorde doth allowe that praier which is made pri∣uately, in secret, and in ones chamber: a
thing that well agreeth with our faith, to the ende to make vs vnderstand that God is present throughout all, that he heareth and seeth all, and that the fulnesse of his maiestie pearceth into the most hidden & secret places as the scripture speaketh. I am thy God neere at hande, and not afarre off. If a man be hidden in a priuie or close place, doe not I see him? Doe not I fill both heauen and earth? Then when wee shall come together with our brethren, we must in good order solemnise the sacri∣fices of God, not thinking to make our praiers to take place before the Lord with chaunting and crying out. God vnderstandeth the heart, not with the voice: for it is not needeful to aduertise him, by a lifting vp of a voice who seeth our thoughts. This is it that he often sayth, that he is the searcher of hearts, hauing the knowledge of our most secret thoughtes. We haue a goodly example in the good woman Anna, mother of Samuel, who prayed vnto the Lord not with a strong or lifted vp voice, but secretly, soberly, and in her heart. Her praier was secret, but her faith was open: shee spake not with the voice, but with the heart: knowing verie well that the Lorde our God so heareth his and in such sort, she receiued in effect,
that which by faith she had required. We haue another example of a praier right wel directed and verie modest in the person of the Publicane. He went vp into the tem∣ple, and made his praier not in a rude and presumptuous maner as the other, without lifting vp his head, or his forehead: he on∣ly fell downe, & confessed with his mouth his sinne, that hee felt shut vp in his heart: in such sort as God heard the prayer of the humble that rested not vpon his owne in∣nocencie. For who is hee that is innocent? His praier was humble, and hee which ad∣uaunceth and fauoreth the humble, heard the poore Publican. Thus much cōcerning the fashion and coūtenance that we ought to keepe in our praiers. Let vs now consi∣der how our maister hath taught vs to pray. When you pray, sayth he, say thus: Our Father vvhich art in hea∣uen, halowed bee thy name, thy kingdome come, thy vvill be done in earth as it is in heauen, giue vs this day our daily bread, and for∣giue vs our trespasses as vve for∣giue
them that trespasse against vs, & leade vs not into temptation, but deliuer vs from euil. For thine is the kingdome, the povver and the glorie, for euer and euer. A∣men. THe first thing which wee learne in the entrie of this prayer,An expo∣sition of the Lords prayer. is that the Do∣ctor of peace, and the Maister of all true vnion and concord, would not that our prayer should be particular for one alone. See wherefore we doe not say, My father which art in heauen, giue me my dailie bread, &c. Thus it appeareth, how this prayer is publike and common, and wee pray not for one alone but for all: because in deede all Gods people is but one bodie. God would that one onelie making his prayer, should pay for all the other, euen as one onelie man hath saued manie: and through one onelie spirit he gouerneth all his childrens heartes. And to this doeth agree that which wee doe read of the A∣postles,Actes. 1. who continued together in ho∣lie prayers, so as there was but one heart amongest them all, and of their holie
companie. Now my brethren, it is an in∣credible thing how manie great secretes there bee here in this prayer of the Lorde, that is so well trussed vp, and short in wordes, but of most great strength, and right well furnished of all demaundes that are needefull and necessarie for vs. Yee shall say then,Our Fa∣ther. Our Father which art, &c. Oh the happie and louing beginning of our prayer. For marke yee howe the new & regenerate man, that is reconciled vnto God, such a one calleth vppon God his father, because that hee hath alreadie begunne to bee the childe of God. To all those that haue receiued him,Iohn. 1. hee hath gi∣uen vnto thē this priuiledge, to bee made the children of God: vnto those I say that doe beleeue in him. In such sort as the be∣leeuing man, to make an acknowledge∣ment vnto the Lord of such a fauour,Deut. 33.9 Not that he ought to despise his father, but God ought to goe before and those places are not simply to this purpose. both to strengthen his faith, & also to make wit∣nesse to whome hee doeth belong, ought to call vpon God as his father before all things, & to recken him for such. In ye 33. of Deut. he saith of his Father & Mother, I haue not knowen nor seene him, such a one is praysed, because he stayeth himselfe to keepe the statutes & couenants of ye Lord. To this hath our Lord respect in the 23. of S. Matthew saying, Let vs not name ye Fa∣ther
on the earth,Mat. 23.9. because yt we haue a fa∣ther that is on high in heauen.Matth. 8.22. And in S. Matthew, he said vnto a yong man, Leaue off from burying thy father which is dead: which was to the ende yt hee might studie to doe rather his duetie towardes ye liuing and heauenlie Father. Go to then, behold God which is in heauen: but see ye consolation of Christians, how he is ours, and we are his, in as much as he hath cho∣sen and sanctified vs.The Iewes. The wretched Iewes that haue mistooke Iesus Christ, and cruel∣ly haue put him to death, cannot call God their father. For as the sauiour reprooueth them to their great confusion,Iohn. 8. the deuill is your father, seeing that you fulfill his de∣sires. God did then this honor, to com∣municate himselfe with them. But he saith by Esai,Esay. 1.2▪ I haue nourished and chosen chil∣dren, and they haue mistaken and disdai∣ned me: that which the Oxe and the Asse haue not done, who know the stable and crib of those which owe them. Therefore my brethren, let vs consider how God by ye meane of our faith, beginneth to be our father, and for the Iewes vnbeliefe, cea∣seth to bee theirs: are wee then giuen ouer to sinnne? Wee bee no more chil∣dren but seruauntes according vnto that our Lorde saith, Whosoeuer sinneth,
is a seruant to sinne. The sonne remaineth alwayes in his fathers house, that which ye seruant doeth not. Let vs therefore my louing brethren acknowledge & acknow∣ledge againe, what fauor it is for vs to dare, & be able to presēt our selues before God, in the qualitie of Gods childrē. Who durst haue beene so bold as to haue giuen himselfe such a title & to haue vndertaken it, if the true onelie, & euerlasting sonne of God had not giuen vs leaue and com∣maundement? It is for vs to haue remem∣braunce, that hauing God for our Father, wee must behaue our selues according as it is becomming for the children of such a Lorde: And if wee be well contented of such a father, let vs also doe in like man∣ner, that hee may of his owne part in like case haue iust occasion not to bee misly∣king of vs. Let vs not become bastardes, but let vs become spirituall and giuen to all holie and praise woorthie thinges, af∣ter the example of our father: and that it may appeare how wee bee the children and temple of this great God. Now what is the first demaund that we doe aske of our Father?How the name of God is made ho∣lie. Hallowed bee thy name. Not that our prayers doe make the name of God holie, but wee pray that
his name may be made holie in vs. What is hee, will some say, that shall sanctifie the name of God? Is it not hee, which sanctifieth all thinges? Wee are admoni∣shed in the 20. of Leuiticus: Be ye holie, as I am holie. Therefore let vs pray him, that hee will graunt vs grace to enter into the holinesse, whereof we are aduertised in our baptisme to continue therein. And so be we, who aske to bee sanctified: yea al∣wayes, for so much as our sinnes doe dailie defile vs: in such sort, as the name of God & his word are not made holie & honored by vs, vnlesse wee our selues be also san∣ctified. Afterwardes hee saith, Thy king∣dome come. Gods kingdome is euerla∣sting, and was before that euer wee were. But it is in the respect of vs that wee doe aske, Let thy kingdome come: That wee which haue serued in the world and to Sa∣than, may haue from henceforward Christ raigning in vs. This kingdome is gotten vnto vs by the bloud of our Sauiour, and shall bee truelie fulfilled, when wee shall heare this sweete saying: Come yee blessed of my father, into the kingdome which is prepared for you &c. Now wee doe well to require the kingdome of heauen. For
there is also an earthlie kingdome: But hee that hath tasted the least thing in the world what the heauenlie things are, doth despise the earthlie. And it is a thing vnto the which wee ought diligentlie to watch with Prayers and supplications, least yt we be shut out of Gods kingdome: But that we may be vnder his guide and Empire. Manie shall come, saith hee, from the East and West, and they shall sit with A∣braham. But the children of the kingdome shall be cast out into outward darknesse, there where shall bee weeping and gna∣shing of teeth. The Iewes were the chil∣dren of the kingdome so long as they were the children of God, and hauing lost this qualitie, they haue well changed both their condition and their estate. It follow∣eth then: Thy will be done in earth as it is in heauen. Wee say not, let God doe that hee will, but that wee may doe that hee will. For who is hee that wil resist against God? What is hee that shall let him to doe his will? Now, because that the diuell is con∣tinuallie about vs to turne away our hearts
from obedience to God, and to doe that which God would: wee must bee holpen by himselfe, and none alas is assured but by his grace. Our Lord Iesus being in the agonie of death, and according to the in∣firmitie, stronglie fighting against a num∣ber of temptations hath left vs yet a faire example: When hee bursteth out in this sort: If it bee possible O father, let this bitter cuppe passe away from me: Yet ne∣uerthelesse, not my will, but thy will bee done. There is (in the second Chapter of the first Epistle of S. Iohn) an other faire sentence; Loue not the world, for in so doing the loue of God is not in you: See∣ing that the world with all his desires shall passe away. And as concerning God hee is euerlasting: and he that will dwell with him for euermore, must doe the will of the euerliuing God. Now,The will of God. what is the will of God? It is that which Christ hath fulfilled, and that hee hath taught vnto vs. And what is that? Humblenes in con∣uersation, stayednesse in faith, modestie in wordes, iustnesse in doings, mercie in workes, discipline in manners, and not to doe wrong vnto an other, and to abide it in himselfe, to keepe in peace with his brethren, to loue God with all his
heart, to loue him as a father, and to feare him as God: and to haue nothing more dearer than Christ, for hee also hath no∣thing more dearer than vs, to keepe our selues vnseuered in his charitie, to beare him cōpanie couragiouslie in his crosse, when his name or glorie is called in que∣stion: And in our talkes to shew a stayed confession, and an assurednesse in our aun∣sweres, when wee bee set vppon: and to shew patience in death, seeing that by it wee are crowned. To doe these thinges, is to bee willing to be coheires with the sonne, and to fulfill the will of the Fa∣ther. In heauen and in earth. We may take the spirit for the heauen, and the flesh for the earth, that all our partes may bee obedient vnto God, or rather that we doe the will of God as An∣gels. Giue vs our dailie bread. This may be vnderstood spirituallie of Christ, which is the liuing bread: as S. Iohn in his 6. Chap. saith. But it is certaine that here the Lord would teach vs, not to
be caryed away with the cares of this pre∣sent life: for as it is said elsewhere, it suffi∣ceth for euerie day to haue his miseries.Mat. 6. And in deede, this will not agree well to desire the kingdome of God, and with∣all to loue the earthlie life, and to delight therein. Now as S. Paul saith,1 Tim 6. sith that we brought nothing into this world, neither shall wee carie anie thing away: where∣fore doe wee not content our selues with foode and apparell: seeing likewise that those which doe aspire vnto riches, fetter themselues in manie sorrowes, and easilie fall into the snares of the diuell? To bee short, the coueting of riches is the roote of all ill. This is a goodlie shewe that our Saui∣our maketh in the 12. of S. Luke, Oh wretch that thou art, this day shall they demaund thy soule, and for what purpose shall the great heapes of thy ritches sto∣red vp serue thee? And will we be well disposed to follow Christ? It behooueth vs at ye least to hinder ye causes of worldly thinges. In the meane time the iust re∣maineth not forsaken, neither brought into an extremitie by famine. The heauenlie Father which prouideth for the young Rauens and Sparowes,Pro. 10. Psal. 37. well know∣eth
to furnish vs of our lackes that are necessarie. Wee doe see by example apparant∣lie that which happened vnto Elie, in the first booke of the kinges and the 17. Chapter, where wee reade that namelie a Rauen caried vnto him wherewith to re∣fresh him. After wee doe pray, that the Lord forgiue vs our offences, as wee doe forgiue them that offend against vs. Now hauing receaued assistance of our foode wee doe demaund the forgiuenesse of our sinnes, to the end that hee who is nouri∣shed of God, may liue to God, and that so wee may not onelie haue our bread in this life, but that wee may also haue the inioying of the other, that is farre better, and whereunto wee cannot enter, if our sinnes be not forgiuen vs. Now our sinnes are called debtes: as likewise in the 18. of S. Matthew: I haue forgiuen thee all thy debt, because thou hast required it of me. Wee are then my brethren here warned, that wee be sin∣ners, praying to God for the forgiue∣nesse of our sinnes, and asking grace of God, the conscience being ouercome through offence.
Therefore let none of vs set vp our selues, what giftes soeuer wee have, see∣ing that dailie we sinne, and doe aske mer∣cie of GOD. If wee doe confesse our sinnes saith S. Iohn in the first Chap. of his first Epistle: hee is faithfull and iust to for∣giue vs our sinnes: But if wee say that there is no sinne in vs, wee doe lie. And since that this good Iesus doeth make vs aske forgiuenesse o our offences, hee gi∣ueth vs a certaine assurance to finde it, hee I say, that maketh vs strong through the mercifulnesse of his father. The condition that hee hath ioyned to this demaund, buindeth vs before GOD to forgiue others, if that wee will that he forgiue vs. This is it that hee speaketh in an other place. With what measure you mete vnto others, the same shall they measure vnto you. And in the 18. Chap. of Saint Matthew the seruant that goeth on against his companion with all rigor, is reproued, cast into prison, and declared vnwoorthie of the fauour of his Maister. And yet this is more clearelie expres∣sed in Iesus Christ. When yee shall ap∣peare before God to pray vnto him: If you
haue anie thing against anie bodie. For∣giue him: otherwise your father will not forgiue you. Then doe wee neuer make this prayer, but that we doe condemne our selues, if wee forgiue not one an o∣ther. For as the Lord calleth vs to peace, in regenerating vs: so will hee that wee doe continue in that brotherhoode and friendship. And in deede this is the fai∣rest sacrifice that wee can offer vnto God, that is, our louing heartes knit together. For God loueth the offering of him who hath a louing heart: But if the heart be froward, then doeth nothing of his actions or doinges please the Lord. A thing that is plainelie seene in the histore of Abel and Cain. In short, for so much as hee which hateth his brother is a murtherer,1. Iohn. 3. & God will haue no acquaintance with murthe∣rers: let vs make no account to obtaine his diuine fauour, if wee be not louing and at peace with our neighbors. Afterwards the Lord warneth vs howe wee should pray. Lead vs not into Temptation. ANd in this behalfe hee dooth warne vs, howe the aduersarie can doe nothing
against vs, but in so much as the Lorde dooth suffer him, to the end that all our feare and reuerence bee alwayes made readie to the Lorde. Wee reade in the 24. Chapt. of the second booke of the Kinges, how God did deliuer the citie of Ierusa∣lem into the handes of the king of Babylon. For it was by the occasion of our sinnes, that the wicked were let loose against vs: as it is said in the 42. of Esai: Who is it that giueth Iacob for a spoile? Is it God a∣gainst whome they haue sinned? And in the first booke of the Kinges and 11. Chap. The Lord threatened Salomon to raise vp an aduersarie against him, because yt he had forgotten himselfe in cōmitting so manie vilanous thinges.Where∣fore wee be temp∣ted. And as concerning these powers and temptations which hee prepareth against vs, they are for two di∣uers causes: Either it is to punish vs when wee doe offend: or else to make vs victori∣ous, when as by them wee be onelie proued & tried: which may be seene in ye historie of Iob. The Lorde in the 19. of S. Iohn, speaking of himselfe, said vnto Pi∣late: Thou shouldest haue no power ouer me, if it were not giuen thee from aboue.
Now this prayer whereby wee doe pray, that the Lord lead vs not into temp∣tation, doeth represent before our eyes, mans weakenesse, that is subiect vnto so many knockes; in such sort as it is not for him to doe any brauerie, but rather dailie to watch, to the ende that hee enter not into temptation following so many war∣ninges as are made vnto vs. The spirite is readie but the flesh is weake, what then shall we doe? Let vs praie the Lorde: and that that we shall aske with humblenesse, he will grant vs for his fidelitie. There is in the end of the praier, But deliuer vs from euill. Vnder this is cōprehended all that our enemies can deuise and platte against vs, and wherewith we be defended if ye Lord doth heare our praiers, & lend vnto vs his helpe. Well then, when we doe pray to be preserued from euill, it is to be deliuered from all daunger, and from all enterprises whether it be from sathan, or the world: in such sort as hauing the protection of God against euil, we may wel hold vs most assu∣red. For how shall he feare any ill in this world, that is kept of God in this world, & compassed about with his safegard? To be
short, this is the life euerlasting & the ful∣nesse of all good hap,Iohn. 17. to know one onelie true God, and him whom he had sent into this world, Iesus Christ our Sauiour. Now our Lord Iesus hath not onelie commaun∣ded vs to pray,Luke. 6. but he himselfe hath giuen vs an example, withdrawing himselfe oftē vp, into ye mountaine to make his prayer. And if he did pray which was exempt frō sinne: how is it then yt we poore wretches doe not pray to God?The pray∣er of Iesus Christ. And if he haue pas∣sed some times whole nightes therein, wherefore doe we leaue off a thing so ne∣cessarie? His prayer was not so much for himselfe, as for vs. And wee see that which is spoken, how yt Sathan had desire to sift the Apostles: but that he had prayed that their faith should not faile them. In ye 17. Chap. of S. Iohn he saith: I pray not one∣lie for thē, but for all those yt shall beleeue in me. O what bountie & affectioned loue was that of our sauiour, that was not con∣tented to redeeme vs by his bloud, but had moreouer great desire to pray for vs. And he hath prayed that we might bee all one, well knowing that in the kingdome of God no discord doeth enter. Nowe, when wee pray my bre∣thren, let all fleshlie thinges bee farre
from vs, that the spirit may thinke vppon none other thing but vppon onelie praier. And thereof commeth the manner that wee haue, when as one in the beginning of our prayers pronounceth these wordes: Lift vp your heartes. And the people aun∣swere: Wee lift them vp vnto the Lord. So that it is requisite that our heartes be shut vp from Sathan, and open vnto our God. The Diuell is craftie and hee seeketh some clift, creuie or chinke by the which hee may slide into our vnderstandinges, and to turne them away from God: So that by this meane hee maketh vs to haue one thing in our heartes and an other thing in our tongues: and yet in the meane space it is the heart that God de∣maundeth, & not the sound of the mouth. For what lack of consideration is this, for a man to be wretched in manie thoughtes in praying to God, seeing that it is a thing wherein wee ought so much to take heed how wee pray vnto this great God? How wouldest thou that GOD should heare thee, when that thou doest not heare thy selfe? Wouldest thou yt God should haue remembrance of thee, & thou doest no∣whit at all remember thy selfe? This is to giue our selues for a pray vnto our ene∣mie,
and to offend the maiestie of GOD: This is also to watch with the eyes, and to sleepe with the heart. Furthermore it is needefull that the praier haue his effect, and not be barren: and this is the cause wherefore the scripture hath often times ioyned with it almes and fasting, as the examples are thereof in Toby, and in the good captaine Cornelius, whereof it is spo∣ken in the 10. of the Actes. And in the 58. of Esay, amongest other thinges that the Lorde requireth of those which call vpon him, it is that they breake their breade vn∣to those which haue hunger. Beholde heere the chiefe pointes that are requisite in true prayer that S. Cyprian describeth. Blessed are those whome the Lorde shall finde waking and praying: be it that he take vs by death, or else that wee be chaunged in the twincking of an eie to appeare in his iudgement. Now, O Lord giue vs grace to praise thee: vnto whom be all honour and glorie for euer. So be it. 2. Thessalonians Chap. 2. Brethren stande fast, and holde the ordi∣naunces which ye haue beene taught, whe∣ther
it be by our preaching, or by our Epistle. Our Lorde Iesus Christ, and God and our Father, which hath loued vs, and hath giuen vs euerlasting consolation, and good hope in grace, comfort your hearts, and stablish you in all good saying and dooing. FINIS.
