24477 17760 99846803 11793
Tyros Roring Megge. Planted against the walles of Melancholy. One Booke cut into two Decads. Vno die consenui. At London Printed by Valentine Simmes. 1598.
¶ To the worshipfull and true Gentleman Maister Iohn Lucas, Eternitie. DEigne (gentle Sir) to cast a willing eie Vpon the issue of an idle braine: Once (though an Eagle) stoupe vnto a Flie, Then scorn such preis, & soare aloft againe. Great oddes betweene the Mowse and Lion be, And yet the Mowse as much a beast as he. Hope lifts me vp vpon her snowie wings, Chearing my thoughts with fortunate euent: Feare pulles me downe, and whispers out such things, As curb my ioyes, and make me mal-content: Saying, the bird that seemes a Swanne by night, Will prooue a wild-goose set against the light. Naithlesse, prickt on with foolish hardiment, I put into those gratious handes of thine These looser numbers: fitter to be rent, Or swept away, like deft Arachnes twine, Than to be read: yet (deerest) list a while Vnto thy Tyros Democriticke stile.
To the curteous Reader. QVocunque aspicio, nihil est nisi Pontus, & aër. I turne round about, and can see nothing but greefe. Coelum vndi{que}, & vndi{que} Pontus. Here, and there, and euerie where, Dowlands Lachrymae. I wa altogether terrestriall, or rather melancholicke, o rather sadnesse it self in the Abstract. A friend of mine perceiu'd it, and told me I was in my winding sheete, vn∣lesse I droue out one contray by another. Resolu'd to be the grater that should chafe the sad humour to crums, I became Sub-sizer, to Democritus, being well content to be no longer mal-content. The light-hearted gardian sent me such Adsums, that on a sudden I began to looke like a Queene-apple, and my wit was so leger, that I could no sooner call for a conceit, but incontinent it would answere like a Knaue-tapster, anon, anon. In this veyne I composed these Epigrammes, which I request may be taken in good gree, and read when thou art la∣zie. Blame me not too bitterly, for mispending a little time: and consider that learned Poets haue, for recrea∣tion, wrought vpon worse subiects. I say nothing of Mi∣sacmos, who descended from Ela to the Base Keys that open the Priuie doore. Wel: be as good to vs as you may, and farewell. Thin while he hath any radicall moysture, T. Tyro.
In Zoilistam. HE makes each mote a mount, and keepes in store A brazen penne to dash at this and that: Yet doth this currish censor see no more, Than the mashapen Owle, or doubtfull Bat. O let the man that carpes without a cause, Be caught himselfe in Momus griping Clawes, Recentibus Salem, & Salutem Recentibus Plurimum. & Salutem ABsurd. Let Heraclyte do nought but crie, And put his raw-bond finger in his eie. Laugh ye: let earthie melancholie parte: It's Aqua fortis to a merrie heart. Can all your Logick prooue that matter good, That fils the mother-veyn with sickly bloud? Salt not so much your tender bosomes frets, As do the humours thrilling greefe begets. What is the reason why your faces beene So neare a kinne to Wakefield on the greene? Is't not, for that you do so seldome smile, Ne with blithe matters winter nights beguile? Is't not, because you sit in darkesome nookes, And reade such Vengeable and puling bookes? Go then, my rimes, with dimples in your cheekes,
And chide them that they are so greene as leekes. Be ye as working pilles to purge their paine, And make them cleare complectiond once againe. Say for theyr sakes your maister tooke in hond, (Being tyed their friend with Adamantin bond) With sun-shine iest t'expell their roten fogges, And make them dapper like pale-yellow frogges. O ye no Tyrants, but of Tyros crew, Beate not my crouching meeters blacke and blew. O let your Substances be well content For to support this feeble Accident. So shall I pray with voyce articulate, That the drie Barrell may you euer hate. Each day Ile perbreake wishes more or lesse, That ye may oft be seniors of your messe. If not: and if my chickens fare not well, Which are but newly crept forth of the shell: By the fiue praedicables I protest, That who writes nought at all, does write the best. Your matriculated cozen and fast friend Winter and Summer. T. Tyro. Decad 1. Epig. 1. THe Sunnes proude coursers, hauing rest their fill, Curuetted stately vp the Easterne hill.
The flowring fieldes each creature did content, VVith motly coate, and goodly blandishment. The cheerefull larke sang prick-song in the air, And yonger sheepe skipt on the face of care. Wel mught I walke, for why me thought it sinne, Not to peke forth my head, but keepe it in. Strange thing: scarce had I well a furlong gone, Whenas, mee seemd, I heard a pitteous mone: Ay me, t'was one wrapt in a bead mans gowne, Whose gesture shewd him freshely come to towne. Small labour lost, quoth I, to lst a while To this poore gowne-mans lamentable stile. He spake: I listen'd▪ Lucklesse lad, said he, That am inforst this dismall day to see: Shall I that wont to make my bellie cracke, Stay here and loose the flesh from of my backe? Raher then Tyro such a change will brooke, Out at the Ropers window will he looke. I nly greede to heare him plaine his harmes, When he infolded Dawes-crosse in his armes: And, the warme humor drizling downe his face. Bade it adew and foorthwith trudg'd apace. I like a thiefe that had in ambush line, Did bid him Stand, and go with me and dine. Such dinner was lesse easie to disgest, Then greafie brew is swimming in the brest. He thought, poore soule, no harme: I, like a king, Strait led him to his Tutor in a string: VVhee the graue Agent did his part so play, That since his Patient neuer ranne away. Had he escapte, he had felt mickle losse. For Tumbling stone nere gathes ceauing mosse. He is a friend, albe he seeme a soe, That serues all nimble-footed fresh-men so.
Epig. 2. LO, he the boy, whose mouth whilom did lug The slauered milke from out his mothers dug: Is now exalt to vndeserued hap, And walkes in Garment milde, and circled Cap. And strouting it along the vnknowne street, With some fantasticke Ramist doth he meet: Who can him greet and welcome him full faire All lowting low: and nodding like a mare That ore her bridle wagges her wanton head, Pincht with the hungrie flies thereon bespread, He thus can say. VVelcome to Athens, gentle yonger brother: Thou maist, ere long, be comfort to thy mother, And to thy dad, and to thy grandsire too, It thou attend the wordes I shall thee shew. Be wist, and warie of that prating sect Which striues 'gainst Ramus, lest it thee infect. For tidy Peter like a pritty primmer, May well be learned ere thou go to dinner. Hee's pithie, deep, succinct, methodicall, A Cornucope, a volume all in all. But Aristotle is a ridling Sphinx, A riuer poysonous to him that drinks. Hee's blunt, vnpolisht, tedious, harsh, obscure, Fraught with vile stuffe, and sentences impure: The childe is tourn'd, and claps him on the backe, And sweares, that Ramus foes shall go to racke: Making (forsooth) a sad and solemne vow, Tha he will reuerence the golden Bough. When Boyes in age, or wit haue said their fill, Old Organon must be best Logike still.
Epig. 3. WHat though Albertus be a merry man, My I not take the floure, and leaue the bran? Let him be baudie (as he is indeed) May I not choose the flower, and scorne the weed? What though vnseemly secrets he disclose, May I not hide mine eyes, and stop my nose? Great All-beard, rough with thy luxurious hide, Ile be thy scholer whatsoe're betide. Ile be Acute, and Graue, and Circumflex In the deepe dealings of the female sex. And yet I will not. What? shall Tyro be A Prentice to the trade of midwiferie? Hence bolde bad Albert, pleasing baite of sinne▪ Bellowes of lust to him that reades therein. I would not for a pecke of Tagus sand, My Tutour had espyed thee in my hand. I rest thy foe, deferring thy damnation, But till I make a Theame or Declamation. Epig. 4 O grosse! O monstrous! fie, Tom Tiro, fie: Giue thy king Edwards shilling for a pie, And then transport it to thy den alone, And chop it vp, and giue thy fellowes none? What? spoile a Neats-foote, and a marrow-bon, And neuer call thy next Vcalegon? Fie that thy greedy-wormed tong is such; Fie that thy chopping kniues can mince so much. Art thou a Milo, or Philoxenus, That art so sturdie and delicious?
Th' Harpyae would not snatch so greedily, Whose alons were of great capacity. How can thy noddle choose but be so dull▪ When capon-like thy maw is cramd so full? Right well I wot thou maist haue lighter hart; If this thou leaue, and learne to size a part. Epig. 5. WHat is he vnder heauens inammeld vault, That liueth spotlesse, and deuoide of fault? Where is the soule contain'd in brickle wall That standes so firmely that she cannot fall? Venus was debonaire, and beauties grace, And yet a mole lay sleeping on her face. Faire are the sphears wherein the Planets bin, And yet colde Saturne claimes a place therein. No meruaile then though Tyro haue some blot, Sith perfect vertue fals to no mans lot. Tyro can strike the sitterns siluer string, And to the lute full many a dittie sing. Tyro can act and if he like the Stage, Hop like a Bull-finch in a Babers cage. Yet when he solde his Aelian at the stall, Had not the villaine almost sham'd vs al? Would not the drowsie dormouse haue bin hang'd, That slept till ten a clocke and then was Stang'd? O faults! no faultes, but trickes of gentle kinde, And Proper adiuncts to a youthfull minde. Epig. 6 HO: weepe rose-water, spit tat viniger: Tyro is waxt a ruffling Caualiere.
Mount vp ye mil-stōes: heauens come kisse your centre: Tyro can strike a die starke dead, and enter. Ye toothlesse sheepe, go teare your howling foes: Tyro is ietting in his Bag-pipe hose. Xanthus, good Xanthus, turne thy posting streame: Tyro annoynts his nose with clowted creame, The drunken colour thence away to wipe, Bred with the fumes of the Tabacco pipe. Natures whole workemanship, forsake thy kinde: Tyros round breeches haue a cliffe behinde: And that same perking Longitude before, Which for a pin-case antique plowmen wore, Nor hath he siluer faces in his purse, On this superfluous trumpry to disburse: Nor hath he skill in Magickes damned spell, To raise some golden diuell out of hell. But who the man that treades on licourd shooe, Or could beleeue, or dreame that this was true? Tyro was wont to leade so staid a life, That sage Sobrietie was thought his wife. The gracelesse gallant with the crisped lockes. Was worse to him than any nine-hold stockes. The painted paper, and the swearing die, Were ghastly Night-crowes to his single eie. The witherd leafe that is in such request He would not ken, but did the name detest. His Slops were spruce, and stucke so neare the skin. That one might hardly part them with a pin. Tyro decayes in good, but thriues in ill: Prowdr as a Beacon on a Forrest hill.
Epig. 7. LOoke how a Horseleech, or back-biting flea, Sticks to the skinne, ne can be got away, Vntill her panch be tympanized so, That she must either burst, or else crie who: So bookish Tyro cleaues vnto his tunne, Vntill his houre-glasse be twelue times runne, And till his Common sence, and Phantasie, And Vnderstanding part ygutted bee: Two yoke of Oxen and a mare before, Can hardly draw him to his studie dore. I dae auerre he felt no sweete-breatht aire, Since the Red Bull drew weights at Sturbridge faire. Lo what it is that makes him languish still, Like a crow-troden hen that makes her will. Lo here the proper cause as I suppose, Why wormes digge parsnips in his dunged nose. Faith, Tyro, you and I must plucke a crow, If you go on to spoyle your carcasse so. Epig. 8. TYro by chance did reade, that Generation Was the sole finall cause of Augmentation. Eftsooes he shooke the hand with single life, And set his wit on reters for a wife. He tooke his quill, and pend this kindly plaint, Vnto a mincing minion fine, and daint. O thou Eclipticke lyne, wherein the sunne Of my felicitie doth dayly runne: Eye-pleasing obiect, hnnie-succle sweete. Tyro thy vassall tumbles at thy feee:
He a Leander, readie for thy sake, To passe an Hellespont of paine and ake. Be thou a Hero standing on the shore With open armes, and claspe him more and more. Thou shalt perceiue, 'so be thy loue be wonne, I am not Snow to melt against the sunne. My bleered eyes shall steepe themselues in teares, Till some milde answer ventilate my feares. Ah, dearest Nimph, some light-foote lackie send With white, and blacke, to giue me life, or end. Roses are in thy lips, O hellish smart, If angrie nettles grow vpon thy heart. Farewell thou prettie Mop, and me remember, Written in haste the twentith of December, About the dinner houre of Eleuen, 1597 Tyro, thy Delphicke sword til Crowes be old, Til Ister be luke-warme, and Ganges cold. Epig. 9. SHee read and writ, I did my selfe much wrong, To view the weeping accents of thy song. Thy lines the foes that sought my Fort to win, Mine eyes the traytours that haue let them in. Tyro, my all in all: alacke, how can Seely weake virgin chuse but loue a man? Nor can drie tinder stony fire withstand, Nor straw the ieat, nor I thy faire demaund. But, bonny Boy, the pillar of my ioy, How canst thou shunne thy imminent annoy? All wert thou Homer, famous Poets pride, And th' Heliconian Ladies by thy side: Yet, sith thou want'st the worlds pale-colour'd Queene,
I may not haue my kind affection seene. Adde wealth to wit, for, if thou faile in this, We must not bathe our selues in Salmacis: That I am forst to ring this heauie knell, I can but greeue, and so I shall. Farewell. Epig. 10. THe lad replide: Were I an Alcumist, Earths yellow excrement sould fill thy fist. Base-minded thing, shall asses trapt in gold Haue free accesse, while I the candle hold? O tree! O blocke! O stone, if still I stand, And see my nosegay worne in clownish hand. What Iacke? Anon sir. Saddle me my nag, New-Market heath affoords a man a bag: My Atalanta will runne on too fast, Vnlesse some Golden Apples I her cast. No, maiden, no, my liuer's not so hot, As to compell me loue, if you loue not. And yet (regardlesse of thy selfe and me,) How darst thou marre so sweete a symphonie? Say truely, am I a Sardanapale? Thou knowst thy seeming vertues were my stale. No Night-flie I, to dallie in the flame, Til I be scorcht, and shamefully fall lame. The more thy sinne to shew thy selfe vniust To him, whose kindnes was no kinne to lust. In vaine I champe the bit: no Ouids art, No Nestors tongue can riue thy flintie heart. Then sinke thou, swim thou, liue, or die all's one, Who would be yokt, when he may liue alone? Be wed to home-spunne russet coate, or blew, To both, to neither, what care I? Adew.
Decad 2. Epig. 1. A Threed-bare prouerbe, Youth must haue a swing, For greener age flies with a wanton wing. It was the sober season of the yeare, When Pisces and Aquarius dominiere, It's cleaped Lent. Tom Tyros itching legges Aduertisde him to take his leaue of egges, And get him flesh. The rake-hell strain'd his wit, To compasse rost meate for the naked spit. He gat him gone vnto a neighbour towne, To see what pullen stragled vp and downe: He went a thousand paces long and tall, Ere he could spie one bird Domesticall: At last he cast his eye vpon a gander, That from his fellowes new began to wander: He threw, and hat, and made a deadly hole, In the tue keeper of the Capitole. An old old Beldame plodded there along, Whose teeth did waggle faster then her tongue: He ranne, she followed with a yelling sound, And tucked vp her dirtie sauegard round. But Tyro floated on the beaten way, Like a swift vessell on the yeelding sea: She faire and softly walkt in pausing moode, And tract the felon by the Ganders blood. The ruddīe sunne forsooke our Hemispheare,
When she the wilie fx approached neere. The new-faln droppes led this olde bloud-hound hie, To an out-chamber, where she did espie &c. The heauie accidents that then befell My merry Muse may not abide to tell. Yet thus much: Tyro stampt, and fret, and swore, Neuer to prey on foolish goose-flesh more. Epig. 2. TYro the dastard needs would learne to swim. Yet durst he not come nie the riuers brim. He saw the tempting grauell through the cleere, And yet he trembled like the heartles deere. Pleasure a spur, and Danger was a reyne. That prickt him forward, this did him deteyne. But goodly well anon he can deuise To checke himselfe for shamefull cowardize. Crauen, he saies, pluck vp thy fainting heart: Albe thou want renowned Digbies art, Or swift Palaemons matchles facultie, Yet mayest thou wade withouten ieopardie. O minde degenerate, what needst thou feare? Proud Thamis dashing sourges are not heere. False-harted lad, go cut the cristall waue, Fortune is with them that stout courage haue. He laide him downe, and gan to be so bolde, As feele the water whether hot, or colde: Whether his head went first, the truth to tell, I weene not certainly, but in he fel. Let not the foote my tender shin-bon punch, Whose dayly burthen gaue so lude a lunch. Was neuer liuing eye saw finer tree, His head the roote, his legges the branches bee.
But the milde streame was loath to let him die, And set him on his ten toes by and by. He hid his chilling bare, and home he went, And lay bed-ridden till sixe weekes were spent, Since when he wisht the reason might be found, How chance diue-dappers liue so long vndrownd. Epig. 3. BVt ah, what meant I to forbeare this while. To tell of Tyros Steeple-climing stile? Had sweete-lipt Tully slaunting Tyro seene, Cratippus had not his sonnes Tutor beene: Had mightie Philip knowne this wittie elfe, Platos great scholler might haue hang'd himselfe. The greater beare, and the still-standing light He can demonstrate in a winter night. And yet (I blush) three loaues of horses bread Set bolt-vpright, are leuell with his head. Time was when he that did the credite win. Had store of excrement vpon his chin. Now he that looketh with a visage graue, Is hight a blocke, a stocke, a knaue, a slaue. Time was, (and then it was the time of ioyes,) When men were men, and prating lads were boies. Epig. 4 ALl white, all white: T'was uoisde amidst the streetes, That lechers two stood vp in sinfull sheets. When Tyro knew the tydings to be stale, He vp and told this prettie Poets tale. Iunos lewd Husband sleeping in the night, Be got a diuell that Agistis hight.
This beastly barne was an Hermaphrodite, And not his fellow-diuelles fauourite. Wherefore the hel-hounds menaced amaine, To prune the worthier member of the twaine. The deede made good the word: without delay They cut it off, and threw it quite away. The needelesse part (forsooth) was presently Transmewd into a fruitfull Almon-tree. Heer's all. If leachers might such haruest reape, Then Almon-butter would be better cheape. Epig. 5. THe Lap-wing, when her nest is nothing neere, Deludes the boy, and cries, Its here, its here: So Tyro. Deest fortasse quippiam. Epig. 6. MErry it was, when Tyro in a throng, Thus praysed Cherilus for skill in song. Well sang the Bird that neuer sings amisse, The Vocall musicke most delightfull is. When Cherils throate is swild with butterd beare, He Syren-like inchaunts the tune-full eare. Nay furthe hees the Nightingale alone, That sings a Triple, or a three to one. At large or long he will not come behinde, So he may rest, for feare he loose his wind. He can be breefe, ne thinks he it a crime To sing a common song in minym time. Cherils estate has bene at, ha now, ha, Ere since he vsde vt, re, mi fa, sol, la.
Epig. 7. WHen Tyro sawe faire pictur'd in a booke The gilt-hornd hart that swift Alcides tooke, He tolde the standers by, he would not rest, Vntill he caught a Swallow (in her nest.) Epig. 8. THe wilfull Papist could not Syllogize, Yet, in his owne conceit, he only wise. A very verbal youth, yet, like a man, He magnified his father Campian. Then Tyro thus. Not Bellarmine the prim-rose of your sect, With all his Sophistrie can me infect. Nor Stapleton, that goodly branch of thyme Whereon the Roman bees delight to clime. Sir boy: know that my gall doth grate for teen, That thy poore shankes with Ringes molested been. Rings with a vengeance, for they cry clinke, clincke, Yet when they come toth' brooke, they wil not drinke. Now by Saint Tan thy tortled rings do shew That olden Poets sober sawes be trew. For why, beneath thy knees cast but an eye, And there our Yron Age thou shalt espie. Blamst thou thy rings? thou doest them wrong I wis: A Circle the most perfect figure is. If by a right lyne thou doe downward slide, And the Tyburnian Triangle diuide, The Maxime will prooue sound. Wel, sirrah, mend. And saue your selfe from such a doggish end.
Epig. 9. A noble Student had a hake at mew, And Robin Falc'ner for a weeke or two Must needs be absent: so the bird must die. I Tyro looke not to her carefully. The wagge was loth, yet daring not say no, He saide, good Robin, tell me, ere thou go, What diet she does vse: now welaway, Whether worms, or curdes be best I cannot say. The Faulc'ner smil'd, and askt him if he iested, And giuing Cut the rowell, him requested To giue each meale a pigeon all but bones. And pepper her, and see shee want no stones. He gon, Tom Tyro looked all about, And seeing nought but trees, these wordes burst out. Stones? pepper? pigeons? pigeons? pepper? stones? Faulcones six dishes, and I liue with bones? Study, bookes, papers, burne you al in one: Who buyes all Tully? take it: Ile be gone. Yet ere I iourni Ile go see the Kyte: Come, come bird, come: pox on you, can you mute? I now conuaie my selfe incontinent To'th shamble for this vermins nourishment. Butcher, and freind: I pray thee let me see A Bull, or Tup, or Oxe-calfe presently, And cut his hangers off: pepper and hese The only fare that will a Faulcon please. Wo▪ ho: fall too: no pigeons can be go, But I haue bought thee better meate I wot. Eate lesser bittes, for, if your haukeship choke, My gowne and twelue pence for an honest cloke.
Epig. 10 MOunting Elpenor had a simple fall, His braines were onely dasht against a wall And Icarus that hie aspiring slaue, Had but his corps sowst in a water graue. Tyro, a word: lift not thy chinne so hie: Tis shame that thy pen-featherd Muse should flie. Were I as dumbe as a Seryphian frogge, My signes should tell what doth my stomacke clogge. Rather than at thy foolerie Ile winke, My nose shall be my penne, the droppings inke. Finis. Sunt, ô sunt iurgia tanti?
To the Reader. MIshapen does mishapen stand, And craues Correction at thy hand. In the Inuectiue 'gainst the Daw That makes a mil-post of a straw, At the fourth line, is to be seene The Beast: and so, God saue the Queene.
Tyronis Epistolae: Siue Mus rampant in agro aureo. Liber vnus in duas Decades partitus. Capilli curis semicani. Londini, Ex Officina Valentini Sims. 1598.
Expectato ad amplissimam dignitatem adolescenti, Iohanni Lucas, Aeternitatem. REgia ales defessa (generosissime adolescens) erecta stat: & caepe augescit, decrescente solis sorore. Ego, tametsi nomine duntaxat faelix, curam expuo. Non sum Vranoscopus vt sine corde viuere possim. En tibi meras nugas, te∣stem huiusce rei locupletem. Maximo te oro opere vt illas dextra manu accipias. Quid nisi vota supersunt? Deus det quae velis. T. T. Moroso Lectori. HAbes à nobis Epistolas (vir candidissime, idem{que} doctissime) mea quidem sententia, calamistratas satis, atque elegantes. Pol, tu non minima in parte apud me haerebis, si talibus sententijs, apo∣thegmatibus{que} laetabere. Valeto, memento{que} ve∣teris verbi, Legendis authoribus proficis.
Decad 1. Epistola prima. Patri Salutem. INtelligo ex tuis literis (mi genitor) esse quae ex me solo scitari vis. Nihil autem ardentiùs concupis∣cis, quàm vt Athaenarum nostrarum mores quasi viuido penicillo depingerem. Difficile quidem est, & arduum quod petis, cùm noudum sex septimanae abierint, ex quibus earum factus sum inquilinus (absit arrogantiae nota) in∣utilis. Et tamen in spem certissimam venio, me aliqua ex part tibi satisfacturum. Academiam nostram putaui stultus ego oppido vestro similem. Atqui non satis illam noui qualis fuit. Scin crucem in caemiterio? Illam pagum vestrum: templum, nostram Muarum sedem putato. Hactenus de externis: nunc de ijs quae ad ventris victum conducunt. Nec cygnus, quamuis albus sine nigredine: nec Collegium nostrum, quamuis clarum, sine nubecula. Nam, proh deorum fidem! quenquámne ho∣minem posse sine nutrimento vitam tolerare? Campana euocat ad prandium: quantum possum, festino: sto, sedeo: singulis mo∣mentis in praedam inhio. Oculos conijcio in famis alumnos, Sub∣sizatores, venientes, & abientes. Rogito, eho, tu: Amicis opi∣tulare: atque ille respondet, Alienis abstine. Colligo me quoad possum; spe sola viuo. Affertur tandem patina. Ecce autem
(tremisco referens) macilenti aguelli minutissimam morsiun∣culam. Sprans montes Hogmagoggicos, inuenio colles Sohistco. Extemplo pallesco, dentibus frendo, caput scalpo, mussito. Obseruat sophista quidam, accurrit, & obturbat inep∣tus disputator: ait Ventrem esse capitis sepulchrum. Sci∣licet: nnignorat versipelli mihi tantùm esse logicam natura∣lem. Triumphat, salem inspergit in nos recentes fungos: a∣rundineum argumentum iactitut. Tunc ego, homo minimè ma∣lus, hoc vnum dico, quòd nihil dico. Confero me ad musaeo∣lum, singultio, lamentor. Senat tertia: itur ad merendm; per obstantem turbam erumpitur. Promus panem porrigit miseris modis truncum. Ego impendio ad iram procliuior, sta∣tim expono quàm largam possideo conuiciorum supellectilem. Mox, subeune animum miserecordia, hominem appello in haec ferè verba. Crudelis seruole, siccine innocentem vulne∣ras? vbi (inquam) excelsa, & humilis crusta? Frustra Quòd ego te per Deum oro (mi parens) vt mittas Peram? Illam tuus musculus pulchrè inuadet. Furiosè mehercule in illam inuola∣bo, cibabo me opiparè, at{que} oppleb largiter. Polliceor, mea fide, me contubernales meos non accersiturum: (nihil enim opus est: vltrò accurrent, & respondebunt non vocati.) Quòd si Suil∣lae nimia caritas apud vos sit, te vnum hoc rogatum velim mximopere, vt magna vis Butyri ad me deferatur. Etenim, me iudice, Omne tulit punctum qui miscuit oua butyro. Sed, vt sensi, extra gyrum nostra diuertit oratio: lora igitur attraho. Quaeso à te, vt tum fratres, tum sorores meo nomine, ac verbis, salutes. Auiam verò praeter caeteras, qam ego in foci fumoso angulo in scamno sedentem videre videor. Per∣gratū etiam feceris, si Monoculum meum Tabellarium huma∣nissimè tractaueris. Diu te tueatur is, qui est Totum quod vides, & quod non vides, totum.
Epistola secunda. Eidem. EVge ô mi pater, vt tuas literas dissuaniabar cupidè. Ar∣genti aduentus multò omnium mihi est gratissimus. Ruere pecunia mea non potest, vt non ipse etiam labefactatus, conci∣dam. Mi pater: à me omnia summa in te officia profectura expecta, neque fallam opinionem tuam. Ingentes ago gratias pro Capone: tutori medius-fidius leuidense munusculum non videbitur. Facilè tamen probatu est, cacaphagum illam esse, & imperfectum animal. Mi pater: non dubium est quin ti∣bi ornamento sim futurus, & mihimet, & natis, Et natis natorum, & qui nascentur ab illis. Ego logicam scientiam suprà quàm dici potest celeriter ar∣ripui. Quae, Ca, vel Hyp, intellextin? Omnis West X, Omnis Y est W: Ergo omnis Y est X. Quid? an nondum etiam ne hoc quidem? Incumbo sanè toto pectore ad laudem, ac glori∣am, à summo manè, vsque ad multam noctem. Neque verò e fugere volo, me, cum Rhetorem ago, auditorum animos Syrenum suanitate demulcere. Non verborum audacia exul∣to: non proclamo diducto rictu, atque ore hiulco: ita loquor ip∣se, vt ambrosia alendus videar. Huc accedit quòd poësis mea tygrides facit consistere. Cuius rei exemplum habe tibi ver∣sus hos, quos nuper, diuino spiritu afflatus, in laudem compe∣sui Tittlemanni. Artem si Logicam disce, lege Tittlemannum▪ Ille sophistarum crimina pandere vult. Gnauus si vis tales libros voluere nunc, unc Tu pauper pueros ritè docere queas. Exrostro aquilam. Cùm aetatis huius ornamentum Spen∣serus morte erit extinctus, Regina nostra vult mittere pro me, forsitan. Si istiusmodi epistolas consolatorias rariùs acceperis, puta id esse causae, quòd sim grauibus negocijs implicatus. De∣us tibi semper omnia optata adferat.
Epistola tertia. Matri Salutem. SI tu (mea genitrix) vales, bene et: ego quidem aegroto. Ille ego, qui non ia pridem flos ipse fui, en, nunc contractus, deflorui prorsus, atque emarcui. Grauiter hoc dixit qui mul∣ta leuiter, Forma bonum fragile est. Caput meum graue est: nasus tineosus: labra prominentia: manus scabrosae: to∣tum corpus languidum, effotum, &, quasi laterna Pu∣nica, pellucidum. Heu, quid agam, (mea causa procreas & conseruans?) Vtrùm chyragra, vel podagra, vel spasmo, vel apoplexia laborem, non est facilè statuere. Vrinam nuper reseruabam: ad Galenum nostrum veniebam, consilium expe∣tens. Ille tristis, & difficilis, rogitat, Cur? quare? vnde? quor∣sum? num? nunquid? Vbi illum audio tonantem voce terri∣bili, censen' vllum verbum me posse proloqui? Ille instat, e∣go mutio. E vestigio me extrudit, clamitat, Amolire hinc te ∣cyus, aselle, trunce, dedecus tui collegij. Quid iam primum (mea parens) exequar? Atat: non curo ego medicum, quando ille non me: sperno pharmaca, calco catapotia. Sola tu∣os, quae fiio hac in re adiutrix esse queas. Est locus in terri quae Lancastria appellatur: hem! illîc est morbi caput, ac zrigo. Nosti Annam, bellatulam illam? Deos quaeso vt sit superstes. Aut ego falsus sum, aut formae laude Venerem superat ip∣sam. Nullus sum, nullus sum, nifacias, & efficias quî detur mihi. Virginitatem dilando: caeterùm, De dubus bonis, maius est eligendum. Vxor iuuentutem alit, senectutem non dimi∣nuit, pernoctat nobiscum, ac peregrinatur. Fac me, oro, sci∣entem continuò, quid hac in re faciendum censes. Atque au∣din'? Verbum vnum caue patri de amore, ne ad morbum hoc etiam. Sit tibi cura mei: sit tibi cura tui.
Epistola quarta. Fratri Salutem. PRaeposterum habeo tabellarium: cùm à me discedit solidum flagitat: cùm redit autem, ne denarium quidem affert: sed non vrgeo. Nomen ego commutaui meum, & Sophista sio ex Recentiore. Pluuia non cadit è coel (sicut vicarius vester af∣firmabat) guttatim distillat è media aeris regione. Vin descri∣bam animam? Anima est idipsum quod amasia mea: nimi∣rum, Tota in toto me, & tota in qualibet parte mei Etquid me ama de subtilitate stac? O frater▪ frater, vin' explicem come∣diam? Comoedia est multitudi igneorum meteororum, in infi∣ma aëris regione apparere solitorum. Alias. Comoedia est ca∣tera iuuenum magnanimorum, fustm dextra, facem altera manu tenentiam, quorum vestes colore sunt Thaumantis filiae, quae Mille trait arios, aduerso sole, olores. Ne multa, Comoedia est semita quaedam compendiaria ad Pronunciationem partem Rhetoricae artis laudatissimam. Ba∣bae! quis credere psset? Sardanapalus, & Hlogabalus fue∣runt homines: (quorum ill libidinosus, hic gulosus: ille labo∣rauit ad conseruandam Speciem, hic ad conseruandum Indi∣uiduum: vtrique fuit magna Vis expulsiua) O te foelicem ter, & ampliùs, qui germanum habeas subtilem sic, vt vel Dunsum ipsum possit laqueo sophistico irretitum tenere. Non vacat pluribus tecum agere, cui precor omnem foelicitatem. Epistola quinta. Eidem Salutem. OZonam torridam! ô ambos tropicos ô praeclarum Ptolo∣maeum. Ego lector Mathematicus, (nam non desunt mihi sedula turba recentes) orbes coelestes adeò lucidè de lineabo, vt,
si non perceperis quid velim, abs{que} omni sensu insanies. Procur∣re ad horreum: vbi limen praeterieris, ito ad laeuam: albos at∣olle oculos: aspicies Araneam vel in centro sedentem, vel or∣biculari operi manibus, pedibus{que} incumbentem. En figuram. SATVRNE IVPITER MARS SOL VENVS MERCVRIVS LVNA Potin' tu fidem adhibere? Quaeuis harum stellarum vaga∣bundarum terrae vincit magnitudinem. Sed, vt omnia medio il∣lo Planeta clariora fiant, animaduersione dignum erit, Omnem Circulum esse infinitum. Ergo si tibi in mentem venerit annulū amicae tuae donare, inscriptionem hanc (me authore) addas, Amor meus circularis. Sum quidem Iuuenis labore indefesso. Nam, quem dies videt veniens stertentem, hunc dies videt fu∣giens legentem. Adoritur nuper me quidam odiosè argutus Sophista, in hunc modum: Pallescis, Tyro, Ergo vel amas, vel studes. Subridens dixi, Amo studium. Bene vale.
Epstola sexta. Amicae salutem. Anna oror, soror Anna, quid est quod spernis amantē? Deamaui te (ita me tu) iamdiu perditè. Et, si quid facio nunc quoque quaeris, amo. Tu mea rosa, tu rosmaris: tu mea Venus limpidissima. Par∣turijt mter tua, et nata est corusca flamma, qua ego infoelix Ilium incendor. Sic ego vertor in cineres, te homine interea so∣spite. O crudelis Anna, nihil Tyronem tuum curas? Per∣gin' mulier esse? Nil miserere moribundi? Per nitidos illos o∣cellos tuos, per labella purpurea, per marmoream capitis co∣lumnam, per teretes deni{que} digitos obtestor, duram tuam men∣tem exuas: neu committas vt suspiria mea sensus tuos praeter∣volent. O Cytharea, tu{que}, puer{que} tuus spectatissimū iuuenem spoliastis, vulnerastis, trucidastis. Eheu, vbi sum? vbi? vbi? nescio. Amor ingenium mihi omne ex animo expectorat. Ah Anna mollis, & tamen rigida: calida, & tamen frigida: tu homo Adamantina me hominem Ferreum ad te attraxisti. Ne nega: conuincam enim si inficiabere. Abi in rem malam, Naso, cum istoc tuo versiculo, Vix erit è multis quae neget vna tbi. Quam diù ego speraui miser? & iam nil habeo nisi spem me∣ram. Aedepol nae, nos Narcissi egregijs faciebus, aequè su∣mus omnes inuisi puellis propter pauculos fuscos, & deformes. Fallor? an animula mea me Microcosmum vocat? Incertus animum huc illuc voluo. Annuis? Semideus sum: si non, E∣pitaphium hoc sepulchro meo incidi volo. Quis iacet hîc? Tyro. Cur ille? Necatus ab Anna, Anna, cuius amor fcilè reuocaret ab Orco. Vtcun{que} mecum erit, bene sit (mi ignis) tibi.
Epistola septima. Anna Tyroni. A Deon' ex mei amore demens es factus, Tyro? Siccine effli∣ctim togatam togate deperis? Putâram Palladem esse in∣nubam, & Pierides virgines. Scitè fortunatus ille, Vxorm nunquam habui. Vir meus es? nascentur filij: tu{que} in quae∣rundo vitam conteres. Interim (bone vir) studebis probè. Eia age (floscule mi) amor tuus mihi est cordi: cordi? Audi nun iam: tecum praesens absens sum. Miperfector, vale. Epistola octaua. Tyro Annae. INfronte epistolij tui December es: in calce Aprilis. Leo, vt Martius, ingrederis: placida ouis egrederis. Meritè igitur amor meus alitur, crescit, ac corroboratur. Libuit sic praefari: iam argumenta tua discutio. Minerua & Musae vtrum Cupido albus, an ater sic nesciunt, Ergo Occidunt se togati qui animos ad amorem appel∣lunt. Muliebris hercle ratiuncula, cuius ego cerebrum vnae, adem{que} leuicul distinctione dispergam. Quilibet homo infor∣matur ab Anima rationali, quae quidem vim Sensitiuam in se includit. Respectu illius diuinae facultatis, togati semper sunt in∣ter libros: respectu verò huius, ingenuè fateor coniunctionem illos appetere. Nec iniuria. Nam, ne minutissimum animalcu∣lum
sine tactu consistere potest. Pergis. Scitè fortunatus ille, Vxorem nunquam habui. O callidam mortalem! ô ingenium metuendum! sed respondeo. Habuit vxorem, & non habuit▪ Anno enim quinto, & sexagesimo, anum decrepitā duxit. Vi∣den' quàm infirmis fundamentis inniteris? Quamoborem pror∣sus ab hac haeresi opinionem tuam esse amotam vole. Sunt quae in aurem tuam, die Veneris insusurrabo. Pullastra mea, Vale. Epistola nona. Ruffioni Salutem. HEus tu, qui Vulcanum naso inclusum geris: quanti tibi To∣bacco stetit? Equidem pro necessitudine, quam tecum ha∣bui à puero, non possum quin cupiam in viam vt redeas. Quid? An foelicitatem ponis in Euaporatione? Quasi verò nunquam viderim sonipedem fumum è naribus efflantem. Ignes ex o∣re (tanquam Aetna) iacularis: concedo. Generosus igi∣tur: nego, & pernego. Pressiùs agam. Dicito, sodes, quid sibi vult prolixa illa caesaries? Iuro tibi nos abundare tonsori∣bus. Quilibet est in habitu. Elige qui te leuet ill onere (si onus id est appellandum, quod cum voluptate feras.) An clam te est Crinitas stellas ferè aliquid mali praedicere? Nisi verè tuus essem, te tam audactèr non monuissem. Da operam vt ipse valeas animo, si me vis valere.
Epistola decima. Philomacho sanam mentem. PRoh Manors armier! proh Bellona bellicosa. Mené ti∣midm, & fugacem vocari? Sino, at{que} fero, at{que} patior. Siquidem, quae regio in terris tuae non plena fortitudinis? An quisquam Antipodum ignorat quantùm tu Marte feroci, at{que} acie vales? Nae tu is es in quem verè accidit Terentianum illud, Denique, metuebant omnes iam me. Stomocharis, pro∣uocas, clamitas, Ad arma, ad arma. Apage sis (cubitalis Pig∣mae) sic Canibus catulos similes. Deterge gladium, qui totus rubet ferrugine: tunc I prae, sequar. Sequar per {quod} liben∣ter, efficiam{que} vt Corpus tuum organicum non habeat vitam in potentia: saltem vt liguli soluantur, sanguísque erumpat  natibus. Valeto,  ab unde, valeto.
Decas 2. Epistola prima. Philoclono iudicium. A In' verò, verbero? Philosophorum Hectorē (mastigia) iuuenum carnificem vocas? Ob∣stupefacis. Alij quidem Platonis discipulum appellant: alij caliginosum: qui duriùs Sta∣garitam: qui grauissimè, sophistam: carnifi∣cem praeter te, nemo. Moderator hoc intelli∣git: tu tamen viuis: viuis? imò verò in Scholas venis, putida sophismata effutis, illoto ore garris. Hem, (inepte puerule, & miselle pupe) responde huic ratiocinationi. Quod habet crura thymo plena, apis est: Tu habes crura fimo plena, Ergo tu es fucus. Quid negas? Piscis es ergo, non fucus? An elinguis etiam Ve∣romanduus? Tentabo. Comparata sunt quae inter se com∣parantur: horibilis definitio. Dialectica est ars bene dis∣serendi: Quid opus est bene? Imò quid hac appendice Eodē{que} sensu logica dicta est? Dic amabò, anime mi, mi Philoclone, annon amputanda quae redundant? Superuacancum esse liqui∣dò probo. Quod neque ad indagandum, neque disponendum argumentum conducit, illud (tanquam ciuis inutilis) è Logica ciuitate est exterminandum. Atqui clausula illa est eiusmodi, Ergo.
Si in ipso libelli vestibulo tam insignia offendo vitia: quid de medio (in quo consistit virtus) quid de fine sperare possim? , Lex Iustitiae possum scire vbi tu vitam de∣gis? Ah nimis verum est illud, Terras Astraea reliquit. I nunc, miselle, Ramum tuum cole, Aristotelis, oculatissimi viri, candidum nomen denigra. Sed plura quàm decreueram. De magistri tui Scholijs propediem coram cunfabulabimur. Vale, at{que} timida mente circumspice. Nam, si te apprendero, faciam vt cum dentibus linguam excrees. Epistola secunda. Cuidam olim condiscipulo suo. Nunciatum mihi est, te non pingue quoddam sonare, sed ita purè loqui, vt Latinè solus videare. Papae! Nondum quatuor anni sunt, cum is eras, in quem quiduis earum rerum conueniebat quae sunt dicta in plumbeum, & caudicem. Roga∣tus olim à ludimagistro (memini enim, semper{que} meminero) quo∣modo Latinè diceres, My father clipt shéepe: respondisti tu, Pater meus tondebat naues. Ille subiratus, quaesiuit quomodo hoc: I haue gathered flowers out of Terence, tu autem sic, Collegi menstrua ex Terentio. Nonne tunc tibi opus fuit sacculo? Cùm autem asseruisti Candelbrum dictum esse à candela, & labris, quia mulierculae solent vnguere Labra andelis, nonne praebuisti bellam materiem ad ridendum? Atti∣ca iam in te est eloquentia, at{que}in labris lepos habitat: lachru∣mo gaudio. Perge elegans, & limatus esse: perge rem proprijs, aptis{que} verbis explicare. Id quod faciliùs assequere, si in Tulli∣ais eris scriptis studiosè & multùm volutatus. Vale. Epistola tertia. Eidem. Rusticulus es: hoc me malè habet. Dum enim togam sump∣seris, philosophaster es non philosophus. Idcirco restat vt
miserias tuas conmmenteris, obnixe{que} contendas, vt quàmpri∣mum in Academiorum numerum cocptari queas. Interim Maronem lectita: sit{que} Tullius in sinu semper, & complexu tuo. Accipe quo semper finitur epistola verbo. Epitola quarta. Cognato suo Salutem. HEu, hoi, (alter ego) superasné & vesceris aura? Vereor enim vt potes sine me spiritum ducere. Instituenti mihi epistolam benè longam exarare, tutor aurem vellit, iussit{que} breuitati studere. Pro me pernoctet epistola tecū. Tu velim inprimis cures vt valeas. Epistola quinta. Eidem. Enimuero (mi tu) nihil nisi amor sum. O Narde, Narde, quid ni te egregiè diligam qui omnia tibi postputaris esse prae meo commodo? Sum quod eram, ero{que} quod sum, Dum me mor ipse mei, dum spiritus hos reget artus. Viden' quàm repentè poëta prodeo? Au, obsecro mitte me: n∣lo in soluta oratione quasi tabernaculum vitae meae collocare. Euax! volo agere rem seriam tecum. An nondum est ex te a liquis qui appellet patrem? Per mihi mirum sanè videtr te tamdiu esse soliuagum. At∣at, homo verecundans; Nec dulces natos, Veneris nec praemia noris? Vtinam, Iunone secunda, vxorcula tibi esset: Vtinam (parce precor) spes ciuitatis in cunis vagiens. Vide quàm non à vul∣gari meo stylo abhorream, tametsi acerba plura nemini vnquā oblata esse credo. Quantae quantae angustiae meae sunt, vnum ta∣men curo hoc quidem, vt me non planè deseram. Quid quod planè diuino me citò inde emersurum? Quam ego horam si vi∣dero, complures hilares sumemus die. Vale, mea amoenitas, va∣le, vale, & salue.
Epistola sexta. Lau. Wil. suo. ITané tandem quaeso est, perfide, vt te mei obliuio caeperit! Anno enim Platonico sum suauissimis tuis literis frustra∣tus. Vnum hoc scio me meritum esse vt me in germani fratris loco diligeres. Etenim, dum simul viximus, Heliotropium ego, tu Solmeus extitisti. Tecum circumactus sum, &, quocunqu∣te verteris, eôdem flecti cacumen. Nocte autem, hoc est, ab∣sente te, tanq́uam desiderio tui, florem contraho, Rore meo, lachrymisque meis ieiunia pascens. Si tibi vel minima erit adulationis suspicio, insignem mihi iniuriam offeres. Iusiurandum do, Gnatonicos, me infra om∣nes homines infimos putare. Siquid est, in quo in operam requi∣ras meam, fac periculum num idem sit Tyro qui semper fue∣rim. Delatum est ad me, te paenè esse à Musis auersum. Ita me ament superi, vt nihil iam multis diebus accidit, cui aures meas aegriùs dederim. Obsecro (ocule mi) nolito prudens, sciens{que} perire. Satietate in literis nihil periculosius. Acce∣lera, accelera, & ad literariam nostram rempublicam aduo∣la. Si secus apud te statuis, famae tuae malè consulis. Nihil no∣uarum rerum habeo, nisi quòd crassi quidam, & amusi homun∣culi, laudem mihi, siqua est, detrahant: nullum{que} non moue∣ant lapidem quo noceant. Profectò id genus hominum est pessi∣mum, quod ex Musca plusquam Elephantum facit. Sed quid incassum? Cur Curetes, Coribantes, & sycophantas curem impudentes? Fac planè vt valeas (amice singularis, atque op∣time) sic{que} tibi persuadeas, sic sentias, nihil literis tuis mihi fre acceptius. Episto septima. Eidem. CVras, uibus circumuallor, grauissimas, in sinum tuum (lux mea) libenter depono. Capitalis illa pestis Pauperies,
me pessundat. Quam quidem confiteor iure obtigisse, quando∣quidem nunquam consului in longitudinem. Calcei mei sunt pleni rimarum, hac, atque illac perfluunt. Caligae interiores scatent nitentibus ouis: quàm vereor ne non procul absint eo∣rum Parentes. Quos ego, si sensero esse nimis familiares, vn∣guibus vtriusque pollicis coniunctis, morti misero. Indusium meum est lacerum, & diuisibile in semper diuisibilia. O me miserum! ô me afflictum. Pater omnem de me eiecit animum patris. Quodnam ob facinus? Dicetur. Absumens magnam pecuniam in germanas gerras, literas ad illum dedi mendaciun∣culis aspersas, quibus incendi eum, nunc{que} vtor iratissimo. Pro. Item pro pullis, 5. ss. scripsi ego Pro. Item pro pileis. 5. ss. Pro Item pro artocreis, 6. ss. 8. d. scripsi ego Pro Item pro ocreis, 6. ss. 8. d. Iam{que} aut vltrà Sauromatas fugiendum est, aut vitae cur∣sus aliò reuocandus. Salue igitur, Saturne, fons melancholiae: saluete virtutes leniores. Certum est generosi alicuius adoles∣centuli tutelam in me recipere. Ah, quid dixi facturum me? O crux, crux, vtinam tu mihi sis sepulchrum potiùs quidem quàm sim instrumentum animatum. Vah, grauedinosi, se∣mihomines, lapides denique sunt, qui sèdem, aperto capite, infrà salinum. Anxius viuo, & dubius moriar ni tu (spes mea) se∣dulò facias ne ego perditus perdar. Non queo reliqua scribere (sic iaceo in lachrymis, ac sordibus) ne tu etiam corrumpas o∣culos. Vale, & me, vt facis, ama.
Epistola octaua. Ken. Hau. Salutem. QVid putem? se pultumné te? An vtilitatem solam amicitiam nostrā conglutinasse? Annon tantum est ab re tua otij tibi, vt syllabā, velliterulā mittas? Quot lepores in Atho, tot suspitio∣nes in animo meo pascuntur. Euge autem, rem teneo. Curas se∣minarium reipublicae: sic, dum alis familiam, negligis famili∣arem. Nec tamen est cur ita suspicer. Nam, si vt olim, in tene∣bricoso musaeo, tanquam vespertilio, latitas, non credo te Ve∣neris pullum ex Noctua factum. Caeterùm facilè adduci pos∣sum vt credam te in amicitia refrigescere, temporis{que} ongin∣quitatem affectum tuum extinxisse. O animum varium, com∣mutabilem, multiplicem, flexibilem, deuium: vix, ah, vix possum temperare à conuicio. Sum te quidem breuî aestu irae meae absumpturus, ni eam epistola aliqua blanda, pure{que} flu∣enti, sedaueris. Quid ego? quid agitur? Studetur, ambula∣tur. Iuuat aspicere lanigerum gregem, smaragdinum gra∣men tondentem: pastorem cani officiosissimo imperantem, fus∣cam vaccam agros altis mugitibus implentem. Neque verò in∣iucundum est agricolam contemplari colentem, aut stercoran∣tem. Sic, ô sic animum, curis intensum, relaxare soleo. Co∣moedijs valedixi, nec me applico ad studium Musicum. Sunt qui tragoedias nobis excitare conantur: &, non tutum est age∣re in scena gestum, spectantibus Roscijs. Paedagogus tu. O vi∣rum sedulum, dignum{que} qui in nostro oppid situs fuisses. Pre∣cor, vt tibi res foeliciter incoepta, foelicissimè succedat. Vae tui discipulis, qui quotidiè sentiant Ternarium numerum esse per∣fectissimum. Laurentio nostro plurimam ex me salutem di∣ces. Fac va letudini inseruias.
Epistola nona. Grauissimo cuidam viro. MVnsieur, innocuis orte parentibus: Sunt, sunt, qui nequeunt carmina scribere: Atqui versiculos ecce tibi meos Limatos, nitidos: nonne ego sum arrogans? Sum certè, fateor: Gloria calcar est. Transcenden sine te non ego noueram: Porro, non speciem, non Genus, Accidens. Non Formam, aut Proprium. Tu deus es meae Fortunae: O vtinam Virgilius forem, Pol, latè pietas sparsa soret tua. At nostra (heu) tenera est musula. Iam vale. Epistola decima. Idem Eidem. EN tibi carmen, insigne offiij mei testimonium. Quanquam te iam annum auscultantem (Marce) Cratip∣pum, Atque id Athaeis, Philosophum decet esse profundum, Egregium propter nomen doctori, & vrbis, Quorum haec te exemplis, doctrinis augeat ille: Vt tamen ad nostram non paruam commoditatem, Sempr coniunxi cum Graecis ipse Latina, Id tibi item statuo (iunior Tulli) faciendum. Vale. Conclusio. SIc{que} opus exegi: quod si legisse, laboris Non piget, euge, facis pulchra me prle parentem. FINIS.
The meane in Spending: Promising Prayse, to the Liberall, Pittie, to the Prodigall, Mischiefe, to the Couetous. Praestat esse Prometheum quam Epimetheum. At London Printed by Valentine Simmes. 1598.
The meane in Spending. NO Delphicke oracle is truer than that Ma∣xime, The hardest thinges been of greatest va∣lue. Wherefore Aristotle the great, doth easily win credit to his bookes de Anima, by foretelling the difficultie of the inten∣ded subiect. Now, of all things vnder the heauens hol∣lownes, nought is attained with lesse facilitie than ver∣tue: which is so inestimable a gemme, that the dainty sandes of Pactolus, the golden bowels of Guiana, nay, the perfect irrelenting Diamond by comparison will be∣come odious. The reason why she is so deerely bought is perspicuous: for that there are millions of wayes to euill, and poore one to goodnes. So then, it must needs be praisably done, to hit the clout in a fielde, the punch in a butte, the centre in a circumference. If the morall Scholler wil sit in Vertues triumphing chariot, he must be a Phoebus, and make his wilde affections treade the right path: lest if Phaëton like he giue them head, they forthwith carry him to the Lion, and Bull: to the Bow, and Scorpion, to one vgly vice or other. It is much to come acquainted with vertue in generall, but especially with that gentlemanly habit beneficence: whose praises no wight can expresse, though hee runne diuision vp∣pon them halfe a yeare together. The very name of her is Doricall Musicke to a good eare: but (alas) not one
of many tha y shooting short, or ouer doth not lose her. The ying of father Chremes to his selfe-vexing neighbour will sute with the most, Vehemens in vtram{que} partem, Menedeme, es nimis, Aut largitate nimia, aut parsimonia. But, lest I be holden a vagabond, I betake me to method. First I describe the bounteous man: then I point out the most direct, and compendious way to his vertue. Some such order I obserue in the extreames. He is the liberall man that bestowes his precious mettall vppon such persons, and matters as is behoouefull, in such sort, and time as he ought. That bestowes.] For it is the property of vertue, ra∣ther to giue than receiue. It is also more difficult. Vppon such persons.] For euery Synon that hath Or miserere laborum tantorum in his mouth, doth not taste of his mercy. Hee regardeth not the parasiticall kis∣singer, & soothing able-friend, who seemes to gratifie him with faire demeanure, when indeed he is a Melam∣pus, a Pamphagus, and a deuourer of his substance. He abhorres the vnsufferable, execrable, and repro∣bate Iester; knowing him to be the diuells quaile-pipe, that calles gentils to their bane. As for the pasiue wench with the loches qualitie, he may not brooke her: and why? He is sure shee will go proud, when se goes proud: and cause both purse and body to be soone exhaust. No, no, he considers that Bountie and Iustice are two louing twins, that alwaies walke hande in hande. Hee takes a view of the maners of his relatiue, of his affecti∣on, of his laudable partes, rewarding him most freely whom hee findeth most vertuous. Againe, his purse is presēt where there is most need. He is the Zephirus that breathes on the widow, orphan, and foure-footed criple,
and on the true Souldier maimed in defence of our common mother. Aboue al, he is gracious to the learned sisters (whom antique Poets most truely feigned to be virgins, so easily are they wronged and misused of this graceles age.) Concerning expences vppon liueles subiects, he is warie and prouident: prouiding alwaies that he main∣taine his credit; imitating Nature, which abideth nei∣ther defect nor superfluitie. He is none of those that build vast kitchins, but cold: spatious ouens, but emptie: gaudie himnies, but smokeles. He is none of those that raise proud turrets, and ample chambers, with Peri∣pateticall galleries, till their purses lye speechles, and they become right housekeepers. What doth he then? Mary he vseth the best method, beginning a otioribus natura, with the barne and kilne, and in tract of time e∣rectes a worthy house to the relieuing of needy vifiters. To take leaue of this pointe: he spends nothing on gogeous aray, the tel-tale of vanitie: nor vpon frolic∣king, the immediat predecessor to Venerie: but hath his puse in a string, and keepes a decorum in his actions. In such sort and time as he ought.] For benignitie must be correspondent to the giuers ability. Of all, and of all he lookes to this, that himselfe be not drawe drie, lest too late, he sigh forth a booke de tristibus pester'd with such like verses, Tempus erat quando poterā placuisse rgāti, Hei mihi quòd non est. Wherefore he euer forecasteth, and remembreth that Dor non dicitur. Furthermore, he pefourmeth his action with deli∣beration, aduisedly, prudently, chearefully, and for the right ende: For Liberalitie consisteth not in the quantitie of the gifte, but in the minde of the Giuer. Finally, hee is neuer Practitioner when hee is inuirond
with eies: for that is ostentation, and ranke poyson to this vertue. Go too now, were I a Theophrast, or Marcus Tully, that golden Trump of eloqence, yet should I come short in commending the Liberall. O heauenlie mind that esteemes golde as Quick siluer, and Brim∣stone, scorning to be vaslalliz'd by an Indian Excrement. Who keepes open house, and open purse: regarding o∣thers, and yet not neglecting himselfe, vpholding o∣thers, and yet himselfe not vnder. Surely so healthfull a plannet, that blesseth his inferiours with his influence, in spight of Enuie and Tyme shall purchase immortalitie. There is a two-fold threed will bring thee out of the Laborinth of vice to Beneficence. First, thou must indeuour to auoyde that vice, which is most opposite to it. Them thou must marke to which of the vices thou art most inclined by nature, and frame thy selfe to the contrarie. Now step I ouer to the Spend-all, who consuming his Patrimonie, killes himselfe with kindnesse: & this yong∣ster is rather to be pittied for his follie, than condem∣ned out of measure for his fault. This vnthrift is onely Pro nunc (as Iauell saies) neuer prognosticating, vnlese n this wise. The first day merrie weather. The second and third vnmasked heauens. The fourth and fift, weather indeed. Full moone on Munday the sixt, limpid ayre. The se∣uenth, eighth, ninth, and tenth, neuer such trim weather since king Richard id naked to Leicester. The eleuenth, and twelfth, dame Earths haire waxes long. The thir∣teenth, the sunne sheades his beames most radiantly. The foureteenth & fifteenth the may-bird sings plain-song lustily. The sixteenth, and seuenteenth, weather, weather, weather, fine weather, wished weather. And
thus, regardlesse of sleete, blacke frosts, tempests, thun∣derclaps, eclipses, after a while, like the Optatiue Moode, he hath euermore an Aduerbe of wishing ioyned with him. If he meete his mistresse, he hales her to the Iuy∣bush, and at first dash cries out, Drawer, fil a quarte of thy most vendible claret. His braine heated, the cor∣ruption of one pot is the generation of another. Then coupleth he lippes with his make, and threatens down∣fall to the chamber. And when his purse is corke-light he thus tryumphs ouer her. Dicite Iö Peacocks, & Iö bis dicite Peacocks: (as though he meant Iö the cow mentioned in Ouids Cronicles, and her vigilant keeper, whose hundred eyes were sette in the Peacocks taile:) Euen so the good muckel-cock, whē he hath shewed all the kindnesse to his hen that hee can, crowes and clappes his wings, and is lighter by an ounce at the least. Ne wil he take heede of the Identicall sea, cal∣led Item, and Item, till he be vppon the mercilesse rocke, named Summa totalis. Alacke for pittie that the best wittes and kindest natures are most addicted to this good vice. Well, howsoeuer it be blameable, yet in some part it agreeth with Liberalitie, and by Age and Want may soone be brought to mediocritie. Themistocles was such an vngracious wag, and so franke, that his father dis∣inherited him, and his mother dispairing of his amend, made a long letter of her selfe. Yet in processe of time he was not the man: for he left his by-wayes, and grew to singular account with the weale-publike. Fabius was a wilde youth, yet in his best time a man of good stuffe. This so, no doubt but the kind-hearted gentleman may descend to the mean, which shall in short time be effec∣ted: if for a time he striue to bee miserable. Not for a Persian mountaine would I amplifie this poynte anye more: for I think each Now an houre, till I be at the in∣durate
Button-capt Euclio. As this churle sauours of nothing but earth, so hath he a down-looke. His neigh∣bours maide cannot fetch fie, but he thinks his pelfe is gone with her. His cocke cannot scratch for a corne, but he feares his coyne will be digged vp. Where he is, there he is not, where he is not, there he is, for his mind is amongst his siluer. He is hourely aking vp substance, and yet not for himselfe. So ye, not for your selues, O oxen, beare the yoke. What more monstrous then that money should be∣get mony? yet he neuer quiet, but when his coyne is in∣gendering. At night his eyes see no sleepe, or if they do, it is momentarie, for at euerie minute he gruntles like a ringle-tailde hog. So that that shoo will fit his foote, which the peerelesse Poet gaue Dido when shee was loue-sicke Nec vnquam, Soluitur in somnos, oculísue, aut pectore noctem Accipit: ingeminant curae. A Midaicall slaue, that had his trunks full of bagges, and his bagges full of baggage, kept but one boy, who was his cooke and bedfellow. The wretch at midnight by chance fell asleepe, and dreamed that a theefe with twentie sorts of keyes in his hand, was about the lock of his wel beloued container. Affright, he start vp, crying out amaine. Ferte cui fustem, date telum, expellite furem. And so laide about him, that he made his bedfellow ful fac't. The next day waxed olde, and the sun was giuing light to our vnderlings, when the master and man be∣gane to yeelde to Morpheus. The boy dreamed and would haue sworne he had beene pined, in somuch that he exclaimde: Ferte cite panem, date cruftum, expellite famem.
and supposing one had thrown him a manchet, he light vpon his masters gnomon, dilacerating it most currishly, so that eur since he is knowne by his torne nose. No matter if all vsurers were so vsed. So vsed? by Stix I sweare, were I a Iudge, they should all and euerie of them be turnde off roundly, to the great indangering of their neck-bones. Certes Auarice is a capitall plague, a swallowing gulfe, a bottomlesse hell, the greatest euill that the diuell can shuffle into a countrey. Where the Spleene is bigge, the bodie is little, where this mischiefe increaseth, vertue is in a consumption, O what a rotten taile of euils doth this leane beast draw after her. Hence is it that the fatherlesse hath not his hunger quailed, while the mouse and weeuell pamper themselues in the garner. Hence is it that the Clients purse is neuer lesse full than when full. Hence it is that the tenth sheafe is scarse the tenth part of the ninth, or at the least, the least in the companie. Hence it is that one and the selfe same dish, shewes it selfe on one and the selfe same table, til it be either gray-headed, or vide Aristotelem de generatione Animalium. Hence it is that the dunce hides his butter-teeth in bacon, while the approoued scholler pickes marrow out of a Spade-bone. Hence it is that the farmer deales with his daughter, as he does with his hecfar in the market, he that will giue most for her, take her. In summe, hence it is that such a number of money-men ride continually to hell in wheele-barrowes. Who lists to reade Demea his repentance in Adelphi, shall see as in a mirrour, the cursed fruits of Illiberalitie. This carle, who a long time had beene ille agresti, sae nus, tristis, par∣cus, truculentus, tenax, (for so he speaketh of himselfe to himself) on a sodain becomes a Micio. The reason, Mei me sugitat, meam mortem expectant Lo here the guerdon of too much neerenesse, hate is the misers seruing-man.
Money came in by law, not nature, and was inuented for the easie supplie of mens seuerall necessities. O then, would not he be doone to some exquisite death, that keepes it in close prison till one peece infects ano∣ther? Crassus thirsting after gold, hadde his scull filde with lead. Aquilius gaping after wealth, had gold pow∣red into his mouth. Pittie but all misers should haue some such Catastrophe. There is no remedie for this disease, no electuarie, no pill, no potion can purge it: the onely way to helpe it, is to gette some Suppositorie fellow to blowe Pindust into his bumme. And thus, though rudely, haue I plaid the Summister. FINIS. Nam cur me verberas?
