3441 S114772 99849995 15176
Errata. Pag. 51. l. 15. for rather, read either. p. 53. l. 4. for The, This. p. 55. l. for note, roote. p. 65. l. 4. dele, not. p. 98. l. 10. for vse, inioy. p. 101. l. 7. for walke, wash. p. 108. l. 20. dele, that. p. 109. l. 7. deest, to. p. 119. l. vlt. for that, if. p. 120. l. 3. deest, to. p. 140. l. 11. for turning, curing.
A TREATISE FVL OF CONSOLATION for all that are afflicted in minde, or bodie, or otherwise. Which armeth vs against impatiencie vnder any crosse. By NICOLAS BOVVNDE Doctor of Divinitie. Lament. Ierem. 4.27. It is good for a man, that he beare the yoke in his youth. Printed by CANTRELL LEGGE, Printer to the Vniuersitie of Cambridge. 1608.
To the right Worshipfull Sir HENRIE WARNER Knight, and to the vertuous Ladie FRANCIS WAR∣NER his Christian and godly wife, the daily increase of that true godlines, that hath the promises of this life, and of the life to come. RIght Worshipfull Sir, in respect of your place indeede, some learned Treatise of Iustice might haue seemed more fitting: which if I had at∣tempted, I could haue added nothing vnto that, which you daily practise, and haue done many yeares, to the great good of that part of our countrey, wherein God hath placed you. But yet, as you are a Chri∣stian, and a professor of the Gospel, and so (euen in the multitude of Gods blessings, many waies, and plentifully powred out
vpon you) are subiect with all the rest of Gods children, vnto some afflictions and crosses; this argument, I hope, for the time present, or to come, may seeme not altogether vnseasonable. Seeing that the Lord hath saide, that if any man will follow him,Matth. 16.24 he must take vp his crosse and follow him. And therefore that is it, which euery one must looke for, at one time or an other, and in what kind it shall seeme best to his heauenly wisdome. For here I haue laboured, to shew out of the word of God, many reasons of the pati∣ent and comfortable bearing of the same. But whatsoeuer it be, it proceedeth from an heart vnfainedly well wishing vnto you: and so I pray you accept of it, as an apparant testimonie of the same. And for your selfe, good Madame, though your owne vertues and kindnes deserue much, God hauing put vpon you that crowne of glorie,Prov. 16.31. that Salomon speaketh of, namely, that your age is found in the way of righteousnes, e∣uen
in these most corrupt and dangerous times: yet the worthie memorie of M. Robert Foorth sometimes of Butly, E∣squire,Prou. 2 17. heretofore the guide of your youth, your selfe beeing ioyned vnto him in the neerest couenant of God, had beene sufficient to mooue me among o∣ther his friends and allies, to shew what te∣stimonie of loue I could vnto any of his. Whose zeale to the Gospel of Christ, and loue to all, that professed it: with his since∣ritie in executing of iustice, heartie affe∣ction to all his neighbours; great hospita∣litie and releefe to the poore, euen in the times of greatest scarsitie and want; with most excellent orders in his family for daily praier, for reading the Scriptures, and for singing of Psalmes, doe yet speake for him, and shall whiles this age remai∣neth. Whose vprightnesse of heart vnto God (wherein he was a right Nathanael,Ioh. 1.47. euen a true Israelite indeed) I pray God, that all his right worshipfull children, sonnes and daughters may set before their
eyes, as an example to follow. And so praying God to blesse you both, with many comfortable daies together in this life, and eternall happines after death in the kingdome of heauen, neuer to be se∣uered: with the like blessing of God vpon the right worshipfull your children, and childrens children on both sides, I bid you all most humbly and heartily fare-well in Christ. Norton in Suff. Iun. 24. 1608. Your Worships in all vnfained loue for Christs sake, Nicolas Bownde. Errata. Pag 19. l. 5. read, that God. 25.4 r. mixt thing. 27.20. r. di∣stracted. 2 9 r. our selues. 33.16. r. infirmities. 42.20. deest are. 24. r. rich mercie. 47.11. r. want. 53.7. r. meaning. 57.18. r. fauour of God. 62 3. r. searing. 99. 5. after man, put in co∣lon.
A COMFORTA∣BLE TREATISE for the afflicted. Rom. 8.26, &c. Likewise the Spirit also helpeth our infir∣mities: for we know not what to pray as we ought: but the Spirit it selfe maketh request for vs with sighes, which cannot be expressed. 27 But he that searcheth the hearts, knoweth what is the meaning of the Spirit: for he ma∣keth request for the Saints, according to the will of God. 28 Also we know that all things worke together for the best vnto them that loue God: euen to them that are called of his purpose. 29 For those whome he knew be∣fore, he also predestinate to be made like to the image of his Sonne, that he might be the first borne among many brethren, &c. THe generall intent and purpose of the Apostle here is, to intreat
of the matter of afflictions, to this ende, that he might shew, that none of them shall be able to hinder vs frō our saluation, that so beeing well per∣swaded of them, and of the goodnes of God towards vs in them, we might be the better prepared for them, and haue more comfort in the bearing of them. For he hauing prooued before, that we are iustified & saued by faith in Christ, for the further assurance of all those that relie vpon Christ for their saluation, he remooueth out of their minds, those things that might seeme to weaken their faith herein. And namely, first of all the consi∣deration of our naturall corruption, cleauing fast vnto vs; hindering vs from that which is good, and draw∣ing vs to that that is euill, euen after such time, as we do beleeue: of which he hath spoken in the former chap∣ter,Rom. 7 15. saying, I allow not that which I doe: for what I would, that doe I not:
but what I hate, that do I. For I know that in me, that is, in my flesh, dwel∣leth no good: for to will is present with me, but I finde no meanes to performe that that is good. For I doe not the good, that I would, but the euill that I would not, that doe I. I finde then, that when I would doe good, I am thus yoaked, that euill is present with me. For I delight in the law of God in the inner man. But I see an other law in my members re∣belling against the law of my minde, and leading me captiue vnto the law of sinne which is in my members. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliuer mee from the bodie of this death! For answer vnto which he saith, that by the imputation of the perfect holinesse of our Sauiour Christ, the guiltines of this is taken away, and is not imputed vnto vs before the iudg∣ment seat of God: and therefore he
saith,vers. 17. it is no more I that doe it, but sinne that dwelleth in me: for if I doe that I would not, it is no more I that doe it, but the sinne that dwelleth in me: and therefore it shall not be laid vnto my charge:and 25. for I my selfe in my minde serue the law of God: though in my flesh I serue the law of sinne: and therefore in the next chapter he breaketh out into this comfortable saying, and auoucheth it most confi∣dently, that there is no condemnati∣on to them that are in Christ Iesus, which walke not after the flesh,Rom. 8.1. but after the Spirit. And this communion and fellow∣ship that herein we haue with Christ for the discharging of vs from the guilt of our naturall corruption, we know by two infallible tokens: the one is the Spirit of sanctification, which we haue receiued from him, whereby it commeth to passe, that we walk not afrer the flesh any more,
but after the Spirit.vers. 11. For if the Spirit of him that raised vp Iesus from the dead, dwell in vs: he that raised vp Christ from the dead, shall also quic∣ken our mortall bodies by his Spirit that dwelleth in vs:13. and therefore if we mortifie the deedes of the bodie by the Spirit, we shall liue: for as ma∣ny as are lead by the Spirit of God, they are the sonnes of God: and thus this sanctification of ours, which is in sinceritie and truth, though in much weaknes and great imperfection pro∣ceeding from the Spirit of God, is a sure token that we are partakers of the righteousnesse of Christ to the perfect iustifying of vs in the sight of God, and to the taking away of all the remnants of sinne inhering & dwel∣ling in vs continually. The second testimonie hereof is the Spirit of adoption, which he gi∣ueth vs, to assure vs of his fauour, and to deliuer vs from our feares in mea∣sure,
and to teach vs chearefully and comfortably to pray vnto God, as to our most merciful Father: for he saith that this spirit of sanctification,vers. 15. is not the spirit of bondage, to feare again: which feare is wrought in vs by the sight of our sinnes through the mi∣nistery of the law: but it is the spirit of adoption, whereby we crie, Abba, Father, that is, it sealeth vp our adop∣tion in our mindes, and so openeth our mouthes in prayer vnto God: and therefore he addeth: that the same Spirit beareth witnes with our Spi∣rits, that wee are the children of God: and if wee be children, wee are also heires, euen the heires of God, and heires annexed with Christ. Thus by the Spirit of a∣doption, which is discerned by this most excellent operation of his, that it causeth vs to pray in hope to God, as to our father, and to call him not once father after a faint manner, but
twise or thrise; yea continually, Abba, father, or father, father: we know that we haue our part in Christ, for whose sake onely he is our father, and so are by him deliuered from the guiltines of all the remnants of corruption & sinne, though they are in our flesh, and dwell there continually, as the Apostle saith: and doe shew them∣selues both by vnbeleefe, and by hin∣dring vs frō doing of that good that we would, and causing vs to doe that euill that we would not. Another thing whereby our faith is assaulted and often weakened, is the consideration of those manifold and grieuous afflictions which may and doe befal vs in this world; where∣by it might seeme vnto vs, that our waies are not so acceptable vnto the Lord, that we might haue comfort in them. For answer vnto which, hee sheweth, that of what nature or kind soeuer they be, they shall bee so farre
from hindering vs from the fauour of God, & from our saluation; as that in them wee haue Christ Iesus, who went before vs in all our afflictions, further then wee can, and yet at the last came vnto glorie: and therefore if we patiently abide, as we haue not onely the Prophets, and Apostles, & Martyrs, and other holy men; but e∣uen Christ himselfe to be our fellow in them; so we shall be fellowes with him, & like vnto him in glorie: for he saith,16. If so be that we suffer with him, we shall also be glorified with him. And least that it might seem grie∣uous vnto vs, to goe to so happie an estate through so grieuous & painfull a way, and so might thinke, that the kingdome of heauen, though it bee neuer so pretious in it self, we should buie it too deerely; he telleth vs as∣suredly, that by considering the affli∣ctions of this world on the one side, and the felicitie of the kingdome of
heauen on the other side, and so ca∣sting vp the account of the one and the other, hee hath found the totall summe of them both to bee so farre differing, that all the afflictions of this miserable and wretched world indured by any, and from the first houre of their birth, vnto their last breath, are not to bee compared in greatnesse or continuance, vnto that glorie and happinesse that shall there be reuealed and bestowed vp∣on vs, according to the expresse wordes of the text: I count,vers. 18. or all things beeing well considered, I ga∣ther, that the afflictions of this pre∣sent time, are not worthie of the glo∣rie that shall be shewed vnto vs. And as this glorie is thus great, so it is most sure and certaine, though we doe not presently enioy it; and therefore we need not in any wise to doubt of it: for all the other creatures of God, besides man, which are vn∣reasonable
and dumbe, haue in their kind a certaine sense and feeling of it; for though they bee now subiect, (and that yet but for a time) vnto this vanitie, that is, corruption and abuse, which they are in: yet by the instinct of nature they doe most earnestly, & as it were with their heads lifted vp, and neckes stretched out, that they might see a great way off, looke for the reuealing of the sonnes of God, that so they themselues also might then be redeemed from bondage in∣to their glorious libertie; and they shall not bee disappointed of their hope. Therefore much more we that haue receiued the first fruits of the spirit, should with greater patience in trouble abide the will of God a while, and with more certaintie and earnestnesse of desire looke for an happy change of all our afflictions in that most glorious day. Which the Apostle setteth out in
much more patheticall and signifi∣cant wordes then I haue expressed, and therefore I could not passe them ouer; for he saith,and 19. The feruent desire of the creature, that is, of the whole frame of this world, and of all things in it, waiteth whē the sonnes of God shall bee reuealed. 20. Because the creature is subiect vnto vanitie, not of his owne will, or natural inclination, but by reason of him which hath sub∣dued it vnder hope. For though hee did by his curse vpon all the crea∣tures, which he had made for man, shew how greatly he was displeased with the fall and sinne of man, yet he would giue them hope to be resto∣red: and therefore he addeth, 21. For the creature also shall be deliuered from the bondage of corruption in∣to the glorious libertie of the sonnes of God. For we know that euery cre∣ature groaneth with vs also, and tra∣uaileth in paine together vnto this
present: as a woman with child, not onely with exceeding sorrowe, but with hope of a comfortable deliue∣rance in time. And not onely the creatures, but we also which haue the first fruits of the Spirit, euen we doe sigh in our selues, waiting for the a∣doption euen the redemption of our owne bodies, that is, our last resto∣ring, when as our adoption shall be fully accomplished in soule and bo∣die. Which condition of ours in affli∣ction, though grieuous for a time, but most happie in the ende, that we might not refuse to vndergoe, with the rest of the creatures, and our bre∣thren & sisters: he calleth vs to con∣sider the wise order which God hath appointed in sauing of vs, which is by hope:vers. 24. for he saith, We are saued by hope, but hope that is seene is not hope: for how can a man hope for that he seeth, but if we hope for that
we see not, we doe with patience a∣bide for it. Therefore we must not i∣magine so soone to inioy all happi∣nesse, as we beleeue it: but be content to want all things for a time: that ho∣ping for them with patience & long-suffering, we might come to them at last: vnlesse we will goe about to in∣uert this excellent order, which the Lord hath determined and appoin∣ted to be in sauing vs; which is by trayning vs vp in the hope and expe∣ctation of all things promised for a season. But now because the hope that is deferred, is the fainting of the heart, as Salomon saith, that is,Prou. 13.12. it maketh a man sick at the very heart, to be long deferred of that that we desire and hope for: & therefore we might feare both in respect of our own weaknes, and also the greatnes, together with the long continuance of affliction, that we should not with patience vn∣der
the crosse continue to hold out happily vnto the ende: he further ad∣deth for our singular comfort, that the Spirit, which we haue receiued, whereby we are sanctified, and wher∣by we pray to God, as to our Father, shall performe this office also vnto vs, that it shall helpe to beare the bur∣den of our affliction with vs; and so though we be neuer so weake, yet be∣ing supported by the power of it, we shall bee able to endure them well e∣nough:Rom. 8.2. for hee saith, Likewise the spirit also helpeth our infirmities. So that it shall be all one with vs, as with a young childe, vpon whose shoulder the father laying a heauie burden, which of it selfe were able to presse him downe to the ground; hee should so put his hand vnder it, that hee should beare the whole waight almost and stresse of it himselfe, and so he should make him carry it. Now if the earthly father wil not of his na∣turall
affection ouerlade the poore childe, then wee neede not to feare, but that the Lord our spiritual father will so increase our strength, accor∣ding to the measure of our afflictiōs, that we shall find this promise to be true by experience, That his holy spirit shall helpe our infirmities. And thus Dauid commendeth the mercie of God vnto vs,Ps. 103.13. That as a fa∣ther hath compassion on his childrē, so hath the Lord compassion on thē that feare him: he knoweth whereof we be made, he remembreth that we be but dust: where hee rendreth this one reason of the merciful dealing of God towards vs, euen the knowledge that he hath of our weake and fraile estate; which thing, as it is most com∣fortable to consider, so we shall finde it to be most true by experience; be∣cause our Sauiour Iesus Christ hath praied for vs, as himselfe witnesseth in the Gospel, vnto his heauenly fa∣ther,
that he would giue vs a comfor∣ter that might abide with vs for euer;Iob. 14.16. euen the spirit of truth, whom the world cannot receiue. And the blessed Apostle confes∣seth of himselfe, that he was partaker of the fruit of this praier; for beeing in many afflictions that were able to haue ouercom him, yet by the power of Gods spirit, he did hold out hap∣pily in them:2. Cor. 4.5. saying, Wee are affli∣cted on euery side, yet are wee not in distresse; we are in doubt, but we de∣spaire not; we are persecuted, but not forsaken; we are cast downe, but wee perish not: Euery where we beare a∣bout in our bodie the dying of the lord Iesus, that the life of Iesus might also be made manifest in our bodies; for we which liue, are alwaies deliue∣red vnto death for Iesus sake, that the life also of Iesus might bee made ma∣nifest in our bodies. Where he com∣pareth the miserable estate and con∣dition
that the faithfull, and more spe∣cially the Ministers are in, vnto a con∣tinuall dying, and the vertues of the spirit of God in them vnto life, which oppresseth that death: & he rendreth this reason, why the Lord doth thus often afflict his seruants, namly,vers. 7. That the excellencie of that power might be of God, and not of vs, that is, that all men might perceiue howe they stood not by mans power, but by the singular vertue of God, in that they die a thousand deaths, but neuer pe∣rish: and so in many daungers as hee defendeth them, so in much weake∣nes he vpholdeth them, and his Spi∣rit helpeth their infirmities. And this grace of God also vphol∣ding him in great weaknesse against most dangerous temptations he ac∣knowledgeth in an other place: for when he felt himselfe so sore troub∣led with them to his continuall grief, as if he had had a pricke thrust intochap. 12.7.
his flesh; and the messenger of Satan did so molest him, as though he had beene most shamefully buffetted on the face: for which he besought the Lord thrise, that is, very often, that it might depart from him: he receiued this answer from God,vers. 9. My grace is sufficient for thee; for my power is made perfect through weaknes. So in this spirituall combate, the Spirit of God did vphold him against the temptations of Satan, and of his own corruption: and so he concludeth, that when he was weake, then was he strong: that is, in his greatest weak∣nesse he felt the power of God vp∣holding him; and so shall wee, if wee waite vpon him. For the Apostle sheweth that this which hee found by experience in himselfe, by the goodnes and mercie of God, belongeth to all the rest of the faithfull, when he writeth thus to the Corinthians:1. Cor. 10.13. God is faithful, which
will not suffer you to bee tempted a∣boue that you be able, but will euen giue the issue with the temptation, that you may bee able to beare it: where he saith, The God that would haue vs tempted for our good, wil by his spirit so strengthen vs, that wee shall be able to beare them, and haue an happie issue out of them. And if there were no Scripture to prooue it, our owne experience might tell vs the truth of it; for if wee haue obser∣ued any thing, wee may remember that many times wee haue beene brought very lowe, and haue vnder∣gone such hard brunts, that wee thought we should neuer haue beene able to haue borne them. Neither in∣deede should we, but that there was another thing in vs, farre aboue our selues, which did helpe vs, and cau∣sed vs both to indure, and to ouer∣come those things, which we thoght wee should haue fainted in the mid∣dest
of them: and so we may boldly say with this holy Apostle, Blessed be God,2. Cor. 1.3. euen the father of our Lord Ie∣sus Christ, the father of mercies and God of all comforts; which comfor∣teth vs in all our tribulations, that we may be able to comfort them that be in affliction, with the comfort wher∣with we our selues are comforted of God. For as the sufferings of Christ abound in vs, so our consolation a∣boundeth through Christ. Thus the Lord increaseth the com∣forts of his Spirit in his seruants ac∣cording to their afflictions, so that they doe not onely equall them, but also exceede them in time: and so beeing supported by the Spirit, they are able to beare them. And this pro∣mise of God, that his Spirit shall help vs in our infirmities, is so much the more worthie to be considered of vs, because it is so generall, that it shall helpe vs, not in some few onely, but
in all our infirmities whatsoeuer: for he speaketh indefinitly, and not limi∣teth the promise to any one. So that there can be no weakenesse in vs so great, or infirmities so many vpon vs, in which the Spirit shal not strēg∣then vs, euen to the bearing of the greatest crosse, that God shall lay vp∣on vs; as we haue seene it in the A∣postle before, who said, that God did comfort him in all his tribulations, and his consolations in Christ did a∣bound, euen as his sufferings did a∣bound. But in the meane season Paul gi∣ueth vs to vnderstand, that the affli∣ctions of Gods children are often∣times so great, that they farre passe a∣ny strength that is in vs to beare thē; and that we are not able to doe it of our selues: yea, that we are very weak of our selues, and subiect to many in∣firmities, though we haue receiued the Spirit of sanctification, and of a∣doption:
for the same Spirit doth not cleane ridde vs of them, whiles wee are in this world, but doth onely help vs in them: according to the expresse words of the Apostle, Likewise the Spirit also helpeth our infirmities. In so much that he confesseth not onely of other the faithfull, but also of the Apostles, and of himselfe, in whose name he speaketh, and ioyneth him∣selfe with them, that they were not a∣ble to haue vndergone so many and great things, as they did, being fraile men like vnto vs, but that they had the Spirit helping them in their in∣firmities: for hee doth not say, that the Spirit helpeth your weaknes, but vs, that are the strongest, and helpeth vs in our infirmities: then no man must thinke to be free from them, it is and must be sufficient for vs that the Spirit doth helpe vs in them. The truth of which may likewise appeare in the great complaint of
Dauid, Iob, and the rest of Gods ser∣uants, who though they did patient∣ly beare many great things, yet not without the bewraying of many great infirmities in themselues: for Iob though he be commended vnto vs as a most tried patterne of all pa∣tience; yet how many and great in∣firmities appeared in him it is eui∣dent, when he thus cried out against himselfe, Let the day perish,Iob 3.3. wherein I was borne, and the night when it was said, there is a man child concei∣ued: let that day be darknesse, let not God regard it from aboue, neither let the light shine vpon it: and why died I not in the birth? or why died I not when I came out of the womb? why did the knees preuent me? and why did I sucke the breasts? and ma∣ny more such bitter wordes procee∣ding from great weaknesse he vttered against himselfe. And Dauid, though he was a man after Gods own heart,1. Sam. 13.13
and did beare many afflictions vnder Saul with great patience;1. Sam. 13.13. yet in many Psalmes he bewraieth great infirmi∣ties:Psal. 31.22. I said in mine hast, I am cast out of thy sight; he acknowledgeth his infidelitie to be such, that he did rash∣ly say that God had cleane forsaken him: and in an other place he spea∣keth thus of himselfe; I saide in my feare,& 116.11. All men are lyars, that is, he said in his temptation, that Samuel the Prophet, when he told him, that hee should bee King of Israel, did not speake it from God by the spirit of prophesie, but of his owne head, and so did but lie and dissemble with him. Therefore we are not to imagine of such a portion of Gods Spirit, that might swallow vp all our infirmities, and cleane ridde vs of them, (for then we should be no men) but it must be sufficient, that we are aided with the strength of it, so that we finally fall
not downe, and lie stil vnder the hea∣uie burden of affliction, yeilding to our infirmities, and so ouercome of them: so that there is a xt thing, as it were in vs; namely, our owne infir∣mities to humble vs, and the strength of Gods Spirit to inable vs to beare our afflictions. So that hauing so strong and so able an helper, to beare with vs the burden, we may be com∣forted with hope of induring the greatest thing, that may befall vs in this world, though continuing vpon vs neuer so long. Not indeed alwaies in that manner, that we ought, and doe desire, but so as it may be accep∣table vnto God, and so farre forth as his holy Spirit shall helpe vs in our infirmities: for though there be no∣thing in vs but infirmities, yet there is helpe for vs from the Spirit of God. And that we might euen in our in∣firmities, by the helpe of the Spirit of
God beare all afflictions as we ought, the Apostle further addeth, that the same Spirit shall likewise stirre vs vp in all necessities of ours, to pray vnto God for helpe, and for his grace, and to make our moane vnto him, as to our father, and we shall be heard of him therin,Rom. 8.26. saying, For we know not what to pray as wee ought: but the Spirit it selfe maketh request for vs with sighes, which cannot be expres∣sed: but he that searcheth the hearts, knoweth what is the meaning of the Spirit: for he maketh request for the Saints, according to the will of God. Where we see, both what great infir∣mities we be subiect vnto, and also how the Spirit of God helpeth vs in the same. For sometimes through the greatnesse of our miserie, we know not what to say, or howe to pray to God as we ought: and yet then his Spirit doth stirre vp in vs, though not many wel ordered speches or words;
yet those sighes and groanes which beeing vnspeakable, and not felt of them, in whom they are, are well vn∣derstood and accepted of God, be∣cause they proceede from his spirit, whose meaning he knoweth & gran∣teth, because it maketh request for the Saints according to the will of God. Wherein we are first of all to cō∣sider, that though wee haue receiued the spirit of God, euen the spirit of adoption, whereby we crie Abba, Father, which spirit teacheth vs to pray, and by which wee haue many times called vpon God with great as∣surance and comfort, both for and with our selues and others also; yet there may be a time, & that very of∣ten, wherein wee may be so dishor∣ted by some great affliction, and in such a case, that beeing as it were a∣stonished and ouercome with the greatnesse and strangenesse of it, wee
cannot well tel what to pray, or what to aske of God. And though prayer at such a time especially be our only refuge, according to the saying of the Prophet,Psal. 50.25. Call vpon me in the day of trouble, so wil I deliuer thee: yet we cannot tell how to begin, and what to say. And so vnlike shall we bee vn∣to our Father, and to that that wee haue beene in times past, as though wee were not the same: nay, our e∣state may seeme to bee like vnto the wicked, who are at their wits ende, and know not how to pray vnto God at all. For if we were asked then, what we would haue, we cannot make a di∣rect answer; and though we haue li∣bertie to aske of God according to our neede, yet wee cannot vse it: for we cannot tell what to pray. O what a wonderfull thing is this! but yet most true; and that which is to be found not in some fewe meane persons onely, that are ignorant, and
haue not accustomed themselues to prayer; but in the most excellent ser∣uants of God, euen the Apostles thē∣selues; as Paul here bringeth himselfe in with the rest for an example, and in this great infirmitie maketh him∣selfe like vnto the rest, saying; For we know not what to pray as we ought. And though there be many excellēt praiers in the old & new Testament, by which wee might learne how to pray; and especially wee haue a per∣fect forme of prayer prescribed by our Sauiour Christ to direct vs in all things needfull for vs: yet in temp∣tation wee aske those things many times, which if we had them, would bee hurtfull vnto vs: and when wee doe aske that that is profitable and good, yet euen then by prescribing vnto the Lord the time when, & the manner how, and the meanes where∣by wee would bee deliuered, accor∣ding to our owne minde, wee pray
with such impatience and distrust, that it may be truely said of vs, Wee cannot tell what to pray as wee ought. This was the estate of that good King Hezekiah, when he was sicke vn∣to death; at what time beeing greatly pained in his body, and sore troubled in his minde, and out of all hope of life, he turned his face vnto the wall, and praied vnto the Lord; but how? hee doth expresse it in these words. Like a Crane or a Swallow so did I chatter,Esa. 38.14. I did mourne as a doue: that is, in the bitternesse of his soule hee did not vse many words; yea, hee was altogether so confused, that his pray∣er was like the chattering of birdes, he knew not almost what to say. Such was the perplexitie & more then infirmitie of Dauid, when as in his great afflictions, in stead of pray∣ing, he roared all the day long, as hee saith of himselfe;Psal. 32.3. When I helde my
tongue, my bones consumed, and vvhen I roared all the day: so that sometimes he held his peace, bee∣ing betvveen hope and despaire, and sometimes he vttered many desires; but beeing carried avvay vvith the present feeling of his aduersitie, they vvere more like the roarings of a vvilde beast, then any vvell ordered prayer. And at another time he saith, Mine heart trembleth vvithin me,Psal. 55.4. & the horrors of death are fallen vpon me: feare and trembling are come vpon me, and an horrible feare hath couered me: in vvhich vvords, hee shevveth in vvhat infirmity & vveak∣nesse he vvas then fallen into: & for his prayers, after vvhat manner they vvere framed, hee declareth in these vvordes;Vers 2. I mourne in my prayer and make a noise, so that there vvas mourning and some kinde of noise, and little else. And another time hee expresseth his outvvard estate, & the
inward affection of his mind, and the maner of his prayer then, after this sort.Psal. 102.3. My daies are cōsumed like smoak, & my bones are burnt like an herth: mine heart is smitten and withered like grasse, because I forgat to eate my bread: for the voice of my groa∣ning my bones doe cleaue to my skinne. I am like a Pellican of the wil∣dernesse, and am like an owle of the desarts. I watch, and am as a sparrow alone vpon the house top. Surely I haue eaten ashes as bread, and ming∣led my drinke with weeping. By which kind of speeches he sheweth how greatly his affliction did worke vpon him, so that in them he did groane and weepe, and cast out many fearefull cries, but all things were so out of order in his praier, that they were like the chattering of a Pelican and of a sparrow, and the skreeks of an owle, rather then any thing els, if God had considered them in his iu∣stice,
and so he might haue reiected them. Thus wee see, that these most ex∣cellent seruants of God in their grea∣test conflicts and agonies, were so farre from beeing able to pray vnto God in any tolerable manner, that in their own sense and feeling they did but roare & crie, sob and sigh, weepe, mourne and complaine; and that also very confusedly, euen like the Crane, the Swallow, the Pellican, the Spar∣row, euen the shreeke Owle it selfe: so distracted were they in thēselues, and full of disorder, and fallen into so many great disorders at once. There∣fore we may not iudge of our selues, or of others, by any one such acci∣dent, or few particular cases, least we should deceiue our selues, saying, I haue not the spirit of God, for I can∣not pray nor call vpon God in mine affliction; and if I doe at any time, it is not as I ought: for this is that
which Paul confesseth of himselfe, & of other the seruants of God, and which wee haue seene in these two excellent Kings, Hezekiah and Dauid, that in affliction oftentimes we can∣not tell what to pray as we ought. But yet in this great vnfitnesse of ours, we must not be like to the wic∣ked, who then giue ouer all prayer, because they are vnfit for it: and we are subiect vnto this temptation, to put off praier, because we see that we cannot pray as we ought, and so wee are made to thinke, that wee should offend God in praier. But wee must then striue earnestly against this in∣firmitie of ours, and so pray to God that we might pray; and as the Disci∣ples said vnto Christ,Luk. 11.1. Lord teach vs to pray; so let vs desire the Lord to giue vs his good spirit of prayer: which if we will doe, no doubt wee shall find his promise to be true, that then The spirit of God in vs shallRom. 8.26.
make request for vs. For as our Sa∣uiour Christ comforteth his Disci∣ples in an other case,Math. 10.1 seeing that they should bee brought before the Gouernours and Kings for his sake: But when they deliuer you vp, take no thought how, or what you shall speake, for it shal be giuen you in that houre, what you shall say; for it is not you that speake, but the spirit of your Father that speaketh in you: E∣uen so wee shall finde by experience, that when we are most vnfit to pray, if we will not yeeld to this infirmitie and slothfulnesse, but striue against it, there shall be a secret inward wor∣king in vs, whereby we shall bee stir∣red vp to doe something; and there shall be a labour of the heart, and an endeauour of the minde, aspiring vn∣to that which we may seeme not to attaine vnto: and there shall be ma∣ny sighings, though few words; ma∣ny great desires, though fewe voices:
yea, there shall bee that which wee cannot greatly cōceiue of our selues, and euery thing shall be vnspeakable: according to the saying of the Apo∣stle, That when we know not what to pray as we ought, the spirit of God shall make request for vs, with sighes which cannot be expressed. For no doubt these men that we spake of before, Hezekiah and Dauid, euen at those times, when they could not tell what and how to pray of thē∣selues; yet the Spirit of God helping their infirmities, they did pray in some good acceptable manner, and there were at the least vnspeakeable sighs and groanes stirred vp in them: for it is said of Hezekiah,2. king. 20.3. that he then turned his face to the wall, and praied to the Lord: and afterwards it is said, The Lord did heare his prayer. And Dauid, when as in his owne feeling he did but roare and sigh, and mourne; as he saith,Psal. 38.6. I goe mourning all the
day, I roare for the griefe of mine heart: yet then hee made his desires knowne vnto the Lord in prayer, and poured them our very plentifully be∣fore him. And when hee did but mourne and make a noise, he desireth the Lord to hearken vnto him,and 55.2. and to answer him: and when he saith, that his groanings were like the Pel∣licans, and the sparrows, & the shrike owles, yet to shew, that in them there was a worke of Gods spirit, which made them acceptable to God, hee beginneth the Psalme thus: O Lord,and 102.1. heare my praier, & let my crie come vnto thee: incline thine eares vnto me, when I call make hast to heare me. And to shew that his example in thus praying was for the instruction and comfort of the Church, it is thus intituled, A praier of the afflicted, when he shal be in distresse, & powre out his meditation before the Lord: Shewing not onely that the afflicted
in their distresse doe thus pray, but that the Lord heareth them therein, and graunteth their desire. And thus is it saide of the whole Church of God in Egypt, at what time,Exod. 1.14. as they were greatly oppressed, so that they grewe wearie of their liues, by sore labour in clay, and in bricke, and in all worke in the fielde, with all manner of bondage, which was laid vpon them most cruelly; so there was great ignorance and much weakenesse among them, and there∣fore not knowing well many of them how to pray to God,Chap. 2.23 They sighed to God for the bondage, and cried; and their crie for the bondage came vn∣to God, and he heard their moane, and looked vpon them, and had re∣spect vnto them: and hee said vnto Moses,& 3.7. I haue surely seene the trou∣ble of my people, and haue heard their crie, for I know their sorrowes, therfore I am come down to deliuer them.
This is then a most notable com∣fort in all afflictions, that wee belee∣uing in Christ, and made thereby partakers of his holy spirit, it shall so helpe vs in all our infirmities, that when we cannot tell what, or how to pray as we ought, it shall teach vs so to doe it, as wee may haue hope and comfort of beeing heard. For this is that which Paul addeth in the next verse,Rom. 8.27. That hee that searcheth the hearts, knoweth what is the meaning of the Spirit; for he maketh request for the Saints according to the will of God. Where by knowing, he doth not onely meane that he vnderstan∣deth it, as hee doth all other things; but he accepteth and alloweth of it, and doth most willingly graunt such requests, as though they were made in farre better liking to our selues: & so is the word taken in the first Psalme, where the Prophet saith, The Lord knoweth the way of thePsal. 1.6.
righteous, that is, hee doth make ac∣count of them, approoue, and allowe of them, regard and prosper them. For as wee haue seene euen now, hee heard the crie of the Israelites, when they did but sigh & make their moane, and did deliuer them from their cruell bondage; & he did heare king Hezekiah chattering in his prai∣er like a Crane, and raised him vp from death, and added fifteen yeares more vnto his life;2. Ki. 20.11 and to confirme him therein, hee brought againe the shadow tenne degrees backe, by the degrees whereby it had gone downe in the diall of Ahaz. And hee heard Dauid when he roared for the extre∣mitie of his paine, and forgaue the punishment of his sinne; that is, for∣gaue him his sinne, and remooued the punishment thereof. And wee may remember our selues, if we haue marked any thing, how the Lord hath heard vs many times in our
greatest need, when we haue howled and cried, rather then made any set∣led and well ordered prayer: yea, when we haue rather moaned then spoken, rather sighed then vttered a word. For the Lord in this case re∣gardeth not so much the multitude of wordes, as he looketh to the mea∣ning of his spirit, and granteth that, though they speake neuer a word. For euen as a father or mother hauing a young infant sicke of some sore disease, though the childe can∣not speake and call for this and that, yet they are readie to helpe it; and if it be elder, and can speake, yet being full of paine, it cannot call for things as it ought: neuerthelesse, if they can by any signes guesse at the mea∣ning of it, they will accept as much of it, as though the childe had spoken very distinctly, and vsed many words: Euen so the Lord, who is infinitely filled with the bowels of compassion
towards vs in Christ, farre aboue a∣ny father or mother; insomuch as the Lord saith, Can a woman forget her childe,Esa. 49.15. and not haue compassion on the sonne of her wombe? though they should forget, yet will not I for∣get thee: though hee delighteth to heare vs pray to him, as Christ him∣selfe witnesseth to his Church, say∣ing, My doue, shew me thy sight, let me heare thy voice;Cant. 2.14. for thy voice is sweete, and thy sight comely: yet when by the extremities of our mi∣series wee are so oppressed or distra∣cted, that wee cannot in any orderly manner pray vnto him as we ought; yet he alloweth of the sighes & sobs that we offer vp vnto him, and gran∣teth not so much our wordes (which sometimes none or very fewe) as the meaning of his spirit, which is large and plentifull in vs. And hereupon it commeth to passe, that the Lord in his iust mercie
imputeth not vnto his seruants the manifold rebellions of their flesh, or great complaints in their praier; as hee did not vnto Iob nor to Dauid, who were full of them, as wee haue seene before; because he hath respect vnto the meaning of his spirit in thē: As the mother is not so much grie∣ued or offended with the murmu∣rings, impatiencie, and froward out∣cries of her poore sicke childe; as she by the least token guesseth at the meaning of him, and taketh that in good part, and giueth to him accor∣dingly. What shall we say to these things? Is it true indeede, that the Lord will vouchsafe to looke vpon the low de∣gree of his seruants; and haue respect vnto poore sinnefull creatures, who when they are fallen into the bottom of their iust deserued miserie, and e∣uen then can not pray vnto him one word aright; and when they begin
to speake vnto him, euen then their tongue cleaueth to the roofe of their mouth; that he will yet heare their sighs, and their cries? yea vndoubted∣ly, he that of his great mercie will beare with such great weaknesse in men,Matt. 12.20. that he will not breake a bruised reede, nor quench the smoking flaxe; he will of the like mercie heare, not onely the well ordered prayers of his Church, but euen the very cryings & roarings of his seruants, though they be like the Pellicans and the owles: yea their mournings, though they be like to the doues: yea, when they say nothing, neither indeed can, their very sobs and sighs, which come frō the abundance of a troubled spirit, and can not be expressed: for he al∣loweth of the meaning of his Spirit, which worketh these things in them: and if they could, thereby they are willing to performe better seruice vnto him, and are sorie that they can
not doe it. What can be more com∣fortable vnto vs, then this? Therefore in all our necessities let vs goe vnto the Lord in Christ with great boldnesse, and come vnto the throne of grace: and though we can not vtter many wordes, yet let vs speake vnto him: for surely the accep∣tation of our praiers consisteth not in the multitude or well placing of our words, but in the request and de∣sire of our hearts: and therefore if we can pray but two or three words, & say with the poore Publican, Lord,Luk. 18.1. be merciful vnto me a sinner; or with the Apostles, Lord increase our faith;& 17.5. or with the man in the Gospel, Lord I beleeue, Lord help mine vnbeleef;Mar. 9.24. or with the blind man,Matt. 9.29. O son of Da∣uid haue mercy vpon me; or with the theefe vpon the crosse,Luk. 23.4. Lord remem∣ber me in thy kingdome, &c. this short prayer proceeding from the Spirit of God in vs, and offered vp in
the mediation of Christ Iesus, and in the vertue of his prayers, shall be as well receiued of him, when we can doe no better, as if we had spent an whole houre in prayer. Yea, if we do but lift vp our minds vnto God, and pray in our spirite, though we vtter not one word, as that godly woman Hannah the mo∣ther of Samuel did;2. Sam. 1.10 who beeing troub∣led in her minde praied vnto the Lord, and wept sore: but how did shee pray? shee spake in her heart, her lips did mooue onely, but her voice was not heard: The Lord will heare vs, as he did her, and giue her accor∣ding to her desire: as shee afterward confessed to Heli the Priest: I praied for this child, and the Lord hath gi∣uen me my desire, which I asked of him. And so did Nehemiah pray vnto God, for he waiting vpon the King of Babylon as hee sate at table, and beeing sad in his presence more then
he had wont to be, the King deman∣ded of him the cause, & he told him: then hauing leaue of the King to ask what he would for the accomplish∣ing of his desire; it is saide that hee praied to the God of heauen: that is,Nehe. 2.4. he lifted vp his mind vnto God, and desired him to blesse him in that en∣terprise of his, and so he did. So we if either we can not pray in words, or waite opportunity of time and place, and doe but sigh vnto him after an vnspeakeable manner, the Lord will not refuse that, because it proceedeth from his Spirit. And as this may be no small com∣fort vnto vs in our affliction, so the Apostle Paul in the next verse fol∣lowing doth for our further com∣fort shew what is the ende of all the afflictions of the children of God; namely, their benefit and good, whē he saith,Rom. 8 2. Also we know that al things worke together for the best to them
that loue God, euen to them that are called of his purpose. In which words he ministreth this soueraigne medi∣cine against the contagion & poison of all affliction, telling vs, that they come to the beleeuers not for their hurt, but for their singular good; e∣specially seeing they befall them not by fortune or chance, but by the spe∣ciall prouidence of God, and that for the same ende: who as he hath cho∣sen them from euerlasting, so in the same counsell of his he ordained that they should in their crosses bee like vnto his sonne.Vers. 29. For those whom hee knew before, hee also predestinate to be made like to the image of his son, that he might bee the first borne of many brethren: and therefore hee calleth them in time, iustifieth them by faith, and by the crosse bringeth them to eternall glorie, as he did his owne naturall sonne: as it is said in the next words,30. Moreouer, whom he
predestinated, them also he called; & whome he called, them also he iusti∣fied; and whome he iustified, them al∣so he glorified. Whereupon he boldly concludeth, that no affliction shall be able to hurt them, seeing that the Lord is with them in the same, meaning thereby to doe them good: for he speaketh after a most confident maner, What shall we then say to these things?31. If God be on our side, who can be a∣gainst vs? as if he had said, seeing that God is with vs in all our afflictions by his prouidence and power, and by the assistance of his holy Spirit, none of them shall be able to doe vs any harme: And the truth of Gods loue and meaning towards vs this way, he confirmeth by a most excellēt proof, when he addeth,32. Who spared not his owne Sonne, but gaue him for vs all to death, how shall he not with him giue vs all things also? In which
words he sheweth, that we haue no cause to feare, no not in any crosse, that the Lord will not giue vs what∣soeuer is profitable for vs, seeing that he hath not spared his owne Sonne to saue vs. Therfore when he saith, All things worke together for the best to them that feare God, it is most true, whether we take it generally, as the words may be expounded, namely, not onely prosperitie but aduersitie also, not onely health but sicknes, not onely libertie but imprisonment, not onely honour but dishonour; make for the best to those that loue God. Or whether it be restrained to this particular purpose of his; namely, to affliction of what nature or kind so e∣uer. It is no doubt the intent of the Apostle to speake of this latter, and to shew, that all afflictions doe not onely not hinder the saluation of the godly, but doe greatly further the
same. Which saying of his, though it containeth an whole and entire mat∣ter by it selfe, yet beeing inferred vp∣on the former wordes, he seemeth therein to answer a secret obiection, which might arise in mens mindes from thence; namely, that it seemeth many times that the Lord doth not heare the praiers of the afflicted, be∣cause their afflictions be not onely not remooued, according to their praiers, but somtimes increased con∣trarie to their earnest desire. Therefore wee must remember, what hath beene alreadie said touch∣ing this matter, namly, how the Lord in graunting our requests, looketh not so much to the particular things which we desire, as to the meaning of his Spirit in vs: and granteth that, in turning our afflictions to our sin∣gular good: wheras if they were pre∣sently remooued, the Lord seeth that it would be far worse with vs, though
we imagine the contrarie. For as if one in a burning feauer should in the middest of his fit impatiently desire to be washed with colde water; and then the skilfull Physitian standing by, beeing his friend also should giue him some wholesome conserues or other cooling thing, hee should in denying that particular thing demā∣ded, graunt vnto his generall mea∣ning, which was, that he might haue some thing giuen him, that might do him most good, though now beeing distēpered, he was not able to iudge of it, but did mistake one thing for an other, and thought that to be best, as to be plunged into the colde water, which indeede is the worst: So wee whatsoeuer we aske in our distresse by praier vnto God, our meaning is and must be, if it be ruled by Gods spirit, that we would haue that giuen vnto vs, which might procure our best good, and further our saluation
most of all. Therefore if the Lord suf∣fer our crosses to remaine, and turne them to our good, though we in par∣ticular praied for the cleane taking of them away, hee fulfilleth both these promises vnto vs at once; namely, he giueth vs according to the measure of his spirit in vs; and hee also causeth them to worke together for the best to those that loue God. Thus then Paul besought the Lord thrice, that is, very often,2. Cor. 12.8. that the messenger of Satan might depart from him; and yet the Lord suffered him stil to buffet the Apostle, least he should bee exalted out of measure, through the aboundance of reuelati∣ons that were giuen vnto him: and the Lord gaue him this further an∣swer, that his grace should be suffici∣ent for him to vphold and strengthen him, and that the power of God should be seen in the Apostles weak∣nesse. The Lord in denying this re∣quest
of his, did giue him according to the meaning of his spirit in him, which was, that the Lord would deale with him this way, as it should make most for his owne glorie, and for the furtherance of Pauls saluation; and also did cause this affliction to worke together with other things for his best good; for this did him more good remaining, then if it had beene taken away: for hereby he had more experience of his owne weake∣nesse, and of the power of God, then otherwise he could haue had. And thus also the Lord hath veri∣fied from time to time vnto the rest of his seruants the truth of that pro∣mise of his, which is vttered by the mouth of the Prophet Salomon,Pro. 10.24. God will fulfill the desire of the righte∣ous; that is, God will not onely blesse those that serue him, but hee will be∣stowe those blessings vpon thē most of all, which they especially desire,
and do most earnestly pray vnto him for: according to that that is said in the Psalme,Psal. 145.19. Hee will fulfill the desire of them that feare him. Which pro∣mises are so to bee vnderstood, not that he will alwaies giue them euery particular thing that they aske, for many times through ignorance, or beeing distempered with some tēp∣tation, they aske that that is hurtfull, and then God denieth them: but he giueth them some other thing that is more profitable for them, according to the generall meaning of the spirit of God in them. And so doe parents vnto their little children, whom they loue full dearely, when they aske kniues and such hurtfull things, in stead of them, they in wisedome giue them some other thing that they shall delight in as much; and so still their frowardnesse, and giue them their desire in another kind. Euen so the Lord fulfilleth the de∣sire
of his seruants, by making an ex∣change, when as they name one thing, and he giueth them an other as good, or better: as it is saide in the Psalme,Psal. 21.4. He asked life of thee, & thou gauest him a long life, euen for euer and euer: where in the person of Da∣uid he sheweth how God dealeth with his Church, they aske life of him, and he giueth not onely that, but eternall life: as he did to Hezeki∣ah; but yet sometimes they that are weake and sicke, and desire life, they haue it not graunted, but linger and pine away euen vnto death, and so God taketh them into his blessed kingdome, and giues them eternall life, which is better then that life that they desired. And thus did he deale with many of the Corinthians,1. Cor. 15.32. whō he did by death iudge and chastise in this world, that they might be saued in the world to come. And this was the case of his faith∣full
seruant Moses,Deut. 3.25. who in the wilder∣nesse desired earnestly of the Lord, that he might goe ouer and see that good land that was beyond Iorden, and that goodly mountain Sion, and Lebanon: but he would not heare him in that, and so caused him to goe vp into mount Nebo,chap. 34 . vnto the top of Pisgah where he shewed him all the land, and there he died, and so entred into the kingdome of heauen, and tooke possession of it for euer, where∣of this land was but a type & figure: and so the Lord denying him that particular, euē to come into the land of Canaan, gaue him that that was farre better, & whereby he was more confirmed in the same of God, and in the truth of his couenant; euen to en∣ter into the kingdome of heauen, and so gaue him according to the mea∣ning of his Spirit. But further touching this matter, we are more generally to vnderstand,
that the Apostle saith not onely, that the crosse shall turne to our good, but that this shall be verified of all the crosses that euery way come vpon vs, be they neuer so strange, or vnloo∣ked for: whether it be sicknes, pouer∣tie, imprisonment, banishment, losse of husband, wife, children, father and mother, friends and kinred, losse of name and credit, or any thing els: as sorrow and griefe of minde, and affli∣ction of the spirit. Which is wisely to be marked of vs, least at any time we might be deceiued, to think when the Lord shall lay his hand vpon vs, as it pleaseth him, that if it were some other affliction, then that which now is come vpon vs, we could haue some good hope in it; but this is so great, it toucheth vs so nearely, that we can not possibly see, how or which way it should bring vs any good. And as the Deuill is readie to as∣sault vs with this temptation, so we by
reason of our corruption are too prone to yeild vnto his perswasion therein, and so by impatiencie to be wearie of the crosse, as not able to looke for any good from it. We ther∣fore that wee might comfortably withstand this temptation of his, be∣sides that we must holde our selues fast to the words of the Apostle, who saith, that all things worke together for the best to those that loue God;Gal. 1.9. he speaketh of all, not of this or that: against which if any, yea an Angel from heauen should perswade vs, we must hold him accursed. We must cōsider that this good commeth frō all affliction, not as though it were naturall & proper vnto it: for indeed it is otherwise, that of it selfe it ma∣keth men worse, as the sunne harde∣neth the clay: and it driueth men from good, as the rodde driueth the child away from the mother. And this is that which Satan aimeth at in all
men,Iob. 1.11. as hee did in righteous Iob, though he preuailed not, when hee said of him to the Lord, Stretch out thine hand, & touch all that he hath, and see if he will not blaspheme thee to thy face. And thus he preuaileth with the wicked in all crosses that come vpon them, as wee see in the example of Pharaoh king of Egypt, who by the ten plagues that God sent vpon him, was made more hard hearted, and waxed still worse and worse, and would not heare the com∣mandement of God, to let the peo∣ple of Israel goe. But with the children of God it is not so, the goodnesse of God towards them ouercommeth the malice of the deuill against them. And as in the wildernesse the sting of the fierie ser∣pēts were healed in the bodies of mē by looking vp to the brasen serpent;Num. 21.8. so the venime and poison of all cros∣ses is taken away in the children of
God, by vertue of the crosse of Christ; so that contrarie to the nature of it, it worketh good: as also by the death of Christ,1. Cor. 15.55. the sting of death is taken away, so that it cannot hurt any of his, but doth them the greatest good, beeing thereby made for them a passage into eternal life. The which that it might not seeme strange vnto vs, much lesse impossible; namly, that afflictiō hurtfull in it selfe to the wic∣ked, should work for the best to those that loue God: wee must remember that euen men by their wisdome are able to make those things serue for the benefit of man, which of them∣selues are most hurtfull vnto him. For the Physition through his skill can cure a man by Gods ordi∣nance and blessing, and so make him stronger then hee was before, by ta∣king away some part of his blood, e∣uen that wherein the life consisteth; and by taking away other humors, &
so diminishing a great part of his flesh: and the Chyrurgion by cut∣ting and piercing the flesh with an hotte yron, or eating it away with some corrasiues, is able by these woundes and hurtfull things, to pre∣serue the state of the members of the bodie: Then the Lord much more by that which in it selfe would hurt our soules, is able to cure them; and to doe them good. And if the Apothe∣carie can so temper that which in it owne nature is poyson (as the Vipers flesh) so temper it I say, with other wholesome ingredients, and correct it with those that be cordiall; that of it hee will make a most soueraigne Treacle, and such an wholesome con∣fection, as shall expell poyson, and driue it from the heart; and so make that which of it selfe would cause death, to bee a speciall preseruer of life: Shall not the Lord by his infinite wisedome, goodnesse, and almightie
power, the Lord I say,2. Cor. 4.6. which caused the light to shine out of darkenesse, contrarie to the nature of it, and who calleth the things that bee not, as though they were, and so causeth thē to be, and which bringeth good out of euill, euen his owne glorie out of the sin of man; shall not he bee much more able by the most grieuous cros∣ses that can befall vs, to worke the greatest good for vs that may be? Therefore when we would looke for good from our afflictions, and so be comforted in them, patiently bea∣ring them, in hope of the blessed fruit that we shall reape by them; wee must not so much looke to the things themselues, how fit they bee for vs, nor to our selues, how wee bee fitted for them; as to the truth of Gods pro∣mise made vnto vs concerning this matter, & so be sure that the Lord wil worke our good thereby, because he that is true and al-sufficient hath said
said it. And this one perswasion no doubt, should worke in vs great pati∣ence in all our afflictiōs; yea it should make vs cheerefully, and with our heads lifted vp, & not hanging down, to beare them; for how many grie∣uous things will naturall men indure willingly, if they see that they will make for the bettering of their e∣state? As what will not the sicke pa∣tiēt suffer at the hands of the Physitiō or Chirurgion by launcing, purging, fearing, diet, &c. when he is perswa∣ded that they will procure his bodily health? should not a Christian man and woman much more indure hard things at the hands of God, seeing he hath said that they shall procure the health of his soule, & worke his good that way. But indeede herein lieth the point of this matter, and this is all in all, namely, that the poore afflicted soule knoweth not, that the Lord by
his affliction will work his good: and that maketh him so vnquiet, and euer complaining: for giue him this faith, and the feeling of it, that his afflicti∣on shall be turned vnto his good, and lay vpon him whatsoeuer you will, he is content to beare it. Therefore for the satisfying of our selues here∣in, let vs hearken to that which the Apostle saith, Wee know,Rom. 8.28. that all things worke together for the best to those that loue God: which is as if he had saide, though you because of your ignorance, vnbeleefe, and want of experience, are vncerten what wil be the happie issue of all your affli∣ctions, yet we know very well, that all shall worke together for our & your good. Which he speaketh confident∣ly both as a teacher of the Church, an Apostle, and as a man of experi∣ence, and therefore we ought to giue credit vnto him, rather then to our selues. Euen as the patient doth to
the Physitian, though himselfe had neuer experience of any such thing before: when he saith vnto him, I knowe that this will make for the health of your bodie, and the preser∣uation of your life. And in this thing wee ought to giue credit vnto the Apostle so much the more, because vnto his own word and saying, he ioyneth the testimony of many other, saying, Wee know, meaning the rest of the Apostles and ministers, and men of experience; he saith, that all of them knew it, & ther∣fore this word beeing confirmed by the mouthes not of two or three witnesses onely, but hauing (as the Apostle speaketh) so great a cloud of witnesses for it,Hb. 12.1. it should be receiued without all gainesaying. For it is all one, as if the sicke patient fearing to take the potion that is prescribed vn∣to him, lest it should make him more sicke, he should haue not onely one,
but an whole counsell of Physitians saying vnto him, that vndoubtedly this medicine is like to do you good; we know the working of it very wel, and haue had great experience of it in many, you neede not to feare it, take it vpon our credit. This would much mooue and incourage him vn∣to it. So no doubt this should correct the too much feare that is in vs, of beeing hurt by the crosse, when we heare so many excellent and famous men, very skilfull therein, to speake so boldly vnto vs of the benefit of it: e∣uen those, whome seeing that we are most readie to beleeue in all other things, why should we not giue cre∣dit vnto them in this also? But that we might doe it the rather, let vs a lit∣tle consider in particular of the bene∣fit of the crosse. And though the A∣postle name one great one here, which might be sufficient; yet before
we come to it, let vs see, what other endes of it the Scripture affoardeth vnto vs. And first of all, we shall finde it to be a speciall meanes to draw vs from the too much loue of this world; that according to the saying of the Apostle,2. Cor. 7.31. they that vse this world might be as though they vsed it not, that is, that we might be so addicted to these worldly things, that we set not our affections too much vpon them. For such is the corruption of our nature, that when wee haue all things at will, we are so wedded to this world, that we thinke it best for vs alwaies to abide here, and here we would set vp our tabernacles for euer; and wee are readie to say with the worldling in the Gospel,Luk. 12.19. Soule, thou hast much goods laid vp for many yeares, liue at ease, eate and drinke, & take thy pleasure: and though hea∣uen be a thousand times heauenly,
yet we desire it not at all, or not so earnestly as we should; but wee are still earthly minded, and as it were groueling vpon the earth: so hardly or not at all can wee come vnto that that we are exhorted vnto, to seeke,Colos. 3.. and to set our affections on those things that are aboue, and not on things which are in the earth; yet when by affliction we shal finde that there is no contentation in any e∣state here below, it may mooue vs to despise all worldly things, and to a∣spire vnto heauen,Psal. 16.11. where in the pre∣sence of God is the fulnesse of ioy, & at his right hand are pleasures for e∣uermore. For this cause the holy Patriarkes suffered so many afflictions in the daies of their pilgrimages, as appea∣reth in their seueral stories; in respect of which one of them said,Gen. 47.. That his daies were fewe and euill. For wher∣as many earthly things were promi∣sed
vnto them, yet that they might not staie in them, but from them, as it were by certaine stairs, they might ascend vnto the consideration of hea∣uenly things, which the earthly did shadow out vnto them, and which they were especially to looke for; he mingled his manifold great blessings with manifold crosses: & in that land that was promised vnto them, they had no certaine abiding, that they might seeke after the kingdome of heauen: As the Apostle saith vnto the Hebrewes,Hb. 11.9. By faith Abraham a∣bode in the land of promise, as in a strange countrey, as one that dwelt in tents, with Izaack and Iacob heires with him of the same promise; for he looked for a citie hauing a foundati∣on whose builder and maker is God. These men had none inheritance in the land of Canaan, that they might not dream of a perpetuitie there, but might thinke of heauen, as of a better
countrey, where they should remain for euer, confessing themselues con∣tinually to bee but strangers and pil∣grimes on the earth. Thus also the Lord dealeth with many before their death, laying long and grieuous diseases vpon them, as he did vpon his seruant Iob, that they finding no rest in this world, might be willing to goe out of it when hee shall send for them, and say with olde father Simeon, Lord,Luk. 2.29. now lettest thou thy seruant depart in peace: yea that they might desire death most wil∣lingly, which before as most ougly and loathsome they did abhorre: and so saie with S. Paul, I desire to bee loosed, and to be with Christ,Phil. 1.23. which is best of all. So that as the mother by some vnpleasant thing weaneth the sucking childe from the breast, now when stronger meate is more fit for it, vpon which otherwise it would alwaies linger to the hurt of
it; so the Lord by the crosse weaneth our affections from the profits and pleasures of the world, and so turneth it vnto our good: and therefore if by experience we find that by any affli∣ction we growe more wearie of the world, or lesse in loue with it, we are not onely to take it patiently, but therein see the truth of this promise: we know that all things worke toge∣ther for the best to those that loue God.Rom. 8.28. Moreouer by affliction the Lord bringeth vs to a more thorough re∣pentance and sorrow for our sinnes, and worketh that in vs therby, which the word did not before; when wee finde by woefull experience what great miseries our sins haue brought vs vnto, and how iust and true God is in all his threatnings.1. Cor. 11 31 For if when we haue sinned, we would iudge our selues before hand, God would not iudge vs: but when wee are iudged,
wee are chastened of the Lord, that we might not bee condemned with the world: whereunto agreeth the saying of the Psalmist, which is foūd to bee true by daily experience; that whether the Lord laie vpon men sickenesse, or imprisonment, or po∣uertie and want, or banishment, or such like;Psal. 107.11. when he hūbleth the heart with heauinesse they crie vnto the Lord in their trouble: so that afflicti∣on bringeth men to humilitie for their sinnes, and to pray vnto God to be pardoned, and to be deliuered. As we see in the example of the pro∣digall childe, who by great miserie came to repent him of his riotous life; for when he had spent all,Luk. 1. there a∣rose a great famine in that land, and he began to bee in necessitie, which afterwards was so great, that hee would faine haue filled his bellie with the huskes that the swine ate, but no man gaue them him: then he
said, I will rise and goe to my father, and say vnto him, Father, I haue sin∣ned against heauen, and before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy sonne, make me as one of thy hi∣red seruants. Thus wee see by afflicti∣on vnto what measure of humiliatiō and repentance for his sinnes, & con∣fession of them he was brought vnto: a most excellent fruit of the crosse. The like may bee said of the bre∣thren of Ioseph, who after that they had sold him into Egypt, and made their father beleeue that hee was torne in pieces of some wilde beast; though we may presume of thē, that they beeing brought vp, and still li∣uing in the house of their godly fa∣ther Iacob, they did secretly repent thē of their ill dealing towards their bro∣ther Ioseph: yet many yeares after, e∣uen twentie or thereabout, whē they were in aduersitie, the memorie of it renued it selfe afresh, and thereby
they were brought more seriously to iudge themselues for it; for they said one to another,Gen. 42.21 We haue verily sin∣ned against our brother, in that wee sawe the anguish of his soule when he besought vs, and wee would not heare him, therefore is this trouble come vpon vs. Thus this crosse was turned to their good, in that it brought them to a further sight and feeling of their sinne, and to a more voluntarie and free confession of the same. So that affliction in this respect is compared to fire that purgeth the gold, and consumeth the drosse of it; and vnto a file that scowreth off the rust of yron, and maketh it bright; & vnto a purgation, that expelleth the corrupt and superfluous humors out of the bodie. Therefore euen as the fire doth not hurt the gold in consu∣ming the drosse, neither the file hur∣teth the yron in taking away the rust,
neither doth the purgation hurt the bodie in expelling of ill humors: So afflictions causing vs to abhorre and leaue some sinne or other, which if we continued in, would destroy vs, may truely be said not to hurt vs, but to worke our good, of what nature or kinde soeuer they bee: according to the saying of the Apostle, All things worke together for the good of those that loue God. In the third place, this is the bene∣fit of affliction, that it preserueth vs from many sinnes, which otherwise through our owne corruption, and the temptations of the world and Satan we might fall into; but that be∣ing vnder the hād of God, as it were vnder the rodde, we are thereby kept in more awe: So that as Physicke ser∣ueth not only to cure vs of the disea∣ses which we are alreadie fallen into, but also and especially to preuent them, and to keepe vs in some tole∣rable
estate of health: So the crosse recouereth vs out of sinne, when we are fallen into it, and preserueth vs from many, which otherwise might creepe vpon vs. And therefore as some sickly bodies are driuen to diet themselues, and are in a continuall course of physicke, to preuent that which their corrupt estate would o∣therwise necessarily pull vpon them: So others by reason of the corrupti∣ons of their soules, and the manifold offences that they liue amongst, are alwaies, or the greatest part of their liues in the diet of affliction, as it were the physicke of their soules: not so much to bring them from grosse and grieuous sinnes, which they are as yet free from; as to keepe them frō falling into them, which the Lord foreseeth they are most readie to do, in respect of their ages, callings, and places, that they liue in. If then the Lord at any time deale
with vs, as men do with vnruly co, or vntamed heyfers, which are kept from straying out of their pastures with hedges and ditches, so that they can not break out without their own hurt: so the Lord puts thornes and bryars as it were in our waies, that is, laieth affliction vpon vs, and so stop∣peth the way against vs, that wee might not breake forth by any kinde of disobedience either on the right hand, or on the left, to our own hurt must we not needs say, that euen this way, as well as any other, the Lord worketh by affliction our singular good? And this is that, which God promised to his owne people among the idolatrous Israelites, namely, that by his afflictions he would so keepe them in, and bring them to such straitnes, that they shold haue no lust to play the wantons, and to fall away from him by idolatrie after the ex∣ample of others: when he faith, I will
stoppe thy way with thornes,Hos. 2.6. and make an hedge, that shee shall not finde her paths. So that their afflicti∣on should be an hedge of sharpe thornes to pricke them, least they should breake out, and stray frō Gods commandements. And this as it is a singular ende of affliction, so Dauid pronounceth thē blessed that are partakers of it to that ende, and can make that good vse of it to themselues, saying, Blessed is the man, whome thou chastisest, O Lord,Psal. 94.12. and teachest in thy law: that thou maiest giue him rest from the daies of euill, whiles the pit is digged for the wicked. So that it is a blessed thing to be so corrected, that he is taught the right vse of it, euen to walke more carefully in the obedi∣ence of Gods law, that so he may e∣scape those punishments which shall come vpon the wicked for their sinns to their destruction. And this vse Da∣vid
made of his affliction, as he pro∣fesseth of himselfe,& 116.7. before I was affli∣cted, I went astray, but now I keepe thy words: so that by his affliction he was kept from going astray, as he had wont to doe, and was constrained in a reuerent feare to walke in the com∣passe of Gods holy law: whereupon he concludeth thus by his owne ex∣perience:71. It is good for me that I haue beene afflicted, that I may feare thy statutes. Thus affliction was a sensible kind of teaching to cause him to liue after Gods statutes, and not after the common course of the world. Fourthly, afflictions in the Scrip∣tures are called trialls, because that by them the Lord trieth vs, and proo∣ueth what is in vs: not that he is ig∣norant of it; for Dauid saith vnto God,Psal. 139 2. Thou knowest my sitting & ri∣sing, thou vnderstādest my thoughts a farre off; thou compassest my paths,
and my lying downe, and art accusto∣med to all my waies: for there is not a word in my tongue, but loe thou knowest it, O Lord. So that he hath full & perfect knowledge of vs with∣out any triall: yet he trieth vs by af∣fliction, because thereby he would haue our selues and others through∣ly to know, what is in vs, and in what measure: and that both in respect of the good and euill that is in vs; which without the triall could not so well be knowne. Which kind of triall ser∣ueth to this ende, that if we haue re∣ceiued any good grace, we might be thankefull to God for it, and for the measure of it: if not, we might labor for it; and if we haue any sinne in vs, we might repent and striue against it: if not, we might take heede, that wee fall not into it for the time to come; and so euery way God might be glorified. And thus speaketh the Apostle S.
Peter of the afflictions of the church, comparing them vnto fire, whereby mettalls are tried, whē he saith, Now for a season (if neede require) ye are in heauines,2. Pet. 2.6. through manifold tenta∣tions; that the triall of your faith, be∣ing much more pretious then gold that perisheth (thogh it be tried with fire) might be found vnto your praise, and honour, and glorie at the appea∣ring of Iesus Christ. Where the A∣postle saith, that if men by the fire will trie their gold, to that ende, that they might certenly know, what is the value of it, and yet it is but a thing that perisheth, and therefore in no wise to be compared to faith and o∣ther most excellent graces of the spi∣rit of God: Then the Lord much more may make triall of them by af∣fliction, to the ende that all men may see them to be so pretious, and so pure as they be; and that they may be discerned from the hypocriticall and
counterfeit shewes of vertue that are in the wicked and vngodly: that so men might make sure reckoning of the one, and not trust to the other, & so be deceiued by them. Thus it is truly said, that God did prooue Abraham,Gen. 22.1. when he saide vnto him, Take thine onely sonne Isaac, whome thou louest, and get thee in∣to the land of Moriah, and offer him there for a burnt offering vpon one of the mountaines, which I wil shew thee: and he did so: and therefore the Apostle saith, that by faith he offered vp Isaac, when he was tried:Heb. 11.17. so that this was a great triall vnto him, to sacrifice his owne sonne, whome he so loued, and in whome he had recei∣ued the promise. But when he stret∣ched forth his hand,Gen. 22.10. and tooke the knife to kill his sonne, the Lord said vnto him from heauen, Lay not thine hand vpon the child, neither doe any thing vnto him: for now I know, that
thou fearest God, seeing for my sake, thou hast not spared thine onely son. The Lord knew the obedience of A∣braham before, but he speaketh ac∣cording to mens vnderstanding, that now he by good proofe and triall knew it, and made it knowne to A∣braham himselfe, and to all poste∣ritie. And thus our Sauiour Christ in the Gospel by a parable sheweth, how it is knowne, who haue receiued the seede of Gods word into good hearts, and who into bad: namely, they that continue in the obedience of it in the time of temptation and triall, and they that fall away, saying, They that are on the stones,Luk. 8.13. are they, which when they haue heard, receiue the word with ioy; but they haue no rootes: which for a while beleeue, but in the time of temptation goe a∣way. Thus though they seemed to beleeue for a time, yet when they fall
away in temptatiō, by this triall it ap∣peareth, that the word of God was neuer throughly rooted in thē. And by an other comparison also he shew∣eth, how vpon triall it is manifest, who are profitable hearers of the word of God, and who are not: for he that heareth the word of God,Math 7.24. & doth it, is like a wise man, which hath builded his house on a rocke; and the raine fell, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beate vpon that house, and it fell not: for it was groū∣ded on a rocke. But he that heareth the word, and doth it not, is like a foolish man, which hath builded his house on the sand, and the raine fell, and the floods came, and the winde blew, and beat vpon that house, and it fell, and the fall of it was great. Temptations therefore and trialls, which are here compared vnto stormes and tempests, will shew what is in all sorts of men, and whether
they haue beene profitable, or vn∣profitable hearers of the word of God; and this is a speciall ende of them, thus to lay open men, both to themselues, and to the world: when as it shall appeare, that in affliction & vnder the crosse they are the same that they were before, or they are not, but farre vnlike. After this manner were the Israe∣lites tried and prooued in the wilder∣nesse by the space of fourtie yeares, in which time some of them prooued themselues murmurers, some forni∣cators, some idolatours, some disobe∣dient, some faithfull: and all this was by the seuerall afflictions and crosses that did befall them. And thus also by the great afflictions that did befall Iob in one day, as the losse of all his goods and children, it appeared what great vprightnes and sinceritie, and faithfull obedience was in him: when as he saide, Naked came I out of my
mothers wombe,Iob 1.21. and naked shall I returne thither: the Lord hath giuen, and the Lord hath taken it: blessed be the name of the Lord. And in all this great losse he did not sin, nor charge God foolishly. For though Satan tooke him to be like other men, and that he serued God more for his commodities sake, because he blessed him, then of con∣science, and therefore said,and 1.9. Doth Iob feare God for nought? hast thou not made an hedge about him, and about his house, and about all that he hath on euery side? thou hast blessed the worke of his hands, and his substance is increased. But stretch out now thin hand, and touch all that he hath, to see if he will not blaspheme thee to thy face: and then the Lord said vnto Satan, Loe, all that he hath is in thine hand: and thereupon Satan destroied in one day all that he had; and yet he continued in his vprightnes, and was
the same man that he was before: by this great triall it appeared, that that was true, that the Lord had saide of him before: that hee was an vp∣right and iust man indeede; and one that feared God,vers. 10. and eschewed euill: for all these great afflictions could not make him to fall from his former course. And thus lastly by triall appeared the great weakenes of the Apostle S. Peter, and the rest of the Disciples, who though as a most resolute man he had said,Mat. 16.13. Though al men be offen∣ded by thee, yet will I neuer bee of∣fended; and then Iesus said vnto him, Verily this night before the cocke crowe, thou shalt denie me thrice: & Peter said to him againe, Though I should die with thee, I wil in no case denie thee, and so said also all the di∣sciples:47. yet when they saw a great multitude with swordes and staues from the high Priest and Elders of
the people, and Iudas with a kisse be∣traied him into their hands, and so they tooke him & led him away; then all the Disciples fledde. And whereas there seemed to be a little more cou∣rage in Peter then in the rest,58. for hee followed Christ though a farre off, & so came into the high Priests hall, and sate downe with the seruants to see the ende; yet when he saw greater danger like to ensue, & he was char∣ged to be one of Christs Disciples, at the voice of a maide he grew to be so timerous and fearefull, that hee sware and forsware with cursing and banning, denying Christ,74. euen that euer he so much as once knewe the man. Neither himselfe, nor any other would haue thought that so much weakenes should haue broake out from him, before he came to this tri∣all; but thereby it was laid open. Therefore, if it bee good for vs not to be ignorant of our selues, as
indeede hath beene thought to bee a point of greatest wisdome, for a man throughly to know himselfe, that so he might not be deceiued with an o∣uerweening of himselfe; if it be good I say, for any man to see his wants & weaknesses, that he may be humbled by them, and seek to haue them sup∣plied; if it be good to know certaine∣ly that we haue receiued such & such graces of the spirit of God, & in that measure that wee haue, that so wee may be thankfull to God for them, & comforted in our selues ouer them: Then seeing that affliction and the crosse bringeth forth all this fruit at once, and by triall wee finde what faith, hope, loue, patience, obediēce, &c. is in vs, and what not; insomuch, that whatsoeuer we seemed to be be∣fore to our selues, and to others, yet now we know certainly that wee are thus and thus, and no otherwise: it cā not be denied but that affliction wor∣keth
much good vnto vs, and wee ought vpon experiēce to say, that we know it to be so, euen as the Apostle doth here; We knowe that all things worke together for the best to those that loue God. Which also wee may so much the more cōfidently say, when we shal see (omitting to speake of many moe v∣ses that the crosse hath) that last and greatest of all, which is spoken of in the verse following, in these words; For those whom he knew before,Rom. 8.20. he also predestinate to bee made like to the image of his sonne, that he might be the first borne of many brethren: where he sheweth this one ende of the crosse, namely, that thereby wee might bee made like vnto Christ in his sufferings. But before we come to that, we must remember that hither∣to we haue seene, that there is great vse of affliction, and that it worketh much good: and therefore wee must
consider that in euery crosse, besides the present bearing of it, the Lord of∣fereth great cōmoditie vnto vs, and worketh it in vs thereby, according to the words of the Text, All things worke together for the best to those that loue God. So that as in all other things there is not onely the present possession, & enioying of them, but there is the vse and comfort of them; insomuch that men may haue great store of goods and possessions, and yet haue no vse of them, as Salomon by his great wis∣dome obserued, and set it downe in the booke of the Preacher, saying, There is one alone,Eccles. 4.8. and there is not a second, which hath neither sonne nor daughter, yet is there none ende of his trauaile, neither can his eie bee satisfied with riches, neither doth he thinke, for whom doe I trauaile, and defraud my soule of pleasure: Euen so many haue great and long crosses
vpon them, but make no good vse of them, neither doe labour after the fruit of them: but God worketh by them their good, in those that bee his. Seeing then afflictions are com∣mon both to the good and the bad, and God layeth them vpon them both alike, and they must beare them whether they will or no; the one must labour for the good which the Lord offereth to them therby, which the other not once so much as looke after: of which dutie of theirs, when Gods children are somewhat more carelesse of then they should, then no doubt the Lord in wisdome and in mercie continueth his rod vpon thē longer; yea, and often increaseth thē, because his purpose is to doe them good thereby: and so herein dealeth with them as a most louing and ten∣der father (as indeede he is) who spa∣reth not the rod, vntill his childe bee
thereby humbled, and brought to the confession and amendment of his fault: because his purpose is, by his fatherly correction to doe him good. Wherein parents often put a dif∣ference betweene their children and their seruants; for often they let their seruants alone, and leaue them as in∣corrigible, when they will not profit by words, or a few stripes, as not ca∣ring for them, because they purpose not alwaies to be troubled with thē: but their children, because they see that they cannot cast off naturall affe∣ction from them, therfore they leaue them not after once or twice corre∣ction, but still follow them with the rodde, till they amend: So the Lord, when he spareth the wicked in their sinnes, and reserueth them for a fur∣ther and more heauie iudgement at the last, correcting his owne children in the meane season againe and a∣gaine; he sheweth that his purpose is
thereby to doe them, aboue all other, much good. Therefore let no man in the con∣tinuance of his afflictions, though long and grieuous, be too much dis∣couraged, as though the Lord were continually angrie with him, or had a purpose to destroy and make an ende of him thereby; for he could do that in a moment at once: but let him rather thus thinke with himselfe, and reason but of the word of God; Now I know assuredly, that the Lord lo∣ueth me indeede, because hee purpo∣seth to doe me good by all things, e∣uen by affliction, according to his promise: and therefore whereas I through the vntowardnes of my na∣ture, haue not profited sufficiently by his former chastisements, according to his good meaning towards me, he hath sent me a new fatherly correcti∣on, thereby at the last to worke my further good: and whereas I tho∣rough
the crookednesse and vnto∣wardnesse of my sinnefull disposition doe not yet profit by them, as hee would haue me; therefore I see, that in much mercie and louing kindnesse he continueth it, that so I might get good by it at the last. Wherein the Lord dealeth with vs like a wise and conscionable Phy∣sitian; who purposing not so much to giue physicke vnto the sicke pati∣ent, and to practise on him for his owne gaine, as to cure him by those medicines that he applieth to him, and so seeketh his health and recoue∣rie: if the first medicine will remooue the disease, thē there he leaueth him, and goes no further; if not, he mini∣streth an other medicine after that, and it may be the third & the fourth, because he hath a care of him, and seekes his health. And if at any time he maketh any intermission in the course of his physicke, and ceaseth to
practise any further on him, it is not because he meaneth to leaue him, & to giue him ouer, but because of the patients weaknes, that he might ga∣ther some further strength, and haue a breathing time to that ende. Euen so the Lord purposing ac∣cording to his gratious promise, to doe vs good by affliction, and he ha∣uing sanctified it by the crosse of Christ to that ende; when by the first crosse we profit not, as we ought, thē either he letteth the same lie the lon∣ger vpon vs, that it might do vs good at the last; or els taking it away, lea∣ueth an other in stead of it to the same ende. Which though hee doe not presently, because we were not then able to indure, yet sometime af∣terwards, when it seemeth best to his heauenly wisdome. Therfore the best thing for euery man is, soone to pro∣fit vnder the crosse, that God hath laid vpon him, that so it might spee∣dily
be remooued: and not to labour so much for the remoouing of it, as for the fruit of it; least it going a∣way without profit, and not working that in vs, for which God did send it, the Lord bring vpon vs some greater afterwards, seeing it is his purpose thereby most assuredly to doe vs good. Moreouer, by this we know, that whereas euery man naturally desireth that which is best for him, and yet most men erre in the particulars, they desiring that which is most pleasant, profitable, and honourable, &c. in this world: which desires of theirs the Prophet expresseth in these words;Psal 4 6. Many say, who will shew vs a∣ny good: By this, I say, we know, that that thing indeede is best for vs at all times, whatsoeuer it be, which ma∣keth most for the glorie of God, for our owne saluation, and for the edify∣ing of our brethren: which because
the Lord worketh many times by af∣flictions, as we haue heard, and often more by them, then by his benefits; we must be perswaded, that euē they are then best for euery man which though it be contrarie to mans rea∣son, yet it is agreeable to the word of God, & which we ought to beleeue. Euen as when a mans bodie is greatly distempered with abundance of blood, or ouerladen with superflu∣ous and grosse humors, or hath some member greatly putrified: then and in these respects it is best for him to haue his blood taken away, and his humors, that his flesh may be abated, and fall away; yea it is best for him in these cases to be launced and cut, to be seared; and to haue a part cut off, that the rest might be saued. Which though they be grieuous in them∣selues, yet at this time they are most profitable, and to be desired. There∣fore when any affliction or calamitie
doth befall vs, let vs not be disconten∣ted therewith, as with that that is hurtfull for vs, neither be too impati∣ent and wearie, as of a thing that we would faine be ridde of; but submit∣ting our iudgements and wills to the iudgement and will of God reuealed in his word, let vs quietly indure, see∣ing that euen now the Lord giueth vs that, not which we fondly desire, as the best; but which he knoweth to be, and is indeede at this time the best. Seeing then it is so, (for the fur∣ther clearing of this truth) what I pray you is the cause, why not onely the wicked and vngodly, who are not able to iudge of this matter, by all the wit and reason that they haue; but e∣uen the very godly, who beeing en∣lightened by the spirit of God, ought to know this doctrine to be true, and to beleeue it, that they, I say, doe so grieuously complaine of their affli∣ctions,
as those which are the worst for them that can be? and as those that should not onely doe them no good, but much hurt: when as wee haue seene alreadie how many waies they worke their good, and therefore are the best for them indeede. Why did Iob, seeing his afflictions were sent vnto him by God for his triall, and for his good, why did he so complaine of them?Iob 6.2. Oh that my griefe were well waied, and my mi∣series were laid together in the bal∣lance? for it would now be heauier then the sand of the sea: therefore my words are swallowed vp. For the ar∣rowes of the Almightie are in me, the venime thereof doth drinke vp my spirit, and the terrours of God fight against me, &c. Why doth Da∣vid also make so grieuous complaints in respect of the affliction that did befall him, when he beginneth the Psalme thus lamentably; O Lord,Psal. 38. . re∣buke
me not in thine anger, neither chastise me in thy wrath: for thine arrows haue light vpon me, and thine hand lieth vpon me: there is nothing sound in my flesh, because of thine anger, neither is there rest in my bones, because of my sin. My wounds are putrified and corrupt; I am bow∣ed and crooked very sore; I go mour∣ning all the day: for my reines are full of burning, and there is nothing sound in my flesh: my heart panteth, and my strength faileth, and the light of mine eyes, euen they are not mine owne, &c. If these afflictions of theirs did worke their good, why did they thus complaine of them? Truely it can∣not be denied, but that men for the most part doe more complaine of their afflictions, then they ought to doe, and are more full of murmuring and impatiencie vnder the hand of God, then they should be: and they
doe not so comfortably beare their crosses as they should and might yet all this hindereth not, but that the Lord by them seeketh their good, & they should labour to profit, & to be bettered by their afflictions, and bee perswaded that they shall worke to∣gether for the best vnto them, thogh they be full of cōplaints, whiles they are in the middest of them. For who euer complained more of their af∣flictions, then these two men, Iob and Dauid, and yet who had more profit, or gote more good by thē then they? both of thē being thus tried, & in the triall found to bee most faithfull and patient, and constant vnto the ende. And concerning this pronenesse in vs to complaine, we must consider that such is our nature, that we must needes haue the feeling of our affli∣ctions, vnlesse our hearts were harde∣ned, like yron or steele, and so wee were senslesse like stocks and stones,
and not as men. And therefore see∣ing it is otherwise, namly, our hearts naturally are soft and tender, and rea∣die to be broken with affliction, and some more, and some lesse; it cannot possibly be, but that euery thing that befalleth vs, should worke vpon vs, and that we should bee mooued ac∣cording to the nature and qualitie of it; either to ioy or sorrow, loue or ha∣tred, anger or feare, and such like: & therefore tribulation must needes trouble vs, and affliction must needs afflict vs, and the crosse cannot but crucifie vs; & yet we may and ought for all that bee perswaded, that it is for our good, and looke for it from thence, and pray to God in faith that we may finde it. Euen as the sicke patient, & pain∣full languishing creature vnder the Physitians hand, cannot as he is a na∣turall man, indued with sense and rea∣son, but feele to his great griefe the
launcing with sharpe kniues, and the searing of his flesh with redde hotte yrons, & so complaine of them with much heauinesse, and many teares; yea crie out and roare for the extre∣mitie of his paine, though he know∣eth it be best for him then thus to be handled: and therefore though he be sometimes bound in the dres∣sing both hand and foote, or violent∣ly held by men; yet after a sort hee doth most willingly suffer it. And this is one cause of complaining in affli∣ction, though they are perswaded that it is for their good, euen the in∣firmitie and tendernes of our nature, whereby all crosses worke on vs as they doe. But there is an other cause more principall then this, which procee∣deth from ignorāce, or want of faith: for many are too full of complaints in their affliction, because they are not perswaded at all, or not at that
time, when they are in temptation, that aduersitie, or the crosse is for their good; or at least not that parti∣cular crosse, and in that manner, that it is vpon them: which if they could come vnto, whatsoeuer should be laid vpō them, they would not great∣ly complaine of it, for the hope of fu∣ture good would mitigate and as∣swage all. Therefore all such are to meditate vpon that which hath alrea∣die beene spoken concerning this matter; namely, how many waies by affliction the Lord doth vs good. In the latter part of the verse, whē he saith, To them that loue God; that is, all things worke together for the best vnto them that loue God: as he thereby restraineth this general pro∣mise, because it is not made to all; so he sheweth to whome it appertai∣neth; namely, to those that beleeue in Christ, and are sanctified by his Spi∣rit, whereof this is one speciall fruit;
The loue of God. For he intreateth here of the certentie of the saluation of those that belong vnto Christ, as appeareth by the first words of the chapter;Rom. 8.1. Now then there is no con∣demnation to them that are in Christ Iesus, which walke not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. Where he also discerneth the true beleeuer from o∣thers, by this fruit of faith, namely, sanctification; & here he doth name one principall of it, which is loue: Loue to God, from whence ariseth loue vnto men for his sake, and from them both, all duties to God and man. And thus the Apostle also in an o∣ther place ioyneth faith and loue to∣gether, as those that are inseparable, when he saith,Gal. 5 6. that in Iesus Christ neither circumcision nor vncircum∣cision auaileth any thing: but faith, which worketh by loue: where his meaning is, that no outward thing, or
seruice of God, though commanded by him, as circumcision was, com∣mendeth vs to God, or maketh vs ac∣ceptable vnto God, but onely Christ, and his obedience: which we take hold of, and so make ours by faith: which faith is then effectual and liue∣ly, when it breedeth in vs a loue, which loue appeareth by the fruits and effects of the same. So then the Apostle here vnder one fruit, which is loue, comprehendeth all godlines, and sanctification. But hee taketh this thing rather then any other, (The loue of God) as that, that is most fit for his purpose: for speaking of affliction he saith, that by this we shall trie our faith, if our loue to God continue euen then: so that wee cease not to loue God, though he afflict vs. For whereas the very wicked will pretend to loue God in prosperitie, and as long as all things goe well with them, they will
professe that they loue God, as much as any, yea; and that they were worse then the bruit beasts, if that they did not loue him, and that with all their heart, who bestoweth all things vpon them so liberally, and many such glo∣rious words they will vtter: but in ad∣uersitie, and when God layeth affli∣ction vpon them, their loue is chan∣ged: yea, they fall into open hatred and defiance with God, yea euen vn∣to plaine cursing and banning; as ap∣peareth by the example of Iobs wife, who saide vnto her husband;Iob 2.. Doest thou continue still in thine vpright∣nesse, blaspheme God, and die. But he that loueth God truly, loueth him not for his backe and belly, as we say, but because he is goodnes it selfe, and therefore principally to be beloued for himselfe: and so their loue conti∣nueth, though all outward blessings be taken away. And herein the wicked too mani∣festly
bewray vile mindes, and seruile natures; that like as seruants loue not their masters, nor maidens their mi∣stresses, if they once beginne to cor∣rect them for their faults; & so grow wearie of them, and are readie to run away from them: as the maid seruant Hagar the Egyptian did from her mi∣stresse Sarai.Gen. 16.6. But the godly doe this way as apparantly shew their liberall nature, and ingenuous disposition; in that as no correction or stripes of the father or mother, can make the child to change his loue to them, & whol∣ly to alienate his minde from them, much lesse can they driue him cleane away from them, but he will abide in their house, and in all his neede resort to them for succour: so will they still in affliction loue God, and depend vpon him for all things needfull. And this corruption to be in the nature of all men generally, euen by affliction to fall away from the loue
and seruice of God, Satan knew well enough, and therefore thought to haue found it in Iob, though he did not, when he saide vnto the Lord, Doth Iob loue, or feare,Iob 1.9. or serue God for nought? as if he had said, he doth not serue thee for thine owne sake, or for any loue that hee beareth vnto thee, but for the commoditie that he receiueth by thee: for he addeth, Hast not thou made an hedge about him, and about his house, and about all that he hath on euery side: thou hast blessed the worke of his hands, & his substance is increased in the land: but stretch out thine hand, and touch all that he hath, to see if he will not bla∣spheme thee to thy face. In which words he noteth that vice, that men commonly are subiect vnto, that is, to hide their rebellion in prosperitie, and in aduersitie to bewray it. Therefore if we be free from this vice, and so cease not in affliction to
loue God, and in loue to serue him, we shall be sure, that he will fulfil this promise of his vnto vs, of turning all things to our good: and causing all our crosses to make together for the best vnto vs, so long as we loue God: and this vnfained loue that we finde we beare in our hearts vnto God, is a sure testimonie vnto vs of it, and we ought thereby to be perswaded of the vndoubted truth of it, & so com∣fort our selues for the time present, that God will doe vs good by this correction of his, euen because wee loue him. Moreouer, seeing that the Apo∣stles purpose here is, to intreat of pa∣tience in affliction, and to prepare vs for it; this no doubt is most fit for the fame, namely, the consideration of that loue, which we ought to beare vnto God, whereby we might be mooued to take all things in good part, that he sends vnto vs, because
we loue him, and in loue are desirous to please him. For we see daily in all worldly matters, what great things all sorts of men will beare at the hāds of them, whome they loue: as how many grieuous things doth the mo∣ther put vp at the hands of her fro∣ward child, whome shee tenderly lo∣ueth? And the husband passeth ouer with silence many things that are of∣fensiue proceeding from his wife, be∣cause shee is deare vnto him, and his loue towards her causeth him not to regard them; yea for her sake he bea∣reth with many things at the hands of others. As it is said of Iacob,Gen. 29.20. that he serued Laban a very hard master seuen years for Rahel, during which time he tooke great paines day and night:& 31.40. for in the day he was consumed with heat, and with frost in the night, and his wages was changed ten times: yet they see∣med vnto him but a fewe daies, be∣cause
he loued her: thus loue vnto men causeth vs to indure hard things for their sakes whome we loue: and the more we loue them, the more willingly to gratifie them doe wee chearefully vndergoe any hard ser∣uice for them. How much more then ought we patiētly to beare all things at the hand of God, whom we know, that he so loued vs, that he spared not his owne sonne,Rom. 8.32. but gaue him for vs all to death: and therefore we ought to loue him aboue all other things, yea aboue our selues againe. And no doubt wee would thus beare all crosses laid vpon vs by God for our good, a great deale more pa∣tiently then we doe, if there were in vs that loue vnto his maiestie, that there ought.1. Cor. 13 5. For loue seeketh not her owne things: that is, it is the proper∣tie of loue, not so much to seeke to satisfie their owne minde, as to gra∣tifie the partie whome they loue, euē
in things osten contrary to their own liking: therefore let vs labour for that pure & sincere loue vnto God, which may abide in the greatest affliction, so shall we not onely patiently beare them, but be assured, that they shall be turned vnto our good: according to the saying of the Apostle here; All things worke together for the best vnto them, that loue God.Rom. 8.28. When he addeth these wordes in the ende of the same verse, (which are called of his purpose) as he doth in them further shew to whome this promise doth appertaine, namely, that all afflictions shall worke for their best: euen vnto such as are effe∣ctually called vnto the knowledge of their saluation in Christ, according to the good purpose and decree of God towards them: So he sheweth the cause, why all afflictions are made profitable vnto them especially, and turned vnto their good in the ende:
which is not any worthines of theirs, that they deserue it at Gods hands, or any right behauing themselues vnder the crosse, as though they were able to worke it out themselues; for of themselues they are as weake, and fraile, and impatient vnder it, as any other: but the free loue of God to∣wards them in Christ, whereby be∣fore the beginning of the world, he purposed to do them good, and ther∣fore in time effectually called them. Which purpose of his nothing can alter, but he maketh all things to fur∣ther it, yea sometimes contrarie to their nature, as afflictions. So that from the first vnchangea∣ble cause of their saluation, and of all good intented towardes them, he sheweth the certentie of this, that all afflictions shall worke together for the best to those that loue God: for who can hinder or frustrate the de∣terminate purpose of God in any
thing? None in the world, no not the deuill himselfe: and therefore afflicti∣ons can not hinder the good that he meaneth to his children, because he hath purposed to doe them good. Which purpose of his for their good hath alway appeared by their fruit∣full and effectuall calling. For when he had purposed to saue them by his sonne Iesus Christ, he called them by the ministerie of the Gospel in his good time some sooner some later vnto the knowledge of it; and from the same purpose of his it came to passe, that the word was made effe∣ctuall vnto them by the inward ope∣ration of his holy Spirit, working in them faith and repentance: and so became vnto thē The power of God vnto their saluation,Rom. 1.16. as the Apostle calleth it: that is, the mightie and ef∣fectuall instrument of God to worke their saluation, when it was altoge∣ther vnprofitable vnto others, that
heard it, as well as they. So then the Lord continuing the same purpose of his towards them, it shall vndoubtedly come to passe, that though al other men should not pro∣fit by their afflictiōs, but waxe worse and worse, as commonly the wicked doe, as we see in the example of Pha∣raoh king of Egypt, who after many grieuous plagues brought vpon him,Exod. 9.35. and vpon the whole land, one after an other, his heart was still more and more hardned, neither would he let the children of Israel goe: yet the Lord would turne all this to their good, because he had purposed it. And for the certentie and full assu∣rance of this, he leadeth them to the consideration of the purpose of God appearing in their calling, which beeing very strange, and many things to the outward appearance against it, yet the Lord brake through them all, and none of them could hinder it,
or stay it, because God had purposed it. And truly it is worthie our consi∣deration, to remember how many things haue beene in the way to hin∣der the calling of men vnto saluation, yet none of them could doe it, be∣cause God had purposed. As who would euer haue thought,Act. 9.1. that Paul sometimes called Saul, breathing out threatnings and slaughter against the Disciples of the Lord, and hauing now in this great furie and rage of his obtained letters of the high Priest to Damascus, that if he found any that were of that way or profession, (either men or women) he might bring them bound vnto Ierusalem: should at this time be so suddenly conuerted, that he should not onely become a Christian, but an Apostle: so that it should be truly said of him, he which was a great persecutor in time past,Gal. 1.22. now is a zealous preacher
of the faith, which before he destroi∣ed: but he shewes the cause of it there himselfe,vers. 15. when he saith, that God had separated him thereunto from his mothers wombe, and so called him vnto it of his grace: that is, in his e∣uerlasting counsell he first appointed him to be an Apostle, and secondari∣ly euen from his birth he did separate him to this office; and thirdly, in time of his meere grace and fauour he called him vnto it, according to his purpose. The like may be said of some other, as of Manasseh king of Iudah,2. Chr. 33 2. who doing euill in the sight of the Lord like the abominations of the heathē: setting vp altars for Baalim, and wor∣shipping all the hoast of heauen, cau∣sing also his sonnes to passe through the fire in the valley of Ben-hinnom: and giuing himself to witchcraft and to charming, and vsing them that had familiar spirits; there was no likeli∣hoode
that he should be conuerted vnto God, there were so many things against it: but the Lord, that had pur∣posed to shew him mercie, did bring him vnto it against all these: for he caused the King of Ashur to come a∣gainst him, who tooke him prisoner,vers 11. and put him in fetters, and bound him in chaines, and caried him to Babel; and when he was in tribulati∣on, he praied to the Lord his God, & humbled himselfe greatly before the God of his fathers; and praied vnto him, and God was intreated of him, and heard his praier: and then he knew that the Lord was God. But to let these passe; let euery man consider the manner of his own calling, & see how many things were within him, and without him, that might haue hindred him from com∣ming to that measure of grace, that he hath now receiued, that so he may acknowledge vpon his owne experi∣ence,
that nothing is able to hinder the good purpose of God towardes those that loue him. And then he shal finde, that the great ignorance, ido∣latrie, or Atheisme, in which all his kinred were left might haue staied this good worke, but that God did draw him out of them, as he did A∣braham,Rom. 12.1. commanding him to forsake his countrey, and his kinred, and his fathers house: or that the manifold great corruptions that were rooted in vs, and confirmed by custome, like vnto the seauen deuills that were in Marie Magdalen, might haue kept vs from the hope of it: or the loose and dissolute life that we lead, mispēding our time, and the gifts of God, our wit and strength in riotousnes and wantonnes, as the prodigall childe did; might haue kept Gods good hand from vs: or that we did despise and tread vnder our feet the pretious pearle of Gods word, when it was
offered vnto vs, like vnto the pro∣phane beasts, or swine that Christ speaketh of in the Gospel: or that ma∣ny things els might in the iudgement of all men haue beene as a barre to keepe vs from an effectuall calling; but that the Lord in much mercy had purposed it, and so according to the same purpose of his, he bore all things downe before him, and came tho∣rough them vnto vs for our good. And so we shall be the better per∣swaded, that the Lord of the same vn∣changeable goodnesse of his hauing purposed euen by the crosse, and all manner of affliction to doe vs good, how many things so euer may seeme to our selues, or to others to be a∣gainst it, that he will verifie this pro∣mise vnto vs, and we shall find it to be true, as well as others, that all things shall worke for the best to those that loue God, euen those that are called of his purpose.
Rom. 8.29.In the next verse when he addeth; For those whome he knew before, he also predestinate, to be like to the image of his sonne, that he might be the first borne of many brethren: he declareth an other most excellent ende, wherefore the Lord laieth the crosse most of all vpon his children: namely, that thereby they might be like vnto Christ their eldest brother, as the Lord hath ordained, that all that are his should be, some more, & some lesse. And so by this meanes e∣specially it worketh our good, when it maketh vs the members conforma∣ble and like vnto Christ our head. In which words he not onely saith, that all afflictions doe befall vs by the ve∣ry speciall prouidence and hand of God, and not by fortune or chance: but also he sheweth, to what ende he sendeth them;Luk. 24.26 namely, that as Christ himself first suffered, and then entred into glorie: so all others going the
same way, that he did, they might be like vnto him; as the Lord hath ap∣pointed, that they should be. And therefore we neede not to feare, that the crosse should hinder vs from our saluation, no more then it did Christ from glory: but rather that we ought in the midst of it to haue such hope, that we shall be like vnto Christ in glorie, because we are like vnto him in the crosse: according as it is said in an other place, If we suffer with him, we shall also raigne with him. Now concerning the former of these two points, namely, that no af∣fliction commeth by casualtie, or be∣falleth vs by happe hazard, as we say, neither that any thing is done by for∣tune or chance, but by the very speci∣all appointment of God: he not one∣ly willingly suffering it, and behol∣ding it, and vs in it with his own eies, but laying it vpon vs himselfe, euen with his owne hands, and first of all
ordaining it: this, I say, not onely con∣taineth in it most notable comfort, and singular consolation, considered alone and apart by it selfe: but also is that, vnto which the whole Scripture of the old & new Testament beareth very plentiful witnes. For seeing that we beleeue, according to the first ar∣ticle of our faith, that God made all things of nothing, therefore also we are assured, that whatsoeuer are the means knowne or vnknowne, of any thing that befalleth vs, that the Lord himselfe is the doer of the same: for that which they did, they did by his speciall power, seeing that of them∣selues they were first nothing, and therfore without him could not doe any thing. And thus the Psalmist professeth his faith, in the name of the rest of the seruants of God, acknowledging that the Lord himselfe hath brought all their troubles vpon thē, which they
suffered by the violence and crueltie of their aduersaries; and that he a∣lone did in the ende deliuer them out of their hands: whē he speaketh thus, Praise our God, ye people,Psal. 66.8. and make the voice of his praise to be heard; which holdeth our soules in life, and suffereth not our feete to slippe. For thou, O God, hast prooued vs, thou hast tried vs as siluer is tried; thou hast brought vs into the snares, and laid a strait chaine vpon our loines: thou hast caused men to ride ouer our heads: we went into fire and into water, but thou broughtest vs out in∣to a wealthie place: where they con∣fesse that though men did so oppresse them, as though they should ride o∣uer them, yet that the Lord caused them so to doe, and he brought them into the snare, and by the crueltie of tyrants laid a strait chaine vpon their loynes, which pinched them: and so he did not onely behold their affli∣ctions,
but by them did of purpose trie them, as men doe siluer. Whereunto agreeth that most ex∣cellent saying of Iob, containing the like profession of his faith in this very point; that God bringeth all afflicti∣on vpon men, though he vseth men, or any other meanes, or the deuill himselfe, as instruments and meanes to work vnder him in the same thing. For whē Satan had desired the Lord to stretch out his hand,Iob. 1.11. and touch Iob in his possessions, to see what would become of him then: and thereupon the Lord saide vnto him, Loe all that he hath is in thine hand. then he stir∣red vp the Shabeans, who came vio∣lently and caried away all his oxen, as they were plowing, and his asses as they were seeding: and he caused fire to come downe and burne vp his sheepe and his seruants that kept thē: and he mooued the Chaldeans to set vpon his camels; and to carie them a∣way,
and to slay his seruants: and he raised vp a tempest of winde, which blewe downe the house where his sonnes and his daughters were, and slew them all. And when the tidings of all these were brought vnto him on the sudden, then he fell downe vpon the ground,vers. 20. and worshipped God, saying, Naked came I out of my mothers wombe, and naked shall I returne thither: the Lord hath giuen, and the Lord hath taken it: blessed be the name of the Lord. Thus though he saw the meanes of his vndoing, yet he looked vp to God, and confessed him to be the principall doer in this busines: not ascribing his losses vnto the Chaldeans or Sabeans, but vnto God working by them: and therfore he said, The Lord hath taken away. Thus we ought so beleeue and confesse, that whatsoeuer doth befall vs either by wicked or vngodly per∣sons, or by Satan himselfe, and all his
hellish power, that the Lord is the doer of the same: for the very deuills themselues were constrained to ac∣knowledge vnto Christ, when he was vpon the earth, that they could doe nothing without his permission, or rather without his warrant and speciall commaundement: and that not onely vnto men, but euen to the worst and meanest of his creatures. For when he was in the countrey of the Gergaseus, there met him two men possessed with many deuills;Matth. 8.28. and the deuills speaking in thē, besought him, saying, If thou cast vs out, suffer vs to goe into the heard of swine; which was feeding a farre off vpon an hill: so they all confesse, that they were not able to enter into those ve∣ry bruit beasts to hurt them, vntill such time as Christ gaue them leaue. Mark. 5.12.But S. Marke speaketh of it more significantly, namely, that they said vnto him, Send vs into the swine: and
then as S. Matthew saith, he did not onely suffer them, and giue thē leaue so to doe, but bade them goe, and so sent them to them: whereupon they entred into them, and caried them headlong from the hill into the sea, and so choaked them there. So that they confesse, that they could doe no∣thing but by the power of Christ, sending them, ruling them, and re∣straining them at his pleasure. Thus also it is written of our Lord and Sauiour Christ Iesus,Matth. 4.1. that he was lead aside of the Spirit of God into the wildernes, to be tempted of the deuill; to shew vs, that whatsoeuer did befall him there, the Lord God sent him thither, and to that end: and that God was not onely contented to suffer him to be diuers waies tem∣pted by the space of fourtie daies, and fourtie nights continually; but that he went thither by the immediate di∣rection of the Spirit of God for the
same ende and purpose: who could otherwise haue preserued him, that the Deuill should haue had nothing to doe with him. And according to this dealing of God with him, Christ hath taught vs all thus to pray, Lord lead vs not into temptation:Luk. 11.4. which kind of wordes, as they be agreeable vnto the words of the Euangelists, yea of our Sauiour Christ, So they are more full of faith and comfort, then if we should say, as many had wont to doe, Suffer vs not to be lead into temptation: because therein we confesse, not onely that the Lord be∣holdeth vs in our troubles, and suffe∣reth vs to be lead into them, and so is in those things a looker on; but that he, that is our father, and therefore loueth vs; who made vs, and therfore knoweth our strength, laieth them vpon our backes himselfe, and doth not as it were stand by till an other doth it: and therefore we neede so
much the lesse to feare, lest we should be ouerladen with them: for as it is said in the Psalme,Psal. 103.13. as a father hath compassion on his children, so hath the Lord compassion on them that feare him: for he knoweth whereof we be made, he remembreth that we are but dust. The consideration of this should not onely make vs patient in all affli∣ctions, and willingly to beare them, because they come from God, that loueth vs: but also to looke for some good from them in the ende, because that he, who hath promised to worke our good thereby, doth lay them vp∣on vs himselfe. And vnlesse we be thus perswaded of them, we shall be readie to fret, and storme, and impati∣ently to beare them; much more shall we thinke them to be for our hurt, rather then for our good. If Iob when he lost all, if he had looked vnto the violence and robberie of the Chal∣deansIob 1.15.
and Sabeans; who spoiled him▪ or to the malice of the Deuill, who set them a worke, and had gone no further, he must needes haue had a number of reuenging thoughts a∣gainst them, and he could no waies haue put it vp at their hands; but whē he considered of the prouidence of God working by them in wisdome and mercie, beyond that that flesh & and blood could conceiue: and was resolued of this, that the Lord had ta∣ken all away: that made him patient∣ly to beare all, and to giue thanks vn∣to God; and not to vtter one foolish word,vers. 22. or to offend with his mouth. Gen 37.24.And this made Ioseph patiently to put vp those iniuries and wrongs that were offered vnto him by his brethe∣ren; when as first of all they cast him into an emptie pit, that there he might perish: and afterwards they drew him out of it, and solde him to the Ishmaelites, who brought him
into Egypt. Where afterwardes he beeing aduanced vnto great honour, when in the time of famine his bre∣thren came thither to buie corne, and he at their second comming made himselfe knowne vnto them; saying, Come neere, I pray you to me:& 45.4. I am Ioseph your brother, whome ye sold into Egypt: but he staieth not there: for then he might in some great heat of affection haue expostulated the matter with them, and haue don thē some harme, seeing he had power in his hands: but he addeth further for their comfort, and to shew what staied him: Be not sad,v. 5. neither grie∣ued with your selues, that ye sold me hither: for God did send me before you for your preseruation: for now two yeares of famine haue been tho∣rough the land, and fiue yeares are behind, wherein shall be neither ea∣ring, nor haruest: wherfore God sent me before you, to preserue your po∣steritie
in this land, and to saue you a∣liue by a great deliuerance. Now thē you sent me not hither, but God, who hath made me a father vnto Phara∣oh, and lord of all his house, and ru∣ler throughout all the land of Egypt. Where we see, how he turneth his eyes from his brethren, and looketh vnto God, saying it was not they that sold him, but God that sent him thi∣ther, and that for the good of them all: and this made him so patiently to beare it. And thus the Lord, though he de∣testeth such sinnes as these in men, yet he often vseth them to his glorie: which when men can wisely consi∣der of, and discerne the one from the other, it will make them quietly to beare great things at the hands of men, because they stay not in them, but cast vp their eyes vnto God: whereas if they should onely looke vnto men, and goe no further, they
know that they in their doings mean them no good, but hurt: and know∣ing that they haue deserued no such measure at their hands, they would be like the dogge that bites the staffe wherwith he is beaten, and considers not of him that striketh him: there∣fore in all afflictions, let vs beleeue that we haue to deale with God, so shall we be patient, and comfortable vnder the same. And this is that, no doubt, that staied the old man Heli the Priest, when he heard that mes∣sage from the Lord by Samuel, which otherwise would haue beene a great deale more vncomfortable vnto him, as appeareth by his words, and an∣swer, that he gaue vnto him. For whē he told him, that God would iudge his house for euer,1. Sam. 3.3. for the iniquitie which he knew, because his sonnes ranne into a slaunder, and he staied them not; then he answered,18. It is the Lord: let him doe what seemeth him
good. This faith, that he knew, that all things should fall out not accor∣ding to the will of man, but of God, was that, that gaue him hope of a good issue of all those troubles in the ende: and so it must doe to vs. For this is all one, as if the sicke patient should haue a Phisitian to deale with him, who were his father, his brother, or his friend: who should not onely prescribe the quantitie of all the ingredients for his medicine, knowing well the qualities and wor∣king of them; but should also make the confection himselfe, bring it vn∣to him, and minister it with his owne hands: of whose fidelitie and care to∣wards him, and desire of his health, because he doubteth not one whit; that would make him most willing to receiue it, though very bitter and vn∣pleasant: and though at the first he found it in the working somewhat churlish, yet he would hope to re∣ceiue
some good by it in the ende; knowing who made it, and brought it vnto him. And after this manner, and vnder this very comparison, our Sauiour Christ speaketh of his owne afflicti∣ons, and did most willingly indure the crosse, which others would haue put off from him, because it was that, that his father did lay vpon him. For when Iudas and the rest came with weapons to take him,Ioh. 18 . Peter hauing a sword drew it out, & laid about him, hoping to haue rescued him out of their hands: and striking at the head of one of the seruants of the high Priest, cut off his right eare.11. Then Ie∣sus saide vnto Peter, Put vp thy sword into the sheath: shall I not drinke of the cuppe, which my father hath gi∣uen me? Wherein he sheweth not onely what made him so patient, and what caused him to stay Peter, euen the will of his Father: but thereby he
doth also teach vs, that whensoeuer any crosse doth befal vs, it is that por∣tion and cuppe, which God our fa∣ther in great wisdome and mercie hath mingled for vs: and therefore we should not feare any hurt by drin∣king of it, but rather take it willingly, and hope that it shall work our good, according to his meaning towards vs, and as he hath promised in his word. If when the child hath offended his father, he should say to one of his seruants in his anger; Take him out of my sight, and punish him so and so: this would be more grieuous and fearefull a great deale vnto an inge∣nuous child, then if the father should take correction of him himselfe; be∣cause he was better perswaded of the goodnes of his father towards him, then of the seruants, and so might looke for more mercie from the one, then from the other, Euen so it may
minister vnto vs no small comfort in all our afflictions, that we beleeue, that in thē we are vnder our fathers hand, and he himselfe dealeth with vs, and that he hath not in his displea∣sure deliuered vs to any other to be tormented by them. Againe, if one that were blinde, offending his father, should be sud∣denly taken away, and caried to some punishment, he knew not whether, nor by whome, he might iustly feare what would be the ende and measure of it: but if he knew it were his father, part of his feare would be diminish∣ed, and he would be the lesse vnwil∣ling to goe with him, and more qui∣etly submit himselfe vnto his corre∣ction: So we if at any time through our ignorance and blindnes doe not rightly conceiue of our crosses, and of the author of them; but as vncer∣taine we ascribe them to this, or to that, or to we know not what, we are
so much the more timerous & feare∣full: but if the eyes of our minde by faith in Gods word be so opened, that we see clearely God to be the author of them, and that we are in the hands of none but of our father; our minds are so much the more pa∣cified, and we shall finde a wonderful alteration in our selues, ouer that was in vs before, in respect of the patient bearing of our present estate, what∣soeuer it be. Or (to shew it in an other compa∣rison) if one should be so hardly dealt withall, as is the manner in the Spa∣nish Inquisition; in which men are examined for their faith in Christ, and religion to God, that the poore soule might be put into the greater feare, and so the sooner abjure his faith; if he should haue a tormentor sent vnto him very ougly disguised, more like a deuill then a man, who should carie him into some dark dun∣geon
he knew not whether, and there lay him vpon the racke: this would no doubt increase the griefe of his af∣fliction so much the more, because he knew not who did deal with him, and so could looke for no mercie at his hands. But now, if when he were in the midst of his torture he should heare the voice of his father speaking vnto him, though thus disguised, that might somewhat vphold him, and ridde him of a number of thoughts that he was troubled with before. So all afflictions must needes be so much the more vncomfortable vnto vs, as long as we looke not vp vnto him, that sendeth it; and are so blind, that we consider not, who stri∣keth vs. Yet when we heare out of the word the voice of our father spea∣king vnto vs, and telling vs that it is he that dealeth with vs, how straunge and deformed so euer the tormentor may seeme to be, that is, how grie∣uous
and vnlooked for so euer the af∣fliction be, and contrarie to our na∣ture; let vs not be too much discou∣raged, because that then when he striketh vs, he still loueth vs, and the bowels of his compassion doe yearne vpon vs,. king. .26. more then in a mother to∣wardes her childe, when shee seeth what harme is like to come vnto it: and he then seeketh thereby to doe vs good. And this is that, which the Pro∣phet Ieremie speaketh of in the per∣son of the Lord, shewing how he standeth affected towards them whē he doth most of all afflict thē. Where first of all he bringeth in the Church of the Iewes sorowing for the great∣nes of their affliction, which God had laid vpon them for their sinnes: and in the same committing them∣selues wholly to God, and praying to him for his saluation; when he saith, I haue heard Ephraim lamentingIer. 31.18.
thus thou hast corrected me, and I was chastised as an vntamed calfe; conuert thou me, and I shall be con∣uerted: for thou art the Lord my God; surely after I was conuerted, I repented: and after that I was instru∣cted, I smote vpon my thigh: I was a∣shamed, yea confounded, because I did beare the reproach of my youth. Then the Lord maketh this answer, that he had not cast them off, though he had so afflicted them, but did still loue them, and when he did most of all afflict them, then he was mooued with pitie and compassion towards thē, saying, Is Ephraim my deare son,v. 20. or pleasant child? I surely: for since I spake vnto him, I still remembred him: therefore my bowels are troub∣led for him, I will surely haue com∣passion vpon him, saith the Lord. Thus we see, that all afflictions are ordained, and sent of God, & that for our good, & that he beareth the same
fatherly affectiō towards vs in them, that he did before. And therefore that the saluation of the Church, and of euery member of the same is by Gods decree ioyned with bearing the crosse: in so much that we are not to looke to be free from it, vnlesse we will peruert this order established by God himselfe. Neither neede we to feare it, when as the Lord, who hath determined to saue vs, hath appoin∣ted this way and meanes also to saue vs by, and to worke our good: and so his decree and purpose of sauing vs can not be seuered from his decree of exercising vs vnder the crosse. And that none of vs all might looke to be freed from the crosse, or feare, that it should hinder vs in our saluation, or in any gift that might further vs thereunto: the Apostle tel∣leth vs, wherfore the Lord hath thus decreed of the whole Church, to ex∣ercise them vnder the crosse; namely,
seeing that his owne dearely belo∣ued sonne,Math. 3.17. in whome he is well plea∣sed, (as it was testified from heauen) seeing that he came no other way but by the crosse vnto his great glo∣rie, to be set at the right hand of God: he beeing the eldest brother in the house of God, all other by their pra∣ctise and obedience to the crosse, might yeild vnto him soueraigntie, and acknowledge him to be chiefe, when they will not refuse to goe that way to their inheritance, which Christ went before, the eldest and onely naturall sonne of God, though it seeme neuer so grieuous, euen tho∣rough many afflictions. For euen as a noble man wil haue all his seruants to weare one liuerie, and all of them to haue the same cog∣nizance, that they may be knowne whose they are: So the Lord would haue all his seruants and children, to be knowne from the rest of the world
by one and the same badge: & though there be some other marks of them, whereby they may be discerned, as the outward profession of his wor∣ship and seruice, and his holy Sacra∣ments; yet there is one more special: now the badge that hee put vpon Christ Iesus his eldest sonne, was af∣fliction and trouble in this world: according to that that was prophesi∣ed of him,Esa. 53.3. he is despised, and reiected of men; he is a man full of sorrowes, and hath experience of infirmities; he was oppressed and afflicted,7. yet did he not open his mouth; he is brought as a sheepe to the slaughter, and as a sheepe before the shearer is dumb, so he openeth not his mouth. The lord did break him,10. & make him subiect vnto infirmities: all which we see verified in the Gospel in the whole course of his life, but especial∣ly in his death. Seeing this was the case of the first begotten, none of vs
the younger brethren must refuse it, or be wearie of it. We see by experience, that in e∣uery family great is the prerogatiue and priuiledge of the eldest brother aboue all the rest, he by the law of God was by his double portion pre∣ferred aboue all the rest: and Iacob in blessing all his children,Gen. 49.3. called Reu∣ben his eldest sonne, The excellencie of dignitie, and the excellencie of power, and so did shew what belon∣ged vnto him as he was the eldest, if he had not lost it, namely, that he should haue beene the chiefest of all his brethren. None therefore must looke to goe beyond the eldest, nay all can not be like vnto him: and if a∣ny of the younger might come to as great an inheritance as he, by doing the same things that he did before them, though neuer so hard, and by going to it the same way, that he did, though full of many difficulties and
daungers; they might not with any colour refuse the conditions, vnlesse they would preposterously and with∣out reason preferre themselues be∣fore him, and thinke themselues bet∣ter then he. In like manner seeing it hath plea∣sed the Lord,Heb. 2.10. as the Apostle saith, to consecrate the price of our saluation through afflictions, and he came vnto glorie no other way then this; we must thinke it good for vs to goe the same way, that we might be like vnto him, and so by our practise shew, that we acknowledge him to be the prince of our saluation, and our el∣dest brother. Therefore as he is the most chief and principall in the com∣monwealth, or in the Church, or in a priuate family, or in any place els, whome all the rest desire to be like vnto: So when we are contented to be like vnto Christ in any thing, euen in the crosse, then shall we declare
indeede that wee hold him not in word onely, but in true faith & hear∣tie affection to be chiefe and princi∣pall aboue all others, and as was said before, to be the Prince of our salua∣tion; or as it is saide in this text that we haue in hand,Rom. 8.29. The first begotten among many brethren. For indeede howsoeuer there is great difference betweene the head and the rest of the members, and all of them are farre inferiour vnto it: yet there is and must be a certaine conformitie betweene the one and the other; that is, a certain likelihood and agreement betweene the mem∣bers of the same bodie and the head: So howsoeuer there is no compari∣son betweene Christ and vs, yet we must thus farre agree with him, that we must not thinke to be aboue him, and therefore we must not refuse a∣ny condition, that he hath vndergon before: vnlesse we would most disor∣derly
preferre our selues the mem∣bers, before him our head: which thing to doe, were to darken the glo∣rie of him that is the first borne, and to staine the honour of him that is truly called, The Prince of our salua∣tion. For what a confusion were it in the commonwealth, if the Nobles, yea the meanest of the subiects would refuse to doe that, which the King & Prince had done before? or what dis∣order wold there be in a family, if the yonger brethren should think much and disdaine to be brought vp that way, that the heire of the house had beene before: Euen so when we shall refuse to beare the crosse, which our Lord and Sauiour Christ Iesus by the appointment of his father hath born in greater measure, then we shall or can: it is nothing els but pride and selfe loue to lift vp our selues aboue him, and to say by our deedes, that we
will not in this thing be conforma∣ble vnto him, as to our Prince or el∣dest brother. And then consider I pray you, what an intolerable thing this were, that we beeing worse then dust and ashes, and wormes meat, yea nothing els but a lumpe of sinne, should desire to be spared aboue the onely sonne of God, whome he hath made heire of all things;Heb. 1.2. by whome also he made the worlds; who is the brightnes of the glorie, and the ingrauen forme of his person, bearing vp all things by his mightie power: and is made so much the more excellent then the Angels, in as much as he hath obtai∣ned a more excellent name thē they: for of him he saith, Thou art my son, this day haue I begotten thee: and of the other, Let all the Angels of God worship him, as the Apostle doth most excellently shew at large in the Epistle to the Hebrewes. Therefore
let vs not so loue our selues that the estate of Christ Iesus should seeme vnmeete for vs: as if he beeing tho∣rough all afflictions and temptations brought vnto glory, we should dream of a more easie way for our selues, and thinke to come to it after a more peaceable & quiet manner, we know not what. But rather let this comfort and vp∣hold vs in all trouble and aduersitie, that we can neuer be pressed downe so low with it, but that Christ Iesus our Lord and Prince hath been more deepely plunged in it before: & ther∣fore the more that we suffer, the more like we are vnto him. In so much that if it were possible for vs to haue the afflictions of Iob doubled vpon vs, yea if we could goe downe into hell, and so suffer all the torments of a damned and desperate creature both in soule and bodie; hauing the worme of our conscience knawing in vs continual∣ly;
euen in them we should be most like vnto Christ in his fearefull ago∣nies, and deadly sorrow that he fell into, complaining that his soule was heauie euen vnto the death:Math 26.3. and in his bloodie sweat, by which all the parts of this bodie were strained to the full: yea in the lamentable out∣cries that he made vpon the crosse, when as he finding no comfort in heauen nor in earth for a while he cried with a loud voice, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me,& 27.46. and so gaue vp the ghost. But if all this doe not suffice vs, and we further demaund, why the Lord should appoint so hard a way for vs vnto saluation, and why he should or∣daine the gate to be so strait,& 7.14. and the way so narrow, whereby we should enter into life: and so should foolishly wish, as many doe, that he had ap∣pointed some easier way then this. First of all I must say, as the Apostle
doth,Rom. 9.20. O man, who art thou, which pleadest against God? shall the thing formed say to him that formed it; why hast thou appointed me to doe so and so? we must not prescribe any thing vnto the Lord in the course and man∣ner of our saluation: no more then children must prescribe vnto their parēts after what maner they should come to their inheritances and por∣tions. But seeing that the ioyes of the kingdome of heauen are so great, e∣uen such,1. Cor. 2.9. as the eye hath not seene, nor the eare hath heard, neither haue they entred into the heart of man; and that we are altogether so vnwor∣thie of thē, we must thinke our selues happie, if we come to inioy them a∣ny way at the last, be it neuer so hard; yea, if we should goe to heauen tho∣rough the midst of hell. For when we are come thither, in the presence of God is the fulnes of ioy,Psal. 16.11. & at his right hand are pleasures
for euermore, we shall finde them so farr to exceed all that euer we heard, read, or thought of them: so that we shall say of them, as the Queene of Sheba saide of the wisdome and ho∣nour of king Salomon, when she saw it: It was a true word,2. Chr. 9.5. which I heard in mine owne land of thy acts, and of thy wisdome: howbeit I beleeued not their report, vntill I came, and mine eyes had seene it: and behold not the one halfe of thy great wisdome was told me: for thou exceedest the fame that I heard: happie are thy men, and happie are these thy seruants, which stand before thee alway, &c. So we shall finde all things there to surpasse all that euer we heard, & so shal count our selues and other happie & thrise happy, that may stand in the presence of God for euer. At what time we shall finde the happines of that life in many degrees to surmount all the troubles and ad∣uersities
that we haue suffered in this life, to surmount them I say both in greatnes, and in continuance with∣out any interruption. As the Apostle saith, who had so great experience of all kind of afflictions, that he saith of himselfe,2. Cor. 4.8. We are afflicted on euery side; and euery where we beare about in our bodie the dying of the Lord Iesus: for we are alwaies deliuered vnto death for Iesus sake: yet he saith, he did not faint vnder them: for when he considered of the ioyes of heauen, and compared the afflictions of this world with them, he accounted the afflictions to be but short, euen for a moment of time, and very light and easie, in respect of the eternall glorie, and the great waight of it, that was prepared for him, and for others: when he saith,17. for our light affliction, which is but for a moment causeth vnto vs a farre more excellent and e∣ternall waight of glorie: and as he
deliuereth it in an other place more plainly & confidently in these words: I count,Rom. 8.18. or all things being well con∣sidered, I gather, that the afflictions of this present time are not worthie of the glorie which shall be shewed vnto vs. And then we shall neuer repent vs of the hardnes of the way, by which we came through manifold afflicti∣ons vnto so great and eternall glorie; no more then the sicke patient is so∣rie that by induring so many hard things vnder the physitians hands, he attained vnto perfect health at the last. But rather as it was a great com∣fort vnto Ioseph,Gen. 49.5. to see what great honour he was come vnto in Egypt, so that he was made lord of all the countrey, though he had suffered ma∣ny hard things before: according to that, that is said in the Psalme,Psal. 105.17 Ioseph was sold for a slaue; they held his feet in the stockes, & he was laid in irons,
vntill his appointed time came, and the counsell of the Lord had tried him. Then the King sent, and loosed him, euen the ruler of the people de∣liuered him: he made him Lord of his house, and ruler of all his substance. So it shall be a comfort vnto vs for e∣uer and euer, that by walking in the straite way of godlines, and induring many grieuous things in the same, we are come to that place where we are made Kings & Queenes to raigne with Christ in glorie world without ende. And as Iacob was not sorie, that he came to inherite his fathers bles∣sing at the last by induring a long ex∣ile frō his fathers house by the space of twentie yeares, and a tedious kind of seruice vnder his cruell master La∣ban, who did often change his wages, and caused him to be pinched with the frost in the night, and to be scor∣ched with the heate of the sunne in
the day. So it shall be no griefe of heart at all vnto vs then, that by pati∣ence vnder many crosses here, we are come to inherit the blessing of our heauenly father in the kingdome of heauen, which was prepared for vs before the foundation of the world. But as the Israelites when they were quietly possessed of the land of Ca∣naan, that good land that flowed with milke and honie, for ioy thereof neuer remembred their long iorney trauailing by the space of fourtie yeares through a vast desart and for∣lorne wildernes, in which sometimes they wanted water, sometimes food, sometimes were in daunger of their enemies, sometimes were stung with fierie serpents, and sometimes were put in great feare of other calamities: So wee when wee are come to that land of promise, whereof this was out a type and figure; where is the tree of life indeed,Reuel. 12.2. bearing fruit con∣tinually,
whose fruit are for meat, and whose leaues are for medicine: where shall be no more curse, but the throne of God, and of the lambe shall be in it, where his seruants shall serue him, and they shall see his face, and his name shall be in their foreheads: and there shall be no night there, & they shall neede no candle, neither light of the sunne: for the Lord God shall giue them light, and they shall raigne for euermore. Then all things that we haue suffered in these daies of our pilgrimage shall be cleane forgotten, and remembred no more. To conclude, as Dauid did not re∣pent him, that he came to the king∣dome of Israel at the ende of many yeares, in which he suffered so many hard things vnder the tyrannie of Saul, as he did; when as sometimes he would haue smit him through with his speare vnto the wall,1. Sam. 18.2. and at an o∣ther time he would haue slain him in
his bed: and continually he hunted after his life,& 26.20. as one would hunt a par∣tridge in the wildernes: So we shall not repent vs, that we are come to the kingdome of heauen after many yeares, in which sometimes we haue beene pursued of one affliction, and sometimes of an other: so that all our life long hath beene nothing els but a continuall warrefare with our own corruptions, and with the temptati∣ons of the world, and of the deuill. Therefore to vphold our selues in a good course, and that in all trialls we might possesse our soules in patience unto the ende, we must consider and seriously meditate vpon the happines of the life to come: which shall so sweeten the bitternesse of all afflicti∣ons, that either we shall not feele it in comparison, or it shal seeme nothing unto vs: and so let vs put that exhor∣tation of the Apostle in practise, Let  not be wearie of well doing,Gal. 6.9. for in
due season we shall reape, if we faint not. Where to perswade the Galatians and vs to go on cōstantly in all good courses vnto the end, he makes a pro∣mise of great reward which God will bestow vpon all them that shall so doe, not so much in this life, as the life to come, when euery man shal re∣ceiue the things that are done in his bodie,2. Cor. 5.10. according to that he hath done, whether it be good or euill: and this he doth by a familiar and plaine comparison; That as the husband∣man though the seede-time be very painefull and costly vnto him; so that both he buies his corne at a great price, and hath many an hard iourney at the plow, and meetes with many a boisterous storme, yet he giues not ouer in the midst, but comforts him∣selfe with the hope of haruest, which in due time will come, though long after: and is perswaded, that that will
fully quite all his cost, and recōpence all his labour to the full: and when he hath gathered his corne into his barne, he repents himselfe not one whit of his cost, or trauell, but rather is glad that by neither of them he was discouraged from following of that good course, which now he see∣eth to be so gainfull vnto himselfe. So we in all afflictions and in all difficulties continuing in well doing, must comfort our selues with the hope of that reward, that God hath promised in the kingdom of heauen: according to that, that is said in the Psalme, they that sow in teares,Psal. 126.5. shall reape in ioy; they went out weeping, and caried pretious seede, but they shal returne with ioy, and bring their sheaues. Where the time of affliction is compared vnto a seede-time in a deare yeare, when poore men be∣cause of the scarsitie and price of corne sow it with teares: but the re∣ward
in heauen is likened vnto the haruest, when the increase is so great, that they reape & carie in their corne with great ioy. This is that then, which we must set before our eyes, that we might patiently vndergo the hardnes of affliction, it beeing the readie way to bring vs to glorie. And this Paul applieth vnto ser∣uants, whose condition of life, especi∣ally of bondseruants, and vnder hea∣then and vnchristian masters in those daies was very hard: and willeth thē to doe their duties conscionably, as seruing the Lord, knowing that of him, they shall receiue their reward: when he saith,Coloss 3.23. Seruants be obedient vnto them that are your masters ac∣cording to the flesh, in all things, not with eye seruice, as men pleasers, but in singlenes of heart, pleasing God: whatsoeuer ye doe, doe it heartily, as to the Lord, and not to men, know∣ing that of the Lord ye shall receiue
the reward of the inheritance: for ye serue the Lord Christ. Thus he would haue them to go on in their callings chearefully, though they were very base and painfull, in hope of that in∣heritance that was prepared for thē in the kingdome of heauen. And tru∣ly if not onely seruants, but all other men did beleeue that in all things they had to deale with God, and that he would reward them if they did well, though all other should neg∣lect them, the hope of that might comfort them in all difficulties. And this made Moses the man of God to refuse all the riches and plea∣sures, that he might haue inioyed in Egypt, as beeing the reputed sonne of Pharaohs daughter, and to choose rather to ioyne himselfe with the people of God though in great affli∣ction,Heb. 11.26. because he had respect vnto the recompence of the reward. Which reward could not then be seene, and
therefore the Apostle saith, that he did it by faith: and truly if we did be∣leeue that great reward that is laid vp in heauen for them that serue God, and is offered vnto vs in his word, if all the pleasures of the world were laid before vs on the one hand, and all the afflictions of the same on the o∣ther hand, we should be of Moses his minde; to choose rather to suffer ad∣uersitie with the people of God, then to indure the pleasures of sinne for a season: esteeming the rebuke of Christ greater riches, then all the treasures of the world, because by faith we haue respect vnto the recō∣pence of that reward. And so I may conclude with that most excellent exhortation of the A∣postle in the chapter following: Wherefore let vs also,chap. 12.1. seeing that we are compassed about with so great a cloud of witnesses, cast away euery thing that presseth downe, and the
sinne that hangeth so fast on: let vs runne with patience the race, that is set before vs, looking vnto Iesus the author and finisher of our faith: who for the ioy that was set before him, indured the crosse, and despised the shame, and is set at the right hand of the throne of God. Where he sets before our eyes the example of our Sauiour Christ, who in those grie∣uous agonies he was in, to sweeten the bitternes of his crosse, did ear∣nestly consider of the ioy and glorie, which a little after he was to enter into: that we might also in our suffe∣rings hold our thoughts seriously vn∣to the meditation of the ioyes of hea∣uen, and for them indure them, and treade vnder our feete for them all the shame, reproach, and contempt of the world, that shall be cast vpon vs. Where also that we might not faint vnder the burden, we are to con∣sider
of the circumstance of time, when we shall reape the fruit of our labours,Gal. 6.. that is, In due season, if we faint not. Which is partly in this life, for godlinesse hath the promises of this life,2. Tim. 4.. as well as of the life to come: and the Lord as he doth in this life giue to his children the first fruits of his Spirit:Rom. 8.23. so he doth giue them the first fruits of their labours, as a tast of their happines, which they shall en∣ioy more fully hereafter: and there∣fore Christ saith in the Gospel,Mark. 10.0. that he will reward those that are his an hundred fold in this life. But this due time is meant principally of the life to come, when they shall receiue their reward fully: not onely in the houre of death, when the soule en∣treth into happines, as it is saide of Lazarus, that when he died, the An∣gels caried his soule into Abrahams bosome:Luk. 16.22. but especially at the day of iudgement, when soule and bodie
beeing ioyned together, they shall be in full possession of eternal glorie and felicitie for euer. And seeing the Lord hath of his wisdome and goodnes set downe the time, when we shall be comforted & receiue our reward; we must in faith and patience waite vpon him for it. And as the husbandman that hath sowne his field, doth not looke for his croppe the next day, or the next weeke, but tarieth till the haruest come; so must we sow the seede of o∣bedience vnto God, euen vnder the crosse, though with teares, and looke for the fruit of it at the great day of haruest, when we shall reape it with ioy, euē with that ioy that is vnspeak∣able and most glorious: when he shal separate the sheepe from the goates, and giue them their reward, saying, Come ye blessed of my father,Math.  take the inheritance of the kingdom pre∣pared for you, from the foundation
of the world. And seeing the Lord hath beene patient in waiting for our amende∣ment from day to day: let vs patient∣ly expect the accomplishment of this his gratious promise from day to day, and from yeare to yeare. Setting be∣fore our eyes the example of the dumbe creatures, which expect with a feruent desire to be deliuered from that bondage and corruption,m. 8.19. that now they are in, into the glorious li∣bertie of the sonnes of God: and this they doe with stretching forth their heads, as the Apostle saith, like vnto the poore prisoner, that is condem∣ned, and puts out his head at the pri∣son window, looking for the gratious pardon of the Prince. And if we can thus doe, as we shall not be frustrate of our hope,. 6.1. so it shall maruelously vphold vs, as an ankor fixed in hea∣uen, and not in earth, in all the waues and tempests of this troublesome
world, till we ariue happily at the ha∣uen of heauen, we shall find the ioyes so to exceede all the miseries that we haue indured here, that we shall not be grieued one whit, that we are come to such a place of rest, by so long and tedious a iourney: Which grace God graunt vnto vs, for his sonne Iesus Christs sake. Amen. FINIS.
