4863 99843613 8357
CATO VARIEGATVS OR Catoes Morall Distichs: Translated and Paraphras'd, with variations of Expressing, in English verse. By Sr. Richard Baker Knight. LONDON Printed by Anne Griffin, and are to be sold by Anne Bowler dwel∣ling at the signe of the Marigold in Paules church-yard. 1636.
To the Reader. A Lover of Learning, translated these ver∣ses of Cato into English, some twelve years since: whose labour, I cannot blame: but tying himselfe, strictly to the words; he could not alwaies, either so fully, or so gracefully, expresse the mening: for indeed, the words of one language, cannot alwaies be reached, by the very same words of another: which made an Able man, in this cause to say: Nec verbum verbo curabis reddere. And therefore seeing the sence especially in precepts, is principally to be re∣garded, there is iustly a liberty given, in this kinde, not onely to use Periphrases, but Paraphrases also, as the cause may require, which liberty if I be censured by any to have used too liberally: Yet so long as Sensus est in tuto, and nothing is said, but what is drawn, Epo∣tentia verborum: I expect to be excused at least, if not commended: And if many of these, seeme rather Para∣phrases, or rather Collateral Conceits then translations: yet seeing they tend all to the same sence: and that the di∣rect translations are sent before, as set alwayes next the latine: they are but after the fashion of young men; who weare thin cloaths, in cold winter, but haue good warm wast-cotes vnder them, and some men, may bee of that
disposition, to take as much delight, in the conceit of the Expressing as in the expressing of the conceit-And in∣deed, this kinde of writing, seemes not onely away of me∣ditation, but a Fruit: Not only an Exercise, but a Di∣lating of Invention; and if there were nothing else, but the Variety; we see, how much the Eye, is delighted with varietie of colours, in the same obiect; the Eare, with variety of Descant upon the same Plaine song; & euen Nature herselfe, seemes delighted with it: For, who doubts, but into one forme of a Flower, she could have infused all kinde ofsents; and all, of sappes, but that shee takes a pleasure, in the variety of Formes. Some man will perhaps say; Here is variety indeed; but one well done were better then all: what good doth choice, where All is Refuse stuffe? It is true: but let this man bring better stuffes out of his warehouse; & then, let these be thrown away: till then, he may content himselfe with these; They may keepe him warme, though not make him fine. And seeing there is variety of Iudgements; it is not unfit, to tender them, variety of Expressings: some may take better with one Iudgement: some, with another: and oftentimes, one Expressing, gives lustre to a∣nother, and makes the reason, which lay hid before to looke abroad: which is not yet, another thing; but the same thing, in another light: and lastly, being Prae∣cepts of Morality; they cannot haue too many allure∣ments.
How soever it be; the worke I am sure, is such, as need not repent me, of one moneth spent in writing it: Nor thee, whosoever thou art of one houre spent in rea∣ding it. I have quoted in the margent such places in di∣vine writings, as are consonant & agreeing with these Precepts of Cato; that we may see, how farre it hath pleased God, to illuminate even Heathen men, in matters of Morality. And I intended, to have set at the end, a Patterne of the like variety in Latin; done eyther by Virgil, or by Ausonius: and translated in a greater variety into English: but considering, this present work is it selfe, nothing else, but variations: I have chosen rather to omit it, least it might be thought, a supernume∣rarie idlenesse: yet thus much, we may gather by it; that even the Ancients scorned not, this variety of expres∣sing; either as an exercise to the Writer, or a delight to the Reader; and seeing it hath beene now so long for∣borne; it may come in also, as a novelty: and so I may suppose my selfe to haue two good supporters, (varietie & noueltie) to helpe to beare out my own imperfections. Now for the Cato, that was the Author of these ver∣ses, whether it were a Person, or but a Name onely, (as Cicero called his booke De senectue Cato Major, to giue it the more lustre of grauitie) it is uncertaine, but certaine it is, what Cato it was, is nothing certaine: and not much more certain, what time he liued; only Io. Scal.
by some probable coniecture gathereth: that he lived, a∣bout the times of the Emperours Commodus and Se∣verus: which might well bee: seeing the saeculum of yeeres,about an. Dom. 170. next proceeding; was in sobriety of manners, a∣mongst the Romans, of all other, the most flourishing. And though the Emperours themselves were not yet Christians; yet they made approches toward it, in Mo∣rall Doctrine, as neere, as could be: as, well testifies that excellent Booke of Morality: written by the learned Emperour, Marcus Aurelius Antonius; father vnto Commodus: which, to the great commendation of the Translatour, is lately published amongst us: out of which perhaps this Cato, whosoever hee was, might make choice of some speciall Precepts: and put them, into short Disticks; for the better reteining them in memory. And for my selfe; if any man thinke me Repuerascere; and to enter upon a worke, that were fitter for a schoole boy: let him know, that one Planudes, long since, and of late, Ioseph Scaliger, two excellent men, & of singular lear∣ning; haue Both of them, thought it no disparagement to their grauitie, to translate them into Greeke; as, ma∣ny learned men haue likewise done into other langua∣ges; whose Examples, I dare boldly oppose to the Cen∣sure of any, or all Inferiour Iudgements.
Cato Variegatus. SI Deus est. Animus, nobis ut carmin dicunt: Hic tibi praecipue, sit pra mente clendus. 1 If God a Spirit be, as Poets write: He must be worship, with a minde upright. Or thus, 1 The chiefest duty of thy life is this: To serve God purely, who a spirit is. Or thus, 1 As God, in truth a Spirit is, so He In spirit and in truth, must worship be. Or thus, 1 Gods outward worship, must not be neglected: But 'tis the inward that is most respected. Or thus, 1 God must be serv'd with Tongue; with every part: But no such service, as an upright Heart. 2 Plus Vigila semper, Ne somno deditus este: Nam diunra quies, Vitiis alimenta ministrat. 2 Wake alwayes more, and be not given to sleepe:Pro. 6. 9. & 19. 15. & 10. 13. & 24 30. 33. Much sleepe doth vices, both Beger and Keepe, Or thus. 2 Give not thy selfe to sleepe, but waking rather: Much sleeping, is to vice both Nrce and Father.
Or thus, 2 Vse waking more, and be  given to sloth: From whence all vices have both birth and growth. Or thus. 2 Sleepe not too much: vices will soone be dead. If with the milke of sloth, they were not fed. Or thus. 2 Vse walking more, yeeld not when sleepe : Much sleeping is the soyle that manures Vices. Or thus, 2 A drwsie body, makes the minde be such Hee's good for no good, that loves sleeping much. Or thus, 2 Confine thy sleepe; but doe not banish it, Though much be too much; yet a Fit is fit. Or thus, 2 Not sleepe, but sleeping much, must be withstood: Much resting makes men restie to all good. Or thus, 2 Hold sleeping short; Hold watchfulnesse in price: Much resting is the Exercise of Vice. Or thus, 2 Be walking more, sleepe but what needs thou must: Much sleepe breeds in the minde a kinde of . Or thus, 2 Or thus, 2
Or thus, 2 Sleepe is both Prodigals, and Misers Crime: It Hoords yet wasts, the chefest Treasure, Time. Or thus, 2 Much Sleepe, is a Betraying Vertues Ward: It tyes the senses hands, which are her Guard. Or thus, 2 Much Opium doth the sences overcome: And what is sleepe, but Natures Opium? Or thus, 2 Though Sleepe, the name of Lifes refreshing merits: Yet much Sleepe, is a surfet to the Spirits. Or thus, 2 Sleeping, is as the oyle of our Lifes Lampe: Little, Refreshes: Too much, makes a Dampe. Or thus, 2 Be Master of thine Eyes; not They of thee: Sleepe makes a Drone; tis waking makes a Bee. 3 Virtutem primam esse puta, Compescere lingnam.Iam. 3. 21. Pro. 10. 19. Ecclus 5. 13 & 20. 1. 2. Prximus Ille De, qui scit ratione tacere. 3 Count it a Vertue chiefe, thy Tongue to bridle; Hee's next to God, whose words are never Idle. Or thus, 3 Tis a great Guift, to speake in sense and season; But greater farre, to hold Ones Tongue with reason. Or thus, 3 What meanes the double Fence, the Tongue about, Of Teeth and Lips, but least it should breake out?
Or thus, 3 Many can roule the Tongue; and make it run, But Turne, and make a Soppe, is hardly done. Or thus, 3 The Tongue, hath this one rare, yet common Notion: It Vertue shewes, no lesse in Rest, then Motion. Or thus, 3 Speake not at all, or else speake wisely; least It shew thee, First a Man, and then a Beast. Or thus, 3 The stronger the Tongue is, the man's the weaker: Hee that can hold his Tongue, is the best speaker. Or thus, 3 The tongue, both stirres Debate, and makes it Cease: He holds Peace best, that best can hold his peace. Or thus, 3 The Tongue may thus, be Encreast, or Decreast; Rul'de well, It makes an Augll, Ill, a Beast. 4 Sperne Repugnando tibi t Contrarius esse: Conueniet uss, qui secum dissides ipse. 4 Take head, est to thy selfe thou Crossing be:Pro. 26. 7. Eccles. 9. 4. 29: & 5. 10. Who thwarts himselfe, with whom can he agree? Or thus, 4 Looke that thy deeds and words be Prayers: for Hee Thats odde to himselfe, with none can even be. Or thus, 4 If thou with others, wouldst all quarrels Cease Bgne first, with thy selfe to be at peace.
Or thus, 4 Be sure thy selfe, and Thou, be One; for One In peeces with himselfe, can peece with none. Or thus. Be constant to thy selfe, and doe not rome: Hee's but a Vagabond, that hath no Home. Or thus, 4 When thou art gone one way; doe not decline: A crooked Rule, can never make streight line. Or thus, 4 Fall not out with thyselfe; but still be one: He can be no mans friend, that's not his owne. Or thus, 4 Be none of those, of whom a man may say Two can agree, if one be ouo'th way. 5 Si vitam in spicias hominum, si denique mores: Quum culpas alios, Neme sine crimine vivit. 5 If on the lives of men, thou cast thy thoughts; Stand not a blaming some; for All have faults Or thus. 5 If lives of men, be lookt into and sought: Some more, some lesse; but None, without his fault, Or thus, 5 Looke into all mens lives, and you shall see Not this; or that man; but all, faulty be. Or thus, 5 This you shall finde, if to mens lives attend: The most are starke nought; and the best may mend.
6 Quae nocitura tenes, quamvis sint eara, relinque. Vlitas opibus praeponi tempore debet. 6 Leave off the things, though deere, which hurt thy health: For safety alwayes, must take place of wealth. Or thus, 6 For beare things hurtfull, though thou hold them deere; Better, hard Fare; then surfet with good Cheere. Or thus, 6 What thou holdst hurtfull; make of it no store: Better, be safe with lesse; then spoyld with more. Or thus, 6 Not Gold, if over weight, worth keeping thinke: Better, goe empty, safe; then laden, sinke. Or thus, 6 Please not thy fancy, to displease thy sence: Profit sometimes, yeelds to convenience. 7 Constans & lenis, vt Res expostulat, Esto: Temporibus mores, sapiens sine crimine mutat. 7 Be Constant or Remisse, as is the case: For wise men, change their course, with time and place. Or thus, 7 Be sterne, or milde, as thou the cause dost finde: For change of time, makes wise men, change their minde. Or thus, 7 Be gentle, or sever, as cause may be: To change with time, is wise mens Constancy.
Or thus, 7 To be now sharpe, Now gentle; s no Crime: Wisdome makes men, Chamaelions of time. Or thus, 7 Tis no fault, to be sterne, then milde agen: Time makes Chamaelions of the wisest men. Or thus. 7 If men, to one thing, be Now prone, Now loath: The difference of time may warrant Both. Or thus, 7 Sternenesse, Remisnesse, Harshnesse Lenity, Are All good: and None good, as cause may be 8 Niltemere Vxori, de servis Crede querenti: Saepe etenim mulier, quem Coniux diligit, Odit. 8 Blame not a seruant streight, thy wife reproves: For, women hate them oft, their Husband loves. Or thus, 8 A wifes complaints of servants, often savour Not of their faults, but of her Husbands savour. Or thus, 8 Your wives complaints of Servants, harke not to: Perhaps she loves them not, because you doe. Or thus, 8 Blame not streight, servants when your wife makes mone She therefore finds fault, because you finde none. Or thus, 8 When servants oft, you heare your wife accuse: If they be of your choyce, she cannot chuse
Or thus, 8 Condemne not seruants though your wife reprove them: 'Tis Cause enough of her hate, that you love them. Or thus, 8 Complaine of servants, needs your wife must doe: Shee cannot love a servant; and you too. 9 Quumque mones aliquem, nec se velit ille oneri: Sitibi sit carus,  ol defistere Captis. 9 When thou warn'st one, that take no warning will: If he thy friend be; give him warning still. Or thus. 9 Warning a friend, that doth thy warning sleight: Yet hold thy course still: and Doe Friendship, Right. Or thus. 9 If warning thou a friend, hee leave not Erring: Yet Erre not thou, in leaving off, Deterring. Or thus, 9 Warning a friend, that takes no admonition; Yet warne him still: Continuance workes Contrition. Or thus. 9 Telling a friend his faults; 'tis fault as much In thee, to leave; as in him, to be such. 10 Contra verbosos, noli contendere verbis:Eccle, 10. 4 Ecclus. 8. 3. Sermo datur cunctis: Animi sapientia Paucis. 10 Strive not in words, with men whose words are many: All men can speake, but wisely speake, skarce any.
Or thus, 10 Words against wordy men, thou must not vse: That's their owne weapon; thou must wisdome chuse. Or thus, 10 Strive not, of talking men, the day to get: Least it be said; Two Parrats are well met. Or thus, 10 To strive to put downe, men of words, is vaine: For Most have Tongue at will; but Few have Braine. Or thus, 10 To make men hold their Tongues, would do them wrong Most men would be no men, but for their Tongue. Or thus, 10 To strive in words, with men of words, Despise: A victory of words, sits not the wise. 11 Dilige sic alios, vtsis tibi carus micus.Pro. 9. 11. Eccles. 9. 12. 1. 2. & 29. 20. & 14. 11. Sic bonus est bonis, ne te mala damna sequantur. 11 Love others so, thou love thy selfe still most: Be good to good men; but not to thy Cost. Or thus, 11 Others love is the Bye; thy owne the Maine: Put not thy selfe to losse for others gaine. Or thus, 11 Love thy selfe without stint; others, in measure: Take care, thou take no hurt, for no mans pleasure. Or thus, 11 To all, be loving; but of none, be fond: Be not so Free, to bring thy selfe in Bond.
Or thus, 11 Loves Bonds thou must embrace; other Bonds ee; Be not so Free, as not to keepe thee free. Or thus, 11 Love first thy selfe: let others love be last: Where wit is Herauld; so will love be plac't. Or thus, 11 Th'account betweene thy friends and thee, so cast: Thou Feast not them, and bring thy selfe to Fast, Or thus, 11 Thy owne turne serv'd, let others Dole come after: Be not so franke; to make thy selfe a laughter. Or thus, 11 Be friend to others; but thy owne friend, first: The kinde Foole, of all kindes of Fooles, is worst. 12 Rumores fuge; ne incipias novus Author haberi: Non ulli tacuisse, nocet; Nocet esse locutum.Pro. 13. 3. Eccle. 9. 19. 7. 10. & 41. 23. 12 Spread no reports; least thou be Author thought: By silence, None; by speech, much hurt is caught. Or thus, 12 Spread no Reports, least thou, for Author runne: Sylence, hath none; Speech, many hath undone. Or thus. 12 Spread no Reports, least thou be charg'd withall: Silence goes safely; Speech, makes many fall. Or thus, 12 Spread no Reports; least they spread thee againe; Speaking turnes often to the speakers paine.
Or thus, 12 Let not thy Tongue, speake all thine Eares doe heare; Least, thou mayst chance, to buy thy speaking deere. Or thus. 12 Be not the brickewall, of words that may fright: Thou see'st, from whence they come; not where, they light. Or thus, 12 Spread no Reports, left thou be thought to make them: Thou know'st not how, Interpreters may take them. Or thus, 12 Spread no Reports, what ever thy words are: No Text so cleare; but that a Glosse may marre. Or thus: 12 Spread no Reports; Doe not thy words expose: To Descanting of men; perhaps thy foes. Or thus, 12 Spread no Reports; thou know'st not Fames encrease: The safest hold, is for to hold ones peace. 13 Spem tibi promissi certam promittere noli: Rara fides ideo est, quia mults multa loquuntur.Eccle. 9. 1 11. 13 On no mans Promise, build thy expectation: For Faith is rare; and words are but a Fashion. Or thus, 13 Upon mens words, grow not streight confident: To give good words, is but a complement. Or thus, 13 Thinke not a thing streight done, when men professe: Men promise faire, when they meane nothing lesse,
Or thus, 13 Rely not on mens words: words are but wind: And come but from the lippes, not from the minde. Or thus, 13 Youle finde mens promises, but flender cheere: Faith is flowne hence: onely her Tongue left here. Or thus, 13 Thinke Accidents without substances; and then You have the right stampe, of the words of men. 14 Quum te aliquis laudat, udex tuus esse memento; Plus aliis de te, quam tu tibi credere noli. 14 When thou art praisd; be Iudge thy selfe thereto: Thou better knowst thy selfe, than others doe. Or thus. 14 Take not mens prayses of thee, as thy Due: Vnlesse thy owne Heart, know them to be true. Or thus. 14 When any praise thee; Iudge if it be iust: And doe not take mens praises up on trust. Or thus, 14 When men praise thee; doe thou Iudge them; and show: Whether, They, Thee, or Thou, Them better know. 15 Officium alterius, multis narrare memento: Atqui aliis quum tu benefeceris, Ipse sileto. 15 Others good turnes to thee, Divulge to many: But thy good turnes to others; not to any.
Or thus, 15 When others shew thee kindnesse; let all know it: But when thou shewst to others; never show it; 16 Muliorum quum facta senex, & dicta recenses:Eccles, 9. 19. 8. Fac tibi succurrant, iuvenis quae feceris ipse. 16 When old, thou Censurest the deeds of men: Remember, what being young, thy selfe didst then. Or thus, 16 When thou art old; censure not young mens Act: But call to minde first, thy owne youths defects. Or thus, 16 Iudge not of young mens words and deeds, before Thou have examinde well, thy owne youths skore. Or thus, 16 When thou wilt be a Censor of mens carriage: Looke first, now much thy owne is in arrerage: Or thus, 16 Make this thy Rule, in iudging young mens way: What thy owne way was, when thou wert as They. 17 Ne cures si quistacito sermone loquatur:Eccles. 9. 21, 24, 28. Conscius ipse sibi de se putat omina dici. 17 When men be whispering softly; Never care: They thinke all said of them that guilty are. Or thus. 17 Whether men talke a loud; or soft and still: What i'st to thee; if thou have done no Ill.
Or thus, 17 Who doubt mens whispering talk; shew themselves vici∣ous: Tis guilcinesse of minde, makes men suspitious. Or thus, 17 Care not, what men betweene them whispering be: So long as Conscience whispers not to thee. 18 Quum fueris faelix, qua sunt adversa Caueto:Pro 20 21. & 27, 23, 24 Eccle. 9. 18. 25. Non eodem cursu, respondent vltima Primis. 18 When thou art at the best; then feare the worst: The last times alwayes, answer not the first. Or thus. 18 In thy prosperity; take heed of Crosses: A life begunne in Gaynes, ends oft in losses. Or thus, 18 When skies are cleere, take heed of Overcast: Our life like wine, hath all the Lees at last. Or thus, 18 When Dice runne faire, take heed of casting out: The wheele of Fortune, brings the worst about. Or thus. 18 In times of store, for times of want provide: Ther's Flud: and then an Ebbe in every Tide, Or thus, 18 In Fortunes Blisse, take heed of Fortunes Curse: The Elder that she growes, she growes the worse. Or thus, 18 In present calmes, to future stormes attend: Fortune, like cloath, hath alwayes a Fagend.
19 Quum dubia & fragilis nobis sit vita tributa: In morte alterius, spem tu tibi ponere noli. 19 Since thou art sure to Dye, thou knowst not when: Put not thy hope, in death of other men. Or thus, 19 Since all are mortall; what more vaine can be Then hope to bury them, may bury thee. Or thus, 19 Since God a fraile, vncertaine life doth give thee: Hope not on dead mens shooes, that may out live thee. Or thus, 19 Why should we hope, of being others Heyres? Doth not our owne sand runne, as fast as Theirs? Or thus, 19 Since in us all, Life hath a doubtfull scope: To hope for dead mens Goods, is dead mens Hope. Or thus, 19 What contract canst thou make with Death; that He Should serve his writs on others, and spare thee? Or thus, 19 It is not Hope, but wan hope to surmize: That thou shalt live, to close anothers eyes. Or thus, 19 Since all our lives, are brittle Glasse and weake, What reason thine should hold; and others breake? Or thus, 19 Why shouldst thou thinke, t'out live them that be old: Though thou art young? Dth death a scantling hold?
Or thus, 19 Thinke not thy selfe from Death the more at rest For being young; 'tis greene fruit, Death loves best. Or thus, 19 Thinke not, that life's a fruit, not fit to gather But when tis ripe: Death likes it unripe rather. Or thus, 19 Lifes fruit is tender; seldome comes to good: Death is a Frost in May; nips it i'th Bud. Or thus, 19 The lives of men seeme in two seas to swimme: Death comes to young folkes: and old, goe to him. Or thus, 19 Which may we count, to death the greater haster, The old, hath lesse to goe: the young, runnes faster. Or thus, 19 No certaine time, is set to be lifes border; Death takes away by lot, and not by order. Or thus, 19 Old folkes so gastly are; and looke so grimme: That death feares them, as much as they feare him. Or thus, 19 To thinke, t'out live thy youngers, midnesse were Thine Elders, Folly; therefore Both forbeare. 20 Exiguum munus, quum dat tibi pauper amicus.Eccles 9. 4. 8. Accipito placide; plene & laudre memento. 20 When a poore friend, a small gift gives to thee: Take it in worth: and let it praysed be.
Or thus, 20 When a poore friend presents thee some small toye: Shew thy acceptance by some show of joy. Or thus, 20 When a poore friend, for some small thing makes shift: Looke on the Givers minde, not on the Gift. 21 Infantem nudum, quum ie Natua crearit: Paupertat is onus, patienter ferre memento. 21 Since Infants, bare and naked, borne we were: Let us our Poverty, with patience beare. Or thus. 21 Even nature teacheth, Poverty to beare: Since bare, and naked, made by her we were. Or thus, 21 What child, that's good; would skorn his Mothers ble∣ssing Then skorn not barenesse, which is Natures dressing. Or thus, 21 She that gave Life gave Barenesse; Is sh'a Mother, In giving life? A stepdame, in the other, Or thus, 21 Since Poverty is Natures Gift: and Gifts Of Nature, All are good: why seeke we shifts? Or thus, 21 Barenesse and Poverty; are of Natures giving, In Birth and Death; and why not then, in living? Or thus, 21 Nature that's simple; why wouldst thou have mixt? Poore, first and last; and why not Poore betwixt?
Or thus. 21 Richmen, and Poore; what difference between them? All Borne; All dead, alike; the rest, a Dreame. Or thus, 21 We came into the world, without a clout: And in as poore a pickle we goe out. Where lifes both Ends, are in so meane degree: What matter is't; how meane the middle be. Or thus, 21 We came into the Word, without a robe: And we goe out againe, as poore as Iob: If Earth unto us, should a heaven prove; How could we looke, to have a Heaven, above. Or thus, 21 Since Nature made us poore: lets patient be: Shee better knowes, what's good for us, then we. 22 Ne time as illam, quae vitae est vltima finis: Qui Mortem metuit, quod Vivit, perdit idipsum.Eccle. 9. 14. 1, 17, 18 22 Feare not that Ende of life, which Nature gives: He that feares Death; looseth, even that he lives. Or thus. 22 Feare not that End of life, which is the last; The feare of Death, puts Lifes mouth out of taste. Or thus, 22 Doe not thy minde to frightfull fancies give? To live, still fearing Death, is not to live. Or thus, 22 Betimes thinke on thy last End; and be steady: He that feares Dying, is halfe dead allready.
Or thus, 22 Feare not least Death, should thee of life deprive: Such Feare, puts life, into her Grave alive. Or thus, 22 Feare not the houre, that life shall lose her light: Where such Feare is, she never hath but night. Or thus. 22 Feare not lifes last; each day Death cuts our skore; And yet not Felt: the last, will doe no more. Or thus, 22 Feare not the time, that life shall end her taske: The Feare of Dying is Deaths Antimaske. Or thus, 22 What cause have we, at Death to take offence? If Feele, we live still: if not live, No Sence. Or thus, 22 As good to fall; as still to feare we were; Feare is as deadly, as the Fall we feare. Or thus, 22 Feare not lifes End; to feare, that Dye we shall, Makes life a Death; and so, no life at all. Or thus, 22 Feare is it selfe a Death; then Death comes on: And makes Two Deaths, where we might scape with one Or thus, 22 What day is liv'd, but that, to death we give? Who therefore, would not Die; He must not live. Or thus, 22 Feare's never good, but when it may preserve: Then feare not Death; for which no feare will serve.
Or thus, 22 Possesse thy minde in peace; stint Passions strife: Neither Feare death; nor Be in love with life. 23 Si tibi pro meritis, nemo respondet amicus:Ecclus. 20. 16 Incusare Deum noli; sed te ipse coerce. 23 If thu find'st no friend, answer to thy merits: Yet charge not God withall; but calme thy spirits. Or thus. 23 If men, for thy deservings prove unkinde: Yet blame not God; but moderate thy minde. Or thus, 23 If thou be kinde to friends; They not to thee: Yet doe not lay the blame, on Gods Decree. Or thus, 22 Because thy friends not gratious are to thee; Wilt thou to God, Ungratious therefore be? Or thus, 23 To finde thy friends ungratefull, is a curse: But for it, to repine at God, is worse. Or thus, 23 If all thy friends unthankfull prove to thee: Yet, doe not Thou to God, but thankefull be. 24 Ne tibi quid Desit, qusitis vtere parce: Vt{que} quodest, serves; semper tibi deesse putato. 24 To keepe from want; spend prodigally never: To keepe from spending; Thnke, thou wantest ever.
Or thus. 24 That, want thou mayst not; save what thou hast got: That save thou mayst; Thinke, that thou hast it not. Or thus, 24 The best way not to want, is, to be sparing; The way to spare; To be, for want still caring. 25 Quod praestare potes, ne bis promiseris vlli: Ne sis Ventosus, dum vis vrbanus haberi:P. 3. 28. 25 Promise not Twice, a thing within thy might: Least thou instead of kinde, be counted light. Or thus, 25 Let men, no lightnesse in thy Promise finde: Paying with Aire, thou shalt be thought but winde. Or thus. 25 Thy Promise breaking, is the Truths denying: And is, but a more solid kinde of lying. Or thus. 25 Discredit not thy Promise, with delay: Least no man trust hereafter, what you say. Or thus, 25 Performance of thy Promise doe not sleight: Why shouldst thou make thy selfe a Graine too light? Or thus, 25 Promise once made, Intend to keepe it streight: Who would be counted light, that may be weight? Or thus, 25 In maing promise; hy faith stands at stake: Doe it thou must; or else thy faith forsake.
Or thus, 25 Who promise breakes, when he can doe a thing, Is like a foolish Bird: clips her owne wing. Or thus, 25 That promise is a due Debt; make no doubt; Who Promise breakes, is the true Bankerout. Or thus, 25 In keeping Promise; if thou canst, be Iust: Why shouldst thou goe a lying upon trust? 26 Qui simulat verbis, nec Corde est fidus amicus. Tu quoque fac simile; sic Ars deluditur arte. 26 When one is Friend in words, but not in Heart: Be thou so too: so Art is mockt with Art. Or thus. 26 When One is much in words; in Truth, not much; Be thou so too; Feigning is made for such. Or thus, 26 When one beares thee no love; yet makes a show: Doe thou so too: It may be Blow for Blow. Or thus, 26 When One meanes thee no good, yet speakes thee faire; Doe thou the like: so thou shalt make a Paire. Or thus, 26 When One professeth Loue, but is not sound: Doe thou the like to him; such Hare; such Hound. Or thus, 26 When one pretends Love, that hath no such thought. Doe thou the like: so Dottrels must be caught.
27 Noli homines nimium blnd sermone prob Fistula dulce canit, Volucrem dum decipit Aceps. 27 Trust not to men, for their faire speeches making: The Pipe sounds sweetly, while the Byrd is taking. Or thus, 27 When men come hony mouth'd; if you but watch, you'l finde their words but lime twigs; shine to catch. Or thus. 27 In fawning words, thinke not true meaning streight: What good doe trapps, vnlesse they haue a baite? 28 Quum tibi sint Nati, nec opes; tunc artibus Illos Instrue, quo possint inopem defendere itam. 28 When thou hast children, and no goods to giue: Then traine them up, in trades, whereby to liue. Or thus. 28 When thou hast children; and small sustentation: Then, giue them portions, in good education. 29 Quod vile est, carum: quod carum, vile putato: Sic tibi nec Cupidus, nec Auar us nosceris ulli. 29 Account base things, as deere: deere things as base: So shalt thou haue selfe-peace: and others grace. Or thus. 29 To hold things base and deere in equall price: Abates both clogge and staine of avarice. Or thus. 29 Account no oddes, betweene things base and deere: A gilt or wooden dish, make both one cheere.
Or thus, 29 Thinke Bewter; Silver and Thinke Silver Bewter. What are they more or lesse; if Thou be Newter? 30 Quae culpare soles, eatune feceris ipse:Ecclus. 20. 1 Turpe est doctri, qum cupa redarguit ipsum. 30 Doe not thy selfe, what thou art wont to blame: A Teacher, to need Teaching, is a shame. Or thus, 30 In blaming others, looke thy selfe bee free: Tis shame to Censure them, may Censure thee. Or thus, 30 What thou cal'st soule; let it thy selfe not soyle: Tis shame for Teachers, when their faults recoyle. Or thus, 30 What thou findst fault withall; forbeare to doe: Tis shame to be both Iudge and Guilty too. Or thus, 30 Blame not in others, what thy selfe may touch: Tis shame, when one may say, Thy selfe is such. Or thus, 30 When you condemne; be sure, you guiltlesse stand: Tis shame, to see a Iudge hold up his hand. 31 Quod instum est, petito; vel quod videatur honestum: Nam stultum est, petore id, quod possit iure negari. 31 Aske that is iust: at least, iust to the Eye: Tis shame to aske, what tis iust to deny.
Or thus, 31 Aske that is iust; tis Folly, if not Pride, To aske a thing, may iustly be denide. Or thus. 31 Aske not, but what is iust; tis want of wit To aske a thing, thou know'st to be unfit. Or thus, 31 Be sure, thy site be iust: an uniust suite Proclaimes its owne Denyall; or stands mute. Or thus. 31 Aske that is iust; at least in estimation: To aske a thing uniust; is meere Temptation. Or thus. 31 Aske that is iust; who things uniust doth craue: Makes him he askes, a Foole; Himselfe, a Knave. 32 Ignotum tibitu, noli praeponere notis: Cognita, Incio constant; In cognita, cas. 32 Preferre not strangers before them thou know'st: In those, thou Ventur'st; In these, Iudgement showest. Or thus. 32 Rather then strangers, men thou know'st approve: Iudgement shews These; tis chance, how Those may prove. Or thus, 32 Better, things knowne, then unknowne to advance: As much as Iudgement better is then chance.
33 Quum dubia in certis versetur vita periclis: In lucro tibipene diem, quicun{que} laboras.Ecclns. 14. 17. 18. & 17. 2. 33 Since Life is threatned every houre with Death: Count that day gain'd, in which thou draw'st thy breath. Or thus, 33 Since every day, of life might be thy last: Count that day more then due, which thou hast past. Or thus, 33 Amongst the gaynes, that you have made the day: Account the Day it selfe, you iustly may. Or thus, 33 So Imminent is Death; Dangers so rise: That we may Count, Each New day, a New life. Or thus, 33 So fraile is life; Dangers so manifold: That New dayes are but scape Goats of the old. Or thus, 33 What's life, or Health? what's beauty, strength, or breath? All is but Interest of our Debt to Death. Or thus, 33 All sit at Interest, while they draw their breath; He that takes use of life; Payes use to Death. Or thus, 33 Each day that's liv'd, is gaind: poore Gaine God wot: That makes one so much poorer, as is got. Or thus, 33 If we count that day gaynd, which we have past: Thats lost, thats past; and so, thats gain'd, thats lost.
Or thus, 33 Death and we Both; lay claime, to the same houres: Whats past, is His; and onely that is ours. 34 Vincere quum posses, interdum Code sodali: Obsequio quoniam dulces retinentur aici. 34 Loose sometime to a friend, when thou couldst gaine: Such kindnesses, doe Friendships League maintaine. Or thus, 34 Yeeld sometimes to a friend, whom thou couldst master: Such tricks of love, tye friendships knot the faster. Or thus, 34 Not allwayes strive with friends, thy force to show: Tis victory sometimes, to take a blow. Or thus, 34 Wrastle not still with friends, thy strength to prove: The Mastry to be tride with friends, is love. Or thus, 34 When thou couldst Bend a friend; Thy selfe yet bow: One must Beginne love; and then, why not Thou? Or thus, 34 Thus stand the mutuall services of friends: One, first Beginnes a kindnesse, Th'other, Ends. Or thus, 34 In oddes of friends, where one must loose; One win: Never straine courtsey, who shall first beginne. Or thus, 34 When one to other, shewes a friendly part: Hee, that Beginnes first, seemes to have the start.
Or thus, 34 When we by friends, doe any losse sustaine: Wee seeme to buy their friendships new againe. Or thus. 34 The losses that by friends, to thee accrue: Are but the Rents, that are to Friendship due. Or thus, 34 These are the Noates; make friends so well agree: Thou yeeldst to him; and then he yeelds to thee. Or thus, 34 Where friends to one another, doe not yeeld: Such lye in Garrison; nere come ith'field: 35 Ne dubites, quum magnapetas, impendere parva:Ecclus. 0. 0. Hisetenim rebus Conjungit Gratia cares. 35 Small things are well Bestowd, where great are sought: So deerenesse may, with things not deere, be bought. Or thus, 35 Asking great things, to give small, never shrinke; Such small things get more love, then one would thinke. Or thus, 35 Who gives small things, in asking great, is thrifty; A gui of five, may get a suit of Fifty. Or thus, 35 Hees no good Husbandman, that will mislike: To sow a Pyte where he may reape a strike. Or thus, 35 Thou neither Husbandman, nor Husband art: If for a Quarter, sticke to sow a Quart.
Or thus, 35 A Feather give, when for a Goose you aske; Who but a Goose, would grudge at such a taske? 36 Litem inferre Cave, cum que tibi Gratia juncta est:Prov. 17. 14. & 15. 1 & 20. 3. & 25. 8. 9. Ecclus. 28. 11. Ira, odium generat; Concordia nutrit amorem. 36 Avoide Contentious brabblings with thy friends; Concord, breeds Love; Anger, in Hatred ends. Or thus, 36 Stand not in Suites, where thou in league dost stand: Debate breeds Hate: Concord is Loves right hand. Or thus, 36 Begin no strife, where thou in Love mayst end: What good, to winne a cause: and loose a friend? 37 Servorum culpis, quum te dolar urget in iras:Pru. 19. 21. & 25. 28. Ecclus. 4. 30. Ipse tibi moderare, tuis ut parcere possis. 37 When servants faults, move thee to indignation: Let thy owne worth, move thee to moderation. Or thus. 37 When servants anger thee: shew thy selfe then More Master of thy selfe, then of thy men. Or thus, 37 If thee to wrath, a servant mooved hath, Yet be not thou a seruant to thy wrath. 37 Be Msline: & let not servants faults Engender wrath, upon thy female thoughts.
Or thus. 37 Keepe greater state, then that thy servants ryot Should have the honour, to disturbe thy quiet. Or thus, 37 Be milde to servants; let not their excesse, Make thee exceed in that, which makes thee lesse. Or thus, 37 If Servants doe a fault: yet patient be; No fault so great in them, as wrath in thee. 38 Quem super are potes, interdum vince ferendo:Ecclus 7. 8. Iames 5. 10 11. Ecclus. 1. 23 Maxima enim Morun semper Patientia, virtus. 38 Beate sometimes by forbearing whom thou beatest: Of Morall vertues, Patience is the greatest. Or thus, 38 Master by meekenesse, whom thou couldst by force: To change for Patience, Rage; is a good course. Or thus, 38 Tis Mastery sometimes to take a Fall: Hee knowes no manners, that still takes the wall. Or thus, 38 Give ground sometimes, when overcome you can: Sufferance is Manners; Manners maketh man. 39 Conserva potius quae iam sunt parta labore: Quum labor in damno est; Crescit rials Egestas.Ecclus. 25. 3 39 Take care to keepe, as well as paines to Get: When labour growes a looser: want growes great.
Or thus. 39 Save rather that, which thou already hast: Where paines retaines no Gaines; want comes at last. Or thus, 39 If thou canst get, but not keepe what is got: Beggery, when all is done, will be thy lot. Or thus, 39 The way to Thrive, is more to Keepe then Get: Whats the Sunne rising, if as soone it set? Or thus, 39 When thou hast dig'd a well, that water gives; What good wilt doe, if poure it into Sives? Or thus, 39 As one hand brings in, Th'other must lay up: Else thou mayst haue to Dyne, but not to sup. Or thus, 39 Hold fast thy state; why shouldst thou looke for more; And couldst not keepe that, which thou hadst before? Or thus. 39 Hold fast thy state; why wilt thou rather waste: In hope to get more, then keepe that thou hast? Or thus, 39 Keepe that thou hast; and doe not want Importune: Tis hard to Play au After Game of Fortune. Or thus, 39 Make Conserves of thy Gaynes: thou canst not tast: Of Fresh fruits alwayes; but Conserves will last. Or thus, 39 Keepe rather that, thou hast already got: Learne of the Ant: Nip each graine, least it rot.
Or thus, 39 Tis an old saying; spend, and God will send; But what? Beggery, and Barenesse, in the end. 40 Dapsilis interdum notis, & carus amicisEcclus. 14. 11. Quum fueris falix; semper tibi proximus esto. 40 When thou hast store, be franke to them are deerest; Be francke to all; but to thy selfe be neerest. Or thus, 40 When thou hast plenty; plentifully give; But yet forget not, that Thy selfe must live. Or thus, 40 Vse Hospitality to friends; to All; But not to bring thy selfe, to th'Hospitall. Or thus, 40 In keeping Christmas, something may be spent; But not to make the whole yeare after Lent. Or thus, 40 Carue to thy friends, of tha is good and fit: But for thy selfe, keepe alwayes the best Byt. Or thus, 40 The odds thou mak'st, betweene thy skinne and cloak: Make that, betweene thy selfe, and other folke. Or thus, 40 Thy bounty may have leave, sometimes to roame: But still remember, Love beginnes at Home.
Liber Secundus. SIpotes, Ignotis etiam prodesse mement: Vtilius Regn est, meritis acquirere amics. 1 Even strangers, if thou canst, Be thou releiving: Tis worth a Kingdome, to get friends by Giving. Or thus, 1 Let them thy good deeds know, that know thee not: A Kingdome is but Friends, by merits got. Or thus, 1 Let Vertues Iustre, even to strangers show thee: Ist not a Glory, that more Love, then know thee? Or thus, 1 Thats the right goodnesse, which to all extends: Ones skarce halfe good, thats good to none but friends. Or thus, 1 Give cause, even strangers may thy worth approve: What King so great, as He whom all men Love? Or thus, 1 Let even strangers, be thy Bounties Objects: A King in Friends, excels a King in subiects. Or thus, 1 Thy worth would bounded be in narrow space: If no more feele thy hand, then see thy Face.
Or thus, 1 More lovd then knowne; more Knowne by Grace then Face: This fruit they reape, that Charity embrace. Or thus, 1 Thats truest Charity, which to All extends: For while it Counts; it makes, even Foes our friends. 2 Mitte Arcana Dei, Calmque inquirere, Quid sit: Quum is Mortalis, quae sunt Mortalia, Cura. 2 Search not Gods secrets; nor to Heaven ascend: Since thou art Mortall; Mortall things attend. Or thus. 2 What Heaven is: and what Gods secrets are: Seeke not to finde; let Earth of Earth take care. Or thus, 2 What God and Heaven is; search not to know: What are the things Above; to us Below? Or thus, 2 About Gods hidden workes, straine not thy wit: To Humane Creatures, Humane things best fit. Or thus, 2 Gods secrets, Riddles are; for which a man, Is no fit Oedypus, Doe what he can. 3 Linque metum Lethi, Nam stultum est tempore in omni: Dum Mortem metuis, amittere gaudia vitae. 3 Leave eare of Death; for what Folly more rise: Then fearing Death, to lose the joyes of life?
Or thus, 3 Leave fearing death: let life have some delights: Which can have none, as long as Death affrights. Or thus, 3 Leave feare of Death; who can have merry heart: As long as Feare stands brandishing Deaths Dart? Or thus, 3 Leave feare of Death: what pleasure can life have; When feare still keepes her thinking, of her Grave? Or thus, 3 Leave feare of Death: what mischiefe greater were Then feare a mischiefe, that comes with a feare? Or thus, 3 Leave to feare Death: for Death beares life a spight: And hurts her more, with terrour then with might. Or thus, 3 Leave feare of Death: why shouldst thou not adhere: Rather to life, in Ioy; then Death in Feare? Or thus, 3 Make Death looke merrily: what shrewder turne: Then putting Death in Blacks: to make life mourne? 4 Iratus dere in certa contendere noli: Impedit Ira animum, ne possit cernere verum:Pro. 14. 29. Eccle. 7. 9. 4 Contend not Angry, about doubtfull things, Anger, the minde, into starke blindnesse brings. Or thus, 4 Strive not in doubtfull things with angry sprite: Anger feeles up the minde, from seeing right.
Or thus, 4 In doubtfull matters, how can Truth be seene, When Anger stands before it, as a skreene? Or thus, 4 In doubtfull things, no Angry man sees right: Doubt makes the object lesse; Anger the light. 5 Fac sumptum propere, quumres desyderat ipsa: Dandum tenim est aliquid, quum Tempus postulat, aut Res.Pro. 11. 24. 5 Be ready to bestow, as Cause requires: For something must be given, to Times desires. Or thus, 5 Spare not to spend, when there is just occasion: From Cause and Time, we must seeke no Evasion. 6 Quod nimium est fugit; Parvo gaudere memento: Tta mage est puppis, modic quae mine fertur. 6 With little be content: seeke not Extremes: The Ship goes safest, in the smaller streames. Or thus, 6 Be not Aspiring; nor too lofty flie: No Falls so dangerous, as those from High. Or thus, 6 Seeke not Extremes: 'tis the conceit of Pride, To thinke it never Fld, without Spring-tide. Or thus, 6 Be not more curious, then needes to be: Brightnesse is for the Stars, cleannesse for thee. Or thus, 6 If little be enough; Much is too much: Why seekst thou then to be such, and not such?
Or thus, 6 When Natures turne is servd; the rest runs ore: Little serves that; then never seeke for more. 7 Quod pudeat, scis prudens celare memento: Ne plures culpent id, quod tibi displicet vni. 7 With what thou mayst be sham'd; disclose to none: Least many blame, what now thou blam'st alone. Or thus. 7 Why shouldst thou make that knowne; which tis too much: Thou knowst thy selfe? sores are not fit to touch. Or thus. 7 Faulty in Doing, Be wise in Concealing: Faults are twice done, when of ones owne Revealing. Or thus, 7 When thou commitst a fault; tell not the same: What needs a Theatre to shew thy shame? Or thus, 7 Blaze not abroad to others, thine owne Evill: This were to light a candle, to the Devill. 8 Nol putes pravo homines peccata lucrari: Temporibus peccata latent; sed tempre parent. 8 Thinke not, that men can steale sinnes, and goe quite: Sinnes lurke a time; but Tyme brings them to light. Or thus, 8 Thinke not, that men can gaine their doing wrong: Times mute awhile; but keepes not Counsayle long.
Or thus, 1 Thinke not that men can sine and goe invisible; To Times cleere Eyes, the most hid things are visible. Or thus, 8 Thinke not, that sires, once doue, are gone and past: Time is a Blab; and will tell all at last. Or thus, 8 No sinne was ever cloakt with such disguise: but hath lyen open alwayes to Times Eyes. Or thus, 8 No sinne was ever done; nor ever shall: But for a reckoning, Time is sure to call. 9 Corporis exigui, noli contemnere vires: Consilio pollet, cui vim Natura negavit: 9 Skorne not the strength, of men of little size; Whom Nature makes lesse strong, she makes more wife. Or thus, 9 Slight not small statures: tis not said in vaine; The lesser Head, the better is the Braine. Or thus, 9 Marke Natures course; and you shall finde, she puts Her Choicest wine, in Runlets, not in Buts. Or thus, 9 Despise not littlemen, tis natures guise: To give the greater sight, to lesser Eyes. Or thus. 9 Little men have their worth? tis Natures pleasure: To adde in weight; what she abates in measure.
Or thus. 9 He knows not Nature, that small statures mocks For whom she makes no Oxe, she may a Foxe. Or thus. 9 Nature is wise; and gives not All to One: To some more Braie; to others greater bone. Or thus. 9 By bulke of Body, Indge of men who can? Great bones make Drones; 'is spirit makes a man. Or thus. 9 Marke inward worth; and you shall finde it then: that lesser bodies make not lesser men. 10 Cui scierisnon esse parem te, tempore Cede: Victorem a victo supera faeye videmus. 10 Finding thy selfe too weak, sound a retreat: We see the Conquer'd oft, the Conquerour beat. Or thus. 10 Forbeare when overmatcht; and doe not fret: Though beaten now, thou mayst hereafter beat. Or thus, 10 To give ground, when theres Ods, never disdaine: He that yeelds now, may fight againe, and Gaine. Or thus. 10 Yeeld being too weak; and stand not out mens laughter, Thou mayst perhaps, have better Cards hereafter. Or thus, 10 Yeeld when thou art too weake; and never fret: Though lose a Game; yet thou mayst win the set. Or thus, 10 Thy forces faying, be content to yeeld: Who winnes it now, may after lose the Field.
Or thus. 10 The cause bidds yeeld; but Valour cannot flie: Then Valour is, in a fools custody. Or thus, 10 Why not yeeld, when too weake? Valour sayes, No: Valour is but a Foole, for saying so. Or thus, 10 To fly, when overmatcht; doth not Disparage: It comes from strength of wit, Not want of Courage. Or thus, 10 It is not Valour, but Foole-hardinesse: To see the Danger more, and flee it lesse. Or thus, 10 What hope, for such men ever to recover; That stand an Ill match out: and nere give over? Or thus, 10 Theres no Bow, shoots so farre, as made of Ewe, Because it bowes and turnes; and so must you. Or thus, 10 The strongest may be overlaid; and where You finde it so; tis wisdome to forbeare. Or thus. 10 Who yeelds not being too weake; is but a Mocke: And stands it out, but like a Lenton Cocke. Or thus, 10 What man but meanly read in wisdomes Grammer, Would be an Anvile, that may be a Hammer? Or thus, 10 To yeeld when overmatcht, can be no Crime: Thou yeeldst not, to the Foe but to the Time.
Or thus, 10 To goe backe, being too weake: in wisdomes Eye Is but to Traverse ground; tis not to Fly. Or thus, 10 Who yeeld though loose the day, yet winne the time: Flee, but to fight againe: Fall but to climbe. Or thus, 10 Who Triumphs now, may be in Triumph ledde; The Garland stands not still, on one mans Head. 11 Adversus notum, noli contendere verbis: Lis minimis verbis interdum maxima crescit.Pro. 25. 8. & 15. 1. 11 With thy Acquaintance, have no warre of words; A small strie oft, from words proceeds to swords. Or thus, 11 To thy Acquaintance give noe termes of Ire: A litle Blowing, kindles a great Fire. Or thus. 11 Doe not in harsh termes, with thy friend Contend: Harsh words, are Blowes; and chiefely, from a friend. Or thus, 11 Provoke not with thy wrangling, a friends minde: Vnkinde words oft, put Kindnesse out of kinde. Or thus, 11 Offend not a friends Eares, with being louder. What may not a sparke doe, if light on Powder? Or thus. 11 Irritate not a friend, with words of Ire: His Humour may be Flaxe, if thine be Fire.
12 Quid Deus intendat, Noli per quirere sorte: Quid statuat de te, sine te deliberst ipse.lob. 23. 8. 9. 12 Gods purpose towards thee, search not by lots: Thy part to thee, without thee he allots. Or thus, 12 Search not Gods counsailes, by unlawfull Art: He meanes not, what he meanes, to thee t'impar. Or thus, 12 Concerning Gods intents, never Demurre: He meanes not to make thee his Counsailour. Or thus, 12 Thinke not, to conjure Gods designes: must Hee What He consres on thee, Cons with thee? Or thus, 12 Search not by Lots, what Gods intentions be: His Counsailes, must be councell unto thee. Or thus, 12 Thou canst not found the Depth of Gods least motion: Mns Plummets are too short, for such an Ocean. 13 In vidiam nimio cultu vitare mement: Quae snon  molestum est.EccIus, II. 4. 13 Procure not Envy, with too great a Traine: Which though it hurt not, yet to beare, is paine. Or thus, 13 Draw not on Envy, with too costly carriage; Which, though perhaps not hurtfull, doth disparage.
Or thus, 13 Make not thy selfe Envide, with too much bravery: Envy a Bondage is, though not a slavery. Or thus, 13 Why should thy Fompe draw Envy, as a Prize? You loose mens Hearts, although you gaine their Eyes. 14 Esto anio forti, qu : Nemo di gaude, quod Indic vincit iniq.Pro. 19. 14. 14 Condemn'd uniustly. yet in Heart be strong; What's got by unjust Doome, lasts never long. Or thus. 14 Condemn'd uniustly, let this case thy woe: Tis seldome long enioyd, that's goen so. Or thus, 14 Condemn'd by wrong,  this thy mindeerect: The lge, may rule the Cause, but not th'Effect. Or thus, 14 Be not cast downe, when cast uniustly downe: No man weares long, n iust Iudges crowne. Or thus: 14 If thou be wrong'd in Iudgement; let it goe: A victory hath no Triumph, gotten so. 15 Litis praeteritae, Noli : Post Pro. 17. 9. 15 Doe not Repeate the words of Brabbles past: Least, when the winde o laid,  raise new Bast.
Or thus, 15 Never let words of brawles past, be repeated: Cold bloud, by hot blouds words, is oft new heated. Or thus, 15 He Erres, that words of Brabbles past, remembers: This is, to stirre old coales, rak't up in Embers. 16 Necte Collaudes, Nec te Culpaveris ipse. Hoc faciunt stulti; quos Gloria vexat inani.Pro. 25 27. EccIus. 15. 9. 10. 11. 16 Neither Commend thy selfe; Nor yet Accuse; For, this doe Fooles, whom vaine conceits abuse. Or thus, 16 To Discommend, or Prayse thy selfe, Refraine: Who but a Foole would shew himselfe so vaine? Or thus, 16 To Braise, or Blame thy selfe, are Both, Extreames: Such talk use Fools, who make themselves their Theams Or thus, 16 Neither Dispraise thy selfe; nor yet commend: One is a wrong End; Th'other, to no End. Or thus, 16 Of thy owne Praise or Blame, no Trumpet be: Why should mens Eares, stand wayting upon thee? Or thus, 16 To Praise, or Blame thy selfe, shewes little wit; Ones more then Needs; the other, more then's fit. Or thus, 16 What can to Praise or Blame thy selfe, releeve thee; If Blame, who cares? If Praise, who will believe thee?
Or thus, 16 Make not thy owne Prayse, or Dispraise, thy story: The One is Folly: Thother, is Vaineglory. Or thus, 16 Praise not, nor Blame thy selfe; though thou art able. The One, deserves a whip: Thother, a Bable. 17 Viere quaesitis parce; quum sumptus abundat: Labitur exiguo, quod partum est tempore longe.Ecclus. 6. 3 17 Be sparing in Expence Excessive spending Brings what was long a getting, to quicke Ending. Or thus, 17 Vse sparingly thy Goods; Goods are as Oakes: Long time in growing; Cut downe with few strokes. Or thus, 17 Spend sparingly: Let something be preservd: No Meanes can serve, where no Meane is observd. Or thus, 17 Live sparingly: One wastefull houre may spend, More, then the sparing of an Age can mend. Or thus. 17 Be sparing constantly; and not by fits: One day may spend more, then a whole life gets. 18 Insipiens Esto, quum Tempus postulat aut Res: Stultitiam simular eloco,Pro. 24. 7. Prudentia summae est. 18 To be a Foole sometimes, doe not despise: A folly counterfait, is oft most wise.
Or thus. 18 Seeme ignorant sometimes, of what thou knowest: In wit dissembled, oft most wit thou showest. Or thus, 18 Folly sometimes comes out of wisdomes schoole: None but wise men, can counterfeit a Foole. Or thus, 18 There's time and place, when Folly may be fit: To Personate and Act, the part of wit. Or thus, 18 Thou mayst if time and place, thou well discernest: Both lay the Foole: and yet be wise in Earnest. Or thus, 18 Would any Pedlers, if they were not Typsies: Open their Packs amongst a sort of Gipsies? Or thus, 18 Wisemen not alwayes, lay abroad their wit: But when occasion, time and place are fit. Or thus, 18 Wit to convenience, is so much devote; It yeelds sometimes, to put on a Fooles coate. Or thus, 18 Wisdome is like the sunne; shines when she list: And when she pleases, hides her in a Mist. Or thus. 18 This we may learne in observations schooles; Fooles cannot be wise men; wisemen cafooles. Or thus. 18 In stinting wisdome, greatest wisdome lies: No man i ever wise, that's Over wise.
Or thus, 18 If Time and due respect, be not his schoole: The wiser that one is, he is more foole. Or thus, 18 If Time and place, be not before his Eyes: There may be wisdome: yet the man not wise. Or thus, 18 He onely, wisdome may be said to have; That holds it as a Lord; not as a slave. Or thus, 18 I bid not be a foole, but seeme to be: When cause requires it, Else thou art not free. Or thus. 18 No man is wife, whose wisdome is his Master: What can he doe, that cannot rule his Waster? Or thus, 18 That man is onely wie; and hath true wit: That can be so; or not so: as is sit. 19 Luxuriam fugit; Crimen Avaritiae:Pro. 28. 16. Ecclus. 10. 9 & 18. 32. nam sunt Contraria Fam. 19 Shunne Covetousnesse and ryot, as two shames: That both are contrary to mens good Names. Or Thus, 19 Syll' and Charibdis, are two Rock to flye at: Thinke; One is Avarica: the other Ryot.
20 Nli tu quaedam referenti Credere semper:Pro. 0. 19. Exigua ijs tribuenda fide,Ecclus. 19. 14. qui multa lquntur. 20 Credit not alwayes him, tels this or that: His Credit might be more, if lesse his chat. Or thus, 20 Beleeve not alwayes him that brings thee Tales; Such mens words beare no weight, in iudgements kales Or thus, 20 Credit not men, by whom still Newes are borne: Their words must needs be light, are so much worne. Or thus, 20 Credit not alwayes them, that talke a vye: How can their Tongues but lye; that never lye? Or thus. 20 These great Tale bearers; are like Almanacks: If one Report hold weight; ther's twenty lacks. 21 Que potus peccas Ignoscere tu tibinoli:Pro. 20. 1. &  20. 30 Esay 5. 11. Nam Crimen nullum vini est, sed culpa bibentis. 21 Excus not faults, committed in thy wine: The wine is not too blame: the blame is thine. Or thus. 21 They Erre, that faults in Drinking veniall thinke: The fault, is not the wines; but theirs, that drinke. Or thus, 21 Distempers in thy Drinke; Doe not avow: The Drinke is temperate; but intemperate Thou.
Or thus, 21 In faults of Drinke, canst thou be innocent? When thou art Actour; Drinke but th' Instrument? Or thus, 21 What is much Drinke, but the Braynes Inundation? Are not men mad, that mak't a Recreation? Or thus, 21 Excesse of Drinke Devasts, and drownes all Good: What is it, but a Remnant, of Noys Fludde? Or thus. 21 Thy Braines are weake enough, when at the best: Why wilt thou let them be with Drinke opprest? Or thus. 21 In this one fault of Drinke all are included: What Fault can want, where Reason is excluded? Or thus, 21 Other Faults, Reason quit, but let sence stay: Drinking, sweepes Reason, sence, and all away. Or thus, 21 No marvell men thinke faults in Drinke, Defensible, Of that makes sencelesse, how can they be sensible? Or thus, 21 'Tis strange, noe warning makes men Drinke forbeare: But 'tis the Bellies faul:, that hath noe Eare. 22 Consilium are anum tacito committe sdali:Ecclus. 1. 17. 19. & 27 16. 17. & 37 8. 13. Corporis auxilium medico Committe perite. 22 Thy secrets to a secret friend Commit: Thy Bodies cure, to the Physition fit.
Or thus, 22 Intrust thy secrets, where they may be sure: Intrust thy Body, where it may have cure. 23 Noli successes indignos ferre moleste:P 10. 24. 1. Indulget Fort malis, ut ladere possit. 23 Grieve not at Fortunes favouring wicked wayes: To make faules greater, tis her use to Raise. Or thus, 23 Take not to heart ungodly mens successe; Where fortune favours more, she favours lesse. Or thus, 23 Let bad mens good successe, neere breed thy woe: Tis for no good, that fortune hugs them so. Or thus, 23 Envy not men, whom Fortune seemes still wooing: Fortune hath no good meaning, in so doing. Or thus, 23 Pitty bad men, whom Fortunes Blessings lade: She hotter shines, to make them sooner fade. Or thus, 23 When Fortune still her favour is affoording, To wicked men: Know, she goes then a Birding. Or Thus, 23 Fret not at those, have Fortune singing still: Shees one of Homers Syren sings to kill. Or thus, 23 It matters not, what Fortune gives: but why: Her good, to bad, to Hurt: to good, to try.
24 Prospice qui venint, hos casus esse ferendes: Nam levius laedit, quicquid praevidimus te.Pro. 22. 3. 24 Foresee the chances, that on thee may light: Their force is much abated, by foresight. Or thus, 24 Forecast the chances, thou mayst chance to beare: Evils foreseene, grow lesser then they were. Or thus, 24 Foresee the Ils, must be suffer'd: such Foreseeing, Weakens their Blow; though hinders not their Being. Or thus, 24 Forecast ils, ere they come: for when the minde' Meets them, as 'twere halfe way, they grow more kinde Or thus, 24 vils are worst when suddaine; Least; Foreseene; They Rot with foresight; that would else be Greene. Or thus, 24 Twill be sore Crossing out, thy crosses skore: If thou Forecast them, in thy minde before. Or thus, 24 To cast ills before hand; is in a kinde,' The casting up a Trench before the minde. Or thus, 24 Twill be a meanes, to make Ills meaner be; If thou goe to them, ere they come to thee. Or thus, 24 Evils are like a wolfe; seene, ere they come: Doe little hurt; Not seene, they strike us dumbe.
Or thus, 24 All Evils, are on Goods, or Body cast: Which when the minde Foresees; the worst is past. 25 Rebus in adversis,Pro. 14. 10. animum submittere noli: Spem retine: spes vna hominem, nec morte relinquit. 25 Cast downe by fortune; cast not downe thy Head: Keepe Hope: and Hope will keepe thee, even dead. Or thus. 25 Though Fortune frowne: Despayre not yet to thrive: Keepe Hope: for, Hope keep's life it selfe a live. Or thus. 25 Though Fortunes stormes, be great and manifold: Yet Hope: for, Hope's an Anchor that will hold. Or thus, 25 In stormes of Fortune, doe not thou despaire: But Hope: for, Hope can make a foule day, faire. Or thus, 25 When thou art most opprest; yet Hope: for, Hope In streights of Fortune, gives thy Fortune scope. Or thus, 25 If thou be toft with tempests, stormes, and thunders: Yet Hope: for, Hope's a thing, that can doe wonders, 26 Re tibi quam nosces aptum dimittere noli: Frnte Capillata, Post est occasio calva. 26 Slight not an offerd thing, that fits thy minde; Time, hath a locke, Before; is Bald behinde.
Or thus, 26 Take Reason when tis offerd; and be wise: Time useth not to make a Proffer twice. Or thus. 26 Neglect of Opportunity, is a Vice: Of which you cannot be an Actor twice. Or thus, 26 When time offers it selfe; be sure to take it: Once gone before, nere look to overtake it. Or thus, 26 Take Balls at Bownd; Time is, as he is usd: Kinde at first hand; but froward, once refus'd. Or thus, 26 Take fruits when they be ripe: for that once past, Nature gives over: and they fade as fast. Or thus, 26 To let Time slip, is a recurelesse crime. You may have Time againe; but not the Time. Or thus, 26 Take fruites when they be ripe; Take Bals at bound: Else those grow rotten; and these fall to ground. Or thus, 26 Time is as proud, as Tide: in this much one: That must be waited on; This waytes for none. 27 Quod sequitur, specta; quod{que} Imminet, ante videte: Illum Imitare Deum, partem qui spectat utramque.Pro. 4. 25. 27 Marke, what is past; and whats to come, Foresee; Like Ianus, let thine Eyes on Both sides be.
28 Fortior vt valeas, interdum parcir Esto: Pauca voluptai debentur, Plura saluti.Ecclus. 37. 29. 30 & 31. 19. 20. 28 To strengthen Health, Eat oft in sparing measure: We owe more to our Health, then to our Pleasure. Or thus. 28 Eate sometimes lesse, thy Health may be the more: For we are more on Healths, then Pleasures skore. Or thus. 28 Forbeare meat sometimes, though thy stomack crave it: For Pleasure must give place, if Health will have it. Or thus, 28 Eate sometimes sparing, thou mayst healthfull live: We take from Health, what we to Pleasure give. Or thus, 28 If thou shalt eate to please; not to make strong: Thou shalt have neither strength, nor Pleasure long. Or thus, 28 We eate to make us strong; and yet the longer, We spare to eate sometimes, we grow the stronger. Or thus, 28 Be temperate in thy meate, and thou shalt finde: Thy Body more disposd, more light thy minde. Or thus, 28 Eate not to please: but what for Health is best: Pleasure is but a wayter: Health's the Guest. Or thus, 28 To change for Pleasure Health, is no good Boot: Pleasure is but a Leafe; Health is the Roote.
Or thus: 28 Let Health be steward of thy meate, not pleasure; Health's a good Husband: Pleasure hath no measure. Or thus, 28 Pleasure and Health, i'th Bodyes Common wealth, Are severall Factions; Facting Holds with Health. Or thus, 28 Fasting sometimes saves a Physitians Fee: Yet Physicke ministers as good as He. Or thus. 28 Some physicke is to cure: some to prevent: But Fasting serves, both this and that intent. Or thus, 28 Hard Commons make sound sheepe; your fattest pasture May sooner feed them; but they Rot the faster. Or thus, 28 A temperate Dyet, is Healths chiefe preserving: Luxuriant Feeding, is as Bad as sterving. Or thus, 28 Rich men of poore, this one advantage get: That they may kill themselves, with better meate. Or thus, 28 To fill thy stomacke alwayes, is not best: To fast sometimes, is to make Health a feast. 29 Iudicium Populi, nunquam contemperis unu: Ne nulli placeas, dum vis contemnere mults.Ecclus. 7. 7. 29 Slight not a multitude, thy selfe alone: Least, while thou sleightest many, thou please none.
Or thus, 29 If thou alone, the people dost Oppose; A thousand tis to One, that thou wilt lose. 30 Sit tibi praecipue, quod primum est, Cura salutis: Tempora e Culpes, quum sis tibi Causa deloris. 30 Of Health, the chiefest thing, take chiefest thought: Charge not the times, with what is thy owne fault. Or thus, 30 Looke chiefely to thy health: if sicke thou be; Lay not the blame, on spring and Fall, but Thee. 31 Somnia necures nam Mes humana quod ptat: Dum vigilans sperat; per somnum Ceruit id ipsum. 31 Regard not Dreames; for what men wish should be, And waking, hope; the same in sleepe they see. Or thus, 31 Care not for Dreames; for, what men thinke of deepe, And wish awake; that followes them in Sleepe. Or thus, 31 Care not for Dreames; they are but steps that stay Vpon the minde: which Thoughts troad in the day.
Liber Tertius. 1 INstrue Praeceptis ani ; Nec discere cesses: Nam sine Doctrina, Vit rest quasi Marti Image. 1 Furnish thy minde with Arts: Cease not to learne: Without which  can life from death discerne Or thus, 1 To fill thy minde with Precepts, labour most; For without learning, life i but deaths Ghost. Or thus, 1 Learning, above all other treas es set: Without which, life is but Deaths counterfeit. Or thus, 1 Learne still, and with it let thy minde be fed, For without learning life it selfe is dead. Or thus, 1 What good doe eyes, if it be alwaies Night? No more doth life, if learning give not light. Or thus, 1 Let Learning be thy light: Knowledge thy marke: Or else the minde but wanders in the darke. Or thus, 1 Body by Soule; and Soule by Learning lives: That Life without this life, small comfort gives.
Or thus, 1 Learning is Lifes Perfume, and ornament: without which, Life hath but a dismall sent. Or thus, 1 Learne still for without learning no man can Be more, then the Anatomy of a man. Or thus, 1 Learne still: and thou shalt come to plaine discerning: That Life is but Deaths Image, without learning. 2 Fortunae Donis semper parere memento: Non opibus bona Fama ditur, sed moribus ipsis. 2 As Fortune shewes her gifts, so shew thou thine: Not wealth, but vertuous Life makes men to shine. Or thus, 2 Be Fortune what she will: Be thou the same: Mens Carriage; not their wealth carryes the Name. Or thus. 2 When Fortune, does her worst; thou best mayst bee; And mayst shame Fortune, more then Fortune thee. Or thus. 2 Fortune with all her Gifts, and gaudy elfe: Can give no better Name, then sh'hath herselfe. 3 Quum recte Vivas, ne cures verba malorum: Arbitrit non est nostri, quid quisque loquatur. 3 When thou livst well; care not for lewd mens chat: Tis more then we can doe, to hinder that.
Or thus. 3 Live well; and never care, what men be talking: Tis not in us, to keepe mens Tongues from walking. Or thus, 3 Looke to thy Life; and care not for mens talke: For, doe the best thou canst, lewd Tongues will walke. Or thus, 3 Care what thou dost; care not, whats said of thee: Vertue it selfe, is not from slander free. Or thus, 3 Balance thy selfe; weigh not mens wrongfull nips: No worth of ours, can soder up lewd lips. Or thus, 3 When thou liv'st well; care not though men speake ill; Our lives we can, we cannot Rule their will. Or thus, 3 Some men speake ill; not to give men their Dues: But they speake ill, because they cannot chuse. Or thus, 3 When thou liv'st well; of mens words make no matter: Doe not Dogges barke at Moone-shine in the water? Or Thus, Be nere so milde, yet some will call thee cruell, Lewd Tongues are Fires that burne, and have no Fuell. Or thus, 3 No worth of thine, can set Tongues such a stint: But some will speake, as some men looke a squint.
4 Productus tostis, salvo tamen ente pudore: Quantum cunque pies, elato crimen amici. 4 Brought for a witnesse (what with Conscience Thou safely canst) conceale thy friends offence. Or thus. 4 Brought for a witnesse; if thou canst, so doe: That thou maist cleare thy friend, and Conscience too: 5 Sermones blandos, blasosque cavere memento: Simplicitas, veri fama est; frans ficta loquendi. 5 Suspect words spoken smooth; and yet in paine; Truths voice is simple: Fraud is faine to Feigne. 6 Segnitiem fugito, qua vitae Ignavia fertur: Nam cum animus languet, consumit inertia corpus. 6 Fly sloth, the moth of life: for when the minde Wants its due nourishment, the Bodie's pinde. Or thus, 6 Fly slothfulnesse; which we may iustly call A Megrim, not of Head, but Heart and all. Or thus. 6 Fly Sloth; which is a seeming loath to live; Body and Minde, no mutuall comfort give. Or thus, 6 Fly Sloth, which is a Calme worse then a storme; And doth our leaking ship of life more harme.
Or thus, 6 Fly sloth; which is to life an irksome Guest, it take so much Rest, that it takes no rest. Or thus, 6 Fly Sloth; which Body pines; and Minde be mes: It is a taste of Death, before Death comes. Or thus. 6 In drowsie men, what differs life from Death, More than for (salt to keep them sweet) their Breath? 7 Interpone tuis, interdum gaudia curis; Vt possis anim quemvis sufferre labrem. 7 Mixe with thy Studies sometimes Recreation: That so the spirits may have relaxation. Or thus, 7 Thou must not alwayes worke; nor alwayes Play: This, That a breathing gives; That, this a stay. Or thus, 7 Care spends the spirits: if it alwayes spend, And no supply by mirth; 'twill soone have end. Or thus, 7 Myrth after Care, is the Mindes Holyday: It inermieth Care, that care it may. Or thus, 7 The Minde is as a Bow; if This still bent: If That still Caring; both grow impotent. Or thus, 7 Not Mirth, nor Care alone; but enter wreathed: Care gets Mirth; stomack: Myrth makes Care long breathed
Or thus. 7 Not Care, nor Mirth alone, but both by turnes: The minde, without Care rusts; without Mirth, mourns. 8 Alterius Dictum, aut Factum, ne carpseris vnquam: Exemplo simili ne te deriderat alter. 8 At others Deeds or Words, no Carper be: Least, as thou Carp'st at them, they Carpe at thee. Or thus, 8 Skoffe not at that, which others doe or say: Least others thee, in thy owne mony pay. 9 Quod tibi sors dederit, tabulis suprema notato: Augendo serva; ne sis quem Famalequatur. 9 The stocke, and state, thy friends have left to thee: Keepe and Encrease, least thou a By word be. 10 Quum tihi Divitiae, superant in fine senecta:Ecclus. 14. 13. 17. &. 33 27. Munificus facito vivas, nonparcus amicis: 10 When life neere spent, thou still hast riches store; See thou be liberall; and give almes the more. Or thus. 10 When thou hast more, then thy old life can spend: Be franke, tis fit, thy Goods end, with thy end. Or thus, 10 When extreame old, thou art extreamely rich: Let bounty make it knowne, that thou art such.
Or thus, 10 When Death now threats, to take thy Goods from thee? Doe thou take them from Death: and Bounteous be. Or thus, 10 Since wealth skornes not, thy Age to wayte upon: Place it, where it may live, when thou art gone. Or thus, 10 Since Fortune hath thee, all thy life attended: Cast her not off, but to some friends Commended. Or thus. 13 Though Fortune stay, to bring thee to Deaths doore: Yet manners learne; and take thy leave before. Or thus, 10 When thou art come, with riches nere the Grave: Loose not the benefit, thy Almes Deeds may have. Or thus, 10 When life neere spent, thou hast still store of wealth: Let charity, make way, for thy soules health. Or thus, 10 When Goods in Almes, are well destributed: One seemes to hold them still, when he is Dead. Or thus, 10 What I gave, that I have: One writ on's Grave: Then old and Rich; Give, that thou still mayst have. 11 Vtile Consilium Dominus ne despice servi: Nullius sensum, si prodest, tempseris unquam:Ecclus. 10. 25. 11 Good counsaile, from a servant never slight: What matter, who: so what is said, be right.
Or thus, 11 Skorne not a servant to be thinet Adviseer: A Foole sometimes, see more then one thats wiser. 12 Rebus & in censu, sinn est, quod fuit ante:Ecclus. 2. 4. & 9. 23. Fac vivas Contentus eo, quod tempora prbent. 12 If Fortune have thy Goods throwne over boord: Yet live content, with what the times affoord. Or thus, 12 If thy Estate be not as it hath beene: Yet be Content, and try, what time will winne. Or thus, 12 In fall of Goods; to fall in Heart, Disdaine: But be content; woods cut, may grow againe. Or thus, 12 If Fields and Fermes, thou hast lesse then have beene: Then Patience hath a Field more, to walke in. Or thus. 12 If Fortune be growne pinching in her wrath: Then cut thy co, according to thy cloth. Or thus, 12 If Fortuen give thee lesse, then she hath done: Then make lesse fire; and walke more in the Sunne. Or thus, 12 Never make wonder, at Moone Fortunes change: if change she should not; That would be more strange. Or thus, 12 Whats Fortune but a Moone? sometimes i'th wayne: Sometimes at Full: nere constant in one veyne.
Or thus, 12 If Fortune powre upon thee all her Gall: Yet patience hath a spleene, will hold it all. Or thus, 12 If all the weights of Fortune, on thee fall: Yet patience hath a backe will beare them all. Or thus, 12 The Burden of Misfortune, never feare: No Burden's great, that patience helpes to beare. Or thus. 12 At losse of worldly Goods, never looke pale: It is but a high winde, turn'd to a Gale. Or thus. 12 VVhy should the change of Fortune, make thee pale: Thou dost but leave the Hill, to walke i'th Vale. Or thus, 12 If Fortune, of her Ankers, have thee ridde, Patience can make an Anker of a thridde. Or thus, 12 VVhen thou hast lesse than that thou hadst before: If thou canst'oe content: thou hast the more. Or thus, 12 Content is all, we ayme at, with our store. If that be had with little, what needes more? Or thus. 12 Content is great; though little bee the meate: The Great in Little, makes the Little, Great.
13 Vxorem fge, ut ducus sub nomine Dotis, Nec retinere vlis, si coeperit esse molesta. 13 Take heed thou marry not a wife for Portion: Nor keepe her longer than she keepes proportion. Or thus. 13 Take not a wife for wealth: or if thou doe, If once she grow insulting; let her goe. 14 Multorum disce exempl, qu Facta sequaris,Tit. 2. 7. Pro. 21. 11. Quae fugias; ita est bis alien, Magistra. 14 By others learne, what to Embrane, or shunne: Their lives may be our guides, what course to runne. Or thus. 14 by others, take example, what is Errour, And what is right; their lives may be our Mirrour. Or thus. 14 No schoole can better teach us what t'embrace, And what to , than others shame or Grace. Or thus, 14 Make other men thy patternes; what to follow, And what to Flie their lives are out Apollo. 15 Quod potes id tentato, pris in pondere pressus Succbat labor, & frustra tent at a relinquas. 15 Take no more on thee, than thou canst performe: Least fainting under it, thou leave with Skorne.
Or thus, 15 Attempt but what thou canst; least in the race Thou faint and tire; and leave it with disgrace. Or thus, 15 Attempt but what thou canst; least thou be faine To turne in at the Signe of Labour in vaine. Or thus, 15 Undertake not too much: least without thanke, Thou prove thy selfe a bragging Mountibanke. Or thus, 15 Strive not above thy strength: least thou be glad To take such Pay as Babell's Workmen had. 16 Quod nosti hand recte factum,Lev. 5. 1. nolite ilere: Ne videare malos imitrt velle tacendo. 16 Conceale no Deed thou knowest to be naught: Least, for concealing, thou as bad be thought. Or thus, 16 Conceale not what thou justly dost mislike: Least thou be thought, as like to doe the like. Or thus, 16 Silence consents: 'tis therefore necessity To tell mens faults, least thou be Accessary. Or thus, 16 Conceale not what thou knowst ill done: Concealing In Acts Fellonious, is as bad as stealing. Or thus, 16 Conceale not mens ill doings: least men Read Thy Will as wicked as the others Deed.
Or thus, 16 Sylence may make an Innocent be guilty; If it conceale mens doings, that are filthy, Or thus. 16 Conceale not mens ill Deeds; least thy Concealing Make thee be thought as bad, as them their Dealing. Or thus. 16 If thou a Theft know; let it be reveal'd: A Theefes Concealour, is a Theefe conceal'd. 17 Iudicis auxilium, sub iniqua lege rogato: Ipsae etiam leges cupiunt vt iure regantur. 17 From wrong of Law; seeke to the Iudge, for Right: For even the Lawes require an oversight. Or thus, 17 Wrong'd by the Law, Implore the Iudges might: It is the Lawes owne suit, to bee set right. Or thus, 17 Appeale thou to the Iudge: from the Lawes spight: For even the lawes themselves appeale to right. Or thus, 17 Fly to the Iudge, when thou art wrong'd by law: For even Law must it selfe, be kept in awe. Or thus, 17 When Law would strike, the Iudge may be a shield: The Dumbe Law, to the speaking Law tnust yeeld. Or thus, 17 When Lawes doe freeze, the Iudges Hearts may thaw: And Iudges are a Law, even to the Law.
Or thus. 17 When Lawes are harsh; the Iudges must be milde: Else, all Humanity will be Exil'd. Or thus, 17 No Law can be a Rule, so streight and iust: But it may Rule awry; If Iudges lyst. 18 Quod merito pateris, patienter perfer id ipsum: Quum que reus tibi sis, ipsum te Iudice Damna. 18 What thou deservst to beare; beare without grudge: And Guilty to thy selfe, Be also Iudge. 19 Multa legas facit: Perlectis, perlege multa: Nam Miranda canunt, sed non Crdenda Poetae. 19 Read much, and much read; Read much more; In briefe: Poets are all for wonder, not beleefe. Or thus, 19 Read much; and much read; Read it againe: Indeed Poets speake strange things, but not alwayes Creed. Or thus, 19 Read more and more: and still Reade more: and know, Poets tel wonders, but not Gospell though. Or thus, 19 Never give over Reading by thy will: Poets sing sweet; but above Ela still. Or thus, 19 Never give over Reading, nor forbeare it. Though Poets tell thee wonders, Doe not sweare it.
Or thus, 19 Be Reading still; and never shut thine Eyes: Poets tel Tales, are neither Truths nor lies. Or thus, 19 Be Reading still: Poets can give a passe, To that shall never be, nor ever was. Or thus, 19 Thy Bookes and thee, let nothing part asunder: In Poets mouthes, A miracle is no wonder. 20 Inter Convivas,Eclu 31. 7, 8, 9. fac sis sermone modestus: Ne dicare lrquax, dum vis rbanus haberi, 20 Amongst Ghests at a Feast, be no Debater: Least seeking praise of wit, thou prove a prater. Or thus: 20 When thou art at a Feast, much talke refraine: Leaft thou be thought, to have more Tongue, then brain Or thus, 20 When thou art at a Feast; forbeare much talke: Men come not thither, to heare thy Tongue walke. 21 Coniugis Iratae noli tu verba timere: Nam struit infidias lachrymis, quum faemina plorat. 21 Let not the Angry words of thy wife fray thee; Tis when a woman weepes, she meanes to pay thee. Or thus, 21 Feare not thy wifes hot words: tis womans guise: Plaine, when she plaigues; deceitfull, when she cries.
22 Vtere quaesitis, sed ne vide aris abuti: Qui sua consuunt, quum Dst, aliena sequuntur. 22 Abuse not thy Estate, with riotous dealing: For, Riot wounds with want; want cures with stealing. Or thus, 22 Vse thy Estate; but Foole it not away: Turn'd out of all; Men turne to Birds of prey. Or thus, 22 Use; but with temper: that which thou hast got: No Leech like One, that had; and hath it not. Or thus, 22 Vse that thou hast; but Use it with discretion: Evacuation's madde, for new Repletion. Or thus, 22 Use thy Estate; but give it not the slippe: VVant makes the Old wife trot, the Young wife trippe. Or thus, 22 Be not profse in spending: when all failes, Men live not by their hands, but by their Nailes. Or thus, 22 Use that thou hast, but make no wilfull waste: All gone; men turne to Cannyballs at last. 23 Fac tibi propanas, Mrtem non esse timendam: Quae bona si non est Finis tamen illa malorum. 23 Resolve; of Death, no feare is to be had: VVhich, though not good; yet Ends all that is bad.
Or thus, 23 Where Death is feard; it seemes not understood: Is not the End of Evils, a Ioyfull Good? Or thus, 23 Be not afraid of Dying: hast not thou Good Cause to welcome that, brings th'Olive bough? Or thus, 23 Who would feare Death? which though an End it be: Yet not of Vs, but of our Misery. Or thus, 23 Soule brought a Bed of Body, and Delivered, Is Death: Is not hee, that feares this, white liverd? Or thus, 23 Death is an End,These fol∣lowing follow Cato, but go a Chri∣stian step beond him. and a Beginning too: As that; not ill: as this; a thing we woe. Or thus, 23 This one thing were enough to raise deaths price: That, ther's no way but it, to Paradise. Or thus, 23 These Goods are onely in Deaths Cabbin kept; All weeping, left: all weeping past, unwept. Or thus, 23 With this account, all feare of Death is fled; To live as long as live; and longer, Dead. Or thus, 23 Be this thy mindes, both quietnesse and strife: To make thy life a Grave; thy Grave a life. Or thus, 23 Make life a Grave; by being dead to sinne; The Grave, a life, by Hope to Rise agen.
Or thus, 23 This I resolve; and let the houres fly; To live upright; and if I dye, I dye. 24 Vxoris linguam, si frugi est  ferre memento: Nom{que} malum est, te nolle puti; hanc non posse tacere. 24 Beare with thy wifes Tongue, if her truth thou see; Why should she, silent; Thou not patient be? Or thus, 24 If thy Wifes Tongue be all, as well she may Thy Patience aske; as Thou, her silence pray. 25 Aequa diligito caros pietate parentes: Nec matrem offendas, dum vis banus esse parenti. 25 Love both thy Parents,Ecclus. 3. 8. & 7. 27. in an equall measure: Displease not one, to doe the other, pleasure. Or thus, 25 Love equally thy Father, and thy Mother: And doe not scratch the one; to claw the other.
Liber Quartus. DEspice Divnias,Eccle. 5. 10 11. 1. lam. 5. 1. 2. Pro. 23. 4. 5. 1 Tim 6. 9. Ecclus. 31. 1. 5. & 40. 18. si vis anime esse beatus: Quas qui suspic,  semper aari. 1 Scorne Riches, if to happinesse thou aspire: Who Riches love, are Beggers in Desire. Or thus. 1 Scorne Riches; if a faire life thou desire; Monies admirers, live but in the mire. Or thus, 1 This were enough, to prove Riches accurst; If nothing else: They make men still athirst; Or thus, 1 Happy, who riches from his Heart removes; And wanting, needs them not; nor Having, loves. Or thus. 1 Who would Imagine, rich men Beggers were? Yet so they are, still craving; still in feare. Or thus. 1 It need no riddle be, whereat to stagger: A man may be a Richman; Yet a begger. Or thus, 1 Riches consist not, in the having store: But in the having no desire to more.
Or thus, 1 Beggery consists not, in an empty chest; But in an empty minde, that cannot rest. Or thus, 1 To be an Actuall Begger, is a curse: Yet the Habituall begger, is the worse. Or thus, 1 The Actuall begger, may be helpt by having: Th'Habituall cannot: still more had, more craving. Or thus, 1 The Actuall begger, doth but want at worst: Th'Habituall wants it more; because more thirst; Or thus, 1 A begger wants but that, which he hath not; But rich men want, even that which they have got. Or thus, 1 A begger hath much paine, a rich man more: Hee, but of want: They, both of want, and store. Or thus, 1 If happinesse thou love, then love not Riches, For such mens minds, are never without stitches. Or thus, 1 Our bodies turne to earth, if Death arrive: Because we turne our mindes, to earth; alive. 2 Commda Natura,Ecclus. 31. 19. 20. & 40. 18. nullo tibi tempore deer unt: Si fue tis contentus eo, quod postulat vsus. 2 Natures supplyes, shall never faile to thee: If with things needfull, thou contented be:
Or thus. 2 Enough for Nature, thou shalt alwayes finde: If thou to nature  conforme thy minde. Or thus. 2 Your store will alwayes Natures want exceed: If you can thinke, you want but what you need. Or thus, 2 If thou art not content, unlesse have store; Thou wouldst not be content; If thou hadst more: Or thus, 2 Little is store to one content: and store, Is little to him, that still longs for more. Or thus, 2 Nature gives all men, a sufficient lot: But they runne after Toyes, and soe it not. Or thus, 2 If Natures treasures, thou desire to finde: Search not the Mines of India, but the mind. 3 Dilige Denari, sed parce Dilige formam: Que Nemosanctus, nec honstus captat ab are. 3 Love Monies forme, but loue it not too much: Which no good man, lov'd ever for the touch. Or thus. 3 The forme of mony Love; but not the stuffe: Much is too much; a little is enough.
4 Quum sistincuatus, nec Remratione gubernes: Noli Fortunam quae non est, dicerec aecam. 4 When thy affaires succeede not to thy mind: Say not, that Fortune, which is not, is blind. Or thus, 4 When thou by thy improvidence art orethrown: Accuse not Fortunes blindnesse, but thine owne. Or thus, 4 Accuse not Fortune, if thy state decline: Fortune is not too blame, the fault is thine. Or thus, 4 'Tis blindnesse, to thinke Fortune blind, and not That we are blind, when we have blind mens lot. Or thus, 4 What we call Fortune, is not hap, or chance: But good our care: Bad, our misgovernance. Or thus, 4 Fortune's no word of Cause, but of Event: The cause our selves; then let our selves be shent. Or thus, 4 Fortune, Adverse or prosperous, never call; Vpon our owne legs, we must Rise or Fall. Or thus, 4 Fortune, thy state can neither make, nor marre: Our selves the Forgers of our Fortunes are. Or thus, 4 Events successfull, or Adverse betide us: As we have cleere, or dimmer Eies to guide us.
Or thus, 4 Fortune is never blinde, if thou have Eyes: Nor ever sees, but when thy selfe art wise. 5 Quum furis faelix,Ecclus. 30. 14. 15. 16. Corpus curare memento: Aeger Dives habet mes; se non habet ipsum. 5 Regard thy Body, more then worldly pelse A sicke rich man hath mony; not himselfe. Or thus, 5 Breferre thy body, before worldly wealth; Riches are of a lower fourme, then Health. Or thus, 5 To gather Riches, Doe not hazard Health: For truth to say; Health is the wealth of wealth. 6 Verbera quum tleris, Discens aliquando magistri: Fer Patris ingenium, quum verbes exit in Iram. 6 Since thou at Schools, wert by thy Master beaten: Thy Father beare, when Anger makes him threaten. Or thus, 6 If of a Master, thou hast blowes abidden: Then of a Father grudge not to be chidden. 7 Res age quae prosunt, Rurss  memento, In queis Error inest; nec spes est certa laboris. 7 Seek wayes of profit: but tread not amisse: In wandring By-waies; where no profit is.
Or thus, 7 Looke after things of profit; but take heed: Of Idle courses that no profit breed. Or thus. 7 Intend to things of value: but refraine All fond Designes; where nothing's got but paine. Or thus. 7 Bestow thy time, in that may quit thy cost: But labour not in things, where labours lost. Or thus, 7 Set not thy rest up; on things base and meane: Who ever knew a Sexton, made a Deane? Or thus, 7 Who aymes not high; shall never shoot but low: And then aswell, may cast away his bow. Or thus, 7 Who the Philosophers stone, 'to make, assay: Though misse the End: meere secrets, by the way. Or thus, 7 If things of worth and value be aaid Though misse Penelope; you may get her maid. Or thus. 7 Sow in good ground: what is in barren sowd; Is seed; and Time; and labour; ill bestowde. 8 Quod donare potes gratis, Ne vede roganti: Nam recte fecisse, bonis in parte lucrorum est. 8 To sell what thou canst freely give, refraine: Good men account good deeds the greatest gaine.
Or thus, 8 Give freely what thou canst, rather then sell: Who gives to good men; hath not he sould well? 9 Quod tibi suspectum est; confestim Discute quid set. Nam{que} solent, primo quae sunt neglecta, nocere. 9 What you suspect; search instantly to know: For, things at first neglected, worser grow. Or thus, 9 Vpon the first suspicion of a thing: Looke to it, least it get a stronger sting. Or thus. 9 What thou suspectest, search without delay: Evils neglected doe not use to play. Or thus. 9 Suspitions search, if safety thou desire: A sparke not look't to, may set House a fire. Or thus, 9 In all things be suspitious; then Advise: Then doe according; and then thou art wise. 10 Quum e detineat Veneris damnosa volupt as Indulgere Gulae noli, qua ventris amicaest. 10 When thou to Venus banefull play dost bend: Fly Gluttony, which is the Bellies friend. Or thus, 10 When thou art taken, with lusts banefull pleasure, Pamper not up thy Flesh; which knowes no measure.
Or thus, 10 The acts of Venery, and Gluttonizing: Are acts that have a certaine sympathizing. Or in a contrary sense: 10 When thou intendest Venus wanton play: Flie Gluttony, which lookes another way. Or thus. 10 The Acts of Venus, Lust and Gluttony: Are acts that have a plaine Antipathy. 11 Quum tibi proponas animalia cuncta timere: Vnum praecipi tibi plus homine esse timendum. 11 Finde cause to feare all Beasts you easily can: But I advise you more, to feare one Man. Or thus, 11 Our feare of hurt, from Beasts, may be the least: Man is to man, a more Beast than a Beast. 12 Quum tibi praevalidae fuerint in corpore vires, Fac sapias; sic tu pteris vir fortis haberi. When Nature makes thee strong, make thy selfe wise: Both joyn'd, will make thee valiant in mens Eyes. Or thus, 12 When thou art strong, be wise too, if you can: These two, make up true valour in a man. Or thus, 12 Strength's Valors hand; Wisdome his Eye; 'twere shame That Valour should be either Blinde or lame. Or thus, 12 Bodily Strength, and wisdome of the Minde: VVhere both these meet, there valour is in Kinde.
13 Auxilium a nobis petito,Pro. 27. 9. & 17. 17. Ecclus. 6. 14, 16. si forte laboras: Nec quisqam milior Medieus, quam fidus amicus. 13 In thy Distresses, seeke thy Friends reliefe: A faithfull Friend is Physicke for all griefe. Or thus, 13 If thou be sicke, or sore; or ill at ease: A faithfull Friend, is th'onely Hippocrates. Or thus, 13 Seeke to a Friend, where thy owne eyes be dimme: Blinde in thy selfe, thou mayst have Eyes from him, Or thus. 13 In thy Disastes, get friends to appeare: No Constellation hurts, if Friends be neere. Or thus, 13 A Friend is all in All; in Beggry, wealth: In Danger, safety; and in sicknesse, Health. Or thus, 13 Who ever saw a Phoenixe? onely Hee: That hath a true Friend, doth the Phoenix see. 14 Quum fis ipse Nocens,Ecclus. 34. 19. mritur cur victima prote: Stultitia est, morte alterius sperare salutem. 14 Why dies a Beast, when thou commit'st the fault? Can a Beasts Offering, be thy Ransom thought? 15 Quum tibi vel fecium, vel fidum quaeris amicur: Nontibi Fortuna ist hominis,Ecclus. 6. 7. & 37. 1. 6. sed vita petenda. 15 To take thy marke; a faithfull friend to finde. Aime not at wealth; but at the life and minde.
Or thus, 15 In choosing of a Friend, observe but this: Regard not what hee hath, but what hee is. Or thus, 15 Choose Friends, as if a choosing sheepe you were: Looke to their soundnesse, not what wooll they beare. Or thus, 15 Thou must to goodnesse, not to Goods attend: Or else thou mayst have friends, but not a Friend. Or thus, 15 A faithfull friend is best knowne by this marke: He's lesse discern'd i'th light than in the darke. Or thus, 15 When thou wouldst finde a Friend to sticke unto: Not Mannours make the man, but manners do. Or thus, 15 Never make doubt, what Friendship should be got: Wealth makes a Bowt; but Vertue ties the Knot. Or thus, 15 A faithfull Friend is hard to light upon: All the rich men that are, can scarce make One. Or thus, 15 Where may we goe, to finde a faithfull Friend? Whither? but to Vtopia, or worlds End. Or thus, 15 If thou wouldst finde a Friend sincere and Simple: Looke him not at th' Exchange, but at the Temple. Or thus, 15 If thou wouldst finde a Friend without disguise: Looke not amongst the Wealthy, but the wise.
Or thus, 15 To know a Friend, that's more in Heart, than Lips: Marke him not in the Sunne, but in th' Eclips. Or thus, 15 Friendship and Wealth, have severall works to do. Friendship makes two, One; and Wealth makes One, two. Or thus, 15 Friendship and Wealth, stay never long together: Wealth onely faire: Friendship likes any weather. Or thus, 15 VVhat Friendship joyes in, that makes wealth to groane: Friendship will have a partner, wealth will none. Or thus, 15 A Reall friend a Cannon cannot batter: VVith Nom'nall friends; a squib's a per'lous matter. Or thus, 15 This one mishap, all other farre exceeds: That we still trust to friends, Egyptian Reeds. 16 Vtere quaesitis opibus; Fuge nomen Avari: Quo tibi Divitias,Eccles. 2. 24. & 3. 13. & 5. 18. & 9. 7, 8. Ecclus. 10. 29. & 14. 3. 7. & 20. 17. si paper semper Abundas. 16 Vse thy Estate, bid Niggards name avant: What good doth wealth, if wealthy, still thou want? Or thus, 16 Use that thou hast; be not thy monies slave: What use to have; if not use what you have? Or thus. 16 Use that thou hast, and long not after more: What good doth store, if onely kept in store?
Or thus: 16 Use thy Estate, what art thou else the better? VVhat good doe Feete, if alwaies in a setter? Or thus 16 Use that thou hast, and be no Miser thought: To have and want, is greater curse than fault. Or thus, 16 A Misers Tenure hath a double curse: Active, it hath much ill; Passive much worse. Or thus, 16 A Misers reckoning hath a double score: Hee doth much ill, and yet hee suffers more Or thus, 16 To have, and use it, are two severall Dowres: Either wee must have both: or neither's ours. Or thus, 16 To want, and not to have it, is a curse: But yet to have it, and not use it, worse. Or thus. 16 Not having, but the using makes men wiser: Not wanting; but not using, makes a Miser. Or thus. 16 Use that thou hast, 'tis great skill to be able: To read how Miser, may spell miserable. 17 Si Famaus servare cupis, dum vivis, honestam: Fac fugias animo,Ecclus. 15. 6. & 41, 12. qua sunt mala gaudia vitae. 17 If thou desire the Fame of a good Name: Then shunne those toyes of joyes, which soyle the same.
Or thus, 17 If in the world thou wouldst have good Report: Then Flie the world; and all the worlds vaine Sport. Or thus, 17 If in true Honour thou desire to Shine: Then all false Joies of life, thou must Decline. Or thus, 17 If in the course of Honour thou wouldst Runne: Thou must vaine sports, and all false pleasures Shunne. Or thus, 17 A good Name, is a sad and sollid Treasure: And Runnes from all them, that runne after Pleasure. Or thus, 17 A good Name is the Prize of Earthly Races: But is not got with running Wilde-goose Chaces. Or thus, 17 Looke not to have Fames Trumpet sound thy Name: And yet to have a Stmpet blow the same. 18 Quum sapias animo,Eccles. 8. 6. Noli videre senectum: Nam quicunque senet, puerilis sensus in illo est. 18 Scoffe not at Age: nor let it be revil'de: To mocke an Old man, is to mocke a Childe. Or thus, 18 Laugh not at those defects which Old age sends: In Childhood, life beganne; in Childhood ends. Or thus, 18 When thou art young, mocke not Old folkes decay: They were as Thou; and Thou shalt be as They.
Or thus, 18 VVho would mocke Children? and Old folks are more: Twice Children, They; Once now; and once before. Or Thus, 18 Nature by Age, seemes to raise childhoods price: VVhich, other Ages once, makes Childhood twice. Or thus, 18 Childhood so harmelesse is: Middle Age so vaine: That Nature makes Old age turne Childe againe. Or thus, 18 VVho scoffe at Age, scoffe at their owne Desire: For who that lives, but doth to Age aspire. Or thus, 18 Let him that mockes Old age, this Doome sustaine: Either die Young; or Old, be crackt in's braine. 19 Disce aliquid; nam qum subito Fortuna recessit: Ars remanet;Prov. 4. 18. Eccles. 7. 12 Ecclus. 21. 21, & 51. 28. Vitamque hominis non deserit unquam. 19 Get Knowledge: for when Fortune slips away: Yet Art stayes with thee, and will ever stay. Or thus, 19 Learne something: for when Fortunes trust deceives thee: Yet Art is as thy Heart that never leaves thee. Or thus, 19 Get Learning, for when outward things decay: Yet Art is neither Times nor Fortunes prey. Or thus, 19 All other things, like Flowers, are fading seene: Learning is like the Laurell, alwaies greene.
Or thus, 19 Get Knowledge: Fortune takes what Fortune gives: Knowledge alone, in spight of Fortune lives. Or thus, 19 Get Knowledge, other things a man may lose: Knowledge is that, which once come, never goes. Or thus, 19 Get Learning; other things are seas'd on daily: Art only's priviledg'd; and feares no Baily. Or thus, 19 Get Knowledge, other things are but as Leases: Art onely is in Fee, and never ceases. Or thus, 19 Learne something: Wealth is of a casuall quality: Art onely hath a certaine Immortality. 20 Perspicito tecum tacitus quid quis{que}Ecclus. 7. 5. 7. & 4. 27. & 27. 7. loquatur. Sermo etenim mores & celat, & indicat idem. 20 Be silent, and observe what each man sales: For, speech mens manners, both hides and bewraies. Or thus, 20 If mens Conditions thou desire to know: Their Speeches marke: These them both hide and show. Or thus, 20 To marke carefully mens speech: Speech is a starre: Both hides and showes, what mens Conditions are. 21 Exerce studium, quamvis perceperis Artem: Vt cura, Ingenium; Sic & manus adiuvat usum. 21 Practise thy Art, though th'art thou have already: As study makes thee know; Vse makes thee ready.
Or thus, 21 Practise thy Art still, though the Art thou knows, By study it was got, by use it growes. Or thus, 21 Practise thy art, though it thou understand: Care bred in it the braine; use in the hand. 22 Multum venturine cres tempera Fati,Iames 4. 14. Ecclus. 40. 2. Non meiuit Mrtem, qui scit contemnere vitam. 22 Much care not, to what destiny thou art borne: He feares not death, that can hold life in skorne. Or thus, 22 Be not much troubled, what Fates thee attend: He that can skorn: life needs not feare his end. Or thus, 22 Care not, what time, Death shall dissolve this slime, He that scornes life, can die at any time. Or thus, 22 Care not what time, thy time of dying is, To one prepar'd, no time can come amisse. Or thus, 22 What matter is it, when or bow thou dyest? Life's not so goodly, when it is at highest. Or thus. 22 What's life, that in it, we should place our joyes? We eate, drinke, talke, walke, laugh, and all but toies. Or thus, 22 Life is to men, as it doth seeme unto them, They that are fond on't; much good may it doe them.
23 Disce,Ecclus. 8, 9. sed a Doctis. Indochos ips Doceto: Propaganda etenim rerum doctrina barum. 23 Learne thou of Learned men: th'unlern'd of thee: So learnings Race, must propagated be. Or thus, 23 Let learned men teach thee: Teach thou, th'unlearned: In this sort, must the ship of Ar be sterned. 24 Ho bibe quod possis,Pro. 23. 2. 30. Ecclus. 31 29, 25. 31. si tu vis vivere sanus: Morbi casae moli, Nimiae est qun{que} volp. 24 Drinke not too much; if thou thy health intend: Every Excesse, hath some Defect in th'End. Or thus, 24 Drinke not extreamely if thou love thine ease: Every Extreme breeds some extreme Disease. Or thus, 24 Drinke what thou canst well beare: surfets to some, As well by drinking, as by eating come. Or thus, 24 Drinke moderately; if health thou wilt maintaine: Excesse of pleasure breeds excesse of paine. Or thus, 24 Thinke not, to breake thy head, with Drinke is good: For, though it bleeds not, yet it teints the blood. Or thus, 24 Drinke serves the Bodies moysture to maintaine: When that turn's sev'd; the rest but drowns the braine. Or thus, 24 Thy braines would shine, if washing every day, Did wash them cleane; not wash them cleane away.
Or thus. 24 Drinke, but in temper: Pleasure without measure, Brings thee at last, to measure without pleasure? Or thus 24 Drinke not too much: what man that were not vaine Would broach his mouth, to set a tylt his braine? Or thus, 24 Drinke what thou cst well beare: for more then that Brings present madnesse; future, God knows what. Or thus, 24 Drinke not too much: such Drinking will in Fyne, Have a worse skore, then paying for the wine. 25 Lad iris quodcun{que} palam; quodcun{que} probaris: Hoc vide,Ecclus. 5. 10. ne rursum  crimine damnes. 25 Dispraise not that, which thou hadst prais'd before: Least thou for lightnesse, be dispraised more. Or thus. 25 Seeme not to have two Tongues within your Head: By Contradicting, what before you said. Or thus, 25 Be not a weather cocke, to change thy mind, In praising, and Dispraising with the wind. Or thus, 25 To praise a thing at one tie, and another To vilifie the same; is lightnesse Feather. Or thus, 25 To Praise a thing; and dispraise it againe: Is, with the Tongue, to play legedemain.
Or thus, 25 First to extoll; then vilifie againe Shews both a gadding tongue; and giddy Braine. 26 Tranquillis rebus,Iob. 24. 24. semper quae adversa cavate: Rursim in adversis, elius sperare memento. 26 In calmy times, take heed of stormes may rise: In stormie times, hope well, for calmer skies. Or thus. 26 Since Fortune of her wheele, is still a turning, Griefe, well may hope for joy, and joy feare mourning. Or thus, 26 On Fortunes lightnesse, set thou up thy rest, In wealth, to feare: in want, to hope the best. Or thus, 26 Nature, for two estates, hath given two passions, Hope, for dejectings; feare for exaltations. Or thus, 26 Wealths Armes is feare: Wants, Hope: so want is best, In better Armes; though wealth, in better Crest. Or thus, 26 When Fortune smiles, doubt it to be but hollow, And when she frownes, doubt not but smiles will follow. Or thus, 26 Thou maist give Fortune leave, to frowne a while, For having rown'd; shee'l turne about, and smile. 27 Discere necesses,Iob 32. 9. cuta sapiei crescit, Ra dtur longo Prudentia temporis usu. 27 Cease not to learne from this doth wise ome rise, Time without learning, seldo ne makes men wise.
Or thus, 27 Cease not to lerne: wisedome by care doth climbe, He knows not much, that's taught by onely time, Or in a contrary sense: 27 Cease not to learne: wisedome by care doth climbe, And then grows rare, when it is taught by time. Or thus, 27 Cease not to learne: that's wisedomes first degree: Adde time to it, and then, 'twill perfect be. 28 Parce laudato;Ecclus. 6. 7. 8, 9. nam quem tu sape probaris, Vna dies, qualis fuerit, oftendet amicus. 28 Praise not too fast; for, whom thou oft hast praised, One houre will shew, on what weake ground t'was raised. Or thus, 28 Be spare in setting a Friends praises forth, For, till the try all day, al's nothing worth, Or thus, 28 Praise not a friend too much: onely one day, Will tell more of him, then all you can say. Or thus, 28 Praise not too fast, thy praise may chance to run, Where thy friends worth, will scarce come creeping o. Or thus, 28 Praise not a friend too much: least if you pay His wages before hand; he run away. Or thus, 28 Praise not a friend too fast; it is not tho, But time and proofe, that must his praise alow.
Or thus. 28 Praise not a friend too much: a sadder wound May come by praises lost, then friend not found. Or thus, 28 Praise not too much; left thou be forc'd in th'end: To eate thy words, and vomit up thy friend. Or thus, 28 Praise not a friend, upon bare intimation: There's more belongs to proofe, then protestation. Or thus, 28 Make no post haste, to put friends in thy Creed. Many are friends in shew, but Few in Deed. Or thus, 28 You cannot count one happy, till he die: You must not count a Frind untill you trie. 29 Ne pudeat quae nescieris,Ecclus. 21 12. te velle dcri: Scire aliquid, laus est; culpa est, Nil discere velle. 29 What thou knowst not, thinke no shame to be taught: To know, is praise: no will to learne, the Fault. Or thus, 29 What thou knowst not, be willing to be taught: The will to learne, makes Ignorance  fault. 30 Cum Venere & Baccho lis est,Ecclus. 19. 12. & 31. 27. 28 sed juncta voluptas: Quod blandum est animo complectere: sed fuge ites. 30 Venus and Bacchus, have both strife and joy: Avoyd the strife: The joy thou maist enjoy. Or thus, 30 In love and wine, there is both strife and rest: Thy part's to part them: and then take the best.
31 Demisso tacitos animo vitae ento:Ecclus. 19. 26, 27, 28. & 27. 22. 23 Qua flunon platidum est, for san latet ltius nda. 31 Offilent, solemne, sullen men beware: The streame runs smooth, where deepest waters are. Or thus; 31 When you see men, that words and lookes can keepe, The stream tels what they are; more smooth, more deep. Or thus, 31 The streame runs smooth where deepe; and such is one, That saies not much, and lookes like Fryer Iohn. Or thus; 31 Looke to such men, as looke deject and still: The still Sow alwaies eats up all the will. 32 Quum tibi displiceat rerum Fortuna tuarum: Alterius specta, quo sis discrimine prior. 32 When thy owne Fortune, seemes to thee a curse, Marke others; see, what numbers there are worse. Or Thus, 32 Why shouldst thou grieve, or think thy own case strange, When most are such, with whom thou woulst not chang? Or thus, 32 If Fortune now give thee not thy content, Wert thou, as some are; how should she be shent? Or thus, 32 When thou conceivest, Fortune doth beshrow thee: Thinke, in what case are others, farre below thee. Or thus, 32 Thinke when thou envy'st others, thy superiours: How many envy thee, that are inferiours.
Or thus 32 What needs the Moone with envy looke so pale? Shee's great to stars, though to the sunne be small. Or thus, 32 If nothing else content thee, yet this may: The Best, have better; the worst, worse then they. Or thus, 32 All Fortunes Oddes, is by comparisons Eye, Looke up, or downe; and thou art low, or high. 33 Quod potes, id tenta: nam littus carpereremis: Tutius est multo, quam velum tendere in Altum. 33 Strive not above thy strength: the shoare to keepe: Is safer farre, then launch into the Deepe. Or thus. 33 To deale in things above thy reach, Refraine: The shore is alwaies safer, then the Maine. Or thus, 33 Climbe not too high; least thou endangerd be: Low bowes are strong; but weake, at top o'th Tree. Or thus, 33 Thinke not thy forces, greater then they are: Conceit is able, Able-parts to marre. Or thus. 33 Let not presumption, worke thy owne deceit: No greater Mountibanke, then selfe-conceit. 34 Contra hominem iustum,Pro. 3. 30. & 22. 22. 23 Esay 19. 21 Ecclus. 35. 18. prave contendere Noli; Semper enim Deus iniustas ulciscitur iras. 34 Seeke not to justle just men from their right, God never failes revenge, to vnjust spight.
Or thus, 34 Strive not unjustly, against one that's just, God takes his part; and Answere it thou must. Or thus, 34 Let not just men, unjustly feele thee strong: God is himselfe, Revenger of all wrong. Or thus. 34 Wronging iust men, you wrong not them alone, God makes account, of their cause, as his owne. Or thus. 34 Be not unjustly, with just men at oddes, The cause is theirs, but the Revenge is Gods. Or thus, 34 Offer no wrong to iust men, though you might: God is a god of Vengeance, in their Right. Or thus, 34 By iust mens wrong, doe not Gods wrath procure, He strikes not alwaies soone, but alwaies sure. 35 Ereptis opibus, nolitu flere querendo: Sedgud potius, tibi quum conting it habere. 35 Loosing thy riches, doe not fall a weeping: But rather ioy thou hadst them once in keeping. Or thus, 35 If thy goods be flowne from thee: doe not cry, But rather ioy, thou hadst them to let fly. 36 Est Iactura gravis,Ecclus. 19 10. quae sunt amittere damnis: Su quaedam quae ferre decet patienter amice. 36 'Tis great disaster, to loose all by losses: Yet for some friends, we suffer must some crosses.
Or thus, 36 The losse is great, when all away is swept: Yet there are some things better lost then kept. Or thus, 36 It needs must grieve, to be with losses rost: Yet, what is lost for friends, is never lost. 37 Tempera longa tibi, noli promittere vitae: Quocunque ingrederis, sequitur Mors,Iob. 14. 14. & 21. 23. Ecclus. 14. 12. corporis Vbr. 37 Make to thy selfe, no Promise to live long: Death as thy shadow, followes thee all along. Or thus, 37 How canst thou Promise to thy selfe long life; Which but a thred holds; and Death holds the knife? Or thus. 37 All Promises of Life, deceitfull are, Death's nearer to us, then we are aware. Or thus, 37 While men their daies of life, are multiplying: They live not longer; but are longer Dying. Or thus. 37 How can we reckon upon lifes Extent. That know not, what we have, till all be spent? Or thus. 37 Why shouldst thou count thy life to be an Ell; When if it reach to be a spanne, tis well. Or thus, 37 Death searcheth all our ports; and when we thinke Our ship most sale; we spring a leake, and sinke.
Or thus, 37 This partiall Errour, on mens mindes is growne: They thinke Death, others case, but not their owne. Or thus, 37 We must Examples to our selves apply; Such men dide young, or suddaine: why not I? 38 Thure Deum placa: Vitulum sine erescat tr: No credas placare Deum, quum cade litatur. 38 Incense for Sacrifice: Leave calves for plowes; Thinke not, thou canst please God, with bloudy Vowes. 39 Cede locum lasus Fortuna; Cede Potenti: Ladere qui potut, prodesse aliquando valebit. 39 Give Fortune place: Give place to men in place: Who hurts thee now, may one day shew thee grace. Or thus, 39 Vaile to ill Fortune Vaile to men of might: Who wrong thee now, may after, doe thee Right. 40 Quum quid peccaris, Casigata te ipse subinde: Vulnera dum saas, Dolor est medicina doloris. 49 For every fault, some chastisement sustaine: In healing wounds, Paine is the Cure of paine. Or thus, 40 When faults are done; let chastisement beginne: The Paine of pennance, cures the paine of sinne. Or thus, 40 Punish thy selfe, for every idle vaine: Twill aske some rubbing, to get out a staine.
Or thus, 40 Penance for sinne, must not be counted vyne; No wound is cur'd but with some sence of paine. Or thus, 40 To every sinne, some chastisement impart: Men will be loath to sinne; if sure to smart. 41 Damnaris nunquam post longum tempus amicum: Mutavit mores: sed pignor a prima memento. 41 Condemne not friends, whom long Experience proves. What if they Change? Thinke thou of their first loves. Or thus, 41 Condemne no friend, that of Times sealing is; Say he be chang'd; yet thou hast Pawnes of his. Or thus, 41 Condemne no friend, whom often tride thou hast. Suppose he change: Thinke thou, of that is past. Or thus, 41 Condemneno friend, where Time gives Evidence: Say he be changed; Thinke tis thine own offence. 42 Suspectus cave sis,Ecclus. p. 1. Ne sis miser omnibus horis: Na timidis & suspectis, aptissima mors est. 42 Be not suspitious, least thou alwaies cry: Suspitious men, and cowards, were best Dye Or thus, 42 For men suspitious, there is no releife: Nothing but Death, can remedie their griefe.
43 Quum famlos fueris proprios mercatus in vsus,Ecclus. 7, 20, Vt servs dicas, homines tamen esse memento. 43 When for thy use, thou buyest servants: the Though slaves, thou call them; yet know they are Men. 44 Quam primam capindatibi est Occasi prima,Ecclus. 4, 20, Nerursus quaer as quae iam neglexer is ante. 44 Neglect not the first opportunity: Lest it neglected, after neglect thee. Or thus, 44 Take hold of opportunity, before: Least offered and refus'd; it come no more. 45 Morte repentina,Prov. 4. 17. noli gaeudere malorum: Felices obeunt,Ecclus. 8. 7 quorum sine crimine Vita est. 45 At bad mens suddaine dying, be not glad: Where life was good; no kinde of death is bad. Or thus. 45 At bad mens suddaine Ends, doe not reioyce. The best men, cannot of their deaths make choice. Or thus, 45 Never reioyce, at bad mens suddaine death, What matter, in what for me, death stops our breath?
46 Quum tibi sit eoniux, Ne Res & Fama laboret: Vitandum ducas Inimicum Nomen amici. 46 Having a Wife: Take heed of such a friend: That may thy Fame detract, and Fortunes spend. 47 Quum tibi contigeris, studio cognscere multa: Fac discas multa, et vita nil vell doceri. 47 Having learned much; learne more; and shun as naught: 47 The Will of being unwilling to be taught. FINIS.
Faults escaped in Printing, correct thus. IN the Epistle page 2. line 4. for next proceeding, read next praeceding. fol. 4. li. 19. Prayers read Paires. p. 18. l. 7. for word, r. world p. 49. l. 20. to the Phisitian r. to a Phisitian f. 50 l. 6. Faults r. Falls. fol. 51. li. 13. Twill be sore crossing out: re. Twill be some crossing out. fo. 75. li. 11. a rich man more: r. yet rich men more. fo. 88. li. 17. To marke: blot out, Te: fol. 89. l. 4. bred in it, r. bred it, in. In the quotations also there are Errours crept in, which if they be not blotted out to his hand; I desire the Reader to blot out, as namely. The quotation out of Ecclus. upon the 26 Distich, Lib. 1. The quotation out of Ecclus. upon the 2 Distich, Lib. 2. The quotation out of Ecclus. upon the 13. Distich, Lib. 3.
