5668 S108654 99844311 9112
THE CHARACTER OF WARRE, OR The Image of Martiall Discipline: contay∣ning many vsefull directions for Musters & Armes, and the vry first principles in Discipline, the groun es, all the Military motions now vsed: Their vse  demnstration of their vse, first by precept, then by example, Shewing how to doe them, how to performe them gracefully, how to command them properly, playnely, without distractions to the Souldiers. Contayning many excellent Pollicies and Stratagemes, many good Documents for young Souldiers, shewing how they must bee qualified, what qualities best be∣fits them. A worke fitt for all Noble, Generous and good Spirits, that loue Honour, or Honourable Action. By EDVVARD COOKE. Exodus. 15.3. The Lord is a man of Warre: his Name is Iehouah. LONDON, Printed by Tho: Purfoot. 1626.
To the right Honourable and most No∣ble Lord Edward Lord Sackuile, Baron of Buck∣hurst Earle of Dorset, and Knight of the Noble order of the Garter THey that write vpon any serious Subiect (right Hono∣rable and most noble Lord) whether it be of Peace or Warre, commonly doe dedicate their Bookes to No∣ble persons: to the end, that what they haue ef∣fected by Labour and Study, may by their greatnesse be protected from Maledictions and Enuie: and they chose such, whose eminent vertues (exempt from Riualles) is of all admired, by all obserued, and withall beloued, where the choycest witts shelter their chiefest workes. Hence I take my imitation, and in all humi∣litie prostrate this my poore labour to kisse your noble hands, not as any adition to your vncontrolable and approued knowledge, but as a weake Fabricke which onely wanteth the support of your much admired goodnesse. In former time, if any were longheaded, as Pericles, crooked no∣sed as Cyrus, foretopped with his hayre growing vpright as Alex∣ander; he had fauour shewed in all Courts, and in euery company he came in: Such respect did they giue to their outward shapes, who it may be had not any of their Habituall vertues; Oh then what loue, what respect ought euery one (in what degree or place soeuer) to giue you, that haue the Habit of their vertues, onely want their blemishes. Pericles loue to his Country. Cyrus (the elders) care of his Souldiers. Alexanders vertues (not vices) are pregnant in your honour, the world sees it. Demetrius, Nero, and Caligula, (not setting their Empire aside) are not to be compared with your ho∣nour: yet let me lay Gold to copper, that the gold may appeare the more glorious.
Demetrius care was more for an Astrologicall Cloake (thereby to hang the world on his backe,) then for his Kingdome or people. But your honours care is for the Kingdome, to doe good to euery member thereof, Mentally, Actually, to your power. Nero the Tyrants care was for new inuented Garments (dayly) to weare none twice: your care is that euery man haue good Armes to grace the Kingdome dayly. Caligulas care was to weare Sacras Deorum vestes, to set forth the greatnesse of his authority. But your care is the Habit of a Souldier, shewing power in your command that all may obey. These Noble parts being eminent in your honour, are powerfull inducments for me to sue euer for such a Noble Patrone, therefore to you, and onely to your honoured selfe, I humbly dedicate this Booke. The Booke deserues more your honours censure then prayse; for like Phormio it seemes to reade a Lecture of warre (to an Ha∣niball) who for it was reproued, but if I escape from your honour vn∣chekt, I will impute it (not to desert in me) but to your honours suf∣ferance, vsuall Mildnesse, passing by my presumption. Thus com∣miting the Booke to your Noble patronage, you to the Almighties protection, and my selfe to your honours command and seruice, I euer rest In Field and out of Field your honours Seruant EDVVARD COOKE,
To Captaine Pert, Lieuetenant Millen, Lieuetenant Keneston, Ancient Gualter, Ancient Clarke, Mr. Tho: Webster, Mr. Iohn Foster Gentlemen, and to all the rest of their place and office, in the Sixe Cautionarie, or trayned bandes of Middlesex. ALSO, To the worthy Captayne Gostock Mustermaister for the County of Middlesex: And to all the suruiuing Founders of the Artillery Garden, and Military yard. THe Actions of vertue (worthy Gentlemen and Souldiers) should so much affect the beholders, that they should pre∣sently not onely admire them, but indeauour to follow them.Plutarch in the life of Ju∣lius Caeasar. Iulius Caesar reading the braue acts of Alexan∣der the great fell (saith Plutarch) a weeping, and was angry with himselfe, to thinke how Alexander a young man (iust about his age) had notwithstanding conquered the whole world, whereas he as yet had done nothing worthy the name of a Generall: From this Princely Emulation he fell to Action, and became so excellent, that Plu∣tarch himselfe paralells him onely with Alexander. I make no doubt, but that setting before your eyes the braue exployts of your Ancestors you haue beene mooued to practize Armes, by which you haue gayned great applause, (and worthy of it) because you haue done good seruice to your King and Country. The greatest seruice that men can doe, is to saue their Country frem dan∣ger. The Romans gaue him a crowne that saued one Cittyzen: then how many crownes deserueth you, that helpeth to saue a number. They vsed to make a Coyne for his commendation with this inscription: The Senate and people of Rome for Citizens saued. You saue the liues of men by teaching them the right vse of their Armes, whereby they saue themselues from danger. Would to God that all would follow you, as you doe follow the vertues and Actions of the Romans and Grecians. The Grecians were the first, that out of varietie of actions and long ex∣perience reduced the knowledge of Armes into an Art, and gaue precepts
for the orderly mouing of a battaile, and taught, that the moments of victo∣rie rested not in the hands of multitudes, but in a few men rightly instructed to mannage Armes, and trayned vp in the obseruation of the dicipline of the field. In which regard they had Schooles and Schoole-maisters called Tac∣ticks, which deliuered the Art Militarie to such as were desirous to learne. Out of whose Schooles issued those chiefs of Warre in number so many,Captayne Bingham. in Skill so exquisite, in Vallor so peerelesse, in all vertues beseeming great Gene∣ralls so admirable, that no Nation of Europe euen to this day hath been able to match, much lesse to ouer-match their same and glory. The braue Romans cm farre short of them: yet the Romans following their ordi∣nances both haue kept in vse, and also set forth in writing the rules of Martiall policie or discipline: And you haue Schooles wherein you teach this Martiall policy or discipline to such as are desirous to learne. The one is called the Artillery garden, the other the Millitary-yard. The first of these was erected by the Vertuous Gentlemen of London. The second by you the no lesse vertuous Gentlemen of Midlesex: out of these two Schooles as out of the former, haue issued men of worth taking their de∣grees: As Captaynes, Lieuetenants, Antients, and Sergeants, so that all the trayned bands in London & Midlesex, are furnished with able & sufficient Officers out of both these Schooles, to your honours that were the Founders. I, the last in degree (of inferior officers) had my first egresse from the Artillery Garden. In that Schoole I spent Foure yeares compleat, to gayne the little know∣ledge which I haue, neuer presuming to shew my skill, much lesse to contend with others in it: vntill the Scollers of another Schoole (Low-Country-like) banded together for tryall of skill, vrged me thereunto. Then for the honour of my Schoole (put on by my owne Schoole fellowes) I entred the List to play my Schollers Prize: And I haue now done it, but whether I haue per∣formed it ill or well, resteth not in me the Scholler to iudge but in you the Maisters of Science, most skilfull in the Art Military. Iudge then and Censure, Your Friend Edward Cooke.
To the worthy Company and whole body of No∣ble Souldiers, seruing in the Fift Cautionarie or Trayned Band of Midlesex, otherwise called Captayne Perts Company. WHere a generall voyce warrants an approbation (worthie Gentlemen and Souldiers) there euery seruice is a Duty. The truth of it concernes & inuites mee to write a pecu∣liar Epistle vnto you, and therein to extoll your worth: And none will discommend me for it, that either imitates your vertues, or would be praysed (as you) for worth. Your worth Implyes your rare parts: your rare part (though many) may bee Epitomized in Foure. 1. Your pronesse of mind to beare Armes. 2. Your actiuenesse in all Milli∣tary motions. 3. Your Subiugated wills to obey your Officers. 4. Your Da∣mon, and Pythian like affection one to another. The three first are rare, but the fourth and last is the most rare and ex∣cellent; For as a Diamond fairely set in Gold, it giues luster to all the rest, and makes me stile you Philonida or Philonis, a bande of friends, or true friendship, or indeed the Holy band. Plutarch telleth of an holy band errected by one Gorgidas,Plutarch in the life of Pelopidas. which did con∣sist of three Hundred chosen men, entertayned by the state, & kept within the Castle of Cadmea, called the Townes band, (as you the Kinges band:) This band was neuer broken nor ouerthrowne before the battaile of Chae∣ronea, where they were all slaine, found lincked together with cordes of silke arme in arme, Pikes sticking in their brests.Philip King of Macedon. Father to Alexander the great. King Philip their enemie shedding teares for them, and causing them to bee buried together, who in death would not be parted. Thus the louing Holy Band, Fell by the Macedonians hand. Each one dying for his Frend, Keeping Friendship to the end. From whose ashes doth arise, You that them doth Sympathize. Neuer to dissolue together, Nor like God to liue for euer, For one by one, be sure to die, Time takes away, time will supply. And as he brought you to the Wombe, So backe hee leads you to your Tombe. Yours in life and death, Edward Cooke.
To his Brother in Law Thomas Cham∣berlaine, a louer of Armes, and an expert Souldier. WHen I first made entrance into this worke (you know wor∣thy Brother) that there was no speech made in the Citty or Subburbes, of Plague or Pestilenc: But when I had almost finished it, the Plague began amongest vs. Then was both speech & complaint too in an vncessant manner? So I least of. Inited by you in the heate thereof to finish it, (least dying and leauing it an abhortiue, it should vtterly fayle and come to ruine.) But what auailed it mee to write of warlike tratagemes and Policies, to oppose, opugne, repell an humaine Enemie in the field? when tht Lord God of Hosts great in powr, (whom none could resist) was entred the field, destroying Thousands on his right hand, Ten Thousand on his left hand, and all the Kingdome in generall, had not his mercy exceeded his Ivstice. Then it was for mee not to write, but to pray: not to forcast where to flie from the sword of the Lord, but how to submit my selfe to the sword of the Lord, which when the Lord saw, he manifested his power to me, preseruing me, that I might hereafter trust in him, and declare his goodnesse to the Sonnes of men. Thus the Presse of the Lord went forth, it tooke away whole families; it contynued many Moneths together in the Subburb in be Citty. The Citty was almost desolate (yet not desolate) because she had a graci∣ous God with a flaming sword, purging, not consuming her? A blessed Sa∣uiour interceding for mercy not Iustice: A King on earth (as Hezekiah) weeping and praying in secret for her; calling vpon his Lord pirituall and Temporall, on all the Moyseses, and Arons in the Kingdme to ioyne with him in Prayer (as they had in fasting) & to crye mightily vnto the Lord, to spare this Citty, the holy Citty, the Citty where his name was cal∣led vpon. Nay shee had a carefull Magistrate in her, whom diuine prouidence did preordayne to that place to do hr good,Sr John Gore was then Lord Mayor of London. And Alderman Heylyne, and Alderman Parkebust, were Shriefes. who went in person to visite her, relei∣ning her relinquished members readie to starue for want of foode: Sending his two worshipfull Brothers the Shrieues to doe it for him, if his Lordship was otherwaies imployed. These two good Samaritans came into the Suburbes among the poore Trino∣bantes of Saint Sepulchers, inquiring their number, their estate, their wants, their greiuances, finding them great (past their expectation) they re¦turned
with melting hearts, condoling their miserie, and informing the Lord Mayor of it, who by them (& through their meanes) sent instantly a supply of Fourteene Poundes for their reliefe: commanding information weekely to be giuen of their wants, & they should be relieued. Which was done by me, and performed by them, euen till the sicknesse was mightily decreased, & our Gentlemen returned home, so they left off: being seconded by M. George Allington Esquier, (and one of the Maisters of the Pipe office) who sent them Fortie shillinges, as formerly he had done at other times weekely. This money was truly distributed, though it came not to my hands: The money that came to my handes (from the Lord Mayor, Sheriffes, and Churchwardens) was Twenty Fiue Poundes Ten shillinges. So when all this was discharged, and the plague quite ceased, and thankes rendered to Almighty God for our deliuerance: I betooke my selfe to Penn and Paper a∣gaine, to fininsh what before I vndertooke; which by Gods helpe I haue ef∣fected; and would not haue published it to the world, had not some Low Country-like forced, You brotherlike perswaded; Now if any good come thereby, let such as reape it thanke you, who would not let me rest till I had finished, then printed it: If none at all, then let them blame me, not you, if not, excuse me thus: he had a good intention, but hee failed of the execution, in this I rest: and resting rest Your louing Brother, Edward Cooke.
❧ The Index or Table, briefely poynting out the seuerall Contents of euery perti∣cular Chapter. Of Armes and Men: And of the choise of Men for Souldiers Chap. 1. Out of what Clymate or place Souldiers may be most Con∣uenyently taken: Chap: 2. Of what Age Souldiers should be allowed, either for pre∣sent seruice or Muster. Chap: 3 How they must be armed. Chap: 4. What Exercises they must vse when they want Imploy∣ment. Chap. 5: viz. Running, Leaping, Vaulting, and Swymminge. Why Souldiers must vse Runninge. Chap: 6. Why Souldiers must vse Leapinge. Chap. 7. Why Souldiers must vse Vaultinge. Chap. 8. Why Souldiers must vse Swimminge. Chap. 9. Vnto what younge Souldiers must be disciplyned and how often trayned in a Moneth. Chap: 10 When Souldiers must be brought into the fieild for Bat∣tell. Chap. 11. What the beats of the drumme are, which Souldiers must Know. Chap. 12 What the distances in fiiles and Rankes are which Soul∣diers must know. Chap. 13. How a fiile and a Ranke is distinguished for a Souldier to know. Chap. 14 What the fiights are which Souldiers must be expert in. Chap. 15 What the qualities are which befitt Martiall Men. Chapter. 16. Of wisdome and pollicie: The vse of it: how it may be
attained: with a breife Summary of Stratagems and polli∣cyes pertynent for these tymes. Chap. 17 Of the vse of Faceinge. Chap. 18 The words of Command for it. Chap. 19 Of the vse of wheeling. Chap: 20 The words of Commande for it. Chap 21. Of the vse of Countermarch and the words of Com∣mande for it. Chap. 22 Of the vse of doublinge. Chap. 23. Of the distances to be obserued in Battaile, Of their vse, and how to be Commanded. Chap 24. The words of Commande by which the length or depth of a Battaile, may be doubled in place or number. Chap. 25. A platforme of Exercising for those that would; but are not exquisite. Chap. 26. The Postures of the Musket in that forme, as it was pre∣scribed vnto vs by his Maiestie, and his most honorable pri∣vie Counsell. Chap. 27 The seuerall Postures of the Pike, abstracted from that Booke which the Prince of Orange his Excellencie did al∣lowe of. Chap. 28.
Chapter the first. OF ARMES AND MEN. WARRE is my Subiect, and therefore my first dis∣course shall be of Armes and Men; because in them consisteth whatsoeuer belongeth or ap∣pertayneth to Warre, that is vnto Land seruice As Cato (the singuler and notable Author a∣mongst the Latines) doth testifie.Marcus Cato. I am not ignorant of Vegetius definition:Vegetius Lib. 2. Chop. 1. saying, that whatsoeuer appertayneth to Warre, is diuided into three parts: Horsemen, Footmen, and Navies. Horsemen to keepe the playnes, Footmen to keepe the Hilles, Citties, Champion ground, and also steepe places: Navies to keepe the Seas and waters: But Vegetius implyes herein both Land and Sea seruice; I onely (here) but Land seruice. With Sea seruice I will not intermedle, with Land seruice (by Gods helpe I will) and so I begin with Armes. Armes doth vphold Kingdomes, States, and Lawes;Of Ames. The first thought therefore of a Prince or State, that is resolued to put an Ar∣my into the field, ought to prouide Armes. Armes are the security of their owne Soldiers, the terror of the Enemie, the assured and ordinary meanes of Victory. The antiquitie of Armes is all one with the beginnig of Warre. For when of ancient times mighty men puffed with Pride, and led by Ambition,Captaine Bing ham in his notes vpon Aelia. sought to bring vnder subiection their bordering Neighbours, they were forced to fly to the inuention of Armes, without which no victorie could be obtayned. Since Armes haue been taken vp for defence also, Necessity the mother of Arts, inuen∣ting away to withstand Ambition. Now Armes are Implicitly taken for Headpeeces, Gorgets, Curaces, Vambraces, Gauntlets, Taces, Swords, Pikes, Muskets, Hargabuses, Petronells, Pistolls, Frontlets, and Pectoralls for horses; with many o∣ther
necessaries appertayning and going vnder the name of defen∣siue and offenciue Armes. Of these a Prince or State ought to haue store. For warlike Na∣tions and victorius haue euer sought to haue aduantage of their e∣nemies by aduantage of Armes. This our Nation knowes to be true, and therefore by continuall suply of of Armes they make way for new victories. The next care of a Prince or State, is to prouide Men. All men are not fit for warre, therefore there must be a choyse of Men. This is likewise premeditated vpon in the thoughts of a Prince or State before they vndertake Warre: As is apparant by the anci∣ent Romanes, who had their Muster Masters for the choyse of their men, & their Tribunes & Centurions to make them Souldiers. These taught their young soldiers the vse of all their Armes, and were present at their exercises; Making them runne, leape, vault, shoot, cast darts, fling stones of a pound weight, foyne and thrust with the sword, & not to strike downe wright: Such as were expert, they rewarded, preferring them to places of desert, giuing them wheaten bread, (the vnexpert) bar∣ly bread, keeping them from preferment vntill they could do some thing as well as the best: Then they were preferred as Souldiers for a Legion. This did the Romanes. Care then ought to be had (you see) in the choyse of men and Armes. The burthen of which care doth rest on the discreet and honest Muster-maister, whom the Prince or State for some good cause doth repose their trust in. And therefore all his wits must bee set on worke for this seruice. But there may a question arise, whether a Muster master should chuse more for stature or strength. To this I answer, staturo and strength are both seruiceable, but curage ioyned to them is more auailable: Therefore currage is more to be regarded then stature. Vegetius Lib. 1. Chap. 5.Marius (I confesse) being Consull of Rome alwaies chose yong Souldiers of tall stature, so that he would allow none for horsemen in the wings or front of his Battaile, but such as were Sixe foot high, or fiue and tenne inches at the least. But then there was (saith Ʋegetius) mor plenty of people, and
more that followed the Warres. And now the Philosepher (with his saying) is iustified: The longer the world doth continue, the lesser bodies it will produce. Therefore let Muster-maisters doe as they may, and rather chuse for strength then stature. And that they are not herein deceiued, they haue Homer for wit∣nesse, who declareth that Tideus was but small of stature, but yet of good courage and stomach. Then more requisite it is that Souldiers should be strong and va∣lient then huge and great. If that all our Muster-maisters would chuse thus, what strong, valiant Souldiers should our State haue. But either through neg∣ligence, or to curry fauour, or for want of knowledge, they doe that as they may be ashamed of: But to take away all excuses of want of knowledge, I will out of Ʋegetius shew them how they should chuse them. Let the young man therefore that shall bee a Souldier not looke drowsely, let him be straight necked, broad breasted,Ʋegetius. lib. 1 Chap. 6. let his shoul∣ders bewell fleshed, let him haue strong fingers, long armes, a gaunt bellie, slender legges, the calfe and the feet not to full of flesh, but knit fast with hard and strong sinewes: Finding these tokens in a Souldier he may proue good. For Pirhus would often say to his Muster-maisters, chuse you good bodies, and I will make them good Souldiers. But well, say he haue all these? and yet be of no occupation or science, shall wee chuse him (may they say) why not? Vegetius (I confesse) would haue none to bee called to the warres but Smithes, Carpenters, Butchers, Hunters of the Hart and the wild Boares: excluding from the Campe, all Fishers, Fowlers, Pa∣sturers, Lynnen weauers, and whosoeuer that dealeth with any thing that belongeth to womanish nicenesse. But what is Trade to man-hood; yet Ʋegetius Iudgement is sound: For what men are more beneficial to a Campe, then Smithes, Carpenters and the like. A Romane Legion being as a well furnished Citty stored with all kindes of Artificers: The strength of that Realme (and to say truth) the name of the Romans laie in this choyse. Their many discomfeictures & damages by the enemie (Vegetius imputes) to their carelesse neglect of those men, and is bold to tell
the Emperour Valentinian in playne words, That neuer sped that Army well in battell, whereof hee that tooke the muster was any whit negligent in allowing the Souldiers. I forbeare to speake more for feare of giuing offence, and I pro∣ceede forward to the next Chapter, to shew out of what Clymate, Place, Citty, or Country, young Souldiers should be chosen, or ta∣ken most conueniently. CHAP. II. Out of what Clymate, Place, Citty or Country, young souldiers should be chosen or taken most conueniently. As Vegetius notes Lib. 1. Chap. 2.THe temperatnes of the Clymate (sayth the learned) doth very much auaile, not onely to strengthen the body, but also the mind: and therefore they are of oppinion that those people that are farthest off from the parching power of the Sunne are for their temperature the best of all to make Souldiers: for say they, those Nations which bee nigh to the Sunne, parched and dried with ouer much heate, haue more wit indeede, but yet lesse blood within them. And for this cause they dare not manfully and boldly stand vnto it when they fight, well knowing how little blood they haue, and feare much therefore wounding: Contrariwise, the people of the North whom the Sunne burneth not so neere, being more rash and vnaduised, yet a great deale better blouded, are most readie of all and desirous of warre: What these men haue approued I will not altogether contradict, though I leaue it to iudgement. Now it remaines that you know out of what place, namely, whether out of the Citty, or out of the Country you may most conueni∣ently chuse them. Vegetius would haue you to take them out of the Country, vnlesse necessity doth otherwise constrayne you: and his reason is, that none euer douted but that these common rude sort of people, were alwaies fittest for the warre, being brought vp abroad, vsing to take paynes, abiding Sun-burning, passing not for the shade, know∣ing neuer what Bathes meant,Vegetius. Lib 1. Chap. 3. ignorāt of dilicatnes, symple of mind, content with a little, hardned in euery part to abide & beare labour, least fearing death hauing least tasted of pleasure. This is Vegetius iudgement, which may hold in some, but not in all; I passe it ouer.
True it is and must bee graunted that they of the Country who are farthest off from the Citty haue likely the ablest bodies to make Souldiers, and therefore are fittest for the warres. But whe∣ther they haue the best capacities to conceiue of Souldierie, is to be doubted? surely they haue not, rather it is to bee expected from thē of the Citty, or adioyning to the Citty, who haue commonly the ripest wittes to apprehend, and to increase in Souldierie: But bee it as it wil, neither of them are naturally borne Souldiers: the one may incline to warre more then the other, but the skill cometh not with∣out industery and paynes. Plutarch sayth, that it is neither Eurotus,Plutarch in the ise of Pe∣lopidas nor the place betwixt Babix and Gnacion that bringeth forth valiant and warlike men, but they are to be found in all places where youth is brought vp in the shame of vice and boldnesse to vndergoe perills for vertues sake; Vegetius himselfe sayth,Vegetius. Lib. 3. Chap. 26. that nature bringeth foorth few valliant men, but diligence doth make many by good instruction and disci∣pline, that in all places both cowards and hardy men are bred: And that some Nations yeelds better Soldiers then other.Vegetius. Lib. 1. Chap. 3. Hence I inferre, that Citty and Country may yeeld both good and bad Souldiers, yet the one may as farre excell the other in feats of warre, as the other excells in strength of body; Chuse then your Souldiers out of Cittie and Countrie, Often exercise the one, for the is dull & hard to learne, make the other strong, for he is actiue & may get strength: Let him learne to toyle and trauell,☜ to runne too and fro, to carry burthens, to abide the Sunne and dust:Vegetius. Lib. 1. Chap. 3. let him fare hardly and homely, bee kept farre off from the allurements of the Citty: and by this meanes, both the strength of his body & mind shall be increased. The next chapter shall shew of what conuenient age he should be, either for present seruice or Muster. CHAP. III. Of what age Soldiers should bee of for present seruice: ond a∣bout what age young Souldiers should appeare for Muster. IF vpon a sudden you are to raise an Army for expedition, my coun¦sell is, that you will make choice of such as are of mature age, about
Eighteene, Twenty, Thirty, Forty, and more, strong and lusty, able to abide heate and cold, & to performe the duty of Souldiers. Vegetius. 1. Lib.But if after the Romane manner you will haue young men to mus∣ter the time that they must appeare at muster must be so soone as they grow any thing to mans estate: this will be when they are a∣bout the age of 14. 15. or 16. yeares: Then not onely more spee∣dily, but also more perfectly all thinges are learned, the sooner the better. For Vegetius sayth truly, that it is better that a young man exercised should alleage that his age to fight is not yet come, then that hee should truly lament that the same were allready past. Let young men then be exercised betimes, for it is readinesse gotten by former practise that maketh a Souldier. ☞Hauing in the three former Chapters discussed at large of Armes and men, and selected them forth to be made Soldiers: I will in the other 12. Chapters following fit them with Armes, and times of ex∣ercise and discipline, that so they may be desirous of the face of the enemie and be brought forth to battell. CHAP. IIII. How Souldiers must bee Armed. Souldiers must be Armed in euery kind according as they are di∣uided. The Dragons are light horse men, other∣wise called Harqnebusiers Armes of a Pikeman.Souldiers are deuided into two kinds: Foot, and Horse. The foot, againe are of two kindes; Pikemen, and Musketeirs. The Horse men, againe into two kindes; Curassiers, and Dra∣gones. The Armes of Pickemen are a Gorget, Curace, Headpeece, Pike, Sword, G rdle and hangers. Armes of a Muskateire.The Armes of Muskateirs, are a Musket, a Rest, Bandeleires, Headpeece, Sword, Girdle and hangers. Armes of a Horseman Cu∣rassier.The Armes of a Horseman Curassier, are a Gorget, Curace, Cu∣tases, Pondrons, Ʋambraces, a Left-hand Gauntlet, Taces, Cushes, a Caske, a Sword, girdle and hangers, a case of Pistolles firelockes, Saddle, Bridle, Bitt, Petrell, Crooper, with the leathers belonging to fasten his Pistolles, and his necessarie sacke of carriage, and a good Horse to munt on.
The Armes of a Dragone (which hath succeeded in the place of alight Horseman) are a good Harquebus or Dragone,The Armes of a Dragon fitted with an yron worke to be carried in a belt, a Belt with a flaske priming boxe, Key, and Bullet bagge, an open headpeece with cheekes, a Buffe coate with deepe skirts, Sword girdle and hangers, a Sadle, Bridle, Bitt, Petrell, Crooper, with straps for his Sacke of necessaries, and a horse of lesse force, and lesse price then the Curassiers. As Souldiers were diuided into two kindes, so are their Armes into two forts: Defensiue, and offensiue. Offensiue Armes are such as they indeauor to wound and kill,Offenciue Ar∣mes. withall as Muskets, Hargabuses, or Dragones, Pistolls, Pikes, Swords, and Rapiers, &c. Defensiue Armes,Defensiue Ar∣mes. are such as they weare to resist the force and charge of the enemie; of this sort are the Headpeece, Gorget, Curace, Vambraces, Gauntlet, and Taces, &c. Defensiue Armes are preferred before the Offenciue,Captaine Bingham in Aelian. in that they bring safety to him that beareth them, whereas the other are im∣ployed in anoying the enemie onely. These Defensiue Armes should be made strong, fit, and with all comely: Strong to protect or anoye, fitte, to sit close to the body, and be manageable, comelie to grace such as weare them. When Souldiers are thus prouided of Armes, let them be care∣full to weare them, for by often wearing them, their bodies will bee strong, and their Armour will be no more cumbersome vnto them, then the cloathes on their backe. The Romans did so inure their bodies to beare Armes,Example. Ʋegetivs. lib. 1. Chap. 20. (that as Ve∣getius doth report of them) they would both wrastle and run races in their Armour, and were so strong of body by continuall vse thereof that they made nothing of it. But when field exercises through negligence and sloth was giuen ouer, Armour began to grow heauie, because it was seldome put on. Their bodies being weakened by idlenesse, they made suite to the Emperour that they might weare no more Cataphracts, nor Corslets: Afterwards that they might lay away their Helmets, and so when they should goe to fight against the Goathes, being naked on their breasts, & hauing nothing for their heads, they were often∣times by the multitude of Archers vanquished and ouercome: Therefore let Souldiers still accustome themselues to weare their Armour, and when want of Imployments bids them cast them off,
let them not forget to vse exercise at home, to keepe their bodies still in strength: so when they shall reasume their Armes againe, their bodies will be strong and able to beare them. The next Chapter shewes what exercises they should vse; when they want imployment. CHAP. V. What exercises Souldiers should vse at idle Times, when they want imployment. BEcause Souldiers may want imployment, and want of imploy∣ment may breede idlenesse, and idlenesse procure a stiffenesse in the ioynts: therefore they must vse at idle times such exercises as may put life into them, which may make them strong and health∣full,Vegetius. Lib. 3. Chap. 2. for exercise is more auaileable then Physitions. The bodie by idlenesse ingendereth many grose and cold hu∣mors which will be very painefull to lazie Souldiers, but moderate exercise taken in time, will not onely preuent it, but when they are come, expelle them soone and giue them ease. Therefore let Souldiers vse exercise, and such exercises as haue in them the tokens of courage, and feates of actiuity. As Running, Leaping, Valting, and Swiming. The vse of them followeth in the 6. 7. 8. and 9. Chapters. CHAP. VI. Why Souldiers must vse running THe ancient Romans did exercise their young Souldiers to run∣ning, that so with greater violence they might set vpon their enemies, gayne the commodious places from the enemie, or pre∣uent them if they would doe the like. Ʋegetius. Lib. 1. Chap. 9.For this cause (saith Ʋegetius) they were often exercised to runne, that so being set out for Scouts, they might more chearefully goe forward, more readily returne, and more easily ouertake their Ene∣mies when they fled.
We that doe imitate the Romans in those thinges which be vsefull, doe louingly incite our Souldiers at vacant times to vse running, that so they may be the better breathed, and the more able to helpe vs when we call for it. The enemie being too strong in shot for vs, we command them to runne,☜ that so we may ioyne with him sooner; Thereby auoyding the inconuenience of playing vpon our battaile, hee hauing libertie to dispose of his shot as he list himselfe. The enemie seeking to gayne some hill, or strong place by vs,☜ we command them to runne, that so he may be preuented. The enemie flying, we command them to pursue him running, not in dis∣order; but in good order, for their safety. Thus must of running, now of Leaping and the vse. CHAP. VII. Why Souldiers must vse Leaping. SOuldiers must vse Leaping, for passing of deepe places, that when such kind of dificulties happen, they may goe ouer with∣out all manner of trouble. Pompey the great excelled herein, touching whom Salust in this wise seemeth to make mention. With the lightest in Leaping, with the swiftest in running, with the stron∣gest he stroue in casting the Barre. Our gratious Soueraigne (King Charles) as a second Pompey excel∣leth in this. Thus much of Running, and Leaping, now of Valting and the vse. CHAP. VIII. Why Souldiers must vse Ʋaulting. SOuldiers must vse Vaulting to make them ready, nimble, and quicke on horsebacke. The ancient Romans (sayth Vegetius) had horses of wood,Ʋegetius. Lib. 1. which
in winter was set in a house, in somer in the open field: Vpon these the young Souldiers were compelled to mount, at the first without Armour, afterwards with Armour; when being perfect, they could with swords and long poles in their hands get vp vpon any side. Let Souldiers then vse vaulting to make them ready, nymble and quicke on horsebacke, that if it should so chance that they were vnhorsed in battell, they might with ease mount themselues vp againe and renew the fight. Thus much of Running, Leaping, and Vaulting: Now of Swym∣ming, and the vse. CHAP. IX. Why Souldiers must vse Swimming. SOuldiers must vse Swymming to passe ouer Riuers, for Bridges are not euer ready. Likewise in retyring, or chasing, an Army, may be often times compelled or constrayned thereunto. Ʋegetius. Lib. 1.Sudden showers or great snowes (sayth Vegetius) makes the wa∣ters breake out, and by ignorance herein Souldiers are subiect to danger, not onely on the behalfe of the Enemy, but also for drow∣ning and perishing themselues: for this cause they must be expert in swimming. The auncient Romans which by so many warres and contynuall perilles came to be excellent in al warre matters chose the field Cam∣pus Martius (sayth Vegetius) hard by the Riuer Tiber, that in the same when they had left exerciseing their weapons, they might wash off all the sweat and dust: and when they were wearie with running, refresh themselues with swimming. Thus much of the vse of Running, Leaping, Vaulting, Swym∣ming; The next Chapter shewes vnto what, young Souldiers must be disciplined, and how often trayned in a Moneth. CHAP. X. Vnto what young Souldiers must bee disciplined, and how often trayned in a Moneth. YOung Souldiers must be disciplined in the right vse of their Armes, in all the beates of the Drumme, in all militarie mo∣tions;
To march well, to Face, to Wheele, to Countermarch, to double Rankes and Files, to doe all these either by word of mouth, by motion of hand, or by any other mute signe. Therfore if you would confirme their knowledge in these things, it is requisite that they should be trayned either once a weeke, (or at the least thrice a quarter) for continuall vse of the thing bringeth perfectnesse. The Latines haue giuen vs two words for an Army, Acies and Exercitus. Acies is latine for an Army set in Battell Array. Exercitus, is latine for an Army which is in exercise. This name denotes vnto vs, that it should be euer in labour, and neuer out of practise. An Army therefore that is out of Exercise doth loose a Name. Therefore wee must trayne the oftner, and in our traynings at home, practize that which may befall vs in battell abroad. This wee learne from the Romans. The auncient Romans did vse to trayne their yong Souldiers twice a day, their old once,Vegetius. Lib. 2. Chap. 24. and this they neuer mist what weather soeuer came. In faire weather they exercised abroad, in foule, vnder co∣uerts erected for that purpose: Thrice a moneth the whole Army was brought forth to march; Their march was ten myles from the Campe: The footmen Armed & furnished with all manner of wea∣pons, the Horsemen deuided by troopes, & in compleat Armes: In which march they made semblance of batel, the horsemē began first. Sometimes they followed, sometimes they gaue backe, and for∣sing their horses ranne them vpon the spurre, not onely in plaine fields, but in strange dificult places, in breaches, & gapes of ditches: sometimes the foot rescued the horse, sometimes the horse rescu∣ed the foot, and both horse and foot did ascend and run downe high and steepe places. Thus were they practised at home, in that which might befall them abroad: so that happe what could happe to them in fight, these practized Souldiers had very well forelearned. No maruile then, though they were the conquerors of so many Nations. And when they neglected this, that they were so foyled by Haniball and his Carthaginians, foure & 20. yeares they lay idle & were weakened by pleasure and difuse of Armes: That in the second warre of Cartha∣ge (as Ʋegetius reporteth) they were by no meanes comparable Hanniball.
But after so many consuls lost, so many Captaines slaine, so many Armies cast away: falling to their former exercise, they came at length to bee Conquerours againe. Oh England, England remember this? By a presumption of long se∣curitie thou didst bring these things out of vse. But follow what thou hast begun, and the the end will be Glory: practize Warre in Peace & Peace shall be thy reward:August: de Ciuit. Dei. Lib 19. Chap. 12 for Warres end is peace. Be diligent in Trayning & instructing thy Souldiers accor∣ding as his Maiesty hath directed (euery weeke) for three monethes together, and euery holiday after in euery yeare; So thou shalt a∣bate the pride of thy Soueraignes Enemie, making him vnwillng to come to handy blowes, seeing thee so expert: And withall, thou shalt incourage the friends of thy Soueraigne, and retayne still the name of a valiant victorious Nation. Therefore coueting to be victorious, still practize Armes, and desiring Peace, prepare for Warre, and so both will be effected. The next chapter shewes when young Souldiers must be brought forth into the field for battell. CHAP. XI. When young Souldiers must be brought into the field for Battell. WHen they know the beates of the Drumme, the Distances in Rankes and Files, a Ranke from a File, and a File from a Ranke, being expert in all fights, and hauing such qualities as befit Martiall Men: then let them bee brought forth into the field for Battell. For the knowledge of Warre will make them the more bold to fight: And when they are perfect in it, they will not be afraid, but take pleasure to meet the Enemie in the field; For wee see by expe∣rience, that no man feareth at any time to doe that which hee per∣swadeth himselfe he hath throughly learned. And this may be concluded as a well grounded proposition, viz. That as the well tryed and exercised Souldier desires the battell, euen so the vnexpert and ignorant will feare the same. Then take with you Ʋegetius counsell: Neuer bring your Souldiers into the field, till you haue tried and proued what they can doe. The next Chapter shewes what the beates of the Drumme are, which Souldiers must know.
CHAP. XII. What the beates of the Drumme are Which Souldiers must know. THe Drumme hath beene of long vse, and is now for great ser∣uice: The beating of which, each Souldier ought truly to vn∣derstand in the right name. The wisedome of the Romans was such, that when they would change their pace in March, or inflame their Souldiers in fight,Reade Gar∣rads Art of VVarre. they did vse a contrary sound: And as the sounds did vary, so likewise vsed they varietie of names to them: Some they called the Doricke & the Phrigian sound, the one did inflame the Souldiers hearts; The other did make meeke and appease them. They had also the Aeo∣lian, Iasan, and Lidian, and diuers others which did serue to incite or coole the courage of Men. Which diuersities of sounds not one∣ly wee, but most Nations doe retayne vnto this day. The Drumme was first inuented by Bacchus,The antiquitie of the Drum. from him it came into India, from India into Asia, from Asia into Aeurope, & now is vsed of all European Nations: (As the learned Captayne Bingham re∣porteth) in his notes vpon Aelians Tactticks. chap. 9. The Souldier then ought to know by the Drumme, 1. A Call. 2. A March. 3. A Troope. 4. A Charge. 5. A Retreate. 6. A Battalia. 7. A Batterie. 8. A Reliefe. For when the commanders voyce cannot extend to the hearing of the company, the Drumme denounceth & expresseth the same. The next Chapter shewes what the distances of Files and Rankes are, which Souldiers must know. CHAP. XIII. What the distances in Files and Rankes are Which Souldiers must know. THere bee Fiue sorts of distances in Files (say somme,) and they be these that followeth:
Distances in Fies.The first is closest. The second is close. The third is order. The forth is open order. The fift double distance. which is, Pouldron to pouldron A foote and a halfe. Three foote. Sixe foote. Twelue foote. There is fiue sorts of distances in Rankes say they: Distances in Rankes.The first is closest. The second is close. The third is order. The fourth is open order. The fift double distance. which is To the sword poynt. Three foote. Sixe foote. Twelue foote. Fower & twenty foote. Although they be thus set downe to be fiue in number, yet most Commanders obserue and teach, as most proper, onely three. viz. Close: Order: and Open order: Antiquitie had no more, yet the rest must not be cashered or slighted, for some times a commander must doe that in a double distance, which cannot be done in a single. Therefore Souldiers are bound to know all distances in Files and Rankes, that they may the better execute what their Captayne com∣maunds. The next Chapter shewes how a File and a Ranke is distinguished for a Souldier to know. CHAP. XIIII. How a File and a Ranke is distinguished for a Souldier to know. A File, is a number of men beginning at one leader and con∣tynuing in order of followers to the last man.A distinction of a Fie. Aelian. chap. 4. Or thus. A File is a sequence of men standing one behind ano∣ther backe to bellie, and consisteth commonly of Ten or Eight in depth.Suidas. The depth is no other then a File, for Rankes stretch forth in length, Files in depth. A Ranke is a number of men side to side, in a right line, stretching out in length from one end of the body vnto the other, and is ter∣med the length because it runneth along the Front vnto each wing Aelian. Chap. 7. A distinction of a Ranke.Or thus, A Ranke is a row of men standing one by another Poul∣dron
to pouldron, or shoulder to shoulder, their faces being directed all one way. This distinction of Files and Rankes a Souldier must know, that when he is bid to double Files, he may not Rankes, and when he is bid to double Rankes he may not Files. The next Chapter shewes what the fightes are which Souldiers must bee expertin. CHAP. XV. What fights they are which Souldiers must be expert in. THe fights necessary for all Souldiers to be expert in are Sixe. First, to fight aduancing vpon an Enemie. This is when the Enemie appeares in the vantgard,To fight ad∣uancing vpon an Enemy. and they by two rankes a peece march from the body ten paces, and giue fire at the place appoynted. Or when the first ranke giues fire (mar∣ching still on with the body,) and the nex ranke passes through by their right hand, giues fire standing still before them: And so still successiuely all the rest in order. This is like the Lacedemonian Countermarch to gaine ground. Secondly, To fight retyring from an Enemie. This is when the last Ranke faces about to the right, giues fire,To fight vpon a march, retir∣ing from an e∣nemy. mar∣ches vp to the Front and places themselues before their File leaders. But if you will maintayne a set fight with the Enemie (to gayne a better ground) then it is requisite you teach them the Macedonian Countermarch, making your File leaders to face about and stand, the rest to passe through by the right hand, placing themselues be∣hind their leaders, and so meeting your Enemy in the Reare with your best men. Thirdly, To fight Front and Reare with the Enemy. This is when the middle men face about to the right,To sight Front & Reare with an Enemy. and all the Muskettiers fall in the diuision betweene both. Fourthly, To fight with both Flankes against an enemy standing. This is when the outward File of each Flanke is commanded to face, hauing giuen fire:To fight stan∣ding both Plankes a∣gainst an E∣nemie. each File deuideth it selfe into two parts, one halfe marches vp to the Front and places it selfe in a right line before the first File of Pikes. The other halfe mar∣ches
to the Reare, and places it selfe in a right line behind the bringer vp of the same File of Pikes: the like doth all the rest on the contrary Flanke,Captaine Bing¦ham, his exer∣cise. so continuing, halfe the shot will bee in the front, the other halfe in the Reare. Then doe but face them to the right and left by deuision, and each Flanke will be a battell for the Enemy. Fiftly, To giue fire by Flankes vpon the Enemy marching. This is when both their outward Files next to the Enemie makes readie,To fight mar∣ching both flankes against an enmie. faces to either hand, giues fire at command, stayes till the rest of all the Files bee cleare of them; Then marches vp by the Pikes, till all the rest doing the like, bringes them againe to their first place. Or when they giue fire and stand, and being (as it were in two Files) the body of Pickes marching, an officer comes, and gathers vp the winges & ioynes them againe in equall front with the Pikes. To fight a∣gainst horse in a set battell for the pur∣pose against an enemy.Sixtly, To fight against horse in a set battell for that purpose. This is when they countermarch their winges into the midst of the battell, and are impaled round with Pikes, and so drawne forth on either side vnder the shelter of them. In these sixe fights your Souldiers must bee very expert, that they may auoyd all confusion. And thus much shall suffice for the Twelue Chapters before mentioned. ☞The next two Chapters declare what qualities they are which befit Martiall men, and how requisite it is for them to bee wise and politicke to preserue the liues of their men, and how politicke wisedome may be attayned, with a briefe Summarie thereof. CHAP. XVI. What qualities they are which befitt Martiall Men. THe qualities which befit Martiall men are many, but I will at this time treate but of Eight, and they be these, viz. Silence. Obedience. Secrecie. Sobriety. Ʋalour. Loyalty. Free∣dome from Bribes. Moderation in expence. I begin with the first: Silence. SIlenceSilence. was of such veneration amongst the Aegyptians, that they made thereof a God, which with them was called Harpocrates: and according to the Greekes Sigaleon: him they portratured in the
likenesse of a young childe,August. de ciuit. Dei, li. 18. cap. 5. who close to his lips held one of his fingers: sometimes they pictured him without any face at all, all couered ouer with the skin of a Wolfe, on which were depainted as many eyes and eares as could be inserted thereon, signifying thereby that it was needfull to see and heare much, and to speake little, in that he that speaketh not, offendeth not. All this is to de∣note vnto vs the excellencie of Silence, which is commendable in all men, but especially in Souldiers, who must rule their tongues and be silent, or else they will soone perish and come to nought. Plutarch saith that there is no danger in silence.Plutarch in the life of Seneca. Homer highly commendeth it in the Grecians, in his descriptions of their fights with the Troians. His words be these: The Captaines marshall out their troopes, ranged in goodly guise, And forth the Troians pace like birds, which lade the aire with cries. Not so the Greekes, whose silence breathed flames of high desire, Feruent in zeale to backe their friends, on foes to wreake their ire. And in another place speaking of the Grecians; You surely would haue deem'd each one, of all that mighty throng Had beene bereft of speech, so bridled he his tongue. Thus much of Silence. The next qualitie for a Souldier is Obe∣dience. ObedienceObedience. is the Queene of vertues, and crownes her followers with the wreathes of honour. It effecteth much with few, and gaines the victory ouer multitudes. Therefore let Souldiers obey their Commanders, for without Obedience nothing can be done. Paulus Aemylius being to obserue the custome of the Romans,☞ and to make an Oration of thanks vnto the people for chusing him Consull, in his Oration told them, That if they had any trust or confidence in him, or thought him a man sufficient to discharge his place, that then they should not speake nor meddle in any mat∣ter that concerned his dutie and the office of a Generall, sauing only that they would be diligent without any words to doe whatsoeuer he commanded, that should be necessary for the warres and ser∣uice they tooke in hand.Plutarch in the life of Aemylius 250. All which (saith Plutarch) the Romans obeyed, and by yeelding vnto reason and vertue, came to com∣mand
all other, and to make themselues the mightiest people of the world. And indeed they were the most obedient to their Com∣manders of any; insomuch as a certaine Numidian asking young Scipio how he would conquer Carthage, Scipio vpon a hill poin∣ting with his finger to his Souldiers below, answered him thus: With these I will conquer Carthage; for if I should bid them from hence cast themselues downe headlong, know they will doe it. How seuerely the Consuls did punish disobedience in the campe,Examples of rigorous pu∣nishment for disobedience. may appeare by the rigorous punishment which Manlius Torquatus did execute vpon his sonne Titus Manlius, commanding his head to be stricken off in his owne presence, for hauing passed his com∣mand in sallying forth to fight with Genutius Mtius Captaine of the Tuseulans, who gaue him the defie and challenge. Nothing auailing the poore Gentleman in hauing ouercome and slaine his enemie, nor the whole Armies supplications and intreaties. The like rigour vsed Posthumus Tiburtus against his sonne Aulus Post∣humus, at his returne from his conquered enemie. All this to shew the excellencie of obedience,1 Sam. 15.22. which the Prophet prefers above scifice. Thus much of Obedience. The next qualitie for a Souldier is Secrecie. SecrecieSecrecie. is a qualiie appropriated to none but wise men; for a foole hauing heard a secret, trauelleth as a woman with childe vn∣till he haue dsclosed i; but a wise man keepeth it close in his breast, and when any goes about to commit a secret vnto him, he will seeke all meanes to auoid it. King Lysimachus as he aduised and talked vpon a time with Philippedes (the Comicall Poet) a friend and familiar of his, he said vnto him, What wouldest thou haue me to impart vnto thee of all that mine is? Euen what it shall please you Sir (answered the Poet) so it be none of your secrets. Anacharsis, being inuited one day and feasted by Solon, was re∣puted wise,Plutarch in his Morals. for that being asleepe, he was found and seene holding his right hand to his mouth, and his left vpon his priuities and na∣turall parts. Hence Plutarch inferres this, That he had good rea∣son so to think, because the Tongue required and needed the stron∣ger bridle to restraine it, being a hard matter to reckon so many persons vndone and ouerthrowne by their vntemperate and loofe life, as there haue beene Cities and mightie States ruinated and sub∣uerted vtterly, by the reuealing and opening of some secrets. Therefore let all men striue to attaine this vertue of secrecie;☞ especi∣ally
Souldiers, for by their ouer-much babling, they may be an oc∣casion of the ouerthrow of themselues and others. A strange accident did happen to the City of Athens, (which Sylla did beleager) through the lauishnesse of certaine vnbrideled tongues.☜ Plutarch. Certaine old fellowes being met in a Barbers shop with∣in the City of Athens (being blabs of their tongues) chatted it out in their talke together, that a certaine quarter of the Citie, named Heptacaleon, was not sufficiently guarded, & therefore the Towne in danger to be surprised, by that part; which talke of theirs was o∣uer-heard by certaine Espies, who aduertised Sylla so much, where∣upon immediately he brought all his Forces to that side, and about midnight gaue an assault, made entrie, and went within a very lit∣tle of forcing the City, and being Master of it all; for he filled the whole street, called Ceranicum, with slaughter and dead carkasses, in so much that the channels ran downe with bloud. A fearefull ex∣ample. Plutarch saith, That words haue wings, and when they flie out they cannot be recalled backe againe. Symonides saith, A man may repent many times for words spoken, but neuer for a word kept in. The Kings of Persia did punish with death the lauishnesse of the tongue. This made the Persians famous for secrecie. Quintus Curtius reports thus of them, Alexander the Great, saith he, wrought all the wayes he could, to obtaine knowledge where Darius was become, and into what Countrey he was gone, and yet could not get the intelligence; by reason of a custome among the Persians, which were wont with a maruellous fidelity to keepe close their Princes secrets, in the vttering whereof, neither death nor hope of reward could cause them to bring forth a word, there be∣ing (in those parts) not any goodnesse looked for at any mans hands, that hath not the gift of secretnesse, whereof Nature hath giuen a facillity in man. Thus much of Secrecie. The next vertue re∣quired in a Souldier, is Sobriety or Temperance. Sobriety is a great vertue, and greatly to be accounted of all men,Sobrietie. for it extinguisheth Vice in the cradle, and stfleh it in the eed. It is the mother of health, & an assured medicine against all maladies, and that which lengtheneth a mans life. Socrates by Sobrietie had alwaies a strong body, and liued euer in health; whereas Alexander, by his drunkennesse, dyed in the flower of his age, though he were
better borne, and of a sounder constitution than Socrates. All the greatest Personages of the world haue beene Sober. So was Cyrus the elder, so was Caesar, so was Iulian the Emperor. Therefore let all Souldiers be sober, and embrace Sobriety, for it will make them as Kings and Princes to gouerne their passions, and to bridle their insatiate appetite. To Sobrietie let them adde Temperance. TemperanceTemperance. is a rule that sweetly accommodateth al things vn∣to Nature, Necessity, Simplicity, Facility, Health, Constancie. Temperance will weane their soules from the sweet milke of the pleasures of this world, and make them capable of a more solide and soueraigne nourishment. These two will highly aduance them in the fauour of their Generall, and raise them in time to great pre∣ferment, whereas drunkards and vntemperate persons are contem∣ned of all men, and no matter of importancie to be committed vn∣to them.Reade Garrards Art of Ware. The Turkes are famous for their Sobriety. A certaine Gentleman, at his returne from Constantinople, did declare vnto the Earle of Salma, that he had seene foure miracles in the Turkish Do∣minions; which was, first an infinite Armie almost without num∣ber, consisting of more than foure hundred thousand men: Second∣ly, that amongst so many men bee saw not one woman: Thirdly, that there was no mention made of wine: Lastly, at night when they had cried with a high voice, Alla, which is God, there conti∣nued so great a silence thorow the whole Campe, that euen in the Pauilions they did not speake but in a low voice. A thing worthy to be admired and imitated, though from Turkes. The next Quali∣tie required in a Souldier is Valour. ValourValour. is the greatest, the most generous and heroycallest vertue for a Souldier of all other, it consisteth in the stoutnesse of his heart, in the resolution and stayednesse of his minde, grounded vpon the dutie, the honesty, and iustice of the enterprise, which resolu∣tion neuer slacketh whatsoeuer hapneth, vntill he haue valiantly en∣ded the enterprise, or his life. Here is Valour, let Souldiers striue to be thus valiant: some doe seeke this vertue in the body, and in the power and strength of the limmes. But they are mistaken, for it is not a qualitie of the body, but of the minde, a setled strength, not of the armes and legs,They terme it. but of the courage. This Valour is Philoso∣phicall, not altogether humane, being an impregnable bulwarke, a compleat armour to incounter all accidents, arming a man against
his owne aduerse fortune,Peter Charron of Wisdome, lib. 3. pag. 499. and making him to brooke the constancy and vertue of his enemy, containing Magnanimity, Patience, and other chiefe heroicall vertues: All other helps are strange and bor∣rowed: strength of armes & legs is the quality of a Porter; to make an enemy to stoope, to dasle his eyes at the light of the Sunne, is an accident of Fortune. He whose courage faileth not for feare of death, quelleth not in his constancy and resolution, and though he fall is not vanquished of his Aduersary (who perhaps may in effect, be but a base fellow,) but of Fortune: and therefore he is to accuse his owne vnhappi∣nesse, and not his negligence;☞ The most valiant are oftentimes the most vnfortunate. Seeing it is so; Let no man be disheartned, especially a Souldier, seeing he must be brought vnto some honou∣rable enterprise, and therefore not to aduenture, is cowardnesse, to aduenture on, valour, be the euent what it will. Many are accoun∣ted valiant, who haue no sparke of true Valour in them; such are all our Thrasonicall Braggadoshes, Ragamuffin Rorers, who will quar∣rell with any man they meet with for the Wall, and send their challenges abroad as oftentations of their Valour. But such are not to be dealt withall, being but rash men, bastardly Valorous,Peter Charron of Wisdome, lib. 3. pag. 500. as they call it. True Valour, though it be Humane, is a wise Coward∣linesse; a Feare accompanied with foresight to auoid one euill by another: and such men as are thus valorous, will not venture their life vpon any sleight occasion. These are wise and are to be commended; the other vnwise, and are to bee discommended. Cato the elder, hearing many to commend a hare-braind fellow for his Valour, wittily taunted the applausers thus: My friends (quoth he) I wonder why you should esteeme Valour so much, and Life so little. Plutarch against heady Rashnesse speaketh to this effect, and saith; That when King Pyrrhus sent his Herald vnto King Antigonus; to challenge him to fight, Antigonus made him this answer, That he made Warres as much with Time as with Wea∣pons; and if Pyrrhus were weary of his Life, there was enough open to put himselfe to death. Thus you see how heady Rashnesse is to be contemned and auoided. But this doth no whit impeach Valour, for Valour executed in fit time and place, hath produced wonderfull effects. Quintus Curtius saith of Alexander, that hee got the Victory at Arbella, more by his owne Vertue than by any Fortune; and that with Valour and hardnesse more then through
any aduantage of ground.Plutarch in the life of Corola∣nus. Plutarch saith of Cains Martius; That by his meere Valour and manhood, he tooke the City of Co∣rioles; and after was the cause of the Consul Cominius victory a∣gainst them, which came to the rescue of it. For the Volfes (fea∣ring the taking of the City) came from all parts of the Countrey to saue it, and had diuided themselues into two parts, to hold the Romanes play in two seuerall places.) Therefore Martius hauing taken their City, left the spoile thereof to his obstinate Souldiers which stayed behind, and with a few that willingly offered them∣selues to goe, he went to aide the Consul Cominius against the rest. When he came he asked him how the Order of the Enemies Bat∣tell was, and on which side they had placed the best fighting men. The Consul made him answer, that he thought the Bands which were in the Vaward of their Battell, were those of the Antiates, whom they esteemed the warlikest men, and which for courage would giue no place to any of the Hoast of their Enemies. Then prayed Martius to bee set directly against them; the Consul granted him, greatly praising his courage. Then Martius, when both the Armies came almost to ioyne, aduanced himselfe a good space before his Company, and went so fiercely to giue charge on the Vaward that came right against him, that they could stand no longer in his hands, he made such a lane through them, and ope∣ned a passage into the Battell of the Enemies. The Romanes pre∣uailing against their foes, besought Martius that he would returne to the Campe, because they saw he was able to doe no more, hee was already so wearied with the great paine he had taken, and so faint with the great wounds he had vpon him. But Martius an∣swered them, that it was not for Conquerors to yeeld, nor to bee faint-hearted; and thereupon began afresh to chase them that fled, vntill such time as the Army of the Enemies was vtterly ouer∣throwne, and numbers of them slaine and taken prisoners. The next morning betimes, Martius went to the Consul Cominius, who highly commended him for his Valour, and proffered him many gits, but Mrtius refused all. Therefore the Consul did or∣der and decree, that he should henceforth be called Coriolanus, in lieu of the noble seruice he had done, & for his Lion-like courage. Tu much of Valour. The next Vertue required in a Souldier is Loyalty.Loyalty. Loyalty is a transcendent Vertue, and passeth my power to expresse. It con∣sisteth
in the faithfulnes of Subiects to their Prince, of Souldiers to their General, of one friend to another. For without faith no friend∣ship. Faith is the band of all humane society, the foundatiō of all Iu∣stice, & aboue all things ought to be religiously obserued. The Ro∣manes were wont to exact it from their Souldiers by an oath, the fome whereof (in Vegetius time) did run thus:Vegeti b. 2. cap. 5. We sweare by God the Father, by Christ his Sonne, and by the Holy Ghost, to do all thing: valiantly which the Emperour or Prince doth command vs; we will neuer forsake the warre, neither refuse death for the Romane Com∣mon-wealth. This shewes what manner of man a Souldier should be, loyall and faithfull, such a one by nature, not by Arte or obli∣gation; therefore let all Souldiers striue to attaine this excellent vertue of Loyalty, which will so arme them against all the temp∣tations of the Enemy, as he shall neuer be able to make them Trai∣tors.☜ What Souldier would become a Traitor to betray his Ge∣nerall or Captaine into the hands of his Enemy, if he did consider the penalty of the same; it may bee from him that sets him on worke? I will instance it in the Argyraspides.They loue the Treason but they hate the Traitor. Plutarch in the life of Eume∣nes. Plutarch in the life of Pausa∣nias. The Argyraspides were old Souldiers of Macedon, who did deliuer their good Cap∣taine Eumones aliue into the hands of Antigonus, his deadly enemy. But Antigonus, who set them a worke, commanded euery mothers sonne of them to be slaine in recompence of their Treason, (saith Plutarch in the life of Eumenes.) Treason is a horrid fact, and the iustice of God will not let it passe vnpunished, be the committer neuer so great: I will instance it in Pausanias. This Pausanias was Generall of the Lacedemonians, when the Persians ouer-ran Greece, and wasted all the Country before them, he receiued of Xerxes, King of Persia, fiue hundred Talents of gold, promising him to betray Sparta: but his Treason being discoue∣red, Agesilaus his father pursued him into the Temple of Miner∣ua, called Chalciaecos, where he fled for Sanctuary, where he caused the doores of the Temple to be mured vp with bricke, and famished him to death: his mother tooke his corps, and cast it forth to the dogs, not suffering it to bee buried, saith Plutarch in the life of Pausanias. These examples being set before their eyes, will not only make them to detest Treason, but to become more faithfull vnto their Commanders. Of all Souldiers none euer were more faithfull to their Com∣manders
than the Romans, ye shall not read in any History of any faithfuller Souldiers than they haue beene. When their Consull Crassus was endangered by the Parthian Arrowes, which flew thicke about his eares, they did compasse him about, and brought him into the middest of them, then co∣vering him round with their Targets, they told him, That neuer Arrow of the Parthians should touch his body, before they were all slaine, one after another, fighting it out to the last man in his de∣fence. Plutarch in the life of Otho the Emperour.Plutarch reports a more admirable act of theirs than this. The Emperour Otho (saith he) was forsaken of all his Captaines, who had yeelded themselues to Vitellus, the new Emperour, his Souldi∣ers notwithstanding forsooke him nor, neither went they to sub∣mit themselues to their enemies the Conquerours, neither tooke they any regard of themselues to see their Emperor in that despaire, but all ioyntly together went vnto his lodging and called for their Emperour; when hee came out, they fell downe at his feet; pro∣strated thus on the ground, they did kisse his hands, with the teares running downe their cheekes, and besought him, not to forsake and leaue them to their enemies, but to command their persons, whilest they had one drop of blood left in their bodies to doe him seruice: ☞Then one of the poore Souldiers, drawing out his sword, said vnto him, Know, O Caesar, that all my Companions are determi∣ned to dye in this sort for thee; and so slew himselfe. These were faithfull and loyall Souldiers, worthy to bee remem∣bred to all posterities: They were constant to their friends, faithfull to one another; not refusing death for the Romane Common∣wealth. Let all Souldiers imitate them in faithfulnesse. Faithfull Souldiers are a Captaines bulwarke. Caesar was safer in the Campe then in the Senate. Thus much of loyalty. The next quality required from a Souldier, is freedome from bribes. It is a dishonourable thing for a Souldier to receiue a Bribe; and it is the more dishonourable, because the law of Armes doth for∣bid it: wherefore doth the law of Armes strictly forbid it with a penalty to the same, but because those men, whose nature is most
prone to take bribes, are the most fittest to be made Traytors? On them the enemy will lay golden bookes, to draw them to his pur∣pose, vpon any occasion. Thus Xerxes dealt with Arthmius,Plutarch in the life of Themi∣sticles. borne at Zelba, who by gold was to corrupt the Graecians, to make him way into Greece. But Arthmius was thereupon noted of infamy, not alone, but his children, with their posterity after. Thus he dealt with Pausanius, Generall of the Lacedemonians,Xerxes corrup∣ted Pausanius with 500 ta∣lents of gold to betray Sparta. Plutarch in his Morals, and in the life of Pau∣sanius. to whom he gaue fiue hundred Talents of gold, to betray Sparta in∣to his hands: but Pausanius, being too much gorged with gold, was mured vp in a Temple, and famished to death, as I haue already declared. Good reason therefore it is, that the law of Armes should so strictly forbid the taking of bibes, seeing the whole Army may be endangered thereby. And the law of Armes doth likewise in∣clude all acceptance of gifts, as vnlawfull for any to receiue of a professed enemy, that is, or hath beene, or may be guessed at to bee hereafter, whether they be giuen him in lieu of his desert, or to re∣compence him for his Ambassage; he must not, I say, accept them of him, forfeare of bringing himselfe into danger. Haue not ma∣ny bin brought into suspition by it? Haue not some lost their liues for it? Read Histories, peruse this example. The Athenians sent their Ambassadors (who were Souldiers) to Artaxerxes, King of Persia, to fulfill the desire of the King,Plutarch in the life of Pelopidas pag. 302. and to grant him peace: The King was so pleased therewith, that he en∣tertained them royally, and sent them backe againe with many gifts; but when they were returned home, they were deseruedly checked by their State and Communalty, who had them all in sus∣pition; and some had much adoe to cleare themselues. Among them was one Timagoras, who had receiued of the King of Persia, fourescore milch Kine, for the peale, and other presents, with a great deale of gold and siluer, him the Athenians condemned to dye, and neither wealth nor friends could saue his life. This should make a Souldier to beware how he takes gifts or presents from an enemy, lest he lose his life, or incurre the ill will of his Prince, or be of no repute among men. What made Pelopidas to be so well reputed of among the The∣bans?Plutarch in the life of Pelopidas pag. 303. but because he refused the gifts and presents which the King of Persia offered him? What made Plutarch so highly to commend Manius Curius? but because he refused the gifts which the Sam∣nites
sent vnto him by their Ambassadors? This Manius Curius was a Romane and had triumphed thrice, being the greatest man of Rome in his time, hauing subdued the mightiest nations and peo∣ple of Italy; and driuen King Pyrrhus also out of the same; yet himselfe dwelt in a little farme, hauing a small patch of ground be∣longing thereunto, being therewith contented, and manuring the same with his owne hands: thither notwithstanding, after his three triumphs,Plutarch in the life of Marcus Cato. the Samnits sent their Ambassadors to visit him, who found him by the fire side, seething of Parsnips, and presented him a maruellous deale of gold from their State and Communalty; but Curius returned them againe with their gold, and told them, That such as were contented with that Supper, had no need of gold or siluer; and that for his part, he thought it greater honour to com∣mand them that had gold, then to haue it himselfe. They who will immitate this man, shall inherite his commenda∣tions: I conclude with this admonition to all Souldiers. S. Trussell, in his Souldiers plea.Let them not receiue any thing from the enemy, either gift or letter, or any such thing; no, though it be from their owne fathers, without the license of their Generall or Captaines; if they doe, they will bee wonderfully suspected, and in danger, not onely of their credits, but also of their liues. The next quality required in a Souldier, is Moderation in Ex∣pence. Moderation in expenceModerate in expence. is not onely profitable, but commen∣dable. Therefore let Souldiers be moderate in expence, rather spa∣ring than wasting. The ancient Romans were commendable for this, the halfe of that which was giuen them in the warres, they set apart by their Standards, there to be kept, lest through excesse and ryot, or the getting of vaine things, it might bee wasted by themselues or o∣thers; but being by their Standards they knew it safe. This made them neuer to forsake their Standards, but rather sticke to them: so when they came home from the warres, they brought that with them that was able to maintaine them. The next Chapter shew∣eth what the wisdome and policy is which ought to bee in euery Commander.
CHAP. XVII. Of Wisdome and Policy; the vse of it; how it may be attained: with a briefe Summary of stratagems and policies, pertinent for these times, divulged for such as haue the command ouer thousands: I meane, for young Commanders, not old Soldiers. WIsdome and Policie is fit for euery Souldier,Of wisdome & policy, the vse of it, and how it may be attai∣ned. &c. but more proper for those Commanders before mentioned; there∣fore they must studie to get wisdome and policy, for it is the onely meanes, next vnder God, whereby they may preserue their owne liues, and the liues of their Souldiers. If a Captaine bee void of wisdome and learning, Martial discipline wanteth her greatest stay; courage proueth rashnesse, and policy will be but weakely suppor∣ted. Learning in a Souldier (saith Vegetius) is an Armour of ne∣uer tainted proofe, and a wounding Dart vnresistable: Therefore let Soldiers, if it be possible, study to attaine to learning: learning is obtained by industry and instruction, as policy and wisdome by experience. The way to attaine wisdome and Policy,Read Xenophons Historie of Cy∣rus Warres. Read Frontines booke of Stra∣tagems, now extant, and commonly ioy∣ned in one vo∣lume with Ʋe∣getius. Read Plutarchs liues, the Turkish Hi∣story, and many others; especi∣ally the Chro∣nicles of euery Nation now extant in Eng∣ish. is to be frequent in the reading of Histories; especially of such Histories as are stored with worthy stratagems, and the braue exploits of worthy Gene∣rals: There young Commanders shall finde store of examples, and be taught to obserue euery one of these particulars; 1 When they are to take a iourney, and to make warre with an enemie in his owne Countrey, they must by all meanes get aduer∣tisement, by intelligencers, of all the difficult passages of the same, the shortnesse of the waies, the turnings, the mountaines, and all the riuers that are therein, lest in going they suffer inuasion of the enemie, to their detriment, or finall destruction: but being pread∣monished, they are halfe armed, and preuent the danger with lit∣tle losse. 2 When they are prepared, and setting forth to march, there must be this warinesse and heed taken that it be not knowne or di∣vulged abroad vnto what places they goe, nor by what waies they meane to passe, for that iourney is taken in hand without feare,
which the enemy doth not so much as once suspect. The two famous Souldiers of Rome and Greece, which shot like two thunder bolts into the West and East, and filled the whole world with the fame of their Victories, are renowned for nothing more then their celerity in doing and preuenting the very report of their comming. ☞They who would arriue at the Port of Victory, and by her gates enter the Tower of Fame, must keepe their intentions secret. Old Metellus being importunated by an insinuating friend of his touching the army, and setting forward of some expedition, an∣swered him thus: If I will (quoth hee) that my shirt which i ne my skin knew this my inward intent and secret purpose, I would put it off and fling it into the fire Vegetius lib. 3.The old men of warre (saith Vegetius) had in then Legions the badge and signe of the Minotaure, that as he was said to be hid in the innermost and most secret place of the Labyrinth, euen so the intent of the Captaine should be kept secret and hid, therefore it must be kept close, vnto what places and by what wayes they meane to passe forth. But because Spies sent out on the other party doe either see or suspect which way they are intended to goe, and many times there wanteth not Runnagates or Traitors. In the next place it shall be declared how these things at hand may be preuen∣ted and resisted. 3. When they are vpon their march, they must send most trustie and fine witted men, with the best tried horse, which must search the places thorow which they must take their iourney, before and behinde, on the right hand and on the left hand, lest the enemie goe about to set an ambushment, and lie in wait to deceiue them. 4. When they haue discried an Ambush, they must compasse the same about politikely; so it shall suffer more perill and danger than it went about to doe. 5. When they approach nigh vnto the enemie, they must be in∣quisitiue to know what manner of man their aduersarie is, what his Companions are and Leaders, whether they be rash and hastie, or warie and circumspect, whether they be hardy, or fearefull, cun∣ning in the feats of warre, or such as are wont to fight at all aduen∣ture; whether they excell or exceed them in number of men, or mu∣nition and fence of armour; whether they can doe more with foot∣men, or horsemen; with Piemen, or Musquetiers; whether by
night, or in the dawning of the day, or in the  of repast, their custome be to assaile their wearied enemies. Then to debate and treat of their owne power, what may be done in this case; whether it be more profitable to prolong the vrgent necessitie of battell, or to fight it out of hand. If they know themselues to haue the better Horsemen, the better Footmen, the better Souldiers, the better furnished in many things, let them not deferre the conuenient and fit occasion of fighing. But if they perceiue their enemies to be the better, let them auoid the open and set battell, for a few in number and weake in strength, oftentimes vnder good Captaines haue ob∣tained the victory, by sudden inuasions and lying priuily in wai, which they may doe, taking time. 6. When they are resolued to aduenture a set battell with the enemie, they are first to sound the mindes and dispositions of their Souldiers, whether they stand affected to fight or no, (it being as they would haue it) they must begin to forecast how to get the Sunne, the Wind and Dust, in the face of the enemie. The higher ground likewise, to the intent the enemie may fight both against them and the place; for these are not the least meanes of obtaining the victorie. 7. When they hope for victory through Footmen, against the Horsemen of their enemies, they must chuse ruffe places, vneuen, and full of hils. But if they looke to gaine the victory through Horsemen, against the Footmen of their enemies, they must chuse such places as be indeed somewhat higher, but plaine and open, encumbred neither with woods nor sennes. 8 When they haue cunningly incompast the battels of their enemies, they must leaue them some way whereby they may flie, for if a passage to depart away be once opened, as soon as the minds of all doe agree to runne away; they are slaine and murdered like beasts. Neither is there any danger to pursue them, when they haue flung downe their weapons and will fight no longer but being so inclosed, that they haue no way to flie, they fight stoutly, and become desperately desperate, because they looke for no safetie or life; so you haue no oddes at all, but are both indifferent alike. For they are as couragious and as desperate to fight as you, rather more, by the occasion. Therefore young Scipio's counsell is to be fol∣lowed:☜ The way whereby the enemie may flie must not bee for∣tified.
9 When they are not resolued to fight, but to depart away from the enemie, the Souldiers must not know that they doe it to shunne battell, but they must bee brought in beliefe that they are called back for this policie: That the enemie may be allured vnto a more conuenient place, that he may be the more easily vanquished and intrapped by them.Vegetius lib. 3. cap. 21. This they must not faile to doe, (for Ʋegetius saith) they will be readie to flie, if they perceiue their owne Cap∣aines to despaire. 10 When their enemies doth perceiue their flight, then their care must be to send some before to possesse the places of greatest aduantage which the enemie doth couet, that the rest may the bet∣ter passe in safety, and the enemy be frustrated of his purpose. Others behind must lie in ambush to intrap the enemy who comes on with boldnesse, no whit suspecting this policy. The rest must be pread∣monished to be euer in readinesse, lest the sudden cōming of their enemies make them fearefull: 11 When they are in feare to bee inclosed by the number of their enemies, they must either seeke some place of naturall defence, or make the place so by art. I will explaine both by examples. How to choose a ground to fight with an enemie, when you feare to come into the champion to be inclosed by his number. Plutarch in the life of King A∣geslaus.Agesilau being in Aegypt, and hauing to do with a great mul∣titude of Aegyptians, of whom he stood in feare of, to abide them battell in the champion, by reason of their multitude, did thus: He brought his men into the field. One while hee made as though hee fled, and inticed them to follow him; suddenly againe he would turne this way, and that way, in fine he brought all this multitude into a strait sluce walled about on either side, with great broad dit∣ches full of running water, so that euen when they were in the mid∣dest of it, he suddenly stopped their passage with the front of his battaile, which he cast to the breadth of the sluce, and thus made the number of his fighting men equal with the number of his ene∣mies, who could neuer compasse him in behinde, nor flanke him on the sides.☞ This he did by choosing a place fit for his purpose. How to fortifie a pl ce by art.The place may be helped by art, in case it be otherwise too open, and fit for the enemy, that abounds in number, to incompasse them on euery side. So CaesarCaesar e bello Gall. lib. 2. 36. & lib. 3. 323. being to fight against multitudes of Gaules, drew a deepe Trench on both the Flankes of his army, to secure it from the charge of the enemie. The like did SyllaPlutarch. in Syla, & Ain. in bello Mitbri∣dates. against Archelaus, the Generall of Mithridates, in the battell of Orchomene, and both of
them so securing their armies from circumuention, became Masters of the Field, and Conquerours of their enemies. Of latter times Iohn Huniades the HungarianTurkish. Hist. 297. §. 2. King, being to fight against the huge armie of the Turke, gained a noble battell against them, by placing his armie on the one side against a Fenne, and inclosing it on the other side with his Waggons. 12. When they cannot preuaile against the Enemy by strength, then let them minister and breed causes of discord amongst their Souldiers; for no Army, though it be very little, can quickly be destroyed of the Enemies, except it be consumed with priuate dis∣sentions and hatred within it selfe. This is practised to this day, and is tollerated by our chiefes of Warre, who prefer policy before strength, therefore let it be followed. The old Spartan that had conquered by policie, offered an Oxe; but he that preuailed by force, offered only a Cocke; because the greater sacrifice of thank∣fulnesse, was due to the gods from him, for the one; and the greater praise and reward was due vnto him, from the State for the other. But this is the greatest glory of all to driue out the naile of their Enemies practise, with a stronger of their owne, and to blow him vp in his owne Mine. Policie against force deserueth much, and preuaileth often; but by Stratagem to preuaile against Policy is euer excellent. Behold it in this. The Souldiers of Ferdinand, plotted with some of the French Garrison in Gifon-Castle, neere San-Seuerino, to betray the place vnto them: the French entertained the motion, and assigned an houre, and the manner, for the execution: In the meane while, they acquainted the Gouernour. The Arragoneses came at the time appointed; found a Port open, and enter; they were taken in the trap; seuen hundred, part horse, and part foot, were slaine on the place; the rest were taken prisoners. Thus Stratagem did preuaile against Policy: Stratagem and Policie are of great force, and in Warre may be lawfully vsed. It is vsuall and allowable by the Law of Armes (saith Sir Robert Dallington) for a publique and professed enemy to attempt that by stratagem, fraud, or suborned treachery,Sir Rob. Dall. in his Ahorisme, chap. 37. which cannot be got by fine force without long time, vttermost danger, and extreame charge, for this way the purchase is sooner made and at lesse rate. Therefore let them vse all stratagems and policies that may be to circumuent and ouerthrow an enemy; let them vpon fit occasion
corrupt the enemies men with money; let them by cunning meanes and fained letters cause the enemies Captaines to be suspe∣cted; Let them bring the Generall himselfe into more dislike, if hee bee disliked of his Souldiers: So they may bee rid of him by policie, whom they could not be rid of by force. I will shew you the euents of all these by presidents. The first ex∣ample of presi∣den, shewing how to corrupt the Enemies men with mo∣ney.Monsieur Trimouille, Monsieur de Ligny, and Iohn Iaques Tri∣ultio, being to warre with Lodowick Sforza Duke of Milan in the behalfe of Lewis the twelfth the French King, thought with them∣selues there was no quicker way to end the Warre than to corrupt Lodowicks Souldiers with money. He had entertained many Swis∣sers into pay, and these Swissers were valiant men of their hands, but very couetous, and easie to be corrupted with gold: therefore they sent priuily to the Colonels of the Swissers, profering them great summes of money to forsake Lodowicke, or to betray him into their hands. They being tickled with these proffers, stirred all the rest to mutiny, taking their occasions that their payes were not performed at the iust dayes that were promised. The Duke ran to the stirre in person, bringing forth vnto them all his siluer, plate and vessels, desiring them to rest contented but till the money came from Milan, yet they would not yeeld, but said they would depart suddenly into their Countrey. The Duke not being able neither with prayers, nor with teares, nor by infinite promises to pacifie any whit their barbarous disloyalty, recommended himselfe wholly vnto them, to the end that at the least they would lead him to a place of safety. But because they had contracted with the French Captaines,Guichiardin. lib. 3. pag 108. to goe their wayes, and not to lead him with them, being not willing to grant vnto his full demand, yet they consented that he should march away amongst them, taking the habit of one of their footmen; and so, if he were not knowne, to saue himselfe by the helpe of his fortune. The which conditi∣ons being accepted of him, for a last necessitie, was not sufficient for his safety: for that marching by direction, through the midst of the French Armie, he was knowne by the diligent espiall of such as were assigned to that charge; or rather disclosed by the Swissers themselues, as he marched in a Squadron of Foot, attired and armed in all points as a Swisser, and was by that meanes made prisoner.Guichiardin. lib. 3. pag. 108. Here you see the French Pistolets could doe more than their men at Armes; ouercomming him who stiled himselfe
the sonne of Fortune. From these acute and politique French, we take our next president or example by fained letters to cause our enemies Captaines to be suspected. Burbon and Triuultio the King of France his Generals,The second ex∣ample or pre∣sident, shewing how by cun∣ning meanes and fained Let∣ters, wee shall cause our ene∣mies Cap∣taines to be suspected. being besieged and very hardly distressed within Milan by the Emperor Maximilian, deuised this policie to free themselues: They sent a seruant of Triuultio's (who spake the Swissers tongue perfectly well) with fained letters vnto the Captaines of that Nation, then seruing in Maximilians Campe, thereby to make them to be suspe∣cted and doubted; the which fained messenger being taken by the Sentinels and Watches, cunningly (like Sinon of Troy) humbly be∣seeched them his life and pardon, and that he would deliuer them certaine things, which he had to deliuer to the Colonels and Cap∣taines of the Swissers: the which being granted him, hee drew out of his shooe the deuised letters, which hee carried to cause a suspition to grow vpon these Captaines: the which being seene and read by the Emperor, holding for certaine their contents to be true, and mistrusting some treason, as they had before vsed vnto Lodowicke Sforza, raised presently his Campe, and withdrew him∣selfe with lesse constancie and credit, then to his honour and repu∣tation was conuenient. Here was a way made without a golden bridge: Here was a fetch fit for a Carthaginian Haniball: from whom we take the last president or example, how to bring our enemies Generall into fur∣ther dislike, by adding fuell to the former fire. Haniball being in Italy did such hurt to the Romanes,The third ex∣ample or presi∣dent, shewing how to bring a Generall into further dislike then he was in before. as they were almost at their wits end, not knowing what to doe, nor what Consull to choose: at length they sent against him Quintus Fa∣bius Maximus, who was both their Dictator and Generall; one both skilfull and politique, and by delay meant to prolong the Warre, so to haue wearied Hanibals strength and power out (for hauing increased his pouerty by his long stay, spending his owne stocke, he should at last haue beene forced of his owne accord to haue forsaken Italy, to the great glory of this man,) who by policy and wisdome, might haue beene said to haue ouerthrowne Hani∣ball; for this he was despised of the Romanes, and counted a cow∣ard, and confronted by them: But Haniball most of all feared him, and therefore craftily put this tricke vpon him.
anibals crafti∣esse against abius.Hee commanded his Souldiers, when they came neere any of Fabis lands, that they should burne and destroy all round about them, but gaue them charge in no wise to meddle with Fabius lands, nor any thing of his, and did purposely appoint a Garrison to see that nothing of Fabius should miscarry nor take hurt. This was streight carried to Rome, which did wonderfully incense the people against him, by the meanes of Metellus their Tribune, who made them an Oration, in which he taxed him no more of Cow∣ardlinesse, but of flat Treason, accusing the Nobility and greatest men of Rome, saying, that from the first beginning, they had laid a plot to draw these Warres out at length, only to destroy the Peoples power and authority, hauing brought the whole Com∣mon-weale into the state of a Monarchy, and into the hands of a priuate person, who by his remisnesse and delayes, would giue Ha∣niball leisure to plant himselfe in Italy, and in time giue open pas∣sage to the Carthaginians, at their pleasure, to send Haniball a se∣cond aide and Armie, and to make a full conquest of all Italy: perswading the people therefore to take the Tyrannicall power of Dictatorship from him, and to put their affaires into the hands of Minutius Generall of their Horsemen, who would and could tell how to bring them safely to passe: The people were tickled mar∣uellously with these seditious words, but yet they durst not force Fabius to resigne his Dictatorship,Plutarch in the life of Fabius the Dictator. though they bare him a great grudge, and were angry with him in their hearts: Howbeit they ordained, that Minutius should thenceforth haue equall power and authority with the Dictator in the Warres; a thing that was neuer seene nor heard of before. Now say; Was not this a braue policie of Haniball to bring Fabius into such dislike at Rome? and Rome it selfe into such an vprore vpon it? Surely it was: and it had as good successe as might be. Therefore hauing sufficient pre∣sidents for these things, feare not to put them in execution, when you see fit time. I conclude now as I began, that all these policies and more, are to be attained with learning, and often reading of Histories, as by all braue Commanders which euer were yet, may well be vnderstood. And therefore let no man thinke but a Soul∣dier ought to be learned and read, the which ioyned with experi∣ence, makes him a perfect man of Warre, and without this lear∣ning and reading, a Souldier may haunt the Warres many yeeres,
and neuer attaine to the deepe points of Souldiery;In Barrets art of Warre lib. 8. pag. 173. the which by much reading and few yeeres of experience, may be farre bet∣ter perfected, as may be seene by Lucullus the Romane Comman∣der, and many others of other Nations. Thus much of Policie, and of the qualities which befits Mar∣tiall men. The next eight Chapters following declares the vse of Facing, the vse of Wheeling, the vse of Counter-marching, the vse of Dou∣bling, the vse of those Distances which are to be obserued in Bat∣tell, (naturally arising out of Doubling) with the words of com∣mand for either. CHAP. XVIII. Of the vse of Facing. IN exercise we commonly prefix vnto our selues this method or order. First to face and stand: Secondly, to face and march. When we face and stand,☜ Of facing and standing. it is to shew our Souldiers how they should defend themselues, if they should be set vpon, in Front, in Reare, in Flankes: by transferring their faces that way to receiue them closing, or sering themselues together at a conuenient di∣stance, and bearing out aThis is liuely expressed in the Hollow battell called Plaesium, wher the Musketier are in the mid∣dest, the Pikes outwardly Frō¦ted euery way and chargin ouer-hand to shelter the Musketiers. Apian in the Warres of Si∣ria, and Capt. Bingham. multitude of Pikes euery way vpon them: (as that Phalange of Antiochus the Great did) when Domi∣tius, Scipio's Lieutenant encompassed it round with horse-men and light armed. I cannot doe amisse in relating the manner of it vnto you, it being so pertinent for my purpose, and so fit for the vn∣derstanding of the motion: Therefore out of Apian I will dilate it thus. As soone as the horse and chariots, of Antiochus, were put to flight by the Romane Horse-men, and by Eumenes his Phalange of foot being destitute of horse, first opened and receiued the light armed (that had all the while fought in the Front) into the middest of it. Then afterwards againe closed: And when Domitius, Sci∣pio's Lieutenant incompassed it about with horse and light armed, which he might easily doe, by reason it was thrust vp in a thickeThis Plinth¦um was a grea square battell full of men, and not the hollow Plinthium spoken of in Xnophon. The depth o this Plinthium was 32. in depth. The light armed in the middest. Plinthium, it was driuen to great distresse: being neither able to
charge the enemie, nor yet to countermarch in so great a depth as it carried: It grieued them much that their long experience nothing auailed them to annoy the enemy, and that notwithstanding, they were subiect to Arrowes and Darts at all hands. Yet bearing out a multitude of Pikes on euery side of their square, they called the Ro∣mans to come to handle blowes, and still made a countenance, as though they meant to charge, keeping themselues for all that with∣in their Rankes, as being foot-men and heauy armed, and the rather because they had to doe with an Enemy on horse-backe. Besides, they were loath to breake the thicknesse of their battell; which forme they could not now alter. The Romanes also Durst not ap∣proach them, and come to sword, fearing their experience in War, and closenesse of Aray, and desperation. But running about here and there, plyed them with Arrowes and Darts, whereof none was throwne in vaine, falling amongst a troupe so closely put together, that they could neither auoid, and decline any thing throwne, nor giue a way, albeit they saw it comming. At last being weary and ir∣resolute what to doe, they retired easily, with a threatning counte∣nance notwithstanding and in good order, and not deliuering the Romanes of feare, who durst not yet come neare, but sought to an∣noy them aloofe; till the Elephants placed in the Macedonian Pha∣lange, being affrighted, and not to be ruled by their gouernours, troubled all, and gaue occasion of flight. Hitherto Appian. Whereby you may see how suddenly they did face, maintaining a Charge (as it were) vpon a stand; and when the Romanes would not come to handy strokes with them, they angerly, yet leasurely retreated: and when they were distressed, made as though they would charge, holding out a multitude of Pikes euery way; to the amazement of the Romanes, who durst not approach them. The like may be done by ourThat is the Hollow square whee the Pikes are with∣out, and the Musketiers within. Battell, if it should be charged as that was. Thus much to face ane stand. Now to face and march. ☞ Off facing and Marching.When we face and march, it is to shew our Souldiers how we can vpon deliberation (as occasion serues) preuent the enemie from Falling on our right or left Wing, by bringing it to some Riuer, or such like place of strength for succour, wherby the enemy can haue no way to encōpasse it: which we do by bidding them first to face, then to march to the place, afterwards to face againe. And so they are reduced to the first posture, and the Front is, as it was at the first.
This we continually vse in our Trainings at home, to make ou men fit for it in the face of the Enemie. Howsoeuer some may be ignorant in the vse of the motion, yet they cannot bee vnskilfull in the motion it selfe, by reason of the practise. No Battell can well be without this motion, especially in the field, where the enemy doth seeke aduantage. Let me therefore shew you some other ex∣cellent vses thereof, that it may bee the beter esteemed, and the oftner practised. This motion, as it is performed marching,The vse of Fa∣cing, as it is performed marching. is of this singular vse, not onely to giue an assault vpon the aduerse wing of the ene∣my, but to fail any way off from the enemy, and suddenly againe to turne vpon him with an euen front to his front; that is, Pikes to his Pikes, Shot to his Shot, whereby he is preuented from falling, ei∣ther on the Flankes, or on the Reare, comming on with one maine Bodie. Manie other vses it hath, as partly this; ToCaptaine Bing∣hm in his notes vpon Aelian cha. 25. shunne a dange∣rous ground on which an enemie hath strewed, Calthrops, or laid a secret trap, this was found practised by Alexand. the great, when he fought with Darius at Arbela; Arrian describes it thusArrian lib. 4. & Alexand. 17. (saith he) Alexander hauing imbattelled his Army, to fight with Dari∣us, had intelligence, that Darius had strewed the ground betwixt the two Armies with Calthrops; hee commanded therefore the right Wing, which himselfe led, to turne faces to the right hand, and to follow him, to the end to goe round about, and avoid the places that were strewed with Calthropes: Darius marching a∣gainst him to the left hand, disioyned his troopes of horse, and A∣lexander taking the aduantage, and guing in quickly betwixt the spaces, put Darius to flight. Here you see the euent of it, and what a victory Alexander gai∣ned thereby. If he had faced and stood still, what would it auailed him? Had hee marched fore-right, hee had falne vpon the Cal∣thropes, but by facing and then marching vpon it, hee effected all. First he auoided the ground where the Calthropes lay (by fa∣cing and marching forth) then hee reduced them againe to their first posture, by facing them to the left hand. Afterwards (taking his aduantage) hee went on to the charge, and so defeated the enemie. Why Alexander made choice (onely) of this motion, is not to be wondred at, because necessity made him to make vse of this mo∣tion
when no other would serue. Countermarch had bin ridiculous, so had doubling; wheeling had bin in vaine: nay, it was impossible for him to haue wheeled, the ground being so scantie, (betweene him and the Calthropes) his Phalange of so great a bredth, and the enemie so nigh. Yet say he had wheeled (hauing had ground sufficient) hee must haue beene forced (hauing wheeled) to haue faced withall, and mar∣ched further out, then wheeled againe, or else to no purpose; so haue failed of his expedition. Thus you see how fit this motion serued Alexanders turne, and by it may learne to make like vse of it, vpon like occasion. Another singular vse of this motion is, to get the vpper ground from the enemie. This was found practized by Philopaemen, the Achaean Generall. When Machanidas, the Lacedemonian Tirant, had put his left wing to flight, yet he by this meanes restored the battell, and with∣all obtained the victory. Polibius lib. 11. 634Polibius describes the manner of it thus; The fight being begunne betweene Machanidas, the Lacede∣monian Tirant, and Philopaemen, the Achaean Generall, it happened that Machanidas had the better, for he hauing put the left Wing of the Achaean Mercenaries to flight, followed hard the chase; Phi∣lopaemen, as long as there was any hope, endeauored to stay his men: when he saw them vtterly defeated, hee hasted to the right Wing, and perceiuing the enemy busie in the chase, and the place voide where the fight had bin, commanding the firstA Merarchy consisteth of 2048 men. Merarchies to turn their faces to the right and, he led them on with high speed, not yet breaking the order of their imbattelling, and quickly sei∣zing vpon the forsaken ground, hee both cut betwixt them that gaue chase, and home, and withall got the aduantage of the vpper ground against the left wing of the armed, whereby hee obtained the victorie. Captain Bing∣ham vpon the same moti∣on, Aelian chap. 5.If Philopaemen had in this action vsed wheeling of his Battell, which onely was the other motion which would haue serued his turne, besides the troublesomnesse of the winding about, he should haue bin forced to haue vsed two wheelings, and so failed of the celeritie, which was at time requisite, faces were turned in a trice, and he made himselfe master of the ground hee desired, before hee could haue wheeled once his Battell.
Besides to haue Fac'd and stood still, had beene to no purpose, but Facing and Marching on was to some purpose, as you haue heard. Thus you see what Facing is;Of the vse of Facing in ge∣nerall. How it is the easiest of all Mo∣tions, but of no lesse importance or necessitie: How it may be done in a trice, though the Enemy come very suddenly vpon vs: Though he encompasse both our Wings: Though hee enuiron vs round with Foot and Horse, yet we may Face vpon him, and make him resistance: How that there is no Battell but hath need of this Motion: So that when we finde our Enemies to encom∣passe our right Wing, wee turne our Faces and Weapons that way to receiue them. To the left, when they come to charge vs on that side: If on both sides, then wee turne Faces halfe to the right, and halfe to the left hand. But being to remoue the Bat∣tell from any of the Flanks, we cause Faces to be turned to that Flanke; so we lead on vpon the Enemy, either to assault him, or to preuent him where he would assault. Which if we cannot doe, we make a stand, and so receiue him. All this I haue expressed fully both by precept and example. Now it remaines that I shew you foure other things. First, by what words of Command it may be done. Secondly, in what order. Thirdly, with which Legge comming forward. Fourthly, how to reduce all this (by way of document or obser∣uation) shall be declared in the next Chapter following. CHAP. XIX. Obseruations for Facing; shewing the manner how to performe the action; with many other Circumstances appertaining to the precedent Chapter. IN the precedent Chapter, mention was made of Facing. In this Chapter are certaine Obseruations positiuely set downe for the exact performance thereof. They are in number foure. The first obseruation is, for the motion of the Legge.
The second for reducement to its first Posture. The third for distance to grace the Action. The fourth for words of Command, either to Face and March; or to Face and Stand; expressing their vse. Of these in order. The first Ob∣seruation.First then obserue that in Facing vpon a stand, the Motion, must and ought to be performed with the right Legge; that is, the left Legge must stand firme: The right must either remoue forward, or backward: Forward, when you Face to the left hand; Back∣ward, when you face to the right hand. Be it to the right about, or to the left about, the left Leg stands firme; only you moue the foot vpon the heele or toe: But in the March it is to be done,How to Face Marching. sometimes with the right Legge, sometimes with the left Legge: With the right Legge, when it is to the left hand: With the left Legge, when it is to the right hand; for you must gaine ground, and not lose. The second Obseruation.In the second place, obserue or take notice, how to reduce vnto the first Posture. This must be thus performed: When you Face to the right, returne backe to the left hand. How to reduce vnto your first Posture.When you Face to the left, returne backe to the right hand. Hauing Fac'd about to the right, returne about to the left. Hauing Fac'd about to the left, returne about to the right. For still the contrary must be done. Obserue it and forget it not. The third Ob∣seruation.In the third place obserue, or take notice, of the Distances ap∣propriated to Facing. These Distances are of three sorts: to wit, Open Order. Order. Close Order. The first for Exercise: The two last for Seruice. No Captaine must be so absurd, as to Face vpon an Enemy (in open Order) the Enemy comming to push of Pike. The Grecians would neuer Face to receiue the Charge of an Enemy, but in their close Order. Their close Order, was a foot and a halfe from file to file, and three foot from ranke to ranke. This we commonly vse with Pikes. But our Musketiers are neuer to be closer then the second Distance of three foot in square, because they are to haue a free vse of their Armes. If then they be at a closer Distance, they will much throng and trouble one ano∣ther, and are subiect to firing.
In the last place, obserue how to giue the words of Command,The fourth Obseruation. either to Face and March, or to Face and stand. That you may doe it orderly, and properly, I haue fitted them to your mouth thus: Face to the right hand, March.Words of Command to Face and March. Face to the left hand, March. Face to the right hand about, March. Face to the left hand about, March. Thus you may set vpon your Enemy as you see aduantage, or preuent him where he would charge you to your disaduantage, or shun a dangerous ground prepared for you, as Alexander did, when Darius would haue intrapped him. Thus much to Face & March, and of the words of Command for it. Now to face and stand, with the words of Command for that Motion. The words of proper direction for it are these.Words of Command to Face & stand. Face to the right hand.If you restore to the first Po∣sture, you are to say, As you were. Thus if the Enemy haue encompassed your right Flanke, you are ready for him. Face to the left hand. Thus if the Enemy haue encompassed your left Flanke, you are ready for him. Face to the right and left hand, by diuision. Thus if the Enemy hath encompassed both the Wings of your Battell, (being vnable to auoide itThey face to the right and left, by diui∣sion.) you Face thus to resist him. Face to the right and about. Thus if the Enemy haue suddenly made his Approach vpon your Reare, you are ready for him, and resist him in an instant. Middle men to the right hand about. This forme is called Phalange Amphistomus, described by Aelian chap. 38. And is of excellent vse to resist the charge of the Enemy, assaulting vs in Front and Reare.
Obserue the forme of this Face, being ten in depth. This is the Pinthium full of men.The three last Rankes face about to the Right. The three first Rankes in the Front stand as you doe. The Rest in the midst to the Right and Left, by diuision. Thus if the Enemy haue enuironed you about on all sides: On all sides you are ready to resist him. Plutarch in the life of Paulus Aemilius.This was the last remedy of the Macedonian Phalange opposed against Paulus Aemylius in his Battell with Perseus, which distres∣sed the Romanes, and had gained the victory, had it not beene bro∣ken for want of ground. Thus much for Facing. Now if in stead of Facing, you would command Charging, giue the words thus: Charge to the right hand. Charge to the left hand. Charge both to the right and left hand. Charge to the Front. Charge to the Reare. Charge both Front and Reare. Charge euery way. A Caution.When you charge vpon a stand, fall backe with the right Legg. When you charge to goe on, come forward with the left Legg. This is to charge Marching. Thus much for this Chapter. CHAP. XX. Of the vse of Wheeling. WHeeling is of the same vse with Facing, both may be done vpon the sudden approach of the Enemy, whether hee shew himselfe on the right or left Flanke, or in the Reare of your Battell. The excellency of Wheeling.If he shew himselfe in the right or left Flanke, Wheeling will
haue the preheminence of Facing, for it will oppose him with thy front, which are thy best men. If he shew himselfe in the Reare, Wheeling will yet haue the preheminence, and oppose him there with thy fileleaders (or best men) as it did before in the Flanke ButOf the pre∣hemincie of Facing ouer Wheeling. if the enemie shew himselfe in Front and Reare, or in more then these places at once (suddenly to charge thee) Facing will then haue the preheminence, and Wheeling will doe more harme then good. Therefore being in this straight, the best reme∣die is to turne faces and so receiue him. But hauing sufficient place, and fit occasion to wheele,Captaine Bing∣ham in his notes vpon Aelian, Chapt. 25. omit not this oportunitie, but meet him with thy best men. For example whereof I bring the Graetians: They coveting alwaies to bring their best men, that is, the fileleaders to fight; did thus, In open order they chose to countermarch? In close order hauing place to wheele their battell about, they did turne the face of it against the enemie. If they could doe neither of these, they came to the last remedie which was turning of faces of euery particular man in the battell. This was the Gre∣cians order, which shewes the excellencie of their discipline: And therefore we are willing to follow them, being the Mirrours of Arts and Armes. They were so perfect in these motions by their continuall practise and exercise, that few or none were euer com∣parable vnto them. In wheeling they would moue as a ship (or some other body) caried about wholly and ioyntly together, remaining vndisolued. When they were to wheele to the right, they did first warne the right corner file leader to stand still (as it were the hooke of a doore-hinge) and the rest they commanded altogether to proceed forward, and to turne about the same fileleader like the doore.They will not wheele, vnlesse they be at an vnfitting order Pouldion to Houldion and then Rankes to the swords point a di∣stance not fit for that moti∣on. Thus was the battell wholy turned by them (as the body of a man) to the right, to the left, or about to either, being caried about the corner fileleader, as about a Center. This was a comely sight to looke vpon? would to God all would doe it as exactly as they But wishes are in vaine, men will doe as they list, not as they should: a Some will neither obserue the distance vsed by the Gre∣cians, no the distance appointed by our Tacticks, for the comely grace thereof. This distance is three foot from file to file, and three foot from ranke to ranke?
If this be not obserued, the motion will want grace, the vse of it will be frustrated? the enemie will preuaile against them: For how can those men fight whose hands are tyed, being thronged and pestred together, they are as it were bound and tyed, and can neither assault the enemie, nor defend themselues, but are subiect to be killed one of another. Therefore true distances, must be ob∣serued. But of distances more hereafter. Faceing and wheeling are the subiects on which I treat. Now faceing and wheeling being ioyned together are of singu∣lar vse? To preuent the enemie where he would assault you: To giue the assault on him, and to circumuent him in taking of ad∣uantage of ground, Wind and Sunne, it likewise serues to streng∣then the middest of your battell with the best men. By Wheeling the Wings into the middest of the battell. In doing whereof you curtall the depth, and extend the length, bringing more men to fight then you had before Thus much of Wheeleing. The words of Command followes in the next chapter. CHAP. XXI. Of the words of command for Wheeling. THe words of command for Wheeling may be thus giuen. Viz. Wheele the body to the right hand. The Vse.Thus if the enemie appeare to the right Flanke, you bring your best men to fight against him: Wheele the body to the left hand. The Vse.Thus if the enemy come to charge your left Flanke, you bring your best men against him: Wheele the body about to the right hand. The Vse.Thus if the enemie appeare in the Reare, you bring your File-leaders, that is, your best men to fight.
Wheele the body about to the left hand. Thus you are reduced to your first Posture.The Vse But it may be you would Face, then march; after Face againe, then wheele. If you would, it may be commanded thus: Face to the right hand.Face & March. and march twenty paces. Face to the left hand. and march twenty paces. Then wheele to the left, and charge ouer-hand. Thus you may gaine the aduantage of ground vpon the right Flanke:The Vse. you may assault your enemy on the left Wing with your File-leaders or Front, you may gaine the aduantage of Wind and Sunne, from the enemie: And presently fall vpon a charge. It may be you would extend the length of your Battell by whee∣ling (by bringing the Wings into the midst.) Then you may com∣mand thus. Wheele the Wings into the middest of the Battell. Face to your Com∣mander. Thus the strength of your Battell lies in the middest;The Vse. it may be you would reduce. Then command thus: To the right hand about. Then begin with the Bringers vp, and say: Wheele your Wings againe into the middest of the Battell. Then bid them Face to their Commander: after that. Face to the left hand about. And so they are fully reduced as they were. It may bee you would know the way how to performe this Wheeling, for as yet you are Ignorant. Then obserue how to do it by this Instance which will somewhat explaine it vnto you. There be ten File-leaders in Front,The Instance. fiue of them on the right Wing wheeles forward to the left, transferring their faces to the contrary Wing, their Followers mouing with them, and standing behinde them as they did at the first, only they change their former ground, as did the File-leaders.
The other fiue on the left Wing wheeles forward to the right, meeting them in the midst, face to face, hauing all their Followers (behind them) as the other fiue. Then the Commander bids them Face to him: And so the countenances of all the Souldiers are dire∣cted (or transferred) all one way. Thus you may performe this wheeling; but action doth better performe it than words. This wheeling of the Wings into the midst of the Battalia, was vsed by the Ancient Grecians, to make their Diphalange Antistomus, their Diphalange Peristomus, their Hollow-wedge. The Figure of which is to be seene in Aelian, with the description of them, Chap. 36. 40. and 41. What Victories haue beene gained by this kinde of Imbattal∣ling, I haue seen, and read in a written Copie of Captain Binghams composing, to be diuulged (shortly) for a publike good, that is now but for a priuate vse. This worthy Captaine was the man that did first shew the Gentlemen of the Artillery Garden how they should performe this kinde of wheeling, which now they doe most exactly: And he will proue the vse of it to be as profitable for Ser∣uice now, as heretofore with the Grecians, if we will but doe what he shall aduise. Thus much of this Kinde of Wheeling, and of the other Wheeling, which must not be vsed when the enemy is vpon you, but when he is aloofe off. Now of Counter-march. CHAP. XXII. Of Counter-marches, and the diuers kindes thereof: with the manner how they are to be made, and of their vse. COunter-marches are two-fold: for either we Counter-march the Files or the Rankes. And these either by changing of ground, or keeping still the same ground. If we Counter march by Files, it is to oppose the enemie appea∣ring in the Reare with our best men. If by Rankes, it is to bring one Wing into the place of the other; or all our best men into the middest of the Battell. If we Counter-march by Files or Rankes, to change our ground,
we do it either by the Macedonian, the Lacedemonian, o theThe modern Counter-march stan∣ding, is thus performed; The Fyle-lea∣ders counter-march to the right, the next Ranke stands til they be past, then they fol∣low: the like do all the rest, transferring themselues to a new ground. mo∣derne Counter-march which was inuented for that purpose, and to be performed standing. If to maintaine ground, then we doe it by the Choraean Coun∣ter-march, which makes the File-leaders to take the ground of the Bringers vp, and the Bringers vp the same ground, in the which the File-leaders stood. The like in the Wings. These Counter-marches, namely, the Macedonian, the Lacede∣monian, and the Choraean, are described by Aelian thus. The Macedonian Counter-marchAelian chap. 20 of the Macedo∣nian Crunter-march by Fyle. by File, is said to be, when the File-leader turneth about his face, & all the rest with the Brin∣ger-vp goeth against him on the right or left hand, and passing on to the ground before the Front of the Battell; place themselues in order one after another, according as the File-leader himselfe hath turned his face. This Counter-march you see transferreth the whole File to ano∣ther place equall to the first, by taking the ground that lyeth before the Front, in lieu of that it lost behinde. It likewise maketh Shew to the enemy appearing in the Reare of running away, but it is of excellent vse. Say that before thy Battell lay a Riuer,The vse of the Macedonian Counter-march by Fyle. and betweene the Riuer and thee a faire plot of ground, higher than that thou standest vp∣on (the enemy appearing in the Reare, and compelling thee to fight) the only way to oppose him with the best men, and to got this ground for thy aduantage, is this Macedonian Counter-march. This Counter-march was first Inuented by Philip King of Mace∣don, Father of Alexander the Great. The Lacedemonian Counter-march by Fyle is,Of the Lacede∣monian Coun∣ter-march by Fyle, described by Aelian, chap. 28. when the Brin∣ger vp turneth his face about, and all the rest turning also their fa∣ces, and proceeding forward together with their Fyle-leader, or∣der themselues proportionably in the ground which was behind the reare of the Battell. Or else, when the Bringer-vp turneth his face about, and hee that stood next before him passiing by on the right or left hand, is placed againe next before him, and the rest following, are placed one before another in their former order, till the Fyle-leader bee first. In this Counter-march you see, the proceeding is contrary to the former that tooke the ground before the Phalange, or Battell,
this takes the ground after. In that the moouing was from the reare to the front; in this from the front to the reare.Captaine Bingham in his notes vpon Aelian chap. 28. Aelian preferreth the Lacedemonian Counter-march before the Macedo∣man, because in it the Soldiers seeme to fall on and charge, wherin the Macedonian they seeme to flie. There is notwithstanding, times (as Captaine Bingham notes) when it is better to vse the Macedo∣nian; As when you seeke to gaine some ground of aduantage: or in case you mean to march on and not to fight with the Enemy, vn∣lesse you be compelled, for the Macedonian continueth still the march, and staieth not: the Lacedemonian returneth vpon the Ene∣mie, and so looseth ground in marching. There is likewise times (say I) when it is more requisite to vse this Lacedemonian Counter-march, than any other. As in case you haue passed the ground which the enemy follow∣ing seekes to gaine, and to charge you suddenly, the onely way to possesse it againe, and to fight with him with your best men, is thus to Counter-march; the Macedonian here will doe no good. Aeian chap. 28.The Lacedemonians haue another Counter-march, which bears the name, and that is this; the Fyle-leaders begin the Counter∣march, and euery one in their Files follow them orderly. This is no other then our modern Counter-march now in vse. TheOf the Chorae∣an Counter-march by Fyle, otherwise cal∣led Persian or Cretan. Choraean Counter-march by Fyle, is said to be, when the Fyle-leader turning about to the right hand, precedeth the Fyle, and all the rest follow, till the Fyle-leader haue the place of the Bringer-vp, and the Bringer-vp the place of the Fyle-leader. This Counter-march (saith Aelian) is called likewise Persian & Cretan: Persian and Cetan (saith Captaine Bingham) because it was vsed among the Persians and Cretans.Captaine Bing∣ham in his notes vpon Aelian chap. 28. Choraean also, for the similitude it had with the solelmne Grecian daunces vpon Stages, the compa∣ny that shewed themselues in such daunces being called Chorus, who in their daunces ordered themselues into syles and rankes, as Souldiers doe in battell, and moouing themselues to the brinke of the Stage, when being straightned by the place, they could passe no further, they retired one through the rankes of the other, excee∣ding not the bounds of the place, as is done in this Counter-march: The words of command for the Choraean Cuunter-march by Fyle.It may be commanded thus; Fyle-leaders, Counter-march to the place of the Bringers∣vp, and stand, and let your Files follow you, keeping your distance.
Or thus; Fyles, Counter-march, and maintaine ground. The Lacedemonian may be commanded thus; The words of command for the Lacedemo∣nian Counter-march by File deliuered in Captaine Binghams owne words.Bringers-vp, turne your faces about to the right hand: the rest, turne your faces about, and beginning at them that are next the Bringers-vp, Counter-march, and place your selues in your distances, before the Bringers-vp, and one before another, till the Fyle-leader be first. Or thus; Face all to the Reare: Bringers-vp stand; the next Ranke, passe through by their right hand, and place your selues be∣fore them, keeping your distances; all the rest moue with them, placing your selues one before another till the Fyle∣leader be first. When your men are perfects you need but say, The Lacedemoni∣an Counter-march, and it is enough. This gaines the ground lying after the Reare, as the Macedonian the groundlying before the Front: Now the Macedonian may be thus commanded; File-leaders, turne your faces about to the right hand;Words of com∣mand for the Macedonian Counter-march by File, Aelian. chap. 28. the rest of euery Fyle passe through in order, one after another, and place your selues at your distances, after your Leaders, turning your faces about, and so stand. Looke what these Counter-marches doe by Fyle, the very same they doe by Ranke for like aduantage. The Macedonian Counter-march by Ranke, taketh the ground that lyeth on the side of the contrarie Wing, beginning to moue at the corner of the Wing which is nearest the enemie, seeming ther∣fore to him to runne away, because it dismarcheth from him, as that of the Fyle did before. The words of command for it may be these; The right hand corner File face to the left;Words of com∣mand for the Macedonian Counter-march by Rank the rest of each File passe through to the left, and place your selues orderly behind your side-men, keeping your distance.
The vse.This gaineth the ground lying on the side of the right Wing, farthest of from the Enemy. The Enemy appeared to the left Wing B his Counter march you may set the strongest part of your Battell against the Enemy, and apply the weakest vnto some Riuer Lke, Hill, or such like place, so that the Enemy cannot come to encompsse it. Of the Lace∣demonian countermarch by ranke.The Lacedemonian Counter-march by Ranke, taketh the ground that lieth on the side of that Wing which is towards the Enemy, and bringeth the best Wing to be formost against the Ene∣my, comming still on vpon him, without any shew of running away; and by these words of command may be effected; Words of command for the Lacedemo∣nian Counter-march by ranke. The vse.Left hand corner File, where the Enemy appeareth, turne your faces to the left hand; the rest of each Ranke, turne your faces, and passe thorow to the left hand, and place your selues before your side-men, keeping your distances. Thus when our forces are able to encounter the enemy, and we desire to bring our best wings to fight; then we proceed after this manner to oppose him. Of the Chorae∣an Counter∣march by ranke.The Choraean Countermarch by ranke keepeth the same ground the battell had at first, and bringeth one Wing, into the place of the other, or else the Sections to possesse the place of the Wings, thereby to strengthen the midst of the battell. These two may be effected, as the other, by seuerall words of Com∣mand: The first by this word of command, Words of com∣mand for the Choraean Countermarch by ranke.Rankes to the right hand Countermarch and maintaine ground. The second by this word of command, Countermarch the Wings into the midst of the battell. The way to doe it is this, First they are to face to the right and left hand by diuision: Then to Countermarch into the midst of the battell; After they are to face to their Commander, and so the Countermarch is effected. The vse.Thus we strengthen the midst of our battell with our best men; bringing them to fight with the enemie, which is the end of Coun∣termarch. Wherein notwithstanding there is a Caution to bee
held, that if the enemie be very neare, that we cannot conuenient∣ly Countermarch, before he come vpon vs, we forbeare, lest we fall into disorder, and in disorder be easily defeated. In which case the best remedie is to turne faces and so receiue him. As Countermarches are not to be done, vnlesse the enemie be aloofe off, so neither can they well be done but at open order. When then your files and rankes are at six foot, which is (your first distance) Then you haue sufficient roome to Counter∣march any way. But in Countermarch obserue this. If the word be for the right hand, then step forth with the right legge, and bring the left legge ouer. If to the left, then step forth with the left legge, and bring the right ouer. But if the Word be to the right, and maintaine ground, then stand fast with the right legge, and bring the left ouer. Thus much of Countermarching. Now of Doubling. CHAP. XXIII. Of the vse of Doubling. THere is two kinde of Doubling, the one of Rankes, the o∣ther of fies. The first doth double theThe length of the batell is the Ranke, the depth is the File Rankes stretch forth in length, Files in depth (saith Suidas.) Length, the second the Depth of your battell. The Length of your battell may bee doubled in Place or Num∣ber. InDoubling of the length of a battell in place. place, when euery file doth open, from three foot to six foot, which is your open order in files. By this meanes the Front possesseth double ground to that it had before. There is another way to double the Front in place, as you shall heare anon. The Length of your battell isDoubling of the length of a battell in Num∣ber. doubled in Number, when of twentie in a ranke, it is made fortie, and of fortie fourescore. So that you haue twice as many men in the Front as you had before. This doubling of the Length of your battell by number, may be done vpon fit occasion, either in open order, or in order In open order, by doubling of Rankes, by middle men doing
the same. By bringers vp doubling the front either to the right or left hand at discretion. In order by middle men doubling of the Front, either to the right or left hand intire, or by deuission to both. Which doth likewise double the length of a Battell, not onely in number but in place also, as Captaine Bingham doth ob∣serue in his notes upon Aelian chap. 29.Chap. 29. Two Causes are assigned for the doubling of the length of your Battell both in number and place. The one to ouerwing the enemie. The other to auoid ouerwinging. Two wayes you may auoid ouerwinging. One is by making choise of such a ground, as may giue you this aduantage of the enemie; That he can neuer compasse you in behinde,Ptar in the liues of Aes∣laus and S lla, pag. 630. & 478. nor flanke you on the sides. Now if you cannot finde such a ground, vse art. Cast a trench vpon each flanke; or Wag∣gons on either Wing. As Syila and Huniades did, fearing to be en∣compassed by the multitude of their enemies. The second way to auoid ouerwinging is, by placing of Aides in the Reare of your Battell; or by laying them in Ambush aloofe off, that so vpon a word giuen they may suddenly start out vpon the Enemy, as Caesar made his to doe at the Battell of Pharsalia, where he put Pompey the Great to flight. These Aides must be of the most chiefest Souldiers you haue, with Officers appointed for their conduct, as was vsed by the auntient Romanes before and in Vegetius time,Vegetius lib. 3. cap. 17. who did alwaies res rue many of these Aides, when their number was inferior to their Enemies, their Battell lesse pitched, and they in danger to be ouerwinged. But when they had plenty of fighting men, they by Doubling would make their Battell equall in length and depth to their Enemies. So that they could not breake through or ouerwinge them. Thus much to aoid ouerwinging. And for the doubling of the length of a Battell in plce and number. Doubling the depth of a Battell in place.The depth of your Battell is doubled in place, when euery Ranke from the swords point opens to three foot, from three foot to six foot, from six foot to twelue foot, which is your double di∣stance. The vse of this is twofold. First to imploy a great deale of ground for your owne aduan∣tage, making your number seeme more then it is. Secondly, to make way for the Canon shot, by which the enemy afar of would annoy your flanks. Therefore you march at a double distance.
The depth of your Battell is doubled by number,Doubling th depth of a Battell by number when of ten in File, it is made twenty, of twenty forty, and of sorry fourescore. The doubling of the depth of your Battell may be done vpon fit occasion, either in open order or in close order. In open order, by doubling of Files: When Files double by Countermarch, either to the right or left hand: Or when halfe the Rankes double the right or left flanke: When Ranks file by conuersion, either to the right or left hand, which is vsually done at a double distance. In order (or close order) by aduancing of Files to the right or left hand: By File-leaders drawing forth their Files (into one) or if you will both to the right and left hand by diuision. Then both right and left hand File leads forth together: so the body is drawne into two Files. All these waies and more, may the depth of your Battell be doubled in place and number, not to change the forme thereof, or (if it be) to alter the fashion, whereby your Battell may bee made suteable to the ground vpon any occasion: which is not the least thing to be taken notice of. Obserue. A large fronted Battell is vnfit for a narrow place. A deepe narrow Battell for a Champion, is not so suteable. This the Romanes and Grecians knew full well, and therefore they would order themselues accordingly, making a politicke vse of either, as they saw occasion. It is reported of Manius Acilius the Romane Consul, that be∣ing to fight with Antiochus the Great in the Straits of Thermopy∣les, because therein he could march with his men no more then fiue in Front. He ordered all his Legions into anOrthiophala is a deepe P¦lange commo¦ly called a Heirs, hauing the Depth much excee∣di the Length. Aean. chap. 30. Appian in the wares of the Romnes with Sians. Orthiophalanx, wich was a kinde of Battell in forme of a Heirse, of far greater depth than length. Thus being extended in depth (and but fiue in Ranke) he proceeded on, appointing Marcus Cato (one of his Tribunes) with a selected band of men to fetch a compasse about to seeke some other passage: If not, to scale the Rocks, and then to seize vpon Antiochus Campe. And likewise hee sent Lucius Ʋalerius (another of his Tribunes) wih a like band of men, to force the Aetlians from the Rocks on the other side, (he being to passe vnder them) that so hauing gained the Rocks, they might further his passage, and annoy Antiochus from thence wih
missiue weapons. He himselfe led his Army in Front against An∣tiochus in the manner before said. Now Antiochus hauing forti∣fied the Straits with a wall (where it was broad) stood there ready to receiue him with his Battell of Macedonians, farre broader in Front than Acilius Armie was. But when Marcus Cato had gai∣ned the Hills, Antiochus was instantly strucke into amazement, and Acilius taking courage thereby, came brauely on, and forced Antiochus to flight. Thus suting his Battell to the nature of the place, (and yet making vse of his men for his best aduantage) he obtained a glorious victory. One example more out of Xenophons Historie, and so I will conclude. nophon. lib. 4.The Grecians which Cherisophus and Xenophon conducted out of Persia, were in the Champaigne ordered into a square hollow Battell, euery part of like strength, with their baggage and loose multitude in the midst. These Grecians when they came into the Country of the Cardu∣chans and Colchans, were otherwise ordered. There was high Hilles, huge steepe Mountaines, and but narrow passage. They must now be Imbattelled (not in a hollowThe Paesium a square bat∣l of men ollow in the ddest. Plaesium) but in seuerall Companies, and euery Company into a single File, euery file hauing an hundred men a peece, ascending those steepe Mountaines, and beating the enemie from thence, which stood thereon in battell aray, doing more with ten thousand men, than a King of Persia could doe with twelue Myriades, that is, twelue hundred thousand. Thus the Grecians and Romanes (Mirrours of Armes and lear∣ning) did alwaies shape their battell according to the proportion of ground, and being perfect in the art of Imbattelling, did all things proper as they saw occasion. The like must we. And thus much shall suffice for the doubling of the Length and Depth of a Phalange or Battell. Now followes the Distances to be obserued in them. So the words of command shall follow for all in the fiue and twentieth Chapter.
CHAP. XXIIII. Of the Distances to be obserued in Battell. And of their vse. DIsorder is the confusion of a Battell, but good Order peunts is confusion. Therefore all Commanders, as much as in them lies, must studie to preuent this in time. And this may be done by obseruing of Distance, for Distance is the rule that squares all. Distance is to the battell, as the soule to the body. The Battell may be called a body. Now take away Di∣stance from this body, and it falls to ruine for want of a soule. Iphicrates the Athenian said, That in an Armie of men, the light horse-men resembled the hands, the men at Armes the feet, the battell of foot-men, the stomacke and brest, and the Captaine the head of the body. See here a Millitary body proportioned to the body of a man: See how it receiues motion and life, Distance being the soule that makes it moue. Care then ought to be had in mouing: now this care is effected by the obseruing of Distances. Three kinds of distances are mentioned by Aelian,Aea chap. . for the ope∣ning and shutting of a Phalange or Battell. The first are large distances of foure Cubits, which amount to six foot. The second are lesse, but of two Cubits, which amount to three foot. The third are of a lesser kinde, but of a Cubit, which amounteth at the most but to a foot and a halfe. These are all one and the same, with open Order, Order, and close Order. Open Order, is when euery Souldier in the battell taketh six foot both in File and Ranke, and marcheth with their Pikes shoul∣dered. It is for ease in marching, being likewise of great vse going against a Fort or strong place of the enemies, for it giues way to the Cannon shot, and is of singular vse to saue your men. We vse to march thus when the enemy keepes aloofe off. Order is when euery souldier in battell taketh three foot both in File and Ranke, and marcheth with their Pikes either aduanced or Ported.
This is to prepare for skirmish when the enemie is neare. Close Order, is when euery Souldier in the battell taketh a foot and a halfe in File, and a foot a foot and a halfe from the swords point, which is three foot in Ranke. And this is to endure the brunt of a Charge. The first was vsed in Ancient times for march, Solemne pompes and shewes. The second for their fights only before they did Ioyne. Noted y Capt. Bngham  Aelian ch. 11.The third was the Sinaspisme of the Macedonians, so called, be∣cause therein they Ioyned Target to Target, which they neuer vsed but when either they gaue vpon, or receiued the charge of the ene∣mie. The Targets so knit together, serued for a wall, as it were, to the whole Phalange; and by them the souldier was defended from the Missiue weapons of the Enemie, and his body couered euen from the piercing of the sword. This was formerly vsed by the Ancient Heroes at Troy, and re∣viued againe to new life, by Philip, King of Macedon, who first constituted the Macedonian Phalange, and inuented the distances of opening and shutting the same. From his discipline (as the learned Captaine Bingham obserues) sprung these distances in Ae∣lian,Aelian chap. 11. of which I haue spoke. And thus I haue briefly declared the vse of those distances which are to be obserued in Battell. The words of command for them may be these, viz. Eiles and Rankes, open to six foot. Now they are at open order. Rankes and Files, close to three foot. Now they are at order. Files, close to a foot and a halfe. Now they are at close order. Rankes and Flles, to your open order. That is, six foot euery way. Thus if your Battell bee disioyned by too large distances, you may reduce it to good order by closing. If it be thronged vp, or pestered too close together, you may amend all by conuenient ope∣ning. Too much thronging bindeth the Souldiers hands, and ta∣keth away the vse of their weapons; and too farre standing a∣sunder breaketh the Battell, and maketh a passage for the Enemy, whereby he may enter. Therefore these three sorts of distances,
to wit, open Order, Order, and close Order, haue beene inuented as the onely meanes betweene both, to amend all, and to fit our turne as wee see occasion. Thus much for Distances, of their vse, and the words of com∣mand giuen for them. The words of command for doubling of the length and depth of a Battell next followeth. CHAP. XXV. This Chapter sheweth what the words of Command are, by which the length and depth of a Battell is doubled, either in place or number; and teacheth a young Soldier how to per∣forme the Motion. IN the three and twentieth Chapter of this booke, mention was made of the doubling of the length and depth of a Battell, both in place and number, but the words of command were refer∣red vnto this Chapter. If then you would double the length of your Battell in place, the proper words of direction for it may bee this, (viz.) Open your Files from your close order to your open order, six foot. The manner of the Action is thus performed: The middle Lea∣ders presse vpon their Flankers, first, taking their distance com∣manded, hauing opened both waies, the rest of the companie on both Flankes, takes their distance from them: now sixteene men are so extended, as they hold as much ground in breadth as would serue thirty two men. It may be commanded some other way, peculiar and distinctly from the other: as,The word of command for doubling the length of a Battell in place Files, open to the right hand to your open order, six foot. Or, Files open to the left hand to your open order.
Files open to the right handThe word being giuen to the right hand, the left hand File is not to mooue, but standeth fast, the next to the left hand Fyle, first taketh the distance, pressing vpon the right hand, still opening by the right hand, till they haue taken the distance of six foot. Files open to the left Hand.The word being giuen to the left hand, the right hand Fyle must stand fast, the rest must open to the left hand, still pressing vpon the left hand Files, till they are all in the distance and order com∣manded. Thus by three distinct peculiar words of command, may the length of your Battell be doubled in place, each of which you may make choise of as occasion serues. But if your Battell beare too great a bredth, by possessing too much ground, then you may amend it by this word of command, (viz.) The two mid∣dle Files close first, the rest mouer with them, both to the right and left hand, to the distance namedFiles, close to your order. Or, Files, close to the right hand, to your order. Or, Files, close to the left hand, to your order. Files close,If the words be, Piles close, without naming to any hand, then it must be performed thus; The two middle Leaders must close, the one to the left hand, the other to the right hand, till they are in the distance com∣manded; then the rest of the companie must take their distance from them on either Flanke, closing to the middle Leaders. Files close to the right hand.If the word be, To the right hand, the right hand File moues not, but standeth fast; all the rest close to the right hand File, ta∣king their distance one by another from the right hand. Files close to the left hand.If the word be, To the left hand, obserue like forme; then the left hand File stands fast, the rest of the Files close, and take their distance from the left hand. Thus much of the words of command, by which the Battell is lessened or doubled in place,The words of command for the doubling of the depth of a Battell in place thereby im∣ploying a greater or lesser bredth, as the word is giuen. If you would double the depth of your Battell in place, the proper word of direction for it may be this, viz.
Open your Rankes from the Front to the Reare, to your open order, six foot. The manner of the Action is thus to be performed; The first Ranke must stand firme: the second Ranke takes their distance first; all the rest must doe the like distinctly in order. Now you take as much ground in depth for ten, as would serue very well for twenty men. If you would double the length of your Battell in number,The words of command for the doubling of the length of a Battell in number. that is, to make the front haue twice as many Files, or persons in it as it had before, then you may effect it by this word of command; Rankes to the right hand, double. Or thus, Rankes to the left hand double. It is thus performed: Euery second Ranke cometh between the distance of the Ranke before it, and that either to the right or left hand,Rankes to the rig hand double. as the word is giuen, so that of ten in Ranke, they become twenty in Ranke, and but fiue in depth, who before were ten in depth, because the Front is doubled. Or if you are minded to effect it by middle men, then the last fiue Rankes must march vp through the distances betweene the Files, till they come to be euen in Front, with the File-leaders, then they stand, hauing euerie one their followers following them, as they had before, onely now they are fiue in depth, when they were before tenne. The word of command for it is; Middle men, to the right hand double your Front. Or, being minded to diuide your middle men, and so to double.Doubling of the length of a Battell by mid∣dle men. Then the last fiue rankes must turne their faces, the one halfe in their files to the right hand, and the other halfe to the left hand, and so march forth from both the Flankes, till they haue gotten such a proportion of ground, or distance, as is answerable to the order, the first fiue Rankes doe stand in: and then presently with∣out attending any further commandement, they must turne their faces againe towards the front, and march vpon both flankes till
they come euen with the front. The word of direction is, Middle men double your front to the right and left hand by diuision. Or, being minded not to diuide your middle men, but to bring them vp to the front, entire to one particular hand. Then the fiue last rankes must face, then march forth altogether beyond the skirts of the body, then face to the front, and march vp to ioyne them∣selues in euen front with the file leaders. The word of Command to effect it maybe this, Middle men to the right hand Intire double your front. Or if you are minded after all this, to make vse of your bringers vp in the front of your battle, then you may performe it, by this word of Command, Bringers vp to the right hand double your front. The last ranke you know are the bringers vp: These being in the reare doe aduance through the distances betweene the files:The length of a battell dou∣bled by the bringers vp And next after them the next ranke: and so the rest successiuely till the bringers vp be in ranke with the Leaders, and their mid∣dle men with the Leaders middle men. Thus your front is dou∣bled with your best men, being now but fiue in depth, who were before tenne in depth. Doublng of the battell in Depth by num∣ber.If you would double the depth of your battell in number, that is, make some files haue twice as many men in them as they had before, you may effect it by this word of Command, The word of Command for it. Files to the right hand dou∣ble.Files to the right hand double. It is thus to be performed. The right hand file (which is the outermost file, on the right hand moues nor, but stands fast, the next file to the right hand file, moues into the right hand file, so that of tenne in depth, it is now become twentie. Accordingly euery second File moueth into their next file on the right hand. Files to the left hand double.The like order must be obserued, if the word be to the left hand, the left hand file must stand fast, and euery second file is to moue into the next file on their left hand. Thus the depth is doubled by number.
But it may be, you would execute it by Countermarch as did the Macedonians. Then the word of Command is, Double your files by Countermarch, to the right hand.Aelian chap. 2 This is performed when the next side files in seuerall (as in the former example the second,The first, thir fift, seuenth, ninth, are odd files, the se∣cond fourth, sixth, eigth, an tenth, are e∣uen files. and the fourth and the rest of the euen files) Countermarch to the Reare placing themselues behinde the bringers vp of the odde files, Aelian chap. 29. It may be you would double the right flanke with the left flanke, to make the Orthiophalanx, or heirseAelian chap. 30. battell, which proceedeth by Wing, hauing the depth much exceeding the length. The way to doe it is by this word of Command, Halfe Rankes double to the right hand. Or, Rankes double the right flanke. It is thus performed. Halfe the Rankes (for they are diuided as it were into two parts) turnes their faces to the right hand, and marches into the spaces, be∣twixt the other Rankes, and being within, they face as the rest: Thus the battell is brought into a Wing. It may be you would bring it into a file. Then the word of Command may be this, Rankes file to the right hand. Or, Rankes file by Conuersion to the right hand. It may be you would bring it into two files. Then you may giue the word of direction thus, Rankes file to the right hand. Or, Rankes file by Conuersion to the right  left hand. It is thus performed. Halfe the rankes falls backe into the spaces behinde the right hand men of the rightThe right hand file pre∣cedes the right flanke. flanke,The left hand file precedes the left flanke. and the other halfe into the spaces behinde the left hand men of the left Flanke, doing that by diui∣sion,
which the former did intire by this word of Command, (Rankes file to the right) but you must obserue a double distance betweene Ranke and Ranke, to doe it, or it cannot be well done. We haue another way to doe the former (which is) by drawing or leading forth of Rankes, this is (as the other) new and vpstart. We haue another way (by leading forth of files) pristine or anci∣ent, commonly vsed in former times both of Grecians and Persians. Xenophon Cyrop. l. 2. 56.You shall reade of Cyrus the elder, how he commanded thirtie thousand men to be drawne forth (out ofA Phalange is a grosse bo∣dy of men brought into a battell. Xenophon in his 4. booke of the ascent of Cyrus the younger. a Phalange) into a sin∣gle file. And it was his custome when euer his souldiers went to dinner, to bring them forth file by file, and into a Phalange or bo∣dy againe at the sound of a horne or a word giuen. You shall reade of the Grecians, that when they were to ascend the Colchian Mountaines, they put themselues into seuerall com∣panies, and euery company into a single file, euery file hauing an hundred men a peece, reducing againe into a body when they came to the top of them, where was roome enough. This the Gre∣cians at that time did doe. Which we Command thus. Right hand file leade forth, the rest follow in sequence one behinde another. Thus many wayes, may the Depth be doubled by Number, to alter or change the forme of a battell. I am not ignorant that there are many more waies to doe it. For in the Artillery garden, this word of Command is frequent. (Aduance your files to the right hand) which is the doubling of the Depth. One file aduances to stand before another, the second before the first, the fourth before the third, or the contrary as the word is giuen. This is the way to doe it, and I will name no more. All this variety of waies helpes such as would be exquisite in exercising. I say would; are not already. I presume not to teach any that knowes more then my selfe; Nor such as knowes lesse then my selfe, yet scornes to be taught: but such as knowes little (it may be nothing) yet haue a a desire to learne; To such, I that know some thing, (to others but little) doe impart that little which I haue. And in the next chapter will teach them how to exercise a company as I my selfe haue beene taught in the Artilery Garden, or elsewhere, for I haue attained nothing but by paines taking, much cost, and reading.
But first obserue my Method in Exercising. My Method in Exercising, is not at this time to Intermeddle with new formes of battells, various fights, sundry kindes of Indu∣ctions, and the like; But to apply my selfe somewhat to that which hath been deliuered, practized in former times, agreeing with our moderne discipline, and at this time in vse, beginning at the first principle of all, to order a company of men into a battell that are at first confused one among another, and to doe it by distinct words of Command, whereby they may order themselues into a body, without helpe of a Sergeant, taking their first distance of six foot in square both in file and ranke, in which we commonly vse at the first to exercise our Motions in. All this I meane to doe, and the Chapter following will shew it. CHAP. XXVI. This Chapter sheweth a young Commander how he should begin to order his Company: How to command the same properly by se∣uerall distinct words of Command: And to obserue true Di∣stance in euery Motion: Whether it be to Face, to Wheele, to Charge, to Counter-march, or double. THus then he may Command (when the Company is vnorde∣red, intermingled one with another, parted from their Armes, and lying in sundry places.) Separate your selues. To your Armes. File and Ranke your selues. Euery File-leader, know his place. Aduance your Pikes. Shoulder your Muskets. Fall into a body, and flanke your Pikes with Mus∣kets. Take your first distance six foot both in File and Ranke. Order your Pikes. Rest your Muskets.
Stand Right in your Files. Stand right in your Rankes. Marke your Directions. Silence. Face to the right hand. as you were. Face to the left hand. as you were. Face to the right hand about. as you were. Face to the left hand about. as you were. Rankes to the right hand double. as you were. Rankes to the left hand double. as you were. Files to the right hand double. as you were. Files to the left hand double. as you were. Middle men to the right hand, Double your Front. Middle men as you were. Middle men to the left hand, Double your Front. Middle men as you were. Middle men to the right hand In∣tire, Double your Front. Middle men as you were. Middle men to the left hand In∣tire, Double your Front. Middle men as you were. Middle men double your Front to the right and left hand by diuision. Middle men as you were. Bringers vp to the right hand, Double your Front. Bringers vp as you were. Bringers vp to the left hand, Double your Front. Bringers vp as you were. Now they must aduance their Pikes, and so Counter-march.Rankes to the right hand Counter-march. Rankes to the left hand Counter-march. Files to the right hand Counter-march. Files to the left hand Counter-march. The second Distance is for Wheeling and charging.Files close to your Order. Three foot in File and Ranke. Rankes close to your Order. Three foot in File and Ranke. Wheele to the right hand. Wheele to the left hand. Charging vp∣on a stand, when their Pikes are ad∣uanced.Wheele to the right hand about. Wheele to the left hand about. Charge to the right hand. As you were. Charge to the left hand. As you were.
Charge to both by diuision, As you were. Charge to the Front, As you were. Charge to the Reare, As you were. Charge to both by diuision, As you were. Charge, Front, Reare, and Flankes, As you were. Open yur Files to your open Order. Six foot. Open your Rankes to your open Order. Six foot. Order your Pikes. March. Shoulder your Pikes. March. Charge to the right hand.Marching and charging from the shoulder, at o n then o∣pen Ode Do all this by the beat of the Drumme. As you were. March. Do all this by the beat of the Drumme. Charge to the left hand. Do all this by the beat of the Drumme. As you were. March. Do all this by the beat of the Drumme. Charge to the Reare. Do all this by the beat of the Drumme. As you were. March. Do all this by the beat of the Drumme. Beare-vp your Pikes and Counter-march to the right hand.This was done by Captaine Bingham in the Artillery Gar∣den. Beare-vp your Pikes, and Counter-march to the left hand. Aduance your Pikes marching. Keepe your first Distance six foot in File & Ranke. Port your Pikes marching. Keepe your first Distance six foot in File & Ranke. Traile your Pikes marching. Keepe your first Distance six foot in File & Ranke. Cheeke your Pikes from the traile. Keepe your first Distance six foot in File & Ranke. Make a stand: Marke your Directions. The right hand file lead forth, the rest follow in sequence one after another. Lay your Pikes on the outside one of another. Recouer (Marching) and aduance your Pikes. Stand. File-leaders bring vp your Files into a body. Files open to the right hand Open order. Six foot. Files close to the left hand to your Order. Three foot. To the A foot and a halfe. In Fle. Rnkes open backward to your double Distance. Twelue foot.
Rankes File to the right hand. Rankes as you were. Rankes File to the left hand. Rankes as you were. Rankes File to the right and left hand. Close your Rankes to six foot. Open your Files to six foot. Being reduced to your first Distance. Order your Pikes. Lay downe your Pikes. Take vp your Pikes, and order. Thus much for Exercising, and of the Postures of the Pike therein vsed. The seuerall Postures of the Musket followeth in the next Chapter. CHAP. XXVII. Of the Postures of the Musket. THe Postures of the Musket are sundry and many. Some make 32. some 40. some 43. some more, some lesse. All which are for Military instruction in the time of Trayning, and to make the Souldier most exquisite and perfect: But in time of present ser∣uice before the face of the enemy, or in fight, then all this great number of Postures they reduce into three only and no more, viz. 1. Make ready. 2. Present. 3. Giue fire. All the other, they wittily and properly sort into foure kindes, or orders: To be performed, Standing, Marching, Charging, and Discharging; (as is to be seene in Captaine Pantons Table,) all which must be obserued. Thus much of them. The Postures or words of Command which we must vse in or∣dinary Training, or daily exercising of Souldiers, agreeing to the Prince of Orange forme, (and by order from his Maiesties most Honourable Priuy Councell) are these: March with your Musket shouldred, and the Rest in your right hand. March, and with the Musket carry the Rest. Sinke your Rest, and vnshoulder your Musket.
Poyse it in your right hand, and let it sinke into the left. In your left hand hold your Musket, and carry your Rest with it. Take your Match in the right hand betweene the second fin∣ger and thombe. Hold your Match fast and blow your coale: Cocke your Match. Try your Match. Guard your pan and blow your match. Open your pan. Present. Giue fire. Dismount your Musket and carry it with your Rest. Vncocke your match, and returne it betweene your fingers. Cleare your pan. Prime your pan. Shut your pan. Cast off your loose powder. Blow your pan. Cast about your Musket. Traile your Rest. Open your charge. Charge with powder. Draw out your scowring sticke. Shorten your sticke. Ramme in your powder. Draw out your sticke. Charge with Bullet. Ramme in your Bullet. Draw out your sticke. Shorten your sticke and put it vp. Bring your Musket forward with your left hand. Poyse it in your right hand and recouer your Rest. Shoulder your Musket. March and carry your Rest with your Musket. Vnshoulder your Musket. Lay your Musket in the Rest. Stand Rested. Your saluting Posture,] as you were.
In the right hand take your Match betweene the second finger and the thumbe. Blow your Match. Cocke your Match. Try your Match. Guard your pan and be ready. This last is the Sentinell Posture. Ths I haue run ouer the Postures of the Musket, after the Low Couty fome, first marching, then discharging, then caging, after standing. Adding three more vno them, (because th char∣ging with the bullet was left out:) which I hope will giue oftence to none. As for the gesture of the body, hand and foot, to grace the Po∣sture, I referre you to the booke expressing it by Figures; Or to e Atillery Gaden, or Military Yrd, where it is done by some xy: bu neuer to be obtained without practise. You may like∣w egin whee you please, for this forme is not so strictly ob er∣  the Artillery Garden. B ca ou had the Postures of the Pke implicite, and not di∣sti but mixt with other kindes of Motions different from thm; I will in the next Chapter shew them seuerall, and con∣cld. CHAP. XXVIII. Of the seuerall Postures of the Pike. THe seuerall Postures of the Pike (saith Sargeant Trussell) are in number twelue. Three are to be done standing, six marching, d three charging. The three which are to be done standing he expresseth thus: Lay dw yur Pi. Tk vp yur Pike. der your Pik. The si which are to be done Marching he expresseth thus Aance your Pike.
Shoulder your Pike. Leuell your Pike. Slope your Pike. Cheeke your Pike. Traile your Pike. The three which are to be done charging he expresseth thus: Pot. Charge ouer hand. Charge at the right foot for Horse. This is the briefe Epitome of the Postures which that Gentle∣man tooke from Captaine Pantons Table: Captaine Panton from the Booke published by the most Excellent Prince, the Count Maurice of Nassau, and I from both. So I end my Booke. Let God haue the glory. Amen. Exodus 15 3. The LORD is a man of Warre: His name is IEHOVAH. FINIS.
