7963 99847439 12473
¶ By the Queene. WHereas the infection of the plague and pestilence doth at this present re∣maine and continue within the Cities of London and Westminster, to the great griefe of the Queenes Maiestie our Soueraigne Lady, and perill of many of her good Subiects of the same, (the which almightie God for his mercy stay) and that by accesse of her people thither about their lawfull and necessary suites and affaires in this next Terme of Saint Michael, (the plague then enduring) might be rather occasion to increase the same, then diminish it, which should be great sorrow to her Highnesse, and danger to her whole Realme. Minding therefore the preseruation of her louing Subiects, from the perill and danger of the said infection, hath thought it expedient by the aduise of her Counsell, for sundrie good considerations, to adiourne the whole Terme of Saint Michael next comming, from and in the first day thereof, vnto the first day of Hyllarie Terme then next ensuing. And therefore her Maiestie doth signifie vnto all and singular her louing Subiects, that they and euery of them which hath cause or commandement to appeare in any of her Highnesse Courts at Westminster, in or at any day or time in the saide Terme of Saint Michaell, may tary at their dwellings, or where their businesse otherwise shall lye, without resorting to any of the saide Courts for that cause, before Octauis sancti Hillarii, next comming, and that without danger of forfai∣ture, penaltie or contempt to incur towards her Highnes in that behalfe. And neuertheles her Maiesties pleasure is that two of her Iustices, that is to say, of either Bench one, shall the first day of Michaelmas Terme, called Octauis Mchaelis, according to the ancient order of her Lawes, keepe the Essoines of the said  M, at which vtas of Saint Michael, writtes of adiournement shalbe directed to the said Iu∣stices, giuing them authoritie to adiourne the saide whole Terme of Saint Michaell, and the same ad∣iournement shalbe made in the first day of the said vtas, commonly called the day of the Essoines. And her Maiesties further pleasure is, that all matters, causes and suites, depending in any of her other Courts betweene partie and partie, as in her Highnes Courts of Chancerie, Starre Chamber, and Exchequer, Courts of Wardes and Liueries, and Duchie of Lancaster, shall haue continuance, and the parties shal haue day from the date of these presents, vnto the said first day of Hyllarie Terme, next comming. Prouided alwayes, and her Maiesties pleasure and commandement is, that all Collectours, Recei∣uers, Sheriffes, and other accomptants, and all other persons that ought or should accompt or pay any summe or summes of money in any of her Maiesties Court of Exchequer, Courts of Wardes and Liue∣ries, or in her Duchie of Lancaster, or in any of them, or to enter into any accompt in any of the same Courts: shall repaire vnto her Maiesties house of Sion in the Countie of Middlesex, where her Highnes hath appointed such officers and ministers, as for that purpose her Maiestie hath thought expedient, and there to paye and doe in euery behalfe, as though no such Proclamation of adiournement had bene had or made: Any thing mentioned in this present Proclamation, or in any writ of adiournement to the contrary, notwithstanding. Willing and commanding euery of her saide Subiects, to whom it doth appertaine, to obserue and keepe their assemblies and apparances in her Highnes saide Courts at West∣minster in Octauis sancti Hyllary, next comming, then and there to be holden and kept, there to doe their offi∣ces and dueties in euery behalfe, as they will answere for the contrary, at their perils. Yeuen at her Highnesse Castell of Windsor, the xxi. of September, the fifth yeere of her Maiesties reigne. ¶ God saue the Queene. Imprinted at London in Powles Church yarde by Richarde Iugge and Iohn Cawood, Printers to the Queenes Maiestie. Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.
