9175Q 33142613 28151
I R HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms KNow all Men by these presents, That wee Thomas Walsingham, William Wythines, and Henrie Snelgar Knights, William Style, Lambert Cooke, and Iohn Vaighan Esquires, Iustices of the Peace of our Soueraigne Lord the King, within the Countie of Kent, haue admitted, Licensed and Allowed,  of  within the said Countie  to keepe a Common-Ale-house or Tipling-house in his now dwelling House, scituate in aforesaid, and not else-where. He the said  obseruing and keeping the Articles prescribed in the Condition of his Recognisance, and also here vnder written, for the maintenance of good Order and Rule to be had and vsed in his said House. And for vsing such admittance and allowance accordingly, we haue Bound the said  in the Summe of tenne Pounds, with two sufficient Suerties in the Summe of fiue Pounds a piece to his Maiesties vse, according to the Tenure of the Statute in that case made and prouided. And this our Admittance and Allowance, to continue for the space of one whole yeere and no longer, from the day of the date of these presents. In witnesse whereof, We the aboue named Iustices of Peace, haue hereunto subscribed our names. Yeuen the  Day of May, in the yeere of our Lord God  and in the yeere of the Raigne of our Soueraigne Lord, IAMES by the Grace of God of England France and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, &c. And of Scotland the INPRIMIS, You shall not (during the time abouesaid) permit or suffer, or haue any Playing at the Cards, Dice, Tables, Quoits, Logets, Bowles, or any other vnlawfull Game or Games, in your House, Yard, Garden, or Backside. ITEM, You shall not suffer to bee or remaine in your House, any Person or Persons (not being your ordinarie Houshold Seruants) vpon any Sabboth-day or Holy-day: during the time of Diuine Seruice or Sermon. ITEM, You shall not suffer any Person to Lodge or stay in your House, aboue one Day and one Night, but such whose true Name and Sur∣name you shall deliuer to some one of the Constables, or in his absence to some of the Officers of the said Parish the next day following; (vnlesse they be such Person or Persons as you well know, and will answere for his or their forth-comming.) ITEM, You shall not suffer any Person to remaine in your House, Tipling or Drinking contrarie to the Law. ITEM, You shall not suffer any Person to be in your House Tipling or Drinking, after nine of the Clocke in the Night time. ITEM, You shall not Buy nor take to Pawne, any Stolne Goods of any Person or Persons shall bring the same to sell. ITEM, You shall not Harbour in your House, Barnes, Stables, or other where willingly: any Rogues, Vagabonds, Sturdy-beggers, Master∣lesse-men, or other notorious Offendours whatsoeuer. ITEM, You shall not suffer any Person or Persons, to Sell or vtter any Beere, Ale, or other Victuall by Deputation, or by colour of your License. ITEM, You shall keepe the true Assise and Measure in your Pots, Bread, and otherwise in vttering of your Beere, Ale and Bread. And the same Beere and Ale to sell by the Sealed measure, and according to the Assise and not otherwise. ITEM, You shall not Vtter or Sell any strong Beere or strong Ale, aboue a Pennie the Quart, and small Beere or small Ale, not aboue a Halfe∣pennie the Quart, and so after the same Rates. ITEM, You shall not Dresse or suffer to be Dressed, or Eaten in your House, any Flesh during the time of Lent, nor vpon any Day forbidden by the Lawes and Constitutions of this Realme, except by Persons lawfully Licensed thereto. ITEM, You shall not Vtter, nor willingly suffer to bee Vttered, Drunke or Taken, any Tobacco within your House, Celler, or other place thereunto belonging.
