A3159 R28295 10492335 45171
THE Yearly Intelligencer; OR A PERFECT CHRONOLOGY: OF ALL The Battailes, Sieges, Conflicts, Actions, Exploits, and all other Signal and Remarkable Passages, which have happ'ned in the World. From September the 29th. 1671. to September the 29th. 1672. Collected by William Andrevvs, Student in ASTROLOGY. With Allowance. LONDON, Printed by E. Crowch, for T. Vere, at the Angel without New-gate. 1672.
TO THE READER. Gentlemen, YOu have here presented unto publick view, an Annual Chronology: or a Particular Account, in a Chrono∣logical way, of all the most material Actions and Passages, &c which have happ'ned in most Parts of the World, for one whole Year last past; which we hope will prove acceptable unto you. The work it self, I presume, may not only be useful and necessary, but also very delectable unto many; there being therein clearly set down, not only what publick matters have hap∣pened in the said Year past, in His Majesties Dominions: but also even in all, or most parts of the Inhabitable World: diligently Collected from the publick Writings of others, and from such Informations as are unquestionable. What either through the Printers, or my own Inadvertency, hath therein happened Erroneous, we beseech you to pardon: Considering there are, and will be mistakes and defects in the best of Humane Acti∣ons: However, I have been as careful in my Collections as possible, and I hope the Printer and Corrector will be as careful in what be∣longs unto them, concerning it, in the Printing and Correcting thereof.
If this present Chronology, shall find your kind acceptance, it may animate me hereafter (Deo permittente) to carry on from Year, to Year, the like for the future: And none shall more oblige me, then such, as shall for time to come, give me real and true Information, of any material matters, &c. which shall hereafter happen: warrantable for their entry. In the interim, I remain, Your very humble Servant. William Andrews. Radwinter, near Saffron-Walden in Essex, Octob. 31. 1672. ADVERTISEMENT. THe Letters N. S. in the several Columns of the Days of every Month, signifie Stilo Novo, New Stile, or the Foraign Account.
THE Yearly Intelligencer; OR A PERFECT CHRONOLOGY: OF ALL The Battailes, Sieges, Conflicts, Actions, Exploits, and all other Signal and Remarkable Passages, which have happened in the World. From September the 29th. 2671. to September the 29th. 1672. September. 1671 THeir Majesties dined at Sir John Hubbarts House at Blech∣ing: after din∣ner his Majesty parted to Sir Robert Pastons at Oxney: and her Majesty return∣ed to Norwich. Sir George Waterman was chosen Lord Mayor of the City of London for the ensuing year; and Alder∣man Jonathan Dawes, and Alder∣man Robert Clayton, were sworn Sheriffs of London and Middlesex, Their Majesties dined at Sir Robert Pastons at Oxney: after which his Majesty, together with his Royal Highness, parted thence to the Lord Townesends at Rayn∣ham, and arrived there at night, and her Majesty returned again to Norwich.
Her  removed from the Lord Henry Howards at Norwich, for Enston, where her Majesty lodged this night. Doctor Henry Bridgeman, was in the Quire of the Cathedral Church of Chester, consecrated Bishop of Soder and Man. His Majesty parted from the Lord Townesends at Raynham, and arrived at Newmarket. Her Majesty parted from Enston, and arrived and lodged at Audley∣end this night. His Majesty honoured the Uni∣versity and Town of Cambridge with his Royal presence, attended by many of the Nobility from New∣market; conferred at Cambridge the Honour of Knight-hood upon Charles Caesar Esq, Son of Sir Henry Caesar, and in the evening returned again to Newmarket. A sharp dispute happ'ned about the Isles of Bayon, between the Swallow, a Merchant-Man, English built, Captain John Baddisson Com∣mander, and an Algerine Pirate, in which the Captain was shot in the Cheek, his Boat-swain, and two others killed, the Carpenter and fourteen more dangerously wound∣ed: yet by the courage of the said Captain, the Vessel was saved from the Turks. Happ'ned a most violent storm at Falmouth: in which some Ves∣sels were lost, and many driven ashore. Certain news from Dublin, of the safe arrival of the Lord Berkely, (Lord Lieutenant of that King∣dom) there. Dyed in Child-bed rhe Dutchess d'Ossuna,N.S. wife to the Governour of Milan. October. The King of Danemark instituted a new Order of Knight-hood, un∣der the name of the Danne Broge, (or the Danish Colours) and Cre∣ated twenty four Knights, in re∣membrance of a great Battel given heretofore, by Woldemar the second King of Danemark, against the Swedes: upon the sight (as is said) of the Danish Colours display∣ed in the Heavens, &c. The Queen of Danemark was delivered of a young Prince. His Majesty and the Court re∣turned to Whitehall from New∣market. Arrived at Plimouth the flying Falcon of Amsterdam, from whence she went the first of January 1669. upon Discovery, the Master where∣of affirmed, that he was 50. de∣grees Southward, that he made the main Land, and discovered two Islands in the South Sea: on which were men of an extraordinary Stature, being eleven foot in height and all hairy, that he sailed out and home 12900 Dutch leagues. Captain Baddisson with the Swal∣low arrived in the Downs. Was fought a Duel at the Hague at night by Torch-light,N.S. between the Heer vander Myle, and the Count de Warfuse, on the one side, and the Counts de Donah, two Brothers on the other, in which the Heer vander Myle was despe∣rately wounded. Captain Baddisson came to Lon∣don, and was presented to his Royal Highness, and by his Royal Highness to his Majesty, who was pleased to order him a gold Chain and Meddal, for his great valour and courage, in saving the Swal∣low from the Algerin Pirates.
Sir Robert Southwell, his Maje∣sties Envoy Extraordinary to the Count de Montery, took leave of his Majesty, in order to his Jour∣ney to Brussels. Their Majesties dined at the Lord Mayors Feast at Guildhall London, as also his Royal Highness, and his Highness Prince Rupert, &c. where his Majesty, conferred the honour of Knight-hood upon Jonathan Dawes, and Robert Clayton Esquires Sheriffs of the City. November. The States General of the Uni∣ted Provinces,N.S. by a Placaet, forbad all persons whatsoever within the Territories of the seven Provinces, to import any French Wines, Vine∣gar, Canvas, Paper, or Chesnuts, &c. upon forfeiture of the same, &c. Being her Majesties Birth-day, was solemnized with the usual ex∣pressions of publick joy. Dyed at Paris Julie Lucine d'An∣geness,N.S. Dutchess of Montansier, in the 64. year of her age. Was Married by a Proxy at Metz the Princess Palatine (daugh∣ter to the Elector Palatine) to the Duke of Orleans.N.S. Monsieur Lindenow Envoy for the King of Danemark, in an Au∣dience, acquainted their Majesties with the Birth of the Prince of Danemark; and at the Lady Wil∣liams House, in the Palace-yard Westminster (entertained several) of the Nobility, &c. at a very no∣ble Supper, with other demon∣strations of joy. Arrived at Brussels Sir Robert Southwell Envoy Extraordinary of his Majesty of Great Britain.N.S. Letters from Sir Edward Spragge dated September 30. N. S. in Al∣giers-Bay, signifying great disor∣ders there: and an alteration of Government among those people. Sir Robert Southwell had Au∣dience of the Count de Montery at Brussels.N.S. The Earl of Sunderland, his Maje∣sty's Extraordinary Embassador to the Crown of Spain, went to Dover in order to his journey for Spain. His Excellency Don Francisco de Melo, Embassador from the Crown of Portugal, made his publick en∣try at London. December. His Excellency Don Francisco de Melo, Embassador from the Crown of Portugal, had his publick Audi∣ence of their Majesties, and after∣wards of his Royal Highness. Sir George Downing, his Maje∣sties Embassador to the States Ge∣neral of the United Provinces, be∣gan his journey for Holland. The City of Astracan was sur∣rendred to the Commander in chief of the Czars Forces. Dyed the Lady Katherine, his Royal Highness's youngest daugh∣ter, being about ten Months old. Was privately Interred in King Henry the 7th. Chappel. Dyed his Grace William Duke of Somerset, in the 20th. year of his age, leaving his Uncle, the Lord John Seymour Heir of his Honour and Estate. The new Church, now called Christ Church, near Paris Garden in Southwark, built by John Marshal late Inhabitant there, was Conse∣crated by the Right Reverend
Father in God, the Bishop of Ro∣chester. A Proclamation concerning St. Christophers, relating to some mat∣ters there acted by Sir Charles Wheeler, touching the former Inha∣bitants, and Proprietors in that Island, &c. Certain news of an Agreement made by the Elector of Cologne and that City. Sir George Downing, his Maje∣sties Embassador to the States Ge∣neral of the United Provinces ar∣rived at the Hague.N.S. Ianuary. Ralph Montague Esq was sworn one of his Majesties most honour∣able privy Councel, and took his place accordingly. Several accidents of fire hap∣pened at Venice, which did some considerable dammage. Sir George Downing Embassador from his Majesty of Great Britain,N.S. had his publick Audience of the States General of the United Pro∣vinces. Was appointed for the Inter∣changing of the Ratifications of the Treaty,N.S. between the Elector of Cologne and that City. A Proclamation for the calling home all Marriners, and Sea-faring Men, out of the service of Forain Princes and States, and prohibit∣ing their entering thereinto for the future, without License first had and obtained. Certain news of the arrival of a very considerable body, both of Horse and Foot of the French Forces, in the Electorate of Co∣logne. Dyed the Right Reverend Fa∣ther in God John Cosin, Lord Bi∣shop of Durham, and Count Pala∣tine there, in the 77. year of his age. A publick fast was held in the United Provinces, by the command of the States General, for the a∣verting those evils, which seemed to threaten them from abroad. Certain news from Captain Hart, from aboard the Rupert Frigat in Aligant Road, of Sir Edward Spragges having concluded an ho∣nourable and advantageous Peace with Argiers. Mr. Joseph Williamson sworn Clerck of the Councel in Ordina∣ry, and his Majesty conferred on him the honour of Knight-hood. February. The heart of the Princess de Conti,N.S. being embalmed and inclo∣sed in a Box of Silver, was carried to the great Convent of the Car∣melites, where it was received with the usual solemnities. Sir George Downing his Majesties Embassador at the Hague, arrived at Whitehall. Sent Prisoner to the Tower. The Empress of Germany was brought to Bed of a Daughter in the Morning,N.S. which was Christned in the Evening by the Popes Nun∣cio, by the name of Maria, Anna, Apolonia, Josepha, Antonia, Scho∣lastica. Was Consecrated in the Abby of Westminster Doctor Guy Carleton Bishop of Bristol, by his Grace the Arch-bishop of York. His Majesty Constituted Sir Gil∣bert Gerrad Knight and Baronet,
High Sheriff of the County Pala∣tine of Durham, and appointed Sir Francis Goodrick Temporal Chan∣cellor of the said County: to be Keeper of the Great Seal of the said Bishoprick and County Pala∣tine of Durham. Dyed Sir Thomas Ingram, at his house at Thistleworth. His Majesty made choice of Sir Robert Carr Knight and Baronet, to succeed Sir Thomas Ingram, as Chancellor of the County Pala∣tine, and Dutchy of Lancaster, and Keeper of the Seals of the same: who was thereupon sworn of his Majesties most Honourable Privy Councel, and took his place ac∣cordingly. The Marquis d'Astorgas, the new Vice Roy at Naples,N.S. took possession of that Government. Was put to death in Spain Don Jayme de castel Blanca,N.S. a Noble∣man, Sentenced thereunto by the Royal Councel there, for many enormous crimes, by him com∣mitted for 40. years together. Dyed at Vienna the young Em∣perial Princess.N.S. Dyed Thomas Lord Leigh in the 77. year of his Age, leaving his Grand-child Thomas now Lord Leigh, Heir to his Honour and Estate. The young Emperial Princess was privately Interred in the Ca∣pucins Church at Vienna.N.S. A fire at Amsterdam. N.S.The States General of the uni∣ted  Provinces, conferred on his Highness the Prince of Orange,N.S. the Commander of Captain General, and Admiral of their Land and Sea Forces. His Highness the Prince of O∣range,N.S. entertained the States of Holland at a very noble and splen∣did Feast, in the great Hall, where the said States usually assembled. The Count de Donah by a Court of Justice in Holland,N.S. sentenced to loose his Command, he had in the service of that State, and his goods within those Dominions to be con∣fiscated, for killing in a Duel Mon∣sieur vander Myle. His Majesty honoured the Rea∣der of Lincolns-Inn Sir Francis Goodrick, with his presence at dinner, accompanyed with his Royal Highness, and his Highness Prince Rupert, conferred there the honour of Knighthood upon Mr. Pedley, and Mr. Stote, two former Readers there: as also upon Mr. James Butler, and Mr. Francis Dor∣rel, of the same Society. March. Dyed at St. Germans Madam Marie Therese of France,N.S. in the fifth year of her Age. His Majesty in Councel decla∣red and ordered, that it should be lawful for any of his Subjects, ha∣ving a Pass from his Royal High∣ness the Duke of York, Lord High Admiral of England, &c. to Sail and Navigate their Ships with one third of their Seamen and Marri∣ners, being Foraigners, without a∣ny hinderance or molestation, &c. A sharp Sea-fight began in the afternoon, between some of his Majesties Frigats, nigh the Isle of Wight, and the Dutch Smirna Fleet, which continued till night. The fight began again, conti∣nued all day, in the evening five
of the Dutch richest Merchant Men were taken, and their Ree Admiral borded by Captain John Holmes in the Glocester Frigat, who took her, which afterwards sunk in his possession. Captain de Haes, Admiral of this Dutch Smirna Fleet, was killed in this Engage∣ment. His Majesty with the advice of his Privy Councel, issued a Decla∣ration for the maintaining of the Church of England, in its Doctrine, Discipline, and Government, as it is established, and for indulging of Non-conformists, and dissenting persons in matters of Religion. His Majesty in Councel gave order for the publishing of his De∣claration of War against the States General of the United Provinces. And also ordered his Proclama∣tion to be issued for a general fast, throughout this Kingdom, for the imploring the blessing of Almighty God, on his Majesties Naval For∣ces, to be kept in London and West∣minster, &c. on Wednesday the 27th of this Month, and through∣out the rest of the Kingdom, on Wednesday after Easter week. Sir Edward Spragge, late Admiral of his Majesties Fleet in the Me∣diterranean, arrived at Whitehall. The Marquis de Valparacio was shot at Madrid,N.S. by an unhappy accident, which fell out between the Carpenters of that place, and the Marquis's Gentlemen Difference arose at Brussels, be∣tween the Magistrates and the Commonalty, at a Meeting there of the Commonalty,N.S. call'd the nine Nations, about giving their consent for the raising of 300000 Florins more, &c. His Majesty accompanied with his Highness Prince Rupert went to Chattam, whether his Royal Highness went before early this morning. In Essex, between 5 and 6. of the Clock after Noon, was seen to the Southward of the Sun, and at a pretty distance from him, an unu∣sual appearance of a Rainbow co∣lour, giving a light resembling that of the Sun, (which was then to be seen) which seemed to be a Mock-Sun, the fourth of this Month in the morning, 'twas seen before though not so plainly. The Heer Grotius Embassador from the States General of the U∣nited Provinces,N.S. had his last Au∣dience of his most Christian Ma∣jesty at Versailles. 1672. News of the continuation of the great scarcity of Corn at Naples, Palermo, Zant, Cephalonia, and Corfu, &c. to the great distraction of those places, &c. and that at Ishia, an Island lying about 150. miles from Naples, the Inhabitants had been several days without bread. The fast was solemnly kept in the Cities of London and West-min∣ster. Arrived at Cologne the Count of Hohenfelt,N.S. with the Emperors Ra∣tification of the Treaty concluded by that Elector and that Town. War was proclaimed against the States General of the United Provinces in London and West-min∣ster. A Proclamation relating to Sea∣men and Mariners, having left their
ordinary and usual places of a∣bode, &c. Another Proclamation for cal∣ling home all persons of his Maje∣sties Subjects, living in the ser∣vice, &c. of the States General of the United Provinces. April. Dyed at Paris Madam Margui∣rette de Lorraine,N.S. Dutchess Dowager of Orleans, in the 57. year of her Age. The Deputies of the States of Britain had Audience of his most Christian Majesty,N.S. about some matters relating to their Pro∣vince. The body of the Dutchess Dowager of Orleans,N.S. was conveyed to St. Dennis, where 'twas Inter∣red with the usual solemnities. A Proclamation for the better clensing of the streets in Westmin∣ster, and other adjacent places in the County of Middlesex. Was published at Paris the most Christian Kings Declaration of War against the States General of the United Provinces.N.S. Monsieur Durant, a French Cap∣tain of Horse in the service of the States of Holland,N.S. was by their or∣der taken into custody. Arrived at the Hague the Heer Meerman,N.S. Extraordinary Embassa∣dor of the States General of the United Provinces, to his Majesty of Great Britain. He made his report in the As∣sembly of the States General,N.S. and afterwards in that of the Councel of State. Was published a Manifesto of the Elector of Cologne,N.S. wherein he de∣clared to be Neuter, during the war between his most Christian Majesty, and the States General of the United Provinces. A Proclamation for recalling and making void all Protections whatsoever, before granted to any Seamen or Marriners, serving in any Merchants Ships, &c. The Marquis del Frso Embas∣sador Extraordinary, from his most Catholick Majesty to his Majesty of Great Britain, made his publick Entry at London. The Heer de Groot late Embas∣sador of the States General of the United Provinces at the Court of France,N.S. arrived at the Hague. Happened an Earth-quake at Venice,N.S. and at some other places, as at Rimini, Pesaro, Cesen, &c. where it appeared violent; espe∣cially at Rimini, where (as was re∣ported) many of the Inhabitants were killed, and most of the Hou∣ses ruined, with one of the prin∣cipal Churches, and the Bishop and Clergy of the Place, &c. killed in the same thereby. The Marquis del Fresno Embas∣sador Extraordinary from his most Catholick Majesty had his publick Audience of their Majesties, and afterwards of his Royal Highness. The two Houses of Parliament met at Westminster, according to their former Prorogation of the 22. of April 1671. And further prorogued, in pursuance of his Majesties Proclamation of the 22. of September last, till the 30. of Octo∣ber 1672. Was Created the right Honour∣able John Earl of Lauderdail, Duke of Lauderdale; Henry Lord Ar∣lington, Earl of Arlington, and
Viscount Thetford; Anthony Lord Ashly, Earl of Shaftsbury, and Ba∣ron Cooper, &c. and Sir Thomas Clifford, Baron Clifford of Chudleigh. The Right Honourable Henry, Marquis of Worcester, Arthur Earl of Essex, George Viscount Hallifax, were sworn of his Majesties most honourable Privy Councel, and took their places accordingly. His Grace the Duke of Lauder∣dail was Elected a Knight Com∣panion of the most noble Order of the Garter. Dyed Sir Jonathan Dawes She∣riff and Alderman of the City of London, in the 46th. year of his Age. Proceeded the Funeral of the Right Reverend Father in God John Cosin, late Lord Bishop of Durham, from Sir Gilbert Gerrads House in the Pell Mell near Saint James, in order to the Interment of the said Bishop, at Bishops Auck∣land near Durham. Was published at Paris an Or∣donance,N.S. granting six months time to all Subjects of the States General of the United Provinces in France, to withdraw themselves and their effects with leave and li∣berty to Trade and Trafficque du∣ring that time, but no longer. Mr. Montague Embassador from his Majesty of Great Britain had his Audience of leave of their Ma∣jesties at St. Germans,N S. and Mr. Sid∣ney Godolphin arrived at Paris from England, in quality of Envoy Ex∣traordinary. His most Christian Majesty part∣ed from St. Germans towards Nan∣tevil,N.S. where he lodged this night. May. 1672 Sir Thomas Osborne Baronet, was sworn of His Majesties most Hon∣ourable Privy Counsel, and took his place accordingly. News that the Count d'Estrees Vice-Admiral of France, was with the Squadron of French Ships ar∣rived at St. Helens in the Isle of Wight. There happened at Rimini so violent a storm,N.S. as to throw to the ground all the Houses the Earth-quake, which had not long before happened there, had left standing. At Bologna and Ferrara most of their Vines were ruined, and their Corn blasted, to the undoing of those Inhabitants. Dyed at Madrid the Cardinal de Moncada,N.S. Duke of Montalto. His Majesty parted from White∣hall for Portsmouth, and his Royal Highness passed with his Majesties Fleet by Dover westward, in order to a Conjunction with the French Squadron. Her Majesty parted from White∣hall towards Deal. His most Christian Majesty ar∣rived at Charleo,N.S. accompanied with the Duke of Oans. The Dutch Fleet was riding in Dover road. His Majesty returned from Ports∣mouth to Whitehall. And her Majesty from Dover. A fire at Hambrow, which be∣ginning in a Merchants-House, in some hours divers considerable Houses, where thereby consumed. His most Christian Majesty cau∣sed a review to be made of his For∣ces at Charleroy.N.S. The Dutch Fleet stood for Ca∣lais, where it Anchored this night.
His Majesty in Councel order∣ed, &c. that the Act of Parliament made in the 12th. year of his Raign, for the encouraging and increasing of Shipping and Navi∣gation, &c. should be suspended totally, &c. concerning or relating to any Ships or Vessels, their Ma∣sters or Marriners, their Guns, Furniture, Tackle, &c. or to any Goods or Commodities Imported or Exported to or for Norway, or the Baltick Sea. The Dutch Fleet was seen at the back of the Goodwin. The States General of the Uni∣ted Provinces, published a Placaet, forbidding their own Subjects to Trade for England or France, from any Countreys whatsoever, &c. as likewise all Strangers, though not inhabiting within the said United Provinces, to transport any Goods or Commodities out of their Ter∣ritories, for the said Kingdoms, &c. The Dutch Fleet was plying too and again N. N. E. off the North Forelands. His most Christian Majesty part∣ed from Charleroy,N.S. accompanied with the Duke of Orleans, with all his Troops, who marched in three bodies, and lodged this night at Tongres. They continued their march to∣wards Pirove,N.S. two leagues and a half from Tongres, where his said Majesty Encamped. The Viscount Turrenne arrived with his Forces at Luden. The most Christian King with his Army parted from Pirove,N S. and arrived at Branon. The Glocester with ten of his Ma∣jesties Fregats, came to an Anchor below the Gunfleet. Several broad sides were ex∣changed between the said Fregats and some Dutch Ships. His Royal Highness appeared with his Majesties Fleet within fight of Dover. His most Christian Majesty at the head of his Troops marched to grand Hach,N.S. where they En∣camped upon a large Plain. His Majesty of Great Britain commanded and ordered, that the Ships, Goods, and Marchandizes of the Subjects of the States Gene∣ral of the United Provinces, seized in any of his Ports, before the Declaration of War, should be forth with set at liberty, &c. and that all Dutch Merchants, or o∣thers, who neither in their Persons or Goods were under this Deten∣tion, might freely depart this King∣dom, &c. A Releasement was also made by the States General of the Uni∣ted Provinces, of all English and Scotch Vessels stopt in any of their Territories, before the said Decla∣ration of War, &c. The French Army removed from Grand Hach,N. S. and marched to Frere. The Inhabitants of Maeyck per∣swaded to take in French Forces, in order to the fortifying thereof. Arrived at Tongues 80. Waggons laden with Corn, for the use of the French, bought up in the parts a∣bout Viset. His Royal Highness came with his Majesties Fleet to an Anchor near the Falls. Sir Jonathan Dawes, Sheriff and Alderman of the City of London, was honourably Interred in Saint Katherines Creed Church.
His most Christian Majesty, &c. Encamped with his Army in the great Valley near Viset,N.S. all along and beyond the Meuse. His Majesties Fleet under the Command of his Royal Highness, appeared at the North-sand head, standing Northwards. Those of his Majesties Fregats, under the Command of Captain Coleman in the Glocester, came to an Anchor in the Buoy of the Gun∣fleet. The Dutch Fleet after the re∣turn of their Squadron out of the River, weighed out of the Gunfleet and in the Evening appeared in sight of Alborough, and came to an Anchor within four or five leagues thereof. Maestricht almost blooked up by the French. His Majesties Fregats under the Command of Captain Coleman, set Sail in order to a Conjunction with his Majesties Fleet. His Majesties Fleet under the Command of his Royal Highness, got sight of the Dutch Fleet, about eight leagues E. S. E. of the Gun∣fleet. His Majesties Fleet under the command of his Royal Highness appeared this Evening, standing in for Southwould Bay, and came to an Anchor about four leagues thereof. The Sluces at Lillo were open¦ed,N.S. and all the Polders set under water, as were likewise the Low∣lands about Bergen-op-Zoom. A Proclamation, that it should be lawful to and for his Majesties Subjects, as well Merchants as o∣thers, to set out Ships to Sea, and to carry on their Trade and Com∣merce, as fully, &c. as they could or might have done, if no restraint or imbargo formerly had been made, &c. and that all passes and protections for Ships and Marri∣ners formerly granted, should be in full force and effect. Arrived at Copenhagen his Grace the Duke of Richmond,N.S. Extraordi∣nary Embassador from his Maje∣sty of Great Britain. A Bridge over the Rhyne was wholly finished,N.S. at or about Key∣sarwaert, where the French Army quickly after passed over. His most Christian Majesty and his whole Army decamped from Viset,N.S. and passing the Meuse over a Bridge of Boats, encamped a∣bout half a league from Viset afore∣said. The Bishop of Liege came to complement his most Christian Majesty upon his arrival in those parts.N. S. A suddain and violent fire broke out in the house of a Tobacco and Strong-water seller, at the I∣ron gate near the Tower, doing considerable mischief. News that at Zant, Zeffalonia, and Corfu, the Inhabitants were in so great want of Corn, that several men did daily sell themselves to the Galleys, only to have a small sustenance for life. A sharp Sea-fight happened to∣wards Southwould, Laytoff, &c. be∣tween his Majesties Fleet, under the Command of his Royal High∣ness, and the Dutch, in which the Royal James was burnt. Dyed Sir John Trevor, one of his Majesties principal Secreraries of State, and one of his most ho∣nourable Privy Councel, in the
fourty seventh year of his Age. Being the great Anniversary of his Majesties Birth and happy Re∣storation, was Celebrated at Lon∣don, with great demonstrations of publick joy, &c. a new Conduit of a noble and beautiful Structure being opened in the Stocks Mar∣ket Place, near Lumbard street, running Claret for divers hours, &c. erected at the sole charge of Sir Robert Viner, &c. 'Twas also Celebrated at Lyn, with great demonstrations of pu∣blick joy. The Right Honourable Henry, Marquis of Worcester, the Earl of St. Albans, and the Earl of Bed∣ford, were Elected Knights Com∣panions of the most noble Order of the Garter. His most Christian Majesty ha∣ving with his Army passed the Rhyne at Keyserweart, arrived at Holtzen, a small place not far from Nuis, where his Majesty was met by the Elector of Cologne. Iune. His most Christian Majesty with his Army marched towards Rhyne∣berg. Was honourably interred Sir John Trevor at St. Bartholomews in Smithfield. His Majesties Fleet, under the command of his Royal Highness, came to an Anchor in Sole Bay. The Fleet weighed again and stood to Sea. The Dutchess d'Enguine was brought to Bed of a Son at Saint Germanes.N.S. His Grace the Duke of Lauder∣dale, by a Proxy, the right ho∣nourable Henry Marquis of VVor∣cester, the Earl of St. Albans, and the Earl of Bedford, were enstal∣led at VVinsor Knights of the most noble Order of the Garter. Was Interred in the Quire of Rochester Monsieur Rabiniere tres le Bos, Reer-Admiral of the French Squadron, who dyed at Chattam of the wounds he had received in the late Engagement. Great troubles began to seize upon the people of the United Pro∣vinces, by the appearance of the French Armies, who Besieging Rhyneberg, Orsoy, VVesel, and Burick, were quickly possessed of them. Fell a violent Rain at Madrid with much Thunder,N.S. which broke down a part of the Tower of the Covent of the Holy Trinity; The Lightning scorched one of the Fa∣thers, and killed three men with∣out the Gates. Arrived a Bode or Messenger (at Harwich) of the States Gene∣ral of the United Provinces, on his way to the Dutch Embassador at London. Arrived at Edinbergh his Grace the Duke of Lauderdale, his Maje∣sties High Commissioner of Scot∣land. The body of the Earl of Sand∣wich was discovered floating on the Sea, by one of his Majesties Ketches, and brought up to Har∣wich. His most Christian Majesties Armies appearing before Rees, quickly made that and Emmerick their own; as the Bishop of Mun∣ster did Doetechem, Groll, and Bor∣kelo, after the taking of Rees and Emmerick the French proceeded to Skenkscance of the Rhyne, in order
to a passing the River about Tol∣huys. His Majesty gave order for the publishing of his Gracious Decla∣ration, towards all such Subjects of the Low Countreys, as should come into his Kingdom, &c. His Grace the Duke of Rich∣mond, his Majesties extraordinary Embassador to the Crown of Deu∣mark, made his publick Entry at Copenhagen. A Proclamation, forewarning and straitly commanding all his Majesties Subjects, &c. not by writ∣ing or speaking, to utter or pu∣blish any false news or reports. At mid-night her Majesty of France was brought to Bed of a young Prince.N.S. A solemn Procession at Paris, on occasion of his most Christian Majesties good success against the Dutch.N.S. A tumult at the Hague, the peo∣ple throwing stones at the house of the Heer van Mombas.N.S. Bonfires at Paris, and other de∣monstrations of publick joy,N.S. for the birth of the young Prince. The right honourable Henry, Earl of Arlington, elected a Knight Companion of the most noble or∣der of the Garter. News that the French had pas∣sed the Rhyne into the Betuwe, that Utrecht had yielded to his most Christian Majesty, and that the French Troops were advanced as far as Amersford, and that the Bi∣shop of Munster had taken Swoll and Breefort, the French Knotzen∣bergh, and that Culenbergh, Tiel, Buren, &c. had yielded to the French, that Ravestine was demolished by them, and that Scenckscance, and Arnhem were also taken, & that the common people began to be very rumultuous at Middlebourgh; and that at Amsterdam they were late∣ly in danger of being plundered by the commonalty, and that the Countrey there abouts, as also at Dort, &c. was set under water for some leagues together, to hinder the approach of the French; as also at Rotterdam, Leyden, and Delf, that the common people were ve∣ry unruly and tumultuous. The two young Counts Tillions two brothers,N.S. were Assassinated at Mons by seven or eight Spani∣ards, as they were coming out of the Church. The Trenches were opened be∣fore Daesburgh.N S. A great tumult at Dort amongst the Inhabitants,N.S. in which the peo∣ple would have been killing and plundering their Burgemaster, and other chief Officers of the Town, had not the Lords presently de∣clared his Highness the Prince of Orange their Governour and Stadt∣holder. His Grace the Duke of Bucks, the right honourable the Earl of Arlington, the Earl of Shaftsbury, and the Lord Clifford went to the Deputies of the States General of the United Provinces at Hampton Court. Doesburgh yielded to the French. N.S.The Count Conningsmark, Em∣bassador Extraordinary from the Crown of Sweden, had Audience of his most Christian Majesty. The right honourable the Earl of Arlington, was at Windsor, by a Proxy, enstalled Knight of the most noble Order of the Garter.
His Grace the Duke of Bucks, and the right honourable the Earl of Arlington, began their journey for Holland, as his Majesties extra∣ordinary Embassadors and Pleni∣potentiaries. Their Excellencies parted in the Katherine and Henrietta Yachts from the Buoy in the Nore. His most Christian Majesty had advice of the taking of Deventer,N.S. and that Swoll, Campen, Elborough, Arderwick Hatten, Hasselt, and Ommen, &c. had yielded upon sum∣mons. His Majesty had an account of the taking also of the Forts of Voorne and St. Andre. His Grace the Duke of Bucks, and the right honourable the Earl of Arlington arrived at the Maes, Landed at Maesland Sluice, and in the evening arrived at the Hague. The Bishop of Strasburgh arriv∣ed at the French Camp,N.S. and had Audience of the most Christian King. The Bishop of Munster arrived there,N.S. had (after his Majesty had had some conference with him) a Cross of Diamonds, of very great value, presented unto him by his most Christian Majesty, and so re∣turned to his Army. The Baron de Metemiche, En∣voy from the Elector of Treves, had likewise Audience of the said King. And this night came news to his most Christian Majesty, of the surrender of Zutphen. His most Christian Majesty part∣ed from Biloni towards Ameron∣gen.N. S. His said Majesty arrived at A∣merongen.N.S. The Sieur de Groot arrived in the French Camp with ample power, &c. from the States Ge∣neral of the United Provinces. Dyed not far from Rome Cardi∣nal Francisco Mancini,N.S. in the 66. year of his age, and 15th. of his Cardinalato. His Royal Highness with his Majesties Fleet, came to an An∣chor off of Harwich. Set Sail for the Coast of Hol∣land. At Dort his Highness the Prince of Orange,N.S. by an Act was made Stadt-holder. His Majesties Fleet in the even∣ing appeared within six leagues of the Brill. Iuly. The States of Holland conclud∣ed, that the perpetual Edict of their never admitting of a Stadt-holder, should cease, &c. Grave yielded to the French. The States of Zealand made his Highness the Prince of Orange, Stadtholder of that Province, &c. His Highness was also made Stadtholder of Holland quickly af∣ter, and declared Stadt-holder at Amsterdam. The body of the Earl of Sand∣wich, (which was taken up at Sea) was magnificently Interred in King Henry the 7th's Chappel, in the Vault on the North side of the Quire. Henry Coventry Esq sworn into the place of his Majesties princi∣pal Secretary of State, in the room of Sir John Trevor deceased. Sworn also together with Sir Robert Long Knight and Baronet,
of his Majesties most honourable Privy Councel, and took their pla∣ces accordingly. Their Excellencies the Duke of Buckingham, and the Earl of Ar∣lington, arrived at Utrecht from the Hague. Had their publick Audience of his most Christian Majesty in his quarters in the Camp. Arrived at Utrecht the Viscount Hallifax, Envoy extraordinary from his Majesty of Great Bri∣tain. Had his Audience of the most Christian King in his Camp.N.S. Nimmegen taken by the French. The Commonalty at Rotterdam plundered the house of one of their Magistrates, and beat out the windows of another, and several Articles were presented by the Citizens to the Burgermasters and common Councel of the same, &c. relating to the Prince of Orange. The Commission of Stadtholder, was delivered at the Hague to his Highness the Prince of Orange.N.S. His most Christian Majesty with his whole Army,N.S. decamped from Zeyst, and took his way towards Boisleduck by the way of Arnehem, Nimmegen, &c. leaving the Duke of Luxemburgh, with a considerable Force in the Province of Utrecht, which Province was now wholly possessed by the French. The French Army Encamped half a mile from Rhenen.N.S. Under the Walls of Arnehem. N.S.Happened at Venice a violent storm with Thunder and Hail, of an extraordinary bigness.N.S. His most Christian Majesty pas∣sed over with his Army at two or three several places of the Rhyne,N.S. and Encamped within half a league of Nimmegen. Covoerden surrendred to the Bi∣shop of Munster.N.S. Arrived at Vienna the Prince d'Anhalt from Berlin,N.S. with full power to conclude a Treaty with the Emperor and the Elector of Brandenburgh, for the defence of the Empire. Certain news of the continuati∣on of the difference between the Duke of Savoy, and the States of Genoua, a War being begun be∣tween them some time before. The Duke of Savoy's Troops, ta∣king (or attempting upon) Pie∣vé. A Vessel arrived at Harwich from his Majesties Fleet, giving an account that the said Fleet was in a good condition upon the Coast of Holland, and that his Royal Highness was in perfect health. The Sieur Pelnitz arrived at the Hague,N.S. on the part of the Elector of Brandenburgh. The English Embassadors and Plenipotentiaries lodged at Nim∣megen. His most Christian Majesty saw his Army pass the Waal,N.S. and than it marched to Grave. The Army reposed it self at Grave.N.S. The Army removed two lea∣gues further,N.S. to a place called Box∣tel. Crevecoeur taken by the French. The English Embassadors and Plenipotentiaries,N.S. parted from the French Camp at Boxtel towards Antwerp, and lodged at Turn∣hault. They arrived at Antwerp.N.S.
Was honourably Interred in the Parish Church of Bumstead of the Tower in Essex, that most ac∣complished and aged Gentleman, Sir Thomas Bendish Baronet, for∣merly for very many years toge∣ther Embassador in Turky. Bommel surrendred to the French.N.S. His Majesties Plenipotentiaries, the Duke of Bucks, the Earl of Arlington, and the Lord Viscount Hallifax returned to Whitehall. His Majesty conferred the ho∣nour of Knighthood upon Henry Ford Esq Secretary to the Earl of Essex, as likewise on Captain John Edgeworth. The Earl of Essex, Lord Lieu∣tenant of Ireland, began his jour∣ney towards that Kingdom. The Cambridge and Bristol Fri∣gats, met the Dutch East-India Fleet, ten or twelve leagues to the West-ward of Heylige Landt, where they hotly engaged them. A Proclamation that no person or persons whatsoever, should im∣port, or cause to be imported into England, VVales, or Barwick up∣on Tweed, any kind or sort of Painted Earthen Wares, whatsoe∣ver, except those of China, and stone Bottles, and Jugs, &c. up∣on pain of being grieviously fi∣ned, &c. His most Christian Majesty parted from the Camp at Boxtel,N.S. for the Abbey of Postel, parted from thence towards Berningnen, proceeded to Lummen, where he lodged this night. The Sieur Mombas made his escape out of Prison at the Hague.N.S. Was brought to the Hague Pri∣soner from Dort, the Sieur de Wit, Ruwaert van Putten. News that Groningen was close Besieged by the Bishop of Mun∣ster. His most Christian Majesty re∣turned to St. Germanes.N.S. August. Was concluded the Treaty for the publick security,N.S. and general Defence of the Empire. The Earl of Euston was married to the onely Daughter of the Earl of Arlington. The Sieur Pelnitz, Envoy from the Elector of Brandenburgh,N.S. took his leave of the States General of the United Provinces, in order to his return home. Then Pensionary de Wit was in the Assembly of the States of Hol∣land,N.S. endeavouring to clear him∣self of several matters whereof he stood accused. The Dutch Fleet Northward of the Maes. The Earl of Essex, Lord Lieute∣nant of Ireland, arrived at Dunlary, and about three in the afternoon arrived at Dublin. Happened a great disturbance at Middleburgh,N.S. between the Ma∣gistrates and Burghers, &c. Te Deum was sung in the Church∣es at Genoua,N.S. for the Victory their Forces had lately obtained over those of the Duke of Savoy at Ca∣stello Vecchio. Maestricht more then ever block∣ed up by the French, by their lying quartered round about it.
Was exchanged with the French Embassador at London, the Ratifi∣cation of the Treaty concluded by his Majesties late Plenipotentia∣ries in the French Camp, &c. The French passed on both sides the River,N.S. near the Fort of Na∣vaigne, with a very considerable Army towards Maestricht, and quickly after as it were quite sur∣rounded Maestricht, and drew a line of Circumvalation between on Ravens House, and a small Village called Scharen, to defend them∣selves against the Sallyes of that Garrizon. News of Oneglia's surrender to the Genoueses. A Proclamation, touching half pence and farthings, &c. Great disorders at Delf. N.S.Mr. Cornelis de VVit, ancient Burghermaster of the Town of Dort,N.S. and Ruward of the Lands of Putten, was Sentenced by the Court of Holland and West-Fries∣land, to be banished out of those Provinces, and to loose all his Dignities and Imployments posses∣sed by him, &c. He and his Brother the Pensio∣nary de Wit killed by the people at the Hague, in a most notorious manner, and their dead bodies hanged upon a Gallows by the heels, being used in such manner as scarce the like hath ever been heard off. Happened at Madrid in the Pla∣ca Mayor a very great fire,N.S. which in few hours burnt to the ground all the Pile of Buildings, called the Planadera, with many other dwellings, &c. containing as was supposed 2000. Families, whereof some were killed and burnt, and others hurt in quenching of the fire. Certain news that the Heer de Groot was with drawn, &c. also that Sieur Mombas and he was at Cologne. A general Rendez-vous of the Emperial Forces at Egra in Bohe∣mia,N.S. who quickly after marched from thence towards Halberstadt, in order to a Conjunction with the Brandenburgh Forces, &c. Ar∣rived there. Her Grace the Dutchess of Monmouth, was brought to Bed of a Son. Several Articles were put up up∣on the Exchange at Amsterdam,N.S. of a menacing nature, and the peo∣ple much dissatisfied, urging for a further reformation in the Magi∣stracy, in imitation of Rotterdam and Delf. The Heer Fagel elected Pensio∣nary of Holland. The Turks invade the Ukrain. Was beheaded in the Dutch Ar∣my Colonel d'Ossery,N.S. late Gover∣nour of Rhynebergh. The Turks take Cominiec. The Bishop of Munster raised his Siege at Groningen. The Dutch Fleet arrived again before Shoonevelt. The French Army, which had for some time been encamped before Maestricht,N.S. broke up from thence and marched towards the Rhyne. September. Colonel Zouteland Prisoner at the Hague,N. S. made his escape out of Prison, but was retaken.
News that the Burghers at the Brill had displaced all their old Magistrates. Blockzeil retaken by the Dutch. Happened a Rencounter be∣tween the Duke of Luxemburgh's Forces,N.S. and the Dutch about Woer∣den. The Burghers at Delf drove their Magistrates from the Town-house.N.S. The Bishop of Munster returned with his Forces into VVestpha∣lia. At Middleburgh the Soulders under the command of Captain Soutland,N.S. came in an unruly man∣ner to the States, demanding their Arrears. Charles Earl of Duncaster, his Grace the Duke of Monmouth's son was Christned by his Grace the Archbishop of Canterbury. Poland much disturbed and a∣larmed at the approach of the Grand Seignours Forces, now ha∣ving entred into those parts, act∣ing vigorously against that King∣dom. A great disturbance at Amster∣dam,N. S. where the Commonalty, would have been plundring Lieu∣tenant Admiral de Ruyters House. Arrived at Genoua Monsieur Gaumont,N.S. the French Envoy. He had private Audience of the Senate there,N.S. making some Pro∣positions, in order to a Peace be∣tween that State and the Duke of Savoy. Monsieur Turenne passed the Rhyne about Wesel with his whole Army,N.S. in order to his attending the coming down of the Imperial and Brandenburgh Forces. His Highness the Prince of O∣range wrote a Letter unto the Bur∣ghers of Amsterdam,N.S. in order to their desire in their changing of their Magistrates. The Heer Kievit made Pensio∣nary of Rotterdam, in the place of the Heer de Groot. Arrived at Halberstadt General Montecuculi,N.S. having left his Troops at Mulhausen. The Dutch Fleet off of Zealand, and many of their great Ships or∣dered to be laid up for this Win∣ter.N. S. A great fire in Saint Bernards Cloyster at Antwerp.N.S. His Majesty ordered his Pro∣clamation to be published for the proroguing of the Parliament, from October 30. to the 4th. of Fe∣bruary next. His Royal Highness arrived at the Court from the Fleet. Certain news, that many of the Dutch great Ships and men of War were gone in. The Elector of Brandenburgh took up his own Quarters in the English Monastry at Lambsping.N.S. Several Horse and Foot of the Brandenburgh Forces arrived at Leeuwen.N.S. Count Montecuculi left the Bran∣denburgh Court, and went to the Imperial Army. The Imperial Army passed by Eysenach,N.S. and took up their chief quarter at Herleshausen. They came to Heringen. N.S.To Kirckhassel a league from Heunfeldt. The Imperial and Brandenburgh Troops at or about Heuxter, and made towards Francford.
Five Felons were executed at Durham, one of whom John Usard, at the place of Execution, con∣fessed he was in the plot in the year 1663. shewing his hearty sorrow and penitence for the same. Was a sharp dispute at the Bles∣serbrugh,N.S. between Steenwick and Wolviga, between a party of the Dutch, and some French and Co∣logne Troops. Sir Robert Hanson was chosen to be Lord Mayor of the City of Lon∣don, for the ensuing year. Pritchard and James Smith Esq sworn Sheriffs of London and Middlesex.
