B1650 R28899 10776028 45812
THE WHOLE DUTY OF MAN, In all his Stages, in a plain and familiar He∣roick Verse, with Va∣riety of Cuts proper to the several Chapters thereof, &c. By W. Beck, M. A. Fitted for the Plea∣sure and Benefit of YOUTH. London, Printed and Sold by J. Bradford in Little Britain.
ADVERTISEMENTS. BOOKS Printed and Sold by J. Bradford. 1. YOuth's Travels: Or, The Vanity of Mans Age. Represented in Seven several Stages thereof, from his Birth to his Death. With variety of Pictures, exposing the Vanities and Follies of this Age. By A. F. Price Two-Pence. 2. A Mirror for Atheists; wherein they may plainly see their Prodigious Follies, Vast Extravagancies, No∣torious Impieties and Absurdities: containing a com∣pendious account of the egregious vicious Life, and Emi∣nently and Sincerely Penitent Death of John Earl of Rochester: Wherein is briefly receited his Disputes and Arguments against God and Religion, as the same were used at several Meetings. Also, the manner of his wonderful Conversion, and his Godly Expressions du∣ring his Last Sickness. Abstracted from the Remarks of the Right Reverend Dr. Gilbert Burnet. Price Sticht in Blue Paper, Two Pence. 3. The Father's Blessing, Penn'd for the Instruction of his Children. With a Paraphrase upon the Lord's Prayer. With Motives to Prayer. By William Jole, Minister of Sarrat in Hartfordshire. Price Two-Pence. 4. A Choice Drop of Honey from the Rock Christ: Or a short Word of Advice to all Christians; in order to a thorough Reformation. Price stitcht Two Pence. 5. The Triumph of Faith manifested to the World: Or, Abrahm offering up his Son Isaac, as a sweet Burning Sacrifice upon Mount Moriah to the Lord. Being a Dia∣logue between Abraham, Isaac, and the Angel that sta∣ved his Hand from Execution. With a large Cut to it. Price One Penny. 6. A Dialogue between a Blind Man and Death; By Richard Standfast, late Minister of Christ-Church in the City of Bristol. Also the Great Assize; or Christs Cer∣tain and Sudden Appearance to Judgment. Price 1. d. 7. The Grand Question Resolved, What we must do to be Saved: Being Instructions for a Holy Life. By Dr. Burnet. Price Sticht Two Pence.
THE Whole Duty OF MAN, In all his Stages, in a plain and Familiar Heroick Verse; With Variety of Cuts proper to the several Chapters thereof. With several Private Prayers and Thanks∣givings annexed to it, both for the Plea∣sure and Benefit of Youth. By W. Beck, M. A. Prov. 22.6. Train up a Child in the Way he should go, and when he is Old he will not depart from it. LONDON, Printed and Sold by J. Bradford, in Little Britain, the Corner House right against the Pump, 1700.
A PREFACE. To the Good and Honourable, But more Particularly The Courteous READER. SInce this Renowned Book has been by some, in part impefectly turned into Lyrick, or Jam∣beck Verse; so that I thought it necessary to give you it compleat i Heroick: And seeing every Body now adays ha an Inclination either to Read or Write Verses, and some by an unhappy Skill that way, taking the advantage of the general humour, have exercised their abused parts in the recommending of Vice with all the flourish of Wit; adding to the natural propensity to sin, the sweet taking Seduce∣ments of Poetry; but since the Contagion rather spreads than decreases, and because it becomes me to hope, that many rather love the Vice for the sake of the Verse, than the Verse for the sake of Sin. Therefore I thought it not unworthy the Cha∣racter of a Christian, nor besides, my duty as such (for the Reformation of Manners in Youth) to make, and humbly present you with this little Ver∣sion of The Whole Duty of Man, in a plain and familier dress, to be got by Heart by the Ignorant, being divided into Thirteen Chapters, one quarter of which being learned every Sunday; the Whole in one Year may be compassed: And it is
measured out in Verse only to make it go down the smoothlier, and stick the better upon the Memory: for as Verse has been a great occasion of the breach of most Duties contained herein, and a means of drawing too many from performance; so I hope this may and will be as prevalent for the reclaiming as many, since according to the Poet, A Verse may find him whom a Sermon flies, And turn Delight into a Sacrifice. So if all Dignity, and Renown, and Parts, and Ʋnderstanding of Birth, and Fortune, would but freely and conspicuously offer themselves for Patterns of Education and Conversation, they must, and would undoubtedly entice and make others to be good: and the Honour of our Religion would soon be retrieved and brought again into Credit, and our Off-spring be as promising and hopeful as our de∣ceased and much Lamented Duke. But since that there are too many Proud, Covetous and Malicious Pluralists; and also incroaching and intruding Ʋnnaturalized Foreigners, which having ingrossed the Inheritance, being more for the Fleece than the Flock, Lording over it. So that I as well as others in this Iron Age, having nothing to support us but a feeble Quill, are almost ready to be Interred in the Ru∣ins of a low Fortune; yet being desirous of giving a publick Testimony of the value I have for all that are good, and more particularly for you which soars above the rest, being unbyassed by the Customary Opinion of the World, and so far from believing
any to be undeserving, because unfortunate, that their very Indigency in a great measure entitules them to your Protection. So humbly beseeching to accept of my weak En∣deavours, Prayers, and Good Wishes, in reliance n your Goodness, I assume the boldness to subscribe my Self, Your most Humble and Devoted Servant, Will.—Beck. ADVERTISEMENT. THe Author (being Master of Arts of a long standing, now either at his Lodgings at the Kings-Head, and Grammar-School in Jermain-street, St. James's; or at any ones own House, if desired) doth, and will in a few Years exactly, tho' not pedantickly, teach Young Ladies, and Gentlemen the Tongues and Sciences; he having lately contrived and made a Compendious, yet exact English Accidence, Grammar, and Rhetorick, &c. By which any of an ordinary capacity, with the Author's assistance, without a Miracle, in a few Months may learn (that which is so much wanting and desired to accomplish La∣dies) viz. to Write True English, and good Sense either with, or without the Latin Tongue. The Accidence he promises (God willing) to publish the beginning of the New Year. But the other will be dictated only to those that can write, to be got by Heart against the next Day.
THE Whole Duty of Man, &c. CHAPTER I. (1.) The Necessity of caring for the Soul. (2.) The Worth of the Soul. (3.) The Misery of the Soul. (4.) The dan∣ger of the Loss of the Soul. woodcut of angel flying over flaming mouth (1.) THE chief Intent of this Book is to show, Those things which each Person is now to do, Being in as plain and familiar way, That Old and Young should never go astray,
And in the end of all most happy be, And from Eternal Burnings then set free. So to be happy let all Mankind strive To run the Race of Vertue whilst alive, And practise only what's herein laid down, That after Death he may receive the Crown That's glorious, and of immortal weight, Which God doth give to those that lives the height Of this their Duty, and likewise do run The Race before them that is now begun. (2.) How noble also is the Soul of Man, He ought therefore to take what care he can Of it, being so precious, and so dear, Seeing God's lovely Image it does bear, He breathing into Man the Breath of Life, Which must endure in spight of Satan's Strife, Being so good, so pure, and excellent, It must remain when Ages all are spent. So like to God it is, being made to be Blessed with him to all Eternity. Why do we then such noble Souls defile, As with the splendor of this World beguile, And with all foul, and sad polluted Sin, Let e'en the dreadful'st Foes to enter in: Pray then slight Worldly Wealth, and Honours too, And Satan's gilded Baits, which will undo. (3.) How many Men now stand in greatest fear, Of keeping, and of losing Treasure here, Which will not spare to be at any Charges To keep a float these their crazy Barges. For if an Eye, or any part endure Aching, or Pain, they streight seek for a Cure; As first to know the Cause of the Disease, And then what things can Cure; or give them ease; But why should any take so great a car Of Body more than of his Soul most dear? Which is of purer Essence, and by Birth Innocent; but the other's from the Earth,
Base, and corrupt, whose Loss some more condole Here then the better part their precious Soul Which never can fade, perish, or decay, Tho' Satan it invade, 'twill force its way: But who can dwell in that Eternal Fire, Where is not granted them the least Desire, Either of asswaging present pain, or grief, Or any to come to for their relief, But there to languish, and therein to lie, And burn in Flames to all Eternity: And since we can't one Spark of Fire endure, Should on our tender Bodies lie, be sure W'had better to our God betimes return, Than evermore in scorching Flames to burn. (4.) The World, the Flesh, and Devil, all do strive Poor Man of Happiness for to deprive. Oh then let all call on that mighty Power For Grace, & strength, 'gainst those which would devour Their precious Souls, and let them always stand Fast, whiles Breath, obeying God's just command: For he has always promised to those Which keep'm, and on Providence repose, To give them that good thing which they have chose. Then for your holy help, learn, and read o'er This foll'wing Book, your Sins for to disco'er, And practise to be happy for your part, The whole which done, to others it impart; For Verse may find him whom a Sermon flies, And turn delight into a Sacrifice, And make him open, tho' h' has shut his Eyes.
CHAP. II. (1.) Of the Light of Nature; and (2.) by the Light of the Scriptures; wherein three great Branches of our Duty's contained, (1.) To God, as the belief of his Being. (2.) Of the Trinity. (3.) God's Attributes. (4.) The Immor∣tality, and Worth of the Soul. (5.) Of the Resurrection, and future state. (6.) Of God's Commands. (7.) Faith in Christ. (8.) In the Holy Scriptures. (9.) In the Threatnings and Promises there. (10.) The Duty of Love to God. (11.) Of Fear to God. (12) Of trust in God. (13.) Of Care. woodcut of woman sitting and reading (1.) THe Light of Nature doth us plainly tell, Not to do things which leads us down to Hell. So let the Heathens now Examples be, Which use the Moral Law, yea, more than we.
(2.) But since the Light of Scripture doth exceed That Light, as Christians, we do always need; Whose Precept's good, if they be well applyed, Will fill the Soul with Heavenly Food beside, And it to Heaven will most surely guide. Tho' Christ has to Mankind purchased Heaven, and Happiness; yet there is need Of something on our part still to be done, Before that conquer'd Country be our own, Or e'er we can that highest Bliss attain, And tast the Comforts there, and there remain; For Prophets, and Apostles, do command Us to live Godly, and t'our Promise stand, Our Duty to perform to God, and Man To be as just, and right'ous as we can. (1.) Would we be saved? then we must believe There is a God did all things being give, That made the World, and stretched out the Sky, That's a Spirit, infinite, Almighty. Tho' Persons Three, yet n'other God but one, Since all Perfection is in him alone. (2.) Believe you must the blessed Trinity. That in the Godhead there are Persons three, The eternal, Son and Holy Ghost, Who made, redeemed, saved what Sin had lost. (3.) That God's gracious, a Spirit, just and wise, Too pure and holy for our mortal Eyes To view, all things ruling by h's Providence, Is every where, knowing the inmost sense Of every Heart, and secret Thoughts of Men Yea, more, and better than any of them. (4.) Believe you must a Soul within your Breast There is, which will be miserable, or blest, That after this Life will for ever last, Then endless Sorrows, or such Joys must tast
In t'other World, while we are in this; Nothing of more value w'have than 'tis; Therefore it is our Duty whilst we re here, To make Salvation still our chiefest care. (5.) For why, our Bodies must not always rot In this dull Earth, as things by God forgot; No, no, be sure they all again must rise, And see as Job saith, with these very Eyes, At the Last Judgment; then the trembling Soul And Body shall be saved, or perish whole; For from Hell's Furnace there'll be no return, They which go there, must then for ever burn. Now then, attend, consider well the case, As to avoid the Torments of that place. By Faith it must be done with fervent Love To Christ, which by our Actions you must prove. (6.) If Happy you would be, there's no'ther way Than to Love God, and his Commands obey, And to do these, 'tis fitting that you know What his Wll is, which now remains to show. Now the first Cause of all our Misery, Was Adam's Sin, for which he was to dye, And al his Off-spring; but th' exceeding love Of Christ did interpose, and Death remove: He on himself our Condemnation took, Discharged all Debt, and crossed the fatal Book, So now if you'l Repent, and so but yield Sin to forsake, you'l have your Pardon seal'd. (7.) If you be but sincere, and do relie On Christ by Faith, who for all Sins did dye: This do you must, or else that weighty guilt Of Adam, all your own, and Christ's Blood spilt, Will sink you but the lower into Hell, In Everlasting Torments for to dwell; For Christs the only Person that can can save Your Soul from th' second Death, so as to have
A place, yea, far above the Starry Sky, In Joys to live, which ne'er was seen by Eye. So now what Christ commands, you must obey, Thanking Infinite Goodness, that you may So happy be, Faith being the first Command That is enjoyned; see to it then you stand. (8). Behold Mankind, now posting down apace, And can of nothing boast, but Love and Grace, Which God has freely set before his Face; So needs must he on his dear Word relie, And willingly obey it till he dye: If he would live the Life, he must believe The Bible is God's Word, and must receive It all for Truth, Testament Old and New; God cannot lye, 'twas given us all for true: Let's then perform what's there injoyn'd throughout, And not dispute, omit, nor yet to doubt, But with such Sorrow for our Faults, Repent, Bathing in Tears even till our Life is spent. (9.) For if we Sin, and after don't repent, But at our black Ingratitude relent, The Threatnings of God's Book do aim at all, Whch by Transgressions oftentimes do fall, The Great shall have their due as well as Small; God promising to those that do obey, Glorious Rewards, and can you thnk that they Which disregard his Threatnings, shall be Partakers of the same Felicity? If th' promise you expect then hs Threats ear, A Faith in both begets true Love and Fear; For whilst with a firm Fath a Man believes The Promises, and dreadful Threats he gives, He will not dare to Sin, but rather chuse To hope in God, and Sin and Vice refuse. (10.) Love is an innate Duty, which we owe To God, from whom all Goodness now do flow,
Being so good, so merciful, and kind, So apt to pardon, ought he not to find Returns of Love? He that with Love began, Should he not have returns of Love from Man? Yes, its a Duty which we ought to pay With all our Hearts to him, and not say nay, Making't our business, and our whole imploy, If that we would that blessed Place enjoy. (11.) A Second Duty which to him we owe, Is filial Fear, which we must bestow; Let this our daily care, lest we offend, Be to commit no Sin at Man's command, But let God's Fear the fear of Man withstand. (12.) You must relie on God, and in him trust, Being both knowing, powerful, good, and just; If Dangers threaten, or Temptations smile, Hope still in him, and let them not beguile, But to your utmost power their force resist, Then God will with his Grace, and Strength resist, And in all Troubles which you shall be in, To be deliver'd, must not act one Sin. (13.) Endeavours use lawful in case of want; If that woun't do, no doubt but God will grant His Spirit to assist, if strength you want. In all Affairs observe a moderate Care, And second thy Endeavours still with Prayer, And for support God will then nothing spare.
CHAP. III. (1.) The Duty of Humility. (2.) The Fruits of it. (3.) The Duty of Honour to God. (4.) Of Baptism. (5.) Of the Covenant. woodcut of infant baptism (1.) HVmility, is another Duty, Which is any Christians chiefest Beauty, Without which Grace the greatest cannot be So happy here, or in Eternity; And that Humility is a true Sense Of our own weakness, and God's Excellence. (2.) The thoughts of which should make us more submi, And fearful how we act, or think amiss, 'Twill keep us from Conceit, both vain and proud, Of our own Works, and not cry out aloud,
Making us patient till our God should please To lay aside his Rod, and give us ease, Making us thankful for his Chastisement, And under every Providence content; When it has these Effects, then all may be Assur'd that they have true Humility, For without it none can a Christian be, As to partake of true Felicity. (3.) Honour to God with Tongue's an other due, Which we must give with Hearts, and Hands most true, At all times in his Church, and on his Day, In every Time, and Act, and Place, and Way, By Learning, Reading, following God's words, And practising the Rules which it affords, By Catechizing of the Ignorant, As Servants, Children, and all such as want, Instructing them to live in the true fear Of God; taking them with you, when you hear Sermons, making them practise what they'r taught, That when they come from Church they be not naught. (4.) Inform your selves, be sure of the Intent, Of Baptism, and the other Sacrament, They being Covenants of God's free Grace Between himself, and Adam's sinful Race, Wherein he promises to pardon Sin, And all the Trespasses we have been in, To sanctifie us, and at last to save Our Souls from Hell, and raise us from the Grave; And on condition to Eternal Life, If Faith in Christ we use with holy strife, With true Repentance, and all Submission, Of three things promised to have Fruition, If th' Remnant of our Days we truly do That we promised solemnly, and vow At Baptism, to renounce Flesh, World, Devil, Th' Articles to believe, t' abstain from Evil The days to come, and that with all our heart, If we expect God to perform his part.
CHAP. IV. (1.) Of the Lord's Supper. (2.) Examination before. (3.) Humility, Repentance and Confession. (4.) Faith and Charity. (5.) Thanks. woodcut of communion scene (1.) 'TIS every Christians Duty to receive The Sacrament, to strengthen his belief, That oftentimes the Death of his dear Lord, He calls to mind even that which 'tdoth afford, That purchas'd, and also to renew The Covenant between the Lord and you, In Baptism by Proxies, but at Age You promise for your self, so must ingage That Promise to perform, lest for fear Even at the Lord's Supper you should appear To come unworthily, with no intent That's good for to receive that Sacrament.
(2.) Therefore before you 'proach the holy place, Examine well your self, and know your case, What Sins are unrepented of, and what You have committed, or may have forgot. (3.) For there you must confess, both great and small, And bending Knee, be sorry for 'em all, With grief, for having forfeited your Word, In all Humility before your Lord, And then resolve a better Life to live For time to come, and against Sin to strive. (4.) Having so done, you firmly may believe Your Sins then pardoned, and so receive The blessed Bread, and Wine, even with all Love, To Men on Earth, and to your God Above, That Bread and Wine are symbols of his Blood And Body which he gave when here he stood, These all must receive often, and not some, And must be so doing e'en till he come, Which is but the performing of his Will, Which till his Coming, is our Duty still. (5.) Having received, let's thank God that permits Us to partake of such rich benefits.
CHAP. V. (1.) Honour to God's Name. (2.) Worship. (3) Prayer. (4.) Confession to him, &c. woodcut (1.) THere's always Honour due to God's great Name, Which thou must not by Word or Thought prophane, By Swearing falsly, or by needless Oaths His Name prophane, and on Mankind impose: When Passions boyl, and Anger smarts, forbear Both, if thou canst even with thy Tongue not swear. Such boyling of thy Soul's but empty froth, Which God and all good Men do always loath; It will no profit, or yet pleasure bring, Nor Honour, when it in all Ears do ring,
But rather Horrour, and a great Disgrace, Both to the Person, and so to the Place. 'Tis silly then for any to sin gratis, As to prophane God's Name, having satis. Its Sin you know to quarrel with thy Fellow, And greater much against thy God to Bellow Such horrid Oaths, and Imprecations too, As will thee here and afterwards undo: Therefore refrain that foul and ugly Sin, By which the Devil often enters in, And then the state of that Man's worse than first, So his Damnation must be deemed just. (2.) Worship's next thing that's naturally due In private, publick to our God most true; It must be payed with Body, and with Mind. (3.) By Prayers, Confessions, and our selves resign'd To his disposal, begging holy aid To mend our Lives, and pardon what is said, Or done, Praying with, or for others praise, Giving for Blessings all, and quiet days, Yea, for every benefit we receive, Must sincere Thanks, and humble Praises give. Its a small matter, I think twice a day, To lay aside the World, fall down and Pray: No Man I'm sure can better use his Time, Than to implore a Pardon for his Crime.
CHAP. VI. (1.) Man's Duty towards Himself. (2.) Humility in oppo∣sition to Pride. (3.) Vain-glory. (4.) Meekness. (5.) The Fruits of it. (6.) Consideration. woodcut of man kneeling in front of book (1.) HUmble thou must be, having a low esteem, Even of thy self, tho' others do thee deem As little too as thou dost think thy self, Be not deceived, tho' thou abounds in self. (2.) For God hates Pride, and therefore will not love Thee till thou dost that hateful Sin remove. What tho' thou art Hansome, Active, Strong, or Wise, And thy clear Soul shine through thy sparkl ng Eyes, Thou hast no cause thy self for to disguise, And make deformed what God made otherwise.
Such great Advantages even for to stain And spoil by Pride, which is a cruel Bain: To Happiness therefore, when it begins To spring up in thy Mind, from gilded things, Which thou hast got, or done, sink down thy Knee, And contradict it with Humility. Quench thy vain Thoughts with Tears, expell with Pray'r The Wind of empty Praise, and swelling Air. (3.) For God will not accept those Deeds you do, Out of Vain-glory, and external show. (4.) Meekness also is our bounden Duty, Which is a Christian's Excellence, and Beauty, To have an even Calmness in ones Soul, That can the Passions surly Wrath controul. (5.) That Man, of Men and God, is the delight, Submiss, and quiet both, doth never Fight, Nor ever Quarrels, nor yet hatches Strife; But in a Knotless Thread spins out his Life; Such a good Christian's like his blessed Lord, Which never utter'd an impatient Word. (6.) Consideration makes an other part Of a good Christian Life to search the Heart, And to consider of its present State, Whether it doth incline to Love, or Hate Of Sin, that according as it is bent, Whether to approve, or else in time repent. Then every Night consider what you've thought Or done in the Day past, which if it's nought, Or any ill appear that has been wrought, Strait ask God's pardon for the unwary Sin, Before it wholly slips, or enters in, And that before next Morning doth begin.
CHAP. VII. (1.) Contentedness. (2.) Chastity. (3.) Temperance. (1.) in Meat. (2.) in Drink. (3.) in Sleep. (4.) in Recreations. (5.) in Cloaths, &c. woodcut of woman holding two snakes IT is our Duty to be still Content With Providence, and not for to Relent, However bad, or harsh proves the Event. Tho' thou be Sick, in Slavery, or Poor, Yet never set thy Heart to covet more; Do not by means unlawful in the least, Your needy wishes practise: It's a Feast To be content with Rayment, and with Food, Such Moderate Desires are always Good. So set your Self with Industry to watch,
And Diligence, lest unawares you catch A Fall; to avoid which, always imploy All Graces, and all Gifts you do enjoy. (2.) And keep thy self so pure, and always Chaste, Thy Strength on Women be sure not to waste, Nor give thy self that fatal Liberty, To look at random with a glancing Eye; Restrain thy Thoughts, thy Hands, thy guilty Words; Take all the Helps that this wise World affords; But above all, being pure, see that thou fly Idleness and all Wanton Company. (3.) Be Temperate in every thing you Eat, And make judicious choise of Harmless Meat. (1.) In Drinking also, see there ben't Excess, To stain thy Mind by filthy Drunkenness, Which is a Sin so loathsome to the sight Of God, and Man, committed but by night, At first so odious, murthering Reason, Making the Body reel, or act some Treason, Then is confin'd into some loathsome Cell, Whose Soul at last is plunged into Hell. Make no Man Drunk, for whatsoer's Sin, Thou must not act thy self, nor draw Men in. Be not concern'd then when Sots thee upbraid, If thou be Sober, be not then afraid Of such Mad-men, which can as little move Thy Reason, as their Persons draw thy Love. (2.) Be moderate in Sleep, lest thou offend Thy God, and quite destroy that Christian end. (3.) In Recreation be temperate also; For tho' thou may'st divert, thou yet must know Not to engage thy Heart in them most deep, Neglecting God's Laws and Statutes to keep. Play t for Money, but for Exercise, In one the Use, in th' other the Mischief lies: For by the Use of them, thou shew'st to man Which way thy Soul is biass'd, do what thou can.
(4.) Be temperate also in the Cloathes you wear, Only in such as suits thy Rank appear; If Rich, don't put a value on such Cloathes; If Poor, let not their Meanness discompose Thee at no time, 'tis alike to be proud, And Fret for want, as Strut for having good. CHAP. VIII. Man's Duty towards his Neighbour. (1.) Justice. (2.) Charity. (1.) Not to seduce him. (2.) Not to Murther. (3.) Nor to Beat. (4.) Nor Slander. (5.) Nor to commit Adultry. (6.) Nor Spight. (7) To do no Injustice. (8.) Not to Rob. (9.) But be Fair in Dealings. (10.) To make Restitution, and how to make it. woodcut of personification of Justice (1.) LET these two Duties to your Neighbours be. (2.) Strict Iustice, with good natur'd Charity: Not Spightful as to gall, or vex his Mind, But with a Disposition always kind.
(1.) Do still what Good you can, never begin T' intice, nor yet provoke him unto Sin; But if it has been your Misfortune sad, To make him Err; yea, or to make him bad, Strive all you can then him to Vertue win, And to an Holy Life, or else you sin, And answer must for his, as well as yours, Which were contracted at such certain hours. Since your Counsel and Practise made him Sin, See Sorrow true with him you enter in. (2.) Be sure that Blows, and Murther thou forbear, These always God, and sometimes Men do hear, And makes them by a dismal Fate appear. (3.) What e'er thy Neighbour feels, his very Sorrow Will eccho out thy Guilt e'en to Morrow. (4.) But if in Anger thou with Blows him treat, Or bitter Slandering Words him worser greet; If Hatred in thy Heart thou dost conceive Against him, thy Duties then to grieve, And make amends for what thou'st done amiss, Or else be sure God will thee never Bliss. (5.) See that Adultery thou ne'er commit, Nor with untamed Lust to burn; for it Will Body unto ruin bring, and Mind, The most part here, or else be sure to find Them both reserv'd for a more dismal place, Eternally to Burn in a sad case. (6.) Spoil not, nor Covet Goods of any Man, For such Extortion, and Oppression can, And will thee to that dismal Hell-pit damn. (7.) Much less may'st thou apply thy Hand to Steal, Or keep back Servants Wages, they'll appeal
To God for Justice; do not then with-hold Anothers Right, but pay th' Indebted Gold. (8.) Thou must not take by Violence, nor Rob Thy Neighbour, tho' some think it's a good job: It is Injustice what's not thine to take, Or Stolen Goods to buy, or profit make Of such you know, use no Deceit or Sleight In any Trust, in Measure, or in Weight. (9.) Sell not thy Bad for Good, nor over-rate Thy Goods to Ignorants, but rather bate Such silly Souls which know not how to buy, Often deceived are by gainful Lye. Of Necessity don't advantage make, For what you get by that, will make you quake At last; for always such unlawful ways Will make you then for ever Curse the days. (10.) But if tho'art Guilty, be sure to restore What Goods thou took unjustly heretofore, Or else such unfair Deeds will prove much more Intollerable, being put upon thy Score. Granting the Person that you have wrong'd be dead, What then! the Justice is not with him fled: You are alive, and must the Wrong repair, By making Restitution to his Heir. But if t'a Multitude you've done wrong, And can't Recompence in such a throng, Or Restitution to that Man so render, Because you can't justly it remember, Who you've wrong'd this, or that man, therefore In such a case as that you must restore What was unjustly got, unto the Poor, To the full value of what e'er you took, Or else for Pardon you in vain may look: But if with Dives you your Conscience sell, There will be no Repentance but in Hell. Then all in vain th' abundance, and the Pence, Can not so much as ease for one poor Sense,
Procure for his loud Cries, were all in vain, For to procure Relief, or end of Pain. 'Tis true, the Man that's wronged, may, if he please, Forgive, yea, and discharge you with much ease. CHAP. IX. (1.) Not to Defame. (2.) Not to bear False Witness. (3.) Nor despise. (4.) Nor Censure. (5.) Nor bear Ill∣will. (6.) Nor Envy. (7.) How to make Reparation of those Offences. (8.) Nor Lye. (9.) What Behaviour. (10.) Respect to Betters. (11.) Duties to such as are in Want. (12.) Thankfulness to others. woodcut (1.) YOu must not lessen any Man's good Name, By False Reports, tho' h'may deserve the same, Do not too hastily Credit give, nor blame, And be not over-forward of the Fame,
Tho' ill of him, thou may'st for certain know, Yet he as much of thee may hear: Be slow Therefore to think him Guilty, or yet tell His Failings, tho' thou know'st them ne'er so well. (2.) Do not Backbite, Rail, or False Witness bear, Tho' thou of him may Truth with Falshood hear. (3.) Despise not any, tho' he's very Poor, Deformed, or Foolish, Begging at thy Door; Nor yet because he is perhaps Prophane, That's not the way him then for to reclaim. (4.) Do no Man judge, for if you do, there's still A Judgment just on you at last pass will. (5.) Wish not thy Brother evil in Estate, Or Person, neither in thy Heart him Hate. But if some Evil to them both befal, Express no Satisfaction in't at all; But if to him any such Harm do hap, Then with Moses stand in, and stop the Gap. (6.) Nor thou by spightful Wishes oughtest more To pine and envy't his abounding store. (7.) But if you Guilty be of some, or all, By causing his Credit thereby to fall, By Slander, Railing, or by ill report, Unto the Injur'd Party then resort, Begging his Pardon, if you can restore To him the same Good Name he had before. (8.) The Truth profess, be sure to tell no Lye, Tho' thou sure wer't to get the World thereby. Use gentle Courtesie to all, and then Thou shalt be sure to have the Praise of Men. (9.) Rail not at Railers, nor seem Proud to be, It's odious both for God, and Man, to see
Such Quarrelers with Brawling to begin, Nor in thy Heart curse, or revile thy King; For Christ, and his Apostles, taught us all, That we should for all Mankind mercy call. So having taught, and likewise practised thus, Let Precept or Example work on us, That we with them may always happy be, In Joys so good to all Eternity. (10.) Your Betters reverence, of great Renown, For Piety, whether in Cloak, or Gown, Or Eminence, being of Sense, or Fame, Of Learning, Wealth, do not spoil their good Name; To all that want, afford a kind Supply, According to thy best Ability. If they want Knowledge, give them what thou hast, Thou mayst Communicate, and yet not waste Thy Stock. If Comfort, give them what Relief Thou canst of hope t'asswage their present Grief: If they want Reputation, try to clear Their Credit, and to make the best appear; If 'tis Money they ask, what thou can'st spare, Bestow, they'l pay thee back again in Pray'r. (12.) To all that doth thee good, thou thankful must Be, by putting up Prayers to God the just, For them which thee admonished has of Sin, Which thou perhaps had Headlong fallen in, Or which thee kind Advice, so often gave Thy self to God and Man as to behave, Upon thy dreadful Journey to the Grave. Be thankful then, and ready to advise Another who is than thy Self less wise.
CHAP. X. (1.) To the King. (2.) To Ministers. (3.) To Natural Parents. (4.) Parents Duty to their Children. (5.) Concerning Marriage, &c. Moses with Ten Commandments (1.) HOnour the King, obeying His Commands, And Tribute due pay thou with thine own Hands, But if he doth command a Sinful Thing, See God that thou obey, and not the King. (2.) Have for Good Ministers a due respect, Namely those which the Church and State protect, Contribute to their Maintenance what's fit, Even all that's due, spare not to give one bit;
Pray for them, that they no False Doctrine may Deliver, but God's just Commands obey, Such as they teach you, follow in thy way: Don't as they do, but do still as they say. (3.) Honour thy Parents with such tender Love, Being Submissive when they thee Reprove; With Reverence, and Thanks, take their Advice, For by it unto Honour you may rise, Tho't be so common, yet regard and prize, Since Disobedience is a great Vice; If to Infirmity they are subject, Covering their Failings, you may them protect; And think not that because they're even so, To them, no Observation you must owe, Granting that thou art wiser than they are, Yet if thou art so, then thou must not dare To Mock at them, or Scoffingly despise Their Persons, or Commands, God will those Eyes And Tongues torment: But yet indeed if they Through weakness, bid you Sin, refuse you may; Nay, you incur the Guilt, if you obey. Then with an humble Modesty; you must Shew that the Inconveniency is just, And would be fatal in performing such, Therefore refusing, is the better much, If they are Needy, and thou canst relieve, Thou ought'st in that thou dost repay, not give, Tho they are Wicked, and even unkind, Yet still thy Duty of Child doth bind; Let nothing then by thee be left behind. (4.) Since Parents are bound their's for to maintain With things needful, Women should not abstain From Nursing theirs themselves, its only Pride, And Lust which makes them daily thus deride; No wonder then Children are so perverse, Sucking the Milk of such a peevish Nurse, Instead of Blessings, needs must bring a Curse.
Take timely care for Baptism, and prepare Their tender Minds for Piety and Prayer, Instructing them by Catechising, what Their Duties are to God, and Man, and that With a Mild Hand you them in time correct Their Faults at first, but obstinate defect Calls for more Strength; for as they grow in Years, When their Mind's Inclination appears, Then then's the time for training up your Son, To pollish in him what has been begun, Which may continue longer than the Sun. If he be Good, give all Incouragement To that your Child; If Bad, betimes prevent The growing Ill, before it do's obtain An Habit, and is seated in the Brain, Shewing them Good Examples in your Lives, Vertue by Imitation fastest thrives For them provide against they to come to Age, That no necessity their Minds ingage In evil Courses; and be sure take heed That with no ill-got Goods you them do feed; Such Wealth as that, often destroys the Line, And leaves a Curse intail'd on thee and thine. Therefore let that Provision thou mak'st, be Goods well got with unstrain'd ability, And then Prosperity thou mayst expect, And that thy God will them and thee protect. (5.) Marry them not, unless in Love inclin'd They be to such an one you have a mind Also, as to adopt, and make your Child: For if you force them, you may be beguil'd, Nay, the Child that is Marry'd to much Pelf, Is often tempted to destroy its Self. 'Tis too true, being forc'd, an Ass to take, No marvel then their Duty they forsake To God, and Man, resolving for to stear An other Course, where there Affections bear; Therefore the rather yield to them to chuse, As they in Old time never did refuse
CHAP. XI. (1.) Love, &c. (2.) Wive's Duty to her Husband. (3.) Husband's Duty to his Wife. (4.) To a Friend. (5.) A Servant's Duty. (6.) A Master's Duty. marriage scene with Ten Commandments in background (1.) KIndness, and Love, is to your Brethren due, Both Natural, and Christian, so true, The poorest Child is Servant of the Lord, And thy Kinsman, with whom thou must accord, And have regard to; being in Friendship near, A Member just of Mind, and Body dear; Then think him so, not letting an abuse Awake thy Anger, or disturb thine House. In every sort of Friendship do resign Thy self in Temporals, and things Divine, To God in Prayers, in one Commun'on meet, And joyn your Praises 'tis an Off'ring sweet
To God, for he always delights to see Brethren to live in Peace, and Unity. If a weak Brother doth commit a Sin, Correct him mildly, till by Love you win Him back to true Repentance, by which way You save his Soul e'en from that evil Day. (2.) That in Woman is the chiefest Beauty The Husband to obey, which is her Duty; She must in nothing but in Sin deny, With all Commands, besides, she must comply: She must be faithful to him, and so use Care at all times, and no wise refuse That Duty due, not striving for that Rule, Which being unnatural makes him a Fool, And more than that a meer despised Tool, But with a tender and peculiar Love, Let her obey, and Houshold Joys improve; Tho' perhaps by Labours, may be cross, Or much perplex'd at some unlucky Loss, Yet ought she not to slack her Love; or Hate, Nor any of her former Warmth abate, Because she's bound to him her only Mate. (3.) Her Husband is to render Her the same Dear Love, and only change the rugged Name, Obedience, or else he is to blame, Into that Faithfulness to her he owes, And Love with due respect, which he well knows He promiss'd only in her chast embrace, All foreign Joys for to detest, and face, And he a due Maintenance to allow, Instructing her in all good things, and how To serve the Lord; and must together Pray, By mutual Kindness wear their Lives away. (4.) Take not to Wife those which are near a Kin, To thee, whether second or first Cousin, Them then refuse, for that's an horrid Sin.
(5.) Be to thy Friend faithful, his Secrets keep, Him in distress supply now, lest he Weep, And by despairing, take a deadly Sleep, Through thy neglect: To be a real Friend, Is sacred, and a Tie no Straits should rend. (6.) A Servant's Duty is for to obey, And Love with diligence, and not say nay, He must be Faithful, not inclin'd to waste His Master's Goods, since Confidence is plac'd In him, 'tis petty-Treason to betray His Trust, by careless squandring them away. With modest Carr'age, and respectful Grace, He must discharge the Duty of his Place, Attend to good Instruction, Pray, and Hear, And Sins of every kind he must forbear. (7.) The Master also to his Servants must Pay them their Wages, and always be just To all them for discharging of their Trust, From them withdrawing nothing that is due, Doing by them as they have done by you, Lest publickly they for their Wages sue. He must admonish, and reprove their Vice, Instructing them how they may best then rise To most perfection in Goods, and Mind, Not to enslave them, but be always kind, Casting all Cruelty even behind. Because if he to them no Mercy give, From God he must then as little receive. Masters discreetly should with Servant bear, And without any Anger speak, and hear, That will win on the Servant, and so make Him do more than he bids him for your sake, And then also the Master ought to give A good Example how they ought to live: For how can any Man expect to find Dutiful Servants, if they do not mind, To do their Duty to the King of Kings, Doubtless they'll be regardless of your things.
CHAP. XII. (1.) Charity to Brethren. (2.) To Enemies. (3.) By the Example of Christ. (4.) By his Command. (5.) Cha∣rity in Actions. (6.) To the Soul. (7.) To the Body. Charity personified holding anchor (1.) NExt Charity, which urges us to love, Of Christian Duties, is so far above Them all, by wishing, and by being Kind, By having Bad and Good still in our Mind, For all Mankind, so as to do them good, Praying, as to our very selves we wou'd, Wishing the welfare of the Souls of men, Bearing a meek Deportment towards them, To have a fellow-feeling of all you ken, So as to mourn with those that mourn, and weep, And to rejoice with them that Joy, and sleep;
Not apt to censure; apter to Believe A good Report, not given to Deceive, With sly Hypocrisie, and false Pretence, But always speaking plain, and real Sense. (2.) An Enemy to such there cannot be, Which Loves, and Prays, and Blesses as they see, When they him brawl at, and likewise do Curse, Yet cannot conquer, tho' they grow much worse, The more they hate, the more is his desire Them to reclaim, and quench the raging Fire: He knows 'tis what his Lord has done before For all, who lov'd till they could hate no more; In doing which he doth but imitate His Lord, and also Saints which ne'er did hate. (3.) Who in disdain of all the Scoffing Crew, Doth still his Duty, giving all their due, In spight of Spight it self, and all that Jeer'd, Tho' much despised, Heaven-ward he Stear'd His Course with patience onwards still he goes, Arriving there in spight of all his Foes. (4.) This Christ has done, and this he do's command All People that do List in his own Band, That to their Promise first they always stand, And in that order, and array to move, All armed with Patience, and unfeigned Love, Being assured of a Victory, Against their Foes, whether they live or dye, If in this World we do all here forgive, As we in th' next have always hopes to live; Then by so doing we may get to Heaven, If that our En'm'es be by us forgiv'n; But if they be not as we daily pray In our Lord's form, which we should often say, Then we are Lyars, and no Truth is in Us, but in th' very Pray'r we daily sin.
(5.) Besides all this, all Christians should be Both kind, and good in all Sincerity, And must be forward also to do good To th' Souls and Bodies of their Neighbourhood. (6.) All should be ready for to cure the Grief, To teach the Ignorant, and give Relief, T' encourage Vertue, where they find it weak, Letting their own Example chiefly speak. (7.) Are any Hungry, or else under Pain, Naked, or Sick? Oh! let them not Complain, But Feed, and Cloath, and Heal them, if so be Thou canst relieve them in such Misery; If not, however let them never want Those Pray'rs of thine, tho' they be mean and scant.
CHAP. XIII. (1.) Alms-giving. (2.) How. (3.) The Time when. (4.) And to Whom. (5.) Of Lending. (6.) Of Libe∣rality. (7) Charity with respect to Credit. (8.) The Rule of Charity. (9.) Of Peace-making. (10.) Going to Law. (11.) Self-denyal. (12.) Pray for Grace to perform all Duties. (13.) The Danger of Neglecting those Duties. Charity personified holding children (1.) BY Charity is further understood, Thy doing to thy Neighbour so much good, As to promote his Interest, and Gain, Or else your Love to God is but in vain; Hence giving to the Poor is always just, A Charity divine, which do you must,
For who'll believe that Man doth love his Mak'r, Who will not let the Poor be a partak'r Of what God gives him, and so not deny To try his Faith, and prove his Charity, Since some have Riches, others Poverty; For what you give, you give not Man, but God; It's He that brings the Poor Man to the Rod. The Beggar had been Rich, not made to try, Had God not thus ordain'd a Charity. (2.) Therefore when e'er thou giv'st here thy Alms, Do it without Reluctancy, or Qualms. God loves an Hearty Giver, let then none In giving his Good Things, him sore bemoan; For giving much, God is Security, And will reward him, since he cannot Lye: Nor let him think, by Giving, he shall want, No! God being just, and true, will not recant, But on the contrary, so much increase His Riches, Holiness, and present Peace. (3.) What e'er thou giv'st, then give without delay, And to the sore distressed do not say, I'm busie now, I'll do't another Day. Who knows if then thou wilt be in that mind, Or he thy Soul may in the Body find, For when one's asked, to Give is doubly kind, Delays are dangerous, the Poor may be Famish'd with a long-winded Charity. (4.) Make a good choise of those to whom you give, Bestow on such as cannot work to live, Or those oppressed with Families so great, Which with their Labour cannot get to eat, Much less to Cloath them, groaning then alone, Few being so good, as him for to bemoan. He! such as he your Charity doth crave, Begging your Hands to prop him from the Grave.
(5.) Others perhaps may want, but not so much, It's meer Charity to Lend to such: And when thou Lendest, lend it then so Free, Intrest agrees not with True Charity, But if thy Debtor can't at present pay, Do not him dun, but with some patience stay, Till that he can: If able never he be, Forgive him then as God will do to thee. (6.) In Giving Alms, be liberal and free, Or else thou only Banters, and shalt see Thy Gift with Charity doth not agree. What now thou dost not use, thou must bestow, A Stream when more than full, doth overflow, And so shouldst thou, keep just enough for Use; If thou keeps more, thou dost but that Abuse. If that in Charity thy Gift's but small, 'Tis not a little, since 'tis almost all. (7.) Of Charity there is an other sort, That of thy Neighbour thou dost well report, His good Name injur'd, see with some Defence Thou vindicate his Dove-like Innocence. Do not the Tales (Ill Fame may tell) believe, And if thou know'st him faulty, yet relieve Him, and his Secrets see thou not reveal, Tho' infamous, and publick, them conceal; Joyn not the Noisy Scandal with thy Voice, But let an harmless Silence be thy Choice. (8.) The Golden Rule observe, and always do Just as you would your self be done unto, For to Receive, no doubt thou hadst a mind, In thy Necessity, therefore be kind. I doubt not neither but thou dost thy Name Desire to be preserv'd from Slander, Blame, And all the Injuries of Cruel Fame. Therefore all Men by thee as do thou wouldst, E'en so to all thy Neighbours do thou shouldst.
(9.) Be always Peace-maker in any Strife, 'Tis one of the best Offices of Life. (10.) Go not to Law with any, nor invade His Properties; escape the wrangling Trade: And if thy Cause must needs come to the Bar, Be not in such a case as many are, Meer Enemies, but very calmly hear The Event, then whether thou'rt cast, or clear, Let none thy Boastings, or thy Murmurs hear. 'Tis true, we cannot love them, nor forgive Our Enemies, and wish them well to live, Much less their Wants, then as we ought relieve. (11.) Strugle we must, and with a bitter trial, To bear the Cross, and learn Self-denyal; And so we must deny, and must withstand Our selves, if we'll obey our Lord's command, As his Cross to take up, and bear the Shame, Which he endured for his most Holy Name, So we as Christians must do the same. Wherefore rejoice when that comes to your turn To suffer, better drown in Tears than burn In Hell with the Rich Glutton, for to lie Tormented there to all Eternity. (12.) Now then thy War begins subscribe the List, Resolve to do thy Duty, and Resist Thy own Corruptions, make incessant Prayer To God, that he for Christ's sake thee would spare, Grace sufficient to maintain the War, Or else thy feeble Soul will quickly yield To Satan cowardly; and quit the Field. (13.) Oh quickly, quickly then thy self apply To thy whole Duty, lest Sinning thou dye. And now thy self often to Prayer betake, Imploring Mercy for thy Saviour' sake;
Use these short Forms, which are herein prescrib'd, Be Earnest, and thou shalt not be deny'd: What monstrous Hazards dost thou undergo, Which ventures on in Sin, which will bring wo. Therefore thy Duty know, and now begin, Leave thy delight in Error, and in Sin; Defer not thy whole Duty day by day, But unto God, for Christ's sake, always Pray, Uing those Means prescribed in thy Way. PRAYERS. (1.) For Pardon. (2.) For Grace. (3.) For Comfort. (4.) For several Graces. (5.) The Lord's Prayer. church service our Father. (1.) THou Lord of Mercy, to thee now I Pray, Let my Request be heard; do not say Nay, That all my griev'ous Sins be done away.
I am a Sinner, Lord, thou know'st full well, And Duties owe to Thee, who doth excel In Goodness, and in Kindness evermore, Tho' I am much behind, and in thy Score. But if thou hast such Mercy behind still For me, then make me to fulfil thy Will; And thou, O Lord, do all my Sins forget, And let them not on my account be set, Lest my Misdeeds at length should so prevail, If them thou mark'st, then my Soul will fail, And sink by that sad weight of its own Fate, For ever banished from that blessed State, Even from that blessed Company, and Place, Unless thou dost restore me by thy Grace. Thy Mercies, Lord, are manifold, thou'rt kind, Let me, Oh! then one Branch but only find, That I may, e'er I sink, lay hold thereon, On thy great Goodness, and Salvation. (2.) Now grant good God, I may both hear, and see, To do all things well-pleasing unto thee, Be pleas'd to give but to my weak Faith, Strength, That I to Happiness may come at length. Teach me good God, and so give me thy Grace To walk aright, that I may see thy Face; Take from me Clouds of Sin which do so blind My Sight, by making clean my Heart and Mind, Lest into that unfathomed Pit I fall, And there for thy kind help in vain do call, Where being stung with Vengeance of thy hate, I call, and call, but yet alas too late: Convert me then, O Lord, betimes, lest I Be overtaken with thy Wrath, and dye: I am a Stranger here on Earth, incline My Heart to what is good, and so d vine, That I with thee and others there may shine. (.3) Why, why, O Lord, dost thou thy Face so hde▪ Making me row against the Wind and Tide?
In vain, in vain, my grief and labour's all, If thou, dear Lord, dost not return, and call Me to thy self with longing in my Soul, Letting no Sorrow ever me Controul. (4.) Give me both Faith, and Hope, and also Love, Humility, with Fear to thee Above, Trust, Gratitude, Contrition, to be Mild, Contrite, Chaste, Temp'rate, to be thy Child, So Diligent, Just also, and Content, With Perseverance, ne'er for to Repent, Of doing good to all, that I may be Blessed with Angels to Eternity. (5.) These Six Petit'ons grant me, Lord, I pray, Which I do put to thee e'en day by day, 1. First that thy Name may sanctified be. 2. Thy Kingdom come, when fitting thou dost see. 3. Thy Will be done in Earth as Heaven is. 4. This Day our daily Bread give, and it bless. 5. Our Sins forgive, as we forgive all men, 6. And lead us not into Temptation then. Thy Kingdom, Power for ever be; Amen.
(1.) Thanksgivings. (2.) For Deliverance in Trouble. (3.) Ejaculations for the Lord's Supper. (4.) Before you Receive it. (5.) After Receiving. (1.) YES I will ever, O God, thy Name praise, Proclaiming it on high, my Voice will raise, Whilst I have Breath, I will stil Speak, and Sing, My Praises all unto my Lord, and King, Wishing my self all Voice, and Tongue to have, To sing thy Praises, and for me to crave A Blessing which thou always dost bestow On humble Penitents here now below; Oh that my Thanks could then but equal grow: Bless'd then for ever bless'd be thy Name, Thou Fountain from whence all our Blessing came. (2.) O God, for Mercy I on thee do call, My Soul do's trust alone in thee for all True Shelter; to thy Wings, O Lord, I run, O cover me, or else I am undone: Thou art my Hope, and Refuge also still, Deliver me, that I may do thy Will: Preserve my Soul, for unto thee it flies, O look upon me with thy Holy Eyes. With mine I'll look up, till the Tears have wore My Sight away, and I here be no no more. O pitty, pitty my distressed Estate, Leave me not wholly desolate, nor Hate Me, for I have here no true Friend but thee; O pitty, whither, whither shall I flee? (3.) I am not worthy that under my Roof Thou Lord shouldst come; Can I bear thy Reproof?
For I have Sinn'd, if thou shouldst now mind With rigour to correct for what's behind, Who could abide? But Mercy is in store Reserved for me, and so for others more, Thro' thy beloved Son; my Trust shall then B' in Him that took away the Sins of Men. Oh see and hear the Cry of his dear Blood, Which I with others plunge into that Flood. (4.) The Symbols now which I m about to use, Eternal Life by them do not refuse, To give to me as promised I'll take, (5.) The Bread, and Cup, and so thy Passion make Known unto all, thy Sitting on the Throne, For ever blessed Thou great Three in One. FINIS.
BOOKS Printed and Sold by J. Bradford. THE Complaint of English Subjects, deliver'd in Two Parts. The first, is the Complaint of the Poor, Middle and Meanest sort of Subjects, concerning their Bodily Assistance. The second is, The true Christians Complaint against Vice and Wickedness, for the good of their Souls health. Wherein also is set forth the Late prodigious Growth of Atheism, Errors and Vice. With a Call to Repentance. As also how needful it is in these Times, for every one of us, first of all, to look into our Hearts, and endeavour to Amend what is there amiss. And lastly, a brief Discourse concerning our late Un∣fruitful and Cold Summers. As also, what is the Real Cause of it, by way of Opposition to the Opinion of Astrologers. By Richard Newnam of Tiverton in De∣vonshire. Price 6 d. A Gold Chain of Four Links, to draw poor Souls to their desired Habitation: Or the Four Last Things briefly discoursed of, viz. Death, Judgment, Heaven and Hell. By the late Reverend Dr. Stevens. Price 2 d. The Path-Way to Perfection: Shewing the Duty of Chil∣dren to their Parents; With the Promised Blessings which attend those that perform it, &c. To which is added, A short Perswasive to the Duty of Prayer. By J. Stevens, D. D. Price 2 d. The Pious Man's Kallender: Or, Christian Thoughts for every Day of the Week. 1. Of Faith. 2. Of the End for which Man was Created. 3. Of Death. 4. Of Judgment. 5. Of Heaven. 6. Of Hell. 7. Of the Presence of GOD. Also, an Instruction how to prepare to Dye. Concluded with a brief Paraphrase of the Lord's Prayer, in Verse, suitable to the occasion. Published for the Benefit of the Poor. By William Ioie, Minister of Sarrat in Hartfordshire Price 2 d. A brief Account of the most Remarkable Prodigies which happen'd at the Birth, in the Life, and at the Death of our Lord and Saviour Iesus Christ. As also, a Lively Description of the Person of Christ. In a large broad Sheet. Price 2 d.
