b3921 12329081 59609
The Honble. Robert Boyle.
THE WORKS OF THE HONOURABLE Robert Boyle, Esq EPITOMIZ'D. VOL. I. By RICHARD BOULTON, of Brazen-Nose College in Oxford. Illustrated with COPPER PLATES. — Consilium est, universum Opus Instaurationis (Philoso∣phiae) potiùs promovere in multis, quam perficere in paucis. Verulamius. LONDON, Printed for J. Phillips at the King's Arms, and J. Taylor at the Ship in St. Paul's Church-Yard, MDCXCIX
IMPRIMATUR Liber Cui Titulus, THE WORKS Of the HONOURABLE ROBERT BOYLE, Esq EPITOMIZ'D By RICHARD BOULTON, JOHN HOSKYNS, V. P. R. S. Vecesimo Septimo Martii, 1699.
ERRATA. IN the Preface, pag. 2. lin. 13. read less entertaining Di∣gressions. P. 64. for dissolve into Crystals, read dissolve, shoot into Crystals. P. 433. l. 7. read which would not have been done, were, &c. P. 436. l. 1. read in our Third Plate. In the Table, under the Letter T. l. 2. dele their.
TO THE Right Honourable JOHN Lord SOMMERS, BARON of Evesham Lord High Chancellor of England, AND President of the ROYAL SOCIETY; And to The Honourable Sir JOHN HOSKYNS, Vice-President: Together with the Council and Fellows Of the said SOCIETY, INSTITUTED For the Advancement of Natural Knowledge; This VOLUME, Intitul'd an EPITOMY OF Mr. BOYLE's WORKS, Is humbly Dedicated by RICHARD BOƲLTON.
TO THE Right Reverend Father in GOD NICOLAS, Lord BISHOP of CHESTER. My LORD, THAT I presume to lay a Book be∣fore Your Lordship, which bears so mean a Name as mine in the Title-Page, might want a better Apology than I could make, were there not likewise the Illustrious Name of that justly esteem'd and most Famous Author, the Honourable Mr. Boyle before it. For were the following Sheets, entirely the Products of my weak Endeavors only; I should think it no small Piece of Vanity to hope for Your Lordship's Notice, and much more to expect your Patronage: But,
since the Honourable Author's Works have sufficiently recommended themselves to the Learned World; and more especi∣ally to those that are most Eminent for Learning themselves; He cannot but al∣ready, amongst Those, have deserved Your good Esteem; and therefore, should I endeavour an Encomium of so Great a Man, by way of Apology for my present Presumption, I should but let Your Lord∣ship see, that all I can say of so Eminent a Person, would come far short of the Esteem You have for him already: Not that I can pretend to know Your Lordship's Senti∣ments in any Particular, any further, than I may presume to guess, by the Notion I have of Your Lordship's Esteem for Learn∣ing and Learned Men. But tho' the Name of Mr. Boyle may be sufficient to recommend the Honourable Author's Works to Your Lordship, and the rest of the Learned World; yet if Your Lordship will be pleased to condescend to Patronize Your most Humble and Obedi∣ent
Servant, who hath the good Fortune to Conduct them into the World, and to extract those purer Streams of Know∣ledg, which are separated from the less discerning Part of Mankind, by polite Apologies and Florid Complimental Digres∣sions, It will be the greater Happiness, that I have the Honour to be Just to the Author and Serviceable to the World; But much more, that I have at the same time, so Fa∣vourable an Opportunity of expressing my Gratitude for the Favours which Your Lord∣ship hath already been pleased to bestow on me: Favours, which are much more valuable, because Your Lordship's; and which carry with them a double Obligation of Grati∣tude; the One to Your Lordship and the Other to my good Friend and Worthy Pa∣tron Dr. Robert Angell, to whom I am infi∣nitely Obliged for Your Lordship's Favour, and for being first made known to Your Lordship. But it will not be the only Happiness to me, that Your Lordship is pleased to Pa∣tronize
my present Undertaking; but it may in a great Measure Contribute to their Candid Acceptance by the World, who will put a higher Value upon them, for Your Lordship's Favourable Approba∣tion. Indeed, were it Generally receiv'd and agreed on, what some People hold, viz. That Philosophy is prejudicial to Religion; I should have more Reason to beg Your Lordship's Pardon, than Your Patronage; since it must be in Vain to hope, that One, who promotes the Latter, by Instructive Doctrin; and what is more, an Exam∣plary Life, to be imitated, but not paral∣lell'd; should encourage any thing, that may be of Disservice to that: But I need not tell Your Lordship, that the Honoura∣ble Author hath made it appear, That we may search into Efficient Causes, without denying the. All-Wise Author of Created Beings, his just Attributes: For, whoever diligently searches into Efficient Causes, can∣not but discern the Necessity of an Omni∣potent
Creator, who first establish'd the Laws of Nature, and gave them their due Limits; and our Author having made it evident, that Efficients themselves, direct us to Final Causes; and confequently rather dispose and incline a Man, than hinder him from being a Good Christian; your Lord∣ship needs no other Inducements to pro∣mote it. And indeed, were I not satisfy'd, that Philosophy, if rightly made use of, by the Effects it hath upon my Self, did not en∣able Me the more to discern the Shortness of the Utmost Attainments of Finite Ca∣pacities, and to adore what I cannot com∣prehend; I should be so far from desiring Your Lordship's Patronage, that I should be ready to oppose it my self, to the utmost of my Weak Endeavours: And were it not too soon to make Your Lordship Promises, before I have qualify'd my Self to write any thing of my own, worth Your Lord∣ship's Notice, I should not be backwards to say, That I may in a few Years, shew
that it will afford us no small Light in ex∣plaining the Mosaick Creation, in directing us to frame some faint Ideas of the Methods by which the Omnipotent Fiat brought the World to what it now is, and to prove the Works of the Omnipotent Creator, as Historically deliver'd by Moses, consonant with Philosophy. But I am afraid, that, endeavouring to make an Apology for this Dedication, I ought to make another, for having been too tedious already; since Your Lordship's own Judgment, will satisfie You of the Usefulness of Philosophy, and since that Consideration is enough to induce You to encourage it. Yet I cannot perswade My self, so soon to pass by this Opportunity of expressing my Gratitude to Your Lordship: nor can I forbear reflecting on my own Happiness, under Your Lordship's Patronage: For as no one better understands, how to encou∣rage the Endeavours of those, that make Im∣provements
in Knowledge their Aim, than those that are most intimately acquainted with it, and than Your Lordship; So it is an equal Happiness to be under the Prote∣ction and Favourable Eye, of a Patron so desirable: Neither is it any Vain Opinion I have of my own Merit, that makes me think my self Happy under such a Patron, but rather the Sense of my own Weakness; for could I perswade my self that I deserv'd Your Lordship's Favour, or the Favour of some Others, both eminent and Learned, to whom I am oblig'd: I must be very vain indeed. But notwithstanding the Sense I have of my own Weakness, Your Lordship's Favour will encourage me to improve the small Talent I have, since in the Search of Truth, Est aliquid prodire tenus, si non datur ultra.
But My LORD, the World, who are wont to find in Dedications, the Characters of their Patrons, may wonder that I have declin'd the Usual Method, since any one that knows Your Lordship cannot want Ma∣terials for a Character, that might be of Use to the World, in setting them a Good Pat∣tern to imitate: Yet since Your Lordship's Character would be drawn amiss by so mean a Pen as Mine; I would rather be thought out of the Common Road, than mistaken in it; since any Body that knows what Character belongs to a Truly Apostolical Bi∣shop, is not unacquainted with Your Lord∣ship's: Therefore since no Encomiums can add to that which can only be augmented by a Continuance of Your Life; the Fear of Mis-representing, is the Reason I decline it. But not to take up too many of Your Lord∣ship's pretious Minutes, which are always Im∣ploy'd in doing Good, and promoting Chri∣stianity in it's Original Stream; that Your
Lordship may live long, for the Honour of the Church, and the Good of those that are under Your Care, is not only the Wishes of hose that think themselves happy under the nspection of Your Lordship; but more par∣ticularly of, My LORD, Your LORDSHIP's Most Dutiful, and Most Obedient Servant, RICHARD BOULTON.
Plate the Second Fig: 1 pag. 407 Fig: 2 pag: Fig: 6 pag: 432 Fig: 3 pag: 416 Fig: 4 pag. 410. Fig: 5. pag: 420
Plate the Third. pag: 435.
Plate the fourth. pag: 435
Plate 5. Fig: 1. pag. 438 Fig: 3. pag. 454 Fig: 2 pag. 452. Fig: 4. p. 459
Plate. 6. Fig: 1 pag. 443 Fig: 3 pag. 445 Fig: 2. pag. 443. Fig: 4. pag. 447
Plate. 7. Fig: 4. p: 470 Fig:2 pag 4 Fig: 3 pag. 470 Fig: 1. pag. 456.
Plate. 8. Fig: 3 pag. 474 Fig: 4 pag. Fig: 5. pag. 475 Fig: 7. p: 477 Fig: 8. p:477. Fig: 6 pag. 476 Fig  pag. 4 Fig: 2 p 4
THE WORKS Of the HONOURABLE ROBERT BOYLE, Esq EPITOMIZED. BOOK I. CHAP. I. Considerations and Experiments concerning the Origin of Forms and Qualities. The Divi∣sion of this Chapter.THAT before I descend to a more particular Consideration of the Do∣ctrin of Forms and Qualities, I may premise some General Apprehen∣sions of the Doctrin, to be collated with, and to be either confirm'd, or disprov'd by what follows of Particular Forms and Qualities; I will, at the Entrance, give you a short Ac∣count of our Hypothesis, compriz'd in the Eight following Particulars. We teach then (but without peremptorily asserting it)
Matter De∣fined.I. That the Matter of all Natural Bodies is the same, Namely, a Substance Extended, Divi∣sible and Impenetrable. Motion the Catholick Agent of the Uni∣verse.II. That since there could be no change in Matter, if all its Parts were perpetually at rest amongst themselves, to discriminate the Catho∣lick Matter of the Universe, into a Variety of Natural Bodies, it must have Motion in some or all its Parts, which Motion must be variously determined. And though it is manifest to Sense, That there is Local Motion in Matter, yet Motion is not congenite to Matter, nor coeval with it, Local Motion being not included in the Nature of Matter, which is as much Matter when at rest as in Motion: And though it be hotly dis∣puted, How Matter came by that Motion, by those who acknowledge not an Author of the Universe; yet, since a Man is not the worse Naturalist, for not being an Atheist, we allow that the Origin of Motion in Matter is from GOD; and that, since it is unfit to be believ'd, that Matter in Motion left to it self, should ca∣sually constitute this Beautiful and Orderly World,Guided by GOD in the Crea∣tion of Things. it is not amiss to think, That the Wise Author of Things, guided the first Motions of the small Parts of Matters so, that they might convene after a Manner requisite to compose the World, and especially did contrive those Curious and Elaborate Engins, the Bodies of Living Animals, enduing most of them with a Power of propagating their Species. But to pass by such Notions, I shall proceed to what re∣mains requisite to explicate the Origin of Forms
and Qualities, as soon as I have taken Notice, That Local Motion seems to be indeed the Princi∣pal amongst Second Causes, and the Grand Agent of all that happens in Nature; Bulk, Figure, Rest, Situation and Texture, being the Effects of Mo∣tion, or the Conditions and Requisites, which Modifie the Operation, as in a Watch, or Key, it is Motion that makes all the other Requisites useful. Motion, Size and Shape, three Pri∣mary Affe∣ctions of Matter.III. That Matter being Naturally by a va∣riously determined Motion, divided into Parts, each of those Parts must needs have a peculiar Size and Shape: So that there are three Essen∣tial Properties, or Primary Affections of the Parts of Matter, Magnitude, Shape, and either Rest or Motion; the two first of which may be call'd Inseparable Accidents: Inseparable, because Bodies extended and finite, cannot be devoid of a Determinate Shape; Accidents: because that whether Physical Agents may have a Power to alter the Shapes, or subdivide Bodies or not, yet mentally they may do both without destroying the Essence of that Matter. Whether there be in Bodies Qua∣lities and Accidents, distinct En∣tities from them.Whether these Accidents may be call'd the Modes, or Primary Affections of Bodies, to di∣stinguish them from those more compound Qua∣lities (as Colours, Tastes, and Odours) or the Conjuncts of the smallest Parts of Matter, I shall not now determine; only one thing which is taught by the Modern Schools concerning Acci∣dents; Namely, That there are in Natural Bo∣dies Real Qualities, and other Real Accidents, which are no Modes of Matter, but Entities di∣stinct from it, and which may exist separate from all Matter. To clear this Point, we must take
Notice, That Accident is used in two several Senses; for sometimes it is opposed to the fourth Predicable (Property) and is defined, That which may be Present or Absent, without the Destruction of the Subject; as a Man may be sick or well, yet a Man: And this is call'd Accidens Praedicabile, to distinguish it from what they call Accidens Praedicamentale, which is opposed to Substance; and as Substance is commonly defined to be a thing that subsists of it self, and is the Subject of Accidents; so Accident is said to be Id cujus esse est inesse: And therefore Aristotle, who usually calls Substances , Entities, calls Accidents , Entities of Entities, these needing a Subject of Inhaesion. And we are likewise to take Notice, That, according to them, That is said to be in a Subject, which hath these three Condi∣tions; That however it (1) be in another thing, (2) is not in it as a part, and (3) cannot exist sepa∣rately. This premised, it will appear easily, that if they will not allow these Accidents to be Modes of Matter, but Entities really distinct from it; they make them indeed Accidents in Name, but represent them under such a Notion, as belongs only to Substances, the Nature of a Substance con∣sisting in this, that it can subsist of it self. So that we may consider, when a Bowl runs along or lies still, that Motion or Rest, or Globous Fi∣gure, are not any parts of the Bowl, nor real and Physical Entities distinct from it, but certain Modifications, and several Capacities in relation to the Matter of that Bowl.
An Excursion about the Relative Nature of Physical Qualities. Qualities the result of a pecu∣liar Modifi∣cation.BUT because this Notion about the Nature of Qualities may be of some importance, I shall illustrate it a little further. We may con∣sider then, That whoever was the first Inventor of Locks and Keys, they both consisted of a piece of Iron, of a determinate Figure; but in respect of the Congruity betwixt the Wards of the Locks, and those of the Keys, they each of them obtained new Capacities; it being a peculiar Faculty of the Key to unlock, as of the Lock to be unlocked by it; yet by these new Attri∣butes, no real or Physical Entities were added, either to the Lock or Key: so those Qualities, which we call Sensible, tho' by virtue of a Con∣gruity or Incongruity in point of Figure or Tex∣ture to our Sensories, the portions of Matter they modifie, are enabled to produce various Effects, upon whose account we make Bodies to be en∣dued with Qualities, yet they are not in those Bodies any real distinct Entities, or different from the Matter it self, furnished with such a de∣terminate Bigness, Shape, or other Mechanical Modifications. It is reckoned amongst the prin∣cipal Properties of Gold, that it is dissoluble in Aqua Regis; and if one should invent another Menstruum, that will in part dissolve pure Gold, yet the Nature of Gold is not at all different now, from what it was before either of those Men∣struums were invented, there no new real En∣tities accruing to it, without the Intervention
of a Physical Change in the Body it self, by the Addition of these Attributes. Proved by Physical Observa∣tions.There are some Bodies neither Cathartick, nor Sudorifick, with some of which Gold, being em∣bodied, acquires a Purging Virtue, and with others Diaphoretick Qualities; and Nature her self doth, either Artificially, or by Chance, produce so many things, that have new Relations unto others: And, Art especially assisted by Chymistry, may, by variously dissipating Natural Bodies, or compounding either them or their constituent Parts with one another, form a multitude of new Productions, which will be able each of them to cause new Effects, either immediately upon our Sensories, or upon other Bodies, whose changes we are not able to perceive; so that no Man can know, but that the most Familiar Bodies, may have a multitude of Qualities, that he dreams not of; and a considering Man will hardly ima∣gin, That so numerous a crowd of real Physical Entities can accrew to a Body, whilst in the Judg∣ment of all our Senses it remains unchanged. Again, Glass beaten is commonly reckoned amongst Poysons, which deleterious Faculty is no superadded Entity distinct from the Glass, but depends on the sharp Points and cutting Edges of the Fragments, which by Mechanical Affections, cut and wound the Membranes of the Stomach and Guts; from whence follow great Gripings and Contorsions, and often a Bloody Flux by the Perforations of the Capillary Vessels, and horrid Convulsions by the consent of the Brain and Cerebellum, as also great Drop∣sies, occasioned by the loss of Blood: And that those Effects depend on the Edges and Points of
the Fragments, appears, because when the Guts are sufficiently lined with Slime, or the Cor∣puscles of the Glass are ground fine, they pass without damage along with the Execrements. And this may put us in mind, That the Mul∣tiplicity of Qualities, in the same Natural Bo∣dies, may proceed from the bare Texture, and other Mechanical Affections of its Matter: For every Body is to be considered not barely as an entire distinct Portion of Matter; but as it is a Part of the Universe, placed amongst a great number and variety of other Bodies, upon which it may Act, and by which it may be Acted on, in ma∣ny ways, which are falsly thought to be distinct Powers or Qualities in the Bodies, by which those Actions and Passions are produced. And every Portion of Matter thus considered a few Mecha∣nical Affections are sufficient to diversify it from other Bodies: As in a Watch, there are a great many Qualities; as to shew the Hours, to strike, to give an Alarm, or to shew the Age of the Moon and Tides; yet these are all to be attri∣buted to the determinate Shape and Texture of the Parts of it, and the Motion of the Spring. So the Sun hath a Power to harden Clay, and soften Wax, to melt Butter, and thaw Ice, and a great many more, which seem contrary Effects; yet these are not distinct Faculties in the Sun, but the Productions of Heat diversify'd, by the dif∣ferent Textures of Bodies it chances to work upon. And thus much (Pyrophilus) may serve to re∣move the Mistake, That every thing Men are wont to call a Quality, must needs be a Real and Physical Entity. To conclude this Excursion, I
shall add this short Advertisement, That to make what I have declared more intelligible, I have ra∣ther done it by Examples, than Definitions; the latter being more difficult, because of the diffi∣culty of assigning the true Genus's of Quali∣ties. And, Here it may not be amiss to take Notice, That Aristotle himself does not only define Accidents, without setting down their Genus; but when he comes to define Qualities, tells us, That Quality is that by which a Thing is said to be Qualis; which is to define the Thing by the Same, without denoting its Genus; for 'tis supposed to be as lit∣tle known what Qualis is, as what Qualitas. Be∣sides, 'tis a Doubt whether it be not as false as obscure; for to the Question Qualis res est, An∣swer may be made out of some, if not all of the other Praedicaments of Accidents. Posture, Order and Texture Se∣condary Af∣fections of Matter.IV. Besides the foremention'd Primary Affe∣ctions of Matter, viz. Motion, (or Rest) Bulk and Shape; which a portion of Matter singly by it self must have; if all the rest of the Universe were annihilated, there being now in the Uni∣verse multitudes of Corpuscles mixed together, there arise two new Accidents, or Events: The one relates to its Posture, in reference to the Bo∣dies about it (whether erected, inclined or hori∣zontal) and the manner of those Bodies in refe∣rence to each other, which may be called Order; as Aristotle in his Metaphysics recites this Ex∣ample, from the Ancient Corpuscularians. A and N differ in Figure, and A N, and N A in Order; Z and N in Situation; and Posture and Order in∣deed seem both reducible to Situation. And, lastly, when these Corpuscles do so convene, as to
make up a Body; the Disposition and Contri∣vance of Parts in the whole, may be called the Texture of it. Colours, &c. no inherent Qualities,V. We are to consider, That the Bodies of Sensible and Rational Beings, being endued with several Senses, adapted so, as to receive from without various Impressions, according to the Diversity and peculiar Texture of each Part; these Impressions being falsly imagined to proceed from real Qualities, inherent in those several Ob∣jects, have been signify'd by several Names, as Heat, Colour, Sound, Odour, together with a vast variety of each, as so many Species, to be rank'd un∣der these Genus's; which really depend on the Fi∣gure, Shape, Motion, Texture, and the Man∣ner in which these Bodies, differently modify'd, variously affect the Senses. VI. But here is one Difficulty to be remov'd, which is, That besides the Sensible Qualities, evi∣dent in Relation to our Senses, they have an ab∣solute Being irrelative to us; since they do not only Operate upon our Senses, but other inani∣mate Bodies. To clear which, I have several things to represent. But Se∣condary Ef∣fects of Matter.1. That there are Simple, and more Primitive Affections of Matter, from whence these Secon∣dary Qualities do proceed, and on which they depend. 2. The Knowledge we have of the Operations of Bodies, proceeds from some Sensible Quality, or some more Catholick Affection of Matter; as Motion, Rest, or Texture; generated, or de∣stroy'd in one of them. 3. We are to consider every distinct Body that affects our Senses, not as a bare Lump of Matter,
of that Bigness and outward Shape that it ap∣pears of, most of them having their Parts cu∣riously contriv'd, and in Motion too. And like∣wise we are to consider the Universe that sur∣rounds us, as a great Engine, with no Vacuity, or no considerable one betwixt its Parts; and the Actions of Particular Bodies, are not to be esti∣mated, as if two Portions of Matter of their Bulk and Figure, were plac'd in some Imaginary Space beyond the World, but as situated in the World, as now constituted, and their Actions liable to be promoted, or hinder'd, or modify'd by the Actions of other Bodies about them; for it is not giving of a Concave Speculum, that Figure, that enables it to burn Wood, or melt Metals; but the Sun-Beams thrown together into a Point, by the help of that Concavity. And to shew how various and different Effects the same Action of a Natural Agent may produce, according to the several Dispositions of the Bodies it works upon, we may consider, That tho' in two Eggs, the one Prolifick, the other Barren, before Incu∣bation, the Sense can distinguish no Difference; yet their internal Disposition is so different, that if they be both expos'd to an equal Degree of Heat, the one will be chang'd into a putrid Fetid Substance, and the other into a Chick, furnish'd with a variety of Organical Parts of very cu∣rious Textures. 4. I grant that Bodies may have those Qua∣lities we call Sensible, tho' there were no Animals in the World, every Body having such a Dispo∣sition of its Constituent Corpuscles, which duly apply'd to the Sensory of an Animal, would pro∣duce a Sensible Quality, which another would
not. So that if there were no Sensitive Beings, those Bodies that are now the Objects of our Senses, would be but Dispositively endued with Colours, and the like, and Actually only with those more Catholick Affections of Bodies, Figure, Motion, Texture, &c. To illustrate which, we may consider, That, tho' an Eccho is suppos'd to be a Peculiar Faculty, in the Rock, yet it is no∣thing but a Repercussion, and the undulated Mo∣tion of the Air, reverberated by that Rock, which striking upon the Ear, causes such a Sensible Qua∣lity. Qualities act by vir∣tue of Lo∣cal Mo∣tion.5. The Sensible Qualities, which are acquir'd by the Action of one Body on another, are no otherwise produc'd, but by some Local Motion of Parts, or some change of Texture produc'd by that Motion: For, when a Pin, by a Dissolution of the Continuity, causes Pain, that Pain is only a Consequent of its Motion, which superadds no real Quality to the Pin, which it had not before: And therefore I shall intimate, That when for shortness of Speech, I make use of the Word Qualities, I would be understood to mean them in a Sense sui∣table to the Doctrin above-mention'd. As when I would say, Roughness is apt to offend and grate the Skin, I would mean, That a File or other Body, by having upon its Surface a multitude of hard, and extant Parts of an Angular or Sharp Figure, is qualify'd to cause the mention'd Effect. Of the Nature of a Form. Form the Result of a Congeries of united Accidents.VII. We may now consider further, that cer∣tain conspicuous Accidents being associated into Bodies; those Bodies are distinguish'd by Genus's
and Species, as they are referr'd to a more Com∣prehensive sort of Bodies, or to a narrower pe∣cies, or Individuals: As amongst Fossils, the Supe∣rior Genus comprehends both Metals, Stones, &c. each of which Concretes, in respect of that Genus, are Species, comprehended, as they are Fossils, un∣der that Superior Genus. Now when those Accidents, which are Essen∣tially requisite to compose a Body, of this or that Kind, are united; the Texture of that Body is call'd the Form: which, tho' some think to be a kind of Soul, which, when united to a Natural Body, acts in it, by virtue of several Qualities in∣herent in that Soul, yet, really, it is nothing di∣stinct from that Matter, but only such an Agreeable Convention of Accidents, as by common Con∣sent, are reputed sufficient to make a Portion of Universal Matter belong to this or that Deter∣minate Genus, or Species of Natural Bodies. And those Qualities in Bodies, which are usually ascri∣bed to the Substantial Form, do not proceed from any Real Substance distinct from Matter, but a Convention of those Primary Mechanical Affe∣ctions of Matter before-mention'd; viz. Bulk, Shape, Motion or Rest; and the Texture thence Resulting, which is the Form, or Essential Modi∣fication; which Convention of Accidents are ca∣pable of performing what we usually ascribe to a Form, since they are sufficient to discriminate it from all other Species of Bodies. The Effects of Forms whence.And since the Form of a Body by some is as∣serted to be the Principle of its Operations, it may not be amiss here to take Notice, That be∣sides those Operations, that proceed from the Essential Modification of the Matter, the Body
being considered per modum unius, as one entire Agent, it may have several other Operations in Respect of the Particular Corpuscles of which it is compos'd; as in a Watch, besides those things it does as a Watch; the several Constituent Parts of it, as the Springs, Wheels, &c. may, each have their peculiar Attributes, as Bulk, Shape, &c. upon the Account of which it may do several things besides what it performs as a Watch: And if the Effects of those Corpuscles of which Bodies are compos'd are sometimes so Prodigious; as for Instance, the Effects which Fire produces by its Heat, we need not wonder that such great things may be done, as we sometimes see by several Active Qualities convening into one Body; since we see Engines perform very strange things, by virtue of those Accidents, viz. the Shape, Size, Motion, and Contrivance of their Parts. Of Generation, Corruption, and Alteration. VIII. Having thus according to our Hypothesis shewed what is meant by a Form, it remains that we explain, what is to be understood by Generation, Corruption, and Alteration. In order to which we are to consider, Considera∣tions re∣quisite to the Doctrin of Genera∣tion, &c.1. That there are some Particles of Matter so small, that tho' they be Mentally, or by Divine Omnipotence, divisible, yet are scarce Actually divided by Nature; which in that respect may be call'd Minima Naturalia. 2. That there are Multitudes of Corpuscles, con∣sisting of a Coalition of several of these Minima Naturalia, whose Bulk is so small, and Adhe∣sion so close, that tho' not absolutely indivisible
into the Minima Naturalia, yet very seldom are actually divided; and these are the Seeds or imme∣diate Principles of many sorts of Natural Bodies, as Earth, Water, &c. 3. That both the Minima Naturalia, and those Primary Clusters resulting from the Coalition of them, having their determinate Bulk and Shape; when these are united, the Size and Shape by their Juxta-position must be often altered, and often∣times their Tendency in and to Motion vary'd; which Accidents will also happen when they are dis-joyn'd, by which Unions and Separation of Parts, the Size and Shape being variously altered, they are accordingly adapted to several Pores, upon which Account they have different Effects upon several Bodies. 4. That when several of these Corpuscles are associated, and put into Motion, that Motion will produce great Alterations, and many new Qua∣lities in the Bodies they compose; as Air swiftly moved, is call'd Wind, and feels colder to the Touch; and Iron rubb'd against Wood, feels warm. But besides these Invisible Alterations, there are several which are visible; as when the Particles, by knocking together, are broke and dis-joyn'd, and by that means acquire new Forms, their Bulk and Figure being altered, and the Tex∣ture and Interstices of the Parts being also vary'd: Thus Water froze, acquires Firmness, and loses its Transparency; and Milk, by a languid inte∣stin Motion of its Parts, in hot Weather, turns into a thinner Liquor, and into Cream, which agitated in a Churn, turns to an Oyly Substance, and a thin fluid. So Fruit, by being bruised, loses its Colour, Taste, Smell, and Consistence: From
whence it appears, that Motion is not only the Grand Agent in Altering, but Composing and Constituting the Forms of Bodies. 5. And that since the Qualities of Bodies are derived from the Size, Shape and Motion, and the Texture, or Essential Modification of the Parts of Matter, we need not deride the Ancient Atomists, for attempting to deduce Generation and Corruption from the , the Con∣vention and Dissolution, and their Alterations from the Transpositions of their Atoms; tho' I believe they all three are concern'd in Generation, as well as Corruption and Alteration. Generati∣tion, Corru∣ption, &c. what.These things premis'd, our Doctrin of Gene∣ration, Corruption and Alteration may be compri∣z'd in a few Words; for when there is such a Concurrence of Accidents as are requisite to con∣stitute any determinate Species; such a Species is said to be generated; in which Action no new Substance is produced, but that which was Praeexi∣stent obtains a new Manner of Existence, or new Modification; which is evident in the making of a Watch, where the Parts are the same, when se∣parate, as when joyn'd, only the Union in respect of the whole, makes a new Body of a peculiar Modification: And when that Union of Acci∣dents, which denominates a Body generated, is destroy'd and dissolv'd, that Body, losing its Essential Modification, is said to be corrupted; for as a Watch is said to be made, when its Parts are put together; so when they are again dis∣plac'd, it is no longer call'd a Watch. Hence we may learn to understand that Axiom, Corruptio unius est Generatio alterius; & è contrà for when those Accidents which make one Body,
are by any means altered, it loses that Denomi∣nation, and being modify'd anew puts on ano∣ther Form, and becomes a Body of another Kind. Putrefa∣ction what.And here before we wholly leave off the Con∣sideration of Corruption, it may not be amiss to take Notice, That Putrefaction is but a peculiar kind of Corruption, where the Texture of Matter is more slowly altered, than in Corruption in a strict Sense; and also, that all the Essential Qua∣lities are not destroy'd. Alteration what.And here it may be seasonable to take Notice also, That tho' the Form of a Body depends on its Essential Modification, yet it seldom happens, that a Body acquires no other Qualities, than what are essentially and absolutely necessary to deno∣minate its Species; since in most Bodies it falls out, that there are some Qualities, which whe∣ther absent or not, don't essentially change the Subject; the Acquisition or loss of which is call'd Alteration (or by some Mutation). Generation and Corruption, depending on an Acquisition or Loss of the Essential Qualities of a Body. But to conclude this Theoretical Part, let us re∣flect briefly on the Fruitfulness of this Mechani∣cal Hypothesis: For, according to this Doctrin, the World we live in is not a moveless indigested Mass of Matter, but an , or Self-moving Engine, whose Parts are most of them in a va∣riety of Motions; and so close set together, as to leave no Vacuities, or very little ones betwixt them. And since the various Coalitions of these Parts, are enough to make several Bodies of as various Textures; and we see such a vast variety of Words made only of 24. Letters differently situated, we need not wonder that so many, and
such multitudes of Bodies should result from Matter differently Modify'd, by a Coalition of Matter subject to so many Accidents, as Matter in Motion must be, its Parts being subject to be alter'd variously by the Addition, Comminu∣tion, or Substraction of a few Parts of Matter. CHAP. II. Further Considerations concerning Particular Qualities. HAVING said thus much of the Qualities of Bodies in General, I now proceed to Particulars: And here I shall not spend Time in reckoning up all the Different Significations of the Word Quality; since what follows will explain, what Sense we use it in: I shall there∣fore only in short intimate, That several things have been accounted Qualities,Primary Modes of Matter, and Complexi∣ons of Qua∣lities mis∣taken for Real Qua∣lities. which seem ra∣to be Complexions of them; as Inanimal, Ani∣mal, Health and Beauty; the last of which seems to be the Result of Symmetry and Complexion, with Agreeable and Delightful Colours. There are other States of Matter also, as Rest and Mo∣tion, Size and Shape, usually call'd Qualities, which are rather to be accounted Primary Modes of Matter. But this concerning Names rather than Things, I shall (waving the usual Divisions of Qualities) treat of them according to the follow∣ing Division: viz. First, I shall consider them under two Heads; to wit, Manifest and Occult Qualities; the former of which we shall divide
gredients of a Body, is evident; since Water Hermetically Sealed, being froze, instead of re∣taining Fluidity and Transparency, becomes Brittle, Firm, and sometimes Opacous; which Qualities upon a Thaw it again loses. Also fixt Metal, barely by being hammer'd, becomes brit∣tle; which Quality it presently loses, when heated in the Fire. And Silver, by being hammer'd, puts on Qualities, which it by no means had when cold; as a Power to melt some Bodies, and to dry others; with several others, which it only acquires, by Virtue of the invisible Agitation of its Parts, put into Motion, by hammering. I might add several Instances of this Kind, but having mention'd them in other succeeding Cha∣pters, I shall omit them here; and pass to The Third Consideration, which hath been prov'd in the preceding Chapter; which is, That we are not to consider the Effects of Mix'd Bo∣dies, as the bare Result of the Parts of Matter of such a determinate Texture; but as plac'd a∣mongst other Bodies, on which they may vari∣ously act, and be acted on. But Fourthly, to remove this Objection, we must consider, That the Peripatetick, as well as Chymical Principles, are incapable of accounting for the various Phaenomena of Nature, which the Corpuscular Philosophy hath a greater Advan∣tage in: For neither the different Colours of the Planets, nor the Generation and Perishing of Spots in the Sun, are to be accounted for by the Doctrin of the Peripateticks, nor Chymists; be∣sides several Phaenomena relating to Magnetism, Musick, Dioptricks, Catoptricks and Staticks. And indeed, I should think it not a little
strange, that the various Textures,The Diffe∣rence in A∣gents and Patients di∣versify the Actions. as well as Mo∣tions of Bodies, would not more sufficiently ac∣count for the Phaenomena of Nature, than the Cosideration of Quiescent Ingredients; for as all Natural Bodies, act on one another by Motion; so that Motion is variously determin'd, accord∣ing to the different Textures of the Agents and Patients. But to proceed to the Second Objection against the Corpuscularian Philosophy; which is,A Second Objection a∣gainst the Corpuscu∣larian Phi∣losophy an∣swer'd. That it is impossible, so great a variety of Qualities should arise from so few Principles, as Matter and Mo∣tion. In answer to this, I shall endeavour to shew, that it is possible those Catholick Affections of Matter, should be deriv'd from Local Motion; and that those Principles being variously combin'd and joyn'd together, should afford Phaenomena, as various as any to be observ'd in Nature. And First; If we allow what is undeniable, viz. That the Tendency of Matter, as to Motion, is different in several Parts of the Universe; it will follow, that by Local Motion so diversify'd, Matter must be divided into Parts distinct from one another; and consequently, being Finite, must necessarily have a determinate Size, as well as Shape: And since all the Universal Bulk of Matter, hath not its Parts in a constant Motion, some of them, being intangl'd together, must needs be at Rest. And hence the Primary Af∣fections of Matter flow. But there are yet other Affections of Matter, belonging to the lesser Fragments of it, in Respect of their Situation, as Posture, either Horizontal, Erect, or Inclining, in reference to our Horizon; and also a peculiar Order, in Relation to each
other; the Union of which Parts collectively consider'd, may properly be call'd Texture, or Modification. And since most Bodies are made up of Parts something Irregular; it is impossible but that there should be Interstices, or Pores left betwixt them. And further, some Parts of Bo∣dies, being very subtile and fine, and easily put into Motion by Heat, or other proper Agents; such Bodies cannot but emit good store of Efflu∣viums. And when Particles of Matter are fitted and adapted, so as to adhere together, they form those similar Bodies, call'd Elements, which be∣ing mix'd with one another, constitute Com∣pound Bodies; which being again associated with Compounds, form Bodies, still more Complex; which Compounding and Decompounding of Bodies,The Diffe∣rence be∣twixt Mix∣ture, and Texture. may be Properly call'd Mixture; which differs from Texture, because it implies a Hetero∣geneity of Parts, which the latter does not. And Lastly, all Bodies, whether Simple or Compound, are to be consider'd, as plac'd in the World, as it is now constituted, and rul'd by The Ʋniversal Fabrick of things, as well as the Laws of Motion. The Phoeno∣mena exhi∣bited by the Corpuscu∣lar Princi∣ples very numerous.From hence it appearing, That Matter is very Naturally diversify'd by eleven Primary Affections, to which it self being added, makes twelve; we may by Parity of Reason consider, that if such an inaccountable Number of Words, may be made of the 24. Letters; it will not be hard to think, that so many different Modes of Matter may arise from such Finite Principles, as could Reasonably be suppos'd to result from the va∣rious Associations of those ten Letters. And indeed, an inaccountable Number more: since every one of these Principles admits of an
Incredible Variety. As first, there may be a vast Variety of Associations in respect of the Figure or Number, or Order of the Parts joyn'd; as in Fi∣gure, some may be Triangles or Squares, others Pentagons, &c. There may also another Variety proceed from the Different Shapes and Sizes of the Parts of Matter united; their Figures being either Spherical, like a Bullet, Elliptical, like an Egg, or Cubical, as a Dye, &c. together with a great many others: Examples of which the In∣struments of Carvers, Gravers, &c. afford; those Tools being not only of different Sizes, but also various Shapes. And there is no less Variety in the Degrees of Motion; since Motion may be in∣finitely different in Swiftness or Slowness, Uni∣formity or Difformity; as also, according to the different Lines in which Bodies move, as Streight, Circular, Hyperbolical, Ellyptical, &c. as also ac∣cording to the differently Figur'd Parts they strike against; to which Causes of Variety, may be added the different Sizes or Shapes of the Bo∣dies mov'd: as also, the several Degrees of Compound Bodies, and the different Modifica∣tions of their Ingredients; and likewise of the Mediums through which they move, as well as the Degreess of Impulse. And the Effects of these may be vary'd again, according to the different Situation or Determinate Natures of the Bodies they strike against. Musical In∣struments afford in∣stances of the various Effects of Motion.And, that Motion is able to produce a vast Variety of Effects, we may learn from Musical Instruments; where according to the Difference of the Air's Motion, arising from the various Vi∣brations of the Strings, &c. different Sounds are produced; which, as they are more or less co∣incident
cause either Concords or Discords in Sound. But it would be too tedious to mention all the Diversities which might happen in Quali∣ties, by the various Combinations of our Ten Principles; and therefore, since from hence their Fertility may sufficiently appear, I shall proceed to A Third Objection answered.The last Difficulty raised against the Corpus∣cular Philosophy, which is, That if the Qualities of Bodies depend on the Size, Shape and Tex∣tures of Bodies, all Bodies of the same Colours must have the same Textures; and if the same Textures; the same Qualities in other respects: But we see it is contrary, since the Calx of Harts∣horn is insipid, and yet the Volatile Salt of Harts∣horn is very strong Scented, and of as strong a Taste: To which a great many more Examples might be added were it necessary. Considera∣tions in or∣der to re∣move the Difficulty.But I shall rather, since it is not requisite, of∣fer the following Considerations to remove the Difficulty. First, That several Heterogeneous Parts may be lodged in the Pores of a Body, which tho' of a different Nature from the Body it self, yet they may produce some considerable Effects; as in Perfumed Gloves, the Odoriferous Parts are both different in Substance, and have diffe∣rent Qualities from the Leather the Gloves are made of. The Second Consideration is, That Parts of very different Natures may be linked together, not in an Essential Structure, but a Juxta-Posi∣tion, or Peculiar kind of Composition, and yet afford the same Qualities, notwithstanding their
Essential Differences; for invisible changes in some Parts of Matter, may be sufficient to cause new Qualities, tho' the Essential Parts of those Bodies be unaltered; and not only so, but di∣versified enough to denominate them of dif∣ferent Species. So a Bar of Iron, by being ham∣mer'd, may feel hot, though there be no visible alteration in the Nature of the Metal by an in∣tense Agitation of the Insensible Parts of it. But to illustrate this Consideration a little further; tho' a Piece of Iron, Wood or Tin, should have sharp protuberant Parts, yet are they distinct Substances, notwithstanding they all agree in that Quality of Roughness; and if those rough Parts were worn off, and the Body endowed with a smooth Quality, yet still would they in respect of their Substance, remain unaltered: And tho' the superficies of Steel, Brass, Flint or Marble should be polished as to become Specular, their Essential Differences would still be the same. And as I took notice before, tho' Air be put into an Undulating Motion by different Instruments, yet if the Mo∣tion be raised to the same degree, it causes the same Sound, and produces the same Note. So that Bodies may agree in some Extra-Es∣sential Attributes, and yet be different in their Essential Modifications: To confirm the Truth of which, Heat will afford us an Eminent Ex∣ample, which may be produc'd in a Body, by putting its Parts into Agitation, without de∣stroying the Essential Properties of the Body so affected: So that the Essential Nature of a Body may not be concern'd in reflecting the Rays of Light, which produce those Extra-Essential
Qualities, which are called Colours; since to produce Whiteness in a Body, it is suf∣ficient, that the Surface of that Body be so mo∣dified, as to reflect the Rays of Light copious∣ly and undisturbed, whatever the Essential and proper Texture of that Body is. Different-Qualities afforded by Bodies Ho∣mogeneous as to Sense.And here it may be proper to take notice, that there are several Bodies Homogeneous as to Sense, which afford different Qualities; as Salt-Peter, becomes fluid and transparent, when briskly agitated in a Crucible; whereas it hath other Qualities when cool, being a hard and white brittle Substance: And the Powder of A∣labaster being duly exposed to a convenient heat, acquires several Qualities not different from those of fluid Bodies. So Aqua Fortis although it be transparent and clear, yet if rais'd in the form of Fumes, it puts on a red Colour. The Third thing I would propose to remove this difficulty is, what hath been several times hinted before, viz. That a Body is not to be considered barely as a determinate Substance, but as a part of the Universe, and placed a∣mongst other Bodies. But Fourthly, As to that part of the Objection, which questions the Corpuscular Principles, in making it appear, why a Body so qualified as to cause whiteness, should have other Quali∣ties which are of no Affinity with it; what hath been already delivered, may be sufficient to re∣move it, viz. That the Extra-Essential Parts may be so qualified, though the Essential Parts be not altered; which we have more reason to believe, since most sensible Qualities are only relative Attributes, and may result from an ac∣cidental
Motion, or more than ordinary Laxity or Density of Parts, or some other such like Affections. Several Qualities exhibited by Venice TurpentineTo illustrate which, if a Third part of Ve∣nice Turpentine be evaporated, we may obtain from it a Colophony of a Reddish Colour, which being beaten small, will lose its Trans∣parency, and be turned into a white Opacous Powder; which with a Moderate heat will a∣gain be restored to its former Transparency, Fludity and Colour; into which fluid Body, if one immerges the end of a Quill, something below the Surface, and blows Artificially, it will rise in Bubbles, curiously adorn'd with vivid and lively Colours; and if in that state you take it into your Hands, it is Viscid enough to draw into Strings; and if put into a Triangu∣lar Figure, will like a Triangular Glass, yield a variety of Colours: When cold, it is very brittle, and if moderately rubbed, it is en∣dowed with an Electrical Virtue of attracting Straws: The same Phaenomena will appear up∣on managing purified Rosin after the same man∣ner. Another Experi∣ment of the like Nature tried upon Putrified Urine.To this I shall subjoyn another instance, to shew, that a Homogeneous Body, may, by shape or other Mechanical Affections, have different Qualities in respect of our Senses, and the At∣tributes assigned to it upon that Score: The instance is in Putrified Urine Distill'd, the Spi∣rit of which, when it hath by frequent Distilla∣tions been dephlegmed, hath a pungent Taste, and swims in a Phlegmatick Vehicle, being also of a very offensive Smell; whose Salts when freed from the Water, are of a white Colour, and are
sharp and caustick if applied to an Excoriated Part; besides which Qualities, they likewise make the Eyes water, and cause Sneezing. And in respect of Physick, their Qualities are no less noted, being Diuretick, Diaphoretick, and Specifick in Hysterick Fits; when mixed with Fi∣lings of Brass, they turn them into a green Co∣lour; yet if mixed with Blew Juices of Plants, they change that Colour for a Green one. They dissolve Copper, yet destroy the Corrosive Vir∣tue of other Acid Menstruums; and precipitate the Copper when dissolved by them: Yet if com∣mon Salt be associated with it, this Salt ceases to produce most of the forementioned Effects, and forms a Body very like Sal Armoniack: which change may probably depend on the Motion and Shape of its Parts destroyed, since by Eva∣porating most of the Liquor, I have found the Salt not only much less Fugitive and Volatile than that of Urine, but the Crystals of a different Figure, being like Combs and Feathers. And These Considerations, together with the Ex∣tra-Essential Changes of Bodies, may let us see, that Substances may work variously upon dif∣ferent Senses as well as other Bodies; and those Effects too, may depend on Extra-Essential Changes, which may be wrought in Motion, Shape and Texture, &c. the Essential Mo∣difications of Bodies nevertheless agreeing. So that from what hath been said, the Objection, I hope, will seem less considerable, and not so perplexing as some imagine. And these Three Difficulties I have the ra∣ther considered, because they may not only ex∣plain, but confirm and illustrate what is de∣liver'd
in the Chapter before, concerning Forms and Qualities; and may also clear and render more Intelligible, some things hereafter to be related. CHAP. III. Of the Origin of Forms. THE Origin of Forms, Pyrophylies, is one of the most Noble, yet most Obstruse En∣quiries in Natural Philosophy; so that the Wi∣sest of the Peripateticks, have either confessed their Inability, or given Explanations of them very insatisfactory. But not to examine all their Various Opinions on this Point, I shall only here briefly consider the Opinion of the Mo∣dern Aristotelians, having already in our Hy∣pothesis laid down in the foregoing Chapter, our Thoughts on this Subject. The Doctrin of the A∣ristotelians considered.The Controversie betwixt us and the Schools is this, Whether the Forms of Natural Bodies be eduted out of the Power of the Matter, and whe∣ther they be substantial Entities distinct from Mat∣ter? That they are not, appears from what is contained in the foregoing Chapters; and there∣fore what I shall here insist on is, that the Doctrin of the Peripateticks is to me Incomprehensible; for tho' the Schoolmen make use of an Obscure Distinction, viz. That in producing Forms, the Power of Matter is partly Eductive, and partly Receptive; yet since they deny Forms, to exist in Matter; it is hard to conceive how they
should be educed, before existent: And since the Receptive Power, only enables Matter to receive a Form, how can it help to produce it, when the Form must be produced before the Receptive Power can lodge it? It is manifest, that the Body hath a Recep∣tive Power in Relation to the Soul,Forms not educed out of the power of Matter disproved. which ne∣vertheless they allow to have a Substantial Form, yet not educed out of the Power of Matter. It's true, were the Form of a Body a more subtile Portion of Matter, as Spirit is of Wine, the Eductive Power might be considerable; and sig∣nifie the same, as if it were granted, that the Form is but a Modification of Matter; which would amount to this, viz. That by proper A∣gents, Matter may be so disposed, as to pro∣duce a Body of this or that denomination: As the Form of a Sphaere may be conce o exist potentially in a Piece of Brass; because that Me∣tal is capable of being put into such a Form: But this they disallow, because, if it were granted, Forms would be but Accidents. And as for the other way of educing Forms out of Matter, as Spirit out of Wine, that cannot be granted by them; because, then Matter and Form would be the same Substantial Principle diversified by Accidents. But they tell us strange things of the Efficacy of the Agent, which works upon the Matter out of which Forms are to be educed: To which it may be briefly answered, That the Agent can only act as a Physical Agent; and if the Form produced by it's Operation, be a Substance not preexistent in that Matter it works upon, and which constitutes the Body, the Form must ei∣ther
be made of some Parts of that Matter, or created de novo; if they allow the former, then the Form is not a Substance distinct from Mat∣ter; but if they will not allow it to be made of Matter, it must be de novo, i. e. out of nothing; which being granted, Natural Bodies must be produced by Creation and Generation, and not by the latter only; and it's strange if they allow that a Physical Agent can effect that, which Antient Philosophers thought too great to be ascribed to God himself. The Aristo∣totelian Do∣ctrin of Forms con∣trary to Reason.And as for these Reasons, what they say of the Origin of Forms, is to me Incomprehensible; so, that what they deliver concerning Substan∣tial Forms is irreconcilable to Reason: For though they allow these Forms to be Substances, yet they teach, that they depend upon Matter, both in fieri and in esse: i. e. they cannot exist out of the Matter which supports them; which is to give them the Name of Substances, but the Nature of Accidents. Nay, these imaginary Forms as much invalidate the Doctrin of Cor∣ruption, as that of Generation; for if a Form be a Substance distinct from Matter, it must exist of it self, as the Soul of Man does, when the Body is dissolved: But they assert, that in Cor∣ruption the Form ceaseth to exist; by which means they make it an Accident, and likewise contradict what they commonly hold, viz. That upon Corruption Bodies are resolved into their first Principles; since if what they assert of Forms be true, Bodies are but partly dissolved into their first Matter, and partly annihilated or restored to the common Stock of Forms; which, notwithstanding any thing to the con∣trary, must be immortal.
Arguments alledged by the Schools in defence of their Do∣ctrin an∣swered.But to examine some of the most Plausible Ar∣guments brought by the Schools to evince their Doctrin of Forms: First, they argue thus, Om∣ne compositum substantiale requirit materiam & for∣mam substantialem ex quibus componatur: Omne Corpus Naturale est compositum Substantiale, Er∣go, &c. In which, Syllogism for Brevity sake I shall deny the Minor, because nothing in Na∣ture is composed of Matter and a distinct Sub∣stance, but Man. The Second Argument they bring, is, that if Substantial Forms were deny'd, all Bodies must be Entia per Accidens; to which it may be an∣swered, that there is no such Necessity, since Matter, Figure, Texture and Motion, ordinantur per se & intrinsice, to make up natural Bo∣dies. Another Argument which they alledge is, That if there were no Substantial Forms, there could be no Substantial Definitions; which comes to no more, than that if we don't grant some things which are not in Nature, we shall want a Foundation for our Definitions: And indeed if we must define Natural Bodies by Imaginary Forms, which we know not, it is better to exchange Substantial for Essential Definitions, grounded on the Essential Differences of Natural Bodies themselves. Their Phy∣sical Argu∣ments con∣sidered.These Arguments for Substantial Forms being examined, I shall briefly consider the Physical Arguments usually alledged for the proof of them. The first is, the Spontaneous cooling of hot Water; an Action usually attributed to the Power of the Substantial Form; which might
be plausible, were it not otherwise to be explain∣ed; for Bodies esteem'd cold, having their Parts in a less Agitation than the Natural Juices about the Sensory, cause that Sensation; but when the Parts of that Water, by the heat of the Fire, are put into a Violent Motion, stronger than that of the Parts of Matter about our Sensory, it becomes hot; which hot Water be∣ing removed from the Fire, and the Agitation of its Parts being diminished, it returns to its just Temperature: To effect which, a Substan∣tial Form is no more requisite, than when a Ship is put into a violent Motion in a Storm, there is required a Substantial Form to stop its Motion upon the ceasing of that Storm. And in opposition to Substantial Forms, it may be likewise considered, that Water in upper Rooms in hot Climates, will be kept warm, and in Nova Zembla, in the Form of Ice, meerly by the Temper of the Air, in spite of the Sub∣stantial Form. Another Argument urged is, that Matter be∣ing indifferent to all Accidents, it wants a sub∣stantial Form to link the Accidents requisite to every Particular Body together. To which it is answered, that the World being now made and constituted, the Phaenomena of Nature de∣pend on one part of Matter acting on another; so that especially fluid Bodies frequently change their States, being altered by the several Sea∣sons of the Year, and Temperature of the Air, which is evident from the different Effects it hath on Weather-Glasses. So that the Accidents observable in most Bodies, depend on Agents and Efficient Causes, which produce in Matter
what in the Precedent Chapter we call an Essen∣tial Form: And there is no need of a Substan∣tial Form to keep those Accidents together, since they will continue in the same state, till some other Agent works on them, which is strong enough to destroy and change the Tex∣ture and Form of that Matter; which Agent, the assistance of a Substantial Form being not able to resist, the Body in spite of the Peripa∣tetick Doctrin must be chang'd; an instance of which we have in Lead, which (tho' when melted, it returns to it's pristine state upon cooling) if it be long continued upon a Violent Fire, will be turned into a reddish brittle Glass, and lose all its former Qualities; and retains those new acquired ones, till some powerful Ex∣trinsick Agent, cause a fresh Change. On the contrary, Oranges, Tamarinds, Senna, and se∣veral other Bodies, retain the same Qualities, when gathered and removed from the Soul of the Tree, and without the influence of its Form, which they had before whilst growing: And the colour of Snow soon perisheth, notwith∣standing its Substantial Form, its Texture being altered by a Dissolution. The Parts of a Body may adhere without the help of a Substantial Form.But there is still another Argument general∣ly alledged in favour of Substantial Forms; which is, that without them, the various changes observable in Bodies, and the adhering of se∣veral Parts of Matter united into one Totum, would be unaccountable. As to the first Part of this Argument, it is easily answered, since Local Motion variously determined, is able to effect considerable and various Changes in Bo∣dies; an Instance of which (besides what hath
been said in the first, and the preceding part of this Chapter) we have in Tallow, which by the Mechanical Effects of Fire, exchanges Heat for Coldness, Fludity for Firmness, and instead of Whiteness, puts on Transparency. And be∣sides the Changes which are caused by the Ac∣tion of one single Quality in an Agent, as Heat; the Operations of Bodies, proceeding from the Texture of the whole, are various, as appears by Factitious Vitriol, which is made of Iron and a Corrosive Menstruum, yet hath all the Quali∣ties of Natural Vitriol. And as to the Second Part of the Argument, viz. That the Parts of a Body could not be u∣nited into one without a Sustantial Form; I answer, That a Connexion of Parts convenient∣ly figured is sufficient; as when a Pear is grafted on a White-thorn, or a Plum is inoculated on an Apricock; there is a Union of Two different Forms meerly by a Connexion of the Parts of Matter, and the Parts grafted or inoculated, receive Nourishment as naturally, as if they were supposed to be joined by a Substantial Form, to a Stock of the same Form and Tex∣ture with themselves. Another Instance of U∣nion by a Connexion of certain figured Parts, we have in Glass, where the Particles of Sand are linked together with the Saline ones, by the help of Colliquation, and the violent Action of the Fire. But to conclude; I am not ignorant that it is alledged in favour of Substantial Forms, that they render Natural Philosophy much more per∣fect, and that it would be very imperfect with∣out them; which comes to no more, than that
if we must not explain things difficult by things unknown, we must be imperfect; where I think the Imperfection is not at all remedied; for should it be ask'd why Jet attracts Straws, or why Rhabarb is a Cholagogue, and the An∣swer should be, by reason of their Substantial Forms; it would be all one as to say, by I know not what, because those Forms are unknown. Being therefore in things purely appertaining to Natural Philosophy, unwilling to believe what is not intelligible, I shall leave the Doctrin of Substantial Forms, to those that have clearer Heads than my self, and shall rather proceed upon Intelligible Principles. The Form of a Body is its Essential Modifica∣tion.I shall therefore briefly intimate what hath been delivered before concerning our Notion of Forms, viz. That the Form of a Body is its Essential Modification; and tho' Matter at the first Beginning of things, had both Form and Motion from the wise Creator of things; yet now the various Forms of Bodies depend on the Effects of Local Motion, which divides, and variously transposes, and so alters both the Textures and Forms of Natural Bodies, tho' I say, at the Creation, the Parts of Matter were guided by a Supream Power, so as to con∣vene into an orderly and well contrived Fa∣brick.
CHAP. IV. Considerations concerning Subordinate Forms. as they are usually held by several Learned Modern Philosophers. IT is usually held by several Modern Philoso∣phers, That besides the Specifick Form of a Body,The Notions of Modern Philoso∣phers, con∣cerning Sub∣ordinate Forms, there are several Subordinate Forms in Determinate Parts of it, subservient to that which is the Common Form of the whole Sub∣stance; and which, upon the Dissolution of a Body, become Specifick Forms themselves; the Specifick Form which presided over them before, being destroy'd: As when in a Living Animal, the Soul, which is the Specifick Form of that A∣nimal Body is separated from it, the Forms which were before lodg'd in every Part, as sub∣ordinate to that, become the Specifick Forms of each Part: But tho' Sennertus ingeniously al∣ledges the Specifick Virtues of Plants in favour of this Doctrin, yet we have reason to repute them invalid Arguments; since we see, That several Flowers retain their Natural Colours and Smells, and for ought we can perceive, the same Virtues with which they were endu'd when growing, af∣ter they were gather'd. Considered, and exami∣ned.But since this Doctrin hath been made use of, to corroborate their Notions of Substantial Forms; I shall make it appear, that what they atrtibute to Subordinate Forms, may be explain'd by the Corpuscular Philosophy. In order to which, I shall consider and observe,
First, That the Technical Word Form is usually made use of, to signify some conspicuous Phaeno∣mena of a Body, upon the Abolition of which it is said to change, or deposit its Form. Secondly, That those Parts, or Substances usu∣ally held to be the subject of Inhesion to a Subor∣dinate Form, are Organical; and tho' some appear as to Sense Similar; yet are they compos'd of Parts very different: As Vitriol, which tho' to Sense it appears to be a Similar Substance, yet it is by Art discover'd to consist of Saline Parts, united with a Metalline Substance: And Rhubarb, which in∣stead of that Specifick Form it had whilst grow∣ing, according to their Doctrin, exerts its Sub∣ordinate or Substantial Form, when laid up for use, retains Virtues, which are different from each other; as a Styptick Virtue, when the Pur∣gative is extracted: So that there is no Reason but that it should have Subordinate Forms, agree∣able to each of these Qualities, distinct from those which are call'd Forma Mistionis, by the Schools: But further, we may observe in an Almond, which tho' when gather'd, it loses its Vegetative Form; and that which was before Subordinate becomes the Specifick Form of it: yet there is no Reason why we should deny Forms Subordinate to that, since by a bare Pressure, it discovers it self to consist of an Oyl and an Insipid Substance, both of which have Forms distinct from that of the entire Fruit: To these,Observati∣ons to prove Subordi∣nate Forms. I shall add two Instances more; the first of which is in Sulphur Vive, which by being kindled under a Bell, yields oyly Parts which are spent in a Flame, and Saline Corpuscle, which, being condens'd by the Moisture of the Air, ad∣here to the sides of the Glass, and constitute a
Menstruum violently corrosive, which will afford a dry brittle Salt. The Second Instance is in Cinnabaris Fossilis, which is a Substance com∣pounded of three Forms, very distinct from each other; as that of Mercury, and Sulphur, which is also a Compounded Substance: From all which it appears, that there are in most Concretes, be∣sides the Substantial Forms of the whole, Forms Subordinate to those, belonging properly to the Parts of those Compound Bodies. But, A Com∣pound Form what.Thirdly, That all the Ingredients of a Com∣pound by Uniting, make one Form, upon the Union of which all the Effects of that Body de∣pend, is evident in Gun-powder, the Action of that Compound depending on the Concurring and united Effects of Charcoal, Nitre, and Sul∣phur: So that Fourthly, Tho' a Compound acts by Virtue of its Composition, and ad modium unius; yet each of its Ingredients retain their particular Attri∣butes, as well as their Modifications, which distinguish'd them from other Bodies before that Composition was made: and this is evident from what some of the Aristotelians write concerning the Life of an Embryo; viz. That an Embryo hath a Vegetative and Sensitive Life, before that of a Man; where the Vegetative and Sensitive Souls, pre-existent to the Rational, are not destroy'd, but only depos'd by the Succession of a Super∣added Soul; which become the Specifick Form; from whence it Naturally follows, that there are Forms which in respect of others are only Prepara∣tory, and dispose the Matter modify'd by them, to receive a more exquisite Stamp, or a more per∣fect Form; which, if it be not added, those ruder
Forms, are nevertheless Specifick in respect of those Bodies they are the Forms of. But tho' I make use of these Arguments, I would not be thought to adopt altogether what these Men teach,In what Sense the Soul may be said to be the Speci∣fick Form. having elsewhere explain'd, in what Sense, according to their Doctrin, the Souls of Living Bodies may be said to be their Forms, by observing the Difference betwixt Animating and Natural Forms, as to the Manner of their In∣forming the Bodies they belong to. As the Soul is not the sole Architect of the Body, nor do the Properties of the Body flow from it, tho' in other Bodies the Compound Form, as well as Qua∣lities, depend on the Forms of the Ingredients of that Body united.In what the Speci∣fick Forms of an Ani∣mate Body differ from those of an Inanimate. And indeed the Properties of a Body are so far from flowing from the Specifick Form, where the Soul alone is esteem'd so; that in Brutes, as well as Plants, several Qualities re∣main undestroy'd, after the Form is destroy'd; as Shape, Colour, and Vertues, &c. And tho' it be held by some, That there's a Forma Cadaveris, that keeps the Parts of a dead Body united, and preserves their Qualities en∣tire; yet, since it is only held as necessary, to sup∣port the Peripatetick Doctrin, we shall not dispute it; but shall only say, That the Fabrick and Con∣nexion of the parts of a Body, are sufficient to preserve the Pristine Qualities of it from Disso∣lution, till the Internal Agitation of the Juices breaks that Texture: which is apparent by what hath been observ'd in very cold Countries, as Russia and Sweden; where the dead Bodies are for several Months kept unburied, and uncorrupted: and in Aromatick Plants, there is an undeniable Argument, since after the Vegetative Soul is
de∣stroy'd, they continue uncorrupted for several Years. The Forms of the In∣gredients of a Com∣pound truly esteem'd Forms.But to determine whether the Soul be the sole true Form of an Animate Body, is not our Design at present; and therefore I shall only bring an In∣stance or two to shew, That the Forms of the Sim∣ple Ingredients of Compound Bodies are as truly Forms, as those of a Complex Body. The first is, That the Spring of a Watch is as truly a Spring before it is made a Part of that Watch, as after; and as truly hath its Form: And tho' Copper by Corrosive Spirits be turn'd into a Vitriol, and consequently the Form of Copper, in respect of that Vitriol, becomes a Subordinate Form; yet it is as truly one as that of any other Body. , hard to be determin'd amongst Natural Bo∣dies.And tho' Aristotle attributes to Forms , yet it is a Matter of Difficulty to know what Form is most Noble; since Pearls, which are of the greatest Value, being prepar'd in the Form of a Magistery, are of little Value to them that only wear them; tho' by a Sick Man the latter is more to be priz'd. Fifthly, But tho' it be so difficult to distinguish Valuable Forms, from those of less Esteem; yet there may be allow'd some Distinction amongst Subordinate Forms, in as much as some belong to Similar, and others to Organical Parts. Sixthly, amongst the Parts of Plants, or Ani∣mals, there may be some Parts so modify'd, as to put on the Form of Seminal Principles, which upon the Dissolution of that Body, may act as such, in actuating and guiding some Parts of Mat∣ter so, as to convene into Insects, &c. Seventhly, Upon the Dissolution of the Spe∣cifick Form of a Body, the Body is to be consider'd
as beset with other Substances, which may act upon it; as the Sun, Air, or some other A∣gent; by means of which the Seminal Principles may be put into Action, or new Forms may re∣sult, from new Contextures of that Matter. Sennertus his Opinion agreeable to the Corpu∣scular Phi∣losophy.These Observations being premis'd, I shall en∣deavour to shew, That what the Learned Sen∣nertus delivers, is agreeable to the Corpuscula∣rian Philosophy. I agree then with the Learned Sennertus, That the Faculties of Plants and Animals, depend not on the Materia Prima, and Vegetative or Sen∣sitive Soul; nor on the Form of Mix'd Bodies, consider'd barely as such; but that there is some∣thing else requisite to produce that Variety of Effects, observable in Specifick Medicines. But tho' I allow these things, yet I disallow their Way of Explaining them, as well as a great deal more which they assert; as, That Subordi∣nate Forms act under the Superintendency of Specifick Forms;Subordi∣nate Forms act not un∣der the Su∣perinten∣dency of the Specifick Forms. forasmuch as we may as ea∣sily attribute the Effects of a Compound Body, to the mix'd Action of the Compounded Ingre∣dients, as to the Subservient Actions of Subor∣dinate Forms, which united will have an Action in common, and proper to their Complex Mo∣dification; it being different from what each of those Ingredients would produce separately. As in a Ballance, the Scale, which by its Specifick Gravity ought to tend downwards, is rais'd up∣wards, by the Addition of a Weight in the other Scale. So an Arrow, by the Spring of a Bow, is forc'd to flie in a Line, different from what its Specifick Gravity would incline it to, and with greater Violence. And as a Clock, whose Parts
concur to the forming of an Engine, proper to produce such Effects, as usually are produc'd in that Machine, does not act by Virtue of a Su∣perintendent Specifick Form; but the Parts are set on Motion, and move Mechanically by the help of Weights; so, several Subordinate In∣gredients, may have a Joynt Effect, each of those Bodies cooperating, and modifying each other's Actions. Likewise Gun-powder, acts not by Virtue of a Specifick Form, superintending Sub∣ordinate ones, but Mechanically, by Virtue of the Joynt Effects of its Ingredients; which is evi∣dent, since the Effects of the Composition are so different from what the separate Ingredients would produce; and as from hence it appears, that the Efficacy of it depends on its Mechanick Texture; so, to make it appear, that the Ingre∣dients were but slightly mix'd, I boyl'd the Pow∣der of it in Water, and, evaporating the filtred Liquor, obtain'd Cristals of Salt-Petre, the black stuff remaining in the Filtre, being insipid, and in∣flamable like Sulphur: And this black Matter being boyl'd in a strong Lixivium, so as to dissolve the Sulphur, the Sulphureous Liquor will run through a Filtre, leaving the Charcoal behind; into which Liquour if an Acid Spirit be dropp'd, the Sul∣phur precipitates in the Form of a white Powder. But to illustrate our Doctrin of Forms and Qua∣lities a little further, I shall add, That a blue and yellow Powder being mix'd in a just Proportion, produc'd a green Colour: which did not hap∣pen, because those two Ingredients were subser∣vient to a Predominant Form; but because they both being joyn'd made a Compound Impression
upon the Eye. And likewise in making Subli∣mate or Vitriol; all that is requisite to enable them to produce Effects proper to such Bodies, is, that the Parts should be in a proper manner contex'd and modify'd together; and then, they are not only capable of performing what is usually ascrib'd to them, upon the Account of their more specifick properties; but some, which are not different (as Vomiting, and Purging, &c.) from those Effects, which are said to be produc'd upon Vegetables, upon the account of a Super∣intendent Form. So that tho' the Operations of Compounded Substances depend on the United Texture of Sub∣ordinate Forms,Neither are the Actions of Com∣pounds wholly to be attributed to their Union. yet, as I have before taken No∣tice the Actions of those Bodies, are not wholly to be attributed to their Union; since upon the Dissolution of that Contexture, each Body hath its determinate Form and Virtue; as when the Ingredients of Gun-powder are again separate; or as when a Rose loses its Specifick Form, by being taken from the Tree: But, To conclude this Discourse, we shall again take Notice of what we have before hinted at in the beginning, viz. The unfixt use of the Word Form, and that a Body is said to be of this or that Form, upon the Account of a very few Qualities: If then the Form be nothing but a Congeries of Accidents, it may, by proper Agents, lose that Form, the Subordinate ones still remaining un∣dissolv'd;The Modi∣fications of Bodies two∣fold. till a more powerful Agent destroys them too: (so that a Body may have a twofold Modificatiod:) As for Instance, The Spring of a Watch, may, by being put into the Fire, lose that Elastick Virtue; yet nevertheless the Sub∣stance
is Iron, and retains Qualities proper to such a Substance. Again, another Instance we have in a Rose, which when it hath lost its Faculty of receiving a Nutritious Sap from the Tree, yet it retains other Qualities, which depend on the Texture and Modification of its solid Parts, the former being only Qualities, in respect of the Spe∣cifick Form; but the latter, the Result of its Con∣texture. To illustrate this Notion a little further, I shall make use of the following Comparison, viz. That as a Mill, which is an Organical Machine, per∣forms what belongs to it as such, as long as it is supply'd with Water; so a Plant is enabl'd to ef∣fect several things, whilst actuated by a Vital Spirit: And further, as a Mill upon the Con∣sumption or Congelation of that Water, still re∣tains the same Parts it had before, so do the Parts of a Plant, tho' the Soul ceases its communicative Virtue. And to continue the Parallel further, as the Constituent Parts of a Mill are not de∣stroy'd, tho' the Faculty of Operating as such be lost; so neither is the Water, but only by reason of Congelation, or Evaporating in the Form of Exhalations, ceases to coexist in a Form fit to turn the Mill: So tho' a Plant or Flower be lopt off, and retains the same Texture of its solid Parts, yet when it ceases to be water'd with a continual supply of Sap, the Sap is only dispers'd in the Air, or intercepted, and spent in some other Part of the Tree: From whence it appears, that nothing at all perishes, but only the Manner of Union, and the Particular Modification of those Parts of Matter cease; so that those solid Parts are no longer fitly adapted to be nourish'd by
those Fluids. Which Instance may serve to il∣lustrate our Doctrin, tho' there be considerable Difference betwixt the things compar'd, inas∣much as a Plant hath not always that Aptitude to be again actuated as the Mill hath. But there are some Instances, which may ren∣der the Difference less considerable, if we consi∣der that the Rose of Jericho, which tho' for seve∣ral. Years gather'd, and wither'd, is so far re∣fresh'd by Water, as to seem but lately gather'd: And I have observ'd, that tho' a Plant of Aloes had several Years hung near the Ceiling of my Chamber, yet it was by the use of a convenient Liquor, so far renew'd, as to perform several things, which are usually the Effects of Life and Growth. And the like is confirm'd by what may be experimented in Wasps, which, tho' drown'd in Water, will yet recover Life by the Heat of the Sun. The Quali∣ties of a Body whose Specifick Form is de∣stroy'd, de∣pend not on the United Action of the whole IngredientsBut to wave needless Illustrations, I shall pro∣ceed to observe, That tho' a Body hath laid down its Specifick Form; yet the Qualities remaining, are not always the Result of the united Subor∣dinate Forms; but depend sometimes on the de∣terminate Forms of Particular Parts of that Body, tho' the Union be such as to preserve the Structure, as to Sense, unalter'd; as appears when an Extract is drawn out of Rhubarb, or the Juice of Oak-Bark is extracted by Water, the Remain∣ing Substances, tho' as to outward appearance the same,New Qua∣lities may be added upon a Dis∣solution of a Speficick Form. retain not their Specifick Virtues. Besides, upon the Abolition of Specifick Forms, several new Qualities may be added to a Body, which it had not before, by the Influence of ex∣ternal Agents: As when Musk results from the
Action of some External Body upon Flesh: For not only the Seminal Rudiments, latent in Bodies that have undergone a Change, exert them∣selves; but several outward Agents, to which those Bodies are expos'd, do, by agitating and altering the Textures of that Matter, promote such a Favourble concourse of Circumstances, that Noble and very Exquisite Forms, may result from their Union and Contexture. As a Lime-Stone, being Physically chang'd by the Influence of Congruous Particles, when expos'd to the Air, will yield Salt-Petre, genuine and inflam∣mable. And I have often observ'd an Efflore∣scence upon certain Marcasites, agreeable in both Colour and Taste, as well as other Operations, with Vitriol, which could be nothing but the Ef∣fect of outward Agents, changing the Texture of those Parts, which lay open to the Air for some time. The Modi∣difications of a Body may be two∣fold, first in respect of ths Speci∣fick Form, secondly in respect of its own Parts.But to wave there things, I shall illustrate a little further, what I just before hinted concern∣ing a twofold Modification of Matter, viz. the Relation it hath to a Specifick Form, and that which is the meer Result of Texture amongst its own Parts: what I shall offer, is, That some things are attributed to the Soul or Specifick Form, which may be effected by the meer Subor∣dinate Association of Parts, promoted by a mu∣tual Concourse of Natural Agents; as the Ex∣crements may be voided when a Man's dead, or Fruit may be ripen'd after it is gather'd, without the assistance of the Expulsive Faculty of the Soul in the former, or the Perfective in the latter. Agreeable to this, the Inquisitive Oviedo relates a Story to the Emperor Charles the Fifth, of a
Fruit in the West-Indies, call'd Anana's, which are gather'd as soon as One is ripe, the rest being kept in Chambers to acquire Maturity after∣wards. And the Learned Josephus Acosta relates the following Account of the Fruit of a Plane-Tree to the same, viz. That they usually gather it when green, which being laid up in a Vessel mix'd with a certain Herb, gradually ripens. But the Diligent Piso tells a Story, more to our Purpose, of those Brasilian Plants, call'd Pa∣coeira, and Bananiera; for concerning the Fruit he says, Continentur plerumque in Ʋno Ramo, qua∣tuordecem aut sedecem numero, ut it a una Planta, proferat septuaginta aut octuaginta, qui subinde Vi∣rides avulsi, nunc in Aedibus, nunc in Navibus su∣spenduntur, donec justam maturitatem & flavedinem consequantur: And he also says of the Boughs, when lop'd off, Ramus autem ille fructibus onustus, interea dum illi maturescunt, augetur, floresque sem∣per protrudit, ex corpore illo foliceo, &c. And it is not less remarkable, that Onions, and such like Fruit, as well as Potatoes, will shoot of their own accord, tho' suspended in the Air. But not here to take Notice how far these things may result from the Exertion of Latent and Seminal Principles, I shall rather observe, That several things usually ascrib'd to the Soul, may result even from the Texture of the Body, concurring with external Causes; as the Hair, or Nails will grow considerably for a long time, after the Body is dead. A Cessa∣tion of Vi∣tal Functi∣ons upon Death, no Arguments of the Soul's Superinten∣dency whilst living.And tho' by the Espousers of Sennertus his Opinion, the Cessation of the Vital and Animal Functions upon Death, are look'd upon as strong Arguments, That the Soul is the Agent, which
effects whatever is acted in the Body; yet I con∣ceive it depends on somethings very precarious; since notwithstanding what is manifest to us, the Cessation of those Faculties may depend on the in∣ternal Organization, which may in some measure be destroy'd; Since the Body consists of Parts, not only solid, but soft; as the Brain, and also liquid, as the Humours; a right and convenient Coap∣tation of which is required to preserve Life, considerable Changes in the Humours, being e∣nough to obstruct Circulation, on which Life so much depends. Thus in Palsies, tho' there be no visible Change; yet by an Indisposition, either in the Humours or Vessels, the Parts become void of Sense as well as Motion: And even Sleep it self, so alters the Disposition of our Bodies, that Odours and Sounds are not perceiv'd by a sleep∣ing Man, tho' nothing externally obstructs the Operation of the Soul, which lodges in the Bo∣dy; and what considerable Alterations in the Humours may be effected, without our Percep∣tion, may be urg'd, from the Effects which Thun∣der hath upon Wine, in turning it into a Vi∣negar, sower and uninflamable. The former Doctrin of Subordi∣nate Forms, apply'd to Inanimate Bodies.But to render what I have said of Subordinate Forms, more intelligible, I shall lay it down in certain Propositions, without making long and tedious Excursions, applying it chiefly to Inani∣mate Bodies: And first I shall consider, 1. That the signification of the Technical Word Form, is indeterminate; since it is not agreed what is enough to determine, what Forms Bo∣dies are of; it being not only disputed, whether Water, by being froze, loses its Form or not; But further, several Bodies have no particular
Forms assign'd to them; as Ink, Gun-powder, Beer, Coal, &c. Nay, some Bodies consider'd in different Respects, may seem to have more Forms than One, as in Vitrum Saturni, which is made of Lead, it may be doubted, whether it hath the Form of a Metal or Glass; since it hath a great many of the Qualities of Both, as Fusi∣bility, Transparency, and Brittleness; and will, contrary to common Glass, dissolve in Aqua For∣tis, yield a sweet Solution, and may be reduc'd into a Malleable Lead by Fire; so likewise Amel, whose Ingredients are calcin'd Tin, together with Salt and Sand, and some burnt Copper, will again yield most of the same distinct Ingredients; yet the Compound had not all the Properties be∣longing to these Bodies. But, The Noble∣ness of Forms, hard to be distin∣guish'd.II. It is a Matter of Difficulty to determine the Nobleness of Forms. This is not only evident from Examples be∣fore given, but several others; as Glass of An∣timony, is more apt for some uses than Crude An∣timony, and vice versa. Again, it hath been for∣merly a Dispute, and may be a Doubt still, Whe∣ther the Powder resulting from Gold and Silver precipitated, be a Nobler Metal than Gold; of which were a Spagerical Physician, and a Gold∣smith to judge, the Former would value the Powder, as much as the Latter would the Gold. Again, tho' Silver Soder be the Result of Silver, alloy'd with Copper or Brass, and of very great use; yet it may be question'd, whether it is not by that means render'd less valuable. And tho' a Plant be petrify'd, and for that reason valu'd as a Rarity; yet is that New Form in it self less Noble than the former.
The most Noted Qua∣lities of a Body, deno∣minate its Form.III. Tho' several Alterations are made in Bo∣dies, by a Recess or Access of Qualities, yet they retain the same Denomination, and are said to have the same Form, by reason of some Eminent Quality or Use; which is proper to them. For which reason Vitrum Antimonii is call'd so, because it hath the Fusible and Transparent Qualities of Glass; tho' it, in other Respects, besides its Vomitive and Purgative Properties, hath Qualities different from Glass. So all Un∣ctuous Bodies, as Oyl of Almonds, Olives, &c. are call'd Oyls, because Fluid, and not apt to be mix'd with Water; yet there is a great deal of Difference betwixt them, and Empyreu∣matical Oyl of Guajacum or Box: So likewise several Substances of very different Effects, are reckon'd amongst Salts; because they readily dissolve in Water, and are very sapid; so that the Word Form, seems to be apply'd to Bodies on the account of some Metaphysical Conceptions, and in respect of some General Use; rather than Physical Forms, by which Substances of the same Form, are said to be of the same Specifick Nature and Virtue. From whence it may be thought that several Substances are generally Class'd to∣gether, as they are alike States of Matter, rather than agreeable Forms: As Water and Wine may be turn'd into Ice, or Tallow and Mineral Con∣cretes, may become of the number of Substances which constitue Flame. The Acti∣on of seve∣ral Com∣pounds de∣pends on the Union of their Parts.IV. That by Compound Bodies, several Effects will be produc'd, upon the account of the Union and Joynt-Action of their In∣gredients.
These Operations, by the Schools, are said to be done Actione Communi; as when a Man dis∣putes vivâ voce, the Rational Soul concurs with the Vocal Organs, to the Forming of Syllo∣gisms: Or, to use a plainer Instance, as a Bullet acts on a Plane, by Virtue of its whole Specifick Gravity, tho' it touches the Plane but in a Point; the other parts acting on it by the Intervention of that: Or as in a Pair of Scales, the whole Sub∣stance of a Man, and all that he hath about him, presses upon the Scale, tho' he touches it but with his Feet. But to use an Instance of the Con∣current, or Actio Communis, of an Organical Body; the Effects of a Compound Body, are like that of a Watch, where if any Part be wanting, the Complex Action so much depends on the Common, and Joynt-Action of the whole, that the Action of the whole is destroy'd. Inanimate Bodies have Subordi∣nate Forms.V. It is agreeable to Reason, to admit of Sub∣ordinate Forms, in Bodies Inanimate. Against this it is objected, That one Body can∣not have two Forms. To this it may in short be answer'd, That tho' a Body can have no more than one Adaequate Form; yet being a Compound, it may have several, which are Subordinate to, and Parts of that; as the Parts of a Watch have each their own Forms, which are Subordinate to the Form of the whole. A Second Objection is, That a Body having a Compleat Form, whatever is Concurrent to it, makes it Ens per Accidens. To this it may be an∣swer'd, That according to the Schools, the Soul and Body, which have each separately distinct Forms, being joyn'd, make Ʋnum per se, and not per Accidens; and the Rational Faculties, which
are its Accidents, are said to make Ʋnum per se: So that thence, by Parity of Reason, tho' a Con∣geries of Accidents, concur to the Forming of a Body, yet the Operation and Property of the whole United, being one, it may as well be said to be Ʋnum per se. Add to this, that the Peripa∣teticks have not scrupled to teach, That the Forms of Elements, are not destroy'd by being mix'd, yet they hold each of the Bodies made up of them, to be Ʋnum per se. But it may be further answer'd, That tho' a Form be compleat in it self, yet the Form result∣ing from the Union of another with it, may be far more Noble, and perform things much more curious than before: As when Sulphur and Nitre are added to Charcoal; or when a Spring is added to the other Parts of a Watch, where by the Addition of these Forms, the pre-extent are not destroy'd, but improv'd; the whole, in each Composition, making one Compound Form. A Super∣added Form may modify the Actions of Subor∣dinate ones, without de∣styng them.VI. Sometimes a Superadded Form is Acci∣dental to a Pre-existent; yet it modifies the Ope∣rations of it, without altering its Nature. As a Needle, which hath its Form consider'd as Steel, besides its Figure as a Needle, and by being touch'd with a Load-stone, acquires seve∣ral other Properties; as to attract others, and instead of its Indifferency to move any way, re∣gulates its Motion, so as to point North and South; of which Properties it is again depriv'd by being drawn upon the Pole of a powerful Load-stone. But that we may more clearly understand, how a Superadded Form modifies the Actions of a
Body, we need but reflect on the Parts of a Watch, from whence the Forma Totius proceeds; where we may see, how the Spring, by being bent, acquires a Tendency to expand, and how the Wheels moderate that Expansion: From whence we may gather how the Parts of a Body, which united, make the Forma Totius, concur in super∣adding several New Qualities to the whole. So a piece of Lead is Vitrify'd by the Action of the Fire, by which Action the Parts, which before were pliable, become brittle; and being other∣wise rang'd as to Situation, give way to the Rays of Light, and becomes Transparent: And Salt-Petre, by the Addition of Coal and Sulphur, instead of burning by degrees, and leaving an Alkalizate Salt behind it, flashes all away at once. Compound may act by Vir∣tue of one single Ingre∣dient.VII. Besides the Actions of a Body, which are specifick, in respect of the whole; it may have several Operations depending on the se∣parate, and particular Properties of an Ingre∣dient. This may appear from what hath been deli∣ver'd above: But to make it more clear, I shall again intimate, what hath been before deliver'd, viz. That the Parts of a Watch, retain seve∣ral of their Pristine Qualities, when put toge∣ther, as they did before: To which another In∣stance might be added, from what is elsewhere said of Gun-powder. To which it may be added, That several Ingredients in Physical Composi∣tions, retain their own Qualities, tho' the Com∣position hath in General a Particular Effect upon the account of its Mixture. As for Instance, Ambergreece retains its Smell, as well as Aloes its
Taste, when made up into Pills with other Ingre∣gredients; and Opium likewise its Soporifick Qua∣lities, tho' mix'd with so great a number of In∣gredients as those of Venice-Treacle. Another Example we have in the Precipitate of Gold and Mercury by Heat, which tho' it hath a red Colour, different from both the Ingredients, yet the Mercury retains its Salivating Faculty. The most noted often esteem'd the Specifick Form.VIII. That is often call'd the Specifick Form in several Natural Bodies, which is not the Presi∣ding, but only the most Eminent. To prove this, we are to consider, what hath been already observ'd: As First, That the Sig∣nification of the Word Form, is made use of Ar∣bitrarily, and without sufficient Distinction. Se∣condly, That Forms are only Respective, and the Result of a Determinate Coexistence of the Parts of Matter. Thirdly, That they are attributed to Bodies, upon the account of some particular Qualities; as Unctuousness in Oyls, &c. or some particular Use. Pourthly, Agreeably to these, a Body must be endued wich several of those Qua∣lities, upon the Account of which Bodies are re∣ferr'd to different Classes. As in Vitrum Anti∣monii, in which besides those Qualities by which it is referr'd to Glass, it hath a Vomitive and Purgative Faculty, by which it is brought into another Class in Physick. Fifthly, It is not re∣quisite, that these Forms should depend on one another; since neither the Vomitive nor Purga∣tive Faculty depend on the Form of Glass, they both being inherent in the Calx, before it was Vitrify'd, and would be preserv'd, tho' the Glass, without an Addition of other Matter, should be turn'd into a Regulus. Sixthly, To these Obser∣vations,
we may add, That the Qualities of Bo∣dies, are said to be less or more Noble, in respect of their different Uses: As in Glass of Antimony, tho' the Glass may be taken for the Noblest Form by an Artist, yet its other Antimonial Qualities are more Eminent amongst Chymists and Physicians. Seventhly, From these Considera∣tions we may gather, that the most Predomi∣nant Form is not always that which denominates the Form of a Body; but sometimes that which is most Eminent, that is, most regarded. Some are ra∣ther Con∣current Forms, than Subordi∣nate.IX. The Forms just now mention'd, are ra∣ther to be esteem'd Concurrent, than Subor∣dinate. And indeed, where the Denominating, or most regarded Form, may be so vary'd, they ra∣ther seem Concurrent than Subordinate, in respect of the Body, whose Attributes they are. So that the Subjection of some sort of Forms, seems very difficult to be explain'd. And in∣deed we are so apt to mistake Names for Things, since by only denominating some Bodies, which have Particular Operations, we are apt to attri∣bute what is the sole Effect of Modification, to that Metaphysical Conception, which we have of an Aery Form, rather than to the Body consider'd as a Physical Agent, endued with a Mechanical and Adventitious Texture. And it is so far from Appearing that there is any thing of Super∣eminency, or Dominion of one Form in all the Operations of a Compound Body, that in some Simple Bodies, the Specifick Form is not in the least concern'd in the Effects of them; as Water will scald by Virtue of its Adventitious Heat, which is contrary to those Qualities attributed to
its Form as such. And so Springiness may be ad∣ded to, or taken away from Silver, without alter∣ing the Specifick Form of the Metal; nor does the Form of a File, consider'd as Metal, affect what is attributed to it, upon the Account of those Aspe∣rities: Nor is the more than usual Hardness the Product of the Substantial Form, but an acquir'd Temper given it by the Smith. It would be an easy Matter to add several other Instances: But to conclude; Tho' the uncertain Signification of Terms, hath made the Foregoing Discourse the more Difficult and Dark; yet I hope it may serve to detect some receiv'd Errors, and promote a truer Theory concerning these Matters. CHAP. V. Experiments and Thoughts about the Pro∣duction and Reproduction of Forms. Bodies di∣stinguish'd into Spae∣cies how.IT was not without Grounds that I intimated in the preceding Chapter about Qualities, that Bodies are in a great measure distinguished into several Species by a sort of Tacit Agree∣ment; there being as yet, no Diagnosticks suf∣ficient to distinguish the several Species of things, but they are rather taken for distinct Species, by being known by such Names, than any true Characteristicks. As for instance, some well skill'd in the Writings of Aristotle, hold, that Water and Ice are not esteemed distinct Kinds
of Bodies, they both having the same Nature; yet Galen not without Reason, favours the con∣trary Opinion, since they differ both in respect of Fluidity and Firmness, as well as Transpa∣rency: Besides, Ice and Salt beaten together, will freeze other Liquors, whereas Water and Salt will not; where there seems to be diffe∣rence enough to denominate them Two distinct Species of Bodies, as well, as that Must, Vine∣gar, Wine, Spirit of Wine or Tartar, should be esteemed so; or that a Chick should be thought different from the Egg which was hatched. Yet some Aristotelians have been ve∣ry doubtful whether the Natures of them be different or not, as also whether Clouds, Hail▪ Rain or Snow differ in Specie from Water▪ tho' the Writers concerning Meteors usly treat of them as different. And if so small an Accident as Mo o whatever distinguishes Wind and Exhala is enough to entitle them to distinct Species of Bodies, a Greater Right may be presumed  Paper and Rags, Glass and Wood-Ashes, should be esteemed so too; as also Soap, Sugar, Gun∣powder, &c. For it is not a sufficient Objection that most of these Bodies are Factitious; for the present state of a Body, denominates its Species, however it came by that Nature; as the Salt which is made in the Isle of Man, by the Sun acting upon the Sea-water, is as much Salt, as that which is artificially made by the Heat of the Fire, by boiling Sea-Water in Chaul∣drons; and Silk-Worms and Chickens hatched by the heat of Ovens or Dunghils, are equally as much Silkworms or Chickens, as those pro∣duced
by the heat of the Sun, or warmth of a Hen. The Pro∣ducts of Art, the Effects of Nature.Besides, the Objection, that most of the fore∣mentioned Bodies are Factitious, is less va∣lid, since they seem equally performed by Na∣ture, the Artificer being only concerned in putting Natural Agents together, which take the same Measures in causing their Effects, as if they had casually been brought together by Chance: As in Chymistry, the Agent which is Fire, operates upon the Subjects it hath to work upon as Fire, and not as it is barely an Instru∣ment of a Chymist; and therefore tho' the Ap∣plication belongs to the Chymist, the Action is as much Natural, as the Productions of Aetna or Vesuvius; where by the internal Action of the Fire, Stones are Calcined, and Metals not only colliquated, but Metalline Flowers and Ashes dispersed about the adjacent Parts. And I am not without Probability inclined to believe, that several Minerals as well as o∣ther Bodies, which lie near the Center of the Earth, are rather the Productions of Subterra∣neal Fires, changing the Textures of other Bo∣dies than that they have lodged there, since the first Creation of things; for we see, that Lead becomes Minium, and Tin Tutty, in a very small time, and the Fumes of Sulphur, u∣niting with those of Mercury, convene into that delicate red Mass called Vermilion, which hath so far the similitude of a Mineral, that it hath been called by the same Name of Cin∣nabaris: So that we may easily conceive, how in the Bowels of the Earth, certain Mineral Fumes penetrating and uniting with a stony Concre∣tion,
Minerals may be formed: From whence it may appear, that a Congeries and Union of Accidents, is as sufficient to discriminate the several Species of Bodies, as the imagination of Substantial Forms. The Arti∣ficial Pro∣duction of Vitriol, cor∣respondent to the Na∣tural.But to illustrate the Mechanical Origin of Forms, we may take notice of the Artificial Production of Vitriol, which is so like the Na∣tural, that it makes us able to guess what Mea∣sures are taken in the Natural Production of it. And since Vitriol is not a meer Salt, but rather (to use a Chymical Term) a Magestery, it is requisite to observe, that according to the sense of that Word, it is not prepared by a Se∣paration of Principles, but by the changing the Form of a whole Body, by an Addition and intimate Union of a Saline Menstruum: A∣greeable to which Notion it is to be noted, that an Acid Spirit, and a Metalline Substance, may be drawn as well from Artificial as Natu∣ral Vitriol; and consequently both must be e∣qually natural Vitriols in the strict sense of that Word. But these are not the only Characteristicks of the Natural Agreement of Factitious and Natural Vitriol; since Vitriol of Mars, whe∣ther prepared by Oyl of Vitriol or Spirit of Salt, hath both the Colour, Transparency, Brittleness, aptness to Fusion, and Styptical Taste, with the Vitriol of Marchasites; as also several other Qualities, as to turn an Infusion of Galls into Ink; a Vomitive Faculty, when taken in a small Dose; as also to be endowed with Crystals of very Curious Figures, and a Dis∣position to run per Deliquium, as Guntherus
Belichius hath observed common Vitriol made use of in Germany to have. And here we see, that the same Qualities may arise from the Union and Association of Two Ingredients, which are to be found in Common Vitriol; without the Incomprehensible force of Imaginary Substantial Forms, or a Generation of a Form distinct from the Ingredients and their Essential Modification; or a Texture of Parts of convenient Shapes and Sizes: Neither is there such an Intimate Mixture, as the Schools imagine, of these Two Ingredients, but a Juxta-Position and new ranging of their Parts in respect of Order and Position: Which is e∣vident, since by Distillation the greatest part of the Vitriol may be drawn off, leaving the Metalline Substance behind; and that most of its Qualities depend upon the Position of its Parts is plain, since through a good Burning Glass, the Sun Beams will so alter their Order and Texture as to turn it red.
CHAP. VI. Doubts and Experiments, concerning the Cu∣rious Figures of Salts. The Figures of Salts to be account∣ed for, with the help of a Plastick Power.THO' I am not willing to acquiesce in the Doctrin of Substantial Forms, since to me they are Incomprehensible; Yet I am as forward to own, That I acknowledge the Admirable Wis∣dom of our CREATOR no less, because He hath thought fit that the Changes and Altera∣tions in Matter, should depend on Accidents easy and intelligible, at least with less Difficulty to be conceiv'd, than the incomprehensible Doctrin of Substantial Forms: And tho' the Curious and Delicate Shapes of Salts, be Generally us'd as Ar∣guments of the Great Plastick Skill of Substantial Forms; yet I must own, I think them very slight things, compar'd with Organiz'd Bodies; and therefore I would not have it inferr'd, That be∣cause the Figures of Salts may be accounted for, without the Assistance of Plastick Powers, that therefore the Bodies of Animals may. That Substantial Forms are not necessary to the Production of those Curious Figures in Salts, I am induc'd to believe; First, Because a Concrete of no less Curious Figured Parts, than other Vitriols may be made by a bare Connection of Metalline and Saline Bodies. Secondly, because according to the different Quantities of Liquor, or the space of Time they shoot in, their Figures vary: Accord∣ing to which Agricola, lib. 12. p. 462. de re Me∣tallica, speaking of the Cords that are immerg'd
into Vitriol-Water, for the Crystals to stick to, says, Ex his pendent restes lapillis extentae, à quo Humor spissus adhaerescens densatur, in translucentes atramenti sutorii, vel cubos vel acinos, qui Ʋvae spe∣ciem gerunt. Crystals ob∣tain'd from an Alkaly.I remember also, that having a long time thought that the Method usually taken in pre∣paring Alkalyes, such as Salt of Tartar, &c. was the reason, why they are gather'd in the Form of Calx; I took care to dissolve Alkalyes well pu∣rify'd in Water, slowly evaporating it, till crusted over, with an Icy Crust; which being preserv'd entire, lest they should want a suffi∣cient quantity of Liquor, to give them liberty to move, in order to their more Curious and Con∣gruous Coalitions, I continued them in a mo∣derate Heat for some time, and then breaking the Crust, I had a variety of figur'd Lumps of Crystalline Salt; transparent, and not much un∣like white Sugar-Candy. From Oyl of Vitriol, and a Solution of Sea Salt.Likewise having several times distill'd Oyl of Vitriol, and a strong Solution of Sea-Salt to∣gether, till the Matter left behind was dry; that Salt Substance, when dissolv'd in Water, filtrated and evaporated, would shoot into Salts, of Figures differenr, according to the various Proportions of the Ingredients; yet nevertheless tho' sometimes in the same Glass the Salts would be of different Figures; yet would they be more exquisitely figur'd, than those of Vitriol often are. And from a Mixture of Spirit of Wine, and Spirit of Nitre, digested long together,From a Mixture of Spirit of Wine, and Nitre. I have got Crystals much like in shape to Crystals of Salt-Petre; and I have obtain'd Plates of Crystals, made up of solids, very curiously shaped,
and so congruously adapted, as to make a very plain Surface, much different from what I have elsewhere mention'd from a Solution of Silver in Aqua fortis, or Spirit of Nitre; when I have order'd it so, that it should shoot leisurely. Thirdly, I have several ways made it appear, That Insensible Parts of Matter of various, tho' very curious Shapes, guarded with plain as well as smooth sides, will convene into Bodies diffe∣rently shap'd. And tho' Blood, Urine, and Hart's-Horn, might probably have their Sub∣stantial Forms destroy'd by the Fire; yet foras∣much as the Saline Parts, with which they are im∣pregnated, are of the Figures just now men∣tion'd, in the Liquors they have been expos'd, to shoot leasurely; I have observ'd several Masses, the surface of some of which were Plains, very curious and delightful, and the Figures of others exactly Geometrical: And stillatious Acids, as well as the Bodies they are appropriated to dis∣solve into Crystals variously figur'd, according to the Nature of the Menstruum, or the Bodies it works upon; as I have experienc'd with a Men∣struum which would dissolve Gems, and likewise with Coral dissolv'd in Spirit of Verdigreece: For which Reason, when I try'd whether the Shapes of the Particles of Silver, dissolv'd in Aqua fortis, would dispose them,Salts ob∣tain'd from a Solution of Copper. without a Coagulation with Salts, to shoot into smooth and flat Concretions; I observ'd, that Part of the Solution being di∣luted with distill'd Rain-water, and a Copper-Plate immers'd in the Liquor, after it had re∣main'd there a while, Clusters of Metalline Bo∣dies, devoid of Transparency settled about it, joyn'd together in Plates very thin, yet very
glossy and flat, the Edges of the largest, being prettily shaped. From Gold.And that the Particles of Gold are apt enough to associate with Congruous Salts, and to com∣pose Bodies of determinate sizes, I have ob∣serv'd in Crystals, afforded me by Gold, dissolv'd in Aqua Regis, and being preserv'd in a cold place, till the superfluous Moisture was evaporated: And from the Parts of Gold divided by a stronger Menstruum, so minutely as to be capable of be∣ing sublim'd, I have obtain'd Crystals much of the same shape, tho' different in size from one another. And I remember, having long since dissolv'd several Saline Bodies together in Water, by a gentle Evaporation, they have yielded Con∣cretes, different in shape from each of the Ingre∣dients; but it oftentimes is very difficult to asso∣ciate them, because some are dispos'd to Cry∣stallize sooner than others: As may be observ'd in purifying Barbary Nitre, from the common Salt it is mix'd with; and as Agricola, lib. 12. de re Metallica, takes Notice, where a Vitriolate Substance, and that from whence Allom is drawn, are joyn'd together; yet Venetian Borax,Crystals ob∣tain'd from Venetian Borax. tho' made up of several Salts, yields Crystals of very Regular and Geometrical Figures: And the Ca∣put Mortuum of common Aqua fortis, which con∣sists of Bodies disagreeable in Nature, by fre∣quent Solutions and Coagulations of their Saline Parts, yield Salts of very curious Figures, as Tri∣angles, Rhomboids, Hexagons, Prisms, and Py∣ramids, compos'd of several Triangles, meeting in a Vertical Point, and as curiously shap'd as Cornish Diamonds.
But the Acquisition of new Shapes, by being compounded, is not only practicable in these Grosser, but even in Chymical Salts, which affect one another, with an Ebullition; because in that Conflict, the Volatile Spirits unite and lose much of their Force; so that being less apt to fly away upon Evaporation,Salts ob∣tain'd from Spirit of Urine, and Nitre, &c. they form curiously shap'd Crystals; as I have Experienc'd with Spirit of Urine and Spirit of Nitre, Spirit of Sheeps Blood and of Salt, Spirit of Nitre and Oyl of Vitriol, and likewise with Spirit of Salt and Spi∣rit of Urine; the last of which shews, how much Compound Figures are owing to the Union of the Particles of the Ingredients, of which they are compos'd; the Spirit of Ʋrine and Salt, afford∣ing Concretes different from those of Oyl of Vi∣triol and Spirit of Ʋrine; the shape of the first being like that of a Comb, whose Teeth stand out on each side; or like a Feather, the Crystals on each side being so much inclin'd: Crystals of a like Figure to which,From Soot and Sal Armoniack. arise from a just Propor∣tion of Soot dissolv'd, and coagulated with com∣mon Sal Armoniack. Fourthly, To confirm what I have above de∣liver'd concerning the Origin of Vitriol; and also to make it appear, That the Figure of its Parts depends on the Texture of its Ingredients, I shall add another Particular, which is, That having compar'd the Composition of Artificial Vitriol, I thought it might reasonably be rank'd under the same Species with the Natural: To which I shall subjoyn, that having also consider'd, that Oyl of Vitriol, and Spirit of Salt, were improper Men∣struums to dissolve several Metals, I made use of Aqua fortis, which with Copper, made a Curious
Vitriol; and with Silver, it afforded Crystals shoot∣ing into thin Plates; and with Lead and Quick Silver, it yielded Crystals far more thick, and dif∣ferently shap'd from each other. Now if from hence it appears, That the Cu∣rious Figures of Salts, generally alledg'd as Ar∣guments of the Necessity of Substantial Forms, de∣pend meerly upon Texture; why may not the more Ordinary Phaenomena of Nature, since it is manifest that Matter, and a Congeries of Acci∣dents, are sufficient to account for what is usually attributed to Imaginary Forms? Neither can I see Reason, why Arguments grounded on the Qua∣lities and Effects of Bodies, esteem'd factitious, may not be sufficient to shew us, what may be ascrib'd to the Mechanical Affections of the univer∣sal Mass of Matter; since it is not agreed how fa∣ctitious shall be distinguish'd from that Species of Body, call'd The Productions of Nature. In fa∣vour of which Gun-Powder is no despicable In∣stance; where by a bare Mixture of Nitre,The Ingre∣dients of Gun Pow∣der. Char∣coal, and Sulphur, without the least shadow for the Pretence of a Substantial Form, a Body is produc'd, of Effects more prodigious, than any of Nature's Production: Nor can Nature pro∣duce a more Noble Concrete than Glass, which is but the Product of Matter, brought together by Art; where in less than an Hour, an Opaque Body becomes transparent, and acquires several other Qualities, for as much as appears to Sense, with∣out the Addition of any other Body; which yet by another change, in a trice, may make a Sub∣stance not Glassy, but Opacous. Substan∣tial Forms not necessa∣ry to Dis∣criminate Bodies.Nay, the Aristotelians themselves allow, That there may be slight Changes in Matter, so as to
distinguish Genus's, without an Introduction of Substantial Forms; as in Coral, which in the bot∣tom of the Sea is tender, and grows like a Plant, yet when harden'd in the Air, it is by several Eminent Writers, class'd amongst Stones: And indeed, its Calx is very much unlike the Ashes of Plants, being apt to be corroded by Vinegar, as Lapis Stellaris, and several other Mineral Stones are. And a thing equally to be admir'd, is to be seen in Sombrero, an Island in the East-Indies, near Sumatra, according to Sir James Lancester; who relates a Story of a Worm, which is trans∣form'd into a Tree; and that again into a Stone, much like white Coral: And Piso, in his History of Brasil, vouches many Witnesses for the Trans∣formation of Animals like Grass-hoppers, into Ve∣getables. Likewise Michael Boym, a Jesuit, af∣firms, That he saw in the Island Hainan, in China, Crabs, which pull'd as out of the Water, were im∣mediately petrify'd. But, Pyrophilus, that I may draw to a Conclu∣sion, I shall only further add, to what hath gone before,Oyl of Vi∣triol turn'd into Allom. that Remarkable Experiment of Hel∣mont's, which is that Oyl of Vitriol may be turn'd into Allom, by the Fumes of Mercury: To which may be added another Instance, presented us in the Production of Salt-Petre: For if on the white Salt, afforded by Solution of Pot-Ashes, Spirit of Nitre be pour'd,Salts ob∣tain'd from Spirit of Nitre and Pot. Ashes. till they cease to ferment, that Mixture will yield Crystals endued both with the Shape, and other Qualities of Nitre.
CHAP. VII. Experimental Attempts concerning the Re∣dintegration of Bodies. HAving already to confirm the Origin of Forms, as intimated in our Hypothesis, al∣ledged the Measures taken in the Productions of Forms, I now proceed to illustrate it from their Reproduction, which might prove the stronger Argument of the Two, could it be clearly made out; because to Re-produce a Body, whose Substantial Form hath been destroyed, may argue, that a Form is only a Modification of the Parts of Matter of which a Body is com∣posed, in such order in reference to each o∣ther, as is requisite to produce such Properties: Whereas were those Parts otherwise placed, they would make up a Body of a different Nature; which would be again of the nature of the for∣mer were the Parts of which it consists associated in their former Order. But tho' an Adaequate Redintegration of Bo∣dies Chymically Analized were impossible, by Reason of some Dissipated Parts; yet such a one as is possible, may be sufficient to our Pur∣pose; which is the Experiment concerning the Reproduction of Salt-Petre. But Experimental Attempts of this kind being very difficult, all that I shall do at the present, is, to represent that Difficulty. And
An At∣tempt to re-unite the Parts of Amber.First, we shall do it by relating our Suc∣cess in an Attempt to dissipate and re-unite the Parts of common Amber; for having put Four or Five Ounces of Amber into a Glass Retort, by a gentle Heat it began gradually to melt and bubble; and after the Operation was ended, we found in the Receivers half the weight of the Amber, consisting of a Mixture of Volatile Salt, Spirit, Phlegm and Oyl; and in the bottom of the broken Retort, we found a Cake of Matter very black, yet so smooth, that nothing could be finer Polished; so that it might very well have supplied the place of a Looking-Glass; which, when it was broke, the Fragments were accompanied with a more than ordinary Lustre. All which divided Parts of Amber be∣ing mix'd in a Glass Body, to which a Blind Head was luted, and placed in Sand, the Fire being by Accident increased, the Fumes raised the Vessel out of the Sand, which falling, the Top of it was broke, by striking against the side of the Furnace, and the Fumes flew away. The remaining Matter was very like Tarre, but would not Tincture Spirit of Wine; tho' with Oyl of Turpentine, it would make a Blood-Red Balsom. The whole Process be∣ing again renewed, and some Accidents hap∣pening, we could not finish the Experi∣ment. An At∣tempt to re-unite the Parts of Roch-Al∣lom.But notwithstanding the Difficulty of Tryals of this kind, having once drawn what Quan∣tity I could of Phlegm and Spirit from Roch Al∣lom, and poured it again upon the Caput Mor∣tuum, after some time, some Parts were so as∣sociated again, as to form several curiously figur'd
Crystals:An At∣tempt to re-unite the Parts of Vitriol. And though Vitriol may seem a Body unapt for such Experiments, yet I once drew from blew Vitriol a Phlegm and Spirit together, with a heavy Oyl, which be∣ing divided into several Parts, the red Caput Mortuum was divided into an equal Number, one part of each of which being mixed over Night, in the Morning I found several Grains of pure Vitriol upon the Surface of the Matter; which I again found upon the Mixture of an∣other part of the Powder and Liquor, only more in Quantity; and this Experiment was also confirm'd by a Third Tryal. As also of Antimony and Oyl of Vitriol.To these I shall add, what happened upon the digestion of powdered Antimony, with a double quantity of Oyl of Vitriol: For having drawn from it a little Liquor, together with a considerable Quantity of combustible Antimo∣nial or Antimonio-Vitriolate Sulphur, the Caput Mortuum remaining in the Report was light and friable, and upon the upper part white like common Wood-Ashes; the rest being like a Cinder. Whereupon we exposed it to the Fire, in a Retort of Glass well Coated, and fitted with a Receiver; and after some time separating the Vessels, we found very little Sulphur sublimed; and not the least Antimonial Quicksilver, but the Caput Mortuum was united into a Mass of black Antimony, covered over with white transparent Glass. From whence we may infer, that Antimony generally abounds with more Sulphur than is requisite to consti∣tute that Mineral; though in this Experiment we might suspect, that part of it was turned
into Glass, by the Loss of the Sublimed Sul∣phur. Another to re-unite the Parts of Vitriol.But amongst all my Experiments of the Re∣dintegration of Bodies, the following was the most successful; for having distilled from se∣veral Ounces of Turpentine in a Glass Retort, a considerable Quantity of Transparent Li∣quor, and a dry brittle Caput Mortuum, I re∣duced the Caput Mortuum into Powder, which by that means was turned from a Red, to a pure Yellow Colour; and being mixed with the Liquor, was formed into a Red Balsam; which, by a continued Digestion, began to lose that Colour, so that the Powder being wholly dissolved, it could not be distinguished from Laudable Turpentine. CHAP. VIII. Experiments concerning the Origin of Qua∣lities and Forms. HAving in some of the foregoing Chap∣ters, given a short Scheme of the Princi∣ples of the Corpuscularian Philosophy, for the better understanding our Experiments concern∣ing the Productions and Changes of Particular Qualities, I shall now lay down such Natural Phaenomena as induced me to take up such Notions, in which, not Art but Nature disco∣vers her Operations.
EXPERIMENT I. An Experi∣ment to il∣lustrate what hath been deli∣vered con∣cerning Forms and Qualities.The First I shall begin with is, what occurs in hatching of an Egg. And. First, we are to consider, that in a Prolifick Egg, by the same Reason, that Bones and Mem∣branes are called Similar Parts of an Animal; the Liquor of the Yolk, as well as the White, is to Sense, a Similar Substance, though by Di∣stillation several Substances may be drawn from them. Secondly, That by beating the White of an Egg well, it loses much of its Tenacity, and becomes a fluid Body; in which Agitation, there is only a Mechanical Alteration of the Texture of the Body. Thirdly, That the Rudiments of the Chick, lodged in the Cicatricula, are nourished only by the White, till it becomes a great Chick; the Yolk being reserved as a stronger Nourishment, till the White is spent, and the Chick is able to di∣gest it; and in effect the Chick seems to be fur∣nish'd with Head, Wings, Beak and Claws, before the Yolk is touched. Lastly, It is not a little to be admired that so Soft and Similar a Liquor as that of an Egg, should be in so short a time, changed into a Chick, endowed with Organical Parts of dif∣ferent Fabricks; and Similar ones different in Texture very much from one another; be∣sides the Liquors contained in the Solid Parts, being as different as the former, and endow∣ed
First, With new Qualities, as Colour, Taste, Odours, Heat, Hardness, &c. Secondly, Quali∣ties distinct from Sensible ones, as Fludity, Con∣sistency, Hardness and Flexibility, &c. Thirdly, Occult Qualities, as when Birds or Parts of An∣nimals, afford Specifick Medicines, or at least most Noble ones. But Fourthly, since some may Object, that these Parts are formed by the Plastick Power of the Soul, and that a Chick is not a Mechanically contrived Engine, we are to consider, that let the Plastick Principle be what it will, yet still, being a Physical Agent, it must act after a Physi∣cal manner; and having no other Matter to work upon, but the White of the Egg, it can work upon that Matter but as Physical Agents, and consequently can but divide the Matter into Minute Parts of several Sizes and Shapes, and by local Motion so variously contex them, as is requisite to produce an Animal of this or that Species; though from so many various Textures of the Parts formed, there must na∣turally arise such different Colours, Tastes and Consistencies, and other Qualities, as we have taken Notice of: For we are not here to con∣sider so much, what is the Agent or Efficient in these Productions, but after what manner the Matter they are made of, is affected in producing them: To illustrate which, we may observe, that a Man who is to frame a Build∣ing, or some curious Engine, though he may by the help of Reason and Art, skillfully con∣trive his Materials, yet he can but move, di∣vide, transpose and contex the several Parts, in∣to which he reduces the Matter assigned.
And that the Soul of a Hen, does not any more contribute to the forming of a Chick, is plain; fince we are assur'd, that multitudes of Eggs may be hatch'd meerly by the regulated Heat, either of Ovens, or Dunghills: Whence it easily ap∣pears, That the Plastick Power, no otherwise contributes to the Formation of a Chick, than by guiding the Parts of the White, put into Motion by the external Heat; so, that they may asso∣ciate after a manner necessary to produce an Or∣ganical Chick. EXPERIMENT II. Water may, by altering its Texture, put on New Forms. Water, tho' a Homogeneous, Diaphanous, Fluid Body, devoid of Colour, Taste and Smell, &c. may, by altering the Texture of its Parts, acquire Attributes different from these: This is evident, in the Growth of Vegetables, when nourish'd even by simple Water, in Bottles; where I have observ'd, that Crows-foot, after six Months Growht, weigh'd above three times as much as before it was put in. But not only Crows-foot, but several other Plants, owe their Substance to the Particles of Water, alter'd in Texture, as Spear∣mint, Marjorane, Raphanus Aquaticus, and Ra∣nunculus: From whence we may infer, that the same Particles of Matter which compose Water, may, by having their Parts differently modify'd, produce several Concretes, endu'd with different Qualities, as Firmness, Volatility, Colours, Smell, and Taste; together with other Specifick or Occult Qualities: Yet it is to be admir'd, that so insipid a Body as Water, should be converted into a Juice so caustick, as that of Ranunculus, or
one so inflammable as Oyl, which may be drawn by Distillation from Plants, only nourish'd in Bottles. OBSERVATION III. All Plants may be nou∣rish'd by one and the same Sub∣stance.It is usually believ'd, That Plants by the Fa∣culties of a Vegetative Soul, select and suck in a Juice, appropriated to each; rather than that they are all nourish'd by one Juice differently modify'd in that Plant: But the Latter will ea∣sily appear, if we consider, what happens in Grafting and Inoculations; for if a Pear-Tree be Grafted into a White-Thorn, the Aliment suck'd in by that Root, will be so alter'd, as to yield Nourishment to a Pear; Fruit much diffe∣rent from that of the White-Thorn: The same is evident in Inoculations, where the Sap, selected by the Root, is so alter'd in the Bud inoculated, that the same Sap, which in the Genuine Branches of the Tree, constitutes one sort of Fruit, is turn'd into another, in those springing from the inoculated Bud. And here it is further Re∣markable, That not only the same Juice yields various sorts of Substances in different Plants, but even in the same Tree; where the Skin of the Fruit differs from its Flesh, and that from the Stone, and all of them from the Substance of the Tree; not only in Colour, but several other Qualities; as the Blossoms of a Peach, have a Purgative Virtue, which is not in the Fruit: And Garcias ab Horto affirms, That the Seeds of so∣lutive Cassia fistula, are Astringent: An Account not unlike to which we have of certain Kernels of a Fruit, much like a White Pear-Plum, by
Mr. Lygon, in his History of Barbados, p. 67, 68. Five of which work'd a dozen times upwards with him, and twenty times by Stool; yet by taking away a thin Film, which divides the Ker∣nel into halves, the Nut is as sweet as a Jordan Almond, and has no sensible Operation: Which Relation is also favour'd by Monardes, under the Title of Fabae Purgatrices, where he speaks of a Purgative Fruit, brought from America, from Carthagena, and also from Nombre de Dios. And Vincent le Blank, in his Survey of the World, p. 260. Part. 2. gives an Account of a Golden Apple, as bitter as Gall, containing Five Kernels, of an equal Bigness with Almonds, whose Juice is sweet; and he also relates, That of a thick Film, which encompasses the Nut in the Shell, they prepare an Excellent Sweet-Meat. OBSERVATION IV. Further In∣stances in Cheese.We have also an Instance, how Matter may be alter'd, by a Variation of its Texture in Rotten Cheese; which differs from the Sound, both in Colour, Taste, Smell, and Consistence. In which likewise, by a good Microscope, we may per∣ceive Clusters of Animals, endu'd with Parts very differently modify'd, and Qualities little diffe∣rent from Occult ones.
CHAP. IX. A Continuation of Experiments concerning Forms and Qualities. EXPERIMENT I. MIX a convenient Quantity of Camphire, grosly beaten, with Oyl of Vitriol, and when it begins to dissolve, and, by shaking the Glass, to mix with the Oyl, it will first tinge it with a Yellow, and afterwards a Colour not much different from Red; which Tincture will be so deep, as to render the Clear Oyl Opacous. And from the Ingredients perfectly mix'd, if in just Proportion, may be obtain'd a Liquor void of a Camphire Smell; yet by the sole Addition of Fair Water, the Mixture will become Pale, and the Camphire will again associate, and form a floating Combustible Body as before dissolv'd, and renew its Odour. Several Phaenome∣na the Re∣sult of a Change in Texture.From the Phaenomena of this Experiment, may be drawn several Instances to our Purpose. I. That a Light Body reduc'd into Parts, con∣veniently Figur'd, may be mix'd with a Body heavier than it self; so that Gold, the heaviest of Bodies, may float in a Liquor, if its Parts be dissolv'd, and render'd minute enough by Aqua Regis. From which two Observations we may Learn; That the Textures of Bodies, as well as the Rules of Hydrostaticks, are concern'd in determining, whether Bodies will sink or swim.
II. That several Colours may be produc'd, by a Mixture of a Colourless Liquor, and a White Concrete. III. That those Colours may again be de∣stroy'd, and the former renew'd by Water, which can neither afford the Colour it reduces Camphire to, nor destroy that of the Liquor. IV. That a Light Body emerges out of one much lighter, which did not in a heavier Li∣quor, which the Mixture was before the Addi∣tion of Water; which may be an Argument a∣gainst the Schools concerning Mistion; since some of them assert, That, in Mistion, the Ele∣ments depose their own Forms, and put on new; whereas the Camphire had not its Form destroy'd throughout the Process; but still retain'd its own Qualities in a Disposition to be again united. V. It is to be admir'd, That Odours should depend on so slight a Texture, that Camphire, by a bare Separation of its Parts, should lose its Scent, and upon the Mixture of a Body void of Odour, should again recover its Smell; and that so slight a Texture, as that of the Oyl and Cam∣phire, should, as to Sense, wholly for a time alter the Qualities of the Latter: And that several of the preceding Phaenomena, are caus'd by the Par∣ticular Texture of the Liquors, made use of to exhibit them, is manifest, because if Camphire be cast into Spirit of Nitre, well dephlegm'd, it will not afford those Phaenomena, which it does with Oyl of Vitriol. And when to the Red Mixture, above-mention'd, two or three parts of Spirit of Wine, were added instead of Water, no such Changes succeeded; but the whole Mixture, with its Accidental Colour, was dissolv'd by it, being
in Colour much like Red Turbid Wine: So that the Colour of the Mixture was wholly owing to the Mixture of the Oyl and Camphire, and de∣pended on their Union; which is further con∣firm'd, because when we added a sufficient quan∣tity of Water to that Turbid Liquor, it presently depos'd its Colour; and the Particles of Cam∣phire immediately emerged in the Form of a white Powder. But there are other Phaenomena, which by a pro∣secution of this Experiment, the Mixture afforded us: For, VI. Having kept the Mixture moderately warm in a Glass Retort, and distill'd it; the Li∣quor drawn off had a Smell, unlike both that of the Camphire, and also that of the Mixture: And the Ingredients united in this Mixture, were both. Transparent, in the Sense that Fluid and Solid Bodies contus'd are said to be so; yet the Re∣maining Mass, not only became Opacous, but of a very Black Colour: some Parts of it, being not unlike polish'd Jets; which is the more Re∣markable, because Camphire Chimically handled, usually ascends in White Flowers, leaving behind them a Caput Mortuum of an Agreeable Colour. VII. The last Phaenomenon this Mixture afforded us was, That tho' Camphire be a Body very much dispos'd to dissipate, and fly away; yet by the Association of the Oyl, it might be kept together, so that the Caput Mortuum above-nam'd, was able to endure a pretty hot Fire in the Retort, before it was reduc'd to that Pitchy Substance, lately taken Notice of: And further it was Remark∣able, That Part of the Substance being taken out of the Retort, and kept in a Red-hot Crucible
for half an Hour, it afforded a considerable quan∣tity of Black Brittle Matter, without the least Smell of Camphire: Fixedness and Volatility are so much vary'd by Texture. EXPERIMENT II. Diversities of Qualities depend on Variety of Textures.Amongst the various Experiments, which might be produc'd to prove, That the Diversity of Qualities depends on the various Alterations of Texture; I shall instance those afforded me in Copper and Silver, by the Intervention of Sublimate; where we shall have a Considerable Number of Changes, made by the Recess, Ad∣dition, and Trasposition of the Insensible Parts of Matter. First then, Having put a Pound of Venetian Sublimate, grosly beaten, into a Glass Retort; we threw in Copper Plates, an Inch broad, and about as thick as a Grain of Wheat; so that the Ascending Fumes, might by Compulsion act on the incumbent Metal: Which being done, we plac'd the Retort in a Sand Furnace; and having adapted a small Receiver, we continu'd a Gra∣dual Fire, for seven or eight Hours; and at the last increas'd it to a considerable degree, which was as high, as the Furnace would permit: The Effects of which Operation were the following. 1. Very little Liquor was carry'd over into the Receiver, but about ten Ounces of Sublimate was crusted over the Neck of the Retort: The Retort contain'd two Ounces and a Quarter of Running Mercury; and what was to be admir'd was, the Acid Spirit, uniting with the Copper, left the Mercury unaffected.
2. When the Fire was increas'd, the Matter, beginning to Melt in the Retort, made a Noise not unlike to Vitriol, when brought to a Fusion, in a Calcining Pot: which Circumstance con∣stantly accompany'd this Experiment; whereas the same Experiment being again try'd, we scarce could find either in the Retort, or Receiver, the least Running Mercury. 3. The Lump of Metal in the Retort, was heavier by more than two Ounces; some of the Plates being too thick, and yet retaining their Shape and Malleableness; the others, being chan∣ged into a Brittle Lump, like a piece of good Benjamin, which, when broke, was of divers Co∣lours, and almost Transparent. 4. But this Lump, being divided into smaller Pieces, and expos'd to the Air in white Paper, in a Night's Time it was Colour'd like Verdigreese on the out-side; which by its longer continuance in the Air, penetrated deeper; yet the Paper which it stain'd, was ting'd with a Green, inclining to Yellow. And here we may take Notice of the strange Subtlety of the Air, which alter'd some of these Fragments so, that they were cover'd over with a Powder, like Vi∣ride aeris, notwithstanding they were shut up in a close Box. 5. Here I shall observe, That several Copper Plates, off which Sulphur had been drawn, had not their Shapes alter'd in the least; but were colour'd over with a white Silver colour, which penetrated the whole Substance of them, being much more glorious within, than on the Surface of the Metal: so that we suspected the Sublimate to be adulterated with Arsenick; but that it re∣tain'd
its Malleableness; which Arsenick usually takes away. 6. We thought it more considerable, because the Venus of the Copper was so unlock'd, that the fore∣mention'd Transparent Substance, would melt like Rosin, and burn with a lasting Flame, if laid on a Red-burning Coal, or held to a Candle, much like the Flame of Sulphur, only more Green. To these Phaenomena, afforded by Sublimate and Copper, I shall joyn some, observ'd in the like Experiment, with Sublimate and Silver. We put ten thin Silver Plates into a well-coated Retort, with double the weight of Subli∣mate upon it, which when Sublim'd, the Subli∣mate ascended into the Neck of the Retort; in which was to be found several Portions of Re∣viv'd Mercury: In the bottom of the Retort was a Lump of Matter, which could scarce be separated from the Glass, but was brittle and of a Pale Yellow, and much of the same weight with the Metal. In the middle of the Lump, were contain'd pieces of Silver very brittle, but not totally dissolv'd: This Rosin, as that of Cop∣per, when moisten'd by the Air, was in 24 Hours cover'd over with a Greenish Dust; but whe∣ther it were the Result of Sublimate working on the Copper, which Silver is generally alloy'd with, or on the Compound Metal, I will not dare to determine: Yet it is usual for Painters to make a sine kind of Azure of Silver, by corroding it with Saline Bodies: All that I shall add to be observ'd in this our First Tryal, is that this Rosin, when cast upon hot Coals, continu'd flaming for a considerable Time, the Colour of the Flame be∣ing very like that of Copper.
But for a Second Experiment, we made use of an Ounce of Refiu'd Silver Laminated, and cast upon double its quantity of Sublimate; which, by the violent Force of the Fire, being partly melted, we found in the Retort a Lump of Matter, which in some places next the Glass, was cover'd with a thin Plate of Silver, the remaining part of the Metal, (except some small pieces) being dissolv'd into a Substance, neither like Silver, nor any other Metal or Mineral. In which process it is strange, that so fix'd a Metal, should, by an Ad∣dition of a Fourth Part of Matter, be so alter'd in its Qualities; as also, that a Mass of an Amber or deep Amethystine Colour, (some of whose Parts on he upper Superficies were of a light Yellow, which on the lower ended abruptly in a colour not far from a Black one) should be the Result of a Mixture of two white Bodies: Nor is it less to be admir'd, that a Body Transparent like Amber, should be made of so Opacous a Body as Silver, mix'd with a white Powder; and that Silver, in∣stead of the Qualities of a Metal, should become a Friable Body; and when cut with a sharp In∣strument, like Horn; as also, that it should be chang'd into a Body, apt to take Flame at a Candle, which before was difficult to melt. These Experiments being try'd; To shew how much these Qualities depended on the Particular Textures of Bodies, I took two distinct Urinals, and put Gold finely Laminated in one, and Re∣fin'd Gold in the other, with a treble weight of Sublimate to each; which tho' rais'd in a Sand-Furnace, alter'd neither of them: But in these Experiments, being forc'd to make use of a Sand-Furnace, I could not employ a Fire so strong as
I could have wish'd for, which might in some measure alter the Phaenomena, which our Expe∣riment might have otherwise afforded: But, Before I leave this Experiment, it may not be improper to give the following Advertisement, viz. That a further Improvement might be made of this Experiment, by making use of several kinds of Sublimates; which might easily be ob∣tain'd by raising several other Bodies up with Sublimate. Of which I shall add an Instance; for having Sublim'd a Mixture of equal Parts of Sal Armoniack, and Common Sublimate, in Uri∣nals plac'd in a Sand-Furnace, I obtain'd a Subli∣mate different from the former; for Salt of Tar∣tar dissolv'd, being drop'd into the Common sort dissolv'd in Water, turn'd it into an Orange∣tawny Colour, but chang'd a Solution of the other into a Liquor white like Milk. To try the Effects of this New Sublimate, we Sublim'd it with a Mixture of Copper in the Re∣tort, in the bottom of which was to be found a Cupreous Rosin, which would, as the other above∣mention'd, turn to Verdigreese: But it is very Remarkable in this Experiment, That the Subli∣mate was ting'd with a Blewish-Green, by Par∣ticles of the Copper carry'd along with it; and also, that in the Receiver, was found near an Ounce of Liquor ting'd with Copper: From whence it appears, That this open'd the Texture of Copper, more Powerfully than the other Pre∣paration of Sublimate.
The same Method is not requisite to produce a Body, pro∣vided the Result be of the like Texture. EXPERIMENT III. To make it appear, That there are several Ways to produce the same Qualities in Bodies, provided the change of Texture be the same, I shall instance a Particular Experiment made with what the Alkymists callThe Pre∣paration of Luna Cor∣nea. Luna Cornea. Having dissolv'd Refin'd Silver in Aqua fortis, and Filtrated the Solution, we dropt Spirit of Salt into it, till the Liquor would no longer curdle, which being Filtrated through Cap-Paper, we dry'd the Remaining Substance, wash'd and clear'd from its Salts, whilst it re∣main'd in the Filtre, by running fair Water through it; when dry'd, it was melted into a Mass in a Viol, cover'd with Ashes, and being preserv'd in Fusion for a little time, afforded a Luna Cornea. But if instead of dropping the Salt upon the Solution, the same Method just be∣fore laid down, be taken with the Crystals yielded by that Solution moderately evaporated, they will shoot into Diaphanous brittle Crystals, much different from those of other Metals endu'd with several other Qualities, the Quantity of Salts in∣terpos'd betwixt the Parts of the Metal weighing but a third part of the Compounded Mass. In the Foregoing Process, the following Phae∣nomena may be taken Notice of, to our present Purpose: First, That tho' Acids, and Alcalyes have gene∣rally contrary Effects, yet both Oyl of Tartar per Deliquium, and Spirit of Salt have the same Effect in Precipitating Silver; which evinces, That the Precipitation of Bodies is neither to be attributed to Alkalyes nor Acids, consider'd as
such; But to a mutual Interposition and Tex∣ture of the Parts of the Matter, whereof those Bo∣dies consist. Secondly, It may be observ'd, That Bodies Diaphanous, and void of Colour, may be chang'd into Opacous, and white ones. Thirdly, That a white Powder may be turn'd into a Yellow Body, in some measure Transparent. Fourthly, That Silver by a Mixture of Saline Parts, may be render'd so apt to Fusion, that it will melt like Wax at the Flame of a Candle. Fifthly, It is remarkable, That tho' either of the Ingredients of this Mix'd Body, would readily dissolve in Water; yet the Composition would not. Sixthly, It is to be admir'd, that a Body in Texture, not unlike a piece of Horn, should be the Result of an Association of two rigid Bodies: Wherefore to be satisfy'd, That the Alteration depended on the Texture of Parts of the Ingre∣dients, I made use of the Oyl of Vitriol, in∣stead of Spirit of Salt, and found that the Concrete resulting from an Union of that with the Crystals of Silver, differ'd from the former, it being much more brittle, and easily divided into Parts. But what is more remarkable is, That a Body compounded of one of the most Bitter, and an∣other of the sowerest Taste, should be it self in∣sipid, or of a different Taste from either of them: And it is yet as strange, that Salts so fugitive, and apt to dissipate in the Air, as those of Aqua fortis and Spirit of Salt, should by acquiring a New Texture put on such a degree of Fixedness, as to melt with a Metal, and that without the least per∣ceivable Evaporation.
EXPERIMENT IV. Several Phaenome∣na in Proof of the Do∣ctrin of Forms and Qualities. Having made a Salt of very different Quali∣ties from all others, and which is so nice in the Preparation, that it is as difficult to direct how it is to be made, as to make it; I shall rather chuse to mention what Phaenomena it afforded me. The First Thing Observable was, That tho' the Ingredients of this Salt were Eminently Sa∣line, yet the Salt it self was judg'd by a Stranger to be Sweet, tho' it had a Sweetness peculiar to it self, as every Sweet Body hath: Another Thing Considerable is, That tho' it be of an Inoffensive Smell, when cool; yet if expos'd to a considerable Heat, it emitted Effluviums more strongly faetid than those of Aqua fortis, Spirit of Armoniack Salt, or Distill'd Urine; whereas those Fumes being again united, into a Salt, became Inoffen∣sive as before. And it is further to be Observ'd, That tho' all Volatile, Fix'd, and Lixiviate Salts are so speci∣fically different from each other, that being mix'd together, they ferment, and by that means destroy each other, and unite into a Substance different from each; yet this Salt is so powerful, as to be destroy'd by none of them; but being mix'd with any of them, remains quiet, and without the least Ebullition: But to be further satisfy'd that it was different from each of the foremention'd Salts; I try'd several Experiments, by which I sound, that it would neither turn Syrup of Vio∣lets red, as Acids do, nor green, as Volatile and Fix'd Salts usually do; and tho' Spirit of Armo∣niack,
Salt, or Urine will turn a Solution of Subli∣mate in Water, white; and Salt of Tartar will give it an Orange Colour; yet was it not in the least alter'd by this: Nay, tho' this Salt was dropt into a Solution of Syrup of Violets, along with Acids and Alkalyes, yet did it not hinder their Effects: Tho' in Dissolving several Sub∣stances, this Salt exceeds both Aqua fortis, and Oyl of Vitriol. And it is further Observable, That tho' by a gentle Heat, this Salt wholly Sublimes; yet when mix'd with Liquors, it does not fly away, as other Volatile Salts do; and tho' it be Volatile, yet it will run per Deliquium, as soon as any Salt can do, and as present reassumes its own Form, the Superfluous Moisture being taken from it; add to this, That by a gentle Heat it may be dissolv'd in a Limpid Liquor. And, it is endu'd with a Quality yet more Admirable, for it will readily dissolve, either in Spirit of Wine, or Water, or Oyls themselves: whereas some Bodies which may be dissolv'd in Water, cannot incor∣porate with Oyls or Spirit of Wine, and è con∣versò. EXPERIMENT V. Several Changes in Bodies may be effected by the Ad∣dition, or Substracti∣on, and new Modificati∣on of Mat∣ter.The Experiment which I am about to deliver, I presume, will be sufficient to shew, That Con∣siderable Alterations in Bodies may be effected, by the Access of some Parts, and a Recess of others, the Remaining Parts being Modify'd afresh. The Experiment is the following, viz. Digest for some Time one Part of Sea-Salt, with a double Proportion of Spirit of Nitre; which
being distill'd in a Retort, till the Caput Mor∣tunm remains dry, the following Changes of Qualities will be observable; First, That it be∣comes an Aqua Regis, and would dissolve Gold, but not Silver; yet would precipitate the Latter when dissolv'd in Aqua Regis: Secondly, The Taste is more mild, affecting the Sensory, rather like Nitre, than common Salt: Thirdly, It be∣comes Fusible, like Salt-Petre; and like Nitre, dis∣solves in the Flame of a Candle. But Fourthly, Tho' it be a Quality of Sea-Salt to resist the Action of Fire, and of Acid Spi∣rits to cool Inflammations; yet a Lump of this Matter cast upon Coals, flam'd like Nitre; as also by an Addition of Charcoal, when melted in a Crucible, it wou'd burn with a lasting and splendid Flame, which would again renew, up∣on a fresh Addition of burning Charcoal. But what I chiefly design'd in this Experiment was to turn an Acid into an Alkaly,An Acid may be turn'd into an Alkaly. which was effected by consuming the more Fugitive Parth of the Salts, by repeated Deflagrations; whereupon it acquir'd, instead of an Acid, a Lixiviate Taste; would turn Syrup of Violets green, precipitate a Solution of Sublimate, into an Orange Colour; and as other fix'd Salts, would ferment with even Spirit of Salt; which Alkalyzate Nature, could not be suppos'd to proceed from the Char∣coal Ashes; because the whole Quantity made use of, could not yield above 2 or 3 Grains of Salt: Yet that I might be further satisfy'd, I drop'd a sufficient Quantity of Aqua fortis upon the Li∣xiviate Salt, till the Mixture ceas'd to ferment; which upon Coagulation, shot into Saline Cry∣stals, from the Inflammable Qualities of which
it appear'd, That the Nitrous Spirit was united with the Alkaly. And if it should be again sus∣pected, that the Alkaline Parts were only the Remains of some of the Aqua fortis, which might be carry'd over into the Receiver: I answer, That Nitre being an Acid, it must follow that two Acids united, were turn'd into an Alkaly. And to prosecute this Experiment further, we distill'd a Mixture of Spirit of Nitre, with a double Proportion of Spirit of Salt; yet tho' some Parts of the Nitre were carry'd over with the Salt, the Remaining Substance would wholly flash away, if plac'd upon the Coals, like common Nitre. EXPERIMENT VI. Several Phaenome∣na exhibi∣ted by a Mixture of Oyl of Vi∣triol, &c. Having Distill'd Oyl of Vitriol with a Solution of Nitre in a Glass Body and Head plac'd in Sand, I drew from it a Spiritus Nitri, which be∣fore Rectification would dissolve Silver, tho' it was diluted with Water treble to the weight of the Nitrous Parts. And from the Matter left be∣hind, and evaporated to a Driness, I obtain'd a Salt, which would shoot into Crystals, neither like those of Crude nor fixt Nitre, nor those of Vitriol, but of a Figure hard to be describ'd. As for the other Qualities of it, it was easily fusible by Heat, yet was not inflammable like Nitre, tho' quick Coals were thrown upon it in a Crucible; for it was so far from that, that when it was hot enough to kindle Sulphur, it neither flash'd nor flam'd it self, as Salt-Petre usually does; yet this white Substance, being kept in Fusion for a while, with a little piece of Charcoal in it, smell'd very
strong of Sulphur, and had a very Fiery Taste on the Tongue, as also a Colour very red. Encourag'd by these Circumstances, (they be∣ing agreeable to what Glauber relates of his Salt) and since he made use of Vessels of Silver, I judg'd it could not be Aqua fortis that he open'd the Sea-Salt with; nor common Spirit of Salt, because too weak; wherefore having put an equal weight of Oyl of Vitriol, and Sea-Salt together, into a Glass Cucurbite set in Sand, I obtain'd, besides Phlegm, a Spirit of Salt; which mix'd with Spirit of Nitre, dissolv'd Crude Gold; and likewise when pour'd upon Spirit of Urine, and fermented, till there no longer succeeded an Ebullition, after a gentle Evaporation, it shot into Crystals, like Combs and Feathers; from whence it appear'd to be of a like Nature to Sal Armoniack. The Experiment sometimes also succeeded, when in∣stead of Oyl of Vitriol, I made use of Oyl of Sulphur by the Bell. But to apply this Experiment to our present Purpose; we may observe, That tho' Sea-Salt be so fixt, as not to be rais'd without a considerable quantity of beaten Bricks, to prevent its Fusion, and a naked Fire; yet when its Parts are un∣lock'd by an Addition of Oyl of Vitriol, they may be carry'd over with a Moderate Fire in Sand, the Vitriol being fix'd and left behind; yet in other respects considerably chang'd, so as to be void both of the Taste of Sea-Salt and Vitriol. And from this Experiment, what I formerly in∣timated, likewise appears; viz. That the Figures of Salts, by being embody'd with other Substances, might be so far chang'd, as to shoot into Crystals
of very different Shapes: For from the Caput Mortuum Dissolv'd, Filtrated, and leisurely Coa∣gulated, may be obtain'd Crystals, much more transparent and of a different Figure from those of Sea-Salt, and from each other. But to conclude this Experiment, I have found this Preparation of Sal Mirabilis very uncertain and tiresome, by reason of the Disparities of Bodies taken to be Oyl of Vitriol. EXPERIMENT. VII. The differ∣ent Quali∣ties of all Bodies are theproducts of Matter variously Modified.To shew that all Metals and their different Qualities, were but the Effects of one common Mass of Matter differently Modified, as to the Shape, Size and Texture of their Parts; I took the following Method, viz. Having praecipita∣ted the Bezoardicum Minerale, by an Affusion of Spirit of Nitre, on the rectified Oyl of Butter of Antimony, I drew off by Distillation as much of the Liquor as I could; sometimes cohobating it upon the Powder of the Antimo∣ny; which being done, I melted pure Gold with Three or Four times it's weight of Copper, which being put into Aqua fortis, the Copper was dissolved, and the Gold subsided in the form of a Powder, which was further purified by an Antient Chymist, and by a competent heat re∣stored to it's Natural Colour; which being dis∣solv'd in a large Quantity of the above men∣tioned Liquor there remained a considerable Quantity of white Powder, which would nei∣ther be dissolv'd by the above nam'd Menstruum, nor Aqua Regis.
The Gold being a second time reduced to a Body, by a repeated Solution in the aforesaid Menstruum, yeilded more of that Powder, which reduced to a Body was White, and being dissolved in Aqua Fortis had the same nauseous bitter Taste with Silver; so that it is plain the Transmutation of Metals is not impossible, nor Gold a Metal impossible to be destroy'd; so that I am more apt to believe, that by pro∣per Menstruums the Body of Gold may be so ordered, as to communicate a Tincture to a Liquor duly conjoyned;The Tran∣smution of Metals not impossible. as when Sulphur and Mercury by a Coalition constitute Vermilion; since from this Instance it is plain, that the Co∣lour of the Tincture (as well as of the Vermilion) may be produced by the Position and Texture of some Particles of Gold associated with that Liquor. And that the Colour of such Tinctures as well as of the Gold it self depend on certain Particles conveniently Modified, I rather be∣lieve, because I am told, that a known Man in the Netherlands had a certain Menstruum, which would extract a blue Tincture from the Calx of Copper, prepared by a Dissolution in Aqua Fortis, leaving a white Powder behind, which would by Fusion be turn'd into a Metal of the same Colour. A second Inference which may be drawn from the foregoing Experiment, is, that if Gold, one of the most Permanent Bodies, may have it's Texture destroyed, there is no Body in Nature but may undergo a Change, when wrought on by an appropriated Agent; and
that the noblest of Metals may be Mechanical∣ly transmuted; from whence it appears also, that the noblest of Forms, are but the Results of the Texture of the Parts of Matter of which they consist; and a Convention of Accidents, which are the Substratum of that Texture: So that without a substantial Form, merely by a saline Menstruum, the Body of Gold may be changed into another substance, of very differ∣ing Qualities from what it had before. But to render our present Experiment more instructive; I shall add another Attempt, to sublime Gold after the following Method. Having then dissolved laminated Gold in some of the above mentioned Menstruum, we drew it off in a Retort placed in a Sand-Furnace, by which means a considerable Quantity of Gold was elevated, and either fell into the Receiver in the Form of a Golden coloured Liquor, or shot into red Crystals like Rubies in the Neck of the Retort; which in the Air would run per Deliquium: Where we are to observe, that by a new Affusion of the Menstruum upon the remain∣ing Calx, more of itwould still be elevated by Distillation. But to make this Experiment more serviceable, it will be necessary to Note, that upon pouring running Mercury into this elevated Tincture, the Particles of it were immediately Guilded, and by degrees, the Mercury being kept in Motion, the whole Liquor lost it's Tincture, which be∣ing decanted, and the Guilded Mercury with a good Quantity of Borax Melted in a Crucible, the elevated Gold was reduced into a Mass;
which evinces what I just now taught, viz. that a Liquor might be Tinctured by having the Parts of that Body, from whence it received it's Tincture, conveniently interwoven in it's Texture, without being wholly destroyed. And here I think it seasonable to advertise, that having elsewhere mentioned a Volatile Gold in some Oars, where none of that Me∣tal is to be found; I would be understood to mean it Volatile in no other Sense, than the foregoing Sublimation intimates, viz. that it's Volatility depends on a mixture of Volatile Parts which carry it along with them, when dis∣solved into very minute Parts; so as to be ca∣pable of Swimming in that Vehicle. EXPERIMENT. VIII. How so hard a Body as Silver, &c. may become a sowre substance by an alterati∣on of Tex∣ture.Having dissolved an Ounce of refined Silver in Aqua Fortis, and permitted it to Crystalize, we found, that the Silver, by the addition of Acid Salts, was increased in weight several Drachms; which distilled in a Retort, with such a degree of heat as made the Retort red hot, yielded a Phlegm eminently Sower. Which shews, that a very Bitter Body may yield a sub∣stance of a quite different Taste. For the Li∣quor being cold in the Receiver, Smoaked as well as Smelt and Tasted like Aqua Fortis, and by corroding Copper turned it into a Bleuish Colour. After wards we made a Solution of Minium in Aqua Fortis, and having by Filtration and E∣vaporation procured a Saccharum Saturni, we
Distilled it in a well coated Retort, over a na∣ked Fire, and obtained an offensive Acid which had the Smell of Aqua Fortis; which being put upon Minium, bubbled, and making a considera∣ble noise, presently afforded a Liquor, from which might easily be obtained a true Sugar of Lead: Where it is observable, that the Caput mortuum, was neither Sweet, as before Distillation; nor Sower, as the Body drawn from it; but insipid and ea∣sily reducible, by Fusion, into a malleable Lead. Phaenome∣na to be ob∣served in this Expe∣riment.In which Experiments, the following Phae∣nomena are also Remarkable: First, that the Salt, which encreased the Silver in weight no more than a third or fourth Part, was able to Sublime the greatest Part of that fixed Body. Secondly, that the Parts of the same Liquor, being mixed with three several Metals, may produce as many different Tastes; tho' the same Aqua Fortis should be successively made use of in those three Experiments, and howsoever varied in respect of Order in the Tryal: And here we are to observe likewise, that Part of the Distilled Spirit of Nitre, being poured on the Caput Mortuum of Saccharum Saturni, turned some Parts of it into a Vitriol; and ano∣ther Part of it being poured upon Filings of Silver, the Silver, being partly dissolved with a hissing Noise, was Coagulated into a Bitter Salt.
EXPERIMENT IX. Because Transmutation of Bodies, whose Tex∣tures are esteem'd Primordial, as those of the Elements, and which are found to be Ingredients of most Compositions here below, will be a further Confirmation of the Possibility of Altering the Textures of other Bodies; I shall subjoyn, what Progress I have made, in order to turn Water into Earth. A Trans∣formation of Water into Earth.Having therefore in a Glass Vessel distill'd Fair Rain-Water, and several times re-distill'd it again; we found, that after every Distillation, there was a considerable Quantity of white Earth remaining at the bottom of the Vessel, which was more plentifully afforded in the latter Distilla∣tions, than the first; and therefore we had the greater Reason to believe, it could be nothing else but a certain quantity of Water, turn'd into Earth; which afforded the following Phanomena, viz. 1. Being put into a Microscope in the Sun-Beams,Phaenome∣na exhi∣bited. it appear'd to consist of Parts exceeding fine, which were as fine in the Microscope, as Hair-powder usually is to the Eye; yet not in the least Transparent. 2. Being mix'd with Wa∣ter, it turn'd it into a whitish Colour, as the Powder of white Marble usually does; yet being settled in the Bottom, it remain'd undissolv'd. 3. After it had lain a considerable time in a Red-hot Crucible, it was neither diminish'd in quan∣tity, nor did it in the least smoke. 4. It exceeded Water in weight, so as to be equal to twice its Bulk of Common Water, being almost as heavy as Wood-ashes, freed from their Salts; which,
to its Bulk of Water, is as 1 to 2 ⅙, which does not much come short of the weight of white Glass, which is twice and a half heavier than its weight of Water: So that from these Phaenomena, we had Reason to term the Foremention'd white Substance, Earth; considering likewise its fixed∣ness, and other Qualities. But further it is to be Observ'd, That the Glass in which it was distill'd, was not in the least damag'd by this Process: as also, That an Ounce of Water yielded six Drachms of Powder,Water al∣most wholly convertible into Earth. a con∣siderable quantity of Water still remaining be∣hind. So that this Experiment is no small Confirma∣tion of our Hypothesis: For if Elements themselves may be Transmuted, and Artificially Destroy'd, by an Alteration of the Texture of their Parts; why may not Considerable Changes be effected also in other Bodies, by a Local Motion, and a New Manner and Form of Union of Parts, of dif∣ferent Figures and Sizes; since in this Experiment, the Parts of Water being modify'd a-new, form a Solid Body, of very different Qualities from what belong'd to it before, as want of Transpa∣rency, Solidity, &c. How Water acquires the Form of a Solid Powder.As for the Manner of its being so modify'd a∣new, it may easily be conceiv'd, That the Parts of Water, being put into Motion, and rubbing upon one another, by violent Occursions, might be so alter'd and adapted as to stick together, and to form several little Moleculae, which being more condens'd, and consequently heavier than Wa∣ter, could no longer swim in it; but obtain'd the several New Qualities before mention'd.
And that the Change was thus effected, we have Reason to believe; since by a bare Circu∣lation, in a just Degree of Heat, Quick-Silver will assume the Form of a Powder, which will not with so much ease be rais'd by the Fire, as the Mercury it self; but this will be further illu∣strated by the Tenth Experiment. Inferences drawn a∣gainst the Doctrin of the Chy∣mists.Therefore to draw Inferences from this Expe∣riment, which may disfavour the Hypostatical Principles of the Chymists; If Water be capable of being chang'd into Earth, by the same Reason the other Ingredients of Bodies may; and in the Analization of Bodies there may be a Trans∣mutation of Substances, as well as a Separa∣tion of Pre-existent Principles. From hence also may be brought strong Arguments against Helmont; who, because he boasted of an Alkahest, which, he says, would turn all Bodies into a Li∣quor, therefore concluded all Bodies were made of Water; for by the same Reason I might say, All Bodies are made of Earth; because Water may be turn'd into Earth: So that tho' he should turn all Bodies into Water, yet that Water being again capable of being disguised, it would only shew, That Water and Earth may be mutually Transmuted, by a successive Change of Texture. But to leave these Reflections, I shall mention some Scruples, concerning this Transmuted Powder, which I could not have time to satisfy my self in: As, Whether the Water Remaining was lighter than before Distillation? Whether the Particles of Insipid Bodies, may act as Men∣struums in the Dissolution of others? not but that they may be so chang'd in the Vessels of Plants, as to become sharp and powerfully pe∣netrating.
Whether the Weight of the Glass-Vessel, was diminish'd by this Experiment? I should likewise be willing to be satisfy'd, Whe∣ther Water it self be truly a Homogeneous Body? which if it be, it will be strange, that without the help of a Plastick Power, or Seminal Prin∣ciple, it should be so transmuted; since that a bare Convention of the Particles of a Fluid into a Concrete should alter their Specifick Gravity, is hard (if not impossible) to be parallell'd by Art. But in this Experiment it is further Remarka∣ble, That Oyl of Vitriol pour'd upon this Pow∣der, would corrode it, and that by an Effusion of Spirit of Salt there was rais'd a considerable Ferment; as when Spirit of Salt is put upon La∣pis Stellaris: So that I suspected the Rain-water might be impregnated with some of the Sandy Parts of Glass dissolv'd, by the help of the Fire, and actuating the Particles of it; but this Suspi∣tion was partly taken off, because I had observ'd the like Ebullition, upon a Mixture of Spirit of Salt with Wood-ashes, which were clear'd of their Salts in Boyling Water. But to conclude this Experiment, we may fur∣ther reflect upon the fore-going Suspitions; that if the Body of the Glass-Vessel were in the least dis∣solv'd in this Operation, it will be a powerful Instance of the Force of Insipid Menstruums; and it will be no less a Confirmation of the Doctrin of Forms and Qualities before deliver'd, that Wa∣ter it self is subject to undergo such considerable Changes, as this Experiment shews it is. I might produce a great deal more on this Occasion, to corroborate what I have deliver'd
concerning Transmutations; but I shall only add, that I, as well as two several Persons whom I employ'd, have without the Addition of any thing, obtain'd from Spirit of Wine, which was wholly inflammable, a considerable Quantity of Phlegm; and that too, without its being affected by any Visible Body. EXPERIMENT X. Consider a∣ble Chan∣ges may be wrought in Bodies by Mixture, and the Texture thence re∣sulting.To conclude this Chapter, I shall add an Ex∣periment, to shew what sudden Productions and Alterations of Qualities may be effected by a Coa∣lition of the smallest number of Ingredients, ge∣nerally taken for Homogeneous Bodies; from whence it will appear, That the Changes of Bo∣dies, in themselves considerable, may be effected by very easy Mixtures, viz. Having by Degrees mix'd an equal weight of Spirit of Wine, and Oyl of Vitriol together, and plac'd them in a Bolt-head, stopp'd close with hard Wax, and a Cork; digest the Mix∣ture in a Moderate Heat, for some time; then pour it out into a Glass Cucurbit, luting on a Head and a Receiver, to preserve the Subtle Spirits from flying away; then with a moderate Heat draw off the Spirit of Wine, till the Drops be∣gin to come over-sowrish; then shift the Re∣ceiver, and carefully go on with the Distillation, increasing the Fire till as much is drawn off as you can, keeping the Substance remaining in the Cucurbit, in a Glass well stopp'd, and secure from the Air.
The Phaenomena exhibited by this Experiment were the following: First, That the Spirit, first drawn from these two Inodorous Bodies, was endow'd with a Smell different from all others, and parts tho' pleasant and fragrant, yet very subtle and penetrating. Secondly, That the Li∣quor, drawn off last, had a very strong Sulphu∣reous Smell, which stunk, and affected the Sen∣sory, so powerfully, that it would almost take away one's Breath. Thirdly, This Mixture yielded a Liquor, which would mix with neither of the former; yet was very subtle, pleasant, and Aromatical. Fourthly, The Substance remain∣ing in the Bottom of the Vessel, was Opacous, and almost as black as Jet, and withal very brittle. Fifthly, And tho' it was made up of two Liquors, the one corrosive, and the other inflammable, and both of very pungent Tastes; yet was it void of Taste, and could not without great difficulty, if at all, be brought to burn. Sixthly, Neither would it be mix'd for some Days with Water, tho' the Oyl and Spirit, readily diffuse themselves in that Liquor; besides, it was of so very fix'd a Nature that it would not be rais'd by a strong and lasting Fire, tho' both Oyl and Vitriol, and Spirit of Wine be extreamly Volatile. And now, Having thus in short laid down these Experi∣ments, as sufficient Proof of the Doctrin before deliver'd, I shall conclude with this Reflection, viz. That in all the Changes and Alterations, that have been effected by Art, it appears, that they are so far from depending on the Imaginary Substantial Forms of the Schools, that they evi∣dently appear to be the sole Effects of Local Mo∣tion, so altering the Figures and Sizes of the Mi∣nute
parts of Bodies, or otherwise transposing them; as, upon a fresh Association and Coalition of them, to form New Concretes, of Textures very different from the former. And if Motion, Bulk, and Shape, together with peculiar Textures, be enough to cause so many different Phaenomena, as have been laid down; there is no Reason, why other Qualities may not be produc'd by the same Fertile Principles; since all the Difference betwixt the Works of Nature and Art, in alter∣ing the Forms of Natural Bodies, lies in this, viz. That in the Works of Nature Active and Passive Bodies casually meet together; and in the Latter the different Substances, concern'd in every New Production, are brought together by an Artist; for in both the Agent acts as a Natural Agent. CHAP. X. An Experiment, with some Considerations touching the differing Parts and Redin∣tegration of Salt-Petre. SALT-PETRE is a Concrete so universally concern'd in the Composition of most Bo∣dies, that it will be of no small Import to Na∣tural Philosophy, to enquire throughly into the Nature of it; which will in some Measure ap∣pear, by considering how many Substances may be drawn from it, or turn'd into it; which will be briefly intimated in the following Experi∣ment.
An At∣tempt to re∣dintegrate the Form of Salt-Petre.Having, according to the usual Method, Cry∣staliz'd Nitre, we melted four Ounces of it in a Crucible into a Limpid Liquor, throwing in Live-Coals successively, till it would kindle and fulminate no longer; and continuing it in a strong Fire a considerable time, to dissipate the remaining Volatile Parts, and then breaking the Crucible, we divided the fix'd Nitre immedia∣tely into two Portions; one of which being dis∣solv'd in as much Water as was sufficient, we drop'd in Spirit of Salt-Petre, till the Ebullition, rais'd by the Mixture of these Liquors, wholly ceas'd; and then filtrating the mix'd Liquor, we expos'd it to the Air in an open Glass-Viol; and on the other Part undissolv'd, we likewise dropt the same Spirit, till the Firmentation ceas'd, exposing it to the Air in an open Glass-Jar. In the former Mixture, wherein the Water was put, in a few Hours certain Crystals of Salt-Petre stuck to the Lower Parts of the Glass, amongst which were several other Crystals, like Mustard-seed, encompass'd with a downy Sub∣stance. The Crystals the next Day being consi∣derably greater, were taken out, and both by their Burning and Shape, appear'd to be Ni∣trous, (Nitrous Salts being furnish'd with flat Sides, which when opposite are usualy parallel;) and as for that downy Matter which adhered to some of them, we judg'd it to proceed from the Disproportion of the Volatile and Fix'd Parts of the Nitre, which were to be joyn'd together a-new. These things being observ'd, we pour'd the remaining Liquor into an open Glass-Vessel, which in about three Weaks-time, being again
Saturated with Petre, we pour'd it from the Salt, and evaporated it in a Digesting Furnace. The other Mixture, which was only fix'd Nitre and Spirit of Salt-Petre, for the most part presently Subsided in the Form of a Salt, which when dry'd in the Air, was of very irregular Fi∣gures; and, in some Parts, not much diffe∣rent in Shape from Salt-Petre; which it also much resembled in Burning, tho' the Deflagra∣tion was in some measure peculiar to it self. But this Salt, together with the Liquor swimming upon it, being preserv'd in the Air for about a Month longer, after Evaportion, the one half shot into Crystals, which burnt much like Petre, and had a Similar Figure, tho' a different Taste; and the other half, being speedily exhaled, shot into Crystals, of a distinct Figure from all others. Cautions to be observ'd in the Fore∣going Expe∣riment.Now to make this Experiment clearer, the fol∣lowing Things are to be observ'd; 1. That in Fixing the Nitre, New-Coals are not to be cast into the Crucible, till the former are almost spent, or be thrown out by the violent Exhalations of Nitrous and Volatile Parts. 2. That the Quantity of Spirit of Nitre dropp' upon the Fix'd Nitre, was almost proportionable to the Salt-Petre, spent in the Fixing of it. 3. That this Fix'd Nitre was very little different in Taste from Salt of Tartar; had the same aptness to Absorb Air, and to re∣laxate in moist Air: Yet it differ'd in Colour, being betwixt a Blue and a Green One, which it lost upon the Affusion of Spirit of Nitre. Another Method of Reuniting the Parts of Salt-Petre.But this Method being tedious, I shall propose a Way more expeditions, which is this; Having run Fix'd Nitre per deliquium, and by Filtra∣tion separated it from its Faces, we dropp'd upon
the Liquor Spirit of Nitre, which, after a Fer∣ment usual to a Mixture of those Liquors, pre∣sently shot into Crystals, in Shape, as well as Na∣ture, manifestly Nitrous. A Third Method.Another way we took was this: Having Im∣pregnated a Solution of Fix'd Nitre in Water, with Spirit of Nitre, and filtrated it through Cap-Paper, the Cool Liquor, in a short time, shot into Crystals, like those of Petre; and the Liquor, being again Evaporated, afforded a fresh Quan∣tity of Crystals not unlike the former. But lest the Sal-Petre re-produc'd by the Coali∣tion of these two Bodies, should be thought to lodge in the Fix'd Nitre; and only to be unyok'd by their Solution, it is requisite to annex, That the greatest Quantity that can be suppos'd to remain in the Fix'd Nitre, would not amount to such a Quantity as that Mixture affords: And to make the Matter less suspicious, we impregnated a So∣lution of Pot-Ashes, after the same manner as we had done the Fix'd Nitre,Salt-Petre obtain'd from Pot-Ashes, A∣qua fortis, and Salt of Tartar. which after Filtra∣tion and Evaparation, shot into Crystals, which 0103 0207 V 3 were very like Salt-Petre in Taste, as well as their Deflagration upon Live-coals. We likewise ob∣tain'd a small Quantity of Salt-Petre, from Aqua fortis and Salt of Tartar associated. But to draw Inferences from the Foregoing Experiment; from hence we may learn, That the Sensible Qualities of Bodies may be accounted for by the Mechanical Motion, together with the Figure and Disposition, or Modification of their Parts. And first, tho' Salt-Petre be a Body inwardly, and in it self cooling; yet the Parts of it diffe∣rently Modify'd, in our Experiment, being put
together, do immediately put each other into so violent a Heat, that I could with much ado hold the Glass in my Hand; so that Heat seems to be nothing but a quick Motion of the finest Particles of Bodies, since it no longer con∣tinu'd in that Mixture, than the Parts of it were in Agitation. Upon the Mixture of these two, viz. the Spirit of Nitre, with the Fix'd, there was likewise produ∣ced an audible Sound, proceeding from the Percus∣sion of the Air, by the swiftly and impetuously agi∣tated Parts of the Mixture: A Sound like to which is produc'd by a hot Coal cast into Water, or into melted Nitre in a Crucible, tho' the Latter causes a Sound much louder. Which Sound probably proceeded from the Percussion of the Air, be∣cause the Motion of a Bullet, or a Stick, where the Quickness of the Percussion puts the Air into an Undulating Motion, will cause a Sound, as soon as that Undulating Motion reaches the Ear; and it is further confirm'd, because that Sound no longer continues, than the Parts are violently agitated: And here it is to be observ'd, That the Sound, produc'd by the Mutual Conflict, ceases long before the Heat, which is acquir'd by that Ebullition; from whence it may be in∣ferr'd, that the same Intestine Motion of Parts which are able to produce Heat, are incapable of causing Sounds; as Amber continues warm a considerable time after the Sound, made in rub∣bing of it, ceaseth. Several Qualities flow from an Altera∣tion of Tex∣ture.We observ'd likewise, That the Fix'd Petre was of a Colour betwixt Blue and Green, which it presently lost upon the Mixture of the Acid Spirit, the Disposition of Parts being so alter'd,
as to reflect the Rays of Light differently to the Eye; A Change not unlike which happens upon the Exposing Fix'd Nitre to the Air: And it is not less to be admir'd, That Soot, which is Black, and a Congeries of Opacous Exhalations, should, by the help of a good Fire, fill the Receiver with Fumes as white as Milk: And the Colours to be observ'd upon the Sublimation of Black Anti∣mony, and White Sal-Armoniack are no less pleasant. But to return to the Experiment: Having not long ago attempted to make Salt-Petre, of Salt of Tartar, and Aqua fortis, the Mixture united, prov'd to be of a very Green Colour, which re∣sided more peculiarly in some Parts of it than others, tho' the Salt of Tartar was a particular Preparation, whose Crystals were as white as Su∣gar Candy. It is on this occasion likewise further to be observ'd, That tho' Fumes of Nitre, rais'd Distillation, be of a Red Colour; yet they condense into a Liquor altogether void of it; and also, That Fix'd Nitre, tho' an Opacous Body, yet does it unite, with the imbib'd Spirit, into Diaphanous Crystals. Several Qualities destroy'd. and regain∣ed by the Redinte∣gration of Salt-Petre.There is likewise to be observ'd, Upon the Mixture of these two Ingredients, a very offen∣sive Smell, caus'd by the Spirit of Salt-Petre, emitting stinking Exhalations, stirr'd up by the Mutual Conflict betwixt it, and its Fix'd Salt; where it is strange, that this Mixture should have a Smell, which is neither in Nitre, nor either of the Ingredients; and yet, that it should lose that Smell again, when turn'd into Nitre. Besides the Taste of the Spirit, being strongly Acid, and the Taste of Nitre, like that of Salt
of Tartar; it is surpizing, that these two should unite into a Body of so much less pungency in Taste as Nitre, bateing that it is a little shar∣per by reason of some Spirituous Parts sticking to the Particles of the Nitre. But besides these there are several other Re∣flections may be made on the preceding Experi∣ment; for it seems a Question, whether there is any real necessity of a distinct Sulphur to render a Body Inflammable, or whether rather Inflammability depends on a disposition of Matter to be put in∣to Motion by the help of adventitious Bodies; as when the Ingredients of our Experiment are mixed; or when a Piece of Iron is cast into Spirit of Nitre; for the Parts of that Liquor, which before were quiet and cold, meeting with Pores which disorder their Motion, they presently begin to move among one ano∣ther with a strange Rapidity, and to cause such a Heat, that the Vessel would burn the Hands of them that held it: And here it may not be amiss to take notice of one thing further, that Occurs in our Experiment, viz. that tho' Ni∣tre put upon a burning Coal, or a burning Coal being cast into it, will consume it self, in a Blue Flame, yet when it is contiguous to the Sides of the Crucible which is red Hot, it melts without the least Flame. It may be also worth Enquiry, why Nitre which is a solid Body should not rather stick in the Form of Sublimate to the Receiver, like Sal Armoniack, than con∣dense only into a Liquor, which does not again coagulate as some Volatile Spirits do. But leaving these Phaenomena, I shall observe further, that though Spirit of Nitre, exposed to
the Air Insensibly exhales, yet when associated with it's own fixed Salt, it admits no such Efflu∣viums. Another thing to be observed is, that up∣on a Mixture of these two Liquors, several Saline Parts are tossed out of the Glass into the Air, which falling down again, several Grains of Salt will remain on the outside of the Vial, which will be visible if the Experiment be tried in the Sun Beams. And that there is a very brisk Mo∣tion amongst the Parts of Spirit of Nitre, is evident by dropping some of it into a solution of Salt of Tartar; for immediately some Grains were shattered in Pieces, and thrown up to the top with a seeming Violence; till the strength of those Liquors was mutually diminished by their frequent Occursions: And that the Parts of each have contrary tendencies in their Mo∣tions is plain, from this, viz. if when the Fer∣ment ceases, more of one of these Liquors was dropped in, there followed no Ebullition, till some of the other was added to Ferment with it. The same Particles of Matter have diffe∣rent Effects when in a Fluid, from what they have in a solid Form.And here it is seasonable to observe what different Effects the Parts of these Bodies have when at liberty and disjoyned in Liquids, from what they produce when locked up in Con∣cretes, tho' their Effects, even then, are not wholly to be attributed to the briskness of their Moti∣on, but also, to their determinate Sizes; by which means Aqua Fortis, which leaves Gold untouched, will dissolve Silver; yet, by an Addition of Sal Armoniack, it having acquired a new Figure, and a peculiar Motion, it Works upon Gold; and for the like Reasons a Solu∣tion of fixed Nitre will dissolve Ʋnctuous Bo∣dies,
which the Acid Spirit will not Work upon. Again we may observe, that the several sub∣stances into which Salt-Petre is reduced, viz. the fixed Salt and the Volatile Liquor, are both different from the Concrete it self; which is an Argument against those Chymists that pretend, that Bodies Distilled, retain the Virtues of those Bodies they are Distilled from;Chymistry rather de∣stroys than discovers the Princi∣ples of Bo∣dies. for the Acid Spirit of Nitre will precipitate the same Bodies, which fixed Nitre dissolves. And so Spirit of Nitre will turn a Tincture of Brasil into a Yellow Colour, which it will lose, and in some Measure by an addition of a Tincture of fixed Nitre, regain the former, whereas a Solution of Salt-Petre changes neither of these Tinctures. Eut to proceed, This Experiment gives us Reason to believe, that the Air is considerably concerned in the Production of Salt-Petre, and in giving a Figure to it's Salts; since the Crystals, which shoot in the Solution exposed to the open Air, are of a more exact Size and Figure, than those obtained after a quicker Evaporation. Besides which we have observed, that a Mixture of Aqua Fortis and Salt of Tartar yielded Crystals much more like Nitre, when it had been exposed to the the Air for some time, than what it afforded up∣on an immediate Crystallization. As for the Reason why the Crystals which shoot in the Air, are more naturally Figured than others; I conceive it to be, because the Air is a more quiet and undisturbed Vehicle for them to move leasurely in, by which means they have the Liberty of uniting as they ought, to form Crystals of a natural Figure, which Guess
is confirmed, because the Crystals which shot in Water, where they have room enough, and an indifferent Vehicle, were more perfect than those, which were produced by a Mixture of the nitrous Powder and Saline Spirit, where they were forced, for want of Room, to Cry stalize, before they had time to Convene after a manner requisite to make them of a natural Figure and Size. But to proceed: This Experiment, which shews how a Body divided into different sub∣stances, by Distillation, may be again united into an Original Concrete, will be a very strong and convincing Instance to prove, that the Forms and Qualities of Bodies depend on an essential Modification of their Parts; and that the difference observable in particular Sub∣stances, depends on a different Texture, and a Co∣alition of Parts of different Figures and Sizes; so that the Redintegration of Bodies is no more, but a restoring of their former Parts into the same Or∣der and Position, being Artificially handled, so as to acquire their former Sizes and Figures in order to their Coalition. Yet this I think necessary to be represented, viz. that the Composition of Nitre is so little Organical, that it will be hard to judge what success, in order to Redintegration, may be ex∣pected in other Bodies, where the Fabricks of them are so curious, by Reason of their numerous In∣gredients, and the curious Contexture of them, that the latter is not to be imitated by Art, in the Production of Substances much less Organi¦cal, than the Parts of living Animals. Chymical Medicines laid aside too rashly.The last Observation I shall make on our Ex∣periment, is, That from what hath been said it
may be thought that some Chymical Medicines may be too Rashly laid aside by some Physitians, who suppose, that the Menstruums made use of in their Preparations, are in some measure mix∣ed with them; since, besides that those Salts may by care be washed away, several Parts of them may be so altered by Corrosion, that those, associating with other Particles of the Body they work upon, may degenerate into an innocent Concrete: An Instance of which we have in our Experiment, where a corrosive Spirit and a Caustick fixed Salt, unite into an innocent Me∣dicine. And that Corrosive Salts may in a great measure be dulcified by their acting on other substances, is evident in a Mixture of Spirit of Vitriol and Crabs Eyes, or any other testaceous Body. And again, though Vinegar power∣fully corrodes calcined Lead, yet uniting with it, it constitutes a Sweet Body, in which the sharpness of Vinegar is perfectly destroyed. And tho' it be an Argument usually alledged against the use of Medicines so prepared, that from several of them corrosive Particles may be drawn; yet since the same may be Effected by the Action of Fire upon Salt-Petre, the Ob∣jection is as invalid as the general Practice of Physitians can make it. CHAP. XI. Containing the History of Fluidity. WHETHER Fluidity and Firmness, might not with more Reason be esteem'd States than Qualities of Bodies, or not; this is most
certain, that they are to be accounted the most General Affections of Matter, all Bodies being either Fluid or Solid: If then these Qualities or States of Bodies be so General, it will be of mo∣ment to consider the Causes of them; and the rather in this place, because the Foregoing Expe∣riments of Salt-Petre may serve to illustrate them. The Defini∣tion of a Fluid Body.To proceed then: A Body is said to be Fluid, because it consists of Parts, which easily slip upon one another's Surfaces to and fro, when mov'd, by Reason of the Porous Interstices, which re∣main betwixt those Parts, which they are made up of, they not being wholly Contiguous on every side; and also, because by Virtue of that Motion, they spread and diffuse themselves on every side, till oppos'd by some Solid Body, to the Internal Super∣ficies of which, they presently adapt themselves. And what Thoughts Epicurus, and the An∣cient Corpuscularians had of Fluidity, will appear from these Verses of his Paraphrast Lucretius. Illa autem debent ex Laevis at que Rotundis Esse magis, fluido quae Corpore liquida constant. Nec retinentur enim inter se glomeramina quaeque, Et procursus item in proclive Volubilis extat. And indeed, we may rationally believe, That the Smoothness of their Parts may much con∣tribute to the Fluidity of Liquors, as well as the Globular Figures of them; tho' there are several Fluid Bodies, whose Parts are of Figures very various, besides Flame and Air; the Figures of whose Parts are very irregular. Bodies whose Parts are less con∣densed than Water, to be esteemed Fluid.And here we are to take Notice, That to render a Body Fluid, there is no need that its Parts should be so closely condens'd, as those of
Water are; since Flame and Smoke may be so manag'd, as to resemble Liquid Bodies; of the Latter of which we have Proof, by blowing Rosemary-Smoke into a Glass-pipe, which, if when it is fill'd, the lower End be stopp'd, and the Pipe be held in a Perpendicular Line, the Surface of the Fumes will subside till Level; and tho' the Pipe be inclin'd several ways, yet the Superficies of the Smoke answers to the Horizon, till the Glass be further inclin'd; and then, the Smoke will run along the Pipe like Water, dispersing it self afterwards in the Air. But to return to the Cause of Fluidity: We con∣ceive that there are Three things requisite to render Bodies Fluid:Minuteness of Parts re∣quisute to Fluidity. 1. The Minuteness of the Particles which constitute them; by which they are dispos'd to an Intestin Motion, and to be preserv'd in it more easily; as the Parts of Lead, Quick-silver, and Gold, when dissolv'd by a Men∣struum, are easily rais'd and mix'd with the Parts of that Menstruum. Nay, Fluidity so much de∣pends on the Minuteness of the Parts of Matter, which constitutes Fluid Bodies, that the Parts of Antimony, dissolv'd and broken into small Cor∣puscles, may be turn'd into Butter of Antimony; and, that Butter of Antimony, is chiefly made up of the Substance of the Antimony, is evident, since by a Mixutre of fair Water, a white Calx will precipitate, easily convertible into Glass of An∣timony. And Nature her self supplies us with further Instances; since the very Substance of Bones, is, by Comminution in the Stomachs of Dogs, turn'd into a Liquor: And to confirm this Ob∣servation, I shall add, That I knew a certain Gen∣tleman, who was a close Student, who liv'd for se∣veral
Days together without the least Drink, tho' in the mean time he sweat moderately, and easily enough, his Urine being agreeable to his Con∣stitution, as the Urine of other Men's generally is to theirs: But that Solid Substances may yield, and be turn'd into Fluids, by a Comminution of their Parts, may be evinc'd by the Fusibility of Metals; since the more the Massy Particles of Me∣tal are broke into small Parts, the more their Flui∣dity is encreas'd. A Fluid may be ob∣tain'd from a Consi∣stent Body.And here it may not be unseasonable to en∣quire, how it comes to pass, That a Transparent Liquor should be drawn from such Brittle Bo∣dies as Common Salt; I know it is usually alledg'd, That the Fire only separates the Moist, from the Dry Parts; but since Bodies already Calcin'd or Melted, must needs by the Action of the Fire, have their moist Parts likewise so separated; it is rather probable, That the Fire only divides their Parts, and puts them into a violent Agita∣tion, by which they are rais'd in the Form of Va∣pours, which falling into the Receiver, condense into a Fluid; whose Parts, by reason of their Shape and Size, being apt for Motion, continue to move up and down, and so preserve that Body in the Form of a Fluid, the Motion of the Air, or of some Interpos'd Bodies concurring to preserve the Parts of that in Motion likewise; and that the Air abounds with Parts, perpetually in a va∣rious Motion will appear by and by. Some Bodies more easily preserv'd fluid than others.But in the mean time that a much greater De∣gree of Motion is requisite to preserve some Bo∣dies in a Fluid Form than others, is plain, since seve∣ral Bodies will be froze with one Degree of Cold, with which others will not; and tho' the Watry
Parts of Wine, in some Countries, will freeze; yet the Spirituous Corpuscles of the same Liquor remain untouch'd: And tho' it is evident, by the help of good Weather-Glasses, that Cold condenses the Air; yet it was never so far con∣densed, as to become Ice; because the perpe∣tual Motion concurring with the Minuteness and Shape of its Parts, they are always in an Agita∣tion requisite to keep it in that Form; and it is not improbable, but that the Parts of Salt are very Minute; since, from Experiments before mention'd, it appears, That Spirit of Salt and Ʋrine, will unite into a Sal-Armoniack; and it is further confirm'd, since, Common-Salt, mix'd with Aqua fortis, will dissolve Gold, as well as Spirit of Salt joyn'd with the Latter: and tho' Crude Nitre it self, be mix'd with Spirit of Salt, the Re∣sulting Mixture will supply the Place of an Aqua Regis. And I am inform'd that, that a Chymist in Holland, drew no less than fourteen Ounces of Spirit from a Pound of Salt, a whitish Clay being made use of instead of the Common Caput Mortuum; and that when he had dephlegm'd the Spirit, twelve Ounces remain'd very highly re∣ctify'd; which may be something in favour of Beguinus, who pretends to have got a Pound of Spirit from a pound of Salt. But it may be a Que∣stion, Whether the Fluidity of these Bodies may not in part proceed from the Action of the Fire, working upon some Parts of the Concrete; since a Phlegm or Water may be obtain'd from Re∣ctify'd Spirit, so as to change Part of it into a moist Body like Water. And this will rather be thought probable, if we consider and believe what the Famous Helmont says, viz. That he could reduce
Oyl and Salt into Insipid Water,The Figures of the Parts of Bodies, as well as their Sizes, contribute to tseir Fluidity. without the help of that Noble Alkahest, which would render Gross Bodies wholly Liquid. And here it is requisite to add, That it is not only the Sizes of the Parts of Bodies, that endues them with a Disposition to Fluidity, but also, their Shapes; and I am the more confirm'd in this Opinion, because, having distill'd Oyl of Olives in a Glass-Retort, per se, near a third Part of it was coagulated in the Receiver, into a whitish Substance, not very much unlike Butter; where the distill'd Substance, which usually is fluid, tho' drawn from solid Concretes, was on the con∣trary in this Experiment, a Consistent one, yielded by a Liquid; for which no other Reason can be given, but that the Shape of the Liquid Parts were so alter'd, as to become unfit for Motion. But to return to the Reason of Fluidity, it is evi∣dent, That in pouring of Sand, Corn, Flower, Apples, Walnuts, &c. out of a Sack, that that Aggregate of Bodies, whose Parts are the least, appears most like Liquids; and it is commonly ob∣serv'd, That Whites of Eggs, by being beaten with a Whisk, presently lose their Clamminess and Viscidity, and are reduc'd to a thin and fluid Substance, their Parts being broke asunder, and more minutely divided. And I have observ'd, that That Jelly (which is by the Vulgar thought to fall from a Star) by being a long time digested in a well-stopp'd Glass, became a permanent Liquor. Again, it is observ'd, That when Silver is to be cast in Moulds, and to receive the Curious and Fine Impressions of Hair-Lines, the Metal is not only to be pour'd in very hot, but to be kept a Considerable Time in Fusion, before it is thin
enough to run into those Lines, and to take exact Impressions of them; from whence it appears, That Bodies already fluid, may become more fluid; and the like Instances might be brought from other Bodies, as Turpentine, Oyl, &c. And if what Helinont asserts of the Liquor Alkahest, be true, viz. That it will turn all Substances, whether Minerals, Metals, Plants, or Animals, into a fluid Substance, of an equal Weight with each other; then it follows, That to divide a Body into Parts small enough, is enough to make it fluid. And to this I must add, that considerable Changes may be effected, meerly by a long Digestion in Vessels well stopp'd, and plac'd in a Convenient Heat. 2. The Second Requisite to constitute a Fluid Bo∣dy, is, That it should have considerable Vacuities or Pores, betwixt the Parts of it;Porousness in Bodies requisite to their Flui∣dity. for if there were no such Spaces, the Parts being put into Motion, would not have Space to continue it in, nor could one Particle by the Impulse of another, be forc'd to give way. But before I proceed, it will be requi∣site here to Note, That by Spaces, I would not be thought to mean Vacuities properly so call'd; but that there is no such Substance betwixt them, which will obstruct the Motions of the more Solid Parts. This Caution being premis'd, I shall (to illu∣strate this Second Requisite) observe, That Snow, which is of an open and slight Texture, before it is compress'd, may soon be squeez'd into so close and compact a Lump, as to resist a very strong Pressure; the Air, which before was interpos'd betwixt the Parts of it, being press'd out. Again, we may observe, That when Water is clos'd up in a Bladder, and wants its Liberty to move in a yielding and free Medium, the Parts thus
confin'd together, resist Impressions like a Solid Body; and this Experiment I the rather made use of, than a Bladder distended with Air, because the Distention of that, might partly be attributed to the Spring of the Included Air. How such Vacuities contribute of Fluidity.But it is further to be observ'd, That tho' such Vacuities are necessary to constitute Fluid Bodies, yet they are only so, to use School-Term, as Removens, prohibens, i. e. they prevent the Inconveniencies which must be the Conse∣quence of a Plentitude, viz. Want of Liberty to move; or in other Words, as they dispose the Parts of a Body, to yield to each other's Motion. And here I would Note, That tho' in most Li∣quid Bodies, this Doctrin may take place; yet I conceive it not altogether absurd, to Question, Whether Matter may not be so exquisitely agi∣tated and divided, as to fill up these Vacuities, and to be squeez'd into any Figure, as Occasion requires. But not to spend Time in examining this Point at the present, I shall proceed A Perpe∣tual Motion if Parts re∣quisite to Fluidity.3. To the Principal and last Requisite, in Mo∣difying a Fluid Body; which is, That all the Par∣ticles of a Fluid Body, should be separately and variously mov'd up and down, either by Virtue of some subtle Matter diffus'd through their Sub∣stance, or an inherent Quality of their own. For the Difference betwixt Solid and Fluid Bo∣dies, seems to consist in this, viz. That the Parts of Solids are at rest, and not so apt to yield to the Pressure of One's Finger, as the Parts of Liquids are, which are in Motion; since the Latter be∣ing already agitated to and fro, it is much more easy to guide that Motion, than to put the Parts of a Body into Motion; whose Parts, according
to the Laws of Motion, must be at rest, till mo∣v'd by an Agent powerful enough to put them into Motion. But when once they are put into Motion, by the same Laws, they must continue so, till stopp'd by some other Body; and consequently, they must be in a perpetual Change, as to their Places and Order: so that hence it appears, why some Bodies come to be so soft, since such small Parts of Matter, being in Perpetual Motion, must needs yield very easily to the Touch, and give way to the Impressions of other Bodies. And also, it cannot but dispose them easily to be confin'd by the Vessels they are contain'd in, and as apt to disperse themselves, when Liberty is given them. Having premis'd this Brief Account of Fluidity, I shall now proceed to illustrate it by Experi∣ments: And first, by that concerning Salt-Petre. The Doctrin of Fluidity illustrated by Experi∣ments. Salt-Petre then may become a Fluid Body, either by having the Particles of it dissolv'd in Water, so that they may move up and down, and to give way to the Impression of an External Agent, as the other Parts of that Liquid do; or it may put on a Liquid Form, by being ex∣pos'd to the Air in a moist Cellar, where by run∣ning per Deliquium, the Salt-Petre will be dissolv'd, and put on so far the Form of a Liquid, as to have all it's Parts in an Agitation, sufficient to rank it amongst Fluid Bodies. But Salt-Petre may put on a Liquid Form, without the Addition of a Liquid Body; as first, It may be reduc'd to so fine a Powder, as to re∣semble a Liquid, in the pouring of it out of one Vessel into another, besides the other Requisites
of a Fluid Body; viz. That it hath Vacuities betwixt its Parts, and that they may be easily put into Motion; only they differ from the Parts of Liquids in some Respects, since the Powder hath not it's Parts always in Motion; besides the Vacuities are more sensible: But not∣withstanding, if by the force of Fire each of these Parts be again subdivided, those insensible Corpuscles, being violently agitated, make up a Fluid Body: So the Particles of Metals, being by the same Agent seperated and put into Mo∣tion, do not only move variously one amongst another, but are sometimes toss'd a considerable height into the Air. And not only Fire, but some other Bodies, which are sensibly Cold, may, pro∣vided the Texture and Motion of their Parts be rightly dispos'd, reduce several Substances to a Liquid Form; so Camphire puts on the Form of an Oyl, when swimming upon Aqua fortis: And when Salt-Petre is by the Action of Fire, endow'd with a Fluid Form, it is equally a Fluid, as when incorporated with Water, there being very little difference betwixt these two States of Nitre; only that in the Former, the Agent, which keeps the Nitrous Parts in Motion, is more Vola∣tile and Brisk, and divides it into smaller Parts, without making an Addition to its Bulk. But, perhaps, it will be a Scruple, Whether the Powder of Nitre be an Imperfect Fluid, when pour'd out, or rather like a heap of Sand, not reduc'd to a permanent State of Fluidity: To remove this Scruple, we may take Powder of Alablaster, or instead of it, Plaster of Paris, and we shall find, that by putting it into a hot Vessel, by the continued Action of the Fire, the Parts of
that Powder will be so agitated, and, by the As∣sistance of the more Spirituous Parts, kept in Motion, as to Boil and emit Steams like a Fluid Body, and altogether resemble a Coherent Substance; yet, if it be remov'd from the Fire, it again subsides in the Form of a Powder, tho' for once again it will assume the Form of a Li∣quid, if expos'd to a competent degree of Fire; yet when the Ebullition of the Parts of it are most violent, if a small Portion of it be thrown upon a piece of Paper, it appears to be nothing but a very fine Powder: From whence it is evident, that Fluidity depends on a vehement and various Agitation of Parts; which Fluidity the same Body may be depriv'd of, by losing that Intestine Motion. What the Motion of the Parts of Fluids de∣pends on.And thus it briefly appears how much Motion contributes to the Fluidity of Bodies. And here, tho' it would be very desirable to determine what is the Essential Cause of that Motion; yet since it is a Matter of too much Intricacy, it be∣ing by some held to be inherent in Matter, and by others to be promoted by Impulse, I shall ra∣ther pass it by, than enter upon an Examination of those two Points; especially, since there would be the same Necessity of Discussing others, which equally relate to the Cartesian Principles: It may therefore suffice in short, that neglecting the Unintelligible Doctrin of Substantial Forms, we rather ascribe it to those Catholick Affections of Matter, Motion, Shape, and Situation. But to omit what we have elsewhere deliver'd concerning these Catholick Affections of Matter, we shall observe, what this Experiment further affords us: We are therefore to take Notice, That there
is a difference remarkable betwixt a Fluid, and a Body which hath a Quality of Wetting Bodies which are Contiguous to them; since every wet Body is Fluid, but not vice versâ: For Air, Flame, Melted Liquors, or Salt-Petre, tho' fluid, are all void of a Wetting Quality. Humidity a Relative Quality.Whence we are led to consider, That Humi∣dity is but a Relative Quality, depending on the Congruity that one Body hath to stick to the Pores of another; whence some Fluid Bo∣dies, whose Parts are not adapted, so as to ad∣here to the Pores of other Bodies want that Qua∣lity, as Quick-silver, which slips over the Sur∣faces of most Bodies, without sticking to them; tho' in Respect of some (as Gold or Tin,) it may be esteem'd Fluid; since, inasmuch as it dissolves them, it hath much the same Virtue as Liquids have in softening other Substances: And that Humidity depends on an apt Configuration of the Parts of Matter, and their Congruity with the Pores of other Bodies, is further evident, since Water it self, in respect of some Bodies, is not moist as the Feathers of Swans, Ducks, &c. Add to this, That it is further observable, that when the Texture of a Liquor is chang'd, it may adhere to Bodies it would not stick to before: As for Instance, Tho' neither Quick-silver, Lead, Tin, or Tin-glass, will stick to Glass; yet a due Pro∣portion of each mix'd together will presently, without the Assistance of Fire, adhere to it.That the Pores of a Body can∣not be per∣ceiv'd no Argument of their Non-exi∣stence. But further: If it be objected, That the In∣sensible Agitation of the Parts of Fluid Bodies, are but Imaginary and Precarious; since the Smallness of them, makes them too fine to appear: I must answer, That since their Vacuities, are
so small as not to be Visible, it is as impossible to discern their Parts, and consequently the Mo∣tion of them; since one Part is so presently suc∣ceeded by another, that the Eye hath always a whole heap before it, tho' separated by Pores so small as to be undiscerned. And tho' the. Vacuities betwixt the Parts of powdered Nitre, be so large, as to be discern'd by the Eye; yet when it's Corpuscles, by the Action of the Fire, are render'd more Minute, not only Salt-Petre, but Gold also, are said to possess a less Space, and consequently must leave less Vacuities be∣twixt their Parts, and which are altogether In∣visible to the Eye: For which reason the Body appears continuous. The Motion of the Parts of Liquids variously determin'd.And that the Particles of Fluid Bodies, are in Motion, variously determin'd, appears from their Effects; since they not only penetrate, but putrify some Bodies, and presently dissolve them; as when Sugar is cast into Water, that sweet Substance is dissolv'd, and its Parts so much as∣sociated with those of the Water, as to be car∣ry'd up to the Top of it; which is further ob∣servable in Sea-water, whose Salts upon Evapo∣ration swim at the Top of the remaining Liquor; and it is not less remarkable, That a Solution of Gold in AquaRegis, will presently Tincture twenty times as much fair Water: And further, That the Particles of Flame may be discern'd to move very fiercely, even by the Eye, is commonly known, and further confirm'd, both by their Operations, and the Rays which every way ex∣pand themselves, and strike against the Neigh∣bouring Bodies. And that the Air hath it's Parts in a constant Motion, variously agitated,
we have ä great deal of Reason to believe; since we may easily discern whole swarms of Motes swim up and down in the Sun-Beams: and not only so, but in clear Sun-Shine Days, we may perceive on the Walls of Churches, and other Spacious Buildings, certain obscure Shades to quiver and tremble: And we have yet a fur∣ther Instance in Salt of Tartar, which, after Fusion, being for a considerable time left in a moist Cellar, will dissolve, and put on the Form of a Clear Liquor, by imbibing the Moistness of the Circumambient Air, which penetrates, and gets into the Pores of the Salt by an Intestin and Powerful Motion. And it is further to be Noted, That if in Summer, cold Water be put into a Glass, the moist Vapours which move about it, will be condens'd on the outward side of the Glass, and appear in the Form of Dew, those Moist Particles, which swim in the Air, being, by the Perpetual Motion of it's Parts, successively driven upon the External Superficies of it: In trying of which Experiment it is Re∣markable, That the Dew on the out-side, was not to be observ'd above the Surface of the Li∣quor contain'd in it. And these Relations are the less to be wonder'd at, if we consider, that so weighty a Body as Lead, may be rais'd in the Form of Smoke, a considerable height into the Air, by the Assistance of proper Vessels, plac'd in a convenient Furnace; which Smoke, will be soon scatter'd and dispers'd, by the Various Motion of Aerial Particles: And this Experiment does not only shew, that the Parts of Air are in a Perpetual Motion, but also how much the Minu∣teness of them contributes to their Fluidity.
And tho' Quick-silver much exceeds any other Body in Weight, except Gold, yet it's Minute Parts, agitated and rais'd in the Form of a Va∣pour, will, like other small Particles of Matter, glide to and fro in the Air; whence it hath often-times happen'd, that in Evaporating of it, several pieces of Gold have been so whitened over with the Fumes of it, as not to be got off again without a great deal of Trouble. But to make it almost Visible, that the Parts of Liquid Bodies, are perpetually in a variously determin'd Motion, mix a Solution of unrefin'd Silver in Aqua fortis, with 15 times its Propor∣tion of Fair Water, Decanting or Filtrating the clear Mixture: In which Liquor the Parts of the Silver are not in the least discern'd, tho' upon Immerging a Copper-Plate into it, the Particles of that Metal, which before swam up and down in the Mixture, presently adhere to the Copper, and crust it over with a Metalline Powder; and if the Copper Plates remain in that Liquor for a Night, the whole scatter'd Corpuscles of Silver will be collected together about them, the Li∣quor being Tinctured with a Blue Tincture, by some Parts of the Copper, corroded and divi∣ded into Parts, by the Salt Parts of the Aqua fortis. And to render this Experiment still more Useful, I have observ'd, That by letting a piece of Spiltre lye in this Tincture for some Days, the Copper Particles were gather'd round about that also, from all the Parts of the Liquor; which could not be, were not the Water in a Perpetual Intestin Motion; so that its Parts might, by often changing their Places, suc∣cessively
strike against the Spelter, and so leave the Silver behind. To this Experiment may be added another, which I have long since try'd, when first I be∣gan to consider the Reason of Fluidity. I drop'd then, into Spirit of Wine, moderately Deflegm'd, a small quantity of Oyl of Turpentine, letting it fall so far, that it might by the force of it be broke into small Drops, which by reason of their Tenacity, being unapt to mix with the Spi∣rit, would swim upon it, and be mov'd up and down, variously and irregularly, by the Spirituous Parts of the Liquor, which struck against them in their Ascension; and whilst these Spirituous Parts continue to exhale, it is pleasant to be∣hold, how the Globous Parts of the Oyl will sometimes be gather'd together, and almost unite, and presently after, be again dispers'd abroad, and move to and fro amongst one another; and this Motion would continue, till the most Agile and Spirituous Parts of the Liquor were wholly spent. And lest this Motion of the Oyly Parts, should be suspected to arise from some Antipathy betwixt it and the Liquor, I try'd the Experiment with small chop'd Straws, which were likewise impetuously, and confusedly mov'd up and down on the Superficies of the Spirit: From whence we may learn, That there may be an Intestin Motion of the Parts of a Liquid Sub∣stance, tho' it be not discern'd by the Eye. I might here reckon up a great many more Phae∣nomena exhibited by this Experiment; but it shall suffice to take Notice, besides what hath been already deliverd, That some of the afore∣mention'd Spirit, being clos'd up in a Glass,
Hermetically seal'd, to try whether the Oyly Drops would continue their Motion, when the Vinous Spirit could not exhale, the Vessel was presently broke, without any force otherwise discernible, than by the effects of it. And that the small Parts of the most weighty Liquors, are actually in a Continual Motion, may not only appear from what hath gone before, but may be further confirm'd; since Quick-silver will not only penetrate into the Pores, but de∣stroy the Texture of so solid a Metal as Foliated Gold: And Salt of Tartar, tho' cold, is able to extract Tinctures from several Bodies: And that the Parts of Oyl of Vitriol are in a Perpe∣tual Motion, may be evinc'd, by the Corrosive Qualities of it, which it powerfully exerts with∣out the Assistance of Heat, not only in Corroding Metals; but if pieces of Camphire be thrown into it, they are presently turn'd into an Oyly Substance. And whoever is unwilling to believe that there is an Intestin Motion of Parts in these two Oyls, may easily be undeceiv'd, by the Heat and Ebullition, which follows upon the Mixture of them agitated together in a Glass. But here we are to observe, that tho' it be an Essential Property of Fluid Bodies, that one Par∣ticle readily gives way to another; and that the other is as apt to succeed in the Place of it inter∣changeably; yet that is not to be conceiv'd of all Fluid Bodies in General; but is to be understood only in such Bodies, as are either Simple and Homogeneous, or as have an Aptitude to mix with each other, as Wine and Water; since there are some Liquid Bodies, which will not be mix'd together; but like compact Substances,
resist the Impressions of each others Superficies; and it is not a little strange that Lucretius and some other of the Antient Atomists should over∣look so obvious an Observation, since it is ap∣parent in Oyl, which will not mix with Wa∣ter; but more eminently in Quicksilver, which denys to mix any of those Liquors which were familiar amongst them. But to add an Experiment which is more re∣markable, having so prepared and opened the Body of Copper with a sufficient Quantity of Sal Armoniack, as to render the prepared Mineral inflammable; I applied some Grains of it to the Wiek of a Candle, by the force of whose Flames it was not only Melted, but carried up along with the Tallow to the Bottom of the Flame; where it was observable, that the Flame of it was both lasting, and as distinct from that of the Candle, as if the two Flames had been separated by the Interposition of some other Body. Why some Liquids are unapt to mix with each other.But to return to what I have said of the un∣aptness of Liquors to mix with one another, the reason in general seems to be no other than the particular Texture and peculiar Motion of their Parts. And this I am the rather induced to believe, because Salt of Tartar, dissolved by the moistness of the Air into a Liquid Form, will readily mix with Spirit of Wine, the Texture be∣ing only changed by an addition of Water; tho' before, they both had their distinct Su∣perficies; and tho' mixed by a Violent Motion, yet would presently separate again, and each regain it's former Position. And Oyl or Spirit of Turpentine, gently drawn off from Sea-Salt,
Melted or well Decrepitated, will readily mix with Spirit of Wine, though there was no sensible difference betwixt that Oyl and ano∣ther which would not. Again, a Solution of Salt of Tartar, digested for some time with Oyl of Almonds, would be turned into a soft Saponary Substance; tho', by a strong Agitation, Lixivial Liquors cannot be mixed with Oyls. More∣over, tho' cold Quicksilver will not mix with Oyl of Vitriol, yet, the boiling Oyl will, by piercing it's Substance, both alter and incor∣porate with it. The Super∣ficies of Li∣quids by pressing one against ano∣ther, give each other a determi∣nate Figure.There remains one thing, yet to be taken no∣tice of concerning the Difference in fluid Bodies, which is, That some of them, which will touch each others Superficies without Mixture, will al∣so reduce them to a determinate Shape. As for Instance, if Spirit of Wine be poured upon Oyl of Tartar per deliquium, tho' the contigu∣ous Superficies of both be parallel to the Horizon, yet the upper Superficies of the Spirit will be endewed with a visible Concavity, if the Ex∣periment be tryed in a slender Glass unstopped. In which Liquors it may be further noted, that upon a Mixture of Oyl of Almonds, it present∣ly separated the one from the other, the Super∣ficies of the Oyl of Almonds contiguous to the Oyl of Tartar, being Level as well as that, which was next to the Spirit of Wine: But if Oyl of Turpentine be poured upon it instead of Oyl of Almonds it will be divided into several Portions, some of which Swimming in the Spi∣rit of Wine, will be of a Globular Figure, and o∣thers which rise to the top of the Liquor, will be partly Level with the Superficies of the
Liquor, and partly Sphaerical, on the immersed Superficies. And it may be yet further observed, that some Globular Parts would, tho' the Li∣quor was shaken, continually Swim upon the Oyl of Tartar, being contiguous to it only in a Point. But what is more Remarkable is, that several drops of Oyl of Turpentine falling into the Spirit of Wine, lay upon the Superficies of the Oyl of Tartar, like so many Hemispheres, their convex Superficies being upwards; yet by degrees they became Globular, being equally pressed on every side, and touching the Oyl of Tartar only in a Point. And these Experiments I have the rather recited, because, they being added to that which may be observed in the Torrecellian Experiment by suspending Mercury in the Air (by admitting Air into the Glass Tube, so as to separate the Mercurial Pipe into several Short ones, which will have on each side a Superficies something convex) because I say, they might be of Use in Accounting for the different Con∣figurations of Fluid Bodies, as well as the di∣stinct Superficies of those Vapours which Swim in our Atmosphere. A Tran∣sparent Li∣quor may yield a Li∣quor Dia∣phanous and another Opacous.Having said thus much of Fluidity, it may not be amiss to subjoyn one Experiment which shews, how a transparent Liquor may be divi∣ded into two, the one Diaphanous, and the other Opacous. Pour into a warm Solution of an Ounce of Quicksilver with a double Quantity of Aqua Fortis, about half an Ounce or an Ounce of Filings of Lead, being cautious that it be not put in so fast, as to make the Liquor Boyl over; the Event of which will be, that the Lead will be immediately precipitated in the Form of a
white Powder, the Mercury running together again into a Fluid Body immersed in the Aqua Fortis. And here it is to be noted, that if the success of this Experiment be frustrated, the Mercury may by degrees be again recovered if the white Precipitate be diligently ground for some time with Water. Motion in the Parts of some Consis∣tent Bodies.But to put a Conclusion to this Chapter, it is highly probable, that not only Fluid, but some consistent Bodies have their Parts in a certain degree of Motion; whence, as we may con∣jecture, proceeds that Dust which is the Effect of Putrefaction, in some sorts of Wood: And it is not absurd to imagine, that from hence Worms in Fruit as well as Magots in Cheese de∣rive their Original. And that there is Motion amongst the Parts of some consistent Bodies, is further made probable, both by that Turpentine which I have observed to Sweat out of Deal Boards, and the growth and increase of the Bones, and other consistent Parts of Bodies; but more particularly in those of colder Ani∣mal Substances; as Oyster-Shells, Crabs-Claws and such like consistent Substances. Having said thus much concerning Fluidity, it might not be improper to take notice how by the Mixture of Liquids, their Fluidity is some∣times promoted, and also sometimes destroyed. But since we shall have occasion sometime or o∣ther in the following Chapter, to make such Ob∣servations; I shall, to close this Chapter, add an Experiment, which may intimate, that the event of Mixtures is not always certain: The Experiment is the following; We Evaporated a Solution of Copper in Spirit of Nitre, from
whence we obtained a Vitriol of a lovely Co∣lour: We likewise dissolved one Part of good Tin in a double Quantity of Spirit of Nitre; and tho' Salt-Petre as well as Tin, be both Fusible, yet this Metalline Mixture would neither melt on quick Coals, nor in a red hot Crucible: Where∣as the Vitriol of Copper would melt with the heat of ones Hand, though the Metalline Ingre∣dients be much more hard to be brought to Fusion than Lead, or even Silver it self; and we have sometimes obtained such a Vitriol, as might be preserved in a Fluid Form by the Languid heat of the Sun in Winter, either with Spirit of Nitre or a certain Aqua Fortis: From whence it appears, that the Textures of Compositions are to be considered, as well as the Particular Consistence of the Ingredients. CHAP. XII. Experiments concerning the Superficial Fi∣gures of Fluids. Especially of Liquors Contiguous to other Liquors. COnsidering that the greatest Part of the Universe, is made of Fluid Bodies, especi∣ally if according to the Cartesian Hypothesis, the Sun and fixt Stars consist of Fluids, it may not be amiss to illustrate, what we have only hin∣ted at in the foregoing Chapter: For the follow∣ing Experiments made about the superficial Fi∣gures
of Fluid Bodies, may not a little contri∣bute to illustrate, as well what hath been be∣fore delivered, as what hath been said concer∣ning the Pores of Fluid Bodies; besides, they may be of no small use, in accounting for seve∣ral Phaenomena belonging to the Grand System of the World. EXPERIMENT I. and II. The Figure of the Sur∣face of a Nitrous Li∣quor.To try whether the concave Surface of Fluids, contained in a Pipe, was wholly to be attri∣buted to the Pressure of the Contiguous Air, I poured Dephlegmed Spirit of Wine upon a strong Alkalizate Menstrum, which was made of fixed Nitre run per deliquium in a moist Cel∣ler, and contained in a Cylinder of Glass of a∣bout a quarter of an Inch Diameter; I found that the Menstrum changed it's concave for a horizontal Superficies; and the like succeeded in a Glass of a much greater Diameter. And that Superficial Cavity was likewise almost destroyed by pouring on Oyl of Turpentine instead of Spi∣rit of Wine. EXPERIMENT III. Of Water.If instead of the former Liquor, common Water was put into the Glass Cylinder, it retain∣ed it's former Surface, tho' Oyl of Turpentine Swam upon it instead of Spirit of Wine. EXPERIMENT IV. To try what Surface would be made by an
Oyl heavier than Water,Of Oyl of Turpentine. by being contiguous to it, I put pure Oyl of Turpentine into a Glass Cylinder, and found that the Concave Superficies which it had whilst the Air was Contiguous, became Convex and protuberant upon an Affu∣sion of Water. EXPERIMENT V. The Superfi∣cies of a So∣lution of Tartar, &c.Again having put Salt of Tartar deliquated in∣to a Glass Cylinder, and poured Oyl of Guajacum upon it, we found, that the Concave Superfi∣cies was not altred as it was by Oyl of Turpen∣tine: And having gently poured Water upon these two, the Oyl of Guajacum Swam betwixt the Water and the Oyl of Tartar, having a Convex Superficies at each end, that next the Oyl of Tartar being most protuberant. EXPERIMENT VI. Of Oyl of Cloves.Having likewise put Oyl of Cloves into a Glass Cylinder; by pouring Water upon it, it's Concave Superficies presently became Con∣vex; and this Oyl being too heavy to Swim upon Water, we poured some of it upon Deli∣quated Salt of Tartar, pouring upon it likewise a little common Water, which being done we found the Oyl Protuberant at both Ends, but more at that which was Contiguous to the Wa∣ter. EXPERIMENT VII. Again, having put a considerable Quantity
of Quicksilver into a Pipe of the same Diameter,Of Quick∣silver. but much longer than the former; we found, that the Superficies of it, which was otherwise considerably Protuberant, was in some measure Depress'd, when Water instead of Air was Contiguous to it. EXPERIMENT VIII. Of the same.Upon tryal, whether a greater or less Quantity of Water would alter the Surface of the Mercury, I found that the greater the Quantity of Water was, the more it was de∣pressed; tho' it did not always succeed: But when the Cylinder, being of a considerable length, was filled with Water, the Mercury Contiguous to the Glass was depressed to a Le∣vel; having, in the Center of its Superficies, a Protuberance Semicircular and raised above the other level Surface half it's Diameter, which Protuberance gradually subsided as the Mercury was drawn off. EXPERIMENT IX. The Surface of Liquors in Vacuo Boyliano.Having conveighed two of the afore-men∣tioned Cylinders, one containing Water, and the other Mercury into our Pneumatical Recei∣ver, we found that, notwithstanding the Air was not Contiguous, the Superficies of the Wa∣ter was not manifestly altred by the Exsuction of the Air, tho' the Mercury seemed some∣times to be a little more Protuberant, especially when the Exhausted Air was let in with any Celerity. But one thing in the Mercury, which
was observable; was, that upon the Exsuction of the Air, several Bubbles seemed to rise in the Mercury, and how much those might con∣duce to the mentioned Phaenomenon, we leave others to try. Again, having conveighed ano∣ther Cylinder into our Receiver, which con∣tained an Oyl, whose Superficies, when Water was poured upon it, was Convex; we found, that upon the Exsuction of the Air, neither the Oyl lost it's Protuberant, nor the Water it's concave Superficies: From which Experiments it may appear, what Effects the Pure Aether would have upon such Bodies, were they re∣mov'd out of this Atmosphere. EXPERIMENT X. Though the Figures of the Parts of scatter'd Fluids, and of condensed Vapours, be usually Globulous; yet those Observations being too Transient, to deduce from them the Figures of the Parts of Fluids, we tryed the following Experiment, that I might observe something more Remarkable: Having mixed Fixt Nitre, dissolved into a Liquor by running per deliquium, with exactly rectified Spirit of Wine, and found that, those two Liquors, tho' shaked together, would retain distinct Surfaces; I drop'd Oyl into the Spirits, which gradually subsided till it touched the Superficies of the Ni∣trous Liquor. The Phaenomena exhibited by this Experiment were the following. Phaenome∣na exhibi∣ted by a Ni∣trous Li∣quor and Spirit of Wine.I. That if the Drops were small, they retain an exact Spherical Figure, being neither de∣pressed by their own weight, nor the gravity of
the ambient Spirit, the Oyl being much of the same specifick Gravity with the Spirit of Wine. II. If an Aggregate of Drops were a quarter of an Inch in Diameter, the Pressure of the upper Parts would depress the lower so much as to form a Plain on that side Contiguous to the Nitrous Liquor, so that the Horizontal exceeded the Transverse Diameter in Length. III. And if the Quantity of Oyl was great∣er, it would so depress the lower Parts, as to form an imperfect Hemisphere, the lower Part of it having it's plain and horizontal Superficies, parallel to that of the Superficies of the Nitrous Liquor. IV. But if the Oyl poured in, was moderate as to Quantity; tho' at the first it would spread over the Surface of the Nitre, yet, by degrees, it would be compress'd and be so raised, as to form either an Hemisphere upon the Surface of the Nitrous Liquor, or a Segment of a Globe, or even of an Imperfect Ellipsis; to the production of which Phaenomenon the Tenacity of the Oyl, as well as the Ambient Spirit in some Measure contributed. V. Tho' these Globules of Oyl would some∣times readily mix and associate, when brought together; yet, for the most Part, they would make an Impression into one another without uniting, and again recover, their former Fi∣gure when permitted to separate. VI. It was not unpleasant to behold, how if a large Quantity of Oyl was poured into the Spirit, the Convex Superficies of it would acquire various Figures upon the Motion of that Am∣bient
Spirit; and if the Agitation was strong, several Parts being broke off, would form as many Aggregates of a Globular Figure. EXPERIMENT XI. Of Oyl of TurpentineHaving put a Mixture of two Oyls, one of which was drawn from Turpentine, into other Liquors, to try whether the Lighter Oyl would separate from the heavier, with which it was incorporated; I found, that tho' it answer'd not my Expectation; yet as the Quantity of either of the Oyls was prevalent, the Mixture would ei∣ther sink or swim, in the Liquors it was put into. And to the Phaenomena exhibited by Oyl of Tur∣pentine, it may be added, That when part of it is contiguous to the Liquors it is put into, and part adheres to the Glass, the Superficies contiguous to the Water is of Figures too va∣rious and extravagant to be described. EXPERIMENT XII. Several Co∣lours exhi∣bited.It is to be noted, that when the Nitrous Li∣quor is very clear, it will, in the former Expe∣riments, be very difficult to discover where the Surfaces of the two Liquors are contiguous, they both appearing to be one and the same Mass, except some Dust swims upon the Nitrous Li∣quor, or the Rays of Light fall obliquely upon it.
EXPERIMENT XIII. Having pour'd a peculiar sort of Oyl upon a Deliquation of Nitre and Tartar, ting'd with Cochinele, I observ'd, that by holding the Mix∣ture in a certain Position, the plain Superficies not only variously refracted the Incident Beams of Light, so as to represent several vivid Reflections, but the plain Superficies appear'd almost as con∣vex, as that of Quick-silver; and it was fur∣ther to be observ'd, That it almost as strongly reflected the Rays of a Candle, as a Close Spe∣cular Body usually does; which Phaenomenon could not proceed from the Alkali altogether, but might partly from the Concurrent Action of the Oyl, which I observ'd to contribute to Re∣fraction, when mix'd with other Liquors; but I shall not here endeavour to determine, what was the Cause of the Foremention'd Phaenomena; but in order to it shall observe, First, that nei∣ther the Confining Plain, which separated these two Liquors, nor the Superficies of the Nitrous Liquor, was the Occasion of that Red Colour, which the Flame of the Candle acquir'd. Se∣condly, the Liquor being chafed, the uppermost would be turn'd into a Froth, consisting of Bo∣dies imperfectly Globular, which in a little time would form a rude Physical plain, the Upper Su∣perficies of which, would reflect the Rays of Light very briskly; and when the Parts of the Froth became a little finer, they would reflect the Rays of a Candle, so as to represent so many pieces of Silver polish'd, or a Copper Plate freshly immers'd in a Solution of Silver in Aqua fortis: To which Phaenomena a Third may be added, viz.
That the confining Surface of the aforemention'd Oyl upon Spirit of Wine, was not a little strongly reflective. Most of these Phaenomena before mention'd, were afforded, by making use of Oyl of Limons instead of the former, except that the Reflection was not so brisk. EXPERIMENT XIV. Of Oyl of Aniseeds.Having pour'd Oyl of Aniseeds dissolv'd by a Moderate Warmth, upon warm Water, con∣tain'd in a Viol, I found that the Upper Surface of the Oyl, as well as that of the Water was Con∣cave; tho' the Lower Superficies of it was very Protuberant and Convex; and when it had been remov'd for some time into a Cold place, so that the Oyl might be Coagulated, the Convex Su∣perficies of the Oyl was something less protube∣rant: So that it seem'd to resemble a Concavo-Convex-Glass made use of for Dioptrical Purposes. EXPERIMENT XV. It is not only observable in the former Li∣quor, that the Oyl caus'd a much more vivid Reflection, in a Fluid than Consistent Form; but it may be further noted, That even the Shi∣ning Reflection of Quick-silver, may be increas'd by the Addition of a Liquor: For if Distill'd Mercury be put into a Viol, and Petroleum be gently pour'd upon it, the Reflection will be sensibly increas'd by the Addition of that Li∣quor; but whether that Reflection proceeds from some Subtle Body included betwixt the Petrloeum and the Mercury, I shall not deter∣mine; only to make it probable, That were
there such a Body included it might much con∣tribute to such a Phaenomenon, I shall add, That I once saw a Transparent Body, which was sup∣pos'd to have a true Oriental Pearl in it; but upon the Breaking of it, that which was suppos'd to be a Pearl, was nothing but a Cavity containing a Substance, something grosser than Air: And I have a piece of Glass by me, which hath Air included in a Cavity of a Pear-like shape, which causes such a vivid Reflection, as to resemble a fair Pearl. And I am Master of a Small Stone, which look'd upon in one's Hand directly down, seems to be like Common Glass; but if the Beams of Light in another posture fall upon it obliquely, it appears to be a fine Opal, or Oriental Pearl. EXPERIMENT XVI. An Expe∣riment in Vacuo Boy∣liano.Having melted a Gummy Substance in a deep round wide-mouth'd Glass, and conveigh'd it into our Pneumatical Receiver; upon extra∣cting the Air, we found, that which was con∣tain'd in the Pores of the Gummy Substance, to rise in Bubbles, several of which settled at the Top, and others were detain'd in the Body of it, upon the Cooling of that Substance: Where it was to be observ'd, that those which were in∣cluded in the Gummy Substance, did not only cause a considerable Reflection, but also the Air was so rarify'd in them, that upon the intro-admission of external Air into the Receiver, those Bubbles, which were rais'd to the Top, and ad∣orned with Curious Colours, like those of a Rain∣bow, were presently broke:
EXPERIMENTS XVII, and XVIII. Of Water included in Oyl.Tho' it is usually thought, That the Parts of Water are Spherical, in falling Rain; yet since Hail, which is nothing but Drops of Water froze, and often of a Figure different from Orbicular; to be further satisfy'd concerning their Figures, we conveigh'd several Portions of Water into Oyl of Cloves, and found, that one which was as big as a Pea, was so near an Orbicular Fi∣gure, as to approach an Elliptical one; and other Portions of Water, which were larger, were somewhat Elliptical, but rather more depress'd in the middle; and these Phaenomena were afford∣ed by those Portions of Water which were only contiguous to the Oyl and Air. EXPERIMENT XIX. Having put Oyl of Turpentine upon Oyl of Cloves, which was contain'd in a Glass Cylinder; I observ'd, that Water being encompass'd be∣twixt these two Heterogeneous Bodies, the Sur∣face of the Oyl of Cloves was but a very little protuberant; And the lower Surface of the Oyl of Turpentine, was but moderately Convex. EXPERIMENT XX. Of Coagu∣lated Oyl of Aniseeds.To try whether Fluid Bodies would retain their smooth Surfaces, when reduc'd to a Solid Form, I left Oyl of Aniseeds to coagulate upon Water, and found that that Superficies, which was Contiguous to the Air, as well as that which was next the Water, had each a peculiar kind of Roughness.
EXPERIMENT XXI. Having expos'd one Portion of Water to be froze, with Oyl of Junipers upon it, and another with Oyl of Turpentine; I found that the Ice, which was under each, had a different and pe∣culiar Surface: A Variety of Surfaces may like∣wise be observ'd upon several frozen Liquors, which abound with Water. And I have ob∣serv'd my self, in a red Decoction of Soot of Wood, set to freeze, Crystals shap'd like Daggers, curiously emboss'd, as well as fring'd at the ends. EXPERIMENT XXII. And besides the Irregular Surfaces of a frozen Liquor, contiguous to a Heterogenous Body, I have observ'd in Oyl of Vitriol, that Part of it being froze, the Superficies, which was conti∣guous to the Liquid Part, was very unequal with several Asperities. EXPERIMENT XXIII. And not only Bodies, which are Naturally Fluid, but those brought to Fusion by Art, ac∣quire Various Sufaces upon their putting on of a Solid Form; For I have observ'd, upon the Sur∣face of a Regulus Martis Stellatus, and a Regu∣lus of Antimony without Mars, Curious Emboss∣ments of the Figure of a Star; but if to these Bo∣dies Copper be Artificially added, they acquire New Surfaces, sometimes resembling a Net: And I have now by me, a Mass of a Conical
Figure, consisting of two Parts, contiguous to each other, which when separated, the lower Part had upon it's upper Side, a great many Protuberances; and the Conical Part on it's Su∣perficies, which was contiguous to that, was furnish'd with Cavities answerable to, and adap∣ted to receive those Protuberances: Whence it might be inferr'd, That the more Metalline Part, which was emboss'd with those Protube∣tances, was first hardned, and the other more scorious and recrementitious Part, was after∣wards adapted in it's Coagulation to the Protu∣berances of that which would melt with the Heat of ones Hand, tho' the Metalline Ingredients be much more hard to be brought to Fusion than Lead, or even Silver it self; and we have some∣times obtain'd such a Vitriol, as might be pre∣serv'd in a fluid Form by the languid Heat of the Sun in Winter, either with Spirit of Nitre or a certain Aqua fortis: From whence it ap∣pears, that the Textures of Compositions are to be consider'd, as well as the particular Con∣sistence of the Ingredients. CHAP. XIII. Containing the History of Firmness. ALTHO' the Compactness and Solidity of Bodies, is usually attributed to the Coa∣gulating Qualities of a saline Ingredient, by the Chymists, yet since their Explications are
not intelligible, I shall proceed to enquire after another Cause. First then The Solidity of a Body being a Quality con∣trary to Fluidity,A Definiti∣on of Solidi∣ty. seems to consist in this, viz. That the gross Parts of solid Bodies are so en∣tangled and interwoven together, that they are unapt to diffuse themselves several ways, like flu∣id Bodies; and that the Figure of their Super∣ficies is rather to be attributed to the Connection of the Parts that compose them, than to the Impressions of outward Bodies. In which De∣finition these three Things appear to be the Causes of Solidity, viz. Grossness of Parts, Rest, and the Implication of the constituent Parts. The Gross∣ness of the Parts of a Body con∣tributes to its Solidity.And First, That the Grossness of the Parts of a Body contributes to the Solidity of it, is evident from what hath been already said of Fluidity; for if Minuteness of Parts is requisite to pro∣duce such a Quality as Fluidity, it must follow that the Inaptitude that is in grosser Matter to be put in Motion must be a further Argument, That the Grossness of Particles is conducive to Firmness. But here it is to be noted, that by Grossness or Minuteness of Parts, I would not pretend to decide the Controversy, Whether Bodies may be indefinitely divided into smaller Parts; but I would only intimate, that tho' mentally all Bo∣dies may have an indefinite Divisibility, yet the Parts of solid Bodies are made up of a Number of such minute Parts, as convening together form those grosser Corpuscles, which, when united, are not to be dissolved by the external Impressions of ambient Air or Aether, or any
thing else, usually reckon'd amongst the Causes of Fluidity. Secondly, It is to be noted, That tho' I have said, that the Grossness of Bodies contributes to their Firmness, yet I would be understood to mean, caeteris paribus; for the gross Parts of a Body, by being broke and divided into smaller, may be so dispos'd, to lye nearer one another, so as upon their more close Union, to put on the Nature of Firmness more conspicuously, by affording a more full Contact to other Bodies, especially, if those minuter Parts be so adapted, as to leave smaller Pores betwixt them. But this being evident from what hath gone before, I shall pass on to Rest contri∣butes to the Solidity of Bodies.The other Requisite for the producing of so∣lid Bodies, viz. Rest, which, tho' it is taken notice of by the Ingenious Des Cartes, yet since it is not confirm'd by Experimental Philosophy, I shall here illustrate it a little further; first ob∣serving, that it is agreed on to be one of the Laws of Motion, That when a Body is at rest it will continue to be so, till forc'd to move by the Impulse of an outward Agent; and what∣ever may be urg'd by some Atomists, concerning the Adhesion of the minute Parts of Matter, yet, that a Juxta-position of Parts is sufficient, with∣out the Addition of a Cement, is evident; since several Pieces of Glass, if exactly fitted and polished, will adhere so firmly together, that by lifting up the uppermost the rest will adhere so closely as to be rais'd with them; which will also succeed, if two Marbles exactly polished and ground, have their Superficies ap∣ply'd to one another; and it is further remark∣able,
that if two Glasses be rubb'd one against another, the one will be suspended at the other, without any visible Prop to support it, and pre∣serve it from falling. But here it may be ne∣cessary to take notice, that an exact and level Superficies is not always requisite to make the Experiment succeed, since a concave and a con∣vex Glass rightly adapted will adhere with the same degree of Cohesion; an Example of which we have had in a Glass Stopple, duly adapted to the neck of a Bottle; by which the Bottle, containing a Pound weight of Liquor, might several times be lifted up from the Table; which could proceed from nothing, but the close con∣tact of those two Bodies; unless it be urg'd, that by pressing the Stopple down the small As∣perities of the one might be squeez'd into the small Pores of the other. A Juxta-position of Parts, not the only Cause of their Adhe∣sion.But tho' from hence it may be argu'd, that a bare Juxta-position is sufficient to account for the Cohesion of the Parts of some Bodies, yet it is not to be deny'd, but that their strict Contact may be promoted by the Spring and Pressure of the Atmo-sphere; since by reason of their Juxta-position, the Air, which presses upon the low∣er Superficies, hath not an equal Pressure to ba∣lance it on the other Side of the same Piece; it be∣ing immediately contiguous to the lower Superfi∣cies of the Piece adjoyn'd to it; by which Means the Pressure of the Air resisting the Gravity of the Glass, instead of tending towards the Centre it is boy'd up and press'd against the upper Piece, just as if a Board were press'd with ones Hand against the Cieling of a Room, which will con∣tinue in that Place as long as the Pressure with
ones hand is continu'd: And indeed, That the Air does so press upon the lower Superficies of Glass is but the natural Effect of the Weight and Spring of it, which being bent and press'd to∣gether, by the Weight of incumbent Air, will naturally recoyl and fly back, from the Superfi∣cies of the Earth, upon any Body which is in the Way to be press'd upon. The Weight and Spring of the Air may contri∣bute to the Cohesion of Parts.To confirm this Conjecture I shall add, that if a Piece of Glass be stuck to the Superficies of a Looking-glass parallel to the Horizon, it will stick fast to it, except it be mov'd by one Hand; but if the Horizontal Superficies be inclin'd, the smaller Glass will readily slip from one Side of the greater to the other, accordingly as it is differently inclin'd. The Reason of which is, partly because the Gravity of it does not resist the Horizontal Motion, but only that which tends from the Centre; and partly, or chiefly, because the Pressure of the Air on both Edges of the Glass is equal, and consequently its own Gravity makes it tend either this or that way, as the Glass is variously erected or inclin'd; where∣as the Superficies adhering to the Looking-glass receives no Pressure proportionable to the Pres∣sure of Air recoyling against the lower Surface. And for a like reason, if the neck of a glass Vi∣ol full of Mercury be immers'd in fluid Quick-silver, the Bottle will continue near full, as long as the neck of the Glass is immers'd in the Quick-silver, tho' it be several ways inclin'd; the Reason of which seems to be, only the Pres∣sure of the external Air upon the Surface of the Mercury; by which Means it is forc'd up against the Surface of the inverted Glass, so
that for want of an equivalent Pressure upon the Mercury in the Glass it is kept from subsiding; for that it does not proceed from Nature's Ab∣horrency of a Vacuum is plain, from what hath been try'd concerning the suspended Mercury in the Torrecellian Experiment; and that it may appear more fully, that the Exclusion of Air, as well as its immediate Contact, contri∣butes to the keeping of Bodies from falling asun∣der, it will suffice to relate, that having suck'd a good Quantity of Air out of a Bottle, and apply'd a Book which was next at hand to the Orifice, it stuck so firmly to it, that, tho' the Weight of it was 20 Ounces, it would be rais'd a considerable Height, and tho' but a small Part of its Superficies adher'd to the circular Edges of the Glass. The Reason of which seems to be no other, than that the Pressure of the ex∣ternal Air overpowers the weak Resistence made by the Air in the Bottle; and since the Resi∣stence of the internal Air is so weak, the whole Orifice of the Bottle seems in some Measure to be a common Superficies; for as much as the Pressure of the Air in the Bottle, scarce makes any sensible Impulse upon that Part of the Book encircled by the Edges of it. The Solidi∣ty of Glass depends on a Juxta-po∣sition of Paris.And it is not altogether improbable, but that the compact Texture of Glass, may depend on a like Juxta-position of Parts, since the Parti∣cles of Fire, in the making of it, may so divide the Parts of the Ingredients as to render them subtile enough for so strict and close a Uni∣on, as is requisite to exclude Air from betwixt them; for it is not only obvious, That Air cannot penetrate the Pores of it, when heated
in Distillation, but in blowing of Glasses where it hath not the least Vent; through the Pores of it, tho' impell'd with Force, yet its Pores are fine enough to give way to the Beams of Light and Heat, and likewise to the fine Effluvia of a Loadstone, without damaging the Texture of it in the least; nor would it be more absurd to conceive that the Parts of Salt-petre or Ice were after the like manner joyn'd together, by a Juxta-position. But to return to the Place from whence we have made this short Digression; tho' from hence it appears, that the Spring of the Air may contribute to the Cohesion of the Parts of Solids; yet it is not altogether necessary, since the same may be accounted for by the Air con∣sider'd barely as a Weight; for the Air being a fluid Body, and pressing by its Gravity towards the Centre, it must needs diffuse it self every way, when resisted by the Surface of the Earth, and consequently expand it self orbicularly, by which means the whole Pillar of Air incumbent on it, being virtually incumbent on the lower Superficies of the Glass, whatever separates one from the other, must out-balance that Pressure of the Air; otherwise (there being no Air betwixt the two Glasses) they must needs stick together; but it is not necessary that the contiguous Superficies of these two Glasses should be equal to the Horizon, since if they be perpendicular, the Sides of the Glasses have a collateral Pressure from the Pillars of Air pres∣sing against them, and consequently the Diffi∣culty must be as great to separate them.
But to try more exactly, How much the Pres∣sure of the Air is concern'd in the former Expe∣riments, we took two polish'd Marbles, as smooth as we could get, and fastned Wires to the up∣permost, so that the lowest could not slide off the other Horizontally, but, if any way, must fall Perpendicularly; which Caution being observ'd, we found, the one would not only draw up the o∣ther, but a Pair of Scales fixed to it with 16 Oun∣ces of Troy Weight; and to make the Experiment more compleat we found, That when the Sur∣faces of the Stones were wet with pure Spirit of Wine, the Air being by that Means kept from insinuating it self betwixt the Stones, the up∣permost would not only draw up the other with a pair of Scales, but an hundred, and sometimes a hundred and thirty Ounces of Troy Weight; tho' the Diameter of the Stones exceeded not an Inch and two Thirds: But having repeated the Experiment with Oyl of sweet Almonds instead of Spirit of Wine, we found, that it took up above four hundred Ounces Troy Weight: And that it may not be suspected, That this Difference proceeds from the more clammy Parts of the Oyl, which caus'd the Stones to adhere more closely, I shall add, That the contiguous Surfaces being held perpendicular, tho' they would easily slide off each other, when moisten'd with Oyl, yet would they not slip down, when moistned with Spirit of Wine, without an additional Weight joyn'd to one of them, the Protuberances of one, perhaps, being fastned in the Pores of the other.
But to shew, That the Adhesion of these po∣lish'd Marbles is proportionably greater as the Diameter of them is larger, and consequently as they are press'd together by a larger Pillar of Air, I repeated the same Experiment with Spi∣rit of Wine, and took up about four hundred and seventy Ounces; but when I made use of Oyl of Almonds, the Weight rais'd, was much more considerable, being a Thousand three hundred and forty four Ounces of Troy Weight; besides at the same time the Marbles were ob∣serv'd to stick close together: And here again, lest it should be suspected, that the Oyl made the Adhesion more close, I shall relate this Ob∣servation, viz. That tho' it requir'd so great a Weight to separate these Stones when their con∣tiguous Surfaces were in an Horizontal Line; yet would they easily slide one upon another, not unlike the contiguous Glasses before mention'd; and for the same Reasons; and if they were the least inclin'd either this way or that, their own Weight was sufficient to separate them: From whence it appears how much the Air may be concern'd in compressing the Particles of solid Bodies together. And lest it should be further objected, That the Cohesion of these Stones rather proceeds from Nature's Abhorrency of a Vacuum, than the Cause assign'd by us, I shall add these Consi∣derations; First, That if it were so, the same Reason would hold when a much more consi∣derable Weight is fastned to the lower Marble; yet we see, that then, notwithstanding Nature's Abhorrency of a Vacuum, they presently part. Secondly, That the Pressure of the Air is suffi∣cient
to account for it: Which to make it more plausible I shall add, that tho' the Stone were fastned to the Ground, yet it would require as much Force, to separate the Uppermost from it in a Perpendicular Line, as to lift up a weight aequiponderant with the Stone, and the Pil∣lar of Air incumbent on it, since there is nei∣ther Air, nor any other Body, betwixt the two Stones to help to raise the Lower up, and in part to sustain the weight of the incumbent Atmosphaere; and therefore it needs not seem strange, that when the lower Marble and the weight affixed to it, is not sufficient to ballance the weight of the Atmosphaere, it should rise a∣long with the Uppermost when drawn up, ra∣ther than be separated from it; since it is usual, for two Bodies, when joyned together, to move the same way, if they be not separated by Weights or some other Force; which is obser∣vable in trying of Load-stones; for if the Load-stone be able to raise a Body more ponderous than it self, the Knife will as soon raise the Load-stone as the Load-stone will lift up the Knife. To Illustrate what hath been said I shall add an Experiment registred amongst my Adver∣saria, which is this, viz. Having immerged a Glass Syphon with a Brass Valve cemented on one end, almost half a Yard in a tall Cucur∣bite, till it touched the Bottom, I filled it with Water, till the Superficies of the Water in it, was equal to that in the Cucurbite, which being done, I took a pair of Scales, putting an Ounce weight into one Scale, and fixing a String to the other, one end of the String being likewise fastned to the Valve, fixed to the bottom of
the Glass Tube; where it was to be observed, that by that single Ounce I was able to open the Valve, whereas when the Water was poured out of the Pipe, and it was immersed again, the Valve would not be open'd again without the Additional weight of four Ounces; And in this Experiment it was further to be obser∣ved, that as the Valve was raised higher and higher in the Cucurbite, a weight portionably less was sufficient to open it. In which Expe∣riment, if fuga Vacui resisted the opening of the Valve, it would have required the same weight at the top of the Water as in the Bot∣tom, the Valve being in both places under Water. And therefore the difference rather proceeds from the Compressure of the Ambient Water, that presses the Parts of the Valve to∣gether. And tho' Air be a Body much more light than Water, yet considering that the difference is but about as much as 1000 to 1, and that the Particles of Air, which press upon our Atmosphaere, are incumbent upon each other for several score Miles in height; it is not absurd to expect, that their pressure should be considerable, and sufficient to press the two Marbles together. For a further Confirmation of our Doctrine of Firmness, to this I shall add another Experi∣ment, which is, that having suspended the afore∣mention'd coherent Marbles in a large Glass, when the Air was considerably exhausted the lower presently fell from it; And tho' the uppermost was let down to it, yet it could not be raised, till fresh Air was admitted into the Glass again, and then they were again pressed
strongly together and became coherent as in the open Air. Rest it self for the most part suffici∣ent to cause Rest.But to return to our Discourse from which these Experiments have made a Digression; tho' the Pressure of the Air may so joyn Bodies to∣gether, as to make them coherent; yet gene∣rally, Rest it self is sufficient to render a sub∣stance Solid; for since from what we have said above, concerning Fluidity, it appears, that it depends on the Motion of Minute Parts one a∣mongst another; to deprive Matter of that Motion is enough to render it Solid, the Parts of a Solid being contiguous and at rest. The Opini∣ons of some Antients and Mo∣derns brief∣ly refuted.I know it is by all Philosphers, whether Mo∣dern or Antient, usually held, that there is something else requisite to keep the Parts of a stable Body together: For some hold, that a Substantial Form is requisite; but since it is equally as difficult to conceive, how Matter should be so variously united in several Substances, by a substantial Form as without it, we may as well fly to imaginary Substances which are united by their peculiar Texture. Others think, that the Particles of solid Bodies are linked together by a Spirit dif∣fused throughout the World, or by a certain sort of Glue, which Glews their small Corpuscles together. But as to the first its altogether un∣likely; for it may as well be a Question how those Parts stick to the Spirit, as how they stick to one another themselves; and it will be no less difficult to conceive, how the Particles of that Spirit it self come to be fastned together. Be∣sides, were that true, it would follow, that Ice, which is looked upon as a Body void of Spirit,
must abound with it; since the Parts of that brittle Substance, could not be joyned by a Spirit which was not betwixt them: Nor is it more Reasonable to suppose them joyned by a Cement, since it might likewise be asked, how the Parts of that Cement were linked together, which should it be affirmed to be done by a Sub∣stance yet finer, the Question might still be con∣tinued ad Infinitum; so that, it would at last be allowed, that some Parts of Matter must ad∣here without a Cement, or there must be Ce∣ments finer one than another ad Infinitum; which since it cannot be allowed, we may as well sup∣pose, that the Parts of a Body adhere without a gross Cement, as that the Parts of a subtile Cement can stick together without another Sub∣stance to Cement them; especially, since the Corpuscles of a Body may be so figured and contrived as to be linked amongst one another very firmly; an agreeable Contact, with a real rest of Parts, contributing to render the united substances a Solid Body. But in favour of the former Opinion, it is urged by some, that the Spirit which they sup∣pose joyns the Parts of a Body together, con∣sists of Parts indivisible; and consequently, there is no need of another substance to Unite them: But since Bodies as Solid and Adamantine as these can be supposed to be may be broke, a bare Affirmation must not be taken for Proof; for to suppose, that these Parts of Matter were made up of hooked Parts; it would be as rea∣sonable to believe, that those hooked Parts might not be broke, as that by a violent Agent the Particles of the most Solid Bodies cannot be divided, since it is plain they may.
But to proceed, The last thing we suppos'd necessary to constitute a Body, was the Texture of its Parts; and indeed tho' a Juxta-position and Rest of the Parts of a Body, are sufficient to render it Solid; yet if those Parts are more in∣timately interwoven with one another, so as to be linked together like Hooks, it must contri∣bute to render the Body much more firm, Parts so joyned, being much more difficultly separa∣ted, and put into Motion, than those which have only an immediate Contact; And it may not a little serve to confirm our Opinion, to take Notice, that in an Egg or Water, by a meer alteration of Texture, the Disposition of Corpuscles of those Substances are considerably changed; as when an Egg is, by the insinuation of the Parts of Fire, so altered, as to become hard; or as when the Latter as well as Water is beaten into a Froth, which in some Measure is like a Solid Body, as long as they continue in that Form. Having thus far inquired into the conjunct Causes of Solidity, we shall consider briefly, how many Ways a Body may come to be so Modified, and what things are requisite to make Bodies apt to put on such a Form. The Figure of the Parts of a Body contribute to their So∣lidity.The first and most remarkable thing is the Fi∣gure and Shape of the Parts of Matter, as if they be hooked or otherwise shaped, so as to entangle one within another, they will be with more difficulty separated; which is evident in close-set Hedges, where by pulling away one Bough the slender Twigs of others interwoven with it, make it harder to be separated; and not
without pulling some others along with it; o likewise the slender Threds, which make up Cables, being twisted and wound one within another, are capable of sustaining a much grea∣ter Weight, and require much more Force, to braeke them. And indeed this Configuration of Parts seems to have been the Opinion of the antient Atomists, of which Lucretius hath given the following Account in these Verses; Denique quae nobis durata ac spissa videntur, Haec magis hamatis inter se esse necess' est, Et quasi ramosis alta compacta teneri. In quo jam genere imprimis adamantina Saxa; Prima acie costant, ictus contemnere sueta Et validi salices, ac duri robora ferri, Aeraque quae Claustris restantia vociferantur. And indeed the correspondent Figures of Bodies may be so numerous, that the same Par∣ticles, which before in two distinct Bodies were Liquid, may, by an Union, have their Parts so interwoven with one another, as to be∣come Solid; an Instance of which hath been given in the foregoing Chapter concerning Salt-Petre, where by a Mixture of a Liquor distilled from Nitre, with a Mixture of fixed Nitre run per Deliquium, a third Substance will be obtain'd firm and brittle, viz. a Saline Body. To this I shall add another, mentioned with a different design by Lully and Hartman, which is the follow∣ing, viz. If two Parts of rectifyed Spirit of Wine; be mixed with one of Spirit of Urine ex∣quisitely Dephlegmed, they will in a Minute unite into a consistent Body; but in this Experi∣ment
it is to be Noted, that the Spirits must be more rectified than those usually made use of by the generality of Chymists; and I shall further observe, that having my self had the Curiosity to try it, I found that Spirit of Harts-horn well rectifyed would have the same Effects, if made use of instead of Spirit of fermented Ʋrine. And it may be fit yet further to observe that tho' there was such a predisposition in the Parts of fermented Ʋrine to Coagulate with Spirit of Wine, yet the highest Spirit of unfermented Ʋrine be∣ing of a different Texture would not Coagulate as the former. And it is further to be noted, that if this white Coagulum was kept in a Glass well stopped for some Months, by the means of Heat it would be Melted into a limpid Liquor; those Parts of the Liquor which were intangled one within another being broke and dissolved, so that the Particles of the united Liquors being again restored to such Figures as would enable them to move upon one another's Surfaces, the Coagulum assumed the Form of a Fluid Body. To this I shall subjoyn two Experiments which seem to have an Affinity with the former; the first is, That rectified Spirit of Wine, by being digested with Saccharum Saturni prepared with Spirit of Vinegar, so far changed its consistency as to remain in a Glass without floating as a Liquid when the Glass was inclin'd; the Second is, That by the Addition of a dry Body, from whence nothing could be obtain'd by the help of the Fire, to the Coagulum just now mention'd, the result of this Mixture was a permanent Liquor. But for as much as the fore-mention'd Experi∣ment
which produc'd the Coagulum upon the Mixture of Spirit of Wine and Urine is difficult to be performed, since it is a hard Matter to ob∣tain Spirits fine enough for such a pourpose, I shall subjoyn a more easy one, which is, That if Spirit of Salt be added to the White of an Egg beaten to a certain Thinness, the Mixture will be so much Coagulated as not to afford the least Drop, tho' the Glass in which the Experiment is tryed, be turn'd with the Mouth downwards for a considerable time. And Sir Francis Bacon relates an Experiment much to the same purpose; which is, That if the White of an Egg be shaken with Spirit of Wine it presently turn into such a Coagulum as will not yield one Fluid Drop in a Minutes time, and tho' that great Naturalist at∣tributes the Effect of this Mixture, to the Heat of the Spirituous Parts; yet I rather think it the Effect of the particular Texture of its Saline Parts, since other Salts which are accounted cool, have the same Effect; And not only so but tho' Spirit of Wine will Coagulate the Whites of Eggs, yet it hath not that Effect upon the Serum of Mans Blood, tho' the Heat of the Fire will Coagulate the one as well as the other. But it does not only experimentally appear, that a consistent Body may result from a Mix∣ture of two Fluids, but also that a Fluid may un∣dergo such an Alteration as to be changed into two Consistent Bodies; and this is evident in distilled Sallet Oyl, since the Substance drawn over is devoid of Fluidity as well as that which remains behind; and to make it appear, that the Reason of it is the bare result of Texture and the hooked Figures of its Parts, if we add to
the Oyl a sufficient Quantity of Common Salt, it affords an Oyl, which falls in drops into the Re∣ceiver, and retains its Fluidity. And to this it may be added, That by adding two pound of Brandy, and one of Sea-Salt to eight Ounces of Oyl of Amber, the Texture of that Oyl was so far from being so chang'd, as to come over clear and transparent; as Essential Oyls drawn off in Lim∣becks, usually do. To which we may likewise add, That the Texture of Oyl of Aniseeds, di∣still'd in a Limbeck and Refrigeratory, with a sufficient Quantity of Water; will, by the Win∣ter's Cold, be coagulated into a white brittle Substance, tho' it continues Fluid all the Summer. The Tex∣ture of Bo∣dies contri∣butes to their Flui∣dity, or Fir∣mness.And to make it further appear, how much the Alteration of Texture contributes to the Fluidity, or Firmness of Bodies; and to what weak, and al∣most inconsiderable Agents, those Effects may be attributed; I shall subjoyn another Experi∣ment, which shews, that the Particles of a Body may be sufficiently agitated, to render it Fluid, by another not sensibly hot; for having melted coagulated Oyl of Aniseeds by the Fire, and put it into two Glasses; the one was congulated again in a short time; yet the other continu'd dissolv'd, being only cover'd over with a Men∣struum, in whose Parts there is no sensible Heat. To this I shall add another, of a much like Nature, which is the following. Having pow∣der'd some of that brittle Gum or Colophony, which remains upon the Evaporation of about a fourth Part of Venice Turpentine, I mix'd so much of it with Spirit of Wine, that, the Li∣quor being wholly impregnated with it, some part might remain undissolv'd; which never∣theless
had its Parts put into an Agitation, suf∣ficient to render it, in some measure, a Fluid, tho' a Viscous Substance, notwithstanding the Force of the Menstruum was spent upon what had been dissolv'd; but tho' this Substance was kept in a Fluid Form in the Menstruum; yet in the Air, it would harden in a little time. And in this Experiment, it is likewise observable, That tho', by a violent Agitation, the Viscid Matter was mix'd with the Menstruum, yet it presently separated, and subsided again. The Tex∣tures of Li∣quots con∣tribute to their Mix∣ture.And this suggests to my Memory an Experi∣ment, which shews how much the Textures of Liquors contribute to their Mixtures with each other; for tho' it be usually in General asserted by the Chymists, That Salts and Oyls will not mix together; yet I obtain'd an Opacous Liquor, like Balsam in Consistence, from a Mixture of an equal weight of Oyl of Turpentine, and Oyl of Vitriol: And that it might more evidently ap∣pear, that the Mixture of these two Fluids, de∣pends on the peculiar Texture of each, I com∣mitted the Mixture to Distillation; and obtain'd a gross Substance, which seem'd to be that which united the other Liquors: For as soon as this was drawn off, the Liquors presently succeeded, but separate one from another, being not to beunited again, by a Violent Agitation, but so as to se∣parate again, and swim one upon another. To this may be added the Liquor, which we have mention'd in another place, obtain'd by Distil∣lation from Benzoin: One Part of it always continuing in the Form of an Oyl; and the other, according to the Difference of the Weather, ei∣ther shooting into clear Crystals, or preserving
it's Fluid and Oyly Form. To which may be subjoyn'd what we have formely taken Notice of concerning Salt-Petre; which, tho' when mix'd with Water, it becomes Fluid; yet, upon an Evaporation of some Part of that, it presently shoots in Solid Chrystals: From whence it not only appears, what a gentle Agitation of Parts is sufficient to keep a Body Fluid; but from hence we may observe, That sometimes Solid Bodies result from a Mixture of Liquids: So Oyl of Vi∣triol, distill'd with Quick-silver, leaves a white Calx behind it; and if we consider how Mercurius Dulcis is prepar'd, we shall find, that that Solid Substance consists for the most part of Quick∣silver, the Salts united with it being scarce one Part of three of the Composition. And tho' Fluidity be opposite to Solidity, yet may it conduce to the Production of a Solid Body, since those Particles which lie in the Form of a Powder, and are not in a capacity to unite, may, by swimming in a Fluid, have the Opportunity of frequent Occursions, so that their Motion bring∣ing them often together, they may, in time, be dispos'd to unite into one Body; which is evi∣dent in Powder of Alablaster; which, if when it hath been boyl'd for a considerable time, it be well burnt, and reduc'd to the Consistence of a thin Pap, with clear Water, will become firm, and admit of, as well as retain, any Form im∣press'd upon it, by the Internal Surface of whatever Mould it is cast in: Where, that the Parts of the Alablaster are put into Motion, and variously agitated in the Water, is evident, from that sensible Heat, which for some time, suc∣ceeds the Affusion of Water; and this hath been
sufficiently experienc'd, by filling a Glass full of this Mixture, which some time after it was stop∣p'd, broke the Viol, and harden'd into a Sub∣stance, correspondent in shape to the Cavity of it; several Spoons-full of this Liquor it was moisten'd with, being squeez'd out at a Crack, which was made by the Swelling of the Powder; and this Substance acquires such a Degree of Firmness, as to endure several strokes with a strong piece of Iron, without breaking. But there are several other Substances, which may acquire a greater degree of Solidity, than the Powder of Alablaster burnt; for the Learned Hydrographer Furnier, Hydrograph. lib. 2. cap. 6. relates a Story of a sort of Sand in the King∣dom of Naples, near Cuma and Puteoli, two parts of, which mix'd with a third of Quick-lime, be∣comes a hard Substance like Flint, when it hath lain or some time in the Water: To which Re∣lation he subjoyns, That the Lime-ashes of a certain Marble, near Tournay in Holland, being cast into Water, upon a heap of Stones, petri∣fies to that degree, as to change into a Substance as hard as Marble. But to return to what we have digress'd from, That the Variously determin'd Motions of the Parts of Matter, contributes to their Union and Coalitions, into Solid Substances, appears from those Curious Salts, which Spontaneously shoot and Crystallize in the Bottom of Spirit of Harts-Horn, when it hath been expos'd to the Air for several Months: For those Particles, by fre∣quent Occursions, are by degrees so dispos'd to unite, that at the length those Parts, which
are most apt to cohere, meeting together, they form exquisitely figur'd Crystals, which adhere to the sides of the Vessel. And it is not less Remarkable, That tho' a Tincture of Amber, drawn with pure Spirit of Wine, for some Years continu'd Fluid; yet, at the last, some of its Parts were so combin'd, as to form little Par∣cels of Amber, almost Spherical in Shape, which adhered partly to the Sides, and partly to the Bottom of the Vessel. Solidity may proceed from the In∣terposition of the Mi∣nute Parts of another Body.But there are yet other ways, by which Bo∣dies may become Compact and Solid, as first by the Insinuation of Small Particles of Matter, into their Pores and Recesses; which may pro∣duce their Effects various ways: First, by dri∣ving out those Particles, which being dispos'd to Motion, hinder'd the Cohesion of the Fluid Parts. Secondly, by obstructing the Motion of the Fluid Parts: And, Thirdly, by altering the Constituent Parts of the Fluid, so as to render them unapt for Motion, and inclinable to a mu∣tual cohesion: So the Particles which constitute Rennet, by Uniting with some Parts of the Milk they are mix'd with, link them together, and cause them to unite into a Coagulum; and that the Parts of the Rennet cause them to coagulate; and that they unite those Viscid Parts, and link them together, is plain; since it is a usual Complaint that the Cheese made where Rennet is us'd, tastes very strong of it. And that the Coagulating Virtue depends on the Saline Parts of the Rennet, appears; since other Acid. Li∣quors have the like Effect in Coagulating Milk, as Juice of Limmons, &c. as also a very small Quantity of Oyl of Vitriol, artificially mix'd with
it. To which I shall add, That some Years past, I prepar'd a certain Salt, endew'd with Qualities not unlike those ascrib'd to Glauber's Sal Mira∣bilis; which would not only, like other Salts, when dissolv'd in Water, upon Evaporation, shoot into Crystals, it self; but also would coa∣gulate, and Crystallize a treble Quantity of Wa∣ter with them, which would so far put on the Nature of a Salt, as to become brittle, and to be reducible to Powder. A Liquor turn'd into a Consistent Body, by the Addition of a Powder.And it may not be fruitless here to subjoyn, That tho' the Particles of Oyl of Vitriol, be in so violent an Agitation, as to acquire a Sen∣sible Heat, upon their Mixture with some Bo∣dies; yet I so alter'd the Texture of that Li∣quor, as, by a Mixture of a certain whitish Powder of my own Preparation, to render it a Consistent Body: In which Experiment, it was observable, That several Days, after the Oyl was coagulated, the Powder remain'd undis∣solv'd in the Bottom of the Viol; so that the Coagulation seem'd to be effected by some subtile Effluvia, insinuating themselves into the Pores of the Liquor. To this Experiment, I shall subjoyn another, in which the same Effect was produc'd, by leaving Oyl of Vitriol upon Crystals of Salt-Petre well dry'd; where it was to be noted, That the Oyl was not only Coagulated, but seem'd to be joyn'd together, by certain Fibres, which were form'd out of the Saline Effluvia of the Salt-Petre, dispers'd through the Body of the Oyl. And that those subtle Effluvia, which insinuate themselves into the Pores of a Fluid Body, may so alter the Texture, as to render it Solid, is more eminently evident, from the Fumes of
Lead, which Coagulate and harden, Quick∣silver; and that Lead, does really emit such Fumes, is evident, from the Effects which a Physician] observ'd in himself; viz. both Vo∣miting and Purging, by barely holding his Head over melted Lead, several times successively. and it hath been observ'd by the Famous Geo∣metrician Dr. Wallis, That the Fumes of Lead, have, by being several times melted, been so spent, that the Lead, after the first time it was melted, sometimes lost it's a Coagulating Vir∣tue. And Phaenomena not much different from the former, are exhibited by the following Expe∣riment: For if either Common,A Fluid turn'd So∣lid. or Oyl of Sweet Almonds, be pour'd upon Aqua fortis, the Steams of the Latter will soon Coagulate either of them; whereas if Camphire, which is a brittle Substance, were cast upon the same Aqua fortis, it would be turn'd into an Oyly Substance;A Solid Bo∣dy turn'd Fluid. which shews how much the Effluvia of Bodies may contribute to Fluidity, or Firmness, accordingly as the Bo∣dies acted on, are pre-dispos'd to assume diffe∣rent Forms: And before I leave this Experiment, it may be material to take Notice, That tho' Oyl of Tartar, per Deliquium, be endew'd with an Extraordinary Faculty of Mortifying Acids, yet it would not reduce the Coagulated Oyl to a Fluid Form. But to proceed: The Last way by which such Penetrating Effluvia may conduce to the Soli∣dity of Bodies, is, by putting those Bodies into such Violent Motions, as they may, by being impell'd upon, and knock'd one against another, be dispos'd to Union, and to be entagl'd one within another.
And tho' this Concurrent Cause, never acts separately, without the Joynt-Action of the aforemention'd Ways, yet is it necessary to make a Distinction; because this differs from the For∣mer, in as much as these Effluvia, contrary to the other, make up no part of the Body, upon which the Alteration is wrought, but only agi∣tate the Parts of it: So that the Figure and the Texture of the Parts of the Body, become diffe∣rent from one another,A Compli∣cation of Parts suffi∣cient to ren∣der a Body Solid. and more complicated. And that a bare Complication of Particles, is suf∣ficient, in a great Measure, to render a Body stable, will appear from an Observation very common; viz. That That tho' from a heap of Osiar-wands, a single Twig may be taken, with∣out removing the rest; yet if they be twisted together in the Form of a Basket, the whole follow upon the taking up of one; and the same may be observ'd, in most of the Works of Mechanicks. And what great Effects bare Motion may have, in altering the Textures of Bo∣dies, is manifest, and very obvious in Churning; where the Branched Particles, which are dis∣pers'd and diffus'd through the whole, by fre∣quent Occursions, are so freed from the rest of the Liquor, that they presently unite, and form that soft Oyly Substance call'd Butter; and not only so Homogeneous a Body as Milk, may be so al∣ter'd by Motion, but even Oyl of Turpentine, may be render'd a Consistent Body, without the Assistance of any other Agent, than Mo∣tion given to it's Parts by Distillation, the Sub∣stance drawn off being a Stable and Consistent Coagulum. And to illustrate farther, what we have deliver'd of Fluidity and Firmness; I shall
add the following Experiment; viz. That Oyl of Wax, being distill'd, afforded a Substance not unlike Butter; which when it had stood a while, was dissolv'd, without the Influence of any Ex∣ternal Heat, into a Transparent Oyl. A Change of Qualities succeed a Change of Texture.But further: Fluidity and Firmness so much depend upon Texture, that the same Corpuscles, which united one way form a Fluid, by an op∣posite Texture, may become Solid, and è con∣versò: And this is not only evident, in Water successively Froze and Thaw'd again; but also in Metals, which, after Fusion, put on their Pri∣stine Form, upon Cooling: But a more Emi∣minent Instance is, That Quick-silver being kept in a Sand-Furnace, for about ten Weeks, in a Glass-Vessel well stopp'd; the Particles of that Body, being variously entangl'd and wound to∣gether, constitute a Red Powder; which may, by Chymists, be precipitated per se; and in a few Hours, if a quantity of Quick-silver be distill'd in a Glass Retort, a Red Powder, like the for∣mer, will remain in the Bottom, as well as about the Sides of the Vessel: In which wonderful Phaenomenon, it is not absurd to imagine, that the Change is wrought, much after the same man∣ner as in Whites of Eggs, which by an Altera∣ration of Textures, become hard; or, that by frequent Revolutions, the Parts of that Liquor are so link'd one within another, as to put on a different Form; and whatever may be the Me∣thod by which this Change is effected, yet, that it depends on an Alteration of Texture, is most certain; since that Powder being rais'd in the Form of Fumes, in a convenient Glass, condens'd into Running Mercury, in the Neck of it.
But to prove further how much Motion, or Rest, contributes to the Fluidity or Solidity of Bo∣dies, I shall add, That I once had Mercury, which I looked upon to be Mercury of Saturn, which by be¦ing barely agitated to and fro, would put on the Form of a Black Powder, which would again be∣come fluid Mercury, by grinding it in a Glass-Mortar. Fluids con∣sist not of Parts divi∣sible into Fluids, as Quantity into Quan∣tity.From which Experiments of Mercury, we may learn, what may be thought concerning the Opinions of some Modern Philosophers, who are of Opinion, That Fluid Bodies may be divided into Fluid Bodies, as Quantity into Quantity; as if every Particle of a Fluid Body, must be Fluid it self; since, from the aforemention'd Expe∣riments, it is evident, that the Particles which constitute Fluids, are Solid in themselves; foras∣much as, upon a bare Change of Texture, they ap∣pear in that Form; which is render'd further probable, if not evident, both since the Par∣ticles of which Salt consists, being dissolv'd in Water, put on, as to Sense, the Forms of Fluids; as well as, because the Corpuscles of so Solid a Body as Silver, do the same, when dissolv'd in Aqua fortis: And on the contrary, the Calx, re∣maining behind, after a Distillation of Quick∣silver, with four times its quantity of Oyl of Vitriol, in a Sand-Furnace, is a Consistent Sub∣stance, which, if dissolv'd in Water, will after Evaportion, shoot into very brittle Crystals; which rather proceeds from the Parts of the Oyl condens'd, than from those of the Metal; since the Calx remaining behind, exceeded the weight of the Mercury, the Liquor drawn off, being not equal to that of the Oyl. And
I am further confirm'd in this Opinion, because I have observ'd several Crystals sometimes to adhere to the Sides of a Glass, in which Oyl of Vitriol was contain'd, which were again re∣solv'd when expos'd to the open Air into the pristine Form of Oyl. But it may be further urg'd, as an Argument against the Divisibility of fluid Bodies into such fluid Parts, that if it were so, all Bodies would be equally dispos'd to insinuate themselves into the Pores of other Bo∣dies; and it would not happen, that one Body should be more inclin'd than another. Motion as well as Mi∣nuteness of Parts requi∣site to Flui∣dity.It is not indeed to be deny'd, but that a fluid Body may be divided into very small Parts, consider'd barely as Matter; and that Minute∣ness of Parts may render it more apt for Moti∣on, and consequently more fluid; but it does not therefore follow, That the Parts of a fluid Body are indefinitely so divided, because consi∣der'd as Matter, they may be Mentally, since it does not appear, that they are Naturally so divi∣ded: Besides, to render a Body fluid, Motion as well as Minuteness of Parts is requisite, which appears from what we have said before concerning Powder of Alablaster, which puts on the Form of a fluid, by having its Parts vio∣lently agitated. But Solidity not altogether proceeding from Saline Parts.From what hath been already premis'd it ap∣pears likewise, What Thoughts we are to en∣tertain of the Doctrin of the Chymists, who assert, That Coagulation, Stability, &c. are the Effects of saline Parts. For tho' Salt hath a Power to curdle Milk and coagulate other Hu∣mors; yet the hardning Properties of it are not the Effects of any inexplicable Qualities in∣herent
in it; but of the Shape and Motion of the Particles which constitute it, which, by in∣sinuating themselves into the Pores of a Body, and sticking several Parts together, do like a Wire fasten them one to another. But notwith∣standing the saline Parts of a Body may thus contribute to the Solidity of it, yet it is not an Ingredient altogether necessary; since the Parts of a Body may be so interwoven, and, by rea∣son of their Figure and Contexture, be so dis∣pos'd to Union, as to form a solid Body without the Association of a saline Ingredient; besides, it might be urg'd, That Salts themselves may easily be reduc'd into fluid Substances, by a Mixture of Water; and several of them, as Salt of Tar∣tar, &c. will, without the Addition of any other Body, barely by being expos'd to the Air, be render'd fluid. But not to insist upon these Instances, I shall rather desire to know, what Salt can be sup∣pos'd to insinuate it self into, and cause Solidity in Mercury, when it coagulates in the Fumes of Lead? Or what Access of saline Parts can be imagin'd in the Preparation of Mercury preci∣pitated per se? And it may as well be question'd, how any saline Body can penetrate the fine and subtle Pores of Glass? When, in a cold Night the Water contain'd in it is frozen, and is tur∣ned to so consistent a Substance as Ice. And it may be likewise noted, That tho' the Shells of Hens Eggs be soft when first lay'd, yet they pre∣sently harden without the Addition of any other saline Ingredient. And that this Effect cannot be wholly attributed to the Influence of the Air, it may be urg'd, that it hath often∣times
been observ'd, That Shells have been found hard several times in the very Bodies of the Hens, before they were laid. But that which I look upon to be a more con∣vincing Argument, is, that in Aegypt, where Eggs are hatch'd by the Influence of a moderate external Heat, that fluid Substance is chang'd into several Parts, of very different Degrees of Consistency, without the Addition of any other Body, or the Accession of a new Salt. But further, I shall make use of Arguments drawn from the Concessions of the most Emi∣nent of their own Writers; for in transmuting of Quick-silver into Gold, by a white or red Tincture, the Quantity of it being only a Grain to a Pound of Quick-silver; it may justly be demanded, How so small a Quantity should change six or seven Thousand times its Weight, whereas even that Grain is not altogether sa∣line, Part of it being a▪ sulphureous Substance? And it is observ'd, that Helmont affirms upon his own, as well as the Experience of Raymond Lully, that if the Alkahost were drawn from Quick-silver, the fluid Mercury would be so coagulated, as to be capable of being reduc'd into a Powder, tho' not the least of the saline Liquor was left behind. And I am credibly inform'd that the present Duke of Holstein hath by him a certain Glass Spirit of Urine, which in cold Weather shoots into Crystals, and in warm dissolves into a limpid Liquor, which Spi∣rit was no otherwise prepar'd than by cohoba∣ting the distill'd Spirit so often, till the whole saline urinous Substance was brought over uni∣ted together into one Mass.
And for a further Confirmation of the Do∣ctrin by us deliver'd, to these I shall add, that it hath been observ'd, that if so much as Juice of Lemmons falls into a Caldron of Sacharine Syrup, it keeps the whole Mass from Thick∣ning into a Sugar; and this is confirm'd, both by the French Publisher of the Natural and Mo∣ral History of the American Islands, call'd Les Isles Antilles Histor. Moral. Cap. 5. and also by Gulielmus Piso Histor. Nat. & Med. Brasil. l. 4. c. 1. the latter of which expresses himself in these Words, Si Momentum succi Limonis, vel Acidi quid injiciatur, Sacchari Consistentiam nun∣quam acquiret, sed in totum perditur; and it may be further observ'd to our present Purpose, that in making of Sugar, the Juice squeez'd out of the Canes, is usually first depurated in large Vessels of Copper, from whence it is remov'd into Vessels of a less Size, in order to a farther Depuration; where we are to note also, that whilst it remains in the larger Vessels, they usu∣ally add very strong Lees to promote Depura∣tion, and when the depurated Liquor is re∣mov'd to the small Vessels, it is the Custom to add Oyl or Butter to preserve the Liquor, and to prevent it from boiling over, which Prepa∣ration Piso takes notice of, together with the above-mention'd Author, the Words of the former being these, Observatu dignum, si Oleum majoribus inderetur Ahenis, in quibus Liquor pri∣mus, Caldo dictus, purificatur, Saccharo conficien∣do planè foret ineptus; vicissim si minoribus lixivi∣um sicut majoribus infundatur, aequè impossibile Saccharum conficere. The Fluidity and Firmness of Bodies depend so much upon the peculiar
Texture of the Matter which constitutes them, rather than on a saline Substance. To these Authorities, for a further Confir∣mation of our Hypothesis, I shall add a few Experiments of my own; and first, having pre∣par'd a Liquor not much inferior in Saltness to Aqua fortis, and then put small Fragments of solid Harts-horn into it, we found, that they were gradually soften'd, the Particles of the Liquor insinuating themselves into the Pores of the consistent Body, and rendring it in a few days time of the Consistence of a Mucilage: We mix'd likewise Spirit of Vinegar with Salt of Tartar,An insipid Water drawn from Sp. of Vine∣gar & Salt of Tartar. till the Ebullition wholly ceas'd, and by Distillation obtain'd an insipid Water from the Mixture; and so successively pour'd fresh Spirit of Vinegar upon the Mixture, and again extracted the insipid Water, repeating reite∣rated Affusions and Distillations, till the fix'd Salt was sufficiently impregnated with the Acid Parts of the Vinegar; and then we obtain'd a Mixture, tho' made up of pure and elementary Salts, which so far emulated a fluid Body, as to depose its saline Form when influenc'd by a very moderate Heat.Camphire dissolv'd in Oyl of Vi∣triol, &c. Again, we mix'd some Pieces of Camphire with Oyl of Vitriol, by which they were presently dissolv'd into an Oyl, and when violently agitated together, readily mix'd with the Oyl of Vitriol, and seem'd to consti∣tute a uniform Liquor for several Hours; yet by an Addition of four times as much fair Wa∣ter, the Camphire presently assum'd its own Form again, and swam upon the Top of the Liquor; where it is to be noted, That the saline Parts of the Oyl of Vitriol render the Cam∣phire
Fluid, instead of making it more Solid; and on the contrary, that Fluid is turned into a Consistent Body again, by a Body so much void of Saltness as Water. And that a Body may acquire those other Qua∣lities, viz. Hardness and Brittleness, without an Addition of Saline Parts, is evident, from the different Tempers that may be given to a Piece of Steel; for if it be immerged in Water red hot, it acquires a Brittleness and Hardness, which it hath not, if leisurely cooled in the Air; yet if it be again heated till it turns to a deep Blue, it acquires a comparative softness and apt∣ness to bend. And that an Alteration in Tex∣ture, is enough to render a Body more or less Solid, is evident in Snow; for its Parts being compressed more closely together, it is abler to resist the Impressions of other Bodies; and yet when further, by thawing it, it's Parts are brought closer together, it hath a greater de∣gree of Solidity and Firmness, when Froze a∣gain; the Texture being much more close and compact, than that of the Snow. But by some it is taught, that Induration de∣pends on a certain inward Principle,A Plastick power inhe∣rent in Be∣dies. or a Pla∣stick Power, called by some a Form and by o∣thers a Petrifying Spirit, lodged in a Liquid Ve∣hicle. And indeed, since I have observed, that some Stones dug out of the Earth are endewed with such curious and exquisite Figures, as if they had been the product of Art; I cannot but ac∣knowledge a Plastick Power, which the wise Creator of Things hath implanted in certain Particles of Matter, which produce both the determinate Figure as well as consistnce of those
Bodies:Plastick Power what? But we disagree with the generality of those Philosophers, as to the Manner in which this internal Principle produces its Effects; and since the Manner of it, by them, is not intel∣ligibly explained, it will be necessary to Consi∣der, how many ways Nature takes to render Bodies Solid, by which we shall be better Qua∣lify'd to Judge of the Manner which those Par∣ticles operate by, in which the Plastick Power is said to lodge. But to proceed; For as much as Hardness is the highest degree of Firmness, we shall endeavour to make it appear, that an Alteration of Texture, concurring with other dispositions of the compo∣nent Parts of a Body, is enough to render it hard without the Addition of an adventitious Salt. The Tradition is common amongst those, that search into the Secrets of Nature, that Co∣ral, tho' a hard Substance with us, is a soft Body whilst remaining under Water, according to that of Ovid, Sic & Cor allum quo primum contigit Auras Tempore durescit, mollis fuit herba sub Ʋndis. Ovid. Metamorph. Lib. 15. And tho' Beguinus Tyrocyn. Chym. lib. 2 Cap. 10. hath urged very strong Arguments against this Tradition; yet, that it hath sometimes been found true, appears from what Gassendus lib. 4 An. Dom. 1624. relates of an Ingenious Gentle∣man, who Fished for Coral near Toulon, viz. The Plants, which were pluck'd up, and drawn out, were neither red nor handsome, till their
Bark was pulled off; in some Parts they were soft, and would give way to the Hand, as to∣wards the Tops, which being broken and squez∣ed, they sent forth Milk like that of Figs. To which may be added the Testimony of the Jesuit Fournier, Hydrograph. lib. 4. Cap. 27. And I am informed by one that Practises Physick in the East-Indies, that he gather'd white Coral di∣vers times on the Sands of the Island Mehila (not far from that of Madagascar) which is usually as soft as an Onion; and is observed to decay, if it is not gathered at a certain Season of the Year. Agreeable to which Piso lib. 4. Cap. 68. making mention of several stony Trees on the Brasilian Coast; says, E fundo erutae mox durissimae; si inso∣lentur in Littore, siccae niveique coloris fiunt, which may be favoured by the following Relation of Scaliger's. Ex bovillis Oppidanus adjutus Medica∣mentis eminxit vitrum sane ex illa Nobili Paxagorae pituita dum mingeretur, albuminis Mollitie, emis∣sum vitri duritie ac splendore, Senatoris filius ejecit, puttis modo multis, & maximos: Qui aeris Contactu, postea in Gypseam tum speciem tum firmi∣tatem concrevere; hic quoque nunc recte valet. And I have been informed by a Merchant, and likewise a Chymist of Dantzick, that several Lumps of Amber have been taken up soft upon their Coast which presently grew hard in the Air; which I the rather believ'd, because I have several times observed, both Spiders, Flys and Straws enclosed in Amber. Observa∣tions of In∣durated Bo∣dies.And here we may take Notice, that tho' it from hence appears, that some Bodies which are soft under Water, become hard when ex∣posed to the Air; yet it is a Matter of difficul∣ty
to determine, how much, the Infiuence of the Air contributes to the hardning of them: For Gassendus in Vita Piereskii. lib. 1. says, he hath observed in the lesser Streams of the River Rhos∣ne, where he usually washed himself, several Lumps of hard Substances, upon the same Place, where he was wont to find the ground smooth and soft; and that some time after, the same hard Substances remaining in the Water, as well as some which he carried home with him, were turned into perfect Pebbles; from which relations, and also what we have before observed concern∣ing the Powder of Alablaster, it appears, how much the Mechanical Textures of Bodies, toge∣ther with other Mechanical Qualities contri∣bute to their various Forms; for besides the aforementioned Instances I have observed, that that bony Substánce, so much esteemed by Phy∣sitians, which is usually taken out of the Deer's Heart, and is of a hard Consistence, hath ap∣pear'd, in one of those Creatures which I pur∣posely look'd into, to be soft and flexible like Cartilages. And indeed Solidity seems so much to depend upon Texture, that it may justly be doubted, whether the most solid Bodies have not before their Concretion been in Fluid Forms; since a∣mongst other Rarities I have seen, in the midst of Stones, the exact Figures of Fishes with their Scales and Finns, &c. And I have known, not only Wood, but several other Substances as Lead-oar, Minera Antimonii, Marchasites, &c. found in the midst of stony Concretions; which are strong Arguments that those Stones have been before their Indurations in the Forms of
Fluids; and from hence we may have ground to Question the Opinions of some, who think, that Stones and such like, or more solid Concre∣tions, have been existent in the same Forms since the Creation; since we may with probabi∣lity enough presume, that these Concretes are the Results of Matter, newly modified; and united after a different Manner from what they were before; otherwise it would be impossible, that such things should be lodged in such hard Concretes; And these Considerations and Ob∣servations may farther confirm, what we have elsewhere noted concerning the growth and in∣crease of Minerals. But the most eminent Instances, to shew, how much the Fluidity and Firmness of Bodies,A very re∣markable Instance to shew how much Flui∣dity, &c. depends on Texture. is owing to the Texture and various Coalitions of their Parts, are in those Waters, which when permitted to rest, instead of Fluidity acquire a stony hardness. And it hath been observed in some hollow Caves, that by the Coagulation of a certain Humor, which issued out of the top of it, several Concretes have been formed like Ici∣cles; of which I have some by me now, ga∣thered by a very ingenious Person, which are of a perfect stony hardness, being 8 or 10 Inches in Length, and of a proportionable Thickness; and I have also now by me, certain stony Con∣cretes sent me from a famous petrifying Cave in France. And if we will give Credit to Aventinus as well as some other Authors, he hath recorded, in his History, that several Men and Women were at once Petrify'd by a Terrene Spirit, and changed into Statues; that Petrifying exhalati∣on
operating much after the same Manner, and altering the Texture of their Bodies, as when by Incubation and the subtile Insinu∣ations of calorifick Atoms, the Parts of an Egg are so newly modifyed and disposed, as to put on the Form of a Chick. And it is Testi∣fied by Pamphilio Pixcentino, of a Woman in Venice, who upon eating of an Apple, was tur∣ned into a very hard Stone, after she had been hideously tortured for about 24 hours;Mixture sufficient to produce Pe∣trifaction. which History together with Observations of my own, which I shall add, will be a good Argument to prove, that even Mixture is sufficient to petrify some Bodies; the Observation is in the following Experiment, viz. If two Ounces of Quick-silver be mixed with two Ounces and a half of Verdi∣greese, together with about an Ounce of com∣mon Salt, and put into a Frying Pan; when that Mixture hath been Boiled for a considerable time, with an equal Quantity of Vinegar and Water, gradually infus'd, as it wasts by Effluvi∣ums, the Mixture, washed and cleansed from its Salts, will afford an Amalgama not unlike Quick-silver; which, if Dexterously prepared, may be cast into Moulds and formed into imbost Im∣ages; and it is in this Amalgama very remarkable, that tho' at the first it is so soft, as in a great Mea∣sure to emulate a Fluid Body; yet when for some hours exposed to the Air, it becomes hard and as Brittle as Steel; where the Induration seems to result from the Coalitions of the mixed Ingre∣dients, and their new Texture, rather than from any innate Principle; The Particles of the Fluid Mercury being so intangled and interwoven one with another, as to lose their former Fluidity,
and to convene so closely as to unite into a Solid Body. And that the Induration depends on a Mu∣tual Combination of the Saline Ingredients with the Mercury, is beyond doubt; since not only a true and perfect Copper may be obtained from the Amalgama; but when it hath been for some time exposed to the Air, the Surface will be covered over with the Saline Parts of the Verdigreese, which have freed themselves from their more intimate commixture with the metalline Particles of the condensed Quick-Silver. But lest it should be Questioned, whether the Particles of Salt can have any sensible Operati∣on, when mixed with a Body so firm as con∣dens'd Quick-Silver, I shall add, that in Bodies much more firm, it hath been observ'd, viz. in those Stones from which Vitriol is got; for it is remarkable in them, that when they have been for some time exposed to the open Air, the in∣ternal Agitation of the Saline Parts, is so vio∣lent, that several of them will not only swell, but even burst asunder. And I remember that having preser'd a Mineral, much of the same Nature with these Stones, in my Chamber, the Superficies was cover'd with a Powder, both in Colour and Taste resembling Vitriol. And that the Motion of the Parts of this A∣malgama, whilst it was Fluid, which they might be put into, by the external force of the Fire, might contribute to their Concretion, we have suffi∣cient Reasons to believe, from what is related and observ'd by experienc'd Masons, viz. That the best Morter will not acquire it's utmost com∣pactness, under 25 or 30 Years, and that, after
a long time, it becomes so hard, as to be more unapt to break than the Stones it Cements. But lastly, that the Condensation of the Parts of the Quicksilver, depends on the Mixture of the Ingredients, and the Texture thence resulting, is evident; since the Proportion of the Ingre∣dients being vary'd, the Condensation of the Mercury was neither so speedy, nor so firm. And that it may appear, That Nature and Art sometimes take Measures not unlike, in the Hardning of Bodies, I shall add a Passage from a Jesuit, nam'd Pierre Belleprat, who relates it as an Observation in the American Continent, where he was sent to preach to the Indians:A Strange Sort of Earth. The Relation is, That near the Mouth of the River, there is to be found a Green sort of Clay, which being soft, and capable of being put into any Form, whilst under Water, grows so hard when expos'd to the Air, as not to be much softer than Diamonds; and this, he says, the Natives usually make Hatchets of, which they cut their Wood in pieces with. But, A Concrete resulting from a Mix∣ture of Spi∣rit of Wine. and a So∣lution of Coral.To conclude this Discourse, I shall add an Experiment, which will be a farther Confirma∣tion, That Fluidity and Firmness, depend on Texture, and the Motion or Rest of the Insen∣sible Parts of Matter. The Experiment is, That having made a Solution of Coral in Vinegar, so strong, that part of it fell to the Bottom; I pour'd Dephlegm'd Spirit of Wine, upon the Clear Decantated Liquor, so gently, that it might swim upon it for some time; where it was suprizing, that upon a violent Agitation, the two Liquors being mix'd together, united into a Concrete so firm, as not to afford the least
Drop of a Fluid Liquor; yet by adding an equal quantity or thereabouts of Spirit of Nitre, it would again lay down that Viscidity, and be∣come a Transparent Liquor. And here it will not be amiss to specify, That this Experiment is so difficult, that it scarce succeeds, without a great deal of Caution; for, First, If the Tincture be not strong enough, or the Spirit of Wine not rectify'd, the Coagulation will be but partial, and not so quick: Secondly, The Experiment hath succeeded in a Wide∣mouth'd Glass, where it had a free access of Air, tho' it would not in one which was closer: Thirdly, Upon an Infusion of Spirit of Nitre, the Mixture must be stirr'd with an In∣strument, made of Gold, Wood, or Glass, lest the Menstruum corroding it, should render the Ex∣periment unsuccessful: And Fourthly, The quan∣tity of each of these Ingredients is hard to be defin'd, by Reason of the Difference in respect of the Strength of the Tincture, and the Spi∣rituousness of the Spirit; but it is rather to be learnt, by Varying the Proportions, if the first Tryal does not succeed. Having made this Progress in the History of Fluidity, and Firmness; It might be seasonable to pass on, and consider those other Qualities relating to it; as Hardness, Brittleness, Softness, &c. but remembring the Advice given by some of the Ancients, Noscenda est Mensura sui; I shall leave them for others, who are better able and more at leisure; being content, that I have explain'd the two former Qualities more Intelligibly, than some of the Peripateticks, or Chymists; having lay'd open a Way to accommodate Chymical Ex∣periments,
to the Explanation of Fluidity and Firm∣ness, so as to deduce those Qualities, from more Intelligible Principles, viz. Size, Shape, and Motion. CHAP. XIV. An Essay of the Intestine Motions of the Particles of Quiescent Solids. The Signifi∣cation of the Word Rest limited.THE Word REST, is of so Ambiguous a Signification, that before the Question, Whether there be in Bodies any Absolute Rest? can be answer'd, it is requisite to consider, That in the Common Acceptation, it is us'd to de∣note, such a Rest as is not perceivable to Sense; but when taken in a more Strict and Philosophical Sense, it usually signifies such an Absolute Rest, as to intimate a total Negation of Motion. In which latter Sense, if it be taken, I will not af∣firm, That there is such a Rest, even in the Parts of Solids; since it is not improbable, but that there is Motion, tho' imperceivable by Sense, even in the most Solid Bodies. In favour of which Opinion, were it necessary, I should offer Arguments à priori, deduc'd from the Doctrin of the Epicurean and Cartesian Principles. For should we allow the World to arise from a Casual Concourse of Atoms, and that there were actual Motion in all of them; it would not be absurd to think, That tho' in Forming Con∣cretes, they are usually wound one within another,
yet there is a continual Endeavour to Elasti∣city, by which they continually strive to dis∣entangle themselves, and to fly away, and con∣sequently the Result of those Endeavours must be a Motion amongst those Atoms. And on the other side, should we, with Cartesius, allow a Continual Circulation of a Materia Subtilis through the Pores of Bodies, we may imagine, That the Insensible Atoms, which constitute that Body, will be shak'd and disturb'd by it, tho' not so much as to be perceiv'd by Sense: So in the Summer, the Leaves are carry'd off the Trees with gentle Gales of Wind, which are not perceiv'd by those that stand some Distance off. But not to enlarge upon this Point, it may appear, from several of the Phaenomena men∣tion'd above in the History of Fluidity, that the Particles of Bodies may be in Motion, tho' that Motion is not discern'd; and Particularly, that of Water; where tho' its Parts be in a very Va∣rious Motion, yet to Sense they seem to be as much at Rest, as those, which form the Glass, in which the Water is contain'd. And that there may be a like Motion, in the Substance of Silver or Iron, may be argu'd from what is evi∣dent to the Touch, or by throwing Water upon them when hot, it being peculiar Properties in them when hot, to burn the Fingers, and to set the Water a-boiling; and the like Qualities, tho' not so violent, may be rais'd without the help of Fire, by barely Hammering of Iron, or Silver; they not only, by that means, acquiring a Power to heat, but likewise to raise Water into Va∣pours.
Argument to prove Motion in Solids.But if to this it should be objected, That tho' the Motion be indiscernible; yet the Agent that gives it that Motion is not, since we can discern how those Qualities are added to it, and how the Alteration is wrought: I answer, That tho' a Vigorous Loadstone, appears to be drawn along it's Axis, and back again, the Alteration is not vi∣sible in the Body of the Iron; yet it certainly loses, after it hath acquir'd, those Noble Faculties, viz. it's Attracting and Directing Virtues properly belonging to Magnetical Bodies: But, that there may be in Metals a Motion, tho' not discernible, is further evident in a Bell; which a long time after it has been struck with the Clapper, conti∣nues to put the Air into an Undulating Motion; and thereby to cause very odd Sounds; which must be an Argument, that the Partieles of that Bell are in a very nimble Agitation; otherwise they could not communicate Motion to the Circum∣ambient Air, and thereby cause such a Noise in the Ear. But I must confess there are two Difficulties,Objections answer'd. which occur to what I have been offering: As First, That it is hard to imagin, how the Inter∣nal Parts of such Solid Bodies should be work'd upon, by Agents so weak as the Air, and espe∣cially some parts of Matter more Minute, which are dispers'd through it: And Secondly, It may be question'd how any Parts of Matter can be mov'd so slow, if at all, as to be so long in moving from the Internal Parts of a Needle, to the Su∣perficies, as our Hypothesis requires: But, To the First, I answer, That those External Parts are not the sole Causes of these Motions, but only assistant to the Principal; which is evident from
what hath lately been noted concerning the Con∣nate Dispositions to Motion, attributed to Mat∣ter, according to the Epicurean and Cartesian Phi∣losophy; and by the Effects of a Loadstone upon the Needle, we may be taught to guess, what lasting Changes may be produc'd, in the Textures of Bodies, by the Influence of very Insensible Parts of Matter. And as for the other Part of the Objection, viz. The Slowness of Motion, which Nature makes use of in some of her Works, are altogether as inconceivable, as the Motion of a Shadow upon a Dial, or of an Index upon a Clock: And Nature may upon other Accounts, and undoubtedly does, make use of Motion in a degree yet more remiss. But not to insist upon the Slowness of Motion, which Nature makes use of, it may be otherwise offer'd against this Obje∣ction, that the Motion of the Insensible Cor∣puscles of a Loadstone cannot be suppos'd to be in a Direct Line, since they must not only pass through Pores very crooked and intricate, but must also meet with several other Particles of Matter, which will oppose them; and not only drive them back, but also make their Passage still more intricate and winding, by driving them from one side to another, as well as several other ways, by which their Motion may be retarded. Besides it is but Reasonable to suppose, That it is much more easy to keep a heavy Body in Mo∣tion in its own Medium, than to remove it from that to another. But to decline Speculations,Instances alledg'd. I shall bring Instances to confirm what I am about to prove, viz. That the Corpuscles, which constitute Bodies, are in∣clinable to Motion, and that their Motion is
very slow: The first Instance I shall mention, is in a Spring made of Steel, which, tho' it be press'd and squeez'd together for some time, it will, upon a Cessation of that Pressure again, un∣bend it self, and recover its former Position; but if it be kept long in that compress'd Posture, it will by degrees lose that Power of Restitution, and continue in its crooked and unbended Figure: From whence we may learn, That tho' Elastick Parts may be endu'd with an Endeavour to ex∣pand themselves, yet they may be a long while in working their Effect; since we see, that Steel being put into a Springy Form, retains that Springiness for a long time. The Effects of a Bar of Iron held in a Perpendi∣cular Po∣sture in a Mariners's Compass.But to confirm what I have been discoursing of, and to evince what considerable Changes the Air may Effect in the most Solid Bodies; I shall add this Observation, viz. That if one End of a Bar of Iron, held perpendicularly, be apply'd to the Point of a Mariner's Compass, it will force it away towards the East or West; but if the Position of that Bar be alter'd, it pre∣sently loses its Magnetical Qualities: Yet it is observ'd, That if this Iron Bar be kept long in a Window, it's Magnetick Qualities become much more durable and constant; from whence it ap∣pears, That the Air together with the Magneti∣cal Effluvia of the Earth, may work changes very lasting upon the Particles of Solid Bodies, by insi∣nuating themselves into their Pores; and that the Motion, which must needs be concern'd in al∣tering their Texture, must likewise be very slow, since it cannot in a little time acquire such Mag∣netical Virtues.
But to proceed to a further Confirmation of what we have deliver'd, the first Observation I take Notice of is, that it is usnally observ'd, That if Lignum Vitae, which is one of the hardest Woods, be work'd before it be sufficiently sea∣son'd, it will be very fragile, and subject to break; so that curiously work't Vessels expos'd to the Sun, have broke in pieces: And it hath been observ'd likewise, That several Cavities have been found in the Substance of it, full of a certain Gum, which some People much esteem in Venereal Distempers; to which may be added, That in the Seasoning of this Wood, for some particular uses, it is requisite to keep it longer than others, so that less than twenty Years will not make it fit for some uses. From whence we may infer, That if this Wood requires so long time to acquire it's utmost Compactness, and to evaporate its Watery Parts, the Motion of those evaporated Particles, must not only be very lasting, and durable, but slow. And if it be allow'd, that those Gummy Parts were collected in their Cells, after the Felling of the Tree, as it is highly probable, it will be further to our Advantage, because it shews how the Parts of a Gross Body do permeate the fine Pores of a very Solid and Inanimate Substance; where the Motion must need be very insensible and slow. But what is more strange, I am in∣form'd, that the Wood of which certain Mu∣sical Instruments are made, sometimes, tho a much softer Wood than Lignum Vitae, requires at least forty Years Seasoning, and does not ac∣quire its best Resonance under Fourscore.
But further, That there is not only a Change of Texture in Solid Vegetable Substances, but even in Stony Concretes, appears from what is observ'd in Building;Observati∣ons made in Quarries. where some Walls acquire not their Utmost Solidity under forty Years. To which I shall add, what is further observ'd in somes Quarries by Masons: And First, that there are Marchasites to be found, which being much more hard than Stones or Marble, and which consist as well of a Metalline, as a Stony Substance; yet have such a Degree of Motion in their Parts, as not only to burst, but, if long ex∣pos'd to the Air, to be cover'd over with Vi∣triolate Efflorescences. To this I shall add, That an Ingenious Friend of mine had a Turquoise-Stone, in which there were certain Spots of different Colours from the Gem it self, which were ob∣serv'd to shift their places several times; which that there might be no doubt of, I employ'd one to take the Picture of it with those Spots in it, at several distant times, one after another, which Pictures, when compar'd, shew'd, that the Spots had shifted their Places; having pass'd up and down through the Substance of so solid a Gem, ve∣ry slowly, in a Figure as irregular. And I am in∣form'd by a Jeweller, that he once had one of these Stones, which had a different Blue in two several Parts of the Stone; and that, in some time, the one overspread the whole, and mix'd with the other: And an Ingenious Friend of mine told me, That he had observ'd a certain Cloud in an Agate, to move several times from one place to another. Motion in the Parts of Solide.But there is not only an Intestin Motion of Parts in such Solid Substances as these, but in Bodies
look'd upon to be of the Closest and most Compact Textures; for I have now a Diamond by me, which being rubb'd, will easily become Electri∣cal, and shine in the Dark; which Qualities can∣not be added to it, without a Change of Tex∣ture; and that in altering that Texture, there is an Internal Motion of Parts, will easily be evinc'd; because, otherwise the Texture could not be chang'd; and further, because a very gentle Agent is sufficient to put the Parts of a Diamond in Motion. And to this Relation I shall add, That I have often observ'd, a Dulness and Clearness to suc∣ceed each other, in a Diamond, which I now have set in a Ring with the Former, which Chan∣ges could be attributed to no Manifest Cause: And I have observ'd no less suprizing a Change, in the several Degrees of Electricity, which could not be effected by any Cause that I could think of: And I have been inform'd, by one who had a certain Hungarian Diamond, that it would acquire a much greater Degree of Sprightness, by lying some time in Water: From all which it appears, That Considerable Changes may be effected in Diamonds, by Agents, which, to Sense, Operate very gently. And if Diamonds are generated in the Earth, as I have observ'd other Stones to be; it is reasonable to think, that the Hardness of their Substance, proceeds from the Closeness of their Parts, depending on the In∣testin Motion of their Insensible Corpuscles, by which they are brought to convene closer than ordinary: And this I am rather Inclin'd to be∣lieve, because I have been told by an Eminent Jeweller, That the Diamonds of late Years, are
much more soft than those he formerly us'd to deal in: And the truth of this is further con∣firm'd, by what Egrezes a Frenchman writes of Diamonds, P. M. 17, 18. brought from the Mine, call'd Gazerpoli; the Sense of the Words is this: They are very clear, and of a good Water, but they cannot be ground by Mutual Attrition, ex∣cept with Stones of the same Mine: for if one should employ for that purpose, the Stones of another Mine, those of Gazerpoli would be broken in pieces: They do also easily break upon the Wheel, and those that are not vers'd in the Knowledge of Stones, may be easily deceiv'd in them. And the same Author, speaking of another sort of Diamonds, says, That they sweat a sort of Unctuous Substance, which being wip'd off, as often renew it's Appear∣ance. And to these I shall add an Account of a Ruby, which is one of the hardest Diamonds, one of which a Lady, nearly related to me, wore up∣on her Finger; which would often change it's Lustre, the Cause of which could not be assign'd; tho' these kind of Phaenomena seem to be the Ef∣fects of some Internal Motion in their Parts, the Parts of Diamonds being capable of having their Parts put into Motion, without much difficulty. But tho' it be hence Evident, That there is such an Intestin Motion of the Parts of Diamonds; yet it may be thought strange, to find the like in so firm and compact a Body as Glass. But that the Parts of Glass are not always at Rest, I am induc'd to believe, by the following Observa∣tions. First, That several Plates of Venice-Glass, have crack'd and broke in pieces, when no ex∣ternal Agent could have any Sensible Opera∣tion on them; which I conceive to proceed
from a Redundancy of Saline Parts, which stri∣ving to fly away, break the Glass by their vio∣lent Motion; which Conjecture I am confirm'd in, since it is commonly observ'd,The Parts of Glass in Motion. That there is a Saline Substance, adhering to the Surface of these Glasses in Cold Moist Weather. And I have observ'd in a Glass, into which too much Salt was put, to make it Diaphanous, several Cracks and Flaws, which it got in the Cold Wea∣ther: So that it rather appears to be a white, than a Glass-Cup at a Distance. And I, as well as those that deal much amongst Glasses, have ob∣serv'd, several to fly in pieces, when there was no outward Agent, to be the Cause of such an Effect; and I am inform'd by an Ingenious Man, who is Master of a Glass-House, That near a Third Part of a parcel of Glasses, flew in pieces of their own accord, after they had been kept for about five Years pack'd up. To which I might add several other Instances, to prove and illustrate the Doctrin above-deliver'd. For these Phaenomena may be, and are, very Naturally accounted for, by the Corpuscular Philosophy; for supposing, the Particles of Glass to be in a continual Elastick Endeavour to ex∣pand themselves, and fly away; and that several of those Particles are got together, it is no won∣der that they break and dis-joint those Parts of the United Glass, which are least able to resist, and keep them from Expansion. And to Coun∣tenance this Explanation, I shall add, That seve∣ral Alkalizate, or other small Parts of Matter, being inclos'd in the Body of a Glass, it is always apter to break, especially at that place, from
whence several Cracks spread themselves as from a Centre. But whether the Elasticity of these Parts, be promoted by any Subtile Bodies, which penetrate the Glass, I shall not now stay to examine; but shall rather proceed to acquaint You, That in a considerable Space of Time, the Texture of Glass may be so alter'd, as to be more unapt to give a free Passage to Aether it self, or any other Subtle Body, which could penetrate it before; and consequently those Bodies Endeavouring to make their way, tho' oppos'd by it's Texture, cause a Proportionable Crack, or Dissolution of the Substance of the Glass. Observati∣ons con∣cerning the Intestine Motion of the Parts of Glass.And to what we have deliver'd concerning Glass, these Observations are not altogether dis∣agreeable; viz. First, That it is a Substance, which by being rubb'd easily, becomes Electrical; which is an Argument, that the Parts of it may without any great difficulty, be put into Motion. Secondly, The Parts of Glass may fly asunder, if the Neighbouring Parts be put into Motions dis∣agreeable to each other; which is evident, if a hot Glass be immediately put into cold Water: for the Motion of it's Corpuscles, being ex∣ternally checked, those which within remain in a violent Agitation, cause a sudden Dis∣ruption. To which may be added, That tho' one would think the Particles of Glass were so fix'd, as to become unfit to alter their Figure and Shape; yet their Parts continuing in some De∣gree of Agitation, they may, by invisible and insensible Agents, be so work'd upon, as to be
forc'd to alter their Shape and Size: In confirma∣tion of which, it may be observ'd, That White and pure Transparent Glass, will in a little time, become very unfit to be put again into the Moulds they were first cast in. But tho' I have mention'd both these Me∣thods, by which the Cracking of Glasses, may be accounted for, to shew, that which soever of them we allow, they will be Proof of an In∣testine Motion in the Parts of Glass; yet I will neither examine or determine which of them is rather to be rely'd on; but shall only observe, That the Motion of their Parts must needs be very slow; since it is so long before it shews its Effects. And now to conclude, tho' from what hath been deliver'd, it may be expected that I should draw Consequences, to determine whether there be absolute Rest in Bodies, or no, I shall omit that, and only intimate, That it is not absurd to doubt, nor improbable to think, that there is not; since it hath been discover'd in Bodies, which are usually esteem'd, most Quiescent.
CHAP. XV. Of the great Effects of even Languid and unheeded Local Motion. THO' several Mathematicians, as well as Philosophers,Several Phaenome∣na arising from un∣heeded Cau∣ses, Com∣prized un∣der the fol∣lowing Pro∣positions. have exercis'd their Indu∣stry in limiting the Laws of Motion; yet since several Qualities usually esteem'd occult, may arise from a faint and unheeded Motion of the Parts of those Bodies, to which they are attri∣buted, I shall consider the Extent of local Mo∣tion a little further: But before I proceed to consider the particular Effects of languid and unheeded Motion, I shall first premise, in ge∣neral, what I have elsewhere upon another Occasion intimated, viz. That we are not to consider Bodies, barely as so many Portions of Matter endow'd with particular Powers; but as Bodies whose Particles are variously figur'd and modify'd after a peculiar Manner; so as to act or to be acted on by those Bodies which are about them; yet not wholly to derive their Effects to the Influence of external Agents, but in a great Measure from the mutual Action of one Part of Matter upon another. But there are several other Circumstances of local Motion, besides what we have taken no∣tice, which are not to be discern'd; and there∣fore I would not be thought wholly to attribute the Phaenomena of a Body to Motion only but to
a Concurrence of several other Causes; but to avoid tedious Preambles, I shall take notice that the Reasons why some Men slight or overlook the strange Effects of languid Motion may be compriz'd under the following Heads. I.Prop. I. Men are wont to overlook the great Efficacy of Celerity, in Bodies which are very small: And especially, if the Space which they move through be but small. What strange Effects may be deriv'd from rapid, tho' undiscerned Motion, we have a con∣vincing Instance in Bullets, which by reason of their swift Motion, are able to effect more than those battering Engines of the Ancients, which were of a vaste Bulk in comparison of Bullets, which are shot out of the largest Canons: To this I might add several other Instances, but I shall rather proceed to alledge, in favour of the second Part of the Proposition, that I have often observ'd, That the Particles of Iron, which fly off Iron Rods, when they are turn'd, affected my Hand with a sensible Heat, if held at a small Distance; and it is likewise observ'd by those who work in Brass, That the Particles which fly off upon turning, affect their Eyes, as well as other Parts, with an offensive Heat; so that an experienc'd Workman shew'd me a Bli∣ster upon his Hand, which was rais'd by the in∣tense Heat of Particles of Brass thrown off by a rough Tool. And I am further inform'd, That in turning of great Guns, the Parts which fly off are so hot as to burn the Fingers of those, who offer'd to take them up: Amongst which
Observations it is to be noted, That Brass ac∣quires a much greater Heat in turning than Iron. And to these Observations I shall add, That not only the Parts of Metals, but Wood, will become in some Measure warm, by being put into a rapid Motion by the Force of the Turners Engines; from which Instances it appears how considerable are the Effects of a rapid, tho' a short Motion. And we have Instances of this kind no less remarkable in Vegetables, where a good Cane by being struck with a Piece of Flint, emits Sparks not unlike Flint in a Moment of Time; and the like succeeds, if Loaf-sugar be dexte∣rously scrap'd, so as to put its Parts into a brisk Agitation: But what is most worthy to be observ'd in Flint is, That it's Parts being put into a brisk Motion by another Piece of Flint, will not only assume the Form of Fire, but as the Ingenious Mr. Hooke hath observ'd, will be vitrify'd, tho' in Glass-houses both an intense Heat and an Addition of some Borillia are requi∣site to bring Sand or Flint to Fusion and to vitri∣fy them: And that this Vitrification is made of the Portions of the Flint put into a brisk Motion, I am induc'd to believe, because one Piece of Flint will strike Fire upon another, without the Assistance of a Piece of Steel; and Fire may not only be struck out of Flint, but Bodies much harder, as Diamonds, which when grated on in a Mill have their Parts put into such a Motion, as to constitute Flame, though the most intense Degree of Heat will not dissolve them; and even the Parts of fluid
Bodies, if put into a brisk Motion, may have considerable Effects upon solid Bodies; for whether, the Beams of the Sun consist of Par∣ticles, which flow in direct Physical Lines from the Sun, or are only contiguous Matter, as the Cartesians think, put into a successive Motion, yet it is enough to countenance what is here de∣liver'd, that that Matter thrown into a Focus will melt Lead, Tin, or foliated Silver and Gold, and in a little time set green Wood on Fire. And how the small Parts of fluid Bodies will affect consistent and solid ones, will be further evident from Instances alledg'd under the fourth Head. The Effects of Light∣ning.What I shall further offer here is the Strange Effects of Lightning, which, as several Histo∣ries, &c. testify, by the Motion and Minute∣ness of its Parts hath melted Metals in a Mo∣ment. Nor are the Effects of the Air in a Wind-gun upon a Bullet less to be admir'd; it's Parts upon the Account of their Springyness, being put into a violent Motion; for when the Air is permitted to expand, by affecting the Bullet no longer than whilst it passes through the Barrel of the Gun, the Bullet acquires such a Degree of Motion, as, upon it's being shot against a Plate of Metal, to be press'd into the Shape of an Hemisphere; and the Particles of the Bullet will be put into so considerable a Degree of Motion, by striking against the Plate, that I could scarce hold it betwixt my Fingers. II.We are inclin'd to think,Prop. II. That the insen∣sible Motion of so soft Bodies as Fluids, can
scarce have any sensible Operation on solid Bo∣dies. By the Motion of fluid Bodies I would be understood to mean, not that which may be discover'd by the Eye or Touch, but the un∣perciev'd Motion of their insensible Parts; of the Effects of which, I might alledge several Instances from the Operations of Sounds upon solid Bodies; for upon the Discharge of great Guns, the Sound of their Explosion is not only heard a great way; but the expanding Gun∣powder gives such a Motion to the Air, as to enable it to break Glass Windows at a conside∣rable distance. And tho' to this it may be ob∣jected, That since the Cannon stands on the same Piece of Ground with the Houses whose Windows are so broke▪ the Effect may proceed from a tremulous Motion continu'd by the Soyl it stands on, yet the following Instance will make it appear, That the Parts of a Liquid being put into Motion may have such Effects; tho' it is not to be deny'd, but that a tremulous Motion may be given to the Earth, so violent as to be extended to a greater Distance; the Instance is, That the Water hath been put into so violent a Motion by an Engine contriv'd to sink Ships, that it shak'd several Ships which were at a considerable distance, so strongly, that those who were on the Decks could scarce stand. And in the late great Sea-Fight between the English and the Dutch, tho' they engag'd at several Leagues Distance from the Hague; yet the English Embassador, who was then Resident
there assur'd me; that the Guns were not only heard thither, but that his Chamber Windows were considerably shaken. And some Bodies are so apt to receive Impressions from the undu∣lating Motion of the Air, as to be sensibly, tho' not visibly affected; of which Simon Pauli in his ingenious Tract De Febribus Malignis p. 71. gives an Instance in these Words. Atqui aeger ille Gallus brachio truncatus, octiduum quidem su∣perfuit, sed horrendis totius corporis Convulsionibus correptus; qui quoque (ut & illa addam Observati∣one dignissima,) dum in Domini sui aedibus ad pla∣team Kiodmoggerianum, Romanè, Laniorum appellares, decumberet, ac me ac aliis aliquandiu ad Lectum illius considentibus quidem, sed nobis non attendentibus, explodentur tormenta bellica ex Re∣giis ac Praetoriis Navibus, sinistra truncum dextrâ brachii fovens ac complectens, toties quoties explode∣rentur singula exclamabat au, au, me miserum! Jesu, Maria, cont undor penitus, adeo permolesta & intoler∣abilis illi erat Tormentorum explosio, & quidem ex loco satis longinquo, terrâ non firma aut contiguâ, verùm super salo aut mari Balthico, instituta: From whence it appears, that a Fluid Body may operate considerably upon a Solid, tho' the Mo∣tion which causes such Effects be not perceiv'd: And of the Truth of the foregoing Relation, I am further assur'd, by the like Effects produc'd in the shatter'd Bones of wounded Men at Sea who have had sensible pain upon the Discharge of the Enemies Cannon. But lest in the aforemention'd Instances it should be alledg'd, that these Sounds are rather propagated by the Earth, which the Bodies which receiv'd the first Impression leaned upon,
than conveigh'd through the Air; I shall subjoyn, that the Sound of Thunder is not liable to such Objections, since it can only be propagated through the Air; yet the Parts of the Air are in so Powerful an Agitation; that they have been observ'd to shake, not only Houses but se∣veral Ships at Sea. But these Effects will not be thought strange, if we reflect on what hath been observ'd to be produc'd by the Celerity of the Motion of the minute Parts of a Body; especially if we like∣wise consider, that Sounds are propagated with greater Celerity than any thing we know be∣sides, in our Sphere. For tho', as Marsennus takes Notice, a Bullet moves 240 Yards in the sixth Part of a Minute; yet I have observ'd Sounds to move 400 Yards in the same space of time. But tho' (it being granted that Sounds may be conveigh'd through the Air,) the Con∣cussion of Houses or Ships at Sea might be sup∣pos'd to arise from the Impetuous Motion of the Medium, violently shaken by an intense Agita∣tion, where those Sounds were originally form'd; yet I conceive the Effects which those Sounds have on Bodies which are plac'd upon the Surface of this Globe, depend in some mea∣sure on the Dispositions of those Bodies to be work'd upon by such. But to put an end to Instances alledg'd in Proof of this Proposition I shall add an Obser∣vation made by the Experienc'd Platerus, which shews, that a Solid Body may have such a Dis∣position as to be capable of receiving Impressions from the languid Motion of Air; for lib. Observ. 1. p. 185. He says, Faemina quaedam in subitaneum
incidit morbum, viribus subito prostratis, se suffo∣cari indesinenter clamitans, etsi nec Stertoris nec Tussis aliqua essent Indicia, maxime verò de aura quadam adveniente, si vel leviter aliquis adstantium se moveret, quae illam opprimeret, conquerebatur, se∣que suffocari, si quis propius accederet, clamita∣bat: Vix dum biduum in ea anxietate perseverans expiravit: To which he adds, Vidi & alios aegros de simili aura, quae eos, si quis illis appropinquaret, in suffocationis periculum, induceret conquerentes, quod semper pessimum est signum deprehendi. III.Prop. III. Tho' the Number of Insensible Parts of Matter put into Motion, enable them to perform several things, yet they are usually slighted because invisible. The Effects of some subtle Parts of Matter are usually esteem'd very inconsiderable, by those who imagine, that these more subtle Effluvia of Bodies only Act upon the exteral Su∣perficies of others: But if we consider, that those Effluvia are not only very Numerous, but of convenient Figures and Sizes to penetrate into the inmost recesses of Bodies they work upon, we may attribute more powerful Effects to them than Men usually are wont to do; for as the Motion of the Effluvia are more or less strong, and numerous, they may either disjoyn or other∣wise alter the Textures of those Bodies. As in an Ant-hill, whose Soyl is full of Eggs, by the Number and Motion of those little Insects; the Eggs which are up and down interspers'd betwixt the Parts of the Earth, will presently be separated and displac'd; or as the Leaves and
Boughs of a Tree are variously bent and broken off, by the force of the Invisible Parts of the Air which passes through it. But to come to Instances which may more Il∣lustrate what we are about; That the subtile Parts of Matter whose effects are less taken No∣tice of, are enabled, by their Size and Figure, to disjoyn the Parts of Bodies they work upon; we have an evident Instance in Sugar, and Amber thrown together into Water; for the Water presently divides the Parts of the Sugar, and totally dissolves them; whereas the Amber con∣tinues unaltred. To which Instance may be ad∣ded one of no less Force, afforded by Chy∣mistry; for if you pour limpid Water, upon that consistent Substance, which remains after an abstraction of five Parts of Oyl of Vitriol from one of Mercury, and shake the Mixture, the Calx will presently exchange it's White for a Limon-colour, the Texture of the whole Mass being presently alter'd, And how powerful the minute Parts of some Bodies are, we may further observe in Spirit of Wine: For if a Piece of Metal be held in the Flame of it, these subtil Particles presently pe∣netrate the Substance of that Solid Body; and so exagitate the Parts of it, as to put them into a Motion strong enough to Cause a sensible Heat. And we have not a less remarkable Instance of the Force of unheeded Agents in Animal Bo∣dies and the Effects of those invisible Spirits which move through the Nerves, which by such weighty Masses of Matter, as the Bodies of some Ani∣mals, are violently mov'd up and down: To which may be added, that by the bare insinuati∣on of Moisture into the Pores of a Rope, it
may be so contracted, as to raise above sixty pound weight, above the place those Weights were suspended at in dry Weather. And tho' Me∣tals will endure the Heat of a Red-hot Crucible, yet may they easily be melred with the Flame of a Candle, if the Heat and Activity of it be pro∣moted by a Blow-Pipe. And how much more able the Parts of an Agent, are to operate upon a Body, when they are intimately mix'd with that they are to work upon, than Superficially, appears from Tartar, which is much sooner calcin'd, if Nitre be so mix'd with it, that upon Deflagration, the Flame may be commix'd with all it's Parts, than if it only acts immediately on the Outside. The Effects of a Lead∣stone upon Filigns of Iron.But to alledge Instances, which will be of more Force; tho' the Effluvia of a Load-stone be very minute, and the Body of Iron or Steel very solid; yet I have seen a Magnet, whose Effluvia were so powerful, as to attract and sustain fifty times the weight of the Stone it self. And to make it ap∣pear, how probably the Effluvia of a Magnet may change the Texture of solid Steel, and by that means endow it with those Qualities, which Iron usually derives from it; I plac'd Filings of Steel upon a piece of Paper, holding under it the Pole of a vigorous Load-stone, by the Effluvia of which, the Filings were presently so rang'd, as to repre∣sentseveral Needles, or Pikes, made up of Particles of Iron, sticking one upon another; and these might be mov'd up and down, by removing the Load-stone, from one place to another; but as soon as the Load-stone was remov'd from that place, to such a Distance, that it's Subtle Ema∣nations had no longer any Influence upon the
Powder, the Parts of it presently lost that order, and fell into a confus'd Heap, as before that Load∣stone was apply'd. Again, tho' the Particles of Water be so small, as to be Invisible, and their Motion very weak; yet is it so powerful, that upon Freezing, the Expansion of the Frigorifick Parts are strong enough to break Bottles, not only of Glass, but Metal, and the Expansion oftentimes is so vio∣lent, as to exceed the Force of any other Body in expanding (except Gun-powder) that I know of. CHAP. XVI. Of the Propagable Nature of Motion. IV. It is usually not sufficiently taken Notice of,Prop. VI. how Local Motion may be propagated through several Mediums, and even Solid Bodies. IT is usually thought, because some Bodies when they strike against Solid ones, commonly fly back, That the Impulse of that Body is not able to put the other into Motion; but that the Parts of a Solid may be put into Motion, and that that Mo∣tion may be propagated through such Consistent Substances, is evident, if we strike a piece of Timber slightly upon one End: For by that means, the Motion caus'd by that Impression, will be carry'd on to the other. And I have by Ex∣perience found, that having drawn the Point of a Pin upon the Brim of an Hemispherical Vessel,
which was made of Bell-Metal, which is much harder than Steel, I found it, from a very slight Impression, to produce such a lasting Sound, as was an Argument, that the Parts of the Metal were not only put into such a Vibrating Motion, as to communicate it to the Air, but to continue it successively round the Brim of the Vessel, till the Sound ceas'd. And the like Propagation of Sounds I found to succeed, tho' the Point of a Pin were but struck upon that Vessel, which was seven Inches in Diameter. And indeed the Pro∣pagable Motion of Solids, when they are acted on by Fluids, is not less remarkable; since the Parts of a Bar of Iron, or Glass, may be put into such a Motion by Heat, as to have it continu'd to some Distance from the place where the Fire first work'd upon them, tho' it be capable of being propagated much further in the former of the two; which shews how much the Tex∣tures of Bodies dispose them to be differently work'd upon by the same Agent; and how much a Convenient Texture disposes them to be work'd upon at all. And it may be further observ'd, That it is look'd upon as a Sign of the firm Connection of a House, that upon the Clapping of a Door, the whole shakes; and it is likewise an Argument of the Communicableness of Motion, whether it de∣pends on the mutual Contact of the Door, and the Posts it shuts against, or upon the Impression made upon the included Air by the Door; for the former shews how a Solid may propagate Motion amongst Solids; and the Latter, how it may give Motion to a Fluid, and Vice versâ.
But further, it is asserted by Seneca, that upon the Explosion of those Subterraneali Exhala∣tions, which are the Causes of Earth-quakes, the Tremulous Motion of the Earth is continu'd above two hundred Miles: And Josephus Acosta witnesseth, That it hath been continu'd for three hundred Leagues in the Kingdom of Peru: And Learned Writers in the beginning of our Age (1601) witness, that the Motion of the Earth was so violent, as to shake most part of Europe, being propagated through most part of Asia, Hungary, Germany, Italy, and France: And I have frequently observ'd, That the House I have been in, hath sensibly shook, by the Tremulous Motion of the Earth it stood upon, propagated from some Coach or Cart, which mov'd at some distance upon the Ground; and some observing Scouts say, That, by the Motion of the Earth, they can discover the Approach of a Troop of Horse at a good Distance. And, to conclude this Member of our Dis∣course, if such Disproportionate Causes, can produce such Effects in Inorganical Bodies, well may they in those that are Organical, where there is only wanting a small Cause to call in the Assistance, and to determine the Cooperation of others; as the Tickling of a Feather in the Nose, by Determining the Tendency of the Spirits, Causes Sneezing: And I remember, being once held with such a Distemper, as depriv'd me of the use of my Hands; If, in the Summer, a Hair were but blown upon my Face, and continued there long, it would put me into Convulsions and cause me to faint.
Motion may be pro∣pagated through different Mediums.But to determine another Member of this Pro∣position, viz. Whether Motion may be propaga∣ted, thro' several Mediums, or terminates at the utmost Limits of the Medium it was be∣gun in, I shall offer the following Experiment; viz. I caus'd a Glass-Receiver to be blown with a Button, upon that part of the Internal Super∣ficies which was uppermost; and suspending a Watch by a Chain, which was fix'd to a Soft Body, fasten'd upon the Button, I luted on a Receiver, to prevent a Communication be∣twixt the External and Internal Air; yet the Sound of the Watch might be perciv'd by hold∣ing One's Ears over that place, where the Watch was suspended. And I have often felt not only the striking of a Watch included in a double Case, when I have worn it in my Pocket, but even the gentler Motions of the Ballances. To the Foregoing Instances, I shall add, That upon sudden Claps of Thunder, the very Beds have been perceiv'd to shake, by those that lay upon them: And Agricola, de Nat. eorum quae fluunt è terra, Lib. 4. cap. 7. says, Si Animal deijicitur in Antrum, quod est in Carelia, Regione Scandiae, erumpit, ut perhibent, sonus intolerabilis magno cum flatu: Si leve pondus in Specum Dalma∣tiae, quamvis, inquit Plinius, tranquillo die, turbini similis emicat procella. But there are still some who are unwilling to believe, That Motion is propagable through Li∣quid Bodies; at least to any considerable Di∣stance, because of the easy Cession of their Parts: But the contrary easily appears, if we allow of the Corpuscular Notion of Light; by Consider∣ing, not only how far the Rays of Light are
impell'd, and propagated from a small Light, but from the fix'd Stars, which are plac'd at so im∣mense a Distance. But to proceed to Instances, not so liable to Objections, that the Parts of Liquids, tho' in Motion, and Separate one from another, may communicate Motion, and propagate it a consi∣derable way, is evident, by casting a Stone into the Water; which, by that Impulse, will succes∣sively propagate Motion in the Mass of Water; which appears by the Curling and Circular Streams which flow from it: And I am told by one who was us'd to Fish for Whales, near Green-Land, that sometimes, upon the Thawing of the Ice, it would give such Cracks, as to cause Sounds much lowder than Claps of Thunder; and when huge pieces of Ice upon a Thaw, fell into the Sea, they caus'd such a Disturbance in it, as at two Leagues Distance to raise a considerable Storm. And tho' some People are apt to think, That, the Air, being a Body much more Fluid than Water, Motion is less propagable in it; I shall intimate, that even in that Medium, a very small Sound is propagated, much further than we think of; for tho' we are not able to take Notice of it, beyond the Place where we stand, yet we may learn from Ecchos, that the Undulating Motion of the Air is continu'd a good way further; and it is not improbable, that it is continu'd further than the Place where the Eccho is made; since the Learned Fromundus, Professor of Philosophy at Lovain, in the Year 1627, says, That at the Siege of Ostend, the Noise of the Cannon was heard an hundred and twenty English Miles. To which
may be added what Verenius Geogr. Gen. Lib. 1. Cap. 19. relates, as observ'd by Traelichius, at the Mountain Carpathus in Hungary: His Words are these, Explosi in ea summitate Sclopetum, quod non majorem Sonitum, primò prae se tulit, quam si tegillum aut bacillum confregissem; post intervallum autem temporis murmur prolixum invaluit, inferioresque Montis partes, Convalles & Sylvas opplevit: De∣scendendo per Nives annosos intra Convalles, cum iterum Sclopetum exonerarem, major ac horribilior fragor, quam ex Tormento capacissimo inde exorie∣batur; hinc verebar, ne totus Mons concussus, me∣cum correueret; duravitque hic Sonus per semiqua∣drantem horae, usque dum abstrusissimas Cavernas penetrasset, ad quas Herundique multiplicatus resi∣liit, & talia quidem objecta concava in summitate. se non illico offerebant, idcireo fere insensibiliter pri∣mum Sonus repercutiebatur, donec descendendo An∣tris & Convallibus vicinior factus ad eas fortius impegit. V. The Effects of the Particular Modifications of the Invisible Motions of Fluids,Prop. V. on Animal Bodies dispos'd to be work'd upon by them, are not usually sufficiently noted. Tho' it may be thought strange, That the Im∣pulse of so Slight and Languid Parts of Matter, as those of Air, should by their Motion, pro∣duce any Sensible Effects; yet, if we consider what a number of those Parts succeed each other, it is less to be admir'd, that the Effects of their Joynt-Action should be considerable, since we see, that a Pendulum of a Clock is continued in a swinging Motion, by a very Languid Force, and
the Air may be put into a Motion so powerful, either by the Vibration of the Strings, or the Mechanical Form of a Musical Instrument, or Scraping the Edge of a Knife upon Metal, as, to cause an Involuntary Excretion of Urine upon a Body rightly dispos'd, as it hap∣pened to a Knight of Gascony; or, to cause that Effect which is usually term'd, Setting the Teeth on Edge. Besides which Instances, of the Effects of so Languid a Motion as that of the Air, I shall add, That I had a Servant, whose Gums would pre∣sently bleed upon tearing of Brown Paper: And Sir Henry Blount, as well as Kircherus, relates a Story of the like Nature; the former having ob∣serv'd in Grand Cairo in Egypt, a Nest of Serpents, which upon the Sound of a Citron, would pre∣sently crawl out of their Nests; and upon a Ces∣sation of that Sound, run away again as fast: and the Latter tells us of a Fish about the Streights, which divide Sicily and Italy, which will be en∣tic'd to follow the Ships which pass by that way, by the Sound of a Musical Instrument. And that these Effects are produc'd by a sort of Disposition in those Bodies, to be work'd on by such Sounds may be confirm'd, by observing, That a Man is sooner affected and awak'd out of Sleep, by the Agreeable Sound of his own Name, than any other. And the Effects of a gentle, if a Surprizing Sound, are no less Remarkable, which will raise a Body from the Ground, which could not be so pois'd with some hundreds of Weights. But the most Eminent Instance is in Persons bit by a Tarantula, who, upon the Play∣ing of a peculiar Tune, are compell'd to dance,
as long as it continues, tho' other Tunes have no such Effects on them; the Truth of which Re∣lation is confirm'd both by Epiphanius Ferdinan∣dus, and several Others: And I was acquainted with One, who told me, That a certain Lady could not forbear Weeping, when she heard a particular Tune play'd; and I have found seve∣ral times a sort of Chilness upon my self, upon the Repetition of two Verses in Lucan, especially when I have been any thing Feverish. To which Instances of the great Effects of Languid Motions, may be added, what is pro∣duc'd by the Subtile Effluvia, the Rays of Light causing those that come out of a dark Place pre∣sently to Sneeze: And Colours, which are but se∣veral Modifications of Light, have not less consi∣derable Effects; which is evident from the Influ∣ence Red Cloth hath upon Turky-Cocks: And the Learned Valesius, relates a Story of a Person, whose Eyes were much offended by Red Objects, which influenc'd him so much, as to cause an Effusion of Humours in the Adjacent Parts. VI. Men do not consider the Effects of Fluids upon Inanimate Bodies,Prop. VI. upon the Account of a Particular Texture andModification of the Agent, and the Patient. That the Peculiar Modifications and Relations which Bodies have to each other, upon that Ac∣count, may contribute much to the Effects which the Languid Motions of the Air produce; and that upon that score, a weak Motion of it, may cause more considerable Effects, than Louder Sounds, not so aptly modify'd; I shall produce several
Instances: For not to urge, That the String of an Instrument may be made to Vibrate it self, by the Motion it receives from the Instrument, and which that Instrument first receiv'd from another String, I shall rather offer the following In∣stance; viz. That a Strong Wire being made use of amongst other Strings on a Musical In∣strument, it was observ'd, that the Wire would be made to tremble, by the Impulse of the Air, caus'd by a Sound which was made at a Distance, tho' the other Strings were not sensibly affected; but in this Experiment it is to be noted, That a pe∣culiar degree of Tension is requisite, to afford the Foremention'd Phaenomenon. To this Experiment it may be added, That I have not only observ'd, that by making a Deter∣minate Sound at some Distance from an Hemi∣spherical-Glass, it would sensibly ring; but I have likewise taken Notice, That having screw'd seve∣ral Strings of a Musical Instrument to a different Degree of Tension, and likewise plac'd several Glasses at some Distance, those Strings being put into a strong Degree of Tension, would cause one Glass to ring without affecting the other; and if the Tension of that String was alter'd, it would affect another Glass, but not the same: And what is more Remarkable, is, That tho' a String wound up to a Determinate Degree of Tension, would affect such a Glass; yet if the Foot of the same Glass were a little broke, it would not till it's Tension was alter'd. And I have taken notice, That upon the Open∣ing of some Stops in an Organ, the Sound hath been so considerable, as not only to cause the Or∣ganist's Seat to tremble, but a Seat in the Church,
which was at a considerable Distance; and I could easily discern with my Fingers, that the Sound not only caus'd the Seat, but the Borders of my Hat to tremble: Which Instances shew, that the Effects of that Sound are not so much to be attributed to the Violence of it, as to the Dispositions in such Bodies to be acted on by it. And to prove, That Languid Motion may have considerable Effects upon Bodies, both So∣lid and of considerable Bulk, I shall bring the following Instances: The First is, That an An∣cient Musician affirm'd to me, that playing upon a Basse-Viol, he found, that when he struck a certain Note, it had always such an Effect upon a Casement, in the Room where he play'd to one of his Scholars, as to cause a Jarring Noise. A Second Instance is, That I observ'd in a certain Vault, that tho' a Musician vary'd his Notes on purpose, to make Tryal whether they would re∣sound in the Arch, it would answer to but one Note; and I am told, that there is the like pecu∣liarity in most Vaults. VII. Some Bodies are thought to have their Parts in an Absolute Rest,Prop. VII. when they are only in a state of Tension, or Compression. Tho' the External Superficies of a Body, seems to argue, That it's Parts are at Rest, since it re∣tains it's Proper Figure and Dimensions; yet it is not improbable, but that those Corpuscles which compose it, are variously mov'd amongst themselves, or in a Tendency to Motion; An Instance of the First of which, we have in heated Iron, whether made hot by Actual Fire, or Ham∣mering:
For tho' the Eye can discern no Motion at all amongst it's Parts, yet the Touch perceives it manifestly hot: And tho' the Lath of a Cross∣bow, or the String of a Bow, be look'd upon, when bent, as Bodies at Rest, yet the Springi∣ness of the former, and violent Separation of the Ends of the Latter, when cut, manifestly de∣monstrates, that they were only in a state of Ten∣sion: To which might be added several Instances, taken as well from Nature as Art. Of the Latter sort I have observ'd, That amongst Glasses, which to all appearance were well bak'd, several Months after they were made. some of them flew in pieces of their own accord, which they scarce ever fail to do, if they be taken from the Fire, and suffer'd to cool suddenly. The like to which I have observ'd, in a Metalline Glass of my own Preparation, which would shrink so much when remov'd from the Fire, as, if sud∣denly cool'd, to fly in pieces. And if a piece of Copper heated to a Redness, or a Whiteness, be, upon Cooling, held over a piece of Paper, several Fleaks will presently fly off it; which seem to be Vitrify'd Metal, which, upon their shrinking, when expos'd to cool, fly asunder, like the Strings of a Musical Instrument in moist Weather. And upon this Occasion, to shew how much Metals may shrink, I shall add, That I have found, that tho' a piece of Iron, when hot, would not go into a Cavity made in a Metalline Body for that purpose; yet when expos'd to the Air, and cool'd, it would shrink so much, as to be able to enter it: And to this, I shall add two Notable Observa∣tions; viz. First, That a certain Artificer, having
cast a number of Metalline Concaves, found, that tho' he took care to keep them from being ex∣pos'd to the Air, whilst cooling, and tho' they were of a considerable Thickness, and much har∣der than Iron; yet when they were leasurely cool'd to a certain degree, they would crack with a great Noise. The Second Observation is, That an Expert Artist, having cast a quantity of Bell-metal, and permitted it to cool about 12 Hours, upon the Area of an Iron Instrument, he found it considerably shrunk from the Instru∣ment, and crack'd in several places: And the like Accident hath happen'd in Brass: for an Artist assur'd me, That having cast a Ring of Brase, about a Cylinder of Iron, upon cooling, it was so much shrunk, as to leave a Crack quite through on one Side. From which Experiments it seems reasonable to infer, That a Body may be brought to a state of Tension, as well by being expanded by the Ex∣ternal Force of the Fire, as any other external Agents; and also, That the Preter-natural states of Bodies, which they are brought into by some Agents, are to be look'd upon to depend on their Previous Dispositions, since tho' the Moisture of the Air will not cause a String of an Instru∣ment to crack, which is moderately wound up, yet if it's Tension be much stronger, it presently flies in pieces: So likewise, if a Piece of Glass be hot in one Part, and cool in another, tho' cold Water dropp'd upon the hot Glass, will crack it, yet it will not have the same Effect on the Cool part of the Glass.
From which and the rest of the Experiments contain'd in this Capter, it is apparent, that the Parts of Solids are not so much in a state of Rest, as of Tension, and Compression: To confirm which I shall add, That an Experienc'd Artist shew'd me a Lump of Matter, consisting of a great many Agats lodg'd in a Cement much harder than or∣dinary Stones; which Agats, he affirm'd would sometimes, when taken out of the Cement, en∣deavour to expand themselves so powerfully as to fly in pieces, in a little time after. VIII. The Reasons why Languid Local Motion,Prop. VIII. and it's Effects, are so much overlook'd, is, be∣cause we are too apt to take notice only of the Visible Impressions of one Body against ano∣without observing the Intestin Motions of Mi∣nute Parts. To prove this Proposition, I shall offer the fol∣lowing Experiments: And First, Having turn'd a Key in a Brass stop Cock, a considerable time, till the Metal, by frequent Attritions, became hot; I observ'd it at the last so to swell, as to stick fast like a Wedge, so that it could not be mov'd, till the Metal was again cool: And an Experienc'd Workman hath inform'd me, that in making such Instruments, before the Key could rightly be ad∣apted to the Cavity it was to fit, he was forc'd to cool it several times in Water, to take down the Expansion effected by the Heat. To this Experiment, it may be added, That the Parts of a Drinking-Glass, will be put into Mo∣tion,
by drawing One's Finger round the Brim; and that so violent, as to toss several Drops of the Water contain'd in it, a considerable height into the Air; and a Drinking-Glass Artificially cut by a spiral Line, being dextrously inverted and shaken, will have its Parts so manifestly vibrated up and down, as to acquire a quarter of an Inch in Length, without any evident injury to the Glass. And it hath been observ'd, by one who made use of harden'd Steel Instruments to turn Iron, and shake off the Protuberances of that Metal; that in a little time it would acquire such a Heat and so lose it's Temper, as to look blue or yellowish, if it was not timely dipt in a convenient Liquor, to keep it cool. To this I shall add, That having two or three times bent a Bar of Tin in my Hands, backwards and forwards, I found, upon the Breaking of it, that the internal parts had acquir'd a considerable de∣gree of Heat. From which Experiment it appears, that Attri∣tion of Parts, without a manifest Percussion, is able to cause a sensible Heat; and that not only hard, but soft Bodies, may do so too, I shall add the following Experiments, to evince, which is that an Artist having only rubb'd Optick-Glasses with Putree, upon a piece of Leather, to polish them, told me, that they acquir'd such a degree of Heat, as sometimes to crack; tho' I am not unapt to think, that such an Effect might as well be attributed to a peculiar Motion of the Parts of Glass, which were too violent; since from the aforemention'd Vibration of the Parts of a Drinking-Glass, it appears, That they may
be put into a considerable degree of Motion, without Heat: And that, by a very easy Friction, such Bodies may acquire a Tremulous Motion, appears from the following Experiment, viz. ha∣ving suffer'd melted Brimstone to cool, in a Ves∣sel whose Cavity was concave, I rubb'd the con∣vex Superficies of the Brimstone, upon a Cushion for some time, and found, by applying my Ear to it, that the Parts of the Brimstone were put into such a Vibrating Motion, as to continue a crackling Noise for some time, after the Friction was discontinu'd. To which I shall add, That ha∣ving rubb'd two Stones taken out of the Bladder together, I found them to yield a strong Urinous Smell: And not only Sulphur will emit Sulphu∣reous Steams, by rubbing it upon Cloth, but Dia∣monds themselves will acquire a considerable de∣gree of Electricity; and I have one by me, which, if rubb'd, will appear Luminous in the Dark. And that it may further appear, that a peculiar Modification of Motion, may contribute to the various Effects produc'd by it, I shall observe, That those Stones which Italian Glass-men make use of, afford Sparks of Fire by Collision; but if moderately rubb'd together, they emit faetid Ex∣halations; from whence probably proceed those offensive Steams, emitted by Glass; and what is most remarkable, and to our purpose is, tho' Glass when Red-hot emits no such Effluvia; yet if two pieces be dexterously rubb'd together, they will send forth Steams copious enough and faetid. And to shew how brisk the Motions of the Parts of inorganical Bodies are, and how soon they communicate Motion to one another, we need
but consider, how the Tremulous Motion of a Bell is continu'd successively round it; and how, all that time, it communicates that Motion to the Air about it; for that the Parts of it are so successive∣ly kept in Motion, appears from that Trembling Motion, which may be perceiv'd by one's Finger: And it is further confirm'd, because a Solution of the Continuity much deadens, and causes the Sound to be much shorter: And that the Air receives its Undulating Motion from the Impress of the Bell all that time, appears, if One's Finger, or some other Body be apply'd to it, which stops that Tremulous Motion. And that the Motions in the Parts of the Bell are very brisk, is evinc'd from what is general∣ly affirm'd, viz. That if a String be ty'd about a Bell, so as to check the Tremulous Motion upon the striking of the Clapper, it would break, some Parts being more agitated than others; so that the Disproportionate Motion compar'd with the Mo∣tion of the other Parts surmounting their Cohe∣sion, they must consequently fly asunder: And, As a further Argument, that the Parts of the Bell are so agitated, I put Filings of Steel, and Drops of Water into a Hand-Bell, and observed, That, upon the Impulse of a Key, the Water shi∣ver'd, and the Filings had likewise such a Motion given to their Parts, as enabled them to dance up and down. But to put an end to these Observations, I shall only intimate, That from what hath been said, it may appear, what considerable Effects may be caus'd by the Unheeded Motions of Invisible Parts of Matter, which are wont to be ascribed to other less Intelligible Causes.
CHAP. XVII. A Supplement to the former Chapter of the Great Effects of Languid, and Unheeded Local Motion. TO illustrate what hath been deliver'd in the former Chapter, I shall add the fol∣lowing Observations: And First, That the Motion of the Air may act on Bodies duly pre∣dispos'd, at a great Distance, appears from what the Learned Borellus De vi Percussionis, Prop. CXI. relates, viz. That being at Tauromenium in Sicily, about thirty Miles from Mount Aetna, when it first broke out, it was observable, that the Houses in that Town apparently shook, espe∣cially those which were most directly situated towards the Gap; which, as that Author ob∣serves, must needs proceed from the Impression of the Air upon the Houses: for had it been the Effect of a Tremulous Motion in the Ground, all the Houses would have shook alike, which was otherwise. To prove that Motion may be propagated through different Mediums, besides what hath been before deliver'd, I shall add, That the Elo∣quent Famianus Strada, De Bello Belg. Dec. 2. lib. 6. vel 7. says, That a very Stupendious Work being rais'd by the Prince of Parma, to prevent the City of Antwerp from being reliev'd by the River Scheld, an Engineer contriv'd to blow it up, tho' with Success not a little Tragical, by a Boat fraught with Gun-powder, &c. for it rais'd such a Commotion, that the Earth shook to the Distance of 36 English Miles; and the deep Ri∣ver
was so agitated, as first to discover it's Bot∣tom, and afterwards to overswell the Banks; the Castle, together with Men, Cannons, &c. be∣ing violently toss'd into the Air, together with a vast number of other Accidents horrid and dreadful. And to illustrate further what hath been de∣liver'd in the foregoing Chapter, concerning the Effects of Musick on Bodies duly dispos'd to be work'd on by it; I shall add, that an Expe∣rienc'd Traveller told me, That in the East Indies he saw Tame Serpents, which would raise them∣selves erect in the Air, except 3 or 4 Inches of their Tails, which they rested upon: And he added, That upon the Playing of some Parts of the Tune, they would be put into very brisk and surprising Motions, whereas when another Part of it was a-playing, they seem'd to be half a sleep, and dissolv'd in Pleasure. Another Instance, which shews how much the Peculiar Textures of Bodies contribute to their Effects, is publish'd by the Learned Marhofius, who relates, That Nicolaus Petterus had found out a Note, which, being loud and lasting, would, without visibly touching the Vessel, cause a Glass-Romer to tremble and burst; but if the Note were rais'd either too high, or depress'd too low, it would have no such Effect. A further Instance of the Efficacy of Languid Motion is, That I once obtain'd several pieces of Glass, the Textures of which were so peculiar, that if the internal Superficies were gently scratch'd obliquely with a Pin, they would fly in pieces, tho' 6 or 7 times thicker than common Drinking-glasses.
To shew how much Motion, even in Solid Bo∣dies, may be promoted by the Strokes of very weak Agents, I shall here relate, that several Urinals whose Parts were of a peculiar Tex∣ture, being rubb'd with Sand and Water, had their Parts put into such a Degree of Motion, as, in a little time after, to break without any Cause to be observ'd, except that precedent At∣trition of Sand. To make it evident, that the Parts of Solid Bo∣dies, which seem to be at Rest, may have very powerful Effects, I shall add the following. Ob∣servations. First, That I have been inform'd, by a Famous Jeweller, That when he ground Rubies or Sa∣phires, or other Precious Stones upon a Mill, their Parts would acquire such a degree of Heat, as to afford Light like Fire; the Light flowing from each being of the same Colour with the Gem it came from: And I am likewise inform'd by ano¦ther, that when they have acquir'd a certain degree of Heat, the Edges would gape; and if the Motion of the Mill was continu'd, the Gems would fly in pieces; but if it was stopp'd, the cold Gem would be whole and entire. To this Observation it will not be amiss to add, That, I once plac'd a Bottle, to which was adapted a Glass-stopple, in my Win∣dow, and about a twelve Month after, as I was sit∣ting in the Room, the Top of the Stopple flew off, of its own accord, leaving the other Part fast in the Glass; but the Parts of Solid Glass will not only fly in pieces of their own accord, but I have been inform'd, that sometimes, in the East-Indies; Dia∣monds themselves, are observ'd to burst asunder, without the Impression of any Visible Agent.
THE WORKS Of the HONOURABLE ROBERT BOYLE, Esq EPITOMIZED. BOOK II. CHAP. I. Of the Systematical, or Cosmical Qualities of Things. Qualities proceeding partly from the Influence of outward Agents; as well as the Primary Affections of MatterCONSIDERING that the Particu∣lar Qualities of Bodies, depend on a certain Relation, which they have one towards another, by which they are adapted to Act or to be Acted on; I the ra∣ther chuse to call the Qualities consider'd in this Chapter, Systematical or Cosmical Qualities; they not being the Effects of those primary Af∣fections of Bodies consider'd barely as such, viz.
Motion, Size and Shape; but of Bodies so di∣versify'd by those primary Affections, Acting mutually on one another: As Quicksilver is en∣dew'd with a Power to dissolve both Silver and Gold, and an Aptitude to be dissolv'd in Aqua fortis. So that I would not be understood to mean, by Cosmical Qualities, such as may be at∣tributed to the mutual Actions and Passions of Bodies, plac'd in some imaginary Spaces beyond the World, but plac'd in the Universe, as now Constituted, with a vast Variety of Bodies about them. This I have already hinted in the foregoing Chapters of Forms and Qualities; and there∣fore my design in this Chapter, is, to consider what Qualities a Body may Aquire, by the Im∣pressions or Influence of Agents whose Effects are unknown, or not taken notice of. And though all these Phaenomena, which are usually attributed to the Laws of Nature, might properly be considered, in a Chapter that bears this Title; yet since those Agents most concern∣ed in the Effecting of these Phaenomena are either the Stars, the subterraneal Parts, or the Aether and Atmosphaere we live in; I shall wave those, and only here consider, what is requisite to prove, that there are such real Qualities, depending on unheeded Agents, and the Ordinary Course of Nature;Our Notion of Cosmical Qualities grounded on the three following Propositions but before I proceed, I shall briefly in∣timate, that our Notion of Cosmical Qualities is grounded upon these three Propositions. 1. That some Bodies are altogether inactive, till they are acted on; and that others, are put into Action, chiefly by the Influence of these Ca∣tholick and unheeded Agents.
2. That there are several Bodies, which when put into Action, are subtle enough to insinuate themselves into the Pores of other Bodies, which they are by the Established Laws of Nature for∣ced to act on. 3. That an Alteration of the Mechanical Tex∣ture of the Body, is enough to dispose it, or ren∣der it unapt to be worked on, by those unheeded Agents. And these three Propositions I shall en∣deavour to make out by the following Phaenomena and Experiments. To begin then with the first Proposition, viz. That some Bodies are altogether inactive, till they are acted on; and that others are put into Action,Proposition the first. chiefly by the Influence of these Catholick and Ʋnheed∣ed Agents. The first Part of this Proposition, I presume undeniable, if we consider, That till a Hammer, or some other Body be struck upon a Wedge, it wants the Power or Faculty of cleaving Wood, but when forced by the Impulse of that Body, which strikes upon it, the Wedge presently in∣sinuates it self betwixt the Parts of that Solid, and divides them; As also, that a Knife is alto∣gether unable to attract a Needle, till it hath re∣ceived that Power from a Loadstone. But to proceed to the second Part of the Pro∣position; I shall, to what I have elsewhere ob∣served (viz. That the Property of a Burning-Glass, in respect of it's Effects, does not proceed from the Convex Figure, considered as such, but the Rays of the Sun cast into a Point) add the fol∣lowing
Instances. The first is, That a Bar of I∣ron, by standing a considerable time in a Win∣dow, in a perpendicular Line, will acquire a considerable degree of Magnetism, by the In∣fluence of Invisible Agents; and several Mag∣netical Qualities which it had not before. Second∣ly, That tho' a flat Piece of Marble, considered barely as such, hath not a Power to raise any Body by a bare Contact; yet if it be applyed to another, whose Superficies is adapted to it; by virtue of the Constitution and Fabrick of the World, and the concurrent Causes of Bodies a∣bout it, it may acquire such a Faculty, the lower Stone being boyed up by the Weight and Pressure of the ambient Air; yet, if these two Stones were contained in a Vacuum, they would not have such a Power to lift up one another. But to pro∣ceed to The second Proposition.The second Proposition; which is, That there are several Bodies, which, when put into Action, are subtle enough, to insinuate themselves into the Pores of other Bodies, which they are, by the Established Laws of Nature, forced to Act on. And here, though some of the Experiments to be related, might be also alledged in favour of that Aether or Mate∣ria coelestis, which some Philosophers have sup∣posed to be dispersed throughout the World; yet the Invisible Agents, which are here to be mentioned, are only such as the Magnetical Ef∣fluvia of the Earth, and also the Air, in reference to it's Spring and Weight. And first, Tho a Bar of Silver, and another of Steel, be exposed to cool, when red hot, with their ends directly North and South; yet the Textures of these two Metals being different one
from another, the Pores of the Steel, being ope∣ned, and the Metal made plyable, it is by the In∣sinuation of Terrestrial Effluvia, endued with se∣veral Magnetical Qualities; and particularly, when poised, to point North and South; where∣as Silver acquires no such Properties. And that it may be less strange, that the Earth should af∣ford Magnetical Effluvia, which are imagined by some to be very spirituous Ones, I shall add, that having heated an Oblong Loadstone, and expo∣sed it to the Air to cool, with it's Ends pointing North and South, and so deprived it of it's Mag∣netical Qualities; I could make either End to tend to the Southern or Northern Pole, as, upon Ignition, I suffered it to cool with one end dire∣cted either North or Southwards. To this it may be added, That if the Air be exhausted in some measure out of a Vial with an oblong Neck, and, upon it's Immersion in Water, ones Finger, which prevented the retroadmission of the Air, be presently taken away; the Wa∣ter will contrary to the Tendency of it's own Gravity, presently fly up in the Bottle, being squeezed in by the External Pressure of the Air, lying upon the Surface of the Water, the Spring of the Internal Air, being so weakned, as not to be able to oppose the force of it; whereas in a Vacuo the Water would not be so raised, having no external Agent to boye it up. The Expan∣sive force of Beans soa∣ked with Water.Again, being desirous to know the Causes of Germination, and from what Causes, that pow∣erful Intumescence of Seeds, when sown, proceed∣ed, I filled several Vessels of Glass, as well as Earth, with common Beans, filling up the Inter∣vals with Water, and tying the Corks fast with
Strings; which being done, when the Beans had imbibed Water enough, their Intumescence was so powerful, as not only to break several of the Vessels, but a great many of the Strings which hindred the raising of the Corks. But that I might be more exact in estimating the Power of that Expansive Force, I put a sufficient Quantity of Beans and Water into a Brass Cylinder, whose Diameter was two Inches, and it's Length six; which being done, and the Orifice of the Cylin∣der being likewise fitted exactly with a Plug, a Trencher was placed upon it, which was broad enough to bear a half hundred weight of Lead: In which Experiment it was to be observed, that in two or three days, the Expansive Force of the Beans had raised the Plug a considerable Height. And it may further be noted in such Tryals, that as the Diameter of the Cylinder is larger, so the Expansive Force of the Beans are able to raise a more considerable Weight. How far these Experiments may confirm the Corpuscularian Philosophy, or whether that Force may be Mechanically explained by it, I shall leave the Reader to consider, and shall here only observe, That the Air, together with the Aether, may in a great Measure concur to the producing of some of the Phaenomena of Nature, which we imagin it very little concerned in; for besides the Effects which may be ascribed to the Pressure of the Air, it contributes to the producing of some upon another Account; it being easy to be observed, that Flesh may be preserved lon∣ger from Putrefaction, by being secluded from the Contact and Influence of the Air; and also, that the Light which flows from rotten Woods,
and some putrefyed Fishes, will appear and dis∣appear upon the Contact or Separation of ambi∣ent Air. Several Phaenome∣na produc'd by Virtue of Motion in the Parts of the Air.But for a further Proof, that the Air may ef∣fect several things, besides what it produces by virtue of it's weight by the Insensible Motions of it's Parts; I might add, that whereas a Piece of Paper being wet with Oyl, hath it's Pores so al∣tered, as to be capable of transmitting more ea∣sily the Rays of Light; and the Air being impelled, by the Laws of Nature, presently acts upon it, and represents a great many Objects, by being reflected from those Bodies beyond it, which could not appear through it before. And if a large Box be so contrived, as to have one end of it open, and a Hole in the other end, covered with a Lenticular Glass; if the open end be made up with a fine sheet of Paper, and a small Hole be likewise made upon the Top of the Box; by placing ones Eye to the Lenticular Glass, one may discern upon the Paper the Lively Repre∣sentations of External Objects, and their vari∣ous Motions as well as Shape and Colours; which Phaenomena could by no means be exhibi∣ted, were not either some Insensible Corpuscles, transmitted in the Form of Effluvia from those Objects, or some other subtle Particles of Matter, directed by Local Motion from the Object to the Paper, and from thence to the Eyes. The Esta∣blish'd Laws of the Universe Contribute to the pro∣ducing of several Phaenome∣na.From whence it appears, that the Established Laws of the Universe, in a great measure, con∣tribute to the producing of several Phaenomena, which arise from the Operations of insensible and unheeded Causes: For a further Confirmation of which I shall add, That if a Bar of Iron be held
in a perpendicular Line; so that the lower end of it touch the Northren Point of a Magnetical Needle, it will presently drive it away; where∣as, if the Position of that Iron Bar be so altered, as to touch that Point with the other end, it will, by a contrary Faculty, attract it, except the Iron Bar hath stood a considerable time in a Perpendi∣cular Posture, exposed to the Air and the Magne∣tical Effluvia of the Earth, or hath lain a consi∣derable time, pointing North and South, and so hath acquired a more durable Verticity. And if it should be asked;How a Bar of Iron ac∣quires Mag∣netical Qua∣lities. why, by such Postures, the Magnetical Qualities of Iron should be so much increased? it might probably be answered, that it proceeded from hence, viz. Because the Pores of the Iron, by lying nearer the Magnetical Efflu∣via of the Earth, have their Pores rendred more apt to receive and transmit the Effluvia of the Needle; so that consequently, that Part of the Iron which is most affected by those Steams, must become the stronger, and consequently the North Point of the Needle; for which reason, it must drive away the North Point of the Needle, and attract the South. But if on the contrary, the o∣ther end of the Bar be applyed to the Needle, by a contrary reason, it being less Magnetical, it must attract it. But not to insist upon this Explanation of the Magnetical Qualities of a Bar of Iron, I shall only observe, that it is necessary in order to acquire a durable Magnetical Virtue, that the Iron should stand long in that Perpendicular Po∣sture, which is sufficient to prove what I contend for, viz. That the established Laws of Nature are requisite for the Production of several Phaeno∣mena, which would not be effected, were not those Laws observ'd.
The Third Proposition.But to proceed to the third and last Propo∣sition, viz. That an Alteration of the Mechanical Texture of a Body is enough to dispose it or render it unapt to be work'd on by those unheeded Agents. This is evident from what is practis'd at Sea, it being the usual Custom for the Sea-men, to throw Water upon their Sails to quicken the Motion of their Vessels, when pursu'd by Pi∣rates; for the Threeds of the Sails being swel∣led with Water, and the Pores by that Means made less, the Wind, not finding so free a Pas∣sage through them, must consequently have the greater Force upon the Sail-Clothes, and so drive the Ship forwards more swiftly. Another In∣stance of considerable Effects succeeding a very slight Alteration in Texture may be observed, when, on a windy day, a Chamber-Window is left open; for the Wind, which before only shook the Glass, will presently blow the Curtains about and other things in the Chamber, which are in a Disposition to be easily moved, as Dust, Papers, &c. But to proceed to Examples altogether not so gross, we may take notice, That though com∣mon Tartar will neither dissolve in the Air, nor easily in Water, yet when Part of it is dri∣ven away by Calcination, it readily dissolves and runs per Deliquium in a moist Air. To which may be added, that tho' a Loadstone by being heated in the Fire and cool'd again, underwent no visible Change as to Shape or Size, nor for as much as could be perceiv'd by the Eye, lost none of it's Parts; yet, by an invisible Change of Tex∣ture, effected by the Magnetical Effluvia of the Earth, it may alter its Verticity according to
the different Postures it is permitted to cool in: And the like Change I have observed in Iron, whose Verticity was altered by a Change of Tex∣ture, wrought by so weak an Agent as the Earth. To these we may add several Instances in li∣quid Bodies; and first, That, tho' Honey and Water mix'd together in an undue Proportion, reserve each their distinct Natures; yet if four or five Parts of Water be added to one Part of Honey, by some subtle Agents or other, they are presently fermented, and unite into one common Mass; and I am assur'd, by a Mer∣chant who liv'd several Years in the Canary Islands, That if a Hogshead of Wine close stop'd be violently roll'd along; the Texture of the Liquor would be so chang'd, that, if it were but about a Month old, one of the Ends would be burst out, and the Liquor lost. Ano∣ther Instance in which the Texture of the Body disposes it to be so powerfully work'd upon, we have in Glass, which upon a sudden Removal from the Fire into cold Water, is subject to fly in Pieces. But an Instance which is more remarkable is, That a hot Plate of Copper being permitted to cool upon some which were more moderately hot in the Fire, and thence remov'd upon a Plate; several Pieces like Scales would fly off it, when expos'd to the Atmosphere; and To conclude this Chapter, I shall add, That the Bolonian Stone acquires such an admirable Quality by Calcination, that, by being plac'd in the Sun-beams for some time, it gets such a Degree of Luminousness, as to retain it a
considerable time, when remov'd into the dark. CHAP. II. Of Cosmical Suspicions. THE World about us being stock'd with such a Variety of Objects, and other things, too small or subtle to be discern'd; it may not be unuseful, upon some Accounts, to propose Conjectures, where the Subject con∣sider'd admits of no clearer Discoveries. Suspicion the First.And First, it is not without Reason I suspect, that, besides those uniform Parts of Matter, of which the Aether, by some Philosophers, is thought to consist, there are also several other Parts of Matter, which are differently dispos'd to work upon Bodies, according to the various Textures of those Bodies they chance to work upon; or according to the different Agents they chance to work concurrently with: And this Suspicion is not improbable, since the inquisitive Gilbert hath not only discover'd the Magnetical Qualities of the Earth to be diffus'd on every side, but also it is commonly known that upon the Hunting of a Deer, several subtle Effluvia are left behind in the Air; which we should pass by unobserv'd, were there not such Creatures as Blood-hounds, endow'd with Organs fitted to receive those subtle Steams. A Second.And it is not a little strange, that several Persons should have such peculiar Temperaments,
as to be able to discover Pestilential Steams in the Air, for a considerable time before they are dispos'd to affect other Men; and that those Constitutions should be so dispos'd to be work'd upon by Effluvia, by others not in the least discern'd. And that there are such Bodies, as well as unheeded Effluvia, may be evinc'd by several Instances; as one which was remarkable in the Year 1665, in which, a certain Man, three Months before the beginning of the Plague, was taken with a Swelling in his Groin; which he had likewise as a Forerunner to seve∣ral other Plagues. And Fabritius Hildanus re∣lates a Story no less remarkable of himself; who, when, in his Youth, he had had the Plague, could never pass any House infected with it without a sensible Pain in that Part. To which may be added, a third Instance from that Curi∣ous Physician, who observ'd the various Phaeno∣mena of Distempers at the Siege of Breda, and says, Annotandum hic meritò Naturae Facultatem ad Pestis Praeservationem Momenti esse maximi: Observavi in meipso contaminatos invisente statim inguina olere vel axillas; afficiebatur aliquando Caput, noctu inde Sudor, & secessus tres quatuorve; hoc & aliis accidit, qui fideliter mihi retulerunt. And these Testimonies I am rather inclin'd to depend on, because deliver'd by Men of Judg∣ment and Credit. Another Suspicion which I am about to re∣late,A Third. is, That the Laws of Nature, which con∣tribute to the producing of several Phaenomena, are not only of larger Extent than what we are us'd to imagin; but likewise concur to the Pro∣duction of a greater Variety of Effects: For not
to spend much time in observing, That several Industrious Astrologers and Geographers, have, instead of Physical, given us Mathematical Hy∣potheses; having taken pains to describe the Situations and Motions of the fixed Stars and Planets; and likewise, that they have been Industrious in discovering the four little Pla∣nets, which move about Jupiter; as also the little Moon, which runs about Saturn, as well as several Phaenomena relating to Comets, with∣out considering the Frame and Constitution of those Bodies, which compose our Globe; I con∣ceive it not impossible to make it out, That there is a Commerce betwixt them and our Globe; as well as several Laws or Customs of Nature even in our own Globe not taken notice of by Scholastical and Mathematical Writers. The Fourth.And I am, not without Reason, induc'd to suspect, That this Globe of ours hath undergone several considerable Changes, not only in seve∣ral Countries, but the internal Parts of it; That which is call'd the Mariners Compass, having been, in several Places, observ'd to vary consi∣derably, in its Declension from the true North Pole; as for Instance, about London in the Year 1580 it declin'd eleven Degrees; in 1612 about six; and in the Year 1633 about four Degrees. And I have my self, at one time, observ'd little or no Declension, whereas at another I observ'd it to decline near half a Degree. And I am in∣form'd by one who often observ'd the Variation of the Compass at the Cape of good Hope, that, when he was a young Man, he observ'd it to decline two Degrees Westward; whereas of late, he found the Variation to be six Degrees
and about forty eight Minutes; so that, by his Observation, it had vary'd little less than five Degrees, in the times he hath sayl'd past that Place. From whence we may have Reason to think, That there are certain Agents very pow∣erful, tho' not to be taken notice of, which may work several, and very considerable Changes, even in the Terrestrial Globe it self; which whether regulated by any certain Laws of Na∣ture, we know not. And besides these, there are several other unheeded Phaenomena, which we have troubled our selves very little to consider about; as the different Weight of our Atmosphere, and the Causes of that Difference; we having only no∣ted that they proceed from some subterraneal Effluviums mix'd with the Air; but what other Effects those Effluviums may have upon other Bodies hath been scarce discover'd. Considera∣ble Variati∣ons in the Temper of Climates.And it is not a little strange, what Monsieur de Rochfort relates, concerning those Hurricanes observ'd in the American Islands; for, whereas, for a long time, they were observ'd to come but once in seven Years; yet in a short time they grew so frequent, as to return two or three times in the same Year. And I have been in∣form'd by an Ingenious Gentleman, that, having liv'd in New England, he observ'd a considera∣ble Alteration in the Temper of that Climate; it being much less cold and more temperate than formerly. And Mr. W. Wood, in his Pros∣pect of New England, takes notice of no incon∣siderable Alteration; who says, That since the English Inhabitants settl'd there, the Showers
of Rain are much more moderate, though more frequent. An Obser∣vation con∣cerning Manna.And the Learned Magnenus observes, in his Tract de Manna, That about three hundred Years ago there was no Manna to be found in Cenotria; and it is not above two Ages since Manna hath been found in Calabria, a Country so famous for it. And the Ingenious French Writer in his History des Isles Antilles Lib. 4. Cap. 6. says, That if the Juice of a Fruit call'd Acajou, falls upon a Cloth, it presently stains it red, which continues till the Tree bears Flow∣ers again; which Phaenomenon will be the more to our Purpose, if it may be doubted, whether it proceeded from the Temper of the Air or Length of Time. Another SuspicionBut besides these Phaenomena, when I observe the exact time, that the ebbing and flowing of the Sea keeps; and how exactly coincident with the New and Full Moon Spring-Tides happen; as also what vast Spring-Tides are constantly observ'd every Equinox; together with those various Phaenomena, which may be observ'd in Sea-Water, which, in some Places and upon the blowing of some Winds, appears to be luminous, whereas other Parts are, at the same time, neither luminous, nor in the least affe∣cted, so as to become luminous by those Winds at any other time; I am very apt to believe, That these Phaenomena proceeded from some Cosmical Law of Nature; or that the Plane∣tary Vortex was not a little concern'd in pro∣ducing these Effects.
Another Suspicion.And I am not unapt to believe, but that all those Distempers, which are either Endemic or Epidemic, proceed from a certain Influence, which those Globes which move about us, may have, together with some Terrestrial Effluvia, which are different in several Countries. But not to engage in so fertile a Discourse as the Phaenomena, which every particular Region affords; I shall only add two Suspicions more, which may be further Instances of the Established Laws and Customs of Nature. A very con∣siderable Phaenome∣non rela∣ting to the Sun.And first, it is a Question, whether those Pla∣nets, which move about our Globe, keep such constant Bounds in their Motion, and move in such Lines as Astrologers teach they do. And if we consider the vast variety of Bodies, contai∣ned in and about our Globe, it can scarce be ima∣gined, that Nature should always keep to one constant and regular way of Acting, but that in several Particulars, she must deviate and ope∣rate variously; for not to mention, that Astro∣nomers have observed, even Natural Days to va∣ry in Length; and have disputed much concern∣ing the Anomalic assigned to the Motion of the Sun's Apogeum; The Sun it self hath been sometimes observed, to be even obscured by o∣pacous Matter, as in Caesar's time, and at the be∣ginning of Augustus his Government; when the Sun was for near a whole Year obscured. To which we may subjoyn the Number, Duration, and Vastness as well as Motion of some Co∣mets. And I am informed, that in the Northern He∣misphere, in that part of the Galaxy, which is not to be discerned by us, there are certain
black, and near the Northern Pole, white Clouds, which move along with the Galaxy in twenty four hours; and these may be discerned by those that sail 18 Degrees South Latitude; but I shall not insist upon these as Arguments, since I suspect those black Clouds to be nothing but the Azure Sky appearing through the Galaxy, and those white ones, to be only Constellations, like those of the Galaxy or the Belt of Orion. Nature may not always be exact in her Laws.But having hinted, that Nature may not al∣ways be exactly regular in the Motion of Planets, &c. I shall here intimate, that sometimes we may think, those Motions which are Periodical and return at set times, irregular; because we live not long enough to observe the frequent Returns of such Changes, as we usually esteem Prodigies in Nature; for it would as much be thought strange, to see Trees blossom, and Fruit in the Summer, to a Man that lived but one Year, as several other Phaenomena are strange to us, who have not lived long enough to have observed such Phaenomena in their Periodical Turns before: So before the different Appearances of Saturn had often been observed, they were thought Pro∣digies. But it is most remarkable, that several Stars have Periodically appeared and disappeared se∣veral times in the same Place, as hath been ob∣served in the Girdle of Andromeda, and about the Swans Breast, and another amongst the fixed Stars in the Whales Neck. These I say are most remarkable, because they not only confirm what I have been saying of the Periodical Appearan∣ces of some Phaenomena; but invalidate the Phi∣losophical Systems of some, who allow of no
Vortices beyond the concave Surfaces of the Fir∣mament:Vortices be∣yond the Concave Surfaces of the Firma∣ment. But if rather than to allow of Vortices beyond the Surface of the Firmament, we would imagin the Stars, which appear and disappear, to have dark and light Hemispheres, which Perio∣dically turn towards our Globe; it will still be an Argument to question the Uniformity of the Motions of some of the Globes of the Universe; since at so vast a Distance, such considerable Al∣terations are observable. But to conclude this Chapter; It may be a que∣stion, whether such prodigious Changes as are sometimus observed, may not by being frequent∣ly repeated, become a Custom, and have a Right to be reckoned amongst the Laws of Nature. CHAP. III. Of the Temperature of Subterraneal Regi∣ons as to Heat and Cold. FOr some Reasons, having been unable to ex∣amin into the Temper of the Air in subter∣raneal Regions my self, I shall rather give such an Account of it, as I have received from se∣veral Persons. The Temper of the Air in Groves.And first, I shall relate a Story of the Tem∣per of the Air observed by a Chymist, who pur∣posely travelled into Hungary, which was the following: That going down into a Grove, at the first Entrance of it, he perceived the Air sensi∣bly warm; but presently after for a quarter of an
hour in his descent, he felt it considerably cold; which cold Region being passed, he began to perceive it sensibly warmer, and the lower he descended the hotter it grew; so that, in the low∣er Veins, it was hotter than the Air above ground is usually in Summer: And this Relation was confirmed by a like Observation made by a Physitian, who told me, that in a Mine, whose de∣scent did not much exceed an hundred Fathom, the cold Region was extended near to the bot∣tom of it. And this Relation is agreeable with what Morinus affirms, viz. That the Cold Regi∣on, in an Hungarian Mine, which he visited, was extended 80 Fathom, after which the Heat sensi∣bly increased, the lower he descended; and the same Author affirms, that besides the different Tempers of those Regions, there is likewise ob∣served, a different Degree of Heat, in the hot Region, correspondent to the different Seasons of the Year, viz. Winter and Summer. The Tempe∣rature of Subterrane∣al Regions consider'd under cer∣tain Propo∣sitions. Prop. I.These things premised in General, I shall now proceed to consider the Particular Regions of the Earth in the four following Propositions. PROPOSITION I. The Bounds as well as Temperature of the first Region are very different. The Reason of both Parts of which Proposition are plain; since the Sun Beams must not only penetrate deeper in the Summer than the Winter; but also, because the solidity or porousness of several Parts of the Earth may dispose the Soil to Heat or Cold∣ness.
But to proceed, it is remarkable, that the up∣permost Region is much more temperate, because both the violent Impressions of Sun Beams, and rugged Winds, are kept off by the sides of those Subterraneal Cavities. And that the Power of the Sun Beams is much weakned by those sides, is plain; since, by such like means, the Heat of the Sun may be so broken, as to preserve Ice from thawing all Summer; and not only so, but if those subterraneal Cavities be sufficiently guarded with a Cover of Brick, well clayed over; and be, by that means, preserved from any Intercourse with the External Air, it may be preserved without digging deep into the Ground, as is observed in the South Part of France; so that, though the Coldness of Subterraneal Cavities may conduce, yet it is not altogether requisite to preserve Ice from a Thaw. But the subterraneal Regions are not only pre∣served from excessive Heat, by preventing the Intercourse of the Internal and the External Air, but may be considerably lessned in such Cavities as are considerably exposed to the open Air: as I my self have observed in an Iron Mine not above twelve foot deep. As as it is to be observed, that this cold Re∣gion of the Air is not apt to be influenced by external Heat in the Summer, so neither is the hot Region subject to be altered much by the ex∣ternal Cold in Winter; which appears from the smoaking of some Springs in Winter, which are supplyed with Water, which had run a conside∣rable depth in the ground, or passed through some Earth that was fitly disposed to warm it in it's Passage.
But further, that Winters Cold is much more disposed to influence the superficial Region of the Earth than the hot one which lyes under it, appears from Reason it self, and may be further confirmed by observing, that even Water in freezing los it's Fluidity, and puts on the Form of Ice, first in those Parts which are most contiguous to the Air, and subject to the Influ∣ence of External Cold: And it is observed, not only in England, but also in Russia, that if Wine or Beer be kept in a Cellar well roofed over, and about twelve foot deep, it may be preserved from freezing, notwithstanding the Violence of external Cold; where it is to be observed, that the Warmth of those Vaults, does not only de∣pend on the Exclusion of External Air, but also on the Steams of those fermenting Liquors, toge∣ther with some subterraneal Steams, which are gathered there, and hindred from flying away. PROPOSITION II.Prop. II. But to proceed to the Second Proposition, which may be comprized in the two following Members; As first,Member the first. That the Temper of the Second Region of the Earth seems to be colder than that a∣bove or that below it. This is both confirmed by Observations already cited, and also by Reason; by the latter, because the Earth, being a Body compounded of Parts less agitated than those a∣bout our Sensory, they must consequently cause a Sensation of Cold;Why the Middle Re∣gion is cold∣est. and why that Region should have it's Parts less agitated, than those about it is plain, because it lyes remoter both from the In∣fluence
of External, as well as Subterraneal Heat. But here it is to be noted, That though I say, the middle Region is coldest, yet I would only be understood to mean a comparative Coldness; for I by no means think that Region to be posses∣sed with the most intense Degrees of Coldness, since neither Ice or Snow have been ever obser∣ved to be found in it: And though it be compara∣tively colder than those Regions about it; yet, that it is not the coldest may be hence argued, be∣cause it is observed in the Summer, that the Ex∣halations which steam from the middle Region are sensibly warm at the Orifice of the Grove; which they could not be, were the middle Re∣gion through which they passed extreamly cold. The second Member of the second Proposition.But to pass to the second Member of this se∣cond Proposition; It is observed, That in several Places, which may be referred to this middle Region, the Temperature of the Air is different at the same Seasons of the Year. Which is evident both from Reason and Experience. And first, from Experience it hath been learnt, by those who have often been in those Hungari∣an Mines, as well as some here in England. And indeed if we consider the different Heat in diffe∣rent Climates; but more peculiarly the Difference in Soils, it will not be less consonant to Reason; for the Soil may be more or less porous and com∣pact;The diffe∣rent Temper of Subter∣raneal Re∣gions may be varied by the Soyl. and may have different Substances mixed with it, or run through it, which may alter the Temper of it; for there is not always that Re∣gular Order in Nature, which is in our Thoughts of her; since Salts, Marchasites and Minerals are
dispersed through the middle as well as the lower Regions of the Earth; and may, by impregnating those Fluids which run through the Earth, cause different Refrigerating Effluvia to affect various Parts of the same Region; as if, in one Place, it be impregnated with Nitre, and in another with Marchasitical Earth; the Coldness of the former must render that Part of the Region the colder of the two. Besides, the Temper of them may differ upon the account of the Soil it self, which varies according to the several Degrees of it's Maturi∣ty; so that for these Reasons, the Temper of Effluvia may be different in the same Place at one time from what they are at another in the same Place; not to mention those Differences which it may undergo by several other Accidents, and the Subterraneal Effluvia, which ascend more or less from the lower Regions. And before I leave this Proposition, it may be necessary to advertise, That the different De∣grees of Heat or Cold, in the several Regions of the Earth, are not easily discover'd by those Thermoscopes, which are usually made use of, to distinguish such Differences; because the Pillar of Air, which presses upon the Liquor may dif∣fer in it's Pressure, according to the Length of it; it being longer, and consequently heavier, the lower it descends. But to pass to the Third Region compriz'd in the following Proposition,Prop. III. viz. That the Temper of the Third Region is warm, which Warmth va∣ries in several places. That it is Warm, and that that Heat varies in several places, I think is suffi∣ciently attested, by the several Persons that have gone down into those Mines; but as for the
Causes of it, those are not so easily discover'd: for I am not a little inclin'd to suspect, That con∣sidering the Closeness of those Cavities in which they work, the Effluviums of their own Bodies, and of the Metal they work in, may in some mea∣sure contribute to it. The effects of Subter∣raneal Fires.But to pass by this Suspicion, I shall rather briefly intimate, That I conceive the Earth to be stocked with store of Subterraneal Fires; and that several Calorifick Qualities, being carry'd up through Clefts and Veins in the Earth, cause a Sensible Heat to be diffus'd through the whole. And that there are such Steams, appears mani∣festly from those Damps, which are often ob∣serv'd in Groves; not only in England, but Ger∣many, Bohemia, Hungary, &c. which are some∣times so Bituminous and Sulphureous in Smell, as to be apt to take actual Fire. But one thing I must intimate here, which is, That tho' I am induc'd to believe, for some Rea∣sons, this Argument valid; yet, I am not without a Suspicion, that notwithstanding the Aptness which these Exhalations have to take Flame; yet, even several cold Steams may rise from the lower Parts of the Earth, which may acquire Heat in the Upper Regions; for we see, that several Substances, which are apt enough to take Flame, have not the least sensible Heat in their Parts before; nay, are so far from that, that Salt-Petre, which is so apt to flame, will, by being dissolv'd in Water, add a considerable Degree of Coldness to it: And the like may be observ'd in Spirit of Wine, whose Spirit, tho' easily in∣flammable, affects not the Touch with the least Heat, if rais'd in the Form of a Vapor.
But that which inclines me to be of the Opinion just now mention'd, is, That not only Morinus, but several others have observ'd, the Exhalations of Mines considerably hot in Summer time. And the Experienc'd Agricola hath oserv'd, That the Mi∣neral Steams which pervade the Earth, are so powerful, as not to permit a Hore-frost to lie upon the Ground which they lie under; and the like hath been observ'd upon Coal-Mines: And I remember, that an Acquaintance of mine shew'd me a piece of Land, which was so powerfully penetrated with warm Effluvia, that Snow would not lie upon it above two Days, were the Wea∣ther never so cold, which hath been confirm'd by frequent Observations; except where Layers of Rock, or some other Stony Concretes, obstruct∣ed the Passage of those Mineral Steams. To which may be added, That the Steams near Gold-Mines are so copious in Hungary, as to give the Leavs of the Trees a Golden-Colour. But notwithstaning these Instances, I am apt to doubt, that there are several Parts of the third Re∣gion, which by reason of their Remoteness from such Subterraneal Fires, have not that Heat. But since these things are but uncertainly guess'd at, none having so great Curiosity, as to be at the Charges to dig deep enough without prospect of Gain, I shall rather proceed to consider, That,Whence the Unusual Heat in some Mines proceeds. besides the foremention'd Causes, there is in some Mines such a degree of Heat, as cannot be ac∣counted for without another Cause; the Inca∣lescence being so great, as not to be produc'd without the Concourse of some other Mineral-Steams, or Water to work upon, and promote the mutual Actions and Operations of the Vo∣latile
and Active Parts of those Mines. And that such Incalescenses may be produc'd in the Bowels of the Earth, I have elsewhere observ'd: And further, That Immature Minerals, such as Marchasites, whose Parts are impregnated with Vitriol and Sulphureous Parts, may, by reason of their Aptness to be dissolv'd, be able to cause such Effects, we may be induc'd to believe, because Vitriol hath not only been found in several Mines in Hungary; but likewise such Strong and Cor∣rosive Effluviums, as were very offensive to Respi∣ration, and in a little time fatal to those that ven∣tur'd to work in them. And there is one thing further Remarkable, That several pieces of Vi∣triol, which were found in the Bottom of some of those Mines, of a soft Consistence, presently, when brought up and expos'd to the open Air, grew hard, retaining several Golden Streaks in it. But there is one thing here to be noted, which is, That, in Groves which are very deep, the Air is so unfit for Respiration, as to want a frequent Ventilation; so that the Miners are wont to sink an Air-Shaft, as they term it, some Paces off the Grove, that the Air passing from the Grove to that, by a short of Channel, or Ventiduct, (which Agricola lib. v. and vi. de re Metallica, calls Cuni∣culus) might keep the Internal Air in such a Tem∣per, as to make it fit to breathe in; tho' the Mines were 200 Yards deep. And Agricola, in his Book de re Metallica, gives further the following Account of the Course of the Air in these Cuniculi, or Air-Shafts, in these Words: Aer autem exterior se suâ sponte fundit in Cava Terrae, atque cum per ea penetrare
potest, rursus evolat foras. Sed diversa Ratione hoc fieri solet; Etenim Vernis & Aestivis diebus in altio∣rem puteum influit & per Cuniculum vel Fossam laten∣tem permeat, ac ex humiliori effluit similiter iisdem diebus in altiorem Cuniculum infunditur, ac interje∣cto puteo defluit in humiliorem Cuniculum atque ex eo emanat. Autumnali & Hyberno Tempore contra in Cuniculum vel Puteum humiliorem intrat & ex altiori exit: Verum ea fluxionum Aeris Mutatio in temperatis Regionibus fit in initio Veris, ac in fine Autumni; in frigidis autem, in fine Veris, & in initio Autumni: To which he adds, Sed Aer utro∣que tempore antequam cursum suum illum consuetum constanter teneat, plerumque quatuordecem dierum spatio crebras habet mutationes, modo in altiorem Pu∣teum vel Cuniculum influens, modo in humiliorem. And these things may give us some Reason to believe, That there are in the Earth seve∣ral Periodical Changes in the Temperature of those Regions, which deserve our Consideration. But having several times enquired about these things, I am inform'd that the Air generally goes in the same way, both Winter and Summer, en∣tring the Air-Shaft, and coming out of the Per∣pendicular Grove. But to conclude this Chapter: From what hath been said, it may appear, That tho' in some Mines, the Earth seems to be distinguish'd into three Rgions, yet generally the Temperature of the whole is various and uncertain: And much more uncertain is it, what is the Constitution of the Central Parts of it; and whether that be divided into Distinct Regions, or what is the State and Texture as well as Consistency of its Parts, we must be content to be ignorant of; since one of
the deepest Mines we have heard of, being men∣tion'd by Agricola, in his Book call'd Bormannus; Cap. 12. was at Cotteberg, which exceeded not 500 Fathom; and if, according to Gassendus, the Semi-diameter of our Globe be 4177 Italian Miles, what a Superficial Knowledge must we have of it, who have not been able to make our Observations above 500 Fathom; and that too, in but a small Part of it's Orb. CHAP. IV. Of the Temperature of the Submarine Re∣gions, as to Heat and Cold. THE following Chapter relating to the Temper of Submarine Regions, I would be suppos'd to mean, by that Term, not such as are beneath the whole Ocean, but only such as are beneath its Superficies; concerning which, I shall not relate what follows, as upon my own Observation, but only as receiv'd by Informa∣tion from others, who have dived into them. Submarine Regions two.And First, I shall only assign to this Element two Regions; the One bounded by the utmost Penetrations of the Rays of the Sun, and other Calorifick Causes; the other extending it self to the utmost Depth of the Water. The Tempe∣rature of the Upper∣most.According to which Division it will follow, that the Upper Region must vary in it's Extent; according to the Difference of the Climate, and the Heat of the Sun, (supposing the Warmth of it
not to proceed from Subterraneal Effluvia;) and not only in the Extent, but the Temperature of that Region; which may not only be vary'd by the Influence of the Sun, but also, by the dif∣ferent Nature of the Soil about the Shores, being either Nitrous, or Marchasitical; as also by the Shallowness of the Water, which may contribute to the Warmness of it, the Rays of the Sun be∣ing refracted by the Subjacent Sands. To which Causes may be added the Influence of Subter∣raneal Fire: An Observation favouring which, hath been made by Monsieur de Ponts, in his Voyage to New France; in the way to which he observ'd, That in one Place the Water was very warm, as well as the Wine, which lay in the Boat, tho' there was no sensible Alteration in the Air; and that this continu'd for three Days; whereas, on the 21rst of the same Month, it was for 2 or 3 Days observ'd to be as cold. The Tempe∣rature of the Lower Region.These things in short being premis'd, con∣cerning the Upper Region, I shall now pro∣ceed to the Lower, which is Cold; the Parts of Water being in a less violent Agitation than our Sensory: And that the Lower Region is sensibly cold, is not only consonant to Reason, but also confirm'd by the Observation of those, who have dived a considerable Depth, not only in the Northern Seas, in Africa and America; but it is also further evinc'd, by what is commonly practised at Sea, viz. to let down Bottles of Wine into the Sea all Night; which, by being immers'd in the Water, will acquire a considera∣ble Degree of Coldness. And I am also inform'd by an Observing Traveller, that having let down about 400 Fathom of Line, with about 30 pound of
Lead at it, thirty five Degrees North Latitude beyond the Line; the Lead, when drawn up, was as cold as Ice. From which Instances it appears, that the Air and Water so far agree, that the Parts of them being put into Motion, by External Causes, they acquir'd each a considerable Degree of Warmth; but, being remov'd and separate from those Causes, put on a contrary Quality; so that the Air and Water seem chiefly in this respect to differ, viz. in their inverted Order. But further: From what hath been deliver'd, it appears, That tho' the Submarine Regions be sensibly colder, the nearer the Bottom; yet their coldest Region does not, by any of the afore∣mention'd Phaenomena, appear to be the Summum Frigidum; for tho' I have several times frozen Salt∣water, yet it does not appear, that there is the least Ice generated in the Bottom of the Sea; since from the Bottom of the great Ocean 35 Degrees South Latitude, Gray Sand hath been brought up, where the Water was no less than two hun∣dred and twenty Fathom deep: But yet there is one Caution to be added, which makes this Observation the less to be rely'd on; which is, That one Reason why no Ice is to be found in the Bottom of the Sea, may be the Unaptitude of Salt-Water, more than of Fresh, to be congeal'd; it requiring a much greater degree of Cold to freeze Salt-Water, than Fresh.
CHAP. V. Relations about the Bottom of the Sea. The Bottom of the Sea very Rough and Une∣qual.THAT the Bottom of the Sea is usually Salt and Cold, is a very common Obser∣vation; but being desirous to be more nicely inform'd, about what occurs in that Region; I have been told by several, who have in long Voyages, fathom'd in several places, that the Bottom of the Sea is rough, with considerable Inequalities, and Precipices; so that in a small Space a little Depth of the Sea hath increas'd to a hundred Fathom, and decreas'd as suddenly: There being likewise found several other Ine∣qualities and Hills, observ'd in Places about 30 or 20 Fathom deep; where a Line of 16 Fathom, would upon the next Cast require 35 or 40 to reach to the Bottom of the Sea; and the like Observations I have receiv'd from seve∣ral Experienc'd Mariners: Amongst which, I transcrib'd the following Account, from some Notes left in England, by one who had made a Voyage to the East-Indies: The Account was this. February 12. After our Observation, seeing the Ground under us, we heaved the Lead, and had but 19 Fathom Rocky Ground, then hal'd by N.N. E. the Wind at N.W. and found our Wa∣ter to shoal from 19 to 10 and 8 Fathom, hard Coral Ground; then suddenly deepned again from 8 to 20 and 22 Fathom Sandy Ground; and then suddenly saw Rocks under us, where
we had but 7 Fathom, and the next Cast 14 Fathom again; and so having run N. N. E. from 6 in the Morning, till 12 at Noon, about 19 Mileswe deepned our Water from 16 to 25, and the next Cast no Ground with 35 Fathom of Line. The Gravi∣tation of the Water.But besides the Inequalities to be taken No∣tice of at the Bottom of the Sea, there are several other Things to be observ'd; amongst which the Gravitation of the Water, is remarkable; and tho' it be disputed amongst Philosophers, whether there be such Gravitation or not; yet that there is, appears from several Experiments. And First, If a Glass-Cylinder, with one End open, be immerg'd in a Glass-Vessel, it may be observ'd, That as the Cylinder is press'd lower, the Air by the Pressure of the Water, will be squeez'd higher and higher, the water rising gra∣dually below it in the Cylinder. And the like hath been observ'd by several Persons, who have dived in a Diving-Bell, not only in the Northern Sea, but upon the Coast of Africa; where as the Bell went deeper and deeper, the Air became more compress'd, and the Water accordingly rose higher and higher in the Bell. And some∣times the Pressure hath been observ'd to be so powerful, that I have been inform'd by one who let down a Glass-Vial into the Sea, near the Straight's Mouth, that, having let it sink about 40 Fathom, it was burst in pieces, by the out∣ward Pressure of the Water; to which he added, That, having let down an Aeolipile of Metal, and sunk it about 60 Fathom, he observ'd when it was drawn up, that the sides were in several places bruis'd and compress'd by the violent Pres∣sure of the Water.
The Bottom of the Sea not disturb∣ed in StormsAnother thing observable in the Bottom of the Sea, is, That tho' the Violence of Storms may disturb it, where it is shallow; yet where it is considerably deep, the nearer the Bottom, the more calm and undisturb'd it is. And this hath been confirm'd by the Observations of Divers, who have taken Notice, That tho' the Waves were six or seven foot high, yet, at fifteen Fa∣thom deep, the Water was very little disturb'd, only the Mud was rais'd, which made the Water dark; and what is very remarkable, is, that the Person that dived inform'd me, that having stay'd a considerable depth for some time, he found, when he came up again, a Tempestuous Storm, which had risen when he was in the Water, without being taken Notice of by him below. And the like hath been observ'd, near the shoar of Manar, in the East-Indies, where they dive for Coral, in a Sea, that lies be∣twixt the Island of Ceylon, and the Cape of Co∣mori, which is usually very much disturb'd; in∣asmuch as it lies near the Indian Ocean, and the Gulf of Bengala, formerly call'd Sinus Gangeti∣cus. And it hath elsewhere been observ'd, That, in considerable Storms, the Seas have not been disturb'd over the Depth of 4 Fathom. The Water at the Bot∣tom of the Sea almost stagnates.And to these Observations I might add, had I sufficient Evidence to build upon, That, having enquir'd, whether upon Ebbing and Flowing of Tides, the Motion of the Water was continu'd to the Bottom; I have been told by some, that it does almost stagnate, and by others, that the Current of the Water above, is different from the Tendency of that below. But not to rely upon these Relations, I have been inform'd,
by a Person who made his Observations beyond the Cape of Good Hope, in the Southern Sea, that, having let down his Plummet, about an hun∣dred Fathom, he found, that the Plummet be∣ing suspended in the standing Water, made the Boat turn to the Tide, as if it lay at Anchor. And that there is such a Stagnation of Water at the Bottom of the Sea, hath been likewise confirm'd to me, by Observations made near the Coral Fi∣shery, in the East-Indies. CHAP. VI. Further Relations about the Bottom of the Sea. THAT the Air, is not only necessary to the Preservation of Animals, but also promotes Vegetation, and the Growth of Plants, I have elsewhere observ'd; but since several Trees and Plants are observ'd to grow under Water, I shall further observe what Informa∣tions I have receiv'd concerning them. Observati∣ons relating to Coral.And First, To what hath elsewhere been de∣liver'd concerning the Growth of Coral under Water, I shall add, That I am inform'd by one, that saw it near Algiers, that Coral, when first taken up, is not only soft and flexible, but very pale; yet when the Bark is taken off, and it is expos'd to the Air, it's Natural Redness presently appears: To which he added, That
having broke several Pieces, he found it much paler within than on the outside; and that there were several black Knobs on the extream Parts of the Twigs; the place from whence this Coral was taken, being about nine or ten Fathom deep. And I have been further inform'd by one that sail'd to the East-Indies, that upon a certain sort of Coral he hath observ'd, certain round Berries of a very pleasant Colour. Trees un∣der Water.To these Relations I shall add, That Divers have not only observ'd Trees to grow under Water, near Manar, which bore Leaves like those of a Laurel, but that not far from the Coast of Mosambique, in Africa, several Trees are ob∣serv'd to grow under Water, whose Fruit and Leaves are like those of the Tree in America, which bears a Fruit call'd Acayu. But an Observation more Valuable, is con∣cerning the Maldavian Nut, call'd Coco, which by experienc'd Divers, are found to be the Fruit of a Tree, which grows at the Bottom of the Sea, which are either gather'd by the Divers, or torn off by the violent Agitation of the Wa∣ter: In which Fruit it was observ'd, that, whilst it was under Water, it was very soft; but when it had been expos'd a considerable time to the Air, it became very hard.
CHAP. VII. Observations and Experiments about the Salt∣ness of the SEA. The Inva∣lidity of the Cause as∣sign'd by the Peripa∣teticks.THE Saltness of the Sea, by several Peripa∣teticks, hath been judged to proceed from the Influence of the Beams of the Sun upon the Water; but with what little reason may easily appear from those standing Lakes and Ponds, whose Water, notwithstanding the Influence of the Sun, continues fresh: And that it neither pro∣ceeds from the Influence of the Sun, nor any o∣ther external Heat may be argued, since though some fresh Water be drawn off by Distillation, and consequently undergoes as great a Degree of Heat, as it can be supposed to do from the Sun Beams, it yields not so much Salt as is to be found in some Water, never exposed to such Heat; which Salt differs very little from Sea Salt, only that it is whiter, being more clear of it's faeces, and free from a Mixture of earthy Parts. And though some alledg in favour of Aristo∣tle's Doctrin, That Scaliger affirms the Sea Wa∣ter to be saltest in it's upper Region; yet it will appear, by comparing the Saltness of the super∣ficial Parts of the Sea with the bottom, that the Observation was ill made, and does not general∣ly hold; neither will it favour his Doctrin, should it be alledged, that Sea Salt dissolved in Water, otherwise than common Salt christalizes at the Top of the evaporated Solution; for conside∣ring how much Salt Water must be impregnated
with; and that the Quantity of Salt in Sea Wa∣ter hath been observed by a Dutch Geographer to be only as One to Forty;The propor∣tion of Salt to Water. it's Disposition to cry∣stalize can be no Argument of the swimming of Sea-Salt more on the top of the Water than the other Region. But though I differ in this Point from the Pe∣ripatetick Philosophers; yet I do not believe, on the contrary, with some, that the Gravity of Salt makes them sink the more to the bottom; since the intestin Agitation of the Parts of the Water continually shifting Places must consequently car∣ry it along with them; which Consideration joyned with another, which is, that I have not u∣sually observed, Metalline Tinctures stronger at the top than bottom, might perhaps give a sus∣picion to some, that the present Argument is less cogent, notwithstanding the specific Gravity, be∣twixt Metals and their Menstruums does much exceed that betwixt Salt and Water. But further in behalf of the Peripatetick Do∣ctrin, it is urged out of Linscotten, that, at Goa in Portugal, it is usual for their Slaves to dive, and fetch fresh Water from the bottom of the Sea; but tho' this Matter of Fact were true, yet no ge∣neral Rules could be drawn thence; because Ex∣perience tells us, that in other Places it is contra∣ry. Besides it might be probably guessed, that,Springs in the Bottom of the Sea. were it true, that fresh Water might rise by cer∣tain Springs covered over with Sea Water, as well as that several Springs in other Places should be under Water upon the flowing of the Sea: And that there may be such Springs is so far probable, that the curious Hungarian Gover∣nor de admirandis Hungariae Aquis, says, That in
the River Vagus, near the Fortress Galgotium, Veins of hot Water rise up in the very bottom of the Water; his Words are these, Ne{que} in Ripa tan∣tum eruuntur calidae, sed etiam intra amnem, si fun∣dum ejus pedibus suffodias; calent autem immodicè, &c. And the like hath been observed upon the Neapolitan Coast. But not to urge these Relations, I shall inti∣mate briefly, That an ingenious Acquaintance of mine, who lives in that City, hath informed me, that that fresh Water is not fetch'd so deep as to be suspected to rise from such Springs; but that it is rather the fresh Water which runs into the Sea from a River not far off, before it is mixed with the Salt Water; which Conjecture I the ra∣ther believe, because near Mouths of Rivers it hath elsewhere been observed, that fresh Water hath for some time floated together, without being perfectly mixed with the other Stream. And as for Scaliger's Opinion, it might be ur∣ged against it, that by a Vessel so artificially contrived, that it might be opened at the bot∣tom of the Sea to take in Water, the Water drawn up hath been found to be Salt. But since it may be urged against this, that the Salt Wa∣ter being heavier than the fresh, as it was draw∣ing up might be mixed with it, by pressing into the Vessel; I shall add Instances not lyable to such Objections; for it hath been observed, not only at the Cape of Comori, but elsewhere, by Divers, that the Water is as Salt at the bottom as at the top; and I am informed, that Divers have not only under the Torrid Zone observed the Wa∣ter exceeding Salt, but have brought several Lumps of Salt from the bottom with the Sea:
And the like Saltness of the bottom of the Sea hath been discovered near the Straights of Gi∣bralter's Mouth: And further, that I might not only be sure, that the Sea was thus Salt at the bottom, I procured two Quarts of Sea Water, the one taken up at the bottom of the Sea and another at the top; in which, though there was some Difference in Colour; yet being Hydrosta∣tically tryed, there was no sensible difference in the specifick Gravity of them. But to make out what I have before intimated, viz. That the Freshness of the Water in the bot∣tom of the Sea near Goa might be produced by the Rise of some Springs under Water; though it may be objected, that the specifick Gravity of the Salt Water, would in some measure obstruct the Rising of fresh Water: Yet this Objecti∣on will easily be answered, if we consider, that according to what we have delivered in our Hy∣drostatical Paradoxes, and also what Stevinus hath observed, let the Quantity of Water be never so great, no more can resist the Rising of such Springs, but that Pillar of Water which lyes o∣ver them in a perpendicular Line; and if the Spring takes it's Rise from some high Place, so that the Weight of that Water which lyes in the Vein, be heavier than the perpendicular Pil∣lar of Sea Water, the Rising of it can by no means be hindered by the Pressure of that incumbent Water. But to explain and confirm this Paradox, I shall add, that having procured a long Glass Syphon, part of it being inverted so as to form a short Leg, I filled it with Claret, stopping the Orifice of the longer Leg with my Thumb, which Sy∣phon,
being immersed in Salt Water contained in a Glass Vessel, and the Orifice of the longer Leg being opened, the Claret, notwithstanding the Pressure of the Salt Water, presently rose up in it in the Form of Clouds, which lasted till the Liquor in the Pipe was brought to a just Aequi∣librium with the incumbent Pillar of Salt Wa∣ter. The Reason of the Salt∣ness of the Sea.But to pass on to the Cause of the Saltness of Sea VVater, I deny not what Gassendus and other Moderns teach; but grant, that the Saltness pro∣ceeds from a Solution of Salt in the VVater; yet I am apt to suspect, that that Saltness is not only supplyed by those Salt Rocks, which may be con∣tiguous to, or near the Water; but that the Sea is in a great Measure supply'd, by Salt wash'd away and carry'd into it, by Springs and Rain-water, which float into the Ocean. And I am the more confirm'd in this Suspicion, because several Chymists have not only found Salt in some Waters; but have obtain'd a good Quan∣tity of common Salt upon refining of Salt-Pe∣tre, which according to Sir Francis Bacon, is in most Soils, which are not spent in Vegetation, or wash'd and consum'd by the Sun and Rain. But not to insist too long on these things, it is not only probable, That the Salts in the Earth, may, by this Means, contribute to the Saltness of the Sea; but that, from what hath been be∣fore deliver'd, such Salts may be communicated to it by latent Springs, not to be taken notice of or discern'd by us. And further, That such Salt as abounds in the Earth, may supply the Sea with most of the Salt which is perceiv'd to be in it; we are to render it further probable,
to consider, That the Sea-Salt, and that, are agreeable in the main, with each other; since they have almost the same Shape and Taste, &c. the former of which will appear by Evapora∣tion and Crystalizing them; and as for some small Difference to be perceiv'd betwixt them, that may easily arise from those Bituminous and other, as well as Nitrous Bodies, which flow into the Sea, and which may be mixed with them, both by the internal Agitation of the Parts of the Water, as well as the outward Action of the Sun and Air. And that there is such Salt dissolv'd in Sea-Water, might be probable, if it were possible so to raise the fresh Water it was dissolv'd in, by Distillation, as to leave the Saline Parts be∣hind; but not now to mention, that not only I, but the Judicious Sir John Haukins, in his Voy∣age to the East-Indies, have, by distilling of Salt-Water, obtain'd from it a wholesome fresh Water; I shall, without making a long Digression, proceed to answer an Objection, which is urg'd against what I have deliver'd, viz. That if the Springs acquir'd such a Salt∣ness by running through the Earth, it would be discernible before they emptied themselves into the Ocean. To this I shall answer, That besides those fresh Springs which are visible to us, there may be several others which lye too deep for us to take Notice of: But here it may be requisite to take Notice, That I do not say, That the Saltness of the Sea wholly depends on such Sup∣plies; but that they contribute to the Saltness of it.
The Bitter∣ness of Sea Water, whence.Having said so much of the Saltness of the Sea and its Causes; it may be now seasonable to observe, from whence proceeds that Bitter∣ness remarkable in some, if not most Sea-Wa∣ter; which, we conceive, may proceed, part∣ly from the external Power of some Catholick Agent, and partly, from those Bituminous Bo∣dies which are carried along with Spring-Wa∣ter into the Sea, which hath been visibly appa∣rent in the Island Barbadoes, where that which they call Barbadoes Tarr, hath been seen to flow from the Rock into the Sea; and to these Causes may concur some Subterraneal Exhala∣tions and Effluvia, which I have elsewhere taken notice of to flow from and pervade the Earth. And as for those different Tastes which are per∣ceiv'd in the Sea at several Places, it is no less probable, that they proceed from other adven∣titious Bodies mix'd and incorporated with the Sea-Water; for that the Sea-Salt which is dis∣solv'd in it, is not a simple Salt, but a com∣pound, I have been induc'd to believe by a Salt which I obtain'd from it. And that some Catholick Agents may work Changes in the Saltness of the Sea, which it would not otherwise have, by a bare Solution of those adventitious Bodies that are mix'd in it, I have Reason to believe, since I have found, That by keeping the Parts of Sea-Water in A∣gitation, by a continued digestive Heat, it hath considerably differ'd in Taste, from a bare Solu∣tion of Sea-Salt in Water. And for a further Confirmation, That the Saltness of the Sea is vary'd in several Places, I shall barely intimate those several Colours, different Qualities, and
stupendious Multitudes of adventitious Corpus∣cles which are mix'd with it. Agitation requisite to preserve Sea Water from stinking.But to proceed, amongst the various Obser∣vations to be made about Sea-Water, it is worth our Notice, That if it be kept from A∣gitation, it will in a short time stink; which I have not only observ'd, by keeping some of it in a Runlet for some time; but also, I am in∣form'd by one, who, in a Voyage, was for some days becalmed, that the Sea, for want of Agitation, stunk so much in twelve or fourteen days, that the Smell was almost intolerable; which continued till the Winds put the Water into Agitation. Which agrees with what Sir John Hawkins hath observ'd, who relates the following Story: Were it not for the Moving of the Sea, by the Force of Winds, Tides and Currents, it would corrupt all the World. The Experience of which I saw Anno 1590, lying with a Fleet about the Islands of Azores, almost Six Months, the greatest Part of the time we were becalmed, with which all the Sea became so replenished with several sorts of Gellies, and Forms of Serpents, Adders and Snakes, as seem'd Wonderful; some green, some black, some yellow, some white, some of divers Colours, and many of them had Life, and some there were a Yard and a half, and some two Yards long; which had I not seen, I could hardly have be∣liev'd; and hereof are Witnesses all the Company of the Ships, which were then present, so that hardly a Man could draw a Bucket of Water clear of some Corruption. In which Voyage toward the End there∣of, many of every Ship fell sick of this Disease, and dy'd apace, but that the speedy Passage into our own
Country was a Remedy to the Crazed, and a Pre∣servative for those that were not touched. The Saltness of the Sea differs.As for the different Degrees of the Saltness of the Sea, I shall deliver what I have been in∣form'd of, as briefly as I can. And First, It hath been observ'd, by one to whom I gave a Glass conveniently shaped to try the specifick Gravity of the Water, that it grew heavier and heavier as he came nearer the Line, till within about thirty Degrees Latitude; from whence to Ja∣maica he observ'd no Alteration in the specifick Gravity in the least. And in Confirmation of this I am likewise inform'd, by one, who for his own Satisfaction weigh'd the Water, both under the Aequinoctial and at Cape of good Hope, and found that the Weight of both was the same. To which may be added that it is com∣monly observ'd at Mosambique, one of the hot∣test Places in the World, that the Sea is so salt there, that it bears up the Ships a considerable Height out of the Water, more than in other Places; and that the Water may be much salter in one Place than another, by having more Salt dissolved in it, does not only appear from what hath been said, but also from what is frequently observ'd in the different Strength of Brine-Pits. But to pass from what I have learnt by In∣formation, to what I have observ'd my self con∣cerning the Proportion of Salt to the Water it was dissolv'd in, which I have observ'd in Sea-Water, betwixt England and France. The Propor∣tion of Salt in Sea-Wa∣ter.The first Experiment I made to discover the Quantity of Salt was this, that having, in a Viol, weigh'd an equal Proportion of Sea-Water taken up at the Surface of the Sea, with com∣mon
Water, the Weight of the former exceed∣ed the latter of forty fifth Part; but these Li∣quors being more Hydrostatically try'd, by weighing Sulphur in them, that which in the Sea-Water weigh'd ℥ss + 10 ½ gr. in Sea-Wa∣ter, fetch'd from the bottom, ballanced the same Weight; but being weigh'd in common Water, it weigh'd ℥ss + 15 ½ gr. so that the Sea-Water was a Fifty third Part heavier than the fresh; the Difference in which way of try∣ing it, from what was observ'd in the former Tryal, I could attribute to nothing, but some grosser Saline Parts mix'd with the common Water, or some evaporated Parts of the Sea-Water. Another way we made use of to try the dif∣ferent specifick Gravity of these Liquors, was, by Distillation ad Siccitatem in a digestive Fur∣nace, in which a Pound Averdupoise Weight yeilded ℥ss 10 gr. of Salt; so that the Propor∣tion of the Salt to the Water was as 30 and 12/100 to one, being near the Thirtieth Part. But suspecting that the Quantity of this Salt was much increas'd by imbibing Moisture from the Air, I caus'd it to be dry'd in a Crucible, and found it weigh'd ʒiij + ss, which is about a Thirty sixth Part. How so much a greater Quantity of Salt should be obtain'd by Distillation, is difficult to con∣jecture; yet I am apt to think, that it might proceed from some Parts of the Water detain'd from flying away, by being enclos'd amongst the cubical Salts; and this I am apter to believe, First, Because I have elsewhere prepar'd a Salt, which would coagulate and embody it self with
Water; and Secondly, Because I am told, That a Sort of Salt is brought from the Coast of Spain, which being here purify'd and dissolv'd, will yield a double Quantity. The Sea-Water salt∣er some∣times than at others.Whether the Sea-Water may at some times be more impregnated with Saline Parts than at others, I conceive probable, if we consider the Supplies that it receives both from the Earth, which are carry'd to it along with Springs, and also, the sudden Additions it may receive from Subterraneal Exhalations; but these Observa∣tions being very nice, it most commonly re∣quires other Measures than what Hydrostaticks afford; for it may be observ'd, That several volatile Salts which are of no considerable Weight above common Water, may be mix'd with it without being perceiv'd; so that one may easily be deceiv'd in judging of the Salt∣ness of the Sea altogether by Hydrostaticks; because, that which violently affects the Taste, may have but a small Influence in the Balance: To confirm which I shall add, That a Bubble of Glass, having Metal in it, weigh'd ʒiij ✚ 51 ¼ gr. in Spirit of Sal Armoniack, and but ʒiij ✚ 45 ¾ in common Water. But further, I weigh'd in the same Liquor an equal Proportion of Sea-Salt brought from the torrid Zone and Sal Ar∣moniack, and found, that the Bulk of the former was, to an equal Proportion of that Liquor, as two and a quarter to one, whereas the Sal Armoniack was not above a hundredth Part, a∣bove one, and 7/10 to one, which is the more strange, because Part of the Composition of Sal Armo∣niack is Sea-Salt.
But that I might be satisfi'd what was the great∣est Degree of Saltness, that Water would be impregnated with; I shook a Lump of Salt in Water, till it would dissolve no more; and found that a Brine might be made so strong, that the Salt would be dissolv'd in five times its weight of Water. To conclude this Discourse, I shall add one thing which hath not been taken notice of by Hydrostaticians; which is, the weight of the Sea-Salt to its Bulk of Water, which I have found to be almost as two to one; and I likewise found, that a piece of Sal Gemm, which is more pure and weighty than Sea-Salt was to its Bulk of Water about as 2 2/8 to 1. CHAP. VIII. Memoirs for the Natural History of Mineral Waters. THE Use of Mineral Waters are so Uni∣versal, and the Methods which some Phy∣sicians take to try them so slight; that, tho' I am satisfied it is difficult, without Experience to Ascribe Virtues to them à priori, by Reason of the Great Variety of Minerals, which may im∣pregnate them with Particles of various and very different Natures; I cannot but think, but that if we were furnish'd with a sufficient Num∣ber of Quaeres, and several Methods in order to a Discovery of them, more nice Tryals might
much Contribute to the clearing up of a Na∣tural History of Mineral Waters; since by a competent number of Experiments it might be hoped, that the Nature of those Metalline Salts, with which Mineral Waters are Impregnated, might be discovered. Wherefore I have lay'd down such sorts of Experiments, that might be most easily try'd, viz. chiefly Chimical Ones, which may be made at home, without the Inconveniencies of atten∣ding those Mineral Fountains from whence they spring. And because my Design is rather to improve Physick by the following Observations, than to entertain Speculative Naturalists; I have chief∣ly made it my Business in the following Papers, to consider those Waters call'd Acidulae, rather than the other term'd Thermae, because the for∣mer are of more general Use. The danger of an ill use of Mineral Waters.But perhaps some may think that the Quares hereafter propounded may be too troublesome, and more than requisite; since the Use of Mine∣neral Waters are thought so innocent, as to be of no ill Consequence if Unsuccesful. To which it may be answer'd, that tho' when skil∣fully given, they do a great deal of good; yet they are as prejudicial if unskilfully prescrib'd; and therefore, since there cannot be too much Caution, we cannot be too inquisitive to inform our selves of their Virtues; for there may be a great many hidden Qualities in them, and they may be impregnated with several Metalline Pro∣perties, which may not be discover'd to the Eye or by common Tryals.
Besides, were such Experiments industriously prosecuted, they might help to discover several other Qualities in Mineral Waters, which are as yet unknown; for from the following Expe∣riments it is evident, that the Earth, which a∣bounds with Minerals of a Martial Nature, may be more apt to impregnate subterraneal Waters than we can otherwise imagine; for upon pouring of a Tincture of Galls filtrated through Cap-paper upon filings of Steel,The Effects of filings of Steel, in a Tincture of Galls. the Liquor in half an hour became Opacous, and almost as black as Ink: The like Phaenomena to which were exhibited by Steel in an Infusion of Brasil or Log-wood made in common Water. To which we may add, that several Waters have been discover'd under ground of very different Tastes; some of which have been found to be corrosive, and others as harmless, being endow'd with se∣veral Medicinal and Useful Qualities; and I am inform'd more particularly of one, which is a Mine of Coral in Devonshire about 360 foot deep, in which was found a Water very thick and red, yet cool and Diuretick, and not in the least nauseous to the Taste.
CHAP. IX. Titles propos'd for the Natural History of Mineral VVaters, consider'd whilst in their proper Channel. Quaeries in order to a discovery of the Virtues of Mineral Waters.IN order to a natural History of Mineral Wa∣ters, they ought to be consider's in three dif∣ferent Capacities: First, as they are found in their natural Receptacles; Secondly, when drawn up for use; and thirdly, with Respect to their Effects on Human Bodies. To the first of which Heads the following Quaeres may be re∣fer'd. 1. Within the Precinct of what Climate or Parallel, and in what degree of Latitude the Mineral Waters are to be found? 2. To what point these Waters lie open most in their Receptacles? 3. Whether the Ground in which they are found be a Plain, or how much it differs from a Plain? 4. If the Ground be upon an Ascent, how far they are from the botttom of that Ascent? 5. Whether a Recrementitious Substance ad∣heres to Stones long contiguous to these Wa∣ters? 6. Whether subterraneal Fires be near such Waters, and what Phaenomena such exhibit? 7. Whether Brimstone or Sal-Armoniack, &c. be found about the Vents of such subterraneal Fires?
8. Whether instead of subterraneal Fires, there are other adjacent Aestuaries? and whether such be constant or intermitting? and if so, whether periodical or irregular? 9. Whether Mineral Fumes of particular co∣lours or smells arise from such Aestuaries? 10. Of what Temper the neighbouring as well as the Soil they pass through is of? 11. Whether and of what Nature those Mi∣nerals are of which they pass through? 12. Whether the Mineral Waters be origi∣nally fresh, and derive their Virtues from the Soil they afterwards pass through? 13. Whether if it acquir'd its Virtues so, there were upon the Impregnation any Efferves∣cence? or whether any such Effect succeeded its Mixture with another Liquor? 14. Whether there be a Spring of a contrary Nature near it, viz. as to Heat and Cold, as it is observ'd in France. 15. Whether an oyly or bituminous inflam∣mable Substance float in it? 16. Whether the Seasons of the Year, or Tem∣perature of the Weather alters them? and what Qualities they lose or acquire by such? For after Rain I have observ'd such Waters incapable of turning a Tincture of Galls black: But as to its Medicinal Virtues, I have found that Rain after long Droughts, hath rather increas'd than dimi∣nish'd their Strength, by dissolving and diluting those Salts, which were fix'd in the Earth for want of a Vehicle; but if the Waters be weak, and the Rain much, those Salts being the more diluted, render the Waters less Effe∣ctual.
17. Whether the Qualities of the Waters may be Chymically and Mechanically discover'd? as also of what Colour and Weight, and with what Menstruums their Salts may be mix'd? and likewise what Substances they will yield when expos'd to different Degrees of Fire, and what other Chimical Tryals those as well as the Caput Mortuum may undergo? CHAP. X. Containing Titles for the Natural History of Mineral Waters when drawn out of their Receptacles. A Continu∣ation of Qeaeries.1. WHether the Mineral Water propos'd be actually Hot or Cold? From whence we may judge from what Depth those Waters rose? and whether they were impreg∣nated with a Salt-Peter or Sal-Armoniack in their Ascent? And the several Degrees of Heat or Cold may be either try'd by immerging a Ther∣moscope, or by trying whether they will Coagu∣late Oyl of Aniseeds or melt Butter? 2. Of the specifick Gravity; which, being compared with that of common Water, will shew what Quantity of Mineral Substance the Water hath dissolv'd in it; and whether Me∣talline or more Volatile, as it is heavier or ligh∣ter; where we are to observe, that Mineral Waters are sometimes lighter than common Wa∣ter; partly, because they are impregnated with
Volatile Parts; and partly, because they are void of Saline Parts, which makes common Water something heavier. But to discover the different Weight of several Mineral Waters, I caus'd a Glass-Viol with a flat Bottom and a long Neck, three Inches long, to be blown, which was so light, as to weigh but ʒvi + 42 Grains; tho' it was capable of containing ℥iij ss and 43 Grains of Water; which made it more proper for a Nice Ballance, by which I found the following Mineral Waters to differ thus in Weight. Waters Ounces Drachms Grains Common 3 4 43 Common distill'd 3 4 41 Acton 3 4 48 ½ Epsom 3 4 51 Dulwich 3 4 54 Staton 3 4 55 Barnet 3 4 52 North-Hall 3 4 50 German-Spaw 3 4 40 Tunbridge 3 4 38 Islington, from the Musick-House. 3 4 36 Islington, from the Vault with Steps. 3 4 39 Islington, from the Cellar. 3 4 39 3. Of their different Degrees of Transpa∣rency or Opacity. 4. Whether without being exposed to the Air, it will afford a Pracipitate. By which Ob∣servation
the different Soils through which they pass, will not only be discover'd, but hence we may learn to distinguish such from the true Ca∣put Mortuum of the Water. German Spaw Wa∣ter yielded a good Quantity of yellowish Oker. N. B. the Water so try'd must not be expos'd to the Air, for if it be the Air will precipitate a considerable Quantity of Matter in most Waters. 5. What Microscopes can discover in Mineral Waters? N. B. those moving Corpuscles discernible in a Solution of Pepper, &c. in Water, are Animalcula, and not Portions of Inanimate Mat∣ter, which swim up and down such Liquors; which is apparent if those little Animals be touch'd with Spirit of Salt, for being kill'd by it, they move much more slowly. 6. Whether there be any variety of Colours in several Mineral Waters? 7. Of their different Odours. These are to be perceiv'd at the Spring-Heads, where not only a Bituminous and Sulphurious Smell may easily be perceiv'd; but I am inform'd, that there is a Mineral Spring in France which hath a mani∣fest vinous Odour. 8. Concerning the different Tastes of Mineral Waters. 9. Whether taking it up, or keeping it stop'd or unstop'd? or whether freezing or thawing it will alter the Colour, Smell or Transparency of it? For tho' some Waters retain their Purgative Virtue a good while; yet, I have observ'd an Exhalation of some fugitive Parts from those which are lighter than Water, and abound with
Spirituous Parts; so that, tho' they were car∣ry'd but a little way from the Fountain, they pre∣sently lost their Power of turning a Tincture of Galls into a Purple, and instead of that, turn'd it red; and even the Strongest Waters, if kept un∣stopp'd, or not kept close, presently lose that Property. 10. Concerning the different Consistency of such Waters. 11. Whether they be more apt to Expansion and Condensation, or Heat and Coldness, than Common Water? 12. Whether they are apt to Putrify, and how soon, and what Phaenomena they afford? 13. What Alteration in Colours ensues the Mixture of Astringent Juices with them, as also their Mixture with several Juices of the Body. N. B. in trying of Mineral Waters, it is usual to make use of a Tincture of Galls, without con∣sidering the Alterations which may be made in the Tryal, by an Uncertain Proportion of Galls: Wherefore I usually make use of a settled Propor∣tion, as 5 Grains to an Ounce; tho' Mineral Wa∣ters may be try'd with much more Expedition, and Certainty, by making use of the Powder it self, suspending about three Grains of Powder in an Ounce of the Waters; and I have found by Experience, that so small a Quantity as a Grain, hath given German Spaw-Water a deep Purple Co∣lour. But it is not always necessary to make use of Galls in such Tryals, since Rose Leaves, or the Flowers and Bark of Pomgranates, will have much the same Effect, affording a Cloudy and Blackish Tincture.
And it is further to be noted, That I made it one Part of this Quaere, what Colours would be pro∣duc'd by a Mixture of Mineral Waters with Ani∣mal Juices; because I have observ'd the Root of the Tongue sometimes Blackish upon the taking of Large Doses. But to return to what I have observ'd concern∣ing the trying of Mineral Waters, by an Infusion of Galls; I not only doubt whether all Martial Wa∣ters will turn a Tincture of Galls black, but whe∣ther all liquors which will, are to be esteem'd Mar∣tial; for I have found that a Mineral of a Diffe∣rent Nature from Steel, would give it a Black Colour; and that a Liquor, which was a Prepa∣ration of Steel, would not; which induc'd me to think, that such a Tincture was rather the Ef∣fect of some Acid Fumes, which had work'd on the Mars, with which those Mineral Waters are Impregnated. To which it may be added, That I have found, that if a Vitriolate Water be impregnated with Copper, instead of Iron, instead of turning a Tin∣cture of Galls Blackish, it only would render it Muddy and Thick. And I had a sort of white Earth, which I found by Tryals to be Lead, that would turn a Tincture of Galls Blackish, tho' it was altoger void of Martial Parts, and probably would have very bad Effects, if taken inwardly. To which I might further add, That a Tincture of Gold in Aqua fortis, likewise turn'd an Infusion of Galls Black. And those Observations I have been the willinger to lay down, because, tho' I would not be thought by them to slight the Use of Galls, in such Tryals, yet I would thence
urge them to make such Tryals to be more wari∣ly made. Observati∣ons requi∣site in Try∣ing Mine∣ral Waters.And because it may be of some Use to observe the different Colours exhibited by such Tryals, I shall add, the following Considerations, as Re∣quisite to be thought on by him, who designs to make such Experiments. 1. That he ought to observe the Changes of Colours, made by such Tinctures, in a good Light; which may help a Curious Observer to distinguish what Minerals such Tinctures are impregnated with. 2. It way be of Use to vary the Shades of Colours, produc'd by Mineral Wa∣ters, either by dropping such Waters upon Pa∣per, whose Pores are saturated with Vitriol pow∣der'd, or ting'd with a Decoction of Log-wood: Several Variations in Colours may be also made, by dropping other Medicinal Liquors, either into the Mineral Waters; or the Infusion of Galls, before Mixture, or after. 3. I would recom∣mend, for such Tryals, not only the Parts of Astringent Plants, but also Animal, and espe∣cially Mineral Substances: For, besides the A∣stringents, I have contriv'd a certain Substance, which would not only turn a Vitriol Water im∣pregnated with Iron black; but also One satura∣ted with Copper; a Succedaneum, to which may be made, by adding to Sulphur as it melts over the Fire, and equal Proportion of Salt of Tar∣tar finely powder'd, stirring them till they in∣corporate, and become red: Which Mixture, being put into a Glass Retort, with half it's weight of Sal-Armoniack, dissolv'd in Water; let it be distill'd in Sand, shifting the Receivers as the Liquor drawn off, is ting'd more or
less; so that the strongest may be preserv'd by it self. And such Tryals as these will be of more use, than those usually made with a bare Tincture of Galls; since there are several Mineral Sub∣stances and other Bodies, which Mineral Waters may be impregnated with, which discover not themselves in an Infusion of Galls: As Sul∣phur or Copper, may be so lock'd up in these Wa∣ters, as not to be perceiv'd, till the Body of the Liquor is open'd by some proper Additament. And even Arsenick it self, may be so disguised, as not to be perceiv'd, when mix'd with the Wa∣ters; yet if Spirit of Urine, or Oyl of Tartar; per Deliquium, be dropp'd into a Solution of it, it presently precipitates in the Form of a white Powder; and so likewise, if a Solution of Subli∣mate be added to it.Whether Mineral Waters have Arse∣nick dissol∣ved in them But to discover, whether Mineral Waters be impregnated with Arsenick or not, I put Dantzick, or English Vitriol into a Solution of it, either of which caus'd a dark precipitate gradually to subside. 14. Whether Spirituous Acids, volatile Al∣kalys, or Lixivial Salts will precipitate such Wa∣ters? 15. The Manner of Extracting Salts from such Waters, and what Quantities may be ex∣tracted? Guesses may be made concerning the Saltness of these Waters, by trying whether they will Lather with Soap? and if not, what Quantity of Curdled Matter they will yield? I have ob∣serv'd that even the lightest Waters will yield a small Quantity of common Salt. 16. How to discover what Acidity is to be found without Evaporation. Having taken a
peculiar Method to try the Acidity of Mineral Waters, by mixing them with an Infusion of Lignum Nephriticum in simple Water, I found, that tho' German Spaw, yielded a small Quan∣tity, yet in that of Action, there was none di∣scernible. 17. What may be observ'd by Distillation in Balnco? 18. What, and whether the same Quantity of Caput Mortuum, be afforded by Evaporation, and Distillation? 19. Whether Mineral Waters will acquire the same Qualities and Texture, by a Reunion of their Caput Mortuum, when distill'd to such a Consistence, in Glass-Vessels exactly luted, which they had before? 20. What Changes, if any, Mineral Waters undergo by being boil'd in Water, in a Glass Hermetically seal'd? From whence might be learn'd whether a Change of Qualities would succeed an Alteration of Texture, without a manifest loss of Parts? And whether an Agita∣tion of Parts, without the Influence of the Air, would precipitate any thing, or deprive it of it's Power to turn a Tincture of Galls Purple? 21. How much the Mineral Waters exceed their Caput Mortuum in Proportien? 22. What Parts are contain'd in the Caput Mortuum, and whether dissoluble in Water? 23. How much the Saline and Terrestrial Parts differ in Proportion? 24. Whether in strong Fires, the Salts be Volatile or Fix'd, and to what Degree? 25. Whether the Salts will Crystallize per se,
or with other Salts, and what's the Figure of the Genuine, or Compounded Crystals? 26. Whether Acid or Alkaline Qualities are most predominant? The Acidity will either appear to the Taste or Smell; or may be disco∣ver'd by turning Syrup of Violets red; as also, by making use of an Infusion of Lignum Nephriticum, which upon a Mixture of Acids loses it's Blue Colour: Their Acidity may likewise be disco∣ver'd by trying, whether they will be precipi∣tated by Alkalys, or ferment with them. And if Alkaly be predominant, it, on the contrary discovers it self by a Lixivial Taste and Smell; and may be discover'd, by turning Syrup of Vio∣lets Green, or precipitating a Solution of Subli∣mate, or Fermenting with Aqua fortis; or lastly, by increasing the Colour of a Tincture of Brasil or Log-wood in Common-water? And tho' we have no such Springs here in England, as afford Alkaline Salts; yet without question, in Egypt such may be found, since their Latron, or the Egy∣ptian Nitre, abounds with a Salt of an Alkaline Nature: and I have obtain'd such an Alkaly, from that Famous Water of Bourbon in France, which would turn Syrup of Violets green, and fer∣ment with Volatile Acids. If such Waters abound with Vitriol, they'll turn an Infusion of Galls black, and Vomit those that drink them; and, if an Alkaly be added, will yield a yellow Pre∣cipitate, upon dropping of Spirit of Ʋrine, or Salt of Tartar into them. I have not found any of the Waters about Lon∣don, to be impregnated with Vitriol; and I am told, that in France the Mineral Waters are so far from being impregnated with Vitriol, that there is
a Vitriolate Spring in that Kingdom. As for the Nature of the Salt, which most Mineral Wa∣ters are impregnated with, I think that it is not to be referr'd to any Glass, but is either sui gene∣ris, and a peculiar one, or a Compound Salt, made up of such as the Water is impregnated with, in it's Passage through the Earth; and that Purgative Salts may, by a Change of Texture, be made of Salts not at all Purgative, I the rather be∣lieve, because I have been told by an Ingenious Emperick, That a Salt which I made of Salt of Tar∣tar, and Common Sulphur mix'd together, had a gentle Purging Virtue. 27. In what Menstruums the Caput Mor∣tuum may be dissolv'd? and in what it may not? Whether Volatile or Fixt, and what Qualities it hath in Respect of Colour or Smell? What Pro∣portion of Salt Mine∣ral Waters afford.It is to be admir'd, what a great deal of Caput Mortuum some Mineral Waters yield in Compa∣rison of others; since those Waters: which are purely Diuretick have very little, if compared with the Caput Mortuum of Purging Waters: For tho' a pound of Barnet Waters, yielded a Drachm, yet the same weight of Tunbridge afforded but a Grain. And, It is not a little strange, that so small a Quan∣tity of a Mineral should impregnate so much Water, as I have, by Tryal, found a Grain of Iron Stone did, enabling it to Tincture an Infusion of Galls, deeper than Tunbridge or German Spaw Wa∣ter would. And I have try'd, that half a Grain of Marchasite, dissolv'd in Spirit of Nitre, com∣municated a Tincture to 61440 Parts of Water; tho' Part of that Marchasite was Sulphur, and Part of it Caput Mortuum.
And here it may be seasonable to take notice, That if so small a Portion of a Metalline Sub∣stance would, when grosly dissolv'd, impregnate so large a Quantity of Water; how much more may it, when rais'd in the Form of a Subtile Mi∣neral Fume? and as in such a Form, it may im∣pregnate a larger Quantity of Water, so will it be more apt to fly away, when expos'd to the Air. And that Vitriol may probably rise in the Form of a Vapour, without losing it's Qualities, is evident in Sublimate, which consists of Mer∣cury, chang'd by an Addition of Salt and Vitriol; for some Vitriolick Parts being carry'd up in the Preparation, turn Opacous upon an Affusion of Spirit of Sulphur. But further, to make it evident, that the Par∣ticles of Iron may be considerably expanded, I dropp'd four Drops of a Vitriolick Liquor, made use of in Copperas-works, into twelve Ounces and a half of Water, and found, that it so much im∣pregnated 1500 times it's Proportion of Com∣mon Waters, as to make it strong enough to turn a Tincture of Galls Purple, tho' by Evaporation we found that 3 Parts of 4 of that Liquor were Water. 28. What Alterations the Earthy Parts of Mineral Waters undergo by Ignition; and whe∣ther they may be Vitrify'd per se? as also what Colours they impart to Venice Glass, if mix'd with the Powder before Fluxion? 29. Of what use they are in Baking, Brewing, Tanning, or Dying of Colours, &c. 30. How many ways they may be made Artificially, and with what Proportion of In∣gredients?
CHAP. XI. Titles for the Natural History of Mineral-Waters, consider'd as a Medicine. IT may be worth Observing, in order to a more Compleat Natural History of Mineral-Waters, what Constitutions they agree with, and in what Distempers they are Proper or Dan∣gerous: What Sensible Operations they have; and whether their Effects be alter'd by Drink∣ing them Hot or Cold; at the Well, or at a Di∣stance from it: Whether Exercise, or the Warmth of a Bed, promotes their Operation: Whether they have any Occult Qualities. It may likewise be requisite to observe; What good Effects may succeed a due Preparation of the Body that drinks them, and what Advantage it may be to drop some Strengthening Sto∣machick into the First Dose: What Quantity is enough for the First Dose, and how it must be vary'd: How long they may be Drunk, and whether constantly, or with Intervals; whether Purging sometimes may contribute to their good Effects: What Regimen in the Six Non-Naturals is to be observ'd, whilst they are a-taking: Which are the Signs that denote the kindly Ope∣rations of them; or their future ill Effects. What ill Accidents attend the taking of them, and how they may be Remedy'd, or Prevented. Whether it be proper to Purge after the Taking of them.
What Effects they will have by Mixing other Liquors with them; or, by Boiling Meat in them; Whether a Salt extracted will be of Equal Effect, when Diluted in Fresh Water. What External Effects they will have, and of what use their Se∣diment is when Externally apply'd: What Ef∣fects they will have on Dogs, if injected into their Veins, or if they be kept with such for constant Drink. CHAP. XII. Of the Natural and Preternatural States of Bodies; especially the Air. IT is the General Consent of most Men, that the Determinate States of Bodies are not on∣ly first fram'd by what they call Nature; but that they are likewise preserv'd in those States, by the Superintendency of that Power; and that whenever they lose that State, they are said to be put into a Preternatural One. But if we consider, that such Changes proceed from Natu∣ral Causes, and that those New States depend on the like Catholick Agents,The Com∣mon Distin∣ction be∣twixt Na∣tural and Preternatu∣ral States ill grounded and the Establish'd Laws of Nature; it will appear, That the Di∣stinction Men usually make betwixt the Natural and Preternatural.▪ States of Bodies, is but ill-grounded; and that Preternatural, is only a Re∣lative Term, intimating that that Body hath un∣dergone a Change, either by the Operation of some unheeded or more noted Agent. For
Matter being altogether void of Sense and Per∣ception, and not affecting one State more than another, the Changes it undergoes, depend on the Alteration of it's Textures, and New Po∣sition of it's Parts, alter'd afresh, by that Agent, which such a Body was last expos'd to. As a piece of Wax, is put into a New Form, by the last Impression, made by another Body upon it, without affecting one Form more than another it self. Ice a Na∣tural State in some Places.And that the States of some Bodies, which are said to be Preternatural, as truly depend on Natural Causes, and the Establish'd Laws of Nature as others, is evident in Ice and Wa∣ter: In which Bodies, the Forms of each de∣pend upon the Effects of External Agents; for, tho' in these Hotter Climates Water is Esteem'd a Natural, and Ice a Preternatural State of that Substance; yet I am inform'd, that in Siberia, a Province belonging to a Russian Emperour, Water is froze most part of the Year; and at a small▪ Depth, from the Surface of the Earth, the Soil is froze throughout; where Ice is look'd upon to be the Natural, and the Alterations made by a Thaw, and the Influence of the Ex∣ternal Temperature of the Air, and the Sun Beams, are esteem'd Preternatural States of Bo∣dies. And further, tho' Butter in our Clime be sold in a consistent Form, and when it is melted, is look'd upon to be in a Preterna∣tural State; yet I am inform'd, that amongst the Europeans it is fluid, and is sold by Mea∣sure, and not by Weight, as here in England. And it is further observ'd, That several Sub∣stances, as Rosin of Jalap, Gum Lacca, and even
Aloes it self, are considerablely softened in their Consistence, by the Temperature of the Air, and the Force of External Heat, whilst they pass under the Torrid Zone; so that I am told, that the former of the aforemention'd Drugs was melted into a sort of Balsam, whilst it con∣tinued in Africa, but when it was brought to Spain, it put on a Consistent Form again: And tho' Aloes was soft whilst carry'd through America, and those hotter Climates, yet when it approach'd our Climate, it presently became hard. But to bring further Instances concerning the Natural and Preternatural States of Bodies, I shall observe, That according the Receiv'd Notion of Natural and Preternatural States, it is very difficult to determine the Natu∣ral State of the Air; for, not to insist on the different Temperature of the Air, as to Heat and Cold, in different Climes; It may be de∣manded, Since Heat and Cold, rarifie and ex∣pand the Air, what is to be esteem'd the Na∣tural State of it, in Reference to Rarity and Density? And it is no less Questionable, what Place is most fit to determine it's Natural State, since the State of it is not only different in several Countries; but in those Places at diffe∣rent Times: And that the Changes, as to the Density or Rarity of the Air, are very fre∣quent, appears by the several Degrees of the Atmosphere's Gravity, evident in the Torrecel∣lian Experiments, hereafter to be deliver'd. A forced State, the Natural State of the Air.But further: Except the States of the Air be said to be Preternatural, only in a Relative Sense, with respect to the State it was in, before it
underwent the last Change, it is not impos∣sible to make it out, That the Air is always in a Preternatural, because always in a Forced State; the Lower Parts of the Air being con∣stantly press'd upon, and by the Weight of Incumbent Air, kept from expanding it self; but if the further it recedes from a forc'd State, the nearer it approaches to a Natural One, then the Force of the Fire must by Rarifying it, contribute to the Destroying of it's Preterna∣tural State; and by the same Reason the Air contained in our Pneumatical Receiver, when Part of it is drawn out, must approach to a Natural State, the Remaining Part having fur∣ther Liberty to expand it self. To conclude this Chapter: From what hath been said, it appears, That that is truly the Na∣tural State of a Body, in which it is preserv'd by a Natural Concourse of External Agents: And likewise from what hath been said, we may infer, That it is a common Error, That nothing Violent is Durable; since it is evident, that the Atmosphere we live in, is always in a Forc'd or Compress'd State.
CHAP. XIII. The Description of the Pneumatick Engin, and it's Use. Physico-Mechanical Expe∣riments touching the Air, in a Letter to the Right Honourable Charles, Lord Vis∣count of Dangarvan. My Dear Lord, PErceiving that several of the Virtuosi at Paris, intent in Examining, how far the Air was concern'd in hindering the descent of Quick∣silver, in the Torrecellian Experiment, concern∣ing a Vacuum; I thought it seasonable to pro∣mote that Experiment; and to acquaint Your Lordship with my Attempts on that Subject, which may afford some Hints at least towards the Advancement of that Philosophy. A Subject which I the rather make Choice of; because, the Air being of so general use in Re∣spiration, and, by it's almost Perpetual Conti∣guity, as well to our own Bodies, as those we are here concern'd with, having Considerable Effects, in Producing those Various Diseases in∣cident to Crazy Bodies, upon Changes of Wea∣ther, a Discovery of it's Nature may be of Mo∣ment; and likewise, because it may shew us how far it concurs in Exhibiting several other Pha∣nomena. But before I present Your Lordship with the Experiments, it will not be improper to give
Your Lordship an Account of the Engine con∣cern'd in the making of them. A Descrip∣tion of the Pneumati∣cal Engin.It consists then of two Principal Parts; a Glass Vessel, and a Pump to suck out the Air contain'd in it. The First of which is a Glass, furnish'd with a Hole at the Top, to which a Cover is ad∣apted, and also a Stop-Cock, fitted to the Ex∣tremity of it's Neck below; the Cavity of it being large enough to contain about 60 lib. of Water, allowing ʒxvi. to each Pound. The Diameter (B C) of the Top of the Vessel (A) is about four Inches, which is en∣compassed with a Lip, almost an Inch in Height; the Use of which is for the Cover to rest on; which is describ'd in the second Figure, where (D E) denotes a brazen Ring, which is to co∣ver and to be closely cemented on the Lip (B C) of the first Figure. To the Internal Orifice of this Ring is adapted a Glass Stopple, so exactly, as to prevent any considerable Access of exter∣nal Air: In the midst of this Cover there is a Hole (H I) about half an Inch Diameter in∣circl'd with a Ring or Socket, to which is a∣dapted a brazen Stopple (K) so exquisitely, that it may be turn'd round without admitting in the least Air. Through the lower end of it there is a little Hole (8) made for the Passage of a String (8, 9, 10) which is likewise to pass through a small brazen Ring (L) fix'd to the bottom of the Stopple (F G) the use of which String is to move what is contain'd in the exhausted Vessel, when stop'd. That the Stop-cock (N) in the first Figure, might more exactly exclude the Air, a thin Plate of Tin (M, T, V, W) was soder'd on
the Shank of the Cock (X) of a Length pro∣portionable to the Neck of the Receiver, which was cemented, with a Cement made of Pitch, Rosin and Wood-ashes, pour'd hot into the Ca∣vity of the Plate; and to prevent the Cement from running into the Orifice (Z) of the Shank (X) it was stopp'd with a Cork, to which was fix'd a String, that it might be drawn out of the upper Orifice of the Receiver, and then the Neck of the Glass Receiver being press'd moderately hot into the Cement, it fill'd the Interstices betwixt the tin Plate and the Re∣ceiver, and also, betwixt the Receiver and the Shank of the Cock. The lower Part to be describ'd is made up of an Air-pump, supported by a Frame of Wood with three Legs (111) so contriv'd, that, for the freer Motion of the Hand, on one side it may stand perpendicular; a-cross the midst of the Frame, a Piece of Board is nail'd (222) to which the Pump is fix'd. The Pump is made up of four Parts, viz. An exact and strong Cylinder, endued with a Cavity about three Inches cross; to which a Sucker (4455) is adapted, made up of two Parts; one of which (44) being not so large in Diameter, as the Cavity of the Cylinder, a thick Piece of tann'd Leather is nailed on it, by the Addition of which, it closes so exactly to the Cylinder, that the Air cannot insinuate; The other Part being a thick Plate of Iron (55) is firmly joyn'd to the middle of the former Part; it is a little longer than the Cylinder; one Edge of it being smooth, and the other indented,
to the Interstices of which the Teeth of a small Jaton Nut (α β) are to be adapted, which is fix'd by two Staples (22) to the under-side of the Board nail'd transverse (222;) on which the Cylinder resting, it is turn'd by the Manu∣brium (7.) The last Part of the Pump is the Valve (R) being a Hole at the Top of the Cy∣linder, which is taper towards the Cavity: To this is fitted a brass Peg, to be put in or taken out, as Occasion requires. The Engine being thus delineated, the Stop-Cock must be well oyl'd with Sallad Oyl, to stop the Intervals of the Internal Surfaces of its Parts, and also, that it may with less diffi∣culty turn the Key (S) at Pleasure; for the like Reasons the Sucker as well as the Valve is to be oyl'd also. And here it is as much strange as to be admir'd, That when Oyl or Water separate, have fail'd in effecting our Design, a Mixture of both hath prov'd effectual. Lastly, That the Ingress of Air betwixt the brazen Cover and the Ring, may be likewise prevented; it will be convenient to plaister the Edges with the for∣mer Cement, laid on with a hot Iron, that it may the better fill the little Cavities. Things being thus ordered, That no Air may remain in the Cylinder, the Handle is to be turn'd till the Sucker rises to the Top of it; and then, the Valve being shut, it is to be drawn down to the bottom; by which Means, the Air being driven out of the Cylinder, and a Succes∣sion from without being prevented, the Cavity of the Cylinder must be emptied of Air, so that the Turn-cock beng turn'd so as to afford a Passage betwixt the Receiver and Cylinder,
Part of the Air before lodg'd in the Receiver will be drawn down into the Cylinder, which, by turning back the Key,The Method of Mana∣ging the Pump. being prevented from flying back into the Receiver, may, by open∣ing the Valve, and winding up the Sucker, be forc'd into the open Air; and so, by reiterated Exsuctions of the Air out of the Receiver, and Expulsions of it again out of the Cylinder, it may be exhausted as the Nature of the Experi∣ment requires. Having thus given your Lordship a Descrip∣tion of the Engine, and Cautions for the Pre∣vention of the Ingress of Air, necessary in some more curious Experiment; I shall in short ac∣quaint your Lordship, That the Experiments I proceed to entertain your Lordship with, are such, as require not such Exactness in the fore∣mentioned Cautions, provided the Pump be well plied and the Crannies not considera∣ble. EXPERIMENT I. The Manner of Pumping out the Air. A Digres∣sion concerning the Spring and Elasticity of the Air, in Order to a more clear Apprehension of subsequent Experiments. FROM what hath been deliver'd it appears, that, the Sucker being wound up, and, upon stopping the Valve and turning the Key, drawn down again, the Air will be equally ex∣panded both in the Receiver and Sucker; and upon returning the Key, and opening the Valve,
near a Cylinder full of Air will be expell'd; but the Receiver, by reiterated Excursions, being more and more exhausted, less proportionably is forc'd out; so that at the last, before you need to open the Valve, the Sucker will rise almost to the Top of the Cylinder; and if, when it is so exhausted, you let go the Pump, and the Valve be stop'd, the Sucker, meerly by the Force of external Air, overpowering that more rarify'd Air within, will be forc'd up to the Top of the Cylinder; where we may ob∣serve, That as the Sucker is press'd higher by external Air, so it is an Argument of the Re∣ceiver's being more or less exhausted; the Air in the Sucker being accordingly more or less able to resist the external, as it varies in Quan∣tity: We may observe also, That whilst the Receiver retains any considerable Quantity of Air, there is a brisk Noise upon turning the Key. A Springi∣ness in the Air.But to render these Experiments more intelli∣ble, I shall take Notice to your Lordship of a Notion, which may explicate them; which is, That the Air consists of certain springy Parti∣cles, which, being bent and press'd together by incumbent Bodies, always endeavour to remove that Pressure, and to dilate themselves; which Notion may be confirmed, by considering, that the Air consisting of Parts incumbent on one another, the uppermost, by their weight, must needs compress the lower; which compressed Parts must consequently have a Power of self-Di∣lation: So when a Fleece of Wool compressed, upon the Removal of that Pressure again ex∣pands it self, the Springiness of the Air may like∣wise
be explicated by supposing with the Inge∣nious Des Cartes, that the Air is a Congeries of flexible Particles, of various sizes and very ir∣regular Figures, raised by the Heat of the Sun, and swimming in that Matter, which encompasses the Earth; which being, by that Aether that floats about them, kept separate and in a violent Agi∣tation, acquire that Springiness which they would lose in some measure by being compres∣sed. By both these ways the Springiness of the Air may be explained; yet by which with most Rea∣son I shall not now dispute, being not so much concerned about the adequate Cause of that Sprin∣giness, as to manifest, that it hath a Springiness, in order to shew the Effects of it; for I am not sa∣tisfyed, whether either so far explains it's Na∣ture, as to make it intelligible. But in opposition to this Notion it may be al∣ledged, that tho it were granted, that the Air is made up of springy Particles; yet, it would only account for the Expansion, and the Dilatati∣on of the Springs of the Air, when apparently compressed in Wind Guns and other Pneumati∣cal Engines; whereas from these Experiments it does not appear, that there was any Compres∣sion before the Air was included in those Guns. To remove this Difficulty, there are several Ex∣periments which prove, that our Atmosphere is not light, but heavy, in respect of some Bodies, one of which I shall mention here, which is this, that a Lamb's Bladder dryed, whose Cavity con∣tain'd two thirds of a Pint, being press'd toge∣ther, and counterpoised in a very nice Balance, and being prick'd, upon the avolition of the
Air contain'd in it, lost a Grain and an eighth Part of what it weigh'd before; from whence, if we may conceive, that it hath weight, it fol∣lows, that a Column of Air of many Miles high leaning on those below, is enough to compress and bend their Springs; as when Wool is heaped to a considerable height, that which lyes under is compressed by that which lyes upon it; and if upon a Parcel of Air, so large a Quantity lyes, no wonder, that upon the Removal of that Pres∣sure, it powerfully expands. As for the Objection, that Water varies not in it's Weight in the lower from the upper Part, it may be answered, that the difference betwixt Air and Water is very considerable; the last not being capable of Compression; whereas Air is. To which may be added the Experiment tryed by Monsieur Pascal (the Son) at the foot, the midle and top of that high Mountain (in Avergne) cal∣led Le Puy de Domme,Why Mer∣cury is sus∣pended higher at the bottom than the top of a Hill. where the Mercury subsi∣ded above three Inches more at the Top than the bottom; the Reason of which is, that the Air less vigorously pressed against the Quicksilver at the Top, and so was less capable of bearing it up. And if it be objected against what hath been proposed, that if it were so compressed, it would not be so ready to yield to the slight Force of Flyes, and even Feathers, it may be answered, that as a Piece of Wool squeezed together, makes a manifest Resistance to the Pressure of the Hand; so the Air does to those Bodies, tho it's Resistance is not strong enough to overpower their Motion, the Parts of it being in a continual Disposition to yield to solid Bodies, upon the Account of it's
Fluidity, and the perpetual Motion of it's Parts, occasioned by their continual Endeavours to ex∣pand and unfold themselves. EXPERIMENT II. Of the Pressure of the Air against the Sides of the Bodies it encompasses. The Pressure of the Air in∣cluded within an Ambient Body explain'd. The Air presses upon the sides of Bodies it encompas∣ses.IF, when the Air is almost drawn out of the Receiver, one endeavours to lift up the Brass Key which is plac'd in the middle of the Brass Cover; it will be as difficult to raise it, as if a considerable Weight were ty'd to it; for the Spring of the Air included in the Receiver being weaken'd, and not able to bear up strong enough against the bottom of the Stopple, as powerfully as before; whoever lifts up the Stop∣ple, must likewise bear up the whole Pillar of External Air, which presses upon the top of the Stopple: But if the Air be gradually permitted to get into the Receiver, the Internal Air being more compress'd, and its Spring encreas'd, it bears up against the Stopple more powerfully, and the Pressure of the Internal and External Air being brought nearer to an Aequilibrium, the Stopple may proportionably be lifted up with less difficulty; till at length, the whole Cavity of the Receiver being fill'd with Air, it may ea∣sily be taken up. But it's thought strange by some, how the Pressure of the Included, can be any ways pro∣portionable to the Pressure of the External Air; since it is so encompass'd by the sides of
the Receiver, that those Pillars of Air, which would press upon it, if open to the Air, are only icnumbent on the External Superficies of the Receiver; but to unfold this Difficulty,The Air en∣closed in the Receiver Acts by vir∣tue of its Spring. we may consider, That as a piece of Wool squeezed in ones Hand, and so enclos'd in a Box, is kept from expanding equally by the sides of the Box, as if it remain'd in ones Hand; so the Air com∣press'd by the Incumbent Asmosphere, and con∣veigh'd in that compress'd State, into the Re∣ceiver, is equally kept from expanding it self by the sides of the Receiver, as if it were still squeez'd together by the weight of the Atmosphere: And if it should further be objected, that if the Air in∣cluded in the Receiver were so confin'd by the sides of it, it's continual Endeavour to expand would break the Glass: It may easily be an∣swer'd, that the expansive Force of the Inter∣nal Air, is counterpois'd by the Compressure of the External, and consequently there being an equal Pressure on both sides, it is preserv'd en∣tire; for a like Reason those slender Bubbles, which Boys usually blow up with Soap and Wa∣ter, continue whole for a good while, the In∣ternal and External Air, being compress'd to a just Aequilibrium. EXPERIMENT II. Concerning the Force requisite to draw down the Sucker: The Opinion of a Modern Naturalist examin'd. What Weight is requisite to draw down the Sucker.THough the Sucker may be easily drawn down, by the help of the Manubrium▪ yet without that it will require a Force capable
of raising so much of the Atmosphere as presses upon it: The Reason of which is evident, from Mercury suspended in a Tube; for tho' the Weight of the Atmosphere is able to ballance and keep it up to twenty five Digits; yet if the suspended Mercury exceeds that height, it pre∣sently over-powers the Pressure of the incum∣bent Atmosphere, and subsides to its just height. And as from hence we may learn, why it is so difficult to draw down the Sucker; so it like∣wise teaches us, for what Reasons the Sucker, when so violently forced down, upon a Relaxa∣tion of that Force rises up again; for the Spring of the Air included being weak, it must conse∣quently be buoy'd up by the Pressure of the Ex∣ternal, till that which is contain'd in the Re∣ceiver be equally compress'd, so as to be able to resist the Pressure of the Atmosphere. There is one Thing more remarkable in this Experi∣ment, which is, that if the Valve be stopped close, when the Sucker is rais'd to the Top of the Cylinder, it finds an equal Resistance by the Pressure of the Atmosphere when first drawn, as when nearer the Bottom of the Cylinder; from whence we may gather, that what an Eminent Modern Naturalist delivers concerning the Rea∣son of the violent Ingress of exhausted Air, viz. That it is encreas'd by the Addition of that Force, which it receives from the Air sucked out, is a mi∣stake; for were it so, it would be more difficult to draw down the Sucker, when it is further from the Receiver, a greater quantity of Air being exhausted. But from what hath been premis'd in the first Experiment, it is evident, that the weaken'd Pressure of the Internal Air,
is sufficient to account for the more violent In∣gress of the External. EXPERIMENT IV. Concerning the Swelling of a Bladder, The Opi∣nion of a Learned Author Examin'd. The Expan∣sion of Air in a Lamb's Bladder in our ReceiverHAving conveigh'd into the Receiver a Lamb's Bladder, well dry'd and limber, and half full of Air, the Cover being luted on, and the Pump set on work; we observ'd, that as the Air in the Receiver was gradually exhausted, that in the Bladder was accordingly expanded, till the Receiver being near fully exhausted, the Bladder seem'd very much distended, with the included Air. And to confirm our Guess, that the Ex∣pansion of the Air in the Bladder, proceeded partly from the weaken'd Pressure of the am∣bient Ai, rwe gradually left in the external Air, and found, that the Bladder by degrees subsided till it became as empty as before: But one thing Remarkable in this Experiment was, that the more the Receiver was exhausted, the more sensibly the Bladder was distended. And lest in this Experiment it should be doubted, whether the Distention of the Bladder did not rather proceed from the Fibers of the Bladder, returning of their own accord, to their natural Extension upon the removal of the ex∣ternal Air, we put in two empty Bladders a∣long with the former, and found them very lit∣tle extended upon the Exsuction of the Air. And the like Phaenomena were afforded, by re∣peating the Experiment with a Bladder, which
was half empty, and half fill'd with Air, the empty Part being parted from that which con∣tain'd the Air, by a Ligature. EXPERIMENT V. Concerning a Bladder which burst in the Re∣ceiver, and another by Heat. The Force of the Airs Ex∣pansion.HAving put a Bladder moderately Blown into the Receiver, before the whole Air was drawn out, the Air presently expanded and broke the Bladder with a considerable Crack; and tho this Experiment frequently succeeds, yet if the Bladder be one that is too dry, it is hard to tie it so fast, but that some of the included Air will get out, and so frustrate the Tryal. But to be fully inform'd whether the Air is out or not, we may be satisfi'd, by admitting Air afresh into the Receiver, which will, if the mention'd Acci∣dent happens, compress the Bladder more than when it was first put in. But it is not only possible, that the Air should expand it self so powerfully in an exhausted Receiver; but if a Bladder well blown, be brought near a good sire, the included Air will burst the Bladder with a considerable Noise. EXPERIMENT VI. The Airs Expansion measur'd.TO try how much the Air was capable of being expanded, we fix'd the Neck of a wet Lamb's Bladder to the Neck of a Viol; which being conveigh'd into the Pneumatical Receiver, upon the Exsuction of the Air, we observ'd, that
the Air which was contain'd in the Cavity of the Viol was so far expanded, that tho' the Viol was able to contain above five Drachms of Wa∣ter, if filled and distended the empty Bladder, which was large enough to hold five Ounces and half a Drachm. In which Experiment, the ex∣panded Air possessed nine times as much space as it did before Expansion. But to measure the Air's Expansion more nicely, we fix'd a Glass Bubble to one end of a Cylindrical Pipe, hermetically sealed; the Di∣ameter of whose Bore was about a quarter of an Inch; and having pasted a Piece of Parch∣ment upon the outside of the Tube, which was divided into twenty six equal Parts, and mark'd with black Lines, we fill'd the Cylinder almost full of Water, so that, after a few Tryals, by inverting the Cylinder, and stopping the open End with one's Finger, we could perceive, that as much Air might be permitted to rise up to the Bubble, as was equal in Extension to the Breadth of one of those twenty six Divisions; When this was done we fitted the open end of the Cylinder to a Glass Viol, which was fill'd with Water to the Height of half an Inch; all which being put together into a Pneumatical Re∣ceiver, after a few Exsuctions, the included Air was so much expanded, as to extend it self to the Surface of the Water; in which Expe∣riment the expanded Air took up thirty one times as much Space as before. And this Experiment being repeated in a Cy∣linder, which afforded a larger space for the Air's Expansion, it took up above sixty times the space it did before. And repeating the like Ex∣periment
with a Glass Pipe thirty Inches long (part of it having a Hole in the Cover to stand out through) by weighing the Water in a nice Pair of Scales together with the Pipe, first with the Bubble of Air included, and after when the Tube was wholly filled with Water, we found, That the Air which possessed but the Space of one Grain of Water had been expanded, in the exhausted Receiver so much by its own , as to take up 152 times its Space before Extension. And since Marcennus affirms, That the Air may be so expanded by Heat, as to take up seventy times its Space, I conveyed a Cylinder of the former Magnitude into the Receiver, and found, That upon the Exsuction of the Air in the Receiver, that in the Cylinder descended down almost to the bottom of it, the lower Surface of it being very convex, and seeming several times to knock upon, and re∣bound from the bottom of the Viol; which was an Argument of the expansive Force of the Air; since the Water it depressed, upon the drawing out of the Air, was much below the Surface of the Water contain'd in the Viol. EXPERIMENT VII. What Figure best resists the Pressure of the AIR. HAVING got a thin Glass Bubble, which was large enough to hold about five Oun∣ces of Water, to which was fix'd a slender Neck, about the Bigness of a Swan's Quill, we moderately exhausted the Air out of the Re∣ceiver, and then taking it out of the Pump, we
joyn'd the Neck of the Bubble to the lower Orifice of the Receiver, stopping the Crannies with melted Plaster to prevent the Ingress of the Air; and tho' the Glass was as thin as Paper, yet upon turning the Key of the Stop-Cock, and giving the Air included in the Bubble Liberty to expand, the Bubble sustained the Pressure of the whole Atmosphere, without being broke. EXPERIMENT VIII. The former Experiment illustrated.WE took a Glass Alembick, which was large enough to hold about Three Pints, represented by the Seventh Figure; The Rostrum (E) being hermetically closed: In the Top of the Rostrum was a Hole, into which, one of the shanks of a Stop-Cock of an ordinary size was cemen∣ted, the other being fixed with Cement in the upper Part of the Pump; which being done, and the upper Orifice of the Alembick being cove∣red close with a Plate of Lead exactly adapted to it, upon drawing the Air out of the Receiver the Glass presently cracked; which Crack is re∣presented by the Line (a, b) and this Flaw ex∣tended it self further accordingly as the Air was more exhausted, yet this Glass Vessel was near twenty times thicker than the Bubble. And that the Figure of the former Glass ena∣bled it so much better to sustain the Atmosphere, was further confirmed by suspending one of the Bubbles hermetically sealed in the Receiver, which so strongly resisted the Expansion of the Air contained in it, as to continue whole, when the Receiver was exhausted.
EXPERIMENT IX. A Confirmation of the former Experiment: An Ex∣periment to shew that these Phaenomena exhibited in Vacuo Boyliano proceed not from a fuga Va∣cui, &c. A Confir∣mation of the former Experi∣ment, &c.HAving put the end of a slender Glass Pipe into a Viol, which was large enough to contain four Ounces of Water, and fixed it to the Neck of the Viol with a Cement of Rosin and Pitch, so that the end of the Pipe almost touched the bottom of the Viol, as in Fig. 6, this Viol was conveighed into a small Recei∣ver, as much Water being put into it, as wrought a little above the bottom of the Cylin∣der; the upper End of the Pipe being most of it without the Vessel, a Hole having been purpose∣ly made for it in the Top of the Receiver: The Event of which Tryal was, that upon drawing the Air out of the Pump, the Weight of the At∣mosphere internally pressing into the Pipe, and the Spring of the Air within the Receiver, not equally pressing against the sides of the Bottle, which were exposed to it, a Piece of the Bottle burst out of the side of it, with such a Force as to crack the Receiver in several Places; and having reiterated the Experiment with a round Glass Bubble, the Leaden Cover of the Receiver was not only de∣pressed, by the Weight of the Atmosphere, so as to thrust out one side of the Receiver, but the Glass Bubble was cracked into Pieces with such violence, as to tear a Bladder, which it was en∣compassed with to keep it from breaking the Re∣ceiver, in several Places.
Before I proceed to the next Experiment, it may be requisite to advertise, That though the larger Receivers are apt, upon some Tryals, to crack; yet, they are not rendered altoge∣ther useless, since when the Air begins to be exhausted, the ambient Atmosphere compresses the Lips of the Glass closer together. But if the Crack be considerable, it may be cemented with a Plaster made of Quick-lime and Scra∣pings of Cheese ground together very finely in a Mortar, and made into a Paste with a little Wa∣ter, which being spread upon a Cloath about three Inches broad, must be apply'd to the Crack. EXPERIMENT X. Of the Flame of a Candle in a Receiver.HAVING suspended a Tallow Candle in our Receiver, we found, That upon an Exsuction of the Air, it was presently extin∣guish'd; but another being suspended there without pumping the Air out, it burn'd a little longer, the Flame of both before they went out gradually contracting and ascending almost to the Top of the Wieck with a blue Flame. In which Experiments it was observable, that when the Air was drawn out, the Wieck was presently extinguish'd, emitting very faint Ef∣fluviums, which rose a little Height, and dis∣pers'd themselves in the Receiver very faintly; whereas when the Air remain'd in the Vessel, the Smoak ascended in a. Cylindrical Stream, very briskly and recoyl'd from the Cover. To try what difference there would be in the Phae∣nomena
exhibited by a Candle made of Virgin's Wax, and the former, I suspended several small ones, stuck together, and found, that they would be immediately extinguish'd before the Cover could be cemented on; but having let down one of them alone, we observ'd, that upon the Evacuation of the Air, it continu'd to burn about a Minute; but if the Air was not pump'd out, the Flame continu'd more vivid and lasting: And, as in the Former Experiment, the Flame gradually rose to the Top of the Wieck; so in the Latter, it was depress'd nearer the Bottom, before it was extinguish'd. EXPERIMENT XI. Concerning the Burning of Coals, and the Continu∣ance of the Heat of a piece of Iron in Vacuo Boyliano. HAving suspended a Screw made of Wire in the Receiver, such as Fig. 10. represents, it being first fill'd to the height of five Inches, with live Wood-coals; upon the first Exsuction made by the Pump, they grew dim, and the Pump being ply'd for three Minutes, they were quite depriv'd of their red Colour, and seem'd extinct; but when they were taken out of the Re∣ceiver, they were re-kindled again; and being let down into the Receiver afresh, without Pum∣ping out the Air, they continu'd red for a Mi∣nute longer than before; but a like quantity of Live-coals, continued to burn half an Hour, in the open Air.
But a piece of Red-hot Iron, being suspended in the same Wire, upon an Exsuction of the Air, it seem'd not to be sensibly alter'd; but conti∣nu'd red for 4. Minutes; neither was it alter'd by re-admitting the Air into the Receiver, tho' Fumes, which were rais'd from some Wax, which stuck to the Wire, were much more expan∣ded, when the Air was pump'd out, than up∣on it's re-ingress. But one thing observable, was, that whether the Air was suck'd out, or not, the sides of the Receiver were considerably heated by the Effluvia trasmitted from the Iron. EXPERIMENT XII. Concerning the Burning of a Match.HAving suspended a lighted Match in the Receiver, it presently fill'd the whole Ca∣vity with Smoak; which, together with Air, being pump'd out, we could discern the Match to burn still more languid, till at the last it seem'd to be totally extinguish'd; yet some time after, upon a fresh ingress of Air, it renew'd it's Fire, being blown up a-fresh by the Access of that Aery Body. EXPERIMENT XIII The Reason of the afore∣mention'd Effect.HAving suspended a lighted piece of Match, together with a Bladder, to try whether the Smoak would hinder the Distention of the Bladder, as also whether the Light of the Match would be put out by it's own Smoak; I ob∣serv'd, that it afforded the same Phaenomena men∣tion'd in the foregoing Experiment, except that after Successive Re-admissions of the Air, it be∣ing
excluded for some time, the Fire was totally extinguish'd. Besides which, the following Phaenomena were to be observ'd: First, That upon the turning of the Stop-Cock, the Cavity seem'd immediately darken'd, as if it proceeded from a Change of the Position of the Parts of the Smoak. Second∣ly, That a kind of Halo, consisting of some Ex∣halations hover'd about the Flame. And Lastly, It was observ'd, that the Fumes did not in the least obstruct the Distension of the Bladder. Having try'd the Former Experiment with a lighted Match, in a small Receiver, I found, that the Fire was quite extinguish'd with it's own Smoak, before the Cover could be cemented on, except the overplus of Smoak was successively pump'd out, and a Supply of Fresh Air was let in at the Stop-Cock; which Method would con∣tribute to the Preserving of it. EXPERIMENT XIV. Of the Striking of Fire, and Explosion of Gun∣powder in Vacuo Boyliano. Gun-pow∣der explo∣ded in Va∣cuo Boylia∣no, &c.HAving fasten'd a Pistol to a Prop, which was plac'd in a Perpendicular Situation in the Receiver, and having ty'd a String to the Tricker, the other End of which was fix'd to the Key above-mention'd, in the middle of the Cover, we turn'd the Key round, to shorten the String; by which means the Tricker being check'd, and the Flint as it is usual, falling upon the Steel, it struck Fire, tho' the Receiver was exhausted, as a Pistol usually does; tho' by the
strongest Collision we could contrive, we could not, in our Engin, strike Fire with two pieces of Steel, striking one upon another. But we observ'd, That having endeavour'd several times, without Success, to fire Gun∣powder, we, but once or twice, met with the desir'd Effect: Where we observ'd, That the Flash was more expanded, than if it had been exploded in the open Air; and that when the Flash was extinguish'd, the Receiver was full of Smoak, the Parts of which mov'd up and down very briskly, but much swifter, when Air was permitted to return into the Cavity of the Re∣ceiver. EXPERIMENT XV. The Ʋnusefulness of Kindling Bodies inclos'd in Va∣cuo Boyliano, with a Burning-Glass. HAving conveig'd some Black and Dark Combustible Matter, into a small Receiver, and plac'd it in the Sun-shine; a Good Burning-Glass threw the Rays of the Sun so powerfully up∣on it, as to make it smoak, and fill the Receiver; but the Air getting into the Cavity of it, we could not prosecute the Experiment. And having repeated the Tryal in our Large Receiver, we found the Glass so thick, that it broke the Rays of Light, and scatter'd them so much, that when they fell upon the Combustible Matter, they were altogether incapable of working any considerable Effect upon it.
EXPERIMENT XVI. The Opera∣tion of a Load-stone.HAving plac'd a piece of Wood in our Re∣ceiver, with a piece of Iron, in a Perpen∣dicular Line, upon it; and fix'd a well-pois'd Needle upon that, we pump'd out the Air, and then apply'd a Needle to the outside of the Re∣ceiver; and observ'd, That the Load-stone drew or repell'd the Needle, as a Load-stone usually in the open Air; and the Needle, upon a Re∣moval of the Load-stone, after some tremulous Vibrations, pointed North and South again. EXPERIMENT XVII. The Gravity and Rarefaction of the Air examin'd, by the Torrecellian Experiments; together with Considerations concerning a Vacuum, &c. The Gravi∣ty of the Air, &c.COnsidering that it would be a very probable Method, to inform us, how far the Pressure of the Atmosphere, contributes to the buoying up of Mercury, in a Cylinder, so many Digits above the Surface of the Mercury it leans on, to try, whether in our Engine, as the Air was more or less exhausted, the Mercury in the Tub would accordingly subside; we fill'd a Glass-Cylinder Hermetically seal'd with Mercury, whose Bore was about a quarter of an Inch Diameter, and 3 Foot long; which being inverted in an oblong Box, and carefully let down into the Receiver; and the Cover lutedon, the Tube came through the Hole in the midst of the Cover, the Cranies be∣ing fill'd with melted Diachylon; where it was
observ'd, That the Mercury remain'd elevated to the same height, as if the Foot of the Tube had been press'd upon, by the Atmosphere, the Air included in the Receiver being in a compres∣sed State, and acting by Virtue of it's Spring. The Cylinder of Mercury being thus plac'd in the Receiver, we caus'd a Cylinder of Air to be pump'd out, and after that, another, observing the Mercury after each, gradually to subside; till at the last, it subsided a considerable way in the Pipe, down into the Body of the Receiver: and to put it beyond dispute, that the Subsiding of the Mercury, depended upon the weaken'd Spring of the included Air, and the Aequili∣brium betwixt the Pressure of that, and the Gra∣vity of the Mercury; we turn'd the Key, and permitted Air gradually to re-enter; and ob∣serv'd, That the Mercury accordingly rose in the Pipe, almost to the height which it was first su∣spended at; and the Reason why it was not rais'd quite so high, was, because several Bubbles of Air, which were before mix'd with the Mer∣cury, rising above it, depress'd, and kept it from ascending, by taking up more room in the Top of the Cylinder. In trying of which Experiment, having once made use of Diachylon Plaster, to stop up the Top of the Tube, we found, that tho' the Mer∣cury subsided considerably upon the Operation of the Pump; yet the Air so powerfully insi∣nuated it self through the Diachylon Plaster, that it sunk in the Pipe insensibly of it self. Another thing observable in this Experiment, was, that if, when the Air was exhausted, it were again permitted to run in too fast, it would
go near to break the Cylinder, by forcing the Mercury up too quick. Besides we observ'd, as we have before inti∣mated, That tho' upon the First Exsuctions, the Mercury subsided above an Inch; yet when it was low in the Receiver, it would not subside over the Breadth of a Barley-corn; besides, by reason of the Parts of the Air, tending to a Restitution of their Springs, it check'd and caus'd the Quick∣silver after it's descent, to fly back again a little after each Exsuction. Another thing remarkable in this Experiment, is, That having try'd it in one of our small Re∣ceivers, we found, that at one Exsuction it fell 18 Inches and a half, and at another time 19 and a half; from whence we may infer, that it might be of no small use to consider, the various Phae∣nomena afforded by the different Magnitude of the Receivers, in which these Experiments are made; and also the various Bores of the Cylin∣ders, which contain the Mercury; for thence one might probably guess at the Quantity of Air ex∣tracted out of the Receiver, by the Subsiding of the Mercury in the Tube. To the foregoing Observations, we shall add, That having once try'd the Experiment, in a Tube about two foot long, I found, that upon the first Exsuction, the Mercury fell above a Span, and afterwards subsided by degrees, till the Air was re-admitted, and then it was rais'd near to the top of the Tube again. Lastly, It hath been observ'd, That when, by the help of the Pump, more Air hath been squeez'd into the Receiver, than what was forc'd in by the Weight of the Atmosphere, the Mercury
would rise above 27 Digits in the Tube, and would be suspended at that height, till the Air was again let out. Concerning a Vacuum.Having said thus much of the Torrecellian Ex∣periment, and the several Phaenomena observable in it, perhaps it may be expected, that I should say something, concerning that Controversy, Whether or no there be a Vacuum in the Re∣ceiver, when the Air is pump'd out: But being unwilling to take it upon me to determine so nice a Controversy; I shall only intimate, that were the Cavity of the Receiver void of Matter, it would be a difficult thing to conceive, how we should have visible Idea's of things contain'd in it; since they must either be convey'd to our Sen∣sory by the reflected Rays of Light, or they must proceed from some sensible Emanations from the Bodies themselves. And from the foregoing Six∣teenth Experiment, it appears, That the Effluvia of a Load-stone do permeate the Cavity of the Receiver, which makes it probable, that the Magnetical Steams of the Earth do so too. But on the other hand, it may be alledg'd, That since the Effluvia of a Load-stone may be ad∣mitted into the Receiver, when it seems full of Air, it may be urg'd, that the subtle Emanations of that Substance are only dispers'd through the Vacuities of the Air; and consequently when that Air is exhausted, the Spaces which the Air posses∣sed before, may be left void of Matter; for from the Thirteenth Experiment it appears, that Mat∣ter, which, if closely pinned up together, takes up but a small Space, may be dispers'd through∣out the Receiver, a very small Portion of the Match being able to fill the whole Cavity of it
with Fumes. And as for the Arguments before alledg'd in favour of a Plenitude; they rather seem to argue, that it may be, than that it really is; and the Consequences usually drawn in Proof of such a Plenitude, are rather grounded on the Cartesian Notions of a Body, than on Substantial Experiments; for they thinking it a Contradi∣ction in Adjecto so say, a Space can be void of Body, since they make Body and Extension inse∣parable; they therefore in favour of their own Doctrin draw Inferences from their own Positions to argue for a Plenitude. But to leave so Nice and Doubtful a Dispute, I shall proceed to lay down the following Adver∣tisements: First, That the Difference which sometimes happens betwixt the rising of Mercury here in England, and beyond Seas, being about two Digits, it rather proceeds from the Short∣nese of our English Inches, compar'd with those beyond Seas, than any such considerable Diffe∣rence in the Weight of the Atmosphere. Ano∣ther thing to be advertised is, That except more than ordinary Care be taken, when the End of the Cylinder is immers'd in the Vessel of Mercury, several Bubbles of Air will rise to the Top of the Tube, which, being condensed with Cold, will permit the Mercury to rise higher in the Tube; but being expanded with Heat, would sensibly depress it. And, If it should be demanded, What Methods are to be taken to prevent the Intrusion of the Air, the following Requisites are to be observ'd: First, the lower Orifice of the Cylinder must be smooth, and so much inverted on each side, as not to exceed a quarter of an Inch in Diameter.
Secondly, the Tube must be fill'd so full, as not to admit of any Air, betwixt the Finger and the Mercury. Thirdly, before the Tube is quite fill'd, it will be requisite to invert the Tube, that the Air included in it, may, by ascending to the Top, and upon a Re-inversion back again, gather all those little Bubbles of Air, which are dispers'd through the Mercury, as it passes from one end of the Cylinder to another; and to drain the Mercury more exactly you may, by applying a hot Iron, cause those less Bubbles, which are not excluded by the former Method to break forth, which will be promoted by shaking the Vessel upon every Drop of Mercury, put into the Pipe. By which Method, having in a great Measure clear'd the Tube of Air, I have, in one, that was pretty short, rais'd the Mercury to no less than 30 Digits and an eighth. EXPERIEMINT XVIII. The Variation of the Rise of the Mercury in the Glass-Cylinder, and the Reason of it consider'd. HAving fill'd a Tube about 3 foot long, with Mercury, and plac'd it in a wooden Frame in the Window, I observ'd, the Mercury was sensibly depress'd in hot Weather, by the Ex∣pansion of the Air, which swam about it, and rais'd again in Cold; the Altitude very often varying without any manifest Cause: So that in five Weeks time it had ascended and descended about two Inches; the utmost descent below the Altitude of it's first Suspension, being 9/16 of an Inch; and it's utmost Descent being 7/16, and it is
not improbable, but that the Variation of the Altitude of the Mercury, would have been more considerable, had the Experiment been try'd in a longer Tube, and in the open Air. And here it may be seasonable to take notice, that could there be any sensible Variation, ob∣serv'd in the Altitude of the Mereury upon the Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea; it would be of no small Moment in determining whether the Pressure made upon the Air, by the Moon, were any ways concern'd in causing the Ebbing and Flowing of it, and such like Phaenomena. But to return to what we observ'd further: Having taken the Cylindrical Tube out of the wooden Frame, on a snowy day we observ'd, that the Mercury was rais'd Twenty nine Digits and three Quarters, above the Basis which it lean'd on. If it should be ask'd, from whence these Va∣riations in the Altitude of the Mercury. pro∣ceeded? I shall offer the following Considera∣tions. The Reasons why Mercu∣ry is not al∣ways equal∣ly suspend∣ed. First. That the Air above the Mercury, being very weak, and not able to make any strong Resistance to the Rising Mercury, it may be esteem'd a Cause, why it rises no higher, be∣cause the Asmosphere is able to sustain no more of it; forasmuch as the Mercury and the At∣mosphere are ballanc'd in an Aequilibrium; for the Resistance which the Air above the Mer∣cury can make, is so small, that it would rise but very little higher, were there none at all in the Top of the Tube.
Secondly, We may consider, that the External Air is subject to many more Alterations and Changes, than the Internal contain'd in the Top of the Tube, the latter being subject to be wrought on only by Heat and Cold: But the former is subject to many and considerable Alterations, besides those observable in this Experiment, the Effect of its fainter Changes being evident by their Effects on bruis'd and feeble Bodies. And that there are considerable Changes in the Air,Considera∣ble Changes in the Qua∣lities of the Air. is further evident from what Kircherus, during his Stay in Malta observes concerning Mount Aetna, which he could see from that place on some days, tho' on others, which seem'd clear, the Air was so condensed, that he could not dis∣cern it; and thet the like Changes of the Air have sensibly alter'd the Prospects of several Pla∣ces, is too commonly known to need further Instances: And we our selves have often taken Notice of plentiful Steams and Exhalations in the Air, by the use of Telescopes, which could not otherwise be taken notice of, which after a Showr of Rain would presently disappear: And that such Steams do rise from the Earth, hath been observ'd by Miners, who are often too sen∣sible of Damps, which except timely prevented, make the Air so thick and muddy, as to put out their very Candles. And that the Thickness of the Air may contribute to the raising of the Mercury in the Pipe, appears from what hath been before observ'd in the Torrecellian Experi∣ment. And since the External Air is liable to be al∣ter'd so many ways, by the Mixture of insensi∣ble Corpuscles of Matter, its Rarity and Densi∣ty
are sufficient to account for the several Varia∣tions in the Height of the suspended Mercury; since accordingly as the Air is Rarifi'd, its Pres∣sure in Bodying up the Mercury must accordingly be varied. EXPERIMENT XIX. The subsi∣ding of a small Cy∣linder of Water.TO try whether a Cylinder of Water would subside in our Receiver as the Cylinder of Mercury did, we fill'd a Cylinder of four foot long with it, which being inverted, and the low∣er end placed in a Glass Vessel, we let it down in the Receiver and closed it up; which being done, and the Pump set on work, we found that it did not in the least subside till such a Quantity of Air was exhausted, as to leave the included Air so much weaken'd in its Spring as to be work'd upon, and over-power'd by the weight of the Water; and then, upon every Suction, it sensibly subsided, tho' not so much as the Quicksilver; for whereas the Quicksilver sub∣sided till it fell within an Inch of the Basis, the expanded Air remaining in the Receiver, was able to bear up the Water a Foot high. But the Experiment being try'd in a small Receiver, the Quantity of Air included in that, coming near∣er to an Aequilibrium with the Cylinder of Wa∣ter, it sensibly subsided upon the first Exsuction; and much lower upon the second, and sometimes not much less than two foot; and the Water in this as well as the former, upon a reingress of Air rose to the Top of the Cylinder, but with more Speed than the former.
EXPERIMENT XX. Conceening the Elater of Water.TO evince that Water hath, besides a no∣table one, a languid Elater, we fill'd a Glass Bubble with a long Neck, term'd by the Chymists a Phylosophical Egg, about a Span a∣bove the Bubble, with Water; where fixing a piece of Paper, we conveigh'd it into the Re∣ceiver, and found, that, after part of the Air was pump'd out, the Water sensibly rose upon every Exsuction, the breadth of a Barly-Corn; and upon the ingress of the Air presently subsi∣ded to its former place. Another Instance of the Air's Expansion, I obtain'd by filling a round Pewter Vessel with Water at a small Hole, which being stop'd with Soder, and the Vessel bruis'd in several places, to compress the Wa∣ter, the Vessel being perforated with a Needle, it spun out with Force enough to raise it a con∣siderable height into the Air. EXPERIMENT XXI. Concerning the same.HAving fill'd a Glass Viol with Water, which contained something above a Pound, I took a Glass Pipe, about as thick as a Goose Quill; and having put one End of it into the Neck of the Bottle, and clos'd it with Cement, I fill'd the Pipe half full with Water, sticking a piece of Paper at the Superficies of the Water on the outside of the Pipe, which being plac'd in the Pump, after the Air had been pump'd a while; above sixty Bubbles of Water as big as Pease rose out of the Water, one after another;
and the Water in the Bottle so far expanded, as to rise quite up to the Top of the Pipe; and be∣ing permitted to subside, several Bubbles of Air rose out of it afresh, as soon as it renew'd its Ex∣pansion as before; but upon a reingress of the Air, it presently subsided almost to the Bottom of the Pipe. Besides which, the following Phaenomena were observable: First, That those Bubbles, which as∣cended last, were much larger than the former, either, because their Parts were more expanded than before, or because more Bubbles of Air were united together, but whatever was the Cause of it, we observ'd, that they ascended much slower than before. Another thing to be observ'd was, that tho' Bubbles are usually wont to rise above the Sur∣face of the Water, encompass'd with a thin Film; yet, in this Tube, the Surface of the Water being Convex, the less protuberant Parts of the Bubble were covered with Water. Another Observation which occurr'd was, that whereas those Bubbles which rose at the Beginning of the Operation, divided the Water which they pass'd through, in their Ascent; these latter expanded Bubbles, filling up the Cavity of the Cylinder in their Passage, rais'd the Wa∣ter before them; till the Air was again permit∣ted to re-enter the Receiver, and then they wholly disappeared. From which Observations it may Naturally be inferr'd; First, Bodies under Water may be press'd upon by the Atmosphere, as well as in∣cumbent Water; Secondly, It cannot be hence inferr'd, that the Intumescence of the Water
proceeded from any Elasticity in it; since, it might more probably proceed from the Elasticity of the Air lodg'd in the Pores of the Water. And to make it probable, that those Bubbles proceeded from small Particles of Air, dispers'd through the Pores of the Water, and not from any spirituous Parts of the Liquor expanded, I shall subjoyn the following Experiment. EXPERIMENT XXII. The Bubbles prov'd to be Aerious, and not Watery, by observing the like Bubbles in î Mercury: To which is subjoyn'd a Digression, whether the Air is ge∣nerated de Novo, &c. THO' it be generally alledg'd, that the Bubbles which rise in the Cylindrical Tube, in the foregoing Nineteenth Experiment, are Particles of Water expanded, upon a Dimi∣nution of the Incumbent Weight of the Air; Yet I am apter to believe them really Parts of Air dispers'd through the Water; because, up∣on the re-entring of the Air, the Water was not impell'd quite to the Top, but was depress'd, by the Air lodg'd above it, almost an Inch, which, being collected together, was able to resist the Pressure of the Air. The Bubbles which rise in Water, Aerial, pro∣ved.But in order to a further Discovery, whether the aforesaid Bubbles were Water or not? We try'd the Nineteenth Experiment in a small Re∣ceiver, and upon drawing out the Air, the Water subsided; upon which, several Bubbles rising to the Top of the Cylinder, prevented the Rising of the Water, half an Inch, being
possess'd by the Bubbles of the Air, collected at the Top of the Cylinder: And we were further perswaded, that those Bubbles were Aerial, be∣cause the Air, being a second time exhausted, the Water contain'd in the Tube, was, by the Spring of that Air contain'd in the Cylinder, depress'd below the Surface of the Water which was without the Tube, having a Convex Super∣ficies, as Water expos'd to Air in such Tubes usually hath, but rather more protuberant: And to demonstrate, that those Bubbles were really made up of Aerial Particles, when the Air was almost exhausted, and the Water had subsided near as low as the external Water, by applying Water to the Tube, which contain'd the Air, we observ'd that it was so far expanded, as to depress the Water down to the Bottom of the Tube, several Inches below the External Water: So that the Air, which was before ex∣panded to near a hundred times it's extent, was capable of being further expanded by Heat. But I was yet further confirm'd in my Opini∣on, that those Bubbles were nothing but Air, lodg'd in the Pores of the Water, because the Air being exhausted out of the Receiver, the subsiding Water yielded not Bubbles as before, except a few small ones, when it was near pump'd out. And what I took for a stronger Argument was, that the same Experiment being try'd with Mercury, several Bubbles likewise rose to the Top of the Cylinder; and the Mercury subsiding a second time, upon the Exsuction of the Air, several Bubbles appear'd in the Bottom of the Cylinder; which grew bigger and bigger as the Surface of the Mercury descended lower. From
whence it appear'd, that a Body,The Expan∣sion of Wa∣ter depends on the Ela∣ter of the Air lodg'd in its Pores. more ponderous than Water, might contain Aerial Particles in it's Pores, capable of expanding themselves, when the Cause of their Compression is taken away; so that we have Reason to believe, that the Intumescence of the Water, not only in these Experiments, but also the  of the Water, contain'd in the Pewter Globe before mention'd, proceeded from the Expansion of the Aerial Par∣ticles contain'd in the Pores of the Water, ra∣ther than from any Elasticity in the Water it self. These things being premis'd, it would be a Mat∣ter of some Importance, and of no small Conse∣quence,Whether Air be a primogene∣al bedy or not? to determine, whether what we have said of the Air be true, to consider whether Air be really a Primogenial Body, and inconvertible in∣to Water, and Vice versâ, or not: But it being as difficult, as requisite, we shall rather chuse to offer what may be urg'd of either the Affirmative or the Negative. And first, in favour of the inaptitude of Air to be turn'd into Water, or of Water into Air, it may be urg'd; that besides, that it hath been the Opinion of several Philosophers, it hath likewise been found impossible by Experience to effect such a Change in either of them; And the diligent Schottus Mecham. Hydraulicopneumat. Part 3. Class. 1. relates, that in the Musaeum Kircheria∣num, Water hath been hermetically seal'd in a Glass with a long Neck, and kept there this for∣ty Years, without undergoing any Change: Nor, indeed, do we perceive the least alteration in the Nature of Air, Hermetically seal'd in Glasses for Chymical Uses, tho' it may acquire several Degrees of Heat in them: And it may very
plainly be seen, that tho' Water is divided into smaller Parts, and rais'd in the form of Vapours, by Heat; yet it is so far from being turn'd into Air, that in Chymical Distillations, it falls down into the Receiver in the form of a Liquor. And likewise Volatile Spirits and Salts, tho' their Parts swim up and down in the Receiver for some time, yet the former presently con∣dense into a Liquor, and the latter, into Salts. And further it may again be urg'd, that tho' the Parts of Water may be put in such an Agi∣tation, as in some measure to counterfeit the form of Air, yet since the quick Coalition of those Parts into a fluid Form, argues the impossi∣bility of giving them a due Texture, requisite to add to Air the Springiness observable in it; it is a strong Argument against the Possibility of effecting such a Change. And that a bare Mo∣tion and Agitation of Parts is not sufficient to add Springiness to a Body, appears from the foregoing Experiment concerning a piece of Match, included in our Receiver; where the Agitated Parts of Smoak, were by no means capable of hindering the Expansion of the Blad∣der contain'd in it. And tho' Josephus Acosta tells us, that Grates of Iron have been so much corroded in the Air, as to be turn'd into a Substance which would crumble into Powder like parched Straw; and tho' the Accurate Varenius hath observ'd in the Issands call'd Azores, that by the Sharpness of the Air even the Tiles of the Houses have been corroded; yet are they no Arguments, that such corrosive Humors may put on the form of Air;
since such Phaenomena may be accounted for, by the Mixture of corrosive Steams mix'd with it; which are so far from being endow'd with the true Qualities of Air, that they may, notwith∣standing they are mix'd with the Air, retain their own Natures; which is evident in subliming of Sal Armoniack. And I have had a subtle Saline Body, which would not only rise it self, retain∣ing it's own Nature, but would also raise the Sub∣stance of Gold along with it, whose Parts would also retain their own Natures, and stick to the Top of the Receiver like pure Gold. I remember that once having ty'd a Bladder to the Neck of an Aeolipile, when the Water was forc'd out into it, so as to distend it, we slip'd it off, and having ty'd it close, put it into our Receiver; where we observ'd, that upon the Exsuction of the Air, it was considerably expan∣ded: And tho' the Bladder, when taken out of the Receiver, continu'd in the Cold for some time; yet the included Substance continu'd near as fully distended: But notwithstanding the Plau∣sibleness of this Experiment, I could not but su∣spect, that the Distension rather proceeded from the Air, which upon the first working of the Aeolipile came out with it, than from any parts of the Water converted into Air. But to proceed to what may be alledg'd, to Countenance the Change of Water into Air; If a good Aeolipile be plac'd upon hot Coals, the Water will sometimes spring three or four foot high into the Air; and when taken off the fire, will continue to emit copious Streams: And if, when it is taken from the fire, almost empty, the Neck be immers'd in Water, as soon
as it begins to suck in Water, it will raise Store of Bubbles, which seem to proceed from Water too much expanded by the Heat of the Aeolipile; and if, when that Aeolipile is almost full of Wa∣ter, a live Coal be held before the Neck, it will manifestly be kindled, by very vehement Steams which flow out of it, which will have the more powerful Effects, the nearer the Coal is held to the Mouth of the Aeolipile. But since by holding a Knife before these Steams, they will be condensed upon it into Water; and thence appear not so much to have acquir'd the Nature of Air as to have their Parts put into a violent Motion, I shall add a Relation from the Industrious Kircher, of a Famous Hudraulick Engine,See Figure the 15th. which he made by the Order of Innocent the Tenth. The Ac∣count of it, in his own Words, is the follow∣ing, Cum eodem tempore quo haec scripsi, Summi Pont. Innocentii X. Mandato Organi Hydraulici in Horto Quirinali constituendi Cura mihi com∣mendata esset, Aeoliam Cameram insigni sane Successu construi jussimus, ea quae sequitur Ra∣tione. Erat Longitudo seu Altitudo Camerae (A H) quin{que} Pedum, Latitudine tres fere ex Lateribus, con∣structa, in Medio duo continebat Diaphragmata (C D) & (E F) in Modum Cribri pluribus Fora∣minibus pertusi. Paulò infrà Canalis (G) Aquam advehens inserebatur in (H) eidem Epistomium parabat Exitum. Aqua ita{que} per Canalem (G) maximo Impetu ruens vehementissimum Ventum mox intus excitabat; qui Ventus nimiâ Humiditate imbutus, ut purior xiret siccior{que} Diaphragmata illa in Cribri Modum pertusa, ordinata sunt. Intra
haec enim Aquae vehemens Agitatio, rupta fracta{que} Aerem puriorem per Canalem (A) subtiliorem e∣mittebat: Verum cum postea inventum sit Aerem plus aequo humidum interioribus Organi Meatibus maximum Detrimentum inferre: Hinc, ut Aer aquosus siccissimam Consistentiam acquireret, ordi∣navimus Canalem plumbeum (Q R) in Haelicem contortum Vasi (S) aliquantulum capaciori in modum Ʋrnae efformato, insertum. Intra Ʋrnam enim plumbeam & Canalem tortuosum illisus Aer humidus, ita ab omni Aquositate defaecabatur ut ex Furno in Organum derivatus dici potuerit. Ʋrna (S) Canalis tortuosi (Q R) ultimum Orificium (Z) inseritur Anemothaecae Organi. Et hunc Mo∣dum Organis Hydraulicis omnium aptissimum re∣peri. And I rather cite this Account, because it is deliver'd as Kircher's own Observation; and had I, when I was at Rome, taken notice of these Engines; and found that the Effluviae which blew the Organs, were not again con∣densed into Water, I should be apt to believe it not impossible to turn Water into Air; it being altogether impossible, That the Air lodg'd in the Pores of the Water, should sup∣ply so large a Quantity of Air, as is requisite to blow the Organs: I therefore was induc'd to think, that it might proceed from some Parts of the Water put into a very brisk Moti∣on, since I had observ'd, as I pass'd betwixt Lyons and Geneva, that the River of Rhone, be∣ing on a sudden straitned betwixt two Rocks, which are so near, that a Man may stand with one Foot upon one, and the other Foot upon the other, some Parts of the Water were put into
so violent a Motion, as to be rais'd into the Air a considerable Height, and at a distance to ap∣pear like a Mist; tho' I must confess it difficult to conceive, how such Vapours should pass through a leaden Pipe of such a Length, since we see that Vapours are condensed into Liquids, in a much less time, in the Heads of Alembicks, and the Necks of Aeolipiles, when once the Motion of their Parts are checked by Cold. But leaving this plausible, tho' not satisfacto∣ry Experiment, I shall proceed to another, which is this; Having filled a Glass Bubble, ca∣pable of containing about three Ounces, with near equal Parts of Oyl of Vitriol and Water, half a dozen Iron Nails being cast into it, we stopp'd the Cylindrical Neck of the Tube with Diapalma, so close, as to exclude the Air alto∣gether; which being done, we immers'd the Neck of this Bubble into a Glass Vessel full of the same Liquor, and in a little time perceiv'd Bubbles to rise to the Top of it, being rais'd by the Heat produced by the Action of the Oyl upon the Nails; and this Air was so much in∣creas'd, in a little time, as to depress the Water quite out of the Bubble into the Cylindrical Neck of it: But lest that Pressure should be thought to proceed from the Agitation of those insen∣sible Parts of Matter, we observ'd, That tho' the Vessels were expos'd to the Air for four days, to give the Motion of the Parts time to cease, had the Effect proceeded from them; we observ'd, That the Liquor, all that time, continued depressed, the Space beforementio∣ned being filled with Air. And, what was worthy to be noted, Upon a small degree of
Heat approaching the Bubble, the included Air was further dilated. And the like Phaenomena succeeded upon a Tryal with Nails corroded in Aqua fortis; From which Experiments, it might be inferred, That if Water be not con∣vertible into Air; yet it seems probable that it may be generated anew. And that Air and Water are mutually con∣vertible into each other might further be urg'd, as nothing but what the Aristotelians teach and allow of. But we shall rather urge, That if what Democritus, Lucippus and Epicurus, toge∣ther with other Naturalists teach be allow'd of, viz. That the Qualities of Bodies depend on the different Figures, Shapes and Textures of the Parts of Matter, they consist of; it will be reasonable enough to think, That the Texture of the Parts of Water being alter'd, they may acquire the several Qualities of Air; since it is certain, That the Parts of Matter may, by a lucky Concourse of Causes, become springy: So Silver by being beaten with a Hammer ac∣quires Springiness, which it loses by being heated in the Fire, and becomes flexible. EXPERIMENT XXIII. The Subject of the for∣mer Expe∣riment pro∣secuted.IN Prosecution of what was deliver'd in the foregoing Experiments, We filled a Glass call'd a Philosophical Egg with common Water, about a Foot and a half high; it being large enough to contain about nine Ounces, and the Diameter of the Neck being, at the Top, half an Inch, and at the Bottom an Inch; this being put into the Receiver, and the Pump ply'd,
when the Air was pretty well exhausted, several Bubbles rose to the Top and broke; but all of them finding an easy Passage through the Water, did not elevate it as when they ascend∣ed in a narrower Cylinder; but upon an Admis∣sion of Air into the Receiver again, the Water was sensibly depressed. To try whether distilled Water was more subject to expand than common Water; I put two Ounces of it into a Glass Bubble, which wrought to the Middle of it's Neck; but it neither swelled nor yielded Bubbles upon an Exsuction of the Air. But having put distilled Water into two di∣stinct Philosophical Eggs, the Neck of the for∣mer being straitned with a Glass Tube, we plac'd them in the Receiver, and found a mani∣fest Difference upon the Exsuction of the Air; for in that which was straitned, the Air ma∣nifestly elevating the Water, several Bubbles were gather'd about the bottom of the Glass Tube; whereas in the other Egg, the Water was not in the least elevated; and though the Bubble in the last-mentioned, disappear'd upon the Re-ingress of the Air, those above the Tube continu'd visible, only a little contracted, for a considerable time; the Surface of the Water, which was before elevated, being de∣pressed lower than when first put into the Egg. And after a days time having again ply'd the Pump, we observ'd, That the Bubbles were so much drawn out before, that we could scarce discern a Bubble in either; but that in which the Cylindrical Tube was plac'd, swell'd the
Breadth of a Barly Corn, tho' the other did not; yet, in the former, upon a Re-ingress of Air, it subsided again, and whether that Swelling was caus'd by the Rarefaction of the Water, or the Spring of some latent airy Parts, is not easy to determine. EXPERIMENT XXIV. The former Experi∣ments pro∣secuted with other Liquors.HAVING put Sallad Oyl into a Glass about the Size of a Turkey's Egg, whose Stem was near ⅓ of an Inch in Diameter, the Liquor reaching up to the Middle of the Stem, we plac'd it in the Receiver, together with the like Vessel fill'd to the same Height with Wa∣ter; and upon drawing out the Air, the Bub∣bles were not only more copious than those of the Water, but rose much sooner as well as longer, continuing till the Pumper was quite tired with Pumping; and what was very re∣markable in this Experiment was, that when the Oyl was put into the Receiver, before the Receiver could be closed, and the Pump put into Action, it subsided near half an Inch in the Stem. Having put Oyl of Turpentine into a Glass Bubble, we observ'd, That it afforded a good Quantity of Bubbles, which expanded them∣selves in their Ascent, and would sometimes raise the Oyl in the Tube so much as to make it run over. But besides the foregoing, we try'd the like Experiments with other Liquors, amongst which, a strong Solution of Salt of Tartar afforded very few Bubbles, and those much
later than other Liquors: Spirit of Vinegar likewise yielded very few. Red Wine afforded Bubbles pretty plentifully, which chang'd Pla∣ces by moving in an oblique Ascent, and for∣med a sort of Froth near the Top, which pre∣sently disappear'd: Milk afforded plentiful Bubbles, which elevated that Liquor more than common Water. We likewise put Eggs into the Receiver, to see whether the Substance contain'd in the Shells would break them; leaving the Film within it whole, as that Substance frozen had done; but it succeeded not. We put Spirit of Urine into a Glass Egg, filling another up to the Middle of the Neck with common Water; to which we added as much Spirit of Wine as rais'd it half an Inch higher; and into a Glass which differ'd from the former only in having a flat Bottom, we pour'd rectify'd Spirit of Wine, till it rose to ⅔ of the Neck: And the Edges of these three being mark'd, we put them into a Receiver. Upon the Exsuction of the Air the Mixture of Water and Spirit of Wine afforded very few Bubbles: The Spirit of Urin swell'd near an Inch and a half above the Mark, affording Store of Bubbles, which formed a Froth, upon which several larger Bubbles lay, which were plac'd one above another, to the Top of the Tube: The Spirit of Wine afforded Bubbles till we were weary of pumping, which ascended very swiftly, and immediately disappear'd at the Top, first lifting up the Surface of that spiritu∣ous Liquor so as to form a thin Film. And it was further observable, That the Motion of
these Bubbles in their Ascent, was in a strait Line; whereas those of the Water and Wine made a Line, which on each side appear'd like the Teeth of a Saw: And lastly, in this Spirit we took Notice, That the order which these Bubbles ascended in, was in Lines parallel, and of an Equal Distance from each other; the Bub∣bles likewise following each other, in such an order, as to form a sort of Bracelet, one end of which seem'd to rise from a certain Point at the Bottom of the Glass. When Air return'd into the Receiver, the Bubbles on the Spirit of Wine gradually sub∣sided; yet neither that, nor the Mixture of Water and Spirit were depress'd below the Mark: But the Spirit of Wine continu'd ex∣panded, near half an Inch, which I found to suc∣ceed upon several Tryals. EXPERIMENT XXV. Concerning the Air's Gravity, and Expan∣sion under Water.HAving fill'd a Wide-mouth'd Jar, with about half a Pint of Common Water; we sunk two Glass-Viols, whose Shape and Size is represented by the Eighth Figure, one of which contain'd just so much of a Ponderous Mercurial Mixture, as was requisite to sink it, when co∣ver'd with white Wax; the other being weigh'd down by Water, and the Mouths being down∣wards; the Quantity of Water contain'd in the former, filling three Parts of four of the Glass, the Air contain'd in the latter being equal in Dimensions to a Pea. These being let down into the Receiver, upon plying the Pump, at the last so many Bubbles
rose up to that which swam upon the Water, as were able, by expanding themselves, to cause some of the Water to fly out, and make the Viol emerge to the Top of the Water contain'd in the Jar; where at every Exsuction it conti∣nu'd to expand, till it was able to raise up the side of the Viol, and in part to evacuate it self; upon which it presently swam upon the Water, as before, and eight times after discharg'd a Bubble of Air about the Size of a Pea; but, when we permitted the Air to enter in again, it presently subsided to the Bottom. As for the other, it continu'd at the Bottom all the while. But some time after, the Pump being ply'd, it rais'd it self considerably; but about sixty Parcels of Air as big as Peas, finding vent, and getting out, it presently subsided; tho' upon a further Expansion of the Air, it rose again, and subsided, which successive Ascent and descent, it continu'd Nine times after after the Pump ceas'd working; but when the Air was again let in, it was presently fix'd at the Bottom. From which Experiment, that Hydrostatical Rule, That a Body will swim in the Water, if it be lighter than its equal Proportion in Bulk, will appear to be likewise true, when the Weight of the Atmosphere is taken off. EXPERIMENT XXVI. Concerning the Vibra∣tions of a Pendulum.IT being usually taught, That the Motion of a Pendulum is something quicker, accordingly as the Medium it moves in, is thinner; we su∣spended one, which weigh'd about twenty Drachms in our Receiver, fixing it to the Cover
by a piece of Silk; and having fix'd another of an equal weight without the Receiver, we gave them both an equal Motion, and observ'd, that whilst the Latter made twenty Vibrations, the Former counted twenty; but the Pendulum, be∣ing afterwards put into Motion in the exhausted Receiver, and likewise in the same Receiver, before it was exhausted, continu'd it's Vibrations to an equal space of Time in both; so that from what we could observe, the Difference of the Vibrations in Air, and that more rarify'd Me∣dium, viz. the exhausted Receiver, was scarce sensible. EXPERIMENT XXVII. Concerning the Propa∣gation of Sounds.IT hath been the receiv'd Opinion of the Schools, That the Air is the Medium, through which Sounds are conveigh'd: But the Indu∣strious Kircher having observ'd, that if a Bell be fix'd in the upper end of a Tube, and, upon making the Experiment de Vacuo, be left there, a Load-stone apply'd to the side of the Tube, will attract the Steel-clapper; which, upon a Re∣moval of that Load-stone, will fall upon the other side of the Bell, and cause an Audible Sound: He thence infers, That the Medium through which Sounds are conveigh'd, must be much more subtle than the Air. But to evince the contrary, we suspended a Watch in our Receiver, by a Packthred, and observ'd, That the Sound was not only audible at the sides of the Receiver; but that that which was likewise perceiv'd by the Ear, held near the Cover, was different from that which we heard at the sides of the Receiver; but the
Air being drawn out, we could not perceive the least Sound, tho' the Motion of the Minutes assur'd us, that the Pendulum continu'd it's Mo∣tion; yet upon admitting of Air again into the Receiver, the Sound was again renew'd; which Experiment seems to evince, that the Air is the Chief Medium, through which Sounds are con∣veigh'd: Yet it is not a little strange, that so slight a Stroke as that of the Pendulum, should give such an Impulse to the Ambient Air, as to inable it to communicate a Motion to the sides of the Receiver, strong enough to put the External Air into an Undulating Motion. But having supported a Bell in the Middle of our Receiver, by a large Stick, which reach'd from one side to the other, the Diameter of the Bell, being about two Inches, we observ'd, that tho' the Sound in the Receiver, was not equally as sharp as in the open Air; yet there was no considerable Variation, when the Air was drawn out; which evinces, that a subtler Medium than the Air, is not altogether incapable of propa∣gating Sounds, no more than Air; however, in the foregoing Experiment try'd with a Bell, su∣spended in a Glass-Tube, it may not without Reason be suspected, that the Cavity of the Tube was not wholly void of Air, since Expe∣rience informs us, that it is impossible to fill the Glass-Cylinder, so as to keep the Upper Part of the Tube void of Air, since the Aery Parts lodg'd in the Pores of the Mercury, fly up into it. And further on this Occasion, to shew how far the Air is the Principal Medium of Sounds, we might alledge, that it was observable in a
former Experiment, that tho' upon the strik∣ing of Fire, with the Lock of a Pistol in our Receiver, the Sound is audible; yet it is much more dead, than when made in the open Air: And the like Variation is observable in all other Sounds made in our Receiver. EXPERIMENT XXVIII. The Erup∣tion of Bub∣bles from Water, upon the remo∣val of the Air.FOR a further Confirmation of what hath been deliver'd in the XXth Experiment, viz. That the Air included in our Receiver, makes as strong a Pressure upon Bodies encompass'd by it, as if they were expos'd to the Pressure of the Atmosphere; we put a Viol, fill'd with Water, and well stopp'd, into our Receiver; and, upon an Exsuction of the Air, found no sensible Alte∣rations; but another, which was not so close stopp'd, being put in, we observ'd that the Air included in the Bottle, upon the Surface of the Water, making it's way out, several Bubbles presently appear'd in the Bottom of the Water: from which Tryals, it appears, That whilst the Air was included, the Water appear'd as if press'd upon by the Atmosphere. But in order to a further Prosecution of our Design in this Ex∣periment, we fill'd a Glass-Egg with Water, and suspended it by a String to the Cover; so that, by turning the Glass-stopper in the middle of the Cover, we so screw'd up the Neck of the Egg, as to break it, and thereby make way for the Exclusion of the Air; upon which a number of Bubbles presently rose in the Water, so as to represent a Shower of Rain inverted. But this Experiment may be try'd with less trouble, in one
of our little Receivers, where the Exsuction of the Air is more expeditious. In one of which the Experiment being made with red Wine, in∣stead of Water, it appear'd immediately frothy, like Bottle-Ale, tho' open'd less cautiously. EXPERIMENT XXIX. The reason of the A∣scent of Fumes and Vapors.TO shew, whether the Ascent of Fumes and Vapours, was rather promoted by the Am∣bient Pressure of the Air, than that their Ascent depended on their own Positive Lightness; I conveigh'd a Certain Liquor which I had for∣merly made for other Purposes, into our Re∣ceiver; it consisting of Metalline Ingredients, which upon Unstopping of the Bottle, would emit copious Steams, like the Powder of Ala∣blaster; but upon stopping of it again, the Up∣per Part of the Bottle, as well as the Liquor, be∣came Transparent; and this Liquor being con∣veigh'd into our Receiver, with a Weight affix'd to the bottom of the Viol, to keep it from ris∣ing up, when the Cork was pull'd out, we ty'd a String to the Cork, and the other End to the Receiver; and having clos'd it up, and pump'd out the Air, we screw'd the Cork out of the Bottle, and observ'd, that tho' some Parts of the Air included in the Bottle, rais'd a few; yet the Fumes did not rise as when expos'd to the open Air, but lifting up themselves by their own Agi∣tation, rose to the Top of the Viol, and no higher, but ran down the outside of the Glass in Streams; which continued till the Ingress of Air was permitted to put a stop to that Phaenomenon; but as soon as the Bottle was taken out into the
open Air, Fumes plentifully rose as before: From whence it appears, that Steams in a Medium thinner than themselves, may tend downwards. EXPERIMENT XXX. The Nature of Fluid Bo∣dies illu∣strated by Smoak.TO shew how much the Ambient Atmos∣phere, emulates the Nature of a fluid Body; We enclos'd a light Match, in our little Re∣ceivers; and when it was fill'd with Smoak, we took the Match out, leaving the Smoak behind, closing the Receiver again, to keep it from flying away; upon which, we observ'd, that the Smoak settling it self in the lower Part of the Receiver, so far emulated a Fluid, as to change it's Horizontal Superficies, as the Glass was variously inclin'd. As also upon a more vio∣lent Agitation of the Vessel, it was put into a Vibrating and Undulating Motion, as Liquids usually are, which it lost again by degrees. When the Key of the Stop-cock was turn'd, Part of it would flow out like Red Wine, out of a Bottle, when the Neck is inverted and im∣mers'd in Water; the Air gradually ascend∣ing into the Receiver in it's Room: Besides which Phaenomena it was remarkable, that a hot Iron being held near one side of the Vessel; the Smoak was presently rais'd in a Stream up to the Top of the Receiver, keeping distinct Su∣perficies, from the Air included in the Receiver, yet nevertheless upon a Recess of that Heat, it would again subside. And these things being consider'd, as likewise that there is a manifest Difference in the Weight of Proportionable Quantities, as to Extension, of other Liquors,
it may not be absurd to mention the Atmosphere, amongst others Liquids; especially since, besides what we have already taken notice of, we may rationally suppose, that there are several Ine∣qualities upon the Borders of the Atmosphere, as well as upon the Surface of that Smoak; since the Inequalities of it's upper Superficies are not altogether indiscernible, if we look upon the Setting-Sun, with a good Telescope; for by that means, we may perceive the Surface of it rough, with several Inequalities, which curl along like Waves in the Sea. EXPERIMENT XXXI. Concerning the Cohae∣sion of Flat Bodies.TO try the Strength of the Air's Spring, when rarify'd, in a great Measure, by Ex∣suction, in our Receiver; we try'd an Experi∣ment, formerly more fully taken notice of, with two flat polish'd Marbles: For having fasten'd a Weight of about four Ounces to the lower, and wet the flat Superficies of them with Spirit of Wine, to keep the Air from getting betwixt them, we put them into our Receiver, and found that the Spring of the Air, after several Exsu∣ctions, was strong enough to bear up the Under∣stone, and to keep it from falling. And how strong the Cohaesion of Flat Bodies may be, we have a Notable Instance related P. Nic. Zucchius, apud Schot. Part. 1. Mec. Hydraulopneum, who says, Juveni lacertorum suorum robur jactanti proposita semel est laminea aerea, per ansam in medio extan∣tem apprehensam elevanda è Tabula Marmorea, cui optimè congruebat: Tum instantibus amicis manum utramque admovens, cum luctatus diu harentem re∣movisset,
excusavit impotentiam objecta peregrini & potentissimi glutinis Interpositione, quo fortissimè co∣pulante nequiret divelli; donec vidit ab alio per ta∣bulam facillimè laminam deduci, & ad extrema pro∣ductam, & actam in transversum inde deportari. But to make it evident, that two Bodies may stick together, by having their Surfaces Contiguous only in a small Compass, I shall subjoyn an Ex∣periment made in our Receiver. EXPERIMENT XXXII. The Pressure of the out∣ward Air, on a Valve fix'd to the External Orifice of the Stop-cock.HAving exhausted our Receiver, and taken it off the Pump, we apply'd a tapering Valve of Brass, such as the Ninth Figure repre∣sents, the taper End being put into the Orifice of it, and the Chink betwixt the Stop-cock and the Glass, being fill'd up with Diachylon. To the lower Superficies of the Door of that Valve, was fix'd a Button, to which a Scale was hung, to hold Weights in; and then, the Key of the Stop-cock being turn'd, the Atmosphere made such a strong Pressure to get in, as to keep the Valve close to the Orifice, till a considerable Weight was put into the Scales, and then the Weight of the Atmosphere being overpower'd, it was pre∣sently drawn down. In which Experiment it was to be observ'd, That tho' the Receiver was but moderately exhausted, and tho' it leak'd conside∣rably; yet the Weight supported by the Pressure of the Atmosphere, amounted to ten Pound: Nor indeed is it strange, that it's Pressure should be so considerable, if we do but think, how large the Cylinder of Air, that recoiling from the
Ground, presses against it, is, being extended to the utmost Superficies of the Atmosphere. EXPERIMENT XXXIII. Concerning the Pressure of the Air against the lower superficies of the Sucker, what Weight will draw it down, and how much it is able to raise. A Discourse concerning the Nature of Suction, &c. The weight of the At∣mosphere consider'd.TO compute more exactly the Weight of the Incumbent Atmosphere, we impell'd the Cy∣linder to the Top of the Pump, taking off the Receiver, and fixing just such a Weight to one of the Teeth of the Sucker, as was able to bring it down to the Bottom of the Cylinder; which being done, and the Sucker impell'd up again to the Top of the Cylinder, the upper Orifice of it was exactly stopp'd; and a pair of Scales being fix'd to the Iron-Sucker, by casting in so many Weights, as were able to draw down the Sucker, we were truly inform'd of the Weight of a Pillar of the Atmosphere of an equal Diameter with the Bore of the Cylinder. By which Me∣thod we found, that the Sucker, which requir'd 28 Pound of Lead to draw it down, was not drawn down with less than the Addition of an hundred Pound, when the upper Orifice of the Cylinder was stopp'd; tho' upon turning of the Key of the Stop-cock, and letting in Air, it would readily fall without that Weight; which was an Argument, that the Descent was hinder'd by the Pressure of the Air, which buoy'd up against the lower Part of the Sucker.
What weight the Atmosphere is able to raise, sus∣pended at the Sucker.This Experiment being try'd, and the Sucker being forcibly drawn down to the Bottom of the Cylinder, whose Diameter was about three Inches; the Pressure of the Atmosphere was so considerable, as to be able to raise above a hun∣dred Pound weight; besides the weight of the Sucker, which was not a little admir'd by the Standers-by, because they saw no Force used to lift it up. And tho' by such Tryals we may not be able to discover exactly the weight of the Atmosphere; yet, as a Famous Poet says, Est quoddam prodire tenus, si non datur ultra. But were this Experiment Try'd at several Seasons, in the Year, and in several Climes, as well as in Cylinders of a different Diameter, it might render our Guesses more certain as to the Height, and Gravity of the Atmosphere, and whether it varies considerably at such distant times: For the Place where the Foregoing Experiment was try'd, was about 51 Degrees Latitude, being try'd in the Winter, and about the Change of the Moon. But, not to spend so much time, as would be taken up with all the Reflections, that might be made on the Foregoing Experiment; I shall con∣sider some few Inferences, which may be drawn from them. And First, From the Rising of the Sucker, and the Weights fix'd to it, we may call in Question, what some teach concerning Suction, viz. That there is a sort of Endeavour, to draw the Body suck'd, in the Parts of that Body which is said
to suck; for tho' when we suck a thing with our Mouths, there is a Manifest Endeavour of our Mouth to draw the Body suck'd; yet the Cavity of the Cylinder is not so dispos'd by any Endeavour in the Glass-Tube. Nor can the Ascent of the Sucker be attributed to any sucking Force of every Part included in the upper Part of the Cylinder, since it appears not, how such Aery Particles should be hook'd in the Pores of the Sucker, or how they should be able to raise such a Weight: Nay, that those Particles of Air do not draw it up, is further evident; since by admitting more Air in, that supposititious sucking Qua∣lity is diminish'd, and not increas'd: And for the same Reason it is evident, that it cannot pro∣ceed from a fuga Vacui; for there is the same Reason for an Endeavour to prevent a Vacuum, tho' a little more Air be let in, as there was be∣fore; since there still remains a Vacuity. Nor can the weaken'd Attraction, upon letting in of Air, be attributed to the Resistance of the Va∣cuity, but rather the Spring of the included Air; since when in the former Experiment it was plain, that the rising of the Sucker and Weights, was not obstructed by the Cavity of the Cylinder, when void of Air. Considera∣tions con∣cerning a Vacuum.But to proceed: From hence further we may be directed, what to think of Nature's Abhor∣rency of a Vacuum, which hath been so long held as an Axiom in the Schools: For besides, that the Insensible Parts of Matter, can neither have Sense to perceive any ill consequences in the Universe, which would ensue a Vacuum, nor be able to know how as Intelligent Parts of Matter to prevent it; (for if they did, Nature may be said in a great
many Cases to act very irrationally to effect her Designs, since in the XXXIId Experiment, instead of rushing into the Receiver, she less cautiously rais'd up the Valve, and kept her self out. But, I say, besides the Insensibility of Matter, it may farther be urg'd against that Axiom, that the Endeavour which those Bodies may seem to have, rather is to fill than to prevent a Vacuum; since upon the drawing down of that Valve, the Air which rush'd in, could not prevent what was al∣ready in Being. Besides in our XIXth Experiment, it might be demanded, Why the Water which descended into the Tube, upon the Exsuction of the Air, did not rather keep it's place to prevent a Vacuum, or why for the same Reason it did not ascend before the Re-ingress of the Air. Moreover, the Air may rather be said to rush in again, as being impell'd by the Spring of the Neighbouring Air, than a Design to fill the Va∣cuities, since from our XVIIth Experiment, it ap∣pears, That when the Receiver was suppos'd to be full, we could by the help of the Sucker, find the Spring of Subsequent Air impell'd by it, still force more into it; and even in Wind-Guns it is manifest, that the Air compress'd as much as it is in our Receiver, may be squeez'd into half the Room. And from the foremention'd Experiments, it may further be deduc'd, That the Reason, why Metaphorically speaking, Bodies may seem to for∣get their own Natures, to shun a Vacuum, seems to consist in this, viz. that the Weight of the in∣cumbent Water, or the Pressure of the subjacent Air were not strong enough to press down or buoy up one another; for from our Nineteenth
Experiment it appear'd, that when the Pressure of the Air was taken away, the Weight of the Water it self was sufficient to make it subside, tho it left no Air behind it: But further, from this last mention'd Experiment it appears, that it is possible, Even by Weights, to measure how far Nature is dispos'd to prevent or fill Vacui∣ties; since a small difference in Weight deter∣min'd, by depressing or permitting the Sucker to rise, how far Nature's Abhorrency of a Vacu∣um depended on the Causes we have so often mention'd. But here it may be requisite to advertise, that by Vacuities, I do not mean Spaces altogether void of Matter, but void of such as may be perceiv'd; so that I take the Word Vacuum in the Common, not the strict and Philosophical Sense of the Word. But lastly, from this XXXIII Experiment it appears, that the Weight of the Atmosphere we live in, is stronger than what Men usually think it is; And probably, near the Northern Pole, it is much stronger: Since, if what Varenius observes, the Air is so condens'd in Nova Zembla, as to hinder the Motion of a Pendulum, except moved by a heavier Weight than what is usually made use of in our Climate. EXPERIMENT XXXIV. Attempts to weigh light Bodies in our Re∣ceiver.TO try whether the Aequilibrium of two Bodies, of an equal Weight in the Air, but of unequal Dimensions, would be lost in our Receiver, as it usually is in Water, by Reason of a greater Quantity of Water buoying up a∣gainst
that whose Dimensions are most extensive, I took a Bladder half full of Air, and ty'd it to one end of our Balance, which turns with the 32 part of a Grain; which being counterpois'd with a Weight in the other Scale, we let it down into the Receiver, and having clos'd it up, upon an Exsuction of the Air, we found the Bladder to dilate and manifestly to preponderate; but upon admitting the Air into the Receiver again, the Bladder was over-pois'd by the Weight; but leaving them in the Receiver all night, the Bladder imbib'd so much of the External Moi∣sture, as to weigh that end of the Balance down a good way; yet the Bladder being dry'd a lit∣tle, they were both brought to an Aequilibri∣um: And the like Experiment we try'd with a piece of Cork instead of the Bladder, and ob∣serv'd, that, the Receiver being Evacuated, as well as upon a reingress of the Air, the Cork manifestly preponderated. EXPERIMENT XXXV. Of the Cause of Filtration, and the Rising of Wa∣ter in the Syphons, &c. The Cause of Filtration.TO try whether in Filtrations the rising of the Water might not proceed from the Impulse of the Air; we made use of a Syphon of Glass, represented by the Third Figure, which is made of two strait Pieces, and a crooked one, which joyns the other two together, the Jun∣ctures being well clos'd. The longer Leg of the Syphon was pervious only at the small End, so as to suffer the Water to pass through it; but
both the ends of the shorter Leg were equally pervious, the Diameter of their Bore being ¼ of an Inch. The length of these two Pipes was about a Foot and a half, that the Rarifi'd Air in the Receiver, when it was pretty well exhausted, might not raise the Water included in the Pipe too high. The shorter Leg of the Syphon be∣ing immers'd two or three Inches in a Vessel of Water, the other end was fastned to the Cover; which things being done, and the Receiver clos'd up, we began to pump. The Result of which was, that the Water dropp'd out of the lower Leg of the Syphon, as if it had been expos'd to the open Air; till the Receiver was in some measure exhausted, and then several Bubbles ri∣sing in the Water, gather'd together at the Top of the short leg'd Syphon, where expanding themselves, they stopp'd the Course of the Wa∣ter; that in the longer Leg being suspended in the Tube and ceasing to drop; and the Water in the shorter Leg, was so far depress'd, as not to be above a Foot high: But as soon as the Exter∣nal Air was let in again, it enter'd in at the small Orifice of the longer Tube; and, ascending through the Water contain'd in the Pipe, joyn'd with the former, which was lodg'd in the upper Part of the short leg'd Tube. But, to prevent what Inconveniences ensu'd the rising of these Bubbles, the two foremen∣tion'd Tubes, were placed so, as to meet in the middle of a Glass Viol, the Neck of the Viol being clos'd up with Cement; and the Tubes be∣ing thus fix'd, and they, as well as the Viol, fill'd with Water, the Syphon represented by the Fifth Figure was plac'd in the Receiver with its
shorter Leg in a Vessel of Water, upon which the Pump being ply'd, the longer Syphon con∣tinu'd to drop much longer than before; but at the last, the Bubbles which rose in the Pipes, were so dilated in the Viol, as to press down into the Ends of the Tube, and interrupt our Experiment, tho' what we observ'd gave us Reason to believe, that the Air contributed to the Motion of the Water through the Sy∣phons. And here, I shall subjoyn, that I once had a very slender Pipe, which when held upon the Surface of the Water in a Perpendicular Posture, the Incumbent Atmosphere press'd so much more on the Surface of the External Water, than that contain'd in the Tube, that the Water was rais'd in the Tube; and this Pipe being bent into a Sy∣phon, and plac'd with the shorter Leg in Water as Syphons usually are, the Water, of its own accord, rose up in the shorter Leg, and ran down the other; and this Syphon being plac'd in our Receiver, to try what Alteration of the Phaenomenon would appear there, we could not dis∣cern any sensible one. But tho' in this Tube just now mention'd, the Water rises of its own ac∣cord; yet, if such a Tube be thrust a little way into the Mercury, instead of rising, the Mer∣cury in the Tube will be below that which is without it.
EXPERIMENT XXXVI. The Weight of Air in the Exhausted Receiver. The subtle penetrating Power of some Spirits above that of the Air. The Cause why Air will not enter the Pores of some Bodies which Water will. The Weight of the Air, examin'd by an Aeolipile. The Proportion betwixt the Gravity of Air and Water: Betwixt Water and Quicksilver. Con∣jectures concerning the Weight of the Atmo∣sphere. The Weight of the Air.NOtwithstanding the several Methods pro∣propos'd by Galileo, and others, to try the Weight of the Air; being willing to be fur∣ther satisfi'd, we caus'd an Oval Glass with a small Tube at one End to be blown at the flame of a Lamp. And this Glass Bubble, being of the size of a Hen's Egg, was fix'd to one End of a Balance, being counterpois'd by a Weight at the other End, which being suspended in our Receiver, and the Pump set on work, the Bub∣ble, after three Exsuctions, continu'd to prepon∣derate more and more, till the Air was let in again, and then the Balance was reduced to its former Aequilibrium. But having repeated the Experiment with an additional Weight of three Quarters of a Grain, in the Scale opposite to the Bubble, the Weight of the Air included in the Bubble brought the Balance to an Aequilibrium, when the Air was drawn out; which Aequili∣brium was again lost upon a reingress of it; so that had the Air been wholly exhausted, the Air contain'd in the Bubble might probably
have weigh'd a whole Grain; and to prove that the Weight of the Air did really depress the Balance to which the Bubble was fix'd, we ex∣hausted the Receiver when the Neck of the Bubble was open; and did not perceive that End of the Balance in the least to preponderate: But a Lamb's Bladder being equally pois'd with a correspondent Weight, manifestly weigh'd down the Balance, tho the Air included in it, was considerably expanded when the Air was pump'd out of the Receiver. The Pene∣trating power of some Spirits above that of the Air.But once having caus'd the Pump to be ply'd longer than ordinary, the Air contain'd in a Glass Bubble expanded it self so powerfully, as to cause the sides of it to fly in pieces; which is a strong Argument of the Closeness of the Pores of the Glass, which are too fine to per∣mit the Air to pass through them. And for a further Proof of the imperviousness of Glass, even by so minute Particles as those of the Air, I shall add; that in all the Tryals I ever made, I but once found that a Spirit whose Parts are much more subtle and volatile than Air; I say, I but once found that a Spirit drawn from a Substance abounding with volatile Salts, and subtle Spi∣rits, made way through the Pores of the Recei∣ver, which unusual Phenomenon probably de∣pended on the brisk Agitation of those spiritu∣ous Parts, encreas'd by the more than ordinary Heat with which they were rais'd; for the Mo∣tion of them was so violent, as to fill the Recei∣ver, and almost burst it with their impetuous Steams; so that the Pores of the Glass being open'd with the violent Heat, several of them
penetrated those Pores, and appear'd on the out∣side of the Glass. Why the Parts of the Air are more indispos'd to pass through the Pores of some Bodies than others.But tho' by some, the Particles of the Air are thought to be able to penetrate Glass; yet by o∣thers, they are thought to be Grosser than Wa∣ter; since from the following Experiment it ap∣pears, that Water is capable of penetrating Bodies, and of being compress'd into their Pores, which Air is not: For having conveigh'd a small Bubble of Water into the longer Leg of a Sy∣phon, whose Orifice was as small as a Pin, that Air being incapable of passing through so small a Pore, kept the Water above it, suspen∣ded in the Tube; but as soon as that Bubble, by blowing into the wider Orifice of the short Leg, was compress'd and squeez'd out, Water pass'd through that small Orifice without any other force than the Weight of that which lay upon it. And the Inability of Air to pass through such Pores, which Water will readily enough, will be further evinc'd, by holding Water in a Tube, the lower End of which being very narrow, and perforated with a Pore no longer than a Hair; for the Water will readily pass through it; but if the Tube be inverted, the Water in the narrower End of that Pipe will be suspended, as if the End were wholly unperfo∣rated; the Air not being able to get through so small a Passage: And that Water will pass through Pores, which Air will not, may be fur∣ther evinc'd, by putting a little Alkalizate Salt into a Lamb's Bladder; for by wetting the End of the Bladder on the outside, the Water passing through it's Pores, will presently dissolve that Salt.
The force of the Air's Expansion.But to return to what we have hinted before, concerning the Expansion of Air in a Bubble, so violently, as to break it; the Learn'd Jesuit Cabaeus says, he saw a Pillar so thick, that three Men could not grasp it, and that 1000 Yoke of Oxen could not tear it in Pieces; yet the Air in∣cluded in the Crannies of it, so violently expan∣ded upon the burning of a Fire near it, that it flew in pieces, tho' the Pillar was made of so so∣lid Stones as Marble. And as for the Reason why sometimes the Bubbles included in our Re∣ceiver, did not break as at others, it probably pro∣ceeded from the Air's Expansion by Heat, when they were seal'd, the included Air, upon a Re∣moval of that Heat, contracting it self, and losing part of it's Springiness; but this Guess we can∣not wholly rely on. But, The Weight of the Air.To determine more exactly the Weight of the Air, we heated an Aeolipile of Copper, as hot as we could conveniently; and removing it from the Fire, we stopp'd the Neck with hard Wax, to keep out the Air; which being Weigh'd, when cold, counterpois'd six Ounces, six Drachms and Thirty nine Grains; but the Air being permit∣ted to rush in, by perforating the Wax with a Needle, the Aeolipile and Wax balanced an ad∣ditional Weight of 11 Grains; so that the Weight of so much Air as fill'd the Cavity of it, weigh'd half a Scruple and a Grain. And tho' Mersen∣nus affirms, that he had rarifi'd the Air to seven∣ty times its Bulk in an Aeolipile, yet I must con∣fess it seems impossible to me, except the Metal his were made of, would bear a much greater Degree of Heat, without melting, than ours would, to rarifie, and expel the Air contain'd
in them: Besides, the Method he took seems much less exact than ours, since he weigh'd the Aeolipile whilst hot; which might throw off a Considerable Quantity of Scales, as we have often observ'd; the Weight of which, in weigh∣ing so light a Body as Air, might be considera∣ble. Proportion betwixt the Weight of Air and Water, &c.As for the Difference in the Weight of an e∣qual proportion of Air and Water, tho' Riccio∣lus and Galileo have, by different Methods, made very different Computations; and Mersennus hath asserted it to be as 1300 to 1. Yet by the most accurate Computation we could make in our Aeolipile the difference appear'd to be, no more than as 1 to 938. I shall not wholly reject what Mersennus relates, but rather endeavour to reconcile the Difference, by representing, that my Observations were not only made in this Climate in London, where it is much colder than at Paris; but also at a time, when the Air was condens'd by the Winter's Cold; at which time it may be suppos'd to be a fifth Part heavier than at Paris, when Mersennus made his Observa∣tions. Wherefore it would be of no small use, to make such Observations in several Countries and at several Seasons of the Year. Conjectures concerning the Height of the At∣mosphere.Having said thus much about the Weight of the Air, it may perhaps be expected, that I should, by the Assistance of the Observations already deliver'd, determine the Height of the Atmosphere, from whence the Pressure of the Air proceeds: But tho' it may be no difficult Task to shew, that the Accounts given by others are false; yet it is not altogether easie to deter∣mine a Controversie, in which the Truth is so
hard to be assign'd; and therefore, I shall only lay down something in order to the Elucidation of it. And first, it is necessary to take Notice, that the Weight of an equal Proportion of Air and Water about London is agreed on to be as 1000 to 1. In the next place it will be requisite to consi∣der, the Difference in Weight, of an equal Pro∣portion of Air and Quicksilver; to discover which, I took a Glass Pipe, such as is represen∣ted by the Sixteenth Figure,See Plate the First. which being partly fill'd with Quicksilver, and held in such a Po∣sture, that the Superficies of the Quicksilver in each Leg was in a Horizontal Line, E. F. I. pour'd Water into one Leg, till it was fill'd up to the Top, by the Weight of which, the Sur∣face of the Mercury was weigh'd down from E. to B. the Surface of the other being rais'd from F. to C. so that measuring the Height of the Tube of Mercury D. C. which was buoy'd up by the Water in the other, we found it to a∣mount to 2 13/54 Inches; the Height of the Cylin∣der of Water B. A. which counterpois'd the Mercury being 30 45/54 Inches, and the whole Num∣bers with the Fractions, being reduc'd to impro∣per Fractions of the same Denomination, the Proportion was as 121 to 1665, or by Redu∣ction, as one to 92/121. Besides this, we took another Method, to di∣scover the Proportion of these two Liquors, by weighing them in a Glass Bubble; by which we found, that it was as 1 to 13 19/28; and because Spirit of Wine is usually esteem'd the lightest of Liquors, and Quicksilver the heaviest, I
weigh'd that likewise, and found the Proportion of Quicksilver, and it, to be as 1 to 16 641/1084. So that the difference betwixt Spirit of Wine and Water was as 1 44/171; And here it may be neces∣sary to observe, that I the rather weigh'd these Liquors in a Bubble; because, when they are weigh'd in open Vessels, the Protuberant Sur∣face of the Mercury, and the Concave of the Water, makes it a difficult Matter to propor∣tion them exactly, if the Superficies be large. The Weight of an equal Proportion of Air and Mercury.But to return to the Atmosphere. Having laid down the Proportion of Air to Water, and of Water to Quicksilver, it will be no very diffi∣cult thing to find, the Proportion betwixt Air and Quicksilver. And since from the Torrecel∣lian Experiment, it appears that the Cylinder of Mercury is buoy'd up by the Pressure of the Air, it consequently follows, that the Proportion of Air to Quicksilver is as 14000 to 1; so that a Cylinder of Air, that is able to buoy up Mer∣cury two Foot and a half, must amount to 35000 Feet of our English Measure, or seven compleat Miles; supposing the Air to be equally com∣press'd above, as here below; but this Compu∣tation is not to be accounted so exact, since not only Seneca Nat. Quaest. lib. 4. cap. 10. says, Om∣nis Aer, quo propior est Terris hoc crassior; quem∣admodum in Aqua & in omni humore Faex ima est; ita in Aere spississima quaeque desidunt, but it like∣wise is a Consequence of the Air's Spring; since it must needs be considerably compress'd by the Weight of what lies upon it; besides, if we con∣sider, that the Air may be expanded by Heat, to near a hundred and fifty times its Bulk, it may not be improbable, but that the utmost ex∣tent
of the Atmosphere, may reach to some Hun∣dreds of Miles. And this Conjecture may enable us to guess at the Height to which some Vapours may as∣cend, allowing what Emanuel Magnen a dili∣gent Mathematician observ'd at Tolouse in a clear Night in August; for as Ricciolus records it, Vidit ab Horâ undecimâ post Meridiem us{que} ad mediam Noctem Lunâ infra Horizontem positâ, Nubeculam quandam lucidam prope Meridianum fere us{que} ad Zenith diffusam, quae consideratis omnibus non poterat nisi à Sole illuminari; ideo{que} altior esse debuit tota Ʋmbra Terrae: And the same Author further says, Addit simile quid evenisse. Michaeli Angelo Riccio apud Sabinos versanti, nempe viro in Mathesi Eruditissimo. But to conclude; It would be of no small Use in estimating the Height of the Atmosphere, were Observations of the Density and Rarity of the Air made upon several Parts and on high Mountains; but till by some Means or other, we can arrive at some degree of Cer∣tainty, as to the various Degrees of it's Rare∣faction above, it will be a hard Matter to de∣termine the Height of it. EXPERIMENT XXXVII. Concerning Flashes of Light in the Receiver. AT the first when our Engin was made, we observ'd, upon drawing down the Suck∣er, and turning the Key, several Flashes of Light in the Receiver; which would not ap∣pear, if the Window which fac'd North-ward
were darkned; and this Phaenomenon depended on so unknown Causes, that upon often re∣peated Tryals, I found, that sometimes it would appear and sometimes not; though for as much as I was able to perceive, there was not the least Difference in the Circumstances of these Tryals; which made it difficult to bring our Observations to any Rules about it, or to frame an Hypothesis to Account for the Cause; tho' the Validity of some Conjectures that have been made may be afforded by the fol∣lowing Tryals and Observations. For, First, We found, That the Phaenomenon might as well be exhibited by a Candle-light or Day∣light, and however situated, so that the Rays of Light could but fall upon the Receiver. Next, The Flash appears just when the Key is turn'd to let the Air out into the Cylinder; but the same Phaenomenon would appear in a small one upon drawing the Sucker hastily down, tho' the Key was turn'd before; and it was further to be observ'd, That the Flashes, which appear'd when first the Receiver began to be exhausted, were much stronger than when it was further evacuated. And it was besides observable, That when the Experiment was made in the small Receiver, and the Sucker had not been long before well oyl'd; the Oyl, upon the drawing of it down, being put into Agitation, and divided into small Parts by the Attrition of the Pump, would rise into the Receiver like Smoak; which would likewise flow out of the Valve, when it was open'd on purpose; and these Fumes, if the Glass was held in a light Place, would in some
Measure appear luminous. And what was fur∣ther to be admir'd, was, That when the Flash was considerably great, upon the Disappearance of it, the Receiver would become opacous, lea∣ving white Steams upon the internal Superficies of the Receiver. And now if it should be asked, Whence all these Phaenomena proceeded? We should pro∣pose the following Conjectures, viz. First, That had the Phaenomenon constantly succeeded, we should have suspected the seeming Light to pro∣ceed from some Refractions from the Glass darkned within by those white Steams. Se∣condly, That, since the Air abounds with Parts gross enough to appear in the Sun-beams, and to reflect the Rays of Light, which rise from Bonfires, the Reflection might proceed from some gross Airy Parts within the Recei∣ver. Thirdly, The Whiteness seem'd to pro∣ceed from the various Surfaces of the airy Parts, reflecting one upon another like Looking-glas∣ses, so as to represent each other contiguous; so Water or Eggs beaten to Froth, lose their Transparency, and appear white: But further having immers'd the Neck of our Receiver in Wa∣ter, and set the Pump on work; the Water being drawn in through a small Hole, had its Parts so bro∣ken, that the Receiver appear'd full of Milk rather than Water: And if a Piece of Crystal be thrown very hot into cold Water, it will crack, and having so many new Surfaces within appears white. Which Things being consider'd and weigh'd, it may not be an improbable Guess, That the aforementioned Phaenomena proceeded from the Parts of the Air displac'd as to their Posture and
Situation, as, whilst in that Motion, to di∣sturb their former Continuity and Transpa∣rency. And this Conjecture may be made probable by observing, That the more Air was included, the more conspicuous was the Whiteness; but more especially by this, viz. That having ex∣hausted the Receiver, and apply'd a Glass Bubble to the Hole in the Stop-cock, so that there might be a Communication betwixt the Cavity of the Receiver, and it, upon the Exsuction of the Air out of the Receiver, the Air in the Bubble was so disorder'd, by so sudden a Disilition of it's Parts, that it appear'd like Milk; but upon a sudden Re-ingress of the Air, became trans∣parent again. But if it should be objected, That the White∣ness in Water turn'd into Bubbles may proceed from the Interposition of so Heterogeneous a Body as Air; I should answer, That I have in another Place mentioned two volatile Liquors, which being mix'd produce a white consistent Body, though both the Ingredients were trans∣parent. But having convey'd some Smoak into our Receiver, and observ'd upon plying of the Pump, That the Air remaining in the Pump, became opacous; we suspected, that the Rea∣son why the former mentioned Light sometimes appear'd and sometimes did not, might pro∣ceed from some Parts of Matter swimming in the Air more at one time than another, which was dispos'd, more to cause such Reflections of the Rays of Light as to afford the fore-named Phaenomenon; which is rendred probable by
observing, That the Receiver appear'd opaque when the Smoak settl'd about the Sides of it; and it may further be illustrated by what we mentioned before of our smoaking Liquor, where the Corpuscles of it being put into a new Mo∣tion became opacous instead of transparent. And if it should be asked, How the Air should abound with such various Parts of Mat∣ter? I must answer, That it is not an unusual Observation, That the Air undergoes several and very frequent Changes; for besides several Instances which might be added, the Learned Josephus Acosta observes, That in America, There are Winds which naturally trouble the Water of the Sea, and make it Green and Black; others, clear as Crystal. Besides we observ'd, That the Pen∣dula as well as Scales suspended in our Receiver, lost a great deal of their Brightness, upon draw∣ing out and letting in the Air. And I once made a Tincture of a certain Metalline Substance, which would become turbid and clear successively, for several times, for which strange Phaenomenon no Reason could be given. EXPERIMENT XXXVIII. Of the free∣zing of Water and it's Expan∣sion.HAVING conveyed a Glass Vessel into our Receiver, in the midst of which was con∣tained a Cylinder filled with Water, and enclo∣sed with Snow and Salt, upon plying of the Pump, the Snow began to melt a little faster than we expected; and the Receiver being pretty well exhausted, the Water in the Cylin∣der began to freeze; so that, in a little time, the Surface of the Ice was above that of the
Water, in which the Snow and Salt was dis∣solved, and which swam about it. The Super∣ficies of the Water was concave, and being held betwixt the Eye and the Light, appear'd full of Bubbles. And it is not a little strange, That there should be so powerful an Expansion in Water froze, as not only to burst Bottles in the Win∣ter-time, but, as I am inform'd, to separate the solid Parts of Metals; so that Bell-Metal having been expos'd to the Wet, and that Wet froze in the Pores of the Metal, it would fly in Pieces; and Cabeus in lib. 4. Meteor. Aristot. relates a no less memorable Account of Vessels made of Stone, which would fly asunder, upon the Expansion of the Moisture lodged in their Pores, and froze there. Where it is not a little strange, That Cold should by freezing Water, cause it to swell, whereas the Effect it hath upon the Air is manifestly to condense it. EXPERIMENT XXXIX. A Phaeno∣menon ta∣ken notice of in the exhausted Receiver.HAving put the End of a Glass Tube into an Oval Glass, so that it almost touched the Bottom, we cemented it to the Neck of that Oval, and then, conveying about six Spoons full of Water into the Egg, we blew it so full of Air, as to force the Water into the Pipe, and to keep it suspended betwixt that Air shut up in the Viol and the external Air; this Wea∣ther-glass represented by the Fourteenth Figure, was plac'd in a small Receiver, at the upper End of the Tube, which was small, being permit∣ted
to stand about five Inches above the Cover, the middle of which it penetrated. Upon pumping out the Air, it was to be ob∣serv'd, That the Water in the Pipe manifestly descended; which was an Argument that no Sen∣sible Heat was produced in the Receiver, by the Action of the Pump; since by barely applying my Hand to the outside of the Receiver, that gentle Warmth so far rarify'd the Air in the Egg, as to enable it to raise the Water in the Tube, much higher than it was depress'd, upon the Ex∣suction of the Air: Tho' we will not thence in∣fer, that the Cavity of the Receiver, was colder after than before the Air was pump'd out; since the Pressure of the Air in the Egg, together with the Weight of the Incumbent Atmosphere might, in some measure, cause the sides of the Glass to give way, for want of an equal Pressure of the Air on the Convex, and external Superficies of it; which Guess may seem the more probable, not only because the Springiness of Glass might contribute to the bending of it; but likewise since upon a Re-ingress of Air, the Water was rais'd up to it's former Height again. But to return to our Experiment: From hence it appears, That if there be no Vacuum betwixt the concave sides of the Receiver, and the Su∣perficies of the Bubble, every Substance fine e∣nough to penetrate the Pores of Glass, hath not it's Parts in an Agitation, strong enough to pro∣duce Heat and Fire. Besides the Former Experiment, having try'd what Effect the Exhausted Receiver, would have on Camphire, whose Parts are so fugitive as to fly away when put into Motion, by the Action
of Ambient Air, we found that it was not in the least alter'd. EXPERIMENT XL. Whether Rarify'd Air will su∣stain Flying Insects.HAving conveigh'd a Flesh-Fly, a Butter-fly, and a Humming-Bee into our Receiver; the former presently dropp'd down from the Place she was walking on; and after a few Ex∣suctions, the Butter-Fly, which before flutter'd up and down, dropp'd down void of Motion, except a Tremulous one in her Wings. And the Bee in a little time, was wholly depriv'd of Motion: But whether the Falling of them de∣pended on the Thinness of the Medium, which was unapt for them to swim in or not, will ap∣pear from the following Experiment. EXPERIMENT XLI. Concerning Respiration.HAving conveigh'd a Lark into our Receiver, and clos'd it up; upon plying the Pump, the Bird presently began to droop, and when the Receiver was further exhausted, being first taken with violent Convulsions, and Tossing up and down the Cavity of the Vessel, it died with it's Back contiguous to the Receiver; it's Head directed down towards the Stop-cock, and it's Neck awry: And tho' at ten Minutes Di∣stance, after this Bird was clos'd up, the Air was again let in at the Stop-cock, yet did it not recover again. And the like succeeded upon In∣closing a Hedge-Sparrow, except that the Air being let in again, at the end of seven Minutes, it recover'd by degrees; but when it seem'd
able to fly away, the Receiver being again ex∣hausted, it died in five Minutes Time. Having inclos'd a Mouse in our Receiver, it continu'd to leap up for some Time after the Air began to be exhausted; but in a little Time after that, it appear'd sick and faint, and very giddy, and at the last fell down dead; yet upon a Re-ingress of Air, presently recover'd; but the Air being again pump'd out, in about ten Minutes, it died moderately convulsive. And it was not only observable in this, but all the other Experiments of this Nature, that I try'd, that the Included Animals died convulsive. And to make it appear, that in the Foremen∣tion'd Tryals, the Animals died for want of Air, and not by being chok'd up with Fuliginous Re∣crements; I inclos'd another Mouse in our Re∣ceiver, which, the Air not being drawn out, liv'd 3 Quarters of an Hour; but upon pumping out the Air, in ten Minutes, died convulsive. And another being left in all Night, was alive the next Morning, and had eat Cheese, which was, for Tryal's sake put in with him, A Digression containing some Doubts touching Respiration. HAving made these Experiments relating to Respiration, it may perhaps be expected that I should say something concerning the Use∣fulness of Air in Respiration. In doing of which, it is not requisite that I should take Notice of the Structure of those Parts, since they have been sufficiently describ'd already. Nor shall I any further engage in that Controversy, Whether the Motion of the Lungs depends on the Motion
of the Thorax, or not, or how the Lungs are di∣stended by the Air, any further than it may be Illustrated by our Engin. As for the First Part of the Controversy, it seems to be determin'd in favour of the Affirma∣tive, by what the Learned Dr. Highmore, and Bartholinus have observ'd; the former having taken Notice, That the Lungs subside, if the Intercostal Muscles be so wounded, as to lay the Thorax open; and the latter having observ'd the same upon a Division of the Diaphragm: But what it is that conveighs the Air into the Lungs, is yet undetermin'd; since some think it to pro∣ceed from the Dilatation of the Thorax impelling the Air contiguous, and what it contiguous to that, successively into the Lungs: But this Supposition is fairly answer'd, since it is possible to breathe out of a Glass, where the External Air press'd on by the Thorax, can only press on the outside of the Bottle. But a more easy Solution may be taken from our Engin, since it appears, That if the Lungs be dilated by the Thorax, the Spring of the Air is sufficient to force it in, there being less Resistence made by the Rarify'd Air in the Lungs, than that in the open Atmosphere. And tho' there are some Observations, which testify, that when the Diaphragm hath been considerably wounded, without damaging Respiration, yet since the Lungs are void of Musculous Parts to dilate themselves, we are rather inclin'd to be∣lieve that they are dilated by the Expasion of the Thorax, and fill'd by the Gravity, and Pressure of the Atmosphere. But to proceed to the Use of Air in Respira∣tion, besides the Usefulness of it in Modulating
Sounds, and the Conveying of Odours, it is beyond Doubt, That it is in a great Measure ne∣cessary to the Preservation of Life, tho' as to the Manner of it's Contributing to the Continuance of Life, several disagree; since it is by some thought only to keep the Blood from growing too hot in the Ventricles of the Heart. But that this is not all that the Air, in Respiration, per∣forms, is evident, since not only Old People, but several Creatures, have no need of Cooling their Blood and Humours being cold enough without it, yet they cannot live without Respiration. Others hold that the Air being convey'd into the Left Ventricle of the Heart, contributes to the Generation of Spirits; but since there ap∣pears no such Passages, as are fit for it's Con∣veyance, we shall not here recite what other Ar∣guments might be alledg'd against it. But others, as Moebius and Gassendus, are of Opinion, that it chiefly serves to Ventilate and Carry off the Excrement of the Blood; for as a Candle may be extinguish'd by it's own Smoak; so the Heat of the Blood might be prejudic'd, were not it's Fuliginous Recrement carry'd off, by mixing with the Air upon Inspiration. Which is Congruous enough, to what hath been observ'd by several Travellers; viz, That there is a certain Consistence requisite in the Air, to carry off such Fumes; for it is observ'd, That if the Air drawn in, be too much impreg∣nated with Vapours, as in some Cellars, when Damps arise in Mines, it becomes so unfit to Breathe, as to stifle those that do not avoid the Latter, or use some Method to rarify it, as by holding a Chaffing-dish of Coals near
their Faces, to disperse and scatter those Fumes. And to confirm these Observations, I shall add, That having clos'd a Bird in our Receiver, I observ'd, that the Air being thicken'd by fre∣quent Respirations, it began in a little time to pant and gape, and at the last grew so sick, as to throw foul Matter off it's Stomach; and in 3 Quarters of an Hour to be ready to die: And that the Receiver should be so fill'd with Steams, needs not seem a Wonder, to any one that con∣siders, what Sanctorious hath observ'd, viz. That the greatest Part of our Aliment is carry'd off, by Insensible Transpiration. And as these Instances shew, how unfit an Air too gross, is for Respiration; so that an Air too thin is likewise prejudicial, appears from the Ex∣periments already try'd in our Receiver; so that it is not Improbable that if a Man were remov'd to the Top of our Atmosphere, he would die for want of Breath. In favour of which Conjecture, I shall add, That the Learned Josephus Acosta, tells us, that going up a high Mountain in Peru, call'd Pariacaca, which was so high above the Alps, as to make them appear only as high Towers, he and his Companion were taken with excessive Vomiting, together with Blood, which lasted till he came to a Region more convenient for Respiration; and he likewise says, to our present Purpose, That the Element of the Air is so subtle and delicate there, that it is too fine for a Man to breathe in; the Action of Respiration, requiring a grosser and more temperate Air. But tho' from hence it appears, that the Air contributes to Respiration, in carrying off the
Recrements of the Blood; yet it is scarce pro∣bable, that those Recrements should so soon kill an Animal, as to cause Birds inclos'd in our Re∣ceiver, to die in a few Minutes, for want of be∣ing carry'd off. And it would not be harder to account for such Effects, should we allow with Paracelsus, That Air contributed to the Gene∣neration of a Vital Spirit; since the Interruption of it's Generation, for so small a time could scarce be fatal. Yet I shall add on this occasion, That I have been told, that Cornelius Drebellus, made a Boat for the Learned King James, which would swim under Water, in which, to make the Air inclu∣ded fit for Respiration, he was wont to open a Vessel which contain'd a Liquor, which added such a Vital Spirit to the Air, as purg'd it of the grosser Exhalations, and condens'd them. Where∣fore I am the more favourably inclin'd to think that the Air may conduce to the Preservrtion of Vital Spirits; and that it contributes to the Pre∣servation of Life, as Air to Flame; for having con∣vey'd rectfy'd Spirit of Wine into our Receiver, we found, that it would not continue long, no more than the Vital Flame of an Animal, if the Air was exhausted. But not to insist upon these things, we shall add, That having dissected a Bitch, and taking out one of the Whelps, tho' we open'd his Ab∣domen, and Thorax, and divided the Diaphragm; yet having once began to breathe, his Heart con∣tinu'd to beat above six Hours; whereas three more, which were involv'd in the Secundines, in the mean time, were all dead; tho' they were neither wounded, nor had ever breath'd. How far
this may serve to illustrate the Problem propos'd by Dr. Harvey, viz. Why a Foetus may live lon∣ger before it hath breath'd, if involv'd in the Se∣cundines, than if, when it hath once respired, Re∣spiration be stopp'd, we leave others to judge. Whether Fishes breathe or not, under Water, especially those that want Lungs, I cannot now determine; but that Air is necessary to the Pre∣servation of their Lives, seems to be evinc'd, by observing, that if Fishes be inclos'd in a Bottle, which is close stopp'd from the Air; or if they be kept from the Air by the Freezing of Water, they presently die. And indeed, considering how many Particles of Air are interspers'd in the Pores of Water, it may not be altogether impro∣bable, that part of it is separated, as it passes through their Gills, or some other way: And I am the rather inclin'd to believe it, because ha∣ving put a large Eel into our Receiver, upon exhausting the Air, she turn'd up her Belly, and lay as dead, till the Receiver being un∣stopp'd, and the Fish taken out into the open Air, satisfy'd us of her Recovery, by very brisk and vivid Motions. But what is not a little to be admir'd, having put a Gray Snail into our Receiver, we perceiv'd not the least Alteration, when the Air was drawn out; but whence these Phaenomena proceeded, we shall not now stay to determine. Nor are we now at leisure to examine any further, whether the Paradox which some hold, be true, viz. That the Child respires in the Womb; only we shall say that it is not altoge∣ther Fabulous, That the Foetus hath sometimes been heard to cry in the Womb; and Chickens
have been observ'd to pip in the Egg-shell, be∣fore it was broke; which may be Arguments of an obscure Respiration, except it can be made to appear, That such Sounds may arise from Ha∣lituous Vapours in the Larynx; and that they may, will not be a little favour'd, by observing what audible Sounds arise from the Halituous Vapours of an Aeolipile forc'd upon the Blade of a Knife, held in various Postures. But to proceed, the Necessity of Breathing, tho' those that are not well are accustom'd to want it, may appear, from the small time, that such Men are able to stay under Water; but may further be illustrated by the following Experi∣ments: For having convey'd a Humming-Bee, a Flesh-Fly, and a Palmer-Worm, into our Re∣ceiver, upon the Exsuction of the Air in a Mi∣nute's Time, they all seem'd dead; but pre∣sently recover'd by the Re-ingress of Air; yet when the Air was again drawn out, they ap∣pear'd dead, which is a strong Argument to in∣duce us to believe, that the Bodies of Animals are but so many Curiously-contriv'd Engins, ex∣cept those of Men, whose Wheels are set on go∣ing, by the Influence of External Agents; for even those Flies, which presently die in our Re∣ceiver, will crawl about, even when their Heads are cut off. And it is not unworthy our Obser∣vation, That Insects which want Lungs, are no less sensibly affected upon the Exsuction of Air, than some that have them, which may be Grounds for a Suspicion, that the Particles of the Air enter in at their Pores, and that it keeps them alive by a Universal Perspiration.
But to put an End to this Digression: Tho' the Foremention'd Experiments have given me cause to suspect, that the Depuration of the Blood, is the chief Use of Respiration; yet since I believe it hath some other Uses, which are not yet explain'd, I shall conclude with that Saying of St. Austin's; Mallem quidem eorum quae à me quaesivisti, habere Scientiam quam Ignoran∣tiam: sed quia id nondum potui, magis eligo Cau∣tam Ignorantiam confiteri, quam falsam Scientiam profiteri. EXPERIEMINT XLII. The diffe∣rent Opera∣tions of Cor∣rosives in, and with∣out our Re∣ceiver.HAving fill'd the third part of a Long-neck Viol, with ten Sprigs of Coral, and as much Spirit of Vinegar, as swam about an Inch over them, we plac'd it in our Receiver; and tho' at the first there appear'd but very few Bubbles, yet upon a few Exsuctions of the Air, they rose so plentifully, as to make the Menstruum appear white, the whole continuing to boil and fer∣ment, as in a Seething-pot, as much Froth stand∣ing upon the Liquor, as answer'd the Depth of it, in the Viol: Yet upon letting in the Air, the Froth presently disappear'd, and the Liquor be∣came transparent again. And these Phaenomena successively follow'd each other, no less than five times, as the Air was drawn out, or let in again; and the Ebullition in those Tryals, upon the drawing out of the Air, was so great sometimes, as to run over the Top of the Glass; and that those numerous Bubbles might not be suspected to arise from the Spirit it self, we clear'd it of those, before the Coral was put in, but the same
Phaenomena, still succeeded: nor was there any considerable Difference, when the Tryal was made with Powder of Coral, except that the Li∣quor was obscur'd by several Parts of it carry'd up along with the Bubbles. But one thing in the Foregoing Experiments, was remarkable, That tho' the Ebullition was so violent, yet the Viol immediately taken out of the Receiver, did not affect our Hands with the least sensible Heat. EXPERIMENT XLIII. Of the spon∣taneous E∣bullition of warm Li∣quors.HAving clos'd in our Receive a Viol of four Ounces fill'd with hot Water, which had been freed from Air by boiling, we pump'd out the Air, and observ'd, That upon the fourth Ex∣suction, it began to boil, as if it had been over a hot Fire, so that part of it ran over, and conti∣nu'd boiling in our Receiver. And what was more remarkable, was, that as often as the Air was let out of the Receiver into the Pump, the E∣bullition was again renew'd, the Fiery and Agi∣tated Parts of the Liquor, upon a Removal of the Air's Pressure, having more Liberty to expand themselves. And that the Phaenomenon was pro∣moted by the Removal of that Pressure, we may guess, because the Ebullition was only in the Top of the Liquor; and that it was renew'd upon a Removal of that Pressure. But especially, be∣cause Sallet-Oyl, whose Parts adhere, by Reason of their Clamminess, would not ferment; yet Oyl of Turpentine, or Wine would, whose Parts are not so tenacious; the former rising five times its Height, and near four Parts of the latter running over into the Receiver.
From all which Experiments it appears, that the Air may have a considerable Influence on a greater Number of Phaenomena than Men usually think of, especially where the tumultuous Agi∣tation of the Parts of a Body are concern'd; so that were a hot Body convey'd above the Atmosphere, the Effects of it would be different from what they are here below, and the Parts of it would have more Power to dissipate them∣selves. Having thus far, My Dear Lord, given you a faithful Historical Account of the Productions of your Lordship's Commands, if they may in∣vite you or your Friends at Paris to a further Prosecution of what Discoveries may be made by that Engin, I hope they may afford your Lord∣ship as much Pleasure as they did me in endea∣vouring to express my self, Your Lordship's Most Obedient Servant, &c.
CHAP. XIV. The Doctrin of the Spring and Weight of the Air defended against Franciscus Li∣nus. THIS Chapter containing the Honourable Author's Vindication of his own Hypothe∣sis, concerning the Weight and Spring of the Air: It will not be requisite here to lay down, all the trivial Objections of Franciscus Linus; which are easily answer'd, by any one that hath but read and consider'd the Author's Hypothesis, and will at the first sight appear to be ill-ground∣ed or invalid Arguments, or rather false Criti∣cisms: But, it being more consistent with the design'd Epitomy, I shall only take notice of such, as may serve to illustrate the Hypothesis al∣ready laid down, and think it unnecessary to fill an Epitomy with, what our judicious Author did not repute as Arguments against his Doctrin: And especially, because the Learn'd World, by their General Consent have agreed upon what the Ho∣nourable Author hath taught: Wherefore I shall lay down only those Objections which may seem considerable, and annex their Solutions. The first Argument of Francis∣cus Linus Answer'd.The first Argument alledg'd by Franciscus Li∣nus, is, That, did the Suspension of the Mer∣cury in the Cylinder, depend on the Aequilibri∣um of the Weight of the Atmosphere; when a Cylinder is fill'd full and inverted, upon an In∣version of the Tube, and a Subtraction of the lower Finger, the Mercury would not subside,
were its descent not promoted by the Dila∣tation of the Air above the Mercury; for if it were, that Expansive Force would raise the Finger upon the upper Orifice of the Cylin∣der. To which is answer'd, That the included Air may depress the Mercury by it's Expansion down∣wards, without raising the Finger; for the Weight of the whole Cylindrical Pillar of the Atmosphere, which presses upon the top of the Finger, being too strong to be overpower'd by the weak Expansion of the Air in the Pipe, it must consequently press downwards, where the Weight of the Mercury is ready to joyn with it to over-balance the Pressure of the Air, which before buoy'd it up: And that the Weight of the Cylinder of Mercury disposes it to spend its expansive Force downwards, appears from a Cylinder of Water suspended instead of Mer∣cury; for the Weight of that being not able to resist the Pressure of the Atmosphere downwards, equally as the Mercury; the Air in the Top of the Cylinder does not press it down near so far: And tho' the Objector says, that if Water in∣stead of Air be above the Mercury, it will not subside; the Reason of that is only, because the Water wants a Springiness to expand it self: And as for the Reason why the Pulp of the Finger seems to be drawn down into the Tube, that on∣ly happens, by Reason of the Weight of the Incumbent Atmosphere, the Rarifi'd Air within, not being able to make an equal Resistance to prevent the Finger from being press'd into the Pipe: And tho the Objector further urges, that he cannot conceive how the Air can be so expand∣ed
without possessing a greater Space, we have sufficiently clear'd that, by comparing the Ex∣pansion of the Air's Spring to a piece of Wooll squeez'd together, which when it is no longer Compress'd, dilates it selt by Virtue of its springy Parts. A snd Objection.The second Objection is, That if Mercury be suspended in a long Pipe, about 40 Inches long, when the Tube is inverted, and the Finger is taken from the lower Orifice, it falls down till it comes to its usual Station; and the Pulp of the Finger is equally depress'd into the Tube; which evinces, that the Mercury is suspended by a Funiculus, which draws down the Pulpy Part of the Finger. But, what Answer is to be given to this Ob∣jection, appears from what hath been said to the former; for the Mercury subsiding, till it came to an Aequilibrium with the Atmosphere; the Air above it being very much Rarifi'd, and unable to buoy up against the Finger; the Depression of the Pulp of it must proceed from the Weight of the incumbent Atmosphere, tho' the swelling of the Pulp in the Pipe might perhaps partly pro∣ceed from an Expansion of the Humours within the Substance of it, the Weight of the Atmo∣sphere being prevented from squeezing upon it by the Equivalent Weight of the Mercury. A third. Objection answer'd.Another Objection is, That if a Tube twen∣ty Inches long, be immers'd in Quicksilver, and when it is full, the upper Orifice of it be stopp'd with ones Finger, as well as the lower, upon taking away the lower Finger, the Pulp of the upper will be drawn down, tho' the Weight of the Atmosphere is said to be able to buoy up a Cy∣linder
much longer; So that this is a plain De∣monstration of the Suspension of the Mercury by a Funiculus, and that it is not buoy'd up by the Pressure of the Atmosphere according to the Elaterists. But tho' this Objection may seem to represent some Difficulty, yet it will easily be answer'd, by thus explaining the Phaenomenon, viz. Tho' when the Tube is stopp'd at both Ends, the Finger upon the Top of the Tube be e∣qually pres'sd upon on both sides; yet, upon a Removal of the Finger below, tho' the Pressure of the Air upon the Finger continu'd to be the same, yet the Pressure of the Mercury is by two Thirds less, against the Pulp of the Finger, its Gravity pressing upon the subjacent Air; for notwithstanding the Air is able to buoy up a greater Quantity, yet that in Part takes off the full Pressure of it, so as to make the Pressure upwards, disproportionable to that which tends downwards: And tho' the Objector urges, that the Mercury is equally suspended upon a Remo∣val of the Finger, as before; I answer, that the Finger presses it up much more strongly, to pre∣vent any of it getting out; whereas the Pressure of the Air only depends on the Weight of it, which cannot be intended or weaken'd, as that of the Finger may, which is capable of raising a much greater Weight. Another Objection answer'd.Another Objection alledg'd by the Author is, that were the Mercury buoy'd up by the Weight of the Atmosphere, it would be as easy to suck up Mercury in a Pipe as Water, nothing more being requisite but to draw away the Air.
But this may easily be taken off by consider∣ing, that the Dilatation of the Lungs depend∣ing upon an Ingress of Air upon the Motion of the Diaphragm and Intercostal Muscles, and that Air being press'd in by the Gravity of the Air and it's Spring, it will follow, that that Gravity or Spring being more powerfully re∣sisted by the Cylinder of Mercury than Water, the Lungs cannot so powerfully dilate; nor can the Mercury be rais'd with equal ease, because, that Air in the Lungs, together with the Weight of the Mercury, brings the External Force of the Atmosphere nearer to an Aequilibrium. Be∣sides, the External Air pressing upon the Thorax, and keeping them from dilating themselves, the Air contain'd in them, pressing against the Su∣perficies of the Mercury in the Tube, is a fur∣ther Cause, why it rises not so high; which Ex∣planation is confirm'd by observing, that as the Lungs are more violently dilated, the Mercury rises higher in the Tube; and it will be further Probable, by considering, how much greater a Pressure may be made upon so large a Superfi∣cies as that of the Thorax, than can be resisted by the Rarifi'd Air in the Lungs. And as for the Funiculus, which our Author supposes to raise the Mercury, by contracting it self; it would not be a little strange, that it should raise such a Weight as a Cylinder of Mercury, without tear∣ing off the thin Membranes of the Lungs to which such a Funiculus must, at one end be joyn'd. To these Objections the Author adds an In∣ference, that if the Spring of the Air be of no Force, in loco aperto, no more can be effected by
it in loco Clauso; but the Place which the Obje∣ctor takes to be in loco Clauso, appearing to be only in a Room; It is answer'd, that whereas the former Objectoins appear to be invalid, the Inference must be so too; because there be∣ing a Communication betwixt the Air in a Room and the External, by some Holes or Crannies, or otherwise, the included Air will be able to do as much by its Spring, within as without. CHAP. XV. The Funicular Hypothesis Examin'd. THE Hypothesis laid down by our Adversa∣ry, and which is now to be examin'd,Arguments in favour of the Funi∣cular Hypo∣thesis exa∣min'd. is, That what we ascribe to the Spring and Weight of the Air is done by a sort of Funiculus, con∣sisting of a thin Substance powerfully expanded, which being betwix two Bodies, endeavours to contract it self, and to bring those Bodies toge∣ther, ne detur Vacuum. The first Argument alledg'd, is, That the Finger would not be so drawn down by the De∣scent of the Mercury, were there not a Funicu∣lus; and that were there not a thin Substance there extended, there would be a Vacuum, As to the first Part of the Argument, it hath already been answer'd in the foregoing Chapter. And tho' he alledg'd the Necessity of such a Fu∣niculus from Nature's Abhorrency of a Vacuum; the first Argument he offers, being deduced from the Suction of the Pulp of the Finger upon the
Descent of the Mercury, It is likewise already An∣swer'd by what hath gone before in Explaining that Phaenomenon. But another Argument he alledges against a Vacuity is, the Diaphaneity of that Part of the Tube; for were there a Vacuum, he says it would be like a black Pillar, neither capable of affording any thing visible, nor of permitting visible Objects to appear through it: But the Invalidity of this Argu∣ment will appear from the Doctrin of the Epi∣cureans and Atomists, who Teach, that Light is made up of such subtle Emanations, as are capa∣ble of penetrating Glass it self, and tho' the Cavity of the Cylinder may seem full of Light; yet no doubt, but were the Parts of luciferous Matter condensed into a Lump, they would not fill half the Cavity; since the Smoak which fill'd up the Cavity of our Receiver, so as to make it appear Opa∣cous, was but capable of filling a small part of it, when condens'd. Besides, should the Torre∣cellian Experiment be made in the Dark, a Va∣cuist might argue, that the Matter, which upon an Access of Light was visible, was not in the Receiver before, but proceeded only from the Rays of Light darting through the Glass: And tho' Light should not be caus'd by a Trajection of such luciferous Beams, but from an Impulse of luciferous Bodies; yet would it not thence follow, that the Tube was full; since from our seventeenth Experiment it appear'd, that when the Receiver was in a great measure exhausted, there remain'd a sufficient Quantity of Matter behind, to communicate a tremulous Motion to the External Air: And tho' it should be allow'd, that the Cavity of the Tube were fill'd with the Car∣tesian
Materia subtilis; yet, since they allow that capable of passing in and out upon the Access of a grosser Body, it would not be any more to his Purpose, in maintaining his Funicular Hypothesis or opposing Ours, because such a Body as so ea∣sily passes in and out, will be as ready to give way to the Motion of a more gross Body, and con∣sequently to the rising or subsiding of the Mer∣cury. Another Argument alledg'd in Favour of the Funicular Hypothesis, is, that when the Mercury is subsided to its wonted Station, it gravitates no farther. But it being already shewn, why it does not, viz. because it is counterbalanc'd by an equal Weight or Pressure made by the Atmo∣sphere, what hath gone before hath been a suffi∣cient Answer. And if it should be ask'd, why, when the Finger is press'd upon, by a Cy∣linder of the Atmosphere, and at the same time by a Cylinder of the Mercury on the other fide, it feels no sensible Pain; it may be answer'd, that the Pressure being equal on each side, the Sense of Pressure is the less perceptible; which is confirm'd by what divers observe at a considera∣ble depth under Water, viz. that they are not sensible of it. And if it should be further ask'd, why upon the Descent of the Mercury, it, at the first, falls some∣thing below its wonted Station, and presently rises up again, it may be answer'd, that that proceeds from an Impetus acquir'd by its De∣scent, which at the first partly overpowers the Spring of the Air below it; but that Impetus being quash'd, the Spring and Weight of the Air presently weighs it up again to its usual Sta∣tion;
and having been put into a little more than ordinary Compression, raises it something higher; so that the Impetus upon a second De∣scent brings on a successive Elevation, till at the last the Impetus on each side gradually is lost, and discontinues that vibrating Motion; and this may not only be illustrated by the successive Vibrations of a Pair of Scales put in Motion by depressing one and elevating the other; but was farther confirmed by Mercury in a Glass Tube, made use of in our 36th Experiment, for ha∣ving put a Quantity of Mercury into it, and by inclining of it permitted it to run into one Leg, I stopp'd the Orifice of the other with my Fin∣ger, upon which, the Tube being erected, the Air contained in the Syphon, which was stopp'd at the Top, depress'd the Mercury in that Tube; but as soon as it was unstopp'd, the vibrating Motions of the Mercury began and continu'd to rise and fall successively for some time. CHAP. XVI. A Continuation of Objections against the Funicular Hypothesis. BESIDES the forementioned Objections, there are several others which perplex the Funi∣cular Hypothesis: As first, How the superficial Parts of two solid Marbles, which adhere toge∣ther, when exactly polished, can be drawn out into a Funiculus; a Difficulty which does not at
all perplex our Doctrin. Besides, were the Funicular Hypothesis allowed, it might be que∣stioned, How it comes to pass, that Liquors whose Parts are not equally liable to be extend∣ed into such Funiculus's should exactly subside till Aequiponderant to 29 ½ Inches of Mercury, and no further; an Objection which our Doctrin admits not of, since not only from Wind-Guns, but our former Experiments, it appears too manifestly to doubt of the Air's Spring and Gravity. Nor is the Author's strange Method of pro∣ducing his Funiculus less exceptionable; for he says, When the Mercury touches the Top of the Tube, upon it's Descent, it leaves it's Super∣ficies to stick to the Top of it, which is extended by the Weight of the Mercury, till it leaves another Superficies joyning to that; where it may be objected, That neither Sense perceives any such Thing, nor can it be made probable by Reason; it being impossible to con∣ceive, How the Superficies of a Body can be so extended as to become a Body it self: And should it be allowed, that the Funiculus might be turned into so subtle a Body, it would be altogether inconceivable how it should be so firm and strong, as to suspend the Weight of a Cylinder of Mercury; and that it should have such an admirable Property as to extend without being made thinner, contrary to the Nature of all Ropes. Besides, the Method he takes to illustrate his Generation of the Funiculus, by comparing it to the Flame of a Candle, does not enforce the Belief of it any more; for not to urge, That
the Parts of a Candle, are by Agitation, and a powerful Motion amongst each other, kept at such a distance, as to leave several and a Mul∣titude of Vacuities betwixt their Parts; if the Rarefaction of the Mercury in the Funiculus be like that, when it is rais'd in the Form of a Vapour, it would be too slight to suspend a Tube of Mercury. And it might be further demanded, How the Funiculus came by such Hooks, as to take hold of every Body contigu∣ous to them, so firmly, as to be able to break strong Glasses, by drawing their sides inwards; and how Fluids should be so suspended, as to appear one entire Piece, contrary to what their Fluidity disposes them to do. Nor is it less strange, That our Objector should allow this subtle Body a Spring which he denies to be in Air; since Nature's Abhorrency of a Vacuum cannot be the Cause of it, in as much as a Va∣cuum would not ensue, according to his Doctrin, tho' it were not contracted. Moreover, it would not be a little hard to conceive, were such a Funiculus allowed of, how the Surfaces of Marbles extended, could contract into Marbles again; and how in the Cylinder of Mercury, the Funiculus is so easily relaxed, upon an Admission of Air into it, since, it filling up all the Space above the Mer∣cury before, it cannot easily be conceiv'd how it should be dispossess'd of that Space, without being thrust into another. Again, I should be glad to know, if the Ca∣vity of our Receiver, upon an Exsuction of Air, were fill'd with such stretched Strings, it would be possible for a Pendulum to move in it without
breaking them; but our Author's Funiculus being made up of Strings, endued with pecu∣liar Qualities, we shall decline making any more Objections, since these Peculiarities may be sufficient to distinguish it from Truth. CHAP. XVII. The Aristotelian Rarefaction Examined. The Aristo∣telian Noti∣on of Rare∣faction re∣jected.BESIDES the former Objections which ren∣der the Funicular Doctrin unintelligible, there are yet others, upon the Account of the Doctrin of Rarefaction employed in the expli∣cating of it. For the Doctrine of Rarefaction made use of by our Author, supposing a Body not only to fill up a larger Space, when rarified, but likewise so to fill it, as not to leave the least Vacuities betwixt it's Parts; it will be very hard to conceive, How a Hundred Parts of Matter, which are circum∣scribed by so many Spaces of the same Extenti∣on with themselves, should be capable of filling up more Space adaequately than they are circum∣scribed by, without the Addition of other Mat∣ter; and it seems strange, That without the im∣mediate Act of Omnipotence, Matter should be so extended as without any Addition to alter it's Dimensions. And tho' our Author takes two Ways to ex∣plicate his Notion, either upon a Supposition of the Parts of Matter being indivisible or divisible in infinitum; yet, since he explicates it neither
of those ways so clearly, as to make it intelli∣gible, I must confess, I cannot acquiesce in them; nor are the Difficulties at all made less by asserting, That Matter may be virtually so extended as to possess more Space than is circumscribed by it; since a virtual Extension is as unintelligi∣ble as Extension without the Term virtually joyn'd with it; for since he seems to allow the Parts of Matter to be indivisible, it rather pre∣judices the Doctrin of Rarefaction as taught by Aristotle, than explains it; since it is incon∣sistent to think, That a Body, whose Parts are circumscribed by a certain Space, should fill a larger Space, without being divided and re∣moved out of the former. Nor does it at all explain or render the Aristo∣telian Doctrin of Rarefaction, to say, That Matter may, by Omnipotence, be so ordered, as to possess adaequately double the Space it did before; since in Natural Philosophy it is not disputed what GOD can do, but what he hath done. But besides the Difficulties in our Author's Doctrin of Rarefaction, there are no less in the Condensation which his Funiculus supposes; for since he allows of no Vacuities in it, it is impossible the Parts of it should be brought nearer than to touch one another, without a Penetration of Dimensions, which is wholly disallow'd of, and by no means to be admitted in Nature; for were that allowed, two or three Thousand Bodies might be contained in a Space, which every one of them by it self would fill; which is altogether unintelligible.
CHAP. XVIII. A Consideration concerning some Tryals of the Torrecellian and other Experiments' at the Tops and Feet of a Hill. The Height of Mercury suspended at the Top of a Hill.FOr a further Proof against Our Adversaries Doctrin, and for a Confirmation of ours, I shall add the following Experiments. And First: The Famous Pecquet mentions an Experiment, made by Monsieur Pascal, at the Foot of a Mountain 3000 Foot high; where when he ascended, 150 Fathom, the Mercury in the Cy∣linder was not buoy'd up so high, as at the Bot∣tom, by two Inches and a Quarter; and at the Top of the Hill, it wanted 3 Inches of that Sta∣tion, which it was suspended at, at the Foot of the Hill; which is a strong Argument against our Adversary; the Difference plainly appear∣ing to depend on the different Length of the At∣mospherical Cylinder, which was abler to weigh up the Mercury at the Bottom, than the Top of the Hill. And Gassendus, Tom. 1. P. 211. relates, that the like was observ'd 5 times on the Hills at Auvergne. And a very Noted Virtuoso, Mr. J. Ball, as well as that Ingenious Gentleman Mr. Townley, have observ'd the like in England. And it was by the last nam'd, likewise observ'd, that the Mercury included in the Top of the Cylinder, was not able to depress the Mercury, near so much at the Bottom, as at the Top of the Hill.
But to discover the weight of the Air, and it's Spring, without going up to the Top of such high Mountains, we made use of the following Weather Glass, suspending Water in the Pipe, instead of Mercury. The Instrument was a Glass with a broad Foot, and a narrow Neck (A B), and a slender Pipe of Glass (C D), which was open at both Ends; and so plac'd, that the lower End was not far from the Bottom (A B), and was so closely cemented at the Neck (A),See Fig. the First, Plate the Second. as to prevent the Internal Air (I I) from communicating with External (K K), unless it were through the Pipe (C D). And having conveig'd Water (H H) into the Glass (AB), which was pretty large, and having blown so much Air into the Bottle, as to raise the Water in the Tube above the Vessel, upon the Leads of Westminster Abby. When the Air was thought to be equally Cold and Con∣dens'd within the Bottle, as without; we mark'd the Station of the Water (F), and letting it down by a String to the Ground, the Water subsided an Inch, where it's Station (E), being mark'd, and the Vessel drawn up again, the Water was rais'd to the Mark (F) again. Which Experiment being again try'd, had the like success. And af∣terwards the Top of the Tube being broke, we let it down within the Church, the Surface of the Water in the Pipe being at (G) an Inch above the Water in the Glass; where I observ'd, that the Air so depress'd it, when it came to the Bottom, as to force the Water out of the Pipe into the Glass, several Bubbles breaking through into the Capa∣city of the Glass, and this Glass being drawn up to the Top of the Church again, the Water was manifestly rais'd in the Tube again; from whence
it appears, that the Atmosphere gravitates more; Caeteris paribus, the nearer the Surface of the Earth; for the Experiment being repeated, we found that as the Height, at which it was try'd, vary'd; so the Elevation or Depression did. Another Particular which may be a further Confirmation of our Hypothesis, is, That which is mention'd by Monsieur Paschal, viz. That a Foot-Ball being weakly blown, and carry'd to the Top of a Hill, swell'd more and more, as it was carry'd higher; and as gradually grew lank, when it was carry'd down the Hill again: From whence it appears, That as the Atmosphere is lon∣ger or shorter, it makes a greater Gravitation and Pressure upon the Bladder. To this I shall add an Experiment, sent to Dr. Croon, by a Learned Professor of Gresham Col∣ledge,See Fig. the Sec. Plate the Second. which is the following: Having Observ'd that in the Weather-Glass (A B), represented by the Second Figure, which was about two Foot long; the Water was suspended in the Pipe, about thirteen Inches above the Superficies of the External Water, at the Bottom of Hallifax Hill; but being carry'd to the Top of the Hill, it sub∣sided an Inch and a Quarter, to the Point (D). The Internal Air (A C), which was taken in at the Bottom, dilating it self at the Top further by (C D). In which Experiment, the Descent being much more considerable than what it ought to be in such a small Ascent, by the bare Pressure of the Atmosphere diminish'd, the Reason appears to be, the Expansion of that Air included in the Top of the Weather-Glass; as well as the Short∣ning of the Atmospherical Cylinder.
CHAP. XIX. Experiments concerning the Measure of the Force of the Spring of Air, compress'd and dilated. TO make it evident, That the Spring of the Air is able to do much more, than we have attributed to it, upon the Account of its Spring and Weight, we try'd the following Experi∣ments. The Air's Condensa∣tion mea∣sur'd.Having pour'd Mercury into a Glass-Tube, which consisted of a Long Leg, and a Short One, which were so bent as to lye Parallel almost to each other; we pasted Papers upon each, which were divided by Marks into Inches, and each of those Inches into eight Parts; and upon pouring Mercury into the Longer Tube, we observ'd, That the Air contain'd in the Shorter, which was Hermetically seal'd at the Top, by twenty nine Inches of Mercury, was condens'd into half the Space it possess'd before; from whence it ap∣pears, that if it were able in so compress'd a State, by Virtue of it's Spring, to resist a Cylin∣der of Mercury of 29 Inches, besides the Atmo∣spherical Cylinder incumbent upon that, it fol∣lows, that it's Compression in the open Air, be∣ing but half as much, it must have but half that weight from the Atmosphere, that lyes upon it, in that Compress'd State.
But to be more exact,See Fig. 4. Plate 2. we took a Tube repre∣sented by the Fourth Figure, pasting upon the Shorter Leg a Paper, divided into twelve Inches, and each of those into Quarters; and another upon the Longer Leg, which made up several Feet, which were likewise divided into Inches, and those subdivided again into Quarters. The Tube being thus Mark'd, the Lower End was plac'd in a Wooden Box, that the Mercury might run into it, if the Pipe chanc'd to break: And one being assign'd to pour in Mercury at the Top of the Tube, another was plac'd to observe, when the Mercury in the small Tube, rose up to each of the Divisions, abovemention'd; and to take notice likewise, how high it stood in the Long Tube, at the same time, where the several Ob∣servations were set down, and are contain'd in the following Table.
A Table of the Condensation of the Air. A A B C D E 48 12 00 Added to 29 ⅛, makes 29 2/16 29 2/16 46 11 ½ 01 7/16 30 9/16 30 6/16 44 11 02 13/16 31 15/16 31 12/16 42 10 ½ 04 6/16 33 8/16 33 1/7 40 10 06 3/16 35 5/16 35 — 38 9 ½ 07 14/16 37 — 36 15/19 36 9 10 2/16 39 3/16 38 ⅞ 34 8 ½ 12 8/16 41 10/16 41 2/17 32 8 15 1/16 44 3/16 43 11/16 30 7 ½ 17 15/16 47 1/16 46 ⅗ 28 7 21 3/16 50 5/16 50 — 26 6 ½ 25 3/16 54 5/16 53 10/13 24 6 29 11/16 58 13/16 58 2/8 22 5 ½ 34 15/16 64 1/16 63 6/11 21 5 ¼ 37 15/16 67 1/16 66 4/7 20 5 41 9/16 70 11/16 70 — 19 4 ¾ 45 — 74 2/16 73 11/19 18 4 ½ 48 12/16 77 14/16 77 ⅔ 17 4 ¼ 53 11/16 82 12/16 82 4/17 16 4 58 2/16 87 14/16 87 ⅜ 15 3 ¾ 63 15/16 93 1/16 93 1/ 14 3 ½ 71 5/16 100 7/16 99 6/7 13 3 ¼ 78 11/16 107 13/16 107 7/13 12 3 88 7/16 117 4/16 116 4/8 A, A, The Number of Equal Spaces in the Shorter Leg, which contain'd the same Parcel of Air diffe∣rently Expanded. B, The Height of the Mercury in the Long Tube, by whose weight the Air in the Short one, was com∣press'd. C, The Height of the Mercury, which coun∣terpois'd the weight of the Incumbent At∣mospere. D, The Aggregate of the Columns B and C, shewing what Pres∣sure was sustain'd by the Included Air. E, What that Pressure should be, allowing the Pressures, and Ex∣pansions, to be Reci∣procal Porportions. But in Trying this Experiment, whoever pours in the Mercury, he must do it by degrees, and ac∣cording to the Directions of the other, that takes notice of the Ascent of the Mercury below; for if it be pour'd in without Caution, it may rise up
above the Marks plac'd on the Outsides, before due Observations can be made. Having, by the weight of so vast a Cylinder of Mercury, compress'd the Air into a Quarter of the Space it possess'd before, we observ'd, tho' it could not be sensibly condens'd further by Cold, yet the Flame of a Candle brought near it, gave us reason to think, that a greater degree of Heat would have expanded it; but fearing the Cracking of the Tube, we durst not try it. From the Experiment it appears, That as the Air is more or less compress'd, so it is able to counterpoise a Heavier or Lighter Cylinder of Mercury. And that the Mercury was born up by the Spring of that condens'd Air, appear'd by sucking up the Air out of the Tube, when the Mercury was 100 Inches high in the Pipe; for the Pressure of the incumbent Pillar of the Atmo∣sphere, being by that means taken off, the Mer∣cury was rais'd in the Long Tube, by the Expan∣sion of the Air in the Short Leg: And not by any Funiculus, since the Objector confesses, that cannot raise more than a Cylinder of 30 Inches. The Air's Rarefaction consider'd.But, together with what hath been said, it may not a little illustrate our Doctrin of the Spring of the Air to observe, how much it's Spring is weaken'd, accordingly as it is differently Expan∣ded, and Rarify'd.
A Table of the Air's Rarefaction. A B C D E 1 00 0/9 Substracted from 29 ¾, leaves 29 ¾ 29 ¾ 1 ½ 10 ⅝ 19 ⅛ 19 ⅚ 2 15 ⅜ 14 ⅜ 14 ⅞ 3 20 2/8 9 4/8 9 15/12 4 22 ⅝ 7 ⅛ 7 7/16 5 24 ⅛ 5 ⅝ 5 19/20 6 24 ⅞ 4 ⅞ 4 23/24 7 25 4/8 4 2/8 4 ¼ 8 26 0/0 3 0/8 3 23/32 9 26 ⅜ 3 3/0 3 11/36 10 26 6/3 3 0/0 2 39/40 12 27 ⅛ 2 ⅝ 2 23/48 14 27 4/8 2 2/8 2 ⅛ 16 27 /8 2 0/0 1 55/64 18 27 ⅞ 1 ⅞ 1 47/72 20 28 — 1 6/8 1 9/80 24 28 ⅛ 1 4/8 1 22/96 28 28 ⅜ 1 ⅜ 1 1/16 32 28 4/8 1 2/8 0 110/128 A, The Number of Equal Spaces at the Top of the Tube, which the same Parcel of Air was contain'd in. B, The Height of the Mercury, which together with the In∣cluded Air, counterpois'd the Pressure of the Atmosphere. C, The Pressure of the Atmo∣sphere. D, The Aggregate of B to C, representing the Pressure counterpois'd by the Included Air. E, What that Pressure should be, according to the Hypothesis. In which Experiment it is to be Noted, First, That we made use of a Glass-Tube, about 6 Foot long, sealed at one End. Secondly, We had in Readiness a Glass-Pipe, about the Diameter of a Swan's Quill, which was mark'd with a Paper stuck upon it, divided into Inches, and half Quarters; which being im∣mers'd in the other Cylinder of Mercury, and open at both Ends, that the Mercury might rise in it, it help'd to fill the other up. And about
an Inch of it's standing above the Mercury, the Orifice was seal'd up; so that an Inch of Air was contain'd in the Tube, which, by lifting up the Tube, was gradually expanded to several Inches: It being noted, in the mean time, how much the Mercury in the small Tube, was, by the Expanded Air, in several Stations, permitted to rise above the Surface of the Mercury in the other Tube: By which Method, the former Observa∣tions being made, we inverted the Large Tube, and found by trying the Torrecellian Experiment, That that Day the Air sustain'd the Mercury at 29 ¾ Inches; where it was observ'd, That in ma∣king the foregoing Observations, the Difference betwixt the Account which answers our Hypothe∣sis and the other, probably proceeded from a new Access of Air, to that included Inch; and indeed, by immerging the Tube, when the Observations were made, we found, that it had gain'd about half an Eighth; which we judg'd might arise from some Bubbles lodg'd in the Pores of the Mercury. From which Experiment it appear'd, that the Inch of Air expanded to double it's Dimensions, was able with a Cylinder of Mercury abuot 15 Inches, to counterpoise the Pressure of the Atmosphere, which would raise the Mercury eight and twenty Inches, when the Spring of that Air was lost, by a further Expansion: So that the Atmosphere here below, must consequently be as much compress'd, as if twenty eight Inches of Mercury gravitated upon it.
CHAP. XX. Objections against Particular Phaenomena answered. The reason why Air condens'd by Cold, does not raise Mercury e∣qually, as when con∣dens'd by Pressure.WHAT our Author says in the Vindica∣tion of Particular Experiments, being only a Repetition of what he had said before against the Objector's Funicular Hypothesis, there is no need now to make a Repetition; since the Funicular Hypothesis, being already confuted, it conse∣quently follows, that the Explications are Er∣roneous. I shall therefore only take Notice of what hath not yet been deliver'd, or not so fully explain'd. And First, The Reason why the Air condens'd in Winter, by Cold, does not buoy up the Mer∣cury equally, as when the Air is condens'd in a Vessel, is because that condens'd Air adds no greater a Weight to it; but as a pound of Fea∣thers, it is as heavy when compress'd, as before that Compressure; but when expanded Air is condens'd in a Vessel, it acts more Powerfully by Virtue of it's Spring. Mr. Boyl hath taken a great deal of Pains in his Explications, to shew several Absurdities in the Objections; but those being neither Useful, nor Instructive, especially considering the Objector's Hypothesis is wholly laid aside, and our Author's Receiv'd, it will be needless to take notice of what will be of no Use in Explicating the Phaeno∣mena before deliver'd.
CHAP. XXI. An Explication of Rarefaction. IT being objected by the Author of a Book, De Corporum Inseparabilitate, that the Spring of the Air cannot be made out, whether we allow a Vacuum, or a Plenum. Waving the Forms which he lays his Objections down in, and a particular Answer to his Ways of Arguing, I shall take the following Method, to explain the Air's Spring. For supposing the Particles of the Air to consist of Matter, extended into thin Laminae, and those wound and folded up, like the Spring of a Watch; and that these Parts of Matter so wound up, are in a Continual Circular Motion, it will follow, that the Laminae in this Motion will en∣deavour to extend themselves, and to recede from the Axis or Center of their Motion, till hinder'd by the Opposition of each other, or some adja∣cent Bodies: and this Expansive Endeavour will be proportionably increas'd, as the Circular Mo∣tion of those Particles is quicken'd. And these Springy Corpuscles thus shap'd, and thus Me∣chanically mov'd, are sufficient to account for all that we ascribe to the Spring of the Air. For supposing the Diameter of those Parts of Matter next the Surface of the Earth, compress'd by the whole Weight of the Incumbent Atmosphere, to be 1/1000000000000 of an Inch,See Plate the Second. and to be represented by the Third Figure A B C D; it will Naturally follow, that Part of the Incumbent Weight of the Atmosphere, being taken off, they will expand
themselves so as to be 10/1000000000000 of an Inch in Diameter, as represented by E F G H. so that these Zones whirling round, will take up a space 1000 times bigger than before. And as from hence the Rarefaction of the Air is naturally accounted for; so the swelling of a Carp's Bladder, upon taking off the Pressure of the Atmosphere, is explain'd by the same Reason. And as the spon∣taneous Rarefaction of the Air is hence naturally explain'd, so it's Forced Rarefaction by Heat, is; for if the Particles of Heat penetrating the In∣terstices of these Aery Particles be in a violent rapid Motion, by increasing the Motion of the former Particles, they increase the Motion of the latter, and consequently strengthen their expan∣sive Virtue; And if these Rarifi'd Parts of Mat∣ter, by expanding themselves, leave larger In∣terstices betwixt their Laminae, they must conse∣quently be more pervious to the Rays of Light. So that granting this innate Motion in the Parts of Matter, and such a Configuration as I have mention'd, it naturally follows, that all the Phae∣nomena belonging to Rarefaction and Conden∣sation, may easily be explain'd by it. Rarefaction according to the Doctrin of the Ple∣nists.Nor will it be impossible to explain the Rare∣faction and Condensation, admitting of a Ple∣num, if we suppose with Cartesius, That the Air consists of Parts which are long, slender and flexible; for supposing with him, that these are whirl'd round by the Rapid Motion of the Glo∣buli Coelestes, those that lie next the Surface of the Earth, must needs be compress'd and hin∣der'd from that expansive Motion, more than those that have less Weight upon them; and consequently, when that Compression is taken
off, the expansive Force being encreas'd by it, they will consequently be expanded more Pow∣fully; and by whirling round, acquire longer Vortices: And for the like Reason the Air con∣tain'd in the Carp's Bladder, will extend it self when the Pressure of the External Atmosphere is taken off; and consequently, when the Exter∣nal Pressure is again admitted, those springy Parts being again compress'd are less able to maintain their new Vortices, but being wound up together again become more condens'd, that Pressure resisting the Force of their Spring. And as for the Reason why Water flows into the Re∣ceiver again in the Magdeburg Experiment, so impetuously; it hence evidently appears to pro∣ceed, from the Weakness of the Spring of the included Air, not being able to resist the more violent Pressure of the External; and for the same Reason likewise, the Carp's Bladder upon a reingress of that Air, is presently compress'd into its former Inconspicuousness. Elasticity explain'd by the Carte∣sian Hypo∣thesis.Nor will it be a less Piece of difficulty to ex∣plain the Aptness of Explosion in Gunpowder, by the Cartesian Hypothesis; for the Parts of that Combustible Matter of which it is made being shattered and broke into Pieces, consequently become more apt to be whirld about by the Materia Subtilis, and justling against each other, take up 1000 times as much space as before; and these Parts being thus agitated whatever Gun∣powder they fall upon, they presently shatter its Parts so as to put it in a Capacity to be agi∣tated by the Materia Subtilis: and consequently, the Globuli secundi Elementi, being expell'd out of the Place which contain'd the Gunpowder,
and the Parts of it being impetuously mov'd in that, they not only burst the Vessel they are con∣tain'd in, but drive every thing out of its Place which stands in their way, and is not able to re∣sist them. CHAP. XXII. An Explication of the Rota Aristotelica. NOT to mention all those Absurdities which Mr. Boyle hath shew'd in the Author's Explanation of the Rota Aristotelica,See Plate the second Fig. 5. I shall pass on to lay down what Explanation Mr. Boyle himself gives of it; for Mr. Boyle conceiving no such Difficulties in it, as our Author would represent, says, that it is so far from containing any Obscurities in it, that it is plain and easie. For if the Wheel A B C D. be mov'd in a di∣rect Motion from A I C. to K L M. each of the Points A E I G C. will either on a Plain, or in the Medium it passes through, form so many parallel Lines to I L. But if instead of that direct Progres∣sive Motion, it have a Circulation, each Point in one Revolution, whilst mov'd from G to L. will form a Cyclorid. Besides, each Point of the Circle acquires various Degrees of Celerity in its Pro∣gression by this complex Motion, according to its various Position to a Point, which is always to be found in some part of the Line, drawn from the Center of the circular Motion Perpendicu∣lar to the Progressive; for as the Circumfe∣rence to the Radius, so is the Line of the Pro∣gressive
Motion to the distance of the Point from the Center; because the Line of Progression is equal to the Circle, describ'd on that distance as Radius; and therefore, each Point of the smal∣ler Circle, when it touches the Perpendicular, will in respect of its Progressive Motion stand still: This Point therefore, will be the Center of the complex Motion. Our Au∣thor's Ex∣plication of the Rota Aristotelica.But since it may sufficiently explain the Rota Aristotelica, if we only consider those Points which pass across the Perpendicular, we shall suppose in our Example that A is the Center or immoveable Point; and then the Circumference A B C D will be equal to I L or A K by our Hy∣pothesis. And since the Point I hath only one motion, viz. that of Lation, the Point C which hath two Motions, must have double the Velo∣city of I, and the Point F having the same De∣gree of Lation with I, and put half the Distance of C from the Center I, it must have one Degree of Motion and a half. And further, the Point E having the same Progressive Motion with I, and being mov'd backwards with half the Velocity, loses half the Progressive Motion forwards. And the Point A being by its Progression mov'd forwards, with an equal Velocity with I, and by its Rotation (the Circle A B C D being equal to the Line I L) being carri'd back with equal Celerity, must ne∣cessarily stand still as to the Progressive Mo∣tion. Now from hence it appearing, that the Point A, (being at Rest, by reason of its two oppo∣site Motions) only touch a Point of the Line A K, without being in the least mov'd upon it,
and that the Point E, (moving forwards as fast again as it is carri'd backwards by its Rotation, and consequently mov'd half as fast as the Point I) not only touches the Line E K, but is mov'd upon it with a progressive Motion, half as quick as that of I, it will consequently follow, that each Point in E must make a small Line, which is a Part of the whole E C; so that the Contact of the former, and the Contact and the Progression of the latter, being perform'd by an infinite Suc∣cession of Points, in an infinite Succession of Instants, the Difficulties represented by our Author's Explaining it, are taken off, all that he says coming to no more, than that in such a determinate Moment or minutes Space of time, such a determirate minutes Corpuscle, will successively pass over such a determinate Space or Length. CHAP. XXIII. An Abstract of what is further contain'd re∣lating to the Weight and Spring of the Air in the Examen of Mr. Hobbs his Dialo∣gus Physicus. IN this Chapter I shall not take notice of what Absurdities the Author hath shew'd Mr. Hobbs guilty of, but shall only extract what may tend to a further Illustration of the Doctrin of the Air's Weight and Spring. And first, from what hath been before deli∣ver'd concerning the Weight and Spring of the Air, it appears, that the Reason why the Wa∣ter
in a watering Pot, is prevented from descen∣ding through the Holes of the Bottom, by stop∣ping the upper Orifice, is no other than the Pressure of the Atmosphere; which making a stronger Resistence than a Cylinder of Water of such a Length is able to resist, it must conse∣quently be suspended in the watering Pot: and that this is the true Reason, appears from what hath been deliver'd in the nineteenth Experi∣ment; where it was made evident, that if the Pressure of the Air was weaken'd by extracting the Air out of the Receiver, as soon as the Water in the Tube was able to out-balance the Spring of the included Air, it began to subside. CHAP XXIV. The VVeight and Spring of the Air asserted. THE Author having prov'd the Weight of the Air, by weighing it in an exhausted Re∣ceiver in a Lamb's Bladder, and a Glass Bubble, and likewise in an AEolipile: And the Air's gra∣vity being further confirm'd, by weighing the Receiver before and after it had been exhau∣sted in the Magdeburg Experiments: All that Mr. Hobbs objects, relating to the Bladder weigh'd in the Receiver, only intimates, that the Air being blown into the Bladder, the Weight proceeds from Atoms which swim in that Air, or the Haltius which pass into the Cavity of the Bladder along with the Air: But since this de∣nies
not the Weight of the Air, but rather que∣stions the Cause; we think it sufficient to ac∣count for what we aim'd at, to prove, that Air does gravitate, tho' the Cause of Gravitations be not known. The Spring of the Air proved.As to the Spring of the Air, waving what trivial Objections Mr. Hobbs makes, I shall add the following Experiments to evince it. The first, is, That if a Cylinder of Mercury be suspended at the usual Height, in the Torre∣cellian Experiment, by stopping the upper Ori∣fice of the Tube, and lifting the lower End above the Basis it rested on before; we may observe, that the Finger can discern no Gravitation of the Mercury in the Tube; but if it be inverted, and the External Air let in, the Mercury which be∣fore did not gravitate upon the Finger, will be so depress'd by the Spring of that Air, as to cause it to weigh considerably upon it; and if the lower Orifice be unstopp'd in the restagnant Mercury, the included Air will depress that in the Tube, below its former Stations: And if the Experiment be made in a Tube not so long, and both Ends be stopp'd with ones Finger, up∣on the removing of the uppermost, the lower will perceive the Weight of the Incumbent Pil∣lar of the Atmosphere, which before depress'd the Pulp of the Finger into the Cylindrical Ca∣vity of the Tube; so that this Experiment proves both the Spring and Gravity of the Air. The other Experiment is the Fourth in the E∣pistle, where it was evident, that a Bladder sus∣pended in the Receiver, subsided or swell'd as the Air was let in, or drawn out: And tho' Mr. Hobbs teaches, that the swelling of the
Bladder is effected by the Air, per vim incussus, which getting into the Bladder, presses against the Internal Superficies of it in their circular Motions; yet, since from several Experiments it appears, that Bladders are impervious to Air, to deny that the Ingress of it, is a sufficient An∣swer to his Explanation: But further, were the Bladder so pervious to Air, it might as readily get out of the Bladder, as in, without breaking it. And whereas Mr. Hobbs endeavours to expli∣cate all the Phaenomena afforded by our Engin and Wind-Guns, by the Motion of the Aery Parts, which Motion they acquire by the Force of the Engin; yet, that the Air hath parallel Effects where it acquires no such Motion, ap∣pears from the Experiments formerly mention'd made in the open Air, at the Top and Bottom of Hills; the Mercury being not near suspended so high at the Top, as at the Bottom of those Hills. And tho' he endeavours to Explain the difference, by supposing the Motion of the Air brisker at the Bottom than the Top of the Hill; yet, since it can only keep the Mercury from subsi∣ding, by virtue of its Pressure, that Pressure must either proceed from its Spring or Weight; and since it is highly improbable, that the Pressure of so few Parts of the Air, as are contiguous to the Mercury, should be able to keep it from sub∣siding, it must do it by virtue of the whole At∣mosphere which is equiponderant to it. But to evince the Spring and Pressure of the Air further, I shall add, that a Thermoscope be∣ing carri'd to the Top of a Hill, the Air con∣tain'd in it not finding so strong a Pressure from
the Water, which there receives a less Impressi∣on from the Atmosphere, visibly expands it self by virtue of its Spring. CHAP. XXV. Mr. Hobb's Principal Explications of the Phaenomena of the Engin Examin'd BEfore Mr. Hobbs sets about an Explication of the Phaenomena exhibited by our Engin, he lays down an Hypothesis, which he endeavours to explain them by; supposing that a great many earthy Particles are interspers'd in the Air, which have a congenite circular Motion of their own; and that there is a greater Quantity of them nearer, than further from the Earth: But be∣sides that it may be question'd, how such Parti∣cles can move in so exact an Order, without knocking against, and disturbing each others Motion: It is as unintelligible how Matter should have its Motion congenite: But to leave Mr. Hobbs to dispute these things with other Ad∣versaries, I shall proceed to his Explica∣tions. The exhau∣sted Recei∣ver void of Air.And first, to prove that there is no Vacuum in our Receiver, he says, that the Air being remov'd by the Pressure of the Sucker outward, it gets into the Receiver again betwixt the Convex and Concave Surfaces of the Sucker and the Cylinder, which if. true, it would follow, that there was a Vacuum for some time, viz. till the Air had time to get into the Re∣ceiver
again. But that the Air is in a great Measure drawn out, and that the Receiver is, in respect of Air, empty, not only appears by those Bubbles of Water which pass through the Water, when the Receiver is encompass'd with it; but it further appears, by weighing the Re∣ceiver when exhausted, which is considerably lighter than before. As also, by observing, that if the Receiver be ill shap'd, so as not to be able to resist the Pressure of the outward Air, it breaks inward upon the Action of the Pump. But a further Argument is, that the Receiver being exhausted, and the Cocks turn'd when the Receiver is encompass'd with Water, seve∣ral Gallons will be impell'd into it, which could not be without a Penetration of Dimensions, except the Receiver was empty. And even in the Common Experiment its evident, that the Air, upon turning of the Stop-Cock, rushes in with a considerable Noise. But if Mr. Hobbs should say, that the Purer Air only flows into the Receiver; I shall demand, how it is possible for that to flow in, when the Receiver is exhausted in Water; where we might expect, that it should as well raise Bub∣bles in its Passage through it, as that such Bub∣bles rise in the Water in the exhausted Re∣ceiver. And tho' Mr. Hobbs affirms, That this Air getting into the Receiver moves up and down violently I know not how; to prove that it does not I shall intimate, That were it so, the Smoak as well as the Bladder contain'd in the Receiver in the forementioned Experiments, would be disturb'd by that Motion; since upon
the Admission of the Air into the Receiver, it appears, That it puts them both into a very violent Agitation. And, That in the Torrecellian Experiment, the Tube above the Mercury is void of Air, may be evinc'd, by reciprocally inverting the Tube; for by that Means, the Mercury will move back∣wards with a much greater degree of Swiftness and Force, than if Air be let into that Part of the Cylinder which is not filled with Mer∣cury. And indeed, were it not allowed, That the Air is drawn out of the Receiver, for any thing that Mr. Hobbs hath offer'd, the Reason of the Ascent or Descent of the Mercury, as the external Air is let in or drawn out, would be difficulty understood, if not altogether un∣explain'd, without admitting the Weight and Spring of the Air. The next Phaenomenon Mr. Hobbs offers to ex∣plain is, why the Sucker rises up when the Re∣ceiver is exhausted, tho' a hundred Pound Weight be suspended at it; the Reason of which he attributes to the swift and violent Reper∣cussion of the Air, which was thrust out, which finding not room enough in the World, must conseuqently press the Sucker before it into the Space which contain'd it before; but if the Air be so swiftly repelled, I cannot understand, why it should not resist the Egress of Air, or raise the Sucker when a greater Weight is hung at it. But further, that the return of this Air does not depend on the swift Repercussion of the external Air is hence manifest; since if the Sucker be held down till the Air about it seems
to be settled, and as calm as before; it will nevertheless rise when the superfluous Weight is taken away. And as for an Internal Conatus of the Included Air, were such allow'd, as Mr. Hobbs contends for, it would rather hinder than promote the Rising of the Sucker; for were that Included Air forc'd out so violently, as he sup∣poses, and were it strong enough to cause a vio∣lent Repercussion in the Air, the Internal Force counterpoizing the External, the Rising of the Sucker would not thereby in the least be pro∣moted: But since from our Experiments it ap∣pears, That the Receiver is, for the greatest Part, void of Air, and that such an Impetus would be of no Force, in causing the Phaenomenon he en∣deavours to explain by it, it is more Natural to belive, that the External Pressure of the Atmo∣sphere rais'd it. CHAP. XXVI. Several scatter'd Explications, and Passages in his Dialogue, consider'd. WHEREAS we have in the XXXXVth Experimenti, mention'd an Experiment, wherein the Water Rose up into a long slen∣der Tube, which was plac'd in a Perpendicu∣lar Line; the Water in the Tube, being above the Surface of the Water, without the Tube; Mr. Hobbs endeavours to explain this, by the Impulse of the Particles of Matter, swiftly agi∣tated in the Air; but since the same Agitation
of Parts within the Tube, might also depress that to an equal Surface, with the External, the Account he gives of it, is the less satisfactory. The Reason which he assigns for the Difficulty in drawing up the Stopple, when the Receiver is exhausted, is, a Violent Conatus, proceeding from the Motion of the Particles within; but were the Impetus so great, as to cause so great a Repercussion, as Mr. Hobbs before suppos'd able to repel the Sucker, it should rather raise the Stopple; and if that Motion contributed to the fastning of it, it would continue upon a Re∣admission of the Air; since the Air in the Ca∣vity runs about, and is in Motion for a good while: Nor could the Plentitude he supposes, cause the Phaenomenon, because he supposes the World to be equally, and at all times full. But that the close Connexion of the Stopple to the Socket, depended on the Pressure of the Ex∣ternal Air, appear'd by closing the Hole in the Cover with Cement, instead of that Stopple; for when the Air was drawn out of the Receiver, the External Air was drawn out of the Receiver, the External Air would press so violently upon it, as to make the upper Superficies Concave, and sometimes to force it down into the Receiver with a Noise, and great Violence. He further assigns the Boiling of Water in our Receiver, to the Motion of the Air included; but since I have made it appear, That there is no such Motion, our Explanation is the more pro∣bable; since the Parts of the Liquor being agi∣tated by Heat, will be apt to to expand more powerfully upon a Removal of that Pressure. And tho' he says the Parts of the Water could not be mov'd, except à Movente contiguo, A Con∣tiguous
Body in Motion; yet since he allows, that the Motion of his Earthy Parts, which swim in the Air is innate, and consequently depends not on any Contiguous Body, I shall leave that to answer what he here delivers; and shall only intimate, That the Parts of the Water being agi∣tated, when put into the Receiver, is enough to account for the Phaenomenon, when the Pressure of the Air is taken off. Why Ani∣mals die in the Exhau∣sted Recei∣ver.The sudden Death of Animals, which I ascribe doubtingly, tho' not without Probability, to the Exsuction of the Air in the Receiver, he attri∣butes to the Circular Motion of the included Air, and it's Tenacity; but since I have already made it appear, that there is no such Motion, that is a Sufficient Answer. And as for the Air, being thicker in the Exhausted Receiver, than before, the contrary appears in the Magdeburg Expe∣riment; where the Exhausted Receiver weigh'd much less than before; but from the Breaking of Bubbles outwards it further appears, that it is not a thicker, but a lighter and more yielding Body: And tho' Mr. Hobbs from his supposition of the Air's Thickness, endeavours to Account for the sudden Extinction of Flame in our Re∣ceiver; yet thinking it a Matter of Difficulty to explain, the true Cause of the Extinction of Flame, it may suffice, that I have made it ap∣pear, that the Air is not thick as he supposes.
CHAP. XXVII: Several other Passages in Mr. Hobbs's Dia∣logue, examined. IN this Chapter Mr. Hobbs objects against what our Author delivers, concerning the Cause of the Coliesion of two Marbles; but all that is contain'd in what he here offers, being obviated by what hath been deliver'd under the Title of Fluidity, and Firmness; For a further Confirmation of the Doctrin there deliver'd, I shall add the following Experiments: And, The Pressure of the Air upon Bodies contain'd in it, prov'd.First, If an Aeolipile freed from Air, be, whilst hot, stopp'd with Wax, upon a Perforation of that Wax, the Air will be press'd in to the Cool Aeolipile, whether the Orifice be held down, or Horizontally; which shews, that the Air on each side may press upon the Lower Superficies of the Marble, as well as the Subjacent Pillar of Air, and that the Air is not impell'd against it only in a Pyramidal Figure, as he would urge, viz. be∣cause Lines drawn from the Circumference and Borders of the Stones, to the Center of the Earth, must form Pyramids. To which it might be added, That Part of the Air being drawn out of a large Glass, and a Book clapp'd upon the Orifice, the Pressure of the Sub∣jacent Atmosphere, kept it suspended there. And the Author of the Magdeburg Experiment says, That two Plates of Copper, whose Diame∣ter was about half an Ell, stuck so close to each other, that six Men could not pull them asund.
See Fig. 6. Plate secondAnd it appears from an Experiment made in a Glass Viol, anon to be describ'd, that if the Tube be so immers'd, that it's Lower Orifice just touch the Water, the oblique Pressure of the Atmosphere, will raise the Water in the Tube, a considerable Height, as the Air is suck'd out of the Tube. Mr. Hobbs objects against the Author's Expli∣cations of the Rising of: Water in Glass Foun∣tains; and says, That it cannot be accounted for by the Expansion of the Air, since the Parts of the Air expanded, take up no more room after they are expanded, than before; but since he means so as adequately to fill more Space; and we only mean such an Expansion, as is before ex∣plan'd, by instancing compress'd Wool; it ap∣pears, that in our Sense it will take up more Space, so as to keep the gross Parts of Water from getting betwixt them. There are other Objections mention'd in this Chapter, as well as some other Particulars, rela∣ting to the Royal Society; but since the Author finds no weight in them against any thing he hath taught; I shall only further take Notice of what Mr. Hobbs and Gassendus teach, concerning the Rise of Water in Syphons; viz. That it is perform∣ed by Suction. But not now to mention what hath elsewhere been deliver'd to prove the contrary, I shall only add the following Experiment: Ha∣ving taken a Glass Vessel, which was large enough to contain about a Pound of Water, I caus'd a Glass Pipe to be fix'd in the Neck of it; so that the Air within was kept from having any Inter∣course with that without, the Lower End reach∣ing almost to the Bottom of the Vessel: The Pipe being thus fix'd, we convey'd Water into the Bot∣tle,
till it rose something above the Bottom of the Pipe, and then having inclin'd the Bottle to give a due Intercourse betwixt the Internal and Ex∣ternal Air, I suck'd the Air out of the Tube, till the Water rose into my Mouth, and till the Spring of the Included Air, was able no longer to lift up the Water; which would not have done, been were the Common Notion of Suction allow'd, viz. That it is effected by the Pressure of the Air, thrust away by the dilated Chest of him that sucks, and thereby drawing the Water into the Pipe at which he sucks. But besides the Preceding use made of this Ex∣periment, I pour'd out the Water, till the lower End of the Pipe was but just immers'd in it; and upon Suction, it rose almost to the Top of the Pipe; but the Spring of the Air being too much weaken'd to raise it higher, several Bubbles of Air broke through the Water; but as soon as I left off sucking, the Pressure of the External Air so compress'd the Rarify'd Air within, as to bring it to it's wonted Station, several Particles breaking into the Bottle through the Water, till that Internal Air was equally press'd with the External.
CHAP. XXVIII. What Mr. Hobbs teaches concerning Fluidity and Firmness, examin'd. Motion the Chief Qua∣lification in order to Fluidity.THE First Particular examin'd in this Chap∣ter, is a Mistake of Mr. Hobbs, concern∣ing the Author's Opinion of Fluidity; the Ob∣jector making the Author's Notion of Fluidity to consist in the Size of the Parts of Liquid Bodies; whereas our Author assigns Motion, as the Chief and Principal Qualification; since a Coagulum of pure Spirits of Urine and Wine, may by bare Digestion, be turn'd into a Per∣manent Liquor; and Quick-silver, tho' fluid, may be turn'd into a Permanent Powder, by stopping the Motion of it's Parts. And tho' Mr. Hobbs further asserts, That Fluid Bodies con∣sist of Parts Divisible into Fluids, as Quantity into Quantity; yet, since I have made it appear, That Fluidity depends on the Shape, Size, Tex∣ture, and Motion; and Firmness, on a Rest amongst the Parts of Solids; and likewise, that Fluids are not divisible into Fluid Parts, as Quan∣tity into Quantity, it is needless to repeat what is there deliver'd. As for the Explication of Fluidity and Firm∣ness, which Mr. Hobbs Substitutes, it teaches, That the Parts of Fluids may move whilst the whole is in Motion, and that Solids may have their Parts in Motion, tho' the whole lyes still: As also he says, That the Parts of a Fluid may be render'd less fluid, by being compress'd; but since he hath
asserted these things, and not prov'd them; and since the Hypothesis he goes upon, is sufficiently invalidated before, the Author thinks these re∣quire no Particular Answer: And tho' he fur∣ther makes an Objection against the Size of the Parts of Matter contributing to Fluidity and Firm∣ness; yet since our Author makes Motion or Rest the Chief and Principal Requisites, what hath been deliver'd in the History of Fluidity and Firm∣ness, may suffice for an Answer: For that there is Motion in the Parts of Fluids, appears, if a Lump of Salt be put into Water, the Parts of which will be presently dissolv'd, and carry'd up to the Top of the Liquor, which could not be without Mo∣tion; and that Rest contributes to Solidity, is evident, since Water froze, becomes Ice; and on the contrary, that, as well as Metals, by having their Parts put into a violent Motion by Heat, become Fluid. CHAP. XXIX. An Explanation of the Engin made Use of in the following Experiments. See Plate the Third and Fourth.THE Structure of our Engin being such, as not to admit of an Alphabetical Explana∣tion, so as to make it intelligible, to those that are unacquainted with Mechanical Structures; and it being easily enough understood by those, espe∣cially that are acquainted by our First Engin, we
thought it sufficient in our Plate, to repre∣sent the Engin just ready to be set on Work; and in the Fourth the Parts, which it is made up of. Only there are two things, which may deserve to be explain'd: First the Sucker being always co∣ver'd with Water; and the Perforation (p q), which goes through it in a Perpendicular Line, and together with the Stick (r s), supplies the Place of a Valve, being to be stopp'd at the Bot∣tom of the Cylinder (n o), when fill'd with Wa∣ter, it was necessary the Stick (rp) should be of a considerable Length. Secondly, The Pipe (A B) lies in a Gutter, made purposely in the Board (c d e f), which Board is laid over with Cement, and a piece of Iron laid upon that, to keep it from warping: In which Iron-plate is fix'd a Lip, which rises up about the End of the Pipe (B), which is bent up, to prevent the Water which comes from the Receiver from be∣ing Spilt; and notwithstanding the Stop-cock (G H I K), might be inserted into the Cylinder (L M N O), at (I) with Soder; yet it is much more convenient to have the Branch (I) made like a Screw; so that being screwed into the Barrel, it may more easily be mended, when any thing is amiss; Whether it be that the Air gets in betwixt the Plate and the Wood, or the Cement be drawn into the Pipe, where the in∣verted End is united to the Receiver; and lest the inward Orifice of the Pipe should be stopp'd with any thing, contain'd in the Receiver drawn to it, there is fix'd at some Distance from it a Tin Plate, so contriv'd as to give free Passage to the Air.
The Wooden Part represented in the Plate, and which contains the Cylinder, is always so full of Water as able to overtop the Cylinder, and to make the Sucker soft and plump, by which means it is more exactly fitted to the Cylindrical Cavity. And as for the Iron Plate abovemention'd, it hath this Conveniency, that it excludes the Air, better than if the Receiver had a Stop-cock, in most Experiments, tho' in some it is less ser∣virceable. But most of the following Experiments may be try'd in our First Engin, if the following Alte∣rations be made. And First, If a square Board, and a suitable Iron Plate, such as is made use of in this Engin, be fasten'd opposite to the Iron Rack, to the Upper Part of the great Cylinder, and a Glass Tube, like that just now describ'd, be fix'd to the Lower Branch of the Stop-cock, with a Cement, made with near an equal Propor∣tion of Wax and Turpentine, in Winter, and three Parts of Wax to two of Turpentine in Summer; for the Ingress of Air being thus pre∣vented, upon drawing down the Sucker, the Air, by Virtue of it's own Spring, will force it self out of the Receiver.
CHAP. XXX. A Continuation of New Experiments concern∣ing the Spring and Weight of the Air and their Effects, by way of Letter to the Right Honourable the Lord Clifford and Dungarvan. My Dear Lord, HAving already given your Lordship an Ac∣count of the Design and Scope of our Mechanical Experiments, without any further Preface, being encourag'd by your Acceptance of my last, I shall proceed to a Continuati∣on. EXPERIMENT I. Concerning the Raising of Mercury a great Height in an open Tube, by the Spring of a small Quan∣tity of included Air. IN order to make an Estimate of the Force of the Air's Spring, in it's several Degrees of Expansion; We fill'd the fourth part of a Viol with Quicksilver, the Neck of which was none of the largest, in which we fix'd a Glass Tube with hard Wax, the lower End reaching almost to the Bottom of the Quicksilver, and the up∣per almost a Yard above the Viol, which being conveigh'd into a Receiver (See Plate 5. Fif. 1.) which was pretty Tall,See Plate 5. Fig. 1. upon an Exsuction of the Air in the Receiver, that in the Viol ex∣panding
it self, rais'd the Mercury 27 Inches in the Tube; yet when the Air was again admitted into the Receiver, it subsided so far as to be al∣most; if not quite equal with the Surface of the Mercury in the Viol: And this Experiment was try'd before the Famous Savilian Geometer Dr. Wallis, tho' it does not constantly succeed alike, it sometimes rising higher than at others. In which Experiment the following Observa∣tions were to be made. First, That so much Air being blown into the Viol, to try whether it was stanch, as was able to raise the Mercury three Inches in the Pipe, upon the Exsuction of the External Air in the Receiver, the Mercury rose 30 Inches above that in the Viol. Secondly, When the Mercury is taken out of the Receiver, it does not suddenly subside as low as before it's Ascent, the Air being a little more Expanded by the Heat of the Cement when melted with an Iron. Thirdly, Whilst the Air included in the Viol retains any considerable Springiness, after each Exsuction the Mercury will be rais'd by the Force of its Expansion, a considerable Height above what that Air is able to suspend it at, and makes several Vibrations before it settles. Fourthly, Upon the first Exsuction the Mercu∣ry rises near ⅔ of the whole Weight that the Expansion of the included Air is able to raise it, and continues every subsequent Exsuction to rise less and less as the weight of the suspended Mer∣cury encreases, and the Spring of the Internal Air grows weaker, and as the Mercury rises less every Exsuction than it did before, so are the Vibrations less considerable.
Lastly, Having observ'd the Weight of the Air in a good Barometer, when it was but light, the Mercury was rais'd to 29 and ⅜ tho' soon af∣ter the Tryal it was but 29 Inches high. To make an Estimate of the Quantity of Air which rais'd the Mercury to the usual height, we counterpois'd the Viol, and then filling it full of Water, we found it to weigh about 5 Ounces 2 Drachms, and about 20 Grains; but so much being pour'd off, that the remaining Water on∣ly filled the Space which the Mercury was before contain'd in, it weigh'd 1 Ounce 2 Drachms 14 Grains, so that the Air which by it's Expansion elevated the Mercury, fill'd the Space of no more than 4 Ounces and a few Grains: The Diameter of the Pipe employ'd in this Experiment was no more than the ⅛ of an Inch. An Argu∣ment a∣gainst a Fuga vacui.But besides the Spring of the Air, from this Experiment we may learn, what is to be thought of what some Learned Men teach concerning the Suspension of Quicksilver by a Funiculus, and, it's rising to avoid a Vacuum; for were the first true, it might be demanded, why that Funicu∣lus raises it not above 27 Inches; and as for the latter it's objected, that the Mercury being unable adequately to fill up more Space by rising, than if it rose not, the Reason must be invalid.
EXPERIMENT II. A good Quantity of Air raised the Mercury in an open Tube, no higher than the Weight of the At∣mosphere does in a Baroscope. HAving put a sufficient Quantity of Mercury into a large Bottle, capable of containing about ssij, we immers'd the one End of a long slender Tube, below the Surface of the Mercu∣ry; and having clos'd the Neck of the Viol with Cement, it was conveigh'd into a Receiver diffe∣rent from the former in nothing but Size; where we observ'd, that the Quantity of Air being greater in this Viol, than that made use of in the former Experiment, it was capable of ex∣panding further, and of raising the Mercury to about 29 Inches and about ⅞ out of which half an Inch being deducted, for the height it was eleva∣ted to by Air injected to try the Stanchness of the Bottle, the Spring of the Air included in the Bottle, rais'd it to 29 Inches and about ⅜; The Weight of the Air in a Baroscope at the same time, elevating the Mercury 29 Inches and ½, which was ⅛ higher than the elevated Mercury in the Receiver. But having continu'd to ply the Pump still longer, we learn'd, that the Spring of the included Air was incapable of raising it higher, than the Weight of the Atmosphere did in the Baroscope. This Experiment was several times repeated with the like Success, but once, the Pump being ply'd more than usually, the Air contain'd in a Green Glass expanded so violently, that tho' it
could not raise the Mercury higher, it broke the Glass with such violence, that the Piece which flew off crack'd the Receiver. EXPERIMENT III. The Spring of the included Air, will elevate Mer∣cury almost to an equal Height in Tubes of a diffe∣rent Bore. IN order to try, whether the same Quantity of Air would by it's Expansion raise the Mercury to the same Height in a narrow, as in a Cylinder of a larger Diameter, we repeated the former Tryal with a Pipe of the same Diameter, but much longer; in which the Spring of the Air rais'd the Mercury to 28 Inches and ⅛, the Mercury in the Borometer, being 29 Inches and ¼ high at the same time. So that the Air was able by its Spring, to raise the Quicksilver with∣in an Inch as high in a large Tube, as in a smal∣ler: And when the Spring of that Air was no further able to expand it self, the Parts of it be∣ing put into Motion by Heat, the Spring of it was so much increas'd, as to raise the Mercury ⅝ of an Inch higher. EXPERIMENT IV. A new Hydraulo-Pneumatical Fountain made by the Spring of uncompress'd Air. HAVING put a Quantity of Water into a Bottle, and immers'd the End of a Glass Tube a little below the Surface of it, which was
about 3 Foot long, the Interstices betwixt the Neck of the Bottle and the Pipe were fill'd with Cement (see Plate 6. Fig. 2.) and the whole was conveigh'd into a Receiver.See Plat. 6 Fig. 2. And because the Pipe was too long to be contain'd in the Re∣ceiver, another made of White Glass was Ce∣mented upon the former, to the middle of whose Cavity, the upper End of the Pipe extended, so that the Motions of the rising Water had more Space to move in, when the Pump was set on work; where it was observable, that upon the first Exsuction the Pressure of the external Air being taken off, that contain'd in the Bottle, expanded it self so powerfully, as to raise the Water in the Tube with such Force, that it flew violently against the Top of the Receiver; but as the Air in the Bottle was leasurely expanded, and came nearer to an Aequilibrium with that in the Receiver, the Spring of that in the Bottle, being less powerful, the Water in the Tube gradually ceas'd in its Ascent, unless the Pres∣sure of the external Air was taken off by a fresh Exsuction In which Experiment, the following Particu∣lars were to be noted; First, that as the upper Orifice of the Tube was narrower, the Water would rise slower, and the Experiment would be longer continu'd. Secondly, If a Pipe be Cemented upon the Top of the Tube, and branch'd out into several small ones, with Pin∣holes in the Ends of them, the Water will fly out, as out of Artificial Fountains in Grotto's. Thirdly, If the Bottle to whose Neck the Tube was Ce∣mented, was larger, the Water would rise so much the longer; and the Experiment might
be reiterated by first letting in the Air again, and then exhausting the Receiver by pumping it out afresh. From the Phaenomena exhibited by this Expe∣ment, it appears, that the Spring of the Air was able to raise the Water in the Tube to a much greater Height than the Pipe we made use of. Secondly, From hence it appears, that Wa∣ter contain'd betwixt two Parcels of Air, may be put into Motion by its Spring, without the Concurrence of adventitious Heat. Thirdly, we observ'd, That when the Air was in a great Measure exhausted, the upper Receiver being taken off, the external Air press'd the Water quite down to the Bottom of the Tube, and se∣veral Bubbles getting through the Water, joyn∣ed themselves with the Air in the Bottle: But what was more strange was, that when the Re∣ceiver had been taken off a considerable time, several Bubbles of Air continu'd to make their way through the Water, as if the Spring of the Included Air, being before expanded, could not be brought again to its former State of Com∣pression; but like a Balance put in Motion, con∣tinu'd several successive Vibrations, resisting each Impress of the Atmosphere. But the Chief Remark in this Experiment was, that the Salient Water in the Receiver, form'd several large Lines, some of which were Parabolical, when the Receiver was pretty well exhausted.
EXPERIMENT V. About the Production of Heat by Attrtion in the exhausted Receiver. IT being the Opinion of some Learn'd Men, that the Incalescence of solid Bodies depends on the Attrition, or violent Agitation of the intercepted Air; To try how far this might be true, I caus'd a strong Spring of Iron or Steel (See Plate the Sixth,See Plate 6. Fig. 3. Fig. 3.) Figur'd much like the Lathe of a Cross-bow, to be fix'd to a staple Trencher: On the upper Part of the Spring was fix'd a Concave Piece of Brass, like a Burning-Glass, about 2 Inches Diameter, and moderate∣ly slender; to the Concave Superficies of which, was fix'd a Convex Piece of the same Metal; which had a square Handle on the upper Part, to which was fix'd a square piece of Wood, the other End being fix'd to the Basis of a Wooden Pillar, made use instead of our Vertical Cylinder; and the upper End of this Pillar was fix'd to the Turn-Key, being of such a Size, that when the Stopple was depress'd into the Socket made in the Brass Cover, the Concave and Convex Su∣perficies of the two Pieces of Brass, contain'd betwixt the Wooden Pillar and the Spring, were squeez'd together, and the Spring in some mea∣sure expanded. All things being thus provided, and a Mercu∣rial Gange conveigh'd into the Receiver, a Wimble was fix'd to the Top of the Stopple, which being turn'd round for some time, and the Air being exhausted out of the Receiver, we
presently took off the Cover; and perceiv'd, that the contiguous Superficies of the Pieces of Brass, betwixt which we had laid some powder'd Amel to make them move more easily one upon another, were sensibly warm. And the Experiment being repeated a second time, and the Air so far exhausted, that the Mer∣cury was no further depress'd, they grew so hot, that I could scarce endure to touch them; and a considerable Degree of Warmth succeeded, when the Experiment was try'd with two Pieces of Wood, the one of Oak and the other of Beech. From which Experiment it appears, that At∣trition of Solids may cause a considerable Warmth, when the Air betwixt their Superfi∣cies is exhausted. EXPERIMENT VI. About the disjoyning of two Marbles (not other∣wise to be separated without a considerable Weight) upon a Removal of the Pressure of the Air in the Receiver. HAVING several times suspended two flat Polish'd Marbles, whose contiguous Su∣perficies were moistned with Oyl, to keep the Air from getting in betwixt them, upon a con∣siderable Exsuction of the Air, they would some∣times fall asunder in the Receiver, at the eigh∣teenth Suction, and sometimes at the eighth; tho' a Pound Weight was only suspended at the lower; yet in the open Air, where they were
compress'd by the ambient Atmosphere, they were able to sustain 80 Pound without separa∣ting. But having provided a Receiver with a Brass Conver (See Plate 6. Fig. 4.) and suspended two Contiguous Marbles in it,See Plate 6. Fig. 4. with a Weight of a few Ounces at the Bottom of the lowest, the String which suspended them being fix'd to the Bottom of the Brass Stopple in the middle of the Cover by turning the Stopple, and by that means shortning the String, the Marbles were rais'd up in the Receiver, but upon drawing out the Air, they presently fell asunder; yet having so contriv'd the Matter, that the lower should not fall too far, the other was let down to it, and upon the Re-admission of the Air, they were so closely compress'd together again, that they could not be separated as easily as before: Yet if by turning the Stopple, the uppermost was rais'd before the Air was let in, it would leave the lowermost behind it. EXPERIMENT VII. A way to break Flat Glass speedily, by the Weight of the Atmosphere. TO make it appear, that the round Figure of a Body enables it to resist a more vio∣lent Pressure from the Atmosphere, than Bodies otherwise shap'd; We made use of a Brass Hoop, about 3 Inches high, and 3 Inches and 2/10 in Dia∣meter, and Cementing a round Piece of Glass upon the one Orifice, the other was joyn'd to the Receiver with Cement; and upon drawing out
the Air, the Atmosphere press'd so strongly up∣on the Glass, as to burst it asunder with a con∣siderable Noise, like that of a Pistol. How far this may contribute to account for the Noise which accompanies the Explosion of Gunpow∣der in Pistols, we leave others to consider. EXPERIMENT VIII. The breaking of the Glass Plates in the foregoing Experiment may be accounted for without a Fuga Vacui. THAT the breaking of the Glass Plates did not depend on Nature's Abhorrency of a Vacuum, appears hence; for if instead of the former Brass Hoop, we make use of a Vessel Figur'd like a Conus Truncatus, or a Sugar-Loaf, the Cone being cut off; if the lower Orifice be large, and the upper not above an Inch Diame∣ter, the Glass Plate Cemented to the larger Ori∣fice, will break when the Receiver is exhausted; but if the smaller Orifice be upwards, the Glass Cemented to it will be whole; whereas did Na∣ture's Abhorrency of a Vacuum cause the for∣mer, it would have the same Effect in the lat∣ter: Wherefore I rather think the Reason why the latter did not break as the former, was be∣cause a small Basis of the Atmosphere presses upon it, which it is. abler to resist than a larger Plate of Glass.
EXPERIMENT IX. A Bladder burst by the Spring of the Inclu∣ded Air.NOT to mention, of what Advantage it might be, to have a Good Method to break Bladders fill'd with Air, in our exhausted Receiver, by supplying it with Air speedily, and without danger of letting in too much from without; I shall intimate, That if a blown Blad∣der be contain'd in an exhausted Receiver, the In∣ternal Air will be so powerfully expanded, as to distend the Bladder, and stretch it's Fibers, which when taken out again, and the Bladder at the Neck, being ty'd something nearer than before, the Bladder so distended with Air, and not liable to give way a second time to the Spring of the Included Air, the next time it is put into the Re∣ceiver, it is apt to burst. EXPERIMENT X. A Considerable Weight rais'd by the Spring of the Air included in a Bladder. TO shew that the Force of the Air's Expan∣sion is so great, that ¼ of a Bladder, being fill'd with it, is able to distend it so powerfully, as to swell it up, tho' a considerable Weight be ty'd to the Bottom of it, to keep it from Rising; we fill'd the fourth Part of a Bladder with Air, and tying the Upper Part of it to the Stopple, it was suspended in our Receiver, with a Weight suspended by a String, which was ty'd to the Bottom of it; where we observ'd, That upon the Exsuction of the Air, the Included Air ex∣panded
it self, and distending the Bladder shortned it so, as to raise 15 pound weight. And another Bladder, having both Ends ty'd to the Stopple, and a Weight suspended at the Middle, of no less than 28 pounds, the expand∣ing Air rais'd that an Inch from the Bottom of the Receiver; but when the Air was again ad∣mitted into the Receiver, it fell down again. EXPERIMENT XI. Bubbles Hermeti∣cally seal'd, broke by the Air inclu∣ded.HAving clos'd a Glass Bubble Hermetically seal'd, in our Receiver, and pump'd out the Air more than usually in such Experiments, about four Minutes after the Pump ceas'd to work, the Bubble unexpectly flew into so many pieces, and with such force, as to be broke against the sides of the Receiver, into a Powder as small as Sand: But this sort of Glass being capable of stretching a little before it breaks, may be a Reason why the Experiment does not always succeed, the Spring of the Air contain'd in it being weaken'd by that Expansion of the Bubble. EXPERIMENT XII. Tryals representing the Force of the Spring of Ʋncom∣press'd Air upon Staple Bodies. The I. TRYAL. HAving cemented a Glass Plate upon the Brass Hoop, mention'd in the Seventh Ex∣periment, and joyn'd the other Orifice of the Hoop
with Cement to the Pump, upon that, a Large Receiver was fix'd: So that the Hoop supply'd the place of a Receiver, and the Receiver kept the Atmosphere from pressing upon it; yet, upon an Exsuction of the Air out of the Hoop, the Spring of that contain'd in the Receiver, broke the Glass Plate into an hundred pieces. The II. TRYAL. AND a Receiver shap'd like a Tumbler, which was capable of containing only a sixth part of what the Large Receiver did, being made use of, the Spring of so small a Quantity of Air, presently shatter'd the Glass Plate in pieces. The III. TRYAL. The Force of the Air's Spring.BUT a Large square Glass capable of hold∣ing a Pound, being made use of instead of the Hoop and the Glass Plate, upon the Exsu∣ction of the Air, it was broke in pieces, both when the Large Receiver was whelm'd over it; and likewise, when a Receiver not much higher than it self was made use of. In which Experiments we observ'd, That the Air making a greater Pressure on the Sides of the Bottles, than the Top, first broke them. And it was further observ'd, in the last Experiments, that the Glasses did not fly in pieces, till some time after the last Exsuction. But lest it should be question'd, Whether the Glasses were broke by the Pressure of the Air in the Receiver, we repeated one of the former
Tryals, with the Brass Hoop, leaving a commu∣nication betwixt the Receiver, and the Cavity of the Hoop, a small Tube, whose Cavity was no wider than the Diameter of a Hair, being lodg'd in Part of the Cement; and upon plying the Pump, we found, that the Air, having a free tho' a small Vent out of the Receiver, did not break the Plate as before. Yet notwithstanding, if the Air be suck'd out of the Hoop too fast, that in the Receiver, not finding quick Vent, will break the Glass Plate, the Pressure of the Air in the Receiver, being too strong to be ballanc'd, by the Resistance of the Air in the Hoop: And for a like Reason a slender Pipe, blown at the Flame of a Candle, up∣on it's first Removal into the Cold, hath it's sides, if thin, squeez'd nearer together, the Pressure of the Outward Air being greater than the Resi∣stance of the Internal. EXPERIMENT XIII. Suction is able to raise Mercury no highier in Pipes than the Weight of the Atmosphere impels it. HAving fitted one End (see Plate 5. Fig. 2.) of a Brass bent Pipe to a Stop-cock,See Plate the 5. Fig. the 2. and the other End to the Top of a Cylindrical Glass Pipe, near 50 Inches long, the lower End of it was immers'd in a Glass of stagnant Mer∣cury: And tho' the Pump was set on work, yet was it not able to raise the Mercury above thirty Inches, by frequent and reiterated Suctions. But Water being substituted instead of Mercury, it rose, at the first Exsuction, to the Top of the
Pipe; and when the Stop-cock was open'd, it would run down through the Exhausting Brass Syphon. From whence it appears, that the Rise of Mercury depends not on Suction, or a Fuga va∣cui, whatever some Learned Men teach; but is rais'd by the weight of the Atmosphere; since a Baroscope consulted at the same time, made it ap∣pear, that the Atmosphere was able to suspend it at such a Height. And as this is an Argument against those that dispute for a Fuga Vacui; so it is against those that hold, that it depends upon the Attraction of a Rarify'd Substance in the Top of the Pipe; for tho' we could rarify the Air further, by con∣tinuing the Action of the Pump; yet the Mer∣cury would not rise one jot higher. ANNOTATION. BUT the Syphon, here mention'd, being else∣where made use of, it may be requisite to Observe: First, The Pipe which bends so much, is made of Metal, to make it less subject to break: Secondly, The End of it, which is joyn'd to the Stop-cock, must be a little wider than any other Part, to admit the Shank of the Stop-cock: Thirdly, The Cement which joyns the Brass Pipe and the Stop-cock, being apt to be loose; I rather make choice of one, to which a Stop-cock is fix'd, together with a Glass Syphon, about 10 Inches high, (see Plate 5. Fig. 2. where the whole is represented). And tho' this Additional Glass makes the Experiment longer, and more te∣dious, yet it is more useful and secure.
EXPERIMENT XIV. The different Heights to which the Liquors may be elevated by Suction, accordingly as their Specifick Gravity varies. See Plate the Fifth, Fig. the Third.FROM Experiments already laid down, it ap∣pearing to what Height Mercury may be rais'd in a Tube; we may guess at what Height Water might be suspended, by considering that it is 14 times lighter than the former. But to be further satisfy'd, I caus'd a small Pipe, which branched it self into two (see Plate the 5th Fig. the 3d) So that a Cylinder being fix'd to each Branch, the Liquors contain'd in the Vessels, in which the lower End of the Pipe was immers'd, would rise proportionably as their Specifick Gra∣vity enabl'd them to resist the Pressure of the At∣mosphere; which being done, and the Pump set on work, Water rose in one of the Cylinders to 42 Inches, and the Mercury in the other Tube not above 3 Inches; so that the Water was fourteen times higher than the Mercury. And to make the Experiment more satisfactory, we let Air into the Receiver, till the Water subsided to fourteen Inches, and at the same time the Mercury was sunk to about an Inch; for in this Experiment it was observ'd, That the Proportion was not so exact as 1 to 14 precisely Specifies, but there∣abouts. From this Experiment, we may draw Argu∣ments, not only against what is taught con∣cerning Nature's Abhorrency of a Vacuum; but it may likewise more nicely inform us of the
Specifick Gravity of Liquors: For having put into one of the Vessels, under the Glass Tubes, Fresh Water, and into the other Salt Water; when the Fresh Water rose to 42 Inches, the Salt Wa∣ter was but 40 Inches high. But having made use of a Brine, made of Sea-salt, melted in the Air, instead of Salt Water, when the Fresh Wa∣ter was rais'd to 42 Inches, the Brine did not exceed seven. I likewise put into one of the Vessels, when this Experiment was over, a Solu∣tion of Pot-ashes, and Common Water into the other, and when the Water rose to 42 Inches, the Solution was rais'd but to 30. EXPERIMENT XV. To what Heights Water and Mercury may be rais'd proportionably to their Specifick Gravities. HAving put Mercury into a Bottle, and pour'd Water into the Bottle upon the Mercury, we immers'd one Pipe so low, as to have it's End in the Mercury; and another Pipe was likewise immers'd in the Water only; which being fix'd by the help of a Cement in the Neck of the Bottle, the whole was convey'd into the Engin, and the Pipes being each divided into Inches, by hard Wax, with which they were mark'd, we observ'd, that the Water rose 15 times as high as the Quick-silver.
EXPERIMENT XVI. The Former Experi∣ment Illu∣strated.HAving put Mercury into a short Tube, and Water into one that was longer; both of them being Hermetically seal'd at one End, we inverted them both, the End of each resting in a Distinct Vessel; which being convey'd into the Receiver, the Water in the Cylinder did not in the least subside, till by Pumping out the Air, the Mercury subsided within 3 Inches of the Bot∣tom, which was sooner than it ought, according to Statical Rules, which we conceiv'd to pro∣ceed from some Aiery Parts, lodg'd in the Pores of the Water, which rising to the Top of the Cy∣linder depress'd it by their Spring; yet the Wa∣ter, when the Mercury subsided to the Height of an Inch, was near as high as before. EXPERIMENT XVII. The greatest Height to which Wa∣ter may be rais'd by Suction, &c.TO try how high Water might be rais'd by Suction in a Pump, I provided a long Tube, about thirty Foot long, being made of several Tin Pipes, closely joyn'd together with Soder, and cover'd over with a Black Cement; which, to keep it from sticking to our Hands, we cover'd with Plaster of Paris: To the upper End of this Pipe, was fix'd a Glass Tube, about three Foot long; and to the Top of that was fix'd another Pipe, consisting of two pieces, which made a right Angle with each other, part of which was Parallel to the Horizon,See Plate the Seventh. Fig. 1. and the other Perpen∣dicular; the lower End being fix'd to the Engin, which was plac'd upon a Flat-roofed House: And
a Vessel fill'd with Water, being put under the End of the Pipe below, the Pump was set on work; and the Water, after a few Exsuctions, was rais'd to the middle of the Glass Tube, emit∣ting several Bubbles, which proceeded from the Air, formerly lodg'd in the Pores of the Water. But the chief Aim of our Experiment, being only to try to what Height the Water could be rais'd, I caus'd the Pump to be nimbly ply'd, till the Water could rise no higher; which be∣ing done, and the Height of the Water measur'd by a String, we found it to be 33 Foot, and about six Inches; Quick-silver in a Baroscope, at the same time, standing at 29 Inches, and about 3 eights of an Inch; so that the Water was near fourteen times as high as the Mercury. In which Experiment, that the upper part of the Tube was sufficiently exhausted, appear'd from several Circumstances; as First, If any Air got in at Crannies in the Pipe, it would rise in Bubbles, easily to be distinguish'd, from those which rose from the Pores of the Water; and tho' the Quantity of those Bubbles was considerable, yet more Air being thrown out by the Pump, than could get in, it must needs be empty enough. But, In this Experiment, it was to be noted, That when first the Water appear'd in the Glass Tube, they would be very numerous, and form a Froth; yet, when the Pumping was further continu'd, they grew less and less: Secondly, we observ'd, that the Water made several Vibrations in it's Rise; which, tho' near a Foot at the first, grew less and less. Thirdly, it may be observ'd, that the Baroscope, consulted before, some time after,
was noted to have risen considerably; so that had the Experiment been repeated again, the Water would have been buoy'd up a good deal higher. Now from this Experiment it appears, how im∣probable it is, what some Men teach concerning the Rise of Water, in Spiral Pipes, up to the Top of high Mountains; since it is evident, that it cannot be drawn higher than 36 Foot, by a Sucking Pump: EXPERIMENT XVIII. About the Bending of a Springy Body, in the Ex∣hausted Receiver. TO be satisfy'd how much the Elasticity of Bodies depends on the Influence of the Air, I fix'd one End of a Whale-bone in a Trencher, and ty'd a Weight to the other, by which it was bent, so low, as almost to touch the Plane under it. This being convey'd into our Receiver, upon the Exhausting of the Recei∣ver, I could not perceive any Alteration. EXPERIMENT XIX. Concerning the making of Mercurial Gauges, where∣by to estimate how much the Receiver is ex∣hausted. SEveral Gauges have been made use of to dis∣cover, when the Receiver is well exhaust∣ed, as by suspending a Bladder, which is al∣most empty of Air, or by inverting a small
Tube in which Spirit of Wine was contain'd; but the former taking up too much Room in the Receiver, and the latter not discovering whether the Receiver was exhausted, or not, till the Air contain'd was too much Rarefi'd, for any Considerable Observations; Therefore, to enable me to make more Observations in the seve∣ral Degrees of the Receiver's Exsuction, I took a slender Pipe of Glass, about 10 Inches long, and as small as a Goose Quill, and having melted it at a flame, so as to soften it, and make it apt to be bent; I caus'd it to be put into the Form represented by (Plate 5. Fig. 4.) so that about an Inch of the lower Leg being fill'd with Air,See Plate 5 Fig. 4. and the rest of that, as well as the greatest Part of the short one, being fill'd with Quicksilver, the Ex∣pansion of that Air might easily be perceiv'd, by pasting a Piece of Paper upon that Tube, divided into several exact Parts; for as the Re∣ceiver is more or less expanded, the Air in the longer Leg of the Gage, will be extended to some of those Marks; and if when the Air is so expanded, the Experimenter desires to know, at each of those Marks, how much the Receiver is exhausted, it will appear by letting in as much Water as the Capacity of the Receiver is able at that time to hold; so that if when the Air is at any determinate Mark, the Water be let in, and it appears, that the Air in the Receiver was so far Evacuated, by observing how much Water will be admitted, when the Air is expan∣ded to each Mark; the Gage, for the future, will not only inform us, how much the Air is exhausted; but by the help of the small Gage, a larger may be made, by putting both into an
exhausted Receiver at once, for by observing, when the Air is expanded to each Mark in the little one, how far it is expanded in the large one; we may learn, how much the Receiver is exhausted, for the future, by taking notice of the Expansion of the Air in the Leg of that lar∣ger Gage. And, This Gage is much more useful than some o∣thers: First, because the Mercury being a heavy Body, the Air, by expanding it self, is less apt to make it run over, or to make it's way in the Form of Bubbles through the Mercurial Cy∣linder, as it would if other Fluids were made use of instead of it. Secondly, The longer Leg of the Gage is to be mark'd, by sticking Wax or Knobs of Glass to the Pipe, every Tenth being of a different Colour from the rest, at equal Distances from each other, which Divisions will be less subject to be rubb'd off than Papers, which are also subject, in some Experiments, to be wet. Thirdly, The Leg of the Syphon in which the Air is included, may be either seal'd up, be∣fore it is divided by the aforemention'd Marks, or after, by drawing out the End of the Tube into a small Apex; and when about an Inch of the Pipe is fill'd with Air, it may be seal'd up by blowing a Lamp Horizontally upon the Apex. Fourthly, Where very Nice Observations are to be made, and the Receiver admits of a lon∣ger Gage, instead of Mercury we may make use of a Tincture of Roses, or of Spirit of Wine with Cocheneel; in which, the Exsuction of the Air will be more nicely represented. Fifthly, We may vary the Mercurial Gage, by ordering the shorter Leg, so that it may have a Bubble
about half an Inch Diameter, at an Inch distance from the Basis of that Leg, which Bubble must have a Pipe upon the upper Part of it to give way to the Air; which Bubble hath this Ad∣vantage above the other, that less Air may be contain'd in the Top of the longer Leg; since the Mercury not being capable of being rais'd so high, the Rarefaction of the included Air will be render'd more apt to be estimated by the Eye. Sixthly, This Gage is much more useful than those mention'd by other Authors, because it gives us an Account of the several Degrees of the Air's Rarefaction. EXPERIMENT XX. An easie way to make the Pressure of the Air sensi∣ble to the Touch. The Pres∣sure of the Air sensible to the Touch.THE Pressure of the Air will be made sen∣sible to the Touch, if a Tapering Tube of Brass, whose Cavity at one end is an Inch, and the other two Inches and an half wide, be fix'd to the Pump instead of a Receiver; for if when the larger Orifice is Cemented on the Pump, one presses the Palm of ones Hand upon the smaller Orifice, and the Pump be set on Work, it will be a difficult Matter to take off ones Hand, and not a little painful; but the Pressure of the Incumbent Atmosphere will have a much more sensible Effect, if the larger Orifice be upwards instead of the smaller.
EXPERIMENT XXI, About the subsiding of Mercury in the Tube of the Torrecellian Experiment, to the Level with the Superficies of the Stagnant Mercury. THE lower Part of the Ball of a Bolt-head being circularly cut off, we made use of it for a Receiver, including a Baroscope in it, and upon the first Exsuction, the Mercury subsided from 29 Inches to 9 or 10, and by three Exsu∣ctions more, would be brought to a Level with the Stagnant Mercury, but would rise to it's first Station again, as the Air was admitted in flower or faster. In which Experiment it is to be noted; First, that upon the first Exsuction, the Mercury was brought within an Inch of the Bottom, and con∣tinu'd several successive Vibrations before it set∣led at 10 Inches high. Secondly. If instead of drawing any out, Air be forced into the Recei∣ver, it will raise the Mercury higher than it's former Station: Thirdly, The Receiver was so far exhausted, as to make the Mercury subside to a Level.
EXPERIMENT XXII. In Tubes open at both Ends, when Nature's Abhor∣rency of a Vacuum cannot be pretended, the Weight of Water will impell Quicksilver no higher in slender than in larger Pipes. The suspen∣sion of Quicksilver equal in small and wide Pipes.TO prove that the Weight of the Atmos∣phere, may buoy up Mercury equall in large as in smaller Tubes, I shall add the following Tryals. The I. TRYAL. Having put as much Mercury into a Glass Tube, about two Foot and a half long, as reach'd 3 or 4 Fingers, the one End being seal∣ed Hermetically; we hung two Tubes by Strings to the Top of the former, so that the lower Ends of them were immers'd in the Mercury; which being done, we pour'd Water upon the Mercury, and observ'd the Mercury to be equally rais'd in the great Pipe, as in the little one, and the Water being suck'd out, it proportionably subsided in each. The II. TRIAL. Having pour'd a Convenient Quantity of Quicksilver into a Tube of Glass, near a Foot long, and filled two Pipes of Mercury of an un∣equal Bore, the one End of each being Hermetically seal'd, we immers'd them in the large Tube, contriving to open the lower Orifice, when be∣low
the Stagnant Mercury; and I observ'd, that they not only both of them subsided to an e∣qual Station; but Water being pour'd upon the Stagnant Mercury, the Weight of it buoy'd them up both alike in the Tube, and the Water be∣ing successively suck'd out, and put in again, the the Mercury in the Tube, proportionably fell and rose equally in both; no difference proceeding from the Wideness of their Diameters, in the Height of the Mercurial Cylinders. EXPERIMENT XXIII. At what Height Mercury Amalgamated with Tin, as well as pure Mercury, will be suspended. HAVING fill'd a Glass Tube with Mercu∣ry Amalgamated with Tin, and inverted it, it did not fall below 31 Inches. In trying this Experiment, the following Particulars are to be noted: First, That if the Amalgama be too thick, it will be apt to stick to the Tube, and will likewise hinder several Aerial Corpuscles from flying away. Secondly, From hence it may be observ'd, that as the Aequilibrium of Mercury, and the Atmosphere varies; so does it's Ascent in such Tubes. Thirdly, It would not be amiss here to consider, whether these two Metals penetrate each others Dimensions, as I have observ'd Copper and Tin to do; and by forming a new Metalline Substance to render the Composition heavier than the Weight of the two single Ingredients.
EXPERIMENT XXIV. A Method of making Barometers, which may be carried to distant Countries. TO make a Portable Barometer, we took a Cylinder about 4 or 5 Foot long, and ha∣ving bent one End at the Flame of a Lamp, so as to make the shorter Leg about a fourth Part as long as the other, sealing up the End of the longer Leg, we injected Mercury into the short∣er Leg by a Tunnel, till it was rais'd about 3 Inches in both Legs; which being done, and the Orifice of the shorter Leg being stopp'd with the Finger, we inclin'd the longer Leg, and so by successively filling the short Leg, and inclining it so as to make it run into the longer, we fill'd the longer Leg quite full of Mercury, and by incli∣ning it several times afterward, and permitting the Bubble of Air, which usually lies at the Top of the seal'd Head, to run through the Mercu∣rial Cylinder backwards and forwards, we freed it from those Bubbles, which are usually in it's Pores. But besides this way of filling the Pipe, we have, with less Trouble, done it by making use of a Tunnel; which, when the Pipe is a lit∣tle inclin'd, reaching a little above the Flexure of the Syphon, will fill the Tube without much trouble: And the Pipe thus fill'd with Mercury may, by often erecting of it, and shaking the Pipe so erected, be freed from those Aery Particles which commonly lodge in the Pores of the Mercury.
See the whole Baro∣meter, Plat. 7. Fig. ig. 2.The Barometer being thus order'd, we con∣triv'd a Frame to carry it in, which was made of a Piece of Wood, in which a Gutter was cut for the Pipe to lie in; the lower End of the Frame being likewise so contriv'd, as to contain the short Leg of this Tube: The Pipe being lodg'd in this Gutter, we fix'd a Cover to one side of the Frame, with little Highes; the o∣ther, when occasion requir'd, being fastned with Hasps. And because the Motion the Mercury would be put into, would be apt to break the Pipe, were there too much Liberty given it to move in, or were there any Interstices betwixt the Pipe, and the Gutter it is lodg'd in; we took Care to lay Cotton both betwixt the Pipe and the Concave of the Frame, and betwixt the Co∣ver and it; and that the empty Space which is usually above the Surface of the Mercury in Ba∣rometers, might not be prejudicial, we took Care to invert the Tube, and to fill the remaining Space unpossess'd with Mercury either with an Addition of Mercury or with Water, sealing up the Orifice of the shorter Tube Hermetically, till it came to be us'd again; and then, the Super∣flous Mercury, may be taken away by immer∣sing a small Pipe in it; which, if the upper O∣rifice be stopp'd with ones Finger, will take a∣way so much as the Cavity of the immers'd Tube had receiv'd into it: But if Water be made use of, instead of Mercury, it may be lick'd up with a Spunge. And if by shaking of this Barome∣ter in long Journeys any Particles should get out of the short Leg into the larger, by successively inverting the Tube, and permitting the Bubble
of Air to pass backwards and forwards, the Mercury in the long Tube may easily be freed from Bubbles. Of what Use this Barometer may be, in dis∣covering the Weight of the Atmosphere in long Journeys, both at Sea and at Land, I shall leave to others to consider; only I shall annex this Ad∣vertisement, that sometime after I made this Ba∣rometer, having carri'd it about 33 Miles I ob∣serv'd, that it did not rise by ¼ of an Inch as high as it did before; but whether it might be impu∣ted to the narrowness of the Pipe, or any other Accident, I cannot yet determine. EXPERIMENT XXV. What Height the Mercury in Barometers will be suspended at, at the Top of Hills. Some Obser∣vations of the Height of Mountains, especially, the Pic of Teneriff. HAVING observ'd the Height at which Mercury was suspended at the Bottom of a Hill, and compar'd it with a Barometer made the ordinary ways; it was observ'd, that the Height it was suspended at, at the Top of the Hill, was ¼ part of an Inch below the Mark it reach'd at the Latter; and as the Barometer was brought lower, the Mercury in the Pipe rose higher and higher: But if such Observations could be made at the Top and Bottom of the Mountain Teneriff, the Experiment would afford further Proof of our Hypothesis concerning the Air's Spring and Weight.
An Appendix about the Height of Mountains. The Height of Moun∣tains.NOtwithstanding some Ingenious Men have taught, that the Height of the Atmosphere is of stupendious, and others confine it to narrower Dimensions; yet, I shall add some Observations, which may confirm what we have taught concerning it; and tho', as Ricciolus takes notice, the Jesuit Rector Melensius says, that of all the Clouds, whose Height he measur'd, they did not exceed 5000 Paces, yet if we allow Me∣teors and Comets to arise from Terrene Exha∣lations, and that the Height of Clouds varies according to the different Degrees of the Air's Rarefaction, it will follow, that the Height of most of them exceeds what Carden and Kepler allow. But to proceed to what I have to relate con∣cerning the Height of Mountains; I shall re∣late, what I have learn'd by Information. And first, the Ingenious Mr. Sydenham told me, that the Mountain Teneriff is so high, that the Top of it may be seen 60 Leagues off, and that he himself had discover'd it at 40 Leagues distance like a blew Pyramid above the Clouds; and he likewise told me, that the Island of Madera might be seen from it, tho' 70 Leagues distant; and that the Great Canary seem'd so near it, that one would think it possible to leap down upon it: And indeed, Riciolus observes, that it might be seen 4 Degrees distance; and Snellius also al∣lows the Height of it to be Ten Miles; tho' I believe, that the way he takes to calculate the Height of it, may be none of the truest; he
likewise by Refraction, judging the Mountain Caucasus to be 51 Bolonian Miles high, which is not believ'd probable; since the Mountain Teneriff hath been observ'd, by one who took it's Height in a Ship at Sea, not to be above 7 Miles high in a Perpendicular Line, yet it is esteem'd the highest Mountain in the World; tho' if what Aristotle and others report of Mount Caucasus, be true, there may be others much higher than those. For tho', if measur'd from the Foot, or Level of that piece of Ground, which they stand on, they may be lower, yet considering that the Ground they stand on, may be much more protuberant, from the Level Superficies of the whole Globe, they may be much higher upon that Account. EXPERIMENT XXVI. The Pressure of the Atmosphere may be able to keep up the Mercury in the Torrecellian Experiment, tho' the Air presses upon it, at a very small Orifice. IT being observ'd by several Learned Men, That Mercury is suspended at an equal height in a close Room, as in the open Atmosphere; to prove, that the Air having a Communication with the External, even at small Crannies, may have an equal Force, as if the Mercurial Cylin∣der was immediately subject to the whole Atmo∣sphere; I shall add, That if the Tube, just before mention'd, for a Portable Barometer, be so drawn out at the Flame of a Lamp, that the Orifice is but about a tenth Part as big as before, the Mer∣cury will be suspended at the usual Height; and the like will succeed, if instead of drawing the
End of the Pipe out so, a Cork be put into the End of the Tube, leaving but a small part of the Orifice open to the Outward Air. EXPERIMENT XXVII. An Oblique Pressure of the Atmosphere may be suffi∣cient to keep up the Mercury at the usual Height, in the Torrecellain Experiment, and the Spring of a small quantity of Air may do the same. IF the the Shorter Leg of a Syphon,See Plate the 7th. Fig. the 3d. being bent, as represented by Fig. 3d. Plate the VIIth the Mercury be suspended at it's usual Height, it ap∣pears that the Pressure of the Atmosphere hath as strong Effects, if the End of the Tube, through which it is convey'd, only admits of the Pressure of the Air, which it receives downwards. But if instead of being so bent,See Plate the 7th. Fig. the 4th. the End of the Shorter Leg be Hermetically seal'd, as represent∣ed Fig. IV. Plate the VII. the Mercury is sustain'd at it's usual Height, it will appear, that the Spring of a small quantity of Air is able to bear up a Cy∣linder of Mercury. N. B. If the Tube thus Hermetically seal'd, be shaken, the Mercury will form some Vibrations upon the Included Air; the Spring of it being compressed, and expanded again successively for a while. But the former of these Tryals may be made in a Pipe, conveniently shapen before the Longer Leg is fill'd with Mercury, and the latter by stop∣ping the Orifice with a Cork, and Close Cement, which may be pierc'd with a Wire, when this is
us'd as a Baroscope; which way may be taken with a Travelling Baroscope. EXPERIMENT XXVIII. A Baro∣scope of use but at some times.TO shew that the Suspension of Mercury in a Glass Tube, less than 30 Inches long, does not proceed from a Fuga Vacui, I caus'd one to be Hermetically seal'd at one End, the Length of it being about two Foot and a half; and fill'd it with Mercury, a small quantity of Water be∣ing left upon it; and when the Atmosphere was much lighter, I found that the Mercury subsi∣ded, and that there appear'd a small Bubble of Air in the Water, which being no bigger than a Pin's Head, was so far compress'd before, as not to appear. EXPERIMENT XXIX. The Ascension of Liquors in very slender Pipes, in an Exhausted Receiver. HAving tinged Spirit of Wine with Cocheneel, which bubbled in the Exhausted Receiver, for some time, several slender Pipes being put into it, it rose highest in those whose Bore was narrowest; but when the Air was let in again, the Liquor in both subsided to a Level: But two Pipes of different Bores, being let down into that Liquor a second time, tho' it answer'd the for∣mer Tryals in the Ascent; yet, the Surface in the slenderer Pipe, remain'd something above the other, when the Air was let in again. But what was more Remarkable, was, that tho' the
Liquor in the Vessel, in this Tryal, emitted no Bubbles, yet that in the Ends of the Tubes did; which were suppos'd to be caus'd by the sides of the Glass, they were contain'd in. EXPERIMENT XXX. When the Pressure of the External Air is taken off, it is very easy to draw up the Sucker of a Syringe, tho' the Hole at which the Water should succeed, be stopp'd. FOR a further Illustration of the Doctrin of the Spring and Weight of the Air, we made the following Tryals. The I. TRYAL. We took a Syringe of Brass (see Plate 8th. Fig. 1st.) whose Barrel was about six Inches long,See Plate the 8th. Fig. 1st. and it's Diameter about one Inch ⅜, and having fitted the Sucker to the Barrel of the Syringe, we stopp'd the lower Orifice of the Syringe, and ty'd a good Weight to it; which being done, we let it down into the Receiver, ty∣ing a String to the Sucker, and another End of that String to the Turning-Key in the Cover of the Receiver; where we observ'd, That tho' when the Receiver was exhausted, we could, by turning the Key, draw up the Sucker easily; yet, when the Air was admitted into the Receiver again, it could not be lifted up with a less Force, than what was sufficient to overpower the Pres∣sure of the Atmosphere, or the Air contain'd in Receiver; but the Air being once let in, when the Sucker was rais'd to the Top of the Barrel, the Pressure of it was so violent, as, by forcing
the Sucker down into the Barrel of the Syringe, to break the String, which was ty'd to the Turn∣ing-Key. The II. TRYAL. Being a Variation of the former. We took the former Syringe, and having ty'd a Weight, which weigh'd about two Pound and two Ounces, to the Sucker, we suspended it in our Receiver, the Orifice of the Barrel being first stopp'd with a Cork; and we observ'd, that after a few Exsuctions, the Weight drew down the Bar∣rel of the Syringe; and when the Air was again let in, the Pressure of it rais'd it up much faster than it fell. But in this Experiment, it is to be noted, that if Air gets into the Barrel of the Sucker, whilst it is drawn down, it will not be rais'd quite so high again as before. And likewise, the Reason why it is requisite, that so large a Weight should be ty'd to draw it down, is because it must not only overpower the Pressure of the Air, but also the Straitness which requires a Force to make the Sucker move in the Barrel. Secondly, it is observ'd, that as the Weight did not overpower the Pressure of the Air, till a good deal was exhausted; so neither did it rise again, till a sufficient Quantity of Air was let in again.
EXPERIMENT XXXI. About the opening of a Syringe, whose Pipe was stopp'd in the exhausted Receiver, and by the help of it, making the Pressure of the Air lift up a conside∣rable Weight. HAving clos'd up the Hole at the Bottom of the Syringe,See Plate 8th. Fig. 2d. with good Cement, we ty'd a hollow piece of Iron to the Barrel, into which several Weights being put, we ty'd the Rammer to the Turn-Key; and tho', when the Receiver was exhausted, we could draw up the Rammer without the Syringe; yet, upon a Reingress of Air, the Syringe and the Weights would be rais'd swiftly up: So that so small a Cylinder of Air as equalled the Barrel of the Pipe, was able to lift up the Weight of sixteen Pounds. EXPERIMENT XXXII. The Sticking of Cupping Glasses depends on the Pressure of the Air. TO make it evident,See Plate 8th. Fig. 3d. that the Sticking of Cup∣ping Glasses, and the Pain which they cause, proceeds from the Pressure of the Air, we provided a Receiver, and a Large Glass, such as Plate the 8th. Fig. 3d. delineates; I caus'd the Cupping Glass to be apply'd to a Young Man's Hand; which being done, and his Hand apply'd to the Top of the Receiver, in∣stead of a Cover, the Lower Orifice of the Re∣ceiver, having first been cemented on the Pump,
upon the first Exsuction of the Air, the Cupping Glass fell off his Hand, for want of the Pressure of the External Air, to press against it. EXPERIMENT XXXIII. TO illustrate the former Experiment, we took a Brass Hoop, mention'd in the Fifth Ex∣periment, and stretching a Bladder upon the up∣per Orifice of it, as upon the Head of a Drum, we ty'd it up in the Middle of the lower Orifice,See Plate the 8th. Fig 4. and placing it upon a piece of Wood, which had a hole in the Middle for the Neck of the Bladder to hang through, we made several holes on the Lower Side of that Bladder; which being done, we suspended a Blind-head at the Turn-Key of our Receiver, and when the Receiver was exhausted, we let it down to the Bladder, and found, that when the Air was again admitted into the Re∣ceiver, the Pressure of it so press'd upon the Bladder, as to fix it fast to the Blind-head. But repeating the Experiment, and exhausting the Receiver more perfectly, we took out the Bladder thus fix'd to the Blind-head, and having ty'd the Glass to the Hook of a good Statera, and likewise a large Scale to the Neck of the Bladder, and put in Weights into it, till they amounted to 35 Pound weight; then the Weight, over∣poising the Pressure of the External Air, the Bladder fell off: But in this Experiment it was observ'd,See Plate the 8th. Fig. the 5th. that as the Weights in the Scales grew heavier and heavier, the Bladder seem'd to be suck'd more and more into the Receiver.
EXPERIMENT XXXIV. Bellows whose Nose is very well stopp'd, will open of their own accord, when the Pressure of the Exter∣nal Air is taken off. AS an Argument of the great Force of the Air's Weight, it is observ'd, that when the Nose of a Pair of Bellows is stopp'd, it re∣quires a Force able to overpower the Pressure of so large a Pillar of Air, as lies upon them, to open them; but when that Weight of the Atmosphere is taken off, the Spring of the Included Air is so strong, as to be able to raise and expand the Bellows of it's own accord. To make this Evident,See Plate the 8th. Fig. the 6th. we caus'd a Pair of Bellows to be made, whose Boards were circu∣lar, and near 6 Inches Diameter, without a Valve, the Nose of them being about an Inch long, and the Leather limber: Which Bellows, when full of Air, seem'd to be a Cylinder of about 18 Inches high. The Nose of these Bellows being stopp'd, when they were empty'd of Air, we convey'd them into our Receiver, and observ'd, that when the Air was exhausted out of the Receiver, the Air con∣tain'd in the Folds of the Bellows, and betwixt the two Bases lifted up the Higher a considerable Height.
EXPERIMENT XXXV. An Attempt to examin the Motions and Sensibility of the Cartesian Materia Subtilis, or the Aether, with a Pair of Bellows, which were made of a Bladder, in the exhausted Receiver. IN order to try, whether there be any finer Substance than Air, in the exhausted Recei∣ver, we contriv'd to make a Pair of Bellows of a Bladder, whose Bases were Paste-board,See Fig. the 7th. Plate the 8th. the up∣per being cover'd with a Plate of Pewter, to which was fix'd a Leaden weight to press it down: Besides, over against the Nose of the Bel∣lows, in which the Neck of the Bladder ter∣minated, it was contriv'd, that the End of a Feather was fix'd so, that if any Subtle Matter were forc'd out of the Bellows, it should disco∣ver it self by moving that Feather. The Bellows being thus provided, and the Pillars, to which the Feather is fastened, being joyn'd to the upper Basis of the Bellows, with Cement, we fix'd a Weight to the Lower Basis, and convey'd it into the Receiver;See Fig. the Eighth. where we observ'd, upon the exhausting of the Receiver, that the Air in the Bellows rais'd up the upper Basis, together with it's Weight; and the Air rising out at the Vent, manifestly mov'd the Fea∣ther: But when the Receiver was quite ex∣hausted, and the Weight upon the Upper Basis depress'd it violently, we could not perceive that the Feather was in the least mov'd, and the like was observ'd upon repeating the Experi∣ment.
EXPERIMENT XXXVI. The great and seeming Spontaneous Ascent of Water, in a Pipe filled with a Compact Body, whose Par∣ticles are thought incapable of imbibing it. WE took a slender Pipe, and having ty'd a Linen-cloth to the Iower Orifice, we fill'd it with Minium; and immerging it in Water in a Wide-mouth'd Glass about an Inch, the Water ascended about 30 Inches; and the Experiment being again repeated in another, it rose 40 Inches. In which kind of Experiments, the following Particulars were to be observ'd: First, That other Powders being made use of instead of this, the Experiment did not succeed so well; nor was the Success much better, when we made use of Ink instead of Water. Secondly, Our Experiment succeeded the bet∣ter, the finer and closer the Minium was: But if the Pipe be too small, the Event will not always be successful. Thirdly, We observ'd, That the Water ascends not to it's utmost, under 30 Hours, and some∣times longer. Fourthly, From hence it appears, That the Wa∣ter in our Tube rose, without any swelling of the sides of the Tube, which some Learn'd Men a∣scribe the Cause of Water's Rising in Filtres to. Fifthly, From hence it may be urg'd, as pro∣bable, That the Sap in Trees may rise after the like manner, being promoted by Heat, and a due Texture of Parts.
EXPERIMENT XXXVII. Of the seeming spontaneous Ascent of Salts, along the sides of Glasses, with a Conjecture at the Cause of it. I Have several times observ'd, that the watery Part of a Solution of Sea-Salt or Vitriol, be∣ing evaporated, the coagulated Salts would creep up the sides of wide-mouth'd Glasses, in which the Solution was contain'd; and not only so, but if the Experiment were longer continu'd, they would rise over the sides of the Glass, and cover the external Superficies with a Crust of Salt. As for the Cause of so strange a Phaenomenon, tho' I will not be positive in it; yet, it may not improbably depend on the like Cause, as the As∣cent of Water in the Tube, mention'd in the foregoing Experiment. For we may observe, that the Edges of Water are not only above the Superficies of the rest of the Water; but Sea-Salt as well as several others, chrystallize at the Top of the Liquor they swim in, and near the sides of the Glass, their Coa∣gulation being promoted by the Coldness of it; which Salts, when once the sides of the Glass is beset with them, the Water may rise to the Top, for the same Reason that it does in the slender Pipe before mention'd, and Salts carri'd up to the Top of those, and coagulating there, still lay a further Bottom for their Ascent; and so successively, till they rise to the Top of the Vi∣ol: And that there are Passages betwixt these sa∣line Parts, for the Water to ascend through, ap∣pears; since they may be broke off in Flakes,
separate from each other: And if it should be thought, that the Water in such an Ascent, would dissolve the Salt; it may be answer'd, that the Water being so much impregnated with Salt already, can imbibe no more; and conse∣quently, for that Reason, when it runs down the outsides of the Vessels, coagulates by the way, being too thick and full of Salts to conti∣nue long fluid. EXPERIMENT XXXVIII. An Attempt to measure the Gravity of Cylinders of the Atmosphere, so that it may be known and express'd by common Weights. The Weight of a Pillar of Air of a determi∣nate size.BEING desirous to know what was the Weight of an Atmospherical Cylinder of Air, of a determinate Diameter, I caus'd a Pipe to be made of Brass, whose Diameter was an Inch, and it's Length three; one End of which being clos'd up with a Plate of Brass, I counter∣pois'd it in a nice pair of Scales; and found, that it was able to contain about 137 Drachms 45 Grains of Mercury; which being multiply'd by Tens, a Cylinder of Mercury of 30 Inches, and consequently an Atmospherical Cylinder able to counterpoise it, must amount to 12 Ounces and about 6 Drachms. And by weighing Wa∣ter in this Tube, before the Mercury was put into it, the Water weighing 10 Drachms 15 Grains, the Proportion of Water to Mercury seem'd as 13 18/41 to 1. But in estimating the Weight of a Cylindri∣cal Pillar of Air, it may be here requisite to advertise, that I made use of a Brass Cylinder, because the Cavities of a Glass Tube are unfit
for such an Experiment; since it is a hard thing to know, whether the Bore of such Tubes be e∣qual throughout their Diameter. The Weight of a Cylinder of Mercury be∣ing thus found, it will not be very difficult to know, the Weight of a Cylinder of a different Diameter, by the Assistance of the Doctrin of Proportions and the 14th Proposition of the 12th Book of Euclids Elements. For since according to that, Cylinders of equal Bases, are to one another as to their Heights; and since, by the second Proposition of the same Element, such Circles as the Bases of Cylinders, are to one another as the Squares of their Diameters; and since Mercurial Cylinders will bear the same Proportion in Weights as they do in Bulk; The Rule will be, That as the Square of the Diame∣ter of the Standard Cylinder, is to the Square of the Diameter of the Cylinder propos'd, so will the Bulk of the former be to that of the latter; and the Weight of that to the Weight of this; so that the Square of one Inch being 1, and the Square of 2 being four, the Weight of the lat∣ter will be four times the Weight of the for∣mer. EXPERIMENT XXXIX. The Attractive Virtue of a Load-Stone in the Ex∣hausted Receiver. TO try how far the Account given of the Attraction of a Load-Stone, depended on what some Modern Philosophers teach, viz. That the Effluvia of a Load-Stone pressing away the Air betwixt the Body attracted, that Air helps the Attraction, by pressing against the op∣site
side of the Stone; We plac'd a vigorous Load-Stone in our Receiver, having adapted a Cap of Steel to it, to the lower side of which, a Scale with 6 Ounces of Troy Weight was fix'd, which being all the Load-Stone, besides the Steel and the Scale was able to keep up (all which be∣ing suspended at a Button, which was on purpose on the inside of the Cover of the Receiver) we observ'd, that tho' the Receiver was exhausted as much again as in common Experiments; yet, the Load-Stone sustain'd it's Weight almost as firmly as before the Pump was ply'd; and the Reason why it was not altogether, was, the thinness of the Medium; since the Weight sus∣pended must be heavier, when the Air which was nearer proportion'd to their Weight was exhausted. FINIS. ADVERTISEMENT. THE Number of Sheets contain'd in this Volume, amounting to what the Booksel∣lers think fit to answer the Price put upon it; And also, to make the succeeding Volume Pro∣portionable, the next Volume begins with a Con∣tinuation of what our Author further delivers concerning the Air.
The TABLE. A. ACCIDENTS no distinct Entities Pag. 3. Secondary Affections of Matter, what Pag. 8. The Effects of Natural Agents, how diversi∣fy'd Pag. 10,21. Considerations in order to the Doctrin of Altera∣tion Pag. 13, 14. Alteration what Pag. 15, 16. Products of Art the Effects of Nature Pag. 59. An Acid may be turned into an Alkaly Pag. 90. The Air's Spring and Weight proved Pag. 166, 167, 311, 317. from thence to the End of this Volume. Objections, raised by Franciscus Linus, answered Pag. 393. The Actions of some Bodies depend on the Catholick Laws of the Ʋniverse 241. and the Established Laws of Nature Pag. 242. The Temper of the Air in Subterraneal Groves Pag. 256. The Air inclosed in the Receiver acts by Virtue of it's Spring Pag. 315. What Weight is requisite to draw the Sucker down Ibid. The Air's Expansion in a Lamb's Bladder Pag. 317.
—The Force of it Pag. 318, 371, 451. —It's Expansion measured Pag. 319, 320, 409. Whether Air be a Primogeneal Body Pag. 341. The Air's Gravity and Expansion under Water Pag. 351. The weight of the Atmosphere considered Pag. 360. Why Air is indisposed to pass through Pores, which Water will Pag. 370. Proportion betwixt the weight of the Air and Wa∣ter Pag. 372. —beewixt it and Mercury Pag. 374. The Height of the Atmosphere considered Pag. 372. The Tunicular Hypothesis examined Pag. 398. A Table of the Air's Condensation Pag. 411. —of it's Rarefaction Pag. 413. Why Air condensed by Cold does not raise Mercury equally, as when condensed by Pressure Pag. 415. Why Animals die in the Exhausted Receiver Pag. 430. The Air's Pressure on Bodies contained in it Pag. 431. The weight of a Pillar of Air of a Determinate Size Pag. 480. The Air's Pressure sensible to the Touch Pag. 461. B. A Bitter Substance may become sower Pag. 96. The Expansive Force of steeped Beans Pag. 243, 244. A Bubble broke in the exhausted Receiver Pag. 450. A Bladder broke by the Air's Expansion Pag. 449. A Portable Barometer Pag. 465 C. Colours no Inherent Qualities Pag. 9. Considerations in order to the Doctrin of Corruption Pag. 13, 14.
Corruption what Pag. 15. Similar Colours no Arguments of Similar Substan∣ces adequately Pag. 24, 25. The Chymists Doctrin refuted Pag. 100, 112. Motion in the Parts of Consistent Bodies Pag. 144. Colours exhibited by Reflection Pag. 151, 153. Camphire dissolved in Oyl of Vitriol Pag. 188. A Concrete the Result of a Mixture of Spirit of Wine, and a Solution of Coral Pag. 196, 197. The different Temper of Climates Pag. 252. Observations concerning Coral Pag. 272. Of the Flame of a Candle in the Exhausted Recei∣ver Pag. 323. Concerning Live Coals, &c. Ibid. Corrosives, their Effects Pag. 390. Cupping Glasses, how they operate Pag. 474. D. Motion in the Parts of Diamonds Pag. 205, 206. E. Eggs how Hatched Pag. 73. A strange sort of Earth Pag. 196. The Temperature of the Regions of the Earth Pag. 256. —of the First Pag. 257. —of the Second Pag. 259. —of the Third Pag. 261. Why the Middle Region is coldest Pag. 259. The Pneumatick Engin described Pag. 307. —The Method of managing it Pag. 310. Elasticity explained Pag. 418. The Pneumatick Engin made use of in the First con∣tinuation described Pag. 435.
F. Forms what Pag. 11. —Their Effects whence Pag. 12. The Doctrin of Substantial Forms considered Pag. 29. Forms not reduced out of the Power of Matter Pag. 30. The Aristotelian Doctrin of Forms contrary to Rea∣son Pag. 31. Their Arguments considered Pag. 32, 33. Substantial Forms no Causes of Adhesion Pag. 34, 35. A Compound Form what Pag. 36, 41. The Doctrin of Subordinate Forms considered Pag. 37. Subordinate Forms proved. Pag. 38. A Compound Form what Pag. 39. Specifick Forms considered Pag. 40. , hard to be distinguished amongst the Forms of Natural Bodies Pag. 41, 50. How distinguished Pag. 51, 55. Subordinate Forms act, how Pag. 42, 43. Subordinate Forms in Inanimate Bodies Pag. 49, 52. A Superadded Form it's Effects Pag. 53. Concurrent and Subordinate Forms how distin∣guished Pag. 56. Subordinate Forms not necessary to Discriminate Bodies Pag. 67. Fluidity, it's Definition Pag. 115. What is requisite to render Bodies Fluid Pag. 116, 119, 120, 121, 193, 434. All Bodies not equally inclined to Fluidity Pag. 117, 118. What the Motion of the Parts of Fluids depends on Pag. 124. The Superficial Figures of Fluids Pag. 142. —of a Nitrous Liquor Pag. 146. —of Water Ibid.
—of Oyl of Turpentine Pag. 147, 151. —of a Solution of Tartar Ibid. —of Oyl of Cloves Ibid. —of Quick-silver Pag. 148. —of a Nitrous Liquor, and Spirit of Wine Pag. 150. —of Oyl of Aniseeds Pag. 153. —of Water included in Oyl Pag. 155. —of Oyl of Turpentine upon Cloves Ibid. —of Oyl of Aniseeds coagulated Pag. 155. —of several other Mixtures Pag. 156, 157. A Fluid turned Solid Pag. 180. Fluids not divisible into Fluid Parts, as Quantity in∣to Quantity Pag. 183. Subterraneal Fires, their Effects Pag. 262. Filtration, it's Cause Pag. 365. G. Considerations in order to the Doctrin of Genera∣tion Pag. 13, 14. Generation what Pag. 15. Gun-powder it's Ingredients Pag. 67 Phaenomena afforded by a Gummy Substance, in Vacuo Boyliano Pag. 154. Solidity of Glass depends on a Juxta-position of Parts Pag. 162. The Parts of Glass in Motion Pag. 207, 208, 209. What Figured Glasses best resist the Pressure of the Air Pag. 320, 321. Gun-powder exploded in Vacuo Boyliano, &c. Pag. 328. Glass Plates broke in the Exhausted Receiver Pag. 448. Flat Glasses broke in the Exhausted Receiver Pag. 447.
H. Heat no Inherent Quality Pag. 9. Heat what Ibid. Humidity a Relative Quality Pag. 125. Heat unusual in Mines whence Pag. 263. Heat produced by Attrition Pag. 445. I. Juxta-position of Parts not the only cause of Cohe∣sion Pag. 160. Juxta-position of Parts promoted by the Air's Spring Pag. 161. —proved by the Cohesion of Polish'd Glasses Pag. 163. —by the Cohesion of Polished Marbles Pag. 164, 165, 166. The Interposition of Minute Parts may turn a Li∣quor into a Solid Pag. 178. Observations of Indurated Bodies. Pag. 191. —of the Bone of a Deer's Hart Pag. 192. The Effects of a Bar of Iron held to a Mariner's Com∣pass, in a Perpendicular posture Pag. 202. Iron, how it acquires Magnetical Virtues Pag. 246. L. The Motion of the Parts of Liquids variously deter∣mined Pag. 126, 127, 128, 140. —proved by a Solution of Sugar in Water Pag. 126. —by a Solution of Salt of Tartar Pag. 127. —by Lead raised in the Form of Vapours Pag. 128. —by droping Oyl of Turpentine upon Spirit of Wine Pag. 139. —by opening the Body of Copper with Sal Armo∣niack, and applying it to a Candle Pag. 141.
Liquids, why sometimes unapt to mix with each other Ibid. A Diaphanous and Opacous Body afforded by a Li∣quid Pag. 143. The Superficies of Liquors, in Vacuo Boyliano Pag. 148. A Liquor may become consistent, by the mixture of a Powder Pag. 179. The Effects of a Load-stone upon Filings of Iron Pag. 293. M. Matter defin'd Pag. 2. Motion, a Catholick Agent Ibid. —Guided by God in the Creation Ibid. Mechanical Affections, their result Pag. 7. Mixture and Texture, how different Pag. 22. The Effects of Motion various Pag. 23. Modification, twofold Pag. 44, 45. —In what Respects Pag. 47, 48. Medicines Chymical, laid aside too rashly Pag. 113, 114. The Effects of languid and unheeded Motion, from Pag. 210 to 238. Motion, may be propagated through different Me diums Pag. 223. An Observation concerning Manna Pag. 253. Concerning a Match, burning in the Receiver Pag. 325. Why Mercury is not always suspended at the same Height Pag. 334. Marbles disjoyn'd in the exhausted Receiver Pag. 446. Mountains, their Height Pag. 468. N. Nature, may not be always exact in her Laws Pag. 255. Natural and Preter-natural States of Bodies not rightly stated Pag. 302.
The natural Sate of the Air, a forc'd State Pag. 304. O. Odours, no inherent Quality Pag. 9. Odours, what Ibid. Observations about Lignum Vitae Pag. 103. Observations made in Quarries Pag. 104. P. Primary Affections of Matter Pag. 3. Putrefaction, what Pag. 16. Corpuscularian Principles very firtile Pag. 21, 22. Minuteness of Pores no Arguments of their Non-existence Pag. 125. A Plastick Power inherent in Bodies Pag. 189. Plastick Power, what Pag. 190. Petrification, how effected Pag. 194, 195. Q. Qualities, no distinct Entities Pag. 3. Qualities, the Result of Modification Pag. 5. —Proved Pag. 6. Qualities, act how Pag. 11. Complexion of Qualities no real Qualities Pag. 17. Whether Qualities depend on substantial Forms Pag. 18. Qualities of a Compound, different from the Ingre∣dients Pag. 19. Some Qualities, the Result of mixture Ibid. Qualities, how alter'd Pag. 20, 182. Different Qualities in Homogeneous Bodies Pag. 26. —Exhibited by Venice Turpentine Pag. 27. —By putrifi'd Ʋrine Pag. 27.
New Qualities added upon a Dissolution of the Spe∣cifick Form Pag. 46. Qualities, the Result of Motion, &c. Pag. 73, 74, 76, 77. Various Qualities produc'd, by a Change of Texture, in Camphire Pag. 78, 79, 80. —In Copper and Silver Pag. 81, 82, 83, 84, 85. —In preparing of Luna Cornea Pag. 86, 87. —In preparing of a Peculiar Salt Pag. 88. —By digesting Spirit of Nitre with Sea-Salt Pag. 89, 90. —By distilling Oyl of Vitriol with Nitre Pag. 91, 92. —By digesting Spirit of Wine and Oyl of Vitri∣ol together Pag. 102, 103. —By a Redintegration of Salt Petre Pag. 108, 109. R. Redintegrations of Bodies consider'd Pag. 69. —Of Amber Pag. 70. —Of Roch Allom Ibid. —Of Vitriol Pag. 71, 72. —Of Antimony and Oyl of Vitriol Ibid. —Of Salt Petre Pag. 105, 106, 107. The Signification of the Word Rest, limited Pag. 198. Of Respiration Pag. 382. The Aristotelian Rarefaction examined Pag. 404. Rarefaction explained Pag. 416. —According to the Doctrin of the Plenists Pag. 417. The Rota Aristotelica explain'd Pag. 419, 420. S. Sounds, no Inherent Qualities Pag. 9. Sounds, what Ibid. Species of Bodies, how distinguish'd Pag. 57, 58. Salts, their Figures how accounted for Pag. 62.
Salts obtain'd from an Alkaly Pag. 63. —From Oyl of Vitriol and a Solution of Sea-Salt Ibid. —From a mixture of Spirit of Wine and Nitre Ib. —From a Solution of Copper Pag. 64. —From Gold Pag. 65. —Venetian Borax Ibid. —Spirit of Ʋrine and Nitre Pag. 66. —Soot and Sal Armoniack Ibid. —Spirit of Nitre and Pot-Ashes Pag. 68. Salt Petre obtain'd from Pot-Ashes Pag. 107. —Aqua Fortis and Salt of Tartar Ibid. Solidity refin'd Pag. 158. What is requisite to Solidity or Firmness Pag. 158, 159, 160, 161, 168, 169, 170, 171, 172, 173, 174, 176, 177, 178, 179, 181, 184, 185, 186, 187. A Solid turn'd Fluid Pag. 180. Motion in the Parts of Solids Pag. 200, 201. Cosmical Suspitions, from Pag. 249, to 256. The Temper of Submarine Regions Pag. 266. —Of the uppermost Ibid. —Of the lower Pag. 267, 268. The Bottom of the Sea unequal Pag. 279. —Ʋndisturb'd in Storms Pag. 271. —Almost stagnates Ibid. The Proportion of Salt in the Sea to the Water Pag. 275, 282, 283, 284. Springs in the Bottom of the Sea Ibid. The Reason of the Saltness of the Sea Pag. 278, 279. —Its Bitterness, whence Pag. 280. Concerning the Propagation of Sounds Pag. 353. A Spring bent in the exhausted Receiver Pag. 458. To what Height Water will be rais'd by Suction Pag. 452, 454, 456.
T. Transmutation of Metals not impossible Pag. 94, 95. The Texture of their Liquids contributes to their Mixture Pag. 175. The Texture of Bodies enables them to work on each other Pag. 247. Trees under Water Pag. 273. V. Union, the Cause of the Effects of Compounds Pag. 44, 51. Vitriol, Natural and Artificial agree in Qualities Pag. 60, 61. Vitriol turn'd into Allom Pag. 68. Vortices, beyond the Concave Surface of the Firma∣ment Pag. 256. Of a Vacuum Pag. 331, 362, 440. Vapours and Fumes, why they ascend Pag. 356. W. Water acquires new Qualities by an Alteration of its Form Pag. 76. Water Convertible into Earth Pag. 98, 99. —How it becomes Solid Powder Pag. 99. An insipid Water drawn from Spirit of Vinegar and Salt of Tartar Pag. 188. Water its Gravitation Pag. 270. Agitation requisite to keep Water from stinking Pag. 281. Memoirs for the Natural History of Mineral Wa∣ters Pag. 286.
The different Weight of Mineral Waters Pag. 291. —Observations requisite in trying them Pag. 295. Whether they have Arsnick in them Pag. 296. What Proportion of Salt they afford Pag. 299. Of the Elater of Water Pag. 337. It depends on the Elater of the Air contain'd in the Pores of it Pag. 339. Water hot, its spontaneous Ebullition Pag. 391. The END ADVERTISEMENT. THis Volume containing an Epitomy of se∣veral of the Author's Works; I think it necessary to advertise, that to avoid a Repetition of all the Titles prefix'd to the Tracts Printed se∣verally; I have digested each of those Books into such a Method as they would have been probably Printed in, had they been all writ by our Author at one time; each Book being contain'd in Chap∣ters, the Titles of which, will acquaint the Rea∣der what Tracts they belong to: And that the Reader may be more clearly satisfi'd, I intend at the End of the next Volume, to add such a Ta∣ble of the Author's Works, as shall readily di∣rect what Chapters each Book is abridg'd in, by referring to them.
IMPRIMATUR Liber Cui Titulus, THE WORKS Of the HONOURABLE ROBERT BOYLE Esq EPITOMIZED By RICHARD BOULTON. JOHN HOSKYNS, V. P. R. S. Vicesimo Septimo Martii, 1699,
THE WORKS OF THE HONOURABLE Robert Boyle, Esq EPITOMIZ'D. VOL. II. BY RICHARD BOƲLTON, of Brazen-Nose College in Oxford. Illustrated with COPPER PLATES. LONDON: Printed for J. Phillips at the King's-Arms, and J. Taylor at the Ship in St. Paul's Church-Yard, MDCC.
To His Excellency The Most Illustrious PRINCE, CHARLES Duke of BOLTON, Marquiss of Winchester, Earl of Wilt∣shire, and Baron St. John of Basing; the Premier Marquiss of England; one of the Lords Justices of the King∣dom of Ireland; Lord Lieutenant and Custos Rotulorum for the Countys of Dorset and Southampton, the Town of Southampton and County of the same; Vice-Admiral of Southampton and the Isle of Wight; Lord Warden of the New Forest in Hantshire, and one of the Lords of His Majesty's most Honourable Privy-Council. May it please Your Excellency, SInce nothing contributes more to the Advancement of Natural Knowledge, than the Encou∣ragement of great and eminent Per∣sons;
not only Custom but Interest hath generally inclined those, who employ their time in the pursuit of it, to shelter the Fruits of their La∣bours under the Protection of noble Patrons: For as there can be no greater Motives to Virtue and Mo∣rality, than the Favour of an Omni∣potent Power; so in the Affairs of this World, we are most inclin'd to pursue, whatever may deserve the Esteem of great Men, or lead us into their Favour. And if the Tree of Knowledge flourishes most under the favourable Patronage of Princes, the Interest of, Learning will, at the same time, be a good Plea to extenuate my Pre∣sumption, and a great Argument why I should lay this at your Ex∣cellency's Feet. For, Illustrious SIR, whilst amongst the happy Number of His Majestys
Favourites, we behold Your Excel∣lency dignified with Titles of Ho∣nour, at the same time we are sur∣prized to see, that no Titles can be so great but Your Excellency's Cha∣racter adds a Lustre to, and increases the Dignity of them: A character! which, could I convey it down to future Ages, I must be able to re∣present, in the most lively Colours, All the Virtues of a good and pious Christian; the meek and liberal Temper of a Puissant and Noble Prince; the Wisdom of a Counsel∣lour, and the Qualifications of one, to whose Judgment and Sagacity the Administration of the Government of a Kingdom hath been, in a great measure, committed, by the most Ju∣dicious and Sagacious of Kings. But, Illustrious SIR, since the draught of so Noble a Character as Your Excellency's is too hard a Task
for a Pen better qualified than mine, I have sufficient reason to decline it; and shall rather reflect on the Happiness of this Kingdom, whilst so Great a King hath made choice of so Wise a Counsellor; and the great Felicity of the Commonwealth of Learning, whilst under the Patro∣nage of so Illustrious a Prince as the Duke of BOLTON; and particularly on my own Happiness under Your Excellency's Protection, which is the more augmented by this opportunity of professing my self, Most Illustrious SIR, Your Excellency's Most Humble and Devoted Servant, Richard Boulton.
THE PREFACE TO THE READER. THE candid Acceptance of the former Volume, and the favourable Approbation of the Learned, having given the Book∣sellers sufficient Encouragement to proceed in Printing the two subsequent Volumes; there is no need that I should, on their part, enlarge on the Subject of the Preface annexed to the first Volume, to shew the Usefulness of the Design; since the general Consent of the Learned hath already put that beyond Doubt. Therefore, having laid down the Reasons why I proceeded in such a Method as I have placed the Subjects in, in the first Volume, in the latter end of that Preface, I shall, without encreasing the bulk of this Volume with a long Preface, briefly subjoyn the Rationale of this; And,
First, The first Volume ending with an Epi∣tomy of the Honourable Author's first Continuation of Physico-Mechanical Experiments, I have begun this with some Experiments belonging to that first Continuation, and to them I have subjoyn'd his second Continuation; to which, by reason of some affinity betwixt particular Experiments that Trea∣tise and another, delivered in another Tract, I have added a Chapter of Observations on Ani∣mals included in Vacuo; and another relating to the same Subject, out of the Philosophical Transactions: And because these Observations engage our Thoughts in several things relating to the precedent Phaenomena of the Vacuum Boy∣lianum, and may remind us of what he bath de∣livered of the Spring and Weight of the Air, I have in the next place laid down his Animadver∣sions on Mr. Hobbes Problemata de Vacuo, his Discourse of Attraction by Suction, and what he hath deliver'd concerning the Barometer in the Philosophical Transactions. And forasmuch as in all his Physico-Mechanical, and other Expe∣riments already deliver'd, and tryed in Vacuo Boyliano, we have several instances of the Rare∣faction
and Condensation of the Air, &c. hopeing it would help some to a seasonable Reflection on what was before delivered; I have added what he hath taught concerning the admirable Rarefaction of the Air, and the Duration of its Spring; as also con∣cerning its Condensation and admirable different Ex∣tension, when rarified and compressed: And since these Subjects renew our Considerations concerning the Spring of the Air, I have added further, a Chapter of the Weakened Spring of the Air, out of the Philosophical Transactions. And because the Spring and weight of the Air and their Effects, are not the only Qualities and Considerations to be taken notice of in the Atmosphere, from those I pro∣ceed to deliver what he hath Taught concerning Hy∣groscopes and their Utilities; as also what he hath writ of the Efficacy of the Airs Moisture: And because there are several Qualities in the Air which not only affect our outward Senses, but have a ma∣nifest Influence on the Mass of Humours which cir∣culate in our Bodies, and on whose Tempers the Preservation or Distempers of a human Body de∣pends, I have added what he hath deliver'd con∣cerning the Salubrity and Insalubrity of the Air, whose variations in Temperature, alter the Consti∣tution
of the Humors of our Bodies. And since we are not only affected by manifest Qualities of the Air, but also by occult ones, I have laid down what our Author hath said on that Subject: and since Magnetical and Electrical Qualities are generally accounted Occult ones, I have added his Tracts on those Subjects. And to conclude the Third Book, I have added his General History of the Air, which I have therefore placed the last relating to that Element, because it consists of several Frag∣ments which belong to several of the preceding Sub∣jects, or bear a relation to some others which follow, concerning Colours, Tasts, and Odours. And having thus ended the Third Book, the Fourth contains those Subjects which have a more immediate Relation to the Outward Senses, and are considered as their Ob∣jects; which I therefore for distinction sake place together: Of which what our Author hath delivered concerning the Mechanical Production of Tasts, O∣dours, and Colours, I have laid down in this Volume, and shall proceed to the remaining Objects of our Senses, in the Third Volume; where I shall give a short Account of the Method I take in that, and in the mean time subscribe my self the candid Readers Very humble Servant, R. Boulton. London, Octob. 13. 1699.
Vol. II. Plate. 1 Fig: 1. pag. 4. Fig: 3. pag. 5. Fig: 4. pag 6. Fig: 2. pag. 2.
Vol. II. Plate. 2. Fig: 4. p: 14 Fig: 1. p: 8. Fig: 5 p: 17. Fig: 3. Fig: 2. p: 14.
Vol. II. Plate. 3. Fig: 2. p: 22. Fig: 1 p: 21.
Vol .II. Plate .4. Fig: 3. p: 27. & .29. Fig: 4. p: 29: p: 23. Fig: 1. Fig: 2. p: 25.
Plate .5. Vol .II. Fig: 1. p: 32. Fig: 5. p: 485. Fig: 3. p: 32. Fig: 2. p: 32. Fig: 4. p: 33.
Plate .6. Vol: II. Fig: 1 p: 33. Fig: 3. p: 35. Fig: 5. p: 366. Fig: 2 p: 34. Fig: 4. p: 365.
Plate .7. Vol: II. Fig: 1. p:35. Fig: 2. p: 37. Fig: 4 p: 374 Fig: p: 334
THE WORKS Of the HONOURABLE ROBERT BOYLE Esq EPITOMIZED. BOOK III. CHAP. I. Experiments touching the Spring and Weight of the Air, &c. THE Bulk of the former Volume, for∣bidding that I should add any more of the Experiments concerning the Air's Spring and Weight, I shall now proceed to lay down what our Author hath fur∣ther deliver'd in his first Continuation of Ex∣periments relating to that Subject.
EXPERIMENT I. The Cause of the Ascension of Liquors in Syringes is to be derived from the Pressure of the Air. AS in the Experiments recited in the for∣mer Volume, it appear'd, that the Pres∣sure of the External Air, occasions the Difficul∣ty of drawing up the Sucker of a Syringe; so I shall now shew, that the Pressure of the Exter∣nal Air, upon the Surface of the Water, in which the Syringe is immersed, causes it to as∣cend, when the Sucker is drawn up. TRYAL I. Having cemented a Glass Pipe to the lower End of a Syringe, and immersed the lower End of that Pipe in a Viol which contain'd Mercury, we tyed the Sucker of the Syringe to the Stopple which is in the Cover of the Receiver, and ha∣ving conveighed it into such a Receiver as Fig. 2. Plate 1. Represents;See Plate 1. Fig. 2. we observ'd, that upon drawing up the Sucker, the Mercury did not in the least ascend, till the Air was let into it, and then it ascended up to the Top of the Glass Tube: And this Experiment being varied, by drawing the Sucker up an Inch before the Recei∣ver was exhausted, the Mercury rose to the Top of the Glass Tube, tho' it did not in the least rise when the Sucker was drawn up as high a∣gain, after the Receiver was exhausted. And in trying this Experiment it was further to be noted, that when the Receiver was exhausted,
it was as difficult to raise the Sucker, as when the End of the Syringe was stopped, the remain∣ing Air which was able to keep the Sucker from rising, being unable to raise the Mercury. TRYAL II. Being a Prosecution of the former. The former Tryal being again repeated, be∣sides what we observed in that Experiment, we further noted, that a considerable Weight being tyed to the Syringe to keep it steady and firm, the Mercury did not rise till we permitted the Air to return again into the Receiver, tho' the Sucker was raised two Inches. But lest the Phaenomena exhibited by these Ex∣periments, should be influenced by the Air con∣tain'd in the Glass Pipe; I caus'd the Pipe to be fill'd with Spirit of Wine, and immersed it in a Viol which contain'd the same Liquor tinged with Cocheneel; and observ'd, that tho', when the Re∣ceiver was exhausted, the Liquor afforded Bub∣bles plentifully, and at the Top seemed to boyl, yet it did not ascend in the least, notwithstand∣ing the Sucker was raised two Inches and a half: But when the Air was let into the Receiver a∣gain, it ascended into the Body of the Syringe, which appeared, by the small Quantity of Spi∣rit remaining in the Bottle, in which the Glass Tube was immersed.
EXPERIMENT II. An Attempt to discover the Motion of Aether in the Exhausted Receiver. HAving instead of the Glass Tube mention'd in the former Experiment, provided a crooked one of Brass,See Plate 1. Fig. 1. such as the first Figure represents, and joyn'd a Glass Tube to the short∣er Leg with Cement, we caus'd Weights to be fixed to the Top of the Sucker to depress it speedily when occasion required: This Syringe was fixed to a Pedestal to keep it firm, and to hinder it from tottering; and a Feather was likewise fixed with Cement to the lower End of the Syringe, so that the small End was placed above the Orifice of the crooked Tube. All which being conveyed into a Receiver, and the Pump set on Work, we observ'd, that, the Suck∣er by the help of the Turning-Key being of∣ten elevated and permitted to fall again, the Feather was gradually less shaken, with what was forced out of the Syringe, as the Receiver was more and more exhausted, till at the last the Feather did not seem in the least to be mo∣ved, before Air was again let in, and then it was blown up as before: In which Experiment we observ'd, that as the Cavity of the Receiver was more or less exhausted, the Descent of the Sucker was accordingly quickened, so that had there been a Substance finer than Air in the Re∣ceiver, the Blast would have been greater as the Descent of the Sucker was swifter.
We tryed the same Experiment a second time, contriving to draw up the Sucker higher than we did before, but the Event was no more sa∣tisfactory than the former. But that I might be informed, what Quan∣tity of Air was drawn out every Exsuction, as well as when the Feather was more or less sha∣ken by the Wind thrown out of the Syringe, I made use of a Glass Tube, such as Figure the Third represents,See Plate 1. Fig. 3. instead of the former Brazen One; and the one End being immersed in a Jar, and placed in the Receiver, as the Air was pum∣ped out, several Bubbles broke through the Wa∣ter out of the Pipe, but External Air getting in at a Leak, the Water was pressed up into the Pipe again; nevertheless, upon an Exsuction of that Air it again subsided; yet yielded so ma∣ny Bubbles, that we could not conveniently make any further Observations, till the Recei∣ver having stood still for some time, the Water was freed from Air; and then, tho' the Pump was set on Work, till the Gage discovered the Receiver to be very well exhausted; yet we could not discern, that any Bubbles were forced through the Water in the Bottom of the Tube by fre∣quently elevating and depressing the Sucker; for tho' there appear'd a few in the Top of the Water, yet we judged that those rather pro∣ceeded from some aery Particles lodging in the Pores of the Water. But what was most Remarkable in this Expe∣riment was, that after some time the Water ri∣sing about an Inch in the Tube, above the Sur∣face of the Water without it, we several times rais'd the Sucker 2 or 3 Inches, and fuffered it
to fall again, without perceiving, that the Wa∣ter in the Tube was in the least Affected; which is an Argument either of a Vacuum, or that the Parts of that Aether are so fine, that they exceed the Rarefaction of the Air so far, as not to be able to effect what a Particle of Air does which is not above 1/500 part of the Quan∣tity of a Pin's head; a Particle of Air, before Expansion, of that Minuteness being able, when the Receiver is exhausted, to displace much more Water upon their Expansion than this Ae∣ther. By which Experiment, as well as what we have taken notice of, the Reason I formerly as∣sign'd for the rising of Water in Syphons seems to be confirm'd; the Water in the Pipe made use of in these Experiments, not being able to rise when the Air was exhausted, tho' the Suck∣er was drawn up, till Air was permitted to en∣ter into the Receiver again. EXPERIMENT III. Concerning the falling of a light Body in the Ex∣hausted Receiver, the Figure of it disposing it's Mo∣tion to be visibly alter'd by a small Resistance of the Air. TO discover whether so light Bodies as Fea∣thers would be affected in their descent in the exhausted Receiver by any subtle Matter contain'd in it, we fix'd a small pair of Tobac∣co-Tongs in such a Receiver as Fig. the Fourth Represents,See Plate 1. Fig. 4. which was 22 Inches high, and ha∣ving joyn'd four Feathers together with Cement,
so as to lie across each other, we fixed a small piece of Paper to them, which being held in the Tongs, the Feathers hung in an horizontal Po∣sture; And upon an Exsuction of the Air out of the Receiver, till by a Mercurial Gage it seem'd void of Air, we open'd the Tongs, by turning the Stopple in the Cover of the Receiver, (a short String, the one End of which was fixed to the Stopple, and the other to the Tongs, being by that means shortned) upon which we ob∣serv'd, that tho' these Feathers turned several times in the unexhausted Receiver, yet the Ex∣periment being often repeated, we could not per∣ceive them in the least to turn in the exhausted Receiver, but to fall like a dead Weight; and what was further to be observed was, that the Descent of the Feathers was much quicker in the exhausted Receiver, than when it was full of Air. Yet in this Experiment it was observed, that the Phaenomena were less convincing than the for∣mer, because we took notice that the Feathers fell without in the least turning when the Re∣ceiver was but half exhausted. And we further noted in this Experiment, that, the Receiver being lengthened with a Cy∣linder of Laton, cover'd over with Cement, and kept from being press'd too much inward by the outward Air, by a Case made of Iron Bars, when the Air was let in again into the exhaust∣ed Receiver, it made a considerable crackling Noise, the sides of the Metalline Receiver which before were in some measure compress'd being again extended.
EXPERIMENT IV. Of the Propagation of Sounds in the Exhausted Receiver. HAVING caused a Cylinder of Box to be turned,See Plate 2. Fig. 1. with an Axle-tree at each End, into the Cavity of the uppermost was received the Bottom of the Stopple; and the Axle-tree at the Bottom was adapted to a Hoop of Brass fixed in the middle of a Trencher, which was about 5 Inches broad, and 3 thick, and which had a piece of Lead fixed to the Bottom to keep it steady; which being done, a Wyer was fixed in the upper part of the Trencher, and at the End, which bent downwards, was fixed a Bell, and at another place of the same Trencher was fixed a Steel Spring, to the upper part of which a piece of Steel was joyn'd, at such a convenient Distance, that when it was bent back by two Pegs placed at right Angles in the Cylinder (which had several Holes made in it on purpose) and the Spring on a sudden ceased to be pressed up∣on, it would fly forcibly upon the Bell, and give it a smart Stroak. Things being thus ordered, I caused the Re∣ceiver to be exhausted, and tho' the Sound (which was caus'd by turning the Cylinder fixed to the Stop-Cock, so as to make the piece of Steel strike upon the Bell) was scarce discerni∣ble, yet as Air was gradually let in, it became louder and more audible.
And the like Experiment being tryed by sus∣pending a Watch which had an Alarum belong∣ing to it, by a piece of Thred, which was ty∣ed to a Glass Button purposely blown in the in∣side of a Receiver which was made of one en∣tire piece, so that it was less subject to break; we ordered the Watch so, that the Alarum should begin to go by the time that we were ready to make our Observations, at which time one that held his Ear near enough to the Top of the Receiver, perceiv'd, that when the Air was wholly exhausted, the Sound of the Alarum was scarce at all discernible, but became much louder as the Air was gradually let in. EXPERIMENT V. About the breaking of a Glass Drop in the Exhausted Receiver. TO know the Reason, why upon the Break∣ing of a Part of the solid Case of the Stem of a Glass Drop, which upon it's first Formation falling into Water, was kept full of Rarifi'd Air; I say, to know the Reason, why such a Bottle flies in pieces when part of the Stem is broken off upon a sudden Ingress of External Air; I caused the lower End of a Glass Drop to be fastened to a staple Body, the Stem being tyed to one End of a String, and the other End being fastened to the Turn-Key; which being done, and the Receiver exhausted, the Stem was broke off by short∣ning the String, whereupon the Bubble flew
into a Thousand Pieces, the Air inclosed ex∣panding violently, and endeavouring to rush out at that small Vent. EXPERIMENT VI. About the Production of Light in the Exhausted Receiver. TO try whether Light might be produced in the Exhausted Receiver without an Access of Air, we made use of a Virtical Cylin∣der, the lower Basis of which was fixed in a Staple Trencher; and having fixed two pieces of Steel in the lower End of that Cylinder, so as to rub forcibly against a Lump of Loaf-Sugar, I observ'd, that the Vitriol Cylinder being forcibly turn'd by the help of the Turning Key, the Steel made Impressions strong enough upon the Sugar, to cause it to afford, not on∣ly several Flashes, but little Sparks of fire. EXPERIMENT VII. The Production of a kind of Halo, and several Co∣lours in the Exhausted Receiver. WE made use of a large inverted Cucurbite for a Receiver, which being exhausted, and a large Candle held on the Opposite side, when the Stop-cock was turned, to give way for the Air, to pass out of the Receiver into the Cylin∣der, the Cavity of the Cylinder seemed to be filled with Fumes; so that the Candle whose Flame was visible, though it appeared to be en∣compassed
with a kind of Halo, whose Colour was between Blew and Green; and after a few Exsuctions, would be of a Reddish or Orange Colour, very vivid: Which Meteor I supposed to arise, from some Particles of the Turpentine, which extricating themselves upon the Applica∣tion of a hot Iron to the Cement, caused an Explo∣sion in the Receiver, when the Parts of the Air were put in Motion and disposed to Expansion; and the variety of Colours, I conceive to pro∣ceed from the various Positions of those Particles of Matter which fill up the Receiver and vari∣ously reflect the Rays of Light. To confirm which Opinion I observed several Steams to rise up from the Cement upon turning of the Stop-cock; and if we continued to exhaust the Re∣ceiver, it would become clearer and clearer, and the Colours more dilute, till the Cement was enabled to emit more Steams, by re-ap∣plying a hot Iron to it: And as for the Reason, why these Steams do not so plentifully rise, when the Receiver is evacuated, it appears to be, because the Particles of the Turpentine are less agitated as the Heat declines; and further, be∣cause they want Air to support them. To confirm what I have intimated, as the Causes of the aforementioned Phaenomena, I con∣veyed some of the Cement Melted in a Crucible into a Receiver; and observed, that upon open∣ing of the Stop-cock to let out the Air, the Steams would for some time plentifully fly about, but after a little time would subside again. But in the aforementioned Phaenomena, the several Colours seemed to depend on the different De∣grees of Heat which the Cement acquired; as
also, on the different Size and Figure of the Re∣ceiver; as also, on the Nature of the Cement and the Quantity of Air which was left unpum∣ped out. EXPERIMENT VIII. About the slacking of Quick-lime in the Exhausted Receiver. HAving conveyed an Evaporating Glass, with a sufficient Quantity of Water in it into the Receiver, when the Air was drawn out, we let down a piece of unslacked Lime into it, by the Assistance of the Turning-Key; and ob∣serv'd, that in about ¼ part of an Hour, the Lime began to slack violently, and at each Ex∣suction afforded very large Bubbles, which con∣tinued as long as we plyed the Pump; so that in a little time the whole inside of the Receiver was cover'd over with Lime Water, a great part of the Mixture boiling over into the Capacity of the Receiver; in which Experiment the Outside of the Vessel was considerably hot, and the Mixture continued its Heat near ¼ part of an Hour after the Receiver was removed: The Lime made use of in this Experiment was very strong.
EXPERIMENT IX. An attempt to measure the force of the Spring of included Air, and examine a Conjecture about the difference of it's strength in unequally broad-mouthed Glasses. TO measure the force of the Air's Expansi∣on, we fixed a Syringe in a Frame, that it might be kept firm and erect; which being done, we provided a Leaden Hoop, which was sus∣pended at the Top of the Sucker, and hung so far below the Bottom of the Syringe, that it might have Space enough to rise in upon the Ex∣pansion of the Air in the Cavity of the Syringe, when the Receiver should be exhausted; the Weight in the mean time being prevented from compressing the Air beyond it's natural State by a String, the one end of which was tyed to the Top of the Sucker, and the other to the Turn∣ing Key; which being done, and the Pump set on Work, we found, that the Expanding Air was able to raise about 7 or 8 pound Weight, and had the Rammer had a free Passage it probably would have raised a much greater Weight; but the Experiment was less satisfactory in determin∣ing the force of the Air's Expansion, in elevating a determinate Weight; because the Air made it's way too easily betwixt the convex Superficies of the Sucker, and the concave Surface of the Cylinder. Therefore to be more exact, I caused two Cy∣linders to be made different both in Length and Breadth, the Diameter of the one being an Inch,
and of the other two Inches; In the former, I put a Lamb's Bladder, which contained a suffici∣ent Quantity of Air, and having ordered the Receiver to be exhausted, I found, that a Cylin∣der of Air of an Inch Diameter, was able to raise a Weight of 10 Pound Averdupoiz Weights; but tho' the Bladder for a long time kept the Air from flying away, yet when it was loaded with the utmost Weight it was able to bear, some Air getting out of the Bladder rendred our Tryal less satisfactory. Wherefore we made use of a Cylinder 4 Inches Deep and two in Diameter, which having a broad Basis to stand upon, we put a Lamb's Blad∣der into it well blown and tyed;See Plate 2. Fig. the 2 and 4. and putting a Wooden Plug upon that, we loaded the Plugs with Weights amounting to 35 Pound, the up∣permost of which was fastned to the Turning-Key, to prevent it from falling, and then the Plug being marked at the brim of the Cylinder, we set the Pump on Work, and observed that the Expansive force of the Air in the Bladder was so great that it lifted up the Plug consider∣ably; yet when the Air was again let into the Receiver the Plug was so far depressed that the Mark was below the Edges of the Receiver; yet the Air being again a second time exhausted, the Bladder raised the Plug so high, that ⅜ parts of the whole Plug was lifted up above the Edges of the Cylinder. And by repeating the Tryal we found, that the Air in the Bladder, when the Receiver was exhausted, was able to bear up 7 pound Weight more, by which Weight the Mark upon the Plug, was not depressed below the top of the Cylinder.
But in trying these Experiments the follow∣ing Particulars are to be Noted. 1. That the Plug must be so adapted to the Cy∣linder as to move up and down easily; also it must be of a convenient length, not exceeding an Inch and a half; and it will be likewise re∣quisite that the Plug should have a strong Ledge upon the upper part of the Cylindrical Surface, that it may rest upon the Edges of the Cylinder and sustain the Weights laid upon it more firm∣ly. 2. When the Bladder was put into the hollow Cylinder, we took care to adapt it by easie and frequent Compressions to the Cavity it was pla∣ced in, making a Mark in the inside of the Cylinder where the Air in it's Natural State was Compressed to, that we might learn what Weight the Expansion of the Air was able to sus∣tain above that Mark; for the Air being preter∣naturally compressed, upon the Account of that accidental pressure may be able to raise a greater Weight than Air uncompressed, so that the Weight it raises above that Mark is alone to be taken for what Air condensed is able to lift up more than the Air in it's Natural State. 3. When the Bladder was taken out of the Cylinder, the Figure of it was proportionable to the Cavity, which it was contained in, being 2 Inches Diameter, and 2 Inches and ½ long. 4. From the Experiments now mentioned it appears, that the Air is able at it's first Expansion, to raise a Weight proportionably larger accor∣ding to the different Bores of the Cylinders
made use of; but when it hath been a little more Expanded the Proportion is not so exact, be∣cause a small Quantity of Air being to fill up ¼ or ½ part of an Inch more, the smaller Quantity of Air must be much more rarified and conse∣quently lose of it's expansive Force. But comparing the expansive Force of Air in different Bores at it's first Expansion, some may think the Proportion not exact; since the small Bladder being able to raise no more but 10 Pound, and the Weight which the larger raises being 42, it is more than a Duplicate Proportion-of what our Hypothesis requires; but if we consider that comparing the Diameter of each Cylinder, the Bladder in the less, proportion ably takes up more Room than in the larger; it may be sufficient to account for the Differ∣ence. 5. Considering that the Bladders in which Air is Included, may straiten the Cavities of the Cylinders, the expansive Force of the Air might be more exactly determined, could Cylinders be contrived stanch enough without such helps. 6. And it will not a little contribute to ren∣der the Force of the Air's Spring difficult to be determined, that the Air it self at different times varies, in it's degrees of Pressure: Yet from what hath been said it seems probable, that were it possible to contrive an exact Cy∣linder very tite one, of an Inch Bore would be able to raise above 10 pound Weight.
EXPERIMENT X. An easie way of making a small Quantity of In∣cluded Air raise 50 or 60 Pound or a greater Weight in the Exhausted Receiver. TO demonstrate more obviously the Air's Spring, we took aSee Plate the second Fig. 4. Brass Cylinder whose Depth was 4 Inches and it's Diameter 4 Inches and ¾, to which we adapted aSee Plate short Plug, to whose upper Basis was fixed a broad Rim for Weights to stand on more firmly; which being done we pressed a Bladder into the Cylinder, that it might adapt it self to the Cavity of it; and then, observing, how much the Plug was above the surface of the Cylinder, we laid the Weights upon it (see Plate the 2d Figure the 5th) and observed that the Air in a Cylinder about 4 Inches broad lifted up 75 pound at the 5 Exsuction so high that one might discern the Mark;See Plate 2. Fig. 5. and at 2 Exsuctions more it was elevated 3/10 above the Top of the Cylinder, and at the same time, in a Mercurial Gage the Mercury that usually stood at ⅛ above the highest Glass Mark subsided to ⅛ below the Second. When the Air was let into the Receiver again, after some time the Bladder subsided again, and being taken out exactly answered the Cavity of the Cylinder. The Receiver being again exhausted at the 24th Exsuction the Mercury in the Gage was de∣pressed to the lowest Mark, and at the 35th to ⅛ below it. And the former Experiment being tryed in a small Receiver in which we heaped flat Weights one upon another, the Air raised 100 pound
Weight, and would probably have raised much more, had it not been, that the Bladder was so much strained as to give way for some Air to get out at a Leak. And here it may not be improper to advertise, that the Orifices of such Receivers must not be very wide, for if they be they will be subject to be crack'd by the violent external Pressure of the Atmosphere. EXPERIMENT XI. TO Compare the Gravity of Air and Wa∣ter, I weighed a Glass Bubble in the Re∣ceiver, which I found to weigh above half a Grain more in the exhausted Receiver than be∣fore the Air was drawn out; and this Bubble being weighed in the open Air counterpoised 68 Grains and an half; upon which the Bubble being immersed in Water, we found that the Air in it had been so far rarified by the Heat employed in sealing it up, that the Nip being broke off, it sucked in 125 Grains of Water, the Glass together with the Water sucked into it weighing 193 ½ Grains: The whole Cavity of the Bubble being large enough to contain 739 Grains of Water, it weighing 807 ½ Grains, so that the Proportion betwixt the Weight of the Air and Water did not quite amount to 1228 to 1. Having weighed a Glass Bubble in the Recei∣ver, whose Weight was 60 Grains, the Air con∣tained in it in Vacuo weighed 27/92 of a Grain, and the Weight of such a Quantity of Water as it would contain, weighed 720 ¼ Grains. In
which Experiment the Proportion of Air to Water in Weight was as 857 17/27 to one. But Galileo says, Water is but 400 times heavier than Water, tho' Ricciolus is as much mistaken on the other side, who says it is 10000 times hea∣vier. To inform my self further of the Weight of the Air, I took the following Measures; having exhausted a Receiver, and when it was void of Air counterballanced it, upon turning the Stop-Cock and a Reingress of Air, it weighed 36 Grains more than before, which succeeded when tryed a second time, and likewise a third. And then the Receiver being exhausted was immersed in Water, and the Stop-Cock turn'd to give way to an Ingress of Water, and when as much Water as was able to enter into the Receiver had succeeded in the Place of the exhausted Air, we turned the Cock again to keep that Water in, and the Receiver being again weighed, the Water weighed 47 Ounces, 3 Drachms and 6 Grains, so that the Water was heavier than its bulk of Air, near 650 Grains, the Mercury in a Baroscope at the same time being boyed up to 29 Inches ¾, so that the Weight and condensed state of the Atmosphere being greater then than usually, was the Reason why the Disproportion was not as great as at other times; tho' we may reasonably suspect, that the Quantity of Air contained in the Pores of the Water, joyning with that in the Receiver, might hinder so much Water from getting in as was requisite to fill the Space deserted by the Exhausted Air; besides several Particles of Air might probably get in at the Stop-Cock, whilst the Experiment was
trying, which joyning with the Air remain∣ing in the Receiver might contribute to prevent a sufficient Ingress of Water. From all which Experiments it appears, that tho' the Weight of the Atmosphere is so vari∣ous, that it is impossible to know exactly the Proportion betwixt it and Water, yet it is e∣vident that Water is to Air some Number be∣twixt 600 and 1100 to 1, being greater or less as the Atmosphere is more or less conden∣sed. But these Tryals are only of use in Eng∣land, for the Weight of Water as well as Air, is so different in most Countries, that it is requisite to make frequent Experiments in each, to determine the Proportion of the Weight of Air in such Places.
CHAP. II. A second Continuation of Physico-Mechani∣cal Experiments. PLATE III. A Description of the Engin with a double Tube to exhaust the Air. A. A. TWO Brazen Pumps. B. B. Two hollow Plugs, the lower Part of whose Cylindrical Cavity is open.See Plate 3. Fig. 1. C. C. Two smaller Orifices in the upper Ba∣sis of the Plugs, furnish'd with Valves, which open outward, so that the Air may get out, but cannot return into the Cavity of the Plugs again. D. D. D. D. Iron Rods, fixed to the Gno∣mons, F. F. and designed to move the Plugs. E. E. Two Iron Stirrups fixed to the Tops of the Rods D. D. D. D. designed for the Opera∣tor to stand in, to set the Engin a going. G. G. G. A Rope which lies upon the Pully H. each End being tyed to the Stirrups E. E. L. L. Two Valves placed at the Bottom of the Pumps, so that by opening inward, they may admit the Air out of the Tube M. M.
M. M. A Tube which rising from both Pumps, ends in the Plate O. O. Having first made a Curvature P. P. Q. Q. of a convenient length that the Tube P. Q. Q. may not hinder the O∣perator from standing in the Stirrups E. E. O. O. A Plate perforated in the Middle to afford an Intercourse betwixt the Tube P. Q. Q. and the Receiver R. To render this Engin fit for use,See Plate 3. Fig. 2. it must be supported in a Wooden Frame, (See Fig. the second;) and then a Quantity of Water being thrown into the Tube P. Q. Q. sufficient to fill the Pumps and something more, the Operator standing in the Stirrups, must weight them up and down successively, one after another, which being done, as the Plug in each Pump is raised up, the Air contained in the Receiver R. and the Tube Q. Q. will by it's Spring and Expansion, lift up the Valves L. L. and make it's way into the Space deserted by the Plugs in the Pumps; but as soon as the Plugs begin to be pressed down a∣gain, the Air contain'd in the Pumps will be hindred from passing into the Receiver by the Valves K. L. and consequently the whole Cavity of the Plugs being full of Water, the Air, as they are forc'd down, will lift up the Valve C. and so the Air contained in the Receiver will be successively drawn out as the Plugs move up and down alternately. The Reasons why this double Engin is prefer∣able to a single one, is because it evacuates the Receiver more speedily, and also with less trouble; for whereas in a single one the Pillar of Air which presses against the descending Sucker is to be resisted by force, as well to depress the Sucker
as to keep it from rising up again, in this double one the Weight of the Atmosphere depresses one Plug proportionably as it resists the Rising of the other, and the Motion of the Plugs up and down is rendered much more easy, when the Receiver is in some measure exhausted, be∣cause the Atmosphere which lies upon the de∣scending Sucker helps the Operator to weigh it down, the Spring of the included Air being so far weakned as not to resist the Weight of the Atmospherical Pillar that lies upon it. PLATE IV. A description of the Mercurial Gage made use of in the following Experiment. The Gage A. B. C. D. E. is made up of three Glass Tubes cemented together,See Plate 4 Fig. 1. so that their Cavi∣ties make a continued Passage, being open to each other; The Tube B. C. D. is designedly crook∣ed, that the lower Orifice of the Tube E. D. as well as the Orifice of Tube A. B. may be ce∣mented to it; which being done, the crooked Tube, whose Diameter is larger than either of the other two, is to be filled with Mercury, and then the Orifice E. of the smaller Tube is to be hermetically Sealed up; but the Orifice A. of the Tube A. B. whose Diameter is larger than that of E. D. is to be left open. This Gage being put in a Receiver when it is exhausted, the Air contained in the Tube E. D. will expand so powerfully as to descend into the crooked one to C. forcing the Mercury to
rise into the Tube B. A. almost to the Top, be∣fore the included Air hath lost it's Spring. To discover then the Quantity of Air inclu∣ded in a Receiver, we may make use of the Re∣ceiver F. G. E. which being placed on the Plate L. M. we must try the Torrecellian Experi∣ment, by inverting the Tube H. fill'd with Mercury into the Glass I. and then the Top of the Receiver F. being clos'd with Cement, and the Tube A. B. and E. D. being mark'd with Papers, as the Mercury in the Receiver is sus∣pended at 30, 29, or 28 Inches or less, accord∣ingly as the Receiver is exhausted, the same Marks, viz. 30, 29, &c. being placed upon the Papers, pasted on the Tubes of the Mercurial Gage, at each distinct Surface of the expand∣ed Air and the rising Mercury, for the future, when the Air and Mercury descend and ascend to those Marks, in the exhausted Receiver, it will denote, that the Receiver is so far exhaust∣ed, that the remaining Air is only able to bare up a Cylinder of Mercury in the Torrecellian Experiment, so many Inches as the Mark to which the lower Surface of the Air, and the upper Surface of the Mercury rest at, is more or less in Numbers. But if the Air contain'd in the Receiver, be more than naturally compress'd, it will like∣wise compress the Air contain'd in the Tube E. D. by squeezing the Mercury somewhat into the lower part of the Tube. How much taller a Cylinder of Mercury Air so compress'd will bear up, than when it is but naturally condens'd, we may learn by the following Computation.
For supposing a determinate Quantity of Air to be contain'd in the Space A. when the Force that compresses it is F. if the Pressure F. be in∣creased by the Pressure G. it will compress the Air contain'd in A. into half the space it took up before;See Fig. 2. so that the remaining Space B. will be ½ a part of the Whole: And if to the Pressure F. G. we add H. the Air which possessed the Space A. when it was only pres∣sed by F. will be squeez'd into a fourth Part of the Space A. viz. C. And consequently the Air compress'd will possess a Space proportionable to the Whole, as the first Pressure is to a total Pressure. The Remaining Space: the Total Space. The First Pressure: the Total Pressure. So that three of those Quantities being known, the Rule of Proportion will teach us the fourth. For if the Atmosphere as usually condens'd in England, possesses the Tube E. D. and the At∣mosphere is then able to raise a Mercurial Tube of 30 Inches; When that Air is compress'd in∣to the Space N. E. to know the Quantity of it's Pressure, I exactly measure the Space N. E. which if 6 Inches, I constitute that the first Term or Quantity of Pressure; so that the second Term will be the whole Space D. E. suppose 12 Inches; the third Term will be the Height of 30 Inches of Mercury, which was the first Pressure; and so the fourth Term or total Pressure will be found to be 60 Inches of Mercury; From whence I con∣clude, the Air so condens'd in the Receiver, to be able to bear up a Mercurial Cylinder 60 In∣ches tall.
And by the same Principle before laid down, it will be no difficult matter to judge, what the Proportion betwixt the size of the Tube A. B. and E. D. ought to be; for that depending on the Length of the Legs, the higer they are, the more able they are to restrain the Air, when it is but a little dilated in the sealed Part. For supposing the Length of A. B. to be 10 Inches, which Height of the Mercury is ⅓ of the usual Pressure; the Tube A. B. will be large enough if it be as big again as E. D. for when the Mercury hath ascended to A. the expanded Air in the other Leg possessing the Space which it forced the Mercury out of, will take up three times as much more as it did before; and con∣sequently, ⅓ of it's first Pressure will be able to curb it's Spring: But if the Legs were not al∣together so long, then the Mercury being but partly expell'd out of the crooked Tube, the Diameter of the Tube A. B. ought to be pro∣portionably larger in respect of E. D. That the ascending Mercury leaving it more space to expand in, it's Spring may be so far spent, that the Mercury by it's Weight may seasona∣bly resist it's further Expansion: And it would always answer, if the Height of the Gage be in the same proportion to 30 Inches, as the Space first possessed by the Air is to the Whole, which that Air would possess in Vacuo, according to the Principle above delivered. The Tube is more useful when longer, than shorter, because the expanding Air being more able to drive the Mercury into the Tube A. B. more Degrees of it's Rarefaction will be dis∣covered, tho' less sensibly. But
The D. C. ought to hold Mercury enough to fill the Tube A. B. before the Air in the Tube E. D. can make it's way out; But how much larger, or of what Figure it is, is not so ma∣terial. A Description of the Engin made to compress Air. A. A. A Glass Vessel,See Plate 4. Fig. 3. whose Orifice is ex∣actly cover'd by a Brazen Plate B. B. C. C. A Brass Tube penetrating that Plate in the middle, to which it is fixed. E. A small Valve, which opens inward, and covers the Orifice of the Tube C. E. A Spring which presses it down. G. G. G. A Gnomon fix'd to the Plate B. B. to hold down the Spring F. I. I. A square Lath which the Plate B. B. lies upon, which is bored through in the Middle for the Tube C. to pass through. L. L. L. L. L. L. Two Iron Wyres which be∣ing fix'd in the Lath, and encompassing the Iron Plate K. K. keep it from rising too high. In the Middle of the Plate K. K. is a Screw M. M. which joyns the Receiver and the Plate B. B. close together. And that the Receiver may nei∣ther be damaged by the Screw, nor the Glass by the Iron Plate, a piece of Wood and Lea∣ther is put betwixt the former, and as well to prevent damage as to render the Receiver closer, a piece of Leather is to be put upon the Plate. N. N. A Pump fixed to the Tube C. below the Plate B. B.
O. O. The Sucker. P. A small Orifice at which the Air enters in, when the Sucker is brought to the Bottom of the Pump. When we have a mind to compress any thing in the Air, we conveigh it into the Receiver thus prepared; and drawing down the Sucker, that the Air may enter in at the Orifice P. and fill the upper part of the Cylinder, we raise the Value, by which means the Air lifts up the Sucker, and makes it's way into the Recei∣ver, till the Sucker being drawn down again, the Valve closes up the Orifice of the Pipe C. and so successively keeps the Air in the Re∣ceiver as it is forced in, the State of the pres∣sed Air being made evident by the Mercul Gage. If the Pump be fixed to the Pipe C. by a Screw, when one Receiver is full, it may be re∣moved to another. The Mercurial Gage described in the first Fi∣gure will not so evidently shew the different De∣grees of the Air's Condensation as the Gage T. for the whole Tube being full of Air, except one Inch, the Condensation of so great a Quan∣tity will be more evident. But here it will be requisite to note in very accurate Experiments, that tho' the Figure of this Gage makes it fit for short Receivers, yet if the Mercury be, when the Air is compressed, squeez'd down or upwards, it's Gravity causes some difference in the Degrees of Pressure, which is not to be slighted.
PLATE IV. How Mixtures may be made in compressed Air.See Fig. 3. A. A. The Receiver in which they are to be made. Q. Q. R. R. Two Tubes, the one End of each of which is sealed, and the other open. R. R. S. A Brazen Vessel laid upon the Ori∣fice of each. The Substances to be mixed must be each put into a distinct Tube Q. Q. R. R. The Vessel of R. Q.S. being inverted, and laid upon their Orifices, and being thus conveighed into the Receiver, when the Gage T. T. shews that by the help of the Pump, the Air is sufficiently compress'd, by inverting the Engin, the Substances contain∣ed in the Tubes, will be mixed together in the Vessel which was inverted on the Tops of the Tubes, when placed first in the Receiver. PLATE IV. A Description of a Wind-Gun. A. A. A hollow Copper Globe.See Fig. 4 B. B. A Tube fixed to it. F. A Valve opening internally, and shutting the Tube B. B. G. A Spring to depress that Valve. H. A Gnomon so placed as to keep the Spring∣fast. C. C. An Iron Tube fixed to the Tube B. B. and the Globe A. A.
D. D. A Plug adapted to the Cylindrical Ca∣vity of that Tube. E. E. E. Another adapted to the Tube B. B. with a Wyre which almost reaches to the Valve F. R. The Protuberance of the Tube C. C. whose upper Part is designedly hollow, to receive the End of the Iron L. L. L. L. A crooked Iron, whose End R. being moveable, helps to lift up the Plug E. E. E. O. P. O. A crooked piece of Iron, fixed in M. that the Shoulder might be set against it when any Mark is aimed at, and that the Thumb be∣ing set against the bending P. in pressing up the Plug E. E. E. the Fingers might more vigorous∣ly draw up the Leaver L. T. T. A Rectangle of Iron, compassing the Leaver L. L. and the Iron O. P. O. to keep it in such a Posture, that the Plug may not fly out, whilst the Air is compressed into the Globe A. A. I. I. An Elliptick Hole which is shut with a Valve that opens inward; the Design of it is, that what is amiss in the Globe, may be seen and mended. S. S. A Plate of Metal perforated with a Screw V. which sustains the Valve, and keeps the Hole V. shut. Q. A Hole for the Air, which is to be pres∣sed into the Globe to enter in at, when the Suc∣ker D. is pulled down to the lower End of the Tube C. C. The Method to press Air into this Globe is this; I set my Foot upon the crooked End of the Sucker D. and then pulling up the Globe, as
soon as the Tube C. C. is full of Air, I depress the Globe, by which means the Air in the Tube is forced into it through the Valve F. and this Method being taken as long as the Air's Spring would permit us to compress it any fur∣ther, the Air may be discharged, if, when the Plug D. is drawn out, and a Bullet is put into the Tube instead of it, the Plug E. E. E. be raised so that the End of the Iron Wire may o∣pen the Valve B. for the Air violently rushing out, will drive the Bullet away with great Vio∣lence. The Globe will be sooner filled with Air, if half an Ounce of Water be put into the Tube C. C. before the Sucker D. for the Top of the Tube being filled with Water, the Air will be forced clearly out of the Tube into the Globe. And this Wind-Gun hath these Advantages above any other yet mentioned; First, that it is not so subject to be spoiled, as those that have two Valves; Secondly, it is easily mended, what is amiss being taken out at the Elliptick Hole. Thirdly, it is much more stanch, the Crannies being stopped with Silver Soder, which dama∣ges not the Leather on the Valve, because it is put in after the Soder is cooled, at the Elliptick Hole. Fourthly, several Bodies may be con∣veighed into it at the Elliptick Hole, whereby we may be enabled to try several Experi∣ments.
PLATE V. How Factitious Air may pass out of one Re∣ceiver into another. A.A. A Metalline Plate perforated in the Middle. B. B. To which a Stop-Cock is fixed, the lower Orifice being made into a Male Screw. D. C. Which is received by the Female Screw D. of the Copper Funnel D. C. See Fig. 2. E. E. A hollow Tube, both of whose Ends are formed into a Female Screw, to receive the Male Screw of the Stop-Cock B.B. See Fig. 1. F. F. The Receiver laid on the Plate A. A. and exactly fitted to it. The Matter of which factitious Air is to be made, is to be put into the Receiver F. F. and the Orifice of the Tunnel C. being placed on the Receiver, and the Stop-Cock B. being open'd, the Air is to be drawn out of the Receiver, which being done, the Stop-Cock is to be shut again, and the Male Screw being taken out of the Female Screw in the Brass Tunnel, the Re∣ceiver is to be immers'd in Water to keep Ex∣ternal Air out; As for the Degrees of Com∣pression of the factitious Air, they may be dis∣cover'd by the Mercurial Gage before men∣tion'd. To transmit this Air into another Receiver F. F. we make use of the small Tube E. E. Fig. the Second, into each End of which the Stop-Cocks of two Receivers being screw'd, and the
Crannies stopp'd with Cement, by turning the Stop-Cocks, the Air may be let out of one into the other. To discover the Rarefaction of the Air con∣tain'd in which Receivers, because they must be inverted, we contriv'd the following Gage. See Fig. 4. A. A. A Viol filled with Mercury up to the Superficies D. D. B. B. A Tube cemented in the Neck of it. C. C. Another which passing through the Tube B. B. leaves room for a due intercourse betwixt the External and Internal Air, the up∣per End of which must be seal'd, and the other End open. If this Gage be put into a Receiver when it is inverted, both the Tubes will have the Air contain'd in them exhausted, and will be ready to receive factitious Air, as soon as the Stop-Cocks are turn'd to give an Intercourse betwixt them; and then the Gage being inverted, and the Mer∣cury which lay below the Orifice of the Tube B. B. falling about the Pipe C. C. by rising up into it, will shew the Degrees of the Compression of that factitious Air. PLATE VI. An Instrument by which Air may be filtrated through Water. See Fig. 1. A. A. A Glass Receiver whose Orifice is ad∣apted to the Plate B. B. which is perforated in the Middle by the Tubes C. C. D. D. which are cemented to it.
E. E. E. E. A Stop-Cock into which the low∣er Ends of the Tubes C. C. D. D. are inserted. F. F. The Key of the Stop-Cock in which is made the Chink G. G. without any Perfora∣tion. H. H. The Receiver to which the Stop-Cock is fix'd, preventing an Ingress of outward Air, and having a due Intercourse with the Pump I. I. L. L. A Glass Vessel. M. The Stopple in the Top of the Receiver fasten'd with a Screw. See Fig. 2.A Stop-Cock cut transverse, so that the In∣sertions of the Tubes C. C. D. D. into the Stop-Cocks may be perceived. The Use of this Instrument is as follows, To try how much Air may acquire new Qua∣lities in respect of a Body included with it, we conveigh that Body into the Vessel, and then pouring a sufficient Quantity of Water at the Orifice M. until the Receiver A. A. be half full, and the Vessel L. L. swim up to the Top of it, the Orifice M. is stopped up, which be∣ing done, and the Key so placed, that the Tube C. C. may communicate with the Chink G. G. upon drawing down the Sucker, the Air in the Receiver A. A. will pass through the Pipes C. C. and the Chink G. G. into the Receiver H. H. and from thence into the Pump: Upon which, the Chink in the Stop-Cock being turn'd so as to communicate with the Insertions of the Tube D. D. and then the Sucker being rais'd to the Top of the Cylinder, the Air will be impell'd into the Tube D. D. and emerging through the Water, will rise into the Top of the Receiver A. A. and by this Method we could strain it through Wa∣ter
as often as we had a mind to be inform'd, what new Qualities it acquir'd in reference to the Bodies about it. FIGƲRE III. How the same Numerical Air may be sometimes condensed, and sometimes rarified. The Receiver A. A. being fix'd upon the Plate B. B. and the Stop-Cock C. C. being fix'd to the Perforation of the Plate B. B. The Pump D. D. is joyn'd by a Screw to the Stop-Cock C. E. A Vessel which fluctuates in the Receiver, in which an Animal being put, and the Pump fill'd with Water, and joyn'd to the Stop-Cock by a Screw, the Water contain'd in the Pump will, by lifting up the Sucker, be forc'd into the Receiver, and by that means condense the Air, without an addition of new, and by drawing the Sucker down again, the same parcel of Air will be again expanded; so that Observations may be made, how much the thickness or thinness of Air contributes to the preservation of the life or health of Animals. PLATE VII. An Instrument to distil in Vacuo, See Fig A. A. A Brazen Vessel, the lower part of which is shut, and the upper open. B. B. A piece of Tin exquisitely adapted to the Tube, so as to prevent the External Air
from entring in, being adapted to the Edges of it A. A. D. D. C. C. A Tube fix'd in the middle of the Tin Plate B. B. D. D. A Brazen Vessel, whose Orifice is con∣tiguous to B. B. E. E. A Stop-Cock fix'd to the Perforation in the Plate B. B. F. F. A Tube-reaching from the Stop-Cock to the Pneumatick Engin. G. G. A metalline Vessel enclosing the Jun∣ctures of the Vessels with the Diaphragma, and also the Stop-Cock, that by keeping them im∣mers'd in Water, they may be free from Exter∣nal Air; this is cemented to the Vessel A. with Soder. The manner of using this Engin is the follow∣ing, viz. The Tin Plate being remov'd, and the Ingredients to be boil'd, being put into the Vessel A. A. then re-applying the Tin Plate A. A. and the Vessel D. D. and the Tube F. F. being apply'd to the Pneumatick Engin, and the Air pump'd out, the Vessel G. G. having been first fill'd with Water, we shut the Stop-Cock, and remove the Tube F. F. and then the exhau∣sted Vessel being placed on the Fire, Vapours will ascend through the Tube C. C. which will be con∣dens'd in the upper Vessel; and what Quantity of Air is there generated, will appear by the Mercurial Gage H. in the Top of the Ves∣sel. But here it is to be noted, that round pieces of perforated Paper being laid upon the Orifices of the Vessels A. A. D. D. they will be more exactly joyn'd with the Tin Plate. The Junctures of
the Tube F. F. both with the Pneumatick En∣gin and Stop-Cock are to be guarded with Ce∣ment, and the Stop-Cock must be so contriv'd, as to stand so far without the Vessel G. that it may be conveniently turn'd: When any thing is to be conveigh'd into the Vessel, the Tin Plate E. E. and the Stop-Cock may be laid a∣side: Which may be done without any great Dissiculty; for the Key being made up of two parts, the one of which M. is turn'd in the Stop-Cock, by a Chink, into which the End of the other part O. O. which fills the Pipe N. N. fix'd to the Vessel G. G. is receiv'd, so that one End being prominent outwardly, whilst it is turn'd, it may communicate Motion to the o∣ther Part M. But whilst the Tin Plate B. B. is is to be taken out of the Vessel G. G. it must be drawn outward. Fig. 2.Another Instrument for the same Ʋse with the former. B. B. A small Tube, both Ends of which are polish'd, that it may be exactly adapted to the Orifices of the Vessels A. and D. A. A. D. D. Two Vessels made of Glass, so joyn'd by the Tube B. B. that Vapours may pass from one to the other. E. E. F. F. G. G. I. Are of the same Use with the first Figure, and the Instrument is to be eva∣cuated by the same Method; only the Glass Ves∣sel must be placed in Balneo Mariae, or on Sand, and the Vapours so rais'd will condense in the Vessel D. D.
CHAP. III. ARTICLE. I. Several Ways to help the Production of the Air. EXPERIMENT I. Air produ∣ced from Bread.TO try whether a piece of Bread, which was moist, and a little kneaded, would yield Air; I included it in Vacuo with a Mer∣curial Gage, July 12th 76. but it yielded none: On the 12th. some broke in the Receiver, and raised Mercury 3 Inches high; and at Night it was rais'd an Inch higher, tho' no exter∣nal Air got in. July 13th. it ascended higher. On the 26th Day it expanded it self so pow∣erfully, as to separate the Receiver and it's Cover, the Smell of it being acid. So that Air may be drawn out of Bread by such a Menstruum as Water. EXPERIMENT II. JƲly the 11th. Bread being burnt by a Burn∣ing-Glass in Vacuo, yielded Air, which came from it with an Explosion; whence we may guess, that could Air be separated more easily from it, it would produce very considerable Effects.
EXPERIMENT III. Septemb. 22. I Enclos'd in a Receiver,From Grapes. Eight Ounces of dry'd Grapes, bruis'd in 7 Ounces of Water, the Receiver being large enough to contain 22 Ounces. Septemb. 23. Tho' the Receiver was cover'd with Water all Night, the Mercury was rais'd two Inches. Septemb. 30. In seven Days it was rais'd thirteen Inches. Octob. 5. In five Days more it was 25 Inches high. Octob. 18. The Mercury ascended slowly, some Air ma∣king it's way out of the Receiver. Grapes with∣out Water did not yield Air so plentifully. See Art. IX. Exp. I. EXPERIMENT IV. July 12. I Shut up 10 Ounces of Raisins of the Sun bruis'd,From Rai∣sins. in as much Water as was sufficient to make them ferment. July 14. In 48 Hours rais'd the Mercury ten Inches; at Night the Mercury was 5 Inches higher; the next Day it was almost as high as when buoy'd up by the Atmosphere.
July 16. In the Morning the Receiver and it's Cover were separated by Air, which got through the Water which the Receiver was cover'd with. The same Raisins were shut up in Vacuo again. July 18. In the Morning the Air broke out. July 19. They were enclosed in the empty Recei∣ver. July 21. The Receiver was so full of Air, that some of it forced it's way out; and they were inclo∣sed in the exhausted Receiver again. July 22. The Receiver was almost full: The 23d in the Morning it forced it self out. When the Parts of the Water have work'd upon Grapes 5 or 6 days, they yield. Air very fast, tho' at the first they do not. EXPERIMENT V. August 13. 1677. PLums were shut up in one Receiver,From Plums. and Pears in two others. August 16. They were all full of Air, and one which con∣tain'd Pears, and lay open to the Sun-Beams, rais'd the Cover in 24 hours.
EXPERIMENT VI. Octob. 16. 77.From b∣sed Grs. I Enclosed two Ounces of bruised Grapes in a Receiver large enough to hold 20 Ounces of Water.. Octob. 17. The Mercury was raised half an Inch. Octob. 18. The Mercurial Cylinder was raised half an Inch more. The 20th it encreased 2 Inches. The 22d 4 Inches. The 27th near 6 Inches. Jan. 2. 78. It was not quite 10 Inches high. Octob. 16. 77. Three Ounces of bruised Grapes being inclu∣ded in an exhausted Receiver, large enough to contain 30 Ounces of Water, with half an Ounce of Spirit of Wine. Octob. 17. The Mercury did not ascend much. Octob. 18. It was not an Inch high. Jan. 2. 18. The Receiver was quite full, and some of the Liquor as it was poured out, produced Bubbles in some Turpentine about the Orifice, which broke outwardly. Tho' Spirit of Wine pro∣motes the Generation of Air in Vacuo, yet in the open Air it hinders it. See the II. VIII. and XIV. Exp. Art. II.
EXPERIMENT VII. July 19. 78.MƲST expressed;From Must. bruised Grapes were put into a Receiver, when it was 10 Months old. The 21. The Mercury was no higher. 23. It was raised 3 Inches. 24. Raised 5 Inches. 25. In the Morning it was 104, in the Evening 137 and the Must made its way out. 26. More Must got out. The Air was fur∣ther expanded, but the Mercury was suspended at the same heighth. 27. The Screw being left open, half the Must got out: From thence it appears, that by keeping Grapes for some time, their Fermentative Virtue becomes more powerful. EXPERIMENT VIII. Jan. 30. BOiled Apples being put into Receivers,From boil'd Apples. with, and without Sugar, they both presently filled them full of Air. Jan. 31. Raw Apples being shut up in Receivers, in one of which was put a third part of Sugar, and the other without. Feb. 10. The former had yielded some Air. Feb. 14. The raw Apples and Sugar rais'd the Mercury 30 Inches: Those which were boyled raised it
two Inches: In the other Receivers we had no Air generated, Feb. 18. In the Receiver in which the raw Apples and Sugar were enclosed, the Mercury was raised 56 Inches. The Boiled Apples and Sugar raised it 3. The raw Apples had yielded little; but in that which was almost full, the Apples were very little Fermented, but of a very pleasant Taste. Feb. 21. The Cover was broke, and the Apples and Sugar had lost some of their Juice, but they were not Rotten. March 1. In the great Receiver in which raw Apples were shut up, the Mercury was rais'd 25 Inches: In the little One not above 7. Where Boiled Ap∣ples and Sugar were contained it was raised 9 Inches. March 8. In the large one it was 29. In the less 22 ½. That where the Boiled Apples were, stayed at 9 Inches. March 17. Some Juice got out of the large Receiver: In the less the Mercury stood at 67 Inches; and the boiled Apples and Sugar raised it 15 Inches. From whence it appears, that the Sugar, and the largeness of the Receiver as well as the Cru∣dity of the Fruit contributed to the Production of Air.
ARTICLE II. Several ways to hinder the Production of Air. EXPERIMENT I. Decemb. 20. 78. DOugh made without Leaven;From Dough. but with the same Meal with Bread-Corn, being en∣clos'd in a Receiver, where the Heat of a Fire kept it warmer than at Midsummer, in 10 hours it yielded no Air: So that if Dough be once too cold it hinders it's Fermentation for the fu∣ture, which I the rather believe, because Dough being shut up in the Summer presently genera∣ted Air. EXPERIMENT II. May 23. THree Ounce of Dough Leaven'd being en∣clos'd in a Receiver large enough to hold 50 Ounces of Water; I put Spirit of Wine to it. May 24. The Mercury was Three Inches high. May 26. The change was small. May 27. None at all. May 29. None at all. June 2. It ascended a little. June 14. Not at all.
Decemb. 14. Being taken out it smell'd subacid: And be∣ing put into an Empty Receiver it swell'd so much as to take up twice as much space as before with a gentle Ebullition. May 23. The same Quantity being of Dough shut up without Spirit of Wine. May 24. The Mercury was 19 ½ In∣ches high. May 26. It's Heighth was 38. May 27. No alteration. Decemb. 14. It continued at the same Heighth; and the Dough smell'd subacid: From whence it appears, that Spirit of Wine prevented the Generation of it in the last Experiment. EXPERIMENT III. August 29. PEars,From Pears. and a Mercurial Gage being clos'd up in a Receiver fill'd with Water, such a Quantity of Air was pressed in as was able to raise the Mercury 26 Inches higher than it us'd to be. In a little time they were all made like a Pultis for Consistence. Aug. 30. In 24 hours the Mercury was depress'd an Inch and an half. Aug. 31. It remain'd at the same Heighth.
Sept. 1. They began to yield Air, the Mercury being rais'd to 27 Inches. Sept. 2. In 24 hours it was rais'd 8 Inches higher. Sept. 3. The Heighth of the Mercury was 17 Digits higher, the heighth being 52 Inches. Sept. 4. The Mercury was buoy'd up 7 Inches further, rested at 59 Inches. Sept. 5. The heighth of the Mercurial Tube was 64 Inches: And a Pear broken in the Receiver was turned Black. Sept. 6. It was rais'd 3 Digits and ¼ higher than what is usual. Sept. 7. It was 3 Digits lower, and rested again at 64 Inches. Sept. 8. This day the Mercury subsided to 58 Inches. Sept. 9. It was rais'd up 3 Digits higher again, and was suspended at 67 Digits. Sept. 10. In 24 hours it was rais'd 1 ½ higher, being sus∣pended at 69 Inches. Sept. 11. It descended to 67 Digits again, the Night being very cold. Sept. 12. No Alteration happen'd at all.
Sept. 13. It subsided further to 64 Digits, the Cold was sharper. Sept. 14. It was 70 Digits high. Sept. 16. It subsided to 69. Sept. 19. It stood at the same heighth. Sept. 20. It was rais'd again to 71. Sept. 23. It subsided to 69. Octob. 1. It was buoy'd up again to 75 Digits. Octob. 3. On the 2 there was no alteration: To Day it stood at 70, the Weather being exceeding cold. Octob. Yesterday the Mercury remain'd at the same heighth; but this Day being Rainy it rose again to 75. Octob. 7. The Weather being the same, the Mercury was at a stand. Octob. 10. This Day it subsided to 69 Inches, the Rai∣ny Weather continuing. Octob. 12. To Day it was Depress'd to 65 Inches: Cold Weather coming on again. Octob. 13. It was 64 Inches high. Octob. 14 It was 69 Digits high. Octob. 15 It was 74 Digits high. Octob. 24 It was 68 Inches. The Season being cold Nov. 2. It was 64. The Cold more violent. Nov. 5. The Mercury was 80 ½ Inches high. The Cold more mo∣derate. Nov. 2. It was 65 Inches high: It was sharp frosty Weather. Nov. 27. It was 68 Inches high. A Thaw coming on. Dec. 6. It was 61 Inches high. The Weather being ve∣ry Frosty.
From the former Experiment, it appears, that Fruits yield not Air plentifully when violent∣ly compress'd, in the Air: The Air afforded, when they are compressed not being ⅛ of what they yield in the Empty Receiver. But that the Cold might concur to hinder the Generation of Air will be evident from the following Experi∣ment. EXPERIMENT IV. Feb. 22. 77. TEN Ounces of Paste being included in a Receiver which was large enough to hold 22 Ounces of Water,From Paste. I impress'd Air enough into it to sustain 73 Inches of Mercury above the length of a Cylinder which the Weight of the Atmosphere is able to bear up. In two hours there was no sensible Alteration. Feb. 23. In 18 hours the Mercury was rais'd 7 Inches. And in 6 hours more it ascended 8 Inches higher, being buoyed up to 83 Inches. Feb. 24 It was 90 Inches high. Feb. 25 It was 97 Inches high. Feb. 26 It was 101 Inches high. Feb. 27 It was 105 Inches high. Feb. 28 It was 107 ½ Inches high. March. 1 It was 112 Inches high. Water seemed to be expres∣sed out of the Paste. March. 2 It was rais'd to 120 Inches. March. 3 It was rais'd to 121 Inches. March. 4 & 5 It remained at 121 Inches. March 8. Upon a Thaw the Mercury ascended 4 Inches and rested at 125 Digits. March 10. It rose 6 Digits higher, being suspended at 131 Digits.
March 21. The Season being so long Cold, no Air was ge∣nerated, except that in the three last Days the Mercury was rais'd 7 Inches, and rested at 138 Digits. April 4. One of the Iron Wires made use of to straiten the Receiver, was broke, and the sides of the Receiver started out of their Places 4 or 5 Foot. From whence it appears that Cold and Com∣pression hinder the Generation of Air. EXPERIMENT V. March 1. 77. TWO Raisins of the Sun being bruis'd were shut up in an exhausted Receiver with Six Ounces of Vinegar: It afforded Bubbles plenti∣fully. March 2. It still yielded Bubbles; but the Mercury was not rais'd half an Inch. March 25. The Vinegar seem'd to contain Bubbles; but the Mercury was not rais'd an Inch. So that Vinegar hinders Fermentation and the Production of Air. EXPERIMENT VI. April 7. HAving put 10 Ounces of Paste into a Re∣ceiver able to contain 22 Ounces,Paste inclu∣ded in a Re∣ceiver. of Wa∣ter, as much Air was press'd in as sustain'd Mer∣cury
above its usual height 128 Inches. In Six hours it was rais'd four Inches, being sustain'd at 132 Digits. April 8. In 16 hours it ascended 9 Inches higher, but for nine hours after it rested at 141. April 9. Some Air broke out in the Morning; the Mercury subsided to 130 Inches, therefore thrust∣ing in as much Air as rais'd it to 141 I clos'd it it up with a Screw. Apr. 10 It was at 151 Digits. Apr. 11 It was at 158 Digits. Apr. 12 It was at 168 Digits. Apr. 13 It was at 176 Digits. April 14 It was at 183 Digits. April 15 It was at 183 Digits. April 16 It was at 187 Digits. April 17 It was at 191 Digits. April 27. Eight Days it's Station was unalter'd, but the two last it was rais'd 7 Inches, being rais'd to 198 Digits. April 30. So much Air being let out, that the Mercury was rais'd but 50 Inches above it's usual height, to try whether the compress'd State of that Air hindred it from expanding, the remaining Air being pinned up presently rais'd the Mercury sensibly, and 3 hours after the Mercury was rais'd to 62 Digits from 50. In five hours space after rose 1 ½. May 1. In 15 hours it rais'd only an Inch. May 3. On the Second it was at a stand; to Day it was rais'd 1 ½.
May 4. The Mercury ascending no higher, I let the Air go; and the Screw being set again, in five Minutes the Mercury was rais'd two Inches. May 7. In 3 Days it was rais'd 2 Inches higher. May 8. In the two last Days it was rais'd ½ an Inch. And the mass being shut up in Vacuo, in 5 hours the Mercury was buoyed up an Inch. May 21. It had not been rais'd 3 Inches yet. May 30. It rested at 4 Inches and ½. From whence it appears, that all the Air that Paste will afford, may be obtain'd from it, tho' it be compress'd; yet it is hindred in some Measure, till that Pressure is taken off. And from hence it appears, that Air may be generated by repeat∣ed Turns and Reciprocations; and that it is more slowly generated in compress'd, than in free Air, it usually yielding all that it will, in two or three Days time. EXPERIMENT VIII. Artificial Air. July 30. 77. HAving included Plums and Apricocks cut asunder in a Receiver,Plums and Apricocks. I press'd so much Artificial Air of Cherries into them, as rais'd 64 Digits of Mercury.
August 1. They yielded no Air, but became Yellow, as if too ripe. August 3. The Mercury was rais'd a little higher, and a whole Apricock, appear'd full of Drops of Water. August 7. The whole Apricock grew softer; and the Mercurial Cylinder 59 Inches taller than it's usual Length. August 8 It was 61 Digits high. August 9 It was 65 Digits high. August 10 It was 71 Digits high. August 11 It was 74 Digits high. April13 It was 78 Digits high. April14 It was 80 Digits high. April15 It was 80 Digits high. April16 And till the 22th it rest∣ed at the same height. The 24th it was 77 Inches high. On the 29th I open'd the Receiver, and found that the Fruit was well Colour'd and smell'd Sub∣acid, the Flesh being Spongeous; It emitted se∣veral Bubbles when first it was freed from the ambient Pressure. Common Air. July 30. 77. The same Fruit being conveyed into a Re∣ceiver with Common Air, some being cut and others whole. July 31. The Mercury was rais'd 8 Inches high. August 1. At six a Clock in the Evening the Mercury was rais'd 20 Inches.
August 3. The Fruit was much more firm, than those Included with Artificial Air. The Mercury was rais'd to 35 Inches. August 4. The Mercurial Cylinder was rais'd to 42 Inches. August 6. The Apricock appear'd unalter'd: The Mer∣cury stood at 57 Inches. Aug.7 It was 81 Digits high. Aug.8 It was 95 Digits high. Aug.9 It was 113 Digits high. Aug.10 It was 124 Digits high. The Apricock began to turn Yellow: But did not in the least appear Moist. Aug.11 It was 131 Digits high. Aug.13 It was 157 Digits high. Aug.14 It was 163 Digits high. Aug.15 It was 171 Digits high. Aug.16 It was 171 Digits high. Aug.17 And for some time after it stood at the same height. Aug. 27 It was 182 Inches high. Aug. 29 The Receiver being open'd, the A∣pricocks were more Acid and less grateful to the Taste, than those in factitious Air: The Pulp was well Colour'd, but Spongy; they yielded Bubbles as the others did. From this Experiment, we may be induced to think that the Artificial Air, hindr'd the Apri∣cock enclos'd with them, from yielding Air; yet it enriches their Colour and Firmness; and is good to preserve their Taste.
EXPERIMENT VIII. Grapes without Spirit of Wine.AN Ounce and an half of unripe Grapes bruis'd being enclos'd in a Receiver, ca∣pable of holding 10 Ounces of Water. Oct. 11 The Ascent of the Mercury was small Oct. 12 The Ascent of the Mercury was small Oct. 13 It was ½ an Inch. Oct. 17 It was 1 Inch. Oct. 18 It was 1 ½. Oct. 19 Near 4 Inches. Oct. 20 The same, but their surfaces seem'd mouldy. Oct. 21 It was 4 ½. Oct. 22 The same, the surface seem'd more mouldy. Oct. 23 The same, the surface seem'd more mouldy. Oct. 24 The same, the surface seem'd more mouldy. Octob. 26 It was 5 ½ Inches high. Octob. 27 It was 6 Inches high. Octob. 28 It was 6 ½ Inches high. No. 2 It was 7 ½ Inches high. No. 6 It was 9 Inches high. No. 8 It was 10 Inches high. No. 9 It was 13 Inches high. No. 12 It was 15 Inches high. No. 14 It was 17 Inches high. No. 18 It was 23 Inches high. No. 21 It was 26 Inches high. Dec. 8 It was 36 ½ Inches high. Dec. 12 It was 39 Inches high. Dec. 27 It was 39 Inches high. Jan. 6 It was 36 Inches high. The Air made it's way out. Octob. 10. 677.Grapes with Spirit of Wine. The Experiment being made with another Receiver into which was put 2 Drachms of Spirit of Wine along with the Grapes. Oct. 11 The Mercury un∣alter'd. Oct. 12 The Mercury un∣alter'd. Oct. 13 The Mercury un∣alter'd. Oct. 17 The Ascent was small. Oct. 18 Not ¼ of an Inch. Oct. 19 It rose but little.
Jan. 6. The Grapes all this time afforded no Air: So that Spirit of Wine hinder'd their Fermentati∣on. EXPERIMENT IX. HAving conveigh'd a Peach into a small Re∣ceiver, and so much Spirit of Wine as was just able to afford Vapours to rise about it. March 28. 78. It had the same Colour but was the less Firm: It had almost wholly contracted the Taste of the Spirit of Wine, but yielded no Air. EXPERIMENT X. Air with Spirit of Wine.I Conveigh'd 5 Peaches into a Receiver with as much Spirit of Wine as was sufficient to raise Vapours about them. Octob. 18 The Mercury as∣cended not. Octob. 20 It was 3 ½ Inches. Octob. 21 It was 5 ½ Inches high. Octob. 22 It was 7 ½ Inches high. Octob. 23 It was 9 Inches high. Octob. 26 It was 9 ½ Inches high. Nov. 2 It was 12 Inches high. Nov. 6 It was 14 Digits. Nov. 12 It was 16 Digits. Nov. 14 The same. Nov. 16 The same. Dec. 8 It was 18. Dec. 16 It was 19 ½. Dec. 27 It was 20 ½. Jan. 6 It was 23. March. 8 It was 31 ½. Air without Spirit of Wine. Octob. 17. Five Peaches being shut up in a Common Re∣ceiver
without Spirit of Wine; Octob. 18 it as∣cended not. Octob. the 20th The Mercury was 5 Digits. Octob. 21 It was 8 Octob. 22 It was 10 Octob. 23 It was 10 Octob. 26 It was 12 Nov. 2 It was 15 Nov. 6 It was 17 ½ Nov. 12 It was 20 Digits high. Nov. 14 It was 20 Digits high. Nov. 16 It was 21 Digits high. Dec. 8 It was 26 Digits high. Dec. 16 It was 26 ½ Digits high. Dec. 27 It was 28 ½ Digits high. Jan. 6. 78 It was 32 Inches high. March 28 It was 33 ½. April 15. Liquor broke out, and the Air after it: From this Experiment it appears that the Vapours do not hinder Fermentation so much as Spirit of Wine it self. EXPERIMENT XI. Paste with Leaven.HAving clos'd an Ounce and a half of Lea∣ven'd Dough in a Receiver with so much Air as was able to bear up 23 Ounces ½ of Wa∣ter. April 28. The Mercury in the Gage was 2 ½ of an Inch high. April 3. It was 3 ¼ of an Inch high. May 4. The Mercury subsided, and the Paste was Mouldy, It was rais'd 2 ½ high.
May 6 It was 2 ¾ May 8 It was 3 May 10 It was 3 ½ May 14 It was 4 May 17 It was 4 ½ May 20 It was 5 May 24 It was 6 May 28 It was 8 June 2 It was 9 June 6 It was 10 June 41 It was 11 ½ July 5 It was 13 ½ July 19 It was 15 Paste without Leaven. April 27. 78. An Ounce and a half of Paste without Lea∣ven being contain'd in a Receiver large enough to hold 23 Ounces ½ of Water.Without Leaven. April 29. In the Afternoon it ascended ¼ of an Inch. April 30. There was no Alteration. May 4. It ascended slowly and the Paste turn'd Moul∣dy. May 6. It was about 4 Inches high. May 8 It was 5 ½ May 10 It was 7 ½ May 14 It was 10 ½ May 17 It was 12 ½ May 20 It was 13 ½ May 24 It was 16 ½ May 28 It was 18 ½ June 2 It was 20 ½ June 6 It was 21 ½ June 14 It was 25 ½ From whence it appears, that Leaven hinders Fermentation and the Production of Air.
EXPERIMENT XII. May 23.Paste with Spirit of Wine. AN Ounce and a half of Paste, on which Spirit of Wine was pour'd, being shut up in a Receiver. May 24th The Height of the Mercury was 1 Inch. May 26 It was near 2. May 27 It was near 2 ½. May 31 No Alteration. June 1 It was 3 ½ Digits high. June 6 It was 4 Digits high. June 10 It was 4 ½ Digits high. July 19 No Variation. Decemb. 14. The Receiver being open'd, the Paste smell'd subacid. Paste without Spirit of Wine. May 23.Without it. An Ounce and a half of Paste being put into a Receiver large enough to contain 25 Ounces of Water, without an Addition of Spirit of Wine. May 24. The Mercury did not ascend. May 26 It was 3 Digits high. May 27 It was 4 ½ Digits high. May 28 It was 5 ½ Digits high. May 29 It was 7 Digits high. May 31 It was 9 ½ Digits high. June 2 It was 12 Digits high. June 6 It was 17 Digits high. June 10 It was 22 Digits high. July 4 It was 30 Digits high. July 19 It was about the height of 30 Digits. The Air broke out. Decemb. 14. The Mercury was rais'd 15 Digits again; The Receiver being open'd, the Paste was very a∣cid.
From these Experiments it appears, that Spi∣rit of Wine prejudices the Production of Air; And it likewise hence is evident, that Paste which is made without Ferment, will in time yield as much Air, as that prepar'd with it. EXPERIMENT XIII. Octob. 11.New Ale enclosed in a Receiver. NEW Ale was put into one Receiver, so that the whole Cavity was taken up with it, and another Receiver was likewise fill'd with the same Liquor, except a small Part of it's Ca∣vity which contain'd Air. Octob. 12. In the Receiver exactly fill'd, the Mercury was rais'd a little; the other had it's Cover burst, and the Ale was conveighed into another large enough for the Purpose. Octob. 13. In that wholly fill'd, the Mercury was 12 Di∣gits high; In the other it was rais'd 13 Di∣gits. Octob. 14. The Mercury in the full Receiver was 13 In∣ches, and the other 18. In the Evening the height of the Mercury in the full Receiver was 22 Inches, and in the other 20. Octob. 15. The Height of the Mercury in the full Recei∣ver was 42 Inches: In the other 26. The Bubbles which before appear'd in the full Receiver disappear'd; And the Air in the Gage possessed a larger Space than before.
In the full Receiver the Height of the Mer∣cury was Octob. 16 60 Inches. Octob. 18 90 Inches. Octob. 22 90 Inches. Octob. 23 108 Inches. Octob. 26 108 Inches. Octob. 28 138 Inches. In the other. Octob. 16 30 Inches. Octob. 18 40 Inches. Octob. 22 42 Inches. Octob. 23 50 Inches. Octob. 26 60 Inches. Octob. 28 63 Inches. The Bubbles appear'd again. Nevemb. 8. When the Receiver was open'd the Ale seem'd ready to fly into Froth, except the Orifice was presently stopp'd again; It's Taste was very Pungent: As the Hole in the Gage is open'd or shut, the Mercury will descend or ascend. Novemb. 9. Almost the same Phaenomena were taken notice of when the other Receiver was open'd. From this Experiment it appear'd, that tho' the Ale sooner ferments when Air is permitted to be with it, than when it is not; yet the Ale in such Receivers, at the last expands more vio∣lently. EXPERIMENT XIV. June 27.Pease with Spirit of Wine.GReen Pease and Spirit of Wine being put into the Receiver, by some Air that got in accidentally, the Mercury was rais'd 18 Inches: to prevent which a second time, the Receiver was cemented, and made firm with Turpen∣tine.
June 30. The Height of the Mercury did not vary. July 7. No Air was generated in the highest Degree of Heat. Pease without Spirit of Wine. The same Quantity of Pease being put into the Receiver, as in the last Experiment, with∣out Spirit of Wine. June 28. At night the Height of the Mercury was 5 Inches. Jun. 29 It was 10 Digits high. Jun. 30 It was 16 Digits high. July 1 It was 19 Digits high. July 5 It was 26 Digits high. July 7 It was 30 Digits high. July 8. The Air got out of the Receiver, it being too much filled. From which it appears, that Spirit of Wine hinders the Generation of Air in Pease. ARTICLE III. The Effects of Artificial Air, are different from the Effects of common Air. EXPERIMENT I. June 19. 77.Cherries in: closed in a Receiver.CHERRIES being shut up in an evacuated Receiver; the Mercury was rais'd in 6 hours 5 Inches ½.
June 20. The Mercury was rais'd 3 ½. At night it was 2. June 21 It was rais'd 1 ½ June 22 It was rais'd 1 ½ June 23 It was rais'd 2 June 24 It was rais'd 1 ½ June 25 It was rais'd 1 ½ June 26 It was 3 June 27 It was 3 June 28 It was 5 June 30 It was 1 ½ July 1 It was rais'd 3 July 2 It was rais'd 4 July 3 It was rais'd 2 July 4 It was rais'd 2 ½ July 5 It was rais'd 3 It was 45 Inches high, but the Air being con∣veighed into another Receiver, It subsided to 25 Inches. July 6 It rose 4 July 7 It rose 5 ½ July 8 It rose 5 July 9 It rose 5 July 10 It rose 6 July 11 It rose 12 July 13 It rose 7. July 13. The Mercury being rais'd 3 Inches, was suspended at 92 Inches, and the Air being conveighed into another Recei∣ver, was 50 Inches high. July 14 It was rais'd 14 July 15 It was rais'd 11 July 16 It was rais'd 13 July 17 It was rais'd 5 July 18 It was rais'd 9 The 19 It was subsi∣ded from 102 to 92 Inches; Part of it be∣ing conveigh∣ed into ano¦ther Recei∣ver. The 20 It ascended 15. The 22 Air getting out, it subsi∣ded to 63 Inches ½ The 23 It ascended to 12 ½. The 24 It ascended 4, the height of the Cylinder being 79 But the Air being remov'd into another Re∣ceiver it stood at 62. July 25 It rose 8 July 26 It rose 9 July 27 It rose 4 July 28 It rose 5 July 30 It ascended ten Inch. the Length of the suspend∣ed Cylinder be∣ing 98 Inches. And part of the Air being con∣veighed into an∣other Receiver, it stood at 64. July 31 It rose 6 Inc. August 1 It rose 9 Inc. August 2 It rose 4 Inc. August 3 It being remo∣ved into another Receiver was 68 Inches high. August 4 It being remo∣ved, subsided to 54 Inches. August 6 It rose 7 In. August 7 It rose 4 In. August 8 It rose 0 In. August 9 It rose 3 In. The Receiver being open'd; the Cherries were almost insipid, being of a whitish Colour, and the Pulp spungy. From this Experiment it appears, that, tho' Cherries are capable of yielding Air, yet the Production of it is not very regular. EXPERIMENT II. July 13th 67.Cherries enclos'd in a Receiver. CHerries being enclosed in a Receiver, toge∣ther with as much Air, obtain'd from Cher∣ries put up in another Receiver, as was able to sustain a mercurial Cylinder 50 Inches.
July 15. It was rais'd two Inches higher, tho' the day before there was no Variation in it's Height. July 16 It was rais'd 1 ½ July 17 It was rais'd 1 ½ July 26 It was rais'd 18 Some Air got out. July 27 It was rais'd 2 Some Air got out. July 30 It was rais'd 7 July 31 It was rais'd 9 Inches. August 1st. It stopped at the height of 61 Inches, some Air making it's way out. Aug. 27. The Air being wholly vanish'd; I took out the Cherries, which retain'd their Colour with∣out Putrefaction: Their Taste was acid, and the Pulp was full of Cavities like fermented Paste. From this and the foregoing Experiment com∣par'd, it appears that Fruits yield less in artifi∣cial than common Air, and consequently, their natural State is longer preserv'd. EXPERIMENT III. Septemb. 10th 77. Common Air.Grapes in∣closed in a Receiver. SIX Ounces of unripe Grapes being shut up in a Receiver, which was large enough to hold 25 Ounces of Water, with common Air, I shut up the Receiver firmly with a Screw.
Septemb. 11 The Mercury rose not in the least. Septemb. 12 It was about an Inch high. Septemb. 13 It was rais'd to 3 ½ Septemb. 14 It was rais'd to 7 Septemb. 15 It was rais'd to 10 Septemb. 16 It was rais'd to 12 ½ Septemb. 17 It was rais'd to 14 Sept. 18 It was rais'd to 16 Sept. 19 It was rais'd to 18 Sept. 20 It was rais'd to 20 Sept. 21 It was rais'd to 22 Sept. 22 It was rais'd to 23 ½ Septemb. 23 It was rais'd to 27 Inches, no Alte∣ration being observ'd in the Grapes. Septemb. 24 It was 30 Inches high. Septemb. 25 It was 31. The Colour of the Grapes being turn'd yellow. Septemb. 26 It was rais'd to 32 ½ Septemb. 27 It was rais'd to 34 Sept. 29 It was rais'd to 35 Sept. 30 It was rais'd to 35 Octob. 1 The Mercury was 35 Inches high. Octob. 2 It was 36 Octob. 0 It was 36 Octob. 6 It was 36 Octob. 10 It was 35 Octob. 13 It was 32 ½ None of the Air made it's way out; but the Cold encreased. Novemb. 9 The Mercury had neither ascended nor descended. Decem. 19 The Air was lost. Decem.20 The Grapes took out of the Recei∣ver were firmer than before, their Taste and Smell discovering them to be mouldy.
Factitious Air. Septemb. 10. 77. Having included 2 Ounces of unripe Grapes in a Receiver which was large enough to con∣tain 8 Ounces of Water, and as much of factiti∣ous Air of Pears as sustain'd a mercurial Cylin∣der of 10 Digits. Sept. 11. The Mercury subsided to 8 Digits. Sept. 12. It ascended 3 Inches. Sept. 13 It rose to 16 Sept. 14 It rose to 20 Sept. 15 It rose to 23 Sept. 16 It rose to 24 Sept 17. It was sustain'd at 28 Inches; the Colour of the Grapes being turn'd Yellow. Sept. 18 It was 29 Sept. 19 It was 30 Sept. 20 It was 31 Sept. 21 It was 33 Sept. 23 It was 35 Sept. 24 It was 20 Some Air got out. The Grapes were Yellow. Sept. 24 It was 21 Sept. 25 It was 22 Sept. 26 little Variation. Sept. 27 It was 22 Sept. 29 It was 27 Sept. 30 It was 28 Oct. 1 & 2 It was 28 Oct. 5 It was 30 Oct. 6 It was 31 Oct. 10 It was 31 ½ Oct. 13 It was 31 Nov. 9 It was 13. Some Air made it's way out. Nov. 19 It was 29 Inches high. Dec. 20. The Grapes had acquir'd a greater degree of Firmness, The Taste and Smell being not less grateful than before. In which Experiment the firmness seems to be effected by an exhalation of the Spirits; and it hence likewise appears, that Factitious Air may preserve the Taste, tho' it causes a change in Colour. EXPERIMENT IV. July 18. HAving enclos'd two Pieces of Oranges,Artificial Air from Oranges. the one with Common Air, and added as much Factitious Air of Cherries as was sufficient to bear up 12 Inches of Quicksilver, and the o∣ther without any addition to the Air contain'd in the Receiver. July 20. The latter seem'd Mouldy; the other not appearing to have undergone any Change. July 23. The Orange contain'd in the Factitious Air was unalter'd, the Mouldiness of the other be∣ing encreas'd. July 26. That in the Common Air seem'd Putrid; as likewise the other did, but without Mouldi∣ness. August 1. No farther Alterations appearing in the Oranges, I open'd the Receivers, and observ'd that in the Artificial Air, which held the Mer∣cury 26 Inches high, was well Tasted and Firm; only the Top of the Rind had lost a little Juice;
that in the other Reciver seem'd Rotten, except the Rind. It may be here observ'd, that Factitious Air of the Cherries, hath different Effects on several Fruits. EXPERIMENT V. Factitious Air. July 20. 76.  Artificial Air from Beef.HAving compress'd Air made of Cherries in a Receiver with a Piece of Beef, so that it bore up a Cylinder of Mercury 27 Inches high. July 21 There was no considerable Change in the Height of it. July 22 There was no considerable Change in the Height of it. July 23 There was no considerable Change in the Height of it. July 25 There was no considerable Change in the Height of it. July 26 The Receiver and Cover were sepa∣rated; the Flesh Stunk. Common Air. July 20. 76. Beef being shut up with Common Air: The Mercury was rais'd. July 21 0 July 22 1 Inch. July 23 5 ½ July 25 9 ½ July 26 14 ½ towards Night 18. July 27 21 ½ towards Night 25. July 28 The Air got out. Hence it appears, that the Artificial Air of Cherries, hindred the Generation of it from Flesh.
EXPERIMENT VI. Common Air. March 14. 76.  Artificial Air from Onions.TWO Onions being enclos'd with Common Air in a Receiver. March 28. The Mercury on the Sixteenth was depress'd ¼ of an Inch, but after was buoy'd up 2 ¼. And the Air geting out, the length of the Roots was increas'd. April 28. They were putrifi'd and corrupted. May 9. The Mercury neither ascended nor subsided, but the Roots were putrifi'd. Factitious Air. March 17. 76. Onions bing included with Air obtain'd from Paste. March 28. They took Root just as they usually do in Common Air. April 28. The Extremities of the Roots began to pu∣trify, perhaps because the Artificial Air might be moister: The Mercury Ascended 9 or 10 Inches. May. 18. One of them began to corrupt: From whence it appears, that Vegetation is not hinder'd by artificial Air; and it likewise appears, that the Quantity of Air is increased.
EXPERIMENT VII. Common Air. August 25.  Artificial Air from Grapes.SIx Ounces of Grapes being shut up in a Re∣ceiver large enough to contain 25 Ounces of Water. Aug. 26 It's Ascent scarce discernible. Aug. 27 1 Inch. Aug. 28 It's Height was 1 ¼ Aug. 29 It's Height was 1 ¼ Aug. 30. The Mercury subsided a little; the Grapes were not equally alter'd, as in Artificial Air of Pears. Aug. 31. The Grapes being open to the Atmosphere. Septemb. 7. Their pungent Taste was something abated; tho' they retain'd their Colour. Factitious Air. Aug. 25. Two Ounces of Grapes being shut up in a Re∣ceiver, large enough to hold 8 ½ of Water, so much Air of Pears was thrust in, as was able to raise it 15 Inches. Aug. 26. Some Air getting out, a supply was added, which rais'd the Mercury to 17 Inches high.
Aug. 27. The Mercury subsided to less than 16 Inches; towards night it ascended again to 17 Inches. Aug. 28 It rose to 19 Aug. 29 It rose to 21 Aug. 30 It rose to 22 Aug. 31 It rose to 23 ½ Sept. 1 It rose to 24 Sept. 2 It rose to 24 Sept.and 4 thay acquir'd a Yellow¦ness. Sept. 5. Air got out. Sept. 7. The Grapes were insipid, and of an ungrate∣ful Taste. From this Experiment we may argue for the Power of Artificial Air in changing Colours: It promotes the Generation of Air, and pre∣serves Tastes. EXPERIMENT VIII. Factitious Air. Aug. 2.76. Artificial Air from Gilliflowers.A Gilliflower being enclosed with Air of Paste in a Receiver. Aug. 4. It was moist, and alter'd it's Colour. Aug. 9. It was in some measure alter'd. Aug. 12. Their Moistness increas'd gradually without Mouldiness. Aug. 31. It was not so fresh as those in Vacuo. Aug. 2. Common Air. Being enclos'd with Common Air.
Aug. 4. It was unalter'd. Aug. 9. It was wet, and almost Colourless. Aug. 12. It was very Mouldy. Aug. 4. Vacuum. Two Gilliflowers being shut up in Vacuum. Aug. 4. They seem'd moist. But in a year after under∣went no Alteration. From whence it appears, that factitious Air renders Colours more subject to change. EXPERIMENT IX. Common Air. July 24.Artificial Air from Apricocks and Plums. A Pricocks and Plums being inclosed in a Receiver. July 28. There was no Change in the Fruit, but that one Plum which was cut in pieces, was a little mouldy. Aug. 11. The Colour Taste and Consistence of the Fruit were all very acceptable. July 24. Artificial Air. The same Ingredients being shut up with so much Artificial Air of Cherries, as kept a Cy∣linder of Mercury up to 22 Inches.
July. 25. It subsided 3 Inches, and rose to 22 again-towards Night. July. 26 It rose 28 July. 27 It rose 34 ½ July. 28 It rose 36 July. 29 It rose 40 July 30 It rose 44 Foot high. Those Apricocks which were cut in pieces were moist, and be∣gan to dissolve in Water. July. 31 The Height was 51 Aug. 1 The Height was 60 Aug. 2 It was 65 Foot high. The Fruit being taken out, were of a grateful Taste, and as far as they were immersed in Water, very soft. From whence it is evident, that the Air of Cherries hastens Alterations in Colour, and Firmness in Apricocks. EXPERIMENT X. July 30. PLums cut in pieces, being shut up in Vacuo, and likewise with Common Air; and in a∣nother Receiver with Common Air of Goose∣berries. Aug. 2. In the latter, they were unalter'd: In common Air they grew mouldy: In Vacuo they became soft. Aug. 5. In the Artificial Air, they became red, soft and moist; In Common Air black and mouldy, yet firm: In Vacuo they were near a Dissolution.
August 7. They became soft in Common Air. August 8. They became red instead of Black: Artifici∣al Air seems to promote Alteration. EXPERIMENT XI. Sept. 24.Peaches shut up in a Receiver. FIve Peaches being clos'd in a Receiver, with Artificial Air of Grapes together with Common Air. Sept. 25 The Mercury was 21 Inches high. Sept. 26 It rose to 23 Sept. 27 It rose to 31 Sept. 28 It rose to 39 Sept. 29 It rose to 42 Sept. 30 It rose to 45 Oct. 1 It rose to 48 Oct. 2 It rose to 48 Oct. 3 It rose to 52 ½ Oct. 5 It rose to 52 ½ The Peaches were Wet. Oct. 6 It rose to 58 Oct. 7 It rose to 58 Oct. 8 It rose to 61 Oct. 11 A little higher. Oct. 19 It rose to 95 Oct. 25 It rose to 61 Very Cold. The Cold abating it Ascended. Oct. 27 Oct. 30 It rose to 61 / Nov. 2 It rose to 59 Very Cold. Nov. 6 It rose to 61 A Thaw. Nov. 7 A little heigher. Nov. 9 At the same height. Nov. 9 In a Month it gradually as∣cended to 8 Inches. April 1. It was 96. When the Receiver was open, as the Air broke out, it emitted several Bubbles; their Taste and Colour were good, the consist∣ence of them was as if they had been boil'd: And in three hours time they were Rotten.
Bodies corrupt less in a Mixture of Factitious and Common Air, than in the Latter it self. EXPERIMENT XII. August 4.Pears en∣clos'd in a Receiver. FOur Pieces of Pear being clos'd with Com∣mon Air in a Receiver. August 6. The Colour of this Fruit was equally alter'd as of others: The Mercury ascended not. August 7. The Mercury ascended a little, the Alteration in the Pears being small. August 8. They were very little Alter'd; the Cylinder of Mercury was 4 Inches. August 9. It was 4 ½. Aug. 10 It rose to 6 Aug. 11 It rose to 10 Aug. 13 It rose to 16 Aug. 4 It rose to 20 The Pears grew softer. Aug. 15 It was 21 Aug. 16 It was 19 Aug. 17 Air got out. Aug. 8 The Air being got out, and the Fruit taken out, it was rotten. August 4. Other Pieces of the same Fruit being shut up with as much Artificial Air of Cherries as sus∣tain'd 23 Digits of Mercury above it's usual height. August 6. The Colour of them was a little alter'd. August 7. They were almost all Rotten: The Mercury neither subsiding nor ascending.
August 8. They were in some Measure alter'd. August 10. They gradually became softer: The Mercury being rais'd 40 Digits. Aug. 11 It rose to 51 Aug. 13 It rose to 61 Aug. 14 It rose to 67 Aug. 15 It rose to 73 Aug. 16 It rose to It Descended, tho' no Air made it's way out. August 17. The Mercury was 67 Digits high: No Air got out. August 18. The Mercury subsided not: The Taste of the Fruit was Acid, and their substance very soft; the Air contain'd in the Receiver likewise, smelling very sharp. August 4. 77. Pieces of the same Fruit being enclos'd in a Receiver. August 6. They alter'd their Colour. August 7. A piece of a Pear became soft: and another in Artificial Air was putrid the Day before. August 8. They were all soft; and one was Moul∣dy. August 9. Their Rottenness gradually encreas'd. August 11. They were altogether Rotten and Mu∣cid.
From this Experiment and the former it ap∣pears, that Rottenness is equally promoted, in included and open Air, tho' much faster carri'd on in the Latter. August 4. 77. Several Pieces of Pears being shut up in Va∣cuo. August 6 The height of the Mercurial Cy∣linder was 5 Digits. Aug. 7 It rose to 8 Aug. 8 It rose to 10 Aug. 9 It rose to 12 Aug. 10 It rose to 14 Aug. 11 It rose to 16 Aug. 13 It rose to 20 Aug. 14 It rose to 23 Aug. 15 It rose to 25 Aug. 17 It rose to 28 August 20. They were not in the least Chang'd till to Day; when being soft, the Mercury was at a stand. August 26. All things Remain'd as before. From which Experiments it appears, how apt Artificial Air is to soften Fruit. EXPERIMENT XIII. August 21. 77.Apricocks shut up in a Receiver. SIX Apricocks being divided into Quarters, one Piece of each was inclos'd in a Recei∣ver. August 22. They seem'd Riper. August 23. One piece which touch'd the Water, acquir'd
Mouldiness, the other beginning to putrify. The Mercury ascended a little. August 24. Those next the Water were not only Mouldy, but all Rotten. August 25. Putrifaction gradually became greater: The height of the Mercury was 7 Inches. Aug. 26 It rose to 15 Aug. 28 It rose to 30 Aug. 29 It rose to 30 The Fruit was almost dissolv'd. Aug. 30 It rose to 33 Aug. 31 It rose to 38 Sept. 1 It rose to 38 Sept. 2 It rose to 38 Sept. 3 It rose to 38 † A little. Sept. 4 It rose to 41 Sept. 5 It rose to 43 Sept. 7 It rose to 45 Sept. 8 It rose to 46 Sept. 9 It rose to 46 Sept. 22. The Mercurial Cylinder vari'd little: The Fruit was almost dissolv'd. Octob. 1. The Taste of the Fruit which remain'd un∣dissolv'd was subacid and grateful: The Mer∣cury then standing about 46 Inches high. August 21. 77. A Quarter of each of the same Fruit being plac'd in a Receiver, which was not sufficiently guarded from the outward Air, August 22. They became as flaccid as if they were wi∣ther'd. August 23. Many were Rotten and Mouldy. August 24. They were wholly putrifi'd.
August 21. A Quarter of each of the Apricocks being shut up in a Receiver, and a sufficient Quantity of Artificial Air from Pears added, as rais'd the Mercury 20 Inches. August 22. The Mercury stood still, but became Riper than those in open Air. August 23. The Alteration was not so great as in Com∣mon Air. August 24. They were unalter'd. August 25. They began to yield Air; but the Quantity was not discernible. August 26. They underwent no considerable Change. August 28. They began to be a little moist: Yet the Al∣teration they underwent was not so considerable as of those in Common Air. August 30. The Mercury Rose 30 Inches above it's usual Height. Aug. 31 It rose to 40 Sept. 1 It rose to 40 Sept. 2 It rose to 40 Sept. 3 It rose to 45 Sept. 8 It rose to 49 † A little. Sept. 9 The height was 40 Sept. 11 The height was 38 Sept. 12 The height was less Sept. 13 The height was 33 Sept. 14. The Mercury subsided so far as to disappear.
Sep. 22. It rose again to 33 Inches: The Fruit was cover'd with a Mucor. Octob. 1. The Apricocks were well colour'd: But spon∣gy and soft, and of a subacid Taste. August 21. A quarter of each of the aforesaid Fruit, being enclos'd with as much Common Air as was able to raise the Mercury 90 Inches above it's usual height. August 22. The Receiver bursting with the Elasticity of that Air, the Fruit was enclos'd with as much Air as rais'd the Mercury 60 Inches. August 25. New Air was added, the Fruit was not Moul∣dy. August 26. They were altogether Rotten and Mouldy. From whence it appears that Corruption is quicker in Artificial, tho greater in Common Air.
ARTICLE IV. The Effects of Air compress'd, different from the Effects of Common Air. EXPERIMENT I, March 21. 77.Onions shut up in a Re∣ceiver, TWO Onions being shut up with as much common Air, as was able to sustain 60 Inches of Mercury. March 28. They took Root like others in the Air, no more compress'd than that of the Atmosphere. April 28. Onions shut up 8 Days ago, were mouldy: The Extremities of the Roots of those in com∣pressed Air, began to rot: And new Air being put in rais'd the Mercury 69 Digits. April 29. Those in the compressed Air were mouldy. From this Experiment it appears, that Com∣pression hinders not Vegetation; and tho' Com∣pression seem'd to hinder Corruption at the first, yet upon an Intrusion of fresh Air, it was by that promoted.
EXPERIMENT II. May 9. HAVING inclos'd an equal Proportion of Tulips and Lark-Spurs together in two Receivers;Tulips and Lark-Spurs enclos'd in a Receiver. as much Air was squeez'd into one as was able to raise Mercury 70 Digits. May 11. Two Tulips in the common Air uncompress'd, were mouldy. May 12. Another in the uncompress'd Air became mouldy. May 14. All the Tulips and one Lark-Spur became mucid; One Tulip in the compress'd Air being likewise mucid. May 17. Three in the compress'd Air acquir'd a Mu∣cidness, yet not so much as those in the Air un∣compress'd: Two of the Lark-Spurs in uncom∣press'd Air were finew'd, but those in the com∣press'd Air, were not. May 21. The Flowers shut up in uncompress'd Air were rotten, those in the compress'd Air being unal∣ter'd, except that the Mouldiness was rather di∣minish'd. May 30. The Flowers being dissolv'd and taken out, those in the compress'd Air were subacid; From these Tryals it appears, that Compression hin∣ders Putrefaction.
EXPERIMENT III. May 21. 77. HALF an Orange being inclos'd in a Re∣ceiver,Oranges shut up in a Receiver. and as much in another; to which, so much Air was added, as rais'd the Mercury 100 Inches above it's usual height. May 25. That in the uncompress'd Air was more mu∣cid than the former. May 26. The compress'd Air getting out, it was sup∣ply'd by a new Addition. May 30. The Air being daily added as it got out, the Orange in the compress'd Air was more mucid than the other. June 1. The Oranges being taken out of the Recei∣vers, that in the compress'd Air was much more corrupted than the other, so that, tho' Compres∣sion hinders Corruption, yet 'tis promoted as the Quantity of Air is removed. EXPERIMENT IV. May 31. 77. AN equal Quantity of Roses being put in∣to two Receivers,Roses shut up in a Recei∣ver. so much Air was press'd into one of them, as was able to raise the Mercury 90 Inches above the Height it is suspended at, by uncompress'd Air.
June 11. Those in the uncompress'd Air had lost a little of their Colour; but those in the other Recei∣ver had contracted a Yellowness, as if expos'd to dry in the open Air, neither were they mucid. June 18. Those in the uncompress'd Air were very lit∣tle alter'd, but those in the compress'd Air, grew yellower and yellower: They were nei∣ther dry nor flaccid, nor was there any conside∣rable Alteration in their Smell. But both being expos'd to open Air, those were sooner alter'd which were in the uncompress'd Receiver. From whence it appears, that sometimes com∣press'd Air is more dispos'd to alter Colours, than uncompress'd; and it may not be amiss to observe, that the Roses after this manner shut up, did not acquire the least Mucidness, but only a yellow Colour: But when the Expe∣riment was try'd with Tulips and Lark-Spurs, the Success was different. See Exper. II. EXPERIMENT V. June 1. I Put one half of an Orange in one Receiver,Oranges shut up in a Receiver. and the other half in another, adding to one, as much Air as was able to raise the Mercury, an hundred Inches above the Height it was sustain'd at in the other. June 6. Both of them became mucid, but especially that which was kept in the compress'd Air: In this Experiment it was to be noted, that
the Air which was compress'd in the one Re∣ceiver, daily got out, and was as often re∣new'd. June 11. The Orange in the uncompress'd Air acquir'd no further Mucidness, tho the other did. June 18. The Mucidness of the Orange in the uncom∣press'd Air decreas'd; And tho' the other Orange ceas'd to encrease it's Mucidness, as long as it was not supply'd with fresh Air, yet so much fresh Air being shut up with it, as was able to raise the Mercury 80 Digits, June 20. It became much more mucid in two days time. Whence it appears, that as the Quantity of Air is more or less, so the Body enclos'd in it, is more or less mucid. EXPERIMENT VI. June 17. 77. HAVING shut up two Shrew-Mice,Shrew Mice shut up in a Receiver. and each of them in a distinct Receiver, we added so much Air to one of them, as rais'd the Mercury 30 Digits: But the Mouse in the un∣compress'd Air, was shut up, about 5 and 521, 61 after the other. The Mouse in the compress'd Air seem'd to lose its Strength a great deal sooner than the other, the Motion of its Breast being not near so quick; nevertheless, about 6 and 181, that in the common Air dy'd Convulsive, yet that in the
compress'd Air, continu'd to be as well as it was an hour and half ago. About 11 of the Clock that in the compress'd Air continu'd Respiration; but about 4 in the Morning it was found dead, in the same Po∣sture it was 7 hours before in; whence we may guess, that it was free from Convulsive Fits. The Mouse in the common Air had consum'd, so much of it, that the Mercury in the Gage, which stood at 29 Inches, was rais'd to 30 when the Receiver was open'd. From whence it appears, that compress'd Air contributes to the prolonging of Life. EXPERIMENT VII. June 13. 77. I Enclos'd 4 Flies in a Receiver,Flies shut up in a Re∣ceiver. with as much Air as rais'd the Mercury 60 Digits above it's usual Height; 3 others at the same time be∣ing shut up with common Air. July 14. In the Morning they were all well. In the Afternoon 2 of those in the compress'd Air were dead. About 5 all in the compress'd Air were dead but one, and the 3 in the common Air were alive. July 15. In the Morning, those in the common Air were dead; but that in the compress'd Air being taken out, flew speedily away. From hence it appears, that they dy'd rather for want of Nourishment, than Air; since that
which surviv'd in the compress'd Air, and had the Bodies of the other to feed upon, was not distemper'd. EXPERIMENT VIII. June 15. EIGHT Flies being included in two distinct Receivers,Flies shut up in a Re∣ceiver. and the Air in one compress'd more than in the foregoing Experiment. June 16. Two in the common Air, and one in the com∣press'd were dead in the Morning. In the After∣noon all in the common Air seem'd dead. June 17. All, except one in the compress'd Air, were dead. From this and the foregoing Experiment it appears, that the Compression or Rarefaction of the Air, affects Flies very little, except there be almost a compleat Vacuum. EXPERIMENT IX. June 18. TWO Frogs being enclos'd in two Recei∣vers,Frogs en∣clos'd in a Receiver. shut up by the help of Screws, the one with common Air, and the other with an Addition of as much as rais'd the Mercury 70 Digits. June 19. No Alteration was perceiv'd.
June 20. The Frogs were alive, and the Air seem'd to be increas'd. June 21. In the Evening, that in the common Air was dead. June 23. In the Morning, that in the compress'd Air was dead. Whether the Compression of the Air, or Dis∣position of the Body of the latter contributed to prolong it's Life, must be determin'd by fur∣ther Observations. EXPERIMENT X. June 18. 77.Oranges convey'd into a Re∣ceiver.TWO halves of an Orange being shut up in two Receivers with Screws, so much Air was added to the one, as sustain'd the Mer∣cury 90 Digits. June 22. That in the common Air was mouldy: And at 3 a Clock Afternoon, the other had contract∣ed a Mucor. June 23. That in the common Air was more mucid than the other. June 24. That in the compress'd Air was all over mouldy. June 28. That in the common Air had lost it's Moul∣diness: The other was unalter'd.
June 30. Being taken out, that in the common Air was half rotten; the other, wholly putrify'd, and mucid. From hence it appears, that as the Quantity of Air is greater, so is the Body contain'd more mucid. The Mouldiness in the compress'd, in∣creas'd more intensly, tho' it began not so soon. EXPERIMENT XI. June 29. 77.Roses en∣clos'd in a Receiver.TWO Receivers stopp'd with Screws con∣taining Roses, so much Air was squeez'd into one, as rais'd the Mercury 90 Digits. July 14. The Roses in the common Air were alter'd. But the others began to wither and look yellow about 4 days ago. July 17. Being taken out, those in the compress'd Air were much corrupted, and of an ungrateful Smell; The others had undergone very little Alteration. From hence it further appears, that the Quantity of Corruption depends on the Quantity of Air.
EXPERIMENT XII. July 4. A Limon being divided, and shut up in two Receivers with Screws, so much Air was added to one, as sustain'd the Mercury 90 Digits. July 7. Both pieces seem'd to acquire a Mouldiness at the same time. July 17. That in the compress'd Air, was much more hoary and putrid than the other. This Expe∣riment does not only confirm what was inferred in the foregoing, but also that a Triple Com∣pression of the Air in Respect of a Limon, is too weak sensibly to retard the Production of Mouldiness or Finew. EXPERIMENT XIII. July 18. 77.Gilliflowers enclos'd in a Receiver.ONE parcel of Gilliflowers being enclos'd in a Receiver with common Air, and an equal parcel in another, with as much compress'd Air, as sustain'd the Mercury 100 Digits above it's wonted Pressure. July 23. Those in the compress'd Air were cover'd with a Mouldiness: but the others were only moist: The Air was subsided 30 Inches.
July 25. Those in the compress'd Air were more com∣press'd than the others, and had lost their Co∣lour. July 26. Those in the compress'd Air were wholly putrify'd, and cover'd with a hoary Finew; the others were only moist in some places. August 1. Those in the compress'd Air being taken out, were rotten and stunk; the others were moist, retain'd their Colour, and smell'd not at all of∣fensive. This Experiment confirms, That the Quantity of Air doth increase Corruption; and also that Mouldiness is not produced, but in com∣press'd Air. EXPERIMENT XIV. July 21. 77.A Shrew Mouse in common Air.TO try whether a Shrew-Mouse would con∣sume or produce Air, I shut it up in a Recipient with common Air. After 2 hours some was consum'd; but the Mouse died. July 24. Toward Evening, the Mercury seem'd a little higher. July 25. A great deal of Air was produc'd de novo. July 26. It increased considerably. From whence it appears, that living Animals consume, and dead ones produce Air.
EXPERIMENT XV. August 31.Pears en∣clos'd in a Receiver. AS much Air was pressed into a Receiver which contain'd Pears, as sustain'd the Mercury 30 Digits above the usual height. Sept. 1. The Mercury was depress'd. Sept. 2. It sunk to 25 Inches. Sept. 3. It was rais'd to 26. Sept 4. It was 28 Digits high. Sept. 8. The Receiver being open'd, 5 of the Pears had lost their Firmness, but 2 retain'd. August 31. The same sort of Pears being shut up with common Air. Sept. 1. The Mercury was depress'd a little; I suppose by the Cold. Sept. 2. It was not changed. Sept. 3. It was rais'd a Digit. Sept. 4 The height of it was 4 Sept. 5 The height of it was 6 ¾ Sept. 6 The height of it was 6 ½ Sept. 7 The height of it was 12 Sept. 8 The height of it was 20
Being taken out, they retain'd their Taste and Firmness, much better than in Vacuo. Aug. 31. The same sort of Pears being shut up in Vacuo, so much External Air broke in, as sustain'd the Mercury an Inch. Sept. 1 The Height of it was 4 Sept. 2 The Height of it was 8 Sept. 3 The Height of it was 12 Sept. 4 The Height of it was 16 Sept. 5 The Height of it was 19 Sept. 6 The Height of it was 23 Sept. 7 The Height of it was 27 Sept. 8 The Height of it was 30 Being taken out, they had lost their Taste in a great measure, but reserv'd their Firmness. From these Experiments it appears, that as the Compression is greater, the less Air is pro∣duc'd. EXPERIMENT XVI. Decemb. 7.A small Bird. A Small Bird being shut up in a Receiver, which was large enough to contain 20 Ounces of Water, began to be ill, before I had set the Screw; but as much Air being press'd in, as rais'd the Mercury 30 Digits, she seem'd to recover; but after a little time, she began to be ill again: yet so much Air being thrust in, as rais'd the Mercury to 45 Digits, she recover'd a second time; But some time after she began to gasp again; nevertheless, 28 Minutes after the Receiver was open'd, she got out, and was ve∣ry well.
EXPERIMENT VII. Jan. 20. 1678.A Shrew-Mouse in a Wind-Gun. A Shrew-Mouse being shut up in my Wind-Gun, and the Air so far condens'd, that it reduc'd it to a twentieth Part of the Space it possess'd before, upon a Discharge of that Air, the Elliptick Hole being open'd, the Mouse was taken out dead. Another Mouse being put in, and the Air compress'd to a third Part of it's Space, it was taken out well. The Experiment was repeated, and the Air 7 or 8 times con∣dens'd, by which the Mouse seem'd not the least prejudic'd; The same Experiment being repeat∣ed, the Air being 7 times compress'd, when the Mouse had been shut up 24 Minutes, upon a Dis∣charge of the Air, after repeated Groans, died. From whence it appears, that compress'd Air is noxious, yea, mortiferous. EXPERIMENT XVIII. Jan. 28. 78.A Shrew-Mouse in compress'd Air. I Put a Shrew-Mouse into a Glass, to whose Neck I ty'd a Bladder, stopping the O∣rifice, which being shut up in a Receiver, when the Mouse began to be sick, by pressing new Air into the Receiver, the Bladder was straitned, and tho' new Air could not pene∣trate into the Mouse; yet the Air it was shut up in being compress'd, it was much better, and being taken out, in a short time recover'd.
Another Mouse being shut up after the same manner, till it could scarce breath; when the Air was compress'd, its Respiration seem'd abated; upon which, the Receiver being open'd, and the Mouse expos'd to the Air, it could not breath much more freely; yet when Air was blown up∣on it with a pair of Bellows, it seem'd re∣liev'd; but being again shut up with compress'd Air, it breath'd less frequently, and died. March 25. A Mouse being shut up in an Instrument be∣fore describ'd, when I perceiv'd the Mouse sick, I intruded Water into the Receiver, so that the Air was reduc'd into half the Space it possess'd be∣fore; upon which, the Mouse breath'd more rarely; but the Air being successively compress'd and left to it's liberty again, the sick Mouse seem'd to breath more lively in the common Air, than in the compress'd. Whence I conjectur'd, that the Air is to Animals as Food, which ought to bear some proportion to the Strength of the Animal. In Confirmation of which Conjecture, I shut up a Mouse in my Pneumatick Engin, and rarifi'd the Air so much, that it possess'd three times the Space it did before; upon which, the Mouse seem'd better, but presently began to be sick, yet underwent no sensible Alteration up∣on an intromission of Air: The like success happen'd three times successively, tho' at the last the Mouse died.
ARTICLE V. The Effects of Artificial Air upon Animals. EXPERIMENT I. May 5. 77. A Bee,A Bee in Artificial Air. together with distill'd Vinegar, and Powder of Coral, being convey'd into a Receiver; I so contriv'd the matter, that when the Receiver was exhaustod, the Coral fell into the Vinegar: But the Air produc'd, had no Ef∣fect on the Bee; yet when it had been a little expos'd to the Air, it began to move: Whence we may gather, that Artificial Air is not fit for Animals to live in. EXPERIMENT II. August 12. 76. TWO Flies being contain'd in a Receiver,Flies in Ar∣tificial Air. with as much Artificial Air of Goosberries as sustain'd 26 Inches of Mercury: And two o∣thers being shut up in Vacuo, adding common Air enough to sustain 23 Digits of Mercury, up∣on which, in a quarter of an hour the latter be∣gan to fly, but those in the Artificial Air lay without motion.
Aug. 13. Those in the Artificial Air seem'd dead; the others were well; nor did the former recover, tho' expos'd to common Air a whole day. Aug. 18. The same Experiment was repeated with the like Success. This Experiment is a further Con∣firmation, that Artificial Air is noxious to Re∣spiration. EXPERIMENT III. June 22. 77. PASTE being contain'd in 3 exhausted Re∣ceivers.Paste in∣cluded in 3 Receivers. June 23. Into one I put a perfum'd Cone kindled, which was extinguish'd in a Minute, as soon as the Receiver was stopp'd; yet in common Air, it burnt bright for some time after the Receiver was stopp'd. Another Experiment being try'd with a Fly, I observ'd, that tho' when it was shut up in Ar∣tificial Air for some time, it seem'd dead, till reviv'd in the Sun-Beams; yet another shut up in common Air, receiv'd no damage: The like Success follow'd, when we try'd the Experi∣ment a second time, save that the Fee being taken out of the Artificial Air, was something longer before she recover'd. From hence it ap∣pears, that Artificial Air is prejudicial to Fire as well as to the Life of Animals.
EXPERIMENT IV. Jun. 25. 77. HAving enclos'd Paste in four Receivers, two of which were exhausted, and the o∣ther two but half evacuated. June 26. Those which were half full of common Air, being fill'd with Artificial, I put two Flies into one of them, which were depriv'd of Motion, as soon as they came to the Bottom; A Third, and then a fourth, successively being put in, they continu'd to live longer; yet after some Convul∣sions, lay unmov'd and supine; But being remov'd into common Air, in a little time they came to themselves: Those Flies that were put into Re∣ceivers, which only contain'd common Air, were well sooner. June 27. One of the Receivers which had been wholly exhausted of common Air, being casually thrown down, gave way to an Ingress of external Air; A Frog being being put in, was not much dis∣affected. June 30. The fourth Receiver being forced away from it's Cover, I put a Frog into it, which after five minutes high Convulsions, lay without Motion four minutes; and then being taken out of the Receiver, continu'd so 46 minutes; but in five minutes more grew very well. From hence it appears, that if Artificial Air be mix'd with common Air, it is so much the less prejadicial to Animals.
EXPERIMENT V. June 28. I Enclos'd Paste in four Receivers,A Frog in Artificiab Air. 3 of which were wholly exhausted of common Air, but the fourth was left half full. June 29. One of the Receivers being full of Artificial Air, and a Frog put into it, after it had been violently Convulsive for 4 or 5 Minutes, and lay void of Motion for about a Minute, being taken out of the Receiver, in about 5 Minutes, be∣gan to move, and was well again in a little time. A Frog being put into another Receiver with Artificial Air, was Convulsive for about 7 Mi∣nutes, and then lay void of Motion for about a Minute; yet when it was taken out of the Re∣ceiver, it began to struggle and move, after which Motions, which seem'd to be the Relicks of its Convulsions, it lay for about half an hour void of Motion again; yet, at the last, it recover'd a second time. A Frog being cast into that Receiver, which was but half exhausted, for ten Minutes seem'd Convulsive; and then, lying still for about a Mi∣nute, the Receiver being open'd, within half an hour recover'd power to move again: But in the Experiment it was to be noted, that the Quantity of Artificial Air, was so much encreas'd before the Frog was cast in, that part of it, and consequently some of the common Air made it's way out.
A Frog being shut up in a Receiver with com∣mon Air. July 1. In the Morning it was alive, in the After∣noon dead; It liv'd near 48 hours. June 30. A Frog being shut up with Artificial Air whol∣ly, after 7 Minutes Convulsions died; nor did it recover, tho' taken out 2 Minutes after. July 1. It did not recover: Hence it appears further, that Artificial Air is most detrimental, when least common Air is mix'd with it. EXPERIMENT VI. June 30.Paste inclu∣ded in a Receiver. PASTE being shut up in two exhausted Receivers. July 4. Some little Air having got into one Receiver, I put a Shrew-Mouse into it, who after vehe∣ment Convulsions, died in a Minute. A Snail being put into the other Receiver, continu'd to move vehemently for a quarter of an hour, after which time, its Motion gradually declining, in a quarter of an hour it seem'd dead, but in a short time grew well again. Flies being shut up in another Receiver, were not at all prejudic'd, too much External Air having got in. From hence it appears, That Artificial Air is prejudicial, upon the Account of some veno∣mous
Quality; and not only by defect of Com∣mon Air; since Snails liv'd a longer time in Va∣cuo. See Art. VI. Exp. III. EXPERIMENT VII. July 5. 77.A Frog in Artificial and Com∣mon Air. HAving transmitted Artificial Air of Cher∣ries out of One Receiver into another, full of Common Air, in which a Frog was con∣tain'd; so much Water flow'd out, as was suffi∣cient to give way to the Ingress of the Artificial Air. Upon which the Frog being Convulsive for about a Quarter of an hour, lay still; yet soon recover'd again, when expos'd to the Air. This Experiment seems to prove, that Arti∣ficial Air of Cherries is less pernicious than that of Paste; See Exp. V. EXPERIMENT VIII. July 9. 77.Goosberries enclos'd in Vacuo. GOosberries were shut up in three empty Receivers. July 20. So much Air was produc'd, as separated the Cover from the Receiver: Two Flies being cast successively in, presently Died; a third seem'd Convulsive; a fourth in less than a quarter of a Minute lay without Motion: The Receiver be∣ing clear'd of the Artificial Air it, grew well. July 24. A Shrew-Mouse being shut with Air from Goosberries, Died in half a Minute.
Hence it may be inferr'd, that Air produc'd from Fruit is less prejudicial than Air obtain'd from Minerals; for July 20 a Mouse being shut up with Air produc'd from Gunpowder, Died in a Quarter of a Minute. EXPERIMENT IX. July 5. 77.Paste in Va∣cuo. PAste being contain'd in four exhausted Re∣ceivers. July 6. One was forc'd from it's Cover: Some Com∣mon Air got in before it could be stopped. A Shrew-Mouse being put in, was Convulsive a Minute and ½ and then remain'd moveless: Being taken out, after some Convulsive Motions, Died. July 7. A Bird shut up as the Mouse was, in a quarter of a Minute Died: A Bird of the same kind be∣ing shut 4 Minutes with common Air, was very well. July 9. The same Bird which continu'd well in the Common Air, Died when enclos'd with Artifi∣cial Air, in a quarter of a Minute. An Adder being shut up with Artificial Air, in 2 Minutes began to be ill; and in 24 Minutes was depriv'd of Motion, and tho' 6 Minutes after it was expos'd to the Air, yet it reco∣ver'd not. July 10. There was no hopes of Recovery.
EXPERIMENT X. July 12. 78.A Bird in Artificial Air. A Bird shut up with Air from Raisins Died in ¼ of a Minute. July 18. A Shrew-Mouse being shut up with the same sort of Air, after 2 Minutes seem'd ill and void of Motion; yet in 2 or 3 Minutes was well a∣gain. EXPERIMENT XI. Octob. 1. 78A Shrew-Mouse in a Receiver. A Shrew-Mouse being shut up an hour in Common Air could scarce Breath. Another being cast into the same Receiver, before the Stopple was clapt on again, some fresh Air broke in, by which the first Mouse was refresh'd; yet about an hour after both died. About 4 after Noon, another Mouse be∣ing clap'd in very cautiously, died in 3 Mi∣nutes. Whence it appears, that the same Air is not long fit for Respiration. EXPERIMENT XII. April 28.A Snail in Artificial Air. A Snail being enclos'd with Air from Paste, froath'd, and contracted and expanded successively, till in 4 Minutes it became void of Motion; At a quarter of an hours end, being taken out, it was void of Motion: Yet being
prick'd with a Pin, a quarter of an hour after mov'd a little. A Snail being shut up when that Air was blown out, was not ill at all: whence it appears, that Artificial Air is more prejudicial to Animals, than a Vacuum. EXPERIMENT XIII. Jun. 22. 78.Green Pease in a Recei∣ver. IN a Dayes time green Pease yielded Air e∣nough to sustain 10 Digits of Mercury. Jun. 23. The Mercury was 30 Digits high. Jun. 24. It rose no higher. The Cover and the Recei∣ver stuck not together, yet no Air got out. Jun. 26. The same Pease being shut up in the same Emp∣ty Receiver. Jun. 29. A Snail being thrown in, and the Receiver being full of Factitious Air, it froth'd, and frequently contracted and expanded; but after six Minutes, lay still 2 or 3. Being taken out it mov'd a little. Whence we gather, that Factitious Air of Pease is not so prejudicial to Snails as that of Paste. See Experiment XII, XI. The Factitious Air being blown out, a Snail did very well in the Receiver. In this Experiment it is observ∣able, that Pease sooner yeild Air in Vacuo, than in Compress'd Air.
ARTICLE VI. Animals in Vacuo. EXPERIMENT I. Jun. 22. 76.A Butter-Fly in Va∣cuo. A Butterflie mov'd 3 hours in Vacuo, and re∣coverd it's Motion when lost, upon an ingress of Air. Being hung by a thred, tied to one of her horns, it was mov'd from one side of the Receiver to the other by the Motion of it's Wing, but when the Air was drawn out, we could not move the Thred from a perpendicular Posture. EXPERIMENT II. July 12. 76.Two Flies in Vacuo. TWo Flies being shut up with as much Air as sustain'd 10 Inches of Mercury, the biggest seem'd presently Dead, tho' the other liv'd 24 hours. When both Flies lay as Dead, so much Air was let in as rais'd the Mercury to 15 Inches; upon which the less Flie began to move. Infects may breath in rarifi'd Air soon∣er than in Artificial.
EXPERIMENT III. May 1.Two Snails in Vacuo. TWo Snails seem'd well for the space of an hour in Vacuo and crept up to the Top of the Receiver; but in two hours fell down void of Motion: 4 hours after, being expos'd to the open Air they began to move. Whilst they were shut up they help'd to produce Air enough to raise the Mercury ¼ of an Inch. They liv'd longer in Vacuo, than others in artificial, Art. V. Exp. VI. EXPERIMENT IV. August 12. 76.Fly-Blow∣ings in a Receiver. FLy-blowings were put into an empty Re∣ceiver. August 14. Worms were form'd: So much Air got in as was sufficient to sustain Mercury 15 Digits. Whence it is evident, Insects may be pro∣duc'd and live in very rarifi'd Air. See Exp. VI. and VIII. EXPERIMENT V. March 17. 77. FRog-Spawn being divided into two equal Parts,Fog-Spawn. and each of those included in a distinct Receiver, the Spawn being first put into glass Vessels; one of the Receivers was
expos'd to the Sun, being totally exhausted; the other was left full of Air. That in Vacuo swell'd into Bubbles. May 2. The Bubbles remain'd in Vacuo. No Frogs were produc'd in either. 3 Days since the Bub∣bles disapear'd; and the Spawn turn'd into a green Liquor. July 2. The Spawn in Vacuo, and the Water con∣tain'd in the Vessel being rais'd in Vapours, stuck to the sides of the Receiver, and there condens'd: The Spawn and Water in the Com∣mon Air retain'd their own Form. EXPERIMENT VI. August 16. 77. I Enclos'd Flies Eggs in an empty Recei∣ver.Flies-Eggs. August 29. No Worms being produc'd, I let the Air in∣to the Receiver. Sept. 4. They produc'd nothing: This Experiment compar'd with the IV, seems to shew, that tho' Insects may be produc'd and live in Air highly rarifi'd, yet they cannot in Vacuo.
EXPERIMENT VII. June 15.A Frog in Vacuo. A Frog enclos'd 14 hours in an exhausted Receiver, Died. June 16. The Experiment being repeated; in 2 hours the dead Frog afforded some Air. June 18. The Frog in Vacuo was swell'd; but the Air being let in, it was more lank than before. Artificial Air is more prejudicial than a Vacu∣um to the Life of such Animals. See Exp. IV, and VII, of Art. V. EXPERIMENT VIII. August 3.78. FLie-Blowings sticking to Flesh being shut up in Vacuo. August 12. No Worms generated. August 15. There being no Alteration in the Eggs; Air was let into the Receiver. Sept. 15. They produc'd nothing. This is a confirma∣tion of the Inference drawn from Exp. IV.
EXPERIMENT IX. April 22.78. VInegar full of small Eels,Vinegar with Eels in Vacuo. or Vinegar Worms was shut up in Vacuo. August 29. The Worms still mov'd, the Number being fewer than before. Sept. 6. Yesterday they mov'd: To day they were all dead. Those left in the open Air were as lively as before. Whence it is evident, that the Air influences even those diminutive Animals. ARTICLE VII. Fire in Compress'd Air. EXPERIMENT I. May 14. I Enclos'd such a Cone in a Receiver,Perfum'd Cones in Vacuo. as is usual∣ly wholly consum'd in the open Air before extinguish'd, and then intruding as much Air as rais'd the Mercury 120 Digits high above it's usual height, I kindl'd the Cone with a burn∣ing Glass; when ⅞ parts of an Inch were con∣sum'd and the Receiver fill'd with Smoak, I
took it out, and found that the outside was only burnt, the inner Parts being left untouch'd. Another Cone being shut up with uncom∣press'd Air, in a Receiver something larger, much less of it was consum'd, than of the for∣mer. EXPERIMENT II. May II. A Perfum'd Cone being enclos'd in a Re∣ceiver, and kind'ld in uncompress'd Air, being weigh'd when the Fumes were condens'd, it had lost a Grain. Another being shut up with as much Air as ele∣vated the Mercury 90 Inches, lost 4 Grains more than the former. So that the more Air is con∣tain'd in the Receiver the greater is the Con∣sumption of the Matter burning in it. EXPERIMENT III. May 17.77. A Persum'd Cone being shut up with a Screw in a Receiver, with as much Air as sus∣tain'd 60 Inches of Mercury above it's usual height, being set on Fire with a Burning-Glass, it lost 3 Grains and a half. The Experiment being repeated in Air compress'd so much as to sustain 120 Inches, lost 7 ¾ Grains.
May 17. The Experiment being try'd, when the Mer∣cury was at 97 Inches, it lost 6 Grains. This Experiment confirms the Inference drawn from the foregoing, and shews that the Consumption bears a greater Proportion to the Compression, than the Compression to the Consumption. May 18.77. A perfum'd Cone being shut up in a Receiver, 7 times as big as before, lost 3 ¼ of it's Weight; which Air, had it been compress'd into a 5th part of that Space, the Cone would have lost 10 Grains. Whence it appears, that the Condensation of the Air promotes the Consumption of the Mat∣ter contain'd in it. EXPERIMENT IV. May 19.77. THE same Experiment being repeated in a Receiver closely stopp'd with a Screw, the Cone lost a Grain and a quarter. May 21. The same Experiment being repeated, and the Cone set on fire, it lost 4 Grains. May 23. It was twice repeated, but the Cone not be∣ing well fir'd; In one it lost ¼ of a Grain; in the other, a whole one. May 24. The Cone lost 1 Grain and ¼ The Cone be∣ing taken out, and cleansed of the Soot, it lost
in a Receiver, 6 Grains ½. In an uncleansed Re∣ceiver it lost 3 Grains in Weight. May 25. In a cleansed Receiver it lost 6 Grains ½. In one well cleansed after it lost 7 Grains ½. In a Receiver unwash'd, the Cone would scarce be kindled. May 26. In a Receiver unwash'd, in the middle of a Sun-shine Day, the Burning-Glass being long apply'd, it was 8 Grains lighter. Whence it appears, that tho' the Consumpti∣on of the Matter be not always the same in the Quantity of Air, yet it is greater, according to the Degrees of Compression. EXPERIMENT V. May 22. HAving enclos'd a perfum'd Cone with so much Air as rais'd the Mercury 30 Di∣gits above it's usual height; it lost 1 ¾ of a Grain. May 23. The same Experiment was try'd with the same Success. The same Experiment being try'd again, the Receiver broke into 100 pieces. See Exper. 3. yea in Exp. VI. of Art. II. tho' it re∣sisted Air compress'd enough to sustain 198 Di∣gits, yet another time it was broke with a sixth part of that Pressure: Therefore a Man ought, in trying such Experiments, to guard his Head, lest a Receiver accidentally breaking, should fly in pieces and wound him.
ARTICLE VIII. Fire us'd to produce Air. EXPERIMENT I. June 4. 76.Paper be∣smear'd with Sul∣phur. PAper besmear'd with Sulphur, and burnt in Vacuo, yielded Air, which lasted 2 Days without Diminution. EXPERIMENT II. June 15.Harts-horn in Vacuo. HArts-Horn burnt in Vacuo, yielded some Air. June 17. Air produced by burnt Harts-horn was soon destroy'd; but if it lasted an hour undiminish'd, it usually continu'd a considerable time. June 19. Harts-horn taken out of the Receiver yield∣ed a fetid Oyl, but no Volatile Spirit. EXPERIMENT III. June 21.Amber in Vacuo. AMber being burnt in a Receiver, ascended in Fumes up to the Top, and thence re∣flected downwards; but burnt in Vacuo, they
rose not above a Digit at the first; but afterwards it rose almost to the Top: The Mercury in the Gage was not alter'd in it's height. June 22. Water, in which the Receiver was immers'd, got into the Receiver. July 8. No more Water got in: Nor did the Amber produce the least Air. EXPERIMENT IV. Jan. 18. 77Camphire included in a Receiver. TWO Drachms of Camphire being put in an empty Receiver upon a Digesting Furnace. Jan. 19. It was sublimed into Flowers; no Air was produced. EXPERIMENT V. May 24. 76.Sulphur Viv. melted in a Receiver. SULPHUR Viv. being melted in an ex∣hausted Receiver by the help of a Burning-glass, yielded no Air. EXPERIMENT VI. July 19. PASTE included in a Receiver and burnt, afforded so much Air, that the Cover which
before could not be mov'd without difficulty, easily parted from the Receiver. ARTICLE IX. Concerning the Production of Air in Vacuo. EXPERIMENT I. Sept. 9. 76.Dry'd Grapes in Vacuo. AN Exhausted Receiver being half full of dry'd Grapes. Sept. 10 It as∣cended ½ Sept. 12 It as∣cended ½ Sept. 14 It as∣cended ⅜ Sept. 17 It as∣cended ⅜ Sept. 22 The Ascent was ⅝ Sept. 27 The Ascent was ⅝ The Height was 3 Digits. Octob. 11. The Mercury was 6 Digits high. Sept. 9. 76. A Receiver being half full of dry'd Figs, the Air was drawn out till it stood at 3 Inches. Sept. 10. No Air produced. Sept. 17. No Air. Whence it appears, that there is no Regularity in the Production of Air from dry'd Fruits.
EXPERIMENT II. August 5. 76.Pears and Apricocks. PEARS and Apricocks were shut up in Vacuo. Aug. 6. In 18 Hours the Mercury was rais'd 2 Inches; In ten Hours more the Height of it was 3 Digits. Aug. 7 The height was 5 Aug. 8 The height was 6 ½ Aug. 9 In 14 hours it was 7 ¼ Inc. hig. Aug. 10 The height was 8 ¾ Aug. 11 The height was 10 ¾ Aug. 12 The height was 12 ¼ Aug. 13 The height was 14 ¼ Aug. 14 The height was 16 Aug. 15 The height was 18 Aug. 16 The height was 20 Aug. 18 The height was 25 Aug. 19 The height was 29 Aug. 20 The height was 31 ½ Aug. 21 The height was 32 ½ Aug. 22 The height was 34 Aug. 23 The height was 35 Aug. 26 The height was 38 ½ Aug. 29 The height was 41 Sept. 1 The height was 42 ½ Sept. 4 The height was 44 Sept. 7. The three last Days being hot, it was rais'd to 46 ¼ Sept. 10 The height was 47 ½ Sept. 13 The height was 44 Sept. 23 The height was 48 Sept. 27 The height was 50 ½ Nov. 5 The height was 52 ⅓ Nov. 28. The Apricocks were reduc'd to Water; the Skin being sever'd from the Pulp, no more Air was produc'd.
Jan. 10. 77. It was a hard Frost, at which time the Mer∣cury came to 57 Inches. Upon a Thaw, it was depress'd to 23. March 3. The Apricocks were putrifi'd and had lost their Colour. Hence it is evident, that Apri∣cocks afford Air almost as fast in their wonted Pressure as in Vacuo. EXPERIMENT III. June 20. 76.Sowre Cher∣ries. SOwre Cherries whole, being put into one Re∣ceiver, and others cut into another; The whole ones rais'd the Mercury in two hours, 10 Lines; the dissected ones, 20. June 21. The whole ones rais'd the Mercury to 3 Inehes; the other Gage was spoil'd. June 26. The whole ones rais'd the Mercury 15 Digits; The other Receiver was full of Air. July 9. The Receiver being remov'd from it's Cover, I eat a Cherry, which was well tasted: The rest being included in Vacuo, and some of them broke, in an hour rais'd the Mercury 2 Digit. July 10. The Mercury ascended not, because the Gage was spoil'd.
July 15. The Cover was sever'd from it's Receiver. Whence it appears, that dissected Fruits produce Air sooner than whole ones. EXPERIMENT IV. June 9. 77.Cherries in Vacuo. CHerries being put into a Receiver, rais'd ¼ of a Digit of Mercury, in an hour. Jun. 10. The Mercury was rais'd in 18 hours to the height of 11 Digits. June 11 It rose to 15 June 12 It rose to 15 † June 13 It rose to 22 June 16 It rose to 30 June 18 the Receiver was open'd. Fruits of the same kind in France fill'd their Receiver in 2 Days; and probably there may be the like difference in other Fruits, in several Countries. EXPERIMENT V. June 12. 76.Cabbages in Vacuo CAbbages being included in a Receiver, in an hours time rais'd the Mercury a Line. June 13. It was rais'd to 10 Digits. June 17. It was rais'd almost to the Top of the Gage; the Cabbages being very little alter'd.
June 19. Having been 2 days expos'd to the Air, were corrupted and blackish; being shut up in Vacuo, they rais'd the Mercury ½ an Inch. June 22. It was rais'd to the height of 1 ½. June 23. No more Air being produc'd, the Cabbage was taken out: It stunk much: So that I suspect∣ed, that Bodies have afforded as much Air as they can before they putrifie. EXPERIMENT VI. May 29. 76.Oranges in Vacuo. HAving shut up two pieces of Orange, which weigh'd 4 Ounces, in 2 exhausted Recei∣vers, large enough to hold 10 Ounces of Wa∣ter. June 10. They remov'd the Receiver from it's Cover; upon which, I shut them up in an exhausted Re∣ceiver, capable of containing 8 Ounces of Wa∣ter; upon which the Mercury ascended ½ of a Digit. June 13. It was almost 2 Digits high. June 16. It ascended about 3 Lines. June 21 It ascended not one Line. July 18. The Mercury was no higher, but some Moul∣diness appear'd.
EXPERIMENT VII. April 27. 76A Tulip in Vacuo. A Tulip being shut up in a Receiver, with as much Air as rais'd the Mercury 2 Di∣gits. May 2. That which before was strip'd, put on a dark Red, and became moist: It afforded but little Air. EXPERIMENT VIII. April 22. 76.A Limon in Vacuo A Limon shut up with a Mercurial Gage 3 Digits long. April 24It was 1 ½ Digits high. April 25It was 2 Digits high. April 26It was 4 lines higher. Apr. 27It rose 1 Line Apr. 28It rose 1 Line Apr. 29 May 3. In four Days it ascended a little above a Line. May 3. 77. The Limon was a little alter'd; The Mercu∣ry was rais'd to the Top of the Gage. Jan. 1. 17. The Limon had contracted a Yellowness and Moisture.
EXPERIMENT IX. March 16. 67.An Apple in Vacuo. AN Apple which began to putrifie, was put into one Receiver, and a bruis'd one into another. May 15. The bruis'd Apple appear'd wholly rotten; and the Receiver was forced from it's Cover. The other Apple was unalter'd. Aug. 20. That which before began to putrifie, was yet unalter'd; It tasted grateful, but subacid; The Pulp was of a mealy Consistence. This Confirms the Inference from the 5th Exp. of this Article. EXPERIMENT VII. May 17. 76.Milk in Vacuo. AN equal Quantity of Milk being shut up in common Air, and in Vacuo. May 18. That in the common Air was cover'd with Cream; the other, with Bubbles. May 19. The Bubbles swell'd more and more, the Mer∣cury was rais'd a little. May 20 The Bubbles swell'd more and more, and the Milk seem'd curdled: The Mercury in the Gage
being rais'd to the Top. The Milk in the free Air was evidently curdled. May 22. The Milk in Vacuo being curdled, yielded more Air yet, almost all the Bubbles being broke: From this Experiment it appears, that Milk is sooner coagulated in open Air than in Vacuo. June 20. The Milk in the free Air stunk, and was full of Worms; and emitted several large Bubbles when the Air was drawn out; the Worms mov'd vehemently, and all liv'd four hours. All the Bubbles on the Milk in Vacuo, were broke, and it continu'd coagulated. May 19. 77. Some Whey in Vacuo, was pour'd out of a Vessel into a Receiver about 4 days ago, it seem∣ed limpid like Water: The Whey remaining in the Vessel, was sufficient to separate the Buty∣rous from the Caseous Part. To day the Milk stagnant in the Receiver, seem'd to be got out; the Cover being forced from the Receiver. Towards night, the Milk being taken out of the Receiver, was found a∣cid, both in Smell and Taste: After a little time, the limpid Whey disappear'd, being mixt with the Caseous and Butyrous Part. May 24. The Butyrous Part vanish'd, and the Milk be∣gan to smell amiss. June 1. The Milk had no very bad Smell, nor had it produc'd Worms, but grew dry, and then the Mice eat it up.
In this Experiment the following Particulars were remarkable. First, That the Coagulation was slower when the Air was drawn out. Se∣condly, The Weight of Butter, Whey or Cheese, is not the same in the Air, as in Vacuo, because one swims on the Top of the other. Thirdly, The Putrifaction of Milk is retarded, by draw∣ing out the Air. Fourthly, Milk by being kept in Vacuo, is not unfit to generate Worms, when expos'd to common Air. EXPERIMENT XI. Sept. 5. 77.Urine in Vacuo. HAving enclos'd 3 Ounces and 3 Drachms of Urine in a Receiver, capable of hold∣ing 10 Ounces. Sept. 7. The Mercury was rais'd 2 Digits. Sept 8. It was somewhat higher. Decemb. 5. The Mercury ascended to the height of 3 In∣ches. The Urine was unalter'd. Decemb. 6. Urine was set under a Receiver, being left o∣pen to the common Air. Decemb. 16. The Urine in Vacuo was not chang'd. The o∣ther in 10 days time seem'd Turbid, and it's Su∣perficies mouldy. From this and the foregoing Experiment we may infer, that Urine contains less Air than Milk.
Besides, the Efficacy of Air corrupting Urine is worth Notice. EXPERIMENT XII. May. 19.Diluted Paste. A Vessel half full of diluted Paste, which was without Leaven, being convey'd in∣to a Receiver, before the Receiver was quite exhausted, the Paste was swollen quite to the Top of the Vessel. May 20. It swell'd more, several Cavities being inter∣spers'd through it. May 22. It yielded more Air, and was much more tumid. May 23. The Receiver was separated from the Cover by the Air produc'd in the Receiver. The swelling of the Paste was something abated, and it was much more so in the Afternoon: It did not Taste Acid. EXPERIMENT XIII. July 20. 76.Beef in Vacuo. A Quantity of Beef being put into one ex∣hausted Receiver; and a like Quantity into another, which was in some Measure ex∣pos'd to the Air.
July 21. The exhausted Receiver was fill'd with Air: But suspecting that some Air had got in, I shut the Beef up in another Receiver. July 22. The Mercury in 14 hours was rais'd 15 Inches. July 25. The Receiver was not half full of Air. July 26. The Receiver was sever'd from it's Cover; and the Beef being again ncluded in Vacuo, sus∣tain'd 10 Digits of Mercury in an hours time. July 28. The Receiver was full, and when re-exhausted, the Beef yielded a great deal of Air again in a short time. July 30. The Receiver was again fill'd, and being ex∣haust'd, the Beef yielded so much Air in an hour as was able to sustain 10 Digits of Mer∣cury. August 1. The Receiver being again full, and the Beef Stinking, we threw it away. Hence it ap∣pears, that, Flesh yields more Air whilst it Putrifies than before, but it is otherwise with Fruits. See Exp. IX of this Article.
EXPERIMENT XIV. July 18. 78.Goosberries in Vacuo. GOosberries being shut up in Vacuo; In half an hour the Mercury was rais'd a Digit: In an hour and half it was rais'd ano∣ther. July 19. The Receiver was almost fill'd. July 20. The Receiver and it's Cover being parted, a good deal of Juice ran out. July 29. The Goosberries were again included in Va∣cuo. July 30. In 16 hours the Mercury rais'd an Inch and ½. July 30. 77. They did not wholly fill the Receiver: Some time since they lost their red Colour, and in∣clin'd to a White one. It seems from hence to follow, that since after they had yielded all their Air, they under∣went no change, that Air was the Cause of Cor∣ruption. EXPERIMENT XV. Aug. 23.Pears in Vacuo. PEars being included in a Receiver, with as much Air as rais'd the Mercury an Inch
and ½. In two hours it was almost 6 Inches high. Aug. 24 It was 12 Aug. 25 It was 16 Aug. 26 It was 18 Aug. 27 It was 21 Aug. 28 It was 23 Aug. 31 It was 30 Sept. 1 It was 32 Inches high. Sept. 2 It was 35 Inches high. Sept. 3 It was 38 ⅓ Inches high. Sept. 4 It was 44 Inches high. Sept. 5 It was 45 Inches high. Sept. 6 It was 50 Inches high. Sept. 7 The height was the same; some Air getting out. Sept. 9 It was 53 ½ Inches high. Sept. 8 It was 54 ½ Inches high. Sept. 10 It was 58 Inches high. Sept. 12. Yesterday there was no Alteration: To day, as I suspected, some Air getting out, it was 53 ½. Sept. 13. Being transmited into another Receiver it was 32 ½. Sept. 16. The Receiver being open'd the Pears were Rotten. EXPERIMENT XVI. From Sept. 17 to 22.Plums in Vacuo. PLums dried being enclos'd in a Receiver yielded very little Air.
Nov. 8. The Receiver was open'd, no more Air being produced. EXPERIMENT XVII. Sept. 28.Nut-Ker∣nels. NUt-kernels being enclos'd in a Recei∣ver. Sept. 26 It rose A little Sept. 30 It rose 2 Inches Oct. 6 It rose By degrees to 6 Inches. Oct. 15 It was 10 Digits high. Oct. 22 It was 15 Digits high. Nov. 28. It was 20 Digits high. The Kernels had neither lost their Colour nor Taste: So that Air may be procur'd from Fruit of an hard Consistence, without Putrefaction. ARTICLE X. Concerning the Production of Air above it's wonted Pressure. EXPERIMENT I. Jun. 22.Pease with a Glass full of Raisin.NEw Pease were shut up in a Receiver with a Glass full of Raisins of the Sun bruis'd and mixt with Water.
Towards Evening the Raisins yielded Air e∣nough to raise the Mercury 12 Digits. Jun. 23 It was 49 Digits high. Jun. 24 It was 75 Digits high. Jun. 25 It was 90 Digits high. Jun. 26 It was 90 Digits high. Jun. 28 It was 100 Digits high. The Pease turn'd Yellow and seem'd to Sweat. Jun. 30 It was 110 July 1 It was 110 July 4 It was 124 July 7 It was 140 July 16. It remain'd at the same height; but the Li∣quor which came from the Pease got out. July 12. New Liquor was produc'd; The Mercury neither rose nor fell. July 13. The Liquor got out, and some Air; But the Cover being better adapted, new Liquor was produc'd. July. 25. The Receiver was broke in Pieces. The Pease kept their Taste, and parted from their Husks as if they had begun to boyl. EXPERIMENT II. Sept. 15.76.Unripe Plums in Compress'd Air.UNripe Plums being shut up with as much Air as sustain'd an Inch of Mercury. Sept. 16 It rose to 6 Sept. 17 It rose to 8 Sept. 18 It rose to 10 Sept. 19 It rose to 12 Sept. 20 It rose to 14 Sept. 22 It rose to 18 Sept. 23 It rose to 18 Sept. 24 It rose to 19 Sept. 26 It rose to 23 Sept. 28 It rose to 26 Octob. 1 It was 30 Octob. 4 It was 31 It was some∣what Cold. Octob. 5 It rose to 32 Octob. 7 It rose to 33 Octob. 9 It rose to 33 ½ Octob. 11 Octob. 14 It rose to 27 Octob. 15 The Cold abated. Octob. 17 It rose to 38 Octob. 19 It rose to 39 ½ Octob. 22 It rose to 41 Octob. 26 It rose to 43 Octob. 29 It rose to 45 Nov. 2 It rose to 46 Nov. 5 It rose to 47 Nov. 20 It rose to 53 The Production of Air is, in this Experiment, sometimes regular and sometime irregular. EXPERIMENT III. July 6. 76.Goosberries in Com∣press'd Air.GOosberries included in a Receiver with as much Air as rais'd Mercury ½ of an Inch; in half an hour it was rais'd half an Inch more; in 7 hours it was rais'd to 5 Inches. July 7 It rose 5 July 8 It rose 3 ½ July 9 It rose 3 ¾ July 10 It rose 4 ¾ Digits high. July 11 It rose 4 Digits high. July 12 It rose 4 Digits high. July 13. The Cover was broke; and another substi∣tuted in it's Place. July 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. There was no Change: The Fruit being ta∣ken out, Part was shut up in Vacuo; the rest with common Air. In four hours the Ascent of the Mercury was 4 Digits. July 19. The Mercury ascended ½ in 14 hours; but because I suspected that some Air got out, I set the Screw, and in 9 hours the Mercury rose 11 Inches. The Cover broke and the Air was lost. Hence it appears, that unfermented Goosber∣ries contain much Air, which they more readily afforded, when the Pressure of the Air, is taken off; tho when fermented they yield a great deal more in Compress'd Air. EXPERIMENT IV. July 8. 76.Paste in Compress'd Air.SWollen Paste being included with as much Air as rais'd Mercury, by the Pressure of that, lost a third Part of it's humidity. Soon after it swell'd again, and in half an hour rais'd the Mercury two Digits. The Paste continu'd to swell, and the Mer∣cury in an hour was rais'd 2 ½. In an hour more it was rais'd 3 ½ and in another 4 ½. It staid at 16 Digits.
July 9. In 14 hours it was rais'd 21 Inches high, and stood at 37. the Screw being set to prevent Air from getting out, the Cover broke, and upon an Ingress of Air, the Paste subsided 2 Digits, tho' the Compression was less than before. In 5 hours Space the Mercury ascended 13 Digits. But the Screw being set, the Cover broke again, so that the Air got in, and depress'd the Paste again. In 4 hours the Mercury ascended 10 Digits, and the Paste rose as before; But being willing to make use of another Screw, I permitted a little Air to get out. July 10. The Paste rose again this Night, but yielded no Air. In 7 hours time the Mercury ascended 4 Inches. July 13 A little Air was pro∣duced. July 17. The Paste being taken out, was subacid in Smell. Hence it appears, that Paste may yield Air in Compress'd Air, as well as in Vacuo. The rising of the Paste seem'd to depend on the Expansion of the Air in the Paste, which was depress'd and over-power'd by the Exter∣nal Air, when it was let in.
EXPERIMENT V. July 13. 76.Beans shut up in a Re∣ceiver. BEANS, such as Horses eat, being shut up with Water in Vacuo, those that were bruis'd, seem'd to swell; those which were whole, seem'd unalter'd. The Mercury, July 14 rose 7 July 15 rose 5 July 16 rose 3 July 17 rose 6 July 18 rose 9 July 19 rose 1 July 20 rose 3 ½ July 21 It rose 5 ½ It rose 2 July 22 It rose 78 July 23 It rose 5 i. e. 35 July 24 It rose Above the wonted Pres∣sure. July 25 The Receiver was not able to bear a greater Pressure. The Beans were very fetid, like pu∣trify'd Flesh. Beans yield Air in a moderate Pressure, as well as in Vacuo, sometimes sooner, and sometimes slower. EXPERIMENT VI. July 23.Goosberries in Vacuo. GOosberries shut up in Vacuo; and in 2 hours the Mercury ascended 1 Inch. July 24 It ascend∣ed to 7 ½ July 25 It ascend∣ed to 12 July 26 It ascend∣ed to 17 July 27 It ascend∣ed to 20 July 28 It ascend∣ed to 24 ½ July 29 It ascend∣ed to 30 July 30 It ascend∣ed to 31 almost Some Air, being transmitted out of this into another Recei∣ver, it stood at 26. July 31 The height was 35. August 1. Some Air got out, and whilst I endeavour'd to stop the Receiver close, the Mercury that was rais'd to 39 Inches, subsided to 30 In∣ches. Aug. 2 The height of the Mer∣cury was 39. Some Air being transmitted, it stood at 31. Aug. 3 The height of the Mer∣cury was 39 Aug. 4 The height of the Mer∣cury was 41 Aug. 5 The height of the Mer∣cury was 43. Air transmitted it stood at 30 Aug. 6 The height of the Mer∣cury was 43 Aug. 7 The height of the Mer∣cury was 47 Aug. 8 The height of the Mer∣cury was 48. Air being transmitted, it sunk to 36. Aug. 9 The height of it was 41. Aug. 10 The height of it was 47. Air being transmit∣mitted, it stood at 35. Aug. 11 The height of it was 38 ½ Aug. 12 The height of it was 42 The Air was drawn out, and the Mercury was 26 Inches high. Aug. 13 The height of it was 33 Aug. 14 The height of it was 36 Aug. 15 The height of it was 39 Aug. 16 The height of it was 41 ½ Aug. 17 The height was 44 Aug. 11 The height was 47 Aug. 19 The height was 50 The Air being transmitted, and the Goos∣berries taken out, they had lost their Colour, and almost all their Acidity. They produced Air very regularly, except a little faster, when some part had been drawn out. EXPERIMENT VII. Sept. 12.Crude Grapes. CRUDE Grapes were put into a Recei∣ver, with as much Air as rais'd Mercury 3 Digits. Sept. 13 The hight was 5 Sept. 14 The hight was 10 Sept. 16 The hight was 17 Sept. 17 The hight was 19 Sept. 19 The hight was 23 Sept. 20 The hight was 25 Sept. 22 The hight was 30 It was stop'd with a Screw Sept. 23 The hight was 3 ½ Sept. 24 The hight was 32 Sept. 26 The hight was 34 ½ Sept. 27 The hight was 36 ¼ Sept. 28 The hight was 36 ¼ Sept. 29 The hight was 37 ¼ Sept. 30 The hight was 37 ¼ Oct. 2 The hight was 39 ½ Oct. 4 The hight was 39 ½ Oct. 5 The hight was 40 ½ Oct. 7 The hight was 41 ½ Oct. 8 The hight was 42 ½ Oct. 15 The hight was 46 Nov. 2 The hight was 54 Nov. 5 The hight was 58 Jan. 10 The hight was 70 There was no sensible alteration in the Gage when the Frost was most severe, tho' the Grapes and their Juice was Froze. Sept. 21. The Grapes being little alter'd, and the Mer∣cury not much higher, the Receiver was opend, and the Grapes tho' more pungent, had not lost their Taste, but their Juice preserv'd it's red Colour. Hence it appears, that Grapes yield not all their Air in a little time. EXPERIMENT VIII. August 10. 77.Pears in Vacuo. PEars cut in two being included in a Vacuum, about Evening the Mercury was rais'd 10 Digits.
Aug. 11 It rose to 20 Aug. 13 It rose to 38 Aug. 14 It rose to 48 Aug. 15 It rose to 55 Aug. 16 It rose to 60 Aug. 17 It rose to 68 Air being Transmitted it subsided to 53 ½. Aug. 18 The hight was 61 Aug. 19 The hight was 64 Aug. 20 The hight was 70 Aug. 21 The hight was 72 Air being transmitted it stood at 61. Aug. 22 The hight was 68 Aug. 23 The hight was 74 Aug. 24 The hight was 79 Aug. 25 The hight was 81 Air being transmitted it sunk to 61. Aug. 26 The hight was 56 Soem got out; being transmitted it sunk to 52. Aug. 27 The hight was 60 Aug. 28 The hight was 68 Aug. 29 The hight was 75 Aug. 30 The hight was 83 Aug. 31 The hight was 88 Sept. 1 The hight was 93 Sept. 2 The hight was 100 Sept. 3 The hight was 89 Some Air got out. Sept. 4 The hight was 100 Sept. 5 The hight was 100 Sept. 7 The hight was 100 No Air got out. Sept. 9 The hight was 107 Sept. 10 The hight was 107 Air being Transmitted it sunk to 99. Sept. 11 Sept. 13 The hight was 105 Oct. 8 Air got out. Pears yielded their Air by fits.
ARTICLE XI. Various Experiments. EXPERIMENT I. March 16.Melted Lead in a Receiver. LEad being melted in a Brass Vessel, an Inch and ½ in Diameter, it was conveigh'd into a Receiver, and the Air pump'd out, before the Lead cool'd; when it was cool the Surface was concave, especially in the Middle; tho' when it cools in open Air, the Surface is gene∣rally convex, except in the Middle. The same success happen'd when the Experi∣ment was made with Tin. Neither of the Metals afforded Bubbles. EXPERIMENT II. Sept. 2.A Solution of Salt in Water. A Solution of Salt in Water being con∣veigh'd into a Receiver. Sept. 15. The Salt was not Christaliz'd.
EXPERIMENT III. August 8. 76.Artificial Air. ARtificial Air from Goosberries was included in a Receiver. March 1. 7 6/7. No Alteration in the height of the Mercury. EXPERIMENT IV. August 8.Air weigh∣ed. A Phial which was large enough to hold 7 Ounces 5 Drachms and 3 Grains of Water, having the Air exhausted, was pois'd to an Aequi∣librium with another weight. Upon which a Piece of a Bladder which cover'd it, was pierc'd with a Needle, and the Air getting into it, weigh'd 4 Grains & ½, which Weight is to the former, as 1 to 814; so that Water is 800 times heavier than Air of the same Bulk. EXPERIMENT V. Jan. 16. 77.Aqua fortis and fixed Nitre. AQua fortis and fix'd Nitre, being mix'd in a Receiver together, yielded much Air. March 5. The Air was not destroy'd, nor the height of the Mercury alter'd. But Nitre was pro∣duc'd in Vacuo from the Mixture.
EXPERIMENT VI. May 12. 76.Several Bodies in Vacuo. A Phial which had a long Neck, being so far fill'd with Oyl, that it wrought up to the middle of it's Neck, was conveigh'd into a Recei∣ver; and so much Air Compress'd into it, as rais'd the Mercury 120 Inches above the usual height. The Surface of the Oyl subsided ¾ of an Inch, being condens'd by Cold; which was e∣vident, since the compress'd Air being let out, the Surface rose not again. August 5. The same Experiment being made with Wa∣ter, there was no sensible Alteration in the height of it's Surface, tho the heat might have given reason to expect some change. Jan. 14. 78. A Glass Phial being fill'd with Spirit of Wine, till it rose within 3 Inches of the Top of it's Neck, was by the heat of my Hands, caus'd to rife to the top of the Vessel: Which being then Invert'd into a Vessel full of Mercury, and my Hands re∣mov'd, the Cold Spirit admitted 3 Inches of Mercury into it's Neck; yet being conveigh'd into a Receiver, and so much Air compress'd into it, as rais'd 90 Digits of Mercury, the Spirit was not in the least condens'd by com∣pression, tho Cold had such a considerable ef∣fect on it. When the Receiver was open'd there was no appearance of Bubbles in the Spirit of
Wine. It would be worth while to consider, why Cold should have such a considerable Ef∣fect in condensing Spirit; and why it cannot be condens'd by Compression. EXPERIMENT VII. May 12. 76.Spirit of Wine and Oyl of Tur∣pentine. SOme Spirit of Wine contain'd in a Glass Vessel, with some drops of Oyl of Tur∣pentine upon it, were briskly mov'd about, till the Receiver being exhausted, they stuck to several Bubbles which rose out of the Spirit of Wine, and were by them carri'd to the sides of the Vessel; where they were kept, except 2 Drops, which the Bubbles left behind upon the Surface of the Spirit; which, whilst the Receiver was exhausting, continued their Mo∣tion, but in a little time after, were wholly at rest. Yet upon a Re-ingress of Air, they for a little while renew'd their Motion again. The same Experiment being repeated with Spirit of Wine and Oyl of Turpentine, wholly freed from Air; there was neither any Ebulli∣tion, nor an appearance of Bubbles; yet the Drops of Oyl mov'd in Vacuo after the same Manner as in open Air. Hence it appears, that the Motion of the Parts of Oyl, depend not in a Dissolution in Vacuo; since all Dissolutions are company'd with a production of Bubbles.
EXPERIMENT VIII. May 19. 76.Radishes in a Receiver with Cla∣ret. HAving cut two Radishes transversly, and suspended them all Night in Vacuo, o∣ver a Vessel of Claret, the small End of one being downwards, and the other in a contrary Posture; all being freed of their Air, the next Day I freed two other Radishes from their thick Skin, and cutting them transversly, suspended them over the Wine, as the others, in Vacuo; upon which, immersing them all in the Wine, they emitted Bubbles considerably; especially, those that had been longest in the Recei∣ver. From this Experiment we may urge, that Bubbles are form'd of Particles of Air contain'd in Water; and the Reason why those Radishes yielded most Air; whose Skins were not pull'd off, is, because those Skins are full of Canals and Pores, to contain Air, in for the forming of Bubbles. The Liquor ascended equally in all the Ra∣dishes, notwithstanding their Postures. EXPERIMENT IX. May. 4.A small Tube im∣mers'd in Water. A Small Glass Tube open at both Ends, be∣ing immers'd in Water, the Water in Va∣cuo, ascended as high as it usually does in com∣mon Air; but in a little time it was rais'd high∣er,
by Bubbles of Water, which divided and intercepted the Cylinder of Water in 3 several places; besides, several Bubbles of Water pass'd out at that End of the Tube which was im∣mers'd. One End of this Tube being Hermetically seal'd up, the Experiment succeeded after the same manner, as when it was open; but in the open Air, the Water ascended not. One thing in this Experiment was very Re∣markable, viz. That the Water suspended in the Tube, yielded no Bubbles, but only at the Bottom of the Tube; nor did the Cylinder of Water even at the Bottom yield Bubbles, when it was rais'd above the Surface of the Water which it was before immers'd in. May. 5. The Experiment was repeated; but before the End of the Tube was immers'd in Water, a Drop, which ran over the Superior Aperture of the Receiver, fell down to the open End of the Tube, and was rais'd two Lines in the Cavity of the Pipe: No Bubbles were form'd in half an hour, till the Tube was immers'd in Water, and then successively they rose one after another. In trying this Experiment, several times I ob∣serv'd, that tho', whilst the Tube was immers'd, several Bubbles appear'd about the End of it, yet when it was rais'd above the Surface of the Water, none were to be seen. May 6. The Experiment was try'd with an Infusion of Nephritick Wood; in which the Success was alike, except that in the Infusion, when the Bub∣bles
were small, they ascended to the Top of the Liquor, which is an Argument of it's Thinness, and that it hath no Viscocity. May 10. I repeated the same Experiment, with a Mix∣ture of Spirit of Wine, and an Oyl made per Deliquium; In which nothing was to be observ'd different from the former, but that the Liquor ascended not so high. From these Experiments it may probably be inferr'd, That the Formation of Bubbles in the Extremity of the Tube, depends on aerial Par∣ticles, which swim in the Water, and meeting with some Impediment at their End, are kept there, till new ones joyning with them, form Bubbles. EXPERIMENT X. July 18. 76.Beans with Water in an Iron Tube. BEANS, such as Horses eat, being shut up with Water in an Iron Tube 2 days ago, to day seem'd unalter'd; but the Stopple of the Tube being pull'd back, Air and Water broke out; which Eruption was succeeded by a bub∣ling Noise, which continu'd above an hour. July 25. The Iron Tube was open'd a second time, and a bubling Noise succeeded as before. Whence it appears, that Beans contain Air, which cannot discharge it self in a Compression, till that Compression is remov'd.
EXPERIMENT XI. March 4. 77.Spirit of Sal Armo∣niack and Copper. A Glass half full of Spirit of Sal Armoniack, being included in Vacuo, with Filings of Copper in it, in 15 Minutes it was tinged with a diluted Blew, which, upon an Ingress of Air, in 3 Minutes became vivid and thick. April 4. The Liquor having been enclos'd in Vacuo, had almost lost it's Colour, which it regain'd when the Air was let in again. EXPERIMENT XII. May 8.Oyl per Deli∣quium with Spirit of Wine. OYL made per Deliquium, being shut up in a Receiver, with Spirit of Wine swim∣ming upon it; when the Air began to be ex∣hausted, great Bubbles rose from the Spirit, and small ones from the Oyl; but in an hour, the Oyl afforded Bubbles large enough to fill the whole Diameter of the Pipe in their Ascent, and an hour after that, they broke out so vi∣olently, as to strike against the Top of the Receiver. May 9. The Experiment being repeated in a Vessel, which was longer and narrower, I observ'd, that the Bubbles which rose from the Oyl, were not very large, till ¼ of an Inch above the Sur∣face
of it, and then they were suddenly ex∣panded. EXPERIMENT XIII. May 3. 76.Aq. Fort. and Spirit of Wine. A Mixture of Aqua Fortis and Spirit of Wine, being divided into three Parts, and each of those included in a distinct Vessel with a piece of Iron, one of them was included in Vacuo; upon which, several considerable Ebullitions suc∣ceeded. The Liquor when taken out, was black and Turbid; tho' in the other two, it was not alter'd in Colour, but only a black Powder was settled in the Bottom. Wherefore one of those being included in Vacuo, after Ebullitions, less vi∣olent than those in the Vessel first included, the Liquor in a quarter of an hours time, being ta∣ken out, was almost as black and turbid, as that first put into the Receiver: That in the open Air, was not much alter'd. May 4. The Liquors shut up in the Receivers, appear'd clear and green; But that in the open Air, bub∣bled more than the day before, and was of a red Colour: And all three being shut up in Vacuo, the red Liquor afforded larger Bub∣bles. Hence it appears, that Spirit of Wine pro∣motes Ebullition in Vacuo.
EXPERIMENT XIV. Jan. 21. 78.Spirit of Sal Armo∣niack with Filings of Copper. A Glass half full of Spir. Sal Armon. with Filings of Copper, stopp'd with a Lea∣ther Stopple, was put into a Receiver, with un∣fermented Paste. Jan. 22. The Air yielded by the Paste, penetrated the Leather, which is impervious to common Air, which appear'd by the Tincture it gave the Liquor. Jan. 25. The Liquor had almost lost it's Colour; so that the Particles of Artificial Air are so minute, as to penetrate Pores which common Air can∣not. Feb. 2. The Glass being shut up in a Receiver, which admitted Air so gradually, as to be fill'd in 24 hours, the Liquor still remain'd Colourless. Feb. 15. The Glass being again shut up in Vacuo, with Paste, the Air afforded by it, did not as before, penetrate the Leather; nor was the Liquor in the least tinged by it.
EXPERIMENT XV. April 2. 78. HAving put a Shrew-Mouse into the Engin describ'd,A Shrew-Mouse in Vacuo. for the Filtration of Air through Water; when the Pump was stirr'd, and the Air began to penetrate the Water, it was a lit∣tle better; but could not recover. Apr. 12. The Experiment was repeated with a weakly Mouse, that had been kept fasting a long time; the Success was the same as in the last Experi∣ment; for the Mouse being taken out before it was dead, could not recover in the free Air. EXPERIMENT XVI. May 2. 78. SIX Weeks ago,Spawn of Frogs in Vacuo, &c. Spawn of Frogs being in∣cluded in common Air, in Vacuo, and in another Receiver with compress'd Air, which sustain'd 60 Digits above the ordinary height. The Mercury in Vacuo, in 15 days was rais'd 1 Inch. The Spawn in common Air, was cor∣rupt and blackish; that in the compress'd Air remain'd unalter'd. A Month after, the Spawn in Vacuo was turn'd into Water, except the black Spots; but had not alter'd it's Colour. That in the common Air was very black; That in the compress'd Air be∣gan to be reddish; which Colour sensibly in∣creas'd.
May 22. That in the common Air had lost it's Colour. June 23. That in the compress'd Air had acquir'd a Greenness. Octob. 15. That in Vacuo was exhaled out of it's Vessel, and remain'd in the Receiver in the Form of Wa∣ter: That in the common Air was void of Co∣lour; and that in the compress'd Air was still red. EXPERIMENT XVII. May 9. 78. AN Orange having been divided,Oranges in Vacuo. and in∣cluded in two Receivers, in which was left an equal Vacuity; the Capacity of the lar∣ger being so far fill'd with Water, as it was big∣ger than the Cavity of the other, I observ'd, that that which was shut up with Water, was four times more mouldy than the other. The same Experiment was repeated, the third part of the Cavity of one Receiver being fill'd with Water, yet the Orange was not touch'd by it. June 15. Neither of the Pieces of the Orange was mouldy, and the same Experiment being again repeated, neither Piece was mouldy in a Months time. The Difference seems to be the Effect of some Disposition in the Air.
EXPERIMENT XVIII. June 1. 78. A Small Glass Tube,Venice Tur∣pentine in a Wind-Gun. half full of Venice Tur∣pentine, being put into the Wind-Gun, as soon as the Air was compress'd into a tenth Part of the Space it possess'd before; The Lea∣ther which cover'd the Elliptick Hole was driven out. The Tube being taken out, I perceiv'd se∣veral Bubbles in the Top of the Turpentine, which I suppos'd, had been press'd into it when the Cavity of the Gun had Air compress'd in it; Therefore placing the Tube again in the Gun, I caus'd the Air to be condens'd to 15 times as little compass. June 3. The Turpentine being taken out, was free from Bubbles, but by degrees, a great many were form'd in it. June 4. Having freed Turpentine from it's Air, and pour'd Water upon it, I shut up all in the Wind-Gun. June 8. At the first sight, both the Water and Tur∣pentine were free from Bubbles; but soon after they appear'd and ascended in the Turpentine, almost from the Bottom: So that the Air that form'd these Bubbles penetrated the Water and most of the Turpentine.
EXPERIMENT XIX. Aug. 11. 78. WHEN Spirit of Sal Armoniack was clear'd of it's Bubbles,Filings of Copper and Sp. Sal Ar∣mon. in Vacuo. I mix'd Filings of Cop∣per with it in Vacuo; upon which, it yielded several Bubbles; they did not yield Air, but de∣stroy'd what was contain'd there before; The Liquor was green and turbid. Decemb. 5. The Spirit was for the greatest part got out of the Vessel, and condens'd in the Receiver; that which continu'd in the Vessel, was as clear as Water. The Mercury was wholly driven out of the Gage; whence it was reasonable to sup∣pose, that the Air was gradually consum'd in the Receiver. EXPERIMENT XX. Septemb. 2. 78. A Cylinder of Tin, and another of Lead,Mercury rais'd in a Tube in Va∣cuo, &c. be∣ing immers'd in Vacuo in Mercury, and two others in Mercury expos'd to common Air. Sept. 6. The Mercury in the Tin Cylinder in Vacuo, was rais'd 4 Inches and a half. The Pipe being cut transversly, half of that Space above the Mercury it was immers'd in, and in another place an Inch above the Surface of the Mercury, the Amalgama had penetrated into the Metal half a Line above, and a whole one below.
The Mercury in the Lead Pipe had not sensi∣bly penetrated into that Metal, except where it was immers'd: It was rais'd in it 2 ½. Sept. 7. The Mercury had ascended 5 Digits in the Tin Pipe, which was expos'd to the Air. Sept. 10. The same Cylinder continuing in the Mercury, was besmear'd up to the very Top, 6 Inches a∣bove the Surface of the stagnant Mercury, which had penetrated the Tube the deeper, by how much the nearer the stagnant Mercury, so that near the Surface it had penetrated 3 Lines deep. The Mercury was not rais'd above 3 Digits and a half in the Lead Pipe, nor had it made any sensible Penetration: So that the Pressure of the Air contributes little to the Ascent of Mer∣cury into Metals. EXPERIMENT XXI. Decemb. 12. 78. THE Head of a Whiting being cut off,A Whiting in Vacuo. and divided into 5 parts, one of them was shut up in Vacuo; another in common Air, another in compress'd Air, which sustain'd 50 Digits a∣bove the usual height. The fourth was included with Air from Paste, the last piece was expos'd to open Air. Decemb. 15. That in the open Air, in the Morning began to shine; and in the Evening, yielded a Light more vivid.
Decemb. 16. It gave over shining till Evening. Dec. 17. It shined a little. Dec. 18. at Night it shone a little. Dec. 20. It continu'd to shine. Dec. 22. It ceased. Dec. 23. That included in common Air, be∣gan to shine. The 24. It did not. Jan. 26. 79. None of them shined. ARTICLE XII. Artificial Air destroy'd. EXPERIMENT I. August 3. 77. ARtificial Air of Cherries being transmitted into a Receiver full of common Air,Artificial Air of Cher∣ries de∣stroy'd. till the Mercury was rais'd 25 Inches above it's usu∣al height. Aug. 4 It sunk to 23 Aug. 6 It sunk to 20 Aug. 7 Aug. 8 a little Aug. 10 to 19 ½
EXPERIMENT II. May 26. 76.Artificial Air genera∣ted and de∣stroy'd. SIX Grains of Sal Armon. being let fall into a sufficient Quantity of Oyl of Vitriol in Vacuo; there follow'd a great Ebullition, so that the Mercury rose to it's usual height, but presently subsided again. May 27. The same Experiment being try'd, with this difference, viz. that the Salt was kept 10 hours in Vacuo, before it was dropt into the Oyl; the Success was, that it was 7 or 8 hours before the Air generated by the Ebullition, was destroy'd. May 29. The Salt being not mix'd till after 24 hours, the Ebullition and Quantity of Air generated, were less, and more slowly produc'd; and it was observable, before the Ingredients were mix'd, that the Mercury rather subsided in the Gage, as if some Air had been drawn out. July 8. Oyl of Vitriol being included with a fifth Part of common Air, rais'd the Mercury a lit∣tle, and kept it up 24 hours. From whence it appears, that Artificial Air may be destroy'd.
ARTICLE XIII. Experiments concerning the different Cele∣rity of Air produc'd in Vacuo, or in Com∣mon Air. EXPERIMENT I. Common Air. July 1.0 77.Air from sowre Paste. SOwrish Paste being included in a Receiver, In an hour the Mercury was rais'd an Inch; in 7 hours 6 Digits. July 11 The height was 11 July 12 The height was 24 July 13 The height was 30 July 14 The height was Sensibly greater. July 15 It ascended a little. and was 38 In∣ches high. July 19 It yielded no more Air. Vacuum. July 10. 76. A less Quantity being enclos'd in Vacuo, in an hour the Mercury ascended 2 Inches, In 7, it was rais'd to the Top of a short Gage. July 19. The Cover was not separated from it's Re∣ceiver; but the Paste being fired by a Burning-Glass, it's Superficies was tinged yellow by the
Fumes, which after their Ascent fell upon it, so much Air was produc'd, that the Cover was ea∣sily remov'd from the Receiver. EXPERIMENT II. Common Air. August 20. 76.From Paste 24 hours old. PASTE 24 hours old, being included with as much Air as rais'd Mercury 4 Digits and ½ above it's usual height. In 6 hours, it was rais'd to 8 Inches. Aug. 21 It rose 4 ½ Aug. 22 It rose 1 Aug. 23 It rose ½ Aug. 26 It rose ½ Aug. 27 It ascended not. Aug. 29 It smell'd suba∣cid. Vacuum. Aug. 20. Paste being enclos'd in Vacuo, the Mercury was presently rais'd 2 Inches. Aug. 21 It rose 5 Aug. 22 It rose 3 Aug. 23 It rose 1 Aug. 26 It rose 2 in 3 days. Aug. 27 It rose 0 Aug. 28 The Paste was taken out. Hence it appears, that sometimes Air is more easily produced in Vacuo, than common Air.
EXPERIMENT III. Vacuum. Septemb. 4. 77.From Fil∣berd Ker∣nels. FILBERD Kernels were enclos'd in com∣mon Air. Sept. 5 The height was 5 Sept. 6 The height was 10 Sept. 7 The height was 10 Sept. 8 The height was 12 Sept. 9 The height was 15 Sept. 11 The height was 18 Sept. 12 It was 23 Sept. 13 It was 27 Sept. 14 It was 29 Sept. 15 It was a little more. Sept. 17 It was 30 Sept. 18. Some Air got out; several Bubbles appearing in the Turpentine, which guarded the Joynts of the Receiver. Common Air. Sept. 4. In the Afternoon the Air seem'd to be dimi∣nished. Sept. 5 It was almost ½ Sept. 6 It was the same Sept. 7 It was 1 Inch. Sept. 8 No Altera∣tion. Sept. 18 No Altera∣tion.
EXPERIMENT IV. Septemb. 15. 77. EIGHT Ounces of Raisins of the Sun, bruis'd and diluted with Water, being in∣cluded in a Receiver, large enough to hold 22 Ounces of Water. Sept. 16 The height was 6 Sept. 17 The height was 10 Sept. 18 The height was 15 Sept. 19 Sept. 20 It was 29 Sept. 21 The Receiver forc'd from the Cover. Sept. 24. Some Raisins being taken out, the rest were shut up in Vacuo. Sept. 25. The Receiver was sever'd from it's Cover. Sept. 15. 77. The same Ingredients being shut up in com∣mon Air. Sept. 16 The height was ½ Sept. 17 The height was 1 ½ Sept. 18 The height was 3 Sept. 19 The height was 5 Sept. 20 The height was 7 Sept. 21 The height was 9 Sept. 22 The height was 11 Sept. 23 The height was 12 Sept. 24 The height was 15 When the Air broke out, several Bubbles rose from the Raisins: Hence it appears, that Air is more easily generated sometimes in Vacuo, than in common Air.
EXPERIMENT V. Vacuum. Feb. 17.77.Onions in Vacuo. THREE Onions being enclos'd in Va∣cuo. Feb. 19 The Ascent was 1 Feb. 21 The Ascent was 1 Feb. 25 The Ascent was 9 May 4 They were not al∣ter'd. May 18 They were not al∣ter'd. Jun. 19 The onions rot∣ten. Rarified Air. Feb. 17. Three Onions were enclos'd in Air, so far ra∣rifi'd, that it sustain'd only 10 Digits of Mer∣cury. Feb. 19. The Mercury ascended not. 21. They had acquir'd a Mouldiness. 25. The Mercury as∣cended 7 Digits. May 4. No Alteration in the Onions. 18. No Alte∣ration in the Onions, but the Receiver was forced from the Cover. Common Air. Feb. 17. Three Onions were included in a Receiver, not exactly shut. Feb. 21. They were not mouldy; but bud∣ded. 25. They shot forth their Roots.
May 4. They began to be Mouldy. This Experiment shews, that some Bodies yield Air as well in rarified Air as in Vacuo. As also that Vegetation is promoted by Air. It is here likewise worth our Notice, that whilst the Onions shot forth, they did not grow Mouldy ARTICLE XIV. EXPERIMENT I. Bruis'd Fruits. August 23. 77.Bruis'd Pears in Vacuo. BRuis'd Pears being included in an exhausted Receiver. Aug. 25 The height was 5 Aug. 26 The height was 10 Aug. 27 The height was 14 Aug. 28 The height was 18 Aug. 29 The height was 21 Aug. 30 The height was 25 Aug. 31 The height was 28 Sept. 1 The height was 30 Sept. 2. Receiver was separated from the Cover. Whole Fruit. August 23.Whole Fruit. The same Quantity of Pears being propor∣tionably included in a Receiver. Aug. 25 The height was 11 Aug. 26 The height was 17 Aug. 27 The height was 25 Aug. 28 It was 28 Aug. 29 It was 33 Aug. 30 The Receiver was forc'd from it's Cover.
Hence it seems, that entire Fruit yielded Air sooner than Bruis'd ones. EXPERIMENT II. August 24.Whole Ap∣ples in Va∣cuo. WHole Apples being included in a Re∣ceiver exhausted. Aug. 25 It was 5 Aug. 26 It was 9 Aug. 27 It was 12 Aug. 28 It was 15 Aug. 29 It was 19 Aug. 30 It was 25 Aug. 31 It was 28 Sept. 1 It was 29 Sept. 2 It was 30 Sept. 3 The Receiver sever'd from the Cover. August 24. An equal Quantity of bruis'd Fruit being put into a Receiver. Aug. 25 It was 1 Aug. 26 It was 3 Aug. 27 It was 4 Sept. 3 The same. Sept. 25 The same. This Experiment is a Confirmation of the In∣ference drawn from the last.
EXPERIMENT III. August 25. 77. BRuis'd Grapes were shut up in Vacuo.Bruis'd Grapes in Vacuo. Aug. 36 It was 1 Aug. 27 It was 2 Aug. 28 It was 2 ½ Aug. 29 2 ½ Sept. 15 2 ½ August 25. 77. Unripe Grapes whole were shut up in a Re∣ceiver. Aug. 26 It was 3 Aug. 27 It was 5 Aug. 28 It was 7 Aug. 29 It was 10 Aug. 30 It was 12 Aug. 31 It was 13 Sept. 1 It was 15 Sept. 2 It was 16 Sept. 3 It was 18 Sept. 4 It was 18 Sept. 5. They began to be Yellow. Sept. 7 They grew Yellow; the Mercury was 18 Inches. Sept. 15 it was 20. This is a further Confirmation of the former Experiment.
EXPERIMENT IV. Sept. 10. 77. TWO Ounces of ripe Grapes being in∣cluded in a Receiver capable of holding 10 Ounces.Ripes Grapes. Sept. 11 It was 6 Sept. 12 It was 9 Sept. 13 It was 12 Sept. 14 It was 15 Sept. 15 It was 20 Sept. 16 It was 25 Sept. 17 It was 28 Sept. 18 It was 30 The Grapes unalter'd. Sept. 19 It was 30 Sept. 20 Grapes a little riper. Sept. 21 The Recei∣ver was forc'd from the Cover. Sept. 22 The Grapes be∣ginning to Rot, were shut up in another Receiver. Sept. 23 It was 5 Sept. 24 It was 9 Sept. 25 It was 14 Sept. 26 It was 17 Sept. 27 It was 20 Sept. 29 It was 27 Sept. 30 It was 28 Oct. 10 The Receiver forc'd from the Cover. The Grapes seem'd rot∣ten; but preserv'd their Firmness Sept. 10. 77. The same Quantity of bruis'd Grapes being included in a Receiver of the same Size. Sept. 11 It was 4 Sept. 12 It was 7 Sept. 13 It was 10 Sept. 14 It was 12 Sept. 15 It was 15 Sept. 16 It was 18 Sept. 17 It was 20 Sept. 18 It was 25 Sept. 19. A good Quantity of the Juice was Spilt, the Receiver being sever'd from the Cover. Sept. 20. The same Grapes were shut up with as much Air as rais'd the Mercury 3 Inches. Sept. 21. The Receiver was separated from the Cover; and the Grapes enclos'd in another Receiver with common Air. Sept. 22. The Mercury was 11 Inches high. Sept. 23 It was 19 Sept. 24 It was 19 Sept. 30 It was 20 Oct. 3 Being taken out they were bitter. Ripe Grapes yield more Air when bruis'd, than unbruis'd. EXPERIMENT V. Nov. 19. 78. A Sound and a bruis'd Apple,Sound and bruis'd Ap∣ples in Re∣ceivers. being each put into a distinct Vessel; Another bruis'd one was put into a third; which was so adapted to it, that when the Receiver was exhausted, the Air form'd in the bruis'd Apple expan∣ding it self, squeez'd out the Juice. Nov. 22. In the first Receiver the Mercury was 5: In the second 3: In the third 0.
Nov. 23. In the 1st 7 Inches: In the others no Altera∣tion. Decemb. 7. In the 1st 11: No Alteration in the others. Jan. 23. The first separated from the Cover. May 20. 79. The third separated from the Cover: In the second no Air produc'd. The Reason why bruis'd Fruits yield most Air in Vacuo, seems to be, because they there have more Liberty to expand their Parts. ARTICLE XV. Air is sometimes found unfit to produce Mouldiness. EXPERIMENT I. July 12. 78. ROses being included in two Receivers,Roses in Common and Com∣press'd Air. and as much Air with one of them as sustain'd 60 Digits of Mercury. August 2. Those in Common Air turn'd Yellow, the others retain'd their Colour.
Feb. 10. 79. Those in the Compress'd Air were unalter'd. This compar'd with Exp. IV. Art. IV. shews, that several times the Air is so different, as some∣times to hinder and sometimes to promote Cor∣ruption. EXPERIMENT II. May 22.Tulips and Lark-Spurs. TUlips and Larks-spurs being shut up in two Receivers, and as much Air com∣press'd in One as sustain'd 60 Inches of Mer∣cury 15 Days ago. In five days some of the Tulips in the Com∣mon Air that were cut, seem'd Mouldy. To day the other part seem'd Mouldy. The Flowers seem'd as fresh as when first put in; but those in Compress'd Air were more moist. June 22. No more Mouldy: This Experiment com∣par'd with the same made the Year before, con∣firms the Inference drawn from the forego∣ing.
ARTICLE XVI. Experiments concerning the Change of Weight, made in the Beams of the Sun, even in Vessels seal'd Hermetically. EXPERIMENT I. Sept. 4. 78.Minium expos'd to the Sun Beams. A Drachm of Minium being expos'd to the Sun Beams, concenter'd by a burning, Glass lost ¼ part of a Grain. EXPERIMENT II. Sept. 6.Calcin'd Coral ex∣pos'd to the Sun Beams. CAlcin'd Coral being expos'd to the Beams of the Sun in a Glass hermetically seal'd, became whiter. Sept. 10. In two hours, the Glass being weigh'd, it from the first had lost 1/1 of a Grain. EXPERIMENT I. May 23.Calx of Tin in a Glass Her∣metically Seal'd. CAlx of Tin included in a Glass hermeti∣cally Seal'd, lost 1/64 part of a Grain, by the Effects of the Sun Beams concentred by a burn∣ing Glass.
May 29. The Experiment being tried with Minium, it lost 1/32 part of a Grain. May 30. Being about to repeat the Experiment, the Glass flew in Pieces. June 6. The same Experiment being tried with Mi∣nium it lost 1/64 part of a Grain. Upon a second tryal the Glass broke. July 15. The Sun had no effects on Coals of Wood. June 20. The Sulphur Vive tho' it melted and fum'd, lost none of it's Weight. August 1. The same Experiment being repeated it lost no Weight. ARTICLE XVII. The Preservation of Bodies in Compress'd Liquors. EXPERIMENT I. Aug. 3. 78.An Apri∣cock in Water. AN Apricock was shut up in one Receiver full of Raisins of the Sun ston'd; Ano∣ther being conveigh'd into a Second, so that it neither touch'd the Water nor Raisins.
Sept. 10. The Apricock enclos'd in the Water being ta∣ken out, bubbled whilst the Air made it's way out. The Apricocks had a pleasant Relish, but the Raisins had lost their Taste. Feb. 10. 78. The other Apricock only seem'd to have lost it's Firmness. Some Fruits may reserve their Taste in an Infusion of Raisins of the Sun, if the Vessel will bear a great Compression of Air. EXPERIMENT II. Sept. 17 78.Peaches in∣cluded in Artificial Air. PEACHES being included in 2 Receivers, with an Infusion of Raisins. Sept. 11. The Air generated in one Receiver, forc'd out some of the Air. Sept. 25. More of the Liquor was forc'd out, so that a fifth part seem'd empty; but the Screw being set, it was preserv'd. Sept. 26. The same Receiver leak'd again. Nov. 27. The Receiver being open'd, whilst the Air made it's way out, the Peaches bubbled: The yellow sort were soft, but preserv'd their Taste; the other sort reserv'd it's Firmness. The Liquor was very grateful and pleasant. Decemb. 28. The other Receiver being open'd, tho' before it seem'd unalter'd, yet both the Liquor and
Peaches bubbled. One side was soft, the o∣ther hard: It's Taste was pleasant, but some∣thing sharp. So that Liquors may acquire a Sowerness, tho' no Spirits evaporate. EXPERIMENT III. Sept. 20.Peaches and crude Grapes. PEACHES and unripe Grapes, being in∣cluded in two Receivers, in one of which was Apples bruis'd to a Pulp; In the other, an Infusion of Raisins of the Sun. Sept. 25. That in which the Raisins were had, forced half it's Liquor out, and rais'd the Mercury 100 Inches, the Receiver being open'd, whilst the Air got out, the Peach turn'd as soft as a Pultis; the Taste of it was pleasant. The other Receiver was unalter'd. Another Peach was shut up with an Infusion of Raisins of the Sun. Sept. 26. The Mercury was 30 Digits higher than usual. Sept. 27. It was 72. Sept. 28. It was 90. Liquor got out. Sept. 30. It was at a stand: the Liquor was all gone. Octob. 1. The Receiver was open'd, and the Peach tho' soft, tasted pleasant. Octob. 3. The Receiver in which the Apples were con∣tain'd being open, all things were much ferment∣ed; the Juice of the Apples having got out, the Peach tho' soft, tasted pleasant. Fruit cannot long be preserv'd in the Pulp of Apples, they yield so much Air.
EXPERIMENT IV. Sept. 23. 78.Pears with the Pulp of Apples. PEACHES and crude Grapes being included in one Receiver with the Pulp of Apples, and in another with unripe Grapes bruis'd. Octob. 1. That which contain'd the Apples was unal∣ter'd: But the other had lost it's wind; one of the Peaches had lost it's Firmness, both of them retain'd a grateful Taste. Feb. 5. 79. That which contain'd the Apples, seem'd un∣alter'd; the Pulp and Peaches tasted grateful, but a little too pungent; when the Receiver was open'd, there happen'd a very great Ebul∣lition. EXPERIMENT V. Sept. 25. 78.Pears with the Pulp of Apples. TWO Butter Pears were shut up in a Recei∣ver with Pulp of Apples. Sept. 26. The height of the Mercury was unalter'd. Octob. 5 It was 16 Octob. 6 It was 16 † Octob. 12 It was 16 † Octob. 29. It subsided. Octob. 26. The Recei∣ver was crackt One of the Pears began to rot, the rest, as well as the Apples, tasted well.
EXPERIMENT VI. Octob. 1. 78. PEACHES being included with Pulp of Apples in one Receiver, and unripe Grapes bruis'd in another. Octob. 5. Wine got out. The Mercury was 64. Digits high. Octob. 6. Wine ran out. It was 70 Inches high. Oct. 8. All the Wine ran out: It was 86 high. Oct. 12. 86. Oct. 18. 86. The o∣ther Receiver which contain'd Pulp of Apples, for those five Days, had lost some Juice. Decemb. 4 The Receiver which contain'd the Apples being open'd, several Bubbles broke out, with a conside∣rable Noise; The Peach was soft and pungent. Jun. 28. 79. The Mercury in the other Receiver, stay'd at the same height. The Peaches emitted several Bub∣bles, being wrinkled and a little alter'd in Colour; their Taste was very pungent, and a little acid. EXPERIMENT VII. Octob. 4. 78.Peaches with Wine and Beer. PEACHES being shut in one Receiver with Wine; In another with Beer hopp'd; and in another with Beer without Hops. Octob. 5. The Mercury in the last was 15 Digits high. In the second, 10. In the first, 9. Octob. 6. In
the last. 25 Inches. In the second, 15. In the first, 20. Octob. 8. In the last, 35. Second, 15. First, 20. Octob. 12. In the last, 63. Second, 15. First, 28. Oct. 15. In the last, 81. Second, 15. First, 30. Oct. 16. No Alteration at all. 18. It descended a lit∣tle in all. 22. The Ascent in the Wine answer'd the Degrees of Heat and Cold. Octob. 24. In the last, it was 96 Digits high. Second, 15. First, 30. Oct. 30. In the last, 115. Second, 29. First, 30. Nov. 3. In the last, 117. Second, 20, First, 30. Oct. 6. In the last, 120. Second 31. First, 31. Oct. 11. In the last, 105. Second, 31. First, 28. Cold Weather. Nov. 16. The Peach which was lowest in the middle Receiver, rose up to the Top; the others re∣main'd at the Bottom. Nov. 25. In the last, 140. The second, 47. First, 32. Nov. 28. In the last, 96. Second, 36. First, 28. very cold Weather. Decemb. 13. In the last, 96. Second, 47. First, 33. In the first, the Peach was firm, and well colour'd; it had borrow'd a Taste from the Wine; which might be made grateful with Sugar. The Wine was very palatable. Decemb. 30. In the last, 96 Digits. Second, 47. The Peaches in the last when it was open'd, rose up to the Top, and bubbled; The Taste, which they had got from the Sugar, was made pleasant with it.
Hence it appears, that fermented Liquors may preserve Fruit. EXPERIMENT VIII. Sept. 5. 78. ONE Peach whole, and another cut, was included with old Wine in a Receiver. Nov. 20. Some of the Wine ran out: Nov. 30. A third part was lost. Decemb. 8. The Wine was almost lost, but what remain'd was pleasant; the Peaches were much fermented, and a grateful Taste. This compar'd with the first Receiver in for∣mer Exp. shews, that Wine hinders Fermen∣tation, if in a sufficient Quantity; but here the Peaches took up too much Room. EXPERIMENT IX. Octob. 11. 78. A Whole Peach, and another cut, was in∣cluded in hopp'd and fermented Beer. Octob. 12 It was 3 Octob. 15 It was 15 Octob. 16 It was 15 Octob. 18 It was 12 very cold. Octob. 20 It was 12 Octob. 22 It was 12 x Warmer. Nov. 2 It was 20 Nov. 3 It was Lower, cold. Nov. 6 It was 28 hotter. Nov. 8 It was 33 Nov. 11 It was 40 Nov. 12 It was 40 Beer got out. Nov. 16 It was 46 Nov. 19 It was 43 Beer lost. Nov. 20 Beer lost. Nov. 23 It was almost all lost. The Receiver being open'd, the Peaches were soft, yet of a grateful Taste.
This Exper. compar'd with the second Re∣ceiver, Exp. VII. shew that Beer in a sufficient Quantity, hinders the Generation of Air, and Fermentation of Peaches, but here the Peaches took up too much Room. EXPERIMENT X. Octob. 19. 78. RAW Beef being shut up with stale Beer,Beef with stale Beer. compress'd till the Mercury rose 60 Digits above it's usual height. In another it was shut up with Beer uncompress'd: And in a third, the Receiver was fill'd with common Air. Octob. 20. In the first it sunk 40 Digits. In the second, a little. In the third, it ascended a little. Octob. 26. In the first, it ascended and descend∣ed irregularly: It ascended slowly in the second. In the third it was at a stand. Oct. 27. A Piece left in the Air, began to smell ill: In the second and third, the Mercury as∣cended: In the first it descended. Nov. 3. In the second, it was 20; in the third, 10 Digits high. Nov. 5. The two first did not stink, but the Flesh had got a Taste from it; and being boil'd in it, was tender. That included with common Air, stunk. But the same piece of Beef being shut up again with Air. Nov. 6. Mercury was rais'd 3 Digits. Nov. 11. 8. Nov. 25. 20 Di∣gits. The Flesh stunk. Hence it appears, that Beer may preserve Beef, when compress'd for some time.
EXPERIMENT XI. Nov. 12. BEEF was shut up with Water,Beef with Water and Salt. and a for∣tieth Part of Salt, in one Receiver; In ano∣ther with Salt Water, compress'd till the Mer∣cury was rais'd 15 Digits above it's usual height. In a third, Flesh and Air was only enclos'd. Nov. 13. Mercury descended in all; especi∣ally where the compress'd Water was. Nov. 18. In that which contain'd compress'd Water, it almost rose to it's former height. A piece of the same Beef expos'd to the Air, be∣gan to smell ill. Nov. 23. Air was generated in all; The Mercury in the second was 20 Digits, having descended 3. In the other two, it was about 16. In the first the Flesh was not corrupted. Nov. 30. The Flesh included with Salt, did not stink; but when boil'd, was tender and pleasant. Decemb. 6. The Mercury in that which con∣tain'd the compress'd Air was 25 Digits: The Flesh was strong scented, but did not stink. That included in Vacuo, bubbled when the Re∣ceiver was open'd, and in an hours time, yield∣ed Air enough to sustain 3 or 4 Digits of Mer∣cury. The Receiver which contain'd it, being immers'd in hot Water, the Liquor bubbled much, tho' the Water it was immers'd in, did not boil; the Receiver was soon full of Air, and then, tho' it was immers'd in boiling Wa∣ter, the Liquor did not bubble. The Flesh was
pleasant and tender. So that Water as well as Beer may help to preserve Flesh. EXPERIMENT. XII. Nov. 29. 78. OYsters were shut in one Receiver with∣out their Shells;Oysters. In another they were shut up in their Shells with common Air, and in a Third with Salt-water. These three being closed up with Screws, 3 Oysters in their Shells, and 8 taken out were shut up in Vacuo; where it was observable, that when the Air was exhausted, those which were without their Shells emitted large Bubbles, one of the others opened the Shell. Nov. 30. The Mercury in Vacuo ascended a little, but in those 3 which were stopped with Screws it descended rather. Decemb. 4. The Weather growing warmer, the Mer∣cury in the first Receiver was 7 Digits. In the Second, 0. In the Third, 3. In the Fourth 3. Dec. 5. In the First 20. In the Second, 1. In the Third 3. In the Fourth 5. Dec. 7. In the First the Height of the Mer∣cury was 30. In the Second 1 Digit. In the Third 3. In the Fourth 8. Other Oysters left in the open Air began to Smell ill. Dec. 9. In the First it was 30; In the Fourth 11. In the Rest no Change. Dec. 13. In the Fourth it was 14 Inches High.
Dec. 20. In the First it was 46. In the Fourth 24. No alteration in the others. Dec. 21. In the 1st. 52. In the 4th. 25. No alteration in the others. Dec. 22. In the 1st. 60. In 4th. 27. No altera∣tion in the Rest. Dec. 27. In the 4th. 29. No alteration in the Rest. Jan. 7. 79. The Oysters in the Third Receiver had Co∣loured the Water black. Jan. 25. Some Bubbles were formed in the Turpentine, about the Commissure of the Receiver and Co∣ver, of that which was exhausted; the Height of the Mercury was not altered, but the Oysters being taken out Stunk: Those in the other Re∣ceivers Stunk, and were turned to a viscous Gelly. From this Experiment it seems to follow, that Fishes yeild not so much Air as Flesh; yet they will Corrupt tho' not affected by the out∣ward Air. EXPERIMENT XIII. Nov. 29. 78.A Vessel of fresh But∣ter.A Glass Vessel filled with fresh Butter, be∣ing conveyed into a Receiver with a Mer∣curial Gage. Nov. 30. The Butter being in the Night condens'd by Cold, the Mercury sunk a little.
Decemb. 2. The Cold encreasing, the Mercury sunk sen∣sibly. Decemb. 5. The Cold growing more remiss, the Mercury ascended almost to its former Height; some of the same Butter having been all the time exposed to the Air, smelled ill. Decemb. 7. The Cold coming on again, the Mercury re∣turned to the Top of the Gage. The Butter in the open Air smelled worse. Decemb. 24. The Butter had yeilded no Air, but was all of a gratefull Taste, except the Superficies of it, which was contiguous to the Leather. So That But∣ter may be Preserved a long time, if Preserved from the Contact of Air. EXPERIMENT XIV. Nov. 30. 78.Whitings and Oysters▪ONE Receiver was filled with Whitings and Wine, another with Whitings and Oysters. When the Screws were Set, the Mer∣cury in the Gage was compressed, but in 3 hours returned to it's former Mark. Decemb. 2. The Cold increasing, the Mercury Sunk in both. Decemb. 4. The Cold ceased, and the Mercury ascended in that Receiver which contained the Oysters.
Decemb. 5. In that which held the Oysters, the Mercury was Raised 20 Digits. Decemb. 7. It rose to 40 Digits. Dec. 9. No alteration in either; that in which the Wine was contained, remaining still below it's first Height. Decemb. 20. The Contents of both stunk. But what was remarkable in this Experiment, was, that there was Corruption without a Generation of Air, in that Receiver which contained the Wine. EXPEREMENT XV. Decemb. 3.78.Raw Beef with Pep∣per and Cloves.RAw Beef with Pepper and Cloves being put into two Large Receivers, and as much Beer added as filled the Remaining space, in a little time after the Pressure of the Air growing more Remiss, the Mercury came almost to the open ends of the Gage. Decemb. 8. The Mercury ascended not. The Beef be∣ing taken out of one to be Boil'd, had acquired a sweet smell from the Cloves, and the Liquor smelt like Hippocras. Jan. 2. 79. The other Receiver was opened, no Air be∣ing produc'd. The Flesh was uncorrupted; and being Boil'd in Vacuo with an intense Fire, I ob∣serv'd, Air or Spirits broke out at the Stop-cock fastned to the Top of the Receiver. When the Receiver was Cool the next day, it was almost
void of Air; The Flesh was Tender, and well Tasted, only it was Boil'd a Little too much, hav∣ing been on the Fire Six Hours. Hence it appears, that Beer impregnated with Aromaticks will preserve Flesh. EXPEREMENT XVI. Decemb. 4.78.Larks with Beef.TWo Larks with some Beef being shut up in a Receiver, with as much Ale as filled up the Space not possessed by them: Another was filled with Beef alone, and a Mixture of Beer and Ale. Decemb. 9. Some Pieces of the Larks which were exposed to the Air, began to smell ill; but those in the Re∣ceiver had not yeilded Air enough to sustain 5 Digits of Mercury. In the other Receiver no Air was Generated. Decemb. 19. The Cover of the Receiver, which held the Larks being broke, Liquor ran out: The Beef and Larks were uncorrupt, and being Boil'd Tasted gratefully, the Taste of the Beef being made pleasant by the Mixture of the Larks and Beer. Decemb. 23. The other Receiver being opened, the Boil'd Flesh seem'd pleasant. Hence it appears, that Birds may be preserved long in Beer and Ale.
EXPEREMENT XVII. Decemb. 14. ONe Receiver was filled with a whole Apple,Apples and Sugar, &c. and a sufficient quantity of Powdered Sugar. A Second was filled with an Apple cut in Pieces, and Sugar. A Third was filled with an Apple cut in Pieces and Water, with a 1/10 part of Sugar. A Fourth had 5 parts of Water, and one of Sugar included with an Apple cut in Pieces. Decemb. 21. In the first the Sugar was not Melted; The Mercury ascended a little. In the Second the Sugar was Melted and the Apples shrivel'd; they yeilded much Air when First included in the Receiver. In the other Two the Mercury ascended a little. In the Third the pieces of Apple were corrupted very much, for the Skin was taken off. Decemb. 22. Air was produced in all the Receivers, but most in the Second and Third. Decemb. 27. In the 3 First the Mercury was 10 Digits high, in the Fourth 6. Decemb. 31. In the 1st. and 2d. It was 13. In the 3d. 15. In the 4th. 9. Jan, 2. 79. In the 1st. and 2d. almost 14. In the 3d. 17. In the 4th. 11. Jan. 7. In the 2d. It was 16. In the 3d. 36. In
the Fourth 15. The Mercury in the First rose no higher; but the Air made it's escape, when the Screw was eased. Jan. 9. In the first it was 6 Inches high. In the 2d. 16. In the 3d. 39. In the Fourth 15. Jan. 17. In the 1st. 13. In the 2d. 19. In the 3d. 56. In the 4th. 17. Jan. 30. In the 3d. 76. Digits. The Liquor broke out, and therefore I opened the Receiver. The Fruit had communicated it's Taste, which was pleasant, to the Water; The Mercury in the 2d. being raised no higher, I opened it, and found that the first was better Tasted than the former, and hav∣ing communicated, in a great Measure, it's Taste to the ambient Sugar, It was in the form of a good Syrup. Feb. 16. The Mercury in the First Receiver was 22. In the Fourth 33. The Receiver being opened, I found that the Taste of the First being wholly imparted to the Water, had made it very Pleasant. Feb. 27. The Mercury in the First Receiver was 30 Digits high. March 15. The Receiver being opened, I found, that tho' the Colour of the Apple was good; yet the Pulp was Spungy, and had in a great Mea∣sure lost it's Taste. Hence it appears, that Sugar does not pre∣serve Fruit so well as Fermented Liquors. See EXP. VII.
EXPERIMENT XVIII. Decemb. 23. A Glass Vessel being full of Milk,Milk in∣cluded in a Receiver. and stop∣ped with a Screw, was conveighed into one Receiver, and Milk with a Lark in it into another. Decemb. 24. In the Evening the Caseous and Butyrous Parts were separated both in the Milk in the Receivers, and in some of the same exposed to the Air. Decemb. 27. No Air generated where the Lark was; The other Gage was spoiled. Decemb. 31. The Mercury was raised in that which held the Lark. 3 days since, Milk that had all the while been exposed to the Air, Stunk. Jan. 1. 79. The Mercury was 10 Inches high, where the Lark was contained. Jan. 2. It was 14 ½. The Milk below the Buty∣rous Part seemed red. Jan. 4. It rose to 19 Digits. White Serum grew together in the Bottom of the Milk. Jan. 9. The Mercury was 29 Digits high. Jan. 25. The Receivers being opened, the Lark Smelled strong, but when Boll'd Tasted Plea∣sant; tho' it had been kept 32 Days. In the other Receiver the Butyrous part was sowre, but the Caseous Part Tasted subacid.
From hence it appears that Milk may Preserve Flesh. EXPERIMENT XIX. Decemb. 24. 78. A Lark was put into a Small Receiver,A Lark with Melt∣ed Butter. and the Remaining space filled up with Melted Butter. Decemb. 27. The Mercury sunk, the Butter grew Yellow below, White in the Middle, and Fluid above. Jan. 5. 79. The Mercury gradually rose. 9. It was a little higher. 28. It was altered but little, the Receiver being opened; the Butter contiguous to the Lea∣ther which Lined the Cover, was of an ungrate∣ful Taste and white. The Rest of the Butter was Yellow and Rancid. The Lark being Roasted was Pleasant to the Palate. Hence it appears, that Butter when Melted and hot, does not preserve Flesh so well as otherwise. EXPERIMENT XX. Jan. 4. 79. A Receiver being filled with Boil'd Flesh and Broth, whilst the Screw was Set,Boiled Flesh and Broth. they were so Compressed as to Raise the Mercury 6 Digits, but it soon subsided again.
Jan. 28. The Mercury had subsided 8 Digits below it's usual Height. The Receiver being opened, we found the Flesh Sweet and Pleasant; The Broth Subacid and well Tasted. This Experiment Teaches, that Beef being kept in Receivers as long as Experience shews that it may, and then taken out and Boil'd, and included again in Receivers, may be carried to Sea without Salting it, which may be of no small use in helping to preserve Beef Fresh in long Voyages. See. EXP. XII. EXPERIMENT XXI. Jan. 30. 79.Raw Flesh with Pep∣per and Cloves. RAw Flesh was included with Pepper and Cloves in one Receiver, and in another by it self. Feb. 11. In the First the Mercury was 3 Digits high. In the Second almost 1 ½. Feb. 12. In the First 4 ½. In the Second 1 ½. Feb. 13. In the First 6 ✚. In the Second 3. The Flesh of the First being boiled was Ten∣der and Pleasant. Feb. 14. In the Second 5 19 In the Second 6 20 In the Second 11. The Flesh being Boil'd was Tender and good, tho' it was kept in B. Mariae but 5 hours. Some of it be∣fore it was boil'd was put into a Receiver free from Air.
Feb. 28. The Ascent of the Mercury was small. March. 20. The Mercury was 16 Digits high. The Flesh being taken out Tasted Pleasant, but was inclin∣ing to corruption. EXPERIMENT XXII. Feb. 10. RAw Beef Seasoned with Pepper and Cloves was put into one Receiver. In another it was enclosed with Salt. In a Third alone. Feb. 19. In the 1st. and 3d. the Mercury ascended. In the 2d. it did not. Feb. 21. In the 1st. it was 4 ½: In the 3d. 10: In the 2d. 0. 25 In the 1st. it was 6: In the 3d. 19: In the 2d ½: 26. No Ascent: The Third being opened, and the Flesh Boil'd, it tasted well. In the former Experiment Spices seem'd to hinder, but here they promote the Generation of the Air: So that I am inclined to think, that the difference in these two Experiments depends on this, Viz. that in the former the Ingredients were shut up so close that there was no Room for Air to be Generated in. March 9. The Mercury in the 1st. was 8 Digits; In the 2d. None. 12. In the 1st. it was 12; In the 2d. 1.
April 3. In the 1st it was 11: In the 2d 1. April 3. In the 1st it was 11: In the 2d 1. The Receiver being open'd and the Flesh boil'd, it was sweet and tender. From this Experiment we may infer, that Salt hinders the Generation of Air. Less air was generated in the second Receiver, because it was more exactly fill'd. To preserve Flesh without Salt the Air must be kept out; and like∣wise there must be a great compression in the Receiver. Of what use these Experiments may be for to help Mariners to transport fresh Meat and Fruits, the Reader may judge. ARTICLE XVIII. Experiments concerning Elixation and Distil∣lation in Vacuo. EXPERIMENT I. Dec. 12. 78.Beef boil'd in Vacuo. A Reciver large enough to contain 22 Oun∣ces of Water, having 2 Ounces and 6 Drachms of Beef in it, was immers'd 3 hours in boiling Water, and then lest to cool all
Night; I found by the help of our Pneumatick Engin that the Air form'd in the Receiver, was not able to hold up 3 Digits of Mercury: So that by deducting from the Calculation, one may learn that Flesh, whilst boiling, cannot gene∣rate a sufficient Quantity of Air to cause an entire pressure in a Receiver large enough to hold a double Weight of Water: That is, a Pound of Flesh shut up in a Receiver capable of containing 2 Ounces of Water, will not yield Air enough to sever the Receiver from the Cover without the help of heat. EXPERIMENT II. Dec. 23. THree Ounces of Beef being shut up in a Receiver large enough to contain 32 Oun∣ces of Water, when it had boil'd long, sepa∣rated the Receiver from the Cover, so that Va∣pours got out. The Receiver being close a∣gain, it was a good while before the Cover and it were sever'd a second time: If the Fire be strong enough, sweet Exhalations continually make their way out. Dec. 24. The Receiver being cool, was almost wholly evacuated by the Pneumatick Engin: So that it appears, that the Receiver and it's Cover are not separated by Air which is able to continue in that Form; but by violent exhalations, which when resisted, fall back, and condense in the
Receiver, so that if the Fire be not too vio∣lent, the Avolition of those Steams may easily be prevented. EXPERIMENT III. Jan. 21. 79.Paste with∣out Leaven in Vacuo. PAste without Leaven being shut up in Vacuo and in another Receiver with Common Air: And both of these shut up with a Screw in Balneo Mariae, I left them there 3 hours, and then after they had been expos'd to a moderate Fire, I caus'd them to be open'd. The Paste in Vacuo was reddish on it's Superficies, the other was not boil'd enough, therefore both were shut up in B. M. all Night. Jan. 22. The Paste being taken out, was sufficiently boil'd, but had no Crust. That in Vacuo, was full of Cavities and insipid; the other was well Tasted and of a Close Body. Both Receivers were void of Air. EXPERIMENT IV. Feb. 3. 79. When Leaven'd Paste had fill'd a Receiver full of Air, it was remov'd into ano∣ther, upon which it stunk; yet when it was in a hot Balneo M. 3 hours, Bread was made of it full of holes, but without a Crust.
Feb. 5. The same Experiment being repeated with∣out removing the Paste from one Receiver to another and exposing it to the Air, the Bread made of it was much lighter than the For∣mer. EXPERIMENT V. Feb. 12.Rosemary and Water distill'd in Vacuo. ROsemary and Water being shut up in the Instrument, contriv'd to distil in Vacuo, that being plac'd in Balneo Mariae, it yielded a Water which had a sweet Smell; as also some Drops of essential Oyl, well scented and clear from any Empyreuma. But the Stop-cock be∣ing open'd to let in Air, the Noise which the Air rushing in caus'd, was soon over, so that I judge the Rosemary had afforded a good deal of Air. Feb. 13. The same Rosemary being again expos'd to a more violent Fire, it only yielded a Water less odoriferous than the former. EXPERIMENT VI. Feb. 10. 79.Flesh boil'd in Vacuo. A Pound of Flesh was boil'd in Vacuo, with 4 pound of Water, and in 3 hours the Mercury, in a Gage which was contain'd in the upper Part of it, was not rais'd above 3 Inches. It Tasted ill, as also the Liquor which was made
of the condens'd Vapours; it was not boil'd enough. Feb. 11. The same Experiment was repeated, the Flesh being first sprinkled with Pepper and Cloves, the Mercury ascended 6 Inches, in the same time that before it was rais'd 3: It Tasted well, and the Liquor form'd of the Vapors Tasted strong of Pepper. These Vessels seem proper to distil Bodies that are very thin and Volatile in. ARTICLE XIX. Concerning Elixation in Vessels stopp'd with Screws, by whose help, Harts-horn and the Bones of Fishes and four-footed Crea∣tures may be soften'd. EXPERIMENT I. Jan. 29.Beef boil'd in B. M. BEef boil'd in Balneo Mariae eight or nine hours, in a Vessel stopp'd with a Screw, had a very unpleasant Taste: After I boil'd Beef season'd with Pepper and Cloves 3 hours and it Tasted very pleasant: Beef that was not so Season'd being boil'd 3 hours Tasted well. So that I conjectur'd that the first Flesh was spoil'd with over-boiling, when the Flesh was
not season'd, Vapours gather'd in the Top of the Vessel, and condens'd Tasted unpleasant. EXPERIMENT II. Jan. 29. APples boil'd 2 hours, were soft and well Tasted; but some Pieces, impregnated with the condens'd Vapours, which were of an ungrateful Smell, had acquired a less acceptable Taste. EXPERIMENT III. Feb. 4.Season Flesh inclos'd in a Receiver. FLesh closely compress'd and season'd with Pepper and Cloves, being shut up in a Re∣ceiver stopp'd with a Screw, that was kept hot in Balneo an hour, in which time the Flesh was alittle over boil'd: when the Balneum was open'd, all the Water broke out. Feb. 5. Some Part of the Water was inclos'd in a Receiver shut up with a Screw. March 12. The Flesh was very good. Elixation, by how much the more perfect, contributes the more to the hindrance of Fermentation. See Art. XVIII. Exp. XII, XX.
EXPERIMENT IV. Feb. 10.Cow-heel boil'd in Vacuo. A Cow-heel being boil'd, four hours over a moderate Fire, was so soft, that the Bones might be eat like Cheese. Feb. 12. A Cow-heel being boil'd 12 hours, Tasted Empyreumatical, and the Juice would not Coa∣gulate: So that hard Bones and Tendons in Balneo Mariae may become good Nourish∣ment. EXPERIMENT V. Feb. 10. A Fish boil'd in B. M. 2 hours Tasted well, and the Bones were very soft. The Juice harden'd presently into a Gelly of a firm Consistence. This is a good way to boil Fish that are full of Bones. EXPERIMENT VI. Feb. 5.Hearts-horn boil'd in Vacuo. HArts-horn boil'd 4 hours, was very soft like Cheese, and the Juice presently har∣den'd into a Gelly.
Feb. 17. The Experiment being repeated, the Harts-horn was Boil'd 6 hours, and grew very soft: The Juice getting out of it, harden'd into a Gelly, and stuck to the outside of it. These Experiments may be of great Use to Mariners, since by them they may learn how to boil their Meat with out consuming fresh Water, which may be kept for other more cogent Oc∣casions. CHAP. IV. New Experiments about the Preservation of Bodies in Vacuo Boyliano. EXPERIMENT I. Several Substances included in Vacuo.A Piece of roasted Rabbet was preserv'd in Vacuo above two Months unalter'd. EXPERIMENT II. WHite Bread being enclos'd in Vacuo from the 11th of March to the 1st of April, was unalter'd, save that the outside of some Crumbs were a little dry; nor was it any further alter'd in 17 days time more. The inside of the Receiver was not Moist.
EXPERIMENT III. MIlk having been shut up in Vacuo three Months, smell'd and Tasted sowrish, being turn'd partly into a Whey, and in Part into a soft Curd. EXPERIMENT IV. VIolet Leaves being shut up a Month and 2 days in Vacuo, had undergone no Alter∣ation, but that they had lost their smell by being crush'd down into the Vessel; it being usual for them by crushing to exchange their Fragrancy for an earthy Smell. EXPERIMENT V. SOme Violets being kept 7 Months in Vacuo, some retain'd their proper Colour, others look'd like white Violets. EXPERIMENT VI. SHeeps Blood being shut up in Vacuo, whilst the Receiver was exhausting emitted Bub∣bles and swell'd: Being kept in a heat equal to the heat of a digesting Furnace, for two days, was Florid and Fluid; afterward it inclin'd to a Blackness: Eighteen days after, external Air rushing in, and the Glass which held the Blood, being in a light Place; we perceiv'd the lower side of it to be cover'd with a Coagula∣ted substance of a deeper Colour than that
which swam upon it; but when, by shaking, it was rais'd, it seem'd of a fair Colour: The Blood being pour'd out, had no more an offen∣sive Smell than the Blood of a newly kill'd Dog. EXPERIMENT VII. CReam being shut up in Vacuo near a Year, was like Butter on the top, which by agi∣tation was separated from the Butter-Milk it swam in: The Butter-Milk was of a grateful Sowerness, like other Butter-Milk; but the Butter was Sowrer. EXPERIMENT VIII. SOme slices of roasted Beef being put into one Vial; White Bread into another; and pieces of Cheese into a third, on the 15 of September; February the 18 we perceived little Alteration; they being free from Putrefacti∣on. EXPERIMENT IX. JƲly-Flowers and a Rose being inclos'd in a Vial on the 12th of August; February 18 they were a little moist; but retain'd their Shape and Colour. In these two Experiments no Dew was perceiv'd in the upper Parts of the Receiver.
EXPERIMENT X. STrawberries being included in Vacuo, June the 4th: In the beginning of November we found them alter'd in Colour, but not in Shape. No sign of Corruption appear'd. EXPERIMENT XI. ROasted Beef, Cheese and a French Rose be∣ing included in three distinct Receivers in Vacuo, May the 2d; were unalter'd September the 5th: Flowers were preserv'd unalter'd 8 Months and a half. EXPERIMENT XII. A Pint of Beer, which was a Year Old, be∣ing shut up in Vacuo, June 17; tho' in August Thunder turn'd the Drink in our Cellar Sower; yet that in Vacuo appear'd unalter'd September 1. EXPERIMENT XIII. ALe being inclos'd six Weeks in Vacuo; tho' Thunder happen'd which turn'd the Ale in the Cellar Sower, yet this was good as before.
EXPERIMENT XIV. BLackberries included in Vacuo September 1st, 70; June 20th 73 were free from an ill Scent, and not in the least Mouldy; some sower Liquor being taken out from under them, they were shut up again. Octob. 11. 74. They were much blacker than before: No other perceivable Alteration. It is not a little strange, that so tender a Fruit should thus be preserv'd so long. POSSCRIPT. TO shew that Liquors, by being Hermeti∣cally seal'd in Bolt-heads, may be kept from sowering a long time, June 14 we shut up good Ale in one; the 5th of July next Year after, it was not sower: In 13 Months time after it was turn'd a little Sower. This Ale was preserv'd much longer from sowering than otherwise it would. June 14. 70. A Pint of French Claret being shut up, July 5, 71 was clear and high Colour'd, and had deposited a Sediment. When the Glass was broken, white Streams rose plentifully from the Wine, which presently disappear'd again: The Wine was rough, but well Tasted.
July 6. It was shut up again. August 5, next Year the Wine Tasted well. June 20, 73, it was still good, and therefore Seal'd up again. Octob. 11. 74. It was open'd again; and appear'd to be well Colour'd, but less Spirituous; yet it was not Sower. CHAP. V. New Pneumatical Experiments about Re∣spiration, upon Ducks, Vipers, Frogs, &c. communicated in the Philosophical Transactions of August the 8th and Sep∣tember the 12th 1670. contain'd under the following Titles. TITLE I. Observations made about the lasting of Ducks included in the exhaust'd Receiver. EXPERIMENT I. Animals shut up in Vacuo.TO try whether Ducks, which continue a good while under Water without Re∣spiration, would bear the absence of Air much longer, than other Animals in Vacuo, we inclos'd a Duck in a Receiver, which was third Part fill'd by her: The Air being exhausted
she continu'd well longer than a Hen would have done; yet in a Minute she was discompos'd; and in two, she, after violent Conuvlsions, hung down her Head as if dead, but presently re∣viv'd when Air was let in. Being shut up much longer in Common Air, she was not Discom∣pos'd. EXPERIMENT II. A Duck.A Callow Duckling being shut up in a Re∣ceiver, in a Minute seem'd disorder'd: In less than two Minutes being ready to dye and violently Convulsive, we let in Air; upon which she recover'd. Being shut up 6 Minutes with Common Air, she seem'd well. N. B. The Duckling seem'd much bigger when the Air was exhausted, than before. TITLE II. Of the Phenomena afforded by Vipers, in∣cluded in an exhausted Receiver. EXPERIMENT I. A Viper.TO try what effects Air would have upon Vipers, (Animals constituted differently from other Creatures) January 2, 6 ⅖ A Viper was shut up in a Receiver; as the Air was drawn out she began to swell, and soon after we ceas'd Pumping, she began to Gape. In 2 ½ hours she did not appear to be quite Dead: Soon after
she gap'd, the swelling subsided, but presently rose again. EXPERIMENT II. ANother Viper being shut up in Vacuo, after she had mov'd a little up and down, be∣gan to froth at the Mouth; soon after we left pumping, her Body and Neck swell'd prodigi∣ously, and a Blister rose on her Back, 1 ½ hour she appear'd to be alive, but no longer. Her Neck and a great part of her Throat seem'd transpa∣rent; Her Mouth was open and distorted; The Epiglottis with the Rimula Laryngis was almost thrust to the end of the Neather Chap. The black Tongue arising from beneath the Epiglottis, raught beyond it, but seem'd dead. The Mouth was black within. Upon a Re-admission of Air, in 23 hours, the Mouth was shut, tho' it open'd again. Scorching or pinching the Tail caus'd Mo∣tion in the Body of it. EXPERIMENT III. A Snake.A Snake, being inclos'd 22 hours with a Gage in a Receiver, seem'd dead; but when held something near the Fire, put out her forked Tongue. The next day she was dead, her Jaws gaping as if stretch'd with Violence.
TITLE III. Phaenomena afforded by Frogs in an exhaust-Receiver. EXPERIMENT I. Sept. 9. 1662. A Large Frog being shut up in Vacuo,Frogs in Vacuo. was but little swell'd, and mov'd her Throat al∣most as fast as before the Receiver was evacua∣ted. Her Body swell'd more, and she continu'd alive about 2 hours. In a little more than 3 hours she seem'd dead; but being left all night upon the Grass; she recover'd again. EXPERIMENT II. A Frog being enclos'd in a Receiver almost totally exhausted, about 11 a Clock; at the first seem'd unalter'd, but in six hours dy'd. EXPERIMENT III. Sept. 6. 62. A Slender and a large Frog being both in∣cluded in a Receiver; whilst it was ex∣hausting, the Lesser skipp'd up and down, and some time after; but in a quarter of an hour seem'd dead. The Larger Frog swell'd a little, and continued alive half an hour; but the Re∣ceiver leaking, we pursu'd the Experiment no further.
EXPERIMENT IV. A Small Frog being included in a Receiver, at the first seem'd lively; but after, mov'd up and down as if very uneasie; yet was alive when the Receiver was wholly exhausted for the Space of an hour, but at the latter end of the time, she wanted Respiration, and her Belly and Throat were swell'd. In 3 ½ hours time, the Air being let in, the Abdomen and Throat subsided, and instead of a Swelling, there remain'd a Cavity. EXPERIMENT V. A Large Frog being shut up in a plated Re∣ceiver exhausted, in seven hours was dead, being much swell'd; but upon an Ingress of Air, was lanker than ever. TITLE IV. Of the Phaenomena afforded by a newly kit∣ten'd Kitling in Vacuo. A Kitling in Vacuo.A Newly kitten'd Kitling being included in a Receiver, when it began to be ex∣hausted, in a Minute, after Convulsions, lay with the Tongue out as if dead; but when expos'd to the Air, in a Trice recover'd. An∣other Kitling of the same Age, being included in the same Receiver, after it had been, by turns, convulsive six Minutes, upon pumping out the Air, seem'd dead; and when taken out of the Receiver, lay with its Tongue out, without either
Pulse or Respiration; but being pinch'd, it pre∣sently gave signs of Life, and in a quarter of an hour, gaping and straining to fetch Breath, it recover'd. A third being put into the same Re∣ceiver, after violent Convulsions and want of Breath, in a Minute and half seem'd dead, no more Air being drawn out, than what was done at 3 Exsuctions. The Pump being still ply'd, and the Kitling seeming to swell, some time after gave signs of Life, being violently con∣vuls'd. After it had been inclos'd 7 Minutes, we let in the Air, and put Aq. Vitae into the Mouth of the Kitling, yet it dy'd in our Hands. These Animals continu'd perhaps 3 times as long alive in Vacuo, as others would have done. TITLE V. Some Tryals about the Air, usually harbour'd in the Pores of VVater, &c. Air con∣ceal'd in the Pores of Water.TO try how much Air is contain'd in a Quantity of Water, in reference to their Bulk: We fill'd a Chymical Pipe 36 In∣ches long, with Water, and inverted it in a Glass Vessel about ¼ of an Inch deep, and 2 Inches Diameter. These being included in a Receiver, the Air was pump'd out, and upon a Re-admis∣sion of it, the Bubble collected at the Top, wan∣ted 8/10 of about 100 part of an Inch. Soon after, a Tube, to be describ'd by and by, was fill'd with the same Water, and inverted; and when the Receiver, into which it was conveigh'd, was so far exhausted, that the Water in the Pipe
sunk even with the stagnant Water, Air was let in, and rose the Water within a Tenth part and ½ of an Inch to the Top. The Tube was 43 ¼ Inches above the stagnant Water; this Ex∣periment being twice try'd, the first time the Space possess'd by the Air was ¼ of an Inch, and more; the second it was ½ and 1/15. The first time the Water subsided level with the stagnant Water: In the second Tryal, within 4 or 5 In∣ches of it. In these Experiments it was observable, that tho' the Air possess'd so little Room in the Pores of the Water, that the Water seem'd not to sub∣side when it was drawn out; yet, the Air in the Cavity of the Tube, possess'd a considerable Space. Quare. Whether Water freed once of it's Air, will yield Air again? and whether there is not Air enough in the Pores of Water, to be ser∣viceable to Fishes, when suck'd through their Gills? To discover more nicely what Quantity of Air is contain'd in the Pores of Water, we made use of a Pipe, which consisted of a Globous Part 3 ½ Inches Diameter, and a Stem 9 Inches long; an Inch of which, at the Top, was melted and drawn out 2 or 3 Inches, till it was as slender as a Crow Quill: This Glass being fill'd with Wa∣ter, was with a Pedestal conveigh'd into a Re∣ceiver, and upon evacuating of it, Bubbles plen∣tifully rose, and made a kind of a Froth or Foam, but breaking at the Top of the slender Pipe, they did not run over. When the Re∣ceiver had been pretty well exhausted, we left off pumping till the Water had been pretty well
freed from Bubbles; and so we successively pump'd and left off again, till the Water seem'd quite free from Air; and then, letting in External Air, the Water did not seem a Hairs breadth lower than before. The like Experiment was try'd with Claret, which made us think it worth while to try what kind of Substances may be obtain'd from Aerial and Spirituous Bodies, by handling them thus. TITLE VI. Of some Phaenomena, afforded by Shell-Fishes in an exhausted Receiver. EXPERIMENT I. Oysters in Vacuo.TWO Oysters in their Shells, being shut up in Vacuo; whilst the Receiver was ex∣hausting, several Bubbles got out of the Shell; the Oysters were alive at the End of 24 hours. EXPERIMENT II. A Craw-Fish in Va∣cuo.A Craw-Fish being included in a Receiver, when the Air was pretty well exhausted, seem'd dead, but reviv'd upon a Re-admission of the Air; when the Air was again exhausted, it was void of Motion; the Experiment being 3 or 4 times exhausted, and Air let in again, when the Fish was taken out, it seem'd not to have suffer'd much harm.
EXPERIMENT III. ANother Oyster being shut up in a Receiver, and immers'd in Water, that the Bubbles which might come out of the Shell might be vi∣sible, if any; we found that this Fish was so strong, that no Bubbles could get out of the Shell. EXPERIMENT IV. A Craw-Fish stronger than the former, ex∣cept one small Intermission, continu'd in Motion whilst the Air was exhausting. TITLE VII. Of the Phaenomena of a Scale Fish, in an exhausted Receiver. A Gudgeon in Vacuo.WE fill'd the Globous Part of a Receiver, which was shap'd like a Bolt-head, and large enough to hold a Pint, half full of Wa∣ter, and put a Gudgeon 3 Inches long into it, which swam up and down; this being done, we exhausted the Receiver so far, that but one part of twenty of the Air was drawn out, and then we observ'd the following Particulars. First, The Water, except about the Fish, af∣forded no Froth, and but few Bubbles. Secondly, The Fish discharg'd several Bubbles at its Mouth and Gills, and several, after it rested half an hour, stuck to its Fins and Tayl, and other Parts; these Bubbles by swimming
would be shaken off, but upon a little Rest, they would appear about him again. Thirdly, Except at the latter End, he seem'd to take in Air at his Mouth and Gills. Fourthly, After a while, he lay on his Back, and would swim in that Posture. Fifthly, In some time he mov'd more lively than at first. An hour and half after he was in∣cluded, he seem'd clear of Bubbles, but lay on his Back, and was a little tumid, yet as lively as before. An hour and a ¼ after he was without Motion, and stiff, yet being excited by Motion, he mov'd a little. Air being let into the Recei∣ver, whilst he was under Water, he sunk to the Bottom, and seem'd a little reviv'd, and being conveigh'd along with the Water into a Bason of fresh Water, he was further recover'd; yet could not lie on his Belly, but turn'd from one side to the other: his Belly seem'd much shrunk; he was alive at 24 hours end, and then was able to lie on his Belly. TITLE VIII. Of two Animals included, with large Wounds in the Abdomen, in the Pneumatical Receiver. EXPERIMENT I. ABird in Vacuo.A Small Bird, whose Abdomen was open'd tranversly, in about a Minute after we began to Pump, had Convulsions in its Wings; and being taken out, was past Recovering, tho'
there was very little Alteration in its Lungs, and the Auricles of its Heart continued to beat. EXPERIMENT II. A Frog in Vacuo.A Frog, whose Abdomen was so much open'd, that two curl'd Lobes of its Lungs came out at the Incisions, was suspended by the Leg in a small Receiver, which when it was in some Measure exhausted, lay void of Motion, its Abdomen and. Thigh being swell'd very much, as if distended with some Aery Vapour. One Lobe, when the Frog was shut up, appear'd full, the other shrunk up, and thus they continu'd, till Air was let into the Receiver again, and then the Body growing less tumid, and the Lobe of the Lungs which was tumid, subsiding, it pre∣sently recover'd. TITLE IX. Of the Motion of the separated Heart of a cold Animal in the exhausted Receiver. EXPERIMENT I. The Heart of an Eel in Vacuo.THE Heart of an Eel being shut up in a Receiver upon a Tin Plate, beat as in the open Air; and the Receiver being exhausted, grew tumid, emitting several Bubbles out of it; yet it continu'd to beat as fast, or faster than in the open Air. The like Success we had with another.
EXPERIMENT II. THE Heart of another, tho' tumid, beat an hour in Vacuo, and then beginning to fail, I apply'd Heat to the Glass, upon which, it re∣new'd and continu'd it's Motions another hour; at which time, it's Motion was renew'd, by ap∣plying of Heat a second time; at the end of the third hour, the Motion, which was but a trem∣bling one, could neither be promoted by the Air, nor Heat. TITLE X. A Comparison of Times, wherein Animals may be kill'd by drowning, or withdrawing of the Air. EXPERIMENT I. Sept. 10.Animals in an exhaust∣ed Receiver A Green-Finch being sunk in Water by a Weight, was dead after it had lain half 0184 0108 V 3 a Minute without Motion. EXPERIMENT II. A Sparrow, which at the first moved very vigorously under Water, being taken up, after it had lain half a Minute without Motion, was past Recovery.
EXPERIMENT III. A Mouse being immers'd half a Minute, and some Seconds, after some faint signs of Life, tho not Convulsive, dy'd. EXPERIMENT IV. A Duck, being immers'd by a Weight, after it had lain quiet for a Minute, was a little uneasie; but being quiet at the end of the se∣cond Minute, we took it out, and in a little time it recover'd; but being immers'd again in fresh Water, it emitted several Bubbles at its Beak and Nostrils; and in two Minutes time, began to struggle: At the end of four Minutes ceasing to emit Bubbles, it began to gape, which continu'd two Minutes, and then its Head hang∣ing carelesly down, it seem'd dead; being ta∣ken out a Minute after, it was past Recovery. EXPERIMENT V. A Duckling being immers'd with its Beak a∣bout 2 Inches under Water, emitted Bub∣bles at its Beak, which likewise arose from some place in its Neck, about as far from its Eyes as from its Ears, after which, several times it endea∣vour'd to dive lower, and having been mode∣rately convuls'd, hung its Head down, as if dead at 3 Minutes end; soon after, a trembling Motion appeared in some parts of its Bill, but that cea∣sing, at the end of the 4th Minute, it was taken out past Recovery.
EXPERIMENT VI. A Viper was so long kept in Vacuo, that it seem'd dead; but, being kept all night o∣ver a digestive Furnace in a Glass Body, was as lively as ever. Then we immers'd it in a Glass Body stopp'd with a Cork, and depress'd with a Weight; where it lay a considerable time, with very little Motion; when four hours were almost past, it swam above the Bottom of the Water, and had several times put out its Tongue; when a little more than seven hours were past, it seem'd dead, its Head and Tail hanging down without Motion. N. B. Tho' several of these Animals seem to die a little sooner in Water, than in Vacuo; yet it does not certainly prove, that the former kills them faster, for in Water they are depriv'd of Air instantly; In a Receiver, by degrees; which is evident from hence, viz. That having provided a Receiver which could be exhausted at one suck, the Animal contain'd in it would be dead in half a Minute. TITLE XI. Of the Accidents that happen'd to Animals in Air brought to a Considerable Degree, but not near the utmost one of Rarefaction. EXPERIMENT I. Aug. 18. A Linote being 3 hours in a Receiver,Several A∣nimals in Vacuo. large enough to hold 4 ½ Pints, seem'd sick; but being taken out, recover'd.
EXPERIMENT II. Aug. 18. A Linote being enclos'd in a Receiver half exhausted, was not in danger of Death in less than 1 ¼ hour, and then being expos'd to the Air, Recover'd. EXPERIMENT III. Sept. 9. A Lark being included in a Receiver of the former Magnitude, together with a Gage; when ¾ of the Air was exhausted, in a Minute and half was taken with Convulsions, and at the end of the second Minute, was past Re∣covery. EXPERIMENT IV. Sept. 9. A Green-Finch being shut up in the same Re∣ceiver, half exhausted, in a Minute was sick, and threw Matter, which she vomited, upon the side of the Glass; upon which, she seem'd bet∣ter, and continu'd so for 3 Minutes, and then being sick, and vomiting as before, she eat part of it up, and seem'd again to recover; some Air getting in, though it was pump'd out again, for the last Eight Minutes, she seem'd better than we expected. At the end of a quarter of an hour, the Bird being not like to die, we took her out.
EXPERIMENT V. A Viper, together with a Gage, being in∣cluded in a Receiver, which held 3 1/ Pints of Water, for 36 hours after it was exhausted, mov'd up and down nimbly, and put out her Tongue often: At the end of 60 hours she seem'd almost dead, and the next day at Noon was quite dead. The Receiver taking in as much Water as the included Air would admit, by measuring it, we found that 5 parts of six of the Air had been drawn out. A Digressive Experiment concerning Respiration on the Tops of High Mountains. Of Respira∣tion on the Tops of Mountains.Upon Enquiry I was told, that the Mountains in Armenia are so high, that they cannot get to the Tops of them for Snow, and that those that go up high, are troubled with a shortness of Breath. And the like difficulty of Breathing hath been ob∣serv'd on a Mountain in the Country of Sevenes, in or near the Province of Languedoc. And one that had been on the Top of Pic de Midi, one of the highest Pyrenean Mountains, observ'd the like shortness of Breath: And the Air on the Mount Teneriff, hath so violently affected some, that they were not able to climb to the Top of it.
TITLE XII. Of the Observations produc'd in an Ani∣mal in Changes, as to Rarity and Density, made in the same Air. TO try whether an Animal that was almost dead, by being contain'd in rarifi'd Air, would recover upon a Condensation of that, without admitting any fresh Air to come to it; we took a Lamb's Bladder, whose outside being oyl'd, to render it more transparent, we cut so much of it's Neck off, that way might be made for a Mouse to be put in; which being done, that the Neck of the Bladder might be ty'd up so, that no Air could get in at the Wrinkles, we cover'd a Wooden Stopple with Cement, which squeezing into the Crannies, we could utterly exclude the Air. A Bladder thus prepar'd, being conveigh'd with a Mouse in it, into a Glass Receiver, we ply'd the Pump, till the Glass Vessel was so much exhausted, and the Air in the Bladder so far expanded, that the Mouse was like to die. Up∣on which, the rarifi'd Air in the Bladder being again condens'd, by admitting External Air into the Receiver, the Mouse was reviv'd. The Ex∣periment was a second time try'd with the like Success.
TITLE XIII. Of an unsuccessful Attempt to prevent the Necessity of Respiration, by the Producti∣on or Growth of Animals in our Receiver. EXPERIMENT I. Respiration necessary absolutely continue Life.A Good Company of Tadpoles being shut up in a Receiver, upon the first Exsuction, they rose to the Top of the Water; and tho they subsided again, yet upon the second, they rose again, and seem'd to be discompos'd; when the Receiver was exhausted, they swam upon the Top, being not able to dive down; and in an hours time, they became destitute of Motion; when the Air was let in, they sunk to the Bottom, but recovered not. EXPERIMENT II. THE like Experiment being try'd with a less number in a less Receiver, tho' they were supply'd with Air sooner than the others, yet very few recover'd. EXPERIMENT III. THE same Experiment with the first, be∣ing try'd some Years after in another Re∣ceiver, we had the same Success.
EXPERIMENT IV. WE included some of those Insects in a Re∣ceiver with Water, which first live in Water, and then turn winged Insects; which swimming up and down a few days, put off their exuviae, and were perfect Gnats, which stood upon the Water, and liv'd a considerable time. A digressive Experiment concerning the Expansion of Blood and other Animal Juices. The Blood and other Humors ex∣panded.Lamb's Blood preserv'd from Coagulation was conveigh'd into a Receiver in a wide mouth'd Glass: When the Receiver was pretty well exhausted, the more spirituous Parts of the Blood making their way out, rais'd the more clammy Parts into large Bubbles; and the Ex∣pansion of the volatile Parts were so vehement, that it boil'd over a Glass, of which it fill'd but ¼ part. Having included warm Milk in a Cylin∣der 5 Inches high, the Quantity of it being only 3 Ounces, it boil'd so impetuously when the Air was totally exhausted, that several parcels of it flew out of the Vessel. Gall discover'd a greater degree of Intumescence. N. The design of these Experiments was to know, whether when the Air is drawn out of a Receiver, Animals may not be prejudic'd by an Expansion of the Humors in the Capillary Ves∣sels, as well as by an Absense of Air, since the Parts of them distending the Vessels may, stop Circulation, and cause Pains and Convulsions.
I once observ'd a Bubble to move to and fro in the Humors of one of the Eyes of a Viper in our exhausted Receiver. Another Digressive Experiment. The Liver and Heart of an Eel, together with the Head and Body of another, being conveigh'd into a Receiver; when the Air was exhausted, the Liver manifestly swell'd, and several Bub∣bles seem'd to arise from the Medulla Spinalis, or the Parts adjoyning. The Air being let in, the swollen Parts subsided, and the Skin seem'd more flaccid than before. TITLE XIV. Of the Power of Custom to enable Animals to hold out in Air too much Rarified for Respiration. EXPERIMENT I. The Pre∣valency of Custom to enable Ani∣mals to con∣tinue in Vacuo.A Small Mouse being conveigh'd into a Viol with a Wide Neck, a Bladder was ty'd up∣on it, which had all the Air express'd out of it. This being conveigh'd into a Receiver with a Gage; a fourth part of the Air was only re∣maining in it; upon which, the Bladder was half distended with rarifi'd Air, and the Mouse was very uneasie, and ill; but that rarifi'd Air by an Ingress of External Air being condens'd, it presently recover'd.
EXPERIMENT II. THE Experiment being repeated, and the Mouse kept in the rarifi'd Air four Minutes, was very ill, and with much difficulty recover'd in the outward Air, trembling for a long time. EXPERIMENT III. THE same Mouse being again shut up, was a quarter of an hour in rarifi'd Air, and when taken out, sooner recover'd than before, and with less trembling. EXPERIMENT IV. THE same Mouse being again conveigh'd into a Receiver, after it had recover'd its Strengh, the Air was a little further rarifi'd than before: At the first, the Mouse seem'd dis∣compos'd; but after continu'd quiet a quarter of an hour. The Air being expanded by three Exsuctions more, it seem'd ready to die, but Air being let in again, it presently recover'd.
TITLE XV. Some Experiments shewing, that Air, become unfit for Respiration, may retain it's wonted Pressure. EXPERIMENT I. Air unfit for Respira∣tion retains it's usual Pressure.A Mouse being shut up in an Oval Glass her∣metically seal'd, and a Gage suspended by a Wire in the Neck, in 2 ½ hours we found it dead; and with much ado recover'd, when Air was blown in with a pair of Bellows, the seal'd end of the Glass being broken off. The Station of the Mercury in the Receiver was not alter'd. EXPERIMENT II. THE same Experiment being try'd with a small Bird, in half an hour it was sick and drooping, and in 2 ½ hours a difficulty of breath∣ing gradually increasing, it dy'd. The Gage was not sensibly alter'd. EXPERIMENT III. TO shew that it is not a defect of Cold in an exhausted Receiver, that kills Animals included in it. We hermetically seal'd a small Bird in a Receiver, large enough to hold 3 Quarts of Water; In a few Minutes it began to be sick and pant, and continu'd so half an hour: The Viol was immers'd 6 Minutes in Wa∣ter refrigerated with a Solution of Sal Armon.
but the Bird was not refresh'd; it vomi∣ted and purg'd, when taken out of the Wa∣ter; and continuing to pant as before, in an hour from her first Imprisonment, dy'd. TITLE VI. Of the Use of the Air to elevate Steams of Bodies. The useful∣ness of Air to raise Steams from Bodies contiguous to it.TO prove that the Air carries off the fuli∣ginous Steams from the Lungs in Respira∣tion; We prepar'd a Red Liquor, consisting of such Saline and Spirituous Parts, as the Mass of Blood yields: This Liquor well stopp'd up in a Bottle, tho' it be but half full, emits no Steams; but when the External Air comes to it, it emits white Exhalations, which rise up into the Air. Whence it appears, that the Contact of the Air, may enable Bodies to emit Vapors. In this Liquor there are two things worth our Notice; the First is, that when the Viol hath lain quiet and stopp'd a competent time, the upper Part will appear void of Fumes, so that the Air will retain but a certain Quantity; which may help to give a Reason, why the same Air which will be clogg'd with Steams, in a short time becomes unfit for Respiration. The Second is, that in Vacuo for want of Air, tho' the Bottle was unstopp'd, these Exhalations would not rise; but as soon as it was let into the Receiver, they rising up plentifully, were drawn out along with the Air, a second time exhausted. This Experiment hath some Affini∣ty
with that Mentioned in the 29 of the Experi∣ments of the Spring, and the weight of the Air in the first Volume, that being made with Cor∣rosive Ingredients, and this of Medicines good for the Lungs. TITLE XVII. Of the long Continuance of a Slow-worm, and a Leech alive in the Vacuum made by our Engin. EXPERIMENT I. A Slow-worm and a Leech a∣live in Vacuo.WHite Snails without their Shells, being shut up in Vacuo had store of Bubbles sticking to them; but they put out and drew in their Horns at pleasure; in some Hours they be∣came void of Motion and Tumid; And in the space of Twelve hours seem'd like blown Blad∣ders, the substance of their Bodies being con∣sumed; The External Air being let in, they sunk together like two Skins, no signs of Life appearing, EXPERIMENT II. ANEft being included in an Exhausted Re∣ceiver 48 hours, it seem'd swelled in it's Belly; it's under Jaw moved the first Night, but not after. The Receiver being opened under Water and half filled, the Animal was very much revived.
EXPERIMENT III. A Leech being included with a little Water in a Receiver, large enough to hold 12 Ounces; when the Air was Pumped out, the Leech keeping under Water, several Bubbles rose from distinct parts of it's Body, yet it was not much indisposed. It continuing well five days, by opening the Receiver under Water, I found that it had been all the time well ex∣hausted. TITLE XVIII. Of what happen'd to some Creeping Insects in our Vacum. EXPERIMENT I. SIX Caterpillers being shut up in Vacuo, two hours after,Creeping Insects in Vacuo. moved up and down: 8 hours after they seemed quite dead; but being expos∣ed to the Air in the Morning were alive. EXPERIMENT II. CAterpillers being Shut up in two Receivers, to one we added the Air which was drawn out of the other Receiver. Those which had Air with them, were alive two days, the others in Vacuo seem'd dead in a little time.
TITLE XIX. Of the Phaenomena suggested by Winged Insects in our Vacum. EXPERIMENT I. Winged In∣sects in Va∣cuo.FLesh-Flies whose head were cut off, being in∣cluded in a Portable Receiver; furnished with a large Pipe and a Bubble at the end of it; When the Air was drawn out, they lost their Mo∣tion; two hours after, Fire not being able to excite Motion in them, I let in the Air, and then they began to move; and were observed to move the next Morning. EXPERIMENT II. SEveral Ordinary Flies and a Bee or Wasp, lay as if dead in the exhausted Receiver, ex∣cept some, which for a few Minutes were Con∣vulsive; after 48 hours, they neither Recovered when exposed to the open Air, nor the Meridi∣an Sun. EXPERIMENT III. A great Flesh Flye being put into a Portable Receiver was very brisk and lively till the Air was drawn off, but then was taken with Con∣vulsions; the Air being let in again she Recover∣ed, but it being a second time exhausted, she lay
as dead till the Glass was stirred, and then she moved a little; the next Night after neither heat nor any thing else would recover her of a long time; but at the last, when she was well, being shut up again 48 hours and placed in a Warm place, she grew so ill as to be past Recovery. EXPERIMENT IV. A Grass-hopper whose Body was an Inch long, being shut up in an oval receiver large enough to hold a Pint; when the Pump was first Plyed he was very uneasie, and several Liquid drops came from his Abdomen to the quantity of a quarter of a Spoonful; when the Receiver was pretty well exhausted he fell on his back and lay as dead. But the Receiver being plac'd in the Sun-shine he moved a little, and soon after lay as dead 3 hours. But the Receiver being open'd and placed, after he seem'd dead half an hour, some time in the Sun beams, in a short time he reco∣vered. EXPERIMENT V. A Rose-Flie being shut up in a receiver, strugled much whilst the Receiver was exhausting, but in 6 hours time seem'd dead; the Receiver being opened Four hours after, the Beetle was lively enough. The Receiver being a Second time exhausted, the Animal in the mean time seemed much disquieted. EXPERIMENT VI. SEveral Butterflies being Shut up in Vacuo, were not able to flye in so thin a Medium,
but when the Receiver was inverted, would fall from one end to another rudely enough. TITLE XX. Of the Necessity of Air to the Motion of such small Creatures as Ants and even Mites themselves. Air requi∣site to the Life of very Minute Animals.ANts being shut up in Vacuo, in Seven hours time seem'd dead; but the Receiver being opened, about 14 hours after they were most of them Recovered. Cheese, which had a great many Mites in it, was convey'd into Four several Receivers, Three of which were exhausted: The Mites in the unexhausted Receiver were alive a Week. In two of the exhausted Receivers they seem'd dead, and continued so Four hours; but Air being permitted to rush in 3 days after, several of them were revived, and continued alive 2 or 3 days longer. In the other Receiver Mites which lay dead 3 days Recovered presently upon a Re∣admission of the Air.
CHAP. VI. The most Considerable Animadversions on Mr. Hobbs's Problemata de Vacuo. THe first Passage in Mr. Hobbs's Problemata de Vacuo taken Notice of is this, Viz. He says,Why con∣tiguous Marbles are not easily sepa∣rated. if a Vacum interspersum, were allow'd in the Air, when two Flat Marbles are exactly adapted to each other's Superficies, they might as easily be separated, as moved, when separate in the open Air. To which it is Answered, that tho' there be several Vacuities interspersed betwixt the Particles of an Atmospherical Pillar of Air; yet notwithstanding, since each of those Particles are endued with a Specifick gravity, and are incumbent on the surface of the uppermost Marble, whatever separates those two Bodies, must have a force able to sustain the weight of the Pillar of Air which leans on it. But when the Air is contiguous to each side of the Marble, having an equal Pressure on each side from the Ambient Atmosphere, there is required no more force to move it up and down, than is sufficient to surmount the Weight of it, &c. And tho' Mr. Hobbs says, that the Reason why two Marbles cannot be Separated sudden∣ly,
is, because the Air cannot instantly fill the space deserted by them; yet from Experiments already laid down; it appears, that they may be pulled asunder, and much more easily, in an exhausted Receiver where there is no Air to succeed the space left betwixt them upon their Avulsion. Where it is evident, that a force able to overcome the hardness of the Stone, is not requisite to draw them asunder, but only so much as is able to raise the Weight of the upper Mar∣ble; and in the open Air as much as is sufficient to over-power the incumbent Atmosphere. Another Argument against what Mr. Hobbs lays down in favour of a Plenitude, may be taken from the following Experiment. We took a Glass Bubble about as big as a Nutgmeg, and having Sealed up it's Stem, we held it in a Flame, and as soon as it was ready to Melt, removed it into the open Air, where the Bubble, which was dilated in the Flame by the help of the included Air's spring, was pressed in on one side by the Weight of the Ambient Atmosphere, the Rarified Air, being condensed, and not able to resist the Pressure of the External Air; yet when the Bubble was again convey'd into the Flames, the Internal Air expanding plumped up the sides of the Glass, which were a∣gain compress'd and bruised by the Weight of the open Atmosphere; and this Experiment being tried a Third time, Answered as when First re∣peated, till at last the one side of the Bubble had a hole made in it, by the violent Pressure of the Atmosphere; from whence it appears, that the same quantity of Air may, by being Rari∣fied, and leaving Vacuities betwixt it's Rarified
Parts, be able to take up and possess a larger space; and that there must be Vacuities inter∣spersed betwixt the Parts of that Air, is evident, since the Pores of the Glass are too sine, to admit External Air, or when the Bubble was com∣press'd, to give way for an egress of the Air con∣tained in it. A Second Argument Answered.Mr. Hobbs asserting, that the Cavity of a Re∣ceiver exhausted, is full of Air, the first Expe∣riment here alledg'd against him, and which shews, that the Weight and pressure of the At∣mosphere is very considerable is this: A Pewter Porringer being cemented down upon an Iron Plate, which was fixed to the Pump, we drew out the Air, upon which the Incumbent Atsmosphere depress'd the Convex surface of the Porringer, and rendred it Concave; and in another Tryal I took Notice, that the Atmosphere did not exert its Gravity in a perpendicular Line, but collaterally. The Reason of Bubbles in an ex∣hausted Re∣ceiver.Mr. Hobbs ascribing the Reason of those Bub∣bles, which in an exhausted Receiver, appear for some time upon the Surface of Water, to the violent Motion of the Air contained in the Receiver, Mr. Boyle to disprove him, takes Notice that when Water is once freed from it's Air, let the Pump be Plyed never so violently, the vio∣lent Motion of Mr. Hobbs's Air will not be able to cause Bubbles; so that the Phaenomenon ra∣ther depends on a want of Air to press on the Surface of the Water, and to over-power the Ex∣pansive force of that Air, contained in the Pores of it; which for want of such a Pressure makes it's way through the Water it's contain'd in.
Mr. Hobbs Explanati∣on of the Torrecelli∣an Experi∣ment Exa∣mined.Mr. Hobbs's Explanation of the Torrecellian Experiment having been elsewhere Answered, to what hath been their delivered, I shall add the following Experiment; The Torrecillian Ex∣periment being Tried with a straight Tube, we raised the Pipe a little in the stagnant Mercury; and then conveying a piece of a Bladder under the End of it, and tying it firmly; when the end of the Tube was raised above the stagnant Mercury, I observ'd, that the Weight of the Mercury upon the Bladder was very slight, and the Equilibrum betwixt the Mercurial and At∣mospherical Cylinder was so equal, that if the Tube was but inclined, so that the Weight of the Mercury was not Perpendicular, the Atmos∣phere would buoy up the Bladder, and form a Concave in the lower end of the Mercury; but when the Tube was Erected again, the Bladder would be depress'd, and become Protuberant: And if the Bladder was nimbly apply'd, when the Mercury was a little below it's wonted Sta∣tion, the Mercury being then lighter than the Atmospherical Cylinder, the Bladder would be raised up into the Cavity of the Tube: In which Experiment we may Observe, that tho' upon the Ascent and Descent of the Mercury, the Cavity above it is accordingly varied in it's Di∣mensions; yet no Air can Ascend to fill it, as Mr. Hobbs would suggest, since the Bottom of the Tube is shut up with a Bladder, which as I have elsewhere made it appear, cannot be pene∣trated by Air. Another Argument against Mr. Hobbs's Ex∣planation of the Torrecellian Experiment, is de∣duc'd
deduced from an Observation made on the Tra∣velling Baroscope; for it is Observed, that when the shorter Leg is Sealed up with Air included in it, Heat will so Rarisie that Air, that it will elevate the Mercury in the longer Leg, with∣out making it's way through the Mercury below, as Mr. Hobbs supposes it does in the Torrecellian Experiment; where one would expect, that if Air condensed could Penetrate Mercury so easi∣ly, the rarified Air would rather penetrate than buoy it up. The Reason of Suction.To shew, in Opposition to Mr. Hobbs, how much the Atmospherical Air is concern'd in Sucti∣on, we took a Glass Bubble, whose long Stem, was Cylindrical and very slender, and having, by the help of heat, expelled a good quantity of the Air contain'd in it, when by immerg∣ing it in Water that Rarified Air which re∣mained in it, was condens'd; the VVater was almost raised to the Top of the Pipe; when this was done, the Air in the Bubble being Rarified, it forced out almost all the Water in the Stem, only a few Drops, which satisfi'd us that none of the Rarified Air had got out of the Pipe; as the Depression of the Water so low assured us, on the other side, that the included Air was almost as much Expanded, as when the Water began to ascend into the Pipe. When the Air was thus Rarified, we presently removed the Pipe out of the Water into the Stagant Mercury, which ascended into it in a short time. In which Ex∣periment, did the Mercury rise to prevent a Vacuum, or did it's Ascent, depend on any inter∣nal Principle of Motion, or on the compression
and propagated Pulsion of the Air that was ex∣pelled, there would be no reason, why the Mercury should not rise as high as the Water. But from our Hypothesis, the Reason is plain; for as soon as the Cylinder of Water or Mercury together with the compress'd Air is equiponderant with the Atmosphere incumbent, it rises no higer; So that tho' the Air is less condens'd, when the Tube is immers'd in Mercury; yet the greater Weight of Mercury making a greater resistance than Water, the external Air is not able to buoy it up any higher to compress the Air en∣closed. And this Experiment is confirm'd by the fol∣lowing: For having expell'd a little Air out of the Bubble by heat, so much Quicksilver ascend∣ed into it, as fill'd a Fourth Part of the Pipe; which being carefully removed, so that no Mer∣cury could run out; we caused the Air in the globous part to be Rarified till almost all the Mercury was expell'd, the end of the Pipe be∣ing all the while immers'd in Water; as soon as the Air included began to cool, the Water rose up into the Body of the Ball, buoying up the Mer∣cury before it, whereit was observ'd, that as the Air was more or less Rarifi'd, and the Quicksilver exepll'd out of the Stem, the Ascent, of the Water would proportionably vary. So that as the Body to be buoy'd up by the External Air varies in Weight, so do the Degrees of it's Ascent. Another Observation, which shews that there is no Circulation of Wind, such as Mr. Hobbs sup∣poses to be the Cause of Suction, is, that Smoak will ascend without being in the least blown a∣bout. But since Mr. Hobbs will not allow of a Va∣cuum,
but asserts, that the Air makes it's Way through the close and solid Bodies, I shall add, that having expell'd the Air by Rarefa∣ction, out of a very thin Aeopile, and stopp'd the Orifice up with Wax, the External Air made such a violent Pressure on it, as to thrust the Sides of it considerably inwards. CHAP. VII. The Cause of Attraction by Suction. Attraction, what.SUction being look'd upon to be a sort of Attraction, before I descend to a more par∣ticular Consideration of the former, I shall pre∣mise something of the latter. And tho' Attraction is generally taken to be a kind of Pulsion, yet both of them to me seem to be but extrinsical Denominations of the same Local Motion; in which, if a Body mov'd, precede the Movent, or tends to acquire a greater Distance from it, we call it Pulsion; and if upon the Account of Mo∣tion, the same Body either follows, or tends towards the Movent, it is term'd Attraction; so that the difference is no Physical one, but on∣ly Accidental, in respect of the Line of Motion to the Movent. As when a Man draws a Chain after him, tho' he goes before it, yet he hath some Part of his Body behind one Link, which draws the rest after it; and so if that Chain draws any thing after it, tho' the Cause of the
Attraction goes before, yet there is a certain Cohesion of Parts, that enables it to drag that Body after it; so that Attraction evidently ap∣pears to be a Species of Pulsion, and such an one as is usually term'd Trusion, as when a Gar∣diner drives his Wheelbarrow before him with∣out letting go his Hold. But perhaps it may be said, that there are At∣tractions where it cannot be pretended that the Attrahent comes behind any Part of the Body attracted; as in Magnetical and Electrical At∣tractions, or as when Water rises by pumping. As for the two first Instances, should we allow with Modern Philosophers, of screw'd Particles and other Magnetical Emissions, we might say, that these coming behind either the Body attract∣ed, or it's porous Parts on it's Superficies might cause such an Effect; or by procuring some Dis∣cussion of the Air, that may make it thrust the moveable towards the Attracting Body. But were there none of these, nor any other subtil Agents, that cause this Motion by a real, tho' unper∣ceiv'd Pulsion; I should, to distinguish these from other Attractions, term them Attraction by Invisibles. But as for the last Instance, I suppose it will be easily granted, that the ascending Rammer only makes way for the Water to rise, as it is buoy'd up by External Air; for from the Tor∣recellian Experiment it is evident, that, since the Terraqueous Globe is continually press'd up∣on by the Atmosphere, if in any part, that Pres∣sure be taken off, the Incumbent Atmospherical Pillar will buoy up as much of that Liquor, as a Pillar of Air of such a Diameter is able to
counterpoise: The Truth of which is further confirm'd by observing, that, if the Air from a∣bout a Syringe be exhausted, the Sucker may be pull'd up without elevating the Water, or draw∣ing it up after it. And indeed, supposing two Men, by thrusting equally on each side a Door, to keep it shut, one might as well say, that he that left off thrusting on one side, was the Cause of the Doors opening, as that the Water rises by the drawing up the Rammer, which only gives way to the Water as buoy'd up by the External Air. Thus much being said of Attraction, I shall proceed to consider,The Cause of Suction, as laid down by o∣thers ex∣anun'd. that Species of it call'd Suction; for which several Philosophers have thought on various Causes. As Nature's Abhorrency of a Vacuum, which, were it true, Water by Suction might be rais'd to any Height; but we have found by Experience, that it will not be rais'd above 33 ½ Foot, which Weight the Atmosphere is able to buoy up; as appears from the Torre∣cellian Experiment. And further from an Ex∣periment elsewhere laid down, where, tho' Wa∣ter may presently be suck'd up to the Top of a Pipe 3 Foot long, yet Mercury being too heavy to be buoy'd up so high, it will not be elevated higher than an Atmospherical Cylinder is able to raise it. But those Modern Philosophers who allow not a Fuga Vacui, ascribe the Ascent of such Liquors to an Impulse or Propagation of Motion, by the Dilation of the Thorax; for they think, that the Lungs drawing in the Air, the dilated Tho∣rax propagates the Impulse, till it reaches suc∣cessively the Body suck'd; for such thinking the Universe totally a Plenum, think that such Mat∣ter
not finding any other Place to move in∣to, does upon that score buoy up the Water or Mercury in the Pipe. But if we consider, how vast the Dimensions of the Air are, and compara∣tively how inconsiderable an Impulse the Tho∣rax by dilating can make, it will scarce be thought, that so slight a one will compress the whole Air, so much as to make it impel the Bo∣dy suck'd vigorously enough to rise to that height, which Liquors may be rais'd to by Suction. But the Ascent of such Liquors evi∣dently depends on this, that by Suction the Pressure is taken off the Surface of the Water, within the Pipe, and consequently, it must rise and be buoy'd up by the Pressure of the Atmo∣sphere, on the stagnant Water. To countenance my Opinion, and to refute the others I have mention'd, I shall offer the following Experiment, viz. A small Bubble with a Stem being seal'd up, when the Air was forc'd out by Rarefaction, the Stem was broke under Water, upon which the Water rush'd in∣to the Cavity of the Bubble, where if it be said to go into the Bubble to prevent a Vacuum, those that say so, allow dari Vacuum, and subvert their own Principles; and as for the Plenists, upon the same Account we may ask them, what became of that Air which was expell'd out of the Bub∣ble, and remain'd so, till the Stem was broke; since were the World an absolute Plenum before, there could be no room for it without, nor could there be such an empty Space within to receive the Water. Besides, if they say the external Air being condens'd and compress'd by that which is forced out of the Bubble, occasions the
Re-ingress of Water when the Stem is broke off, it may justly be wonder'd, that a cubic Inch of Air should be able to condense the Air so much, that a Mile's distance from the place the Bubble was evacuated in, it should be able to press the Water thus in again. But by our Hy∣pothesis, it is accounted for without these Diffi∣culties; since the Resistance of the rarifi'd Air within the Bubble, being disproportionable to the Pressure of the less rarifi'd Ambient Air, it must consequently yield to it, and give way to the Ingress of Water. Our own O∣pinion pro∣pos'd and prov'd.From what hath been said, it plainly appears what our Hypothesis is, which that I may confirm by the following Experiments I shall briefly intimate: That the Ascent of Liquors by Suction, in a Word, depends on the External Pressure of the Air, when it is taken off the internal Superficies of the Liquor in that Tube; what that Pressure depends on we have elsewhere prov'd in our Physico-Mechanical Experiments of the Air's Spring and Weight, and therefore shall proceed to Experiments to confirm what we teach of Suction. We took then a crooked Syphon, whose short∣er Leg was parallel to the longer, which being hermetically seal'd, and so much Water conveigh'd into the crooked End, that it was of an equal Height in both Legs, so much Air was contain'd in the Cavity of the shorter Leg, as possesses an Inch and ½. The Instrument being thus pre∣par'd, one was order'd to suck at the Top of the longer Leg, and by all the Force and reiterated Suctions, he was not able to raise the Water higher than the Air in the shorter Leg depress'd
the Surface of that; for when the Spring of that Air was so far weaken'd, that it could not depress the Water subjacent; the Water kept at the same Station, being not above four Inches high, which was not two Inches and an half higher than at first. But as soon as the Ex∣ternal Pressure of the Atmosphere, was again ad∣mitted to the Surface of the Water in the longer Tube, it was presently depress'd, and the Air in the shorter Leg condens'd, till the Water like∣wise rose in that to it's first Station. For a further Confirmation of our Hypothesis about Suction, I shall subjoyn Experiments to prove the following Propositions. Our Hypo∣thesis re∣duc'd to Propositions.I. That a Liquor may be rais'd by Suction, when the Pressure of the Air, neither as it hath Weight, nor Elastacity is the Cause of the Elevation. II. That the Weight of the Atmospherical Air is sufficient to raise up Liquors by Suction. III. That in some Cases Suction will not be made, as, according to the Hypothesis I dissent from, it should, although there be a Dilatation of the Suckers Thorax, and no danger of a Vacuum, tho' the Li∣quor should ascend. The first Propositions prov'd.To make out the first Proposition, I made the following Experiment, viz. I took an invert∣ed Tube, such as was formerly made use of, for a Travelling Baroscope, but something longer, which being fill'd with Mercury, it was inverted, and the Mercury in the longer Leg stood above the Mercury in the shorter Leg, as high as it usually does in an ordinary Barometer; and then, one was order'd to suck at the shorter Leg, upon
which the Mercury subsided in the longer, and rose in the shorter; the Mercury in the longer by it's own Weight depressing the subjacent, and raising that, when the equivalent Weight of the Atmosphere was taken off. The second Proposition prov'd.As for the second Proposition laid down, viz. That the Weight of the Air is sufficient to raise Li∣quors in Suction; It may easily be prov'd by Argu∣ments drawn from our Physico-Mechanical Expe∣riments, and therefore here I shall only take notice of Phaenomena exhibited by our Travelling Baro∣scope; for having got a Baroscope, whose shorter Leg was something longer than ordinary, we caus'd one by Suction to raise the Mercury up to the Top of it, and then hermetically sealing it up, we mark'd the place to which the Mer∣cury had subsided in the longer; which being done, we unseal'd the shorter Leg, and observ'd, that the Pressure of the Atmosphere elevated the Mercury in the longer Leg 5 Inches. The third confirm'd.For a further Confirmation of the Doctrin laid down in this Proposition, I shall subjovn the following Experiment. We made use of a Travelling Baroscope, whose shorter Leg was 2 Inches above the Surface of the stagnant Mer∣cury; and having seal'd up the End of the short∣er Leg, we open'd the End of the longer; up∣on which, the Weight of the Atmosphere being added to the Pressure made by the Cylinder of Mercury, the Air contain'd in the shorter Leg was compress'd into half the Space it pos∣sess'd before. This Experiment being try'd a second time had the like Success. To make it further appear, how much the Ascent of Liquors depends on Pressure. I took
a Glass Syphon like the former, and having her∣metically seal'd up the shorter Leg, I pour'd in so much Mercury as compress'd the Air in the shorter Leg, into half the Space it possess'd be∣fore; the Mercury in the longer Leg being at the same time, about 30 Inches higher than in the other; nevertheless, the Mercury could not be rais'd by Suction above one Inch higher in the longer Leg; whereas, did the Ascent of Li∣quors depend on Nature's Abhorrency of a Va∣cuum, it would have rose much higher, there being no danger of leaving a Vacuum in the shorter Leg, since the Air was compress'd into half the Space it naturally possesses; so that the Reason according to our Hypothesis evidently ap∣pears to be this, viz. that the Pressure of the Cylinder of Mercury, and the compress'd Air being in a due Aequilibrium, when, by sucking, the Air is drawn out of the longer, the Air in the shorter expands it self so much, as Pressure is taken off by the Removal of that Air, and when it is expanded so far, the Pillar of Mercury keeps it from expanding any further, so that, there being no other Force to raise and press the Mercury up, it can be elevated no higher, since the Air included in the shorter Leg acts only by Virtue of it's Spring, and not as in the open Atmosphere, by Virtue of it's Spring and Weight too, so when it hath lost it's Spring, it can propel the Mercury no higher. To conclude this Discourse, I shall here ex∣plain one Phaenomenon in Vacuo Boyliano, which to some seems an Argument of Nature's Abhor∣rency of a Vacuum. The Phaenomenon is, That if ones Finger be apply'd to the Orifice of the
Pipe, that conveighs Air from the Receiver to the Pump, the Pulp of one Finger, will enter a good way into the Pipe, and be very pain∣ful; the Protuberant Part of it seeming to be drawn in by Attraction. To which we give this brief Answer, viz. That when first the Finger is plac'd there, it receives an equal Pressure from the Air within the Pipe, and from the Atmos∣phere; but when that Air is drawn away, the External Pressure finding no Resistance, presses the fleshy Part into the Tube, which is accord∣ingly painful, as the External Pressure in refe∣rence to the internal Resistance is greater or less. To illustrate this Explication, I shall add, that having clos'd up one End of a Glass Pipe, whose Diameter was an Inch, with a piece of oyl'd Bladder, and fill'd it full of Water; it was immers'd in a tall Vessel full of Water, the immers'd End of the Tube reaching almost to the Bottom of the Vessel, and the other End emerging, and standing open above the Vessel: This being done, we took Water out of the Tube, till the Surface of it was considerably lower than the Surface of the Water in the Glass Body; upon which, the Bladder being more strongly press'd against by the Water in the Vessel, than that in the Tube, the Bladder was forc'd so much into the Cavity of the Tube, as to form a Semi-Globe; but if, when the Water in the Tube, and that in the Vessel were equally pois'd, the uppermost Orifice of the Tube were stopp'd, tho' the Pipe were so much immers'd, that the Quantity of Water, which press'd a∣gainst the lower side of the Bladder, were great∣er
than that in the Tube; yet would not the Bladder have the least Protuberance; but if the Orifice of the Tube were left open to the Air, the Bladder would suddenly be press'd so much into the Hollow of the Pipe, that it's Convex Superficies would represent a Semi-Circle. The same Experiment being try'd with a Tube, the lower End of which was so bent, as to form a right Angle, the Success was the same: Nor did it vary when try'd in the straight Pipe, with Wine instead of Water, save that Wine not being specifically aeque-ponderant with Water, a greater Quantity of Wine was requisite to set∣tle them, at first, in a just Aequilibrium; but when that Aequilibrium was lost, by immerging the Tube into the Water, the Bladder was rais'd, so as to become protuberant in the Cavity of the Pipe. CHAP. VIII. Some Observations and Directions about the Barometer, communicated by Mr. Boyle, in the Phil. Transact. of April 1666. Observa∣tions con∣cerning Ba∣rometers.THE Design of trying Barometrical Expe∣riments in several Parts, being only that by comparing Notes, The Extent of Atmosphe∣rical Changes, in Point of Weight, might be the better estimated; I shall lay down the following Directions for those, whose Curiosity leads them that way. First, It will be requisite to note the Day and Hour in which Observations are made. Secondly, The Situation of the Place where the Barometer stands as to Height, since by the
Length of the Atmosperical Pillar of Air that presses upon it, the height of the Mercury may vary; tho' not always exactly; for sometimes upon Changes in the Air not otherwise ob∣servable, the Mercury will subside more than u∣sually in that which stands furthest from the Center of the Earth, when at the same time it does not proportionably subside in that which is plac'd in a lower Situation. And It, perhaps, may be Worth Noting, whe∣ther upon excessive Droughts, when the Ground is parch'd and crack'd, some subterraneal Ef∣fluvia may not rise, which may add a specifick Gravity to the Air. Nor will it be needless, when other Observa∣tions are making, at the same time to observe the Weather; as also what Winds blow, and whe∣ther violent or more remiss; for sometimes it is observ'd, that when high Winds blow, the Mercury is the lower, tho' not always. But to favour what hath been intimated, viz. That the Alterations in the Weight of the Air, depend on subterraneal Steams mix'd with it; It hath been observ'd, that after long Droughts, upon a Shower of Rain, so many Steams have been either prevented from rising, or depress'd and precipitated, that the Mercury hath subsi∣ded within 2/16 of an Inch.
CHP. IX. An Account of a new kind of Baroseope which may be call'd Statical: communicated in the Phi∣losophical Transactions of July 2. 1666. A new Ba∣roscope de∣scrib'd.HAving caus'd a Glass Bubble to be blown, as large and thin as it possibly could be; I counterpois'd it in a Pair of Scales, which would turn with the 30th Part of a Grain; which Ballance being suspended at a Frame, both the Frame and the Ballance were placed by a good Baroscope, from whence the present Weight of the Atmosphere might be learnt. By which means I could discern Variations, by which the Altitude of the Mercury was not alter'd above ¼ of an Inch. And it was not a little pleasant to behold, that sometimes the Bubble would be counterpois'd; but when the Atmosphere was ve∣ry high, it would manifestly preponderate, and upon other Changes the Scales would preponde∣rate on the other side, and in some Days time a∣gain regain it's Aequilibrium; so that by look∣ing first on the statical Baroscope, one might foretel, whether in the Mercurial Baroscope the Water were higher or lower; but of all the Seasons we made our Observations in, the most frequent Changes were in the Spring. This statical Baroscope having exactly an∣swer'd upon frequent Observations, I shall add the following Notes concerning the Instru∣ment. And first, as to the Grounds on which I pro∣ceeded in making this Baroscope. 1. That the Glass Bubble and it's Glass Counterpoise are not
of the same Bulk, the Bubble being a hundred times bigger than the Counterpoise. 2. If Bodies of equal Weight and unequal Bulks be weigh'd in another Medium, the Aequilibrium will be lost; for if the new Medium be heavier, the Body whose Dimensions were larger, will be lighter than before; and Vice versâ, and the Disparity of Weight in the new Medium will be greater, as the Inequality of Bulk betwixt the two Bodies varies. 3. These two things being laid together, I consider'd, that it would be the same thing in reference to the Effects, what Medium these Bodies were weigh'd in, provided the difference were considerable; and consequently, since the Baroscope made it evident, that the Weight of the Air vary'd, the Bubble and it's Counterpoise would be differently affected upon those Variations, and would accordingly preponderate, the Bubble being subject to pre∣ponderate when the Air was lighter; and Vice versâ. Secondly, The Bubble was about the size of a large Orange, and weig'd 1 Drachm and 10 Grains. Thirdly, If I had had, any Opportunities, I would have try'd whether the Aequilibrium of these two Bodies would have been alter'd, by the Driness or Moisture of the Air. Fourthly, When I could not get one Bubble large enough, I have made use of two less, which tho' they are not altogether so convenient, yet, if the Scales be strong enough to bear the Weight, they will answer the Design of the Experiment.
This Instrument may be improv'd by several Accomodations. As, First, To the Ansa of the Ballance, an Arch of a Circle may be fitted, which being divided into 15 or 20 Degrees, will readily tell the Quantity of the Angle, and how much the Po∣sition of the Cock declines from a Perpendi∣cular. Secondly, A Counterpoise of Gold may be made use of. Thirdly, The Ballance being made of Copper or Brass, will in time vary less in it's Exactness, than if it be made of Steel, which is more sub∣ject to rust. Fourthly, The Bubble and it's Counterpoise may be suspended at the Beam, by which means it will be less burthen'd with Weight. Fifthly, The whole Instrument will be more free from Dust and irregular Agitations, if placed in a Frame, like a Square Lanthorn, with Glass Windows and a Hole at the Top to give an Intercourse betwixt External and Internal Air. Sixthly, This Instrument having a light Wheel and an Index fitted to it, such as Dr. Wren us'd to open Weather-Glasses with, and the Ingeni∣ous Mr. Hook, apply'd to Baroscopes, will disco∣ver more minute Variations. Seventhly, The Beam may be improv'd by be∣ing made longer, and it's Ballance may be more exquisite than those I generally employ'd. Thus, tho' this statical Baroscope be inferior to the Mercurial one in some Respects, yet in others it is more convenient; For
First, It demonstrates to Autopsie, that the Ascent and Descent of the Mercury, depends on the varying Weight of the Atmosphere; since here it cannot be pretended, that the Changes depend on a Fuga Vacui. Secondly, It shews that the Air hath Weight, and much more than some Learned Men would allow; since in so small a Quantity of it, we see considerable Va∣riations. Thirdly, It is more easily, provided; and more conveniently removed. Fourthly, We are more easily satisfied of the Goodness of them. Fifthly, The Absolute or Respective Weight of the Air may more easily be discover'd; if, when the Weight and Dimensions of the Bubble is Hydrostatically discover'd, upon every Altera∣tion of the Mercury's Height in the mercurial Baroscope, the statical Baroscope's Aequilibrium be restored by the Addition of Weights; that Weight in the statical Baroscope answering the Variations in the Ascent or Descent of the Mer∣cury in the other. Sixthly, By this Instrument, we may compare the mercurial Baroscopes of several Places, and be able to make some Estimate of the Gravities of the Air therein; for, if in one place the Bubble weighs a Drachm, when the Mercury is 29 ½ Inches high, and that when the Mercury is risen an 8th, it is requisite to add the sixteenth Part of a Grain to preserve the Aequilibrium; When I come to another Place, and find the same Proportions answer, I may con∣clude, that there is no sensible Difference in the Weight of the Atmosphere in those Places; but if an additional Weight be requir'd to preserve the Aequilibrium, then the Air is so much hea∣vier,
than when the Mercury stood at 92 ½ Inches. But in making these Observations we must take notice, whether the Places in which they are made, are equally distant from the Center of the Earth; for if one be a Valley, and the other a Hill, there will happen a difference upon that Account. There is yet another use which may be made of this statical Baroscope, which is, to disco∣ver the Weight of the Atmosphere at the Top and Bottoms of high Mountains; but whether that may contribute to the discovering the Height of Mountains, or not, I shall leave to be consider'd with more leisure. CHAP. X. A Discovery of the Admirable Rarefaction of the Air, even without Heat. FROM what hath been deliver'd amongst our new Physico-Mechanical Experiments, it appears, that long since I could, by the help of my Engin, rarifie the Air to 152 times it's usual Dimensions; and the Virtuosi of the Flo∣rentine Academy tell us, that they would ra∣rifie it, without the help of my Engin to 173 times it's former Dimensions; Yet for further Satisfaction, I made the following Tryals.
EXPERIMENT I. Air expan∣ded to a∣bove 8000 times it's natural Di∣mensions.HAving fill'd a round Glass Egg of clear Metal, and furnish'd with a Pipe some Inches long, with Water; this, together with a Viol, in which Water was likewise contain'd, was conveigh'd into a Receiver; and when the Air was exhausted, we observ'd, that Bubbles were afforded plentifully in both, so that the Water seem'd to boil, and that in the Stem of the Glass Egg ran over. This being done, and the Water in both freed from Air, we took them out, and filling up the Stem of the Glass Egg, with Water out of the Bottle, we invert∣ed it into more of the same; so that the Glass Egg and Stem was wholly full, except that a Bub∣ble of Air was contain'd in the Top of the Egg, whose Dimensions were a Tenth and less than two Centesms of an Inch. Then the Glasses being placed in the Receiver, we set the Engin on Work; and observ'd, that the Bubble gra∣dually expanded, till it fill'd up the whole Ca∣pacity of the Egg, except the Stem; and lest the Water should be thought to subside only for want of the Internal Air to bear it up, we con∣tinu'd pumping, till the Bubble in the Egg expanding further, depress'd the Sur∣face of the Water in the Stem, below the Surface of the External Water. The Air be∣ing thus far rarifi'd, we compar'd the Diame∣ter of the Bubble with the Diameter of the Glass, and found it to be as 1 to 20; and con∣sequently, according to Euclid, the Proportion betwixt Spheres being triplicate to that of their
Diameters, the Diameter of the lesser being one, the Diameter of the other must be 8000. So that the Air expanded, possess'd 8000 times the Space it possess'd before. The Glass Egg being fill'd with such Water again, and no Air included in it, tho' the Receiver was in a great measure exhausted, yet the Water did not subside, till a Bubble at the last rose to the Top, whose Diameter was to the Diameter of the Glass as 1 to 14, so that according to Euclid's Rule before-mention'd, the Bubble expanded, pos∣sess'd 2744 times as much Space as before. But Dr. Wallis, observing the great Thinness of the Glass, thought that the expanded Bubble posses∣sed 8232 times it's former Dimensions. N. B. Water being let into the Exhausted Receiver, till it would receive no more; we found, that by reason of some Leaks, the Re∣ceiver had not been perfectly exhausted. EXPERIMENT II. June 2.62.Air expan∣ded to 10000 times it's former Bulk. ASmall Bolt-head, which was able to con∣tain 80 Grains of Water, being invert∣ed into a Jar, it was shut up in the Receiver; and when the Air was exhausted, Bubbles which rose out of the Water expanding themselves, presently drove all the Water out of the Bolt∣head; but when the Air was let in again, the expanded Air in the Bolt-head form'd a Bubble no bigger than a Pin's Head: After this, we fill'd the Bolt-head with Water clear'd of Air, and when the Receiver was pretty well exhau∣fied, a Bubble ascended to the Top of the Bolt∣head,
which, when the Air was again let in, was almost invisible; yet the Receiver being again exhausted, it expanded it self so far as al∣most to drive all the Water out of the Bolt-head; yet when the External Air was again admit∣ted into the Receiver, it shrunk into a Bubble, whose Diameter was 1/22 part of the Diameter of the Bolt-head, so that to fill the whole Cavity it ex∣panded it self 10648 times; but considering the Cavity of the Neck of the Vessel, which it likewise in some measure fill'd, it was expanded to 13769 times its Bulk. The Diameter of the small Bubble retracted, was 1/27 of an Inch. The Diameter of the out∣side of the Head of the Glass was 29/36 of an Inch. The Water that fill'd the Head was 60 ½ Grains. The Water that fill'd so far of the Neck, as the expanded Bubble possess'd was 17 ½ Grains. The Bolt-head weigh'd 15 Grains. EXPERIMENT III. THE foregoing Experiment being repeated, we found that a Bubble, whose Diameter was 1/16 of an Inch in Diameter, when expanded, possessed the whole Space of the Ball, as well as Neck of the Bolt-head, and depress'd the Sur∣face of the Water within the Pipe, below the Surface of the stagnant Water. From these Experiments it appears, that ac∣cording to the most moderate Estimate, Air expanded will possess 2744 times it's natural Space, and according to our most successful
Experiments 13000. So that we may justly ad∣mire the Minuteness of those Aerial Instru∣ments, that she employs even about Visible O∣perations. CHAP. XI. New Observations about the Duration of the Spring of Expanded Air. Observati∣ons about the Durati∣on of the Air's Spring.IT having not been as yet attempted to shew, whether a Portion of expanded Air, would retain it's Elasticity, and it's Power of Restitu∣tion or not, nor how long; nor whether a Por∣tion of Air inclos'd in a Receiver, would have it's Spring vary'd upon Full, or the Change of the Moon; tho' I cannot much boast of the Progress I have made, yet I shall subjoyn the following Attempts on that Occasion. A Glass Bubble newly blown, and whilst it contain'd none but rarifi'd Air, had it's Stem imediately clapt into a Flame, and Seal'd up; Many Months after it was inverted into a Basin of Water, and the Seal broke off under the Surface of it; and tho' Water was violently impell'd into the Cavity of it, yet the included Air had so far retain'd it's Spring, as not to suffer the Cavity to be quite filled with Wa∣ter. Another Method I took to shew the Dura∣bleness of the Air's Spring was the following, viz. Leaving a small Portion of Air in the Folds
of a Lamb's Bladder, whose Neck was closely ty'd; it was inclos'd in another Vessel, and con∣veigh'd into our Pneumatick Engin, and when the Receiver was exhausted, the expanded Air distended the Bladder, so that it fill'd the whole Cavity of the Vessel, by whose sides, it was guarded from the Pressure of the outward Air, so that the expanded Air kept the Bladder di∣stended two Years. For further Satisfaction, I contriv'd an Instru∣ment, by which I could learn, whether, and how long Air variously expanded will retain it's Spring; by which I could not discover, that the Air lost any thing considerable of it's Spring, in ten Weeks time. Another Instrument I made use of, by which I could find, that Air expanded to 1000 times it's usual Dimensions, would be sensibly affect∣ed by Heat, and lose the Expansion it gain'd thereby, upon a Removal of that Heat. March 18. We try'd the following Experi∣ment. A Cylindrical Glass having a long Stem at the unseal'd End, was fill'd with Water, and inverted into Water, which lay in the bot∣tom of a large Pipe, seal'd at one End, and 3 or 4 Foot long; which being done, the large Pipe was so far exhausted, that the Air the inverted Pipe possess'd the whole Cavity of it down to the Stem; upon which the larger Tube being clos'd up, the expanded Air possess'd the same Space 3 Months after, except that be∣twixt the Pipe and the Stem, upon extream Cold, the Water rose ⅛ or near ¼. The clos'd Apex being broke open under Water, it gra∣dually fill'd the whole Cavity, except a small
Space possess'd by a little Bubble. The Diame∣ter of the Cylindrical Part of the Pipe was ⅗ of an Inch, and its Length 3 Inches; the Bub∣ble was about 2/10 in Diameter, and 2/100 in Depth; so that the Bubble was, according to Dr Wallis his Computation, to the Space it possessed, when expanded, as 1 to 1350. CHAP. XII. New Experiments touching the Condensation of the Air by mere Cold, and it's Com∣pression without Mechanichal Engins. Of the Air's Condensati∣on by Cold, &c.TO try how far the Air is capable of be∣ing condens'd by mere Cold, when the Season of the Year hath not pre-affected it; I try'd the following Experiment in Au∣tumn. In the middle of September about Noon, on a Sun-shiny Day, we placed a Bolt head in a Frame, so that the Stem was Perpendicular to the Horizon, and the lower End of it immers'd in Water. This done, we cover'd the Ball of the Bolt-head with a Mixture of beaten Ice and Bay-Salt; upon which, the internal Air being con∣dens'd, the Water rose up into the Stem, and stood a good while: Then having made a Mark at it's highest Station, we fill'd the Vessel with Water, and found that it yielded ℥19 and ʒvj, the Weight of the Water which fill'd the Stem up to the Mark being ℥j and ʒiij, by
which Number, the former being divided, the Quotient was 14 4/11 Drachms; so that the Pro∣portion of the two Quantities being as, 11 to 158; The Space into which the Air was condens'd, was, to it's former Space, as 147 to 158: So that the highest Degree of Condensation it was then capable of, made it lose of it's former Ex∣tent 11/158. N. B. First, The Stem of the Glass ought to be long, lest the Water, upon the Air's Con∣densation, should rise into the Ball of it. Secondly, The Cylinder of Water was two Foot, so that it might, by it's Weight, in some measure, hinder the Ascent of more, and so keep the Air from condensing to it's ut∣most. Thirdly, When the Water rose as high as it well could, we observ'd it to rise and fall alter∣nately, for a little time. Fourthly, The Air may thus be further con∣dens'd, than by Winters Cold. But to shew that in the forgoing Experiment, the Cold did not compress the Air immediately, but partly, in as much as it, by stuffing up the Pores of the Water, caus'd it to swell, and so to compress the Air; I took a new Glass Bolt-head with a short Neck, and fill'd it full of Wa∣ter; so that when it was hermetically seal'd up, the Liquor wrought within 3 Inches of the Top, the sharp End which was made for the Conveni∣ency of sealing being ¼ of an Inch long; This be∣ing done, the Bolt-head was plac'd in a Mixture of Snow and Salt, upon which, the Water as∣cended and compress'd the Air into the Coni∣cal Part; upon which, the Glass flew in pieces.
In which Experiment, according to Dr. Wallis his Estimate, the Air was compress'd into a 40th part of the Space it possess'd before. Which is considerable above the utmost Compressure made in Wind-Guns, where it is usually thought not to be compress'd into less than a 15th, and (according to Mersennus) into an 8th part of it's former Space. CHAP. XI. Of the Admirably differing Extension of the same Quantity of Air rarified and compress'd. The admi∣rable diffe∣rent Exten∣sions of the same Quan∣tity of Air.THE first Thing I shall take notice of, concerning the different Degrees of the Air's Rarefaction and Condensation, is, That, in our Climate, tho' Cold will not con∣dense it near into a 20th part of the Space it possess'd before, yet it may be expanded to 70 times that Space. Secondly, The Air may be much more con∣dens'd and rarifi'd by our Engins, than by Heat or Cold; the Proportion in respect of Expan∣sion being as 1 to 70. But, Thirdly, Perhaps the Proportion betwixt the Degrees of the Air's Condensation and Ra∣refaction will not be thought so great, as what we have mention'd; if we consider, that the Air we make Experiments with here below, is so much compress'd already, by the Incumbent
Atmosphere, that for that Reason it is more inclin'd by it's Spring to yeild to an Expansive, than a Compressive Force. Fourthly, It may be question'd, how the parts of the Air, which have a specifick Gravity, come to be spread so thin in the Cavity of the exhaust∣ed Receiver, since there is nothing in it for them to swim in, and to bear them up; Since the Proportion is so great betwixt the Parts of the Air, and the Cavity of the Receiver, they are contain'd in. Fifthly, It is not a little wonderful, that Air should be so subject to vary it's Dimensions; so that if we consider how far it may be expanded without the Assistance of Art, elaborate Engins or Heat, the Top of the Atmosphere must be ex∣tremely rare. To conclude; If we compare the utmost De∣grees of Condensation and Rarefaction toge∣ther, the same Portion of Air may possess 520000 times the Space, at one time, that it did at another.
CHAP. XII. New Experiments about the weakned Spring, and unheeded Effects of the Air, com∣municated in the Philos. Transact. of Decemb. 75. TO try whether, as some Corrosions of Bodies in close Vessels increase the Spring of the Air, so others may not weaken it; and likewise to discover whether some Ef∣fects of the Air may not depend on some un∣heeded Qualities, I made the following Expe∣riments, which I shall lay down when I shall have made some Tryals. the Changes of Co∣lour in Solutions of Copper, by the Influ∣ence of the Air. EXPERIMENT I. Change of Colour in a Solution of Copper.FILINGS of crude Copper being put in∣to a Crystal Glass of a Conical Figure, with as much Spirit of Salt, as stood a Fingers breadth above the Filings; we cover'd the Ves∣sel with a Stopple exactly adapted to it; upon a Solution of the Copper, the Colour of the Liquor was a dark Brown; but it soon lost that Colour, and was clear again like common Wa∣ter; but when, by taking out the Stopple, the Liquor was again expos'd to the Air, it first acquir'd a brown Colour upon the Top, and that penetrating deeper into the Liquor by de∣grees;
it, in a quarter of an hour, was wholly tinged with a brown Colour again; and so it successive∣ly laid down, and re-acquir'd that Colour, as it was stopp'd up, or expos'd to the Air, till at the last, being kept up a Month, it kept the brown Colour it had acquir'd in the Air unalter'd. EXPERIMENT II. A Bottle of the same Liquor with the for∣mer, and which was much clearer, being expos'd to the open Air, in half an hours time was not in the least alter'd; but the Vessel be∣ing again clos'd up for two or three hours, it acquir'd a faint Green; and the Glass being again unstopp'd 24 hours, the Green was deep enough, but not very transparent. EXPERIMENT III. ABout 3 Spoonful of the brown Tincture of Copper, was shut up in a Receiver, ca∣pable of holding ten times as much; It retain'd it's Colour half a Year in Vacuo, and then being expos'd to the Air, it acquir'd a Green in about an hour, without the Precipitation of any mud∣dy Sediment. EXPERIMENT IV. SOme of the aforemention'd Tincture being left a considerable time in a Window, lost it's Colour, and appear'd like common Water; but towards the latter end of December, being expos'd to the Air, it acquir'd a faint and mode∣rately transparent Green.
EXPERIMENT V. Filings of Copper and Spirit of Wine.FILINGS of Copper, and as much recti∣fied Spirit of fermented Urine, as rose an Inch above them; being shut up in a Conical Glass with a mercurial Gage, in some hours the Mercury in the seal'd Leg was depress'd. EXPERIMENT VI. A Gage being shut up in a Receiver, with the same Ingredients as in the former Ex∣periment; In some time the Spirit acquir'd a very pleasant blew Colour, and two or three Days after, that Colour began to grow fainter and fainter; so that at the end of the fourth Day, it had wholly lost it's Colour: But being expos'd to the Air, in four or five Minutes the Top of the Liquor began to turn Blew, and at the end of ten Minutes, it diffus'd it self through∣out the Whole, and five Minutes after, grew so strong, as almost to be Opacous. The Liquor shut up again, in two or three days time grew clear. And this Experiment being try'd seve∣ral times, had the like Success. In trying these Experiments, I forbore to shake the Glass, lest the Alterations should be suppos'd to a∣rise from any Sediment rais'd and mix'd with the Liquor, tho' for the most part, none was to be perceiv'd.
EXPERIMENT VII. Filings of Copper with Spirit of Sal Armon.HAving enclos'd Filings of Copper with Spirit of Sal Armoniack, enough to cover them an Inch, we shut up, with them, a Gage; In some time, the Spirit had got a blew Colour, and in the mean time, for two or three Days the Mercury in the seal'd Leg descended near 1/ of an Inch. The like Success we had, when the Experiment was try'd several times after. EXPERIMENT VIII. Coral and Spirit of Vinegar.A Mercurial Gage with Coral and Spirit of Vinegar, being enclos'd in a Conical Glass, whilst the Menstruum work'd on the Coral, se∣veral Bubbles were produc'd, which breaking in the Cavity of the Vessel, compress'd the Air into ⅔ parts of the Space it possess'd before; but after the Operation of the Menstruum was ended, the Compression declin'd, till the com∣press'd Air regain'd it's Extent within a third of what it was dispossess'd of by the Com∣pression. Spirit of Vinegar and Mini∣um.Spirit of Vinegar and Minium, being after the like manner enclos'd with a Gage in a Co∣nical Glass, tho' the Minium was in a great measure dissolv'd, yet the Gage, discover'd no Alteration in the Air.
EXPERIMENT IX. Filing of Copper with Sp. of Sal Armon.ABOUT the 20th of August we put Fi∣lings of Copper into a Viol, with as much Spirit of Sal Armon. as cover'd them an Inch; In three Days it had acquir'd a deep blew Colour, and almost lost it again: The Viol being open'd, in five Minutes it was of a deep Blew; but being shut up again nine Days, it lost it's Colour. EXPERIMENT X. THE same Ingredients being shut up in a Viol hermetically seal'd, presently ac∣quir'd a deep Blew, and in twelve Days after lost it again; during which time, the Mercury in the open Leg was impell'd up; but, when in the Night the Seal was broken open, there succeeded a Noise, and the Mercury in the short∣er Leg was rais'd briskly near 3/ of an Inch; and tho' the Air had access to the Liquor, at an Orifice no larger than a Pea; yet, in a Minute and a half, the Surface of the Liquor had acquir'd a lovely fair Colour a quarter of an Inch deep; and in five Minutes, the whole was Blew.
CHAP. XIII. A Statical Hygroscope propos'd to the Se∣cretary of the Royal Society. COnsidering how much Men's Bodies are in∣fluenc'd, by the Moisture of the Air and it's Dryness, I made use of the following Hy∣groscope to discover the different Degrees of those Qualities, viz. A Spunge; which is a Body that sucks up the Air's Moisture much more commodiously than several other Bodies; for tho' common Sea-Salt or Salt of Tartar will imbibe the Moisture of the Air, yet it is a hard matter to separate it from them again. And tho' Lute-Strings discover'd the De∣grees of the Air's Moisture by the increase of their Bulk, yet they continu'd not to answer Expectation long. I likewise made use of a Cup, made of a Light Wood, with a Button on the Bottom of it, to which a Hair being ty'd, it was, by that, suspended at a Ballance; and al∣so, I observ'd several things, when I made use of Sheep's Leather, which would be a good Hy∣groscope, being plentifully furnish'd with Pores to imbibe Moisture, but that it is more subject to Rot than Spunge. A statical Hygroscope.For in the main, I found nothing so conve∣nient as Spunge, which is so plentifully stock'd with Pores, that a Drachm, having imbib'd as much Water as it could contain without drop∣ping, weigh'd 2 Ounces and 2 Drachms; And
All that is requir'd in using this Hygroscope, is, that the piece of Spunge made use of, be first weigh'd in Air of a moderate Tempera∣ture, with a Nice Ballance; for as afterwards it increases or decreases in Weight, so accordinly the Air is moister or drier. In making use of this statical Hygroscope, you may use what Quantity of Spunge you please, so that it's Weight be not so great as to injure the Bal∣lance. CHAP. XIV. A Brief Account of the Utilities of Hy∣groscopes, The Useful∣ness of Hy∣groscopes.THE Use of a Hygroscope is either Ge∣neral, or Particular; The general Use is, to estimate the Changes of the Air, as to Moisture and Dryness, by ways of measuring them, easie to be known, provided and communi∣cated. This appears from the Description of our statical Hygroscope; by which, we can by the help of small Weights, discover the least sensible Alterations in the Temperature of the Air; nor is it the only Advantage in our Hy∣groscope, that it is able to discover such Alte∣rations in the Air's Temper, but it is an Ad∣ditional one, that it is durable and lasting. N. B. It is one great thing wanting in the Preparation of Hygroscopes, that we have not yet found a Standard of Moisture and Dryness to adjust and compare other Hygroscopes by.
But having thus briefly intimated the most general Use of Hygroscopes, I shall now proceed to mention their Particular Uses. ƲSE I. To know the differing Variations of Weather in the same Month, Day and Hour. I Have commonly observ'd, that when the Weather was at a stand, the Spunge grew hea∣vier in the Night, but lost that Moisture the next Day, before Noon; but in frosty Nights, at the latter End of the Winter, this Observa∣tion did not hold. Amongst other Observations, it would not be amiss to note, whether there be any Corre∣spondence in the Air's Operation on Hygroscopes and Baroscopes; and if at all, in what kind of Weather. For usually in the Summer, when the Hygroscope is lightest, the Baroscope is higher, tho' strong Winds may make both lighter, such as the North-West with us; whereas South Winds with Rain usually make the Ba∣roscope lighter, and the Spunge heavier. And East Winds, tho' they make the Baroscope hea∣vier in Winter, yet they make the Hygroscope lighter. It would likewise be of use to observe on the Sea-Coast, whether the Ebbing and Flow∣ing of the Sea, causes any sensible Alteration in the Hygroscope, as likewise at what time the Air is moistest; especially at Full and New Moons; by which Observations we may more easily hope to determine, whether the Moon
diffuses a Moisture through the Air or not, than by observing the Plumpness of Oysters and Shell-Fish, or of the Brains or Marrow of Animals, which is a hard thing to be sure of. To these Observations it will be requisite to note, whe∣ther upon Spring-Tides in March or September, the Hygroscope receives any sensible Altera∣tion. ƲSE II. To know how much one Year or Season is dryer or moister than another. IF the Hygroscope when it continues longest without some sensible Alteration, be taken for a Standard; by comparing Observations made at other Seasons of the Year, and in other Years, it will be easie to learn how much one Year is moister than another. How much these Observations may be of Use to Physicians, where Distempers arise from too much Moisture or Dryness, and to Husband-Men and Shepherds in ordering their Corn, and removing their Flocks, from too moist Ground, I shall leave un∣determin'd. But in order to make Predictions, it will be necessary to Register the Number, Bigness and Duration of the more considerable Spots, that appear or are dissipat'd near the Sun; and what Alterations happen to the Hy∣groscope at such times. Nor would it be a∣miss, to observe what Alterations happen upon Eclipses of the Sun and Moon, or great Con∣junctions of the Planets.
ƲSE III. To discover and compare the Changes of the Tem∣perature of the Air made by Winds strong or weak; frosty, snowy and other Weather. THAT the Spunge in the Wind or Sun loses considerably of it's Weight, I my self have experienc'd, a Spunge hanging in the Sun in January, having lost a 24th Part of it's Weight, after it had been 3 quarters of an hour expos'd to it; and making use of half an Ounce of Sheeps Leather instead of Spunge, this being hung in the Wind, only lost 1/18 of it's Weight in an hour. But tho' it be possible thus to make Ob∣servations of Particular Winds; yet it requires a great deal of Caution, as well as Skill in Phy∣sick and Cosmography, in forming Rules for the observing of the Qualities of other Bodies, since Winds which come from the same Quarters in several Countries have different Qualities; for tho' North Winds in the Winter, are generally attended with Frost, yet at the Famous Port of Archangel a Thaw accompany'd it; the Reason of which seems to be no other than, that the Northern Wind coming a long way over the Northern Seas, does not acquire such a Disposi∣tion as the South Wind, which passes over a large Tract of Frozen Land. And it is observ'd in Aegypt, that the North Winds which are else∣where drying, are there moist, which is attested by Mr. Sands in his Travels into Aegypt, lib. 6. Cap. 8. Sect. 3. And Monsieur de Serres affirms,
that about the Quarters of Tholouze, the South Wind dries, and the North Wind brings Rain; yet from Narbonne to Lyons, all over Provence and Dauphinè it is quite otherwise. But, besides that on this account Winds from the same Quarters may differently affect the Hygroscope; It's Operation may be considerably diversify'd, as it blows vehemently or slowly over the same Country; for tho Wind would rather increase the Weight of a Hygroscope if mov'd slowly, yet by a more vehement Agita∣tion, several moist Particles in the Spunge are dissipated and dispersed. To these Observa∣tions I shall add the following, Viz. that frosty Weather hath been observ'd to make the Hy∣groscope grow lighter towards Night, and that snowy Weather increas'd the Weight of it, as likewise misty and foggy Weather. But what is more strange is, that on a Sun∣shiny day, the Spunge hath preponderated up∣on the passing by of a Cloud; but as soon as that was gone, regain'd it's Aequilibrium; and I have observ'd, that when the Air hath grown heavier, the Hygroscope hath grown lighter, as if those Terrestrial Effluvia which increase the Weight of the Air were unfit to be imbib'd into the Pores of the Spunge; wherefore at such times it may not be amiss to take notice; whether any, and if any, what kind of Meteor, as Wind, or Rain or Hail, or in the Winter, Snow or Frost, will commonly be signifi'd or produc'd.
ƲSE IV. To compare the Temperature of differing Houses, and differing Rooms in the same House. THIS may be of considerable Service in en∣abling Men to choose Rooms, which may be most consistent with their Health; for the difference in some Rooms hath been observ'd to be so considerable, that a Drachm of Spunge hath acquir'd the Additional Weight of 3 Grains and ⅛, and upon a removal into another, hath lost 1 Grain and ⅛, tho' in a rainy Night. And a piece of Spunge that wanted 4 Grains and ¾, being remov'd into another Room near a Fire, in a short time, wanted but 1 ½ Grain, and the next Evening after this Observation was made, it weigh'd ʒj 1 Grain and almost a half: The next day it exceeded a Drachm above 2 Grains; but about 4 in the Afternoon the Weather grow∣ing frosty, it lost of it's Weight; and a Drachm of Spunge that was kept in a dry Room upon foggy Weather, being remov'd, in a Nights time, gain'd 11 Grains, and in the Morning being remov'd into the former, it gain'd 2 Grains. ƲSE V. TO observe, in a Chamber, the Effects of the Presence or Absence of a Fire in a Chimney or Stove; which will sensibly appear by the help of our Hygroscope.
ƲSE VI. To keep a Chamber at the same Degree, or an assigned Degree of Dryness. THIS may easily be done by observing the Aequilibrium of the Spunge, and accord∣ingly increasing or diminishing the Fire. I have observ'd a notable Difference in the Weight of a Hygroscope, when the Room hath been wash'd, tho a good Fire was kept in it to dry it pre∣sently. To these Observations I shall add, that I have sometimes taken notice, that the Hygroscope hath not answer'd our Expectation, as at other times; whether the Air, at that, abounded with other Effluviums, which render'd the moist Par∣ticles of it, more unfit to be imbib'd by the Pores of the Spunge, I shall not determine; nor whe∣ther in time, Hygroscopes may not help us to dis∣cover the Nature of different Effluviums, such as those of Spirit of Wine, Chymical Oyls, &c. Nor shall I undertake to determine, whether this Instrument joyn'd with the Baroscope and some others, may not help to give us a foresight of some Constitutions of the Air which precede Diseases, Hurricanes, Earthquakes, or Inunda∣tion; especially of those Accidents which de∣pend on the Air's being overcharg'd with Exha∣lations and other moist Vapours; as well as it does of a shower of Rain. To conclude this Chapter, I shall intimate, that tho' in these Matters it be perhaps impossi∣ble to form Hypotheses, which can in no Points
be call'd in Question, yet the Theory may be as good as can, by a wise Man, be expected, in so mutable a Subject as the Air; and therefore they ought not to be slighted or suddenly laid aside, since several Accidents may intervene in the Air, on which those may depend. As we know, tho' Tides generally Ebb and Flow, so as to answer the Theory given of them, yet by fierce Winds and great Land-Floods, the regular Course of them hath often been alter'd. CHAP. XVIII. A new Experiment and other Instances of the Efficacy of the Air's Moisture. The Efficacy of the Air's Moisture.THAT the Moisture of the Air hath had considerable Effects on Subjects far less tender and curiously contriv'd, than Men's Bo∣dies, will appear from what follows; and that the Moisture of the Air hath a considerable In∣fluence,, and usually a bad one, may well be argu'd from the Effects we have taken notice of on several Parts of Animals; and that the Skins of Animals are sufficiently prepar'd to receive such Effluviums, appears from what I have be∣fore observ'd, viz. That Sheep's Leather being made use of for a Hygroscope, plentifully im∣bib'd the Moisture of the Air; and even Blad∣ders which by Nature are made impervious to Urine, are so dispos'd to imbibe the Moisture of the Air, that the membranous Part put into a
Pair of Scales, and counterpois'd, makes a good Hygroscope; and not only these, but Lute-strings, which are made of the twisted Guts of Animals, and even Bones, the most solid Parts of Hu∣man Bodies, will so far imbibe the Moisture of the Air, as to swell considerably. Nor are Animal Bodies alone capable of ha∣ving their Pores penetrated by the Moisture of the Air; but it insinuates it self into inanimate Bodies, and swells the solid Parts of Wood; and even Polish'd Marbles are observ'd to be so plentifully stock'd with moist Vapours, as evi∣dently to sweat; nay even the Air it self is not without Vapours and moist Parts, dispers'd through it in the Heat of Summer, which will appear from the following Experiment. Having fill'd a Bottle with Water and four Ounces of Sal Armon. we counterpois'd it in a Pair of Scales, and in an Hours time, so many moist Particles in the Air were condens'd by this frigorifick Mixture, that, they first appear'd in the form of a Dew, on the outside of the Glass, and then ran down the sides of the Vessel, till that Scale preponderated and weigh'd a Drachm more than the other. But to proceed to Instances, which, shew the Force and Efficacy of moist Vapours, when they penetrate solid Bodies. It is no weak Argument of their Efficacy that we observe, that, by the powerful Insinuation of Moisture, the Strings of Musical Instru∣ments are swollen and broken; nor is it in consi∣derable, that Doors and Door-Cases are so swol∣len in Rainy Weather, as to open and shut with a great deal of uneasiness.
Marcha∣sites burst by the Air's Moisture.Besides which Instances, I have observ'd a Piece of Wood to encrease considerably in it's Weight in rainy Weather: And I am told, it is usual for musical Instruments to grow out of Tune, not only the Wooden, but the Metalline Pipes of Organs being apt to swell in wet Weather. And not only by the help of Rain, but the Moisture of the Air, Marchasites have been swollen and burst asunder; which I am apter to believe, because I have observ'd Vitriolate Efflorescences upon the Surfaces of shining Marchasites, caus'd by the Action of external Moisture on them; and the Moisture of the Air hath so powerfully penetrated some Marchasitical Substances, that they have burst asunder; whereupon it appear'd, that a greater Quantity of Vitriol was ge∣nerated within their Substances, than with∣out. To conclude what I have to say on this Sub∣ject, I shall add the following Experiment to assist a Virtuoso, to make an Estimate in known Measures of the mechanical Force of the Aerial Moisture. I caus'd a Rope about 22 Yards long, to be fasten'd at a convenient Height, to an immovea∣ble Body; and then having fix'd a Pully to ano∣ther stable Body, about 18 Yards distant from the former, the Rope lying upon the Pully, was, betwixt both, almost in an horizontal Posture; but to that End of the Rope, which hung down from the Pully towards the Ground, was fix'd a Weight of 50 Pound, and to the upper Part of that, an Index, which being plac'd ho∣rizontally, pointed to a Board which was divi∣ded into Inches and parts of Inches, that we might
discover the better, the Ascent and Descent of it upon changes of Weather. When the Weight had stretch'd the Rope as much as it could; I observ'd, that in one rainy Night the Weight was rais'd five Inches; but the next Day proving a dry Day, it was depress'd lower than before. But a heavier Weight being made use of in∣stead of the former; June 4th in an hour and quarter, the hundred Weight was rais'd ¼ of an Inch. The Sky being cloudy, but without Rain. June 6th. In the Night which was cloudy, it was rais'd about 3 Inches, and an hour after that Observation was made, it rose half an Inch more. From whence it appears, that the Force of the Air's Moisture is considerable, since the Rope that, by it's Assistance, rais'd the Weight, was but about the third Part of an Inch Diameter, being 3/10 and 4 decimal Parts of 1/10. CHAP XIX. Of some unheeded Causes of the Insalubrity and Salubrity of the Air, &c. The Insalu∣brity and salubrity of the Air de∣pends on subterra∣neal Va∣pours▪AMongst the several Causes, on which the Salubrity and Insalubrity of the Air de∣pend, subterraneal Effluvia are in Effect most considerable; which differ not only according to their respective Natures, but according to Place and Time; according to Place, as they ascend from the superficial or deeper Parts of
the Terraqueous Globe; according to Time such as ascend daily, and may be term'd ordinary Emissi∣ons, or only at distant times; the latter of which may be term'd periodical, and sometimes for∣tuitous or irregular. But notwithstanding the Vapours which rise from the Earth, may be distinguish'd by these Distinctions; yet since Nature offers her Phaeno∣mena not so distinct, but confusedly and to∣gether, I shall sometimes consider the Terra∣queous Steams, in the more general Notion, with reference to each of the Members of this Distinction. But that I may deliver what I have to say more distinctly, I shall lay it down in the following Propositions;Proceed un∣der the fol∣lowing Pro∣positions. having first observ'd, that the Insalubrity of Marish, and the Salu∣brity of Sandy Grounds, may depend on some Effluvia, which act not meerly or principally as they are Moist or Dry. PROPOSITION I. THE first Proposition is,Prop. 1. That it seems pro∣bable, that in divers places, the Salubrity or Insalubrity of the Air considered in general, may be in good part due to subterraneal Expirations, especially to those I call'd ordinary Emissions. Which may contribute to the preserving of Health ei∣ther by promoting Respiration, or by correct∣ing noxious Particles in the Air, and checking morbifick Ferments. And indeed, if we consider what a great va∣riety of Bodies, besides Minerals, the Earth is stock'd with, tho' some may emit Effluvia noxi∣ous to Men as well as Plants, yet in that Varie∣ty
there may not be a few, whose Exhalations may be as friendly to him; for Trees and Grass have not only been observ'd to flourish over Tin Mines in the West of England, but over Veins of ano∣ther kind of Mineral, which was not far from the Surface of the Earth. And it is observ'd, that those that Work in Tin Mines, usually live ve∣ry long. And I have not only been told, that the Fumes that rise from such Mines, tho' often very bituminous, and of an offensive Smell, yet some of them are well scented: And a Friend of mine, who caus'd himself to be let down in a subterraneal Cavern, which was broken open by digging for a Mine, not only observ'd, that the Air was very pleasant to breath, but like∣wise amongst several imperfectly form'd Mine∣rals, store of a Mineral Earth very fragrant and pleasant, which Smell it in some measure re∣tain'd, when it had been expos'd to the Air for some time. And I my self have observ'd in Ireland, a piece of Ground to yield very good, tho' short Grass, in a Country justly esteem'd healthful, which I at∣tributed to some sulphureous Exhalations-from Lime-stone; which have had so considerable Ef∣fects in other places, that I am told that a piece of Ground in Derbyshire which lies upon Lime-stone, is so warm'd by the Vapours that rise from it, that Snow is much sooner Thaw'd upon it, than that which lies near it, on Soil which covers Free-stone. To which it may be added, that a Gen∣tleman observ'd in Hungary, that walking over some Ground which affords that Noble Oar call'd by the Germans Rot-gulden ertz, the Air was very pleasant, nor was the Air much
less pleasant on that Ground which lay upon Veins of Cinnabar; yet over other sorts of Mines the Air was very inoffensive. Nor is it improbable, that subjacent Fossiles should influence the Air, since I have observ'd Mineral Earths twenty Foot deep, yield a volatile saline Spirit, like that of Harts-horn. And that several Effluvia may impregnate the Air, which are not to be discern'd by any of our Senses, appears from those Magnetical Ef∣fluvia of the Earth, discover'd by the Ingenious Gilbert and others, which do not only steam through the Air, but as I have observ'd, act up∣on Bodies in an Instant, which are contain'd in Glasses hermetically seal'd. But tho' from hence it may appear, that the Salubrity of the Air may be improv'd by the Effluvia of some Minerals; yet it is beyond doubt, that in general they render the Air In∣salubrious, since there are a great many more that emit bad, than good ones: For besides that the Air hath been observ'd in Hungary to be very offensive and prejudicial to Respiration, that in the Neopolitan Grotta de Cani, suddenly deprives Dogs both of Sense and Motion. To which may be added the Averni in Hungary, which suddenly kill those that draw in the Air infected with them. Besides which, there are a great many noxious Effluvia which rise from Marchasitical Minerals, which we take little notice of, and in places which we little suspect them to be in; neverthe∣less, they infect the Air, and render it corro∣sive, by emitting that ill condition'd Sulphur, which they so much abound with, that a pound distill'd in an Earthen Vessel with a good Fire,
besides an inflammable Sulphur, which was con∣dens'd into thin Films on the side of the Recei∣ver, yielded a strong Acid, not much unlike Gas Sulphuris, which was corrosive enough to dis∣solve Coral in the Cold. And that there is o∣ther Marchasitical or Vitriolate Matter in England, besides those Stones, from which the greatest part of Vitriol is obtain'd, I my self am a Wit∣ness, who have obtain'd a Vitriol from a Vein of Metalline Oar, consisting of a black, heavy Stuff, without any troublesome or artificial Preparation. PROPOSITION II. It is probable,Prop. 2. that in divers Places some Ende∣mical Diseases do chiefly or partly depend on subterraneal Steams. UNder the Title of Endemick Diseases, I not only comprize those that are solely peculiar to some Places, as the Plica Polonica to Poland, and the Disease in France call'd la Co∣lique de Poictou, but those that chiefly appear in particular Countries, as Agues in Kent and Es∣sex Hundreds, Consumptions in England, and Fluxes in Ireland. But before I proceed further under this To∣pick, it is requisite I should first Advertise, that I deny not but that a great many of such Di∣stempers may depend in a great measure on Ex∣cessive Heat or Cold, or some other manifest Qualities of the Air, as also bad Diet, or In∣temperance; but the Reasons why I think they generally in a great measure likewise arise from
some noxious and contagious subterraneal Efflu∣via, are the following. 1. Because frequently the Causes are not ma∣nifest; and 2. Contagious Effluvia may be e∣mitted. 3. A large Tract of Land may abound with the same kind of Mineral, and another piece of Land with another. 4. As the Efflu∣via are Saline, Sulphureous, Antimonial, Arse∣nical, or of another Nature, they may have dif∣ferent Effects; so in Hungary, some cause a dif∣ficulty of breathing. But the Effluvia of the Earth, do not only affect the Body by the Mediation of Respiration, but being contiguous to the Skin, get in at the Pores of the Body, and have sensible Effects on the Internal Parts. And that the Pores of the Body are capable of receiving very subtle Effluvia, might be evinc'd by several Instances; but it may suffice to intimate, that I have so prepar'd a Mineral Substance, that it would have very sensible Effects on Substances contain'd in the Bladders of dead Animals, when it had no other way to get to those Substances than through the Pores of the Bladder, which are not near so perspirable as other Parts of the Body, not con∣stituted to hold so subtle and penetrating a LI∣quor as Urine. Nor need it be a less Wonder, how these sub∣terraneal Effluvia should have so sudden Effects on human Bodies, and in so little time, since we see in moist Weather, how suddenly Lute-strings are broke, and Ropes shorten'd by the Insinuation of moist Particles into their Pores. And tho' those Effluvia are not so plentifully dispers'd in the Air, as to enter the Pores in such Swarms,
yet the Mass of Humors may in time be suffi∣ciently impregnated with those noxious Vapours to enable them to produce their Effects, when, suck'd into the Capillary Vessels, they gradually deprave the Mass of Blood. And that Effluvia from without, may have considerable Effects on the Mass of Blood, ap∣pears from Appensa and Periapta, as also the Ef∣fects of Mercurial Plaisters and Girdles; and the Effluvia of a Load-stone, which caus'd a Friend of mine to be troubled with Fits of the Colick, an Argument that Mineral Effluvia may cause particular Diseases. To which we may add, that Arsenical Appensa, extoll'd by some in the Plague, have produc'd the Effects of Poy∣son, and in some a Faintness and Dispiritedness, according to the Testimony of several Physici∣ans. And that Mineral Expirations may cause a determinate Distemper, we may learn from an Observation of mine, which was, That a Chymist rubbing very often Red Arsnick in a Mortar, and endeavouring to make an Excel∣lent Medicine of it, first complain'd to me of a Difficulty of breathing, and sometimes of Pains and Tumors in his Testicles. And it will not be very much doubted, whe∣ther Mineral Effluvia penetrate the Pores of the Body or not, by those that shall know, that the Fumes of Sulphur are so penetrating, that at the Pic of Teneriff, they blacken Silver in the Pockets of those that go up to it. I made a Preparation of Sulphur, which emitted Effluvia so powerful in the Cold, that they penetrated a Leathern Purse, and discoloured Silver con∣tain'd in it.
But besides the forementioned Effects of Va∣pours on the Pic of Teneriff, I was told that one that ascended that Mountain, had the Colour of his Hair altered before he came down again; which argues the Power of Mineral Effluvia to penetrate the Pores of the Body. But lest it should be questioned by some, whe∣ther such Mineral Effluvia would not be con∣sumed, and cease in less time than Endemical Diseases are continued in one Place; I shall im∣timate that I think several subterraneal Bodies may have a power of propagating their Virtue to Matter contiguous to them, by some Semi∣nal Principle, or something Analogous to a Fer∣ment, or by bringing some more Crude Mine∣ral Earths gradually and successively to a greater Degree of Maturity and Perfection: For it hath been observed, that in Tract of time a Mineral might be obtained from an Earth which at ano∣ther time it could not be obtain'd from; which Ob∣servation holds as to Nitre, which is one of the most Catholick Fossils, and most plentifully emits Effluvia. Besides, tho' Mineral Effluvia in the Regi∣on of the, Earth discoverable by us, should be con∣sum'd; I see not why supplies may not be brought from the Bowels of the Earth. Indeed, consi∣dering how closely the Matter of Minerals is crowded together, and how long Magnets se∣vered from their Mines, emit Effluvia without a sensible Diminution, the Stock of Mineral Earth from whence they flow cannot be thought suddenly to be exhausted; for an Effluviating power is so durable, that one had a perfumed Watch, which, tho' constantly worn, preserv'd it's Scent 16 years, and by the same Reason could
perfume Marbles quite through, so that they retain'd their Scent a long time. But before I leave this second Proposition, it is requisite that I should take Notice, that noxious Effluvia may cause Distempers, not on∣ly by Respiration and penetrating the Pores of our Body, but by impregnating the Water made use of for preparing and Diluting our Aliment, without any sensible alteration in the Water to be discern'd by us; So Water by an Infusion of Crocus Metallorum becomes Eme∣tick; and indeed sometimes, those Effluvia are so numerous, that in the Borders of Lancashire, the Mud in a Ditch is so strongly impregnated with subterraneal Exhalations, that at the Sur∣face of the Earth or Water they will take fire, and flame like a Candle. But besides that Distempers may be propa∣gated by these subtle Effluvia impregnating Wa∣ter, they may be also prejudicial, in as much as being mixed with the Nutriment of Plants, they may deprave their Juices, and consequent∣ly make them unfit to be eaten: And that Mi∣neral Effluvia may in a great measure deprave and influence the substances of Plants in their growth, is confirmed by some, who have noted, that Oaks, growing in Ground which abounded with Vitriolate Mines, were much more heavy and solid than others; and these Effluvia are sometimes so numerous and crouded into the Pores of Plants, as not to be overcome and con∣cocted by the Ferments of the Plants, but to keep their own Natures; for I have observed in a Vine near Paris several Marchasitical Particles throughout the Pores of the Root and Trunk.
And I have been told that at Tockay in Hungary the very Kernels of the Grapes are as if it were Guilt over with Leaf Gold. But, Besides the aforementioned Ways by which our Bodies may be affected with Noxious Effluviums, we may not a little suffer, by the deprav'd Humours which some Animals we Feed upon, are nourished by, and which viti∣ate their Bodies primarily, and secondarily ours. As from what hath been said it, appears, that Subterraneal Effluvia may cause Distempers, so it may not be amiss to take Notice that possibly in some measure Mineral Effluvia may prevent Distempers; for 'tis Observed, that several parts of Scotland are free from Agues, and that very hot and large Regions in the East-Indies are rarely troubl'd with the Plague; nor is it less re∣markable that in Ireland the Air is impregnat∣ed with such sort of Emanations as pre∣vent the Generation of any venemous Crea∣tures; To which I shall add the following In∣stance from Beguinus in his own words, who says, Dignum admiratione est, quod quamvis in vi∣cinia Hydriae Comitatus Gloricensis, ubi reperitur co∣piosè ☿ singulis fere annis Lues pestifera grassatur, illa tamen semper immunis ab hac manere soleat, id{que} viri providae aetatis se observasse, et a Majoribus suis accepisse mihi sancte confirmarunt; to which I shall add further that the Learned Michael Magerus, pronounces Mercury an Antidote against several Diseases; and particularly the Plague.
PROPOSITION III. It is likely,Proposition 3. that divers Epidemical Diseases are in great Part produc'd by Subterra∣neal Effluvia. THo' several Epidemical Distempers are caused by manifest alterations in sensible Qualities of the Air; yet to shew that some of them principally, and others partly depend on the Effects of Subterraneal Effluvia, I shall offer the following Considerations. And First, the Structure and disposition of the Parts of our Globe, which are not much below the Surface of it, and much more, the deeper Sub∣terraneal Regions, are so plentifully stocked with Mineral substances; so, that it is not improbable but that Subterraneal Effluvia ascending thence into the Air, may cause excessive Heat or Cold, or some other manifest Qualities, and consequently in part occasion most Epidemical Diseases. For from what I have elsewhere shewn, it not only appears, that these Effluvia, by acting on one another may excite sudden heats; but also that Minerals, of different Degrees of Maturity, act∣ing on one another, may produce an Intense Cold. Besides, the changes of the Air on which Epidemical Diseases depend, are so considerable, and instantaneous, that they can scarce be attri∣buted to the Influence of the Sun or Moon, which are too regular and constant in their Influ∣ence to cause such Anomalous effects, as we can∣not but take Notice of in a few years time; but
are rather caused by an irruption of Subterra∣neal Steams, which are frequently both impe∣tuous and irregular: And tho' some attribute them to the Influence of the Stars; yet the va∣nity of Judiciary Astrology having been so plainly detected by several Learned Men, I shall here only observe that it is much more unlikely that particular Towns should alone be Influenced by such, than by Effluviums from Bodies near the Surface of the Earth where those Places stand; and that which renders it much more probable is, that I have frequently known Diseases very Fatal to happen suddenly in some places, where the first Contagion hath been ac∣companied with a very troublesome Fog. That sudden and violent Heats may be pro∣duc'd by a Mixture of Subterraneal Bodies, not only appears from Oil of Vitrol pour'd upon Iron, Spirit of Nitre upon Butter of Antimony, Filings of Copper, Tin, or crude Antimony; But from Oil of Vitriol poured upon Powdered Mar∣chasites which was accompanied with very strong Scented Fumes: To which I shall add, that e∣ven Sulphur hath to my knowledge had consi∣derable effects on Marchasites: And I have been told by a German Chymist, that in Germany, Marchasites which were found there, would grow hot, if long immers'd in pure Water. And if we consider upon how many Accidents the Course of Subterraneal Waters may be turn∣ed, it will be easily evident, upon that Ac∣count considerable Degrees of Heat may suc∣ceed; for if a convenient quantity of Filings of Steel be mixed with Powder of Sulphur, and that Mixture be moistened with Water, it pre∣sently
grows very hot, and emits Fumes copi∣ously, like Slak'd-Lime. And I have been inform'd by several, who fre∣quent Mines, that Damps, which are made up of Subterraneal Effluviums, are not only very irre∣gular in Reference to their Distance, but also their Duration; and have very ill effects on those that come within the reach of them; and if such pernicious Fumes are to be discover'd so near the Surface of the Earth, well may they affect those that Inhabit on the Soil, near which such Effluvia rise: I say near which, because tho' they do not immediately rise in the very Towns they infect, and are carried thither by the Motion of the Air; yet in a large Tract of Land, they may be so dispersed as to have no considerable Effects. But it is not requisite always that those Efflu∣via, which cause Distempers, should be noxious at their first Rise from the Earth, since Mineral Fumes may acquire new Qualities by associat∣ing with particular Particles in the Air, and may by that means be disposed to act upon par∣ticular Parts of the Body, and to cause a de∣terminate Disease: So tho' neither Spirit of Nitre nor Sal Armoniack alone can Dissolve Gold; yet Aq. Regia which is a Composition of both, will; but hath no such effect on Silver, Diamond's or Rubies. As for the Reason why Epidemick Distempers affect some and let others go free; it may not only be accounted for by the peculiar Dispositi∣ons of those Bodies, but also by considering, that the Effluvia which rise from the Earth, may be
so imperfectly mixed with the Air, as to fall up∣on one Body, and not another; so I have ob∣served several Leaves on a Tree blasted with a Wind which blew at that Corner of the Ground, yet others on the same piece of Ground were untouch'd; nay, the very Leaves of that were not all blasted on that side which the Wind blew, so that I suspected some Arsenical Vapours being mixed with the Air, cast upon them were like Hail shot from a Gun, and scattered in it's Flight: And on a Cause not much unlike this may depend the Ef∣fects of some Winds which cause Blasts on the Faces of some People, yet let others go free, as I remember I was Riding once in the Wind, which, tho' it disaffected not me, yet my Man, who Rid after me, scaped it not. In favour of our Hypothesis already laid down, I shall add, that the short duration of some Dis∣tempers, as well as their Progressive Motion from one Town to another, are Arguments either that these Vapours rise all at once, and are dispersed, or the Subterraneal Commotion that causes them passes on from one Part of the Earth subjacent, to another. Nor is it less Con∣sonant to our Hypothesis that the short durati∣on of some Distempers may depend on a suc∣cessive rise of Effluvia, since when those of one kind cease to be emitted, and another kind suc∣ceeds, the latter may check the former by preci∣pitating them, or uniting into Quid Tertium less prejudicial to all Animal Bodies. So by an as∣cociation of new Particles with those Pestilen∣tial Effluvia which cause an Annual Plague in Grand Cairo, it suddenly stops, and those al∣ready infected, dye not, if the Air be sufficient∣ly
impregnated before, as a late Writer of Voy∣ages into Aegypt testifies in these Words. The Drops or Dew purifies the Air; for as soon as it falls, the Plague ceases to be Mortal, none dyes of it; The Air is wholesome, all Distempers cease; and if any person grows sick, he never dyes, &c. I have been told that about the Tin Mines in Devonshire, not only the Grass and Fern, but the Trees will be suddenly blasted, by the powerful Effluvia which suddenly rise over a considerable compass of Ground. Having said thus much of Epidemical Distem∣pers, it perhaps may be Expected that I should say something of the Plague and it's Origin, which I must own my self at a loss in; for tho' I think it rather seemingly Pious, than really so, to ascribe such things to a Supernatural Power, which may be accounted for by Natural ones; yet I deny not but that some may arise from a Supernatural Origin. But what ever may be the first Origin of Plagues, I am inclined to think, that the Propagation of them depends on a Malignant Disposition in the Air, arising from some Subterraneal Effluvia; for these Reasons; First, because the Malevo∣lent Aspects of the Planets seem too Remote and Indeterminate to act on a particular place. Be∣sides, according to the vulgar Hypotheses, the Plague ought to rage most where it very seldom happens: For Leo Africanus informs us, that in Nu∣midia, tho' raging hot, it happens but once in an hundred Years; and Purchas in his Pilgrimage, Lib. 6. Cap. 13. tells us, it is not known at all in the Land of Negro, and seldom in Japan or New-England; and in the East-Indies, China, Tunquin,
and Cochinchin, it is never heard of: Where∣as the Country of China contains more Inhabi∣tants than all the Nations of Europe; and were the Plague a Punishment inflicted for the sins of Men, certainly in Countries so large and sa∣vage, they might expect it from Divine Justice as often as we. But perhaps it may be said, that these Histo∣ries as much Press our Hypothesis, as those o∣thers alledged by Physitians: But if we consi∣der, that I confess it difficult to deter∣mine the Original cause, the other part of my Hypothesis is not at all shaken, since it could not be denyed, but that noxious Effluvia would be able to propagate the Plague there, were there an Original cause to set those secondary causes on work: But for as much as from our Hypothesis it appears that the Original Cause of the Plague is not always so abstruse, but sometimes begun, as well as propagated by those noxious Effluvia, without the Concurrence of any other Cause, it may be requisite to take Notice; that in China and those Countries where the Plague, is un∣known, we may presume such noxious Steams are not emitted; for tho' Sulphur is usually found in many Countries where Metalline Veins are frequent; yet I never heard that in those Mines an Ounce of Native Sulphur was ever found. Besides, tho' there may be Minerals in a Coun∣try which may emit noxious Vapours; yet the Mines from whence they come may by so deep in the Earth that they may not be able to infect the Atmosphere powerfully enough to cause a Pestilence, tho' promoted in making their Way
by some violent Earth-quake, when upon a fall of some weighty Mass of Earth in Subterra∣neal Caverns a trembling Motion is communicat∣ted to the Earth about it, and propagated more or less proportionable to the first Cause; for which Reasons, noxious Effluvia being sometimes emitted which could not otherwise make their own way, probably the Plague happens in A∣frica once in 30 or 100 Years periodically. And a French Historian takes notice of a Disease in France, not much unlike the Colick, which, for a long time return'd every 10th Year. And Platerus, Lib. 2. P. M. 303. Relates that the Plague at Brasil successively return'd every 10 Years, for 70 Years together. But further, tho' in the East-Indies such Va∣pours should arise, which would of themselves be pernicious; yet others may rise, which tho' noxious likewise, may by combining with them, form a Third Substance innocent enough: So Corrosive Sublimate, when combined with Crude Mercury, becomes so useful and innocent a Medi∣cine as Mercurius Dulcis. Besides what hath been said, another Reason why some Countries are free from the Plague, may be some peculiar disposition in the Air to resist the Effects of noxious Exhalations; as when the River Nile Increases and Over-flows, the Plague in Aegypt ceases: And the Soil in some Countries is of such a Temper as to impregnate the Air, so that it suffers not poysonous Crea∣tures to live in it, A Second Reason why I think the Plague is propagated by Subterraneal Effluvia, is, because it happens sometimes when no Distemper is per∣ceivable
in the Air which seems able to pro∣duce such an Effect; yet when the Aspects of the Stars have been threatning enough, and the Air very intemperate, no Plague hath follow∣ed; as when Fernelius Writ his Observations De abditis rerum Causis, Lib. 2. Chap. 13. It was immoderately hot, but very Healthful; and the same further tells us, that the Plague hath some∣times began in Winter, and gone off in Sum∣mer: And Johannes Morellus, that a Temper∣ate and Healthful Spring, which succeeded a Winter, in which the North-wind Reign'd, brought in the Plague, tho' at the same time, the North-wind continued serene and clear. And the Constitution of the Air before the Plague in 1665, was not much unlike it. Whence it is evident, that the Plague depends not on manifest Qualities of the Air, but is rather caus∣ed by Subterraneal Effluvia which float in it, and which are drawn in by Respiration; and that Poisonous Exhalations have rose from the Earth and infected the Air with a Pestilential Disposi∣tion, Monsieur de Meszeray in the Life of Phi∣lip de Valoris, and Diemerbroeck de Peste, Lib. 1. Chap. 8. testifie. And tho' there is a manifest difference in Pesti∣lential Distempers in several Countries, and at different times; yet it is easily accounted for by our Hypothesis, since the Minerals from whence those Vapours rise may be varied by new Com∣binations, and the Influence of Subterraneal Fires and Menstruums, as well as in the open Air, by which they may be enabled to produce Symptoms more violent than in ordinary
Distempers; so that Hippocrates might well ac∣knowledge in Distempers , something a∣bove the ordinary Course of Nature. The ill Ef∣fects of Mi∣neral firmerAs for the Natures of those Exhalations, tho' they are hard to be known, yet by the Effects and Symptoms of some Plagues, and of Yellow, Red, and White Orpiment, we may suspect them to flow from that Mineral Substance; but tho' I believe some Plagues may arise from such Causes, yet since the Earth abounds with se∣veral Minerals which we are not acquainted with, we cannot deny but by the combinations of such, there may result Substances which yeild Effluviums hurtful enough to human Bodies; so by adding Common Salt to Orpiment, they prepare White Arsnick, which by the Mixture of Salt, of it self innocent, becomes more per∣nicious, causing violent Symptoms, which I have taken off by Oil of Sweet Almonds and something made of Limons; And Sandarach, as well as Native Arsnick, seem to be little else than Red and White Orpiment, the Effects of which are taken Notice of by Sennertus. M. P. E. vid. Page 66. on a Painter, whose Face was swell'd, together with Fainting Fits, upon opening a Box where Orpiment had been kept some time. And White Arsnick hath had very fatal Effects, when externally worn in Amulets, sometimes causing burning Fevers, Anxieties about the Heart, inflammations, exulcerations of the Breasts; Black Pustles, as if made with a Caustick, weak∣ness and Fainting, and sometimes sudden Death, which Symptoms have been cured by the same Antidotes that the Plague is. And that Subter∣raneal Mineral Effluvia are able to effect ve∣ry
strange things, appears from what Kircherus observes, Scil. That in the Kingdom of Na∣ples 1660, there were several Stains observ'd on Linnen Clothes, much resembling Crosses, that poysonous Matter which was the Cause of them, being spread along the Threds, which cross'd one another at right Angles. These Stains would wash out with Soap and Water; but their duration was very unequal, some of them con∣trinuing ten, and others fifteen days. Antidotes against the ill Effects of the Pla∣gue.And tho' it be impossible to discover the Natures of all noxious Effluvia; yet, undoubted∣ly a great many may, and Antidotes thought on to destroy their ill Effects. In the great Plague of London, when upon a subsidence of the Pestilential Humors, the Patients usually dyed, the following Plaster apply'd to the Tu∣mors of several, prevented them from falling; and either burst or made them fit to open; and so saved the Lives of many. Emplastrum attractivum Pestilentiale nostrum. ℞. Gum. sagapen. Ammon. Galban. an ℥iij. Tere∣binth. Lact. Cerae Virginis an. ℥iiijss. Magnet. Arse∣nicalis subt. pulv. ℥ij Rad. Aron. pulv. ℥j Gummi depurentur cum Acet. Scyllit, & ad consistentiam Emplastri coquantur, & postea ponderentur, deinde cum rebus aliis F. Empl. S. A. Hoc Emplastro Car∣bunculus obducatur, quod paucis horis Venenum ex∣trahit.
Praeparatio Magnet. Arsenicalis anteà dicti. ℞ Arsen. Chrystallin. Sulphuris Vitri, Antimonii Crudi an. Haec tria in mortario ferreo pulverisentur. In Vase fortissimo Vitreo, ponantur ad ignem arenae, donec vitrum optime incalescat, & praedicta solvan∣tur & liquentur instar Picis, quod observabitur quan∣do filum quoddam immittitur in fundum, quod ex∣tractum postea instar Terebinthinae trahetur ubi satis coctum erit. Postea remove vitrum ab igne, & subtiliter pulverisa & ad usum serva. Another eminent Physitian preserv'd him∣self from the Plague, by taking every Morning a little Sea Salt dissolv'd in Sea Water: And in another Plague, I knew two recover'd with a Conserve made of Goats Rue. Why the Plague sometimes unexpected∣ly ceases.But further, besides what hath been dis∣cours'd on; it is not less disagreeable with our Hypothesis, that sometimes the Plague unex∣pectedly ceases; since those subterraneal Ef∣fluvia, which continue the Infection, ceasing to be emitted from the Earth, those in the Air are soon spent and swept away with the Wind; which Effluvia may cease to be emitted; either because they meet with some other Effluvia in the Earth, which corrects them; or because they pri∣marily rose from a Conflict and Agitation, depend∣ing on the mutual Action of two Bodies; which as Spirit of Salt pour'd on filings of Iron, or Aquafor∣tis on Salt of Tartar, emit Fumes less plentifully, as the Ebullition declines. And that noxious Exhalations may be corrected, by a combinati∣on of others as pernicious, not only appears from what hath been before deliver'd; but
may be illustrated by noting, that tho' Spirit of Salt-Peter will corrode Silver; yet, if Spirit of Salt be added to it, it soon loses that Qua∣lity. PROPOSITION IV. It is very probable, that most of the Diseases, that even Physitians call new Ones, are caus'd either chiefly or concurrently by Subterraneal Steams. New Dis∣eases caus'd by subterra∣neal Steams.BY new Distempers, I would be understood to mean, not every one that varies a lit∣tle in Symptoms from the same sort at another time; but such as at their appearance are, by their Symptoms altogether unknown: That these Distempers depend not on any intemperate and manifest Qualities of the Air; nor on the influence of those Heavenly Bodies, that move about us, seems evident; because the Influence of the latter are too indeterminate, and the al∣terations in the Temper of the Air, much more frequent than the Access of new Distempers. But from what hath been said under the Third Proposition, it appears, that the Globe we inhabit, abounds with various noxious Mi∣nerals, which are subject to various Confluxes, Conflicts and Dissipations; and which, by e∣mitting Effluvia, may infect the Air, and cause new Diseases, which may continue according∣ly, as the Cause is more or less durable; so Manna for these two or three Ages hath been found on certain Trees, which faculty of pro∣ducing
Manna, they still retain, yet had it not before. Experi∣ments to shew that Metals may be rais'd in the form of Vapours.To conclude this Chapter, and to render what we have taught concerning mineral Ef∣fluvia more probable, I shall add the following Experiments; from whence it will appear, that malleable Metals may be rais'd in the form of Vapours into the Air, and become part of Fumes, or perhaps of Invisible Vapours, or even of Flame it self. EXPERIMENT I. Dantisic Vitriol and Sea Salt Distill'd.HAving powdered three Pound of Dantsic Vitriol, and two of Sea-salt, and distill'd them with a strong naked Fire; we obtain'd a blew Spirit of Salt: Besides which there rose a Powder of a Cupreous and Martial Nature, which settl'd in the bottom of the Liquor. EXPERIMENT II. English Vi∣triol and Sea Salt.THE former Experiment being repeated with English, instead of Dantsic Vitriol, we obtain'd a Yellow Spirit, with a Yellow Powder, which seem'd to be a Crocus Mar∣tis. EXPERIMENT III. Mercury Sublimate and Copper.WE cast thin Plates of Copper into a Re∣tort upon a double weight of good Mer∣cury Sublimate, and having luted on the Recei∣ver, by a long continued Fire, we obtain'd some running Mercury, and some Sublimate,
which had not fastned upon the Copper. In the Bottom of the Retort we found a weighty, brittle and resinous Substance, fusible and inflammable, almost like Sealing Wax; this being beaten and expos'd for some time to the Air, turned to a kind of Verdigreese, which gave a green Tincture to Spirit of Salt. This being Distilled ad Siccitatem several times, till fully impregnated with the Spirit; it was mix'd with Triply, and with a strong Fire afforded a colourless Liquor, like Water, which upon an Addition of Spirit of Harts-horn turn'd Blew. EXPERIMENT IV. Venetian Sublimate and Cornish Tin. VEnetian Sublimate Distill'd from Cornish Tin, into a good large Receiver, yield∣ed a Spirituous Liquor, which emits white Exhalations, upon an Access of free Air; but if the Orifice of the Vessel be but cover'd with a Piece of Paper,Air pro∣motes the rising of Metalline Vipours. it presently ceases to emit those Exhalations; yet begins again, when that Paper, which lay but lightly upon it before, is taken off: Whence it appears, that the Air may promote the rising of metalline Vapours in the Atmosphere. And that Metalline Fumes will ascend in the form of Vapours, will appear from the follow∣ing Experiment, viz. Having satiated Aqua fortis with Copper, and steeped some brown Paper in it to soak up some of the Menstruum, when the superfluous Moisture was partly eva∣porated, we laid some of it upon the Hearth, near a Wood Fire, upon which, the Paper be∣ing
Scorched, emitted Fumes like Smoak, which rising up in the Air, as soon as they came to the Flame, they imparted to it a Colour, partly Blew, and partly Green; as it was variously mix'd with the Flame and Smoak of the Wood. CHAP. XX. Suspicions about some hidden Qualities of the Air. Latent Qualities in the Air.BEsides the four first Qualities of the Air, viz. Heat, Cold, Moisture and Driness, and those which Philosophers and Chymists have discover'd, as Gravity, Springiness, &c. I am apt to suspect, that there are other latent Qualities in it, due to the substantial Ingredi∣ents, which it is made up of: For the Air we live in, is not a simple Body, but a confus'd Ag∣gregate of Effluviums; which, being jumbl'd together, constitute a great Mass of Hetero∣geneous Matter, endew'd with different Qua∣lities. For from what is elsewhere deliver'd, it ap∣pears, that there are various Effluvia, besides those that afforded ordinary Meteors, which arise from Bodies in subterraneal Parts; several of which have no Names, or at least none as∣sign'd them, and have several Powers and Qua∣lities which we know not of.
Besides, the Sun and Planets may have In∣fluences here below, distinct from their Heat and Light, which may mix with the Atmosphere we live in: And for as much as those celestial Globes that move about us, may be endew'd with substances, that we here know nothing of, the Effluviums which come from them, may affect us in a different manner from any Bodies, we here have in our Atmosphere. And tho the greatest Part of those Effluviums,Qualities in the Air which arise from the Union and Conjuncti∣on of other Bodies with it. which are active in our Atmosphere, arise from subter∣raneal Parts, and from Celestial Bodies; yet doubtless there are a great many that result from the mutual Action of the different Parts of it acting on those Bodies that are expos'd to it; for tho', notwithstanding any manifest Qualities we can discern in it, the Air seems to be unfit for a Menstruum; yet I doubt not, but it may have considerable Effects on Bodies dispos'd to be acted on by it; for not to urge, that sometimes the Quantity of a Menstruum compensates it's want of strength; we know, that there are several Liquors, which, tho insipid, and make no sensible Impressions, on the Organs of Taste, yet by their various Attritions and frequent Motions against Bodies, become fit for Solvents: So the Air, having it's Parts always acting on Copper expos'd to it, in tract of time, produces that Efflorescence colour'd like Verdigrease; a factitious Body usually produc'd from the same Substance corroded by Vinegar or the Juice of the Husks of Grapes. Besides, we see, that Mercury, which hath no sensible Taste, hath a faculty of Dissolving Gold and Silver, and all Strong Menstruums, which dis∣solve
Bodies with the utmost Vigour, are soon glutted, and can dissolve no more; so that, tho' the Air be a weak one, yet it hath this lasting Advantage, that when a small Quantity of it is glutted, it bears so great a Proportion to the Body it acts on, that a fresh Part of it is still to supply the Deficiency and Place of that which can act no longer. The Air a∣bounds with saline and sulphureous Parts.Besides, the Air abounds with so many saline and sulphureous Parts, that by rubbing upon Bodies that lie in their way, by frequent occur∣sions, they cause considerable Effects, so we see, according to the Proverb, Gutta cavat Lapidem, non vi, sed, saepe cadendo. Moreover, tho' the Parts of Air are very minute, yet, we know, that the Bodies which are expos'd to their Action, are only acted on by them upon their outward Superficies, which may consist of as many Parts, and as minute as those of the Air, which, by successively hit∣ting against them, carry them along with them: So Sugar or Sal Gem. being immers'd in Water, have their Parts dissolv'd and carri'd up into the Liquor, by the successive attritions and occursions of so insipid a Menstruum, and whose Parts are in so gentle a Motion. The Sun-Beams suf∣ficient to raise some Bodies.And I am apt to believe, that some Bodies have may such a disposition, to be worked upon by the Sun-Beams, as to be rais'd by them in such a form, as not to be distinguish'd from the Body they are rais'd in. But whether they may or not, certainly it is consonant to Experience, that the Atmosphere is fill'd, in several Places,
with Effluviums of different kinds, and of un∣common or unobserv'd Natures; which Con∣jecture may be favour'd, by observing, how subject Camphire is to waste; and that, when the Superficies of some solid Bodies have been taken off they emitted Steams copiously, by which in a Minute of an hour, they suffer'd a manifest decrement of weight. Arguments to prove la∣tent Quali∣ties in the Air.But to reassume the Discourse we have made this Digression from, I shall urge some Argu∣ments à posteriori, which favour what I propos'd concerning these latent Qualities in the Air. And first, I shall urge the appearing growth of some Salts, in Bodies, which usually afforded them not at all, or not in such plenty; Vitrio∣late Efflorescences having been observ'd to be, after sometime, on the glistering parts of Marcha∣sites, which were kept in a dry Room: And it hath been observ'd, that a heavy ponderous Mi∣neral expos'd to the Air for some time, became so brittle, that it would crimble away, and plentifully abounded with Copperas; and some of the same being kept in a close and dry Place, was in some time covered over with an Efflore∣scence, which being mix'd with an Infusion of Galls, manifested it self to be a Vitriol; whose growth is the more strange in the Air, because it is not a meer Acid Salt; but abounds with combustible and sulphureous Parts, which I have often separated from common Vitriol without the addition of any combustible Mat∣ter; and sometimes without any addition at all. And it was not a little strange that our blackish Minerals, yielded vitriol Efflorescences so soon, since I kept shining Marchasites, from whence
they usually prepare Vitriol, without being changed near so much, as those I have men∣tion'd; and it is usual, sometimes, to let them lie expos'd to the Air two Years, before they yield their vitriolate Parts. Alum Ore regains it's Salt when expos'd to the Air.To these Observations we may add, that Alum Ore, being robb'd of it's Salt, recovers it again by being expos'd to the Air; and Lime in old Walls hath in time regain'd a Nitrous Spi∣rit, which I have learn'd by dissolving it in common Water, and evaporating the filtrated Solution. Nay,And so does Vitriol. calcin'd Vitriol expos'd to the Air, in a competent time regains fresh Parts of a vitriolate Salt. Suspicions about the Productions of Vitriol.But tho I propose these Observations as favou∣rable to the Suspicions laid down; yet I am apt to suspect, that the Air concurs to the Production of them, rather as an Ingredient, than as an Agent; or that the Production of them depends on some seminal Principle, by which, when they are once ripen'd, the Moi∣sture of the Air helps them to disclose them∣selves in the Form of saline Concretes; as in Tartarous Matter saline Parts are generated, which cause that acid Taste in Tartar, of Renish Wine especially: Besides, it may be suspected, that the Salt found in Marchasites, &c. may be made of saline Particles swimming in the Air, and attracted by congenerous Particles, that re∣main in those Bodies, that are, as it were, the Wombs of such Minerals; or that these Aerial Salts, assisted by the Moisture of the Air, open the Textures of these Wombs, and by extricating the latent saline Parts, and adjoyn∣ing with them, compose those emergent Bodies;
but tho I suspect, that the Air is not wholly con∣cern'd in producing such Bodies, yet I believe it is in a great measure concern'd, as I have al∣ready intimated. The necessity of Air to continue flame, an Argument of a latent Principle.But to proceed to other Instances of these Aerial latent Qualities, I think that the neces∣sity of the Air's Presence to preserve and conti∣nue Flame, is a sufficient Argument of some latent Spirit or Quality, whether vital Sub∣stance or nitrous Spirit diffus'd through the Air, on which likewise the Life of Animals depends, and without which, they, as well as Flame, presently, are extinguish'd and die. To these I shall add, that Animal Substances enclos'd in Vacuo, yield not Insects, as when ex∣pos'd to the open Air; And it is related by a Noble Man of this Country, that an Oak being dug out of a Rock of Salt, was so hard, that Iron Tools could scarce work upon it; yet in three or four Days, being expos'd to the Air, it was rotten. And it hath been observ'd by several, that the Air hath such an Influence on Diaphoretick Antimony, that if it be long ex∣pos'd to it, it becomes Emetick. From which Observations, and what I have before laid down concerning Quick-Lime, the Air seems to be a Substance capable of being assimilated by every Body,The Air seems to consist of all sorts of se∣minal Prin∣ciples. or that it consists of all sorts of seminal Corpuscles; so that any Body may find a Substance there, analogous to it, and fit to make up a part of the same Body. But without any further notice of this odd Surmise, I shall subjoyn the following Phaenome∣na to favour my Suspicion. The first is, That
tho' the Juice of the Fruit of the Tree Junipa (which the Indians use to black their Faces, to make them more formidable to their Ene∣mies) gives such a Tincture, that it cannot be wash'd out with Soap; yet the Air abounds with Particles of such a Nature, that it disap∣pears in ten Days time; tho' I suspect that, it in a great measure depends on the continual Excretion of Sweat, through the Pores of the Skin. Damasco S And I am inform'd, that Instruments made of Damasco Steel, tho' when first made, they excel not, or scarce equal those of commo  yet when kept in the Air two  they answer Expectation and a  prov'd. And I have observ'd, that  e Body, which would not be dissolv'd in a strong Menstruum, nor lose it's Colour by Fusion, would presently be turn'd black, if expos'd to the Air. Remarka∣ble Changes of Colours.It is observ'd in Blood concreted, that the black internal Parts being expos'd to the Con∣tact of the Air, become florid; and I have pre∣par'd a factitious Concrete, which if kept to the Fire, or secluded from the Air, would be of a red Colour; yet in a quarter of an hour, being expos'd to the Air, it would turn almost black. To which I shall add, that an inquisitive Per∣son prepar'd a Medicine of a vegetable and A∣nimal Substance, which at that time of the Year would be coagulated in a Viol like Oyl of Ani∣seeds; but if unstopp'd and expos'd to the Air, it would presently dissolve again, and recoagu∣late when stopp'd up again; The Consideration of which Experiments may tell us, that the
Air by being communicated to the Blood by Re∣spiration, may have Effects not inconsiderable upon it, in carrying off it's fuliginous Recre∣ments, To what hath hitherto been deliver'd in fa∣vour of our Suspicion, it may be added, That there are Anonymous Substances and Qualities in the Air; To countenance which, I shall take notice of those various and odd Diseases, incident both to Men and Beasts, which prove Mortal to a particular Species of Animals, and in particular Places, which depend on some unknown subterraneal Vapours: To which I shall subjoyn, that Fernelius mentions a Plague, which affected no Animals but Cats; Dionysius Halicarnassus, takes notice of one that only affected Maids; whereas, that which ra∣ged in the time of Gentilis, seiz'd none but Lusty Men: And Bolerus gives us an Account of another, which only affected the younger sort of People. Cardan speaks of a Plague at Brasil, which only affected the Switzers, and neither the Italians, French or Germans; and Johannes Ʋtenhovius gives an Account of a cru∣el Plague at Copenhagen, which only raged a∣mongst the Danes. As for the Cause of these Diseases, tho I think they are chiefly to be ascrib'd to subterraneal Effluviums; yet I deny not, but that the Particular Constitutions of Men are concern'd in them; nor do I think the Distempers already mention'd, alone de∣pend on such Steams as rise from the Earth, but the Sudor Anglicus in the 15th Century, the Scurvy and the Morbus Hungaricus, the
Lues Moraviae, Novus Morbus Luneburgensis, and some others in the last Century. Considera∣tions drawn from what hath been said.And now, if from what hath been said, our Suspicions concerning Subterraneal and Syde∣real Steams, may seem not ill grounded; they may lead us to consider the following Particu∣lars. 1. Whether those Effects, which are some∣times thought to depend on the immediate Wrath of God, and the Intercourse of Angels, may not arise from these Steams, whose Quali∣ties are probably heteroclite, and unknown; since we see that there are several Steams di∣spers'd through the Atmosphere, which cause it to raise Mercury in a Baroscope, which could be no otherwise discover'd, but by the Effects they have on the Air, made evident by that In∣strument. And this Consideration hath some∣times made me suspect, that even the Sun-Beams may cause a manifest Gravity in the Atmosphere besides that which they do by virtue of their Heat; and it may be worth Enquiry, whether some Spots in the Sun, upon their Dissolution, may not be dispers'd through, and cause some considerable Effects in our Atmosphere, at least in it's Gravity. 2. It will not seem improbable, that some Bodies have peculiar Dispositions to be associa∣ted with those Exotick Principles, which arise from subterraneal Parts, or are transmitted from the Planets. Upon which Dispositions, or the contrary, what we call Sympathy and Anti∣pathy depend. By Virtue of such Dispositions, a Burning-Glass refracts the Sun-Beams, and the Sun-Beams impart a Lucidness to the Bolonian
Stone. And that the Steams of subterraneal Bo∣dies will act on some Bodies, and not on others we have given sufficient Proof. 3. The third thing which may be suggested by what we have deliver'd; is, whether there may not be Receptacles or Attractives of Syde∣rial and other Exotick Effluviums, that wander up and down the Air, such as are Magnets; by which I mean, not such a Body that can attract foreign Effluvia; but such a one as can detain them, when by virtue of their various Motions they happen to come near such a Magnet. Just as Oyl of Tartar per Deliquium draws to it, aque∣ous Vapours, and embodies with them, when they chance in their Passage through the Air to come near it. But a greater resemblance of the Magnet may be allow'd to some Bodies, than what is here mention'd; for such a Magnet may not only by a Juxta-Position or Contact detain the Effluviums, that would glide along it; but also arrest those subtle Parts of Matter by a kind of precipitating Quality; and so it may fetch in some Effluvia, which would otherwise pass by it: On which occasion, I remember, that in some Cases, I have been able to give some Bo∣dies Electrical Qualities, without exciting them by rubbing, &c.
CHAP. XXI. Some Additional Experiments relating to Suspicions about the Hidden Qualities of the Air. EXPERIMENT I. Experi∣ments rela∣ting to oc∣cult Quali∣ties of the Air.HAving pour'd Water upon the Calx of Dant∣zick Vitriol, part of it, soon after it was sufficiently impregnated, with the Vitriol re∣maining in the Calx, was filtred and gently ab∣stracted, and yeilded several Grains of a Salt of Vitriol, not much different from that which had been calcined. Another Portion of Water was left in the Air six Weeks, upon the calcined Vitriol in a wide mouth'd Glass, and then being abstracted as the former, it yeilded a Salt much like Salt-Petre, and different from the former. And Colcothar which had lain several Months in the Air free from Rain, being turn'd into a Lixivium, yeilded a Salt much whiter than Vitriol, and of a different Figure. From whence it appears, that the Air hath considerable Force in varying Salts obtainable from calcin'd Vitriol. EXPERIMENT II. DUlcifi'd Colcothar of Venereal Vitriol being expos'd to the Air in January and Februa∣ry, increas'd in Weight 4 ¼ Grains.
EXPERIMENT III. THE 12th of March, Eight Ounces of Out∣landish Vitriol calcin'd to a Redness, be∣ing put into a broad and flat Metalline Vessel; and into another Vessel smaller than the other, we put 2 Ounces of Colcothar, so that the Su∣perficies of the latter, was larger, in respect of it's Quantity than the Superficies of the other. June 25. We weigh'd these Powders, and found that the 8 Ounces had gain'd a Drachm and 16 Grains, and the 2 Ounces had gain'd as much within a Grain. Then the Powders being put into the same Vessels, August the 4th, the smal∣ler Quantity weigh'd 26 Grains more than it did in June. Whence it appears, that different Cir∣cumstances cause notable Disparities in the In∣crease of Weight. EXPERIMENT IV. TWO Ounces of small Lumps of Marcha∣sites, which were partly shining, and part∣ly darkish, and seem'd well dispos'd to yeild Vitriol, were kept in a pure Air, and gain'd 12 Grains in Weight in seven Weeks. EXPERIMENT V. SPIRIT of Salt being put upon Filings of Copper, and kept in a moderate Heat, when it had acquir'd a thick and muddy Colour, we decanted it into a clean Glass, with a wide Mouth, and left it a competent time expos'd to the Air,
till it had acquir'd a fair Green; yet nothing was precipitated to the Bottom to make it clear. EXPERIMENT VI. I Once Observ'd, that the Fumes of a sharp Liquor acted more powerfully on a certain Metal, held in the Air, than the Menstruum, from whence those Fumes rose, would do it self. And it is observ'd in some Mines in Hungary, that the Fumes render those Ladders soonest unserviceable, which were nearest the Top of the Grove, where there is a more free access of Air. EXPERIMENT VII. A Soft Chymical Substance, which would smoak in the open Air, being conveigh'd into our Pneumatick Engin in a Viol, when the Air was exhausted, ceased to smoak; and by continuing there some time, would not smoak again, when it was re-expos'd to the Air, till the fresh Air had blown upon it some time. This Preparation, being kept in the Vessel it was prepar'd in six Weeks, would cease to smoak, when the Vessel was but cover'd with a piece of Paper; and another remarkable thing was, that when it was contain'd some time in a Receiver, close Luted, it would soon so glut the Air with it's Steams, as not to be able to smoak longer.
CHAP. XXII. Of the Celestial and Aerial Magnets. IT would be of great Use in discovering the Nature of the Air, and it's Correspondency with Subterraneal and Celestial Regions, could we,Of Celesti∣al Magnets, ctc. by Experiment, make any progress in pre∣paring such artificial Magnets, as would imbibe the Exotick Parts of the Air. Nor will it be lost Labour to expose several Mineral and other Substances to the Air, and to enquire, what it is that gives them the additio∣nal Weight, they receive by it; and with what Qualities that Substance is endew'd; for if such Experiments could be try'd with good Magnets at several times, and in several places, we might by them learn, what Effluviums the Air, then, and in those places, abounded with; nor might it be of small Importance in discover∣ing a correspondency betwixt the Terrestrial and some Etherial Globes of the World. Amongst other things which make me hope that Equiries of this Nature may not be altoge∣ther unsuccessful; I shall only intimate, that No∣table Operation the Air hath upon Vitriol, diver∣sified by circumstances, after Fire could work no further on it: For Zwelser speaking of a Chymi∣cal Preparation of Vitrol, Viz. Colcothar, says, that the Salt it yeilds, when long kept, is im∣bibed into it, from the Air. For, says he, when it hath been exposed to the Air, Sal praebet, quan∣do{que} candidum, quando{que} purpureum, aspectu pul∣cherrimum, quod aliquando in Copia acquisivi, & penes me asservo, quando{que} etiam Nitrosum. And an ingenious Person told me, that he likewise had obtained several sorts of Salts from Colcothar;
and at the last, when it had been kept a long time, a pretty quantity of true running Mercury. Besides what hath been already said, concern∣ing Colcothar, I shall propose two or three In∣quiries, to any Virtuoso, that would assist in these Tryals. And first, it will be convenient to note, the Nature of the Soil; the Temperature of the Air; the Month of the Year; the Winds; the weight of the Atmosphere; and, if any, the Spots of the Sun; the Moon's Age, and her place in the Zodiack, as well as the principal Aspects of the Stars and Planets; since we cannot deny, tho' not posi∣tively assert, that these Bodies are concern'd in the production of those Salts which Colcothar yields: This, nevertheless we know, that, tho' those Bodies which move about us, should have no considerable effect on what is done in our Atmosphere; yet it, at different times and Places, abounds with various subterraneal Steams, and several Phaenomena appear in it, which are irre∣gular, and tho' some are regular enough, yet are they as to their Causes unknown, as those Ther∣mae Piperinae in Germany; which begin and cease to flow at certain times: And Johannes de Laet tells us, that in the Mexican Province, Xilolepec, there is a Fountain, which successively flows and ceases to flow for four Years together; and in the time of it's flowing, it's observ'd, that it flows much more plentifully in dry, than Rainy Weather. Secondly; I would recommend the following Observations, viz. What kind of Vitriol the Colcothar is made of, Martial, Hungarian or Roman Vitriol; what degree of Calcination is made use of, and how far the Calcin'd Matter is freed from it's Salt by Water: For I have ob∣serv'd,
a Saltless Colcother expos'd to the Air several Months, without the least increase of Weight, which probably might depend on some Peculiarity of the Air, where the Expe∣riment was try'd, since in other Places, the suc∣cess hath been the contrary. But Thirdly; Besides several sorts of Vitriols, it may not be amiss to try these Experiments with several Preparations of them; for I once made a Solution of Copper with Sublimate and Spirit of Salt; which, expos'd to the Air, was green, tho' before, it was not of that Colour, but of a muddy Red; and some which, appear'd to be a dirty Liquor, as long as it was kept in the Vessel it was made in, free from the Air, ap∣pear'd to be of the Colour of an Emerald, when expos'd to it. And what was remarkable in these Experiments, is, that accordingly as the Qualities of the Matter and Circumstances dif∣fered, the green Colour appear'd sooner or less speedily. But to conclude: Tho' the success of Experi∣ments of this kind be very doubtful; yet since the Attainments are so desirable, it may en∣courage the curious, not to pretermit the Ad∣vantage, which may succeed such Endeavours: For as Mariners at Sea, who at a distance upon the Horizon, some times see something ob∣scure which, whether it be a Cloud, a Moun∣tain, or an Island, they cannot distinguish, yet it hath prov'd worth their while to approach it, and not lose the probability of a Discovery; so, who knows, but by making an advance in less promising Experiments, we may discover something which may richly reward our Pains.
CHAP. XXIII. Experiments and Notes about the Mechani∣cal Production of Magnetical Qualities. Magnetical Qualities Mechani∣cally pro∣nuc'd.THo' the Operation of a Load-stone is just∣ly reckon'd amongst occult Qualities, and thought to flow from the substantial Form of the Magnet; yet I see no Reason, why it may not be easily mechanically produc'd; since a Piece of Steel, fitly shaped, and well excited like a Loadstone, points to determinate Poles, viz. North and South, draws other Pieces of Steel to it, and Communicates to them in a faint degree the same Attractive and Directive Virtues, which are not slight and transient Im∣pressions, but durable and lasting; where it is evident, that, tho' the Steel is endew'd with magnetical Virtues, yet it hath not the Form of a Load-stone; but only, the Metal by the Acti∣on of a Load-stone acquires such a disposition in it's Parts, as inables it to perform Magneti∣cal Operations; which Power it loses again, by being heated red hot, and cooled in the Air, yet the Form of the Steel is still the same: And from what I have in another place laid down, it appears, that a Load-stone it self may lose it's faculty of attracting Iron, and yet retain all it's other Qualities; Nay, tho' it is a pecu∣liar Quality of a Load-stone, to point North and South; yet without destroying it's substantial Form by Fire, the Poles may very easily and
speedily be chang'd, if a small Fragment of a Load-stone hath it's Poles successively applied to a very vigorous Magnet. But to make it further appear, that Magneti∣cal Qualities may be Mechanically produc'd, or alter'd; I shall add, that I have observ'd, that whilst the Parts of well temper'd Steel have been excited to Motion by Rubbing, they would draw to them Filings of Steel, or thin Fragments of Steel or Iron; but when the Ad∣ventitious Warmth acquired by that attrition ceases; they presently lose their attractive Pow∣er: And I have elsewhere observ'd, that the lower end of a perpendicular Bar of Iron, hath been so far alter'd by the Effluvia of the terraqueous Globe, as to be turn'd into a kind of Magnet, whose lower end becomes the North Pole of it, and the other the South; to which Observation we may add, that if the Bar of Iron stand but a while in an erect Posture, the Magnetical Qua∣lities of it will be so transient, that if the upper End, which attracted the North end of a Nee∣dle, be inverted and held downward, it will drive it away; and on the contrary, if it re∣main a long time in that Posture, the change wrought upon it is so great, that a Piece of a Bar of Iron, which was upon the Top of a Church, call'd Arimini, in Italy, by the Rustyness of it, and the Magnetical Virtues it had acquir'd, seem'd to be turn'd into a Load-stone. And further, it may be observ'd, that if a Piece of Iron, have it's Pores open'd and loosen'd, it imbibes the Magnetical Effluvia of the Earth so fast, as to acquire Magnetical Virtues much
sooner. And here it may not be useless to ob∣serve, what different Effects, Fire hath upon two different Bodies; for by keeping a Load-stone red hot, it loses it's attractive Power, tho' afterwards, it be cool'd in a perpendicular Posture; whereas, Iron, by being heated and cool'd in a perpendicular Posture, acquires a manifest Virticity; so that the internal Texture and Constitution of the Load-stone, seem'd to be destroy'd and weaken'd by Ignition: From whence likewise it appears, that Magnetical Qualities may be altered by, and depend on Me∣chanical Principles. And, To these Observations, I shall add further, that having brought a Piece of Oker to a con∣venient Shape, and after I had heated it red hot, suffered it to cool in a convenient Posture, it was able to exercise Magnetical Operations on a poised Needle. And indeed, a convenient Posture, so much contributes to the preservation of Magnetical Qualities, that leaving a very vigorous Load-stone, for sometime, in an incon∣venient Posture, it lost considerably of it's Mag∣netical Virtues. And this corruption of Mag∣netical Qualities is further evident in an excited Needle, which, as it is variously touch'd with this or that end of a Load-stone, points with this or that end North-ward or towards the South. To make it yet more probable, that Magne∣tical Virtues may be Mechanically produc'd and destroy'd, I shall subjoyn, that by an Experiment tryed by the Ingeniou Dr Power, it appears, that a Bar of Iron, ignited, and suffer'd to cool North and South, and hammer'd at both Ends,
will lose it's Magnetical Virtues, by two or three smart Blows, upon the middle of the Bar, with a Hammer. CHAP. XXIV. Chymico-Magnetical Experiments and Observations. Magnetical Experiments and Observa∣tions.THE Load-Stone being a Body, whose Nature is so little known, and whose Qualities are so admirable, I shall, in order to the better Understanding of it, lay down some Experiments, made upon several, brought from different Countries, and of diffe∣rent Sizes, Shapes and Colours. But before I proceed to them, it is requisite to advertise, That although the Title of this Chapter be Chymico-Magnetical, yet all the Ex∣periments contain'd in it are not Chymical, several others being mix'd with them. Also it is requisite to note, that Iron and Steel being usually reckon'd amongst Magnetical Bodies, I have also added a few Experiments made upon them. EXPERIMENT I. SEveral Stones being heated in the Fire, had, by the Action of it, their Texture visibly alter'd; some being brittle, others flying asun∣der
of their own Accord, whilst others con∣tinu'd whole; in which it was observable, when broke, that some were not unlike Iron Ore; whereas others were shatter'd into flakes or plates of various Colours: But some, which were English, reserv'd their Solidity and Co∣lour. EXPERIMENT II. SEveral small Load-Stones being burnt, we could not perceive the least of that sulphu∣reous blew Flame, which Porta, Lib. 7. Cap. 7. of his Nat. Magick, takes notice of. EXPERIMENT III. & IV. IT is worth observing, that several Load-Stones, being struck with Steel, afforded Sparks of fire much bigger than those that are usually struck from Flint. Whereas two cubial pieces of Load-Stone being struck together, afforded Sparks, but not so large as the former. EXPERIMENT V. IF an oblong Load-Stone be cool'd in a per∣pendicular Posture, the lower End becomes it's Northern Pole; yet if that End instead of being expos'd to the Effluvia of the Earth be cool'd, whilst resting on the Northern Pole of a strong Load-Stone, it will be the Southern Pole, and will attract the North End of a Needle.
EXPERIMENT VI. IF a Load-Stone, which hath lost it's attractive Virtue, be heated red hot, and cool'd in a perpendicular Posture upon the North Pole of a vigorous Load-Stone, and continue there for some time, the attractive Virtue is renew'd. EXPERIMENT VII. A Load-Stone that hath lost it's attractive virtue by Ignition, will not acquire so durable an attractive Virtue, by being apply'd cold, as hot, to a Load-Stone. N. B. Tho' several Load-Stones lose their at∣tractive Virtue by Ignition, yet the Observation does not hold in all; since English ones, not only retain a Directive, but an Attractive Vir∣tue after it. EXPERIMENT VIII. HAving heated two Load-Stones red hot, and placed them upon a Plate of Silver, we found, that as they grew colder, it had a more sensible Operation on them. EXPERIMENT IX. WE observ'd, that one of the two Magnets just now mention'd, not only retain'd something of it's Magnetical Qualities when twice ignited, but being thrust into Filings of
Steel, carry'd a considerable Quantity of them up with it; which shews, how firmly the Qua∣lities of some Magnets are lodg'd in it. EXPERIMENT X. BUT we observ'd, that the Magnet which would thus carry Filings of Steel along with it, being heated again, and suddenly im∣mers'd in Water; when cool, would not carry Filings of Steel along with it, as before, nor would not move a well-pois'd Needle, except held near to the Point of it. EXPERIMENT XI. AN oblong Load-Stone of a black Colour, which weigh'd about three Drachms, by being kept some time in a Charcoal Fire, lost much of it's Colour, and about ⅚ of a Grain in Weight. And to discover the Affinity betwixt a Load-Stone and Iron Ore, I took a Lump of it, which was almost like white Stone; and observ'd, that it did not only manifestly move a Needle, but when ignited, underwent a sensible Change in Colour, and would attract the North End of a Needle. EXPERIMENT XII. TO prove that some Bodies, not usually class'd amongst Magnetical ones, have neverthe∣less Magnetical Qualities, I shall subjoyn; That a Brick being divided into two oblong pieces,
and heated in the Fire, acquir'd a Verticity by cooling North and South, it's Southward End be∣ing in some measure able to draw the North Point of a Mariner's Needle, which the other End of the Brick would drive away. EXPERIMENT XIII. HAving without the help of Iron Instru∣ments powder'd a black Load-Stone, and pour'd Spirit of Salt upon the fine Powder, it caus'd such an Ebullition, as usually succeeds the Effusion of that Liquor upon Filings of Iron, and likewise rais'd fetid Fumes: And being kept for about two Nights in Digestion, extracted a strong Tincture, being almost red, and not green, like that of Mars; yet would, like that of Iron, turn a Tincture of Galls black, which in several Positions would appear Blew. And to this I shall add, that a Solution of Load-Stones being made in Aqua Regia, the Tincture appear'd to be of a golden Colour. EXPERIMENT XIV. HAving powder'd an ignited Load-Stone, and digested Spirit of Salt upon it, it ex∣tracted a Tincture, which was much like that of troubled Gold, and would turn an Infusion of Galls black: This Tincture being evaporated, would not shoot into Crystals, but upon an Af∣fusion of Salt of Tartar, yielded a Precipitate much resembling a Solution of Vitriol, whereas another Part of it upon an Addition of Spirit of
fermented Urine, afforded a yellowish red Pre∣cipitate. EXPERIMENT XV. HAving wet a red Mineral, (which I suspect∣ed to be Iron Ore,) with Linseed Oyl; and preserv'd the Powder in a red hot Crucible for about two hours, it was turn'd black; and when cool, had acquir'd a Magnetical Virtue, which another Portion of it did, tho' it was not as the other, wet with that Oyl. CHAP. XXV. Experiments and Notes about the Mechani∣nal Origin and Production of Electricity. Of the me∣chanical Production of Electri∣city.THO' Electricity be a Quality, generally reckon'd amongst the Number of those that are term'd occult ones; yet there is no need to ascribe it to the power of a Sub∣stantial Form, since it may be mechanically pro∣duced by material Effluviums, issuing from, and returning to the Electrical Body, assisted in it's Operation by the External Air. There are several Modern Hypotheses which en∣deavour to account for Electricity; as the Learn∣ed Cabeus's, who supposes that, the Steams of the ele∣ctrical Body discussing and expelling the ambient Air, that, when driven off, is violently oppos'd by the Atmospherical Air, and being driven back upon
the Body said to be attracted, forces it up to the electrical Body. Another Hypothesis, propos'd by the Ingeni∣ous Sir Kenelm Digby, and embrac'd by Dr. Brown and several others; is, that the Electrick Body being rubb'd, emits unctuous Steams, which be∣ing cool'd by the External Air, shrink back, and carry along with them, those light Bodies which lie in their way. Of this Opinion is Gassendus, who supposes these unctuous Steams to cross each other, and by getting into the Pores of Straws and other attracted Bodies, take faster hold of them, and when they shrink back, draw those Bodies along with them. Cartesius rejecting these Hypotheses, supplants another, which I cannot in few Words lay down; but all the Reason he rejects them be∣ing, because he supposes Glass incapable of e∣mitting Effluvia; it will be sufficient to remove that difficulty, to Observe, that if two Pieces of Glass be rubbed together, they emit odo∣rous, and sometimes very Stinking Effluvia. But without taking any further Notice of what Moderns have laid down about Electricity, since they allow it to be performed by Virtue of subtle Emanations from the Attracting Body; It may suffice, that I proceed to mention some Phenomena, that make us probably believe it done by Virtue of Mechanical Affections, ei∣ther of the Attracting Body, or both. And First, it is Observed, that most, if not all E∣lectrical Bodies, attract not till warm'd; by which heat they are enabled to send forth Eufflvia.
Secondly, Amber attracts most vigorously when warmed by rubbing and Chafing; by which Action, the Motion of the Effluvia, as well as of it's internal Parts are more agreeably modified, than by the Action of Fire; but if the Parts of the Amber be first put into Motion by the Fire, and then Modifi'd by Chafing, it soon∣er becomes Electrical. Thirdly, Tersion, as well as Chafing, promotes Electricity, by removing those Bodies, which might choak the Pores of the Amber, and ob∣struct the Efflux of Emanations, by sticking to the surface of it. Fourthly, Electrical act not like those more subtle Magnetical Steams, since the Operation of Electrical Effluvia, are obstructed by the Inter∣position of a piece of the finest Linnen or Sarsnet. Fifthly, Electrical Effluvia act less vigorously in Thick and Cloudy Weather, especially, if the South Wind blows; and on the contrary they act like∣wise more faintly in the Night than in the Day. Sixthly, Most Electrical Bodies are made of Matter, capable of emitting Odoriferous Steams by Heat and Attrition. Seventhly, For which Reason, Bodies continue their Electrical virtues sometimes after the attri∣tion; the Commotion in the Parts of the Concrete, caused by that attrition, not immediately ceasing. Eighthly, To make it probable that Electrical Effluvia may insinuate themselves into the Pores of other Bodies, I shall add, that I found them subtle enough to attract Spirit of Wine, and also the Smoak of an extinguished Wax-taper at a considerable distance.
Ninthly, The Electrical Virtue depends not on any Sympathy betwixt the Body Attracting and the Substance Attracted; since Amber indif∣ferently draws to it all Bodies, which are not too gross, except Fire, by the violent Motion of whose parts, the Electrical Emanations are dissi∣pated, and the Fire determined another way. Tenthly, A vigorous and well excited piece of Amber will attract not only the Powder, but less minute Fragments of Amber; and the fol∣lowing Experiment may give us Reason to be∣lieve, that the Electrical Effluvia of the At∣tracting Body, not only fasten upon the Body to be drawn, but that the Cohereing Particles of the Effluvia make up viscous Strings, which intervening betwixt those two Bodies, when their agitation ceases, shrink inward, and are contracted; as a highly stretch'd Lute-string, when permitted to shorten it's Dimensions: The Experiment was this, viz. We suspended a piece of Amber by a Silken-thread, by the help of a piece of Wax, and then rubbing the Edge of it with a Pin-cushen covered with Course black Stuff, when it was well excited, and brought to settle, we observ'd, that if the Cushen was held near the excited Edges, the Effluvia would fasten upon it, so that when the Cushen was remov∣ed, the Amber would follow it several times for the space of ten or elven Minutes. Electricity Mechani∣cally pro∣duced and destroy'd.But to proceed to what I promised in the Ti∣tle of these Papers, I shall add some Experiments to shew, that Electricity may be Mechanically produc'd or destroyed.
EXPERIMENT I. A Fourth Part of Good Turpentine being evaporated, the remaining substance hardened into an Electrical transparent Gum. EXPERIMENT II. THE dry Mass which remain'd after a Distillation of Petroleum and strong Spirit of Nitre, being a brittle substance like Jet, resembled it in it's Electrical Quality. EXPERIMENT III. THE Transparent Glass made of Antimony burnt to Ashes, had a considerable Degree of Electricity. Which is the more worthy our Notice, because, that as a Vitrum Antimonii, which is accounted purer than ordinary, may be made of the Regulus of the same Mineral, (in whose preparation a great deal of Sulphur is separated and left amongst the Scoriae) so Glass of Antimony made without Addition, may in part be reduc'd to a Regulus (a substance not looked upon to be Electrical:) Nor is some peculiar and fixed part of Antimony alone capable of Vitrification, since of the other Part, which usually flies away, an Antimonial Glass may be made, without an Addition of other Ingre∣dients.
EXPERIMENT IV. I Once prepared a Glass of Lead per se, which had a Languid Electricity, and which would afford a Malleable Lead again, which is not in the least Electrical. EXPERIMENT V. AMber being Distilled per se, the Caput Mor∣tuum being quite burnt was black, and brittle, and not in the least like Amber; yet tho' it's substantial Form was destroyed, it was more vigorously Electrical than Amber it self; And as it appeared from the Instance of Glass of Antimony above, that the remaining substance may retain an Electricity, tho' the Form of the Body be destroyed, and part of it dissipated; so from common Glass, we may Learn, that a compound substance may be Electrical, tho' the separate Ingredients were not. EXPERIMENT VI. Electricity may be pro∣duc'd by unheeded and fortui∣tous Causes.TO make it appear that Electricity may be caused by unheeded and fortuitous Causes, without depending on the substantial, or even Essential Form of the Attrahent, I shall subjoyn, that Locks of some Hair being brought to a cer∣tain degree of Dryness, by Curling or other∣wise, have been oserv'd to be attracted by the Flesh of some Persons, as Hair is wont to be by excited Amber; which they were more subject to do in Frosty Weather.
To try whether the Air was much concern∣ed in Electricity, I suspended a piece of Amber (which, when excited, would stir a poised Needle ¼ of an Hour) in a small Receiver, and when the Air was exhausted, the Amber being let down near a Straw or Feather, attracted it in Vacuo. EXPERIMENT VII. TO shew that the Attraction of light Bodies, depends on very small circumstances, I made use of a Downy Feather taken off the Bo∣dy of a Fowl, to which when it had been at∣tracted by an excited piece of Amber, I appli∣ed the end of my Finger to it, upon which it stuck and left the Amber. The same success I had, when the Experiment at distinct times was tryed with the Tip of a Silver Instrument, and Iron Key, and, a piece of black Polish'd Marble. We had the like success, when the Experiment was tryed at several distant times afterwards. But one thing remarkable was, that if the Am∣ber had lost it's attractive virtue, before my Finger or the other Bodies were applyed, the Feather was not disposed to stir, till the Amber was again excited. To conclude these Notes, I shall advertise, that the event of Electrical Experiments is very uncertain, and varied by slight Circum∣stances, some of which are altogether over∣look'd, which in some Measure appears from the above recited Notes. And therefore I shall add, that sometimes it is very hard to know whether a Body be Electri∣cal
or not; for, tho' Kircher denies Chrystal to have an attractive power; yet I have observ'd the contrary. And tho', the industrious Gilbert denies Electricity to Cornelians and Emeralds, yet all that I have try'd, had some Degree of it, except one Cornelian. And indeed Electrici∣ty is constantly inherent in Diamonds, so that it may be one good way to try whether they be Genuine, since most of them are considerably more attractive than common Glass. But to conclude, I shall add further, that rough Diamonds are Observ'd, to have a faculty of attracting much more eminently than Polish'd ones; for which no other Reason can be conceived, but that the Diamond in Polishing, being conside∣rably, Heated by the Mill, several and a great part of it's Electrical Effluvia are spent and fly away. CHAP. XXVI. The General History of the Air begun. TITLE I. What we understand by Air.BY Air, I mean, that thin, Diaphanous, fluid Body in which we Breath, which en∣compasses the Terraqueous Globe, and is capable of Rarefaction and Condensation; so different from Aether or Vacuum, that it refracts the Rays of the Moon as well as other Remoter. Lumi∣naries.
TITLE II. Of the constant and permanent Ingredients of the Air. Of the Na∣ure of the Air.BY Air, I would not be thought to mean, such Artificial and Temporary Air as usually flows out of an Aeolipile, when one that is furnished with Water is exposed to a sufficient Heat, and then condenses into Water again; but com∣mon Air, which is Permanent, and continues in that Form; Which I conceive, is made up of three kinds of Particles. The first are Effluvia, from several substances belonging to the Ter∣raqueous Globe: The Second are the Magneti∣cal Steams of the Earth, and Sydereal Emanati∣ons: The Third are these Elastick and Springy Parts of the Air which are Permanently so. As for the Structure of these Elastick Parts, they may be conceiv'd different as Mens contri∣vances devise to answer Particular Phaenomena: One may think them like the Spring of a Watch; others like a Fleece of compress'd Wool, endea∣vouring always to expand themselves; others, like Curl'd pieces of Wire, of different Lengths and Thickness, and diversified by being more or less Curl'd: All of which may be capable of being compressed and expanded again, by vir∣tue of their Native Structure, Heat, Girations and other Motions. I have likewise compar'd 'em to thin shavings of Wood, which are of different Sizes; and this comparison may in some Mea∣sure
Illustrate their Generation, there being no Art requisite to the production of such, nor curious Instruments; and yet their Curls are ve∣ry different and seemingly Casual; as also their springness depends on their convenient shape. And the Generation of Air may be further il∣lustrated, by observing, that these springy Chips may be made of the Parts of Beams and Blocks, not at all Elastical before. Which fa∣vours an Experiment I made, wherein, by the Action of a Menstuum upon a Mineral Body, a quantity of Fire was Generated, permanently Elastick. But not to multiply Conjectures about the Structure of the Parts of the Air, I shall add, that, tho' their Elasticity seems to depend on their Structure; yet it may be encreased, by quickening their Motion by the Action of Fire; Besides, there may be several Elastick Parts in Air, whose Elasticity may rather depend on their Motion, than Figure, they being, there∣by enabled to strike against Bodies about them, and to keep them off. And not improbably in these warmer Climates, the parts of Temporary and Artificial Air may be put into such Motion, as may for the time keep it fluid; those parts of Matter being dispos'd to be kept in Motion.
TITLE III Of the Aether in the Atmosphere. TITLE IV. Of the spungy Particles of the Air, and the the Spring of the Air. Aerem va: lide com∣primere aur dilatare.FOllibus lusoriis aerem pyulico ingerentes majo∣rem subinde at{que} majorem difficultatem per∣cipiunt; quo enim magis Aer conclusus naturali raritate recedere cogitur; etiam majore nisu resistit, ne{que} solum magis densari renuit, sed & se latiùs explicare molitur. Hinc didicimus & pneu∣matico fontes construere, qui Spiritu interno urgen∣te aquam in altum evibrant, & plumbeas Glan∣des fistulis ejaculari, non pulvere nitrato ignem concipiente, sed aere per vim densato ad antiquas dimensiones recuperandas erumpente. Quoniam ve∣rò ingesta jam in conceptaculum non exigua aeris copia difficilius comprimitur novâ aeris accessione; quam ut manus valeat trusillum recta impellere, id∣circò trusilli hastulam deformatam in helicem; & suae Matrici insertam, adhibere oper pretium erit, dum enim manubio agitante contorquetur Cochlea, sensim deprimitur Embolus, aerem{que} in∣gerit. Ne autem mora longiore opus sit perpetua versatione Manubrii, ita Cochleae Matrix externam vasis faciem contingat, ut illi adnecti, at{que} ab eo disjungi valeat: initio enim, quando adhuc levis est aeris modice compressi resistentia, lamella illa suo foramine interius claviculatim striato cohaerens
hastulae emboli, si à vase disjuncta fuerit unà cum hastula movebitur: deinde verò, quando jam tru∣sillis aegrè impellitur, lamilla illa cum Vase connecta∣tur, & non nisi versato Manubrio adduci at{que} re∣duci Embolus poterit, id quod satis lentè perficie∣tur: Rem claritatis Gratia in fonte Pneumatico explicemus. Sit vas A. B. ex materia Metallica, in cujus superiore parte labrum, ex quo perforamen A. im∣mittatur in vas aqua, ita tamen, ut non impleatur; aqua enim in vas modice inclinatum descendens, aerem expellet per Tubulum C. D. ubi satis Aquae immissum fuerit, occludatur foramen A. diligen∣tissime Cochleola congrùente & convoluto Epistomio E. Tubus D. C. sit Aeri impervius ad vasis latus statuatur modiolus cum embolo congruente H. I. & emboli hastula sit connexa cum mobili vasi an∣sa, H. O. Porro hastula H. K. perforata sit, & continuo ductu us{que} ad emboli K. F. fundum pateat Aeri ingredienti via H. S. sed foramini S. adjecta sit Valvula, quae Aeri regressum obstruat. Similiter modioli fundo in I. Valvula exterius apposita ape∣riatur ingesto Aeri transitum praebens; sed Aeri intra vas compresso cum nusquam exitus pateat, Valvula ipsa modioli foramen I. occludit. Hastu∣lae verò H. K. exterior facies sit in helicem striata, & lamellae M. N. tanquam Matrici congruat, quae in M & N. Cochleolis adnecti queat exteriùs vasi, quasi esset ansae fulcrum. Ʋbi immissum fuerit quantum satis est aquae, Cochleolis M & N. revolutis disjungatur Matrix
à vase: tum attractâ ansâ H. O. una cum Lamella M. N. attrahitur embotus K. S. & per apertum ductum H. S. ingreditur Aer, modiolum implens. Impulso deinde Embolo, Valvula ad S. clauditur, & Aer ex modiolo, per patentem Valvulam I. ingreditur in Vas; ex quo nequit exire, ne{que} aquam propellere, clauso scilicet Epistomio & foramine A. quapropter comprimitur, & densatur; ideo{que} attracto denuo Embolo K. S. inclusus vasi Aer se latius explicare connitens Val∣vulam L. F. valide applicat foramini modioli, sibi{que} exitum obstruit. Toties adducitur at{que} reducitur Embolus, & Aer ingeritur, quoad magna premendi difficultas percipiatur; ubi eò ventum fuerit, tunc Lamella M. N. iterum vasi adnectatur suis Cochleo∣sis; nec jam Embolus recta adduci queat; sed a∣reptum in O. manubrium versatur, & Embolus intra modiolum circumactus sensim attollitur, qui deinde revoluto in contrarium Manubrio deprimitur, & multa vi Aer in vase comprimitur. Laxato demum Epistomio E. compressus in vase Aer, aquam expri∣mit per Tubum C. D. primum quidem vehementius, subinde remissius, prout Aeris vis elastica sensim conquescit. Hoc idem quod de Aere intra Vas comprimendo ad aquam evibrandum comminisci placuit, servatâ analogiâ, dicendum est de Aere, tum conatu manûs re∣ctâ trusillum impellentis, tum ope Cochleae similiter con∣formatae, intra conceptaculum comprimendo, ut ex fistula deinde multa vi emittatur plumbea Glans, ubi reseratus Aeri exitus illum subito dilatari per∣miserit. Quin & Pneumatica hujusmodi tormenta citra conceptaculum Aeris compressi construere non in∣utile accidat, si, quemadmodum nostrates pueri surcu∣los sambuceos fungosa medulla exhauriunt, & utra{que}
Tubuli extremitate papyraceis Globulis obstructa, al∣terum Globulum congruo Cylindro propellunt, at{que} inclusum Aerem densant, quoad Aeris vim elasti∣cam, & impellentis manûs Conatum, non ferens extremus alter Globulus edito scloppo expellatur; ita ferream fistulam longiorem paraveris, cujus alteri extremitati immittatur plumbea Glans, obducta pa∣pyro, aut simili Materia, ut exquisitè Tubi osculum implens, demum universam Aeris vim excipiat, al∣teram extremitatem aliquot Spiris ambiat cava Cochlea, quam impleat Cylindrus ferreus in con∣gruentem Cochleam deformatus; si enim hujusmodi Cylindrus, vis brevior fuerit, quam fistula, & apto Manubrio convolutus, in fistulam sensim immittatur, totum Aerem, quo fistula replebatur, ad exiguas spatii angustias adiget, ex quibus magna vi de∣mum, qua data porta, erumpens, ejacul abitur plum∣beum Globulum Casati Mechanicorum, Lib. 8. Cap. 5. p. 792. 793. &c. TITTLE V. Of the Magnetical Particles in the Air. TITLE VI. Of the Destruction, Generation, Absorpsion and Extrication of the Air. Concerning the Produ∣ction of the Air.AIr being a body not only concern'd in agreat many Phenomena of Nature, but likewise so necessary to the Preservation of Animals; Is
thought it of no small use to thy whether it might be Artificially prepar'd and obtain'd from Bo∣dies which seem'd not at all to abound with Air; for could it be done, it would not only be considerable in helping to explain several Phae∣nomena of Nature, but to preserve Divers much longer under Water. To try therefore whe∣ther it might be effected, and whether that which seem'd to be Air, were truly so; I made use of the following Experiments, taking a durable Springiness or Elasticity as the Criterion, by which I should judge, whether the Air genera∣ted were Genuine or not. EXPERIMENT I. Jan. 17.Air genera∣ted by a mixture of Oyl of Vi∣triol and Filings of Steel. FIlings of Steel, and a conveniently shap'd Glass, which contain'd Oyl of Vitriol, and was seal'd at both Ends, but with a Hole open'd near one of them, were coveigh'd into a long and large Tube, so much Water being put in with them as was sufficient to dilute the Oyl. This being done, and the External Tube and the Water exhausted, till the Mercury in the Gage was so far rais'd in the open Leg, that lit∣tle remain'd in the seal'd Leg; we clos'd up the External Tube exactly, and observ'd, that when the Oyl was caus'd to run out of the internal Tube, by acting upon the Metal it caus'd seve∣ral Bubbles, and a sensible Heat; when this Con∣flict had continu'd some time, so much Air was generated, as depress'd the Mercury in the open Leg down to the Bottom; and rais'd it so much in the other, that the Air above it was more
compress'd, than when the Atmosphere had free Liberty to press against it. The Spring of this newly produc'd Air was so strong and durable, as to keep the Mercury at he same height 3 or 4 Days; and some Days after, a Boy having heedlesly remov'd the Tube from its usual Station, the Mer∣cury in the Gage ascended an Inch and a half, at which Height it continu'd till the 25th of January. EXPERIMENT II. March. 8.Flower moi∣sten'd with Water. A Glass Viol, which was large enough to hold a Pint, was fill'd with Flower of Wheat drench'd with Water; and the Orifice being clos'd with a Cork and strong Cement, after the Glass had been placed 13 Days in a warm Place, it was burst by the Violent expansion of the included Matter, tho' the Night before, part of the Glass below seem'd empty. The Taste of the included Matter seem'd to me on∣ly a little sowrish; but to another manifestly a∣cid. EXPERIMENT III. March 9.Raisins in∣cluded in Vacuo with Water. BRuised Raisins with a little Water being put into a Bolt-head; when it was exhau∣sted, I plac'd it in a warm Place. In four Days no Air was generated; but some time after the Bolt-head was burst in pieces, and the Raisins thrown about.
EXPERIMENT IV. Feb. 22. A Glass, which would hold about 3 Pound of Water, having a sufficient Quantity of Raisins put into the Water, a Bladder was ty'd to the Neck of it, which had all the Air squeez'd out, and, in two Days time, it was so fill'd with Air, that we could not tye it up, without losing some of the Water. EXPERIMENT V. April 28. SPirit of Salt, and Filings of Steel, being put into a wide mouth'd Glass, we cover'd it with a Receiver, fitted with an Eel-Skin and a Wire, to the latter of which, a thin Glass Vessel was ty'd, hermetically seal'd at the Bottom, and fur∣nish'd with a sufficient Quantity of Filings of Cop∣per. This being done, and the Receiver exhau∣sted, we thrust the Glass which contain'd the Filings, against the Bottom of the Viol, and broke it off; whereupon the Filings falling into the Menstruum, a considerable number of Bubbles were generated. The Viol being kept ¼ of an Hour longer in Vacuo, the Liquor acquir'd not the least Greenness. EXPERIMENT VI. Air shut up in Oyl of Turpentine and Spring Water.A Bubble of Air about the Size of a Pea, being left at the Top of a round Viol with a long narrow Neck, the Cavity of it being fill'd
with fine Oyl of Turpentine, and then inverted into a Viol fill'd with the same Liquor; Another Viol which had a Bubble in the Top, was fill'd with Alcohol of Wine, and inverted it into the the same Liquor. On the sixth Day the Bubble in the Oyl disappear'd, and on the seventh, that in the Spirit of Wine vanish'd. EXPERIMENT VII. May 23.Frog's Spawn: A Receiver, which had been three Years ex∣hausted, was open'd; and a black opacous Liquor, which we judg'd to be Frog's Spawn, which was contain'd in a Viol, being taken out, was of a stinking Smell, but not mouldy. It had yielded some Air. EXPERIMENT VIII. IT is observ'd, that when Miners meet with running Waters under Ground, they are by those, supply'd with Air enough for Respiration; tho' it is observ'd, that standing Waters do not afford Air. Experiments about the Production of Air, and the Examining thereof propos'd. Sect. I. To produce Air by Fermentation in Receivers exactly clos'd; and in seal'd Glasses. Sect. I. To separate Air from Liquors, by boyling; or by the Engin.
Sect. I. To obtain Air by Corrosion, especially with Spirit of Vinegar. Sect. I. To separate Air by Sulphureous and Animal Menstruums. Sect. I. To produce Air in Vacuo by Burning-Glasses and hot Irons. Sect. I. To obtain Air from Gun-powder, and other nitrous Substances. Sect. II. The Air produc'd may be examin'd, by trying whether it will Preserve or Revive. 1. Animals. 2. Flame. 3. Fire. 4. The Light of Rotten Wood, Fish. Sect. II. To examine it's Spring, and the Duration of it, as also it's Weight, and whether it will help to raise the smoak of Liquors. TITLE VII. Of the Accidental or less constant Ingredients of the Air. TITLE VIII. Of Aqueous Particles in the Air, and of it's Moisture and Dryness. Of the Air's Moisture and Dry∣ness.THO' Dryness be a Quality which only de∣pends on this, viz. That the Pores inter∣cepted betwixt the stable Parts of a Body, are not fill'd with any visible Liquor; yet it hath a considerable Interest in the Changes of Bodies upon different Scores. First, In as much as the
Body dry'd is depriv'd of Liquid Parts, upon the Effects of which, several of it's Operations depend. Secondly, Upon the Recess of those Parts evaporated, the Texture of the Body may be so far chang'd, as to acquire a disposition to act otherwise, and to be acted on in a different man∣ner to what it was before. EXPERIMENT I. TO evince the Efficacy of the Air's Moi∣sture, we suspended a Quarter of a hun∣dred Weight by an Iron Ring at the End of a Rope, which was about 3 Foot and a half long, and 3/10 of an Inch in Diameter; and when the Weight had stretch'd the Rope for 2 or 3 Days, we plac'd a Board under it, so that it might just rest upon it, and then causing the Rope to be wet, in about half an hour it shorten'd so much, that the Weight would swing this way, and that, like a Pendulum without touching the Board; yet the same Day the Rope was stretch'd again, so that it touch'd the Board. About Morocco, which is an Inland Town, tho' the Soil be dry, and the Heat violent in the Day; yet I am told by one who was there, that the Nocturnal Air was so damp, as to be able to make his Cloaths unfit to be worn, till Air'd; yet, tho' the Air was very piercing, neither the Knife in his Pocket, nor the Sword in his Scab∣bard were subject to rust, tho' the same Metal expos'd to the open Air, was. Air too moist cannot be wholsom. The Air about Oakly and Brill in Buckinghamshire, tho' a high Country, is so moist in October, that the
Stair-Cases and Pictures will stand all over Dew, which gathering in drops, runs down in Streams; and it is obser'd, that the North and North-East side of the Houses are so moist, that except the Rooms be air'd often, the Furniture will rot. Having made use of a Hydroscope which was made of a Box, to whose Bottom a piece of Gut-string was fastend, and the other End of it to an Index, which lay upon the Top of the Box, the Circumference of the Box was divided into Degrees, or Partitions; By which we could perceive, that when Moist Vapours insinuated themselves into the Pores of the Lute-string, it would be wreath'd and twisted up, and the In∣dex would be mov'd that way, which the twist∣ing of the Rope inclin'd it, and when the Wea∣ther was dryer, it would return back the other way. EXPERIMENT II. ONE of these Hygroscopes being conveigh'd into a small Receiver, when the Air was ex∣hausted, the Index did not sensibly alter it's Place in a long time; till the External Air was let in again. From which Experiment, and some o∣thers try'd with a Thermoscope, it appears, that the Aether, or that subtle Matter which succeeds in the Place of the exhausted Air, is neither hot, cold, moist, nor dry.
TITLE IX. Of Clouds, Mists and Fogs. Of Clouds, Mists and Fogs.AN excellent Astronomer told me, that of all the white Clouds, whose Height he had measur'd in fair Weather, he found none to exceed ¾ Quart. of a Mile; and very few above ½ a Mile. A Mist at Sea driving towards the Shoar, with∣out any sensible Wind, causes the Sea to swell more than a brisk Wind. It hath likewise been ob∣serv'd, that Mists in some places rising about 30 Foot high, have fallen down in a Dew again. TITLE X: Of Terrestrial Steams in the Air. Of Terre∣strial Efflu∣via.PIllars of Fumes have been divers times ob∣serv'd to rise from Ground which had se∣veral Veins of different Metal in it, some ill scented, some well scented, and others inodo∣rous; and I have observ'd, that the Charcoal made in Cornwall affords a manifest Arsenical and Sulphureous Smell beyond other Charcoal. Jcournal des S avary, III. 1685.Tel est par exemple ce nuage horrible d'une fumée epaisse qui s'eleva de la mer de Cretee au Commencement de l'Eestede l'an, 721. et
qui s'etant repandu dans l'air le fit parôistre tout en feu. La mer n'en fut pas mesme ex∣empte, car les grosses Masses de pierres enflam∣mées qu'on en vit sortier, et qui se joignirent al 'Isle qu'on Nomme Hiera, échauferent si fort les eaux qu'elles en bruloient les maines. TITLE XI. Of Salts in the Air. Of the Salts in the Air.THO' the Peripateticks teach, that the Air is an Element, and consequently a pure simple Body, whose Qualities are moist and dry; yet from what we have already deliver'd, it ap∣pears, that it is an Aggregate of various kind of Effluvia jumbled and mix'd together; I mean, the Air distinct from that Purer Substance Ae∣ther, which I suppose diffus'd through the In∣terstellar Part of the Universe. Amongst the Effluvia which rove up and down the Air; I account Saline ones the Chief, which is not unlikely, since the Terraqueous Globe, which continually emits Effluvia, abounds with great Quantities of Marine, Aluminous and Vitriolate Salts, which impregnate the Air; besides several Exhalations rais'd by the Sun-Beams, from the Surface of the Earth and Water; not to mention several other Saline Vapours which are dispersed in the Atmosphere, and arise from Vulcanos, as well as common Fires.
And as it is not improbable, but that the Air plentifully abounds with Saline Effluvia; so very likely, besides Nitrous, there are other kinds raised up and roving about in it; as Common Salt, and Vitriolate Salts; and that which seems to prove, that the Air in some places abounds with vitriolate Salts, is, that it hath been observ'd, that Hinges have been corroded and rotted, and other things prejudic'd upon a Vitriolate Soil, whereas in Houses, which stood on a Chalky Soil, no such Effects were observ'd: Be∣sides, on the Vitriolate Ground, we took No∣tice of Saline and White Efflorescences upon the Surface of the Soil, when beaten upon by the Sun-beams. Besides which kinds of Salt, I am induc'd to believe, that the Air abounds with Volatile ones; For besides, that an Acquaintaince of Mine obtained a Spirit and Salt of Similar Qualities with Spirit of Harts-horn from Earth dug up some Yards deep; we may observe in favour of what I propose, that the very Soot which rises from fires near great Towns, a great part of which is dispersed in the Air, abounds with a Saline Spi∣rit, which may be obtain'd from it by Distillati∣on; as likewise, a great quantity of Volatile Matter may be raised in the form of Va∣pours from Animal substances putrified and cor∣rupted. But besides these more simple Salts, there may be several others compounded in the Air, which may result from several Coalitions of simple Salts; and several Compound Salts may, not unlikely, arise from Subterraneal Parts: In favour of which I shall add, that in
America the Effluvia of a Vulcano, not only of∣fended, the Faces of some that approach'd too near, but caused a manifest alteration in the Colour of their Hair. And it hath been ob∣serv'd that several Sulphureous Exhalations have been gathered about the Crannies of Mount Ve∣suvius, which issuing out of small Crannies stick to the Edges like Flower of Brimstone: To which I shall add, that I had a Stone brought me from another Vulcano, whose Pores were full of a White Salt compounded of a fixed one, and an∣other Volatile much like Sal-Armon. The Salts we have hitherto taken Notice of, are such as may be referred to a determinate Species: But I am apt to believe, that there are others which are such as are not known, nor have they any Names given them; this appears from what we have elsewhere taught of Sub∣terraneal Fumes; and may be further illustrated, by intimating, that I have observ'd Old Glass-windows sometimes corroded, as if Worm-eaten; which probably proceeded from some corrosive Particles carried thither by the Wind. As for the Nature of these several Salts, that at different times, and in various Places, impreg∣nate the Air, amongst the different Methods that might be taken to investigate them, I shall mention the following. Several ways to discover the Nature of the Salts in the Air. First, We may expose such Bodies to the Air, as we think will most likely be work'd upon, by the Salt we judge Predominant in that place; as Lime, where we think Nitre abounds; as also we may hang up Silks of such Colours as Nitre is most apt to fade, or discolour. In
places where we think Vitriol abounds we may expose Preparations of Sulphur, which it usual∣ly turns Black: In other Places we may spread White Linnen Cloths, and observe what Salts they imbibe along with the Rising Vapours and Falling Dew. A Second way to discover the Nature of the Salts in the Air may be, by exposing some Body, which several Salts have different Effects on. EXPERIMENT I. CLean Copper Plates being placed over Glasses, under which, Spirit of Salt and Spirit of Nitre diluted with Water, were set. I Oserved, that they were discoloured alike by the ascending Fumes; it being common for these Spirits to draw a green Tincture from Copper as Spirit of Soot and Urine do a Blew one. I have observed a piece of Copper brought from a Mine overcast in several Parts with a Verdi∣grease, which effect I judged to depend on the Efficacy of some Effluvia in the Air. And possi∣bly with other Bodies, discovering different dis∣colourations, we be enabled to learn what kind of Steams those Effects are produced by. And it hath been observ'd, not only at Amsterdam, but elsewhere, that Plate, in a little time, in those Airs, would acquire a Rusty Colour, or one partaking of Yellow and Black. A Third way, which may be taken to dis∣cover the different Nature of Effluvia, may be
by exposing Preparations of Mineral Bodies, whose Colours are apt to be changed by the Air. EXPERIMENT II. IF a Solution of Silver in Aq. Fortis be preci∣pitated with Spirit of Sea Salt, the Powder will be at the First White; but after a while be∣ing exposed to the Air, the Surface of the Liquor will acquire a dark Colour, which may perhaps vary as the Air is differently impregnated. EXPERIMENT III. AN equal Weight of Filings of Copper and Powdered Sal Armoniack, being mixed and put into a Covered Crucible, and kept over a moderate Fire till the Sal Armon. had done Smoaking, as much of the remaing Mass as could be parted was taken out, and looked of a Dark Colour; but being grossly beaten and exposed to the Air, looked like Verdigrease, a substance whose Colour commonly varies, according to the Nature of the Salts concerned in the producti∣on of the Pigment. But a Parcel of the same Mass being grosly beaten, and Hermetically Sealed up from the Air, and left in a South Win∣dow, was not discoloured when that exposed to the Air, had acquired a Virdigrease Colour.
EXPEREMENT. IV. SPirit of Soot of Wood dissolved Copper in∣to a lovely Azure; but the substance grow∣ing dry in the Air, changed it's Ceruleous for a Cyanious Colour, such as may be seen in good Turquoises. Which Change depended not on the Saline-Sulphureous Salt. Which I rather believe, because I had the same success when I made use of an Urinous Spirit drawn from an Animal substance. Most of the Inland Parts of our Country a∣bound not with Corrosive Vapours, the Bars of Iron being not so subject to be corroded and Rust; So that I believe this Salt may proceed from Sea Vapours, or a dissolution of some Cor∣roding Salt, upon the burning of a Sea, or Mineral Coals. Mox ollam ex igni removent;Agricola de re Metal. Lib. 12. postea ex refrige∣rata eximunt halinitrum purissimum: quod candidi marmoris speciem gerit; aet{que} tunc etiam id quod ter∣renum est, in fundo residet. At terra, ex qua dilu∣tum fuit factum, & Rami quernei vel consimilis Arbo∣ris alternis sub dio ponantur, & aqua quâ combibit halinitrum conspergantur: quo modo quin{que} vel sex annis rursus apta fit ad conficiendum dilutum. Ha∣linitrum quodammodo purum, quod dum terra tot annos quievit interea, ortum fuit, & quod lapidei parietes in Cellis Ʋrinariis & locis opacis exudant, cum primo diluto permistum decoquatur. Si verò locus aliquis talium venarum, copiam sup∣peditaverit, ipsae statim non conjiciantur in cast ella;
sed primò convehantur in areas, at{que} cumulentur: quanto enim diutius aeri & pluviis expositae fuerint tanto meliores fiunt. Nam in ejus∣modi cumulis, aliquot post Mensibus, quam Venae in are as fuerint conjectae, nascuntur fibrae longe venis bonitate praestantes: deinde vehantur in sex, plurave Castella longa & lat a ad novem pedes, ad quin{que} alta. Si verò dum dilutum recoquitur, seperata non fue∣rint, mox ex minoribus Vasis infundatur in Majora, ea{que} concludantur; in quibus item atramentum suto∣rium seperatum ab alumine concrescit utrum{que} inci∣sum & in Hypocausto siccatum divendatur dilutum, quod in vasis & cupis non concrevit in cortinam, re∣fusum recoquatur: sed verra, quae in fundo cujus{que} cortinae resedit, ablata in castella unà cum verra; de∣nuo aqua & urina dilutaur. At terra quae in Castel∣lis diluta, postquam effluxit, superfuit egesta & coa∣cervata quotidie, rursus magis ac magis fit aluminosa, non aliter at{que} terra, ex qua halinitrum fuit con∣fectum, suo succo plenior fit: quare denuo in Castel∣la conjicitur, & aquae effusae ea percolantur. And I have not only been informed, that the Dews in the most Southern parts are more than ordinary Corrosive; but that in Basil they are so Esurient, that the Portugals are forc'd to keep their great Guns cased up; in which Country the same Person told me the very Mony was cor∣roded by the sharpness of the Air; and he like∣wise observed, that the Dew left a White Salt upon the Grass, which looked like a Hoar Frost. And I am likewise inform'd by a Native of the Place, that in a Town call'd Fahlure in Sweedland,
which stands upon the bottom of a Hill, which hath a Copper Mine in it, The Exhalations are so powerful as to Corrode Iron and Brass, and even Money it self, tho' lock'd up in Chests of Wood an Inch thick. TITLE XII. Of Sulphur and Inflammable Particles in the Air; and of Lightning, and it's Effect. Of Sulphur and Inflam∣mable Mat∣ter, &c.A Neopolitan Lord told me, that Riding upon Sulphureous Ground, the Horses Feet would raise a Dust, which would be ready to take Fire; and when purposely, he had caus∣ed several pieces of that Earth to be cut like Turffs, and to be laid in a heap, in the Night, the Steams which plentifully rose from them, would sometimes take Flame; And the same Lord told me, that near Mount Vesuvius, He observ'd the Flame so violent, than when Measured by a Quardrant, it appear∣ed to be near two Miles high above the Top of the Mountain, and that great Flakes of Fire were thrown up into the Air as big as the Room we talked in. Voila tout ce qu' on peut dire cette Isle, qui semple un enfer car on voit la mer du port,Voyage de Levant. page 203. & de la coste toute noire & brûlee d'un petit escuel, qui paroist depuis environ soixan∣te ans, & d'ou on vit sortir en ce temps la une
grande flamme, qui is a laisse une ouverture si profonde, que si on y jette une pierre, on ne l'entend point tomber. Mais ce qui est arrive de∣puis en ce port, n'est pas moins estonnant; je le rapperteray icy comme je l'ay appris de di∣verses personnes en plusieurs endroîts. Ily a environ 18 ans que durant la nuit d'un certain Diamanche, commenca dans le port de Santori∣ni un tres grand bruit lequel s' entendit jus∣ques à Chio, qui en est eloigne deplus de deux cent milles, mais de telle sorte qu' on crut a Chio que c' estoî l'armèe venitienne qui combatroit contre celle des Turcs, ce qui fit que des le matin chacum monta aux lieux les plus elevez pour en estre Spectateur, & me sou∣viens que le Reverend Pere Bernard superieur des Capucins de Chio, homme Venerable, & tres digne de foy, me conta qu'il y avoit este trompè comme les autres, car il crut aussî bien qu' eux eux entendre pleusieurs coups de canon; cependent ils ne virent rien, & en effect ce fut un feu qui seprit dans la terre du fond du port de Santorini, & y fit un tel effect, que depuis le matin jusqu' au soir il sortit du fond de la mer quantite de pierres de ponce, qui montient en haut avec tant de roideur & tant de bruit, qu' on eust dit que ce fusset autant de caups de ca∣non, & cela infecta tellement l'air, que dans la dite Islle de Santorini, il maurut quantite de personnes, & plusieurs de la Mesine Isle en per∣dirent la veue, qu' ils recouvrerent pourtans quelque jours apres. Cette infection s' estendît ausi loin que le bruit quî l'avoit precede, car non seulement dans cette Isle, mais mesme a Chio, & a Smyrne, tout l'argent devint rouge,
soit qu' il fut dans les Coffres, ou dans les po∣ches; & nos Religieux demeurans en ces lieux la me dirent que tous leurs calices en estoient devenus rouges. Au bout de quelques jours cette Infection se dissipa, & l'Argent reprit sa premiere couleur, les pierres de ponce qui sor∣tirent de la couvrirent tellement la mer del'Archipel, que durant quelque temps, quand il Regnoit de certains Vents, il y avoit des ports, qui en estoient bouchez, en façon qu' il n'en pouvoit sortir aucune barque, pour petite qu' elle fut, que ceux qui estoient dedans ne se fissent le Chemin au travers de ces pierres de ponce avec quelques pieux; & on en voit en∣cor a present par toute la mer Mediterranée mais en petite Quantite, cela s' estant disperse ca et la. Seneque raconte en une de ses Epistres que Santonini est bastte sur des mines de sou∣phre, & ce sont elles qui fournissent asseure∣ment la matiere pour allumer en cet endroit, & n'y trouva point de fond. Il y a pourtant une petite Isle appellée Firesiá, á la pointe de laquelle▪ on peut donner fonds, & point en aucun autre endroit. It is usually observ'd, that there is a strong smell of Sulphur near where a Thunder-bolt falls. When I was near the Lake of Gene∣va call'd Lacus Lemanus, there was a terrible Storm of Thunder, and the next day so strong a smell of Sulphur, that a Souldier who stood near the Place where a Thunder-bolt fell into the Water, could scarce bear the smell of the Sulphur.
July 24. 81. A Ship being at Sea about 100 Leagues off Cape Cod in 48 Latitude about 3 P. M. after a violent Storm of Thunder, the Bituminous Matter fell upon the Stem of the Ship, and burnt there, emitting a strong Sulphu∣reous Smell; and what was very remarkable, was that when Night came, they found, that the North Point of the Compass was become the South Point, and vice versâ. And, It was observed by a very famous Planter, that several Trees remote from one another, had very long and remarkable fissures in the Bark, upon great Storms of Lightning. TITLE XIII. Of Electrical Influences or Effluviums in the Air. SIR, Celestical Effluvia in the AirIN order to discover the several affections of Winy Liquors, and the several Distempers incident to them; and how to preserve them, it is requisite to consider the Qualities of the Air, it's Temperature and Motion. And this puts me in mind to beg our Friends Assistance, who would do well to make some progress in perfecting the Theory of the Planets; for if that be not clear, we cannot be free from Er∣rors in respect of their Motions and Calculati∣ons; and if we be mistaken in these, i'ts im∣possible to know either their Places in the Hea∣vens or their Aspects, and consequently the Phi∣sical
way of their Motion must be uncertain, and of no use or advantage. But, tho' by some they are looked upon to have little or no influence upon our Globe, yet all the Arguments alledged against that Opini∣on, are rather levelled against Astronomy, in Re∣lation to some Superstitions about this Doctrine, than that they shew, why, when the Rays of each make different Angles upon one another, they may not at the last affect us. Since that they do is evident, by undeniable Experiments, not only on inanimate and vegetative Bodies; but likewise from the Observations of Physitians in all Lunatick, Epileptick, Paralitick or Lethargick Persons. And indeed, since Rarefaction and Condensa∣tion are mediate Motions, which dispose Bo∣dies to Corruption, and are assisting in Generat∣ing New ones; and, since all the Affections and dispositions of Moisture, Heat, Cold, Drought, the Course of all Winds, Showers, Thundering, or whatsoever else is used by Nature, to pro∣duce these two General Effects of Rarefaction and Condensation, do in a great Measure, if not wholly depend upon, and are altogether regu∣lated by the Course and Aspects of the Celestial Bodies, it will not be irrational to teach, that every one of those, emitting Rays peculiar to themselves have, by the Influence of those, dif∣ferent Effects on our Atmosphere: The subtle parts of the Air being not only subject to be work∣ed upon by them, but likewise our Spirits, and other Humours, whose Parts, by the impressi∣on of these subtle Rays, may acquire a new determinate Motion, and consequently be altered,
whence may arise Convulsions, Cramps, Lame∣ness, &c. Accordingly as the Humours influen∣enced by them, are differently acted on, and disposed to shew their ill Effects in this or that Part. So that it would be of considerable Import to Natural Philosophy, and of no small use in Hus∣bandry, Gardening, as well as Physick, to make such Observations, as might tend to the Improv∣ment of the Theory of the Planets by keeping exact Diàries in several Places, of the Changes of the Weather, and at the same time of the Mutual Aspects, places and Motions of the Planets; Besides, it would not a little conduce to the Perfecting of the Natural Histories of Countries, and particular Places. But in instituting and perfecting Observations of this kind, we are not yet Furnished with Thermometers, sufficiently improved; for, First, We are not yet acquainted, what Pro∣portion the Diameter of the Cylinder ought to bear to the Diameter of the Head; to make our Observations of the Alterations in the Air, regular. Secondly, We are not told what Length the Cylinder ought to be; nor hath it as yet been well graduated, 16 being the greatest Number; whereas to make Observati∣ons on the more Minute alterations, every Inch may be divided into 10, and consequently the whole into a 1000 Degrees. Thirdly, We are not yet told what Liquors are most proper to make such Experiments with; Whether such as Attract the Air, and preserve their first Quanti∣ties; such as Ol. Sulph. per Campanam Ol. Vitriol. or
Liquors, such as Sal Tartar, &c. or whether Li∣quors whose Parts are more subtle and fine, such as Spirit of Wine, or Turpentine; or Lastly, Spirit of Vinegar, or well refined Quicksilver. In making such Experiments, it may be con∣venient to fix several Glasses in one Frame, with several sorts of Liquors in them; and that Ob∣servations should be made in several Rooms together, the Glasses being neither exposed to the Sun Beams, nor to the injury of Storms, Rain or Winds. In the History it self it will be requisite to give an Account of the very place such Experiments were made in, taking Notice whether the Experiments are not influenced by the Air in the Chimney, the Cranny of a Wall or Door, or the Breath of People. It will be requisite likewise to note the Proportion be∣twixt the Warmth of Day and Night, in constant Weather: The agreement or disagreement of the Motion of the Air, and Bodies above it in uncertain Weather: How far these may foretell Winds or Rain; the disposition of Air, when it Thunders, under times of Mildews or Blasting, eminent Eclipses, Conjunctions. It is a Received Tradition in Java, that the Beams of the Moon, if one stays long under them, will cause Contractures; so that a Physitian, who Slept under them, had his Mouth strangely contorted, and his Neck stiff, which Symptoms he removed sooner than they are wont to go off, by the use of Aromatick Medicines.
TITLE XIV. Of the Height of the Atmosphere. TITLE XV. Of the Motion of Air, and of Winds. Storms of Wind.AT Porta Nova Nov. 22. 1667. There was so violent a Rain and Wind, that most of the Houses were Ruined; Men and Beast carried into the Water by the Violence of the Winds and Flood; the Town Wall was most of it thrown down and few Trees left standing. I am told that Hur∣ricanes are very frequent about the Island Mauri∣cius, where one lasted four days, in one of which it had seven Exacerbations, each of which differed two Points of the Compass from the Preceding; The surface of the Sea by the Collision of the Waves, was covered with a White Froath; the Day was darken'd by it, and the Noise like, that of Thunder, so that those on the Shrouds could not hear those on the Decks. A Learned Physitian, that Travelled into A∣merica, told me, that those Countries are sup∣plyed with a constant Wind from the Hills; but Barbadoes, which wants Hills, hath no such Winds. In the Island of Teneriff Bree∣zes constantly flow from the Sea; but all Night, a sharp Wind blows on each side from the Land Sea-ward. I am told by a Traveller, that tho' the Tops of Mountains are generally calm; yet he had met with Winds considerably strong.
In Lettere di Venetia MArtedi sui li 29. Agosto 1679. alle hore 19. incirca si leuolevò nelle Paludi della Villa di Fauis del Dominio Cesareo tre miglia lontana da Palma Noua Dominio Veneto un ucnto chiamato Bissa boua, che allargandosi per circa cinquanta passi scorse con anto empito, e furore, che portò per aria diuersi huomi∣ni, che tagliauano il fieno in quei Prati, e anco alcuni Carri carichi di fieno con i Buoui pre∣cipitandoli assai lontano con la rouina delli ani∣mali, de Carri, e degli huomini, e passando per i Campi sbarbicando ogni sorte di Piante le por∣tò per aria gettandole molti passi lontano, ren∣dendo la terra per oue scorce cosi arsa, che pare non ui sii mai stata piantata cosa alcuna. Arriuò nella villa decta Bagnaria del Dominio Veneto doue gettò a terra molte Case sino a fondamenti, et altre discoperse, e rouinò portando per aria tauole, traui, et ogni altra cosa che era dentro esse Case restando mal trattate molte Persone sen∣za però la morte di alcuno. Fuori di dettata Villa ui e una Chiesa chiatata S. Tomaso la qua∣le resto scoperta, e rouinata una parte del muro portando uia il Campanile, e Campane che nel gior∣no seguente non erano per anco trouate;—Di lá si portò uerso Seuigliano Dominio Veneto e rouinō tutta la Campagna senza danno però della Villa stessa mentre li passò poco lontano, e girando poco lungi dalla Villa stessa spiantò da fondamenti un Palazzo del D. Co. Horatio Strasoldo, nel quale gli amazzò ogni sorte di ànimali che ui erano, portando per aria li mobili e sino le botti, ester∣minando
parre della possessione. Non restorono però offese Persone, perche erano alla Campagna a lauorare, e nel camino getto pure a terra due altre Case che sono nel Taglio per andare a Stra∣soldo spiantandole affacto con la morte di una Donna, d'un Fanciullo, e diuersi Animali. Di là uoltò uerso Palma, et arriuando sino alle mura della Fortezz agirò uerso la Villa di Priuano mezo miglio distante quale rouinò la meta, spian∣tando da fondamenti belissimi Palazzi, portando per aeria travi, tavole, et ogni altra cosa con la morte di molti, quantità di feriti, e diuersi strapazzati con far alla Campagna di molto ma∣le. Di poi scorse nella Villa di Visco Dominio Imperiale, e tra li altri danni fatti roninò tutto il Palazzo novo del D. Marco Foscolini Gen∣tilhuomo di Cinidal nel quale essendoni una gran rimessa da Carozze, la di cui Porta haue∣na tre Cadenazzi, & entrando il Turbine per li balconi gettò la Carozza con tanto empito nella Porta siessa che la ruppe, e portò fuori la Ca∣roza tutta fracassata gettandola sopra un muro della Corte assa alto, portando il Cielo della stessa mezzo miglio lontano, e vertò nel me∣demo Palazzo ferito, e mal trattato un seruito∣re di esso Foscolini, di cui ronino pure Braida, & un Brolo essendo in detta Villa restati due morti, e diversi feriti; — S' inoltrò poi nella Villa di S. Vido di Crauglio stato Imperiale, la quale rouino tutta affatto senza restaurui ne∣meno una Casa, portando per Aria coppi, travi, legne, sassi, e mobili con la morte di moltissime Persone, e moltissimi feriti e rouinati, et in detta Villa non si può anddare, ne con Carri, ne con Caualli per la grande moltitudine di rouinazzo,
arbori et altro che hanno attauer-sato le stra∣de, essendo rimassi morti gran numero di ani∣mali.— Da questo luoco si portò uerso Villes Villa Imperiale buona parte della quale gettò a terra andar al. Territorio di Monfalcone con la morte di molte persone, et quantità di animali con las∣ciar le Campagne per dove è passata senza pi∣ante, e come strada battuta.— Hà danneggiato anco altre Ville ma leggier∣menre, ne per anco si sá quello hauerà fatto piu avanti nel detto Territorio. Questo successo hà lasciato un spauento gran∣de in queste Parti, essendosi uedute cose incredi∣bili mentre pioveuano sassi, tauole, arbori, traui, coppi, huomini, donne, fanciulli, botti, sorghi, uva, galline, animali, et in conclusione ciò che incontraua portaua per aria con un rumore, e fracasso così gradne, che faceua terrore essendo per dette Ville un concorso grande di Popolo uicino per uedere cose che si rendono incredi∣bili. I am told, that tho' the Eastern Winds blow near Tangier about ¾ of a Year, yet they reach not into the Inland Country; where such Winds are not common. I am told by one who observ'd it in the Bot∣tom of a Mine near the Sea, that before South Winds the Water would be troubled, but be∣fore East Winds it would be clearer than ordi∣nary, the Depth of the Mine was about 15 or 20 Fathom. He told me likewise, that the Hurricanes at Goa, come but at two Seasons; about the be∣ginning of March, and the 4th of October.
TITLE XVI. Of the Air as the Medium of Sounds, and of Sounds and Noises in the Air, and Par∣ticularly Thunder; and of the Airs Ope∣ration on the Sounds of Bodies. Of the Air as the Me∣dium of Sounds.UPon the Rising of several Tempests toge∣ther, the Sky seems covered over with Globes of Smoaky Clouds, the Air seeming black and Thick; and by and by incessant Light∣ning, with terrible loud Thunder breaks out; Ludolph's History of Aethiop. l. 1. c. 5. A Viol String hath been Observed, upon Rainy weather, to sound half a Note sharper than before, and, I am told by the same Per∣son, that having kept false Strings in his Pockets for some time after, they became true ones; and the same Person hath Observ'd, that some Strings are apter to Receive a Tension, than others. TITLE XVII. Of the Weight of the Air The Weight of a cubical Inch of Wa∣ter.HAving placed a hollow Cube of Brass, e∣very side of which was an exact English Inch, in a pair of Scales as Horizontally as we could, It's Weight being ʒxi. gr. 1. ss. we fill'd
it with common Water, and then, besides the Counter-poise of the Brass Cube, the Water weighed 254 / Grains; and since it is a hard Matter to fill the Vessel more exactly than we did, I judge that a Cubick Inch may way, 256 Grains. Of Quick∣silver.A Cubick Inch of Mercury weighed in the same Brass Cube was 3580 Grains, which is to the Weight of Water, as 14 to 1 Of a Pil∣lar of the Atmosphe∣re.The Weight of the Air incumbent on an Inch Square of Air here below, amounts to 18 l ½ Troy∣weight, i. e. 15 l. 1/17 Averdupois-weight. As 11 to 14. or rather as 355. to 452, so is the Area of a Square inscribed in a Circle to the Area of the Circumscribed Circle. Hence 355 : 452 ∷ 1 : 1, 2732394. Hence if the side of a Circumscribed Square be an Inch, that Multiplied by an Inch, renders a Cubick Inch for the Solid Content. In the like manner, if the Height of a Cy∣linder Erected on the Circumscribing Circle, be an Inch, the Solid content of that Cylinder is, 1, 2732394. Wherefore 1, and 1, 2732394, Multiplyed, by the Weight of the Cubick Inch of any kind of Metal, give the Weight of a Cubick Inch, and of a Cylindrick Inch that Circumscribes the same; whence an Inch Table for both is easily made, by contiunal addition, or for any Height propounded, Multiplying both by the same.
See Plate 6. Fig. 4.LE Tuyan recourbé estoit fermé au bout ae et Ouuert alautre extremité B. La. recourbure depuis G. jusq' a C. estoit pleine de Mercure & tout le reste estoit plein d'air. La longueur AE.C. estoit 4. Pouces ou 32/8. J'echauffay cet air, et il feit baisser le Mercure Jusques en f. qui estoit ⅜ plus bas, & en mesme temps il monta jusq' en H. qui estoit ⅜ plus haut que G. ou C. Pour sçauoir quélle hatetur de Mercure auroit este necessaire pour empescher la dilatation de lair, & retenir le mercure en C. je nay quá trou∣uer ce qui seroit necessaire pour repousser le mer∣cure en C. Etainsy contenir lair dans léspace AE. C. non obstant la Chaleur. Jepose pour prin∣cipe ceque lexperience fait voir, Cest que quand une quantitè dáir occupe un certain espace que jáppelle AE. et que la pression qui leretient dans cet espace soit B. si on vient a augmenter cette pression de telle quantité que lón voudra comme X. on diminuera l'espace AE. d'une certain quan∣tité D. Laquelle quantité est au restant M. comme X est a B. D. M ∷ X. B. donc. M. D ∷ B. X. Il est aiséd áppliquer cette reigle à lexperience cy dessus. Car AE. f. ou 35/8 de pouce sont lespace AE. Lapression ordinaire de lâir qui est de 30 Pouces.
Jointe nae un pouce de haut que se trouue entre. f et H. est B X 31 Pouces de Mercure: et si nous y en adjoustons assez pour reduire lair a léspace AE. C. Le dit AE. C. sera M. X 32/8 Et. f. C. sera D. X ⅜ Posant donc. M. D. B. 32. 3. 31. La quatriesme propotionelle sera X. X 2 29/32 pouces, qui estants joints a B. X 31 Pouces feront 33 29/32 pouces dont láir sera pressé en C. AE. qui sont pres de 4 Pouces au dessus de la pression or∣dinaire. An Experiment made at the Spire of the Ca∣thedral Church in Sarum. HAving procured all the Surveying Chains we could, and a proper Frame for a Baro∣scope, we went into the Church, where when the Tube was inverted, as in the Torcellian Ex∣periment; the Mercury stood at 30 Inches, and 50 Centesms of an Inch: Being drawn up to the first floor which is 1033 ½ Inches, it subsided 9 Cents of an Inch; being drawn up 935 Inches higher, it sunk 8 Cents more; being drawn up 2313 Inches higher yet, it lost 23 Cents, and when it was let down again the Mercury reas∣cended to it's former Station at every one of the Marks. At another time an inverted Baroscop being made use of, such as Plate 5, Fig. 6, delineates, having set a Mark where the Mercury stood be∣low, when it was raised.
Inches   Inch. Cent. 1033 ½ The Liquor Ascended 1 25 168 2 39 2467 3 22 4281 5 64 4800 or 400 feet 6 40 On the great Continent not far from the Sea, before a great Storm, in which the Wind blew along the Continent, the Mercury was Raised two Inches above it's usual Station; but when the Wind blew from the Sea, the Mer∣cury subsided; which hath been observed by an∣other Gentleman in England, where in the In∣land Parts likewise the Mercury subsided before a Storm. An Extract of a Letter writ to the Au∣thor, by the Ingenious Author of that most incomparable Essay of Human Un∣derstanding Mr. Lock, Dated Ch. Ch. May 5th 1666. An Ac∣count of Minedeep Gruffs.IN the Letter we are inform'd, that designing, at the Request of Mr. Boyle, to try some Barometrical Experiments in the Gruffs at Minedeep, when he came there, he found it nei∣ther safe nor easy, for one not accustomed, to go down into them; for the Descent not be∣ing Perpendicular, but crooked, as the Cranies of the Rocks gave them way easiest in sinking their Pits, they are forc'd to clamber up and
down the Narrow Passage, by setting their Hands and Feet against the sides of it, all the Assistance besides, being a Rope which they take under their Arm; besides, sometimes when they are down, the Damps catch them; and if they cannot get out speedily, they fall into a Swond and die: The only Remedy which Recovers them is this, they first Dig a hole in the Earth for their Faces, and then cover them close with Turffs. To force Air into these Gruffs, they place Turfs on the Lee side of the Pits Mouth, instead of which, if they be pla∣on the other side, those in the Gruffs are seised with a want of Breath and Fainting. Sweet Flowers being taken down into them, presently Stink. And it is likewise observ'd, in these Gruffs, that it is very dangerous to descend in∣to them, when any Fire remains in the Chinks of the Rocks; for they usually make such Fires up∣on hard Rocks, that they may more easily Dig through them. The Torrecellian Experiment being tryed, on a Steep Hill, the Mercury at the Bottom was suspended at 29 Inches and ⅛; at the Top of the Hill it subsided to 28 ¾, where both as I ascended and descended, the Mercury gradually subsided and rose again; only the Sun had so far Rarified the Air above the Mercury, that when the Tube was brought to the bottom again, the Mercury wanted 1/32 of it's former height, which I sup∣pose depended on the Resistance that Rarified Air made to the Pressure of the Atmosphere. Having visited the Incrusting Spring, I for∣merly mentioned, I observ'd, that about the Spring-head there was only a little Moss In∣crustated;
but 40 or 50 Yards of it, where the Water hath a Fall higher than my Head, it Sheathed every thing with Stony-cases, and makes the sides of the Banks hard Rock. It bears Soap, Freezes Quickly, and Waters Ground with advantage; It is used in the Kitchen and Brew∣house belonging to the Gentleman, in whose Ground it Rises in, without any sensible ill Ef∣fects; only his Horses are Observ'd to be usual∣short Breathed. Thus for the Extract of Mr. Lock's Letter. Some days ago the King doing me the Honour to Discourse with me about the use of Baro∣scopes, he told me, that he himself had by ob∣serving the Baroscope, foretlod a Storm, which accordingly ensued. Nous apprenons de ces experiences, que puis∣que le poids de l'Air et le poids de l'eau qui est dans les Pompes se tiennent mutuellement en E∣quilibre, ils pesent precisement autant l'un que l'autre; & qu' ainsi en connoissant la hauteur ou l'eau s'élve en tous les lieux du monde, nous connoissons en mesme temps combien chacun de ces liex est presse par le poids de l'Air qui est au dessus d'eux; et partant. Que les lieux qui sont au bord de la mer, sont pressez par le poids de l'Air, qui est au dessus d'eux jusques au haut de sa Sphere, autant precise∣ment, que si au lieu de cét Air on substituoit une colomne d'eau de la hauteur de 31 Pieds deux poulces. Ceux qui sont plus elevez de dix toises, autant que s' ils portoient de l'eau de la hauteur de 31 Pieds un poulce.
Ceux qui sont élevez au dessus de la mer de 500 Toises, autant que s' ils portoient de l'eau à la hauteur de 26 Pieds onze poulces: & ainsi du reste. Nous apprenons par ces experiences que l'Air qui est sur le niveau de la mer pese autant que l'eau, à la hauteur de 31 Pieds deux poulces; mais parce que l'Air pese moins sur les lieux plus ele∣vez que sur le niveau de la mer; et qu' ainsi il ne pese pas sur tous les Points de la terre egale∣ment, & mesme qu'il pese differemment par tout, on ne peut pas prendre un pied fixe, qui marque combien tous les lieux du monde sont Chargez par l'Air, le fort portant le foible; mais on peut en prendre un par conjecture bien approchant du juste; comme par exemple, on peut faire es∣tat, que tous le lieux de la terre en general con∣siderez comme s' ils estoient également chargez d'Air, le fort portant le foible, en sont autant pressez, que s' ils partoient de l'eau à la hauteur de 31 Pieds; et il est certain qu' il n'y a pas un demy pied d'eau d'erreur en cette Suppositi∣on. Or nous avons veu que l'Air qui est au dessus des montagnes hautes de 500. toises sur le nive∣au de la mer, pese auntant que l'eau à la hauteur de 26 Pieds 11 Poulces. Et par consequent tout l'Air qui s' étend de puis le niveau de la mer jusqu' au haut des mon∣tagnes, hautes de 500 Toises, pese autant que l'eau à la hauteur de 4 Pieds un poulce, qui estant à peu prés la septiéme partie de la hauteur entiere; il est visible que l'Air compris depuis la mer jus∣ques
à ces montagnes est à peu pres la septiéme partie de la masse entiere de l'Air. Nous apprenons de ces mesmes Experiences, que les vapeurs qui sont épaisses dans l'Air, lors qu'il en est le plus Chargé, pesent autant que l'eau à la hauteur d'un pied huit Poulces; puis∣que pour les contrepeser, elles font housler l'eau dans les Pompes à cette hauteur, par des∣sus celle ou l'eau contrepesoit déja la pesanteur de l'Air: de sorte que si toutes les vapeurs qui sont sur une contrée estoient reduites en eau, comme il arrive quand elles se changent en pluye, elles ne pourroient produire que cette hauteur d'un pied huit poulces d'eau sur cette contrée. Et s' il arrive par fois des orages ou l'eau de la pluye qui tombe vienne à une plus grande hau∣teur; c' est parce que le vent y porte les va∣peurs de contrées voisines. Nous voyons aussi de là, que si toute la Sphe∣re de l'Air estoit pressée & comprimée contre la terre par une Force qui la poussant par le haut, la reduisist en bas à la moindre place qu' elle puisse occuper, & qu' elle la reduisist comme en l'eau, elle auroit alors la hauteur de 31 Pieds seule∣ment. Et par consequent qu' il faut considerer toute la masse de l'Air en l'estat libre ou elle est, de-la mesme sorte que si elle eust este autrefois com∣me une masse d'eau de 31 pieds de haut á l'en∣tour de toute la terre, qui eust esté rarefiée et di∣latée extremement, et convertie en cet estat ou nous l'appellons Air, auquel elle occupe à la verite plus de place, mais auquel elle conserve
precisement le mesme poids que l'eau à 31 pieds de haut. Et-comme il n' y auroit rien de plus aisé que de suppter combien l'eau qui environneroit tou∣te la terre à 31 Pieds de haut peseroit de livres; et qu' un enfant qui scait l'Addition et la Sous∣traction le pourroit faire; on trouveroit par le mesme moyen combien tout l'Air de la Nature pese de liures, puisque c' est la mesme chose; et si on en fait l'épreuve, on trouvera qu' il pese à peu prés huit Millions de Millions de Millions de Liures. I' ay voulu avoir ce plaisir, et j' en ay fait le compte en cette sorte. I' ay supposé que le Diametre d'un cercle est à sa circonference, comme 7 à 22. I' ay suppose que le Diametre d'une Sphere estant multiplié par la circonference de son grand cercle, le produit est le contenu de la superficie Spherique. Nous Scavons qu' on a divise le tour de la ter∣re en 360 degrez. cette division à esté voluntaire, car on l'eust divisée en plus ou moins si on eust voulu, aussi bien que les cercles celestes. On a trouve que chacun de ces degrez conti∣ent 50000 toises. Les lieues autour de Paris sont de 2500 toises; et par consequent il y a 20 lieues au degré: D'autres en comptent 25 mais aussi ils ne mettent que 2000 toises à la lieue; ce qui revient à la mes∣me chose. Chaque toise a 6 pieds. Un pied Cube d'eau pese 72 libres. Cela pose, il est bien aise de faire la supputa∣tion qu' on cherche.
Car puisque la terre a pour son grand cercle, ou pour sa circonference 360 degrez. Elle a par consequent de tour 7200 lieuves. Et par la proportion de la Circonference au Diametre aura 3291 lieues. Doncen multipliant le Diametre de la terre par la Circonference de son grand cercle; on trouvera qu' elle á en toute sa superficie Spheri∣que 1649200 lieues quarrées. C' est à dire 103, 095, 000, 000, 000, toises quarr. C est à dire 3711, 420, 000, 000, 000, pieds quarr. Il's ensuit qu' un pied cube d'eau pese 72 liv∣res. Et parce qu' un prisme d'eau d'un pied quar∣re de base, et de 31 pieds de haut, pese 2232 livres. Donc si la terre estoit couverte d'eau jusques à la hauteur de 31 pieds; il y auroit autant de pri∣smes d'eau de 31 Pieds de haut, qu' elle a de Pieds quarrez en toute sa surface. (Ie scay bien que ce ne seroient pas des prismes, mais des secteurs de Sphere; et je neglige exprés cette Precision.) Et partant elle porteroit autant de 2232 livres d'eau, qu' elle a de pieds quarrez en toute sa sur∣face. Done cette masse d'eau entiere peseroit. 8283, 889, 440, 000, 000, 000, livres. Donc toute la masse entire de la Sphere de l'Air qui est au monde, pese ce mesme poids de 8283. 889, 440, 000, 000, livres.
C' est à dire, Huit Millions de Millions de Millions, deux cent quarte vingt trois Mille huit cent quatre vingt neuf Millions de Millions, quatre cent quarente Mille Millions de livres. Mr. Pascal in his small Tract, either De∣la Pesanteur de l'Air; or in that Del'Equilibre des liqueurs. See Plate 7 Fig. 4.De caetero, feci haud ita pridem experimen∣tum ponderandi aeris, quod pulchré successit; nam sumptâ vitreâ lagenâ, valde levi et ad lam∣padem sufflatâ, ejus figurae, qualem alibi excusam vides, magnitudine parvae pilae quales habentur in sphaeristeriis, non habente nisi minimam quandam aperturam per quam immittatur pilus in extremitate orificii sui B. ponderavi eam in lance valde exacta, & frigida pondus habuit 78 granorum cum dimidio: Postea calefeci eam car∣bonibus impositam, & reposui in bilancem eo si∣tu quo hic descriptum vides, nimirum orificio in imum verso, & deprehendi eam vix habere pon∣dus 78 granorum, tum immergendo orificium in aquam, refrigescere feci, & dum aer se conden∣sat pro modo quo refrigescit lagena, intravit tan∣tundem aquae quantum aeris calor antea expu∣lerat; denique ponderans eam cum omni illa aqua deprehendi eam habere pondus 72 grano∣rum & dimidii plus quam antea: unde concludo aerem qui per ignem expulsus erat, se habere ad aquam quae in locum suum regressa erat uti ½ se habet ad 72 ½, aut uti se habet 1. ad 145. sed po∣tui in eo errasse difficile, quippè est in ea re omni∣no exactum essée; Id saltem certò scio, quòd pon∣dus
aeris hoc modo sit sensiblile, & prolixe hic deduxi processum meum, ut si te eadem curiosi∣tas incessat, possis id eodem modo perficere ex∣perimentum. Vale. TITLE XVIII. Of the Consistency of the Air; it's Rarity, Density, Fludity, Subtily. Of the Con∣sistency of the Air, &c.A Thin, but large Bladder, having a third Part of the Air, it was capable of con∣taining, remaining in it, had it's Neck strongly tyed; and at the other end a Weight was sus∣pended of 14 Pound by a String, which could not shrink ¼ of an Inch, without raising the Weight from the ground: But the Air in the Bladder was so far expanded by heat, that the Weight was raised, and would swing in the Air like a Pen∣dulum. The same Experiment being tryed with a 50 pound Weight, before the expanded Air was able to raise the Weight, the Bladder would burst. To try whether the Corpuscles of the Air would penetrate into a Liquor exposed to the Ordinary pressure of the Atmosphere, we poured a Urinous Spirit upon as much Filings of Cop∣per, as covered the bottom of a Cylindrical Vi∣al, so that the Spirit was the Breadth of 3 Fin∣gers above the Filings, which being done, on that, we poured so much Oyl of Almonds, as covered the Spirit the Thickness of a Crown piece; upon which the Vial being kept some days in a quiet place, the Urinous Liquor did
first acquire, and then lose a blew Tincture. When the blew was in a great Measure vanished, the Bottle was kept unstopped a Minute, and then stopped again; in a short time the Urinous Spirit was tinged with blew, which Colour in an hour extended it self all over the Liquor, the Oyl upon the Top of it still remaining clear. TITLE XIX. Of the Heat and Coldness of the Air. TO shew that it is not without Reason that I Question what the Peripateticks teach a∣bout the Limits and Temperaments of the Air, which they divide into three Regions, I shall pro∣pose the following Particulars. The Air at Morocco, tho' excessive hot in the Day is Cold at Night, as well as the Mounta∣nous Parts thereabouts. One, who stayed a Year in Guinea, tho' it is ex∣cessive hot, told me, that about 4 a Clock in the Morning, he was ready to tremble with Cold. One told me, that in Jamacia, when he lay in his Hammock about 3 or 4 Foot from the Ground, tho' he had much Cloths under him, yet he perceived it Cold beneath, and Hot a∣bove. So that to shew that not only Liquors, and Ani∣mal Bodies may be affected with the Summers heat, but even Glass it self, I shall intimate, that Glass-stopples of Factitious Crystal being so fitted to Vi∣ols of the same, tho' in Winter they would move
about easily; yet in the Summer they would not be pull'd out by the Assistance of a String, till the Expansion of the Glass was taken off by be∣ing cool'd in Water. I am apt to believe, that several Effects, which we are apt to attribute to the Heat of the Air, putting the Parts of the Juices of our Bodies in Motion, depend on some Effluvia rais'd by Heat from other Bodies, and which swim in the Air. A large Piece of Amber being plac'd in the Summer in the Sun-Beams, had its Parts put in∣to such an Agitation, as enabled it to emit Ele∣ctrical Effluvia, and to attract light Bodies, which Power it would lose when remov'd out of the Sun-Beams again. Mr. Nickson told me, that, near Hudson's Bay, when they were a Leeward of certain floating Islands of Ice, they were sensible of it by a new Access of Cold; before they approach'd so near as to see them, which was at 20 Miles distance. He likewise told me, that that Wind brought a∣long with it a Foggy Air; And that in that of Hudson's Bay where he winter'd, the Rivers were not free from Ice from the latter End of October, to the middle or end of May, tho' the Latitude of Charlton Island, most frequented by the English was of the same Latitude with London, and at the most not exceeding 52 Degrees: The Ice was near six Foot deep; and the Frost so vio∣lent, that Bottles of Brandy would have a fourth Part turn'd into Ice, the unfroze Liquor being much stronger than before: The Ice which swam upon the Water was fresh, from whence they supply'd themselves with fresh Water, ei∣ther
by melting it in their Pots, or by gather∣ing it from large Cavities in floating pieces of Ice, where it was melted by the Sun-Beams. A Traveller told me, that upon the Top of a Pyrenean Mountain in the Summer it was very hot, tho' the same Day it was cover'd with Snow; and another told me, that the Winds at Morocco were so hot, as almost to stifle him. And it hath been observ'd, upon the Tops of high Pyrenean Mountains, that, below them there were Clouds which yielded Rain plenti∣fully, out of which Lightning flash'd upwards as well as downwards. Dr. Stubbs told me, that in a Bolt-head about 2 Foot ½ long, about 7 or 8 a Clock in the Morning, which is the faint time of the Day, the Water would rise but ¼ of Inch and half a quarter, af∣ter which time it would subside till that time the next Day. He further added, that in 8 or 10 Months time in that hot Country, Water would not decrease in Quantity, tho' kept un∣stopp'd. I am told by another, that in the Torrid Zone near the Coast of Sumatra, tho' Ice nor Frost nor Snow are ever observ'd, yet he hath known Hail to fall. And I am told, that in the Island of Ceylon, which lies betwixt 6 and 10 Degrees North Latitude in that Torrid Climate, it would be so cold at the Top of some Hills, to whose Tops they could ascend in half an hour, that they would almost shiver. And Capt. Knox told me, that having spent 18 Years in that Island, he observ'd a kind of Meteor in Winters Mornings between a Dew and a hoar Frost, which
presently vanish'd; and that once there hap∣pen'd a shower of Hail, which were about the size of a black Cherry, but were presently melt∣ed upon the Ground. The Heat is so violent in the Island Suaquena, that it excoriates the Skin, melts Indian Wax in a Cabinet, and sears your Shoes like a red hot Iron. Yet on some Mountains in Aethiopia, they dread Cold more than Heat; tho' no Snow falls, but only a little Hail now and then, which soon melts; and Tellesius witnesses, that in many Re∣gions in Aethiopia, the Air is more mild than in Portugal, so many Degrees distant North∣ward. At Tripoli in Barbary it is observ'd, that when the Wind blows over a long Sandy De∣sart, it, as well as the Wind it brings along with it, seems as hot as the Steams from an Oven: And and the same hath been observ'd near the Island of St. Lovis, on the Coast of Africk; where it was further remarkable, that the Ground was so hot, that the Gentleman, who related it, could scarce endure to stand upon it; and he fur∣ther told me, that when the Wind blew from a Wood, in which the dead Bodies of Wild Beasts lay, it stunk so that it could scarce be endu∣red. In summo ejus montis, Idae sc. fastigio sacellum est, quod aedificiolo duntaxat constat saxis sibi invi∣cem impositis & sine calce cohaerentibus fornicis in modum constructo, ad tectum praebendum. Sublimi adeo loco est, & à vehementioribus ventis inter∣dum ita perflato, ut lapilli inde transferantur.Petri Bello∣nii, lib. 1. cap. 16. Pau∣lo infra id sacellum planities conspicitur montibus
undique cincta, in quâ multa sunt pascua, ubi Ari∣etes & Caprae Cretenses aestate pinguescunt. Si quis ex summo montis vertice undique prospiciat, p aberit, quin totius Insulae ambitum videat cum  vicinis Insulis, Miso, Cerigo, sive Cythera,  Archipelagi. Aeris intemperies in hoc te adeo magna est quemadmodum ut in caeteris prae montibus, ut in ipsis Caniculae ardoribus ridie▪ nullo etiam spirante vento, ingens sentur fri∣gus: qua de causa nec hyeme, nec aslte  eum incolit. Nam licet pastores interd i greges ad pascua agunt, noctu tamen in valles se re¦cipiunt. In the next Chapter. Latè porro patet hic mons ejusque radices  maris littora, ut ante diximus, attingunt; nam li∣cet urbi Candiae sunt vicinae, meditullium tamen in∣sulae occupat ipse mons, adeo in sublime evectus, ut nives ejus verticem perpetuò tegnant; tamque frigida ara mediis etiam astatis ardoribus isthic est, ut vix ferri queat: tametsi in convallibus magnus sit aestus. Jacobi Za∣barelli de-Regionibus Aeris, c. 8.Contigit id meae experientiae, quod etiam aliis contigisse audivi, ut ascenderem ad summutatem usque montis Veneris, qui omnium in Patavino a∣gro altissimus est; ibi per totum diem habui Aerem serenissimum, sed infra circiter medium montis vi∣di nubes, quae me visione vallium prohibebant, ve∣speri autem postquam de illo monte descendi, inve∣ni factam eo die infera parte magnam pluviam cum in montis cacumine nihil pluisset; ex eo in∣tellexi me transiisse per mediam Aeris regionem,
in qua est facta pluvia, nec tamen eam sensi fri∣gidissimam, imò vix aliquam animadverti diffe∣rentiam frigidioris & calidioris Aeris, nam aesti∣vum tempus erat, pro aestivo tempore eram vestitus, nec tamen tantum frigoris, quod me laederet, ex eo loco percepi; pars igitur illa non est absolutè frigida, sed solùm comparatione inferi, Aeris ca∣lidioris. Idem de Alpibus proprio exemplo edoctus testatum reliquit Bartholinus Syst. Phys. Instit. Succinct. de Terra, Aere & Igne, C. 4. Resp. 1. Mount Atlas in the Heat of Summer hath been seen cover'd with Snow; and several Peo∣ple who have visited the Tops of high Moun∣tains, such as the Alpes and Teneriff, have found it exceedingly cold. I am told by one, that he never heard of Snow or Ice in Guinea; but in Barbary, where the Plains were excessive hot, the Tops of Mountains were cover'd with Snow, and the like hath been observ'd in the Island Ceylon, and the Mountains of Congo. In the Summer 88, I plac'd a Glass in a Cave, which faced the Sea, it being cover'd with 80 Foot of Earth, and cut right in about 130 Foot, the Mercury stood ½ above Temperate; and at the same time, in another Glass in the open Air it stood at hot: About Christmas following the Mercury in the Cave vary'd not, but that with∣out stood at Frost. In New-Hampshire in New-England it is ob∣serv'd, that in the Winter the North-West Wind is very cold, and in Summer intensly hot; It is ascrib'd to a large Tract of Woody Land, which in the Winter is cover'd with Snow, and
in the Summer, the Valleys being close, keep in the Heat till it becomes very violent. Balbini Hist. Bohem. l. 1. c. 9. Demon∣tibus, & de valle Lau∣ezka, p. 29. Chanow∣sky in ve∣stigio Boh. piae, C. ult. Montes par∣te eltera ae∣statem, al∣tera hic∣mem re∣ferentes. De montibus ad Bavariam stantibus mira est Al∣berti Chanowii nostri narratio: Post Bergreichen∣steinam (oppidum fodinis hodieque nobile) esse montes non tam situ (alii enim ad septentrionem, alii ad meridiem latus obvertunt) quam Coelo & temporibus adversantes, vallibus latissimis montes illos dirimentibus; monstri instar est (quod se vi∣disse, & Anno 1639. in rem praesentem venisse religiosissimus ille & Apostolicus vir asserit) in al∣tero monte saepius aestatem, in altero apposito hie∣mem dominari, it a ille succus aestivat, hic altissi∣mis nivibus obsitus à viatore superari non po∣test; ob eamque causam Messes ipsae variant, & dum in montibus ad nos obversis demessa sunt om∣nia,Id. Ibid. altera Montium parte seges virescit: Mirius illud quod in Biessinentibus & Czachroviensibus Agris in tractu Plsnensi, contiguis, quos unus tan∣tum sulcus dirimit ac dividit, deprehenditur: Cza∣chrovienses adhuc hibernant, cum in Biessinensi Coelum ardeat, ibi caput attollit humo frumentum, cum Czachrovii adolescit in culmum; clemento quoque dispari, illud riget, hoc tepet & ferve, eâque ex causâ, dum Czachrovienses bene pelliti ingrediuntur, Biessinenses pellibus onerari se sen∣tiunt, villosque deponunt. Aliquid tale Anno 1652. mihi quoque accidisse memini: nam cum Glacio Zambergam in Bohemia contenderem, & Glacio ob nives altissimas certum vehiculi genus, quod tra∣has dicimus, sumpsissem, superatis montibus, qui comitatum Glacensem à Bohemia dividunt, subitò alia rerum facies apparuit: altero enim montium latere viridia omnia reperimus, sic ut Trahae nulli
jam rei & usui essent, & currum petere cogere∣mur, nisi in luto natare placuisset; at accolae mon∣tium illorum quotannis id sibi accidere confirma∣bant, ut unum latus montium profundissimae nives contegerent, quando alterum latus lectissimos flores proferret, & cum ibi omnia ventis verti videren∣tur apud se è floribus suavissimos odores efflari. I was told by a Gentleman, who several times went down into the Hungarian Gold Mine at Cremonitz, that when he was drawn up the Groove, which was bout 100 Foot deep, as soon as he ascended half the way, he perceiv'd the Air sensibly warmer, which continu'd seve∣ral Feet nearer the Day; in which Region he observ'd, several Veins of Native Vitriol of dif∣ferent Colours, which were soft under Ground, and being expos'd to the open Air, presently hardened. Under the Torrid Zone the Mariners, I am told, hang up their Bottles of Liquor in a Linnen Cloth, that the Wind may blow upon it, by which means it would be cool'd enough to make it fit for drinking. The Heat of the Sun is so violent in some Parts of Moscovy, Norway and especially at Mozam∣bique, that it often sets the very Houses on fire; which I the less wonder at in the latter place, be∣cause they build their Houses with a Stone that abounds with Sulphur Viv. When the Sun is in the Zenith, the sandy Ground is so hot, that they can scarce endure to tread on it. Ʋn Gentilhomme de mes amis plein de merit & digne de creance me mande entre plusieures choses extraordinaires qu'il a observées proche de Barege
aux Pyrenées, qu'il y a des ponts de niege d'un rocher à lautre pardessous les quels passent des tor∣rents. Il en a vu un qui embrasse deux torrents, & qui a vint neuf toises de long & autant de lar∣ge par dessus. Il y a par dessous ce pont Neuf toi∣ses & demi entre les Naissances de la voute les ponts sont tellement forts qu' il estime que du Ca∣non y passeroit, & il a fait rouler de grosses pieces par dessus. Le tremblement de Terre que souffrit la Syrie l'an 750. ne fut gueres moins surprenant; puisque la Terre s'estant ouverte de toutes parts, plusieurs Villis furent abîmèes, d'autres renversées, & quel∣ques unes qui estoient elevées sur des hauteures transportées dans des plaines eloignées de six mille de leur situation. On en peut dire autant du froid extreme qui l'an 753. glaça le Pont-Euxin a la longueur de cent mille, & toute l'estendue de la mer voisine, jusq' à 30 condées de profondeur, quoy qu'on ne fût encore qu'au commencement de l'autom∣ne. Journal de Scavans III. 1685. It is the Custom at Guinea to cool their Water by burying it all Night under Ground: And on the contrary in some Places it is so excessive Cold, that in the Woods, it would freeze our Eye-lids; the outside of the Houses would be half cover'd with Snow, and Ice-ickles would hang on the Insides; the Cloaths on our Beds would be cover'd with a hoar Frost, and Water which stood near the fire, would have one side hot, and the other froze: The Sea would be froze up till the beginning of June, and the Ground till the beginning of July. Capt. James. I was told by one who ascended to the Top of
the Pic de Medi, a Pyrenean Mountain, that tho' the North side was covere'd with Snow, yet the Heat of the Sun-shine could scarce be endur'd on the South side; this Hill is so high, that it may be seen from Montauban 27 Leagues distant. An Ingenious Physician told me, that tho' Jalap at Tangier might be reduced to Powder; yet at Morocco it was so melted by the Heat of the Air, as to become incapable of being powdered. Nel capo di comorino si termina cosi I' esta, come I' inverno dalla parte, di la dal capo verso Notte, & dal'altra parte correspond illi mpo assai contrario è eiverso, di maniera che, chi va navigando, per quella costae nel mese di Ottobre, sino ad Aprile naviga nel esta, è non puo in tutto questo tempo, passare il capo per Esser iui la sta∣gione del inverno, & il Puere, che resiede nelle Chies ch' appartengono al Capo di Comorino ne Al∣cune la state, il che e cosa di gran Meraviglia, essendo cio nel medessimo tempo nella distanza sola mente di due, o tre miglia. An eminent Virtuoso descended into a Mine in Tirol 1800 Foot deep, without taking notice of any hot Region by the way; and at the Bottom the Air was so temperate, that notwith∣standing what is said of Antiperistasis, no in∣tense Cold was retreated thither to shun the Heat of the superior Air. One that descended into several Mines in England, observ'd it sensibly colder, when he was about a Yard below the Fast, as Miners call that solid Earth, which they distinguish from
that looser Earth that lies above it, in which Plants and Trees spread their Roots, they sel∣dom reaching to, or penetrating into the Fast, tho' sometimes it lies near enough the Exter∣nal Surface of the Earth. An Exact Relation of the Pico Teneriff. A relation of Mount Teneriff.The Gentlemen who gave the following Ac∣count, set out from Oratava, a Town situated on the North side, two Miles from the Sea, and in 8 hours got to the Top of the first Mountains, to wards the Pico de Terana, from whence the Com∣pany proceeded over sandy and lofty Mountains, which were not cover'd with Pine Trees as the first 8 hours Passage was: This Way continu'd till they came to the Foot of the Pico, where they found very large Stones, which seem'd to have fallen from some superior Part. Thoughts concerning the cause of it's stupen∣dous Bulk.It is thought by Dr. Pugh, that the whole Soil in that Island being sulphureous, did take fire, and most of it Blew up at the same time; in which general Conflagration, he supposes, those many Mountains of calcin'd Stones which lie up and down the Island, but especially the South-West Parts of it, were cast up; and the greatest Quantity of Sulphur lying about the Center of the Island, rais'd the Pico to that Height, which it now remains at. On the South-West side these calcin'd Rocks lie one upon another from the Top of the Pico to the Sea shore, but very few on the North; so that he supposes the Vulcano chiefly discharg'd it self that way; several of these calcin'd Rocks resemble Iron Ore; some Silver, and others Copper; especially in
the South-West Parts call'd the Azuleios, there are vast Quantities of a blewish Earth, inter∣mix'd with blew Stones, which are cover'd with a yellow Rust, like that of Vitriol or Copper; and he was told, that a Bell-Founder of Orata∣va got pure Gold out of two Horse Loads of Earth; and he was further told by another, that a Lump of Earth brought from the Top of the Mountain, yielded a good Quantity of Sil∣ver. About this Mountain are likewise observ'd, several Vitriolate as well as Nitrous and Martial Springs. To confirm this Notion of the Reason of what he observ'd, he alledges, that the very Tracts of the Torrents of Sulphur which ran down from the Mountain are yet visible, which did so much Damage to the Ground it flow'd upon, that nothing but Fern is able to grow up∣on it. But what seems further to confirm his Account is, The Instance of the Palm Island 15 Leagues from Teneriff, where upon the firing of a Vulcano, the Earth shook terribly, and the Torrents of flaming Sulphur made as loud a Noise as Thunder; and the Light of it made the Rooms as light all Night for six Weeks, as if Candles had been in them, and the Sand was carry'd about in the Wind like Clouds. But to proceed: What was further observ'd by Mr. Clappham and others, who purposely ascended this Mountain: As soon as they were got a Mile in their Ascent upon the Pico, some of them grew faint and sick, several that ascended were taken with Fluxes and Vomitings, and were Aguish; their Horses, and even their Wine as well as themselves being extreamly cold. When they had ascended a Mile further, they
came to the black Rocks, from whence they travell'd over a white Sand, so hot that it burnt the Skin of a Dog's Feet who went up with Dr. Pugh. When they came to the Top, there were sulphureous Steams copiously ascending and con∣tinually, which were so hot, that they made their Faces sore, and at a little distance appear'd like Smoak. There was little Alteration in the Wind, till we came to the Top, where it was very im∣petuous. The strong Waters there had lost their Force, but the Wine seem'd rather more Spirituous. An account of the Pico.Upon the Top is a Pit call'd Caldera, of a Coni∣cal Figure, which is about 80 Yards deep, and a Musquet-shot over; It is cover'd over with loose Stones, Sulphur and Sand, which being stirr'd, very offensive Vapours are rais'd; it is dangerous to go further than 4 or 5 Yards into it, because their Feet are apt to slip from under them. In the Bottom is a sort of clearer Sul∣phur, which looks like Salt upon the Stones. From hence they could see the Grand Canaries, Palma and Gomera, and Hiero, 20 Leagues di∣stant. When the Sun rose, the Shadow of the Mountain cover'd all betwixt it and the Hori∣zon, so that the Top of it cast it's shade into the Clouds; but when the Sun rose higher, so many Clouds were rais'd, that we could see no∣thing but the Emergent Tops of some Moun∣tains, which to those that are below, sometimes seem to be wrapt about the Pico, and upon North-West Winds foretel a Storm. From the Tops of most of those Mountains very exuberant Springs issue out in great Spouts. At the Foot of the
Sugar-Loaf is a Cave about 10 Yards deep, and 15 broad, having a Hole at the Top 8 Yards o∣ver; opposite to which, in the Bottom, is a round Pit of Water 6 Fathom deep, whose Brink is about a Yard below the Surface of a Bed of Ice which encircles it, the Orifice of which is as broad as the Overture above, so that those that descend into it, are let down by a Rope, and swing to and fro, that they may light upon the Snow. The Water seems to be only melted Ice: From the Top of this Cave Ice-icles hang very plentifully. The Perpendicular Height of the Pico is ac∣counted two Miles and a half. Trees and Plants, &c.In all the Passage nothing but Pines grew; and amongst the white Sand, a bushy Broom; and where, in their Ascent they lay all Night, a sort of Cardon, whose Stems are Eight Foot high; the Trunk about half a Foot Thick, e∣very Stem growing in four Squares, and rising from the Ground like Tuffs of Rushes; on the Edges of these grow several red Berries, which by squeezing, yield a poysonous Milk, which fetches the Hair off where it lights on the Skin of any Beast, so that I suppose it to be a kind of Euphorbium. In this Island there likewise grows a Shrub call'd Legnon-vell, which is car∣ry'd to England as a Sweet-Wood. There are growing in this Island also, Apricocks, & Peaches, which bear twice a Year; very fruitful Pear-Trees; Almonds of a tender Shell, Palms, Plantanes, Oranges, Limons, and especially Preg∣nadas, call'd so because each of them carries a small one in it's Belly. Besides these, they have Sugar-Canes, Cotton and Coloquintida, Carna∣tions,
and Roses that blow at Christmass; Sam∣pier covers the Rocks, and Clover the Ground; and another Grass grows near the Sea, which is of a broader Leaf, and so luscious, that it will kill a Horse, tho' no other Cattle: 8 Ears of Wheat have been found to spring from one Root, and a Bushel to yield 130. The Canary Birds build in the Barrancos of Gills,Birds. which the Water hath fretted away in the Mountains, places very cold. They have also Quails and Partridges less than ours; great Wood Pigeons, Turtles at Spring, Crows; and sometimes the Falcon appears from the Coast of Barbary. They have Goats on the Mountains,Beasts, &c. and also Hogs and Conies, but their Camels come from Lan∣cerote. Amongst their Fish are the following, viz. The Cherna,Fish. a large well-tasted Fish. The Mero, Dolphin, Shark, Lobsters, Mussels, Pe∣riwinkles, and the Clacas, the best Fish in the World, which grow in the Rocks, 5 or 6 under a Shell, through the Top of which they peep with their Nebs. They have likewise a Fish with 7 Tails, each of which is a Span long united to a short Body, and much resembling our Eel. They have besides these, Turtles, and Cabridos, preferable before our Trouts. The Island is full of Springs of pure Water like Milk,Springs. which in Laguna they strain through a Bason made of a Spungy Stone. Their Vines are very plentiful.Vines. Customs of the Inha∣ants.Dr. Pugh, who had done some charitable Cures amongst the Antient Inhabitants, called Guanchios, was permitted to visit the Caves where the dead Bodies lie, which are sew'd up in Goats Skins, ve∣ry
curiously and close, with Thongs of the same; which are more soft and pliable than our Kid's Skins: The Preserving of Bodies thus by Embalm∣ing them, was a Custom of a Particular Tribe of Men, who marri'd only amongst themselves, and kept their Art of Embalming to themselves; so that, upon the Conquest of the Spaniards, most of them being destroy'd, the Knowledge they retain of the Ingredients is by Tradition, which is that, Of the Em∣balming of Bodies.They boil in Butter of Goats Milk, which for that Purpose is preserv'd in the Skins. 1st. A sort of Wild Lavender. 2ly, A Gummy Herb call'd Gara, which grows on the Mountains. 3ly, A kind of Sow-Bread. 4ly, A Wild Sage, of which they make a Balsam, and when their Bo∣dies are Embowel'd, and several times wash'd in a Lixivium of the Bark of Pine-Trees, and dry'd again either in the Sun in Summer, or in a Stove in Winter; they then several times successively anoint them with the Balsam, and dry them a∣gain, till they grow light, and the musculous Parts appear through the shrievel'd Skin, and then they sew them up in Goats Skins curiously dress'd; but the Poorer sort having their Brains taken out, are sew'd up in Skins which have the Hair on. They have above 20 whole Families of their Kings and great Persons, which they will not discover. They are laid in several Po∣stures; and some of them being laid along on Beds of Wood so harden'd, that Iron will not cut them. They also have Earthen Pots so har∣den'd, which they boil their Meat in; They make their Knives and Lancets of a kind of Slate call'd Tabona.
Their Food.Their Food is Barly roasted and ground be∣twixt two Stones, which they make into Cakes with Milk and Hony, and carry it on their Backs in Goats Skins. They drink no Wine; nor do they care for Flesh; But are Lean, Tall, very Active and Couragious. They will leap from one Rock to another,Activity. sometimes Ten Fathom deep. Having a Lance which they point at the Place which they design to light on and then when they leap, they clap their Feet to the Lance, which Lance lighting on the Rock first, takes off the Violence of their Fall: Novices often break their Necks in learning. They whistle so loud, they may be heard 5 Miles; and it so affected the Relator's Ears, who was in Company with one of them, that he could not hear well of 15 Days after. Besides, they throw Stones with as much Force as a Bullet goes out of a Gun. But to return to Mount Teneriff, by one that went to the Top; it was observ'd, that no Snow was on the South side, and tho' it was on the North side, yet it was not within two Miles of the lowest part of the Sugar-Loaf. He likewise observ'd, that tho' the Sack which they drank at the Top was exceeding cold, and seem'd to have no Effect on them; yet when they came into a thicker Air, two of the Com∣pany were drunk. Having try'd to fire a Birding-Piece upon the Top of the Mountain, he could not; the Com∣pany that gave the former Relation, say they did. The sulphureous Matter they travell'd o∣ver was so hot, that it burnt two or three pair
of Pumps in pieces in the Journey, tho' their Feet were not sensibly more hot than at other times. In some Regions of the same Mountains it was very hot, and on the other side of the same, very cold. To what Depth the Water will be frozen in hard Winters. To what Depth the Earth will be froze at the same time. Whether Muscovian Ice be harder than that in England. Whether Liquor cast up, will freeze before it comes to the Ground. Whether Brandy, Sack, &c. will freeze in Russia. Whether Instruments of Iron or Steel be brit∣ler there than here. Of the cracking of Timber and the Causes of it in Wooden Houses. Of the Preservation of Flesh, Fish, Herbs, &c. in hard Weather. Of the curing of those whose Nose or Cheeks, &c. are frozen. Of the Symptoms of those that are froze to death. Of the keeping of dead Bodies.
TITTLE XX. Of the Air in Reference to Light, it's Perspicuity, Opacity, Reflections, Refra∣ctions, Colours, Light and Lightnings. Of the Air in reference to Light, ctc. I Am told by a Traveller, that on the Coast of Genoua, from a high Place he could see Pla∣ces remote, in a Morning, tho' not when the Sun was near the Meridian. The late King Charles the Second told me, that walking upon the Beack on the Strand by Do∣ver, he unexpectedly discern'd a Coast, which had rising and falling Ground, upon the Virge of the Horizon; and the same was observ'd by the Courtiers that stood by him; but in a little time it disappear'd again, as if it had sunk into the Sea, which Phaenomenon I attributed to this, viz. That that Coast lying but a little too far off to be seen before, the Air interpos'd betwixt His Majesty's Eye and the Shoar, being fill'd with Vapours and subterraneal Steams, was render'd more refractive than before, by the help of which new Refraction, the French Coast which lay be∣yond it, was as if it were lifted up, in reference to the sight, and so became visible as long as that new Refraction lasted; but when those Steams were dissipated, they presently disappear'd: In favour of which Conjecture I alledg'd, that a piece of Gold being laid in the Bottom of a Cup, and the Eye so plac'd, that the Object is but just hid from it, upon pouring in Water, the Object will, without removing the Eye, become
visible. The Surface of the Water, which is a thicker Medium than the Air, refracting the Rays, and changing them from a Perpendicular to an inclin'd Position, so that they are caus'd to fall upon the Pupil. The Duke of York told me, that he was not a little surpriz'd in Scotland, that contrary to the common Observation, by Country men in other Places, a Morning in which the Sky was red, was succeeded with a fair Day, it being usual in those Parts. It is observ'd, that when the Red∣ness is pretty near the Ground, and appears with narrow streaks intensly red, it signifies bad Wea∣ther; but if it be elevated, and the Wind Easter∣ly, it foretels a fair Day. Capt. James in his Northern Voyage observ'd, that by Reason of these Refractions, the Sun seem'd to rise 20 Minutes too soon, and to set 20 Minutes too late; and this he learn'd by cal∣culating of it's rising and setting with good run∣ning Glasses, and comparing that Calculation with the Stars when come to their Meridi∣an. March. This Evening the Moon rose in the Form of an oblong Oval along the Hori∣zon. April. Tho' on a clear Sunshiny Day I could not see an Island which lies but 4. Leagues off South-South-East, yet when the Weather was misty, it might be seen from the lowest Place. The Height of it being taken Instrumentally, standing near the Sea-side, it was 34 Minutes, the Sun bing 28 Degrees high, which shews how great the Refraction was; yet it will not be a∣miss to note here, that I have seen the Land ele∣vated
by Refractitious Air, when the Sun hath rose presently round. Jan. 6. The Latitude was 51, 52, which Difference was occasion'd by a greater Re∣fraction. Jan. 21. The Sun rofe like an Oval, seem∣ing as long again as it was broad, but as it rose higher, it gradually recover'd it's round∣ness. In Poland near Warsaw June, 1669/70 we had clear Weather, and extreme cold, and for two Days we observ'd the Sun and two Parhelions, from near 10 to almost 12 a Clock, yet the Air was free from Clouds, and so clear, that we could perceive Icy Spangles flying in it. And where∣as usually in Frosty Weather, any smooth Iron or rather Metal, being brought into a warm Room out of the open Air, first a Dulness, and then drops of Water will appear in the Glass; at this time there appear'd something like a hoar Frost. Whether subtle Particles of Cold will pe∣netrate polish'd Metal or not, I will not deter∣mine, tho' the sudden Adhesion of ones wet Finger to Iron, seems to favour the Affirma∣tive. The same Month returning back from Warsaw, I saw the Sun rife with a large Pillar, colour'd like a Rainbow, perpendicular over it, out of a clear Horizon. In Cornwall it was observ'd, that in driving home Levels or Links, the Waters partaking of the Minerals, are sometimes sanative, and at o∣ther times cause Wounds. One who travell'd over the Alps observ'd, that in the Clouds below, which seem'd big with
Thunder, something mov'd up and down like a shining Fish in muddy Water, the Lightning appearing through the Cloud. It hath been ob∣serv'd on the Coast at Naples, that in the Morn∣ing at Sun rising a Town which was at some distance off, seem'd to have two Steeples, tho' it really had but one in it; and another Morn∣ing, the Refraction was so strong, that there seem'd to be a very fair Town beyond it, wall'd about; and adorn'd with Towers and Steeples very delightful; which very Town disappear'd when the Sun was rose higher above the Hori∣zon. A dry blighting East Wind, which Country People call a red Wind, causes an Opacity or Thickness of the Air, like Vapours, which con∣tinuing for two Years together, not only blast∣ed the Fruit, but the Leaves of the Trees just in the Tender. Mr. J. T. That the Air is sometimes Clear and Transpa∣rent, and sometimes darker and more clogg'd with terrestrial Steams, is a common Observa∣tion. But it hath been sometimes observ'd in Russia, that in a clear frosty Air, the Stars have appear'd to be much more Numerous than at o∣ther times. Captain James hath observ'd, in Charlton Islands, which, tho' of the same Latitude with Cambridge almost, is but little warmer than Nova Zembla; that in January the Firmament appear'd fuller of Stars by two Thirds than be∣fore; The Cloud in Cancer appearing full of Stars, and a great many small ones amongst the Pleiades: But the Moon rising about Ten a Clock, a quarter of them was not to be seen; the Wind
for most part of the Month being Northerly and very cold: And the like hath been observ'd by the Russian Emperor's Physician. The Duke of York, when he was High Com∣missioner in Scotland, sent me word that he had observ'd the Sky so clear, that the Stars afford∣ed Light enough to read by; and that several Fleaks of Light extended themselves from the Horizon, like so many Tails of Blazing Stars; and passing betwixt Charles's Wain and the North Star, seem'd to terminate over our Heads: This was observ'd in December. TITLE XXI. Of the Operation of the Air on the Consisten∣cy of Animal Substances. The Effects of Air on Animal Substances.IT is generally believ'd by those, that judge of things by their Senses, that since the Air is an invisible Body, it acts only upon others, by it's manifest Qualites, viz. Heat and Moisture: But I am apt to believe, that it hath other Fa∣culties, amongst which, some may be call'd Ge∣nerative and Restorative, and others Corruptive; and that not only in respect of Animals, and o∣ther Bodies of a slighter Texture, but also of Salts and Minerals. It hath been observ'd, that when Cheshire Cheeses have been carry'd from hence to the East-Indies, without being kept in leaden Boxes fitted to them; those that have been cut under the Line, were dry on the outside, but unctuous and soft in the Middle, as if all the oyly Parts
wanting in the outside, were shrunk back thi∣ther. But those that were cut when they had pass'd the Torrid Zone, and came into the Temperate Zone, were uniform and good e∣nough. It is observ'd, that in Peru as well as Aegypt, where it seldom rains, that Bodies are not sub∣ject to corrupt. In the Country last mention'd it is likewise observ'd, that the Air abounds with Nitre. It hath been observ'd, that under the Line, not only Biskets have been alter'd, but that most of the Meat, and even Salt Meat hath been much impair'd; but that their Water which was fresh, would be as clear and sweet as when first put into the Casks. Silk Stuffs that have been brought to Jamaica, I am told, have rotted without losing their Co∣lour, by being expos'd to the Air. TITLE XXII. Of the Operation of the Air on the Consistency of vegetable Substances. The Effects of the Air on consistent Bodies.A Piece of Limon having been kept a Year and some Months in a Receiver, with a mercurial Gage; it kept it's Colour pretty well, as well as it's shapes, except, that, the upper side was a little depress'd, the Liquor which fill'd it up before stagnating upon a Glass Plate, which was adapted to the Receiver. When the Receiver was open'd, the external Air rush'd in with a considerable Noise; whence it was evi∣dent,
that all the Air the Limon had yielded in that time, was not sufficient to fill the Cavity of the Receiver. Neither the Limon nor the Juice were mouldy or ill tasted; so that it made me think, that Mouldiness cannot be well produc'd without a Concurrence of the Air. The Liquor was acid, but clear and without Faeces, being of a Colour betwixt brown and red: It turned Syrup of Violets into a Purple Colour, and cor∣roded Fragments of red Coral in the Cold. It hath been observ'd, that Lozenges, which a Scholar frequently carry'd in his Pockets, were dissolv'd when he came near the Line; but recover'd their old Consistence, when much past it. TITLE XXIII. Of the Operation of the Air on consistent mi∣neral Substances. The Effects of the Air on mineral Substances.IN drawing Copper out of deep Mines in Sweedland, I am inform'd, they use Ropes made of Leather, Links of Iron being subject to break with the Coldness of the Air and the Weight of the Ore. It hath been observ'd, that Glasses kept half a Year, tho' well neal'd, have broke in pieces, and froze of themselves; the Cracks partly de∣pending on some Particles of Salt, which had not undergone a sufficient Comminution. I am told, there is a House in Suffolk near the Sea, in which, tho' it is but 8 Years old, the Iron Bars are swell'd, and so rotten that they'll
crimble away; The Winds which blew upon those Windows in which they were being South∣ward; and I am likewise told, that Iron Bars drench'd in Sea Water, and after expos'd to the Air, were so far impair'd, that when hammer'd, great Flakes would fly off them. Purbeck and Blechington-stone will moulder a∣way in the Air; But those dug up at Painswick, near Gloucester, will, by being expos'd to the Air, change their Primary Softness for a Crust∣hard and Glassy Marble, which penetrates but a little way into it's Substance, but is generated sooner, the oftner it is wash'd. TITLE XXIV. Of the Air in reference to Fire and Flame. CAndles which burn in Grooves furnish'd with Air Shafts, will sometimes continue burning 8 Fathom deep or more. When they come into close Ground, tho' Candles will burn for a while, yet when the Dust rises, they go out. Experiments touching the Relation betwixt Flame and Air. THE burning of Candles, &c. under a Glass Bell, as also Spirit of Wine, Matches, Touch-Wood, Sponck, &c. The keeping of A∣nimals under a Glass Bell, whilst the Flame is burning.
The burning of Bodies to Ashes in sealed Glasses, as also in exactly clos'd Receivers; Cot∣ton burnt in a seal'd Glass. The burning of a Mixture of Flames under Water in an E. R. as also of a saline Substance, and likewise of Salt Petre. A Pistol not firing in an E. R. An Experiment of burning Gunpowder. The burning of Spirit of Wine and Oyl of Turpentine in Glass Vessels with slender Necks. TITLE XXV. Of the Air in reference to Fermentation. Of the Air in reference to Fermen∣tation:RAisins being enclos'd in an exhausted Bolt∣head half full of Water, and set on a di∣gestive Furnace, presently began to ferment; and swimming upon the Liquor afforded Bubbles, which were gradually fewer; and at last a Sedi∣ment appeard in the Bottom. The Top of the Bottle being accidentally broke, the External Air rush'd in with some Noise, and the Surface of the Liquor was cover'd with Froth like Bottle Drink, and I thought I perceiv'd a visible Fume come out of the Glass, which had a Languid Smell. The Liquor had a high Tincture of the Raisins, and was of a better Consistence than that of Water.
TITLE XXVI. Of the Air as the Receptacle of Odours. TITLE XXVII. Of the Operation of the Air on the Odours of Animal Substances. Of the Ef∣fects of Air on Odours.SOur Grapes having lain 3 Years in Vacuo, were not mouldy; but the Surface of the uppermost was discolour'd with a Tartarous Efflorescence. The Grains had a musty Smell; but the Liquor tasted Acid, and would corrode Coral in the Cold. The Gage scarce discover'd any Air produc'd. In Madrid I am told, tho' they throw their Excrements into the Streets in the Night, yet the stink is not very much the next Day; nor will dead Animals stink long there. TITLE XXVIII. Of the Operation of the Air on the Odours of vegetable Substances. LArge Pieces of Oranges having been three Years included in Vacuo, their Rinds were, on their Surface, almost black; they yielded ve∣ry little Liquor; being neither mouldy nor pu∣trid.
TITLE XXIX. Of the Operations of Air on the Odours of Mineral Substances. TITLE XXX. Of the Operation of Air on the Tastes of Animal Substances. MR. Nickson told me, that Meat might be preserv'd in frosty Weather, all Win∣ter without Salt; but, if drest when froze, would not relish well. TITLE XXXI. Of the Operation of Air on the Tastes of Vegetable Substances. TITLE XXXII. Of the Operation of the Air on the Tastes of Mineral Substances. TITLE XXXIII. Of the Operation of the Air on the Colours of Animal Substances. Of the Ef∣fects of Air on Colours.THE Air influences Colours so much on black Taffety, that in Brasil, after it
hath been worn a few days, it becomes of an Ironish Colour; but if it be kept from the Air, the Colour fades not. In a Particular Region in Brazil, 50 Leagues beyond Parigna, White People turn Tawny; but a little beyond that, they recover their Co∣lour again. Upon Charlton Island, there is a sort of Birds call'd Partridges, which are white in the Winter, and gray in the Summer. TITLE XXXIV. Of the Operation of the Air on the Co∣lours of Vegetable Substances. I Am told, that most Trees in Jamaica acquire a Greenness, when newly cut down, on that Part which is most expos'd to the Air; and that Lignum Vitae, when green, is as soft as Oak. Several Trees which are soft when cut down, afterwards grow hard; especially the Cabbage-Tree, which presently hardens, and the Pith rotting out, it serves for a Pipe about 100 Foot long, which will not corrupt under Ground, but grows as hard as Iron. The Juice of Aloes Plants, which in the Island of St. Jago was clammy, bitter, and of a dark Co∣lour; under the Line lost it's Bitterness, and ac∣quir'd a green Colour. Stains are most easily got out of Linnen, at those times of the Year, when the Fruit with which they were stain'd flourish.
TITLE XXXV. Of the Operation of the Air on Mineral Substances. ONE Part of Lapis Calaminaris being mix'd with four of Salt-Petre, was kept some hours in a vehement Heat in a Crucible, by which means the Matter being alkaliz'd, Water was pour'd upon it, which made a muddy red Tincture; which being set in a Wide-mouth'd Glass in a Window, it became green and more diaphanous than before; but in a few Days, it became a transparent Liquor, a Powder subsiding which was red like Brick-dust. Spirit of Vinegar receiv'd no Tincture from Copper boil'd in it; but being expos'd to the Air in a broad Glass, in which part of the Fi∣lings were not cover'd with the Menstruum, some acquir'd a greenish blew Colour; but those Fi∣lings which were quite cover'd with the Men∣struum, acquir'd no such Colour, till by evapo∣rating it, they were expos'd to the Air. A Solution of Sal Armoniack in Water, be∣ing pour'd on Filings of Copper, contain'd in a slender Viol, and on another parcel contain'd in a Wide-mouth'd Glass, that in the latter was much more tinged than the other; And what was remarkable was, that tho' the lower Part of the Solution was of a deep Blew, yet it was cover'd with a Film of a differing Blew, like that of the finer sort of Turcoices.
Three Drops of Spr. Sal Armon. being put upon two distinct parcels of Filings of Copper, which were on two pieces of brown Paper; one was expos'd to the Air, and the other shut up in Vacuo; that in the open Air tinged the Paper with a Blew, the other remain'd ¼ of an hour without any Effect; but when it had been ex∣pos'd to the Air as the other, it tinged it Blew. A yellow Urinous Spirit of the Lees of Wine, having Filings of Copper thrown into it, drew from them a pleasant green Tincture, which in a few days became yellow; but by being expos'd to the Air, it turn'd green again; yet regain'd it's Yellowness when it had been shut up for some time. I have sometimes observ'd, that tho' by being, kept from the Air, this Tincture would lose it's Greenness, yet it would sometimes re∣new it again, without being expos'd to the out∣ward Air. Spirit of Amber extracted a green Colour from Filings of Copper. And tho' Spirit of Ho∣ny uses to turn Blew, when expos'd to the Air, yet this Evening it continu'd yellow an hour. And I have observ'd, that tho' a Tincture often vary'd it's Colour, being sometimes Colourless, and at other times of a deep Blew, yet ano∣ther Bottle, which contain'd the same Mixture, did not so. It hath been observ'd about a Mountain in Wales, that there are several Stones, which tho' of a Rusty dark Colour, yet when ex∣pos'd to the Air, in a few years they become white.
Mercurius Sublimatus Dulcis and Vitriolum Ro∣manum, being kept in Papers apart near two Years, the Sublimate look'd like Antimony, and the Superficies of the Vitriol had acquir'd the same Colour. TITLE XXXVI. Of the Air destroying or introducing other less obvious Qualities into Animal Sub∣stances. TITLE XXXVII. Of the Air destroying or introducing other less obvious Qualities into Vegetable Sub∣stances. The Effects of the Air in producing Putrefacti∣on.THE Heat and Moisture of the Air in Gui∣nea, hath been observ'd so much to pro∣mote Putrefaction, that Maggots were found in white Sugar; several Drugs have lost their Vir∣tues; and Ointments became verminous: And in the Island St. Jago, the sweet Meats contract∣ed such a Moisture in one Night, that they were forc'd to dry them in the Sun. The Oxford Air being generally moist, agrees not with splenetick Bodies. Mr. J. T. Air too dry, tho' hot, produces not divers Insects, such as white Snails and Fleas, which are bred in wet Summers.
TITLE XXXVIII. Of the Air destroying or introducing other less obvious Qualities into Mineral Sub∣stances. Less obvious Qualities introduc'd into Mine∣rals.OBservandum etiam quod Antimonium Diapho∣reticum quocun{que} modo, sive cum solo Nitro aut addito etiam Tartaro, paratum sit, tractu Tempo∣ris Aeri expositum, pravam ac quasi malignam in∣duat Naturam, sumptum{que} intra, Cordis & angu∣stias, Cardialgias, Lipothymias, vomitus{que} simi∣lia prava symptomata procreet, quae facile tamen evitabimus, si vel singulis diebus vel tribus Mensi∣bus recenter illud conficiamus, vel jam paratum Antimonium Diaphoreticum vetustum, addita por∣tiuncula Nitri, aut etiam abs{que} Nitro per unam vel alteram horam, Vulcano tradamus penitus{que} ignia∣mus, iterum{que} si Nitrum additum fuerit, edulco∣remus, & parumper reverberemus. Zwelf. p. 800. The Earth of Aegypt preserv'd dry, at the 17th of June begins to increase it's Weight, which still increases more as the River aug∣ments. Ceruss of Antimony, I am told, as well as Ant. Diaphoret. acquir'd a vomitive Quality, tho kept in a stopp'd Glass long. Those Pots which are made of Earth, which hath lain 4 or 5 Years dry, bear Fire best; and it is observ'd, that those Bricks which lie at the Tops of Brick-kills, bear Weather worst, being not so well burnt as the others.
TITLE XXIX. Of the Air in reference to the Propagation and Vegetation of Plants. The Effects of the Air in respect of generation.IT hath been observ'd, that that side of the Pyrenean Mountains, which respects France, is flourishing and verdant, tho' at the same time, the other side which respects Spain, is barren, and looks dismally, being blasted and parch'd with noxious Winds. TITLE XL. Of the Effects of the Air in Reference to the Generation, Life and Health of A∣nimals. The Effects of the Air in respect of Generation. DE vita igitur ac morte, & iis pene omnibus quae huic considerationi affinia sunt, dictum est. De sanitate verò morboque non solum Medici, sed & Physici est, causas quadantenus referre. Quatenus verò hi differant, & quatenus diversa contemplantur ignorare non convenit. Equidem quòd confinis sit quadantenus haec Medici Physicique Tra∣ctatio, & res ipsa testatur. Nam & Medici, qui∣cunque paulò elegantiores & diligentiores sunt, de natura dicunt, & artis sua principia inde sumere dignantur; & Physici omnes fere, qui concinnitatis aliquid habent, tractationem naturae usque ad medi∣cinam persequuntur. Aristot. de Respirat. cap. 21. & parag. 87.
The Temperature of the Air depends on subterraneal and terrestrial Steams mix'd with the Air, and shuffled amongst one another. The last great Plague was foretold by one who had a great Swelling in his Groin the Year before, the like having happen'd to the same Man once before. That there are Changes in the Air which de∣pend on the Motion of it barely, I am perswa∣ded, not only because it ventilates those places it passes through when in Motion, and drives away stagnant Air; but I am told that in Lan∣guedoc, that if, when the Silk-Worms had eaten their fill, it happen'd to Thunder, the Air being put into a disturb'd Motion, the weakest of them would die. Several Horses being let down a third part of the way into Mines 1000 Foot deep, some of them dy'd; but others surviv'd, and were there employ'd without any inconveniency to Respi∣ration, tho' the Receptacles they wrought in were furnish'd with Air, only from the Groove by a moderately big Shaft: I am told, the deepest Mine in Bohemia is 2000 Foot deep. I am inform'd by one who liv'd at Tripoli and Guinea, that the Air is not constantly unhealth∣ful there, but that the Men are sometimes sud∣denly taken with Fluxes and Fevers, which fre∣quently kills in 48 hours. The Air in Russia in the Winter when the North Wind blows, is too thick for Respira∣tion; And I am likewise inform'd, that when our Europaeans pass the Line, all the Lice about them ascend into their Heads, but disperse them∣selves again when they have pass'd the Equa∣tor
a good way; but they usually die under the Equator. It it observ'd, that in Scotland Agues are ve∣ry rare, tho' at the same time they are very rife in England. Aer autem corrigitur causa corruptionis ablata, & quod jam inductum est mali extinguendo;Roderici Fonf. de Sanit tuend. pag. 105, 106. si igitur ex nimio humore Aer putrescit, ignibus ac∣censis qui omni putredini remedio sunt, exsiccandus, sic ignes, per vias & domus fiant ex odoratis plan∣tis, qualis Laurus est, Mirtus, Pinus, Cupressus, Ros∣marinus, & reliquae ejus generis, qua ratione pe∣stem Athenis Hippocrates extinxit; vapores praete∣rea maligni per Aerem sparsi, dissipandi sunt, id quod à magnis ventis fieri solet. Sic Olysiponi, cum trium dierum ingens procella venisset pestis extincta nuper est; in Maroco ingens pestilentia vento quodam evanuit; qui veluti è fornace (adeo calidus erat) exire videbatur, Aerem autem nos imitando ventos commovere poterimus, si bom∣bardarum strepitus fieri curemus; si verò vapo∣res ex paludibus, ac stagnantibus aquis fieri vi∣dentur; eas resiccare aut novare oportet frequenter, maximè per aestatem. Renovantur autem novis su∣pervenientibus aquis quas è fluminibus per canales traducere oportet; aut siccandae sunt factis rivulis, & fossis per quae superfluant ad flumina; quod cum primus magnus Etruriae Dux Cosmus Pisis fecisset, & magna animi contentione, tunc faciat Ferdinan∣dus, factum est, ut saluberrimus ejus urbis Aer per omne anni tempus sit redditiis; verum si cadaverum inhumatorum multitudo Aerem inficit; magna & profunda facta fovea sepeliantur, si ab immunditie, & excrementis, quae per urbem domos sparguntur, id quod, ut reor Bisantii, & Olysiponi, in causa
ect, cur pestis adeo saeviat, ac duret, mundare opor∣tet omnia; viae ac domus quotidiè, vel saltem se∣mel in septimanâ repurgandae. 1. Joh. Beguinus in Tyrocin. Chimic. lib. 2. cap. 13. Dignum admiratione est, quod quamvis in viciniâ Hydriae Comitatûs Goriciensis, ubi re∣peritur copiose Mercurius, singulis ferè annis Lues pestifera grassatur, illa tamen semper immunis ab hac manere soleat, idque viri provectae aetatis se ob∣servasse, & à majoribus suis accepisse, mihi sanctè confirmarunt. Hinc patet, Mercurium esse sum∣mum omnis putredinis ac corruptionis alexiphar∣macum. 2 Michael Majerus in lusu de Mercu∣rio. Argentum vivum est plurimorum morborum alexipharmacum, & ut testantur quidam, ipsius Pestis (cum eo loco ubi Mercurius effoditur, & tractatur, nunquam aut rarissimè hoc Contagium grassetur) dummodo maneat in suâ propriâ natu∣râ, & non à salibus aut aquis corrosivis inficia∣tur, ac venenosus reddatur. Several Clove Trees growing in the Island of Ternate, in the East-Indies, after they were all cut down, it was very unhealthful, the Exha∣lations from them being wanting to correct the noxious Steams of a neighbouring Vulcan. So that tho' the Inhabitants of Batavia formerly resorted thither for Health's sake, they now are some of them forc'd to go to supply the Defi∣ciency of men, which the Unhealthiness of the Place makes, to supply their Garrisons. It is observ'd at Tangier, that new Comers are usually feverish for some time, especially if the East Wind blows.
Several Ants included in a Receiver, ran a∣bout till it was exhausted, and then lay as dead, but recover'd when Air was let in again, two or three times successively. Relatione della Pro∣vincia di Malavar. pag. 64 & 65. Si Patrono queste barche dalla costa della pescaria, e vanno all isola di Ceilam, nella costa della quale per la lunghezza di venti miglia, tre sole miglia lontane da terra, sette braccia abbasso arrivando sino alli dieci nel fondo, si ritrova infinita quanta di madreperle, escono per questa pesca le barche la matina col vento di terra, & arrivando al posto delle madreperle, gettare l'ancore, e fermaresi in quel posto, cominciano a tuftarsi nel mare i mari∣nari, de quali ogni barca ne ha quindeci, e venti, e ciascuno di essisi lega nel mezzo, con una fuc, della quale ha cura uno, che resta in barca e con un' altra fune legandosi una pietra alla gamba, un' altro ha pure cura di quella, e cingendosi un' sacco di cuoio dinanzi, mettendosi le guante alle mani, cosi legato si tufta con violenza nel mare, lentan∣do quelli le funi, e col peso della Pietra, va con grandiss' violenza giu, & arrivato ch' e, scioltasi dalla gamba quella fune, con la quale sta legata la pietra, resta egli libero, & la pietra viene subito tirata soprada quello, che n' ha cura, et il mari∣naro poi comincia con molta sollecitudine à pigli∣are quelle madreperle, che li vengono dinanzi, e le mette nel sacco, e sentendosi mancare la respi∣ratione, tocca la fune, con la quale sta legato nel mezzo, e quello subito con grandiss' velocita lo tira et arrivando nella barca, scaricando le madre per∣le ripiglia fiato, e dopo torna a legarsi di nuovo la pietra, e dinuovo si tufta come sopra's 'e detto, e sempre cosi per tutta la giornata. Et è tanto
faticosa questa pesca, eh' essendo, tanto profunde le Madre perl nel mare, molti mancando loro la respiratione si trovano affogati. In the Island Johanna it is observed, that if a Stranger lies all Night there, he will die of a Putrid Fever in a few days; but tho' they go but a Mile upon the Sea every night in a Boat, they are generally safe. The Island is very hot in the Day, but cold after Sun-set; and it is suppos'd, that the Unhealthfulness of the Place depends on Exhalations which plentifully arise from a vast Number of Plants that grow in the Island, which being condens'd at Night, infect the Mass of Blood. There is one Hill in the Island very high, which is seldom ever free from Fogs or Clouds, which vary in their Height ac∣cording as the Weather alters. On the Coast of Cormandel, and most Mari∣time Places of the East-Indies, there are some∣times such Fogs, that the Inhabitants for the time, are forc'd to keep the Windows and Doors of their Houses fast shut, there being at those times little or no commerce, tho' the Weather is very hot. At Balassore in the Bay of Bengale, and o∣ther Places of that Country, after great Raius the Air is so much corrupted, that the Smell is very nauseous to the Inhabitants, which may be occasion'd by a great number of Frogs, left on dry places after Inundations, and putrify'd by the Heat of the Sun. At that time there is great Mortality amongst the Natives, chiefly by vio∣lent Fevers.
When sick People are set on shore at St. He∣lena, they are generally much better in a few days, tho' before they were very weak. Le chemin plus court de Mosul a Bagdad, est par la Mesopotamie; mais on n'y trouve aucun Vil∣lage, & le Samiel y regne tout l'Eté depuis Mo∣sul jusques a Sourat; ce qui oblige a prendre l'eau, sur le Tigre où ce vent ne Soussle point. Le nom de ce vent et composé des mots, Sam et jel, c'est a dire poison et vent comme qui diroit vent de poison, Ce pourroit être le vent urens, dom parle Job xxvii. 21. Lorsque quelqu'un a respiré ce vent, il tombe mort subitement quoi qu' il en ait quelques uns qui ont le temps de dire qu' ils brûlent au dedans. D' abord qu' on est mort, on devient tout noir, et si on tire le mort par le bras où par la jambe où par un autre endroit la chair quite les os et reste entre les mains de ceux qui la touchent. Thevenot dans le Bibliotheque Ʋniversel Tom. xiii. p. 266. Dr. Collins told me, that in Muscovy their Horses are subject to a very foul Disease, from which they defend them by keeping Goats in their Stables. The Plague generally at Smyrna, but especi∣ally Aleppo, at the End of June, or the begin∣ning of July, degenerates into other Distem∣pers, the infectious Particles of the Air, then being dissipated, and depriv'd of their per∣nicious Qualities. For a like Reason the Of∣fensive Smoak of a Candle being further rarifi'd by the Application of Smoak, loses it's ill Scent and other ill Qualities; besides, it may be fur∣ther offer'd, that the Heat of the Summer, may
raise other saline Effluvia from the Earth, which mixing with the former, may correct and alter their infectious Qualities. And as for the Rea∣son why the same does not happen at other places as well as Smyrna, it may be answer'd, that the Concurrence of Causes may be the Rea∣son of the Difference, since some Soils may emit Pestilential Vapours with a sleight Heat, which others may correct when rais'd by a greater; for a like Reason to which, the Plague in Grand Cairo ceases, the Earth, upon the swelling of the River Nile, emitting Nitrous Vapours, which correct the Pestilential ones. To shew, that the Qualities of the Air may be very much alter'd by the supervening Cold∣ness or Heat of it, I shall alledge the fol∣lowing Experiment, viz. That equal parts of Allum and Nitre, being dissolv'd in the same Portion of Water, when the Liquor was pretty well evaporated, and an earthen Vessel which contain'd it, was set in the Cold, the Alum was first coagulated into several octoedrical Grains, and upon a further Evaporation, at the last the Nitre shot into very fine little Crystals, of a Figure natural to such Salts. From whence we may conjecture, that several Salts which act joyntly, may be so separated by supervening Qualities in the Air, as to act separately. A Mouse lived ten Minutes with a Quarter of Air, and three afterwards.
TITLE XLI. Of Heavy Bodies sustained in, or taken up into the Air. TITLE XLII. Of Dew. TITLE XLIII. Of Rain. IT hath been observ'd, in the Country of Campen, that Rain falling into Pits, which were dug to a sort of Quicksand, would in a little time form a Clay, which skilfully hand∣led, would yield good Iron. The Waters in that Country are obser'd to leave a strong Matter at the Bottom when distilled, notwithstanding the Rectification. Quicquid erit, sine fuco significat, velut Rot∣tenburg,L. 1. c. 8. De mont. Bohemtae, p. 26. A Milessow monte tem∣porum prae∣sagia capi∣untur. Silesiae compastum appellant, perinde Milessow Temporum prognostes, jure merito dici potest. Vidi ex proximo totum aliquando Montem densissimis Nebulis contectum, eà prorsus Imagine, qua Mons Sinai Moyse in Ne∣bula latente depingitur, at caeteri circum Mon∣tes, innubes & hilares velut rerum gerendarum ignari stabant. Sol ipse formosissimus ibat; at accolae locorum domum fugiebant, pecora urge∣bant, meque, ut domum protinus reciperem, pro∣perarem, & equos currum trahentes concitari ju∣berem
monebant, ne{que} horae quadrans intercessit, jam Coelum obduci, Sol contegi, cripi omnis aspectus. Immensum Coelo ruit agmen aquarum —ruit arduus Aether,Virg. Et Pluvia ingenti sata letae, boum{que} Labores. Diluit, implentur fossae, & quae Divinus Poeta prosequitur. At contra etiam accidere vidi, ut caeteri fumárint Montes, Milessow ni∣hil se commovente, nihil aut Nubilum, aut turbidum minanse; Incolae rogati, nihil esse magnopere timendum à caeteris spondebant, hunc unum intuendum esse, horum Nubila om∣nia à Milessow quodammodo devorari. TITLE XLIV. Of Hail. ON cerit de l'Isle en Flandres le 25 May; style nouveau, qu'il tombe dans cette vil∣le la une graisle dout les moindres grains estoi∣ent comme des oeufs de Pigeon. Cet orage a passé sur la Citadelle & la ville, & na pas laissé une vitre entiere du coste du vent: les maisons sont toutes decouvertes, & les arbres rompus, les bleds coupez, & les perdrix & les lieures morts. On a pese plusieurs grains de cette graisle, dout les uns estoient d'un quarteron, de d emi livre, de trois quarterons, et les plus gros d'une livre & d'avantage. Il y en avoit un entr' autres qui avoit dans le milieu une espece de matiere brune qu'ou mit dans le feu, qui fit faire un grand bruit. Il y en avoit un, qui estoit diaphane, lequel estant mis aupres du
feu, fondit tout aussi tost comme du plomb, quoy qu'il fut beaucoup plus dur que les autres. TITLE XLV. Of Snow. TITLE XLVI. Of other things falling out of Air. EO ipso anno quo Dux Eboracensis postre∣mo rediit e Scotia Londinum, depluere tan∣ta copia pisciculi halecibus colore, figurà, sa∣pore quam simillimi in superiori Gallocidiae in Scötia parte non procul à mari, ut duo terrae jugera ad Robertum Murray de Brughton equi∣tem pertinentia nunc Londini, ut audio, de∣gentem, cooperuerint. Rem autem totam se∣renissimo Duci Eboracensi prius de eadem ab eo interrogatus, quod tum certior aliis de hâc plu∣via factus esset, tanquam testis oculatus, ut qui aliquos horum pisciculorum videram, confir∣mavi: is porro ingeniosissime, summâque veri specie nodum ita solvit, ut diceret hos piscicu∣los unà cum aquis furentium ventorum gyro in turbinem actis evectos esse nubes, è quibus non procul inde pondere rursus suo relapsi fuerint in vicinam terram. TITLE XLVII. Promiscuous Experiments and Observations of the Air. TITLE XLVIII. Desiderata in the History of the Air, and Proposals towards supplying them.
THE WORKS Of the HONOURABLE ROBERT BOYLE Esq EPITOMIZED. BOOK IV. CHAP. I. Experiments and Observations about the Me∣chanical Production of Tastes. THAT Taste, which is Quality of a Body, by which it is enabled to cause such a Sensation upon our Sen∣sory, may be caus'd, by the Pecu∣liar Size, Shape, Motion, and mechanical Tex∣ture of a Body will appear from the following Instances, whether they be simple or compound Bodies.
EXPERIMENT I. To divide a Body almost Insipid, in two Bodies of very strong and very different Tastes Two Corro∣sives ob∣tain'd from an insipid Body.SAlt Petre refin'd, tho' almost an Insipid Body, distill'd by the way of Inflammation, or by the Help and Addition of a Tastless Clay, will yield a nitrous Spirit, so sharp and corro∣sive, that it will dissolve Metals; and a corrosive fixt Salt, different in Taste from the former, and this will dissolve Substances that the other will not work upon, and precipitate several Me∣tals, and other Concretes, out of those Solutions, made of them by the Spirit. EXPERIMENT II. Of two Bodies, The one highly Acid and Corro∣sive, and the other Alkalizate and Fiery, to produce a Body almost insipid. An insipid Body pro∣duc'd from two Cirro∣sives.IF a sufficient Quantity of Spirit of Nitre, be dropp'd upon the fixt Nitre made per Deli∣quium till it is satiated, upon a gentle Evapora∣tion, it will afford a Salt Petre; and I have often obtain'd the like from Spirit of Nitre and Salt Petre, which new Taste I am apt to believe proceeds from the new Figure and Size of the component Parts, which they acquire upon a mutual Attrition in the Preparation. For as the Prismatical Figure of Salt of Nitre, by being broke and render'd more minute, may have a more free Access to the Organ of Taste, and by
it's new figur'd Angles be able to corrode it; these again uniting and forming Prisms may become as inoffensive to the Taste as before. So Wedges may be made of a piece of Iron, and those again united after a convenient Manner, may form blunt pieces of Iron again, and tho' a Stick cut in two, be inoffensive enough to the Hand, yet if violently broken, the rag∣ged Ends will be apt to prick into the Flesh. EXPERIMENT III. Of two Bodies, the one very bitter, and the other extremely salt, to make an insipid Substance. An Insipid obtain'd from a bit∣ter and sa∣line Body.IF strong Brine made of Salt and Water, be cast upon Crystals of Silver dissolv'd in Aq. Fort. or Spirit of Nitre, the dry'd Mixture being brought to Fusion in a Crucible, and kept in that state a competent time, will afford a tough Luna Cornea insipid, which will not easi∣ly dissolve in more powerful Menstruums than Spittle. PROPOSITION IV. Of two Bodies, the one very sweet, and the other salter than Brine, to obtain an insipid Mixture. An Insipid obtain'd from a sweet and a salt Body.IF a just Proportion of Spirit Sal Armon. or Urine, be cautiously pour'd on a Solution of Minium in Vinegar or Saccharum Saturni dis∣solv'd in a proper Menstruum, if the Taste be not destroy'd by the Mixture, it will by being dry'd and flux'd as in the foregoing Experiment.
EXPERIMENT V. Of an Insipid and Soure one, to make a Substance more bitter than Aloes. A Bitter ob∣tain'd from an insipid and a sour Body.WHich is done by dissolving a sufficient Quantity of Silver in Aq. Fortis, to sati∣ate the Menstruum; which if it be filtrated, and it's superfluous Moisture abstracted, it will yield Crystals more bitter; and no wonder, since if one touch the Powder of the Crystals with ones Finger or Nail, it would so stain them, that it cannot easily be remov'd. EXPERIMENT VI. Of an insipid Body and a highly corrosive one, to make a Substance as sweet as Sugar. A sweet Bo∣dy obtain'd from a cor∣rosive and an insipid.IF good Aq. Fortis be put upon Minium, and kept together in a gentle Heat, till the Men∣struum is satiated, it will be as sweet as Saccha∣rum Saturni, but the Ingredients must be both good. EXPERIMENT VII. Of obtaining without Addition from the sweetest Bodies, Liquors corrosive enough to dissolve Bodies. A corrosive obtain'd from a sweet Body.SUgar distill'd in a Retort, will yield a red Spirit, which being rectify'd, will come o∣ver clear and colourless; And the Caput mor∣tuum
will be altogether insipid; The Spirit is of a very penetrant Taste, and tho' taken to be a homogeneous Body, yet I have found it to consist of two Spirits, one of which would dis∣solve Copper; Yet these sour Spirits being in∣corporated with Minium, would acquire a sac∣charine Sweetness, part of which they will dis∣solve in Digestion. And a like Spirit to this may be obtain'd from Hony. EXPERIMENT VIII. To divide a Body, bitter in the highest Degree, into two Substances, the one extremely sowre, and the other perfectly insipid. A sowre and an in∣sipid ob∣tain'd from a bitter Substance.THis is done by distilling Crystals of Luna in a Retort, with a strong fire in a Sand Furnace; by this means the Spirits being driven away, unite into an Acid corrosive Men∣struums, leaving an insipid Substance behind them. EXPERIMENT IX. To produce Variety of Tastes in one insipid Body, by associating it with divers Menstruums. Divers Tastes pro∣duc'd in an insipid.IF Zinke be dissolv'd in Aq. Fortis, Aq. Regis, Oyl of Vitriol, Spirit of Nitre, Spirit of Salt, distilled Vinegar, Spirit of Sal Armon. or of Urine, it will, by a Conjunction with those sapid Bodies, so alter their Textures as to produce a different Alteration in the Tastes of each.
EXPERIMENT X. To produce Variety of Tastes with one Memstru∣um, by associating it with insipid Bodies. Various Tastes caus'd by an insipid. AQua Fortis with refin'd Silver will produce a Bitter; with Lead, a saccharine sweet Taste; with Tin, a different Taste, tho' not odious; with Copper, an abominable Taste; with Mercury and Iron, bad Tastes of different kinds. It will likewise produce different Tastes with Tin, Glass, Antimony, Brass, Emery and Zinke. EXPERIMENT XI. Of two Liquors, the one highly corrosive, and the other very pungent and not pleasant, to compose a Body of a pleasant and Aromatick Taste. An Aroma∣tick ob∣tain'd from two corro∣sives.MIX gradually an Ounce of good Aq. For∣tis or Spirit of Nitre, with an equal Quantity of inflammable Spirit of Wine; and when they are well mix'd and grown cold a∣gain, if they be distill'd over together, they yield an acid corrosive Spirit of a vinous Taste and a pleasing Smell.
EXPERIMENT XII. To imitate by Art, and sometimes even in Mine∣rals, the peculiar Tastes of natural Bodies, and even Vegetables. natural Tastes Ar∣tificially i∣mitated.WHatever is the Plastick Agent in the for∣mation of Bodies of each distinct Species, to shew that the Nature of them depends on Mechanical Principles, I endeavour'd to imitate natural Tastes Artificially. Endeavouring to alter the Taste, Smell, &c. of Oyl of Vitriol and Spirit of Nitre, I obtain∣ed a Liquor, which tho' at the first pleasant, would at a certain point of time taste like Gar∣lick. And it hath been observ'd, that Mustard-Seed put into Cyder to give it a brisk Taste, made it stink like Garlick: And Semen Dauci fermented with Beer or Ale made it relish of Limon-Pills. If Gold be dissolv'd in a Mixture of Aqua Fortis and Spirit of Salt, and the Experiment be made hastily, one may obtain a Solution or a Salt of an Austere Taste like Slows. And the like Taste I have observ'd in Gold volati∣lized; or dissolv'd without any Tincture at all. The last Instance I shall make use of, is this; Take a ʒj of Orris Root sliced, and infuse it in a Pint of Canary or Malaga Sack, till it hath given it the desir'd Taste and Smell, and then keep it in a cool place.
The same Method being taken with Claret-Wine and Cochinele, the Tincture was taken for good Rasberry-Wine, some of which re∣tain'd it's Taste 2 or 3 Years. A short Excursion about some Changes of Tastes made by Maturation. Tastes pro∣duc'd by Matura∣tion.THAT several Fruits after they are ga∣ther'd, acquire a greater degree of Matu∣rity, after they are separated from having any communion with the Soul of the Tree, is be∣yond doubt, since it is not only observ'd in England, that Apples, and Medlars become Mellow after they are gather'd; but the Fruit call'd Bananas in the East-Indies, are gather'd green, and hung up to acquire a greater degree of Maturity, and to ripen by degrees, and there∣by undergo a Change both in Colour and Taste, and this I am told, hath been often found true in America. And that the Texture and Consistence of Fruits may be much alter'd and vary'd by the Influence of outward Agents, mechanically working upon them, is evident in Cherries, which undergo a sensible Alteration by a small Bruise, by which the Parts are forc'd to work one upon another; and another Instance we have in Wardens set to roast in the Ashes. And I have seen a sort of Pears betwixt France and Savoy, which being stew'd a while in a moderate Heat, would be reduc'd to a juicy Sub∣stance of a lovely red Colour, and very sweet
and luscious to the Taste; And some Pears by a moderate Compressure will lose their hard∣ness, and acquire a yielding Contexture and a pleasant Taste. But not only vegetable, but more stubborn Salts may be alter'd by an intestin Motion of their own Parts, when dissolv'd in Water, so as to become of a peculiar and a pleasant Taste. And how in Vegetables, by an intestin Com∣motion of the saporifick Parts, a new Taste may be produced, is evident in Juice of Grapes, which from a sweet and spiritless Liquor, be∣comes a spirituous Wine, and after that a sharp Vinegar, without any Addition. CHAP. II. Experiments and Observations concerning the Mechanical Production of Odours. TO shew that not only Tastes, but like∣wise Odours may be Mechanically pro∣duc'd, I shall lay down the following Experi∣ments. EXPERIMENT I. With two Bodies, neither of them odorous, to produce immediately a strong Ʋrinous Smell. A Smell pro∣duc'd from inodorous Bodies.THis will succeed if good Quick-lime and Sal Armoniack be ground together.
EXPERIMENT II. By the bare Addition of common Water, to pro∣duce immediately a very strong Smell, in a Bo∣dy that had no such before. A Smell re∣nu'd by an inodorous Body.IF a good Quantity of Camphire be dissolv'd in Oyl of Vitriol, the Gum will lose it's Scent, but by an Infusion of cold Water the Camphire will emerge and smell strong as be∣fore. EXPERIMENT III. Of producing some Odours, each of them quite dif∣ferent from that of any of the Ingredients. Odours pro∣duc'd diffe∣rent from those of the Ingredi∣ents.TWO parts of Oyl of Turpentine being gradually mix'd with one of Oyl of Vitriol, the clear Liquor which they afforded, by Distil∣lation in a sand Furnace, smelt very strong of Sulphur, and not of Turpentine. What re∣main'd behind in the Retort being forc'd, for the most part, over in the form partly of an Oyl and partly of a Butter, they smelt like distill'd Oyl of Bees-Wax. EXPERIMENT. IV. Of the Production of some Odours by local Motion. I Know several Bodies inodorous, which be∣ing considerably hot, emit not odorous Ef∣fluvia, yet being put into a peculiar kind of A∣gitation,
emit a strong Smell. And some Woods yield a powerful Scent whilst in a Turner's Leath, which before were not odoriferous, as Lignum Vitae and Beech-Wood, the latter yield∣ing a fragrant Smell much like Roses. EXPERIMENT V. By mixing a good Proportion of a very strong scented Body, with an inodorous one, to deprive it speedily of all it's umell. IF Aqua Fortis not too much dephlegmed, be pour'd upon Salt of Tartar till they cease to ferment; this Liquor evaporated, will yield Crystals like Salt Petre, but if distill'd or burnt, they yield very offensive Fumes. EXPERIMENT VI. By putting a very strong stinking Body to another of a Smell not sweet, to produce a Mixture of a pleasant and strongly Aromatick Odours. THis Phaenomenon is afforded by the Liquor prepar'd in the XI Experiment of the pre∣ceding Chapter.
EXPERIMENT VII. By digesting two Bodies, neither of them well scented, to produce Bodies of a very subtle and strong fragrant Odour. SOme Ounces of Vitriol digested with ssj of Spanish Wine afforded this Phaenomenon. EXPERIMENT VIII. By the bare Addition of a Body almost inodorous, and not well scented, to give a pleasant and aro∣matick Smell to Spirit of Wine. EQual parts of Oil of Dantzick Vitriol and Inflammable Spirit of Wine, being digest∣ed together about a Month, and then being di∣still'd, yielded a very fragrant Spirit, which was sometimes so subtle, that, tho' distill'd with a gentle Heat in a tall Glass, it would sill the Elaboratory with Fumes; whence we may learn how much a Mineral Sulphur may be enobled with a vegetable Sulphur; and how much new Coalitions and Contextures may alter the Odours of Bodies. EXPERIMENT IX. To make the foremention'd fragrant Body, without Addition of fire, degenerate into the rank Smell of Garliek. A fragrant Body turn'd into one of a Garlick Smell.THE Odiferous Liquor mentioin'd in the preceding Experiment, being kept in a Bottle close stopp'd, in a little time acquir'd
a Garlick Smell. And the like Smell I have perceiv'd in an Oyl distill'd from vegetable and mineral Subtances. Salt of Tartar being digested with several times it's Quantity of Onions, acquir'd a Gar∣lick Smell. EXPEEIMENT X. With an inodorous Body, and another not well scen∣ted, to produce a Musky Smell. A Perfume made of an inodorous, and another Body not well scented.THIS we have done, by casting small Pearls into Spirit of Vitriol, for whilst the Men∣struum was dissolving them, we could evidently perceive a strong Musky Smell. EXPERIMENT XI. With fixed Metals, and Bodies either inodorous or stinking, to produce strong and pleasant Smells, like those of some Vegetables and Minerals. To imitate vegetable Smells, &c.THO' Gold is inodorous, and Aqua Regis of an offensive strong Smell, yet the So∣lution being precipitated with Oyl of Tartar, and the Precipitate fulminated per se in a Silver Vessel; we observ'd, that when the Fulmination was newly made, the Steams were of a very plea∣sant Smell, like Musk; so that Art, by lucky Contextures, may imitate natural and specifick Odours: And not only so, but Nature may en∣dew several differing Bodies with similar Smells; for in the West-Indies, there is a sort of Seed, which for it's Smell is term'd Musk-Seed; and in
Muscovy the Skins of Musk-Rats, have such a kink of Smell; and Ducks at a certain Season of the Year, if violently chased, emit a Musk Scent. And on the other hand, there is a cer∣tain Wood in the East-Indies, which smells like Stercus Humanum. And I remember, that ha∣ving distill'd Saccharum Saturni with a strong Fire, besides the Empyreumatical Liquor, the Caput mortuum which was of a grayish Colour, emitted a pleasant Scent. And we may observe, that Nature sometimes takes the same way to produce different Effects; since tho' the Dung of most Animals is faetid, yet that of a Musk Animal is well scented. So that it is e∣nough to introduce into a Body noble Qualities, that it hath a due Contexture and Constitution of Parts. And on this Occasion, I shall add, that the Ex∣crements of other Animals are sometimes so much vary'd by the Temper and Dispositions of our Constitutions, that Dung hath at a cer∣tain distance, smell'd well, and like Musk to some People. And not to mention what hath been said of Alexander the Great, I knew a Gentleman, whose Sweat was very fragrant. And Civet, which is so well scented, in a lax Air, is as offensive to those that come too near great Quantities. And it hath been observ'd, that a Monky upon eating Spiders, would cause a Scent like Musk.
EXPERIMENT XII. To heighten good Smells by Composition. To inrich Smells by Composi∣tion.IT is observ'd, that a due Proportion of Ci∣vet or Musk mix'd with Amber-grease, pro∣motes the Scent of it; for it is not the Quanti∣ty, but the Justness of Proportion that inriches the Scent. The best Proportion being 8 parts of Amber-grease, two of Musk, and one of Civet. And it hath been observ'd, that Bodies ino∣dorous mix'd with the Ingredients of Perfumes, promoted their Scent; for which End, Wine Vinegar hath been made use of by some. And I my self prepar'd an Essence of Musk, by digesting some of it in Spirit of Wine for some Days, and then decanting the Tincture; and a weaker sort may be made, by pouring Milk upon the remaing part of the Musk, and decanting it after a cold Digestion. And one thing in this Tincture observable, is, that tho' it, of it self, hath but a weak Scent, yet if a few Drops of it be mix'd with good Sack, it perfumes the whole very richly, both in Smell and Taste.
CHAP. III. Many Changes of Colour produced by one simple Ingredient. Several changes of Colour pro∣duced by one simple In∣gredient.TO make it appear how much the Colours of Bodies depend on the Variation of Texture, and their Modification, I try'd the following Experiments; in which several Phaenomena are exhibited, by the Mixture of a colourless Ingredient, such as Spirit of Salt. I. If a little Spirit of Salt be mix'd with Sy∣rup of Violets upon a piece of Paper, it is pre∣sently turn'd from a Blew, to a red Colour incli∣ning to a Purple. II. But if Spirit of Salt be dropp'd in a just Proportion into a Solution of Filings of Copper, made with Spirit of Sal Armoniack, the Blew will be turn'd into a green Colour. III. Having mixed Syrup of Violets with Spi∣rit of Urine, Harts-horn or Oyl of Tartar per Deliquium, and by that means turn'd it green, I mix'd Spirit of Salt with it, which turn'd it red. IV. If Spirit of Salt be dropp'd into Wa∣ter, in which Red Rose Leaves well dry'd are put, it will make the Tincture to be of a love∣ly Red.
V. But if Tincture of Brasil be heightned by an addition of Spirit of Hartshorn, or Urine, Spirit of Salt will make it as pale as Sack; so that that which heightened the Red Tincture in the former Experiment, destroys it in this. VI. Tho an Infusion of Lignum Nephriticum in Water, betwixt it and the Light appears yellow, yet when held so that the Eye may be placed betwixt it and the Window, it appears to be blew, yet upon the dropping of Spirit of Salt into it, it loses that property. VII. Having dropped Spirit of Salt upon Paper stained with Ink, the black was presently changed into a yellow and blew colour. VIII. If Filings of Steel be dissolved in Spi∣rit of Salt, the filtrated Liquor will, upon Eva∣poration, shoot into green Cristals; which, if when they are dry they be kept in a Cru∣cible, a moderate Heat will turn them red. IX. We found that the red Precipitate of Mercury per se would dissolve in Spirit of Salt, tho crude Mercury will not; we likewise found, that the Redness of Minium was wholly de∣stroyed by boyling it in Spirit of Salt, and that the Tincture of Coral extracted with this Menstruum, was wholly void of colour. X. If Filings of Copper be long digested in a Sand-Furnace, in a good quantity of Spi∣rit of Salt, viz. as much as will cover it the breadth of two Fingers, the Metal being in
part dissolved, will be of a colour not unlike a muddy Red, if held betwixt your Eye and the the light. XI. But if it stand some hours in a wide-mouthed glass, it will be of a green colour, finer than that which is made by a solution of Mars. XII. If Spirit of Salt be dropped into a So∣lution of Silver, or Quicksilver in Aqua Fortis, the mixture will be of a milky whiteness, and presently deposite a white Precipitate. XIII. And the same Phaenomena will like∣wise happen, if Spirit of Salt be dropped up∣on a Tincture of Benjamin, or a Solution of Resinous Jalap. XIV. Having mixed a sweet Solution of Red Lead in Spirit of Vinegar, with a Tincture of Red Roses, I dropt Spirit of Salt into the mixture, which precipitated the red, and tur∣ned the green mixture into a durable Scarlet, which if disturbed by a mixture of the white precipitate, will be of a Carnation colour. XV. Spirit of Salt, which was muddy by standing upon Filings of Copper, being boyl'd to a clearness, and set in a wide-mouth'd Cri∣stal Glass, in a small time puts on the colour of a German Amethist; and, in three hours time, a lovely Green.
XVI. Having gathered by filtration the Precipitate of Sublimate dissolved in water, and when it was dry, poured Spirit of Salt upon it, in a glass Vessel, the precipitate at the first will become white, and when the ebul∣lition which succeeds the mixture is ended, it becomes a transparent Liquor. XVII. Having dropt Spirit of Salt upon a fourth part of Calcined Copper, we found that the mixture produced a Tincture of a muddy Red, and a white Powder, which being acted on by the fire, exhibited several colours. XVIII. The Solution of Copper, just now mention'd, being put into a Cylindrical Vial, and 2 or 3 Spoonfuls of highly rectify'd Spirit of Wine poured upon it, by shaking the mix∣ture we obtained a Liquor of a green Colour like that of Emeralds. XIX. A few drops of Spirit of Wine being dropt upon a Taffety Ribband, chang'd its Green into a Blew Colour; and being dropt on a black Ribband, alter'd that, and made it put on that which is call'd a Fading Leaf. XX. If Spirit of Salt be dropt upon Purple Paper, it presently turns it Red. XXI. Powder of Antimony being boyl'd to a Dissolution in Spirit of Salt, in a glass Ves∣sel, lost its blackness, and the Solution being dropt into Water, it in a little time subsided in the Form of a white Precipitate.
These Experiments being laid down, it may be necessary for us to observe, how unexpected the Result of most Mixtures are; which may be an Argument against the too frequent use of Compound Prescriptions, since it often not only is uncertain how those Ingredients may destroy the Vertues of each other, but som∣times whether they will duly mix according to Physitians expectation. CHAP. IV. An Experimental History of COLOURS begun. Containing Part the First. THO there are some, especially Chymists, who think that a considerable Diversity of Colours,Diversity of Colour not always an Argu∣ment of a variety in Qualities. must always imploy a Di∣versity of Nature; yet we see, that Taffaties are endued with changable Colours, as well as the Feathers of several Birds, which have as great an Affinity in Nature as in Place; and not only several Feathers vary in Colour from one another, but sometimes several parts of the same Feather: And there is no less variety of Colour in several Leaves of Flowers, tho no difference can be discovered in their Pro∣perties: A considerable Instance in which, we have in Marvail of Peru, which tho it pro∣duces several Scores of Flowers in its Season, yet I have scarce found two coloured alike.
Yet changes of Colour oft signify Alteration in the Pro∣perties of Bodies.But tho I believe that a variety of Colours does not always imply a Diversity of Proper∣ties, yet I question not, but that an altera∣tion, in point of Colour, signifies a Variation in the Disposition of Parts of Bodies; which is evident in the Extraction of Tinctures, and several other Chymical Operations, wherein the Change of Colours is the only Observation by which the Artist regulates his Process. So we see, that several Degrees of Maturation produces various Colours in Fruit; and Steel, if it be heated glowing hot in the fire, and held over a Basion of Water, till it changes its white to a red Colour, so far as is then quench'd will be hard'ned, and when polish'd at the end, will look whitish; but if the end of the Steel be held in a Candle, so that the polish'd part may not be sully'd, that which is almost contiguous to the Candle, would change from a bright Yellow to a deep one, or a sanguine Blew, and from that to a fainter, and then to a deeper Blew; and in each of these diffetent Appearances, its Texture is so much different, that if whilst it is yellow it be cooled, it is fit for Gravers Drills, but when blew, it is softer and fit for Springs of Watches; and if it be kept long in the flame after this blew appears, it will be too soft for Drills till hardned again. And it is not a little pleasant to see how these Colours will succeed one another and run along the Steel very fast. But because the flame of a Candle usually sullies the Steel, we generally make use of a red-hot Iron to heat it with. But not to prosecute these Experiments out of their due Place, before I descend more Par∣ticularly
to present you with my Considera∣tions concerning Colours,What is meant by Colour. I think it requisite to premise, That Colour being a Word of a twofold Signification, in the following Dis∣course, I shall sometimes use it to signifie on∣ly the Sensation of those reflected and modified Rays of Light, which cause that Effect on the Sensory; and generally, in the vulgar Accep∣tation, intimating by it, the Disposition in the Object which causes the Rays of Light to be reflected, so as to produce on the Sensory this or that Colour. What the Perception of Colours depends up∣on.And, perhaps, it may not be inconvenient to add, that it is the Opinion of several Modern Atomists, that the Sensation of Colours depends not so much on the inherent Qualities of the Object in the Sense, but that such a Motion is given to the Spirits in the Retina, that that communicated to the Brain, and causing a Lo∣cal Motion in some part of it, we always think we see such a colour, when the slender strings of the Retina are put into a like Motion, whe∣ther the Light concurs to the Production of that Motion or not; whence dreaming Men often think they see several things in their sleep; and distracted Persons fancy they see several things before them, which depends only upon an Internal Local Motion of their Spirits: And so upon a violent blow upon the Eye, we some∣times fancy we see Lightning and flashes of Fire; and even upon a blow on the Head, or when internal Humours cause such a Concussion in the extremities of the Optick Nerves, as is wont to produce a Sensation of Light. And I remember, that having my self a violent
Cough, I fancy'd I saw flashes of Light, which presently disappear'd again: and a very discreet Lady observ'd, that the day before she was seiz'd with some violent Hysterick and Hypo∣chondriacal Fits, which for the time gave her a bastard Palsey, every thing before her seem'd to be dyed with bright and vivid, but unusual colours: And I am told by an ingenious Gen∣tleman, that several that were seiz'd with the Plague, sometime before, fancy'd every thing coloured over very beautifully; and this Symp∣tom was successfully remov'd, as well as the other Symptoms of that Distemper by a Vomit The Vomit which was successfully given in this was made of about 8 or 10 Drachms of Cro∣cus Metallorum, and half a Drachm of white Vitriol. But further, as the Apparition of a Colour may be caus'd by the Motion of the Humors within, so the Sensory being Indisposed, that Indisposition may vary the appearance of Ex∣ternal Objects: For I have taken notice, that after looking upon the Sun or Moon with a Telescope, my Eye hath been so alter'd, that the flame of a Candle seem'd to vary much in its colour from what it used to be, and if I often open'd and shut my Eye whilst that ad∣ventitious Colour seem'd to last, I could discern it gradually diminish, till the Candle appear'd to me as before; and one thing worthy of no∣tice was, that if I looked upon the Object with one Eye, when the dazled Eye was shut, the Adventitious Colour disappear'd, but was visible again, upon opening the dazled Eye.
To this Observation I shall add, that a Lady, who had by a Fall, got a Hurt near her Eye, for six Weeks together fancy'd every thing co∣ver'd over with very dazling and glorious Co∣lours, especially white Bodies, some of which were such as she could not describe. And a Learned Gentleman told me, that looking upon the Sun with a good Telescope, without a co∣lour'd Glass to guard his Sight, the Brightness of the Object left such an Indisposition in his Eye, that nine or ten Years after, whenever he look'd upon the Window, he fancy'd he saw a light Body before his Eye, of the Size and Brightness of the Sun, as it appear'd to him in the Telescope; to which Instances, I could add others from the Experien'd Epiphanius Ferdi∣nandus, of the Symptoms of those Bitten by a Tarantula; from whence it would appear, that an Indisposition in the Organ of Vision, is suf∣ficient to vary our Judgment of Colours, but these may be more properly deliver'd in ano∣ther place. The Super∣ficies of a Body consi∣der'd as the cause of Co∣lours.But to proceed, from what hath been said it appears, I allow and teach, that the superficial Parts of a Body, reflecting the Rays of Light, and modifying them, may in one sense be said to be the Cause of that Colour it represents, since as the Beams of Light are variously modify'd, we perceive several Sensations. And tho' some hold, that the Rays of Light which conveigh Colours, are not reflected bare∣ly from the Superficies of a Body, but penetrate deeper into it's Substance; yet we are apt to call those Bodies transparent or semidiaphonous, whose Substance the Rays of Light visibly insinu∣ate
themselves into: And that in all Bodies there is no such Penetration of Light is evident, since several Substances appear to be of one Colour on the outside, and of another within; which is evident not only in Fruit, but temper'd Steel; for tho' it be furnish'd with very vivid Colours on the Superficies, yet within a Hairs breadth of it, it retains it's Steel Colour: And a more Eminent Instance is, that Lead being melted and pour'd into an Iron Vessel, when the Scum was taken off, several Colours succeeded one an∣other, upon it's Superficies, and that which ap∣pear'd last, before the Metal cool'd, remaining upon the Superficies of it, we found, that if never so little was taken off, that adventitious Colour would be taken off too, and the Metal would appear in it's own Colour; which shews not only what I alledg'd it for; but also, that probably an adventitious Colour may be acquir'd by the Effects the saline Parts of the Air, have on Lead so dispos'd to receive it's Impressions, which it will not do, till brought to a much higher degree of Fusion than bare melting. One thing remarkable in these Colours was, that they succeed not so regularly as those in Steel, but in the following order, Viz. Blew, Yellow, Purple, Blew; Green, Purple Blew, Yellow, Red; Purple, Blew, Yellow and Blew; Yellow, Blew, Purple, Green mixt, Yel∣low; Red, Blew, Green, Yellow, Red, Purple, Green. Tho' it is held by antient Atomists, that the Figure of a Body is sufficient to vary it's Colour;
yet I am perswaded, that there are other things requisite; since we see by the help of good Te∣lescopes, that the Superficies of Bodies are not only full of several Protuberances, but like∣wise several Cavities, which appear not to the naked Eye; so that the very Figures of those may have a great stroke in causing various Colours, and differently forming the Superfi∣cies of a Body, so as to enable it variously to reflect the Rays of Light, and cause different Effects in our Organ of Sense. The vari∣ous Figures of the Super∣ficial Parts requisite for the Produ∣ction of Co∣lours.But besides the various Figures of these su∣perficial Particles, the Surface of a Body may be enabled variously to reflect the Rays of Light, as they are bigger or less; and the Protuberant Particles are set closer, or at a greater distance: So Water if it have but a few Bubbles on the Top of it, hath scarce any sensible Colour, but if it be beaten into a Froth, and a great number of Bubbles are close set, it presently varies it's Co∣lour, and seems white; to which not only the Number, but the Convex Superficies of the Bub∣bles conduce; nor is it requisite, that all the Pro∣tuberant Corpuscles should be of one Figure, since, those which produce a Blew, and those that yield a Yellow being mix'd together, afford a green Co∣lour. But further, the Cavities intercepted betwixt the Protuberant Parts and their Figures, are to be consider'd in the Production of Colours, as well as the Figure and Size of the Particles them∣selves: For the Superficies of a Body may be cut transversly with a Methamatical Plain, void of Depth or Thickness, above which as well as be∣low, may be several Superficies, as in the Super∣ficies of the Earth, there may be several Parts a∣bove
the Horizontal Plain as well as below; upon which Account, the Rays of Light may be so differently reflected, as to cause diffe∣rent Colours; so the two sides of a Piece of red Glass seem differently colour'd, when the one is Rough, and the other Polish'd; and tho' several sorts of Marbles are never so curiously Polish'd, yet their Superficies so far vary, as to exhibit distinct Colours. The Situa∣tion of them likewise re∣quisite.Besides, in variously reflecting the Rays of Light, the Situation of the superficial Parts of a Body are considerable, in reference to the Light and the Position of the Eye, and also their order in reference to each other; for the Rays of Light will be differently reflected to the Eye, from Parts which are erected upon a superficial Plain, from what it will be from those Parts inclined and obverted to the Eye; so Plush or Velvet va∣ries it's Colour as the Parts of it are different∣ly inclin'd; and a Field of Corn varies it's Co∣lour as the Wind depresses the Ears of Corn suc∣cessively, or in different places: And for a like Reason the Hair of a Dog exhibits a different Colour, when the order of them is changed; and so the Parts of Water in Froth, and the Parts of Harts-horn shaved, alter their Colours, and Glass by being beaten, loses it's Transpa∣rency with the order of it's Parts, and becomes white; And for a Reason not very different, I have observed, that Pease set in parallel Lines, when they are risen about half a quarter a∣bove the Ground, by casting one Eye the same way with the parallel Lines, the Ground would appear of it's own dirty Colour, but if I look'd upon it transversly, it would wholly appear
green, the Rays which were reflected from the Soil being intercepted. The Motion of the part of a Body contribute to the Co∣lour.And that the motion of the Parts of a Li∣quor, may contribute to the change of a Colour, I am perswaded, since I have elsewhere men∣tion'd a Liquor, which, whilst it was at rest, would be clear and transparent, but when it's Parts were put into Motion, they would rise up and form a white Fume; and the like Fumes I have observ'd to rise from a Liquor diapha∣nous, and another red. And if the Superficies of a Body be made up of Parts, whose different sides afford several Colours, then the Motion or Rest of that Body may contribute to the variation or continuance of a Colour, since a new side being turn'd towards the Eye, we must consequently see a new Colour; so when the Leaves of a Tree, whose Colour on each side varies, are forced by the Wind, to appear with their other sides outward, they exhibit a new Colour, tho' a few of them makes no considerable Alteration; as a single Thred of Scarlet, seems almost void of Redness; but when several of them are pla∣ced together, their Colour becomes more con∣spicuous. So likewise in a Piece of Taffety which is made of red and blew Threds inter∣woven, I found by a Microscope, that when the Silk was so commodiously placed, that the blew Threds were not intercepted by the red ones, the Colour would be blew; but when the red Threds were more commodiously placed than the others, the Colour would vary: Where∣fore it would not be amiss to endeavour to dis∣cover a Reason, by the Use of Microscopes, why Mother of Pearl, Opals and such like Bo∣dies
are of such curious Colours, and what con∣texture of Parts is apt to produce Colours so delightful. How far Asperity contributes to Colours.But till we are furnish'd with better Micro∣scopes, or more exquisite Senses, I fear these things must be undiscover'd, since there are se∣veral degrees of Asperity, and the Parts which form them are so minute, that we are not able to know how their Shades are mix'd with, or intercepted one by another; tho' I was told by Dr. Finch, that there was a Blind Man at Ma∣stricht, not far from Ʋtretcht, who was able to distinguish simple Colours by the Touch, tho' mix'd Colours he could not discern: And The Account this Man gave the Doctor of his Sensations of those Colours was, that Black and White were the most Asperous Colours, and so like, that it was hard to distinguish them; but Black was the rougher of the two; Green next to it, Gray next to Green, Yellow a degree below that, Red and Blew so much alike, that they were hard to be distinguish'd, but that Blew was the least rough of the two; and these Diversities of Surfaces this Man discover'd, by placing the Body whose Colours he was to try betwixt his Thumb and his Fore-finger; And it was very remarkable, that his Thumb was not only the most sensible of the two, but that he had only this Exquisiteness of Sense when fasting, the least drink disabling him, to di∣stinguish so nicely the difference of Colours. But I am apt to suspect, that this blind Man rather discriminated these different Colours by the Smell of the ingredients, than the Touch; and that if the Organ of Touch contributed to
it, it rather did it, by discovering the several Forms than Degrees of Asperity, since he found it so difficult to distinguish Black and White from one another, tho' not from other Colours; and indeed tho' the Ribbons which were offer'd might be almost equally rough, yet in such slender Corpuscles as those which reflect the Rays of Light, we may easily conceive, not only a greater closeness of Parts, or a paucity of extant Parts, but that they may be otherwise ranged, and the Cavities left betwixt, much deeper in one than the other; for supposing the Pro∣tuberant Particles to be very slender, and cylin∣drical like the Hair of a Brush, and furnish'd with Hemispherical Tops, they may be so very sharp, that a less exquisite Touch, cannot di∣stinguish them, than that of this blind Man. Nor is every kind of Roughness inconsistent with Whiteness since the level Superficies of Water being made rough by Bubbles, present∣ly acquires a Whiteness, and so does Glass when scratch'd with a Diamond. But to proceed, supposing the sharp pointed Particles which are ranged upon the Superfi∣cies of black and white Bodies were so like, that the Touch could not distinguish them ea∣sily; yet upon the Account of some difference in the Cavities, which intercept the Rays of Light, they may variously reflect it; as if the Cavities of a black Body be deep, and the other superficial, the one will drown and detain the Rays of Light, whilst the others undisturbedly reflect them. From whence it appears, that Co∣lours rather depend on different Forms of Aspe∣rities, than on different degrees of it; and tho'
the blind Man tells us, that Black was the roughest of Colours, yet it does not therefore follow, that those Bodies which have the least Asperities, must be the lightest, and reflect the Rays of Light most, since according to him, White is the roughest next to Black; and tho' he assigns Yellow two degrees less of Asperity than Green, and as many more than Blew, yet it is manifestly to the Eye a lighter Colour, and reflects the Rays of Light more plentifully than either. How many ways Li∣quors may alter Co∣lours.But to return to what I was saying of the different Asperities of Bodies, by which Co∣lours may be diversify'd: To assist us to judge of the Reason of the Changes in Colours pro∣duc'd by corrosive saline Corpuscles in a fluid Form, I shall consider how many ways such Liquors may, by working upon them, alter the Superficies of Bodies upon which they act, and consequently cause them variously to reflect the Rays of Light. And First, Such Liquors may alter the Co∣lours of Bodies, by insinuating and lodging their small Particles in the Pores of a Body: So Oyl or Water dropp'd upon Paper, alters the Co∣lour of it; and the High Road upon Rain loses it's dry Colour, and changes it for another. Secondly, A Liquor may alter the Colour of a Body, by freeing it from an adventitious Co∣lour; as when the dirty Colour of Gold is ta∣ken off by putting it into the fire or Aq. Fortis. And not only Silver may be restored by the like means to it's genuine Lustre, but I know a vola∣tile Liquor, which, incorporating with Grease, will take such Stains out of Cloaths. And I have try'd, that having rubb'd a Compound Metalline Body
on a Touch-stone, Aq. Fortis would take off all the other Ingredients, and leave the Gold, ap∣pearing with its genuine Colour. Thirdly, A Liquor may alter the Colour of a Body, either by destroying or subdividing the Parts of it; as when Wood is cut into Chips, or a piece of hot Crystal quench'd in cold Water, for it being by that means crack'd, will not re∣flect the Rays of Light as before. Fourthly, A Liquor may change the Colour of another Body, by collecting together Parts of Matter scatter'd and dispers'd; so Quick∣silver pour'd into a Solution of Gold, acquires a thin Film, of a yellow golden Colour; and by a like Method all those Colours, that seem to be produc'd by Precipitation, are generated; tho' Resinous Gums dissolv'd in Spirit of Wine being unites into a Mass again; and so rectifyd transparent Butter of Antimony, upon a Mix∣ture of Water precipitates that white Substance, which when it's Salts are wash'd off, is called Mercurius Vitae. A Fifth way, by which a Liquor may alter the Colour of another Body, is, by altering the Texture of it's Parts, as, when Quicksilver is kept long in a convenient Heat; Metals are corroded, or Fruit is bruised; or when the Parts of a Liquor are agitated by the Affusion of an∣other Body; or when Chymical Oyls are shaken in a Bottle; for the Bubbles by that means rais'd will exhibit very lively Colours. Another way, is, by putting the Parts of a Body into Motion, after which they may unite in a new Form; so Vitriol rubb'd upon the Blade of a Knife, imparts not any new Colour to it;
but if the Vitriol be moisten'd, it will impart a true Copper Colour to the Iron. Another way by which a new Colour may be imparted to a Liquor, is, by an Association of it's saline Parts with those of the Body it is made use of to work upon, by which means the super∣ficial Parts of a Body, may be alter'd both in Shape and Figure; and not only a greater num∣ber or a less, may be compriz'd in the same space, but the Pores betwixt the Protuberant Parts may be much straitned, and the old ones partly fill'd up, as well as new ones intercept∣ed; as when Quicksilver is dissolv'd in Aq. Fortis, the saline Parts of the Menstruum associating themselves with the Mercurial Corpuscles, will af∣ford a Green, which afterwards degenerates easily. And so Minium by being dissolv'd in Spirit of Vinegar, yields a clear Solution; and if Aqua Fortis be dropp'd upon a Copper Plate, the Parts of the Metal being corroded, acquire an Asperity, and coagulating with the Menstruum form Grains of blew Vitriol, whereas Spirit of Urine will produce a much deeper Blew. And Aqua Fortis, which will give Red Lead a dark Colour, with crude Lead will produce a white one, with Iron, a reddish, and upon white Quills a yellowish Colour. And that in Chy∣mical Dissolutions and Precipitations the saline Parts of the Body made use of to precipitate, unite with metalline Parts they precipitate, we shall have reason to believe if we consider how much Vitriol, and the Calces of Metals are heavier than the Metals themselves. After what we have laid down concerning the Causes of Changes of Colours, there are
two things to be taken Notice of; The one is, that there are other ways to vary Colours spee∣dily, besides those we have taken notice of by the help of Liquors; as in Tempering Steel, &c. The second Particular requisite to be noted is, that tho' a Change of Colour may be effected a∣ny one of the ways above-mention'd, yet gene∣rally at least three of them are at once con∣cerned. Several Bo∣dies gene∣rally esteem∣ed opacous semidia∣phanous.From what we have been discoursing of the Asperities of Bodies in causing a Reflection of the Rays of Light, one would think that the Sub∣stances themselves are perfectly opacous and impenetrable by the Rays of Light, and so con∣tribute to the Variety of Colours, reflected to the Eye: But I am apt to believe, that even those Bodies which we call Insensible, are com∣pounded of Parts still more minute, whose Com∣missures are not utterly impervious to the Rays of Light, and that the Bodies compounded of those are in some degree Diaphanous. For in a dark Room, where the Light is only permitted to enter at one Hole, I have observ'd, that those Motes which were otherwise insen∣sible; in the Beams of Light, would represent several vivid and florid Colours, like those of a Rainbow, or of sparkling Fragments of Dia∣monds; and as soon as that Position, which they had at that time, in reference to the Eye and the Light, was lost, they ceas'd to repre∣sent those Colours, tho' still remain'd visible; so that from hence it appear'd, that these small Fragments of Matter, commonly reputed Opa∣cous, did not barely reflect, but also refracted the Rays of Light: And it is not a Phaenomenon
altogether to be slighted, that Water, tho' a diaphanous Body, hath a manifest Power in re∣fracting the Rays of Light so, that by passing through it, they represent the lively Colours of a Rainbow. And it is further observable, that several Bo∣dies which are generally esteem'd Opacous, ap∣pear in a great measure transparent, when they are reduc'd into thin Parts, and interpos'd be∣twixt the Eye and a Powerful Light, which is evident in thin Plates of Ivory, thick Leaves of Trees, Shells of Fishes and shavings of Wood. And in a darkned Room I found, that the Sub∣stance of my Hand was in a great measure tran∣sparent, when it was held betwixt my Eyes and the Rays of Light which came in at a small Hole. And not only white Marble of a convenient Thickness, but Lapis Specularis, or Muscovite Glass, being divided into thin Plates, will be considerably transparent; and even Coral it self will manifest the same Transparency if held near the Light. But on the other hand, I must own, that having look'd upon Mercury precipitate per se, Filings of Copper and Steel, the Red Calx of Lead, and the Red Colour of Vitriol, they appear'd not to have the least Transparency. How far the Transparency or Semidiapha∣neity of Bodies may contribute to the Variety of Colours produc'd by them, I shall not take upon me to determine, since beaten Glass, Snow and Ice, whose superficial Parts are manifestly transparent, represent not the lively Colours
which they do when conveniently qualifi'd by their Bigness, Shape and Texture. But to draw an Inference from what hath been said of the Cause of Colours; It appears, that according to the Hypothesis we have laid down, Bodies can only be said to be coloured when placed in the Light; but that, according to the Antients, if we take the Sense of the Word Colour, to mean only that Disposition of the superficial Surface of a Body, which enables it to modifie the Rays of Light; They may be said to have Colours in the Dark, since they have that Disposition, which enables them to re∣flect the Rays of Light in such a Form as to pro∣duce Colours. The short duration of Colours no Argument of their not being ge∣nuine.And from what hath been deliver'd, it like∣wise appears, that tho' Colours which are eva∣nid, and last but for a while, as the Colours of the Rain-bow, and all Emphatical Colours, are generally distinguish'd from True and Ge∣nuine ones, in as much as the latter are pro∣duc'd by Reflection, and these proceed from Refraction; yet, since we usually account all Ecchoes genuine Sounds, and all Smells true Smells, in as much as they are real Objects of the respective Sensories they affect, by the same Reason we may conclude these Emphatical Co∣lours genuine, since the Rays of Light equally affect our Sensory for the time: And tho' the shortness of their Continuance hath been offer'd as an Argument of their not being genuine, by the same Rule we might say, that the Colour of Grass is not genuine, because the Colour of an Emerald is more lasting; but white Co∣lour of Froth is held to be genuine, tho' it is
soon generated, and in a little time destroy'd. Besides, were the Whiteness of Froth accounted an imaginary Colour, we must no longer be∣lieve such to be distinguish'd from genuine ones, by Refraction; since Froth retains it's White∣ness, whether the Sun be setting, rising, or at the Meridian; the Position of the Sun in refe∣rence to the Eye, and the Object not at all di∣versifying it. Moreover, were a Colour to be pronounced genuine by the time of it's Duration, the white Froth of a Tenacious Body, might be said to be more genuine, because it will continue much longer, than the Colour of those Flowers of the Mervail of Peru, which fade the very day they are Blown: And I have seen a Virginian Flower, which seldom continues longer than a day. And that the bare Disposition of the Parts of a Body, by which it is said to reflect or re∣fract the Rays of Light is sufficient to produce different Colours, is not only evident in Cloth held in several Positions, by which means it variously reflects the Rays of Light; but it is further evident, since the Beams of the Sun tra∣jected through a Prismatical Glass, represent a lively and vivid Rain-bow, upon any Body up∣on which they terminate, which may be dis∣cern'd by the Eye, plac'd in any Position what∣soever, viz. whether above, or below, or on the side of the Glass. And tho' when the Prism is taken away, the Rain-bow disappears, yet nevertheless, the Light, for the time being truly reflected and refracted from the Prism, and reflected again from the Body, which those
as the Cartesians suppose, the several kinds of Motions of these Globuli might contribute to vary the Perception of Colours, so I think that without such Globuli, the Rays of Light may variously affect the Eye themselves, as their Mo∣tion is vary'd in order, or degrees of Swift∣ness when they affect our Sensory, or as their Motion is undulating or more or less di∣rect. But since I pretend not this Discourse to be a compleat History of Colours, I shall only in their proper Place deliver some Experiments, which may shew the Insufficiency of the Peripa∣teticks and the Doctrine of the Chymists, and in favour of that opinion which I am most inclin'd to be of; which is, that Colour is a Modification of the Beams of Light, which they receive from the Object, from whence being reflected to the Eye, they cause that Sensation we call Colour. But how they come to be so modify'd, I shall not take upon me to declare, till I know both what Light is it self, and what figur'd Cor∣puscles it consists of, and likewise their Size and Motion: And before I pretend to lay down my Opinion, I would further be satisfy'd what is the Nature of Refraction, and what degrees of Commixture of Shades with the Light, made in the superficial Parts of a Body is requisite to produce this or that Colour.
CHAP. V. Of the Nature of Whiteness and Blackness. Part. II. Of the Experimental History of Colours. ACcording to Aristotle it is taught by Demo∣mocritus, that Blackness depends on the Asperity of the Surface of a Body; and Gas∣sendus, who is the first that hath attempted to explain the contrary Colour, viz. Whiteness, mechanically gives us the following Account; Cogites velim (says he) lucem quidem in Diapha∣no nullius coloris videri,A mechani∣cal account of White∣ness. sed in opaco terminante candicare, ac tanto magis, quanto densior seu col∣lectior fuerit. Deinde Aquam non esse quidem coloris ex se candidi, & radium tamen ex eo reflexum ver∣sus Oculum candicare. Rursus eum plana Aquae Superficies, non nisi ex una parte eam Reflectionem faciat: Si contigerit tamen illam in aliquot Bullas intumescere, Bullam unamquam{que} reflectionem fa∣cere, & candoris speciem creare, certa superficiei parte. Ad haec spumam ex Aqua pura, non alia ratione, videri candescere & albescere, quam quod sit congeries confertissima minutissimarum Bullarum, quarum unaquaque suum radium reflectir, unde con∣tinens candor alborve apparet. Denique nivem ni∣hil aliud videri quam speciem purissimae spumae ex bullulis quam minutissimis & confertissimis cohae∣rentis. Sed ridiculum exhibeam, si tales meas Nu∣gas uberius proponem. But tho' this Account be ingenious enough, yet I shall to render it more full: Add, that
Whiteness consider'd as a Quality in the Object, depends on the Asperity of the Surface of a Body, whose Parts are so ranged as to reflect the Rays of Light, not upon one another, but upon the Spectators Eye, and that too, barely by reflecting them as a Looking-glass does, without Refraction; for in most other Colours they are so ranged, as either to alter the Texture of the reflected Light, or to vary it with Shades; but in reflecting the Rays of Light to represent the Body white, it is not only requisite, that the reflected Beams should be unalter'd, but likewise, that they should almost all be reflected back, so that some of them facing one way, and some ano∣ther, they may obvert themselves to the Eye on which side soever it is placed. To illustrate this Opinion with Experiments and Observations, I shall first observe, that the Colour of the Sun at Mid-day in clear Wea∣ther, is much more near to a Whiteness, than when stain'd by sublunary Bodies, and than when near the Horizon, where it's Rays have a great∣er Quantity of Atmospherical Parts of Matter to pass through; and Water it self the more it is shin'd on appears to be much whiter to the Spectators: And I have taken notice, that the Sun when cover'd with a white Cloud, hath ap∣pear'd in the Water to be not red, but white: And it is observ'd by Smiths, that Iron, which when moderately hot appears red, when it hath acquir'd a higher degree of Ignition, it seems to be white. So those that have weak Eyes complain of too great a Reflection of Light, when the Ground is cover'd with Snow; and it is attested by seve∣ral
Writers and other Travellers, that the Whiteness of the Sun hath been so great, that in Muscovy and Russia they found the Snow, to reflect the Light so much, that they could see much farther upon snowy Ground, than we here in England where no Snow lies on the Ground; so that they could see their way by the bare Reflection of the Snow, when the Sun did not shine. Tho' I am apt to believe, that the Ef∣fect might in some measure proceed from the Clearness of the Air, cleans'd of those Steams which sometimes darken it; since it appears, that we are able in a frosty Night by reason of the clearness of the Air, to discern more Stars than at other times. And that white Bodies reflect the Rays of Light most plentifully, and have no native Light of their own appears, since Snow en∣closed in a dark Room was not at all visible: But on the contrary it is observ'd, that white Cloths are the most easily discerned in dark Nights. And for a further Confirmation that white Bodies reflect the Rays of Light not only most plentifully, but from themselves; I shall add, that if the Rays of Light, which enter into a dark Room at a small Hole, Light upon a white Wall, they Enlighten the Room much further than if they fall upon any other Co∣lour. And that white Bodies cast most Rays of Light from themselves appears, since, white Paper is not near so apt to be set on fire by a Burn∣ing-Glass as black, the concentred Beams be∣ing reflected back much more by the one than the other. To which I shall further add, that,
I have perceiv'd a much greater degree of Heat, when I have held my Hand in the Sun Beams, with a black Glove on; than when it was co∣vered with a White one. And to shew that white Bodies not only re∣flect the Rays of Light plentifully, but un∣stain'd, I shall add, that in a dark Room, when the Rays reflected from a coloured Body, were thrown upon a white Wall, they would repre∣sent the Colour of that Body, whereas, if the Beams Reflected from a yellow Body upon a blew, it would make a green. And to these I shall further add, on this oc∣casion, that having cast the Rays of a troubled Water, by the help of a Lenticular Glass, into an upper Room darkened, the concenter'd Reflections of the glittering Waves at a few Paces distance, represented a white Body; but if we approached near the Place on which those Rays were cast, they only seem'd to be Beams reflected from glittering Waves, which appear'd like so ma∣ny shining Scales of Fishes, succeeding each other successively and disappearing again. But if the seeming Whiteness of a River, proceed not from the reflection of the Sun Beams, but the brightness of the Sky, a Storm may cause the Surface of it to appear Black, the Rays of Light, being reflected more inward than out∣ward; except near the Sea Shore, where the Surface of the agitated Water is covered with Froth. The Surfaces of White Bodies Spe∣cular.But to shew, that the Surfaces of white Bodies are Specular, I shall Subjoyn, that drops of Mercury being rais'd, by a convenient heat in an Alembick, represented so many looking
Glasses, but caused the sides of the Glass they stuck to, to appear White: And it's observ'd, that if we look upon the Milky Way or Gallaxy, with a Telescope, tho' to our Eye it appears White, by the help of that we shall discover, that that Whitness only depended upon a Col∣lection of the Rays of Light, whose confused Beams represented to the Eye, a white Body; and why for a like Reason, the Superficies of a Body, which to the Eye reflects the Beams confusedly may not appear White, as well as the Planets which shine by a borrow'd Light, I see no contradi∣ctory Reason But to return to Experiments, we see, that the whites of Eggs, which are in some measure Na∣tural Speculums, by being beaten into a Froth appear White. And if Oyl of Turpentine be mixed with Water, and shaken in a Vial, as the Particles of the Oyl are more or less numerous, and minutely divided, it appears more or less White; which Experiment will likewise succeed if tryed with a yellow Mixture of crude Tur∣pentine, instead of the Oyl; and likewise with an Oyl dyed Green with a Tincture of Copper. And for a like Reason the Water which is car∣ried over with Oyls distilled in an Alembick, appears White, as long as the globular Parti∣cles of Oyl Swim in it; and hot Water is ob∣serv'd to be considerably Whitest and Opacous when the hot Vapours disper'd through it, stop the Passages of the Rays of Light, and cause them to fly from it, more plentifully upon the Eye; so that I am apt to think, that the Super∣ficies of white Bodies may as well be convex, as smooth, provided the Superficies be so set with
Specular Particles, as to reflect the Rays of Light plentifully upon the Eye; for it is not on∣ly observ'd, that the globular Particles of Oyl, make the Water they are mix'd with appear White; but the same Colour is likewise re∣flected, from Powdered Glass, and even several Threds of it laid together; so that it is not, ac∣cording to the Opinion of some, requisite that the Particles of a white Body, should be alto∣gether Globular. And I have observ'd, that Snow look'd upon, with a Microscope, ap∣pear'd to consist of slender Icicles of several shapes. And I remember, that by contusion, I have obtained a whitish Powder of Granates, Glass of Antimony, and Emeralds; and the Salt of Venereal Vitriol, Powdered, will com∣paratively with the Entire Chrystals, exhibit a considerable Degree of Whiteness. And as a Body which is not White, may ac∣quire that Colour, by a Change of the Texture of its Parts; so one that is White, may be de∣prived of that Colour: Thus Silver being first brush'd, and then boyled with Salt and Tartar appears White; but becomes Specular by being rubb'd with a Piece of Steel, the protuberant Parts, being by that means depress'd into a con∣tinu'd Superficies, and reflecting the Image of a lucid Body, whereas before the innumerable lit∣tle Speculae reflected the Rays of Light more con∣fusedly. cha∣ Ac∣ of Blackness.From what hath been said of Whiteness, we may be able to guess in some Measure of the Reason of Blackness, concerning which Quality Gassendus says, Existimare par est, corpora suapte natura nigra constare ex particulis, quarum Superfi∣cicculae
scabrae sunt, nec facilè lucem extrorsum re∣flectunt: So that Black differs from White, in as much as the Particles which are reflected ex∣ternally by the one, are deaded by the other, and not reflected outward, either because the Superficies hath such protuberant Parts, as reflect the Rays internally, or being soft and pliable yield to the Impress of those lucid Parts that strike against them; so a Ball, that would fly back from a Stone, will scarce at all Rebound from a Net or Mud; tho' the latter Explication I think the less propable, because several Bodies are Black, whose Surfaces are scarce of so yield∣ing a Texture, except their peculiar Texture would render them more capable of being worked on, by the Rays of Light, than other Bodies, otherwise softer than they. But whatever is the Cause, why the Beams of Light are very sparingly reflected from Opa∣cous Bodies; that that is the Reason of Black∣ness will be rendred probable if we take no∣tice, that if a black Substance be held partly in the Sun-shine, and partly out, that Part will appear Blackest, which is least Shone upon; and if the rough Surface of a black Marble be well Polish'd, and brought to the Form of a Concave Speculum, it will represent the Image of the Sun without dazling the Eyes, and will not in a long time set Wood on Fire, tho' a less Speculum of Matter of a more reflecting Nature would cause it to Flame in a Trice. And to this I shall add, that having set a white and a black Marble Mortar in the Sun, the Black one collected the Rays of the Sun, so as to form a Focus much more conspicuous
and hot than the other, by which they were more dispers'd, and reflected a glaring Light. And the Beams of a Candle being cast upon two Pieces of Marble, through a round Hole, half an Inch Diameter, the Circle of Light on the Black one, tho much less Luminous, was better Defin'd. And for a further Confirmation of our Hypo∣thesis, I shall add, that when the Rays of Light, fall on the Holes in linnen Cloth, or the Mouth of a Well, those Parts are much Darker, the Beams of Light being not reflected back upon the Eye; And even black Velvet, being stroak'd up and down, seem'd much Blacker one way than the other, the silken Piles when inclin'd, reflecting a greater Number of Rays to the Eye, than the Tops of them were able to do, which make but a small Part of the Superficies: And I have observ'd, that a Cart-load of Carrots, ap∣pear'd much more Dark when the Ends of them were towards me, than when a greater Number of Rays were reflected to the Eye by the sides of them. And in a dark Room it is ob∣serv'd, that if the Light falls upon a black Cloth, the reflection from it is not near so sensible as if a White one be employ'd. And I have observ'd, that a Piece of Tile be∣ing partly colour'd Black, and partly White, the Red was much hotter than the White, tho' not so hot as the Black Part: And it hath been observ'd in Italy, that black Marbles expos'd to the Sun were much hotter than White ones, tho' it is observ'd, that the black Marble is much more solid than White. And it is further observ'd, that Rooms hung with Black are
much warmer than others, so that a Lady who was of a Tender Constitution was us'd to com∣plain that she was apt to take Cold, after she had visited Persons whose Rooms where hung with Black. And I am told, that in hot Coun∣tries, Eggs colour'd Black, and expos'd to the Sun, would be roasted by it. And I have observ'd them in England to acquire a considerable De∣gree of Heat by being expos'd to the Sun in the Summer-time Blacken'd over. And not only the blind Dutch-man, but as Bartholinus says, a blind Earl of Mansfield could distinguish White from Black by the Rough∣ness of the latter. And for these Reasons I am the rather inclin'd to believe the Doctrine propos'd, leaving it to be determin'd by experience, whether the Beams of Light be reflected from opacous Bo∣dies, and so differently modified before they reach the Eye, or whether from white Bodies they are not mov'd more briskly. CHAP. VI. Experiments in Consort, concerning Whit∣ness ond Blackness. EXPERIMENT I. Several Ex∣periments concerning Whitness & Blackness.TO shew that the Colours of two diapha∣nous Liquors, may be destroy'd by a Change of Texture; Satiate warm Water with
Sublimate, and having filtered it through Cap∣paper, to render it clear and limpid; if a few drops of Spirit of Urine be drop'd into two Spoonsful of it, the mixture will immediately become White; yet by an addition of Aqua fortis it will again become Transparent, and will be∣come White again, with Spirit of Urine; and the like hath succeeded in other Experiments as well as of these. EXPERIMENT II. IF a Solution of Vitriol be shaken with an In∣fusion of Galls diluted with Water, it will turn it Black; but by an addition of a few drops of Oyl of Vitriol, it will presently lay down it's dark Colour and become Transparent; but upon an addition of Salt of Tartar dissolv'd, it will again acquire a Blackness; and tho' this Ink be pale, yet when Dry, it is very Black. The like succeeded with common Ink, but not so easily, the Operation of the Salts being hin∣dred by the Gum. And here I shall take Notice, that tho it be generally allow'd, that alkalizate Salts will not precipitate Bodies, except first dis∣solv'd in some Acid Menstruum; Yet I have try'd, that a Lixivium of Pot-ashes, being pour'd upon Decoctions of Vegetables, would precipi∣tate a curdled Matter, which would be left be∣hind in the Filtre. And in making the first Ink, several Particles of black Matter, would be seperated by a Filtre; and when the Ink was made Clear again by the Oyl of Vitriol, the Salt of Tarter seem'd to precipitate and to unite
those Particles of Matter which were dissolv'd by the corrosive Oyl. And to shew, that Galls are not so requisite to the making of Ink, as they are generally sup∣pos'd, I added a few Drops of a Solution of Vitriol, to a Decoction of Rose Leaves, upon which it turn'd black, and changed that Colour for a deep Red, when Aqua Fortis was added to it, which was reduc'd to a Black again by Spi∣rit of Urine. And tho' upon a Mixture of Li∣quors, mention'd in the Second Chapter of this History of Colours, a black Colour immediate∣ly emerges, yet both the Infusion of Orpiment and a Solution of Minium were before they were mix'd, limpid and Colourses. EXPERIMENT III. THE Caput Mortuum of white Harts-horn distill'd in a Retort will be black, which, that it depends on the change of it's Texture only is evident, since the same happens if it be distill'd in Glass Vessels: Yet by Calcination in open Vessels, it will regain it's pristine White∣ness. Ivory burnt yields a curious black, and so does the burnt Caput Mortuum of Tartar; but if it be throughly calcin'd it will be white. So white Woods, as Hazel, will yield a black Char∣coal and whitish Ashes, and even Animal Sub∣stances grow black by being burnt, and white when perfectly calcin'd.
EXPERIMENT IV. THO' it be held as a Maxim by some Phi∣losophers and most Chymists, viz. Adusta nigra, sed perusta alba, yet I have try'd, that Alabaster burnt yields a Yellow; and Lead cal∣cin'd forms a red Minium, which urg'd further by the fire, turns to a Glass darker than Mi∣nium. So likewise white Calx of Antimony yields a Glass of a red Colour, deeper than the Calx of burnt Antimony. And tho' common Glass of Antimony adulterated with Borax is of a more diluted Colour, yet by being urg'd with a vio∣lent fire, it's Colour was heighten'd. Blew Vi∣triol burnt till it may be rubb'd to a Powder betwixt one's Fingers, will acquire a white Co∣lour; but if urg'd by a greater Heat, it will pass through other Colours, as Gray yellowish and red, and when it is almost calcin'd throughly, it will be of a dark Purple, near to a black Colour. To these I may add, that Crocus Martis per se, is not so near a White, as the Iron it is prepar'd from. And that judicious Traveller Bellonius tells us, that a white Charcoal is made of the Wood of Oxyceder. EXPERIMENT V. THO' Camphire kept in close Glasses would not lose it's Colour by Heat, yet being set on fire in the free Air, it emitted Smoak copiously, and a Concave Glass with a Hole in the Middle being turn'd upon it, it continu'd burning, and cover'd the inside of the Glass,
with a black Soot, which was so copious, that the whole Substance of the Camphire seem'd converted into Soot. EXPERIMENT VI. REctify'd Oyl of Vitriol being gradually mix'd with Essential Oyl of Wormwood drawn over with store of Water in an Alem∣bick, this Mixture was distill'd in a Retort, where the Caput Mortuum that remain'd was black; and the like succeeded with Oyl of Win∣ter-Savory made use of instead of the Oyl of Wormwood. EXPERIMENT VII. TO render yellow Wax white, put a suffici∣ent Quantity of it into a Bolt-head, with Spirit of Wine, and place it in a Sand-heat, gra∣dually increas'd till the Wine begins to boil; and then, the Wax being melted, the Mixture will be white; which, upon an Evaportion of the most subtle Parts of the Wine will subside into less Room than before. And one thing re∣markable in this Experiment is, that the yel∣low Colour will neither remain in the Wax, nor the Spirit of Wine separated by a Filtre of brown Paper whilst it is hot. EXPERIMENT VIII. TWO Parts of Sublimate being mix'd with one of Tin-glass and sublim'd together, the Matter which ascended was of a peculiar
Texture, made up of thin, smooth, soft and slippery Plates, much like the Scales of Fishes, and of a shining Colour, much like Orient Pearls. EXPERIMENT IX. IF a Mixture of Gold and Silver be cast into Aq. Fortis, the Gold falling to the Bottom will be turn'd black, tho' neither the Silver or Aq. Fortis were of that Colour. It is look'd upon by Alchymists, that a Mineral abounds with Gold, if it precipitates a black Powder: And it hath been observ'd, that Gold and Sil∣ver refin'd would fully white Cloth, by rub∣bing them on it: And I have likewise taken no∣tice, that Pens would be colour'd black, by a Silver case I kept them in. EXPERIMENT X. THAT a Solution of Silver will colour Hair black, hath often been found. And I have observ'd, that Silver dissolv'd in Aq. Fortis, and evaporated ad siccitatem, and clear'd from their greenish Blewness by a successive Affusion and Evaporation of fair Water; this Calx being laid either upon the Skin or Hafts of Knives, would stain them with a lasting black Co∣lour. EXPERIMENT XI. IN order to discover the Reason of the Black∣ness of Negroes, and the Colours of Foxes
and Hares as well as other Animals, I shall sub∣joyn some Collections I have made for that pur∣pose. And first, tho it is believ'd, that the Blackness of the Skins of Negroes depends on the Heat of the Sun, which in other hot Coun∣tries is observ'd to darken the Complexions of Men, more than in England; yet I am apt to be∣lieve, that something else is requisite to the Pro∣duction of those Colours, besides the Influence of the Sun, since we see that Infants are of the same Colour. Besides, in other Places of the same Latitude, the People are observ'd to be at the most but Tawny; and several Nations in the Empire of Aethiopia situated almost under the Torrid Zone: And it is observ'd by Travellers and Navigators, that there are very few Blacks in America, tho' the New World contains ma∣ny Climates, and reaches from one Tropick to another. And tho' the Danes are whiter than the Spaniards, yet it is observ'd, that the Swedes who likewise Inhabit those cold Countries are not so white as them. And I have seen several Russians, who were of a much browner Com∣plexion than the Danes, tho' these are said to proceed from a Race of Tartars, for in one Province the Muscovites are observ'd to be much whiter. And I am told, that Negroes live not far from the Cape of good Hope, which is beyond the Southern Tropick, tho' near the same degree of Latitude Northward, Divers American Nations are not inhabited by Negroes, and the Inhabitants of Candia, some Parts of Sicily, and even Spain are not so much as Tawny Moors. And even the Inhabitants of Greenland are observ'd to be of an Olive-colour, or a darker Complexion.
But nevertheless, that Coldness may in some measure contribute to Blackness or Whiteness, appears from what hath been observ'd in Russia and Livonia, viz. that Hares and Foxes become white in Winter, and regain their genuine Colours again in the Summer; yet in Curland, as Olaus Magnus relates, they vary not their Colour in the Winter; tho' this Country is only severv'd from Livonia by the River Dugna, where it may seem too strange to be credited, that so small a compass as that River takes up, should di∣versity the Effects of Cold so much; and the same Objection may be made in respect of the Moors, since Negroes inhabit on one side the River Cenega, and Tawny colour'd People on the o∣ther. Another Opinion concerning the Colour of Negroes is, that it was a Curse entail'd upon the Race of Cham. But not to shift off the natural Cause of that Colour, by flying to a Principal and Universal Cause, whilst there is no necessi∣ty of it; not to urge, that the Curse pro∣nounced by Noah, was, that he should be a Ser∣vant of Servants, which was fulfill'd, when the Posterity of Sem subdued the Cananites; I see not why Blackness should be esteem'd a Curse, since the Negroes are so much content with it, that they paint the Devil white: Nor do I think Blackness inconsistent with Beauty, since it con∣sists in a Sumetry of Parts and good Features in the Face; so that Blackness cannot reasonably be accounted a Curse, except that Colour causes their Bodies to be more scorched by the heat of the Sun, than if it were white, according to the Doctrine above deliver'd.
But I am rather inclin'd to think, that they proceed from some seminal Influence, since Ne∣groes, as well as Americans Transplanted, re∣tain their Proper and Native Colours; and Twins which are got by the Portugals and Aethiopian Women, are, sometimes, one of them white, and the other black. And how far seminal Im∣pressions contribute to the differences of Orga∣nical Parts, appears from the flat Noses, and Blubber Lips of most Negroes. To which may be added, the little Feet of the Chineses and the Macrocephali mention'd by Hypocrates. And it hath not only been observ'd, that a sort of Hens want Rumps; but I have seen a Raven perfectly white. To which I shall add, that a Lady, who was a devout Catholick, looking upon the Peb∣bles at the Bottom of St. Winifred's Well, some time after bore a Child whose Skin was cover'd with the Resemblance of Red Pebbles. To what hath been said of Negroes, I shall add, that the Epidermis only is black, the Skin under that, being as white as that of the Eu∣ropeans; so that a Child who had the Measles or small Pox, after those Pimples had broke, was cover'd with a multitude of white Spots: And it is attested by several, that the Negroes when first born, are red or white like other Children, but in a few days acquire the Colour of their Parents: Nevertheless, some of them that are born under the Torrid Zone, continue white, and are presented to the King, and always wait on him. These are usually, as Purchas witnesses, brought up in Witchcraft, and the People stand in great Awe of them.
EXPERIMENT XII. NOT only common Crab's Eyes and Pearls, but Coral and Minium dissolv'd in Spirit of Vinegar, may be precipitated by Oyl of Tar∣tar into white Powders: And not only Silver and Tin, but Lead and Quicksilver dissolv'd in Aqua Fortis will yield a white Precipitate, upon an Affusion of salt Water, and so will Tin-glass; and the Calces will be much better colour'd, if they be precipitated with Oyl of Vitriol instead of Oyl of Tartar. And black mineral Anti∣mony may, by the Salts which concur to the Composition of Sublimate, be turn'd into a rectify'd Butter of Antimony, which upon an Affusion of fair Water, will precipitate the white Powder call'd Mercurius Vitae; and the like Powder may be made of Antimony without any Addition at all: And the like white Sub∣stance will be precipitated by an Affusion of Water, upon a Solution of sulphureous Gums in Spirit of Wine. And to these I may fur∣ther add, that Water being pour'd upon a red Tincture of Benjamin, drawn with Spirit of Wine, will turn it white: But if such seemingly white Bodies stand for some time, unstirred, a resinous Substance will of it self subside; And if acid Spirits be dropp'd upon a red Solution of Sulphur in Pot-Ashes, or some other sharp Lixivium, the precipitated Sulphur, before it subsides, will turn the red Liquor white. But tho these several Bodies yield white Precipitates, yet all will not, since Gold yields a yellow one, whether precipitated by Oyl of Tartar, or Spi∣rit
of Sal Armoniack. And Mercury, tho when reduc'd to a Sublimate, whether precipitated by Spirit of Urine or Hart's-horn, it yields a white Precipitate, yet with a Solution of Pot-Ashes, or other strong Lixiviate Salts, it will let fall an Orange Tawny colour'd Powder; And so will Crude Antimony upon an Affusion of an acid Liquor. To which we may add, that any of these fix'd Salts being pour'd upon a Solution of Vi∣triol, it will yield a Sulphur of Vitriol, not at all white. EXPERIMENT XIII. THO it be in some measure true, that White is a Colour like the Materia Prima, fit to take any Form, and that Black is a Colour which is not to be changed for another; yet it does not hold universally true; for tho' the Ingre∣dients which dye a Body Black, by infecting o∣ther Ingredients usually hinder it from taking a higher Colour; yet we have made it appear, that Inks of different kinds might be depriv'd of their Blackness. And I have sometimes turn'd black Pieces of Silk, yellow, with Oyl of Vitriol. And as for Whiteness, we ought not to believe it so easily destroy'd without Caution and some Restrictions: For Lead is by Calcination, turn'd into a red Body; and Tin is reduc'd into a white Calx, and the common Putty sold in the Shops, is made up of half Tin and half Lead, and yet, not∣withstanding the Lead, the Putty is white, with∣out discovering any Mixture of Minium. And so if Copper be mix'd by Fusion with half the Quantity of Tin, they will yield a Substance,
in which the white Colour is much more tran∣sparent, than the reddish Colour of the Cop∣per. And on this occasion I shall add, that Arsnick being colliquated in Copper, blanch'd it; but the white Mixture being kept upon the Cupel, till the Arsnick flew away, the Copper return'd to it's Pristine Colour. And to shew how much the white Colour of a Metal may obscure the Colour of those it is mix'd with, I shall add, that a fourth Part of Gold being mix'd with Silver, the yellow Colour of the Gold was not to be discern'd; but when it was rubb'd on a Touch-stone, Aqua Fortis would take off the Silver, and leave the Gold behind it, upon the Stone. EXPERIMENT XIV. A Polish'd Piece of black Horn being scrap'd with a Piece of Glass, and laid upon a black Beaver Hat, seem'd white enough; but being plac'd upon white Paper, the Colour of that eclipsed the Whiteness of the Horn, and made it appear like dirty Linnen. From which Experiment it appears, that Colours depend neither on substantial Forms, nor the Hyposta∣tical Principles of the Chymists, but on a Re∣flection of the Rays of Light, variously modi∣fy'd by their new superficial Texture.
EXPERIMENT XV. IT is Taught by the Chymists, that Black∣ness depends on Sulphur adust. But besides what hath been already offer'd as the cause of Blackness, I shall add, in reference to the Opi∣nion here propos'd, that common Sulphur sub∣lim'd, is far from black, but it is in a great measure yellow, and rather more than less white than before; and when set on fire to make O∣leum Sulph. per campanam, it yields very little Soot; and the Flame yields so little, that it will scarce black a white Sheet of Paper; and it is observ'd rather to whiten than to black Linnen, and makes red Rose Leaves grow pale and not black. And I have seen a Piece of fix'd Sulphur, which was kept several Weeks in a violent Heat, yet it had no other Colour when cool, but a pure red. And not only Sulphur, but that sulphureous Body Camphire may be kept in a violent Heat without acquiring any thing of Blackness: Nor will inflammable Spi∣rit of Wine, discolour a piece of Paper held o∣ver it whilst it consumes. And Tin calein'd, yields not a black, but a white Calx; and not only the Charcoal made of Oxy-Cedar is white, but the Smoak of Tinby Coals is observ'd rather to blanch Linnen than black it: To what hath been said we may add, that the Ingredients of our Ink were not hot but cold; and Juice of Li∣mons will blacken the Blade of Knife, except it be quickly wiped off, tho' no actual Heat in∣tervenes to adust the Sulphur. And if the Black∣ness
of the Ink depended on adust Sulphur, it might be demanded, what became of those a∣dust Particles, when the Liquor, by a few drops of Oyl of Vitriol, lost that Colour. Besides, Soot it self may have it's Texture so far alter'd, as to yield a Crystalline Salt and a transparent Colour. But were it allow'd, since Adustion renders some Bodies black, that that Colour depended on a trorrify'd Sulphur, it might be further demanded, what gives torrify'd Sulphur that Colour; and it might be question'd, what makes a Window half shut, at a distance to appear black, since it hath no Access of torrify'd Sulphur upon that Posture, but only the Rays of Light are not so plentiflly reflected by it, as is requisite to affect the Senso∣ry with a more lively Colour; But to conclude. What the Chymists teach of Blackness, to me seems to come to no more, than if in answer to an Enquiry after the Cause of Salivation, they should tell us, that the several kinds of Precipi∣tates of Gold and Mercury, and likewise of Quicksilver and Silver salivate upon Account of the Mercury that abounds in them, where we are still at a loss to know why Mercury should have that Effect.
CHAP. VII. Containing promiscuous Experiments about Colours, being the Third Part of the Ex∣perimental History of Colours. EXPERIMENT I. Promisu∣ous Experi∣ments con∣cerning Co∣lours.TO shew how much the Diversity of Co∣lours represented by Opace Bodies, de∣pend on the Mixture of the Rays of Light with Shades more or less as to Quantity, or as to Interruption, I shall subjoyn the following Notes. Paper stain'd with several Colours, plac'd in a dark Room whose Window was Southward, the Beams of Light entring in at a Hole 3 Inches ½ Diameter; the White yielded the brightest Reflection. Red gave a Reflection stronger than Green or Blew, whose Colours were scarce discernable, and of an equal Brightness. Yel∣low reflected more Light than either Green or Blew. Red reflected more Light than Purple, and so did Blew. Marble Paper sleek'd reflect∣ed the Rays of Light unstain'd, but not so bright as white Paper. Purple seem'd to re∣flect more Light, than a dark Green. In com∣pounding Colours by Reflection we observ'd, that if the Colours were not strong and some∣what glossy, the reflected Rays would not form a compound Colour on the Wall.
EXPERIMENT II. I Have often taken notice, that white Linnen would receive and reflect the Colour of a red Silk Wastcoat in a Light Room; tho' it be generally believ'd, that a dark Room is requi∣site to make the Colour of one Body visible by Reflection from another. EXPERIMENT III. COlour'd sheets of Paper held betwixt the Light and the Eye, at the Hole which was made in a dark Room, the Colours were each of them represented to the Eye single, but by placing one sheet of Paper before another, the Rays of Light passing through the Blew and Yellow exhibited a darker Yellow; but a finer Paper which was blew, being made use of in∣stead of the former, they afforded a good Green. The yellow and red represented a dark Orange colour'd Red. The Purple and Red, appear'd of a deeper Scarlet. Purple and Yellow made an Orange Colour. Green and Red a dark O∣range Tawny. Green and Purple, made a Pur∣ple more dirty. Blew made the Purple deeper and more lovely. Red Marble and yellow re∣presented a Scarlet; but the Colours which were thus compounded vary'd much, as the Co∣lours of the Paper were deeper or more slight, and as the Paper differ'd in fineness.
EXPERIMENT. IV. IN the aforesaid darkened Room we plac'd a Triangular Prismatical Glass in a conveni∣ent Posture, and observ'd no less than four Re∣flections and three Refractions; and by hiding sometimes one Part of the Prism, and some∣times another,See Plat. 5. Fig. 5. we found the Rays of Light as the following Scheme represents (See Plate 5. Fig. 5 The Explication of the Scheme. P. P. P. An Aequilatero-triangular Crystal∣line Prism, of whose Edges P. is placed next the Sun. A. B. and α. β. Two Rays from the Sun, fal∣ling on the Prism at B. β. and thence partly reflected towards C. and γ. and partly refra∣cted towards D. and δ. B. C. and β γ. Those reflected Rays. B. D. and β. γ. Those refracted Rays which are partly refracted towards E. and . and there represent a Iris 345, denoting the five Consecutions of Colours, Red, Yellow, Green, Blew and Purple, and are partly re∣flected towards F. and 3. D. F. and γ 3. Those reflected Rays which are partly refracted towards G. and η Co∣lourless, and partly reflected towards H. and θ. F. H. and 3. θ. Those reflected Rays, which are refracted towards I. and I. and there re∣present another fainter Iris, the Colours of
which are contrary to the former 54321. sig∣nifying, Purple, Blew, Green, Yellow, Red, so the Prism in the Posture represents four Rain∣bows. EXPERIMENT V. WE observ'd, that in a light Room, the Prismatical Iris might be reflected, with∣out losing any of it's Colours, from a flat Look∣ing Glass, the Surface of Water, or a Con∣cave Looking-Glass; and that Refraction did as little destroy their Colours as Reflection: For tho' by a Burning-Glass one Part of the Iris would appear either beyond or on this side the other, yet the Colours would appear as vivid in the displac'd Part, as in the other. To which I shall add, that the most part of the Prism be∣ing cover'd with an opacous Body, so that, the Rays falling but on a small Part of it, the Iris was but little, yet the Colour appear'd to be the same through a Microscope as to the naked Eye. EXPERIMENT VI. COlours which appear in a dark Room are so dim, that if the Light of the Sun be let in, they presently disappear; which I expe∣rienc'd by casting the converging Beams of the Sun upon the Prisimatical Iris, by a concave Spe∣culum; and if these Rays only cross'd the Rays of the Iris, before they fell to ground, they would likewise disappear.
EXPERIMENT VII. TRying whether the Colours of opacous Bo∣dies would be vary'd, as they were in a diffe∣rent Position in reference to the Eye, or according to the nature of the Lucid Bodies that shine upon them; we look'd upon several Pieces of Paper by Candle Light; and found, that Yellow was much fainter, than in the Day. The Red was little alter'd. A deep Green seem'd to be a dark Blew; but, being held by a Blew, appear'd Green; and much blewer than at the first, when look'd upon by a Yellow. Blew, look'd like a deep Purple. Purple was very little alter'd. Red look'd upon with the Yellow, made it ap∣pear like brown Cap-paper. EXPERIMENT VIII. SUspecting the Flame of a Candle to be tinged yellow with it's Fuel, we look'd upon it through a deep blew Glass; and observ'd, that through that it appear'd green; a Colour which emerges from a Composition of an obscure blew and a Yellow. And for a like Reason, at the first sight it is not easie to distinguish a Paper from a light Yellow Paper; and other white Bodies reflecting the Rays of Light less troubled or more sincere than other Bodies. EXPERIMENT IX. A Leaf of Gold being held betwixt the Light and the Eye, seem'd full of Pores like a
Sieve, and so modifi'd the Rays of Light that came through it, that they appear'd to the Eye of a greenish Blew; and the like succeeded with a Leaf of Silver. EXPERIMENT X. I Am told that Lignum Nephriticum is us'd in the Country where it grows as an excellent Medicine against the Stone; which Virtues Mo∣nardes likewise ascribes to it given in Infusion. An Infusion of this Wood, if it be not too strong will appear, betwixt the Eye and the Light, to be of a golden Colour, except that upon the Top it will be cover'd with a sky Co∣lour'd Circle; but if your Eye be plac'd be∣twixt the Window and the Vial, the Liquor will appear to be of a lovely Blew. And this Experiment hath succeeded by Candle Light: If the Liquor be held partly before the Eye and a Light, and partly betwixt the Eye and an Opa∣cous Body, it will half of it seem of a golden Colour, and half a Blew; but if turning your back on the Window you observe the Liquor as it is poured out, it will at the first seem Blew; but when it hath fallen lower, and the Rays of Light penetrate it more, it will seem Parti∣couloured. If a little of this Tincture be pour'd into a Basin of Water, partly in the Sun Beams and partly shaded, it will afford several pleasing Phaenomena. If some of it be pour'd up∣on white Paper, the drops about it will appear of different Colours, as the Position of the Eye in reference to them varies; and when it is pour'd off, the Paper will be dyed Yellow; and
if this be plac'd in a Window in the Sun-shine, and a Pen held betwixt the Sun and part of the Paper, the Verge of the Shadow next the Body that Causes it will be Golden, and the other Blew. Which Phenomena proceeded from the most subtile Parts of the Wood Swimming in the Water, and in several Positions variously re∣flecting the Rays of Light. Some of this Li∣quor being carefully Distill'd, it yielded a co∣lourless Limpid Water, a deep ceruleous Li∣quor remaining behind. Spirit of Wine and Salt of Harts-horn, being mixed together I observ'd, that it required a certain proportion betwixt the Liquor and the Salt, which enabl'd it to vary it's Colour. So that tho I was induc'd to believe that our Tincture receiv'd its Colour from a Salt dispers'd through it, yet I suspected, that this Salt would be either alter'd or incor∣porated by Acid Salts; and accordingly drop∣ping Spirit of Vinegar into some of the Tin∣cture it lost its Blew, but not the Golden Co∣lour; but upon an Affusion of Oyl of Tartar per deliquium, that correcting the Acid Salts, it presently regain'd its Blew Colour again, the ponderous Tartarous Liquor first altering the Bottom of the Liquor and gradually rising a∣gain. And since Kercherus Art. Mag. lucis & umbrae Lib. 1. Part 3. writes something of this Exo∣tick Plant, which agrees not with our account of it, since he says it will according to the dif∣ference of the Medium, in respect of Light and its several Positions, vary its Colour; yet from the Account he gives of it, it appears, that the Wood he made use of, was different from Ours
since he calls it a white Mexican Wood, where∣as ours, as Monardes witnesses is brought from Nova Hispania, and is not of a White, but a darker Colour, except on the outside, which part is much weaker than the other. Besides, he tells us that his Tincture was like Spring Water when held betwixt the Light, whereas ours is Yellowish or Reddish, as the Tincture is wea∣ker or stronger. And since he tells us, that the Tincture will afford all sorts of Colours, and resume a ceruleous Colour in the Dark, I could wish to know how he was convinc'd of the Lat∣ter; and as for the Former, I have tryed that it would not at all Answer. Tho' this I must needs own, that having held a Tincture of Lignum Nephriticum in the Rays of the Sun, in a darken'd Room, partly in and partly out, and also, wholly out of the Beams but partly near them, it afforded a much greater Variety of Colours than in a lighten'd Room. In this Experiment it is not a little to be ad∣mir'd, that the Blew Colour should be so easily destroy'd, whereas the Yellow Colour is so du∣rable; and further, that Acid Salts should destroy it and Sulphureous one Restore it. A Corollary of the Tenth Experiment. Acid and Sulphureous Salis adi∣stinguish'd.THis Experiment may give us a hint towards a Discovery of some way to distinguish whether Liquors abound with Acid or Sul∣phureous Salts; for if they be Acid, they destroy the ceruleous Colour; if Sulphureous, they re∣store it. And by this Method we have found, that, tho' it hath been doubted what was the
Nature of Quicklime, it abounds with Lixiviate rather than Acid Salts. But of what use this Tin∣cture may be, where neither Acid nor Alkalious Salts are Predominant, I leave to be determined by Experience; since I found not that Spirit of Wine, Spirit of Tartar freed from Acidity, or Chymical Oyl of Turpentine would restore the ceruleous Colour of this Tincture, when it disappear'd upon a mixture of Oyl of Turpen∣tine. EXPERIMENT XI. I Have a flat Piece of Glass, which held be∣twixt my Eye and the light appears Yellow; but being held so, that it reflects fewer Beams upon the Eye, it degenerates into to a pale Blew. And the same Piece of Glass being held Perpendicular to the Horizon, that Part which the Sun shines on will be of a more dilute Yel∣low, than the other which is shaded; but if it be held Perpendicular to the Horizon, the shaded Part will be of a Golden Colour and the other Blew; if the Sun-beams pass through it upon a white Paper, they will represent a Yellow; yet the Position may be so vary'd, as to yield a mix'd Colour more or less inclining to Yellow in some Places and in others to Blew. N. 1st In trying of these Experiments, the Sun-beams must fall upon the superficial Parts of one side of the Glass, on which we must take care to keep our Eye. And we have prepar'd a sort of Glass which would answer our expectation by laying a Leaf of Silver on one side, and urging it with a stronger Fire than usual. And one thing
in this Experiment remarkable was, that where∣as common Artificers colour their Glass by put∣ting a Calx of Silver, Calcin'd without corro∣sive Liquors, and temper'd with fair Water, on the Plates of Glass when they burn them, theirs appears Yellow whatever side is held to the Eye, or in whatever Posture, but this of ours held betwixt the Eye and the Light appear'd Tran∣sparently Yellow; but the Eye being placed be∣twixt the Light and it, it appear'd Blew, and not in the least Transparent. EXPERIMENT XII. IT is worth observing, that, tho Painters can imitate most Colours which are to be met in Nature, yet they make use of no more than, White, Black, Red, Blew and Yellow, to produce all their Compositions: Thus Black and White represent several sorts of Grays: Blew and Yel∣low, Greens; Red and Yellow, Orange Tawny; Red with a little White, a Carnation; Red with an Eye of Blew, a Purple; and by a Decom∣position of all these, they represent what Co∣lours they please. But in producing of Colours it is to be observ'd, that we must take care that the Pigments be so harmless as not to destroy each others Textures, for then the success will be frustrated. EXPERIMENT XII. WE observ'd that the Colour of a Body did not only seem compound, when we look'd through two Glasses at once upon it, but
when the Beams of the Sun were cast through a double Glass, the penetrating Beams would be ting'd with the compound Colour. But the Rays of Light cast by reflection on a Sheet of Paper from several varnish'd Glasses, they were ting'd with none of the Colours except Yellow, so that I suspected the Beams of Light to pene∣trate deeper into that Substance than others, and to be ting'd with the Varnish; which Guess I was confirm'd in, by spreading a little tran∣sparent Varnish of a Gold Colour, on a Plate of Muscovy Glass; for the Rays thence reflected were of a Yellow Colour. EXPERIMENT XIV. I Not only found by Experience, that those Colours, which are by the Schools, taken to be Phantastical, might be compounded with as much certainty as real ones; but that if those Colours were deficient, the resulting Colour would be so too. And amongst those Experi∣ments I made, it was observable, that the Yel∣low Beams of an Iris passing through a blew Glass were turn'd Green. And the blew Part of an Iris cast upon Red CIoth, would turn it Pur∣ple: And by casting one Part of an Iris upon ano∣ther Iris made by another Prism, I could com∣pound Colours, which would answer my expecta∣tion as well as with those that are esteem'd real Co∣lours. EXPERIMENT XV. I Endeavour'd to try what alteration would be made in Colours by the use of a Colour'd Prism; but I found, that it was too difficult to
get such as I desir'd, since whatever Pigments a Prism was Colour'd with, they would make it too Opake for our Purpose. EXPERIMENT XVI. THere are some Liquors which are of them∣selves devoid of Colour, but when rais'd in the form of Vapours, for the time have very conspicuous Ones; as Spirit of Nitre and Aqua fortis, which in the form of Vapors put on a Red or a deep Yellow. And I further Observ'd, that the Beams of the Sun Trajected through these Steams appear'd Ting'd with their Colour, and so did the Rays of Light, which were re∣ceiv'd from the setting Sun upon a Piece of white Paper. EXPERIMENT XVII. HAving mix'd Colour'd Powders together, I observ'd, that if a Liquor was made use of in the Mixture, the same Colour would not emerge as from the dry Powders. Orpiment and Yellow Oker being mix'd afford a good Green. A Yellow solution of Gold in Aqua fortis being mix'd with a blew Solution of crude Copper by shaking yielded a transparent Green: And so did blew and yellow Amel melted together: Whether this compound Colour proceeds from a Union of Rays, or else from the joint Effect they have upon the Retina, as when two Strings sound at the same time they make one united Sound I shall not now stay to Examine; but shall briefly intimate that by a good Microscope I
could discern each of the Powders of the Bise and Orpiment Distinct, so that a Transposition and Juxtaposition of Parts may produce a new Colour, by variously modifying and reflect∣ing the Rays of Light that fall upon them. So that Colours being mechanically produc'd, there is no need of substantial Forms to explicate them; nor do they seem to be such inherent Colours as they would have them to be, since they consist only of a heap of mix'd Particles of Matter. Nor does it appear, how these compound Co∣lours should be caus'd by a Sulphur, which tho' the Ingredients must contain it, cause no such Effect there. EXPERIMENT XVIII. SYrup of Violets being drop'd upon Paper, and a yellow Solution of Gold mix'd with it, the result was a Red, not a Green, which was occasion'd by the Acid Salts in the Solution; so that to produce a particular Colour with cer∣tainty by the mixture of Ingredients, it is re∣quisite they should be such as may be mix'd with∣out altering each others Texture, for a blew Solution of Copper in Spirit of Urine, made with Syrup of Violets not a Blew, but a Green. EXPERIMENT XIX. TO shew that Colours may be alter'd, with∣out any Change in the Chymical Princi∣ples of a Body, I shall urge, that essen∣tial Oyls or Spirit of Wine being shaken, till
Bubbles rise, they will afford, as long as they last, very lively Colours, and so does Water and Sope, made into Bubbles by Children; and so will Bubbles in Oyl of Turpentine and thin ones blown of Glass. And I have discern'd several Rainbows represented, by holding before my Ryes and the Sun, a Feather or a Piece of black Ribband. EXPERIMENT XX. ALmost any Acid mix'd with Syrup of Vi∣olets will turn it Red; but Oyl of Tar∣tar per deliquium will turn it Green, and all other Alkalize Salts. And this may disco∣ver, what Salts are predominant in Bodies, as well as our Tincture of Lignum Nephriticum: Only it will not be work'd upon by so slight and weak Ingredients. EXPERIMENT XXI. BLew Bottle or Corn-weed being Candied preserves its Colour a long time; and when newly press'd the Juice will be Blew; yet Spirit of Salt will turn it Red, and Alkalies, Green; and this being drawn upon a piece of Paper moisten'd with an Acid, it render'd it Red. A Solntion of blew Vitriol in Water, upon an Addition of a Lixiviate Liquor, or an urinous Salt, becomes Yellow: Whence it appears, that Volatile or Alkalizate Salts change not Blew into Green upon the account of an easie Transition from Blew to Green, but upon the Account of the Texture of them.
EXPERIMENT XXII. ITalian Painters being us'd to imitate Ʋlira∣marine Azure, by grinding Virdigrease with Sal Armoniack, and leaving it to rot in a Dunghil; This gave us a hint to pour Oyl of Tartar upon a Solution of Verdigrease; which, tho' at first, the Mixture was turbid, yet being settl'd, it produc'd a lovely Tincture; and a Lixivium of Pot-ashes, being made use of in∣stead of this Oyl, it yielded an Azure some∣thing Paler than the former; and if Spirit of Harts-horn be made use of instead of these, a greater variety of ceruleous Liquors may be obtain'd. The better way to separate these Azure Liquors from their Feces, is by Decentation, than Filtration, the Lquor being, by the latter means usually stain'd. EXPERIMENT XXIII. THo' the Fumes of Sulphur usually whitens Rose Leaves, yet Oyl of Sulphur per Campanam, heightens the Colour of their Tincture. EXPERIMENT XXIV. A Grain of Cochinele dissolv'd in Spirit of Wine, and afterwards gradually in Wa∣ter, it gave a Tincture to above 125000 times its weight; which is an Instance of the great Minuteness of the Parts of Matter, and of a vastly minute Division of them.
EXPERIMENT XXV. RIpe Privet Berries, being crush'd upon white Paper, stain it with a Purple; Yet Spirit of Salt will turn it Red, and a Solution of Pot-ashes, Green; and so will Meserion, and the Juice of Pease. From whence and the like Experiments before premis'd, it appears, that the Saline Parts of Bodies have a considerable stroke in producing their Colours. EXPERIMENT XXVI. SPirit of Salt being drop'd upon several Sub∣stances already Red, as Syrup of Clove∣july-flower, Berries of Spina Cervina, an in∣fusion of Red Roses, Brasil, and several others, it either made no Alteration, or render'd the Red Lighter. An infusion of Roses was turn'd into a dirty Colour, by an affusion of a Solution of Pot-ashes; and Syrup of Cloves was render'd a little more inclining to Green. Another Red Infusion was advanc'd into a Crimson; but the Juice of Buckthorn-berries acquir'd a lovely Green. EXPERIMENT XXVII. SPirit of Salt had a very small Effect upon the Juice of Jasmin; but Spirit of Urine turn'd it to a Greenish Yellow; and the Event was much the same when we try'd it with those less Oyly Leaves, call'd Snow Drops, which appear about the end of Winter.
EXPERIMENT XXVIII. MAry-Gold Leaves, fresh Madder, and early Primroses, &c. being rubb'd upon Paper till they Coloured it, they would be turn'd Red or Green, by Alkaliz'd Liquors; tho' so Acid a Salt as the Spirit of it, rather diluted them, yet it almost destroy'd the Colour of the early Primroses; and an Alkalizate Solution turn'd the Juice of Madder Root Red, as well as the bruis'd Root it self. From whence it abundantly appears, that the Effects of a peculiar Salt upon the Juices of Vegetables depends on their particular Textures. EXPERIMENT XXIX. A Black-berry full Ripe, and another only Red, being rubb'd upon a Piece of Pa∣per, the Juice of the former was turn'd into a Green by a Lixivium; and one much fainter, by a Urinous Salt, and by an Acid, into a Red. But the unripe Berry was little alter'd by the Acid, but by the other Juices, receiv'd Impres∣sions different from the former. Damask Roses would be colour'd Red by an Acid, and Green by an Alkaly; but a Yellow Province Rose by a Solution of Salt of Tartar was turn'd into a Green Blewish Tincture; but an Acid only diluted the Yellowness of the Leaves. And were I in the Is∣land of Banda, I should try what Effects these Salts would have on the Juice of Cloves, which I am told, are first White, then Green, and after∣wards Reddish, and when dry'd, grow Black;
but the Flowers of them are said to be of an excellent Blew. And one thing which deserves our notice is, that tho' Damask, as well as red Roses, give a red Tincture to Water acidulated, yet the one hath a purgative, and the other a binding Quality. And to what hath been said under this Experiment, I shall add, that Mr. Parkinson tells us, that Buckthorn Berries ga∣ther'd green, and bruis'd into Allum-Water, yield a yellow; when they are black they yield a Sap Green; and if they grow upon the Trees till the middle of November, they yield a Pur∣ple Colour. And Clusius of Alaternus tells us, that the grosser Parts of some Plants differ in Colour from each other; for the Portugal's Dye their Nets blew with a Bark, and blackish blew with the Wood. EXPERIMENT XXX. TO shew that a change of Colour depends on an Alteration of Texture, I shall add, that the same Matter being seal'd up in a Philo∣sophical Egg, it will by Digestion, pass through several degrees of Colours, before it comes to that of the noblest Elixir. And that several Substances will undergo changes of Colour by Digestion, is evident, in rectify'd Spirit of Harts-horn, Precipitations of Amalgamas of Gold, and Mercury, without Addition, where by a continu'd Heat, the Silver-colour'd Amal∣gama will be turn'd into a shining red Powder; which Effects are produc'd without an Addition or Substraction of Matter, by the bare change of Texture.
EXPERIMENT XXXI IN most Tinctures which the Chymists draw, Redness is the common Colour, as well as in more gross Solutions, tho' the Menstruums be colourless; as with Spirit of Wine, from Jalap, Guajacum, Amber and Benzoin, Flowers of Brimstone, Turpentine, &c. And most Acid or Alkalizate Salts will with sulphureous Bo∣dies produce a Red, and so will Glass of Anti∣mony; and I know an Acid which will turn Oyl of Turpentine into a Red. EXPERIMENT XXXII. THO' Balsam of Sulphur seems red, as well as other Liquors in a broad Vessel, yet it stains Paper yellow; but a Tincture of Coche∣nele, never so much diluted, will still remain Red. EXPERIMENT XXXIII. OYL of Turpentine digested upon white Sugar of Lead, yields a red Tincture. EXPERIMENT XXXIV. IF 5 Ounces of Brimstone and Sal Armoniack, be distill'd in a Retort with 6 Ounces of Quick-Lime, in a Sand-Heat gradually increas'd, a volatile Tincture of Sulphur will be obtain'd, which is red, tho' none of the Ingredients were so; yet if agitated when the Vessel it's contain∣ed
in is unstopp'd, it will yield a white Fume. And sometimes it may be so drawn, that tho' the Fumes are white, yet the Liquor will dye the Fingers black. EXPERIMENT XXXV. WE let a Drop or two of Oyl of Vitriol fall upon Oyl of Aniseeds coagulated, and spread upon white Paper, by which there was a red Colour produced with Heat and Smoak. EXPERIMENT XXXVI. ONE thing to be observ'd in the Experi∣ments above recited is, that tho' the Co∣lours mention'd, are easily produc'd; yet some of them presently fade, by the Influence of the Air, or the Intestine Motion of their own Parts. And Parkison tells us, that Berries of that Plant, which bears Turnsol, a Pigment well known in Painters Shops, when they are at their full Maturity, yield a Juice, which being rubb'd upon Paper appears green, but pre∣sently degenerates into a blewish Purple, upon the Cloth or Paper; and these being wet in Wa∣ter, and wrung forth, will give it a Claret Colour. And I have observ'd the Red Colour of Buckthorn Berries degenerate into a dirty Grey Colour; yet by the Mixture of an Alkaly or an Acid it would put on a green or red Colour; and the same Success we had when we dropp'd the same Li∣quor upon a Piece of glaz'd Tile. And I have observ'd, that Silver precipitated in Aq. Fortis, tho' at the first it is white, yet when upon a
Decantation of the Liquor, the Superficies be∣comes expos'd to the Air, it presently turns blackish. And I have seen a sort of Pears, which would give a red Tincture to Wine. And it is observ'd, that Spirit of Wine being kept upon white Salt of Tartar, acquires a red Tincture. But as for the reasons of these things, and also why all Bodies burnt in the open Air almost, are black, I shall leave to Pyrophilus to en∣quire. EXPERIMENT XXXVII. SPirit of Salt pour'd on a Solution of Co∣chinele, or the Juice of black Cherries, ren∣ders their Colours clearer; but turns an Infu∣sion of Brasil yellow, the Acid Liquor in both weakening the Spirit on which it falls; for as Crimson is a Red with an Eye of blew, so Yel∣low is but a dilated Red; and therefore Alka∣lizated Salts, will not only restore the Infusion of Cochinele and Brasil to Crimson, but will turn the yellow Juice of Madder red, and an Infu∣sion of Brasil to a Crimson. And here it may be worth while to consider, why Blew and Purple seem to bee deeper Colours than Red; and therefore the Juices of Plants of either of the two former Colours, may be turn'd red by Spirit of Salt, or Aqua Fortis; yet Syrup of Vi∣olets, should be, on the contrary, turn'd green by Oyl of Tartar and Spirit of Urine, which is a more dilute Colour than Blew.
EXPERIMENT XXXVIII. SALT distill'd, at a certain time of the Operation yields red Fumes; and Vitriol, tho green or blew, comes over in white Fumes; and the like I have observ'd in the Fumes of several other Concretes. And I have observ'd, that even Soot hath fill'd the Receiver with white Fumes; yet neither Spirit of Nitre is red, nor that of Vitriol or Soot white. And to these Observations we may add, that the Empyreu∣matical Oyls of Woods are of a Colour betwixt black and red: And tho' there is so great a dif∣ference in the Colours of Plants, yet the distil∣led Liquors vary not. And it is observ'd in Sublimation, that the Flowers differ much in Colour from the Fumes that compose them; as red Benzoin yields white Flowers, and Antimo∣ny affords Flowers some of them Red and some Gray; and some of them purely white. And it is the Practice of some Glass Men, to make a Blew sublimate of a convenient Proportion of Brimstone, Sal Armoniack and Quicksilver: And it is observ'd, that Orpiment which is a yellow Substance, yields a Sublimate, amongst which, several red Fumes ascend; and I have seen a Sublimate whose lower Parts were set with red∣dish Particles, which glitter'd prettily. EXPERIMENT XXXIX. IF good Spirit of Urine be dropp'd into a Tincture, or an Infusion of the Flowers of Pomgranates, the Red will be turn'd into a Green Colour; but by Spirit of Sea-Slat, it will be∣come
come a transparent Liquor, which red may be tur'd into a dirty Green, by Spirit of Urine. Oyl of Tartar being dropp'd into Water wherein Leaves of Senna were immers'd, it pre∣sently appear'd red; but the same would not happen upon an Affusion of Oyl of Vitriol. Yet red Rose Leaves being put in warm Water, Oyl of Vitriol extracted a red Tincture, but Oyl of Tartar would not. But we observ'd, that the Oyl of Tartar only hasten'd the Tin∣cture of the Senna, since the Leaves in a Nights time will yield a Tincture in cold Water, which will not be heighten'd by Salt of Tartar. And it may be said of the red Rose Leaves, that the Tincture was rather extracted than produc'd by the Oyl: Yet this is observable, that in extract∣ing the Tinctures, the one will not do what the other will; but I have found that Aqua Fortis will do as well as Oyl of Vitriol. If upon the red Tincture of Roses decanted, you drop Spirit of Urine, and shake the Viol it is contain'd in, it will acquire a greenish Blew; which is observable, since the turning of red into blew is a very unfrequent Observation. And in the Passage of this red Tincture to a blew, if it be taken as the Liquor is dropp'n in, it will afford a pretty variety of Colours, so as some∣times to represent the Tincture of Lignum Ne∣phriticum. And if the Tincture be very high, the Spirit of Urine will turn it to a deep Opa∣cous blew; but the Liquor being left open two or three Days, both the blew and the red Co∣lour vanish'd; the Liquor being of an Amber Colour, and having a feculent Sediment of the same Colour, which seems to be form'd of the
Roses drawn together by the Acid, and pre∣cipitated by the Volatile Salt of the Spirit of Urine, in whose room other sulphureous Salts may be substituted. And on this occasion I shall add, That Having dropp'd Spirit of Urine into an In∣fusion of Galls, it presently turn'd the Red Li∣quor into a Purple one; but if the Infusion of Logwood were impregnated with acid Spirits of Salt, it would yield neither a Red nor a Purple, but a yellow Liquor. EXPERIMENT XL. TO shew that Colours may be generated de novo, and again destroy'd; We dropp'd Oyl of Tartar into a Solution of Sublimate in Water, and the Liquor being agitated, it was turn'd into a deep Orange Colour; but upon dropping in some Drops of Oyl of Vitriol, and continuing to shake the Glass strongly, the whole will presently become transparent again. In which the Colour results from a Coalition of the Mercurial Particles with the saline ones, and with the Alkalizate Particles of the Salt of Tar∣tar, which swim up and down in the Oyl: But how these uniting come to form such a Substance as reflects such a Colour, I confess my self at a loss to explain. But in Confirmation of the Rea∣son I have given for the Colour of this Precipi∣tate; I shall add, that having sublimed together equal Parts of Sal Armoniack and Sublimate, and dissolv'd the ascending Flowers in Water, and siltred it, the limpid Liquor turn'd white upon the Affusion of an Alkaly, and not yellow.
And not only by altering the Texture of the Mercury, but by varying the precipitating Li∣quor, the Success of the Experiment will be different: For if Spirit of Urine be made use of instead of Salt of Tartar, the Precipitate will be of a different Colour from the former. And from Quicksilver it self, without Sublimate, we may prepare a Pricipitate, dissoluble in Water without discolouring it. And the Colour of such Substances so much depends on the Texture of the Parts concurring to the Composition, that tho' in our Experiment, Oyl of Vitriol de∣stroys the yellow Colour; yet by the Assistance of Oyl of Vitriol, we may make a yellow Pre∣cipitate, with Quicksilver and Water alone. And I the rather employ Oyl of Vitriol in such Experiments, because it is not only void of Co∣lour, but strong and incisive; for notwithstand∣ing common and undephlegmed Aqua Fortis will not effect the same thing; yet being carefully dephlegmed, it will in some measure answer Expectation. But one thing to be noted in this Experiment, is, That tho' by dropping in Oyl of Tartar and Oyl of Vitriol successively, the Liquor will regain and lose it's yellow Colour, yet the Proportion of the Liquor growing less in respect of the successive additional Drops, the yellow Colour will gradually appear more faint. An Improvement of the fortieth Experiment. If Crude Antimony be boil'd in a strong Lixi∣vium, it will yield a sulphureous Sediment, which will settle in yellow Flakes in the Bot∣tom,
and will be more apt to take fire than the Powder of Antimony. Therefore considering that Sulphur boil'd in a Lixivium, may be precipitated by Rhenish or white Wine; and likewise that by Acids I could precipitate other sulphureous Con∣cretes out of lixiviate Solvents, such as crude Antimony; And tho' common Sulphur yields a white Precipitate call'd Lac Sulphuris; yet I concluded that Antimony would yield a yellow one, as well by being made by Oyl of Vitriol, as Length of time. Wherefore I put a fresh Solution of Antimony into one Glass, and some of the Orange colour'd Mixture into another, where by dropping Oyl of Vitriol into the lat∣ter, it would become transparent, whereas the same Oyl would turn the other clear Solution in∣to a deep Yellow. But in this Experiment we are to observe, that the Solution of Antimony must be fresh, otherwise in Winter it will scarce succeed. Reflections on the XL Experiment compar'd with the X and XX. Tho' the X and XX Experiments shew how Acids may be distinguish'd from Urinous and Al∣kalizate Salts; yet thence we cannot distinguish Urinous Salts from Alkalous. But by the Pre∣ceding Experiment I was enabled to distinguish Lixiviates by their precipitating an Orange Tawny, from a Solution of Sublimate in Water, whereas Urinous Salts would make it either White or Milky. So that by this Experiment I could discover, that Sal Armoniack drawn from an Alkaly, is but a Urinous Salt more refin'd,
the Alkaly separating, and retaining the Sea-Salt mix'd with it; for it would not only turn Syrup of Violets green, and Verdigrease Azure, but would precipitate a White Substance from a So∣lution of Sublimate. And from hence we may not only learn to conclude Affirmatively, but Ne∣gatively of the Nature of Salts, since Spirit of Wine and Essential Oyls have either no Salt in them, or it is of a peculiar kind, since they will neither turn Syrup of Violets Red nor Green, nor a Solution of Sublimate White or Yellow. I found that Spirit of Oak, tho' it be a Chymi∣cal Principle, yet it would turn Syrup of Vio∣lets Purple, and destroy the Blewness of a Tin∣cture of Lignum Nephritium, as Acids do, and would corrode Coral like Spirit of Vinegar; but when the Acid Part of this Spirit was separa∣ted from the other, it would have no more Ef∣fect upon any of those Liquors as Spirit of Wine or Essential Oyls. And by this Method we may discover the Nature of most Salts produced ei∣ther by Art or Nature; And by the same Me∣thod here laid down I have observ'd, several Liquors, which, tho' run per Deliquium, would have no other Effect than Spirit of Wine. And I know how to make a strong saline Body, which will neither Work upon Syrup of Violets, or a Solution of Sublimate. And now to what I have said, it may be seasonable to add, that the Effects of Salts upon a Solution of Sublimate depend on the peculiar Texture, not only of the Solution, but of the Bodies by which it is precipitated; for a Solution of Gold in Aqua Regia will yield a yellow Precipitate, whether Oyl of Tartar, Spirit of Urine or Sal Armoni∣ack
be added to it; yet Oyl of Vitriol, which precipitates a Solution of Silver in Aqua Fortis will have no such Effect. And the Crystals of Silver dissolv'd, will yield a White Precipitate; whether an Alkaly, or an Acid. was dropp'd into the Solution, yet Sal Armoniack would not produce the like Effect: So that the Superfluous Moisture being evaporated, the metalline Corpuseles with the saline ones that had imbib'd them, coagula∣ted into Salt, as such Solutions usually do, when the Metal hath been precipitated. EXPERIMENT XLI. AN Azure Solution of Copper in Spirit of Urine being shaken with Oyl of Vitriol, would become clear as Water. And tho' A∣qua Fortis usually extracts a Blew greenish Solu∣tion from French Verdigrease, yet being drop∣ped into a Solution of it in Water, it almost render'd it Colourless; but upon an Affusion of Oyl of Tartar or Spirit of Urine, it will dis∣close a Colour somewhat different from the So∣lution of Verdigrease it self. EXPERIMENT XLII. THE dry'd Calx remaining after an Evapo∣ration of a Solution of Quicksilver in Aq. Fortis, gave a yellow Tincture; but Quicksilver being put into a Retort with four times it's Weight of Oyl of Vitriol, and the saline Men∣struum being drawn off in a Sand-heat, till a dry Calx remain'd in the Bottom, tho' this Calx was of a White Colour, it would pass through
a Milky Colour to a Yellow upon an Affusion of Water. And Beguinus, Tyr. Chym. Lib. 2. cap. 13. Prepares Turbith Mineral, which he calls Mercurius praecipitatus Optimus, by digesting, and then two or three times Cohobating one Part of Quicksilver with two of Oyl of Sulphur, and by frequent Ablutions in hot distill'd Water, &c. But tho' this Yellow of ours be a much finer than any in the Painters Shops, yet it is too dear for ordinary use, were we certain it would agree with oyl'd Colours. From whence it ap∣pears, that a Menstruum which is devoid of Co∣lour, may produce a Colour, being mix'd with a White Calx. EXPERIMENT XLIII. TO shew that a Colour may be produc'd by a Liquor that hath neither Colour nor sa∣line Parts, we pour'd Water on a gray Calx of Vitriol, and tho' at the first the Mixture was of a muddy Colour, yet being shut up in a Viol for some days, the Calx being partly dis∣solv'd and shot into Vitriol, gave the Water a vitriolate Colour; and so it did to fresh Water pour'd on the Calx, when the tinged Liquor was decanted. EXPERIMENT XLIV. BY dropping a few Drops of a Tincture of Co∣chinele or Brazil into Water; it will acquire a Pink Colour; from which, by successive Additions, it will pass from that to a fine Red, and from that to a Crimson, and after that,
to an Opace Red; and several intermediate Colours may be perceiv'd in it's Passage from one Colour to another. But these variations will be more conspicuous if we make use of cylindrical Pipes instead of Viols. And I have observ'd, that a Tincture of Brazil being put into a Viol, that in the Body of it appear'd Blew, but that in the Neck, which the Rays of Light trajected more plentifully, appeared green; and I had a Piece of Glass, which being held betwixt the Eye and the Light seem'd clear, and when the Eye was placed betwixt it and the Light, it appear'd slightly discolour'd; yet, be∣ing apply'd to the Glass it was knock'd off, it appear'd as green as Grass. And I have had Bot∣tles, which, tho' they were made of the same Materials with the Stopples, were nevertheless different in Colour. And I have a flat Glass, which obverted to the Eye flat, appears like or∣dinary Window Glass; but if the Edge of it be obverled to my Eye in a convenient Posture, it will appear like an Emerald: And I have had a certain Pigment, which if it lay thick upon a Piece of Paper, would appear to be of a Crim∣son, but being spread thin on the Paper, it would seem green. And I have likewise ob∣serv'd, that that blew Substance call'd Lit∣mase being dissolv'd in Water, gave it a Tin∣cture betwixt Crimson and Purple; yet it stain'd Paper Blew; and the like Colour was afforded by it on a Piece of flat glaz'd Earth. And some of the same being dropp'd into a Glass of Wa∣ter of the Figure of an inverted Cone, exhibi∣ted great-Varietys of Crimson and Purple; and when the Litmase was perfectly mix'd with the
Water it afforded a glorious Yellow like that of a Topaz, when a few Drops of Spirit of Salt were dropp'd into it: And if a few Drops of a Solution of Pot-ashes were dropp'd into it, they Subsiding into the bottom of it would af∣ford a bright dilute Colour in the bottom of the Glass; a Purple above that, and a deep Crimson, betwixt that, and a Yellow, which rought to the top of the Glass: And if Spirit of Sal Armoniack were pour'd upon that it would turn Part of the Yellow into a Purple or Crimson. From which Experiments it ap∣pears, that as the Particles of a Pigment are nearer or more dispers'd, the Colours repre∣sented by them Vary. EXPERIMENT XLV. A Preparation of Steel, us'd as a Succeda∣neum of Spaw-Waters, and whose Colour was like that of German Amethist; be∣ing dropp'd into Rhenish-Wine afforded a love∣ly Green, but Water or Spirit of Wine will not receive that Tincture from it. And to satisfie my self that the Effect depended not on any Acidity in the Wine, I impregnated Water with Spirit of Salt, but notwithstand∣ing, it would not receive a green Tincture from the Liquor. And to vary the Experi∣ment, I dropp'd Alkalizate and urinous Salts into the Green Tincture, by which it put on a dirty and a turbid Colour, but if this es∣sense of Steel was drop'd into Water impreg∣nated with Spirit of Salt, a Solution of Salt of Pot-ashes or of Spirit of Sal Armonick
would turn it Yellow, the Vitriolate Salt be∣ing precipitated by them: And Olaus Wormius takes Notice of a rare kind of Turn-sole, which would communicate a red Tincture to Water; and tho' it would to Wine, yet Spirit of Wine would not be at all Ting'd by it, so that Tincture both depends on the peculiar Tex∣tures of the Body that receives and that which gives the Tincture. EXPERIMENT XLVI. THe Adventitious Colours of Metals are either such as they acquire by the Action of the Fire upon them; or such as re∣sult from the Coalition of Metaline Particles with the Mestruum which dissolves them; or lastly when they are mix'd together by Fusi∣on. And first Tin, by the Action of the Fire be∣ing calcin'd, affords a white Calx and Lead a Red one; and Copper calcin'd per se, yields a dark blackish Powder; and Iron by reverberated Flames may be turn'd into a Crocus, and Mer∣cury may be turn'd into a Red Powder. And, Besides these more obvious Colours there are several intermediate ones, whilst by the Action of Fire, Metals are a Calcining. And not only the Calces, but the Glasses of Minerals vitrifi'd per se are of Colours different from the Metal; so that I have seen a Glass made of Silver, of a dark Colour. And not only Metals, but Minerals may be brought to yeild Colours, by the Action of the Fire, different from their own, as Antimony
affords a whitish Gray Calx, and Flowers vari∣ously Colour'd; and the Calx by being flux'd will yield a Glass of a yellow or reddish Colour. And Vitriol Calcin'd passes through several Colours before it comes to be of a dark Pur∣ple. EXPERIMENT XLVII. AS for the Adventitious Colours produc'd by the Union of Metals with their Sol∣vents; Gold gives Aqua Regis it's Yellow Colour, but Mercury gives no considerable Co∣lour to Aqua Fortis, except a Greenness or Blew∣ness at the first, which presently disappears. Tin corroded by Aqua Fortis, subsided in the form of curdl'd Milk or Eggs. Lead dissolv'd in Spirit of Vinegar, affords a clear Solution; and if the Menstruum be drawn off, appears White. Iron dissolv'd by Oyl of Vitriol diluted with Water, yields a Green Vitriolum Martis; but gives a Saffron Colour to Aqua Fortis, or a yellowish Red. Common Silver, such as is coin'd, gives a Copper Tincture to Aqua fortis; but such as is refin'd perfectly, gives a blewish Green to Aqua fortis, and Spirit of Vinegar; and being sublim'd with Sal Armoniac, it affords a blewish Sublimate: And indeed Copper dis∣solv'd in several Menstruums will yield a great Variety of Greenish Blew or blewish Green Co∣lours. But with Spirit of Sugar and Turpen∣tine it affords a Blew Tincture with a mixture of Green. And to shew that the Adventitious Colour may result from the Copper it self as well as the Salts which Corrode it, I moistned
Dantzick Vitriol with Spittle, and then rubbing it upon a Knife, it gave it a redish Colour like that of Copper. Saccharum Saturni with Spirit of Turpentine will yield a red Balsam; and that Stone which Helmont calls Paracelsus his Ludus, in a proper Menstruum affords sometimes a yellowish and sometimes a red Solution. And before I leave this Experiment I shall add that if Quicksilver be precipitated out of Aqua fortis with Spirit of Sea-salt, or Sea-salt dis∣solv'd in Water, it will subside in the form of a white Powder; but if it be precipitated with an Alkaly it yields a yellow tawny Powder; but if the Menstruum be drawn off without pre∣cipitating it, the remaining substance, will vary it's Colour, as it is expos'd to different degrees of Heat; so that once I observ'd the white Calx, to remain partly in the bottom of the Vial, of a deep Yellow, and in some part Red, the remaining Part being elevated in the form of a reddish and ash-colour'd Sublimate. And Vermilion, is only a Sublimate of Mercury and Brimstone. EXPERIMENT XLVIII. TO shew that Metals Associated with other Bodies will afford different Colours, I have given an Instance in Silver, which gave Glass a lovely golden Colour. And I shall now add, that I am told, that Artificers paint Glass yellow with Calx of Silver. And I have obtain'd a Substance of a saphirine Blew from Shel-silver mix'd with Powder of crystal Glass, kept in Fusion two or three Hours, which I
attributed to some Copper latent in the Sil∣ver. And tho' Copper calcin'd per se yields a dark colour'd Calx, yet it tinges Glass Green; But being kept in Fusion with 100 times it's Weight in Glass, it afforded not a green, but a blew Substance, which whether it proceeded from the Action of the Mineral, or it's saline Parts only, or both, I must not stay to en∣quire. But to proceed, Putty made of Tin and Lead Calcin'd together, being a white Calx gives colliquated Glass the resemblance of white Amel, which will receive into it the Colours of divers Minerals which will indure the Fire: And I have elsewhere taken Notice, that blew and yellow Amel, being compounded will afford a Green. And it is commonly known that the dark Substance call'd Zaffora will give Glass a blew Tincture. And that dark Substance term'd Magnesia from it's simi∣lar Colour to that of a Load-stone, gives Glass not only Colours different from its own, but in themselves; as a Red, Purplish or Blackish, as the Quantity of it varies; yet it is us'd to free Glass from that blewish green Co∣lour that it is subject to; and this may serve to confirm what we deliver'd in the XLIV Ex∣periment, viz. that as the Parts of a Pigment are more closely or set at distance, the Colour will vary. And here it may not be altogether fruitless to advertise, that it may be a good way of trying Ores, and what Metal they most abound with, to try what Colour they give Glass, when mix'd in a due proportion, and kept in Fusion in an equal Degree of Heat and length of time.
But to proceed to other Instances agreeable to those we have laid down, yellow Orpiment and Sea-salt Sublim'd together constitute white Arsnick, and tho' Orpiment is the greater Part of the Composition; yet Arsenick gives Cop∣per a white Colour within and without. In counterfeiting Factitious Gems by Vitrifi∣cation, it is observ'd, That calcin'd Lead, Colli∣quated with white Sand, or Crystal powder'd by successive Ignitions and extinctions, yields a Decoction, of the Colour of a Ger∣man Amethist: And I have observ'd, in cal∣cin'd Lead it self, something like the Colour of such an Amethist: And with Glass of Lead overpower'd with other Pigments, you may emulate the Greenness of Emeralds, tho' in several Cases, the Colour of the Lead may vi∣tiate that of the Pigment; and these Colours so much depend upon Texture, that before the aforemention'd Mixture acquir'd an Amethistine Colour, it passed through several intermediate Colours; and the Colours of such Substances may be so much vary'd by degrees of Fire, that I have had, a Mass of the size of a small Nut, of four distinct Colours. ANNOTATIONS. BUt besides the aformention'd Ways by which Metals may acquire adventitious Colours, there are yet two unmention'd. For I am told, that it is impossible to strike that Colour term'd a Bow-dye without the Materials be boyl'd in Vessels, either made of, or lin'd with a Particular Metal.
The other way of dying Bodies, is with the Solution of Metals in their proper Menstruums; so Gold dissolv'd in Aqua Regis, will dye the Nails and Skin, and Hafts of Knives made of Ivory, not with a Golden Colour, but a Pur∣ple, scarce ever to be wash'd out: And I have already told you, that a Solution of Silver will dye the Nails Black. So Brine colours Beef Green or Red, and a certain proportion of Salt-Petre and common Salt Colours Neats Tongues Red, and such Flesh as would be otherwise White. And to these I shall add, that a Solution of Sulphur of Vitriol or com∣mon Sulphur, will Colour Silver with a golden or reddish Colour, for which Reason the Bath Water causes that Effect. And the Juice of Alcanna, which is Green, dyes the Skin and Nails of a lasting Red. EXPERIMENT XLIX. BOyl a sufficient Quantity of powder'd Tur∣merick with Water, adding to every pound of Water, two Spoonsful of a filtred Solution of Pot-ashes, in a clean glaz'd Vessel, till by immersing a Piece of Paper, you find the Turmerick to have given it's Tincture; then drop into the filter'd Tincture a Solution of Roach Allom, the ting'd Parts being curdl'd, will swim up and down in Flakes, and the Liquor will pass through a Filtre clear, leaving the Yellow Parts behind it, which may be dulcifi'd by an Affusion of Water, but this vegetable Lake may be seperated from the decanted Liquor without filtration by pouring
on a sufficient Quantity of Water; for then it will either swim on the Top or subside to the Bottom, and may be made fit for use by being dulcifi'd with fresh Water, after it hath been gather'd by Filtration, and then it must be dry'd upon a Cloth, under which Bricks Chalk or Paper, is plac'd to imbibe the Mois∣ture. ANNOTATIONS. THo' it be generally believ'd, that this Ma∣gistracy of Vegetables is only made up of the colour'd Parts of the Plants, yet to favour the contrary I shall represent that Allom con∣tains a stony Matter as well as an Acid Spirit; and tho' Workmen in the making of it use a Sea Weed (call'd Kelp) and Urine, yet natural Al∣lom hath been found in England, a Solution of which, by an Affusion of Lixivium of Pot∣ashes would depose a white Curd, which be∣ing filtred would leave behind it a metalline stony Calx, very White, little Bits of which, being plac'd upon a live Coal, would neither melt nor fly away, nor would they wash a∣way in hot Water, so that they were unlike∣ly to be seperated from the Vegetable Lake by Ablutions. And to this I shall add, that from the filtred Liquor I have obtain'd saline Parts, which would Flame at a Candle, and fly away with some Noise; and I have obtain'd such a Substance from Allom by precipitating it with urinous Salts and even Urine it self; so that sometimes we may think, that we obtain a Pre∣cipitate
from a Liquor, when it is in a great mea∣sure yielded by the Solution of Allom made use of to precipitate it. The abovemention'd way of making Lakes, being try'd with Madder, it yielded a Red one, and with Rue, it afforded one of the same Co∣lour with the Leaves. But since the Colour is extracted from the Vegetable by the addition of a Lixivium, it is a Question, whether the Lake will always be of the Colour of the Herb, since Lixiviate Salts may not only extract, but alter the Tinctures of Vegetables. And tho', Acids sometimes do, yet we have found by experience, that they will not always restore Colours destroy'd by Alkalies, since Syrup of Violets turn'd Green by an Alkaly, will not be restor'd to a Blew by an Acid, but is chang'd to a Red. And I have found, that when the Colour of the Lake was not alter'd by the Al∣kaly, it would be much fainter than the Ve∣getable it was drawn from. But to conclude this Experiment, I shall add, that Allom is not only of use in such like Experiments as these; but also in the Dyers Trade. EXPERIMENT L. HAving a Mind not only to change the Colour of one Body into another, but also to obtain two Substances of distinct Colours from one Body; in order to it I consider'd, that since Spirit of Vinegar wholly loses it's Acidity by work∣ing upon Minium, the Solution would alter the Juices of Plants, as Oyl of Tartar usually does,
and acordingly I found that it turn'd, an In∣fusion of red Rose Leaves Green. And fur∣ther considering, that Oyl of Vitriol will pre∣cipitate Solutions of Minerals, especially in Spirit of Vinegar, and that the Calcesare usual∣ly fair and White: Considering these things, I dropp'd a Solu∣tion of Minium into an Infusion of Roses, by which it was turn'd Green; but dropping on that, Oyl of Vitriol, it would precipitate the Lead in the form of a white Powder, and leave in the Liquor a clear and high Tincture of Roses, which appear'd when the Experiment was try'd in a Glass shap'd like an inverted Cone. And this Experiment likewise succeeded, when Spirit of Salt was made use of instead of Oyl of Vitriol; but with Aqua Fortis it would not succeed; for tho' that Liquor will heighten the Colour of the Tincture of Roses, yet it will not precipi∣tate the Lead. And as by this means from a Green we ob∣tain'd a white and red colour'd Substance, so a Purple will yield a yellow and a red Liquor; for if instead of an Alkaly, which turns an In∣fusion of Logwood Purple, I made use of a Solution of Minium, and put one Part of this to two of the Infusion, Spirit of Salt would precipitate a red Substance and leave the Li∣quor above Yellow. But an Infusion of Log∣wood being turn'd Purple by a Mixture of a Solution of Minium, Spirit Sal Armoniack drop∣ped upon them, precipitated a Blewish deep Purple Substance, partly in the form of a Powder and partly Curdl'd; but upon an addi∣tion of Spirit of Salt the remaining Part of
the Lead was precipitated in the form of a white Powder; so that there were in the Glass three distinct Colours, viz, a Purple at the bottom, a white Carnation upon that, and upon the top a transparent Liquor, Yellow or Red. But to conclude, I shall add that I would not have my Readers too hastily to think, any of the foregoing Experiments false, tho' they should not succeed upon first Tryal, since very slight Circumstances may alter or frustrate the Event of several of them; to Confirm which I shall add the following Instance, viz. that if the In∣gredients made use of to dye Scarlet, be weighed and mix'd never so exactly, and all other cir∣cumstances be observ'd; yet if they are not boyled in a Vessel lin'd with Tin, the Cochineel will not be able to strike a right Colour. FINIS.
Advertisement. THE Works of the Ho∣norable Robert Boyle, Esq Epitomiz'd, Vol. I. By Ri∣chard Boulton, of Brazen-Nose Colledge in Oxford: Illu∣strated with Copper Plates. Printed for J. Phillips at the Kings-Arms, and J. Taylor at the Ship in St. Paul's Church-Yard. Price Bound 6 s. ☞ The Third Volume of the said Abridgment is now in the Press, and will be Publish'd in Michaelmas Term and sold at the same Places.
THE TABLE. A. THE Effects of AIR on Feathers in an exhausted Receiver, page 6, 7 The Force of the Airs Expansion. p. 9, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17 The Specifick Weight of a determinate Proportion of Air and Water, page 19, 20 Air produced from Bread, page 38 — from Grapes, page 39, 79, 115 — Grapes bruised, page 41 — Must. page 42 — Apples, page 42, 121, 164, 164, 182 — Plums and Apricocks, page 72, 77, 168 — Pears and Apricocks, page 116 The Production of Air obstructed from Dough, page 44 — from Pears, page 45 — Paste, page 48, 49, 56, 58 — Raisins, page 49 — Plums and Apricocks, page 51 — Grapes with Spirit of Wine, page 54 — Without, page Ib. — Peaches, page 55 — from Ale in Vacuo, page 59 — Pease, page 60 Amber burnt in Vacuo, page 113 Aq. Fortis mixed with Nitre, page 139 — with Spirit of Wine, page 146 Ale in Vacuo, page 198, 199 Whether Air be contain'd in the Pores of Water, page 205 Ants and Mites in a Receiver, page 227 Attraction what, page 234 Of the admirable Rarefaction of the Air without Heat, page 249
Air expanded to 8000 times its Natural Dimensions, page 250 — To 10000 times its Dimensions, page 251 Of the Duration of the Air's Spring, page 253 Of the Condensation of the Air by Cold, page 255 Of the different Extension of Air rarified & compressed, page 257 Of the weakened Spring and unheeded Effects of the Air, page 259 Of the Efficacy of the Air's Moisture, page 272, 273, 341 Of the Insalubrity of the Air, page from 276 to 299 The General History of the Air begun, page 330 What is meant by Air, Ibid. Its Ingredients, page 331 Of the Air's Spring, page 334 Of the Generation of the Air, &c. page 336 Of the Air's Weight, page 363 AE. Whether Aether is contained in Vacuo Boyliano, page 4, 5, 6 B. A small Bird included in a Receiver, page 93, 103, 209, 221 A Bee in Artificial Air, page 96 A Butterfly in Vacuo, page 105, 227 Beef inclosed in a Receiver, page 68, 124, 176, 180, 187, 188, 192, 197, 198 Beans included in a Receiver, page 133, 144 Butter, page 178 Bread in Vacuo, page 195 Beer in Vacuo, page 198 Blackberrys in Vacuo, page 199 Blood and other Humors expanded, page 218 The reason of Bubbles in Vacuo, page 230 Observations about the Barometer, page 243 A statical Baroscope proposed, page 247 Of the Production of Blackness, page 461, 469. C Colours produced in Vacuo, page 10, 11 Cherries inclosed in a Receiver, page 61, 62, 63, 64, 117, 153
Perfumed Cones in Vacuo, page 109, 110, 111, 112 Camphire in Vacuo, page 114 Cabbages in Vacuo, page 118 Coral, page 167 Cow-heel, page 194 Cream in Vacuo, page 197 CLARET in Vacuo, page 199 A Crawfish, page 207 Catterpillars in Vacuo, Of the Changes of Colours in several Mixtures, page 259, 260, 261, 262, 263, 305, 405 Of Clouds, page 344 Of the Mechanical Production of Colours, page 436, 440. Promiscuous Experiments of Colours, page 483. D. A Duck in Vacuo, page 200, 212 New Diseases caused by Subterraneal Effluvia, page 296 E. The Heart of an Eel in Vacuo. page 210 An Eft in vacuo, page 223 Of the Mechanical Production of Electricity, page 323, 324, 325, 326, 327, 328, 329, 330, 355 F. Flies inclosed in a Receiver, page 86, 105, 225 Frogs in compressed Air, page 87 — In Artificial Air, page 99, 101 — In Vacuo, page 108, 203, 210 Fly-blowings in a Receiver, page 106, 148 Frog-Spawn, page 106, 148 Flies Eggs in Vacuo, 107 Flesh and Broth, page 185, 186, 192, 193 Of Frogs, page 344 The Influence of the Air on Fire and Flame, page 401 The Relation betwixt Flame and Air, Ibid. Of the Air in reference to Fermentation, Ibid.
G. Grapes inclosed in a Receiver, page 64, 135, 162 Gilliflowers in compressed Air, page 90 Goosberrys in a Receiver, page 101, 126, 131, 133 Gillyflowers in a Receiver, page 71, 197 A Gudgeon in Vacuo, page 208 A Greefinch in Vacuo, page 211, 214 H. Hartsborn burnt in Vacuo, page 113, 194 A Statical Hygroscope proposed, page 264 Of the Utilities of Hygroscopes, page 265, 266, 267, 268, 269, 270, 271 Of Hail, page 419 K. A Kitling in Vacuo, page 204 L. Why Liquors ascend in Syringes, page 2 Of the Production of Light in Vacuo, page 10 A Limon inclosed in a Receiver, page 90, 120, Melted Lead in a Receiver, page 138 Larks with Beef, page 181 — with Butter, page 185 A Linote in Vacuo, page 213 A Lark in Vacuo. page 214 A Leech in Vacuo, page 224 Of Light ning, page 350 An Extract of Mr. Lock's Letter, page 367 Of the Effects of the Air in reference to Life, page 410 M. Milk in a Receiver, page 121, 184, 196 Mercury in Vacuo, page 151 Must, page 42 Minium, page 167
A Mouse, page 212, 220 Why Contiguous Marbles are not easily separated, page 228 Marchasies burst by the Airsmoisture, page 274 Metals may be raised in the form of Vapors, page 297, 298 Of the ill Effects of Mineral Fumes, page 293 Of the Celeftial and Aerial Magnets, page 312, 313, 314 Of the Production of Magnetical Qualities, page 315, 316, 317 Chymico-Magnetical Experiments, page 318, 319, 320, 321, 322 Of Mists, page 344 The Effects of the Air on Mineral Substances, page 400, 406 Of Maturation, page 428 N. Nut-Kernels in a Receiver, page 128, 157 O. Oranges shut up in a Receiver, page 67, 83, 84, 88, 119, 149 Oyl per deliquium with Spirit of Wine, page 145 Onyons in a Receiver, page 69, 81, 159 Oysters, page 177, 207 Of the Effects of the Air on Odours, page 403 Of the Mechanical Production of Odours, page 429, 430, 431, 432 P. Pears included in a Receiver, page 75, 92, 126, 136, 160, 171 Paste inclosed in a Receiver, page 97, 102, 131, 155 Pease in a Receiver, page 104, 128 Paper burnt in Vacuo, page 113 Paste burnt in a Receiver, page 114 Plums in a Receiver, page 40, 127, 129 Peaches, page 74, 169, 170, 172 Antidotes against the Plague, page 294 Why the Plague sometimes ceases unexpectedly, page 295 The Vestigation of Plants, &c. page 410 Q. Quicksilver slacked in Vacuo, page 12 Latent Qualities in the Air, page 299, 310
Whence. p. 300 Of the Manifest Qualities of the Air, page 375, 376, 394 Of the Production of manifest Qualities, page 408, 409 R. Roses in a Receiver, page 83, 89, 165 Radishes with Claret, page 142 Raisins of the Sun, page 39, 158 Rosemary and Water distilled in Vacuo, page 191 A Roasted Rabbet in Vacuo, page 195 Of Rain, page 418 S. Whether Sounds be Propagated in Vacuo, page 8 A Shrew-Mouse in a Receiver, page 85, 91, 94, 103, 148 A Shrew-Mouse in a Wine-Gun, page 94 A Snail in Artificial Air, page 103 Sulphur Viv. in Vacuo, page 114 A Solution of Salt in a Receiver, page 138 Spirit. Sal Armon. with Copper, page 145, 151 Sal Armon. and Oyl of Vitriol, page 154 Sheeps Blood in Vacuo, page 196 A Snake in Vacuo, page 202 Steams elevated by the Air. page 222 A Slow-worm and a Leech in Vacuo, page 123 The Reason of Suction, page 232, 236, 238 Saline and Sulphureous Parts in the Air, page 301, 343, 352 — How raised, Ibid. Seminal Principles of all sorts in the Air. page 304 Damasco Steel improved, page 305 The Medium of Sounds, 363 T. Tulips in a Receiver, page 82. 120. 166 A Tube immersed in Water, page 142 Venice Turpentine in a Wind Gun, page 150 Calx of Tin, page 167 Tadpoles in a Receiver, page 217 Of Terrestrial Steams, page 344 Of the Effects of the Air on Tasts page 404
Of the Mechanical Production of Tastes. page 421, 422. 423. 424. 425. 426. 427 V. Vinegar with Eels in Vacuo. page 109 Ʋrine in Vacuo, page 123 Violent Leaves, page 196 A Viper in Vacuo, page 201, 213, 215 Of the Production of Vitriol, page 303 The Effects of the Air on Vegetable Substances, page 398 W. Spirit of Wine and Oyl of Turpentine in Vacuo, page 141 A Whiteing in Vacuo, page 152, 179 Of Winds, page 359 Of the Production of Whiteness. page 519 The End.
Books Printed for and sold by John Taylor at the Ship in St. Paul's Church-Yard. In FOLIO. POOL's Annotations on the Holy Bible, with Mr. Clark's Concordance to the same, in 2 Vol. the 3d Edition: Much cor∣rected. Monsieur Thevenot's Travels into Persia and the East-Indies. Phillips's New World of Words; or an Universal English Dictionary, containing the proper Significations and Derivations, of all Words from other Languages, &c. the 5th Edition, with large Additions, and Improvements from the best English and Foreign Authors. Systema Agriculturae, The Mystery of Husbandry discovered; treating of the se∣veral new and most advantagious Ways of Tiling, Planting, Sowing, Manuring, Or∣dering and Improving all sorts of Gardens, Orchards, Meadows, Pastures, Corn Lands, Woods and Coppices; with Monthly Di∣rections for Husbandmen, and the Inter∣pretations of Rukick Terms. the 4th Edit.
IMPRIMATUR Liber Cui Titulus, THE WORKS Of the HONOURABLE ROBERT BOYLE, Esq EPITOMIZED. By RICHARD BOULTON. JOHN HOSKYNS, V. P. R. S. Vicesimo Septimo Martii, 1699.
THE WORKS OF THE HONOURABLE Robert Boyle, Esq EPITOMIZ'D. VOL. III. BY RICHARD BOULTON, of Brazen-Nose College in Oxford. Illustrated with COPPER PLATES. LONDON: Printed for J. Phillips, at the King'-s Arms, and J. Taylor at the Ship in St. Paul's Church-Yard. MDCC.
TO THE Most Illustrious Prince WILLIAM, Duke of Bedford, Marquiss of Tavi∣stock, Earl of Bedford, Baron Rus∣sel, and Baron Russel of Thorn∣haugh, Baron Howland of Streat∣ham; Lord Lieutenant of the Coun∣ties of Bedford and Cambridge, and during the Minority of Wrichesly, (commonly called Marquiss of Tavi∣stock) his Grandson and Heir appa∣rent, Lord Lieutenant of Middlesex; as also Custos Rotulorum for the said County and the Liberties of West∣minster; One of the Lords of his Ma∣jesty's most Honourable Privy Council, and Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter. May it please your Grace, THE Great and No∣ble Character which you have already obtain∣ed
in the World, hath justly obliged them both to applaud and admire You; and no Wonder then, that it should raise in me an Ambition to lay this at Your Feet; where whilst I lye secure from the Censure of the World under your Grace's Pa∣tronage, I have this great Advantage, that in what∣ever I can say, in relation to your Illustrious Cha∣racter, I cannot be Guil∣ty of Flattery; since the World universally agrees, that Your Noble Quali∣fications are not unworthy
so Noble a Prince; Your Sagacity and Judgment not being less conspicu∣ous in State Affairs, than your Virtue and Piety in Divine things; the For∣mer having rendred You both acceptable and ser∣viceable in Council, as the Latter have made You an Eminent and Illustri∣ous Example of Christia∣nity; so that You be∣come serviceable to your Country upon a double score; Your Virtues in∣cite your Admirers to pur∣sue and emulate Good A∣ctions, and your Wisdom
and Prudence contribute to the well Governing of a People, who are the more disposed to be Loyal and Good Subjects, the more by Example you promote Religion, which teaches them to obey: Upon which Account we may truly say, that You act not the Politician, but, what is much more diffi∣cult, like a Wise and Pru∣dent States-Man; You gain the People not by Stratagem, but Exam∣ple. But on this Ocasion I can make use of no great∣er
Encomiums than what his Majesty hath been plea∣sed to Honour You with, in the Preamble to the Pa∣tent which creates you Duke, where He declares, in better Words than I am now Master of, that, as there was no Family in En∣gland more conspicuous in Virtue and Piety, so he thought himself obliged to give Testimony of it, by conferring that Ho∣nour on You, which You long before deserved. But not to enlarge too much on a Subject which the World is so well ac∣quainted
with, I shall need to say no more, than that in Your Illustrious Person we may see all the just Qualifications of an English Nobleman concentered; since your Honour is sup∣ported not only by Titles, but Actions; so that Your Character is pure and un∣spotted, in a World ready to take the least occasion of Calumny and Aspersi∣on. Let me therefore rather admire than endeavour to delineate so Noble and so Great a Character; which be it never so well copyed,
must come far short of its truly Illustrious Origi∣nal. I shall therefore only add, that all Your Admi∣rers wish that You may long continue an Orna∣ment of the English Nati∣on, and a Standard of Ho∣nour and true Nobility; which are more particu∣larly the Wishes of, May it please your Grace, Your most humble, and most devoted Servant, RICHARD BOULTON.
THE PREFACE TO THE READER. HAving already, in the Prefaces prefixed to the two preceding Volumes, intimated the Reasons brief∣ly, why I have placed the Subjects in the Order and Method they there appear in, I shall take the same Me∣thod in this. And,
First, The Second Volume conclu∣ding with those Subjects which are more immediately the Objects of our Senses, viz. Tastes, Odours, and Colours, this Third begins with what our Author hath said in Relation to Cold and Heat; to which is added, what he hath delivered concerning Fire and Flame, and those Bodies which chief∣ly affect our Sight. And as for the remaining Part of the Book, it will be so evident to the Reader, that the Subjects bear a Relation one to ano∣oher, that there is no need I should alledge any thing else to suggest why I placed them in that Order. And now having thus far at the last performed a Task which hath been so long desired, and which hath hi∣therto been so well accepted by the Learned; it would be Ingratitude in me not to return them Thanks, for re∣ceiving
so candidly the Labours of one who values himself upon nothing more than that he hath had the opportunity of pas∣sing away his Time in their Service, and in contributing his Endeavours in a Work that may be useful in promoting Natural Knowledge: To do which, is not only the Study, but the Diversion of the Can∣did Reader's very Humble Servant, R. BOULTON.
A Catalogue of Books Printed for J. Taylor, at the Ship in St. Paul's Church-Yard. 1. POol's Annotations in 2 Vol. Fol. The 4th Edition now in the Press. 2. Phillips's new World of Words, or an Universal English Dictionary, containing the proper Significati∣ons and Derivations of all English Words. The 5th Edition, with Improvements from the best English and Foreign Authors. Fol. 3. The Mystery of Husbandry discover'd. The 4th Edition, with large Additions throughout the whole. 4. Arch-Bishop Ʋsher's Life and Letters. Published by Dr. Parr, his Graces Chaplain. Fol. 5. Love's whole Art of Surveying and Measuring of Land made Easie. 4to. 6. Abbadie of the Truth of the Christian Religion, in Two Parts. 8vo. 7. Quintilian's Declamations English'd. 8. Ward's Compendium of Algebra. 9. Bp. Ho on the Lord's Prayer. 10. Diogen aertius Lives of the Philosophers, in 2 Vol. English. 11. Edward's Authority, Style, and Perfection of the Scriptures. 12. Plutarch's Morals. 5 Vol. Englished by several Hands. 13. Dr. Eachard's Works. 14. Logic, or the Art of Thinking, done into En∣glish by several Hands, The 3d Edition. 15. Esop's Fables, English, with Cuts, the true sort. 16. The Queen's Closet open'd. The Tenth Editi∣on with Additions. 17. A large and general Phrase-Book, By W. Ro∣bertson, M. A. 18. Dr. Salmon's practical Physick.
TO THE Learned and Ever Honoured HANS SLOANE M. D. FELLOW, OF THE Colledge of Physicians; AND SECRETARY TO THE Royal Society. Learned Sir, GRatitude it self does not only oblige me to make a Thankful Acknow∣ledgment of Your Favours, but at the same time, makes the Obligations greater, since the Opportunity of owning Favours re∣ceiv'd from Eminent Men, makes an Ad∣dition to them.
And if Gratitude be such a Virtue as carries along with it it's own Reward, and also a future Obligation, it is the greater Satisfaction to Me, that whilst I own your former Favours, I lay a Foundation for a second Acknowledgment; But more, that it gives me the Opportunity of solliciting Your Patronage, which you are so free to give to any thing that may promote Na∣tural Knowledge: The Noble-Design of that Royal Society, in which, Your Station makes you an Useful, but Your Qualifica∣tions a more Serviceable Member. And as our continual Contributions to the Philosophical Transactions, for which the World is oblig'd to that Learn'd and Royal Society, and in Great Measure to You, makes them the more Valuable; so Your Readiness to encourage my weak Endeavours hath given me sufficient Reason to acknowledge my self, Learned Sir. Your Most Obliged and Most Humble Servant, R. BOULTON.
THE PREFACE To the READER. Candid Reader. ALthough it is the General Consent of all Learned Men, that the Author's Works deserve the highest Esteem amongst all Cultivators of Natural Knowledge; yet, it is as common a Com∣plaint that long Apologies and too frequent Excur∣sions interspers'd through his Writings make 'em less serviceable to Vulgar Readers, who are una∣ble to carry his Sense along with them, when inter∣rapted too often with Digressions, which have little or no Relation to the Subject under Consideration. And as his Prolix and Complaisant Way of Wri∣ting is some Disadvantage to Vulgar Readers; so there are some, who, tho' they have Abilities suf∣ficient to extract the Instructive Part, and to pass over his Prolixities, without losing the Advantage of his Improvements; yet they are not backwards to say, that the Reading of Compliments takes up too much time, and they had rather have the In∣structive Part, without his long digressive Excu∣ses, since Men, desirous of Knowledge, and less stu∣dious of Compliments, need no Apologies to render Knowledge Acceptable, it being sufficiently recom∣mended to Inquisitive Readers by its own Useful∣ness. The Consideration of this made me more willing to be concern'd in a Work, likely to be useful to
vulgar Readers, and Acceptable to All; being de∣sirous and ready, to take any Opportunity of ex∣pressing my Willingness to do any thing, that may oblige the Learned World, or tend to the Im∣provement of Knowledg. For tho' it is not to be deny'd, but that Com∣pliments are great Ornaments and Arguments of the Candor of a well accomplish'd Author; yet, it is to be allow'd, that, as too many of the finest Flowers may as well intercept the Light of the Sun, as an obscure Cloud, so Compliments may prejudice Knowledge if too frequent, as soon as entertaining Digressions. And if Digressions of any kind be of Disservice to the Reader, and consequently Disadvantagious to the Author, it will be the more acceptable Work, if whilst I endeavour to gratifie the Reader, I become serviceable to the Author, in dispersing those Clouds; which, tho' they may seem Gentle∣men-like Embellishments, are not so entertaining to Philosophers, who consider things just as they are without Additions of Art or Rhetorick. Having thus briefly given the Reader the Rea∣sons, which induc'd me to the present Work, I shall in the next place proceed to give an Account of the Work it self. First then, considering that the Author's De∣sign and Aim was not only to improve Knowledge, but, to use a Motto prefix'd to one of his Books from the Illustrious Verulam, Potiùs promovere in multis, quàm perficere in paucis; and since
in order to a general intelligible System of Phi∣losophy, he was sollicitous of collecting as many Phaenomena as he could, and which might be ser∣viceable in framing such a System; so I have, (that the Author's Aim and Design might not be prejudic'd by an Abstract), taken Care both to Epi∣tomize those things in which he might be said per∣ficere, and likewise have taken Care not to omit the least Phaenomenon which might contribute to the promoting of Natural Knowledge: So that I can justly say, there is nothing in the Author's Works which is not in the Epitomy, except Digressions and Apologies. And as I have taken Care to omit nothing, so I have been as sollicitous to draw an Epitomy without any Enlargements, which the Nature of the Subjects did not require, or without contract∣ing more than the Subjects would admit. And further, as where the Author has laid down several Historical Truths by way of Notes without Philosophizing upon them, his Design being to pro∣mote as well as perfect, I have taken Care to avoid any other Connexion than the Author thought such Notes requir'd, so I thought my self oblig'd to give an Abstract of the Author's Philosophical Thoughts, where he hath interspers'd them with his Historical Truths, that the Work might be more perfect. So that the Reader will have in the following Volume, which contains about 30 Sheets besides the Cuts, as much Matter as in the Original takes
up near 200 Sheets, which will not only carry this Advantage with it, that what before would have taken up near two Months time in reading, may be read in a Week, but he will likewise purchase Phi∣losophy at so cheap a Rate, that upon that Account it will undoubtedly be more acceptable, the Price of this Volume coming far short of Forty Shillings, which the Books Epitomiz'd in this Volume al∣most amount to. But what is the greater Advan∣tage is, that so much Knowledge compris'd in so small a Compass, will be more easily accquir'd by young Philosophers, who in larger Volumes are apt to forget what they left at the Beginning, be∣fore they arrive at the End of them: But by this Epitomy, a System of Philosophy being brought, almost before the Eye at once, it will be more easily swallow'd and digested. But whilst I am considering the Advantages which the Reader will receive by the Abridgment, I am told by the Booksellers, that it is likely to meet with some Disadvantages upon another Ac∣count; for it being common for Buyers to esti∣mate the Value of a Book by the Bulk, they may think too great a Price put upon this Volume; And therefore, the Booksellers think it necessary that I should acquaint the Reader, that their Rea∣son will take off that Objection; for besides, the Dearness of Paper, and the Number of Cuts con∣tain'd in this Volume being so chargeable as to amount to a fourth Part of the Charges of the Book; it is hop'd that the Usefulness of the Cuts
will excuse the Dearness of it; for to have Print∣ed an Abridgment without 'em, would have made it dearer, tho' of a less Price, the Cuts being as requisite to Illustrate the Author's Works, as Maps in Geography to render Accounts of the Ter∣raqueous Globe more intelligible. Thus much being said in favour of the Book∣sellers, I shall now proceed to give a brief Account of the Method I have taken in this Volume, re∣serving a further Account of the subsequent Vo∣lume till the Publication of it. And first, considering that it is the usual Me∣thod in Systems of Philosophy, to begin with Ge∣nerals, and thence to proceed to Particulars; and likewise to lay down Principles in Order to Explain the several Phaenomena of Nature by those Principles; I have in compliance with so reasonable a Method, first laid down the Doctrin of Forms and Qualities, and the Principles by which those Qualities are diversified, from whence likewise arise those various Forms from whence each Particular Quality is deriv'd; and because subordinate Forms depend on the same Principles, and differ only from simple or complex Forms in reference to their Union in Compound Bodies. I have likewise adjoyn'd an Account of them, which Doctrin of Forms and Qualities is further Illustrated by Experiments and Observations annex'd by our Author for that purpose: And because there is an Affinity betwixt those Expe∣riments, and those made by our Author on Salt-Petre,
to them I have annex'd an Abstract of his Essay on Salt-Petre, which is not only a farther Illustration of the Doctrin of Forms and Quali∣ties, but being likewise of equal Force in Illu∣strating what he delivers concerning those Gene∣ral Affections of Matter, Fluidity and Firmness, I have in the next place laid down what he Teaches concerning those more Catholick Modes of Matter; and since our Author in his Chapter of Fluidity hath likewise taken notice of the Su∣perficial Figures of Fluids, I have to that added what is delivered concerning the same Subject in the Philosophical Transactions, and because the Firmness of Bodies is said to proceed from a Rest in their Parts, I have subjoyn'd to that an Essay of the Motion of the Parts of Solids: And to conclude the first Book, which Treats of the most General Affections of Matter, I have added an Account of the Effects of Languid Mo∣tion, and the Propagableness of it through those Catholick Mediums, viz. Fluids and Solids. And these more Catholick Phaenomena of Na∣ture being Explain'd in the first Book, to distin∣guish 'em from Qualities more Particular; in the Second Book I begin with the Doctrin of Particular Qualities, which do not only depend on the Motion or Rest, Shape, Size and Texture of Matter, but likewise on the Structure of the World as now. Constituted, and the Laws of Na∣ture as now Establish'd. And because That Part of the Universe con∣tain'd
in Our Vortex, is the Subject chiefly of the following Sheets, having first begun with an Introduction to Particular Qualities; I proceed to consider, first the most General Observations in the Earthy Region, and from that proceed to consider Submarine Regions, after which, by way of Introduction to the Region of the Air, I have added an Essay of the Natural and Pre∣ternatural States of Bodies, and Particularly of the Air, from which proceeding to Experi∣ments made in the Air, those closing the first Volume; In the second Volume I proceed to what he says further relating to the Air, in which I shall give a further Account of the Me∣thod taken in that. Having thus briefly given the Reader an Ac∣count of the following Method, I shall without detaining him any longer, subscribe my self the Candid Reader's Very Humble Servant, R. BOULTON.
THE INTRODUCTION, Representing the Grounds and Excellency of CORPUSCULAR PHILOSOPHI. HAVING in the Preface given the Rea∣der an Account of the following Sheets, I shall, by way of Introduction, represent the Grounds and Excellency of the Corpuscular Philosophy, as deliver'd by our Author. And first: It hath this to recommend it above all other Systems of Philosophy, That it teaches us not, as the Doctrin of the Epicureans does, that the World was made in an Infinite Vacuum, by a Casual Concourse of Atoms; nor as the Cartesi∣ans, That Matter, first put into Motion by GOD, convened into a World, as now constituted, by Laws Mechanical only; but it allows the Omni∣potent Creator a greater share in the Works of his Hands, teaching that the Motions of the small Parts of Matter, which compose the Universe, were guided by that Wise Architect, who when he had constituted the World, establish'd the Laws of Nature. So that we only endeavour to explain those as now constituted, and how they are Mechanically carry'd on. In doing of which, it accounts for the several Phanomena of Nature, by Principles more intelli∣gible and clear, than the Doctrin of the Peripa∣teticks; since it is much more easily understood
what I mean by Motion or Rest, Size, Shape, Or∣der, Situation, and a Contexture of the Parts of Matter, than by fanciful Ideas represented by the Doctrin of Privation, Substantial Forms, and their Eduction, &c. Nor hath our Hypothesis a less Advantage over the Hypostatical Principles of the Chymists, since it accounts for several Phaenomena, which they are at a loss in; as Eclipses of the Sun, which are brought on, and remov'd by a Local Motion of the Interfering Body, and those others concern'd in the Phaenomenon: Or, to use another Instance, it is easily understood, that the Image of a Man cast into the Air, by a Concave Spherical Looking-glass, are more Naturally accounted for by a Refraction of the Rays of Light than any Hypostatical Principles. But besides the Intelligibleness of our Princi∣ples, it is a farther Recommendation, that none are more Primary than Matter and Motion; which is the first General Affection of it, nor can any be more simple: None more Primary, because had the same Parts of Matter been always in the same Place, they could not be diversify'd; there∣fore Motion was primarily necessary: Nor could any be more simple, because neither could be divi∣ded into Parts of a different Denomination; since all Matter is equally Matter, and all Motion must bear the same Title, consider'd barely as Motion. And as none can be more Simple and Primary, so none can be more Comprehensive; since Motion, Size, Figure, Order and Texture, may be diversi∣fy'd thousands of ways; and as whole Libraries are made of Twenty-four Letters, so the several Phae∣nomena of Nature may be explain'd by the several
Varieties of Textures, and other Differences, arising from the various Changes our Principles are subject to. Nor are the most Obvious Phaenomena of Na∣ture alone explain'd by our Hypothesis, but those Qualities esteem'd Occult ones, since the Particles which are concern'd in such Compositions, as abound with occult Qualities, are subject to the same Laws, and capable of the like manner of A∣ction; tho' their Parts are so Minute, as to make their Modus Operandi indiscernible. But what is still more an Advantage in our Hy∣pothesis, is that it flies not to an unknown Power, as a Plastick one, or an Anima Mundi, whose Ope∣ration is not known, but gives us a Mechanical Account of Things; for the former gives no more Satisfaction, than if one were told, that a Watch tells the Hours of the Day, because made by such a Man; whereas the true Reason is, because the Parts so plac'd together are in Motion. And the same Instances may serve to shew us the Deficiency of the Hypostatical Principles: Be∣sides Ingredients by a bare mixture, being able to effect nothing, nor able to work upon each other, without Motion; those Principles them∣selves, appear, to be only different Modes of Mat∣ter, vary'd by our Hypothesis. To conclude, There is not any one Phaenomenon which any Hypothesis is able to explain; but a more Intelligible Account may be given by the following.
Plate .1. Vol .III. Fig: 1. p: 39. 4. p. 17 Fig: 5 — p: 317. Fig: 6. p: 37. Fig: 2 — p: 37. Fig: 7. — p: 3. Fig: 3 — p: 36. p: 314. p: 314. p: 314. p: 314.
Plate .2. Vol .III. p: 281. Fig: 1. Fig: 2. p: 285 Fig: 3. p: 285. Fig: 4. p: 288. Fig: 5. p: 290. Fig: 6. p: 293. Fig: 8. p: 295. Fig: 7. p: 294.
Plate .3. Vol. III Fig: 1. p: 296 Fig: 2. p: 296. Fig: 3. p: 297. Fig: 4. p: 297. Fig: 5 — p: 299. Fig: 6. Fig: 7. p: 301. Fig: 8.
Plate .4. Vol .III. Fig: 1. p: 303 p: 303. Fig: 2. p: 305 Fig: 3. Fig: 4. p: 305. Fig: 5. p: 307. p: 309 Fig: 6. Fig: 7. p: 309. Fig: 8. p: 310.
Plate .5. Vol: III. Fig: 1. p: 329.
THE WORKS Of the HONOURABLE ROBERT BOYLE, Esq EPITOMIZED. An Appendix to BOOK IV. CHAP. I. Of the Mechanical Production of Cold. TO make it appear, That Heat and Cold,Experi∣ments con∣cerning the Mechanical Origin of Cold. which are generally esteemed two of the most active Qualities, may be me∣chanically produced or destroyed by a bare change of Texture, or by Alterations otherwise mechanically brought on, without the assistance of the Peripatetick Doctrine of Sub∣stantial Forms, or the Hypostatical Principles of the Chymists; I shall subjoin the following Experiments.
EXPERIMENT I. A solution of Sal-Ar∣moniac.Having dissolv'd Sal-Armoniack in four times its quantity of Water, whilst the Mixture was a stirring, and the Salt dissolving, the Water ac∣quir'd such a degree of Coldness as to congeal Water, with which the Bottle was wet on the outside, into Ice; but after a Dissolution of that Salt, the Coldness gradually declin'd. EXPERIMENT II. To try whether the Coldness which the for∣mer Mixture acquir'd, did not rather proceed from the Effect which the Water had on the saline Parts than on the Dispersion of those Sa∣line Parts through the Water; I immerg'd a Thermoscope in Water, which was so warm as to make the Spirit of Wine ascend; but the same Thermoscope being removed into Powder of Sal-Armoniac warm, it ascended much faster; yet the Weather-glass being conveyed into the Liquor again, and the Salt poured into it, it speedily began to subside, and sunk a Division and ¼ below the Mark it stood at in cold Wa∣ter, remaining at that Station a considerable time. And the same Experiment succeeded when tryed a second time. EXPERIMENT III. Having immersed a Thermoscope in Spirit of Salt, I pour'd Spirit of fermented Urine leisure∣ly upon it, and observ'd, that the Mixture by a
mutual Conflict growing hot,A Thermo∣scope im∣mers'd in a Mixture of Spirit of Salt and fermented Urine. sensibly raised the Spirit of Wine; which being done, and a Salt obtained from the evaporated Mixture, not much unlike Sal-Armoniack, it was carefully dri∣ed, and being put into Water, in which a Ther∣moscope was placed, upon its dissolution, whilst it was stirred about, the Spirit of Wine in the Weather-glass gradually subsided. EXPERIMENT IV. Another immersed in Spirit of Roch Allom, &c.Having poured as much rectify'd Spirit of Roch Allom into a wide mouth'd Glass, as was sufficient to cover the globulous part of a Thermoscope, when the Spirit of Wine was equally cooled with the Air about it; we poured into it a vo∣latil Salt, obtain'd by Sublimation from Sal-Ar∣moniack, and a fixt Alcali; and tho' upon the joint Action of these two Bodies, a considerable Noise was raised, with Bubbles and Froth; yet the Spirit of Wine began to subside, and conti∣nued to do so, 'till the Spirit of Allom was wholly glutted with the volatil Salt, the whole Descent being the length of an Inch. From this Experiment and the foregoing it appears, That when Alcalies and Acids produce Heat, upon a mutual Conflict which ensues their Mixture, they have not that Effect precisely consider'd as such; since it is evident, that an urinous Salt mixed with an acid Spirit, viz. of Roch Allom, produces Coldness; and not a true Effervescence.
EXPERIMENT V. A Thermo∣scope in a Mixture of Oil of Vi∣triol and Sal Armon.One part of Oyl of Vitriol being shaken toge∣ther with twelve parts of Water, the Mixture acquir'd a little Warmth; but when it was cool, being poured into a wide-mouth'd Glass, and a Thermometer immersed in it, when the Liquor in the Thermoscope was equally cool with the external, we poured in a sufficient quantity of Sal-Armoniack to glut the Acid: The effect of which Mixture was, that upon a cold Ebullition the Spirit of Wine descended an Inch. EXPERIMENT VI. Heat pro∣duced by a Mixture of Salt-peter and Oyl of Vitriol.Tho' Salt-Peter usually produces a Coldness in Liquors, yet eight Ounces of it being mixed with six of Oil of Vitriol, the Mixture acquired a considerable degree of Heat, emitting Fumes copiously. EXPERIMENT VII. The effect of Gun-pow∣der mixed with Water.Though Gun-powder be a Body so inflamma∣ble, yet it evidently imparts a Coldness, if mixed with Water. If a small quantity of Oil of Vi∣triol be mixed with the Salt formerly made use of, before the Oil hath been mixed with Water, it acquires a considerable degree of Coldness.
A Digression about Potential Coldness. Potential Coldness Mechani∣cally ex∣plained.Potential Coldness is usually looked upon to be a Quality so absolute, as not to be explicable without the Doctrine of Substantial Forms: But it will easily appear, That it may, without any great difficulty, be clearly explained by Me∣chanick Principles; if we consider, that the Fi∣gure, Shape and Texture of Bodies may be so contrived as to lessen the usual and natural Agi∣tation of Humors about our Sensory, and con∣sequently, the Perception of this Imminution, may cause such a Sensation as is usually term'd Potential Coldness; which account being allow∣ed, it will follow, That Potential Coldness is only a relative Quality, depending on the dispersion of the Agents through the Bodies to be cooled by them: According to which Notion, the cold Fitts in Agues may easily be conceived to arise from an Intermixture of the Parts of some clam∣my Matter, which before a Dissolution, were unable to cause any considerable Effect in the Mass of Blood; but presently after being mixed with the Blood, produce such a change in the Motion of its Parts, as affects the Sensory with such a Sensation as is usually esteemed Potential Coldness; which Sensation may not only be so produced in Agues, but by a like Cause in other Distempers, and in several Parts of the Body, as in Hypochondriack and Hysterical Cases. To render which Account more probable, I shall subjoyn, That I have learnt by the Effects of Poysons, that the small Parts of them being in∣terpersed
through the Parts of Humors previ∣ously disposed, may cause a notable Refrigeration: And I my self have prepar'd a penetrating Chy∣mical Liquor, a Drop of which being given to an Animal, would cast him into a seeming Sleep; and a little larger Quantity, being by Mischance applyed to an akeing Tooth, gave the Person a sort of trembling, and almost an universal Re∣frigeration. And that Coldness may be produ∣ced by the Mixture of some subtile Parts of Mat∣ter with the Mass of Blood, appears from the following Histories. Famulum habui (says Be∣nivenius, Cap. 56. Abditorum apud Schenk. Lib. 7. de Venen. Obs. 24.) qui a Scorpione ictus, tam subito ac tam frigido Sudore toto Corpore perfusus est, ut algentissima Nive atque Glacie sese opprimi quere∣retur, verum cum algenti illi solam Theriacam, ex Vino potentiore exhibuissem, illico curatus est. And to this I shall add another, related by A∣matus Lusitanus, Cent. 6. Obs. Vir qui a Scorpi∣one in Manus digito punctus fuit, multum dolebat, & refrigeratus totus, contremebat & per Corpus dolores, Cute tota quasi aut puncta, formicantes pa∣tiebatur, &c. What Re∣frigeration depends on.Whether such Refrigeration depends on a sort of Coagulation of the minute Parts of the Blood, or whether it may be produced by a dif∣ferent Determination of the motion of the Parts of those Liquors as to the Lines they move in, I shall not now examine; but shall rather offer it to be considered, since the internal Constituti∣ons of several Parts of the Body are different from each other, and since the Size and Textures of seve∣ral Agents are also various, whether they may not upon that account have different Effects upon
distinct Parts of the Body, for all the Qualities of such Agents do not wholly depend on the Acti∣on of the Corpuscles of the Medicine only; but depend on some adventitious Qualities, which they acquire by being mixed with particular Hu∣mors and which they may dispose to be more or less worked upon, by the other Efficients of Heat or Cold. And these Conjectures may not be render'd a little probable, by observing, That tho' Spirit of Wine inwardly taken causes Heat; yet exter∣nally it abates the Heat of inflamed Parts; but hath different Effects on a tender Eye: And though internally five Grains of Camphire may diffuse Heat through the whole Body, yet ex∣ternally it is used in refrigerating Medicines. How far these Observations may be of Service in determining whether Camphire, &c. be hot or cold, I shall leave to Physicians to consider, and shall here only offer in Proof, That Potential Coldness is only a relative Quality, the follow∣ing particulars, viz. That from the VI. and VII. Experiments it appears, that according to the Dispositions of Bodies to be worked on, the Agent may have different Qualities: As Fumes of Lead may coagulate Mercury, tho' it hath not a like Effect on other Liquors: And further, al∣though Sal-Armoniack and Nitre be, when sepa∣rate, cool, and tho' the latter melted in a Cru∣cible takes not Fire of it self, yet upon an addi∣tion of Sal-Armoniack it flashes vehemently. But I shall leave this Digression, and proceed to Ex∣periments about Cold.
EXPERIMENT VIII. Oyl of Vi∣triol poured upon a So∣lution of Sal-Armon.To make it appear, how much Motion and Texture may contribute to the Production of Cold, we gradually added twelve Ounces of Wa∣ter to an equal quantity of Sal-Armoniack; and whilst upon a Dissolution of the Salt, the Wa∣ter became cold, we poured in twelve Ounces of Oyl of Vitriol, upon which the Mixture be∣came hot; where it is not a little strange, that though Sal-Armoniack in either of these Liquors produces Cold, yet a contrary Effect should happen upon its Mixture with both together: The Reason of which could be no other but that the Heat produced by the two Liquors over∣powred the Degree of Cold, which the Salt was able otherwise to produce. EXPERIMENT IX. The Effects of the same Mixtures are so un∣certain sometimes, that I have observed, that having placed a Thermometer in eight ounces of Spirit of Verdigrease, and gradually put in two ounces of Salt of Tartar, after some time, the Ingredients having worked upon each other with a copious Froth and a hissing Noise; the Bottle was something warm, and the Liquor in the Thermometer raised: Yet another Salt being mixed with Salt of Tartar, and Spirit of Verdi∣grease prepared without Spirit of Vinegar, and Spirit of Wine poured upon it, instead of an In∣calescence, a considerable degree of Coldness would be produced.
EXPERIMENT X. Oyl of Vitriol and Water shaken together, upon an Addition of Sal-Armoniack, acquire a sort of Goolness; but if Oyl of Vitriol and the Salt be first mixed, upon an Affusion of Water they become hot: And tho' Salt of Tartar grows hot in Water, yet the Caput Mortuum of Salt of Tartar and Cinnabar, distill'd in a strong Fire, produces no Heat, notwithstanding a hissing Nolse like that of Quick-lime succeeds its Immersion. A coinci∣dent Dispo∣sition be∣twixt the Agent and the Patient requisite to the produ∣ction of their Effects.That the artificial Production of Cold may be obstructed by an Indisposition in the Pati∣ent, to be acted on by the grand Efficients of Cold, I have learned by several Observati∣ons; and particularly by noting that tho' Oyl of Vitriol be so fiery a Liquor, as in some measure to have the Effects of Fire it self, and to dissolve Ice sooner than Spirit of Wine; yet a Pound of choice rectified Spirit of Wine being put into a Bottle, except a little at the Top, it was wholly coagulated into a consistent Mass like Ice, notwithstanding the Glass stood in an Elaboratory in which that Oyl was never at any other time observed to congeal. And this Phe∣nomenon was the more remarkable, because the Oyl continued in that state, when the Weather was too moderate to be the cause of such an Ef∣fect; on the contrary I have observed, that Oyl of Anniseeds, which usually coagulates with a less degree of Cold than Water, continued undi∣sturb'd and transparent, without the least Coa∣gulation, in a very frosty Season; and the like
we have observ'd in Camphire reduced to an Oyl by some Nitrous Spirits. But to conclude this Section; If Heat depends on a brisk agitation of the Particles of the Hu∣mours about our Sensory, and if Cold be an Effect of a less degree of Motion than that about our Sensory; it appears that an Imminution of that Motion which is requisite to produce Heat, is sufficient to cause the contrary Quality, viz. Coldness. And tho' Cold seems in such a Sense a privitive Quality, yet in as much as the A∣gent which causes that Imminution acts positive∣ly upon the Parts in motion; it may be esteem∣ed a positive Quality, tho' in respect of our Sensory it is but a relative one, as luke-warm Water will appear hot or cold, as the Hand im∣mersed in it hath either been exposed to an intense degree of Cold or Heat. And indeed the princi∣pal mistakes which sometimes occur in Discourses concerning Cold, happen upon the account of the ambiguity of that Expression, which sometimes is used to signifie the Idea imprinted on the Mind by the advention of an external Object; some∣times for an Imminution of such a Motion as causes Heat, and sometimes for the Object upon a contact of which we perceive Cold.
CHAP. II. Shewing, that not only our Senses, but com∣mon Weather-glasses, may misinform us a∣bout Cold. neither our Sensories nor Weather-glasses, in∣fallible Cri∣terions of the degrees of Cold. THO' most Philosophers have hitherto taken the Testimony of our Sensories for the only Criterion, by which they estimated the de∣grees of Cold; yet since Cold is, in respect of our Organs, only a Relative thing; and since it hath sensible Effects on other Bodies, which are affected by more minute Variations than our Sensories; it may not be amiss to estimate the degrees of it, by the changes it causes on those Bodies that discover it's slighter Variati∣ons, as well as by the assistance of our Senses; since neither our Sensories alone, nor common Weather-glasses are too confidently to be relied on in judging of the degrees of it. For Cold being a relative Quality in respect of our Sensories, as the Disposition of the Organ va∣ries, so the same degrees of Cold may seem vio∣lenter or more remiss; as it is observed in hot Baths, the most remiss degree seeming hot to those that come out of the open Air, yet Cold and Chilling to those that come out of a hotter Bath into that; the Reason of which appears to be, that the Parts of the cooler Bath are more briskly agitated about our Sensory than the Ambient Air; but when we come out of a hotter Bath, they being less agitated in Respect of that, causes a Cold Sensation by altering and checking
the motion of the Humors, which before were briskly agitated about our Sensories. But our Sensories may not only misinform us in such Cases, where they evidently ap∣pear to be differently tempered in respect of those Objects; but sometimes, when those Va∣riations in the Dispositions of our Sensories are Caused by unsuspected Agents, or insensible de∣grees; so we perceive the Air in a celler much Colder in the Summer, when Bodies accustom∣ed to a warmer Air descended into it. Nay sometimes we judge amiss of the degrees of Cold, when we think our Sensories unaltered; so Air blown out of a pair of Bellows upon the Sensory, by penetrating into the Pores and re∣tardating the Agitation of the Humors, seems Colder than before, yet when blown upon a common Weather-glass, that motion enables it not to depress the Mercury. Besides, sometimes we may be more sensibly affected with Cold, when it depends not on the Qualities of the Air in general; but either on some Steams which are endowed with frigo∣rifick Qualities, as Opium externally applied; or on some chilling distempered Humor in our Bodies. But further, sometimes Bodies appear colder to our Sensories than to a Weather-glass; be∣cause the former are more affected by the Density and Penetrancy of the Parts. So water hath appeared cold to our Bodies,See Plate 1. Fig. 1. when by a nice Weather-glass I could not discover, that it was Colder than the Air.
Amongst several Tryals made with these Weather-glasses, the following were remarka∣ble. Having caused a Glass-Egg with a Stem, (such as Fig. 1. Plate 1. Delineates,) to be blown at a Lamp, the Stem being dipped in Water, admitted into it a Cylinder of Water about half an Inch long, which, when the Pipe was erected, would subside to the Bottom of the Cylinder, just where it rises from the Egg, and there it would stand; but if the Glass-Egg was immersed wholly in Water, or but half way in Quick-silver, the Water would ascend up to the middle of the Cylinder, and subside again when taken out. In this Experiment several times repeated, I observed, That when the Glass-Egg was suddenly removed out of the Water, and immersed in the Quick-silver, the Cylinder of Water would be raised higher; but if it was first immersed in Quick-silver, and thence removed into Water, it would subside, but not near so much as in the open Air. These Tryals were made the 26th of June, the Weather being moderate. But being repeated another day when it was windy and rainy, the Aqueous Cylinder upon the immersi∣on of the Thermometer subsided. June 27 in the morning, the Aqueous Cylin∣der would subside when the Thermometer was immersed in Water; but ascend when it was depressed into Mercury; yet when the water had been kept in a warm Room some time, till it was as warm to the Touch, as the Quick∣silver,
they would both of them immediately raise the Mercury in the Pipe. The like Experiment being tryed in January, in Frosty Weather, the Internal Air being of an equal temper with the External; when the Thermometer was immersed in a shallow Vessel of Water, the Aqueous Cylinder was raised half an Inch; and when it was immersed in a deep∣er Vessel, it was raised as high again; but soon subsided when taken out into the free Air. From whence it appears, That we may be differently informed of the degrees of Heat and Cold, when we Employ our Organs of Touch, and when we make use of proper Instruments. On this occasion I shall subjoyn, that not only Water, but moist Vapours in the Air may cause it to seem Colder to our Sensories, than com∣monly Weather-glasses discover it to be. And tho' it be generally agreed, that a Themometer only more exactly measures the Effects which Cold hath upon it and our Sensories; yet I my self have taken notice, that at the same time the Weather hath seemed cold to me, when the Weather-glass agreed not with the Information my Senses gave me, which, that it did not pro∣ceed from my , was apparent; since others were sensible of it at the same time. From what hath been said, it appears, That it is requisite to take notice when Birds and other Animals, whose Perception is more delicate than ours, seem to be affected with Cold, and likewise to examin the degrees of Coldness, as well by Experiments as by the Touch. For a further Confirmation of what I have de∣livered on this occasion, I shall add what Mar∣tinius
in his piece of Geography called Atlas Chinensis, says, speaking of the Air of that Po∣pulous Country; his words are these. Ad Coeli solique temperiem quod attinet, majus in hac Pro∣vincia frigus est, quam illius poscat poli altitudo; vix enim illa excedit gradum secundum supra qua∣dragesimum; & tamen per integros quatuor saepe Menses Flumina omnia adeo duro concrescunt gelu, ut currus equosque ac gravissima etiam onera glacies ferat, innoxie ac securissime transeant: Ex iis etiam ingentia glaciei frusta excinduntur quae in futuram aestatem ad delicias servant. His Mensi∣bus omnes Naves ita in ipsa Glacie defixae sunt, ut progredi nequeant ubicunque illas frigus occupat (quod certo certius circa medium Novembris ingruere solet) per quatuor illos Menses immotae ibi perstare co∣guntur, neque enim resolvitur Glacies ante Martii initium; haec plerunque Glaciei concretio uno fit die, cum non nisi pluribus fiat Liquefactio. To which he adds what is more for our present purpose, Omnino illud mirum, tantum non videri aut sentiri illud frigus ut Europaeos ad bypocausta subeunda vi∣deatur posse cogere, aut in Europa ad Glaciem pro∣ducendam sufficere, unde ad subterraneas illic ex∣halationes pro harum rerum Causis indagandis o∣mnino recurrendum est, &c. But tho' I have urged the necessity and useful∣ness of Weather-glasses, as preferable to the Informations we receive from our Senses; yet, tho' they are not obnoxious to the same Causes of uncertainty, they are apt sometimes to de∣ceive us; since in common Weather-glasses, be∣sides that the external or internal Air may be ra∣rified or condensed by Heat and Cold, the in∣cumbent Atmosphere being contiguous to the
suspended Liquor, it may be boyed up by an additional Gravity, as well as Heat, in the Atmo∣sphere and Vice versâ as we have experienced by a statical Baroscope, whose Ballance would turn with the 500th part of a Grain. And likewise by conveying a common Weather∣glass into the bottom of a deep Pit; and at ano∣ther time by raising it up to the top of a Church or Steeple, and comparing it at the same time with a more exact Thermometer; for, by this Method, it appeared, that the rising and falling of the Water in the common Weather-glass, depended not on the temperature of the Air as to Heat or Cold, but on the different altitude of the Atmospherical Pillar of Air incumbent on the Water. But besides the Gravity of the Atmosphere, there may be other Causes of the ascent and de∣scent of the Liquor in common Weather-glas∣ses, as well as Heat and Cold. For not to urge, that tho' the height of the same Atmospherical Pillar of Air should seem unaltered, the Weather-glass remaining in the same place; yet the weight of the Air may be increased by the copious disper∣sion of Vapours and heavy Steams through the Air, and also may be diminished upon a preci∣pitation of those by Dew or Rain; which Effects may perhaps be falsly attributed to different de∣grees of Heat or Cold. To be satisfy'd of the truth of what I have here hinted, I tryed the fol∣lowing Experiments. I took two Weather-glasses of a more than ordinary length,See Plate 1. Fig. 2d. and 3d. the divisions of one of which were half Inches, and those of the other not much less. The one, which was furnished with
good Spirit of Wine (see Plate 1. Fig. 3.) was sealed. The other (see Plate 1. Fig. 2.) was not sealed; but was so contrived, that the Air being shut up in the lower part of the Instru∣ment, might rise with Heat and fall with Cold. In these Thermoscopes I observed, That in that which was sealed, the Liquor regularly ascend∣ed in warm Weather and subsided in cold: But in the other, there being a little hole left open at the top, it was remarkable, That tho' when the Atmosphere continu'd to be of the same weight, it would regularly rise and fall; yet when the Gravity of the Atmosphere was alter'd, it would not exaltly correspond with the other; for as when the incumbent Pillar of Air was hea∣vier than ordinary, the Liquor would not be raised high enough by Heat, the pressure of that Air resisting it: So, on the other hand, when the Atmosphere was lighter than ordinary; the Liquor in the unsealed Glass would rise too high. So that by comparing the two Thermometers together,See Plate 1. Fig. 4. I could tell, whether the Mercury in the Torrecellian Tube (see Plate 1. Fig. 4) was risen or fallen, and Vice versa; the rising and falling of the Mercurial Cylinder one quarter of an Inch; usually signifies a great disparity betwixt the ascent or descent of the Liquors in the two Instruments. The difference betwixt the height of the Li∣quors in the two Thermometers last Night, was but 1 or 2 Divisions: To day, the Barometer making it evident, that the Air was much lighter; the Liquor in the unsealed Thermoscope was at 58. Tho' in the other, the number of the Divisions it stood at was but 41; yet a Week ago, when the
Mercury in the Barometer was much higher, and the Liquor in the sealed Weather-glass stood at 46, that in the other was no higher than 27. So that in a Week's time the Liquor in the sealed Thermoscope descended 5 Degrees, and that in the unsealed one ascended 31. At another time I observ'd, that when the Mercury in the Barometer was higher than or∣dinary, the Liquor in the sealed Glass stood at the 50th Division, but in the other it was fal∣len to 32 in warm Sun-shiny weather; so that an unheeded change in the weight of the Atmo∣sphere, may have a greater power to compress the included Air in an unsealed Weather-glass, than a considerable degree of warmth may have to dilate it; and consequently it may happen in an ordinary Weather-glass, where the Air is in∣cluded at the top, that the pendulous Water may rise in warm weather and fall in cold weather. For a further Confirmation of what I have been saying, I shall add, That even Yester-night I observ'd, that the Mercury in the Barometer being at 39 Inches, the Liquor in the sealed Ba∣rometer was at the 40th Division, and in the o∣ther at 39 ½ but this Night the Mercury being raised ¼ of an Inch, the Liquor in the sealed Glass rose to 45, the other being depressed to 34 ½. The Night following, the Mercury being raised ¾ of an Inch, the Liquor in the seal∣ed Glass continu'd at the 40th Division; the Liquor in the other in two Days time having been depress'd to the 17th, that is 23 Divisions. Two or three Days after, the Mercury being risen to 30 Inches, the Liquor in the sealed Glass
was at 41; the other was depress'd below the 9th Division, being 33 Divisions lower than the other. The Day after, the Mercury continuing at the same height, and the weather growing much colder, it subsided uniformly enough; that in the sealed Glass subsiding to the 33 and the o∣ther below the lowest Mark of all: Which diffe∣rence still continu'd so great betwixt the Li∣quors of the two Thermometers, because the Air to Day was very heavy; whereas at another time when the Atmosphere was not so heavy, and the Mercury was suspended at 29 Inches and less than a half; the Liquor in the Herme∣tical Glass stood at 34 when the Liquor in the other was not below 41. But once I observ'd the difference betwixt the two Weather-glasses to be greater than any I have recorded yet; it being near 45 Divisions. And a few Hours ago I observ'd, when the Mercury in a Baroscope had risen above ¼ of an Inch higher than it was the Night before, the Liquor in the shank of the Weather-glass was depressed above an Inch below the surface of the ambient Liquor in the Viol, and in the Night was so far depressed, that a Bubble of the exter∣nal Air made its way out at the bottom of the Tube, and joyn'd with the common Air in the Cavity of the Viol; an Effect which the coldness of the Season could not give one hopes to expect; the Pipe in which the Liquor was contained be∣ing 20 Inches long.
CHAP. III. Containing some new Observations about the Deficiencies of Weather-glasses, together with some Considerations touching the new or Hermetical Thermometers. Consider ati∣ons of the de∣ficiency of Weather-glasses.TO excite Men to greater Curiosity and In∣dustry in making Thermometical Experi∣ments, to what I have already said; I shall add the following Considerations: And First, In order to make our Discourses, and what we Communicate to those that are at a distance more satisfactory;Considerati∣on the 1. we are not provided with a Standard of Cold, to estimate and judge of the degrees of it by: For our Senses are by no menas proper Standards, since the same Bo∣dy that feels Cold to one is not of the same degree of Coldness to another; nor can Ther∣mometers be given as Standards: Since they only shew, how far the Air recedes from that degree of Heat or Colndess wherein they were made, and give us no satisfactory account of the temper of the Air at other times; nor do they inform us how to express it, so that it is a very difficult thing, if not impossible, to give a true Standard of Coldness. Besides it is a Quality, for whose differences there are very few distinct Names there being a great many Intermediate degree of Cold, betwixt Luke-warm and Freezing; a as well as several degrees of each of those Qualities, for which we have no Names assigned▪ And indeed, the Observations made by a Wea∣ther-glass, are so confined, that if a Glass
chance to crack, or some Bubbles of Air get in; we are forced to look out for another Instrument, as a Standard of the Air's Heat or Coldness. And further, tho' it be not difficult to include in the Cavity of a Weather-glass, another Body instead of Air; yet it cannot be done, without being liable to receive Impressions from the Atmosphere, when first put up. But tho' it be difficult to get a Standard of Cold for to judge of it's degrees by, yet I have sometines thought, That Oyl of Aniseeds, which is coagulated in Cold and thawed again in warm Weather;An Ingenious Gentleman propos'd to settle a Stand∣ard for Weather-glasses, by observing the Effects of such a degree of Cold as is requisite to freeze Distilled Water, and it may be ad∣vantageously made use of when strong enough to freeze Water. might enable us to make two Thermo∣meters exactly correspon∣dent: If the ball of the Thermoscope being im∣mersed in Oyl of Ani∣seeds melted, we observe what station the Spirit of Wine stands at, when it just begins to coagu∣late: But in doing of it we are to observe, That the Cavities of the Glasses and the Quantity of the Spirit of Wine ought to be as equal as can be; otherwise the success will be much more uncer∣tain. Which way of Estimating Weather∣glasses, tho' it be not so certain as unquestion∣ably to answer expectation, yet it may be of advantage to come as near as we can to certain∣ty. But Considerati∣on the 2d.Secondly, There is unaccurateness in measu∣ring of Cold by Weather-glasses which may be avoided, yet is not; since sufficient care is not taken, that the Diameters of the Cylinders are exact all along, from one end to another, nor
that there be a certain Proportion betwixt the Diameter of the Cylinder, and that of the Pipe. Besides, open Weather-glasses may be more Commodiously contrived for Thermometrical Experiments than those that are commonly made use of;See Plate 1. Fig. 2. (See Plate 1. Fig. 2.) In which, the mouth of the Vial being so closed with ce∣ment or wax, that the External Air hath no communication with it but through the Pipe; upon an Expansion or Condensation of the In∣ternal Air, the Liquor hath much more Room to rise and fall in, than the Pendulous Liquor in ordinary Glasses, where the Quantity of Air is much too small in respect of the Proportion of the Cavity into which it must expand it self, when rarified; to make the rising or falling of the Liquor in that, to be so sensible enough. But besides, that this of ours hath this advan∣tage, that the Quantity of Air is greater in re∣spect of the Proportion of the Cylinder, and consequently the Water hath much more Room to play up and down in; it hath this advantage further, that it is much more convenient for our purpose: Since the Ball of it may be immersed in Bodies, whose Coldness we have a mind to measure; and consistent Bodies, as Snow or Ice may be more conveniently heaped about it, than common Weather-glasses. Thirdly, Men too Confidently conclude, that if the Liquor in a Thermoscope rise an Inch higher to day,A third Considera∣tion. than it was the day before, and an Inch higher the next, that the Air must be as Cold again the last day as it was the preceed∣ing; since it appears not, tho' we should allow that Cold of it self contracts the Air, That a
double degree of Cold must produce a double degree of Condensation exactly; for besides that the different Quantities of Air contained in these Instruments, and the Proportions of Pipes, as well as the degrees of the Expansions consi∣dered together are sufficient to render the Hy∣pothesis suspicious: I am inclined to believe, That the Condensation of the Air and the ascent of the Water depend on the Pressure of the ambient Air, as we shall in a little time make appear, and then this Computation will be found to be very fallacious: For we have else∣where shewn, that the forces required to compress Air, is in Reciprocal Proportions or there∣abouts, to the spaces comprehending the same proportion of Air; so that if a Cylinder of four Inches be able to resist a Pressure equiva∣lent to ten Pounds weight, when it comes to be compressed into two Inches; an equal force super-added to the former, will drive up that already compressed Air into half the space, which is about an Inch: Whence it follows, that in estimating the Condensation of the Air in a Weather-glass, we must not only Consi∣der how much Space it is made to desert; but also what Proportion that deserted Space bears to the whole Space it possess'd before, and to what degree of Density it was brought before the Application of that force: And we must remem∣ber, that the resistance of the Included Air is not to be looked upon as that of a weight, which may remain always the same; but that of a Spring forcibly bent, whose resistance is great∣est as it is crouded into less Room.
The fourth Considera∣tion.Fourthly, we ought to have a regard to the particular Nature of the Liquors employed in Weather-glasses, till we have a more determi∣nate Theory of the cause of Cold: For amongst Liquors, it does not follow, That because the one is most subject to be affected with the high∣est degrees of Cold, and to freeze; that the other is less susceptible of the lower degrees of it: Since it is observed, That Spirit of Wine re∣ceives notable Impressions from fainter degrees of Cold, than Water does, when made use of in Weather-glasses; tho' in our Climate the lat∣ter is much more readily turned into Ice. Be∣sides, we are not to conclude, That all Subtil and most Spirituous Liquors must be least capa∣ble of being congealed; since Oyl of Aniseeds Distilled by a Limbeck, is extremely hot; yet will it be congealed by a much gentler degree of Cold than Water, and will be longer undis∣solved upon a Thaw. And I know some di∣stilled Liquors, which consist of Parts very pe∣netrating and vehemently Agitated; yet more subject to freeze than the generality of Chymi∣cal Oyls or saline Spirits. And indeed, if we allow, that Cold depends on a Diminution of the usual motion of the Parts of a Body; I see not, besides those more Catholick Agents which produce Cold in most Bodies they invade; why one Body may not be said to be more or less frigorifick in re∣spect of this or that Body, and not of a third? For Quick-silver will be coagulated by the fumes of Lead▪ which have no such effect on other Bodies; nor can the utmost degree of Cold  power to congeal it, and from
the Jesuit relates it appears, That Water in pecu∣liar Regions may receive such a disposition from the Soil, as to receive strange Impressions of Cold, in respect of the effects it produces there on Hu∣mane Bodies. And tho' Opium refrigerates not Water, as I have experienced by the help of a good Weather-glass; yet a few Grains of it presently refrigerate the Mass of Blood; which is not only an argument, That most Li∣quors have peculiar Textures; but that the Parts of one Body may be so conveniently shaped as to be able, by insinuating into the Pores of a∣nother, to stop the Agitation of their Parts. And in favour of what we have laid down, I shall further add, That I know more Liquors than one, which, mingled with Spirit of Wine well dephelgmed, will presently deprive it of it's Fluidity; and the like change I have some∣times observed in other Liquors: And I can make a Liquor much of the same temper of Water, that receives a degree of Coldness by the Addition of a certain substance which stops the Agitation of it's Parts; that would scarce have any sensible effect on Water. But to proceed to what we have further to offer in favour of our new Thermometers,Considera∣tions con∣cerning the new Ther∣mometers. be∣sides that the Water and Air may be both al∣ternately condensed, without the influence of the Atmosphere's gravity; they have another advantage, That they may be used in several Places, and removed without spilling the Li∣quor contained in them, or without danger of it being evaporated. Besides they may be safe∣ly let down into any Liquor, even the most Corrosive; it we have a mind to examine their
In doing of which, instead of Liquors made use of in common Glasses, we employ Spirit of Wine tinged with Cochineele, opened by the most Volatile Spirit of Urine, which is not only in less danger of being froze, but suscepti∣ble of the slightest degrees of Cold impressed upon it by external Bodies. But tho' we think these Weather-glasses subject to fewer Excepti∣ons than common ones; yet in estimating, the several degrees of Cold, we look upon them as Instruments to be employed by our Reason, and not quite exempt from those Imperfections, we have imputed to Weather-glasses; since I suspect, that some sort of Steams, penetrateing the Pores of the Glasses, may have other effects upon the Spirit of Wine, than what they have in reference to Heat and Cold: For I once ob∣serv'd, that having immersed the Ball of a Weather-glass in a strange kind of a Luke-warm mixture, the Spirit rose up slowly 8 or 9 In∣ches in a Tube not above a foot long; and subsided not again much above half an Inch when exposed to the Air a good while after it had been immersed in Water 5 hours. The Chymist Orthelius in his Theatrum Chymicum Vol. 6. tells us, That the Liquor Distilled from the Oar of Magnesia or Bismute, will swell con∣siderably in the Glass it is kept in at the full Moon, and subside at the New; which observa∣tion the Jesuit Casatus makes use of as an Argu∣ment. And I have observed my self a Tincture of Amber made with rectified Spirit of Wine, undergoe several changes, when stopped up in a Bottle, which other Liquors abounding with Spirit of Wine did not; so that not unlikely,
if Weather-glasses furnished with different Li∣quors were kept together in the same Place, there would be some disparity, which could be ascribed to nothing but the peculiar Natures of the respective Liquors, which, tho' of different kinds, may receive the same Colour from the same Metals: So Copper gives the known Co∣lour to Aqua fortis, and affords a fair Solution in Aqua Regis, as well as gives a lovely Blew to Spirit of Urine, or Sal Armoniac; and I have found, that it would give a good Tincture to Chymical Oyl of Turpentine. And to shew, that even Spirit of Wine in Weather-glasses may be worked upon and influ∣enced by external Bodies, I shall add, That I have observed in one that lay by me some time, emergent Bubbles: Which whether they were only made up of united Bubbles lodged in the Pores of the Liquor, or some Parts of the Wine disposed to Elasticity by frequent alterations; I examin not: But sometimes they have been so great as to possess many Inches of space in the shank of the Weather-glass; which Bubbles, if they be small and lurk about the juncture of the Ball and of the Cylinder; may, by dividing the Spirit in the Stem from that in the Ball, hinder it from rising according to the Changes of the Weather; a Bubble of Air being more dicffiultly removed up and down in the Stem of the Glass, than the Spirit it self; in favour of which, we have else-where shewn, That Water will pass through a narrower space than Air, except the latter be forced.
But to draw near to a conclusion, tho' I have mentioned all these difficulties about sealed Glasses; I would not be thought to do it with a design to set Men upon greater Nicities than are necessa∣ry, but rather to excite us to take into our Con∣sideration as many collateral Experiments and Observations; besides those made by our Senso∣ries, on Natural as well as Factitious Bodies, in judging of the degrees of Cold as we can: For tho' Water be thought to be most susceptible of such an intense degree of Cold as destroys Fluidity, yet besides Oyl of Aniseeds, I have distill'd a sub∣stance from Benzoin, which becomes fluid and consistent upon much slighter alterations as to Heat and Cold, than would freeze Water or thaw it: And I have observed likewise, That Amber-grease dissolv'd in highly rectified Spirit of Wine, or in other Sulphereous or Resinous Concretions dissolved in the same Liquor; will shoot into fine figured Masses in cold Weather, and re-dissolve in warm; others being more rudely congealed. And even in Chymical Preparations of Harts-horn and Urine, I have observed, That sometimes the Spirits would be clear, and at o∣ther times would suffer a greater or less quanti∣ty of Salt to Chrystallize at the bottom; accord∣ing to the various alterations of the Weather, in point of Heat or Cold. But to bring Instances from more obvious Liquors, it is observed in some Parts of France by the Water-men, That their Boats will carry greater Loads in Winter than Summer; and on frozen Coasts in several Countries it is observed, That Ships draw less Water than on our British Coasts; which is an Argument, that the Water
is heavier and thicker in Winter than in Sum∣mer. And I my self have poised a Bubble so exactly, with Water in it; that tho' it would swim upon the top of the Water at Night; yet in the Day, when the Sun had rarified the Wa∣ter it swam in, it would subside to the bottom: And sometimes was so exactly of a correspon∣dent weight with, and so equally poised in the Water, that it would neither subside nor swim upon the top, but move up and down till the Water was either more rarified or further con∣densed. From what hath been said in this Chapter, it appears, 1st. That by reason of the various pre∣dispositions in Bodies, the testimony of our Sen∣ses is not to be taken in judging of the several degrees of Cold. 2dly. Tho' Weather-glasses are subject to fewer alterations than our Senses, yet they may misinform us; except we, at the same time, measure the Air's Gravity by other Instruments. 3dly. Our sealed Weather-glasses are highly preferable before common ones. 4thly, To conclude this Chapter I shall add, That I would not have Men easily deterred from making Experiments about estimating Cold; because they may seem disagreeable to vulgar Notions, since I doubt not but that the Theory we have is not only very imperfect, but ill grounded.
CHAP. IV. Concerning the cause of the Condensation of the Air, and ascent of Water by Cold in common Weather-glasses. COncerning the Reason, why Water in com∣mon Weather-glasses descends upon Heat, and is raised by Cold? there are three Opinions which may deserve our Consideration. The Opini∣on of the Schools con∣cerning the ascent of Water in Weather-glasses exa∣mined.The first is, that of the Schools and com∣mon Peripateticks, which teaches, That the external Air condensing that included in com∣mon Weather-glasses; it rises to fill up that space deserted by the Air to prevent a Vacuum. But not to urge, That they have not yet pro∣ved, that Nature will not admit of a Vacuum, or that it is contrary to the Notion a Naturalist ought to have of Matter; to suppose it to act any thing contrary to its own natural tendency for a publick Good: I say not to urge these Argu∣ments, which we have elsewhere made use of; I shall alledge the following Experiment. viz. That, Experi∣ments al∣ledged a∣gainst their Doctrine.If a Bolt-head with a long Stem be made use of to try the Torrecellian Experiment with, the space deserted by the Mercury in the Cavity of the Bolt-head, and from whence the Mercury drove the Air, continues void; the Pendulous Cylinder remaining at 30 Inches, without offer∣ing to ascend to prevent a Vacuum. Nor will the Quick-silver rise ¼ of an Inch higher upon the application of cold Bodies outwardly; tho' in a common Thermometer, the same degree of Cold would make Water ascend several Inches.
To this I shall add another Argument taken from the consideration of sealed Weather-glasses (see Plate 1. Fig. 3.) in which it is observed,See Plate 1. Fig. 3. That the Air, instead of contracting upon an in∣crease of Cold, expands it self. If it be said, That the Water contracting the Air follows it to prevent a Vacuum; it may be demanded, Why, since Nature causes the one to contract in com∣mon Glasses, and the other in sealed ones, to a∣void a Vacuum; she does not rather make the Air retain its natural extension than suffer it to be condensed, and then put her self to double trouble, in compelling the Water to as∣cend contrary to its nature? But not to insist on these Arguments, I shall rather urge, that what is offered by them will not solve the Difficulty; for whether the Water or Air be expanded into a large space, since Glass is impervious to Air and Water; I see not how a Vacuum interspersum and coacervatum can be avoided: For if upon the expansion, no o∣ther Body is added and penetrates the Glass to fill the space deserted by some Parts of the ex∣panded Body, there must remain Vacuities be∣twixt them: Because it is impossible, the same quantity of Matter should compleatly and ade∣quately fill a greater space by being expanded; the Parts of the Body being only able inade∣quately to fill it by receding from each other: But were it allowed, that upon the expansion of one of these Bodies, and the condensation of the other, a third Substance harboured in the space deserted by the one; it may be questioned, how such Matter should make its way out again?
Mr. Hobbes his Doctrine examined.The second Opinion I shall take notice of, is that of Mr. Hobbes, which is to me partly pre∣carious, partly insufficient, and scarce intelligi∣ble; for tho' when he asserts, That the coldness of Liquors depends on their being pressed with a constant Wind, besides that he asserts it without Proof; it will appear from an Experiment short∣ly to be alledged, That Liquors sealed up in Glasses, and suspended in Liquors not subject to freeze, may be refrigerated; tho' it appears not how they can be raked on by the Wind as his Hypothesis requires. Secondly, I see no necessity, that the Cold should press upon the superficies of the Water in the Shank; since by Cold it will be raised in a Weather-glassess, kept in a still Place and void of any sensible Wind. Besides, he ought to shew, Why Air insensibly moved deserves to be styled Wind, and how it is possible such a Wind should raise Water so many Inches by pressing upon it? Nay further, Water poured into a Bolt-head till it reaches into the Stem, will subside when refrigerated, and not rise. And if the Ball of a Weather-glass be encompassed with a mixture of Ice, or Snow and Salt; the Water will readily ascend; which how it will be explained by Mr. Hobbes's Hypothesis, I do not see. Thirdly, Mr. Hobbes allowing not of a Vacuum, I wonder he should tell us, That by a bare Pres∣sure, the Water finding no other Place to re∣cede into, is forced to rise into the shank of the Weather-glass: For since, according to him, the shank of the Weather-glass must be full be∣fore; I see not how it should be able to receive the ascending Water, except to use Mr. Hobbes's
own words, it can be fuller than full. Besides, it may be further alledged against Mr Hobbes his Doctrine, that it gives us no account of the con∣densation of the Air by Cold, in Weather-glas∣ses in which the Water descends with Cold and rises with Heat. Fourthly, whereas Mr. Hobbes in explaining the depression of Water in Weather-glasses, at∣tributes it solely to it's own Gravity; it will easily appear, that we must likewise have re∣course to the spring of the included Air: For if a Thermometer be placed in the Sun, when the Water in the shank is but a little above the Sur∣face of the Water without the Tube; the rari∣fied Air will depress the Surface of the Water in the Pipe below the other, and sometimes so far, that some of the rarified Air making it's way out of the Pipe, as soon as the remaining Air is refrigerated again, the Water will be able to rise up higher into the Tube than it did be∣fore. A Modern Opinion ex∣amined.The third and last Opinion I shall consider is one held by some modern Naturalists, which ascribes the Ascent of the Water to the Pressure of the Air gravitating upon the Surface of that Water without the Pipe; but supposes that the Air contained in it, is contracted by Cold a∣lone: As for the first Part of this Hypothesis, I readily Assent to it;and the Au∣thor's pro∣posed. but am apt to believe that the contraction of the included Air depends on the same Cause, and that the spring of it being weakened by Cold, it is condensed by the same Pressure of the Atmosphere; the weight of the External Air over-powering the weakened Spring of the Internal.
In favour of this Opinion I shall add the fol∣lowing Experiments,See Plate 1. Fig. 5. and First, having filled a Vial capable of holding five or six Ounces, half full (See Plate 1. Fig. 5.) and having inverted a Glass Tube into it, about 10 Inches long, much bigger than a Swan's Quill, it being first sealed at one end and filled with Water; the Orifice of the Vial was closed with Cement, so that the External and Internal Air, had no communication with each other: It was placed in a Mixture of Snow and Salt, till the Water in the Bottom of the Vial began to freeze; yet notwithstanding so great a degree of refrigera∣tion, the Water in the Tube did not at all de∣scend; so that either the Air was not conden∣sed by Cold, or the Water descended not to prevent a Vacuum. The Glass being left in this Posture, in our absence, the sealed end of the Pipe flew off; being beaten out by the In∣tumescence of the freezing Water. Having fixed another Pipe as the former, which was some Inches longer, and drawn ve∣ry slender at the sealed end, that it might easi∣ly be broken; this was set to freeze as the o∣ther, yet the Water descended not, but as soon as the top of the Glass-Tube was broke off, the external Air pressing upon the Water, and by the intercourse of that upon the Air; the Water in the Tube subsided 8 or 10 Inches, but rose again when the internal Air was rari∣fied, within half an Inch of the top; and then the Apex being sealed up it was placed in Snow and Salt, yet the Air in the top, had it's Spring so weakened by refrigeration, that it was not able to depress the Water; tho' as soon as the
Apex was broke off, it subsided several Inches, the external Air pressing upon it. The Experiment being a third time reitera∣ted with 3 ½ of Air in the Pipe, when the Wa∣ter in the Vial was in some measure froze, it was able to expand it self a little: But when the Apex was broke off, the External Air de∣pressed the Surface of the Water two Inches, but being removed into a warm Room it as∣cended above an Inch higher than the upper∣most Level. Having put so much Water into a Vessel,See Plate 1. Fig. 6. (Such as Plate 1. Fig. 6. Delineates) as was a∣ble to fill almost the whole Tube, we caused a Mixture of Snow and Salt to be placed about the Ball of it, yet we perceived not the Wa∣ter in the least to rise; but if at all, it might well be ascribed to the the Intumescence of some airy Parts lodged in the Pores of the Water. But the Apex of the Tube being broke off under Water, the External Air forced the Water several Inches up into the Cavity of the Pipe. Another Experiment we made with the fol∣lowing Vessel (See Plate 1. Fig. 7) the Stem of this being no thicker than a Raven's Quill tho' several Inches long,See Plate 1. Fig. 7. and the Ball being about as big as a Nutmeg; we dropped a few drops of Water into the Stem which being suspended there, betrayed very slight changes in the Rare∣faction or Condensation of the internal Air. Watching therefore when the Air within had raised the Bubble up to the top of the Stem; we immediately sealed it up, and observed, That tho' the sealed Glass was placed in a Mixture of
Snow and Salt, the Bubble did not in the least subside: But if the Apex of the Stem was broke off, the Bubble of Water would be sometimes depressed so low, as to fall into the Ball of the Weather-glass. And what was further remark∣able, was, That when the Liquor was descending, if the end of the Tube was sealed up; the Wa∣ter would immediately stop at the place it rest∣ed at, when the Pressure of the Atmosphere was taken off: Where it would continue till the Stem was broke open again, and then the Wa∣ter would be further depressed; as the weight of the Atmosphere was able to over-power the Resistance made by the internal Air. Having made use of such a Vessel (as Fig. 7. Plate 1.) represents and conveyed a pretty Quantity of Water into both the Legs,See Plate 1. Fig. 7. we seal∣ed up the end of the bent Stem; leaving so much Air above it, as we thought convenient: Which being done, we placed the Ball of it in a frame, in which, the Tube hanging down, we could cover the round Ball with Snow and Salt: Upon which the Air in the Stem was able to expand it self so far, that the Water in the longer Leg was raised the length of a Barly-corn higher than before, and depressed as much in the o∣ther: But when the end of the Stem was broke open, the Water was raised 2 ¼ Inches in the longer Leg, and depressed so low in the shor∣ter, that several Bubbles rose into the Cavity of the Ball. In which Experiment it cannot be supposed, That the weight of the Water in the shorter Leg could be able, to raise the Water in the other, except by Virtue of it's Spring, which being
but small, answerable to the Quantity of of it; it cannot be expected that it should have any con∣siderable Effect upon the Air in the other Leg; tho' it's Spring were in some measure weaken∣ed by Cold. An Explication of the Figures in the first Plate. Fig. 1. p. 12. A. The Ball or Egg. B C. The Stem. D. The little Aqueous Cylinder. Fig. 2. The open Weather-glass mentioned p. 16, 22. Fig. 3. The Sealed Weather-glass, or Ther∣moscope mentioned p. 16. Fig. 4. The Barometer or Mercurial Stand∣ard placed in a Frame B B. mentioned p. 17. Fig. 5. An Instrument mentioned p. 34. A. The Vial. B C. The Pipe cemented into the neck of the Vial, open at C and sealed at B. Fig. 6. p. 35. A. The Bolt-head. B. The small Stem. B C. The Cylinder of Water enclosed. Fig. 7. p. 36.
CHAP. V. The Experimental History of Cold begun. TITLE I. Experiments concerning Bodies capable of Freezing others. BEfore we proceed to the natural History of Cold, it perhaps may be necessary to consi∣der what Bodies are capable of retaining such Qualities, and what are not; but that being a con∣sideration not so necessary to our present pur∣pose, which is only to set down what Obser∣vations we have made in Bodies subject to be froze; I shall only in short take notice, That most Bodies, except fire, are susceptible of actual Cold, and it is a Question whether even that be not rather a state of Matter in such a peculiar motion, than a distinct and particular species of Natural Bodies; since even Gun-pow∣der, and Spirit of Wine before they are set on fire by some other Body are actually Cold. But to proceed to what Observations relate to our Title. Experi∣ments of Bodies ca∣pable of freezing others.1. Bodies cold enough to freeze others are very few here in England; Snow and Salt mix∣ed being most remarkable; which cool the Liquor contained in those Vessels, which are closed up in such mixtures.
2. Snow alone would not freeze Water, as a Mixture of it and Salt does; and tho' Water poured betwixt the Interstices of Snow or Ice freezes; yet there is a great disparity, betwixt exposing it to the Air, and keeping it up in Ves∣sels; and tho' it is froze, when covered with Snow in a Bottle all night, yet that may proceed from the Coldness of the Air, as well as the in∣fluence of the Snow. 3. If Nitre, Allum, Vitriol, Sal-Armoniack, or Sugar be mixed in due Proportion with Snow; they will enable it to freeze, tho' not so intense∣ly as common Salt. 4. Spirit of Salt being shaken together with Snow in the Vials, they caused a Dew which was gathered on the outside the Glass to be froze; tho' the Mixture within was not, and Oyl of Vitriol mixed with Snow in a thin Vial, had the same Effect only more intensely. 5. But not only these Acid Spirits had these Effects on the moisture of the Air condensed on the outside the Glasses; but likewise Spirit of Nitre, Spirit of Vinegar, and Spirit of Sugar, the former of these three being very powerfull, tho' the latter were not so strongly frigorifick. 6. Spirit of Urine mixed with Snow in a Vi∣al froze the External moisture weakly; but Spirit of Sal-Armoniack drawn from Quick∣lime did it powerfully. 7. Spirit of Urine and Oyl of Vitriol poured upon Snow, froze moderately. 8. Sal Gem▪ with a sublimate made with common sublimate and Sal-Armoniack; nay, and with both loaf and Kitchin-Sugar; as like∣wise a strong solution of Pot-ashes mixed with
Snow did freeze, tho' very faintly. And both a Solution of Salt of Tartar and Pot-ashes Agi∣tated with Snow in a small Vial, produced Fil∣mes of Ice on the outside the Glass, tho' very thin ones. 9. A sweet Solution of Minium in Spirit of Vinegar mixed with Snow, excited the frigori∣fick Quality of it; yet some of that Solution being enclosed in Snow and Salt, would not be froze by them. Snow shut up alone, thawed much more slowly, than that which was mixed with Salts or Spirits. No Salts will promote the frigorifick Quality of Snow, so far as to enable it to freeze, which quicken not it's Dis∣solution. Neither Chrystals of Tartar, nor Borax, both beaten to powder, nor Sublimate would enable Snow to freeze, as well as the Powder of each lying undissolved in it. 10. Water of Quick-lime being twice tryed would not freeze, but only gather a dew on the outside; yet the Liquor being kept up 12 Months the Spirits with which those Waters abound flew away. 11. Oyl of Turpentine in which Ice dissolves slower than in several other Liquors enables not Snow to freeze. Tho' Spirit of Wine shut up with Snow in a Bottle, enabled it to freeze powerfully, and to Chrystalize even Urine it self, which might be taken off in Scales. 12. Spirit of Nitre and Snow being mixed together in a just Proportion froze very pow∣erfully and speedily, not only Water but Spi∣rit of Vinegar, and weak Spirit of Salt; the first of which retained it's taste, when froze, and the latter shot into Chrystals which lay across
each other. A Solution of Sal-Armoniack part∣ly evaporated would shoot into Chrystals like combs and feathers, and Sal-Armoniack distill'd from Quick-lime would shoot into Branches al∣most like those, so nimbly, that one's Eye might discern them to spread and increase. The like Experiments being tryed with Wine and strong Ale succeeded, but very faintly. 13. Since Bodies generally help Snow to freeze, which hasten it's dissolution; we threw into a Vial, which contained Snow, heated Sand, which enabled it to cause a Dew, but not to freeze. And warm Water poured into another, when it had been shaken, produced a considerable degree of Cold, and gathered Dew, but froze it not. 14. Tho' it is generally believed, That the Hoar-froast on Glass-windows, is only exsu∣dations through the Pores of the Glass, and froze by the External Cold; yet it will easily appear, That it is rather on the inside the Glass; the Steams which rove up and down the Room being condensed by the External Cold, and froze. 15. To shew, That the Ice which appears on the outside of the Vial in the fore-going Experi∣ments, proceeds not from any subtil Parts of the Mixture penetrating the Pores of the Glass and settling on the outside; we found that four Ounces and ¼ of the Mixture of Ice and Salt, being shut up in a Vial, by the access of Dew on the outside, the weight of it was increased 12 Grains. Another Vial which contained two Ounces six Drams and a half increased in weight 4 Grains; the Vial being unsealed under Water,
it sucked in a good quantity of it. Six ounces Snow and Salt being sealed up in a Glass, the Hoar-Frost was wiped off but returned again; and the Vial being counterpoised in a pair of Scales, the Vapours condensed by the coldness of it, in the time that the Snow was melting, weighed 10 Grains. A like quantity of Snow and Spirit of Wine being shut up in a single Vi∣al, the outside was presently cover'd with Ice, and in all it became 7 Grains heavier than be∣fore. Another time a mixture of Snow and Salt, which weighed 3 ¾ ounces, afforded 18 grains of condensed Vapours. And a mixture of Snow and Sal-Gem. which counterpoised 3 ounces and 70 grains, upon an additional weight of condensed Vapours, weighed 20 grains more than before. TITLE II. Experiments and Observations concerning Bo∣dies disposed to be Frozen. Of Bodies disposed to be frozen.WIthout any more than barely intima∣ting, that there are several Bodies dis∣posed to be froze by one degree of Cold, that are not with another; I shall observe, 1. That in very cold snowy Weather, Wa∣ter, Urine, Beer, Ale, Milk, Vinegar, French and Rhenish Wine, were either totally or part∣ly turned into Ice. But besides these more ob∣vious Instances, we froze a Solution of Sugar, and another of Gum Arabick, in Water; a So∣lution
of Allum, Nitre, and Vinegar, froze without affording any considerable Phaenome∣na. A Solution of Vitriol was in part froze, and in part unfroze, that which was froze be∣ing not much different in colour from Water; but the unfroze part was of a very high Vitriol-colour. 2. Spirit of Urine and Spirit of Vinegar expo∣sed to an intense Fire, both of them froze. 3. A drachm of Salt of Pot-ashes being dis∣solv'd in two ounces of Water, presently froze in an intense Cold; and Oyl of Tartar per de∣liquium, or at least, a Solution of the fixed Salt of Tartar was congeal'd in a mixture of Snow and Salt. Appendix to the II. Title. Oyl becomes much more hard in Muscovy than here in England in the most excessive Cold, but will in neither be turn'd into perfect Ice. And Captain James, speaking of an Island where he and his Men were forced to Winter, Pag. 58, says, All our Sack, Vinegar, Oyl, and every Thing else that was liquid, was now frozen as hard as a piece of Wood, and we must cut it with a Hatchet. And Olaus Magnus, Gent. Sept. Hist. l. 11. c. 24, says, speaking of the Fights wont to be made on the Ice in the Northern Regions, Gla∣cialis congressus fit in Laneis calcibus, non pel∣libus, aut coriis unctis. Vis enim frigoris, quod∣cunque fit unctuosum, convertit in Lubricitatem gla∣cialem. There being a great similitude betwixt Spirit of Wine and Oyl, in respect of their inflamma∣bility,
and being dispos'd to mix with oily Bo∣dies, and as great an aptitude in the Spirit of Wine to mix with other Liquors: I enquir'd of the Russian Emperor's Physician, what alte∣rations he had observ'd to be produc'd by Cold in Muscovy? To which he answer'd, That Ani∣seed and other weak Spirits would be turned into an imperfect kind of Ice, and that strong ones would turn Ice into a kind of Substance like Oyl. Particulars referrable to the II. Title. 1, In a very hard Frost in December, a Solu∣tion of Minium near the Fire seem'd to be froze; tho' it was made with Spirit of Vinegar, and so strong, that part of it was shot into Saccharum Saturni. Some at the top, which was yellow, did not freeze, tho' poured out. 2. A Solution of Gold made with Salts was likewise froze. As also a Pint-vial full of the Tincture of Lignum Nephriticum, which being froze, the Ice had no such colour as the Tin∣cture. 3. It is reported, That in Russia, Brandy will freeze, but the Ice of it is not so hard as com∣mon Ice. And I am inform'd, that in Moscow the Spirit of Wine would freeze; leaving some dissolv'd in the middle which was much stronger than ordinary Brandy. And I am told, that in Russia it is usual to have Wine froze. French Brandy being exposed to the Air in Russia froze; and Sallet-oyl become as hard as Tallow, but Water, at the same time did not freeze.
TITLE III. Experiments touching Bodies indisposed to be frozen. Bodies not disposed to freeze.1. THE subtil parts of several Bodies be∣ing brought over by distillation, would not freeze by such an application of Snow and Salt as froze other Bodies. Of this sort were Aqua-fortis, Spirit of Nitre, of Salt, Oyl of Turpentine, and almost all the Chymical Oyls we had then in possession; Spirit of Wine, and of other fermented Liquors; and Sack, if good, would scarce freeze; but the inflammable Part being spent by burning, it would easily freeze. 2. Two drachms of Salt of Pot-ashes, being dissolv'd in an ounce of Water, the mixture would not freeze; tho' the outside of the Ves∣sel was cover'd with Ice. At another time a strong Solution of Salt of Tartar would not freeze, tho' at the same time Salt of Pot-ashes being dissolv'd did. 3. That common expressed Oyls of Vegeta∣bles will freeze after their manner, and curdle in cold Weather, is commonly observed; yet Train-oyl, which is usually made of the Fat of Whales by the help of Fire, continued fluid in Weather that was very sharp, but in an exces∣sive cold night it lost its fluidity; which seems to disfavour what Olaus Magnus writes, who says, That in the Northern Regions it is usu∣al to cast Train-oyl upon the Water in their
Ditches, to keep the Water from freezing, and thereby unpassable, the Oyl, as he says, not be∣ing subject to congele with Cold; but it may be worth while to enquire, Whether the Train-Oyl he speaks of be the same as is used by the Swedes, Laplanders, and Muscovites, and whether they have a different way in keeping of it or not? 4. Tho' a Solution of Sugar would freeze, yet a strong Solution of Sugar of Lead would not in a mixture of Snow and Salt; which is re∣markable, since the Spirit of Vinegar it self would freeze: Besides there must needs be some Water in the Solution, and the Sugar be∣ing but a Vitriol of Lead, it is not a little strange, that it should not freeze as well as com∣mon Vitriol; tho' in this latter concrete, Metal be corroded by a Spirit; which, if we may judge by the Liquor afforded in Distillation, is very much sharper and stronger than Spirit of Vine∣gar. 5. Quick-silver would not freeze in the sharp∣est Air, tho' expos'd to it in very thin Glasses, and in such a manner, that a little quantity of it made a large Surface. 6. A very sharp Frost was not able to freeze a strong Brine, tho' at the same time other sa∣line Solutions were congeal'd. But a Solution consisting of twenty Parts of Water and one of Salt, was froze in a very sharp Night; the Ice swimming at the top, in Figures almost like Broom, spreading from the surface of the Wa∣ter downwards: The Salt dissolv'd in this Wa∣ter, is double the proportion of that which is usually in Sea-water. I thawed Ice of Salt-wa∣ter,
to try whether the dissolved Ice would be fresh or not, but it retain'd a little brackishness, which, I suppose, it receiv'd from the contigu∣ous Brine; tho' I am inform'd, That in Amster∣dam they make use of thaw'd Ice, instead of common fresh Water, in Brewing. And Bar∣tholinus de usu Nivis, Cap. 6. p. 42. says, De Glacie ex marina aqua certum est, si resolvatur, salsum saporem deposuisse, quod etiam non ità pri∣dem expertus est Cl. Jacobus Fincbius Academiae Nostrae Senior, & Physices Professor, benemeritus, in Glaciei frustis è portu nostro allatis. Particulars referrable to the III Title. 1. Spirit of Sal-Armoniack made with Quick∣lime, volatile Oyl of Amber, a small quantity of Oyl of Vitriol, being exposed two Nights and a Day, froze not. A Solution of Silver in Aqua fortis was; and Spr. Sanguinis Humani, being froze, swelled so much as to force out the Cork. 2. Unrectify'd Oyl of Turpentine exposed to the Cold in a Bottle would not freeze; but ano∣ther Portion being contain'd in an earthen Por∣ringer did. 3. I am inform'd, That there is a Lake of Water in Scotland, out of which a small River runs, the Water of both which is never froze; but dissolves Snow or Ice if cast into it. 4. Sallet-oyl being made use of to keep the Locks of Guns from freezing, hinder'd them from being discharg'd; but Oyl of Hemp, or Train-oyl kept them from freezing.
TITLE IV. Experiments and Observations concerning the degrees of Cold in several Bodies. Of the de∣grees of Cold in several Bodies.TO discover the different degrees of Cold we have proposed several Thermometers in the preceeding Chapters, concerning which we shall add this Advertisement viz. That tho' those which are to be immersed in Liquors, have the Ball end round; yet, when we are to try the degrees of Cold of consistent Pow∣ders, it is better to make use of such as have flat Bottoms, that they may be able to stand on their own Basis: For so it will be pleasant to see the suspended Bubble in one of our Thermo∣meters rise and fall, as it is removed from one Body to another. 2. Freezing hath been so generally esteemed, the utmost Effect of Cold, That most have been content, without examining strictly the several degrees of it. Nor indeed is it very easily done, since if we do it with common Weather-glasses it will be a hard thing to distinguish whe∣ther the Cold of one Day, exceeds that of a∣nother; since there intervening so much time betwixt the Observations, the Alterations may be caused by an increase in the weight of the Atmosphere. And should we make an estimate by the Testimony of our Senses, we should easi∣ly be mistaken; since it is believed, That the different sensations of Cold which we perceive, depend on the various Dispositions of our Bo∣dies.
But allowing, that vulgar Thermometers might give us a true Information of the degrees of Cold, which Nature affords, yet they ac∣quaint us not whether Art may not produce greater; much less will they help us to make an estimate of this Disparity. And though we may make some guess by the Operation of Cold on Liquors exposed to it, yet some as A∣queous Liquors freeze too soon, and vinous Li∣quors here in England will not freeze at all, ex∣cept French Wine; which happens seldom and leaves too great an Interval betwixt the degrees necessary to congeal Wine, and sufficient to freeze Water, besides the uncertainty proceed∣ing from the several strengths of Wines. Wherefore to discover the Intensity of Cold, produced by Art above the highest degree that Nature affords,See Plate. 1. Fig. 1. we furnished a sealed Weather-glass (Such as Plate 1. Fig. 1. Delineates) with Spirit of Wine, and immersed the Ball and part of the Stem in a Vessel of Water, which was half buried in Snow and Salt, and when the Water began to freeze at the bottom and a∣bout the sides, the Liquor was Subsided to 5 2/ Di∣visions, each Division being half an Inch; and then the Weather-glass being taken out of the Water and applied to the Snow and Salt, it Subsided to 1 ½ Division. To this we shall add another which shews, That the Water tho' froze was warmer than the Spirit of Wine, when the Mixture of Snow and Salt was applied to it. Jan. 15 the Wea∣ther-glass being kept in the Water till it began to freeze descended to 5 ½ but being removed into the Snow and Salt it Subsided first briskly
and then more gradually till it sunk to the Bottom of the Stem; but being removed into the Water again, it ascended to the same height, the Water had before depressed it to. For a further Tryal, how much Liquors may be condensed by Cold, we took Oyl of Tur∣pentine rectified in a gentle Heat, and having weighed a Glass-ball with a long Stem, it being one Ounce, one Dram, five Grains and a half; we poured on it so much of the Turpentine as in∣creased the weight to, two Ounces seven Drams and thirty four Grains and a half; which reach∣ing a little way into the Stem, we marked the Superficies with a Diamond; after which we poured a Dram more in, and successively more; still marking how high each Parcel, which was weighed exactly, rought in the Stem, till the Additional weight increased the former to three Ounces, one Dram, four Grains, and a half; and then taking a wide-mouth'd Glass with Water in it, we immerged the Weather-glass in the Water as before; the Vessel in which it was contain'd being first encompass'd with Snow and Salt: When the Water began to freeze, we mark'd the Stem of the Glass which contain'd the Oyl at the place to which it subsided; and then conveying it into a Mixture of Snow and Salt, when it had subsided as low as it could, we mark'd the Superficies, and then remov'd it into the Air, till it rose to it's first station; and then we pour'd so much of the Oyl out into a∣nother Glass carefully poised in a pair of Scales, that the Superficies of the Oyl remain'd at the Mark which it subsided to in the Water; and we found that the Oyl poured off weigh'd a∣bout
10 Grains: And so much more being pour'd off as made it stand at the Mark to which the Snow and Salt depress'd it, it weigh'd about as much as the former; so that the Oyl was Ar∣tificially condensed, so far, That it subsided as much after it had been condensed by Cold strong enough to freeze Water, as it was caus∣ed to fall by the force of that. And by divid∣ing the whole Proportion of Oyl, by the num∣ber of Grains whose Bulk it seem'd to lose by subsiding in Water, we found that it was con∣densed by the first degree of Cold to a 94th Part of it's Bulk and by dividing it by the Ad∣ditional number of the Grains more, we found that the Snow and Salt had condensed it a 47th Part of it's Bulk. Having circumscrib'd Water moderately Cold with a Mixture of Snow and Salt, what it shrunk was, if not insensible, inconsidera∣ble. To measure the differing weight and Density of the same Proportion of Water, in the Heat of Summer and when extremely Cold; we weighed a Glass-Bubble in it, which was Hea∣vier than Water moderately cool, and by the Diminution of it's weight in that Medium; we found, according to the Rules of Hydrostaticks, the weight of a Portion of Water of equal Bulk: And then weighing it in Water cool'd, by a Mixture of Snow and Salt, we were inform'd by a new Decrement of it's weight, of the weight of an equal Bulk of that Cold Water; by which we were enabl'd to make an Estimate of the Gravity and Density acquired by the Action of Gold, and by weighing the same Bubble in the
same Water in hot Weather, we Learnt further how much more dense and heavy Water mode∣rately Cold and extremely Cold, is than warm Water. It would be of use to try such Experi∣ments as these in Italy, where they have the Conveniency of keeping Snow, and of freezing warm Water speedily. A Glass-Bubble which in the Air, weighed 150 Grains being weighed in Water; on a Day not frosty, it weighed 29 /8 and being weighed in Water which was a little froze in a Mixture of Snow and Ice, it was not above ⅛ Part of a Grain lighter than before; so that the Water by Condensation lost not above a 230th Part of it's former Bulk. How far it may be of use at Sea to make such Experiments as these, and whether they may thereby learn to know, by finding the Density of the Water in several Places; what Loads to carry in their ships and what the Water will be able to bear, I shall leave others to Judge: But if such Experiments be try'd in several Parts; our Seal'd Weather-glasses, or that which contains the Pendulous drop of Water, may be of use; since they not being subject to be varied by the Alterations in the Atmosphere's Gravi∣ty, and since they may be conveniently carried from one Country to another, the different de∣grees of Cold in various Regions may be better Estimated; a Register being kept of the de∣grees the Liquor or Pendulous drop stood at such times as the Tryals were made and where, and when exposed to such a degree as was a∣ble to freeze. To conclude this Title I shall add, that in making these Experiments, with the Ther∣mometer
in which the Pendulous Water is con∣tain'd; the Stem may, for conveniency, be held either Horizontal, upwards or Perpendi∣cular. TITLE V. Experiments concerning the Tendency of Cold upwards or downwards. What way or in what Line Cold acts most vigorously.THAT Heat generally acts most power∣erfully on Bodies above it, and that it's Tendency is upwards, is self-evident: But to discover in what Line Cold acts most vigorous∣ly and furthest, we made the following Experi∣ments. A Glass-Bubble with Water in it, having a flat Bottom, was suspended within less than half an Inch over a Mixture of Ice and Salt, but froze not. A Bottle which contain'd a Mixture of Snow and Salt being held under Water, it was cased with Ice, especially about the Bot∣tom; so that the Action of Cold seems chiefly to tend downwards. But I rely less upon this Experiment, because it is observ'd, That when a frigorifick Mixture is exposed in a Vial, the Ice on the outside is always opposite to the Mixture, not reaching higher or lower than that Mixture, above half the Breadth of a Barly-corn; and as the Mix∣ture dissolves, and that which swims upon the dissolv'd Part grows less and less, so Proportion∣ably the circle of Ice grows narrower on the out∣side, till the Mixture is wholly dissolv'd, and then the Ice vanishes.
And from an experiment shortly to be men∣tion'd, viz. Eggs suspended under Water, it appears, That Cold acts on every side, the Shells being wholly incrustated with Ice. To put an end to this Title, I shall, in order to facilitate some Experiments hereafter to be made, advertise, That whereas in common Ex∣periments Water naturally beginning to freeze at the top, and that Ice confining the subjacent Water, so that when froze it hath not room to expand; I say, whereas in such cases the Glasses are subject to break, to prevent such ill Conse∣quences; I lay the frigorifick Mixture first about the bottom of the Glasses, by which means the Water beginning to freeze at the bottom, the Water is raised up above it; and as the Salt and Ice is raised higher about the Glass, so the Ice gradually rises, without danger of breaking the Bottles. To this Advertisement I shall add, That tho' I only at the first lay the mixture about the bottom of the Glass, yet to keep the Water a∣bove, cool, I usually put Ice it self or Snow (ei∣ther of which will succeed in these Experiments) above that Mixture.
TITLE VI. Experiments and Observations concerning the preservation and destruction of (Eggs, Ap∣ples, and other) Bodies by Cold. Of the Pre∣servation of Bodies by Cold.IT is a common Tradition, That if Eggs or Apples be thawed near the Fire, it spoils them; but if they be immersed in cold Water, they thaw slowly without dammage. To try the truth of this Tradition, I made the following Experiments. An Egg which weighed 12 drachms and a grain, being wrapt in a wax'd Paper to defend it from the thawing Snow, was froze in a mix∣ture of Snow and Salt; and then wanting 4 grains of its former weight, it was put into a Basin of Water: It acquir'd such a Crust of Ice about it, as increased the weight to 15 drachms and 9 grains; and the Ice being taken off, and the Egg dryed, it weighed 12 drachms and 12 grains; being broke we found it almost thawed: When froze it swam in the Water, but when thawed it sunk. We took two Eggs well froze, and placing them both at an equal distance from the Fire, the one was put into Water and the other laid on a Table: When that in the Water was crust∣ed over with Ice, we took it out, and breaking it, found that the Yolk and some part of the White were thawed; but the other Egg being cut asunder, the White was wholly frozen, and the Yolk hard as if it had been over-boyl'd: There likewise appear'd in it certain concentri∣cal
Circles of different Colours, and a very white Speck in the middle of it. The same Experiment being tryed a second time, we were confirmed in our Perswasion, That frozen Eggs will thaw sooner in cold Wa∣ter, than in the open Air. An Egg being suspended in Water, was co∣ver'd with a Crust of Ice equally thick on all sides. Frozen Pippins being put into a Basin of Wa∣ter, were covered over with a Crust of Ice of a considerable thickness; where it was observa∣ble, 1. That that Part of the Pippin which was immersed, was covered with a much thicker Crust than that which was above it. 2. The extant Part seem'd harder than the immersed. 3. Those in the Water were thawed, but one that lay out of it was much harder and more froze. 4. Neither the frozen Eggs or Apples condensed and froze the Air, tho' they incrusta∣ted the Water. Eggs being froze in Snow and Salt till they crack'd, we put one into Milk, two into a Glass of Beer, and two more into a large Glass of Sack, but produced no Ice. Eggs being put into Vinegar produced no Ice; but the Vinegar cor∣roded the Egg-shells. A Cheese immersed in Water in a cold Coun∣try, was crusted over with Ice; but lumps of Iron, pieces of Glass, and Stones, being kept longer in Snow and Salt than was sufficient to freeze Eggs, produced no Ice in Water. Water being poured into a Bottle which stood on the North-East side of our Elaborotory, Part of it was presently turned into Ice.
Ice and Juice of Pippins shaken together in a Vial produced a great deal of Dew, and so did Ice beaten into a Liquor with the White of an Egg. Pippins were much better when thaw'd in cold Water than hastily. It hath been observed in the cold Northern Climates, That when they have come out of extreme Cold too hastily to the Fire, it hath raised Blisters; wherefore it is a custom amongst the more careful sort, to wash their Hands, or other frozen Parts, in cold Water or Snow be∣fore they approach the Fire. I am told by one, That Cheeses being froze in Muscovy, those thaw'd in Water were crusted over with Ice; but were much better than others thaw'd in a Stove. And Guilielmus Fabritius Hildanus, Cap. 10. de Gangraena & sphacelo, gives an Account of a Man who was successfully thaw'd and crusted over with Ice as our Apples and Eggs were. Tho' a moderate degree of Cold preserves Bodies from putrifaction; yet Glaciation leaves them more subject to it upon a thaw, tho' whilst they are in that state they putrifie not. To prove that the highest degree of Cold un∣der Glaciation hinders Bodies from Corruption, I shall alledge the following Instances, Bartholinus de usu nivis, says, p. 80. Regii Mutinenses ni∣vem hoc fine arcte compactam servant, in Cellis Nivariis, in quibus fervente aestate vidi carnes mactatorum Animalium a Putredine diu se conser∣vasse. And Capt. James in his Journal, p. 74. hath these words, By the ninth of May we were come to and got up our five Barrels of Beef and Pork, and had four Buts of Beer and one of Cider— It had lain under Water all the Winter; yet we
could not perceive that it was any thing the worse. P. 79. he farther says, That a Cable having lain under Ice all Winter, was not in June found a jot the worse. And from Simlerus his Account of the Alps, it appears, That entire Bodies may be preserv∣ed by Snow without Glaciation. Refert (says Bartholinus, speaking of him, p. 79. de figurati∣vis) in Rhetis apud Rinwaldios; nivium è monte ruentium moles Sylvam & proceras Abietes dejecisse, accidisse etiam Helvetio Milite per Alpes iter fa∣ciente, ut 60 homines & plures eadem Nivis con∣globatione opprimerentur. Hoc igitur Nivium tu∣mulo sepulti ad Tempus aestatis delitescunt, quo so∣luto nonnihil Nive deciduâ Corpora Mortua invio∣lata patent; si ab amicis, vel transeuntibus quaeran∣tur. Vidimus ipsi triste hoc Spectaculum, &c. To prove that inanimate Bodies whilst froze are not subject to Putrifaction, I shall bring se∣veral Instances. Nor indeed is it much wonder, since, whether Glaciation proceeds from intru∣ding Swarms of frigorifick Atoms, wedged in betwixt the Parts of a Body, or whether we sup∣pose it to arise from an avolition of those restless Particles which before kept the Body fluid or soft; we must suppose an unusual rest, and con∣sequently the concomitant cause of Corruption to be wanting. But to proceed to Instances, I am told, That on the Coast of Sweeden and Denmark, the Cold will preserve Bodies a long time from putrifacti∣on. And Bartholinus relates a Story of several dead Bodies (p. 83. de usu Nivis) which being kill'd in a Battel in the Winter, were froze in several Postures, and continued so without be∣ing
corrupted as long as the Winter lasted. To which I shall add, that Capt. James tells us, p. 76. of a Man whom they found froze in the Ice six Weeks after he had been committed to Sea, and all the alteration the Frost had wrought on his Body, was, that his Flesh would move up and down upon his Bones like a Glove upon a Man's Hand. And Bartholinus de usu Nivis, Cap. 12. further tells us, That 'tis observed in Greenland, that the Frost preserves Bodies from Putrifaction 30 Years. But tho' freezing preserves Bodies from Pu∣trifaction for the time, yet when they thaw they presently discover, that the Textures of them were impaired and vitiated all that while by the action of the Cold; for having froze an Ox-Eye, I observ'd, that the Chrystalline humour, which was so transparent before, being froze, lost its dia∣phaneity and became white. And it hath been ob∣served by others, That tho' Cheeses which were thaw'd in Water, were better than those that were otherwise freed from the Ice; yet they were all, in some measure, impaired by the Frost. To these Instances I shall add, that Purchas, Lib. 3. Cap. 5. Sect. 2 p. 493. tells us, That in Nova Zembla, their strong Beer being froze, was wholly vitiated, and without strength or taste. And Capt. James tells us, That strong Alicant Wine, by being froze, had lost much of its Spirits. And it hath been observed in the Northern Country, less cold than Muscovy, That Beef having been froze, was almost insipid, and yielded Broth little better than Water. Besides which Instances I am inform'd, That
Bodies much harder than any yet mention'd may be work'd upon by Cold; not to mention, that it is observ'd, That Bones, and even Steel it self, are much more subject to break in frosty Weather than at other times. And it is to our present Purpose, further observable, That Capt. James relates, that in Charlton-Island the Wood must be thaw'd before the Carpenters are able to work it. And I am further inform'd, That the Timber of the Houses in Moscow will not only crack in frosty Weather; but 'tis observ'd, That Brick-Houses in the West-Indies decay much sooner than here in England. And it hath been further observed, That Marbles themselves have not on∣ly flown in pieces in frosty Weather, but that Brass-Instruments, and even Iron-Hoops have been crack'd by extreme Cold; as Olaus Wormius, and the Dutch-men in their Voyage to Nova Zembla witness. But I am apt to believe, that the break∣ing of the Iron-Hoops rather depended on the operation of the Cold on the Liquor contain'd in those Barrels; than immediately on the Iron-Bars themselves, and that they were broke by the ex∣pansion of that Liquor. An Appendix to the VI. Title. In confirmation of what hath been deliver'd before, the Russian Emperor's Physitian told me, That if those that have their Noses or Cheeks froze, don't rub them with Snow before they go into the Stoves, they sometimes drop off; and he likewise told me, That moderately weak Wine by being froze, would lose both its co∣lour
and taste. He further told me, That Bo∣dies there, will keep all the frosty Weather un∣corrupt; and that Venison and Beef, and other Flesh, will be preserved a long time by Frost; but if it is not thawed leasurely before it comes to be roasted, it will be much impaired. And I am told, That a young Man having been froze all over, was recovered by being first rubb'd with Snow before any other means was used. Particulars referrable to the VI Title. Fishes taken from under the Ice, in Lakes and Ponds which were frozen over, and packed up, would be preserv'd a Month without being salt∣ed or dryed; and it was observ'd, That when they were taken out of the Water in the cold Air, they would be froze immediately. It was like∣wise observ'd by the same Person who told me these things, That tho' Flesh-meat froze was better when thaw'd leasurely in cold Water than hastily by the Fire, yet it acquir'd not a Crust of Ice about it. In Lapland when any Part is froze, they toast Cheese made of Deer's Milk, and anoint the af∣fected Part with the Cows-body. I had some Cheshire-Cheeses froze my self, one of which being thrown into Water gather'd a Crust of Ice about it. There are white Bears in Green-Land which have so excellent a scent, that when the Car∣cass of a Whale was left at some distance from the shore; they would raise themselves, on their Legs, and with their two Paws, would fan themselves with the Air, and snuff it in at their
Snouts, and then throwing themselves into the Sea would Swim towards the dead Carcasses; the fat of some of them would yield a Hogshead of Oyl. In Moscow a Hogshead of Malaga-Sack being froze, a Spirituous Liquor distill'd out of it stronger than the Sack it self; but the Li∣quor left behind it, was a strengthless Phlegm. A Barrel of Beer being froze on the Coast of Green-Land, the Spirituous Part was contain'd in the middle. The Spanish and French Wines, that are brought to Moscow betwixt Russia and Poland, are sometimes so frozen by the time they come there; that they are forced to break the Casks, and to transport it in Jars from one place to a∣nother, and when they have a mind to thaw it, they put it into another Hogshead, and that being placed in a hole made in Ice or Snow, it thaws leasurely there without being so much impaired as if thawed in a Stove or by the Fire. TITLE VII. Experiments concerning the Expansion of Wa∣ter, and Aqueous Liquors by freezing. Of the Ex∣pansion of Water and other freez∣ing Liquors.THO' it hath been generally allowed, that Water and other Liquors are condensed by Cold; yet from what I shall offer, it will appear, That Ice is not Water condensed but Rarified. For I have not only observ'd, That Water exposed to be froze in a Bolt-head, would if the frigorifick Mixture inclin'd it to begin to
freeze at the Bottom first, be expanded, so as to rise considerably higher in the Stem, but when that Ice was thawed again will subside. And to this I shall add, That having included Water in a Cylinder, both ends of which were stopped up with Wax, the Cylinder being hung up in the Air, and the Water froze; it was so far expanded, That it forced the Wax out of each end of the Pipe, and form'd a Rod of Ice much longer than the Cylinder; from whence it appears, That the breaking of Bottles by Cold rather depends on the Expansion of the Included Li∣quor, than that the weight of the Air caused that Effect, as some Moderns teach; or that the Internal Liquor being condensed by Cold, the Air breaks in to prevent a Vacuum: For that Water is expanded by Cold, appears from what I have said; besides nothing is more commonly observ'd, than that Water being froze in a Vessel whose sides are strong enough to keep it from bursting them, the Superficies of the Ice is gene∣rally protuberant and convex. And that the breaking of Bottles depends not on Nature's abhorrency of a Vacuum, appears; since should we suppose, That the Fluid contain'd in a Bottle would be so far condensed as to possess less space than before; it is possible there might be a Vacuum there, and the Bottle not burst; since Glass-Bubbles much thinner than ordinary Bottles will endure the frost, tho' stopped close with Air in them. But not only Water expands it self upon freezing but other Aqueous Bodies; so Eggs being froze, burst their shells asunder. And Milk, Urine, Rhenish Wine, and good Spirit
of Wine, being set to freeze in distinct Glass-Eggs; the Wine being froze swell'd an Inch above the first Surface, the Milk two Inches, and the Urine six or seven. And a Solution of Dantzick-Vitriol, did not only become Opace, but rose considerably higher in a Cylindrical Pipe, upon Congelation. Whether more stable and consistent Bodies are capable of being expanded by Cold; would be worth enquiring; since it hath been observ'd, That in Nova Zembla the very Clocks have been froze so that they would not goe; and the like hath been observ'd by Capt. James in his Voyage at Charlton-Island; his Watch being froze as well as his Clocks. Whether these Effects depended on any Swelling of the Ropes, or whether the Spring of his Watch might be weakned by Cold, or whether some Iceicles stuck to the Internal Parts of it; I shall leave as bare Conjectures, to be further examined in∣to by Experience. The Phaenomena of an Experiment about Freez∣ing referrable to the VII Title, read before the Royal Society. Having filled a Bolt-head which was as big as two Turkey Eggs with Water, till it rought, a pretty height into the slender Stem, being put into a Mixture of Snow and Salt, it subsi∣ded a little; but when it began to freeze it would sensibly swell. The Experiment being repeated with a Glass whose Stem was as thin as a Raven's Quill; when first the Ball of it was immersed in the frigori∣fick
Mixture, the Water presently ascended the height of a Barly-corn, and presently subsided again, which the Florentine Virtuosi would attri∣bute to a Constriction of the Glass upon the Application of the frigorifick Mixture. Secondly, And tho' the Florentine Virtuosi, re∣late, That they have observ'd, the Water after it had subsided, a little to rest, and then subsided again; yet in all the Tryals I made I did not observe it. Thirdly, When the Water had subsided a little, it would be at a stand, till the Liquor began to freeze. Fourthly, The Experiment being try'd with Glas∣ses whose Stems were unequally big, upon Glaci∣ation, the Ascent of the Water in the large ones would be indiscernible; but in a slender one it would ascend several Inches in a Minute, till it rose up to the top of the Stem. Fifthly, Tho' the Forentine Academians, say, they have observ'd the Water to rise again, be∣fore Glaciation; yet I could never see such a Phaenomenon. Sixthly, If the Glass was taken out of the Mixture when first it began to freeze, as soon as the small Iceicles were melted, it would sub∣side again; yet if reapply'd to the Mixture a second time, it would freeze in half a Min∣ute.
TITLE VIII. Experiments concerning the Contraction of Liquors by Cold. Of the Con∣traction of Liquors by Cold.1 THO' the Liquors we have mention'd ex∣pand themselves upon an Intense degree of Cold, yet we are not thence to couclude, that all will; since we have found it by experi∣ence not only in Spirit of Wine, Aqua fortis, Oyl of Turpentine and several other Liquors which would not be brought to freeze; but al∣so in Oyl congeal'd by the vehemence of the Cold. 2. Amongst the several Experiments made of the Efficacy of Cold to condensed Liquors, I shall lay down the following. 3. Spirit of Wine being put into a small Glass-Egg with a slender Stem, in a Mixture of Snow and Salt subsided ¾ of an Inch. 4. Mercury being freed from Air, and placed in a Bold-head in a Mixture of Snow and Salt, subsided 2 Inches. Common Oyl placed in the same Mixture subsided till it froze; but if it were immediately thaw'd near the fire, it would expand it self so much as to rise about the Mark. The Experiment succeeded a second time, and being try'd a third time, the Lumps of the congeal'd Oly would sink in the fluid Oyl. Oyl of Aniseeds artificially froze subsi∣ded considerably in a small Pipe. Empyreu∣matical Oyl of Gaujacum being exposed to the
utmost degree of Cold, would not freeze; but evidently subsided. Particulars referrable to the VIII Title. 1. Two seal'd Weather-Glasses, the one made of a Tincture of Cochineele in Spirit of Wine; and the other of a blew Tincture of Spi∣rit of Man's Blood and Copper in Spirit of Wine; were immersed in Water till it began to freeze, and then being remov'd into Oyl of Turpentine set in a Mixture of Snow and Salt; we observ'd, That the Liquor in both Thermometers subsided. Oyl of Aniseeds be∣ing put into a small Glass with a large Stem, and placed in a frigorifick Mixture made by a Solution of Sal-Armoniack subsided 3 Inches; the substance of the Oyl being turn'd into a white Concrete, which when it was leasurely dissolv'd, the fluid Part emitted several Bub∣bles; and it was further observ'd in this Con∣crete, That tho' when thaw'd it swims upon Water, yet when congeal'd it will not.
TITLE IX. Experiments concerning the Bubble from which the Levity of Ice is supposed to proceed. Of the Le∣vity of Ice and its Cause.1. IT is usually accounted an Argument of the levity of Ice above Water, that it swims up∣on it: For tho' the superficies of small Portions of it are not sensibly emergent above the Surface of the Water; yet in Greenland, where huge Rocks of Ice float in the Sea, they are observ'd to be as high above the Water as the Masts of Ships, which could we suppose to float in an e∣rect Posture, and to be of a prismatical Form, that Part immersed would be nine times as much as that above the Water. As for the Reason why Ice is born up above the surface of the Water so much in Greenland more than in our Climate; besides that the size of those pieces of Ice contributes to the rendring the Observation more remarkable, the Water's expansion in that cold Climate may cause it to be further ex∣panded there than here, and consequently light∣er. 2. Pieces of Ice free from Bubbles floated in Spirit of Wine drawn from Brandy, and like∣wise from Quick-lime; and tho' if that Spirit were warmed, it would presently subside, yet as it cooled, the Ice would ascend; neverthe∣less some part of it being thaw'd, the Water would subside in a stream through the Spirit. In warm Water the Ice would swim; but in Oyl of Turpentine and the rectify'd Spirit of Wine it would sink like a Stone.
3. A piece of Ice which was clear from Bub∣bles, for as much as we could discern, and very transparent, would not sink in Water; but a∣nother piece, which in a Microscope appear'd to be full of Bubbles, was nevertheless transpa∣rent, and would float on Water. 4. That the levity and expansion of Ice de∣pends on the number of Bubbles dispersed through it, is unquestionable; but how it comes by those Bubbles is a matter that deserves our Inquiry: And tho' Mr Hobbes attributes it to the Intrusion of some external airy Parts, yet we observ'd, That Water defended from the Intru∣sion of external Air, was not without Bubbles, when froze in a Glass hermetically sealed; but being expanded, the numerous Bubbles disper∣sed through it, gave it a whitish Opacity; and the same Phaenomena were afforded by Ice froze in Metalline Vessels. 5. And that the Ice froze in the hermetically sealed Glass, received not its Bubbles from the Air shut up with it; is reasonable to believe: First, Since the Water must be expanded before it could divide that Air into Bubbles. Second∣ly, That the Air in the sealed Glass cannot be dispersed through the Ice, and thereby cause it to expand, appears; since oftentimes it is so far compress'd by the swelling Ice, that it breaks the Glass, which it would not do, could it be mixed with the Ice and dispersed through the freezing Water. But, Thirdly, Were the expansion of Ice to be attributed to the insinua∣tion of airy Parts, it may be question'd, How, when Liquors begin to freeze at the bottom first, the Air, which is so many times lighter
than Water, can dive into the bottom of it, and that too without being seen? Fourthly, If the Bubbles contained in Ice were deriv'd from the external Air depress'd through freezing Water, Ice thaw'd would yield Air enough to fill as much space as the frozen Water possess'd more than the thaw'd Water. 6. That the Bubbles contain'd in frozen Wa∣ter are not adequately fill'd with Air, tho' some∣times the Air that they contain be afforded by those airy Parts dispers'd through the Pores of Water; and that they are often generated nu∣merously, notwithstanding a recess of the great∣est part of that Air, will appear from the fol∣lowing Experiments. I. Water freed from Bubbles in Vacuo Boylia∣no, and afterwards convey'd into a frigorifick Mixture expanded not so much as common Wa∣ter, nor was the Ice near so full of Bubbles. II. Water which had been freed from Bub∣bles in our Prismatical Engine, being froze, con∣tain'd few Bubbles, but being thaw'd and then pour'd into a Glass-Cylinder, it was powerfully expanded so far as to burst the Glass. III. A Glass-egg with a narrow Stem being filled so far with Water, that the surface of it rose an Inch within the Stem; it was convey'd into a Receiver, and whilst the Air was ex∣hausting, Bubbles rose so plentifully, that the Liquor seem'd to boyl: Which when it was in a great measure cleared of, we placed it in a mixture of Snow and Salt; and observ'd, that the expanded Liquor being froze, had risen a great way above its first height. When it was placed in the open Air, of such a temper as
made it thaw leisurely, we observ'd, That the exterior part of the Ice was full of Bubbles: But when that was dissolv'd, the Ice in the middle was of an unusual Texture; being void of Bub∣bles and not unlike a frosted piece of Glass, whose aspereties were very thick set: When the Ice was almost thaw'd, we convey'd the Bub∣ble into the Receiver; but tho' the Air was ex∣hausted, we perceiv'd not that the Ice was soon∣er melted; but the Water afforded a few Bub∣bles, and in a little time some few appear'd in the Ice. When the Ice was wholly thaw'd, we took the Glass-Bubble out of the Receiver, and found, That the Water had subsided to its first Mark, if not a little below it; so that the Wa∣ter when expanded rising three Inches in the Stem, and the weight of the whole Water be∣ing but two ounces and a half; the Ice seem'd to take up about a twelfth Part more than the un∣froze Water. 7. A Cylinder of Water being immers'd in a Mixture of Ice and Salt, and that convey'd into a Receiver; we found, That when the Air was exhausted, and the Water in a great measure freed from Bubbles, the surface of it was consi∣derably rais'd; the Water in the bottom being turn'd into Ice as far as the Mixture wrought, in which we perceiv'd, besides a few large Bub∣bles, small ones enough to render it opacous. 8. To shew, that the Bubbles perceivable in Ice are not filled with true and springy Air, I shall subjoyn the following Experiment. We plac'd a Glass-egg, which was about as large a∣gain as an ordinary Egg, in a mixture of Ice and Salt; the Cavity of it being fiill'd with Water,
which rising up into the Neck, stood about an Inch above the superficies of the frigorifick Mix∣ture which circumscribed it; the Diameter of the Stem being large enough to receive the end of my Finger. The Particulars afforded by this Experiment were, I. The Water did not sensibly subside before it began to freeze. II. Some part of it began to swell in a quarter of an Hour. III. In an Hour the Liquor rose 4 2/9 Inches, and continu'd to rise till it was above five Inch∣es ½ when we took it out. IV. The frigorifick Mixture being below the surface of the Water, it froze at the bottom first, leaving the top of the Water uncongeal'd. V. No Bubbles appear'd in the Water tho' the Ice was full of them, some being as large as small Pease. VI. We pour'd as much Sallet-oyl upon the Water, as wrought two Inches in the Stem, and then hermetically sealing the end of it up; the Water subsided a little, but was presently rais'd again to its former height in the Mixture; about an Inch and a half of the Stem remaining above the Oyl filled with Air. VII. The Glass-egg being weighed first in Air, was left in the Water poised with its opposite weight. VIII. Upon the thawing of the Ice, several Bubbles rose which vanish'd at the top. IX. The Water being thaw'd, the Aequili∣brium continu'd the same, and subsided to its first Mark and no lower, tho' it had parted with so many Bubbles.
X. The Glass being inverted, the seal'd end was broke off under Water; upon which some of it being forced up into the Pipe, press'd the contain'd Air into less room than before. XI. The Water and the Oyl possess'd the same Places that they did before. XII. The Oyl being thrown out, and so much Water put into the Stem as rais'd the surface as high as it was rais'd by Glaciation; the Glass weighed 4374 Grains: When fill'd to the low∣est Mark it weighed 4152, and when empty 1032; so that the Water contain'd betwixt the two Marks, was about the 15th Part of the whole. 10. A large Glass-egg with a proportionable Stem, being so far fill'd with Water, that it wrought up an Inch into the Stem; the next Day the Water was rais'd 15 Inches: The whole contain'd in the Cavity of the Egg being froze; the frozen Water continuing to swell, was rais'd 4 Inches higher, a few drops running o∣ver the top of it; but when the Ice was wholly thaw'd it subsided again. 11. Another Egg about the same height, be∣ing plac'd in beaten Ice and Salt, the Water rose an Inch in an Hours time, and several Laminae of Ice appear'd at the Jointure of the Ball and the Neck; but after an Hour and a quarcer, those disappear'd, and the Ball seem'd to be fill'd with white Ice; the Water in the Neck being rais'd 4 ½ Inches above the first Mark. Several small Bubbles ascended through the Neck till it was wholly thaw'd, and the white Ice was full of Bubbles. The Experi∣ment being further prosecuted, the Water
swell'd till some of it ran out at the top of the Tube: Upon which, the top of it being seal'd up, we plac'd it in a warm Room till the Water was quite thaw'd; so much Air on∣ly-remaining above the Water when froze, as in dimensions equall'd a small Pea. When the Ice was wholly thaw'd, the Water subsided to its first Mark, and then the top of the Stem being broke off under Water; so much of it was impell'd by the external Air, as, when the Pipe was re-invert∣ed again rose 7 Inches, above the first Mark, and left about an Inch ¼ above it; so that the Air which caus'd the Water when froze to swell, and which was generated there, took up one Inch and ¼: Which being expanded through the Cavity of the Cylinder, above the surface of the Water when thaw'd; so far appear'd not to be Air, that it wanted a Spring to resist the ingress of the Water. 12. Another time the tip of a seal'd Stem be∣ing broke under Water, it receiv'd 10 Inches and above ½ 13. In the same Bolt-head wherein the great∣est condensation of Air was try'd, the Water be∣ing froze, was rais'd a Foot above its former sta∣tion; and then being seal'd up, and leasurely thaw'd; it subsided again to its former Mark: And then the Seal being broke off under Water, so much of that contain'd in the Basin was forc'd into the Tube, as sill'd 11 Inches of it; near ⅛ of an Inch of Air being generated in the former part of the Operation. 14. Another time the Water swelling 10 In∣ches in the same Glass, we broke off the Neb under Water, and it receiv'd as much of the
external Water; so that in this no Air was ge∣nerated. 15. The like Experiments being try'd with aqueous Liquors; the Neb of one that contain'd Milk being broke off under Water, it was ma∣nifestly impell'd by the outward Air. And a∣nother being likewise open'd under Water which contain'd Urine, it receiv'd about five or six In∣ches of Water. 16. Another Glass which contain'd Claret-Wine, being open'd under Water, the Water was impell'd near an Inch above the Mark; which would not have happen'd, had the Bub∣bles been fill'd with true and permament Air. TITLE X. Experiments about the Measure of the Expan∣sion and the Contraction of Liquors. The expan∣sion and contraction of Liquors measur'd.TO measure the expansion of the Air, we took a Bolt-head, and pour'd in so much Water, that it rose a little way into the Stem; which being done, and the number of Ounces it contain'd set down, to those we successfully ad∣ded one Ounce after another; marking how high each of them wrought: Which being done, we pour'd out a convenient quantity, and froze the remaining Water from the bottom upwards, and the Ice that consisted of 82 parts of Water, filled the space of 91 and ½; so that the congeal'd Water possess'd a 9th part of space more than it
did before. In another Experiment 55 Parts of Water being froze, were extended to 60 ½; 6 of those remaining unfroze. 2. Another way we took to measure the ex∣pansion of Water, was, by marking a Cylindri∣cal Pipe at the superficies of the Water contain'd in it; which, when it was froze, was rais'd a tenth part higher than before. Another more exact Cylinder being made use of, we found, that Water froze expanded to about a ninth Part of the space it possess'd before. 3. But perhaps this Method of measuring the expansion of freezing Water may suggest a diffi∣culty to those that are acquainted with Hydrosta∣ticks: since Archimedes hath made it appear, as well as Stevinus, That floating Bodies will so far, and but so far, sink in the Liquor that supports them, till the immersed Part of the Body be equal to a bulk of Water, weighing as much as the whole Body. 4. For Capt. James hath observ'd Ice to float a great deal above the Water; and the Hollan∣ders in their Voyage to Nova Zembla, take no∣tice of a Hill of Ice which was 16 Fathom above the Water, tho' but 36 below it: And Janus Munkius in his Account of Genland, observ'd, That one that was but 4 Fathom under Wa∣ter, was 20 above it; whereas according to our Computation of the expansion of Water, the Part under Water ought to be 8 or 9 times as deep as that above it. 5. But to clear this difficulty I have these things to represent; First, That the Ice which we take notice of, floats in fresh Water, but that observ'd by Navigators, being fresh floats in salt Water; yet this is to be likewise consider'd, That near the Poles the Seas are not so salt as ours, or
those under the Line, and consequently will not be able to bear up the floating Ice so high; except the coldness of that Region recompenses the want of Salt. 6. But besides these Considerations, that which I would chiefly insist upon for the removal of this difficulty, is, That these huge Piles of Ice are made up of vast Lumps, betwixt which are large Vacuities which are only fill'd up with Air; so that we are not to judge of their weight by the bulk they appear to be of to the Eye; but by the specifick weight incumbent on that part immers'd in the Water: For we see in Barges, that sometimes they carry Loads, which consist∣ing of light Matter, may be piled a great height above the Water, without depressing the Vessel so much as heavier Bodies of less bulk, which are more ponderous in Specie; for the greatest part of these floating pieces of Ice, as Bartholinus takes notice, are compiled of store of Snow fro∣zen together. Besides, it is observ'd, That most of those stupendious Mountains which lay so much above Water below rested on the Ground, so that probably they might have sunk much lower, had the Water been deep enough for them; for Mr. Hudson in his Voyage takes no∣tice, in a Bay that bears his Name, of a piece of Ice sevenscore Fathom deep. 7. Having said thus much of the expansion of Water, it perhaps may be expected, that I should say something of the expansion of aque∣ous Humours; and also of the degrees of the Condensation of Water and watry Humours: But as for the first, I doubt whether there be any expansion, except of the watry Parts of them; but if it may be of any use to
direct us in making an estimate of the diffe∣rent Proportions they contain of Phlegm, or o∣ther more spirituous Ingredients; I would not discourage those whose Curiosity shall prevail with them to prosecute such Experiments. And as for the condensation of Water by Cold, tho' perhaps in hotter Climates it may be considera∣ble, yet I have not found it very sensible in all the Tryals I have made here. Particulars referrable to the X Title. 1. A Bolt-head whose Stem was 17 Inches above the Water being seal'd up, and placed about 9 hours in a frigorifick Mixture, the Water ascended 15 Inches ½ and afterwards ½ of ¼ of an Inch; being neglected for an hour the seal'd end was blown off, and the Bottom of the Glass broke in peices. 2. Water freed from Air in. our Receiver, and seal'd up in a round Bolt-head, in which the seal'd Apex was about 5 Inches above the Water, afforded an Ice very free from Bubbles, and having stood in a frigorifick Mixture about 2 hours, it was raised 4 Inches and ⅜: The Co∣nical Apex being broke with a noise and a seeming smoak, we found Water unfroze, un∣der the Pipe, and that the Air was condensed to a 20th Part of the space it possess'd before. 3. The Globous part of a Glass-Egg 3 Inches Diameter was filled with Water and froze from the Bottom upwards; after it had been Hermetically seal'd, it rose 8 ½ Inches, the length of the whole Stem being 10 Inches and a half. But being a second time sealed up and
froze with Ice in it, it wrought not 4 Inches a∣bove its first station. TITLE XI. Experiments touching the Expansive force of Freezing Water. Of the Expansive force of freezing Water.1. TO help us to make an estimate of the Ex∣pansive force of freezing Water, We fil∣led a Pewter-Bottle full of Water; it being large enough to hold half a Pint: In a frosty Night it crack'd the Bottle; and the like success we had with frozen Water in a Pewter-box, such as they keep Salves in. And we found the Ex∣pansive force of Frost so strong, That it burst a Bottle, the thinnest part of which was 1/14 of an Inch, and the thickest /86: It also broke an Earthen Bottle of Flanders-Metal, the thinnest part of which was as thick as the strongest of the other. 2. To make a more Determinate Estimate of the Expansive force of Frost; we made use of a Brass-Cylinder, to which we adapted a Plugg, which falling a little way within the Cylinder rested upon the edges of it. The length of the Cylinder was about 5 Inches and the breadth 1 ¾ The Experiment made in this In∣strument was by filling it full of Water and then laying 56 pound weight upon the top of it: And tho' it was a hard matter to cause the Mixture to freeze; yet we were at the last a∣ble to do it, and then we observ'd, That the Ex∣panded
Ice lifted up the one side of the lower so high, that the weight fell down; but at ano∣ther time it succeeded so well, that the lower was uniformly raised, the breadth of a Barly-corn. Upon a gentle thaw the Superficial Parts being taken out, the Ice appear'd full of Bubbles: And in the Morning when it began to melt before the fire, the weight being taken off; several drops of Water, dilated into numerous Bubbles, issu'd out, like a kind of Froth. 3. Another way we took to measure the Ex∣pansive force of Cold, was, by driving a Wooden Plugg so fast into the end of the Brass-Cylinder, That half a hundred weight and a quarter of a hundred, might be suspended at it without pulling it out; yet in two frosty Nights the expanding Water was able to raise it a quarter of an Inch. 4. There is one thing in these Tryals de∣serves to be taken notice of, viz. That the Expansion of Air by Heat being sufficient to make it possess 70 times it's former space; yet the utmost degree, Water by Glaciation will extend it self to, is a ninth: So that the for∣mer by Expansion acquires 60 times the space that Water does; taking Mersennus his account of the Air's Expansion to be true, which comes short of what we have shewn it capable of be∣ing Expanded to. 5. We endeavoured likewise to measure the force of Waters Expansion when congeal'd, by enclosing it in a Iron-Globe whose Diameter was about 3 Inches, and which had a Female Screw continued from it's Cavity to the out side; to which was adapted Male a screw so close,
That we were forc'd to use a Vice to screw it in; but our hopes were frustrated; the Com∣pactness of the metal, as we suppos'd, keeping the Liquor from freezing. 6. It would be worth while to consider the cause of so powerful an Expansion, since nei∣ther the Cartesian nor the Epicurean Doctrine are able to explain this Phaenomenon: For the first only accounting Cold to be a Privation of Heat; and depending upon the recess of those subtil Parts, which he supposes Expansion to depend on; according to him, they should ra∣ther continue an Inactive Mass, than retain such a Springyness. And since according to Epicurus, Expansion depends on an Insinuation of frigo∣rifick Atoms, It may well be question'd, how parts of Matter, which have such a free entrance into such Vessels, should not rather find as easie a Passage out again as in, without breaking them? Besides in several Oyls and other Li∣quors which must receive those frigorifick Atoms we perceive not the least Expansion at all; but they are rather condensed. 7. How great the Expansive Force of con∣geal'd Wine, Milk, Urine and other Liquors is, I shall leave it to others to enquire, and shall only take notice, That undoubtedly it is consi∣derable; since in the Dutch Voyage to Nova Zembla it was observ'd, That even Iron-hoops were burst by the forcible Expansion of inclu∣ded Liquors. And in Russia it hath been ob∣serv'd, that tho' Beer and Wine would not burst Wooden Vessels, yet Glass and Stone-Vessels would be often broken
Particulars referrable to the XI Title. 1. We took a Brass-Cylinder 2 Inches Di∣ameter, and having put a Bladder with Wa∣ter ty'd close up in it, so that upon Expansion it could not get out into the Cavity of the Cy∣linder; we put a Plugg into it, upon which were placed several weights; which amounted to 120 Pounds, yet the frigorifick Mixture being apply'd to the Cylinder, the Water expanded rais'd the Plugg, near half an Inch; and the Experiment being repeated again the next Day the freezing Water raised 130 Pound-weight. 2. An Iron-Barrel 14 Inches long and ⅜ of an Inch in Diameter, whose sides were at the thickest Part 1/16 and at the least /16; was filled with Water, and being buried in a Mix∣ture of Ice and Salt 2 hours, it made an oblique crack in the Barrel Six Inches long; and the Ice being taken out seemed full of Bubbles but ve∣ry small ones; and the like success we had with another Barrel of a Gun, whose Muzzle and Touch-hole were stopped up with Metal; nor had we less success when we buried a Pewter Bottle in a frigorifick Mixture, both the Bar∣rel of the Gun and the Bottle being burst in a quarter of an hour.
TITLE XII. Experiments concerning a new way of Esti∣mating the Expansive force of Congelation, and of highly compressing Air without En∣gines. A new way of Estima∣ting the Ex∣pane force of Con∣gelation.HOW far we were able to compress the Air by the Incumbent weight of a Cylin∣der of Mercury, we have else where shewn; but to reduce it to a greater degree of Condensati∣on I made the following Experiments. 1. Having filled a Glass-Egg with Water till it wrought about an Inch into the Stem, we placed it in a Mixture of Snow and Salt, and in a few hours the Surface of the Liquor was raised about 7 Inches; and the Apex of the Stem being sealed up, by a fresh application of Snow and Salt it was raised 8 Inches higher: So that the Air being compressed into the space of an Inch, possessed about nine Parts of ten of what it did before: Whereupon the Stem being inverted and the seal'd end opened, the Air which when the Stem was inverted, rose up to the Ice, and separated the unfrozen Water in the Stem from it, powerfully expanding it self; forced out about ten Inches of Water, with Violence and Noise, besides a great number of Bubbles ascended from the Bottom of the Glass to the Top. N. B. when the Air was compres∣sed beyond seven Inches, we several times ob∣serv'd, That the Glass just above the Water on
the inside was full of little drops of Dew, which when the Apex was broke off Disappeared. 2. A Vial whose neck was drawn out into a slender Pipe, being filled till it wrought an Inch within the Pipe; in a little time, by the Ex∣pansion of the Water, the Air being too much compressed, the head of the Pipe flew off; and the same happened to a round white Glass whose Stem, filled with Air, was about 3 Inches: Nor was the success otherwise when we re∣peated the Experiment in a large single Vial, whose Stem was four Inches long, and it's Basis an Inch broad. 3. An Oval Glass about the size of a Tur∣keys-egg, with a neck almost Cylindrical, was filled with Water within four Inches and a half, and then a piece of Paper being pasted upon the Stem divided into half Inches and quarters, and the Apex being sealed up by a moderate Heat; the Surface of the Water was raised considerably, but the Oval Part of the Glass being covered with a Mixture of Ice and Snow, the Air was compressed into a 17th Part of the space it possessed before; And the Ball of the Glass bursting afterwards with a considerable Noise, the Ice appeared full of Bubbles, which rendred it white and Opacous. In another Glass whose Ball was larger in proportion to the Stem, the Air was compressed into a 19th Part of it's former space before the Glass flew in pieces. 3. And this way of trying how far the Air might be compressed and Water expanded by Cold, we thought least Exceptionable; because the Pores of Glass are more impervious to Air
and Water, than some Metalline Vessels; for having broken open the Apex of the Stem of one of our Glass-Eggs, we found, that tho' the Wa∣ter was but a little expanded; yet not finding a way out at the Pores of the Glass, the Water rose up a quarter of an Inch. TITLE XIII. Experiments and Observations concerning the Sphere of Activity of Cold. Of the Sphere of Activity of Cold.IN estimating the Sphere of Activity of Cold, we are not only to consider the Degree of it in the cold Body; but also the Medium through which it is to pass, and the Consistence and Texture of it; as likewise the Instruments em∣ploy'd to receive or acquaint us with the Action of Cold: Since, from what hath been before laid down, it appears, That Weather-glasses give us a more nice account of the Degrees of it; and that our Sensories may mis-inform us, upon the ac∣count of their various Predispositions. Besides the Sphere of Activity may be vary'd by the Bulk of the cold Body. 1. But to consider the Sphere of Activity of small Pieces of Ice; we have found it very small in comparison of the Atmospheres of odo∣rous Bodies; insomuch that I am perswaded, we can have no sense of Cold, without the im∣mediate Contact of a cold Body; since Ice ap∣proaching our Sensory, or a Weather-glass, af∣fects neither; tho' held as near as possibly they may without touching. And the like hath been
observ'd at Sea, where in foggy Nights the Sea∣men have not been able to discern neighbouring Mountains of Ice: Tho' by a Merchant who made the Observation in Greenland, I am told, That he perceived a manifest access of Cold, upon the approach of a floating piece of Ice. 2. And I am told, that in Ispahan the Capital City of Persia, the Ice being never much more than a Finger thick, they usually pour Water upon it, which as it runs over the Ice, is in part froze, by which means, they thicken the Ice, and preserve it in proper Conservatories. This Experiment having been tryed in England, by pumping of Water upon Flakes of Ice; I found, That the Pump-water, being warmer than the Ice, thawed it, instead of increasing the Thick∣ness of it. And tho' here in England, Water poured upon Snow promotes its Dissolution, yet in Russia and Muscovy I am told, That Water thrown upon Snow freezes it; which they there∣fore make use of to incrustate several Bodies with Ice; yet one thing is to be observ'd, that gene∣rally at the same time, the sharpness of the Air is so violent, as to incrustate several Bodies with Ice, when only Water is made use of; so that in trying such Experiments, we are to consider the Temperature of the Air at the same time, which hath a great Influence in promoting or va∣rying the Effects of such Tryals. 3. How deep Frost penetrates into Water and Earth will be a very hard thing to determine; since Earth especially, may be more or less dispo∣sed to freeze, according to the several Degres of Cold, and its Duration; the Tex of the Earth, and the Nature of the Juices ded
through it, or subterraneal Steams: Whence large Tracts of Land that lye over some Mines, are always free from Snow, good quantities of Lime∣stone being near the Surface of the Earth. 4. But tho' it be so difficult to know to what Depth Frost will reach, yet that we may contri∣bute as much as we can to the general History of Cold, we shall add the following Notes. Af∣ter four Nights hard Frost the Ground in the Orchard was froze about 3 Inches deep, and in the Garden about 2; after ten Nights Frost, the Ground in the Garden was froze about 6 Inches ½, and that in the Orchard was froze 8 ½ or more. Eight Days after, it was froze about a Foot Deep. 5. A Pipe of Glass 18 Inches long being thrust down into a Hole in the Ground, the Surface of the Water contained in it being level with the Earth; the next Morning the whole Capa∣city of the Cylinder was froze 3 Inches, from which Stick of Ice a Part of the Cylinder was froze 6 Inches deep; but the rest of the Water remained unfroze: The Ground in the Garden, that Night was froze ten Inches deep. 6. It hath been observ'd, that in Moscow the Ground in a Garden was not froze above two Foot deep; but Capt. James says in Charlton-I∣sland he observ'd the Ground froze ten Foot deep; and the same Author in his Journal, p. 86. says, That the Water does not freeze naturally above six Feet.
One Particular referrable to the XIII Title: I am told, That a Lee-ward of great Banks of Ice, they may discover them by the access of Cold, twenty Leagues. TITLE XIV. Experiments concerning the Different Medi∣ums through which Cold may be diffused. Of the Me∣diums through which Cold may be dif∣fused.IN trying these Experiments we are to take Notice, that the Mediums are not to be too thick; since, from Experiments already deliver'd it appears, That a compact Medium very thick will not give way to Cold. 1. Having placed a Mixture of Snow and Salt in a Pipkin, and another in a white Basin glazed within and without, they were both incrustated with Ice. And that Cold will penetrate Pewter-Bottles, appears from Experiments already laid down. 2. Having caused two Cups to be made of Lattin, or Plates of Iron covered over with Tin, the Convex Part of one of which, was less than the Concave of the other; and the less having a broad Ledge, by the help of which it rested on the Brim of the other, so as to leave an Interval betwixt its Convex Superficies and the Concave of the other; we filled that Interval with Wa∣ter, and putting a Mixture of Ice and Salt with∣in the less Cup, and on the outside of the other, we had Cups of Ice made of the inclosed Water.
2. The Learned Erasmus Bartholinus in his discourse De figura Nivis mentions an Experi∣ment by which Air is turned into Water in the midst of Heat, viz. Ice or Snow being put into a a funnel; which he supposes refrigerates and condenses the Ambient Air; but I rather think, That the Dew which he supposes to be condensed Air, is made up of moist Vapours swimming in it; which is so small in Quantity, That having suspended a Tunnel in the Air, with a Mixture of Snow and Salt; which is much more refrigerating than either Ice or Snow by themselves, it gathered but a very small Quantity, and that too lasted no longer than whilst the Mixture was dissolving; besides those condensed Vapours were first Froze before they dropped down in the form of Water. 3. That in Hermetically sealed Glasses, a Mixture of Snow and Salt will freeze Vapours on the outside, is evident, from what hath been laid down; but that Cold should not only penetrate Glass, but afterwards act upon Water in Vacuo; was a little more strange: For having suspended a Tube of Water in Vacuo and pi∣led Snow and Ice about it, as high as the In∣cluded Water wrought; it worked upon it, and Froze it from the top to the bottom. 4. But what is yet more strange is, That Cold will act through a evidently hot Medium; for drinking a good quantity of Mineral Waters timely in the Morning, I observ'd a Manifest Coldness through the Muscles of my Abdo∣men, which was in a higher degree remarkable in a Gentleman who drunk much greater quan∣tities.
5. To try whether the fluidity of Water depended on a Congenite motion in the Parts of it, or whether it was conveyed to it by impulse from the Ambient Air; we provided a Glass-Bubble about the size of a Wall-nut and of a Pear like shape, whose Stem was purposely made crooked, and suspending it by a thread in Oyl of Turpentine contain'd in a narrow Glass; and this being placed in a Mixture of Snow and Salt, tho' the Oyl continued fluid; yet the Water in the Bubble was froze. And when we went to take it out, the Bubble being crack'd, the greatest Part subsided to the Bottom of the Mixture; but we per∣ceiv'd, That, that which was pulled out, was divided by a line through the middle from the top downwards. And it was further observa∣ble in this Tryal, That the two separable Piec∣es of Ice, being left in a Mixture of Ice and Salt for 14 hours, were very little wasted. The like success we had with a Bubble of Water suspended in Spirit of Wine; but another sus∣pended in Sea-Salt was not froze at all; nor was another that we hung in a sharp brine: But the same Experiments being tryed another time; the Water was froze both in the Bubble suspended in Spirit of Wine, and in that which was immersed in the strong Brine; the Bottle which contain'd the latter being crack'd, which cracks were not much unlike the lines drawn from the Pole of a Globe to the Meridi∣an; reaching from the top of the Bubble down∣wards.
6. A Bubble suspended with Water in it, in a Glass immersed in Snow and Salt, was froze, without the Intervention of any Li∣quor. TITLE XV. Experiments and Observations concerning Ice. Concerning Ice.1. THO' in the East-Indies it hath been thought strange, That Water in England should without any Artificial means be turned into a consistent Body; yet it is related by some, That in Russia the Ice on the contrary, is found much harder than Ours. 2. To make an Estimate of the Cohesion of the Parts of Ice, we thought to have tryed what weight Cylindrical pieces of Ice of diffe∣rent Diameters would bear: But being frustra∣ted in such Tryals, we try'd how much weight a Plate of it placed betwixt two Iron-Bars would bear; but having not convenient weights we were forced to be content to know, That it bore a much greater weight than one could suppose it capable of. 3. A peice of Ice 3 Inches long, and as ma∣ny broad; and about 4 of an Inch thick was laid cross a frame; and a peice of Iron of this Figure (7) having a scale hung at the longer Leg, the Horizontal Leg was placed upon the middle of the Ice; and then 117 Ounces Troy-weight being put into the Scale, when the Iron had melted half the Ice through on one side,
and a third Part of the other, the weight was able to break it. The Experiment being repeat∣ed when the piece of Ice was 2 Inches and a half long, it bore 17 pound Averdupois and 48 Ounces Troy-weight, when the Iron on one side had melted ⅔ and on the other ½ Parts of the thickness of it. 4. Plates of Ice being laid upon a stool, and Bay-salt strewed on some Parts of them, they promoted the melting of the Ice so much, That they buried themselves in it; but the Parts thaw'd by this means, were so incorporated with, and froze to the stool, That we could not separate them without knocking them in pieces: At a∣nother time Salt thrown upon Ice made a crack∣ling Noise and by a Candle-light, several Steams were observ'd to rise from them, like from some hot Liquors: A few drops of Aqua∣fortis dropped upon Plates of Ice, and Oyl of Vitriol, the latter sooner penetrated but the former with more Noise as if the Ice were crack'd. 5. Olaus Magnus Gent. Septentr. Hist. Lib. 1. Cap. 14 says, of the strength of Ice, Glacies primae & mediae byemis adò fortis & tenax est ut spissitudine seu densitate duorum digito∣rum sufferat hominem ambulantem, trium verò digitorum Equestrem Armatum; unius palmae & dimidiae, turmas vel exercitus militares; trium vel quatuor palmarum integram Legionem vel myriadem Populorum quemadmodùm inferius de bellis hyemalibus memorandum erit. But this account is the less satisfactory; because he tells us not how far distant from the shore this
weight would be born, for the weight of one Man may be much greater at some distance from the shore than of more, upon or near the side; since the shore hath there a greater strength to support it. 6. Purchas Lib. 4. Cap. 13 sayes, That the Ice in Russia was as hard as a Rock; and it is ob∣serv'd by the same, Lib. 4. Cap. 13. p. 813, That the Ice which floats in the Sea being ta∣ken up and thaw'd yields fresh Water; but whe∣ther it consists of an accumulation of fresh Particles in the Sea, or whether it is a Collection of Ice carried thither from some fresh Water I much Question; since the main Ocean is seldom froze, and especially since Purchas Lib. 3. Cap. 7. says, That the floating Ice near Nova Zembla which closes up the straight of Wei∣gals flows down from the Rivers Oby and Jenesre and several others. 7. As for the bigness of some Pieces of Ice they seem almost Incredible; the Dutch in their Voyage to Nova Zembla take notice of one 96 foot high; and Capt. James hath met with some as deep under Water, besides what float∣ed above, and some much higher: And Purchas Lib. 4. Cap. 18. p. 837. Tells us of a Moun∣tain of Ice which was 140 fathom high. As for the Length of these pieces of Ice, all that I can meet with is an observation of Capt. James's who measured a peice of Ice which was 1000 paces long. 8. As for the bigness of concrete Pieces of Ice, Mr. Hall in his Voyage to Greenland takes notice of one 24 Miles long. And by another, a vast Tract of Ice hath been observ'd, which
was so long that the Bounds of it could not be discover'd from an indifferent high Hill. To which we may add what the French Hydrographer Fournier relates in his Passage to Canada, That he met with some Pieces of Ice as big as Moun∣tains; others, as Ships; and one 80 Leagues long; in some Places plain, and in others une∣qual with high Mountains. And Olaus Magnus, Lib. 3. Cap. 2. pag. 384. says, Neque minori bel∣landi impetu Sueci & Gothi super aperta Glacie, quam in ipsa solidissima Terra confligunt: Imò ut prius dictum est, ubi antea aestivo tempore, acer∣rima commissa sunt Bella navalia, iisdem in locis Glacie concretâ, Aciebus militari modo constructis, Bombardis ordinatis, habentur horrendi conflictus, adeò solida Glacies est in Equestribus Turmis suf∣ferendis, ampliter vel strictè collocatis. And it is known to us all, that not long since, the King of Sweedland and his whole Army marched over the Sea to Zeeland, where Copenhagen the Capital City of Denmark stands. And Bartholinus, de Nivis usu, takes notice, That in the Eastern Re∣gions the Sea hath been froze a considerable Depth. To which I shall subjoyn that Glycas apud Fournier, Lib. 9. Cap. 19. observes, That in the Year 775, the Mediterranean was froze for 50 Leagues, 30 Cubits thick, upon which as much Snow fell as raised it 30 Cubits above the Top of the Water. 9. To what Instances we have already recited, we shall add that of the Dutch-Men in their Voy∣age, viz. that some pieces of Ice which were 18 Fathom below Water and ten above, were very blue; the like to which Capt. James takes notice of; and Virgil, speaking of the Frigid Zone, says,
Caerulea glacie concreta, atque imbribus Atris. 10. In the Spring the Ice is observ'd by Olaus Magnus to be much less compact than in the Win∣ter; and it is attested by the same, and also by Mr. James Hall in his Voyages, that when these Rocks of Ice break they make a vast Noise; and the like hath been observ'd by others: And tho' Olaus Magnus attributes the cleaving of these Rocks of Ice, to the Effect which warm Exhala∣tions have upon them; yet I am told, that some∣times they are observ'd to fly in pieces upon ex∣cessive Cold. Particulars referrable to the XV Title. 1. A Decoction of Sage, Rosemary and Par∣sly being exposed to be froze in distinct Vessels, the Superficies of the former was very rough. Juice of Lemons froze, represented Trees with∣out Leaves. 2. Hard Ice beaten, and common Salt being mixed together, afforded white Fumes like Smoke, tho' the Experiment was tryed in a close Room. Snow-Water froze in Ice and Salt, af∣forded an Ice very transparent, and with minute Bubbles. 3. Ice partly powder'd, and in part grosly beaten, being mixed with Bay-salt, when the Mixture was stirred, afforded a sensible Smoak, which was greater or less as the Mixture was more or less stirred; and floating over the Brim of the Vessel, rather sunk than rose; just as the
Fumes do from a Cloth dipped in Aq. fortis and hung up to dry. 4. I am told by one who was in the Frigid Zone, that he supplyed himself with fresh Water from the Ice, by digging Pits in it; and the same Person tells me, That he hath observ'd Pieces of Ice 50 Fathom deep, which were not above a tenth Part above Water. He likewise observ'd near the Coast of Greenland, the Variation of the Compass to be 22 Degrees; and a little time after scarce any thing at all. He told me fur∣ther, That sailing in the Main Sea in the Height of 77 Degrees, his Ship was surrounded with Ice 'till the 7th of June; and the Ice opening he fail∣ed through it; Part of it passing along towards Hudson's Streights. And it is observ'd, That these Mountains of Ice much weaken the strength of Winds, insomuch that if they be driven near them by a Storm, the Wind is so much quashed that they immediately find a Calm. TITLE XVI. Experiments and Observations concerning the Duration of Ice and Snow, and the destroy∣ing of them by the Air and several Liquors. What Li∣quors soon∣est dissolve Ice and Snow.TO discover what Liquors Ice would be soonest dissolved in, we contrived to freeze Water in a long Cylinder; which being loosen'd by applying a warm Hand, we divided some into Pieces ¼ of an Inch long, and others into Inches, and our Experiments being made with these Cylindrical Pieces of Ice:
In the first Tryal. 1. In Oyl of Vitriol, a Cylindrical Piece of Ice of an Inch in length lasted 5 Minutes. 2. In Spirit of Wine 12 Minutes. 3. In Aqua fortis 12 ½. 4. In Water 12 Minutes. 5. In Oyl of Turpentine about 44 Minutes. 6. In Air 64 Minutes. The second Tryal. 1. In Oyl of Vitriol an Inch of Cylindrical Ice lasted undissolv'd 3 Minutes. 2. In Spirit of Wine 13 Minutes. 3. In Water 26 Minutes. 4. In Oyl of Turpentine 47 Minutes. 5. In Sallet-Oyl 52 Minutes. 6. In Air 152 Minutes. 2. We likewise thought it worth while to try, what difference there would be in the Duration of Pieces of Ice, of the same Bulk and Figure, but of different Liquors; as also whether Attrition would contribute to the Dissolution of Ice, which Iobserv'd it did: Whence it appears, That as the Agents contiguous to Ice are different, they dissolve it's Texture sooner or later, and if Snow or Ice be kept in a Place where neither the Sun nor the Air hath much Influence upon it, it will continue a long time.
An Appendix to the XVI Title. 1. In confirmation of what was said in the Close of this Title, I shall add the following Account of the Italian Conservatories, sent me by my ingenious Friend Mr. J. Evelyn: The Snow-Pits in Italy, &c. are sunk in the most solitary and cooled Places, commonly at the Foot of some Mountain or elevated Ground, which may best protect them from the Meri∣dional or Occidental Sun; 25 Foot wide at the Orifice, and about 50 deep, is esteemed a competent Proportion. And though this be excavated in a Conical Form, yet it is made flat at the Bottom, or Point. The Sides of the Pit are so joyced, that Boards may be nail∣ed upon them very closely jointed. About a Yard from the Bottom, is fixed a strong Frame or Tresle, upon which lyes a wooden Grate; the Top or Cover is double thatch'd, with Reed or Straw, upon a copped Frame or Roof; in one of the sides whereof is a narrow Door∣case, hipped on like the Top of the Dormer, and thatched— To Conserve Snow. They lay clean Straw upon the Grate or Wattle, so as to keep the Snow from running through, whilst they beat it to a hard Cake of an icy Consistence, which is near one Foot thick; upon this they make a layer of Straw, and then Snow, and Straw again; and continue S.S.S. 'till the Pit is full, and then laying Straw
or Reeds upon all, they keep the Door locked. This Grate is so contrived, that the Snow melting by any Accident in laying, or ex∣traordinary Season of Weather, it may drain away from the Mass, and sink without sta∣gnating upon it, which would accelerate the Dissolution; and therefore the Bottom is but very slightly steened, &c. 2. And it hath been observ'd by the Dutch-Men in their Voyage to Nova Zembla, That in June, the Sun was not powerful enough to melt Snow: And even in warmer Climates, where the Reflection of the Sun-beams is not so considera∣ble, Snow continues unthawed all Summer; as upon the Top of the Alps, and other high Moun∣tains. And Capt. James observes, that, in Au∣gust, Ice that was kept in the Sun-beams, conti∣nued unmelted 8 Days or more; and the same Author observes, that the very Ground was fro∣zen in June. TITLE XVII. Considerations and Experiments concerning the Primum frigidum. Of the Pri∣mum Fri∣gidum.1. THO several Sects of Philosophers have disputed about a Primum Frigidum, some contending for Earth, others Water, others Air, and another Sect for Nitre; yet I am apt to be∣lieve, That there is no such thing as a Primum Frigidum, or , in which that Qua∣lity principally resides, and from whence all o∣ther Bodies derive theirs; no more than that
there is a , or Principle subject of Residence for any other Quality: For if an in∣tense Degree of Motion amongst the minute Parts of a Body, be sufficient to give it the Qua∣lity of Heat; it may be enough to render a Body cold, that that Motion is diminished upon a remo∣val of its Cause; so that it may be doubted whether Cold be a positive or a privative Quality. The Earth not the Pri∣mum Frigi∣dum2. Indeed Plutarch supposes the Earth to be the Summum Frigidum: But we daily see, That it is froze by the contiguous Air communicating Cold to it, and, by the Interposition of another Body, may easily be preserved from that. So the Salt-Works upon the Marshes of the Island Xain∣tonge in France, are preserved from the Dammage the Frost would do them, by letting in Water, by Sluces, to overflow them. Besides, were the Earth the Summum Frigidum, it might justly be wonder'd, why it congeals not the Water conti∣guous to it, sooner than Hail or Snow in the Air? Since Terrene Parts of Matter cannot be brought thither without some Cause able to ele∣vate them, and perhaps to alter the Qualities of them. Not to mention those Vulcano's which argue the Earth to abound with Subterraneal Fires; and that in several Places where there are no such Vulcano's, as in deep Mines, those that work there, find it very hot and troublesome: And in deep Wells, it is observ'd, that the Water is so far from being froze, that it comes up reaking hot; which cannot be supposed to proceed from the Beams of the Sun, since it hath been observ'd by Monsieur de Claves, Livre 11. Chap. 8. That in the Southern Countries the Heat of the Sun penetrates not above six or se∣ven
Foot deep. And the subterraneal Parts are so far from being extremely Cold, That it is observ'd by Miners, That the lower they dig, the more Vapours, exhalations and Heat they find. And Jo. Baptista Morinus, witnesses, That in Mines in Hungary four hundred fa∣thom deep, after the descent of 80 fathom, it is always hot; but whether these may proceed from Subterraneal Fires or a Mixture of other Bodies I shall not determine; since I have seen Bodies actually Cold mix'd together produce Heat. And I am told, That in some Parts of England they dig up a Mineral, which, upon a Addition of Water only, becomes Hot; and for a like reason perhaps those Heats in the Hungarian Mines may be caused: For that Mi∣neral Steams ascend, is evident, since they have been observ'd in a Perpendicular Groave not only to stink, but by their Corrosive Qualities, to corrode the wooden Ladders. And Morinus himself tells us, That descending into the Gold∣en Mines at Cremnitz, the Heat increased ex∣tremely as he descended; which they attribu∣ted to a Mine of Smaragdine Vitriol, which lay under it; of which kind of Vitriol, there is some, even in the Cold and Superficial Regi∣on of the Earth. 3. But if against what hath been said it should be alledged, That by the Primum Frigidum they only mean some Earth Mixed with the com∣mon Parts of the Terrestrial Globe, I should be glad to know, how we must discover this. But tho' I have brought these Arguments against this common received Notion; I cannot agree with Gassendus, who thinks, that the Earth is
no more Cold than Hot: Since it being natu∣rally a Body whose Parts are inclined to rest; it, without the assistance of some Extrinsick A∣gent to put it's Parts in Motion, must conse∣quently affect our Sensory with a greater degree of Coldness, than Air or Water, whose Parts are more Agitated. 4. And if those that argue for the Earth's being the Primum Frigidum, had only urged that it was the Summum Frigidum,Earth the Summum Frigidum. I could have more easily agreed with them: Since, in the Straits of Weigats, the Seas are froze; but not in the Northern Seas, nor that of Tartary; for the main Seas never freeze, but only near the Land, where it is much Colder than in the Ocean. Water not the Primum Frigidum.5. It is the Opinion of Aristotle, and the Schools, That Water is the Primum Frigidum; but in all Waters that are Froze by Cold we always see, they begin at the top, where the Air is Contiguous; which argues the Air Cold∣er than the Water, since it congeals it: Where∣as if Water was the Coldest Body, it ought al∣ways Naturally to be Froze, or to begin to freeze, rather in the middle than at the top, and rather in the main Ocean than in Gulfs, Straits and small Rivers: For it is observ'd, That those vast heaps of Ice that float in the Sea, and which we have so often mention'd, depend not on the Penetration of Cold to that depth they sometime sink to; but vast pieces of Ice being gathered together from the shore and small Rivers, and cemented together, de∣press each other by their own weight; upon
which, the falling Snow, gradually increases their Bulk. 6. But tho' I am far from taking Water to be the Primum Frigidum; yet I cannot agree with Gassendus, who thinks it indifferent as to Heat and Cold: For except where some adven∣titious cause Concurs, the Parts of Water being less Agitated than the Humors about our Sen∣sory, by it, we must adjudge it Cold. And tho' by the Heat of the Sun the superficial Parts of the Water are a little warmer; yet all Di∣vers Unanimously agree, That it is Colder, at the depth of a few Fathoms. Besides it is ob∣serv'd in warm Regions to be much warmer at Land than Sea, and those Countries that lye near the Sea are generally cooler. But as Cold as it is there, they don't find, That it is able to congeal the Water, tho' at the top it is of∣ten Froze. Air not the Primum Frigidum7. By the Stoicks and many of the modern Philosophers, the Air is looked upon to be the Primum Frigidum. Yet considering how great a Part of it lies under the Torrid Zone, and that it is for the most Part very Hot, and like∣wise, that Water enclosed in a Mixture of Snow and Salt will freeze at the bottom and not where it is contiguous to the Air; I say, considering these things, it will appear, That the Air is so far from being the Primum Frigi∣dum, That it is not the Summum Frigidum. Besides Air condensed to the utmost degree it was possible by the Coldness of the Air; and shut up in a convenient Glass, hath been con∣densed further by the Application of other Bodies: Whence it appears, that the Coldness
of the Air depends on the Mixture of some frigorifick Corpuscles with it, and not on the Spe∣cifick Texture of it's own Parts. Besides, Wa∣ter may be Froze when inclosed in Substances not apt to freeze, and when the Air is not Contiguous to it. Nitre not the Grand Efficient of Cold.8. The next Opinion I shall consider is, That of the learned Gassendus, who ascribes the frigorifick Virtue of Bodies to the admixture of Nitre: But tho' I allow Nitre to be a sub∣stance dispersed through most Bodies; yet, since Cold is only a Privative Quality and an ab∣sence of Heat; there are other Agents, which, by stopping the motion of the Insensible Parts of a Body, may deprive it of it's power of Heating. Besides, it must be a prodigious Quan∣tity of Nitre, That would be able to render every Part of the Sea so Cold as it is found to be; rot to mention, That Nitre is scarce ever found so deep in the Earth as some Seas extend; besides the Seas afford us very little Salt-Petre, but a great deal of common Salt. 9. And tho' Gassendus asserts, That Bodies receive the Impressions of Cold, from Ni∣trous Exhalations swimming in the Air; yet amongst all the Experiments I have made, to resolve Nitre into Vapours, I have not found, that it was able to effect more in the Production of Cold, than other Saline Bodies. And Spirit of Nitre is so far from having an actual Coldness greater than other Bodies, That it is potentially Hot. And whether the Exhalations of Nitre will congeal Water or not; Spirit of Nitre, I have observ'd, will dis∣solve Ice, as soon almost as Spirit of Wine:
And tho' Nitre mix'd with Snow or Ice may promote Congelation; yet it proves not that the Parts of Nitre are frigorifick; since the Ex∣periment will succeed with Spirit of Wine. 10. Having said, thus much of Gassendus his Opinion, we shall in the next place, propose some Experiments; which will be a further Confirmation of what we have been say∣ing. 11. Rock-Petre and Ice, being put into a Bottle, congeal'd the Vapours on the outside; but pieces of Salt-Petre laid upon Plates of Ice dissolv'd it. Water being satiated with Salt-Petre, and exposed to the Cold in a Bottle, broke it; several Chrystals of Salt-Petre having shot in the Bottom of it. From these Experi∣ments it appears, That there are Colder Bo∣dies than Salt-Petre, and that it dissolves Ice, and it is rather Hot than Cold in respect of Ice. 12. On a windy and a cloudy Day, having suspended a Weather-Glass in Water satiated with Salt-Petre we observ'd, That when it had stood a considerable time, and was raised by the string up into the Air, the Liquor contain∣ed in it was raised about 2 divisions; and being again immersed in the solution of Nitre, it was presently raised; so that the Air was Colder, than the solution of Nitre. 13. But to conclude this Title; tho' I am far from thinking Nitre to be the Summum Fri∣gidum; yet I doubt not, but that Parts of it ri∣sing from the Earth in the form of Vapours, may contribute to the refrigeration of the Air. Not but that there are several other Bodies in
the Bowels of the Earth, whose Effluvia being mix'd with the Air and dispersed through it, may cool the Air according to their Propor∣tions, as much as Nitre: Besides, since common, Salt co-operates with Snow in the Production of Ice as well as Salt-Petre, and according to Democritus, hath Parts of a Cubical figure, which he assigns to Cold Atoms: And since Gassendus observes, That Salt-Petre consists of Parts not altogether so apt for the production of Cold; these Figures being not Pyramidal but Prismati∣cal; I say, since these Circumstances all concur, I see no reason, why common Salt may not be numbred amongst those Bodies, that are apt to produce Cold. 14. Nay, sometimes it may happen, That more violent degrees of Cold may be caused by a like Coalition of several sorts of Salts. So the Coldness of Snow is advanced by a Mixture of Nitre or common Salt, or other appropriated Additaments. But I must con∣fess, That it is a doubt with me, whether Cold depends on any such saline Exhalations, or the Effects of frigorifick Atoms; but to pass by this Scruple at present without any further Notice: I shall add, that what I have said upon this Title is not so much to confute what Opi∣nions I have mention'd, as to shew, that they are Doubtful.
One Particular referrable to the XVII. Title. I am told by the Russian Emperor's Physitian, That in the Northern Province of Russia; the Earth is thaw'd but the depth of two foot, and yet good Corn grows upon it. TITLE XVIII. Experiments and Observations touching the Coldness and Temperature of the Air. Of the tem∣per of the Air.1. THO' Gassendus and several others as∣sert, That the Air is Indifferent as to Cold and Heat; yet since Cold is only a Re∣lative Quality, and since the Parts of the Air, are of themselves in a less degree of Agitation, than the Humors about our Sensory; I see no reason why it should not be esteemed Cold: For notwithstanding it may acquire a conside∣rable degree of Heat by the adventitious Effects of the Sun-Beams, or fire; yet we see, that it naturally tends to coolness it self again. And as for the Coldness of the Air, tho' I deny not but that frigorifick Atoms may be mixed with it; yet I judge them not absolutely or al∣together requisite to the Production of Cold; since a bare Diminution of the motion of it's Parts, is sufficient to produce such a Quality in higher or more remiss degrees. 2. But the Principal intent of this Section being to produce Experiments and Observations;
I shall begin with the former. A sealed Weather-Glass with Spirit of Wine in it, being en∣closed in a Cylindrical Receiver, when the Air in the Receiver was exhausted, it subsided the length of a Barly-corn; but rose again when the Air was let in again; which Effects I attributed to the Expansion of the Included Air, when the External was drawn out. When the Air was drawn out of the Receiver, hot Bodies Exter∣nally applyed, affected not the Weather-Glass; but when the Air was let in again they caused the Spirit to rise sensibly. 3. To measure the Condensation of the Air by Cold, we made the following Experiments. And, First we enclosed Air in Weather-glasses hermetically sealed; which, when it was artifi∣cially or naturally refrigerated, and the Apex of the Weather-glass broke open, we could not discern, by the Water it received, that it was condensed above a 30th Part of it's former di∣mensions. A Glass-egg being inverted into Salt Water, in a Cold Night, the Air was so far condensed in it, That the Water rose five Inches in the Stem. And Jan. 29 the Air ex∣tended into 2057 Spaces was in a frosty Night contracted to 1965 Spaces. So that the great∣est degree of Condensation we could observe was a 22 Part and a little above a third. But a Mixture of Snow and Salt being applied to the Elliptical Part of the Glass, the Water rose 4 Inches higher than in the former Experiment; and the Air was contracted from 1965 Spaces to 1860; so that the Artificial Cold contracted is more in respect of the Contraction, which the natural Cold produced, than That Condensation
was in Proportion to it's natural temper or ra∣ther a moderate degree of Coldness. 4. But to proceed to Observations: Cold may hinder the Operation of the Sun upon the Air in the middle of Summer; and I am told, That it hath been observed to Snow in Green∣land all Mid-summer Night, and in the North∣ern Parts of Muscovy it hath been observed, That severe Frosts happened in the close of Au∣gust. And further, Capt. Weymouth says, That in the midst of Summer, when they sailed not near the Latitude of Nova Zembla, their ve∣ry sails and Tackling were froze: To which we shall add, that the English when they were sailing to Cherry-Island, which lyes betwixt 74 and 75 degrees Latitude; in July it froze so hard, that the Ice hung upon their Cloaths. 5. As for the degrees of Cold in the Air, Dr. Fletcher tells us, that in Russia, if they go out of a warm Room into the Cold, it makes them Breath with difficulty. It is observ'd at Moscow, That Water thrown up into the Air falls down congealed, the Air is so Cold; and at Smolensko in Russia, the Spittle freezes before it can fall from one's Mouth to the Ground. 6. I have observ'd the Air grows sensibly heavier, in frosty Weather; but whether it depends on any frigorifick Atoms dispersed through the Air, or not, I shall leave to be de∣cided by further Tryals. In Northern Countries it is observ'd, That foggy Weather presently vanishes when Frost begins; the moist Vapours being, by that, condensed and precipitated, and the Surface of the Earth so closed up, that other Vapours were repressed, and kept from rising;
and the Air hath been by several observ'd to have been much more clear in the Winter, here in England, and Sweedland, and elsewhere, than at other times. 7. The Refraction of Luminaries in the Nor∣thern Air in Nova Zembla is so great, that the Dutch-Men observ'd the Sun to appear to them 14 Days sooner than it ought to have done. And Capt. James tells us, That he observ'd the Lati∣tude of Charlton-Island to vary 52 Minutes, and the Sun to rise 20 Minutes sooner than it ought to rise: Besides several Instances of Refraction, laid down in the History of the Air. 8. To what we have said, of the Coldness of the Air; we shall subjoyn the Relations and Observations of Navigators, which we shall either propose as promiscuous, or in Con∣firmation of the three following Observati∣ons. 1. That the greater or lesser Coldness of the Air in several Climates and Countries, is nothing near so regularly proportionate to their Respective distances, from the Pole or their Vicinity to the E∣quator as Men are wont to presume. It hath been observ'd, That of Places of an equal distance from the Northern and Southern Poles, those near the latter are Colder. Tho' in Moscow, the Cold is almost intolerable; yet in Edenburgh, which is a degree more Northwards, the Air is temperate enough, and the Snow seldom lies on the Ground. Mr. Pool in his Northern Voyage tells us, That it did not freeze near so hard near the 79th degree as in the 73d. And tho' Nova Zembla, lies near 4, 5 and 6 de∣grees more Southerly from the Pole than Green∣land,
yet the latter hath Grass and Trees and such Beasts as feed upon them; whereas in No∣va Zembla there is no Grass and only such Beasts as feed on Flesh. To which I shall add, That Josephus Acosta tells us, That under the Line, when the Sun was in the Zenith and just entred into Aries, in March, he felt himself ve∣ry Cold; and he likewise tells us, That under the Burning Zone in Quitto and the Plains of Peru the Air is temperate; at Potofi very Cold; and in Aethiopia, Brasile and the Moluccoes ve∣ry Hot. And he observes further, That Snow lyes on the tops of the Hills, and that it is ex∣tremely Cold, when the Sun is for their Zenith under the Line. Mr. Hudson in his Voyage hath observed, That one Day, they were much disturbed with Ice; and that the next Day, it was very Hot: And we are further in∣formed by Acosta, That tho' the Seas of Mo∣zambigus and Ormus in the East, and Panama in the West, are very Hot; yet that of Peru of the same height is very Cold. And Capt. James's Observes, That tho' Charlton-Island is Cold∣er than Nova Zembla, yet is it of the same La∣titude with Cambridge. To which I shall sub∣joyn, That an English Navigator tells us, That tho' Pustozera in Russia is 68 ½ degrees, yet it is well inhabited, and a Town of great Trade. And in Hudson's Voyage it was observed, that beyond 80 degrees they found it moderately warm. 2. The next Observation is, That the degree both of Heat and Cold in the Air may be much greater in the same Climate, and the same Place,
at several seasons of the year, or even at several times of the same Day, than most Men would believe. In Proof of this Proposition we shall produce the following Testimonies of Travellers and of Navigators. And 1. That there is a great variety Weather in Russia, Dr. Fletcher witnesses, who observes, that tho' all Winter the Ground is covered with Snow and the Fields frozen up; yet the Fields in the Summer are covered with flowers and filled with the delightful noise of Birds; and then the Weather is as much too Hot, as it was before Cold; June, July and August being warmer than the Summer in Eng∣land: And the like is confirmed by the Obser∣vations of others, amongst whom Olearius tells us, that at Moscow he saw Melons of 40 Pound weight better than those in Italy. And at Pequin, the Royal City of China, tho' it is but 42 degrees Latitude; yet in the Win∣ter, Martinius the Jesuit tells, us it is a hard frost for four Months together, so that all the Rivers are froze up. And Prosper Alpinus tells us, that Grand Cairo, which is only 6 degrees from the Tropick of Cancer, tho' the Summers are insupportably Hot; yet the Winters are considerably Cold: And one thing he there takes notice of is, That in that Place they are seldom or never troubled with Distillations or Rheums. And Purchase tells us, That in Green∣land one Day will be extremely Cold and the next as violent Hot; so that at Mid-night Tobac∣co may be lighted at the Sun-beams, by the help of a Glass: To which Relations I shall add, That Capt. James tells us, That in Charlton-Island,
tho' the Winter was excessive Cold; yet in June it was so Hot, with Thunder and Light∣ning, That the Men were forced to go a shore to cool themselves in the Water. Alpinus tells us likewise, that in Aegypt the Air is some part of the Day extremely Hot and at other times very temperate and cool. And O∣learius tells us, That travelling over Mount Tau∣rus in Persia; tho' it was too Hot in the Day for them to proceed in their Journey; yet at Night they were so benummed with the Cold, That they were scarce able to light off their Horses; and the same Traveller observ'd at Fallu in Per∣sia both Lightning and Thunder, Winds, Snow, Rain and Ice, in one Night. And in Charlton-Island tho' the Heat of the Sun in June be insup∣portable in the Day; yet at Night, the Cold is strong enough to freeze Water, in Vessels, an Inch thick. 3. The third Observation is, That in many Places the Temperature of the Air, as to Cold and Heat, seems not to depend so much on the Eleva∣tion of the Pole, as upon the Nature and Circum∣stances of the Winds that Blow there. It is commonly known, That in this Part of the World, Northerly and North-easterly Winds are accompained with Cold, and in Winter with Frost: But I once observ'd here in England a South-Wind when it froze hard; and Capt. James in his Voyage hath observ'd the like: And Prosper Alpinus observes in Ae∣gypt, That the North-Winds are extraordina∣ry cooling; and that upon the Blowing of the Aetesian Winds the Plague ceases, at Grand Cairo.
That this cooling Quality depends on the changes it receives from the Places it passes over, is highly probable, as well as that it ac∣quires other Qualities the like way. Acosta Lib. 3. Cap. 9. Takes notice of Winds, That, in some Parts of the Indies, so corrode Iron-gates, That they will crumble away in one's Fingers. And the same Author tells us, That tho' in Spain an Easterly-wind is Hot and troubles one; yet in Murria, it is Cold and healthful; but in Carthagena not far from the former Place, it is troublesome and unhealth∣ful. The Meridional (which they of the Ocean call South, and those of the Mediterranean Sea, Mezzo Giorno) is commonly Rainy and Boyste∣rous; and in the same City, I speak of, it is wholesome and pleasant. And in Peru, he says, the South and South-west-winds are very plea∣sing. How the Winds come by these Qualities I shall not now dispute; but to give some light into the matter I shall propose the following Experiment. Setting a Weather-Glass with a flat Basis up∣on a Board, and Blowing several times upon it with a large pair of Bellows, tho' the Air seem∣ed Cold to my Hand; yet the Pendulous drop ascended a little, the Air being a little heated in the Bellows: But if the Clack of the Bellows was so fastned, That the Air must wholly en∣ter in at the Nose of it; the stream of Air, which was by that means drawn toward the Weather-Glass from the Window, being cooler, would cause the Bubble to subside.
But having provided such a Tile as they lay on the ridges of Houses and filled the hollow side with a Mixture of Snow and Salt, and Part of that Mixture being placed about the Bellows; I found, That the Air blown upon my Hand was, by that means, highly refrigerated: And this Air be∣ing blown upon the Ball of a common Weather-Glass, the Water manifestly ascended; but subsided again, when we left off blowing. But to prosecute the Tryal, we drew back the Nose of the Bellows, and upon that, the Wind blowing along that Cavity upon the Weather-Glass, manifested a higher degree of Cold∣ness. But tho' it from hence appears, That frigori∣fick Atoms may refrigerate the Air; yet I be∣lieve not, that all Winds must necessarily be cooled so; since the Cold Air near the Poles swimming upon that which fills the lower Part of the Atmosphere, may, for want of a Reflecti∣on of the Sun-Beams, be so Cold, as to cool the Air suddenly, when by the falling of Rain it is beat down upon us: For Acosta hath observ'd, upon Mountains higher than the Alps, That the Air was extremely Cold. And the Hollan∣ders who failed within 17 degrees of the Pole observ'd, That their Cold Winds were chiefly Northerly and North-easterly. But, To conclude this Title, I shall add an in∣stance or two to shew, That Cold Winds re∣ceive not so much their Qualities from the Quarters from whence they Blow, as from the Regions over which they pass. For Mr. Wood tells us, That tho' in England the most troublesome and unwholesome Winds
came from the Sea; yet in New-England those are the most wholesome: Because the North-east-wind coming from the Sea thaws the Ice and melts the Snow; but the North-west-wind coming over the Land causes Cold. And Capt. James observ'd the like in Charlton-Island, viz. That the South-wind was Coldest which came over a frozen Tract of Land. Particulars referrable to the XVIII Title. 1. The little sealed Weather-Glass being immersed in Water, contained in a Glass-Vial greased in the inside, when the Water was froze, and the Ball of the Weather-Glass was incrustated, being taken out, the Ice was broke off: Upon which the Tinged Liquor immedi∣ately rose in the shank of the Weather-Glass; but presently subsided again below the former Mark; from whence it appears, That the Air may communicate a greater degree of Cold than Ice it self. 2. Having placed a Weather-Glass, made by the Standard at Gresham-College, in a Cel∣lar, where Beer continued unfroze in a very sharp Winter; last Night and this Morning the Tinged Liquor stood 2 Divisions and ⅛ above the freezing Mark; but being removed into the Garden, it subsided to the freezing Mark: But tho' the Cellar was warmer than the Air; yet it was not so warm as my Chamber; the Weather-Glass there standing two Inches above the freezing Mark, in the Morning before the fire was made; and in the Summer the Tinged
Spirit ascended to the 8th 9th and sometimes almost to the tenth Mark. 3. The last Night being rendered very Cold by Snow, Frost and Wind; this Morning, the Weather-Glass being removed into the Garden, the Tinged Spirit subsided two Divisions be∣low the freezing Mark: Yet the Cellar did not become so much Hotter, by an ; but that Oyl of Aniseeds continued undissolv'd in it till, the next Morning, tho' the mode∣rate warmth of Spring or Autumn is sufficient to keep it fluid. 4. A Weather-Glass being held in the Stream of Water as it came reaking Hot out of the Pump, the Liquor subsided considerably; and being carried to my Chamber, the Air there being Colder than the Water, it was depressed lower. 5. Having held a Weather-Glass in the reaking stream of Pump-Water, the Spirit rose about 5 Inches higher than it did at a Well in Oxford; and being in some measure immersed in a Spring that usually smoaks in the Winter, it was raised a little higher. And the Weather-Glass being placed on the North side of the House about Noon, I found that the temper of the Air then, was much the same with the temper of the smoaking Spring. 6. Feb. 19. The Frost having continued 3 Days, the Spirit was raised as high, by the warmth of the Spring as it used to be. The next Day the Spring beginning to smoak, the warmth of the Water raised the Spirit near a quarter of an Inch higher than it used to rise at the
Spring-head some Months ago. And the Water was then much warmer than the Air, for the Spirit when brought to my Chamber subsided; the Ground without being covered with a lit∣tle Snow 7. A Gentleman told me, That he had ob∣serv'd the Tinged Spirit sometimes higher, when it was frosty, than when it was not. And he further told me, That the Weather-Glass being left in Water till it was froze, when it was cleared of the Ice and exposed to the Air, the Spirit manifesty subsided. The size of the Ball of this Weather-Glass was as big as that of a large Crab, and the Stem was a∣bout 2 foot and ½ long. And the distance be∣twixt the station which the Spirit rested at in the Water and the Air was above three Inches. A Relation given me by an Ingenious Gentleman lately returned out of Poland. 1. In frosty clear Weather, he observ'd the Sun and two Parhelions one Eastward and the other Westward; betwixt ten and twelve a Clock; and when the Sun-shine appeared it was full of glit∣tering Particles of Ice. 2. A Dutch and a Scotch Ship having sailed beyond Greenland, within one degree of the Pole, they observed, That tho' there were vast Regions of Ice near the shores; yet near the Pole, the Sea was open and free enough. From the North-East they observ'd, That there came a great rolling Sea, not unlike the Spanish Seas: And that the Cold was no violenter than that in Greenland. And further they observ'd,
That sailing from Greenland, the Compass first varied a Point and then two, and when they came near the Pole, the Compass varied 4 Points, and that towards the East. The Captain likewise told me, That they are troubled at Sea, sometimes with thick Fogs, some of which last half a Day, others a Day; and others a whole Day. And he likewise told me, That lying at An∣chor near Bellsound on the coast of Greenland, near a very high Rock, he and some others got to the top of it; which they judged to be half a Mile high: And when they came there; they found the Weather clear and the Sky serene, and so Hot that they were forced to strip them∣selves: But below they could discern a thick fogg; which when they came down, they found was very Cold, and Dark. A Passage taken out of the Czars-Doctor's Letter. 1. At Vologda in the North-East from Mos∣cow we found the Cold Weather in December not to last 3 Days; but the Rain was unusual and dangerous. And for 30 years past the Win∣ters have been so moderate, That People are not froze on the Roads in several Postures; but sometimes they lose their Noses, and have their Faces froze. 2. The Warmer the Room is in the Day, the thicker the Hoar is at Night upon the Glass; being sometimes an Inch thick: And if it be a small Frost, The Nails of the Windows and Doors will be tipped with Frost. The Falconers say. That the Birds creep under the Snow at
Nights. Bears make themselves Caves against Winter, and I remember I kept one two Days without meat or drink; he in the mean time, making a Lather with his Tongue and sucking his Paws. 3. A Wind from the Sea causes a Thaw as well as at Archangel. The Air is so healthful they use very little Physick, so that the Poor∣er sort live 80 or 100 years old. TITLE XIX. Of the strange Effects of Cold Of the strange Ef∣fects of Cold.THE Dutch tell us, That they found it so Cold in Nova Zembla that when their Sheets were washed and hung to dry by a fire, one side would freeze as the other thawed, and that they themselves were so Cold, That they could not warm themselves by the fire; for they usually smelt their stockings burn, be∣fore they were sensible of the Heat. And Capt. James tells us, That in Charlton-Island, the one side of Water in a Vessel froze, whilst the other was next the fire. To these Relati∣ons I shall add, That Marcus Polus was told, That on a Plain, which was betwixt two of the highest Hills in the World; fire would nei∣ther burn so briskly, nor boil things so effect∣ually as in other Places; which I am the more unwilling to reject as impossible: Because if Snow and Ice owe their Coldness to some∣thing which reigns in the Air, Nature may make
the Air as Cold in any other Northern Climates; Saline Expirations being every where disper∣sed through the Earth and Sea. And this Cold is so violent, that Water being poured on a stool and a Tankard placed upon it; by a Mix∣ture of Snow and Salt, the Tankard will be so frozen to the stool, That the one being lift up, raises the other along with it. 2. Gerat de Veer, says, That if they put a Nail into their Mouth it would be froze, and bring Blood along with it when taken away. And Dr. Fletcher tells us, That in Muscovy, if one hold a Pot in ones Hand; being froze to it, it will pull off the skin at Parting. And in No∣va Zembla, it hath been observed to be so Cold, That it froze Salt Water two Inches thick. 3. In the Market-Place at Moscow, Olearius tells us, That the extreme Cold caused a Clift a foot broad and several Inches long; and that considerable Clifts will be made by the Cold, I am inform'd by others: And the Dutch in Nova Zembla acquaint us, That the Ground was so froze, that they were not able to thaw it by burning Wood upon it. 4. As for the Effects of Cold on compound Bodies, &c. That it will freeze Beer, Ale, Vinegar, Oyl, common Wine, and even Sack and Alicant we have already shewn; and that it hath considerable Effects on Wood, Bricks, Stone, Vessels of Glass, Earth, and even Pew∣ter and Iron themselves. To which I shall add, That tho' Cold preserves some Plants; yet an excessive degree of it destroys them.
5. Capt. James tells us, That he found the Cold when at the highest degree insupportable; and Olearius acquaints us, that sometimes the Cold in Muscovy is so excessive, That neither motion nor Cloaths resist the ill Effects of it; but in Moscow the Air is very good and healthly, the Plague very seldom happening there. And Dr. Fletcher tells us, That in Russia it is so Cold sometimes, That People fall Dead in the Streets, and that the Bears and Wolves in∣vade and Plunder the Towns in whole Troops. And the Effects of Cold have been found so strange sometimes, That it hath caused Blisters to rise, not only upon the Hands and Face but their Arms and Legs: Besides these Instances, Capt. James tells us, That their Cloaths would be covered over with Frost, and Iceicles would so hang to their Hair, That he was forced to shave his Head and Face, that they might have nothing to hang at. And Purchas says, That their very shoes would be covered over with a Hoar-Frost on the inside, so that they were not able to wear them. And I am told, That an Army of 40000 of the Turks all perished at once by excessive Cold. I am also inform'd, That a Province of Poland, of the same height of the Pole with Normandy, is subject to some sort of Colds, which occasion a pecu∣liar kind of Sickness and at other times Death. And Cancerous Sores are as fatal as those caused by Hot corroding Humours; and those that dye of the Cold, either are seized with a drow∣ziness and Coldness of the Extreme Parts, and dye in a sleep, or having their Guts and Reins first froze and then Gangre∣ed
and Mortified, vomit every thing they take, and then languish with violent pain and Dye; and their Bodies being opened, their Guts are black, and as if it were glewed to∣gether. 6. What effects Cold hath upon other Ani∣mals, hath not been much observ'd by Authors: But a French Author tells us, That the Cold in Ʋkrain as the Polanders call it, is sometimes so great, That it destroys Horses and some o∣ther tame Beasts. And the same Author men∣tions a four-footed Creature, called Bohack, pe∣culiar to that Province, one of which being dug out of the Ground where he was froze, (for they usually hide themselves there in the Win∣ter) when they were about to flea him, the sense of Pain recovered him; and this was present∣ed to a Polish Lord from whom I had the Rela∣tion. 7. It is reported, That in the Northern Countries, the Birds and wild Beasts are usual∣ly turned white: But tho' I don't wholly re∣ject it as false; yet I cannot believe it univer∣sally true. But this is certain, That good Au∣thors mention, white Bears and Foxes in No∣va Zembla, and white Partridges upon the Snowy Alps; and I have heard of white Pheasants in Savoy. What may be the Reason of this Co∣lour I shall not dispute, nor shall I determine, whether it be caused by any seminal Impressions, or the Imagination of the Females, who have Snow always as an Object before them: But that all Beasts and Fowls in the Northern Cli∣mates are of that white colour I find is a Mistake; for I have seen Deers skins brought from Green∣land
of a Dun colour. Yet one thing which is very strange is, That in Greenland and Livonia Hares become white in the Winter, and return to their Natural colour again in the Summer. And Capt. James tells us, of Foxes in Green∣land which are pied black and white. Particulars referrable to the XIX Title. 1. Lieutenant G. Drummon told me, That at Smolensco, the Barrels of Beer, being frozen a considerable thickness; the Liquor contained within was much stronger. 2. Two Swedish Ambassadors confirmed to me, That the Hares in Muscovy, change from their Natural colour to white in the Winter, and recover their own colour in the Summer; and that on one side the River Duna which separates Livonia and Muscovy, the Hares are white, and on the other side of ordinary colours. 3. It is observ'd in Russia, That if a Man, touches his Tongue with the Metalline Head of a Cane, it freezes his tongue immediately; so that he cannot separate it without much Pain: For the Parts of the Metal being at rest, and the Spittle whose Parts are in a weak Mo∣tion, striking against the Metalline Body, are wholly deprived of it, and consequently freeze. So in a Billiard-Table one Bowl in Motion stri∣king against another not in Motion, communi∣cates as much of it's Motion as it can to the other, and loses it's own; and so the Vapours and steams in a Room, in frosty Weather striking against the Glass-Windows, are de∣prived
of their Motion and froze, which is ob∣serv'd to be much thicker upon the Glass in Russia than here in England. A Note out of Martinius in his account of China. This Author tells us, That at Peking, tho' the Pole be not elevated above 42 degrees; yet for four Months together, from the mid∣dle of November, the Rivers are froze in one Day, so that they bear Coaches and Hor∣ses. A Note taken out of Martinius Cromerus his Polonia. The Cold is so violent in these Countries sometimes, That the Trees wither at the Roots, and Water is froze as it falls through the Air; and the Waters are froze up for two Months, so that they bear Horses loaden, and Coaches. And this Author tells us, That he passed over the Weisell in Massovia with a Coach and Hors∣es, and other Horse-Men. And in Prussia the Fishing in the Ice began after the beginning of November, and lasted till March was en∣ded. Another Note out of the same. 1. They catch Fish more commodiously in Winter than Summer; for breaking holes in se∣veral Places in the Ice, a Net being cast into one of them, and ropes fastned to it, Men with
Poles, and Horses, draw the Net from one Place to another. 2. I am told that at Warsaw, in twelve Hours the Water was froze 4 Inches downwards. One that sailed to make Discoveries beyond the Arct∣ick Circle, told me, He could eat as much in one Day, as in ten here; and that after they had sailed over a deep blew Sea, they came to one as black as Ink, which being sounded, it was above 70 Fathom. Sack being froze, and thaw∣ed again, presently lost its Vigour. 3. In these Parts the Frost penetrates the Ground five Foot; and the Ice in Iberia in the River Ob, is said to be a Fathom and a half thick; there being there but twelve Weeks in the whole Year without Frost: The Rivers have breathing places a Mile long, out of which Fumes ascend, as out of a Cellar, when the Door is open'd. Death by Cold is not painful, if it be intense. Cold dries excessively, cleaves the Earth, and causes Timber to crack. TITLE XX. Experiments concerning the Weight of Bodies frozen and unfrozen. The Weight of Bodies frozen and unfrozen.1. TO try whether Bodies upon freezing would grow heavier, since Epicurus and other Atomists, suppose Congelation to depend upon the crowding in of frigorifick Atoms; we exposed Eggs to be froze all Night, and in the Morning we found they had lost four Grains of their Weight, which we suspected to proceed
from the Avolition of some Exhalations through the Shell; since at other times we observ'd, That Eggs counterpoised lost eight Grains of their Weight, in some process of Time. 2. Water froze and weighed, counterpois'd a Grain and a little more, than when it was thawed: But the Experiment being made in a Glass with a long Stem, hermetically seal'd when the Water was froze; it was as heavy or heavier after it was thawed; and the same Equa∣lity of Weight betwixt frozen and unfrozen Water, happened in other Experiments. 3. Stones being weighed after exposed to the cold Air, and also in a warm Air, they seemed to discover an Increase of Weight; but I suspe∣cted it proceeded from Water imbibed into their Pores, since Stones are observ'd to increase their Weight in Water: And further, because one that was well polished, and not apt to im∣bibe Water, retain'd barely its own Weight. So that the Doctrine of the Epicurean Freezing, must be invalid, except he supposes the frigori∣fick Atoms, like those of a Load-stone, to be without Weight. An Appendix to the XX Title. The fore-going Experiments, may not only satisfie us, That the Doctrine of the Epicureans is erroneous, but may likewise help us to cor∣rect some extravagant Relations, on the other Hand: For Helmont tells us, That Water thaw∣ed in a Vessel Hermetically sealed, was ⅛ heavi∣er than before. But perhaps this Difference might in part depend on the Access of Vapors
on the outside the Glass. In opposition to what Manalphus tells us, I found, That Water froze in a Metalline Porringer, in one Experiment lost 50, in another 60 Grains of its Weight; which I attributed to an Avolition of some Parts of the Water, since when we order'd the Mat∣ter so, that no Water could steam out, there was no considerable Increase or Decrease in the Weight of Water froze or thawed. Particulars referrable to the XX Title. 1. Quick-silver being weighed in the Air, and afterwards counterpoised in Water, when by the application of a Mixture of Snow and Salt, it began to freeze; the Bubble weighed ¾ of a Grain less than before. A Globe of Snow rammed into a Mould, whose Diameter was an Inch, weighed 112 Grains. A Globe of Ice of the same Diameter weighed, 2 Drams, and 5 Grains. 2. After a long Frost and Snow, the Liquor in the gaged Weather-glass stood below the first Mark; but the Mercury in the Baroscope stood at near 2/ below 29 Inches; which perhaps might be attributed to the high Wind. 3. Four Ounces of Snow being counter poised were exposed to the Frost all Night, and at 10 or 11 in the Morning, had lost near 30 Grains, which Parts seemed to have been evaporated; the melted Liquor in the Bottom of the Scale a∣mounting to no more than 8 Grains. 4. Two Ounces of Snow depressed flat, so as to form a large Superficies, and counterpoised, in a Night's time, lost 55 Grains; no Water be∣ing
found in the Scale; and two Hours after, the Decrement was 63 Grains, none of the Snow appearing yet to be melted. TITLE XXI. Promiscuous Experiments and Observations concerning Cold. Whether Frost hinder odoriferous Effluvia from exert∣ing their Power.1. SEveral Flowers being gathered in Decem∣ber and January, and hastily smeled  had no sensible effect on the Sensory, whic Phaenomenon I attributed to the Frost, hindring a sufficient Quantity of spirituous Sap from ri∣sing up into them; and not that it prevented those spirituous Parts from emitting Effluvia; since a vigorous fresh Primrose, had an Odour genuine and sweet. 2. Rose-water being froze, when it was whol∣ly Ice, afforded a genuine Scent, but something fainter, than when it was thawed again; but in making these Experiments it is requisite, that the Body smelt at, should not be held too long near the Nose, lest the warmth of one's Face should help to excite those Odoriferous Parts, and consequently frustrate the Tryal. 3. Stinking Water being exposed to the Cold and froze, was altogether inodorous. 4. It is reported by several, and attested by Olearius, That the Russians and Livonians, en∣able themselves to bear Cold extremely, by go∣ing out of their Store naked, immediately in∣to cold Water, and even Ice it self.
5. Having made use of a good burning-Glass to concentre the Rays of the Moon, I could nei∣ther perceive them cold or hot; tho' Sanctorius tells us, That they are hot, and that being con∣centred, and cast upon the Ball of a common Weather-glass, the Water was sensibly depres∣sed; but since my Glass, for as much as I can gather from the Narrative, was better than his, I must suspend my Assent, 'till further satisfied by Experience; for since he tells us, that seve∣ral of his Scholars stood by to watch the Event, the Effect might in a great measure depend on the Warmth of their Breath. One Particular referrable to the XXI Title. The Samojedes cloath themselves with Renes Skins, the Hair being outward; and I have found a Pair of Cangies warmer than furred Gloves. They are chiefly made use of for the Sledge, tho' one may walk in the Snow with them, it being so dry, that a Scarlet being co∣vered all over with it, it will brush off without wetting or endammaging it. To the XI Title. The force of Expansion by Cold.1. The Barrel of a Gun which was about a Foot long, and of a proportionable Diameter, had the Touch-hole riveted up, and a Screw fitted to the Nose of the Barrel, which being done, it was filled full of Water, and suspended in a Perpendicular Line: The Screw having been thrust down as forcibly as a Man could; in a frosty Night, the congealed Ice raised the Screw
considerably, so that Ice had made it's way out at the sides of the Barrel: But the Experiment being repeated, and the Intervals of the Screw filled up with melted Bees-wax, the expanded Ice not being able to raise it, the Nose of the Barrel was cracked obliquely; besides several o∣ther Flaws in other Places, which gave way to the Wind blown into the Barrel to try it. An Appendix to the XVII Title. Of the Ef∣fects of Ni∣tre in free∣zing.Bartholinus citeing an Experiment, wherein the Proportion betwixt Nitre and Water was 35 to 100; to try the success of it, we mixed a Pound of Salt-Petre with 3 Pounds of Water, and stirring it about constantly, as Cabaeus directs, in an Hour and half we perceived not the least Ice; whereas, according to him, it ought to have been wholly froze in less time; but we could not perceive the Vapours on the outside of the Glass in the least froze. For a further Tryal, we mixed two Ounces of Salt-Petre with six of Water in a Glass-Vial, but by all the shaking we could not produce the least Ice; tho' whilst the Nitre was dissolving the Mixture was sensibly colder; and the same we have observ'd to happen upon a Dissolution of Common Salt; tho' the Degree of Cold was not sufficient for Congelation, which I was satis∣fyed in, by removing a Thermoscope out of the Mixture of Nitre and Water, into Water which was placed in Snow and Salt: For by that means the Liquor in the Weather-Glass subsided in the latter about 3 Inches; so that I am apt to think
the Learned Cabaeus mistook Chrystals of Nitre for Ice. It is believed by most Water-men, That the Water begins to freeze at the bottom, because they observe large Pieces of Ice rise from the bottom of the Water: But the Truth of it is very reasonably question'd, since we not only see, that Water in Vessels, but in Wells, begins to freeze at the Top; and several Arguments in proof of the contrary may be found in our Section of the Primum frigidum. And as for those Pieces of Ice, which they observe to e∣merge, that Phaenomenon may easily be solved, without supposing the Water to begin to freez at the Bottom: For since the Water, which runs along the sides of the Banks being froze, seve∣ral Stones may stick to it; they by their Weight may cause it to subside, when it is partly loos∣ned by the Heat of the Sun, and the Water, by that Rarifaction becomes lighter: Yet, when the Water above is cooled, and the Water be∣low being warmer, hath melted the Ice in some measure, and loosned some of those Stones which were before froze to it; the Ice becoming speci∣fically lighter than the Water, must consequent∣ly emerge. On which occasion, I shall here ob∣serve, that Capt. James Hall takes notice, That they found a Stone of three hundred weight upon a Piece of Ice. In confirmation of our Solution of this Phaenomenon, I might al∣ledge the Experiments laid down in the Section of the Duration of Ice. And it were to be wish∣ed, that for a further Decision of this matter, that either Divers were sent down, or Instru∣ments
which would bring up Ice if any were there. We took a seal'd Weather-Glass, and having inverted the Stem of it when furnished with Spirit of Wine, so that, that being placed in a Hole purposely made in a Box, the Ball of the Weather-Glass rested on the Box; about that we placed a Mixture of Snow and Salt, and found, that presently the Spirit of Wine was retracted. So that Liquors may be condensed, without the assistance of their Gravity, to de∣press and cause the Parts of the Body to sink to∣gether: But whether in this case, the Contra∣ction was assisted by the Tenacity of the Liquor or the Springiness of some Elastick Particles, will be inquired into in a more proper Place. Frogs and Toads being taken up from under Ice, were brisk and lively; and it is observ'd, that in frosty Weather they generally lye in the Bottom of Pits, for their Security. Paralipomena to the II and XX Titles, of the frost getting into hard and solid Bodies. Of the Ef∣fects of Frost on so∣lid Bodies.In England it hath been observ'd, That Wood whose Diameter, was a Foot through hath been froze; and in Poland the Frost hath been so powerful, that it hath rendred the Timber so hard, that Hatchets would not cut it; and the Wood with which the Houses were cover'd would give Cracks as loud as Pistols. And I am told by one, that his Bow being froze, if he did not take a great deal of Care in thawing it, it would break. Marle and Chalk will be shat∣tered with the Frost, the Texture of those Bo∣dies
being by that means opened and rendered more fit to nourish Plants and Grass. And I am told by an Experienced Mason, that even free stone, of which Houses are built, will crack and flaw in frosty Weather. And it is observ∣ed in England, That stones dugg up in the be∣ginning of Summer and seasoned in the Air are not near so subject to flaw as those that are dug up and worked, whilst the Frost continues. And it is further observed, That both Earthen as well as Glass-Vessels are considerably im∣paired by the Effects of Frost upon them. To which instances I shall add the Testimony of Maistre Bernard Palissy who says, That tho' the stones of the Mountain Ardenne are harder than Marble; yet for fear of Frost they are drawn out of the Quarries in the Winter: And he further adds, That in the Winter the Rocks sometimes crack and fall down without being cut. And it hath been observed, That Iron-In∣struments brought out of the Cold into a warm Room have been covered over with a white Hoar; and it is not only confirmed by foreign Artists but several here, That Cold hath so great an Effect on Steel as to make several Piec∣es of Metal more brittle than in the Summer; so that they are then forced to work them ano∣ther way and to give them a different tem∣per. Hot Water does not freeze soon∣er than Cold.It being a Tradition, and also taught by A∣ristotle, That Hot Water is sooner froze than Cold; to determine the matter, I made the following Experiments.
Cold Water being exposed to freeze in one Porringer, boiled Water cooled in another, and Hot Water in a Third, at 8 a Clock; the Cold Water began to freeze at ¼ after ten; the Boild Water cooled, at ¾ past ten; and the Hot Water at ¼ an hour past Eleven. And the like success happened, when the Experiment was tryed a second time in Metalline Vessels: And the Experiment being again tryed with grea∣ter exactness, the Cold Water and the rest being exposed to freeze at ¼ after 6, the first beganto freeze ¼ after 7; the Water heated and cooled again ¾ after 7, and the Hot Water was not froze ½ an hour after Eight. The like Experiment being tryed with Wa∣ter contained in Glass-Cylinders of an equal Bore sealed at one end, we found that there was very little difference in the time of their Congelation, when immersed in a Mixture of Snow Salt and Water; but once, when the end of one of the Cylinders was drawn smaller than Ordinary, the smallness of the Pipe occa∣sioned the Hot Water to begin to freeze soon∣er than the Cold Water. Postcript. Accidentally looking upon the Circulus Pisa∣nus of Berigardus, I found, That tho' that Au∣thor opposes Aristotle in other Points; yet he agrees with Him, That Hot Water cooled, will sooner freeze than ordinary Cold Water; but having tryed the Experiment, I observ'd, That both being exposed to freeze when by a Weather-Glass I found them of the same temper,
my Domestick who attended them, took notice al∣so that they both began to freeze at one time. And tho' Berigardus further wonders, That warm Salt-Water should be less subject to freeze for being Salt; yet from▪ Experiments already laid down, it abundantly appears, That tho' Salt Externally applyed promotes it, yet Inter∣nally being dissolv'd in Water, it prevents Congelation. Particulars referrable to several Titles. For a further Confirmation of the VI Title. I shall add that Purchas relates Lib. 4. Cap. 19. That the Samojeds, when they Bury their Dead, only cover them with a Pile of stones, and tho' the Dead Bodies may be seen through them; yet the Coldness of the Air preserves them from stinking. And the same Author tells us, That in a certain Island they preserve their Fish and Flesh, by hardening it in the Air, bet∣ter than if it were corned with Salt. In Confirmation of what hath been delivered under the VII Title, I exposed several Vials filled with Water and unstopped, to be froze, and found that the Bottles were broke in pieces, by the Expansion of the frozen Water; so that the Phaenomenon could not be attributed to Nature's abhorrency of a Vacuum: For if either the Expanded Water could have made it's way by stretching the Glass, or leaving the Super∣ficial Ice congealed at first in the Neck, or a∣ny other way easier than to break the Vessel; the Vessel would probably be left intire, I say probably, because sometimes in such Expe∣riments
something may intervene which requires further Tryals and Observations to discover: Since I have in other Experiments made it appear, That the Water beginning to freeze at the Bottom rose a considerable height in the Stem without breaking the Bottle, and I have some∣times had a good deal of a Liquor froze in a stopped Vial without breaking it, as if the success were varyed by some uncommon Pro∣perties in the Glass, or some peculiar softness of the Ice. In Confirmation of what is delivered in the VII Title, of the Expansion of freezing Water, I shall add, That the Capacity of a large Bottle being filled with Water, except the Neck, and that filled with Oyl, the expanding Water not only elevated the Cork; but raised it several Inches; it being supported by a Cylinder, part∣ly consisting of Oily, and partly of Watry Particles of Ice. It is a General Tradition amongst Fisher-men, That when Ponds or Rivers are froze up, ex∣cept several holes are broke up for the Air to communicate with the Water, the Fishes will be suffocated; and Olaus Magnus, tells us, That Fishes are usually found suffocated, when a thaw comes, where Veins of living Water do not enter. But I am not satisfyed, whether, if the Tra∣dition be true, they may not be killed either by some Subterraneal Steams or their own Excre∣mentitious Effluvia prevented, by the Ice, from making their way out of the Water; and it may be questioned further, whether this Phaenome∣non
may not be caused, by excessive Cold as well as for want of Air. Wherefore to satisfie my self, whether the Vulgar Opinion be true or not, I enclosed some Gudgeons in a large Glass with a long Neck, and having froze the Water in the Neck by applying a Mixture of Snow and Salt, I found, That the Fishes lived a considerable time. And the like I observed, when the same Fishes were contained in an Earthen Vessel with a little Water frozen over: Where the External Air was wholly separated, and prevented from communicating with the Water under the Ice; yet one thing observable was, That there was a large Bubble of Air, under the Ice, which I suppose came from the Fish: For I have ob∣served, not only these sort of Fish but Lam∣prels take in Air, and then being immersed un∣der Water emit Bubbles, both at their Mouths and Gills. Gudgeons frozen up in Ice in a Ba∣sin recovered when it was thawed; but some that continued 3 Days in Ice revived not. Frogs froze in Water till they were all enclosed with Ice, and till one of them was stiff with it, recovered when it was thawed, and Swam about; tho' before some of them lay with their Bellys upwards and void of Motion. As for the weight of Bodies frozen, Capt. James tells us, That Wood, that had lain all Winter under Ice would sink when cast into the Water. And he likewise tells us, That the Ice of Wine is so durable, that a Butt of Wine which was froze in the Winter; conti∣nued unthawed in May. Purchas tells us, of two pieces of Ice which they found lay fast on the Ground, the one of
which was 20 fathom under Water and 12 a∣bove, and the other 18 fathom below the Sur∣face of the Water and 10 above it. It is observed by Purchas and several others, That the Snow lying upon the Ground in Rus∣sia as well as in England makes it fruitful. Of the se∣paration of Liquors by Cold.It would be worth while to try, what Ef∣fects Cold hath upon occult Qualities as well as manifest ones; and likewise upon Fermentati∣on; since it is observ'd to retardate the work∣ing of Ale extremely; and it is observed, That Must may be preserved sweet a long time in a deep Well, or if let down into the Bottom of a River; and will when taken up, be less apt to ferment than other parcels of Must kept in the warmer Air. It hath been observed in the Northern Coun∣trys, That the most Spirituous Parts of Li∣quors, have been separated and Collected to∣gether by a Congelation of the Phlegm; where∣fore to try what Cold would Effect in our Cli∣mates, I hung out a Bottle of Beer in a sharp Night; and found, That most Part of it being froze, the Liquor which was not froze, was very strong and Spirituous; the frozen Part being Spiritless. But Rectifyed Spirit of Wine tinged with Cochineel being mixed with Wa∣ter, Congelation separated not their Parts, nor did it separate the red and the Watery Parts of Claret. I made several Tryals upon Milk and Blood, as also on Vinegar, in which my Attempts proved insatisfactory: But a Solution of Salt be∣ing made in 24 Parts of Water, so that it was as strong as the Sea-Water about us, I caused it to be exposed to freeze in a flat Vessel, which was the larger, That the Superficies of the Water
might be considerable; and when it was cove∣red with a Cake of Ice, that being taken off, it acquired another; which, when dissolved, yiel∣ded Water, not near so Salt as that which re∣mained unfroze; and being Hydrostatically weiged was considerably lighter. Having exposed several Vegetable and Animal Substances to be froze, I found, That by that means I could discover, their succulent juices, and squeez them out in the form of Ice, which being done; by cutting them transversely and length ways, I could discover also the Figure and Size, of the Pores in which those Juices lodged. Amongst the Animal substances ex∣posed to freeze, were the Eyes, and the Brains of Animals; which by being froze would be fitter to be dissected; the latter, when cut in two seeming like an Apple froze, the Ventricles and i whole substance being filled with Icy Particles. Nither an Eye nor a Liver, lean flesh or fish▪ nor a living Frog; would be crusted over with Ice, as Eggs and Apples are, when put into Water; after they had been froze. As for the Reason why flesh is usually much impaired by being froze, I suppose it to proceed hence, viz. That the Alimental Juice being expended by freezing hath not it's own texture altered only, but even the solid Vessels which contain it, are thereby bruised and crushed; for from several Experiments it is evident, That Eggs will be burst by the freezing of the Alimental Juice, and that the Textures of Stones and Vegetables will be destroyed by the Powerful Congelation of their respective Juices, which will be less
wondered at, if we consider that Aqueous Parts by their Expansion were able to burst the Barrel of a Gun: Had I had leasure and conveniency I would have tryed what Effects Cold hath upon Animals froze to Death; but having exposed a Rabbet to the Cold all Night, I found that only one Leg was swelled and a little stiff. But a strangled Rabbet being ex∣posed to be froze, Ice was produced in se∣veral Parts. It is affirmed by several Modern Writers, That if Water be impregnated with the Salts of Vegetables; upon Congelation, they will re∣present the shape of the Plant they belong to: But notwithstanding I have several times tryed the Experiment, I found it either false or ve∣ry contingent; since it did not once answer Expectation. But having exposed a Lixivium of Pot-ashes to freeze; I found, That the Chrystals upon the Surface of the Water were Prismatical, and that under those lay a great many thin Parallel Plates of Ice; but not ranged in such an order as to represent the shape of Trees: And tho' Bartholinus tells us, That if a Decoction of Cabbage be froze it will re∣present a Cabbage; yet I could never find, That the Experiment succeded, except that once there appeared the faint resemblance of a single Leaf. But I have found, That fair Water froze would represent the shapes of Vegetables oftner than their Decoctions. And tho' Berigardus also affirms the same; yet I suspect, That he only wirt, without trying the Experiments himself.
And yet, I deny not, but that prepossessed Spectators may fancy they see such things when they do not, for tho' Sea-Salt and Allum consist of Parts of determinate Figures; yet when dissolved in Water they exhibit Figures too various and extravagant, not to be refer∣red to Chance. And on this occasion, to what hath been said I shall add, That by Distilling and rectifying Oyl of Turpentine from Sea-Salt in a Glass-head, as the degrees of Heat were varyed, so would the Figures of Trees be re∣presented different on the inside the Glass. And I have several times produced the shapes of Trees from Bodies belonging to the Ani∣mal Kingdom. And I have found, That tho' Figures curious enough would be represented by Spirits, Solutions, Decoctions, Vinegar, Milk and even common Water; yet it was in vain to hope for the same success, and that the like Figures should always be afforded by the same Liquor; since very small Circumstances would vary them considerably: And in trying of such Experiments as these it may not be amiss to advertise, That it will be convenient, that the Liquor should be as shallow as it possi∣bly may, That it may be more speedily froze. A frozen Egg being Put into Oyl of Tur∣pentine instead of common Water it gathered not about it any crusty Film. It is observed by Mr. Wood, That tho' New-England be 10 or 11 degrees remoter from the Pole; yet the Winters are much more pierc∣ing and Cold than ours. And to what hath
been delivered in the XVIII Title of the infri∣gidating Power of Wind, I shall add, That sometimes it hath been so much more Cold than at others, That being blown through the frigorifick Mixture, it would cause not only the Spirit of Wine to subside; but being blown upon the Ball of another Weather-Glass; not only the Liquor; but even Mercury it self would be forced to ascend, tho' the Vicinity of the frigorifick Mixture could not cause that Effect. And I have often tryed, That when the Temperature of the Air was such, that tho' when first blown upon the Ball of a nice Ther∣moscope; it would not cause the Liquor to as∣cend; yet at another season the Tinged Li∣quor ascended, as if the Air by being more than ordinarily compressed in the Room, had some sensible Effect in compressing and con∣tracting the Air included in the Thermo∣scope. To try whether Liquors, by losing their fluidity and becoming consistent would acquire a greater degree of Coldness, I caused the Ball of a Weather-Glass to be immersed in Sallet-Oyl, and a Solution of Minium in Vinegar, or of Quick-lime in Water, either of which will coagulate the Oyl; but I did not find, That the Mixture tho' consistent was Colder than the fluid Ingredients. To try whether Water was capable of Com∣pression, we took a Glass-Ball with a long Stem, and filled it with Water within two Inches of the Top; then we Hermetically sealed it up, and freezing it from the Bottom upwards in a fri∣gorifick
Mixtre, when the included Air was compressed as much as we thought the Glass would bear, we nipt off the Apex; and found, That thereupon the Air flew out and the Wa∣ter rose ¼ of an Inch above it's former Surface: So that it seemed to be compressed ⅜ of the length of the Aqueous Cylinder; but whether this Phaenomenon might be occasion'd, by the Spring of some latent Air in the Pores of the Water, or whether it might be occasioned by some Springiness in the Ice, or Whether the Glass being before distended and now reduced to it's former Dimensions occasioned this Phae∣nomenon, I will not undertake to determine without further Tryals. And, To what hath been observed in this Experi∣ment, I shall add, That if the Apex were broke off before the Air was much compressed, it would cause no considerable Noise: And fur∣ther, when the Experiment was a second time repeated with one of the same Glasses, and the same Liquor; it would rise ⅛ and ¼ in the Stem, higher than before, upon breaking of the Apex.
CHAP. VI. An Examen of Antiperistasis, as it is usually taught and proved. Arguments alleaged in Favour of an Antiperi∣stasis.THO' the Doctrine of Antiperistasis be asserted by Aristotle; and some of his fol∣lowers urge Reason and Experience in favour of it, yet from what follows it will appear, That what is offered is not sufficient to main∣tain his Doctrine. For first it is Reasoned in favour of it, That nothing can be more requisite for the Preser∣vation of things, and more agreeable to the wisdom and goodness of Nature, than to fur∣nish Cold and Heat with a self invigorating Power, which each of them may exert when encompass'd with the other; and that nothing is more Natural, than for one Qua∣lity, when surrounded with a Predominant one, to retire into the innermost recesses of that Body; where the force of it being increa∣sed, an occasional Exertion of that Power is called Antiperistasis. But from Reason to proceed to Experience, it is offered by the maintainers of an Antiperi∣stasis, That in the Summer, when the lowest and uppermost Regions of the Air are insup∣portably Hot, the Cold flyes to the middle Region of it, and there defends it self against the other two about it: And as the Cold re∣mains in the middle Region, by virtue of an Antiperistasis, so Lightning is but an Explosion of Exhalations pinned up in the Cold.
And to this it is further offered, That the Effects of Antiperistasis are not only evident in the Air, but the Earth it self; for in the Sum∣mer, when the Air above the Earth is Hot, that in Cellars to which the Cold retreats is of a contrary Quality; and on the contrary in the Winter, when the Air without is excessive Cold, that in Vaults and Cellars is warm; and even the Water drawn from Wells is warm, when at the same time Rivers themselves are covered over with Ice. And, To these things it is further offered in Favour of an Antiperistasis, That in deep Pits as well as Mines, it is observed, that the Air is troublesome hot in the Winter: And that it is further observed, That the Water in Charlton-Island hath been observed to be much Colder in June when Ice swam in it, than in December; and that a Well which furnished them with Water in December, afforded none in July; and further, That in Musco the Cellars are able to defend them in Winter from the Excessive Cold; and that even in those Gelid Climates, Water drawn out of Wells usually steams or smoaks if agitated when newly drawn. Thus much being offered in favour of the Doctrine of Antiperistasis,Those Argu∣ments ex∣mined. it is answered on the contrary; first, as to the rational defences of it, That there it no necessity that these two Qualities should thus invigorate themselves, there being no danger of them being lost out of the World; since without the help of an Antiperistasis, there are several substan∣ces, which are plentifully stocked with matter to supply each Quality: Besides, according to
the course of Nature, contrary Qualities ra∣ther destroy than preserve one another; and even the Peripateticks themselves allow, That all Agents act as much as they can. And we have several Instances in the Northern Coun∣tries, That the Natural Heat of Animals is de∣stroyed and not increased by the help of Cold; and tho' it be commonly alledged, to shew that Contraries endeavour to shun each other, That a drop of Water falling upon a Table keeps in a Globular form; yet the Reason of that seems only to be this, viz. That the specifick Gravity of the drop is not so far preva∣lent above it's Tenacity, as to cause it to spread; besides, it is prevented partly by the Ambient Pressure of the Atmosphere: And that it's Globous Figure is not owing to its aversion to spread upon a dry Body, and its disposition to shun Contraries is evident, since it retains the like Figure when mixed with fluid Oyl; and Mercury on the contrary, tho' it be apter to retain a Globular Figure upon a Table, yet if put upon Gold it loses that Figure. Whether the Phaeno∣mena of slacked Quick-lime be an Ar∣gument of Antiperi∣stasis.But to pass by what Reasons may be offered against the Doctrine of Antiperistasis: To pro∣ceed to examine what Experiments and Obser∣vations have been alledged in favour of it; I shall first observe, That tho' the slacking of Quick-lime with Cold Water be generally looked upon to be an Effect of Antiperistasis; yet it appears otherwise, since it will cause a much more violent Ebullition, if boiling Wa∣ter be made use of instead of Cold; the Parts of the hot Liquor being much more apt to pene∣trate
and dissolve it, and to set the Igneous Parts at Liberty; for which Reason, Spirit of Salt causes still a stronger ferment than hot Water. But to shew further, That Water slacks not Lime, because its Coldness keeps in, and thereby invigorates the Power of the Igneous fiery Parts of the Lime, I put a piece into Oyl of Turpentine, which did not in the least dissolve it, nor did Spirit of Wine, tho' upon the removal of it into Water, it was presently dissolved. Another Argument Examin'd.Another Argument alledged for an Antiperi∣stasis, is the freezing of a Pot to the Top of a stool at the fire side, by a mixture of Snow and Salt; but this Experiment having likewise succeded, where there was no fire near, it could not be said that the Effect depended upon the force of the fire invigorating the Cold. Another Experiment employed by the Asser∣ters of an Antiperistasis is, That if a Pot of Snow be set over the fire, and a Vial full of Wa∣ter be placed in the middle of it, it will up∣on the melting of the Snow be turned into Ice; but this Experiment having been often tryed, succeded not; yet tho' it should, any other Agent which would melt the Ice would as soon produce the Effect. What the severel Re∣gions of the Air offer in Favour of Antiperi∣stasis.But as a further Argument of an Antiperi∣stasis, it is urged, that in the Summer the low∣er and third Regions of the Air are Hot, and the middlemost Cold, which to me seems rather asserted; than proved, for not to insist on this, viz. That according to the Peripateticks, the Natural State of the Air being Hot, I see not how it should be Cold in Summer, nor
can I see why the Third Region should be so Hot, since it lyes so far from the Superficies of the Earth, that the reflected Rays of the Sun cannot reach it; and tho' it be urged that it is Hot, because Meteors have been kindled there; yet the same Argument would prove the mid∣dle Region Hot, since Meteors and Light∣ning have been observed there; and even in the lower Region; it being common in Storms fort hose fires called Helena, or Castor and Pollux, to hover about the Masts of Ships. An Apho∣rism of Hy∣pocrates ex∣amin'd.It is an Aphorism of the Great Hypocrates, ventres byme esse Calidiores; but this being grounded upon a Supposition that Digestion depends on Heat, and therefore it must be greater in Winter, because Men have sharper Appetites; All that I need to offer to repugn this, is, that Digestion is not performed by Heat; since several voracious Fishes digest very strongly, whose Stomachs and Blood is Cold. But tho' Concoction depended chiefly upon Heat; yet the greater Heat of the Stomach in Winter could not be attributed to Anti∣peristasis; but a Retention of Hot Humors generated in the Heart, which gradually in∣creasing, produce in all Parts of the Body a more than ordinary Heat, and by that means prepare a greater Quantity of the Stomachi∣cal Menstruum. Bendes Contraries themselves, in respect of other Qualities, agree in this, That they increase Appetite, as Spices, Wine, and Vinegar; and also Wormwood and Juice of Limons. And Fromundus hath observed, That he himself hath been taken with a  upon walking upon Snow, which since they are
not so frequent in the Northern and Colder Climates, I am apt to believe proceed from some other Particles conveighed into the Blood along with those frigorifick Atoms. Hail is thought by the Aristotelians to be generated in the lower Region of the Air,The Aristo∣telian Pro∣duction of Hail exa∣mined. the drops of Rain that fall out of the middle Region being there congealed, by an Antipe∣ristasis, and that it is only generated in Sum∣mer. But on the contrary, I have observed my self the greatest shower of Hail that ever I saw to fall in January, when the violence of the Frost had rendred the lower Region of the Air Cold; at which time a Servant to one of my Domesticks told her Master, That she was led out of her way by an Ignis Fatuus, which, till she could follow it no further, she took to be a Candle, carryed by another Person before her; where how the Nocturnal Air could kindle a fiery Meteor by it's Coldness, and congeal Snow by it's Heat, I profess I can∣not understand: Besides were Aristotle's account true, I see not why they should never see it Hail at Alexandria and Pelusium, places in Aegypt, where the lower Region of the Air is hot enough, and where it rains frequently; be∣sides we have seen Grains of Hail larger by much than dreps of Rain, and at Lyons in France the Virtuosi took Notice of a shower of Hail whose Grains were as large as a Tennis-Ball; and Bartholinus tells us, That he himself hath observed some so large, That they weighed a Pound; and to these I shall add, that tho' Aristotle asserts Hail to be generated in the low∣er  and Snow in the upper, I have ob∣served
Grains of Ice, which contain'd Snow in the middle of them. The next Argument alledged in favour of Antiperistasis, and to be examined, is the Cold∣ness of Cellars in Summer, and their Heat in Winter. And first, I deny that the Air in Cellars is cooler in Summer than Winter; since the rea∣son why we feel it so, is only the Predispositi∣on of our Sensories, which are comparatively warmer, by being enclosed in so warm an Air as that they are encompassed with in the Sum∣mer: But supposing, that not only our senses, but Weather-Glasses should inform us, That the Air in Cellars were Colder in the Summer than Winter; yet it might be accounted for without an Antiperistasis: for since there are se∣veral hot Effluvia sent up from subterraneal Parts, these restrain'd and kept from flying away in the Winter, may alter the temper of the Soil, and Subterraneal Waters; but when by the Heat of Summer the Pores of the Earth are opened, and way is made for the Avolition of them; upon that account the Superficial Parts of the Earth may be a little cooler. And for a like reason; we may think Cellars hotter in the Winter than the Summer, if we judge of them by the Testimony of our Senses; since we are not there affected with those Winds and External Agents of Cold, as in the open Air; and therefore to one that comes out of the open Air into them, they may seem Warm∣er. But that Cellars are Colder in the Winter than the Summer, when we estimate the degrees
of them by Bodies that are not alike subject to Pre∣dispositions as our Bodies are; will appear from what follows. And first, two sealed Weather-Glas∣ses being hung out in a frosty Evening, till they were both of an Equal temper; the one of them remov'd into a Cellar, in two or three Hours ascended five or fix Divisions; whilst that which remain'd in the Air rather descended than rose; but in the Morning that in the Cel∣lar descended a little, so that the outward Air instead of Increasing rather Diminished the Heat of the Cellar: And Oyl which in thaw∣ing Weather was usually Liquid, being placed in a Cellar in a frosty Night, was congealed; so that it would subside in other Oyl: And I have further observ'd, That Oyl that was froze in the Cellar upon a thaw rose instead of sub∣siding according to the Doctrine of Antiperi∣stasis. And in Poland it is observ'd, That in the Winter small Beer freezes in the Cellars; and the like I have observ'd in England in a Cellar, which in the Summer kept Beer cool enough. And I am told, That in Russia, the Cellars are so far from being so Cold in Sum∣mer as in Winter, that they are forced to keep their Beer in the Summer in Water froze with Snow, and to dig their Barrels out as they have occasion. But tho' we should allow, That some Cel∣lars and Vaults are warmer in Winter than Summer, yet it does not therefore follow, that it must be the Effects of an Antiperistasis; since it may be done by the Influence of Subterra∣neal fires; for which Reason deep Cellars are generally warmest: And it hath been observ'd,
That the deepest Mines in Hungary are always the hottest; and tho' the upper Region in some measure seems Cold, yet that may easily be caused by the Predisposition of our Sensories, when out of the warm Air we find it com∣paratively Colder in the top of the Groove, and in our ascent Colder in respect of those Regi∣ons which are nearer the Influence of Subterra∣neal fires. And that the lower Regions are hotter than the uppermost, is not only evident from what hath been elsewhere delivered; but from what Arch-Bishop Ʋpsal hath observ'd in the deep Mountains in Poland, from whence they dig Rock-Salt. And tho' the Heat of Springs in the Win∣ter may be alledged by some as a cause of An∣tiperistasis; yet it is easily otherwise explain'd, since the Subterraneal Effluvia of the Earth, as well as the Comparative Coldness of the Air is sufficient to solve that Phaenomenon: And that the Antiperistasis is not so powerful in the Winter, as to have any effect on the Subter∣raneal Parts is evident; since Capt. James tells us, That he had a Well which remain'd unfroze all Winter; so that by breaking the Ice on the top they could get fresh Water: And it is at∣tested by a Latin Author, That in or near the Island Hueena, wherein the famous Tycho built his Ʋrani-Burgum, there is one Spring which is not froze in Winter, and Olaus Magnus tells us, That near Nidrosia, one of the chief Cities of Norway, there is a Lake that in that Northern Region never freezes. And Josephus informs us of a hot Spring in Peru, from whence the Waters issue out boiling hot; yet a Spring
which is just by it is Cold as Ice; so that the Nature of the Soil through which Bodies flow, may have a considerable stroak in altering the Temper of the Water. And to favour what I have said of the Reason why Springs steam in the Summer, I shall add, That it is observ'd, that our Breath as well as the steams of Issues are visible in the Winter; tho' not discerna∣ble in the Summer; and the very steams of a labouring Man have been froze on the outside of his wastcoat whilst he was working. And it's commonly observ'd, That the steams of a River are very apparent in the Evenings, tho' not discernable at Mid-day in Summer. And that the Earth is not only heated by those Subterraneal steams▪ but that those Me∣teors which we frequently see, proceed from Subterraneal Effluvia, will be rendred proba∣ble, by observing, That Miners usually foretel Storms and alterations in the Air, by the damps which rise in their Mines: And in Corn∣wall it is observ'd by the Fisher-men, that those Sulphureous Exhalations which appear like fire up and down, generally precede considerable Storms. And the like hath been observ'd on the Coast of Ireland, when a black Cloud like a Barrel rising out of the Water, a vio∣lent Storm presently succeeded. And an Anonymous Writer tells us, That in Comitatus Zotiensis in Hungary, a Clift of Ground emits such steams, that Birds and Cats or Dogs being held over it are killed by the steams of it: And the same Author tells us, That near the City Buda, there are such hot Springs, that the River Danubius is not able
to keep them cool; and he tells us likewise, that in the River Istroganum, they may discover hot Springs; by removing the sand with their feet. And I am inform'd by credible witnesses, That in the North of England there is a ditch which emits steams, which are inflamable; and probably there may be other places which e∣mit such kind of Effluvia, and afford matter for fiery Meteors and Winds. And we are told, That not only in Muscovy, a Tract of Water a Mile long continued un∣froze, when the rest was, and emitted hot steams: But Olaus Magnus tells us of a Lake Veter, which thaws with a considerable noise, That as well as the River Peking near China, which thaws in one Day, beginning at the bot∣tom and so thaws upwards; and in these thaws it is observ'd, That they are foretold by a great boiling of the Water first under the Ice. And that such Effluvia being detained from flying away, and kept up in the Earth may contribute to the Heating of Cellars ap∣pears further; since in Muscow, when a Cellar hath been long kept shut; when first the door is opened, the steams will affect the Men so Powerfully, as almost to suffocate them. So that from hence it appears, That the Retention of hot Effluvia depend on a Constipa∣tion of the Pores of the Earth; and not on the Disposition of hot Vapors to fly away from their contrary; since we see that they have no such Disposition, the Vapors of a Well rather di∣spersing themselves in the Air than flying a∣way from it.
But to disprove the Doctrine of Antiperistasis, further, I shall add, That a rod of Iron, which had a piece of Iron fixed to one end of it, hav∣ing that end made red hot, and quenched in Cold Water, the Heat did not recede into the other end, to avoid the Coldness of the Wa∣ter. But a more convincing Experiment is, That a Weather-Glass being suspended in a wide-mouth'd Glass in Water, when that Glass was placed in hot Water, the Coldness of that in the wide-mouth'd Glass, was so far from being drove upon the Weather-Glass, that the Spirit of Wine did not in the least subside; but when the Heat of the External Water was diffused through the other, it manifestly rose. And this Experiment being try'd with warm Wa∣ter in the wide-mouth'd Glass, and Cold Wa∣ter about that, the Heat was not more intense about the Weather-Glass; but when the Cold had diffused it self through the warm Water, the Spirit of Wine subsided. Postscript Tho' from what hath been said, it appears, That the Doctrine of Antiperistasis is not with∣out Reason exploded; yet I shall suspend my Judgment, whether Cellars are warmer in the Winter than the Summer or not; since the learned Jesuite Zucchius tells us, That hav∣ing suspended a Weather-Glass 3 years in a Cellar, the Water would rise in the Winter and descend in the Summer. And another tells us, That he knew a Well Colder in Summer than
Winter, yet I am far from believing this Ob∣servation universal; since what hath been said evinces the contrary; for, tho' the superficial Parts of the Earth are subject to vary in their Temperature, as the Weather influences them; yet Subterraneal Cavities than are very deep are neither hotter or colder in the Winter or Summer; and tho' Zucchius hath undertaken to measure it by the assistance of Weather-Glasses; yet since ordinary Weather-Glasses are subject to be influenced by the Gravity of the Air, as well as the Heat and Cold of it; and since some places are fuller of Subterraneal Vapors than others, and consequently the sud∣den ascent of Exhalations may presently increase the weight of it, I think the following Expe∣riment made by the learned Maignan suffici∣ent to ballance what Zucchius hath delivered, and therefore I shall deliver it in the Authors words. Expertus ego sum (says he) Thermometro fidelis∣simo & a praecedente hyeme in sequentem aestatem prorsus invariato, instructo etiam tali aqua, nem∣pe in hoc ipsum, ex praescripto Trebellii ita com∣parata ut non exhaletur, ne{que} minuatur, expertus inquam sum, in supradictis optimis cellis Vina∣riis maximum, quod ardentissima aestate fuit, fri∣gus non adaequasse illud quod ibidem erat brumali tempore, ut dixi — si quidem in Tubo vitrei Thermometri quatuor circiter palmos longos & in octo gradus Graduum{que} minuta diviso, aqua hye∣me ascendit ad Gradus 7 cum semisse, aestate au∣tem vix gradum sextum superavit, cùm tamen ad sensum multò magis vigerat frigus istud aestivum.
CHAP. VII. An Examination of Mr. Hobbes Doctrine of Cold. Mr. Hobbes Doctrine of Cold.Mr. Hobbes in his Doctrine of Cold tells us, That the Air being put into an Expan∣sive motion by the Beams of the Sun, it is beat∣en down upon the Surface of the Earth; where finding a resistance below, it spreads it self e∣very way towards the Poles, and as the Paral∣lel Circles grow closer towards the Poles, so the Air being straitned and more condensed causes a greater degree of Cold. To which he adds, That as the Air moves betwixt these Parallers, it rakes upon the Sur∣face of Water, more or less as the Air is more or less straitned; by which means the Water not only tending towards its Centre by its own Gravity, but being also condensed by the rakeing Pressure of the Air, the Surface of it is first congealed, and then it gradually de∣scends; and for a like Reason when Water is immersed in Snow and Salt, the Mixture melt∣ing those very Parts which lodged in the Pores of it, they rakeing against the sides of the Glass, give it such a motion, as when communicated to the Water contain'd in it causes it to con∣geal. And for a Reason not unlike the for∣mer, the Particles of Air contain'd in Clouds being in their descent squeezed out, rake the drops of Water in their passage, and so harden them.
And the Reason why serene weather is Colder than rainy weather, he says is; because the force of the Wind is broken and dissipa∣ted by the falling drops; which Reason he likewise alledges, why Water in Wells is not froze, the Wind not being able to beat strongly enough upon the Surface of the Wa∣ter. And as for the Reason why Ice is lighter than Water, he attributes it to Airy Particles, forced into it whilst it is congealing. But it may easily be urged against this Do∣ctrine,Examined. that all congealed Liquors, instead of having their Parts pressed inwards, and so con∣densed, manifestly expand upon Congelation. And as for Animal Bodies, such an inward in∣deavour of the Humors, as his Doctrine suppo∣ses, is not requisite to produce a sensation of Cold; since a decrease of the motion of the fluids about our Sensories, or an Impulse made upon the sensitive Parts, by some alteration in the motion of the Blood and Spirits, or a turbulent motion of some excrementitious Particles hindred from flying away is suffici∣ent; so some Hysterick Women perceive a Coldness on the top of their Heads and the Vertebra, when they are otherwise hot; and Avicen tells us, That the biting of some Vipers in hot Countries causes a sensation of Cold: And I know a Noble Man who feels an extraor∣dinary Coldness upon him, when he is seiz'd with a fit of the Stone. And an inward com∣pression of the Parts of a Body is so far from being sufficient to produce Cold, that com∣pression in some Bodies produces Heat.
But to examine what he assigns as the Grand Cause of Cold, viz. Wind, which according to him is Air moved in a considerable quantity, and that either forwards only, or in an undulating motion. But against this Doctrine I have se∣veral things to offer. And first, that several frosts are begun and continued when the Wind is serene and calm; and that a gentle North-east-wind is much Colder than a boisterous Southerly Wind. Secondly, That the Wind which issues out of an Aeolopile is not Cold but Hot, tho' it moves more violently than the Wind which is blown from the Mouth. Third∣ly, We have made it appear, That Water will freeze, tho' sealed up in a Glass, and tho' that Glass be inclosed in another, so that the Wind cannot beat upon it; and even an Egg frozen will be crusted over with Ice, when suspended in Water, so that the External Air cannot Effect it. And tho' he tells us, That all Winds pro∣duce Cold: Prosper Alpinus in his Medicina Aegyptiorum acquaints us, that he hath found the Winds in those Torrid Regions insufferably hot. And Marcus Paulus Venetus tells us, That the Winds near Ormus have been so hot as to destroy an Army of Men at once: And tho' some Winds put into motion feel Cold, yet that depends on the Predisposition of our Sensories, and the deeper penetration of that fluid into the Pores of the Body, in respect of which it hath a comparative Coldness; and that it is but a comparative Coldness is evident, since the same Wind blowing upon a Weather-Glass affects it not at all; except sometimes by
accident, when, by that means, some calorifick Atoms swimming in the Air, are driven away by it. And tho' Mr. Hobbes tells us, that all Winds cool by diminishing former Heat, yet we see, that Water actually Cold, becomes still Colder by freezing, where the Heat cannot be said to be diminished in a Body actually Cold before. But to proceed, tho' Mr. Hobbes says, that Wind is generated upon the Surface of the Earth by the action of the Sun; yet he tells us not how that Wind must produce Cold; nor does the motion of it towards the Poles help the matter, since we have shewn, that motion in it self is not sufficient to produce Cold; and should he say, that the Coldness is derived from the Mixture of freezing Vapours in it's passage, then those steams would rather be ta∣ken for the cause of Cold, than the Wind; and then I should ask him, Whence the Coldness of those Cold Vapours proceeded? Besides, since in his account of the freezing of Water, he says the Parts of the freezing Water will be raised in Congelation, I see not how it will happen; since Oyl and several other Liquors are contracted by it, and I have not yet seen any one Instance in which Water was ever congeal'd by a Compression: Since when we inclosed Water in a Pewter-Bottle and beat the sides of it together, till the Water made its way out; we perceiv'd not, that that pow∣erful compression had in the least inclined the Water to Congelation. And tho' we should allow, that the Superficial Parts of the Water might be froze as Mr. Hobbes tells us, yet I see not how the Air can beat upon Water, severed from, it by Ice nine or ten Foot thick.
Besides, I think it altogether inconceivable, how Wind by taking upon the outside of a Glass, should cause the Water within to freeze, since the freezing of Water is an action much different from the putting of the Glass into a trembling motion; besides we see, that Water will not be froze by the blowing of a strong Wind against the outside of a Glass, tho' it will when enclosed in Liquors where no Wind can come at it, and those two which are not subject to freeze themselves. And whereas Mr. Hobbes gives it as a Reason why some Wells freeze not, because the Wind hath not liberty to blow strong enough upon the Water, I shall add, that those Wells that are subject to be froze when Northerly or Easter∣ly Winds blow, will freeze, tho' covered o∣ver and sufficiently guarded from the Winds; and in Cold Winters, whether the Wind blows or not. And, Whereas Mr. Hobbes tells us, that the light∣ness of Ice above Water, proceeds from the bubbles received into it whilst it is freezing; the Contrary is evident, since Water froze in a seal'd Glass, will be plentifully stocked with bubbles as well as that which is frozen in the free Air. Postscript To conclude this History of Cold, I shall in∣stead of some other Experiments designed for this Treatise, subjoyn an Experiment elsewhere mention'd in the History of whiteness and black∣ness,
viz. Take a piece of Cork and having burnt it, till it be reduced to a black Coal, and then having slacked it in fair Water, it will, by being mixed with Gum-water, form a black Ink, which you may write what you please with; which writing if it be interlined with a co∣lourless Solution of Minium in Spirit of Vine∣gar, upon wetting the Paper with a spunge dip∣ped in a fluid Liquor, prepared by mixing three Parts of Quick-lime and one of yellow orpiment, and digesting them two or three hours in six∣teen Parts of Water, the invisible Solution of Minium will exhibit black Letters, and the o∣ther black ones will disappear; but whilst this fetid Liquor is preparing, it must be well shaken several times, that the Quick-lime and the powdered orpiment may the better impregnate it, and then the decanted and fil∣tred Liquor must be kept for use. But besides this, there are several other ways of making Ink, which I could be glad to learn: And I my self have tryed that Words might be writ with a Solution of Minium, which I could render legible by the help of the fire.
CHAP. VIII. An account of Freezing made in December and January, 1662. By Dr. Merret. Several Ex∣periments about freez∣ing.THE following Experiments were made in Weather which was very frosty, con∣tinuing six weeks, yet not without some alter∣nate Relaxations, in Stone-Windows exposed to the North and North-East-Winds. The Vessels in which they were tryed were Glass-Canes of several Bores, Earthen and Pewter Vessels &c. Cold Water exposed to the Air in open Pans was froze in an hour, boiling Water in two; boiling and Cold Water mix'd in ½; the Cold Water beginning to freeze at the top and and sides, but the other at the bottom; and when the Water was Cold at the top. The same succeeded, with Water thrown upon a Table, the Cold Water being first froze. A four ounce Vial with a Stem a Foot long and half filled, being exhausted of Air in Vacuo Boyliano, was almost froze as soon as Water exposed in an open Pan, and appear'd white seem∣ing to consist purely of bubbles. Water in which Arsnick was eight Months infused, congealed into a white Ice sooner than Water, and so did So∣lutions of all sorts of Vitriols; and sooner than Solutions of other Salts; except Allum, which froze into an Ice whiter than Milk, and stuck so fast to the Pan that I could scarce separate it.
Sandever presently freezeth, but Eris sooner, and Kelp in less time than that; all of them form∣ing white lumps of Ice. Sal-Armoniack frequently froze before the rest of them, but once after them. Two drams of common Salt dissolved in four ounces of Water was in hard frost congealed into a white Ice in about thirty hours. Stinking Sea-Water full of Salt being exposed in a Beer-Glass, was covered with a film of Ice as thick as ½ a Crown in twenty six hours; when froze it tasted Salt and smelled stinking; but when thawed it had lost the fetor: In four days more the whole was froze, but that in the bottom tasted sharper than the rest. The same Water in broad Pans was quite froze through in thir∣ty six hours, and sooner in a Mixture of Snow and Salt; neither a strong Solution of Salt-Petre, no Bay-Salt, nor Sal-Armoniack were froze in six days. But a Solution of Salt of Tartar froze in a little more time than Water; and being exposed in a Tube it began to freeze at the bottom, top and sides all once; whereas other Liquors freeze uniformly either at the top or bottom first. Salt-Petre in a Cold season was in twenty eight hours froze into a white Ice, which was mistaken for Sal-Prunel, and sparkled in the fire as that Salt usually does. A lixivium of it made with Copperas or Allum singly or mixed, set in Snow and Salt or Snow alone, was frozen in one Night. Sal-Gem, tho' Snow and Salt were mixed with it, and tho' it were set in Snow and Salt, would not be brought to freeze. But Phlegm of Vitriol froze sooner than the So∣lutions before mention'd
Oyl of Vitriol is coagulated sooner than a∣ny of the afore mention'd Liquors, except Wa∣ter; a large Tube being filled ¼ with it, and being froze, tasted of a strong Vitriolate taste; the coagulated Part, was of a paler colour than the other, and both being poured toge∣ther in a Bottle, it became too hot to hold in one's hands, this coagulated Part remain'd un∣thaw'd a week after the rest of the Liquors; and another Tube of the same Oyl being whol∣ly froze, it subsided ½ an Inch below its station to which it rose again upon a thaw, but the other Liquors rose upon congelation. A flask of small Beer froze in thirty eight hours, but three Parts of Ale continued unfroze after six days hard Frost; but at four a Clock in the morning, the unfroze Liquor tasted much stronger and brisker than before it was froze; the Ice was less firm and fuller of bub∣bles than common Ice, and being thawed was very pale and of a quick Aleish taste. A Beer-Glass of Hull-Ale being exposed to the Cold in a Glass, in twenty four hours was crusted over with Ice, as thick as half a Crown, and that being taken off, it yielded another; and so succes∣sively, till the whole was froze; these Laminae were all of the same colour and taste, but the lowest was the most tender: This Ale would not freeze so soon as that which I exposed be∣fore. Hull-Ale hath a brackish taste. Claret exposed in a spoon, in thirty five hours was turned into a soft Ice, which had the Genuine colour and taste of Wine. In thirty eight hours Canary exposed in a spoon was covered with a thin film, which grew no thicker in
four days. But neither Claret or Canary would freeze in Tubes or Bottles. Two ounces of Spirit of Wine exposed in a spoon all evaporated in twelve hours; but the same quantity of Brandy left about a spoon∣ful of Ice void both of taste and it's Inflammable Quality; but being held betwixt my Eye and a candle it discover'd several bubbles. An Ox and a Sheep's Eye were both frozen through in one Night, the three Humours be∣ing Opacous, hard and inseparable. The Chrystalline humour was white like Whitings boil'd, the waterish and glassy humour seemed to be made of flakes of Ice. Sheeps Blood exposed to freeze, the Serum was turned to Ice, which, being separated from the Blood and thawed at the fire, congealed a second time into a Membranous substance; but the Blood was not in the least froze. The Heart and Blood in the Vena Cava of a Dog and Cat exposed dead to the Air were both froze: Milk froze into white flakes, being soft and with few bubbles in it, and retaining the pro∣per taste of Milk. The yolks and Whites of Eggs were froze in one Night, they thaw best by lying on New-Castle Coals or in a deep Cel∣lar: I am told that Eggs, tho' they have been froze, will produce Chickens-Eggs held near the Surface of the Water when froze will ac∣quire a crust of Ice on the outside, the inward Parts of it still remaining froze; and if those Eggs whilst froze, be poched, they will be ve∣ry tough. An Egg and an Apple being sus∣pended two Foot deep in a Cistern and taken up after twenty four hours, tho' both of them
were full of Ice within, yet neither of them had contracted Ice on the outside. Horse-Radishes and Onions froze, yet Beer in which Horse-Radish and Scurvey-Grass are infused will not freeze so soon as strong Beer without them. Oranges and Limons froze, have a hard and tough rind, and lose their ge∣nuine taste; and when thawed they soon become rotten: Apples Cut in the middle, will have a thin Ice on both plains, which may be dis∣cerned by a knife or the touch. The skins of these Apples soon turn brown, and they be∣gin to corrupt there. Oyl exposed look'd like Butter melted and coagulated again; but in Caves and Cellars, it would never appear more than Candied. White Wine-Vinegar froze in a Tube without apparent bubbles. What∣ever hath a watry humour in it will coagu∣late. But what will not, the next Paragraph contains. Spirit of Wine, Aq. Mariae, Coelestis &c, and Canary in large Vessels, Soap-Boilers Lees, Spirit of Salt, Vitriol, Salt-Petre, Aqua fortis, Spi∣rit of Sulphur, and Spirit of Soot will not freeze, but the two last afford a Precipitate; the first of the colour and taste of Brimstone, but not inflam∣mable; the latter a yellowish powder more bitter than the Spirit and inflammable. But tho' these Spirits would not freeze, yet being mixed with twelve Parts of Water, all of them froze ex∣cept Spirit of Salt, Nitre and Aqua fortis: I am told that one having dissolv'd Ice in the North Seas found it Salt. As for the figures of Liquors froze, Allum appear'd in lumps, Salt-Petre, Tartar, Milk, Ale, Wine and Sal-Armoniack in plates. And
other Liquors which composed a soft Ice, seen∣ed to be composed of Globuli adhering to each others. Water, Kelp and Frits resembled the fibres of an Oaken leaf, the interstices being filled up with smoother Ice, and the middle Fibres, as in Plants, appeared larger than the others, and made acute Angles at the lesser end of the leaf. But as for the figures of frozen Urine, those having been accurately describ'd by the curious Mr. Hook, I shall pass that part of my task by. I took the Salts of Rosemary, Rue, Scurvey-Grass, Mint and Plantan, and putting ½ or ¾ of an ounce of each into ½ of a pint of their di∣stilled Waters; the Rue and Plantan being seal∣ed up, none of them froze resembled the Plants they belong'd to; but the Aromatick Waters were much enriched in their scents, e∣specially the Rosemary; Kelp froze represents the leaves of Alga Marina. A Recipient full of Water being froze and the top of the Ice broke, there appeared a Ca∣vity within, which was thick set with Plates of Ice from which Stiriae appeared on each side like the Teeth of Combs, some of which stood at such a distance that I could put my finger betwixt them. A flask full of Water being froze it appear'd full of bubbles like tailed hail-shot, the sharp points of all of them pointing upwards. They had Cavities which would admit a Pin into them and might be discerned in the Ice, appearing like black spots: And in the middle of the Ice was contained a Cavity filled with Water in
which were several of these bubbles imperfect∣ly formed. All the Liquors I made Experiments with, did sensibly rise above the mark, before they froze, and more after congelation. Vinegar and Urine rose ½ an Inch, and Lees made of Salts of Rosemary, Kelp and Frits, about ½ of an Inch. Solutions of Allum and Copperas less, and Saline Liquors in general less than Water, which rose a full Inch, and small Beer in a narrow Tube four Inches. Oyl of Vitriol alone subsides below the mark, hot Water subsides till it is cool and then rises again. Water being froze in Beer-Glasses, rises up and forms solid Triangles, but the rising of it is more visible in narrow Glasses: Ice in a flask rose four Inches above the Water-mark, and hung two Inches out of it, but in a Bolt-head it rose five Inches above the Water-mark. If Glasses be filled about ⅔ full they seldom break. Round Spherical Glasses usually break uniformly. A Bolt-head being filled up to the neck with Wa∣ter, the top which was twelve Inches above it, was sealed up; upon which the Water being froze, was raised three Inches into the neck; and the Glass breaking in the thinnest Part, from that point, several Lines ran as from a Pole to the Meridian, but none of them went round the Glass, nor were they all of the same length: In a flask cracked in many places the cracks were irregular: Glass Bottles and stone-Jugs, kept little order in breaking, and Metals none at all, but Woods cleave with the Grain.
Two oval Boxes, one of Box and another of Maple, containing each two ounces, were fill'd full, and by the Frost in one Night were cracked from the bottom to the top. A Pepper-Box of Latin, had its neck broke off and the joints at the bottom loosned. Lead-Pipes above ground were broke in many places, and some that lay a foot under ground: Brass-Locks and Barrels of Pumps usually break with the Frost. A Copper-Box of the shape of a Pear was cracked the fourth time it was froze. The Cylinder of a silver Ink-horn bore the Frost, but a silver∣ball was considerably extended by the Frost. Tobacco-Pipes and Earthen Ware were burst with the Frost, and Tiles of Houses and stone-Buildings scale upon a thaw; for which Reason the North side of Buildings first decay. Ala∣baster and Marble that have chinks in them u∣sually break with the Frost, but solid Marble does not, nor does Frost affect those stones or Bitumens which will bear a Polish. Ice laid on a Table, and having Salt strow∣ed upon it, it stuck so fast that it could not be separated without being broke in pieces; and the Salt made its way through the Ice down to the board; but if Salt be strowed betwixt the Ice and the board, it will not be froze to it but thawed. The following Salts cause not so firm an adhesion as common Salt, viz. Kelp, Sande∣ver, Sal Indus, Gem, Prunel, Armon. and Pot∣ashes. A nail held betwixt my lips could not be remov'd without difficulty and Pain. A Tincture of Cochineel with Spirit of Wine, and another with a little Sea-Salt Water, being froze throughout, retained an equal colour in all
Parts, and so did a Tincture of Mades-weed, and Indico. A Decoction of Soot was froze without any Concentration; yet Mr. Hook, a worthy Fellow of the Royal Society, hath ob∣served the contrary effect. Eggs and Apples-froze differed not in weight, nor do Bodies weighed in sealed Glasses. Frost renders Wood, Iron, Steel and the Bones of Animals, more friable in frosty Weather; espe∣cially in those that are tainted with the Lues Venerea. Frost preserves Bodies from Putrefa∣ction, and confirms the Tone of Animals, and fattens some; it clears the Air, so that musty Stone-Bottles being fill'd with Water and froze, after a Thaw were very sweet; it likewise de∣stroys Animals and Vegetables, so that in Green∣land nothing but Glass grows, as also in Nova Zembla. The quali∣ties of Ice.As for the qualities of Ice, it is slippery, smooth, hard, firm and strong, diaphanous, in∣terposed betwixt the Eye and a Candle, ap∣pears in many round Circles, from whence proceed Rays, in the form of a Star, a quarter of an Inch in diameter. I have seen the Ice in the Thames eight Inches thick, and in Garden∣walks the Earth froze near two Foot thick, but in rich Soils it did not penetrate above a Foot and a quarter Ice generally swims, but I have seen Snow-balls, compressed and moistned with Water, sink Congealed Oyl of Vitriol sinks. Ice is colder than Water, and that qua∣lity is increased by adding Salt or Snow. It hath no smell, but checks that quality in other Bodies. It yields both Reflection and Refra∣ction.
North and North-east Winds, the absence of the Sun, the highest Parts of Mountains, a mixture of Snow and Salt, promote freezing. Water falling upon Ice or Snow freezes, and a mixture of beaten Ice with Sea-Salt, Kelp, Al∣lum, Vitriol, or Nitre, and Oyl of Vitriol, will promote freezing; and if Water be set up∣on such Mixtures, it begins to freeze at the Bottom; Salt Petre dissolv'd in Water, and a∣gitated in a cold Season, turned not the Water into Ice. A Bolt-head being placed in Snow in a Pan, tho' the Pan was set on the Fire, and thawed gradually, yet the Water in the Bolt∣head froze not. Water frozen in Pans, being set on New-castle Coals in a Cellar, and likewise on Sand, and on the Earthen Floor, they thawed in the same or∣der; and so did Eggs and Apples. A Syphon may be made of Ice, through which Water will run very fast. Another use which may be made of Ice is for Refraction, of which Mr. Hook hath given a learned Demonstration. Having formed Ice into various Figures, the  were the same as those mentioned by Dioptrick Writers. We may likewise make a Speculum of it, by holding a piece of Paper be∣hind it; The Learned Bartholinus delivers the follow∣ing Propositions of it. 1. That the more subtil distilled Spirits gain a clear splendour and elegancy from Snow placed about them. 2. The Rayes of Snow newly fallen, glitter and dazzle the Eyes: by reason of the multitude of Globuli, by which they are reflected.
3. A Cabbage putrified in that part which was above the Snow. And I have observed great Housleek, or American Aloes destroy'd by Cold in an upper Room; and Sea-Onions as well as common Onions will be putrified by the Cold. 4. Snow yields Vapours plentifully, when melted by the Sun-beams. 5. It melts and falls off from Ivy. 6. It contains a little Earth in it; which I have found true by Evaporation. 7. Viscosity with Softness is greater in new than old Snow, 8. Water-Cresses and Scurvy-grass will grow under Snow in Gardens; but I am apt to believe they are at a perfect stand, the nutritious Juice being congealed. 9. Air is included in Snow. Whites of Eggs being beaten into a frothy Consistence, and this being laid on a Trencher, soon appeared to be Snow. A Pail being filled with warm Water, and Hair, Moss and a piece of Rosemary hung over it, the rising Vapors sticking to them formed a Hoar-frost, and the like is observed on the Beards of Men, and the Hairs of other Animals. 10. Snow abounds with Fat. 11. Snow with Ice swims on Water. 12. Snow-water boils Meat sooner, and makes Flesh whiter. I could not find that this bolds in Fish or Flesh. 13. Snow newly fallen hath no taste, but when it hath lain on the Ground, it bites the Tongue. This I could not discern. 14. Worms are sometimes found in Snow. I could never observe this,
15. A strong Salt may be drawn from Snow by a peculiar Art. 16. After much Snow plenty of Nuts. It sometimes fails. The Duke of Tuscany distill'd a Spirit from Wine, only by putting Snow upon the Alem∣bick; and the Duke of Mantua had a Powder, which would freeze Water in the middle of Summer. Weather-Glasses being framed after the Italian mode, and in part filled with tinged Spirit of Wine; I placed one of them in a North-west Window, and the other in Mr. Pullyn's Ware∣house under St. Paul's Church, in the warmest place; the Spirit of both, when they were settled on the fifteenth of Octob. 62. having the Altitude of three Inches; and when that in my Study-Window was depressed an Inch, that in the Cellar receiv'd no manifest alteration: But when the other was depressed two Inches, it subsided ¼ of an Inch, which was the lowest Station it subsided to all Winter; and in April following it rose not above the three Inches it first stood at, above ¼ of an Inch, tho' that in my Study was raised four Inches ¼. In this Cellar, Liquors that were froze above Ground, would be thawed in the Morning, The Spirit in the Glass above ground subsided into the Ball after two days hard Frost. Whence it appears, that Cellars are not hotter in Winter than Summer. One thing observable was, that the tinged Spirit had lost its Colour in the Cellar.
In January, a Pint-Bottle of Claret, a Glass-Cane filled with Canary, a Solution of Sal Gem. Train-Oyl, and the Oyl of fructus Musae, in a Night's time were all froze, except the Sal Gem, in the bottom of which chrystallized Salts appeared. The Oyl of the Fruit became very friable, and of a milky-white Colour, but the Train Oyl only lost its fluidity, and became of the consistence of soft Grease. And the same Night, a Bottle of Rhenish Wine, and another of strong White-wine, were for the most part froze, the Ice tasting weaker than the Wine; but the Wine being several times froze and thawed again, neither lost any thing of its Co∣lour, Taste, or Strength. Mr. Hook shewed me an oval Glass, which had at one end a narrow Cane an Inch long, in which Water tinged with Cochineel being froze, the Ice on the out-side was colourless, but in the middle of a deep Tincture; and I have observed the like in Flasks containing the same Tincture froze. Flesh, Fish, Eggs, and Apples, being held near the surface of Water, and immersed in it, are crusted over with Ice; and I have observ'd that Mortar and Plaister of Paris will freeze. I have seen Ice three Yards thick on the Banks of Thames, the Water which flowed suc∣cessively over the Ice being froze, and gradu∣ally thickening it; and I have froze a whole flask full of Water, by gradually pouring it into a Pan; which confirms what Olearius says of making huge heaps of Ice to preserve Bodies. Tho' my Lord Verulam tells us, that Eggs and Apples cover'd with a wet Cloth will not
freeze; yet I have not observ'd any difference betwixt them and others. Oyls of Animals, and vegetable Oyls by Ex∣pression, subside. Syrups freeze not. Cold affects not Loadstones sensibly in their Opera∣tions. Having exposed distill'd Waters of Plantan, Poppies, black Cherries, Night-shade, Scurvy-grass, and Horse-radish to the Cold, in order to make a Standard for Weather-Glasses, I observ'd that the Black-cherry-water was froze first, and the Horse-radish and Scurvy∣grass Waters last. The best way to discover when Liquors begin to freeze first is, by draw∣ing a Pin through the surface of those Liquors. CHAP. IX. A new Frigorifick Experiment, shewing how a considerable degree of Cold may be sud∣denly produced without the help of Snow, Ice, Hail, Wind, or Nitre, any time of the year; comunicated in the Trans∣actions of July 18. 1666. Cold produ∣ced by a mixture of Sal-Armon. and Water.IF a pound of powdered Sal Armoniack be mix∣ed gradually with three pints of Water, and the Liquor be stirred with a stick or a Whale-bone; whilst the Salt is dissolving, it will produce a considerable degree of Coldness; which will not only be sensible to the touch; but if it be con∣tained in a Silver Tankard, the outside of it will be covered over with a multitude of little drops of Condensed Vapours, as high as the Mixture
reaches; and if some of it be quite wiped off, before the Mixture hath lost its virtue, it will a∣gain be covered over with dew. And if the Ball of a sealed Weather-Glass be immersed in it, the tinged Liquor will presently descend, lower than it did in common Water, and upon a Removal of it into the Air again or common Water, the spirit will manifestly ascend. And this Coldness is more or less lasting, as the seasons of the Air contribute to its Coldness, and as the Quantity of the Salt in proportion to the Water is greater or less; or as it varies in Goodness; or as the Salt is put in in grosser Powder, and more leisurely. And the degrees of Cold may easily be discovered, by frequently immerging, and removing a Wea∣ther-Glass out of it into Water, and from the latter into it again. Whether Sal Armoniack mixed with Sand or Earth will cool Drink bet∣ter than without, when the Mixture is sprinkled with Water, I have not yet tryed. But I have found the aforemention'd Mixture cool Li∣quors conveniently enough after Midsummer. March 27. A sealed Weather-Glass being immersed in Water, the Spirit that rested at 8 1/ Inches, descended to 7 /8; and then the Sal-Armon. being put in, within a quarter of an hour, it descended to 2 1/ ⅙ Inches, and before that time, it began to condense the Vapours on the outside of the Glass. And when the frigo∣rifick Mixture was coldest, Water placed thin on the outside would be froze in a quarter of a Minute. About 3/ of an hour after the Salt was put in, the tinged Liquor being remov'd out of Water into it, subsided an Inch below
the freezing Mark. At 2 ½ hours after the first Solution it was at 5 ½ Inches, or 4 ¾, which Mark the Liquor stood at, in hard and lasting Frosts in the Winter. Three hours after the first Dissolution, the Liquor stood at the uppermost freezing Mark. In trying of which Experiment it was observable, that some Water being shed, it froze the Cucurbite to the Table it stood on. In another Experiment, before the Weather-Glass was put in, it stood at 8 ⅛, but when immersed in Water it sunk to 7 ⅝ or 6/8; in half a quarter of an hour in the frigorifick Mixture it subsided to 7 ¾, and in an hour be∣low 5, and consequently within a quarter of the lowest freezing Mark. Salt which once hath been dissolv'd, may, by being crystallized in an Iron Vessel, be fit for use again. So March 29. the Thermoscope, which in the Air stood at 8 ⅞, in Water subsi∣ded to 8, and in the frigorifick Mixture made of Salt, twice used before, it subsided to 4 In∣ches; but upon an addition of fresh Water, it rose gradually.
CHAP. X. Of the positive and privative Nature of Cold. Arguments alledg'd in favour of its positive nature an∣swered.BEfore I proceed to enumerate what Argu∣ments may be alledged either for the posi∣tive or privative Nature of Cold, I shall briefly intimate, that the word Cold may be either considered in reference to the effect such Bodies have upon the Sensory, or upon other Bodies: If in the latter, then in frosty Weather the Sun may be said to warm the Air, because it enables it to melt the Snow, and thaw Ice, as on the contrary, warm Water is said to be cold in respect of a Hand that is much hotter. The first Ar∣gument.But to pass on to Arguments in favour of the positive nature of Cold: The first Argument alledged is, The considerable Effects it hath both upon the Sensory and other Bodies; so that we may summ our Argument up in the words of Gassendus. Ii sunt frigoris effectus, quales habere Privatio, quae actionis est incapax, non potest. To which it is answer'd, That Heat and Cold depending only on a greater or less degree of motion of the parts of Matter, than those about our Sensory; and all Perceptions being carried to, and distinguish'd in the Brain, and being various, as that Motion is different, and it being likewise considered, that when one Body communicates Motion to another, it loses of its own; it will follow, that when I take a piece of Ice into my Hand, and it is dissolved by the motion communicated to its Parts, the
motion which the Humors in my hand lost, by putting those of the Water into motion; in∣duces a sensation of Cold; and consequently there seems to be a privation of that motion which before caused Heat. The second Argument.Another Argument alledged for the positive Nature of Cold, is this from Gassendus. Cùm per hyemem immittimus manum in labentis flumi∣nis Aquam, quod frigus in ea sentitur, non potest dici mera privatio, aliudque prorsus esse apparet, sentiri aquam frigidam & sentiri non calidam. Et fac eandem aquam gelari, sentietur haud dubie fri∣gidior; an dices boc esse nihil aliud quam minus calidam sentiri? Atqui calida jam antea non erat, quomodo ergò potuit minus calida effici? To which it is answer'd, That our Sensories may mis-in∣form us; as when a Stick is partly immersed in Water, should we judge of it by what appears to our Senses, we should conclude it broke; but our Reason rectifying the Error of our Sen∣ses, we are satisfied it is not: Besides Sensati∣ons may depend on alterations in the internal Parts, as well as on the impressions of outward Objects, as in Hunger, Thirst, Coldness in A∣gues, and Titilation upon venereal Thoughts; besides which Argument, that urged against the former Objection, may be offer'd against this. And since Water is not so cold as Ice, it may in a Philosophical Sense be said to be compari∣tively warmer, and tho' in respect of the Hu∣mours of our Body it be cold, yet by the same reason we might conclude warm Water cold, when the Hand is removed out of hot Water into it.
A third.But in favour of the positive nature of Cold, it is further offer'd, that Cold is sometimes in∣troduced into Bodies not hot before. To which it is answer'd, That since Fluidity consists in an agitation of the insensible Parts of a Body, and Heat in a tumultuary one; those Bodies into which Cold is introduced by Con∣gelation, differ whilst they are fluid, only in degrees of motion from Heat; and even when Water is froze it is not absolutely and perfectly cold; since the Ball of a Weather-Glass being immersed in a Glass of Water, and taken out when the Water was froze about it (the Glass having been before tallow'd over, to make it part with the Ice) the Ice being broken off the Ball of the Weather-Glass, the Air which was colder caused the Liquor to subside. And that there may be sensible Perceptions of several de∣grees of Privation of the impressions of outward Objects appears, since we perceive a sensible privation of Light when the Moon is eclipsed nine Digits, and a more sensible one when it is totally darkned. But tho' I argue for the privative nature of Cold, yet I would not be thought to mean, that an absolute Privation of Motion is the cause of it, and by which it is affected; for I rather think them the occasion, than the efficient cause; the motion of the Blood and Humours being differently modifyed, upon a privation of their motion, and consequently a different Sensation impressed upon the Sensory; and that a Priva∣tion of the motion of some Parts of matter a∣bout our Sensory may occasion a new Determi∣nation of the Motion of those Fluids, may be
inferr'd from easy Observations; for a Tennis-Ball is variously determined in its motion ac∣cording to the Angle of Incidence upon another Body; and tho' the Arches of a Bridge be qui∣escent Bodies, yet by throwing the Water to∣gether, they render its Stream violent enough to turn Mills; and even the rapid motion of a Bullet may receive a new determination of its motion, by striking upon the surface of the Water, if, when it was first discharg'd, it made a sharp Angle with the Water, so that its An∣gle of Incidence might not be too blunt; and that various effects may ensue a Privation of some principal cause of former Events, appears further from observing, that by stopping the motion of Water, a Mill presently ceases to move, tho' no positive violence be offer'd to it: And upon a relaxation of the violence of Wind, all that was perform'd by the Mill presently ceases for want of Wind: And in Paralytick ca∣ses, a viscous or narcotic Humour obstructing or disaffecting one part of a Nerve, so that Spi∣rits cannot freely circulate through it, occa∣sions several odd and terrible Symptoms: And Animals included in an Air-Pump dye barely by a privation of Air, tho' nothing else is pre∣sent to disaffect them. And even Insects, tho' void of motion upon a privation of Air, yet when it is again let into them, they move about as the advantages of their Species enables them; so that from what hath been said it appears, that a privation of the Agitation of the Hu∣mours may occasion a contrary, and probably the effects ascribed to Cold.
A fourth.The next Argument alledged by Gassendus and to be considered is this. Fac manuum im∣mitti in aquam nunc calidam, nunc frigidam, quamobrem manus intra istam, non intra illam refrigeratur? An quia Calor manus intra fri∣gidam retrabitur, manus{que} proinde relinquitur calida manus? At quidnam calor refugit, quod intra frigidam reperiatur nonne frigas? At si frigus est Tantum Privatio, quidnam calor ab illa metuit? Privatio sane nihil est, at{que} adeo nihil agere, unde ejus motus incutiatur, potest. But without supposing insensible matter to be in the least capable of proscecuting or avoiding what is hurtful to it; this Objection is easily an∣swered; for the Reason why warm Water feels hot; and cold affects us upon immerging our hand in it, is, because the Parts of the one is more, and the Parts of the other less agitated than those about the Sensory, and the motion of Humours about our Sensory; being increased we feel a hot sensation; and a cold one upon a Privation of that motion. A fifth.And tho' it be urged by some in favour of the positive Nature of Cold, that Water is froze by externally applying to the outside of a Glass a Mixture of Snow and Salt; yet to shew that Argument proves not that Cold acts positively, I shall add the following explication of des Car∣tes. Quia materia subtilis, partibus bujus aquae circumfusa crassior aut minus subtilis, & conse∣quenter plus virium habens, quam illa quae circa nivis partes herebat, locum illius occupat, dum par∣tes nivis liquescendo partibus salis circumvolvun∣tur. Facilius enim per salsae aquae quam per dulcis poros movetur, & perpetuo ex corpore uno, in aliud
transire nititur, ut ad ea loca perveniat in quibus mortui suo minus resistitur, quo ipso materia sub∣tilior ex nive in aquam penetrat, ut egredienti succedat, & quum non satis valida fit, ad con∣tinuandam agitationem hujus aquae illam concres∣cere sinit. And in a similar manner Calces or Precipitates, or other Powders, are dryed by being placed on a piece of Paper, not that that acts positively upon them, but imbibes the moisture. And I have seen a Cold Liquor acquire a hardness, its moisture being imbibed by a piece of Bread immersed in it; as also Spirit of Wine dephlegmed by a Mixture of Salt of Tartar, without so much as Heat, the Aqueous Parts finding a more ready and easie passage into the Pores of the Alkaly, than through the Spiritous Liquor. And I know a saline Body, which when incorporated with Water, the Water will leave this a consistent mass, and be imbibed by the Spirit of Wine. And for a further illustration of the Cartesian Explication, I shall add, that Camphire by float∣ing upon Aqua fortis will become a fluid Oyl, and continue in that form till the subtle Spirit, which, by pervading it, kept it fluid, flyes away and evaporates; for being put into Wa∣ter, the Spirit leaving the Camphire, and being imbibed into the Pores of the Water, it be∣comes a consistent mass again, which, that it depended not on the Coldness of the Water was evident, since the same would happen on warm Water. But tho' Cold should depend prima∣rily on the influence of frigorifick Atoms, yet since those by acting on the Body cooled, may produce their effect by expelling calorifick Atoms, the
privation of those calorifick Atoms, is the cause of freezing; so tho' a Bullet kills a Man, yet the issue is a privation of life; and when a Room is darkned by extinguishing the light, the darkness depends on the privation of light. A sixth.The last Argument of Gassendus is this, Ta∣metsi multa videantur ex sola caloris absentia frigescere, nibil ominus nisi frigus extrinsicus in∣ducatur, non tam profectô frigescere quam deca∣lescere sunt Censenda. Esto enim Lapis, Lignum, aut aliquid aliud, quod nec calidum nec frigidum sit, id ubi fuerit ad motum Igni calefiet sane, at cum deinceps calor excedet, ne{que} frigidum ullum circumstabit, non erit cur dicas ipsum frigefieri, potius quam minus calidum fieri rediere in suum statum. But to this it may be answered, that if we speak of Coldness with respect to sense, I see not why any Body that grows hot by the action of the fire may not be said, to grow Cold ra∣ther than Decalescere, since Heat being only too brisk an agitation for our Sensory, when upon a removal of that Cause, and a declining of that motion, it became less agitated than the Hu∣mours about our Sensory, we may not then say it grows Colder and Colder till it become Ice. But to conclude this Chapter, I shall add, that tho' I have offered these Arguments a∣gainst Gassendus, yet I shall wave determining the Controversie till further satisfied in some Speculations, and in the Phaenomena of some Particular Experiments; besides I would first know, from those that would have Cold to be
a positive Quality, whether and on what account those little fragments of matter are Cold, Whe∣ther their frigorifick Atoms have weight? As also what is their Texture, and whether that Quality may be destroy'd; and whether they be primitive Bodies or not? And why Coldness ensues the Mixture of two warm Bodies. And in order to the solving of some of which it would be requisite to enquire, how Water comes by its expansive force upon congelation? And since Cold is a Privation of motion, why upon the Mixture of certain Bodies Cold ensues, tho' their Parts be thereby put into motion. CHAP. XI. Two Problems about Cold. An attempt to measure the great expansive force of freez∣ing Water: Of the Production of Cold by the conflict of Bodies appearing to make an Ebullition. The first Problem.THE first Problem I shall propose is; how upon the Mixture of two or three Bodies, there should ensue a great and tumultuary agitati∣on of small Parts, and yet even during this con∣flict, not any sensible Heat; but a considerable degree of Cold be produced. Concerning which I shall only propose the question, whether local motion be not Generical; and whether the figure and size of Parts variously moved may not be able to cause a sensation of Heat, and when va∣riously modify'd, a sense of Cold; or whether the sense of Cold depends not on some frigorifick
Atoms which are let lose in the Ebullition and affect the Sensory, which would otherwise perceive a hot sensation by the effects of the motion of those Parts, with which cold Aoms are mixed, and which they over-power. The second Problem.The second Problem is, Whence the vast force of freezing Water proceeds? For since Cold de∣pends on an Imminution of local motion; it is not a little strange how it should be able to break resisting Bodies, which require local motion to separate their Parts. And tho' Gassendus tells us, that they proceed from the ingress of frigo∣rifick Atoms; yet till Glaciation succeeds, not∣withstanding Water grows colder gradually, it subsides and does not expand: And Spirit of Wine, and Chymical Oyls, the greater degree of Cold they are exposed to contract the more; and some Oyls even when coagulated are con∣densed instead of being expanded. And as for what the Cartesians offer for the removal of these difficulties, it may well be questioned how their Eel-like Particles being relaxed and their spring weakned, they should be able to expand in spite of Opposition. So that consi∣dering that Water when expanded is full of bubbles, I was apt to suspect, that the Air con∣tained in them contributed to the effect, and that a constipation of the Pores of Water might give them a springiness. The great expansive force of Wa∣ter froze.To try the expansive force of freezing Water, we convey'd a Bladder full of Water into a Brass Cylinder, and fitting a Plugg to it, upon that we placed a flat Board to hold Weights on, and then the Cylinder being encompassed with a frigorifick Mixture, upon the freezing of the Water, in one Experiment the Plugg rais∣ed
115 pound, weight and in another 100 pound Averdupois, and in a third 254 pound weight. Three saline Bodies, each purify'd by the fire, being mixed together,Of the Pro∣duction of Cold. produced a cold Effervescense with a hissing noise and a consi∣derable Intumescense. And in the mean time the Glass which contained it would grow cold∣er than before, and gather a Dew on the out∣side, which would reach as high as the Mix∣ture; but on the concave bottom of the Glass there was no Dew, that being not sufficiently exposed to the Air; so that the Mixture could not be supposed to sweat through the Pores of the Glass, since it tasted not in the least of saline Ingredients: But least our Sen∣ses should misinform us of the degrees of Cold, in this Mixture, we at another time immersed a Weather-Glass, in which the Liquor subsided above four Inches lower than in common Wa∣ter. Tho' the Acid Liquor it self, being kept all Night in a Room with Water, was of the same temper with it, which appeared by a Weather-Glass immersed in both successively. And the Salt it self being cast into Water scarce made it sensibly colder; nor did the Glass wherein this Salt was kept disclose any remarkable degree of Coldness. And even the frigorifick Mixture it self, when the Ebullition was over, appear'd not colder than common Water in a Night's time; so that the Coldness depended purely upon the Texture of the fer∣menting Liquor.
And to this I shall add, that tho' I made use of a Spirit that was drawn off at the same time with this Salt, and which in the Judgment of my senses appeared to be of the same kind, yet instead of a cold Ebullition, it produced a Luke-warm Heat. And to these I shall fur∣ther subjoyn, that tho' the Liquor above men∣tion'd would produce a cold Ferment with the dry Salt, yet with the Spirit it grew warm; tho' some of the same frigorifick Spirit kept warm by the fire till the Liquor in the Weather-Glass rose, yet upon the injecting of some of the dry'd Salt it would be manifestly depressed. Nay, tho the Spirit and Salt were both warm, yet upon their Mixture they would produce a manifest Coldness. And to this Experiment I shall add, that Salt of Tartar mix'd with Spirit of Vinegar pro∣duced, upon their Ebullition, a degree of Cold∣ness greater than that of Water, and when a Weather-Glass was removed out of Water into it an hour after the ferment, the Spirit was de∣pressed about half an Inch; tho' Salt of Pot-ashes mix'd with Spirit of Vinegar produced Heat, as appeared by the same Weather-Glass succes∣sively immersed in either.
CHAP. XII. Of the Mechanical Origin or Production of Heat. Of the me∣chanical Production of Heat.HEAT being a quality whose nature seems to consist in a mechanical Motion of the Parts of the Body said to be hot, it may be re∣quisite to note, that the three following Condi∣tions are necessary in modifying that Motion. First, That the Motion be more rapid than in Bodies barely fluid; so Water becomes hot by an increase of the motion of its Parts, which argue their vehement motion by dissolving Butter, and rising in the form of Vapours: Which effects are more conspicuous as the de∣gree of Motion is greater or less. Another In∣stance to shew that the Parts of hot Water are in a more violent agitation than those of cold, is in Water cast upon a hot Iron; for they pre∣sently acquire such an additional Motion from that hot Body, that it hisses and boils, yielding Steams copiously. But a stronger instance of the vehement Agitation of the parts of hot Bo∣dies is in actual Flame, since they move so im∣petuously as to dissolve and shatter whatever lies in their way. A second Condition requisite to render a Bo∣dy hot, is, that the motion of its Parts be va∣riously determined; which variety of Determi∣nation is apparent in Fire, which produces the same effects on the same Bodies, whatsoever is their Scituation in respect of that Fire; so a red
Coal melts Wax, whether held above, below, or on one side of it; and that a variously de∣termin'd Motion is requisite, appears, if we observe that the rapid motion of Water in a River which is only one way, contributes not to the increase of its heat. A third requisite is, that the Parts in such a Motion should be very minute, so as to be in∣sensible; since it is manifest, that tho' Sand be put into a violent motion, it acquires not a heat by it. This account of heat being considered, it will appear, that a Body may become hot as many ways as it is capable of having its parts put into such a Motion: To illustrate which Observati∣on, I shall subjoin some instances of the Produ∣ction of Heat several ways; as first by an effu∣sion of Oyl of Vitriol upon Salt of Tartar, Aq. fortis upon Silver. But to pass over these common Instances, I shall proceed to some not so frequently known, having first taken notice of the Heat which suc∣ceeds an effusion of cold Water upon Quick∣lime, which Phaenomenon, tho' it be common∣ly held to be an effect of an Antiperistasis, upon the enclosure of the Lime in cold Water, yet that the effect is produced by another cause ap∣pears, since the like succeeds if hot Water be made use of instead of Cold; and further, be∣cause, tho' Oyl of Turpentine be poured on it cold, no such Effect follows.
EXPERIMENT I. Tho' Helmont ascribes the Incalescence of Quick-lime upon an Affusion of Water, to a conflict of an Alkalizate and an acid Salt, set at liberty by being dissolv'd in the Water; yet since no such acid appears to be latent in Quick-lime, the account is unsatisfactory: For I might as well suppose an Acid latent in other Alkalies, in as much as Salt of Tartar mixed with Water, either in the Palm of ones Hand or in a Vial, affords a sensible Heat. EXPERIMENT II, III, IV. Others think that the cause of the Heat of Quick-lime proceeds from some fiery Empyru∣matical Atoms lodged in the substance of the Stone, when calcin'd, and set at liberty in the form of Effluvia; but this Hypothesis is not without some difficulties, since no such Heat succeeds an affusion of Water upon Minium, or Crocus Martis per se, tho' their increase of weight argues that they are stuffed with fiery and metalline Particles: To which I shall add, that I knew two Liquors, which being several times separated, and reconjoined without addi∣tion, did at each Congress acquire a sensible heat; so Salt of Tartar several times freed from Water,The effects of a mix∣ture of Salt of Tartar and Water. will produce Heat when mixed again with that Water; which shews that the violence of the Fire is not requisite to impress upon all calcin'd Bodies that will heat with Wa∣ter, what passes for an Empyreum. And this Phaenomenon I am apt to believe proceeds from
a disposition of the Texture of the Salt being stocked with store of igneous Parts, which upon an ingress of Water pressed into the Pores of the Body, by the weight of the Atmosphere, are apt to break the Texture of that Body, and to put them in motion, so as to produce a sensi∣ble Heat. And that the Ferment depends up∣on the peculiar Texture of the Salt, I am per∣swaded, and a constipation of the Pores of it; since Sal-Armon. dissolv'd in Water and boiled to a dry Salt, was not so much impregnated with fiery Parts, as to cause a Heat upon its mix∣ture with Water again, but a considerable degree of Cold; and tho' one would expect a greater cognation betwixt the Particles of fire adhering to Quick-lime, and Spirit of Wine wholly inflammable; yet the latter poured up∣on the former did not produce any sensible in∣calescence, or dissolution of it; and when this Spirit was soak'd into it, I poured Water upon it, without perceiving the least Heat or the Lime broken, till within a few hours after; so that the Spirit being sucked into the most capa∣cious Pores of the Lime, and associating with the Water, rendred it more unfit to penetrate the minuter Pores, and to dissolve the Lime. EXPERIMENT V. Quick-lime being immersed in Spirit of Wine in a Retort, and the Spirit and Phlegm drawn off, the remaining Quick-lime, instead of be∣ing slacked, was a more fiery substance than be∣fore, for if a piece of it was thrown into Wa∣ter it would hiss like a Coal, and heat the Li∣quor;
which property it retained several weeks, being kept close from the Air. Whence it appears how much the Texture of Quick-lime, and the association of the Spirit of Wine improving that Texture, contribute to the Phaenomena offorded by Quick-lime; and that the Spirit of Wine was associated with the Quick-lime is probable, since Part of it became a Spiritless Phlegm; and I have observ'd, Quick-lime and Spirit of Wine sometimes to come over in white fumes. To which I shall add, that in such distillations the Odour of the Spirit hath not only been changed, but its taste rendered more fiery, and brisk: But the suc∣cess is not always the same; being diversified according to difference of the Quick-lime, which may be more or less calcined; or the stone may be of a different nature it self. EXPERIMENT VI. But to proceed to other Experiments which shew, that Heat may be produced mechanically. A nail hastily hammered grows hot, the Parts of the metal being by that force vehemently and variously determined; tho' the hammer and Anvil be not warm; so that hence it ap∣pears, that it is not requisite a calorifick Body should be hot it self, the Hammer being able, tho' cold, to warm the Iron it beats upon; and so the head of a nail grows hot, when it can pierce no deeper into wood, the force of the beating Hammer being not spent in depressing the nail, but putting the resisting Parts into agitation.
EXPERIMENT VII. And once I caused a piece of Iron to be beaten by three Smiths, till it grew so hot as to kindle Sulphur upon it. EXPERIMENT VIII. And that Heat may be produced by percus∣sion and attrition appears further, since Iron grows hot by being boiled, a knife by whet∣ting, a Brass nail by being rubbed, and flints by being struck together. EXPERIMENT IX. To shew that Heat may be produced with∣out the attrition of contiguous Air, I placed pitch under Water; and by the Sun-beams cast into a Focus by a burning Glass upon it, it was not only melted, but seemed to boil and smoak. EXPERIMENT X. The Powder of slacked Quick-lime, washed from its Salts, being mixed with Sal-Armoniack and melted together, the cold mass being put into a Glass, upon an affusion of Water, grew too hot to be touched with ones hand, tho' the Sal-Armoniack it self in Water produces Cold.
EXPERIMENT XI. Sal-Armoniack and filings of Steel being sub∣limed together, the Caput Mortuum in which the greatest Part of the Salt remained, instead of increasing the coldness of Water, being poured upon it several Months after the Caput Mortuum was first laid up; gave the Water a notable degree of Heat. EXPERIMENT XII. Equal Parts of Antimony and Sal-Armoniack being sublimed with several degrees of Heat in a Glass-Vessel, we obtained three several sub∣stances; which being severally powdered; the Caput Mortuum which was like Antimony, be∣ing put into Water in which a Thermoscope was immersed, scarce raised the Liquor sensi∣bly: But the yellow sublimate which consist∣ed of the Sulphureous flowers of Antimony and the more Volatil Salts of the Sal-Armoniack, caused the Weather-Glass in another parcel of Water to descend a quarter of an Inch, and the lower sublimate which was black, being put into a third parcel of Water the Liquor in the Weather-Glass subsided near three Inches. But the like Experiments being tryed with the Ca∣put Mortuum of Minium and Sal-Armoniack, it neither caused the Liquor in the Weather-Glass to rise or fall; but the sublimate raised from these ingredients, caused the Liquor to subside a little.
EXPERIMENT XIII. Whether Solvents dissolve Minerals, and cause that Heat observable in their Action, by any Antipathy betwixt the Mineral and the Men∣struum, or whether it did not rather proceed from the violent agitation of the parts of the Metal, either dissolv'd by the insinuation of its parts into the Pores of the Metal, or by obstru∣cting the passage of some aethereal Matter through those Pores, which wanting its usual course dissolves the Metal, by forcing a new way, I shall not undertake to determine; but having agitated Oyl of Vitriol with four times its weight of Water, thereby it obtained a sensible Heat; from which Experiment it ap∣pears, that the Heat produc'd by Minerals de∣pends not on a conflict of Acid and Alkalies, since Water is void of either of those chymical qualities. EXPERIMENT XIV. If a piece of wet Ice be thrown into a Viol, which before contained Oyl of Vitriol, the Oyl mixing with the Water dissolves the Ice, and causes a strong Fermentation, and a violent Heat. EXPERIMENT XV. Half an ounce of Spirit of Wine being mixed with an ounce of Oyl of Vitriol, acquired a considerable degree of Heat presently, and al∣most
most filled the Bottle with Fumes; and the Bottle grew so hot at the last that I could not hold it in my Hand. The like Succeeded, only in a more remiss Degree, with common Brandy; and also with Aqua Vitae. EXPERIMENT XVI. Tho' the Chymists teach, that the Incale∣scence of Bodies depends on an Antipathy of the mixed Bodies, yet I found an intense Heat en∣sue the Mixture of Parts of the same Bodies; viz. Calcin'd Colcothar, and Oyl of Vitriol. EXPERIMENT XVII. Oyl of Vitriol and Oyl of Turpentine mixed together, produce a considerable degree of Heat. EXPERIMENT XVIII. An ounce of rectify'd Petroleum being mixed with an equal weight of Oyl of Vitriol, the for∣mer Liquor seemed to work upon the surface of this, like a Menstruum upon Metal; the Fumes of the Oyl of Vitriol rising into the Ol. Petrae; and the mutual re-action of both the Liquors caused a moderate Warmness. And we had almost the like success with Petroleum, and Spirit of Nitre. But in these last menti∣on'd Tryals, Spirit of Salt made use of instead of Oyl of Vitriol had no such considerable Ef∣fects.
EXPERIMENT XIX. Oyl of Vitriol caused a considerable Efferve∣scence upon Filings of Steel; especially if they be soaked in Water: And it will grow sensi∣bly hot with Lime, Oyster-shells, Chalk, Lapis Calaminaris, &c. EXPERIMENT XX. Oyl of Vitriol grows hot with Cherries, and likewise with Raisins of the Sun beat in a Mor∣tar, as well as with several other Vegetable Substances, and very considerably with Crumbs of white Bread. EXPERIMENT XXI. Oyl of Vitriol causes a considerable Heat if mixed with minced Flesh. EXPERIMENT XXII. Tho' Sea-Salt imparts a Coldness to Water, yet with Oyl of Vitriol it causes Heat; yet with Sal Armon. part of which consists of common Salt, it produces a Coldness. EXPERIMENT XXIII. Common Sulphur acquir'd a Heat by attriti∣tion, and emitted sulphureous Steams copiously; so that Sulphur it self, as well as other Bodies, ows its Heat to local Motion.
EXPERIMENT XXIV. Equal parts of Sal Armon. and Quick-lime being fluxed together, an ounce of the Powder put into Water, caused a violent Heat, tho' Sal Armon. it self produces Cold. EXPERIMENT XXV. We observ'd that beaten Sublimate being mix'd with powder'd Antimony, after it had stood some time in the Air, the Mixture grew sensibly hot, which Phaenomenon I attribute in part to the Moisture imbibed from the Air, since it is requisite to make the Experiment succeed, that it should be exposed in a moist Cellar. EXPERIMENT XXVI. Tryals have assured me, that in Summer, fine Sulphur and Filings of Steel being mixed together in Water, will grow intensely hot, if stirred about an hour after they are mixed; and will likewise emit Steams copiously. EXPERIMENT XXVII. Several Tryals have convinc'd me, that a Mercury may be so prepared as to afford an Incalescence with Gold.
EXPERIMENT XXVIII. Having distill'd from Quick-silver four times its weight of Oyl of Vitriol, and by that means reduced it to a Powder, which upon the ac∣count of the Salts of the Menstruum was white and glistering, and being put into Water in which a Weather-Glass was immersed, it cau∣sed the Spirit to rise manifestly; which is the more remarkable, because Helmont observes, that the Salt adhering to the Mercury, cor∣roded in a good quantity, by Oyl of Vitri∣ol, if it be washed off and coagulated, be∣comes a kind of Allum. And this Phaenome∣non is still the more remarkable, because Vitri∣olum Martis made with Oyl of Vitriol and Fi∣lings of Steel, being put into Spirit of Wine, was not impelled up as by the former Mixture, but after a while rather subsided. Common Sublimate dissolved in Water, neither sensibly depressed or raised the Spirit of Wine.
CHAP. XIII. Of Mercury growing hot with Gold, commu∣nicated in the Transactions of Feb. 21. 1675/6. Of Mercury growing hoe with Gold.HAving obtain'd a Mercury fine and clean, and even purged by Sublimations and Di∣stillations, and incorporated a multitude of he∣terogeneous Particles with it, so that they could not be discovered, and much less separa∣ted, except by a skilful Artist; I mixed some∣times half and sometimes an equal quantity of Calx of Gold with this Mercury, in the Palm of my Hand, stirring and pressing it with the Finger of my other Hand, by which means the Ingredients being mixed, they grew sensibly hot in a Minute; and I observ'd, that when they were mixed in equal quantities, they would produce a much greater degree of Heat, than if their Proportion was not exact. And the like success ensued, when the Mixture was pre∣served from being contiguous to the Skin, by being contained in a piece of Paper, laid be∣twixt my Hand and it; and the same succeed∣ed in the Hands of other Persons. But with Silver, it would not produce an Incalescence. But tho' this Mercury grows hot with Gold, yet I much question, whether, as Chymists call them, Mercurii Corporum, made by extraction from Minerals and Metals, will grow hot with Gold, as I found Antimonial Mercury did. And I am far from affirming, that that which is cal∣led Philosophick Mercury, or even those ob∣tain'd
from Gold and Silver are fitter for such uses, than common Mercury skilfully purged and impregnated with the subtle and active Particles of congruous Metals and Minerals. To what hath been said of this Mercury, I shall add, that it preserves its quality of grow∣ing hot with Gold two or three Years, and tho' it be distill'd from Gold again and again. And whereas its usual to take eight or ten parts of Quick-silver to make an Amalgama with Gold; this Mercury would do it, being used in an e∣qual Proportion. As for the manner of preparing this Mercu∣ry, I don't think it convenient to publish it, only this I shall say, that it may be made more ways than one, and without employing. Anti∣mony, or such solid Metals as Mars. But that of ours, I observ'd, succeeded best, in the production of Heat, by being mixed with Quercetanus's Calx of Gold, viz. by melting Gold with three or four parts of Silver; for by putting this into Aq. fortis the Silver will be dissolv'd, and the Gold remain in the form of a Calx. But lest an Incalescence, produc'd by such a Calx, should be supposed to proceed from saline Particles of the Aq. fortis working on the Quick-silver, I shall add, that it will not produce such an effect on common Quick-sil∣ver; but ours will cause an Incalescence even with pure Leaf-Gold.
CHAP. XIV. New Experiments to make Fire and Flame ponderable. EXPERIMENT I. A Thin Plate of Copper being placed in a Crucible, which had a Hole on purpose in the bottom of it, this Crucible was inverted into another, which contained flaming Sulphur, so that the Copper-Plate was exposed to the Flame of it. In two Hours the Sulphur being consum'd, the Copper-Plate was manifestly swelled; and tho' its Weight at the first was but a Dram and a half and twenty five Grains, yet it became thirty two Grains heavier, which is about a fifth part above its former Weight. EXPERIMENT II. Refined Silver being placed over the Flame of Sulphur after the same manner as the Cop∣per was, in an Hour and a half weighed one Dram five Grains and three quarters; its weight before being a Dram wanting two Grains. Whether it depends on the closeness of the Metal, and incongruity of the Pores, that Silver acquires not proportionably so great a weight as Copper, I shall leave to the Rea∣der to consider: But from these Experiments it appears, that the Corpuscles of Fire, like other Menstruums, may be united with the Bo∣dies it works upon.
EXPERIMENT III and IV. An ounce of Copper Plates, being kept in a shallow crucible in a Cuppelling Furnace two hours, weighted thirty grains more than before. But an ounce of filings, in three hours time, were caked into a lump, and weighed forty nine grains more than before. EXPERIMENT V. Calcined Harts-horn, and an ounce of Brick; being two hours in a cupelling Furnace, the lat∣ter neither increased or lost of its weight, but being exposed to the Air in a scale, by imbibe∣ing the moisture of the Air, in a little time caused it to preponderate; but the Harts-horn lost near eight grains of its former weight; which I supposed to be caused by an Evapo∣ration of some moist Particles of the Air, be∣cause by being exposed to the Air a while, it in∣creased in weight again. EXPERIMENT VI and VII. An ounce of Tin being calcined in a Cupel under a Mouffler, in two hours had gained a dram in weight. And an ounce of Lead placed upon a Cupel made of calcined Harts-horn was turned into a litharge upon it, and the Part of the Cupel was lost in the fire, yet the Lead and it weighed seven grains more than before.
EXPERIMENT VIII. A Cupel made of ten Parts of Bone-ashes, and one of Charcoal-ashes, with a sufficient quan∣tity of Ale, weighed about two ounces, and this being placed under a Mouffler, and weigh∣ed again when it was throughly hot, it weigh∣ed two grains more, but being kept under the Mouffler two hours longer, and then weighed whilst red hot, it had gained twenty one grains in weight, and by being exposed a while to the open Air, it grew three grains heavier than before. EXPERIMENT IX, X and XI. Four drams of filing of Steel, in two hours increased in weight one dram, six grains and a quarter. A piece of silver, which before weighed three drams thirty two grains and a quarter, in an hour and a half increased to 34 1/ grains. Another time half an ounce of filings of silver in three hours gained six grains. A drachm of Zink or Spelter in three hours gained six grains. EXPERIMENT XII. Two drams of filings of Tutenâg, a metal brought from the East-Indies, being kept upon the Cupel two hours, was not melted into lumps, but looked like Cerus and Minium powdered and mixed together, some Parts appearing
white and others red, the Calx being weighed had gained 28 ¼ grains. EXPERIMENT XIII. To try whether in Cupellations, all the Lead that is usually employed about them, flyes away in smoak, we heated a Cupel and weigh∣ing it, placed two ounces of Lead and a drachm of filings of Copper upon it, and after it had been two hours in a Cupelling Furnace, tho' nothing appeared upon the Cupel, worth weighing distinctly, yet weighing the whole together, they amounted to four ounces three drams and eleven grains, which wanted but nine grains of the whole weight of the Cupel and metals, so that allowing for what the Cu∣pel it self might have gained, the greatest Part seemed to be sunk into the Cupel. EXPERIMENT XIV, XV and XXI. To shew whether metals separated from an immediate contact with the fire would have their weight increased by it, we included an ounce of filings of Steel in two Crucibles luted together, and in two hours being taken out, they had acquired a dark colour, betwixt black and blue, and were increased in weight five grains, and this Experiment being repeated they gained six grains. Two ounces of Cop∣per in an hour and half gained eight grains, the like quantity of Tin being partly reduced to a white Calx, and partly melted in a yellow lump like Gold, it had gained six grains in
weight. But an ounce and four drachms of this Copper being a second time exposed for two hours to a strong fire in two Crucibles as be∣fore, gained ten grains more in weight, and had divers dark coloured flakes upon the Me∣tal, which upon handling, for the most part, fell off. Adrachm of Tin being mixed with two ounces of Lead, tho' at the first the mass was dry at the top, and seemed swelled and discoloured, yet Tin gives Lead such an Indisposition to Cupellation, that it answered not our Expecta∣tion. EXPERIMENT XVI, XVII and XVIII. Copper being made use of which consisted of thinner Plates than the former, an ounce increased twenty one grains in weight. Half a pound of Block-Tin being kept in Fusion in a Glass-Retort placed two days in a sand Furnace, it increased about two grains in weight. I tryed likewise to make a Precipitate of Mercury per se in sealed Glasses, but either by their breaking or other Inconveniences, it answered not my design. EXPERIMENT XIX and XX. A Calx of Tin per se which weighed an ounce, being kept upon a Cupel under a Mouffler two hours, gained in weight one drachm and thir∣ty five grains, and became much whiter than before. No Part of the Putte was melted, much less reduced into Metal. An ounce of filings of
Steel, which had been before exposed to the fire increased in weight two drams and twenty two grains; the filings being baked together, and when broke appearing like Iron. CHAP. XV. Additional Experiments about arresting and weighing of igneous Corpuscles. EXPERIMENT I and II. EIGHT ounces of Block-Tin being cut in pieces and put into a good round Vial, with a long neck, and being cautiously melted over Quick-Coals, the Glass being frequently shaken, to promote Calcination, near an hour, the neck of the Vial being most of the time preserved from the steams of the Coals with a cover of Paper; the Tin which was partly calcined, increased eighteen grains in weight. This being done we melted the remaining me∣tal into thin Plates, by which Operation, it lost three grains of the eighteen it had got; but being a second time exposed to Calcination in another Vial, it afforded a much greater Quantity of it than before, and increased in weight to eight ounces and twenty four grains. In which Tryals it is observable, that agitation much contributes to the Calcination of Metals.
EXPERIMENT III, IV, V. Eight ounces of Tin being exposed to cal∣cine in a Bolt-head Hermetically sealed, the Glass flew in pieces, and a yellowish Liquor, which was of an odious taste and smell, was found in the neck. But the Experiment being a second time repeated, the Metal being suffe∣red to cool, before the Glass broke, the weight was twenty three grains more than before, tho' the whole Calx amounted to no more than four scruples and eight grains: The top of the Me∣tal was very asperous and of a dark colour, tho' the neighbouring Surface and some places near the dark colour'd Calx, which was between the bottom and lowest part of the lump, was of a Golden colour by candle-light. Two ounces of filings of Tin being exposed to Calcination two hours in a small Retort, at the first seve∣ral steams issued out at the small Apex of the Stem, but then the Apex being sealed up, a yellowish clammy substance thinly spread and which smelled like fetid Oyl of Tartar, was gathered in the neck; and the Glass being broke, the lump of Metal which was in some measure covered with a gray Calx, weigh∣ed twelve grains more than before. EXPERIMENT VI and VII. An ounce of filing of Zinke being kept in a Bolt-head four hours over live Coals; fumes copiously were emitted out of the unstoped A∣pex of the Stem; and the whole remaining
Zinke, and the flowers which had ascended be∣ing weighed, wanted five grains of an ounce. But four ounces of Lead being enclosed in a∣nother Retort, it was held over a fire two hours; and then the Apex which was small being sealed up, the Glass was exposed to the fire two hours longer; in which time the Sur∣face of the melted metal was dark and rugged, and Part of it was turned into a dark coloured Calx. The Lead being weighed had gained about thirteen grains in weight. EXPERIMENT VIII and IX. Pieces of red Coral being exposed to the fire, till of a dark colour, gained three grains and a half in weight. Fresh and strong Quick-lime being placed upon a Cupel two hours, and which before weighed two drams, encreased in weight twenty nine grains. From whence it appears, that tho' Lime hath been before ex∣posed to the fire, yet it is capable of having more igneous Corpuscles united with its substance; from whence we may infer, that tho' Lime-stone by calcination hath lost much of its weight, yet it may have recieved a consi∣derable addition from the fire, which may in Part make amends for those Corpuscles which have flown away; upon which account it may be uncertain in other Bodies, which we have made Tryals with, how much weight they have truly received from the fire, since it is uncer∣ain how much of their first weight might be lost in Exhalations.
CHAP. XVI. A discovery of the Perviousness of Glass to ponderable Parts of Flame. EXPERIMENT I. TO shew that Glass is Pervious to the pon∣derable Part of Flame, I shall to the Expe∣riments already laid down subjoyn. That having fixed a small Pan which contained Sulphur, upon another which contained Coals, to continue its Flame; I contrived it so that nothing but the Flame of the Sulphur should come at the Re∣tort, and that the fire and smoak of the Coals should be carried off another way, which being done, two ounces of filings of Tin were Her∣metically sealled up in a Retort, and the Glass being gradually exposed three hours and a half to the Flame of the Sulphur, there was a good quantity of gray Calx at the bottom, and upon some Part of the Metal. In which Ope∣ration, it gained four grains and a half. And the Experiment being again repeated, the Metal acquired eleven grains and a half. And that it may not be thought that the increase of weight depended upon Particles of Glass dissol∣ved and fixed upon the Calces, I shall add, that I several times exposed Glasses to the fire without perceiving any considerable alteration in the weight of the Glass.
EXPERIMENT II. Tho' common Sulphur be a Body homogene∣ous enough, consisting of inflamable Parts, and an acid near a-kin to Spirit of Vitriol; yet to vary the Tryal, I made use of inflamable Spirit of Wine, over the Flame of which, a Glass Re∣tort with an ounce of Tin was held for two Hours; the Calx being considerable in quantity, was weighed, together with the remaining part of the Tin, which was hardned into a Lump, and it appeared that it had increased its weight four grains and a half. EXPERIMENT III. An ounce of Lead being sealed up in a Re∣tort, and exposed to the Flame of Spirit of Wine, seven scruples were turned into a gray∣ish Calx, which being weighed again with the rest of the Metal, it appeared, the increase of Weight was six grains. NB. But lest it should be thought, that the Particles of the Flame, which increased the weight of the Metal, were turned into Metal, I weighed the Calces in Air and Water, and found, that whereas Lead is to its Bulk of Water as 11 ½ to 1, this Calx was but as 9 to 1. From which Experiments it appears, that Metal receives an increase of Weight from Flame, and that too, through the Pores of Glass. But tho' I believe that Glass is penetrable to the Parts of Flame, yet I am far from thinking that
it is pervious either to Chymical Liquors, Quick∣silver, or Air. And this I shall add, that it may be worth while to consider, whether all the parts of Fire are fine enough to penetrate Glass, since Metals acquire not so much weight when shut up in Glasses, as when exposed to the open Fire. And it may be likewise consider'd, whether the Pores of Glass are naturally large enough to give way to the Fire's igneous Particles, or whether their Heat and rapid Motion does not enlarge the Pores of the Glass, and contribute to their Penetration of it: For I know a Menstruum, which will not work upon a Metal whilst cold; but when hot it will reduce it to a Powder. And on this occasion I shall add, that 'till I am further satisfied, I shall forbear to determine, whether the Rectitude of the Pores of Glass contributes to the Perviousness of it, and whether metalline Vessels are pervious to the ponderable parts of Flame, or not. Having laid down these doubts, I shall thence deduce the following Corollaries. COROLLARY I. Confirming the Parodox, That Flame may act as a Menstruum, and make Coalitions with the Bodies it works upon. From the Experiments laid down it appears, that Flame is capable of acting as a Menstruum, not only in dissolving, but by associating with the Parts of the Body it works upon, and there∣by to add Substance and Weight to them; and
tho' it renders not Lead and Tin liquid, yet it may still be accounted a Menstruum, it not be∣ing a constant property of a Menstruum to dis∣solve the Body into a liquid; since Tin dissol∣ved in Aqua fortis remains in the bottom in the form of a white Calx. And when Oyl of Vitri∣ol is drawn from Quick-silver, it leaves the Mercury in the form of a white Powder, but a small Part of which, will be dissoluble in Water. And one thing observable in this Menstruum is, that whereas other Menstruums are several times the proportion of the Body dissolved, in this, the Corrosive makes but a twentieth part of the Body corroded. COROLLARY II. Proposing a Paradox about Calcination and Calces. From our Experiments it appears, that Bo∣dies may be calcin'd, without having the great∣est part of their Substance driven away, and only the Caput Mortuum, and some fixed Salts; remaining behind, as the generality of Chymists and Philosophers teach; since it is evident, that in our Tryal, no considerable Particles flew a∣way, but that the Metal gains more than it lo∣ses. And hence we may have reason to judge of the erroneous opinion of those who suppose Saccharum Saturni to be the sweet Salt extra∣cted by the Spirit, whereas it appears, that it plentifully concurs in the Composition of it; so that from hence it appears, that the Calx of a Metal, may be in some cases not the Caput Mortuum or Terra damnata, but the Magistery
of it, since the bulk of the Body is preserved, and it only, with a Solvent acquires a new form. And I have elsewhere made it appear, that the dry Calx of Lead may be turned into a mallea∣ble Metal again, without Flux-powder, or any other Additament. COROLLARY III. From the foregoing Trials it likewise ap∣pears what will become of the Epicurean and Cartesian Doctrines of Fire; the one teaching, that tho' Fire may penetrate Glass, yet it pas∣ses through Metals, without being arrested by them; and the other, that igneous Particles cannot penetrate Glass. Whether Fire is arrested in Meat as it roasts or not, I shall not undertake to determine; but if it does, it may be considerable in reference to Mens Health, to employ Fire which may be least noxious. COROLLARY IV. From hence it likewise appears, that so sub∣tle, spirituous, and fugitive a Body as Fire, may by uniting with congruous Parts of Matter, form a ponderous and stable Body; and whether the Sun-beams may have the like effect on several Bodies it works upon, I shall leave to be consi∣dered. And I shall also leave others to consi∣der, whether all the Particles of Fire and Flame, that are subtle and agitated enough to penetrate Glass, and fasten themselves to included Bodies, be reduced by Ignition to the same Form, or
else retain somewhat of their proper Qualities, only I shall add, that in such kind of Inquiries it may be of use to compare the specifick gravi∣ties of the Calces of Metals, made in Glasses, by the operation of Flames, whose Fuels are of very different Natures. CHAP. XVII. New Experiments touching the relation be∣twixt Flame and Air. BEfore I lay down the Experiments, I shall first proceed to offer the Difficulties which occurr'd in the Tryals; and first, that some of them in which the Burning-Glass was employ'd, I could only try them in clear Sun-shining Days, the concentred Rays of the Sun being otherwise inconveniently reflected and partly refracted. Secondly, Where I was forced to employ hot Irons, if the Cavity of the Receiver was large, the Iron would be cold before the Air was exhau∣sted; but if it was small, the Cement would be melted; so that I was forced to make use of a peculiar sort of Cement, which was not so subject to be melted. But to these difficulties I shall add, that we must not be too apt to conclude, that the Re∣ceiver in these cases is exhausted sufficiently, when the Mercury in the Gage is depressed; since that may happen upon the account of the Air expanded by the Heat of the Iron; and
therefore the Air is to be exhausted, 'till the Mer∣cury in the Gage can be depressed no lower. But if it should be asked, whether a Vacuum may not more conveniently and speedily be made by Mercury, in the Torrecellian Experi∣ment? I shall answer, That tho' the Vacuum be more nimbly made, yet the Phaenomena exhibi∣ted there are apt to be influenc'd by some ex∣tricated Particles of Air expanding themselves, it being impossible to leave that space wholly void of Air; besides it appears by a Bubble being broke in my Engin, that it exhausts the Air more clearly than Mercury; since in a Va∣cuum made by the latter, the Air included in a Bubble was never able to expand it self pow∣erfully enough to break it. Besides, there is one conveniency in our Engin, that, as Air ex∣tricates it self, it may be drawn out by plying the Engin as occasion requires, whereas in the Torrecellian Experiment, the Vacuum is made all at once; besides the Mercurial Tube is not so proper for the following Experiments as our Engin is. But to proceed to the Experiments contained under the following Titles.
The I. TITLE. Of the dificulty of producing Flame without Air. EXPERIMENT I. An endea∣vour to kin∣dle Sulphur in Vacuo Boyliano.A Piece of red hot Iron, half an Inch in Di∣ameter, and an Inch thick, being con∣vey'd in a glazed melting-Pot into our Recei∣ver, we carefully exhausted the Air, and let∣ting down flowers of Sulphur in a Paper, the Paper was presently consumed, and the Sulphur falling into the Concave Surface of the Iron, only smoaked a little, but did not actually kin∣dle. EXPERIMENT II. Another way we made use of to kindle Sul∣phur in Vacuo was, by putting Flowers of Sul∣phur into a Glass-Bubble, and when the Air was exhausted, placing it upon live Coals, the Heat would not kindle the Sulphur, but raise it in the form of a yellow Varnish up to the opposite side of the Glass, and by turning that to the Fire, it would rise again to that side of the Glass which was uppermost. EXPERIMENT III and IV. To shew how much interest the Air hath in the production of Flame, when the Sulphur was too cool to burn without Air, we took off the
Receiver, upon which it presently flamed: And another time when the Receiver was thrice successively so far exhausted, that the Sulphur ceased to Flame, each time, that the Air was again let in, we could discern several flashes of fire, which by their blue colour appeared to be Sulphureous flames. EXPERIMENT V and VI. Endeavours to explode Gun-Pow∣der in Va∣cuo.The Beams of the Sun in the Summer being cast upon Gun-Powder in Vacuo, it first smoak∣ed and then melted, but did not explode whilst I continued the use of the burning Glass. But another time having convey'd the Iron mention∣ed before red hot into our Receiver, as soon as it was exhausted we let down a piece of Pa∣per with Gun-Powder in it, and tho' the Pa∣per was consumed, and the Sulphur melted, yet it did not go off. But the Experiment be∣ing repeated with a grain of very good Sulphur, when it had burnt so long that we no longer expected an Explosion, I let in the Air, and sometime after it went off. EXPERIMENT VII and VIII. Several grains of Gun-Powder being convey'd into an exhausted bubble, and that placed up∣on the live Coals, it flamed considerably and afforded sublimate, which by the light of a candle exhibited livid colours of a Rain-Bow. In our Physico-mechanical Experiments, we men∣tioned an Experiment where a Pistol was fired in our Receiver; but the Receiver not being
then sufficienly exhausted we reiterated the Experiment, and found, that when by the help of the Turn-Key, the Trigger of a primed Pistol was pulled by a string purposely fastned to the Trigger and Turn-Key, the Powder in the Pan would not go off, yet when a little Air was let in, the Gun-Powder remaining in the Pan, would flash off when the lock was cocked, and let off as before; yet one thing observa∣ble was, that tho' the Gun-Powder would not explode, when the Receiver was totally exhau∣sted, yet the violent percussion of the flint would cause sparks of fire to fly from it. EXPERIMENT IX. Aurum Fulminans was exploded in the ex∣hausted Receiver with a considerable noise, by the Sun-Beams cast upon it with a burning Glass; and a quarter of a grain being let down by the Turn-Key upon a piece of Iron red hot, it exploded with a flash, which was visible; the place where the Experiment was tryed be∣ing purposely dark; and a yellowish powder was scattered about the Cavity of the Receiver.
The II. TITLE. Of the difficulty of preserving Flame without Air. EXPERIMENT I. Of the flaming of Sulphur in Vacuo.FLowers of Sulphur being kindled upon a metalline Plate and convey'd into the Re∣ceiver, when the Air began to be sucked out gradually decay'd, till at the last, the Receiver being totally exhausted, the Flame was extin∣guished, and upon a reingress of Air, it only began to smoak again. EXPERIMENT II. A larger piece of Iron than that formerly mention'd, being made use of, and convey'd in∣to a Receiver, a good quantity of Sulphur was let down upon it, which flamed considerably, and continued not only till the Receiver was exhausted, but a little after, and till it seemed to be extinguished for want of fuel. In trying of which Experiments, the follow∣ing particulars are to be observed. First, that the Iron is placed on a Pedastal of Tobacco-pipe-clay not too near the Glass lest it should break it. Secondly, upon the concave Surface of the Iron, we placed a Convex-shell which was shaped like a flattish bottom, to keep the Hae from having too large a Surface, and con∣sequently from consuming too fast. Thirdly, it will be convenient, for the more commodious
discerning of the Phaenomena of this Experi∣ment to try it in a dark place. And fourthly, it is convenient to advertise that the Sulphur frequently so obscures the Glass with its fumes, which partly stick to it, that sometimes it is very difficult to discern what happens with∣in the Glass. Fifthly, it is requisite the Heat of the Iron should be considerable, that the Flame of the Sulphur may be more lasting; the flaming of it depending on the Heat of the Iron, and not the force of its own Flame. EXPERIMENT III. A very volatile and saline piercing Liquor being dropped upon filings of Steel, the Mix∣ture grew hot, and emitted out of the Vial it was contained in, very fetid steams, which would kindle at the flame of a Candle, and continue to burn a good while; where we convey'd it into our Receiver, and upon the first Exsuction of Air it flamed brisker than before; and like∣wise upon the second and third; but after it went out, it would not be kindled again, tho' the Air was let in upon it. EXPERIMENT IV. Spirit of Wine being impregnated with a Mine∣ral, which tinged its Flame, I convey'd it into the Receiver in a small Glass-Lamp with a slender wick; and observed, that in half a minute after the Pump was plyed, the Flame was extinguished: But letting Air in and out as occasion required, I observ'd, that when the Flame began to decay,
the Turn-Key being successively drawn al∣most out, the Flame lasted a minute and a half, and sometimes longer. The Turn-Key being taken out in the beginning, it lasted two minutes or better. A Pipe being bedded in the Ce∣ment at the bottom of the Glass, and having at each end an open Orifice, almost of the big∣ness of that which the Turn-Key usually fills, the Flame burnt very well, and would have con∣tinued longer than it did if we would have per∣mitted it. The Orifice at the top being stopped, the lower was left open, yet the Flame began to decay, but Air being blown in with a pair of Bellows, it was presently refreshed again, yet in a minute after it was quite extinguish∣ed. EXPERIMENT V. Flame pre∣served un∣der Water.Tho' it is taught that Naptha and Camphire will burn under Water, yet I could never find that they would; but three ounces of Gun-Powder, a drachm of well burnt Charcoal, good Sulphur half a drachm, of choice Salt-Petre near a drachm and a half, being all powdered and mixed together, a Quill or a Tobacco-pipe stopped at one end being filled with this Mixture and kindled in the Air, would burn, till it was wholly consumed, under Water, the force of the Flame keeping the Water from breaking in upon it at the open end. In which Experiment Flame seems to be continued with∣out. Air, there being no Air to preserve it under Water, but what may be lodged in the Pores of the Water; except some moist Particles be∣twixt
the Particles of the Nitre, in favour of the necessity of Air to preserve Flame, may be supposed to be rarified and form Air for a time, as the rarified exhalations which flow out of an Aeolipile, which are not true and permanent Air, but presently return to Water again. EXPERIMENT VI. Of the flaming of a Metal in Vacuo.Having placed the piece of Iron, so often made use of in our Receiver, we designed to let a parcel of Sulphur fall upon it, but when we went to drop the Sulphur down, by accident it fell on one side the Iron; and whilst we were considering what to do, we discerned a a blue Flame in the middle of the Glass, which continued much longer than that of ordinary Sulphur, and when we opened the Receiver, we found that it was afforded by a metalline substance which lay melted in the middle of the concave superficies of the Iron, being a compo∣sition of Lead and Tin; but tho' these Metals mixed, so opened the Bodies of each other as to yield a Sulphureous fuel for Flame in Vacuo, yet in the open Air they would not.
The III. TITLE. Of the difficult Propagation of actual Flame in Vacuo Boyliano. EXPERIMENT I. HAving kindled some Sulphur, which was of a peculiar sort, upon the Iron so of∣ten mentioned, I let down a piece of Spunk upon it, when the Receiver was exhausted; and by being contiguous to the flames it was turned into a substance as black and brittle as Tinder, and disposed to kindle when touched with fire. EXPERIMENT II. Another parcel of the same Sulphur being kindled in Vacuo Boyliano, Camphire, tho' in the open Air, disposed to draw the Flame of Sulphur, yet it was not kindled by hanging in the Flame of it. And a Match being partly dipped in Sulphur, and let down upon the hot Iron, burnt as far as the Sulphur raught, but no further. EXPERIMENT III and IV. Having placed a piece of Paper upon the Plate of our Pump and whelmed over it a very clear and thin Receiver, we laid a train of Gun-Powder upon the Paper, and observed, that tho' by a good Burning-Glass, several grains would be exploded; yet those would
not kindle those that were contiguous to them, the Propagation of Flame so much depends on the free access of Air. And to confirm this, I shall add, that a little Instrument made to try Gun-Powder, being charged and primed and suspended in Vacuo, tho' by the help of a Burning-Glass the priming would be exploded, yet that would not kindle the Powder contain'd in the Box; but when the exhausted Air was let in again, and the Pan new primed, tho' the Receiver was shut, it would in that close Air go off readily; and also in the open Air. EXPERIMENT V. Gun-Powder being put into two Bubbles, one of which was exhausted and the other not, they were placed upon Live-coals, upon which, when they had stood a while, they where both burst in pieces, but without the appearance of any Flame, which effect seemed to depend on this, viz. That the Heat of the coals acted not only on a few grains of Powder at once, but upon the whole Area, so that every Particle being equally acted on, as to sense, they were exploded at the same time, so the Focus of a Burning-Glass acting uniformly on Aurum Ful∣minans, causes it to explode at once, but it may be so ordered, that the Focus not sufficiently warming one Part, a partial explosion will on∣ly ensue.
CHAP. XVIII. New Experiments about the relation betwixt Air and the Flamma Vitalis of Animals. EXPERIMENT I. Animals included in Receivers with Flame and Air.REctified Spirit of Wine contained in a Glass-Lamp with a thin Wick, and at the same time, a small Green-Finch, being both convey∣ed into a Receiver eighteen Inches high, and which was large enough to contain about twen∣ty pints of Water, the Flame of the Lamp was extinguish'd at the end of two Minutes; but the Bird being brisk at the end of the third Minute, was taken out. And when the Bird recover'd again, the Experiment being repeated, the Flame was extinguish'd in two Minutes, but the Bird continu'd well longer. The Experiment being again repeated with two Lamps, they were both extinguish'd in a Minute, but the Bird con∣tinued well five or six times as long. A Mouse continued well a long time after the Lamp was extinguish'd. And the same Mouse being shut up in another Receiver with a Wax-Candle, seemed to have received no damage ten Minutes after the Candle was out, tho' the Air was clouded with the Smoak of it.
EXPERIMENT II. A Gold-Finch and a Piece of a Candle being included in a Receiver, large enough to hold two Galons, the Candle was extinguish'd in two Minutes; but the Bird in that smoaky Air continued well a good while after. And the like succeeded with a wax Taper in another Receiver. Being shut up with a piece of a Can∣dle in another Receiver, which the Air was drawn out of, the Bird out-lived the Flame, but not without Convulsions. And the like suc∣ceeded with a wax Taper. The same Bird being included with a piece of Charcoal two Inches long, and half an Inch thick, when the Air was so far pumped out, that the Coal was past being renewed by letting in the Air, the Bird was sick, but presently re∣cover'd. And the same Experiment was re∣peared with the like success. Whether the Fire and Flamma vitalis of Animals feed upon di∣stinct parts of the Air or not, and whether the former destroys its Pabulum sooner or not, I shall leave to be consider'd. EXPERIMENT III, IV, and V. Of the shin∣ing of Glow Worms.It being the opinion of some, that the shin∣ing of Glow-worms proceeds from a kind of Effulsion of the Biolychnium, or Vital Flame; I shall subjoin, That Glow-Worms being inclu∣ded in a Receiver in the Dark, as the Air was exhausted, their Light was diminish'd, and as it was let in again, renewed. And lest this
should depend on the Glow-Worm drawing the luminous Part of its Body into the dark Part, and so obscuring it, I enclosed the luminous Parts by themselves, and observed the same Phaenomena as before; save that, upon the Re∣ingress of Air, they seemed more lucid than before. The like Experiments being repeated with a dead Worm, it at the first retained its Light when the Air was exhausted, but after a while it diminish'd and increas'd as the Light of a live one, only it shone more vividly, and as the Light of the live one was a greenish blue, so this afforded a white yellow. EXPERIMENT VI. A Mouse being weighed alive, and then strangled, tho' nothing fell from him, he seem∣ed 7/16 of a grain lighter when dead. And a young Catlin of about ten or eleven Ounces weight, lost four grains of its weight whilst a strangling, so many subtle parts being evapora∣ted by its violent Struglings. So that the com∣mon Tradition that Animals are heavier when dead than alive holds not true. To this Expe∣riment, I shall add, that having enclosed Silk-Worms Eggs, and those small Infects which turn to winged Insects, and form Gnats, in Va∣cuo, neither of them hatched or generated as in the open Air.
CHAP. XIX. New Experiments about Explosions. THE Learned Dr. Willis, and others hav∣ing endeavour'd to account for some Phae∣nomena by Explosions, I shall lay down the fol∣lowing instances of Explosions made by Liquors. EXPERIMENT I. Strong Spirit of Nitre being put into a Bolt-head, to the quantity of an Ounce, upon the Affusion of Spirit of Wine, part of it flew up to the Ceiling of the House, and dropping down upon a Man's Skin burnt him terribly; and as Spirit of Wine was successively poured in, it grew intensely hot, and emitted red Fumes, which would take Fire at a Candle held a quarter of a Yard from the Mouth of the Glass, and would burn there 'till blown out. And an ounce of Spirit of Nitre being convey∣ed into another Bolt-head, and a Bladder tied over the top of it, which contained Alkohol of Wine, a little of it being poured into the Bolt-head, it caused a vehement Explosion, by which the Bladder was presently expanded, and the Fumes presently made their way out in the form of an Orange-colour'd Smoak. EXPERIMENT II and III. Oyl of Vitriol and Oyl of Turpentine being shaken together, produce a strong Ferment,
and an Expansion or Explosion. The Blood of Fishes and Sea-Monsters is actually cold, and yet they move very violently; wherefore in favour of those that believe Animal Explosions, I shall add, that if Oyl of Vitriol and Sal-Armoniack be mixed gradually, the one being contained in a Bladder, and the other in a Bolt-head, to which it is tyed (as in the first Experiment) when the Sal-Armoniack falls upon the Oyl, it will cause a violent Explosion. CHAP. XX. New Experiments concerning the relation be∣twixt Light and Air, in shining-Wood, and Fishes. Communicated in the Trans∣actions of Jan. 6. 1667/8. EXPERIMENT I. Of the rela∣tion be∣twixt Light and Air.A Piece of good shining Rotten-wood, be∣ing conveyed into our Pneumatick En∣gin, at the seventh Suction it began to grow more dim, and at the tenth it quite lost its Light. EXPERIMENT II. But as soon as the Air was let in again, the Light appeared again like a little Flash of Light∣ning, and more vivid than before. These Ex∣periments being a second time tryed, the Light was diminish'd at the second Exsuction, and at
the sixth disappeared, which was but six Mi∣nutes from the first Exsuction. EXPERIMENT III. In a third Tryal, the Wood having been kept in Vacuo half an Hour, recover'd its Lumi∣nousness upon a re-admission of the Air. EXPERIMENT IV. A shining Body being included in a Receiver, and the Air exhausted 'till the Body had almost lost its Luminousness, we left it some time in that rarify'd Air, and observ'd that the Light gradually diminish'd, tho' the Receiver was no further exhausted. EXPERIMENT V. Having included shining-Wood in such an Instrument as Mr. Hook hath invented to com∣press Air, I found, that tho' the Air was for∣cibly compressed, the Light was not sensibly impaired. EXPERIMENT VI. Shining-Wood being included in a sealed Glass, for two Days retained its genuine Lu∣stre, but the third Day the Light was more ob∣scure.
EXPERIMENT VII. What effects the exhausted Receiver would have had on Bolonian Stone, Diamonds and Glow-Worms, I had not opportunities to try: But a piece of red hot Iron being stuck in To∣bacco-pipe-Clay, and convey'd into the Recei∣ver, there was no sensible effect produced by evacuating or replenishing the Receiver. EXPERIMENT VIII. Wood being inclosed in a Glass hermetically sealed, and that convey'd into the Receiver, the Rays of Light were equally visible through the vacuous Medium, as through the Air when let in again. EXPERIMENT IX. We took a Glass Tube sealed at one end, and putting a piece of shining-Wood into it, we propped it with a Cork, to keep it from fal∣ling out; which being done, we inverted the open end of the Tube into stagnant Mercury, and conveying it into a Receiver, we exhausted the Air, that that in the Pipe by expanding it self, might make its way out, through the Quick-silver; which being done, we observed, that the Wood which lost its Light in the rari∣fied Air, recover'd it again, when by the Pres∣sure of the external Air the Mercury was buoy∣ed up within two Inches of the Wood, the rari∣fy'd Air being thereby condensed again.
EXPERIMENT X. A shining Fish which was very vivid, lost much of its Lustre, when the Air was drawn out; and a small piece of it, which was less luminous lost its Light in another Receiver, but recover'd it again, when the Air was let in a∣gain. EXPERIMENT XI. To try whether the Fish which retain'd its Light in some measure, did it upon the account of some peculiarity in its Nature, I enclosed a large piece of Wood in a Receiver, but it lost its Light in Vacuo, and regained it when the Air was let in again. EXPERIMENT XII. Rotten shining Fishes being included in Vacuo twenty four hours, they regained their Light again when the Air was let in. EXPERIMENT XIII. Considering how much Putrifaction contributes to the shining of Fishes, and the Air to Putrifa∣ction, I took a Fish, and hanging a piece in the Air a little before the time they usually grow luminous, I included another in Vacuo, to try whether the Fish would grow luminous there, or whether, tho' it appeared not to be so, yet when the Air was let in it would disclose its
Light; but the Attempt being twice made, the one was frustrated by the breaking of the Glass; and the other, by the peculiar Qualities of a Fish, which in the Air grew not luminous in the usual time, nor much beyond it. EXPERIMENT XIV. A shining Fish being immersed in Water in a wide mouth'd Glass, was not at all affected, upon the exhausting of the Receiver, or when the Air was let in again. EXPERIMENT XV. A shining Fish, which lost not its Lustre up∣on the exhausting of the Receiver, was kept in Vacuo forty eight Hours, in which time it lost its Light wholly, 'till the Air was re-admitted, and then it shone again; but the Receiver being a second time exhausted, it lost its Light in four Hours, but renew'd it again upon a re-access of Air. The suddenness of this renewed Light, put me in mind of those Lights which are sometimes seen in Vaults and Caves newly open'd, and up∣on the first ingress of Air; but those are not so lasting, by reason of the less tenacity of the substance which yields those luminous Rays. Another Fish being included in Vacuo three days, renewed its Light when the Air was let in; but a third did not recover its luminous quality 'till it had remained sometime in the Air. And two other shining Fishes, being in∣cluded three Days in Vacuo, when the Air was
let in again, that which was first most vivid, recover'd its Light first; and the other some∣time after. CHAP. XXI. Observations and Tryals about the resemblan∣ces and Differences between a burning Coal and shining Wood. Communicated in the Transactions of Feb. 1667/8 Resemblances. Resemblan∣ces of a shi∣ning Coal and Wood.1. BOTH of them afford Light. 2. Both of them require the presence of the Air to continue their Light. 3. Being deprived of Light by withdrawing the Air, they recover it again upon the re-access of it. 4. Both of them will lose their Light in Water. 5. Coldness of the Air ex∣tinguishes not their Light; for, shining Wood being put into a Glass Tube sealed at one end, and that placed in a frigorifick Mixture, 'till Water contained in another Pipe was froze, it still continued Light, tho' a shining Fish lost its Light in a quarter of an hour. Differences. Their Diffe∣rences.1. A live Coal would be extinguish'd by Compression, but shining Wood will not. 2. Shining Wood will recover its Light when the Air is let in again, but a Coal will not.
3. Shining wood will contiue to give light in a close Glass, but the Coal will not. 4. A Coal emits smoak, but the other does not. 5. A Coal consumes, but the other does not. 6. A Coal is hot, but shining wood is not warm, which I discovered by applying to the shining wood the Ball of a Weather-Glass de∣scribed in the History of Cold, in whose Stem is contained a Pendulous drop. CHAP. XXII. Some Observations about shining Flesh, com∣municated in the Transactions of De∣cember 16. 1672. A Flesh which shines in the dark.A Neck of Veal which was observ'd one Night to be Luminous in the Larder, afforded the following Phaenomena in a dark Room. 1. It shone in several places; those shining spots varying likewise in bigness and form. 2. The Parts which shone most were those grisly or bony places which the Butcher's clea∣ver had past. And we perceived likewise that the Medulla Spinalis did shine. One place of a Tendon shone, and several spots in the flesh distant from the Bone. 3. By the light afforded by these spots, I could discern several Letters in the Title of the Phi∣losophical Transactions; the most vivid Rays being of a greenish blue, like the tails of Glow-worms.
Neither a Weather-Glass or the touch could discover any more Heat in those Parts than in others; nor were they in the least pu∣trid. 4. The window of the Larder is Northward; and the floor a story below the Kitchen, and separated from it only by a Boarded floor. 5. The Wind was high, and South-west, the Air being hot for the season. The Moon was past its last quarter, and the Mercury in the Ba∣rometer stood at 29 1/16 Inches. 6. A piece of a shinning bone being cut off the thickness of half a Crown shone on both sides, and the place it was cut off shone likewise but more faintly. 7. The Flesh lost some of its light by rubbing; but imparted no light to my hand: But the Flesh being pressed betwixt two pieces of Flesh it lost nothing of it's Light. 8. A piece of it, having lain a quarter of an hour in inflamable Spirit of Wine lost its Lu∣minousness; but in Water it continued an hour without being impaired. But being convey'd into our Pneumatick Engin, it was diminished gradually and considerably. 9. I observ'd several Luminous places in a Leg of Veal brought out of the same Lar∣der. 10. A piece of Veal kept all Night in a Phial, shone in the Morning, and continued its Light till the sixth Day at Night. 11. A Pullet hung up in the same Larder, appeared also to be Luminous.
CHAP. XXIII. Observations of a Diamond that shines in the dark. Observati∣ons on Di∣amonds.HAving met with a Diamond, which, tho' it would not yield light in the day, would afford a conspicuous light in the Night, I thought it would be of no small use in explain∣ing the abstruse Nature of Light. And tho' a great many think it no rarity, that there are Carbuncles and Diamonds which shine in the dark, yet there are some who deny, that there are any shining stones at all, as Boetius de Boot; Johannes de Laet, and Olaus Wormius, yet Va∣temannus and Garcias ab Horto, pretend to be Eye witnesses of Carbuncles which shone in the dark; and Marcus Paulus Venetus tells us, that the King of Zeilan had a Rubie as thick as a Man's arm, and a Palm long. And two Russian Cossacks tell us, that they heard from the People of Cottay, that their King had a Rubie which would shine Night and Day. And Benvonuto Cellini, an Italian Writer, gives us an account of a Carbuncle which affor∣ded a considerable Light in the Night. And we our selves have been informed of a shining substance found in Scotland. And I am further told, that a Dutch Admiral had a Diamond, which when he opened a Coffer under Deck in a dark Room, would shine by its native Light, which is the more strange, be∣cause that is a much colder Climate than the East-Indies; for it is observable, that warmth
much contributes to the shining of such stones, since rubbing will cause some to shine, which when cold will not; which makes me the less doubt of what is said of right Turquois, viz. That it changes colour as the wearer is sick or well, and loses its splendor after Death, which is attested by the Observations of Boetius de Boot, and Olaus Wormius; and tho' Antonio Nri tells us, that a Turquois discoloured and grown white, will regain its colour, if immersed in Oyl of sweet Almonds, yet Wormius tells us, that a Nephritick stone being dipped in a De∣coction of herbs lost its virtue. And it is ob∣served, that the Texture of Oculus Mundi will be so changed by being left in Water, that from Opacous it will become Transparent, which acquired lustre it will soon lose in the Air. Observations made on Mr. Clayton's Diamond. It was a flat Table Diamond ⅓ of an Inch long, and less in breadth, of a bad Water, and less vivid in the day than other Diamonds, being blemished with a whitish Cloud about the middle of it, which blemish covered near a third part of the stone. This Diamond being looked upon in a shady place in the day, and also with a Microscope, neither any thing peculiar in the stone, nor a∣ny light was perceived. Secondly, when the Candle was removed in a dark Room, it did not shine without be∣ing rubbed or otherwise prepared.
Thirdly, I could neither produce Light by rubbing together two Pebbles, nor by a vehe∣ment attrition of Rock-Crystal, nor by two Diamonds, as by this stone. Fourthly, it was hard enough to grave upon Rock-Chrystal with it, and was endewed with an Electricity. Fifthly, by rubbing it in the dark, it would be excited to shine like rotten wood, but much fainter than the scales or slabber of a Whiting, or than Glow-worms; and it presently ceased after the attrition was ended. But being rub∣bed brisksly it would continue its Light much longer, so that it lasted eight times as long as it was a rubbing▪ Sixthly, holding it near a faint fire excited its Luciferous Qualities a little, but by holding it near a Candle it was more apparently excited in a dark Room; and it acquired a little glimmer∣ing by being held near a red piece of Iron, as also by being contiguous to my naked Body sometime. Seventhly, by being rubbed till it acquired Luciferous Qualities, it was also Electrical, but not when it was excited to shine by the Heat of the Fire or a Candle. Eighthly, attrition varied its Luciferous Qua∣lities, as the Cloath varied in colour; but on white and red it succeeded best. It was like∣wise excited in some measure by being rubbed upon a white wooden Box; and a purely glazed Earth, which excited it much better than any other Body except white ones. Ninthly, when it was excited, being plunged into Water, Spirit of Wine, Oyls of all sorts,
Acid Spirits, and Alkalizate Solutions, none of them destroyed its shining properties, but when it was taken out of the Water it was not so easily excited as before. Tenthly, neither Spittle nor warm Liquors would extinguish its Light; but being rubbed with a transparent horn, I could discover Light through it, and sometimes little sparks of fire. Eleventhly, being rubbed upon a blue Glass, the faint Light was not visible through it, but being first excited and then applyed to the Glass, the Rays were tinged in their passage through it. Twelfthly, by pressing it hard upon a piece of white Tyle it became Luminous, as also it discovered a short Coruscation when I pressed my finger upon it: And if I thrust or stuck the point of a Bodkin against it, it would discover a short, but not a lasting Coruscation, so that its Light seemed to be promoted by pressure ra∣ther than attrition. The same Experiments being tryed with o∣ther precious Stones, some Diamonds would by attrition be brought to a glimmering Light, but others would not; but neither the other precious Stones, nor Artificial or Natural Chrystal would afford the least glimmering of Light.
CHAP. XXIV. The Aerial Noctiluca, or some new Phaenome∣na; and a process of a Factitious self-shining substance. Of an Aerial No∣ctiluca.PHosphorus's are either natural, as Glow∣worms, some sorts of rotten Wood and Fishes; or artificial, which are the chief subject of this discourse; and are either, First, such as will retain a Lucidness sometime after they have been exposed to the Sun-Beams, as the Bolonian Stone, and Phosphorus Hermeticus of Balduinus, which may be made of Chalk, the latter of which succeeds much better than the former; for it is presently excited in the Sun-Beams, and even at the flame of a Candle, and conti∣nues to shine a considerable time in the dark; yet this advantage the Bolonian Stone hath above the other, that it retains its Virtue of being excited much longer. Or, Secondly, self-shin∣ing substances, such as are usually called Nocti∣luca; and are either consistent or liquid, such as Mr. Crafft brought to London, the consistent one being of a gummy Nature and constantly lucid; but the other apt to vanish, if exposed to the open Air. To which I shall add, one of my own preparation, which does not shine it self, but when exposed to the Air, the Efflu∣via mixing with it became lucid, which there∣fore I call the Aerial Noctiluca: In preparing of which, from some Parts of a Man's Body, it was not only difficult to hit upon the true degree of Heat, but the Vessels in which it
was raised by Distillation, being not able to hold out so long as they should, we were forced to save the Luciferous matter, by small parcels and in distinct Vials. Observations made on the Liquor which was con∣tain'd in the second Vial, which tho' it was large enough to contain two ounces, had but a spoon∣ful of the Liquor in it. 1. By Day-light this shining Liquor was not near Diaphanous, but of a muddy grayish co∣lour. And when it was disposed to shine in the dark, the Cavity of the Vial above the Li∣quor seemed to be full of whitish fumes, tho' at other times transparent. 2. The Vial when close stopped was not Lu∣minous in the dark, but the Light or Flame ap∣peared as soon as it was exposed to the Air, and the Vial was unstopped; and that the Ac∣cension and Propagation of this Flame depen∣ded on the contact of the Air, appeared, since agitation would not kindle it, but when the Bottle was unstopped the kindled Flame would gradually be propagated downwards; and if a few Bubbles of Air were only let in by re∣moving the cork aside and putting it close in again, the Flame would appear upon the top of the fumes, without being able to propagate it self much downwards. To which Observa∣tions I shall add, that when the Flame appeared it was most vivid the nearer the Air, and when it was extinguished, it first disappeared in the bottom, and then expired at the top. But when the Vial had been unstopped for
some time, when it was stopped again, the Air that had leisurely insinuated it self would cherish the Flame for an hour or two. 3. It was observable, that when the Air had been long pen'd up with this shining Liquor, the spring of it would be so far weakned, that when the Vial was unstopped, the external Air would presently rush in again, from whence ap∣pears the Interest of the Air, in promoting the shining of this Acry Noctiluca. Of the Reason of Noctiluca'sAs for the Reason why the Air should▪ con∣tribute to such Phaenomena, I shall offer the following Conjectures, viz. That the Saline Parts of the Air, caused a Fermentation in the fumes of the Liquor, by which means, they being briskly agitated, are either convey'd to, or unite with the common, Aether, and affect the Eye joyntly; and tho' Mr. Craft's consi∣stent Noctiluca shines when closed up from the Air, yet that may be attributed partly to the Viscousness of the Luciferous matter, which is less apt to be dissipated; which I am the apter to believe, since it being once exposed to the open Air, it was considerably wasted and was rendered much more violent; so that it pro∣duced considerable effects of actual Heat. But tho' I am inclined to believe that the Air con∣tributes thus to the shining of these Noctiluca's, by putting the Particles of the fumes into a brisk agitation, yet whether it acts immediately on the fumid matter it invades, or whether it dissipates it, or acts after the manner of a Vital Spirit, or further, whether the Air uniting with these fumes forms a Body fit to be agitated a∣bout,
by the Aether, I shall leave to be further inquired into. But to return to our Observa∣tions. 4. Tho' agitation before the Vial was unstop∣ped would not kindle the Light; yet when it was opened, it would be increased by it. And even when it was in its dark state, if I poured a little of it upon my hand, and rubbed it with my finger, it would presently become vivid, and emit store of Luminous Rays, as well as fumes very offensive to the Nostrils; and when I ceased to rub, and the Luminous Quality was lost, it would be renewed again by a repeated attrition; but in a little time its lucid Virtue would decay. 5. As for the degree of the Light of this Luminous matter, it was equal with that of some rotten wood; and it was observable, that the Rays of it were reflected but weakly by black Bodies, but appeared very lucid when in∣closed in white ones, tho' I could not perceive the Rays of it reflected from a redish Diamond or an Emerauld. This Light in respect of it self was Opacous, but transparent when held near external Light, and interposed betwixt it and the Eye. 6. I tryed whether the Sun-Beams would ex∣cite those fumes, which are Concomitants of its Luminousness, but could not perceive them rais'd in the least. As for the Nature of this Liquor I could not perceive it upon my Tongue either Acid or Alkalizate, but Empyreumatical, al∣most like that of Spirit of crude Tartar, its smell being like that of an Empyreumatical Oyl, compounded with a stink like that of
stale Urine. It turned not Syrup of Violets green, as volatil Alkalies, or urinous Salts do; nor did it by other Tryals appear to be an A∣cid. 7. This Liquor in its lucid State being agita∣ted, several consistent Particles being by that Agitation raised, and sticking to the sides of the Glass, appeared to be more lucid than the Fumes. Having wet my Finger with this Li∣quor, and rubbed it upon my Hand 'till it be∣came luminous, I immersed my Finger in Wa∣ter, upon which the Light was extinguished; but when I took it out of the Water, and rub∣bed it again, it became lucid as before. 8. But twice I observ'd, that there was such a peculiar Temper in the Air, that it continu'd to flame twelve or fifteen Hours after it had been stopped up. And at last this Liquor be∣came so effaete, that it would not yield Light, 'till its Parts were agitated by Attrition, or put into motion by the Heat of the Fire. 9. To what Observations have been already made, I shall add the following, made on the Liquor contain'd in the first Vial. Observations on the Liquor contained in the first Vial. 1. The Liquor being muddy shone ten hours after it was first poured into the Vial, and when the Vial was unstopped the Fumes were put in∣to a circular Motion round the sides of the Glass, like a Whirl-wind; which perhaps might depend in some measure on the violent Ingress of Air, upon opening the Vial; tho' I have
sometimes observ'd lucid Rotations of Matter in the Cavity of the Vial, a considerable time after such Eruptions. 2. The Flames which were afforded by rub∣bing these Liquors, yielded white Fumes of a rank offensive Smell; the Colour of the Flame being yellow, and tremulous in their Motion, and inconstant, sometimes flashing out more than at other times; but it neither burnt the Skin, nor singed fine Linnen: So that if any, it must resemble that Flamma Vitalis which is supposed to reside in Animals. 3. A Pencil being dipped in this Liquor, and drawn upon white Paper, deposed only its wa∣try part; but the more gummy Matter in the Pencil being squeezed out, it seemed to burn like a Candle, and sometimes shooting down∣wards, as if it were played about the Hairs that made up that part of the Pencil, which brought into my Mind those Verses of Virgil, Ecce levis summo de virtice visus Iuli Fundere lumen Apex, tactuque innoxia molli Lambere flamma Comas, &c. Aeneid. And it was observable, that this Flame would successively appear and disappear for a conside∣rable time, and sometimes when the wreathing of the Hairs was violent, the Flame would be accompany'd with a momentary, tho' sensible Heat, yet it would not fire Gun-powder; tho' some of the consistent Matter, whilst it was preparing, being taken out with a Knife, and the Knife rubbed betwixt the Thumb and Fin∣gers with a blue Calico Apron, the Matter re∣ceived
such an Impression from that Attrition, as put its parts into so violent a Motion, that two Holes were burnt in the Apron. Some of the Liquor contained in the Receiver, and di∣luted with Water, turned Syrup of Violets green, and fermented with Acids. 4. Some of this Liquor being contained in a Vial, and convey'd into our Pneumatick Engin, tho' the Air could not be so far exhausted, but that there was a sufficient quantity left behind to kindle the Flame; yet the Commotion occa∣sion'd by Pumping, would be, as if it were ventilated, or blown up, and made to shine more vividly. And a piece of Paper moisten'd with this Liquor, being convey'd into a Recei∣ver, tho' by the Commotion of the Receiver, the Flame seemed to be still increased, yet in those Parts betwixt the Folds it appeared to be much less than in the open Air; and tho' when moist Air was let in again the Flame was extinguish'd, yet upon a removal of the Receiver, when the Paper was exposed to the open Air it renewed its Flame. 5. Some of this Liquor being at the first fil∣tred, the Substance remaining in the Filtre be∣ing enclosed with it in a wide-mouthed Glass, it became luminous when exposed to the Air. And another piece of Paper being shut up in another Glass, when it was spread open in a dark Place, several Flashes sprang out incessantly and successively, first in one place then in another, and were not only various in their Figures, but had frequent Emications and Tremblings. 6. Some of this luciferous Matter being dis∣solv'd in an aqueous Liquor, which was tran∣sparent
when it was setled, tho' a moderate A∣gitation would not produce Light in it, yet be∣ing set in a Sand-heat in a Bolt-head 'till the Ball was too hot to be touched with ones hand, I caused it to be removed into a dark place, and found that it had acquir'd a manifest Lumi∣nousness, and the Liquor being variously agita∣ted and broke, several Flakes of Light ascended to the top of the Stem; and when the Liquor was agitated 'till it was spread over the inside of the Ball and part of the Stem, it was adorn∣ed with luciferous parts of Matter, which twinkled like so many Stars, and descended in Lines, some of which were very oblique and pleasant. 7. Once I observ'd, that when the Liquor contain'd in a Bolt-Glass was not very hot, ha∣ving given it a rude shake, a Spark rose on one side, and spread all over the Cavity of the Ball. And to what hath been observ'd, I shall add, that some of this Liquor was having been hermeti∣cally sealed up, it retain'd its luciferous Quali∣ties a long time. 8. The way to make the Phosphorus Bal∣duini, is the following, viz. Having dissol∣ved fine white Chalk in Spirit of Nitre, or clean Aqua fortis, it must be filtred through Cap∣paper, and the clear Solution is to be evapora∣ted 'till there remains a dry substance; which being spread over the inside of a round Vessel which will endure the Fire, you are to give it a peculiar degree of Heat; and which commonly requires a convenient shaped Vessel, whereby the Flame or Heat may be reverberated, 'till the Matter hath acquired a disposition to retain
Light; and then the Vessel must be covered with a Glass or fine Crystal Cover, to keep it from the outward Air. 10. The Process which we took to make our Aery Noctiluca was the following; We took a considerable quantity of putrified Urine; which was distill'd 'till all the spirituous Parts were drawn off; after which the superfluous moisture was also abstracted, 'till the remaining Sub∣stance was brought to the Consistence of a thick Syrup, which being well incorporated, with three times its Weight of white Sand, the Mix∣ture was put into a strong Retort, to which a large Receiver was joined in a good measure filled with Water: Then the two Vessels being carefully luted together, and a naked Fire being gradually administred for five or six Hours, that the Phlegmatick or Volatil Parts might come over first. When this was done, the Fire was increased, and at the length for five or six Hours, made as strong and intense as the Fur∣nace was capable of giving; by which means good store of white Fumes came over, almost like those that appear in the Distillation of Oyl of Vitriol, which when they are past, and the Receiver grew clear, they were after a while succeeded by another sort, which seemed, in the Receiver, to give a faint blueish Light, al∣most like that of little burning Matches, dipt in Sulphur. And last of all, the Fire being ve∣ry vehement, a more ponderous Substance pas∣sed over, which fell to the bottom of the Wa∣ter, which being taken out, appeared to be luciferous. But whether the shining Faculty de∣pends on the volatil and spirituous Parts of this
Animal Liquor, or of the fixed Salt, and pon∣derous faetid Oyl, I shall not determine, 'till further satisfy'd by Observations. An Appendix to the Aeerial Noctiluca. 1. Some luciferous Matter, that had a long time lost its shining Faculty, being heated by the Fire, presently shone vividly enough, and con∣tinu'd to do so whilst it was sufficiently warm; but in a few Weeks, it likewise lost this Dispo∣sition of Heating. And tho' some consistent Matter had lost its Power of shining, yet the Superficies being taken off, the Matter that lay under it rubbed upon my Hand would present∣ly become luminous. 2. Tho' this luminous Matter be not fecu∣lent, yet it usually leaves some of its gummy Parts sticking to the sides of the Vial, which may be discover'd by heating the Vial, or if it be broke in pieces, and agitated in another Vessel; for by that means, the Parts being rub∣bed one against another, and variously placed with their sides upwards and downwards, they would every way diffuse a clear Light. 3. A twelfth part of a Vial being filled with a liquid Phosphorus of another kind, so that a greater quantity of Air might be contained in it, it continu'd to shine without unstopping the Vial. And I sometimes observ'd several Exha∣lations like Clouds, or Aggregates of Smoak, to roll to and fro in the Cavity of the Vessel; and would grow much more lucid upon sha∣king the Vial.
4. When it had lost its Light for some time, it filled the Cavity of the Vial, when unstop∣ped, with Fumes, which like those of the other Noctiluca's, appeared white in the Light, and luminous in the Dark. A Bolt-head half full of this luminous Matter being sealed up herme∣tically, it continued luminous six Days and Nights; and when a great part of the Liquor was poured off, the remaining Sediment being spread about the sides of the Glass, by inverting it, they appeared like so many bright twinkling Stars in a clear Night. CHAP. XXV. New Phenomena exhibited by an Icy Nocti∣luca, or a solid self-shining Substance; and first, some Qualities of the Noctilu∣ca it self. Some Qua∣lities of the Noctiluca.HAving by a method, not unlike that ta∣ken to produce the Aerial Noctiluca, ob∣tain'd the following Qualities in it; and, first, It came over in Distillation in little Grains of different Shapes and Sizes, and most commonly irregu∣lar, being void of Colour, and when held a∣gainst the Light, transparent; and the greater Pieces looked so like Ice, that for that reason I called it the Icy Noctiluca. But tho' generally it was colourless and transparent, yet some small Pieces were Opake, and of various Co∣lours compared with each other.
2. This Noctiluca is heavier in Specie than Water; and tho' consistent, yet not so hard as common Ice; but it is brittle, and may be spread upon a solid Body, like the unmelted Tallow of a Candle, it may be melted in hot Liquors without waste, but in the Air a great Part of it will be consumed. As to sense it is Cold; but is of such a Texture that it easily becomes hot upon agitation. 3. When held in the Air it yields a vivid Light if wet over, and when first exposed to the Air, it not only shines, but emits store of Effluvia, as long as it is kept there; when it is immersed in Water it ceases to shine and al∣so to smoak, but as soon as it is taken out, it begins a-fresh, and if part be immersed and part above Water, the latter will shine vividly tho' the other will not. The Qua∣lities of Water in which it had been immersed.4. The Water in which this Noctiluca had been sometime immersed, had a strong and pe∣netrant taste like a Mixture of Brine and Spi∣rit of Salt, and relished a little of Vitriol. Be∣ing held in a small Concave Vessel of Silver o∣ver lighted Coals and ashes, it evaporated ve∣ry slowly, and would not shoot into Crystals, nor afford a dry Salt; but coagulated into a substance like a Gelly, or the whites of Eggs, which would be easily melted by Heat. When kept on a hot fire it would first boil, and then make a crackling Noise, and the Explosions would be accompanyed with flashes of fire and light, which if they were small were ge∣nerally blue, like flames of Sulphur, but more vivid, and sometimes bluer; but the greater flakes appeared yellow and very Luminous,
and these Phaenomena appeared likewise for some time after the Vessel was taken off. When this matter was almost melted by Heat, if it was permitted to cool, it acquir'd a rosinous Consistence, and tinged the Flame of a Candle blue. By the Fire working upon it, it acquir'd a Garlick Smell, and being left in the Air all Night, it turned to a Liquor almost as strong as Spirit of Salt. Being put upon the Fire again, it would afford the same Phaenomena as before, but some of the Matter which before broke out in Flashes, sometimes rose only in the form of Smoak, of a rank Smell. And tho' the quantity of this Matter was small, yet it afforded Flashes plentifully for an Hour. What Li∣quors it would be dissolved in, and what not.It would not dissolve in cold Water, tho' the Water would be thereby impregnated; so Crocus Metallorum impregnates Wine or Wa∣ter, without having its Bulk diminish'd. It fermented not with Spirit of Sal-Armon. nor did it lose its luminous Virtue, but would shine when exposed to the Air again. Oyl of Vitriol when cold would not dissolve it, but when hot would melt it; and it would lye at the bottom of so heavy a Liquor. Aqu. fortis had no visible effect on it, nor Oyl of Turpentine when cold; but the latter being hot, it wholly vanish'd in a Night's time, without making any alteration in the Oyl. Being put into Oyl of Cloves, and melted by a Fire, when it was cool, and the Vial unstopped, it yielded not only a Light, that was render'd more acceptable to the Stan∣ders-by, by its grateful Smell; and the like succeeded with Oyl of Cloves, in which Liquor, when impregnated with the Noctiluca, it was
observable, that the Vial being open'd in a dark place, it would yield a flash of Flame very vi∣vid, which would last a Minute; and some∣times, if a Candle were in the Room, the shin∣ing fluid would appear of a pleasant blueish Co∣lour; and another thing observable was, that the Light would vanish, whilst store of white Fumes remain'd upon the Liquor, as if the Light chiefly depended on the finest and purest Part. In Oyl of Mace it did not appear luminous, nor in Oyl of Aniseeds. This Noctiluca continu'd in Spirit of Wine, a considerable time undimini∣shed. 6. This Noctiluca being included in rectify'd Spirit of Wine, was partly dissolved; and left some earthly Parts at the bottom of the Liquor, but did not discolour it: upon unstopping the Vial no Light appeared, but being dropped into cold Water, the Drops were kindled by it; but those Flashes immediately disappeared, the Wa∣ter not being luminous; which Phaenomenon, lest it should be thought to be an effect of An∣tiperistasis, I dropped the impregnated Spirit upon hot Water, and found, that the same Phae∣nomenon succeeded. And this Noctiluca diffu∣ses its Virtue so far, that one Grain impregna∣ted a thousand of Spirit of Wine. As for the reason why these Flashes so suddenly disappear∣ed, it might proceed from a sudden dispersion of the Particles of the Spirit through the Water, and the Avolition of the luciferous Matter. So Camphire dissolv'd in Spirit of Wine, and drop∣ped upon cold Water, is left upon the Surface of it, the Spirit being immediately dispersed through the Liquor.
Experiments discovering a strange subtlety of Parts in the Glacial Noctiluca. Having dissolv'd a Grain of our Noctiluca in a Drachm of Spirit of Wine, and added gra∣dually fifty times its weight of Water, the Noctiluca rendred the whole light, when sha∣ken in the Dark, so that one Grain rendred 100000 times its weight of Liquor luminous; and what was more strange, was, that not only the Steams appeared luminous, but the Light seemed in some measure diffused through the whole Water, which I am apt to believe pro∣ceeded from the Exhalations which shined through that Diaphanous Water, tho' when the Glass was shaken the whole Mass appeared lu∣minous. And the Experiment being further prosecuted, a Grain of the Noctiluca dissolved in Alkohol of Wine, and shaken in Water, it render'd 400000 times its weight luminous throughout. And at another Tryal I found, that it impregnated 500000 times its weight; which was more than one part of Cochineel could communicate its Colour to, the utmost being 125000 parts of Water. In which Ex∣periments, ⅛ of the Noctiluca was undissolv'd. And had we to the aforemention'd Estimate, added the Proportion of the illuminated ambi∣ent Air, the Expansion of this Noctiluca would have been incomparably greater than the above∣mention'd number denotes. But to demonstrate further the strange Sub∣tilty of our Noctilucal Matter, I shall add, that three Grains of our Noctiluca being placed up∣on
a flat-bottom'd Glass, that was broader at the Top than the bottom, and shallow, that the Matter might be more fully exposed to the Air, it was placed in a shelving Posture, that upon its resolution in the moist Air, it might presently run down, and not hinder the free Evaporation of the remaining Matter: The Vessel being thus placed, all the Fragments a∣bout ten a Clock at Night began to shine brisk∣ly, and continu'd to do so 'till reduced to very small Parts; so that so small a parcel of our Noctiluca continued to shine above a hundred and fifty Hours. In which time the following Cir∣cumstances were observable, First, That the luciferous Fumes were visible both Night and Day; and rose from the Particles of the No∣ctiluca, like Smoak from so many Chimneys. Secondly, This Smoak was so copious and te∣nacious, that it lost not that Form 'till it rose a Foot above the Matter that afforded it; the Motion of it being swift, and sometimes tend∣ing directly upwards, sometimes horizontally, and sometimes downwards, as if their Motion had been determin'd by the scituation of the Noctilucal Fragments, by which they were e∣mitted. And one thing further observable was, that when it had been a long time exposed to the Air it emitted strong and odorous Exhala∣tions, distinct from the visible Fumes. As for the Liquor which dropped from this Noctiluca, and which remained in the Glass Vessel, I put it into a Concave Silver Vessel, and held it over Small-Coals and Ashes, where it evaporated not so easily as I expected, but turned into an unctuous Substance, of a dark red∣dish
Colour; and being thence removed and held over quick Coals, it boiled and crackled like Bay-Salt cast into the Fire, and emitted se∣veral successive Flashes. Another piece of this Noctiluca, which weighed three Grains, being put into a small Glass Funnel, whose Stem was so fine that it was less than a small Pin's head, and the Pipe of the Funnel being purposely pla∣ced in a Vial, to catch the colliquated Liquor; and this being set in a South-Window all Day, and placed in my Chamber at Night, I obser∣ved, that it continued luminous no less than 360 Hours. From whence appear'd the extra∣ordinary Minuteness of the parts of our Nocti∣luca; and what is more strange, the Weight of r Noctilucous Matter colliquated, exceeded the Weight of the Noctiluca it self two thirds. This Noctiluca being spread upon Paper, and held to the Flame of a Candle, when the Flame came to the Noctiluca, it burnt away in a fla∣shing and spluttering manner, and cracked like Salt. And some of this Paper being put upon Embers cover'd with Ashes, the Noctiluca would take Fire, and communicate its Flame to the Paper. And to shew its inflamability further, I put a Grain of it into Spirit of Wine, and tho' it discolour'd not the Flame of the Spirit, which was partly red and partly blue, yet when the Spirit was consumed, and the Flame was conti∣guous to the immersed Phosphorus, it took Fire, and emitted a yellow Flame copiously. And a piece of this being set on fire by the Sun-beams concentrated, it burnt very vividly and clear; and the expiring Flame left behind it a Caput Mortuum, which formed several Circles like
those of a Sardonix, whereof the largest was white, another yellow, and the third red, all the three Colours being vivid and pleasant. Some part of the Caput Mortuum being left in the Spoon, was presently resolv'd per deliquium, into a Liquor as sharp as Spirit of Salt; and o∣ther parts having free access to the Air appear∣ed combustible. Another instance of the Inflammability of it, was by rubbing it in a Mortar, for by that means it took Fire, and burnt vividly, but was soon extinguish'd by the Fire. Of the burning of Bodies with the Nocti∣luca.If our Noctiluca be pressed hard betwixt ones Fingers, or against a Board, it will feel sensibly hot; and will sometimes be violent enough to scorch the Skin: And one thing observable is, that Blisters raised by its Heat, are not only more painful, but harder to be cured than or∣dinary ones. But tho' some parts of this No∣ctiluca are disposed to take Flame, yet they are not all equally prone to an Incalescence. To these Observations of our Noctiluca I shall add, that some of it being rubbed betwixt Folds of Paper for some time, they took Fire, and so did it when rubbed with Gun-powder, by which means the Gunpowder was exploded: And once when my Servant carried some of it in his Pocket, the Glass being broke, the At∣trition and Heat of his Body set it on Fire, by which means several Holes were burnt in his Breeches. To which I shall subjoin, that six Parts of Sulphur, and one of this being mixed and beaten with the haft of a Knife, the Nocti∣luca shone through the Paper, and as soon as these Ingredients were exposed to the Flame, they
immediately took Fire; and once the Experi∣ment being repeated, the Brimstone did not burn with a slow Flame, but flashed away like Gun-powder. And once my Laborant having prepared some of it, and trying to write upon a dry Board, the force of Attrition kindled the Wood, and afforded not only vividly shining, but burning Letters. To try what was the Nature of this saline Noctilucal Matter, I dropped some of it upon Syrup of Violets, and found that it did not turn it green, but of a fine Carnation Colour, as Acid Spirits usually do. And I likewise found, that it presently destroy'd the blue Co∣lour, tho' not the other of the Lignum Nephri∣ticum. I likewise poured some of this Noctilu∣cous Liquor upon Filings of Copper, and expo∣sed them to the Air for two or three Days, I found, that tho' the Filings were dissolv'd, yet the Colour of the Tincture was not a deep A∣zure, as if made with a Volatil Urinous Salt, but seemed to partake of green and blue. It likewise fermented with Powder of red Coral, and also with Salt of Tartar. From whence it appears, that the nature of our Salt is not Uri∣nous, but of the Family of Acids. But to pro∣ceed, I enclosed a parcel of this Icy Noctiluca in a small Vial, and another, together with the Water it came over with in Distillation, and I observ'd, that the former lost its Light in four Days, and the other in about a Week. But to try whether a sufficient Degree of Heat would not cause our Noctiluca to take Fire, I enclosed some of it in a Glass-Egg, with Hermes his Seal, and found, that the Ball of the Egg being held
near the Fire, the Noctiluca presently took Flame and burnt much longer than we expected; and when the Flame was over, we sometimes ob∣serv'd a little Liquor in the Glass, the rest of the Matter, by the Operation of the Fire, ac∣quiring a red Colour. Some of this Noctiluca being put into a Glass Egg, and Water poured upon it, when the Water was heated very hot, and the Noctiluca was melted, we poured the Water off; upon which the Noctiluca remaining in the Glass, immediately being exposed to the Air, took Flame, and part of it running out with the Wa∣ter, burnt fiercely upon the Surface of it, and with a crackling Noise, the remaining Caput Mortuum appearing red. To which relations I shall add, that the Beams of this Noctiluca, passing through an Orange colour'd Glass, ap∣pear'd of a very pleasant Colour. And on this occasion I shall subjoin, that tho' once I could not obtain any Light from some of this Nocti∣luca included in a Vial with Oyl of Mace, as with Oyl of Cinamon, yet upon further Tryals, I found that it succeeded. And to what hath been deliver'd on this Subject, I shall further add, when the Noctiluca was wholly consum'd to a Caput Mortuum, that as soon as it was tur∣ned with the other side upwards, it would im∣mediately take Fire a-fresh.
THE WORKS Of the HONOURABLE ROBERT BOYLE, Esq EPITOMIZED. BOOK V. PART I. CHAP. I. New Experiments of the Positive or Relative Levity of Bodies under Water. Arguments against the Positive Le∣vity of e∣merging Bodies.WHEN any Body that is lighter in Specie than Water is immersed in it, and upon the removal of that force which depressed it, it rises a∣gain, it is usually attributed to the Positive Le∣vity of that Body; but since the instance of Wood emerging is that which is usually offe∣red as an Argument, to it I shall answer, That Wood being a Body full of Pores (except some which will not swim in Water) and upon that
account specifically lighter than Water, the Water by the Pressure of that which is incumbent, get∣ting betwixt the Superficies of the Vessel, and the Body immersed, causes it to rise, the Water which succeeds it in its place making a more powerful Pressure against it, than its Specifick Gravity enables it to resist. And that Bodies Specifically lighter than Water will be thus buoyed up by it, will appear from the Hydro∣statical Paradoxes hereafter to be laid down. And tho' it be usually urged, that the Bodies im∣immersed are too closely contiguous to the bot∣tom of the Vessel for the Water to insinuate them∣selves betwixt; yet from the following Experiment it will appear, that were the contiguous Surfaces so close, the positive Levity of the Wood would not be able to raise it; for two black Marbles, being so exactly polished as to be as contiguous as possibly they might, we tyed a Bladder full of Air to the uppermost, and then causing them both to be immersed in Water, the positive Levity of the Bladder, would not cause the Bladder to rise; but as soon as by a servant the uppermost Marble was gradually slipped half off the Polished Surface of the lowest, the Water which before was not able to insinuate it self betwixt the Surfaces of the contiguous Mar∣bles, and to separate them, presently caused the Bladder to rise with a considerable swift∣ness and force, above the Surface of the Water: Which Event, that it did not depend on Na∣ture's abhorrency of a Vacuum is evident, since that would have an equal force when the Polish∣ed Surfaces were wholly contiguous, the Pow∣er of Nature's abhorrency of a Vacuum being
held by its Assertors to be unlimited. And that it was not the heaviness of the upper Marble, nor want of lightness in the included, appeared, since when the Surfaces of the polish∣ed Marbles were not contiguous, the Bladder was able to lift up a weight of six or seven pound, besides the Marble. And to shew, that the Bladder might be raised by the Pressure of the Water, accord∣ing to the laws of Hydrostaticks usually buoy∣ing up Bodies Specifically lighter than it self, having pressed out the greatest part of the Air contained in a Bladder, I tyed a piece of Iron to it, and immersed it in a wide-mouth'd Glass, which was so deep that the Bladder was total∣ly immersed, and yet not far below the Surface of the Water, and this being convey'd into our Pneumatick Engine, when by exhausting the Air part of the Pressure was taken off, the Air in the Bladder expanding it self, and take∣ing up more Room in the Water, and conse∣quently becoming so much more Specifically lighter, and the resistance of the Water which endeavours to buoy it up becoming respective∣ly greater, it was together with the suspended weight, raised to the Surface of the Water, and continued there till the outward Air was let in again; and then the Air being contracted into its former dimensions, it subsided again. In which Experiment the positive Levity of the Air was not varyed, but only its relative and respective weight in reference to its proportion of Water. And that Rarefaction alters not the positive Levity of Bodies, may appear from the follow∣ing
Experiment; for having oyled a Bladder, and when the Air was expressed, tyed it to the neck of a Vial, I found, that in the exhausted Receiver, tho' the Air in the Vial was so far ex∣panded as to fill the whole capacity of the Blad∣der, yet the Vial neither rose higher; nor sub∣sideded lower when the Air was drawn out, or let in again. CHAP. II. New Experiments about the Pressure of the Air's Spring on Bodies under Water. The Pres∣sure of the Air's Spring on Bodies under Wa∣ter.TO shew that the Spring and Weight of the Air hath manifest effects on Bodies sepa∣rated from an immediate contact by the Inter∣position of Water, I shall subjoyn the following Experiments. EXPERIMENT II. We luted the neck of a Vial, which was ca∣pable of containing above a point of Water, upon that pipe which conveys Air out of the Receiver into the Pump, which being done, we whelmed over this Receiver our large one, and having poured in a sufficient quantity of Wa∣ter, we closed it up with the Turn-key, that no Air might get out that way, and then the Air being exhausted out of the Vial, if flew in∣to a great many peices, the sides of the Glass being not able to resist the Pressure of the Air,
that lay upon the Surface of the Water in the large Receiver. EXPERIMENT II. The greatest part of the Air being squeezed out of a Bladder, and the Bladder tyed to a weight, which kept it something below the Sur∣face of Water contained in a wide-mouth'd Glass; this being convey'd into a Receiver, the Air in the Bladder expanded, as the Air on the Superficies of the Water was extracted. EXPERIMENT III. A Brass Plug being fitted to a Cylinder which was closed with a Plate of the same Me∣tal at one end; we put a Bladder half blown into the Cylinder, and placing the Plug upon it, with a weight of a Conical figure upon that; we poured so much Water into the Receiver in which it was placed, as covered the top of the Conical weight, but left the Ring which was fixed to the top of it, and which was fastned to the Turn-key by the help of a string; and things being thus ordered, when the Air above the water was considerably exhausted, the Spring of the Air in the Cylinder rais∣ed the Plugg and Weights a considerable height, tho' the whole weight amounted to twenty eight pounds.
EXPERIMENT IV. A Glass Vial being closed with Cement, and immersed in a deep Brass Cylinder of Water, this was convey'd into our Receiver, and when the Air which pressed upon the Water was drawn off, the Vial in the bottom of the Water was violently shattered in pieces by the Spring of the included Air, for want of a sufficient Pressure of the Air incumbent on the Water, to resist the force of that Spring. EXPERIMENT V. To shew that the Expansion or Rarefaction of Air increases not the positive Levity of Air, we suspended a Bladder half full of Air, with a Counterpoise, at a ballance in our Receiver, and tho' when the Air was ex∣hausted, the Bladder was sufficiently distended; yet it seemed to retain the same weight, whe∣ther dilated or contracted.
CHAP. III. New Experiments concerning an effect of the varying weight of the Atmosphere upon some Bodies in the Water. Communicated in the Transactions of Feb. 24.1672/3. Of the Ef∣fects of the differing weight of the Atmos∣phere on Bo∣dies under Water.COnsidering that the Pores of most Liquors are plentifully stocked with Aery Parti∣cles, and that upon that account the Atmo∣sphere may according to its several degrees of weight have considerable Effects on them, I caused three small Glass-Bubbles with slender Stems to be blown, which were so equally pois∣ed in Water by their weight, that a little thing would make them emerge or sink. And I ob∣serv'd, that these being put into Water con∣tained in a wide-mouth'd Glass, sometimes they would emerge and sometimes subside, and sometimes emerge again, as the Atmosphere va∣ryed in weight or degrees of Heat and Cold. And it was easie to observe, that when the Heat of the Air raised one of these Bubbles, the heat of the Sun-Beams would so rarisie the Water included in them, as to cause some of it to get out, upon which the Bubbles emerged, but when those Beams were intercepted, the Water being condensed, and getting into the Bubble again, it would subside. But when their subsiding depended on the weight of the At∣mosphere, if the Mercury in the Baroscope stood high, the Heat of the Sun would not raise the Bubbles.
N. B. 1. That the Bubbles not being all e∣qually poised, sometimes one and sometimes two would rise, as the Air was heavier or lighter, and consequently capable of affecting the lightest only, or all. 2. The Success did not always answer, for when the subsiding depended on some occult cause, they would continue there, as if some airy Parts had insinuated themselves into the Water. 3. The fittest time for these Experiments, and in which they best succeed, is in the Spring, the Air being more subject to vary in its Weight, as well as other things. CHAP. IV. New Experiments about the differing Pres∣sure of heavy Solids and Fluids. Of the dif∣ferent Pres∣sure of So∣lids and Fluids.ONE great reason why some Learned Men believe that the Air hath no such a consi∣derable Pressure on subjacent Bodies as we teach, is, because they think it would be too heavy for Animal Bodies to live or move under it; but since we have positive proof of it, we may as well doubt whether the Load-stone be en∣dewed with an attracting and other Virtues, because we cannot understand how they are perform'd. Besides, Men being born under such a Pressure, their Bodies seem not only ac∣custom'd to it, but proportionably strong. But could we suppose a Man born somewhere,
without the incumbent weight of an Atmo∣sphere, doubtless such Bodies would not be so able as ours to resist its Pressure. But it is urged by some, that were there such a Pressure of the Atmosphere, it would cause Pain; but to this it may likewise be answered, that our Bodies being from the Birth accustom∣ed to it, we only feel Pain upon some new unaccustomed and additional Pressure; so when we are accustomed to wear heavy Cloaths, we are not sensible of their weight, nor are we sensible of the Heat of the Blood in our Heart, because it's habitual to those Parts, whereas if our finger be put into the Heart of a newly dissected Animal, we shall find it sensibly hot. But further, from what I have elsewhere laid down, it appears, that a Cubick Inch of Air will be able to resist the weight of the whole incumbent Atmosphere, and that a little quan∣tity of Air resists a further compression as well as a greater; and I have likewise shewn, that the Pores of the Parts of Animals whether fluid or consistent, are plentifully stocked with numerous Aerial Bubbles, which cause those Bodies to swell or expand in our exhausted Re∣ceiver. And as for those membranous and fibrous Parts which are not altogether so po∣rous, they are of so strong and firm a Texture, as to resist external Pressure upon that account. Besides, there is a great deal of difference be∣twixt the partial Pressure of a solid Body, and the Pressure of an Ambient Fluid, which pres∣ses uniformly, and is resisted either by the so∣lidity of the Parts, or the Spring of those Airy
Particles contained within their Pores. And that the uniformness of the Pressure makes it less sensible, is evident, since it hath been ob∣served, that tho' the Atmosphere is so much lighter upon the tops of some high Mountains, as not to elevate Mercury so high in a Baro∣scope by three Inches, as at the bottom, yet those that have been upon those Mountains tell us, that they perceived no considerable diffe∣rence in the Pressure of the Atmosphere above and below; nor are Miners sensible of any great weight upon them, tho' in deep Mines in Mountainous Countrys; nor are Divers sensible of any Pressure when under Water; but that Air weighs in Air, and that Water weighs in Water, I have elsewhere made it evident; yet I don't think that a Diver is violently depressed by the weight of the incumbent Water, since from what we have elsewhere delivered it ap∣pears, that if a Man's Body were of an equal specifick Gravity with the Water, the subjacent Water would sustain him, but his Body being heavier than an equal bulk of Water, the Sur∣plusage of weight depresses it; for which Reason, in some Sea-Water, which is near of the same specifick Gravity with their Bodies, Divers find it very difficult to dive. However it is not a little strange, that at so great a depth as one hundred fathom Divers should not perceive a sensible Pressure, especially upon their Thorax and Abdomen: But I am apt to believe that the inadvertency of some of them, rather than any thing else makes them not take notice of it; or else the haste which they rise and sink in; since I have been told by some,
that they have perceived a manifest Pressure when they sunk leisurely. And I was likewise told by another, that when he descended a great depth under Water, the Blood was squeez∣ed out of his Nose and Eyes; and another who dived in a Leathern-case told me, that it was so much pressed against his Thorax and Belly, that he was forced suddenly to come up a∣gain. But since these Relations are not altogether to be relied on, I shall endeavour to give a Reason why the Pressure is no more sensible; which I take to be the strong Texture of a Hu∣man Body, and the uniformity of the Pressure. As to the first, to what I have said of the Re∣sistance made by our Bodies to external Pres∣sure, I shall only add, that a Bladder being ty∣ed upon the end of a Cylinder, about an Inch in Diameter, when the Air was exhausted, the in∣cumbent Pressure of the Atmosphere was not able to break it, tho' when a Man's hand was placed there, he was not able to raise it till some of the Air was let in again, the Pressure which held his hand down being equivalent to a Cylinder of Water thirty foot high. But to shew the effects of an uniform Pressure of Liquids upon Solids contained in them, I shall subjoyn the following Tryals. EXPERIMENT I, II, and III. Having placed an Egg betwixt two Bladders half blown, in a Brass Cylinder, and cautiously put a Plug upon them, with as much weight upon it as amounted to thirty pound, I placed
them all in a Receiver, and when the Air was exhausted, tho' the expanding Bladders must needs press equally against the Egg and the Plug, yet the incumbent weight was raised, and the Egg when taken out as whole as before; the weight it sustained in the Cylinder being not quite so much as the weight of the Atmosphere. But tho' the Egg was able to sustain so much weight when pressed upon uniformly; yet Weights being successively laid upon the same Egg exposed to the open Air, four Pound weight crushed it in pieces. And by further Tryals we found, that an Egg-shell, which had all the Yelk and White taken out, as also a thin Glass Bubble, being placed betwixt two Bladders, as in the first Experiment, neither of them was in the least cracked. EXPERIMENT IV. To shew that what we have taught of the Na∣ture of Fluids, will hold in Water as well as Air, if the Pressure be uniform, we enclosed an Egg in a Bladder almost full of Water, and put∣ting it into the Brass Cylinder, we heaped up∣on the Plug as many Weights as amounted to seventy five pound, yet the Egg being taken out, was as found as when first put in. In which In∣stance it cannot be pretended, that the Egg bore no weight, by those that allow not Water to gravitate in Water, since there was a consi∣derable Pressure made by Metalline Weights, which every body allows to weigh in Water. From this Experiment, and the other before mention'd, of an Egg being broke by a partial
Pressure, it appears, that the Strength of the Texture of a Humane Body, together with the Uniformity of the Pressure of ambient Water, may be the reasons why Divers feel no greater Inconveniency under Water; for tho' their Thorax may be a little more compressed than other Parts, yet that Part being naturally dila∣ted and contracted, a little Pressure may make no sensible Alteration: But I have been told by a Diver, that at a consicerable Depth, he per∣ceived a painful Pressure upon the Drums of his Ears, 'till he contriv'd a way to guard them from that Inconveniency; the reason of which Phaenomenon seemed to be no other, than that in that Part there was not an equal internal Pressure, to resist and counterballance the ex∣ternal Pressure of the Water. CHAP. V. An Invention for estimating the Weight of Water in Water, with ordinary Ballances or Weights. Communicated in the Pub. Transact. of Aug. 16. 1669. A Bubble about the bigness of a Pullet's Egg, with a long Stem turned upo at the end, was heated; and, when the Air was most of it expelled, sealed up; and then being by a con∣venient weight of Lead immersed under Water, it was suspended at the end of a Ballance, and counterpoised; and then the Apex of the Stem being broke off with a Forceps, so much
Water got into the Cavity of the Bubble, as required four drachms and thirty eight grains to reduce the Ballance to an Aequilibrium. Which being done, we drove out the Water by the help of a Flame of a Candle into another Glass, which was counterposed, and we found that it weighed four drachms and thirty grains, which together with what was evaporated and lost, and the weight of the Apex, amounted to the weight first mention'd. So that from hence it appears, that Water weights as much in Water, as it does in the open Air; which according to the best Computation we could make, succeed∣ed a second time in a larger Bubble. As for the Objections which Mr. George Sin∣clair hath made to this Experiment, since it is the Opinion of our Author, that he only dif∣fers from him in Expressions, I shall wave what he there says, as not at all requisite in this Place; and shall only add what our Author hath said, to explain what he means by Water weigh∣ing in Water, viz. That it gravitates or weighs, in as much as it tends downwards, upon the account of its specifick Weight, tho' it does not preponderate, that is, the Parcel of Water weighed hath but an equal Tendency down∣wards with the Ambient Water, but upon an additional Weight it preponderates as much as the additional weight increases its Tendency towards the Center.
CHAP. VI. Hydrostatical Paradoxes made out by new Experiments. BEfore I procced to the Hydrostatical Para∣doxes, I shall briefly intimate, that tho' I can readily assent to the Hydrostatical Conclusi∣ons laid down in Monsieur Paschall's Discourse; yet as for the Experiments he makes use of to prove them by, I must own, I am not satisfy'd with them; since he makes use of such as require that a Man should sit under Water fifteen or twenty Foot, with the end of a Tube leaning upon his Thigh. But he neither acquaints us how a Man shall be able to continue there, or how he shall discern the alterations in the Mer∣cury or other Bodies, at the bottom. Besides, such Experiments as he proposes require Tubes twenty foot long, and Vessels as many foot deep, which are hard to be got in England; nor is it possible to obtain from a Tradesman, Brass Cylinders or Pluggs, made with so much Mathematical Exactness as he proposes. Having therefore contriv'd a more easy way to demonstrate the Truths contain'd in the foregoing Paradoxes; before I proceed to ex∣amine them, I shall premise a word or two by way of Postulatum or a Lemma; which consists of three Parts: The first of which is, That if a Pipe open at both ends, and held perpendicu∣lar to the Horizon, have the lower of them un∣der Water, there passes an imaginary Plain, which touching the Orifice of the Pipe, is pa∣rallel
to the Horizon, and likewise, as to sense, to the upper Surface of the Water. To which it will be consonant, secondly, that as long as the Surface of the Water is even, the Water incumbent on this Plain will equally press on all the parts of it. But, thirdly, if there be a greater Pressure on one part of this Plain than another, as when a Stone presses upon it, the Water which lyes under that Stone will be dis∣placed, as the Stone subsides successively, 'till it come to the Bottom. But on the contrary, if there be less Pressure on one part of that Plain than on another, the Liquor will be raised on that part so high, 'till the Liquor on that part of the Plain gravitates equally as the Water in∣cumbent on the other parts of it; which will appear from the following Experiments. And first, If a Cylindrical Pipe open at both ends, be held in a perpendicular Posture, and the lower end be immersed three Inches in Water, the Liquid within the Tube having a free Communication, will be of an equal height with the external Water, and in thin Tubes, a little higher. But if Oyl be gradually poured upon the Water without the Pipe, the superfi∣cial Plain will have a greater Pressure upon it without than within, and consequently the Water under the Tube, finding not so great a Pressure within the Pipe as without, it gradually rises, 'till the external and internal Pressure upon the imaginary Plain be equal. But since this will be further evident from what is contain'd in the following Paradoxes, I shall proceed to them, as soon as I have laid down the following Experiments, to shew Air
is not a Body devoid of Weight, as some Peri∣pateticks suppose. The first is, that a Glass Bubble being blown, whose Capacity was short of two cubical Inches, it was instantly herme∣tically sealed, whilst hot; and when it was cool, being placed in a nice pair of Scales, and then the Apex of the Stem being broke off, the Air rushing in with a noise, caused the Bubble to preponderate half a Grain, tho' by breaking of the Stem under Water, it appear'd that the rarify'd Air remaining in the sealed Glass, pos∣sess'd one fourth of its Capacity. Another time the same Experiment being tryed, the Air contain'd seem'd to weigh near three quarters of a Grain; and the Capacity of the Receiver being filled with common Water, it weighed 905 Grains: So that allowing the Air contain'd to take up one fourth, and that the weight of the remaining Part was ¼, probably the weight of the whole was about a Grain; and conse∣quently the Water weighed little more than nine hundred times as much as an equal Bulk of Air. PARADOX I. That in Water, and other Fluids, the lower Parts are pressed by the upper. If in a Glass of Water,See Plate 2. Fig. 1. A B C D (see Plate the second, Fig. the first) a Cylindrical Tube be immersed, which contains Oyl of Turpen∣tine; and that Oyl be suspended there, (by keep∣ing the upper Orifice close, after it hath been suck'd up to a convenient height) 'till the Pipe
is depress'd to a convenient Depth in the Wa∣ter; if the lower end of the Pipe B Q be im∣mersed 'till it reaches to the imaginary Surface G H, and the Oyl X Q presses no more upon that imaginary Surface, than the Water with∣out the Tube, then the Oyl will be suspended there, and not be able to depress the Surface of the Water below it; but if the Surface of the Oyl in the Tube be much above the Water, and it presses more upon the imaginary Surface G H than the Water without, then it will make its way through that Surface, 'till the Oyl within and the Water without are brought to an Ae∣quilibrium again, so that they both equally press upon the Surface G H; and the like will hap∣pen, if the Tube be raised to the Surface D S, and gradually on to the Surface L M; for as the Pressure of the external Water grows less and less, as the imaginary Surface is nearer the top of the Glass, so the Oyl in the Tube grow∣ing preponderant, falls out at the lower end of the Tube, 'till the Tube T V being almost raised to the Surface L M, but a little Water pressing upon that Surface, the Oyl is almost wholly fallen out of the Cylindrical Cavity of it. But if instead of raising the Pipe P Q, it be depressed to the Position N O, the Water incumbent on the Surface E F on the outside the Pipe, being more powerful than the Cylin∣der or Oyl W AE, which is only aequiponderant to a Cylinder of Water leaning on the Surface G H, the Oyl must be buoyed up by the Pres∣sure of the external Water, and the Space O AE filled with Water, so that the Oyl betwixt W AE, and AE O, being both aequiponderant to a Cy∣linder
of Water, they may equally press upon the Surface E F with the Water on the outside. And agreeable to what hath been said it is, that the Cylinder of Oyl X Q will be something above the Surface L M, when the Tube is only immersed to the Surface Q. Since Oyl of Tur∣pentine being specifically lighter than Water, the Cylinder must be longer, to press upon the Surface G H, equally with a Cylinder of Wa∣ter, no longer than from the Surface L M to G H. And if a heavier Liquor than Water were made use of, the Surface X must be more above L M than in Water, otherwise it would not press equally upon the subjacent Surface. From whence appears the Truth of the Propo∣sition, for if the Oyl be kept suspended at a different Height as the external Water is deep∣er, to countervail it; and if as it is raised from G H to I K, the Oyl in the bottom of the Pipe is pressed out, it must needs follow, that it is pressed down by the weight of the incumbent Oyl, since then the surface of the Water I K, being not equally pressed upon from without, as by the Oyl, it is able to break that Surface and make its way out. But before I proceed to the following Pro∣positions, I shall subjoin the following Adver∣tisements. First, What we say of the Pressure of Fluids upon one another, is to be attributed to heavy Fluids in general, except some reason appears for a particular exception in some Pla∣ces. Secondly, That in slender Pipes the Sur∣face of the Liquor within, is generally above the Surface of the external, Thirdly, Small Pipes are the fittest for these Experiments, be∣cause
in larger the emerging Oyl passing through the Water obscures the Light of what is design'd to be visible. Fourthly, We make use of Oyl of Turpentine, rather than any other Liquor, because clear and colourless, and not apt to stain ones Cloaths; and as for the offensive Smell, that may be corrected with Oyl of Rhodium, or any other odoriferous Oyl, tho' any other Liquor may be made use of, that will not mix with Water. Fifthly, Oyl of Turpentine may be tinged with Copper, to render the Phaenomena within more visible; for which reason we often employ a Decoction of Brasil instead of clear Water, or of Log-wood, or red Ink it self. Sixthly, the Figure of the Glasses may be what you please, but the Pipes must be broader or longer as occasion requires. Seventhly, The Pipes are to be filled by sucking up the Air to a convenient Height, and then stopping the Orifice above with ones Finger; but if it be too high, the Experimenter may let it out as he pleases, by admitting a convenient quanti∣ty of Air in at the Top, by gradually remov∣ing his Finger. Lastly, In such Experiments as require a considerable disparity betwixt the two mingled Liquors, we may make use of Oyl of Tartar per Deliquium instead of Water, and Spirit of Wine instead of Oyl of Turpen∣tine; these Liquors being not disposed to min∣gle with one another; and instead of fair Wa∣ter 06 we may make use of a filtred Solution of Sea-Salt, when the other is not easily got. And when we have a mind to vary the Experiment, we may make use of Oyl of Turpentine along with the other two; and by depressing a Tube
into them with Water in the bottom, exhibit very pleasing Phaenomena. PARADOX II. That a lighter fluid may gravitate or weigh upon a heavier. The truth of this is evident, since all Bodies have a tendency towards the Center; by which they are always disposed to press downwards, tho' sometimes they have a respective Levity, as when a piece of Wood emerges in Water, yet nevertheless that relative Levity argues not that it hath no weight at all, since tho' when a Man stands in a pair of Scales and lifts up a weight, notwithstaning the Ascent of the weight he will perceive a manifest tendency of it down∣wards. But to make it more plain (See Plate 2d. Fig. 2.) where supposing a Cylinder of Water I G,See Plate 2. Fig. 2. to be immersed in Oyl of Turpentine to the immaginary Surface E F; the Water in the Pipe I H being heavier in Specie than the Oyl, it will equally ponderate upon the Surface E F as the lighter Oyl K E L I, and if the Pipe be immersed deeper, the Cylinder of Water be∣ing not equiponderant with the extenal Oyl, the Oyl will, tho' a lighter Body in Specie, rise in the bottom of the Tube and buoy up the Water. Again the Bubble X which consists of a Glass heavier than Water and Air which is lighter;See Plate 2. Fig. 3. or partly of Water it self which is specifically as heavy, as long as the whole aggregate is
lighter than Water of an equal bulk it will float, but if it grows heavier it will sink, and if any heavy Body presses upon it, which is specifically heavier than Water, by which the included Air may be compressed, the Bubble will subside, but when that Pressure is taken off, and the Air ex∣pands it self again, it will as soon emerge, the Water that was before sucked in being by that means expelled. But for a further Confirmation of this second Paradox, I shall add the following Experiment, viz. That having put a Glass-Bubble pretty well poised, into a Tube filled within a foot of the top with Water, it swam there, till a good deal of Oyl of Turpentine was poured upon the Water, but then more Water being forced into the Bubble by the weight of the incumbent Oyl, it presently subsided; but when part of that Oyl was taken off, the spring of the Inter∣nal Air forcing the impressed Water out a∣gain, the Bubble presently immerged. And, For a further Confimation of this Paradox as well as the first, I shall add, that a Bubble swimming in a Tube, as in the former Experi∣ment, tho' depressed to the bottom by a Wier, yet when that Pressure is taken off again it will rise up as before; but if it be held under Water till more is poured in, and till it rises about a foot above it in the Tube, the weight of the incumbent Water will depress it, but if that Water be gradually taken off, the Bubble will presently emerge. If it should be asked why in these Tryals I did not make use of Oyl of Tartar per Deliquium, instead of Water? I shall answer, That in such
slender Pipes as the first Experiment was made in, as the Oyl of Tartar flowed down one side, the Oyl of Turpentine would rise on the other; which makes me wonder that Monsieur Paschall should teach, that if a Tube filled with Mercu∣ry be immersed fourteen foot under Water, if the Tube be fourteen foot long, the Mercury will not wholly run out, but continue to the height of a foot in the bottom of it; and I the more wonder at it, since probably the Impetus would make it descend; and since the like would not succeed with much more favourable circumstances, betwixt Oyl of Turpentine and Oyl of Tartar. PARADOX III. That if a Body contiguous to the Water be alto∣gether or in Part lower than the highest level of the said Water, the lower part of the Body will be pressed upward by the Water that touches it beneath. This may be proved from what hath been delivered under the first Paradox, for where∣ever an imaginary Surface is beneath the real one, the weight of the Water being incumbent on all other Parts of the same Superficies, that part on which the immersed Body chances to lean must have a Proportionable endeavour up∣wards; and if that endeavour be greater than the specifick Gravity of the immersed Body is able to resist, then it is buoyed up; and tho' the Gravity of the immersed Body is so great, as to over-power the tendency of the Water
upwards, yet the tendency of that Water is not therefore to be denyed, for as much as it in some measure resists the subsiding of that Body. And this may be confirmed by the Ex∣periment tryed in the second figure, for as more Oyl is externaly poured on, the Water is impelled and buoyed up in the Pipe by the subjacent Oyl, which could not be, if the Oyl did not press against it beneath; and even when the Water and Oyl are in an Aequilibrium, the latter presses upwards, in as much as it resists the descent of the Water out of the Tube. And the truth of this Proposition is equally true, whether we suspend Oyl in Water or Water in Oyl. And that the Water makes a resistance to Bo∣dies that descend in it,See Plate 2. Fig. 4. will appear from the following Scheme; for supposing the Pipe E F to contain Oyl specifically heavier than Water, and when the Oyl and Water without were in an Aequilibrium, the Pipe be raised, drops of Oyl will fall out, but much more slow∣ly than in the open Air, where if the drop G were not specifically heavier than the Water, it would not break the imaginary Surface of the Water H I. But further, it not only from hence appears, that since as long as the two Liquors are in Aequilibrium they are not able to remove each other out of their places; but from hence we may infer, that a Liquor of an equal specifick Gravity with Water, being placed in any part of that Liquor, would re∣main in the place assigned.
But to illustrate what we have said, of Wa∣ter obstructing the descent of Bodies heavier than it self, I shall add, that if twelve ounces of Lead be counterpoised in the Air, when the Lead is let down below the Surface of the Wa∣ter, the Scale in the Air will manifestly pre∣ponderate; which shews that the Water hinders the descent of the other. And the resistance of Fluids to the lower superficies of Bodies may be further confirmed by observing, that Bodies specifically lighter than Water are raised by it, as Wood and drops of Oyl; the Reason of which seems to be this, that there is a greater Pressure upon the lowest part N, than upon the upper part of the drop M, because that upon all the Surface K L there is an uniform Pressure of the Water A K. B L, and upon all the Parts of the Surface H I there is a greater weight of Water A H. B I, except at the part N, for there the Oyl G, being not so heavy as so much Water, it is consequently unable to resist the ascent of the Water beneath it, for which Reason it is buoyed up; and the case being the same with that and any other Parallel Plain, where∣ever it is in its ascent, it must be by the same Reason gradually raised up, for the Oyl being pressed against by two Pillars of Water, the one above and the other below, and the low∣er being longer by the thickness of the rising Body, than that which lyes upon it, it must consequently be buoyed up, and more or less swiftly as the lower Basis presses more or less on the subjacent superficies.
And for the like Reason when two pieces of stick of a different length are immersed in Water; the longest rises the fastest, for if O P were two foot high, and Q R but one, and both rested upon the same imaginary Plain, the one hath a Pillar of Water a foot longer to resist its rising than the other, and as the e∣merging Body rises slower, as the proportion be∣twixt the upper and the lower Pillar of Wa∣ter is less; so thence may be deduced a Reason why in some Liquors, whose whiteness depends on the intermixture of drops, are so long a rising, the minuteness of them rendering the difference of the upper and lower Pillar of Air inconsi∣derable, but as these drops by moving up and down unite into larger, the difference grow∣ing more considerable, they are accordingly buoyed up in less time, and swim upon the top of the Water. And for the same Reason,See Fig. 3. Plate 2. that these Bodies float upon Water, a Cubick Inch of Wood is by its specifie Gravity only so far depressed into the Water contained in the Vial A B. C D, till the Water about it makes an equal Pressure upon the imaginary Surface X W, and because the Wood is not so heavy in Specie as Water, therefore part is kept emerging above the su∣perficies of it. But to shew further, that the weight of a floating Body is equal to as much Water, as its immersed Port takes up the Room of, I shall subjoyn, that having placed several Marks upon the Surface of a floating Glass, and, when it was taken off the Water, put just so much Water into it as filled it up to those Marks, by that
means I found, that the weight of the Water which was sufficient to fill the space possessed by the floating Vessel, below the Surface of the Water, was equal to the weight of the whole floating Vessel, and all that was contained in it. And the same end may be obtained another way, viz. By first filling a Cistern or Pond with Water, by a Vessel of a known capacity, and then having emptyed it again; for if the Vessel be placed in that Cistern or Pond, and Water put into the Cistern again till it floats the Ves∣sel, and fills the Cistern or Pond full, as much as it falls short of the weight of Water first contained in the Cistern, so much is the weight of the floating Body. PARADOX IV. That in the ascension of Water in Pumps, &c. There needs nothing to raise the Water, but a competent weight of an external fluid. The truth of this Paradox sufficiently appears from what hath been before delivered; how∣ever to make it plainer, if possible, I shall add, that if a tinged Liquor be sucked up about an Inch into a Tube, and whilst the upper Orifice is covered with ones Thumb, it be depressed in Water till the superficies of the external Water is above the Surface of the internal, and then a considerable quantity of Oyl be pour∣ed upon that, and when ones Thumb is taken off the upper Orifice of the Pipe, the external Flu∣ids will by their Pressure, raise the tinged Li∣quor above the Surface of the Water, tho' not
quite so high as the Oyl: From whence it ap∣pears, that a Liquor may be raised in a Tube by the Pressure of an external fluid, and that lighter than it self in Specie, which may illustrate what we have said of the rising of Water in Pumps, where by the Pressure of the Atmo∣sphere the Water is buoyed up, when the Pres∣sure of the incumbent Atmosphere is taken off the internal superficies by the rising sucker, and makes way for the Water to ascend with∣in the Pipe. I took likewise a small Tube, whose Diame∣ter was the sixth part of an Inch, and having im∣mersed it an Inch in Quick-silver, I put my Thumb upon the upper Orifice, and kept it there till I had immersed the Tube eighteen Inch∣es in Oyl, by the weight of which pressing against the Quick-silver, it was not only kept from fall∣ing out of the Pipe, but raised a little, and as when the Tube was raised some of the Mercury would fall out, so when it was depressed the Mercury would be buoyed up, by the greater weight of the external Liquor upon it. And indeed that the Water in a Pump may be raised by the Pressure of an external fluid, will appear more fully to him that shall consider, that in the Torrecellian Experiment the Pressure of the external Air is able to raise Mercury in a Tube twenty nine or thirty Digits, which is equipon∣derant to a Cylinder of Water thirty three or thirty four foot high.
PARADOX V. That the Pressure of an external fluid, is able to keep an Heterogeneous Liquor suspended at the same height in several Pipes, tho' those Pipes be of very different Diameters. This is evident from what is represented in Fig. 6. Plate the second,See Fig. 6. Plate 2. for if the Orifice of that Vessel A B C D be closed up with a Cork, and that Cork have four holes, in three of which the Pipes are fixed, and in the fourth the Tun∣nel, and if, when so much Water hath been poured in as reaches to the Surface E F, Oyl be poured through the Tunnel till it reaches to the Surface G H it will depress the Surface of the Water down lower, and the Oyl not being able to get into the Pipes L. M. N. by its weight, it will cause the Water to rise to O P Q, the Surface of the Water, which before rested at E F, being depressed down to I K, upon which imaginary Surface the Water contained in the Tubes, answerable to their Bulk, making an e∣quivalent Pressure with a Cylinder of external Oyl of the same Bore, the Water must conse∣quently be buoyed up to the same height in all, except the last Pipe be very small, but the dif∣ference on that account being easily distinguish∣ed, it will be no difficult matter to make an al∣lowance. N. B. when the Oyl is poured through the Tunnel, it will be requisite to put some Cotton Wool in it, to break the force of the falling
stream, lest the violence of it should prejudice the Experiment. PARADOX VI. If a Body placed under Water, with its upper∣most Surface parallel to the Horrizon, how much Water soever there may be on this or that side above the Body, the direct Pressure sustained by the Body (for we now consider not the La∣teral or the recoiling Pressure, to which the Body may be exposed, if quite environed with Water) is no more than that of a Column of Water, having the Horizontal superficies of the Body for its Basis, and the Perpendicular depth of the Water for its height. And so likewise, If the Water that leans upon the Body be contained in Pipes open at both ends, the Pressure of the Water is to be estimated by the weight of a Pil∣lar of Water, whose Basis is equal to the lower Orifice of a Pipe, (which we suppose to be pa∣rallel to the Horizon) and its height equal to a Perpendicular, reaching thence to the top of the Water; tho' the Pipe be much inclined towards the Horizon, or tho' it be irregularly shaped, and much broader in some Parts, than the said Orifice. As for the first part of our Paradox, it is proposed by Stevinus in more general Terms, and thus demonstrated, (See Fig. 7. Plate the second) where, supposing A B C D to be a solid Rectangular figure of Water, whose Ba∣sis E F is parallel to the Horizon, and whose
height G E is a Perpendicular from the Surface of that Water, the bottom D E, E F, and F C cannot be charged with a greater weight than what is respectively Perpendicular, be∣cause none of them can receive an Additional weight from the Water Collaterally, but it must diminish the weight of Water Per∣pendicularly incumbent on that other bottom, else there must be a greater weight upon the Basis D E F C, than is contained in the Surface A B. C D, which is impossible. To which instance of the learned Stevinus I shall add the following. For if Oyl be suck'd up into the Pipe represented by Fig. 8 Plate the second, and when it is at a convenient height in the longer Leg, you nimbly stop the upper Orifice, till it be depressed so low into the Wa∣ter, that the Oyl is but little above the Surface of the Water, it will rest near that station, when the upper Orifice is unstopped; and if it be depressed lower than that, the weight of the incumbent Pillar of Water will force its way into the Pipe, so far as answers the weight of a Cylinder of Water of an equal Bore with the Oyl contained in the Pipe, and on the con∣trary, if the Pipe be elevated above its first station, as much Oyl will rise out of the Pipe and emerge, as answers in weight to the part of the incumbent Pillar of Water removed by that means from gravitating upon it. And to this I shall add, that tho' Water is not con∣tained in Pipes, yet it presses as regularly upon subjacent Bodies as if it were; which will be e∣vident, if a Vessel of the shape of the Funnel de∣lineated in Fig. the 6th be imployed, for
the Liquor contained in the small Stem of that will be able to sustain the whole incumbent Wa∣ter: In confirmation of which, we made use of such a Vessel, as Plate the third, figure the first represents,See Plate 3. Fig. 1. and filling the parallel Leg with Oyl, and the other as well as the Ball with Water, the Oyl was elevated no higher in the longer Leg, than if the less Leg had been an uniform Tube of the same Diameter; and when the Ex∣periment was reiterated with Oyl in the Ball, and Water in the long Leg, the weight of that Oyl was not able to raise the Water in the long Leg to an equal superficies with it self; the Liquors in both these Experiments which was contained in the capacity of the Ball, being sustained by the concave sides of the Glass. And the like Experiment being tryed with Quick-silver, which was poured into the shor∣ter Leg C D, till it rought almost to the bottom of the Ball, and as high in the longer Tube A B, upon an affusion of Water into the long∣er Leg, the Mercury was buoyed up into the Ball, till it rought to H E G, where if more than what was Perpendicularly incumbent on the Tube C had pressed upon it, the Water would not have been able to keep it at such a height. But to confirm the second part of our Para∣dox,See Plate 3. Fig. 2. we made use of a Glass, such as Plate the third Fig. the second represents, and having filled the Glass half full of Water, we stop∣ped it with a Cork, in which the Pipes there delineated were fixed, and likewise the Tun∣nel, the bottom of each of the Pipes, being each immersed considerably in Water, and
then pouring in Oyl through the Tunnel, we observed, that the Water was elevated to an equal height from the lower superficies of the Oyl which pressed on the Water; in which Ex∣periment, tho' the Pipes contained more Wa∣ter by being included, yet that Water pressed no more upon the imaginary Plain, than an e∣rect Pipe of equal Bore with the lower super∣ficies of the Water contained in it would have done. And if Oyl of Turpentine be poised in a Pipe in an erect Posture, and then by inclination a greater portion of it brought under Water, yet the external Water will raise the Oyl con∣tained in it; and the same was evident, when Oyl of Turpentine being contained in three Pipes of such figures as Plate the third Fig. the third represents, for in all such cases,See Fig. 3. Plate 3. where the Pipes are in an inclined Posture, or some Parts of them larger than ordinary, part of the weight of the Liquors contained weigh upon the sides of the Vessel, and no more presses up∣on the subjacent Liquor, than is answerable to an erect Pipe of equal Bore with the lower Orifice, and of equal height with an erect Tube, answerable to the length of one end of that Pipe from the other. To make out what Stevinus hath asserted, viz. That if a Cylinder of Water be placed upon a subjacent Body, the Basis will sustain a weight equal to that Circular Basis, and to the Perpendicular height of it, we provided a Vessel of Laton,See Fig. 4. Plate 3. of the figure represented by Fig. twelve Plate the third, which being furnished with a close bottom C D, made of a flat piece of Wood, covered with a soft Bladder,
and greased on the lower side near the edges, that leaned on the rim of Wood G H, contigu∣ous every where to the inside of the Latten, that it might be easily lifted up from off the rim, and yet at other times lye so close upon it, that the Water should not be able to get out between them. To the midst of this bottom was fastned a long string, for a use to be here∣after mention'd; the Instrument being thus prepared, the Water was poured in at the top of the Pipe A B, which pressing upon the false bottom C D, against the subjacent rim G H, con∣tributed to render the Vessel more close, and to obstruct its own passage, whereupon we tyed the upper end of the string I K to a beam, and put so many weights into the opposite Scale, as were sufficient to raise the false bottom C D from the rim G H. And then deducting from that weight, the weight of the false bottom, and the Water contained in the broad Cylindri∣cal Box B E C H. G D F, we found that the Pres∣sure, which was made upon C D was much greater than what reading Stevinus would make one expect, and than all the Water contained both in the Pipe and Cylinder would have been, had it been contained in an uniform Cylin∣der.
PARADOX VII. That a Body immersed in a fluid, sustains a Lateral Pressure from the fluid; and that in∣creased, as the depth of the immersed Body be∣low the Surface of the fluid increaseth. This appears from what is represented by Plate the third, Fig. the fifth,See Plate 3. Fig. 5. where Oyl be∣ing sucked up into the Pipes G F K, and they sufficiently immersed in the Water contained in the Vessel A B C D, so that the Surface of the Oyl I K, may be but a little above the Wa∣ter, the Imaginary Pillar of Water H G will suspend it there, but if the Pipe be raised, the Oyl becoming too heavy to be kept up by so short a Cylinder, the incumbent Cylinder will force it out of the Orifice G, but if the Pipe be further immersed, the Water will raise the Oyl in the Tube, and fill part of the Cylindrical cavity below it. To this Experiment I shall add,See Plate 3. Fig. 6. that having stopped the Mouth of the Vial ABCD, repre∣sented by Fig. six, Plate the third, with a Cork and Cement, and bored with a hot Iron, a hole to receive the Pipe G H, and the other E F, I stopped the Orifice G with a Cork and Cement likewise, and then pouring in Water through the Pipe E, till it rose to the Surface I, the Bub∣ble X was so nicely poised that it swam, but as soon as by pouring in more Water the Surface was raised to K, the Bubble X subsided to the bottom: From whence it appears, that the whole Water contained in the Pipe E, presses
upon the whole Water within the Glass, other∣wise it could not compress the Air in the Bub∣ble, and make it sink; and likewise that it not only presses upon that subjacent, but likewise upon those Parts that are latterally situated in Respect of it. And that not only the upper Parts of the Water, but even the Cork that is below the Surface of the Water I, is pres∣sed by the weight of it, and obliquely too, appears, since if the Orifice G be not closely stopped, the Water will be raised through it, and if instead of a Cork and Cement, it be only stopped with ones Thumb, one may per∣ceive an evident Pressure of the Water against it. And that the subsiding of the Bubble depended on the Pressure of the Water above it, appeared, since if part of the Water was poured off, by inclining the Vial, it would presenty e∣merge again. And one thing in this Experiment worthy our notice, was, that if the Glass A B. C D was not wholly filled, but the space betwixt L M filled with Air, yet the Pressure of such different Fluids may be so easily communica∣ted from one to the other, that the Bubble would descend equally as if it were filled with Water.
PARADOX VIII. That Water may be made to depress a Body lighter than it self, as well as to buoy it up. The truth of this Paradox will be easily made out by the following Experiments, for if a Glass Syphon,See Plate 3. Fig. 7. of the Figure represented by Fig. 7. Plate the third, be filled from H to I with Oyl of Turpentine, and immersed in the Glass A B C D, till the Orifice A of the shorter Leg be under Water, if then the Orifice E be unstopped, and the whole Tube E I F G H be depressed gradually, the incumbent, Water H K will press the Oyl out of the shorter Leg H G, into the longer E F. And, For a further confirmation of this Paradox, as well as the foregoing, and the second, I shall subjoin; that having provided a Pipe of the Figure represented by Fig. 8. and sucked so much Oyl into it as filled the space L M N P,See Fig.  I immersed it in Water, and upon the opening the Orifice O, as the Pipe was gradually depressed, the Oyl was pressed out of the Pipe L M to N, and from thence to what height I pleased in the Pipe O P N.
PARADOX IX. That whatever is said of Positive Levity, a par∣cel of Oyl lighter than Water may be kept in Wa∣ter, without ascending in it. Considering that since the Surface of a Vessel of standing Water is (Physically speaking) Ho∣rizontal, the Water that presses against the lower part of the immersed Body must needs be deeper, than that which presses against the upper, and that this is the Reason why Bodies lighter than Water emerge, I concluded, that if the Water upon the upper Surface of Oyl in a Tube could be so high as to ballance the Pressure of that Water below, Oyl might be suspended betwixt two Parcels of Water. To try the Result, I sucked an Inch of Water into a Tube, and by stopping the upper Orifice, and by that means suspending the Water in the Tube, I removed it into a Vessel of Oyl, and then opening the upper Orifice till an Inch of Oyl was buoyed up into it, I removed it again in∣to a Vessel of Water, and immersed it so far in that, till the Water below the Oyl was equal in height to the Water above it, in which station the Cylinder of Oyl and Water being equal in weight with the Pressure of the exter∣nal Water, the Oyl Q. R. was suspended be∣twixt the Water S. R. and that below it P. Q. the Surface of the Water in the Pipe T. S. be∣ing so much above the Surface of the Water A D. as was requisite to make the Oyl and Wa∣ter contained in the Pipe to press equally on
the Surface G. H. with the external Water,See Plate 4. Fig. 1. as Plate 4. Fig. 1. represents. PARADOX X. That the Cause of the Ascension of Water in Sy∣phony, and of flowing through them, may be explained without having recourse to Nature's Abhorrency of a Vacuum. To demonstrate this,See Plate 4. Fig. 2. we provided a Glass Tube A B. C▪ D. of a convenient wideness, and half a yard or more in depth, as also a Sy∣phon with two Legs F K, and K G, to which is joined a Pipe E K, and to each of the Legs of that Syphon we tyed a Glass Pipe, seal∣ed at the bottom, and having Water contain∣ed in each, to the height there delineated. Things being thus prepared, Oyl of Turpen∣tine must be poured into the Tube A B. C D, (but that it may not take up too much of the Oyl, the bottom of the Vessel to X Y, may be filled with Water) till it reaches above the top of the Syphon F K G, and then by the weight of it the Water in the Pipe will be raised through the Syphon, and run into the lower Vessel H. In which Experiment the Water is raised through a Syphon by pressure, tho' at the same time there be a free communication of Air through the Pipe E K, without danger of a Vacuum. In which Experiment, if the Rea∣son be asked, why the Water does not rather run out of the Bipe H, into G, than the con∣trary? It may be answered, That tho' exter∣nally the Oyl is deeper upon the surface of the
Water in the Pipe H, and consequently pres∣ses more upon it, yet the Tube G, on the other side, instead of having that pressure of Oyl, hath a Cylinder of Water of an equal length, which being heavier than Oyl, raises the Water out of that Tube more forcibly than it is raised out of the other. And for the like Reason, when once the Water is raised in Syphons, tho' there be a longer Cylinder of Air upon that end which is immersed in the lower Vessel, yet there is a greater weight on the other, because besides the incumbent Atmosphere, there is a considerable Weight of Water: But if the Syphon be a∣bove 34 or 35 Foot high the Water will not flow through it, the pressure of the external Air being unable to raise Water to such a height. And one thing observable in these Ex∣periments is, That if when the Water is run∣ning through these Syphons, a small hole be made upon the top of a Syphon, the Air pres∣sing upon the Water within the Pipe as well as without it, it will cease to run, tho' the hole be no bigger than one made with a Needle; which hole if it be stopped with a Needle, the pres∣sure of the external Air will by that means be taken off, and the Syphon be rendred fit for use.
PARADOX XI. That a Solid Body, as ponderous as any yet known, tho' near the top of the Water, it will sink by its own weight; yet if it be placed at a greater depth, than that of twenty times its own thick∣ness, it will not sink, if its descent be not as∣sisted by the weight of the incumbent Water. To demonstrate what is contained in this Paradox,See Plate 4. Fig. 3. we must fill the Glass A B C D, (see Plate the 4. Fig. the third,) almost full of Water, the length of it being near three Foot; in which Water, if we suppose the Weight E F to be placed upon the surface G H, it will sink by reason of its specifick Gravity, the Water incumbent on other parts of that Plain being not equiponderant, but if we suppose it to be placed upon the Surface I K, the Pillars of Wa∣ter being above nine times as thick as it, they will counterballance it, for which Reason were there no Water upon it, it would subside no further; and were a method contrived to keep the Water from pressing upon it, the like would happen supposing it to lean upon the Surface L M. And to shew, that were the weight so de∣pressed free from incumbent Water, it would not subside, I shall add the following Experi∣ment; let then the Brass Body E F,See Plate 4▪ Fig. 4 (see Plate 4. Fig. 4.) be the cover of a Brass valve, the valve being fastned with Cement to the Glass Pipe O P, the Body E F, must by pulling a hair fired to the button of Valve Q close the Orifice
of it, and then it being convey'd under Water a foot deep, the Cement and sides of the Glass O P, will keep the Water off the upper part of the Body E F, and consequently the imagi∣nary Surface V W will only be pressed upon by the sole weight of the Body E F, but the other Parts of that Surface by the incumbent Cylinders of Water, so that the Body E F will be bore up without the assistance of any thing else but the Water buoying up against it, but if the Tube be raised till the Body E F be above the Surface I K, and near X Y, the weight of it being greater than the weight of the incumbent Pillars of Water, the Body will be no longer supported; but if upon the first immersion, when the Body E F is let down to the Surface R S, a weight L be suspended at it, that will not be able to sever the Body from the Valve; from whence it appears, that there is no need in our Physico-mechanical Ex∣periments to fly to a Fuga Vacui to explain the Reason why two exactly polished Marbles when contiguous are so hard to be separated. To what hath been said under this Paradox, I shall add, that when the weight L is suspended at the button Q, the Body E F will be se∣parated before it rises to the Surface I K. APPENDIX I. Objections to evince that the upper Parts of Wa∣ter press not upon the lower,Objections answered. answered. The first Objection is, that if the upper Parts of the Water pressed upon the lower, the low∣er
would be condensed; but to this it is an∣swered, that Water consisting of Parts tho' minute, yet very solid, it does not therefore follow, since in a heap of the powder of Dia∣monds, the lower are no more compressed than the superficial ones,; besides it hath not been found that Water was capable of being compressed by any force we could use. And tho' it be further urged, that Plants grow in the Sea without being depressed, yet that hap∣pens, because the Pressure is not only incum∣bent but Collateral likewise, and so contributes to sustain it, and the rather because the Colla∣teral Pressure is greater than the incumbent. Another Objection is, that a Bucket of Wa∣ter weighs no more when full in Water than the Bucket it self out of it, nor so much. But the Reason of this is very plain, for sup∣posing A B C D to be a Well, (See Plate the fourth,See Plate 4. Fig. 5. Figure the fifth) in which the Bucket which is contiguous to the Plain I K, is suspen∣ded by the string E F, the Water in the Buck∣et G (if it be made of Wood which is lighter in Specie than Water) and the incumbent Pil∣lar of Water not pressing upon the Surface H equally as the Water on the Surface I K, the Water below must buoy it up. And tho' the Bucket was made of something heavier than Water, yet the whole weight of it will not be perceived by the hand above, but only the Sur∣plusage of weight which surmounts the weight of an equal bulk of Water. And tho' the School-men tell us, that this Phaenomenon de∣pends on the indisposition of Water to weigh in its own place, yet I have found, that Lead
being convey'd into melted Butter contained in a wooden Box, and that being suspended in Water by a Silken-thred at the end of a ballance, we observed that this was as much indisposed to weigh as Water in Water, no more weight than what surmounted the weight of an equal bulk of Water, being made sensible by the ballance: But when it was partly raised out of the Water or wholly, a greater weight was requisite to counterballance it; for sup∣posing, that part of the Bucket N to be a∣bove the Surface of the Water L M, a great force is requisite to sustain it, the weight of Water incumbent on the Surface P Q being not able to ballance it, and consequently the bottom of the Bucket H, will scarce be pressed upwards half so strongly as before. But if the Bucket be raised to O, the Water being not at all contiguous to it, cannot contribute to the supporting of it. All that is further contained in this Appen∣dix, being only a Repetition of what hath been already delivered on this subject, I shall pass it by as needless to be repeated again. APPENDIX II. Why Divers, and others who descend to the bottom of the Sea, are not oppressed by the weight of the incumbent Water. From what hath been already delivered it ap∣pearing, that Water weighs in Water, and consequently presses upon Bodies contained in
it, I shall therefore, before I propose my own opinion, briefly take notice of the follow∣ing. And first Monsieur Des Caries tells us,See Plate 4. Fig. 6. that if the Body of a Man were placed in the bot∣tom of the Vessel B, so as to stop the Orifice A, he would feell the weight of the Water C B A incumbent on him, but if he were placed at B, he would not be sensible of that weight, because should his Body descend, the Water betwixt B and C would not descend with him, but supposing the Orifice A to be stopped with a solid, that would feel the weight of the Water, because it hindred the descent of the Water betwixt B and A, but since the Principles already laid down over∣throw the foundation of this Explication, I shall only add, that were the matter of fact true, the Reason would be, that when his Body was at A, the Man would sustain the weight of the incumbent Water, without any subjacent Wa∣ter at A, to buoy up against him, whereas at B, the subjacent Water buoys up as much as the other presses down or more. But Stevinus, Hydrostat. Lib. 5. Pag. 149. says, Omni Pressu quo corpus dolore afficitur, pars aliqua corporis luxatur, sed isto Pressu nulla cor∣poris pars luxatur, isto igitur Pressu corpus dolore nullo afficitur. Sed Exemplo clarius ita intelli∣ges, esto A B C D,See Plate 4. Fig. 7. aqua cujus fundum D C in quo foramen E habeat Epistomium sibi insertum, cui dorso incumbat homo F, quae cum ita sint, ab aquae pondere ipsi insidente nulla pars corporis luxari poterit, cum aqua undiquaque aequaliter urgeat.
Which solution might hold, if the question was only why the Body of a Diver is not pressed down to the bottom of the Sea. But as for what he says, viz. That the equality and uni∣formness of the Pressure makes it less sensible I am of his opinion, for tho' in the Air the Pres∣sure of it is not perceivable for a like Reason, yet if ones hand be applyed to the top of a Re∣ceiver, and the Air exhausted, the Pressure of the incumbent Atmosphere will cause a sensi∣ble Pain. And to shew that the uniformity of the Pres∣sure, and the firmness of the Bodies of Divers, may enable them to bear the Pressure of the Water, I shall add, that having included a Tad-pole in an Instrument,See Plate 4. Fig. 8. such as Fig. 8. Plate the fourth describes, the Plug was so far de∣pressed, that the Air in the end of the Pipe was compressed into an eighth part of the space it possessed before, so that the Pressure upon the Water was equal to the weight of a Cylinder of Water three hundred foot high, yet the Tad-pole moved up and down as nimbly as be∣fore, being not at all indisposed, tho' its Body appeared to be compressed into less room than before.
CHAP. VII. An Hydrostatical discourse &c. ALL that is contained in this discourse, being chiefly a Repetition of what hath been before delivered in other Parts of the Author's Works, and now only repeated to obviate some Objecti∣ons of Dr. More's, and the truth's laid down by our Author in his Hydrostatical Paradoxes, and Physico-mechanical Experiments being so plain, and these Objections so trivial, it would but be needless to encrease the bulk of the Book, with what may with more Reason be avoided. CHAP. VIII. A new Essay Instrument, and the Hydro∣statical Principle it's founded on, &c. Communicated in the Transactions of June 1675. The first Section. Shewing the occasion of making this Instrument, and the Hydrostatical Principle it's founded upon. A new Hy∣drostatical. Instrument and its uses proposed.HAving several years ago made of a Bub∣ble with a long Stem, to estimate the specifick Gravity of Metals, by its easie or more difficult immersion with them, I applyed it like∣wise
to estimate the weight of other Solids, by observing how Solids suspended at this Bubble would depress it variously according to their specifick Gravities; It being a general Rule in Hydrostaticks, that any solid Body in Water loses so much of its weight, as a parcel of Water of the same Dimensions would weigh in the Air, so that Gold being specifically heavi∣er than Copper, it must lose less of its weight in the Water than Copper; because proporti∣onably the Ignobler Metal possesses the space of a greater quantity of Water, whose weight, by weighing it in that fluid, is lost in the weight of the Body suspended at the Bubble. And consequently an ounce of Gold must cause that Bubble to be immersed deeper in Water, than an ounce of Brass or Copper would, the Brass by Reason of its larger Dimensions losing more of its weight than the Gold. The second Section. Describing the Construction of this Instrument. This Instrument may be made of any Metal or other matter, which will float in the Water, without soaking it in, but the best for the uses hereafter mentioned are those made of Glass; tho' they are not so lasting as those that consist of Copper or Silver. This Instrument is made of three Parts, a Ball, the Stem, and that which holds the Pipe, The Ball consists of two Metalline Plates, each of the fashion of a Convex Glass; and the Cavity within must be so large, that the Air contained
in it, may be sufficient to hold as much Air as will keep the whole Stem from sinking under Water; if the Ballast which is to keep the Ves∣sel immersed in an erect posture is to be con∣tain'd within the Vessel, the Stem ought to be hollow, but otherwise to consist of a small Cy∣linder without any Cavity, and of a convenient length. The Instrument I employ for Guineas hath its Ball as big as a Hens-egg, and the Stem a∣bout four or five Inches long, being soddered on to a hole in the Centre of the uppermost Convex part of the Ball; and to the Centre of the lowermost is fixed a piece of Wire to lay the Guiny upon, or a screwed stirrup to fix it in. If you have a mind to try pieces of Gold of greater weight, the stirrup ought to be fixed to a small Cylinder, upon which several pieces of Metal being fixed, and having holes in the middle, that they may be put on or taken off as occasion requires, the Instrument may be ad∣justed to any piece of Gold, tho' twice or thrice as heavy as a Guiny. To adjust this Instrument for the use of Guineas, it must be lightned by the use of a file, or made heavier by the addition of Ballast, that it may be sufficiently immersed in the Wa∣ter without sinking, and then a mark being fixed on the Stem at the Surface of the Water, a piece of Brass must be substituted in the place of the Guiny of the same weight, or a grain or two heavier in the Air, and a mark set at the Surface of the Water, when it is immersed by that weight.
In which method of adjusting, the following Particulars are to be minded. First, the Guinea must be placed exactly with its middle in the screw, that it may not incline the Tube, but let it stand erect. Secondly, Quick-silver Ballast in Metalline Instruments is apt to dissolve the sodder. Thirdly, the marks may be made of chewed Mastick fixed in small holes; or by fixing a Silver or a Golden Wire in a nick made round the Stem. Fourthly, one of the heavyest Guineas is to be made use of in adjusting this Instrument, and care must be taken that ½ of an Inch be left above the Water, because all Waters them∣selves are not of an equal weight, yet those circumstances vary not the success, since the difference in the immerging this Instrument in several Waters, is in considerable in respect of the difference betwixt a piece of Brass and Gold of an equal weight in the Air, it being an Inch and three quarters. Fifthly, before we can determine by this In∣strument whether the Gold be good, it must be weighed in the Air, to see whether it be of a just weight, and then this will discover whether it be genuine, for otherwise we may think the Metal not good, when it only wants weight in the Air. The Explication of the Figures See Plate 1. Fig. 00.Fig. 1. A B. The Stem or Pipe. C E. The two Parts of the Ball sodde∣red together.
B C D E. The Ball it self. F. The screw. G. The stirrup somewhat out of its Place. H. The mark to which Copper of the weight of a Guinea in the Air depres∣ses it. I. The mark to which the Gold sinks it. Fig. 2. The screw by it self to be taken off or put on the undermost Stem of the Instrument. Fig. 3. The Perforated Plates to be put upon the lower Stem as ballast. Fig. 4. The lower Stem with a Perforated Plate upon it. Fig. 5. The stirrup which my be made use of instead of the screw. Fig. 6. A. B. C. The Glass Instrument. D D D. The Coin supported by four Horse-hairs. Fig. 7. The undermost Stem of a Glass Instru∣ment, to which a screw is fastned with Horse-hairs or otherwise. Fig. 8. A B C D. The Instrument for esti∣mating the specifick Gravity of Li∣quors. E E The Quick-silver or Water em∣ployed as Ballast.
The third Section. Representing the uses of this Instrument, as re∣lating to Metals. The first Ʋse. Is to distinguish true Guineas from Counter∣feit. The second Ʋse. In examining a piece of Gold lighter than a Guinea; so much Ballast may be added as will make that amount to the weight of a Guinea, and if the Gold be heavier, so many of the perforated Plates must be taken off the Stem, that the Instrument may not be sunk by it, and when a Coin but a little heavier than a Guinea is to be tryed, it may be convenient to place a perforated Plate upon the upper screw, so that it may lye upon the Ball, and be taken off, or lightned with a file as occasion re∣quires. That several pieces of Gold may upon some occasions be fix'd at once, the aperture of the screw ought to be wider, than what will just admit of a Guinea. If the Instrument be well proportioned, so that a piece of Gold a little heavier than a Guinea, may not depress it under Water; it may be examined without altering the weight of the Instrument.
And acording to the method above laid down, a half Guinea may be tryed by placing a true half Guinea with it in the screw. The third Ʋse. This Instrument may be adjusted to try Sil∣ver Coins which are lighter than half a Crown, by weighing Silver in it, and marking the Sur∣face of the Water upon the Pipe, and then observing what difference there is betwixt that, and an equal weight of an ignobler Me∣tal in the Air. And tho' several Instruments would be more convenient for the trying of these different Metals, yet by altering the Ballast Plates, one may be made to serve the turn. The fourth Ʋse. And by the like method an Instrument may be adjusted, to discover whether Tin be more or less adulterated with Lead, since Tin being the lightest of Metals, the Lead will depress the Instrument lower if mixed with Tin, as Gold on the contrary is the heaviest Metal, and is lighter upon the addition of another Metal. The fifth Ʋse. It may enable us to guess at the Qualities of Metalline Mixtures, and the proportions of the ingredients, for by adjusting how much such a weight of Gold will depress the Stem, by af∣terwards trying how much lighter in Water
the same weight of allayed Gold in the Air will be, and at the same time observing what was the proportion of Silver in the Alloy, we may be enabled to judge how much other pieces of Gold are alloyed by comparing their weight in Water with this Standard, provided they be of the same specifick weight in the Air, with the Gold unalloyed. And the same mea∣sures may be taken to make an estimate of the alloys of Silver with Copper, or of Copper with Tin. CHAP. IX. Observations of the growth and increase of Metals. About the growth of Tin.I am told by the Master of a Tin Mine, that after a Tin Mine had been quite drained of its Ore, by washing and vanning about 120 years after, it yielded rich Ore again, and that a good quantity of stuff being quire drained of its Ore, and laid on a heap in the Air, in thirty years it afforded Metal again. And the same Gentleman told me, that having caused the Water which washes the Earth away from the Ore, to lay down that Earth, by stopping the current of it, till its own weight made it sub∣side, that Earth being twelve years exposed to the Air, yielded a good quantity of Metal. And Relations agreeable to these I have received from another.
Of the growth of Lead.It hath been observed, that Lead Ore clear∣ed of its Metal, and laid in heaps for some years yields Metal a second time. And J. Gerhard in Decade questionum p. m. 22. says, Fessula∣rum mons in Hetruria Florentiae civitati imminens, lapides Plumbarios habet, qui si excidantur brevi temporis spatio novis incrementis instaurantur. And Agricola, speaking of the growth of Mines in general, testifies the same; but I am told, that this happens not in all Mines. And tho' it be believed that the Reason why the passa∣ges into some Mines grow narrower, is to be attributed to the growth of the Metal, yet I am apt to believe, that it may be caused by the powerful expansion of some frozen Water in the Earth, that encompasses those passages; and whereas it is urged as an Argument of the growth of Metals, that Lead increases its weight by being exposed to the Air on the tops of Churches, yet I am inclined to believe, that it rather proceeds from a Cerusse formed by corro∣sive Parts, uniting with the Parts of the corro∣ded Metal, and chiefly for this Reason, viz. Because I have observed, that the Wood which lyes about that Lead abounds with an Acid Spi∣rit, capable of corroding Lead, and that when they have been long exposed to this Acid, a white Lead may be scraped off better than the common Cerusse, and this is found on that side the Lead which is next the Wood, and not on that exposed to the outward Air. And I have observed, that even Alablaster and white Mar∣ble will yield an Acid Spirit, so that we que∣stion whether Lead fixed to the feet of Statues,
may not by the help of that acquire a greater bulk, and increase of weight. Of the growth of Iron.We are told, not only by Pliny and Srabo, but Fallopius and Caessalpinus, that in the Island of Elva not far from the coast of Tuscany, Iron hath been observed to grow; and Agricola at∣tests the like to be observed in Germany. And Johan. Gerherd. tells us, that he was informed, that not far from Amberga, the Ore exposed to the Air for some time in heaps requires Metal∣line Parts. Of the growth of Silver.I have been told, that Silver grows in the form of Vegetables, and in a Voyage to Pern I find the following relation, viz. That in the Mines of Potosi it is observed, that Earth that was dug out of the Grooves and Shafts, and thrown aside, hath such a propensity to the Production of Metals, that after some years it would yield Metal. Of the growth of Gold.Tho' there is no Gold to be found on the coast of Guyny in Congo, and other Parts of Africk, where Writers mention it to be found, yet I am told, that in Hungary, the Master of that famous Gold Mine of Cremnitz hath observed, that the whole Mountain abounds with Particles of Gold, and that when they have cleared a great deal of the Soil in one Place of its Metalline Parts, they throw it into the hole again, and observe, that in a little time it will yield Gold as before; and Johan. Gerherd. gives us an In∣stance of the growth of Gold in Germany.
Postscript Dr. Brown tells us, that he observed the pas∣sages in several Mines grown up, especially in moist places, and that the yellow Soil near Cremnitz yields some Gold. Whether the increase of Metals depends on the influence of the Air, or some other cause, till further and more strict Observations have been made, I shall not undertake to determine; but shall only add, that a Marchasite having been shut up in Vacuo, it acquired a Vitriolate Efforescence betwixt blue and green. CHAP. X. A Hydrostatical way of estimating Ores. Ores Hy∣drostatical∣ly estimated.TO help me to make an estimate of the pro∣portion of Metalline or the Mineral in∣gredients of Bodies, I weighed a piece of Rock-Crystal or white Marble, first in Air and then in Water, by which I found that its weight, to an equal bulk of Water, was as 2 ¾ to 1, or as 11 to 4, and then by weighing Metalline Bo∣dies, such as Magnets and Emeri, I found that the weight of these in Water was more than that of Crystal, the proportion of the latter being as four to one; by which Tryals I was enabled to guess that these stones contain Me∣talline Parts in them: And by the same method I discovered Metalline Ingredients in some Bo∣dies
which are not generally looked upon as such, as Lapis Hematites, and American Talc. And as it is generally a certain sign, that a Body contains mineral ingredients proportion∣ably as it is heavier than Crystal, so it is no less certain, that Bodies lighter than Crystal are not impregnated with a Metalline Ore, as Jet, Succinum, Sulphur Vive, common Sulphur, English Talc, Venetian Talc, and black Lead, whose weight to Water is but as 1 1/100 to 1, and which by certain Tryals I have found to be a kind of Talc. As for the advantages that may be reaped by estimating Ores, they may either respect Jewellers, Physicians, or Chymists, as when the Metalline Ingrediens are but small; or Mineralists, whose business it is to extract the Metal, when by this Hydrostatical way it appears to be suffi∣ciently impregnated. But, because there are some cruder Metalline Ingredients in some Bo∣dies, as Antimony, Bismuth, Lapis, Cala∣minaris and Pyrites, which may deceive an un∣skilful Mineralist who estimates them this way, it may be convenient to make use of other Tryals to distinguish them. And since some mineral Ores, when tryed in the lump, appear to be poorly stocked with Metalline Parts, it may be of use to beat them to powder, and to separate the Metalline Parts, by washing, or else by fire; for by that means I once found, that a Metalline Ore which was wrought for Lead, afforded a sufficient quantity of Silver to answer the charge of working it, and to this caution I must add the following, viz. That since Marcasites are generally heavier
than common Crystal, and by some looked up∣on to be plentifully stocked with Metalline Parts, because of their weight, and the glittering of their Parts, yet they may easily be undeciv∣ed, by placing them in a hot fire, for by that means the Sulphureous Parts will be consumed, and leave behind them a black Calx; but tho' Marcasites abound not with Metalline Parts, proportionable to their bulk, yet I have found by experience, that some of them have afforded not only Copper, Silver, and Gold, but some∣times a quantity of running Mercury; but whe∣ther Marcasites may be of use in graduating Gold, or not, I shall leave to others to be consi∣dered. There is this Advertisement which I must not omit, and it is that tho' some are used to employ flux powders indiffently with∣out understanding the difference of them, I have tryed, that Lead Ore being fluxed with filings of Mars, afforded a larger quantity of Metal, than with a due proportion of Nitre and Tartar fulminated together; but one part of good native Cinnabar, finely powdered, be∣ing mixed with a fix't Alkaly of Tartar, and the other with a different flux powder, we obtain∣ed twice as much Mercury from the former, as we did from the latter, tho' it was likewise a fixt Alkaly of a mineral Nature. Some Observations about native Gold. Observati∣ons about native Gold.Tho' I once believed, that there was no such thing as a Gold Mine, in which that Metal was predominant, yet I had a Portion of Ore sent me from the East-Indies with the spar about it, which
had I broke it, I question not but that it con∣tained Parts which were malleable without the help of the fire: one piece of this had so much Spar about it, that it weighed to an equal bulk of Water, as 2 91/100 to 1. The colour of the Spar was like white Marble tinged with a dash of yellow, and it differed from Lead Ore, in as much as that is usually so soft as to be easily cut with a knife, but this was as hard as a stone, and would yield sparks when struck with a piece of Steel; and it differed further from Spar of Lead Ore, in as much as it was altogether in∣capable of being calcined, tho' kept in a Crucible red hot for some hours. Nor would it be dissolved in Acid Menstruums, as Spar of Lead Ore may. A piece of Spar in which but little Gold was contained, being weigh'd in Water, was to its proportion as 2 65/100 to 1, which is but little above the weight of common Mar∣ble. But tho' there is such a thing as true Gold Ore, yet I would not discourage Mineralists from seeking it in Veins of other Minerals, since it hath been found not only in Copper Mines, but veins of Tin and Lead; for in a place in Scotland several grains of native Gold have been found, near the Surface of the ground over Lead Mines, some pieces of which being weighed Hydrostatically, one piece of Scotch Gold, which was native and free from adhering Spar, weighed three drachms twenty one grains, and another which had Spar sticking to it, weighed three drachms three grains, and a third of Scotch Gold weighed in Air forty
three grains, in Water thirty nine. Difference 3 × 1/. Proport. 12 × / to one. But to distin∣guish pure Gold from impure, we are to note, that the Proportion of the finest, according to Mersennus, is as eighteen to one of Water, but according to ours, as nineteen to one. So that as it comes more or less short of that Standard we are to estimate its Purity. And thus by weighing Gold Hydrostatically, we may be able to distinguish, that Sand-Gold which is brought from Africa, or that from Guinea, from adulterated; for having once weighed a small Parcel of good, the Weight of that will be a Standard to distinguish the bad by. But since a great many ignorant Sea-men are concern'd in buying Gold, who understand not how to examine it Hydrostatically, I shall sub∣joyn the following method to distinguish it Chy∣mically, viz. By mixing a few Grains with Aq. fortis, Spirit of fermented Urine, or Spirit of Harts-horn; for if it be adulterated with Cop∣per or Brass, a few Grains laid upon Paper, and moistned with this, will be tinged bluish green. And even rank Urine will be able to extract a blue Tincture from Brass, if made use of in∣stead of the afore-mention'd Spirits; and the like success will happen with Sal-Armoniack dis∣solv'd in Water. There are in England such a great varie∣ty of Stones, that it would be worth while to examine them Hydrostatically, and to compare them with Crystal; for I have found near the high Road an Eagle-Stone, which was not su∣spected to be of English growth. And I found a kind of Magnesia near a Potter's Work-house,
which he afterwards made use of to glaze his Pots. And I was brought to a Mineral Substance, which tho' it was hard to be known of what Kind it was, yet I soon discover'd it to abound with Vitriol, and that it would yield it much more plentifully than the Vitriol-Stones found near the Isle of Wight, or those made use of at the Vitriol-Works near Deptford, and elsewhere. And Ore of Bismuth hath been discover'd by a heedful Eye, when common Miners knew not what kind of Substance it was when they dug it up. But this Hydrostatical way of estimating Ores may not only be made of use in judging of Mi∣neral Substances, but those Earths which are the Wombs of them; since, tho' they cannot be suspended by a Hair, as solid Grains of Ore, yet a Jar may be counterpoised in Water, and then being filled with such Earths, the weight of them may be discover'd, by first counterpoi∣sing them in the Air, and then having first wetted them with Water, and convey'd them into the Water in that Hydrostatical Bucket: And that this Hydrostatical way of weighing Earths may be of use appears, since it hath not on∣ly been observ'd, that a red Mud, which lay at the bottom of Water, abounded with Iron plentifully, but I have observ'd the same in an English Oker. And I have been told, that Di∣amonds, as well as Gold, have been found in a red kind of Soyl. And I have observ'd in En∣gland, curiously figur'd Crystals lodged in a Soyl of a red Colour.
And it may not only be of use to weigh di∣vers sorts of Earths in our Bucket, but also se∣veral sorts of Sands; since by a Microscope, I have discern'd several Grains to appear, as if they were made of an Aggregate of Granates; and I have experienc'd, not only Hydrostati∣cally, that that black Sand which is made use of in London, contains good store of Particles of a Martial Nature; but I have likewise been convinc'd by fluxing it, and by casting it, whilst it was melted, into the Conical Part of a Cru∣cible. And I further observ'd, that ⅞ of it would be attracted by a powerful Load-Stone. But a Mineral of a martial Nature hath not only been observ'd in Sand, but Gold on the Banks of Guiny, and on the Banks of Tagus which runs by Lisbon and Pactolus; and some hath been found on the Banks of the Rhine, and a little River which runs down from the Moun∣tains in Savoy. But much more Gold may be got from Sand Chymically, than by picking it up, if the Sand be reduced to Glass with Li∣tharge or Minium, and then the volatil Gold be obtain'd by giving it a Body fit to retain and fix it; such as Silver, out of which I have got by Quartation, out of as much vitrify'd Sand as filled a Retort, and two or three fluxing Addi∣taments of small price, sixteen grains of pure Gold. And tho' by some it is thought strange, that there should be a necessity of fixing Gold, yet I have elsewhere made it appear, that by a small addition of another Substance, Gold may be sublimed without a naked Fire, and form se∣veral Crystals like Rubies.
And if Sands, as well as Earths and Stones, abound with Mineral Ingredients, it may be convenient to take an account where such Sub∣stances are found, and likewise to take a Sample of them, as also of the Ores of different Mines, and to try them Hydrostatically; for I have ob∣serv'd, that in English Lead Ores of several kinds, those in which thirty pound of Lead is only to be got out of an hundred of Ore, are looked upon as not worth working; those that yield half their weight of Metal are indifferent; and other Ore which yields from fifty five to sixty in the hundred is looked upon to be very good; but those that afford eighty Pound in the hun∣dred, are accounted very rich; but I have not met with any that afforded more than seventy five in a hundred weight: Which Ore seemed to consist wholly of Metal, and was made up of Parts of a Cubical Figure, and much resembling Dies placed one by another. But besides what hath been already proposed, to be inquired after concerning Metalline Fos∣sils, not only its Proportion is to be consider'd, but the plenty or scarceness of the Mineral, the easiness or difficulty of coming at it, as also its depth and freeness from Waters, its nearness to plenty of Fuel, its nearness to Water to drive Mills, and to transport it, &c. are to be consider'd likewise before one begins to work a Mine.
An Explication of the Instruments employed in these Experiments, and those in the following Chapter. (aa) The Beam,See Plate 1. Fig. 00. (bb) the Dishes, (cc) the Frame to suspend the Beam, upon which (d) a sliding Socket, (e) its Arms containing (f) a Pulley, over which (g) another Pulley passes, (h) a Line fastned to (i) a moveable Weight, by which the Beam is raised up or let down, (k) a Hair to suspend (l) the Body to be weighed in the Water, held in (m) the Glass Cistern, (n) the Bucket for Liquors, (o) the Box of grains, (p) the Forceps to manage them, (q) the Pile of Weights, (r) the Handle of the Ballance, (ssss) the Table. CHAP. XI. Medicina Hydrostatica. FROM what is contain'd in the fore-going Chapter, it appearing that white Marble or Crystal may be a Standard to distinguish mineral Substances from other Bodies, I shall here subjoin the way of weighing sinking Bodies in Water. The method of weighing Bodies.And first, the solid Body to be examin'd, is to be suspended by a Horse-hair, at one of the Scales just now described, and there to be coun∣terpoised; then the Weights being taken out, by deducing from the weight of the Body in Air the weight of it in Water, by the Remainder
divide the whole weight of the given Body in the Air, and the Quotient will shew the Propor∣tion in specifick Gravity, betwixt the examin'd Solid, and as much Water as is just equal to it in Bulk. For Example, if the Weight of a Cu∣bick Inch of Rock-Crystal be 1169 grains in the Air, and 738 in Water, the Remainder will be 431 grains; by which the 1169 grains being divided, the Quotient will be found to be 2 × 71/100 or near enough 7/10, for the proportion of the Gravity of white Marbles to Water. In which Direction it is requisite to observe, first,Cautions requisite to be observ'd. That what we have said implys, that the Body weighed must be heavier than Water. Se∣condly, Horse-Hairs are more convenient than other strings, because they are nearer to a speci∣fick Gravity with Water. Thirdly, Where the Figure of a Body disabled us from suspending it by tying a hair about it, we platted a sort of net of Hairs to hold it in. Fourthly, So much of the Hair as is above the Water must be coun∣terpoised by a Weight in the other Scale. Fifth∣ly, Sometimes instead of the Scale I counter∣poised the opposite with a weight of Lead, and suspended the Horse-Hair at the String; but when I did not take off the Scale, I caused it to be perforated in the middle. Sixthly, Care must be taken that the Water below touches not the bottom of the Scale, and that the Body be freely suspended, and wholly immersed in the Water. Seventhly, Care must be taken, that no Bubbles of Air be contained in the Pores of the Body weighed, since the success will be apt to fail in some Tryals upon that account.
And these circumstances being observed, it will be easie to know, by the method proposed, the difference betwixt the specifick weight of other Bodies heavier than Water. It being agreeable to that Hydrostatical Paradox of Archimedes, That a Body, heavier than Water, weighs less in Water than in the Air, by the weight of as much Water as is equal to it in Bulk or Mag∣nitude. And, The first Use of this method of weighing Bodies.By this Method we found, That the weight of Lapis Hematites to Water, was as four 15/100 to one, and by subliming it with Sal-Armoniack, we found by the Astringency of it, that it a∣bounded with Metalline Parts of a Martial Na∣ture; which was further confirmed, by obser∣ving that a grain of it turned an Infusion of Galls black Lapis Lazuli was to its bulk of Water in weight, as three to one. A Load-Stone, which besides Magnetical, hath Medicinal Vertues, ap∣peared to be as four 93/100 to one. Lapis Calami∣naris was as four 169/100 to one. In which Concretes, the Medicinal Virtues seem to depend on the plentiful mixture of metalline Ingredients; but some Bodies which abound less with Mineral Substances, may be as operative, by reason of some more active Particles. But, This Hydrostatical method of weighing Bo∣dies, may be further serviceable in distinguish∣ing Stones from Plants, or other petrified Sub∣stances, as Coral, which weighs in proportion to Water, as two 68/100 to one, and therefore ap∣pears to be a Stone, being heavier than Cry∣stal. A monstrous Pearl taken out of an Oyster, which weighed 206 grains, was to Water as two 51/100 to one. A Calculus Humanus, which
weighed six drams and a half, was in proportion to Water as one 76/100 to one; and another that weighed four drachms and a half, was to Water as one 69/100 to one. These Stones, tho' the pro∣ductions of Distempers, have been accounted better than Oriental Bezoar in their Effects. Choice Bezoar Stones, which weighed three drachms in the Air, being weighed in Water, one of them was as one 47/100 to one; another somewhat lighter, was as one 53/100 to one; a third, which was taken out of another Stone, which being weighed in the Air weighed six drachms wanting nine grains, was in proporti∣on to Water as one 55/100 to one: So that these have a much less specifick Gravity than Fossil Stones. A third use of this Hydrostatical way of weighing Bodies, may be to distinguish several Species of Bodies into subordinate Species, as the Load-stones of several Countries are diffe∣rent in weight; for I have observed Norwegian and the English Load-stones, to be heavier in spe∣cie, than those that came out of Italy, in which the Island of Elba abounds with Mines, whereof one intire Mass weighed a great many hundreds of Pounds. Fourthly, This method may enable us to di∣stinguish counterfeit Stones, from those that are real and good, since when they are Hydrostati∣cally weighed, there will appear a manifest dif∣ference, not only in adulterated Coral, but Be∣zoar, and other valuable Stones. Fifthly, By this means we may be enabled to distinguish betwixt genuine Concretes used in Medicine, and those that are not genuine; as
also whether precious Stones abound more or less with Metalline Ingredients. But tho' some∣times Stones that are transparent may not be so plentifully impregnated with Medicinal and Mineral Effluvia, yet considering the Activity and great subtlety of some Pigments, the latter may be as powerful. And that every sensible part of a Body may be impregnated by a small quantity of Pigment, will appear from the fol∣lowing Experiment, viz. If five grains of Za∣phora be mixed with one ounce and half of Venice Glass finely powdered, and kept in fusion in a furnace with a violent hot fire, it will give the whole a fine blue colour, and if the proportion of the Zaphora be as one to six, the Glass will be too deeply tinged to make a handsome Gem. And to shew further, that a small quantity of Metalline matter may be sufficient to impart a virtue to Glass and even Gems, I shall add, that eight grains of the powder of a German Granate, being kept in fusion with an ounce of Crystalline Glass, it gave it a Tincture like that which Steel gives to pure Glass. From what hath been said it appears, how the proportion of solid substances to Water may be Hydrostatically-distinguished; but since there are other substances which cannot be so weigh∣ed, being either subject to dissolve in Water, or not fit to be suspended by a Hair, by reason of their form, being either powders or liquids, to make an estimate of these, I contrived the Bucket formerly mentioned, and represented in Fig. 00, Plate the first, which being suspended in Water and counterpoised, we put a known weight of Quick-silver in it, by which means
comparing its weight in Water with its weight in Air, and dividing the greater number by the difference of its weight in Air from what it was in Water, and which was thirty four grains, we found the Quotient to be fourteen and about 1/10, so that the Mercury made use of in this Tryal was as 14 11/100 to 1, but common Mercury which is sold in the Shops we have found to weigh not above thirteen and a half to one, and indeed I have found a notable dis∣parity in the weight of most common Mercuries, especially those drawn from Gold; for the Mer∣cury being combined with that Metal becomes heavier than common Mercury. By the same measure we may know the specifick Gravity of any Liquors which are heavier than Water, and which are unapt to mix with it, such as Oyl of Cinamon, Cloves, Guajacum, &c. And by the assistance of the same Bucket, we may be able likewise to weigh Powders, and estimate their goodness, if we put a known weight of them in the Air into the Bucket, and pour in gently as much Water as will fill up the Pores contained betwixt them, and be sufficient to expel the Particles of Air contained be∣twixt the small Parts of it; but in all these Tryals it will be requisite to suspend the Scales of the Gibbet delineated in the preceding Figure, that the Scale may hang the steddier, whilst the Body is a weighing. But since there are several saline Bodies, as Sublimate, Mercurius dulcis, Vitriol, Rock-Al∣lom, &c. which cannot be weighed in Wa∣ter, in such cases, instead of Water, we may substitute Oyl of Turpentine, which tho' it be
of a different specifick Gravity from Water, yet by carefully weighing a parcel of any sub∣stance which is genuine in that Liquor, it may serve for a Standard to estimate the goodness of other parcels of the same substance by, and it will be no very difficult matter for one well skilled in numbers, by comparing the specifick Gravity of Oyl of Turpentine and Water to∣gether, to know what proportion the Body weighed in Oyl, would bear to an equal bulk of common Water. Another way which may be taken to estimate the specifick Gravities of Liquors is, by mak∣ing use of a Body that will subside in all Liquors but Quicksilver, for thus by first weighing that Body in Air, and then in several Liquors, and having noted the difference betwixt the solid and each of the Liquors, it is not difficult to find the specifick weight of each, and the pro∣portions betwixt them. And since it is but one solid that is compared thus to the differing Li∣quors; whatsoever their Number is, it will not be difficult to compare the specifick Gravities of the Liquors betwixt themselves, and to dis∣cover by the weight of the first, that of any other, which ever one pleases. But in making choice of such a solid Body, as may serve our present purpose, care must be taken, that it be such as will not be subject to be consumed by Effluvia; or too large for a tender Ballance; nor so big as to require too much Liquor to cover it; and lastly, it ought to be of such a Nature, that it may not be liable to be corroded by sharp and corrosive Liquors, or easily broke, but such as may be easily ob∣tained,
that what Experiments are tryed with it may easily be tryed by others, and communi∣cated to Posterity. The Bodies made use of in trying these kind of Experiments, and which came nearest what we thought requisite for such Tryals was, when we examined common Water, Rain-Water, Spirit of Wine, Wine, Brandy, Vinegar, and the Liquors drawn from it, Cyder, Beer, Ale, Urine, Waters distilled from Vegetable and A∣nimal substances; Amber: But to estimate the weight of heavier Liquors, we employed a Glass-Bubble, Hermetically sealed and filled with Mercury. But this being both hard to be obtained, and harder to be preserved, I made use of the following Body in such Experiments as are to be recorded for Posterity, viz. A Globe of Rock-Crystal which was suspended by a hair which passed through a small hole in it, and which we employed to discover the diffe∣rence of those Liquors, which we could obtain greater quantities of, but for others we employ∣ed an Hexagonal Prism, with a kind of Pyra∣mid at the end, and this Body being of such a Figure we were able to employ it in small Cy∣linders, in which a small quantity of Liquor would surround it and cover it. The weight of the Ball of Crystal we employed was to its bulk of Water as 2 57/100 to 1, and the weight of the Prism as 2 66/100 to 1. And this method of weighing Amber in diffe∣rent Liquors, may not only acquaint us with their specifick Gravities, but also from thence we may learn to know which are most Spiritu∣ous.
For tho' a piece of Amber weighed but 6 ¾ grains in Water, yet in common red French Wine it weighed 8 ½, in Nants Brandy 17 ⅛, and in rectifyed Spirit of Wine 34 ⅛. This Hydrostatical method of estimating, may likewise contribute to discover the strength of Acid Liquors, those that are strongest causing the solid to weigh less, as they are stronger, the greater decrement of weight proceeding from the greater proportion it contains of Salts that are not Volatile. It may likewise save the wasting of several Liquors, as Spirit of Wine or Brandy, in trying their goodness. And further it may be imployed in estimating the intensive weight of Wine, Beer, Ale, Mead, Cyder, &c. and distinguish their goodness, without consuming them. But Amber will not be heavy enough to di∣stinguish the strength of Oyl of Tartar per deli∣quium, and such heavy Bodies, since they are too heavy for it to subside in. Besides, the afore-mentioned there may be another use made of our Hydrostatical solid, viz. To shew when Menstruums are of a con∣venient strength. For that there is a peculiar degree of Spirituousness requisite in some Sol∣vents is evident, since if Aqua Fortis be too strong, it will not be able to dissolve Silver, no more than if it be too weak, till it is diluted by an addition of Water; and it is much more fit to dissolve filings of crude Lead, when more dilute: So rectifyed Spirit of Wine is not always the most proper Menstruum for gummy Bodies, since it dissolves only the purest Resin, and leaves the Mucilaginous Parts behind, which
may be as good in Medicine as the other, and fur∣ther we see that Gum Arabick and Tragacanth are not so easily dissolved in good Spirit of Wine as in weak Liquors; and the like may be observed in dissolving Myrrh. To what hath been said on this occasion, there is one thing to be added, that when this Ex∣pedient is made use of in Oyl of Vitriol or Tar∣tar per deliquium, it is necessary to put some∣thing into the Scale to compensate the light∣ness of the Horse-hairs, since in such Experi∣ments the specifick Gravity of the Liquors ex∣ceed the Gravity of the Hairs, and consequent∣ly they will be apt to buoy up the Body immer∣sed, and misinform us in its true specifick weight. To the afore-mentioned ways of Hydrostati∣cally estimating Liquors, we may add the follow∣ing. And first, it may be done by filling a Vessel with a slender Stem successively, with different Liquors, and weighing them, as also it may be done by a Brass Cylinder, made heavi∣er at one end than the other, by which it may be made to float, and to swim deeper or higher above the Water, as the Liquor contain∣ed is heavier; or another way is by fitting too Bubbles together with Cement, by which their Stems being joined, and the one caused to sink lowest by a Ballast of Mercury, as the other is filled with a heavier or lighter Liquor, it will manifestly preponderate. Another way proposed by Mersennus, is by weighing a Glass and a Stopple in Water, and then filling the Bottle quite full, and putting in the Stopple; for the weight of the Glass and
Stopple being deducted from the weight of the whole, the remaining weight will be the weight of the Liquor proposed. But instead of this we made use of a round Glass-Ball with a Glass Stopple, which being first weighed in Air and Water, and counterpoised there, we were a∣ble to discover the weight of the Liquor con∣tained, and its proportion to the bulk of the Liquor it was weighed in; and if the Bubble were too light to subside in some heavy Liquors, we would bring it to a just weight by a Ballast of Mercury. But since such Vessels as these are very hard to be got, and some other incon∣veniencies attend it, we think it less satisfacto∣ry than those other ways we made use of and proposed before. A sixth Use that may be made of these Hy∣drostatical Tryals, is in reference to several Me∣dicinal Bodies, for thus the Jucies of Plants may be weighed, if when they are contained in our Hydrostatical Jar, delineated in the Figure a∣bove, they be hung at a nice Ballance in Oyl, instead of Water, since they are not subject to mix with it: And by this means we may be satis∣fied whether Juices of Plants alter their specifick Gravity, when kept a good while, and after fer∣mentation. And by this method likewise we may be able to weigh Honey, Vinegar, Ver∣juce, &c. As also we may compare and weigh the Juices of Fruits of different kinds, and the subordinate Species of each kind, as also the se∣veral Juices in their several states of Crudity or Maturity: But the use of this Hydrostatical Bucket being very tedious and difficult, to those that are not very skilful in making Ex∣periments,
the other will be more useful which are tryed with Amber. But to what hath been already delivered on this subject I shall add, that tho' in several Try∣als made with precious substances, a nice Ballance is requisite, yet in most cases the difference be∣twixt Bodies is great enough to be discerned by a Ballance, not altogether so nice; for let the Ballance be never so nice, there is difference in the Textures and Compositions of Bodies of the same Denomination, for which, as well as in defect of a nice Ballance, allowances are easily made. But perhaps it may be objected by some, a∣gainst the method I have been proposing, that since I generally weigh most Bodies in Wa∣ter, it will be a hard matter to make them with any exactness, since it hath been observed, that most Waters themselves differ in speci∣fick Gravity. But to this I shall briefly an∣swer, that I have not perceived so considerable a difference as will frustrate these Experiments, in which we require not a Mathematical, but a Physical certainty.
CHAP. XII. Hydrostatical Stereometry applyed to the Ma∣teria Medica. IT being usual for Physicians in the descrip∣tions of several Parts of the Materia Medica, to signifie the size of Bodies by very indetermi∣nate Terms, I thought that they might be assisted by Hydrostaticks, to give descriptions much more exact and satisfactory; and for that end having made two hollow Brass Cubes, whose Cavities, being Cubical Inches, contained 256 grains, or a Cubical Inch of Water, it being a Law in Hydrostaticks, that whatever Body is weighed in Water, it loses so much of its weight, as an equal bulk of Water weighs, I concluded it would thence follow, that what∣ever solid was weighed in Water, if in that flu∣id it lost 256 grains of its weight, it might be said to be a Cubical Inch; and as it lost more or less, so it might be said to be of a Magnitude proportionable; for if it weighed but 128 grains less in Water, it might be said, to be of such a bulk of Water; but if it weighed 256 wanting thirty two grains, that being an eight of a whole Cubick Inch of Water, the bulk of the Body may be said to be ⅞ of a Cubick Inch. And if the Body weighs one ounce thirty two grains (amounting to 512 grains) or one ounce and a half forty eight grains (amounting to 768 grains) the bulk of the Body will be equal to two or three Cubical Inches. And if
after the Division there remains a Fraction, it will not be difficult to estimate it, and to know the exact bulk of the Body, since the Cubical Inch consists of such aliquot Parts, as are easily and regularly divided and subdivided. And thus we may easily know the bulk of a Body that is heavier than Water, but if it be specifically lighter it will be a difficult matter. The method Mersennus proposes is this, viz. First, weigh the Body to be examined in the Air. Secondly, take a piece of Lead of a de∣terminate weight, and able to sink the other Body in Water. Thirdly, weigh the Plate in Wa∣ter, and the weight it loses in Water, will be the weight of Water equal in bulk to the Body weighed. Fourthly, tye together the Plate of Lead and the lighter Body, and note the weight of the Aggregate. Fifthly, weigh the Aggregate in Water, and substract the weight of it there, from its weight in the Air, and the difference will be the specifick weight of the said Body in Water. Sixthly, from this difference, sub∣stract the formerly found specifick Gravity of the Plate alone in Water, and the remains will give you the weight of the lighter Body in the same Liquor. And then dividing the obtained weight of the light Body in Water by 256 grains, and it will give you the solid content of that naturally floating Body. To illustrate this me∣thod, I shall subjoin the following Experiment. I. The Oaken Cube in Air weighs seven drachms, thirteen grains and a half. 193 ½ II. The weight of the Lead in Air, four drachms. 240
III. The weight of the Lead in Water (three drachms and a half, ten grains) 220 which being substracted from its weight in Air, leaves for its specifick weight in Water.— 020 IV. The Aggregate of the two in Air is 433 ½ V. The weight of both together in Water is— 162 which being substracted from its weight in Air, gives the difference of both the Aggregates.— 271 ½ VI. The difference betwixt the weight of Lead alone in Air, and in Water, or which is all one, the specifick weight of the Plate alone, viz.— 020 Being substracted from the difference of the Aggregates in Air and in Water, gives for the weight of the Cube proposed— which wants but four and a half of the weight of a Cubical Inch of Water. 251 ½ The same method that hath been taken with solids not subject to dissolve in Water, may be taken with Alloms, &c. Which is only by employing Oyl of Turpentine instead of Water; for a Cubical Inch of that weigh∣ing 221 grains and ⅛, the difference of the weight of a solid in the Air, and in that Oyl, being divided by that Number, the Quotient will give you the solid contents of the Examined Body. But to discover the weight of Bodies, which are apt to imbibe too much of the Liquor they are weighed in, we may guard them from it by a thin coat of Bees-Wax, and having first
taken the weight of the Wax in Air, and then fast∣ned it to a Plate of Lead, substract the weight of as much Water as is equal in bulk to the Wax, and proceed with the Body contained, and the Plate of Lead as before taught; and having thus obtain∣ed the Weight of the proposed Body in Water, by dividing it by 256 grains, by the help of the Quotient we may obtain the solid contents of the proposed Body. Another way I devised for to learn the solid contents of a Body, with∣out imbibing Water into it, was, by finding the weight of a Cubick Inch of Mercury, and also the specifick weight of the Vessel, and then pouring upon the Body contained in that Vessel as much Silver as it would hold, by knowing the weight of that Quick-silver from the weight of the whole which the Vessel would contain, one might be acquainted, to how much Mercury the matter contained was equal. Having thus proposed a Hydrostatical way of trying Bodies, I shall leave it to others to con∣trive an Instrument more apt for such uses than I have done: And shall to what I have said add, that these kind of Experiments do not always equally answer in success, being apt to be di∣versifyed, as well by the want of uniformity in the Qualities, and specifick weight of Bodies of the same Denomination, as by the difference in Water in intensely Hot and Cold Weather; as also upon the account of less exact Ballances. But another reason is the difference of weights of the same Denomination, for we are told by a diligent Mathematician, that, cum omnia grana, vel semina, quae reperiri solent in atriis venalibus Lutetiae, and stateram expendisset, vix granum
ullum, inter ejusdem Speciei grana grano alteri ex∣acte respondisset, in incertis Ludere noluit. And the same Author tells us, that 688 Roman grains are but equal to 576 French grains, and this estimate of their difference by another Ballance was found to be thirty six grains false: And the same Author receiving two accounts of the number of grains contained in a Roman ounce, the one told him there were 612, the other 576. And tho' our weights as well as those made use of by Gheraldus, have twenty four scruples in an ounce, yet he divided his scruples into twen∣ty four grains, whereas we divide ours but into twenty. And Mersennus, p. 37. lib. 16. tells us, that cum autem dixi Chelinum, undecim dici denariorum, credunt tamen alii decem duntaxat, nil assero. And. To what hath been said, I shall only add, that tho' this method of weighing Bodies be not Mathematically exact, yet it comes as near Physical exactness as we can expect, and may be of use till some more nice way of Tryals be found out.
A Table representing not only the Weight of several Bodies in Air and Water, but their Proportions in Weight to an equal Bulk of Water. A Weight In Air in Gr. In Wa∣ter in Grains. Proportion. AMber 306 12 1 4/100 to 1. Agat 251 156 2 64/100 to 1. A piece of Allom∣stone 280 ¾ 152 ¼ 2 18/100 to 1. Antimony good and supposed to be Hungarian One 391 295 4 7/100 to 1. B       Bezoar stone 187 61 1 48/100 to 1. A piece of the same 56 ½ 22 1 64/100 to 1. A fine Oriental one 172 60 1 53/100 to 1. Another 237 61 1 34/100 to 1. C       Coral red 129 ¼ 80 ¼ 2 63/100 to 1. Crystal 256 140 2 21/100 to 1.
  Weight In Air in Gr. In Wa∣ter in Grains. Proportion. Cornelian 148 103 3 29/100 to 1. Calculus humanus 2570 1080 1 72/100 to 1. Coco-shell 331 85 1 34/100 to 1. Native Crabs Eyes 77 ½ 36 ½ 1 89/100 to 1. Crabs Eyes Artificial 90 ½ 54 2 48/100 to 1. Calx of Lead 138 ½ 123 8 94/100 to 1. Copper Stone 65 ½ 49 ½ 4 09/0 to 1. Common Cinnabar 802 702 8 1/50 to 1. Cinnabar of Anti∣mony 197 169 7 3/100 to 1. Cinnabar Native 197 171 7 57/100 to 1. Coral White 336 204 54/1002 to 1. Another piece fine 139 85 2 17/100 to 1. Calculus humanus 302 97 1 47/100 to 1. Copper Ore 1436 1090 4 15/100 to 1. Copper Ore Rich 413 314 4 17/100 to 1. Cinnabar Native, very sparkling 226 194 7 6/100 to 1. G       Gold Ore not Rich, brought from the East Indies 1100 682 2 63/109 to 1. Another Lump of the same 1151 717 2 65/100 to 1. Granati Minera 217 147 3 1/10 to 1. Granate Bohemian     4 36/100 to 1.
H Weight In Air in Gr. In Wa∣ter in Grains. Proportion. Haematites English 1574 1156 3 76/100 to 1. I       Ivory 1732 83 1 91/100 to 1. L       Lapis Manati 450 293 2 26/100 to 1. A Fragment of the same 218 ½ 123 2 29/100 to 1. Another 345 197 2 33/100 to 1. Another from Ja∣maica 2011 1127 2 27/100 to 1. Lapis Lazuli one piece 385 256 2 98/100 to 1. Lead Ore 686 590 7 14/100 to 1. Another       Lapis Calaminaris 477 380 4 92/100 to 1. Lapis Judaicus 261 ½ 164 2 69/100 to 1. M       Marcasites 814 631 4 45/100 to 1. Another from Stal∣bridge 243 189 4 ½ to 1.
  Weight In Air in Gr. In Wa∣ter in Grains. Proportion. Another more shi∣ning than ordi∣nary 287 227 4 18/100 to 1. Mercury reviv'd from Ore       Manganese a piece 321 230 3 13/100 to 1. Mineral Cornish, like a shining Marca∣site 145 129 9 6/100 to 1. O       Osteocolla 195 108 2 24/100 to 1. Ore Silver choice from Saxony 458 366 4 9/100 to 1. Another Piece 1120 960 7 to 1. Ore Lead from Cum∣berland Rich 1872 1586 1/ 54/100 to 1. R       Rhinoceros horn 8563 4260 1 99/100 to 1. Rock-Chrystal, ano∣ther Piece 256 140 2 20/100 to 1. S       Saphir      
  Weight In Air in Gr. In Wa∣ter in Grains. Proportion. Seed-Pearl       Sulphur vive 371 185 2 to 1. Germane very fine 306 152 1 98/100 to 1. Slate Irish 779 467 2 49/100 to 1. T       A Piece of Talc like Lapis Amian∣thus 596 334 2 28/100 to 1. Talc Venetian 802 508 2 73/100 to 1. Talc Jamaican 1857 1238 3 to 1. New English Tin Ore, Mr. Huberts. 812 613 4 8/100 to 1. Tin Ore black Rich. 1293 984 4 18/100 to 1. Another piece Choice. 2893 2314 5 to 1. Tutty a piece 104 83 5 to 1. Tin-glass 468 419 9 56/100 to 1. V       Vitrum Antimonii per se 357 ½ 282 ½ 4 76/100 to 1. Vitriol Engl. a very fine piece 1093 512 1 8/100 to 1. Ʋnicorns horn a piece 407 195 1 91/100 to 1.
THE WORKS Of the HONOURABLE ROBERT BOYLE, Esq EPITOMIZED. BOOK V. PART II. CHAP. I. An account of a strangely Self-moving Li∣quor communicated in the Transactions of November 26. 1685. Of a Self-moving Li∣quor.AN Ingenious Mathematician having mix∣ed several Ingredients in an Earthen Pot over Coals, the matter took fire, and began to blaze furiously; which obliged him to stiffle the flame, and remove it from the fire; and when it was cold, he several times successively and at some distance of time observed, that the Liquor moved variously and
briskly; and some seeds being thrown upon it, they formed a sort of scum; part of which be∣ing removed, and the Liquor placed in a warm Laboratory, I observed the following Phaeno∣mena. 1. The scum which remained on it being broke, part would be carryed to the left hand, and part to the right, by the motion of the Liquor. 2. When it came from under the scum, it moved very briskly, as if its motion upwards had been checked by it. 3. The Li∣quor consisting partly of Oyl, and partly of Bituminous Ingredients, their motion might not only be the better discerned, but some of those Oyly Parts rising up to the top of the Li∣quor would diffuse themselves orbicularly, and form a great Halo adorned with the vivid co∣lours of a Rain-Bow, and these would continue till they lost themselves successively under the scum. 4. The motions of this Liquor were fre∣quently Vortical, which appeared by the moti∣on of some Parts of the scum. And the Liquor all this while was actually Cold. 5. Some of this Liquor being poured into a Cylindrical Glass, it moved not as before, but being poured into a shallow wide-mouth'd Glass, it moved more briskly and variously than before in the Earthen Vessel. 6. It moves more briskly or slow as the Weather varies in temper, and in all hath continued its motion ten days; and it continued this motion when poured out of a Vial into a convenient Glass seven or eight weeks after, but very languidly, and soon began to slacken its motion in point of swiftness; and from the first to the last time this Liquor was observed to move, it was about five Months.
CHAP. II. Of the preserving of Birds, and other small Faetus's. Of preser∣ving Birds. &c.IN order to make Observations about young Faetus's, I preserved Chickens taken out of the Shell at several times, and on several days after Incubation, by keeping them in Spirit of Wine to which I sometimes added Spirit of Sal-Armoniack prepared with Quick-lime, and that the Liquor might not be discoloured, I usually remove them twice into fresh Spirits, before I design to preserve them in it. CHAP. III. A Conjecture concerning the the Bladders, of Air found in Fishes. Communicated in the Transactions of May 25. 1675. Of the Bladders of Fishes.TO shew whether a Fish moves in the Water, by expanding or by a constriction of himself, and whether the Bladder within him be contracted and expanded according to the several depths he swims at, we contrived the following Experiment, viz. To put several Fishes into a Bolt-head, filled with Water, and whose Stem is drawn out very fine, and sealed up when filled with Water; for if when the Fish sinks, the Water in the small Tube subsides, we may conclude he contracts
himself; and if when he rises, the Water rises al∣so, we may conclude that he expands him∣self. CHAP. IV. Laudanum Helmontii Junioris: Communi∣cated in the Philosophical Transactions of October 1674. Preparati∣ons of Lau∣danum.TAKE of Opium four ounces, of the Juice of Quinces four pound, cut the Opium small, and digest it in the Juice of Quinces ten days or more, then filtre it, and having infu∣sed in it, of Cinnamon, Nutmegs, and Cloves each one ounce, let them infuse six days, and then having let it just boil a little, filtre it, and evaporate the moisture till the Mass is of what consistence you desire, and incorporate with it two or three ounces of Saffron well powdered, and make it up into a Mass. The Dose of this Lau∣danum, if kept liquid, is from five to ten drops or less; and of the Pills a less quantity is requi∣red.
CHAP. V. Observations of an Earth-Quake made at Oxford, and communcated in the Trans∣actions of April 2. 1666. Observati∣ons of au Earth-Quake.RIding betwixt Oxford, and a Lodging in the Country, which was four Miles off; the first two Miles it was colder than at o∣ther times all that Winter, but before I got home the Wind turned and Rain began to fall. And in an hour after I perceived a trembling in the House where I was, and soon af∣ter there happened a brisk Storm. At Brill, a place higher than where I was, the Earth-Quake was more sensible, the Stones in the floor of a Gentleman's House being perceived to move: This Hill abounds with se∣veral kinds of Mineral substances; and I am told that from that place the Earth-Quake ex∣tended it self several Miles. CHAP. VI. Passages relating to the Art of Medicine. Passages relating to the Art of Medicines.THO' the following passages may be of small use to the Ingenious, and Experi∣enced Masters, yet since they may be fervicable to younger Physicians, I shall for their Infor∣mation impart them.
EXPERIMENT I. A tall well set Gentleman about twenty four years old, having by a fall broke his Skull in several places, which were several times Tre∣paned, and large Chasms made in it by the taking away of several pieces, in about three days time he was seized with a Palsey on one side, so violently as to be deprived of motion and almost of sense, except that in his Leg he had some short remissions. And this Palsie continued about twenty four weeks, about which time his head being further laid open, they found a Splinter of a bone much like the scale of a Fish, which stuck so fast and close to the Dura Mater, that an effusion of Blood accom∣panyed the taking of it away, but that be∣ing stopped in about three days time his Palsie began to leave him, and he is now very strong and healthy, tho' the Callus which supplies the place of his Skull be very large. From whence it appears, what great effects may spring from a very slight cause. But, besides the aforementioned Observations, it was further to be taken notice of, that the Parts whilst the Palsie continued were not only deprived of sense and motion, but were very much extenu∣ated by a continued Atrophy, which loss of substance they acquired again upon a Cessation of the Paralytick affection. And it was further to be observed, that all the difference betwixt those and other Parts was, that they were more subject to be cold. To which we may add, that tho' he was frequently let blood,
he continued to have a good stomach; nor did the affection of the Brain cause the least Vo∣miting, or Convulsions. EXPERIMENT II. To shew the great and terrible effects of sudden Passions of the mind, I shall relate the following. History, viz. That a Woman having taken a Boy to a River side with her, which she loved very well, the Boy accidentally falling into the Water unseen by her, when she mis∣sed him she was taken with a dead Palsie, which could not be removed. EXPERIMENT III. But to shew what contrary effects violent Passions of the mind may have, I shall add, that a Gentleman who was in his youth taken with so violent a Sciatica, that he could not go, but was carried to Church, and look't up∣on as Incurable; yet once, when he was in the Church, news being brought that the enemy was entred into the Town, (which was a Frontier Garrison,) and designed to Mas∣sacre all in the Church, they all fled and left him behind them, who being as much afraid of himself as the rest, got off his seat, and walk'd along like other Men, and this I received from the Person affected forty years after the said fright, who in all that time suffered not the least re∣lapse of the Distemper. It might be of no small advantage to Physick, would Philosophers, amongst those Experi∣ments
which they lay down, as relating to what they write purposely about, communicate those which they think of use to Physicians, though they should be less pertinent to the Subject un∣der Consideration; for which reason, I shall for the future communicate such, desiring this short Advertisement may be my Apology. A desined Chymical Medicine. EXPERIMENT IV. Though Vomitive Medicines are not a little dangerous, yet since in several Diseases they are altogether requisite, I shall here lay down a Preparation which is as effectual, and yet safer than any other Liquor, and much to be prefer∣red before an Infusion of Crocus Metallorum. The Preparation is this, Distill two parts of Antimony, and three of Spirit of Wine, in a Glass-Receiver, 'till the distill'd Menstruum is succeeded with red Flores, and filtrating the Liquor through Cap-Paper, lay it up for use close stoped. It may be given from four to eight or ten Drops, in a spoonful or two of Wine, Black-Cherry Water, or Spring-Water, drinking some of the same Liquor after it, to wash it down; it works very soon, and evacu∣ates plentifully and effectually without danger. It hath had not only very good success in Sur∣feits and several other Cases, but cured a Per∣son of an intermitting Feaver, which put on va∣rious Types, and continued to afflict the Pati∣ent three Years, notwithstanding great quanti∣ties of the Jesuit's Powder had been frequently
given. But here it is requisite to add this short Advertisement, viz. That the Powder, if kept long, being apt to precipitate, it must either be made use of whilst the Liquor is fresh, or the Bottle must be shaked well when it is u∣sed. A designed Chymical Medicine. Considering the great esteem and value of Mineral Waters, I contrived a way to imitate them, by making use of Ingredients, very harm∣less in themselves, and likely to make no less innocent a Composition. The Tryal was this, Having digested in a Bolt-head, two days, one part of Filings of I∣ron, with ten of distill'd Vinegar, and then in∣creased the Heat 'till the transparent Liquor ap∣pear'd to be of an Orange Colour, we poured part of it off, lest the Menstruum being too much impregnated, the Metal should be preci∣pitated. This Orange-Colour Tincture being kept for use, we dropped four Drops into eight Ounces and a half of common Water, which made an artificial Spaw, whose Taste not only agrees with that of the Natural Spaws, but it will, like Tunbridge or the German Spaw, turn a Tincture of Gauls Purple. EXPERIMENT V. The Bezoar Stone being a Medicine of great use, not only in malignant Feavers, but the Plague; and by reason of its dearness apt to be counterfeited, I shall add the following way of
distinguishing betwixt good and bad, viz. by disgesting about fifty grains finely powdered, with six drachms of Spirit of Nitre, in a digestive Furnace; for after they have been mixed some time, the Spirit begins to dissolve the Powder, and extracts a red Tincture; which being pla∣ced in a North-ward Window about eight and forty Hours, shoots into Chrystals, much like those of Salt-Petre. To shew that the purging or astringent Qua∣lities of Bodies, depend on the Disposition of the Patient as well as of the Agent, I shall inti∣mate, that a certain Lady having eat a Toast with Cinnamon upon it, was so violently pur∣ged for about two days, that it brought Con∣vulsions and a Spasmus Cinycus upon her, which was not removed in three Years. A Physician, to whom I communicated seve∣ral things, sent me the following Account in a Letter from Dublin, dated Feb. 27. 1682. viz. That he found the good Effects of Ens Veneris in removing the Subsultus Tendinum, in a Febris Petechialis, which was fatal to many for about fourteen Months. The Method I took in this Feaver was, if the Patient was costive, first to prescribe a Glister, and a large blistering Plaster between the Shoul∣ders, keeping it running 'till the Declension of the Distemper; all this time I prescribed Emul∣sions of Aqua Aronis, Card. Bened. Citri, totius & Syr. Gratorum cum Aceto, Orange and Butter-milk Posset, &c. I avoid the use of all those things that quicken the Circulation of the Blood; and I rather prescribe Blistering to pre∣vent, than cure Affections of the Genus Nervo∣sum,
because the Matter being once fixed in those Parts, they become ineffectual. A designed Chymical Medicine. Considering that the Menstruums usually em∣ployed in opening, and preparing the Body of Steel were Acids, I tryed to do it in the following me∣thod. Having dissolved fresh filings of Steel in a warm place, in a sufficient quantity of Spirit of fermented Urine highly rectifyed per se, the filtra∣ted solution had a taste different from all other Chalybeat preparations, and being set in a cold Window, in three days precipitated a pow∣der of a green colour, yet the decantated Li∣quor by Evaporation would not in the least Cristalize. This Preparation hath effects quite different from those Preparations made by Acids, and is much more agreeable to some Persons. A designed Chymical Medicine. That I might try whether a Metalline Sul∣phur might be obtained from Steel, I pitched upon a Menstruum void of Sulphur, that if the Preparation should yeild Sulphur, it might not be suspected to come from the Menstru∣um. Wherefore I dissolved Steel in Spirit of Sea-salt, and upon Evaporation obtained very curious Cristals, from which we drew by Di∣stillation in a Retort, a good quantity of Li∣quor, which came over in the form of Steams, which had a very Sulphureous smell, which being rectifyed and mixed with Aqua Fortis
would dissolve Gold, and give it the co∣lour of Silver; which may intimate to us, how much the Vitriols of Metals may differ according to the difference of the Menstruums which dissolve them, since our green Vitriol affords Liquors different from that made with Oyl of Vitriol. Besides which, it may be worth while to note, that though neither common or Roman Vitriol will dissolve in Spirit of Wine, which is Inflamable, yet our Vitriol would readily, and here it will not be unnecessary to hint by the by, that a solution of our saline Vitriol may not improbably be of use in Wounds, being a very powerful Astringent, and fit to prevent the breeding of Worms in Wounds, disposed to abound with such in cold Climates. But what we cheifly designed in this Expe∣riment, and what is most to be taken notice of is, that the dry substance, raised by the fire, was distinguished by accidents into three kinds of substances. First, a Powder which when ex∣posed to the Air turned yellow. Secondly, a deep coloured substance betwixt red and brown, of Parts much grosser than the former. Thirdly, a substance of a shining red, whose Parts were very fine and subtle. The Caput Mortuum was changed into a Talky substance, consisting of Lamelloe, situated and connected much after the same manner, as the thick Plates which make up Muscovia Glass.
CHAP. VII. Experiments and Observations Solitary. EXPERIMENT I. A notable Comminution of Gold into Powder, that will sink in Water. A Commi∣nution of Gold into Powder.WE dissolved a grain of refined Gold in Aqua Regia, adding about two spoon∣fuls of Water to the Solution, in which Mixture a small piece of Metal being suspended, it in a few days afforded a deep coloured Precipi∣tate, which was so light that it was a conside∣rable time in subsiding, and as easily raised in the form of Mud upon an Agitation of the Vessel; where it was to be noted, that tho' upon an Agitation the Liquor at the first seemed Opa∣cous, yet in a little time it appeared to be of a fine Purple colour, so that the Particles of Gold were so far divided, as by being scatte∣red through two ounces of Water to give a Tincture to it. EXPERIMENT II. A Proof of the Metalline Nature of Granates. The Metal∣line Nature of Granates, c. &In Confirmation of what I have elsewhere delivered, viz. That the Virtue of Gems de∣pends on a Mixture of Metalline Juices, with the Particles of those Gems whilst in fluid
forms, I shall take notice, that a Granate of a dark colour, being applyed to a Load-stone, it so strongly attracted it, as not without vio∣lence to be separated from it. EXPERIMENT III. I am told by an Ingenious Gentleman, that he saw a flat Saphir in the East-Indies, which had a small Cavity in the middle of it filled with a fluid substance, which was not so apt to petryfie as the rest. EXPERIMENT IV. To prove that Fishes hear under Water, I shall here lay down a Relation which I re∣ceived from an Ingenious Gentleman, who in a Garden near Genoa, observed the Gardiner to assemble the Fishes in the Pond together, by a certain noise which he made. EXPERIMENT V. To illustrate and confirm what hath else∣where been observed, concerning the various colours refracted by the minute and Parts of Solids, I shall here note, that a Globe of Rock-Crystal being sawn in two, the new superfici∣es refracted the Rays of the Sun, so as to exhi∣bit colours more lively than those of a Rain-Bow, which were refracted this way, or that, as the superficies of the Stones were different∣ly situated in reference to the Sun-Beams, and the like Phaenomena succeeded the like
Tryals with a Touch-stone. Which Experi∣ments may confirm what hath elsewhere been delivered, concerning colours of Bodies de∣pending on a peculiar modification of Rays of Light, on the superficies of Bodies different from each other in other Qualities. EXPERIMENT VI. Having put into a Glass-Vessel an Oculus Mundi, whose Diameter was about a third part of an Inch, the Colour of which was white, and its figure Convex, by degrees the whole was turned brown; and in nine minutes time being taken out of the Water was Semi∣diaphanous, which being a gain put into the Water, and after a little less than half an hour taken out again, was almost as yellow and Diaphanous as Amber. But being for some time exposed to the Air, it began gradually to grow Opacous, and to be marked in several places with white streaks, which by degrees expanding themselves, united so as to make the whole Surface of the Stone of a cream white. EXPERIMENT VII. Remarkable Observations about Hurricanes. Observati∣ous about Hurricanes.I am informed by the Governour of the Bermudas Islands, that these are the foreruners of them. First, at some distance from the shore the Sea would swell. Secondly, the Wa∣ter about a day after would beat violently a∣gainst
the shore and adjacent Rocks, which could neither be attributed to Winds or Tydes or any other cause; besides which it would sometimes on a sudden invade the shore suc∣cessively, as suddenly subsiding again without any manifest cause, where it is observable, that as the incroachment upon the Shore is greater, the recess of the Water is proportionable. Third∣ly, an unpleasant smell in the Air would pre∣ceed the Hurricane. Fourthly, long and visible streaks appeared in the Air of very different Colours, as white, blue, red or green, with∣out the least appearance of Clouds. EXPERIMENT VIII. A Monstrous Pearl. Of a Mon∣strous Pearl.Yester day was brought to me a Pearl of an Orient colour, except one spot which I suposed was the place where the Umbelical Cord fast∣ened it to the Shell, it was an Inch and a half long, and about 8/10 of an Inch broad. EXPERIMENT IX. A strange Observation about the Influence of the Moon. Observati∣ons on the Influence of the Moon.I am informed by a Gentleman, that upon a fall had several pieces of his Skull taken out, that he not only observed pricking Pains at the full of the Moon about the Meninges, but like∣wise, that the Chirurgeons perceived an Intu∣mescence, and expansion of those Parts.
EXPERIMENT X. An uncommon Experiment about Heat and Cold. For a further Confirmation of our Doctrine of the Origin of Heat and Cold,Of Heat and Cold. I shall lay down the following Experiment; we immersed the Ball of a Thermoscope Hermetically sealed in a Cylindrical Vessel, which contained Oyl of Vitriol, and presently cast Sal-Armoniack into the Oyl, upon the Mixture of which there suc∣ceeded a violent Ebullition, and likewise a gradual succession of coldness, which was both perceived by touching the Vessel, and likewise by the descent of the Spirit of Wine in the Thermometer; yet this Mixture instead of a cold Effervescensce, presently upon the additi∣on of an equal quantity of Water, became vio∣lent Hot. CHAP. VIII. A Collection of Chymical Experiments. A collection of Chymical Medicines.MY design in following Experiments, be∣ing rather to lay down such as may be instructive to the Reader, than Ostentations of my own skill, I shall give this short Advertise∣ment, that I have upon that account rather made choise of such as are easie, than those that are difficult to be prepared, those being more proper for my design, which is to lay
down Fundamentals for compiling of natural Phylosophy, because they are likely to be most Intelligible; for it does not always happen, that that which is most pleasing to the Eye is most useful, for tho' Gold and Diamonds are valu∣able in themselves, yet a piece of Steel or Flint are in effect in some respects, of greater use to Mankind. EXPERIMENT I. To dissolve crude Gold with dry Bodies. Tho' Chymists so much boast of their Au∣rum Potabile,Crude Gold dissolved by a dry Body. as to think it a curious prepara∣tion, yet it is possible to make one without the help of a furnace, or so much time, after the following manner. Having ground four Parts of pure Nitre with two of Rock-Allom, and one of Sal-Armoniack, I put the Mixture into a new Crucible, keeping it in a moderate Heat, till the Mixture contained in it was dry, which being taken out, and presently pulverised, it afforded a Golden Tincture in highly recti∣fyed Spirit of Wine. EXPERIMENT II. Luna Cornea by Distillation. Luna Cor∣nea by Di∣stillation.Three ounces of Silver being put into a Re∣tort upon six ounces of strong Sublimate, by a strong Fire the Sublimate was carried to the top of the Vessel, leaving the Silver half mel∣ted, and turned into a Semidiaphanous hor∣ny
Substance, which would melt at the flame of a Candle like Wax. N. B. That if there be any Phaenomena in this or other Experiments, above what the Title promises, the Apology I make for them is, that as they may tend to the promoting of natural Philosophy as well as the other, so I was not willing to pass them by without No∣tice. EXPERIMENT III. Mercury growing warm with Silver. Mercury growing warm with Silver.Having gradually mixed the precipitate of Silver made with Copper, with two drachms of Antimonial Mercury in a Man's hand, till it had reduced to a yielding consistence three quarters of its own weight, we put the Amalgama which was noted to be sensibly warm during the Mixture, and of an uniform consistence, in∣to a Glass Vial, which in two Nights time be∣came a hard and brittle Concrete. EXPERIMENT IV. The lasting Disposition of a certain preparation of Mercury to grow Hot with Gold. I sent a Mercury to the Royal Society, which was prepared with a great deal of pains in my Furnaces,Mercury growing Hot with Gold. which being mixed in one hand with a due proportion of Calx of Gold, might be perceived to acquire a sensible Heat, which faculty it retained being Hermetically
sealed in a Glass Egg ten or twelve years. And what is more remarkable is, that the Mercury being separated by Distillation, would when mixed again with Gold reiterate the former Incalescence. EXPERIMENT V. An uncommon method of working upon Antimony. A particu∣lar way of working up∣on Antimo∣ny.In the common method of operating upon An∣timony, the Air not only influencing the fire in its Operation, but also bearing up several of its Particles which work upon each other as in a Medium, I took the following method to try what effects the fire would have upon it, viz. I laid S S S of common Chalk and Antimony powdered, in an Earthen Pot, and placed it in a digestive Furnace, where it con∣tinued about twenty four hours, having taken care that the first and last Stratum should be of Chalk, and that the Layer of Antimony should be pretty thin. EXPERIMENT VI. A method very uncommon of making a Calces of Gold. Calces of Gold.Preparations of Gold being usually taken for extraordinary Medicines, I shall lay down one, which is a Calces prepared without the help of corrosives Menstruums. Having dissol∣ved Gold in Aqua Regia, and distilled off so much of the Menstruum as to leave the Gold
dissolved in so much of it, as to resemble a thick Oyly Liquor, upon which Inflamable Spi∣rit of Wine. being poured, a red Calx presen∣ly subsided; and the like Precipitation succeed∣ed upon mixing Spirit of Wine again upon the decanted Liquor, which was very much sweetned by the first Infusion; and this Calx is not only more subtle, but milder and safer than common Preparations, and may be made yet more safe, if Spirit of Wine be soccessive∣ly poured upon it, and consumed by Defla∣gration, for by that means the residue, if there be any of corrosive saline Parts will be carried off; but there is one thing to be noted here, which is, that amongst this Calx there were several Particles which shined like Gold, so that there ought to be more than ordinary care in the Preparation to dissolve the Gold per∣fectly. N. B. This Menstruum is not only in this but several other Preparations prefera∣ble to common A R, because the Inflamable Spirit being mixed with it renders it more Spirituous. EXPERIMENT VIII. To try how much Volatile Salt might be dissolved in Water, we put a quantity of them both together in a moderate Heat, and found that an ounce and a drachm might be dissolved in three ounces of Water.
EXPERIMENT VIII. Salt of Tartar being dissolved in Spirit of French Verdigrease, two or three times succes∣sively, and the Spirit being as often drawn off by Distillation, the Salt remained in a disposi∣tion to be dissolved in rectifyed Spirit of Wine, and apt to be brought to Fusion. EXPERIMENT IX. To make an Inflamable Spirit of Roses. A quart of Ale-Yest, being kept in fermen∣tation five or six days together, with two bushels of Damask Roses and red Rose Buds well beaten, yielded an Inflamable Spirit being distilled per Vesicam. EXPERIMENT X. About the Chymical Analysis of Pearls. A Chymical Analysis of Pearls.From two ounces of Oriental Pearls distilled in a Retort in a sand Furnace, we obtained a black Oyl which swam upon an Opacous and muddy Spirit, both being in weight about twenty three grains; and from the top of the Retort to the bottom was extended a film of Oyl which was about three grains, being of a fetid smell and discolouring Spirit of Wfne with a redish brown Tincture, the Oyl and Spirit also resembled Harts-horn in smell, and the latter had all the Qualities of a Volatile Alkaly,
as to turn Sublimate white and Syrup of Violets green, and to ferment with Spirit of Salt. The Caput Mortuum which was black being calcined became white, being of a hot and bit∣terish taste, and capable of turning Syrup of violets green. As also when mixed with a So∣lution of sublimate it would yield an Orange coloured precipitate. CHAP. IX. Of Strange Reports. RELATION I. I have been informed by a Physician who lived at Bruxels,Strange Re∣ports. that he hath prepared three or four Resuscitable Plants, and I am likewise told by a certain Virtuoso, that he saw two which an Ingenious Apothecary in Namur had prepared, viz. Carduus Benedictus and Camomile, and tho' Quercetan alledges, that for the production of such and their continuance, actual Heat is requisite, yet this Apothecary put the ashes of those Plants into such a Liquor, that upon an agitation of the Bottle the di∣spersed Particles of the ashes would convene into such an order, as to represent the Plant whose ashes they were, and that they would continue so till the Vessel was agitated a∣again.
RELATION II. I am informed by Chymist of good Credit, that he was not only told by a Virtuoso of Switzerland, that he had a piece of Malleable Glass, but laying it upon an Anvil, and strik∣ing it with a Hammer, he found it to receive the Impression, and to grow thinner after a few blows, though the edges were cracked like those of Silver when over Hammer∣ed RELATION III. I am told by a Pious Man who stayed in London in the Year 1665, when the Plague raged there, that in some places the In∣fection was so strong as to stain the very Walls, so that a Pest-House be-ing only divided by a Wall, he perceived se∣veral spots on the Walls of his Study, he visited at least a thousand, and only took half a spoon-of Brandy about six times a day, and the quantity of a Nutmeg of the Root of Spanish Angelica, a grain of which he usually held in his mouth, when he visited Infected Per∣sons. RELATION IV. I am informed by a Person of credit, that he distilled for a German Physician a certain Mineral, which he gave me a description of, which afforded three drachms of a Liquor
which put into a Glass-Bubble with a neck, would upon the full Moon rise up into the neck a considerable height, which Expansion it lost as the Moon decreased. RELATION V. An ingenious Gentleman, who had distilled a certain Bismute or Tin-Glass for a German Prince, there being a Mine of it in his Territo∣ries, informed me that the Liquor distilled from it, being rectified would swell and sub∣side upon the increase and decrease of the Moon. RELATION VI. I am informed by an Ingenious Person who resided in Prussia some time, that several Swal∣lows which were found upon breaking of the Ice enclosed in it, recovered and flew about the Room when thawed, though none of them survived four days, some of them dying soon∣er. RELATION VII. I am informed by a Traveller that returned from Jamaica, that he saw a Silk-Cotton Tree which was twenty one yards about, which grew upon a certain Mountain; and that the ordi∣nary sort are as large as Oak trees in England.
RELATION VIII. I received the following account from an East-India Merchant, viz. That at Campar and Rakan on the East-Coast of Sumatra, there constantly happens a violent Indraught of the Sea called Bunna which approaches with a ter∣rible noise, in three Parts, the first and last of which are more moderate than the second which is very high and terrible, and comes with such force, that no Vessel, except Anchor be weigh∣ed is able to resist it, and this Bunna constant∣ly returns at new and full Moon. The reason of which the Relator attributes to the great∣ness of the Spring-Tides, which come rouling over Banks of Sand, which choak up the mouth of the River. RELATION IX. I am informed by a Gentleman, that being at Sea near the Coast of Mosambique, the Cap∣tain observing a dark speck in the Sky a di∣stance off, takeing it for a sign of an approach∣ing Storm, took in the sails, and tho' the Sky was for some time after calm, yet on a sudden a Hurricane arose, which turn'd the Ship several times round, as if it had been in a Whirl-Pool, and this Storm continued near two hours.
RELATION X. I am informed by a Physician, that he saw in the Country near Armsterdam, a sort of Mer∣cury in the custody of a Farmer, which was of a Golden colour throughout, and would if put upon the fire in a proper Vessel precipitate in the form of a red Powder. And I am likewise told by a Judicious Phy∣sician, that he saw in the possession of a Stran∣ger, a sort of Mercury whose small Globules were of a green colour. CHAP. X. Various Observations about Diamonds. Observati∣ons about Diamonds.DIamonds being not only the most Noble but Valuable amongst Gems, it may be worth our while to consider them a little, and to relate what Observations I have been able to make about them. And, I. It is observed, that Diamonds are so much harder than other Bodies, that they require a greater force to cut and polish them than other Gems. II. It is observed by one who hath long dealt in Diamonds, that those which are now brought over are much softer than those of the old Rock. III. The Tradition is false, that Diamonds cannot be cut without being softened in Goats Blood, the contrary being found by Diamond
cutters, and an Experienced Diamond-cutter hath informed me, that he uses to polish Dia∣monds with the dust which he obtains by pound∣ing of boared Diamonds in an Iron Mortar. IV. Tho' it be a general received Opinion, that Diamonds have a weight proportionable to their Solidity, yet I find amongst my Experi∣ments, that a Diamond being weighed Hydro∣statically in Wattr was to its proportion of that Liquor as 2 22/23 to 1, so that it did not equal its treeble proportion of Water in weight. V. I am informed that if Diamonds be Cloudy, sometimes one as big again as a Pea, will be at least four grains heavier than another of an equal size. VI. The natural shape of Diamonds is uncer∣tain, since most of them which we see are only broken pieces, whose figures are very irregular, yet I have seen some which seemed to consist of Triangles terminating in solid Angles, and I am told by one who cuts a great number, that those which are of a regular Figure are usually four corner'd. VII. It is observed, that in Diamonds there is a regular tendency of Fibers or thin Plates, which lye parallel to each other, which may be called the grain of them which way they may easily be divided, tho' not against that grain without difficulty. VIII. As to the colour of Diamonds, tho' it generally be so well known, as not to need to be described, yet in the East-Indies some have been observed to be of a pale blue colour: And Monsieur Tavernier says, he hath seen
one of a very red colour, and a Relation of mine wore a Diamond in a Ring which was of a Golden yellow; besides which varieties of co∣lours, I have observ'd one amongst a great many in the East-India House whose colour was green. IX. And I have seen a Diamond brought from the East-Indies, which had six Triangular sides and a Cavity in one of them, in which Diamond the Fibers might easily be dis∣cerned. And the Merchant to which this be∣longed, told me he had seen one brought from Borneo, which before it was Polished was black, tho' after it appeared to be a clear Stone. X. To conclude this Chapter, I shall add the following Relation, which will contenance what I have elsewhere related, viz. That the Virtue of Gems may probably arise from Metal∣line Tinctures incorporated with the matter of them, whilst it was soft and fluid; the Obser∣vation is, that having applyed a Load-stone to a small Diamond which was pretty dull, it would not only be taken up by it, but would at a considerable distance leap up to it. To these Observations I shall only add, that there are several other Observations which are scattered up and down my Writings, which I shall not re∣peat here, they properly enough belonging to those writings.
THE WORKS Of the HONOURABLE ROBERT BOYLE, Esq EPITOMIZED. BOOK V. PART III. CHAP. I. Of the Original and Virtue of Gems. Of the Ori∣ginal▪ of Gems.THO' I am far from believing, that Gems are endowed with so many Me∣dicinal Virtues as are usually ascribed to them; yet I believe they may have considerable Effects on Humane Bodies, which Virtues they may receive from the Intermix∣ture of Mineral and Metalline Parts, whilst they were in a fluid form. And that preci∣ous Stones have once been in a fluid form, may be argued hence, viz. First, from their Di∣aphaneity;
fluid Bodies being more apt to have their Parts ranged in an order requisite to transparency, than solid Bodies; as Silver dis∣solved in Aqua Fortis, and Lead in Spirit of Vinegar, not only become transparent, but may form Diaphanous Crystals. Secondly, from their External figure; it being usual for Bo∣dies to form more regularly and curiously sha∣ped Crystals when in a fluid, than a solid Am∣bient substance; for which Reason, if a Glass-Bottle be filled with a Solution of Nitre, and the Water hath been pretty well consumed by boiling, the Salt will shoot into a Mass, whose side next the Glass answers the form of it, but that next the Water will be set with Prismatical Crystals of a Nitrous figure: And I have seen Indian Granates taken out of a lump of Heterogeneous matter, some of whose Surfaces were Triangles, others Paralellograms, &c. ac∣cording the figures of the Cells they were con∣tained in. And I have seen not only Bristol Stones, but Cornish Diamonds curiously shaped like Crystals of salt Petre: And I have like∣wise seen Rubies very Geometrically shaped; and amongst other Rarities, a Diamond whose Sur∣face consisted of several Triangular Planes, which contained several lesser within them, which for the most part met at a Point, and formed an obtuse solid Angle. And I have observed, that most Diamonds have angular and determinate shapes. And in favour of the Hypothesis already laid down, I shall add, that precious Stones be∣ing dissolved in a Particular Menstruum, they shoot into Crystals like those of Nitre, but
insipid. And I have observed, that tho' Bristol Stones have on the upper part, six smooth sides which were so cut as to represent six smooth Triangles, which terminate like those of a Pyramid in a Virtex, yet the lower Part which was next the matter it adhered to, made it appear less transparent, and conformable in figure to the Cavity of its womb, this is more remarkably evident, when clusters of these Crystals grow out of one Mineral lump. And to this I shall further add, that I have seen a Mass which consisted of two flat Parallel Cakes, which seemed to be composed of a dirty kind of Crystalline substance; and out of each Cake there grew towards the other a great number of Stones, which having a little space about them, were regularly shaped, and of the co∣lour of a German Amethyst. And I have a Stone which consists of four Parts, the lowest being like a flake of coarse Stone, only adorned here and there with very minute glittering Particles, as if of a Metalline Nature; over this is spread a thin white Opacous bed, and the third is made up of a long series of Crystals thick set, and which look whitish; and upon these which are not much thicker than a Barly-Corn, lyes another made up of Crystals like Amethysts, some higher tinged than others, and more elevated where they had most Room to shoot; those that were most elevated being hard e∣nough to grate lines upon Glass. And I have found in the Cavities of concreted Stones Cry∣stals which were set round the sides of them, and seemed to be formed of a Lapidescent Juice, which was Percolated through the substance of
the Stones, and formed curiously shaped Cry∣stals. And I am told by a digger, that he hath observed several clusters of these Crystals which stuck to no part of the Rock, but seem∣ed to be hastily formed in a soft Mould. But thirdly, not only the External but their Internal Texture favours our Hypothesis; since it seems to imitate that of those Bodies which have been formerly fluids: For it hath been observed, that several Particles of Salt sticking together have not only formed large lumps, but Sal-Gem and lumps of the Isle of Mayow Salt be∣ing broke seemed to be made up of the like Parts. And tho a solution of Silver usually shoots into thin Plates, yet it may be so orde∣red, that several of these joining together may form larger Crystals, whose outsides may be finely shaped like some peculiar kind of Vitriol. And tho' transparent Bodies are usually thought to be of an uniform Texture, yet I have obser∣ved, that a thin Muscovy Glass Plate, which was so thin as to be scarce visible, might be fur∣ther divided into Plates; and the like hath been observed in other Stones; and to this I shall add, that I have been able to perceive the grain of a large Grizolette with my Eye, as well as in Hyacinths and Saphirs; and English Gra∣nates when they are broke, appear mani∣festly to be made up of flakes or Plates; and so do even Diamonds themselves, which are observed to cleave much more easily with the grain than against it, as Wood is observed to do, which is made up of an assimilated Juice which was first fluid: But it is observed in some Diamonds, that the flakes are not wholly
Parallel, but in the substance of the Stone, sometimes make Angles; for which reason some of them break in pieces before they will cleave through. Fourthly, it seems requisite, that these Stones should have been in solutis Principiis, that they might be tinged with Mineral Juices. Which proposition suggests several Observations; and First, That most Gems lose their colour, or have it altered by the fire, and tho' it may be suggested, that the loss of a colour may be effected without the addition of a Pigment, by a change of the superficial Texture of a Body; (as when red Ink is beaten into a froth, or when Crystal receives several flaws in its Surface, by being suddenly cooled in Water, and becomes white, or in Cochinele, and puts on a pleasing colour, by the insinuation of the Tincture into the cracks and flaws) yet Indian Granates are observed to change their redish for a dark and dirty Iron colour, and Agats being kept a competent time in the fire be∣came white, except where Mineral Veins ran, where it was observed, that the colour was not destroyed but changed, and became a deep red, tho' I suspected that a more lasting fire would have turned them white, and the like change of colour hath been observed in Pebbles, and other Stones, some of which losing their Transparency by Ignition, acquired a deeper colour upon their Extinction in Water. And to countenance what I have laid down, it may be further offered, that Gems are generally found near Mines, or Mineral Veins; and tho' they are not sufficiently skilled in digging
Mines to discover what they otherwise pro∣bably might, yet I have seen several Amethysts which were taken out of Ground abounding with Iron and Tin Ores; and those softer Gems called by Mineralists Fluores, are often to be found in or near Metalline Veins, finely tinged with Mineral Juices, which were they in hot Countries and sufficiently hardened with the Sun, they might pass for Emaralds, &c. And I remember, that I once prepared a Menstruum no more corrosive than white Wine, which being poured upon well coloured Granates ex∣tracted a lovely Tincture from them. And Benvenuto Cellini tells us, that he saw a Rubie which was not of the usual colour but white, as also he acquaints us, that he hath seen Berils, Topazes, and Amethysts of the same colour; and Rubies and Saphirs have been observed to be of the same degree of hardness, so that they were looked upon to be the same kind of Stone tho' differently tinged; and that the same kind of Stone may be differently tinged appears, since Diamonds have been observed to be yellowish, more yellow and perfectly yellow, bluish, greenish, and some as green as Emaralds. And one who lived near the River Siam or Pegu in the East-Indies told me, he had seen Stones taken out of the Water partly void of colour, and partly of the colour of a Rubie. And besides what I have obser∣ved in Agats and Opacous Gems, as to the differing colours of the same Stone; I wear a Sardoinx in a Ring, the uppermost part of which is black, the middlemost of a Chesnut, and the other of a blue colour, almost like
a Turquois, and each of these of an uniform breadth and Parallel to each other, and even amongst Saphirs tho' they are commonly azure, yet a white Stone hath been called by the same name, because of the same degree of hard∣ness. And to these I shall add, that in Italy I have seen a large piece of Crystal, whose Py∣ramidal part was of a trnsparent green; the Vertex being richly tinged like an Emerald; but the further the colour spread from the Vertex, the more dilute and pale it grew, so that the Base was transparent and like ordina∣ry Crystal; agreeable to which Josephus Acosta says, that Emeralds seem to grow in Stones like Crystals, and by little and little to thicken and refine. He likewise says, he hath seen some half white and half green; others all white, and some green and very perfect. And I have seen a Saphir so odly tinged with Mineral fumes, that it might well be taken for a Chalcedonian, tho' of the hardness of a Saphir. And to shew further, that solid Gems may include Heterogeneous matter in them; I shall add, that not only I but others have perceived something in the Body of Rock-Crystal, which by varying the posture of that Stone might be rendered visible; and the like hath been seen in Grisolets brought from the East-Indies: And in a hard Stone brought from thence, and designedly broke, I found several clear and transparent Crystals, which had their Points in∣wards, and were Arguments that they had swam in some Liquors, whose incoagulable Parts were either imbibed by the Ambient matter or penetrated it. And to illustrate
what I have said I shall add, that I have not only seen a Fly in shape and size much like a Grass-hopper, enclosed in solid Amber, but variously and curiously coloured with his wings displayed. And I have seen white Amethists in which there appeared to be several lines, some of a brownish and some of a reddish colour, which looked like hairs, some lying Parallel to each other, and others more inclin∣ing; and I am apt to believe, that even Dia∣monds are not void of Particles of Heteroge∣neous matter, which is countenanced not only by odd Clouds which I have seen in a great many of them, but the different specifick Gra∣vity of those of the same Water, the difference amounting to a Carrat betwixt Diamonds of the size of two ordinary Pease. But, besides what hath been already offered, to prove that Gems have been once in a fluid form, it may be further alledged, that the Mineral Particles which they are so uniformly tinged with are convincing Arguments, since it is inconceivable how they should otherwise be so impregnated. And to what hath been already delivered; I shall further add, what is delivered by a French Author, viz. That the Stones which are found in the Earth have their Water coloured by the Earth, whether it be fat and black, or abounds with black or red Sand, and in some the Gems have been obser∣ved to be black or yellow; but tho' this Au∣thor hath said thus much which countenances our Hypothesis, yet I must not omit to adver∣tise, that tho' he asserts Diamonds to be not only the hardest but heaviest of Stones, I must yet
say, that they are not the heaviest as may be Hydrostatically discovered. But perhaps against what we have said, It may be urged, first that the figures of these Crystals are so curious, that a Plastick or Se∣minal Power seems requisite to the forming of them; which were it requisite, it might be an∣swered, that that Plastick Power may be lodged in fluid as well as solid substances, since the so∣lid Parts of Animal Bodies as well as Plants are formed of liquid substances; but that the figures of these Crystals may be owing to an apt convension and coalition of fluid Particles may be argued hence, viz. Since common Salt, by the help of Oyl of Sulphur or of Vitri∣ol and Water, will shoot into Crystals with Points like Diamonds, and not unlike native Crystal in shape and transparency; but if the Quality or proportion of the Oyl of Vitriol be varyed, they will shoot into Crystals some∣times of one shape and sometimes of another, for the most part fiuely figured. And to shew that the regular figure of Sea-salt contributes not to such figurations, I shall add, that hav∣ing dissolved some Stony Stiriae, found in Caves or Grottoes, in Spirit of Verdigrease, and e∣vaporated the clear solution in a digestive Fur∣nace after the ordinary manner, it yielded ra∣ther a coagulated Mass, than any thing like Crystals; whence it appears, that a concourse of circumstances may be sufficient to determine the figures of consistent Bodies, made of fluid ones; especially since when I allowed a longer time for the fluid to shoot in, it afforded a
good number of distinct Crystals; long, trans∣parent, and curiously shaped. And not only the external figure of Cry∣stalized Bodies may be accounted for, without he help of a Plastick Power, but their inter∣nal Construction likewise, since divers Bodies upon a slow coalition will form Concretes, some of which will consist of streaks, and o∣thers of flakes; as lumps of Sal-Armoniack, which tho' a factitious Body, when broke will appear to be full of streaks, like those Stiriae observed in petrifying Water. And I have made artificial Concretes of Salts alone, or of Salts or Minerals, as Stones, or Antimony which look very like Talk, being white Bodies made up of a multitude of streaky Particles, lying long ways one upon another as in that Mineral, and I have not only found Concretes shaped like Rhomhus's or Lozenges, composed of a multitude of flat and extreamly thin Plates, but have imitated such by Art. And I have observed, that tho' generally Crystals of Silver form flakes seemingly simple like scales of Fish∣es, yet when they have shot leasurely they are Geometrically enough shaped, and made up of thin flakes sticking one to another. And Tin-Glass which naturally consists of a multitude of shining and polished flakes, will, tho' beaten to Powder, and melted, upon its Refrigeration form several broad and shining flakes, which lying one upon another, cross each other at various Angles, as the matter happens in several Portions to be variously refrigerated. And the like instances may be observed in some Mixtures of Copper, Iron, and other
Minerals; and very conspicuously in good Regu∣lus Martis Stellatus, whose internal structure appears upon breaking of it, to be made up of shining flakes, almost of a specular Polish. And tho' whilst we are looking on some Concretes, the Stony Stiriae in some places have a streaky and in others an angular Configuration, yet I have seen several of them made up of Parts con∣fusedly jumbled together, and if there be a due disposition in the components Parts to such Configurations, they may be brought to Con∣cretes in a far shorter time than any one would expect or believe; so that a solution of Silver being heated hot, and removed suddenly into cold Water, one might not only very easily, but plainly see the Silver shoot with ones nak∣ed Eye; but even a strong Solution of Sal-Ar∣moniack, or some Urinous Spirit, being spread upon the outside of a Glass in which a frigori∣fick Mixture is contained, will in less than a minute of an hour be coagulated into Cry∣stals of a determinate figure, according to the Nature of the Liquor that afforded it. But if against these instances it be urged, that tho' they are taken from saline Bodies, which are for the most part disposed to con∣vene into smooth Surfaces, and Angular shapes, and are easily wrought on by External Cold, yet it may seem strange, that the figure of a Mould or Womb should alter the Internal Con∣struction of solid Minerals and Gems; but that it may is evident, since, tho' Tin-Glass con∣sists of several smooth and bright Planes, which sometimes meet, and sometimes lye a∣cross
each other, at very different Angles, yet having beaten a sufficient quantity of it to Pow∣der, and when it was melted cast it into Iron Moulds, whose Cavities were each an Inch in Diameter, it formed a Bullet, which when varily broke seemed to be made up of a multi∣tude of shining Planes, so shaped and placed that they rought every way like so many Radi∣us's of a Sphere tending from a Centre to the Circumference, so that they seemed gradually to decrease, as they were removed further and fur∣ther from the Circumference. But if the mel∣ted Tin-Glass was permitted to cool in a Cru∣cible, the hardened matter would form several Planes irregularly and confusedly associated to∣gether. And the like Experiment being tryed with Regulus of Antimony it succeded, tho' not so uniformly as with Tin-Glass: And melted Sulphur being hardened in the same Moulds, the Concreted Mass seemed when broke to consist of flakes like Straws lying Parallel to each other: But how the flakes of Tin-Glass came to be so regularly situated; and whether the outside being first condensed, the contiguous Liquor was connected by ap∣position, successively as it moved within the crusted Surface, or whether it was otherwise effected, I shall not now stay to examine; but to what I have said I shall add, that having broke several Marchasites of a peculiar sort, I found them to consist of several rows of Planes reaching from the inermost Parts to the Exter∣nal Surface; and in those which were some∣what Cylindrically shaped on the outside, these Ranks of Gold coloured Particles, in the seve∣ral
Planes of the broken Mineral seemed like Semi-Diameters issuing out from from a row of Physical Points, conceived to be placed on an Imaginary Line; lying almost like the Axes of a Cylinder between the apposite ends; as if the Wombs wherein those Marchasites were found, contained the fluid matter as in Molds, and as if it Concreted there, as Tin-Glass or Re∣gulus did in the Molds. But tho' from hence it may appear, that tho' the figures of such Concretes be curious enough, yet they may easily be accounted for without a seminal Principle, yet I find not the uniformity of the figrue always so great as is imagined, but rather to depend on the diffe∣rent Figure and Texture of the Wombs they are contained in; for comparing American, African, and European Granats together, I found that one which weighed eleven grains and a half, tho it seemed to have been coagulated in a fluid Medium, and to consist of twelve Plains, at the concourse of two or three of which it seemed to have been broken off from the Root or Womb, yet it was not of the Do∣decahedron of Geometricians; for whereas that consists of twelve equilateral and equiangled Pentagons; almost all the Planes that made up our Granate, were quadrilateral, and not of a regular shape or Magnitude; for one of them seemed to have five sides; others resembled a Rhombus, some a Rhomboides▪ but most were a little bigger than the Trapezia But, besides the want of uniformity in these Stones, I observed amongst Cornish Diamonds, that some of them were cu∣riously and Geometrically shaped like Rock-Crystal,
having each six sides, whereof every two that were opposite were equal to each o∣ther; and tho' the Stone had a Pyramidal Ter∣mination, made up of several resembling and curiously figured Planes, that terminated in a solid Angle or Apex, yet the greatest number of the Titular Diamonds were made up of very irregularly shaped Stones; for tho' most of them had six long Planes, yet the opposite were most of them irregular and unlike; and tho' the Apex was made up of Planes apart usually Angular, yet being compared with each other they were far from being uniform; tho' it appeared that they shot in a fluid Ambient, except at the bottom where they were fastned to the Rock. And I have observed a great irregularity in the Area of the Superficial Planes, or their figures, or both, in Diamonds brought from the East-Indies. Having shewn that the figures of Stones are far from discountenancing our conjectures of their Originals, I shall proceed to shew, that they help to confirm them; since I have seen a small Cornish Diamond so bedded in a large one, that it left a Cavity in it when separated, and on the contrary I have sometimes seen a large one so joyned to a smaller as to form a Cavity within it, which is a likely Argument, that the one being first hardened, afterwards a soft matter was collected together, and being contiguous, hardened in such a form as to con∣tain part of the other in the Cavity, which was formed whilst the one was fluid, and the other was hardened; which may be illustrated by considering, how Nitrous or Aluminous
Salts fasten themselves about pieces of sticks, and leave a Cavity proportionably to the solid contained: To which I shall add, that I have seen a Stone which was taken out of a Silver Mine, which had coagulated about the Branches of a Silver Wire, which was produced by Na∣ture in the Mine. Another Argument of the fluid state of Gems, and their Impregnation with Mineral Stems, may be drawn from their Specifick Gravity, for whereas common Rock-Crystal is to its bulk of Water as two and almost two thirds to one, the weight of an American Granate was as four to one. And tho' by this method a tinged Gem hath not so great a difference in its proportion to Water, yet it may never∣theless be impregnated with Mineral Particles, for I found by Hydrostatically weighing Water impregnated with Iron, that it was not much heavier than common Water. Another Argument may be drawn from the Medicinal Virtues of Stones, and the Metalline or Mineral substances, as well from Opacous Stones as Opacous Gems, &c. as the Tur∣quois, the Onyx, the Sardonix, &c. as also Cats Eyes, Opates, &c. And indeed I much question whether Diaphaneity depends on the essence of a Gem; since it may rather proceed from the Position of the Parts of a Pigment, and the scituation of the Pores in reference to the Beams of Light: But waving a further consideration of this matter, I shall rather sub∣joyn, that precious Stones and even Diamonds themselves, have sometimes great clouds, which makes them in those Parts almost Opacous, with∣out
out being less of the Nature of true Diamonds. And it is observable that Cornelians and Agats are some of them transparent, and some of them Semidiaphanous, as the Portion of the Mineral Pigment is greater or less, or as it is more or less inconveniently mixed. And I have seen even a Sardonix transparent, and on the contrary, figured Granates which were both of them Diaphanous: And I have some by me of several Countries, which tho' they are in some places Diaphanous, yet in the main they are almost as dark as ordinary Stones. And I question not, but that if the Glassy Na∣ture of Gems did not render common Men∣struums inaccessable, Mineral Particles might be extracted from them; and when they are con∣siderable, I question not but that they may be obtained from solid and transparent Gems; for having kept Granats in a hot Crucible till they changed their colour and afforded a very fine Powder, that being digested with rectifyed Spirit of Wine, afforded a curious Tincture; and burnt Granats gave Aqua Regis a Tincture, which in some measure resembled a solution of Gold; but a drop of the Liquor being put to a great many drops of Tincture of Galls, it turn∣ed them as black as Ink, if not blacker. And the like measures being taken with Granates which were looked upon by some to be Rubies, the Tincture coloured an Infusion of Galls not quite so black as the other; but a white Powder was precipitated at the same time; and by the use of an urinous Spirit a redish substance, which being dryed in the Air formed Bodies like Moss, and here and there small Mushrooms prettily
coloured. And from other Granates I obtain∣ed a Tincture, which after evaporation did in the Cold afford saline Concretions, but so small that their figures could not be determined. And probably, were tryals made, other Mineral Concretes might be wrought on by appropri∣ated Menstruums, for tho' the Spar that is found in Lead Mines next the Veins of Ore be Semi∣diaphanous, and usually breaks in smooth and Glassy Superficies, and looks like a Talck, and also for the most Part is made up of figured Particles shaped like Rhombuus's or Rhomboides, yet I found it was a more open Body than Talk, being dissolved in Spirit of Salt, without the assistance of Heat. But I am apt to believe, that besides the methods already mentioned, there are other methods to discover the Metalline Ingredients of a Body, by Fusions and proper Additaments. And to conclude this Chapter, I shall subjoyn the following Experiment, viz. Having dissolved Stony Stiriae of petrifyed Water, in Spirit of French Verdigrease, and after a gentle Evapora∣tion, placed it in a cool place, it yielded ∣stals, figured much like those of pure Nitro,  some of this Stony solution being mixed wi a solution of Copper, they did not precipitate each other, but upon Evaporation yielded Cry∣stals transparent and colourless, and that were richly adorned with a greenish blue Tincture of the Metal.
CHAP. II. Containing a Conjecture about the Causes of the Virtues of Gems. FROM what hath been elsewhere, and in the preceding Chapter laid down, it appears, that the Earth does not only abound with seve∣ral Mineral and Metalline substances, a great many of which are undiscoverd, and a great many already known, but also that several Mines are furnished with Water, which being impregnated variously, may be no dispicable Menstruums, but may likewise concur to the Production of Mineral Bodies, and not only serve as corrosive Menstruums, but pure Sol∣vents to Mineral Earths. And that common Water is able to impregnate it self not only with Saline but Mineral Parts, is evident from the various tasts of Waters, and their uses; some being fitter for brewing; others for wash∣ing; some for dying particular Colours, and some to temper Steel; and others again for o∣ther uses: And amongst the most remarkable ies are Thermae and Acidulae reckoned up by various Authors, as also Salt Springs, and those Waters of Hungary and other Parts, which yield a Vitriol, which is a substance com∣pounded and decompounded, containing a saline, a Sulphureous, a Metalline, and an Earthy Part; and if Water may be thus impregnated with Metalline Parts, it is no difficulty to apprehend how a Lapidescent Humour, being sufficiently
mixed with and proportioned to it, may be coagulated into Stony Stiriae, and from such like Coalitions may arise those precious Stones, and transparent Gems; for the Virtue of specifick Juices are so powerful, that I have seen Vegeta∣ble substances sufficiently hardened by them to grave on Iron; and I had a substance which I looked upon to be a petrifyed Gum, which was hard enough to grave on Glass. And if the Parts of Minerals may thus, by be∣ing dissolved in Water, be mixed with a petri∣fyed Body, by this means Gems may not only be impregnated, but thence receive their Me∣dicinal Virtues, as the Nature of the Mineral is different in Qualities and abounds in Quantity, which Original of their Virtues may be rende∣ed probable, not only by what hath been said in the foregoing Chapter, but by their diffe∣rent colours. And that their Impregnation with Mineral Parts, enobles them with Medicinal Virtues, is evident from the Testimony of Experience, and is rendered probable by the Effects of a Loadstone, which tho a much harder substance than some Gems, emits Effluvia very copiously, and hath not only manifest Effects on Iron, but Humane Bodies. And even those Pebbles with which they counterfeit Diamonds, have been caused in a trice to emit copious and strongly scented Steams; and even Diamonds the hardest of Gems, may by rubbing be caused to emit Electrical Effluvia. And tho' it be thought by some, that the digestion of a Man's Stomach is not able to extract the Metalline Parts, yet there may be a greater Congruity betwixt the
Juices of our Bodies, and the Mineral substan∣ces with which they were impregnated, than we are aware of; besides we see that the Stomach hath manifest Effects on Chalybe∣ate Preparations, and even crude Steel it self. And I have obtained a Tincture from several hard Bodies, and even Gems themselves, by a Liquor distilled from a Vegetable substance, as temperately qualifyed as Bread. And that the natural Heat of our Bodies, may contri∣bute to the extracting of the Virtues of preci∣ous Stones, I am perswaded, since it makes an evident alteration in the hardest of them, so as to render a Diamond Electrical; and I have had one which by warm Water would be exci∣ted to shine in the dark. And indeed it is not altogether improbable, that Gems having the most subtile Mineral Steams in them, being not dispersed by the action of fire, they may be more Effectual considering their quantity, than Preparations of Metals which have undergone a Fusion. And their Virtues may sometimes be much different, upon the account of a great quantity of Mineral Particles, since Ʋunzerus tells us, that amongst those Stones which are called Nephritick Stones, some are much more effectual than others, besides the petrifick Juices themselves may have distinct natures, and peculiar Qualities, upon the account of their Coalitions with Ad∣ventitious Liquors. And if petrifying Liquors may have such manifest effects on several Bodies one would think indisposed to petrify, why may not such a Liquor subdue transparent Minerals abounding with Saline, Sulphureous, and Bitu∣minous
Bodies, which being excited may emit their most subtil Parts; and as in the Earth there are severl Bodies compounded by the acti∣on of Subterraneal fires, those petrifyed may enable the Body with correspondent Qualities; on which occasion I here subjoyn, that I have seen a saline substance which was formed in the Bowels of the Earth, like that which is artificially made. And I have seen Volatile Salts and Sulphurs shoot into transparent Crystals in a fluid Medium after Distillation, which have been more curiously figured than several Gems. And if it be objected in disfa∣vour of the Medicinal Virtues of Gems, that they grow no lighter when they are said to e∣mit Effluvia, I shall add, that, not to urge that the Antimonial Cup impregnates Wine with∣out losing of its substance, and that Mercury will give Water a Virtue of killing Worms, by being boiled in it, tho' by these means it loses nothing of its weight, I shall rather de∣mand how it appears, that Bodies grow no lighter by the loss of their Effluvia. And tho' in some cases the Gem may be lighter than Crystal, yet it is no argument of their more languid Effects, since the specifick Gravi∣ty of those Bodies they are impregnated with, may be of a saline Nature, and specifically lighter than Crystal: And I shall in favour of this add, that I have several times made Bodies colourless like Crystal; and curiously and regularly figured, which were of a compound Nature, and abounded with an easily separa∣ble and strongly scented Sulphur. And on this occasion I shall further add, that tho'
when Gems are specifically heavier than Cry∣stal, it is an Argument of a Metalline substance mixed with them; yet sometimes those mine∣ral Particles may be so spirituous, as not to in∣crease their specifick Gravity, for I have seen a ferruginous Water, which, tho' strongly im∣pregnated, was little heavier than common Water. And now, if, together with what hath been delivered in this Chapter, we reflect on what follows concerning the Atmospheres of consi∣stent Solids, and the efficacy of Effluviums, it will not be absurd to ascribe to precious Stones some Medicinal Virtues, especially to those that disposed to emit copious Effluvia. And to shew that what we have deliver'd, may not only be applyed to transparent but o∣pacious Gems; and to render our Hypothesis not only probable, but possible, I shall intimate, First, That I have seen lapidescent Juices so penetrating, as to turn several Animal and Ve∣getable Substances into Stone; amongst which, one was a new Cheese, which could be distin∣guish'd no otherwise from another Cheese, but by its stony Hardness; and I have a piece of Wood petrified, which retains its grain, and is hard enough to grave upon Iron or Glass, and to resist the action of the Fire, and likewise to strike Fire like an excellent Flint. But to render this Hypothesis further probable, I shall subjoin the following Arguments. And, First, It appears from the Method taken, to weigh Bodies in our Medicina Hydrostatica, where White Marble was proposed as a Standard, to determin whether Metalline parts were in
Bodies or not; for a piece of White Marble being in proportion to its Bulk of Water, as 2 72/100 to 1; and Blood-stone, as 5 2/10 to 1; a Load∣stone, as 4 and 6/10 to 1; Lapis Calaminaris, as 4 7/10 to one; and Lapis Tutice as 5 to 1; It fol∣lows that those must proportionably be impreg∣nated with Mineral Parts, heavier in specie than Stone; and for that Reason I have found some Stones of the same kind specifically heavier than others, as they were impregnated in Solutis Principiis, more or Iess with mineral Parts. But it will not be amiss here to advertise, That some Stones lighter in specie than Fossils, may be compounded with mineral Parts, and thence deduce their Medicinal Virtues; and others may be impregnated with mineral Parts, light∣er in specie than Marble, and consequently their mineral Nature cannot be Hydrostatically de∣termin'd as yet, which is to its Bulk of Water, as 1 22/100 to 1, and yields no inconsiderable Pro∣portion of Oyl. A Second Argument for the Confirmation of our Hypothesis, may be deduced from the Necessity of it, to explain several Phaenomena, as why Diamonds and other Gems shouldbe in∣cluded in Rocks or Clusters of hard Stones, which must be soft, or could not, at the first, admit a hard Gem to lodge amongst their Parts; and I shall further urge the Necessity of it, from several Gems which I found in an odd kind of Mineral, sent me from an American Colony. And it is not improbable, that Opacous Gems are petrified Earths, since they vary so much in their Dimensions, so that I have heard of a Spleen-stone which weigh'd 80 Pound weight.
And I have seen a Medicinal Stone, which be∣ing sawed asunder, its internal Parts were full of Cavities; whence it appeared to be made up of porous Earth petrifi'd, and not of an in∣durated Liquor. From our Hypothesis the fol∣lowing Phaenomena may be explained, viz. Why sometimes one part of a Gem is tinged with a Metal, and another is not, since in making Ar∣tificial Gems, the Mineral Pigment hath tinged one Part without discolouring the other. And I have now by me a lump of petrifi'd Matter, which consists of several Stones, which tho' first petrify'd apart, and afterwards joined together by a petrescent Liquor, bear an uniform polish, without discovering betwixt their Parts the least Commissures; and an acquaintance of mine discover'd several loose Stones, where this was found, which were separately of the same Na∣ture, and afterwards harden'd into stony Mas∣ses, by the intervention of a petrescent Liquor. And I have an Agat by me, which seems to consist of several Layers of Clay or Earth, ly∣ing parallel to each other, and petrify'd part∣ly into Transparent, and partly into Opacous Stones; and to favour this conjecture, I shall add, that I have seen several Layers of mineral Earths one upon another, within the compass of an Inch, which lay in different postures, in re∣ference both to the Horizon, and each other; and sometimes the exterior ones successively surrounded the interior; and several of these have been found in a small compass of Ground; and by a like Method, differently coloured Chal∣cedonians and Jaspers may be accounted for. And from hence may be deduced a Reason why
Marchasites and Flints, Wood and Shells, have been found enclosed in other hard Stones. And on this occasion I shall add, that Stones which were partly Diaphanous, and partly Opacous, being calcin'd, the diaphanous Parts became White; and some others which were before tinged, had their Parts heighten'd so, as after Calcination to be of a rich and permanent Red; and this difference of Colours was not on∣ly remarkable in the thin Layers, but in the specks, and irregularly shaped Clouds, whether Greenish or Bluish. And to illustrate an Observation formerly made on Diamonds bedded one within another, I shall urge what is observed in Cryftalizing Salts, where, as well as in a Metalline Solution, I have observ'd, that when a number of Cry∣stals had shot after the first Evaporation, seve∣ral successive Layers shot upon those; in the lat∣ter of which Solutions, the Crystals of one Layer were not only fastened to the others, but differed considerably, as well in their Shape as Postures. In this Metalline Solution the Mine∣ral was only one, and the Menstruum simple; but had the first been Compound, there would have been a greater diversity, as likewise Cry∣stals of a compound Nature; as when a Solution of Salt-Petre and Sea-salt in Water is set to Cry∣stalize, where besides Salts of resulting Figures, a considerable part of the Sea-salt coagulates in the Form of imperfect Cubes about the Bottom, before the nitrous Particles shoot into Crystals of their own shape. And I shall further add, That Crystallization may not only be promoted by Evaporation, but by soaking part of the Water
up either by immersing it, or by placing dry Earth under the Solution, or some other porous Body. And by some Analogy to these Instances, we may conceive how some of the superfluous Moisture of a Petrescent Liquor, being disper∣sed, the remaining may be more apt to coagu∣late; but by a moist Season or supervening Cold, the moisture ceasing to be further dispersed, the Coagulation may be for a time suspended, and upon that account, upon the second Cry∣stallization, may yield Crystals less regular, and apt to convene uniformly with the others, than in Artificial concretions perform'd in di∣stinct Vessels. And on this occasion I shall add, That I have had Fire-stones brought from seve∣ral Places, in one of which, the internal Tex∣ture was very different from the more Central Texture; and in another, I not only observed one Spherical Stone contained within another, but of a different Texture, and distinguished by a visible Commissure, tho' the Commissure was not so uniform as to admit these two to be se∣parated. But perhaps it may be objected against what we have delivered, That these Bodies are found where petrifying Springs are not. Against which it may be offer'd, not to urge that Men and Beasts have been petrify'd upon the sudden invasion of a petrifying Spirit, that Rain-Wa∣ter may bring such Particles along with it. Since over a Bath in Hungary, that abounded with petrifying Particles, the Steams which were arrested by the building over it, were turn∣ed into stony Concretes; which may give us Reason to think, that petrifying Vapours raised
from the lower Parts of the Earth, meeting with rightly disposed Matter, may form Stones, without the help of Rain or Springs; which Conjecture may be favoured, by relating, that I have not only found an Earthy and Sulphureous Sediment in the bottom of Rain-water, but I have observed that a distill'd Liquor being kept some time in a Vial well stopp'd, the Steams penetrated the Cork, and formed whitish Stiriae, very slender and of a surprizing length. And that petrescent Springs are not always requisite, will appear, since I have found transparent Stones in a dry Soil, which lay upon a Rock; and I have found that a solution of stony Stiriae in Spirit of Verdigrease, being poured upon Bolus Armenus, contained in a Glass, when the superfluous moisture was exhaled, several tran∣sparent and untinged Crystals appear'd, dis∣persed through that Red Earth. And the best petrify'd Wood that I know of, was taken up out of a Plot of sandy Ground, where there was not the least signs of a petrifying Spring. And tho' some Stones seem to grow as from a Root, yet these may easily be supposed to have been formed in certain Molds; and that after their formation, the Winds or Rains washed a∣way the looser Soil from their upper Parts. Be∣sides it might be easily shewn, that stony Con∣cretions might be produced by the mechanical action of the Air upon the stony Parts, that successively apply themselves to the Matter that first begins to coagulate; and began to be for∣saken by that moisture that accompanied those Parts, and was necessary to their due Applica∣tion to their casual Roots; in imitation of
which I have obtained from saline and stony solutions, dry Turfs prettily sigured, and dia∣phanous or White; as also slender Stiriae that seemed to grow out of the solid Glass. But further, sometime petrifying Particles may be so diluted with ordinary Water, as not to discover themselves 'till they have fit Bodies to work upon: For I have received transpa∣rent and petrify'd Cristals from a Lake in the North of Ireland, which grew to the Rocks in the bottom, but had no ill effects on the Fish which swam in that Water; and it is easie to sup∣pose, that whether Water which lies in the Cavities of Rocks be impregnated with petri∣fick Particles from Springs, Rain-water, or sub∣terraneal steams; I say it is easie to conceive, how these, after an Exhalation of the superflu∣ous moisture, may petrifie the adjacent Soil, and form different Stones, according to the par∣ticular Nature of the petrescent Liquors, and the disposition and structure of the Soil they in∣vade; in which Soil if any Heterogeneous Mat∣ter be lodged whether Vegetable, Animal, or Mineral Substances, they must needs be found in that petrify'd Soyl when broken up: Nor is it requisite that this Soyl should be all petri∣fy'd at once; for it may be petrify'd gradually, as the Position or porousness of the Body give advantage to the petrifying Body that works upon them; so that from hence it appears, how medicinal Stones of different Colours, Consistencies and Effects, may be formed, and seem entire Bodies. And I have a Stone by me which contains a perfectly shaped Serpent coiled up in it, but without a Head; which
appears to have been formed before the Stone, in as much as in the upper and lower Parts of the Stone, there are Cavities left, which toge∣ther form one Cavity, of the size and shape of the contained Body; and that the Serpent and the Stone about it, were petrify'd at several times, may be argued from the different Tex∣ture of the petrify'd Animal, it being a clearer kind of Stone than that of the Mold; and e∣ven that Part of the Mold it self which is con∣tiguous to the included Body is whitish, and abounds with shining grains or flakes, in both which respects it differs from the other Parts. But to proceed, in those several places in which Stones are plentifully found, in times past pretrescent Liquors may have been, since not only Earth-quakes, Inundations, sinking of Grounds, but the incroaching of the Land on the Water, as well as fiery Eruptions, have been able to dry up Pools and Lakes, and to divert the course of Springs and Rivers, so as to leave not the least footsteps where they flowed before. Another Argument which will favour: the Hypothesis already laid down, may be deduced from this, that by proper Menstruums Mine∣ral Parts may be drawn from some of these Stones, so a Solution of Blood-Stone turned an Infusion or Galls blackish, and so did a Load-Stone Emeri and Marchasites opened with cor∣rosive Menstruums. And Lapis Calaminaris kept in Fusion with Copper, changes it yellow for a Golden colour, and makes it Brass; and adds to its specifick Gravity considerably.
And Quick-silver is known to be distilled from Ore found in the Mines of Friuli. But as we be∣fore intimated, there are several Stones, which owe their Virtues to a Mixture of Bodies speci∣fically lighter than Crystal; which is evident, since not only Brimstone, but Bitumens, are specifically lighter, the proportion of Brim∣stone being as two to one, and that of Asphal∣tum as one and a little less than 4/10 to 1. And even some Bodies specifically Lighter than Cry∣stal, may owe their Virtues to Mineral Particles, since they may be mixed with Ingredients specifi∣cally Lighter than Crystal, which may compensate the Surplusage of theirs; for I have had a piece of blackish East-Indian Flint, and likewise an English one of the same colour, the one of which weighed as 2 6/10 to 1, and the other as 2 7/10 to 1, which is equal to the specifick Gravity of Crystal; so that the Blackish co∣lour seemed to proceed from some Mineral smoak that had pervaded it, which may give us Reason to believe, that the matter of Medi∣cinal Stones may be tinged with Mineral Va∣pours before it is hardened: And that several subterraneal Bodies may be raised in the form of Vapours, will appear from what hath else∣where been delivered; and that Quick-silver will, we are assured by the effects of Fumigati∣ons in the Lues Venerea; and that it may be incorporated with Stones, may be observed in some kinds of native Cinnabar. And I have found that not only artificial but natural Sal-Armoniack, may be raised in the form of Ex∣halations by the help of fire. And that Sal-Armoniack, Sulphur and Mercury, may be sub∣limed
into a Gold like substance, appears from the Preparations of Aurum Musicum, and that the Earth abounds with Mineral Ex∣halations of various kinds, appears from what hath been elsewhere delivered; as well by us as several other Authors; and since the Earth abounds with so great a Number of Minerals, there is no question but some of them may be able to penetrate and tinge some indurated Stones; and that a small quantity of a Mine∣ral may be sufficient to tinge a great quantity of a Stony substance, will appear from several Experiments already delivered. But to proceed to the last Argument to be alledged on this occasion, I shall add, that it appears that opacous Gems receive their Vir∣tues from Mineral Particles, since most of them consist of Mineral Bodies petrified. And tho' most of these Bodies differ little from artifici∣al ones, we are not therefore to deny them Medicinal Virtues, since several Medicinal and specifick Virtues are attributed to Chymical Preparations, and that artificial Bodies may be endewed with Medicinal Virtues, appears from Galen, who delivers the ashes of a Cray-Fish as an Antidote against the biting of a mad Dog: And even Treacle is esteemed not on∣ly as an Alexipharmick, but endewed with specifick Virtues, upon the account of its mani∣fest as well as occult Qualities. And to what I have said, I shall add, that several Stones of the same kind differ in the goodness of their Medicinal Qualities, as Lapis Nephriticus; and several of them have Virtues which seem to belong to other kinds, when they are impreg∣nated
with the like Exhalations; so that I have seen a Blood-Stone which would stop Hemor∣rhagies when made use of without the Persons knowledge, yet by its colour it seemed to be of another kind of Stone. But to the foregoing Particulars I shall add, that subterraneal Exhalations may be so pow∣erful and penetrating, as to petrifie both Ani∣mal and Vegetable Substances, as appears from petrifyed Skulls, Bones, and pieces of Wood; and that Vegetable substances may be hardened into Stones is evident, since Lapis Lyncurius, a Stone near Naples, being rubbed and moistened, and then exposed to the Sun in a due season, will yield Mushrooms fit to be eaten, so that the seminal Principles of Vegetables may be petrifyed, without losing a power of exerting themselves when they find an opportunity: And these kind of Stones are sometimes found to be of an extraordinary bigness. And that other Earths, subject to be petrifyed, may be endewed with Medicinal Virtues appears, since I knew a Clay-Pit in which a Bed of Clay yield∣ed by distillation a Volatile and strong Salt, which was a good Cordial, and a great opening and Diaphoretick Medicine. And that subli∣mable Salts, Sulphurs and Bitumens, may be met with in the Bowels of the Earth and in the Bodies of Stones, I have found by their Chymi∣cal Examens. And that Metalline Parts may concur to the Composition of a Medicinal Stone, may appear from native Sulphur, (which is it self a compound Body) besides a good proportion of Mineral Earth.
CHAP. III. Of the Atmospheres of Consistent Solids. Of the At∣mospheres of consistent Bo∣dies.THAT fluid Bodies, such as Water, Wine, Urine, &c. emit Effluvia, is too evident to want proof; and that even consistent and solid Bodies emit Effluvia, will appear from what follows, since not only Leaves of Plants, but Ambergrease, &c. are manifestly odoriferous. And not only Volatile Salts are sensibly diminished, by being exposed to the Air, but Camphire which is a tough tenacious Body. And even from the Electrical Quali∣ties of Amber, hard Wax, &c. it appears that they emit corporeal Effluvia; which sen∣sibly affect the Nostrils when violently rub∣bed. And as further instances of the Effluvia of consistent Bodies, we may add, that not only Apples but Eggs lose of their weight in Win∣ter, and so does Wood; for having caused a Cup to be made of it, and Counterpoised it, it grew sensibly and gradually lighter, so that tho' it wanted two drachms of two ounces, yet it lost forty grains of that weight in ten hours. And even Ice which weighed two oun∣ces in a frosty Night, lost ten grains of its for∣mer weight, tho' not in the least thawed. And it is known to those that deal amongst Lead and Tin, that those Bodies emit very hurtful Effluvia, and Cold-share Iron hath been observed to smell so rank whilst red hot,
that the Smith could scarce endure to work it; and not only Iron, but Brass and Copper, when heated smell very unpleasantly. And to these instances I shall add, that be∣sides Load-Stones, black Marble, as well as o∣ther Stones, whilst a Polishing, will emit sensible Effluvia, which is evident by the smells they emit. And amongst other Bodies which convince us, that they emit sensible Effluvia by their smell, I shall enumerate those Coni∣cal Stones called Thunder-Stones, which upon attrition emit a Sulphureous smell; and so did a Substance which much resembled a Marcha∣site: And I made a Mixture of a Metalline Body and a coagulated Mercury, which had considerable effects on the Eyes as well as other Parts, near which it was worn as an Appensum. And Vitrum Saturni, made with a good quantity of Minium, is not devoid of Electricity; nor is Brass free from an offensive smell, when its Parts are put into a violent concussion by turn∣ing. And amongst Electrical Bodies I have seen some of so close a Texture, and so hard, that they would strike fire, and Aqua Fortis it self would not work upon them, as Cornelians, Rock-Crystal, &c. And even so hard Bodies as Diamonds are found to be Electrical. And I have observed, that Concretions called Cugoli, made use of by Glass-men in the East-Indies e∣mits a smell upon attrition; and so will a Calculus Humanus; and Iron it self if held to a grinding Stone without the use of Water. And Marchasites likewise upon an attrition e∣mit a Sulphureous Odour.
And even so fixed Bodies, as Regulus of An∣timony, and its Glass, communicate to Liquors Emetick and Purgative Emanations; and Glass it self, which is fixed enough to endure the force of the Fire, upon Attrition, emits offensive Effluvia. And the Heat of the Sun and Fire have so great a stroke in exciting the Atmospheres of Bodies exposed to them; that Amber being exposed to the former, and Glass to the latter, they both became Electrical. And I question not, but that if a great many Bodies, not yet tryed, were carefully weighed, they would appear sensibly to emit Effluvia; tho' the waste made by some Bodies is so small, as to be scarce discernable, if at all, as in Load∣stones, Ambergrease, &c. Those requiring a long time to make their Consumption discernible, in which time we are not sure but the Weights themselves may have lost of their weight, as well as the Counterpoise, and consequently not be able to discover the loss those sustain. But there are several other, besides statical, ways of trying whether Bodies emit Effluvia or not; and there are several peculiar ways re∣quisite to cause them to emit them; as Glass, &c. affect the Nostrils upon an Attrition. I had a Diamond, as well as a Ruby, which would be excited by a gentle heat in my Pocket, or only by strokeing my Finger over the former, tho' sometimes they would fail to be so easily or u∣niformly excited; and it is not a little strange, that upon the Tread of a Hare or Partridge, Effluvia should be so long emitted, as to give a Scent to Dogs several Hours after.
And if Load-stones and other Bodies may have Constant Atmospheres which are only to be discover'd by particular Bodies; several o∣ther Substances, not yet taken notice of, may e∣mit Effluvia, which by peculiar Methods may be discover'd. CHAP. IV. Of the Strange Subtlety of Effluviums. Of the sub∣tlety of Ef∣fluviums.THE subtlety of the Effluviums will be most aptly represented, by considering, I. The strange extensibility of some Bodies, whilst their Parts remain tangible. II. The Multitude of visible Corpuscles, that may be af∣forded by a small Portion of Matter. III. The smallness of the Pores, at which the Effluvia of some Bodies will get in. IV. The small De∣crement of Bulk or Weight that a Body may suffer, by parting with great store of Effluvia And, V. The great quantity of Space that may be filled, as to Sense, by a small quantity of Mat∣ter, when rarify'd or dispersed. And First, I have observed that a Grain of Silver Wire amounted to 27 Foot, or 324 Inch∣es; and since half an English Inch may be divi∣ded into a 100 Parts by diagonal Lines, it must consist of 64800 true Metalline Parts, which may be well conceived to be made of Parts yet more minute. And I had a gilt Wire, an Ounce of which made a Wire 1000 paces long, al∣lowing Five Foot to a Pace, and 720 Foot a∣bove;
and had this Wire been drawn out to an equal smallness with the Silver Wire, the Gold would have been divided to an indefinite num∣ber of Parts, being sufficient to cover the su∣perficial Area of so long a Wire. And I have known Silk to be drawn out of the Mouth of a Worm, which, tho' it weigh'd but two Grains and a half, was 300 Yards long. But to evince the great extensibility of Mat∣ter, we took six beaten Leaves of Gold, the sides of whose Squares were 3 Inches and 2/8, which Number being reduced to a Decimal Fraction, viz. 3125/100, and multiplyed by it self, affords 105/10000 for the Area of each, and this multiplyed by 6, the Number of the Leaves amounts to 6313750/10000 square Inches for the Area of the six Leaves of Gold; which weighed but 1 Gr. ¼; so that 4 Grains was extended to above 50 square Inches. And if each of these Inches may, by Lines drawn from opposite Points, be divided each into 100 Parts, one Grain of Gold must be divided into 500000 little squares, discernable by a good Eye; and if an Inch were divided into 200 Parts, as I have one by me that is, then a Grain may be divided into 2000000 of squares. And to be satisfy'd further of the extensibility of Gold, I enquired, and was told that 8 Grains of Gold would gild an Ounce of Silver Wire as fine as a Hair, and which would reach be∣twixt 90 and 100 Miles. But supposing the Wire to be as fine as that first mentioned, and that 8 Grains of Gold went to gild it; a sheath of Gold weighing but 8 Grains, may be extend∣ed so as to reach 60 times as much (in weight) of Silver Wire as it covers; and consequently,
a grain of that Wire being twenty seven foot long, the ounce of Gold would reach to 777600 foot i. e. 155 ½ miles; and if this Gold Wire were cut into as small thongs or lists as posibly it might be, it must reach to a stupen∣dious length. But secondly, to shew into what a number of visible Corpuscles a Body may be divided, we put an ounce of Water into an Aeolipile, and having placed it upon a Chafing-dish of Coals, we observed that Vapours streamed out or above sixteen minutes; and considering a few intermitting gusts afterwards, and what drops of Water were condensed in the top of it, I guessed, that had the whole been driven out in Vapours they would have continued twenty minutes; N. B. to the Orifice of the Aeoli∣pile we applied a long Tube twenty Inches long and an Inch in Diameter, the remoter end being continued about six Inches longer, and so far expanded that its Diameter was four or five Inches; and by the help this Pipe we were able tho' not actly to measure the Ex∣tension of the rarified Vapours. To this in∣stance I might add the prodigious expansion of some Inflamable Bodies, when turned into actual flame, as Spirit of Wine, &c. Which being burnt in a Glass Lamp, so contrived that the Surface of the Liquor was still Circu∣lar, the waste made in ¼ of an hour was very small, tho' the Physical superficies of the Li∣quor must needs be successively rarified and ex∣panded, and fly away in streams; and if so lit∣tle of this Liquor was able to afford matter for flame so long, the same bulk of a more compact
Body may easily be supposed to be capable of be∣ing expanded to much greater Dimensions. And to these instances I shall add, that half a grain of Gun-Powder being exploded under a Vessel, whose Basis was eight Inches and its Altitude twenty; and its figure such, that it was more Capacious than a Cone of that size, the exploded Gun-Powder was observed to fill the whole Cavity of the Vessel as to sense, and successively issued out of the upper Orifice for half a quarter of an hour, so that the Diame∣ter of it being two Inches, many Myriads of visible Corpuscles, must be conceived to throng out in so long a time as they crouded out one after another: But to make a kind of an estimate of the Expansion of this Substance, we filled the Vessel full of Water, and found that the weight of it amounted to 320000 half grains: And if we suppose the specifick Gra∣vity of the Gun-Powder to be as much again as that of Water, we my probably guess the smoak to posses 500000 times the space that the Gun-Powder did. And as a further Ar∣gument of the great minuteness of small Parts of matter, I shall urge the smallness of Cheese-mites; which being so small as not to be dis∣cernable to a naked Eye, but when they move, must be made of extremely fine Parts, other∣wise there would not be room enough for an Organical Body; and if an Organical Body fur∣nished with all the Parts requisite for the Pre∣servation of Life be contained in so small a com∣pass, how minute must they be at the first, since the Eggs out of which they are formed bear but a small proportion to them, when perfectly for∣med,
and even comparative Observations tell us, that a Mite being ten days a hatching, the Rudiments of its Body at the first must bear but a small proportion to the bulk of that small Egg; and to this I shall add, that tho' these Creatures be so very small, yet I have been able to discern single hairs growing upon their Legs. Another instance of the Extension of mat∣ter minutely divided is this, viz. We dis∣solved a grain of filings of Copper in Spirit of Sal-Armoniack; pouring the Solution into a tall Cylinder four Inches in Diameter, and suc∣cessively filling it four times with distilled Wa∣ter, still pouring it off into a Conical Glass; which being done, and the weight of the Glass Cylinder deducted from the Joint weight of the Liquor contained in it, we found that one grain of Copper was able to give à Tincture to 28534 times its weight of Water, tho' its specifick Gravity is not half so much as that of fine Gold: and if we estimate the proportion not by weight but the bulk of these Bodies, the bulk of Water to Copper being as nine to one, the aforementioned number multiplyed by nine will give us the proportion betwixt the tinged and tinging the Body, so that one grain of Copper gives a colour to 256806 parts of Limpid Water, and by prosecuting this Ex∣periment further, I found that it was able to give a manifest Tincture to above 385200, and a faint but discernable one to above 513620 times its bulk of Water.
To shew that the Effluvia of Bodies may enter in at very small Pores, I shall intimate the effects of Cantharides held in the hands of some Persons; and on the Neck of my own Bladder when applyed outwardly to my Neck. And not only Scaliger tells us of Spiders in Gascony, whose Virulent Poyson would pene∣trate the Shooes of those that trod upon them, but Piso speaking of a Fish called Amoreatim, and by the Portugals Peize sola, he says, Quae mira sane Efficacia non solum Manum vel le∣vissimo attactu, sed & pedem, licet optime cal∣ceatum, Piscatoris incaute Pisciculum conterentis, Paralysi & stupore afficit, instar Torpedinis Eu∣ropeae, sed Minus durabili, Lib. 5. Cap. 14. And to shew that some Emanations, even of solid Bodies, may be subtle enough to get through the Pores even of the closest Bodies; I shall add, that a needle being Hermetically sealed up in a Glass Tube, and that laid upon Water, a Load-Stone would cause the Needle to leap up in it, and by the help of the Load-Stone, I could lead the Tube from one part of the Surface of the Water to another, as I moved the Load-Stone. And to shew that the Magneti∣cal Effluvia of the Earth, may penetrate so close and compact a Body as Glass, I shall add, that a Cylindrical piece of Iron being sealed up in a Glass Cylinder, and held in a Perpendicular Posture, it acquired such Mag∣netical Virtues, as to become a North Pole, and according to Magnetical Laws to drive a∣way the North Point of a Needle; but be∣ing inverted, and held under the Point of a
Needle, it became a South Pole, and attracted it. Another Proof of the great subtlety of Efflu∣viums, may be taken from the small decrease of Weight, by parting with store of such Ema∣nations; as Vitrum Antimonii, Crocus Metallo∣rum, and Quick-silver, the two first of which give a Vomitive Virtue to a vast quantity of Wine, without growing sensibly lighter, and so Quick-silver impregnates Water with a Virtue of killing Worms. And a piece of Amber∣grease which weighed about 100 or 120 Grains, being suspended three days in the o∣pen Air, lost not sensibly of its Weight, not∣withstanding the quantity of odoriferous Steams it must have parted with in that time. Assa Foetida, in about six Days, lost about half a quarter of a Grain; one Ounce of Nutmegs, in six Days, lost 5 Grains ½; and an Ounce of Cloves, 7 grains ⅝. And tho' Loadstones emit Effluvia without a sensible loss of weight, yet I suspect, that as these Magnetical Particles fly out of one Pole, they enter in at the other, and so make the Pores of the Load-stone their con∣stant Thorow-fares. To these Instances I shall add, that a Grain of Copper being dissolved in a spoonful of a Menstruum, and that put into a Glass-Lamp, the Metal tinged the Flame, which continued half an Hour and six Minutes; so that supposing the Flame to have streamed through a Cylindrical Pipe so long, that small parcel of Metal must be divided into a vast Number of small Parts; for Water, which ran through a Cylinder, whose Diameter was but half as great as that of the Flame, amounted to
above Nine Gallons, or Seventy two Pounds. The last Particular I shall insist upon, to shew the strauge subtlety of Effluviums, is the great quantity of space a small parcel of Matter may be extended to, and as to Sense possess it; this we may be enabled to guess at, by consi∣dering how long a Dog will distinguish the Scent of Partridges, Hares, &c. after they have left the Place, and will almost give one sufficient grounds to guess how long the Animal hath been gone from thence before. And I am told that a Blood-hound will not only perceive the Seent of a Man that hath gone over a piece of Ground several Hours before, but that the scent of a Deer will continue upon the Ground from one Day to the next. And if we consider that the eighth part of a Grain, can scarce be sup∣pos'd to be left on the Ground where such an Animal hath stood, and likewise at what di∣stance it may be scented, and how long that scent continues, it will be sufficient to convince us of the extraordinary minuteness of those Parts of Animals, which were rendered more apt to be dissipated in Effluviums, by their having been first strained through the Pores of their Bo∣dies. Nor is it less remarkable, that Birds, especially Crows, are able to discover the smell of Gun-powder at a considerable distance; and that they are, I am satisfi'd by my own Obser∣vations, as well as the Relations of others. And on this occasion I shall add, That Julius Palmarius, in his Tract de Morbis Contagiosis, observes, that Horses, Beeves, Sheep, and other Animals, have grown mad by eating the Straw that mad Swine have lain on; which may give
us Reason to suspect, that the Feet of distemper∣ed Animals may leave an Infection upon the Grass they tread on. But to prosecute the chief aim of our Dis∣course, I shall add, That since Corpuscles that are too minnte to be visible, may affect an Or∣gan of Sense; it is not improbable, but that there may be a great many which may be so fine as not to affect any one of our Senses, and consequently may continue an Atmosphere much longer than we are able to take notice of. So Forestus tells us of a Pestilential Contagion that was a long time preserved in a Cobweb. And Alexander Benedictus tells us of a Flock-Bed, which, when several Years after the Plague, it was beaten, it presently infected the By-stand∣ers. And Sennertus tells us that in Ʋratisla∣via, in six Months, six Thousand Men dyed of the Plague; and that from that time, the In∣fection was preserved in a Linnen Cloth, and being displayed in another Place, 13 Years after, it infected that Place likewise. And Trincavel∣la tells us, that an Infection was preserved a long time in Ropes, by which dead Persons were let down into their Graves. And an In∣stance of the like kind we are furnished with by Diemerbroeck, who acquaints us that an Apothe∣cary of his, turning over some Straw, upon which a Bed had lain which held an infected Person, the Steams immediately caused Blisters upon his Legs, and a Carbuncle which was a For∣tnight in healing. And to conclude this Chapter, I shall add, that I have a pair of Spanish perfum'd Gloves, which have continu'd their scent about Thirty Years, tho' they were not so much as shut up in a Box.
CHAP. V. Of the great Efficacy of Effluviums. THO' Particles of Matter which are minute, are looked upon to be unable to have any considerable Effects;O the great Efficacy of Effluviums yet I shall endeavour to shew, that they may have considerable Effects. I. Up∣on the account of their great Number. II. Their Penetrating Nature. III. The Celerity and Mo∣dification of their Motions. IV. The congruity of their Bulk and Shapes to the Pores of the Body they are to act upon. V. The Motion of one Part of a Body which they cause to act upon the other. IV. Their Aptitude to cause themselves to be as∣sisted by more Catholick Agents; tho' they may perform several things considerable upon these Accounts; yet sometimes two or three, or more, concur to the producing of the same effect. And, First, From what hath been deliver'd in the fore-going Chapter, it appears that the Effluvia of Bodies are very minute, and con∣sequently it will follow, they must be numerous, and that a great number of small Agents, when they act per Modum unius, may have conside∣rable Effects, is evident; since inundations of whole Countrie▪ may be caused by Showers of Rain when drops fall in multitudes; and ag∣gregates of small Sands, not only bound the Seas, but form Banks, upon which the greatest Ships are sometimes split; and tho' the Effects of a single Grain of Gun-powder is immaterial, yet prodigious things may be done by a great number of them; and tho' Vapours are made up of very small Particles, which seem to be ina∣ctive,
yet in moist Weather, they cause Salts to melt, wood to swell, and Viol-strings, if they be stretched too much, to break. And it hath been observed, that the invisible Steams of a newly whited Room are so offensive, that People who slept in such Places, have been found dead in the Morning, being suffocated with those Fumes; and tho' the Vapors which can issue out of such Bodies at once, cannot be sufficient to produce such Effects, yet if we consider that they continually succeed each other, as Wind out of an Aeolipile; their Number and Minuteness may enable them to cause considerable Effects. And that the subtlety and penetrating Nature of Effluvia, contribute much to their Effects; appears, since good Aqua-fortis and Spirit of Nitre are so penetrating, as in a little time to pervade the Corks with which the Bottle they are contain'd in are stopp'd, and to reduce them to a Pap. And running Mercury hath been found in the Heads of those that have been too much exposed to Mercureal Fumes. And in the Laboratories of Chymists, the Steams of Sulphur, Antimony, Arsnick, &c. make those stagger that less cautiously unlute the Vessels in which they have been sublimed or distilled. To which Instances may be added, the infectious Steams in the Plague which suddenly infect the internal Parts; and likewise the sudden. Effects of a Torpedo. And I prepar'd a Sal-Armoniac so powerful, that it restored a faculty of Smelling to one that had lost it a considerable time; which Virtues it had, besides those more com∣mon ones, of affecting the Eyes, Mouth and Sto∣mach. And on this occasion, I shall subjoin, that
the Steams of Water assisted by warmth, are sufficient to dissolve hard and solid Bodies, so that by Philosophical Calcination, solid pieces of Harts-horn are made so friable, as to be easi∣ly reduced to Powder, only by being hung over the Steams of distill'd Waters: And to this I shall add, that under several Places in the Tor∣rid Zone, the Dew is so penetrating, that it causes Knives to rust in their Sheaths, and Swords in their Scabbards, and even Watches in their Cases: And in England I have known hard Bodies become friable by the insinuation of Va∣pors into their Pores; and I have known solid and Mineral Bodies burst, by the powerful insi∣nuation of Effluviums. And that the Celerity of the Motion of mi∣nute Bodies, may contribute much to their Ef∣fects, appears from the Effects of Gun-powder, Aurum Fulminans, Flames, Whirl-Winds, and Winds. And I have made it appear, that those Odoriferous Steams which swim in the Air, and affect our Nostrils, are in too languid a Moti∣on, 'till enabled to affect the Sensory more powerfully, by running through the Nostrils in a Stream; and I have likewise made it appear, that Setting-Dogs, &c. will be much more af∣fected with a Scent, when the Wind Blows from the scent towards their Nostrils, than when it comes the contrary Way, the current of the Wind causing the Odoriferous Steams to affect the Sensory more briskly. And Electri∣cal Bodies exert that Faculty more strongly af∣ter Attrition, the emission of their Electrical Steams being by that means excited: And the Learned Faber hath observed, that if a Hare was
suspended near an Electrick when the Effluviums were too briskly agitated, it would not be at∣tracted, but driven away from it. And I know a certain substance made by distillation, whose smell in the Cold is very inoffensive, but when it is warm, it emits Steams more strong and penetrating than Sal Armoniac. And I have known solid Substances stink egregiously when excited to emit their Effluvia by Attrition. And as celerity of motion contributes to the Effects of subtile Bodies, so does the different modifica∣tion of that Motion; for as a Stick or a Javelin, hath different Effects when they fly with one end first, from what they have when they twirled round with a certain Rotation; and the sounds of Musical Instruments are different, according to the different determination of their Motion, And the Impressions made upon the ambient Air. And that, besides what we have already ta∣ken notice of, the congruity or incongruity of the Particles of Matter, in reference to the Bo∣dies they are to work upon, contribute much to their Effects, appears from the Effects of Light∣ning: For I have seen two tall drinking Glas∣ses so alter'd in their shape by the influence of Lightning, that the one was a little widened near the bottom, and the other so far bent, that it stood awry; the Beams of Lightning being able, in the twinkling of an Eye, to melt Glass; tho' in Glass Furnaces the Fire is sometime be∣fore it can produce that Effect. And I once saw Lead melted by Lightning, which left the Glass unaffected; and likewise other combustible stuff that was near it; and tho' it left these Things
untouched, yet it threw down part of a Wall, belonging to the House, by passing through it. And it is a common Observation, that Thun∣der, either by giving a determinate Concussion to the Air, or transmitting some Effluvia, turns Beer sowre; but having sealed some up in Glas∣ses Hermetically, the Thunder was not able to affect the Liquor contained in them; and it is a common practice to prevent Beer from sowr∣ing upon Storms of Thunder, to place Chafing-Dishes of Coals under the Barrels, the sulphu∣reous steams, being by that means so alter'd, as either not to be able to penetrate the Barrel, or not able to alter the Liquor. Another Way, by which considerable Effects are caused by Effluvia, is by exciting such a Mo∣tion in the Body they work upon, as to make one part of it act upon another. Instances of which may be brought from inanimate Bodies, as well as living ones, since some vigorous Load∣stones destroy the attractive Virtues of an Ex∣cited Needle in a trice; or give it a Virtici∣ty quite contrary to the former, without touching it; and these magnetical Emissions which must needs be very minute, since they are subtle enough to penetrate Glass, are able to take up a considerable weight of Iron; so that I have seen a light one which would take up Eighty times its weight. But the chief Instances I shall now insist on, are those wrought upon Animals; for it is evident, that our Organs of smelling are chiefly affected by such minute Particles of Mat∣ter as the finest Odours consist of; nor do they always affect us as Odours, since violent smells,
whether stinking or sweet, are able to cause very troublesome Head-achs. And the smell of a very pleasing Perfume may produce in a humane Body, which before was well and strong, both faintness, swoons, loss of sensible Respi∣ration, Intumescence of the Abdomen, seem∣ing Epilepsies, Convulsive motions of the Limbs, &c. And I had a Sal-Armoniack which would in a little time remove Hysterick fits, and recover People, who by the by-standers were judged to fall down in Epileptical fits, which sudden effects seem to depend on the consent of the Genus Nervosum. But, besides these effects of Odorous Bodies upon Women, I know a Man of a strong Body and a sanguine Constitution, who will be put into a violent Head-ach by the smell of Musk; and another to whom the smell of Roses was as offensive; and I know a Lady, who would presently swoon at the smell of Roses, if they were not speedily removed. And as these slight smells have proved offensive, so it is not much less considerable that the smell of Sal-Armoniack cures the Head-ach. Besides, the aforemen∣tioned effects of Effluvia, it is observed, that Women have miscarryed upon the stink of a Candle carelesly extinguished. And I not on∣ly know a Gentleman who will Vomit upon the smell of Coffee, but a Physician who will Vomit and Purge, if he does but smell at Electuarium Lenitivum: And I know another whom the smell of the grease which is about the wheels of a Hackney-Coach will make sick, and cause to Vomit, if it does but pass by him.
And not only smoak is offensive to the Eyes and Lungs; but the invisible steams of Sal-Armoniack. And besides, the aforementioned instances of the effects of Effluvia upon the Genus Nervosum, I shall add one of their Effects on the humours; for I know an Apothecary who upon the smell of Roses, hath such a Col∣liquation of Humours in his Head, that they set him a coughing, make him run at the Nose, and give him a sore Throat, and also by an affluence of humours make his Eyes sore. And as Effluvia may be enabled to perform several things on the account of the structure of particular Bodies; so they may effect seve∣ral things, by Virtue of the Fabrick and Laws of the Universe, for Bodies by Effluvia may be rendered fit to be wrought on by Light Magnets, the Atmosphere, Gravity, or some other Catholick Agent of the Universe. And to what instances have already been given of Bodies working upon others placed at a di∣stance, I might add the effects of contiguous Bodies, as Bloodstones, Cornelians, Nephri∣tick Sones, Lapis Malacensis, and some Amu∣lets, and other solid Substances externally ap∣plyed by Physicians, as Cantharides, &c.
CHAP. VI. Of the determinate Nature of Effluviums. Of the de∣terminate Nature of Effluviums.THO' Aristotle and his followers, have on∣ly distinguished the Exhalations of this Globe into those which he calls fumes, and which rising from the Earth, he terms hot and dry; and those Vapours which rise from the Water, which he calls hot and moist, in these words, ; yet besides these slight differences, since the Earth contains several Bodies, which have each of them distinct Atmosphere, we may probably conceive them to have their distinct and determinate natures; and even in fluid Bo∣dies Heterogeneous Parts may swim, which notwithstanding their fluidity may retain their determinate Nature, since Rock-Allom and Salt-Petre being dissolved together in Water, upon a gentle Evaporation, will each of them shoot into Crystals of their respective and de∣terminate Natures. And that Effluvia retain their determinate natures, tho' so small as to swim in the Air or Water, appears, since upon their Re-union they are of the same Nature with the Body that emitted them; as Water raised in Va∣pours condenses again into drops of Water: And Quick-Silver in Distillation, if it be raised with a convenient fire, will almost all be found in the Receiver, in the form of running Mercury: And if when Chymists are either making an Amalgama, or forcing the Mercury
away from it by the fire; they hold a piece of Gold in their Mouths, it will be white as if it were Silvered over. And not only Sul∣phur, but Camphire sublimed in close Vessels, unites into a Substance of the same Nature as the other, and tho' a Body be compounded of a Metal and another Mineral, and two or three Salts; yet upon the Purification of the Mixture from its grosser Parts, if the remain∣ing and finer Parts be minute enough and fine∣ly shaped, the wholy Liquor will ascend; and yet in the Receiver altogether recover its pristine form of a transparent fluid, compo∣sed of differing Saline and Mineral Parts, which is evident in the Distillation of Butter or Oyl of Antimony very well rectify'd; for this Liquor will pass into the Receiver dia∣phanous and fluid, tho', besides the Particles of the sublimate, it abounds with Antimonial Particles, carried over and kept invisible by the corroding Salt: And I am told, that Tin will retain its own Nature in the form of fumes or flowers, which is evident, since that white sublimate which is gathered above the Furnaces where the Ore is brought to Fu∣sion being melted down, will yield store of Tin. And besides these ways, the determinate natures of Effluviums, may be distinguished by their sensible Qualities, since the Exhalations which rise from several Bodies produced by Art, appear to be of different colours; tho' no external Heat is employed to raise them; for the fumes of Spirit of Nitre well rectify'd, when cold and stopped up, appear in the
Vial to be of a redish colour; and when the Vessel is unstopped they will ascend in the form of a redish, or Orange tawny Smoak. And Spirit of Salt or Oyl, will when exposed to the open Air, ascend in the form of a white Smoak; and so will a Volatil Tincture of Sulphur made with Quick-lime; and both this and that of Salt-Petre do by their smell, as well as operation, discover of what Nature they are; and I have observed, that the essenti∣al Oyl of Wormwood, being drawn off in a Copper Alembick Tinned, was not only green, but retained that colour when rectify'd in a Glass-Vessel; and tho' these essential Oyls be but the condensed Effluvia of Vegetables, yet they retain the genuine taste of the Bo∣dies from whence they were drawn. And not only Wormwood but Amber may com∣municate their taste, by Effluvia raised with∣out the help of Heat; for Wormwood having been kept in a close Room, not only affected the Nostrils strongly, but the Tongue with a bitter taste, and Amber kept in Spirit of Wine impregnated it sufficiently to give it a genuine taste, as well as smell; and that most essential Oyls retain their genuine Odours is very evi∣dent. And that the Effluvia of Bodies may affect even the Touch of Animals, may not only be argued from the effects perceived by some People upon changes of Weather, but by that memorable passage related by Diemerbroeck, who after he was cured of the Plague, it left such a change in some Parts of his Body, that he says, Ab illo periculo ad contagiosos mihi ap∣propinquanti
in emunctoriis successit dolor, vix fallax Pestis indicium. To which I shall add, that I knew one who could hear very soft whispers when ill of a Feaver, tho' the sound and healthful standers by could not; and I was told by a Lady, that she could tell by her smell, whether one that came to visit her had been in any place where the Ground was co∣vered with Snow. And I knew a Gentleman, whose Eyes were so tender during a Distem∣per he had in them, that he could discern and distinguish colours in the dark. And I am told, that a Blood-Hound found out a Man barely by scent, tho' he had passed through a Market Town, and several Crouds of People. And further instances may be brought from Obser∣vations made on Blood-Hounds, some of which will scent a Deer twenty four hours after. And a Gentleman told me, that he knew when his Dogs were in pursuit of a Fox or a Hare, because they ran with their Noses nearer the Ground after the latter, the scent of it not be∣ing so strong. And I prepared a Body of a Vegetable Substance, which, tho' actually cold, would impart its colour to a Metalline Plate; tho' separated from it by the interposition of a piece of Paper. But perhaps it may be Objected by some, that these Effluviums may be altered by unit∣ing with each other in the Air. To which it may be answered, That they may nevertheless reserve their determinate natures, tho' they act conjointly or so near it, that their distinct Operations cannot be perceived; as when two strings of a Musical Instrument are struck at the
same time, they both of them seem to make only one Impression upon the Ear. And if Spirit of Nitre be dropped into Oyl of Tartar per deliquium, upon an Evaporation of the su∣perfluous moisture, the Acid and Alkalious Particles will form Nitrous Concretions, whose taste will be different from that of either of the separate Ingredients: And so if an equal pro∣portion of Sal-Armoniack, be added to a strong solution of Pot-ashes or Salt of Tartar, a subtil urinous Spirit will come over in Distil∣lation; and also a Caput Mortuum, which is almost wholly a compounded Salt, differing enough from either of the Ingredients, especi∣ally the Alkalizate, in taste and other Quali∣ties. And to these Instances I shall add, that several flowers being aptly mixed in a Nose∣gay, and held at a distance they make a confused and joynt impression upon the Organ of smell∣ing; and so do Perfume made up of several In∣gredients; and Spirit of fermented Urine, and of Wine being well dephlegmed, will incorpo∣rate like Wine and Water, without affording the least dry Sediment; but if in a convenient Vessel, they be exposed to a moderate Heat, the ascending fumes will adhere to the upper part of the Glass, in the form of a white but tender Sublimate, different from either of the Liquors not only in consistence but taste and smell. And if Spirit of Salt and Nitre, be elevated by Distillation in the form of fumes, the condensed Liquor will dissolve Gold, tho' neither Spirit of Nitre nor of Salt would do so. And to demonstrate the Coalition of steams in the Air, I shall add, that having filled two
Vials, the one with Spirit of Salt, and the o∣ther with Spirit of Sal-Armoniack well rectify'd, the ascending fumes which before were invisi∣ble, working one upon another in the Air, form∣ed visible steams, which appeared like Smoak, but when they were removed a greater distance from each other, the separate and invisible steams were no longer discernable. And one thing relating to this Experiment which was remarkable was, that a drop of Spirit of Salt hanging at the end of a Glass stick, being held over the Orifice of a Vial with a long Neck, the ascending Vapours of Sal-Armoniack would form a Smoak, which would be visible till it was a quarter of a yard above the Glass; but if the drop was held within the Neck of the Vial, the aforementioned fumes would fall in∣to the Ball of the Glass, like a stream of Li∣quor, and spread it self like a mist upon the Surface of the Sal-Armoniack. Which Experi∣ment may help us to account for the sudden Invasion of Meteors and Clouds, especially in reference to the coming in or ceasing of seve∣ral Epidemical diseases; and more particu∣larly the Plague, which seems to depend on the Occult temper, and alterations of the Air, differently impregnated with subterrane∣al Effluvia. An Instance of which is related by Diemer∣broeck, who tells us of a Plague occasion'd by washing of foul Linnen with Soap, the Fumes of the Smoak uniting with other Effluvia in the Air, causing that Effect; to which might be added, what is observed about the ceasing of the Plague at Grand Cayro in Egypt, but enough of
that having been already delivered in another Place; I shall add here, that I have made a stain upon a Body by the invisible steams and Effluvia of another cold Body; I altered the Colour of that Stain by the invisible and cold steams of a Third. And to countenance my Conjecture of the Cause of Meteors, besides what hath been said of subterraneal Effluvia in another Place, I shall add the following Citation from Agrico∣la; who having mention'd, out of Ancient Hi∣storians, the raining of White and Red Li∣quors, subjoins. Ʋt autem majorem fidem habea∣mus Analium monumentis facit res, res illa de∣cantata, quae Patrium memoria in Suaevia acci∣dit; Aer enim ille stillavit guttas, quae lineas ve∣stes crucibus rubris, quasi sanguineis imbuebant. And it will not be thought strange that subter∣raneal Salts, Bitumens and Sulphurs, may be raised into the Air, if so fixed a Body as com∣mon Earth may, which the newly cited Author testifies. And that the odoriferous Particles of Plants reserve their determinate Nature much longer than we are wont to imagine, may appear; since one drop of Oyl of Cin∣namon, gave not only a taste to 14000 times its Bulk of Water, but withal, diffused a great number of odoriferous Particles through the ambient Air. The Last way we shall mention to evince the determinate Nature of Effluviums, is from their Effects on other Bodies. As the stupefying Ef∣fluvia of the Fish Amoreatim mentioned by Pi∣so. The effects of Opium and Hypnoticks upon a Boy, who whilst he was distilling them, cast
him into a sleep. And the Root and Juice of Mandragora is said to cast those that take it in∣to a deep Sopor like a Lethargy; and Levinus Lemnius tells us, that the Apples of the same Plant being laid in his Study, made him so slee∣py, that he could scarce recover himself: Au∣relaeus tells us, that the Poison of a Mad Dog hath been convey'd to one in the form of Ef∣fluvia; and Calius Aurelianus acquaints us, That some have become mad by being wounded only by the Claws of a mad Dog; and that one fell into an Hydrophobia, solo odore ex rabido cane attracto. And Matthiolus tells us of one who was poisoned only by putting his Hand into the Mouth of the mad Dog, without being bit; and to this I shall add, that Sennertus relates, that a Painter having opened a Box, in which Realgar had been contained, the Fumes being snussed up his Nostrils, presently caused a giddi∣ness in his Head, and fainting Fits. To these Instances I shall add, That several have been purged by the smell of Black Helle∣bore; and as Sennertus witnesses by the O∣dor of Coloquintida; and there are several other Things which purge when only externally applyed: And it is attested by approved Wri∣ters, that the Shadow of a Wallnut-Tree, with the Leaves on it, is very hurtful to the Head. And it is not only observed, That Birds will not so much as light upon those Poysonous Trees in the West Indies, called the Manchinello-Tree; and it is looked upon as safe for Men to eat of Fruit found in a strange Country, if it appears that the Birds have been pecking at them before. And Nico∣laus
Florentinus tells us of one, who drawing in∣to his Nostrils the Smoak of a burnt Spider, he was much disordered, and fell into a faint∣ing Fit, and was much disordered about the Heart, his Pulse being likewise weak; tho' after he was cur'd by a mixture of Treacle, Diamosc. and the Powder of Zedoary. And I saw a Berry called Maccu-buy in Ireland, which being pounded in a Mortar, caused the Head and Face of one that stood hard by, to swell enormously. And, To what hath been delivered of the deter∣minate Nature of Effluviums, I shall add, that Amber, Musk, Civet, &c. will communicate a Perfume to Gloves, tho at a distance off them; and contagious Distempers, as the Plague, Small-Pox, or Measles, may not only be communicated by immediate Contact, but by steams which issue from the Body of the sick Person. But to conclude this Chapter, I shall add the following Experiment, Viz. Having shut up an Ounce of a Volatile Tincture of Sulphur in a Vial, capable of holding at least twice as much, and having placed a Paper at some distance, and unstopped the Vial, the spreading Fumes presently caused what was writ with invisible Ink to become legible. And so would several Letters writ with a Solution of Sublimate in Water, some of them being more, and others less Black, according to their distances from the smoaking Liquor and other Circumstances: And when the Paper thus writ upon, was held over the Orifice of the Vial, tho' the Let∣ters were on the upper side, yet in a quar∣ter
of an Hour, they became legible; and as in some cases, this smoaking Liquor, with a solution of Sublimate, will produce a Precipi∣tate of a Silver Colour, so in some of the Co∣lourless Ink we found the like Colour. And I have performed the like with a couple of Li∣quors, wherein was neither Sulphur nor Sal-Ar∣moniac, nor Sublimate. And as a farther Proof of the great penetrancy of Effluviums, I shall add, that having a Paper which was writ on with this invisible Ink, betwixt six folds of Paper, these Fumes penetrated it in Ten Mi∣nutes, and turned the Ink Black; and another piece of the same Inked Paper, being placed betwixt the Leaves of a Book, the steams pe∣netrated Twelve in three Minutes, and turn∣ed the Ink blackish. CHAP. VII. Of the Porousness of solid Bodies. Of the Po∣rousness of Solids.THAT even solid Bodies are not desti∣tute of Pores, I am inclined to be∣lieve, because most solid Bodies, as Gems, &c. have once been in fluid Forms; and since Flu∣ids are generally made up of Particles of a determinate size and shape, they must needs leave some Pores betwixt them. Another Reason why I am inclined to think most Bodies porous, is their specific gravity; which would not vary were the Parts of them equally compressed and closed
together, but since Copper is heavier than Iron and Gold, as nineteen to one to its pro∣portion of Water, and Copper only as nine to one, it must follow, that the matter of Iron possesses as much space again as Gold and more. And tho' hardness is urged by some as an Argument of their Substance being condensed, yet I have elsewhere shewn, that tho' Diamonds are the hardest Bodies, they are far from be∣ing the heaviest, which is the only sign whether they be condensed or not. And since Metals themselves are made up of a Coalition of several Parts, it is impossi∣ble they should be so Physically adapted, as to∣tally implere spatium; since were Cubes made of Marble, it is impossible they should be so exactly Polished as every where to be con∣tiguous, since the Bodies employed to Polish them are observed to make little furrows up∣on them, and consequently leave little Inter∣vals or Pores. And that Wood is not void of Pores will appear, since Quick-silver hath been observed to penetrate the sides of a hollow Cylindrical piece of Wood, and when the Air was drawn out of my Pneumatical Instrument, the exter∣nal pressed so hard upon the outside of a Board which covered it, that tho' it was of strong Wood, and of a considerable thickness, yet it made its way into the Cavity of the Re∣ceiver, through the Pores of the Wood; and to these Instances I shall add, that the fumes of a Smoaking Liquor tinged a Copper Half-penny, through a broad thin shaving of Deal, tho' we could not discover any sensible Per∣foration;
and the same Experiment being a∣gain repeated with two, and a third with three shavings, they tinged the Copper Half-penny, tho' not in so little time, nor quite so conspi∣cuously. And, That baked Clay is not void of Pores is evident, since Oyl will soak through strong and well baked Earthen Vessels, and so will Solutions of Nitre and some other Salts; and very few except Hassian Crucibles will keep Salt of Tartar long in Fusion without being penetrated by them. And Vitriol and Salt-Petre have been observed to lose much of their weight when distilled in Earthen Vessels, the subtle and spirituous Parts flying away through their Pores. And I am told, that those Juggs that are made of Earth, hardened suffi∣ciently to strike fire with a good Stell, have their Pores pervaded by the most subtle Parts of Spirituous Liquors; and it hath been found by Experience, that Spirituous Cyder hath sweat through the sides of Stone Bottles; which manifested it self by its taste: And I have found, that Silver dissolved and turned into a horny Substance with Aqua Fortis, be∣ing kept in Fusion in an Hassian Crucible, se∣veral Particles penetrated the Pores of it, and appeared on the outside. And to prove that natural Stones are po∣rous, I shall intimate, that I had a Vessel made of Stone sent from the West-Indies, through whose Pores Water would sweat; and if the Transparency or Opacity of Bodies proceeds from a rectitude or crookedness of Pores, which makes them fit or unfit to transmit the Rays
of Light, Oculus Mundi will be an Argument of the Porosity of Stones; since whilst it is dry and in the Air it is opacous, but when it hath lain a while in the Water it becomes trans∣parent like Amber, but soon loses its Diapha∣neity when exposed to the Air again, and so Paper wet with Water becomes more transpa∣rent, but loses of that Transparency when dry∣ed again; and to favour this explication, I shall add, that an Oculus Mundi having been weigh∣ed after it was taken out of the Water, it ap∣peared to be heavier than before. And since several Stones, as Granates, Emeri, &c. con∣tain Mineaal Parts, it is impossible they should be exactly contiguous without leaving some Pores betwixt them and the Parts of the Stone; and for the like Reason all artificial Gems made by Fusion, and tinged with Heteroge∣neous Pigments must be supposed to be fur∣nished with Pores; and since natural Gems are made up of Stony Ingredients, and Mine∣ral Parts, for the same Reason we must suppose them to be furnished with Pores likewise; and the like may be concluded in reference to all Heterogeneous and compound Substances; as Marcasites, Load-Stones, &c. And that white Marble is not void of pores may be argued not only from its easie Solution by Aqua For∣tis, Spirit of Salt, &c. but from its aptness to be tinged with Vapours, that are not fretting, so that red and other colours may be soaked into it as Oyl is into Wood. And having ce∣mented some clear Fragments of native Cry∣stal with a composition of some Volatile Mi∣nerals, together with a Salt or two, and hav∣ing
suffered the Crucibles to cool leisurely, se∣veral of the Fragments were stained here and there with different colours, some more and o∣thers less dull; but whether the Tincture these pieces of Crystal received proceeded from some of the finest of the Mineral Parts, imbi∣bed into the Stone when flawed with too much haste; and whether upon cooling those flaws did not grow too close to be discernable to the Eye, I shall not determine, but shall add, that it hath been observed, that Rubies when Po∣lished upon the Wheel, and very hot, have seemed full of cracks, which upon their cool∣ing wholly disappeared. And that Metals themselves are porous may be argued, from their aptness to be dissolved in proper Menstruums. And especially by lay∣ing Sulphur and thin Plates of Copper SSS, in a Crucible upon which another was luted, to keep the Sulphur from taking fire; for having kept them thus about three hours in a heat, which was sufficient to melt the Sulphur, but not the Metal, when it was taken away from the fire and cooled, we found, that the Sulphur had so penetrated the Body of the Copper as to turn most of it into a brittle Substance, which would crumble away with ones fingers, being altered not only in Texture but colour, some being of a dirty dark colour, others of a violet, and many of the Plates when they were broken, seemed to have been divided into two Plates, and to have a manifest distance betwixt them, and we could likwise discern the fibers of the Metal, extend themselves from one side of the Copper Plates to the other. And that the Sul∣phur
penetrated into the Pores of the Cop∣per-Plates might not only be discerned by their increase of weight, and bulk, but a Blue Flame which would discover it self when they were laid upon quick Coles. And by a like Experiment, we found that the Body of Sil∣ver, Tin, and Lead, might be penetrated. And not only Sulphur, but Arsnick will pe∣netrate thus into the Body of Metals. And I know a Pigment which tinged the Body of Copper, so as to give it the Colour of Gold: And Perfumes do not only continue long in the Pores of Glasses; but I am told by one, that he had a Watch, whose Metal∣line Case was richly perfumed. And I re∣member I made a Substance much like Gold, which retained several Mercurial Particles in it, and being cast into a Ring, it was observed to have manifest Effects on the Eyes of several Persons. And I am told that the Off-spring of the Granadine Moors, had an Art of curiously perfuming the Weapons they forged; and the same Nobleman who told me this, acquainted me that he had a Fowling-piece whose Barrel was perfumed, but its smell was much fainter after it had been scou∣red. And, Lastly, To shew that even common Glass is not void of Pores, I shall reduce what I have to say, and comprise it under the following Propositions.
PROP. I. It's very probable, that Glass may be pierced into, at some distance, even by visible and tangible Bodies. And besides the Arguments already offered to evince the porosity of Bodies, I shall add, That a certain Spirit of Salt being kept in a Glass in a cool Place, it corroded some Parts so much as to leave them as thin as a piece of Paper; and lined with a white Substance, which seemed to be some of the Alkali of the Glass and Sand corroded by the Saline Spirits of the Menstruum, and coagulated with them into this odd kind of concrete; and this wrought no higher than the Liquor contained in the Glass. And besides this, I had another Vi∣al corroded by a distilled Liquor of Vitriol, which contained more Phlegm than Oyl; and to this Relation I shall add, That a Pound of Dantzick Vitriol, and a Pound of Sea-Salt, the one calcin'd lightly, and the other decrepita∣ted, being distilled in a well coated Retort, by degrees of Fire, giving at the last a very strong one; when the Vessel was taken off, we found that the Heat had here and there melted it; and that the Fluxed Caput Mor∣tuum had corroded the Glass, fetching off Films from it; and those Parts which did not appear to the Eye manifestly wasted; seem∣ed by their brittleness to have been penetra∣ted; so that their Texture was spoiled by the Saline and Vitriolate Particles.
PROP. II. Common Glass is not ordinarily permeable by Chymical Liquors, tho' strong and subtle, nor by the directly visible or odorable expirations of Bodies; tho' absolutely speaking, it is permea∣ble to some corporeal Substances. And, First, It is manifest, not only that se∣veral Spirituous Liquors and Menstruums, may be kept in Glass Vessels without sweating through them, but even distilled in them; and I have found that neither Salt of Tartar would lent by being held in a Glass Bubble in the Water, nor would Sal-Armoniac penetrate it, so as to make its way out. But it is to be considered, that some Circumstances may vary these Ob∣servations, as when the Texture of Glass is too lax and open; or when the Bodies are vehe∣mently agitated with Heat, or are too subtile; and have a certain congruity with the Pores of the Glass. For I have seen a sort of Glass so soft, that not only hot Liquors, but moderate∣ly Corrosives would work upon it; and I have heard, that some sort of Glass is apt to be prejudiced by corrosive Liquors. And I was told by one, That he several times observ∣ed Gold to penetrate the Pores of Glass; and I have observ'd Fumes to make their way through the Pores of ordinary Glass, upon di∣stilling of Spirit of Harts-horn with a strong Fire. And that the Pores of Glass are penetrated by some Substances, is evident, by the Effects
of Cold and Heat, on Bodies contained in seal∣ed Glasses; and that so gross a Body as the Ef∣fluviums of Earth will penetrate Glass, and work on Iron contained in it: And Light it self appears evidently to be contained in close∣ly sealed Glasses; and by a cantinued Heat, I have found the Parts of Fire to penetrate Glass, and add to the weight of Iron sealed up; and having tryed this Experiment with Filings of Copper, I found that their Colour was much altered, some of them being adorn∣ed with exceeding vivid Dyes; which they yet retain without being increased in weight, as if they were not able to stick themselves fast enough in the Pores of the Metal, to add to its Gravity. And I had a Liquor which would va∣ry its Colour, as if something in the Air was successively communicated to it, and receded again. And to these, other Instances may be brought from what may be observed in painting Glass; for the Pigment being laid upon the Glass, and that placed upon a Bed of Lime, and then continued in a violent Heat, the Pores of the Class will be so opened, as either to im∣bibe the Parts of the Pigment, or to vitrifie and mix with it: And I have found, that by lay∣ing prepared Silver upon Glass, and placing that upon live Coals; when it was nealed a while, by giving it a sufficient degree of Heat, the Glass will acquire a Yellow, and almost a Golden Colour, which is not to be washed off; the way of preparing this Silver, is not al∣ways the same, the Glass-painters usually ad∣ding to it Antimony, Yellow Okre, or the like.
But since the Colour proceeds from the pene∣tration of the Silver into the Pores of the Glass; I usually make use of the Powder of Silver calcined, by burning Sulphur upon thin Plates; and I have often coloured Glass barely by the use of Leaves of Silver laid upon the surface of the Glass, and moistened with something to keep it from flying away. And I have often observed that tho' the Glass betwixt and the Light appeared Yellow, yet being held from it, it appeared Blue; which is a Confirmation of what we have inferred from the variation of Colours, in a Tincture of Lignum Nephri∣ticum; Viz. That they may be solved by Me∣charical Principles. And that the Colour of Glass tinged, proceeds from an Incorporation of the Parts of a Pigment with it, tho' they penetrate not the whole Substance, but tinge the superficies, (as I observed in Glass Plates, which were part of the Windows of St. Paul's Church before it was burnt) may be urged, since the Parts of the Silver may be wrought on by the fix'd Salts in the Glass, and afford different Colours, according to the difference of the Bo∣dies that work upon them, as Copper with Spi∣rit of Urine, give a deep Blue; with Spirit of Salt, a fair Green; and with Aqua Fortis, a Co∣lour partaking of both. And in making Glass of Lead, with Minium and White Sand, or Crystal, the Glass will be of an Amethystine Colour, but if you add a due proportion of calcin'd Copper, the Metal will give it a good Green; so as to pass for no bad Eneruld▪ and I remember, that distilling some Gold in a Retort, amalgamed with such Mercury as would
grow Hot with it in the Cold; the Matter did, before it flew away, perfectly stain an Inch in the Diameter of the bottom of the Glass, with a Colour, which, held from the Light, appeared like that of the better sort of Turquoises; but when interposed between the Window and the Eye, appeared of a some what Golden Colour. And Gold incorporated with Mercury, and kept in digestion, when the Fire was once very vehement, it burst the Vessel, and flew away, but tinged the lower part of the Glass quite through, with a glorious Red Colour, not inferior to that of Rubies. CHAP. VIII. Of the Porousness of Animal Bodies. Of the Po∣rosity of Animal Bodies.THE First Argument I shall urge for the Porosity of Animal Bodies, is from their Structure; for since they are most of them compounded of dissimilar, or similar Parts, we cannot suppose those so exactly united as not to leave Pores and Intervals betwixt them, whose Number and Variety must be very great. A Second Argument of their Porosity, may be deduced from the apposition and consumpti∣on of their Nutriment; and which may be illustrated by observing that those moist Par∣ticles with which the Earth is moistened, be∣ing agitated by the Heat of the Sun and Air, those that happen to be commensurate
to the Pores of the Root are impelled into it, and thence conveighed into the other Parts of the Tree, being conveighed in the form of Sap, which passing through new strainers re∣ceives alterations requisite to turn it into Wood, Bark, Leaves, Fruit, &c. And in young thriving Animals it cannot be imagined, how the nourishment should be conveighed to all the Parts, without supposing them furnish∣ed with Pores for its reception and pas∣sage. Another Argument of the Porosity of Ani∣mal Bodies, may be brought from the plenty of Humours carried off by sweat, and insensi∣ble Transpiration. And by the help of good Microscopes we may discern Pores in the skins of Animals, and especially in the inward sides of Gloves which are nothing but skins dressed; and they are further evident, since Quick-silver readily passes through the Pores of Sheeps skins, and leaves the dross behind in the Leather; and the like I have tryed with the skin of a Man's Arm tanned, which Pores according to Steno and Malpighius, are the Excretory Vessels of the Glandulae Miliares contained in the skin. And that the skins and shells of Eggs are not void of Pores, appears, since the moisture con∣tained is so far dissipated through them as to diminish their weight. And Sanctorius in his Medicina Statica tells us, that if the Meat and Drink taken one day amounts to eight Pound, five Pound will be carried off by insensible Transpiration. And he elsewhere says, that in the space of twenty four hours n the Winter time a healthful Body may ex∣hale
fifty ounces or more, a great part of which is carried off through the Pores of the Membranes of the Aspera Arteria: And if ones finger in hot Weather be held to the Surface of any cold Body, it will presently be sullyed over with the steams that issue out of the Pores of the skin. And their Porosity is further confirm∣ed by observing, how soon those black and blue spots in the skin occasioned by bruises are re∣moved: for which use Helmont employs white Bryony root, and I have seen a Poultess of chop∣ped Hyssop and fresh Butter remove the Pain, and black colour of a contusion in a little time. And not only the Skins but the Membranes of Bodies are stocked with Pores, since the Bladder of a dead Animal appears to be full of them; for if Salt of Tartar be put into a Blad∣der, and it be then immersed in Water enough of it will penetrate the Bladder to dissolve the Salt and render it Liquid; and the like succeed∣ed, but much more slowly when the Experi∣ment was tryed with Sugar; and some say, that Syrups made this way, instead of using or∣dinary Water, are much more preferable. And as a further instance of the Porosity of the shells of Eggs, I shall add, that one having been immersed in very sharp Vinegar, tho' the shell was part of it consumed, yet being taken out and wiped, it was considerably swelled and heavier than before, the Menstruum being imbi∣bed and insinuated into the Pores of it. And I am not only told, that the Chineses had a way of salting Eggs, but I found by coating one over with Clay, after it had lain some time in
Brine, the substance contained tasted evident∣ly Salt. And I know a Physician who was af∣fected with a giddiness upon the use of Clysters of Sack, and another told me, that having ap∣plyed Tobacco to the sore Leg of one of his Patients, it caused her Stomach to turn, or actu∣al Vomiting; and another told me, that he used to Vomit himself, by applying Decoctions of Tobacco to his wrists or other extream Parts, and it is a common custom to Purge Children by the Application of external things; and it hath been observed, that Bathing the sore Heads of Children, with a Decoction of Tobacco hath caused a giddiness. And a Virtuoso told me, that having taken another by the Hand, which was gently besmeared with Oyl, it gave him three or four stools presently. And to what hath been delivered of the Porosity of Membranes, I shall add the aptness of Lute-strings, to imbibe into their Pores moist Particles; and also the Metastasis or Translati∣ons of Morbifick matter in diseased Bodies; as the matter which causes a Feaver, being dis∣charged upon the Brain causes a Delirium; and other Distempers as it is discharged upon the Pleura, the Membranes of the Chest, the Throat or Guts. Another Argument of the Porousness of Ani∣mal Bodies, may be drawn from their aptness to imbibe Effluvia from without, as when Can∣tharides externally applyed affect the Bladder; to which instance may be added the effects of Plasters, and Oyntments, and Pericarpia; for I have often cured Agues with a Mixture of ∣ians, Hops, and Bay-Salt; and it is vulgarly
known, that Mercury externally used in Oynt∣ments will salivate. To which may be added the effects of Periapta and Appensa; of Blood∣stones in stopping of Hemorragies, and of a∣nother kind of Stone made use of by the Indians in Obstructione Menstruum. And I have found my self that the Moss of a dead Man's skull would stop an Hemorrhage, as soon as warmed by the contiguous skin. And Zwelfer tells us of one who preserved several from the Plague, by using Helmonts Troches of Toads in Amu∣lets; and several of these Troches being put upon the Plague sores of the infected, they were afterwards cured by the use of vulgar Re∣medies. And to these I shall add, that having drawn a Spirit from a Mixture of flowers of Brim∣stone, powdered Sal-Armoniack, and good Quick-lime in equal quantities, by degrees of fire in a Retort till the sand be red hot, if a piece of Copper be foulded up in Sheeps Leather, and held over the Vial it is contained in, the Metal will be tinged with the rising fumes, without discolouring the Leather; and the same will succeed, only more slowly, through a double fold of Leather: And all the alteration the Leather received from these per∣vading fumes was, that they gave it a sulphu∣reous smell. And this Experiment may favour the accounts we have of the Effects of Light∣ning, which hath been observed to discolour the money in Men's Pockets, without burning them; and the same effect hath been taken no∣tice of by some, who have ascended a burning Mountain in America. And it is observed, that
Lambs Leather hung up in the Air, acquires a moisture, which adds considerably to its weight. And to these instances may be added, the effects of Cantharides upon some that only carried them in their Pockets, the Effluviums of them having caused them to piss Bloody Urine. And as a further Confirmation of the Porousness of Bodies I shall subjoyn, that the Permeating Li∣quor above mentioned had the like effect upon Copper, through the tough skin of an Egg, and likewise through a wet Sheeps Bladder; and to confirm what I have said, of the Po∣rousness of Animal Bodies I shall add, that a Gentleman who had a long time a Perforati∣on in his Thorax, and was wont to inject me∣dicated Liquor often to cherish the Parts, and likewise to wear a silken Bagg stuffed with A∣romaticks upon the Orifice, he not only had the Taste of the Liquors in his Mouth, but the Aromatick Bag, when fresh, would perfume his Breath in Respiration. And Galen tells us, that Honey and Water having been injected into the Thorax, have been discharged through the Aspera Arteria by coughing. And in a Man who was troubled with a dry short Cough, we found some white curdled Matter betwixt the Pleura and the intercostal Muscles, which seemed to occasion the Cough by some noxious Effluvia transmitted to his Lungs. And to these Instances I shall add, that it seems probable that these Humours collected in the Abdomen of an Hydropical Person, can be carrled off no other way but through the Pores of Membranes, upon the use of Diuretick and Purging Medicines. And an Instance not much
inferior, is the Translation of the Matter of an Empyreuma, so as to be voided by stool or U∣rine; and I have observed my self, that when I have been present at the Dissection of a Dog, whose Blood smelled very rank, the Excrements evacuated by siege, some time after, would re∣tain that Odour. And a famous Surgeon and Anatomist relates, That one who was ill of a Dropsey, judged to arise from a Schirrus of the Spleen; by applying a large Spunge dip∣ped in Quick-lime-water, to the Region of the Spleen, the Schirrus was dissolved, and the Hydropical Humor evacuated. And Galen tells us, that part of the Humors collected, upon the breaking of a Bone, is discharged through the Skin, whilst the Callus is a forming. And not to repeat what Arguments have been already made use of, to prove the Poro∣sity of Animal Substances in general; that the Nails of Animals are porous, may be argued from their aptness to be tinged with a Soluti∣on of Silver in Aqua Fortis, or of Gold in A∣qua Regis; the former giving them a dark and black Colour; and the latter, tinging them with Purple Spots; which would continue, 'till by the growth of the Nail, they were forced to be pared off. And one thing in these Tinctures worthy our Notice is, that tho' the Menstruums are Acid, and Corrosive, yet the Tinctures are not, the Taste of the Tincture of Silver being bitter, and the other styptick. And the same method may be taken to prove the porosity of Ivory; since a Tincture of Silver in Aqua Fortis will tinge it with a dark and blackish Colour, which is not to be washed off.
And I have long since tryed, that a Solution of Gold will give it a sine purple Colour; and that too when both the Ivory and the Liquor were cold. Copper dissolv'd in Aqua Fortis, stains Ivory with a bluish Colour. And even in the Cold without the Use of Corrosives, I have stained Ivory with a permanent Blue, like a Turquois, by suffering a Solution of Copper in Sal-Armoniac to dry upon it. But to return to the Porosity of Bones; it may be argued from the Marrow found in the Cavities of them; since nourishment must needs be conveyed to it, and it is not improbable that Blood Vessels penetrate at the least some depth into the substance of Bones, tho' the Juice re∣ceived from them, may afterwards be convey∣ed through the more internal Parts of them; for we see that the Lower Jaw is perforated by a Nerve, and also a Vein and an Artery to carry and return Blood for the Nourishment of the Teeth; and I have been told that Blood-vessels have been observed by good Anatomists, to enter into the substances of larger Bones; and Blood hath not only been observed in the cavities of the Bones of younger Animals, but in the spungy Substance of several larger Bones. To which may be added in favour of their Porosity; the black∣ness which they acquire when put into a com∣petent heat, and the fatness which they af∣ford; as also their specifick Lightness, and their aptness to be corroded with sharp Men∣struums. And Bones are observed in moist Weather, not only to grow heavier, but they imbibe the moisture of the Air so much, as evi∣dently to swell. And to these Instances I shall
subjoin what Observations I have made on large Ox-bones. Nov. 15. we weighed two (entire or unbroken) Marrow-bones, and found the one to weigh twenty nine Ounces half a Dram, and the other twenty four Ounces four Drams and thirty Grains. November 24. The former weigh∣ed twenty nine Ounces six Drams, and the lat∣ter twenty five Ounces, one Dram, and thirty Grains. December 28. The former weighed twenty nine Ounces, three Drams, and fifty five Grains; and the latter twenty four Oun∣ces, seven Drams, and thirty nine Grains. June 7th, The next Year the former weighed twenty nine Ounces, two Drams; and the lat∣ter twenty four Ounces, seven Drams; from whence it appears, that Bones are Porous, since they imbibe and lose moist Effluvia again. And that there may be Vessels fine enough in the substance of Bones, to convey Nourishment, may be rendred probable, by what the Learned Sennertus hath observed, viz. That Hairs being cut in the Plica Polonica, they have been ob∣served to bleed, so that they seem to be made up of a Bundle of cylindrical Pipes. And as a further Instance of the Porosity of Bones, I shall add, that Mercury hath been found lodged in the Bones of those that have been salivated in the Pox. And the same is attested by Eusta∣chius Rudius (apud Sennet.) Lib. 5. de Morbis Acutis, Cap. 15. And what hath been said may serve to favour the Use of Amulets and Periapta; or at least discountenance their being too sud∣denly rejected.
CHAP. IX. Of the Natural History of Human Blood. PART. 1. Containing a List of Titles for the History of Human Blood. Of the Na∣tural Histo∣ry of Hu∣man Blood.BEfore I proceed to enumerate the Titles laid down for a Natural History of Human Blood, it may be requisite to advertise, that the first Set which I call primary, and to which those in the Appendix are secondary ones, con∣sist of such as offer themselves to the View at the First sight, which need not be either nicely Methodical, or accommodated to any Hypo∣thesis. The second Class consists of such as are to be ranged into a better order, being of a greater extent and more comprehensive, so that one Topick may be branched into several sub∣ordinate ones, or secondary Titles. And from the Materials drawn together under this Head, may be deduced a Set of Titles, reduced into an inchoate Natural History of the Subject they have Relation to. And since the Subject to be treated of is ve∣ry difficult or comprehensive, as the Genera∣tion of Living Creatures, Magnetism, Fermen∣tation, Gravity, &c. it may be useful, if not necessary, to interpose betwixt the Titles of the last, and those of the first Order, a Set of Titles that may be called of the middle Or∣der
or Classis; in which the Nature of the Subject is more narrowly look'd into. Titles of the first Order for the Natural History of the Blood of Healthy Men. Titles for the Natural History of Blood.I. Of the Colours of Human Blood, Arteri∣al and Venal. II. Of the Taste of Human Blood. III. Of the Odours of Human Blood. IV. Of the Heat of freshly emitted Human Blood; which is observed to be much violenter after it hath run a while, than when it first began. The Blood that came out of the Veins of a young Gentlewoman, falling upon the Ball of a Ther∣moscope, caused the Liquor to ascend above an Inch nearer the smaller and upper Ball of the Glass. And in another Tryal it was raised almost as high as to the Ball of an ordinary Thermoscope; but being held in the Blood of a healthful and lusty Man, the Heat raised the tinged Liquor a good way into the upper Ball; which was high∣er than the Heat of the Air in the Dog-days u∣sually does, and the Blood of a healthful Man continued its Heat so lo long, that it raised the tinged Liquor three or four Fingers breadth when it was coagulated. V. Of the inflamability, and some other Qua∣lities of Human Blood. A piece of Human Blood being dryed 'till it was fit to be powdered, and then held in the flame of a Candle, it took Fire, and afforded a flame not much unlike that which caused it, burning with a Crackling noise, and here and there melting; and if it was laid upon live Coals, and now and then blown, it
would yield a very yellow Flame, and during its Deflagration, would seem to fry upon the Coals, and in a great measure to melt into a Black Substance almost like Pitch. And some of the Powder of Blood being cast into the flame of a Candle, they took Fire in their pas∣sage, and flashed not without some noise, as if they had been Rosin. VI. Of the Aerial Parts naturally mixed with Human Blood; and also found in its di∣stinct Parts. VII. Of the Specifick Gravity of Human Blood entire. It may be different in several Persons, according to their Sex, Age, Consti∣tution, &c. as also in the same Person, accord∣ing to the time of the Year, the Day, or, as it is taken out at a less or greater distance from a Meal. But to make an Estimate of its Speci∣fick Gravity, we took the Blood of a sound Man, and put it into an oblong Glass; and when it was setled, we marked with a Diamond, that part of the Glass to which the Liquor wrought; and then weighing the Glass, and the Blood contained in a very Tender Ballance; we poured out the Blood, and having washed the Vessel, we filled it up to the same Mark, and then weighed it in the same Ballance; and then weighing the Glass, and deducting that from the weight of the Glass, and the two Liquors, the Water weighed nine Ounces, six Drams, and fifty Grains. And the Blood equal to it in Bulk, weighed ten Ounces two Drams, and four Grains, so that the Blood being three Drams and fourteen Grains heavier, it was about /2 part heavier than Water.
VIII. Of the Specifick Gravity of the Fibrous and Red part; and of the serous part of the Blood. IX. Of the Consistence of entire Human Blood. X. Of the Disposition of Human Blood to Concretion; and the time wherein it was per∣formed. XI. Of the Liquors and Salts that coagulate Human Blood. Clotted Blood being kept some Hours in Spirit of Wine, which is a Men∣struum fit to dissolve some Bodies, it was taken out as hard as if it had been dryed by the Fire. XII. Of the Liquors and Salts that obstruct or dissolve its Coagulation. XIII. Of the Liquors, &c. that preserve Hu∣man Blood. XIV. Of the Mixture that Human Blood may receive from Aliments. XV. Of the spontaneous or Natural Analysis of Human Blood into a serous and a fibrous Part. XVI. Of the respective Quantities of the se∣rous and fibrous part of Human Blood. XVII. Of the differences betwixt the serous, and the Red part of Human Blood. XVIII. Of the Artificial or Chymical Analy∣sis of Human Blood; and first of its Spirit. XIX. Of the Volatil Salt of Human Blood, and of its Figures. This Salt is so fusible, that one part of it may be brought to boil, whilst the other flies way; and this Observation will hold in most Volatil Salts. And tho' this Salt, when sublimed, looks white and Clean, and a very homogeneous substance, yet I am apt to
think, that it is made up of Parts of Matter of sizes and shapes different enough, for having weighed some Grains of re-sublimed Salt of Hu∣man Blood, that seemed pure, its smell was very strong and diffusive, so that one would have expected it to fly away in a little time, but we observed that it was very little diminished in seven or eight days time; yet what remain∣ed had lost its Odour, but retained a saline Taste; and being put upon a Solution of Sub∣limate in common Water, turned it White, so that its diffusive and penetrant Humour seem∣ed to depend on some more volatil Parts of the Blood. But it may be a Question to be solv'd by further Experience, whether the fixedness of this Salt may not proceed from the Coalition of an Acid Salt in the Air. A Dram of Volatile Salt of Human Blood sublimed in a Lamp-furnace, was put into com∣mon Water, and when a Thermoscope was brought to its right temper, being immersed in this mixture, the tinged Spirit of Wine mani∣festly subsided about 2/10 parts of an Inch; tho' a considerable part of the Salt lay undissolved in the bottom of the Water. And when the Liquor would descend no further, we added to the Solution strong Spirit of Nitre, 'till it would no longer make a manifest Conflict with the Salt; and then we observed, that whilst the Conflict lasted, the Spirit of Wine rose above three Inches and a half higher than the station it stood at before. The figure of this Salt may be either considered in reference to single Grains, or an Aggregate of them, when they are raised and sublimed to the top of the Glass;
the latter of which may be best observed, when they fasten themselves to the inside of the Glass that is set to receive them; for in the begining of the Operation, one may ob∣serve the little saline Concretions to lye in rows, sometimes straight enough, and sometimes more or less crooked, with different Coherings and Interferings, so that they sometimes represent either Trees, or their Branches or Harts-horn, &c. which are casual figurations depending on se∣veral accidental causes and circumstances, as the degree of fire made use of to sublime the Salt, the quantity of the ascending matter in reference to the Capacity of the Vessel that receives it. And the like diversity of Configu∣rations I have observed amongst the Salts of other Volatile Salts, as well as those of Hu∣man Blood. And as for the single grains of the Salt of Human Blood, I discovered a good many of them to be finely shaped; but whe∣ther they were accidental or not, experience must determine. But these figures were only observed in the sublimate of the first Distilla∣tion, for those obtained by rectifying the Salt and distilling it again, were of a conside∣rable bigness and solidity tho' differently sha∣ped, some of them being Cubes, others Paral∣lelopipeds, others Octoedrons, being almost like grains of Allom; but most of them prettily shaped; being comprehended by Planes, smooth, finely figured, and aptly terminating in solid Angles, as if the concretions had been cut and polished. Another way I took to discover the figures of the Salts of the Blood, was to rectifie the
Spirit, so that it may be fully satiated with the Salt, whilst the Liquor continues warm; for when it is refrigerated, a number of saline Concretions of different sizes, several of which shoot into very smooth Crystalline Plates pret∣tily figured, having their broad and parallel Surfaces of an Hexagonal or an Octogonal figure, regular enough. A drachm of dry Volatile Salt of Blood, being dissolved in some distilled Water, we dropped into it good Spirit of Nitre, till the two Liquors would no longer manifestly act one upon another, and when the conflict ceas∣ed, we slowly evaporated the superfiuous moisture, which steamed almost all away be∣fore the saline part would coagulate. At length it became dry, and the middlemost part ap∣peared in the form of thin Crystals, not un∣like those of Salt Petre; but the rest which was by much the greatest part of the Concretion, seemed to be a confused mass without any di∣stinct figure; and this mass weighed but twelve grains above a drachm; so that Volatile Salt of Blood may be satiated with a fifth part of its weight of the saline Parts of Spirit of Nitre. This Salt exposed to the open Air in a win∣dow was very apt to run per Deliquium, and a little of it being put upon a live Coal, it melt∣ed and seemed to boil; and towards the end made a noise, and afforded a flame yellower than that of common Nitre. XX. Of the Phlegm of distilled Human Blood. XXI. Of the two Oyls of Human Blood. By distillation in a Retort, it affords an Empy∣reumatical
and a very fetid Oyl, whose colour is almost black; which seems to be occasioned by the increase and opacous redness of the Liquor, since some of it being spread thin upon Glass, and held against the light, appeared yellow, or of a reddish colour, as they lay thicker or thiner upon it, but when it was well dryed before committed to Distillation, it yielded a greater quantity of Oyl, so that once out of a Pound of not over-dryed Blood, we obtained an ounce and a half of Oyl, and from another we had a much greater quantity of Oyl. And having once prepared Blood by a convenient Digestion, and rectified very carefully the di∣stilled Liquor that came over with the flame of a Lamp, I obtained amongst other things two Oyls of very different colours; the one being of a pale Amber or yellow colour, and the other of a deep red; and tho' these Oyls were both of them afforded by the same Blood, and were clear and pure enough; yet they would swim in distinct Masses one over another, and if mixed by shaking would again separate like Oyl and Water. Whether the difference in specifick Gravity betwixt these two Oyls, kept them from mixing permanently, as well as it kept them distinct before they were mix∣ed; or whether the seeming incongruity pro∣ceeded from the Texture of these Liquors I shall not now stay to dispute. To shew that the Oyl of Human Blood con∣tains several saline Particles, capable of being separated from it, we put a parcel of unrecti∣fied Oyl, to a convenient quantity of distilled Water, and having mixed them sufficiently by
agitation, so that the Water might rob the Oyl of its separate saline Particles, the event was that after the Liquors were well setled, the Water was found to be impregnated with saline Particles, that it obtained by dissilution from the Oyl; so that it acquired a moderatly brisk taste, and would readily turn Syrup of Violets green; and precipitate a white Pow∣der out of a solution of Sublimate; but whe∣ther the like will succeed with other Empyreu∣matical Oyls or not, drawn from Bodies be∣longing to the Animal Kingdom, I shall leave o∣thers to determine. Having put some unrectified Oyl of Human Blood into a concave piece of Glass, and then dropped as much Oyl of Vitriol into it, as might amount to a third or fourth part of the fetid Oyl, we stirred them together with a slender piece of solid Glass, upon which the Mixture emitted store of whitish fumes or Smoak; and acquired a considerable degree of Heat, so that tho' it amounted to not much more than a spoonful, yet I was not able to hold my finger under that Part of the Glass, that contained the Liquor. Having taken some Empyreumatical Oyl of Human Blood unrectified, tho' it was dark, and gross, and muddy, yet it would easily in the cold dissolve in rectified Urinous Spirits, to which it gave a reddish colour deep e∣nough. XXII. Of the fixed Salt of Human Blood. To obtain but one ounce of it, there is requisite to employ a considerable quantity of Blood; and duly prepared by a very obstinate fire; for the
Caput Mortuum being kept three or four hours in the fire, it will yield no fixed Salt at all: But having by an obstinate Calcination obtain∣ed three or four drachms of this Salt, I found that it was of the Nature of common or Sea-salt, tho' a little different; for it tasted like it, and a strong solution did not readily turn Syrup of Violets green, nor precipitate a Brick colour, or brownish yellow, no more than a white Powder, out of a solution of Sublimate; nor did the Spirit of Salt dissolve it as an Alkaly. And having put a little Oyl of Vitriol upon our dryed Salt, it immediatly, as it several times did upon common Salt, corroded it with great violence, and with much foam and Smoak. We also dropped a little of it dissolved in Wa∣ter, upon a solution of Silver made in Aqua Fortis, upon which a white Powder was imme∣diatly precipitated: And having put some Leaf-Gold upon Aqua Fortis, which would not work upon it, whilst it was swimming there without being so much as discoloured, I put a little of our powdered Salt into it, which being thereby turned into a kind of Li∣quor, did without the assistance of Heat, pre∣sently dissolve it. XXIII. Of the Terra Damnata of Human Blood. From twenty four ounces of dryed Blood, we got after two days Calcination, but two drachms and nine grains of Earth; which probably was not pure Earth, since it had a red colour like that of Colchotar of Vi∣triol. XXIV. Of the Proportion of the differing Sub∣stances Chymically obtain'd from Human Blood.
they are scarce to be determin'd, not only be∣cause of the sometimes great disparity, as to proportion, that may be met with of the fibrous part to the Serum, in the Blood of se∣veral Persons; but of the same, according to different Circumstances, and also, because it is hard to distil the pulverised part of the Blood; since no one hath so much as taken notice of the Necessity of shifting the Retort, to gain as much Volatile Substance as may be obtained; and leave as little as may be in the Caput Mortuum. For having distilled a quan∣tity of dryed Blood, the same Heat which made the lower part pass in the form of Exhalations into the Receiver, made the matter to swell, so that it lifted up a considerable quantity of Black Matter to the upper part of the Vessel, which a common Distiller would have called a Caput Mortuum, tho' to a discerning Eye, it appear∣ed to be of the same Nature with the Matter first put in, tho' blackened by the ascending Fumes, therefore taking it out, and mixing it with the remaining Substance, that was more of the Nature of Caput Mortuum; it was com∣mitted again to Distillation in another Retort, whereby we obtained more Oyl, &c. And perceiving that even this Caput Mortuum had upon the top of it, a pretty deal of Matter, which was not sufficiently despirited, I caused it to be distilled again in a fresh Retort, in which it afforded a not contemptible quantity of Volatile Matter. And having thus in three Retorts distilled twenty four Ounces of dryed Human Blood, we obtained of Volatile Sub∣stances,
viz. Spirit, together with a little Phlegm, White Salt, and very high colour'd Oyl thirteen Ounces and one Dram, besides se∣veral parcels of thick Oyl that stuck to the Re∣torts and the Receiver, which we judged to be seven Drams more; so that the whole Quanti∣ty of the Volatile Part amounted to fourteen Ounces, of which the Oyl was six Ounces six Drams, and the clear Liquor six Ounces, three Drams and a half, besides the Volatile Salt, which, when the Spirit was drained from it, appeared white but wet; so that it was not possible to determine exactly, neither how much Liquor it yet retained, nor how much it self weighed; but it will be no hard matter to guess near the Truth to any Man that knows, that having carefully sublimed the Salt, there remained in the Glass two Drams and five Grains of Phleg∣matick Liquor; which was not wholly void of Salt; and of Volatil Salt in a dry form, we ob∣tained one Ounce and two Drams and a half; the Caput Mortuum amounting to eight Ounces and a half, and somewhat more, which being calcined for two or three Days together, afforded not White, but brounish-red Ashes, whence we obtained seven Drams ¼ of White and fixed, but not a truly lixiviate Salt; and two Drams and nine Grains of Earth. But indeed considering the great proportion of each of these Substances lost in distillations, it will, upon that account, be a hard matter to determine the true pro∣portion of the Principles of Human Blood.
XXV. Of the Fermentation or Putrefaction of Human Blood and its Phaenomena. XXVI. Of the Mechanical Uses of Human Blood, as in Husbandry, &c. XXVII. Of the Chymical Uses of Human Blood. XXVIII. Of the Medicinal Uses of Human Blood. XXIX. Of the difference betwixt Human Blood, as its found in sound Persons, different∣ly constituted, and circumstantiated, as Men, Women (when Monstrous and when not) Chil∣dren, Moors, Negroes, &c. XXX. Of the affinity and difference betwixt the Blood of Men, and that of several other Animals, as Quadrupeds, Birds, Fishes, and Sanguineous Insects. XXXI. Paralipomena relating to the History of Human Blood. XXXII. Micellaneous Observations, Ex∣periments and Enquiries about Human Blood. Were this Treatise applyed to any o∣ther than extravasated Blood, to these we might add the following Titles. I. Of the process of Sanguification, or the series of changes that the Aliment succes∣sively undergoes, from its first being taken in at the mouth, till it be turned into Blood. II. Of the motions of the mass of Blood, and particularly its Circulation. III. Of the Chyle, Lympha, and other Li∣quors, that are supposed to enter and mingle with the Blood.
IV. Whether Phlegm, Gall and Melancholly, be constituent Parts of the Blood. V. Whether some other Substances may not, with as much reason be admitted into the composition of the Blood. Titles of the first Classis, for the natural History of Human Ʋrine. 1Titles for the Natural History of Human Urine.I. Of the colours of Human Urine. II. Of the taste of Human Urine. III. Of the Odours of Human Urine fresh and putrified. IV. Of the Heat and Cold of Human Urine. V. Of the specifick Gravity of Human Urine. VI. Of the Consistence of Human Urine, as to Density, Viscosity, &c. VII. Of the Aerial Parts contained in Hu∣man Urine. VIII. Whether Human Urine is a fit Li∣quor for Fermentation properly so called. IX. Of the differences betwixt fresh and stale Human Urine. X. Of the Fermentation or Putrefaction of it, and the time it requires. XI. Of its Spontaneous separation of Parts. XII. Of its Vulgar Analysis by Distilla∣tion. XIII. Of some other ways of distilling Hu∣man Urine. XIV. Of the proportion of the Principles, or Ingredients of Human Blood.
XV. Of the Spirits of Human Urine. XVI. Of the Phlegm of Human Urine. XVII. Of the Volatile Salt of Human Urine. XVIII. Of the fixt Salt of Human Urine. XIX. Of the compounded Salts of Human Urine. XX. Of the shining Substance obtainable from Human Urine. XXI. Of the Salt that is Predominant. XXII. Of the Empyreumatical Oyls of Hu∣man Urine. XXIII. Of the Mellago, or Rob of Human Urine, and its uses. XXIV. Of the Terra Damnata. XXX. Of some accidental differences of Human Urine, as it's emitted in the Morning, or at certain distances from Meat, or after the use of certain Aliments, or Medicaments, as Asparagus, Turpentine, &c. Or at diffe∣rent seasons of the year, as Winter, Sum∣mer, &c. XXVI. Of the affinity of Human Urine with divers other Bodies, especially Vegetables and Minerals. XXVII. Of the Hostility of Human Urine with Acids, &c. XXVIII. Of the affinity and difference be∣twixt Human Blood, Urine, Gall, Milk, &c. and divers Liquors, or Juices belonging to the Animal Kingdom; particularly of the com∣parison betwixt Human Urine and that of Beasts. XXIX. Of the Mechanical uses of Human Urine.
XXX. Of the Chymical uses of Human Urine, and its Parts, especially as a Menstru∣um. XXXI. Of the Medicinal uses of Human Urine External and Internal. XXXII. Paralipomena relating to the Histo∣ry of Human Urine. XXXIII. Promiscuous Observations, Ex∣periments and Enquiries about Human Urine. The second Part of the Natural History of Hu∣man Blood, containing Miscellaneous Ex∣periments and Observations about Human Ʋrine. The third Part containing Promiscuous Experi∣ments and Observations, about the Serum of Human Blood. HAving separately weighed the Serum, and the consistent part of the Blood, the latter weighed four ounces, six drachms and a half, and the former three ounces, six drachms. And having taken the same measures with the Blood drawn from another Person, the fibrous part weighed four ounces, five drachms, and the Serum four ounces. But from these Experiments it does not follow, that the fibrous part is alone heavier than the Serum; since a great deal of the latter is dispersed through the Pores of the former,
which appears, since four ounces, five drachms, and thirty four grains of the fibrous part of Blood being distilled in a digestive Furnace, the dryed Blood remaining weighed but one ounce, three drachms, and thirty four grains; whereas the serous Liquor distilled from it amounted to three ounces, fifty three grains; and the like tryal being again repeated with another parcel of Blood, the dryed mass a∣mounted to one ounce, six drachms, and fifty grains; and the Phlegmatick Liquor distilled from it, to seven ounces. Red Sealing-Wax suspended at a Hair, weighed in the Air one drachm, fifty six grains; in Water thirty five; in Serum thirty three. And having made use of an Instrument pur∣posely made, when common Water weighed 253 grains, an equal bulk of Serum weighed 302; and the Serum of the Blood of another Person being weighed, it wanted but two grains of the weight of the former. Serum which was tinged with Blood being strained through Cap-Paper, the Liquor which passed through it was of a yellow colour. Spirit of Salt being dropped into Serum, coagulated some Parts, which subsided in the form of Cheese-Curd; and Oyl of Vitriol had the same effect, but more powerfully: But Spi∣rit of Sal-Armoniack rather made it fluid. Oyl of Tartar per Deliquium produced a white Curd, by uniting with some Parts of the Serum, but not so powerfully as the other had done. Spirit of Wine rectified produced a copious white Curd, but so soft that it swam upon the top of the Liquor.
Upon an infusion of a solution of Sublimate, it yielded a white Curd; but some of the Se∣rum of Human Blood being poured upon filings of Iron, the Liquor dissolved some of the Steel; which appeared, since upon an addition of some of an infusion of Galls, the Liquor which before was muddy and thick, laid down a whitish Sediment; and a convenient quantity of the infusion being added, the two Liquors united into a consistent Body, wherein the Eye discovered no distinct Liquor at all. But having put some of our Liquor upon filings of Copper, which, when wrought up∣on by Bodies that have in them any thing of Urinous Salt, usually give a conspicuous Tincture, we accordingly found, that the Me∣tal was in a few hours discoloured by the Menstruum; and afterwards it began gradually to grow more blue, and in a day was of a deep Ceruleous colour: And to shew that this colour proceeded from some Volatile Salt la∣tent in the Serum, we mixed some of it with Syrup of Violets, and found that it appeared of a fine green. And one thing observable in the Serum impregnated with Copper was, that I kept it several weeks in my Win∣dow without perceiving that it in the least sunk. About two ounces of Serum was left in a South Window three weeks in the Month of July; but did not appear in the least putrified; but had let down a considerable Sediment, and in three or four days after it stunk offen∣sively; and that at the same time it was void of Acidity appeared, since it would not take
off the blue colour of a Tincture of Lignum Nephriticum. This fetid Serum being distilled in a low Cucurbite, the Liquor that first came over was so little Spirituous or Saline, that it would not in an hours time turn Syrup of Vi∣olets green; yet that it was not without a Volatile Alkaly appeared, since being dropped into a good solution of Sublimate, it caused it to lay down a white precipitate. Serum of Human Blood filtred through Cap-Paper, being distilled in a small Retort placed in a Sand Furnace; we obtained only a few drops of a darkish red Oyl, some of which subsided to the bottom of the other Liquor, but the greater part swam upon it; and after a good deal of insipid Phlegm had been drawn off, there came over a good proportion of Spirituous Liquor, which smelled almost like the Spirit of Blood, and contained a pretty deal of Volatile Alkaly; so that it would rea∣dily turn Syrup of Violets green, and cause a white precipitate, and ferment with Spirit of Salt. And this Spirit being rectified in a small Head and Body, a good quantity of a thick Substance like Honey was left in the bot∣tom of the Glass, which was for the most part of a dark red, and seemed to contain more Oyl than appeared upon the first Distillation. The Liquor that came over the Helm was purer, but not stronger than the first; but having put it into a Glass-Egg with a slender Neck, and given the Vessel a convenient Scitu∣ation in hot Sand, we obtained a Volatile Alkaly, that sublimed into the Neck in the form of a white Salt; from whence it seems
to follow, that the serous part of the Blood affords the same Elementary Principles or Si∣milar Substances, both as to number and kind, as the fibrous and consistent part, tho' not as to quantity; that of the Oyl and dry Salt be∣ing less in a determinate proportion of Serum, than of Blood. Tho' it be necessary, to loosen the Spirit of Urine from the more drossy Parts of it, that before Distillation it should putrefie for about six weeks, yet if fresh Urine be poured upon Quick-Lime a great part of the Spirit will pre∣sently be united, and ascend in Distillation: Encouraged by which Observation, I mixed Se∣rum with Quick-Lime, upon which there ensu∣ed a transient Heat; and this mixed Body be∣ing committed to Distillation, first it afforded a Phlegm in a gentle fire; and then in a stronger, a moderate quantity of Liquor, that was thought to smell manifestly of the Lime, but had not a brisk taste; and this was accompa∣nyed with a greater quantity of fetid Oyl than was expected. The other Liquor being slowly rectified, the Spirit which first came over had a strong and piercing smell, but less rank than common Spirit of Human Blood: Its taste was somewhat fiery, and being drop∣ped upon Spirit of Violets it presently turned it green; in a solution of sublimate with Water, and another of Quick-silver in Aqua Fortis, it presently made two white precipitates. And being mingled with some good Spirit of Sea-Salt, there appeared a thick and whitish Smoak, but neither any visible conflict nor bubbles; yet the colour of the Spirit of Salt
seemed much heightned by this operation. And here I shall observe, that having set the lately mentioned Mixture of the Spirit of Se∣rum and of Salt to evaporate, the Salt afforded by it was not like that of Sal-Armoniack, but the colour produced in the Mixture whilst fluid, was so heightned in the Concrete, that it appeared of a Blood-red colour; but of such a confused shape, that it could not be reduced to any kind of Salt; by all which Phaenome∣na this Spirit of the serous part of the Blood, seems to be very near of kin to that of the con∣creted mass. To try whether the fixed Salt of Pot-ashes would have the same effect on Serum of Human Blood, to four Parts of Liquor we put one of Salt, and having distilled them slowly in a Glass-Head and Body, we obtained a good store of a Liquor, but not near so strong as that drawn off from Quick-Lime; and having rectified this Spirit by a gentle Heat, the two first spoonfuls which rose were not Spirituous▪ but Phlegmatick; nor would it turn Syrup of Violets green, tho' it afforded a light Sublimate when put upon a solution of Sublimate. Having put one part of Salt of Pot-ashes into three of Human Urine, and slowly distil∣led them in a Head and Body; first a Spiri∣tuous Liquor ascended; which being set aside, we continued the Distillation till the remains appeared dry: in which operation we ob∣tained not one drop of oyl; besides which it was observable that this Spirit of Urine was not near so fetid, as that made
the common way; and that that Liquor which came over at the latter end of the Distillation, was so unlike that which the Serum of the Blood affords us, that it was not only con∣siderably strong, and manifestly stronger than that which first ascended, but had a penetrate∣ing and fiery taste which left a lasting impres∣sion upon the Tongue, and made a notable Ebullition with Spirit of Salt, which the Spirit of Urine drawn from Quick-Lime did not; and whereas in the last Liquor I never observed any Volatile Salt to ascend in a dry form, in the operation made by the help of Salt of Pot-ashes, there ascended without Recti∣fication, several grains of Volatile Salt, one of which was Crystalline and very large, so that it appeared to be like a Plate curiously figured; but some lesser corns of Salt hiding one part of it, I could not clearly discern whether it were Hexagonal or Octa∣gonal. And this Experiment being repeated a second time, the Liquor ascending was more Phlegmatick, tho' we both times applyed Salt of Pot-ashes taken out of the same Vessel, and the Urine of the same Person; but this Liquor being rectified per se, afforded more of a brisk saline Spirit, from which we obtained a pretty quantity of Volatile Salt in a dry form, and of a very white colour. Having put betwixt two and three ounces of Serum of Human Blood into a Bolt-head, capable of holding four times as much, and having sealed the Glass Hermetically, and set it aside, we observed the following Par∣ticulars.
First, No alteration appeared in the Liquor for twelve Months, nor were any Worms or Magots bred in it; and tho' it be generally believed, that Insects naturally breed in the fluid Parts of Human Bodies, yet I have ob∣served, that if Blood be so exactly closed up, that Flies cannot blow upon it, and that too before it is putrified, or blowed upon, it will not breed them. But, Secondly, In this Liquor there appear∣ed not the least Mother which usually accom∣panies Putrefaction; but the tip of the sealed Glass being broken off, a pretty deal of Air rushed out with a considarable noise; and that this Air had been considerably compressed, whilst it was penned up appeared, since upon its eruption a multitude of bubbles remained on the Surface of the Liquor, as upon the opening of Botled Drink, or other Liquors, when the Vessels they are contained in come to be unstopped. And to these Observations, I shall add, that some Sheeps Blood being shut up in Vacuo, upon a gentle Putrefaction, the Elastick and Aerial Particles that were produ∣ced blew it up, with a surprizing noise. But, Thirdly, The smell of our Serum was strong but not Cadavarous; rather resembling that of the Tincture of Sulphur made with Salt of Tartar and Spirit of Wine, or some such Sulphureous preparation. Fourthly, This Serum being committed to Distillation in a small Glass Head and Body in a digestive Furnace, the Liquor which first came over, first smelled strong enough, yet
tasted not at all brisk or spirituous, like that distilled from putrefied Urine, nor did it pre∣sently give a manifest greenness to Syrup of Violets; but in a solution of Sublimate, it had the same effect with Spirit of Urine or a Vola∣tile Salt. And having mixed some of it with Syrup of Violets, spread all night upon white Paper, and another parcel of it with filings of Copper, the former in the Morning was turn∣ed green; and the latter was so far dissolved, as to leave a large blue stain upon the Pa∣per. One part of Salt of Tartar being dissolved in eight Parts of Serum of Human Blood, and stirred over a gentle Heat, it was not turned red by it as Milk is. That Blood will be co∣agulated by Heat in a short time into a kind of Gelly, is a common Observation. But having put Spirit of Human Blood into Serum, and kept it a convenient time over a fire, the Volatile Alkaly seemed to make the coa∣gulation more slow. And this effect was more considerable, when we tryed another parcel of Serum with Salt of Tartar instead of Spirit of Blood. The fourth Part, containing the History of the Spirit of Blood, begun. BEfore I proceed to the Titles belonging to this Part of the History, it will be requi∣site to advertise,
First, that the Spirit made use of in the fol∣lowing Tryals and Observations, was drawn from Human Blood without any Sand, Clay, or other Additament; and that the fir Di∣stillations were performed in Retorts placed in Sand, care being taken that the Vessels should not be too much filled, because Blood if not well dryed is apt to swell, and pass into the neck of the Retort, if not into the Re∣ceiver. Secondly, It is to be observed, that the Blood we made use of, was such as was drawn from People, who frequently bleeded by way of prevention. Thirdly, There is so great a Cognation be∣twixt the Spirit, and Volatile Salt of Human Blood, that the latter seems to be the former only in a dry form. A List of Secondary Titles, concerning the Spirit of Human Blood. Of the Hi∣story of Hu∣man BloodI. Whether Human Blood may be so or∣dered by Fermentation or Putrefaction, as that in Distillation, a Spirit either Urinous or Vinous may ascend before the Phlegm. II. Whether Spirit of Human Blood be really any thing, but the Volatile Salt and Phlegm well commixed. III. Of the Species of Saline Bodies, to which Spirit of Human Blood is to be refer∣red. IV. Whether Spirit of Human Blood be differ∣ing from Spirit of Urine, and other Spirits that are called Volatile Alkalies.
V. Of the quantity of Spirit contained in Human Blood, whether accompanyed with Se∣rum or dryed. VI. Of the specifick Gravity of Spirit of Human Blood. VII. Of the Odour, Taste, Colour, tran∣sparency and consistency of the Spirit of Hu∣man Blood. VIII. Of the dissolutive power of the Spirit of Human Blood. IX. Of the Tinctures that may be drawn by Spirit of Human Blood. X. Of the coagulative power of the Spirit of Human Blood. XI. Of the precipitating power of Spirit of Human Blood. XII. Of the Affinity betwixt Spirit of Hu∣man Blood, and some Chymical Oyls and Urinous Spirits. XIII. Of the relation betwixt Spirit of Hu∣man Blood and the Air. XIV. Of the Hostility of Human Blood with Acids, whether in the form of Liquors or Fumes. XV. Of the Medicinal Virtues of Spirit of Human Blood externally applyed. XVI. Of the Medicinal Virtues of Spirit of Human Blood internally given in Pleurisies, Head-achs, Coughs, Fevers, Scurvies, Cachex∣ies, Dropsies, Fits of the Mother. XVII. Paralipomena, and promiscuous Ex∣periments and Observations concerning the Spirit of Human Blood.
TITLE I. Whether Human Blood may be so ordered by Fermentation or Putrefaction, as that in Distillation a Spirit either Ʋrinous or Vinous may ascend before the Phlegm. COnsidering that Fevers have been looked upon to proceed from a Fermentation in the Blood; and likewise, that Human Urine which hath a great Cognation with Human Blood, will not whilst fresh afford a Spirit, till the Phlegm be first drawn off; this Subject of this Title may not appear Groundless. But I am not much encouraged to expect a Vinous or ardent Spirit from Human Blood, nor am I sure there is any such thing as Fermentation in Human Blood. And on this occasion I shall add, that having once kept Blood Hermetical∣ly sealed up in a Glass for twelve Months, when it came to be opened, it smelled so offensively, that we could not make any tryal upon it; and another time having digested, in a pretty large Vial Hermetically sealed some Sheeps Blood; when it had been a good while in the digestive Furnace, it suddenly broke with a considerable noise, and blew off the long neck of the Vial. And here, to what hath been laid down, I shall add, That some Ounces of Serum of Blood being added to a fourth Part of Raisins of the Sun stoned, and kept in a Glass, in a warm Room for several days; the event of this tryal was, that with∣in
in a few Days the Raisins began to emerge, and whilst they floated, yielded a conside∣rable quantity of springy and permanent Air; from whence it appeared, that there had been some Degree of Fermentation. But when this Serum came to be distilled, tho' it did not stink as if it had been putrified, yet the Spi∣rit which first ascended, tasted not like a-Viscous Spirit, nor like a meer Phlegm. Whe∣ther the Fermentation observed in this Li∣quor, depended on the whole Serum, or on∣ly on the Aqueous Parts distinct from it, I shall leave to Experience to determine. To try whether Digestion or Putrefaction would so open the Texture of Blood, as to make it part with its Spirit more easily, and before the Phlegm, I kept a quantity of Se∣rum for that purpose, four times as long as was sufficient to make Urine part with its Spirit before its Phlegm, but the Liquor which came over by a gentle heat, had but little strength either in Smell or Taste; nor would it readily turn Syrup of Violets Green; yet like a Volatile Alkaly, it would soon turn a Solution of Sublimate in fair Water, into a White, Opacous, and almost Milky Liquor.
TITLE II. Whether Spirit of Human Blood be really a∣ny thing but the Volatile Salt and Phlegm well commixed. FOR several Reasons I am inclined to believe, that the Spirit of Human Blood is totally composed of a Volatile Salt, and a Phlegm which is not so pure and Elementary, but that some Particles of Oyl, and others of Salt, may be mixed with it; and whether by frequent Re∣ctifications this Phlegm may be rendered Homo∣geneous I much question, since I am not sure, but that in frequent Distillations, some Par∣ticles of the Fire mny be from time to time associated with the Liquor; and even in the first Distillation, the Fire uniting with the Li∣quor, may form one different from the In∣gredients or Principles of the Body; and I have found that Woods afford by distillation, a Li∣quor which is not an Oyl, nor an Acid, or an Alkaly, and yet no true Phlegm, but an Adia∣phorous Liquor. And on this occasion to shew, That the Composition of a Body may as well be made known by investigating the way of generating or producing it, as by that of Ana∣lysing or resolving it; I shall add, that having dissolved as much Volatile Salt of Human Blood in distilled Water, as the Liquor would take up, and then having distilled it in a convenient∣ly shaped Vessel, with a regulated degree of Heat, the Distillation afforded us such a Li∣quor
as was desired, since by Smell and Taste it appeared to be a good brisk Spirit of Hu∣man Blood. And this Experiment was a∣gain repeated with the like success. TITLE III. Of the Species of Saline Bodies, to which the Spirit of Human Blood is to be refer∣red. THO' it be generally allowed that Saline Spirits are of two sorts, yet it may not be amiss to add, That some of them are Acid in Taste, as Spirit of Nitre, Vitriol, &c. O∣thers are rather like common or lixiviate Salts; and their different Effects and Operations are much less alike than their Taste, for upon their mixture, there ensues a manifest conflict, and usually one will precipitate the Bodies, the other will dissolve. And amongst Salts call∣ed Alkalies, some are fixed in considerable Degrees of Fire, and others, who take Acid and Alkalies for the true Principles of mixed Bodies, call the one Fixed, and the other Vo∣latile Alkalies. And tho' I, who question this Doctrine, often call the Salts made by Com∣bustion, simply Alkalies, or lixiviate Salts, and those that ascend, sometimes Ʋrinous, and sometimes Volatile Salts, yet since the Names of Fixed Alkalies and Volatile ones are in re∣quest now, I shall now make use of them in that Sense.
These Things being premised, I shall pro∣ceed to observe, that notwithstanding that some Physicians and Chymists ascribe Digestion to an Acid Ferment in the Stomach, yet the Spi∣rit of Human Blood is referrable to that Classis, which many call Volatile Alkalies, since it ge∣nerally performs what Volatile Alkalies are said to do; for it will ferment with Acids, turn Syrup of Violets Green, and precipitate a Solution of Sublimate in common Water. Were I sure that the Ferment of the Sto∣mach were Acid, I should be apt to believe, that the Blood retains something of Acidity in it; but yet that would not be an Argu∣ment why I should not refer the Spirit of Human Blood to the Class of Alkalies, be∣cause so few Acid Particles would either be destroyed by the Alkalizate ones, that are so a∣bundant in the Spirit, or at least they would be so very much predominant as to give us Reason on their account to denominate, the Mixture Alkalious. As if some drops of Spi∣rit of Vinegar were mixed with stale Urine, they would be either depriv'd of their Acidi∣ty by some Particles of a contrary Nature, or be so overpowered by the Fugitive Salts they abound with, that the Mixture might well be referred to the Classis of Volatile U∣rinous Salts.
TITLE IV. Whether the Spirit of Human Blood be dif∣fering from Spirit of Ʋrine, and other Salts called Volatile Alkalies. UPON this Occasion I shall offer, that not to intimate that a Body may have many similar Qualities, in respect of another Body, and yet distinct Operations on a third Substance: I say, not to intimate that, there may be a considerable difference betwixt Vo∣latile Salts or Spirits, as they are commonly prepared, and when prepared as they may, by reiterated Rectifications, and other ways of Depuration by a dextrous Chymist, to bring them to a greater degree of Purity and Simpli∣city; a greater degree I say, because it may be difficult to bring them to an absolute Purity, since unheeded commixtures may be made, upon the Account of some Corpuscles of Fire with the Body they work upon. And that there is a manifest difference be∣twixt Spirit of Human Blood and other Alkalies, as Spirit of Urine and Harts-horn, is evident to several People who, tho' they abhor the Odour of Spirit of Blood, yet they will with Pleasure hold their Noses a great while over Spirit of Urine and Sal-Ar∣moniack. And tho' from a due proportion of Spirit of Urine or Sal-Armoniack with Spirit of Salt, I have got a Salt which shoots into the shape of that of Urine or Sal-Armoniack
yet I have seldom, if ever, obtained a Salt of the like shape from a Mixture of the Spirit of Humane Blood with that of Common Salt, for tho upon an Evaporation of the superfluous Moisture, the Salts would coagulate together, yet the Concretion seemed confused, and not of the Regular shapes of those Salts, resulting from a Mixture of the Spirit of Sea-Salt with Urinous Spirits. And Helmont tells us, that the Spirit of Human Blood will cure Epilepsies, which Spirit of Urine will not do. TITLE V. Of the Quantity of Spirit contained in Hu∣man Blood, whether accompanied with its Serum, or dryed. THIS is not easie to determine, since some Mens Blood is much more Phleg∣matick than others, or more Serous, which may of it self be more Spirituous, according to the Complexion, Age, Sex, &c. of the Per∣son that Bleeds. Twelve Ounces of Healthy Human Blood, afforded us seven Ounces and a half of Phlegm, and consequently about Four Ounces and a half of dry stuff. And havig distilled in a Retort, in a Sand Furnace, seven Ounces of well dryed Blood, we obtained about an eighth part of Spirit, which, tho' not recti∣fied, left in the Receiver and Viol I kept it in, a good deal of Volatile Salt undissolved,
which a Phlegmatick Liquor would not have done. And if Spirit of Blood be but a Salt and Phlegm united, We may well sup∣pose, that Human Blood yields a far great∣er Proportion of Spirit than this, since from the seven Ounces of dryed Blood, we obtained about five Drachms of Volatile Salt, which had it been united with a due quantity of Phlegm, it would probably have afforded us near two Ounces more of a Liquor deserving the Name of Spirit. TITLE VI. Of the Consistence and Specifick Gravity of Human Blood. A Compact Body, which in the Air weigh∣ed fifty eight Grains, and in Water weighed six Grains and ¾, in rectifi'd Spirit of Human Blood weighed but five Grains and ¼; and what was considerable, was, That a piece of Amber would not subside to the Bottom, but kept floating upon the Top, and if plung∣ed into it, would emerge again. As for the Degree of the Fluidity of the Blood, or its immunity from Tenaciousness, tho' divers other Alkalizated Liquors, as Oyl of Tartar per deliquium, fixed Nitre resolved per deliquium, a Solution of Pot-Ashes, are sensibly unctuous, and but languidly fluid, yet I ob∣served that Spirit of Human Blood did not appear more Unctuous than common Water.
And whereas it is commonly found, That as Liquors are more spirituous, so the Bubles raised by Agitation, soonest disappear; I have observed that the Spirit of Blood was almost as soon clear of them as Spirit of Wine; and when some Drops of it were let fall, they manifestly appeared less than Drops of Wa∣ter. To discover the subtlety of the Parts of Human Blood, we so prepared common Wa∣ter, by Infusions made in it without Heat, that by putting one single Drop of our Re∣ctified Spirit of Human Blood into ten Oun∣ces and four Scruples of the prepared Water, and lightly shaking the Viol, there appeared throughout the Liquor a manifest Colour, whereof no Degree was discernible before; so that it dispersed it self through a thousand times as much Water, and produced a mani∣fest Change in the Colour of it: And tho' this Computation is made upon the common suppo∣sition that a Drop of Water weighs a Grain, yet tho' it weighs more a little, the Difference is recompensed, since having dropped ten Drops of common Water into a common Bal∣lance well adjusted, and having likewise drop∣ped ten Drops of this Spirit, we found that the last were not only less in bulk, but lighter, since they weighed not above four Grains, so that the Proportion to which it extended it self, may be said to be as one, to betwixt 4000 and 5000; and this subtlety of the Parts of the Spi∣rit of Human Blood will appear to be yet much greater, if we consider, that some Part even of this Drop must needs be Phlegm.
TITLE VII. Of the Odour, Taste, Colour, and Transpa∣rency of the Spirit of Human Blood. THat the Spirit of Human Blood is in re∣spect of some Liquors potentially Cold, since it refrigerates them, and with reference to others potentially Hot, since being mixed with them it renders them Hot, may appear from the following instance; for having put the lower end of an Hermetically sealed Weather-Glass into a slender Cylindrical Glass, we poured as much moderatly strong Spirit of Blood into it as covered the Ball, and then dropped on that Liquor some good Spirit of Salt, upon which ensued a conflict accompa∣nyed with a Noise, Bubbles, and Heat, which made the Spirit of Wine presently ascend a∣bove two Inches and a half; which Experi∣ment seems to be the more remarkable, be∣cause several other Volatile Alkalies being mix∣ed with Acids, produce a notable degree of coldness; and whereas I had several times found by Tryal, that the Spirt of Verdigrease would, with Volatile Salt of Sal-Armoniack or Urine, produce a real coldness. This Spi∣rit of Verdigrease being mixed in the small Cylindrical Glass, with Spirit of Blood mode∣rately strong, not only produced a hissing Noise and store of Bubbles, but an actual Heat, upon which the Liquor in the Thermoscope
ascended above an Inch and a half, tho' both the Liquors employed amounted not to above two spoonfuls. TITLE VIII. Of the dissolutive power of Spirit of Hu∣man Blood. THAT this Spirit is not only a good Me∣dicine for several Diseases, but is also a good Menstruum, will appear from the fol∣lowing instances. And first, having poured Spirit of Human Blood upon Crude Copper, in about a quarter of an hour the Liquor was tinged blueish, which colour grew higher and higher, till in some hours it was deeply Cerule∣ous. And to this I shall add, that having drop∣ped a drop or two of Spirit of Blood upon a piece of bright Copper, within about half a minute of an hour, the Verge of the moisten∣ed part of the Surface appeared blueish, and in a little time after, the rest of the wetted Part acquired a fine Azure. Having poured Spirit of Blood upon filings of Zinke or Spiltre, it presently began to work manifestly in the cold; and when assisted by a little Heat, it dissolved the Zinke briskly, and not without producing store of bubbles, being also a little discoloured by the operation of this Experiment. Having put a piece of clotted Blood, which had been exposed to the Air, into a slender
Vial of clear Glass, and then poured on a lit∣tle rectified Spirit of Human Blood, and shook the Glass a little, the blackness of the superfi∣cial part of the Blood presently disappeared, and became a florid Scarlet, and the Liquor was tinged with a fairer red, and from a suc∣cession of bubbles passing from time to time out of the cold into it, seemed to work some∣what like a Menstruum, but in a little time af∣ter the Blood was degenerated from its for∣mer colour to a little more dark one. But another clot of Blood, one side of which was red and the other black, being put into the Vial, and Spirit of Blood poured upon it, the red side had its colour improved, but the o∣ther continued black and dirty. And I once pre∣served twelve drachms of Blood in two of the Spirit of Blood, and found that twelve months after it remained fair and florid, and little less than totally fluid; and when the Vessel was opened there appeared little sign of Putrefacti∣on, but only a small clot was fastened to the bottom, the rest passing readily through a strain∣er; so that the Spirit seemed to have a great embalming Virtue, since it was able to preserve six times its weight of a Body so apt to putre∣fie: But to what hath been observed, I shall add, that having comitted the Mixture to Di∣stillation, the first Liquor was a kind of Phlegm, which was succeeded by a Spirituous Liquor and Volatile Salt in a dry form. Having poured some of our Spirit upon filings of Iron, where they were not in the least Rusty, and kept them together a while in digestion, we found, as we expected, that that Li∣quor
by working upon them had produ∣ced a light substance, something paler than a Crocus, and there appeared likewise in the Li∣quor good store of thin Plates, which after a gentle Agitation, being held against the Sun-Beams, exhibited the colours of the Rain-Bow very vividly; but the taste of the Liquor ap∣peared not at all Martial. TITLE IX. Of the Tincture that may be drawn with Spirit of Human Blood. SPirit of Blood being put upon Saffron pre∣sently acquired a yellow colour; and from Tu merick, a Tincture like a solution of Gold, which may doubtless prove a good Medicine in the Jaundice; and some of this Spirit being put upon powder of Blood, it presently ex∣tracted from it a colour as red as that of French Claret, but when I made use of another parcel of Spirit well rectified, I found that it extracted not a Tincture so soon; and after several hours the colour it obtained was brown, which in some hours after was heightned into redness, and in a longer time it became al∣most as red as the former Tincture. To shew that Spirit of Human Blood may extract Tinctures out of the hardest Bodies, we put filings with it into a small Egg, and kept them all night in digestion in a moderate Heat; and the next day we found the Liquor
tinged with a deep brownish red; and those filings which stuck to the sides of the Vessel and were above the Liquor, were turned by the Exhalations of this Spirit into a yellow Crocus: But the Mixture being kept some days longer in the same Vessel, the colour of it was grown Opacous, and appeared to be black when it was looked upon in a con∣siderable bulk; but it seemed of another colour when looked upon as it was spread thin upon white Paper. Some of this Ticture being pour∣ed upon an infusion of Galls, it would not make it of an Inky colour, nor was the preci∣pitate, which presently fell to the bottom, of an Inky colour. From which Experiments it appears, that it is unsafe either to suppose, that if Chalybeates be dissolved in the Body, it must be by some Acid Juice, or to conclude, that if Steel be dissolved by the Liquors of our Bodies, they must be ex predominio Alkali∣zate, since a Liquor that is very different from Acids dissolves it; but without touching fur∣ther upon this account, I shall rather com∣mend it to the consideration of Physicians, to pitch upon some other method of explicating the effects of Chalybeates upon Human Bodies, and whether martial Medicines may not be made use of, which are prepared by Volatite Alkalies, instead of Acids. Spirit of Human Blood being kept in di∣gestion with powder of Amber, it extracted no considerable Tincture, but whether the fault was in the fineness of the Amber, or the weakness of the Spirit, I shall leave undeter∣mined.
Some Spirit of Human Blood being put upon some of that Gum called Seed-Lac soon became tinged, which I supposed to proceed from a superficial colour of some Parts of the Gum, proceeding from some adhering Blood of the little winged insects, who by their bitings occasioned this Gum, upon the twigs of the Trees where it is found; so that the colour seems not to be given by the Gum, but the Blood of those Animals, and may probably be a good solvent Medi∣cine, since most of the insects used in Phy∣sick consists of Parts very subtle and penetrat∣ing, and of considerable Efficacy. TITLE X. Of the Coagulating power of the Spirit of Human Blood. HIghly rectified Spirit of Human Blood, being well mingled by shakeing it with a convenient quantity of Urinous Spirits, there will presently ensue a Coagulation or a concre∣tion of Parts, either of the whole Mixture or a Portion of it, into corpuscles of a Saline form, which cohering loosely together make up a mass of a fluid and consistent soft tem∣per; in which form it will continue in a cool place several months.
TITLE XI. Of the Precipitating power of Spirit of Human Blood. IT hath a power of Precipitating, as other Volatile Spirits, most Bodies dissolved in Acid Menstruums; I say most, because there is no need this rule should be general, or hold when the Body is of such a Nature, that it may be as well dissolved by an Acid as an Alkaly; and that there are such Bodies appears, since Spirit of Human Blood will dissolve both Cop∣per and Zink, which may be likewise dissolved by Aqua Fortis and other Acid Menstruums. But that this Spirit will precipitate other Bodies dissolved in Acid Menstruums, I am con∣vinced by several tryals made on red Lead dissolved in Vinegar, Silver in Aqua Fortis, Gold in Aqua Regia, and Tin dissolved in an appropriated Menstruum, and several other Bodies. And out of a Solution of common Salt made in Water, we could readily precipitate with the Spirit of Blood, a Substance which looked like a white Earth, and such a Sub∣stance I obtained in a far greater quantity, from that which the Salt-makers call Bittern, which usually remains in their Salt Pans, when they have taken out about as much Salt, as would coagulate in figured grains. This Spirit of Human Blood does likewise precipitate a Solu∣tion of Dantzik Vitriol in Water, but that Solution is not a total one.
TITLE XII. Of the Affinity between Spirit of Human Blood, and some Chymical Oyls and Vi∣nous Spirits. THAT there is an Affinity betwixt Spi∣rit of Human Blood, and Spirit of Wine, appears, since we have formerly observed that being put together, they will concoagulate, and continue united a long time; and tho' a rectified Spirit of Wine will not draw a Tin∣cture from Blood, yet Spirit of Blood will. But as for Lixiviate Liquors such as are made of Salt of Tartar, fixed Nitre, &c. we find not that they will strictly associate with it. Spirit of Blood readily mixes with that Adia∣phorous Spirit formerly mentioned; but de∣phlegmed Spirit of Blood mixed by agitation with its Oyl, will presently separate again, tho' with Spirit of Wine it will permanently unite, tho these two Liquors belong to a diffe∣rent, viz. the one to the Animal, and the o∣ther to the Vegetable Kingdom. With the essential Oyls of Aromatick Vege∣tables, the Spirit seems to have a greater Affi∣nity; for an equal proportion of this Liquor, and of Oyl of Aniseeds, drawn in an Alembick per Vesicam, being shaken together, they made a soft or Semifluid coagulation, which con∣tinued in that form for a day or two; and would probably have longer done so, if I
had not had occasion to proceed further with it. To shew that Spirit of Human Blood may either communicate some of its saline Parts to essential Oyls, or work a change in them; I digested a while in a Glass with a long neck some recstified Spirit of Human Blood, with a convenient quantity of Oyl of Aniseeds drawn in an Alembick, and found that the Oyl grew coloured of a high yellow, and afterwards attained a high redness; which may afford us a hint of the cause of some changes of colour, that are produced in the Liquors of the Body. To take off the stinking quality of Human Blood, and to render it more grateful, we mixed with it in a Glass about an equal quan∣tity or half as much Oyl of Aniseeds, and hav∣ing shaken them together in the Glass, we placed it in a Furnace with a gentle Heat, by which means the slight Texture of the Coagulum be∣ing dissolved, part of the Oyl appeared float∣ing upon the top, whence being separated by a Tunnel, the Liquor was whitish and with∣out a stinking smell; it smelling and tasteing strong of Aniseeds, tho' the saline Particles retained a considerable degree of their brisk and penetrating taste. Another way I took to deprive Spirit of Human Blood of its offensive smell was, by employing a Medium to unite it with essential Oyls; for having dissolved an eighth part of Oyl of Aniseeds in highly rectified Spirit of Wine, and added an equal quantity of Spirit of Human Blood, and upon a convenient agitation we suffered the Mixture to settle a considera∣ble
time, after that it appeared, that some of the Oyl swam in drops distinct from the other Liquors, which consisted of a Mixture of the two Spirits impregnated with a few particles of Oyl which they had detained. This Liquor abounded with little Concretions made by the Coagulation of the Sanguineous and Vinous Spi∣rits; which by a gentle Heat were sublimed in the form of a Volatile Salt, to the upper Part of the Glass; and this Salt had not only a much less penetrating Odour, than the meer Vola∣tile Salt of Human Blood, but had quite lost its stink, and yet retained a considerable quickness, and something of the scent of Ani∣seeds; and the remaining Liquor was likewise deprived of its ill smell, and moderately im∣bued with that of the Oyl. To try whether there would be any Affinity between our Spirit, and the highly rectified Oyl of Petroleum, I shaked a convenient quanti∣ty of them together in a new Vial, upon which they presently turned into a white Mixture; and tho' after a few hours the greater part of the Oyl swam above the Spirit, yet there appeared be∣twixt the two Liquors a good quantity of whiteish Matter, which seemed to be produced by the Union of many Particles of the Spirit and Oyl, which were most disposed to combine.
TITLE XIII. Of the Relation betwixt Spirit of Human Blood and the Air. TO try whether the Air will have any con∣siderable effect on the Spirit of Human Blood after Distillation, as it evidently hath on the Blood before, I spread thinly upon a piece of white Paper some small filings of Cop∣per, and wetting them well without covering them quite over, with a few drops of Blood; by that means they being well exposed to the free Air; the Action of the Liquor was so much promoted, that within a minute or two it did even in the cold acquire a blueish co∣lour; and in fewer minutes than one would have expected, that colour was so heightned as to become Ceruleous; but another parcel of the same filings being put into a Vial, the in∣tercourse of the Air being excluded, the Li∣quor would not in some hours acquire so deep a colour. Having in a clear Cylindrical Vial of about an Inch Diameter, put more filings of Cop∣per than was requisite to cover the bottom, and poured so much Spirit of Blood upon them as rought about a fingers breadth above them, it in a few hours acquired a rich colour, which after a day or two began to grow more faint, and afterwards gradually declined, till it was almost lost; yet the Liquor was not al∣together limpid or colourless, as I have often
had it with Spirit of Urine or Sal-Armoniack, and these remains of blueishness I attributed to the effects of the Air included in the Bottle, with so small a quantity of Liquor. And tho' I thought it not impossible, but that length of time might destroy it's blueishness, yet un∣stopping the Vessel, I observed, that in two minutes of an hour, the Surface of the Li∣quor where it touched the fresh Air became Ceruleous; and in a quarter of an hour the whole Body of the Liquor had attained a deep∣er colour than that of the sky, which colour grew sensibly paler again when the Vial was stopped: But one thing I must add is, that I have found the Experiment to succeed with some Analogy, when another Volatile Spirit hath been made use of, in which there was no Volatile Salt of Human Blood; but the Ex∣periment being repeated the Air produced a green and not a Ceruleous colour, which makes me suspend my Judgment till satisfied by further experience, whether the event of the former tryal depended on any Affinity of the Spirit with Blood or not. And here I shall add, that a parcel of Spirit of Human Blood being kept in Vacuo Byliano, when the Air was pumpt out, it afforded fewer and less bubbles than an equal quantity of common Water.
TITLE XIV. Of the Hostility of the Spirit of Human Blood with Acids, whether they be in the form of Liquors or Fumes. IT exercises its Hostility against more than one sort of Acid Spirits, as Spirit of Salt, of Nitre, Spirit and Oyl of Vitriol, Aqua For∣tis, Aqua Regis, &c. And not only against Faciti∣ous but natural ones, as the Juice of Lemons, up∣on its Mixture with which there presently ensued a great commotion with noise. But there is not on∣ly an Hostility evident betwixt the Parts of these Liquors, but also their Effluvia; for if Spirit of Salt of Nitre be put into a Vial somewhat wide mouthed, and Spirit of Blood rectified into another, when these Liquors are held near one another, their invisible Emanati∣ons joyning together will form a manifest Smoak. Some pure Volatile Salt of Human Blood be∣ing just satiated with Spirit of Nitre, we slowly evaporated the superfluous moisture, which being done, we took the compound Cry∣stals which the Mixture afforded, and put it into a Bolt-Head with a slender and a long neck, and then adding to it a convenient quan∣tity of Salt of Tartar, and as much distilled Water as made the Mixture Liquid enough, the Salt of Tartar detained the Spirit of Nitre, and a good proportion of the Volatile Salt
ascended in a dry form to the neck of the Vessel. Spirit of Blood and Nitre being mixed to∣gether, there ensued a conflict, in which thick white fumes rose plentifully, and circulating in the Vessel, ran down the sides of it in a white stream; untill the fumes ceased to rise a∣gain, the Mixture in the mean time appearing reddish. Being setled and seeming to have been so discoloured by a fattish Substance, we put to it a little rain Water, and having by filtra∣tion separated the Faeces, and slowly evapo∣rated the thus clarified Liquor, the saline Parts shot into Crystals like those of Salt-Petre; but after a while seemed yellow, as if tinged with the Oyl. N. Tho' on several occasions the Spirit of Blood appears Oyly, yet I not long since dissolved another parcel of Blood, whose Liquor was clear and limpid a year after. Some of the before mentioned Crystals being put upon well kindled Charcoal, presently melted and burnt away like Salt-Petre, but the flame seemed not so halituous, and differed in colour, being not at all blue but yellow; and after the Deflagration ceased, there remained upon the Coal a lump of dirty coloured matter, which had scarce any taste, nor was that little it had Alkalious. This brittle Substance being held in the flame, became red hot without any sensible imminution, and so it did upon a live Coal.
TITLE XV. Of the Medicinal Virtues of Spirit of Hu∣man Blood outwardly applyed. SINCE we meet not with any Acid Sub∣stance, except in the Pancreatick Juice of a sound Person: And since the fixed Salt of Blood does much resemble Sea-salt, whether its Spirit be Acid or no; and since several Parts of the Body whether Solid or Liquid, afford a Liquor impregnated with store of Volatile Salt; it is not amiss to think that the Spirit of Human Blood, may have considerable effects in several Diseases, even when exter∣nally applyed. And that Spirit of Sal-Armo∣niack hath been found successful in assisting se∣veral People in Apoplexies, Epilepsies, &c. when applyed to or put up the Nostrils, it's confirmed by the experience of several learned and able Physicians; and upon the like reason I prepared a Volatile Salt sublimed from a compound Salt, obtained from Spirit of Blood satiated with Nitre. And for a like purpose, to bring over the Saline Part of Blood in a liquid form, we mixed two Parts of dryed Blood with three of Spirit of Blood, and distilling them with a pretty strong fire, we obtained a pret∣ty deal of Spirit, unaccompanyed with any Volatile Salt, in a dry form; and this Spirit seemed to have a stronger taste and smell be∣fore rectification, than Spirit of Human Blood prepared another way had after rectification;
and had we made use of more Lime, I question not but that we should have obtained a more piercing Spirit, since it would have retained more of the Oyl and the superfluous moi∣sture. And on this occasion I shall add, that I have often found Head-aches cured by the se∣parated application of Spirit of Human Blood; which is likewise good in Hysterick and Hypo∣chondriacal Cases, and in fainting Fits; and if the smell of it makes it too nauseous, that may be corrected according to the method already laid down in this Chapter, to which I shall add, that a few drops of Oyl of Rhodi∣um, being dissolved in Alcohol of Wine, if that be mixed with Spirit of Human Blood, it will give it a very grateful and odoriferous smell. And here I shall add, that Medicines made of Amber have been found successful not only in Convulsions, and other Distempers of the Genus Nervosum, but the Tincture of it in Spirit of Wine, hath proved successful enough in Diseases both of Men and Women. And this Tincture may not inconveniently or unsuc∣cessfully be added, to correct the Odour and increase the Virtues of Spirit of Human Blood; and tho Oyl of Amber will not mix readily with Spirit of Wine, yet if they be shaken to∣gether and left to settle at leisure, tho' they settle in distinct masses, yet the Spirit would even in the cold extract a high and a yellow Tincture, little different from the Oyl it self, which may be mixed with the Spirit of Blood, till the smell of the Amber be predominant.
To what hath been said of the external use of Spirit of Human Blood I shall add, that if the Oyl in these Mixtures should be too much predominant, it may be easily separated by runing it through a Tunnel, whose Orifice at the bottom is formed so small and sharp, as to give way for the Spirit to run off first, which may when thus separated be kept in a distinct Vessel. And since if the Vinous Spirit be suf∣ficiently rectified, there will by the Coagula∣tion of the Saline and Urinous Parts, be pro∣duced a kind of Salt, you may either pour the Liquid part into another Vessel, and then use them separate, or else separate the Salt by sublimation in a dry form; and Spirit of Hu∣man Blood thus separated will have a fragrant brisk and piercing Odour. But, To conclude, this Spirit is not only good in respect of the Virtues ascribed to its scent, but it may be good likwise when used as a fo∣mentation, as Spirit of Sal-Armoniack hath been effectual in removing the Pains of the Gout, and in the Erisipelas. And since upon the account of its Alkalizate Nature it may be good to correct Acidities, it may be for that purpose made use of both by Physicians and Chirurgeons.
TITLE XVI. Of the Medicinal Virtues of Spirit of Hu∣man Blood inwardly used. I Have been long apt to think, that the same peccant matter may produce several Distempers as its effects are diversified, part∣ly by its greater or lesser quantities, as well as more or less active qualities, and partly by the particular Natures, or Structures, and Sci∣tuations of the Parts that it invades; which seems to be favoured by the frequent Metasta∣ses of Morbifick matter in several Distempers, since the same Acid or sharp Humours some∣times occasion a Colick, sometimes after that a Palsey, at other times a Cough, a flux of the Belly, an Opthalmia, a Violent Head-ach, Convulsions, &c. As the peccant Humour falls upon this or that part, upon which ac∣count one or two Medicines may be able to cure several Distempers, especially if endew∣ed with any variety of active Virtues; and upon these grounds I am inclined to believe, that the Spirit of Human Blood may be a good Remedy in several internal affections of the Body; and indeed Volatile Alkalies in general have been so prosperously made use of in Physick, since the year 1656 as to in∣vite several Physicians to employ them instead of other Medicines, which clog and weaken the Patient, and want several advan∣tageous
qualities, which may be found in Vo∣latile Alkalies. And indeed Spirit of Human Blood mor∣tifies Acid Salts, which occasion several Dis∣eases: It is likewise a great Resolvent, and fit to open Obstructions which produce not a few Diseases; it is also Diaphoretick and Di∣uretick, and able to discharge several noxious Salts, and to expel several Malignant and Con∣tagious Particles of matter. It resists Putre∣faction and Coagulation; and gives a brisk∣ness and Spirituousness to the Blood, which promotes free Circulation, upon which account it is a good Cordial and an Antidote against some Poysons: It is ve∣ry friendly to the Genus Nervosum, and to cure its Distempers, and Balsamick in some sort of Asthams, it neither causes great eva∣cuations, nor does it clog the Stomach; or is disadvantageous in any manifest qualities. And it may likwise be very good in such cases as Spirit of Sal-Armoniack hath been found successful in. Helmont commends it in Epi∣lepsies, which he says, it will cure in Adult Persons: And I have known it cure an inve∣terate Consumptive Cough, and a very bad Head-ach, which had a long time baffled ve∣ry eminent Physicians. But besides the Virtues it hath when simply used, its Virtues may be enobled and diversified by a long digestion, or frequent Cohobations of the Spirit with the Oyls, Salt or Phlegm of the same Concrete; or, by uniting it with Acids, as Spirit of Nitre, or Vinegar; Verdigrease, Oyl of Vi∣triol,
&c. either used in a Liquid form, or when reduced by evaporation into Crystals. Or the Virtues of it may be enobled, by u∣niting our Spirit with Metalline Solutions, as of Gold, Silver, or Mercury; and with Solutions of Minium made with Spirit of Vinegar; by a Mixture of which Liquor and a slow evapora∣tion of them, I have obtained finely shaped Crystals. Or, again either by uniting with it Sulphur opened with Salt of Tartar; or by dissolving in it Metalline Bodies, as Copper, Zinke, and Iron. Or by adding about a double weight of Alcohol of Wine; for these Liquors being shaken together, will in a very great measure coagulate into a Salt, which will retain a con∣siderable degree of quickness and penetrancy. And why such Salts as these should not be ef∣ficacious I see no reason, since such a kind of a Mixture, tho' made with another Urinous Spirit hath had extraordinary effects in Fevers. nor is the Liquor this Salt leaves behind useless in Medicine when well dephlegmed. But this Spirit may be rendered still more commodious, if impregnated with essential Oyls; and by that means several Oyly Volatile Salts may be produced, which may be useful in peculiar Distempers, as those Oyls respect this or that part in their Medicinal Virtues.
CHAP. X. An Appendix to the Memoirs for the Na∣tural History of Human Blood: Con∣taining, first, particulars referable to the second Part of the foregoing History. EXPERIMENT I. HAving caused twelve Ounces of dryed Blood to be carefully distilled, the Sub∣stances obtained from it, were of Volatile Salt and Spirit together five Ounces; the Liquor poured off from the wet Salt being thirteen Drachms, fifty four Grains, so that the Salt was three Ounces, two Drachms, and six Grains; of fetid Oyl there were two Ounces; of Caput Mortuum four Ounces, and two Drachms; so that about six Drachms of the whole was consumed in the Operation. The Caput Mortuum being calcined yielded but six Drachms and a half of ashes, the fixed Olea∣ginous Parts being consumed by the accensi∣on; the colour of the ashes was reddish when cool, tho' in the fire they appeared white as soon as the Oyl was consumed, these ashes be∣ing turned into a Lixivium, afforded five scru∣ples of white fixed Salt, besides a little which got into the contiguous Sand, which being recovered by Water, and reduced to a Salt made a scruple more. So that there remain∣ed for the Terra Damnata fourteen Scruples and a half, which is a good deal above twice
the weight of the Salt; whence it appears, that the pure fixed Salt is but between the fifty seventh and fifty eighth part of dryed Blood, and therefore probably amounts to no more than about the 170th part of the mass of Blood; and the fixed Earth is to dryed Blood as about nineteen and about a half to one. EXPERIMENT II. A parcel of Blood weighing ten Ounces and seventy three Grains, being slowly distilled to dryness in a Head and Body on a digestive Furnace, afforded of Phlegmatick Liquor seven Ounces, two Drachms, and forty seven Grains; and of Caput Mortuum or dry Substance two Ounces, two Drachms. This pulverable mat∣ter being distilled in a Retort by degrees of fire yielded two Drachms, forty eight Grains of Oyl. The Spirit being poured off, the Salt weighed but forty eight Grains, and the Salt being washed out with the distilled Water, we obtained thence by Sublimation into the neck of a Glass-Egg one Drachm, five Grains of dry Salt. The Caput Mortuum weighed six Drachms, twelve Grains, which being carefully calcined yielded two Scruples and four Grains of ashes; which were red, and these being elixivated afforded eighteen Grains of Salt, besides the remaining Earth, which is of a red colour with an Eye of Pur∣ple,
Particulars referrable to the Primary Title of the Natural History of Human Blood. EXPERIMENT I. Spirit of Vinegar put upon Blood, turned its red colour of a dark or dirty colour. EXPERIMENT II. Juice of Limons poured upon the superfi∣cies of Blood, impaired its florid colour. EXPERIMENT III. Juice of Oranges changed Blood less than Limons. EXPERIMENT IV. The black part of clotted Blood exposed to the Air, presently became of a pleasant and florid colour. EXPERIMENT V. Spirit of Sal-Armoniack dropped upon black clotted Blood, presently rendered it florid, but not so much as the open Air. EXPERIMENT VI. Fixed Alkalies or lixiviate Salts resolved per Deliquium, turned it red, but not so florid as the Urinous Spirit.
EXPERIMENT VII. The Juice of Scurvey Grass fresh drawn, inclined the black Surface of clotted Blood to redishness. EXPERIMENT VIII. Blood being closed up with an eighth or fourth part of Spirit of Wine about three years, was coagulated, but neither stank nor was it in the least putrified. EXPERIMENT IX. A small piece of concreted Blood being left three days in Spirit of Wine, was rendered moderately hard and friable throughout. EXPERIMENT X. Upon tryal we found, that an Ounce of distilled Water would dissolve at least two Drachms of Volatile Salt of Human Blood; and by the help of Heat it was able to dissolve twenty five Grains more, nor did any of this Salt shoot into Crystals upon its Refrigera∣tion. EXPERIMENT XI. The aforementioned Solution being put in∣to a Retort, to be drawn off with a pretty quick heat, we obtained a distilled Liquor, that
contained almost all the Volatile Salt, except a little which escaped in a dry form; and this Liquor being as strong as moderate Spi∣rit of Human Blood, it may give us a hint, what proportion of a Liquor to Salt may be sufficient for such a Spirit. And one thing here may be worthy our notice, viz. That the Liquor which was too much impregnated with Salt, having been exposed to the Air in a frosty Night, we perceived at the bottom of the Glass a good deal of Volatile Salt shot into Crystals, tho' the Crystals that were this way obtained were fine and clear, and some of them larger than Spangles; yet being very numerous and sticking together, we could not discover the shape of particular Grains, nor whether they were all of the same shape, but divers of them appeared to be flat thin Plates, with fine rectilinear Angles, so that we con∣jectured if the whole Plates could have been seen, their broadest Surface would have been found Hexagonal, or of some Polygone figures very near of kin to that. EXPERIMENT XII. An Ounce of distilled Water was shut up in a Glass-Egg, with as much Salt as could be dissolved in it, and exposed to congeal in a frosty Night; but the Salt was neither con∣gealed nor the Water, tho' afterwards it was removed into a frigorifick Mixture, which would perhaps have froze Beer, or Ale, or the weaker sort of French Wine; yet we did not perceive the least Glaciation.
EXPERIMENT XIII. Tho' Sea-Salt dissolved in Water renders it less subject to be froze, yet being joyned with Ice or Snow, and externally applyed, it conduces to the freezing of it. Wherefore we mixed about a Scruple of Salt of Human Blood with Ice, to try whether it would have the like effect, and accordinly we found, that a slender Pipe of Water being immersed in it, the Water in the bottom of the Pipe was froze. EXPERIMENT XIV. Some of the fibrous part of Human Blood, being exposed to the Air in an open and shal∣low Glass in a frosty Night, the next Morn∣ing it was lightly frozen, and the Surface of the Ice prettily figured with resemblances of Combs with Teeth on both sides, not much unlike Sal-Armoniack coagulated in common Water. And not here to mention what hath been said, by some, of the Virtues of Human Blood, I shall propose a couple of Medicines to be prepared from it, one of which may perhaps have no inconsiderable effects: The first Medi∣cine I attempted to make, was by putting to Salt of Tartar Oyl of Human Blood instead of Oyl of Turpentine, and by stirring them long toge∣ther in the open Air, to make such a saponary concretion as Matthew's Corector, which is esteemed and employed with good success by
some London Physicians. The other Medi∣cine I endeavoured to make, was by uniting by long digestion the Salt, Spirit, and Oyl of Human Blood into a Mixture, which some Chymists call a Clyssus. Particulars referrable to the third Part of the History. EXPERIMENT I. THE Blood of a young Man, when cool, having its Serum and fibrous Parts sepa∣rately weighed, the latter weighed about six Ounces, and the serous part not many Drachms from that weight. EXPERIMENT II. The very ingenious Mr. Hook and my self, having often observed on the Surface of frozen Urine, figures which much resemble Combs or Feathers; considering the Affi∣nity usually agreed on betwixt the Serum of Human Blood and Urine, we exposed some of it, strained through a linnen rag to separate the Grumous part, to the Air, in a shallow Vessel several Nights consecutively, and ob∣served, that being froze, there appeared upon the Ice contiguous to the Air, certain figures which did not ill resemble those of congla∣ciated Urine.
EXPERIMENT III To try whether Serum as well as Urine, might not as well be made use of for invisible Ink, we traced some Characters with it upon white Paper; and when they were dryed, we held the unwritten side over the flame of a Candle, keeping it always stirring, that it might not take fire, upon which the Letters on the upper side appeared of a dark colour, tho' not of an Inky blackness. Particulars referrable to the fourth Part of the History. SINCE according to the several ways of distilling Human Blood, the Spirit of Salt, &c. produced, may be considerably di∣versified; I distilled three Portions of Human Blood, each with a different additament. The first which was distilled with Quick-Lime, we shall subjoyn the following account of, viz. Four Ounces of coagulated Blood, being mixed with an equal proportion of Quick-Lime, we distilled them by degrees of fire in a Retort placed in Sand, by which means we obtained a proportion of reddish Spirituous Liquor, which seemed not very Phlegmatick, together with some Oyl, the quantity of which was but small, the rest be∣ing probably detained by the Lime, and a small Portion of that little Oyl that came
over sunk in the Spirit, the rest swiming up∣on it. The Spirit being set in a digestive Fur∣nace in a small Head and Body, to rectifie with a gentle Heat, the Receiver was three or four times removed; and we observed, that the first Spirit that came over was not near so fetid, as that which ascends when it is distilled per se; and the like was observed in the suc∣ceeding Portions, the Oyl being detained be∣hind by the Quick-Lime; the rectified Spirit was clear and colourless, and had a taste much stronger than its smell, and so strong that it made me think some Volatile Alkalious Parts of the Quick-Lime were carried up with it, to be satisfied of which we dropped some of it up∣on a Solution of Sublimate with fair Water; and on the first contact we perceived a precipi∣tate a little inclining to yellow, as Quick-Lime in a greater quantity usually turned it: But afterwards the Precipitate appeared white, like that made with ordinary Volatile Liquors of an Urinous Nature. Some of this Spirit put into a Glass-Egg, afforded not any Volatile Salt in a dry form, and the tryal being continued, we found, that the Spirit by the action of the fire lost its limpidness, and became muddy or troubled. Another Portion of it being mixed with a highly rectified ardent Spirit, upon their be∣ing kept all Night in the cold, no coagulati∣on ensued, nor could we perceive any, when it had been kept several hours in a moderate Heat. But the Mixture acquired a yellow colour, and let fall a pretty deal of darkish powder.
Some of this Spirit being mixed with good Spirit of Salt, they smoaked at their first meeting, but produced neither bubbles or noise. Another Portion being mixed with Oyl of Vitriol, there was produced a great smoak, and an intense degree of Heat without any vi∣sible Ebullition, or any bubbles or noise, but the colour of the Oyl was heightned and grew almost red. From whence it appears, that this Alkali∣zated Spirit of Blood is very different from simple Spirit of Blood; but whether upon this account it becomes a more violent, or a less safe Medicine, further Experience must dis∣cover. EXPERIMENT II. Two Ounces of Tartar calcined to white∣ness by an equal weight of Nitre, being distil∣led in a Retort in a Sand Furnace, with an e∣qual weight of dryed and powdered Blood, it appeared that Quick-Lime acts on this oc∣casion otherwise on Blood than other Alkalies do; for whereas the Blood distilled with that yielded a strong Spirit before rectification, and unaccompanyed with dry Salt; this Mix∣ture afforded us at the first Distillation a weak∣er Spirit, but so much Volatile Salt with it as covered the whole internal Surface of the Receiver. Besides there was a manifest diffe∣rence in their Caput Mortuums: And tho' the Spirit drawn from Quick-Lime did not fer∣ment
with Acids, yet this Salt upon an affusion of Spirit of Salt would. EXPERIMENT III. An equal quantity of the powder of Human Blood and Oyl of Vitriol being mixed together, in a little time they grew warm; and then placing the Retort in a Sand Furnace, by de∣grees of fire we obtained a Spirit, which was preceded by a good deal of Phlegmatick Li∣quor of an odd Sulphureous smell, and very strong and lasting. The Caput Mortuum seem∣ed to be of a very compounded Nature. But one thing observable in our Experiment was, that tho' Oyl of Vitriol usually exercises a fix∣ative Power, on many Bodies wherewith it is mixed in Distillation, yet this Experiment afforded us a pretty quantity of Volatile mat∣ter in the form of a white Salt, but of an un∣common smell and taste. EXPERIMENT IV. We prepared an Aurum Fulminans, by precipitating a Solution of Gold made in A∣qua Regia with Spirit of Human Blood, and by dulcifying the precipitate with common Water, and then drying it leisurely. EXPERIMENT V. Having immersed the Ball of a Weather-Glass in Spirit of Blood contained in a wide mouthed Glass, we poured on some Spirit of
Verdigrease, which made a conflict with it and excited bubbles; there was likewise pro∣duced a degree of warmth not insensible on the outside of the Glass; and the Liquor was raised in the Thermoscope a considerable height, tho' when the conflict was over it be∣gan moderately to subside again. EXPERIMENT VI. Having gradually mixed Spirit of Blood, with as much Spirit of Nitre as it would work on it, they produced bubbles with a con∣siderable noise, and when the Liquors had setled in a cool place, it appeared, that an Oyl had been separated from it in this ope∣ration; since a red colour was not only pro∣duced by it, but the Surface of the Liquor was covered with such a film, as Liquors co∣piously impregnated with Antimony or other sulphureous Bodies usually are. And when it was looked upon with Eyes conveniently pla∣ced in reference to it and the Light, it appear∣ed to be adorned with vivid colours of a Rain-Bow, as Red, Yellow, Blue, and Green; and that too in their natural order. EXPERIMENT VII. Spirit of Human Blood which had been kept twelve years, being when it was looked upon not well stopped, it appeared to be a Spirit∣less Phlegm, but not of a red florid colour, and but little wasted.
EXPERIMENE VIII. Spirit of Human Blood being exposed to the Air in a frosty Night, in which Oyl of Vitriol was froze, it was not in the least al∣tered or coagulated by it, but being put in∣to a frigorifick Mixture, it was presently frozen. EXPERIMENT IX. A piece of black clotted Blood, being put into Spirit of Human Blood, it became of a florid colour, and retained that all Night. EXPERIMENT X. Spirit of Blood being poured upon powde∣red Blood, presently dissolved part of it, and acquired a deep pleasant colour. But Spirit of Wine being poured upon another parcel, acquired not a Tincture, till urged with Heat; and then only a yellow one; but common Wa∣ter presently dissolved a pretty deal of another parcel. EXPERIMENT XI. Spirit of Human Blood poured on lumps of Vitriol, dissolved them slowly without a froth; but upon the powder the solution was quicker and with a froth. And both the So∣lutions were of a more lovely blue than the Mineral it self; nor was there a dark Preci∣pitate
as in a Mixture of ordinary Vitriol and Spirit of Urine. EXPERIMENT XII. Spirit of Human Blood employed for an invisible Ink, is much better than Serum of Blood. EXPERIMENT XIII. Having immersed the Ball of a Weather-Glass in distilled Water contained in a wide mouthed Glass, upon an affusion of two or three spoonfuls of Spirit of Human Blood, the tinged Spirit of Wine did presently subside in the Stem, within a little, as I have observed it with Spirit of Urine. And here it may not be amiss to take notice, that the reason why I employ distilled Water instead of common Water or Pump Water, is, because it is not impregnated with Salts, which may vary the success of the Experiment. EXPERIMENT XIV. Spirit of Blood being poured upon filings of Copper, and stopped up in a Glass extracted a Ceruleous Tincture, which in a few days gra∣dually growing fainter, I opened the Glass up∣on which its Ceruleous colour was renewed, and extended it self downwards towards the bot∣tom of the Vial, and so strong as to render the Liquor almost Opacous. And tho' the Liquor
was stopped up several days after, yet it lost not its colour. EXPERIMENT XV. Some of the same Spirit being poured upon Lapis Armenus, extracted from it a lovely and a deep blue, almost like a Solution of filings of crude Copper in the same Menstruum. Postscript To conclude this Chapter I shall add, that tho' I have laid down these notes with what ex∣actness was possible, yet I question not, but that the Blood of several, and even of the same Animals is so different at different times, that were they to be tryed over again they would scarce have the same effects; yet it will not be a just reason to discourage others in further Tryals, since the advantage natu∣ral knowledge may attain by it, will be a suf∣ficient reward. CHAP. XI. Of the Reconcileableness of Specifick Medi∣cines, to the Corpuscular Phylosophy. Of specifick Medicines.BEfore I descend to shew that the notion of Specifick Medicines is agreeable to spe∣cifick Medicines, I shall first represent, that I am induced to believe that there are such, by
the common Observations of a great many learned Men and able Physicians; and to favour this common Observation, viz. That there are such Substances which have peculiar effects, which can be ascribed to no manifest Qualities, I shall urge the effects of Poysons taken in a very inconsiderable quantity. And I am told, that something that fell from a Spider into a Man's Eye caused him to lose his sight, to which I shall add, that Spiders are observed to kill flies, much sooner than cutting off their Heads, or running them through with Pins will do it. To which instances we may add, that most Poysons are cured by appropriated Antidotes; and as perfumes cause ill symtoms in many Histerick Women, so the fumes of Feathers burnt relieve them. And I have found that the smell of Spirit of Harts-horn or Sal-Armoniack, hath recovered People made sick by fragrant Odours. But beyond all o∣ther Arguments is experience; for Galen tells us, That the ashes of a burnt Craw-Fish will cure the biting of a mad Dog, and that their effects are much more considerable, if to ten Parts of burnt Craw-Fish we add five of Gen∣tian and one of Frankincense. And Diascorides commends them against the same Disease that the Pergamenian does. And tho' the stings of Scorpions usually produce very acute Pains and formidable Symtoms, yet the mischief is easily remedied, either by crushing the Body of the Scorpion upon the Hurt, or by anointing the Part with Oyl of Scorpions, tho' the Liquor appears not to have any sensible Qualities, to which their Efficacy may be ascribed.
And to these Instances I might add, that Verginian Snake-weed cures the sting of a rat∣tle Snake, and the Jesuit's Powder is a speci∣fick in Agues. And tho' it be argued against the Virtues of specifick Medicines, that they are altered by the ferment of the Stomach, and other strainers of different Textures, and that a great deal is carried off by Excrements, or is assimilated and converted into the Substance of our Bodies; yet to these things it may be answered, that not only Oyntments, Plaisters, Periapta, &c. work upon the mass of Humours; but even those Medicines which are allowed to work by manifest Qualities, perform what they do upon the account of their Particles al∣terering, and differently disposing the Hu∣mours of our Bodies, and in doing of that they are liable to the same objections offer∣ed against specifick Medicines. Besides, it is observable that Rhubarb, will tinge the Urine of those that take a considerable Dose. And there is a Fruit called prickled Pears in the English American Colonies, which passes by Urine, so much unaltered, that the People think, when strangers to it, that they piss Blood. And Elaterium so much impregnates the Milk of a Nurse, that it will Purge the Child that takes it. And I remember that in the confines of Savoy and Swizerland, when the Cattle fed on a Herb called wild Garlick, the butter would sensibly taste of it. And in Ireland they have a kind of Sea-Fowl which feed upon Fishes, which is so little altered, as to make some question whether it be Flesh or Fish.
And tho' it be further urged against Speci∣fick Medicines, that so little is dispersed through the habit of the Body, that it can have no considerable effects; yet their Efficacy may answer for their smallness in quantity. For I am told that the Negroes have a Poyson, which tho' it work slow, is nevertheless Mortal, and this they conceal under the Nails of their Fin∣gers, and drop into the Aliment of those they have spite to. And I know a Vegetable Sub∣stance, half a Grain of which will be too vio∣lent a Purgative; and sometimes Mortal: And tho' English Vipers are looked upon as no Poyson, yet by the Wound of a single Tooth I knew one who was taken with violent Vomitings. To which may be added the ter∣rible effects of Scorpions in the Island of Java. And we see that several Women, otherwise strong and lusty, will fall into Swoons upon the smell of Musk or Civet, tho' all the Effluvia that affect them, would not amount to the hundredth part of a Grain; and by Effluvia, perhaps not more plentiful these Symptoms may be again removed. And the Portions of Crocus Metallorum in Wine, or of Quick-Silver in Water, tho' small have very considerable effects, so that when a Child who obstinately refused all Medicines, drank small Beer im∣pregnated with Mercury, he was much reliev∣ed in a violent worm Fever. That their Operations may be Me∣chanically solved, is proved in the follow∣ing Proposi∣tions.Having said thus much of specifick Medi∣cines, I shall now proceed to lay down some things in the following Propositions, to shew that they be mechanically explicated: But first I shall premise, that I would not have the
Body to be considered as a dull lump of matter, but as an admirably contrived Mechanical En∣gin, consisting of Parts exquisitely contri∣ved and adapted to their particular Uses; and that the effects of Bodies upon it may be considered in reference to that Disposition of their Parts. This being premised there is no need to think, that all specificks act after the same manner, or the same way, and sometimes the specifick may operate by a joynt and in a compound way. But to proceed to the fol∣lowing Propositions. PROP. I.Prop. I. Sometimes the specifick Medicine may cure by discussing or resolving the Morbifick matter, and thereby making it fit for Expulsion by the greater common shores of the Body, and the Pores of the Skin. Thus the Blood impregnated with Medici∣nal Particles, may act upon gross Humours which obstruct the Parts, and are not to be resolved without specifick Solvents, which by their figure and agitation may get in betwixt and separate those Viscous Parts; so Blood impregnated with Sal-Armoniack dissolves Copper, not by manifest Qualities; but by Virtue of the Shape, Bulk, Solidity, and other Mechanical affections of its Parts, which con∣cur to enable it to disjoyn the Parts of a Body, of such a determinate Texture. And indeed there are not only a great number of
Menstruums very different from one another, but their effects evidently appear not to depend upon manifest Qualities, since it several times happens that a Menstruum less Acid, may dissolve this or that Body, which a much stronger Menstruum will not work upon; so Wa∣ter will dissolve the white of an Egg, which Spirit of Wine will coagulate, and so will Spirit of Salt and Oyl of Tartar it self; and thus dephlegmed Spirit of Urine will more readily dissolve filings of Copper than Spirit of Vitriol, and yet the latter will speedily dissolve Crabs Eyes, tho' the other leaves them untouched; so Quick-Silver will dissolve Gold in the cold, tho' Aqua Fortis assisted by Heat leaves it untouched; yet Aqua Fortis will dissolve Iron, and Quick-silver will not. And Brimstone will be dissolved by com∣mon Oyl, tho' not by Aqua Fortis. And I know a Liquor of which one may safely drink a Wine Glass full, tho' it will have such an effect upon Stones and Metals as can scarce be matched. And if specifick Medicines may act upon Humours in the Body, after the manner of Menstruums, we may easily guess why they have peculiar Virtues, viz. By reason of their aptness to work upon peculiarly disposed Bo∣dies, so, as I have elsewhere noted, Aqua Fortis will not work upon Silver if too strong, till diluted with Water. And as the dissolution of a Body may part∣ly depend in its disposition, to be acted on by such a Menstruum, from thence may be
deduced a reason, why a Medicine which hath good effects in one Disease may have but in∣different ones in others; for tho pure Spirit of Wine will easily dissolve Gumm, Guajacum, and that Rosinous matter lodged in the Pores of the Wood, yet the same Menstruum will not work upon the Wood it self. And if so, no wonder that those Medicines which cure one Distemper in one Person, will not cure it in another, since a Variation in the Texture of the Morbifick matter, is enough to vary the effects of the Medicines. And that a slight alteration of Texture varies the effects of a Menstruum appears, since, tho' Spirit of Nitre or Salt separate will each dissolve Copper; and tho' the Spirit of Nitre will dissolve Silver, yet if Spirit of Salt be added to it, it soon loses that Quality. And here, tho' some object against speci∣fick Medicines, that since they rove up and down in the Blood, they cannot act well on particular Humours, yet if we suppose the Medicines act by impregnating the Blood, and that they turn it into a kind of Menstru∣um, it is possible that both the Menstruums may be appropriated to the peccant Humour, so as to resolve it more easily than any other Humour of the Body. As if you take some Bone ashes, Crocus Martis, Saw-dust, Pow∣dered Sea-Salt, and filings of Gold, and mix them together, common Water will dissolve the Salt and leave the others untouched, and Quick-Silver will alone dissolve the Gold: And those that work in Spanish Gold Mines
tell us, that Quick-Silver poured upon pow∣dered Ore of Gold and Copper mixed, it will scarce meddle with the latter, till the former is licked up. And from what hath been said, we may be furnished with a reason of the effects of Periapta Amulets and Appensa, especially if we consider what hath already been delivered of the Effluviums of Bodies, and the Porosity of Animal Bodies; and tho' these Effluvia be very small in quantity, yet their effects may be more considerable, in as much as they are neither altered nor consumed, by previ∣ous digestions, and circulating through Parts, in which they might be in a great measure dispersed, and carried off a-long with the Ex∣crements. PROP. II. Sometimes a specifick Medicine may mortifie the over Acid, or other immoderate Par∣ticles, that infect the mass of Blood, and destroy their Coagulatory or other Effects. Tho' I believe not that all Distempers are, yet I question not but that a great ma∣ny are caused either by Acids, or their ill effects or Productions; and which may be cured by specifick Medicines two ways, viz. either by mortifying them by a positive Hostility, such as Alkalizate Salts, whether fixt as the lixiviate Salts of Plants, or Volatile, as those of Urine, &c. Or, by taking off or blunt∣ing
their edges; as a Knife may lose its power of cutting, by putting it in a sheath, or sticking something upon the edge; for the edges of an Acid may be taken off, as well by being lodged in a Porous Alkaly, as by having their edges broken off; and thus it is that Minium takes off the Acidity of Vinegar; Chalk takes off the edge of Aqua Fortis, and Lapis Calaminaris lessens the Aci∣dity of Spirit of Salt and Spirit of Nitre; and that Acids are rather sheathed than alte∣red by these Bodies, I am apt to believe, be∣cause as Glauber tells us, they may by a strong fire be drawn out of Lapis Calaminaris much stronger and more dephlegmed than be∣fore. And tho' it may be urged by those that plead against specifick Medicines, that they act by a manifest Quality, viz. their Alka∣lious Nature, or their Acid; yet there is so great a variety betwixt Acid and Alkalious Medicines themselves, that I am perswaded they perform a great deal upon the account of something else, besides their Acid or Al∣kalious Nature, since Aqua Fortis will not dissolve God tho' it will Silver, but if it be altered by an addition of Spirit of Salt, it will dissolve Gold and not Silver. And a different Modification may not only make a difference betwixt Acids, but a contrariety; since Spirit of Salt will precipitate Silver, which Aqua Fortis hath dissolved: And Spirit of Nitre will precipitate out of Butter of An∣timony, an Antimonial powder with a consi∣derable
Conflict and Effervescence; yet this Butter of Antimony is so highly Acid, that a little quantity of it put into a little Water makes it so sower, that many Chymists call it Acetum Philosophorum. And as there are seve∣ral kinds of Acids and of Alkalies too, so every Alkaly will not mortifie the same Acid; for tho' Chalk will precipitate a Solution of Cop∣per in Aqua Fortis, yet a Volatile Alkaly will not. And indeed when I consider what diffe∣rence there naturally is betwixt Acids, it is not unreasonable to expect, that there may be Acid Humours produced in the Body utterly un∣known to us, and which may require a speci∣fick Alkaly to correct them, as it is observed, that tho' neither Spirit of Vinegar, nor Spirit of Salt, nor Oyl of Vitriol, will dissolve a Calculus Humanus, yet Spirit of Nitre will, and by that means loses its Corrosive∣ness. And to what hath been said, I shall add, that I am of opinion that particular Acids may be the occasion of Distempers, which they are by some rather taken to be Remedies; for tho' Acids are looked upon to be of an incisive Na∣ture, and tho' in some cases I am willing to allow them those Virtues; yet I believe that Ob∣structions and the Diseases depending therein, are caused by Acids coagulating, some fluids disposed to be thickned by them; which might be exemplified by the Coagulation I have made of some Acid Salts, as Spirit of Salt, of the white of an Egg, which by be∣ing beaten is reduced to an Aqueous consi∣stence:
And Milk will be coagulated not only by Spirit of Salt, but Rennet and Juice of Li∣mons, and it hath been found by experience, that some Acids transmitted into the mass of Blood, have coagulated it in living Ani∣mals. But tho' I believe a great many Distempers are occasioned by Acids, yet I conceive some are occasioned by Acid Salts uniting with o∣ther Saline Bodies; as Spirit of Salt, and Spirit of Urine produce a Sal-Armoniack. And Spirit of Nitre with Salt of Tartar dissol∣ved in common Water will coagulate with it into Salt-Petre; and the same Spirit of Nitre with Spirit of Urine will produce a very fusi∣ble Salt, different from either of the Ingre∣dients; and Oyl of Vitriol or Oyl of Tartar per Deliquium will produce Tartarum Vitri∣olatum; in which both the Acidity and Al∣kaliousness of the Ingredients are much in∣fringed, the Body resulting from the compo∣sition being different from both the Ingredi∣dients: And if besides these instances we con∣sider how many different Substances may be produced by Nature, I am apt to believe, that specifick Qualities are requisite to alter or destroy them, in the Medicines made use of for that purpose. And to what hath been said, I shall further add, that I have mixed two Liquors together neither of which were Acid or Alkalious, and yet the resulting Body was a consistent Coa∣gulum. And I have prepared a certain Li∣quor, which upon the affusion of Spirit of U∣rine
will be turned into a Gelly. And the like I have produced without the help of either an Acid or an Alkaly. And I have had a Substance prepared without the help of a Vo∣latile Alkaly, which would in a trice coagu∣late highly rectified Spirit of Wine; and as Spirit of Salt will coagulate the white of an Egg, so will dephlegmed Spirit of Wine; so that an Animal Substance may be coagulated without an Acid. PROP. III. Sometimes a Specifick Medicine may help the Patient,Prop. III. by Precipitating the peccant matter out of his Blood, or the other Liquors of the Body in which it harbours. Tho' Precipitation be generally a Consequent of the Mortification of Acids or Alkalies, by Corpuscles of a contrary Quality, yet some A∣cids and Alkalies may be mixed without a pre∣cipitation of any thing; and several Precipita∣tions may be caused without any such manifest Hostility. As in certain mixtures of Spirit of Sal-Armoniac made with Salt of Tartar or Pot∣ashes, and Spirit of Nitre, or Aqua Fortis; and also when Spirit of Urine and Salt, are mixed in a certain proportion, make Sal Armoniac, which the Phlegm of those Liquors will keep swimming; and that there may be Precipitati∣ons without any appearance of contrariety, is evident, when Silver being dissolved in Aqua-Fortis, the Menstruum is diluted with Thirty
or Forty Parts of Distill'd Water; for if clean Plates of Copper be immersed in the Solution, the Metal will be slowly precipitated out of it, in the form, not of a Calx, but pure shining Scales of Silver; and if you rub Dantzick Vitriol upon the Blade of a Knife well wetted with Water, the Steel in a trice will be overlaid with a reddish substance, which by its Colour and Signs appears manifestly cupreous. And here I shall add, that there are in Nature, Pre∣cipitants which silently precipitate some Bodies dissolved in Urinous Menstruums. And tho' against the Use of Precipitating Medicines, it may be urged, that the Hetero∣genous Particles precipitated, may be of dan∣gerous consequence, yet they may be less per∣nicious than those hostile Particles that pro∣duce the Disease. And further, they may not be so big, but that it is possible for them to be carried out of the mass of Blood, since those Mineral Substances dissolved in Tunbridge Waters, and the Sulphureous ones in the Bath, chiefly perform their effects by being disper∣sed through, and acting on the several Parts of the Body. But moreover it is possible Precipitations may be made in the mass of Blood, without the Medicine getting into it, which is obser∣ved in the use of Chalybeat Medicines; where were it urged, that they pass through the Pores of the Guts, then there is no reason why there are not Pores in the Body large enough to carry off the Precipitated Parts of the mass of Blood.
And not only Sennertus makes use of Medi∣cines in Fevers, to Precipitate the febrile matter, but Kergerus very solemnly declares that he cured thousands only by a Precipita∣ting Medicine. And that Precipitating may be of use in Physick, I am the more inclined to believe, if a Putrefaction of Humours be rightly assign∣ed as the cause of some Distempers; because I know a Liquor which being dropped into stinking Water, Precipitated a light Feculen∣cy out of it, upon which the Liquor was wholly freed from its stink, nor could I per∣ceive that the Feculency it self had any; and what was more remarkable was, that the taste of this Precipitant was neither Bitter, Acid, Urinous or Lixiviate. PROP. IV. Sometimes the Specifick Remedy may work by peculiarly strengthening and cherishing the Heart; the part affected, or both. That a Medicine may have peculiar effects on this or that Part, I am inclined to believe for the following reasons. First, because the se∣veral Parts of the Body are of different∣ly framed, and have different Humours lodged in them; and consequently the Parts of a Medicine dispersed through the Body, may be more aptly appropriated to be receiv∣ed or detained in those Parts; and the Parts being thus strengthened may be more able
to resist the influence of Morbifick Humours, by which means they are thrown upon more ignoble Parts, for which reason, some Per∣sons are seised with the Gout; and I know a Gentleman, who tho' he could drink Wine without much hurt, yet Brandy would cause him to have a severe Tooth-ach. But to illustrate what I was saying, of the disposition of some Parts of Medicines to associate themselves with those Parts they seem friendly to; I shall add, that in nou∣rishing Children, Milk does not only afford grosser Faeces, and various other Excrements as Urine, Mucous, and a Humour by insensi∣ble Transpiration, but Particles which upon their being assimilated increase the bulk of the Body; and whereas it is observed, that some Cartilages in Children acquire a Bony hard∣ness in older Persons, this change cannot be supposed to be the bare effect of Exsicca∣tion. And as Specifick Medicines may confirm the strength of a Part, so they may conduce to the restoreing of strength to the weak Part, by removing Distempered Humours; and this they may do, not only by altering the whole mass of Blood, but their peculiar dispo∣sition to act on the Distempered Humour And as the Morbifick matter is diversify'd, ac∣cording the disposition of the part it is lodged in, so must the Medicine be Speci∣fically appropriated. And as they contribute to the removal of a Distempered Humour, so consequently they will to the strengthening
of the fibres of those Parts; either by giving them a firmness; or by correcting their im∣moderate Heat or Cold; or correcting the Humours lodged in the Pores of the Part, or by takeing away the Convulsive or inordinate motions of the Parts; or by relaxing, or o∣therwise altering their Pores, or causing the matter lodged there to be expelled by a gentle or violent agitation; as when Cantharides cause an Excretion of Urine, or Gravel, by irri∣tating the fibres of the Bladder: And the effects of this Medicine alone are sufficient to prove, that there may be Specifick Medicines which chiefly respect particular Parts; since Cantharides pass through the Body, without affecting any other part but the Bladder. And tho' at the first a Medicine may chiefly respect a particuler part, without altering the Blood, yet when once it hath caused a change in it, the Blood it self, as it successively circu∣lates through that Part, may in some measure act Specifically upon it. And tho' a Medicine may communicate to the Blood Particles of matter so modified, that they may not imme∣diately relieve the Part, by either strengthen∣ing it, or causing the Distempered matter to be carried off by a gentle irritation, yet it may do it by both these ways, as when Rhubarb is taken, it not only purges the Liver of Choler, but strengthens the Tone of the Parts by its astringency. And Osteocalla is observed to be a Specifick, by promoteing the Generation of a Callus, to cement broken Bones.
PROP. V. Sometimes a Specifick Medicine may act,Prop. V. by producing in the mass of Blood such a di∣sposition, as may enable Nature, by correct∣ing, expelling, or other fit ways, to sur∣mount the Morbifick matter, or other cause of the Disease. And this is agreeable enough with what most Moderns hold, viz. That Distempers chiefly depend upon the Temper and ill Con∣stitution of the Humours. And a change in the Humours may be effected. By furnishing the Blood with some sort of active Corpuscles, which may agitate and fer∣ment it, and to quicken the Circulation of the Blood. Upon which occasion it may be ne∣cessary to advertise, That the Medicines usu∣ally made use of for that purpose being very hot; there are several Constitutions of Patients, and several other Circucumstances, upon which account they do more harm by their Heat, than good by their Spirituousness; besides the sluggishness and want of fermentation in the Blood, may proceed from causes which this sort of Medicine will not correct; for I have tryed, that a Vinous Spirit would not dissolve Blood which was a little dryed, nor draw a Tincture from it, tho' an Urinous Spi∣rit presently did; so that a Specifick Medi∣cine in such a case may perform what is in∣tended, without the inconveniences which other
Medicines are liable to: For we know that experienced Physicians, call some Medicines cold Cordials, as Sorrel, which hath an Acid taste; and it is possible sometimes those Hu∣mours whch make the Blood sluggish may not be of a cold, but a hot Nature, in which cases hot Remedies may rather increase than diminish their ill effects; as if the white of an Egg be reduced to Water by beating, Spi∣rit of Wine will instead of diminishing in∣crease its Viscidity. And I once prepared a Vegetable Substance, which upon an additi∣on of Wine became much more Viscous than before. But to proceed, a Specifick Medicine may alter the mass of Blood, by contributing to its Tenacity, without respect to its Fermen∣tation; for if the Blood be too thick, it can∣not readily pass through the small Capillary Vessels, by which Circulation is in a great means retarded; as on the other Hand, if it be too thin, it gets out of the Capillary Vessels, and first Stagnates, and then Putrifies; but these ill consequences may be prevented, by such Medicines as either on the one Hand divide the Parts of the Blood, and make them more minute, or on the other such as associate them, and stick them together. Another way by which a Specifick Medi∣cine may rectifie the state of the Blood, is, by working so upon the Heart, as to make it transmit Blood more advantageously; and that either by corroborating its fibres, or dissolving some ill distempered matter, that
obstructs the Contraction of it; and that a small alteration in the Constitution of the Heart, may do much in respect of the Cir∣culation of the Blood, will be easily granted by any one, that does but consider what in∣sensible Agents actuate it. And that the al∣most insensible Obstruction of Circulation pro∣duces considerable effects in the Body is evi∣dent, from the effects of Sorrow, which presently puts the whole Body out of order; and also from the effects of Joy or shame, both of which promote the Circulation of the Blood; and it hath been observed, that Joy hath had so sudden and considerable an effect, as to take off the sharpness of Hunger; and that Medicines may affect the Heart after the same manner, I am inclined to believe; especially since I knew a Lady, who was so affected upon the smell of perfumed Gloves, that the Blood flew into her Face, and put such a colour into it as if she had blushed. And if the state of the Blood may be thus altered, it may much contribute to the removal of some very troublesome Distemper, induced for want of a due Circulation of the Blood.
PROP. VI. Sometimes a Specifick Remedy may unite with the peccant matter, and compose a Quid Nutrum, which may be less offensive to Na∣ture, tho' not so easily expelled. And this seems to me to be the most genuine effects of a Specifick Medicine; and when peccant Acids are lodged in the Spleen, or any other part less sapid, Alka∣lies may unite with them, without creating any manifest disturbance; and form a harm∣less Liquor; as Aqua Fortis, by being digest∣ed and distilled with a very ardent Spirit, loses its corrosive Acidity and ill scent, and becomes a harmless, sweet, and fragrant Li∣quor; and I knew one who relieved a Ne∣phritick Patient, with the use of inflamable Spirits. And I have elsewhere shewn, that Spirit of Wine acts not upon all Acids uni∣formly, but variously, according to the Na∣ture and proportion of the Acid. And Spi∣rit of Wine mixed with rectified Spirit of Urine, will in a great measure take off the corroding Qualities of it, and composes a Salt which is weaker than the Spirit, and be∣ing sublimed or reduced to a Liquor, becomes a good Medicine; and with a little skill will make a very good Menstruum in several Chy∣mical Experiments.
A few Grains of Glass of Antimony taken inwardly, will both Vomit and Purge, but if instead of Spirit of Wine we make use of that of Vinegar, and when by digestion the Liquor is sufficiently impregnated, it be ab∣stracted, Antimonial and Acetous Corpuscles will emerge, several Grains of which may be taken without either Vomiting or Purging; from whence it appears, that all Correctors are not to be esteemed Alkalies, since Acids themselves prove to be Correctors too. And after a like manner not improbably, the Poysons of Animals and others may be sub∣dued. And it is not improbable, that by a Com∣bination of a Distempered Humour with a Medicine a Salutiferous Liquor may be formed, and tho' sometimes a Medicine is altered before it comes to the part affected, yet that alteration may render it Medicinal: An in∣stance of the former we have in the Preparati∣on of Mercurius Dulcis, where by uniting Poy∣son with Quick-Silver, an Efficacious Medi∣cines is made; and an Illustration of the lat∣ter may be brought from that Odour which it gives to the Urine of the Person who takes it, different from any smell it had of it self be∣fore. And tho' against what hath been been said, for Specifick Medicines some may offer that there are some which are only externally ap∣plyed; yet from what hath been said, of the Porosity of Bodies and the effects of Effluvia, it will easily appear how they may influence
the Body, and alter the Humours which cir∣culate in it; and to what is there offered we may reasonably add, the ill effects of Amu∣lets of Arsenick mentioned by Diemerbreck, and the effects of Cantharides upon some Per∣sons who only wore them in their Pock∣ets. And indeed there are a great many Medi∣cines externally Specificks, which one would not take to be so, as Camphire, which inter∣nally is very hot and good in some Malig∣nant Fevers, yet outwardly it is used to take off Heat Pimples in the Face, and in cooling Oyntments, and against Burns; and Spirit of Wine, tho very hot when internally used, yet it, if presently applyed, takes out the fire of Burns. And so mild a Body as Bread, if chewed and outwardly applyed, hath conside∣rable Virtues in external affections. And I have several times eaten a thing without any such effect, which a Physician told me exter∣nally applyed would Purge Children, being neither offensive in colour, smell or Gripe∣ing. And to these instances I shall add, That Ga∣len tells us, that an Epileptick Boy was free from such Fits, as long as he wore only Piony Root as an Appensum. And I knew one who was Paralitick, that was suddenly relieved in violent Cramps, only by handling the Tooth of a River-Horse; and I as well as others have been relieved in the Cramp, by putting a Ring made of an Elks Hoof upon my fin∣ger. And I knew another cured of an In∣continentia
Ʋrinae, by the sole use of an Appensum. And a Lady had a Scrophulous Tumor di∣spelled, only by successively applying the Body of a dead Man to the part affected, till the cold sensibly penetrated into it. And I my self had not only a violent Haemorrhage speedily stopped, by holding moss of a dead Man's Skull in my hand; but a Gentleman told me, that if when he was let Blood he held it in his hand, no Blood would flow out till he laid it aside. And another told me, that he had been freed from a Palpitation of his Heart, which usually fell upon him after a few hours sleep with great terror, only by wearing smooth and flat Cornelians in a bag over the pit of his Stomach. Galen tells us, That Jaspers worn after the same manner are good for the Stomach; and Monardes tells us, that the Bleeding of the Hemorrhoids have been stopped, by wearing a Ring made of a Blood-Stone upon the fin∣gers. And not only Boetius and Johannes de Laet commends Lapis Nephriticus, but the ex∣perienced Monardes and others. And Untzerus tells us, that by wearing this Stone some Parts of the Stone were made so minute as to be expelled out at the Eyes: And that one that had a Catarrh was Purged fourteen times in one day by wearing of it; and it had the like effect, tho' not so strongly upon another. But, To conclude this Discourse, I shall here ad∣vertise the Reader, that tho' I have laid down
several ways by which Specifick Medicines might operate, yet I think not those always singly effectual, but that sometimes they joyntly contribute to the producing of the effect; without enlarging upon this account I shall only subjoyn, that I hope from what hath been already delivered it may appear, that the Doctrine of Specifick Medicines is not irreconcileable to the Principles of the Corpuscular Philosophy. CHAP. XII. A short account of Ambergrease communi∣cated in the Transactions of October 6. 1673. I Received the following account from one of the Committee of the East-India Com∣pany. Ambergrease is not the Scum or Excrement of the Whale, &c. but issues out of the Root of a Tree, which always shoots out its Roots towards the Sea, seeking the warmth of it, thereby to de∣liver the fattest Gum that comes out of it. Which Tree otherwise by its copi∣ous fatness might be burnt and destroy∣ed. Wherever it is shot into the Sea, it is very tough, and can scarce be loosen∣ed
from the Root, except by its own Weight or the Motion of the Sea. If you Plant the Trees, where the stream sets to the shore, it will cast it up to great advantage. March 1. 1672. in Batavia Journal, Advice From, &c. FINIS. ADVERTISEMENT. THE Works of the Honourable Robert Boyl Esq Vol. 1st. and 2d. Sold by J. Phillips at the Kings-Arms, and J. Taylor at the Ship in St. Pauls Church-yard.
The Table. A AIR not the Primum Frigidum. Page 103 Of the Air's Temper. p. 107 The Doctrine of Antiperistasis examined. p. 145 Of the Pressure of the Airs Spring on Bodies under Water. p. 268, 271 Of the tmospheres of Consistent Solids. p. 412 Of Ambergrease. p. 551 B To preserve Birds, &c. p. 353 Of the Bladders of Air in Fishes. Ibid. The natural History of Human Blood. p. 459 Of the Colour of Human Blood. p. 460 516. Of its Taste. Ibid. Of its Odour. Ibid. Of its Heat. Ibid. Of its Inflamability. Ibid. Of the Acid Parts naturally mixed with Hu∣man Blood. p. 461 Of its Specifick Gravity. Ibid.
Of the Specifick Gravity of the Consistent part. p. 462 Of the Consistence of Human Blood. Ibid. Of its Disposition to Concretion. Ibid. What Liquors or Salts Coagulate it. Ibid. What hinder its Coagulation. Ibid. What Liquors preserve it, &c. Ibid. Of the Volatile Salt of Human Blood. Ibid. Of the Phlegm and Oyls of Human Blood. p. 465 Of the fixed Salt of Human Blood. p. 467 Of its Terra Damnata. p. 468 What substances may be Chymically obtained from it. Ibid. C Of the Mechanical Production of Cold p. 1, 189 Cold produced by a Solution of Sal-Armo∣niack. p. 2 —by a Mixture of Spirit of Salt and Ʋ∣rine. p. 3 —by Spirit of Rock Allom. Ibid. —by oyl of Vitriol and Sal-Armoniack. p. 4. Potential Coldness Mechanically explained. p. 5 Degrees of Cold neither to be judged of by our Sensory nor Weather-Glasses. p. 11 Of the degrees of Coldness in several Bo∣dies. p. 48
Of the Circumscription of the Sphere of activity of Cold. p. 53, 85 Of the Preservation of Bodies by Cold p. 55 Of the Contraction of Liquors by Cold. p. 66 Of the Expansive force of Congelation. p. 83 What Mediums Cold may be diffused through. p. 88 Of the strange effects of Cold. p. 120 Promiscuous Experiments concerning Cold. p. 129 Mr. Hobbes's Doctrine of Cold examined. p. 158 Of the Positive and Privative Nature of Cold. p. 180 D Observations about Diamonds and other shining Bodies. p. 138, 139, 141. E What the success of Experiments depends on. p. 9 The Earth not the Primum Frigidum. p. 100 Earth the Summum Frigidum. p. 102 Experiments about Explosions. p. 232 Of the strange Subtlety of Effluviums. p. 415 Of their Efficacy. p. 424 Of their determinate Nature. p. 431
F Of Bodies capable of Freezing others. p. 38 Of Bodies disposed to be Frozen. p. 42. Of Bodies not disposed to be Frozen. p. 45 The effects of Frost on Solid Bodies. p. 123 Several Experiments about Freezing. p. 164 Fire and Flame made Ponderable. p. 205, 206, 210. Of the Relation betwixt Flame and Air. p. 218, 220, 223. Flame preserved under Water. p. 225 Of the Propagation of Flame in Vacuo. p. 226, 227 Of the Relation betwixt Air and the Flam∣ma Vitalis of Animals. p. 229 G The effects of Gun-Powder dissolved in Water. p. 4. Of the Perviousness of Glass. p. 213 A comminution of Gold into Powder. p. 363 Of the Nature of Granates. Ibid. Of the Origin of Gems. p. 380 Of the Virtues of Gems. p. 397 H Heat produced by a Mixture of Salt-Petre and oyl of Vitriol. p. 4 Of the Mechanical production of Heat. p. 191 Hydrostatical Paradoxes made out. p. 279 A new Hydrostatical Instrument, and its uses proposed. p. 311
Observations about Hurricanes. p. 365 I Of the Levity of Ice and its cause. p. 68 Observations and Experiments concerning Ice. p. 91 What Liquors soonest dissolve Ice and Snow. p. 96 The Qualities of Ice. p. 172 L The Expansion and Contraction of Liquors measured. p. 75 Of the Relation betwixt Light and Air. Of the Levity of Bodies under Water. p. 265 A self moving Liquor. p. 351 A Preparation of Liquid Laudanum de∣scribed. p. 354 M Of Mercury growing hot with Gold. p. 203 Of the growth and increase of Metals. p. 318 Medicina Hydrostatica. p. 329 The weight of several Bodies weighed in Air and Water. p. 346 Passages relating to the Art of Medicine. p. 355 Of Specifick Medicines. p. 528 Their operations Mechanically solved. p. 531 That by their uniting with a Distempered Humour, a third Body may be produced not so offensive to Nature. p. 547
N Nitre not the Grand Efficient of Cold. p. 104 Of the effects of Nitre in Freezing. p. 131 Of the Aerial Noctiluca. p. 245 Of the Reason of Noctilucas. p. 247 Of the Icy Noctiluca. p. 255 Of the Subtlety of its Parts. p. 259 O Oly of Vitriol and Sal-Armoniack mixed together. p. 8 A Hydrostatical way of estimating Ores. p. 321 P Of the Primum Frigidum. p. 99 A Chymical Analysis of Pearls. p. 370 Of the Porosity of Bodies. p. 440 Of the Porosity of Animal Bodies. p. 450 The effects of Putrefaction and Fermentati∣on on Human Blood. p. 485 R What Refrigeration depends on. p. 6 Strange Reports. p. 373 S Of the different Pressure of Solids and Fluids. p. 272 Of the Serum of Human Blood. p. 474 Of the Spirit of Human Blood. p. 483 Spirit of Human Blood what. p. 487
Of what Classis of Saline Bodies it is of p. 488 Whether different from Spirit of Ʋrine, &c. p. 490 Of its proportion to the Substance it is drawn from. p. 491 Of its Consistence and Specifick Gravity. p. 492 Of its Odour, Taste, and Colour. p. 494 Of its dissolving power. p. 495 Of the Coagulating power of Spirit of Hu∣man Blood. p. 499 Of its Precipitating power. p. 500 Of its affinity with some Chymical Oyls, &c. p. 501 Of the Relation betwixt Spirit of Human Blood and Air. p. 504 Of its Hostility with Acids, &c. p. 506 Of its Medicinal Virtues. p. 508, 511 T The effects of a Mixture of Salt of Tartar and Water. p. 193 What Tinctures may be drawn with Spirit of Human Blood. p. 497 V Titles for the Natural History of Human Ʋrine. p. 472 W Of the ascent of Water in Weather-Glasses. p. 30
Of the Expansion of Water and other Freezing Liquors. p. 62, 187 Of the Expansive force of Freezing Water. p. 79 Water not the Primum Frigidum. p. 702 The weight of Bodies froze and unfroze. p. 126 Whether ot Water freezes sooner than Cold. p. 134 Of the weight of Water in Water. p. 277 FINIS.
