B4267 11273166 47239
The Face of the Frontispice unvailed: The Titles of either Subject, whereof these Poems treat, with their proper Imprezza's accurately illustrated and succinctly couched. THe Book consists of two Subjects, and distinguished by these two Titles: 1. The HONEST GHOST. 2. An AGE FOR APES. The Mind of the Frontispice relating to the Honest Ghost; or, A Voyce from the Vault, is thus exprest: A prisoner looking out of a Grate; his hand pointing to the Prisoners Box——with these words: Adesdum. Mite manum in Marsupium. Above the Gate—O ferrea aetas! Within the Prison, an insulting Gaoler, and a dejcted Prisoner; these words from the Prisoners mouth:—Exlium virtus patitur.—Dum moror hic, morior. And pointin at the Gaoler,—Quid tu si pereo? Oe looking out, and in contempt of the World; wi an indifferency to his present condition, using these wds: Dum video, rideo. 2. Intituled An Age for Apes. They are severally din∣guished after their several Notions. Democritus on the one side laughing, displayed by is Impreze: Insanire gregem ridens volo. Heraclitus on the other verge weeping & sympathizing  this: In flumina lumina verto. The portraicture you shall finde more clearly explaned, and more lively personated in the conclusion of the work.
THE HONEST GHOST, OR A VOICE FROM THE VAULT. —In noxam sectatur & umbra. LONDON, Printed by Ric. Hodgkinsonne, 1658.
To my Stationer Health, Wealth, and Liberty. IT is a frequent fashion in this Nation To publish Books in Term time, not Vacation: But I would have my Reader thus much learne, That Westminsters vacation is my terme. Now some will say, the Terme doth wondrous well To vend such fly-blown works as will not sell; But mine's none such, with confidence I tell it, 'Twill vend if self, it needs no Terme to sell it: Health then and Wealth unto my Stationer, And Heavens preserve him from a Censurer. For Health and Wealth doe well, yet we doe see These relish harshly without Libertie: Where if he suffer for me there's small reason But Stationer and Author have one Prison. Yea, but will some say there were danger in't, For so my Pate might plot and he might print: But take my word, we'l doe the State no wrong, But be as merry as the day is long. For if the World a Prison be, then we Who lodge ith' Fleet, are but as worldings be: The onely diff'rence, as I take't, is this, Their Prison's something larger then ours is. Which though it be more spacious, yet our care Forth' World is lesse then wretched wormelins are; Whose highest aime is shame, and deepest drift Is how to starve their bodies by their thrift. Come then my Stationer, and make thy station In this same pettie corner of our Nation; Where though we live by Worldings unregarded, We shall be kept like Princes, double-warded. Come then my Boy, it's many good mans ate To make restraint their Tent, their glasse their grate.
To the ingenuous State-Censor. MY younger years compos'd these rurall Rymes To taxe the errors of corrupter times: When we a State-Monarchicall possest, Which Government our Politicks held best. Pandora's Box pour'd forth such plenteous store Upon our Isle, she could enjoy no more. We knew not then what Drum nor Trumpet meant, No Garrison lodg'd in our Continent. Arms and Alarms were strangers to our Coast, No Civil-Warre, nor State-imbroiling Hoast Disturb'd our calme repose: Phebean rayes Of glorious Peace shone on our halcyon dayes. Our Islander might sit and passe his time Under his Fig-tree, or broad-spreading Vine, And feare no Foe to reap what he had sown, Or seize on that which Conquest made his own. Kings reign'd secure: Scaffolds were reared then For Sceanes of Pleasure, not for heading men. Our peacefull Olives then their fatnesse show'd, Our Wine and Oyle increas'd, our Cups o're-flow'd. Each State knew then its proper residence, The Lower gave their Lords preeminence. Platonick parity was then as farre From us, as now the Rules of Princes are. High Powers on Ours had such an influence, As ev'ry object satisfide the sence. So as no forrain State observ'd our blesse But envide and admir'd our happinesse: And in that glowing Envy might conclude "We wanted nought but civil gratitude. For what did fullnesse of our bread bring in But carnall liberty and height of Sin?
Vice rid on's Foot-cloth; Churches grew to be Nurses to Sacriledge and Symonie. More Tares then Wheat were sown in ev'ry field; Our unprun'd Vines did only wilde grapes yeeld. The Countrey-Cormorants begot rich heirs, And made Sonnes Prodigalls by Fathers cares. The City-Cheas made Fools of Countrey men, And with their Tweaks they gratified them. The Court a Mint of Congies and quaint words, Of Silken-civet-comfit-curtain-Lords: Who in their quest of favours took delight, And gag't their Honour to decline a fight. Imposts fed State-Imposters, Pattenees Hackney'd the Publick with Monopolies. These made MUSAEUS bustle in this sort With Church-abuses, City, Countrey, Court. These Poems then you may suppose of His Reflect on former times, and not on this: For had he meant that Task, Heed drawn all Shapes, Like Protean Pictures, save Assembly Apes: Whose forms are such, should He be catechis'd, He knows not how those Monkeys are disguis'd. Twenty four Harvests now are spent and gone Since This receiv'd its first Conception; So as you may suspect there's something in't That kept this Work so many yeers from print. Which had it been continu'd to these Times, Had made an English Iliad for high Crimes: High-swelling Crimes, which rightly understood, Might Stage a Rubrick Story ach't in blood: Where Presbyterian-Independent-Levell Make work t' inlarge the Kingdom of the Devill. But who stalks too neer Truths heels (under favour) May have his teeth quite struck out for his labour.
To all, or none. LIving on earth, I silenced my wrong; Now shut srom earth, my griefs have found their tongue▪ Which to make good, behold my wronged Ghost Having both friends and hope of freedom lost, Re-visits earth, of purpose to reclaim Such as doe live unto their Countries shame. I aime at all, high and inferiour men, Appearing now to these, and then to them; Whose fight if it affright, know that it is Their Guilt, and not my Ghost procureth this. But see, some great men swell! Why, let them burst, I sleight their sury, let them doe their worst: On earth they did all that they could unto me, Now I'me secure, they can no more undo me.
The honest Ghost, OR A Voice from the Vault. THrice to the sin-sick world my Muse hath come, And has been thought too bitter unto Some, Who, for to shew how much they're discontent, Have meant to keep mee tongue-ty'd by restraint. But can this doe it? No, I'm same I was, And though my earthen vessel cannot pass Nor pierce these wals of stone where I'm restrain'd, And for twelve mon'ths with patience remain'd, I have a Ghost, as now it shall appeare, Sojourns abroad, while I am caged here. For what can these spruce Silk-worms do at me? Shut mee from ayre of high-priz'd libertie: And in this vast and irksom residence, Remove mee from the object of each Sense?
For first my Eye no object views of State, But such as to and fro pass by my grate: And for my Eare, no object doth assail her, But noyse of Keys, and clamor of a Jayler: And for my Smel, because nought likes me well, I catch a cold, whereby I may not smell: And for my Taste, my palat doth decline From relishing ought pleasant at this time: And for my Touch, I feel nought but distress, And more I smile, the more it doth oppress: Yet for all this, I doe enjoy as much In th' faculties of Eye, Eare, Smell, Taste, Touch As he who glories most; and you shall heare How I enjoy them too, if you'll forbeare. I have a grate, where I do see men pass, And this same grate I make my looking-glass, And there I see, and I do laugh to see (For only laughter now is granted mee) An aged gray-beard, whose dimensions have Trac'd half their Pilgrim journey to his grave, Ambiciously aspiring, as if hee Should never grapple with mortalitie. He plots and projects, poor decrepit foole, Lest his insatiat Messaline should scoule, To gain such honor as his Lady choseth, Which got, he dies, and by the bargain loseth. Or else perchance, som high-priz'd Favorite Presents his Suit and works him this despite, And must forgoe his place by his esteeme, Although he know not what the Office meane:
Neither concerns this Him, for know you what? It is not place but profit he aims at; What matters it how he discharge it then? He is above the priviledg of men; For his firm grounds are rear'd on stone, not sand, And shrink he must, that dare him countermand: Yet is it strange to see how he, whose place Resigned is to one new-crept in grace, Would gull himself, and bear the world in hand He is advanc'd to place of more command, Although I'm sure he could be well content To keep his Place and be no An easie Inquest of Inquiry may inform the ingenious Reader touching this discovery. President. O how this tickles mee, to see a Swad, Who ne'r so much as education had To make him generous, advan'd to state: And like a Parachito 'gins to prate More then he ever knew or ever read, Yet must this grand-Sot be authorized, And held so grave a Statist, as if he Were th' only man on earth for policie! Nor am I so restrain'd, but if I please I may behold variety of these; For, wearied with this counterfeit of State, Unto another corner of my grate I streight betake mee; where I may behold A Bulke of honor, like that Asse of gold Which bore the name of Isis, rear'd on high, Yet when I view him with an inward eye,
I find nought in him but an outward shew, Nor care I much if He so much did know; For all the Honour which this man possesseth, As somtimes, in his cups, himself confesseth, Deriv'd their late begining (as 'tis said) From meer extortion in Zacheus trade: But, till he change his habit, I forbid That he ere do as good Zacheus did. Of whom, I think, it may be truly said, That hee 'll prove Banquerout in ev'ry trade; For he hath shewn himself a malefactor Both while he was a Statesman and Contractor. But, besides him, some other Foists there be Deserve a censure full as well as he: But th' State is wise, and with an expert hand Can squeeze these Sponges who do soke our Land. Another personage I see approach, And what he is, I guess by Arms on th' Coach; A great-Man sure, and yet for ought I see He cannot be of great antiquitie, For th' Coate he beares, implies it is not long Since he bore arms, or th' Herald did him wrong: Who may He bee then? I durst pawn my life, One that is honor'd meerly for his wife; So as the only stay of his affiance Supported is, by means of his alliance: Great must hee needs bee then, he cannot chuse, If Mushroms by his means be honour'd thus. But see, good Malecontent, who 's he goes there? I'le call him to mee, Pray good Sir draw neere;
Hee Will not come, Hee doth not like a grate, Though hee had self▪ same Prospect but of late, Yet I 'll display him to, and in a word Uncase yon Pomander sweet-sented Lord. Hee 's such a Sage as hee'd be thought by man, A grave, judicious, learn'd Justinian, A Column of the State, and such an one As all our Isle were worse if he were gone; Yet heare me and i'le tell you what he is, One who hath wrong'd the State by rearing his; A subtle Censor, who his passion smothers Till it burst out to th' ruining of others, Wherein he shews his spirit most of all, By base insulting o're a wretches fall; A Neuter Lord, who walks as in a mist And shews himself a cunning formalist, A meer State-Rhetorician, whose desire, Having now gorg'd himself, is to retire From business of State, because he feares That some ere long will have him by the eares For courses indirect, which he would shun, By living privatly un-look'd upon. But lest this should not hit, he hath convey'd, And, by his Art, a cleere conveyance made Of all his Lands, for hee observes the time Apt to take notice of a rich-man's crime; Which to prevent, he thought to take this course, That He who beg'd his state might fare the worse; Yet I 'm resolv'd, as widows teares and cryes, Sent from their voice and from their dolefull eyes
Seldome returne without revenge from high, Like feathers in the ayre his state will fly From his deputed Heir, and so decline From him and his unto another line. Yet this I wish not, but would rather see His Seed succeed in their posteritie, That grand-oppression, that same crying sin, May ne' survive in his, but die in him; So shall that name which he deserved here Appear like ashes scatt'red here and there. Now Eyes what see you? Is the grate so straite As yee can see no object? Yes, deceite In every corner doth encounter mee, Men bee and seem not, seem what least they bee; For be it Courtier that I eye, whose sense Consists in Sent and Sycophants pretence, I find no part in him of that esteeme To prove him same he outwardly doth seeme; For where He lives it is the only fashion To gull the simple with a Protestation: His life is formal wholy, and he owes Far less to substance then he doth to showes. Or be it Citizen, though he protest The wares he shews you first are still the best, Because he knows you're of so brave a mind, The choice you make is best, that you can find; Yet some evasion still he hath in store To gull you now as he hath done before: Wherfore believe him not although you grieve him, For you deceive your self if you beleeve him.
Or be it Country-man, whose simple seeming Would in opinion cleer him of misdeeming, Yet in his cottage hath he learn'd this art, To make his Tongue a stranger to his Heart; So as all States this maxim learned have, Hee cannot live that knows not to deceive. Thus may you see, though I bee lodged here, Where scarce one glimpse of Sun-light may appear, That I have sundry objects to employ mee, Which somtimes, I confess, so over-joy me, As they in mee leave such impressions after, That to my self I 'm oft enforc'd to laughter. Nor can your eyes dart half so far as mine In the survey of this corrupted time, For were the Curtains ne're so closely spread Where Livia with her Drusus wantoned, The Coach close shut, the eyes of men to dim, Yet know thus much, she is so light within, As shee no more her wantonness can cover, Then if she only had heav'ns arch above her. NOw to my second-Sense, if you 'll draw neere, I will make known unto you what I heare, I heare, and by no mean intelligence, That Barbicon is troubled with the French, And are made famulists, as some suppose, Because they speak so strangely through the nose: But I do heare more serious news than these, And you shall hear them briefly, if you please.
I heare of One who hath been long pent up, And, with his Ladie drunke of sorrows cup, For som egregious crime at first committed, With punishment in joyn'd them, as befitted, Are to be freed now and quite released, As if both blood and Whoordom were appeased By som few yeers restraint! But I do know Superior pow'rs will grieve it should be so; For tell me, can that liberty be given On earth, which never was allow'd by heav'n? Shall Naboths blood cry for revenge and hve it? Shall Abels cry for vengeance and receive it? Shall snarling Curs, as sacred stories tell, Lick up the blood of wicked Jezebel, To shew how ev'ry creature seems to smother Their just revenge, whofe hand 's deep dipt in mur∣ther? And shall These purchase feedom, or obtain Such favor to review the light again? Shall Barbarous Nations, where did nere appeare That glorious light which shews her beauty here▪ Enact such Laws, injoyn such punishment On persons that are held incontinent? Shall savage beasts, who measure their delight By satisfying of their appetite, Hate to partake in love with more than one, And either live with that or live with none? Shall ayrie birds so sort them to their make, That they will sooner die then they will take Themselves to others? Yea, shall every creatur Perform the proper office of their nature?
And shal man, fraight wth knowledg & with reason, Act against God and Nature such high treason? No, Heav'ns forbid; what once was said, say I, Wee have a Law, they by the Law should dy. Yet if compassion move you to assent To give them all their life time to repent, (As ten lives were too little for such crimes) Send them not forth to these depraved times, But guard them close, as Lepers kept have been Causing them cry aloud, Wee are unclean. But this report I scarcely can beleeve it, I will addresse mee elsewhere then, and leave it. I heare a noble-spirit that 's compos'd Of all Heoick actions lies inclos'd In straitest durance; thus much sure I am, Howsoe're his cause be, hee 's a Noble-man, And one who may redeeme the time is past, And by his Prince as well as others grac't, For nere did any one more hopes inherit, Or by descent express more native spirit. But I doe heare  Marriage like to bee, Which hath procur'd this Lord his libertie; What doe I heare? Marriage his freedom get No, rather he by Marriage loseth it; For how can married-men their freedom get, When never any was his own man yet? But if his ayms be such, all hap betide This lively Martialist and lovely Bride▪ Shee, to retain his love at any rate, Hee, to regain his love with Prince and State.
Nor do I feare, but when deserts are known, Some shall mount high, who have been long kept down For carpet-honour still the bayes must yeeld To that which valour gains him in the field. For tell me, tell me, you perfumed Squires, Nere scorch'd with powder but licentious fires; You, whose perfection doth consist in this, To complement a wanton for a kiss, An gloie more in such a bootie gain'd Then if you had a richer prize obtain'd; What could you doe, if you were to resort, Leaving Loves charmes, to raze some stately Fort? Or grapple with som daring enemy To fight or fall, no other remedy? Sure, I perswade mee, you would little care For Bracelets twisted with your Mistresse-haire; You would forget your congies, your salutes, Fingring and quav'ring on your sweet tun'd Lutes; And learn to tosse a Pike, and speak in thunder, To make your unknown▪ valour seem a wonder: But, I much feare me, this were hard to do, When you should fight, you would begin to woo▪ And sue for peace on any terms you could, Thn gain renown, as noble▪ spirits should.* When this Poem was first composed, this noble personage whom the Au∣thor intendeth, was not to Libertie restored, nor his Nuptialls as then solemnized. Now since decased, and withall martiall renoun interred in the ed▪ of hono.
How happy were I, if I might but heare All you sweet-sented-Gallants lodged there n Albion's peacefull court, to bee prest over And see each made a Souldier of a Lover! What sad dieus would young don Phoebo take, And kiss the ground for his Amicla's sake? What heavy news were this to Cinna's eare, To lose the presence of her spritely Clere? What griefe would this bee to that new-wed-Lord, Who on my conscience ne're unsheath'd his Sword? When hee must leave his nuptial-sheets scarce warm With his delicious Dinah, and goe arm Those tender civet-corps, who never bore Arms, but what Nature stor'd him with, before? Zlid, I do think, should they receive command To hoyse up Saile for Brabant out of , The rumor of these news would be so bad, As many of our younkers would run mad, At least (like Ithacu) would feign them so If so they might excused be to go. For 'las! so long hath this same golden dream Of Peace surviv'd, they know not what wars mean; Restie their arms, their armour rustie too, And if they durst fight, yet they know not how. But be there no rare Corants thou hear'st more Related neere thy grate? Yes, there be store, Yet none so much perplex mee, as to heare The fall of On who once the State did steere, And was thought worthy to enjoy his place, Till profuse followers brought him to disgrace.
Of whom, Some say, he so corrupt hath bin, It were a sin to shed one teare for him; Yet, in respect of merit, I lament That hee who was of such accomplishment, Yea a combiner (as hee seem'd to me) Of humane-learning and Nobilitie, Should shew himself so weake as to delight More in preferring of his Favorite, Than in discharge of th' office where He sate, Or to support the ruines of his State; For worser name nev'r any one did git To reape so little benefit by it. But there is somthing more than his disgrace That moves mee to compassionate his case, And it is this; to note how others bee Tax'd for as high and heavy crimes as hee: For his to such a number nev'r did mount, Yet who dare call these State-moaths to account; Hee must be censur'd, these may live secure, Pill Church and Stae to keep their hands in ure, Suck Orphans blood, drain tears from widows-eyes, And fill both heav'n and earth with shriks & cries, Joyn land to land, like priviledged men, They wipe their mouths and say, Who seeeth them▪ `Las none! Who dare do't? They may be allow'd To do what ere they list, and in a Cloud Walk as unseen, for very few there bee That see their hatefull crimes, dare say they see▪ Now, for my life, I cannot see the cause Why this should be, unlesse they have the Laws
Under their girdle, meaning to draw blood Not from themselves, but where they hold it good, Which cannot be; So might I justly tax The Law it self to bee a nose of wax: Wherefore I cannot think this is the matter, For God forbid that Laws should learn to flatter, But I doe rather judge the case so stands, They make their peace with great-ones under hand▪ Whose awfull count'nance is the only cause To stay the execution of our Lawes. If this be so! O yee who injure most This peacefull State, heare my incensed Ghost, Who like a Fury haunts you; cease for shame, To lay npon your honours such a staine! You should be like to Beacons on a hill To give your Country notice of what ill So ev'r assail's her, and by your wise care Divert all dangers that might happen there. You should be like to Pilots to direct Our Ship of State, lest some should intercept Our hopefull commerce, which (I heard last day Ev'n through my grate) was faln to great decay, So troubled were the Seas as none would venter Their goods, because the Ports were hard to enter. Yea, upon serious conf'rence I did heare A rich french-Merchant on his Conscience sweare That by one loss which hee of late sustain'd, He lost more wealth then he three yeers had gain'd. You should be like the Sun, to cleer the mist Of each slie state-exacting Alchimist,
State-Politician, base Monopolist, Church peace-disturbing-factious Novelist: To these, like esoms, it is your behoof To shew your selves, to sweep them from the roo Of Albions speciall Palace; for this Crue Are not o have least countenance from you: You should be like bright Lamps, light to bestow Both on your selves, and upon others too; Upon your selves, that you may patterns seeme, Adding unto your Hoor an esteeme; On others too, that they may take a view Of what is good by taking note of you. You should be Starrs in this same darkesome night Where many walk in blindness, few in light; That by the light which your examples give, You may procure you love, teach them to live; For many Batts we have and Night Owles too Doe more by night, than they by day dare doe; These are of Belall, the sons of night, For wicked men doe ever hate the light, As those who are sworn vassals to the Devill, "Hating the light because their works are evil. And what are these, but of that forlorne tribe Who will dispence with conscience for a bribe, So't be in secret, sell the Orphans right, Oppresse the succourless by th' arm of mght, Divide the Stake, and sare in others State, As an occasion I did hear of late. "Three youths, all Brethren, when death had  them "Of their deer Fathr, who good portions left them
"Amounting to nine hundred pound in all, "Some legacies discharg'd, which were but small, "Were by some friends, who wish'd their welfare, mov'd "To take their Fathers Will, & get it prov'd. "Along they went, and unto One they came, "Who had authority to prove the same; "One, who with long connivencie had made "His place a Stale and mercenary Trade: "The Will he reads, and somtimes questions them, "To try if they were understanding men; "Which had he found, without'en more ado "I am resolv'd He had not us'd them so: "But he observing that they were but weake "Thought not to slip th' occasion he might take "To benefit himself, no matter how, "And thus he gull'd, and satisfied them too. "Young men (quoth he) I have survey'd your state, "But I must tll you, 'tis so intricate, "As I protest, I either have no skill, "O I ne're saw a more defective Will; "But leave your names recorded by my man▪ "Som sev'n-night hence I'll do you th' good I can. "Thus as he wish'd, for that time he dispatcht them "By means of wch delay, hark how he catcht them. "The matter, as he thought, might first be driven "By them to whom the Legacies were given, "With whom he dealt so cunningly, as they "Either for feare or profit gave him way; "On which foundation he his project reares, "Extracting treasures from the Ophans teare.
"For when the time came, they repair'd unto him, "Expecting th' good he promised to do them, "But th' Copy of his countenance was chang'd, "His meer-pretended promises estrang'd, "As one remorsess of the state of men, "For in this manner he accosted them: "Since you were with mee, I perceive in Law "This Will you brought is sarcely worth a straw, "For it relation hath unto some other "Which you out of your cunning seek to smother "But for as much as I doe hereby gather, "There was affection born you by your father, "Both in respect of nature and of blood, "Whereby I think he meant to doe you good; "I will perswade effectualy with these "To whom your Fathers Will grants Legacies, "And who, for ought that yet to mee appears, "May claime as much as you that are his Heirs, "First, that all suits and differences might cease, "And you to have a hundred pound a peece. "Which, simple soules (for little did they know "Their own estate) they condescended to, "Whereby he gain'd, as I have heard it said, "Five hundred pounds, all Legacies defraid. Now was not this a brave Probationer To keep a Register for Lucifer? Could one devise an apter instrument Those sullied wares of Machivell to vent Than this Impostor, this Egyptian Rat, Whom I have seen both whoop'd & houted at.
And must he live uncensur'd, and remain, As if his spotless life were free from stain? Must hee enjoy his Place as he hath done, And hug oppression as he hath begun? Must he be cap'd and congi'd where you meet him, When, on my conscience, I had rather beat him? Must hee retain opinion and esteem. Yes; What's the reason? He has to redeem The name he lost; With what? With lads of gold; Why thn is reputation bought and sold. Alas for griefe, that gold should find a cover To case vice in, and so to gild it over! O so to gild is, but to gull the eyes, And force poore virtue lend her robe to vice▪ Had hee by order been a Benedict, And of such crying crimes as these convict, He should have heard of nothing but confusion, Till he had made a threefold restitution. Had hee, who thus from Justice did decline, Us'd such corruption in Severus time, Were he the greatest man within his Court, Selling his people smoke, had smoked for't; Or borne the highest sway in Xerxes dayes, And fed his Client-Subjects with delayes; Hee had been sure, as in his life appeares, To have his hatefull skin pul'd ore his eares: Yet has this got a Pardon, and much more, By an imposed fine beg'd long before; For this same worldly wise oppressing Hammon▪ Hath made him friends by his unrighteous Māmen,
Fore-seeing well he stood on such salse ground His naughty cause would force him to compound. Whence there appears great wrong, for it is sed Such have his Fine as nere were injured. The poore-ones suffer, and their wrongs express, But all their cries can get them no redress: Which if our Prince (so gracious is he) knew Hee'd cause him make what restitution's due, And feed none such in their unbounded riot, Who with their surfeits doe the State disquiet. But see, by talking of these corrupt Benches I'de like to have forgot three of my Senses; Nor were't a wonder, Some by being crost In course of Justice all their Senses lost: Well might I then forget my Senses too, Having with unjust men so much to doe; But I have heard more than I meane to tell, My Eare is clos'd, now must I to my Smell. THis Sense in mee doth such delight begit, As Mines of Treasures shall not purchase it; In every secret corner of my Grate, I can Smell some abuses in the State. Here one both great, and of as strong a savor, By going brisk and neate creepes into favor; Another holds concurrence with the time, And hee will fall before he will not clime. Here a brave spritely Youth, who, as they say, Wa but a Ladies pag the other day,
And (such was femal bounty) liv'd upon her, Refines my Smell with his perfumed honor. There one who hath more worship farr then wit, And more estate than pate to mannage it. Here one, a lovely Lady in her time, Paints to repaire those Lillies that decline, Who old in yeeres, but youthfull in desire, Cold in the pulse, but hot in fancies fire: And her I Smell, for though her face be dyed With purest colours, she is Mortified: No Saint, yet earthly sented, for her breath Proves she is mortall, and must cope with death. But who coms here? Ismel one neer approaching; What Madam would doe, all the day long Coaching▪ I know her well, shee doth a Husband want, And's held the only choice Court-visitant For feminine discourse, though now and then She talks so broad, she'd shame a thousand men. How far this Dame is out of knowledge growne▪ Some ten yeeres since shee came but to the town With a french fidler and sung northern jigs, And after sold false Tyres and Periwigs: The very first inventresse of Goats haire, Ceruse from Venice and adultrate ware; Besides shee purchas'd of a Jew of late A fucus for the face at such a rate, As had Some Ladies nere desir'd to try it And paid well for't, shee had been loser by it▪ Yet howsoere this Maquerella trade She's tane in Court and City for a maid,
Though I suspect, for I have heard it said, Shee stood in neede once of Lucina's ayd: Bu shee is now grown great, what matter then, If Lais-like shee cope with twenty men? For there is none held now in all our Nation So fi to give young Ladies education, So gracefull in her carriage and discourse, Though vertue say, shee never heard a worse; For shee whom vertue guides, will never seeke With shop-bought beauty to adorn the cheeke. But 'zlid who's this smels in my nose so rank? Pandora that same Lady Mountebank; Who keeps a Catalogue of all diseases, And choice receits, to cure them as shee pleases; Besides Provocatives shee has such plenty, Her well-frequented Shop is never empty. If an affection to a wench should move you, Shee has a powder too will cause her love you: Are you by night time troubled with the Mare? About your great toe shee will ty a haire: Or subject unto dreaming? shee'll assure you She has a soveraign oyle will throughly cure you: Or pain'd with aches? shee has, in her pack, A Balm that cur'd one tortu'd on the Rack: Or hyde-bound? she has by her such a Stone As it hath pow'r to raise the skin from bone: Shee has a water, that in little space, Will take away all wrinkles from the face, Renue the blood, refresh a wasted brain, And, like Medaeas charme, bring youth again.
And if you would beleeve what she'll relate, Shee'll tell you of a cure shee wrought of late, Upon a great nd noble person too, Who struk in age, yet had a mind to woo A fresh young girle; but he thought the sight Of his white-haires would dash his motion quite: Which to prevet, hee to this Artist came, Who by receits as quickly cur'd the same; Within four daies all his white-haires were reft him, Whih I beleeve, for not a hayre was left him. Briefly, for all cures shee so far surpasses, Galen and Paraclsus were but Asses Compa'd to her, sith there be greater store Of Maladies then hve been heretofore; When nationall diseases that di show Their dire effects to some one place or two, Ae ow grown universal; for  than, French, Dutch, Italian, Neopolitan, Have sought unto o Coast their Sores to carry; Where they ae grown i time . But who is thi I snt? A  of dust And mouldred ashes, ye as full of lut, As i her string blood bgun to melt With  f youth,  ere d winter felt. Has she no ? m  sh should stir him; She hs a Husband, but she cares not for him. Those hat are chaste affect no choice, but shee Would surfei, had shee not varietie: So strong's her appetite, that in her plenty, She glories more then if shee were but twenty;
"Such sweetness brings sins custom, as once in, "Delight in Sin, removes all sense of Sin. More do I smell, for I am not invited, But with my Smelling only am delighted; A solemn bride-pie, which upon my life Is for that fox-furd Burgomasters wife Now gone to marry, and has hope to breed, Yet has not one sound tooth in all her head▪ So as this youth struts by his old Trots side; For all the world like Battus with his Bride. But stand; for see his Crest displaid in paste, One who nere lov'd the church, to church doth hast To spouse his youthfull Bride, whom, as 'tis said, Hee in he Husbands life time formalled; Whose corpse scarce cold, no nor the poorest worm Entred his coffin, nor his shroud-sheet torn, His Obits done or funeral-torch burn't out, But shee's so hot, shee needs must go unto 't: Where arm in arm and cheeke to cheeke they meet Leaving her dead Lord to his winding-sheete. Whence I conclude, as Sexton once did cry With a loud voice to such as pssed by, "How short's a womans grief, within three daies▪ "Rosemary sprigs are turn'd to gilded Bayes! Thus may you see when I no Flow'rs may take, Of Weeds for need I can a posie make And smell them too, although they give no Sent To cheer my Sense or tender her content. But men that are restrain'd of liberty Must make a virtue of necessity,
For unto choicer Gardens those may goe, And I'll not say but they my gather too Fr choicer Flowr's, who never were restrain'd Then wee who are from common ayr detain'd. Yet in this grate, although I be no Cat▪ I can as quickly see and smell a Rat, As hee who may have liberty to range From Court to th' Burse, from Cheapside to th' Exchange: For it's not Liberty that gives man sight, Unlesse hee use that Liberty aright. For Some will se more in the darkest Cave Than other Some who greatest freedom have; Yea I may sweare, since I was here confin'd, How ere my eyes bee, I've a cleerer mind. But hast thou nothing to delight thy Smell? But such rank weeds as these that sent not well? Hast thou no flowers, thy cloyed Sense to please, But such unsavery Mugweed slips as these? Yes, I have flowr's and odors too which give Soul-solacing refreshment where I live: But these are such as shall not be made known, Lest by these weeds they should be overgrown, Who from their loathed lives cast such a steem, As with their venom they might poyson them, Which to prevent, prevention must be us'd, Another proper Subject I have chus'd Now to discourse on, yet I will not wast Much time iu satisfying of my taste; For that were sensuall, and would discover I were no Pris'ner but some brain-sick Lover,
Who by his wanton mistresse task'd to more Then he could do, his spirit to restore, Feeds on all dainties, that he strong might grow Both in himself and for his mistresse too. HOw should I taste ought well, since I am plac▪ Where I can relish nothing but distaste? For here in this vast Cve where I doe liv, My very Consorts no contentment give: Not the least beme of comfort shnes pon e, But like the Plague▪sore ll my friends do shun mee▪ The languge of rue officers beside, Whose base condition sticks not to deride My hard mishp, and twit mee to my face, Saying, my wit brought mee to this disgrace. When feeble nature craves some small repast, Though I be hungrie, I had rather fast; For my weake stomach cnnot well digest The meate I have so sluttishly addrest. Which makes me muse and wonder much at these, Who waste their state in superfluities, Stoing their luscious Epicureall boord With forain caes to seast some forain Lord; Who will accept their love, as well hee may, And, with a french shrug, laugh and go his way. Now by my hopes, there' nought distasts me wor▪ Then see a grand gull thus abuse his purse, To gratifie a Mounseur and his trayne, Whom hee perchance shall never see againe.
For this Vitellian Lord, that he may please That great-mans palat with varieties Of all delicious meats, by Land and Sea Sends his Purveiors out, who sto'd must be What e're provision cost them, 'tis no matter, Their Lord will sell his Land to fish the water. Yet it is brave to sport and spend the time In luscious fare, choice consorts, and rich wine▪ To take delight in meats that best do please, Fill Poland Salmons full of ambergreece; And like that Prince of prodigall expence, To please his Humor rather then his Sense, When far from Sea, would only feed on fish, But neer the Sea, made flesh his only dish. To revell unto midnight, and come home A sleepie Sibarite, a heavie drone: Next day addresse himselfe to some new taske, As make a set speech to his mistresse maske; Go see a Play, and when each Act doth end, Rise from his Stoole to commune with his friend▪ Of purpose to induce those that sit neer To think it's State that they discourse of there; When 'las, poor Stage-gulls, they'r so far from that, As they ne're knew what such thing aymed at: Then to make choice where they will sup that night And make their life a progresse of delight. Next day invite some honorable guest, A favorite, or follower at least, To make the world take notice of him then, That hee'll grow great by means of such great men.
Or at his own charge some Court-shew to frame, And make the Ldies think it was his braine That did contrive it, when, Some neer him know it, His purse and not his pate did play the Poet. Or in his entertainment of some State, Make Conduit run with Rhenish at his gate. True; this is brave indeed and princely too, Which Some may better far then others doe, Who racket it abroad and keep a table Free for all commers, when they are unable To feed thmselves; the Cock on hoop is set Hoping to drink their Lordships out a debt. I heard of late a Millener complaine Of a great Lord that's prodigally vaine, Who run upon his score within three quarters, Five hundred pounds, for sho-ties, points & garters; Yet runs he on and feeds him with delay, And eyther cannot pay or will not pay. Yet is his mind good, for he doth afford A racefull presence and a gratefull word Where ere he stands engag▪d, & it doth grieve him To be so long in debt, if they'll believe him. But th' Suite, thus he pretends, he last obtain'd (And this's his grief) comes short of that he aim'd, Or else hee's out of cash, or who collects His rnts, detains them more then hee expects. But howsore hee shroud it with his wit, Nor this nor that is any cause of it; "His lusciou palat and delicious Cook Withhold him from discharging of the Book.
His many Items daily so much spend him, As eyther must some Patentees defend him, Or all his ancient Manors are forgone, Which may be soone, for he had never none, Only some few he got since he came hither, Which with himselfe are shrinking both together. But stay; me thinks there's nought distasts me mor Than to behol a rude uncivil Bore Whom nurture, nor good nature ever had, Whose father liv'd by nought but selling Woad, By means of better fortune to obtaine More grace then men of more deserts may gaine; His honor is his purchase, and his fate To raise himself to greatnesse by his state: For merit who esteems it? When men crave To know not what we are, but what we have? Now by those hopes I have of future blisse, There's nothing mads me hlf so much as this; For who can brook to see a groundling rise To titles of such honor and high prize, Doing no worthy act in all his time, Unlesse it were the gelding of a Swine, As I heard once a mad-conceited Jig, Of one made Knight for rosting of a Pig: And Dietloph Brand obtain'd (some say) as muc With Rostock Beare who overthrew the Dutch▪ Which story made me laugh, for on a time A boon-Companion and a friend of mine Telling this tale, one of a light conceit (Which made the jest more full) replied streight
By thus retorting it; Now by this light, I wonder much why you'r not made a Knight; For if to healths such knightly vailes befall, You's drinke a health with any of them all. But to the purpose; though I force a smile, I'd rather mone th'abuses of our Ile. Again, to see those who have well deserv'd, How they can shew their warlike bodies carv'd, Their arms disjoynted, or their legs cut off, Yet for all this rewarded with a scoff; Their service wants least solace, for out Peace Makes us conceive small pitty toward these: Yet their designes were glorious, and the cause For which they fought deserv'd no lesse applause, But see their end, for all the time they serv'd, The most of these are eyther hang'd or starv'd. Now to propose some due reward to these, Nought were more fit, if it the State would please, Than to injoyne the miserable Chrone (I meane the usurous oppressing one) Whose only sport it is, and recreation, To see a dearth of grain in all our Nation; Who grates, regrates, grinds and engrosseth all, Laughs when our markets rise, grives when they fall, Who will not sell his Corn if men should die; But stops his eare against their ruthfull crye: Then to injoyn (I say) his stonie heart, Some portion of his substance to impart To a deserving Souldier, and know My reason's this why I would have it so.
This earth-adoring and admiring wretch, Who craves no more then that he may be rich, Lives safe at home, his family attend him, But all this while the Souldier doth defend him▪ Snayle-like at home hee ever makes aboad, And little feels the dangers are abroad; While the encamped Souldier doth endure The worst extremes the Miser to secure: From sleep hee wakes, with noyse of least alarm. Surveys the Campe, prevents ensuing harm; Rampiers he reares, Fortes, Bulwarks, Palisadoes, Mures, Countermures, stores his wel-rig'd Armadoes: The key-cold ground, the field-bed, wher he rests him Where not one minute but some fear molests him: All which he beares with patience for this Elfe, Who cares not who fall so he save himselfe. Now ought not he to share in his encrease, Who by his danger doth secure his peace? Do wee not see each one relieve his Cur, Who on the night-time barks and makes a stur To shield his masters house from those would venter▪ But for fear of discovery, to enter? And shall a Cur so kindly be entreated, And a poor Souldier of his right defeated? Can one delight so much a Cur to cherish. And suffer one, endow'd with reason, perish? Nor for my self do I this comfort seek, For (as I think, I'm in for all the week) Although perchance I have as great delight, In a good cause, as any one to fight,
And would be loth to spare my dearest blood, If shedding it might do my Countrey good: But diverse means are form'd for diverse men, Some are to fight with pike and some with pen; Eyther of which requires aspirit stout, To vanquish fiends within, or foes without. But say, can neither eye, eare, taste, nor smell Afford thee ought that may content thee well? Can no choice object to thy eye appeare, Nor no melodious accent to thy eare, No fragrant perfume to refresh thy Scent While thou art here in lists of thraldom pent; No sense-affecting-solacing repast That may delight or relish thy distast? Can none of these thy drooping spirit cheere, Or ease thy griefe while thou art lodged here? Yes, yes, in every faculty I find. Somthing to give contentment to my mind; For thus I argue; If these breed such loathing, I must infer, on earth there can be nothing, Bee't nere so pleasant-seeming or so moving, That may in any measure merit loving. Which to confirme, as I conceiv'd distast In all those former Senses that are past, Now, for my love I bear the Commonweale, Heare but the griefs I for her sake do feele. MUch do I feele, for even my heart doth ake, Not for my self, but for my Country sake,
Wherein ther's nought doth me so neerly touch As to see great-men wrong the State so much. For ther's no place, we heare not some of these Tax'd and reprov'd for their Monopolies, Which they will beg that they their turns may serve, No matter though the common-people starve. O age me thinks thou art distracted growne To squeeze a whole State for advancing one! And what's that one? a profuse Rioter, Who spends upon a painted Sepulcher What ere he gains by begging; thus the poor Are forced to maintain a great mans whoor. They want, he surfeits; they may pine and die, Hee hears, but takes small pitty on their crie. They crave one crum of comfort, he denies them, And when he meets them, stops his nose & flies them, He all enjoys whatso'ere may like him well, And on his foot-cloth rides in state to Hell. O yee high peering Mounts incline your ear Unto the counsel of a Prisoner! For do not think, although I be in thrall, That I will humor any of you all; I have not learn'd to flatter hitherto, And I do scorn to take the trade up now. But what's my counsell? Labour to deserve Well of your Prince whom you are bound to serve, Hate to inhance your State, or fill your purses With wofull widows tears and poor-mens curses; That gaine must needs be ill, be't more or lesse, That's suck'd and strained from the fatherlesse.
Scorne to enrich your selves by others hate, Or rayse your selves by razing of the State. And for as much I heare that Some of you, Which I protest doth much my grief renue, Support your Followers in an ujust cause, Against the course and tenure of the Laws; So as they care not what they undertake, Because they shall be favor'd for your sake: Surcease for shame to countenance a wrong, Either by Letter or perswasive tongue; For there is nought on earth, right sure I am▪ Detracteth more from any Noble-man, Then with the brand of injury to stain him, For love of any on that doth retain him. For this such deep impression leavs behind it, As on your graves succeeding times shll find it, Where it will live long after you be dead, And sprinkle hatefull poyson on your seed. And you the reverend Judges of the Land, Stand in defence of right whosoe're withstand Your just proceedings, let no favor draw you, Nor fear of any great-one over-aw you. Doe you not think it were a shame to heare Such men as you, who on your shoulders beare The burden of the State, and should take care To guard the Prince and those his Subjects are, E're to decline from doing what is right, For love, or lucre, enmity or might? Patrons and Patterns you should be of truth, To curbe the misdemeanors of our youth,
Whose unconfined wills are rather bent To ill then good, unless they feel restraint: But for as much as I have heard Some say, That great-mens power hath ever born much sway In Seates of Justice, which should be so pure, As neither power could awe, nor love allure; That you from course of Justice less may swerve Observe the Rule which Cato did observe: Who on  time, when he in judgement sat Professing truth, the scope he aymed at, Receiv'd a Letter, which in post-haste came From One who was esteem'd a special man Then in the State; addressed to this end, To spare pronouncing judgement on his Friend. But He, suspecting what th' contents might e, Meant to prevent him by this Policie, And that he might procede in judgment better, Fist Sentenc'd him, and after read the Letter. O then to all alike just judgement render As you the safety of the State doe tender! Grant great ones no exemption, who alledge They may offend by writ of Priviledge; But make them know, that you have pow'r to strik (If they impugn the Law) all men alike. This if you do, which onscience bids you doe, Good men will love, and ill men feare you too. Yea God himself, who's present in your Court, Sees your uprightness and shll bless you for'. And you strife-stirring▪Lawyers, who have sold Too oft your souls, more oft your tongues for gold▪
Like some foule Leprosy my Muse would shun you But that the State complaines so much upou you. Eye your profession, and examine then If you your selves be such condition'd men, As both the State requireth at your hands And with the form of your profession stands. And what is this, but that you should take heed What cause you take in hand, for whom you plead, Whom you peswade, and with perswasion mad, Saying their cause is good, when it is bad, How you doe earne your fees? for some mens aym Are by delayes to multiply their gaines: For know, that you, who should judicious bee, Are first to weigh the cause, then take your fee; And if't be such a Cause 'twill bear no water, Perswade your Client to compound the matter: But if the cause be good, fall soundly to it, And slight it not, for so you might undo it. What shame were't then to see men of your Co Distemperd with a swelling in the throat: A dangerous infectious disease, Spung from the practice of Demosthenes; Whom the Milsians feeing on a time, That to their cause he might the more incline, Hee, when he should the matter fully break, Had got the . Vid. Demst. ud Gellium, lib. 11. cap. 9. 82. Squinancie, and could not speak. O take you heed of this, lest God withhold Speech from your tongues thus tipt and tide wit Gold
And you the Gentry, who retaine the name, But not th Worth, of those from whence you came▪ You, who should be life, hope, and all that's deere Both to your selves, and such as neighbour neere, Observe yor ranke, and in your ranke so live, As to your House you may no scandall give. Alasse, for griefe, that ere it should be sed, So many hopefull Plants are withered; Such ancient houses, where reliefe was found By way-beat Passengers, now raz't to ground! And whence comes this, but from improvidenc, Neglect of State, profusenese of expence? So as me thinks, I heare poore earth complaine And chide her brats for being so profane; That th' antient badge of Hospitality, Should be defac'd by prodigality; Cloaths, made to cover shame, and colour sin▪ Are now habilliments to glory in: Meates, given to suffice nature, not delight. Must satisfy our liqu'rish appetite: Drinks, to refresh, times so distemper'd are▪ Must drink down debt, apply a cure to care▪ Of which disorderd rank, I knew of late A youth of faire and eminent estate; Who in few yeares had hi estate o seeke from pissing Conduit that doth stand in Cheap▪ But in my judgement, there is none of these Brings ruine to our ancient families, So much as profane swearing, which doth call Like that hand-writing showne upon the wall
For vengeance on them that the same do use, "Gods curse must nere depart from swearers House. And yet I see, and sigh to say I see, How in this Land, where God should honour'd be With duest praises, for her great increase Of earthly blessings, and continued peace, The Gentry of our Ile, should think no shame, With new coin'd oaths to profane his name: Which is their Parents fault, who so much love them, That when they hear them swear they'l scarce reprove them: Yea though they curse ere they be wean'd from teat▪ And learne to sweare, before they learn to speak, They must not be rebuk'd, but mark their ends, And you'l conclude their Parents, their worst frends. And you, deceitful Tradesmen, whose great'st care It to contrive dark shops, to vent false ware, Scorne with injurious practise to deceive Such as in you, their trust reposed have; And day by day the Chandlers case remember, As you the welfare of your necks do tender. Lastly to you my Brethren, who by nature, Are woodmen borne and gotten by a Satyre: Examine ere you publish any line, For I must tell you 'tis a dang'rous time; The State is jealous, and will have an eye On such wild-headed waggs as you and I. Be warie then good Boyes, and have a care, Least in my censure yee do likewise share, Which could not chuse but turne to your disgrace▪ Besides your lothsom lodging in this place:
Where, trust me, though I doe not lye with any, Spight of my teeth I goe to bed with many; And which is strange, Backbiters have I more Since I lay here then e're I had before. But heark, while I am taxing others sin, My fellows they are roaring now within; I must withdraw; my Keeper he doth call, And now my grate is shut; good-night to all. Exit Spectrum
A Postscript. NO sooner was my Grate closed, than I from my Prospect barred; re∣tiring my self to my rest, which was as restlesse as my fortunes haplesse, my friends hopelesse and helplesse. Neither did this lessen, but heighten my misery, to have mine eye barred from liberty, by being shut from my Prospect of vanity: But beggars must be no choosers, nor prisoners disposers; with Patience I retired, re∣solving to enjoy my selfe, though of all outward joyes deprived and joy in the liberty of my minde, though of bodily freedom restrained. Neither indeed (to doe As surlie Cerberus right) was my Argus-eyed Por∣ter so relentlesse, as wholly to restrain mee; for his promise was unto mee, next morning betime to tender mee a courtesie, by giving mee free recourse to my Grate; where I resolved to spend the next day in a se∣rious survey of such passengers and passages as happily might encounter mee, and make themselves objects to an embleme of misery. But see how humane purpo∣ses are diverted! implying, that nothing can bee by man, so long as hee is man, firmly resolved: For, next day, addressing my selfe to my old taske, I understood
by One of the Knights-ward, that divers broken and decayed Merchants, whose estate, howsoever it seeme to the eye of the world, razed, yet (so wise is humane policy) their supposed Heirs are to great fortunes rai∣sed; were inquisitive how they might procure a trustie and faithfull Retainer, who had knowledg in keeping of a booke, casting an account, and such necessary parte at properly concerned men of their ranke. Upon which enquiry, she whole House, to doe mee a courtesy, and add some small comfort to my present misery▪ preferred mee; knowing mee to have a little smattering in A∣rithmetick, and in that respect fittest to bee imployed for such an instrument; since which time I have used all diligence to tender them all possible content; where∣in I have so far prevailed, as with the generall suf∣frage of these decayed Magnificoes, it is lately conclu∣ded, that if it come to passe (as much may bee) that they may eyther by meanes of Protection, or some o∣ther enfranchisement to them granted, attaine to the honour of a Company, I shall forthwith bee made their Remembrancer; which place I shall right willingly accept, intending to remember them upon all occasi∣ons. Hence then appeareth the cause why I am from further survey restrained, being in affaires of higher consequence imployed; having no time to betake mee to writing or from wasting my Spleene with laughing; to see so many deluded Creditors bemoaning the fall of my politick Masters, whose well-cram'd coffers are so well stored, as they will feed the Breaker, though the Creditor bee starved. To discover their Treasure,
were to betray their Trust; I were a knave then i bee lesse then trustie, although they bee knaves in grain that doe trust mee; only know thus much, there are many here in this City, to my knowledge, that beare their heads high, keepe their shops ope, walke the Exchange, and retaine an opinion of mighty Mer∣chants, who come many thousands short of these in substance. So as my comfort is (for gold to the eye∣sight is very soveraign) I have enjoyed the sight of more treasure since I was restrained, then ere I enjoy∣ed being freed. But silence becomes a man of m place; let this suffice, I enjoy more by sight then e∣ver their thirstie Creditors are like to possesse; s high am I in trust with those who have advanced their fortunes by best be trust. Now to these, wh would have mee proceed further in my Survey or Dis∣play of vanity; having found Poveety an individuate to Poetry, my answere it; when I have hope to gain so much by my Reader as by my Breaker, hee shall heare further from meee. Now to my charge. —10—100—1000—10000—100000— "Thus my wise-Masters burnish though they burst; "Foxes fare ever best, when they are curst.
The Copy of a Letter sent from a Burgess of the Lower-House, to the brittle Society, or broken Company of Bank∣rupt-Merchants, 1625. MASTERS and Magistrates▪ whose timely policy hath got you the deserved name of a provi∣dent Company; Know that both∣Houses, wherein I was employed as an especiall Member, have taken into their Consideration the qualitie of a Breaker: Wherefore I thought good, in respect of that an∣cient familiarity, and inviolable league of former amity which did somtimes cement us so neere to∣gether, to propose certain cautious observations, not so much for your behoofe, who are excluded from this number; and consequently exempted from their Censure; as for our dispersed Bankrupts who have broke since the sixt of October, whose persons and estates are only made lyable to the ex∣tent of a legall Censure. First therefore to disco∣ver to you and your brittle Corporation some ap∣parent Remonstrances of my affection (yet not so
as my love should forget forme, or my Letter method;) my purpose is to reduce this schedule to you directed, to four main heads or principall points; where, in the first branch, I meane to make known what was objected against you; secondly, what was answered for you; thirdly, what was Enacted; and lastly, certain directions, by way of prevention proponnded, that the force or virtue of that Act might bee frustrated or diverted. For the first, divers Bills of complaint were preferred a∣gainst you, and with much heate prosecuted; sun∣dry main objections pressed, the substance or effect whereof I have no lesse freely couched, then friend∣ly touched, that in your memories they may bee the deeper imprinted. It was objected, and that with much vehemency, by a rawbone Knight, who, is it seemd, had been formerly conversant with men of your quality, which occasioned him to exasperate the businesse against you more feelingly. That if such as you were suffered to get mens estates into your hands under pretence of Commerce, and then fraudulently shut up shop, as if the light of you fortunes had received a Dampe, there would it time bee no Commerce in this Iand, but an utter decay or decrease of all trades; the reason hee al∣ledged was this, Because, said hee, every Profession by way of Commerce, useth to have dependence upon mens reputation or credit; now if this repu∣tation (the buttresse of every profession) faile▪ needs must all Commerce, relying upon mens re∣putation
fall. This objection was illustrated by divers apt similitudes, to add more lustre to his proposition, and detract the more from your pro∣fession. The State, quoth hee, is a body politick, and may bee aptly compared to a body naturall and organicall; the Belly or Maw of this body is the Commonaltie, whereto other parts stand en∣gaged to relieve her necessity; with these she con∣sorteth and Commerceth, and on their engaged re∣putation shee relyeth: The eye promiseth to direct her; the hand to relieve her, and the foote to sup∣port her: If these infringe their promise shee of necessity must perish, because their mutuall sup∣portance requires a mutuall assistance; which neglected, the whole fabrick must be dissolved: so fares it with the body politick, where one veine drawes blood from another; if one veine grow too full the whole body suffers for it, which distemper admits no prevention but by Phlebotomy and inci∣sion; Full bodies must bee purged; spungie and ranke Vines pruned; grounds overflowing drained, and impostum'd sores launced; much more this Gangrene of our State, which menaceth ruine to the whole body, if it be not prevented by a speedy remedy: For tell mee, shall these ulcerous Scara∣bees, who feede on others fortunes, and fat them∣selves with others ruines, receive countenance from us, respect by us, or expect lesse then an exempla∣ry Censure of us? Shall these Horsleaches, who suck till they swell, swell till they burst, be suffered
any more to nestle amongst us? Shall these lazie▪ Labourers reape what they have not sowne, eate o the fruit they have not planted, or receive profit for what they never ventured? And more tollera∣ble were it, if they parted but stakes, or only sha∣red in the benefit of others adventures; althoug for this they never laboured, but like egregiou Land-sharks, to strip their honest Creditors (an ruine others to enrich themselves) of all, and ap∣propriate all to themselves; what civill or well-Go∣govern'd State can endure? I (quoth hee) no without just cause, am induced to prosecute this Ar∣gument, being a matter of such generall conse∣quence, as many Families must suffer while they su∣feit, and want the staffe of bread, while they gro fat with the bread of deceit: Neither am I igno∣rant how many impious Imps of that Societie, mak the Royall-Exchange their Plotting-Gallerie, o State-Consistory, where they project ruine to thei Creditor, and advancement to their seldom-thri∣ving-Successor: Nay, which is worse, I have see in my time one of these Bankrupt-Merchants, aft recovery of their pretended breach, brave it with such insolency, as I have wondred how a Christia face could bee so brazed, or with such impudenc glazed, as so soone to forget his sinne or sleight hi shame; but what will not an habituate custom produce, especially where greatnesse becomes  subterfuge to guiltinesse? It was an ancieat Law a∣mong the Persians, That whosoever was more ▪
to receive then requite, should suffer death. What Censure then should be pronounced on these, who receive more then is given them, retain more then is due unto them, and infringe their faith to such as repose trust in them? Violation, or breach of faith, was so odious and contemptible a thing to Heathen men, as they preferred a noble end, be∣fore so ignoble a brand; their reputation was their glory, their honour was their prize, and their good name that precious odor which perfumed them li∣ving, and embalm'd them dying. When a poore woman complained to Tamberlaine, That one of his Souldiers had drunke some of her milke, for which hee had not paid, he caused the Souldier whom the woman accused to bee brought forth, and for this pettie injury to bee ript up, that it might appeare whether her accusation were true or false; which if it had proved otherwise then shee affirmed, had been on her selfe inverted, by inflicting on this wo∣man the selfe same punishment which was practised on this Delinquent. If a Souldier, whose professi∣on is commonly injurie and rapine, deserved so hea∣vy a Censure, for so light and veniall an error, what may hee seeme to deserve who professeth all urbani∣tie, liveth in a State famous for civilitie, and whose very garbe is a complement of honestie? Sure (with all reservancy of respect to you before whom I speake) I cannot imagine how any Censure can be too rigorous to men of a condition so odious and injurious. How much this Speech was approved
and silently applauded might appeare by the seriou attention of the whole House; so as, doubtlesse the Bill had past presently upon the delivery of thi Speech, had not One, whose Copyhold this Cas concerned, boulted upright; who pulling a littl downe his gregorian, which was displac't a little by hastie taking off his Bever, sharpning his peake and erecting his distended mouchato's, proceede in this answere; not only to avert the force of those objections already pressed, but to divert their in∣tentions towards this Act, to the furthering where∣of hee saw the House generally inclined. It is ad∣mirable to note with what prepared facilitie and singular proprietie the tongue can make expression of the minde, in any subject which it intends either to dignifie or disgrace; so as (to use Anacharsi words,) It had need of a more strong restraint th Nature. How violent this Gentleman who spake last hath been in disgracing, yea suppressing the an∣cient company of Breakers you have partly heard  and the reasons hee alledged to confirme his dis∣course, which I must ingeniously confesse, were both many and weighty; so as I perceive by out∣ward appearances, that they have left such deep impression in this honorable Assembly, as the print thereof cannot bee easiliy razed, unlesse reasons of equall or more high consequence bee produced, to answere those which have beene already objected. First therefore, I will lay open unto you what an ex∣cellent
ground of State-policie relies on the conti∣nuance of these broken Merchants; whose suppres∣sion would bee an occasion of sundry maine incon∣veniences in the publick State; for, if prevention bee the life of policie, how so one would this life be extinguished; if it had no subjects of prevention whereby it might bee exercised? If there were no Breakers to circumvent, the Merchants needed no policie to prevent; which would in time inure them to securitie, and make them ignorant in the cauti∣ons of preventing policie. Yea, But it is objected, that these Bankrupt Merchants are profest enemies to all civill Commerce; Admit this were so, yet in some Cases it is as necessarie to have enemies as friends. Nasica, when the Roman Common-weal was supposed to bee in most secure estate, because free of their enemies, affirmed; That though the Achaians and Carthaginians were both brought un∣der the yoke of bondage, yet they were in most danger, because none were left whom they might eyther feare for danger, or who should keepe them in awe. The like course observed Oenomademus, in the Ile of Chios, when hee counselled his fellowes, That they should not expell all their enemies, but still leave some in the City; lest (quoth hee) being void of all our enemies, we should begin to quarrel with our friends: Besides, if our wealthy Traders should not somtimes encounter with these rubs, their much prosperity would make them insolent, so as labouring with their owne burden, they would
become profuse Rioters in the smooth progress of their fortunes, so as I may properly retort th last Speakers words upon himselfe, and confidently affirme, That these Decayed Merchants are excellen Phlebotomists to purge the ful bodies of such Trades∣men, who by continuance of Commerce are grow too rich. Telephus, when hee could finde none a∣mongst his friends to cure his wound, permitte his enemy to doe it; So hee who purposed to kill Prometheus the Thessalian, oepend his Imposthum with his Sword; this Imposthum'd Member is the rich Tradesman, who must be lanced before he can be cured; a continued successe in Commerce hath corrupted him; prosperitie, which best declare what men bee, hath transported him; so as by all likelyhood hee would hazard the losse of himselfe, if hee encountred with no losses to make him feele himselfe; the wisedome therefore of the time hath found out an expert Chyrurgeon to lance him, and lancing cure him; an experienc'd Physician to purge him, and purging recover him; an exquisite Gardiner o pune him, and pruning refine him: And would you have such a singular Artist Censured? Besides all this, reflect on the benefit which re∣dounds to the publick State, in their death as well as life; for these broken Merchants having raised and inhanced their Fortunes, no sooner die then they invest their wives in whatsoever their thriving providence hath scrap'd together; who after some extorted teares, forc'd with much pumping from
the Lymbek of their eyes, plant their affection on some younger brother, to whom they make an en∣tayl'd estate of whatsoever was left them by this Breaker. Thus, like honest men (though much a∣gainst their will) they make decayed Gallants their inheritors, who sing a requiem for their Soules while they set their patrimonies at sale; And good women, when these young Rioters have left them nothing but rags of misery, they never exclaim, but patiently conclude, it was their destinie. A∣gaine, I can see no reason why these Trades∣men should preferre any such Bill of Complaynt a∣gainst these Bankrupts; seeing they confesse how much in their course of Trading they have gained by them, which will not only countervaile their losse, but might bee an inducement to qualifie their demands: Yea, suppose all were true as these Tradesmen affirme, and that these broken Mer∣chants were the utter ruine of their fortunes, who by getting commodities into their hand and so breaking, have diverted the current of all trading. Yet let these Tradesmen lay their hand on their heart, aud tell mee if they have not by times chea∣ted these Merchants Sonnes as often as they them∣selves were ever cheated by their Fathers. All then that they can justly complain of, is but a little delay or drift of time, for when oportunity shal be offer'd I make little doubt, but these who were once deld∣ed, and by the subtlety of these ancient Merchants circumvented, will requite the Fathers policie by
working on his Sons simplicitie. An age then at most will make all streight amongst them, so as whatsoever was injuriously hooked by the prede∣cessors provience, will bee as speedily retendred by the Successors weaknesse. Neither have I pro∣duced all those reasons which might bee here alled∣ged by Courtiers and State-favorites, who should  great prejudice by occasion of this Act. For, whereas formerly Protections were usually procu∣red to secure these decayed Merchants from arests; and consequently enable them to work their owne peace; employments of which nature raised no small profit to the busie Courtier; there will bee now no occasion for any such employment, which would drive the Courtier to a pitifull exigent. Lastly, for I hope I shall not neede any further to presse this Argument, being with such pregnant reasons confirmed; how many grave, judicious and discet States men have wee in this our Iland (and some in this honourable House) who, if they had beene ip't in the head upon their first fall, ha never atayned the honour to show their sufficienc in so brave an Assembly? whose aymes as they were generous, so were their ends glorious, resem∣bling Antaeus, who so often as hee was thrown downe to the earth, received fresh strength, but be∣ing lifted up was soone amed: So they, whe their Fortunes seeme most depressed, meanes o advancement diverted, and so many rubs to thei future hopes objected, remaine so firmly resolve
as they vanquished misfortune with patience: and crowned their fortunes with a glorious conquest. This Speech, as it relished well in the Palats of some, so it distasted others; for some there were who muttered underneath, that they smelled a Rat  others stick't not to say, that this last Speaker had surely some affinity with a Breaker:Some said that this Speech might not unitly  compared to that improbable Paradox writ against  ber∣ty; or to him who  maintayned this bair-braind argument, that a Hare was a more couragious creature them a Lion: or rather to him, a merry Greeke, who held this desperate assertion, That Vice was more behooefull then Virtue in a State politick: Or to him, who Marius like, bombasted his Stockins to hide the infirmity of his small Legs. So as in conclu∣sion, to the great griefe of many true-hearted fra∣ctors, as well principall Merchants, as puny fa∣ctors, who wished your crazie profession well; the last mans Speech was utterly exploded, and the first approved and applau∣ded; upon which dolo∣rous conclusion, with consent of the whole House, it was in expresse termes thus enacted against you. For as much as daily experience sheweth, That the number and multitude of Bankrupts doe encrease more and more: and also the fraudes and deceits invented and practised for the avoyding, frustra∣ting and defrauding the penalties of the good Lawes in that behalfe already made, and the said remedy by them provided, &c. Bee it enacted, That all and singular the aforesaid Statutes and
Lwes heretofore made against Bankrupts, and for reliefe of the Creditors, shall bee in all things large∣ly and beneficially construed and xpounded for the ayde, helpe and relief of the Creditors, or suc person or persons as already bee or hereafter shll become bankupt. And that all and every person and perons using the trade of Merchandize by way of bargayning, exchange, bartering, , &c▪ or shall use the trade or profession of a Look to your Eares Scri∣vener. Scrivener▪ receiving other mens monies or states into his trust or custody, who at ∣ny time after the end of this presen Session of Parliament, shall either by himselfe, o others by his procement, obtaine any Protectio or Protections, other then such person or person as shll bee lwfully protected by the priviledge o Parliament, &c. thereby desiring or endeavorin to compell or enforce them, or any of them, to ac cept lesse then heir just and principall debts, or  procure time or loger dayes of payment then w given at the time of their original contract: or bei indebted to any person or persons in the sum of o hundred pounds or more, shall not pay, or othe wise compound for the same, within six monet next after the same shall grow due, and the Debt be arested for the same, &c. or being arested fo debt, shall afer his or her arest lie in prison t moneths or more, upon that or any other arest  detention in Prison for debt, &c. or procure  enlargement by putting in common or hired Bay
shall bee accounted and adjudged a Bankrupt, to all intents and purposes. Bee  further Enacted, that the like Commissions, Oders, Benefits, Pro∣visions and Remedies which are and bee provided and limited by the said former Acts of Parliaments made 13 Eliz. & 1 Jac. concerning his, her, or their Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, &c. shall and may bee had, pursued, taken and expounded a∣gainst such person and pesons as are herein and hereby declared, described or expressed to bee Bankrupts, and against his, her and their lands, te∣nements, hereditaments, &c. And bee it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the same orders, benefits and remedies, which are and be pro∣vided and limited by this present Act, aginst any Bankrupts, or for, or concerning his, her or their lands, tenements, hereditaments, &c. or the discovery of them, or any of them, shall from henceforth bee had, pursued, taken and expounded against such Person and Persons, as are declared or expressed to bee Bankrupts, by the said former Acts of Parliaments, or either f them, and against his, her and their Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, &c, in such manner and forme, as the same ought and might have beene, if the persons in the said former Statutes, or eyther of them, described to be Bankrupts, had beene mentioned and descri∣bed to be Bankrupts in and by this present Act. And whereas by the former Laws and Provisions orda∣ned, the Commissioners appointed have limited
power to examine the Bankrupt himselfe, &c. B some doubt hath beene made, whether their powe did extend to examine the wives of the  touching the same, by reason whereof the Bankrupt wives doe daily conceale and convey away, and cause to bee conveyed much part of their hubands monies, wares, &c. by meanes whereof much of the Bukrupts estate is concealed and deteined from the Creditors. For cleering the said doubt, Bee it Declared and Enacted by the Authority a∣foresaid, that after such time as any person shall by the said Commissioners, executing the said Com∣mission, or the greater part of them, bee lawfully adjudged or declared to be a Bankrupt, the said Commissioners executing such Commission, shall have power and authority to examine upon Oth, the wife and wives of all and every such Bankrupt, for the finding out Marke this my brie Brethren. and discovery of the estate, and estates, good and chat∣tels of such Bankrupt or Bankrupts, concealed, secretly kept, or disposed of by such wife or wives, in their own persons, or by their owne act or meanes, or by any other person or per∣sons. And that shee and they the said wife and wives shall incur such danger and penalty, for not coming before the said Commissioners, or for refu∣sing to bee sworne and examined, or for not disclo∣sing the truth upon her or their examination or , as in and by the said former Lawes, or yther of them, is already made and provided a∣gainst
any other Person or Pesons, in like Cass. And if any Bnkrupt shll upon his or her exina∣tion, taken before the said Commssioners, be found frauduently or deceitflly to have conveyd awy his or her goods, chattels, &c. to the vlue of twenty pounds or above, purposely to hindr the execution of this Statute, & shall not upon his or her examina∣tion discover unto the said Commissioers, and (if it lie in their power) deliver to the said Commissio∣ners all that estate, goods and chatels, so faudu∣lently and deceitfully conveyed away, shll or may bee indicted for such faud or abue, at the Assize or generall Sessions, &c. and if upon such Indict∣ment or Indictments, the Bnkrupt bee thereof convicted, hee or shee so convicted, shall bee se upon the Pillory, . in some publick place, for the space of two houres, & have one of his or her ears nailed to the Pillory, and cut off. And for that some doubt is conceived whether the Cō ns∣sioners, in case of resistance, have power by the for∣mer Lwes to breake opn, or cause to bee broken open the House or Houses of suh Bankrupts, &c. Bee it therefore Enacted, That in execution of the sid Commission, it shll bee lawfull to and for the said Commissioners, or any other Person or Per∣sons, by them, or the greater part of them, depu∣ted by their warrant or warrants, under their hands and seales, to breake open the House or Houses, chambers, shops, warehouses, &c. where th said
Bankrupt, or any of his or her goods or estate shall be, or reputed to be, and to seize them, and order the Body, Goods and Chattels, ready money, and o∣ther estate of such Bankrupt, as by the said former Lawes are limited and appointed. And for the bet∣ter division and distribution of the Lands, Tene∣ments, Hereditaments, &c. amongst his or her Creditors, Bee it Enacted that the Commissioners, or the greatest part of them, shall and may examin upon Oath, or by any other waies or meanes, as to them shall seeme meete, any Person or Persons, for the finding out and discovery of the truth and cer∣taintie of the severall debts due and owing to all such Creditor and Creditors as shall seeke reliefe by such course of Commission to bee used forth, as aforesaid: And that all and every Creditor and Creditors, having security for his or their severall Debts by Judgement, Statute, Recognizance, &c. or having made Attachment in London or any other place, by virtue of any custome there used, of the goods and chattels of any such Bankrupt, whereof there is no Execution or Extent served and exe∣cuted upon any the Lands, Tenements, Heredi∣taments, Goods, Chattels, and other estate of such Bankrupt, before such time as hee or shee shall or doe become Bankrupt, shall not bee re∣lieved upon any such Judgement, Statute, Re∣cognizance, Specialty, Attachment or other secu∣rity, for more then a reteable part of their just and due debts.
And bee it further Enacted, That if any the Lands, Tenements, Goods, Chattels, Debts, or other estate of any Bankrupt bee extended af∣ter such time as hee or shee is become a Bank∣rupt, by any person or persons, under colour or pretence of his or their being an accountant, or any way indebted unto our Soveraigne, his Heirs or Successors, that then it shall bee lawfull to and for the said Commissioners, to examine upon Oath whether the said Debt were due to such Debtor or Accomptant: And if such contract was originally made, it shall and may bee lawfull to and for the said Commissioners to order, determine and dis∣pose of all such Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Goods, Chattels and Debts, so extended as afore∣said, to and for the use of the Creditors, which shall seeke reliefe by the said Commission, And for that it often falls out, that many persons before they become Bankrupt, doe convey their goods to other men upon good consideration, yet still doe keepe the same and are reputed the owners thereof, and dispose the same as their owne: Bee it Enacted, That if at any time hereafter, any person or per∣sons shall become Bankrupt, and at such time as they shall become Bankrupt, shall by the consent and permission of the true owner and proprietarie, have in their possession, order and disposition, any goods or chattels, whereof they shall bee reputed owners, and take upon them the sale, alteration or disposition as owners; that in every such case, the
said Commissioners, or the greater part of them shall have power to sell and dispose the same, t and for the benefit of the Creditors, which shall seeke reliefe by the said Commission, as fully as a∣ny other part of the estate of the Bankrupt. And for the better payment of debts, and discouraging me to become Bankrupts. Bee it further Enacted that the said Commissioners (on whom this Authority is expresly conferred) or the greate number of them, shall have power, by virtue of this Act, by Deede indented, and inrolled within six moneth after the making thereof, in some of his Majestie Courts of Record at Westminster, to grant, bar∣gain, sell and convey any Manors, Lands, Tene∣ments or Hereditaments, whereof any Bankrupt i o shall be in any waies seized of any estate in tayle, in possession, reversion or remainder, and whereo no reversion or remainder is, &c. to any person o persons, for the reliefe and benefit of the Credito of all such Bankrupts, &c. And bee it further Enacted, That if any perso  now is, or hereafter shall become Bankrupt have herefore granted, conveyed or assured, o shall at any time hereafter grant, convey or assur an Lands▪ Tenements, Hereditaments, Goods Chttels, or other Estate, unto any person or per∣sons upon condition or power of redemption, at day to come, by payment of money or otherwise That it shall and may bee lawfull, to and for th said Commissioners, or the greater part of them
before the time of the performance of such condi∣tions, to assigne and appoint, under their hands and seales, such person or persons as they shall think fit, to make tender or payment of money or other performance according to the nature of such con∣dition, as fully as the Bankrupt might have done, &c. At the end of which Act these two provisions were thought fit to bee annexed: Provided further, That no Purchasor, for good and valuable consideration shall bee impeached by virtue of this Act, or any Act heretofore made against Bankrupts, unlesse the Commission to prove him or her a Bankrupt, be su∣ed forth against such Bankrupt within five yeers after hee or they shall become Bankrupt. Provided further, And bee it enacted by the Authority afore∣said, That this Act, and all other Acts of Parlia∣ment heretofore made against Bankrupts, shall ex∣tend to strangers borne, as well A iens as Denizens, as effectually, as to the natural born Subjects, both to make them subject to the Lawes as Bankrupts, as also to make them capable of the benefit of con∣tribution, as Creditors by those Lawes. Excuse me now (my ancient and familiar friends) in that I have longer insisted upon the verball repe∣tition of all materiall points and branches of this Statute; for I am not ignorant how much the re∣view and perusall thereof concerns you; but fear∣ing lest the length hereof might beget in you a kind of wearinesse (having your heads at this time work∣ing about affayres of high consequence) I have here
reduced all those particulars to one abstract, pun∣ctually comprehending the substance of every branch contained in this Act. First, all such Laws and Statutes as were heretofore made against Bankrupts, and for reliefe of Creditors, are for the better reliefe and redresse of the said Creditors, largely and beneficially construed and expounded. Secondly, the qualitie, nature and condition of a Bankrupt is in his colours lively described, display∣ed and discovered. Thirdly, the like Commissions, Orders, Benefits and Remedies which are, and bee provided & limited by the said former Acts of Par∣liament made 13 Eliz. and 1 Jac. against any Bank∣rupts, shall bee prosecuted and expounded against such Bankrupts, as by their especiall, personall marks are herein declared or expressed. Fourthly, the same orders, benefits and remedies which are by this present Act provided and limited against any Bankrupt, shall henceforth be pursued & expound∣ed against such person and persons as by the said former Acts of Parliaments are declared or expres∣sed to bee Bankrupts. Fiftly, the Commissioners power is illustrated; a doubt, touching examinati∣on of Bankrupts wives cleered, and the penalties whereto refractory women are incident, in cases of denying or refusing to be examined, fully expressed. Sixtly, what publick punishment shall be on such men or women inflicted, as upon examination shall be either found to have concealed the truth, or con∣veyed such estates as were theirs, or to them upon
trust recommended. Seventhly, the Commissio∣ners authority is inlarged, and to the breaking open of the Bankrupts house, warehouse, chamber, shop, chest or trunck authorized. Eighthly, there is a course proposed, how division and distribution of the Bankrupts Lands and Goods, to the reliefe of the Creditor shall be disposed, and how to every one a ratable part is to be apportioned. Ninthly, if any Lands, Tenements, Goods, Chattels, Debts, or other estate of any Bankrupt chance to be exten∣ded under colour or pretence of being accomptant or any way indebted to our Soveraigne Lord, his heirs or successors; the said Commissioners are to examine upon Oath, whether the said Debt were due to the said debtor or accomptant: And if such bargaine or contract was originally made, the said Commissioners are to order and dispose of all such Lands, &c. so extended, to the sole use of the Cre∣ditors, who seeke reliefe by the said Commission, and to whose behoofe they are to bee converted. Tenthly, if any Bankrupt shall with the consent and permission of the true owner and proprieta∣rie, have in their possession any goods or chattels, whereof they shall bee reputed owners, they shall be by the Commissioners power lawfully disposed, and to the Creditors reliefe converted, that Debts may be better discharged, and Bankrupts hereafter discouraged. Eleventhly, the time when this au∣thority or power should be to these Commissio∣ners granted, in what manner exhibited, and in
what particulars extended. Lastly, if any Ban rupt shall convey his estate to any person▪ upo condition or power of redemption, the Commissi∣oners, or the greater part of them, before the tim of performance of such condition, may make ten∣der or payment of money, or other performance, according to the nature of such condition, as fully as the Bankrupt in his owne proper person mig have done: Which Condition so performed, the said Lands may by the Commissioners bee sold, a∣liened and disposed to the benefit and reliefe of the Creditor, for whose redresse this Statute was En∣acted. For these two provisions annexed, they a to you no lesse prejudiciall, then to the Creditor usefull. Now, my Broken-Brethren, these twelve bran∣ches which arise from this one and only Statut must bee the twelve men which you are to bee try by. Guilty prit. God send you good deliveranc▪ I assure mee, there is not one branch of all these which you could not finde in your Conscience to breake, but the feare of the Pillory makes your Conscience more queasie. It resteth then that wee propose certaine cautions or directions, whereby the force or virtue of this Act may be frustrated and diverted, your credulous creditors delded, and yo from future danger secured: These remedies, re∣ceits (or deceits rather) for prevention, are three▪ Antidating, Insinuating, and Adopting. Antida∣ting of yonr couveyance or State-charter. Insinua∣ting
with some eminent Commissioner; Adopting some gracefull Courtier to bee your Heire or Suc∣cessor. For the first, it is dangerous to your person if you be discovered; you must walke therefore in the clouds, and hardly trust your owne brest with this secret, yet you may recommend it safely to the fidelity of your Scrivener: for both his eares he dare not be your discoverer, you must therefore discourse your thoughts in silen Otium & som∣nū loqui. Tacit., & be close brested to your wives, lest they give iutelligence. For I would have you, my shaken brethren, of all others to bee wondrous wary, that none of you make your wife your Secre∣tary; for if she know it, your Foreman is sure to be partaker of it: so as, while you make a shift to con∣vey a part, they take course to contract together for the whole. Those men who (as Cosmo saith) carry their heart in their mouth, are more to bee pitied then feared: bee you none of these pitifull things; cast your selves rather in Tiberius mold, who glori∣ed in nothing so much, as in cunningly cloaking his purposes with faire pretences, going invisible, and deluding his Subjects opinions with a seeming good. None can bee open and wise; avoid then the former, that you may thrive by the latter. Hee that will make gaine his sole object, must not stick to make dishonesty his path, nor a large Conscience his Inmate. He must Who exiled all liberall Arts, Ne quid usquam honesti oculis oc∣curreret. Domitian-like, divert his eye from every object
of honesty, and every day take a new lesson fro the thriving rules of Machiavels policy. But for you (my Crazie Consorts) there is no∣thing so needfull in this secrecie of Antidating,  your intimacy with an expert counterfeiting Scrive∣ner, whose habituate profession in the exquisite grounds of forgerie, never brought their Master within suspicion of knavery; whom that you may better know by his character, and by my experienc' display, bee cautioned to make choice of no Gu for your Scrivener; take along with you these per∣sonall markes, or accoutrements rather, of his pro∣fession. Let him by all meanes partake much of the Jew, and learne to forget the bashfull art of blush∣ing; Let him counterfeit, and that so naturally, as if it were ingraffed in him; an innocent simplicity; to the end hee may shroude his actions more covert∣ly. Let the brazen age shine in his forehead, and  voluble tongue to answere any thing that may bee objected. Let him be no Pillorie-man, for I make some doubt whether the Commissioners, by virtue of their Commission, may not make search whether he hath beene ever at auricular Confession. To cau∣tion him in his trade of swearing when hee shall bee put to't, I neede not; for that is one of their first rudiments when they are Punies. Make this choice and bee confident of successe, for a crafty knave needes no Broker, nor a cunning Scrivener the braines of a Breaker; and this shall suffice to pre∣monish you touching the mysterious- secrecy of An∣tidating.
Secondly, you must insinuate, and as it were, skrue your selfe into the respect or affe∣ction of some eminent Commissioner, and by grate∣full arguments of Love, make him your bosome friend and familiar. And if you cannot compasse this your selfe, recommend the carriage thereof to your wife. Syrens were not men but wo∣men, which makes mee thinke, that men are lesse perswasive then women; let this burden therefore bee laid on them. Meane Homines fronte & oratione magis, quā ipso beneficio, re{que} capiuntur. Cic. time, for as much as men of generous quality, whose affections are not subjected to the observance of any, are rather taken with a countenance amiable, dis∣course affable, and disposition sociable, then with any benefit or bounty whatsoever; you must un∣derstand this art or garbe of gaining Love, consi∣steth much in your fashion or conversation; your disposition must bee, though inwardly surley, out∣wardly lovely; you must bee passing officious, and force them to a familiarity, though it be by palpable Parasiticall-Sycophancy. But it is much to bee feared, that these who bee hereto authorized, as they are too wise to bee thus deluded, so they are too honest to bee depraved; as they are too un∣derstanding to bee flattered, so they are too up∣right to bee corrupted: for the actions of Great ones have more eyes looking over them then infe∣riours have, which makes them more circumspect in their behaviour, lest, for want of good take
heede, they should incur an heavy Non putam hoc futurum, nunquam hoc eventurum re∣dedissem ecquid in eptius? Seu. de tranq. anim. Censure. You must then addresse your course some other way (my endeered Breakers) whereby your provi∣dent intendments may bee effe∣cted, your secret practises, to divert the furious current of this Statute, facilitated, and the Port or Land-marke to which you direct your road, prosperously attained. For the acquisition whereof, it were requisite you make choice of such, for protection, as resemble you neerest in your course of Commerce, qualitie and condition. Now who be these (my brittle-Uri∣nals) but our anfractuous Courtiers? whose glory is like glasse, bright but brittle: For Cour∣tiers are most aptly compared to Plutarc. Coun∣ters, which somtime in account, goe for a thousand pounds, and presently before the Count be cast, but for a single penny. Cast the account of your owne crazie-fortunes, and the allusion will hold. But you will say, by what meanes may wee make these emi∣nent and conspicuous Comets our friends? where∣to I answere, by makeing them your Heires. Bestow but on them adoption, and they will freely bestowe on you their protection; insinuate into their corkie acquaintance, and promise them adoption upon your acceptance. Feare not but they will bite, for such kinde of fishes will nibble at any bayte. You know Vulpones plot, personate him in golden pro∣mises, and leaden performance. Make them all
your Heires by adoption, but none by grace. If it be any of your fortunes to grow humerously great with any eminent favorite, your projects to retain him must bee more select and exquisite. Admire and honour him at first, like Isis Statue; afterward, upon more familiarity, tender him rules of paren∣tall providence, protesting withall that your hopes are soly treasured in him, and a day will come when you may expresse it. This will catch my Golden∣Gull, and cause him trudge to secure your estate, which hee hopes you will preserve and reserve only for his good. If there be any braines left in the sconce of a Courtier, hee will labour to free you from the penaltie of a Beaker, only to enrich his spruce selfe, who, he hopes, shall live to be your sur∣vivor and successor. This will doe admirably well, for not only this Court-Popingey shall be palpably gulled and galled, Dum vult esse praedo, fit praeda. Aug but your Here∣ditaments secured, your true inten∣ded Heire invested; and what your Providence got, shall by your Prudence bee preser∣ved. These courses hold better with thriving poli∣cy, and your states security, then fruitlesse inventi∣ons against the severitie of our times, for enacting such wormwood-Lawes against you, as no age heretofore could exemplifie the like. Wherein, under favor (my splitted-Brethren) you hold an erronious assertion; for against Bankrupts, former times may instance the like Constitutions. Adrian Ordained, That Merchants, or such as
dealt with exchange, by bartering, chievesance, or otherwise ingrosse, or by retaile, that brake their Credit or were Bankrupts, without just cause, but only of covetousness, by fraud to en∣rich themselves and raise a fortune to their po∣steritie; to bee set upon the Pillory in the mar∣ket-place, and afterwards to be banished Rome for evermore. From whence you may collect how much your censure is qualified in respect of prece∣dent times, where, though Paganisme reigned, this Bankrupt-judaisme lesse raged. Thus my (teare∣swoln Termagons) have I briefly touched and cou∣ched all such especiall receits, as duely applied, may allay your passion, secure both your state and per∣son, and deliver you from the Cimmerian Jawes of a Tartarian Prison. If this will not afford any cure to your care, no salve to your sore, there is no other remedy in cases of such extrmity, but as you have ever within you a testem to condemn you, so have ever in readinesse a restem to end you: whereto I commend you, and so leave you. May 29. 1624.
A Prisoners Picture, posture and pressure; all receiving forme, feature, life and lineature from this contracted Letter. My truly noble and best honoured; SInce I last wayed Anchor, and parted from your fleete, where you safely rode within Portsmouth; I bare up with a prosprous gale in my tall vessell, called The little Discretion of Cilly: bent upon a discovery. And for my better assistance in the voyage, you know the strength of my Lord Cromwells Letter of Mart, and so forth. Long I had not tempted the Maine, but a mercilesse Storme most uncivilly drave us upon the extremes of a more cruell Element. For, no sooner came wee neere the Gulph, but wee were grappled by four Turkish-Renegadoes, formerly Christians, and violently brought into the Straights, unto Banco, where I now remaine Captive. When first I entred this paragan Sconce, more pregnable then Lillo, but far more strong and unsavory: The grim Sarazin, with a starch't Cales beard, which kept the Port, find∣ing
mee a man of action, declared to mee the value of my Ransome: and so sorted mee with Rogues, that boasted more of prioritie, as being Slaves, then the welch- Cadwalladers doe their pedegree. The lan∣guage of many old Soldiers, had many severall tones and accents, but all directed to one sence; That they were very unfortunate, having beene laid out Per∣dues vpon so many dangerous executions, yet not to come off with Credit. This Aegyptian house of bondage had all the Canels taken up but one; unto which, when night drew on, a fellow, (whose left hand grasp't many Candles, I mistooke for the dutch-Lyon on a double Stiver) by the feeble glowing of a farthing Light did convey mee. Seaven (according to the number of the wise-Masters) were the inhabitants of this pestred Mansion; all save one was coucht between bisket-bags, or courser napery, which once were whitish themselves, though covered with night, tobaccho and darke linnen, durst not discover there no shirts; But as I dranke to them, each contracted his sheet unto a Mandilion: and received his drinke. The Captive soule that was up, and as yet uncased, had a Monumentall Beaver on, which I presume was free of his Company, for it was throughly crak't; a quondam haughtie and lofty Crowne it had, but now depressed into halfe the value, flat as a Couchant, and shone like one; fat and tydie it was, and in far better case then his Master; whose meager body did shew through the grate of his garment, like a Pypers Timbrell. Whether hee had breeches or coats on, I still remaine doubtfull, for they were so
tattered, that his lower parts seemed a Satyre, and his upper part no lesse fearfull. The more I surveyed him, the more my wonder increased, how Creditors could sit on's skirts, for he had none; flie out he could not, for he had no wings, for his doublet went out but that mor∣ning to borrow three pence, and returned with a sleevelesse errand: and no wonder, for it was but one only rag of gentile sarsenet, torne slashes, which Geo∣metrically hung like Needles on a Load-stone; and when the bleching sluce of his neighbours Lungs chanc't to open; the fellow (had his shirt beene cleane) see∣med like a March-pane hang'd with Streamers. To conclude; This poore penitent doublet, drench't with teares that had wept out the eye-balls of his buttons, seemed to be a sufficient punish't thing, both for his Masters Sinnes and Debts. This fellow I lay withall, and lost nothing by him; but in the morning, my Ma∣hometan keeper Renaldo placed me in a more pallated Roome; where I lay at as brave a hanging Ward, as the Germaines Fencer, in the memorable bed of the late suspended Footeman, each houre suspecting my suspected delivery. Altanus Ponticus.
Two Poems Penned by the AUTHOR, before his restraint, Entituled Loves Lottery and The Cuckow. Whereunto are annexed, The Trapanner. The Tarpolin. Messalina. An Elegie on Phil. Porters death. With his Farewell to Poetry. Or Motto upon Misery. Shewing how the Muses are Patronesses of Poverty.
IPSE DEUS, SUMMUS MAEONIDUM MUSAEUS SUNT aliis alii Studiis ab Origine nati; Artibus ingenui, deliciis{que} proci. Maeonii Musis sapiunt, opibus{que} Coloni; Sole Comes Scrinii nunc Arethusa mei. Ardua magis est provincia Palladis quàm Plaustri; Studii quàm Stivae; Calami quàm Coli; Cerebri quàm Coloni; Mercurii quàm Mallei; Minervae quàm Manubrii. "Who truly loves, and cannot loved be, "May she lead Apes in Hell; shee's not for me.
Loves Lottery. I Pull, God send me fortune in my thank, Either a Prize worth having, or a Blank; What is it Crier? see the blousing fool, How he stands cocking on a buffet stool, And speakes his mind in silence! Sirra, you, That stands like to some Beacon, to the view Of each beholder, tell me what do'est know, Have I a Prize, resolve me yea, or no? None; all the better, I am glad thy eyes Are not a witnesse of a worser prize Then nothing; it is love for which I dw, And since I've nothing for my selfe to shew, I am made free, that was in feare of thrall, Which to avoid, I'le have no Prize at all. No Prize, no booty! wellcome-heartily, I am prepar'd, t'embrace my poverty With an extended arme, for there is want Which makes man happy, as Cleanthes scant Living a single life, got knowledg store, In which (if married) he had still been poor.
Yet once I'le pull againe, hap what hap can, And may my Lot make me a happy man. "Happy or haplesse dle, what ere shall come, "I will with cheerfull brow receive my doom: For this I know, if fortune meane me well, I shall receive a Lot that doth excell So farre the lower ranke, as flowres grasse, "Gold lead, myhe hemlock, diamond the glasse. Now Sir, what has fate sent us, some crackt peece, Not worth receiving? thinkst thou this will please A man, whose fortunes stand upon his Prize? No sir, I'le ferret out your rogueries. This is given out for some virginian travell, Some Sea-gull voyage, and you meane to gravell A country Codshead, and to cheat him too, Telling him what the Merchants meane to do With this grand contribution, but they Meane no such thing: such voyages must stay Till better opportunity admit, And then perchance they will accomplish it. And yet what strange pretences do they make, "All that they doe is for their Country sake; And that this expedition will confer, Store of estate upon our Ilander? Then, what rich oare in every cliffe abounds, The fishie rivers, and faire spacious-grounds, That without tillage yeeld them fruit enough Without the help of either Share or plough. Besides, what commerce will accrue thereby To Albions people, and her Seignory,
Thus our Lot-novices, are drawne to th' bait, And brought to bite, not knowing what deceit Lies shrouded under covert and pretence Or country profit, Dove-like innocence. But heare! A prize, and that the greatst of all Befall'n a Taylor, who upon his stall Scarce could sustaine his wife and family With stealing shreads, and other michery; And now's advanc'd by fortune and his Lot To many hundreds: and yet knoweth not His better fate, till that some friend of his Come to bring tidings of his sodain blisse. Where finding him heeling a paire of ose, Or such like botcherie, He skrues his nose After an upstart-Gallant, leaves his boord, Which many a peece of stolen stuffe can afford: Then streight hee claps a peece or two in th' hand Of his good Nuncio, And thinks what land Where best to purchase for his sunne and heire, (Whose heritage was lists;) then do repaire His Bakers with their scroules, and call him cosin, With—Item for so many dozen dozen All undefraid, yet much they'l not importune, Because they heare the islue of his fortune; Which they admire with knee and vailed head, And now this loopehole must be worshipped, Whose Stile by letters is engraveu thus, The Shrine of Sutor Vestiarius. And this the Country gull, no sooner heares, Then he is rapt with hope, and therefore beares
Some stakes of hazard in this Lottery; And hopes in time to hit as prosprously As ere the yard-man did, and had no doubt If that he could with lots have holden out Till he had gain'd his purchase; but how short He came of that, his own eares can report, Where all he got (so little was his thank) For his disbursements was a Paper-blank. And yet, O hope, how strong an Oratour Art thou in thy perswasion! where, thy power Extracts content from shadows, telling vs That such events may fall out thus or thus; Which though they have no possibility, Yet hope assures them for a certainty. This moves us oft, to lose the substances And reall use of things, for semblances; Meerely phantastick fictions, which proceed From the distemper of an addle head. And such Ixion-like make their receit, Too overweening of their own conceit: Admiring Merrha-like, what ere they make, That nought is good, but what they undertake. Where if event prove sometime sinister To their intent; they presently aver The ground whereon they built the plot was good, Hows'ere the sequell may be understood. O strang condition of depraved men, Where fancy is distracted, how or when Their own affections know not, but proceed In their intendments without better heed
Then purblind Appius in his Cassian lot Who for two Romane talents got a groat! And was not this an excellent receit For such a summe disbursed? O deceit As ancient as authentick! for wee see Acts of this kind gaine an impunitie; Because those grand. Cayrs that doe profit by them, Are all too great for poor ones to discry them. "Laws are like spider-webs, small flies are tane, "Whiles greater flies break in and out againe. But th'lot I draw's cleere of another kind; Where many are, of th' Carthaginian mind, That brave Arminius, and we follow him, Who thought it better farre olose then win In Hymens Lottery: yet in affection Where single numbers be, there's no perfection Because too naked, if that one partake "Not of an other, and assume his make To make this number complete: but we find, Saith Timon, that made perfect in the mind, Where Contemplation reigneth, which can be Hardly united with Effeminacie. True yet the State, if with discretion us'd, And not through wanton dalliance abus'd, Which staines the light of wedlock, may be said, And rightly too, of merit honoured; Where two divided bodies become one by an interiour union, bone of bone; Having recourse to the Creation, when Women had their beginning from us men▪
So as that Mould which gave to us creation, "Being rib-formd gave Woman generation. And much I wonder whence these Womens pride Had propagation! if from Adam's side, Why should they glory in their beauties flwrs "Since their perfection is not theirs but ours? But if (as other Sages do aver) Eve took this from her Lawyer Lucifer; Why should they such esteeme of beauty make, But rather hate it for the Serpents sake? Who under colour of commending faire, Tells them by art they'r fairer then they were; Whence These practise how to dye well more than to live well. they becom (so pure hath art displaind them) Made by themselves, & not as God hath made them. Yet some there be whose Which (as St. Ambrose saith) no age shall extinguish, no death can take away, no sicknesse corrupt. Amb. de Virg. lib. 1. vertues make them faire, And such seeme never fairer then they are, Whose native beauty doth her light retaine, Whilest what art danbs, is soon dissolv'd agāin. But stay, a Prize! most welcom, what may't be? "A Maid of Dian's train, whose modesti Is without reach of Scandal; shee it is That's fallne to thee to consummate thy blisse; "Farwell then Contemplation, I have got "A rarer prize, and I will take my Lot.
The Cuckow. Lalus once laugh'd to heare the Cuckow sing, Thinking it boded some mans cuckolding; Where now in Spring, prime season of the yeare, The Cuckows note sounds har shest in his eare: For he, suspicious Sot, doth make his life A Scout to schoole th' abuses of his wife. HOw now you stutting Raskal, are you made To tax our wives abuses, and upbraid These manlie-horned monsters which appaere Not rare, for they're dispers'd in every Sheere; And now have got prescription to maintaine That they their Predecessors style retaine? And must a scab, one that's scarse taught to speak, With his harsh tongue, our ignominie seeke, Filling his hatefull bill, with Fronde repens rostrum, repetitâ voce laessie Acteonem, solitos balbutiendo modos. hawthorne leaves, And pestring poore Act aeon, with new grieves? Unnurtur'd Lossell, canst thou find out none To make thy Libel on, but such an one
That has no time to answer such as thou, Having a wife finds him enough to doe? And must thou sit neere to his garden walke, And like a stammering gossip 'gin to talk What ere thou sees or heares, nay somtime more Then thou didst ever see or heare before? Is there no Law against thy impudence, No punnishment, our wrongs to recompence? Me thinks if men of lower ranke forbore To chastise thee, that hast incenst them sore; Yet such as be of higher quality, Should with impatience beare such injury. And yet these branched great ones when they spy thee "Will laugh one at another, and go by thee; And misapply thy note, and say, this shame Thou lyes on honour, toucheth none of them; But some silke grogran-Jacket Citizen, Whose mincing Minx can limit where and when Her Court-eringo trader will repaire, Whom she is for, while he is for the Faire. And yet thou means of them, as well as these, And stuts out that which all the world sees, Reproving (harsh reproofe) the bed of honour, Which thus is stain'd with lust insulting on her. Thou Jarring quirister, that wont to sing, And caroll out thy tunelesse note each Spring, Forcing suspicion in the Jealous eare Of some long-travail'd Merchant venturer, Whose fishing farre for pearles hath procur'd An angler for his wife, who hath endur'd
As many firie tryalls in that quarrell As Aetna's quarries or Selucus barrell In Tenedos assault: and yet might she Enjoy her pleasure with securitie; If thy reporting tenure did not beare The newes of strange suspicion to his eare. Ill-nurtur'd nuncio, that comes ever first Saluting us with tidings that are worst; Breathing a jealous spirit to the mind Of him that sees his Wife but onely kind, (And in a modest sort) making him sweare, That for examples sake, hee'l mangle her, Inflicting such strange punnishment, as time Shall brute the act, when ages do decline. And is not this brave dealing, when  wad That hath no tune but one, nor ever had, Must descant on our secret practises, Which are so closely done, as Lynceus With his transpiercive eyes can scarce look thorow The night it is so dark, the place so narrow? Must man endu'd with reasons excellence Not reape the joy, and benefit of sense With an embraced arme, but he must be Checkt by the harsh note of thy jealousie? Is there no honour dew to th' worth of man That gaines a priviledge? No Artizan Was ever equall to him, yet in vaine Hath he exprest his art, when one poore staine Can soile his beauty, and eclypse that light Which man makes claime of, as his proper right.
Yet what Bird is there in the spatious wood, Or desart forest, that so vainly proud Assumes unto her self such daring state, As to curb man, or privately to prate What shee observ's or sees, save onely thou That hast done this, and doest continue too? Wood-building Vid. Calimach. & Tibull. Robin doth the woods refuse, And for mans love, to dwell with man doth chuse; The Vid. Plinium in natural. histo. Summer-Swallow, though she chattering calls Upon her mate, yet will she tell no tales. The nat'rall Basilius in Homil. 8. & 9. Stork, when as her parents age Makes them keepe home, as pent up in a cage, Shee feeds them with her travaile and re-brings Store of reliefe upon her tender wings, Whence to remove, if any time they seeme, Shee is the hackney that doth carry them. The billing bussig Martial. in Epigram. Turtle thought doth teka For nought but for the losing of her mate, Whom lost shee sighs, as if at his depart Shee lost the better portion of her heart. The warbling Faern. in Emblem. Thrush chants out her cheerful layes, Glad at the heat, that Flora now displayes Her various beauties, and shee seemes to sing A Caroll for the Spring times wellcomming. The lively Corduelis, quia pas citur à Car dui pilis. Vid. Varr. Lennet, that is wont to feed Upon no other meat then thistle seed,
Cheeres up her selfe, and with her merry note, Shews that content hath ever been her lot. Night-mourning O vid. Metamorph. 6. Philomel forsakes her nest, And sings with pricking thorne set to her brest; Prognes distresse occasion'd ruthfully, Her selfe disgrac'd by Tereus villany. The jealous, chast, and pure Alciat. in Em∣blem. Porphyrio Will have his love, not lov'd by others too; For if a stranger in his bed he spie, Death-struck he leaves to live, and loves to die. The sprightly Catull. e Mort. Pass. Eleg. 3. Sparrow, he his yong-ones feedes, And as he treads he chirps, and chirps and treades; Yet building in our Eaves, it likes him well To heare us talke and doe what he'le not tell. The wanton Sambuc. in Emblem. Avium. Wagtaile chats not what he hears, But as our bosom-Counsellor forbears To publish ought, though see full well he may A thousand play the Wagtailes on a day. Yea, th' very Ovid. Metam. 6. Scrichowle that may not repaire To th' place where others priviledged are, Haunts desart shdes, and Cat like, sometime hies To Barns and Graners, where she preyes on mice, But never, Critick-like, will she defame The mean'st that lives by staining their good name. Thou only of all others that remaine, Displaies the fate of Lording and of Swaine:
And justifies the fact, though ne're so foule, And who is't dares thy impudence controule? Thou may sit brousing on the Hawthorne bough, And flout, and fleere, and libell on us too; Yet who, though thy harsh voice do ne're so rate him, Dare bring thee in for Scandalum magnatum? Thou may be priviledg'd and rest secure, Whereas if vertue play the monitor, To tax such vices as raigne now and then Amongst the best and highest-ranked men, As shee in conscience must; what's her reward But present censure, torture afterward? Heere Minos, Radamanth, and Aeacus Will be in judgement as censorious, As if poor vertue should be forc'd to dwell Where they have their tribunall reer'd in Hell. They'l terme her proud, and will avouch it too, For what is it these great▪ ones may not do? Shee must (unhappy shee) learne to be wise, Observe mens humors, learne to temporise; Desire to faune on great-ones, and reserve An attribute for vice, and ever serve A rising spirit, whose expectance gives Life to his follower, by which hee lives. Shee must reserve a grace to such an one Whose honours make him worthy, and bemone The death of such a Lord, or such a Peere, Onley to currie favour with his Heire. And this must vertue do, or shee must sterve; For Idiot-like (poore foole) shee's bound to serve
In garded coat, or such like Liverie, Or die in want, expos'd to miserie. But Let her passe, I hope shee will not show Respect to them, where shee doth nothing owe: Such vicious painted-coates, who have no worth To glory in, save eminence of birth, Or large-extended Manors, all which can Adde small perfection to the worth of man; Who draws his Light, if he looke well about him, From worth within him, & not wealth without him. No, Vertue, no; thou knowest what merit is, And canst discerne twixt true and seeming blisse; Thy praises which thou usest to recite, Taste not of gaine as doth the Parasite, Whose oylie tongue is so inur'd to flatter, As he will praise the man without the matter. Nettle vice sharply, for 'tis now high time, When shee on footcloth rides, while such decline As beare respect to thee; but let them feele What's to put honours spurr on vices heele. And if thou want a Cryer to proclaime The purport of thy Edict, I can name One that will do it, and exactly too, Without respect to either high or low. Whom if thou aske, to descant on this theame, It is the loud-voic'd Cuckow that I meane: Whom i'le importune, if thou think it fit To play the Cryer and to publish it.
To the Cuckow. NOw Sir to you I must my speech intend, That it would please you to be vertues friend, And vices perfect foe; it's her desire That you would be, as well you may, her Crier: No matter though you stut and stammer too, So many Criers, when they 're brib'd, will doe. But forasmuch she knows that none at all Will in their charge be more impartiall, Shee has made choice of you, not for your wit, But for your voice, which will this charge befit. One Spring will do't, I pray, good Sir, begin, And leave your harsh distastfull Cuckowing. But you will aske, what may this charge import? I'le tell you Sir, for I did call you for't. First to display Court vices, which partake To much of poison, for example sake; For that place, like the Sunne, communicates Her cheerfull beams to men of all estates: Whose glory▪ if obscur'd by any mist Of church▪ invading pilsring Simonist; Or luke-warme Neuter, roming heretique, Sect-inovatour, itching Scismatique, Oppressing Ahab, painted Jezabel, Sin-plotting Haman, or Achitophel; Treacherous Agent that doth undermine His countrie like another Catiline;
Profane Puntilio, Buffon, Apple-squire, Blood-shedding Cain, that will do ought for hire, Bribe-handed favorite or Sycophant, That shoulders honour like an Elephant; Cinnamon▪ courtier, whose very hide Is better worth, then all his parts beside; Riotous spend thrift▪ wanton Marmosite, Dutch-swilling Hans, Saint-seeming Hypocrite; Whose glory if obscur'd, I say, by these, Or any one of such like crudities, I presently sends out these vapors to Such places, where it did her light bestow: For the Court exemplar is, and seemes to give To other Parts the like prerogative. Next to unmask, for it will be a ditie Worthie the shrillect voice, crimes of the Citie; Where oft is shadowed much impiety Under pretence of meere simplicity. There if you find a Tradesman whose chiefe care Is to get richesse by deceitfull ware; A smooth chin'd Prentice or a Jorney-man, That trades with's mistresse linnen now and then; An English Jew, that conscience-lesse inures His godlesse soule to taking forfeitures; A roaring Haxter, Pandor, Palliard, Bolt, Pimp, Snap, Shark, Cheat, or any such like Colt; Brothelling Punk, her Champion, or that Ape Of man, though woman putting on mans shape; If any these, as some of these you may, You shall by your quick-sighted eye display;
Sing out amaine, and to their eares report What they have done, though they beshrew you for't. Then to the Conntry, for you there shall hear Many a biting-grating- Usurer, Rent-racking Lanlord, hoording Cormorant, That's ever dreaming of a seven yeere want Selfe-pining Miser, whose thick-leaved chest Conteines his gold, the god which he loves best; A Prodigall, whose fathers care is brought, By his unheady providence, to nought; Catchpoule from catch and pull taking his name, Whose conscience's seer'd, & face admits no shame; Counterfeite Pursevant, that dares appeare With forg'd commission though he lose his eare: False-tithing varlet, that will take his booke He has tith'd right, when hee has stolne a stooke; Brazen-fac'd Tinker, that with pike in hand, Budget on back, bids way-beat Trav'ller stand; Shread-miching Patch, hearing what Taylers do Above i'th' City, he must pilfer too; If these, or any these you chance to finde, Pay me them home for all that is behinde: So you shall purchase every mans good word, And afterwards be styled vertues bird. What Cuckow, will you turne your haggard taile, Shall neither vertue, nor her suit prevaile? Will not you leave your harsh-offensive note, To follow vertue, and to weare her coate? Well Sir, I'le paint you out a knave in graine, And what I speake, think not but I'le maintaine;
But to particulize your rogueries, An endlesse volumne hardly would suffice; Some of the, chiefest therefore I'le impart, That th' world may know how dangerous thou art: Which in a tale, I purpose to relate, To make short work, and thus it chanc'd of late. "A zealous brother of the family, "By trade a Malster, so religiously "Imploy'd himself in mysteries divine, "As hee was ta'ne a mirror in his time; "For there was scarce a Sermon preached neer him "Within seven miles, but he would go to hear him; "From morn to night, all Sunday would he fast, "Starving his body for his souls repast; "And night by night, he would to Church repaire, "Where he did shout, and bellow out his prayer. "In briefe, now great in estimation growne "With chiefest Famulists in all the towne; "Hee was esteem'd the onely Rabbi there, "So great was th' reputation hee did beare. "And some, as I have heard, did give him power, "Or thought him fit to be Expositour, "Of any point when any one did move it, "And ipse dixit was enough to prove it. "This holy Brother now growne famous there, "And deem'd a profess'd Doctor of the Chaire, "Mov'd as the Spirit would, for th'spirit mov'd him, "A Sister lov'd, and she as deerly lov'd him. "These famulists now growne familiar, "About Spring-time, when birds begin to paire,
"Upon mature advice resolved either, "To marry there, or leave the towne together. "But forasmuch it was for certaine knowne, "This Malster was engag'd unto the towne, "Owing farre more then ere hee ment to pay, "Hee thought it fit no longer there to stay; "But with his holy sister, to prepare "To leave the Towne, and taste the Country ayre. "This simple Sister doubting no deceite, "Address'd her selfe one ev'ning very late "To his direction, closly to depart "And follow him who now possess'd her heart. "Three dayes they had not travell'd on their way, "Till resting them about midtime of day, "Under a blooming Haw-thorne, they did heare "The Cuckow sing nere th'place wherein they were: "And over them he hover'd, as if they "Had beene the persons which he would display; "A Hawthorne leafe, he in his beake would put, "And then would stut, and sing, and sing, and stut. "Which th'zealous brother noting once or twice, "Now jealous grown, strait from his place did rise, "Using these words: Nay, if the birds of th'ayre, "Whose gift I know in prophecy is rare, "Fortell what shall befall my lot and mee, "And in the Sky thus blab my destinie; "Sister farwell, returne from whence you came. "I will not wive to weave the web of shame. "How ill his Sister tooke this foule retrait "Of that Saint-seeming faithlesse counterfeit,
"May hence appeare: for I have often heard "Shee fell into distraction afterward, "Though I suppose Shee greater reason had "To be surpriz'd with ioy, then to go mad "For love of such a hairebraind Sot as he, "Famous for nought save for his perjurie. Now Sir, to whom may I impute this wrong Done to this Maid but to your lucklesse Song, Which so perplext th' vow-breaking miscreant, As shee, poor shee, must now her Darling want, And live depriv'd of love and life together, Running distractedly, shee knowes not whither? But (good Thalia) whose blest influence Gives sweetnesse of discourse and utterance; Thou y• hast power o're tongues, restraine his tongue, And make this bawling Cuckow henceforth dumbe; So yeerely Maides shall to thy Shrine resort, And free from jealous Tel-tales thank thee for't.
A Vivitur ex rapo. Trapanner. LOok to your Brain-pans, Boyes;—here comes a Traine Of Roysting- Rufflers that are knaves in graine. No corner can secure you; they'l rush in And strippe the downy Gosling to his Skin. Yet they'l accost you with a civile greet, And with Shark-cringing congies brush your feet. Nay, they'l incounter you with curt'sies too, Before they practise what they meane to doe. —Their first incounter. Pray Sir excuse us that by chance are come In this intrusive manner to your roome. But we'll redeeme our error:—Drawer bring Bottells of Sack drain'd from th' Hesperian Spring, Where th' Watchfull The Hesperian Sisters, who kept their constant Sentinall over those golden Apples, which Alcides after took away. Sisters kept their Sentinall; —Quick, Rogue, wee cannot brook a second call. Meane while this wilke, who neere saw any clyme, But his Dads pale, or pantry all his time:
Nor ever view'd Luds-Tarases before, Begins to tremble when they▪ gin to rore. A feverish qualme surprizeth ev'ry part, His vitall heat playes rebell to his heart; His chilled senses, cold as any stone, Partakes no other itch but to be gone: But he findes Remora's; He scapes not so, Whole troups of healths come pealing on a row. This to this Princes Hero; this to that Enamel'd fancy Dangling on his hat; This to his Bracelet; This to that choyce String Impales his hayre; This to his Diamond ring; —This to his Gippo; to his Agget watch; This to his Tuck charg'd with a double hatch; This to the Microcosme of this spruce youth, With his auspicious welcome to the South. Round run these Healths, farre rounder runs his braine, Though surfeit sick, 'tis folly to complaine. And now this birth growne full and perfect too, Which yet aspi'd but to an Embrio: A A Pickhatch Girle new-casten in a Ranters Mould. gaudy-giddy-giglet is convei'd, A virgin pure, as any Hackney Maid, Thick dawb'd with Cerusse, Stibium, & Vermillion, Like Ericina's amorous Pavilion; A rare sense-seazing Tweake, whose Speaking eyes And Spintrian art, compleat this Enterprise. For when they cannot presse him to offence, They must commence a quarrell by pretence.
But these no more his edgesse fancy please Then Lais Lures did cold Zenocrates. Yet left he must be to this Daughter to Sol and Persis. Circes charms Like to a Lambkin in a Tigres arms. For his seer pulse though nought be wrought upon, These Blades Their pre∣tence is to Slice this Brain-strap into Sippets: or mince this Land-gull into a galle-maufrey. No hope, unlesse his pocket purchase him a reprieve. rush in, as if the Feat wer don, And in this sort accoast him:—"'Slid my Wife! "Canst thou redeeme her honour, with thy life? "My Sister, says another! Leave't to me, "It is a Staine laid on my familie. "My Cozen, sayes a third!—I'le flea his Skin, "And pound him into mummey for his Sin. "1. Actaeon me! "2. Distaine my antient house! "3. Corrupt my Cozin!—Heark Boys, a carouse "Shall quart it in his blood, "1. I'le second it! "And expiate what folly did commit. "Who could have thought this downy Lapwing would "To such extreams his reputation sold? "But we shall prune his wings, and seere his crest, "And leave him n're a feather to his Nest. The Dwindling Shallop in this grand dispute Sits silent all the while as any Relating to the Turkish Mutes. Mute,
Reft both of sense and accent: and must dy Were no compass'onat Complice standing by To soften their resolve: Compose this strife By begging pardon for this Wigeons life. The Motion's made; and they incline unto't, So they may plunder Him from head to foot: His substance hee's contented to forgoe, To save his life, and hold't a curt'sy too. "1. This Beaver, says the first, falls to my due; "2. This Diamond shall to my lot accrue; "3. This Scarlet Gippo and his Agget-Watch "Fall to my share, they may advance my Match; "4. His Belt and Tuck are mine; "5. His Suit I claime To hang up for an Ensigne in Long-lane. The act's perform'd; the weakest goes to wall, The Naked man is left, to pay for all. No Two select Societies distinguished by Se∣verull coloured Ribands: and sworne to a Platonick Community. Bugle Blew, nor frisking Titire tu Could be compared to this frontlesse Cru. No Land-sharke of such metall, in our Ile As this TRA-PANNER:—eye his State and Style. Others can play the Cheats, but short of these Who shroud their shame, by shamelesse Dabrides▪ And make their Doxies Agents, to secure Their subtill Projects with a sugred Lure.
A Tar-paulin. TAr-paulin is a Sea-Rat or a Sharke, A Barnicle bred of the Aegean foame, A Passenger shut from Noah's antient Arke, And since a Bandite-Galley-Slave become, I' th' liquid Region destin'd to a Tombe. This quality by nature's to Him given, To prey on men, but seldome pray to heav'n: Unlesse there be a Storme; which past, his breath Braves Fate, though distanc'd but three Nauta tribus digitis gaude divisus ab undis; Incipens satis prospice Naua tuis. Marian. inch from death.
Upon our Ages MESSALINA, in∣satiat Madona, the matchless English-Corombona. HERE lies Lust, Revenge, Defame. Woe to man, to woman shme; Faire and false, as great as ill, Weake in Grace, but strong in Will. Honours blemish, Hymens stayne, Virtues poyson, Beauties baine, Albions-Siren, tyrant-woman, Faith-infringer, true to no man; Femall-Divell, plots contriver, Worths-tormenter, lifes depriver; Tragick actor, blood effuser, Times corrupter, States-abuser; Brothel-Turner, virgin-Trader, Husband-hater, Lusts-perswader; Ages-monster, youths-deflourer, Worlds-rumor, wealths-devourer; Painted-Idol, Arts-new-creature, Ladie in a Pages feature;
Soyle to the soile where shee was bred, Poys'ning most where shee was fed; Vices-harbor, times quotation, Double troth'd by Dispensation; Nights deere-Minion, Lights abjurer, Souls-eclipser, sinnes-securer; Vault of darkness, horrors-Heire; Childe to Mischiefe and Despaire; Saint-appearing, maid-protesting, Yet both Saint and Maid molesting; Saint with sorrow, Maid with furie, Tried by a woman-Jurie; Seeming-try'd, yet was afraid To be censu'd for a Maid; Therefore chus'd a Maid indeede To be searched in her steede; Mask'd, for so did shame require, Suited in her owne attyre; Thus shee passed undescryde, Found a Maid, yet never tryde. One th knew the way to marrie Not by Priest but Pothecarie; Whoe Receits, which Art allow'd her To appli, were Spiders pouder, Coprice, Vitriol, which in part Shew'd her skill in Chymick art. Thus sh liv'd, and thus she di'd, Serpents brood, and Sathans bride, Pitied least when most distrest, Hated most when envied lest:
So as question may be made, Whether that her Corps now laid And inter'd in Natures brest Will endure in Earth to rest, Or her ashes after death Will not with infectious breath Staine that holy plot of ground, Where her lustfull-Corps are found. But howere her body be, Sure I am that infamie Will ne'r leave her, but will have Still her foote upon her Grave. Graving this upon her Tombe As a Theame in time to come: Here lies young Messalina, whose foul lust, Pios'd with revenge, proves thus much; God is just! For heate of lust, immixt with height of blood Had never deeper dye in Womanhood.
PHIL. PORTERS Elegie: In answer to a Libelling Ballader, seek∣ing by his mercenary Pen, to tra∣duce his honour. CEase Ballader; in censuring PHIL PORTER Thou dost but bray thy Brain∣pan in a Morter. Hee was a Man of men, and women too, And could doe more then Others Hectors doe. For th' Style of Honour hee stood stiffe upon't, And would far sooner give then take affront. Besides, he shew'd compassion all his life In taking a doom'd A Capive in Nwgate, shortly af∣ter executed at Tiurne. Pris'ner to his wife, Saying, "She should bee cheer'd before shee dy; "Wedding and hanging goe by destiny. In one word, none to Fortune lesle beholden, Who was in Fare more choice, nor Pocket golden.
His death divin'd a rare Prophetick fate By his prevention of an Act of State; Where Hectors are a strict account to give How, and by what wayes, their ranting humors live: For arm'd with resolution, hee thought fit To passe from hence before hee answer'd it. Should Death thus seize on all our ruffling Fry, That Act might cease, because the Actors dy. His farewell to Poetry. Carmina secessum, scribentis & otia quaerunt. BOOKES fare yee well! your Author now is hurl'd Like a transformed thing into the World. Now am I grown as like as like may be To earth-turn'd Chremes in the Comedie; Now must I take more care then doth become me, For many Items which have quite undone me. Item for sope and candles are but small, Compar'd with those that I've to deale withall.
My cares be many, though my coyne be more, Which add affliction to my carefull store. Those Tales which I on winter nights have told When I was casten in a merry mold, And those same Songs where of I had such choice, Not only I've forgot, but lost my voice. I who of late so cheerfully did looke, And with a wench could drinke a Sillibooke, Am of that ashie hue, scarce one 'mong ten Can know me now, that knew my visage then. Yea, I'm so muddy growne, as now of late I can scarce laugh at any good conceite; Yea, one may talke to mee a summer day, And I nere heare one word that he doth say; So clotted am I growne with worldly pelfe, As I much feare I shall forget my selfe. If I but misse the key of such a chest, Till I have found it I can take no rest, For I am jealous still and full of care Lest some base knave should in my fortunes share. Besides, when rest should my lul'd senses keepe, Strange visions startle mee, and break my sleepe. Sometime I see a sharke, which makes mee shake, The keyes of all my treasure sliely take Under my pillow; and awak't with feare, Me thinks I catch the Rogue fast by the eare; But comming to my selfe, I finde right soone, My hand upon no Rogues eare but mine owne. Straight in a broken slumber doe I heare Fire, fire (me thinks) resounding ev'ry where,
Which feare of fire begets in mee desire To pisse my bed, that I may quench the fire. Much better was my State, and far more free, When I remaind i'th Universitie; Where as I had nought, so I car'd for nought, But for the pitch of knowledg, which I sought: Having both cheerfull sleep, and healthfull ayre, And Stomach too, hows'ere my commons were. What choice delights were then afforded us In reading Plutarch, Livie, Tacitus, Or the Stagyrians rare Philosophie, Whereto the Inds may not compared be With all their precious oare; For I did finde No Mine on earth could so enrich the minde? But see how I am chang'd from what I was! For now I prize more Isis goldan Asse, Who has more means then brains, then such an one, Whose parts are many, though his meanes be none. Besides, no Authors can I brooke to read, But such as in mee hope of profit breed. I have no time to think of Conscience For timely thrift, and Ant-like providence. I weigh no Protestant nor Catholick, Give mee a Georgick or a Bucolick, To teach mee what a Grazer doth befit; And for my tillage how to husband it: Yea, lest I err in rules of husbandrie, An Erra-pater keeps mee companie, To tell mee which are good-dayes, which are ill, And this I keepe closse in my bosom still.
With Pallingenius too I oft converse, Whose sense I relish better then his verse; Where I collect by th'influence of each Star, What yeere is mark`d for famine, what for war; And if I finde a deere yeere like to be, My store shall make that yeere my Jubile. Nor have I only bid my Books a dieis, But yee that are good-fellows, unto you; For what should I doe sitting of a shot, Who set more by my penny then my pot? 'Tis strange to see, how with a little state, I'm wholy metamorphosed of late. Before I could not brooke to have a moate. (So briske and spruce I was) upon my coate: Now earths affections are to mee so moving, As I am grown a very arrant sloving. Besides, I feele a misery in store, For I am far more sparing then before. My care of thriving makes mee one of those. Who ride their Gelding barefoote to save shoes. Nor can I be disswaded from the same, Till under mee I feele my Palfrey lame. The smallest trifle makes mee discontent, And with my houshold so impatient, As all the day I chafe, I fume, I fret, And for no cause at all my servants beat. If any Neighbours doe lesle then become them, I presently commence a suite upon them; And for a Goose-gate (that I more may spite them) Of trespass at next Sessions I'le indite them;
So as of late, by trifling Suits I'm growne The Commonst-Barretter in all our towne. And for as much as I doe know the fashion Is now a dayes bartring Impropriation And Presentations too, it is my thrift To seeme to give, yet profit by my gift: Free from which crime, of beneficed men, It's very rare to finde one among ten. For Symonie is such a common sin, More Prelats by the window doe get in Then by the Door, so as my manner's now To wipe my mouth, and doe as others doe; For I doe hold that rich Drones doctrine best, Who though he cannot preach, can cram my chest, For my Donation then who will come by it, Be he nere so sufficient, hee must buy it. More then all this although I know no sorrow May of more basenesse his beginning borrow, Then to lament, as many worldlings doe, The sudden losse of eyther Oxe or Cow; I'm grown so tender hearted as I'le crye, And like a childe put finger in the eye For ev'ry nislle, and distracted run, As if my State were utterly undun. So as I'm grosly pointed at by some, And call'd old Mammon wheresoere I come; Though neyther I, my Marmosite nor page, Can make amongst us fifty yeers of age. Besides, if any Debtor now of mine Should chance to Bankerout before his time,
And leave mee in the lapse; I'm so opprest With griefe, as night nor day I take no rest, But roving here and there, as one forlorne, I wish the morn were night, the night were morne. Early before 't be light I fetch the Statute, Where all the day long I am poring at it, To see if it will tender mee reliefe To ease my State, cure care, alay my griefe; Which if I cannot finde, I pule and crye, And like a bull-rush hang the head and dye. And yet I dye not (this my fates forbid) Though happy were my Neighbours if I did: For next time I come out to take the ayre) Though for my wealth then health I take more care) I presently some pretty Toft espy, Which to my owne conveniently doth ly; And hee's a very Naboth that doth owe it, Which makes mee hope in time to creepe into it; For I doe wish a famine but to see, And sure I am his Toft will fall to mee; For either want of bread will disestate him, Or to the naked bones I meane to grate him. I am to th' eares in Law, nor doe I care Though I lose by't; my purpose is to spare So much at least in dole-dayes to the poore As will maintain my Suits of law and more. The other day, my friend made mee an offer, But I set light by th' curt'sy he did proffer, That I might Knighted be, if I would buy it, Whereto I answere made, I'de rather fly it,
Then purchase such a state by which I lost, For th' Proverb is, much worship and much cost. All my discourse, when any visit mee, Is to inveigh 'gainst Prodigalitie, And what distempers our excesse doth breede, In hope my guests more sparingly will feede; Lest they should surfeit, which were hard to doe, For all my dishes are but one or two. This my discourse store of examples hath, As Adam, Lot, Moses, Methuselath, Who lived many healthfull dayes no doubt, Yet best of their provision was a roote: Why should not same provision at this day Content our liqu'rish tastes as well as they? Yet thanks unto my Starres, I am as able To feede as freely at anothers Table, And with as luscious fare delight my taste, As those that had their breeding in puffe-paste. Yea, marke th' extent of misery in this, My hyde-bound▪ Nature so restrained is, As for this twelve month I was never found To ease my selfe within anothers ground; Because I would be very loth to see Any mans Land made fruitfuller by mee; For all the good I may or ever can, I wish't my selfe, and to no other man. Besides, I 'm so surpriz'd with my estate, As I've no Stomach to my meate of late; Like to a Picture made of dough, mop I, While others gormandize it that sit by:
I all a dinner time scarce eate a bit, But muse how I may such a Purchase git, Yea, Midas-like, if I might what I would, I could wish all my meate were turn'd to gold; So should I quickly without more adoe, Famish my selfe and all my meynie too. Before, my care was how to prize my health, And next my health, my wench, above all wealth; Wherein I shew'd compassion to the poore, In clothing now and then my naked whore; Where now I' m more perplext then can be told, If my Tweake squeeze from mee a peece of gold; For, to my Lure she is so kindely brought, I looke that she for nought should play the nought. Besides all this, since I came to such wealth, If I enjoy my Wench, it is by stealth; For store of eyes are on mee, and report May bring a Rich man to the Chapter-Court: Where, in bare fees, I might much money spend, Although the Commissiarie bee my friend. I care not much if ev'ry Month were Lent, Not that I meane the sooner to repent, For I no Sac-cloth weare, nor ashes neyther, But that I and my house might starve together: Yea, fasting I commend so much the more, Because spare-Dyet doth preserve my store. I 've tane a course nought in my house to keepe Save Rats and Mice, shall eat when I 'm a sleepe. For Reputation, I so lightly prize it, I hold him only wise that doth despise it:
Yea, this shall be the marke whereat I pitch, Rather to be dishonest then not rich. Well, if these be the fairest fruits of Wealth, I hold him blest has liberty and health; For who 'll desire that Treasurie to keepe, That reaves him of his meate and of his sleepe; Yea mads him too, for thus much sure I am, No Worldling ever yet was, his owne man? I will not play the Asse thus, nor contemn; The only sweet society of men: The Dev'll shall have it first, hows'ee I seeme, (The Divell at St. Dunstans I doe meane) Rather then like a Stoick-worldling strive To hoord up that would famish me alive. At Ducks and Drakes we on the Thames will play And pave the streete with gold to Halloway, Next day, my Boyes, at Ratcliffe we 'll make merry, And bring our Suburbs Tweaks, down in a wherry. From thence to Rumford, where I meane to rore; Thus shall my Sharks share in a rich mans store: For Minus rule shall my direction bee, I 'll rather drown my Wealth, then i dron mee.
AN AGE FOR APES Ultimus hares Domus es licet Prodigenil maeres In Flumina, Lumina verta Imsauire gregem, ridens volo
His Vision. CLose by a Rill, where Springs sweet murm'ring kept, I took a book to read, and reading slept; And whilest I slept, presented were such shapes Of wanton Monkies, Marmosites, and Apes; As more I gaz'd, I mused still the more To note their shapes and habits which they wore. For One took on him state, and at a feast Sat as he had beene some great Lord at least: Those that with all obeysance did salute him, Were Parasite and Sycophants about him; Who with Earth-scraping congies devy show To this State-Marmosite Magnifico The next, a pleasant Ape, came to my sight, And he was all for pastime and delight. He plaid such tricks, I thought som Faune begat him, And I had like awak't with laughing at him. Now would he skip upon a Ladies bed, Then downe againe, as one had surfeited; Streight for some other pleasure took hee care, As how to get choyce Harriers for the Hare,
Or with what Hawke to make his ev'ning flght, Or with what Consorts passe the weary night: So as me thought each houre he did complaine him, Wanting some new device to entertaine him. The third held in his claw a verbal story Larded with ayrie titles of vaine-glory; Wherein his carpet honour was displaid, For th' painted flagg confirm'd what ere hee said: And this same Ape did for his Sea-men call As if he had been some great Admirall, Who had command; or else beene thither sent To keepe in awe the liquid regiment. His Styles were many, and of such esteeme, I mused much at first what they did meane; So as I ask'd one Ape that stood hard by, What had hee done to gaine such dignity? Why, nought at all (quoth hee); for all his store Of Titles now, hee was sometimes as poore As meanest of us all: but this same Ape Hath gain'd him estimation by his shape; Which makes him so vaine glorious as he is, Prizing o▪ mans deserts so great as his. Having tane full and perfect view of him, As hee went out an other Ape came in Tyde round with ribband favours which hee ware About his wrest, or in his eare and hare; The Ape of fancy term'd he well might be, For Ape had never more varietie Of Tyes, Toyes, Rings and Bracelets, which he said Were each one booties from a severall Maid,
Whose hearts hee held, so lovely were his parts, And might be rightly styl'd the King of Hearts. An amorous Ape he was, fixing his eye On his Spectators as hee passed by; For selfe conceite of his deserts did move him To thinke none look't upon him, did not love him. No sooner was hee vanish'd, then an Ape Of complete fashion, and unequall'd sh pe Approch'd methought, who as hee drew more nie, Hee struck more admiration in mine eye; For cloaths hee wore were all of distinct fashion, And had a taste each one of several Nation. His quilted doublet French, his hat Polonian, His breech Italionate, his boots Ionian; Ya view his formal Suite from head to foot, Seven Countries were at least requir'd unto 't. Yet though his lims were neat, his face was hard, And set with Rubies like an Aenobarbe; So as when ere hee came in publique place, Hee had a maske to sconce his firie Face. Yet I prceiv'd of all the Apes that were, None more esteem'd then was this Traveller; For hee was most accomplish'd, and did seeme By helpe of forraine Courts where hee had beene Of choicest Entertainmeut, though his fashion Appear'd to me an apish affectation: "For that is best which with our selves is bred, "And not from other Nations borrowed. Next this, an other made himselfe exprest, By seeming wiser farre then all the rest;
An Ape of Observation, who pretended Hee was from matchlesse Machavel descended, And unto such mysterious knowledge come, Hee knew what ere was done in Christendome. Nor was his knowledge grounded on pretence, But Speculation and intelligence: So as more treasures were hid in his braine Then all the Seventy Provinces containe. Yet did I smile to see how th' rest did grin, And mop, and mow, and flout and fleere at him; For though hee seem'd all others to surpasse, Hee was esteem'd a selfe-conceited Asse, Whose Observations were not worth a stroe, Nor knew hee more then all the World did know. But yet some still would praise him to the skie, Stile him the master-peece of policie, And with their oylie tongues extoll him so, As on these Fauns he would whole Farms bestow. This made me laugh, that such a simple Ape Should of himselfe grow so opinionate, As hee would have the world to beleeve The wisdome of ye wise hung on his sleeve. But while these Apes & all their pranks were shown, A Silken Ape came in and put them downe; His breath was nought but perfume, and his skin As sleeke and smoth as any Ladies chin; Ranke-set with gold and pearle was his coat, As if hee had beene one of speciall note. Yet when hee had shewne all that hee could show, One whispring in mine eare; said hee, I know
This gilded Trunck, this rotten painted Tombe, And how of late hee's to this glory come. "This Cinnamon Tree, quoth he (for his proud hide "Is better worth then all the bulke beside) "Tooke first plantation in the Ile of Wight "From whence he, forc'd wth famin, took his flight; "But ere this wagg did to a beard aspire, "Hee was by fortune made an Applesquire "To a right active Lady, who 'tis sed, "Advanc'd him from the Basket to her Bed. "Since which auspicious fate, hee did resort "Like one of Cynthia's followers, to the Court, "Where he remains as spruce, you see, as may be, "Fed onely by reversions from his Ladie. "Yet note this Court-Ape, and you shall observe "More state in him, then those who best deserve! "Rich is his Robe, his presence scornefull too, "For hee on better men will scarce bestow "Least semblance of respect, so proud is hee "To those where hee should most respective bee. "Yet what are his deserts, that they should seeme "Worthie such congies or so great esteeme? "Perchance this Ape can court; admit hee can, "This makes him not a compleat Gentleman. "Dare hee with resolution enter list "With his Opponent or Antagonist? "Dare hee contend for honour in the Field, "And yeeld up life before one foot hee yeeld? "No, dainty milk-sop, these would soon out dare him "Hee must not fight, his Lady cannot spare him.
This said, this Court-Ape thought he was displayd By that long private whispering we had made; So, as one conscious of some special crime Which this neat Youth had acted in his time, He streight retir'd; To stay, none could intreat him, Till that the Citie-Ape by chance did meet him. Who after due salutes in seemly sort, "As, Brother Ape, when will you come to Court "To see a Maske; or, if you think not fit "To come your self, your wife may visit it. With equall thanks, his curt'sie to requite, The Citie-Ape did tender him the like; "If he unto the Exchange would but repair, "And make his choice of such rare knacks were there. The Court-Ape took his leave, his leave was light, While th' Citie-Ape displaid him in my sight: In comely habit, and of grave aspect; Yet was there one thing I did disaffect, Which to my view, was represented there, And long ere this had cost the Citie deere. For still me thought this Ape could ne're finde any To consort with, though there were Consorts many, But that same Ape of Honour, who did look As if he meant to get into his Book; Which was his aime, and therefore did embrace him As his deebosome friend; For so to grace him Would, as he thought, be th' way to tye him to him; To tye him! No, but rather to undo him. Yet see this credulous conceited Ape, He credits the protestations he doth make,
And to the utmost of his State he proffers To give him trust, and he accepts his offers. Nor skils it much what gain he means to reap, "He that will never pay, gets ware good cheap. These had not long confer'd, but I might see A Country-Ape attyred flovenlie, And he was ever poring on the ground, "Counting how many pence came to a pound: An Almanack he had within his brest, On whose judicious Rules he set his rest; For they did calculate (for so he thought) Whether his Heire would thrive or come to nought. He held no happie dayes were worthy naming, But such as spake of some ensuing Famine; Which having found, with ceremonious show He kist the Book, and blest the Author too. For this same Ape (as he appear'd to me) Was for engrossing, biting Usurie, And all oppression, so surpassing conning, As all his Country had their handulls on him. Which other Apes observing, had displaid him In worser terms before he had conve'd him; But, by a private path or passage, he Retyr'd himself, and gaind him libertie. Thus did this Worme-sprout sheild him from their hate, Or he had paid for wronging of the State. Next him a Rotchet-Rooke, the slough of sloth, Look'd as he had ten Steeples in his mouth: For Silence had so charm'd this Moath of men, As since he preach'd he could not tell day when,
Yet had this witlesse Bird-bolt so much reason, That he could make himselfe a Diocesan, By Symoniack-Contract, and dispence (For an usurped Pale) with Conscience. With great ones too He could insinuate, Sow pillowes to their sleeves to'enhance his State. Close to the poore was his penurious fist, But for Church-livings a Monopolist. For his Religion, howsoere he use it, Hee's not so well resolv'd but he could chuse it; Whether a Rhemist, Calvinist or Luther, Or what sits his profession best, a Neuter. Care of a wife and num'rous progeny Excludes all rites or rules of sanctity. Who for his family provides not well, Is worse, you know, than any Infidell. Yet this Levitick progeny, I wis, Might be his Chaplains brood as well as his. But still, me thought, this Porpoise could not keepe His leaden eyes from falling fast asleepe. For fumes of wine had so surpriz'd his braine, After mid-day he could not wake for Spaine: So as, me thought, I left him to his rest, Leaning his drivling chin upon his brest. Close as the shadow doth the body follow Came in an Ape far wiser then Apollo, Or all the Sages which renowned Greece, If one could judge by outward semblances: But still, me thought, as he assaid to breake His mind, an Asthma would not let him speake.
Corruption did oppresse him out a cry, With a black▪ jaundise which had seiz'd his eye. Nor Arguments with him were worth a straw, Unlesse they had relation to the Law. Authors were Heathen Greeke and disallow'd, Because they were not by him understood. A rout of rag'd Law▪ drivers did attend him, Which from a Bastinado did defend him, But hee perswaded these to let them passe, Tearming his Gowne his Supersedeas. So heavy were his eyes, hee seem'd to mee Surprized with some fearfull Lethargie, Or by the Night-mare rid, or at some Show An Epicureall Feast had made him so; So as to bed his Followers did take him, Enjoyning silence lest they should awake him. Asleepe no sooner was the Synod- Ape, But a grave reverend Sire his place did take; His words were maxims, aphorisms profound, Sententious morals, and positions sound, His answers solid; if hee chanc't to jeast, It was a pregnant Apothegne at least; In briefe, so rarely wise hee did appeere, Some Solon or Lycurgus seemed there. And yet me thought his aymes did ever tend More to a private then a publick end: For hee had beene a Politician ever, And could such rules of Policie deliver, As I may sweare wheres'ever I have bin, The Sages were but Novices to him.
Yet were his Axioms dang'rous to maintaine, For hee did hold, No man could ever gaine And hold concurrence with Religion too, And therefore thought it best to make a show Of what wee least professe, and to dispence In State affaires, with Faith and Conscience. "For if ye will be truly wise (quoth hee) "Be what yee seem not; seem what least yee bee. Now this Politicall time-studied Ape Could soone transform himself to any shape; For if with holy-men hee had to deale, He could pretend a counterfeited zeale; If with the Worldling, hee could worldly seeme, And nothing lesse then of devotion dreame; With the voluptuous hee could likewise share, As if delight and pleasure were his care; And, in  word, no humor doe I know, Hee could not frame his pliant mind unto. But ripe in age, discourse lul'd him asleepe, While a scorch'd Ape did from a Limbeck creepe; For hee in Chymick arts had spent his wit, And yet had little got but smooke for it. Hee of no Subject talk'd but still of one, And hop'd at last to get th▪unvalued Stone, And Kellie-like, whose Art did Art surpasse, Of Lattin Silver make, and gold of brasse; Yea in his house hee would not leave a kettle But should bee chang'd into the purest mettle. For wit and wealth, poore Ape, were so bereft him, As in his house a kettle scarce was left him.
This All-a-mist, or Apish Alchumist Dream'd hee had both the Indies in his fist; Golden-oa'd Tagus, Ganges, Pactolus, Were held by him as meerly fabulous; Out of one Caldron hee more gold could gather, Then these rich shores were worth, or Indies either. It was rare sport mee thoughr, to see him nod, Strut like a stalking-horse, and point, and plod, And laugh at his device as if h'ad found it, When hee and all his shallow wits were grounded. One day (quoth hee) Boyes, wee'll be passing merry, When all the Candle sticks in Lothberrie By my mysterious Art which I uphold, Shall be transfused into Angel▪ gold, Yea not a Spit, Jack, or Landiron there, But like to Ophirs mettal shall appeare. Thus hee discours'd, but prated little after He saw the Apes were like to burst with laughter. But specially 'mongst all the rest was One, An unthriv'n meager Ape, but skin and bone, Who with a Critick visage did deride This Chymick Monkey more than all beside. Nor was it rare; for he could ne're afford Any amongst them all the least good word: So tart he was and eager of his tongue, As he would seldom speak, but he would wrong Some in their name, fame, honour, or esteem; And this his use and custom still had been. Besides, on Palmestrie he was affected, And by an Erra-Pater had collected
Some erring rules of Art, which he profest, And in each Village made himself exprest. Where he pretended rules Political, Auspicious dayes, and seasons Critical; And would sometimes three hours or longer stand, Like an Egyptian, poring on a hand; Where on the Lines he would large Cōments make, Saying, This year you shall a Husband take, A Courtier saies this Line; but I divine You will play fast and loose in Progresse time. But as this Critick did his tricks begin, The Master of these Apes, me thought, came in; At whose approach, submissively they bow them, While I observ'd what he would doe unto them. For, unto me, as one incens'd hee seem'd, As if these Apes his pleasure had contemn'd, Or plai'd some tricks which he did much dislike, And therefore shewd as if he meant to strike. At last, me thought, his Countenance grew smooth, As surging Ocean after Tempests doth, Causing them to be singled one by one, While he, erected on a marble stone, Used these words, as he their Weale did tender, Which I, 'twixt sleep and wake doe well remember. Come Jack  Apes, Come aloft, come aloft, for your Mers advantage: Come, with your tricks get relief, or ye die, to my grief, in a skant age: Show me what tricks ye have plaid while ye staid, be they weake, be they wittie, In shadie Lwne, flourie Plaine, Country, Court, Vniversity, Citti.
The Ape of Honour. I Must, and will; and as my rank is best, In formost rank I'le make my self exprest. Since I plai'd tricks it's now the 13th Sūmer, In which my aime was still to purchase honour. Where e're I saw one held in more esteem Then I my self, I vented streight my spleen Upon his person, and would labour too (As much as lay in me) his overthrow. I could not brook Corrivals; yea my heart Did swell with grief to see men of desert Respected where I sojourn'd, for I fear'd My fortunes should be raz'd, if theirs were rear'd. This caus'd me plot and practise some device To move the State, their service to despise; Suggesting how these men were Popular, And though their course of life seem'd regular, Their studie was but how to broach division, And gain them titles suiting their ambition. Or else, I made a shew of love unto them; And told them, this retirement would undo them;
It were more fit for them to be imploy'd In State-affairs, in which all good men joy'd, Then burie those choice parts wch Nature gave them In airie hopes, which quickly would deceive them. Now if they chanc't to follow my advice, My taske was still to crosse their enterprize By undervaluing what they had effected, That by the State they might be lesse respected. Thus did my Honour take more true delight In thwarting of some rising Favorite, Whose blooming hopes were now to ripenesse growing, Then if my own Estate were overflowing; "For, like to Jacks mov'd in a Virginall, "I thought ones rising was anothers fall. But now, secure of these, my Coach I took, Where I perus'd a little Table-book, Wherein such Citizens recorded be As were to lend me Coine, or credit me For such commodities as I did want, And these my Honour hugg'd, these did I hant. Having now got my purpose, straight I'de flee them, And though they knockt, my Lordship would not see them. My Honour was my Sanctuary made, And by Protection all my debts were paid. For if I grant Protection to another To Conicatch, or to defeat his brother, My shallow Sconce is run on no such Shelfe As to neglect Protection for my selfe. And yet some Apes I had were my delights, And these were Sycophants and Parasites,
Who would so humor me, as I protest No meat without them could I well digest. From these I had directions for my pace, Look, habit, speech, to adde a greater grace Or lustre to my Honour; so as I Would set my Count' nance to look scornfully On these inferiour Vulgars, whose estate My Honour scorn'd once to commiserate: For I have ever held it derogation To men of place, to harbour this compassion. In forain Courts I ever Leaguers had Who did inform me, were they nere so bad, What projects States-men use to gain esteeme, And eagerly I still observed them. For this same Idol Honour was the Saint Which I ador'd, and for whose Shrine I meant, Rather then by my weaknesse it should fall, To hazard Body, State, Renown, and all. For my She-Ape, I mean my plumed Ladie, Our loves were both indifferent as may be; For either heat of Summer, or for hate To Nuptial servitude, or for more state, Though we did plead distemper of the wether, Seldome or never lay we both together. For this my Leaguers told me forain States Observ'd, and this my Honour imitates. Yet did my Lady play me once a trick, Pretending on a day, that she was sick, So as a Doctor might be sent for streight, (Lucina rather, for to make her light)
For first news that I heard, God send me joy, My Fates had blest me with a goodly Boy; Yet might I eaten all my part of him, without committing any mortal sin. But yet I seem'd to joy much in the Lad, As if he hed been mine, and I his Dad; Whereas in truth, I probably could gather, My Page, and not my Honour, was his Father. All these could I dispence with as light Crimes, Being scarce held for errors in these times, Provided that my Lady look unto it, And thenceforth sought more secretly to do it. For well I knew, if I divorce did wish, I could procure't for lesser faults then this; But much I doubted, she would turn flat Rorer, And doe as other some had done before her, Taxe my debility since she was wedded, Which foul aspertion would have split my credit. But now the Wagg is grown a Boy of prize, Inur'd to ev'ry Lordly exercise; Though in the height of all his hopes I doubt Such Bastard▪ slips will never take deep root. Now must I shew, to make my self displaid In University, what tricks I plai'd. If any Dunse had but desire to skip To the preferment of a Fellowship, Were he ne're so uncapable of it, I was a means that he the place might git; Provided that his Parents made him way, And for his insufficiency would pay.
Then thick as haile-shot did my Letters go To such a Doctor and She-Doctor too, That as he tendred the respect I bore him, He should prefer none to this place before him Whom in my Letters I had so commended, Thus was my Suit effectually ended. And reason good they had to yeeld consent, And in my Suits to give me all content, For now and then some notice would I send them Of such a late fallen Living, or Commendam, Which I resolv'd, such was my zealous care, To give to them whose lives most blamelesse were▪ Though all my aimes were rather to procure Gaine to my self, were th' means nere so impure, Then place such men, whose life and conversation Deserv'd my love with choicest approbation. In Country too, had I my Tarriers laid, By whose Intelligence such tricks were plaid, As I may swear, when I doe think upon them I needs must laugh, so nimbly have I don them. When I did heare One had desire to get Unto the title of a Baronet, Or that his itching humor did aspire To leap to Knight before he was Esquire; By these my Tarriers I made known unto him, I'de doe him all the kindenesse I could do him, But for the price of Honour, it was more By means of some occurrents then before; Besides, he should have some additions granted, Which all his former honour'd Neighbours wanted.
And thus I soakt my spungie Knight, that he Might honour gain to cope with Beggerie. Again, if any one within our Nation Had a desire to get a Toleration In matters of Religion, I'de procure He might enjoy his Conscience so secure As none should trouble him; provided, he Did but observe and keep true touch with me. And yet would I, enforc't sometimes by want, Practise right closely with a Pursivant To ferret him, and get a composition, And yet this Act ne're mov'd me to Contrition▪ But much abridg'd our profit now of late is Since Papists may have Tolerations gratis. Have Tolerations! no, that time is past, Since hope to match with Spain is wholy dasht: Anselme and Wright are now return'd again, And left the English pale to visit Spain. Yea, our State-Agents carefully have sought That h' Spanish Legat to account be brought, Whether he hath (for this they seek to know) Exceeded his Commission, or no. If this report be true, Shavelins adieu, The State intends but little good for you. But I doe heare a motion like to be, Which, I confesse, doth much distemper me; But rather then the State consent unto it, I will by all means labour to undo it. And it is this, Some Protestants complain, But their complaints, I hope, will be in vain,
That they are almost weary of their lives, They pay so much for th' Conscience of their wives. The light of Protestancie darts upon us, And drives two hundred fiftie five Vid. Tract entituled, The Foot out of the Snare, in his Catalogue of Popish Priests names. Priests from us. Which to redress, they crave (as doth become them) The State would take commiseration on them: Which, in good sadnesse, I must needs confesse, Deserves, in each mans judgement, due redresse: For it doth little stand with Conscience, That th' husband he should pay for th' wifes offence, Seeing among them there's scarce one of seven, That by their Husbands will be lead or driven. But what's all this to me, though they fare worse, I aime not at their Conscience, but their Purse. In brief, were he Monopolist, or any Who to enrich himself undoeth many; Were he Engrosser, who, if he may serve His own base turn, cares not how many sterve; Were he Forestaller and Regrater too, Whose use is all our Merkets to undo, Made he recourse to me, he might alledge, By vertue of my powerfull priviledge, His Liberty, whats'ever shuld befall, In spite of any Justice of them all. Thus like a nimble Honour-prizing Ape, I have transform'd my self to ev'ry shape; That by this means I might insinuate By secret paths, into anothers state,
And so support mine own, which would decline If others were not props to bear up mine. Now when I'me dead, some by my Tombe will pass, And say perchance, Here lyes Pherecidas, Venting aspersions on me as they please, As that I di'de some lousie vile disease, Or of some State-Impostume swoln so big It had no cure but dy a Spanish Fig, Or scorcht with some outlandish Tinder-box, Di'de eaten by the Bubo, Piles, or Pox. Thus must my styles and titles be forgotten, And rot on Earth, as I on Earth was rotten. Thus all lifes pleasure's but a bussing game, Which leaves us liqu'risher then when we came: Some glim'ring raies of honour we may get, Which once obscur'd, streight is our Summer set. But this I seldom think on, I've no time, Mine aime is to advance these Imps of mine, Whose shade shall spread so broad, as none may doubt But they're derived from a spatious root. Now I referre it to your self to show Whether your Ape deserve not praise or no.
The Ape of Pleasure. IS it not strange to heare this Cock-horse Lord, Who has a Branched forehead on my word, Thus magnifie himself, when I his Page, And at that time scarce sixteen years of age, Was more respected by his youthfull Madam For two yeaes space, then all the time she had him! What Masks, what Shews, what Enterludes could be Contenting to her self withouten me? What late Reere-bankets could delight afford Without her Page, farre deerer then her Lord? And yet this burnish'd Idol, whose esteeme Consists in this, That he doth precious seeme In eye of Vulgars, whose conceits appeare In prizing men by th' Garments which they weare, Preferres that Fame which Fondlings have of him Before that place of Honour he is in. But what concerns this me? 'tis my delight, And in this doe I glory, that the night Hath spread her Curtains close, as one at leasure To tender all content to th' Ape of Pleasure.
See, See, young Messalina how her eye Assures me shee affects varietie! Her once admired Lord grows out a date, So as her love is turned into hate. "For choicest cates may minister delight "At first, but after, cloy the appetite. But lest those tricks which I have plaid, should seem Weake in respect of what this Lords have been, Though I be young and want experience, As one directed by: youthfull sense; I can as Apish bee as others are, Yea and for honesty as little care As any Suburbs trader, whose sole aime Is by pollution to inhance their gaine. For three whole Yeeres I have imploy'd my time In reading baudie Boccace, Aretine, With those ripe Sibaritick merriments, Which our Court-Ladies hold for ornaments Of an unvalued price, they are so wittie, And these I read in Country, Court and Cittie. But in the Court when I a Comment made, More they conceiv'd then I discours'd or said; For a grave Lady standing by the pew Where I my Lecture red, did forthwith shew More grounded Rules for th' Subject that I chused Then all my wanton Consorts ere had vsed. So as desiring much to know her name, Shee haughtily replyed, "Of publique fame, "Whose Love-attractive Beauty had obtain'd "More high- priz'd booties then ere woman gain'd.
"Nor be my hopes extinguish'd by my age, "For I have One (quoth shee) my prety Page, "Who would be loath for to degenerate "Eyther in heat of love or height of State. "And though her Honour, Lustre, and Esteeme "Be not so great as sometimes it hath beene, "Yet her experience with my discipline "Hath train'd her so in postures of this time; "As scarce that Lady is in Europe bred "Who by her Lecture is not bettered. "This I admir'd, which shee observing told me, "While shee about my middle did enfold me, "That if I sought employment in that kind, "Shee could a place of entertainment find, "So I would secret be and not discover "The slie effects of some intrusive Lover. "For wee (quoth shee) who feed imagination "With hope, till meanes bring hope to recreation, "May in our sleepes our waking thoughts disclose; "Now Boy (said shee) if you were one of those "Who publish to the world what they doe heare, "You might destroy our reputation cleare, "And make our names such Emblems of disgrace, "As wee might seeme unworthy of our place. "For what if I should send to such a Lord, "That in the Ev'ning hee would keepe his word, "And in th' appointed place or arbour seat him, "Where I re solv'd assuredly to meete him; "While you, corrupted by some friend of mine, "Acquaints him with this meeting, place, and time?
"Would this shew well in you, seem fair to him, "To see one weare the prize which he did win? "Again, we Ladies many secrets have, "Which in our Pages secrecy doe crave; "For we have Chamber-motives of delight, "Powders to cause men love us at first sight, "Amorous Broths, and cordial Receits, "Love-drawing Lures, and fancy-forcing baits, "That our unbounded pleasures may be fed "With same desire as they were nourished. "Again perhaps, such may our humors be, "(Sith want of change begets satietie,) "Wee'l daigne sometime our Pages to be asters "Of such choice Cates are due unto their Masters. "Now would not this your secrecy deserve "When you may them enjoy, whom you doe serve? This proffer tendred; "Madam, replyed I, "You need not doubt your Pages secrecy, "(If you so please to terme me;) I have bin "For Ladies Secrets ever train'd therein "Since my first infancy, and was thought fit "(So present and so pregnant was my wit) "To carrie divers messages among them, "Yet was I never taxed once to wrong them. "Oft by a private Entrie have I brought "One to my Lady, yet suspected nought; "For, in a Night-Gown, womanly arraid, "I took him for some Ladies Chamber-maid, "So as I took in hand at all aventer "To ope the dore, that he might freely enter.
"Among the rest One was I sometime toward, "Who was so peevish, testie, and so froward, "As shee in nothing took more free delight "Then to become her Husbands opposite. "If he at any time should make resort "Unto the Countrey, she was for the Court; "Were he for Court, she to the Countrey went, "For contradiction was her Element. "Yet, which is rare, this peevish willfull thing "Was much addicted still to wantoning, "So as, amidst the heat of all her rage, "Nought could allay her furie but her Page. Thus I the progresse of my life did tell, Which this grave Lady liked passing well; Wherefore, concluding with one joynt consent To leave the Court, I with my Lady went, Where I presented was some sennight after, As a rich bootie, to her lovely Daughter; Who did so much affect me, she thought meet To lodge me nightly at her own bed feet. None would she suffer scarcely to approach, Or take her hand to bring her to her Coach, But only I; none would she else admit To hold her chat, or in her Coach to sit: I was her Ingle, Gue, her Sparrow bill, And in a word, my Ladies what you will▪ How many Ev'nings Coached she and I With Curtains drawn, that none might us espie? But now grown weak, when I should be rewarded, For want of strength I was by her discarded.
Meane time, had I occasion to remain Here in the Citie, hoping to regain That estimation which I late had lost, But by a litle Monkey was I crost, Who in short time into such credit crept, As ever since he with my Lady slept. But see my fate! through my too sumptuous port, While I remain'd in presence of the Court, Hoping my Love-sick Lady would supply What ere I spent by prodigality, I was attach'd, and in the Counter throwne, Yet lesse disgrac'd, because I was not knowne. Where I sojourn'd some fortnight space and more, Till a rich Drapers wife did me restore, Whose former knowledge me enfranchised, With whom I shortly after married: For having solemniz'd her Widow rites By space of fifteen tedious winter nights, It pleas'd her to make choice of such an one That might supply the place of him that's gone. And now I live as free from thought or care As those who have in fortune highest share: My pleasure is my treasure, whose delight Extends it self from morning unto night. Sometime I hunt the Hare, sometimes I spare The earth, to take my pleasure in the aire, Where my skie-soaring Falcon makes his way, Lessning himselfe till he has got his pray. Sometimes my House and Garden use to yeeld As much content as doth the spatious Feeld,
For there at Bowles, at Tables, or at Chesse My wearied spirits use I to refresh: Yea in an Arbor have I made a Caul, Wherein's an Ape I brought from Portingal, A nimble thing, so tutord and so tame As it can play at any kinde of Game. At Chesse it knows where th' Bishops place should be, With all the Grooms that keep him companie. And it will laugh, so wittie is the Wagg, To see them put together in a bagg, Wondring that He who held a Bishops roome Should play Check-mate with his inferiour Groome▪ Thus doe I sport, thus doe I passe the time, For pleasures are those purchases of mine, Which I the most affect and most admire, To feede with oyle the flame of my desire. Onely my Wife, since her rich Draper dide To me espous'd, seeks to be Ladifide; Which honour I have got her, with a Crest To make mine honour anciently exprest: Wherein I hold the Herald did me right In finding for my Coat a Marmosite, Whose nature is, (so farre doth lust prevail,) For want of better food, to eate his taile. Thus have you heard my whole discourse at large, How I have wasted been in Pleasures Barge, Where I have fed and feasted on such store, As Surfeits make me I▪ can feed no more. For as variety begets delight, Delight begets a moving appetite:
So pleasures tride, like snow-balles melt to nothing, And end their longing with an endlesse lothing. The Ape of Vaine-glory DIsplay, display those Annals and Records Of time renouned Heroes, Peeres and Lords, Their Actions, their Designes; and you shall see These Apes are imitators but of mee. For what have they by resolution won, What Conquest have they got, what have they don? Hath Fame erected Trophies in their praise, Or girt their Temples with triumphant Byes? Are Statues rear'd to memorize their worth, With all those Acts Antiquity brought forth? Trophies, Bayes, Statues adde no longer time To their exploits then Fame hath done to mine. In Court while I reside, I shew such State Even in my Nod, my Countenance and Gate, As there is none that casts their eye upon me But sayes that Garbe doth properly become me. If at the Justs I chance to breake a speare, Methinks the Ladies eyes are fixed there; Whose approbations gaine me more renowne, Then Leaves can make exprest, or Colours showne.
Among my Consorts, Letters doe I show From State of Venice and from others too, To me directed, as one whom they deeme Of choyce, select, and principal esteeme. Though I to Venic never travell'd yet But caus'd these Letters to be counterfe. The great Mogol that Title cannot crave, Which on my selfe conferr'd I would not have; For as my aymes are onely popular, So is my substance meerely itular. With Ladies of accomplish'd qualitie, Ranke, and descent, I hold concurrencie: From whom if I a favour chance to git, I glory in the purchasing of it, Vowing and vanting, not the wealth of th'Land Should ransome such a bootie at my hand. If I doe any worke, as few I doe, I'de have the world take notice of it too. In publique Entertainments I would be Observ'd sole Heire of liberalitie; Which to expresse, this onely taske is mine, To make our City-Conduits un with wine, Scramble Cakes, Wafers, Suckets in the streete, And tread whole carts of Bisket under feete. Farre more affection have I to bestow My bounty on some publique Antick show, So I may have my name endors'd at large, That it was reared at my proper charge, Then building of a Church, or any use Which simple people terme religious:
These works I hate, and all that doe begin them, For their hot zeale show too much Conscience in them. Like Jove in Danaes lap my gold I shoure, When I invite some great Embassadour, Where at one Supper I doe more bestow Then to defray, my Lordship knoweth how. And by this meanes I seeke to gaine esteeme Where this great Legate and his Lords have been; Though they perchance deride mee and my aymes, And with a french-frump gratifie my paines. Of all, there is no act delighteth us So much as that of brave Herostratus, Who to gaine glory made himselfe exemple, In setting fire upon Dianas Temple. Neither shall Nero's glory e're expire, Who playd on's Lute while Rome was all a fire, Sending wild beasts into the publick streete, Such to devoure as they withall should meete. So as, 'twixt fire and feare, amaz'd they run, Feeling the one, while they the other shun. In all my time, I never have desir'd (Such my ambition was) to live retir'd, For that I thought would gaine mee no respect, The only object which I did affect; So as my choice was ever to resort Neere to the Sunne, the Mansion of the Court; Where others correspondence kept with mee, As self-conceited too as I could bee. Yet for exchange, because I had desire That vulgar eyes my presence should admire,
Unto the City daign'd I to approach, Never without six Jennets in my Coach: Where, if encountring any, I use ever To presse salutes with motion of my Bever. To breath the common ayre, or walke the streete, Or entertaine discourse with those I meete I hold it derogation; yet to show I prize my friend, I'll give a nod or so; For hee that will not on his postures stand, And prove his education from the Strand By carriage of his bodie, I doe hold (Howos'ere he be in Honors-booke enrol'd) Hee's but a Goard that doth his Leaves display By one nights growth, and withers on the day▪ Yet in the entertainment of a friend, Though I seeme nice, if he have pow'r to lend, Or yeeld supply to my necessity, I will admit him my Society. Though from familiarity exempt, For that begets in us too much contempt. Now th' practise I have ever used, when I would perswade some wealthy Citizen To lend mee money to supply my want, With ayrie hopes I feed my Cormorant; Telling him how by reason of my place, I ev'ry day have Offices in chace; Which if he free the Bonds that I am in, I will not stand much to bestow on him. Againe, 'mongst all my retinue, no knave But knowes the styles and titles that I have;
For such my pleasure is, that ev'ry Rogue Within my Sculrie have a Catalogue Of all my Titles; which, they doe pretend Were given to mee for some especiall end; Whence these obsequious Shadows that attend mee, Perswade my Creditors great sums to lend mee; Alledging how by reason of my power, It is a credit to my Creditor To gain esteeme with such an one as mee, Whose many Styles proclaim his dignitie. Besides, if any injur'd by my men By taking up commodities of them, Shall sue their Bonds for payment such a day, Which, I'm resolv'd, they never meane to pay, With number of my Styles they so apall Their Creditors, they let their Action fall; For so upon my greatnesse they doe stand, They feare no right is gotten at their hand. Nay more, their Creditors may seeme so fond, That they will plead an Error in the Bond: For, as it may be specialty appeare, They unto such a Lord retayners were; Which Style, as now it seemes, is wholly drownd, And higher Titles for his Lordship found; Whose Style being chang'd, avoids their former state, "Their Master is not same as Bond beares date. So as his Title eyther must bee same, Or else there is an Error in their claime. Thus doe I flourish, and my followers too, As free from debt as those that nothing owe;
Nor owe wee ought, wee may bee bold to say, For they are said to owe that meane to pay. But that I may ith' City keepe a quarter, Ile promise them for to enlarge their Charter With this addition; Any Citizen, Having so many yeers a free-man been, Though he be able for estate, may breake, And have Protection granted if hee seeke; Provided that he pay yeerly revenue To me, to mine, or one of my retinue. Thus doe I lure my City-birds unto 't, With hope of that I nere can bring about. Somtime, for change, the Country ayre I chuse, Where my well-seated ancient Mannor-house Joyes in my presence; I've no sooner shown mee Then all the Country-Gentry come upon mee; Whose presence choice of presents straight begets Of Phesants, Pigeons, Pluvers, Caponets, All which come to my Cooke humbly beseeching They may supply provision of his Kitchin. Next day a stall-fed Oxe sent by a knight, And hee resolves to suppe with mee at night, Which, though it were discourt'sie to deny him, Yet when he comes, seen am I scarcely by him: For strangeness sutes with greatnes, which may seeme To gain to us more popular esteeme. Now for my house, delightfull is the Site, The base-Court pav'd with colour'd Porphyrite, Where two faire Statues curious as may be, One for my selfe, another for my Ladie
Erected are, with Columns reered high, Which force an admiration to the eye Of the Beholder, and their state is such, The golden-Calfe was nere ador'd so much. As for my House, it's open unto all, And they for Beere or any thing may call; Yet have I so provided, though they crave it, My Buttry hatch is shut, they cannot have it. In Country-Musters, it's some Taske of mine To take survey of all their discipline, And teach them what those martial-postures be, Traines, Stratagems, and feats of policie; Though, for my knowledge, I doe freely grant, That I in these am wholly ignorant; For I may sweare I never yet conferd With any one of all th' Artil'ry-yard. Yet joy I much to heare the vulgar say, A braver Leader never did display His Colours in the field, for I'm the man Would seeme more to the world then I am. In my discov'ry further to proceede, Excuse mee Fellow Apes, I shall not neede, For few or none in Albions. Court there are But they doe know my fashions to a hare: Nor am I such a Snake to cast my slough, My Titles make mee Great, and that's enough.
The Ape of Fancy. DOe but admire me, it is all I crave, For as I love my selfe, so would I have All ravish'd with my presence, wch obtain'd I have attain'd the Port at which I aym'd. For if Narcissus, selfe-conceited Elfe, Did love himselfe by looking on himselfe, I cannot see, my beauty beeing such, But I may like and love my selfe as much. But that yee may the better understand My education, Race, Descent, and Land, Where I was borne, where bred, and how I came, I will acquaint you briefly with the same. Some will not stick to call mee forraine brat, But I were mad if I'de be mov'd at that, For I doe know I am no Forrainer But a right nat'ral English Ilander; For even my disposition tells me so Through selfe-conceite which I am subject to. Yeh I'le tell truth, how ere ye wonder at me, A Cortier of a Succubus begat me, From whom such secret night-works have I learn'd, As what I doe can never be discern'd.
In a Court-entry darke of purpose made Fit for encounter am I oft-times laid, Where I enjoy a prey as rich as may be, And for the Maid encounter with her Ladie; Which she, such rare humility suites honour, Receives as freely as is put upon her. I must make one in every Maske and Show, Or our Cort-ladies care not for't a Stro; For I'me their Ape of Fancy, whose delight Doth please them more then any Marmoite. If I finde any Lady discontent, I can prescribe a cure incontinent, And with an active application too Use farre more art then other Apes can doe. For bee't Green-sicknesse, which few Madams have, Or Honours Phrensie, which will make them rave, Bee't the Scotoma, or the Night-mare ride them, Their cure's soone wrought if I may lye beside them. Pills have I store and choice Confections too, Which on my Patients freely I bestow, Not like our base impostur'd Mountebanke Whose ayme's to ell for gaine and not for thanke. Free is my bounty and so well approv'd, As in Court, City, Country I am lov'd, The Trophies of whose favour I doe weare About my wrest, my Hat-band and my eare. For be she Lady conversant in Court, To her as to my Shrine I make resort, And with such Apish complement accost , As she's surprized with my Courtly postre.
To th' Cent we goe, where we at Cent-foot play, By which ou hidden meanings we bewray. Her Feather for a Favour doe I carrie, While she protests if she were now to marrie, The Ape of Fancy should enjoy her heart, And this contenteth me, and so we part. Againe, sometimes unto the Burse I go, Of purpose there to take a turne or two; Not to make choyce of any new thing there, But to survey what beauty might appeare Most gratefull to mine eye; and there I find A pliant nature sorting with my mind. A Widow-Wife, whose absent Husband gives Accesse to world of Suiters, and she lives No lesse observ'd then fancied; yet her wit So smoothly and demurely carries it, As she preserves her fame so ususpected, As more she acts the more she is respected. All which proceedes, as probably may seeme, In that she trades with men of choyce esteeme, Who ferret-like still sport them in her Burrow, With whom she revells it the ev'ning thorow. Though I confess ingenuously my shame, That on a time I lay upon her name Such deepe aspersion, as it did surpasse The compasse of redresse, and thus it was. "Upon a day withouten companie, "I went to cheape a rich commoditie; "Heere and there sought I this, but in a word "Not any shop in Rurse could like affrd
"As this faire Curtezans, who seemed nice, "As if shee would not sell't at any price; "For know (quoth shee) this stands not here for Sale, "But only set to grace the Shop withall. "This answer did not please me, for my fortune "Did promise me, that if I would importune "Or press my uit, hows'ere her brest seem'd steel'd▪ "By hot assault she could not chuse but yeeld. "On this foundation grounded, I did show her "How much respect I ever tendred to her, "So as no fancy could be more exprest "Then th' faithfull service I to her profest. "And know (deere Love) such is my present state "As I will buy this Gem at any rae, "Rather then lose what I esteeme so much, "The boundlesse limits of my Love is such. "Besides, it will no derogation be "To cast the eye of your respect on me, "For I may grace you more then any other, "Both by my own means and my high-priz'd brother, "Whose rising-fortunes gaine him that esteeme "As blest are they that may but follow them. "So moving was this lovely Rhetorick, "A it began to touch her to the quick; "Silent shee was, Silence implies consent, "Whence I perceiv'd my profer gave content: "For there was noghr that wrought so much upō her "As when I gave her notice of mine honour, "And that my Lordship would reward her more "Then all her Silken-guls had done before.
"For these Court-punies, What could they effect "That might deserve the height of her respect? "These are but great-mens-shadowes at the best, "Who sute themselves with shreds of interest, "Learne to looke big, and keep their postures too, "But which of these has money to bestow "On his affected Mistresse, whose repaire "Must not rely on Castles in the ayre? "Yea, which of these, how ere they seeme to prate, "Dare whet their knife neer to the Counter-gate? "Such gilded Puppets are these Courtly-Apes "Who gull faire Idols with deceiving shpes. "Having obtain'd my Suit, I made exprest "By bounteous gifts, the Love which I profest, "So as 'mongst all paid tribute to her beauty, "I was the man to whom shee tenderd duty "With most observance; But behold my fancy "Grew in the end distempred with a Phrensy, "So as I could not any thing conceale, "But 'mongst the rest told how I had to deale "With this fresh amorous Bursan, and what rate "Shee priz'd the traffick of her body at; "So as in briefe (so far had reason crost me) "I told my wife how deere that pleasure cot me. "Shee, though I was distemperd, did apply it "To her conceit, and thought in time to try it; "Which on a day, her Lady-mother being "Of her opinion, and in one agreeing, "With jealous thoughts, they to this Sempster go, "To try if this report wee tre or no.
"The Shop descride, these subtle Syrens take "Their walk by her, Shee asking what they lack, "Little suspecting (simple Soule) that they "Should in those shapes her secret crimes display. "Shew us some Ruffs, quoth one, of choicest fashion, "Spanish, Italian, or some other nation, "As the Venetian; where no Country can "Compare in State unto their Curtezan. "Chiefest & choycest of her Ruffs she shows them, "For she presumes (so perfectly she knows them) "That none would give content but such were best, "Though worse would serv for such a thankles guest "Choice doe they make of such as best doe like, "And at a price they now begin to strike; "What shee demands they give, but pay, they said, "Was more then needs, Shee was already paid. "By whom (said she?) By such a noble Lord, "Who hath engag'd his honor and his word, "That such a time and place, what would you more? "Just to this Sum he paid you long before "Shee (modest Matron) guilty of the Bill, "Stood as a Statue, silent, husht and still; "Yet with Vermilion tinctures shee displaid "That such a Sum had beene by mee defraid: "Which they observing, left her sore perplexed "Through my distemper, thus impeach'd & vexed. After, by meanes of Physick and good diet, My Phrentick humor grew to be more quiet; So at when they did any time upbraid Or tax mee now with that which I had said,
I straight recanted that which I had spoken, But femal spleen is not so soon forgotten; For those aspersions though I did disclaime, Imputing them to th' weaknesse of my braine, My Lady-mother will not let mee gad, But keeps mee still restrain'd, as I were mad; So as the cause why I can scarcely know My friends, is this, my Lady makes mee so. One have I heard speak in my forlorne roome, "A madder Lord is not in Christendome, But hee may thanke his genius for it And not his honour, if he have more wit. Now all the tricks which I must henceforth play Are few or none, for I poor Ape must stay, Like to a starved Snake or drouzie Drone, With house-Baboons and Marmosites at home; Unlesse I goe sometimes unto a Wake, Where I such Stoicks for my Consorts take, As Rumford, Ratcliffe, Hallowell can show, For these are farthest Wakes I goe unto, My Tutors be so strict, unlesse by chance, About a May-pole I dare hardly dance, Or give a wench a green-gown on the grasse, So much the time is chang'd from what it was. Only (kind-Bearward) rests it in your pow'r To make mee free as any Emperour; Whereby you may redresse my present wrong, And make mee merry as the day is long.
The Ape of Fashion. FAshion thou art mine Idol, Pride my Prize, My glass, my globe, my corpse, my Sacrifice, Which I one day must offer to the Mace, For cloath a silver, scarlet and gold-lace. Twelve yeers and more I have a Trav'ler been In France and Italy, where I have seen Variety of fashions, whose rich fraught I now, at last, have to my Countrey brought; For I was he that did the first discover Your Saffron yolkie band, & brought it over; Your paned doublet, and penurious breech Were undescride, till I began to teach The rudiments of Art, nor have I lost All by my voyage, though it deerly cost. For now admires each Gallant my invention, And gratifies mee with a standing Pension; Four Spanish-Mares have I to carrie me, With all accoutrements so properlie, As in more state himselfe he cannot beare Who may dispend ten thousand pound by yeare. Now to acquaint you where I make resort, My residence is for most part at Court;
Where I such tricks as I bring over, show To such, whose dispositions I do know Most itching after novelties, and these Ile pawne my life, that I shall quickly please. For give these noble Courtiers their due, If th' fashion I present them with be new, They care not how ill-favord it appeare, For they would be observed what they weare; Nor is it decency that they respect, For we shall see a kinde of strange neglect In our apparell gaine us more esteeme, Then those who in their clothes more punctual seeme▪ As for example, let our cloaks fall downe Upon left shoulder, or go sweep the Roome In a neglectfull fashion, with sleeves drawne Up to the elbow, to descry the Laune Or Cambrick shirts wee weare, unbutton'd too, That our lac'd Linnen may more neatnesse show, With points untruss'd, as if wee did not care For pride so much as for the subtle ayre: And wee, by this, shall more observance git, Then if, with ginger pace wee minsed it. Of all those servants that I entertaine, A Tayler and a Broker bee the men I most esteeme, and where I most relide, Though I have many hangers on beside; For th' one with new-clothes still renues my state, The other broaks such clothes are out of date. And howsoere some people doe condemne These Brokers for unconscionable men,
I know them to be bounteous and kind, For if you leave in paune your Suit behind, You shall be sure, so freely will he show him, To find more on it then you gave unto him. Nor is my Tayler such a man of sin As some young cheated-gulls would make of him; For what's the cause they beare such hate unto him? 'Tis this forsooth, he hath his Hell below him. If this procure their hate, it doth behove them To finde out some that have their Hell above them. I must confesse hee will od-shreds conceale, But that's a small fault in our Common-weale, For, in our State, some greater-Theeves there bee Whom none dare tax, yet steale far more then hee. Hee one Command'ment breaks and so doth fall, But these State-sharks infringe not one, but all. Now for the place where I do most frequent, Court, City, Country, are my continent; Where, to the garbe of every place I live, And such a forme of fashion use to give, As there is none who would not imitate The fashion I affect at any rate. Which joyes mee much to see an humerous Lord, Whose formal habit only doth afford A personal esteeme, so mad to bee, As in an Apish garb to second mee. But I in change can vie with none of them, Which makes mee curry favor with their men, Who set their Lordships-wardrope at a sale, From whence I hooke some Suit bee't nere so stale,
Which I reduce to fashion by my wit, And this their Lord admires and followes it. For little knowes he, when he notes my fashion, That from his Wardrope it receiv'd translation; Where if hee-knew what to my selfe is knowne, Hee would be loth to imitate his owne. I have likewise a Venice dame brought over, Whom our Court-Ladies eye, aud eying love her; For choyce attyres shee labours to invent, Mixing with English Venice complement: So as no Curtezan observeth there Ought worthy note, but's nat'ralized here. Rounding of haire, short-wasted doublets too, Steeletto-pockets are stale fashions now; "Inventions Mint must goe both night and day, "No matter though our money-Mint doe stay. Long was I bringing of a work about A Looking-glasse, to view from head to foot, Before, behind, so as my very Spur Could scarcely move but I might see it stur. And this invention gain'd mee much esteeme, Chiefly 'mongst such who most deformed seeme, Whose crooked shapes, if they perfection lack, I could applie a levell to their back; Whose equall feature by th' reflecting-glasse, Made them admire themselves as they did' passe, And to some Ladies much deform'd, of late I have prescrib'd another choyce receite, Which now for modesty I will omit, Because Cornelius-tub produceth it.
Nor is my Venice-urinal so brittle, Though she felt once the furnace of the Spittle, But shee demurely can observe all times, And with her Saintly outside cover crimes. So as the City beares her such affection, Shee's only thought the first to give direction For matters of discourse, attyre, behaviour, Striving among themselves who may receive her With most extended bounty; yet will shee Requite their boundlesse liberalitie With Husbands ruine (she has vow'd to do't) And with excesse of Charge to bank her out. For goe they but to Rumford to a feast, Their clothes proclaim them Ladies at the least, 'Though all that while, their wronged-husbands spare it, And satisfie their hunger with a Carret. Nor only there, but on the Country too, Some fashions out a date doe I bestow; Where shee and I marching some fortnight after, Are like to burst our selves (I sweare) with laughter. For in a Country-Church you there shall see The May-pole wenches weare my liverie; But in their forme of fashion so displaid, None can discerne the Mistrisse from the Maid. Yet they'r perswaded what they weare is new, And that their fashion is but known to few Save to themselves, which makes them to appeare Scornfull to such who goe in Country weare: Yet if they knew as much as I, they'd say Themselves were out of fashion more then they.
Thus have I liv'd, and thus am I belov'd, For State appointed, and by States approv'd, Where of no Law I doe so much complaine As of one late-enacted now in Spaine, Touching restraint of all excessive 'parell, Which I'm resolv'd would make our gallants quarel; And reason good; for would one think it fit To reave them that they more esteeme then wit? Surely the Task were hard, the Law severe, Yet this they doe who strip them of their weare. For these are they who descant on one straine, And with no care disturb their giddy braine, Save only how they may in fashion git, And be the first that may encounter it. These are they whom I love, with whom I live, And unto whom this Legacie I give; They who prefer a Coate before a Pate, Shall die without a Coate, Wit, or Estate. The Ape of Observation. THat I' Sites, States & Natures might descry, Columbus hath not travel'd more then I; In Princes Courts I have a lodger beene, And there observ'd whats'ever I have seen:
Which to compile it did mee highly please, Entitling it my Ephemerides. I have been present at late wars of Rhine, Though I to neither party did incline; I heard th' Electors sing a dolefull dirge, At winning of renowned Heidelberge, Redoubling thus the subject of their care, "our neighbours House a fire, bids us beware. I follow'd warlike Tillie at the tayle, When with streight siege he closed Frankindale; To Berg'apsome I did my progresse make, Where I much muz'd how Spynola could scape, When in his Campe hee was so gyrt about, As feare got in, but nothing could get out. "Though plots seeme deepe, one may their bottom sink, But I were mad if I 'de speake all I think. Nor is my observation so restrain'd, As if it earthly objects only aim'd; More high Mysterious speculation's given, To view those Signes and Wonders are in heaven, Prodigious formes and figures in the ayre, All which impressions lately frequent were Neere sieged Prague, and other Cities too, Who have sustain'd what foe or fate could doe. At Turein, two miles from Egeria Within the kingdome of Bohemia, Next to a Stew, where I with others stood, I saw a Table and a Form sweat blood; Which I observ'd and forthwith did divine There would succeed a blood▪ effusing time.
From whence dislodg'd no sooner did I come Unto the famous City Lintium, Then there appeared a fear-increasing vision, Which ore the City shewd this apparition; Two Swords stood pointing one against another, With furious Armies skirmishing together; All which I made th' inhabitants beleeve Would some impressions in their City leave; Assuring them, to make mine Art more knowne, These ayrie Armies would surprize the Towne. This caus'd a strict watch to be duely kept, And I did laugh at this while others wept; For it was far above my element To know what these strange Apparitions meant; Though my conjectures were esteem'd more true Then th' unknown Palmistry of any Jew. But lest the Statute bring me into question, This is the least I use in my profession, Unlesse in forrain Countries where there be So few that practise this same Mysterie, As they will lodg a Wizard in their brest, But ever prize North-Britain Wizards best. Thus I've inrich'd my selfe with Observation, And gaind me such renoune within this Nation, That be my weekly Corrants nere so strange, They passe for current-novells on th' Exchange: So as upon my knowledge their esteeme Hath staid the vent of better labors cleane. Yea, there be divers Stationers in the Citie, Who had been broke (the more had beene the pitie)
Had not my high▪ priz'd travels been brought hether Which kept them up from going down the wether. And now these are, which seems to mee most rare, Held by our Stage-gulls for oracular. Not any story or occurrent passes, But is authentick truth with these sage-Asses, Who neighbourly confer upon a bench Of such a Rampire, Palisado, Trench; Of such a Conquest, such a Battaile lost, And what a world of Christian lives it cost. This they peruse, which they perusing send Into the Country to some speciall friend, Who may ptake these news without delay, And these become as credulous fools as they. For though, to give my thriving-works their due, Scarce among twenty one relation's true, Yet on their truth not one of them will stand, But spread their fame abroad from hand to hand. Nor bee my Corants only Ale house talke, Nor for Duke Humfries Knights, who Pauls doe walke; For I have seene the very Pulpits smooke With some extractions rifled from my booke, Which howsoere they could not well beare water, Yet would they serve for want of better matter. But there's no place so highly prizeth mee, As where out Ordinary- Gallants bee; For there am I admir'd, and to my grace Preferred ever to the highest place: Where my loose glibbrie tongue is prating still Travels more strange then those of Mandevill.
Yea, you shall see some score of Gallants stand, Each with a Table- booke within their hand, To take observance of such speciall heads As from the forge of my discourse proceeds: Which they relating duely, now and then, Makes them esteem'd for most accomplish'd men. Now what may you imagine I deserve, When these extract but that which I observe? And gaine such praise, as those Land-gulls who hear them, Account them highly blest who neighbour neer thē? But now because I'm to my Country come, Ile shew you what I have observ'd at home, And in each sev'rall place where I have beene, Briefly unfold what I have heard or seene. In Court I liv'd, and living felt no scant, But bravely surfeited on others want; It was my ayme, and I did ayme aright, To winde me in with some Great-favorite, Whose gracefull count'nance might support me still In all my courses, were they good or ill. Where I observ'd, more good might be effected By meanes of One who was in Court respected, Were his Cause ne're so faultie nor so weake, Then a good Cause, if he no friends could make: The reason was, though Justice bore ev'n hand, From some of these there came a countermand, Which, cause he was a great- Antagonist They durst not his authority resist; Or else his meanes advanc'd them to that place, Which mov'd them veile to him in any Case.
For this I held a grounded observation, Justice to Greatnesse ever had relation; For some of these oft get a place worth chusing, By being married to a great-mans Cousin: So firm's the linke of mutuall allyance, Against all opposits it pleads defiance. For other silken-Apes who spend their time In making their seer-bodies brisk and fine, I hold it needlesse here to make report, Because ther's such an Ape, just now, in Court; Who will describe himselfe in every lim, Which makes me leave that labor unto him. For our Court-Ladies, very few I know Who racket it with their Comradoes now; Our spritely Lords doe either Treasure lack, Or else they want agility of back, So as amongst a number ther's scarce one But shee is eyther mortifide or gone. "One did I heare of but the other day, "Who now has throwne her lighter Roabs away, "And by a firm-friend whom she well approv'd, "Sent to the wife of that same Lord she lov'd, "How she resolv'd her good esteeme to win "By wearing of a mourning-gowne for him. "But what's the answer shee return'd to her? "I wish, quoth she, your Lady may not weare "But what becomes her best in publique sight, "Her Suite must sute her selfe, her selfe is light; "But if with mee shee'll keepe a mourning part, "Shee must not mourn in Habit, but in Heart.
And so no question doth shee; for long since Shee lost the eye of her concupiscence, Which makes me hope the eye-light of her mind Is cleerer far, since th' outward eye was blind. Thus be our Ladies matchlesse Converts held, To whom no Suiters make but are repeld; Though One I know, nor was old Lais liker Unto her selfe, then shee is to a striker. In City likewise I remain'd a while, Where I observ'd how Trades-men did beguile, And in some darke part of their shop tooke care How they might vent their most deceitfull ware. Here did I stay farre longer then I need, That I with laughter might my humor feed; For here I might observe a Country-gull, Whose fathers death had made his pockets full, Mount Ludgate-hill to buy a Spanish felt, Pull out his money, bid the Knave go tel't. Notes from Black-fryers I presently might gather, For now this Cornish-Chough mourns for his father in a Carnation feather, wherewithall Hee means to grace his fathers funerall. By this hee travells to Saint Martins lane, And to the shops hee goes to buy a chaine; Where ev'ry painted Babie that hee sees, With their horse-gilded varnish doth so please, As such commodities must not bee lost, For he will have them whatsoe're they cost. To th'Royal Exchange fain would he take his course If he had any money in his purse,
But the Long-shop hath brought his pockets low With Daggers, Bells, and Hobby-horses too. For City-wives I will not presse them much, If they be pleas'd that I may only touch Their errors, not their persons; which shall be Shadow'd so covertly as none shall see. I have observ'd that nothing is more sweete In their conceit, then when these gossips meete; Nor would this halfe so much their husbands vex, If all these gossips were but of one Sex: But this the grief on't, forth they will not go But they must have their foremen with them too. Which to redresse, and for a quiet life, Let ev'ry one be foremen to his wife; For this in short time will her humor tame, And purchase to her selfe a better name. For the gum'd grogran Citty-usurer, He is observ'd so much by Lucifer, I need small observation take of him, Being known to be th' Engrosser of all sin. Not all his furrs nor vermin-skins shall save him, He has contracted with him meanes to have him; And reason good, for you shall truely finde The master and his man both of one minde: For there is nought the Usurer doth crave, But that he may Security receive, With whom in this his master doth agree, For all he seeks is but Securitie. Yet for all this I cannot chuse but love him, Because he cheats so many men above him,
And by a Forfeiture or such like Sentence, In time he brings them unto true repentance; Whereas if they had never met with him, Perchance they had still rioted in sin. Besides, he's charitable, for to his door You cannot come but you shall see the poor; Yet th' cause hereof he cannot well conceale, "He makes all poor with whom he has to deale, Now for the Country, though there many be Who make pretences of simplicitie, Because they little know that part of speech Which southerne people to their children teach; Yet in a home- spun native Rhetorick They shew themselves as pregnant and as quick, As those whose education may impart Far more accomplishment by meanes of Art. A subtle-piercing ayre has made these wittie, Apt to deceive as any in the Cittie; For th' richer grubs, we properly may call Broggers, Forestallers, and Regraters all: And these prey on his state that weakest is, As Whales and Sea- Bulls feed on lesser fish. For th' younger sort small policie discerns, Yet as the old Cock crows the young Cock learns; Though they be gulld oftimes by City▪ ware, They are by it made circumspecter farre, And now and then the City recompences With a commodity of stale-stuffe wenches, Who by their carriage gaine them such esteeme As many times they match with Aldermen.
For th' higher ranke, they live at such a rate, As some of them cannot support their state Without sinister meanes, yet these by aw Seeme to oppose and contradict the Law; So as the Law grows tongue-tide, or else bent To give these Bulls of Basan all content. "Law's as a Spiders web, and ever was, "It takes the little flies, lets great ones passe. But let us draine these Rivolets that flow, Those last are lost, they were so long ago. If we extract not poyson from each Rill, Injoyn us Silence, we have lost our Skill: But Pan should thwart the fancy of his Pipe, Ceasing to play when Vices are so ripe. Then to our Trillo; you shall heare more set In this Composure then you heard of yet. A nimble Ningle we did lately heare Has purchased a thousand pounds by yeere, Contracting for Delinquents, though some say' He was Delinquent once as well as they. And there's small doubt, when all Accounts are past, He of his House, shall be both first and last; For though his Fortunes to such grandeur swell, A ranker Cheat breaths not 'wixt Heav'n and Hell: So dearly hugging private Interest As sordid Lucre has intranc'd the Beast. The Proverbe is, "All evill comes from North, And worse then This the North-coast nere brought forth. Here you shall see, wch I did smile to see, Reteyners to some man of qualitie
Cheat a Sot of his Coyne, or which is worse, In the kings high-street take away his purse, Which they with winged speed wil forthwith carrie Unto their old receit or Sanctuarie; Where these Reteyners due account must make, And with their state-split- Master part the stake. Yet who dare say that such a man as he Would give least countenance to theeverie? His port doth rather argue him a Giver, Then to support his State with Stand, Deliver; But so long hee his bounty did display, "He cannot as he would, but as he may. Thus I in Observations of all sort, Be they in Country, City, or the Court, Have in my Progresse such exactnesse showne As I suppose no Traveller hath done. Yea in the Academie I observ'd Those Drones enjoy best roomes who least deserv'd; And many more, which if I should expresse. Would force the hearer to amazednesse, That any one should possibly containe Such store of Observations in one braine. For Rules of Art so far do they excell The diving plots of matchlesse Machavell, That I of all the world could compose An Abstract of her policies, and enclose Each project and occurrent that befell Within the compasse of a Wallnut-shell: For I ne're view'd the forme of any State I'de not Observe, observing imitate.
What resteth then, but that yee doe devise Honors for him, whose knowledg makes ye wise? The Court Ape. SO briske I am, so sweet and so perfum'd, I have no tricks, it may be so presum'd; But I doe muse how any one should think I could thus neatly goe and have no chink; For howsoe'e some Courtiers have said it, They were supported only by their credit. Tradesmen grow now so wise (the more' the pitie) The Court is out of credit with the Citie. At this time have I nere the Minories Two Coaches with distinguish'd liveries, Eight Barb'rie mares, two foot-cloth Naggs beside, O which, for more variety; I ride The publique streetes, to visit such a Ladie, By whom I have a standing pension paid me. Coach men and Pages divers have I too, O whom my cast suits use I to bestow, With other vailes which accidental be, Besides the grace they have in following me. Nor is this all, Crowns must I alwayes carrie, And hazard too when I'me at Ordinarie,
Where like true Heire of bounty I must show Farre more profuse then vulgar Gallants doe. I have a Tweake too, one of my retenue, Who will expect a share in my revenue; "If Phebus had no light, could Phebe shine? "No more can She without some ayde of mine. Now can one thinke, I on this charge should sit, And have no meanes at all to second it? A fire must fuell have or it goes out, A Lampe must needes have oyle applide unto 't; Springs Rivers feed, Seas are by Rivers fed, Bees sucke sweet flowers, and so are nourished. While these in distinct nourishment doe share, Mst I Chameleon-like be fed with Ayre? No; I have meanes in Court to shew my light, For I'me esteem'd a speciall Favorite To such a Peere, whose greatnesse can support The lowest Shrub that grows within his Court; Much more such State- aspiring Pines as I, Who on his grace without desert rely. For if I should desert or merit weigh, I'de make a Conscience of those tricks I play; But bare might I be as the slough- stript Snake, If of my pranks I should a Conscience make: For this my maxim is; "He that will blush, "Or value honesty more then a Rush, "Or so precize, hee'l no advantage take, "May thrive in Court, but he's not very like. But not it rests, that I my tricks doe show, Which showne, judge if I may not thrive or no.
In Court I live and flourish where I live, Apt to receive, but seldom apt to give; In ev'ry Boat a private Oare-I have, Where th' bargain's ill I neither win nor save: For I've a braine has wit enough to plot, And for a Conscience I know it not; Because this Conscience such a Scarcrow is, As it deterreth us from what's amiss; Which if wee should observe, it would be like Within short time to overthrow us quite. If any State-employment be in hand, I by some secret Agent understand Whereto it tends, compounding with a friend, To whom by meanes the State doth recommend This publick taske, that I may share with him In th' benefit that he's employed in; Which if he grant, to raise his estimate I recommend his service to the State, Extolling his deserts, saying; "'Twere fit "Such men as he should reape a benefit "By their employments, otherwise 't would seeme "The State were weak & could not judge of them: Yet I may sweare sincerely from my heart, I little prize or value his desert; My chiefest ayme and principallest care Is how I may in his preferment share. For to that end did I his worth improve, Causing him thinke 't was only for his love, Whereas peculiar profit drew me to it, Nor care I much if all the world doe know it.
For these are usuall projects now a dayes, And if contrived nimblie, merit praise In th' undertaker; yea I know a Man High in the Courts esteeme, who now and than For all his outward lustre will not stick To gul the State with this familiar trick. If any one, whose service hath beene tride, Sue by some meanes for to be gratifide, That he his hopes on stronger stayes may ground, He with this gracefull Courtier doth compound; That if he shall procure him such a Summe For all the former service he hath done, He shall be Sharer with him, and receave Two parts and more of all that he shall have. This moves this spritely Courtier to perswade, That such a summe of money may be paid For such State- service, which above compare Deserv's due guerdon; for his onely care (As he pretends) is to preferre the suite Of them whose name hath purchas'd them repute. The State weighs his deserts, and doth bestow What's fit and equall for his service too. But when it's to be paid, this understand, Seldome a fourth part comes to th' owners hand; For his perswasive Orator will share Above the former composition farre, Telling him how, if't had not beene for him He had not got the value of a pin: Then fit it were that he three parts allot To him by whom his entire suite was got.
Thus must we plot and reape the greatest gaine Through their deserts, who in the Camp remaine Subject to all those miseries of warre, Which on the Souldier still inflicted are. Our soft down beds be all the harms we feele, Our silken- Roabes, our Harnesse and our Steele; Our Crystall springs of luscious Hypocrice, Our humors taste no warlike enterprize; Our Congies, Cringes, amorous salutes, Our Love-inducing- Sonnets, warbling Lutes, Our Masks, Tilts, Triumphs & obsequious greetings, Our closs encounters in our Entry-meetings, Our deere Eringo love-provocatives, Our Julips, Apozems, Preservatives, Our secret plots to work our ends thereby, Closing our drifts within an Oyster- pye, Our private aymes to purchase such a wife, By laying siege now in her husbands life; Our french- Moriscoes, motives of delight, Our Parachito, Monkey, Marmosite, Our Arbour- daliance, when we make resort To those sweet groves and gardens of the Court, Move us to joy in such a happy birth, As those who doe enjoy their heav'n on earth. In brief, what's choice we have it, and contemn Those weake delights are us'd by vulgar- men. Here you shall see a man of discipline, One who came off right bravely in his time, With all observance make recourse to us, That we would deigne to be propitious
To his preferred Suite; which wee set light, Hows'ere his cause seeme equall and upright. The reason is, this Supplicant is poor, And with a bounteous hand can scarcely shoure Into our boundlesse skrips, what wee expect, "This is the cause his Suit takes no effect. Thus in the Court doe wee our lustre shew, And on inferior groundlings take a view With such contempt, as they who us behold, Would hardly think us made both of one mold. For come wee within distance but of those, Wee hold a Pomander streight to our nose, Lest their ranke breath should any way infect us, Or that the popular might more respect us. Yet I protest I can no reason see, That wee of them more cautulous should bee For any such infectious ayre, I say, Then they of us, corrupter far then they. But far be it removed from my brest To hatch least thought of stayning my own nest: For ther's enow that will this staine encrease In ev'ry coast, though I should hold my peace, Now from the Court to City must I goe, Where I my tricks am purposed to show, Which I'm indifferent, please they or displease, But to display them briefly, they be these. I have choice Spies and Tarriers in the towne, Who by their long experience now are growne Ripe in observance; now the use I make Of these, is this; they serious notice take
Of such commodities as bear most sway, And at what speciall rate they goe away. Which known, I hold it thriving policy To make a Suit for this Monopoly, By which the trades-men shall be forc'd to stand Till they seeke composition at my hand. Or else I cause the Impost to bee rais'd, Which new enhancement I 've no sooner caus'd Then I make meanes (such is the course of us) To get unto my selfe the overplus. Or else I farme this Impost of the king, But what is due to him I seldome bring; For th' Maxim is I hope, as it hath beene, "Where there is much, much will be overseene. Another feare I have, and it is this, If any Trades-man in the towne shall wish To vent such Ware as he hath now with him, Before some new Commodities come in, Let him annoynt me well, I will make way That no new Ware be sold till such a day. As for example, if a Vintner wold Before new wines come in, ven all his old; By my procurement I can cause restraint Of all new Wines, till hee his old shall vent: Yea, and inhance the rate too of his owne, Because such want of Wines are in the towne. If any likewise would Protection have, Be he ne'e such a State-abusing knave, He shall receive it by some means of ours, And wipe the nose of all his Creditors:
Yea breake he in the morning, yet ere night The Sonne of this same Bankrupt shall be Knight. More curious feats I have besides all these, Which to my waining coffers yeeld encrease; But in the City they so frequent are, As they grow now like to their sullied ware: So as of these Ile briefly make an end, And to my Country-Cormorants descend. Hath any man desire to have his nest Or any of his brood grac'd with a Crest? Though there were never Title of his own To any of his Predecessors known, He shall to him and his a Style inherit, Which after times may think he got by merit, Or some Field-service that he never did, Or some strange Act, which to the world is hid▪ A Catalogue of Honors I have written, Whereof he may make choice as he thinks fitting; An Heralds arch these Titles are displaid on, Barons, Knights-Baronets, or new-styl'd Vaidon; Only I feare, some of these honors bee Of too high ranke for such an one as hee: Yet if he will but lose his strong-ty'd-purse, Ile get him one, a better or a worse. For Honours as they should, so humble seeme, Many enjoy them know not what they meane; Which th' Herald shadows oft times with a jest, Devising for their Coat as strange a Crest; As three Red-Herrings in a forrest-greene, With a souc'd-Gurnet peering up betweene▪
Or for one Combe, as I have heard it said, A curry-Combe betwixt two Sunnes displaid. But now admit the Country grow so wise, It will by no meanes yeeld to such a price, Alledging how there is no reason why That they at such high rate should honor buy, Seeing decrease of money it is such, As there be few that have it, but will grutch, Though they doe value Honor as their life, To pay so much as then when Coine was rife. Or else perhaps Honors so common seeme, As now they fall into such disesteeme, They 'll have no more Knights made▪ 'is so agree'd on, Lest they should want ancient Esquires to breed on. Admit, I say, all this, I have a feat To get me Lands and livings by Escheat; For, by my Tarriers, I doe understand Of all improved and concealed Land, Which presently I beg, and in an houre Turn Husband, wife and children out a doore. Compound with mee none can at any rate, For now all composition comes too late; I 'm seiz'd and in possession, taking care To build a curious house to seate my Heire; Planting delicious Orchards to delight With luscious fruits, the choycest appetite; Contriving spacious fish-ponds closed round, With marble Columns raised from the ground: In briefe, ther's nothing that you can devise, Appears not in this earthly Paradise.
Now all these works are finished and done, To reare a sumptuous Mansion for my Sonne, Who many times before I turne to mold, Hath his Reversion to another sold; Which so prevents my care, Ide think no sin, But that I have confer'd my State on him, To strip this Wag, who in a Net doth dance, Of all the hope of his inheritance. But 'tis no matter, I 've a State for life, Which I suppose will mediate this strife; For now of late I 'm run so far on shelfe, All I have left will scarcely serve my selfe. Yet must I gull the time and make a show As if I had more owne then I doe ow; My foot-cloth beares mee out, nor is my debt So great as I need much to pawn it yet. In Progresse time, I likewise goe to see 'Mongst other Apes, the Universitie, Where though Licinius Valerianus▪ Licinius-like all Arts I hate, I must be made forthwith a Graduate For which I promise, when they come to Court, Some Chaplains place, but they must pay me for't. Thus have I shown my tricks in ev'ry place, And howsoere some twit mee to my face, Affording mee (poor Snakes) no better word Then of a Carpet-civet▪ comfit Lord, Though aged Court-Apes fall into contempt, I 'm none of these, my person is exempt:
Who have no tricks to cheat may droop and die, But thanks unto the Stars, this need not I; My happy Fate such apprehension lent me, As I would see that man could circumvent me. Now he that has a wit and will not use it Unto his best advantage, doth abuse it. It rests, as you have heard so to report, No tricks are like those tricks are plaid at Court. The City Ape. TIs strange to heare this silken-gull preferre Those plots by which his Court-ship seems to erre, Before those honest aymes which ever are Both more secure and more successive far. 'Tis sure the corrupt age hee liveth in Makes him thus vainly glory in his sin; Or else hee holds Confession of his crimes Agreeing well with these absolving times, Where sundry Rites they to the Church restore Which we nere heard this threescore yeeres before. But doth this painted▪ Truncke, whose best repute Dependeth on the fashion of his Sute,
Imagine all the Projects of the State, To have no other Forge but from his pate? Or that there is no Engineer so quick, To vie with him in matters politick? Yes, know thou powdred and perfumed Ape, For all thy Cinnamon adulterate shape, Though thou seeme to disvalue other men, Ile match thee with a grogran▪ Citizen, Who, as it will appeare before wee part, Shall put thee down with tricks spight of thy heart. Yet I ne're travel'd far to get them neither, Being a byrth-right left me by my Father; So as in these I cannot well miscarrie, Because they are to mee Hereditarie. Nor be my actions halfe so base as His, For all his policie meere servile is; Hee's tyde to dance attendance early, late, And to Petition men for his estate; Grounding his hopes on others overthrow, But Ide be oth to raise my Fortunes so. My Shop's my Ship, where I doe vent my ware, To which both Court and Country doe repaire; Where if the buyer chance to bid too much For his commoditie, I am none such To lessen what he offers; my receite Of custome, is the place where I must waite: Where if I should make scruple of my gaine, How should I pay my rent or port maintaine? I must and will for my best vantage stand, "Let the gull take his losse in his own hand.
Yet some are thus opinion'd, Of all men There's none more simple then a Citizen; For hee can scarcely any reason show For ought he sees, but asks where Malt doth grow: This makes them call us Cockneies, nor doe wee Thrive worse for that we so accounted bee. For wee darke-shops to vent ill ware may use, And with simplicity our guile excuse; Protest yes verily, and make a show Of that which verily is nothing so. Here you shall see a gallant-gull come neere us, When in our shops he shall no sooner heare us Cry out to passengers What doe ye lack? But he is forthwith tane with some new knack; Out cometh gold from this Arabian▪ Rat, Which our keene lick'rish Teeth doe water at. More will we aske then we expect by halfe, Of purpose to entrap this golden-Calfe; For there 's no purchase in the world can please A Citizen so much as gulling these. The reason is, our weakness they contemn As sillie, simple and plain-dealing men, Because (forsooth) we no discoursers be, But only of our owne commoditie. We know no tillage, nor no pasture grounds, The City-walls have ever been our bounds, Unlesse along we with a neighbour go To Croydon, Acton, Newington, or so. Now there is nought on earth makes me so sorie, As that this Court-Ape should so vainly glorie
That we repaire to him for his direction, In the procurement of our own Protection, Which is not so; for as we laid first plot Of bringing that to passe which we have got, So Ile maintain it, none of these but wee Are Agents too in this immunitie: Which to confirme, I purpose to relate A President which hapned but of late. "One of my Bretherhood of good esteeme, "As any neere Long-lane long time hath beene, "Pretending by a mighty losse on Sea, "(Though this was but a meere pretended plea) "That he through poverty could not defray, "What he in Conscience was bound to pay. "Yet long ere this, that he might Statutes shun, "Had he confer'd his State upon his Son. "With this pretence he to a Courtier goes, "To whom sincerely he his purpose shows, "Imparting to him briefly his intent "Was to make men beleeve his means were spent; "That so he might by this deluding cheat, "Increase his State, his Creditors defeat. "Meane time his ayde he humbelly would crave, "That for his Debts he may Protection have; "Which court'sie should so ty him during breath, "His State should be the Courtiers at his death. "This the spruce credulous silk-worm seems to trust, "And little dreams what State was made at first; "But by Assumpsit holding th' Grant secure, "Hee a Protection labours to procure:
"Which got, my fox-fur'd Brother was at ease, "Frolick and merry as a Mouse in Cheese. "But now ensues the jest, when he should die, "(As no Protection 'gainst mortalitie) "Adoption did the Courtier so intrance "In hope of his assur'd inheritance, "Hee'd suffer none (so carefull was the elfe) "To visit this rich sick-man but himselfe; "About his Bed still would he seeme to bee, "Expecting that which he did long to see: "But lo! his hopes were turned to despaire, "When he perceiv'd another made his Heire; "Which caus'd him vow that he would never after, "Make his Protections instruments of laughter. But I doe wonder how Court-Apes should seeme So much our City-Apes to disesteeme; They 'r made, I 'm sure, of selfe-same element, Hows'ere they seeme inferior in discent. No, nor inferior in discent at all, As might be prov'd of late from Girdlers-hall, Where One of obscure race as one could bee, Without so much as a welsh-Pedigree, When he deceas'd, so well his fortunes stood, Was found descended of a noble blood. Which makes me think, if so their race were known, That there be many Trades-men in the Town, Whose high descent aymes at a noble pitch, Provided alwaies, that these men die rich: For then, for Heires they need take little care, Some noble unknown kinsman will be Heire:
The Law enableth him as heire apparant, For why; A great mans claim includes a Warrant. But while I make my Brethrens actions knowne, I am forgetfull wholy of mine owne. For th' little time I did the Court frequent, I found it wanton and incontinent; Which I observing, though a City-Ape, I had a great desire to imitate: And that you may know how I profited, Ile shew you briefly where I practised. "To a Court-Landresse first did I repaire, "Encountring her at bottom of a staire; "Which by experience I may safely sweare, "Within a fortnight after cost mee deare. "For shee demanding of mee where I dwelt, "Weakly and unadvisedly I tell 't, "Whereof she made this use: One day being come "Unto my Shop, when I was gone from home, "(For by direction shee my shop had found) "Shee call'd for ware to th' value of ten pound; "My man expecting money, shee delay'd him, "Asking where was his Master, she had paid him? "Long had not hee and shee contesting bin "Till I, as fortune bad, came rushing in; "Whom shee no sooner ey'd, then by my name "Saluting me, shee justifi'd the same. "Where Duck (quoth I?) shee, rounding in mine eare "(But never blush'd at matter) told me where. "I, lest I should my credit overthrow, "Told her, I did remember it was so,
"Entreating her excuse, I had forgot it; "Thus did I colour 't so, as none could note it. But now my reputation doth remaine Free from all touch, as if it nere had staine; All causes unto mee are now refer'd, As the sufficientst man within the Ward. If any childe be in the Parish got, I of the Parents take especiall note To take them joyntly bound, be 't boy or daughter, That th' Parish be not charged with it after. For I 'm held none of these who prate non sence, Spending the day in nodding on a bench; For these, as if their beard held all their wit, Speake scarce two words but they are stroking it. I know right well, there 's not an Officer, From Treasurer unto the Scavenger, But needs those choice directions of mine, For I have borne each office in my time, And in each place of note so well become me As there was none could take advantage on me. But I shall little neede to presse this theame, The City notice takes of my esteeme; The Vergers too, so highly do approve me, As scarce two Seats be in the Church above me. Now having got such honor in the Towne, Ile take survey where I am lesser knowne; If they dis-value me, impute ye it To want of my acquaintance, or their wit. To th' University I nere repaire But once a yeere, and that 's at Sturbridg-faire;
Yet am I knowne to many Scholars there, Who buy of me whats'ever they doe weare. Silks, Sattins, Grograns, Serges of each sort, Of mee they cheap, and I doe cheat them for't. If á penurious Master have a mind To Satten-face his doublet, though behind It be of Buckram, hee 'll to mee resort, And tell mee hee's injoyn'd to preach at Court; So as he meanes, if God will give him leave, To buy a Satten-forepart, with half-sleeve; For that 's as much he thinks as will be seene, To gaine unto his person more esteeme. Forthwith I finde a Remnant of the best, (So much at least I verily protest) Wherewith I doe sufficiently store This choice Divine, who nere bought silke before. Yet I confesse this Remnant that he bought, Such a commoditie 'twas good for nought, Being gumm'd throughout to make it neatly shine, Which gave content unto this spruce Divine. When th' Fair is done I to the Colledg come, Or else I drink with them at Trompington; Craving their more acquaintance with my heart Till our next Sturbridg faire, and so wee part. Now for the Country; where I make my stay In no place longer then at Beverley▪ To Country maids, and Gentlewomen too, My newest and alluringst stuffs I show; Which doe so mad them, they perforce must buy, And I perceive their humor by their eye:
So as I ever hold that stuffe most deare, To which these Goostings most affection beare; Swearing it cost mee more then all the rest, For P. and G. ▪s the marke which proves it best. Then with shop-usual formal Rhetorick, I touch these itching tamefowles to the quick, For I doe tell them, if they hold 't too deere Ide wish them to goe try some other where; But I 'm perswaded, though they doe complaine My rates too high, they 'l come to me againe; For sure I am, wheres'ever they doe try, There 's none can sell at lower rates then I. Thus I adjure them, yet perhaps they'l go To make a tryall, to a shop or two, But this the jest; we have a practise made, The better to enhance our thriving trade, Amongst our selves no secret must be hid, But we are to give notice what they bid, That we may altogether sing one song, And by our rates not one another wrong. Yea, by our art to gaine our trades their due, We have a trick to sell old ware for new; Which country-people seldom doe perceive, For they 're too simple to smell out a knave. Although sometimes they fit us in our kind, When they with easie gale and ready wind, In ev'ry Coast doe take especiall care To change stale▪ wenches with our slubberd-ware; Which wee accept, and if good luck bechance them, To great-mens wives their fortune may advance thē.
Thus have you heard the tricks that I can play, Which smoothly carried profit more then they, Whose glorious outsides paint their projects over With nothing else save with a gilded cover. If Wags be gulld by running on our shelves, Wee were not cause on't, they may thank themselves Wee in our Shops doe stand, they come unto us, To profit what wee can they will allow us. But if't dislike them that we should doe so, Truth is wee 'll do 't whether they will or no; or it was never yet to any knowne But One might make best use he could of' owne. Which whether I have done or no, review My courses o're, and Ile bee judg'd by you. The Country Ape. HEarke how this silken civet Citizen Esteems of us poor silly Countrey-men; As if wee were of no account or note, But had a braine as simple as our coate. Why, pray you Sir, if I may be so bold, Are you of purer or of choicer mold? Or doe you breath on fresher ayre then wee? Or shines some Starre on your nativitie,
Which keepes her light from us? or is your wit So pure, as all draw influence from it? Are you so subtil, as you onely have The trick to Cheat, to Cozen and Deceive? No Sir, though I live in a wilder place, For sleights and feats I 'le bate you ne're an Ace. Your darke-loom'd Shops shall never have it so, False Ballances, base Compositions too, Counterfeite Stuffs our haire-brain'd Fopps to gull, In ev'ry Country shop wee have them full. For you must know the Country's no such Ape But it can City-fashions imitate; Yea we have nimble Monkeys of all sort Can personate both City and the Court; Which neere resemblance that it may appeare, Give eare to my discourse and you shall heare. First we have Lords and Ladies very many, As proud and hautie as the Court has any; There's not a fashion knowne but it comes downe, For such as these have Taylors in the Towne, By whose intelligence they are informed What's new, which they observe hows'ere deformed. Being thus attyr'd, they're presently addrest To shewtheir bravery at some Gossips feast; Where many Country gentlewomen are, Who by observance take especiall care What these great Persons weare, for they intend To be in fashion ere the sennet end, Which if their frugal Husbands but deny, They hope by putting finger in the eye
To get their purpose; for they little stand Whether new fashions make them sell their Land. Which our May-morish Wenches likewise follow, Who thinke they beare away the fashion hollow. Nor doe these onely imitate the Court In sumptuous habit, and are beggard for 't; But forasmuch as they in Court doe see No great respect of hospitalitie, They hold it providence to shut up door, No matter though they famish all the poor: Or that they may their private waste maintaine, Both Lords and Knights doe table with their men. Here you shall see a Farmers doore barrd up, Where th' poor may cry but is from almes shut; His cryes, his teares can no compassion force, For th' more he beggs, he ever fares the worse. What boots it, though his Barnes and Garnars be Stor'd with all fruits, yet he pleads povertie? His aymes are how to get, and if he can To make his Mushram impe a gentleman. Besides all this, I would be very loth That Court or City either of them both, Should shew more art in any Contract making, Then we can doe for all their undertaking. Yea I my selfe can of my selfe aver, I know no griping-grinding Usurer, Whose practise is oppression, but I'le vye With him or any one under the skye. For Courtiers no such businesse intend, They onely borrow, Usurers doe lend.
But shew me that Man at a full Exchange, Be he home-borne or to our Country strange, Whose long profession, give the man his dew, Has a seer'd Conscience worse then any Jew, And I will cope with him in his profession, Be it Church-simonie or State-opression. For this my practise is the whole yeare thorow, When any come to me in hope to borrow; First to examine his necessitie, As, Wants he Bread to feed his familie; Or is his Living gag't, and day at hand, He either must redeeme or lose his Land; Or is he in such bondage, as his griefe Requires without delay present reliefe; I'le hold his Nose to Grindstone and so use him, He shall doe what I please, or let him chuse him, Statutes on Statutes forthwith so pursue him, As like Actaeons hounds they still doe view him, So that unlesse he hye him all the faster They will in time devoure their breathlesse master. For Conscience haggard-like I doe disclaime her, Since He that has her, seldome proves a gainer. Two bags I have, the one whereof I call Just All the World, and it holds nought at all; The other Bag, with which I use to lend Money to those that want, I call my Friend; Whereof I make this use; if any come Requesting me to lend them such a summe, If th'offers they propound, content not me, As want of paune or good securitie,
I presently reply to these who crave, In All the world I not one pennie have; But if such come as I may profit by them Be 't the same instant, I will not deny them: For though I have no Coyne, as I pretend, To give them all content, I'le use my Friend. After this manner am I wont to deale In all my practise with the Commonweale. Now you shall heare how cunningly I lurch By Simonie the Pastor of the Church. Impropriations have I one or two With some Advousons which I thus bestow, Least any of my profits should be lost, "I hold them best deserving who give most. These I induct, for I doe value them Well worthie th' place who are well-monied men, But least some censure should on me befall By being found thus Simoniacall, Whereby the Princes priviledge might choose one To take the benefit of my Advouson; That I more smoothly may delude the State, I in my sale use to Equivocate. As for example, I doe take a course To sell the Parson whom I choose a Horse, A Librarie of Bookes to furnish him, Because he wants Books when he enters in; And these I rate to him at such a price, As serves for Horse, Books, and for Benefice. Now who can say that I doe sell this Living, Whose bounteous hand is so inclin'd to giving?
Tell me what Great one makes them fairer play, To give both Bookes and Benefice away? No, No, the most of all our Clerks will sweare, Though th' Benefice be cheape, th' Addition's deare: But let them looke to this before they enter, I make no conscience of it, Caveat Emptor. Yea I doe hold these kinds of Sale as good, If they be well and duely understood, As to make tender of them for ones life; Provided that he take her for his Wife Whom they shall chuse; which voluntary offer Makes me suspect, her Master has made proffer Of some familiar curt'sie long before, "I count him mad will for a living bore. But if he must, let him be his owne Carver, "Who chuseth not his Wife doth ill deserve her. She's his impropriation, which through hate Unto his person, might ingraffe his pate; Whence in his Parish would abroad be knowne, "He had a Common-place Booke of his owne. But let these Contracts passe, they'r knowne enough Both in the Church and in the Country through; I'le now descend to shew what fierie spirit Our native Country people doe inherit; Which I perswade me, will seeme strange to all, Because wee seeme as if we had no gall: But we doe scorne that any place should bee More malapertly factious then wee. For when I was a Tennant I doe know, (Though I'm nò Tennant but a Landlord now,)
I would commence a suite upon my Lord (Because I knew the Law) for any word. In which Commencement, many flockt together Like Birds all of one brood and of one fether, Who with joynt Combination made a purse, To put their seame-rent Landlord to the worse. Yea I have knowne so insolent a Nation, As when they heard the Princes Proclamation Tend to th' extinguishment of Tennantright, They in a braving manner set it light, Affronting their weake Landlords at their gate, Vowing they'd force them to confirme their state Nor be their haughtie Lords lesse domineering, Puff'd up with present hope of a next Hearing; For now am I a Landlord and must sharke (For Priest forgets that ever he was Clarke,) As others doe, by raising Fine on Fine, And cram my selfe how ere my Tennant pine. Great are my debts, and my expences large, Now whom should I thinke fitting to discharge This heavie taske which thus ore-burdens mee, But these rich Gormaws who my Tennants bee? Which that it may more covertly be donne, In all my State I doe invest my Sonne; On which Estate doth presently ensue A Gen'rall Fine, which hath beene ever due. Scarce is this Fine paid, till I make a claime, By re-estating of my selfe againe, Of a new Fine, whereto they must consent Or have a triall for their tenement.
Which if the Court ad judge once to be mine▪ To Demaine land convert I it in time; So as Depopulation is as common As is inconstancy unto a Woman: For in the Country many Farms appeere, As neither Farme nor Farmer had beene there. Now forasmuch as we all Learning lack, Unlesse we have it from an Almanack, For I doe know no Nation under Sun In a Prognostication puts us down; You shall perceive (for so I hold it fit) What speciall use we daily make of it. Herein we note and take observance too Whether our Heire be like to thrive or no; Which we collect by this rare-erring forme, We seeke the Planet when he first was borne, For we assure our selves this cannot erre, Prov'd and confirm'd by Shepheards Calender. If any dayes foretell ensuing dearth, Those be our dayes of Jubile and mirth; For my owne part I speake it, I doe feare Nothing so greatly, as a plentuous yeare: For so much graine I've in my Barns engrost, As if it prove not deare, it will be lost; For till the Markets rise, as now they fall, I'le bring none forth, let Ratts consume it all. What doe I care, though Justices doe seeke My Barns and well-stor'd Granars weeke by weeke, Vaults and close-arched caves I have below Within the earth, of which they little know
Nor ever shall; so I my selfe may serve I take no thought if all the Country sterve. "They who for others good their course contrive, "May live belov'd, but dye before they thrive. To Court or City seldome I repaire, Nor doe I know any employment there. To University I never come, Unlesse along I carrie up my Sonne To get a Scholars place, and after rise By my fat purse unto some Benefice. Meane time that he a lesser charge might be, To my Estate I still plead povertie; Which Master of the Colledge oft believes, Whereby my Sonne a Scholership receives: Though I'me resolv'd for money I have more Then many of their Founders had before. Thus have I liv'd, and thus I meane to live, Apt to receive but most unapt to give; Thus hoord I Treasure for my Sonne and Heire, And get my Harvest while the season's faire. Oppression is my darling, which I take From none so much as from the City Ape; Whose contracts are the stories that I read, So as I find my knowledge bettered By daily use and practise I observe, From whose choyce Rules I would be loath to swerve; Meane time let me be rude and simple thought, So may my purpose to effect be brought.
The Church Ape. I Am a Levite and a great one too, And can observe the time as others doe; In my Opinions I am wondrous warie, Lest I offend the State and so miscarrie; For th' only Scar-Crow that I boggle at, Is not distaste of conscience but the State. And twice a yeere I commonly resort For observations sake unto the Court; Where it's the sum and substance of my care To note how men in Grace affected are Unto Religion, for 'tis only these Who at their Gyrdle hang Saint Peters keyes: To whom (I wis) sole Soveraignty is giv'n, To ope on earth, but to be shut from heav'n. If they be pure, I shew my heate of zeale, As much as any in the Commonweale; But if I finde a coldnesse where I come, Or an inclining to the Sea of Rome, Mine Arguments like pellets I bestow The English Discipline to overthrow. Most men are of opinion where I live That I am rich, for I no almes do give,
I keepe no House nor Hospitalitie, But for extortion, fraud, and usurie, I keepe receit of custome; thus say they, But 'las poor fools, they know not what they say; For if they knew how my Corrivalls crost me, How much in bribes my Consecration cost me; How much procuring such a Ladies Letter To such a Lord, though I was nere the better; How, though I beare the Title, yet I am No Real Bishop, but a Serving-man To such a great man, for his Farmer am I, Who though I would, cheat him hardly can I; If they knew this, they would right soone confesse I were the poorst in all my Diocesse. And though a Pastor should be none of these, Who share both in the Flesh and in the Fleece, I must not only Fleece but Flea them quick Till I have paid well for my Bishoprick. Nor is my charge the lesse, when this is donne, For I 've a wanton wife, a wastefull Sonne, Who must have fresh supplies to feed their riot, Hows'ere by hook or crook they may come by it. I have a Lord; and daily I attend him, Who made me once a grant of th' next Cōmendam Should fall into his Lapse; but I doe heare A Simoniack▪Slaves inducted there, Which if I prove, hee's forfeit his Induction, And be suspended henceforth from his Function. Yet though these Motes in others I make known, I never note these Eye-beams of mine owne.
I can dispence with private Symonie, And make a vertue of necessitie; Yea and maintaine that common error too, Framing Apologies for what I doe. 'Tis ill you'l say, which you observe in some, Who by the window to the Temple come; But I must answere, They'r mistaken quite, For to the Church no way can bee more right, For though Noahs-arke, ye Churches type, had doors And windows too as this same Church of ours, Yet that gall-wanting Bird when Noah had sent her To take survey, did by the window enter. An Olive branch shee in her bill did beare, Implying that the dry-land did appeare, And to the Arke, the Churches figure hies, And through no Doore but by the Window flies. 'To us this Simile may have relation, Who should resemble Doves in conversation, Our way is by the window not the doore, Since to the Arke Doves led that way before. In great assemblies I doe seldome preach, Lest I false doctrine to my flock should teach, For I confesse I am no great Divine, Nor in such studies doe I spend my time: At Bethel once indeede I made assay, When most of th' learned Doctors were away, Where som report, my Doctrine mov'd much laugh∣ter Which made mee vow Ide ne're come thither after. And I've observ'd my vow; nor doe I care, When I doe heare that such a Chaplain's rare,
And that hee's flockt to by the better sort, Or gains himselfe a singular report. For this opinion, like a dang'rous shelfe, Makes a poore Preacher oft undoe himselfe With a continuate study, yea not one Of these is ought but only skin and bone. But let me come more neer them; what's their ayme, But to receive preferment by their fame? Which I have got, and now may silent be, While more deserving men attend on me. Unto the City seldome I repaire, Unlesse it bee for some delicious fare, Wherein I take more absolute delight Then ere in fasting did the Anchorite. Sometimes perchance I to th' Exchange may goe, To buy my wife what shee enjoyn'd mee to; Some new-invented Dressing that's in grace, Sweet powders for her skin, oyles for her face, Or some provocatives which may move sense, And cause me give her due benevolence. All which I buy where they are to be sold, For I must tell you I am growing old, And gladly would my imperfections smother, By giving her content one way or other. For else she might, which would a scandall be, During my Visitation cuckold me, As some have done, whom I'de be loth to mention, Who now maintains One with her Bishops Pension: And this is better farre as I suppose, Then have her keep a knave close by my nose,
Who night by night with her would closly drab it, And change my Rochet to Actaeon's habit. Tertullians opinion I despise, Who held this tenent, None should marry twice; With which strange error I was nere misled, For I have two, and neyther of them dead. Of Basils minde among us there be few, Who would not change his old wife for a new. "Much of one thing breeds loathing, therefore we "Must cheere our palats with varietie. I hold that act of Luther bravely done, Who made Besse Bore a Lemman of a Nun, Which spritely action wondrously rejoyc'd her, In hope to get a clister for a cloyster. With Romish-Catholicks I could agree In all their points of Doctrine save these three, Fasting, Pray'r, Alms-works, for these be those Which we professe to be our greatest foes. First Fasting, whereto they ascribe a merit. It takes both of the flesh and of the spirit, Disheartens Nature, weakens her delight, Consumes the marrow, dulls the appetite; Seares up the radick humor, and doth quench The native ardour of Concupiscence. Indeed it makes devotion ferverous And full of zeale, But what is that to us? Let Hermites for devotion give exemple, Zeal hath been long since whipt out of our Temple. Secondly Prayer, though soveraign and good, And rightly styl'd the Soules eternall food,
Our businesse being many, I think meet, That our devotion should be short and sweet. For many worldly affairs have we in hand, Which if we should upon promotion stand Might of miscarrie, whence may gathred be, Long Prays can no way stand with Policie. For Almes-deeds; All mis-deedes I observe, For by Good-works I meane not to deserve; 'Ti superstitious Doctrine, Babels staine, And such as none but Rhemists will maintaine. Time was indeed, but time's not as it was, When no way faing traveller could passe Without reliefe, for Hospitals were then Harbours and Inns to all distressed men. Which bounty was by Abby-lubbers showne, Who had no wives nor children of their owne; Which we account of as an old-wives fable, Our Olive-branches spread about our table, And though they seldome prosper, yet must we Have speciall care of our posteritie: For worser far then Infidels they are, That of their families will have no care. Men of our ranke, there's nothing so much raises As gaining great mens Love with Bribes and Praises; This is that Cement joynes us unto them, Whence wee contemn inferior Clergy-men, Whom th' hand of greatness to small honor lifts, Because they▪r not, as we are, Men of Gifts. Some muse why any one would mee enstall, Having no Learning nor no worth at all;
But I replie, these Places where we be, Require small learning but much policie. There was a time, which time's estrang'd from ours, When we were Rabbies and Expositours Of holy-Writ, and taught the heav'nly way, And in our Gen'rall-Councels bore great sway. But we account him simple now, that cares More for Divine then Temporall affairs. Learning's an uselesse Relique, or a Prize Got with a wasted body, and dim eyes Which oft contemns preferment, with desire, Like a sequestred Ermit to retire From th' view of earth: while we take little care For this esteeme, which vanisheth like ayre. Our contemplation is how we may skip To some more rich, commodious-Bishoprick. Where wee may hatch our eggs, and feed our brood, And labor to get good, but doe no good. And thanks unto my Fates, I 've now in hand The richest-Bishoprick in all the Land, And priviledges too, so great and many, As more or higher there enjoyes not any. To instance some whereof, that I have here, I 've pow'r to chuse the Sheriffe of the Sheere; If any Justice shall my Grace displease, Ile thrust him from th' Commission of the Peace, And make him vaile to th' lowest of my Traine, Before he be restor'd to 's place againe. No Suite may be commenc'd in any Court ▪Gainst  mine but I will fi him .
If any one no present chance to send, He shall ere long find me his heavy friend; So as of late, I 've brought them to that use, As Country Presents will maintain my house. Some works of seeming zeale I doe professe, Yet is my love to th' World nothing lesse; For out of feare lest some men should complaine Of my extreme hard dealing, I retaine Some semblances of pitie to the poor, And for them make a dole-day at my door. Where, that the world may know my ardent zeale, Both to the Church and to the Common-weale, I manifest my charitable ends With sound of trumpet, and invite of friends; Which in my judgement well deserve expressing, To sound alarum to a Bishops blessing: For bounties of this kind are held so rare, 'Tis good to publish those poor few that are. In Visitation time, because there be Many poor people that doe pester me, I give direction wheresoe're I come, Mine Almoner tender reliefe to none, Before I goe from thence, which makes them stay▪ While I out of the back-gate slip away. Hows'ere this be, I zealously pretend My close departures for no other end. Then to prevent vain-glory; which would meet So great a Bishop in a publique street: And therefore I a private passage take, That ostentation I might bètter scape.
Now in the Country where I make retire, My Senses have whats'ever they desire; As first, for curious objects which delight The moving apprehension of the sight, Eye-drawing-Pictures in each chamber stand, Which shew such lively motion and command In their attractive beauties, as they woo them That are Spectators, to doe homage to them. Wherein 'tis one State-axiom of mine, To chuse a Picture sorting with the time. For while Spayne had the name, it was mine ayme, To have th' Ifantaes Picture sent from Spayne, Which in my dining chamber I set up, Or in my private Parlor where I sup, Where any one, by drawing up the latch, Might judge how much I did approve the match. But see what chanc't! Last day a busie knave This Spanish Picture hapned to perceive, Which hee observing, told me he did muse Why I would hang such Pictures in my house, As gave distaste unto the publick State, And made their proffers projects of deceite; Where I reply'd, it little me behov'd To hate that Picture which my Prince once lov'd. Yet lest it should give scandall or offence, I caus'd it streight to be removed thence. Nor is my eye delighted only there, But with selectedst melody mine eare, With choycest cates my liqu'rish appetite, With od'rous perfumes I my smell delight,
And with embraces amorous as may be Touch I my Lordships wife, but not a Ladie. Thus ev'ry Sense enjoys his earthly blisse, As if my heav'n were where my Palace is, For nought on earth doth in me griefe begit, But only one, and I will tell you it. It is intended, having cure of Soules, That upon summons I should preach at Paules, Which though it come scarce once in twenty yeere, I'm sick when I should make my Sermon there; So as enforc't by my infirmitie, (Or want of brains) I hire a Deputie: Which done, I make returne from whence I came, And thank my wits for shielding me from shame. Some other usefull projects I intend, Now when I feele I'm drawing neere my end, For doubtlesse some would think I foulely er'd, If I should leave my children unprefer'd. So as grown weak, my wife and children doubt me, And like Jobs comforters they cling about me, Advising me, as they poor Orphans are, (Not for my Soul, for that's their least of care) But that I would take course to settle on them Some meanes, that they may live as doth becom thē, Likewise my wife puts finger in the eye, And says her joynture dies, when I doe die, This makes me plot how these things may be don, When other matters should be thought upon. First, how my ofspring may preferment have, Before the mete-wand measure out my grave.
Secondly, how their Mother may be sped Of some young Ruffin when her Bishop's dead. Which to effect, there's nought so fully pleases, As the renewall of concurrent Leases; Admit they doe defeat him that succeeds me, This gainfull guilefull contract much besteeds me; For by this meanes, revenues I bestow Both on my wife and on my children too. This makes me send my Briefes from day to day, If any one will Leases take, they may. And at more easie rate then ere they had, Which makes my Leasers run as they were mad. Thus live or die, seven yeers apprentiship Has taught me how to geld a Bishoprick; Which to good use converted, I see not But it may thrive though indirectly got, For, if no ill-got-goods thrive in this Nation, Some would seeme base who now are men of fashion The Judiciall Ape. BRave Apes; briske Bungs; yet they must leave the field, And to an ancient Bencher learne to yeeld; Fox-fur'd 's my Gowne, and smooth my close-cut chin, But far more Foxly-smooth am I within.
Gravely can I for lucre-sake protest, And clap mine unctuous fist upon my brest, Ev'n when my heart's as neer unto my mouth, As East is to the West, or North to South. Musaeus came the other day to me, (A curious wit for straines of Poesie) And he besought me in a Cause as good As truth could make it, if well understood, To be his friend, and I did promise him, But breach of promise is with us no sin. He mee accoutred with his words of Art, And I admit'd him too for his good part; Ripe was his judgement, and his wit as quick Garnish'd with copious flowers of Rhetorick. But these are tongue ty'd Orators with me, Who would have me his friend, must bring his fee. Yet for all this, I will not stick to chide, If any come to tempt me with a Bribe. For I would have these wittalls understand Fees must passe by my servants to my hand, I take no Fees my selfe, they may fee Ned, "They need not feare their cause if he be sped. For we have Tarriers, Agents, Instruments, To ope the Cabinet of our intents And plot our purposes, give them their due, And these we use as men should use a scrue. These be our Harping-irons that will draw Like Ferrets, these minc'd. Maggots of the Law: Who when their cause must to a hearing come, Next night before unto my chamber run,
And currie favour all the waies they can, To get admittance to me by my Man; Which got, they finde me in Majestick sort, Starching my beard, or reading a Report. While each of these more scurvy Court'sies makes Then upon Whitby-Strand are shapes of Snakes; Which country Congies, were they ten times worse, Shew State enough, because they cram my purse. Suppose then how these Rusetings appeare Wholly divided betwixt hope and feare. At whose approach I lay aside my booke, Teaching my face a Radamanthean looke: Sirrahs, What make you here? who sent you hither? Your man, scarce mutter they, walk knaves together; Thus fret I like gumm'd-grogran, which once past, I deigne to take a superficiall taste Of their ill-open'd cause, and give them hearing, Which I intend next morning to appeare in; Yet so, as if it nought concerned me, But out of meere respect to equitie, Though I doe prize the justice of his Cause As much as old Sysambris did his Lawes. But being heard, I doe demeane me so, I get both coyne and good opinion too. Thus doe my plots work for a thriving end, I poll the poor, yet I'm the poor-mans friend. Nor am I alwaies held the same I seeme, For in my time I have a Nigler been: So as in privacy I sometimes must With my seer'd bones quench the desire of lust.
A faire-poor Client fall she in my dish, Ile tickle her for forma-pauperis. Downe goe my trunck-hose with their gravity, To cope for once with acts of levity; Her Case Ile put, like to a man of Law, Bee't right or wrong I doe not care a straw: My Bon-a-Roba shee the day shall win, Nor spend a graine, but what she spent in sin, I weigh not what the world doth Judge of me, My saplesse-age pleads my Apologie. "Appius has silent tongue, but speaking eyes, "Yet who saith Appius loves Virginia lyes. Yet they can tell you that do better know me, How none sometimes can have admittance to me. Fit were it then ye were advis'd when time is, For now and then I drinke a cup of nimis, So as to sleep so soundly I betake me, A thousand Cannons scarcely could awake me. Yet see my boldnesse! while my thirst I drench In profuse cups, I sometimes mount the Bench, And gives my cup-shot-judgement out of hand, Ere I the Case or Pleadings understand, And who dare well control me? sith these shelves Which wrack my wits, my fellows feel themselves. Besides, if any in my friends Case do oppose me, I am their Advocate, if they will chose me. They cannot stand for Seconds, I'm the man By all their Pleadings bob me if they can, Some I have had, and in this English Nation, Who have stood firmly on their generation;
That they were greater and more ancient borne Then any descent was; but I held in scorne Their fruitlesse Pleas, to th' Judges I did write, And made expresse my Byrth, Descent and Scite. Whereto they condiscended out a hand, And doom'd my worthlesse brood take upper-hand. Our Titles are, as wee doe make them good; And if they crosse us they'r mis-understood, For what is for us we embrace and love, But what's against us we doe dis-approve. Zlid, doe you think that our rich scarlet may With such a Pension our Retinue pay Unlesse wee lose by't? No, wee know our time, And with Duke Humfrey wee 'll be loth to dine. Now for my Circuit so imperious am I, That though I purchase the distaste of many, Yet I 'm indifferent how they censure me, I justifie my legall Soveraignty. My white-lock is ambitious of honour, Yea, I must tell you, I doe dote upon her. But in no place am I predominant So much as when I 'm Judge-itinerant: Where flocks of country Gentlemen do meet me, And in submissiv'st manner use to greet me; Like Widgeons some behinde and some before me, As a terrestriall Idoll they adore me. Blest is the man, to whom Ile daigne to speake; And how admir'd when I a jeast doe breake. 'Tis wonderfull to see what preparation Is daily made for me, and in what fashion
Each County entertains mee and my crue, Who take upon them, give the knaves their due, As they were petie- Judges in commanding Weake officers, who have no understanding But only to admire them, and give way To their commands, whats'ere they doe or say. My Tipstaffe is esteem'd a wittie man, And one (so saith the witless Commonty) who can Prevaile much with me, for he ever knowes What way the winde of my opinion blowes. Nor err they in their judgement, for indeed Hee that would in his businesse succeede Must make this man his Orator unto mee, For he so fitly, to my profit knowes mee, As be the Cause you recommend to him Never so foule, yee shall be sure to win. For, truth is, I dare hardly say him nay, He knowes my courses so, which to display Would shame mee quite, so as whats'ere I show, I must keepe in with him whats'ere I do. Now when I leave the County where I sit, (I cannot chuse but jeere them for their wit) The generous Fry swim to my Chequer bag, Where one presents mee with a summer Nag, One with a cast of Hawks, and now and then, Some Shires Scotch Daggers to my Serving-men; Others give hunting-Leases, which remaine For Customs now, and must not off againe. Yet were these bounteous Babies blest the while, If all their bounties could procure a smile
From my composed Count'nance, but they err That doe expect me to be popular. No, I must punctuall be, and set my face According to the tenour of my place. My posture is accoutered with braves, In calling of the Shrieff and Gentry knaves: None dare affront me while I am in place, And whom I please, I put to all disgrace. In Counties where I am at my own finding, My richly-moultred Mill is ever grinding. The Gentry, shey have notice by the Shrieves, And furnish me with Muttons, Veals and Beeves; Others doe send me Venison and Wine, So as my Circuit is a joviall time. For such aboundance of provision have I, As it would furnish neere a Royall-Navie. Now lest yee doubt my numerous Retinue Should want their due or competent Revenue, I give the meaner sort which doe attend me Reversions of that store the Gentry send me; As broken-meat, and beere, all which they prize, And sell poor people at the end o'th Size. There's nought unvalued that may mony give, So well my Meney is inform'd to live. But for the better sort you may suppose, (Specially such who help to trusse my hose) I mint some other profits more then these, As my Subscription unto Refrences, Which ignorant people bring, hoping thereby T' affright their strong and factious enemy:
But they'r deceiv'd, for they no more prevaile By our Referments then an old-wives tale, Nor shall this trouble us; our men gaine by them, Come they as thick as hayle wee 'll not deny them. Thus far our Country life hath been exprest, In Court and City wee 'll display the rest. In Court we seldome come, yet great men know us, And in a Courtly-garbe petition to us By their ingenious Agents, and we heare them, And though their Crimes be odious we forbear them. Or if to us they should a Letter send In such an ones behalfe, to be his friend, Then Stoick-Cato wee 'r instructed better, We passe no Doome before we read the Letter, For wee 've experience of a tickle-seat, How dangerous it is t' offend the Great: Wee 'll not distaste them then in any case, Lest they be meanes to put us from our place. Sometimes we are invited to a Play, Upon some joviall-ceremoniall-day, Where we doe presse, as other Sages use, With grave aspect unto the Banket-house, And there in Conscript manner doe wee sit, Admiring of some passages of wit Which we doe understand as well as he That tooke Opigena for Mercurie. But in reserved jests we have a care, To make men deeme us wiser then we are: If Great-ones laugh, it is a pregnant jeast, And we approve it as we hug a Feast.
If we be widdowers, though saplesse, old, Decrepit, crooked, rhumatick and cold; Yet see what wealth can do, we straight are chosen As fit to match with such a Great-mans Cosen, Though shee, poor Girle, rather would be led Unto her Grave then to a loathed bed: Yet Will an old-man serve them for a cloake, And be a Chimney for a greater smoake. And that's the cause, no question, when we dy And leave our wives so large a Legacy, Why they set their affection on Soldadoes, That can discourse on nought but Barracadoes: For such is their strong-temperd resolution, They love no Judgement like to Execution. But 'tis no matter for the worlds Sentence, We get us honour by our wives acquaintance; Which we so idolize, that we can show it Even in our pace, as we were borne unto it. Were it not fit then we should shew all grace To such as these who raise us to our place? For tell me seriously, how many have Deserved well, who never could receive Any esteeme at all, for all their worth, Because they had no friend to set them forth? These liv'd obscurely, and as poorly dyde, Nor cap'd nor congi'd, nor so much as ey'de, Or popularly viewd; what was the cause? They had nought but the knowledge of our Lawes To give them count'nance, whereas such as we By our Alliance more authentick be.
For there's no place nor person in the Court, Whereto we may not readily resort And have accesse, by consequence, successe In whats'ere we Petition, more or lesse. But now I must unto the City goe, Where I am Councellor and dweller too; Neighbours I have, but principally three, Who now are Wardens of a Companie, Men of sufficient wealth, I can assure ye, And now and then impannell'd in a Jurye: Of one whereof (I cannot chuse but laugh) For all he walks now with his Civil-staffe, Being made Juror of a grand▪ Enquest, And in 's opinion wiser then the rest; Unto his fellowes that himselfe display'd, "Thus long have we our Verdicts (friends) delay'd, "And as ye see it draweth neere to night, "And we by Law are barr'd from Candle-light, "Meat, drink, and necessaries, till we give "Our Verdict up, which die; or which to live. "Now hear me (friends) we 've twelve Indictments here, "Against twelve prisoners as may appeare; "To what end should we thus precisely watch them "Let's hang six and save six, and so dispath them, Yet this is held a man of choyce esteeme, And in his white fox-fur sits to be seene Upon his well-couch'd-Bench, whose Pillars be As fit t' advise a Company as he. Yet deigne I with these sage-gulls to discourse, Nor doe I hold my judgement any worse.
The Sun may shine on dung, none can deny it, And yet receive no stayne nor blemish by it. The object of their knowledge is my jeast, The ground of my acquaintance is to feast, And jeere them for their bounty when they doe it, Though I must tell you I goe gladly to it. But for requitall they have none from me, It is sufficient they've my companie. "Once in his life the Churle make's his feast, "And by that feast, his byrth-day is exprest: Whose rule is my direction, and shall ever; I 'd rather be a taker then a giver. If they invite us to them we will meet them, "Though fools make feasts, wise men may go to eat them. Nor are these all th' delights I cope with here, I have variety through all the yeere. Here a fresh Erithrea of choice price, Came last day privately for my advice, "Whether a Citizen lawfully might "Having, (as she put case, laid with a Knight) "Challenge precedence for her eldest Son "Fore such an one as had no such thing don? Whereto I answer'd; might I put her Case, I little doubt but she should have the place, And for her Son get that prioritie Which did belong unto my Progenie. At which reply, smiling away she went Silent, which silence did imply consent. Thus both in City, Country, and in Court, With a reserved gravity and port
I spread my beams of honour, and descry A select affectation in mine eye. I looke about me with a glorious vaine, While my fastidious wagg beares up my traine: Groundlings I dis-esteeme that crosse the way, As if I were of better clay then they: And in a word, so sweetly doe I breath, I feare no Enemy so much as Death. The Politicall Ape. ALas, fond Apes; how shallow doe these show, Thus to discover whatso'ere they know? They have no Project be it nere so slight But must be publish'd to the open light: Their hearts are in their mouths, which they disclose Not onely to their friends, but to their foes. Which lightnes I abhorre; for nere shall hee Be scholed in the grounds of policie, Who by experience has not got the art To make his Tongue a stranger to his heart. He onely to the hight of wisdome growes Who seemes as if he knew not what he knows. His Projects must be neatly shadowed, His drifts with secret Curtains covered;
His Plotts so smooth as the quick'st-sighted men Cannot with all their sleights discover them. There's nothing in the World I more detest Then t' have transparent Windows in my brest; For by this meanes my inside should be laid Ope to the world, and all my tricks displaid: Which would not onely grieve me, but enforce The World to love me ever longer worse. In my opinion those Cilician Geese Are wiser in their secrecy then these, Who have expos'd themselves to publick view By making others knowne to what they knew. For they (as t'is reported) When they fly Over mount Taurus, least they should descry Their flight by cackling to those Eagles there Which in aboundance to those Hills repaire, With winged speed (for there they dare not tarrie) They hast, and in their Bills small Stones doe carrie. Thus by instinct they use a policie To save them from their furious enemie: While these tame fools, whom sillie Geese condemne Will give their foes advantage over them. But these that dance so blindly in a net Shall be excluded from my Cabinet; They are too full of chinks, so let them rest, "My Secretarie shall be my owne Brest. In all those Coasts wherein I have remain'd, I 've some experience in my courses gain'd, Which I made use of to my owne behoofe; And where I ever seem'd to hold a loofe,
I was most interessed still in that, Yet few could reach the pearch I aymed at. I never saw that Statseman in my dayes, (Nor would I have it spoken to my praise) Whom I in short time could not make my friend, And finde as soone whereto his aymes did tend. For thus I wrought him; First I sought to wind Into his Nature, how he stood inclin'd, Which found, I most affection us'd to show To that, which he stood most affected to: Whereby, as Jet attracts the yeelding straw, Just as I would, could I his humour draw. Or by his ends, if once I had displaid him, I by that meanes would labour to perswade him, Which he could not resist, seeing me bend My speech to that whereto his course did tend. Likewise if my observance found him weake, I of his Weakenesse would advantage take, And if he were so stiffe I could not draw him, His Weaknesse gave me strength to overaw him. But if he could by none of these be rested, By meanes of Some where he was interested, His bosome open'd to receive me in, Where seiz'd, I tooke in hand to governe him. In all my time, Man was my onely book, On which with serious Studie I did look: Tracing all his demensions to and fro, For still I dogg'd him where he us'd to go. Were he a Statist I observ'd him streight, And poiz'd him too, to finde if he were weight;
And now and then I found him wondrous light, Or else bleere-ey'd and blemish'd in his sight. For eyther his Ambition did so mad him, As he would doe what ere his fancy bad him; Or else his bleered Judgement so deprav'd him, As still in State-affaires he misbehav'd him. In which observances I wondred much (Not without just occasion) any such Should be advanc'd to place of that esteeme, Who never knew what State-affaires did meane. So as more aptly could I not compare These Spongie Statesmen who are nought but ayre, Then to that world-wasting Phaeton, Whose ayme's to guide the Progresse of the Sun, When they alasse (so simple are these Elves) Can hardly give direction to themselves. Nor did I onely limit my Survey To these who have the glory of the Day, Sitting like Pilots at the sterne of State, But such as were of lower Estimate. Where I observ'd, there was not any vice Derivative to man form Paradise, That could her secret Poyson so much smother As not infuse it selfe in one or other. For men of all degrees employed were How to their Seed they might a fortune reere; Wherein they all contended how they might Incroach the farr'st upon an others right. Which practise I approv'd, yet much condemne The weake and open passages of them;
For their projectments scarcely were begun Till they discover'd all that they had done; Which gave their foes occasion to prevent, By timely circumspection, their intent. I rather relish him can play the knave, Yet seems as if he knew not to deceive: For in my books He is the only one Who hath a wit, yet seems as he had none. There is no walke that me so much doth pase As tracing clouds with Aristophanes; To walke, I meane, obscure, as censure may Tax neither what I act nor what I say. Which to effect the better, I doe give Such satisfaction wheresoere I live; As there's no rite nor custome that can show it, But I can soon conform my self unto it. Yea of my faith a nose of wax I make, Though all I doe seems done for Conscience sake. For I addresse my selfe in any case Unto the disposition of the place: At Rome I live just as the Romists doe, Elswhere I live as they'r affected to. At pure-Geneva, Protestant I am, At Doway or at Rhemes another man; In Germany a selfe-inspired Luther, At Amsterdam a Laodicean Neuter, 'Mongst zealous men I seem a hot Precisian, But when I come within the Inquisition, Lest, touching my profession, they should doubt me I carry store of Reliques still about me;
Which I suppose to be the only course, For without these I well might fare the worse. Thus I conform my selfe to any Rite, Be he Armenian or Hugonite; State-stirring Brownist, or a Broughtonist, Licentious Famulist, or Barrowist, His Ape I am, and will be so profest, To make me more familiar with his brest; On which I worke my aymes, for by my wit What ere I act, my Conscience shadows it. For prosper in the world few I know, And hold concurrence with Religion too; Which makes me gull the world with a pretence Of hypocritick zeale and conscience. For popular opinion 's my desire, So as in th' Country I have built a Quire Where I and my religious family Make our repire (as seems us) usually; Yet from the Pulpit far remote's my Seat, Because I am not well resolved yet In ase of Conscience, therefore would I be Far of, that's doctrine may not trouble me. The cause is this; as yet I have no time To treat of any thing that is Divine; My ayms are plots of profit, plants of pleasure, For points of Faith, Ile think of them at leisure. "Who wish unto their aymes an happy end, "Must in their aymes no other thing intend; For he that deales much in the world, I trow, Without the Church, he has enough to doe.
Nor with these Politick Rules doe I resort Only to City, Country, and the Court; For I these grounded axioms can show Unto the learned Academie too: Where with quick eye I may observe their tricks Withouten Aristotles-politicks. Here a grand-Senior-Dunce will keep his place, Although he have a Parsonage in chace; Which having purchas'd, yet concealing it, Some yeere or two heel keep his Fellowship. The selfe-same smooth politicall-abuse Have I observ'd in Masters of a House, By whom such Fellowes only are appointed As had their oylie-fists before annoynted; So as, though't seem much different to their functiō, "Nought they affect so much as extreme-unction. Where no Election can be freely granted, If he that would be chosen fellow, wanted; For no admission can be ever made Untill the Master of the House be paid. Besides, conveyance of their Colledge-Leases, Is as the President or Provost pleases; Which many times themselves they so befriend, As they convert them to their proper end: For it is daily seene what course they take, And what commoditie of these they make. To all which acts I approbation give, "For he that cannot sharke, he cannot live. All Engins must be us'd that we may git Unto our selves a certain benefit.
Nor can he thrive that cannot well dispence For profits sake, with Faith and Conscience. From forrain-States intelligence I have, Which like our weekly Corrants I receive By means of such as are employ'd for me In ev'ry place where their occasions be. These, like Architas wooden-Dove, can bring Tidings from such a State, or such a King; So as nought can be done in any Nation, Whereof my Agents give me not relation: Which betters my experience in each part, Making my best friends strangers to my heart. For he that has the humor to display Himselfe unto his friend, although he may, Yet his too open brest shall at no time Partake of any secrecy of mine: I may presume my Councells must be showne By him, who has not brains to keep his owne. I hold it to be oyle and labor spent Here to discourse what th' Spanish-treaty meant, But nere had businesse so strange a carriage; To make more shows and lesse intend a marriage; But this was so well shadow'd, give it due, By th' Spanish Jipsy and her wandring. crue, As I will presse no more this Subject now, "Only the Cinque-ports must be look'd unto. Thus have I sto'd my well-experienc'd pate With Politick-Rules extracted from each State, Where I have liv'd or conversant have bin, As there was none but I could humor him.
For was he zealous? I could make a shew Of fervent zeale and of devotion too; Was he a worldling? I was worldly given, Discoursing more of Mammon then of heaven; Was he voluptuous? Ide consort him right, As one devoted wholy to delight; In briefe, there was no ranke, degree, nor state, Which in my selfe I could not personate. Nor care I much whats'ever the world deeme, This is my Mott: I am not what I seeme. The Chymicall Ape. ALL rules of Art, of small esteeme I hold To his, who can extract refined gold From copper, brasse, or such inferior mettle, For he can make pure Ophir of a kettle. Besides, so rare is Art exprest in him, He may from Lattin, Alchimie or Tin Draine store of silver bulloyne, with the which He maks himselfe and his attendants rich. The Stone, the Stone, O that I had the Stone, By meanes whereof I might be such an one! Which Stone I have long studied to obtaine, Wasting my oylè, weakning my Chymick braine,
And still me thought I had it, yet was crost, For longer that I sought, the more I lost. Yet forasmuch as I did understand That many did professe it in the Land, Whose solid judgements could not chuse but see That such a thing might well effected bee, Or else they nere would such estates have spent In trying of a meere experiment; I reassumed spirit, and betooke My selfe more strictly to my golden-Booke. Besides all this, I heard how Kellie came By practise of this Art to speciall fame; An other likewise so experienc'd grew In this mysterious Art reveal'd to few, As he an artificiall-tree of gold Had curiously contriv'd, which daily would Bud, bloome and blossom, and in branches spring, Which might be soone a beneficiall thing: For these Hesperian-plants in time would prove By their encrease to be a golden-Grove. All this encourag'd me, hoping one day The charges I had been at to defray With plentuous int'rest; but the more I travel'd, The more I found my senses to be gravel'd. Limbecks, with artfull forges builded I, And places too where I my gold might try; Sev'n yeers and more have I my wits thus bet, But not a penny-weight extracted yet. Sometimes unto the Braziers Ide repaire, And laugh'd at my conceit while I staid there;
For I was halfe resolv'd within short space To change the brasse and copper of that place Into pure gold, and make my copesmates merry With transmutation of all Lothberry. Thus fed I on opinion, laying out Great summs, till I my purpose brought about, Which once disburs'd, I never shall receive But count it lost whats'ere I ventur'd have. For having spent my fortunes and my wit In diving to the secrecies of it, My aymes I bended to another marke, Resolving now to learne the art to sharke. For which, that I might more enabled be, I streight betooke me to a companie Of wittie Rake-hells, roaringly profest, And in all forlorne courses bravely flesh't. Flankt were my troups with bolts, bauds, punks, and panders. Pimps, nips and i ints, Prinado's, highway-standers; All which were my familiars, and would doe With quick dispatch whats'ere I put them to. So as some of my crue of choice account Did ev'ry Sessions- time up Holborn mount; Yea I my selfe could Miserere sing Or I had gone to heaven in a string. For to relate those nimble tricks we plaid, Though on the publick Stage they be splaid, As th' subtile-headed Alchimist can show; Or th' Alchimists own Ape, Tom. Trinculo, One hold I fitting to be here exprest, By which you may judge better of the rest.
"One of my Foists resolving to resort "In th' habit of a Courtier to the Court, "Where he demean'd himselfe as none could deem, "But he was just the man that he did seem; "Nor any Courtier there of sweeter scent, "Nor choycer in his forme of complement, "More punctual in his gate, or in his looke, "As one whose postures had been all by th' booke; "After a turne or two, to th' Table came "Where two great personages were at game. "The one whereof, had laid his purse close by, "His losse upon occasion to supply; "My Bung observing this, takes hold of time, "Just as this Lord was drawing for a prime, "And smoothly nims his purse that lay beside him, "And all this while the other gamester ey'd him, "At whom he winks, to move him to conceale it, "As one that had no purpose for to steale it. "He that perceiv'd him, thinking him to be "One of the Court or of his companie, "Smiling, continued play, and so it rested "Untill this Lord seeks for his purse, but mist it: "Whereat the other laugh'd; quoth he, enquire "Of such an one, and clad in such attire, "One of your own acquaintance, I suppose, "Who nim'd you of your purse before your nose. "Diligent search was made all there about, "But my ingenious gue had got him out "Before this inquisition, which secur'd him "Better then when the court-wals had immur'd him.
Thus were my Limetwigs laid in every place, Who like Blood-hounds had still some game in chase, Which they pursu'd with such an eager mind, As where they seiz'd they left small store behind. Scarce could two country fopps together meete To heare a cheating▪ ballad in the streete, But presently some Complices of mine Took hold of th' opportunity of time; For while these to the Ballad-monger flocked, My nimble-Nipps div'd deep into their pocket. But for as much as I perceiv'd these shifts Were meerly grounded on apparent thifts, And that some private foe through in-bred malice Might be a meanes to bring me to the Gallows, This sharking trade relinquish'd, I became A wondrous strange reformed honest man; An Emp'rick-Doctor, who had Art at will, Which I derived from my Chymick-Still, Where I such waters made, as in short time Doctor Stevens water was lesse priz'd then mine. Balms, apozems, confections had I store, Yet th' more I had my Patients wish'd for more: Such rare effects were daily wrought by these, As they were Cures for any strange disease. But that I might seem learned in mine Art, Of late I've got an Herbal all by heart, Whereof I make this use; when I can give No reason why this dies, or that should live, (For no such depth as yet mine art affords) I streight confound them with abstrusest words.
As Cataplasms, Diarrhicks, Cataclisms, Concucurbetuls, Emplasms, Paroxisms, With which I so conjure them, as they cease To aske me any questions touching these. "Who for his practise can no reason show, "He must have words or he's not worth a stroe. Besides all this, such Authors can I number, As they that heare me are enforc'd to wonder: For thus holds Galen, thus Hippocrates, Thus Silvius holds, thus Dioscorides, But Paracelsus thus, who in my brest Hath more esteeme then any of the rest. Though I was never so on learning set As I read any of these Authors yet; Nor care I much, 'tis my desire to seeme More then I am, to gain me more esteeme. Some twenty Patients have I here hard by, Who know not what they ayle, no more doe I, Yet lest of negligence they me condemn, Morning and night I duely visit them; Prescribing them receits to cheere their blood; Which many times doe far more harm then good. Yet am I crouded to on ev'ry side, So as of late I on my foot-cloth ride By meanes of such a Lord, who had occasion To try my profound Art this last vacation; Whose hand of bounty did my state enrich For curing of an ulcer in his breech. How glad am I my Chymick-works are done, Amalga-like they had more Moone then Sonne?
More profit doe I reape by one direction To mine Apothecarie, or inspection Into my Patients water, then I looke Ere to receive from all my Chymick-smook; For Alchymie with piercing Autimonie, Upon my knowledg cans'd a want of monie▪ Minerall metals, Niter, Orochalke, By th' use whereof I in a cloud did walke, Hatching such quaint Chymeraes in my braine, As reaping wind was all that I could gaine. Hope train'd me on till all my wits were rest me; I sought for gold, till I no brasse had left me. But why doe I my weaknesse thus descry? When men have er'd were wiser held then I, In making search for this unvalued Stone, But I must leave them and their wits alone; They hope a day will come will pay for all, But I feare such a day will never fall. So as me thinks I cannot well compare These men who build strange Castles in the ayre, More fitly then to those who once did labor To take a Hare with playing on a Taber. Fly-brasse; no Chymick but a Physick-ape Since I left Mercury for Aesculape: My practise now's cleere of another nature, Trading before in Smoake but now in water. Now am I us'd with choycest entertaine, Had in esteeme wheres'ever I remaine; In City, Court, and Country harbored, With free accesse unto a Ladies bed,
Whilest her weak husband thinks she Physick wants, And for my Potion gives me hearty thanks. Streight she protests my Pills doe only please her, Thus much I'm sure, they for that season ease her; For application is the soveraignst thing That may conceiving to a woman bring. There is a lovely-Lady in this land, Whom I have had these two yeeres under hand, Yet I for manners sake will laine her name, But trust me, shee's a hen that loves the game, Who has been long time barren; yet have I By art and other things I did apply, Made her a fruitfull Mother; yea some say That shee conceiv'd the very selfe same day That I did minister; but I divine It came right neeere unto that very time. And I am glad on't; for I doe not see How he had Heir'd his Land withouten mee. The babe is full of hope, and will no question, For his Syres sake, love men of our profession. But 'tis no matter, now in grace I am, And shall be dead before he be a man; Thus much entirely shall I wish unto him, Hee'd be no Alchymist, it will undo him; For other Arts, a Gods name take his venter, This is so deepe I thinke it has no center. Nor am I only practis'd in the Court, But in the Country too to make me sport. Here Granam Gurton will be sick for love, And I must scent some love-procuring. Glove,
To cause her sweet-heart more affection show, And this I promise out a hand to doe. Some foure houres after I make known to her, That I've confer'd with my familiar, Who has engag'd his word before one weeke, Hee whom she seeks shall for her fancy seeke. Shee payes me well, and hopes all shall be mended, But I am gone before halfe weeke be ended. Young wenches too I have exceeding store, And I content them all, what would they more? Only some zealous-Sisters doe refraine To come unto me, but I know their ayme; They daily so increase and multiply Among themselves, they need none such as I. Thus have I traced many dangers ore, And now at last arived on the shore; I like the Horse-leach feed upon their blood To whom I seldome tender any good: My Patients are my profits, nor care I Leg of a Dog whether they live or die. This is the highest pitch of all my skill, How to draw up a Pothecaries bill Of ounces, drams & doses, wch long Item (Wer't not for gain) would tyre me much to write'em. Within few moneths I hope I shall not need On other mens infirmities to feed; My ten yeers practise so much treasure gaine me, As ten at hundred now may well maintaine me.
The Criticall Ape. NOw by my life, a blind man may discover A Ship of fools or Dottrells new come over. Have you heard such a crue of brainless Skulls, As if they had been bred i'ch' Ile of gulls, Boast of the Vilanies that they have done, Meaning to end just as they have begun? Heere a great Lord like one of Isis Asses In my conceite all other fooles surpasses; For he consumes his Lungs when he doth see Any Man grac'd or in esteeme but hee. 'Tis worth observing too, to note how sin Retaines a kinde of priviledge in him. Be his vile courses nere so indirect, The greatnesse of his place will him protect, And give such lustre to his vices too As they like vertues shine in outward show. For where Ambition or Oppression either, Yea all enormious vices put together Are covered with State, inferiours love them, At least there's few dare censure or reprove them: So as that maxim's true in my conceit, "It is a rare Sight to be good and great.
But I doe heare this high-aspiring fellow, Is in a single combat or Duello Upon disgraces offer'd, prest to fight With an Hispaniolized Favorite; But I'm perswaded neither of them both (So highly grac'd they are) but will be loth To shed one others blood, hows'ere they prate it, Unlesse they be dispenst with for the Statute. But should one kill the other in this sort, I thinke the State had cause to thanke them for't. Now Verulam, good Man, is in his grave, I muse who shall his House and Title have; That spatious-specious-pretiouss refectorie, Which cost a world of wealth, so saith the storie: Those peble-paved Brookes, empaled Lakes, Thick clad with countless sholes of Ducks & Drakes. For's Ladie, she has got one now, will busse her, And chang'd her Uselesse Vicouńt for her Vsher; Whence th' Crosse-inne may report, as sure it will, "A Countesse dain'd to lye her Vnder hill. For him whome some call his adopted Heire, Our waggs point at the Tow'r, and say hee's there, Where he with his She Cousins plays at Gleeke, Though some make bold to say he's in by th'weeke. But what is that to me! this would I know Whether he be Saint Alban yea or no. Saint Alban! no; yet Alban was a Martyr, And one each gate, i'th Towne bestow'd a quarter; Now th' Syate might well afford it to bestow That Style on him, would he be Martyr too.
For I ne're read that any Age did call Saint Alban Martyr Lord High Admirall. But God will have a stroake in every Man, Witnesse the dismall shot of Eglesham, Whose fate was this Dukes fall, enforc'd to loose Those Honours by a stabbe whereto he rose; "So weake's that Arch of Greatnesse which relyes "On Complements and meere formalities: But God is mercifull, as he is just, To whom, with whom I leave him, so I trust. Next him, an Ape of pleasure or delight, A very sensual fleshly Sibarite; And he triumphs, fond Ape, as much as may be, In favors shewn him by his wanton Ladie. Yet should he but unto the world be sent Nak'd, he would die for want of nourishment; For then his outward beauty would deceive him, His consorts loath him, and his pleasures leave him. For this mine axiom is, He that doth find "More comfort in his body then his mind, "May feed, and glut, and gormandize his time, "Yet all this while he lives but like a Swine; "Who spends his dayes in Surfeits and in Sinning, "Making his end far worse then his beginning. Next him, a shallow, weake, vaine-glorious-gull, Of styles and titles who is stuck so full, As there is none, such honours doe befall him, That know to day, to morrow how to call him. Yet lend your ear, I'le tell you in a word What this Colossus is, A Spongy Lord,
Whose merit's meane, whose apprehension small, Great onely in his Titles, that is all. The way by which he seekes esteeme to gaine Is this, he strives great States to entertaine; Conduits run Rhenish, and the Kings high street Smells of his odours and his perfumes sweet. In publique wayes his bounty he displayes In Sucket, Bisket, Wafers, Carawayes; At one reere-supper in expence more large Then all his yeares Revenues will discharge. The height of his Ambition is to get By Citizens acquaintance into debt; But I suppose till he has paid old score, They will be loath to lend him any more: Then let him paune his Honour, but this age Is farre too wise to credit such a gage. This Ape hows'ere in State himselfe he beare, He can with patience take a box o'th'eare And n'ere repine, as if he did allow it More Courtier-like to take a wrong then do it; For he through meekenes of his spirit doth prize Patience above the weight of injuries. Next a licentious selfe-conceited Ape, Who in the Court such sport doth daily make, The Ladies, he protests, so value him They would not want the Wag for any thing. His Parentage he likewise doth disclose, Least his descent should admiration lose, Which he describes, and I believe him, thus; A Courtier gat him of a Succubus;
Of whom both bred and flesht, he nightly trades In darke Court-entries with his Ladies maides: Which Ladies well observing, doe attire Themselves like maids, that they might have like hire. In ev'ry Mask, Court-show or Enterlude, He must make one, or it is holden ude; For (as he thinks) he is by Ladies eyde, More then all those that are employ'd beside. Yet let me tell you, this conceited fancy Whereof he labours, brought him to a phrensy; Nor is he yet recover'd, but inchain'd Untill his madding humor be reclaim'd. Next him a wastefull, formall fashion-monger, A finicall, superfluous state-wronger, Who boasts of his invention in devising All those strange fashions in our State arising, Which by his travaile were first brought a shore, For to this Ile they were not knowne before. Nor is his forraine travell unrequited, So much are we with his conceit delighted; For to discharge the debt that we doe owe him, A yeerly-Pension doe we pay unto him. Wee pay unto him! No; I scorne it I, That any such Pie-colour'd Butter-flie Should gaine by me or any one of mine, To geld the State, or gull the present time. Yea rather then Ide second such a Cheat, Ie see his carrion-gutts about his feet. But I commit him till he pay his Tayler To Brokers-Lavender, or to the Jayler,
Where let him lie in nastie, nittie-linnen, Till he make satisfaction for his sinning. Next an Observing-Ape, who travels Nations To gaine him knowledge by his Observations, Glories in those strange coasts where he hath beene, And in the Novels he hath heard and seene. Nought he observes but he relateth it, And yet me thinks, he somthing doth omit: Which if he had remembred, sure I thinke, Could not so soone into oblivion sinke. But I must tell him of it; "Sir, do you heare? "A strange Conjunction hapned this last yeere "Twixt Mars and Jupiter; pray now divine "What this Prognosticates to after time. "Some, and the wisest, of opinion are "That it presageth famine, others warre, "Others, some pestilent-disease occurring, "Causing men die on heapes by such a murrin. "But what is your opinion?—l'as poor sot, He eyther has forgot or knoweth not What Constellations meane! But sirra, you, Who knows more coasts then ere Columbus knew; While forraine-Country wonders are made known, You much forget this Country of your owne. For in this Iland where your selfe was borne, Did you nere visit Glastenbury-Thorne? Saint Thomas Beckets path, his Shrine, his Cell? The Civit-senting Mosse of Win'freds well? The Stones of Salsbury-plain, which none can number? The Stones of Whitby-strand, that Snakie wonder?
Bruertons Logg which on a Mote doth lye, And sinking bodes, The Ancestor must dye. Or of Saint Quintins (as Ive heard it told) Whose ancient Seat is Harpham on the would, Where at such times as chiefe of th' house shall dy, A Drum to th' hearing of the neighbours by, For three daies space together sounds alarum, (A gentle easie summons to prepare him.) Which dying march, (as I have understood) Issues from th' covert of a shadie wood, But whence or how produc'd, that know not I, (A Sacred-Secret Seal'd from mortall eye.) But it implies (this Charity will grant) He dies a Champion ith' Church militant. Or of those Cornish-Choughs I'm sure you heare, Which built at Claughton once in Lancashire, Who, as I've heard it there reported oft, When a late Ancestor sirnamed Croft Deceas'd, fled streight from thence (but God knows whither) Where they had built for many yeeres together. Which ominous or no, I cannot tell, Nor what it boded can I gather well, But people thereabout affirme, it wants Her ancient priviledg'd inhabitants, Who left their Country-coast, their native nest, And took plantation where they liked best. Or of those rare, intestine, civill-warres, Or fatall skirmishings of Irish-Stares, Where son with father fought, daughter with mo∣ther, Shedding the reeking blood of one another:
Nor could their quenchlesse rage extinguish'd be, But by an universall Tragedie; For there was scarce one left (as I've heard say) To bring their fellowes word, who won the day. So hot is fury (as appear'd by these) As it respects no State, Sex, nor Degrees, But breathing forth revenge holds on the fight A tedious Summers day from Morn to Night. But sure these These stale newes the Cri∣tick purposely recounts, to taxe this Observer of palpable weaknesse. News are come unto your eare, The bruit whereof's dispers'd in every sheare: The fatall vesper (Man) where th' Romish pastor Brought to himselfe and numbers more disaster. Which tragick act should not so censur'd be As if those men had sinned more then we; For those on whom the Towre of Siloam fell Were not the worst, as is observed well: But rather let's this application make, (That of Gods judgements we may warning take:) "If th' best employment that a Christian hath "Be not secure from th' violls of Gods wrath, "And that he spareth not, for our exemple, "To chastise those who doe frequent his Temple; "How can we look, when any of us come "To Sinks of Sinne, but he will pay us home? "We make our Brothells Temples, & in Stewes "Our Saintly-formalists erect their Pewes;
"If Places of devotion then receive "Such fearfull ruines as of late some have; "How can these sensuall Synagogues but fall? "well, Boyes, a day will come will pay for all. But sure he hears these news, for none be newer, I meane that Ratsbane-Academick Bruer, Who rather then he would his Bev'rage lose Poyson'd rare hopefull Plants, as th' rumor goes. Yet he lives still and flourisheth, nay more, Continues selfe-same trade he us'd before; Whereas if Justice executed were Upon th' offender, as his crimes appeare, "Who caus'd these Schollers such Rats deaths to dy, "Should die a dogs-death, more have thought then I. But sure you heare, (for who is 't heareth not) Of th' monstrous fish in Vistula late got, Which wore a triple-Miter on his head, And on whose back were lively figured Saint Peters-keyes, a partizan of warre, Which Wizards doe divine predictions are Of some strange thing that's likely to ensue, Now what that is Ide gladly know from you. Fall upon Rome, you answer somthing will, But I would heare whether 't be good or ill: For under cope of heav'n no State I know But some occurrent it is subject to: Wherefore resolve me, Sir, before you go, Whether it bodes our State some good or no; Or whether this same monstrous fish divine Some doubtfull alteration in our time;
For sure I am nought can escape your dish (If fit to be observ'd) be 't flesh or fish. But sure you've heard or seen that fearfull vision, Which th' wiser sort have held in great derision; That white-mayl'd-Army marshalling her power, All rankt in battail'ray on Burnley Moore; Where not a man but vented his conceite; One said it was an enemy to th' State, Some Spinola that mortally doth hate us: Some thought it was a Posse Comitatus Rais'd in the County, purposely to seaze On some Recusant for arrerages. But most men held it was great Baccbus train, Had shot those Squibs & Streamers in their brain: For most of these that for this Vision stood Could scarce discern a Souldier from a Cloud. But sure you heare (for 'was within this sennet) How Birds would be of th' Order of Saint Bennet, How Raven, Crow, Pie, Sparrow (pretie Soule) Flockt about Bennet, as sh'ad been an Owle: How Raven taken in a golden dreame, Would needs a naked Benedictan been, Till th' sweet tun'd Finch with his melodious plead∣ing, Split Raven quite and plum'd him for his treading. Which sharpe encounter cost Musaeus more Then all these Fowles could ever yet restore. But zlid, Ide like forgot! he cannot chuse But heare of Bugle-blues and Titre-tues, Choice blades, brave youths; yea I durst almost sweare That he has notice what their Projects were,
So as whats'ere he speak in 's own defence, He cannot chuse but have intelligence, And therefore should be censur'd;—'las not he, Though he pretend some Rules of policie Whereon his erring Observations stand, He's held the veriest Widgeon in the land; "For like a bottle (howsoere he show him) "Nought he retaines, unless't be put into him. "So as me thinks I fitly may compare "This simple Sot unto that muddie Maire, "Who of his wisdome self-opinionate, "Like to some state-observing Magistrate, "Mongst other things which he was glancing at, "Observ'd one weare a ribband in his hat "Of dang'rous colour, for the field was blue, "Whence he infer'd he was a Titre-tu, "An enemy to th' State: streight to the place "He sends his ale-tipt- Sergeant with his Mace, "To summon this Titerian to appeare "And show some cause why he such toyes did weare. "The youth accosts the Maire; the Maire the youth; "Who having stroakt his beard & wipt his mouth, "Charg'd him upon th' Allegiance which he bore "His Prince, to show why he such ribbands wore? "Sir, quoth the youth, most Boyes in all our Parish "Such ribbands weare in honor of our Morish. "In honor of your Morish, quoth the Maire, "You and your Morish shall taste both one fare. "Brethren this Morice is a welshman borne, "Who on Saint Davies day weares Leeks in scorne
"Of us true English-Brittains—I think meete "To set you and your Morish both by th' feete; "For we doe know hows'ere these Ruffins prate, "Ribbands and Leeks are stratagems of State; "Which well effected, to the Court Ile come, "And show the Prince what service I have done. But were this State-sot ignorant of these, Has surely heard of th' massacre of Reze, So many Ensignes, Colours, Streamers, Standers, Ancients, Lieutenants, Colonells, Commanders, So many Heroes which we sometime had In Coate of male, but now in Durance clad; So many maine Land-pieces which did breath The seldom welcome Embassie of death, Seaz'd and surpriz'd, so as it may appeare, The French at no time sold their salt so deare. While some doe think th' English had won the day, But that their Generall was slunke away; But this is but some flying-false report, And they that spread it would be censur'd for 't; For is it likely such a man as he, So stout (So sayes the Corrant Historie) Should be on Sea, and scarcely understand How his Commanders far'd that were a Land? Or He rest safe from shot of Enemy, And his whole Navy in such jeopardy? Or so well entertain'd at his approach, As to be sent for by the These Novels relate to the time wherein they were first writ, being according to the Original. An. 32. Kings owne Coach?
Bells to be rung in consort, which descry'de The sorrow they conceiv'd for those that dide? Bonefires erected in each publique streete, With perfumes mixt, fit for a man so sweete, And he deserve so ill? I cannot see How a wife State should so deluded bee. For nere was England brought to such a lurch, Their Colours trail'd unto Saint Michaels Church And reer'd in all contempt, as who should say, Nere France ore England had a fairer day. But our adherence now helps one another As well becomes a reconciled Brother: Which gallant Juncto may enrich our State; Becoming sharers in the Silver plate. Nor doe we feare, but wee next yeere shall catch it, Should Argus & th' Hesperian-Sisters watch it. Yet Ile be thus opinion'd till I die, And so are many persons more then I; Had but that martiall militarie place, Seene but his sweet and amiable face, It would have beene with admiration charm'd To see Adonis like Bellona arm'd; For had those Amazons so bravely bred Been there encamp'd, they would have yield or fled. But we are quite deceiv'd, the Golden-Fleece Surprizeth Souldiers more then Ambergreece. Where hath this great Observer been the while, And never view'd these wonders of our Ile? In Court hee'll say to make himselfe some sport; Well go to Sir, you must be jerked for't,
And that will learne you wit another time, To draw a curtaine o're a great-mans crime. But see you Silke-worme! who is one of those Who scents the street with perfume where he goes; A Courtly▪ carpet-Ape who takes delight In giving Raines unto his appetite. There's many things which he doth glory in, As first, he makes a profit of the king, Farming his imposts at such easie rate, As he both cheats the Prince and wrongs the State. The next abuse, which addes no lesse disgrace To men made eminent by ranke or place, Is that he hath pow'r wheresoere he please For to dispose of all Court-offices. Besides, there's not a Captaine in the Land Receives Exchequer-pay but from his hand; Which must be guelt, as use hath beene before; To make the Courtier rich, the Captaine poor. He bestows Honors too, which to the cost Of the receiver, fall on him bids most: So he who hath deserv'd no stile at all May have his penniworth when Markets fall. To dignifie his undeserving pate, The Academie makes him graduate, Where if the Master of a House deceases, He placeth and displaceth as he pleases. I wonder much the State will suffer him Thus to triumph and riot in his sin; But sure he plays not such vile pranks as these, Boasting too highly of his rogueries;
For many Court-pips be there that I know, Who make a shew of more then they can doe: If this be so, he well deserves descrying, And to be cudgell'd roundly for his lying. But see yon City-Mammon how he struts, As full of Sinns as he is stuff'd with Guts! For nimble tricks I doe not know his match, So sliely can the Urchin Cony-catch, As none but he would think and see his feat, That he had serv'd a Prentiship to cheat. If he owe more then he intends to pay, He seekes by all the conning meanes he may, To frustrate his weake Creditors, whose Wits Goe a wool-gathring, he Protection gits: So as the hopes they ground on are but small, For by this course he wipes their Nose of all. Yet tickles he my itching spleene with laughter, And makes me smile, I sweare, a sennet after, To thinke how he deludes that Ape o'th Court, Who labours his Protection in this sort. He tells him, he shall in his Fortunes share, And at his death he shall be made his Heire, Upon which deed of gift the Gull relyes, And's like to hang himselfe when th' Merchant dyes; For now when he should seize upon his store, He finds an other seiz'd thereon before. In ev'ry Faire too he his tricks can play, And sharke, and cheate, and profit day by day; For Country people they so simple are, They scarce discerne good from adulterate ware.
Besides all these, if th' Academie looke Not to themselves, and shun his dangerous hooke, He hath a tricke to gull them with the show Of Sattin foreparts, Silken halfe-sleeves too. But let him looke to't, though his profits be Great to him selfe, yet his posteritie Drawn from ye loyns of this broad-spreading tetter, I'm so resolv'd, will never thrive the better. Next him the Country Boar comes leering in, So simple-seeming s he knew no sin; But he that holds him so's a simple man, For he can cheat as well as others can: Yea he that holds him so let him but try him, And he will finde himselfe no gainer by him. He makes a shew, that so his tricks may passe, That he can hardly tell to Michaelmas, And so precise, some will not stick to say, He will not lend his Bull on Saboth Day: Yet for Oppression, Biting usurie, Rapine, Extortion, hatefull Simonie, He scorns that any one should put him downe In Court, in University, or Towne. Yet see this Erwig, How he starves himselfe, For all his substance and injurious pelfe; The more he has the more he seemes to lack, Indebted both to Bellie and to Back: For his hid trash he labours so to smother, He'l neither feed the one nor cloath the other. But leave him to himselfe; for such as these May be compared to Hermocrates,
Who when he saw sad deaths approaching houre, Did make himself his own Executour; And being ask'd the reason, did reply, I got my wealth, who should dispose't but I? But eye me yon Church-Chuffe, how broad he struts, With thighs and legs ore-pentis'd by his guts! A furmall apish timist, who delights In fauning on our rising favorites; Who once profest compassion to the poor, Bolts charity and pity out of door. A zeale-pretending halting Laodicean, O Mountebank adulterate Physitian, Who with's infectious drugs corrupts his sheepe, And with his leaden-Sermons makes them sleepe. If a sound Lay-Divine profoundly write, His worke▪ gets scarce admittance to his sight: For this spruce-damask▪ Cassoked Divine, Will have no books divulged in his time, But such as relish of his oyle-spent Lampe, Though like base bulloigne they deserve no stampe. Thus Ignorance must censure what we doe, Raze and deface our choicest Labours too: So as this Aenobarban Bacchanist For th' Presse is now made sole Monopolist: Fo there's no Author without Achans wedge May ever hope to get his priviledge. If this be longer suffer'd, I professe To make my Trunk my Print, my Oleum quod impendi circa vineam, immisi in Scrinium. Deske my Presse.
He has confest he counts it as no sin By th' window to a Living to get in, For he has presidents of divers men That doe the like, and he will follow them. But if he see a vertnous exemple, It's not so soon admitted to his Temple. Well, if Oppression, Rapine, Injury, Equivocation or Church-Simony, Ambition, Assentation, Insolence, Licentious life, and loose Non-residence May under Church-mens copes securely fight, I vow to God I'le be made Deacon streight; For there is no Profession in this Nation Save this, for such crimes may get dispensation. Now shield me deare Justinian! who comes here! O Sir, I know you by the Robes you weare: That conscript habit cannot shroud your sin, Unrip your case, Sir, shew me what's within. Shall I be your Anatomist? I will, And squeaze your ulcerous corrupted ill. This Lime-hound hath disparaged the State By his injurious judgement, and with hate Of God and all good-men, as well appears, Grows rich by Orphans cryes and Widows tears. He may for forme-sake to the Temple goe, Because he hath no other thing to doe, But it is only done to take a nap And thank God for't: he sleeps i'th Churches Lap. Bribes have so stuff'd his Cushion none can wake him Till wrath and fury dog and overtake him.
Hee'd hug Astraea if she were a Whoor, But being pure, he kicks her out a door. Hee's in such grace, he scorneth opposition, Conscience hee'l harbour upon no condition. His chap-fallen chin is shrunk below his Navell, Yet hugs he gold till's mouth be fill'd with gravell. He limits his nice Dame, what she shall pay For this or that, who hopes to see a day When his corrupted corpse reduc'd to dust Shall give free scope to her restrained lust. But note yon politick State-underminer, Of Machiavels opinions late refiner; How he condemns those Apes which went before, Yet to be censur'd he deserves far more Then all the rest: For hath not he confest, And made himself as guilty as the rest? He taxeth them of opennesse (poor Elfe) When he incurres like weaknesse in himselfe. So as I think, whats'ere he seem to know, Hee's lesse in substance then he is in show. Tracing the clouds with Aristophanes, He comes farre short of Aristomanes, Who strait-immur'd, as stories doe report, Within a ragged Rock, an aged Fort, When he with other noble Captains were In Lacedemon kept close prisoner; To free them from these unrelenting Rocks, For shame (quoth he) Let's imitate the Fox, Who were he here, hee'd gain him libertie, Let's not come short of him in policie.
No more they did, for digging those rag'd shelves, Within short time they after freed themselves. But this State-polititian works his ends, By making all he treats with his firme friends; And with pretence of Conscience ties them to him, Caufing thē think he's same man he doth show him: But I make little doubt, when these have tride him, But they'l decest him, having once descride him. "This Ile avouch, and stand to 't when I've done, "He that is friend to all, is friend to none. Let him then gull his friends, engrosse his sin, Till he have no friend left to burie him. But hold sides that ye burst not, luck befall Thi Paracelsi an Chimick-Urinal! Who would not laugh to heare him cry, the Stone, The Stone, the Stone, as if he had just none? Or that his paine had caus'd him shw the madder, By reason of some gravell in his bladder. But'las, poor seered thing, he cannot see His▪ Chymick-works will ever usefull be. For though he once presumed on his wits, To turne Spits, Jacks and brazen Candlesticks Into pure gold, his muddie braines grow wearie, "Brazers may use their trade in Lothberrie. This Cricket now is turn'd a water-caster, Since which blest time his wealth grows daily faster; For as he vaunts, where ere he make resort, Bee't to the City, Country or the Court He's only priz'd and had in all esteeme, Yet knowes not what the Rules of Physick meane▪
If this be so, it cannot be denide, Under his hand but many men have dide, So as no other reason see can I, But that the Lawe should censure him to die: An Homicide is hang'd if he kill any, What sense is't he should live has kild so many? Thus have these Apes display'd them, so could I If I my tricks would labour to descry; But this my feare is, if I should descry them, By their discovery some might profit by them; Which would much grieve me, such an one I am, As I nere wish'd for good to any man: Yea I may sweare, I know not one alive That with my heart I could desire to thrive. But if I might impeach their name; Ide doe it, Or doe them any harme, Ide quickly show it: Their iputation is my joy, their hurt The only pleasant game that makes me sport. When Timon, my deere friend, once chanc'd to see A mans wife hanging on a wild-figtree, O (quoth he) It would Timon highly please That ev'ry bough brought out such fruit as these; For then our wives would sing a silent dittie, And we should need no uck▪ stools in the Cittie! The like wish I; nor doe I only wish To wan kinde that heavie doome of his, For I'm indifferent for sexes both, This could I never love, and that I loth▪ Aesope I hug, and I doe honour him, Who in a tale brought Arist. de part. . l. 3. c. 2. Mmus chasing in;
And in reproofe of nature did proceed, For setting Bulls-horns rather on his head Then on his shoulders, being stronge-rpart; In which respect preferd he curious art Before the hand of nature: for, quoth hee, Such over sights in Art Wee seldome see. His steps I follow, for I tartnesse show To th' choicest works of art and nature too: Nothing can please me in this globe of earth But others woes, whose moans afford me mirth. If on a learned worke I chance to looke, Though I've no judgement I can taxe the booke, And call the Author for his paines a foole, Yet past two Months I never went to Schoole. By meancs whereof, and home-bred education, One taught me th' rules of a Prognostication; Streight by direction from an Erra pater, I knew ech distinct Planet and his nature. Which known, I could not brook my Country well, But in acquaintance with some Gipsies fell; Whose chiefest Bung and Captain now I am, And held in Palmistrie the only man: Where though I cannot sing the Gipsies song, I am as merrie as the day is long. For if a Milk-maid come to me and crave, Ide tell her when she shall a Husband have; Or an old Chrone, that I to her would show, Whether she must out-live her Grub or no; Hows'ere their fortune be, better or worse, My dainty-Doxie nim away their purse;
With which we merrie make and bravely rore, With some stolne Pullen that we have in store. Truth is, since I kept square with these, I find My selfe and my affections worse inclin'd Then ere they were before; nor do I care, "They that fare well may reputation spare. "He must be stain'd, consorts with such s these, "He that lies downe with dogs must rise with flees. Thus in each Village I and my ragg'd nation With canting gibrish doe we make our station; In Corporations we doe seldome tarrie, Because of Statutes to the contrarie. For other Coasts such Officers we find, That though they see us, yet they will be blind; For now and then, they'r such kind▪ natur'd men, They will not stick to eate with us a Hen. But I repent me, I so much have said, Lest some that heare me, come to learne my trade. To the State-Critick. WHy, who are you? whence came you? what's your name? That you should taxe the State, or touch her fame?
Is it your manners Sir, to chide great men, And with your tarter lines to nettle them? Admit you meet with some that nere did good; As deepe in sinne, as they are high in blood, What priviledge have you receiv'd from us To mixe your Inke with gall and Copprice thus? Are you a man of such account I pray, As th' State should notice take of what you say? Have we not in this famous Ile one Sage, Nor one Wise Master in this latter age, That can reprove the errours of our time Without the help of your caprichious Line? Is now your rurall straine of Melibaeus Mixt with Thersites humour or Tirteus? Are great mens crimes your Subject? and must they Tast of your Whippe, when they doe goe astray? But let us heare how you your spleene expresse, Which Sir implyes your male-contentednesse. Some have so blushlesse and soshamelesse beene, To let their Coach and foot-cloth Horse be seene At common Strumpets dores; to rouze a whoor; Why, I have seene this Critick, and much more: And vaild my bonnet, with Godsave your Honour. Just as his Lordship came dismounted from-her And I conniv'd at this, and would not see, Though light was not more manifest to me Then his Licentious actions: now must you Bring these concealements to a publique view? I know a Lord with choicest gifts enricht Who, as report goes, is of late bewitcht,
And to a Doctor goes to cure those spels, But they that know him, think 'is something elss. And will not stick vnder the Rose to speak That this same Docter is (indeed) his Tweak. But what have they or I to doe with him? If it be so, 'tis but a Lordly Sin. Many have beene, and so no doubt will be, Bewitcht with Objects meaner farre then she. Yet I'me resolv'd they judge not fare amisse, Who say that he's Bewitcht, for so he is: For who, unlesse drawne in by some impostor, Would such a Bluse to his dishonour, fostr? Now were it fit, like Glow- wormes, to discover Matings and meetings of so great a Lover? Admit you know exortion in the Land, In officers corruption under hand, Symony, Brocage, Rapine, Sacriledge, May you not see the Age grant priviledge To such State- epidemicall diseases? "What profit gets, it generally pleases. Why Sir, I see as much as you can see, For my whole life is Albions scrutinie: In City, Court and Country I doe want For no intelligence, for I doe hant Wth circumspection every nooke and angle, And how our State-impostors doe intangle Our unexperienc'd New- comes; I observe it, And how they'r honour'd most that least deserve it. All which I could display, and draw the lines Of all their actions to succeeding times
To make men wonder at, but pray thee, say, Would this reclaime these State. moats any way? Or dart a blush in any of their faces? Or make them wearie of their purchas'd places? Or strike a terrour in their conscience? Or reinstall lost justice to her Bench? Would it make one man good that now is evil? Or weane one soule from serving of the devill? Lasse no Sir; Though from God you have your warrant, And faithfully perform his sacred arrant, When so small benefit is wrought by th' Pulpit, Doe you by Satyrizing hope to help it? Is all the Tribe of Lvi so farre short Or shallow to improve, reprove, exhort, As they must silenc'd be, while you begi To taxe their Coat, because they taxe not sin? You are too bold, Sir, in your fluent straine, And tenders that which none will entertaine: For doe you thinke we live in such an Age A Clrgie man will loose a Parsonage Before he scourge not sinne? it cannot be; For how should he relieve his familie, His hopefull Olive branches with his Spouse, With all the holy Meynie of his house; If he should not dispnce with his Creatour, And smooth the sinne of his Impropiatour? Or that an Officer in any Court, Will rectifie himselfe by your report; Or purchase to his soul least hope of blesse By  of a poore man one fee lesse?
For though Extortion be, I grant, a sin, This couse would goe well neere to begger him: A place that at o deare a rate is bought, Must be imploy'd for gaine, not sold for nought. Or that a Lawyer should his practise make Lesse for himselfe, then for his Clyents sake? Or use that glibberie member of his Tongue, To further right, and not to bolster wrong? For so he should grow out of practise quite, And wrong himselfe, by doing others right. For right and wrong though they contraries be, Yet wrong does right, if it bring in a fee? Or a Physitian, whose Empyrick Hand Must kill downe right before he understand, Should apprehend remorse, when, as by doses He weighs his Physick out, but not the losses Of his abused Patients, who with grones Must loose their lives and substance both at once: These haning novght to give must be forsaken, And if they die the care is quickly taken? Or a Civilian, though Conscience be Th Oject of his Law, will loose his fee, Or not protract a Cause and make a sturre By plodding some impertinent demurre: For he such store of Presidents can show, That their examples tell him what to doe, And will secure him: onely let pretences Guilded with sanctity disguise offences. Or that a Rorr will his Oathes forbeare Or shudder when he does Gods judgements heare;
O leave his Brothells, or his midnight revells, O leave consorting with his femal Devels? For so he should abandon all his joy, And loose the Title of a roing Boy; No, Sir, these taskes surpasse a Critick straine, And make him wash the Blackamoore in vaine. Yet I persade me, you xprest your zeale In your dimensions, to the Commonweale; And that your meaning was to waine the State From some of that which all good people hate. But where sinne's grow to ripenesse, you must know Good meanings and intentions will not doe: So delicate ae these corrupted times, As none must taxe or taint heir swlling crimes. But tell me in good sadnesse what's the cause, To think your Lives more powerful then our Lawes? If an Oppressor hatefull Contracts make, Our Laws can bring him like a Beare to th' stake; The Cunningst Church thief be he neere so great, When once detected for a Counterfeate, Must not uncensur'd passe, nor any one Who in a civill State shall throw a Bone. So as in my Opinion from the State Such Stigmaticks doe highly derogate, Who judge their Muse mongst men t' have more command, Then all the Lawes and Statutes of our Land. But to remove this Error, I thinke fit If any one have mind to shew his wit, That in obscurer manner he disclose it, Least too much plainenesse make the Satyr lose it.
This moved some, as in their works we find, In Hieroglyphicks to expresse their mind, Or like choyce Heralds to finde out a Crest Fitting the forme and nature of the Beast As some of our spruce-silken Curtaine Lords Who shew their worth in their imperious words Have beene displaid and shadow'd to their shame, Yet know not who nor where they wounded them. "But most of these their Dingity have lost, "And can of nought but painted  boast, This Course was held at first, and ever since The freest from distaste and from offence. For when we darkely write, thanks be to Heav'n, So small a portion of conceit is given To our Magnifico's, as when they read us, They understand us not, or never heed us; Which happy ignorance secures our pen, And makes them laugh at us, that nettle them. In these darke colours have I drawn the shapes Of vicious Silke- wormes in this Age of Ape. Which shadow'd with a Vision, may doe good To purge, if not to purifie the blood. Nor would I have this to be held in me Weaknesse of courage or timiditie; For in a Cause where I intend to do Service to God I ne're did terror know. Nor doe I see ought in this vale of tear, Which should beget in me such fruitlesse feare. The Substance I enjoy, I nre did gather, But as a Birth-right left me by my Father;
For had my fortunes hung upon my care, My part had com'd unto an easie share. But what I now possesse, be it more or lesse, I never wsh God may it longer blesse Then I shll-willingly forgoe the same, To honour God and magnisie his name. Nor is my health so good that I should feare, When s'ere 't please God, my dissolution here. Besides, gray-hayres have caus'd me change my song, Assuring me my dayes cannot be long: Should I then in my Glorious Makers sight, Play servile Sycophant or Parasite? Should I now when my one foot is in grave, Learne the obsequious posture of a knave? Should I contemne my Soule when death is nie, Or complement when I should learne to die? Should I who ne're could fawne in all my dayes, An unjust Man against my conscience praise? No, heav'ns forbid! that I should taxe that thing In Subjects, which I would not in a King? Or praise that in a King, which I'le not doe Even in his Groome or meanest Subject too? For howso're our Statists Some times frowne Seeing those darling vices of their owne Touch't to the quicke, yet why should good men feare Such Impes who Sattin in and out side weare? No, in that cause where I desire to please My gratious God, I scorne the threates of these. But I returne unto my Critick now, And will informe him too what he shall doe.
I know the Sate, Sir, desperately sick, Where some Sores should be Lanced to the quick, For they must not bee smooth'd or smeer'd with Oyle, Least they attract a more impressive soile: But how should this be done, or how applde, Before the member grow quite mortifide? An art-full and experienc'd hand were fit, And to that active hand a pregnant wit. A grave and serious outside too would prove That they were types of what their selves did move: For him unfit I hold to chastize sin, Whose youth admits no downe upon his chin. He should be of authority and power If he would be a powerfull monitour, For such mens words like nayles enforce our passion, Struck by the Rulers of a Congregation. Yea this our owne experience doth teach, We eye as much the person as the speech: For if he be a man of worth or prize, Speake what he will his person makes it wise. Besides, that life of his should be approv'd, That his example may be better lov'd: For it redounds unto the Teachers shame To taxe, when he is guilty of the same. Who aymes to shoote his shaft at many men, My chance to hit himselfe too, now and then, Unlesse he blamelesse be, which is so rare, As to seeke such our labours we may spare. Lest then this frumpe should in our dish be laid, Phisitian cure thy selfe (as hath been said,)
Our Lifes should forme our Lines, that after times May say, our Lifes did paralel our Lines. But why should we pursue this fruitlesse taske By striving Great-mens errors to unmaske? Their discontent may by some censure move us, But them we cannot hurt, so far above us. I hold it best then Critick, we begin To let these Peers take their Careere in sin, While we restraine our liberty of pen, Untill we see Gods judgement waken them. Have we not known of late some raised high, That they with more disgrace and shame might die? Who would have thought in such a civill State (I rather touch't because it chanc'd so late) That Witch of Endor, who (I thinke) had force In magick- art much like my crop- ear'd horse, Of whom 'twas propheci'd (I can assure ye) Three yeers agoe, that he should die in furie, Should be ith' Street with stones & brick-bats slain. And not one known of all that bandlesse train, Who murdred him? Sure 'twas his profuse sin, Which when he would not mend, God met with∣him But let him rest, they do exceeding ill Who rake him from his ashes with their quill: He troubled us enough ere he was slaine, It were not well to raise him up againe. Should we peruse the Actors and the Crimes Both of preceding and succeeding times; To what command their Soveraignty extended, And with what shame and misery it ended;
What glory they exprest, and how their state Was blemish'd by their fault, not by their fate: What port they bore, yet in the end no gainers, But split themselves, and ruin'd their reteiners. We would admire Gods lawful judgements shown No lesse on other States then on our own. See those Sicilian tyrants, how their power Still labours one another to devoure Envie wrought with suspicion, both conspi'd With hot revenge: to have what they requir'd, Yet what effect produc'd these plots to all Those state-aspiring Flyes but timelesse fall? Though Caesar with victorious honor come To be sole Monarch ore triumphant Rome, And ride in 's Ebor to be seene of all, A stab will serve him in the Capitall. "Much have I seene▪ yet seldome seene I have "Ambition go grayheaded to his grave. This then (State- Critick) would I thee advise, "To leave to God the censuring of vice; But if thou needs must shew thy wood- bred nature, Let it be shrouded in a shadow'd Satyre.
The Apes Censure. EXcellent Apes; yee have your selves displaid, Now heare what shal againe to you be said. And first for you grand- gull, whose ayrie vants Consist of Titles and of Sycophants, I here degrade you, and injoyne you more, To live as private as you did before You came to greatnesse: they that cannot tell How to demeane themselves when they are well, Must by severer meanes be brought unto it, I doe this to reclaime you, pray you show it. For you licentious fleshly Libertine Who in delghts surfeit away your time, Go from our presence; wee have here eow To traine our Lords in lightnesse besides you. Cynthia's pure rayes should not be dark't by those Who live like Venus friends, but Vesta's foes; Retire, Retire, your follies are descride, And live from us till you be mortifide. For you Vaine- glorious Ape, you doe appeare So proud, we cannot brooke your being here. God hath ordain'd before the heav'nes begin, A fall for Pride, A punnishment for Sin;
The proud are ever plagu'd by prouder ones▪ "There must be had sharpe Steele to smooth roug ston Leave us, you are not for us, nor be wee For you, or yours, till you more humble bee. For you, my prettie Guga, whose vaine fancie Hath brought you to a carlesse, curelesse Phrensie, I will not censure you, for as it seemes You understand not what a Censure meanes; Yet that you be restrain'd, I hold it fit, Till diet and restraint restore your wit. Which done, yo may regain your former freedom, "For mad-braind boys our court doth litle need'e For you, new fangle Jack, whose aymes aspir To gaudie and fantasticall attire, For your abuse both to the State and us, Wee censure you and your distemper thus. Till you a fashion finde, rome too and fro, That may content our hum'rous gallants so As they shall never change that fashion more, But keepe them still to that which you bring ore. For you rare Ape, your observation's such, I cannot well admire your worth too much; Yet I may partly guesse what is your ayme, And I will labour to effect the same. It's your ambition to beget esteeme, In publique places to be heard and seene, And so you shall; for trust me you shall b Reer'd on a publique place, the Pillorie. Now my sweete Ape, how brisk my Courtier goes▪ A if for want of feete he went on ' toes?
ou, or I much mistake me, make a sport o buy and sell our Offices in Court; ur Imposts too you fame for such a sum, And glory in your tricks when you have don. For which, neat Sir, you shall y th' heele be laid, Till restitution to the State be made. For you rich City- Ape, who can devour Poore Widows houses, cheat your Creditor, And by Protections bearing such a date, Wipe others of their owne, inhance your State; These I suppresse; and if it shall appeare Your Sonne was not estated a whole year fore you broke, your Creditors shall share: time of Pious Works you must take care. For you penurious drudge, who pores one earth, And joyes in nought but in your Countrey dearth; entie poore Soules you weekely shall maintain, During which time you shall not sell a graine; or ths 's the ayme which I doe levell at, The leane Kine are to feed upon the fat: or if the fat yeeld not the leane supplie, The fat may ryot, but the leane will die. For you Law list, for Law are in your fist, uling our Courts of justice as you list; You shall be spar'd for climing up our stayres, etake you now unto your private prayers: time this Labell shall be writ and hung pon your Gowne, to manifest our wrong: "For love of bribes, and for contempt of right, My Master is become Anacorite.
For you Church-gat, who can observe the time▪ And make your Goat a cover for your crime; Who Church Revenues with your tricks inhance, And pride you in your blockish ignorance; Who to oppression and extortion fold, Dishonour God, idolotrize your gold: Since gold (my Prelate) is to you so deere, To India go, you shall be Bishop there. For you Sir Politick, you are so wise I know not well what Project to divise To keepe your Brains a worke; but for a space My Pleasure is that you doe leave this Place, And not returne, untill you understand What causeth dearth of money in our Land; What way our best commodities doe go, And whether they bring back as good or no. For you my Chimick Ape, I muse you would Pore in a glasse and lose your hope of gold; But let this passe: I heare you have no skill, And that in curing one, you twentie kill; Which to redresse, I have by Act decre'd, Your Urinal be broken on your head: And that you be indited of manslaughter If ere you practise rules of Physick after. Now for my Critick Ape, that Demopho Who sweats i'th shadow, shudders in the Sun, Who never saw that man in all his dayes He could finde in his heart to love or praise; He with his Gypsies is so fitly mated, He will be taken hold on by the Statute.
Mean time let, him by Foists and Bungs be friended It is not long till he must▪ be suspended. Be gon, my Censure shall not be disputed, This is decree'd and must be executed. Affrighted with the Censure of each Ape, Fearing my selfe were one I did awake; But finding it a dreame I thought it fit, Only for pastime-sake to publish it. Similis mihi Simia nulla est.
Upon the Censure of his Vision. SOme Familist or punctuall Precisian Will sleight this worke, because it is a Vision; Saying, "That Visions are deceitfull things, "And to distraction our affection brings; "That this Luciferan Spirit takes the shape "(To gull th' imagination) of an Ape. Whence he inferres, to prove these Visions evil, That this same Ape is an incarnate devil; All which I grant, but likest of all other When he resembles such a Zealous Brother. Truth is, for sinns survey, who would descry it Must closly doe't, or soone be censur'd by it; Whereas 'twere 'gainst all reason, that to Prison One should be sent for s of a Vision. But whether I be censured or no, This will I say and you shall finde it so; Viewing these grosse abuses of your minde, This for a grounded maxim you shall finde: Of all the Tyrants which the world affords, Your owne affections are the fiercest Lords.Ista Pomata. non sine lepidula Genii saceti primùm Conscripta fuere; An. Dom. 1625.
The life of POLYMORPHUS SIMIANUS Author of this Poem. POlymorphus Simianus a Floren∣tine born, a younger brother, but well descended; and during his minority, in all generous & free-born Studies trained. He was naturally affected to Poeie; from the delight whereof his Father being of  esteeme in Florence, la∣boured to waine him▪ by diverting his course that way, and importuning him to the study of the Law. Whereto having for some yeares applyed his minde, he grew in short time indifferently furnished. Neither was his pra∣ctise lesse▪ usefull. then his knowledge fruitfull. Albeit inwardly  could never relish nor palat that professi∣on; being, as he termed it, a practise whose materiall were extracted from extortion: yet to give all possible content to his father, he ever extended his best endea∣vour, ly to further what he could not favour. Being now growne a pretty good proficient in a professi∣on
contrary to his element; you shall heare upon wh occasion he became degraded, from the benefit of  practise excluded, and by a judicial, though incomp∣tible censure, silenced. Pleading one day with great ve∣hemencie for his friend Farnesio, a Citizen of appro∣ved honesty, and whose cause deserved no lesse successe; being in the judgement of the whole Court, grounded vn equity and uprightnesse: He perceived the Judge of the Court to be more indulgent to the Advers part;  the more he pressed it, the more did the Judge sleight and disvalue it. Wherefore being without expectancs of reliefe for his much injured friend, as one  transported with passion, to see corruption seated  the throne of Judgement; or transpierced with a∣ction, to see his honest friend so highly wronged, with a spirit no lesse resolved then enraged, he thus  the Judge▪ My Lord, quoth he, my comfort is, thogh this gentleman my clyent, be by your Lordship inju∣riously censured, the date of your commission for sitting on Judgement is almost expired; so as our hope is, by your Successour we shall be redressed. Expired (said the Judge) how doe you means  I meane (replied Simianus) you are at the point of death. Your reason, (quoth the Judge) for I feale no such matter in my selfe. The more dangerous is your malady (answered Simianus;) for diseases in∣sensible are ever held most incurable: but to resolve your doubt with an infallible reason; your Lord∣ship knowes it is an ancient sacred ceremony herein Florence, as in all other Catholique Countrie, for
sick immediatly before the approching in∣ of their dissolution, to receive from a religi∣ous man thereto ordained and consecrated, extreme ction. The Judge perceiving whereto his meaning , covertly implying corruption by those words f extreme unction, with present passion transported,  him forthwith to depart the Court, in these words. Sir: for your small reverence to this place, heare your censure. So long as the State of Florence shall authorize me to sit in this Seat of iudgement, I injoyne you Silence, to caution others by your example to shew more reverence. No  was this heavie Censure pronounced, then Simianus left the Court; allthough he had many friendly Oraters, who with their best perswasive Rheto∣rick laboured to mitigate the Judges censure; whom they found steeled with relentlesse rigour. About this  when Simianus was silenced, his father died; by hose death he was more troubled, then with his for∣mer sentence disqeted: for of such generall esteeme  I formerly noted) was this old man, as he was no lesse for his wisedome and judgement approved, then for his discreete carriage and amiable conversati∣on generally loved: so as his vertues gain'd his progeny ch honour in Florence. Simianus being thus by publique censure from hope of future preferment ex∣cluded; of his fathers advice, whose pietie was a mir∣ror to his familie deprived; and in some debts by rea∣sons of his ta affable▪ or easie disposition engaged; being brought to these straits, as one doubtfull where to re∣tire:
it fortuned, even then when he had resolved pri∣vately to convey himselfe from Florence, and expose himselfe to some forraine adventures; to fall in ac∣quaintance with a Zealous brother of Amsterdam; with whom in short time he grew so familiar, a none but HE was of his Cabinet councell. Away he must goe with him, so powerfully had his zeal wrought with him, unto Amsterdam; where, as he pre∣tended, he was a merchant of especiall note, ranke, and quality. Simianus, who had even from his infancy, an excellent art of insinuating into mens knowledge, pro∣fessed; that howsoever other occasions of maine conse∣quence had reason to avert his resolution from that course, yet so farre had the opinion of his sanctity, the grounded conceit of his sincerity, and those tyes of fa∣miliar society and sociable amity prevailed with him, as he would leave his Countrey with hope of all promo∣tion, meerely for love of such a Zealous and faithfull Companion. At Amsterdam within few Months after they arrived; where Simianus found as many re∣ligions, as the world had regions; or the Gergason pos∣sessed with Legions; but in principall esteeme grew he with a devout fraternity, by meanes of this Zealous Merchant; who made him acquainted with all those mysterious rites used and practised by that Saintly Society Within short time, being a proper man and wll approv'd of by the Sisterhood, who had their free voices in the election of every Officer; he stood in Ele∣ction for a place, which they call the Emunctorie; the speciall charge whereof is this. At a certaine time,
(which upon signe given is duely observed) when the Conventickle is full, and all things in readinesse, he it to snuffe out the Candles, for the Zealous assemblie  exercise their works of lightnesse in darknesse. This Place by generall suffrage he obtained; wherein he demeaned himselfe so closely to the Sisters content, as no one Officer stood so deepe in their bookes. Nor was he lsse respected for his secrecy, then affected for his diligence and alacrity: so as one day, these Zealous Sisters with one consent resolved to prefer Simianus to a place of more creit and profit; and this should be done without the approbation of any of the fraternitie. Alledging that their prerogative was no lesse in the ele∣ction or taking in of a Brother, then theirs in admission or puting in of a Sister: so as if their Brethren incor∣porated the one, they would make bold to matriculate the other. Upon this resolution grounded, they preferred him to be Secretarie of the Conventickle; a Place of highest honour, and only recommended to such whose untainted secrecie had purchased them a singular opi∣nion of retentive fervor. This Office had these Sisters no sooner conferred on him, then the Brethren generally opposed him: saying, the Election was not to be approved, for as much as their voices were excluded: Whereas formerly, no Of∣ficer was to be admitted, unlesse he were expresly by their fraternal suffrages elected. Whence there arose such opposition, as no Conventickle was observed, no Conclave frequented, no nocturnal-rites acted, nor  due benevolence to the Sisters tendred; for the Bro∣ther
would not goe to the Synagogue without his  nor the Sister, till reconciled to her Brother: For  a maxim in their Divinity; One Sexe without  ther can never edifie. While they were th  sting and contending, Simianus, eyther with heate  passion incensed, or hate to their profession induced, disclaiming all secrecy: became an open discoverer of all their impurity, not sparing to say▪ That there  old tickling in their Conventickles▪ With which  sion the whole Fraternity being much enraged, w∣drew their Pension from him, which formerly had  duely paid him. So as now hee was left to himselfe,  repaire his fortunes by encountring with some  currents. Long had he not sojourn'd; after his expulsi∣on from the Fraternal- tribe, but hee was entertained by a Provincial Deane, who using rather to ▪  fleece, tooke more care to have his due, then discharge his duety, to receive his Tythe, then intend his ; to looke to his Tenths and gather his Rints,  ∣paire those many Ruines and Rents of his Church. Now Simianus, for want of better employment, was appointed to be his Tythe-gatherer; whereto hee  addressed himselfe with all diligent endeavour: but small profit redounded to his Master so long  hee was appointed to gather. For when any Farmer set out his rucks of Corne, whereas hee was to receive  at ten, hee shewed himselfe farre more Conscionable, receiving only one at fiftie: saying; Feede  master better then hee feeds you; hee gives you but one Sermon in fiftie weeks, render you him but one
stookes. This the avaricios Prelat soon per∣ed; so as this conscionable Gatherer, who cut such  of others Leather, was discarded, and hee gaine to seeke his fortunes, to the wide World ex∣ed. So miserable was that time wherein hee lived, with  an universall famine distressed, and through po∣nesse of the place so pestered; as hee, being a  and having no present employment to relieve or  himselfe, became much enfeebled, and likely  have perished; had not a Venetian-Merchant (one  excellent parte) received him, even then when  did most presse him, penury pinch him, and  height of all disasters surprize him. For such was  present estate, that albeit upon his returne to lorence hee could not want, being by such power∣full and eminent friends supported, and to so many flourishing families allyed; yet so high was his spirit,  hee could not endure to stoope to such basenesse as to acknowledge his want. But now by meanes of this Ve∣tian-Merchant, who tooke especiall notice of his suf∣ficiency, being by meanes of his education (as we have formerly observed) made accomplish'd in all Liberal∣iences, he was in a better way of preferment then  during his abode with that zealous Family, or  unprofitable service in that covetous Deanry; for  all trades the Merchant, and of all Merchants the Venetian, as he is highly prized for his generous rank  quality, so is hee worthily praised in spreading the  sayles of his bounty. Nor is hee lesse nobly
affected in his port and hospitality at home, then  rally-minded in his carriage and expence abroad.  this brave Merchant, Simianus long remained;  whom he was highly graced, in affayres of weighty con∣sequence imployed, and in his bosom faithfully  Where doubtlesse, he had continued, as there was  just cause to divert it, had not some unworthy instru∣ments traduced and maligned him; by suggesting to the Merchant that hee read a weekly Lecture to  faire Lady, out of Boccace. Which surmise added fuell to the Merchants jealousie, an infirmity whereto ee was naturally subject; so as presently he imagined  pillow to be stuft with horne-shavings, giving  lesse credit to their report, then if it had beene an Oracle, Such were the interchanges of inconstant fortune which ever accompanied Simianus; so as now he must encounter with new billowes, before he can come to Har∣bour. For howsoever his vertuous Mistresse, the Lady Celia, laboured to cleare her selfe from all occasion of suspicion; so deeply was this impression of jealou grounded, as no Receit so soveraigne could bee apply∣ed, no Reasons so strong or irrefellible produced, to waine him from this conceit so causlesly harboured. Simianus now perceiving, that nothing could remove his jealous Master from this unjust surmise: he resol∣ved from thenceforth no longer to accomodate himselfe to the servile dispositions of such humerous Comman∣ders, but rather to returne into his owne Countrey▪ to see what entertainment it would give him. Whole re∣solution his distempered Master no sooner perceived▪
hee, for all his jealous conceit had of him, fur∣ed him in all points, shewing especiall arguments  bounty at his departure. Wherewith Simianus  somthing encouraged, recalling to mind, how his  could not disvalue him, when they saw him so  provided. For well understood hee, that popular gements were seated in their eyes: and that out∣ habits, with some other superficiall preparation,  gaine one oft times more credit and estimation,  more deserving Ornaments. Wherefore after so∣ne leave taken of all his Comrades in Venice, hee  for Florence; whereupon his arrivall hee was,  above his expectance, with all due solemnity re∣ived; and by meanes of divers eminent and powerfull friends in the City, elected (with a liberal Pension for  Taske allotted) to take Survey of all Countreys,  in his Survey to describe the Sites and States of  Countries: the natures of their people, how affe∣d, how dsposed, & withall to compile such remarka∣ble occurrents as might seeme worthy his observation. Which Taske, after a modest reluctancy, as one more jealous then was needefull of his owne insufficiency, he undertooke; being within these few yeeres resident in  Iland, the description whereof, with the nature if her people then inhabiting, hee hath here in a Poem industriously discovered; where by way of Vision hee rns division, cleanly but closely carried, covertly sha∣dowed, and smoothly closed. Which wee likewise from his owne Originall have faithfully transcribed. Where∣in of ought bee omitted, which might give better light to
their discovery: wee are to imput-the error to  aboad and want of acquaintance to inform hi in thes parts. Neither indeede is it possible, that hee should amplifie his discourse in every particular; or  out all private abuses secretly lurking in a State. For this Taske would require his industry, who should ap∣ply himselfe to the Survey of one Countrey only. Though I confesse (so ripe are all States growne in the over∣spreading growth of all vices) as where one Country was observed more for one particular sin then another; wee shall now finde one State possessed of all those enor∣mities, which formerly were to be sought in many. For where as Pride hath beene observed to bee most conver∣sant among the Babilonians, Envie among the Jewes, Anger among the Theban,  among the Tyrians, Gluttony among the Sydonians, Sorcery a∣mong the Egyptians, and all Effeminacy among the Cretans: this labour now may bee saved, for we shall finde some one flourishing-State, whose long Peace hath fatted her in prosperitie, of all these maladies sea∣zed; But to returne to our Author, wh it may be thought by some, that hee hath sh w too  of spleene in the reproofe of sinne; they are to understand, that no faithfull Relater can be a time-observer; and that nothing so much darkens or blemishes the light of Historie, as that spreading tetter State-flatterie; be∣sides he was a stranger, and did little care for any ones Censure: which in a Poem of his owne, he no lesse lo∣gantly expresseth.
Hee who thinks I can flatter is deceiv'd, For in my youth when I instruction sought, And some small glimpse of knowledg had receiv'd, My Spirit wrestled in me as I thought, And so in time upon my weaknesse wrought, As I gave way; which giv'n, she caus'd me write, To purge the State, and scourge the Parasite. Yet so, as thou shalt never personate Or high, or low, or any one in place, Lest thou incur the censure of the State; Not men but manners thou shalt have in chace▪ Causing shame paint their vices in their face: For then this Rule, a safer there is none, "To te the sinne, but let the man alone. Be jealous what thou heares, spare in reports, For some there he who on this string doe strike, How they may vent disgrace on Princes Courts, Yet these can closly play the Parasite, And with their servile humors force delight: Which ere I'd doe. I wish with all my heart, I may hang for a Signe at Franck-fort. Mart. This well tempred resolution Hee expressed in an Anagram composed on his friends name, included  this Distich:
Virtue hath but bare credit; what's the matter▪ Because to gain a Kingdom shee'd not flatter. His honest resolution sprung from an inbred ∣sity of mind he likewise manifested to the World in this free attestation: which with a constant modest spirit he delivered in a publique resort, at the time of his restraint. Who can prohibit me abroad to tell The Crimes of such high-peeres as doe not well? Why, this Obsequious, Odious, Vicious time, That weaves a Cobweb o're a great mans crime. But Masters, would yee know how I am serv'd Whose honest actions ne're from goodnes swerv'd? "Sense by Petition hath procur'd that Reason "For writing nought but truth, should go to Prison. His well-composed temper and peaceable disposition he likewise expressed; when as being sometimes intan∣gled in Suites of Law about his Patrimonie; as One wasted with expence, wearied with expectance, and impatient of longer attendance, he thus concludeth. After this Suite, as I am now resolved, Shall be decree'd, determin'd, and dissolved,
take a long farwell of my Laws journey, nlesse it be by Proxie or Atturney; ot who from Hippocrene would Rivers draw ust not imploy his Bucket in the Law; rre from Courts clamour then I'le build my nest, smooth-composed line requireth rest. Privacy likewise He highly affected, though by sun∣ie Persons of ranke and quality mainly diswaded. S as, on a time when as Milan a Diet was intended, wherein the Peeres and Commons of the Reale were to be assmbled, redresse of all State-aggrievances generally expected▪ Writs exhibited, Bills preferred, and he for a Burgesse in the Lower House by generall Suffrage elected; yet he rejected this honour, & privat∣ly retired to his Country mannur; the reason whereof  demanded, he  returned this answer. One askt of me what might be my intent To leave the Towne in time of Parliament? Why, answered I  because I held it fit When th' City hath ingross'd the Country wit, And that scarce seven wise Masters now were left Which were not to the Parliament enfoft, That purposely I to the Country cam, Where I am held a nimble-pated man; For though a Swn's a Swan, yet when th' Swan' gon, A white-plum'd Chough is held a comely one.
Where this Author now remaines, it is diversly conjectured; some reporting him to be now at Florence, where he is made Remembrancer of the City; others report, that coasting through the Province of Cecuba, upon some disgrace offer'd by him to a Lyrick, who contended with him for the masterprize in Poetrie, he was by the inhabitants of that place surprized▪ and in a Vinepresse squezed to death: for the truth whereof I will not stand much. Let this suffice, that this Poem now published, was writ by hîm in the xxxv. yeare of his age; which being gratefully accepted, shall be by others of his works no lesse usefull (if the Manuscripts may be procured) hereafter seconded.
The Draught or Portraict of every Ape with their distinct properties, chara∣racters, and differences, expressed in se∣verall peeces. 1, THE Ape of Honour, Is to have a little Flag, Banner or Streamer in his claw, wherein are to appeare severall Coates, Armes, Crests, &c. the Emmet, Hedghog, Cuckow, Seagull, Owle, &c. The principall Crest, a Rat-Rampant: which is the only Imprezza this Ape of honour hath. 2. The Ape of Pleasure, Is expressed by sporting with a Marmosite, with this Imprezza, Dainty content. 3. The Ape of Vaine-glory, Is Characterized, or Emble∣matized thus: Hee is carried by four Apes in a Case resembling a Cabinet, windowes of each side, and all o∣pen, to discover him sitting in State; his Imprezza, Heaven upon Earth. 4. The Ape of Fancy, is expressed by hastning towards a Lure made of Feathers, Ribbands, Garters, Gloves, Rings, &c. Which Cupid winged and hovering in the Ayre is showne throwing out his Imprezza: Love is my Lure. 5. The Ape of Fashion, is expressed in his doublet and hose, phantastically made up, a plume of feathers in his head, amorously eying himselfe in a glasse; his Imprezza, I like my humor well. 6. The Ape of Observation, is expressed looking through a Trunck or Prospective; directly before the end of the
Trunck is a Dung-hill; his Imperzza, I smell a Rat. 7. The Court Ape is expressed sitting mopping in a Tree full of flourishes, above him this Imprezza; The Cinnamon Tree. 8. The City Ape is expressed as in a Rialto or Royall-Ex∣change; Tapestrie-works, Needle-works, Chaines, Gir∣dles and Hangers, Belts, &c. to life shadowed. A walke as in the Exchange, with Signes of eyther side. On the one, an Unicorn, a Bull, an Hart, a Ram, a Goate: On the other, directly opposite, a Tigre, a Panther, an Elephant, a Wolfe, a Fox; his Imprezza, What doe ye lack? 9. The Countrey Ape is expressed poring seriously upon an Almanack; his Imprezza, an Erra Pater. 10. The Church Ape is expressed fat and corpulent, a Mitre or corner-Cap upon his head; the Basis or end ofa Steeple sticking out of his mouth; his Imprezza, Silence. 11. The Judiciall Ape is expressed of meagre or sallow complexion, wasted or decayed constitution, close shaven in a Councellors Cap and Gowne, a Rowle or Scedule in his hand; his Imprezza, Ambidexter. 12. The Politicall Ape is expressed with a paire of Specta∣cles upon his Nose, a paire of Compasles in his hand, a Globe before him with a Jacob's-Staffe, with which hee measures the Globe; his Imprezza, A sound head piece. 13. The Chymicall Ape is expressed holding a payre of Bel∣lowes wherewith he stands blowing against a solid Rock: There are Kettles, Landirons, Candlesticks, &c. to bee shadowed, implying his Chymick Art; his Imprezza, Fly Brasse. 14. The Criticall Ape is expressed laughing and jeering extremely, holding his sides as one oppressed with an un∣moderate passion of Joy; his Imprezza, Hold sides 15. The Censuring Ape is portrayed according to his humor, with a rugged ridged Countenance, fiery and  eyes; corded Whipps in his hand: Looking with an eye of scorne upon the rest of the Ap, his Mott: A shots of Shallops. And pointing at them with a jeering visage clo∣seth in these words, Have among you State-Shufflers.
Parthenia's Passions. To the right Honorable THOMAS Vis∣count WENTWORTH,Afterwards Created Earle of STRAF∣FORD. Baron of Woodhouse, O∣versley and Newmarch, Lord President of the Councell esta∣blished in the North, and one of his Majesties most honourableO quando renascitur alter. Privie Councell: His thrice-honou∣red MECAENAS. The western-Knights Pasquill. MArshall! an hall there! Pray you, Sir, make roome For us poor Knights, who in the fag-end come. Mad is my Muse, and now of late affrighted Out of her wits for feare she should be Knighted.
Knighted▪ defend me, Lord, from such an honour, I shall not git whole Cloaths to put upon her. Nay, since with Knights there is so great a doo, I for my Summons will make ready too. "Come Masons, come, erect an Hospitll, Sith wee must all be Knights whom Statutes call: For England never had unto this houre More * Chevaliers for number, nor more poor. Whence many of our Russetings deplore it, That they 'r not worth so much as they paid for it. Yea, Almanacks, I feare, will beare record In Rubrick Letters, next to th' yeare oth' Lord, Which by Succeeding times will be recited, "How long 'tis since y• Commonty was Knighted. Yea, Justice vows, should she pay twenty five, She cannot doe 't with honesty and thrive; "For some of her Bench-Whistlers States be such, Their meanes & vailes will scarce raise halfe so Yea I could pick out One of these who might Be made GRAND SOPHIE full as well as Knight: "For Justice-sake this imposition wave, Lest they be forc'd to pay more then they have. But since my Pinke 'mongst others runns a shelfe, And ev'ry one is nearest to himselfe, I must debate my Cause before I go, Judge whether I speake reason, friends, or no. "May my State-lov'd MECAENAS but give way "To what the meanest of his Knights can say. Now, my good Lord, your humble Suppliant comes To know the cause why he shold pay these Sums.
`Object. "Our Princes Coronation by a Statute, "Inflicts these fines on those that were not at it: "Provided they have fourty pounds by yeare "Of free-hold Land, the Statute makes it cleare. Answ. Tis true; but this reflecteth not on me, For I was at that high solemnitie, And I'h best note my rurall Muse could sing, Tendred my Poemes to my gratious King, Object. "Yea but the Proclamation did forbid it, "You were not well advis'd then, when you did it. Answ. 'Slid, should I neither then be here nor there But like a Ball hang hovering in the ayre? O bject. No; though the Coronation wil'd you come "The Proclamation wish'd you stay at home, "You should not have cme up Sir; Answ. No more did I, For I, as fortune fell, was there allready; Where my ambitious Muse did Knighthood crave, But what I had I hold, no more I have. Discusse my Lord, then each particular, I shall be found in nought irregular. "I came not up; I broke not th' Proclamation; "The Statute 's kept; I was at Coronation; At which (I'le justify with heart and hand,) I joy'd as much as any Knight ith' Land. These duely weigh'd, your Honour Umpire be, Whether I pay the King, or King pay me. His regall  receiv'd this Muse of mine, And were this reason, think you, for my rime? I sung, my Sov'igne heard me, now wee say
The Hearer, not the Singer, usd to pay. I judge then what soe're to me is done, Is by that figure Usteron, Proteron. You for the King demand of me a fee, When it is meant that He should pay it mee. But lest this should by me too much be thought, So I goe free, my Song shall go for nought. But husht! no more; with this approv'd Position; Your constant Servant closeth his Petition; "More Knights, my Lord, your State has little need on, "Let me be a poore Country Squire to breed on. Now if these Reasons take no place, my Lord, I must Obey if you but speake the word: A Knights fee for your Honour I have heere; "Knight and no Knight; the Purchase is too deere▪ But I 'm resolv'd, my Reasons are so plaine, Your squire may with his Coine go back againe. AMPLITUDINI TUAE DEDITISSIMUS MUSOPHILUS; EBORACENSIS EQUES, EQUITUM HUMILLIMUS. * Area quot spioas, quot profert Silva myrica, Curia quot curas, Semina terrnes: Quot scatebr venas, quot  arnas, Tot Milites inope Angli .
Upon his Hon. Election of Deputation for Ireland. FOr Ireland, Lord! what will become of me? For Conscience-sake looke on my Familie. Would you receive more honour then you have; And so  those whom you may save? Is any one more earthly-blest then you? Firme friends, faire fates, brave Bards, corrivals few. And who is hee that is so richly blest Will hatch his Airy in a forraine nest? There the best Hawks, indeed, they say are bred, But there High-styers oft have perished. Those that doe love my Lord, doe hold it fit, As th' Country honours him, so should he it. Admit, my Lord, that you entitled be Yorks President, and Irelands Deputie; Where you are five yers onely to remaine, Which time expir'd you'r to return▪againe! Nay more then that, when ev'ry third Month ends, You may revisit here your constant friends;
What's this to me? while you at distance stand, I 'm forc'd to write my sorrows in the sand. "It is a weeke agoe since I did dreame, How you and I were swimming in a streame; Rough were the Billows, for the water swell'd While I for safety by a Willow held; Which you catch'd at, but, 'las, it would not be, That failed you what had supported me, For when you strove to save your selfe from Wrack, Rude-chattring Reeds (me thought) still held you back▪ "Now such as are Expositors of Dreames Might thus interpret it; "These troubled Streames Betoken danger; Willowes, friends (indeede) But such as faile us most, when most we need; Rude chattring Reeds, such as doe make a sport To blemish Honour with a base report. But dreams are dreams, & such as rightly know them Will nere give trust nor confidence unto them. But why, my Lord, should you transplanted be, And reave me of that hope supported me? 'Zlid, all the world knows you to be wise▪ And play'd ith' Parl'ament your Master prize: But whats all that? God knows what some will say In heat of hate, when you are gone away. Excuse me, Lord, my zeal conceits the worst, If I should silent be, my gall would burst. No Sycophant am I, upon my word; Ile speak as Servants should unto their Lord. Then taxe not my discretion for the matter, But praise his honesty that cannot flatter.
Here then a tatterd Knight comes sneaking in, And jeers the Honour you bestow'd on him; And swears that Diotolph Brand who look't so big, Being made Knight for rosting of a Pig, Was ne're to more desertlesse honour hurl'd, "For hee's scarce worth a Pig in all the World. Here a rack-rent Recusant cryes amaine O my deere Conscience! and repeats your name; And vowes since Abbies were dissolved heere, A Romish Conscience never cost so deere: So as you must not be, till they be freed, Pre in their Pater-noster or their Creed. Some say you'r grown to that resistless might, He is not wise dare be your opposite; For you will crush him be he nere so great, Having such free accesse to Caesars Seat; Whose gracious rayes are such, as they impart Verdure and vigour to your known desart. These and such like reports they 'l spread on you; Which, though I 'm confident, are far from true; For in that equal Scale your actions stand, As Ile avouch you just with heart and hand. Yet too maliciously will some men deem, When the wide Sea hath sever'd you from them. Nought 's left to answer for you but report, Which good men know you by, and love you for't. Alas my Lord, for Ireland! many one Have gone forth laughing, that come weeping home. Our Modern Stories have sufficient To shew, wee need no other President.
"Nor can you there doe service to your King, For, as I heare, there breaths no venemous thing: What then can Justice finde it selfe to doe? Plant rather here where there be snakes enow, "Such as deserve a Censure: "Hee that's just Must finde offenders, or his Sword will rust. Some from the height of their concealed hate Doe much maligne the fulness of your State, And say, "One day a Parliament will come, And then we hope Some will be payed home, If these, while you live here, so envious be; Judge what they'l doe when you'r beyond the Sea? Your Presence then 's the. way to make you strong, "Just men have oft through absence suffred wrong. "Pardon my boldness, Lord, the Case is such Did I not love you, Ide not speak so much. Oft to your Honor have I made resort, Yet nere Petition'd ought unless in sport; It was your selfe I sought, whose love I gain'd And that was th' only marke at which I aimd. Your choice discourse and judgement I confess, Made mee all yours, I could be nothing less. I should write more, But Seas begin to rise, And with their brinie waves o'reflow mine eyes. Thus then with firme resolve, my knee I bend, So you thereto be pleas'd to condescend: Mount to the Moon, you cannot mount from me My Muse and I will keep you companie. "Only vouchsafe a line, for if you go, England farewell, I'le be for Ireland too.
Upon his Hon. returne from Ireland. Vpon his attendance. MY Lord, I thinke I have more hours attended Then pearled Rills From Taurus ere descended. Still have those rising waters troubled him, But when He strove a greater man stept in. Scotch▪ Irish, English in such numbers came, As none would deigne to tell your Servants name: "Well, my good Lord▪ though you'r the Heir of time, "That I'm the same, peruse this troth-plight ryme, Vpon his admittance. BLessed Patrick, are you come To your long-expected home? None I sweare ere came here To my leaping heart more deere Saving my dread Soveraigne In his wish'd returne from Spaine. Saile not from  back againe▪ Unlesse it bee your Princes aime,
But amongst your owne remaine, "This is the Prayer of your Swaine. 'Zlid you've discharg'd that taske for which you went, Live now unto your owne a President. For the Right Honorable CHARLES HOVVARD, Commander in chiefe over Cumberland, Westmerland, and Northumberland, Upon the Decimation. DEign Sir, in your perusall of these lines, "To cleare their Score, who'r cleare of all Designes: "Which crowns your Honor; when those Shires that beare "Your fair Commands, are only now found cleare. Though change of State, no doubt, some level'd at, Twixt hopes & feares: But husht! no more of that. Assess'd afresh! what have we done or said That this new Taxe should on our States be laid? Deare Goldsmiths Hall six tedious yeares ago Brought the Revenues of our State so low`
As with Rent-Charges, we may safe aver, Some of our Lands ly now in Lavender. Such is the Burthen our condition feeles, As we can scarcely keepe our Cart oth' Wheeles. Weigh our calme temper too, how all our time We made the Muses Ward-robe our designe: And those who were not qualifide that way, For Grazing or for Culture made assay. No Project nor State-action plundg, our braine, "To know God and our selves was our sole aime. And merits this a Censure, pray you say! Must our Retirement this Assesment pay? To th' world we appeale!—where we doe live, Our precious Minutes are contemplative. Our thoughts act not for Changes: our content Is to dispose our Soules to th' government Of their affections: They that have arriv'd And seene as many yeeres as we have liv'd, Should make 't their onely taske their souls to save: And in e'ch pace to measure out his Grave. This, is our Warfare: if 't be held unfit Teach us some other Trade, weel practise it. But to finde out a safer way then this Trace Heaven and Earth, we know not where it is. This all Saints us'd, where were we joyn'd in one, Wee 'd hold our Passage happy to be gone. Weake be our nerves and arteries to fight, "Heav'ns Ord'nance is the Shot gives us delight: And in these aged-deafned Eares sound louder Then any Shot that takes his Charge from Pouder.
From the first Nonne major nobis concedenda est gratia, amplior Cle∣mentia primo a Bello cessantibus & pacificè degenti∣bus, quam iis, qui in Castris assidue fuerunt versati us∣que ad ultimum Worcestriae certaminis exitum? Warre some have not struck astroke But from the Campe betook them to their booke. Or if their profit did not that way look, They plide the Plough-share or the Sheepheards Crooke, For we collected by our Conquering Foes, What Heav'n decreed 't was folly to oppose. For this, our Composition has beene payd, Wherein his GRACE afforded One such ayd, That even in Gold-smiths Hall He did apply His hand, and sought their fine to qualify: Had not a Ridge of Hasles stood ith' way And with a rough obstruction rais'd his pay. "Burn't Child fire dreads: Our pennance has beene such, We acted little, but wee suffer'd much. Had no mans hand beene Conscious of more guilt, Much blood had beene preserv'd, that has been spilt. Some of us may be Hermits for our yeares, There 's no occasion then from us of feares. Besides, SOME Prickt, though not personally summond. Justices were call'd of late, Which would sound harshly to a ruin'd State. Doe not Assesse us then, vnlesse 't be showne; That we enjoy more fortunes then our owne; Much lesse, I'me sure, then we might justly claime: "Heav'ns steere our Bark in this tempestuous Maine.
`Your self 's the North-Starre yt directs our Saile, Geere our Land-voyage with a prosperous Gale. Pensions, Debts, Portions have our States so reft, Like Banbery Cheese, there 's nought save pairings left: And if we must both Crum and Crust forgo Wee'l welcome want, because heav'n order'd so; In hope, when you these Golden Mines obtaine, These Taxes shall be paide us back againe▪ But Grace appeares!—th' Instructions give consent That those who entertaine this Government With a Compòsed and Submissive will Should be exempt from this Assessing Bill: And, sure, Experience taught us so much wit To know what Soveraignty is, and to submit. Wee'r now become Good Boyes (thanks be to God) First take correction, after kisse the Rod. "They who intend t'improve their Means at Court "Must take a wrong and give a Congie for 't. Tender the favour these instructions shew, "So yours prey not on us, wee 'l pray for you: Wishing with all our hearts, Heav'n would decre Our Purse as full, as wee'r of Charitie. If all this will not doe, we hope our Zeale Unto the State will grant us an Appeale; Wherein by plea if we appeare not free, May this same Grand Assesse re-doubled bee. But rather then offend, wee'l meekly fall Under your Doome, without Appeale at all. —This renders no disgust; So you reprive us, Wee'l try what benefit the Law may give us;
Wherein if we unfortunately slip, Wee'l hold th' Adventure worse thenShould a Case of Necessity he urged; the like was in that Argument of Ship-money pretended: and by some of our judicioust and sincerest Judges evinced and held illegall. HAMDENS Ship. Should none of all these Arrows hit the marks, But like Tiresias Shafts be shot ith' darke; Our onely way to cement this Division Is to officiate and take th' Commission. Which, if it may with your affection sute, To th' Tenure of that Writ, wee'l execute: And doe as justly too, or wee'd be sory, As wee were dealt withall,—so ends the story▪ After his Assesse at Penrith; Addressed to his Honour. January 31. 1655. HOw now! Mount I to twenty pounds Assesse, When my Rint-charges rise to such a rate As no inferiour Judgement could hold lesse Then free indulgence to my squiezed State? You doom, I melt; shall I the Cause impart? Your Honours civill usage won my heart.
Yet that those Grounds were good I stood upon, Peruse these Reasons, Sir, and I have don. What's twenty pounds Assesse to him that may Improve the State more by his Pen then Pay; When He to forraine Nations shall make knowne The Bounty and great Pity you have showne To State-Delinquents! when with face to face They 'r look'd upon like Children of Grace. As th' late Act of Oblivion seem'd to approve, That we were all One Familie of love. Thrice Sacred Cement! when Revenge must cease; And Patience smile on forepast Injuries. By which your Fame might to Successions ring; "To have Power and not to doe, 's a noble thing: A Princely-Lyon Ire: when hostile force Puts off the Roabs of Rage, and donns Remorce. No Marble, Topaz, Ivory, Thracian Stone Could reare you Shrines more to be look't upon; Nor more admir'd: Statues are works of time, True worth admits no period nor decline. Now to my selfe;—Should I in briefe relate The forme of th' Spartan or the Theban State In their necessitous times; you might perceive What Priviledges they to Pen-men gave: For by theirPanorm. de Jure Civili. C. X. Conrad. de Magi∣strali discip. C. 5. Palud. de Antiq. Leg. L. 3. C. 6. Carnead. de Princip. Regim. C. 8. Paragraph. 7. Pelarg. in Quaest. Aristocrat. fol. 30. Camerar. de Gest. Orient. Li. Z. C. 6. Annals I shall make 't appeare From all Assessments They exempted were.
First, that their Writings might disperse their Fame; Next, that their Penns more gingerly might blame The Errors of those times: and Palliate In a smooth Style th' Abuses of the State: Seeking by artfull secret mists to smother The Soile of Sinne, but to display the Other. Sometimes have I extoll'd you in this sort, And if too much, pray God forgive me for't. Nor did I onely in that Land-skip show State-virtues, but emergent vices too. "Good faces are withChoicest Perfections art best discovered by their Opposites. Moals much beautifide; "Venus seem'd fair'st, when Nais sat beside. "Vice setts off Vertue best:—No  spread "Their Lustre more, then when they 'r set in Lead. There's none that ever knew me One of those That for a Places of Corresponsive esteeme and benefit prosed me if my etired Condition would have en∣tertai any such Remoa's to Privacy and Conem∣plation: or could have stoop'd to that servile lure of Assentation. Diadem could learn to gloze. For had I practised the Art to Flatter "Th' increase of Fortune had deprav'd my Nature. Yet had I prov'd Proficient in that Art, I'le tell you, Sir, the secrets of my Heart, (For I dare venture to unrivet it To one of Honour, Judgement, Worth and Wit,) I'm confident, I had not so long waited On your Commission to be Decimated.
Since SELDAN that Authentick Instrument And constant Servant to the Parlament, Directly prov'd no Tenths at all were due Unto the Clergy; then much lesse to you. Whom though ourB. Mountagu. B. White. Dr. Helyn. Mr. Wotten. Mr. Burton, &c. Rabbies labour'd to confute, They might have Silence kept with more repute: For such Antiquity and Reason met As his Assertions were not answer'd yet. BESIDES all this; the Spartan State decree'd That all such Parents as their Children breed In Arts and Studies of Philosophie From all Assessments should exempted be: And by deductions from Rint-charges granted Supply those Tacklings Education wanted. Which Law one day when Cleon did oppose, Tyrtaeus in defence oth' Edict rose, Saying; "If these so neare us might not share "In our Provision and Parentall care; "May this strict opposition be obey'd "And al Male-children henceforth Eunuchs made. Which smart Reply drove th'Court to such a laugh∣ter As the like Motion ne're was heard of after. To those object, "'Tis folly to delay "This Grand Assesse, our Souldiers must have pay; My answer is; "I'm Natures deepest debter; "I love a Souldier well, but Children better. But since I must their Benefactor prove, Their prayers, me thinks, should gratify my love.
But though I pay them more then does become me. They pray not for me, but they prey upon me. When aged Priam or'e Sackt Troy did reigne, Never had he more Children to maintaine; Must I dis-owne whom Nature bids me owne, To furnish Those, to whom I am unknowne? The case is Ours: let Application draw From th' Spartan Act, life to an English Law: For if such Masters worse then Ethnicks be Provide not for a private Familie; Those Fathers, surely, should be held unfit To live, who take no care of those they git. "Those wild Oats youth has sowne, Old age must reap thē. "And what we got, an other must not keepe them. Deare Sir give eare; what Native Love alledges Concerns us all; the tender of our Pledges. But you 'r so truly Noble; as no feare Of your just Care dares put in Anchor heere. Your most devotionall decimated Servan R. B. With your HON. Certificate, let me partake this noble favour from your approved Goodnesse: To have my Assesse (after the merit of my Cause) respited, till my repair to London, which I purpose (God wil∣ling) early next Month. Where I hope by application and your HON. assistance, to mitigate, if not whol∣ly mediate my Assesse.
Upon his additionall Assesse; con∣tinued in addresse to his Ho∣nour. February 2. 1655. "What Bill's here posted on our Tything door! "Five pounds to the State-advance—And who bids more? "Not one Scotch Plak; 'tis fear'd the State at length, "Will seize nine parts, and leave us but a tenth. SIr I was lately bit, but knows not how, Nor whether they be friends to th' State or no. For surely those who represent such zeale, And constant service to the Commonweale; Should not be used so.—I'm latelyI heard your Honour much opposed it, But votes passe often more by Beards then Wit. cast By your Grave Synod, since th' Assessement last In five pounds more: if this be not a Shelfe (I must appeal unto your Honour'd selfe) Of dangerous consequence;—when hearts and hands Become addressed to your faire commands, Must these be made State-Martyrs? Where should we But in Committees look for unitie
In their harmonious Votes? How does this show, When one day acts, what next day does undoe? This strange dis-union held a partiall Sin, Caus'd old Sysambris sacrifice his skin In brave Cambises time; who wisely saw How it oppos'd the levell of the Law; And that it alien'd much the hearts of those Who were his Friends to be his private Foes. Affection is of such transcendent price, Assesse should not eclipse it nor Excise. Redresse this, Sir, for unto you I ow Such cordiall Service and devotion too, As you, I'm sure, on whom I doe depend, In my just Cause will prove a faithfull Friend. Which done, if there be Springs in Helicon, I'le fame your honour in our Albion: And make her Face so terrible to Spaine, As if our Army were all-Charlemaine. This Pibrac freed from Taxes in his time, Why may it not to this low Muse of mine? Whose wings so richly plum'd, as She can fly And meet Occurrents with an Eagles eye: And make those grant who 'r ill-opinion'd on us, That we doe nought, but what may well become us. Which, though it seeme a Paradox to Some, They will acknowledge it when I have done: For that Bards Genius is not fit to write, That cannot make white black, & black of white. For since Pharsalians Fields were never in More mouths, than our late Civile Wars have bin;
If home bred Triumphs purchase such renoune, Much more when We have forraine Nations won. "You must my Patron be in this addresse, "Your Pension my Exemption from Assesse. Your Hon. most affectionately devoted re-decimated Servant A parcell of partiall-guilt Justice. HOw! a Commission! Pray thee from what ground? "To salve th' Assessement of three hundred pound. Well, GIB. though this device thy Coffers ease, The Cure may prove farre worse than the disease. I could, but dare not whisper in thine Eare, Lest some Eve-droppers for the State draw neare; One day there may a Fowler come to set And catch a Timing Baron in his Net. No Scottish Style will leave thee Scot free than, Fames Pencile shall ingrave:—Lo there's the man▪ Who spar'd no time with Conscience to dispute, But roundly undertook to Execute; "Whom? Justice; "How? To hang her? No, to Save; "What? His Assesse.—So dyed this worldling Slave. "Was e're wealth worse bestowed?—Stay, Sun's not set; "More's to be done:—Last Sceane's not acted yet.
For Colonell ROBERT WATERS, Upon his Yorkshire Summons. "These late Inquisitions have So my Senses Confouunded, "I am now in a Strait, as if I had never Compounded. THe Laity ought to pay their Tenths; 'tis true; But they of old were to theVid. Parae. in Eccles. discip. Just. de Jure civili. Casel. in med. Theol Crescent. ib. Altar due. If th' Altar be supprest, the Offering dies, For where no Altar, there no Sacrifice. Yet though Delinquents Fatlings be exhaust, Their poore Remains must be the Holocaust: And tho in them small fat be left to fry, Some must be Squiezed forth untill they dy. So as Jobs Maxim will admit no doubt, "Nak't came they in, and nak't must they goe out: And stript of State, well were't if they from sin, Might go as naked forth as they came in: But Caesar with his Power can ne're impose More outward Mulcts, then they have inward foes: Which They by temp'rate dyet may represse, And this Assesse will keepe them from Excesse.
Thus Sinnue-shrunk all rising Statists shun us, "OurIn ostium, Rubrae Crucis si figamus characterem, perniciosa pestis Spectantium oculis ominatur indicium. Cordel. Crosse oth' Doore cryes—Lord have mercy on us. But should all th' Elements combine to faile me, There's One at Cundale, sure I am would baile me. Excuse me, Sir, I am not ev'ry where, My Person's One, and that One Summond here; Nor doe I feare, though I with Others Share, So just's my Judge, but I shall carry faire. For my increase is not in Coine but cares, Aches, Reumes, Tisicks, Children, and Gray-haires: Wherein, if th' State take Tithes in ev'ry part, I wish them th'Tenths of these with all my hart. From him, who In Storms, Winds, and Showres, Subscribes him truly yours. December 28. 1655. For Mr. Ralph Rimer, a discreet State Commissioner. RImer, Me thinks thou should'st a Poet love, Though more then Rhime's requir'd in Poetry;
A word in season's precious; Pray thee move That I from decimation may be free, So shall Swales Banks fame thy Civilitie: For such a friendly-Office done in Season May store Musaeus both with Rhime and Reason. Rhime gives the Close and Accent to our verse, My deerest Ralph approve thee one of those Who may deserve Inscriptions on their Hearse, And gaine more Friends then others gather Foes; By cloathing such as Imposts doe unclose; So to thy Line such honor may be won Time shall Enshrine thy Fame at Brafferton. Since this was writ, good news from th' Parlament, Our Decimations are quite ta'ne away, God grant this Ease raise not our discontent And rack us more then we before did pay, Which would make up th' Malignants holy-day, But if our shoulders must Atlantick be, Let thine owne, Caesar, beare as well as we. Wee have been Asses made while they were freed, Leane not too much upon a bruized-Reed.
For Captain Aitee and L. Bolland. WHen young Leontio was so straitly set As all his State would scarce discharge his debt; Decius the Serjant was injoyn'd to come, And seize of all his Moveables in Rome: Who dealt so fair and mildly in his place, From th' Mace he vow'd he never found like grace. That I may render every one their due, This Story might be instanced in you; Though Some professe themselves your mortall ha∣ters, I'le justifie you Civil Sequestraters. Such Atteus was in honest Appius dayes; Hold on;Nullo minore pretio assequenda est Ami∣citia, viventium Anima, quàm Candore et Clementiâ. mild Spirits merit highest praise. "Your Temperance, no doubt, retein'd a sense Of honest Ned Crofts cordiall Innocence: Who without Boots or Armes was prov'd to be, Which were strange Habits for hostilitie. If his resolvs had beene addrest that way, He would have marcht in a more martiall 'ray. But of his Case if there be no remorse, "His sentence may conclude,—Gramercy Horse:
For if he might have got his price at home, He had not felt the weight of such a Doome. Trust me, high-valued friends, had this beene so, Horse-Faires had beene Sequestred long ago. Malton and Rippon might have sent us Newes That both their Markets were remov'd to th' Mews. In Smythfield no Horse-Couper to be seene, But vanish'd quite as if they had not beene. Though fire and faggot, and a sterne Commission Denounce his ruine, if a late Petition Or a Milde Parl'ament beget not sence In steeled Spirits by their influence: But I am confident, though Durance tye him, It is not meant to crush him, but to try him. Ith' Recluce of a pure-heroick brest. Candour and Valour claime like interest. To have a Power to doe, and not a will, Has beene the Signall of true Honour still. Really yours, PEREGRINE STRANGEVVAIS.
To Captaine Sadler; a rare Scarlet dyer. Noble Sir, I am here, Neare unto your proper Sphere: Visit Him who holds you deare. DEarest Friend, who all thy time Hast been blest in each designe; And hast Colour for thine ends, To improve and right thy Friends: Mayst thou live in Honours Eye, Till thy Scarlet lose her dye. "Love's a Colour dyde in graine, Whose reflexe admits no staine. Ne{que} dives, nec egenus, Ne{que} satur, ne{que} plenus; Nec agrestis, nec amoenus, Nec sylvestris, nec serenus: Palmis nec mulcendus paenis, At in omni sorte lenis.
Upon the Commissioners sitting at the Wildman in York. AT th' Wildman for Commissioners to sit Some hold it strange, but I doe think it fit. We have been Wildmen all; and we'r to git From a Wild-man meanes to re-gaine our wit, But not our Meanes: who can recover it? This made Alcides wise, was wild before; O that I had his Limms, I'de aske no more! For so might I re-gaine my Means at length, Though by no force of pleading, yet by strength. The Quaker. WItches were Seers call'd in antient time, And Speakers now are held to be divine. But why call'd Quakers can I not deliver, Unlesse their Spirit turne an Hectick fever. I rather think this Name of Tophet smells, Where quaking, shaking shame and horror dwels. But if Community their Title prove, 'Tis all in all with Family of love. Where like our wandring Gipsies in mixt seedes Without distinction One with other breedes. No marvaile then if we have Mungrells many When Fox Breeds Cubbs, and unrestrain'd by any
lay priviledg'd in their impostur'd Service Like Soules inspir'd: but what's all this to Jarvis? Thus Folly with a Cuppe of fornication Deludes the Saintlings of our English Nation. But Coal or Walker with their zeale, no doubt, Will either hunt or smoak these Foxes out. Or some choyce Archer will their Legions sever With pile-head Arrows from a Justice quiver: Or clothe them in a Suite of durance ever, Till th' Act of Reformation them deliver. In Answer to this Paper of Verses, intitled The Quaker; whereof He was re∣ported to be the Author. HOld thy penutious Pen, injurious Elfe, In taxing Quakers, I might touch my selfe. These last seven yeares I lived in this Clime And shew'd my selfe a Quaker all that time. For when I saw a sterne Committee-man I from that Sight a Quaker streight became; Quercedulae sumus omnes,—Alis volitantes vagis. Planc. For Fox I hold him a magnetick Sead; And NAILER, One that hits the naile oth' Head.* Ut Magnes ferrum, Vulpes subtiliùs attrahit aurum.
Or when I saw my Name fixt on a post, I turn'd to Quaker, and my Senses lost. When an Excise-man or an undertaker For State-assesse; these Sights made me a Quaker. Tracing those Streets where I did mony ow, The smell of Mace made me a Quaker too: For They who on Parnassus build their nest Are Slaves to Fortune; Subject to arrest. Now in my age too when I weigh my sin, I Quake to think Oth' State that I am in. Cease Critick then, thus to traduce my quill, I have a Quaker beene and must be still. My Body is the Court-loft where I live, From whence no Mortall can me freedome give, Nor from my Grate procure me a release Till my arrivall at the Port of Peace; Where being once infranchis'd in that Citie I'm priviledg'd from Debt, Assesse, Committee. For you, my Quaking Sisters, yee doe make Me when I see your rivell'd beauties, quake; That you should pine, and spend your Spirits and dy Like forlorne Sceletons, and know not why. I wish, deare Ducklings, you would understand That God requires no such thing at your hand. How is it that you cry Repent, Repent, And wast rich houres in fruitlesse discontent? Why doe you hout and houle and take no rest As if in HOPE you had no interest? "Shun such impostur'd fancies; Fly to Him "Whose light can cleare your cloud and clense your Sin.
"Judge not; That power to you was never given, "But judg your selves; for that's the way to Heaven. "Rend not your Clothes but Hearts: The Saints desire "That you should try your selves, not Cloaths by fire. "Make use of what is requisite and fit, "You should not hate your flesh, but cherish it. Be frolick then my Girles, and freely feed And propagate your Doctrin by your seed. "If Quaking proper be in any Sence 'Tis in the sweet injoyment of a Wench. This was well knowne to Adam and his Eve; And what they lov'd, let not their Children leave: Yet so, as each may reape what he has sowne, And ev'ry Adam have an Eve of's owne: For though there were no Statute to forbid it, God has pronounc'd a Curse'gainst Him that did it. A Button-Bung, or, A Westminster Snap. AT Westminster my Cassock chanc't to find A Button-Cutter, who was much inclin'd To medle with our furniture behind; From whence my native Genius divin'd,
"Though Westminster above no Spiders show, "It has a brood of Nimmers hatcht below, Who can Trapan poor Clients where they go, "Leave them not worth a Button nor a Stro. Beware deare Countrey men of Moller stang, Least rurall faction make you sing like Sang; Contest not where your Foe & Cause prove strang, Lest you confesse that all things go a wrang: For though your Countesse pay, I can assure ye, When th' Game is plaid, your purse must pay the Jurie. Desist then, Friends; no more Commissions sit Unlesse it be at Fleece to quicken wit. This short advice comes from a friendly hand As any you can have in Westmerland. Upon the Northern Feast, observed at Sal∣ters-Hall, the sixth of October; 1657. Addressed to his worthy Countrymen, The Northern Society. OBserve the bounty of these Northern Ladds, And you will say, the North-Part glory adds Unto the South: and that their Freedome is An Honour to our great Metropolis;
Whose Union and Communion is such, They may be ey'd, but not ad  too much: Whose fair Comport has raz▪d that Proverb forth, "That no good thing came ever from the North, For what is good, or free, or friendly rare Derive their Essence from our Northern ayre. Your native knowledge is not rank'd with those Who can bouze Ale, yet wonder where Malt grows Your Country Cock crows, and he does not ney; You know a Daple from an Iron-gray; You know that Sun which shews his splendor here, Is the Same Sun shines in your Hemisphere. You of your Cloaths have no such Simple care As to o're-pentise them from bence to Ware. Your Language, though not curiously refin'd, It can expresse the dictates of your mind; And with more brevity and aptnesse too Then These with their minc'd Dialect can doe. Your Northern warlike Habitants of old, Inur'd to Snltry heat, and Shuddring cold, Against Picts, Scots, Saxons, and Lordly Danes Display'd their valour, memoriz'd their Names. Such was the Martial prowesse of your Nation, As it preserv'd your Frontiers from Invasion: And in one yeer did more joynt hearts combine, Then Other Countryes did in all their time: And in composing of their Interests, Made Savage Foes become their Servile Beasts. Brave gallant Blades! disperse your living Fames From Twede to Trent, from Trent to prince'y Thames
That Times may revell in your Annuall joyes, And vow, No linage like our Northern Boyes. May all the Muses, when they dip their lippe In your rich Bolls, joy in your Fellowshippe. While precious Nectar cheers your Poets braine, And gives him hope to visit you again. And you may trust him; when joynt votes succeed For your next Feast, He shall no Ticket need. These Tickets are Half-Crown-men: Our North Zone Stands eyther for a Whole-One, or for none.
Annot. Egregia Fax illa Germa∣niae, quae talem flammam toto Orbe, faci∣litate calami, vel subtilitate ingenii latiùs intulit, ut peraegrè extingui poterit, in uxorem duxit Catharinam Bore, (no∣mine Elizabethae transeuntem in Poëma∣te;) puellam elegantulam; quam mollitie Carnis, seu Oris sui blanditiis, de Clau∣stris perperam illexerat. Pag. 24. lin. 12. Vid. Isich. The Bankrupts Remembrancer; and the Bankrupts Register; being Titles to distinguish the two first Letters relating to the Voice in-the Vault, are omitted. Pag. 38. & pag. 41.
THese Papers bearing the Title of Parthenia's Passions, were pri∣vately procured without the Authors knowledge. Excuse then these Errors: being at the in∣stancy of Persons of quality, published without his directi∣on. FINIS.
