B4804 11613081 47909
depiction of delivery of petition Sec Thurloe Sr: Thes Gentlemen have a Petition for you to deliuer to the Council of State Hugh Peters Paulus Van der Parre The Humble Petition of the States Generall of the United Provinces Allard Peter Iongstall. William Nieuport Hieronymus van Beverningk A Sherwin
The DƲTCH Ʋsurpation: OR, A Brief Vievv of the Behaviour OF THE STATES-GENERAL Of the United Provinces, Towards the Kings of Great Britain: With some of their CRUELTIES and INJUSTICES Exercised upon the Subjects of the English Nation. AS ALSO, A Discovery of what Arts they have used to Arrive at their late Grandeur, &c. By WILLIAM de BRITAINE. Et genus humanum & Mortalia temnitis arma, At sperate Deos. Virg. LONDON: Printed for Jonathan Edwin, at the Three Roses in Ludgate-street. MDCLXXII.
To His Royal Highness THE Duke of YORK. SIR, COuld I but use my Pen, as You Your Sword, I'd Write in Blood, and kill at every Word: The Hogans then my Muse's Pow'r should feel, And find my Verse as fatal as Your Steel. But sure, Great Prince, none can presume to Write With such Success as You know how to Fight:
Who carry in Your Looks th' Events of War, Design'd like Caesar for a Conquerour. The World of Your Atchievements is afraid, While Neptune's Watry Kingdoms You Invade; And that much-courted Mistress th' Ocean's now Not by th' Venetian-Duke Espous'd, but You. And now, Great Prince, may You Victorious be, Your Fame and Arms o'er-spreading Land and Sea: May You our haughty Neighbours overcome, And bring Rich Spoils, and Peaceful Laurels Home; Whilst They, Their Ruine or Your Pardon meet, Sink by Your Side, or fall before Your Feet.
THE Dutch Usurpation. The Belgick Provinces. THe Dominion of the Belgick Provinces being devolv'd to Philip the second King of Spain, who designing to Himself the Western Monarchy, and (the best medium to that end) was to reduce those Provinces to a Kingdom. But they being for∣tified with great priviledges, and many of them inconsistent with Monarchy; 'twas adjudg'd by sober persons, 'twoud prove a work of great difficulty, and that He would never effect that he aim'd at. Besides, the reformation of Religion, which then began to grow to some strength, mov'd the King to reduce them back to the Church of Rome, by the power and terrour of the Inquisition: Which when the people violently oppos'd, the King then resolv'd to bring them by Spanish Rhetorick (that
is by Sword and Cannon) to obedience. To that end Duke Alva is sent into the Belgick Pro∣vinces. The Bloet-rod setled in the Provinces.King Philip sends the Duke of Alva, (an old and expert Captain) with a puissant Army to be his Vice-Roy a∣mongst them. No sooner was he settled in his new Government, but he establish'd the Bloet-rod, as they term it, a Council of Bloud, made up most of Spaniards. Anno 1567. He took off the Heads of the Counts of Horn, Egmont, and of divers other persons of qua∣lity, The Govern∣ment of the Pro∣vinces alter'd.Citadels were erected, and Taxes impos'd upon the people to support them. The Political Government of the Countrey in many things altered, and the people spoyl'd not of their priviledges only, but of their liber∣ties. Amongst the reform'd he brought in the Inquisiti∣on, and therein behav'd himself very tyrannically. This Five thousand Families leave the Provinces.powred Oyl on the fire, formerly kindled, and put all into a combustion; about five thousand Families quit∣ted their Countrey, some flying into Germany, others into France, and most into England, where they were received with all kindness and civility; Churches were appointed them, (they being of the reform'd Religion) and many Noble and great priviledges were bestowed upon them. During those Troubles the Prince of Orange and Count Lodowick, his Brother, were very active, and gave Duke Alva imployment Holland and Zeland for the Prince of O∣range. All Holland (except Amsterdam) follow'd the Fortune and side of the Prince, together with all the Towns of Zealand, except Middle-burg. Anno 1573. Duke Alva was recall'd, afterwards Don Lewis of Requisens was appointed Governour. After him, the Prince of Parma, who brought the Hollander into worse case then ever. They declare Philip of Spain to be fal∣len from his Government. Yet Anno 1581. they declare that Philip of Spain was fallen from His Government, they renounce and abjure Him for their Sovereign, they break his Seals, change the Oath of Allegiance, and took a new Oath of the people, never to return to the Spanish Obedience.
This done, the States (for so they call'd themselves ever after) chose Francis Duke of Anjou, to be their Prince; during whose unfortunate Government, the Duke The Duke of Parma provails much.of Parma prevailed in all places, especially after the death of William Prince of Orange, who was traiterously slain Anno 1584. Now were the Hollanders truely miserable, desperate of pardon from their inraged Prince, and having no per∣son of courage to head them, none of power to protect them, but such as were likely to regard their own pro∣fit, more than their Interest. England was the only San∣ctuary they had now left, to which they sue, offering the Queen the Soveraignty of their Provinces. But that Heroick Queen not intending to Her self any thing, sa∣ving Queen Eliza∣beth takes the Hollanders into her prote∣ction. Articles con∣cluded between Queen Eliza∣beth and the States.the honour of relieving Her distressed Neighbours, Anno 1585. took them into her protection, and conclu∣ded (amongst others) of these Articles. That the Queen should send them five thousand Foot, and a thousand Horse into the Netherlands to fight for them. That they should pay Her Ten Pounds per Cent. for all sums of money, She should lend them, or disburse for them. And Interest upon Interest. And likewise five pounds for every English Gentleman, or Officer, which should dye in their service. All which sums of money were to be paid unto the Queen at the end of the War. And that for the reimbursing of the said monies, the Briel, Flushing, and Castle of Ramekins were to be delivered un∣to the Queen, as Caution and Pledges. Queen Eliza∣beth sendsover to the States 5000 Foot and 1000 Horse. The Queen, in performance of Her Agreement, sent them 5000 Foot, 1000 Horse, Money and a Governour, (The Earl of Leicester) and had the Cautionary Towns delivered unto Her. The renowned Sir Philip Sidney was the first Government of Flushing, who died in their service. Casimir also, the Elector Palatines Son, drew down
to the assistance of the States an Army of fifteen thou∣sand Horse and Foot, at the instance, and great charges of the Queen. When the Earl of Leicester came to wait upon the Queen, at his going over to be their Governour; She strictly commanded the Earl, that he should have a re∣gard of the English Souldiers, and that they served God, and demean d themselves religiously. Which they did with such exemplary zeal, that a sober man might have thought, that the United Provinces then stood in Chri∣stendom. The Christian Religion was first planted in Holland, Zealand and Friesland by an English∣man.And that pious Queen did therein well, for the Christian Religion was first planted in Holland, Zea∣land, and Friesland by Willibroad, an English man, the first Bishop of Ʋtretcht; whence by degrees it gain'd on the rest of the Countries. But since (by the ill practices of some amongst them) they are much fallen from the purity of it. The Queen now resolveth to set all the Royal Signa∣tures of Her favour upon the United Provinces, and give them the most eminent demonstrations of Her Bounty and Kindness. The Staple of English Cloth, that The Staple of English Cloth removed to Delf.was formerly at Antwerp, She settl d at Delf, in great quantities; by reason of the great concourse of people, which that Trade brought with it, the Town became rich, well built, and beautified with spatious Streets. Flushing, before the English came thither▪ was a ve∣ry poor Town, but by the Countenace of the Queen, the English Garrison there, and the Trade which the English brought thither, it flourish'd in a high measure; and by their means, so did all their great Towns and Ci∣ties there. Queen Eliza∣beth gives leave to the Hollanders to fish in our Bri∣tish Seas. She incouraged them in their Trades, protected them in their Navigation, gave them Licences to fish upon the British Seas, (which before was not permitted unto them) and the English did couragiously fight for them (to vindicate their rights) whilst they were im∣ploy'd in Fishing, and in their Manufactures, by which
they increased in Wealth. But one infelicity happen'd The King of Denmark sei∣zes 7 0 Ships of the Hollan∣ders.unto them, that the King of Denmark, having taken some displeasure against them, laid an Imbargo upon seven hun∣dred of their Ships, which were passing backward and forward upon the Sound for Corn, by reason whereof the people there, were now more distressed with fear of a Famine, than with the Sword of the enemy. But the potent Queen presently gave them relief. For She sup∣plied them with great quantities of Corn. And by Her Interest (with the disbursment of some monies) the Ships were discharg'd, and came home to their several Ports, in the United Provinces. Now they tri∣umph, giving out their Med∣dals with this inscription, What we are, we are by Gods Grace and Queen Eliza∣beth. Now was the Queen look'd upon as their only Patro∣ness, and the English, the best sinews of their Wars, and the Atchievers of the greatest Exploits amongst them: Near Newport was fought that memorable Battel 'twixt the Arch-Duke Albert, and the State. The Victory next under God, was gain'd for the States, by the valour of the English, and the excellent conduct of those No∣ble and Gallant persons Sir Francis and Sir Horatio Vere. Ostend defen∣ded by the Eng∣lish 3 years, 3 months. Ostend not wall'd till the Low Countrey Wars, and then with a Mud-wall only; and that not finish'd till the Arch-Duke set down before it. In so much as the Arch-Dutchess Isabella is said to have sworn, That She should not shift her Smock till the Town was taken, Who, had She kept her rash Oath, had been very—For the Town being Garrison'd by the English, and under Sir Horatio Vere, (who was Governour thereof) held out against the Arch-Duke a Siege of 3 years, and so many The Spaniards lost 100000 men before O∣stend.months. The Spaniard at this Siege lost one hundred thousand men. Breda, a Town well fortified, and the Barony of the Prince of Orange, from whom being taken by the Spani∣ards in the beginning of the Wars, 'twas again recover'd Breda recove∣red by the English.by seventy valorous English Soldiers; who, hiding them∣selves in a Boat cover'd with Turf, were convey'd into
the Castle, which they easily master'd, and made the Prince Lord again of all his Dominions and Territories there. The speech of one of the Souldiers there, upon that occasion, deserves never to be forgotton; who fearing lest by his violent noise in coughing (though he did re∣press it) he should, together with himself, betray his Com∣panions: Kill me (saith he) fellow-souldiers, lest we be kill'd. The particular Actions, Gallantry, and noble Attempts of the English here, would deserve a just volume of them∣selves. By their valour and courage most of the Spanish Souldiers were so wasted and consumed, that the King of Spain was enforc'd (to give a stop to their Conquests) Queen Eliza¦beth maintain∣ed 40000 horse and foot for the Hollanders.to send fifty thousand veteran Souldiers out of Spain and Italy into Flanders. And the Queen did supply the States with answerable numbers of men and money, insomuch as She maintain'd for them forty thousand Horse and Foot in their service. She made many Naval expeditions into America, and Q▪ Eliz. infests the King of Spain in Ame¦rica.there did much infest the King of Spain, sinking his Ships, burning his Towns, battering down his Forts and Castles, interrupting all his Trade and Commerce there; and all this to bring that King to Reason and Justice, as to the United Provinces. The King of Spain hereat exceedingly incens'd, Anno 1588. sends his Invincible Armado against England, raised a Rebellion in Ireland against the Queen, sent many Spa∣nish Souldiers to Kingsale to the assistance of the Rebels there, committed many depredations in Cornwall here; many sanguinary and desperate persons were incourag'd to poison, murder and destroy Her, who made many attempts upon Her Royal person. So this excellent Queen being incircl'd with so many infelicities and trou∣bles, and beset with so many calamities, and being wea∣ried with the Wars in the Netherlands (because they did so exhaust Her Treasure, and destroy Her brave people) and finding the States to grow insolent, and to perform
no Agreements, and withall, observing their Subjects to grow rich by the War, (of which they made a Trade and Merchandise) and Her Kingdoms to be thereby im∣poverish'd; She resolved to make peace with the Spani∣ard, (being assured the Belgick War was never to be en∣ded by conquest) and to that purpose She signified Her Royal pleasure unto the States; But finding her Majesty to be in earnest, (as She had great reason for't) they were much perplex'd. For if She had deserted them, they had lost their chief and only support; they sent over their The distressed States petition the Queen not to desert them.Ambassadors into England, and in the most humble man∣ner that could be, petitioned Her Majesty, that She would not cast off the Cause of God and man, and leave sixty Towns, with a poor distressed people, a prey to the malice and avarice of the barbarous Spaniard. But She earnestly press'd them for the payment of Her money, adding with∣all threats, That, if She was not obey'd therein, She would take such courses, as Her lenity was not us'd to be acquainted with: and so dismissed them. Hereat the States were much disturbed; and thereupon, Anno 1598. the distressed States sent the Lord Warmond, The States send Ambassadors to Q Elizabeth.and others their humble suppliants unto Her Majesty, who in the lowest posture of humility, did acknowledg themselves oblig'd unto Her for infinite benefits. But herein Her Majesty excelled the glory of Her An∣cestors, that by how much She exceeded others in power, by so much Her Majesty excelled them in acts of Mercy and Piety, by whose means and aid, the French have gain'd ma∣ny Victories, and they more. As for the Money which the States owed Her, they be∣seeched Her Majesty to consider the dangers dayly grow∣ing upon them, their poverty and disability to pay, and that by original Agreement with Her Majesty, no monies were to be paid, till the Wars were ended. The Queen di pleas'd with the S ates. The Queen understanding their unjust practices and ill dealings with Her, told them that She had been often deluded by their deceitful supplications, ungrateful actions,
unhandsom cavillings, and pretences of poverty (when their rich Cities confuted them) and She hoped God would not suffer Her to be a pattern to other Princes, to help such a people, who bear no reverence to Superiours, nor take care for the advantage, reputation, or safety of any but themselves. And required them to pay Her the money they owed Her. And advised them for the future, that they should not seek a remedy against growing danger, from old acounts by compulsion, but rather merit new favours by their gratitude and thanks for the former. At these expressions of Her Majesty, the poor distres∣sed Alliance with Q▪ Elizabeth was of great advantage to the States.States thought themselves confounded, both for their former and future charges: Yet considering the name of Alliance with England, was of exceeding advantage unto them, they resolv'd to submit (as they could not avoid it) to such Conditions as Her Majesty should lay upon them. The Queen again press'd them for the payment of Her Q. Elizabeth councelled, and inclined the States to peace.Mony, and for Peace; but She could not incline them to peace (being never disposed to pay Her Money which must be at the end of the War.) Yet in complyance with Her Majesty the Account was stated. And the principal Debt (besides Interest upon Interest, and the loss of Her Sub∣jects The States ow∣ed Q. Elizab▪ two millions of pounds.in their Wars) did amount unto 8000000 Crowns: and they did agree to pay Her Majesty, during the War, 100000 Pounds yearly, and the remainder when peace was concluded and the Cautionary Towns surrendred; and that in the mean time 1500 English Souldiers should remain in the Garrisons, and that the States should pay them. The Queen having Her Debts stated, began to be more friendly to them, and wished them to follow their Trade of fishing upon the British Seas; (which She gave them leave to do) that they might be the better able to pay Her, and support the charges of their War, which they did effectually. But I could never find that they ever paid unto Her Majesty any of the money they owed Her. For, it's not
to be conceived, that those persons whom Her Majesty, for so many years, could not bring to an account, would, at the last, pay Her any thing. But Her Majesty being grown into years, and those vigorous and great parts She formerly had somewhat de∣clining; they (that the Queen might not exact of them the payment of Her money, according to Agreement with Her) continually by Emissaries (which they had about Her Majesty and their Pensioners) did infuse Jealousies into Her Head, and what Plots, and secret designs the Cing of Spain had against Her Majesty, and Her Domini∣ons, which did so amuse Her, that I do not observe Her Majesty ever pressed them after, for the payment of any money. But from time to time She supplied them with men as they desired; and ever made good to them her own Motto, Semper eadem. Q Eliz. died April. 3. 1603. She lost 100000 men in the States service. And as Her assistance to them was the first, so it conti∣nued to the last, that is, until April 3. 1603. at which time She died, having lost not fewer than 100000 of Her Sub∣jects in that War: And having spent in Naval expediti∣ons, for their sakes, against the King of Spain, in America, and elsewhere, above a Million of money, besides the Debt which the States owed Her. King James proclaimed King. King James being proclaimed King, and the undoubted Heir and Successor to the Queen. The States sent their Ambassadors to the King, and after some Complements to Him, they signifie to His Majesty, That they had lost Her, whose Goodness and Benefits to them were not to be expressed in words. But they had found His Majesty, as the Heir of Her Kingdom, so the Imitator of Her Ver∣tues, and persuaded Him to a War with Spain, and begged supplies of Him. King James refuses to assist the States. But King James being a wise Prince, (and not to be ta∣ken with their arts and cunning) told them, that He had no difference with the Spaniard, and also, that King Phi∣lip had voluntarily offer'd Him His assistance, if any dispute should have arisen concerning His Kingdoms. And for
the Arch-Duke, he made War with the Queen, not with the Realm. A League con∣cluded between King James, and the Spani∣ard. This highly discompos'd the States, But King James treated withe Spaniards, and concluded a League with them. And the States, such kindness had His Majesty for them, were offered by King James to be comprehended in the Articles of the Treaty, but they refus'd; yet, by the me∣diation of King James a Peace was propounded to the States from the King of Spain. But they signified unto His Ma∣jesty, The States re∣fuse to treat with the Spa∣niard, except they be decla∣red by him Free-States. Peace conclu∣ded between the Spaniard and the States. The Provinces of the States.that they would not treat with the King of Spain, till they were declared by him Free States, abstracted from all right and title unto any of the Provinces or Places by them possessed, which He might pretend unto. All which, by the great endeavours of King James, were granted unto them by the King of Spain. And so Anno 1609. a Peace was concluded between the King of Spain and them. The Provinces in the possession of the States, at the time of the conclusion of the Peace, were Holland, Zealand, West-Friesland, Overyssell, Groningland, Ʋtrecht, Zutphen, three parts of Gelderland, and so some frontier Towns and Pla∣ce, of contribution in Brabant and Flanders. All which Provinces, with their frontier Towns in Brabant and Flanders are not so big as York-shire, one of our Counties in England. And there may be a greater number of stout and gallant men for War raised out of that one County, than they can raise out of all their Provinces. Being now declared Free States, and Peace concluded with the King of Spain; yet for their own security, they were enforced to maintain an Army in their Country. The The Charges the States are at to maintain their Cotries.charge whereof could not amount to less than six hundred thousand Pounds yearly, besides other vast expences, as the preservation of their Dikes, &c. All, or the greatest part thereof, they raised out of the Fishing of the British Sear, or on the people by Excise, and taxes upon every Acre of Ground. Which is such, that the whole Country returns into their hands every third year, and by other Impositions, so insupportable in them∣selves
(and amongst men which would be thought to live in a Free State) that should any Prince in Christendom, lay but half so much upon their Subjects, it would occasion a Revolt. So that, whereas one of the first causes of their falling off from their Prince, was to free themselves from Taxes and Impositions, illegally (as they aid) enforced upon them, they have drawn upon themselves more arbitrary, and illegal Payments, than any Nation in the world. So true it is, that a Rebellion once suppressed, the King is more King, and the Subjects more subject. But if it thrives and happen to be prosperum seelus, and to advance it self to a Free State (as they call it) Tyranny and Oppression, are the two Pillars which must support it. The States being now absolute, and having obtain'd a Sovereign Dommion, only the Cautionary Towns stook in their Stomachs, and might prove a curb to them: But being unwilling to move the King concerning them, by the great sums of money they then owed Him (and be∣ing The projection of the States to get the Cautio∣nary Towns from King James.not well able to pay Him) they would, by some pro∣jection or other endeavour to gain them; Thereupon they resolv'd, as the best expedient, not to pay the English Sol∣diers in the Cautionary Towns, who being thereby put to distress and want, would be enforced to borrow some monies (for their present support) of the States of Zea∣land, which they did; who therewith advised the States General, at the Hague, they consulting with Sir Ralph Winwood, Embassador for His Majesty there, (who was a favourable Instrument to them in this Business) sent In∣structions to the Lord Caroon, then their Ambassador in England, to acquaint the Lord Treasurer herewith. And in case of no satisfaction from him, to make his Adresses to the King, which he did. His Majesty being much in∣censed, that His Subjects and Souldiers should starve for want of their Pay in foreign parts, sent for the Lord Trea∣surer, who drawing His Majesty aside, and telling Him how empty His Exchequer was, His Majesty told their
Ambassador, that, if his Masters would pay Him His Money they owed Him, He would deliver up those Towns. The next day their Ambassadour waiting upon the King: to know whether His Majesty persisted in the same Resolution, His Majesty answered, That He knew the States of Holland to be His good Friends and Confederates, bot in point of Religion and Policy; therefore He appre∣hended not the least fear of any difference that should fall out between them. In contemplation whereof, if they would have their Towns again, He would willingy surren∣der them. Cautionary Towns delive∣red to the States. The States hereupon made up the money presently, and sent it to the King. And so Anno 1616. the cautionary Towns were delivered unto them. The King such was his Royal Bounty unto them) re∣mitted the Interest, and five pounds for every Gentleman, and Officer, which died in their service. The Treasure and men which the Spaniard spent in the Wars, Which Sum certainly would have amounted unto treble the Principal. The King of Spain having spent in those Wars one hundred and fifty millions of Crowns, and wa∣sted 600000 men; and was plung'd so deeply in debt (not∣withstanding his Mines of Mexico and Peru that having taken up money in all the chief Banks of Christendom, He was forced to publish a Diploma, wherein he dispenc'd with himself (as the Holland Stories report) from payment, alledging that he had imployed these monies for the pub∣lick Peace of Christendom. What Sum the King received of them, it is not compor∣ting with the duty of a Subject to question, or dispute; Yet we may observe the treacherous and unhandsom pra∣ctice of the States, to suggest such notoriour untruths to His Majesty, when they themselves, by Agrement with the Queen, were to pay the Souldiers in those Towns; how∣ever they had been ungrateful, to suffer such persons who had so highly merited of them) to want; when the States were built by the English valour, and by their bloud united and cemented.
But having gotten the possession of their Towns, (which were the Lock and Key of their Provinces) and having compounded for those exceeding great sums of money which they owed His Majesty, (which sober men did think they never had been able to pay if rightly stated) they pre∣sently from Poor distressed People, are swell'd up to those The States de∣clare them∣selves High & Mighty States.spreading and magnificent Titles of High and Mighty States. Insolent Boggs! They might rather have said unto Sedition, Thou art my Father; and unto Rebellion, Thou art my Mother. Now they make their Naval Expeditions into Ame∣rica, and other parts of the World: And by the leave and licence of King James, paying some small Tribute, they The States pay∣ing a Tribute, Fish in the British Sas.fall to their Fishing Trade upon the British Seas. Where∣in they did so exceedingly thrive, that towards the latter end of King James His Reign, they imployed yearly eight thousand four hundred Vessels of all sorts for their Trade The number of ships the States imploy in the Fishing Trade.of Fishing upon the British Seas, (which number since is vastly increased) whereby they have a Seminary of Mari∣ners ready for publick Service or Navigation. And upon Computation it appeared, that they made in one year of the Herrings oly, caught upon the British Seas, the sum of five millions of our pounds; (the Custom and Tenth The riches the States gain by their fishing upon the British Seas.of Fish advancing to the Publick Treasury no less than eight hundred thousand pounds) besides the Cod, Ling, Hakes, Pilehard, and other Fish, compated to amount unto near three millions more. By reason of those maltitude of Ships and Mariners, they have extended their Trade to all parts of the World, exporting for the most part, in all their Voyages, our Her∣rings and Fish: in exchange whereof, they return the se∣veral Commodities of other Countries, and sell the same at their own prices. Great part of their Fish they sell for ready money, which commonly they export of the finest Gold and Silver; and coming home, Re-coin it of a baser Alloy, under their own stamp; which advance a great profit to them. The returns which they make for their
Fish in other Commodities, amounts to a vast sum: And all this Wealth, Riches and Grandeur, is derived unto them from the Indulgency and Bounty of the Kings of Great Britain. The Hollanders now beginning to be considerable in the World, by reason of the many Royal Favours wherewith they are inriched by the Crown of England: The English and they having several Factories and Places in the Isles of Molluccaes, Banda, Amboyna, and elsewhere in the East Indies, (the English being some years there setled before the Hollanders had made any discovery of A League be∣tween King James and the States for advance of Trade in Ame∣rica.those Islands) Anno 1619. there was a Solemn League and Agreement by King James and the States of the Uni∣ted Provinces, in a strict Alliance, and social Confederacy of the English East-India Company, and that of the Uni∣ted Provinces, for the better advancing and carrying on of the Trade and Commerce in those Islands, and else∣where in the East-Indies. Here are so many marks of Kindness, such ample De∣monstrations of Favour, as no People could have greater Obligations (if any Principles of Honour or Justice could oblige them) to make returns of Gratitude, and give the greatest instances of their Sincerity and Faithfulness to the Kings of Great Britain, and the English Nation. But with them, Favours past are not accounted; they love no Bounty but what is meerly future. At Amboyna, (one of the Scyndae or Setibe Islands, ly∣ing near Seran, and hath many lesser Islands depending upon it, it's of the Circuit of 60 Leagues) an Island which bears Cloves plentifully, for gathering and buying where∣of the English Company had placed five several Factories: The head of all at the Town of Amboyna, (so called from the Island the chief Town in it) two at Hitto, and Larico, in the same Island; and two others at Latro, and Cam∣bello, in the Island of Seran. But the Hollanders obser∣ving the English to be better beloved by the Natives than themselves, and that they began highly to improve and
gain by their Trade and Traffick, hating that any should thrive but themselves, Anno 1622. upon pretence of a Plot between the English and the Japonesses to betray their Fortress in the Town of Amboyna, (which was built at the charge of the English, and for the safety of Trade and Commerce) the Hollanders having about two hundred Souldiers there, (to the end they might ingross the whole Trade and Traffick of the said Islands to them∣selves) most treacherously murthered, and with Fire and The Massacre of the English at Amboyna. The States seise the Fa∣ctories of the English at Amboyna.Water tortured the English there, (far exceeding the Bar∣barity of all Nations) seized upon their Factories and Goods, to the value of four hundred thousand pounds: All the English and Japonesses which they could meet with, they sent into their own Islands to be their Slaves. An Act so horrid! that the Hollanders are infamous to this very day among the rude and savage Indians, for their barbarous Inhumanity executed upon the English, (the greatest Patrons, under God, they ever had in the World.) King James being made acquainted with this barbarous fact, told the States Ambassadour that He never read or heard of a more cruel and impious Act. But I do forgive them, (said the King) and I hope God will: But my Sons A Prophesie of King James.Son will revenge this Bloud, and punish this horrid Massacre. The King was a wise Prince; and believe it, Wisdom is next door to Prophesie. The States seise upon all the Islands and Plantations of the English in America. Having thus murthered the English, (their insolency and ingratitude did not end there, but) they forcibly seized upon the Islands of Seran, Nero, Waire, Rosingon, Latyo, Cambello, Nitto, Larica, Lantare, the Islands of Poloroone, near Neighbouring to the Molluccaes, Polaway, and Machasser Islands of Banda; all which Islands were formerly surrendred by the general consent and act of the Natives, unto the English, and under the Sovereignty of the Kings of England They seize upon their Facto∣ries and Goods there, possess themselves of one thousand
eight hundred English, which they disposed of into their own Islands. By this artifice they gained to themselves Amhoyna, Banda, the Molluoca Islands, Ternate, Tidor, Maner, Ro∣chian, Machiam, and Botono, with some others: In all which, the English had their Factories and some Ca∣stles, Islands productive of Cloves, Nutmegs, Mace, Ci∣namon, and other rich Commodities; from whence the Persians, Turks, Chinois, and Africans fetch'd them. But by reason the Hollanders were superiour to them in strength, and that horrid act of Amboyna had made a sad impression upon their spirits, (expecting the same mea∣sure of cruelty from them, as they of Amboyna) were en∣forced to quit the said Island and Foctories. So that these insolent and ingrateful persons have gained to themselves solely the Trade of the whole World for Spices. The States drain 400000l. yearly for Spices, out of the Kings Do∣minion. By the loss of which Islands, there's dreined yearly by them out of the King of Englands Dominions for Spices, four hundred thousand pounds, besides the loss of the Trade in those Islands to the English, (which would have much improved and inlarged it self into other places) can∣not amount unto less than four millions of pounds sterling yearly, though formerly some inconsiderable quantities of them did grow in Cupe, Duco, Montio, and Mara, but of The riches the States gain'd by seising of the English Factories. The stock of the East India Company of England lost.late not any. The advantage hereof cannot amount unto the Hollander less than seven millions of pounds sterling yearly: they setting what Rates and Prices they please up∣on these Commodities. By these most unjust practices of the Hollanders, the Stock of the English Company, which did amount unto about sixteen hundred thousand Pounds was the greatest part of it lost. Poloroon de∣livered by the Natives to King James. Poloroone, by the general and voluntary act of the chief men of the Country was surrendred into the power of King James, and the possession thereof was given to His Majesties use to Captain Courtrop Decemb. 23. Anno 1616.
No other Nation, at that time, having any Interest in it, or pretension to it, being a very rich and plentiful Island: from whence the English might have expected great Trea∣sure and advantages. The Hollanders, notwithstanding their League and Treaty with King James, Anno 1619. the English being then in possession of it, with great force en∣tred the said Island, demolished all their Buildings, pull'd up all their Nutmeg-trees, and sent them into their own Poloroon seised by the States from the English.Islands to be planted, destroy'd all their Factories there, and seised upon all their Goods, and forced all the English from thence, and to dispeople it, that it might be of no use to the English for the future, under colour of a Plot that the Oran-keys and Nobles of Poloroone had conspired with the people of Seran to massacre the Dutch, as well at Poloroone as Poloway: The Dutch Governour at Poloway sent command to the Oran-keys, that they should come over to him, a Priest and seventy Oran keys immediately took a Prow, or small vessel, of their own; and embarked them∣selves for Poloway. So soon as they were arrived, they were carried Prisoners to the Castle. Then the Governour with 200 Souldiers went to Poloroone, whence he fetch'd the rest of the Oran-keys, and committed them Prisoners to The cruelty of States against the Natives in Polloroon.the same Castle: And presently were brought to the Torture with fire and water, as they serv'd the English at Amboy∣na. Two of them died in their tortures, the rest, being 162 were all upon their forced Confessions condemned and executed. The Priest, when he came to the place of Exc∣ention, spake these words, in the Mallatian Tongue; All ye, great and small, rich and poor, black and white, look to it, we have committed no fault: And when he would have spoken more, he was taken by the head and feet, layd along, and cut in two by the middle. Their Wives, Children, and Slaves, with all their Goods, were seised by the Hollanders and sent into their other Islands. And this the Hollanders did, because the Oran keys had a great love for the English. Barbarous Miscreants! was it not enough to exercise their
Tyranny upon the English, but that they must destroy the poor Natives for their sakes? The States  them∣selves, the sale Trade and Do∣minion of the East Indies. And to speak freely, prospe∣rous villanies, are Cardinal Virtues in the States Ethicks. So that we may perceive the sole design of the Hollanders is, to get the Riches, Trade, and Dominion of the whole Indies into their own power. And therefore they think any medium just, subservient to that end. The Hollanders having forcibly taken the Town and Castle of Mallaca from the Portugeez, suffer no Ships of any King or Prince in Europe to pass the Streights of Mallaca, into the South Seas to China, &c. upon pain of seisure or confiscation of Men, Ships, and Goods. And to that purpose they grant their Commissions to the Captains of their Ships, to bring all Ships that pass the The States suf∣fer no ships to pass the Streights of Mallaca.Streights of Mallaca, (which Streights were free for all Ships to pass, till the restraint and Usurpation of the Hol∣landers) into Mallaca, or else to sink, or burn by their sides. This restraint is loss to the English three hundred thou∣sand pounds yearly, and advantage to the Hollanders five hundred thousand pounds yearly. Anno 1620. Cabode bon Esperanza was in the possession of the English, and by them taken for the use of King James. But since the English have been forc'd out by the Hollander, where they have a flourishing Plantation. Two ships of the English seised and con∣fiscated by the States. Bon Esperan∣za, a s ip of the English seised by the States. The Dragon and Katherine two English ships seised by the States, and confiscated. Thereupon anno 1620. they seised upon two English Ships, the Bear, and the Star, in the Streights of Mallaca, going to China, and confiscated Ships and Goods valued at fifteen hundred thousand pounds. The Ship Bona Esperanza, an English Vessel, anno 1635. going into China by the Streights of Mallaca, was violently assaulted by three Dutch Men of War: the Master and many of his men killed, and brought into Mallaca: and there the Ship and Goods were confiscated, valued at one hundred thousand pounds. The Dragon and Katherine, two English Ships of Sir William Cureen, valued at three hundred thousand pounds, besides their Commanders, and others, who had very great
Estates therein, anno 1636. were set upon by seven Dutch Men of War, as they past the Streights of Mallaca from China, and by them taken. The men tyed back to back, and slung over bord; the Goods being taken out of the said Ships, were seised to the use of the States there; and the Ships sunk, that it might not be known who committed that cruel fact. Anno 162. The Factories of the English in Sumatia seised by the States. The Factories of the English in Siain seised by the States. In Aru, and Manueado in Sumatia, an Oriental Island, the English had several Factories there, by the consent of the King and Natives: but by the practise of the Hollan∣ders anno 1625. they were all enforced to leave their Fa∣ctories, and the places. In Pachane, the chief City of Pachane, one of the King∣doms of Siain in India, the English had several Facto∣ries there, but by the unjust practices of the Hollanders, they were compelled to quit the Country, and their Factories, to an unexpressable loss to the English. Pachane being a great Country for Gold, Silver, Pearls, Precious Stones, and many other rich Commodities. The States make War against the King of Ban∣tam, for his love to the English. The Hollanders anno 1636. made War against the King of Bantam, one of the Kings of Java major, for that he had a great kindness for the English. And for that he per∣mitted them to have several Factories in Sunda, and Jambe for Pepper; And by this art would have driven the English from thence, and their chief Pepper Trade. And so would have shut them out, both of the Streights of Sunda and Mallaca. Which, from these men we may learn, That those which study to be great by any means, must by all means forget to be good: they must dismiss that puny thing Conscience; for there is no such Remora to Grandeur, as a coy and squemish Conscience: And it's observ d by a learned Gen∣tleman, had Alexander boggled at invading other mens Kingdoms, he had never wept for the scarcity of Worlds. The oppressions and injuries of these men in India, not only to the English, but to the Subjects of many of the Kings and Princes in Europe, are not to be express d (and
indeed they are fitter for our wouder than our words.) It were to be desired that they would set forth a Manifesto to the world of the particular losses they and their Sub∣jects have sustained by the Insolencies and Usurpations of these men. And then they would be as much scorned, by every good man in Europe, as they are now hated by the Indians in America: For the Indians, though they have no kindness for the Spaniard, yet they look upon him as a Gentleman, but the Hollanders they abhor, for their sor∣did acts, and unjust practises. As they have made themselves Masters of the South Seas, so having Anno 1662. taken Cochen from the Por∣tuguez, and other Ports upon the coast of Mallabar, they have the sole command upon the North Seas from Malla∣bar The States have the sole com∣mand of the North Seas.to India, Persia, Arabia, Red Sea, Mosambique, all along to Cabo de Bon Esperanza, so they will in a short time restrain all the Kings and Princes in Europe, and their Subjects to have a Trade or Commerce in those parts. And whether it may not by the help of a little Logick be concluded out of their stile; consider, The States General The stile of the States in the Indies.of the United Provinces of Battavia, Amboyna, Tewan, &c▪ Commanders of all the Seas of the world; Protectors of all the Kings and Princes in Europe; and Supreme Mode∣rators of all the affairs of Christendom: For so they stile and write themselves in the East Indies. Now they are High and Mighty States indeed: Ambi∣tion is never so high, but she thinks still to mount; that sta∣tion which lately seem'd the top, is but a step to her now; and what before was great in desiring, seem little, being once in power.
The Method and Arts which the States have used in India to In∣large their Dominions, and to exclude others from Trade or Commerce there. 1. THey are in a perpetual state of Hostility, ever Warring upon some Prince or other; and thereby gain either Tribute or Dominion. 2. When they have to do with any King or Prince, they order their Affairs so, that he must perform first; and when he hath done, they are States, and so are free. 3. They encourage the Natives upon every small occa∣sion of discontent, to Arm against their Prince, premi∣sing them their assistance, which they exactly perform. When they have Conquered the King, and taken his Ca∣stles and Ports, (which they first secure, making them∣selves Masters of the Seas and great Rivers) then they subdue the Natives: and so Vest in themselves Sove∣reign Dominion, and make both King and Natives their Vassals. 4. If the Natives take up Arms against their Prince, (as many times they do) then they encourage him against his Rebellious Subjects, and give him their assistance: When the Natives are subdued, then they conquer the King himself, or else demand so much for their assistance, that he is not able to pay; and so he must submit himself and his Dominions to their boundless ambition.
5. If there be any Wars between Prince and Prince, they will be sure to fall in with one of them, and give him their Aid, and so make War in the other Princes Do∣minion. When that Prince is subdued, and themselves setled in his Dominions, then they reduce the other Prince to their Obedience, having some Castles or Ports in his Dominions, which do command the whole. 6. If they have any places of concern, and the Subjects of any Prince in Europe have any Factories there, (which they cannot fairly dismiss) then they lay such great Taxes and Impositions upon the Natives, that they are enforced to Arms. When they are subdued, then they charge the Subjects of that Prince as Conspirators and Abetters of the Natives; and so seize upon all their Goods, Factories, and enforce them to quit the Country, or else send them into some of their Islands to be Slaves. 7. If any Prince in Europe make any Treaty or League with the States, concerning any Affairs in India, they send to the States of Battavia private Instructions, contrary to their publick Agreement: So that all Treaties and Leagues, as to the Affairs of India, are ineffectual. 8. Where they have footing in any Island or Dominion, they claim by Conquest, and so lay what Taxes they please upon the Natives. And being in by Conquest, they are Proprietaries; and so exclude the Subjects of any King or Prince from Trade there. 9. If the Subjects of any King or Prince in Europe have Factories in the Dominions of any Prince there, (if they begin to be considerable) they take some occasion to War against that Prince; and upon Treaty, charge those Sub∣jects to be the cause of the War: so if the Prince will have Peace, he must seize their Factories and Goods, and banish them his Country. 10. They pretend great kindness to their Neighbour Princes, and enter into a League Offensive and Defensive with them: And by that means get the favour of those Princes to have some Ports, or strong Castles for Defence
of their Trade, as they pretend in their Territories. When that is done, they either make Wars themselves, (and so those Princes must aid them) or else perswade the Princes his Allies to make War upon another Prince; which they do, and so fight one Prince against another; and when they are sufficiently enweakned, they Conquer them all. 11. If they have any difference with any potent King or Prince, they get time: if it be for their advantage, they give good words, but part with no money. That done, they make their Addresses to some Favorite of that Prince, (which do all in the Court of the Indian Kings,) and so with small charges they effect great matters. By these steps they have clim'd up to those immense Pyramids of Dominion and Power in the Indies, that they are become formidable to the greatest Emperours and Princes there: ever making good in their practice that Lemma of Loyola, (the Apostle of their State) Cavete vo∣bis The States ex∣clude the Sub∣jects of the Princes of Eu∣rope to Trade in the East-Indies.Principes. They have excluded the Subjects of all Kings and Princes in Europe from Traffick and Commerce, where they have any Territories or Power. And by reason of the Dominion they have in the South Seas, and the Con∣quests and Fortifications they make upon the North Seas, all their Subjects will finally be debarred from any Traf∣fick or Trade there. Of what dangerous consequence this will prove, it's very well beseeming the Wisdom of the greatest Kings and Princes to consider. For there are a Generation which are born to be the Plague, Disquiet, and Scourge of Europe; and they gladly sacrifice the Publick Peace of Christendom to their own private Interest. If we consider how many brave and large Dominions in the East-Indies, were under the Sovereignty of the Kings of Great Britain, what flourishing Factories their Sub∣jects had there, how great Kings they might have been in Treasure and Dominion, how rich their Subjects, it can∣not
The great los∣es which the King of Eng∣land and his Subjects have sustained in India by the Vsupation of the States. but discompose an English Spirit, that his King should be ousted of all those Dominions, and his Subjects devested of their Riches and Hopes, by a People who had nothing but the Favour of the King of Great Britain to support them, nor no Fortress to defend them but that of Ambyna, and that built by the Monies of the English Company. Well, we may see what Treachery and Perfidiousness can do, being accompanied with Ambition and Industry: But they will ere long find, that slippery are those Foun∣dations of Might and Greatness, which are not laid upon the Principles of Justice, and regulated by the Maxims of Christian Piety. The Inlen∣cies of the States to the King of Eng∣land in Eu∣rope. And as America was the Theatre where they Acted these Tragedies, and unparallel'd Insolencies: so they have not spared to manifest their Ingratitude, Affronts, and highest Injuries against the Kings of Great Britain, and the English Nation here in Europe. Anno 1639. when his Catholick Majesty sent his Ar∣mado with some Souldiers into Flanders, to strengthen his Garisons there, but by cross Winds were driven upon the English Coasts; the States Equipped out a great Fleet of Men of War, charged the Spanish Armado, ravished his The States fight the Spa∣nish Armado upon the Bri∣tish Seas, a∣gainst the King of Eng∣lands Com∣mand.Ships out of the Harbours of his late Majesty at Dover, and destroyed most of that Fleet, though in his Majesties Pro∣tection and Dominions, and against his Majestles express Command: thereby Usurping Sovereignty to themselves, and giving Laws to his Majesty in his own Dominions. A bold Affront! And certainly they could not think but his Majesty did highly resent it. But to keep him busied at home, and that his Majesty might have no opportunity to bring them to Justice for their Insolency: there being (Anno 1639.) some Distempers in Scotland, they did greatly promote them, and contributed their assistance to them, in all man∣ner of Military Provisions.
Monarchy, and with that the Glory of the English Na∣tion, was now departed; the People model themselves into a Commonwealth, they take a full prospect of the Usurpations, Injuries, and Oppressions of the States, which had such a horrid complexion of Injustice upon them, that the new Commonwealth denounce War against the old States, they obtain many signal Victories, and had much disabled their Naval Forces. Now the States be∣ing not well able to contest with the English Valour, they project how they might deliver themselves from the fury of these men: At last, they having by their Emissaries first disseminated Sedition amongst the People, whereby the Commonwealth became a burthen to the Nation, and wise men began to be troubled at the ill face of affairs, they ad∣judged the best expedient was, to set up a single Person, (the States being now sensible of their former errour, in not supporting the English Monarchy, as their best safety, and greatest Protection) O. as the fittest person for such a Bold-fac'd Treason, (by their underhand practise, and paying to him some hundred thousand of pounds) is pre∣vailed with to take upon him the Government of the Na∣tion. The War is continued against them with great suc∣cess: yet by their Interest they obtain a Treaty. And thereupon paying a Million of Pounds to O. a Peace is concluded; but the most dishonourable and unjust that ever was to this Nation. But such as it was, it conti∣nued till his Majesties blessed Restauration. Difference be∣twixt the King of England, and his Parlia∣ment, and how advanced by the States. Anno 1641. there happening some difference betwixt his late Majesty, and his Parliament, they sent over their Rabbies of Sedition here into England, and infus'd their Antimonarchical Principles and dangerous Doctrines into some giddy heads of the English Nation, who thereby became so intoxicated, that they were never at rest till (like men infected with the Plague) they infected others; and thereby a great part of the people became disobservant to the Laws of the Nation, and Rebels to their King. An Army of these men were raised, they having their
chief Officers and Commanders, and all Warlike Provisi∣ons out of the United Provinces, to bring Destruction to the King, and Desolation to the Kingdom. Thereby that Great King being reduced to streights, (notwith∣withstanding the many Obligations of the States to his Majesty) they could never be induced to contribute any Aid or Assistance to redeem that Excellent Prince from so great Abyss of Misery, or to preserve the Kingdom from Ruine and Confusion, (which with their Assistance might have been easily prevented.) But the States were so far from any Act of Charity or Piety, that Amsterdam was made the great Emporium or Market for the Rebels to sell those rich and costly Goods which they had plundered from his Majesties best Subjects in England, (whereas no King or Prince in Christendom would suffer them to make use of any of their Ports to that purpose) and the best Furniture that some of the States have in their Houses at this very day, are many of those stollen Goods. And by this means they brought Poverty and Misery to this Nation, Riches and Plenty to themselves. This unfortunate Nation being thus in Combustion, and all befry'd, the Hogan Mogans with joy, as an ingenious man observed, did warm their hands at those unhappy flames, which they themselves had kindled, tuning their merry Harps, when others were weeping over a Kingdoms Funeral. In England there being nothing but Confusion and Ruine, nothing to be seen but the Convulsions of a dying State. His now Sacred Majesty, for his own safety and security, withdrew Himself out of England, and re∣solved to live for some time (in his Solitudes) in the Bel∣gick The States af∣ford no kind∣ness to his now Majest being in their Pro∣vinces.Provinces: But the States were so far from affording Him any comfort, as a distressed Prince, or yielding Him any kindness, as their best Friend, and greatest Patron, that if his Majesty had not had timely notice of it, it is cre∣dibly said, that he had been delivered up (in their Territo∣ries) as a Sacrifice to the fury of his cruellest Enemy.
His Majesty, Anno 1660. being restored to his King∣doms, (forgetting all their former Unkindnesses and In∣gratitudes) his care was to conclude a strict League with the said States. But no sooner was it concluded, but they return to their usual practise of breaking of Articles, (who expect an exact observance of them from others, but per∣form none themselves.) Thereupon his Majesty, 1664. was stirred up by the Complaints of his people, and the Unanimous Votes of both Houses of Parliament, to de∣fend the Rights of his Crown, and the Liberties of his People, which the States had most notoriously invaded: yet his Majesty to prevent the effusion of bloud, (as Ty∣rants shed bloud for pleasure, Kings for necessity) spent the whole Summer in Negotiations to bring them to rea∣son, but all his endeavours proved ineffectual. The States make Addres∣ses to the King of Great Bri∣tain for Peace. Thereupon, Anno 1665 ensued the War, and conti∣nued to the year 1667. Wherein his Majesty obtained so many signal Victories, that by their humble Supplications and Addresses to his Majesty for Peace, he was induced to a Treaty. And his Majesty having the Garranty of the most Christian King, and of the said States, that no Act of Hostility during the said Treaty should be attempted by them against his Majesty, or any of his Dominions; thereupon his Majesty did forbear to Equip his Fleet. Yet the said States, contrary to their Faith, during the said Treaty, (with their Fleet though not half mann'd or Vi∣ctuall'd The States burn his Maje∣sties Ships.for any time) most treacherously invaded his Ma∣jesties Dominions, burnt and committed Destruction upon several Ships of his Majesties Navy Royal, in his own Ports and Harbour. Whereas if his Majesty had set forth his Fleet, they had not been able to have put to Sea that year for want of Mariners, and other discouragements upon them, having received so many memorable defeats by the Valour and Courage of his subjects. No sooner was there a Peace concluded, but every Ar∣ticle was broken by them. And no wonder, for it's a Maxime of their State, That all Alliance as to them is in∣considerable:
the foundation of their Greatness and Safety, consists in their own Power and Strength. Therefore to keep any Article is of no consideration to them. Now they invade his Majesties Fishing upon the British Seas without his Royal License, they refuse to strike Sail, and dispute his Sovereignty of the British Seas. Affronts so high, and Indignities so transcendent, that no King or Potentate (except these men) did ever so much as que∣stion any of them. It doth appear by the Records in the Tower, and the Municipal Laws of this Nation, that the Kings of Eng∣land have had ever from the time of the Romans an abso∣lute The Sovereign∣ty of the British Seas, in the King, and the Fishing.and uninterrupted Right, and exclusive Property in the Sovereignty of the British Seas, in the Passages and Fishing thereof; and hath power to make Laws, and ex∣ercise Supreme Jurisdiction over all Persons, and in all cases within or upon the said Seas, as 'twas agreed 26 E. 1. by the Agents and Embassadors of Genoa, Catoloigna, Spain, Almaine, Zealand, Holland, Friesland, Denmark, Norway, and divers other places in the Empire. And by all the States and Princes of Europe, in a case then in question be∣tween the King of England and his most Christian Maje∣sty; concerning Rayner Grimbold his Admiral exercising some Jurisdiction upon the British Seas. See the Records in the Tower, 26 E. 1. de Superioritate Maris Anglici. The Laws of Olleron which (after the Rhodian Laws were antiquated) have now near five hundred years been received by all the Christian World for regulating Sea-Affairs, and deciding of Maritine Controversies, were first declared by King R. 1. at his return from the Holy Land, and by him caused to be published in the Isle of Olleron, as belonging to the Dutchy of Aquitane. Licenses grant∣ed to Neigh∣bour Princes for their Sub∣jects to fish, paying tribute. If the Subjects of any King or Prince have a Right to Fish in the British Seas, I do, desire to be satisfied, What should be the reason that all Neighbour Princes have by Treaty obtained license from the Kings of England, for their Subjects to Fish in those Seas, and have paid Tribute,
as it doth appear by the Licences granted by H. 4. unto the French. By H. 6. unto the Dutchess of Burgundy. To those of Brabant and Flanders by E. 4. To Francis Duke of Bri∣tain for his Subjects. Philip II. King of Spain, in the first year of Queen Mary, obtained a Licence for his Subjects to fish upon the North Coasts of Ireland, for the term of one and twenty years, paying yearly for the same 1000 l. which was accordingly paid into the Exchequer of Ireland. And the Presidents in R. 1. King John, E. 3. and other Kings, are almost infinite. And if any King or Prince could pretend to any right, certainly His Most Christian Majestic hath as good a pre∣tence as any. But that King by the special Licence of the Kings of England, and not otherwise, hath fish'd upon the British Coasts, with a set and limited number of Boats. And that for his own Family, and being likewise to observe the Laws and Orders of his own Fishermen: For breach whereof, divers of his Subjects have been taken and imprisoned in Dover Castle and elswhere; as doth appear by many presidents in time of E. 3. H. 4. H. 7. &c. in the Tower. The Subjects of other Princes pay for their liberty of fish∣ing. Neither is this singular in the King of England only, for in Russia, many Leagues from the Main, Fishermen do pay for their fishing great Taxes to the Emperor of Russia And in most places, other Nations are prohibited to fish. The King of Denmark doth the like, and taketh great Tribute both at Wardhouse and the Sound. And the like he doth now for Norway. All the bordering Princes of Italy do the like within the Mediterranean Seas. The States do take an Imposition upon fish, which is taken upon the British Seas, and within the Streams and Dominions of other Princes. The Hollanders do allow the tenth Fish, both in Russia, Lappia, and other places, or pay a Composition for the same: And do also pay a Tribute in the Sound, for pas∣sage to fetch the said Fish.
But I shall not give my self any trouble in a point so clear. I would desire to know of the Hollanders, by what right or title they fish upon the British Seas. If they have a right, Why did the Earls of Holland, and them∣selves after the said Earls take Licences from the Kings of England, for their Subjects to fish and pay tribute? as they have done, as it appeareth by many ancient Presidents in the Tower. But now I remember, it's a Principle of their State, That if they get the possession of any thing, never to dispute the right, so it be of conveniency or profit to them to keep it. All passing upon the ritish Seas ought to strike sail. The next is the striking of the Sail, which is nothing but an humble acknowledgement of His Majesties Sove∣raignty of the British Seas, and a grateful submission for their liberty to pass upon them; for strangers (by the Law and Custom of the British Seas) being to pass those Seas, either in coming to England, or going to any other place (without so much as touching upon any of His Majesties Licences of safe Conduct granted by the King of Great Britain.Dominions) have us'd to take safe Conducts and Licences of the Kings of England, to secure and protect them in their passage. Vide Rot. Franciae, 11. H. 4 de Salvo conductu. The Presidents are exceeding many amongst the Records in the Tower. The striking of the Sail, is one of the an∣cientest Prerogatives of the Crown of England, For, I observe in the second year of King John, it was declared at Hastings by the King, with the advice of His Lords Temporal, for a Law and Custom of the Sea, That if a Lieutenant in any voyage, being ordained by the King, doth encounter upon the Sea, any ship or Vessel laden or unladen, that will not strike or vail their Bonnets at the Commandment of the Lieutenant of the King, or of the Admiral of the King, or his Lieutenant, but will fight against them of the Fleet; that if they can be taken, they be reputed as Enemies, their Ships, Vessels and Goods taken and forfeited, as the Goods of Enemies. And that the common people being in the same, be chastised by Im∣prisonment of their bodies, for their Rebellion, Inter Leges
Marinas, Anno 2 Johannis Regis, amongst the Records of the Tower. The Hollanders therefore refusing to strike sail, do deny His Majesties Soveraignty in the Seas (one of the most precious Jewels of the Crown) and the principal means of the Trade, Wealth and Safety of this Nation; and The Soveraign∣ty of the Sea ought to be pre∣served. The Hollanders supplant Trade.which all true English men, with the hazard of their lives and fortunes, are obliged to preserve and maintain, for Imperator Maris, est Dominus Terrae. And as they have deny'd His Majesties Soveraignty, so they have by their Artifice supplanted the Trade and Traf∣fick of His Subjects, which are the only Pillars of Riches and Safety to this Nation. Consult the Muscovia, Turkey, &c. Companies, enquire at the Exchange, they will all tell you, It's gone, whi∣ther I know not, but into Amsterdam, and the United Provinces. The English are as active and industrious a people as any, but (of a more generous and noble Allay) they abhor to have Trade, by those base practises, or to gain it, by those sordid means as the Hollanders do. I doubt not but the English Nation being sensible of the Injuries and Op∣pressions done them by these men, will in short time, by their Sword and Valour reduce them to reason. The States have scanda∣lized His Ma∣jesty by Libels. And as they have supplanted the Trade of His Majesties Subjects; so they have endeavoured to make a diminution of His own Glory, by abusive Pictures and false Libels; not only in their own Territories, but in most of the Do∣minions of the Kings and Princes of of Europe, where the name of the King of Great Britain is renown'd. Repu∣tation abroad, and Reverence at home, are the Pillars of Safe∣ty and Soveraignty. By these Arts they have endeavoured, not only to lessen His Majestie, Reputation abroad, but to bring contempt upon Him, even amongst His own Subjects at home. With∣out doubt His Majesties good Subjects have a great Senti∣ment of these Indignities, and will not only carry an An∣tidote
in their ears, against the poyson of these Libels, but with their Swords, Lives and Fortunes will vindicate His Dignity, and bring these Ungrateful Miscreants to Justice. The States having put so many scorns and indignities upon his Majesty, and abuses upon His Subjects in their Trade (for which His Majestie was more troubled than for the Indignities done to Himself) He was resolved to have satisfaction of them. But they to give His Majesty disquiet in His own Dominions, and for a diversion to Him, made their Addresses to some persons of the Scotish Nati∣on The States make addresses to some of the Scotish Nation to rebel.(with them) for their Brotherly assistance, promising them they should be furnished with Men, Arms and Mo∣ney what they pleased. But the Scots (too well remem∣bring their late sufferings and calamities, and) having as great a sense of Loyalty and Duty for their King as any people in the world, with the greatest scorn and abhor∣rency rejected their most impious and rebellious motion. Not prevailing there, they set upon some Factories of Sedition in England: and by their Emissaries here, endea∣voured to work upon an honest party in this Nation, (though differing in some minute Ceremonies from the Church) but they looked upon it, as the greatest Injury and Indignity could be done them, to tempt them from the Loyalty to so good and gracious a King. And certainly His Majesty had a very good esteem for them, or else He would never have granted them that Act of Indulgence: An Act so transcendent, and exceed∣ing the bounty and grace of all former Kings, that it could not be obtain'd of them, though there had been many hundred thousand pounds offered for the purchase of it. But as His Majesty hath granted them Liberty of Consci∣ence; so (there's no doubt) they will make conscience of their Liberty. His Majesty of Great Britain, and the Most Christian King, of all Princes in Europe have most studied and en∣deavoured (for the good of their Subjects) to advance Trade and Commerce; yet their Subjects cry out they
have no Trade, and well they may, when the Hollanders are the great Supplanters of Trade, and obstructers of Commerce (to all others but themselves) in the world. And no wonder, for it's a prime principle of their State, That they must not be like the Joc-caul, which provide food for the Lyon; but they must imitate the prudent Cat, who mouses only for it self. Nothing can be more becoming the Majesty of two such Potent Kings, not only out of charity to deliver the distressed Dutch (an industrous and well meaning people of themselves) from the Tyranny and Oppression of those insolent States; but out of Piety towards God, to settle peace in Christendom (which is only by the power of these two Great Kings to be effected); and to which all The States have made more di∣sturbance in Europe, than the Turk these 50 years.Kings and Princes are oblig'd to contribute their assistance. For let it be soberly considered, if these men (if we may so call them) since the Revolt from their Prince, have not made greater distempers and confusions, and caused more effusion of blood, aud expence of Treasure in Europe, than the Great Turk hath done for these 500 years. And as they are more powerful by Sea, so they are much more dangerous in their practise. For, the Turk is a Prince, who with all Potentates doth exactly observe his Leagues, and keeps his Faith: But it's an Apophthegm in their State, that its for Kings and Merchants to keep their word and Faith: But for States, no longer then it's subservi∣ent to their Interest. And how exactly they make this good in their actions, I appeal to all the Kings and Princes of Europe, if ever they kept one Article, or their Faith in any thing, where The States will prove a greater plague to Chri∣stendom than the Turk.it was their interest to break it. Certainly these men live, as if great Sins would merit Heaven by an Antiperistasis. And its very well becoming the gravest Judgements to consider, if these men may not prove in a short time, a greater Terror and Plague to Christendom, than the Turk Himself. Insomuch as his Arms are at a great distance, and only Land-forces, but these men are seated in
the Centre of Europe, and being so Potent at Sea, and rich in Treasure, may cast an Army, and with that, blood and confusion into any Princes Dominion, whom they please to disquiet (especially being first reduced to poverty, which they labour to effect in all their Territories by obstructing of Trade) And they can more speedily and powerfully offend any Kingdom by Sea in one month, than the most puissant Army is able to to march through in a year. Well, It's time to reduce these men to Justice and Rea∣son; Prudence teacheth us to set limits to that Power, which deservedly may be suspected. For as they grow in Puissance and strength, so the more formidable they will render King of Spainthemselves to all Kings and Princes. From one great King they have taken so much blood, that he is fallen into a deep Consumption: And it's adjudged by some wise Physicians of State, that he will hardly recover. King of Swe∣den, King of Den∣mark. Did they not lately break the heart of one Potent King, and almost the back of another? Do they not privately engage Prince against Prince? and by that means bring misery and calamity to them both; and out of their ruine create riches and plenty themselves? Do they not under∣mine the Trade of all Europe, and send nothing but po∣verty, misery and complaints into all Princes Dominions? How dangerous and fatal their Greatness will in few years prove to all the Kings and Princes of Europe, and to their Subjects (if not timely prevented) a weak Statist  without the help of Galileo s Prospective-glass) may easily see. Yet there are a People in the World, which contribute their assistance to them, but let them be assured, that if these States by their Arts shall ex∣tricate themselves from the destruction and calamity which now threaten them, they must for all their friendly assi∣stance, expect nothing but Polyphemus courtesie, to be the last that shall be swallowed up. This is too evident by their Ingratitude and Insolencies to the Kings of Great Bri∣tain, and to the English Nation.
Nothing can give a check to their growing Power, but the Naval Forces of the King of Great Britain, whose Si∣tuation, Ports, Strength of Shipping, Courage of People, and Experince in Sea-Fights, have always made him very formidable. And that Henry the eighth understood so well, that he assumed to himself that Motto, Cui adhaereo, Praeest. This Naval Power of the King of Great Britain, is the The Naval power of Eng∣land, is the se∣curity of Eu∣rope.security and safety of Europe: For if that were broken, they would look upon all the other as inconsiderable, because they are so far separate, that they might be destroyed be∣fore they could unite; and in case they did, the issue would be very doubtful. Then they would sacrifice one Prince after another, and bring nothing but confusion, poverty, and misery to Prince and People. And whether this be not more than conje∣ctural, look into their practices in the East-Indies: Ob∣serve their Arts and Methods, by which they have reduced so many great Kings, with their Subjects, Vassals and Slaves, to their vast Ambition. I have done: Yet I cannot but drop a few Tears for some honest People amongst them, who must be inwrapt in the Punishment, though innocent as to the Guilt. Now the most formidable and Potent Kings in Christen∣dom, are drawing their Forces against them, All their Trade is gone by Sea, nothing but horror and confusion in their Land; none of their Allyes durst appear for them. A mournful Tragedy. Methinks like wise Patriots, they should seise upon their States (whom they may thank for all their calamities and miseries) and yield them up to Ju∣stice; set up their Prince, whose Ancestors have spent so much Blood and Treasure to Vindicate their Rights and Li∣berties, and not to serve their ends of him (as all wise men think the States do at this juncture of affairs) for its an Adage amongst them, that Leo vinciri liber pernegat. And the States do as certainly hate a Prince, as a Prince doth a Free-State. Discite Justitium moniti, &c. FINIS.
