C1231 12259228 57768
A SHORT DISCOVERIE Of the Coasts and Continent of AMERICA, From the Equinoctiall Northward, and of the adjacent ISLES. By William Castell, Minister of the Gospell at Courtenhall in Northamptonshire. Whereunto is prefixed the Authors Petition to this pre∣sent Parliament, for the propagation of the Gospell in America; attested by many eminent English and Scottish Divines. And a late Ordinance of Parliament for that purpose, and for the better government of the English Plantations there. Together with Sir Benjamin Rudyers Speech in Parliament, 21. Ian. concerning America. London, Printed in the yeer 1644.
ORNATISSIMIS VIRIS. OLIVERO St. JOHN (Sollicitato∣ri Regis generali) & JOANNI WILD Servienti ad Legem; verae Religionis, Iuris municipalis, Patriae debitae liber∣tatis Assertoribus integerimis GVLIELMVS CASTELL, debitae ob∣servantiae, & gratitudinis ergo, sed praeci∣pue, ob eximium utriusque desiderium, propagandi Evangelium, apud Americo▪ Ho suum qualecunque Opusculum humiliter, D. D. D.
AD LECTOREM. NOn opus exegi, tamen haec quae scripta videbis, Romanam Cathedram, Hispanos, Erebm{que} movebunt. Scilicet Americam, sibi soli poscit habendam Rex Cantabrorum (quod non siit iste libellus, Multorum effigies, & fida medulla laborum.) Nec minu infensos Papam, Papae{que} Paentem, Hic liber inveniet; Papam retegendo suorum Impuros coitus, fraudes, perjuri, clades Indorum immeritas, saeve, & sine fine practas. Nec quicquam dubito (slygia depomta pharetra) In me missurum saevissima Daemona tela, Lumen Evangelij audentem suadere Britannis Laete festinare armata milite classe Gentibus ignotis; in quas bis mille per annos Vindicat imperium plus quam regale retentum; Iamque suas (tam sponte suas) vel posse reposci Et fremit, & frendit, velut atrox Cerberus olim At ego quid fremitus, quid inania tela mrarer? Si mode vel quicquam, nostro quocun{que} labore, Americis prosim, misere jam lumine cassis; Vt tandem in se discendant, laqueisque soluti Tartareis, Christitutissima castra sequantur. Agnoscantque Deum terrae caelique supremum Artificem, & Regem, vereque petentibus illum Depositum credant verum solamen in illo: Praesentis perdulce levamen, spemque beatae Vitae venturae, periturae tempore nullo. Hoc mihi si dederit, pater optimus undique ven Divite tellurem, gemmis, auroque, refertam Non focci facio; tanto dignatus honore.
TO THE MOST HIGH AND HONOVRABLE Court of PARLIAMENT, now Assembled. The humble Petition of WILLIAM CASTELL, Parson of Courtenhall in Northamptonshire, for the propogating of the Gospell in America. IN all humble manner, sheweth unto your appro∣ved wisdomes, the great and generall neglect of this Kingdome, in not propagating the glorious Gospell in America, a maine part of the World: Indeed the undertaking of the work is (in the ge∣nerall) acknowledged pious and charitable; but the small pro∣secution that hath hitherto been made of it, either by us or others, having (as yet) never been generally undertaken in pitty to mens soules, but in hope to possesse the Land of those Infidels, or of gaine by Commerce, may well make this and all other Christi∣an Kingdomes confesse, they have been exceeding remisse, in performing this so religious, so great, so necessary a worke. May it therefore please your wisdomes, to give your Petitioner leave to propose briefly, (as the nature of a Petition requireth) the more then ordinary piety and charity of the worke; the evi∣dent necessity, and benefit of undertaking, together with the easinesse of effecting. A greater expression of piety (your Petitioner conceiveth) there cannot be, then to make God knowne where he was never spoken nor thought of, to advance the Scepter of Christs King∣dome.
And now againe to reduce those, who (at first) were created after the Image of God from the manifest worship of Devils, to acknowledge and adore the blessed Trinity in Unity. To do this, is to be happy instruments of effecting those often repeated promises of God, in making all Nations blessed by the comming of Christ, and by sending his Word to all Lands: It is to inlarge greatly the pale of the Church. And to make those (who were the most detestable Synagogues of Sathan) delight∣full Temples of the Holy Ghost. It was a high point of piety in the Queen of the South, to come from the utmost parts of the world to heare the wisdome of Salomon. And so it was in Abraham, to leave his native countrey for the better, and more free service of his God. And certainly it will be esteemed no lesse in those, who (either in their persons or purses) shall religiously endeavour to make millions of those silly seduced Americans, to heare, understand, and practise, the mysterie of godlinesse. And as is the piety, such is the charity of the work, exceeding great, to no lesse then the immortall soules of innumerable men, who still sit in darknesse, and in the shadow of death, continual∣ly assaulted and devoured by the Dragon, whose greatest de∣light is to bring others with himselfe into the same irrecoverable gulfe of perdition. What those blinde and spirituall distressed Americans are, we were, and so had continued, had not Apo∣stolicall men afforded greater charity unto us, Divisis orbe Bri∣tannis, by long journeying; and not without great hazzard of their lives, then (as yet) hath been shewed by us unto them. We are not indeed indued with such eminent extraordinary gifts, as were the Primitive Christians; but yet (if it be duly considered) how fully and how purely God hath imparted his Gospell unto this Island; how miraculously he hath lately pro∣tected us from Spannish Invasions, and Popish Conspiracies; how (at this time) we abound in shipping, and all manner of provision for Sea: It will be found, that we (of all Nations) are most for the work, and most ingaged to do it in due thankful∣nesse to God. Nor is the arms of the Lord shortned, or his wonted bounty so restrained; but that undertaking the Voyage principally for
Gods glory, and in compassion to mens soules, we may expect a more then an ordinary blessing from him, whose usuall custome is to honour those that honour him, and most abundantly even in this life, to recompence such religious undertakings. The Spaniard boasteth much of what he hath already done in this kinde; but their own Authors report their unchristian be∣haviour; especially their monstrous cruelties to be such, as they caused the Infidels to detest the name of Christ. Your wisdomes may judge of the Lion by his claw. In one of their Islands cal∣led Hispaniola of 2000000 of men, as Benzo (in his Italian Hi∣story) affirmeth, they had not left 150 soules. And Lipsius just∣ly complaineth, that wheresoever they came, they cut downe men as they did corn without any compassion. And as for those that survived, they bought their lives at deare rates: for they put them to beare their carriages from place to place; and if they failed by the way, they either miserably dismembred, or killed them out-right. They lodged them like bruit beasts under the planks of their ships, till their flesh rotted from their backs: And if any failed in the full performance of his daily task, he was sure to be whipped till his body distilled with goar blood, and then poured they in either molten pitch or scalding oyle to sup∣ple him. A very strange and unlikely way to work Infidels unto the faith, neither yet could they (if they would) impart unto others the Gospell in the truth and purity thereof, who have it not themselves, but very corruptly, accompanied with many idle, absurd, idolatrous Inventions of their owne, which are but as so many superstructures wickedly oppressing, if not utterly sub∣verting the very foundations of Christianity. And although some of the reformed religion, English, Scotch, French, and Dutch, have already taken up their habitations in those parts, yet hath their going thither (as yet) beene to small purpose, for the converting of those nations, either for that they have placed themselves but in the skirts of America, where there are but few natives (as those of New England, or else for want of able and conscionable Ministers (as in Virginia) they themselves are become exceeding rude, more likely to turn He∣then, then to turn others to the Christian faith.
Besides, there is little or no hope our plantations there, should be of any long continuance, since here in England for some years last past, they have been rather diversly hindered then any wayes furthered, how and by whom, your wisdomes either have, or will shortly find out: but this is evident, that the proud super∣stitious Spaniard (who hateth their religion, and feareth their neighborhood, will spare them no longer then (to his over-swel∣ling greatnesse) shall seeme good: And in the judgement of most judicious Travellers that way, they may (if they will) easily enough suppresse and destroy all other our Plantations, as they did of late that of Saint Christophers, when they were no way provoked by us, as they will now pretend they are by a latter taking of Trinidado, and the losse of more then 150 of their men there. At least they will be sure to be desperately assaulted, as was the Isle of Providence, but the year last past. Whence your Petitioner offereth unto your Honourable con∣siderations a third Argument (drawn from meer necessity) that as you tender the happy proceeding of those (as yet) but weakly setled Plantations: the liberties, livelyhood, and lives, of many thousands our deare brethren and countrey men: and which is yet more the prosperous progresse of the Gospell, you would be pleased to consult of such an able and speedy supply, as may se∣cure them against the now expected cruelty of the Spaniard. To which needfull supply, the better and sooner to induce your wisdomes, your Petitioner desireth your yet a little further patience untill he hath shewed some temporall benefits that are thereby like to accrew unto this kingdome, together with the easinesse of effecting. When a kingdome beginneth to be overburthened with a mul∣titude of people (as England & Scotland now do) to have a con∣venient place where to send forth Colonies is no small benefit: And such are the North-East and North-West parts of Ame∣rica, between the degrees of 25 and 45 of the North latitude, which at this time do even offer themselves unto us, to be pro∣tected by us, against the known cruelty of the over near ap∣proaching Spaniard. A very large tract of ground containing spacious, healthfull, pleasant, and fruitfull countries, not only apt, but already provi∣ded of all things necessary for mans sustentation, Corne, Grasse,
and wholesome Cattell in good competency: but fish, fowle, fruits, and herbs in abuddant variety. If we should look no further then the South of Virginia, (which is our owne) wee shall finde there all manner of provision for life: besides Merchantable Commodities, Silke, Vines, Cot∣ton, Tobacco, Deere-skinnes, Goat-skinnes, rich Furre, and Beavers good store, Timber, Brasse, Iron, Pitch, Tarre, Rosin, and almost all things necessary for shipping, which if they shall be employed that way; they who are sent away may (with Gods blessing) within short time in due recompence of their set∣ting forth, returne this kingdome store of silver and gold, pearls, and precious stones; for undoubtedly (if there be not a generall mistake in all Authors, who have written of these places) such treasure is to be had; if not there, yet in places not farre remote, where (as yet the Spaniard hath nothing to do.) And in case the Spaniard will be troublesome to our Plantations, or shall (as it is generally conceived) be found an enemy to this kingdome, there is no way more likely to secure England, then by having a strong Navie there; hereby we may come to share, if not ut∣terly to defeat him of that vaste Indian Treasure, wherewith he setteth on fire so great a part of the Christian world, corrupteth many Councellors of state, supporteth the Papacy and general∣ly perplexeth all reformed Churches. Nor need any scrupulous quere be made, whether we may not assault an enemy in any place, or not esteeme them such as shall assault us in those places, where we have as much to do as they. The Spaniard claimeth indeed an Interest, little lsse than here∣ditary in almost all America, and the West Indies, but it is but by vertue of the Popes grant, which is nothing worth, as was long since determined by Queene Elizabeth, and her Councell; so as for the Spaniard to debarre us in the liberty of our Plantations, or freedome of commerce in those spacious Countries, were over proudly to take upon him; and for us to permit it were over∣much to yeeld of our own right. Especially, when we may, as now we may, so easily help our selves: For your Petitioner conceiveth there is no great difficul∣ty in the preparation here, or tediousnesse in the passage thither, or hazard when wee come there. The preparation of men and shipping, in respect of the daily happy expected accord between us and the Scots, is (upon the matter) already made. And as for
money it is in the power of this Honourable House to give suffi∣cient, without any grievance, or dislike of the Common-wealth, who (undoubtedly) in the generall will think nothing grievous, which shall be concluded by your wisdomes, expedient to such a pious and charitable worke. And as for the passage, how can it be thought either tedious or dangerous, it being ordinarily but six weeks saile, in a sea much more secure from Pirats, and much more free from shipwrack, and enemies coasts, than our ten or twelve moneths voyage into the East-Indies. And as for our good successe there, we need not feare it. The natives being now every where more than ever, out of an inveterate hatred to the Spaniard, ready and glad to enter∣taine us. Our best friends the Netherlanders being with eigth and twenty ships gone before to assist and further us. And which is much more, our going with a generall consent in Gods cause, for the promoting of the Gospell, and inlarging of his Church, may assure us of a more than ordinary protection and direction. That hitherto we have been lesse successefull in our voyages that way, we way justly impute it to this, that as yet they have not been undertaken with such a generall consent, and with such a full re∣ference to Gods glory as was requisite. And so your Petitioner having delivered his apprehension here∣in more briefely, than so weighty a matter might well require, he submits all the premises to your more full deliberation and conclusion, which he humbly prayeth, may be with all conve∣nient speed; the only best way under God to make it the better successefull. WEE whose names are here under-written, having been upon occasion acquainted with a motion intended to be made by Master William Castell, Parson of Courtenhall in the County of Northampton, to the High and Honourable Court of Parliament now assembled, concerning the propagation of the glorious Gospell of Christ in America. As we do well approve of the motion; so we do humbly desire his reasons may be duly considered: And so good a work furthered their wiser judge∣ments may resolve upon, to which we humbly submit the same.
Iohn Moseley, D. D. Ra Brownricke, D. D. Thomas Bam∣brig, D. D. Robert Sanderson, D. D. Richard Alleyne, D. D. Daniel Featly, D. D. Matthius Styles, D. D. Edmond Stan∣ton, D. D. Stephen Denison, D. D. Edw. Williamot, D. D. Ionathan Brown, D. D. Iasper Fisher, D. D. Hanniball Pot∣ter, D. D. Anthony Clapton, D. D. Thomas Drayton, D. D. Iohn Grant. D. D. Ministers of London. George Walker. Iames Palmer. Edward Malbury. Ioseph Ca∣ryll. Edmond Calamy. Adoniram Byfield. William Price. Ri∣chard Maden. Iames Batty. Matth. Griffeth. Ephrim Paget. Robert Pory. William Ianeway. Nathaniel Barry. Ministers of severall other Counties. Iohn White, Dorsetshire. William Ford, Iohn Pyns, Somerset∣shire. Zachery Caudry, Leistershire. Henry Paynter, Devon∣shire. Stephen Marsholl, Samuel Ioyner, Essex. Iohn Ward, Suf∣folke. Ier. Buroughes, Northfolke▪ Iohn Rawlinson, Darby. Moses Capell, William Rhet, Kent. Francis Charliot, Richard Gifford, Buck. William Englesby, Hertford. Other worthy Ministers of the Diocesse of Peterburrough, where the Petitioner liveth. Daniel Caudery. Ieremy Whittaker. Iohn Barry. Iames Cran∣ford. Samuel Craddock. David Ensme. Edmond Castell. Sa∣muel Male. Daniel Rogers. Benjamin Tomkins. Richard Cook. Richard Trueman. Iohn Guderick. William Spencer. Edmond Iames. Iohn Baynard. George Iay. Francis Presse. Miles Ber∣ket. Francis Atturbury. Ieremy Stephens. Iohn Ward. Peter Fawtract. William Malkinson. THe motion made by Master William Castell▪ Minister of the Gospell, for propagating of the blessed Evangell of Christ our
Lord and Saviour, in America, we conceive in the generall to be most pious, Christian and charitable. And therefore worthy to be seriously considered of all that love the glorious Name of Christ, and are zealous of the salvation of soules, which are without Christ, and without God in the world, wishing the op∣portunity and fit season, the instruments and meanes; and all things necessary for the prosecution of so pious a worke, to be considered by the wisdomes of Churches and civill powers, whom God hath called, and enablad with Piety, Prudence, and Policy, for matters of publick concernment, and of so great Im∣portance. And beseeching the Lord to blesse all their consulta∣tions, and proceedings for the advancing, and establishing the Kingdome of Jesus Christ. Alexander Henderson. Robert Blare. R. Bailly. M. Gallaspie. N. Smyth. M. Borthrick.
AN ORDINANCE Of the LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in Parliament. Whereby Robert Earle of Warwicke is made Governour in Chiefe, and Lord High Admirall of all those Iands and other Plantations, inabited, planted, or belonging, to any his Majesties the King of Englands Sub∣jects, within the bounds, and upon the Coasts of America. And a Committee appointed to be assisting unto him, for the better governing, strengthning, and preservation of the said Plantations; but chiefly for the advancement of the true Protestant Religion, and farther spreading of the Gospell of Christ among those that yet remaine there in great and miserable blindenesse and ignorance. WHereas many thousands of the Natives and good Subjects of this Kingdome of England, though the oppression of the Prelates, and other ill affected Ministers and Officers of State, have of late yeares, to their griefe and miserable hardship, been inforced to transplant themselves and their families into severall Ilands, and other remote and desolate parts of the West Indies: and having there through exceeding great labour and industry (with the blessing of God) ob∣tained for themselves and their families, some compe∣tent
and convenient meanes of maintenance and subsist∣ance, so that they are now in a reasonable well setled and peaceable condition. But fearing least the outragious malice of Papists and other ill-affected persons, should reach unto them in their poor & low, (but as yet peace∣able condition) and having beene informed, that there hath beene lately procured from his Majesty severall grants under the Great Seale for erecting some new Go∣vernours and Commanders amongst the said Planters in their afore-mentioned Plantations: Whereupon the said Planters, Adventurers, and Owners of land in the said forreign Plantations, have preferred their Petition unto this present Parliament, that for the better secu∣ring of them and their present estates there obtained, through so much extreame labour and difficulty, they might have some such Governours and government as should be approved of and confirmed by the authority of both Houses of Parliament. Which Petition of theirs the Lords and Commons having taken into con∣sideration, and finding it of great importance both to the safety and preservation of the aforesaid Natives and Subjects of this Kingdome, as well from all forraigne invasions and oppressions, as from their owne intestine distractions and disturbances, as also much tending to the honour and advantage of his Majesties Dominions, have thought fit, and do hereby Constitute and Ordain Robert Earle of Warwick Governour in chiefe, and Lord High Admirall of all those Ilands, and other Plantati∣ons, inhabited, planted, or belonging to any his Maje∣sties the King of Englands Subjects, or which hereafter may be inhabited, planted, or belonging to them, within the bounds, and upon the Coasts of America. And for the more effectuall, speedier, and easier transaction of
this so weighty and important a businesse, which con∣cernes the well-being and preservation of so many of the distressed Natives of this and other his Majesties Domi∣nions, the Lords and Commons have thought fit that Philip Earle of Pembrooke, Edward Earle of Manche∣ster, William Viscount Say and Seale, Philip Lord Wharton, Iohn Lord Roberds, Members of the House of Peeres, Sir Gilbert Gerard Knight and Baronet, Sir Ar∣thure Haselrig, Baronet, Sir Henry Vane junior, Knight, Sir Benjamin Rudyer Knight, Iohn Pym, Oliver Crom∣well, Dennis Bond, Miles Corbet, Cornelius Holland, Sa∣muel Vassall, Iohn Rolles, and William Spurstow, Esquiers, Members of the House of Commons, shall be Commis∣sioners to joyn in aide and assistance with the said Earle of Warwick chiefe Governour and Admirall of the said Plantations: which chiefe Governour, together with the said Commissioners or any four of them, shall here∣by have power and authority to provide for, order and dispose all things which they shall from time to time finde most fit and advantagious to the well-governing, securing, strenghning, and preserving, of the said Plan∣tations; and chiefly to the preservation and advance∣ment of the true Protestant Religion amongst the said Planters, inhabitants; and the further inlargement and spreading of the Gospell of Christ amongst those that yet remaine there in great and miserable blindnesse and ignorance. And for the better advancement of this so great a work, It is hereby further ordained by the said Lords and Commons, That the aforesaid Governour & Commissioners shall hereby have power and authority upon all weighty and important occasions which may concerne the good and safety of the aforesaid Planters, to call unto their advice and assistance therein any other
of the aforesaid Planters, Owners of land, or Inhabitants of the said Ilands and Plantations, which shall then be within twenty miles of the place where the said Com∣missioners shall then be; And shall have power and au∣thority to send for, view, and make use of all such Re∣cords, Books and Papers, which do or may concerne any of the said Plantations. And because the well-setling and establishing of such Officers & Governours as shall be laborious and faithfull in the right governing of all such persons as be resident in or upon the said Plantati∣ons, and due ordering and disposing of all such Affaires as concerne the safety and welfare of the same, is of very great advantage to the publick good of all such remote and new Plantations. It is thereby further Ordained and Decreed, That the said Robert Earle of Warwick, Governour in chiefe, and Admirall of the said Plantations, together with the a∣foresaid Commissioners, Philip Earle of Pembrooke, Edward Earle of Manchester, William Viscount Say and Seale, Philip Lord Wharton, Iohn Lord Roberts, Sir Gib∣bert Gerard Knight and Baronet, Sir Arthure Haelrig, Baronet, Sir Henry Vane, junior, Knight, Sir Benjamin Rudyer Knight, Iohn Pym, Oliver Cromwell, Dennis Bond, Miles Corbet, Cornelius Holland, Samuel Vassall, Iohn Iohn olls, and William Purstowe, Esquires, or the greater member of them, shall have power and authority from time to time to nominate, appoint, and constitute all such subordinate Governours, Councellors, Comman∣ders, Officers and Agents, as they shall judge to be best affected, and most fit and serviceable for the said Ilands, and Plantations: And shall hereby have power and au∣thority upon the death or other avoidance of the afore∣said chiefe Governour and Admirall, or any the other
Commissioners before named, from time to time to no∣minate and appoint such other chiefe Governour & Ad∣mirall, or Commissioners, in the place or room of such as shall so become voide. And shall also hereby have power and authority to remove any of the said subordi∣nate Governours, Councellors, Commanders, Officers, or Agents, which are, or shall be appointed to governe, counsell, or negotiate the publick affaires of the said Plantation, and in their place and room to appoint such other Officers as they shall judge fit. And it is hereby ordained, That no subordinate Governours, Councel∣lors, Commanders, Officers, Agents, Planters, or Inha∣bitants whatsoever, that are now resident in or upon the same Ilands or Plantations, shall admit or receive any other new Governours, Councellors, Commanders, Of∣ficers or Agents whatsoever, but such as shall be allow∣ed and approved of, under the Hands and Seales of the afore mentioned Commissioners, or any six of them, or under the Hands and Seales of such as shall authorize thereunto. And whereas for the better governement and security of the said Plantations and Ilands, and the Owners and Inhabitants, thereof, there may be just and fit occasion to assigne over some part of the power and authority (granted in this Ordinance to the chiefe Governour and Commissioners afore named) unto the said Owners, In∣habitants, or others; It is hereby Ordained, that the said chiefe Governors and Commissioners before men∣tioned, or the greater number of them, shall hereby be authorized to assigne, ratifie, and confirme so much of their aforementioned authority and power, and in such manner, and to such persons as they shall judge to be fit for the better governing and preserving of the said Plan∣tations
and Ilands from open violence and private di∣sturbance and distractions. And lastly, That whosoever shall doe, execute, or yeeld obedience to any thing contained in this Ordi∣nance, shall by vertue hereof be saved harmelesse and indempnified. Sir Benjamin Rudyers Speech, Concerning a WEST INDIE Association, at a Committee of the whole House in the Parliament 21 JACOBI. Sir Dudley Digs, I Doe professe, that as my Affection, my Reason, and my Iudgement, go strongly with the scope and drift of this proposition; so shall a good part of my poor fortune when it comes to execution. For to my understanding, there was never propound∣in Parliament, a defigne more proper for this kingdome, nor of more pregnant advantage to it, whether we con∣sider the Nature of our situation, or the quality of our Enemies forces. As we are an Iland, it concernes our being to have store of ships to defend us, and also our well-being by their Trade to inrich us. This Association for the West Indies, when it shall be regulated and established by Act of Parliament, and thereby secured from the violence and injury of any in∣truding
hand, it will certainly give many men encourage∣ment and confidence, voluntarily to bring in large and li∣berall contributions, towards so notable, so profitable an Enterprise. So that in short time we shall see many new ships built, many brave men imployed, and inabled for the service of their Country, none of this money shall be carryed out of the Kingdtme, but laid out for ship∣peng, which is the defence of it, and bestowed upon our own men, who must be ed and maintained, though they stay at home. For this, we shall reape the fruit of whatsoever benefit, Plantation, Traffick, or Purchase can procure us, besides honour and security. Now, let us a little consider the Enemy we are to en∣counter, the King of Spain. They are not his great Ter∣ritories which make him so powerfull, and so troublesome to all Christendome. For it is very well known, that Spain it selfe is but weak in men, and barren of Naturall Com∣modities. As for his other Territories, they lye divided and asunder, which is a weaknesse in its selfe; besides, they are held by force, and maintained at an extraordina∣ry charge. Insomuch, as although he be a great King, yet is he like the great Gant, who was said to have 100 hands, but he had 50 bellies to feed, so that raably, he had no more hands then another man. No Sir, they are his Mines in the West Indies, which minister fuell to feed his vast ambitious desire of univer∣sall Monarchy: It is the money he hath from thence, which makes him able to levie and pay Souldiers in all places; and to keepe an Army continually on foot, rea∣dy to invade and indanger his Neighbours. So that we have no other way, but to endeavour to cut him up at root, and seek to impeach, or to supplant him in the West Indies. By part of which course, that
Queen of most gracious memory, had heretofore al∣most brought him on his knees. And this our underta∣king (if it please God to blesse it) must needs effect it soo∣ner and quicker: the whole body of the Kingdome being united and concurring in a perpetuall supply to this acti∣on, so that he will have no free time given him to rest. Moreover, this will be a meanes not only to save, but to fill his Majesties Coffers, enabling the people to give him liberally, and often; the Kings ships will have little to doe, but to guard the Coasts, for the Sea-warre will chiefly be made at the charge of the Subject. Thus, (Sir Dudley Digs) I doubt not but that in short time, both King and people shall be safe at home, and fea∣red abroad. To conclude, I shall be very glad to heare any man make Objections against this Designe, so that he doe it with an intention to refine and perfect the work; but if any man shall speake against it with a minde to hinder and destroy it, I must intreat him to pardon me, if I doe scarce think him to be a good Englishman.
AN INTRODVCTION To the WORKE. THE West-Indies as usually knowne by the name of America, were first found out by Christopher Columbus, in the yeare 1493. at the expence of Ferdinand King of Castile; much furthered by Isabella his Queen, who Pawned all her Jewels to advance the Christian aith, and to augment the revenu of that Crowne. A worthy Princely act, as highly to be commended as the late pawning of th Jwels of the English Crowne, is justly to be condemned for the suppressing of the Gospell in the purity of it, and the exceeding weakning, if not utter ruining both of King and Kingdome. But though this New World (for so it may be justly styled, as being of a vast extent, much larger than Asia, and never heard of before) was first thought of, and in three voyages (not without divine inspiration and assistance) discovered by that worthy Co∣lumbus; yet one Americus, who after made a more full disco∣very, hath been honourd with the name of it. This goodly Countrey was first proffered to one of our Kings, Henry the se∣venth, a very wise Prince, who yet unhappily refused to be at any charge in the discovery; supposing the learned Columbus to build Castles in the ayre: but the motion being afterwards entertained by the said King Ferdinand; Castile, (the least of the three Kingdomes of Spain) became Commander of them all, and by reson of the incredible treasure yearely brought from thence, his successors are now become formidable to all Chri∣stiane
Nations, ye are designed by the Jesuits (the Popes grand Enginiers) to be the sole absolute Monarckes of all Christendom, A plot yet to bee prevented, by our King and State, if timely thought upon, in sending forth a considerable Navy, whereby we may best suppresse the Spaniards overswelling greatnesse, and the most subtill designes of Jesuits, who have bewitched no in∣considerable number of seeming Protestants here to beleeve, that the King and Grandees of Spaine, intend good to this Kingdom, it being most apparent, that that Indian treasure by them dispo∣sed; first raised, and still foments these never sufficiently to be deplored combustions in Ireland and England. I shall say nothing of the causes, that moved Columbus to un∣dertake this strange voyage, nor yet how it came to be first in∣habited, as being by many, espcially by Acosta so fully re∣lated. Thus much in generall is necssarily to be observed, that in re∣spect of latitude, it is extended well nigh from the South to the North-pole. It hath to the East Europe and Africa, from which it is divided by the wide German and Atlanticke Sea, sometimes by more, sometimes by lesse distance of leagues, nearer to Afri∣ca than Europa. To the West it hath Asia, and those Southerne parts of the world, as yet remaining to be discovered, how large the Sea is that divides America from Asia, is as little knowne, some are of opinion that it is but a narrow Sea, but it is more pro∣bable to prove very wide. The forme of this spacious Country is irregular in respect of its many turnings and windings, putting out and taking in a∣gaine both by sea and land, The North part of it hath a Medi∣terranean Sea, wherein lye those great Islands, Portu-Rico, Hi∣spaniola, Iamaica and Cuba, every way comparable to England, were it not for the more constant temperature of this our incom∣parable Climate. There are likewise at least a thousand lesser Islands, all lying within this Mediterranean Sea, which make many parts of the Continent of this Northene America to be farre distant one from another, in regard either of longitude or latitude, New-found-Land, the most North-east part as ye dis∣covered, is distant from the most North-west parts of Calfor∣nia (which are likewise the farthest) as yet discovered, full 90
degrees amounting to 1800 league, either of them by little and little drawing nearer the one to the other, untill they come with∣in a degree and an halfe of the Tropick of Cancer: and then from the most southerne part of Florida to Cullacan bordering upon the South-west seas of Nova Hispania, (which differ not much in latitude) the longitude both by sea and land doth not exceed above thirty degrees. And afterwards in some places more, in others lesse; this North America in a great disproportion falleth to the Equinoctiall, where from the most Esterne part of Gui∣ana to the most Western of Popaian, the longitude is computa∣ted at 35 dgrees, as for the latitude, that also differeth very much. The Northerne corner reacheth to the 53 degree; the Nore-west, so farre as it is yet discovered, but to 48, the maine body of it falling between those corners (which by some are fit∣ly compared to hornes) riseth no farther then the 24 degree. The forme of the South part of America beyond the Equinocti∣all is no lesse irregular, the generall description whereof I here forbeare, as intending in this booke to write onely of the Nor∣therne part. Now for the method which I have proposed to my selfe in the particular description hereof, it is thus. I shall begin with the most Northerne part thereof, which is New-found-Land; from whence keeping the Sea-coast, (the course I intend to ob∣serve constantly through-out this Discovery:) I shall forthwith fall upon our chiefe English plantations, and so taking view of Florida lying upon the Sea-coast for many hundred leagues, be∣tween Virginia and Nova-Histania, so farre as the Mediterra∣nian Sea will permit, I shall (God assisting) retune againe and surveigh the Islands great and small, comming in betweene the two parts of the Continent, which (as I said before) in some places being farre more, in others farre lesse, are divided the one from the other. Having done with the Islands, I am againe to bend West∣ward, and according to the Sea-coast, to proceed with all the prts of that part of this North America, falling downe to the Equinoctiall, adjoyning to the South America, much lager and much richer then are the Islands, or the Northerne side of the Continent: Though therefore New-found-Land, many other
Islnds, and the next adjacent Regions of the Nor-east Conti∣nent (with which I am to begin) afford but very little that may invite us thither; yet I hope those who begin to reade this Com∣pendium, will either reade it over, or at least passing over these Countries of much lesser worth, wil fall carefully to peruse what here by mee faithfully is related out of many approved Authors, concerning the pleasant habitations, exceeding fertility of the earth, abundant provisions in all kinds, and incredible treasure of many other Kingdomes and Provinces, lying Southward and South-west down to the Equinoctiall: Yea, and if it should be granted (as it cannot be granted without condemning of folly and falshood, more than 50 authors who have written more or lesse of this part of the New-World, & many hundred witnesses, who in severall Islands and parts of this wide Continent have seene and injoyed more then I have expressed thereof) yet with true Christians (who in some good measure understand what it is to live or dye for ever) the preservation of many thousands of soules out of those millions of men who now fit in darknesse and perish eternally for want of the light of the Gospell, ought to be of so high esteem, and so prerious in their eyes, as that though the most, or all of the fore-named invitations should be wanting, yet they should be content, I say not, to part with all, but with some considerable portion of their estates, whereby a strong Navy might withall conveniency be snt into such places of this North America, as the wisdome of Parliament shall judge meetest for the propagating of the Gospell. Now to proceed in a particular description according to the former proposed methed. New-found-Land. WHen it was first found out by the English, it was thought to have been the most Eastern part of the North-continent, but afterwards it was discoered to be an Island, one of the grea∣test in the world, a 110 leagues long, and in most places neare as many broad. To the South and East it hath the great Ocean
beating upon it. To the North it is separated by a narrow sea from the most North unknowne continent of America. To the West from Nova Francia by the Sea called St. Laurence Gulfe. Concerning the goodnesse of the soyle, and the fitnesse for a constant habitation (though M. Whitburne in a book written of New-found-Land doth in both the foresaid respects, and some other over highly commend it: Yet upon better inquiry of those who have formerly written of it as alo from those who usually resort thither, I find it to be a convenient habitation for Sommer, but not for Winter by reason of the exceeding coldnesse, and the deep overcovering of the land with snow, the waters with hug shelves of Ice, wherby they are debarred of necessary provisions, such (as in sommr time) the Island affordeth i great abundance and variety, namely, land-fowle and water-fowle, fresh fish and salt fish, upon the matter, all the sustentation that the Island affor∣deth. And yet the yearly rich commodity of sea-fish, almost of all kinds, which are there usually in great quantities taken and tran∣sported into Europe, cause not only us, but all other neighbouring Nations yearly to resort thither: And because the constant return of that fih commodity is worth 200000l. at the least yearely; there hath been diverse contentions betweene us English and o∣ther Nations, who (whether we would or no) have taken full liberty of fishing there, and of late it hath been agreed (and in some sort well observed) that every Nation should peaceably en∣joy those Ports and fishing placs, of which they should first be possessed. This great Island affordth many convenint and safe harboroughs for ships. Towards the North, the first Northrne Port narest to the South, which is cape Raz is Rennosa lying a little above the 46 degree, then Aqua-Forte two leagus more to the North; then Punta de Farilham as many more. Much higher neare upon the 28 degree are Thorne Bay, then the By Conception half a degre higher to the North. Then Bay Blanche and Bay Orge lying between the degrees of 50 and 51. From Cape de Raz on the South-side toward the West, are as many Ports of far greater note, and much more advantageous for taking greater store of fish, namely, Abram Trepessa 2 leagues di∣stant from the said cape: then Chincheca 2 more. St. Marys Ha∣ven 6 leagues more, Much more to the West within 15 scruples
of 47 degrees of latitude is Presenea: After which follow five small Islands, knowne by the name of Saint Peter, then Port Basques, then Claire Bay, all safe and convenient Harbours, remote the one from the other about forty miles. The most Westerne cape of New-found-Land are de Raye and Anguille, from whence the Land turneth againe to the North∣east, from the degree of 48 to 52, in all which space I reade of no Haven but that of St. George 12 leagues distant from Anguille Promontory; neither yet is that of any great repute, because not safe to come unto. It is to be observed before we passe to the next adjoyning part of the Continent, which is New France: that this Island is on all sides (as yet any thing compleatly discovered) found to have many other Islands great and small thereunto belonging, on the North-east side, besides many very small, rather Rockes than Islands; there are two of a pretty extent of good use and note, to wit, Bacalaos upon the 49 degree, and Aves somewhat above the 50. To the South many leagues distant lye foure great Islands, viz. Grand Banek, Vert Banck, Banquereaux and Sa∣ble, between the degrees of 43 and 46 (which to have named may suffice) as being of little worth, save only for fishing, where∣in they are reputed not inferiour to New-found-Land. Between which likewise and Nova Francia to the West and North-west, in a kind of Mediterranian Sea (knowne by the name of Saint Laurence Gulfe) lye the Isles of Britton, Tangeaux, Brion, Ra∣mees, and Natiscotec, not so big, but as profitable and more plea∣sant and apt for habitation than any of the former. These differ much in regard of their several distances towards the West from New-found-Land; but they differ more in respect of latitude, some part of Isle Britton falling to the 46 degree, whereas the most Northerne part of Natiscotec ariseth to the 50, between which two Islands lye the other three, environed with Seas very narrow and shelvy, rockie, and therefore to be carefully ob∣served by those who trade among them.
Nova Francia. NOw to proceed with the Continent. The most Easterly as yet discovered, part of it goth by the name of New France (not that it was first discovered by the French, for that was done long before, Anno 1497. by Iohn and his son Sebastian Cabot, imployed by Henry the seventh, King of England, to that pur∣pose) but because a more full Discovery hath since been made by two worthy French-men, Quarteri and Champlri, from whose much approved relations, I shall here briefely impart unto you what I conceive requisite for us to know. These two worthy French-men tell us that all the discovery they mad of this part of America (more than ever, as yet hath been made) was by the great River Canada, falling from the West about an hundred leagues into the North part of St. Lau∣rence Gulfe, and by the Southerne Ocean Westward. I shall therefore in this my brife Relation, trace them in their long Voyages this way, beginning with that part of New France that bordereth on both sides Canada, where they made their first enterance: Only let me take notice of some Promontories, lying beween the South Ocean and Canada River, not much fre∣quented, for that the comming in unto them hath often proved dangerous, the seas being in most places very narrow, by reason of the foresaid great Islands, and many more which formerly did, and now doth cause them who trade thither to steere a more safe course (above the said Islands) more to the North-east, be∣tween them and New-found-Land. They are knowne by these names, Cape de Esperance, and Bay de Chaleux, somewhat a∣bove the 48, Port Gachepe upon the 49, Cape de Bontoneriers, and Cape Evesque between the degrees of 50 and 49. From which last Cape beginneth the fall of Canada, best known, and most usually used by the West-side of Natiscot, whereunto an∣swereth on the North-side the River of Cheschedec more than thirty leagues distant (for such is the widenesse of that River
there affirmed to be.) The next cape on the South-side where∣unto the River Magaret on the North answereth is de Chate re∣mote from the former neare thirty leagues. Above these some∣what neare opposite: But 20 leagues remote from the former, lye the Rivers Lesquemin to the North, and Montonne to the South. The farthest navigable parts of this great river are on the North: Tadousac a good haven at the falling of the heady River Sagu∣nay from the North-west as yet but very little discovered, and the River May on the South-side. The other part of Canada not navigable with any great ves∣sell (was yet attmpted by Quartery to good purpose) and after upon a further search Champlany is affirmed to reach yet 300 lagues to the South-west. The principall places by them obser∣ved, are Orleance and Sault, thirty leagues from Tadousac, then follow Quebec 20, Mary River 60, Lake Pierto 100 leagues more. Now concerning the goodnesse of this soyle and climate, the condition of the Natives, and what hath been here performed by the French. It may suffice to know that the land o the North side of Canada from the fall of it to the River Saguenay (as far as is yet discovered,) is found to be mountenous, wooddy and barren; besides, the comming up the River on that side is found much more dangerous than that o the South, which also in many places requireth carefull circumspection, But then the land is much more fruitfull and convenient to trade for Bevours and rich Furres (the grand commodity here to be expected) by reason there are more store of Natives to trade withall: In the generall, all this part of the Countrey is judged to be over cold in Winter, to be well inhabited, though yet it be constantly af∣firmed that the Natives might live very plentifully there, were they not carelesse in sowing, planting, and making timely pro∣visions; and so prodigall in spending in two or three moneths, what might serve them the whole year. Sure it is that the French have taken a great opinion of it, for besides many voyages for∣merly made, they have from the yeare 1608. to the year 1616. made six voyages under the conduct of the fore-named Cham∣plany, and it is no lesse certaine that the French have continuall trading thither as finding good returne, especially for Bevours skins.
The other part of New France adjacent to the South Ocean, beginning where we came up in Saint Laurence Gulfe, on the West-side of Ile Britton, are Port Camseau, and Port de Save∣lette somewhat above the 45 degree of latitude, then halfe a de∣gree more to the South follow Bay de Toutes, and Port Elaine; The first ful thirty, the second neare fifty leagues from Savelette; then Bay Senne, Margurite River, and Cape Heve, all these fol∣low one after another for a degree farther: Yet more to the South-west follow Port de Rosignall, Cape de Sable, Port Cou∣rante, and Cape Forcu, one after another for the space of 35 leagues. From Cape Forcu beginneth a great Inlet Sea called Bay Francoyse, of 15 leagues wide at the first enterance, but after a while it is narrowed more and more as it runneth backward to∣wards the North-east, full 30 leagues into the Continent. And into this bosome of Sea are many good havens, but that the com∣ming up unto them is not so good: They are knowne by these names, Marys Bay, Port Royall, and Port aux Mines about five leagues distant the one from the other. And here it is to be observed, that the turning in of the fore∣said bosome of the sea neare as far to the North-east as the Gulf of Saint Laurence, environeth that part of New France, as the French call Cade. On the South-west side of Bay Francoyse, are Cape Range, Saint Iohns River, Port Coquilles, and the River Croix. Now the temprature of this part of this Country is better then the other, as not being so excessive cold, but the goodnesse of the soyle is in the generall not so good as is that part which is called Canada, lying on the South-side of the River Canoda. Yet the French have taken so good liking thereof, that the Lord de Monts, and the Lord de Poutrincourt have made some voy∣ages thither in person, and spent great part of their estates in set∣ling Plantations there, whereof there was great hope of good successe, untill the yeare 1611. and 1613. the then Queene Regent of France (who hath since proved the Fire-brand of Christendome, after the murder of her Husband Henry the fourth by Jesuits) sent some of that hellish fraternity thither in favour of her holy Father the Pope, and the King of Spain, to disturbe the Plantations (as no doubt her deare daughter, our now dread∣full
Queene) hath, doth, and will unhappily endevour to do, y the counsell of her greatest favourites Spanish pentions, especial∣ly if we shall presume to plant or trade in those much richer Southerne Countries, which the Spaniard proudly challengeth as his inheritance. Touching the Native Inhabitants here, I will say no more, but that they are much of the same condition with those who border about Canada; men of no religion, living without God in the world, deluded and captivated by Satan and their Priests (which they call Autonoins. The Country in Sommer affordeth them sufficient food, but for want of due provision for Winter, they then are often ex∣ceedingly pinched, and sometimes dye miserably for lacke of sustenance. It is here to be noted, that all this South part of the Continent knowne by the name of New France. From Cape Britton to Cape Crux, was in the yeare 1621. granted by King Iames to Sir William Alexander, a Scotch-man, who sent forth one since to discover it, and gave it a new name of New Scotland, but we heare of nothing of worth performed by him, or those who were employed by him. New England. THe next part of the Continent adjoyning to New France, (formerly accounted a parcell thereof, is New England) lying between the degrees of 41 and 45. The most Noth-east part of it, (as yet least discovered by our English,) beginneth at the River Penobscot, which the French call Pentegovet, near to the River Haute. The next are the Rivers Kinibequi over against Ile Bacchus 13 leagues, then Willims Bay 15 more, and Traga∣bigsana▪ alias, Cape Anna five more. But the most safe, and most convenient commings in, as lying nearest to the English Planta∣tions are Hender Bay, Accomack, and Milford Haven, near Cape Cod, all within 34 leagues of Cape Anna, opposite to the Bri∣stow
Plantation. The Natives bordering neare these Ports have divers names, and have many little Villages, whereof Sagadehoc, Mascosqueck, Penobscot, and the Mattahunts inhabiting two plesant Islands are chiefe. The greatest part of the Countrey (as our Country-man Cap∣taine Iohn Smith reporteth) aboundeth with variety, and store of wholsome cattell, fowles, fish, fruits, rich Furres, and timber for service; whereunto having added the excellent fertillity of the soyle for all manner of culture, and the sweet and wholsome temperatue of the climate; He doubteth not to compare New England with the most approved Countries of Europe. And I find his commendation seconded, if not exceeded by the Com∣pany of Adventurers for the Plantation there. For the goodnesse of the soyle they compare it to Devonshire. For the temperature of the ayre to France; but yet upon farther enquiry from divers of our English who have been there, and have taken a more ex∣act view lately of this Countrey: I am certainly informed that in regard of fertility it commth far short of old England. And now will I very briefly impart unto you (as far as is re∣quisite) what hath beene performed by our Nation in those parts. In the yeare 1606. King Iames did under the Great Seale Li∣cence a Plantation there, which was undertaken by some Noble men, and some Mrchants, conditionally that neither should plant within an hundred miles the one of the other. The first Colony consisting of an hundred husbandmen, sent at the charge, for the most, of the Lord Chiefe Justice Popham, under the go∣vernment of George Popham, in the yeare 1609. entered the great River Saga de Hoc, and by the bankes of the said River setled themselves, where they continued for the space of one yeare, and then returned into England, for that they were not able to provide for themselves, by reason of the death of both the Pophams, by whose care and charge they were chiefly governed and sustained. But their unexpected returne, was so displeasing to many other Adventurers here, as that for a good while after, they cast off all care of any further Plantation there. Hereupon the French fell upon those parts, but they were easi∣ly, and suddenly beaten out by Captaine Argall.
After this, with far greater preparation was Captaine Hobson sent forth out of England, with two of those Natives, who were intended for Interpreters, (as having gotten some little know∣ledge of our English tongue) in the time of more than two yeares abode here. But the voyage was frustrated, by reason that the Natives then were very much incensed with our English men, because one Hunt an English-man, had not long before most per∣fidiously allured twenty of them into his Shippe, under pre∣tence of Commerce, and so perfidiously carried them away, and sold them for slaves unto the Spaniard. A third and fourth voyage was performed in the yeare 1614, and 1615, by Captain Iohn Smith, but those neither with any good successe, for in the former, he neither discovered any gol∣den or silver Mines, nor yet found any such usefull Whales as he expected. And in the other voyage, he was taken by the French Pirates, and by them for a while detained. A fifth voyage accompanied with a Colony of 19. families, set forth from Plimmouth in the beginning of September, in the yeare 1620. and on the nineteenth of November following, they entered a nooke of the Sea ten miles from Cape Cod, and there they stayed untill the sixteenth of December. But not liking the place, they removed to another more fertill and more commodi∣ous, over against Milford Haven, where having built them a Towne, called Plimmoth, they have continued for more than twenty yeares. And since within these twelve yeares last past, many hundreths of families have resorted either to new Plim∣mouth, or they have made other plantations, as those of Bristall neare Cape Anna, and Connock neare Hinders Bay, where they have continued a good while, every yeare better and better ac∣commodated with necessary provision for life, and not without some indifferent intercourse and correspondency with the Na∣tives, upon whom they have thus far wrought, toward the bring∣ing them to God, as that they usually acknowledge the God of the English, to be good, but their god (which they call Tanto) to be nought. And yet for feare of the Devill by whom they are expresly prohibited, they dare not frequent our Plantatione, nor confer with our men about Christian Religion, so often as they would. Neither indeed is it likely our men should be able to doe
any good upon those (in respect of a happy conversion to Christ) so extreamely seduced and hardened infidels, unlesse they were better able to give them Law, and by a holy violence compell them as it were to come in, which may be done without any colour of injustice, or crulty, as tending both to their temporall and eternall felicity; especially unlesse they had a greater power and meanes to take away their young children, whereby they might become ours, and so be brought to the knowledge of Christianity, which they might successefully impart unto their miserable seduced parents, at least they would be sure to sticks fast to tht most blessed and saving doctrine they learned in their youth. And this rule ought generally to be observed in all other our Plantations in America, either made, or to be made. I might adde many other generall and particular observations concerning New England, but it would not agree with my for∣mer proposall, which was not to write all of any place, but some∣what of every place. Wherefore (leaving those who are desi∣rous of farther information to many English Authors, who have more fully writ of that Countrey) I proceed to the Dutch Plan∣tation. New Netherland. AS the bounds of New England West-ward, and by the South endeth with the Promontory Malebare: So the Dutch Plantation beginneth there, and extendeth it selfe more West∣ward, and more Southward toward Virginia. Yet was first found out in the yeare 1609. by Master Henry Hudson an Eng∣lish-man, imployed by the States of the Low-countries for a dis∣covery in those parts: After which Discovery returning to Am∣sterdam, he was next yeare by the Merchants thereof sent forth againe with a ship furnished with such commodities as were fittest to truck with the Natives, for number far exceeding those of New England. The continent upon the Sea-coast from the foresaid Malebr bending a good space to the South-West. And
then a little to the North-west hath adjoyning foure Islands, Pe∣takonocke, Kotget, Christian, and Block; whereof the third Chri∣stian, is of good note for store of timber, aboundant fowle and fish. Within the Continent lyeth the great River Nassaw, whose first enterance is two miles wide, and for eight miles it cotinneth very Navigable, but after becommeth shallow. The country ad∣joyning on either side is very pleasant and fruitfull, inhabited by the Wapavockes and Nalucantos. Then followeth the River Siccanamos, the country whereun∣to adjoyning is possessed by the Pequets, professed enemies to the English. Then the River Virresche, on the West-side whereof ben∣ding to the North, lye the Sequini, and Novasis. Between these Nations, and the Matawaces, who live by fishing▪ there lieth an Archipellagus, wherein are many Islands: On the North-side of the Dutch Plantation springeth the river Machicham, called the great North river, which running thorow one of the widest parts of that part of the continent, as yet discovered, affordeth conve∣nient habitation for the Aquamachites, and the Manahots on the East-side. For the Sanachans and Tappans on the West-side. Neare of this great River, the Dutch have built a Castle of great use to them, not only for the keeping under of the Natives adjoy∣ning, but likewise for their more free trading with many of Flo∣rida, who usually come down the River Canida, and so by land to them. A plaine proofe, Canida is not far remote. There is yet another River, not fully discovered, bigger then the former, called the South River; It lyeth westerly by South toward Virginia; The enterance into it is very wide, having Cape May to the East, and Cape Hinlopen to the West, lying about the degrees of 41, and from thence the Sea-coast inclineth by little and little somewhat more then two degree to the South. A point necessarily to be observed by those who saile into those seas for avoiding of shelves and sands. The chiefe inhabitance ly∣ing on the East-side of this River to the East are the Sicones, and the Naraticons: On the West are the Minquaans, the Senenqua∣ans, and many more. And now concerning New Netherlands convenient tempera∣ture, the goodnesse of the soile, or commodities which either sea or land afford. I need say no more, but that in all these respects it
differeth not much from New England, only I must in these foure things give it the precedency, that the land in generall is richer, the fields more fragrant with flowers, the timber longer, and therefore more fit for building and shipping, the woods fuller of Bevors, and the waters of Salmon and Sturgeon. Virginia. VIrginia is next adjoyning westerly to New Netherland, it ex∣tendeth it selfe with relation to the Sea-coast, from North to South, from the degree of 39 to 33. And it is divided into two parts, the Northerne and the Southerne; the Southerne was first found out by Sir Walter Raleigh, in the yeare 1586. And by him in honour of our most gratiou Queen Elizabeth called Virginia; from whence the other part also is denominated, what successe his Discovery had or hath, I shal impart unto you in its due place, so soone as I have done with the Northerne part, which in the yeare 1606, from the degree 37 to 39. began to be inhabited by our English, and hath ever since continued, sometime in better, sometime in worser estate, but for some yeares last past, for many temporall respects beyond immagination prosperous. The Sommer is here as hot as in Spain, especially in Iune, Iuly and August, but it is for the most part greatly mitigated by a brisk Easternely wind, and other winds coming ordinarily from the Sea-coast; from December to March it freezeth sharply, but is not usually of any long continuance, some yeares more, and some years lesse, (as in other regions) and though here sometime drought, sometime raine do exceed, (yet do they not so exced,) but that the Inhabitants affording a due care and endevour, may and do reape the fruits of the land in great variety. There is but one only comming up unto this Norther part of Virginia, which is by a wide arme of the sea called Chesapeake, bounded on the North, and on the South with two great Pro∣montories, whereof the Northerne taketh denomination from King Charles, the Southerne from Prince Henry.
It extendeth it selfe from South to North (accompanied well neare for two hundred miles with the ebbing and flowing of the sea) so as it is navigable more than fifty miles; there falleth into it, as it passeth from the North-west, five principall Rivers, fed and maintained by many other Rivers, which I purposely omit, these being sufficient, (lying as they do, some 25. miles asunder) to fructifie and replenish with store of corne, grasse, and other fruits, almost all the knowne parts of North Virginia, which our English either now do, or shall undoubtedly by Gods assistance shortly enjoy. The first River is Pawhatan, which springing out of the Mountaines of Monocham, and afterwards encreased by divers other Rivers, becommeth so wide and so deep, as it is Navigable about an hundred miles from its fall, into the grand streame Che∣sapeacke, not far from Cape Henry: Either side of this River is inhabited by diversity of Natives, whereof on the North-side are the Chicahemans, the Wenankes, and the Paspaheyens, whereof the first are able to bring neare two hundred men to the war, the second an hundred, the third forty. And here forty miles from Cape Henry lyeth Iames Towne, our best hold: On the South∣side, the chiefe are the Nansamunds, consisting of about forty men of war, the Chesapeackes an hundred, the Apamatucks sixty, and either of these and others lesse considerable, by reason of their far smaller numbers, have their severall petty Kings, which they call Weroances. The second River distant from Pawhatan to th North, is Pa∣maunke, at first small, but after greatly increased by the accesse of other Rivers; all the Natives on either side this River, cannot bring above 150 men to the war. The third is Toppahanocke, Navigable about 150 miles, the Natives lying on both sides of it, whereof the Toppanahochs are not much more than 300 serviceable men. The fourth is Patowomeke, a very wide and deepe River, Na∣vigable 140. miles, by reason that divers other Rivers fall into it, and it is on either side, in regard of the commodiousnesse, and pleasantnesse of the soyle much inhabited, and is able out of three Villages only, Adigcomoco, Onawmament, Noyowane, to send 350, and as many more out of others.
The last and least River is called Pawtunxt, the Inhabitants whereof on either side cannot bring into the field above two hundred men. There are yet other Rivers, on the other side Eastward, all which fall likewise into the great River Chesapeacke, but they are of no great note, because not Navigabl, but the Natives in∣habiting about them, for proportion of ground, are as many as on the other side; the number of their fighting men are about foure hundred, so as the whole number of their men of war in the North part of Virginia, do not exceed three thousand, who being no better armed than with bowes and arrowes, and not daring to approach our great Ordnance, no nor our Muskets nei∣ther, if there be any store of them, lesse than three hundred of our men may easily beat away, and keepe them under. And now I shall acquint you with such things as the earth bringeth forth of her owne accord, as also what grain and other fruits carefull husbandry may produce. Store of grasse in many places there is not, not because the soile is unfit to yeeld it, but that it is hindered by the over-shadowing of trees, which almost in every place groweth into great abun∣dance, a thing easily to be amended, bycutting downe good store of them, as appeareth plainly in some of our Plantations, where this course being carefully performed: They have besides store of grasse, store of English and Indian graine; yea, I have been cre∣dibly informed by divers persons of good worth, that they have many fields belonging to a Plantation, where the ground yeeld∣eth greater increase upon bare tillage than ours here in England doth, with the most chargeable, and most painfull husbandry. Among the fruitfull trees of the wood, the prime are the Oak, Walnut, Mulberry, Prune Damson trees, of the fruit whereof stamped together, the Natives make of the dryer part that which serveth them as well as bread; and with the liquid part that which contenteth them as well as beere: They have also store of Cherries, and Graps greater than ours, though nothing so sweet, which undoubtedly may be justly imputed to the want of due husbandry, in setting, grafting, and pruning them. It hath besides diverse other trees, which though they beare no fruit, yet are they no lesse profitable for building and other uses, as
namely the Cedar, the Cyprus, and the Saaffras. It sends forth also of its owne accord great variety of herbs and roots, very usefull both for food and Physicke. The grain which the Natives set, in the place where great trees ood, a yeare or two before they had first burnt them down, and then rooted them up, are chiefly West-Indian Wheat, and Peaze, which being set in April, (foure wheat and two peaze graines, in several holes distant foure foot each from other;) in August they receive a wonderfull increase, every stalke bearing usually two or three eares, and every eare two hundred, some five hundred graines, which are as big, and as sweet, as our Rounsevals; but our Country-men (besides the Indian graine) doe now sow in great quantity our Wheat, Barley, Peaze and Oats, and receive usually as you have heard, a greater increase than our English land affordeth. The Beasts which the North part of Virginia, of it self offord∣eth, whose flesh yeeld wholesome nourishment, are upon the matter only Deere, of severall kinds, Castors, Hares, and Squir∣rels as big as our Conneys, and with either of these it aboundeth. But besides these, our Plantations doe at this present so abound with Neat and Swine, as that they feed more plentifully on them than they need; and as I have been credibly informed by divers worthy inhabitants, that they can, upon occasion spare sufficent, Beefe, Porke, Turkies, Hens, and Salt-fish, with such store of graine as may sufficiently victuall any Navy of ours which shall be imployed that may. The flying fowle there, such as are for prey, are Eagles and divers Hawkes; for food there rre Partriges, Pigeons Turkies, Black-birds, Thrushes, and in the Winter (though but little in the Summer) they do abound with Water-fowles of all sorts, Swans, Cranes, Geese, Ducks, and many more, whom we of Europe never knew. For Fish, there are Sea-calves, Salman, Trout, Eles, Soles, Herrings, Mullets, Pearch; and of all kind of Shell-fish, far greater and better than are ours. Now as concerning the condition of the Natives, it may suffice to know that some few of them, as the Sasquesahanoxs, who lye most Northerly about two miles from the grand River Chese∣peacke, are Giants in comparison of us; that other, as the Wicko∣comacks
are Dwarfs, though for the most part they are of a com∣petent stature, borne white, but turning tawny by continuall painting of themselves; they are strong and nimble of body, and well inured to indured Winter and Sommer; In Winter they lye in the woods by a great fire, clothed with the hairy skins of Deere and Castors, in Sommer with smooth skins. In the year 1606. at the charge of some Nobles and Citizens, under the Government of Master Neoport, a Colony of about an hundred men, was sent into this North part of Virginia▪ The first part where they began to build and plant, was at Cape Hen∣ry, where at the first they were kindly receved by the Natives, but it continued not long, for within a while they refused to sup∣ply them with any provision of victuals, and in the end they set upon them both by treachery and force, to subdue them, which they very hardly withstood, being almost faished, and had un∣doubtedly all forthwith perished, had not there then a new sup∣ply of an hundred and twenty more men, and of proportionable provision happily arrived out of England, under the conduct of the foresaid Master Neoport, in whose absence Captain Smith was Governour; but this was but a short refreshing, by reason that a great part of their provision was consumed by casualty of fire, neither was there any good agreement between the chiefe Officers there, or such a continued supply hence as was requisite, so as they fell again into a very hard condition, being extreamely pinched with famine, and daily assaulted by the Natives, in so much as they were all resolved to have retured into England, had it not been for the Lord De Laware, by whose comming with store of all provision, they were comforted and supported: And so they continued in a much bettering estate, under the Com∣mand of Captain Smith, Master Dale, and Master Gates: Cap∣tain Smith affirmeth that at his departure, he left there neare five hundred well provided with Victuall, and all manner of Amu∣nition; which by the comming of Master Dale and Master Gates was made as good again. And in this flourishing increasing con∣dition, they continued from the year 1610, unto 1621, in which yeare they lost by an unexpected treacherous surprisall of tae Na∣tives, three hundred and forty, and had been utterly destroyed, had not Iames Towe escaped by a Virginian, who had got some
little knowledge in Christianity, but since they have abundantly recovered that losse, being now more than a thousand, and com∣manding the Natives as they please: Many other remarkable passages touching this part of Virginia, are to be found in Cap∣taine Smiths Discourse thereof. The greater and more fertill part of Virginia is the Southerne, found out (as I said) by Sir Walter Raleigh, and since amply de∣scribed by our country-man Master Harcourt, who affirmeth that there are great store of Deere, Conneys, and big Squirrils, which afford very sweet and wholesome nourishment, and no lesse abundance of Fowle, as Peacocks, Partridges, Stock-doves, Cranes, Hernes, Swans, Geese; as also of Fish, as Sturgeon, Her∣ring, Rayes, Mullets, Plaice, Soles, Trouts, Eeles, and many more, beside infinite store of all kind of Shell-fish, and all of these very usefull for mans sustentation: There are likewise in this Southerne part, many Merchantable commodities, besides ample provision of almost all things necessary for shipping, which with a competent supply of men and Ammunition from England, might within a short time, by Gods blessed assistance, command the Northerne parts of America, where would be found silver and gold sufficient, though they never went over the Line, to abate the over-swelling greatnesse of the Spaniard, by whom the Papacy is only supported, and all Protestant Churches at this present so extreamely perplexed. There was in the yeare 1546, a small Colony sent into this part of Virginia, at the charge of Sir Walter Raleigh, but finding themselves not able long to resist the Natives, they returned into England. A Second Expedition was undertaken in the yeare 1585, by Sir Richard Grinvill, who continued not long there, but left a Colony of an hundred and seven under the command of Sir Ra∣phael Lane, who being greatly distressed by the Natives, were next yeare brought back again by Sir Francis Drake. The last voyage we reade of, was undertaken at the charge of the said Sir Walter Raleigh, by Master With, 1587, who finding the former Colony gone, and himselfe not able to make good the Plantation, returned.
Florida. THE next adjacent Countrey unto Virginia, to the West and Southwest is Florida, containing a very large tract of gronnd, not yet fully discovered, it hath the Island Cuba to the South, and runneth South-west to the River de Palmas, about forty miles di∣stant from Panuco, a Province of Nova Hispania. The tempera∣ture of the aire differeth not much from that of Castile in Spain, it is for the most part very fertill, but it seemeth not to have in it any rich mines, either of gold or silver, or not to have been regar∣ded by the Natives, who not long since would not take the pains to take up any of the great store of gold and silver, which was usually cast upon that coast, by reason of many shipwracks which the Spaniard suffered in bringing such treasure thorow the dan∣gerous Straits of Bahema from Nova Hispania, and the South of America; the soile is as fertil, if not more fertill than any part of Virginia, and aboundeth with greater store and variey of flesh, fish, fowle and fruit, than that doth. Great store of gold and silver is found there, which they who have written of Florida, impute rather to frequent Shipwracke, than to any Mines growing there, because they have farre the greater store neare the Sea-coast, though yet there be a constant report of many golden Mines in the Apalaci Mountaines, which divides Florida, from the South part of Virginia, but it is cer∣taine that many of the Sea-shores afford store of Amber Grise. The Inhabitants are of a tawny colour, of great stature, and well compacted bodies, very expert Archers, exceeding active, fierce and manly in their manner of assault. Their Religion is the same, or not much differing from that of their Neighbours, a meere worship of Devils, wherein they are greatly deluded by their Priests, who are great Magi∣cians. They hate the Spaniard extreamly, more willingly they enter∣taine
and joyn their forces with the French, and other Christian Nations against them. They consist of many petty Governments, which usually infeft and weaken one another, in that respect easie to be subdued, though they were better provided for war than they are. The Spaniard, as also the French, have made many voyages in∣to Florida. The first Spanish Expedition was undertaken in the year 1512. from the Isle of Portorico, by Portius, from whom it received the name, for that the face of the Country hath a resemblance of a continuall spring, but this Expedition proved to be of none effect. A second voyage was undertaken in the yeare 1520, by Vas∣ques, from Hispaniola, who performed nothing memorable there, save only this infamous act of inviting many of the Na∣tives into his ships, where once abord, he hoysed sayle, and car∣ried them into miserable bondage. A third voyage was made to as little purpose, by Narvesius, Anno 1526, who stayed so long in the search of the South-west part of Florida, which is the most barren part, as they were faine to eat one another. The most remarkable was undertaken by Ferdinando à Soto, from the yeare 1536, unto 1541, in which time he with his Ar∣mie of nine hundred foot, and five hundred horse, were the greater part consumed, having not found out (what they chiefly sought after) any golden or silver mines; the remainder of his souldidiers, which were not a fourth part of those he brought from Cuba, were after his death under the conduct of Ludovi∣cus Moscosus, brought into Nova Hispania, not without great difficulty, being often fiercely set upon, and prosecuted by the Natives. After which very chargeable and unprosperous voyage of Hernandus the Spaniard for many yeares did intermit any further search of Florida, which indeed was never throughly by them, as having searched no further than that part of the Countrey, which lyeth opposite to the Gulfe of Nova Hispania, and not within and beyond the Straits of Bohema, lying towards Virginia, which is by many degrees the more fertill soyle, and most abounding with treasure, and rich merchantable commo∣dities.
After this the French with two of the Kings ships, every way wel provided, by the procurement of Colinus (that most worthy Admirall of France,) under the conduct of Ribaldus, set forth to Florida, in the yeare 1542, where they arrived within two mo∣neths at the River of Dolphines, lying about the 30 degree, and from thence following the Sea-coast towards the North, they came to a very safe Port, which they named Port Riall, neare un∣to which they built Charles Fort, about the degree of 32, neare adjoyning to the Sea-coast of Virginia, But by reason of great civill war that as then happened very fierce in France, a long ex∣pected supply being not sent from thence, a mutiny arose among his souldiers, so as Ribaldus, though ha was well entertained, and supplyed by the Natives, was inforced to returne into France, af∣ter some discovery made of the North-east part of Florida, not without the losse of some men, though of more money; And in his returne (for want of victuals) they killed one of their owne men, and had hardly ever againe recovered France, but that they were unexpectedly furnished with some victuals by an English ship. After this the civill war ceasing in France, and Colinus the Ad∣mirall returning againe into grace with the King, Laudonerius the twentieth of May 1544, set forth with three ships well fur∣nished for Florida, where he arrived the twentieth of June, and was friendly received by the Natives, but could not find any gold or silver Mines, though he spent much travell and time in search after them, so long as his provision was all spent; And the Na∣tives growing both unable, and unwilling to supply him any longer, he was resolved to have returned into France, if the fore∣said Ribaldus had not againe arrived there with thre small ships out of France; whose expected comming as it was very joyfull to the French, so the Natives seemed to be highly pleased there∣with, as foure of their petty Kings, the Kings of Homoloa Sera∣vatri, Almacam, Malica and Castri, came forth to congratu∣late Ribaldus arrivall, and promised to conduct the French unto the Mountaines of Apalactri, where store of red Mettall was to be had, which they supposed to be gold: But this great hope of the French soone vanished, by reason of the Spaniards comming suddenly upon them with great ships every way well prepared,
upon whose approach the French stole away to sea, but were forthwith pursued by the Spaniard, whom though they as then escaped, yet were they by a violent tempest, after shipwrack and losse of some of their men, againe cast upon the coast of Florida, about six and twenty miles higher to the North-east towards Virginia, where they were forth with set upon by the Spaniard, beaten out of their Forts, and almost all cruelly slaine, to the num∣ber of six hundred, among which Ribaldus the Governour was one, though he yeelded himself among other conditions, to have his life spared; Laudonerius  me few of the French esca∣ped hardly to their ships  returned into France, having cast off all future hopes of ▪ which was now dispose of the cruell Spaniard; neither  the French  (for that he greatly disliked, if not hated , and such were these that were laine in  slaugh∣ter of his people, as ever af o much as attempt the least re∣venge of their bloud, which yet two yeares after one Monsier Gurgius, a private man, at his owne charge with 280 men tran∣sported in three ships, w most vliantly undertaken, and no lesse happily effected, by the help of the Natives, who upon his first arrivall, out of an inveterate hatred to the Spaniard, their in∣solent outragious opposers, joyned with him to the slaughter, and utter extirpating of them out of Florida; and yet for all this compleat victory, the valiant Gurgius, though earnestly invited by the Natives, would not venture with so small a force, to stay long in Florida, as knowing very well that the bloudy revenge∣full Spaniard might in a short time from Cuba, Hispaniola, or other there neare adjoyning Plantations, invade him with far greater forces, and therefore within a while returned, where he found his worthy service to be so displeasing to the King and his Popish Lords, as he was faine a good while to hide himselfe, and to fly for his life, and after this we doe not heare that the French did ever venture into Florida any more. Neither yet hath the Spaniard obtained any strong footing there, for as yet they have no Towne of any note toward the sea of Mexico, and but two which lye towards the Northerne sea, the one (which is chiefest) called Saint Augustines, the other Saint Matthewes, of great difficulty to be taken by a small Navy,
but of great import, in regard of their great wealth to them that shall take them. And now will I only describe the Sea coasts of Florida from the Confines of Virginia unto Nova Hispania, far better known then the Inland countries to the North of Florida. The nearest River of Florida to Virginia of any note falling in∣to the Ocean, is the River Iordaine, which lyeth 32 degrees from the Equinoctiall; from whence, about 20 leagues downe∣ward to the South, towards the West lyeth the Promonntory of S. Hellen, neare Port Royall, which the French chose for the best and surest place to begin their Plantations; between which, Oristanum, Ostanum, and Cayagna, whereof the first is distant from S. Hellen six leagues, the second from the first four leagues∣the third from the second, eight leagues: but how far Cayagua is from the River Iordaine, is not yet determined. From S. Hel∣len to Dos Baxos haven is five leagues, from thence to the Bay De Asapo three leagues, thence to Cafonusum three, to Capula five, to Saron nine, to S. Alcany fourteen, to S. Peter twenty leagues. All Bayes and Rivers Westward falling down to the South from Peter Bay, which lyeth about the 31 Degree to the South, to S. Matthews Town, is five leagues, and from thence ten more to S. Austines, directly Southward, the land so falling in upon the Sea, from the degree of 30 and a half to 25, where the comming up of thestrait of Bahama beginneth, having to the west side those dan∣gerous Rocks called Marteries, to the East those called Roques. betweene S. Austines Towne and the Bay de Mosquito, is fifteen leagues. From thence to the point Caevarall, is 16 leagues; from thence to the River Ayz is full 20 leagues and from thence to Martyres neer as many more; so as from Cape Francis (neer S. Matthewes Towne where the land beginneth to turne direct∣ly Southward) to Martires (comming up from the Gulph of Mexico to the Northeast parts of Florida) is neere six degrees downeward to the Line. Not far from Martires Westward, lie Tortugas dangerous Ilands, where the Continent of Florida turneth againe almost directly North for near 5 degrees: Be∣tweene which and Tacobago which lyeth neer to the top of that great Reach, lye the Bayes of Carlos, Tampa, Muspa, S. Ioseph; Muspa is distant from Carlos thirteen leagues, to Tampa from Carlos as many more, from thence to S. Ioseph are fifteen leagues,
and from S. Ioseph to Tacobago eighteene: betweene which at S. Ioseph beginneth a great inlet of the Sea for more then twenty leagues to the North latitude, and more then forty foure to the Westerne longitude; in the middle of which lyeth Ante, a safe haven, and of great import for those who intend a more full dis∣covery of Florida, which as yet is bu slenderly discovered to∣wards the West; for betweene it and the most Northwest parts of Nova Hispania, which are distant the one from the other four hundred leagues, we reade but of one safe Bay, called the Bay of the Holy Ghost neer Cape de Crus, and some few Rivers for suc∣cour and supply of Navigators. The first River from Ante one hundred leagues is Nieves, from whence the River Flores is twenty, from the Haven of the Holy Ghost (which is of all the surest) To the River Flores is seventy leagues, from which to the River Piscadores is as many more: where the Gulph of Mexico beginneth to turne from the West directly South, from the degrees of 29 to 25. I might here proceed with the description of Nova Hispania, (a countrey of highest esteem with the Spaniard, for riches and fruitfulnesse;) but having passed as far as the Northwest Seas of America will permit, I take it to be our best course to returne back againe to view the Ilands, and the more Southeast parts of the Continent, lying far nearer, and every way of as good conse∣quence for the propagating of the Gospell, and the setling of some weake Plantations which we have there already, for the continuall sending forth more Colonies, and for the obtaining store of treasure, and many rich merchantable commodities. Cuba. THE first great Iland in our returne lying most to the West, is Cuba, having Hispaniola Easternly to usward, distant from the first Easterne part thereof which is Cape Mayzi, twelve leagues, to the West it is divided from Nova Hispania by a long and large interposition of Sea, called Mexico; To the North it
hath the Lucayicke Islands, The neerest parts to the South is the Island Iamaica. From the East promontory of Mazi to Cape Anthony full West it extendeth it self no lesse then 230 leagues but in breadth where it is largest it exceedeth not forty leagues, where narroest not fifteene, A very large Island and fruitfull soyle able abundantly to sustaine many thousand men, for the Natives are well nigh utterly destroyed by the Spaniard, And the few Spanish inhabitants at this time there remaining are not able to make use of the fifth part thereof. The Climate is somewhat hot, but yet healthfull and reasonable temperate, it is so over stored with kine as they kill them meerely for their hides, and so with hogges as they know not what to doe with them. It hath in it a Cathedrall, and a Monestery. To the East thirty leagues distant; and within ten leagues of the Northern Sea lieth a Towne called Baracoa neer to which runneth the River Mares. To the North West likewise thirty leagues lieth Baiamo, which though it be an inland towne yet it is well furnished with usefull commodities, by meanes of the great river Cante which falleth into the Sea on the South-side of the Island, A fourth Towne whereunto belongeth a good haven Porto del Principe lying to the Northside neer forty leagues from Saint Iages; On the Southfide more then fiftie leagues from Iages lieth the Town Spiritus Sanctus, And betweene these lie the great mountaines Tarquino, Cape de Crus, and a great inlet of the Sea, the Land bending to the North, and to the North-east no lesse then a de∣gree, but the coming up unto them (by reason of the many rockes and shelves) is somewhat dangerous. From hence being more then halfe the length of the Island unto Cape Anthony (the most Westerne promontory of great note with mariners.) On the South-side also lieth the Town Seas, Port Xagua, and Cape Corrientes opportune places to harbour, and take in water, and wood. The West end of Cuba from Cape Anthony bendeth Northward where lie the Organes observed by Saylors to be dangerous touching upon in regard of many sands rockes, and shallowes, but after the Land falling into the East not above nine miles from Habana there are two very convenient Ports Port Puercos and Port Marien, but of all the Ports of
Cuba, Habana, on the Northside neer the West end of the Iland is farre the largest, the safest, and most renowned. It is strongly Fortified both by nature and by Arte, by a narrow coming up unto it by Sea, and with strong Castles, as it is thought to be in∣vincible, and therefore hither as to a most secure harbour from all parts of America the Spanish Fleet meeteth yeerly, and so be∣ing gathered together returne about the beginning of September, with there farre greater treasure collected, then considerable Forces to conduct it safely into Spaine. Neither indeed is Haba∣na so impregnable, but that (a Navy Royall landing some of their Forces at Port Marien, or Port Puercos aforesaid may take both Town & treasure before the Spanish Navy can put from thence,) if they could in a seasonable time somewhat about Septem∣ber, light upon the Spanish Fleet. And if the Grandes of Spaine, have (by reason of the large pension of 3. or 4000. pounds yeerly paid to many pensioners here) such intelligence of an in∣tendment that way, yet though we should misse of the Fleet for one yeer, we might be sure to seize upon the Towne, and so greatly straighten them in their yeerly returnes, and in few yeers become Commanders of those narrow Seas, through which their vast treasure is yearly conveighed. Hispaniola. HIspaniola lyeth between the degree of eighteen and twenty one of the North latitude. The most East end of it at Cape Enganno, is very narrow: the most West end, between Saint Nicholas, to the North and Cape Dona Maria, to the Southside, is broader then any other part of the Island. The length from East to West 120. leagues, the breadth as it is related by Spanish Authors is 60. leagues where it is widest, where narrowest thir∣ty. The temperature of the aire till noone is somewhat over hot, but after continually temperate. The commodities of Suger, and Cow-hides are more abundaut here, then in any of these Islands. Acosta reporteth that from hence in the yeer 1587. were brought into Spaine 9000. Chests of Suger, & they though kill their Beasts
most for their hides, yet they multiply to fast upon them, and such is the increase of horse, and hogges, which sufficiently proveth the exceeding fertillity of their soyle, there having been neither Neat, horse nor hogges, in the whole Ile, before it was stored by the Spanish, not above 150 yeers since. Now to begin the particular description, of the Ile, of the Townes, Rivers, and Ports according to the severall Pro∣vinces, as they lie from East to West, betweene North and South. The most Easterne Province called Hygvey is a rough, and mountainous place, yet well furnished, with variety of fruitfull trees. To the South, lie two small Islands Catilina and Zybo well provided with good nature and store of cattell, as also the Island Saona of a larger extent, which though it be not now inhabited, yet it is very commodious for Ships to furnish themselves with severall sorts of provision, it abounding with great store of fruits and wholsome cattell. The next province is Iagvagua upon the South Coast, wherein standeth San Domingo, the onely chiefe City of the Island built by Bartholomeus Collumbus Anno 1494. on the East∣side of the River Osama, but afterwards removed by Nicolas Obando to the Westside. It is neatly built and stately with stones, and environed with a strong wall. It is the seat of an Archbishop, and the place where the governour of the Island, and all the Kings officers do reside, and but that it is not conveniently supplied with water, it might wel passe for one of the best cities in all America. It flourished exceedingly in the preceeding age, but since the finding out of Peru, it hath lost much of its spendour, as being lesse frequented by Merchants. The inhabitants hereof according to the Spaniards own relation, doth not exceed 600. families of Spaniards, the Moores and Mungrels (which are begot of Spanish and Moores) amounting to as many more. It was ta∣ken in the yeer 1586 by Sir Francis Drake with 1200. men, but the spoil came far short of expectation, there being found great store of brasse coyne but little gold. To the North of this prime City, in the same Province is the City De La Concep∣tion, wherein is a Cathedrall and a Monastry as also the Towne Gotuy. Not farre from San Domingo, the Pro∣vince of Cayagua beginneth, and extendeth it selfe on the
South coast near 160 miles, and in this Province is Azna commonly called Compostella very rich in Sugers, and five con∣venient havens Nizao, Formoso. Ocoa, Caligna, and (Yagnion, it selfe,) all greatly frequented especially Nizao, and Ocoa by the Dutch, for the abundance of Suger and hides, untill of latter yeers, trading there hath beene utterly prohibited, by the King of Spaine, Upon this coast are three little Islands (little better then Rocks) Beta, Alta, Vela, Frayles, wherein though there be nothing worth observation, yet are they carefully to be observed for the preventions of Shipwracke, The next Province to the West, and more to the North is Baoca very mountaines, and so hard of accesse as it cost the Spaniard very dear before he could gaine it. The most Southwest Province is Hanigvagia very plaine, pleasant, and fruitfull, wherein standeth Savana just op∣posite to Baqua, a small but very considerable Island to furnish navigatours hath also in it, Cape Tuburo, and the promontory Dona, and many safe harbours for Ships. From the last of these, the Land turning to the East many leagues, admitteth of a great inlet of Sea, upon which bordereth Zagua, a Province no lesse fruitfull, and pleasant then the former, in which standeth the Towne called Iaguana, well provided with store of excellent Salt. And neer unto the North, is the Island Guanabo. The most Northwest is Cape Saint Nicholas, where beginneth the first Northside Province of the Island Marien, where Christo∣phorus Columbus built Navidad, hereunto belong two Islands Mosquites and Port Palma the one to the East the other to the West. The next Province is Lawega Reall, extending it selfe 70 leagues in length twenty in breadth admirable rich in medowes and Pastures. Between this Northerne Province and Yaquimo to the South lie to other, Cibao sometime abounding with golden mines, and Maguana with in comparable meadowes, as being almost incompassed with two wide Rivers Niba, and Yaquen. There are belonging to this spacious Province two Townes of good note Saint Iago and Port de Plata, besides four convenient havens Cape Francis, Port Riall, Mons Christi, and Port Isa∣bell. The most Northeast is Samana unto which belongeth one onely haven of note bearing the same name.
Lucaick Ilands. TO the North of Hispaniola and Cuba, between them and the Continent of Florida, lye the many small Lucaick Ilands, so neer one another, as they make those Seas very rough, heady and dangerous: besides this, there is nothing worth noting in them. I shall therefore herein returne the Readers whom it may con∣cerne (I meane those who are to passe those seas) to advise with that Map, which the most judicious Author Mr. De Laet hath made and placed in that his great and exact Collection of all A∣merica, almost out of all Authors, Latine, English, Spanish, Dutch, or French, who have written in this kinde: From him (by whom I have been most assisted in this my short Compendium) they shall finde their severall names, and be sufficiently informed, how they fall betweene the forefaid Ilands and the Continent, which for me here to insrt, would be both needlesse and trou∣blesome, they are so many, and of so little worth. Porto-Rico. Portorico lying to the North, short of the 19 Degree of the North latitude, is to the East of Hispaniola neare sixteene leagues. To the West of Virgo, Gorda, and Anagado, the most West of the Carib Ilands seventeen leagues, from Cogui Bocoa, a Promontory of Vnezuella, in the Continent of America, to the Northeast it is distant one hundred thirty leagues. The Climate is very pleasant, only sometimes in the moneths of December and January, it is infefted with too much raine; in June, July and August, with somewhat immoderate heat, and terrible tempests, which they call Huracanes. The land for the most part riseth and falleth with convenient small fruitfull hils and vallies, though
the fruitfulnesse thereof is much hindred with the over-great store of Guiabo trees. The Townes and Ports of this Iland are but few: about the middle of the North side lyeth Porto-Rico, the only Towne of note, built after the Spanish fashion, and di∣vided into fair streets: it hath in it a safe Haven for ships, a stately Cathedrall, and a Monastery: and though it hath no wals it is well fortified by land and sea: yet not so, but that it was ta∣ken by our countrey man the Earle of Cumberland, who found there a rich booty, and at least seventy great peeces of Ordnance, which he brought away Anno 1597. It hath since in the yeare 1625 beene assaulted by Henricides the Dutch Generall, who though he demeaned himself very valiantly in the attempt, could not obtaine it. The other Ports on the North side of the Iland, as Visa, Canaba, and Cabeca, to the East of Portorico, are not safe, as being exposed to the Northern tempests and shelves, and sands which lye before them. In the Northwest corner lyeth Agada, a very oportune Haven to water in, between which and Portorico the Rivers Cami and Cabuco fall into the sea. Directly to the West side of the Iland, somewhat about the middle, lyeth the Ri∣ver Guiabo, by which they passe to Saint Germin four leagues re∣mote from the Westerne sea, the Towne is but small, and hath been often taken by the French. Between the harbour belonging to it, which is the mouth of Guiabo and Aguada, directly to the west side of the Iland lyeth the Rock Zacheo, inconvenient and dangerous. There are other small villages in the Island but none o∣ther of great worth or note. On the Southside most to the West lieth Cape Roxo, neer which our English have found some salt pits very usefull for those who travaile those parts. From Cape Roxo lie the havens of Guaima, Xaria; Guadianilla, and Guaiama distant five or six leagues the one from the other. On the Southeast-side lie the small Islands Bieque, on the East coast, then are onely these two Ports Saint Iames and Yabucoa. The prime commodities of this Island are great store of Sugars, Ginger Cassia, and Neats hides. It did abound with silver and gold, but those mines are either exhausted, or nelected for want of worke men.
Burmudos. THere is another Island called Burmudos (which because it falleth much in the same longitude with Porto Rico, though many degrees distant to the North in regard of latitude) I must either here insert or leave out. It lyeth within a degree and a halfe of South Virginia, not so easie to be come unto (in regard it hath but one and that none of the best Ports to land in. Be∣sides it is (as much if not more then any other place infested with most tempestuous fearfull winds called Huracans. The soyle and temperature is farre inferiour to any part of Virginia, and yet is it inhabited no lesse then with a thousand English: Who no doubt when the wisedome of the Kingdome shall thinke convenient to send a strong Navy into America) will be for∣ward to remove and improve their plaion into a more con∣venient and richer soyle. Caribb Islands. TO the the East of Porto-Rico begin the Carib or Caniball Islands; so called, for that the Natives are men-eaters: for the most part, they fall one within another, sometimes in a double, sometimes in a threefold squadron, from the degree of eighteen and a halfe, to somewhat more then the sixteenth degree of lati∣tude. I will onely mention them as they lye in their severall ranks from East to West. Anegado and Virgines, Angotllo and Virgin, Granda, Saint Martin, Saba and Crus, Saint Bartoline and Saint Estasio, Barbada, Nieves and Saint Christopher, Anti∣gua and Monserata, Desseada and Gnadalupe, Mary Glande, Sanco and Astin. From whence the Carib Islands Dominica, Martimno, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent, Beria and Granada, fall downe to the twelfth degree of latitude by a proportionable bending much like a bow towards the West from Anegado to Grada. Onely Barbados lyeth to the East more then twenty leagues out of the foresaid bow-bending figure. Of these Bar∣bados, Saint Christopher and Nieves (now in possession of our
Countrymen) are most spatious, and in all respects fitter for plan∣tation) except Dominica, Matinino and Granada) which though they be not inhabited by Spaniards, yet beside the sustaining of 1000. Savages; either of them affordeth the Spanish Navy in its yeerly voyage to the South Continent of America, good stone of provision at very small rates, foure Porkets and six Hens for one hatchet. I say no more of these Islands but this, though they be thought scarce worth looking after by the Spaniards, yet would they sustaine 20000 men. I might here passe Westward againe, with the Islands of Mar∣garita, Cobana, Coetz and many more which lye upon the mat∣ter directly Westward, not farre remote from Granda, Anda∣lusia and Veneuella, the neerest part of the continent South∣ward; by coasting whereof to Martha, Nicuragua and so to Nova Hispania, I might more perspicuously and conveniently have concluded this my present discovery of the North America, but then I must leave out two great Islands of good note, and which is of twenty times more concernment the most spatious Guiana by our judicious Countryman Sir Walter Raleigh and others, most admired and applauded for health, wealth and pleasure. Though therefore it be somewhat out of my way, and doe a little obscure my proposed method, by the Mediterranian sea of Ame∣rica; yet I may not by any meanes leave them out as falling many degrees on the North side of the equinoctiall, unlesse it be one part of Guiana, which to the South-east goeth over the line somewhat more then a degree, taken up onely with severall branches of the great River Amazon, and many small Islands dis∣persed in them of no great worth. The Islands between Granada and Guiana to the South-west are Tabago and Trinidado: I shall quickly have done with them and from thence begin in a second Booke my discovery of Gui∣ana, and the rest of the Continent; taking it according to the severall regions thereof, as I shall find them neerest agreeing to the Sea-coasts so farre as the Mediterranian will permit us, that is as farre as Nava Hispania. Tabago now in possession of the Dutch, lyeth to the South-east
full thirty leagues from Granada, and upon eight miles to the East of Trinidado: It hath many good harbours but the comming in unto them, especially toward the West is dangerous by reason the seas there are very boystrous and not free from sands and shelves. It is constantly reported by the Dutch (who should best know it) as having many yeeres possest it to afford many rare fruits and hearbs, variety of Fowles and Fish, and not to be utterly destitute of foure-footed beasts, wholesome for nou∣rishment, as having good store of Indian Hogs and Armadillos, both which afford good food. Trinidado, now possessed (as is credibly reported) by the For∣ces of the present most illustrious Admirall of England, the Earle of Warwicke; lyeth according to the severall farre di∣stant parts and corners thereof betweene the eighth and tenth degree of latitudge. For though Sir Walter Raleigh (a judici∣ous Traveller) place point Curiapan, which the Spaniards call Punco de Gallo, the most Northerne part, but in the eighth degree, yet the Dutch (according to Oviedus, upon more ex∣act calculation) found it to come neere to the tenth degree. Be∣sides this, about fifteene miles to the South there is another con∣venient Haven, called Point Blanco; after which, directly to the South, betweene the Island and the falling of foure or more branches of the great River Orono{que} from Guiana, there is a ve∣ry shallow narrow sea not above three miles over, and not above 11 or 12 foot deepe; howbeit by reason of foure or five Islands which come between them, that sea is heady and rough. This Island is according to Herea his observation two hun∣dred leagues from Hispaniola, sixty from Granada; In length, (according to Oviedus) it is twenty five; in breadth twenty leagues. Concerning the fertility of the soyle Authors agree not; Herea reporteth it to be barren in the generall, but Sir Walter Raleigh acknowledgeth it to be so onely in that part which is next adjoyning to Curiapan; but the rest of the I∣sland to be sufficiently fruitfull, especially of Indian graine, and such Roots as the Americans usually make their Bread and
Beere of; besides great store of Deere and Hogges, and other wilde Beasts, of which the Inhabitants may feed plentiful∣ly. Good probability there is, that some Golden Mine may be found there, but as yet what hath beene digged there, is acknowledged by the said Sir Walter Raleigh, and by another of our Countrymen Sir Robert Dudley, to be but Marcaite, which though it shine like Gold, yet it it of no value. The onely great Towne in all Trini∣dad is Saint Ioseph, the Merchantable Commodity there is Tobacco.
The second BOOKE. GVIANA. AND now being to proceed with Guiana. I know no better course, than to follow those, who have gone be∣fore me: who by ascending and descending the grand Rivers; I meane Orono{que} to the North; Amazon to the South, as also many others which fall betweene them, into the east Ocean; have made the onely discovery which have as yet beene made thereof: And no marvaile, for those great Rivers doe on every side inviron Guiana with the Countryes thereunto belonging, so as by helpe of their great labour and cost upon some further search; as compleat a discovery in short time may be had of this large goodly Couutry, as of any other in A∣merica, (to the future incredible benefit of our Nation,) who might long since have injoyed the inestimable riches thereof, (had the true relation of incomparable Raleigh, in his Book In∣tituled Guiana, found that credit, or his most powerfull motives had so timely prevailed with this Kingdome, as was but requi∣site when the Spaniard had got but little knowledge, and lesse re-footing in those parts.) This I write not as conceiving England now too weake to remove the Spaniard thence: No, I know very well that the power and wisdome of this Kingdome now met in Parliament, might & I hope would before this have sent forth such a power and well prepared Navy, as might have driven him out of his strongest holds in any part of the North America; (unto which any reasonable neare accesse may be made by water) had not Spanish Factours, Jesuits from abroad and grand Pensioners at home, raised these present most cruel & most unnaturall, I should rather say infernall commotions in this
Kingdome, and that in Ireland, purposely to divert their wise∣dome from taking such a designe into any deepe consideration, being distracted and perplexed on all sides. But to the matter; great and long inquiry hath been made by the Spanish, English and Dutch, to find out Manoa, otherwise called El Dorado, the chiefe City of Guiana, and the golden Mountaines adjacent, by those great Rivers that empty them∣selves into the East Ocean, especially by those the two greatest, Orono{que} and Amazon, both upward and downeward; I meane downeward neare from whence they arise, upward from their wide mouthes where they fall into the Sea. Of Spaniards, the first of note who attemped the search of Guiana, by the River Orono{que}, were Diego Ordace, a Knight of the Order of Saint Iago; and Pedro Harnandez de Serpa: but we find nothing of worth, or certainty, to have beene performed by either of them in that search. Onely Sir Walter Raleigh affirmeth, that he did see a great Anchor of Ordaces ship, lying in a Port called Mre∣quito, 300 miles within the Land, upon the River Orono{que}, a strong proofe he was there. As for Pedro Harnandez, it is said by some; that taking his journey from Cumana in the West-Indies, by land, toward O∣rono{que}, which may be about 120 leagues; he was set upon, and quite overthrowne, by a Nation of the Indians called Wkery, before he came to the borders of the said River. Others affirme that he was defeated in the very entrance of Guiana, at the first civill Towne of the Empire, called Magureguary; but of this there is but little certainty. One Martines and Berea a Spanish Gentleman, and a Commander of great note and quality, after them proved farre more succesfull (if we may rely upon Bereas own report, as it was taken by Sir Walter Raleigh, from his own mouth) Marianes discovery briefly hapened thus (I may well say happened, for though never so true, yet was it but a meere chance.) The foresaid Voyage of Ordace being utterly lost, by reason his provision of Gunpowder was at once blowne up, through the negligence of this Martines; his finall judgement was, that he should be set into a Canoa alone, without any victuall, onely with his Armes, and so turned loose into the great River. But it
pleased God, that the Canoa was carried downe the stream and that certaine Guianians met it the same evening; (and having never seene any Christian, or man before of that colour) they carried him into the Country to be wondred at; and so from Towne to Towne untill he came to the great City Manoah, the place of Inga, the Emperours abode: Who upon the first sight of him, knew him to be a Christian, as having seene many in Peru, where he formerly lived, before his brother Atabalipa Emperour thereof, was vanquished by the Spaniard: At what time he and many thousands more fled to Guiana; where with∣in halfe an age, by reason of the exceeding riches and fertility of that large Country, having subdued many Nations, he became as potent as ever his magnificent Ancestors were in Peru. The entertainment of this Martines by Inga, is by himselfe acknow∣ledged to have been very free and bountifull; for though he was brought blindfold thither, and during the time of his abode in Manoa (which was seven moneths) he was not suffered to wan∣der any where into the Country; yet Inga caused him to be lodged in his owne Palace, and to be every way well provided for. At the end of which time, when he had somewhat learned the language, he obtained favour of the Emperour to depart, with whom he sent divers Guianians to conduct him to the Ri∣ver of Orino{que}, all loaden with as much gold as they could beare, given to Martines at his departure: of all which as he arived neare the River side, the Oronoque poni (enemies to Inga) rob∣bed him, save onely of two great bottles of Gords, which were filled with beads of gold curiously wrought: With these the Orono{que}-poni, (who thought the bottles onley to have contained some food) permitted him to passe dowre Orono{que} in Canoas: From whence he got to Trinidado, and from thence to Marga∣rita, and so to Saint Ivan de Puerto-Rico; where at the time of his death receiving the Sacrament, he affirmed the truth of this Relation, and gave his gold beads to the Church. You have heard the unexpected successe of Martines wandring; heare now briefly the long and difficult travailes of Berea which were pur∣posely undertaken, as they are recorded by the same Author from hsi owne mouth.
Gundizalvus Zimenes hauing without any good successe spent much in the search of Guiana, by those Rivers of Nuevo Reygno, that fall into Orono{que}, left at his death a very great to Berea, who had married his daughter conditionally, he with his best endeavour should prosequte his designe of Guia∣na, which he faithfully performed; for not long after he fell with great strength and provisions downe the River Cassanar ri∣sing in Nuevo Reygno, out of the mountaines neare the City of Tunia, and falling into Meta another River springing out of a mountaine neare Pampalone, in the same Nuevo Reygno de Granado, where it loseth its name as likewise doth Meta, when a little above the fifth degree of North Latitude, it emptieth it selfe into Bariquan otherwise called Bariqui cmeto, a River of Venezuella, which after a hundred Leagues turning and wind∣ing, meeteth and joyneth with the River Huriaparia which is Orono{que}. Where it is to be observed, that though Berea had from his first setting forth from the River Casanar, fallen neare two degrees to the South, yet he according to Geographicall description in the best Mappes, fell short a degree in Latitude, and at least seventy Leagues in Longitude of Macurewarai, the nearest Towne of all Guiana, properly so called, and somewhat more then three from Manoa the cheife City: so as keeping his course, as he (acknowledgeth he did) downe Orino{que}, running directly North-East from thence, there was then no hope of finding what he so eagerly sought for, but instead thereof re∣ceived both in his forces and provisions much losse, many of them perishing by water, his small vessels being split upon rockes, or overwhelmed and swallowed with the violence of the streame, and many of them killed by the Natives. The first place of note he arrived at, was the Province of Amapaia, which he affirmed to be rich in gold, and though for the greatest time of his abode there (which was six moneths) he was feircely infefted by the inhabitants▪ yet at length, after the concluding of a peace betweene them, he obtained eight Images of gold (as curiously made as any in Europe) which he sent to the King of Spaine. The River of Orono{que} running on the East side of Amapaia is said to be twelve miles broad, and about seven or eight hundreth
miles from its fall into the Ocean. From hence getting over to the South-East side of Orino{que}, he sought very diligently to have found an entrance into Guiana, but could finde none, all places being stopped up with high unpassable mountaines. And although he met with divers Rivers both on the one and on the other side of Orino{que}, yet he professed he could not learne the name of them, but onely of the River Caroly: neither could he (as he pretended) for want of the use of Geography, expresse of what degrees they were, so as he utterly despaired of obtain∣ing any good successe in this voyage, untill he came to Eme∣ria, where he found store of provision, and the inhabitants of a more peaceable and civell disposition. The petty King thereof was called Carapana, a man of a hundred yeeres of age, who in his youth had beene often at the Islands of Trinidado and Mar∣gaita, where he traded with the▪ Christians there, and learned much from them how to governe his people. Berea having staid here some good space of time, and having as he conceived gained sufficient knowledge of Guiana betaketh himself (with∣out staying any where) downe the River Orono{que} directly to Trinidado; from thence not long after he sent backe againe to Carapana, who directed them to Morequito Lord of Aramaia, as having better knowledge of Guiana, living foure or five dayes journey from Magureguaira. This Morequito had some few yeeres before, brought much gold to Gumana; and withall had so highly extolled the great riches of Guiana▪ as that Vedes the Governour of Margarita sought to have obtained a patent thereof from the King of Spaine, but was prevented by Berea; which so troubled Moreuito for (his acquaintance Vedes sake, with whom he had much ingratiated himselfe) as that though he feared openly to deny Bereas request, in sending guides with his men, to trucke with the Guianians for gold: Yet privily up∣on their returne (which is reported to have beene with much store of gold) he caused them to be mutthered neare the bankes of Orono{que}, one onely escaping to informe Berea of this act, which he conceiving to have beene plotted by Morequito, sent a good part of the men he had at Trinidado, to take him and to spoyle his Covntry: Before whose coming Morequio hearing of it, fled to Vides for succour; but being within a while de∣manded
in the King of Spaines name, he was delivered and ex∣ecuted; whose execution so displeased the borderers of Orono{que} as he thought it not safe ever after to venture with a few men, to trafficke that way, neither was his strength now sufficient to make his way; wherefore expecting sufficient forces from other parts of the Spaniards dominions neerest adjoyning, he staid so long at Trinidado, untill he was surprized by Sir Walter Raleigh in the yeere 1596. Here then Bereas discovery of Guiana being interrupted, it is meet I forbeare any further relation thereof, untill I have shewed you what was performed by our worthy. Countryman the said Sir Walter Raleigh, in his first ex∣pedition thither; after which (as being after it in time) the conclusion of Bereas discovery; as also of Captaine Kemish, and others who were imployed by learned and expert Raleigh, that way will more seasonably follow. After six weekes and two dayes departure from England, Sir Walter Raleigh, though he staid seven dayes at Tenerife, one of the Canary Islands in expectation of Captaine Preston, arived at Trinidado, and tooke it within foure dayes; where loosing no time in the prosecution of his intended designe for Guiana; af∣ter diligent search, the narrow sea betweene Trinidado and the fall of Orono{que} being so shallow and shelvie, more especially those branches of the said River; all that was then discovered, (being sound by his Sea-men not above nine foot deepe at high water) he was enforced to leave his ships, and with a hundred men thronged together in two barges and three whirreys to crosse that narrow sea, and to venture up the River by those branches; wherein when they had rowed foure dayes, his owne barge came a ground, so as they were in some feare, whether they should ever have got her off againe; such was the shallow∣nesse of the River when the flowing of sea had left them. After this for many dayes more, they wandred here and there for want of a good Pilot, not knowing which streame to take, (the streams multiplying so exceedingly upon them) by reason of the many great and small Islands that lye in this wide bottome of Orono{que} computated by the most judicious Geographers, neare a hun∣dred miles wide from South-east to North-west. After they fell upon those Islands commonly called Trivitivans, the Inhabi∣tants
whereof commonly goe by the name awani and Wara∣wek, who in regard they are commonly overflowne from May to September, they live in houses upon trees very artificially built, their food being Indian bread, fh and venisons, prepared before hand. Here they happened on a Pilot, more expert then the former, who yet within few dayes was out of his knowledge where againe it was their good hap to meet with a , much more expert, one Martin an Arwacan, whom  ooke in a Canoa, with some others going down Amana, one  the greatest armes of Orono{que} to Margarita with store of bread; both the Pilot and the bread were of singular use to Sir Walter Raleigh, and his almost fainting company▪ without which they had undoubt∣edly beene much straightned for going any further. But by direction, they quickly attained unto Arowacy on the South side of Orono{que}, whereof Toparimaca being Lord, enter∣tained them kindly, and furnished them with provisions▪ as also with another Pilot, yet more experienced in the crosse perplex∣ed streames of Ooni{que} as they grew higher to Guna. From Arowacy bending their course almost directly Westward, they pasted by a great Isle called Arrowpana, twenty miles in length, and six in breadth, and at nigh cast Ancour at Ocawyta not one third part so bigge. The next night they stayed under Putayma Island, from whence they could plainly discerne the continent to the North-West, to be a large pleasant plaine betweene two edges of mounaines consisting of Arable and Medow knowne (as their last Pilot affirmed) by the name of the great Valley of Sayma, running in length almost to Cumana neare upon 120. Leagues. The third, fourth, and fifth day they passed the Isle Manoriparum▪ and a great part of Arromaia. On the sixth day they came and staied at the Port of Morequito, where he was kindly entertained, and informed concerning the state of those parts from Topiowary, Lord of Arromaia and unckle to the aforesaid Morequito. The information he received from him was, that all the Regions thereabout even to Emeria, were called Guiana: though yet the inhabitants were called Orono{que}∣poni as farre as the mountaines of Wacarima, which they might from thence behold afarre off in the Continent, beyond which
he told them, the large valley of Amariocapana did lye, whose inhabitants were called Guianians. And that into the Provinces which lye beyond these more to the South, there came some yeares since multitudes of people called Oriones and Epuremei, who possessed themselves thereof, having driven the Natives out of their ancient inheritances; (the Cassiapagots, Eparagots, and Arawagots onely excepted) who were then great enemies to the Spaniard and possesse Magureguaran, a City strongly and stately built, and withall amply furnished with gold. From hence in two dayes they rowed up neere to the River Caroli, where the heady violence of that, and the other Rivers, (as is usuall at that time of the yeere) permitted them not then by water to make any higher search into Guiana. Here there∣fore staying three or foure dayes, their small company was dis∣persed by direction of the Commander, to view the severall quarters about and above the said River; which upon their re∣turne, they reported in generall to be very fruitfull, in well growne Medowes and Pastures; exceeding commodious for hunting, hawking, fishing, fowling; as having many plaines, cleere Rivers, abundance of Pheasants, Partriges, Quailes, Railes, Cranes, Herons, and most other Fowles; Deere of all sorts, Camas or Antas, as big, and affording as good nourishment, and as pleasant, as our English Beefe, Porkets, Hares, Lyons, Ty∣gers, Leopards, and divers other sorts of Beasts, either for chase or food. But that which most contented them, was (as being the thing they chiefly aimed at) the great store of gold and precious stones, the greater and lesser hils promised them, the very stones glistering like gold; a more then probable argu∣ment, in the judgement of the best Mineralists, that the earth lying a fathome or two deepe, under strong spars or quarries of such stone usually called Marcasite hideth much Treasure. Upon due consideration of the relations made of those that Sir Walter had sent to review the Inland (agreeing so well with what he himselfe had then seene, neere the banke of Caroli, which he with some few musqueteers undertooke to survey) he confidently affirmeth Guiana, in no respect to be inferiour to any part of the world. His owne lively expressions (being a Gentleman of as great
learning this way, as any one our age hath afforded) is worthy to be read and seriously considered. I never saw (saith he) a more beautifull country, nor more lively prospects, hils so raised here and there over the valleys, the River winding into divers bran∣ches, the plaines adjoyning without bush or stubble, all faire greene grasse, the ground of hard sand to march on either for horse or foote, the Deere crossing in every path, the birds to∣wards the evening singing on every tree with a hundred severall tunes, Cranes and Herons of white, crimson, carnation, pearching on the River side, the Ayre fresh with a gentle easterly wind; and every stone we stooped to take up, promised either gold or silver by his complexion. Your Lordship (saith he) writing to the Lord Admirall (that then was) shall see of many sorts, and I hope some of them can∣not be bettered under the Sunne; and yet we had no meanes but with our daggers and fingers to teare them out here and there, the rockes being most hard of a minerall sparre, as hard or harder then a flint: Besides, the veines lye a fathome or two deepe in the rockes, and we wanted necessary Instruments to have digged the treasure out. Which last clause well considered together with what he in his booke of Guiana alleageth for him∣selfe (namely the violence of the waters hourely increasing, un∣seasonablenesse of the yeere, the smalnesse of his company, the inforced leaving off his ships more then 400 miles for a whole moneth, and his unwillingnesse to let the natives now perceive that the intent of his comming was the same vvith the Spani∣ards, chiefly for gold) may in my judgement sufficiently an∣swer those, vvho have and doe still question the truth of Sir Wal∣ters high expressions of Guiana's riches, and the most fruitfull and pleasant habitation it affordeth, for that he made no longer stay there, and brought no more store of Treasure home vvith him. The issue of this vvorthy Travelour's first voyage vvas this, Not being able by reason of the great downfall and over-bearing streame of Caroli, to ascend any further, (vvithout seeing the Rivers Baraquan, Beta, Daune and Obarro, all falling from the West into Orono{que}: and being distant each from other about a degree more and more to the South;) though yet in regard of
longitude from East to West they are much alike, either from Macurewarai or the great City Manoa: He returned in few dayes to the Port of Morequito, where he concluded with To∣piawai; hostages being given on either side, to returne with great forces the next yeere, and that in the time he should work with the Oronoque poni, to joyne with them in an expedition against their enemies the Epuremei, who possessed the regions that most abound with silver and precious stones. But here was the unhappinesse of the man▪ (I might rather say of the King∣dome;) that upon his speedy reture into England, not above eight moneths from his setting forth, he could not (though he were very gratious at Court) procure a Navy to be sent within a yeere to Topiawari, as was promised: Whence it came to passe, that the foresaid Berea, neglecting no time, did by the assistance of Carrapana Lord of Emeria, againe get up the River of Orono{que} with 300 Spanish Souldiers as farre as Caroli, where he built a little Towne called Saint Thomas, consisting of thirty houses of great consequence, to bring under and keepe in the fearfull; unarmed borderers of Orono{que}, and also for opposing any other Nation, who should attempt Guiana that way. But Sir Walter (not understanding of the Spaniards building and strong fortifying Saint Thomas,) sent forth Captaine Keymish with a ship and a pinnace (all he was able to doe at his owne charge) the 26 of Ianuary in the yeere 1596, (which being foure moneths later then he promised and intended,) caused Topia∣wari and the rest of the borderers of Orono{que}, for feare of Be∣vea and his Spanish forces, to withdraw themselves; when Key∣mish (who first discovered the genuine and best Navigable streame of the great River Orono{que}, within eight dayes saile and entrance thereunto, came up to the Port of Morequito, where finding his hopes of assistance from the Natives frustrated and himselfe not able to encounter the Spaniards, he forthwith for feare of surprizall, taketh downe the River againe, and so in the fifth moneth after his setting forth out of England, return∣ned thither safe againe, though without any good successe at all. After this I find no further attempt to have beene made by the English upon Guiana, but that of Sir Walter himselfe, Anno 1617. when he had beene fourteene yeeres prisoner to the
great retarding of his intended prosecution of Guiana. The successe of this voyage was little answerable to the great prepa∣ration thereof: For though he went forth at his owne and friends charge, with seven good ships well manned and provi∣ded, yet he brought no treasure home. And no mervaile (for as he no lesse truly then boldly writeth to Sir Ralph Winwood from Christophers Island) his whole designe, what ships, what men, what Ammunition he would take with him, as also what time he would set forth hence, and what branch of Orono{que} he intended to goe up to Guiana; were all made knowne to the Spaniard before he could get out of the Thames by King Iames, to whom he was enforced by oath (before he could get liberty to goe) to discover the foresaid particulars. Upon which notice speedy directions were sent from the Court of Spaine, to draw up forces, three times as many as ours were, from Porto-Rico▪ Nuequo-Reygno, and other neerest adjoyning parts, to surprize them unexpectedly. Yet such was the courage and resolution of our men, that they went up to Saint Thomas, and tooke it, and in it some store of rich Tobacco; but the Spanish forces purposely abandoned the Towne, for the better defence of the mines, so that ours could not take them, which by reason of Woods lying on every side neare unto them, with 200 Musque∣teers they easily defended. A more then probable argument, that the Spaniard was then possessed of those golden mines (then sought by the English;) else, would they not have left their Towne and betooke themselves to the defence of them? And Sir Walter Raleigh in his foresaid letter maketh good proofe of it, in naming the men in whose possession they then were; and he further confidently affirmeth, that he was sufficiently able to make good what he writ, by the King of Spanes severall grants to severall persons; as also by the Spanish Register books, wherein appeare the abundance of Treasure the mines as then discovered afforded, by the great summes thence arising yeerly from the Kings fifth part. And certainly had the Spanish King not feared, learned and experienced Raleighs future and greater discovery and prosecution of Guiana, he would never so eagerly have pursued him unto death as he did; which yet he had not soone effected, had it not beene for his pensioners; here, some
noble ignoble English men overpowerfull with King Iames, (the reputed Solomon of his time) as now they are much more with his Successour, much inferiour to his father in wisdome. From that time to this (the English hopes being chrushed in losse of so worthy a Commander) there hath beene either none or little venturing from England to Guiana. But the Ne∣therlands since that, have made so many yearely voyages up the River Orono{que} as farre as Saint Thomas (encouraged by the great returne made from thence, not of gold but of rich Tobacco) as that some of their skilfull Pilots, were as well able to direct the best and safest way thither, as our Water-men are able to de∣scribe the passage from Dover to London; the very cause as is generally conceived, why (being growne so expert in that River) they were some yeers since so severely prohibited by the King of Spaine to trade any more there. You have heard of Guiana as it bordereth Westerly on both sides Orono{que}, as much as can be conveniently expressed in so short an Epitome. You shall now heare more briefly how it ly∣eth to the East Ocean, accordng to the pincipall Rivers as they fall betweene Orono{que} and Amazon▪ The first great River of any note from Winkebery, the most Southerne and best naviga∣ble arme or streame of Orono{que} is Essequebe, very broad, but withall very shallow in the mouth of it where it falleth into the Ocean: It is affirmed by the natives bordering upon both sides of it, to arise within one dayes journey of golden Manoa the prime City of Guiana; but both our English and the Dutch, who have diligently endeavoured to make entrance into the continent by this River, have found it in two or three dayes not passable, by reason of many great vvaterfals, three times as high and more heady then is the fall of London-bridge. The Inhabi∣tants about this River, neerest to sea are called Arwaci, as barba∣rous but not so inhumane & cruell as are the Caribs, who possesse the more inland Coutry. They are continually at vvarre be∣tweene themselves, yet both great enemies to the Spaniard, and not to be trusted by us or any other Christian Nation when they are able to doe mischiefe. The soyle especially about 20 miles from sea is exceeding fertill: the Commodities are Chri∣stall, and a kind of wood very usefull, and much desired for dy∣ing
the best colours. The next River of note is Berbice, lying somewhat above the sixth degree, the Land adjoyning is as the former possessed by the Arwaci, but is farre inferiour in regard of fertility, and the forenamed merchantable Commodities. The next two Rivers, or rather two in one is Sarname upon the sixth degree, and Iotera, that falleth into Sarname, three miles be∣fore it emptieth it selfe into the Ocean. The Inhabitants here∣of (being men-eaters, and very false in performing their promi∣ses) are of all others least to be trusted; neither indeed are the Commodities thereabout of that worth (being upon the matter onely Brasil-wood) as might invite men to venture farre into the Country. Twelve miles more to the South is Marawyny, a River of a wide and deepe mouth, affording above twenty leagues convenient passage for vessels of burthen, though yet the comming up from sea into it is very difficult: The inhuma∣nity and infidelity of the borderers is as great as the other, and the Commodities the Land affordeth of as little worth, and therefore seldome frequented either by us or the Netherlands. From hence more and more to the South, five other Rivers of greater note have their fall into the East Ocean. The first is Cajana, inhabited by the Caribs, whose fall is computated to be twenty leagues from Marawiny, the head of it to be more then fifty from the South-west. The second and third Cauwo and Wio, much upon the middle betweene the fourth and fifth degree (inhabited by the Yayi and Shebaij) have their rising to the South-west further into the continent. The most Southern of the five great Rivers is Wiapoco (inhabited also by the Yayi) lying betweene the fourth and fifth degree of latitude, into whose channell many little Rivers fall. The regions in ge∣nerall belonging to the five foresaid Rivers, are very fruitfull, temperate and pleasant; I say in the generall (for they are not in all places alike.) The sea coasts (to omit further particulars) are more hot, but yet withall moarish, and therefore lesse fruit∣full or pleasant. The Inland being mountainous is colder, but yet more profitable, the ground that lyeth between them (both being in some places of greater, in others of lesse extent) doth farre exceed them both in temperature, pleasure and profit: They abound with all manner of provision for life, with Cassavi
root, wherewith the Natives  a kind of bread ad beare, which they prefer before those made with ours or Indan grain; of both which the soyle in generall promiseth great increase. They have also store of beasts, both for food and chase; name∣ly, Deare of all sorts, Bores, Hares, Conneys, Tygers, Leopards and Lyons; but those that are of greatest use for food, are their Maypowri, and Baremo, the flesh of the one like our Beefe the other like our Mutton. As for Fowle, Fish, fruits, they afford according to our Countryman Master Harcourt's relation, not mch lesse store or variety, then is before confidently reported to be found in the Countryes bordering about Caroly, and the other higher streames of Orono{que} And though as yet there hath not beene any discovery made by us, of any golden or silver mines in these parts, yet both English and Dutch Travailers that way, affirme, they have seene two sorts of precious stones, Jas∣pers and Porpheryes; of both which the Natives infore them there are great store to be found in divers hils. But this is very certaine, that few places in the world afford more variety of rich materials for dying, or more sweet and soveraign Balsomes. The third most Southerne River in compssing Guiana, is that of Amazon, so called (not as some have conjectured, for that the Women have killed, or expelled the Males, not admitting any society with tem, but onely for one moneth, in the yeare, for the continuance of Procreation, but because both Male and Female, usually go in long hair hanging downe below their .) This great River is observed to vent it selfe, by so many armes or streames, farre distant the one from the other no lesse then six degrees, viz. from the River Arowary, lying above Cape de Noordneere, upon the third degree of the North Lati∣tde, unto the River Taieuru, as many to the South be∣yond the Equinoctial. Yet because the discovery as yet made, (or at least made knowne to us) of the severall flls of this great River are small and confusedly delivered. I shall reserve the de∣seription of them, and the regions adjacent, with the condition of the Natives, to my next Booke, as having so neare intercourse and respect to Soth America. I hve done with , my dscription must now proceed with the cotinent and Islands adjoyning where I  tey
lye Westward from the Island Granada, by the America Md∣terranean Sea. Margarita, Coetz, Cobana. THe neerest parts of the continent to Granada, the most Southerne of all the Charib Islands is by Herr, stiled Nova Adalusia, but now better  by the names of Cu∣mana and Venesuella, a spacious Country, but not the fifth part of what formerly hath beene reckoned, to belong to Nova Au∣dalusia. In the passage from Granada to Araya, the first part of note belonging to Cumana, about 17 leagues distant from Grana∣da to the South-west, lye Testigos eight rockes rather then Islands. As also, the Isle of Margarita, Coets and Cobana, not long since very famous for exceeding store of rich pearle: I shall briefly dispatch them, and so proceede with Cumana, which is yet more to the South-west. The greatest and chiefest of these three Islands is Margarita, just about the eleventh degree to the North of Cumana, six or seven leagues betweene which lye the two other Cobana and Coetz. According to Herrea it is distant from Hispalinola 170 leagues; the length of it is sayd to be sixteen leagues; the fertility of the soyle is sayd to be very good, but this the late Nether∣land Navigatours deny: In former times the great abundance of pearle obtained by continual taking of Oysters, made this Island of greatest fame and report, insomuch as the Kings of Spaine, for the better securing the Pinaces imployed in the Oy∣ster fihing, bilt two strong Forts, the one to the East, the o∣ther to the South. But now the pearly Oysters, by reaso of the Spanish insatia∣ble and unseasonable taking of them, doe upon the matter ut∣terly faile, the Island is of small note, and lesse resort: The chief Fort of it was taken and demolished 1626 by Heredices the Dutch Admirall, who carried from thence eleven peeces of Ordnance. The other two Islands Cobana and Coetz, which fall between Margarita and Cubana, are but small ones, and at this time of as little regard, though formerly of great esteeme with the Spa∣niard
for the great store of pearle they afforded: It is redibly reported that for many yeeres, the Kings fifth patt, which was imposed upon the Traders, came in Cobana onely to no lesse then 15000 Ducats yeerly. Cubana and Venezuella. ANd now to the continent: The first place of note in Cu∣bana, is the promontory of Araya, in the same paralell of longitude to the West end of Margarita, but distant in regard of latitude to the South six or seven leagues: Upon the winding in of this promontory, betweene it and the gulfe Cariaco, which for many leagues is extended into the continent, are found large pits of excellent and durable salt; of which the Dutch made great use, untill many of their men were there unhappily surp∣ed and cruely cut off by the Spaniard: Since which time, the better to debarre them and other Nations from supplying them∣selves from thence with that most necessary commodity, he hath built a very strong Fort. On the west side of the gulfe two miles distant from Sea▪ is Cumana, a pretty large Towne; from whence the Land begin∣ning to trne againe to the North, hath besides others these foure safe and convenient Havens, Bordones, Saint Fayths, Com∣monagot, and Oychyre. From which last and most Westerne part Oychyre unto Cape Salinas, the most Eastward, neare Bocco Del Draco where Cumana beginneth, are at least seventy leagues: The bredth of it according to Spanish Authors, in most places is fourty leagues unto the South: In former ages it was well stored with Natives, of which the tenth part are not now to be found; the Spaniard having severall occasions to transport them els∣where, and to make unmercifull execution of them. It should seeme by the long stay and large preambulations▪ that Ortelius and Sedenus two Spanish Comanders made in this Country, that but small store of gold and silver is to be found here; neither is there any great provision of sustentation for life▪ except it be of Fish, Fowl and honey, with which it aboun∣deth. Over against the West end of Cumana, a degree remote to the North lyeth Tortugas and Blancas, distant five leagues
one from the other, which for that they afford little ele but Hogges and Goats hard to be taken, being overrunne with ex∣ceeding sharp briers and thornes are seldome gone unto. The next part of the continent bending to the Northwest is Ve∣nezuella, a ar greater and rcher Country; It consisteth of many Provinces▪ and hath in it many Spanish Townes and commodi∣cus Havens. The soyle in generall is so fertill, as it affordeth two crop yeerly; the Pastures and Meddowes thereof are so many and o rich as they plentifully sustaine gret store of wholsome Cattell as well Neat as other: The great sore of Cow and Oxe hides usually brought from thence sufficiently prove the same: It is also generally reported to afford in divers Provinces good store of treasure, especially gold of the best sort. Before the comming of the Grmanes into this Country (to whom the Emperour Charles gave it, in regard of their great service against the Protestants) the Country was full of Inhabi∣tants; but by reason of the covetousnesse and cruelty of those Germanes, whose intent was not to plant, but to make spoyle of the Natives, they were well nigh utterly rooted out, and are not now much increased by a latter possession of the Spanish, but Tygers and other wild beasts have overrunne it. Spanish Au∣thors make mention of severall Provinces belonging to Vene∣zuella, but they doe not so cleerly prescribe their severall limits, as is requisite. Therefore proceeding in my discourse, accor∣ding to my usuall method, in following the Sea-coast, I shall briefly acquaint you with such Spanish Towns as are neare adja∣cent to the Sea-coast, or neer upon the same degree of longitude, though farre distant in regard of latitude from North to South, which is the breadth of the Country. The most Easterne promontory of Venezuella is Cordeliera, within five miles of Porte de Guaira; whence within fifteene miles is the strong Tower called Caraas▪ and from thence with∣in two miles is Blanco, all convenient harbours for ships: Then follow Turane and Burburate two other commodious and safe Havens, the former whereof affordeth good water, and is distant from Blanco thirteene miles; the other store of salt, and is re∣mote from the said Blanco fifteene miles: Within the Land a∣ove
two leagues from the Sea-coast lyeth Carvaleda, a Spanish Towne of some note, and from thence about foure leagues is Saint Iago a greater Town, where the Governour of those parts doth usually reside. From Porte Burbarata about seven leagues within the continent directly to the South, the Spanish of latter time, hath built Nova Valentia; from whence fifteene leagues more to the South is Nova Zerez of a later standing both well accommodated with wholsome provision in a competent mea∣sure: From Zerez to Nova Segovia, another Spanish Towne directly to the South is twenty leagues; it joyneth upon the River Bariquicemet, which falleth after a great circuit of ground into the River Orono{que}: the Country hereabouts is very barren but the mountaines with which it is surrounded are conceived by the Germanes (who built that Towne) to be well stored with gold, & this opinion of theirs is upon good grounds strongly con∣firmed by others of better judgement who have written of those parts. Tucunio that is exceedingly commended for the sweet∣nesse of the Ayre, the temperature of the climate, the super-a∣bundant variety of victuall, and store of gold it yeeldeth, is yet eleven leagues more to the Southwest, distant from the neerest place of the North Seacoast fifty, from Nova Granado 150 leagues; in which long passage two parts are very pleasant and fruitfull, the third very rough and ill provided. Now to returne to the Sea coast and so with relation to the longitude of Venesuella; to survey the middle of this Country as it extendeth it selfe to the South. Not farre from Burburata lyeth a little gulfe called Triste, from which Porte Etsave is a league distant, whence the Land beginning to wind upon the North sea continueth (for the space of 55 leagues) so to doe by somewhat proportionable gaining on the Sea: Onely a little above Coro (the onely City here) the Land turning two leagues to the South, and then againe twelve to the North-west, ad∣mitteth a great inlet of the Sea; which falling somewhat neare to the gulfe of Venezuella, laying on the other side, maketh a kind of Peninsula called Paragoana containing in the circumfe∣rance about 25 leagues: The Cape whereof to the North is San-Roman, a promontory of great note; and betweene the South∣west end thereof and the foresaid gulfe, lyeth the great Lake of
Maracaybo, extended into the continent in length 35.  bredth ten leages over; the mouth of it being a mile and a halfe wide, joyned with the gulfe of Venequell; whence though the Sea daily flow into it, yet doth it empty it selfe by a constant ebbing. The Islands over against this part of the continent some leagues remote in respect of latitude; are first Bonary, neare a degree distant to the North, it is of eight miles circumferance, well provided with store of hogs and horse; as also with one safe Ha∣ven on the Northwest end thereof, from hence 39 leagues far∣ther to the west, and fourteene to the North from Coro, the onely City of Venezuella is Curaca, farre lesse but more fertill. It hath a Haven on the North, but not very safe, especially for great ships. The last is Araba, nine miles remote from Quaraco to the West, and eight from Cape San Roman to the North. Let us now consider the Spanish Townes adjacent to this Sea-coast, and more remote into the Land; Coro which is built in the foresaid Peninsula, having a Bishop seat in it, goeth by the name of a Ci∣ty, and is indeed the onley place of note neare adjoying to Sea and chiefe Towne of Venezuella; it hath belonging to it two Havens to the West and North; that to the west though not very good, is farre better then that of the North. The Country round about is well stored with fish, flesh, fowle and sugar Canes: One thing it hath peculiar, such store of whol∣some and medicinable herbs, as it is said to need no Physitian▪ From Coro directly to the South, betweene the North Sea-coast the Lake Maracabo and neare Valenta, lyeth Portilla de Carora in the fertile Vale of Carora; a large space of ground neare two leagues from the pleasant and fruitfull fields of Coro, to the no lesse pleasant and fruitfull Vale of Carora is mountainous and unfruitfull, inhabited onely by Savages, called Xizatiaras and Axaguas. In the bottome of Maracabo is Lagana a Spanish Towne, sur∣rounded between two Rivers with well levelled grounds, which might serve to good use being abundantly stored with Deere, Coneys, and great variety of Fowle, but that it is overrunne with wild Beasts, especially with Tygers: Beyond which eight∣teene
leagues more to the South is the Province of Xuruara, and beyond that ten leagues more somewhat neare to the south∣east is the Port of Guiacas; of both which we read of nothing much worth noting; but onely betwixt these and the rich Pro∣vinc of Tucuio 25 leagues distant, a short passage may be had into the great Kingdome of Granado: The south side of the Lake Maricabo is inhabited by the Pocabuyes and the Alcoha∣lads, two Nations of a milder temper and more tratable dispo∣sition then are most other Natives; both are confidently re∣ported to possesse great riches, and a oyle every way well furni∣shed for a comfortable sustentation of life. Terra Firma. ANd now having finished Venezuella, we are to proceed with the next adjacent part, called Terra Firma, as being first ound after the Islands; It is thought by Cieca who hath wrote of it, that it extendeth it selfe from about Martha, which is in the eleventh degree of the North latitude, within a degree of the equinoctiall, for the space of 400 leagues. The bredth of it (as it is taken according to the sea-coast, from Cape Vela t Panima directly West) where it is widest doth not exceed three hundred leagues: Betweene which not many leagues distant from sea, though farre remote the one from the other, arise foure high Mountaines running the length of this Region, and all Peru and Chyly are usually knowne by the name of the Andion mountaines, where they are narrowest; they are two leagues over, in most ten, in some more then twenty; but he betweene these mountaines lye many large well levelled plaines, which being continually watered from the many small brookes and wide Rivers issuing from them, make many excee∣ding fruitfull Provinces, except it be some places where over great abundance of waters tuneth them into Mores and Fens. The Climate in generall is very wholsome; but in regard of heat and cold little can be said of it in generall (the mountaines and the plaines differing so much) these being for the greatest part of the yeere somewhat over hot, those over cold; yet so, as having recourse to both according to the severall seasons of
the yere they prove very convenient for habitation, and are for the most part as well stored with gold and precious stones, as any part of Aerica whatsoever. When I have set forth so much of this Sea-coast as shall be requisite at once, I shall then by an orderly falling downe with the continent, within a degree or two of the equinoctiall, particularly acquaint you with the pla∣ces where the foresaid treasure, and many other usefull commo∣dities are to be had. Cape Vela the most Easterne Province of Tera Firma is di∣stant from oro in Venezuella sixty leagues; from whence to Rio de la Hacha are eighteene, thence to Martha thirty, thence to Cartagena five and thirty more. These three are the onely Haven Townes of note belonging to the East part of this Coun∣try, though yet there be many other Ports and Rivers which may and doe affor safe harbour for shipping: Short of dela Hacha to the East is River Ranceria; beyond it to the West foure leagues is Port Ramada; then follow the mouth of the five great Rivers Buhio, Pera, Palamino, Don Diego and An∣chon de Quagcicho, remote the one from the other a league or two: Betweene these and Martha Port doe intervene Con∣cha and Los Anchones two convenient Havens (though nothing comparable to that of Marta) which in the yeere 1587 was certified to the King of Spaine by Baptista Antonella his owne Geographer to be moe safe and convenient for the Spanish Fleets yeerly passage into those parts then Cathagena if any con∣siderable cost were bestowed upon it▪ and that meerly for want thereof, it hath beene twice taken by the English with small forces. Betweene Martha Towne and the falling of the great River Martha, which is neare about the mid-way Cape Agnia, and the navigable Rivers of Gayra and Ciennagoy places of note, doo intervene: So on the other side betweene it and the Port of Carthagena, the sandy Island of Zamba and other shelvy places (by avoyding the coast and striking to Sea) are carefully to be a∣voyded, untill ships ma more safely put in from Sea to Canoa▪ but two leagues from Carthagena. As for the Port of Carthagena it self (were it as well provided as the foresaid Baptista adviseth his Majesty of Spaine to have it
done, it might upon better ground be esteemed impregnable. But for ought I can read or heare, a strong Navy which can spare to land, but 2000 or 3000 men (where they shall find opportu∣nity) may take the Towne and all the rich treasure in it, as well as it hath beene formerly taken by our Countrymen with farre lesse strength when it was less fortified: but of this strong Port more hereafter. From Cartagena where the Sea beginneth to decline from the North to the south-west, for the space of 35 leagues untill we come to the gulfe of Uraba, into which falleth the great Ri∣ver Darion; we read only of some small Islands as (Caramari, Ba∣ra & Tortaga) to be observed to avoyd for the dangerous accesse unto them, rather then for any good to be gain'd from them; yet there are two safe and convenient Haven betweene them. Hitherto of the sea coast of Terra Firma to the said gulfe, where on the West sie the Islands of Panima, a narrow neck of the Land continueth and yet seperateth it from Nova Hispania, where the North continent beginneth to arise some degrees to the North. Let us now pierce into the continent of Terra Fir∣ma, and view it according to its severall governments, with as neere a relation as we may to the foresaid Ports, whether more neere adjoyning or further remote. The fst government taketh its name from Rio de Hacha, (the first Port towne to us-ward) it is but of small extent, for it reacheth not above eight leagues into the continent; but stored with Spanish fruits, golden mines and precious stones of divers sorts; and were it not withall over-stored with wild beasts in the field and Crocodils in the Rivers it might well be reckoned one of the best habitations of Terra Firma: Besides, Rancheria and Ramada, which as Haven townes I mentioned before, we read of one Spanish towne called Tappia, well furnished with Cattell. This Province is seperated by the mountaines of Buri∣taca from the government of Martha, of farre greater extent somewhat more then 110 leagues in length from East to West, and not few lesse in bredth from North to south: The particu∣lar Provinces belonging to this spacious government doe much differ in divers respets. The Valley of Tayrona seven leagues distant to the East of Martha, and the Province of Buritaca
ight moe, are fertill and very rich in gold and precious stones, neither are they oubled with over-much heat or cold: But the Valley of Upar wherein standeth Cuidad, at the head of the Ri∣ver Pomptao, remote from Martha fifty leagues, seperated from Buritaa though it be somewhat fertill yet is it over cold. The Land for three leagues compasse, adjoyning to the Towne of Martha (from which the whole government taketh denomi∣nation) is very healthfull and pleasant but withall very ill provi∣ded with victuall (unlesse Oranges and Lemons and such like Spanish fruits, or that the native fruits which the Pine and Gui∣avah trees there plentifully affod) may suffice. The Provinces to the West of Martha toward Carthagena, namely Bonda and Poziguica are much of the same condition, healthfull but not fruitfull. The rest of this government downe to the South is invironed with two great Rivers (with Martha to the West, and Pompa∣tao to the South-east) which being remote the one from the o∣ther more then forty leagues, for the space of two degrees of la∣titude North and South, untill the River ompatao turning di∣rectly to the West, at length falleth into the greater River Ma∣dalena (for so it is here stiled) though it selfe also be but an arme of Martha. Now for that in so large a tract of ground (which the long continued distance of the foresaid Rivers suffi∣ciently prove) no mention is made of any other Spanish Towne but onely of Tenerifae, which is within forty leagues of Mar∣tha where Madalena falleth into it and Tamalame{que} fifteene leagues belowe more to the South, bordering neere thereunto, it may and is probably conjectured that here may be found ood habitation. A third government adjoyning to the sea-coast is Cartagna, so called from the chiefe Port towne of all Terra Firma. This government is more spacious and populous then either of the former, but withall it is in the generall lesse healthfull and lesse profitable, as being for the most part either taken up with waste unusefull Mountaines, or being pestered with many fennes and bogges, by reason of the continuall overflowing of Martha and and other smaller Rivers of their Valleys, that otherwise might be much more beneficiall for the grazing of Cattell; From the
falling of that great River into the sea where this government beginneth to the East, no mention is made of any Spanish towne toward the sea-coast untill we come to artagena it selfe, which City is inferiour to very few or none in all America. It is re∣ported not onely by Spanish Authors Herea, Bapista and o∣thers, but also by the Dutch, who have lately more exactly viewed the scituation of it to be very strong; it standeth in a kind of Peninsula two miles from the maine sea which upon that coast (unlesse in some ew chanels ) dangerous by reason of many shallowes, sands and shelves; the comming up to it (though no farther remote) is likewise difficult both by water and land. The water passages are three, all narrow and shallow, serving onely for small Vessels, and withall strongly fortified. The land passages that are as many are very narrow made cawy-wise so as but few can goe a brest to force their way, being opposed by severall strong Forts, and o make their way on either side the cawceys is impossible, being all of them so compassed with deep ditches and unpassable bogges: And yet for want of fresh water, they continually fetch from Galeera where the great ships ride, a great Navy may easily keepe them from thence, and so inforce them in a short time to yeeld for want of water. Nor is it impossible but that this City may be taken by the water pas∣sages, if good store of small Vessels well manned and otherwise provided shall be imployed therein. The next towne distant from Cartagena to the south-west is Toku, where great store of precious balsome (either by distilling of it selfe, or by incission of certaine trees) is yeerly gathered and conveyed into Europe. It is confidenty reported by Monar∣des to be no way inferiour, but rather more soveraigne, for the curing of many diseases, then was the balsome of Aegypt and the East Countryes, in all Authors so highly commended. The Climate is much more healthfull, the soyle more fertill and use∣full to feed Cattell, as being six leagues from sea, not mountai∣nous, and yet not taken up with flagges and bulrushes, and other such like increase of Marish grounds, as are Carthagena and the more neere confines thereof. Now to looke yet further into the continent, just opposite to
the government of Martha directly to the South, from the eighth degree of the North latitude, beginneth the Kingdome of new Granada, which extendeth it selfe unto the second de∣gree upon both sides of Madalena, more especially from the ri∣sing of the said River to the mid-way before it commeth into Martha, it is said to be 130 leagues ong, and betweene thirty and twenty broad. The Land is not onely pleasant and health∣ful but generaly very rich, abounding with much treasure and ample provision for livelyhood. The most unusefull parts of this great Kingdome, is the next adjoyning to the government of Martha that is taken up with the waste Opion mountaines, that permit not (without great difficulty and many dayes travail) entrance to Merida, Pamplona, Saint hristohers and other the Norterne parts thereof no lesse wealthy then pleasant. But then this difficult passage may be avoyded▪ by making use of the constant flowing of Sea into the wide mouth of Martha, which conveniently conveyeth ships of great bulke for forty leagus unto Tenerif, where Magdalena falleth into Martha, and then in small Vessels of fifty or sixty foot long and foure or five foot broad, they may with ample provision of men, victuall and ammunition, passe up the River Magdalena untill they come to the rich inhabited places of Granada: Of which the Provinces of Mus and olyma on the East side, the Province of Arbi on the West side of Magdalena are neerest to the Opin mountaines. The Provinces to the Easterfide, in which stand foure Spanish Townes, Placentta, Trinidad, Tudela and Palma▪ are somewhat too hot, by reason that the Sun-beams doe very strongly reflect upon them by a continuation of exceeding high mountaines yet more to the East. And yet withall they are over moysty, the water falling for six moneths in the yeer oo fiercely from those mountaines and the River Magdalena to which they border be∣ing so subject to overflowing: The soyle neverthelesse doth affr two plettifull Crops and feedeth much Cattell. Neither are the mountaines adioyning to these Provinces thought to be utterly destiute of treasure; but certaine it is, they abound with Emmeald and Berril stones. In the Province of Arbi on the West side of Magdalena,
over against lacentia, in the sixth degree of latitude lyeth Se∣nora, constantly reported to be richly furnished with golden Mines as is Maraquita with silver Mines, standing in the fifth degree over against Trinidad. Neere upon the same dgree of latitude fifteene leagues to the East of Trinidad is Tunia, a healthy, wealthy, and well pro∣vided Province for all kind of sustentation, necessary ot onely for life, but even for the abundance of many delights; in which respect it is so well inhabited by the Spanish, as that it is able to bring 200 horse into the field. And in no respect is the Province of Bogota inferiour, in which Saint Fayth the Metropolis of all Granad is scituated 22 leagues directly to the South, inhabited with 600 Spanish Families being the usuall residing place of the Deputy, Bishop, and all their Officers. Beyond this City to the South-east, I find mention onely of one more called Saint Iohns, remote neere fifty leagues; for nothing much commended but for the store of gold it affordeth. To the North-east fifteene leagues from Saint Fayth lyeth the Towne Tocaymai, neere adjoyning upon the River Paty, where it falleth into Magdalena equall to the foresaid Provinces Tu∣nia & Bogota in regard of all provision necessary and delighfull, but much to be preferred in respect of the wholesome, wel-plea∣sing temperature of the Climate, beside some Bathes which by long experience have beene proved right good, for the curing of many dangerous diseases. Having thus briefly discovered Granada, I conceive it most convenient, for the more cleere discription of the next adjacent government, which is Popaian; to begin with it as it lyeth on the South-west of Tocayma and Saint Fe, and as it bordereth neere upon the rising of the River Magdalena and so falleth for two degrees directly South to the equioctiall, where it is devi∣dd from Peru, and then returneth backe to the West rising of the great River Martha, distant from that of Magdalena full forty leagues. Hereby having continuall referrence to the chiefe City it selfe, seated not farre from the head of the said West , we shall the better understand and the scituation of the whole government.
The first Towne of Popaian neerest djoyning to Granada is Saint Sebactian, standing within three leauges from Onda the highest Inland Port belonging to Magdalena, much fre∣quented by the Merchants of Cartagena and Martha, in respect of the exceeding profitable importation of the necessary Com∣modities of Europe into these parts, and the transporting of a∣bundant treasure from hence. This Towne standeth from Saint Fe of Bogota in Granada thirty leagues, from the City Popaian 35; the fields about it are fruitfull, and have many silver Mines in them. Above the rising of Magdalena in the Valley of Ney, the Natives are so numerous, as that they hitherto have stoutly de∣fended themselves against the Spanish, and inforced them to re∣tire from some Townes they had built there: Timana in the most South-west part of the said Valley of Neyva (forty leagues from Popaian) the Spanish as yet with much adoe hold; but thrive very well, by reason of the richnesse of the soyle to fed Cattell, and the abundance of sugar and honey which it affor∣deth. To the North-west of Timana, and as many short of Popaian, upon the rising of the West arme of Martha here called Cauca standeth Almager, in a hilly Country, yet fertill and very rich in golden Mines. Hence the government of Popan extendeth it selfe either directly to the West or to the North. It is conve∣nient I first finish the Western part, as being in this book to fall no farther to the South, which will bring us by the confines of eru to the South sea of America, the knowledge whereof may much further us in the better understanding, not onely of the scituation of its governments, but also of the other parts of the North America, that yet remaine to be described. To the West of Almager about twelve leagues, beginneth the Valley of Mastel, whereunto bending somewhat to the South are the Valleys of Abades and Madrigal adjoyning. Of which this onely can be certainly affirmed, that they are of great extent, full of many little Villages, and those well peopled with the Natives, a good signe, they are not unfruitfull. Beyond these Valleys standeth Pasto in the rih Vale of Atris remote from Popaian fifty leagues. The rest of the Province of
Pasto reaching yet fifty leagues more to the West▪ even to the South sea of America is very mountainous, in which there be many rich mines, but it is well knowne to be very barren either for graine or Cattell. The Promontaries Rivers and Havens of this large Province of Pasto, upon which the South sea beateth are Saint Mathews Bay, Cape Frncis and Los Quiximires nearer bordering to Peru. Higher to the North where the Sea gaineth greatly upon the Land Eastward, are Port Manglares, the River Nicardo and Saint Iohn. To returne where we left to the the rising of the River Ca∣ca, fifty leagues before it commeth to the North sea▪ where it is called Martha, upon both sides whereof lye the better part of Popaian. From Almaguer where this great River first springeth on the East side thereof lyeth the Province of Ganaca, on the West the Valley of , both rich in treasure and exceeding fit for the feeding of Cattell. Betweene these, with the falling of the River for the space of ten leagues before we come to the City of Popaian. on either side doe intervene two other Vaeys Cocomici to the East and Barauca to the West, much of the same condition with the two former. The Metropolis of Popaian it selfe, standeth from the Equi∣notiall two degrees and a half to the North▪ from the Meridian of Toledo in Saine towards the West seventy degrees and thir∣ty scruples; it standeth in a very healthfull Climate and fruit∣full soyle it hath two Winters and Sommers, and both so tm∣perate as it injoyeth a kind of perpetuall Spring and evry yeer affordeth two plentifull Crops; the fields on both sides the Ri∣ver Cauca are very large, affording ample maintainance for in∣numerable Cattell, and incredible variety and store of most de∣licate fruits, besides the first risings of the Andion mountaines to the East, and the Tamban mountaines to the West, yeeld a∣bundance of coure gold. Abot 22 leagues from Popaian done the said River Cauca one leage on the West side of the River leth Cak▪ a Spanish Towne of great trade, in a large fruitfull Valley in some places twelve leagues wide, knowne by the same name, whether great
store of treasure and other ich Commodies are continually brought from rich Peru and Cyy, out of the south sea especial∣ly by the Bay of Bonaventure, remote 28 leagues, which great distance of place is a great part of it taken up with the wide rough and little inhabited mountaines of Timba, and by many boggy places, caused by a frequent fall of many waters, which make the passage very difficult with horse; but this de∣fect the Spanish supplieth by the helpe of poore Indians, whom they cruelly enforce for five dayes hard travaile to beare upon their shoulders through thicke and thin, through share cutting stones and piercing thornes neere upon a hundred weight, and yet affordeth those miserable creatures not necessary sustenta∣tion. Betweene the teiories of Cali and the south sea moun∣taine, more to the North-est mountaines is the Province Con∣chi, inhabited by a Giant-like people in regard of stature, but otherwise as little to be fered as the rest whom the Spaniard hath driven higher into the mountaines on both sides the River Cauca or hath brought into miserable slavery. Twelve leagues on the West of Cauca from Cali lyeth Ca∣rapa a hilly Province, but every way convenient for habi∣tation. As many more downe the said River on the East side begin∣neth a farre greater Province, fifteene leagues in length and ten in bredth, in which standth Cartago▪ betweene two very plea∣sant Rivers werein are found many small peeces of gold con∣tinually washed from the mountains adjoning. Those parts of this Prvince neere bordering upon the loest banks of Cau∣ca are very fenny▪ oergrowne with reeds and bulrushes; and yet Cartago seven leagues remote from that River and many other places, are constantly reported to be exceeding rich and health∣full▪ though yet for the greater part of the yeere they are usually subject to extraordinary raine and thundering. Betweene Carthago and Ancerma twenty leagues, distant al∣most North upon Cauca▪ beginning here to be better knowne by the name of the great River Martha, doe intervene three other Provinces on the West Copia, in which stadeth Acerma of greatest note next to Popaian, distant to the North 50 leagues.
This Province in generall is mountainous (except the Valley of Ancerma pleasant and fruitfull) and the adjoyning Rivers fal∣ling fom the mountaines afford much gold in little grains min∣gled with the sand thereof: Picera, Pozo and Pancura, Provin∣ces on the East of Martha, are of lesse extent, but more levell and more inhabited, and no lesse pleasant or profitable. To these Provinces yet more North, towards the City of A∣tioch (the most noble part of all Popaian and neerest to us-ward, towards the mouth of Martha) on either side the River doe in∣tervene to the West Cartamma, and the spaious Valley of Nore, wherein standeth the City Antiochia, invironed with high hils, but withall sweetly watered, with many little Rivers fal∣ling fom them: To the East are Arma and Cartamma, of which foure last recited Provinces, it may suffice briefly to know that they on either side the River are of at least thirty leagues in length, and in most places ten in bredth, no way in∣feriour if not exceeding the forenamed Provinces of Popaian, either for their temperature of Ayre, or fertility of soyle, or the store of treasure that their muntaines and Rivers afford. Panima. THus have we passed over all Terra Firma both by sea and land except Panima the most Westerne part, which is very narrow▪ in every place, and serveth as a necke to continue the continent of America betweene the North and South sea; I shall briefly finish it having but few places or things of any great consideration to write of it. The length of this last government of Panima, may be taken either according to the North Sea-coast, from the aforementio∣ned gulfe of Uraba to the closing of it with the River Viragua, (from which the most Easterne Province of Nova Hispania ta∣keth denomination) or else Southward, as it is extended from the River Darin, that falleth into the said gulfe and the South sea: the length in either respect is upon due computation found not to exceed ninety leagues; the bredth where it is widest doth not exceed thirty, where narrowest, as from Port Bel to Panima (would moutaines and Rivers and overgrowne Woods permit the shortest cut) it would be found fully 8. leagues from sea to sea.
My greatest care in perusing this government is to take speci∣all notice of the Sea-coasts, for besides the famous Ports, Rivers, Islands, Promontories both on the North and South side of this necke of ground, nothing is much worth the noting; for three parts of it lying betweene the River Darien and the South-sea, are taken up with exceeding high mountaines and those un∣fruitfull and unfit for habitation (being overrunne with wild beasts) besides the plains and Valleys adjoyning to either, though they be more fruitfull yet very unhealthfull, insomuch as though formerly they were well inhabited by Spaniards, yet now they are for the most part deserted. On the North from the gulfe of Uraba (where I left my des∣cription of that Sea-coast) unto the River Chagre, the most Westerne belonging to Panima government (not above forty leagues distant the one from the other) there are found many safe and convenient Ports, beside other places worthy conside∣ration. Within the narrow Uraban sea, five leagues to the South-west of it standeth Darien, a Towne after it was first raised in the yeere 1510. well inhabited, but it continued not so above ten yeers; for the Inhabitants in regard of the unhealthfulnesse thereof, betooke themselves to Panima, the chiefe Towne of all the government upon the mouth of the gulfe. Where the sea beginneth to turne againe to the North lyeth Port My; and then ten leagues further Port Acla, both conve∣nient Havens within, but somewhat dangerous to put into, by reason of the small Islands Gorde de Pinas, and others neere ad∣joyning. From Acla to Nombre de Dios, sometime a famous Port Towne (still a safe Haven) are reckoned twelve leagues; betweene which fall the Ports of Comagra and Cativa, the Ri∣vers Sanquo, Mays, Sardina and Sardinula. But of all the Ports Port Belo (which is by the procurement Baptista Antonellus, was raised out of the ruins and dispeopling of Nombre de Dios, five leagues distant from thence) is the greatest, safest and every way most convenient for the mutuall trading of the North and South Sea, by the River Chagre, many rich and necessary commodities of Europe being from hence continually transported to Panima whence the gold and silver
of Peru and Chily are returned hither twice every yeere. It was taken by Sir Francis Drake before the Towne and Fortifications thereunto belonging were one quarter finished: And since in the yeere 1601 when it was fully finished, it was surprised with two ships and a pinnace by Captaine Parker (who found there in respect of the place) but a very small booty not above 10000 dollers; for that within a few dayes before 120000 were from thence conveyed to Carthagena. The passage from this port Towne to Panima upon the South sea is not above eighteene leagues (and in summer time not hindred by Creekes of sea) not eight, so that as there is no great difficulty with a considerable Navy to take Porto Belo, and to secure the Navy there: so would it prove no long march nor any hard enterprise to take Panima (consisting but of 600 Fami∣lies, little experienced in martiall affaires and with it if the at∣tempt be seasonably made) five or six millions of money, if we may give credit to the foresaid Antonellus, the Spanish Kings Geographer, or to our owne Countryman Master Harcourt. This City (for so it is usually stiled) being the seat of a Bishop and the common residing place of the Governour and his chiefe Officers, standeth in a very unhealthfull Ayre, and no lesse bar∣ren soyle▪ being almost destitute of corne grasse, and other pro∣visions necessary for life, unlesse it be with Oranges and Lemans and divers other wholsome and well pleasing Indian Fruit. And yet for all this it wanteth not store of all kind of victuall, conti∣nually supplyed from other places, by reason it so aboundeth with treasure, in hope whereof the Spanish Merchants make that the chiefe place of trading by the River Chagre out of the North▪ and by the River Chepo out of the south sea: Both which though they come short of the City, yet are they of very great use, to bring the Merchants Commodities so neere which are afterwards much more easily conveyed thither by land. Concening the land passage from one sea to the other▪ a most remarkable attempt of Captaine Oxenhaw (a countryman of ours) Anno 1573. must not be forgotten▪ for though in the conclusion it proved not succesfull, yet it may be a great encou∣ragement of singular concernment to those who with greater strength shall make the like enterprize. It was briefly thus;
Captaine Oxenham (induced by the fame of the vast treasure, which fortunate Drake obtained in those parts) provided a ship of a 120 Tun; in which having with him neere a hundred men, (the winds favouring him, he came sooner then he could well expect on the North Sea-coast of Panima) where getting as neere as he could conveniently, for the shortest cut over to the North sea; he landed his men, drew up his ship into a cranny, where he left her and his great Ordnance, covered all over with bowes. Then he and his men taking sufficient victuall, with two field pieces, and other necessary armes, after twelve leagues march, they came to a River which falleth into the South sea, where he built a barge 45 foot long; in which he conveyed his men into an Island called the Isle of Pearles (close by the side whereof, they who come our of the South sea to Panima, must needs passe.) Here they closely concealed themselves for ten dayes; at the end whereof they seized upon two Pinnaces com∣ming from Peru, wherein was little lesse then 200000 .li. of gold and silver, besides great store of rich Pearles they took from the Islanders; both which they might certainly have conveyed to their ship (and so into England) had not both Captain & soul∣diers in their comming back in three particulars dealt very foo∣lishly. First, in too sudden discharging the two Pinnaces they had taken by whom the Governour of Panima being much sooner informed of the exploit then, otherwise he could have been, made the more quick pursuit after them, with twice as many forces as they had, Secondly, in casting the feathers of hens they had pillaged over board, whereby they gave perfect notice to the pursuers. Of the particular River they returned by, of which before they were very much to seek. But most of all did they forget themselves in an unseasonable contention concerning the divi∣ding of the prize; the Souldiers refusing to beare it upon their shoulders over the land, unlesse the might know how much should come to every mans particular share; which demand of theirs being as undiscreetly denied, the convention lasted so long▪ as the forces from Panima came upon them▪ recovered the treasure▪ and cut them all off, or took them prisoners, whom they forthwith brought to Panima and there cruelly executed,
some few escaped, whom by reason of their youth they spared. Beyond Panima to the South-sea, are some but not many Ports and Rivers. To the South-east is the River Chiepo, the River de Labalsa, Saint Miguels gulf, Port de Pinas, and the River Balsas; neer about which, groweth great store of timber fit for shipping, whereof singular use may be made in the South sea. On the South-west are two Ports, Perico and Nata, whereof the first is not far remote, the other twelve leagues distant from Panima; from whence as being the most Westerne parts of all Panima governments: I am now to proceed with the Province of Veragua, as neerest adjoyning to the West, formerly belong∣ing to the government of Nova Hispania, but now in the ju∣risdiction of the Governour of Guatemala; since, that Province and many more thereunto belonging, are upon the matter, ex∣empted from the Viceroy of Nova Hispania. I might here (following Hrea and others) fall upon the generall description of the government, in respect of the Climate, Soyle and of the severall commodities, and discommodities of the same, but to what purpose, seeing it is evident, and all Authors agree, that in particular they differ extreamly; I shall therefore in my particu∣lar descriptions of them, taking them according to my constant method as they lye by the North Sea-coast, passe through them fro sea to sea▪ where it can be done conveniently and as I pro∣ceed▪ I shall endeavou in all respects to give you such account of their severall qualities and conditions as is requisite. To begin therefore with Veragua, as it hath Panima govern∣ment to the East, so Costo Rica to the West, fity leagues in length▪ ad where it is narrowest 25 in bredth, from the North sea to the South▪ which on both sides it is bounded. The Soyl for the most part is barren, as being mountainous and full of briers, unfit for graine and pastoring, yet very rich in all kind of mettals, especially with gold. The inhabitants are many, very stout men, and great opposers of the the Spaniard, The first who found out Veragua was Christopher Columbus, who at his first arival found some opposition by the Naties, but he soon pacified them with toyes; (and as Hera reporteth) for 36 brasse bels he gained 80. li. whereby we may easily guesse
hat an aple returne he there made for things of very small worth. The north Sea-coast belonging to this Province affordeth but few good harbours; the neerest from the coast of Panima is the River elen, distant from Port Blo 2 leagues; neere which it built the Towne la Conception, where the Governour resideth. A second is a little within the River Veragua; from which the Province is denominated. The last a pretty large gulfe called Caravaro. Between which and Belen lieth an Island ten mile from the continent called Escudo, an Island carefully to be ob∣served, in regard of the many rocks and shelves that are about it. The Spanish inland Towns, to omit all the poor Hamblets, possessed by the Natives are onely Trinidad and Saint Fayth, the one three, the other twelve leagues remote. From la Conception close to the South sea is Carlos, another Spanish Towne five leages from Saint Fayth; over against which and to the East and West of it are 20 small Islands, or ra∣ther rocks, which goe by the name of Zebaco; so as in the South sea of Veragua we read of no good Haven, but onely Port Gera neere cape Maria, in the South-east corner thereof. The next adjoyning Province lying as Veragua, between both seas 40 leagues in bredth, and (if Herea reckon right) 90 leagues to the West in length, up to the continent of Nicaragua is Costa∣rica, much of the same condition of the former, mountainous and barren, but full of rich mines. To the North sea it hath only Saint Hieromes Port, to the south it hath foure convenient Havens, Borica, Saint Lazaro, Para, Nicora. The inland Spa∣nish Townes of this Province are Carthago, standing much a∣bout the middle of it, 0 leagues from either sea. Arames i within five leagues Eastward to the South sea, and Nicora one of the aforesaid Havens. A third Province belonging to Guatimala is Nicuragua, this as the two former taketh its bredth from sea to sea, but in a double poportion▪ in some places eighty leagues over, though in length Westward to Guamala Province it exceedeth not fifty. The Climate in summer is ver hot, in winter over cold▪ the soyle is levell, fit to feed Cattel but not to beare Corn, Hogs,
Fish, Cotten, Salt, and goodly timber it yeelds great store. He∣rea maketh mention here of a kind of Trees called Zeybis, so mighty big about, that five men joyning hand in hand can hard∣ly fathome one of them. The Inhabitants of this Province are much civilized by the Spaniard, can speak their language, have learned their trades, and are very subject unto them, the Con∣talles onely accepted, who keep themselves in Woods and moun∣taines. The most observable thing here is the lake Nicuragua, whence the Province taketh name, both in regard of its large circumfe∣rence, being (as it is reported) no lesse then 130 miles, it hath a constant ebbing and flowing, and though the head of it be not a∣bove foure leagues from the South sea, yet in hath intercourse onely with the North sea, that is in distance fifteen times fur∣ther, the falling of this great lake in no small streames, is in the midst between the eleventh and twelfth degree of the North la∣titude, where the continent againe beginneth to extend it selfe for five degrees at least more to the North, not without some turnings and returnings from East to West, from whence taking in againe with as many windings and turnings for 120 leagues to the North-west, the Sea breakes in againe between the Pro∣vince of Honduras and Yucatan; another part of the continent, which inlet of sea is called the gulfe of Honduras. Now then (keeping my selfe to my proposed method) I am first to piscover the Ports, Rivers and Islands of this North Sea-coast, before I come to speak of this or any other of the Provin∣ces contained in the circumference of the many long and large reaches thereof. The first sea Port to the North of Nicuragua is called S. Iohns Port, the middle streame where the said lake venteth it selfe. A second is called Yaropo, betweene which and Saint Iohns pr▪ being somewhat more then 20. leagues distant, many little I∣slands doe intervene; in which distance there is no safe putting in to land. Upon the 13. degree of latitude falleth the river Yare, affording a convenient haven; and a little above that latitude, though many leagues short of it in respect of longitude, is Saint Catalina, better knowne to us by the name of the Isle of Pro∣vidence, appearing in the Mappe no more then a small spot▪ not
above two miles broad nor five long; yet so fertill and so well accommodated with all provision▪ as for these many yeeres last ast, it liberally sustained more then 1000. English men, untill the Spaniard fearing their over neer approaching to these parts, where the usuall passage and constant receipts of all their trea∣sure was (I meane Cartagena, Panima, and Porto Belo in Terra∣firma, and Havana in Cuba) after many assaults displanted them; which seemeth to me, (all things considered) a great wonder, they did not long before put their full strength upon it; and it is no lesse to be wondred at, that they should offer, and performe such reasonable quarter, not onely as is constant∣ly reported, of permitting them, but also in supplying them with shipping, to transport them into Virginia, New England, and other English plantations they neither feare, nor regard as be∣ing farre remote. Above Yare halfe a degree is the gulfe of Ni∣uesa, a good harbour for shipping▪ and ten leagues further, somewhat about the 14. degree is the promontary of Gracias a Dios bending to the East, from whence the Continent winding in againe to the West for neer 50. leagves, many pernicious I∣slnds, very remarkeable for the shipwracke of many, doe inter∣vene the Islands called Viciosas lying upon the 15, the Isle of Baxos upon the 16, and Millan upon the 17 degree of the north latitude; and that which maketh the passages to these parts more dangerous, is that to the East and North-East, they are beset with Roncador, Serrana, Seranilla, Sancanilla and some other rocks, besides many shallowes and sands that require ex∣pert Piots to avoid them▪ yet by Gods providence and their care they may be safely passed. Betweene the Islands Viciosas and Baxos are two Bayes▪ Honda and Cartago, to both which the comming up is sandy and shallow. Neere adjoyning to Boxos is Cape Camoron, then 20. leagues further to the west is Cape Honduras, betweene which (the land bending like a bow to South and then to north againe) falleth the goodly river Guiapa, whose streames by the small peeces of gold they bring with them, evidently declare the Mountaines adjoyning to have store of such treasure. To the North of Honduras, where that gulfe beginneth, be∣gin many Islands knowne by the name of the first and chiefe
harbours, and worse coming in unto them, they are in most pla∣ces ten leagues from the continent, and follow one upon another for at lest 30. leagues to the south-west. In the middle space whereof Xagua a good haven falleth into the sea from the continent: from whence for full 30. leagues unto port Cavallos, on the West of the pleasant River de Sal is found no safe harbour, bt Cavallos is an exceeding convenient and safe harbour against wind and tempest, yet not so well for∣tified, but that it was twice taken easily by our Countriman Ma∣ster Newport Anno 1591. and by Sir Anthony Sherley 1616. This gulfe de Honduras or Guanios, (for it is knowne by both names) doth yet run for forty leagues further, though still nar∣rowed more and more, by reason that Yucatan another part of the continent being a very long and large Peninsula, falleth in and joyneth with the Province of Honduras; in the narrowing whereof lye the River Vlva, Cape de Puntas, and Port de Hi∣gueras; just in the breaking off another smaller gulfe called Dulce. I shall now from the discovery of the Sea-coast fall to describe so much of the continent as lyeth between Sea and Sea. Upon the North sea for 150. leagues doth the Provice of Hon∣duras extend it self, in bredth here and there more or lesse then 80. leagues, in the generall a very rich and goodly Country; for the Valleyes thereof afford three crops of their Indian graine, and two of our wheat, besides a continuall supply of grasse, so as it is ever green, flourishing, and affordeth great store of provisi∣on for man and beast. The Spanish Townes belonging to this Province, taking them as I proceed in my description from East to West; are first Tru∣gillo, a league remote from sea, standing between two Rivers, whereunto belongeth a port strongly fortified by nature and art; which though it was taken by our English Anno 1576. yet was it in vaine attempted by them, under the command of Sir Anthony Sherley, in the yeere 1596. the region about is tem∣perate both in winter and summer, the soyle exceeding fertill, maintaining great store of Cattell, graine and great variety of excellent fruit: The Vines here in great abundance bring forth
Grapes in wonderfull plenty twice a yeere. The Towne lyeth to the North-east of port Cavallos forty, of Validolid the chiefe City fifty leagues. A second Town thirty leagues to the south of Trugillo is Saint George, in the rich Valley of Olancho, where∣unto the hils adjoyning are lately found so full of gold mines as that the Governour of Honduras and Nicuragua have often drawne their Forces into the field and fought for it, untill the King of Spaine was pleased to decide it, by adjudging it a parcell of this Province. The chiefe City forty leagues to the south within the Land is Valadolid, where the Governour and his Officers, a Bishop and his Cathedrall men reside, very amply provided for with all kind of provision that the goodly Valleyes neere adjoyning afford, and greatly enriched by the gold and silver mines there lately discovered. Upon the North sea in the Valley de Naco, every way com∣parable with Valadolid but for unhealthfulnesse; foure leagues severed lyeth the Haven Towne de Cavallos in the fifteenth degree of latitude, and between them somewhat more to the West are two other Spanish Townes that yeeld many mules and great horses, as doth also the Country about Cavallos (whence the name is taken.) The government of Guatimala and two other small Provin∣ces▪ Saint Salvator and Gulpho Dolce, lye one after another to the south of Honduras towards the south sea, in few places lesse then thirty leagues in bredth, in respect of fertility, ore of Cattell and graine, they come not farre short of it▪ but much in regard of healthfulnesse and the temperature of Aire and season; they being in some moneths over hot, in most infested with too much raine, and which is the usuall consequence thereof with in∣credible multitudes of pestilent Flyes, Bees, Horners, scorpions, and other though small yet deadly venemous serpents. Besides these provinces, especially Guatimala so properly called, is extraordinary subject to continuall Earthquakes, horri∣ble thundering and lightning and which is much worse, to u∣suall breaking out of flames of fire, from the sulpherous moun∣taines▪ which sometime cast them downe in huge lumps to the overwhelming of the Townes and Villages adjoyning; but ne∣ver
are these strange breakings out of fire, but to the great an∣noyance of man and beast, by the loathsome smoak and vapours that necessarily issue upon them, not without much spoyle of Corne and fruits, by reason of many thousand quarters of ashes which at those times are thickly dispersed round about. The chiefe City in these parts is Saint Iago de Guatimala, fourteen degrees in latude, 93 in longitude: From the Meri∣dian of Toledo in Spaine, to East whereof stand Trinidad and Saint Salvador two other Spaih Towns; the first 36. the se∣cond forty leagues remote, both very convenient for trading out of the South-sea. From Nova Hispania and Peru, by the port Acaxulta in a very safe channell, and not above five or six leagues from sea, the two most Easterne Townes of Guatimala are Saint Miguel, 22. leagues from Saint Salvador, within two leagues of Fonseca Bay. Then Xeres eighteen leagues farther, neere to the lake of Nicoagua; which having a short recourse to the sea, affordeth a good Haven called Port possssion; between which and port Guatimala, that goeth up to Saint Iago for the space of eigh∣ty one leagues; there are no other considerable Havens then have been mentioned. The Havens and Rivers about Guatimala to the West, that we may here make an end with the South sea coast belonging to this government, are oatlam, Govetlan, Colate Haziaclan, belonging to Soconusco, a Province extended upon the south-sea, westward thirty leagues in length, and as many in bredth towards Verapaz and Chiapa, two midland Provinces to the North: The Inhabitants thereof not being very many, and ha∣ving few Spaniards among them; live plentifully▪ by reason of the great store of Cacao, a fruit like Almonds, which the Mer∣chants of Nova Hispania fetch from thence at good rates▪ as be∣ing of great use and high esteem as well with the Spaniards as Natives inhabiting those parts, both to eat and drinke, but espe∣cially to drink, it yeelding a liquor exceeding wholsome and pleasant, with some composition tey use maketh it no way infe∣riour to high-country white-wine or Shery-sack. Out of this Ca∣cao commodity in this little Province▪ the King of Spain hath for tribute every yeere at least 400 frayles of them, every frayle be∣ing
worth thirty silver Royals. The next Province to the North of Soconusco, and the South of Yucatan, having Chiapa Province, to the West is Verapaz, so called, for that the Natives came freely in upon the preaching of the Gospell, but having so little profited therein▪ under such covetous corrupt Tutors, as they know scarce any thing aright of Christrianity, and would be very glad they could be freed from such tyrannicall Lords. The middle part of it is somewhat temperate, the residue is extreame hot and extreamly perplexed with Mosquitos▪ usually swarming in other parts of the Indies which are hot and over moist as these are. Neither doth the soyle (by reason of eight moneths raine, which most an end happeneth continually) yeeld any store of Indian wheat, but little or none of ours; and yet it bringeth forth abundance of medicinall herbs, beautifull flowers▪ and trees most usefull and profitable both for nourishment and building▪ but withall it harbours ma∣ny wild beasts; as Lyons, Tygers, Beares, but very few for the use of man. Nor yet (so farre as I heare) have gold or silver mines been here discovered by the Spaniard. The most Westerne Province of all Guatimala, bordering up∣on the East of Nova Hispania is Chiapa, full forty leagues long, and almost as broad every place from South to North, in regard of over great heat and moysture▪ of great store of wild beasts and dangerous serpents much like Verapaz; as also in respect of the innumerable profitable Trees there, the fruit whereof affordeth toothsome and wholsome nourishment, the bodies speciall tim∣ber, the gumme (which in great quantities come from them) precious Balsome and sweet odours, the bark, gumme and fruit very rich materials to dye colours of the best esteeme with us. But herein it farre exceedeth all the Provinces of Guatimala, in that being competently provided with graine, it doth breed and maintaine great store of excellent Horses, Kine, Sheep and Swine, besides incredible variety of the best Fish and Fowle, onely for Mines it must give place to Honduras Province. Thus I have passed through the government of Guatimala; I am now come to make entry upon those Provinces that ap∣pertaine to the royalty of Nova Hispania: For the right sur∣veighing whereof, I must of necessity againe fall to discribe the
Sea-coast▪ so by surrounding in Yucatan, a long and wide Penin∣sula, save onely in the necke of it where the gulss of Honduras and Mexico come neerest together (of no lesse then 25. leagues compasse) the sayling on either side of it is dangerous, by reason of many scattering Islands, rocks shelves, and sands. From the comming up againe of Honduras gulfe on the South-east of Yucatan to the North-east, these are very carefully to be avoyded, as most pernitious, Elbob, Lamanary, Zaratan, Pan∣toia, Quitazuwenho, which last signifieth as much as, now take heed; It lyeth in the eighteenth degree of latiude, a full degree more to the North then Guanima Isle, just opposite to cape Honduras, but much of the same longitude with them; so as though the gulfe on either side towards Yucatan, or Honduras be not safe to saile in; yet by the channell thereof more then twenty leagues broad in most places is safe and navigable. From Quitazuwenho to Cape Conche, the most northeast of this Pe∣ninsula, and neerest to the Island Cuba are neer seventy leagues, between which comes the Island Coznmel and many petty I∣slands called Mucheres. The North and North-west Sea-coast of Yucatan are no lesse dangerous then the North-east; as being also full of sands shal∣lowes and rocky Islands, known by the name of Alcranes and Negrillos: which though they be far remote from land, yet they make the passage dangerous to come into the best ports of Comill on the river Ligartes on that side, being themselus not very good. From hence to the west, the continent falling down again more and more to the South for three degrees, viz. from above 21. to 28. all this coast (as the other) by reason of the Isle of Sands Des∣considla and Triangulo and some others no lesse sandy, but much more rocky, is hazardous and make Cical and Telichaque (the best Havens hereabouts) to be lesse frequented. Neither yet is the Sea channell here adjoyning so deepe and free from sands, as is safe for ships of any great burden to faile in. The land with∣in this long and wide Peninsula, is for the most part neither temperate nor healthfull, save onely in the mountainous places, nor so much inhabited but onely to the North end of it, where standeth Merida the chief Town about twelve leagues from sea, the Governour & Bishops abode, accompanied with 100 Spanish
Families. Another is Vallidolid, 31. leagues to the East of Me∣rida, where a great Monastry of Franciscans standeth, and where the Natives of the region adjoyning are said farre to exceed all others, being at least 50000. A third Towne fifty leagues to the West of Merida is Cam∣peche, where Captaine Parker our Country-man, Anno 1596. with some hazard but greater honour seized (in sight of all the Inhabitants) upon a ship laden with gold & silver and other rich commodities, and brought her away, though they made all the resistance possibly they could. A fourth Towne is Salamanea, in the neck of this Peninsula, not much differing in respect of longitude, though neerer a de∣gree in latitude from port Real; it belongeth to the Province of Tabasco, of which I will say no more, but that it is very slen∣derly inhabited though yet it be of large extent, no lesse then forty leagues, bordering upon the North-sea called the gulfe of Mexico, as many in breth toward the South adjoyning to the province Verapaz and Chiapa. The reasons whereof given by Authors are, that this Country is as intemperate and unwhol∣some as any other thereabouts, and affordeth but slender susten∣tation, and but few Merchantable Commodities. The onely Spanish Towne in this Province is called Senora Victoria, in re∣membrance of the great Victory here obtained by Cortesius, the over prosperious, because the over cruell subduer of this and all the Country hereabout. The next Province to the South is Chiapa, much upon the same bredth and length; whereof also little is to be said, but that it is a more pleasant and healthfull, more abounding with the rare, though usuall fruit of Nova Hispania; and which is Neat, Sheep and Swine the horses are of such an excellent breed as they are sent for as farre as Mexico, the Metropolis of No∣va Hispania, no lesse then 200. leagues distant. Here are likewise many Eagles and other Fowles of prey, that now live upon such wholsome and toothsome Fowle as may be better imployed for mans sustentation, and by their meanes more easily taken. Xi∣menes maketh mention of one monstrous Bird, having one foot like a Goose, and the other like a Faulcon, that liveth by prey
taken both in the water and Ayer. There are in Chiapa many Natives distinguished by the names of Zeques, Zeltales, Quelc∣nes and Secaulands, and among either of these there are many Villages well inhabited. The onely Spanish Towne of note is Cuidad Reall, seventy leagues to the North-east of Guatimala, and as many from Senora in Tabasco. From Chiapa westward followeth the Bishoprick of Guaxaca whereunto the Provinces Misceca, Tucepe{que}, Zapoteca and Guazacoalco are annexed, which take up all the continent be∣tween both seas. From the great River Guazacoalco unto the River Alvarde on the North side, distant the one from the o∣ther fifty leagues. As much more from Tecoantepe{que} a small port, to Tequanapa a safe Haven in the wide and deepe River Onatepec, betweene which lyeth the famous port of Agutulco, taken with much treasure by Sir Francis Drake, Anno 1578. and by Captains Candish 1586. This Bishoprick with the Provinces annexed are in the generall (though mountainous) very fertill and healthfull, but the Valley of Guaxaca (that Crotesius the Conquerer of this Country and the regions thereabout chose for his inheritance) doth exceed imagination in regard of fertility both of grasse and Cattell, Corne and pleasant fruits, Fish and Fowle. Besides that it containeth in it many gold and silver mines, much Chocha∣neel & Silk, strong incitements to make it so fully inhabited as it is, both with Spaniards and Natives; the Natives being repor∣ted to exceed 150000. And though Mistica and the other an∣nexed Provinces, be not every way so beneficially accommoda∣ted, yet are they so well provided with necessaries, streames a∣bounding with golden oare, small peeces of gold washed from the mountaines, and other Merchantable Commodities, that they also are well stored with Inhabitants; of whom this is very remarkable, that they use the Jewish Ceremonies in particular, Circumsicion, which they▪ affirme to have received from their Ancestors. The chiefe Spanish Towne there is Auteguera standing in the heart of the aforesaid incompararable Valley Zapoteca▪ (and Nixapa two other Towns, fall short of it full twenty leagues, the one to the North-east the other South-east:) Agaculco a great
Haven towne upon the South sea standeth directly to the South somewhat more then thirty leagues. The Bishoprick of Tlas∣cula is next to Guaxaca more to the North-west, though exten∣ded also through the whole continent from sea to sea, no lesse then 100. leagues in length▪ in bredth to the South-sea but 18. where we read of no Haven of note but to the North-sea, here called the gulfe of Mexico, being full 80 leagues; there fall ma∣ny Rivers convenient for ships to harbour, lade and unlade; as namely, the Rivers De Banderas and Zempoal, Almeria, Saint Peters, Saint Pauls and de los Cazon. The first Banderas, be∣ing within five leagues of the famous River Alucrado in Gua∣naca: The last not above three leagues from the River Pa∣nuco in the Province of Panuco; which two differ full soure de∣grees in latitude; but the onely ports of note & now of use with the Spaniard are Vera Cruz and Saint Iuan-Uullua, both very convenient and strongly defended, but the latter as being some∣what more healthfull, and comming up to the Towne with suf∣ficient water to bear ships of greatest burden, is at this prefect of greatest imployment; and therefore every day more and more fortified by the Spaniard. Sir Iohn Hawkins in the yeere 1568. came into this Haven, where he found 22. Spanish ships richly laden, which though he might have certainly seized upon, yet he condiscendered to meane conditions, whereof the chiefe was the victualling of his ships; yet neither that nor any of the other were performed, but they with a new Navy from Spaine falling upon him unexpectedly after agreement made, put him so to it, as he had much adoe unvictualled, with two ships onely to escape, and for want of provision was inforced to set 100 of his men on land who all perished, either by the inhu∣manity of the Savages who killed and eat them, or through the cruelty of the Spaniard, who to revenge themselves under the prentence of Religion put them to death. This large Bishoprick of  with the Provinces annex∣ed doe (as others) differ much in respect of temperature and fer∣tility, the temperature and fertility arising not so much from the farther or neerer approach to the Zodacke as from the mountaines and Valleyes, the mountainous parts in many places,
eight leagues over being temperately cold and lesse fertill; the Valleyes (whereof here are many) Achisco and Saint Pauls be∣ing chiefe, exceedingly fruitfull but over hot: I make no que∣stion but that here also are some rich mines, though as yet few have been discovered. But of this I am well assured, that the Native Inhabitants are here more then usually to be found in any place, whose conversion to the true knowledge of Christ, ought in the first place to be considered by us. The Spanish Townes of note here (take them as we passe from East to West) are Sigura, and the two Haven Townes (of which I spake before) all three strongly and statety built, as also well provided with pleasant and profitable fields round about them. In the Bishoprick it selfe standeth Rubla los Angelos, the Valley of Altisco, inhabited with 1500. Spanish Families now the chiefe City where the Bishop resideth. 22. leagues from the Metropolis of Nova Hispana, and within a little of the twentieth degree of North latitude; between which Mexi∣co more to the North-west intervene Guaxacing and old Clas∣cala, from whence all the government hath its name. And now we are to come unto the heart of Nova Hispania, even to the great City Mexico, the center of the Arch-bishoprick (from whence it is denominated) and upon which government (under the command of the Victory) all the rest depend. As it lyeth to the West of Tlascula, so it hath to the North the wide Province of Panuco, to the West and North-west Mecoa∣can, of as large extent; the length of this Archgovernment is taken from the Inland confines of Panuco to the South-sea, where it is in bredth but eighteen leagues, though yet to the North it be reckoned at sixty: In which large tract of ground there are many petty Provinces, now knowne rather by their names then Dominions: It may therefore suffice onely to name them with some small touch of what they have in peculiar. To the North of it are Lateotalpa, wherein lyeth the rich sil∣ver mine of Puchuca, fourteen leagues from Mexico. Then Meslitlan, a Country abounding with Allum and Iron: Then Tula, whereunto belongeth another silver mine called Guaxa∣nao, sixty leagues remote; all three well provided of all neces∣sary
provisions for life, and affording many Merchantable Com∣modities. To the North-east the Provinces of Panpautlat and Tupdx, are neither healthfull, by reason of the excessive heat, nor much inhabited in regard that lying so levell with the sea, the many creeks which come from thence maketh the Country adjoyning barren and unusefull, fit onely to breed innumerable swaes of Musquitos, a kind of pestilent flyes, which as they are rise in many other places of the West Indies, so are they here excee∣ding troublesome to the Inhabitants. The lake of Mexico in the surrounding bosome whereof the City standeth to the North, being more then eight leagues in length, and in most places five in bredth, is on every side well planted and well inhabited: Culuala as is reported consisting of 20000. Families▪ Yztacapalpa of 10000. some others 4 or 5000. A strong argument to beleeve the regions round about to be ex∣ceeding fertill. Eight leagues to the South of Mexico beyond the lake is Zalateco, where is a plantifull silver mine. As are also Tasco 22, and Zumpango 40. leagues to the South. Beyond which yet more to the South, eighty leagues, from the Metro∣polis somewhat above seventeen degrees of North latitude lyeth Acapulco, the most famous port belonging to the South-sea. Of all America concerning the City Mexico it self, it may suf∣fice to know that it is the greatest and richest of all this new World, standing as was formerly noted, upon the North side of the lake, about the twentieth degree of latitude, and according to Herrea 130. in longitude from the Miridian of Toledo, no lesse then 1740. leagues distant the one from the other, it consisteth (according to the relation of Cortesius) who first con∣quered it) of three streets, whereof the least to the West is a mile and halfe; a second to the North is three; the greatest to the South is full two leagues in length, it is credibly reported to be now inhabited with 4000. Spaniards, and 3000. Natives, a small proportion in respect of what was formerly related. But then it is now farre better built and beautified, with a stately Cathedrall, many Churches, Monasteries and Schooles for lear∣ning.
The temperature of this City differeth little from the regions adjacent, in the moyst moneths annoyed with too much rain, in the dry (which are November, December, January, February and March) much more infested with dust, that being raised by sudden whirlwinds, getteth up into their nostrils and produceth many diseases, especially Fevers. There are yet two other things here very observable: First, that this great City, either through the negligence or avararice of the Viceroy and his Officers; in not dispending what was yeerly allowed for repairing the mounds of the lake, was in the yeer 1629. miserably overflown, to the drowning of many thou∣sand Inhabitants, and to the losse of the greatest and best part of their houshold-stuffe and other goods, which were either dri∣ven away or corrupted by the waters. A second thing here to be noted, is that this▪ last yeere (as it was constantly reported in London) the Viceroy of Mexico and with him all Nova Hispania were revolted, and in open Rebel∣lion against the King of Spaine; which if it shall (as yet it is ve∣rily beleeved) prove true, it will be of high concernment to this Nation or any other, into whose hearts it shall please God to put an effectuall desire of dispossesing the Spaniard of his usurped stewardship. so unfaithfully imployed (in respect of the fincere promoting of the Gospell in the purity thereof) and so tyran∣nically exercised, in regard of incredible oppressions, rapines and murthers there (as their owne Authors confesse) inhumanely committed by them. Now for the two other greater Provinces under the com∣mand of Mexico government: Panaco to the North, the Me∣choacan to the South-west: I will briefly set downe so much as is of any concernment to be knowne. That part of Panuco which is said to be both in length and bredth fifty leagues; toward the Arch-bishoprick of Mexico is very habitable and fertill, and in times past of great note, for silver mines (that are now thought to be neere exhausted.) But the other part which bendeth to the North-east for fifty leagues to Florida, so farre as it is yet discovered, is found overgrowne with woods, and barren. The Spanish Townes here not greatly
inhabited beside Panuco it selfe (by them called Saint Steven) are Saint Iago, 25. leagues to the West, and Lewis de Tampice, eight to the North, not farre from the gulfe of Mexico. The most westerne Province belonging to the Mexico government is Mecoachan, lying between Mexico and the Provinces of Ga∣laecia, bending into the continent towards the North sixty, and being bounded to the South, by the South-sea full 80. leagues: whereunto belong the Port towne called Zacatulca, thirty leagues from Acapulco, then Saint Iago and Malaccan 50. more from thence to the North-west. There are belonging to this large Province two other little ones Taximaroa within 30. leagues of Mexico, and Colima to the South-west, upon the confines of Galaecia, 50. leagues from Valadlid the chiefe City of Mecoachan. This Colima is constantly reported to be very healthfull, apt for graine and Cattell, but abounding with the choisest fish and fruit, and not without some gold mines, though it hath more brasse (which is there so common) that since the Spaniards com∣ming thither, they make all those instruments of brasse that we usually make of iron. And though this South-west part be the best of all, yet is there none (unlesse high to the North not yet so fully discovered) but is as rich, and every way as convenient to be inhabited. Besides Valadolid (which the Natives call Guagangareo, stan∣ding upon a great lake as big as that of Mexico) there are many other Spanish Townes of note. First, Leon very famous for the golden mines that have been found about it. Then Salaya, St. Miguell and Saint Philippo, up to the North both of Mexico and Valadolid, though between them bending still Westward (all built by the Viceroyet, many league distant the one from the other) of great use to secure the vast treasute which is con∣stantly conveyed from the most plentifull silver mines of Elere∣ma and many other (of which hereafter) against the Pocacars, the most barbarous of all Savages, who live as wild men in Woods, and cannot as yet be brought under by the Spaniard, though yet
in hath beene long endeavoured, not without great losse on ei∣ther side. Galaecia. I Am now come to Nova Galaecia to the West of Mecoacha bounded to the West with the sea of California; but to the North and North-west, though large and spatious Countryes are discovered, yet it is concluded by the learned in this kind, that there resteth much more to be discovered. This government hath annexed unto it divers other Provinces, Guaidalaara, Xalsco, Zacatecas, Chiametla, Biscaia; as also California, Cbola, Quivira and Nova Mexico; of which when I have briefly spoken, you have all that I thought fit in so short a compendium to communicate touching the Northerne Ame∣rica. Guadalaira the principall and most Southerne Province of Galaecia, is bounded to the East, with some parts of the Provin∣ces of Mexico and Mecoachan, to the West with Xalisco; to the North with Zacatecas, where the most plentifull silver mines are thought to begin; but of late it is found that about Guadaliarae the chiefe, and indeed the onely Towne here, there are more plentifull silver mines, ere they as the other so well searched, which for want of men they have not as yet been dis∣covered. And it is further to be observed that this inland Pro∣vince is for temperature and fruitfulnesse in most respects se∣cond to none. Xalisco is to the West of Guadaliara, upon that Sea-cost called Mare Pacificum, that is, the still sea. The onely thing of observation here is an herbe, which the Native call Curcas, highly extolled by Monardes the great Herbalist, to be of singular use against most diseases. Cametla likewise lyeth upon the same sea-coast, but a degree or two higher to the North: The great store of Inhabitants which Herrea mentioneth to have been there, shew it to be fer∣ti. And Ybara, who in the yeere 1554. built Saint Seba∣stian
the onely Spanish Towne there, found many silver mines and of late more have been discovered. Culacan a degree more to the North, bending to the West and coasting upon the foresaid sea, was found out by Nonnius Gusmanus, who Anno 1531. did build a Towne there called Del Esparu Sancto. This Province (as the former) is very fruit∣full and rich in silver mines; the women here are reported to be very comely and beautifull, and to goe modestly attired, a thing not usuall in these Countryes. Cinoloa yet four degrees further to the North, in the full ex∣tent of it towards the West was discovered by the same Gus∣manus; but I doe not read of any thing (which after his long travails and search) was worth his labour: The maritimate places belonging to these Provinces in North latitude, of no lesse ex∣tent then from the 19. to the 27. degrees, are Cape de Corientes at the turning of the continent, then Port de Singuiquipa{que} up∣on the 22. degree, then Saint Sebastian in Chametla, Saint Miguel in Culica, the Rivers de Pascua, and Petatlan in Cina∣loa, still higher to the North. Calfornia, though it be esteemed to be of very large extent, yet hath it not been as yet discovered. Sir Francis Drake in his admirably happy voyage, compassing the World, fell upon it (and was from such Savages as there inhabiting more kindly entertained then he expected) he took possession thereof in the name of the Queen of England: A good presage, that the most remote parts being seized upon, the rest shall be possessed by us, in his good time who is the onely disposer of the earth. The Inland Provinces Zacatacas, Topia and Nova Biscaya, lying between the Calfornian sea and the upper part of the gulf of Mexico: Between Cullacan and Panuco, of the same latitude upon the Tropicke of Cancer, and between Cinaloa and the Ri∣ver Escondido, foure degrees higher to the North, neere the 28. degree of the North latitude, containe much ground, more rich then any, in regard of the many silver mines; but yet poorer then any, in regard of the small sustentation they afford for the life of man. Ybara imployed by Velascus, Anno 1554. dis∣covered
in the Province of Zacatecas, five exceeding rich silver Mines; one that is known by the name of the Province, forty leagues from Guadalaira; then those of Ellerena, Saint Mar∣tin, Avinno and Dios, which last being neere to the rising of the River Panuco, at least 100. leauges from the North-sea is somewhat fertill. The abundant store of treasure taken forth of these rich mines may be guessed at by the 600. Spani∣ards, who are here continually imployed in digging, and by the tax of the fifth part, amounting to 50000l. yeerly. The other mines belonging to Topia and Biscaia, Edehe, Barbara and Iuan, afford as much treasure and better provision for life. Cibola, Quivira and Nova Mexico, three other Provinces, are yet much more to the North by many degrees. From the most Southerne parts of Cibola to the most Northern of Nova Mex∣ico not lesse then fifteen, so as they must needs be of a very large extent (the longitude being considered with the latitude.) But the relations of these most Westerne North parts of America are so variously reported and so contradicted, as little can here be set downe for certaine. A Fryar Marke de Niza, (in a relation to the Viceroy) telleth wonders concerning the riches, the stately buildings, the most pleasant inviting habitations in Cabola: But Vasquius de Cor∣nado, who thereupon was presently sent away to make a further discovery with 150. horse and 200. foot, finding nothing worth his great travaile and cost, certified so much to the Viceroy, with an ample expression of his, and his souldiers detestation of the Fryars fained relation. Quivira (which Gomara and Herrea likewise place in the 40. degree of the north latitue, is by both said to be barren, and not much inhabited. The greatest riches here that serve to feed, and cloth, and carry them, are infinit number of beasts, resem∣bling in regard of their greatnesse, our greatest horse and Oxen, and their Pels (are said) to afford wool not inferiour to some of ours. Nova Mexico is (as I said) placed yet many degrees more to the north-west; of which (unlesse I would endeavour to de∣lude
the Reader) to write little or nothing, is to write best. Gon∣salez de Mendoca in a little Narrative (Printed at Madrill, anno 1589.) maketh a strange relation of what had bin lately per∣formed by one Augustinus Ruyz (one of his owne more hol∣low, then holy fraternity) how by his powerfull Preaching to Savages (not much inferious to his Founder Saint Francis, who is said to Preach to wilde Beasts) converted instantly two great Provinces of Nova Mexico, Concht, and Tiguria. But withall he confesseth that for the killing of a zealous (it might more truely he said of a foolish over-venturous Fryar amongst men, who in regard of the knowledge of Christ are but beasts) one Anthonius de Espiro, (I cannot thinke him to be inspired with any better spirit then that of The Antichrist of Rome) made flaughter of more then forty thousand poore, silly, ignorant Indians, who had never learned to distinguish what their hol∣low Fathers were better then other cruell, mercilesse, Spa∣niards. He telleth us of many thousands converted to the Christi∣an faith by the Preaching of Fryars (no better inspired then was the foresaid Anthonius.) A strange thing that a few ig∣norant Fryars should doe more in a few dayes, then all their Spanish Clergy did in one hundred and seventy yeeres in pla∣ces farre neerer. He telleth us also, as doth his brother de Benavides (in a more late Narrative) of the conquering of Peri, Tebe, Queres, Tompires, and many more sained Provinces of Nova Mexi∣co, and of the exceeding progresse of the Faith in those parts. All which▪ and many more, their incredible expressions are fit to be cast off, being in all probability but the subtile fictions of Spanish & Popish Factors, who (like travellers) take liberty to lye; and (like Lap-wings) to devert and carry us from those knowne places as are every way convenient for habitation and yeeld such increible yeerely Revenue to the Spanish King, Monarch (who would be of Christendom) that all the reformed Churches of Christendom, for the present extreamlybleed for it; (witnes England and Ireland) which are now set on fire & rea∣dy
to perish (unlesse the great God of Heaven and earth be pleased to put in and redeem both, from the most detestable imaginations and most bloody contrivements of Spanish Penti∣oners (the Popes grand Engeneers) who have cativated our King, and seek to undoe the whole Kingdome, that they may have their yeerly 3 or 4000 li. Pensions continued. But he that dwelleth on high seeth and laugheth their wick∣ed Councels to scorne. And I doubt not but the wisedome of this present Parliament (inspired and assisted from above, will finde out these wicked men (the prime troublers of our Church and Kingdome) and bring them here to condigne pu∣nishment. Which I have good cause confidently to beleeve, because they are so forward and zealous (as appeareth by a late Ordi∣nance) to propagate the Gospell in America, the onely best way to continve it here in the purity and power of it; which is and shall be my constant prayer to God for these so extream∣ly distressed Churches and Kingdomes. The Southerne Description of America (God permitting) shall shortly be set forth in another Booke. FINIS.
