c4188f 09514728 43368
A PRAYER FOR THE KING.
monogram of 'W' (William) superimposed on 'M' (Mary) RR DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms Whitehall July 11. 1690. THe Queen does Approve of this Prayer, and Commands it to be Published. Nottingham.
A PRAYER FOR THE KING, To be used instead of that appointed for His Majesties present Expedition. ALmighty and most Gracious God, we bless and magnifie thy holy Name for thy sate Mercies to us of these Kingdoms, in raising up thy Servant King WILLIAM to be a Deliverer to us in the day of our Distress, and to rescue us from Popish Tyranny when we were so near sinking under it. We also acknowledge with all due Praise and Thanksgiving, that thou hast graciously heard the Prayers of thy Church for him whom thou madest the happy Instrument of our Preserva∣tion; in preserving him in so wonderful a man∣ner from those great and apparent Dangers to
which he exposed his Royal Person for our Safety, and for the Deliverance of our suffer∣ing Brethren. Blessed be thy Name, that thou hast given such visible Tokens of thy gracious Presence with him in this Expedition: That thou hast not only covered his Head in the day of Battel, but encompast him with Salvati∣on round about; that the Messenger of Death which came so near, could not hurt him; that his Enemies who rejoyced over him are clo∣thed with Shame, and that thou hast crowned him with Victory and Success even above our Expectations. We beseech thee to continue him under the Wings of thy gracious Providence; to bless his Arms by Sea and Land against the Common Enemy; and in thy good time to bring him back in Peace and Safety to our Comfort. And give us grace to live worthy of these Mercies, in all thankful Obedience to thy Divine Majesty, in dutiful Subjection to them whom thou hast set over us, and in entire de∣pendance on thy Will, which we have found so gracious to us of this Church and Nation. Grant this for thy Mercies sake, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the King and Queens most Excellent Majesties. 1690.
