C7318 12259661 57814
A Guinean Monarch
THE English Acquisitions IN GUINEA & EAST-INDIA: CONTAINING First, The several Forts and Castles of the Royal African Company, from Sally in South Barbary, to the Cape of Good Hope in Africa: Viz. Iames Fort in the River of Gambo. Sherborow in York Island. Sierra Leona in Bence Island Dickeys Cove. Commenda Cape Coast Castle Fort Royal. Annamabo. Winnebah. Accra. Secondly, The Forts and Factories of the Honour∣able East-India Company in Persia, India, Su∣matra, China, &c. Viz. Spawhawn and Gambroon. In Persia. Fort St. George. Fort St. David. Conimeere. Cudaloor. Porto Novo. Madapollam. Metchlapatam. Pettipolee. On the Coast of Coromandel. Carwar. Callicut. Surrat. Bombay Island. Ballasore. Hugly. Chuttanetti. Daca. Rhajama. On the Co. of Mallabar Atcheen, and York Fort. In Sumatra. Amoy, Canton, and Tonqueen. In China, &c. WITH An Account of the Inhabitants of all these Countries; their Religion, Government, Trade, Marriages, Funerals, strange Customs, &c. Also the Birds, Beasts, Serpents, Monsters and other strange Creatures found there. Intermixt with divers Accidents, and notable Remarks With Pictures. Likewise, A Description of the Isle of St: Helena, where the English usually refresh in their Indian Voyages. By R. B. London, Printed for Nath. Crouch, at the Bell in the Poultry near Cheapside, 1700.
TO THE READER. HAving already endeavoured to Inform my Countrey∣men of the Grandeur of the English Monarchy, by giving them an Account of the Kingdoms of England, Scotland and Ireland, and likewise of his Majestys Dominions in America; the acceptance they met with, hath incouraged me to discover to them what many have only heard of by discourse, namely the English Acquisi∣tions in the 2 other Quarters of the VVorld, Africa and Asia. In the first, the Royal African Company being by their Charter from King Charles 2d. dated January, 2. 1662. Incorporated, the Limits of their Trade were from Sally in South Barbary, to the Cape of Good Hope. In which large Tract of Land, they have Erected several Forts, Factories and Settlements for securing their Commerce, which is very considera∣ble in those Parts. In Asia the English began their Discoveries just an hundred years since, in 1600. under Sr. James Lancaster with 4 Ships only. And soon after, the Industry of others had such success, that the Merchants Trading thither were likewise Incorporated by Charter. This Honourable East-India Company, by the prudent management of their affairs, setled Forts and Factorys in Twenty four several noted Places, Of which our unkind Neighbours deprived us of some, and others were Deserted for Conveniency; the names of those abandoned are as follows. Ormus and Jasques in the Persian Gulf. Cambaja and Agra in the Great Mogols Countrey. Armagon, Pattana, and Siatu on the Coast of Coromandell, and Continent of Asia, Ticko, Jambo, Prianan on the Isle of Sumatra. Ban∣tam,
Jaccatra, and Japarra, on the Isle of Jara. So∣codona and Bornermasa on the Island Borneo. Ma∣cassar on the Isle of Celebs Polleroon in the Isle of Banda. Firando in Japan, Amboina, Hitto, and other Molucco Islands. So that now the English possess only those mentioned in the Title Page, the Ac∣count of all those Places with the Religion, Government and Manners of the Inhabitants, and the Strange Crea∣tures therein cannot but be diverting, I have also given a brief Description of the Isle of St. Helena, and the wonderful Voyage from thence, of Don Domingo Gon∣sales the Little Spaniard, which ingenious and well con∣trived Fancy would have been lost if not here retreived. These with many other pleasant Relations therein, will I hope procure as fair Quarter for this as those for∣merly published have met with, from the Friends of R. B.
The Acquisitions of the Royal African Com∣pany in Guinea, and the several Forts and Castles belonging to them, from Sally in South Barbary to the Cape of Good Hope in Africa. With an account of the Natives of those Countrys; their Religion, Government, Trade, Wars, Marriages, Funerals, and Strange Customs. Also the Birds, Beasts, Monsters, Serpents &c. found there. Intermixt with divers Acci∣dents, and Notable Remarks. THat Tract of Land called Guinea, in Africa, comprehends 700 Leagues from Cape Verd in 14 Degrees N. La∣titude, to Cape Consalvo in the first Degree of South. Latitude, The Por∣tugals were the first that ranged this Shore, and having Intelligence of the Commodities, and manner of Trading, the Natives by fair means and force got footing on the Sea-coasts, building Forts and placing Garrisons and Factories in seve∣ral places, and found such a Golden Trade, that they called some Coasts thereof by that name. This was an inducement (as what will not Gold attract) to their further search all along to the Cape of Good Hope, and thereby consequently to the East-Indies; The fair quarter, and usage, the Inhabitants received from the Portugals already setled there, incouraged them to exchange their Commodities, which Trade according to the Custom of that Kingdom was maintained by
Factors, upon the King of Portugals particular ac∣count in every Port and Town, as if he intended the profits of Merchandizing should defray the charges of his Conquests and Garrisons; furnishing the Natives with Salt, Iron, Tin, Copper, Basons, Knives, Cloth, Linnen, and other European Goods, and receiving in exchange, Cattle, Corn, Rice, and the like, but chiefly Gold in great abundance, both in Sand and melted Ingots, which gave Life and Briskness to the further Discovery of those Countreys, and continuance of that Trade to this day, though not so considerable as formerly. The English and other Nations, desirous to share in this Rich Trade, in short time Sailed thither, and because they had no Forts to Protect their Persons and Goods from the Portugals, and treache∣ry of the Inhabitants, they were compelled to Anchor along the Coasts near the greatest Towns, and signifying to the Negroes what Wares they had brought, by their plausible demeanor, they at length imboldened them to come aboard their Ships, and bring their Gold; the manner of which Trade was very different from that of any other Countrey; For betimes in the Morning, the wind being then generally off the Shore, and the wea∣ther calm, the Natives came aboard in their Canoes and Scues to Traffique some for themselves, and some as Factors for others, carrying at their Girdles a Purse, wherein were several small Clouts or Papers, containing the Gold belonging sometimes to ten several Men, which though all of the same weight and goodness, yet they readily distinguisht, and having made their bargains for Cloth, Linnen, or the like, at Noon they return'd with the Seabrize again to the Shore; and beside the agreement, these Factors had some small thing for themselves, in reward for their Brokage, but in process of time, the Hollanders frequenting these Coasts, and being well acquainted with the manner of the English
Traffique, and coming into the same places where the English Traded and were known, they soon spoiled this Golden Trade, by their sinister and indirect dealing; for Anchoring with the English, whom they found to have a better Trade than themselves, they secretly bribed those Factors to carry their Passengers and Merchants aboard their own Ships, and not the English; obliging them to Trade only with the Dutch; Which Craft the En∣glish perceiving, used the same Arts to ingage the Factors to themselves, so that out-vying each other, these Brokers commonly gained to themselves six or seven per Cent. to the vast prejudice of all Trade upon these Coasts, since this ill Custom must be kept up by all Succeeding European Merchants; It was observed that many Negro Merchants who dwelt up in the Countrey coming to buy Wares of the Dutch, with great quantities of Gold, and divers Slaves, thirty or more according to their Quality, to carry back the Goods they should pur∣chase, and taking their Lodgings in the Houses of these Brokers, whom they acquainted with their full Commissions and Intentions, and to whom they delivered their Gold; these Factors would go aboard the Flemish Ships with them to Trade and Barter, and if the Negro Merchants were not skilled in the Portugal Tongue, these Brokers would bid the Hollanders not to speak the Morisco Language to them, because they Inhabited far within the Land, thereby giving the Dutch the watch-word, that they meant to deceive their Countreymen, and after∣ward divide the Spoil, so that the knavih Factor connived at the extravagant prizes of the Holland∣ers, to draw the more Gold from the Merchant, whom he likewise cheated, sometimes by putting some of his Gold into his Mouth, Ears or other∣wise, which the Merchant Negro finding wanting in the Scale, adds to the Cheat himself by blowing into the Christians Ballance to make it weight;
The bargain being finished, and the Negro again landed, the Factor returns back to the Ship, to share his ill got gains with the Flemings; This way of proceeding was very detrimental to the English, and other Christians Trading on these Coasts, so that unless they connive with these Factors, their Voyage will be lost, and their Goods unsold. In 1553. Thomas Windam, and Anthony Pintado a Portugal, in two English Ships Traded along these Coasts as far as Benin, where they presented them∣selves to the King who sate in a great Hall, the Walls whereof were made of Earth without Win∣dows, the Roof of thin Boards, open in divers places; his Nobles never look him in the Face, but sit with their Buttocks on the ground, and their hands before their Faces, not looking up till the King commands them; when they depart they go backward, turning their Faces still toward him. The next year Captain Iohn Lock Sailed into these Parts to Trade for Gold and Elephants Teeth; And after him Captain Towerson made several Voy∣ages thither, who at the River of St. Vincent, obser∣ved a kind of Pease growing on the Shore like Trees, with stalks twenty seven paces long; At Cape Tres Puntas, they made him Swear by the Water of the Sea, that he would not hurt them, before they would Trade with him; Aban a Negro King treated them kindly with a Pot of Palm or Coco-Wine, which they draw out of Trees. The People are handsom and well proportioned, having nothing disagreeable in their Countenances, but the blackness of their Complexion, some of them have flattish Noses, all little Ears, the Peo∣ple go all Naked till they are married, and then are clothed from the middle to the knees; At the Marriage of their Daughters, they give half an Ounce of Gold to buy Wine for the Wedding; the Bride in the presence of her Friends swears to be true to her Husband, which the man doth not; who
have as many Wives as they can maintain, yet the first has this preheminence, so that he can never take another but by her permission, but because the multitude of Wives and Children are counted the greatest honour and riches in that Countrey, they often perswade their Husbands to take more, and glory therein; the first Wife likewise has the privi∣ledge to lye with her Husband three Nights suc∣cessively, whilst the rest must be content only with one, so that they live very quietly together. A Merchant or Captain will have thirty or forty; the King of Benin had six hundred, wherewith he went in Solemn Procession every year; The King of Fetu's Son had fourteen Sons and twelve Daughters, and kept an hundred Slaves to wait upon them; At Cape Gonsalvo they pink and colour their bodies, and offer their Wives to Strangers; The King uses his own Daughters when grown up as Wives, and the Queens with the like incestuous abomination make use of their own Sons. Their Women are unfaithful Discoverers of Na∣tures hidden secrets, not being ashamed to be de∣livered publickly in the sight of Men, Boys and Girls. They circumcise both Sexes; after Travel they accompany not their Husbands in three months; As soon as she is delivered they give her a drink made of Rice, Mays, Water, Wine, and Mallaguett like our Pepper, after which she lyes warm three or four hours, and then rises, washes her self and Child, and so falls to her work as be∣fore; Next they give it a name, usually of some Christian they are obliged to, then wrapping it in a kind of Blanket or Skin, they lay it upon Rush∣es where it continues above five weeks, then the Mother tyes it to a board and carries it on her back with the Legs under her arm-pits, and the hands tyed about her neck, where it hangs all day, and never comes off till it goes to bed, and yet few or none prove lame or deformed, notwithstanding
the shaking of their bodies; they give them the breast over their shoulders, and this may be the reason of the flatness of their Noses by their knock∣ing them continually against the Back and Shoul∣ders of the Mother while she is walking or at work; for it is observed that the Children of their Gentry whose Mothers do not labour, nor carry their In∣fants about them, have very comely Noses; they wash and rub their Children every Morning with Oil of Palms. When they are seven or eight years old, they hang a Net about their Necks, made of the Bark of a Tree, full of Fetiches or little Gods to secure them from the Devil, who they believe would else carry them away; They hang their Hair full of Shells, and Coral about the Arms and Legs, with several Feticho's of different qualities; one being an Antidote against Vomiting, a second against dangerous Falls, a third prevents Bleeding, a fourth causes Sleep, a fifth secures them against Wild Beasts, and the like, giving to each Fetisso a different name: They soon learn to speak, go, and swim: When they are born, they are not black, but red: About seven year old they learn to spin Thred, make Nets, and go a Fishing with their Fathers, and feed as they do, picking up any nasty thing in the Streets, which they eat with good Appetites: The Boys and Girls are all naked, which makes them have no sense of shame or mo∣desty, they being neither reproved nor corrected by their Parents: They are excellent at Swimming, even at this Age, so that if their Canoe overset at Sea, ther are very little concerned, all of them swimming back again to the place from whence they came, and consequently they can Dive with great dexterity and fetch up any thing from the bottom: About twelve their Fathers instruct them how to make a Canoe, and catch Fish; The Mer∣chants bring their Sons acquainted with Europeans,
and with the Mystery of Trade: At eighteen they begin to set up for themselves, two or three toge∣ther hiring a House and purchasing a Canoe; they then cover their Nudities, grow amorous, and their Fathers look out Wives for them: The Girls clean the Houses, pick the Rice, beat the Mays, make the Bread, clean the Kitchen, buy and sell at Mar∣ket, make Baskets of Rushes and Matts which they weave extream curiously, but their chief care is to provide Meat and Drink for their Parents, secure their Goods, and all other kinds of good Huswifry; when grown up, they are very lascivious, and boast of their Gallantries, especially with Strangers, whom they seem to affect above their own Men: They are very careful to keep their Teeth white, have Wit enough, but are very wanton with the Young Fellows stark naked, to please whom they wash, comb, and plait their hair with great curi∣osity; some paint their Foreheads and Eyebrows red and white, and hang Pendants in their Ears; all love Ribbons especially red, they have Neckla∣ces of Coral, and Bracelets upon their Wrists, Arms and Legs, when they go abroad they weare a piece of Silk, Taffaty or other Stuff wrapt about from the breast to the midleg, and have always a great bunch of Keys, though never a Coffer nor Trunk to open; the Virgins make it their whole business to appear acceptable especially to white men, and are seldom barren before, though not very fruitful after Marriage. For many years the English frequenting these Coasts, made little benefit thereby; for the Inhabi∣tants, perceiving their Gold so earnestly desired by all Nations, set such a rate thereon, and having been often beguiled, they grew more wary in their bargaining, and to the measure and goodness of their Commodities, and though at first they knew no distinction of Christians, but thought the Por∣tugals, and all other white men to be of the same
Nation, yet they have since learned the particular manners and dealing of each Countrey, and have found the fairest Trade from the English, who are therefore most welcome to them, and speed best of any other Nation; Especially since the Traders into these parts were Incorporated, by their Char∣ter dated Ian. 20. 1662. and intituled. The Com∣pany of Royal Adventurers of England Trading into Africa, or the Guinea Company; The Limits of their Trade, being from Sally in South Barbary, to Cape de bona Esperanza, or the Cape of Good Hope, within which Limits all English Ships are prohibited to Trade unless Authorized by them. The Com∣modities exported by the Royal Company to Afri∣ca are Iron, Copper, Slesias, Sheets, Says, Perpe∣tuana's, Cowries, Welch Plains, Manillos, Boysa∣des, Chints, Romberges, Coral, Callico's, Nica∣nies, Clouts, Amber, Powder, Muskets, Batte∣ries of all sorts, Buckshaws, Knives and Sheaths, Swords, Tallow, &c. For which they import from thence to England, Gold, Elephants Teeth, Hides, Malagueta, or Ginny Pepper, Red Wood, Ambergreece, with several other good Commodi∣ties, besides numbers of Negroes for supplying the American Plantations to their great advantage; The Royal African Company have Erected the following Forts and Castles upon the Coast for Se∣curing their Commerce. On the North Part of Guinea, I Iames Fort in the River Gambia. II. The Fort of Sierna Leona in Bence Island. III. Sherbrow in York Island. On the South Part of Guinea, IV. Dickies Cove.
V. Comenda. VI. Cape Coast Castle. VII. Fort Royal VIII. Annamabo. IX. Winnebah X. Acra. I. Iames Fort. THis Fort was formerly secured with eight Pei∣ces of Cannon, but was demolished by the French in the late War. It is now rebuilding much stronger, and designed to have ninety Guns, and a Garrison of Two Hundred and Fifty Europeans besides Negro's and Mulatto's. The Government of this Place is reckoned worth about Two Thousand pound a year. It is Scituate near Cape Verde, so called from its continual greenness, which makes it a delectable place, being a Promontory, which throws it self into the Sea, covered with green Trees, and causing a beautiful Prospect by reason of their evenness, seeming as if planted by a line; the Natives, have generally small Bellies, long Legs, broad Feet, long Toes, sharp Sight, quick Wits, are Envious, curiously Neat, Thieves, Letcherous, subject to the Pox, of which as well as their Puden∣da they are not the least ashamed, yet hold break∣ing wind backward a great incivility, and wondred at the Hollanders for offering them such contempt. They have Stomachs like Estridges, as appears by their strange and usual repasts; when they go to Market, they wash from Head to Foot, and put on other Cloths; They buy only for one day; Their Bread is made by stamping their Millet as we do Spice in a woodden dish, steeping it over night with a little Maiz, and in the morning laying it on a stone, they grind it with another stone, as Painters do their Colours, till it be dough, which they then temper with fresh Water and Salt, and
make Rolls thereof twice so big as a mans Fist baking them a little on the Hearth, and then eat, them. Their Viands are raw flesh, handfuls of Corn, large draughts of Aqua Vitae, Dogs, Catts, Buffles, Elephants, though stinking like Carrion, and a thousand Magots crawling on them; They have little Birds like Bullfinches which hang their Nests on the small ends of branches of Trees for fear of Snakes, these they eat alive Feathers and all; The Negro's say that up in the Countrey, they eat dried Snakes, and the guts of Dogs raw, which our Author hath seen, and a Boy who was left on Ship∣board in pawn for Money, would privately kill the Hens, that he might eat the raw Guts; They likewise eat raw stinking Fish dried in the Sun, yet can dispence with dainties when they have them; They make a kind of Ale of Mays and Water boyl'd together, and putting it into a Ves∣sel as large as a Kilderkin, four or five place them∣selves round, and drink it off, each sending a lit∣tle Pot full to his best beloved Wife; They lay their hands upon the Head of him that drinks, and cry aloud thrice Tautosi, He must not drink off all, but leave a little to throw on the ground to his Fetisso, saying I, ou, spouting out some on the Arms and Legs of their Fetisso's, supposing that otherwise they should not drink in quiet; They are great drinkers, and feed as unmannerly as Swine, sitting on the ground, not swallowing one Morsel after another, but tear their meat to pieces, and throw it into their Mouths, which stand gaping to receive it, they are always hungry, and would eat all day long; Yea the Europeans have great Appe∣tites while they are there; He that gets most, drinks most of their strong Liquors, for they lay up but little.
II. Sierra Leona. THis Fort is in Bence Island, and was likewise demolished by the French in the late War. It is also rebuilding, and will be secured by Sixteen Guns, and Thirty Europeans, besides Mulatto's and Blacks. An Englishman dwelt a long time in one of the Isles, having a fine House, and was well be∣loved and protected by the Kings of that Coun∣trey. In the first War with Holland 1666. our Author being aboard a Dutch Man of War, this English Factor writ to them divers times to come and Trade with them, and told him he might do it with safety, and upon Parole the Englishman cal∣led Abraham came aboard them in his Shallop, rowed by three Slaves, accompanied by a Hollander and two others which belonged to him, and was kindly treated; but afterward the Captain contra∣ry to the advice of the rest, treacherously made him a Prisoner, and the three Moores with him, to their great surprizal; And Ian. 1. 1667. their great Shallop was manned out with thirty Men, and one Cannonto Besiege his House, which was built of Brick and Freestone, defended with four great Guns, incompassed with a fine Wood of Palmtrees, which supplied him with Wine; On one side were about twenty Cabines for the Natives, and on the other a Spring of good Water, it being the most beautiful Island upon the River. Being about to land, they discovered 200 Moores got together about the House with Firelocks, and a greater number farther up in the Woods, which obliged the Hollanders to make a show of going up higher, as being weaker, and so had more occasion for the wind, but the Negroes thought they had been gone to Bowre, and dispatch'd a Canoe to give the King of Boulom the Alarum, which was persued by the Enemy, who fired into their Boat, and at length took them; they were two young Slaves belonging
to the Portugals, who lived with the English Factory but would confess nothing of their Message; The English in the House observing what passed fired at them with their Cannon, and three of their Bullets fell within ten paces of the Boat; The Hollanders got out of the reach of their Guns, and came to an An∣chor to wait the Tyde; About an hour after two Moores belonging to one of the Neighbour Islands made up directly to them in a Canoe, and came within Pistol-shot, but would not be perswaded aboard; the Dutch firing on them, they fled, and stooping for fear of their fire, seemed no higher than Catts; the English in the interim played upon them, though they saw they were out of their reach, to shew the Natives they had undertaken their De∣fence, and desired their Friendship. The Tyde coming in, the Dutch retreated to their Ship, wherein they found several Moores and Portugals, and among them the King of Bouloms Son called Bembo, about 35 years old well propor∣tioned, and abating his Blackness, a handsom Man, he was a great Friend of Abrahams the English Factor, and when he understood he was a Priso∣ner, interceded for his Ransom, and on Monday noon came on board again with an hundred Ele∣phants Teeth, weighing nine hundred pound, and two Civet Catts alive, upon the delivery whereof Abraham was dismist, the Hollanders giving him a little Barrel of Strong-Waters, a Roll of Tobacco, a Cheese and a Salvo of three Guns. III. Sherbrow. THis Fort is Scituate in York River, fortified with Twenty Guns, and a Garrison of an Hundred and Fifty white men, besides Mulatto's and Negro's. The Fort consts of two Palankeys, exceeding strongly built of Stone, and of a great height, in forme of an half Moon. The Religion of the Natives (if we may so call it) is generally Paganism, they salute the New
Moon with horrible roarings, and strange gestures of Adoration; they offer their Sacrifices in the Woods before great hollow Trees wherein their Idols are placed; yet this they do rather out of Custom than Zeal, using neither Form nor Method in their Devotions, every one making a God after his own fancy; some seeming to incline to Mahu∣matism, others to Iudaism, and many of them are Roman Catholicks; yet divers affirm, that God who giveth all things, and can do what he pleaseth, and causes Thanders, Lightning, Rain and Wind, is Omnipotent, and needs neither praying to, nor to be set forth in so mysterious a way as that of the Trinity. They believe that when People die they go into another World, and will have occa∣sion for many of the same things they use here, and therefore put part of their Housholdstuff into the Grave with the dead Corps; and if they lose any thing, imagine their Friends in the other World had need of it, and have taken it away. They have no Letters nor Books, yet keep Tues∣day for a Sabbath, forbearing then their Fishing and Husbandry, and the Palm Wine which is got∣ten that day must not be sold, but is offered to the King, who bestows it on his Courtiers to drink at night. On this Day in the midst of the Market∣place they place a Table on four Pillars about three yards high, whose flat cover is made of Straw and Reeds woven together, upon which they place many Straw Rings called Fetisso's or Gods, and within them set Wheat, Water and Oil for their God whom they imagine devours it; Their Priest they call Fetissero, who every Festival day placeth a Seat upon that Table, and sitting thereon, prea∣cheth to the People, but what his Doctrine is, the Europeans cannot understand: After this the Women offer him their Infants, whom he sprin∣kles with Water, wherein a live Snake swims, where∣with he likewise besprinkles the Table, and then
uttering certain words very loud, and stroking the Children with some kind of Colours, as if giving them his Blessing, he himself drinks of that Wa∣ter, the People clapping their hands and crying, I ou, I ou, and so he dismisseth this devout As∣sembly. Many wear such Rings next their Bodies, to pre∣serve them from the mischiefs their angry God might inflict upon them, in honour of whom they daub themselves with a kind of Chalky Earth, which is their Morning Mattens; At their eat∣ing, the first bit, and the first draught is conse∣crated to their Fetisso, wherewith they besprinkle it: If Fishermen have not a good Draught, they present a piece of Gold to the Priest to reconcile them to their frowning Saint, who with his Wives makes a kind of Procession through the Streets, smiting his Breast, and clapping his Hands with a mighty noise, till he comes to the Shore, where they cut down boughs from certain Trees, and hang them on their Necks, playing on a Timbrel; Then the Priest turns to his Wives, and expostu∣lates with them, and throws Wheat and other things into the Sea as an Offering to appease the Fetisso's displeasure against the Fishermen; When the King Sacrifices to his Fetisso, he commands the Priest or Fitessero to inquire of a Tree, whereunto he ascribeth Divinity, what he will demand; The Priest comes to the Tree, and in a heap of Ashes there provided, sticks the Branch of a Tree, and drinking water out of a Bason, spouts it upon the Branch, and then daubeth his Face with the Ashes, after which the Devil out of the Tree gives answer to the Kings questions; The Nobility likewise adore certain Trees, esteeming them Oracles, and they report the Devil sometimes appears to them like a black Dog, and otherwhile answers them without any visible apparition. Some worship a Bird called Pittoie, spotted and painted as it were with Stars,
and resembleth the voice of a Bull; To hear this Bird low in their Journey, is reckoned a good Omen, they saying, their Fetisso promises them good Fortune, and so they set a Vessel of Water and Wheat in the place where they hear it; And as the Earth and Air yield them Deities, so the Sea yields certain Fishes whom they Canonize; upon this account, they never take the Tunny Fish, the Swordfish they eat, but dry the Sword on his back, which is held in great Veneration: Yea the Moun∣tains are not without honour, and if they did not pacifie their Anger by setting daily Presents of Meat and Drink thereon, they believe they would bend their sullen Brows, and as their High Tops threaten to scale Heaven, would overwhelm the Earth, and destroy them all. Neither has Nature alone this priviledge, but Art likewise is concerned in making Gods, com∣posed sometimes of filthy things, as of a piece of putrified Earth anointed with Suet, Grease and Oil of Palms, with five or six Parrot Feathers up∣right in the middle, to which morning and night they pay their Devotions; when it Thunders, Rains hard, or the wind blows strong, there is not one to be seen in the Streets, all hide themselves in their Houses, and cry, The Gods of the Whites are angry. The Devil is so dreadful to them, they tremble at naming him, and say he beats them, and makes them do evil things for their Fetisso, which every one carries about him, some are only the ends of Horns filled with Dung, others as the heads of some Creature and the like; which their Priests sell them at their own price, and pretend they found them under the Fetiche Tree. When any one Dies they make a new Fetisso or Ring of Straw, and conjure it to keep company and protect the dead in their Journey to the other World; They lay the Corps on a Matt upon the ground, wrapt in Woollen, with a Stool covered with a
Goat-skin under the head, the body is then strow∣ed with Ashes, the Arms laid by its side, and the Eyes open'd; this continues half a day, the best beloved Wife sitting by the Husband (as the Hus∣band doth by his first Wife) crying Aury, and wiping her Face with a wisp of Straw; Other Women go round the House and Corps, singing and beating on Basons; The Eldest Morini or Gen∣tleman goes from House to House with a Bason, into which every one puts the value of Twelve Pence in Gold; with this they buy a Cow, with whole Blood the Fittessero or Priest appeaseth the Fetisso, The Friends and Kindred assembling, pre∣pare a Hen, and then seating themselves in a cor∣ner of the dead mans House, they place all his Fe∣tisso's or Gods on a row, the greatest in the midst, adorning them with Garlands of Pease and Beans, and then sprinkle them with the Blood of the Hen, and hang a Chain or Garland of Herbs about their Necks; after this the Hen being boyl'd, the VVomen set it in the midst of his Fetisso's, and the Priest taking water into his Mouth, amidst his Charms, spits it out on the Fetisso's, and plucking the Herbs from his Neck, he makes a Ball of them, where∣with he besmears his Face; which Ball hereby is made a Fetisso, and the Party deceased is now at rest. In the mean time, the dearest of his VVives fills all the House with Mourning, the Neighbours and Friends assisting with Songs and Dances; At length they take up the Corps and carry it to the Grave, which is about four foot deep, and covered with Stakes that nothing may fall therein; The VVomen come about the Sepulchre, and expostulate thus with him in a pitiful and lamenting voice, Alas, why didst thou dye? Thou hadst so much VVheat, so much Maiz, thou wast beloved of thy Family, and they had great care of thy Person, why wouldst thou dye? what have we deserved,
wherein have we offended thee, what discontent have we ever given thee, to oblige thee to leave us? If he be a man, they add; Thou wert so vali∣ant, so generous, thou hast overthrown so many Enemies, thou hast behaved thy self gallently in so many Fights, who shall now defend us from our Adversaries? Wherefore then wouldst thou dye? Others cry, He is dead, that brave Huntsman, that excellent Fisherman, that vali∣ant Warriour, that great destroyer of Portugals, that generous Defender of our Countrey, he is departed this VVorld. Then they throw on a lit∣tle Earth, but none can get into the Corps, for he hath with him his Houshold Stuff, Armour, and whatsoever he used in his life time, and VVine too, if he loved it, to drink in the other VVorld. Lastly, they cover the Sepulchre with a Roof to defend all from Rain; If the King dyes, greater Solemnity is used, yea his Nobles thinking so great a Personage ought to have Attendants, one offers to him a Servant, another a VVife, a third his Son or Daughter, even many of both Sexes to wait upon him, all whom are suddenly slain, and their Bloody Carcasses buried with him; yea the Kings VVives who loved him best, refuse not this last and everlasting Service, but are willing to dye, that they may again live with him. The Heads of the Slain are set upon Poles round about the Se∣pulchre; Meat, Drink, Cloths, Arms, and other Utensils are buried with them; After the Funeral, they go to the Sea, and there use other Ceremo∣nies, some washing, while others play on Basons and Instruments, where the VViddow or VVid∣dower is laid backward on the water with divers words of complaint, at last they return back to the dead Mans House, where they drink them∣selves drunk, and wash away all further sorrow.
IV. Dickeys Cove. THis Fort hath Ten Guns, very good Saker, and Minion. It lies on the Southern Part of Guinea, and hath four Palankers strongly built of Lime and Stone: VVith a Garrison of Thirty white men, besides Blacks and Mulattoes. There is a Place called Cape Miserado by the Portugals, either because it is incompassed with Rocks that lye un∣der water, and would inevitably destroy any Ves∣sel which should come nearer than half a League, or because the French who were formerly Massacred here, cryed out Misericorde, Misericorde, Mercy, Mercy; Besides the Natives of this place being very cruel, they have denominated the River, and cal∣led it Duro, as being hard and fatal to the Europe∣ans. The Government of this Countrey is absolute and unlimited Monarchy; so that the King is the only and sole Judge in all Causes; and though he admit his Councellors sometimes to give their Opi∣nions, yet he follows his own single resolved deter∣minations; This absolute Power makes him jea∣lous of his Honour, of which he will not endure the least diminution; His Highest Pomp consists in sitting upon a Shield, whereby he signifies that he is the Protection and Defence of his Countrey, and the Manager of all VVars, pacifying Civil In∣surrections, and other weighty matters belonging to him alone; His Title is Dondagh, which is as much as Monarch. VVhen any Nobleman is Disobe∣dient, and will not appear upon Summons, he sends this Koredo or Shield, as if he would upbraid∣ingly say, Be thou Lord your self, and bear the bur∣den of the Countrey. This peremptory command by the Shield is sent by two Drummers, who when they come near the Offenders Habitation, begin to beat their Drums, and so continue without ceasing till they have delivered the Shield, upon receipt
whereof, he must speed to Court without delay, carrying the Shield with him, which he presents to the King, begging forgiveness for his miscarria∣ges, and so taking up the Earth before the King, humbles himself. Those that Address to the King for any favour, make their way with Presents of Ribbons, Elephants Teeth, or such things, which he must deliver at the House of the Kings chiefest Wife, who carries it to the King, requesting that the Person may be admitted into his presence; If the King accept it, the Person hath leave to enter, otherwise if any complaints be brought against him, he sends it back, yet so as the Presenter dares not receive and carry it away, but continues his Suit by Friends without intermission; by whose frequent and re∣newed Mediations, the King at last seeming a lit∣tle pacified, remits his severity, takes the Present, and calls for the Suppliant, who entring the Royal Presence, goes bowing all along toward the King, who sits on the ground upon a Mat, leaning on a Stool, when he approaches within two steps, he bows himself to the Earth, kneeling upon one Knee with his right Elbow on the ground, and names the Kings Title, Dondagh, whereupon the King if pleased Answers, Namady, I thank you, if not he sits silent. If it be a Person of Quality and his Sub∣ject, the King perhaps causes a Mat to be spread on the ground, upon which sitting at some distance, he moves his request; But if a Forreigner, who comes only to salute the King, he is conducted to him without any further Ceremony, and receives an immediate dispatch; If the Person have any Proposition, Petition, or Complaint to make, an Interpreter is called, who coming with his Bow in his hand, opens the whole matter to the King, sentence by sentence, whereto according to the quality of the Affair he receives Answer, with pro∣mise, if upon complaint, that when he hath heard
the other party, he will forthwith give Judgment according to Right. If any man come to thank the King for doing Exempary Justice in a difficult Cause, after his Presents recived, he divests himself of all his Cloths and Ornaments, saving a little Cloth to cover his Virilities, and so casts himself backward upon the ground, and instantly turning again, rises upon one knee, takes up Earth with his hand, and lays it upon his head, then leaning with one Elbow upon the Earth he says three times Dondagh, where∣upon the King answers sometimes Namady, I thank you, and sometimes otherwise as he thinks fit: The first Address is usually performed in his own House in the presence of is chiefest VVife; but such as concern Justice, or the State of the Countrey he hears in the Council House in the presence of his Lords. VVhen some Eminent Person sent from a Neighbour King, desires Audience, one of the Kings VVives goes with a Present, and tells him who sent it, whereupon the Person appears before the King and takes up Earth. VVhen an Ambassador sent from another Great Prince approaches the Borders, he gives notice of his coming; whereupon he is ordered to remain in the next Town till all be made ready which is re∣quisite in the Kings Town, There he is received with great Triumphs, which consist in exercising with Bows, Arrows, Lances and Shields, as if they were fighting against Enemies, with great Drum∣mings and Songs of VVar; The Sport ended, the King retires to the Council-House, where after a little stay, inquiry is made if the King may be salu∣ted; having permission, the Ambassador enters, and kneeling down with his back to the King, and his Bow in his hand bent to the utmost, he allu∣sively implys, that he will set himself to the ut∣most against his Enemies: Mean time the Ambas∣sadors Followers chant forth his praises, as before
the Kings Servants sung Elogiums to his Honour: These Encomiums they always begin with Polo, Polo Sammach, and then add, His handy-work is not to be equalled by another man, and then, I will stick as close as Pitch to him that opposes me. The Council-House is open on all sides, with great Attendance round about, where he receives this first Address; After which the Ambassador desires leave to relate his Embassy, but is put off till next day, so reti∣ring, he diverts himself till the appointed time in Feasts and Recreations. The Ambassador receives Answer by the Kings directions from an Interpre∣ter, and then is shewed the Apartment for him and his Retinue, where the Kings Slaves bring them Water to wash, and the Kings VVomen being neat∣ly dret, in Dishes set on their heads bring Rice and Flesh, after which the King sends for his VVel∣come, VVine and other Presents, as a Kettle, Ba∣son, or the like. If any European Merchant bring the King a Present, he is invited to eat with him, but with no Black of what Quality soever will he eat out of the same Dish, but sends their Meat to them by his VVomen. Once a year he makes a Great Feast for the Com∣mon People, buying up for that purpose all the Palm-VVine, and Herds of Cattel, the Heads of which are painted and hung up in the Kings Cham∣ber, in testimony of his Bounty: He inviteth also his Neighbour Kings, Captains and Gentlemen, and then prays and sacrifices to his Fetisso, which is the highest Tree in the Town. The King comes little abroad; morning and evening, his Slaves blow Trumpets made of Elephants Teeth, while his Wives anoint and wash his Body: He sits in state holding in his hand the Tail of an Horse to drive away Flyes, adorned with Rings of Gold on his Arms, Neck and Legs, and Coral Beads wherewith he ses off his Beard. The Kings Children must main∣tain themselves when of Age, the People not liking
to maintain them idle; the King only bestows on them a Marriage-Gift and a Slave; when he dies, his eldest Brother succeeds in the Throne, and en∣joys his Rice, Fields, Slaves and Women. These People believe that the Almighty whom they call Kanuo, will punish all their misdeeds, and reward well-doers, and therefore when oppressed, call for his Aid to do them Justice, continually inculca∣ting, That there shall a time come when all ill men shall receive their deserts. They imagin that their Friends after death become Spirits, whom they call Iannanen, and know all Transactions here below, with whom therefore they hold familiar Collo∣quies, acquainting them with all their troubles and adversities; When they go into the Woods to hunt Elephants, Buffles, or upon any other dange∣rous Enterprize, they go first and offer to the Spirit of their deceased Parents, either a Cow, Wine or Rice, which they leave on the Grave; They sup∣pose them to reside in the Woods, to whom they address themselves with great complaints and la∣mentations when in affliction; where likewise their most Solemn Acts of Devotion are performed, where no Women nor Children are permitted to come; The King calls upon the Souls of his Fa∣ther and Mother in every difficulty. If a Woman be suspected of Adultery, the com∣plaining Husband desires she may be delivered up to Iannanen, or the Spirits of his Ancestors, and brings her in the Evening before the Council, where cal∣ling the Spirits to her, she is blindfolded, admoni∣shed to forsake her evil Life, and not to go to any but her own Husband, and presently a great noise or murmur is raised, as if Spirits did appear, with some unintelligible (though articulate) sounds, which are interpreted aloud to the whole Congre∣gation, with threatnings, that if ever she commit the like offence again, she shall be punished accor∣ding to her demerits, and with her Paramour, be
carried away by Iannanen, to whom yet none are de∣livered up but upon clear evidence of their Guilt; to which end they have a Water of Cursing or Di∣vination wherewith they extort the Truth in all doubtful matters, compounded of Barks and Herbs boiled together, which when it is enough, the Priest repeats secretly the names of the suspected persons, or other matters to which the Witchcraft must be applied, and then washes the Legs and Arms of those accused with fair Water; after this he puts his Divining Staff, which is bruised and tus∣ted at the end, into the Pot, and drops or presseth the Water out of it upon the Arm or Leg of the suspected Person, muttering these words over it, If he be guilty of this or that, then let this Water scld or burn him till the very Skin come off. If the Party remain unhurt, they judge him innocent, and pro∣ceed to the Trial of another till they have discove∣red the Criminal, who being found, the Executio∣ner instantly leads him bound and blindfold into a Field or Wood, and placing him on his Knees with his Head bowed down, he first runs him through the Body with a Scimetar, and then cops off his Head with an Ax, for they do not believe he is dead till his Head is off; The Carcase cut into four quarters, after great lamentations, they leave in the Field as a Prey to the Beasts and Fowls, but the Friends take away the Head as a great Present, and boiling it in a Kettle, drink up the Broth, hanging the Scull by their Fetisso or Idol. The like Trial is made of other offences among the Blacks, so that every one had need be very careful to pre∣vent suspicion. V. Commenda. THis Fort is Four Square strongly built of Stone. It hath Twenty Guns, and Four∣score Europeans to defend it, with many Negro's and Mulatto's.
Some time since Mendino the King of Manou died, whose Subjects and Favourites made strict inquiry according to Custom, how he came by his end, but the narrowest of their scrutinies not being able to make any discovery, they were forced to acquiesce, yet had such an inveterate hatred against Manimas∣sah, his Brother, that they forced him to the Tri∣al, which seeing no other Remedy, he underwent without any hurt, as a remarkable sign of his Inno∣cence; whereupon he demanded to be restored to his former Honour and Credit, but instead thereof, the Tryers told him, The King in his Life time was our Common Father, and should not we after his death endeavour to find out what caused him to dye it were a great shame for us; we have examined and tryed you but it shall not remain so, we will look farther into the business, and make the Southsayers acquainted with it; Ma∣nimassah mad at these inhumane usages, burst forth at last into these words; This shame is not to be suffered from my own Subjects in my own Countrey, I will go under the Conduct of the Spirits of my deceased Friends, and seek a dwel∣ling place. In this manner leaving his Native Countrey, he travelled Northward into Gala, in∣habited by a mean and simple People, and won so upon them by his endearing behaviour, that they unanimously besought him to be their Prince, to which he consented upon condition, That they should give him some of their Plants and Venison for an acknow∣ledgement of their subjection. This they yielded to, but such was their brutish Barbarism, that though they owned him their Lord, they used him as there Companion, for being wholly unacquainted with Civility, when any of them brought him Wine, Rice or Flesh, they came again to him to require their Callibashes or Basquets, which unmannerly clownish behaviour, Manimassah so resented, that he with∣drew from them, to require assistance from Flansire
King of Folgia, whose Daughter he had Married, to reduce the Gala's to his Authority. The King hearing the request of his Son in Law, lent him many Souldiers under the Conduct of Flonikerry his General, who unexpectedly fell in∣to Gala, and subdued the People, setling Manimassah in an absolute Dominion, who hath ever since con∣tinued their Prince, and taught them with sorrow more respective qualities; after this, Flonikerry re∣turned to Folgia, where he was received and wel∣comed with great applause, and the King willing to gratifie him for his honest performances, he ac∣cording to Flonikerrys Petition, gave him leave to go and Conquer, and settle himself and his People in Cabo Monte an adjacent Countrey, expressing his kindness in saying, I shall do the desire of his Heart. He with a considerable force Marching to∣ward this place, the Inhabitants being numerous and couragious, were not soon subdued, but at length tired with the continual onsets of their Ene∣mies, who shot poysoned Arrows; which made all wounds though never so slight prove Mortal, a fatal Invention unknown to these People, they went with their Hoods upon their Heads as usual, to ask favour, which Flonikerry naturally inclined to pity, easily granted, bidding them go lie down with their Faces upon the ground, then coming out of his Fort he trod upon them with his feet; He then made an Agreement with them some Hens being killed in the presence of them all, of whose Blood the Conquered swallowed a little, as a token of Friendship. Afterward the Hens were boiled, and the Flesh eaten among them, only the Legs were kept for a perpetual Remembrance, for if any Man after that time broke his promise, to him were the Legs shown, who upon sight thereof soon re∣cated for fear of the punishment that would follow.
Flonikerry overjoyed at his success; for assuring his new Dominion, sought to win the minds of the vanquished to him, and to contract a firm League with the Lords of his own Countrey. But scarce were the minds of the Nobility united, when Miminique Son of Manimassah, with a great Army of Gala's, and others make War upon him, of whose design his Father was not ignorant, having forgot the kindness received from Flonikerrys Arms in set∣tling him in his new acquired Dominions; Flonikerry drew together his Forces, to whom the Nobles joining theirs, he formed a considerable Army; wherewith marching toward the Enemy, they came to a Battle, wherein by the multitude of their E∣nemies, they were at first put to a disorderly re∣treat, which Flonikerry who was of an undaunted Spirit perceiving, digged with his hand a hole in the ground, and put his Knees in it, with a resolu∣tion either to die there, or to remain Conquerour; so after a long and sharp contest being even cover∣ed with Arrows, he was slain on the spot. How∣ever his Men to revenge their Princes death, rallied and gave a fresh charge with such fury, that they turned the Fortune of the day, and became sole Masters of the Field. The death of Flonikerry, was kept secret till they sent for his Brother Zillimanque to take his charge, who accepting the same, pursued the Victory, and drew near the Enemies Camp, which he soon sur∣prized, and gave as a spoil to his Souldiers; After which he marched farther, the People all along yielding subjection without blows, whereby they soon became Masters of the whole Countrey, and gain'd the reputation of a Mighty People; After which he was poisoned, as was thought, leaving behind him several Sons who were young, and not capable to manage their Fathers Conquests. How∣ever, Flansire his eldest was admitted Successor, during whose Minority his Uncle Iemmah under∣took
the Government, but Flansire growing to years, took the Royal Authority into his own hands, and to shew that he inherited as well his Fathers Valour as Countreys, resolves to inlarge his bounds yet farther, and to that end marcht with his Forces over the River Galinas or Hens, taking all the ad∣jacent places as far as Sierra Leona, and placing Garrisons therein: having settled his new Con∣quests, he return'd to his own Native Principality, where he spent a good part of his Life in peace and quietness, when on a sudden there came News from Sierra Liona that Kandaqualla his Governour was driven out thence, and forced to fly with all his People to the Islands of Bannaneo, not being able to withstand Falma of Dogo, who with a mighty Force invaded them; Flansire startled at this in∣telligence, and knowing nothing more necessary than expedition, sent to the Lords, his Substitutes, to raise an Army and meet him at an appointed Ran∣dezvouz; but they having made a private Con∣federacy with Gamina their Master Flansires Bro∣ther, neglected and slighted his Commands. Flansire, ignorant of this Combination, leaving the Govern∣ment of his Kingdom, Wives and Children to his treacherous Brother Gamina, marched with his eldest Son Flambore the present King of Quoia, not doubting the Fidelity of his Provincials: He went first by Land to the River of Hens, and from thence in Canoes to the Isles of Bananes, to take with him his People who were driven from Sierra Leona, and so bringing them back thither, he began a sharp War with Falma. This Falma had been formerly in great favour with the King of Dogo, or Hondo, but having de∣bauched one of his Wives, the King was so offend∣ed, that not content it should, as usual, be bought off with Gifts or Slaves, he caused his Ears to be out off, and banished him his presence, but length of time so wore out the Kings Fury, that Falma
was again admitted to Court, where he soon began to shew his Insolence, and at length addrest the King in these Terms; Sir King, considering the wickedness committed against you my Lord and Master, I am obliged to thank you for your gracious Sentence by which I am punished, where∣by every one that looks upon me derides and scorns me, and the rather because the punish∣ment is unusual, and the like offence customari∣ly bought off with Goods and Slaves: Now as you were pleased to punish me, so I desire the like offence in others may be punished in the same manner. It may happen that some of the Kings Servants or Subjects may fall into the same Lapse, but if this Sentence be either denied, or not performed, I shall complain against my Lord the King in the Ways and in the Woods to the Jannanen and Belli, that is, to all the Spirits and Demons. The King having heard this audacious Speech, notwithstanding this seeming Threat, de∣termined that the punishment inflicted on him should not follow upon all: But yet to pacifie him, he made him General of an Army to recover Sierra Leona out of the hands of Kandaqualla, who presided there for Flansire. To repel this Invader Flansire as we said coming to Sierra Leona with an Army, and making sharp War, at length by the help of some Europeans he fell upon the Town of Falmahah, and with Axes cutting down the Treewall, at last they forced an entrance, and set the Houses on fire, whose fury soon increased to an impossibility of being quen∣ched, whereupon Falma unable to resist, fled, whom young Flambore pursued, and though he mist him, yet got great Reputation, the People stiling him, The Pursuer of Falma. Flansire having reconquered these Countries, and setled Kandaqualla, retreated with his Forces, intending to return to his Wife and Children; But on the way he had notice, that
his Brother Gamana had usurped his Kingdom, kil∣led all his Sons he could meet with, taken his Wives for himself, and had set up his Residence at a con∣venient place near the River of Hens, to intercept and hinder his Brothers approach; this Rebellion of his Brother was attended with the Invasion of Manou, who dwelt near Cape Miserado. They fell into his Countrey at Cape de Monto, where they burnt the Town, and led away all they met with for Slaves. Flansire understanding these mischiefs, marched toward the River Maqualbary with all speed, complaining to the Kanou and Iananies (that is, to God and the Angels) of his distress in these words, To you it is known, that my Father left me rightful Heir to his Kingdom, which falls to me by the Laws of the Land, seeing I was the eldest: You likewise know that my Brother hath rebelled against me, and hath set himself up to be Lord, be you Judges between him and me in this intended Fight, and if the Cause be unjust that he manages against me, let the mischief fall upon his own head. Then he passed with all his Souldiers over the River, where the Armies met, and his Brother with great numbers of men being slain, he obtained a compleat Victory, but still kept the Field, to be ready against any other appearing Rebels, his Son Flambore went with a Squadron of Souldiers into the Woods to hunt Civit Cats, and being by his sports got far into them, they discovered some of the Rebels busie in burying the dead body of Gama∣na the Usurper, who perceiving Flambore and his Followers, fled, imagining he had come to search them out, and left the Corps, with three Slaves in Chains, whom they intended to have dispatch at his Grave: Being by this means assured of Ga∣mana's death, when they least expected it, they brought the three Slaves to Flansire, who having understood how all things stood in the Countrey,
he sent them to their Fellow-Rebels to admonish them to come and ask his pardon, and that he would forget their misdeeds; which wrought the desired Effect, for the Rebels submitted, and received their Pardon. King Flansire then marched to Cape Mi∣serado and reduceing Monou, with great slaughter and spoil of the Countrey, retired home with his Forces, Monou made a New Insurrection to revenge the Losses of Falma, but was again totally subdued by Flansires People. VI. Cape Coast Castle. THis Castle is a strong Regular Fortification consisting in Four Bulwarks, Seaventy Guns, and Two Hundred and Fifty men. In the Principality of Anten near Tekorari, the Hollanders built a Fort, which in 1664. was atta∣qued by Sir Robert Holms in behalf of the Royal African Company, with two of the Kings Men of War, six Frigats, and some other Ships, and by them with no great difficulty won, but regained the next year by Admiral De Ruyter, being at that time only mann'd by four or five in health, and as many sick English-men, having in it seven Iron Guns, and six or eight Pounders. Upon the retaking, the Guns being drawn off to the Ship, De Ruyter caused it, as not being tenable, without many People and great Charges, to be blown up into the Air, and totally dismantled. In the mean time the Negro's of the Mine plundered the Village of Tekorari, and laid it waste with Fire and Sword, out of malice to the Blacks of that place, exercising great Cruelty upon the Prisoners, cutting off their Heads, where∣with they went dancing and leaping up and down, and at last carried them home in token of Victory; they were well Armed according to the Countrey fashion, some having Caps like Helmets, adorned with feathers and Horns of Beasts, and Swords
hanging on their Bellies, whereon instead of Handles they put the Bones of Lions, Tygers, and other Beasts, their Faces are generally painted with Red and Yellow, which make a terrible sight. In the Kingdom of Fet the Hollanders have a Fort called Cape Corso, strengthened with great Guns, and mann'd with a strong Garrison of Slaves, but in 1664. this with the Forts of Tekorari afore∣mentioned, Adia, and Anemabo were taken by Sir Robert Holmes for the Royal African Company, but when De Ruyter in 1665. with the Dutch Fleet had forced the English Fort Cormantyn, he spared neither diligence nor cost to regain Cape Corso then in the English possession, and the rather because Iohn Valkenberge the Dutch Commander there, judged it dangerous that any place in that Coun∣trey should be left in the hands of the English, al∣ledging that if during the Wars in Europe they were expelled thence, by consequence they might easi∣ly be kept out, whereas by the holding of this place, they had an opportunity to settle their Ju∣risdiction in the Countrey again, and in defiance of their Power might defend it against them: But finding the Natives sided with the English, threat∣ning Fire and Sword, having also possessed them∣selves of a place, where a hundred men might beat off a thousand, it was judged not feasible, without great danger, and the design was laid aside. VII. Fort Royal. THis Fort was demolish'd by the War, and is now repairing. It will be very Strong, all built of Stone, with Sixteen Guns, and Forty White Men, besides Blacks and Mulatto's. In the Kingdom of Fantyn, the chief Town upon the Seacots led Cormantyn is the principal place of Trade, scituate upon a high Mountain; it is the most delightful prospect upon the whole Coast.
In 1665. Feb. 8. Cormantyn was attaqued by the Dutch, the manner thus; The Holland Fleet coming to Anchor Feb. 6. westward of Cormantyn, the next day they got four or five hundred Canoes with Ne∣gro's from the Castle Del Myne, with which well mann'd they departed from the Fleet, intending to land at Anemabo, but were upon their approach, saluted by the Negro's of Cormantyn, who lay behind the clifts and bushes with Muskets and Cannon, playing from the Fort with such fury that they were forced to retreat. This Enterprize was twice reattempted upon hopes of having the Negro's side with them, but without success, however they came at last to a more strict alliance with the Negro's, who for security of their Faith delivered several Hosta∣ges into their hands; and the design was to be exe∣cuted with the first opportunity; Having pitcht on a time, at Night a Negro called Antonio, came in a Canoe sent by the Inhabitants of Fantyn, decla∣ring that the People about Anemabo, and Adja could not be ready at the appointed hour, but in the Morn∣ing they would not fail of their promised assistance, adding that early in the Morning at the new cast up Fort of Adja the Prince of Oranges flag should be set up, upon which sign the Dutch might land with their whole Force. This concluded, the chief Com∣manders of the fleet resolved the following Morning tomake the onset, yet before hand sent a Letter to the English Commander in chief, requiring the surren∣der of the Fort without opposition. Accordingly at eight a Clock in the Morning, the Princes flag being raised upon the new erected Fort of Adja, they lanched through with much hazard near the same fort, and marched in order along the Shote with three thousand Negro's, every one with a Lin∣nen Cloth about his Neck to distinguish them from other Blacks, and came about Noon to Anemabo, drawing forth about a Musket shot westward of Cormantyn, to a Hill planted with three Pieces of
Ordnance, where they found stout opposition; but at length overpowered they fled, and then the Hol∣landers entred the Town and set it on fire, the flame and Smoke whereof suddenly surprized the Garrison in the Castle, insomuch that as soon as they saw the Souldiers with scaling Ladders, hand Granadoes, and other Utensils of War under their Walls, they took down the red Flag from the Tower, and immediately as it were without a stroke delivered it up. Into this Castle were Souldiers out of the Castle of Myne instantly put to secure it; To the subduing this Fort, the Hollanders were not a little animated by the promise of assistance from the Natives of Fantyn, which they purchased of them as we hinted before, for fifty two Bars of Gold, to the value of two thousand five hundred Pound English Money. VIII. Annamabo. THis is a strong Fort built with Brick and Stone; The Walls are Twenty four foot high. It hath fourteen Guns, and Thirty white men, be∣sides Natives to guard it. This Fort lyes half a Mile West from Cormantyn, one half whereof is in∣habited by the Fishermen of the Myne, and the other by those of Fantyn; At Cannon shot distance West from this lies Adja, where the Dutch had a Fort taken by the English in 1664. and by them kept till the attempt upon Cormantyn, when they blew it up with Gunpowder by Stratagem, for having laid an heap of Earth at the Mine, they n∣tended when any came thereon with hopes of plunder, to have blown them up by springing the Mine, but little harm was done, however the En∣glish in the mean time left the place and retreated to Cormantyn. Between Adja and Anemabo lies a Town called Ianasia, where the English have a Fort. The principal places of Trade lying near
the sea and frequented by the Whites are Cormantyn and Ademabo, the former having been the chief place of the English upon this Coast for some years, where they got the best sort of Goods, and enjoyed most friendship, for the support whereof, they built that Fort planted with forty two Pieces of Ordnance, and fortified with four Bulwarks. The King keeps his residence in the Town of Fantyn, and extends his Jurisdiction about ten or twelve Miles round, being able in time of War to bring eight or ten thousand men into the Field. IX. Winnebah. THis is a Regular Fortification strongly built of stone. It hath 18 Guns, and 50 Europeans besides slaves to defend it. These Countries produce variety of Creatures, and among others, Tygers and Leopards, who bear great enmity to each other, though generally the Tyger is the Conquerour, therefore when the Leopard is pursued by the Tyger, he with his Tail wipes out his footsteps that so he may not be tra∣ced. Some of the Ancients knowing the fierceness of the Tyger, attributed to him the command of the Woods, but in these Parts, because he hurts no man but only Beasts, they make the Leopard King of the Forrest, for which ravening temper they are hunted and killed by all Men, even for their own safety. When a Leopard is killed they bring him dead to the Kings Town, there to be cut up and eaten, being flea'd they present his Skin and Teeth to the King, and the People assembled, eat the Flesh boil'd as a dainty, spending the remainder of the day in Revelling and Dancing, as at their most Solemn Festivals. There is likewise a monstrous Creature which the Portugals call Salvage, that is a Satyr, it hath a great head, a heavy body, fleshy and strong arms, no tail, and goes sometimes up∣right,
and otherwhile upon all four like an Ape. The Blacks affirm it is of Humane Race, but by the alteration and change of the Woods and Wil∣erness it is become half a Beast, they sustain them∣selves in the Woods with Fruit and wild Honey, which they get out of the Trees, and as they are numerous, so upon meeting, they fight continually with each other. The Negro's relate strange things of them, and aver for certain, that they not only overpower feeble Women and Virgins, but dare also set upon armed Men. There is another strange Beast, like a Crocodile six or seven Foot long, very slender, and the Tongue of an extraordinary length. It is a Beast of Prey, and very strong, close set with gaudy Quills over the whole body, wherewith it offends Men, and defends it self against other Crea∣tures, for when the Leopard attempts to seize it, it converts into a round Ball, setting up the points of its Quills that no hold can be fixed, their Food is generally Pismires, which with their Tongues they lick up at a great distance. Both on the Sea coasts, and the upland Coun∣trey many Civet Cats are found, it more resembles a Wolf than a Cat, for it hath a long Head, small Nose, flat Mouth, and short Ears, Teeth like a Dog, the Body part white, part ashcolour'd, speck∣led with black spots, the Legs and Feet of a middle size, with black Hairs, having four Claws forward and one backward, with black short flat Nails, the Tail long, bushy and speckled hanging to the ground; The Civet lyes between the Privities and the Cods, and is taken thence with a spoon. The Giraffa or Camelo-pard is a Beast not often seen, yet very tame, strangely compounded of a Libard, Hart, Buffle and Camel, and by reason of his long legs before and shorter behind, is not able to-graze without difficulty, but with his high Head, which he can stretch forth half a Pikes length in height, feeds on the leaves and boughs of Trees
The Camels in Africa are more hardy than in other places and will not only carry great burthens; but tra∣vel fifty days together without any Corn, only turn them out at night to feed on Thistles, Boughs, and the like, and no less patient are they of Thirst, be∣ing able to endure fifteen days without Drink. The Lions in cold places are gentler, in hotter more fierce, and will not flie the approach of two hun∣dred Armed Horsemen; in time of their coupling eight or ten will follow one Female, with bloody Battles among themselves: They report that Lions spare those who kneel to them, and prey rather on Men than Women, and not at all on Infants, unless compelled by hunger. The Africans believe he hath understanding, and tell of a Getulian Woman, who lying at the mercy of a Lion, besought him, that being so noble a Beast, he would not dishonour him∣self with so ignoble a Prey, as a weak Woman, whereupon he went away and left her: His Tail seems to be his Scepter, whereby he expresseth his Passion; he shrinks at no danger, unles the covert of the Woods shroud him from Witnesses, and then he will take the benefit of flight, which otherwise he seems to disdain. Mentor a Man of Syracuse was encountred with a Lion, who instead of rending, fawned upon him, and with his dumb eloquence, seemed to implore his Aid shewing his Foot, where∣in Mentor perceived a Thorn to stick, which he pluckt out. The like is reported by Gellius of a fugitive Servant, who having performed the same kind Office to a Lion, was by him gratified for a long time by giving him a daily portion of his prey: It happened afterward this Man was taken, and presented to his Master a Roman Senator, who ex∣hibited Games to the People, wherein Slaves and condemned Persons were exposed to the fury of Beasts, among whom he put this Servant, and by a wonderful fate this Lion was soon after taken, and brought to execute these horrid Spectacles. The
Beasts running with violence to their bloody En∣counter, suddenly this Lion stayed, and taking a strict view of him, awned upon his Guest, and de∣fended him from the Assaults of the other Beasts, whereupon at the Peoples Intercession, who under∣stood the Passages from him, he was freed, and the Lion given him, who followed him with a string through the Streets, the Spectators crying, This is the Man who was the Lions Physician; This is the Lion who was this Mans Host. The Hyaena is another strange Beast which some have thought to be Male one year, and Female a∣nother, it hath no Joint in the Neck, and so stirs not his Head, but the whole Body at once; He is said to imitate the Voice of Men, and having heard the name of some of the Shepherds, will call him, and when he comes devour him: They say his Eyes are of various Colours, and that his shadow pre∣vents the barking of a Dog: By ingendring with this Beast, the Lioness brings forth a Corcuta of like qualities with the Hyaena, he hath one continued Tooth without division throughout his Mouth. The Lybard is not hurtful to Men except they disturb him. The Dabu is said to be a foolish Creature, in shape like a Wolf, only his Legs and feet are like a Mans; they that know his haunts, sing and fiddle before his Den, his Ears being so captivated with the Musick, that he is not aware his Legs are capti∣vated with a Rope, whereby he is taken. The Zebra exceeds all Creatures in beauty, resembling a fine Horse, but not so swift, with curious party-colours, from Head to Tail, they live in great Heards, and when one is shot, the rest stand still, gazing till they see three or four fall down before them. The Rivers breed Water Elephants, as big as a large Horse, but much thicker and rounder, seeming as if they were blown up; likewise Sea-Cats, and other monstrous Creatures. There are fowls of divers kinds, as Eagles, Parrots, Cranes, and a Bird like a
Thrush, by whose chirping they guess at their good or ill fortune in their Journey, Crocodiles are so large that they will swallow an Ox whole; but above all the monstrous Serpents are remarkable, among which the most poisonous are of a Grass Green: Some are so curiously spotted with lively Colours as are scarce to be found in any other Creatures. The King of Benin, whom the Inhabitants call King of Serpents, keeps commonly one in his Arms, which he strokes and fosters as it were a young Child, and so highly esteems, that none dare hurt it. The Negroes rost and eat some of them as great Dainties. Africa hath been famous in all Ages for prodigious Serpents and Monsters. One called Minia is so large, that it can swallow a whole Deer without chewing devouring Boars and other Beasts, It lrks for Prey within some bush, which coming within reach it suddenly seizes, winding two or three times a∣bout the body and loins, till it falls down and dies, of which being glutted, he lie, not able to stir till his gorged Paunch has digested his Meal: Of this kind was that which Attilius Regulus the Roman Consul in the first Punick War at the River Bagrada encountred, and planted his Engines and Artillery against it, whose skin sent to Rome, was in length an hundred and twenty Foot; the scales defended it from Darts or Arrows, and with the Breath it killed many, and eat divers Souldiers, till at last with a Stone out of an Engine this destroyer was destroyed. Hear how the elegant Lucan, as eloquently translated describes it, when Iulius Caesar in pursuit of Cato into Africa came to the place which was formerly the habitation of this dreadful Serpent, and had this account given him by an African. Caesar within a shady Grove espies A dismal Cave in which no chearing light, At all ere peep'd: but sad and doleful Night
A squalid filth, and mouldiness had made. From whence exhaled steams and fumes invade The upper Air; Whilst Caesar in amaze Doth nearly view the horrour of the place His longing thoughts an African there by (Taught by Tradition) thus doth satisfie. This Den O Caesar which for many a year Hath empty stood and freed the Land from fear, A monstrous Serpent by Heavens Vengeance bred The plague of Africk, once uninhabited. The Earth a greater Monster never bare Not Hydra might with this dire Snake compare, Nor though the Sun the mighty Python slew, Did ere the Sun a greater Serpent view. The several Snakes that out of Africks slime Are bred, might all have been in him combin'd, An hundred Feet in length was his extent; When he upon this side the River went With his long neck stretcht out, what ere e spy'd With ease he seized from the other side. With Lions here he filled his hungry maw, That came to drink the streams of Bagrada, And fiercest Tygers all besmear'd with Blood Of Cattle slain, became themselves his Food. When first the Roman Armies Sailing o're, And threatning Carthage on the Africk shore Were led by Regulus, whose Tragick fall Sadly renown'd the Spartan General, Here then this hideous Monster did remain; The Army marching on yon spacious Plain, Three Roman Soldiers by ill Fate drew near To quench their fiery thirst i'th River here, And tempted by these shady Trees, to shun A while the scorching fury of the Sun Entring the Wood, down to the stream they stoop. And in their Helmets take the Water up, When suddenly surpriz'd with chilling fear
A horrid hissing through the Air they hear And from the Den the Serpents Head appears At once amazing both their Eyes and Ears What should they do? For help they could not call The Serpents hissing loud had filled all The VVood; nor strength nor Hearts had they to fight Nor scarce did any hope appear by flight, Nor could their trembling hands the Helmets hold, VVhen streight the Serpent from his scaly fold Shot forth, and seized one, who calling on His fellows names in vain, was swallowed down And buried in the Monsters hungry maw. His horrid destiny when the others saw They leapt into the stream to save their lives, But that alas to them no safety gives. For forth his long twin'd Neck the Serpent stretch't, And swimming Havens in the River reach't VVho though too late, he strived to be drown'd In Bagrada, a Fate more cruel found. Marus at last, while Havens death did stay The Monsters speed, had time to scape away, And to th' amazed General relates The Serpents greatness, and his Fellows Fates. But ere his faltring Tongue had fully told The Tragick story, they from far behold The scaly Monster rouling on the Sands In spacious windings; Regulus commands, The Army streight their Piles and Spears prepare To charge and march against it as a VVar, And ready all their Battering Engines make That strongest VValls and Bulwarks us'd to shake; The Trumpets then as to a Battle sound; VVhich Noise the Serpent hearing, from the ground, VVhere he in spaious Rings infolded lay, Aloft his Head advances to survey The Champion round, and to their Eyes appears Large as the Dragon 'twixt the Heavenly Bears, Fire from his threatning Eyes like lightning shot,
And hellish blasts exhal'd from his wide Throat VVhile he advanc't, you would suppose from far A moving Castle made offensive VVar. And shooting forth, he in a moment flew Upon far distant faces; At whose view The startling horses could no more be held By bits, but snorting flew about the field, VVhilst this dread Serpent sad Massacres makes Amongst the men; some 'twixt his Jaws he takes And crushes there; some into the Air he flings Who falling dye; and while his spacious Rings He doth unfold with fury, sweeping round The Sand, he beats whole Cohorts to the ground, The Army now gave ground, and 'gain retire When Noble Regulus inflam'd with Ire To see this shame, cries out, Oh stand the Field, To Africk Monsters shall Romes Virtue yield? If so, I singly will the combat try, And expiting Romes dishonour dye. Then all alone, devoyd of fear he goes, And his strong Pile against the Serpent throws With skilful Aim, whom not in vain he struck In his tough forehead the steel'd Javelin struck, The hideous Monster whose long Age before Had nere felt steel, sent out a yelling rore, And darting forth, impatient of the Wound With his long Tail he lasht the suffering ground, A shout the Souldiers raise, incourag'd now And altogether storms of Javelins throw, Some harmless lighting on his Scaly Back Such noise as Hail on tiled Houses make, Some pierce his Breast, and softer Belly Wound, Those parts alone they penetrable found, Black gore from thence distains the swarthy Sands, At last two Javelins sent from lucky Hands In both his fiery threatning Eyes did light, Depriving him, though not of strength, of sight; Whose yet blind rage draws many a ruin on, Until at last a huge and massy stone,
Shot from a Bulwark battering Engine stroke His bowed Back with such gteat force, it broke That many jointed Bone; Nor then could he Lift as before his speckled Crest on high; But as he strugling lay upon the plain, Another Stone dash't out his poysonous Brain, The Sands discolour'd with black filth appear, And that so lately feared Serpent, there Stretcht out at length, his dismal Life expires, His vast extent the General admires. Some parts of Africa produce Dragons, of vast bulk, slow motion, and their stinging incurable; some are said to be as big as a Ram with Wings, long Tail, and divers rows of Teeth in his Mouth, his scales seem painted with blew and green, hath two Feet, and feeds upon raw Flesh; another Ser∣pent hath a rundle in his Tail like a Bell, that makes a noise as he goes, somewhat like the Rattle-Snake. There are a multitude of deadly Serpents in those Countreys, as the Ceraestes which hath a little Coronet of four horns, whereby he allureth the Birds to him, hiding all but his Head in the Sands, and then devoureth them: The Iaculi so called because they dart from Trees on such Creatures as pass by. The Amphisbena hath two Heads which causeth it to crawl round. The Scytale is admira∣ble for variety of Colours. The Dips kills those she stings with Thirst. The Hypanale causeth them to sleep to death, as happened to Cleopatra Queen of Egypt. The Hemorrhois makes them bleed to death. The Prester occasions them to swell till they burst; And not to poyson you with more names of vene∣mous Creatures, the Basilisk is said to kill with her sight or hissing, as Galen and Solinus affirm, it is not half a Foot long, having on the Head three pointles like a Crown or Bishops Miter, it blasteth the ground, herbs and Trees, and so infecteth the Air, that Birds flying over fall down dead, it
affrights all other Serpents with the hissing, going upright from the Belly; if it kill any thing that is also venemous to such as touch it, only a Weasil kills it; The Bergameni bought the Carcase of one at an incredible price, which they hung up in their Temple, (that was curiously painted by Apelles,) in a Net of Gold, to preserve it from Birds or Spiders; Lemnius affirms that from an Egg laid by an old Cock after he is past treading of Hens, is produced a Basilisk or Cockatrice. The various kinds of Ser∣pents in Africa, and the tremendous effects of them upon Mankind are described by Lucan, lib. 9. rela∣ting the March of Cato's Army over the burning Sands of Libia. THe venemous Asp appears with swelling head, Which in no Serpent is compacted more. In scaly folds the great Hemorrhus lyes Whose bite from all Parts draws the flowing blood. The Pareas whose way his Tail doth guide The greedy Prester too, distending wide His venom-foaming Mouth. The Seps whose bite Consumes the Bones, dissolves the Body quite. The Basilisk whose hiss all Snakes do scare (Hurtful before the Venom touch) who far All Vulgar Serpents from his sight commands, Reigning alone upon the empty d Sands, You Dragons too, glistring in Golden Pride, Who hurtless wander in all Lands beside. You, Africk mortal Snakes; Aloft you fly, Through th' Air on Wings, and follow speedily, The Heards; your strokes the mightiest Bulls destroy Great Elephants scape you not; for you all kill, Nor need you Poysons help to work your will. This thirsty way among these venom'd Snakes Cato amidst his hardy Souldiers takes, Where many losses of his Men be found, And deaths unlook't for, from a little Wound.
A trodden Dipsas turning back his Head Did sting young Aulus Ensign bearer bred Of Tyrrhene Race, no grief no pan ensu'd, His Wound no pity found, no danger shew'd, But yet alas, did fiery Venom deep Into his Marrow and scorcht entrails creep, Which quite drunk up all Moisture that should flow Into his vital Parts, his Palate now And Tongue is scorch't and dry, no sweat could go To his tir'd Joints, from's Eyes no Tears could flow. His place, nor his sad Generals command Could stay this thirsty Man; Out of his Hand He throws his Ensign, Water runs to have Which the dry Venom in his heart did crave. Though he in midst of Tanais did lye Padus or Rodanus, he would be dry, Or drink the streams where ever Nilus flows. The Soil adds to his drowth, the Worm doth lose His Venoms fame helpt by so hot a Land. He digs and seeks each vein in all the Sand. Now to the Syrts he goes, and in his Mouth Salt water takes; which could not quench his drowth Although it pleas'd; He did not know what kind Of death he dy'd, nor his disease could find But thinks it thirst, And now full fain he wou'd Rip open all his Veins, and drink his Blood. Cato commands them (loath his men should stay To know what thirst was,) streight to march away, But a more woful death before his Eye Appear'd; A Seps on poor Sabellus Thigh Hung by the Teeth, which he streight with his hands Cast off, and with his Pile nail'd to the Sands. A little Snake, but none more full than she Of horrid death, the Flesh falls off that nigh The Wound did grow; The Bones are bared round Without the Body naked shows the Wound, His Shanks fall off, matter each member fills, His Knees are bar'd, his groin black filth distils,
And every muscle of his Thighs dissolves, The skin that all his natural Parts involves, Breaking lets fall his Bowels, nor doth all That should remain of a dead body fall, The cruel Venom eating all the Parts, All to a little poysnous filth converts The Poyson breaks his Nerves, his Ribs doth part, Opens his hollow breast, there shews his heart, His Vitals all, yea all that man composes And his whole nature this foul death discloses, His head, Neck, Shoulders, and strong Arms do slow In venemous filth; Not sooner melts the Snow By hot South winds, nor wax against the Sun. This is but small I speak; burnt bodies run Melted by Fire in filth; but what Fire ere Dissolv'd the bones? no bones of his appear, Following their putrid Juice, they leave no sign Of this swift death; The Palm is only thine Of all the Africk Snakes; The soul take they, But thou alone the Carcase tak'st away. But lo a death quite contrary to it Marsian Nafidius an hot Praester bit Whose face and cheeks a sudden Fire did Rost His flesh and skin was strech't, his shape was lost. His swelling body is distended far Past humane growth, and undistinguisht are His Limbs; All parts the poyson doth confound, And he lies hid in his own body drown'd, Nor can his Armour keep his swoln growth in Not more doth boyling water rise within A brazen Caldron, nor are sails more swel'd With western winds; No Limb he now can weil'd. A Globe deform'd he is, an heap confus'd, VVhich ravening Beasts did sare, which Birds re∣fus'd To which his Friends dust do no Obsequy Nor touch; but from the growing Carcase fly.
These Serpents yet present more horrid sights' A fierce Hemorrhus Noble Tullus bites, A brave young man that studied Cato's worth, And as in pouncing of a Picture, forth Through every hole the pressed Saffron goes So from his every part red poyson flows For blood; his Tears were blood, from every pore Where Nature vented moisture heretofore, His Mouth, his Nose flows blood; his sweat is red, His running veins; All parts are bloodied, And his whole body's but one wound become. An Aspes sharp sting did Levus heart benum, No pain he felt; surpriz'd with sudden sleep He dy'd, descending to the Stygian deep. On an old stump a dartlike Snake did lye Which as from thence her self she nimbly threw Through Paulus Head, and wounded Temples flew, 'Twas not the Poyson brought his Fate, the blow It self caus'd death; to her compared slow Fly stones from slings, and not so swift as she From Parthian bows do winged Arrows flee. VVhat helpt it wretched Murrus that he did Kill a fierce Basilisk? The poyson slid Along his Spear, and fastned on his hand VVhich he cut off, and then did safely stand VVith that hands loss, viewing securely there The sad example of his death so near, &c. Ostriches in Africa keep in great Companies, and appear afar off like Troops of Horsemen, putting a ridiculous terrour into the Caravans of Merchants, it seems to be a foolish bird that forgetteth her Nest, and leaveth her Eggs for the sun and sand to hatch, she eateth any thing even the hardest Iron, and is said to be Deaf. Another bird bigger than a Crane soars so high in the Air that his great body is invisible, yet from thence espieth his Prey and falls down directly upon it, he lives so long that all his Feathers fall away by Age, and then is fed by
his young ones. Locusts or Grashoppers do here often renew the Egyptian Plague, coming in such vast numbers that like a Cloud they intercept the Sun, and having eaten the fruits and leaves, they leave their spawn behind, who are worse than themselves, devouring the very barks of the naked Trees. Orosius says, that one time after they had done all this mischief, they did worse by their deaths, for being carried by a strong wind into the Sea, and again cast up dead on the Shore, their putrified Carcases caused such a Pestilence, that in Numidia only there died eight hundred thousand, and on the Sea coast near Utica and Carthage two hundred thousand. In some places they forced the People to leave the Countrey, it being so desart and destroyed that they left nothing to sustain them, and lookt as if it had snowed by reason of the Trees without barks; The fields of Maiz were as if trod∣den down after a Tempest of Rain and Thunder; they lay above two yards thick upon the Rivers Bank, In the River Nilus in the time of Mauricius the Emperour, at the place where Grand Cario now standeth, a Giant-like Monster was seen, from the bottom of his belly upward he appeared like a Man, with Flaxen hair, frowning Countenance and strong Limbs; After he had continued in the view of multitudes three hours, there came out of the VVater another like a VVoman with a comely Face, part of her black hair hanging down, and part ga∣thered into a knot, her face was fair, rosie Lips, fingers and breasts well composed, the rest of her body hid under water, from Morning to Sun-set they fed their greedy Eyes with this spectacle, which then sunk down into the water and was ne∣ver seen more.
X. Acra. THis is a Strong Fort erected all of Stone, and consists of 4 Palankers, 25 Guns, and 70 white men, besides Blacks. Mr. Ogilby in his History of Africa names several other Places belonging to the Royal African Com∣pany as Madre Bomba, Cormantyn, Ianasia, Eniacham, Rio, Nuno, Rio Grande, Serbro, Cestos, Achin, Auta, Ar∣dra, Benin, with Old, and New Calabar. But I am assured, that these mine aforementioned, are all the Castles and Forts, of which they are possest at this time. This Countrey (unknown to the Ancients) is properly a part of Negroland, and called Guinea from the heat hereof. The Air is so extream hot and unwholsome especially to strangers, many of whom live but a short time after their arrival, that were it not for the Rains and Coolness of the Nights, it would be altogether uninhabitable. It is governed by several Sovereigns, the Chief of whom is called, Emperor of Guinea; to whom divers other Kings and Princes are subject. The Capital City is Arda. Next to him is the King of Benin, esteemed a powerful Prince, having several large Territories subject to him. Upon the Death of her Husband. in the kingdom of Benin the Wife is absolutely, subject to her own Son, (if she have any) and can∣not be sold for a Slave without leave from the King. A late Author gives the following List of the Forts, Factories, and Places of Trade, wherein the Royal African Company are concerued on the Coast of Guinea.
On the Golden Coast. James Fort in an Island in the River Gambia. Sierra Leona upon Bence Island. On the Coast of Malaguette Sherborow in York I∣sland. Druwn. On the Qua∣qua Coast Rio de St. An∣dro. Ieaque Iea∣que. C St Apo∣lonia. Aymo in Comore Bay. Succundo. Cabo Cor∣so. Fredecht Burg sold to us by the Danes Annishan unforti∣fi'd. Anmama∣bou. Aggau of no de∣fence. In the Kingdom of Loango Moango Mulemba Cabenda. The Captivity and Deliverance of John Watts an Englishman, from Slavery un∣der the King of the Buckamores, and the King of Calanach, near Old Mallabar in Guinea. HAving met with the following Relation I shall conclude the Account of Guinea there∣with. In 1668 An English Ship bound for Guinea, Sailing to Old Calabar, they entred a River called the Cross-River into Pirats-Island; after they had taken in their Negro's, and were ready to Sail, the Master called up the Boatswain and three Men more to look out the Copper Bars that were left, and carry them on Shore to sell; The Boatswain with his small Company desired they might have Arms, not believing they were so harmless a People as
reported; they took with them three Musquets and a Pistol; and so rowed toward the Shore, but their Match unhappily fell into the Water, and the Ship being fallen down lower toward the Sea quite out of sight, and they ashamed to go back without dispatching their business, Iohn Watt's went ashore to the first House to light the match; but before he was twenty Rods from the Water side, he was seized on by two Blacks or rather Tawny-Moores, and by them haled half a Mile up into the Coun∣trey, and thrown with great violence upon his Belly, and so compelled to lye till they stript him; and more Company coming, they were so eager for his poor Canvas Apparel, that some they tore off, others they cut off, and with that several pieces of his flesh to his intolerable pain; With these Rags they made little Aprons to cover their Privities, clothing being very scarce there; The Boatswain seeing Watts carried away, resolved with his two Companions to venture their Lives to have him again, and arming themselves they were sud∣denly beset with a dosen men in several Canoes, but they valiantly maintained their Boat three hours; for after two or three Musquets were dis∣charged, they defended themselves with their Oars and Boat hooks; The Boatswain received a mortal wound in his Groin, and fell down in the Boat, the other two adventured into the River, endeavouring by swimming to escape the Hands of these cruel Infidels; but the Negro's with their swift Canoes soon overtook them, and brought them on Shore to the other; They took the Boatswain out of the Boat, and instead of endeavouring to pre∣serve what Life remained in him, one of them with a keen Weapon instantly cut off his Head; And while he was yet reeking in his Blood, they in a barbarous manner cut off pieces of Flesh from his Buttocks, Thighs, Arms, and Shoulders, and broil d them on the Coals, and with much impatience eat
it before his Companions Faces to their great astonishment. About a Fortnight after one of the Company fell sick; And instead of being his Physicians to cure him, they were his Butchers to Murther him, cut∣ting off his Head, and broiling and eating his Flesh, rejoicing exceedingly at this rich Banquet. Ten days after the other fell sick, whom they used in the very same manner. Watts continued still in Health though the Natives daily expected such another Banquet, because it seems it is not their Custom to kill those that are well, and so resolved to sll him; his Master was free to discourse, especially since he had before learned the Tata Language in the West-Indies, which is easily attained, being comprehen∣ded in few words, and all the Negro's speak it. He began to discourse his Master of the reason of their cruelty, who told him, he should be content, for if he were not sick, he should not have his Head cut off; In the Boat which they took there was one Musket saved that was not discharged, which his Master some time after brought to him to know the use of; Watts endeavoured to keep him in igno∣rance, but being threatned, at length was forced to shoot it off; but the Negro's who expected some delightful thing were frustrated, and at the sudden noise and flash of Fire, which they much dread, ran from him affrighted, but hearing no more noise came up again, and commanded him to do the like, he told them he had no Powder which caused the noise; but this would not satisfie these Barbarians, who were about to murder him for refusal, ha ot his Master prevented it; After in discourse his Master told him, that the People were naturally civil, and simply honest, but it provoked full of Revenge, and that this cruelty toward him and his Friends was occasioned by the unhandsome car∣rying away some Native, without their leave about a year before, they resolving if any came
they should never go off alive; He had not been above seven Weeks in the Countrey but his Master presented him to the King, whose name was Efme King of the Buckamores, who immediately gave him to his Daughter Onijah; When the King went abroad, he atended him as his Page throughout the whole Circuit of his Dominions, which was not above twelve miles, yet boasting exceedingly of his Power and Strength, and glorying extreamly that he had a White to attend him, whom he im∣ployed to carry his Bow and Arrows. At several places remote from the Seaside, some of the Peo∣ple would run away from him for fear, others fell down and seem'd to worship him, using those Acti∣ons they do to their Gods. Their Progress was never so long, but they could return home at Night, yet never without a full Dose of the Creature. During all the time Watts was a Slave he never knew him go abroad and come home sober. They drink the best Palm-wine, and another Liquor called Penrore; The Englishman knew how to hu∣mour this profound Prince, and if any of the Na∣tives abused him, upon his complaint he had Re∣dress; as once by striving with a Negro, his Arm was broke, which by providence more than skill was set again; After some Months, the King of Calanach called Mancha, hearing of this beautiful White, courted his Neighbour Prince to sell him, and at length he was sold for a Cow and a Goat; This King was sober, free from the Treacheries and Mischiefs the other was subject to, and would oft inquire of him concerning his King and Countrey, and whether his Kingdoms were bigger than his own, whose whole Dominions were not above twenty five miles in length, and fifteen in breadth; The Englishman told as much as he thought conve∣nient, keeping within the bounds of modesty, yet relating as much as possible to the honour and dig∣nity of his Soveraign; first informing him of the
greatness of one of his Kingdoms, the several Shires, and Counties it contained, with the number of its Cities, Towns and Castles, and the strength of each, the infinite Inhabitants and valour of his Subjects; One of these sufficiently amazed this petty Governour, that he need mention no more of His Majesties Glory and Dignity; It put him into such a profound Consternation, that he resolved to find out some way to tender his respects to this Mighty Prince, and could study none more convenient, than that if he could find a passage he would let him go to England, to inform King Charles the II. of the great favour and respect he had for him; This did not a little rejoice our Englishman; He also told him that he would send him a Present, which should be two Cabareets or Goats, which they there value at a high rate, this King having himself not above seventeen or eighteen. He tells the King that the King of England had many thousand Subjects under the degree of Gentlemen, who had a thousand Sheep apiee, the Flesh of which they valued at a much higher rate than Goats. Though our Captive lived happily with this King, yet his desires and hopes were still to return to his Native Countrey, at length he promised him, that the first English Ship which came into the Road, should have liberty to release or purchase him; This much rejoiced his Heart now he thought every day a year, till he could hear of, or see some English Ship arrived. Oft did he walk down to the Sea-side, earnestly expecting the winds of Provi∣dence would blow some in thither; which being observed by one Iaga the chiefest Wizard in those parts, and much admired by the People (though they have a multitude of others) this man came to him one day, and inquired why he went so often to the Sea shore, he told him, to see if he could discover any English Vessel come in there and knowing he was a Wizard, though not acquainted
with his great Fame, nor willing to credit his Di∣vinations, yet to please him, askt when he did believe there would one come in; Iaga instantly told him; That the fifteenth day after, an English Ship would cme into the Road. He then demanded whether that Ship should carry him away, he answered doubtfully, but said, he should be offe∣red to the Master of the Ship, and if they did not agree, but he should come ashore again, and not be sold, he would soon dye of grief. These fifteen days seemed very long, many a look did he cast on the Sea with an aking Heart, the fourteenth day he went to an high hill, but he could discover nothing; next Morning he went again two or three times but saw none; about two or three hours after, some of the Moors came running to the King, telling him there was a Canoe coming, so they call our Ships, at which our Englishman rejoiced, hoping to be re∣least, yet durst not shew it for fear of punishment or death; for though he lived better now than with his first Master, yet his Service was far worse than the Slaves in Turkey, and their Diet worse than Dogs meat, The Ship came in, and he runs to Iaga to know if it were an English Ship, who assured him it was, and so it happened; one Captain Roy∣den being Commander, who hastned to dispatch his business, took in his Negro's, and was ready to Sail, our Captive not hearing a word what should become of him, the King never offering to sell him; This made him resolve to endeavour an escape; he had prepared a piece of Timber, and drawn it to∣ward the water-side, on which he intended to pad∣dle to the Ship, which lay about a League off. Just by the Sea-side as he was about to lanch his floating stick, he espied a great Alligator, which will devour a man at a mouthful, this altered his mind, resolving rather to live with Infidels, than be accessary to his own death; But next day it pleased God to move the Kings Heart to let him go,
sending him in a Canoe placed between a Negro's Legs, with others to guide this small Vessel, for fear he should leap over-board, and swim to the Ship▪ At a distance he haled her in English to the great surprizal of those within her, the Negro's let him stand up and show himself to the Captain, to whom he gave an Account ho four were left there, and he only remained alive. It was some time be∣fore they bargained, though the Captain was re∣solved not to leave him behind. Several times the Negro's padled away with their Canoe, resolving not to part with him, but what with his intreaties and promises, he perswaded them to the Ship again, and at last they delivered him on board for forty five Copper and Iron Bars about the bigness of a mans Finger; When he came on board, his Hair was long, and his Skin tawny like a Mulatto, having gone naked all the time he was there, and usually anointed himself with Palm-Oyl. The Sea men cha∣ritably apparalel'd him, and he arrived safely in England with a thankful Heart for so happy a de∣liverance. And here I shall conclude the view of Guinea.
A View of St. Helena an Island in the Ethio∣pian Ocean, in Africa Now in possession of the Honourable East-India-Company, where their Ships usually refresh in their Indian Voyages. With an account of the Admirable Voyage of Domingo Gonsales, the Little Spani∣ard, to the World in the Moon, by the help of several Ganza's or Large Geese. An Ingenious Fancy, written by a late Lear∣ned Bishop. BEfore I come to relate the Acquisitions of the English in India, &c. I will make a halt at St. Hellens or Hellena, which is now possest by the Honourable East-India-Company. It is called the Sea Inn, because the English and other Nations stop there as a place for watering and refreshment in their Long Voyages to India. It was formerly sei∣zed by the Dutch, but retaken May 6th, 1673 by Captain Munday, with a Squadron of English Ships, and 3 Rich Dutch East-India Ships made Prizes in the Harbor; since which the Company have forti∣fied and secured it, against any future invasion of Dutch, Portuguese, or Spaniards. It was called Santa Helena by the Portuguese, who discovered it on St. Hellens Day, being April 2. There is no Island in the World so far distant from the Conti∣nent or main Land as this. It is about Sixteen Leagues in Compass, in the Ethiopick-Sea; in 16 Degrees of South Latitude; about 1500 Miles from the Cape of Good Hope; 360 from Angola in Africa;
and 510 from Brasile in America. It lyes high out of the Water, and surrounded on the Sea-coasts with steep Rocks, having within many Cliffs▪ Moun∣tains and Valleys, of which one is named Church-Valley, where behind a small Church they climb up to the Mountains. To the South is Apple-Dale, so called from the abundance of Oranges, Lemons and Pomegranats enough to furnish five or six Ships. On the West side of the Church, Ships have good Anchorage close under the Shore, to prevent the Winds which blow fiercely from the adjacent high Mountains. The Air seems temperate and healthful, so that sick men brought ashore there, in a short time re∣cover; Yet the heat in the Valleys is as intollera∣ble as the cold upon the Mountains; It commonly rains there five or six times a day, so that the baren∣ness of the Hills is not occasioned for want of Wa∣ter, of which it hath two or three good Springs for furnishing Ships with fresh Water; The ground of its own accord brings forth wild Pease and Beans, also whole Woods of Orange, Lemon, and Pomegranat Trees, all the year long laden both with Blossoms and Fruit, good Figs; abundance of Ebo∣ny and Rose-trees, Parsly, Mustard-seed, Purslain, Sorrel, and the like; The Woods and Mountains are full of Goats, large Rams, and wild Swine, but difficult to be taken. When the Portuguese disco∣vered it, they found neither four-footed Beasts nor Fruit-trees, but only fresh Water; They afterward planted Fruit-trees, which so increased since, that all the Valleys stand full of them; Partridges, Pigeons, Moor-hens, and Peacocks breed here nu∣merously, whereof a good Marksman may soon pro∣vide a Dinner for his Friends. On the Cliff-Islands, on the South are thousands of grey and black Mews, or Sea-Pies, and white and coloured Birds, some with long, others with short Necks, who lay their Eggs on the Rocks, and suffer themselves to be taken
with the Hand, gazeing at their Surprizers, till they are knocked on the Head with sticks. From the Salt-Water  against the Cls a  or Scum remains in some places, which the heat of the Sn so purifies, that it becomes white and good Salt; some of the Mountains yield Bole Armonck, and a fat Earth like Terra Lemnia The Sea will answer the pains of a patient , who must use an Angle, not a Net, because of the foul ground and beating of the waves; the chief are Mackr, Roach, p, but differing in colour from those among us; Es as big as a mans Arm, and well tasted Crabs, Lobsters, Oysters and Mus∣sels as good as English. IT is in this Island that the Scene of that notable fancy, called. The Man in the Moon, or a discourse of a Voyage thither, by  Gonsales is lay'd, written by a Learned Bishop, saith the ingenious Bishop Wilkins, who calls it a pleasant and well con∣trived fancy, in his own Book intitaled, A Discourse of the New World, tending to prove that it is possible there may be another habitable World in the Moon; Wherein among other curious arguments he affirms, that this hath been the direct opinion of divers an∣cient, and some Modern Mathematicians, and may probably be deduced from the Tenents of others, neither does it contradict any Principle of reason nor Faith; And that as their World is our Moon, so our World is theirs. Now this small Tract having so worthy a Person to vouch for it, and many of our English Histori∣ans having published for Truth, what is almost as improbable as this, as Sr. Iohn Mandavil in his Tra∣vels and others, and this having what they are ut∣terly destitute of, that is, Invention mixed with Judgment; and was judged worthy to be Licensed 50 years ago, and not since reprinted, whereby it would be utterly lost. I have thought fit to repub∣lish the Substance thereof, wherein the Author says
he does not design to discourse his Readers into a belief of each particular circumstance, but expects that his new discovery of a New World may find little better entertainment than Columbus had in his first discovery of America, though yet that pr espial betrayed so much knowledge as hath▪ since increast to vast Improvements, and the en Un∣known is now found to be of as large extent as all the other known World; That there should be An∣tipodes was once thought as great a Paradox as now that the Moon should be habitable. But the know∣ledge of it may be reserved for this our discovering Age, wherein our Virtuosi can by their Telescopes gaze the Sun into Spots, and dry Mountains in the Moon. But this and much more must be left to the Criticks, as well as the following Relation of our little Eye-witness and great Discoverer, which you shall have in his own Spanish Style, and delive∣red with that Grandeur and thirst of Glory, which is generally imputed to that Nation. It is known to all the Countries of Andaluzia, that I Domingo Gonsales was born of a Noble Family in the renowned City of Sevil My Fathers name being Therando Gonsales near kinsman on the Mo∣thers side to Don Pedro Sanches the worthy Count of Almanera, My Mother was the Daughter of the famous Lawyer Otho Perez de Sallaveda Governour of Barcellona, and Corrigidor of Biscay; I being the youngest of seventeen Children, was put to School, and designed to the Church; But Heaven purpo∣sing to use my Service in matters of far another Nature, inspired me with spending some time in the Wars; It was at the time that Don Ferando, the renowned Duke D' Alva was sent into the Low Countreys in 1568. I then following the current of my desire leaving the University of Salamanea, whither my Parents had sent me, without giving notice to any of my Friends, got through France to Antwerp, where I arrived in a mean condition. For
having sold my Books, Bedding and other things which yielded me about 30 Duckets, and borrow∣ed twenty more of my Fathers Friends, I bought a little Nag, wherewith I travelled more thriftily than usually young Gentlemen do, till arriving with∣in a League of Antwerp, some of the cursed Gueses set upon me, and bereaved me of my Horse, Money, and all; so I was forc'd through necessity to enter into the Service of Marshal Cossey a French Noble∣man, whom I served in an honourable imploy, though mine Enemies to my disgrace, affirm I was his Horse-keepers Boy; But for that matter, I re∣fer my self to Count Mansfield, and other Persons of condition, who have often testified to many worthy men, the very truth of the business, which indeed was this, Monsieur Cossey being about this time sent to the Duke D' Alva Governour of the Low Countreys, he understanding the Nobility of my Birth, and my late misfortune, judging it would be no small honour to him to have a Spaniard of that Quality about him, furnished me with a Horse, Arms and whatever I wanted, using my Service, after I had learned French, in writing his Letters, because my Hand was very fair. In time of War if upon necessity, I sometime dressed my own Horse, I ought not to be reproacht therewith, since I count it the part of a Gentleman to submit to the vilest Office for the Service of his Prince. The first expedition I was in, was when the Marshal my Friend met the Prince of Orange making a Road into France, and forced him to fly even to the Walls of Cambray; It was my good Fortune to defeat a Trooper by killing his Horse with my Pistol, who falling upon his Leg could not stir, but yielded to my mercy; I knowing my own weakness of Body, and seeing him a lusty tall Fel∣low, thought it the surest way to dispatch him, which having done, I plundered him of a Chain, Money, and other things to the value of 200 Du∣cats;
This Money was no sooner in my Pockets, but I resumed the remembrance of my Nobility, and taking my audience of leave from Monsieur Gossey, I instantly repaired to the Duke D' Alva's Court, where divers of my Kindred seeing my Pocket full of good Crowns, were ready enough to acknowledge me; By their means I was received into pay, and in time obtained favour with the Duke, who would sometimes jest a little more severely at my Perso∣nage than I could well bare, for though I must ac∣knowledge my Stature is so little, as I think no man living is less, yet since it is the work of Heaven, and not my own, he ought not to have upbraided a Gentleman therewith; And those glorious things that have happened to me may evince, that won∣derful matters may be performed by very unlikely Bodies, if the mind be good, and Fortune second our endeavours; Though the Dukes joques a little disgusted me, yet I endeavoured to conceal my reentment, and accommodating my self to some other of his hu∣mors, I was so far interested in his favour, that at his going into Spain. whither I attended him, by his kindness, and other accidents, wherein by my Industry I was seldom wanting to my self, I was able to carry home 3000 Crowns in my Pocket. At my return, my Parents, who were extreamly disturbed at my departure, received me with joy, which was increased because they found I had brought wherewith to maintain my self without being chargeable to them, or lessening the Portions of my Brothers and Sisters. But doubting I would spend it as lightly as I got it, they sollicited me to marry the Daughter of Iohn Figueres a considera∣ble Merchant of Lisbon, to which I complied, and putting my Marriage Money, and good part of my own into the hands of my Father, I lived like a Gentleman many years very happily; At length a quarrel-arising between me and Pedro Delgades a
Gentleman and Kinsman of mine, it grew so high, that when no mediation of Friends could prevail, we two went alone with our Swords into the Field, where it was my chance to kill him, though a stout proper man; but what I wanted in strength I sup∣plied in courage, and my agility countervailed for his Stature. This being acted in Carmona, I fled to Lisbon, thinking to conceal my self with some Friends of my Father in Law▪ till the business might be accommodated, At which time, a famous Spanish Count coming from the West Indies, published Tri∣umphant Declarations, of a great Victory he had obtained against the English near the Isle of Pines, whereas in reality he got nothing at all in that Voy∣age but blows, and a considerable loss. It had been well if vanity and lying had been his only crimes; His covetousness had like to have been my utter ruin, though since it hath proved the occasion of Eternizing my name I verily believe to all Posteri∣ty, and to the unspeakable benefit of all Mortals for ever hereafter, at least if it please Heaven that I return home safe to my Countrey, and give per∣fect Instructions how those almost incredible and impossible Acquirements may be imparted to the World. You shall then see men flying in the Air from one place to another, you shall then be able to send Messages many hundred miles in an instant, and receive answers immediately, without the help of any Creature upon Earth; You shall then pre∣sently impart your mind to your Friend though in the most remote and obscure place of a populous City, and a multitude of other notable Experi∣ments; But what exceeds all, you shall then have the discovery of a New World, and abundance of rare and incredible secrets of Nature, which the Philosophers of former Ages never so much as dreamt of; But I must be cautious in publishing these wonderful mysteries, till our Statesmen have considered how they may consist with the Policy
and good Government of our Countrey, and whe∣ther the Fathers of the Church may not judge the divulging them prejudicial to the Catholick Faith, which (by those wonders I have seen above any mortal man before me) I am instructed to advance without respect to any temporal advantage whatso∣ever. But to proceed; This huffing Captain, preten∣ded much discontent for the Death of Delgades, who was indeed some Ki to him; however he was willing to be quiet if I would give him a thousand Duckets; I had now, besides a Wife, two Sons, whom I was not willing to begger, only to satisfie the avaritious humour of this Boaster, and so was necessitated to take some other course; I imbarkt in a stout Carrick bound for the East-Indies, carrying the value of two thousand Duckets to Trade with, leaving as much more for the support of my Wife and Children behind, whatever misfortune might happen to me; In the Indies I thrived exceeding∣ly, laying out my Stock in Diamonds, Emeralds and Pearls, which I bought at such easy rates, that my Stock safely arriving in Spain (as I under∣stood it did) must needs yield ten for one. But having doubled Cape Buona Esperanza in my way home, I fell dangerously sick, expecting nothing but death, which had undoubtedly happened, but that we just then recovered the Blessed Isle of St. Hellens, the only Paradice I believe on Earth, for healthfulness of Air, and fruitfulness of Soil, produ∣cing all necessaries for the Life of man; It is about 16 Leagues in compass, and has no firm Land or Continent within 300 Leagues, nay not so much as an Island within an hundred Leagues of it; so that it may seem a Miracle of Nature, that out of so vast and tempestuous an Ocean, such a small Rock or piece of ground should arise and discover it self. On the South is a good Harbour, and near it divers small Houses built by the Portuguese to accomodate
Strangers, with a pretty Chappel handsomely beau∣tified with a Tower, and Bell therein. Near it is a Stream of excellent fresh water, divers handsome walks planted on both sides with Orange, Lemmon, Pomegranate, Almond-trees and the like, which bare Fruit all the year, as do also divers others; There are store of Garden Herbs, with Wheat, Pease, Barley, and most kinds of Pulse; but it chiefly aboundeth with Cattel and Fowl, as Goats, Swine, Sheep, Partridges, wild Hens, Pheasants, Pigeons, and wild Fowl beyond credit; But especially about February and March are to be seen huge Flocks of a kind of wild Swans, (whereof I shall have occa∣sion to speak more hereafter) who like our Cuckoes and Nightingales, go away at a certain Season, and are no more seen that year. On this happy Island did they set me ashore with a Negro to attend me, where I recovered my health, and continued a whole year, solacing my self for want of Humane Society with birds and brute Beasts; Diego my Black-moor was forced to live in a Cave at the West-end of the Isle, for had we dwelt together, Victuals would not have been so plenty with us; but now if one succeeded well in Hunting or Fowling, the other would find means to treat him, and if both mist, we were ain to look out sharply; but this seldom happened, since no Creature there fears a man more than a Goat or Cow, whereby I easily tamed divers kinds of birds and beasts by only muzling them, so that till they came either to me or Diego they could not feed; at first I much delighted in a kind of Par∣tridges, and a tame Fox, whereof I made good use; For if I had occasion to confer with Diego, I would take one of them muzled and hungry, and tying a note about his neck, beat him from me, whereupon he would streight away to Diego's Cave, and if he were not there, would beat about till he found him; yet this conveyance being not
without some inconvenience, I perswaded Dieg, (who though a fellow of good Parts, was content to be ruled by me) to remove to a Cape on the north-west part of the Island, being though a League off, yet within sight of my house and Chap∣pel, and so when the weather was fair, we could by signals declare our minds each to other in an instant either by night or day, wherein we took much pleasure. If in the night I would signifie any thing to him, I set up a light in the bell Tower, which was a pretty large Room with a fair Window well glazed, and the walls within plaistered white, so that though the light were but small, it made a great show; after this light had stood half an hour I covered it, and then if I saw any signal of light again from my Companion I knew he waited for my notice, and so by hiding and shewing my light according to the agreement betwixt us I certified him of what I pleased. In the day I advertised him by Smoke, Dust, and other refined ways. After a while I grew weary of it as too painful, and again used my Winged Messengers; Upon the shoar, about the Mouth of our River, I found store of a kind of Wild Swans feeding upon prey, both of fish and birds, and which is more strange having one Claw like an Eagle, and the other like a Swan. These birds breeding here in infinite numbers, I took thirty or forty of them young, and bred them up by hand for recreation; yet not without some thoughts of that experiment which I after put in practice. These being strong and able to continue a great flight, I taught them first to come at call afar off, not using any noise, but only shewing them a White Cloth; and here I found it true what Plutarch affirms, That Creatures which eat Flesh are more docible than others. 'Tis wonderful to think what Tricks I taught them ere they were a quarter old, amongst others I used them by degrees to fly with Burdens, wherein I found them able beyond
belief, and a white sheet being displayed to them by Diego upon the side of a hill, they would carry from me to him bread, flesh, or whatever I pleased, and upon the like call come to me again. Having proceeded thus far, I consulted how to join a num∣ber of them together, so as to carry a heavier weight, which if I could compass, I might enable a man to be carried safely in the Air from one place to another. I puzled my Wits extreamly with this thought, and upon Trial found that if many were put to the bearing of one great Burthen, by reason it was impossible all of them should rise together just at one instant, the first that rise finding him∣self stayed by a weight heavier than he could stir, would soon give over, and so the second, third, and all the rest. I contrived at last a way whereby each might rise with only his own proportion of weight, I fastned about each Gansa a little Pulley of Cork, and putting a string of a just length through it, I fastned one end to a block of almost eight pound weight, and tyed a two pound weight to the other end of the string, and then causing the signal to be Erected, they all rose together, beg four in number, and carried away my block to the place appointed. This hitting so luckily, I added two or three birds more, and made Tryal of their carrying a Lamb, whose happiness I much vied, that he should be the first living creature to partake of such an excellent device. At length after divers Tryals, I was surprized with a great longing to cause my self to be carried in the same manner, Diego my Moor was likewise possest with the same desire, and had I not loved him well, and wanted his Service, I should have resented his ambitious thought; For I count it greater honour to have been the first Flying Man, than to be another Neptune who first adventured to Sail on the Sea. Yet seeming not to understand his intention, I only told him that all my Gansa's
were not strong enough to carry him, being a man though of no great Bulk, yet twice heavier than my self; Having prepared all necessaries, I one time placed my self and all my Utensils on the top of a Rock at the Rivers Mouth, and putting my self upon my Engine at full Sea, I caused Diego to ad∣vance the signal, whereupon my Birds, 25 in number rose all at once, and carried me over lusti∣ly to the Rock on the other side, being about a quarter of a League; I chose this time and place, because if any thing had fallen out contrary to ex∣pectation, the worst that could happen was only falling into the Water, and being able to swim well, I hoped to receive little hurt in my fall; When I was once safe over, O how did my heart even swell with Joy and admiration at my own In∣vention; How oft did I wish my self in the midst of Spain, that I might fill the World with the fame of my Glory and Renown? Every hour I had a longing desire for the coming of the Indian Fleet to take me home with them, which then stay'd, three Months beyond their usual time; At length they arrived being three Carricks much weather-beaten, the men Sick and Weak, and so were constrain'd to refresh themselves in our Island a whole Month; The Admiral was called Alphonso de Xima, a Valliant Wise Man, desirous of Glory, and worthy better Fortune than afterward befell him; To him I discovered my device of the Gansa's being satisfied, that it was impossible otherwise to perswade him to take so many Birds into his Ship, who for the niceness of their provision, would be more trouble∣som than so many men; Yet I adjured him by Oaths and Perswasions to be secret in the business, though I did not much doubt it assuring my self he durst not impart the Experiment to any before our King were acquainted therewith. I had more apprehension, lest Ambition and the desire of gaining to himself the honour of so admirable an
Invention should tempt him to dispatch me. How∣ever I was forc't to run the Risque unless I would adventure the loss of my Birds, the like whereof for my purpose were not to be had in Christendom, nor was I sure ever to bring up others to serve my turn. It happened all these doubts were causless, the man I believe was honest, but the misfortune we met with prevented all these thoughts, Thursday Iune 21. 1599. we set Sa for Spain, I having allowed me a convenient Cabbin for my Birds, and Engine, which the Captain would have perswaded me to have left behind, and it was a wonder I did not, but my good fortune saved my life for after two Months Sail we met with an English Fleet about  Leagues from the Island of Teneriff, one of the Ca∣naries famous for a Hill therein called Pico, which is kenned at Sea above an hundred Leagues off. We had aboard five times their number of men, all in health, and were well provided with Ammunition; yet finding them resolved to fight, and knowing what infinite riches we carried, concluded it bet∣ter if possible to escape, than by encountring  crew of desperate Fellows, to hazard not only ou Lives, which a man of courage does not value,  the Estates of many poor Merchants, who I  afraid were undone by the miscarriage of this bu∣siness. Our Fleet consisted of five Sail, that is three Carricks, a Bark, and a Caravel, who com∣ing from St. Thomas Isle, had in an ill hour ov taken us some days before. The English had three Ships well provided, who no sooner spied but pre∣sently ingaged us, and changing their course, endea∣voured to bring us under their Lee, which th might easily do as the Wind then stood, they being ght nmble Vessels, as English Ships generally are ours heavy, deep laden, and foul with the Sea So our Captain resolved, wisely enough it may be out neither valiantly nor fortunately, to fly, com∣manding
us to disperse our selves. The Carav by too much hast fell upon one of the Carricks and bruised her so, that one of the English easily fetcht her up and entred her, the Caravel sinking before our eyes. The Bark escaped unpursued and another of our Carricks after some chase was given over by the Enemy, who expecting a sufficient Booty of us, and getting us between them, fell upon us with much fury; our Captain hereupon gave direction to run ashoar upon Teneriff, the Port whereof we could not recover, saying, That he hoped to save part of the Goods, and some of our Lives, and he had ra∣ther the rest should be lost, than all fall into the mer∣cy of our foes. When I heard this Resolution, observing the Sea to work high, and knowing all the Coast to be so full of Rocks and Shoals, that it was impossible our Ship should come near the Land unless broken into a thousand pieces, I represented to the Cap∣tain the desperateness of the attempt, wishing him rather to try the kindness of the Enemy, than throw away himself and so many brave men; But he would by no Remonstrances be removed from his Resolution, therefore finding it high time to shift for my self, I lockt up my little Casket of Jewels, which putting into my sleeve, I then be∣took me to my Gansa's, and having harnassed them to my Engine, and put my self thereon, supposing, as indeed it happened, that when the Ship should split, my Birds though they wanted their signal, yet for saving their own lives, which nature hath taught all Creatures to preserve, would make to∣ward Land, which fell out, according to my ex∣pectation; The People in the Ship wondred what I was doing, none being acquainted with the use of my Birds but the Captain, Diego being in the other Ship which fled away unpursued; We were about half a League from Land, when our Carrick struck upon a Rock, and split to pieces, upon which I let
loose the reins to my Birds, having first placed my self upon the top of the Deck, and with the Shock they all arose carrying me fortunately to the Land, of which you need not doubt but I was very joy∣ful, though it was a miserable fight to behold my Friends and acquaintance in that woul distress, of whom yet many escaped better than they ex∣pected, for the English lanching out their Cock-boats, discovered more generous tempers than we are pleased to allow them, taking compassion of their calamity, and endeavouring with all diligence to save them from the fury of the Waves though with much danger to themselves; among others they took up our Captain, who, as Father Pacio since told me, having put himself with twelve others into the Cock-boat, was forced to yield to one Captain Raymundo, who carried him and our Pilot along with them in their Voyage to the East-Indies whither they were bound, but it was their hard fate by a breach of the Sea neer Cape Buona Esperanca to be swallowed of the Merciess Waves, whose Rage they a while before had so hardly esca∣ped; The rest as I likewise heard, who were about twenty six Persons they took into their Ship, and set them a land at Cape Verde. As for my self being now ashoar in an Island inhabited by Spaniards, I reckoned I was safe, but found my self mistaken, for it was my hap to pitch upon that part of the Isle where the Pike begins to rise, which is inhabited by a Savage People who live upon the sides of that Hill, the top whereof is for the most part covered with Snow, and former∣ly accounted, for its Steepness inaccessible either for man or Beast, yet these Salvages fearing the Spaniards, keep as neer the top as they can, never coming down into the fruitful valleys but to seek for Booty, a crew of these Out-Laws happened to spy me soon after I landed, and thinking they had got a prize, approacht me with all speed; I guest
their design before they came within half a Mile, when perceiving them come down the Hill directly toward me, with long slaves and other Weapons, I thought it necessary to secure my self from these Villains, who out of hatred to us Spaniards, would have cut me to peices; The Countrey was Sandy, but the Pike beginning to lift up it self, I espled in the side a white Cliff, which I hoped my Gan∣za's would take for a Mark, and being put up, would make all that way, whereby I might be carried so far that those Barbarous Raskals should not over∣take me, before I got to some Spaniards House, or hid my self, till by the covert of the night I might travel to Laguna the chief City of the Island, three Miles off. So I setled my self upon my Engine, and let loose the Reins to my Gansa's who by good for∣tune took all one course, though not just the way I aimed at. But what of that! O Reader prick up thy Ears and prepare thy self to hear the strangest chance that ever happened to any Mortal, and which I know thou wilt not have the grace to be∣lieve till thou seest the like Experiment, which I doubt not in a short time may be performed. My Gansa's like so many Horses that had gotten the bit between their Teeth, made not their flight, toward the Cliff I intended, though I used my wonted means to direct the Leader of the Flock that way, but with might and main took up toward the top of the Pike, and never stopt till they came there, a place in vulgar estimation (though since experimen∣tally contradicted) fifteen Miles in height. What kind of place this was I would gladly relate, but that I hasten to matters of greater Importance; When I was set down there my poor Gansa's fell to panting, blowing, and gaping for breath as if they would all have died, so I did not trouble them a while, forbearing to draw them in, which they never use to indure without strugling, but little did I expect what followed.
It was now the season that these Birds take their flight away, as our Cuko's and Swallows do in Spain toward Autumn, and as I afterward found, being mindful of their usual Voyage, just when I began to settle my self to take them in, they with one con∣sent rose up, and having no other higher place to make toward, to my unspeakable fear and amaze∣ment, struck bolt upright, and never left towring upward, still higher and higher, for the space as I guest, of an Hour, after which I thought they la∣boured less than before, till at length; Ah wonder∣ful! they remained immoveable as steadily as if they had sate upon so many perches; the lines slacked, neither I, nor the Engine moved at all▪ but continued still, as having no manner of weight▪ I found then by Experience what no Philosopher ever dream't of, namely, that those things we call heavy do not fall toward the center of the Earth as their natural place, but are drawn by a secret pro∣perty of the Globe of the Earth, or rather something within it, as the Load-stone draweth Iron which is within the Compass of its attractive Beams. For though my Gansa's could continue unmoved with∣out being sustained by any thing but the Air as easi∣ly and quietly as a Fish in the Water, yet if they forced themselves never so little it is impossible to imagine with what swiftness they were carried, either upward, downward or side ways; I must in∣genuously confess my horrour and amazement in this place was such, that had I not been arm'd with a true Spanish Resolution I should certainly have died for fear. The next thing that disturb'd me was the swift∣ness of the motion, which was so extraordinary that it almost stopt my breath, if I should liken it to an Arrow out of a Bow, or a Stone thrown down from the top of an high Tower, it would come vastly short of it; Another thing was exceeding troublesom to me, that is the Illusions of Devi's
and Wicked Spirits, who the first day of my arri∣val came about me in great numbers in the likeness of Men and Women, wondring at me like so many Birds about an Owl, and speaking several Langua∣ges which I understood not, till at last I met with some that spoke good Spanish, some Dutch, and others Italian, all which I understood; And here I had on∣ly a touch of the Suns absence once for a short time, having him ever after in my sight. Now though my Gansa's were entangled in my lines, yet they easily seized upon divers kinds of Flies and Birds, especially Swallows and Cuckoes whereof there were multitudes even like Motes in the Sun, though I never saw them eat any thing at all. I was much obliged to those, whether Men or Devils I know not, who among divers discourses told me, If I would follow their Directions, I should not only be carried safe home, but be assured to com∣mand at all times all the pleasures of that place. To which motion not daring to give a flat denial, I desired time to consider, and withal intreated them, (though I felt no hunger at all, which may seem strange) to help me to some Victuals least I should starve in my Journey; So they readily brought me very good Flesh and Fish of several sorts and well drest, but that it was extream fresh without any relish of Salt. Wine likewise I tasted of divers kinds as good as any in Spain, and Beer no better in all Antwerp. They advised me that while I had opportunity I should make my Provi∣sions; telling me that till the next Thursday they could help me to no more; at which time they would find means to carry me back, and set me safe in Spain in any place I would desire, provided I would become one of their Fraternity, and enter into such Covenants as they had made to their Cap∣tain and Master whom they would not name, I ans∣wered civilly, I saw little reason to rejoice in such an offer, desiring them to be mindful of me
as occasion served;So for that time I was rid of them; having first furnished my Pockets with as much Victuals as I could thrust in, among which I would be sure to find a place for a small Bottle of good Canary. I shall now declare the quality of the place wherein I was; The Clouds I perceived to be all under between me and the Earth. The Stars, be∣cause it was always day, I saw at all times alike, not shining bright as we see in the night upon Earth, but of a whitish colour like the Moon with us in the day time, those that were seen, which were not many, shewed far greater than with us, yea as I guest no less than ten times bigger; As for the Moon, being then within 2 days of the change, she appeared of an huge and dreadful greatness. It is not to be forgot that no Stars appeared but o that part of the Hemisphere next the Moon, and the nearer to her, the larger they appear'd Again, whether I lay quiet and rested, or were carried in the Air, I perceived my self to be always directly between the Moon and the Earth, whereby 'tis plain that my Gansa's took their way directly toward the Moon, and that when we rested, as we did at first for many hours, either we were insensibly car∣ried round about the Globe of the Earth, though I perceived no such motion, or else that according to the opinion of Copernicus, the Earth is carried about, and turneth round perpetually from West to East, leaving to the Planets only that motion which the Astronomers call natural, and is not upon the Poles of the Equinoctial, commonly cal∣led the Poles of the World, but upon those of the Zodiack; The Air in that place I found without any wind, and exceeding temperate, neither hot nor cold, where neither the Sun beams had any Subject to reflect upon, nor the Earth and Water so near to affect the Air with their natural Quali∣ty of coldness; As for the Philosophers attribu∣ting
heat and moisture to the Air, I alwaies esteem'd it a fancy; Lastly, I remember that after my departure from the Earth, I never felt either hunger or thirst, whether the purity of the Air, freed from the Vapors of the Earth and Water, might yield nature sufficient nourishment, or what else might be the cause I cannot determine, but so I found it, though I was perfectly in health both of body and mind, even above my usual Vigor. Some hours after the departure of that Devilish Company my Gansa's began to bestir themselves, still directing their course toward the Globe or body of the Moon, making their way with such incredible swiftness, that I conceive they advan∣ced little less than fifty Leagues in an hour, in which passage I observed three things very Remar∣kable, one that the farther we went the less the Globe of the Earth appear'd to us, and that of the Moon still larger; Again the Earth, which I had ever in mine eye, seemed to mask it self with a kind of brightness like another Moon, and as we discern certain Spots or Clouds as it were in the Moon, so did I then see the like in the Earth; but whereas the form of those Spots in the Moon are always the same, these on the Earth seemed by degrees to change every hour; the reason whereof seems to be, that whereas the Earth according to his natural motion (for such a motion I am now satisfied she hath according to the opinion of Coper∣cus) turns round upon her own Axis every four and twenty hours from West to East) I should at first see in the middle of the Body of this New Star the Earth, a Spot like a Pear with a Morsel bit out on one side, in some hours I should observe this Spot move away toward the East; This no doubt was the main Land of Africa; Then might I per∣ceive a great shining brightness in that place which continued about the same time, and was question∣less the vast Atlantick Ocean; After this succeeded
a Spot almost Oval, just as we see America described in our Maps, then another immense cleerness re∣presenting Mare del Zur or the South Sea, and lastly a number of Spots like the Countreys and Islands in the East-Indies, so that it seemed to me no other than an huge Mathematical Globe turned round leisurely be ore me, wherein successively all the Countreys of our earthly World were within twen∣ty four hours represented to my view, and this was all the means I now had to number the days, and reckon the time. I could now wish that Philosophers and Mathe∣maticians would confess their own blindness, who have hitherto made the World believe that the Earth hath no motion, and to confirm it are forc't to attribute to every one of the celestial Bodies two Motions directly contrary to each other, one from the East to the West to be perform'd in twenty four hours with an impetuous rapid motion; the other from West to East in several proportions; O incredible supposition! That those huge Bodies of the fixed Stars in the highest Orb, whereof they confess divers are above an hundred times bigger than the whole Earth, should like so many Nas in a Cart wheel be whirled about in so short a time; whereas it is many thousand years, no less (say they) than thirty thousand, before that Orb finishes his course from West to East, which they call his na∣tural motion; Now whereas they allow their na∣tural course from West to East to every one of them, therein they do well; The Moon performs it in seven and twenty days, the Sun, Venus and Mercury in a year or thereabout, Mars in three year, Iupiter in twelve, and Saturn in thirty. But to attribute to these celestial Bodies contrary motions at once, is an absurd conceit, and much more to ima∣gine that the same Orb wherein the fixed Stars are, whose natural course takes up so many thousands of years, should be turned about every twenty four
hours. I will not go so far as Copernicus who makes the Sun the center of the Earth and immoveable, neither will I be positive in any thing, only this I say▪ allow the Earth its motion, which these eyes of mine can testify to be true, and all those absur∣dities are removed, every one having only his own single and proper motion. But where am I? I promised an history, and am unawares turn'd disputer. One Accident more befell me worth mention, that during my stay I saw a kind of a reddish Cloud coming toward me, and con∣tinually approaching nearer, which at last I per∣ceived was nothing but a huge swarm of Locusts. He that reads the discourses of learned men con∣cerning them, as Iohn Leo of Africa and others who relate that they are seen in the Air several days before they fall on the Earth, and adds thereto this experience of mine, will easily conclude that they can come from no other place than the Globe of the Moon. But now give me leave to go on quiet∣ly in my Journey for eleven or twelve days, during all which time I was carried directly toward the Globe or Body of the Moon, with such a violent Whirling as is inexpressible, for I cannot imagine a Bullet out of a Cannon could make▪ way through the vaporous and muddy Air neer the Earth with half that celerity; which is the more strange since my Gansa's moved their Wings but now and then, and sometimes for a quarter of an hour not at all, only holding them stretcht out, as we see Kites, and Eagles sometimes do for a short space; during which pauses I suppose they took their Naps, and times of Sleeping, for other times I could perceive they never had any; For my self I was so fastened to mine Engine that I durst slumber enough to serve my turn, which I took with as great ease, as if I had lain on the best Down-Bed in Spain. After eleven days passage in this violent flight, I perceived we began to approach to another Earth
(if I may so call it) being the Globe or very Body of that Star which we call the Moon. The first dif∣ference I found between this and our Earth was, that it appeared in its natural colours, as soon as ever I was free from the attraction of the Earth; Whereas with us, a thing a League or two from us puts on that deadly colour of Blew. I then percei∣ved also that this World was the greatest part covered with a huge mighty Sea, those parts only being dry Land which are to us somewhat darker than the rest of her Body, I mean, what the Coun∣trey people call, The Man in the Moon, and that part which shines so bright is another Ocean besprinkled with Islands, which for their smalness we cannot discern so far off; So that the Splendor which ap∣pears to us in the Night, is nothing but the re∣flection of the Sun beams returned to us out of the Water as from a Lookinglass. How much this dis∣agrees with what our Philosophers teach in the Schools is evident; But alas how many of their Errors hath time and experience refuted in this our Age, and among other vain conjectures, who hath not hitherto believed the upper Region of the Air to be very hot; as being next, forsooth, to the natural place of the Element of Fire; Meer Vanities, Fancies and Dreams; For after I was once free from the attractive Beams of that Tyra∣nous Load stone the Earth, I found the Air alto∣gether serene, without Winds, Rain, Mists or Clouds, neither hot nor cold, but constantly plea∣sant, calm and comfortable till my arrival in that New World of the Moon; As for that Region of fire our Philosophers talk of, I heard no news of it, mine eyes have sufficiently inform'd me there is no such thing. The Earth had now by turning about shewed me all her parts twelve times when I finished my course; For when by my reckoning it seem'd to be (as in∣deed it was) Tuesday September 11. at which time
the Moon being two days old was in the twentieth degree of Libra) my Gansa's seem'd by one consent to stay their course, and rested for certain hours, after which they took their flight, and in less than an hour set me on the top of an high Hill in that Other World, where many wonderful things were presented to my sight. For I observed first, that though the Globe of the Earth appear'd much greater there than the Moon doth to us, even three times bigger, yet all things there were ten, twenty, yea thirty times larger than ours; Their Trees were thrice as high, and above five times broader and thicker; So were their Herbs, Birds, and Beasts, though I cannot well compare them to ours, be∣cause I found not any kind of Beast or Bird there which any way resembled ours, except Swallows, Nightingals, Cuckoes, Woodcocks, Batts, and some kiad of Wild Fowl; And likewise such Birds as my Gansa's, all which as I now perceived, spend their time in their absence from us, in that World, neither do they differ in any thing from ours, but are the very same kind. No sooner was I upon the ground, but I found my self extream hungry; stepping then to the next Tree I fastned my Engine and Gansa's thereto, and in great hast fell to examining my Pockets for the Victuals I had reserved there; but to my great sur∣prize and vexation, instead of Partridges and Ca∣pons, which I thought I had hoarded there, I found nothing but a medley of dry leaves, Goats Hair, Sheep or Goats Dung, Moss, and the like; my Canary-wine was turned, and stunk like Hors-piss; Oh the villany and cheats of these cursed Spirits, whose assistance if I had depended on, in what a condition had I been! while I stood musing at this strange Metamorphosis, on a sudden I heard my Gansa's fluttering behind me, and looking back, I spied them falling greedily upon a Shrub within the reach of their lines, whose leaves they fed ear∣nestly
upon, whereas before I had never seen them eat any green thing whatever; so stepping to the Shrub, I put a leaf to my Mouth; the tast was so excellent, that I cannot express it, and if I had not with discretion moderated my Appetite, I should have surfeited thereon, yet it happened to be a good bait both for me and my Birds, when we had most need of refreshment. Scarce had we ended our Banquet, when I saw my self surrounded with a strange kind of People both in feature, manners, and apparel; their Sta∣ture was very different, but they were generally twice as high as ours; their shape and countenance pleasant, and their habit hardly to be describ'd; for I never saw either Cloth, Silk, nor other Stuff, like that whereof their Cloths were made; neither can I possibly relate their colour, they being in a manner all clothed alike; it was neither Black, White, Yellow, Red nor Blue, nor any colour composed of these; If you ask what was it then, I must tell you, it was a colour never seen in our Earthly World, and so neither to be described nor conceived by us; for as it is hard to make a man born bind understand the difference between Green and Blue, so neither can I decipher this Moon colour, as having no affinity with any I ever beheld; I can only say it was the most glorious and delightful that can be imagined, neither was any thing more pleasant to me during my stay there. Being surprized at the appearance of these Peo∣ple so suddenly and in such accoutrements, I cros∣sed my self and cryd out, Iesu Maria; No sooner was the word Iesu pronounced, but young and old fell all on their knees (whereat I not a little re∣joiced) holding up their hands on high, and re∣peating certain words which I understood not; And presently rising again, one much taller than the rest came and kindly imbraced me, and orde∣ring as I perceived, some of the rest to attend my
Birds, he took me by the hand, and led me to his dwelling down toward the foot of the Hi, which was a building so great and beautiful, as nothing in our World is comparable thereto; Yet afterward I saw such as this seem'd but a Cottage in respect of them; There was no Door about the House less than thirty Foot high, and twelve broad, the Rooms were forty or fifty Foot in height, and ans∣werable in proportion; neither could they be much less, the Master thereof being full twenty eight high, and I suppose his Body would weigh twenty five or thirty of ours; After I had rested with him about one of our days▪ he led me five Leagues off to the Palace of the Prince of the Coun∣trey▪ the stateliness whereof I have not now leisre to describe; This Prince was much taller than the former, and called (as neer as I can by letters de∣clare it, for their sounds are not perfectly to be ex∣prest by our Characters,) Pyls which in their Language is First or Chief, if t doth not rather de∣note his Authority and Dignity, as being the prin∣cipal man in all those parts; Though yet there is one Supream Monarch amongst them, much grea∣ter of stature than he, commg over all that whole World, having under him twenty nine other Princes of great Power; and every one of these has twenty four Inferior Governours, whereof this Pylonas was one. The first Ancestor of this great Monarch came out of the Earth, as they relate, and by marrying the Heiress of that vast Monarchy obtaining the government, left it to his Posterity, who have enjoyed it ever since, even forty thou∣sand Moons, which is 3077 years; His name was Irdonozur whose Heirs to this day assume the same name; he, they say, having continued there about four hundred Moons, and begot divers Children, return'd (though by what means they know not) to the Earth again. I doubt they have their Fa∣bles as well as we, since our Historians never men∣tion
any Earthly Man to have been in that World before my self, and much less to have return'd again. I cannot therefore but condemn this tradition as false and Romantick, though I found earning was in great esteem among them, and they seem to detest Lying and Falshood which is there severely punished, and which may yield some credit to their Historical Narrations. Many of them live wonder∣ful long, even beyond belief, affirming to me that some survived thirty thousand Moons, which is above a thousand years, so that the Ages of three or four men might easily reach to the time of the first Irdonozur, and this is generally noted that the taller people are of Stature, the more excellent are their endowments of mind, and the longer time they live; for their stature is very different, great numbers not much exceeding ours, who seldom live above a thousand Moons, which is fourscore of our years; these they account base, unworthy crea∣tures, but one degree above brute Beasts, and im∣ploy in mean and Servile Offices, calling them Bastards, Counterfeits or Changlings; Those whom they account true Natural Lunars or Moon Men, ex∣ceed ours generally thirty times, both in quantity of Body, and length of life, proportionable to the quality of the day in both Worlds, theirs contai∣ning almost thirty of our days The manner of our travel to the Palace of Pylonas was more strange and incredible than any thing we have related, for at our first setting forth there were delivered to each of us two Feather Fans like those our Ladies in Spain cool themselves with in Sum∣mer; You must understand that the Globe of the Moon has likewise an attractive power, yet so much weaker than the Earth, that if a man do but spring upward with all his strength, as Dancers do in shew∣ing their Tricks, he will be able to mount fifty or sixty foot high; and being then above all attracti∣on from the Moons Earth, he falls down no more,
but by the help of these Fans as with Wings, they convey themselves in the Air in a short space, (though not quite so swift as Birds) whither they please. In two hours time (as I could guess) by the help of these Fans we were carried through the Air those five Leagues, in all about sixty Persons. Being arrived at the Palace of Pylonas, after our Conductor had declared what manner of Present he had brought, I was called in to him by his At∣tendants; By the Stateliness of his Palace and the reverence done him, I soon perceived his great∣ness, and managed my affairs in order to procure his favour accordingly, and having, as you may remember, a certain little Box or Casket of Jewels, the remainder of those I brought from the East-Indies, before I was introduced I secretly took them out of my pocket, and chusing some of each sort. I made them ready to be presented as I should think convenient. I found him sitting in a magnificent Chair of State with his Wife or Queen on one hand, and his Eldest Son on the other, one attended by a Troop of Ladies, and the other of young men, and all along the side of the Room stood a great number of handsom Personages, whereof scarce one was lower of Stature than Pylonas, whose Age they re∣port is now one and twenty thousand Moons. At my entrance I fell on my knees, and taking out my Jewels, I presented to the King seven Stones of se∣veral sorts, a Diamond, a Ruby, an Emerald, a Saphire, a Topaz and an Opal, which he accept∣ed with Joy and admiration. Then I offered the Queen and Prince some others, and design'd to have bestow'd divers more upon his Attendants, but Pylonas forbid them to accept any, supposing, as I heard, they were all I had, which he would have me reserve for Irdonozur his Soveraign; He then imbraced me with much indearedness, and inqui∣red divers things by signs, which I answered in the
same manner to the best of my Skill  which not contenting him, he delivered me to the guard of 100 of his Giants as I may well call them, strictly charging them that I should want nothing fit for me; That they should suffer none of the Dwarf Lunars or little Moon Men, to come near me. That I should be instucted in their Language, and last∣ly that they should by no means impart to me the knowledge of several things by him Specified, what they were I could never understand. It may be you long to know what Pylonas inquired of me; Why what should it be but, whence I came, how I arrived there, what was my name and business, with the like, to all which I answered as near the truth as possible. Being dismist I was provided with all necessaries as my heart could wish, so that I seem'd to be in a Paradise, the pleasures whereof did not yet so trans∣port me, but I was much concerned with the thoughts of my Wife and Children, and still retaining some   I  again  to them I tended my Gansa's daily with much care; which yet had signified little if other men had not done more than I could; For now the time came when of necessity all people of our Stature, and my self likewise, must needs sleep thirteen or fourteen whole days together; for by a secret and irresistible decree of nature when the day begins to appear, and the Moon to be enlightned by the Sun Beams which is in the first Quarter of the Moon, all people of our Stature inhabiting these parts fall into a dead sleep, and are not possibly to be wakened till the Sun set; and is withdrawn; for as Owls and Bats with us cannot indure the light, so at the first approach of day we begin to be amazed therewith, and fall into a slumber, which grows by degrees into a dead sleep till the light be gone, which is in fourteen or fifteen days, that is till the last Quarter. During the Suns absence, there is a twofold light, one of
the Sun which I could not endure to behold, and another of the Earth; Now that of the Earth was at the height, for when the Moon is at the change, then is the Earth a full Moon to them, and as the Moon increaseth with us, so the light of the Earth decreaseth with them. I found the light, though the Sun was absent, equal to that with us in the day when the Sun is clouded; but toward the quarter it dayly diminisheth, yet leaving still a competent light, which seems very strange; though not so re∣markable as what they there report, that in the other Hemisphere of the Moon, contrary to that I fell upon, where during half the Moon they see not the Sun, and the Earth never appears to them, they have yet a kind of light not unlike our Moon light, which it seems the neerness of the Stars and other Planets that are at a far less distance than from us, affords them. You must understand that of the true Lunars or Moon men there are three kinds, some a little taller than we, as perhaps ten or twelve Foot high, these can indure the day of the Moon, when the Earth shines but little, but not the Beams of both, and so must then be laid asleep; Others are twenty Foot high or above, who can suffer all the light both of the Earth and Sun. There are in a certain Island (the mysteries whereof are carefully concealed) men whose Stature is at least twenty seven Foot high; If any other come a land there in the Moons day time, they instantly fall asleep; This is called In∣sula Martini, and hath a particular Governour, who as they report is sixty five thousand Moons old, which makes five thousand of our years, his name is said to be Hirach, and be in a manner commands Irdonozur himself, especially in that Island out of which he never removes; There is another comes often thither, who they say is not above half his Age, that is about thirty three thousand Moons, or two thousand six hundred of our years, and he
orders all things through the Globe of the Moon in matters of Religion, as absolutely as the Pope doth in any part of Italy, I would fain have seen this man, but was not permitted to come near him, his name is Imozes. Now let me settle my self to a long nights sleep, to which end my Attendants take charge of my Birds, prepare my lodging, and signifie to me by signs how I must order my self. It was then about the middle of September, when I perceived the Air more clear than ordinary, and with the increase of the light I began to feel my self first dull and then heavy to sleep, though I had not been lately disturb'd of my rest; At length I delivered my self into the custody of this Sister of Death, whose Prisoner I was for almost a Fortnight after, and then awaking, it is not to be believed how brisk and vigorous I found the faculties both of my Body and Mind; I then applyed my self to learning the Language,, which is the same throughout all the Regions of the Moon, yet not so wonderful, since I believe all the Earth of Moon does not amount to the fortieth part of our inhabited Earth, partly because the Globe of the Moon is far less, and be∣sides the Sea or Ocean covers very nigh three parts of four, whereas the Land and Sea in our World may be judged of an equal measure. Their Language is very difficult, since it hath no Affinity with any other I ever heard, and consists not so much of Words and Letters as Tunes and strange sounds which no Letters can express, for there are few words but signifie several things, and are distingui∣shed only by their Sounds, which are sung as it were in uttering; yea many words consist of tunes only without words; By occasion whereof I find a Language may be framed, and easily learned, as copious as any other in the World only of Tunes which is an Experiment worth searching after; Notwithstanding these difficulties within two
months I attained to such knowledge therein that I understood most Questions demanded of me, and with signs and words made reasonable shift to ut∣ter my mind; which Pylonas having notice of, he oftimes sent for me, and was pleased to inform me of many things my Guardians durst not disclose, though I must needs say I never found they abused me with an untruth, but if I asked a question they were unwilling to resolve, they would shake their heads, and with a Spanish shrug divert to some other discourse. After seven Months time the great Irdonozur ma∣king his Progress to a place about two hundred Leagues from the Palace of Pylonas, sent for me, yet would not-admit me into his presence but dis∣courst me through a Window where I might hear him, and he hear and see me at pleasure. I pre∣sented him the remainder of my Jewels which he thankfully accepted, saying he would requite them with gifts of a far more considerable value. I stay'd there above a quarter of a Moon when I was again sent back to Pylonas, for if we had stay'd a day or two longer the Sun would have overtaken us before we could have recovered our home. The gifts he bestowed on me were such that a man would part with Mountains of Gold to purchase; they were all Stones, nine only in number, of three sorts, one called Poleastis, another Machrus, and the third Ebelus, of each sort 3. the first are about the big∣ness of an Hazel-nu very like Jet, which among many other incredible Virtues hath this property, that being once put in the Fire they ever after re∣tain their heat, though without any outward ap∣pearance, till quenched with some kind of liquor which no way endamages them though heated and cooled therein a thousand times; Their heat is so vehement that it will make any Metal within a foot of it red hot, and being in a Chimney warms the Room as if a great fire were kindled therein. The
Machrus is yet more precious, in colour like a To∣paz, so clear and resplendent as though not above the bigness of a Bean, yet being placed in the night in the midst of a large Church it makes all as light as if an hundred Lamps were hanged round; can any man wish for more useful properties in a Stone than these? Yet my Ebelus is so excellent that it may be much prefer'd before them, yea prized above all the Diamonds, Saphires, Rubies, and Eme∣ralds that our World can afford. The Lunar co∣lour is so exceeding beautiful that a man would travel a thousand Leagues to behold it, the Shape is somewhat flat, of the breadth of a peice of Eight, and twice the thickness, one side is of a more Ori∣ent colour than the other, which being clapt to a mans bare Skin, takes away all the weight and pon∣derousness of his Body, but turning the other side, it adds force to the attractive beams of the Earth either in this World or that, and makes the body half as heavy again; Do you wonder now why I should so overprize this stone? before you see me on Earth again, you will find I have reason to va∣lue this invaluable Jewel. I inquired whether they had not any kind of Jem, or other means to make a man invisible, which I judged a thing of admira∣ble use, and could mention divers of our learned men who had written to this purpose; They ans∣wered, that if it were possible, yet they were sure Heaven would not suffer it to be revealed to us crea∣tures subject to so many imperfections, and which might be easily abused to ill purposes, and this was all I could get of them. Now after it was known that Irdonozur the great Monarch had done me this honour, it is strange how much all respected me more than before; my Guardians who had been hitherto cautious in re∣lating any thing of the Government of that World, grew now more open, so that from them and Pylo∣nas together I understood many notable particu∣lars;
As that in a thousand years there is found neither Thief nor Whore-Monger, for first there is no want of any thing necessary for the use of man, food growing every where without labour, of all sorts that can be desired. As for Cloths, Houses, or whatever else a man may be suppos'd to want, it is provided by their Superiors, though not with∣out some labour, but yet so easy as if they did it for pleasure; Again their Females are all absolute Beauties, and by a secret disposition of nature, a man there having once known a Woman never de∣sires any other; Murther was never heard of amongst them, neither is it hardly pole to be committed, for there can be no wou made but what is cureable; yea they assured me, and for my part I believe it, that though a mans head be out off, yet if within three Moons it be joined to the Carcass again, and the Juice of a certain Herb there growing applyed, it will be so consolidated as the wounded party shall be perfectly cured. But the chief cause of their good government is an excel∣lent disposition in the nature of the People, so that all both Old and Young hate all manner of vice and live in such love, peace, and amity as it seems to be another Paradise; Though it is true likewise that some are of a better disposition than others, which they discern immediately at their Birth; And because it is an inviolable Law amongst them that none shall be put to death, therefore perceiving by their Stature or some other signs who are like to be of a wicked and debached humor, they send them, I know not by what means, into the Earth, and change them for other Children, before they have either opportunity or ability to do amiss among them; but first, they say, they are fain to keep them there for some time till the Air of the Earth alters their colour like ours. Their ordinary vent for them is a certain high Hill in the North of Ameria, whose people, I am apt to believe, are
wholly descended from them, both in regard of their colour, and their continual use of Tobacco, which the Lunars or Moon Men smoak exceedingly, the place abounding much with moisture, together with the pleasure they take therein, and some other respects to long to rehearse: Sometimes, though but seldom, they mistake their aim and fall upon Europe, Asia, or Africa. I remember some years since I read certain stories tending to confirm what is related by these Lunars, and especially one Chapter of Neubrigensis. Inigo Mondejar in his des∣cription of Nova Granata. Also Ioseph Defia de Carana in his History of Mexico if my memory fail not, recount what will make my report more cre∣dible; but I value not testimonies. If you inquire how Justice is executed, alas what need is there of exemplary punishment where no offences are committed; neither need they any Lawyers, or there is no contention, the seeds where∣of when they begin to sprout are by the wisdom of the next Superior pluckt up by the Roots. And as little want is there of Physicians, they never surfeit themselves; the Air is always pure and tem∣perate, neither is there any cause of sickness, I could never hear of any that were distempered. But the time assign'd them by nature being spent, they dye without the least pain, or rather cease to live, as a Candle does to give light when what nou∣rishes it is consumed. I was once at the departure of one of them, and was much surprized that not∣withstanding the happy life he liv'd, and the mul∣titude of Friends and Children he should forsake, yet as soon as he understood his end to approach, he prepar'd a great Feast, and inviting all whom he esteem'd, exhorts them, To be merry and re∣oyce with him, since the time was come he should now leave the counterfeit Pleasures of that World, and be made partaker of all true Joy and perfect happiness; I did not so much admir
his own constancy as the behaviour of his Friends; With us in the like case all seem to mourn, when many of them do oft but laugh in their Sieeves, or under a Vizard. But here all both young and old did, in my conscience, not pretendedly b really rejoyce thereat, and if any dissembled, it was only grief for their own particular loss. Being dead their Bodies putrify not, and so are not buri∣ed, but kept in certain Rooms appointed to that purpose, so that most of them can shew their An∣stors Bodies uncorrupt for many Generations▪ There is never any Rain, Wind or change of Wea∣thr, never either Summer or Winter, but as it were a perpetual Spring, yielding all pleasure and con∣tent, free from the least trouble or annoyan▪ O my Wife and Children what wrong have you done me to bereave me of the happiness of that pla But it is no great matter, for by this Voyage I am sufficiently assured, that when the race of  mortal life is run I shall attain a greater happine elsewhere. It was the ninth of September that I began  ascend from the Pike of Tenaiff; twelve days was upon my Voyage and Arrived in that Provin of the Moon called Simiri Sept. 21. May 12  came to the Court of the great Irdonozur and  turn'd back the 17 to the Palace of Pyls wh I continued till March 1601. When I earne requested Pylonas, as I had oft done before to g me leave to depart, though with hazard of my  back into the Earth again. He dissuaded me,  sisting on the danger of the Voyage, the  of that place from whence I came, and the ab dant happiness I now enjoy'd, but the remembra of my Wife and Children, out weigh'd all th reasons, and to say the truth, I was so elated w a re of the glory I should purchase at my  turn, as met ought I deserved not the name o  if I would not hazard twenty lives r
than lose the least particle thereof. I replyed, I had so strong a desire to see my Children, that I could not possibly live any longer without going to them; He then requested me to stay one year long∣er, I told him, I must needs depart now or never my Birds began to droop for want of their usual Voyage, three were already dead, and if a few more failed I was destitute of all possibility of return. At length with much solliciting I prevail'd, having first acquainted the great Irdonozur with my Inten∣tions, and perceiving by the often baying of my Birds a great longing in them to be gone, I trim'd up my Engine, and took my leave of Pylonas, and March 29. Three days after my waking from the last Moons light I fastened my self to my Engine, not forgetting to take the Jewels Irdonozur had given me, with the Virtues and use whereof Pylo∣nas had acquainted me at large, with a small quan∣tity of Victuals whereof afterward I had great oc∣caon. A vast multitude of People being present and among them Pylonas himself, after I had given them all the last Farewel, I let loose the reins to my Birds, who with much greediness taking wing, quickly carried me out of fight; it happened to me as in my first passage, for I never felt either hunger or thirst till I fell upon an high Mountain in China about five Leagues from the High and Mighty City of Pequin. This Voyage was perormed in less then nine days, neither heard I any news of these Airy men I met with in my ascending; nothing stay'd me in my Journey, whether because of the earnest desire of my Birds to return to the Earth, having already missed their season, or that the at∣traction of the Earth was so much stronger than that of the Moon, and so made it easier, yet so it was though I had three Birds less than before. For the first eight days my Birds slew before me, and I on the Engine was as it were drawn after, but the ninth day, when I began to approach the Clouds,
I perceived my self and Engine to sink toward the Earth, and go before them. I was then horribly afraid least my Birds unable to bear our weight, being so few, should be constrained to precipitate boh me and themselves headlong to the Earth, and thought it very necessary to make use of my stone Eblus which I clapt to my bare Skin within my Cloths and instantly I perceiv'd my Birds made way with greater ease than before, as seeming freed from a great but then, neither do I think they could pos∣sibly have let me down safely to the Earth without that help. China is a Countrey so populous that I think there is scarce a piece of ground thrice a mans length which is not carefully manured; I being yet in the Air some of the Countrey people spying me came running by Troops, and seizing me would needs carry me before a Magistrate, and seeing no other remedy I yielded to them. But when  try'd to go I found my self so light that one foot being on the ground I had much ado to set down the other, which was by reason my Ebelus took all weight away from my Body, therefore I pretended a desire of performing the necessities of nature▪ which being made known to them by signs, for they understood not a word of any language I could speak, they permitted me to go aside among a few shes, assuring themselves it was impossible I should escape from the; being there, I remem∣bred Pylonas his directions about the use of my , and knit them up, with a few remaining Jewels, into an handkerchief, all except the least and worst Ebelus, which I found means to apply in such manner to my body that but the half of its side touched my Skin; This done I drew toward my Guardians, till coming so neer that they could not cross my way, I shewed them a fair pair of ees, tat I might have time to hide my Jewels which I knew they would have rob'd me of if not
prevented. Being thus lightned I led them such a dance, that had they been all upon the backs of so many Race Horses they could never have over∣taken me; I directed my Course to a thick Wood, wherein I entred about a quarter of a League and there finding a fine Spring, which I took for my mark, I thrust my Jewels into a hole made by a Mole hard by. I then took my Victuals out of my pocket, to which till now in all my Voyage I had not the least appetite, and refreshed my self therewith, till the people who pursued overtoo m, into whose hands I quietly surrender'd my self; They led me to an inferior Officer, who understanding that I escap't from those who first apprehended me, caused an inclosure of boards to be made, wherein they put me, so that only my head was at liberty, and then carried me upon the Shoulders of four slaves, like some notorious Malefactor, before a Person of great Authority, who in their Language I learnt, was called a Mandarin▪ and resided a Legue off the famous City of Pequin. I could not understand them, but found I was accused for something with much vehemence, the substance of this accusation it seems was, that I was a Magician as appeared by my being so strangely carried in the Air, and tht being a stranger as both my Language and habit did declare, I contrary to the aws of China had entred the Kingdom without a Warrant, and pro∣bably for no good intent. The Mandarin heard them with a great deal of gravity, and bein a man of quick apprehension, and udious of Novelties, he told them he would take such order as the case re∣quired, and m bold attempt should not go unpu∣nished; Having dismist them he ordered his Ser∣vants I should be kept in a remote part of his vast Pallace, be strictly guarded, and dly used; This I conjecture b my treatment and what followed, for my accommodation was much bet∣ter
than I could expect, I lodg'd well, eat well, was well attended, and could complain of nothing but my restraint; Thus continued I many months, afflicted more with the thoughts of my Gansa's than any thing else, who I knew must be irrecoverably lost, as indeed they were. In this time by my own Industry, and the assistance of those who accompanied me, I learnt to speak indifferently the Language of that Province, (for almost every Province in China hath its pro∣per Tongue) whereat I perceived they were much pleased; At length I was permitted to take the Air, and brought into the spacious Garden of that Pallace, a place of extraordinary pleasure and de∣light, adorned with Herbs and Flowers of admira∣ble sweetness and beauty, with almost infinite va∣riety of Fruits, European and others, all composed with that rare curiosity as even ravished my senses in the contemplation of such delightful objects; I had not long recreated my self here, when the Man∣darin entred the Garden on that side I was walking, of which having notice by his Servants, and that I ought to kneel to him (a usual reverence I found toward great Officers) I did so, and humbly intrea∣ted his favour toward a poor stranger who arrived in these parts not designedly but by the secret dis∣posal of the Heavens; He answered in a different Language which I hear all the Mandarins use, and like that of the Lunars consisting chiefly of tunes, which was interpreted by one of his Attendants, wishing me to be of good comfort since he inten∣ded no harm to me. Next day I was ordered to come before him, and being conducted into a Noble dining Room exquisitely painted, the Mandarin commanding all to avoid, vouchsafed to confer with me in the Vulgar Language, inquiring into the state of my Countrey, the Power of my Prince, and the Religion and Manners of the People; wherein ha∣ving satisfied him, he askt me about my education,
and what brought me into this remote Countrey; I then declared to him the Adventures of my Life, omitting what I thought convenient, and especial∣ly forbearing to mention the Stones given me by Irdonozur. The strangeness of my story did much amaze him, and finding in all my discourse nothing ten∣ding to Magick, wherein he hoped by my means to be instructed, he began to admire the excellency of my Wit, applauding me for the happiest man that this World ever saw, and wishing me to re∣pose my self after my long Narration, he for that time dismissed me. After which the Mandarin took so much delight in me, that no day passed wherein he did not send for me; At length he ad∣vised me to cloth my self in the habit of that Coun∣trey, which I willingly did, and gave me not on∣ly the liberty of his House, but took me also with him when he went to Pequin, whereby I had op∣portunity to learn the disposition of the People, and the Policy of the Countrey, neither did I by my attendance on him, gain only the knowledge of these things, but the possibility likewise of being restored to my native Soi, and to those dear Pled∣ges which I value above the World, even my Wife and Children; For by often frequenting Pequin, I at length heard of some Fathers of the Society of Iesus, who were become famous for their extraor∣dinary favour with the King, to whom they had presented some European as Cocks, Watches, Dials, and the like, which by them were counted exquisite Curiosities. To these by the Mandarins leave I repaired, and was welcomed by them, they much wondring to see a ay Spaniard there, whither they had with so much difficulty obtained leave to arrive. There did I relate to Father Pantoja and others of the Society the forementi adventures by whose directions I put them in writing, and sent this story of my Fortunes to Macao, from
thence to be conveyed to Spain as a forerunner of my return; And the Mandarin being indulgent to me, I came often to the Fathers with whom I con∣sulted about many secrets, and with them also laid the Foundation of my return, the blessed our whereof I do with patience expect, that by  my Countrey with the knowledge of these hid∣den mysteries, I may at last reap the Glory of my Fortunate Misfortunes. A Iourney of Several English Merchants from Oratava in Teneriff, one of the Canary Islands on the Coast of Africa, to the Top of the Pike in that Island, with the Ob∣servations they made there. MEntion being made in the preceding Story of the Pike of Teneriff, it may be some di∣version to insert the following little Journey per∣formed by divers Englishmen a few years since to the Top, who published the following account thereof. The Pike of Teneriff is thought not to have its equal in the World for height, its top being so much above the Clouds, that in clear weather it may be seen sixty Dutch Leagues at Sea. It cannot be ascended but in Iuly and August, lying all the other months covered with Snow, though upon this and the near adjacent Islands none is to be seen; It requires three days travel to come to the Top; The Merchants and other
worthy Persons who undertook this Journey pro∣ceed thus. Having farn our selves with a Guide, Servants, and Horses to carry  Wine and Provi∣sion, we set forth from Oratava a Port Town in the Island of Tenriff, stuate on the north ▪ two mile distant from the main Sea, and travell'd from twelve at night till eight in the morning, by which time we got to the Top o the first Moun∣tain toward the Pico de ;  der a very large and conspicuous P we took  Break∣fast, Din'd, and refresht o selves till two in the Afternoon. Then we pa through many sandy ways, over many losy ountains, but nak and bare, and not covered with P     nights passage was; this expsed  to excessive heat, till we arrived to the fo of the Pico, where we found divers huge oues which   have fallen from some upper part; A  the eve∣ning we began to nd up the Vi,  were sarce advanced a mile, when  being no more pas∣sable for Horses,  left them with our ▪ In the ascent of one mile, some of our Company grew very faint and sick, disordered by xes, Vomitings and Aguish Distempers, our  hair standing up like Bristles, and calling for  of our Wine carried in small ls on an Horse, we found it so wonderfully cold, tht we could not drink it till we had made a  to warm it ot∣withstanding the Air as very cm and moder▪ but when the Sun was set, it bega to blow with such violence, and grew so cold, that taking up our lodging among the hollow ks, we were necessitated to keep Fires in the mou of them all night. About four in the morning w began to  again, and being come another ile up, one of our Company fail'd and was abl to proceed no further; Here began the black Roc; th  of us pursued our Journey ti e came to the S
Loaf, where we began to travel again in a white Sand, being fitted with Shoes, whose single Soles are made a Finger broader than the upper Lea∣thers, to encounter this difficult passage; Having ascended as far as the black Rocks, which lay all flt like a plain Floor, we climbed within a mile of the very Top of the Pico, and at last we attai∣ned the Summit, where we found no such smoak as appeared a little below, but a continual perspira∣tion of a hot and sulphurous vapour that made our Faces extreamly sore; all this way we found no considerable alteration of the Air, and very little Wind, but on the Top it was so impetuous that we had much ado to stand against it whilst we drank K Charles II. Health, and fired each of us a Gun. Here also we took our Dinner, but found that our strong Waters had lost their vertue, and were almost insipid, while our Wine was more Brisk and Spirituous than before; The Top on which we stood being not above a yard broad is the Brink of a Pit called the Caldera which we judged to be a Musket-shot over, and near sourscore yards deep in form of a Cone, hollow within like a Kettle, and covered over with small loose stones mixed with Sulphur and Sand, from amng which issued divers Spiracles of Smoak and Heat, which being stirred with any thing puffs and makes a noise, and is so offensive, that we were even suffocated with the sudden rising of Vapors upon removing one of these Stones, which were so hot as not easily to be hand∣led; We descended not above four or five yards into the Caldera or Caldron because of the Slippe∣inefs under foot, and the difficulty; but some have adventured to the bottom; Other matters obser∣able we discovered none, besides a clear sort of Sulphur which lay like Salt upon the Stones; From this renowned Pico we could see the Grand Cana∣ies fourteen Leagues distant, Palma eighteen, and  seven, which interval of Sea seemed not
much wider than the Thames about London, We discerned also the Herro being distant about twenty Leagues, and so to the utmost limits of the Sea much farther; As soon as the Sun appeared the shadow of the Pico seem'd to cover not only the whole Island and the Grand Canaries but the Sea to the very Horizon, where the Top of the Sugar-Loaf or Pico visibly appeared to turn up, and cast its shade into the Air it self, at which we were much surprized; But the Sun was not far ascended when the Clouds began to rise so fast, as intercepted our Prospect both of the Sea and the whole Island, ex∣cept the Tops only of the Subjcent Mountains which seemed to pierce them through; whether these Clouds do ever srmount the Pico we cannot say, but to such as are far below they seem sometimes to hang above it, or rather wrap themselves about it, constantly when the West Winds blow; this they cal the Cap, and is an infallle prognostick of ensuing Storms; One of our Company who made this Journey again two years after, arriving at the Top of the Pico bee day, and creeping under a great stone to Shrowd himself from the cold Air, after a little space found himself all wet, and per∣ceived it to come from a perpetual trickling of the Water from the Rocks above him; Many excel∣lent and exuberant Springs we sound issuing▪ from the Tops of most of the other mountains, gushing out in great Spouts almost as far as the huge Pine∣tree we mentioned beore; Having stay'd a while at the Top, we al desnded the Sndy way till we came to the foot of the Sugar-Loaf, which be∣ing seep even almost to a perpendicular we soon passed, and here we met with a Cave about ten yards deep and fiften broad, being in shape like an Oven or Cupola▪ having a hole at the Top near eight yards over; This we descended by a Rope that our Servants held fast on the Top, while with
the other end being fastned about our middles we swung our selves, till being over a Bank of Snow, we slid down, lighting upon it; we were forced to swing thus in the descent, because in the midst of the bottom of this Cave opposite to the overtre at the Top is a round pit of Water like a Well, the surface whereof is about a yard lower, but as wide as the Mouth at Top, and about six Fathom deep; we supposed this Water was not a Spring, bt dis∣solved Snow blown in, or Water trickling through the Rocks; about the sides of the Grott for some height there is Ice and Isicles hanging down to the Snow. But being quickly weary of this excessive cold place, and drawn up again, we continued our descent from the Mountains by the same Passage we went up the day before, and so about five in the Evening arrived at Oratava from whence we set forth; our faces were so red and sore that to cool them we were forced to wash and bath them in Whites of Eggs; The whole height of the Pics in perpendicular is vulgarly esteemed to be two miles and an . No Trees, Herbs nor Shrubs did we find in all the Passage, but Pines, and among the whiter  a kind of Broom being a bushy Plant; It is the opinion of some ingenious Persons who have lived twenty years upon the place, that the whole Island being a Soil mightily impregnated with Brimstone, did in former times take fire, and blow up all or near all at the same time; and that many Mountains of hge Stones calcined and burnt, which appear all over this Island, especially in the South-West part o it, were cast up and raised out of the Bowels of the Earth at the time of that general ; and that the greatest quan∣ty of this Sulphur lying about the center of the land raised up the Pico to that height at which it now is seen; which appears by the scitu∣tion of those Rocks that lye three or four Mile▪
round the bottom of the Pico, and in such order one above another almost to the Sugar loaf as it is called, as if the whole ground sweling and rising up together by the ascesion of the Brimstone, the Torrents and Rivers of it did with a sudden erup∣tion Roul and Tumble them down from the rest of the Rocks; especially to the South-West where from the Top of the Pico to the Sea coast lye huge heaps of these burnt Rocks one under another, and there still remain the very tracks of  ne Ri∣vers as they ran over this Quarter of the Island which hath so wasted the ground▪ ond recove∣ry, that nothing can be made to grow there but Broom.
A View of the Bay of Souldania near the Cape of Good Hope, on the Coast of Africa; where the Ships of the Honourable East-India-Company used formerly to re∣fresh in their Indian Voyages. With an Account of the Natives, Birds, and Beasts of that Countrey, now called Cafaria, and Monomopata; or the Countrey of the Hot∣tentots, With some Accidents happening there. BEfore we arrive at the East-Indies, I cannot but divert once more to the Bay of Souldania lying in thirty four degrees and an half of South Latitude, about twelve Leagues short of the Cape of Good Hope, in a sweet Climate full of fragrant Herbs, which the Soil produceth of it self, plea∣sing to the sense; Where the Honourable East-India Companies ships used formerly to refresh, and arriving there very weak and feeble with that Sea disease the Scurvey, have often found very great re∣lief; and it is observable if any be not too much overgone with this malady, as soon as they come to enjoy the fresh Air on any shore with fresh Wa∣ter and fresh Victuals, they presently recover; but if the Survey has overmuch prevaild, they instant∣ly dye as soon as they set their foot on Shore. Here is a most delicious Brook of sweet Water arising out of a mighty Hill hard by, called for its form, The Table, neer which is another Hill exceeding high like a Pyramid, and called by Europeans the
Sugar-loaf; here are great store of Cattel as little Cows, called by the barbarous Inhabitants Boos, and Sheep which they name Baas, who bear a short, course, hairy Wooll, and seem to have been never shorn. These Boos and Baas as they term them, were formerly bought in great plenty for small quantities of Kettle-brass, and Iron Hoops taken off our empty Cask, which for this long Voyage to the Indies are hoop't with Iron. These Salvages had the Cattel we bought of them at very great Command, for with a call they would presently run to them, and when they had sold a Bullock to us for a little piece of Brass, if we did not presently knock him down, they would by the same call make the poor creature break from us, and run to them again, and then there was no getting them, but by giving more Brass; thus they sell the same beast two or three times, by the covetousness and deceit of this brutish People. Of all Metals they love Bass best, it may be for the rankness of the smell wearing great Rings thereof about their Arms, so that if you lay before them a piece of Gold worth 40s. and a peice of Brass worth Two pence, they will leave the Gold and take the Brass; On this shoar are excellent small Roots for Sallads, and store of large fat Mullets. This remote part of Africa is mountainous, and overun with Lyons, Tygers, Wolves, and many other Beasts of Prey, which in the night discover themselves by their noise and roaring; To the Teeth and Jaws of which cruel creatures the Na∣tives here expose their old people, when they grow decrept and troublesome; laying them forth in some open place in the night, when the Wild Beasts, and Lyons roar after their Prey. One poor Old wretch was thus exposed when some English Ships were there, and by his pitiful cries discove∣red by our Court of Guard ashoar, by whom he was delivered from Death; And they asking Cooree one
of the Natives why they did so, he replied, It was their Custom when People had lived so long that they knew not what to do with them, thus to be rid of them; They saw in this Bay of Souldania many Whales, party-coloured Fowls and Ostriches; The Soil about the Bay seems good, but the Sun shines not upon a People more Barbarous than those which possess it, being rather Beasts in the Skins of men, than Men in the Skins of Beasts, for by their Ig∣rance, Habit, Language, Diet and other things they appear absolutely brutish. For generally all People as well Heathen as Christian acknowledge the great God of Heaven and Earth, but they, as Cooree told us, own no God at all; Their speech seems rather an inarticu∣late noise than a Language, like the clucking of Hens, or Gabling of Turkies, sounding like the word Hott-en-tot, from whence they are so called. As they walk about, they make a strange confused noise; if there be two, three, ten, twenty or more in company, they walk in rank one after another in small paths they have made by going thus, as Cows do when they come home to the pail; or as Wild Geese flying in Ranks, make a noise, so these walking together gabble from the first to the last as if all spake and none answered; Their Habits are Sheep Skins undrest thonged together, which cover their bodies to the middle, with a little flap tyed before them, being naked downward; when it is cold they put the Woolley, and when hot the Fleshy side next their Body. Their Ornaments are Bullocks or Sheeps guts full of Excrements about their Necks; and when we bought their Cattel they would take, their Skins, Guts, and Garbage, which plentifully furnish't them with that stinking attire; When they are hungry they sit down and shaking some of that filthy pudding out of the Guts bow down their Mouths to their hands almost as low as their knees, and like hungry Dogs gnaw and eat the Raw Guts.
The Women are adorned, habited and dieted in the same manner, only they wear more about their lower parts than the men. They carry their sucking Infants under their Skins upon their backs, and their Breasts hanging down like agpipes, they put them up with their hands that they may suck them over their Shoulders; Both Sexes make cove∣rings for their heads of Cow-dung mingled with a little stinking Grease, and besmear their Faces there∣with; which makes their Company insufferable if they get the Wind of you; They eat rotten moul∣dy Biskets fit for nothing but the dunghill, yea they will devour what a hungry Dog in England would refuse. A couple of them, had found on the Shoar a large peice of a dead Fish the Sea had cast up, which stunk intolerably; they made a little fire with dry Cow-dung warmd and then eat it, with as much appetite as an hungry man would feed upon a Savoury Dish; which makes one believe they have but three senses, wanting both smelling and tasting. These Brutes devote themselves to Idleness, for they neither spin nor dig; They are streight and well limb'd, though not very Tall, their Faces are ill favoured, most of their Noses flat, have little or no beard; the hair on their heads short, black and curled; their Skins very tawny; swift they are of fot, and wil throw Darts and shoot Arrows very dangerously. In 1615 an East-India Ship returning thence, and arriving at this Harbor; when she was ready to Sail, having two of these Salvages aboard, the Commander resolv'd to bring them home with him, imagining that having learnt English here, they might discover something of their Countrey to us; These poor wretches thus carried away against their wills were much disturbed; One of them meerly out of enness, though he was very well used, died soon after they put to Sea; The other who called himself Cooree, was brought to London, and kept Six
Months in Sir Thomas Smiths House Governor of the East India-Company, where he had good Diet, good Coths, good Lodging▪ and all other fitting Accommodations; One would have thought that this wretch might have conceived his present, com∣pared with his former Condition a Heaven upon Earth. But all these things gave him no content, though to his good Entertainment he had gallantry added, having a Chain of Bright rass, with Breast, Back and Headpeice of the same, and a Buckler all of Brass his beloved Metal, yet all this did not now please him, for never was any man more weary of ill Usage, than he was of Courtesies; being ever more desirous of returning to his Countrey; For he would lve on the ground and cry out very often in broken English, Cooree home go, Souldania go, home go. Not long after he was return'd home, and had no sooner set footing on his own shore but he threw away his Cloths, Linnen, with all his other covering, and instantly got his Sheep-Skins upon his back, guts about his Neck, and a perfum'd Cap of Cow-dung on his Head, and so returned like a Dog to his vomit, and a Swine to his wallowing in the Mire, without a Metaphor; After this Fellow was retur∣ned, the Natives were shy of us, for though they would come about us in great Companies when we arrived, yet three or four days before they thought we would depart not one was to be seen, fearing we would have dealt with them as with Cooree. But it had been well he had never seen England, for as he discovered nothing to us, so when he came home he told his Countreymen, that Brass was but a base and cheap Commodity in England; and we had never after such a free exchange of our Brass and Iron for their Cattel. I asked Cooree, who was their God; He lifting up his hands answered in bad English, England God, Great God; Souldania no God.
In 1614. Ten Englishmen being condemned to dye at the Old Bayly London, had their Execution respited by the intreaty of the East-India Mer∣chants▪ upon condition they should be all banished to this place, that they might discover somewhat advantagious to Trade. One named Duffeld was that year redeemed from this sad banishment by Sir Thomas Row Ambassador to the Great Mgol, and afterward brought back to England by that Noble Gentleman, and being intrusted by him, this in∣grateful Villain stole some of his Plate and ran away; Another was likewise on the Voyage, but what became of him I know not. So that only eight were here left with Ammunition and Victual, and a small Boat to carry them to a little uninhabi∣ted Island, in the Mouth of the Bay of Souldania, as a place of retreat and safety from the Natives on the Main; It is called Penguin Island, probably so named by some Welshman, Penguin signifying a white head, there being many large Fowls with great Cole-Black Bodies and White Heads called Penguins. The Chief Person left here was one Cross, who call'd himself Captain; He was one of the Yeomen of the Guard to King Iames I. but having twice or thrice had his hand in the bloud of men slain in Duels, and being now condemn'd with the rest, upon great suit made he was banished hither with them; yet Divine Justice seem'd to persue him, for being a stout man and abusing the Natives, he was surprized by them who shot his Body so full of Ar∣rows that he seemed all one wound; The other seven recovered their Boat, and got off the Conti∣nent toward the Island without much damage; but the Water running high, as soon as they were ashore their Boat was split in peices; so they were for't to continue in that miserable place where neither Tree grew, nor any thing else to sustain their lives, having no fresh Water but what the Showers left in
the holes of the Rocks; And so abounded with venemous Serpents that it was dangerous treading in the long Grass; They hd bu a small quantity of dry Bisket, their Bes were hungry, and their sleep unsafe, so that nothing could render their condition more unhappy; and yet these seven vile Wretes all lived o be made examples of Divine Justice. For after the had continued in this de∣solate place five or six months, and were all grown almost mad with Famine, an English Ship came in∣to that Road bound for England; Four of these seven growing impatient of an hours stay there, immediately after the Ship came in made a float of the Ruins of their spit Boat, and with ravell'd Boat Ropes fastning as well as they could, all to∣gether, they got thereon, poizing it to the best advantage, hoping by the enefit of their Oars, and strength of the de which ran quick toward the Ship to recover her; But it being toward Evening when they made this attemp, and not being dis∣covered by the Ship which rid a good way up in the Bay, before they could come near her, the Tyde return'd and carried them back into the Sea, where they all were cast away. The day following the Ship sent a Boat to the Island, which took thse three yet surviving into her, who gave this account of thir Fellows mis∣fortune; But notwithstanding all the sufferings of these Micreants, yet they behaved themselves so lewdly in the Ship, that they were often put in the Bilbows; At length the Ship arriving in the Downs she had not been at Anchor three hours, when these Villains got ashore, where they had not been above three hours but they committed a Robbery, and a few hours after were all apprehended for the Fact, and by the Lord Chief Justices special Warrant Executed as incorrigible Wretes upon their for∣mer Sentence, near Sandwich in Kent, where they committed the Crime. In 1615. Three other con∣demned
Persons were carried to be left in this place; but hearing of the ill success of their Predecessors, when the Ships were ready to depart and leave them on shore, they all fell on their Knees with tears in their Eyes before our Captain Ioseph, besee∣ching him they might be nged rather than left there; It was a sad sight to behold three men in such a condition as to esteem Hanging a mercy; Our Commander say'd he had no Commission to Execute them, but to leave them there, and so he must do, and probably hd done, but our fifth Ship the Swan staying a day or two after, took these poor men in. Though the English East-India Company declined raising a Fort, or settling a Colony at the Cape of Good Hope, yet the Dutch have Built a Strong Fort there by the Sea side, against the Harbour, where the Governour lives. And about 300 pāces distant on the West of the Fort is a small Dutch Town of about 60 Houses low, but well Built with Stone Walls, from a Quarry close by. The Countrey, for near an 100 Mile up, is petty well setled with Farms, and yeilds good Crops of Wheat. Barley, Pease, &c. to the industrio Dutch Families, and also to a considerable mber of  Protestants; some of whom, Bless God that their King hath ba∣nished them their Native Countrey; since they are now setled in a Lnd of eace, plenty, and se∣curity. There are great quantities of Grapes, of which the French make excellent white wine, of a pale yellow colour but sweet, pleasant and strong. There are also Cows, Goats, Hogs, Horses, and Sheep very large and fat. Ducks, Geese, Hens and Turkeys are very numerous; So are Ostriches, who lay their Eggs in the Snd, one of which will very well suffice 2 men. They have plenty of seve∣ral sorts of Fish; one not so big as a Herring of which they pickle great Quantities yearly, and send them to Europe.
On the backside of the Town towards the moun∣tains the Dutch East-India Company have a large House, and a Garden, 3 mile long incompassed with a high Stone Wall; full of divers sorts of Herbs, Flowers, Roots, and Fruits; with spacious Gravel Walks and Arbours; watered with a Brook which descends from the Mountains and being cut into many Channells is conveyed into all parts of the Garden. This water is afterward in Pipes carried into the Sea so far, that a Longboat may come un∣der the Pipe, which is raised to some height, and by turning a Cock will fill all the Casks with fresh water▪ with the greatest conveniency; and is the best Watering Place in the World. The Hedges that make the Walks of this Garden are very thick, and 9 or 10 foot high; They are kept heat and even by continual pruning; They keep each sort of Fruit by themselves, as Apples, Pears, Pomogranats, and abundance of Quinces, all which thrive well. The Roots and Garden Herbs have also their dis∣tinct places, hedged in apart, which makes the whole extream pleasant and beautiful. Great num∣bers of Negro Slaves are continually weeding and working therein. All Strangers are allowed liber∣ty to walk there, but not to tast of the fruit with∣out leave. The Dutch that live in the Town get well by the Ships that touch there. When the Men come ashoar to refresh themselves they must give 3s or a Dollar a day for their entertainment, tho' Bread and Flesh is as cheap here as in England. Besides, they buy good penniworths of several Commodities from Seamen, which they sell again to the Countrey Farmers at a dear rate; none of which live within 20 Miles of the Harbour. The high Tax that the Company lays upon drink makes it very dear. There are but 3 Houses in the Town that sell strong liquor; One, where they sell only Wine, and you must buy no where else but by stealth, the Vintner pay∣ing
a considerable price to the Company; So that you may sometimes buy as much privately for 8d. as you give 18d. for there; but if the Person that sold it be known, he is ruined. There is another House for Beer, and Mum; and a Third sells only Brandy and Tobacco. The Natives or Hottentots do likewise fell Beef and Mutton privately at an under rate, which else must be bought only of the Companies Butchers; all others being prohibited buying of the Hottentots. And so we leave the Cape of Good Hope. The Factories of the Honourable East-India-Company in Persia. With an Account of the Religion, Government, and other no∣table Remarks, in that Kingdom. Also the Life and Doctrines of Mahomet the Grand Impostor. HAving clear'd our way let us now Sail m r∣rily toward the Indies, doubting first the Cape of Good Hope, and then passing by Madagascar called also St. Lawrence, one of the greatest Island in the World, stored with all manner of Provisions, but inhabited by a barbarous and Heathenish People yet stout, warlike and very numerous. Over a∣gainst which on the Continent of Africa are Z fala and Mazambique, where the Portugals have got footing, and may be strongly supposed to be the places whither Solomon sent his Navy of Ships built at Eziongebar, which stood on the Banks of the Red Sea in Arabia the Happy, the Countrey of that fa∣mous Queen of the South, who hearing of his Wisdom and Renown, took her Journey thence to visit the Court of King Solomon; From that place
Solomon sent his Ships for Gold, and Silver, and Ivory, coasting all along the African shore, the Art of Navigation being then unknown; And the Mar∣riers steering without Chart or Compass, were necessitated to keep the Neighbouring Lands always in sight, as doubtless they did, these places being stored with those rich Commodities above other parts of Africa. The Portugals, Dutch and English, discovered these Countries of India in the last Age; and have since setled themselves by Forts and Castles there; The Portugals first brak the Ice, who in 1494. sai∣ling from Lisbon under Vasco de Gama, doubled the Cape of Good Hope, and succeeded so well as to Con∣quer and Fortify several places in many Countreys of Asia and the Islands thereof; In 1595. the Dutch set out a Fleet from Amsterdam to India, wherein they used such extraordinary dexterity with their Cannon Law and Steel Arguments, that they made themselves Masters of 28 Forts and Cast∣les, and of forty four or forty five Factories in a short time. In 1600. the English began their Discoveries un∣der Sir Iames Lancaster with four Ships, whose en∣deavours were so blest, and by the good Government of the Honourable East-India-Company prospered so well, that they setled their Residence and Fact∣ories in twenty four several plaees of note, as at Ormus and Iasques in the entrance of the Persian Gulf under the Persian Monarch; At Cambaja, Surat, Agria and other places in the Great Mogols Coun∣trey; At Maslapatan, Armagon, Petipoly, Pattana, Siam, and other places on the Coast of Cormandel, and the Continent of Asia; At Achin, Ticko, Iambo, Prianian, on the Isle of Sumatra; At Bantam, Ia∣catra and Iaparra on the Island of Iava; At Soco∣dana and Beniermasa, on the Island of Borneo; At Macassar in the Isle of Celebs; At Poleroon on the Isle of Banda; At Firando in Iapan; And lastly at
Amhonio, Hitto, and other of the Molucco's, which they quietly enjoyed, till our covetous Neighbours deprived us of some of them, and others were de∣serted on several accounts. The honourable the East-India Company was in∣corporated in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and hath been confirmed, with divers Immunities ad∣ded to their Charter by all the succeeding Kings, so that now they have as ample Priviledges as any Company whatsoever; and are found beneficial to the Nation by the great Trade they drive in Im∣porting so many rich Commodities from India, Per∣sia, and Arabia; They export from hence Peices of Eight, Dollars, Broad cloaths, Perpetuana's, Gun∣powder, Elephants Teeth, Lead, Amber, Looking-Glasses, Sizars, Knives, Beads, Bracelets, Feathers, Coral, Quicksilver, Vermillion, Allom, Brimstone and many others; For which they Import all sorts of Spices, Cotton-yarn, Callicoes, Pintadoes, Tamerinds, Sanders, Spikenard, Bezoar, Alloes, Mirrhe, Rubarb, Opium, Frankincense, Cassia, Borax, Calamus, Mira∣bolans, Green Ginger, Sugars, Sugar Candy, Cam∣phire, Sandal Wood, Benjamin, Musk, Civet, Amber∣greece, Rice, Indico, Silks both Raw and Wrought; Salt Petre, Precious Stones of several sorts, Pearl, Mother of Pearl, Gold, Silver, Christal, Cornelian Rings, Agats, Lacqure, Furrs, and Skins of Wild Beasts, Porcelane Copper, China Roots, Tea, Sanguis Draconis, China Wares of divers sorts, with several other Commodities and Drugs.
Of Ispahan, or Spawhawn, and Gambroon in the Kingdom of Persia. DEsigning to give some Account of Persia, wherein these Factories are setled, I shall begin with Ispahan. This is the Capital City of all Persia, and the Residence of the King, being in the Center of his Empire, scituate in a great Plain, which extends 3 ways, 15 or 20 Leagues, healthy and pleasant, beautified with stately Pallaces, deli∣cious Gardens, magnificent Piazza's, and wealthy Bazars or Market-places; only the Streets are nar∣row and dark, to prevent the burning Rays of the Sun; and annoyed with Loads of Ordure and Filth. In the Summer dusty, and in the Winter dirty. In this City the East-India Company have a Facto∣ry, as also at Bussora. Gambroon, or Gomrow, is a City of great Com∣merce, guarded with 2 Castles, wherein are plant∣ed 80 Brass Cannon. The Air is so hot and un∣wholsome, that no Stranger can live there above 3 or 4 Months in the Year, but retire to the Moun∣tains 2 or 3 days Journey off. All Nations that Traf∣fick upon the Indian Seas, and the Land Caravans, carry Commodities thither, and bring from thence Velvets, Raw Silk, and other Persian Goods. This Ci∣ty of Gombroon, where the English have a Factory, is risen upon the Ruins of Ormus, as you will hear, which besng once the Staple of the Eastern World, and where we once had a famous Factory, I shall give some account of it. Ormus is an Island in the Persian Gulf, about 20 Miles in compass, Stony, and full of Rocks, and in a manner barren of all Necessaries, except Salt,
wherewith the very Rocks are covered, and of Salt Stone many Houses built; So destitute of all things fitting for the Life of Man, that they had their Victuals, yea, the Water they drank from the adjoining Countreys; the Summer so hot, that the People rest in Caves covered with Wood, and stand or sit in Water up to the Chin, and have Loopholes in their Houses to let in the Wind; yet in regard of the Scituation, it was one of the richest Empories in the World, the Wealth of Persia and India being brought thither, and convey∣ed hence by Water to the River Euphrates▪ and so by Boats, or on Camels Backs to Aleppo, Alexandria, Tripoly, and thence dispersed into all the Countries of the Mediterranean Sea; The only City was of the same name with the Island, founded 700 years ago by Mahomet Danku, descended from the Kings of Saba in Arabia Felix; who, with many Fami∣lies of the Sabeans. passed over the Streights into Carmenia, and the Isles adjoining, and liking the Scituation of this Island, built this City in it, which he called Ormus, or Armuzium, the name of the Promontory wherein it lies; It was seated at one end of the Isle, about 2 Miles in compass, well built, with a fair Market place, some Churches, and a well fortified Castle, furnished for a Siege; by reason of its wealth and resort of Merchants, grown to such esteem that it gave occasion to this distich▪ Si terrarum Orbis quaequa patet Annulus esset, Illius Ormusium Gemma decusque foret, Were all the World a Ring, this Isle alone Might of that Ring be thought to be the Stone. It was first under its own King, whose Domini∣on extended also to some part of the Continent on either side, and over all the rest of the Islands within the Gulf; His revenue was of no great yearly
due, till the coming of the Portugals thither, by whom it was discovered under the Conduct of Al∣bukerque, in 1509. Who having fortified some part of it for their own defence, made it the Sta∣ple of Trade for Indian Merchandize, which so inricht the same, that the Revenues of those Kings (though Vassals and Tributaries to the Portugals) a∣mounted to an Hundred and Forty Thousand Se∣riffs yearly; In this flourishing state it stood till 1622. when Abbas the Sultan of Persia having re∣ceived some affronts from the Portuguess, or desi∣rous to remove the Trade from Ormus to some Port of his own, gave Order to Emangoli Chan the Duke of Shiras to besiege it with Fifteen Thousand Men; Who despairing of prevailing by his Land Forces only, furnished himself with Ships and Cannon of some English Merchants, to whom he promised ma∣ny things which he never performed; For being once Master of the City, he utterly destroyed it, removing the Canon to Lar, the Wealth thereof to his own Treasury at Shiras, and the Materials of the Houses to Gombroon; the Portuguess and Chri∣stian Natives, passing over to Muskat in Arabia Felix; Since which though the English Captains that ventured in it were disappointed of the Re∣wards they expected, yet so much Honour hath been given by the King of Persia to the English Nation, that the Agent, who resides at Gombroon, takes Cu∣stom of all Strangers who Traffick thither.
The Religion of the Persians. With the Life and Doctrines of Mahomet the Grand Im∣postor. THE Persians are generally Mahometans of the Sophian Sect, and the difference and ha∣tred is so great between them and the Turks, though both own Mahomet for their Law-giver, that they are absolutely irreconcileable. Now because this horrible Impostor has infatuated so great a part of the World with his blasphemous Dotages, I will here give a breif Account of his Life, and also of his Doctrine, as it is comprehended in his Holy Book▪ as they call it, or the Alcoran Mahomet, the Son of Abdalla, an Idolatrous Pa∣gan, was born after his Fathers death, at Iahrip, an obscure Village of Arabia Foelix; but now be∣come a City called Medina Talnahi, or the Town of the Prophet, to which a multitude of Mahome∣tans go in Pilgrimage every Year. His Mother, named Hemina, was a perverse Jewess both by Birth and Religion, who dying when he was but 2 Years old, left him to the cae of his Uncle Abdal Mualib. He, unable to give him any other Edu∣cation than the Irreligion and Ignorance of his Countrey afforded him, sold him at 10 Years of Age to the Ishmaelites, after the barbarous Cu∣stoms of the Arabians; who exposing him to Sale in the open Market, he was bought by one Abdal  wealthy Merchant; By him he was imployed as a Slave in all Servile Offices, till observing his great Wit, and fitness for better Services, he at last used him as his Factor, sending him with his Camels and Loads of Merchandize into Syria, Persia, Egypt, and
other places, wherein he behaved himself with such dexterity that he much increased his Masters Wealth, and his own Estimation; Of Person he is said to be low, and withal Scald-headed, but other∣wise comely, and of good aspect; Much troubled with the Falling sickness, which Infirmity he made good use of afterward, affirming those Fits were no∣thing but heavenly Raptures in which he conversed with the Angel Gabriel; He is likewise said to have been well Skill'd in Magick, by which he taught a white Pigeon to feed at his Ear, which he declared was the Holy Ghost, by whom he was instructed in the Law he was to publish; but this not till after∣wards; By Sorcerie, comeliness of Person, and the great knowledge he had in his Masters business, he gained so far on the Affections of his Mistriss, that upon the death of Abdal she made him her Hus∣band. Possessed of all his Masters Wealth, he affected Ease, and being till then of no Religion, or at least a Pagan, he began to hearken to Sergius a Nesto∣rian Monk, who flying out of Syria for fear of pu∣nishment (the Heresies of Nestorius being new∣ly both revived and censured) came into Arabia, where he found Entertainment in the House of Mahomet; By his perswasions, who found him a fit Instrument for the Devil to work on, he began to entertain thoughts of hammering out a new Re∣ligion which might unite all Parties in some com∣mon Principles, and bring the Christians, Iews and Gentiles, into which the World was then divided, under one Profession; Resolv'd on this, he retir'd to a Cave not far from Mecca, as if he there at∣tended only Contemplation; Sergius in the mean time Trumpeting in the Ears of the People both his Parts and Piety; who being thus prepared to behold the Pageant, out comes the principal Actor, with some parts of his Alcoron, pleasing enough to sensual Minds, which he professed to have received
from the Angel Gabriel; And finding that this edi∣fied to his Expectation, he next proclaimed Liber∣ty▪ to all Slaves and Servants, as a thing command∣ed him by God, by whom the natural Liberty of Mankind was most dearly tendred; which drew to him such a Rabble of unruly People, that without Fear or Opposition he dispersed his Doctrines, re∣ducing them at last to a Book, or Method. The Book of this Religion he calleth the Alcoran, or Col∣lestion of Precepts, the Original whereof they feign is written on a Table kept in Heaven, and the Co∣py brought to Mahomet by the Angel Gabriel. A Book so highly reverenced by the Mahometans, that they write upon the Cover of it, Let none touch this but he that is clean. The Body of it, as it now standeth, was Composed by Osman, the fourth Ca∣liph or Governour; who seeing the Saracens daily inclining to divers Heresies by reason of some false Copies of Mahomet's Law, and that the Empire, by the same means, was likely to fall into civil dis∣sention, by the help of his Wife, who was Maho∣met's Daughter, he got a sight of all Mahomet's Pa∣pers, which he reduced into four Volumes, and divided it into 124 Chapters; commanding expresly, upon pain of death, that that Book, and that on∣ly should be received as Canonical through his Do∣minions; The whole body of it being only a Gloss and Exposition on Eight of the Commandments. First, Every one ought to believe, that God is a great God, and one only God, and Mahomet is his Prophet. They hold Abraham to be the Friend of God, Moses the Messenger of God, and Christ the Breath of God, whom they deny to be conceived of the Holy Ghost, affirming, that the Virgin Mary grew with Child of him by smelling to a Rose, and was delivered of him at her Breasts; They deny the Mistery of the Trinity, but punish such as speak against Christ, whose Religion was not, say they, taken away, but amended by Mahomet, and
whoever in his Pilgrimage to Mecca doth not visit the Sepulchre of Christ either going or coming is reputed not to have merited or bettered himself by his Journey. 2. Every Man must Marry to increase the Disciples of Mahomet. Four Wives he allows to every Man, and as many Concubines as he will, between whom the Husband makes no difference either in Affecti∣on or Apparel, but that the first Wife only enjoys his Sabbath days Benevolence; The Women are not admitted while alive into their Churches, nor after death into Paradise; And whereas in most o∣ther Countries Fathers give some Portions with their Daughters, the Mahometans give Money for their Wives, which being once paid, the Contract is Registred in the Cadies Book, and this is all their formality of Marriage. 3. Every one must give of his Wealth to the Poor. Hence some buy Slaves and set them free, others buy Birds and let them fly; They use commonly to release Prisoners and Bond-slaves; To build Caves or Lodgings in the ways for relief of Passengers; Repair Bridges and mend High-ways; But their most ordinary Alms consists in Sacrifices of Sheep and Oxen, which, when the Solemnity is per∣form'd, they distribute amongst the Poor, to whom also on the first Day of every Year, they are bound to give the Tyth or Tenth part of their Profits the Year past, so that there are scarce any Beggars a∣mong them. 4. Every one must make his Prayers five times a Day. When they pray they turn their Bodies to∣wards Mecca, but their Faces sometimes one way, and sometimes another, believing that Mahomet shall come behind them while at their Devotions. The first time is an hour before Sun rising, the se∣cond at Noon-day, the third at three a Clock Af∣ternoon▪ the fourth at Sun-setting, the fifth and last before they go to sleep; At all these times the
Cryers bawl in the Steeples (for the Turks and Sa∣racens have no Bells) for the People to come to Church, and such as cannot, must, when they hear the Voice of the Cryers, fall down in the place where they are, do their Devotions, and kiss the Ground thrice. 4. Every one must keep a Lent one month in a Year. This Lent is called Ramazan, in which they suppose the Alcoran was given to Mahomet by the Angel Gabriel. This Fast is only in the day time, their Law allowing them to be as Frolick in the Night as they please; so they abstain from Wine and Swines Flesh, which is prohibited in their Law at all times, but never so strictly abstained from as in Lent. 6. Be obedient to thy Parents. Which Law is most neglected of any in all the Alcoran, never any Children being generally so nnnatural as the Turkish. 7. Thou shalt not Kill. This they keep inviolate amongst themselves, but the poor Christians are sure to feel their Fury. And as if by this Law the actual shedding of blood only were prohibited, they have invented Punishments for their Offenders worse than death. As first the Strappado which is hanging them by the Arms drawn backward, and then drawn up on high, and letting down again with a violent swing which unjointeth all their Back and Arms. Secondly, They sometimes hoise up their Heels, and with a great Cudgel give them three or four hundred blows on the soles of their Feet. Thirdly, It is ordinary to draw them na∣ked up to the top of a Gibbet or Tower full of Hooks, and cutting the Ropes to let them fall down again, and by the way they are caught by some of the Hooks, where they commonly hang till they die for Hunger.
8. Do unto others as thou wouldst be done unto thy self. To those that keep these Laws he promiseth Pa∣radise, a place of all Delights, adorn'd with flowry Fields, water'd with Chrystalline Rivers, beautified with Trees of Gold, under whose cool shade they shall spend their time with amorous Virgins, whose Mansions shall not be far distant. The Men shall never exceed the Age of Thirty, nor the Wo∣men of Fifteen, and those to have their Virgini∣ties renew'd as oft as lost. Friday he ordained to be their Sabbath, partly to distinguish his Follow∣ers from the Iews and Christians, who solemnize the 2 days ensuing; but principally because he was on that day proclaimed King, or Emperor, and so accordingly created; Wine and Swines Flesh are the principal things forbidden by the Alcoran, from the last whereof they all unanimously refrain, but on the first they are so besotted, that when they come at it they seldom go home again un∣led; insomuch that all the Wines in Constantinople have been thrown about the Streets, and death made the Penalty for any who shall presume to bring any more into the City; Mahomet taught them, that every one should be saved by his own Religion, except those who revolt from the Alcoran to another Law; But so that under the Notion of Religion h means only such as worship the One and only God, excluding thereby the Old Gentile Idolaters from the hope of Salvation. He likewise taught that at the end of the World all Men who professed any such Religion should go into Paradise, the Iews under the Banner of Moses, the Christians under the Banner of Christ, and the Saracens under the Banner of Mahomet. They compel no Man therefore to abjure the Faith wherein he was born, but secretly commecd and approve such as are zea∣lous in their own Religion, yet counting it a great Honour to have daily new Proselites, they allure
them with hopes of Freedom and Preferment, which with many are too prevailing Motives to cause them to renounce their Christian Profession; Hence some infer, it is better for a Man that desires his Liberty, to live in these Countries than in some others, since he is never molested if he meddle not with their Law, their Women, or their Slaves. Their Opinions of the end of the World are ve∣ry rediculous, as that at the Winding of an Horn, not all Flesh only, but the Angels themselves shall dye; That the Earth with an Earthquake shall be kneaded together like a lump of Dough; That a second blast of the same Horn shall, after forty days, restore all again; That Cain shall be the Captain or Ring-leader of the Damned, who shall have the Faces of Dogs and Swine; That they shall pass over the Bridge of Justice laden with their sins in Satchels; That the greater Sinners shall fall into Hell, the lesser into Purgatory only, with a thousand the like Fopperies, needless to re∣late, which may be found in the Alcoran; athing so full of Tautologies, Incoherences, and gross Ab∣surdities of so impure and carnal a mixture, that whoever is taken with it must abandon his natu∣ral Reason, if Force, Ambition, or want of Chri∣stian Education, do not induce him to imbrace it. For if we seriously consider the Causes of the de∣plorable increase and long continuance of this Re∣ligion, we shall find them to be chiefly these. 1. The greatness of the Victories obtained by the Saracens, who easily compell'd the conquered Na∣tions to receive their Law. 2. The great Zeal and Diligence of the Arabians themselves, who being a numerous People, and much given to Merchandize, have possessed themselves of all the Sea-coasts of Africk from the Streights of Babel Mandel almost to the Cape of Good Hope; of all the Islands in those Seas, and of many Factories and good Towns on the Coast of India, in all which they have setled their
Religion also, as a thing inseparable from their Na∣tion. 3. A peremptory Restraint of all Disputa∣tions in any point of Religion whatsoever. 4. The suppressing Philosophy, and the study of Humane Sciences, the light whereof might easily detect the grosness of their Superstitions. 5. The sensual li∣berty allowed of having variety of Wives, and as many Concubines as they are able to keep. 6. The promise of the like sensual pleasures in the other World, with which a Mind not illuminated with the Spirit of God, is generally more affected, than with the speculative hope of a future Happiness. 7. The forbidding Printing and Printed Books, whereby People might perceive the truth and pu∣rity of the Christian Faith, with the Falshood and Impurity of the Law of Mohomet. Yet had not these last been sufficient to induce the belief of such Absurdities if the first had not opened and prepared the way. For force of Arms was really the most prevailing Argumeny which Mahomet himself confirmed, and his Successors since have propogated and dis∣persed his Doctrine; Who being strengthned by that Rascal Rabble which resorted to him, he as∣saults Medina, pretending a quarrel to the Iews, who had there a Synagogue, He was repulsed at first with loss of Men and a Wound in his Face, by which some of his foreteeth were beaten out, and was there likely to have ended his New Religion, but recovered by his Soldiers for further Mischief. At the next onset he prevail'd, the Battel being fought near a place called Bedez, scituate betwixt Mecca and Medina, frequently mentioned in the Alcoran. After which Fight he took the City, con∣verting the Synagogue to a Temple for their own Impieties; the News hereof so startled the Nobili∣ty of Mecca, that they armed all their Powers a∣gainst him, and succeeded so well in the beginning of the War, that they drove him forcibly from
their Territories; which yet not long after he again subdued, and made his chief Residence at Mecca. From that his flight the Saracens compute their Years, (as w from Christ's Nativity) which they call the Hegira, and begins about the Year of our Lord 17. so termed from an Arabick word that signifies, The Persecution raised about Religion. It happened about this time that the Saracens revolt∣ing from Heraclius the Eastern Emperor joined themselves to Mahomet, being exasperated by Iu∣lian the Apostate, whom they served in his Wars against the Persians, for telling them upon de∣manding their Pay▪ That he had greater store of Steel than Gold. But they then wanted a Head to resort to. Now serving Heraclius in the same War, they were used by his Officers in the same ill manner, for asking their Pay, the Treasurer of the Army made them this churlish Answer, There is scarce Money enough to pay the Roman and Grecian Soldiers, and why must these Dogs be so importunate for their Wages? Provoked herewith, and hearing the Fame of Mahomet, they joined him, who strengthned by them, and the coming in of the rest of their Countrey-men, he soon brought all Arabia under his subjection; and having defeated the Emperors Forces sent against him, he conquered some parts of Syria and Egypt, and returning to Mecca there died Frantick and distempered, in the 70 Year of his Age, and 23 of his Impostures, of which he spent thirteen at Medina, and the rest at Mecca. His dead Body being kept four days in expectation of a Resurrection, which he promised to perform at the end of three, grown full of stench and putre∣faction, was carried to Medina, and there interred. His Successors, out of wicked and worldly Policy, keeping up the reputation of that Religion after his decease, which they scorned and derided in his life, calling themselves Caliphs, or Vicar Generals to him their Prophet.
Thus dyed Mahomet the Persion and Turkish Pro∣phet, Haraclius being Emperor of Constantinople Sadinion Bishop of Rome, Clotaire K. of France, Vi∣teric K. of Spain, and Ecbald K. of England, about 630 Years after our Savious Birth. He was, as himself confessed, altogether Unlearned, and tho▪ naturally Subtile and Witty, yet often puzzled to invent Miracles to confirm the deluded Arabians in their vain Belief. For he contidually Preaching to them, that God sent him to confirm his Law by force of Arms, the People earnestly demanded some Sign of his Mission; so he was constrained to amuse them with the story of a Voyage which he made to Heaven, to this effect. That the Angel Gabriel with 70 pair of Wings came to him by Night, as he was in Bed with his Wife, saying, That God had sent for him. He going down with this Angel, found at his Door an Hete∣rogeneous Beast, called Elborach, half Ass, half Mule, but much swifter than either; for it would go as far at one step as the most quick-sighted Man could see. This Beast (or Mahumetan) would not let Mahomet mount him, unless he would first pro∣mise to pray for him, which the charitable Prophet did; and was then, in the twinkling of an Eye, brought by him to Ierusalem; where the Angel Gabriel tyed the Beast with his Girdle to a Rock; and taking Mahomet on his shoulders, carried him to Heaven Gate▪ They knockt, and the Porter understanding Mahomet to be there, instantly open∣ed, and bid him welcome. In the first Heavens he saw Angels of divers and monstrous shapes; some composed of Fire and Snow; others of Fire alone, every one of a different Form. Among the rest, one with the Head of a Cock, whose Feet trod upon one Heaven, and his Head toucht ano∣ther; each Heaven being so far distant, that it was a Journey of 500 Years to pass from one to the o∣ther; and when this Cock Crows, which it seems
is his language, all the Cocks upon the Earth Crow likewise. This Angel conveyed him to another, he to a third, and so from one to another, till at length he came to the Heaven where God himself was; who courteously received him, asking how his people did and whether they received his Law. God then familiarly lay'd his hand upon his Shoul∣der, which was so cold that it peirced the marrow of his back bone. He was soon dismist, God tel∣ling him only how often in a day his Disciples should make their Prayers; which were so many that in his return to the fourth Heaven, Moses met him, advising him to go back, and intreat God that fewer prayers might serve his turn, since his Followers were not able to say so many; so at length the number was reduced to five. He then went back to his Elborach, which in a moment brought him home to his house in Mecca, where he went to bed again to his wife; she not once dreaming her husband would leave Heaven for her company, or imagining he had been there; all this he perfor∣med in the tenth part of a night. The Turks do still believe this Romantick story for truth, but the Arabians at that time, requiring him to ascend again to Heaven in their view, he unwilling to take so long a Journey only replyed, Praised be God that I am a Man, and an Apostle. On the Seal which he used was ingraven, Mahomet the Messenger of God. He had several slights to deceive his Followers, performed either by Art or Witchcraft. Once an Ox brought him a Chap∣ter of the Alcoran upon his Horns in a full Assembly. Another time being at dinner with one that was his pretended freind, who yet designed to poyson him, and a Shoulder of Mutton being brought to Table, he pretended the meat spoke, and forbid him to eat of it, tho' none but himself heard it among a great Company; however he permitted one of his dearest freinds to eat, and dye, poysoned
therewith. Other vain Miracles he published, as that the Trees bowed to him, (tho' only shaken by a sudden gust of wind) the Wolves howled, and the Asses brayed to him, all in their several Langua∣ges desiring his Prayers, which he being a Prophet understanding, as religiously performed. He often declared that God gave him Commission to fulfil his own desires in all things, and in his Alcoran writes, that he thus spake to him, O Prophet! it is permitted thee to lye with all Women that are given thee, or which thou dost purchase; thy Aunts, or kindred, and all other good Women that freely desire thy Company, and this is lawful for thee alone. Thus he pretended Religion for fulfilling his inordinate Lusts, in which it is say'd he equalled his strength to that of 40 men. The day of his Death was no less prodigious then the course of his life, a Comet resembling a Sword, appearing at high noon, pointing from South to North, and continued in the sight of all for thirty days together, which the Wise men of that Age concluded to be a Presage of the fatal riseing and grandeur of the Arabian Empire. Haly was astonisht at his distemper, and the high frenzy wherein he dyed, esteeming it no divine quality in a Prophet and a Redeemer (as he called himself) of so many People. He derided his presumption, yet carefully concealed the manner of his death, being willing to promote his Law, that so he might inherite his power and Empire. For near 800 Years after his decease the Arabi∣ans, Saracens, Turks and Persians continued in the Mahometan Faith without any divisions. But in 1482. there happened this memorable alteration of Religion and State in Persia. Mahomet the Lawgiver of the Saracens by his last Will bequeathed to his Cosen Hali (who was also the Husband of his Daughter Fatime) all his Estate with the Title of Caliph; but Abubezar, Haumar
and Osman, 3 powerful men of Arabia, and great Assistants to Mahomet, succeeded one another in that dignity. After their Death Hali hoped to obtain the Government which had so long been de∣tained from him. But Mavias, a valiant Souldier advanced himself, and to remove all future preten∣sions, he slew Hali, with his Son Ossan, and eleven of Ossans Sons; but Musa Ceresin the twelsth Son made his escape; From this Musa one Guine Sophie derived his Pedigree in 1360. And considering that there had been no Caliphs for many Years past, he began to contrive the reviving and estab∣lishing that Honourable Dignity in his own Fami∣ly. He dying in the midst of his Projects, left the prosecution of them to his Son Aider Sophie, who being a man of great industry, sanctity, and power; and strenghtned with the love, and real affection of his people, Ussan Cassanes Prince of the Armeni∣ans gave him his Daughter to Wife. But Iacup the Son and successor of Ussan after his fathers Death, envying the glory of Aider Sophie, and fea∣ring his power, caused him to be slain, and deli∣vered his 2 Sons which he had by Iacups Sister, named Ishmael and Solyman, to Amazor one of his Captains to secure them in prison. Amazor being of a generous temper, afforded them not only li∣berty, but gave them ingenuous education. Afterward Ismael the eldest, a Gentleman of pro∣mising hopes, undertook to revenge the Death of his Father, which he likewise performed▪ staying Iacup and his Son Elvan. After this Victory Ismael being crowned King, or Sophie, or Shaa of Persia, he altered the form of Religion there, declaring Hali and himself to be the only true Successors of Mahomet the Prophet, and condemning Abubezer, Haumar and Osman, with the Turks their Abettors and Followers, as Usurpers, Rebels and Schisma∣ticks; and ordered all Books to be Burnt, and all Monuments to be defaced that mentioned any
thing in honour of those 3 Caliphs. This difference in Religion hath created so mortal an aversion in them to each other, that the Turks hold it more meritorious to kill one Persian than 70 Christians. The City of Medina where Mahomet lyes buried is in Arabia, 3 days Journey from the Red Sea. His Tomb is inclosed within an Iron Grate, and covered with green Velvet, which is every year made New and sent by the Grand Seignior; the old one being by the Preists cut into small peices and sold at great Rates, as Reliques to the Pilgrims. In the Temple where this Tomb is placed, there are say'd to be 3000 Lamps of Gold and Silver, wherein is Balsome, and other rich odours, ointments and oils, continually kept burning. They would im∣pose it for a Miracle that this Tomb should hang in the Air by means of Loadstones, but besides that there is no such thing, for it stands on the Floor, were it true, there were no such wonder in it. For Democrates the Atheniah by order of Ptolomy K. of Egypt, undertook to make the Statue of Arsinoe all of Iron, and to hang in the Air. And in the Temple of Serapis in Alexandria, there was an Iron Sun that hung in the Air by the force of a Load∣stone, being a rare peice of Workmanship. The Turks make a Pilgrimage to this Tomb, and all true Musselmen are obliged once in their Lives, at least, to go thither. To this purpose I will relate the following Story, from a late Travel∣ler into Turkey. A Mahumitan having, in obedi∣ence to a Religious Vow, undertaken this Journey, and being of the Opinion of the rest of his fellow Travellers (or the Caravan, as it is called) that they should meet with Water at a certain Well or Cistern upon the Road, had made use of the best part of their Provision, as the rest had done, upon the Ceremony of the Abdest or Ablution, which is their washing themseives before their Devotious, for they wash the best part of the Head and Neck;
their Arms up to the Elbows, their Feet, the end of the Priapus, and the Posterior Orifice. And for this Reason they never erect any Mosquee, or Church, without planting Fountains round about it, for they firmly believe, that their Prayers put up without these Washings, and in a state of Im∣purity, would rather draw down the Wrath of Heaven upon them than procure the blessings of God. And indeed these severe Commands of wash∣ing so often, are very troublesome, as well to those that live in dry places far from Water, as others in the Northern cold Climates; so that several Turks could wish heartily▪ that they might be permitted to change their Religion, which ties them to so many inconvenient slabberings. When these Pilgrims came to the Cistern where they hoped to be supplyed, they found the Water dryed up by the heat of the Sun. They were ex∣treamly concerned thereat, finding themselves in the midst of the Sands, Deserts, and heats of Ara∣bia. They knew not what course to take in that extremity of drowth which tormented them with Impatience; nor had many of them Money to buy Water of those who had been more provident, and indeed had not much to spare. Our poor Mahu∣metan found himself reduced to endure a scorching drouth, and ready to be buried alive in the stifling Clouds of Sand which the Wind raises in that mise∣rable Road. inspired him with more Execrations against Mahomet and his accursed Errors, tren the most zealous of the Eastern Christians could have invented for him. He said, He did not wish the Devil had taken Mahomet, for he did not believe him so unjust as to let that Impostor escape his Claws, who being the only cause of the death of so many Millions of people as perished in going to his Tomb, justly deserved as many deaths in Hell as he had caused poor Creatures to suffer tor∣ments in this infamous cruel Pilgrimage; But he
wisht with all his heart, That Heaven had Thun∣derstruck from above, and that Hell had then swallowed in Flames the first contrive s of that accursed Alcoran, and the unfortunate Propogators of the Law of Mahomet, or that he himself had been born a Christian. Some Christians in the Company were much sur∣prized to hear a Mahometan thus blaspheme his own Religion, but they were told, That this Person was of a Sect who were neither Turks nor Christians, but a sort of Mahumetan Heretics. When a Mahumetan has purified himself, he goes into the Church with his Eyes fixt upon the Ground, and barefoot. To which end the Eastern People have Shoes, or Slippers, of Goats Skins dyed Yel∣low, Red, Violet, or Black, but none of them may wear them Green in the Turkish Dominions, this being the sacred colour which Mahomet so much af∣fected; only their Emirs wear a Green Bonnet, which they put on with great reverence on their Heads; and is a mark of their being allied to their Great Prophet and Legislator. But this is not regarded in Persia. as we may find by the following Story. Sha Abbas, the renowned K. of Persia, was the most accomplished Prince in all the East. It happened that a Turkish Ambassa∣dor one time at his Court, being much concerned to see Christians as well as Mahometans wearing green Shoes and Trowses over all Persia, He▪ in the name of his Master▪ required the King to for∣bid his Subjects any longer to prophane a Colour which all true Mahometans ought to have a greater Veneration for. That the King knew very well, that it being the Prophets peculiar Colour, it did not become the happy observers of his Law, to cover any part of the Body therewith, but only the Head; or at least the more decent part of the Body above the Wast; it being an insupportable Comtempt to trample under Foot a Colour so sacred, as his Sub∣jects
not only did, but also the Giaurs, or Christians, the Iews, and all other Infidels, and impure Na∣tions in his Dominions. Sha Abbas perceived the folly of this Discourse, and so resolved to make a Jest of it. He made shew of consenting to the Grand Seigniors desire, and promised the Ambassa∣dor that he would take Order his Subjects should no longer prophane the Prophets Colour, hoping the Grand Seignior would issue out the same Orders o∣ver his Dominions. For, said the King, your Master beholds every day a greater prophanation of that Colour, and yet lets it go unpunished. My Subjects only wear the Colour dead upon their Shoes and Trowses, but all the Beasts in Turkey dung without any Penalty upon the Grass, which is the living Colour that Mahomet lov d. Therefore if he will prohibit all the Beasts in his Empire from defiling the green Grass with their Excrements, which they do continually, then will I take care that my Subjects shall wear green no longer.The Ambassador finding the Empe∣ror did but deride his Folly, withdrew silently from the Presence, and left the Persians to their own liberty. This washing and cleanliness of the Mahometans has occasion'd the building of several necessary Houses (which they call The Houses of Shame) for publick conveniency, which are kept very sweet, having a Cock to turn and take away all ill smells; so that you shall never see in all the East, the Walls of their Churches stain'd with Urine or Excrements, as in our parts of the World; Nor is any one prejudiced in his Health by retaining his rtural Evacuations for want of convemency. I never heard so many Ivectives (saith a French Gentleman) as were uttered upon this account by a Turk at Constantinople, who had travelled to Marseilles, and thence to Paris. He be∣ing in France, used, according to the custom of his
Countrey, to eat great plenty of Fruits, Salads, and, among the rest, Cucumbers half ripe, Stalks and all; a Diet enough to break a French Horses Belly, yet much admired by the Eastern People, whose Dgestion tames it▪ well enough. This Mahometan said, He found it hotter in Paris, during the heat of Summer, than at Damasco in Syria, tho' it lye 15 Degrees more to the South; so, to cool himself, he resolv'd to eat a great Dish of Milk and Cucumbers, and so to walk about half a Mile off where he had business. Returning back, the motion of his Body. the coldness of the Cu∣cumbers, and the heat of the season, caused great commotion in the Bowels of the Musselman, and would by no means be appeased. He searched about for an House of Easement, yet could discover no∣thing but open shops and throngs of people; He grew disconsolate, not knowing what course to take. He cursed all the streets of Paris, and wisht himself at Damascus, where is a great place walled in, containing 40 of these Necessary Houses. At last, in the height of his trouble, he thus lamented his Misfortunes, Were I now at Grand Cario, my pains would find redress by only bowing the head, and crying according to custom to Passengers, Pray Sir look another way; but here in Paris, where there are more people than stones in the street, what shall a Man do in my forlorn conditi∣on?  But these sad Complaints little availed, for before he could get to his Lodgings, the Cucum∣bers forc'd their way open at his Back-door, and made the disconsolate Syrian know that Milk and Cucumbers was not so sweet as Milk and Honey, yet he must endure the smell as well as he made se∣veral others, as he passed in that stinking pickle to his Lodgings to cleanse himself. This cleanliness of the Mahometans makes them call Christians Fil∣thy, Unclean, and Nasty Infidels, or Unbelievers.
And thus much for this Grand Impastor Mahomet, whom Heaven permitted to be a scourge for pu∣nishing the Christians; who, at that time, had forsaken the Doctrines of the Gospel, and had im∣braced damnable Herisies. Let this excite us to bless the goodness of God, who enjoy the glorious Light of his Truth; and to admire Gods Judg∣ments, who suffers so many large Kingdoms and Countries to be infatuated, deluded, and inslaved; and so many Millions of people to be abused by that false Prophet, and to believe his Lyes, Non∣sense and Blasphemy. He belies God in making him the Author of his Alcoran, boasting that his Name is written upon the Throne of God, and that he is the greatest of the Prophets, having more knowledge than all the Men and Angels in the World. He belies Jesus Christ, in saying he could not be Gods Son, because God was never Married, as if there were no other way of Generation but what is Carnal. He saith the Virgin Mary conceiv∣ed Christ by the smell of a Rose, and that she was the sister of Moses, confounding her with Miriam, though there were so many hundred Years between. He belieth the Holy Ghost in affirming, that he in∣spired Mahomet to write his Alcoran. He belieth the Scriptures, in saying they are corrupted by Christians; and that they Worship many Gods, and give God a Companion, by affirming the Divi∣nity of Christ Jesus. He belieth the Iews, in say∣ing they make Eleazer a God. He belieth the Pa∣triarchs, in saying that Noah, Abraham, Isaac and Iacob believed his Alcoran, tho' they lived so many thousand Years before he or his Alcoran had a be∣ing. He belies the Apostles, in making them his Scholars, tho' they lived near 600 Years before he saw the Light. By all which it appears, that the Compiler of this Alcoran, was not the God of Truth but the Father of Lies. Especially if we consider the ridiculous stories found therein. He tells us,
That he once divided the Noon, one half whereof fell into his Lap, the other half on the Ground, which he after joined again together; and, per∣haps, in memory of this lying Miracle the Turks use yet the Half Moon for their Arms, and on their Churches and Steeples. He tells of a great Army of Men and Angels raised by Solomon, which being much disturbed in their March by an Army of Flies, Solnmon rebked and routed them. He tells, that in Noah's Ark a Hog was generated of the E∣lephants Dung, and a Rat of the Hogs Dung, which knawing a hole in the Ark, Noah was so affrighted, that he toucht the Forehead of the Lyon, out of whose Brains leaped a Cat that chased away the Rat. To conclude, in the Paradise which he pro∣mises his Followers, he allows Appartments there∣in to several Beasts, such as Abraham's Ram; Mo∣ses's Heifer▪ Solomon's Ant; the Queen of Sheba's Parrot; Esdras his Ass; Ionas his Whale; the 7 Sleepers Dog; and Mahomet's Camel. Which suf∣ficiently demonstrates the Author to be Ignorant, Impudent and Foolish.
The Government of the Kingdom of Persia. THe Government of Persia is purely Tyranical, for the King has the sole Power of life and death over all his Subjects, independent from his Council, and without any Trials at Law. He can put to what death he pleases the chief Lords of the Kingdom, no man daring to dispute the reason; Nor is any Soveraign in the World more absolute than he. The King deceasing and leaving Male Issu behind him, the Eldest ascends the Throne, while his Brothers are kept in the Haram or Castle, and their Eyes put out, and if the King have the least jealously, they are instantly put to death, yea the Children of the Kings Brothers and Sisters like∣wise; Formerly they were not so rigorous, but only mov'd a red hot Iron to and fro before their Eyes; But Sha Sefi perceiving that the poor unhappy Princes had some sight left, ordered their Eyes to be digged out of their Heads; Sha Sefi's cruelty spared not his Eldest Son Sha Abhas the Heir of his Throne, ordering one of the Eunuchs to move an Iron before his Eyes, no man knowing a reason; but the Eunuch compassionating the young Prince, moved an Iron yet not red hot before his Eyes, and teaching him to counterfeit blindness preserv'd his sight till his Father lay upon his Death-bed, when being very Penitent for having put out the Eyes of his Eldest Son to whom the Crown did of right belong, the Eunuch seeing the King so sadly afflict∣ed, and ready to give up the Ghost, assured him that he would restore the Prince to his sight, and brought him with perfect Eyes to his Bed-side, the sight of whom prolonged the Kings life till next
day, and gave him time to command all the Gaan∣dees of the Court to obey Sha Abbas his Eldest Son, as his lawful Successor. There are several of these blind Princes at Ispa∣han, and I knew one particularly, saith my Author, a person of excellent natural parts; As blind as he is, he is a great lover of Curiosities, and has built him a House at Ispahan worth seeing. He is over∣joyed when he meets with any Rarities out of Eu∣rope, feeling them in his hands, and causing his Eunuchs to tell him the meaning of every thing: He is a great admirer of Clock-work and Watches, and to know what a Clock it is, has little points set up in the Dial-plate, and a half hand which points to the hour; with certain Figures which he makes of soft Wax, and sets in order upon a Ta∣ble, he will cast up an Account exactly. Several other good quilities are eminent in him, and it is a miserable spectacle that a Man should be redu∣ced to that deplorable condition only because he is of the Blood-Royal of Persia, This State is distin∣guished like most of those in Europe into three bo∣dies, First that of the Sword, which answers to the Nobility, and consists of the Kings houshold, the Kans or Governors, and all the Souldiery. The second that of the Gown, comprehending all those that belong to the Law and Courts of Justice. The third is composed of Merchants, Handicrafts men, and Labourers. Among other cunning Contrivances of Sha Abbas to know the true state of his Affairs without trust∣ing too much to his Ministers, he oft went disgui∣sed into the City like an ordinary man under pre∣tence of buying and selling, to discover whether false Weights and Measures were used; so going one Evening, in the habit of a Countrey-man, to a Ba∣kers to buy a Man of Bread, and thence to a Cooks to buy a Man of Roast-meat, (a Man is six pound sixteen ounces to the pound) having bought his
bargains he return'd to the Court, where causing them to be weighed exactly, he found the Bread to want 57 Drams, and the Meat 43. Upon which he fell into a rage against the Officers and the Go∣vernor of the City (whose Belly he had caused to have been ript up but for the intercession of his Lords) reproaching them for their negligence of the publick good, and of the injustice of false Weights, how sadly the cheat fell upon poor Men, who having great Families, and thinking to give them 800 Drams of Bread, by that fraud deprived them of 143, then turning to the Lords, he de∣manded what Justice ought to be done to those people; none daring to open their Mouths while he was in that passion; he commanded a great O∣ven to be made in the Market-place; and a Spit big and long enough to roast a Man, and the Oven to be heated all Night, and a Fire to be kindled near the Oven. Next Morning the King caused the Cook and Baker to be apprehended, and led quite though the City, with two Men going before proclaiming to the people; We are going to put the Baker into a red hot Oven in the Piazza, to be baked alive for selling bread by false Weights; and the Cook is to be roasted alive for having sold Meat by false Weights.Thus these two Men ser∣ved for an Example not only to Ispahan but to all the Kingdom, every one dreading the severe Ju∣stice of Sha Abbas. Sha Abbas his successor acted almost such another piece of severity, for having made one Iafer Kan, a great Lord, who kept a magnificent Train, Go∣vernouor of Asterabat; At first he was very mild, but at last began to exact such sums from the peo∣ple, that his violences reached the Kings Ear; who being one day drinking with his Lords, and seeing the Master of his Musick in the Room, who was a merry Droll, and had always some pleasant news to tell the King, he was pleased to ask him what the
people said of Iafer-Kan, adding that he had made him Governour of divers Provinces, and had ne∣ver heard any complaint of him, but now he was accused of Tyranizing over the people. The Mu∣sick Master being a meer Flatterer, and knowing that Iafer-Kan was extreamly beloved of the King, confidently averd'd, that the Governor was falsly accused, and that he had always known him apter to give than receive. There was present an Agis lately returned from a Pilgrimage to Mecca; him the King also asked what was his opinion of Ia∣fer-Kan and his Government, being a person long acquainted with him; The Agis thinking to please the King, returned the same answer. The King who was well informed of the Kans behaviour, turning to the Lords present, What think you, said he, of these two Flatterers, that absolutely know the contrary to what they speak.And commanded two of the Musick Masters Teeth to be pluckt out and driven into the head of the Agis, which had like to have cost him his life, being a very old Man; As for Iafer-Kan he was disgraced for a time, but his excellent Accomplishments soon restored him again to favour. Murther is severely punished, nor will Money save the Criminal; The Murtherer is carried be∣fore the Magistrate; he delivers him to the Parents or Kindred of the person slain, who carry him to Execution, and without compassion torture him to death. The Governor of Shiras had a Favou∣rite, who falling in love with a young Persian Gentleman endeavoured to abuse his Body; One day meeting upon the Road, and lying under the same Tent, the Favourite about Mid-night came to his Bed-side, and after many sollicitations would have forced him; But being violently resisted, for madness to find himself disappointed, and liable to be discovered, he stab'd the young Gentleman to the heart, and fled to the Mountains. The Mur∣ther
being divulged, the Mother, Widdow, and Sister of the young Man repaired to the Governor for Justice, who willing to save his Favourite, of∣fered them Money, which they with scorn refusing, and threatning to complain to the King; he was constrained to pursue hi Favourite; at length he took and sent him to Ispahan, saying, he would not judge of the Affair, but refer it to the King. The Mther, Widdow, and Sister followed the Murtherer to Ispahan and demanded Justice with that eagerness, that though the King had an incli∣nation to save the Favourite for the Governours sake, he was forced to abandon him, and bid them pay themselves with his blood. Immediately he was carried to execution, where the Widdow first stab'd him to the heart with a Dagger, then the Mother took he turn, and after that the Sister, and then holding a Cup to receive his bood, drank every one a Cup full to quench the thirst of their Revenge. Extraordinary care is taken for securing the High-ways, and Guards set at convenient distances; As the Caravan was one day setting out from Tau∣ris to Ispahan, a poor Fellow took an occasion to rob a Cloak-bag, and fled cross the Fields not knowing the way, the Merchant missing his Goods complain'd to the Governor, who sent order to the Guards to search strictly for him. The Thief be∣ing constrained to forsake his Cloak-bag, and cross the Fields for Water, was seized and carried to the Governor, and soon convicted, for Thieves find no mercy in Persia; Only they are variously put to death, being sometimes tyed to a Camels Tayl by the Feet, and their Bellies ript open. Sometimes buried alive all but their Heads, and starved to death, in which torment they will oft desire Pas∣sengers to cut off their Heads, though it be a kind∣ness forbidden by the Law. But the most cruel punishment is, when they set the Thief on Horse∣back
with his extended Arms fastned to a long stiek behind, then larding him with lighted Can∣dles, they burn him to the very Bowels; We met two in this Misery who desired us to hasten their deaths, which we durst not do, only we gave them a Pipe of Tobacco according to their desire. One day there was a great hubbub in a Bawdy-house where the Woman had prostituted her own Daugh∣ter, the King being informed of it, commanded the Mother to be thrown head long from a Tower, and the Daughter to be torn in pieces by his Dogs, which he keeps on purpose for such Chastize∣ments. The Forts and Factories of the Honourable East-India Company upon the Coasts of Malabar, Cormandel, in the Bay of Ben∣gal and in the Empire of the Great Mo∣gul, in India. With an account of the Religion, Government, Trade, Marria∣ges, Funerals, strange Customs of the Na∣tives. Intermixt with divers Accidents and notable Remarks. HAving given some Account of Persia, let us next advance unto the Indies, wherein the Honourable the East-India Company have these Forts and Factories.
Fort St. George Fort St David Comineer Cudaloor. Porto Novo. Madapollam. Metchlapatam. Pettipolee. Carwar. Calliutt. Surat. Bombay Island. Balla-sore. Hugli. Chuttanutti. Daca. Rhajamal. All on the Coasts of Coromandell, Malabar, and the Bay of Bengale. Fort St. George. THis Fort is on the Coast of Coromandell where the Honourable East-India Company have a Factory. On November 3. 1684. About 9 at night there happened a violent Storm in this Place, which continued till 2 next morning. It untiled all the Houses in the Town, with such a ratling noise, as if some thousands of Granadoes had been thrown on them, and lay'd all their Gardens (of which they have many pleasant ones) as level as the Smoothest Bowling Green. Trees of an ancient and prodigious Growth, some perhaps as ancient as Noahs Flood, were violently torn up by the Roots, and their Aged Trunks riven in peices, the noise of the crashing and fall of their Boughs and Branches seeming almost to equal that of a Tempest. But what was most surprizing was, that a strong Iron Bar which belonged to a Window, was with the extream force of the Wind, snapped into 3 peices. Had this Hurricane continued two or 3 hours longer, it would certainly have level'd both the Fort and Town; tho' strongly built, and well fortified. Fort St. David, Commineer, Cuda∣loor, Porto Noro, Madapollam. Pettipole and Carwar, are all on the Coast of Coromandell, In all which
the East-India Company have Factories. It is re∣ported that St. Thomas the Apostle wrought many iracles in these Countries; and foretold the coming of white People thither. And that the Children of those that murdered him, have still one Leg bigger than another. Callicut. This is a Town on the Coast of Malabar, where the Portugals first setled themselves, and the English Merchants have a Factory. The Prince of Ca∣licut calls himself Zamorin, a Prince of great power; and not more black of colour than treacherous in disposition. Many deformed Pagods are here wor∣shipped, but with this Ordinary Evasion, that they adore not Idols, but the Deumo's they represent. The Dutch General who was Cook of the Ship Crowned the present Prince with those hands which had oftner managed a Ladle than a Sword. Ma∣labar is a Low Countrey, with a delightful Coast, and inhabited by people that practice Pyracy. There is a certain wind which blowing there in Winter, so disturbs the neighbouring Sea, that it rowls the Sands to the mouths of the adjoining Ports, so that then the Water is not deep enough for the least Bark to enter. But in the Summer another contrary wind, drives back the same Sand, and makes the Port again Navigable. The great number of Rivers in this Countrey render Horses useless, especially for War. A Countrey for the most part of the Year green, and abounding with Cattle, Corn, Cotton, Pepper, Ginger, Cassia, Cardamum, Rice, Myrabolans Ananas Papas, Me∣lons, Dates, Coco's, and other Fruit.
Surat. THis Town is about 40 days Journey from Agra, and drives as great a Trade as any City in Asia; though the access to it be very dangerous. For the River Tappy or Tindy rising out of the De∣can mountains, glides through Brampore, and in Meanders runs by the walls of Surat; and after 15 Miles wrigling about, discharges it self into the Ocean, but is so shallow at the mouth that it will hardly bear a Bark of 70 or 80 Tuns; So that Ships are forced to unlade at Swally. Which is re∣markable for the mischance of Capt. Woodcock, who at the taking of Ormus▪ seized a Frigate as Prize laden with near a Million of Ryals; but coming into Swally Road the Ship sunk, and therewith all his Golden hopes vanished. The English East-India Company, and also the Dutch, have their Presidents and Factories in this City, making it the greatest Mart in the Indies. Surat is secured with a Castle of Stone, well stored with Cannon. The Houses are generally Built of Sun dried Bricks, which are very large, and lasting; They have flat roofs, rai∣led round about to prevent falling. They have beautiful Gardens of Pomegranats, Melons, Figs, and Lemons, interlaced with Rivulets and Springs. The English House for the reception and Staple of their Goods is very Magnificent. Baroche not far distant drives a great Trade in Cottons. The English have a very Noble House here. Not far from which Tavernier writes, that of a dry stick, a Mountebank in less then half an Hour, made a Tree grow Five foot high, which did bear Leaves and Flowers.
The History of Savagi the Indian Rebel. THe Plundeiing of Surat by the famous Rebel Savagi, and other his Actions deserve here to be inserted. This Raja, or Lord Savagi was Born at Bashaim, the Son of a Captain of the King of Visiapour, and being of a turbulent Spirit, rebelled in his Fathers lite time; and putting him∣self in the head of several Banditti, and other de∣bauched young men, he retired into the mountains of Visiapour, and defended himself against all those that came to attack him. The King of Visiapour thinking that his Father kept Intelligence with him, caused him to be seized and imprisoned where he dyed. Savagi was hereat so incensed against the King that he breathed nothing but revenge. And in a short time plundered Visiapour his principal City, and with the booty he took there, made himself so powerful, as to be able to seize several Towns, as Rajapour, Sasigar, Crapaten, Daboul, and to form a little State thereabout. The King dying about that time, and the Queens endeavours to re∣duce him being unsuccessful, she accepted the Peace he proposed to her, That he should enjoy the Territories which he had subdued, and be tributa∣ry to the Young King, and pay him half his Re∣venue. However Savagi could not rest, but being a stout man, vigilant, bold, and undertaking in the highest degree, he resolved to seize upon Cha-best∣kan Governour of Decan, and Uncle to the Great Mogol, with all his Treasures even in the midst of his Armys, in the Town of Aurenge Abad. And had effected his design if he had not been discove∣red
too soon. For one night being accompanied with a crew of resolute Fellows he got into the very Apartment of Cha-hest kan; where the Go∣vernours Son, forward in his Fathers defence was killed, and he himself grieivously wounded; Sava∣gi in the mean time getting away without damage. Yet this disappointment did not daunt him in the least, insomuch that he undertook another bold and dangerous enterprize in the Year 1664. which succeded better. He drew about 3000 chosen men out of his Army, with whom he took the Feild without noise; spreading a Report by the way, that it was a Nobleman going to Court. When he was neer Surat that Famous and Rich Port of the Indies, instead of Marching farther▪ as he made the Grand Provost of that Countrey whom he met, believe, he fell into that Town, cutting off the Arms and Legs of the Inhabitants to make them discover their Treasures, searching, digging, and loading away, or burning what he could not carry away with him. He continued plundring 40 days; So that none but the Dutch and English saved themselves, because they were in a good posture of defence; especially the English, who having time to send for assistance from some of their Ships which lay near the Town, behaved themselves gal∣lantly and saved besides their own, several other Houses near them. A certain Jew of Constantinople, who had brought Rubies of a great value, to sell them to the Great Mogol, was thrice brought upon his knees, and had the knife held up to cut his Throat, yet still persisted in his denial that he had any, and so sa∣ed his Life and Jewels. At that time the K. of Ethiopia had sent an Am∣bassador to the Great Mogol with several Presents, and among others, Twelve curious Horses, and a little Mule, the Skin of which was speckled like that of a Tyger; So finely, so variously, and so
orderly streaked that no Silkin Stuff of India was more beautiful. There were also 2 Elephants Teeth, so prodigiously large that a very strong man could scarce lift one of them from the ground. Lastly, the Horn of an Oxe full of Civet, half a foot broad on the top. They were no sooner arri∣ved at Surat, but Savagi came and ransackt and burnt the Town, and there House among the rest, So that they could save nothing but their Letters. He emptied the Oxes horn, and carried away the Horses and the Elephants Teeth. He durst not at∣tack the Castle; but Marcht off without oppositi∣on, loaden with Gold, Silver, Jewels, Silk Stuffs, fine Linnen and other Rich Merchandize, to the Value of Three hundred thousand pound English money. The Great Mogol sent an Army under Iesseingue to besiege the principal Fortress of Savagi, who be∣ing expert in matters of treaty, he so ordered the business, that Savagi surrendred before it came to extremity; and afterward joined with the Mogol against Visapour; The Mogol declaring him a Raja, taking him under his protection, and making his Son a considerable Commander. Some time after the Mogol intending War against Persia, writ such obliging Letters to Savagi, extolling his Genero∣sity, Ability and Conduct, that he at length resol∣ved, upon the Faith of Iesseingue to come to the Mogol at Dehli. A Kinswoman to the Mogol being then at Court, having a great influence upon him, perswaded him to secure Savagi, who had murde∣red her Son, wounded her husband, and destroyed Surat. So that one evening Savagi saw his Pavil∣lions beset with 3 or 4 Begments of Souldiers. But he made shift to get away in the night; the eldest Son of Iesseingue was suspected to have furthered his escape; but many say'd, that it was by the con∣sent of the Great Mogol, since he could no longer retain him at Court, because of the great spleen of
the Women against him, for having dipt his hands in the Blood of their kinsmen. After this Savagi seized on many strong Holds, mostly seated upon steep mountains, the Mogol not being able to reduce him, and he often ravages the Countrey from Goa to the very Gates of Surat. He has likewise Ships at Sea, and in the Year 1683 Fifteen hundred of his men in 3 Ships and four Grabbs, attackt an English East-India Ship Capt. Iohn Hide Commander, but were bravely repulsed with a great slaughter, though those brave Englishmen had not the happiness long to enjoy the honour of that Noble Action, their Ship being un∣fortunately cast▪ away coming into the Channell, and all the Men but Two, lost. Savagi now Acts as King, and secures himself in the mountains where the Mogol is not able to attack him. Caambaia is 3 Miles from the River Indus and about 3 Miles in Compass, one of the neatest and best Built Citys in all the East, and called the Indi∣an Grand Cairo for its Greatness, Traffick and Ferti∣lity of soil, and so populous as to contain an hun∣dred and thirty thousand Families. Here they cut the Agats that come from other Countreys, into se∣veral sorts of shapes, and in the Suburbs they make Indico Here the East-India Company had a Facto∣ry; the tydes are so swift, that a Horse at full speed cannot keep pace with the Waves; but the Sea and the Trade is fallen away from it. Swalley is more South, and about a Mile from the Sea, but gives name to a large Capacious Bay where the Ships ride that Trade to Surat, from which it is about ten Mile distant.
Maslipatan. MAslipatan, or Metchlapatam is a great City, the Houses whereof are only Wood, Built at a distance from each other. It stands by the Sea, and the Honourable East-India Company have a Factory here. This being the most famous Road for Ships, in the Bay of Bengal from whence they Sail to Pegu, Siam, Ormus, Sumatra, and other Places of Traffick. This City is in Golkonda, but the Great Mogol is so much dreaded there that his Commissioner is Master thereof, buying, selling, bringing in and sending abroad his Merchants Ships none daring to contradict him in any thing, nor to demand any Customs of him. Paania is a City South from Siam, and was governed many years by a Queen. In 1612. Some English Men came hither with a Letter from Q. Elizabeth, and a Present from the Merchants of 600 Rials of Eight. The Letter was carried in great state, being lay'd in a Bason of Gold, lay'd on an Elephant, adorned with little Flaggs, Lances and Minstrils. They then obtained a Grant to Trade there, upon the same conditions as the Hollanders, and there was an English Factory which is now removed. Siam is a Kingdom; The chiefest part lying be∣tween the Gulf of Siam and Bengale; the Countrey is plentiful in Rice and Fruits. The Forrests sto∣red with Deer, Elephants, Tyers; Rhinocero's, and Apes. Here grew store of large Bamboo Canes; under the knots of them are Ants or Emmets Nests, as big as a Mans head▪ where they preserve themselves during the Rains, which continue 4, or 5 Months. The King of Siam was accounted a very Rich Prince, and stiled himself King of Hea∣ven and Earth▪ though he be tributary to the Kings of China. There were Idols in his Temples Seaven foot high all of massy Gold. When the
King appeared all the Doors and Windows of the Houses must be shut; All the People prostrating themselves on the ground, not daring to look up. And because no Person was to be in an higher Place then the King, they within doors were bound to keep their lowest Rooms; He would suffer no Barbar to come near him; one of his Wives cutting his hair for him. One part of his magnificence consists in his Train of 200 Elephants, among which one was White, which he valued so high∣ly as to stile himself, King of the white Elephant. He passionately admires them, accounting them his Favourites, and the Ornaments of his King∣dom. If an Elephant dyed he was burned with the same Funeral Pomp as a Nobleman. The English had a Factory formerly in this Kingdom, as well as at Armagon. As for Ballasore, Hugli, Chuttanetti, Daca, Rajamell; the present Honou∣rable East India Company have Factorys in all those Places, of which little more can be say'd then what has been spoken of others. At the famous Port of Bombay Island, the English have Built a strong ort and here they Coin both Silver Copper and Tin, which passes among them∣selves, and the Villages along the Coast.
The Empire and Government of the Great Mogol. HAving given some account of the Forts and Fact∣rys of the Honourable East India Company. I shall subjoine a breif Relation of the Empire and Government of that Mighty Monarch. The name of India is now given to the Empire of the Great Mogol, and to the two Peninsula's, one on this side, and the other beyond Ganges; with the Islands scattered in the Indian Sea; which are all comprehended under the general Name of the East-Indies; yea some Authors take in all the Ori∣ental Part of Asia. It is recorded, that the Old Inhabitants consisted in 122 several Nations; ori∣ginally descended from the Sons of Noah, before their Journey to the Valley of Shinaar, and their attempt in Building the Tower of Babel. That it was first invaded by the famous Queen Seinramis, with an Army of above four Millions, whom Stau∣robates an Indian King opposed with equal forces, who overcame and slew her. That the next Inva∣sion was by Bacchus the Son of Iupiter and Hercu∣les, who by policy and force subdued them, and taught them the use of Wine, Oyl, and the Art of Architecture. After this, India was invaded by Alexander the Great; He vanquishing first Clophae Queen of Magaza, and then King Porus, both whom he took Prisoners; But restoring them again their Liberty and Kingdom returned back to Baby∣lon, where he dyed of poyson. After this they lived in peace under several Kings. In 1587. their Countrey being discovered by the Portugals, and
after by the Dutch and English, they have had much Traffick with them. This vast Empire comprehends the greatest part of the Continent of Asia, wherein are contained 37 Kingdoms. As for Remains of Antiquity, there are few or none, the Mogols having ruined all the Ancient Buildings, which according to the Ancients were 30 large Citys, and 300 Walled Towns and Castles, so strong as to be thought impregnable; which may not be improbable, if Noah first planted there, after his descent from Mount Ararat, not far distant from hence. Since such mighty Ar∣mys were raised in those Countreys not many Years after, and the Land so well Built and planted; so that when Alexander had overthrown King Porus near the River Hydaspis, he say'd, He found greater Citys and more sumptuous Buildings in India then in all the World besides. Some of the Citys that end in Pore, as Meliapore, Visiapore, and others, seem to retain the Memory of K. Porus, as others in Scander, the Name of Alexander. The Dominions of the Great Mogol are larger then the Persians, and equal to the Grand Seigniors. His strength lyes in the Number of his Subjects, the Vastnes of his wealth, and the extent of his Empire; his Revenue exceeding the Persian and the Turks both put together. But the K. of Persia exceeds him in Horse, Arms, and warlike People. His Revenue is reckoned to be about Seaven Milli∣ons and an half, English money. The Throne alone wherein he gives Audience, is valued at near Four Millions, being almost covered with Jewels, Pearls, and all kind of precious stones of a vast Value. The present Mogol derives his Original from Tamberlan the Scythian, who overcame all Asia, and took Ba∣jazet the Ottoman Emperor Prisoner, putting him into an Iron Cage, against the Bars of which he beat out his brains. When Tamberlain had taken him Prisoner, he was brought before him, who fix∣ing
his Eyes upon him fell a laughing, Bjazet be∣ing highly offended feircely say'd to him, Laugh not at my Fortune Sir, but know it is God that disposes of Kingdoms and Empires, and the same may happen to you to morrow that has befaln me to day. To which amerlain replyed, I know this as well as you, nor do I laugh at your misfortunes but am thinking that certainly these Kingdoms and Empires are very contemptible things in the eyes of God, since he gives them to such inconside∣rable Persons as we are, you a deformed one eyed man, and I pitiful lame Creature. The Mogol is the General Heir to all those to whom he gives Pensions; and his will is a Law in the decision of his subjects affairs, and therefore they carry the Names of their Imployments, and not of the Lands which they enjoy. Now because of this Barbarous tho' Ancient Custom, in the late Mogols Reign one of the Ancient Governours being very Rich, and finding himself near Death, think∣ing upon this unreasonable Law, which oft renders the Wife of a Nobleman and her Children poor and miserable in an Instant; He secretly distributed all his great Estate to indigent Gentlemen, and poor Widdows; filling his Trunks, with Old Iron, old Shoes, Rags and bones, Locking and Sealing them close, saying, they were Goods belonging to the Mogol; before whom they were brought after his death, and opened in his presence before his Lords that all saw this fine stuff; which so discomposed the Mogol, that he rose and went away in a great fury. He is able to bring 100000 Horse into the Field, but the Foot are inconsiderable. Chah, Iehan the Father of the present Emperor left behind him about 500000 Livers, besides the Rich Throne aforementioned. The present Emperor or Mogol is called Aureng-zeb, having usurpt the kingdom from his Father upon this occasion. This great King having reigned 40 Years with much clemency
and Justice; in his declining Age fancied a Young Lady of extraordinary beauty not above 13 Years Old. And because the strength of nature would not permit him to satisfy his Passion, he took cer∣tain Provocatives, which were so hot that he fell into a distemper which had almost killed him. This obliged him to shut himself up in a strong Fortress, together with his Women, for 2 or 3 Months; During this time he seldom appeared to his People, and then at a great distance, which made them be∣lieve he was dead. He had 4 Sons and 2 Daugh∣ters, whom he loved all alike, making his Sons Governours or Vice Roys of four of the principal Provinces in his Kingdom. During this false re∣port of his Death, Dara his eldest Son continued with him; But soon after they raised Armys, and fought against one another; And after many Bat∣tels and much Bloodshed Aurengzeb the Third Son having destroyed his Three Brethren, mounted the Throne, keeping his Father Prisoner. Some time after, he sent to his Father for some of his Jewels, that he might appear before his People with the same magnificence his Predecessors had done. Chah-Iehan taking his request for an Affront, fell into such a rage that he continued mad for some days, and had like to have died upon it; he cal∣led several times for a Mortar and Pestle, to beat all his Jewels to Powder rather than his Son should have them, but Begum Saheb his Eldest Daughter throwing her self at his feet, by virtue of that Cri∣minal power she had over him as being both his Daughter and his Wife, kept him from it, more out of design to preserve the Jewels for her self than her Brother, to whom she was a Mortal Enemy; For this reason when Aureng-zeb ascended the Throne he had only one Jewel on his Bonnet, and as a Penance, for so many Crimes he would not eat wheaten Bread, Flesh nor Fish, but fed upon Bar∣ley Bread, Herbs and Sweat Meats; But Chajehan
his Father dying in 1666. finding himself rid of an object that reproached his Tyranny, he began to enjoy himself with more delight, receiving his Sister Begum into favour, and calling her Cha Be∣gum or Princess Queen; a Woman of excellent ac∣complishments, and able to govern an Empire; and had her Father and Brothers taken her Counsel Auren-zeb had never been King; He had another Sister called Ruchenara Begum, who always took his part and sent him all the Gold and Silver she could procure when she heard he had taken Arms; in recompence whereof he promised when he came to be King to give her the Title of Cha Begum, and that she should fit upon a Throne; all which he performed; and they lived lovingly together. This Princess having secretly conveyed a handsom young man into her Apartment could not let him out so privately, after she had quite tired him, but the King had notice thereof; The Princess to prevent the shame ran to the King, and in a pretended fright told him, there was a man got into the Ha∣ram even to her very Chamber who designed either to have kill or Rob her; That such an accident was never before known, and that it concerned the safety of his Royal Person, and he would do well to punish the Eunuchs who kept the Guard that night. The King ran instantly with a great num∣ber of Eunuchs, so that the poor Young Man had no way to escape but by leaping out at a Window into the River that runs by the Pallace Walls; a multitude of people ran out to seize him, the King commanding they should do him no harm, but carry him to the Officer of Justice; yet he hap∣pily escaped and has not been since heard of. It is an Ancient custom among the Heathen In∣dians that the Husband happening to dye the Wife can never marry again; so when he is dead, she retires to bewail him, shaves her hair, and lays aside all her ornaments, taking off her Arms and
Legs, the Braccelets her Husband put on when he espoused her, in token of her submission, and being chained to him; and all her life after she lives des∣pised, yea worse than a Slave in the House where she was formerly Mistress. This causes them ra∣ther to dye with their Husbands than live in such Contempt, the Bramins or Priests perswading them, that after Death they shall meet him again in the other World with greater advantage; Yet can no Woman burn her self without leave from the Gover∣nour of the Place, who being a Mehometan, and ab∣horring this execrable custom of self Murther does often deny it. Some women, are so offended thereat that they spend the rest of their lives, in works of Charity. Some sit on the Road Boyling Pulse in Water and giving the Liquor to Travel∣lers to drink; others hold Fire ready in their hands to light their Tobacco; others make vows to eat nothing but the undigested grains which they find in Cow-dung. But when the Governor finds no perswasions will alter the Womans resolution, and perceives by a sign from his Secretary that she has given him Money to that purpose, he in a surly man∣ner bids the Devil take her, and all her kindred; Immediately the Musick strikes up, and away they go to the House of the deceased, with Drums beat∣ing and Flutes playing, in which manner they ac∣company the Person to the place appointed; All her kindred and Friends come and congratulate her for the happiness she is to enjoy in the other World, and the honour their Family receives by this her generous resolution. She then dresses her self as if going to be Married and is conducted in Triumph to the place of Execution, with a loud noise of Musical Instruments and Womens voices, singing Songs in honour of the miserable creature that is going to dye. The Bramins, exhort her to courage and constancy, and many European Specta∣tors think that these Preists give her some stupify∣ing
Liquor to take away the fear of Death; for it is their interest that these miserable Wretches should destroy themselves: Their Bracelets about their Legs and Arms, Pendants, Rings, and Jewels all belonging to them, who rake them from among the ashes when she is burnt; sometimes a little Hut of Reeds is erected on the bank of a River, bes∣meared with Oyl and other Drugs. The Woman is placed in the middle in a leaning posture with her head on a kind of Wooden Bolster, and rest∣sting her back against a Pillar, to which the Bramin tyes her about the middle, lest she should run away upon feeling the Fire. In this posture she holds the Body of her deceased Husband upon her knees, chewing Betele about half an hour. The Woman bids them fire the Hut, which is quickly done, her kindred and Friends throwing Pots of Oyl into it, to dispatch her. In some places they only build a Pile of Wood upon which the Woman is placed as on a Bed, with her Husbands Body layed cross her, then some bring her a Letter, others peices of Cali∣coe, Silver or Copper, desiring her to deliver them to their Mother, Brother, Kinsman, or Friend in the other World; when she has received all, she puts them between her Husbands Body and her own, tyed up in a peice of Taffety, and then calls to kindle the Pile, wherewith she is soon stifled; but there being scarcity of Wood in Bengale, the bodies of these poor Wretches arem any times only grilliaded and then cast into the River Ganges to be devoured by Crocodiles. The magnanimity of many of these Women is admirable; The Raja of Velou having lost his City and life in a Battle against the King of Visiapours General, he was extreamly lamented, and eleven of his Wives resolved to be burnt at his Funeral. The General endeavoured to divert them by kind usage, but finding perswasions in vain he or∣dered them to be shut up in a Room; the Women
in a rage told him, That 'twas to no purpose to keep them Prisoners, for if they might not have leave to do what they had resolved, in three hours there would not one of them be alive. He laughed at this Menace, but the Keeper of those Women opening the Doors 3 hours after, found them all stretched out dead upon the place, without the lest Mark of any outward violence offered to them. Two of the greatest Lords of India came in 1642. to do Homage to Cha-jehan; they having offended the Grand Master of the Household, he told one of them one day in the Kings presence, that they had not behaved themselves as became them toward so great a Monarch. The Raja, or Lord looking on himself as a great Prince, he and his Brother having brought with them a Train of sixteen thousand Horse, being netled at this bold reproof of the Grand Master, drew out his dag∣ger and slew him on the place before the King; The Grand Master falling at the feet of his own Brother who stood just by him, he was going to revenge his Death, but was prevented by the Ra∣ja's Brother who stab'd him likewise, and lay'd him athwart his Brothers Body; The King seeing these 2 Murthers retired into his Apartment for fear; but the Nobles and people presently fell upon the Raja's and cut them to peices; The King incen∣sed at such an attempt committed in his House and presence, commanded the bodies of the Raja's to be thrown into the River, which their Troops that they had left about Agra understanding threat∣ned to enter the City and Pillage it; so the King was advised to deliver them the Bodies of their Princes. When they were to be burned, thirteen Women belonging to the two Raja's came dancing and got upon the Funeral Pile, holding one another by the hands, and being stifled by the Smoak, fell all together into the Fire; presently the Bramins
threw in great heaps of Wood, Pots of Oil, and other combustible matter to dispatch them. When I was at Patna, saith my Author, a handsom young Woman of about two and twenty, came to desire leave of the Governour to be burnt with the Body of her dead Husband; The Governour compassio∣nating her Youth and Beauty, strove to disswade her, but finding her resolute, askt her, whether she understood what the Torment of Fire was, or had ever burnt her Fingers? No, no, answered she, I do not fear fire, and to let you know as much send for a lighted Torch hither. The Go∣vernour abominating her answer, in passion bid her go to the Devil. Some young Lords present desi∣red the Governour to call for a Torch and try her; the Woman ran to meet it, and held her hand in the Flame without altering her countenance, fea∣ring her Arm up to the very Elbow, that her Flesh looked as if broil d, whereupon the Governour commanded her out of his sight. The Government of the Great Mogol is (as we have say'd) arbitrary and Tyranical, measuring his power by his Sword and Lance, and making his will his Law, there being no Laws to regulate Governours in the administration of Justice but what are written in the Breasts of the King and his Substitutes; and so they often take the Liberty to punish the offender rather than the offence; mens persons more than their Crimes; though they still pretend to proceed by proofs and not pre∣sumptions. In matters of consequence the Mogol himself will sit as Judge, and no Malefactors lye above one night in Prison, and many times not at all, for if the Offender be apprehended early in the morning, he is instantly brought before the Judge, by whom he is either acquitted or condemned; if it be Whipping, that is executed usually with much severity in the place of Justice; If condem∣ned to dye he is presently carried from Sentence
to Execution, commonly in the Market-place; which quick Judgment keeps the People in such awe, that there are not many Executions. Murder and Theft they punish with death of what kind the Judge please to impose, some Malefactors being hang'd, others beheaded, some impled upon sharp Stakes a death of extream cruelty and torture; some are torn to pieces by wild Beasts, some killed by Elephants, and others Stung to death by Ser∣pents. Those that suffer by Elephants, who are trained up for Executions, are thus dealt withal; If the Beast be commanded by his Rider to dispatch the poor trembling Offender presently, who lies prostrate before him, he with his broad round Foot at one stamp kills him, but if he be condemned so to die as to  himself dye, the Elephant will break his Bones by degrees with his hard trunk, as first his Legs, then his Thighs, after that the Bones in both his Arms, this done his wretched Spirit is left to breath its last out of the midst of those bro∣ken Bones. In other Places, Some are Crucified or Nailed to a Cross, others rather Roasted than burnt to Death, for there is a Stake set up, and a Fire made at a distance round about it; the con∣demned Person being naked is so fastned to the Stake th  may move round about it, so long as     till his Flesh begins to blister;   down, roaring till the Fire made about   h his Voice and Life; The   exquisite torments is because they    for a manto die by an   iminals are usually commanded   , and those who will not   ; hnce these Condemned     eat and seem to be   nd i the close of the Banquet   ddle, the wretched Self-m▪    into the bottom of his    p; and if after this he
can wipe his bloody Knife upon a white Paper or Napkin laid by him, he is reckoned to dye with honour, and is persuaded he goes to Faaman, or the God of War. When I was in India, saith my Author. One was sentenced by the Mogol for killing his own Father to dye thus; a small Iron Chain was fastned to his Heel, and tyed to the hind Leg of a great Elephant, who drag'd him one whole remove of that King being about ten Miles, so that all his Flesh was torn off his Bones when we met him, and appea∣red rather a Skeleton than a Body. Another ha∣ving killed his Mother, the Emperour was at a stand to think of a punishment adequate to so hor∣rible a crime, but after a little pause, he adjudged him to be stung to Death by Serpents; so one of those Mountebanks who keep them to shew tricks to the People, brought two Serpents to do Execu∣tion upon this wretched man; whom he found na∣ked (only a little covering before) and trembling. Then having angred these venemous Creatures, he put one to his Thigh, which presently twined it self about that part till it came near his Groin, and there bit him till Blood followed; The other was fastned to the outside of the other Thigh twisting it round, and there bit him likewise; the Wretch kept upon his Feet a quarter of an hour, before which the Serpents were taken from him, but com∣plained extreamly of a Fire that tormented all his Limbs, and his whole Body began to swell exceed∣ingly, like Nafidius bit by a Libyan Serpent called a Prester; and about half an hour after, the Soul of that unnatural Monster left his groaning Carcase. It happened a few years before Sir Thomas Row was Ambassador in this Court in 1618. that a Jugler of Bengal, a place famous for Witches, brought an Ape before the Mogol, who loved No∣velties, that did many strange feats; the King to try his skl pluckt a Ring off his Finger, and gave
it one of his Boys to hide, whom the Ape presently discovered; several other tryals he made, wherein the Ape did his part to admiration; At length this strange and unexpected fancy came into the Kings Head; There are many disputes, said he, about that true Prophet which should come into the World, we are for Mahomet; The Persians mag∣nifie Mortis Ally, the Hindoos or Heathens extol Bramon, Ram. and others, the Iews are for Mo∣ses. and the Christians for Christ, adding several others to the number of twelve, who have all their several Followers in that part of the World; He then caused them twelve names to be written on twelve several Scrolls, and put together to try if the Ape could draw out the name of the true Pro∣phet; this done the Ape put his paw amongst them and pull'd out the name of Christ; The Mogol a second time caused these twelve names to be writ again in twelve other Scrolls and Characters, and put together, when the Ape again pluckt forth the name of Christ as before; Mahomet Chan a great Favourite present, said it was an Imposture of the Christians, though none were then there; and desired to make a third trial, which granted, he put but eleven of those names together, reserving the name of Christ in his hand; the Ape searching as before, pluckt forth his empty paw, and so twice or thrice together the King demanding the reason, was answered, that happily the thing he looked for was not there; the Ape was bid search for it, who putting out those eleven names one after the other in a seeming indignation rent them, then running to Mahomet Chan caught him by the hand where the name of Christ was concealed, which he opened, and held up to the King, but did not tear it as the former. Upon which the Mogol took the Ape, and gave his Keeper a good Pension to keep him near about him, calling him the Divining Ape. And this was all which followed
upon this admrable event, except the great won∣der and amazement of the people, the truth where∣of saith my Author, was confirmed to me by seve∣ral Persons of different Religions, who all agreed in the story and the several circumstances thereof. I cannot but relate a remarkable example of a gross Flatterer, but a great Favourite of this King, noted to be a great neglecter of God, believing it Religion enough to please the Mogol his Master, though a Souldier of approved valour. This man on a time sitting in dalliance with one of his Wo∣men, she pluckt an hair from his breast about his Nipple in wantonness, without designing any hurt. This little inconsiderable wound by an unparallel'd fare became the occasion of his death, beginning presently to fester, and in a short time turned to an incurable Canker; When he found he must needs dye, he spake these notable words worthy to be recorded. Who would not have thought but that I who have been so long a Souldier should have died in the face of an Enemy, either by a Sword, Lance, Arrow, Bullet, or some such Instrument of death? But now, though too late, I am forced to confess that there is a great God above, whose Majesty I have ever despised, who needs no big∣ger Lance than an hair to kill an Atheist or a des∣piser of his Divinity; and so desiring these his last words might be told the King his Master, he died. The Great Mogol, is a Prince of much Wealth and Power having multitudes of Souldiers in con∣stant pay, and in his ordinary removes which are not usually above ten mile at once, hath such an infinite number of men and other Creatures atten∣ding him whose drink is water, that in a little time, as it was said of the mighty Host of Sennacherib, they are able to drink up Rivers. Aureng-zeb if he be alive, is about 86 yeurs of Age, and has lived in Tents several years; the Son
of Savagi being still in Rebellion against him. In 1699. Sr. William Norris was sent Ambassador to the Great Mogol, and received with all the Honour ima∣ginable; He will endeavour to satisfy the Mogol, that the Pyrates as well English as others Nations who have done him very great damages, are brought to Justice when taken; several of them having been already executed in England. The Travels of Mr Thomas Coryat. I Shall conclude this Account of the Empire of the Great Mogol, with the Travels of Mr. Thomas Coryat a Man in his time sufficiently known. He for∣merly writ a Book Intituled Coriats Crudities hasti∣ly Globed up in Five Months Travels in France, Savoy, Italy Rhetia, Helvetia, or Switzerland some parts of High Germany, and the Netherlands, newly digested in the hungry Air of Odcomb in Somersetshire, Printed in 1611. If Coryat had lived he designed to have Writ his last Travels to, in and out of East-India, for he resol∣ved like another Ulysses to have rambled up and down the World at least ten years to see Tartary in all the vast parts thereof, with as much as he could of China, and after that to have visited the Court of Prester Iohn in Ethiopia, who is there called by his own people Ho Biot, The King, with many other pla∣ces, which if he had lived to perform and publish, might have been of good use, since he was both a particular and faithful Relator of what he saw, ever disclaiming that bold Liberty of Travellers in Speak∣ing and Writing what they please of remote parts, where they cannot be easily contradicted. So believing him an honest Historian, I shall give some Account of his Foot-steps and Flittings up and down, who while he lived being like a perpetu∣al
motion, tho' dead ought not to be forgotten; In 1612. He shipt himself for Constantinople, where he strictly observed all remarkables, and found much respect from St. Paul Pindar then Ambassador there, to whose House he had free Access; Here he view∣ed several parts of Greece, and in the Hellespont, and of those two Castles directly opposite to each other called Sestos and Abidos on the Banks of that nar∣row Sea famous for the Story of Hero and Lean∣der; He much desired to see those seven Churches of Asia, which lye now in ruins, only Smyrna is still famous for Trade, but not Religion; and Ephesus, with some others, retain their names, though they have lost the profession of their Faith with the rest. He saw the Ruins of Great Troy, once so populous as if sown with people, but now with standing Corn; the very ruins being almost gone to ruine, there only remaining part of an exceeding great House, sup∣posed part of the Famous Palace of Great King Pri∣am. From Smyrna he went to Gran Cairo in Egypt an∣ciently called Memphis and observed the remains of the once famed Pyramids; Returning thence to Alexandria with another Englishman, they passed by Sea to Ioppa and met some going to Ierusalem, with whom joining, they travelled through a Solitary, Rocky way, full of danger from the Wild Arabs, who Rob Travellers; Arriving at Ierusalem they saw and heard all wherewith Pilgrims are usually treated, of which you have a full Account in a small Book called Two Iourneys to Ierusalem, &c. Here our Traveller had the Arms of Ierusalem made upon his left Arm; and on his Right a single Cross like that whereon our Saviour suffered on the sides of which were written, Via, Veritas, Vita, The way, Truth, and Life, and on the foot three Nails like those which fastened our Saviour to it, done so artificially and indelibly by a Black Powder, as if drawn by some accurate Pencil upon Parchment. The poor man would much glory in beholding these Charact∣ers,
applying the words of St. Paul to himself, I bear in my Body the Marks of the Lord Iesus, Gal. 6. 17. Hence they went to the Dead, Sea, the River Ior∣dan, Sidon, Alexandretta, Scanderoon and Aleppo, where he was kindly received by the English Consul, stay∣ing some time there for the Caravan, which consists of a mixt multitude from divers parts, who travel together to prevent Theives and Murderers; With these setting forward they came to the City of Ni∣neveh in Assria which in Ionahs time was three days Journey, but now so mean and obscure, that Passen∣gers cannot say, this is Nineveh, having lost its name and called now Mozel. From thence they journeyed to Babylon in Chaldea upon the River Euphrates, once for its magnitude called a Countrey, now much con∣tracted, and named Bagdat; From hence they pro ceeded through both the Armenias, where our Tra∣veller saw Mount Ararat whereon the Ark rested after Noahs Flood, They went thence to Ispahan in Persia, and after that to Sushan where King Ahasue∣rus kept his Court in Esthers time; from thence to Candahor the first Province North-East under the Great Mogol, and so to Lahore the second City of this Empire, a place of great Trade, Wealth and Delight, more temperate than any other of his great Cities; At length he arrived at Agra the Mogols Metropolis; from Lahore to Agra is 400 English Miles; the Countrey rich, even, and pleasant, and the Road on both sides planted with great Trees, clothed all the year with Leaves, of exceeding benefit to Tra∣vellers in that hot Clime. It is called, The Long Walk, full of Villages and Towns convenient for supply of Travellers. At Agra our Traveller was kindly entertained by the English Factory, and there learned the Turkish, Arabian, Persian, and Indostan Tongues; which was very advantagious to him in his Travels through the Mogols Territories, he wearing the habit, and speak∣king the Language of that Nation; He made an
Oration to the Great Mogol in the Persian Tongue' bringing in the Story of the Queen of Sheba. 1 King▪ 10. In which parts of the Sacred Scripture the Mahometans have some knowledge, and told the King, That as the Queen of Sheba having heard of the Fame of King Solomon, came from far to vi∣sit him, and confessed that she had not been told half of what she now saw concerning the Wisdom, Greatness, Retinue and Riches of Solomon, so said our Orator, I had heard much of your Majesty be∣fore I had the honour of your sight, when I was very far off in my own Countrey, but what I now behold exceedingly surmounts all the reports thereof. Intermixing other slatteries therewith which pleased the Mogol, who gave him an hundred Ropies, being about twelve pound tn Shillings in our money, looking on him as a Dervise Prophet, or Pil∣grim as he called him, who in that Countrey value not money, which might be the reason he did not reward him more liberally. He after got the Vulgar Language; and a Woman belonging to the English Ambassador there, having such freedom of Speech that she would rail from Morning to Night, Coryat one day undertook her in her own Dialect, and by eight a Clock in the Morning so silenced her that she had not one word more to speak▪ At the four Corners of their Mosquets or Chur∣ches in this Countrey there are high, round, small Turrets; into the top of these their▪ reists ascend five times every day, whence they proclaim aloud these Arabian words, La alla illa, alla Mahomet Re∣sul-alla, that is, There is no God but one God, and Maho∣met the Messenger from God. This is instead of Bells, which they use not in their Churches, One time Tom. Coryat hearing Priest a thus crying, got upon a high place directly opposite to him,  thus contradicted him, La alla illa alla, asaret Eesa Be∣nalla, that is, No God but one God and the Lord Christ the Son of God, and say'd that Mahomet was an Im∣postor;
All this he uttered in their own Language, as loud as possible, in the Ears of many Mahometans present, but it may be questioned whether the dis∣cretion of our Pilgrim were to be commended; for if this had been acted in many other places of Asia it would have cost him his Life with as much tor∣ture as cruelty could have invented; But being here taken for a madman he was let alone, haply since every one there has liberty to profess his own Reli∣gion freely, and may argue against theirs without danger; as Tom Coryat did another time with a Moola; The question was which of them was the Musselman or true Believer; After much heat on both sides Coryat made this Learned distinction, That himself was the Orthodox Musselman or True Believer, and the Priest the Pseudo Mussel∣man, or False True Believer. He was a man of a coveting Eye, never satisfied with seeing, as Solomon speaks, and took as much pleasure therein as others in injoying great and rare things; He had the mastery of many hard Languages, besides Greek and Latin which he brought from England, and had he had Wisdom to manage them as he had skill to speak them, he had deserved more Fame in his Ge∣neration, but his Attainments made him ignorant ef himself, being so ambitious of praise that he would hear more than he could possibly deserve, yet had he not fallen into the smart hands of the Wits of those times he might have passed better. On a time a Merchant who came from England met Tom. Crryat travelling toward East-India, and told him that when he was in England King Iames I. inquired after him, and when he had certified him of his meeting him, the King replyed, Is that Fool yet living? our Pilgrim was much concerned because the King spake no more nor better of him, saying, that Kings would speak of poor men what they pleased; Another time the English Ambassa∣dor gave him a Letter (with a Bill to receive ten
pound) to the Counsul of Aleppo, wherein were these words, Sir, when you shall hand these Let∣ters, I desire you to receive the Bearer of them Mr. Thom. Coryat with Courtesy, for you shall find him a very honest poor Wretch, and further I must intreat you to furnish him with ten pounds which shall be repay'd, &c. Our Pilgrim liked the gift well but the Language much displeased him, saying, That my Lord Ambassador had even spoiled his Courtesy in the carriage thereof, so that if he had been a very Fool indeed he could have said very little less of him than he did to call him honest poor Wretch and to say no more of him was t say as much as nothing, and his favour does rather trouble than please me; when I was at Venice, said he, a Person of Honour wrote thus on my be∣half to Sr. Hen. Wotton then Ambassador there, My Lord, good Wine needs no Bush, neither a wor∣thy man Letters Commendatory because whitherso∣ever he goes he is his own Epistle; this, said he, was some Language on my behalf; At length his Letter was phrased to his mind, but he never lived to re∣ceive his money▪ A little before his death he seem'd apprehensive thereof for swounding away once, upon his recovery he declared the occasion was, for fear he should die in the way toward Surat whither he intended to go, and be buried in obscu∣rity, and none of his Friends know what became of him, he travelling now as he usually did alone; Upon which the Ambassador willed him to stay longer, which he thankfully refused, and presently turned his face for Surat, which was then about three hundred English Miles distant, and lived to come safe thither, where being over-kindl treated by some English who gave him Sack which they had brought from England, he calling for it as soon as he heard of it, and Crying, Sack, Sack, is there such a thing as Sack, pray give me some Sack, and drinking of it, though not immoderately (being very temperate)
it increased his Flux that he had then upon him which caused him in a few days after his tedious and troublesome Travels (for he went most on foot) to come at this place to his Iourneys end, for here he overtook death, Dec. 1617. and was buried at Swalley under a little Monument likt those in our Church-yards. The Factories of the Honourable East-India Company in the Island of Sumatra. SUmarra is accounted one of the largest Eastern Islands, in length about 700, and in breadth above 200 where the English have two very considerable Factories named Achen and York Fort. York Fort. IT lyes to Leagues from the Continent of Asia. Six Kings command therein, the King of Acheen is best known to us. They have so well defended their Island that the Europeans could never erect any Fort or Castle in it. There is a Mountain that casts forth Fire like Mount Etna. The Pepper here is better than that of Malabar, because the Land is more moist. They find Gold in Grains, and in little peices after great Flouds of Water. The Inland Countrey is inhabited by Barbarians who kill and eat the Bodies of their Enemies, being sea∣soned with Pepper and Salt. The City of Acheen is the best in the Island, lying half a League from the Sea upon a Plain, by the side of a very shallow River, upon the bank thereof there is a Fortress built. Our English first setled their Trade here in the reign of Q Eliza∣beth, whose name was then famous for her expoits against the Spani∣ards. The Q. Letters to this King were received with much Pomp, the King entertained the Messenger with a Banquet, presented him with a Robe, and a peice of Callicoe wrought with Gold, and gave his Passport for the Generals security, for whom he sent six Elephants, wi Drums, Trumpets, Streamers and many Attendants; The chief Elephant was about 14 Foot high having a small Cactle like a Coach, covered with Velvet on his back; in the midst was a great Bason of Gold with a rich Covering of Silk, wherein the Letter was put; The General was mounted on another Elephant, and being arrived the Dishes wherein he was treated were of Gold, their Wine is of Rice, wherein the King drank to the General out of his Gallery, 4 Foot high∣er than where he fate; it  as strong as Aqua Vitae; After the ast some Young Women danced and played on the Musick, the King sent a Letter and a Present to the Q. and upon parting asked if they had the Psalms of David, and caused them to sing one, which he and his Nobles seconded with a Psalm (as he sayd) for their Prosperity. Another considerable English Factory was at Bantam on the Isle of Java Major; tho chief City in the Island, at the foot of a Mountain, whence issue three Rivers, two running by the Walls, and the other through the City, yet not deep enough to admit any Ships. The Houses are very mean, consisting of three chief Streets; The Natives are Hea∣thens, and believe when they dye their Souls enter into some Bird,
Beast or Fish, and so eat neither Flesh nor Fish, Toward the South are many of the Turkish Religion, some called aquis are desperate Vilains, who having been at Mecca to visit Mahomets Tomb, run through the Streets and kill all they meet with their poysoned Daggers, thinking they do God and Mahomet good service and shall be saved thereby; If any of these Mad men are killd their Followers bury them as Saints, erecting them a Tomb, which they visit, and bestow Alms upon the Keep∣er thereof. I remember saith my Author, that in 1642. a Vessel of the Great Mogols returned from Mecca to Surrat with a great number of these Faquir or Derviches, and one of them was no sooner landed and had said his Prayers, but he took his Dagger and ran among several Dutch Marriners unlading goods upon the Shore, and fore they were aware this desperate Wretch had wounded 1 of them whereof 13 died at length the Sentinel shot him through the Body so that he fell down dead; the other Faquirs and Mahometans upon the place took up the Body and buried it, and in 15 days erected him a fair Monument; Every year the English and Hollanders pluckt it down, but when they are gone the Faquirs rebuild and plant Banners over it, nay some per∣form their Devonions at it; One time, saith my Author, my Brother and I, and a Dutch Chyrurgeon going along a narrow way, having the Pales of a Garden on one hand, one of these Rascals thrust hii Pike be∣tween the Pales thinking to have stabd it into one of our Breasts, the Dutch man being before, the head of the Pike ran into hii Breeches; we both laid hold on the Staff; while my Brother leap'd over and ran the Faquir through; several Chineses came and gave my Brother thanks for killing him; After which we waited on the K. who far from be∣ing displeased gave him a Girdle, for the K, is glad when those Rogues are slain, counting them Desperados, and not fit to live. In 1682. The Eldest Son of the K of Bantam declared himself King, and by the as∣sistance of the Dutch took the City of Bantam and the English Factory there, proclaiming the old K his Father a Rebel, About the same time an Ambassador came from the old K. to K. Charles. 2, by whom he was kindly entertained, and having continued here some time oeturned again to his own Countrey. At Socodona and Beniermasa in the Isse of Borneo the English set∣led other Factories; It is as big as Spain, incompassed with other smal∣ler Islands, and hath a City of the same name founded on Piles in the Salt Water, with Sumptuou buildings of Stone covered with Coco leaves. The People are more white than other Indians, of good Wits and divided beewixt two Kings and two Religions, the K of Borneo and his Wife being Mahumetans, these of Laus still remaining in their An∣cient Gentelism: These believe the Sun and Moon are Man and Wife, and the Stars their Children, ascribing to them divine Honours, to the Sun especially, whom they salute at his rising with great reverence, re∣peating certain verses; Their publick business being treated in the Night, the Councellors of State ascend some Tree, viewing the Heavens till the Moon rise, and then go to the Senate house. Their Apparel is ve∣ry thin by reason of the extream heat, being only a Shirt of Silk or Callico which they wear more for modesty than warmth.
One of the Isles of Celebs is called Macassar where the English likewise setled a Factory, being 600 miles from East to West, plentiful of all necessaries, in some part over-grown with Wood, in which fiery Flyes make nightly such light as if every Twig or Bough were a Candel. In the midst are high Mountains, out of which flow many  Rivers. The Islanders Poyson their Arrows with the  of certain Trees in , so as to work a swift or slow death  re. They think the K. has only these ret Receit to take away the  of it, who boast that he has the most effectual Pson in the World, which no Remedy can cure One time an Englishman in heat of Bd had killed one of the King of Macassets Subjects, and though the King had pardoned him, yet both English, Hollanders and Portugals fearing if the Englishman should go unpunished the  would revenge it upon some of them, besought the King to put him to de, which  much ad being granted, the King unwilling to put him to a ngring death, and desirous to shew the effect of his Poyson resolved to dispatch the Criminal himself, so he took a long Trunk, and shot him exactly in the great Toe of the right Foot, the place he particularly aimed at, Two hirurgcons one an Englishman the other an Hollander provided on purpose, immediately cut off his Toe, but for all that the Poyson had dispersed it self so speedily that the Englishman died presently; All the Kings and Princes of the East use strong Poysons, and some Europeans having tried their Arrows by shooting at Squirrels, they felt down dead as soon as they were touched. The English Factories in China. THis vast Kingdom was governed by Kings of their own for many Generatiens. But Zunchin the last Emperor, suffering the Eunuchs by extortion to oppress the People, became odious to them. So that in 1640. They joined with 2 Revolted Generals, one of whom named Ly, overra the whole Empire in a short space and was crow∣ned K: at Pequin Zunchin to prevent any Insult from the Rebels, hanged himself upon a Tree in the Garden, where his Empress had just before done the same, the Traytor Ly enjoyed his Usurpation ut a short time, for the Cham of Tartary reckoning the former League of Peace with Zunchin, voyd by his Death, without an Heir, He inva∣ded China with mighty Forces and made an absolute Conquest thereof, forcing the Tyrant to fly and hide himself, and most of the treacherous Chinois were cut off by the Tartars, the present Emperor of China and Tartary, is the Son of him who made this prodigious Conquest The East India Company have 3 Factories in this Kingdom, named Amoy Canton, and Tunqueen, from whence they bring great Quan∣tities of Druggs, and several other Commodities.
A late Author gives the following Lyst of the Fors, Factories, and Places of Trade wherein the Ho∣nourable East-India Company are concerned in Asia. Bombay Castle & Island; And Dabul in Decan. On the Coast of Cormandel. Fort St. George. Trinity Watch. Trinity Bass. Porto Novo. Fort St. David Cudaloor. Conimere Manjeckpatam Arzapore, Pettipolee. Messulipatam. Madapollam. Viccegaparam In the Gulf of Bengale. Bengal Hugli Ballasore Cassumbezar Moulda Daca Chutta Nutta Pattana In the Empire of the Geat Mogol Agra Cambaia Surat Amadavd On the Coast of Malabar. Callicut Carwar Gussurat Camboia Batricullay Duno Satanam Tully Chery Beataer Bringen In Arabia Faelix Muscat Mocha Mackula Shahare Kisen Durga Doffare Aden In the kingdom of of Persia. JSpahan Gombroon Bassora In the Isle of Sumatra. AChem Indrapore, Bengalis Jambee Eyer Barma Eyer Dickets yamong ppon amola Selabar On the Malay Coast. PEque Trinacore Cudda In the Empire of China. TUnqueen Canton moy Hockeu Siam, Camboida in the Kingdom of Siam. Mindano, in the Island of Mindano. Borneo, in the Island of Borneo. Iudda, upon the Red Sea. Mucassar in the Isle of Celebs. Now Expelled. Bantam in Iava, till expelled by the Dutch, 1682. FINIS.
Books Printed for Nath. Crouch at the Bell in the Poultry near Cheapside. History. 1. ENglands Mouarchs: Or, a Relation of the most remarkable Transactions, from Iu∣lius Caesar; adorned with Poems, and the Picture of every Monarch from King Willim the Conque∣ror to this time. With a List of the Nobility, and the number of the Lords and Commons in both Houses of Parliament, and other useful particulars. Price one Shilling. 2. THE History of the House of Orange: Or, a Relation of the Magnanimous Atchive∣ments of his Majesties Renowned Predecessrs, and likewise of his own Heroick Actions, till the ate Glorious Revolution. Together with the History of K. William and Q. Mary. Being an Account of the most remarkable passages to this time. By R. B. Price one Shilling. 3. THE History of the Two late Kings, Charles II. and Iames II. and of the most obser∣vable Passages during their Reigns; and the secret French and Popish Intrigues in those Times Pr. 1. 4. THE History of Oliver Cromwel L. Protector, being an Impartial Account of all the Battles, Seiges, and Military Atchievements, where∣in he was ingaged in England, Scotland and Ire∣land; and of his Civil Administrations. till his Death. Relating matters of Fact, without Reflecti∣ons or Observation. Price 1 Shilling. 5. THE Wars in England, Scotland and Ireland, containing an Account of all the Battels, Sieges, other remarkable Transactions, from the beginning of the Reign of K. Charles I. 1625. to 1660. The Tryal of K. Charles I. at large, and his last Speech with Pictures of several Accidents. Price 1 Shilling 6. HIstorical Remarks and Observations of the Antient and present State of London and
Westminster, shewing the Foundation, Walls' Gates, Bridges, Churches, Rivers, Wards, Halls' Hospitals, Schools, Inns of Courts, Charters, and Priviledges thereof; with the most, remarkable Accidents, as to Wars, Fires, Plagues, &c. for above 900 years past. Pr. 1. Shilling. 7. ADmirable Curiosities, Rarities, and Won∣ders in England, Scotland and Ireland, or an account of many remarkable Persons and Places; and of the Battels, Sieges, Earthquakes, Tempests, Inundations, Fires, Thunders, Murders, and othr Occurrences, for many hundred years past: with the natural and artificial Rarities in every County, and several Pictures. pr. 1s. 8. THE History of the Kingdom of Scotland, containing an Account of all the Wars, Battels, and other remarkable Transactions, Revo∣lutions, and State Intrigues in that Nation during the Reigns of 72 Kings and Queens to the Reign of King William II. Intermixt with variety of strange Accidents, Prodigious Appearances, and other con∣siderable Events. And a List of the present No∣bility of that Kingdom. pr. 1 shilling. 9. THE History of the Kingdom of Ireland, be∣ing an Account of all the Battels, Seiges, and other memorable Passages during the late Wars there, till the entire Reduction thereof by the victorious Arms of K. Will. III. To which is pre∣fixed a relation of the Ancient Inhabitants, and the first Conquest of that Nation by K. Henry II. The horrid Rebellion in 164. and the Popish and Arbitrary designs in the two last Reigns. pr. 1 s. 10. THE History of the Principality of Wales: Containing, A brief account of the anti∣ent Kings and Princes of Britain and Wales, till the final extinguishng of the Royal British Line. Also Remarks upon the Lives of all the Princes of Wales of the Royal Families of England, from K. Edward I. to this time; With Remarkable Ob∣servations
on the most memorable Persons and Pla∣ces for many hundred years past: And the birth and strange actions of Merlin the famous Welch Prophet. pr. one shilling. 11. THE Unfortunate Court Favourites of Eng∣land; Exemplified in some Remarks upon the Lives, Actions and  all of divers Great men, who have been Favourites to several English Kings and Queens Namely, I. Peirce Gaveston Favourite to K. Ed. II. III. Hugh Spencer the Fa∣ther and Son, both Favourites  K. Ed. 2. I Rog. Mortimer Favourite  Q. Isabel, Mother  K. Ed. 3. with their priva mours, &c. V. . afford Favourite to Crook-t Richard with that King's secret Intrigues for usurping the Crown and mur∣dering his Nephews. Likewise the Character of Jane Shore by Sir Tho. More who saw her. VI. Cardinal Wooey; VII. Tho. L. Cromwell; both favourites to K. Henry S. VIII. E. of Ex, Favou∣rite to Q. Elizabeth. IX. D. of Bucks Favourite to K. James I. and K. Charles I. X. E. of Strafford, Favourite to K. Charles I. With all their Pictures. Price 1. shilling. 12. THE English Empire in America, or a pos∣pect of his Majesties Dominions in the West-Indies, namely, New-found-land, New-England, New-York, New-Jersey, Pensylvania, Mary-land, Virginia, Carolina, Bermudas, Berbu∣da, Anguilla, Monserrat, Dominica, St. Vincent, Antego Mevis or Nevis, St. Christophers, Barba∣does, and Jamaica. With an account of their Disco∣very, Scituation and Product: The religion and Manners of the Indians, &c. With pictures of the strange Fruits, Birds, Beasts, Fishes, Insects, Serpents and Monsters found in those parts of the World. pr. 1 s. 13. THE English Acquisitions in Guinea and East India. Inlivened with ictures. Price one Shilling.
14. THE English Hero: Or, Sir Francis Drake Revived. Being a full Account of the dan∣gerous Voyages, admirable Adventures, notable Discoveries and and Magnanimous Atchievements of that Valiant and Renowned Commander. As I. His Voyage in 1572. to Nombre de Dios in the West-Indies, where they saw a pile of Bars of Silver near 70 foot long, 10 foot broad and 12 foot high. II. His incompassing the whole World in 1577. which he performed in 2 years and 10 months, gaining a vast Quantity of Gold and Silver. III. His Voyage into America in 1585. and taking the Towns of St. Jago, St. Domingo, Carthagena and St. Augustine IV. His last Voyage into those Countries in 1595. with his Death and Burial. Revised Corrected, enlarged, and beautified with pictures by R. B. price one shilling. 15. TWO Journeys to Ierusalem, Containing first, An account of the Travels of 2 English Pilgrims some years since, and what Accidents be∣fel them in their Journey to Ierusalem, Grand Cairo, Alexandria, &c. II. The Travels of 14 Englishmen in 1669. With the Antiquities, Monuments and Memorable places mentioned in Scripture. To which are prefixed, Memorable Remarks on the Antient and modern State of the Jewish Nation, As 1. A Description of the Holy Land its Scitua∣tion, Fertility, &c. 2. The several Captivities of the Jews, 3. Probable Conjectures what is become of the Ten Tribes carried Captive by the Affyrians. with divers pertinent Relations pursuant thereto, 4. The State of the Jews since their extermination, with the present condition of Palestine. 5. Of the Septuagint or 70 Jewish Interpreters of the Law of Moses. Together with a Relation of the great Council of the Iews in Hungary, in 1650. to ex∣amine the Scriptures concerning Christ. Written By S. B. an Eye-witness. Beautified with Pictures rice one shilling.
16. EXtraordinary Adventures of several Famous Men. With the strange Events, and sig∣nal mutations and changes in the Fortunes of divers Illustrious Places and Persons in all Ages; being an account of a multitude of stupendious Revolu∣tions, Accidents, and observable matters in divers States and Provinces throughout the World; with Pictures. pr. 1s. 17. THE History of the Nine Worthies of the World Three whereof were Gentiles. 1. Hector Son of Primus K. of Troy. 2. Alexander the Great King of Macedon. 3. Julius Caesar first Emp. of Rome. Three Jews. 4. Joshua C. General of Israel. 5. David K. of Israel. 6. Judas Maccabeus a valiant Jewish Commander against Antiochus. Three Christians 7. Arthur K. of Britain, 8. Charles the Great K. of France, and Emp. of Germany. 9. Godfrey of Bullen K. of Jerusalem. Being an ac∣count of their Lives, and Victories. With Poems and Pictures of each Worthy. By R. B. Pr. 1s. 18. FEmale Excellency, or the Ladies Glory, Il∣lustrated in the Lives of nine famous Women. As 1. Deborah the Prophetess. 2. The va∣liant Judih. 3. Q. Esther. 4. The virtuous Susanna. 5. The Chast Lucretia. 6. Boadicia Q. of Britain, in the Reign of Nero; containing an account of the Original Inhabitants of Brittain. The History of Danaus and his fifty Daughters, who murdered their Husbands in one night Of the valour of Boa∣dicia, under whose conduct the Brittans slew 70 thousand Romans, with other remarkable particu∣lars. 7. Mariamne Wife of K. Herod. 8. Clotilda Q. of France. 9. Andegona Princess of Spain. Adorned with Poems and Pictures. Pr. 1. 19. WOnderful Prodigies of Judgment and mercy, discovered in above 300 memo∣rable Histories; containing, . Dreadful Judgments upon Atheists, Blasphemers, and Perjured Villains, 2. The miserable end of many Magicians, &c. 3. Re∣markable
Predictions and Presages of approaching Death, and how the Event has been answerable. 4. Fearful Judgments upon bloody Tyrants, Murde∣rers, &c. 5. Admirable Deliverances from immi∣nent dangers and deplorable distresses at Sea and Land. Lastly, Divine goodness to penitents, with the Dying thoughts of several famous Men, concer∣ning a Future State. With pictures pr. 1 shilling. 20. UNparallell'd Varieties, or the matchless Actions and Passions of Mankind display∣ed, in near 300 notable Instances and Examples, discovering the transcendent Effects, 1. Of Love, Eriendship and Gratitude. 2. Of Magnanimity, Courage and Fidelity. 3. Of Chastity. Temperance and Humility: And on the contrary, the Tremen∣duous Consequences. 4. Of Hatred, Revenge and In∣gratitude, 5. Of Cowardice, Barbarity and Treach∣ery. 6▪ Of Unchastity, Intemperance and Ambiti∣on. Imbellished with Figures. pr. 1s. 21. THE Kingdom of Darkness: Or, The History of Dmons, Specters, Witches, Apparitions and other supernatural Delusions and Malicious Impostures of the Devil. Containing near 80 memo∣rable Relations, Foreign and Domestick, antient and modern. Collected from Authors of undoubted Verity. With pictures. pr. 1s. 22. SUrprizing Miracles of Nature and Art, in two parts; containing, 1. Miracles of Na∣ture, or the wonderful Signs, and prodigious As∣pects and Appearances in the Heavens, Earth and Sea; with an account of the most Famous Comets, and other Prodiges, from the Birth of Christ to this time. pr. 1s 23. THE General History of Earthquakes. Or an Account of the most Remarkable Earth∣quakes, in divers parts of the World, from the Crea∣tion to this time particularly those lately in Naples, Smyrna, Iamaica, England and Sicily; With a Des∣cription of the famous Burning Mount Aetna. p one shilling.
24. MEmorable Accidents and Unheard of Transactions, containing an account of several strange Events: As the Deposing of Tyrants, Lamentable Shipwracks Dismal Misfortunes, Strata∣gems of War, Prilous Adventures, Happy Delive∣rances, with other select Historical passages in seve∣ral Countries in this last Age. Printed at Brussels and Dedicated to K. William 3▪ &c. Published in English by R. B. pr. 1 s. 25. MArtyrs in Flames, or the History of Po∣pery; Displaying the Horrid Persecu∣tions and Cruelties, exercised upon Protestants by the Papists for many hundred years past to this time: In Piedmont, France, Orange, Bohemia, Hun∣gary, the Palatine▪ Poland, Lithuania, Italy, Spain, with the bloody Inquisition, Portugal, Holland, lan∣ders, Scotland, Ireland, with the Massacre in 1641. England, Containing an Account of▪ 1. The Mar∣tyrs in the Reign of K. Hen. 8. and Q. Mary. 2. The Spanish Invasion in 1588. III. The Gunpow∣der Treason. IV. The burning of London. V. The horrid Popish Plot 1678. VI. The murder of Sir. Ed. B. Godfrey. VII. The detestable Conspiraces of the Papists, and their Adherents against K. Will. 3. 1. By Grandevile a Frenchman. 2. By Charmock. Sr. W. Perkins, Sr. J. Friend, Sr J. Fennick and others, with their Tryals and Executions. Also Gods Judg∣ments upon Persecutors, with several pictures pr. one shilling. Miscellanis. 26. DElights for the Ingenious, in above Fifty Select Emblems, Divine and Moral, curi∣ously Ingraven on Copper Plates, with 50 delightful Poems and Lots, for the lively Illustration of each Emblem, whereby instruction may be promoted by pleasant Recreation; to which is prefixed, A Po∣em, intituled, Majesty in Misery, or an Imploration of the K. of Kings, written by K. C. Collected by R. B. Price. 2 s. od.
27. EXcellent Contemplations Divine and Moral written by A. L. Capel, with some account of his Life, his Letters to his Lady, and his last Speech. Also the Speeches of D. Hamilton, and the Earl of olland, who suffered with him: Pr. 1 s. 28. WInter Evenings Entertainments, in two parts, Containing, 1. Ten pleasant Re∣lations of many Notable Accidents. 2. Fifty Inge∣nious Riddles, with explanations Observations and Morals upon each. Enlivened with above 60 pict∣ures, for illustrating every Story and Riddle. pr. 1 s. 29. ESops Fables in Prose and Verse, with Pict∣ures and proper Morals to every Fable; Some very pertinent to the present Times. pr. 1 s. Divinity. 30 A Guide to Eternal Glory: Or, brief Directi∣ons to all Christians how to attain Ever∣lasting Salvation: To which are added several other small Tracts, price one shilling. 31. YOuths Divine Pastime 1. and 2 containing 76 Remarkable Scripture Histories, turned into English Verse. With 70 Pictures proper to each story; very delightful for the Virtuous imploy∣ing the vacant hours of young Persons. pr. 1 s. 32. THe Young Mans Calling, or the whole duty of Youth, in a serious and compassionate Address to all young Persons to Remember their Creator in the days of their Youth. Together with Remarks upon the Lives of several excellent young Persons of both Sexes as well Ancient and Modern; who have been famous for Virtue and Piety in their Generations. With pictures pr. eighteen pence. 33. THe Vanity of the Life of Man Represented in the Seven several Stages thereof; with Pictures and Poems, exposing the Follies of every Age. Pr. 6d. 34. ANtichrist Stormed, or the Church of Rome proved to be Mystery Babylon the great Whore, Rev. 17. By many and undeniable Argu∣ments, Answering all the Objections of the Papists, Pr. 1 s.
35. THe Devout Souls Daily Exercise, in Prayers, Contemplations and Praises containing De∣votions for Morning, Noon and Night, for every day in the Week; with prayers before and after the Ho∣ly Communion: And likewise for person   Conditions and upon all occasions: With Graces and Thanksgivins before and after Meat. By R. P. D. D. price bound 6 d. 36. SAcramental Meditations upon divers select places of Scripture, wherein Believers are assisted in preparing their hearts, and exciting their affections and Graces when they draw nigh to God, in that most awful and solemn Ordinance of the Supper. By Jo. Flavel late Minister of Christ in Devon pr. bound 1s. 3. JAcob wrestling with God, and prevailing; Or, a Treatise concerning the Necessity and Efficacy of Faith in prayer: With divers Questions resolved by T. Taylor. price one shilling. 38. HEaven upon Earth or Good News for Re∣penting Sinners. Being an Account of the Remarkable Experiences and Evidences of ma∣ny Eminent Cristians in several Declarations made by them upon solemn Occasions. Displaying the ex∣ceeding Riches of the Free Grace and Love of God in supporting them under violent Temptations, and at length filling their Souls with Divine Consolati∣on. With the Memorable Conversion, Exemplary, Re∣pentance, and Dying Expressions of the late Earl of Rochester, Approved of as very necessary for com∣forting poor Doubting Believers, By W. Dyer Minister of the Gospel. pr. 1s. 39. THe VVelcome Communicant, Containing brief Directions to the weakest Christians how to proceed from one Grace to another, accor∣ding to the Rule of the Sacred Scriptures, that so they may come with cheerfulness and Acceptance to the LORDS TABLE. with Devotions and prayers before, at, and after the Receiving the y Communio yy   pri. 6. d▪ FINIS
