D200 12646391 65140
TRUE NEVVES FROM CORK. BEING, The Copie of a Letter sent from thence to Master Oliver Daniell Citizen, Inhabitant in the Borough; from his Brother, now resident in CORK. WHEREIN, declared the severall Proceedings of the Prote∣stant Armie, from the fifth of May, to the 12. 1642. LIKEVVISE, true and reall Intelligence of a great Insurrection made by the Papists in Cork, on the 7. day of this instant Moneth. With a Declaration, how by the valour and approved courage of my Lord of Cork, and Sir Thomas Moor, they were appeased, disarmed, and their store and munition seized on, for the use of our English. lso many other remarkable Passages, concerning the Heroick Actions of the Earl of Ormond, Sir Charles Coot, Sir Christopher Loftus, Captain Marro, and the Protestant Army in the Neweries. hereunto is annexed, another Remarkable Passage; concerning Oneal late Prisoner in the Tower. May. 17. LONDON Printed for F. Rogers. 1642.
TRUE NEWES FROM CORK. LOVING BROTHER, AFter my love to your self and my Sister, with the rest of my friends; I will take leave to give you notice of what has hap∣pened since my last Letter. My Lord of Cork hath behaved himself valiantly, otherwise we in Cork by this time might have taken leave of this world, the manner I will relate at large in the ensuing discourse.
On the fifth of May. My Lord of Cork marcht out of the City with 2000 men to relieve a Ca∣stle that was beset with a Partie of the Rebels, leaving Sir Thomas-Moor onely 500 foot to guard the Town, he not suspecting what happened, the Rebels Army being above four dayes march distant from Cork, onely there was in Cork many Papists of the old Pale, in∣deed almost two Papists for one Pro∣testant; Amongst whom, as it appears, there was some of the Rebels faction (though conceal'd) which privately had conspired to rise, not fearing but that all the Catholikes would have rose with them; which had they, both people and City had been buried in sin and slaughter. On the sixth day. My Lord of Cork arrived within ken of the besieged Castle, where he found them sending sad greetings unto one another, for the English had drawn
forth all their strength before the Ca∣stle, resolving either to free themselves, or die in the performance: The Rebels seeing their numbers, and finding them∣selves much stronger, began to vaunt, and promise themselves an assured vi∣ctory; but in the height of this sup∣posed victory, my Lord of Cork fell on upon their Rere, and slew almost a hundred before they knew they had an enemy, which startled so the Rebels, that they stood amazed, leaving their Armes as uselesse, some fled, some yeil∣ded, choosing rather to be hang'd like Cowards, then die manfully; which was their fortunes, for there was 20 of them hanged for scare-Crowes, upon the next trees they came at: Which vi∣ctory obtained, my Lord marcht to∣wards home, and Billited that night at a small Village cald Cardhagen. On the seventh of May. The Papists began their exploits; a matter of 500 of them falling upon the Court of Guard, ceizing the Gates,
which they Baracadoed, to keep out my Lord of Cork; which effected, they beat an Alarum round about the City, making Proclamation, that all those that would declare them-selves true Sonnes of Rome, should present∣ly take Armes and fall upon the Here∣tikes, in the mean time the English mustred their forces, and put them∣selves in opposition, many Papists joy∣ning with us; which had they not, we surely had bin murthered, for their numbers were very great, almost 5000, besides multitudes flockt to them: in this hurley-burly my Lord of Cork ar∣rived at the City, wondring to see this unexpected Tumult, and finding him∣self denyed entrance, he dreadless of their shot, with his field-pieces, batter'd down the gates, and like an inrag'd Lyon in the toyl, despight of all opposers forct his way. Likewise Sir Thomas Moor with his men, plaid his part most valiantly, so that in one three hours we had apeas'd
them, putting 100. and 50. to the sword, some of the chief was likewise taken and hanged in severall places of the Ci∣ty, which done, there was a generall search made through the City, and in a Vault which there was in a house be∣longing to one Mac-Brian a Ringleader in this tumult, there was found great store of Powder and other Munition; thus was this dismall morning con∣verted to a pleasant night, each man giving thanks to God for his delivery. On the eleventh day. In the Neweries there was a great battle fought between the Earl of Or∣mond and Oneal, who as it is reported, was marching to entertain a kinsman of his, which they say fled from Eng∣land, but for the truth of that I cannot inform you; only this, that in this march, he was met withall by our Pro∣tant Army, and if he was there, Ile be sworn he had a very course enter∣tainment; for our English-men plaid their parts so well, that if the Rebels
heels had not bin quicker then their hands, they had gone short home by a thousand, many there was slain, some taken' prisoners, and hangd, till the rest amend. On the ninth Day. Sir Charles Coot skirmished with a partv of the Rebels, and slew 50. losing but 5. men▪ On the tenth day. Sir Christopher Loftus and Captain Marro surpriz'd a Castle, where a party of Rebels were insconsed, putting them to the sword, and firing the Castle. Ma∣ny other skirmishes has hapned, too tedious for me to relate; Wherefore I will refer them to the next opportuni∣ty, and rest, Your loving Brother Benjamin Daniell. Dublin the 12. May 1642. Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, that the Lord Howard of Char, shall attend upon the King, and present some Reasons unto His Majesty. John. Brown. Cler. Parl.
