E3582A 11995768 52104
AN EXACT ACCOUNT OF THE Siege of Namur: WITH A PERFECT DIARY OF THE Campagne in Flanders, FROM The King's departure from Kensington, May the 12th. to his Return to London, Octob. 11th. 1695. By a Gentleman attending his Majesty during the whole Campagne. LONDON: Printed for Tim. Goodwin at the Queen's-Head against St. Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet. 1695.
THE PREFACE. THE Ʋse of HISTORY in general, is too well known to need a Demonstration; and all the Difficul∣ty that arises in our esteem of Particular Histories, consists only in their Validity; to which nothing con∣tributes more than the Ability and Circumstances of the Au∣thor, these furnish him with Opportunity of knowing, that with Capacity of Conveying the Transactions he makes choice of, to Posterity. For the first, none can be more fit than an Eye∣witness; for the second, than a man of just observation; who omits nothing Material, nor rakes together supervacaneous and trifling Occurrences; how far the following Sheets will agree with this, your perusal will inform you. But this I shall ven∣ture to say without partiality, the Writar has been always with his Majesty from his leaving England, to his happy and trium∣phant RETURN: and that may ensure the Truth of what he tells us. But the Validity of a History is not the only Motive of read∣ing, the Importance of the Action comes in for a large share with a sensible Reader. For a Romance that presents us with the true Model of a Brave Commander, is for delight at least preferrable to a dry Truth that contains nothing of Pleasure, and little of Profit. But I am of opinion, that there never has been a War of greater Consequence than the Present be∣twixt the Confedrates and the French King, either as to the Parties engaged, or the Cause for which they fight; that is, the most powerful Monarchs of this part of the World, for the LIBERTY or SLAVERY of Europe.
France has for near Two hundred years been growing, and fixing the Foundations of that Greatness they now possess; and it is no wonder that after such Master-Builders as Henry the Great, Richlieu, and Mazarine, it proves so hard a Task to batter it down. 'Tis more wonderful to me that the Neigh∣bouring Nations could with so much Ʋnconcern look on it, till 'twas almost too well fortified for all their Endeavours to de∣molish. And I may venture without Flattery to say, That nothing but the Providential Accession of his Glorious Maje∣sty WILLIAM THE THIRD to the Crown of Eng∣land, and Head of the most Royal Confederacy that ever was, we must soon have felt Our selves under the most absolute and lasting Tyranny that ever Europe was subject to; for the si∣tuation and other advantages of France renders it more fit for the Monarchy it aim'd at, than the Dominions of the House of Austria formerly, But Our Sacred King (deriv'd from a Race us'd to give Liberty to Europe, and oblige Mankind the Noblest and most Sensible Way) put a Stop to the Fatal Fabrick and by taking Namur has so far underminded it, that we may hope soon a Breach large enough for a successful Assault: It has shew'd us that the French can be forc'd from their Fastnesses in the Eye of a Numerous Veteran, and well Disciplin'd Army.
AN EXACT ACCOUNT OF THE SIEGE OF NAMUR. ON Sunday, May the 12th, the King went from Kensington to Gravesend, where he dined, and about Six in the Evening embarked on Board the Wil∣liam and Mary Yatch, but there being little Wind, 'twas midnight ere we could reach the Buoy of the Nore, where we came to an Anchor until Four in the Morning; His Majesty, notwithstanding the time of night, was saluted by the firing of Guns, and repeated Hussaes from the men of War commanded by the Lord
Berkley. On Monday by 4 in the morning we got up our Anchors, and His Majesty sailed again, the Wind being fair, and joined the Convoy at the Gunfleet, under the Command of Sir George Rook, consisting of 22 Men of War and Frigats, whereof 8 were Dutch; about Noon the Cambridge (Admiral) touched on the edge of the Galloper Sand, but by Sir George Rook's good manage∣ment and care she was got off again in an hour's time, without any damage, and pursued their Voyage with a fine gale which carried His Majesty over by the next morning. The 14th, about 9 in the morning His Ma∣jesty landed at the Orange-polder, where His Coaches were ready to carry him to Naeldwyck, a House of Monsieur Reynenburg's, there His Majesty dined, and was attended by the Pensioner, Monsieur Odyck, Monsieur Dyckvelt, and divers other Persons of Quality, and made it 8 in the Evening before he arrived in the Hague, His Majesty's usual manner of preventing a publick Reception by the Burghers in Arms, &c. which they made up by their great Acclamations and Joy for His Maiesty's safe Arri∣val on their Shore; the Confederate Forces being now ordered to draw together with expedition, the English and Scotch near Deinse, and about two Leagues from Ghent, where the Prince of Vaudemont went this day to command, until the arrival of His Majesty: Another Body is forming near Newport, commanded by Duke Wirtemburg; and the Elector of Bavaria has formed ano∣ther at Sellick, a League from Brussells, where the Forces from Liege and Maestricht, under the command of Count Claude de Tilly, joined the 11/25th of this Month, making in all about Thirty thousand. Wednesday the 15/25th, His Majesty was waited on, and complimented on His safe arrival, by the States-General, the States of Holland, and the Council of State, as like∣wise by all the Foreign Ministers, which took up all the
forenoon; after Dinner His Majesty went to the Assem∣bly of the States-General. 16/26th, His Majesty was present in the Assembly of the States of Holland, and afterwards in that of the Council of State, near two hours. This day arrived here an Adjutant from the Duke of Holstein Ploen, to give His Majesty an Account of the condition our Troops are in, as also to receive His Maje∣sty's Directions for the march of them, which will not be ordered until the arrival of the Quarter-master-General Monsieur Dops, who is hourly expected. Sir George Rook was yesterday in conference with the Deputies of the Dutch Admiralties to concert measures before his return to England. 27th, New stile, (which I shall observe during the Campaign) His Majesty dined at Souestdyke; and af∣ter having diverted himself for some hours with shooting Pheasant, &c. return'd to the Hague in the Evening. The 29th, His Majesty's Bed, with the necessary Bag∣gage, was sent towards Loo, but were to halt at Zugle∣stien until farther Orders. 30th, His Majesty went from the Hague to Zuglestien, a Seat belonging to the present Earl of Rochfort, where His Majesty lay. And 31st, hunted, and afterwards went to Loo, where His Majesty received an Account of the Enemy's Motions, That the Mareschal Duke de Velleroy was return'd from the French Court, and assembling the Army he is to command near Courtrey; and the Marquis de Boufflers is arrived at Namur, where he is drawing to∣gether a Body, to be commanded by himself separate from the other, on the Meuse, and that Duke de Montall is forming a flying Camp between Furnes and Dun∣kirk. June the 1st, The Count de Styrum came to Loo from the Emperor to concert matters with His Maje∣sty for the opening the Campaign on the Rhine, where
he is to return and serve under Prince Louis of Baden. The 2d, arrived at Loo the Count de Autell from the Elector Palatine, and the Baron de Vetilen from the Bi∣shop of Munster, both on the same Errand, to concert measures, and receive Directions for the march of their Troops. 5th, His Majesty left Loo early in the morning, dined at the Grave, and lay that night at Breda, where the Pen∣tioner of Holland again waited on His Majesty for farther Directions, &c. 6th, His Majesty sent all his Baggage forward toward the Army, encampt near Deynse under the Command of Prince Vaudemont. 7th, At three in the morning His Majesty left Breda, and arrived in his Camp about midnight, taking up his Quarters at a Village called Arseele, an hour from Deynse; His Majesty passed through Ghent, where the Elector of Bavaria (being arrived some hours before) waited on His Majesty at Monsieur Overquerk's Lodging; the Burghers and Magistrates received the King at some distance with∣out the Town, and in their Formalities, with lighted Flambeaux walked before His Majesty, whilst the Guns were discharging round the Fortifications; the King of Spain himself could be received with no greater Pomp and Ceremony. The Elector left the Camp at Ninove purposely to meet His Majesty, his Army consisting of about 40000 men. 8th, His Majesty began to review the Forces, with those of the First Line of Foot: And the 9th, reviewed the Second Line, which His Majesty found in excellent order; the two Lines of Foot consist of 70 Battalions, most English and Scotch; 14000 more are encamped near Dixmuyde under Major-General Ellenberger.
The Horse and Dragoons cantoned in the adjacent Villages, have this day Orders to join the Foot in the Camp in order to a review; this day the Earl of Ath∣lone marched from the Elector of Bavaria's Camp at Ninove, with 40 Squadrons of Horse and Dragoons to observe Boufflers, who 'tis said is encamped near Flerus. 9th, His Majesty made a review of all the Cavalry, which were in good condition, and made 82 Squadrons, well mounted; the French Army marched yesterday to Escanaffe on the Schelde. 10th and 11th, The Earl of Athlone being marched with 40 Squadrons to observe Boufflers, His Majesty de∣tach'd the Marquis de Laforest with three Brigades of Horse to reinforce the Elector's Army, which otherwise might be exposed to a sudden Attack for want of Cavalry, Boufflers being in motion that way with some thousands of Horse. 12th, His Majesty decamped from Arseele, and the Army marched in four Lines (by reason of Inclosures) to Roustaer, near 5 Leagues, with great chearfulness; in our march we took a Party of about 50 Prisoners, that had retreated to a Wood for shelter, but were discovered by a Boor (or Country-fellow) whom they had pilla∣ged, although he was under the French Government. 13th, We continued our march about 3 Leagues to a place called Becelaer à Chatteau, where the King had his Quarters; a Party of ours met with, and defeated two of the Enemy's; killed and took many of them Prisoners, pursuing the rest to the Walls of Ypres. This day His Majesty had an Account that Villeray was marched behind their Lines, and encamped between Me∣nin and Ypres, about three Leagues from us, their Lines being between us and them; and that he has sent a strong Detachment to reinforce Boufflers at Point d' Espierre, and
enable him to make head against the Elector of Bavaria, who marched that way; and who designs to be this Evening with the Army under his command within two Leagues of him, between the Rivers Lys and Schelde. 14th, Villeroy detached another Body of men to join Montall, who observes Major Ellemberg, that lies with a flying Army near Dixmuyde; whilst the said Mareschal intrenches himself behind their Lines. 15th, His Majesty had an Account that the Branden∣burgers and Munsterians, with the Garrisons of Liege, Maestricht and Huy, making together a Body of 24790 men, were marching towards Namur. The King is every day near the Enemy's Lines, and from rising ground viewing them behind the same; and our Foragers undi∣sturbed go under those Lines, in comparison, which ob∣liges the Enemy to destroy within themselves, whilst we do the same without their Lines, (but in their Country); and what they used to preserve for filling their Maga∣zines on that side, we and they now destroy. 16th, Major-General Ellemberg received Orders to make ready the Troops under his command to march, and to carry Cannon and Mortars with him, upon which he gave general Orders for every man to repair to his re∣spective Colours upon pain of death; the same day we seized a Spy, who was got clear of our Out-Guards, rub∣bing off to the Enemy in Boors Habit. 17th, Early in the morning His Majesty sent the Duke of Wirtemberg from the Camp of Becelaer to Dixmuyde, to take the Forces there under his command, and march towarch Fort le Knocque, which he accordingly did that Afternoon, with 20 Battalions, and encamped near to it, taking up his Quarters at New Capell, a small Chatteau (or Castle.)
18th, The Duke of Wirtemberg viewed all the ground, and could see the Enemy busied in working on their Lines towards Ypres, from the right of the Fort; they saluted him with several Pieces of Cannon without any effect, except killing of one Horse. 19th, Major-General Churchill was detached from His Majesty's Camp with 8 Battalions to reinforce the Duke of Wirtemberg, which he executed in the Forenoon; in the Afternoon they perceived the Enemy had possessed themselves of some Houses on their side of the Cannall, and had set fire to others, upon which the Granadeers were detached under the command of Collonel Maytland, to beat the Enemy from thence, which they performed with great vigour and resolution. Further, on the right, Collonel Tiffany was sent with a Detachment, sustained by a Regiment of Foot, and there was a very warm Fire (which lasted till night) on both sides; the Enemy had the advantage of a little Fort upon a Hill on the other side the Cannall, from whence they galled our men; not∣withstanding which, ours brought up six Pieces of Can∣non to the side of the Cannall, and made a lodgment; several Officers and Soldiers were killed on both sides; Major-General Churchill was shot through the Hat, and Collonel Tiffany through the Hand. Monsieur de Montall lay behind the Fort with a strong Detachment to succour the Place, and relieve it from time to time, as there appears occasion, with fresh men, and sends the wounded to Ypres. 20th, His Majesty received an Express from the Earl of Athlone, that he was marched from the side of Lovain, towards the Meuse, to join the Forces of Brandenburgh and Liege, which advances towards the Mehaigne, a small Ri∣ver two great Leagues from Namur. 21st, The Elector of Bavaria sent Major-General Fagell with a Detachment of 2500 Foot, and some Dragoons,
to attack a Body of French Foot, covered by 60 Horse posted at a Mill, on a Hill, from whence the Enemy's Lines may be viewed, which they performed without the loss of 40 men on either side. 22d, The Enemy in Fort-Knocque attempted twice to regain the ground our Forces took from them the 19th, but were repulsed each time with considerable loss. 23d, They again attempted the same, but with no bet∣ter success; and opened their Sluces, which soon put a stop to our breaking farther ground. Thi day two Spies were tried and condemned at a Court-Martial, formerly Sutlers in our Army, and executed accordingly; as were likewise several Deserters, that attempted to go over to the Enemy; who to delude our men, and draw them from our Service, give a Louis d'Or to each that goes over, at least makes them fair promises of such a Reward. His Majesty reviewed the Enemy's Lines, with the ground adjacent, with such care and exactness, that we expected we should have forced them. The 24th, A Spy came into the Camp, and gave an account, that the Enemy had detached 600 of their Horse and Granadiers by the way of Mennin, in order to inter∣cept our Provisions coming from Ghent to our Army; His Majesty thereupon immediately order'd 500 Dra∣goons, under the Command of the Earl of Essex, to march and reinforce the Convoy that were with the Pro∣vision-waggons, which they met with and joined near Roaseler: And at the same time another Detachment of about 1000 Horse and Dragoons, under the command of the Earl of Portland, were sent to find out the Enemy, which they did in a Village called Morselle, about mid∣night, between Courtray and Menin; the Enemy's Foot were drawn up in the Market-place, and their Horse at a small distance to sustain them; having notice of our march half an hour before we got up with them; our
Dragoons immediately quitted their Horses, and charged the Enemy with great Bravery, and were warmly re∣ceived; but after three quarters of an hour's hot dispute the Enemy gave way, and got off by the favour of a dark night; for had this Action been in the day, it had been morally impossible for the Enemy to have escaped being killed or taken; 78 were left dead upon the spot of the Enemy, and a Captain of Granadiers taken Prisoner. On our side Lieutenant Web and 5 Dragoons were killed, Captain Holdgate and Captain Collins with 11 men were wounded; and the Convoy arrived safe in the Camp, consisting of 500 Waggons, besides the Sutlers Carts and Waggons with all manner of Provisions. 25th, The Earl of Rivers, Collonel of the Third Troop of Guards, and the Lord Cuts with several Offi∣cers arrived in the Camp from England; they make no great progress in the Siege of Knoque. Couriers come from the Duke of Bavaria's and Earl of Athlone's Camp every day, the News they bring being as yet kept se∣cret. 26th, A Squadron of the Duke of Scomberg's Regiment met this day with a Party of the Enemy's in their way to Bruges, which they took Prisoners, with the Officer that commanded them; Forage grows very scarce, we go 6, 7 and 8 Leagues for ordinary stuff. 27th and 28th, The Army decamped from Becelaer, and marched back to Roselaer; the Duke of Wirtemberg marching from Knoque at the same time to Dixmuyde, that Attack being nothing but a feint to divert Villeroy that way, whilst Athlone, &c. 29th, This morning His Majesty received an Express from the Elector of Bavaria, that the Earl of Athlone was possessed of the Plain of Flerus, and the Passes leading thence to Namur; upon which the Elector decamped
from Kirkhoven, and marched to Ninove, intending to continue his march and join Athlone, and that he had got before Boufflers, who with his Army moved towards Mor∣taigne in the way to Charleroy. Upon which His Majesty left His Army under the command of the Prince de Vaude∣mont, and went with a Guard of Horse and Dragoons to Distelberg, a mile from Ghent. 30th, His Majesty came to Grimberg near Vilvord, ha∣ving on the way received Advice that the Earl of Athlone was encamped at Borsele, between Charleroy and Namur, and the Elector of Bavaria within a day's march of him, the Siege of Namur being designed, and the necessary Provisions, and preparation of Cannon, Mortars, Am∣munitions, and other Stores of War being brought from Maestricht to Liege and Huy for that purpose, and a great many Pioneers summoned thence. July the 1st, His Majesty lay at Park-Cloyster by Lovain, and there received advice that the Brandenburghs, with the Garrisons of Maestricht and Liege, the whole Body con∣sisting of about 24000 men, under the command of Lieu∣tenant-General Baron de Heyde, had marched from Flerus, and passed the Sambre, between Charleroy and Numur, and had invested Namur between the Sambre and Meuse; and the Earl of Athlone on the side of the Town, and the other side of the Meuse, with 40 Squadrons of Horse and Dra∣goons, and that the Pioneers summoned from the Pro∣vince of Brabant were likewise arrived near Namur, and those from about Maestricht hourly expected, which to∣gether will make near 40000 to be employed during the Siege for making Lines of Circumvallation and Contravallation, raising Batteries, and carrying on Tren∣ches.
2d, The Elector of Bavaria, with the Army under his command, after several great Marches, came this day to Masy near Charleroy, where His Majesty arrived about five in the Evening with a small Retinue, the Baggage following by way of Ghent, Macklyn and Brussels. 3d, The King with the Army marched nearer to Na∣mur (which was invested by the Troops commanded by the Earl of Athlone, on this side the River Sambre, and by the Forces of Brandenburg on the other side, between the Sambre and Meuse) His Majesty took his Quarters in the Village of Flawen, about two English miles from Na∣mur, and the Elector of Bavaria is about a League from thence, at the Abbey of Maloigne, on the other side the Sambre. 4th, The Pioneers began to work on the Lines of Circumvallation and Contravallation, and to lay Bridges over the Sambre and the Meuse, for the communication of our Quarters. The Mareschal de Boufflers threw him∣self into the Town with Eight Regiments of Dragoons, two only are mounted; the Duke de Villeroy moved his Camp towards Courtray, and Prince Vaudemont his Army to Wontregem. 5th, Continued to work on the Lines, and put all things in readiness against the coming up of the great Guns, Mortars, &c. 6th, Greatest part of our Horse and Dragoons march∣ed towards Masy, where the Earl of Athlone forms a Camp to cover the Siege; and for the more conveni∣ency of Forrage, this day our great Baggage from the other Army joined us. Deserters come over in considerable numbers, seve∣ral of which are Italians and Spaniards, taken Prisoners at the Battel of Marsalia in Piedmont, and unjustly for∣ced
into the Service; they all concur the Garrison consists of 21 Battalions of Foot, and 8 Regiments of Dragoons. 8th, Twenty Battalions of Foot (whereof Thirteen were English and Scotch) from the Army in Flanders, commanded by the Prince de Vaudemont, joined us, com∣manded by Lieutenant-General Count de Nassau, and Major-General Ramsey. 9th, A great many Deserters came over to us, amongst which were some Officers, who say Boufflers is to stay and command in chief in the Town and Castle, which he pretends to hold out till September, and then does not question Relief. 10th, My Lord Cuts from the other Army joined us with Four English and Two Dutch Battalions more, so that we had now in all Ninety Battalions of Foot; the Horse, under the Command of my Lord Athlone, marched towards Piton, to post themselves in that strong Camp, and secure that of Masy. 11th, This day we finished our Lines, and began to work on several Batteries, and our Cannon and Mor∣tars arrived from Huy; the same time we had Advice that Villeroy was moving towards Pont d' Espierre, and that Prince Vaudemont lay still at Wontegrem and Gramme, near Deynse. 12th, The Trenches were opened, Major-General Fagell commanding the Troops that had the Guard of them; in the night the Enemy made a Sally with about a thousand men, with an intent to disturb our Workmen, and Works, but were beaten in again with the loss of about forty men, besides what were wounded. We had three men killed on our side, and thirteen wounded. Major-General Fagell being shot into the Neck, where the Ball remained until he came off, that is, was relieved.
13th, The Trenches were mounted by Major-General Lindeboom, and our Approaches carried on with good success under the direction of Monsieur Tetteau, Lieu∣tenant-General of the Dutch Artillery, and Monsieur Du Puy, chief Ingenier, who carry the Attacks on against the Town, whilst Monsieur Cohorne carries on those against the Castle, between the Sambre and the Meuse, where the Elector of Bavaria has his Quarters; we have this day three Batteries playing; and more pre∣paring. A Convoy of Provisions that were coming from Lovain this day, were attacked by a French Party; during the Skirmish some Sutlers Carts were plundered, but they were soon made to retire. 14th, The King received notice that the Mareschal de Villeroy had passed the Lys, and was marching to∣wards Prince Vaudemont; and that his Highness had posted himself so as to receive him, or make a good Retreat, if he saw it necessary; (and that my Lord Berkley with the Fleet had bombarded St. Maloes and Granville with good success, the latter being quite de∣stroyed) whereupon His Majesty did this day detach a Brigade of Foot to join the Earl of Athlone's Camp, and with Orders to march from thence to Prince Vau∣demont's, if there should be occasion; Deserters continue to come over upon all opportunities. 15th, His Majesty received an Express from Prince Vaudemont, viz. That on the 13th, in the Morning, he had Advice that the Mareschal de Villeroy had passed the River Lys, near Courtray, over several Bridges laid for that purpose, being strengthned by the Troops drawn out of all the French Garrisons in Flanders; that Monsieur de Montall, with the Forces under his command, was on his march to join him, and that together their Army would consist of 90 Battalions of
Foot, and 149 Squadrons of Horse and Dragoons. To∣wards Eleven of the Clock a Signal was given (by firing two Pieces of Cannon) for our Army, which consisted only of 42 Battalions, and 48 Squadrons, to put themselves in order of Battel, which was imme∣diately done. And the Prince thought fit at the same time to change his Camp, posting his Right at Arsele, and his Left between Gramme and Hottom, the Village of Wontregem on our backs; after which we had no∣tice that the Enemy advanced towards us, and that they had already passed the River Mandell, and the Defile of Dintergem, where our Right was before; the Night following the whole Army continued under Arms, and we began to intrench our selves. We thought the Enemy would have attacked us by break of day, but they did nothing but amuse us, while the greatest part of their Forces filed off towards our Right at Cannegem; this kept our General in suspence until Three in the Afternoon, when we saw the Ene∣my's Battalions begin to plant their Colours between Cannegem and our Right, within two Musket-shots of our Intrenchment, while their Horse and Dragoons moved towards the Village of Fink, in order to get between us and Ghent, and to attack our Right Wing in Rear and Flank; whereupon our General gave Or∣ders about four in the Afternoon for a Retreat, and having sent away the Artillery, the whole Army marched off in great order, and made as fine a Re∣treat as ever was seen; for notwithstanding the Ene∣my's Numbers, who (by reason of the Detachments we had made to Dixmuyde and Namur) were stronger than we by almost 40000 men; we continued our march without any other disturbance, save that some of their Troops charged three or four of our Batta∣lions
that were in the Rear of all, but they were soon forced to retire, having killed some few on either side. We marched the 15th all night, and came to Ghent yesterday about Seven in the Morning, and passing through that City, encamped with the Schelde before us, where we shall observe the Enemy's Motions, and either march towards Brussells or Newport, as shall be found necessary. The French being enraged at their having thus missed their Aim, took their revenge up∣on the Countrey people, plundring and burning in their march, without having even any regard to the Reli∣gious Houses; the Duke of Wirtemberg was sent to join Major-General Ellemberg with a strong Detach∣ment to cover Newport, or Dixmuyde; the Earl of Ath∣lone marched likewise nearer Flanders to join Prince Vaudemont, if need require. 15th, Major-General Salish relieved the Trenches, and carried the Works on with good success. 16th, Major-General Lindeboom relieved the Guard of the Trenches. 17th, Major-General Hewklem relieved the Guard a∣foresaid. 18th, Our Works and Approaches being carried on within Pistol-shot of the Enemy's Outworks upon the Hill, near the Brussell's-Gate, His Majesty was resolved to attack the same; and the necessary Dispositions be∣ing made for it accordingly, the Attack was begun about Six in the Evening, as followeth. Major-General Ramsey was commanded with five Battalions of Guards to attack an old Tower below a place called la Bouge; and the Enemy's Works des∣cending towards the Counterscarp, the disposition of the Attack was as followeth. The first Battalion of the First Regiment of Guards, the Battalion of the Cold∣streamer's
Regiment of Guards, and the Battalion of Scotch Guards, for the Right-hand Attack towards the bottom: And the second Battalion of the First Regi∣ment of Guards, and one Battalion of Dutch Guards, for the Left-hand Attack by the Old Tower; at the head of each of these Attacks were 120 armed Fusi∣liers carrying Fascines before them, and 120 Grana∣diers, followed by 100 Workmen with Tools and Gabions. On the Right of the Body on the Right-hand were 100 Granadiers carrying Fascines before them, followed by 50 Workmen; and the same num∣bers of Granadiers and Workmen on the Right of the Body on the Left-hand, betwixt the two At∣tacks. The Signal being given a little after Six in the Evening, the several Battalions marched forward in the order before-mentioned, with the greatest Courage and Undauntedness that was ever seen, without taking any notice of the Enemy's Fire, which was very fu∣rious; and the Fusiliers in the front carried their Fas∣cines to the very Pallisadoes, where laying them down, they fired upon the Enemy; and the Granadiers threw their Granadoes into the Tower and Works, while the Battalions marched close after them in order, with their Arms shouldered, till they came so near that they presented over the Pallisades, drove the Enemy from thence, and pursued them through a large place of Arms, to the bottom of that Work. The French making fresh fire from the Counterscarp, and a Redoubt on the other side of a hollow way on our Flank, my Lord Cuts with Three Battalions from our Trenches, viz. Tidcomb, Stanley, and Colling∣wood's, came immediately to sustain our Men; with the first Battalion he marched to the lowest Pallisades,
and with the Guards, again repulsed the Enemy, a great number of them into the Water, and the rest where they could best escape; Brigadier Fitz-Patrick marched at the same time with the Regiment of Lord George Hamilton, his own Regiment of Fuseliers, Ingoldsby, Saunderson, Lawder, and Maitland; the two first of these were sent to relieve the Dutch Guards, and those with the Lord Cuts at the lowest Pallisades, and the rest were drawn up by the Tower to sustain as the Action should require, except the Regiment of Lawder, which was posted on the other side of the hollow way to prevent being flanked or surprized; in the mean time Major General Ramsey ordered all the Pikemen to carry Fascines, and to dig till a Work was made sufficient to resist Musket shot, where he Posted the Regiments of Ingoldsby, Saunderson, Lawder, and Mait∣land; and at break of day drew off the rest of the Troops to the first Parade; the heat of the Action lasted about Two hours, during which time we possessed our selves of the Enemies Works, which were defend∣ed by great numbers of Men; the General Officers, Colonels, and all the other Officers and private Sol∣diers, behaving themselves in their several Stations with the greatest Vigor and Bravery, forcing the Enemy to give ground where-ever they came, and made them pay for their Ill Language of, Come on you English Dogs, You English Rebels. The Chief Officers Killed and Wounded in this Action, are, of the first Regiment of English Guards, Colonel Robinson Killed; and Lieutenant Colonel How, and Lieutenant Colonel Davis Wounded; of the Cold∣stream Guards, Colonel Matthews, Lieutenant-Colonel Edgworth, Lieutenant-Colonel Jones Wounded, and Lieutenant-Colonel Pierce, and Lieutenant-Colonel Mor∣rison taken Prisoners; of the Scotch Guards, Colonel
John Hamilton Wounded; of the Dutch Guards, Lieu∣tenant-Colonel Goudaker, Major Hetzler, and Lieute∣nant-Colonel Pannie, Wounded; of the Royal Regi∣ment, Major Mac Ilvan Killed, and Lord George Ha∣milton Wounded; of Colonel Ingoldsby's Regiment, Lieutenant-Colonel Sabin Wounded, feveral Captains, Lieutenants, and Ensigns in the Regiments before mentioned, and the others that were Engaged in the Attack, were likewise Killed and Wounded; the whole Loss of private Soldiers, as given in by the several Colonels, is 308 Killed, and 604 Wounded. Deser∣ters inform us that the Enemy had 1600 Killed and Wounded in this Action. 19th, Major-General Hewklem relieved the Guard of the Trenches; the Enemy made a Sally yesterday on the Brandenburgh Quarter, and Killed the Colonel that Commanded, and about 100 men, surprizing them in the Trenches; but Coehorn's Regiment put a stop to the French, and gave the Brandenburghs time to Rally and Beat back the Enemy. 20th, Major-General Salish Mounted the Guard of the Trenches; the same day a Deserter came over to us, and brought with him a Priest that he stopp'd making off from our Army into the Town, whom he knew to be a Spie; upon search Papers were found about him of Consequence; the Deserter was Re∣warded, and the Priest sent to the Provost; the Sol∣diers that remain in the Camp, Wounded in the late Attack, had daily Meat and Broth from the King's own Kitchin-Tent. 21st, We finish'd several Batteries for 24 Pounders, besides Mortars; Major General Ramsey relieved the Trenches, and the Works were pushed on with good success, the Trenches being carried to the foot of the Bridge, and Batteries preparing for 32 Mortars.
Prince Vaudemont continues at his Camp of Ostacker, the Duke of Wirtemberg at Plassendaele, between Bru∣ges and Ostend, and Sir Henry Bellasis near Newport, with strong Detachments to observe the Enemy, who have an eye on Dixmuyde, where is a Garison of 8 Battalions, under the Command of Major General Ellemberg, who has caused the Sluces to be opened which covers one side of Dixmuyde with Water. 22d, The Batteries for Mortars were got ready to play against the two Bastions on each side St. Nicho∣las Gate; we had now Eleven Batteries playing upon the Enemy; the Breaches in the Bastions widen con∣siderably, but they have the old wall of the Town with a wet ditch, and Retrenchments behind that, Major-General Lindeboom relieving the Guard of the Trenches. 23d, The King had Advice that the Earl of Athlone was marched from the Village of Aubay to his for∣mer Camp of Pont a Selle, where he covered the Seige. Major-General Salish relieved the Trenches. 24th, Our Artillery-Horses were sent from hence towards Mechlyn, to bring hither the Flanders train of Artillery, in which are Eight Pieces of whole Can∣non, to be employed against the Castle; Major-Ge∣neral Hewklem relieved the Guard of the Trenches this Evening. 25th, Major-General Ramsey relieved the Guard of the Trenches, and carried on the works with great success in order to make a Lodgment, having advan∣ced above 300 paces in three days. 26th, We carried our Lines so far, as to cut off the Communication between the Town and Fort Pollard, which hindered our approaches to the Coun∣terscarp, and the Enemies other Works near St. Ni∣cholas Gate; whereupon the French Posted there, were
summoned to Surrender, which they refused to do, unless they might have leave to retire into the Town, which was denied them; and our Miners set at work, who having made a considerable advance in the night, lodged themselves under the Counterscarp of the said Fort: The Garison consisting of a Captain, Two Lieutenants, an Ensign, an Ingenier, a Chirur∣geon, and 55 chosen Men of the Dauphin's Regiment, Surrendred early the 27th at Discretion, and were made Prisoners at War; soon after our Guns were brought down, and a Battery raised upon the said Fort to play upon the Counterscarp near St. Nicholas Port, where we have been for some days making a Breach, and undermined the dams that keep up the Water in the ditch of the Town, in order to drain the same, by blowing them up. 28th, Major-General Lindeboom relieved the Guard of the Trenches; and our Lines being carried on to the edge of the Maese near the Counterscarp, all things were disposed for the Attack of it, in order to a Lodgment on the Glacis; and accordingly about 4 a Clock in the Afternoon it was begun by the Granadiers, English and Dutch, who with continual fire, and Hand-granadoes, with the help of our Bat∣teries, soon obliged the Enemy to retire, and made a Lodgment on the Glacis; but the Enemy having ma∣ny works within this, as the Counterguard, the Ravelin, and the Town-walls, they very much annoyed our Men, being also continually relieved from the Town; however, ours Fortified themselves and kept their Post; our Granadiers were sustained by Colonel Ingoldsby's Regiment, which suffer'd very much in this Action, by the accident of Fire taking in the Woolsacks and Gabions that were to cover their Men; Colonel Saunderson and Colonel Collingwood's Regi∣ments
sustained next to Ingoldsby's; the Dutch Grana∣diers were sustained and relieved by Detachments of the Regiments of Ploen, Tetteau, Weed, and Heyden; Sweeds and Dutch Lieutenant-Collonels were Killed, and another Wounded; Mr. Godfrey, Deputy-Governor of the Bank of England, who was come from Antwerp to wait upon the King, standing very near his Ma∣jesty in the Trenches, was Killed by a Cannon Ball; Lieutenant-Colonel Eck, of the Fourth Troop of Guards, had his Arm taken off by the same Shot. 29th, Our Lodgment being thus made on the Counterscarp, on the side of the Maese, as was in∣tended, our Batteries will be advanced nearer to the Enemies Works, and a further Breach made for an Assault of the Town; in the Attack of Yesterday we lost, that is, Killed and Wounded of the English and Dutch, about 300. The Elector of Bavaria made an Attack at the same time upon the Cloyster of Salsine, wherein the Enemy had a Garison of 400 Men, and possess'd himself of it with little Loss; by which means he can now make his approaches nearer to the Enemies works. Upon the arrival of an Ex∣press from the Duke of Savoy with the good News of the Surrender of Casal, all the Foot made a treble Discharge round the Town and Castle, whilst our Cannon and Mortars did the same against them both, as rejoicing upon-such an Occasion. Major-General Salish relieved the Trenches. 30th, About Four a Clock in the Morning, the Elector of Bavaria, with a Detachment of Granadiers, and 15 Battalions of Foot of his own, the Branden∣burgh, and other Foreign Troops, made an Attack upon the Works and Retrenchments the Enemy had without the Coehorn Fort, upon the Hill towards the Sambre, which hindred our approaches upon that side;
in about Two hours time we beat the Enemy out of them, and pursued them to the very walls of the Castle, so that we are now Masters of their great Line drawn over the Hill from the Sambre to the Maese, on which the Enemy had two Batteries; we are now Fortifying our selves there in order to At∣tack the Coehorn work; it Rained violently all the while of the Attack, notwithstanding which the Men continued it with great Resolution, and we lost about 100 Men; the Enemy are much disheartned at our being Masters of this strong Work, which they gave out would cost us many Thousand Men; the ascent of the Hill was difficult by reason of its rocky steepness, and the Enemies Cannon playing on all sides; yet sometimes on all four up they got, and made themselves Masters of the pretended impregna∣ble Line, made by Monsieur Vauban the French Chief Ingenier. Major-General Hewklem relieved the Trenches. 31st, The rest of the wounded in each Regiment were by water sent to Liege to the Hospital Erected there on this occasion, well furnished with Doctors, Chirurgeons, Nurses, and all manner of Conveniencies and Necessaries whatsoever. This day the Guard of the Trenches was re∣lieved by Major-General Ramsey. August 1st. His Majesty caused an Attack to be made on the Counterscarp before the Half-moon, and on the Demi-bastion on our left near the Maese; which was begun about Seven in the Morning by the English Guards under the Command of the Lord Cuts on the Right, and by the Dutch Commanded by Brigadier Dedem on the Left; and notwithstand∣ing the fierce and continual fire of the Enemy, by Ten a Clock we had made our Lodgment on the Right, and secured the same, and the Dutch lodged
themselves on the point of the Demi-Bastion, not being able to maintain the Work it self; the King was all the while in the Trenches, which His Majesty visited every day; and because no time should be lost in giving ne∣cessary Orders, His Majesty frequently eat in, and near the Trenches; the Provisions, when drest, being carried from His Majesty's Quarters thither. Major-General Lin∣deboom relieved the Guard of the Trenches, and carried on the Work with good success. In this Action we had about 400 men killed and wounded of English and Dutch; the Trenches were relieved somewhat after the usual hour by particular Order, and then Major General Ramsey and Brigadier Fitzpatrick, who came on the Guard, visited the Works, which they continued and carried about 50 Paces farther to the Right; in this, as well as all the other Actions of this Siege, our men behaved themselves with such undaunted Courage and Bravery, that they carried all before them; for whatever they attacked, they carried; and what they took, they maintained, to the great disheartning and discouragement of the Enemy, who found it in vain, notwithstanding their numbers, to pretend to resist such Vigour: Nay, the most Expe∣rienced Officers declare, they never saw Attacks made with greater Vigour and Resolution. 2d, Preparations was made for a General Assault of the Town, the Breaches being wide enough for 100 men in front: We had an Account that the Dauphin, with the Houshold Troops, was marching from Court to join Villeroy, and attempt the Relief of Namur, cost what it would; and that the French King in Person would come to the Frontiers: At the same time arrived some Officers that made their escape from Dixmuyde, after the surrender of that Place by Major-General Ellemberg; amongst the rest Collonel Brewer,
who gave His Majesty an account of the whole Trea∣chery; and that Brigadier d' Offerrer had delivered up Deynse upon no better Account, the Garisons be∣ing made Prisoners at War; and the Enemy had Ra∣zed the Fortifications, and carried the men towards Ypres. 3d, Major-General Salish relieved the Guard of the Works and Trenches, and all things were disposed for an Assault of the Town, when about Two in the Af∣ternoon the Enemy hung out a White Flag, and de∣sired a Parley; which being granted, Hostages were exchanged, Collonel William Seymour and Major Stork on our side, and Count Nogent and a French Major on the Enemy's; and Articles were sent out and de∣manded by the French for the Surrender of the Town, some of which were granted, others disagreed unto. 4th, The Articles were Concluded and Agreed to, and are as follow. Articles of Capitulation demanded by the French for the Surrender of the Town of Namur; with what was Granted them thereupon. I. THE Exercise of the Roman Catholick Religion shall be preserved in the Town, and no other permitted. Granted. II. All the Priviledges of the Inhabitants shall be pre∣served; and their Goods that may have been confiscated, restored. Granted.
III. All the Inhabitants, French and others, may stay in the Town; or remove in three months with their Fami∣lies and Effects. Granted. IV. None of the Burghers, or others, shall be troubled for having served the French King; and they, as well as all Deserters, shall be pardoned. Granted, Except what relates to the Deserters. V. The Horses taken during the War, and bought by the Burghers, or others, shall not be restored. Granted. VI. The Sick and Wounded shall be transported to Di∣nant, with the Persons appointed to take care of them; and Boats and sufficient Carriages shall be provided for them by the Allies (they paying for the same) with the necess Convoy and Passports within six days after signing Capitulation. The Besieged may provide Boats for their Sick and Wounded, and shall have Passports to send for what Boats and Boatsmen they want from Dinant, and may make use of what Boats there are at Na∣mur, provided they forthwith send them back again. VII. Such of the Sick and Wounded as are not in a condition to remove, may continue at Namur; and when they are well, shall be furnished with Carriages and Pass∣ports to carry them to Dinant. Granted.
VIII. Six days shall be granted for the Garison of the Town to retire into the Castle with their Families and Effects; during which time no Hostility shall be committed by either Party on the side of the Town or the Castle; and to prevent all Disorder, the Troops of the Allies shall only possess themselves of the Gate of the First Enclosure of the Attack; and none of them shall enter into the Town until the Garison is entirely retired into the Castle; and the Second Gate of the Second Attack shall, during the said time, be guarded by the Garison. There are granted to the Besieged Two days only, to begin from the 4th at Noon; and they shall forth∣with give up the Posts at the entrance of the Iron-Gate; the Besieged may place a Guard jointly with the Allies at the Gate of the Old Enclosure to prevent Disorders. IX. The Garisons in the Redoubts of St. Fiacre, Espi∣y and St. Anthony, may enter into the Town, and thence retire into the Castle. Granted. X. All persons put by the French King into any Places of Judicature, or others, shall continue to enjoy the same. Granted. XI. No Officer, sick or wounded, or others, shall be stopt on account of Debt, or on any other pretence; but Security shall be given to such as shall make out their Debts for payment of the same. Granted.
XII. All Contracts and Agreements made between the French and the Burghers, and with the Magistrates, shall be faithfully performed. Granted, provided the same be not prejudicial to His Catholick Majesty. XIII. The Horse and Equipage of the Officers and Ga∣rison in the Town shall be conducted with a Convoy to Di∣nant, and they may not be stopped or searched on any pre∣tence whatsoever, and no prejudice done to the said Equi∣pages, or those that conduct them. Rejected. XIV. The Prisoners taken during the Siege, shall be released on both sides. Granted. XV. All the Hostages may be conducted with a Convoy to Dinant. Granted. XVI. There shall be given up the Town which is between the Sambre and the Attack of St. Nicholas, as also the Iron-Gate, and the two Towers which are at the end of the Bridge on the Meuse towards the Condros, except the Draw∣bridge, which is to remain in the hands of the Besieged. Granted. XVII. The Hostages given on both sides for the due Execution of these Articles, shall be reciprocally restored af∣ter the full performance thereof. Granted.
The Mines and the Magazines shall be discovered by the Besieged to those that shall be appointed for that purpose. The Besieged shall commit no disorder, nor insult the Inhabitants in quitting the Town. 4th of August, These Articles were Signed by the Elector of Bavaria, and Count Guiscard, Governour of Namur. And in Pursuance of this Capitulation, Collonel In∣goldsby took possession of the Gate of the Town with his Regiment. 5th, About Noon the Garison of the Town of Namur retired into the Castle according to the Capitulation, and broke down the Bridge between the Town and them; they left behind them to the care of the Allies 1430 Sick and Wounded men, of which 140 are Officers, and are all to be carried to Dinant, as they shall be fit to be re∣moved. They had in the place 2400 Dragoons when the Siege begun, who are reduced to 7 or 800 men; and their whole Garison is reckoned now to consist of 7000 men; most of the private Soldiers went with great unwillingness in∣to the Castle, and many hid themselves, who have since surrender'd themselves as deserters, to the number of near 500. His Majesty detached Count Nassau, and Major-Gene∣ral Ramsey with 30 Battalions to reinforce Prince Vaude∣mont, who is marched from Ghent to Diegem by Brussells, upon the Duke of Villeroy's moving that way. The Prince of Hesse (Son of the Landgrave) arrived to serve as Voluntier. 6th, The King sent the Marquis de Laforest from be∣fore the Town with 40 Squadrons of Horse towards
Prince Vaudemont's Army to enable him to make head against the French, who seem'd to have some great Design in hand; and the Earl of Athlone has Orders to join him, if it be necessary. 7th, His Majesty changed his Quarters, and went to the Abbey of Malloign, over the Sambre, where the Ele∣ctor of Bavaria had his, during the Siege of the Town, and the Elector took his Quarters at the Convent of Car∣melites, where the French King lay when he took Na∣mur; all the Troops being likewise disposed of; there being none left before the Town on the Brabant side, but the Garison. In the Evening we had Advice the French Army was come to Hall, three Leagues from Brussells. 8th, His Majesty had Advice the Enemy marched to∣wards Brussells, designing to Encamp at Anderleck; and that Prince Vaudemont had drawn his Forces about Brus∣sels for the security of that City, and has posted some Troops along the Canal of Vilvord, to prevent the Ene∣my passing on that side. The 9th was taken up in raising Batteries, and ma∣king provision to push on the Siege of the Castle and Out-works with vigour, the Trenches being carried on with success notwithstanding the continual Rains; about Midnight arrived an Express from the Earl of Athlone. The Guard of the Trenches was relieved by Major-General Hewklem. 10th, About Three this Morning His Majesty, upon advice that the Enemy approached nearer Brussels, left the Elector of Bavaria to command against the Castle, and went with two Troops of Guards, the Troop of Granadier Guards, and several Squadrons of Brandenburg Horse, to the Earl of Athlone's Camp at Watterloo, three Leagues from Brussels; where was likewise joined the
Detachments sent from Namur under the Command of the Count de Nassau, and Major-General Ramsey; the Enemy Encamped the same day within a League of Brussels. 11th, The King detached 10 Battalions of Foot from Watterloo to reinforce the Prince of Vaudemont, by Brus∣sels; Deserters come over to us from the Castle in great numbers; Major-General Salish relieved the Guard of the Trenches, and undisturbed carried on the Works considerably. 12th, Prince Vaudemont arrived at Watterloo from Brussels to concert Measures with His Majesty for the Security of that City, which the Enemy threatens with a Bombardment. After Dinner a Council of War was held, after which his Highness departed for Brussels again, and His Majesty returned to the Camp before the Castle of Namur. This Night Linde∣boom carried on our Trenches about 150 Paces before the Coehorn-Fort towards the Sambre, and made a very good Lodgment. 13th, We advanced our Trenches near 200 Paces more, notwithstanding the Rain continued to wash the Earth down again. In the Afternoon one of our Bombs fell into a Magazine of the Enemy's, where they had a quantity of Grenades and Powder which blew up; and by the Deserters we were informed, it did them considerable damage. Major-General Salish relieved the Guard of the Trenches. 14th, This Morning His Majesty had an Account that the French possessed themselves of the high grounds near Anderleck Gate the Night before, and was Bombarding Brussels, upon which the Elector of Bavaria, went away immediately with a good Guard of his own and the Brandenburgh Horse, to be present and give
the necessary Orders in that City. Last Night the Enemy made a Sally upon 600 of our Men Com∣manded by Colonel Seymour, who were Posted near their Palisades to cover the Workmen that were to carry on the Trenches, but they were repulsed and several of them killed; on our side 4 Men were killed, and Colonel Seymour's Major, a Captain, and 12 Men wounded; we continued our Works with good success, advancing 150 Paces, though the ground was stony; the Guard being relieved by Ma∣jor-General Hewklem. 15th, 115 Deserters came over last night and this morning to us, who were in the last Sally, which they all agree in, that Boufflers design'd it on pur∣pose to favour his Escape, by forcing his way through with his Horse, but he found our Troops well posted and too vigilant for his purpose; they say likewise that our Cannon and Bombs do great Execution, and harrass the Soldiers that they know not where to shelter themselves with security. Major-General Lin∣deboom this day made a new Trench of about 300 Paces in the plain of Salsine behind the other, and run a Line from our Lodgment to the old Trench at the foot of the Mountain, to secure it against Sallies; the Enemy made but little fire, we did not lose one Man, only 5 or 6 wounded. The Landtgrave of Hesse ar∣rived in the Camp, and was by His Majesty received with great Respect. 16th, We advanced our Trench in the Plain of Sal∣sine, and enlarged and mended that at the foot of the Mountain, which was much endamaged by the continual Rains that loosened the Earth cast up, and made it shoot down again to the bottom of the Trench, and
lay there like mud; and rendred it very troublesome to pass and repass. 17th. We advanced our Trench Salish at the foot of the Mountain about 100 Paces, and carried on that of the Salsine towards it. The Enemy made a great fire in the Night both with the Cannon and small Shot, and made two Sallies to disturb our work∣men, but were presently beat in again; a Colonel of the Brandenburghs and 10 Soldiers were killed, and some wounded; our Cannon and Bombs play without ceasing day and night on the Castle and Coehorn, and according to the reports of Deserters, do greatly an∣noy the Enemy, having killed great numbers of them, and, dismounted some of their Cannon; this Evening arrived here from Maestricht 32 Twenty-four Pounders to be employed against the Castle from Count Tilly's side; the Batteries had had good success and done the Ene∣my considerable mischief; and we prepare more on all sides in order to a Breach in the Coehorn and Castle; the Forces of Hesse and Lunemburg, which came from the Rhyne are Encamped between Liege and Huy: This Morning His Majesty received an account that the Mareschal de Villeroy had raised Batteries on the high Ground of Anderleck, from whence he Bombard∣ed Brussels, from the 13th about Six in the Evening, untill the 15th about Noon; when he drew off, and marched towards Engheim, by way of Hall; that the Lower Town had suffered the most, and several Houses as high as the great Market are ruined, but all the Maga∣zines in general have escaped; but the Electoress of Bavaria with the Fright miscarried, but is in no dan∣ger, and was removed to a great House in the Suburbs.
18th. The Count de Rivera Master of the Horse to the Elector of Bavaria, and my Lord Cutts relieved the Trenches, and we advanced our Trenches 150 Pa∣ces notwithstanding the disturbance we met with from the Enemy, who near Midnight made a Sally with 200 Dragoons mounted, and 500 Grenadiers; they first made an Attack on our Right with 160 Grenadiers, when the Count de Rivera was visiting the Night Posts immediately repulsed them; and then they made an Attack on our Left, where my Lord Cutts had just posted the advanced Guards to cover the Workmen. 100 Dragoons came upon Lieu∣tenant Sutton of Seymour's Regiment, who being posted in the Plain of Salsine with 37 English Fusiliers, let them come on until they were within a few Paces of him, and then fi∣ring upon them, retreated softly towards our main Guard or Body, and the Dragoons pressing again upon him, he gave then a second Volley; at which time the Spanish and Ba∣varian Horse, who were posted in the Plain of Salsine to su∣stain the Infantry, fell in with the Enemy Sword in hand, and followed them to the very Gate of the Castle, killing several, and taking some Prisoners. 19th. The Communication between the Trench of Sal∣sine and that at the foot of the Mountain, were joyned without any manner of interruption from the Enemy, who were sick of their last Sally. They own to have lost 100 of the 200 Dragoons, and the Officer that commanded them, Major General Hewklem relieved Count de Rivera and my Lord Cutts. 20th. This Morning we had Advice that the Enemy was marched from Enghien to Soignies, upon which Prince de Vaudemont, with the Army under his Command, came from Genap and encampt at Mazy two Leagues from Namur, a Camp advantagious and strong. This Night was employ∣ed in repairing the Damage in our Trenches, occasioned by the continual Rains, Major General Swerin relieving the
Guard, and two Men and a Woman seiz'd for Spies, the Woman had several Letters. 21th. Very early this Morning we began to fire from se∣veral Batteries in the Town, with about 70 Pieces of Can∣non and 40 Mortars and Haawitzers; the Enemy began to fire some shot about Noon, and afterwards from 5 Mortars, which we endeavour'd to dismount; a Brandenburgher relie∣ved the Guard. The two Battalions of Guards, and the four English Regiments which have been employed during the Siege, were this day relieved from the Army by six other Battalions. This Night we continued to repair and enlarge our Trenches. 22th. His Majesty had Advice that the Enemy were come to Senefs, and had drained all their Garrisons, in order to attempt the relief of Namur: upon which his Majesty went to view the Army Commanded by Prince Vaudemont at Mazy, where his Majesty dined, and in the Evening return∣ed hither. Deserters continue still to come over every Night, and say our Cannon and Mortars from the Town do the Enemy considerable damage. The Guard of the Trenches was this day relieved by Major General Sa∣lish. 23d. His Majesty was pleased to make Colonel Selwyn, and the Lord George Hamilton, Brigadiers General of Foot, in consideration of their good Services, and more parti∣cularly at this Siege. Our Batteries continued to play with great success, making Breaches along the side of the Co∣horn next to the Town. About Noon the King received Advice that Villeroy had made a review of his Troops at Soignies, and yesterday marched to Fellug between Nivelle and Senef. The Forces of Hesse and Lunenburg came up to us this Morning, and are to assist at the Siege; they passed the Maese about Noon, being about 7000 Foot, the Horse and Dragoons making together 22 Squadrons, joyned the
main Army, under the Command of Prince Vaudemont. 24th. We carried on our Trenches very considerably, not∣withstanding the Enemies continual Fire, and who endea∣voured to disturb us in the Night with three false Salleys. My Lord Cutts and Major General Swerin relieved the Guard. 25th. Our Trenches these three last Nights were pushed on 500 Paces, 80 yards distant one behind the other, and we are now within 200 Paces of the Enemies Redoubt at the foot of the Cohorn near the Sambre, being a Stone Re∣doubt; to Attack which all things were prepared; but upon sight of our Men, the Lieutenant that Commanded, with 15 of the Enemy surrendred, and were made Prisoners at War. Count de Rivera mounted the Guard. 26th. Early in the Morning his Majesty received informa∣tion that the Mareschal de Villeroy was marching with the Army to Flerus; his Majesty thereupon thought fit to leave the Camp before the Castle of Namur to the Care of the Ele∣ctor of Bavaria and Duke of Holstien Floen, and joyned our main Army under Prince Vaudemont, taking up his Quar∣ters at the Village of Bone See near Mazy. This day Major General Salish mounted the Guard. 27th. The Enemy remained at Flerus, and were joyned by the Detachments from Germany, and the other Troops Commanded by Monsieur de Harcourt, &c. from the Sea Coasts. 28th. The Enemy marched to Gemblours, and seemed to dispose every thing to a Battel; in the mean time we were not idle in preparing to receive them, notwithstanding their Superiority of at least 20000 Men: And our Forces that carried on the Attacks against the Castle went on vigo∣rously. 29th. The Enemy did actually leave their Tents standing in their Camp, and marched towards us in Battalia, as near as the Ground would permit them. Whereupon his Majesty
caused our Army to be drawn out likewise, in which Po∣sture we remained the whole Day, his Majesty being on Horsback from four in the Morning until eight at Night, riding from Right to Left, and to the Right again; appear∣ing every where to give necessary Orders, and view the Disposition of the Enemy; and our Army ordered to lye all Night under Arms in a readiness to receive the Enemy if they please to come on. In the mean time all things were ready for a General Assault. 30th. The Enemy only appeared in the Front of our Line, and moved off again without daring to attempt any thing, and with about 70 Squadrons took Post at Bonef on the Me∣haigne, extending their Line from that place to the Right near Perwys. Whereupon his Majesty caused our Army likewise to move, and extended our Right to Longchamp, our Left being near St. Dennis, and a Brigade of Foot left at Mazy Camp to secure that Post. This Day a General Assault was made against the Castle and Cohorn. The Disposition as follows: The Lord Cutts attacked the Counterscarp and Breach of the Terra Nova with a Detachment of Grenadiers, and four Regiments of Foot: Count Rivera Major General in the Spanish Service, Attackt the Cohorn on the side next the Terra Nova with 3000 Spaniards and Bavarians: Major General La Cave Attackt the Cohorn on the Right of the Spaniards with 2000 Brandenburgers; Major General Swerin Attackt the Cassotte with 2000 Dutch; and the lower Town by a Co∣lonel and about 2000 Men. The English advanced with great Order and Resolution, and had gained the top of the Breach (through a great deal of Fire on all sides) but found the Enemy so advanta∣geously posted and entrenched behind the Breach, and the Ground on their side so very craggy and uneven, that it was impossible to advance in any Front, were forced to re∣tire. Count Rivera was kill'd upon his approach to the
Counterscarp, but the Bavarians took Post upon a Saliant Angle of the Cohorn, and maintained a hot Fire with the Enemy, who disputed hard to dislodge them; and when most of the Officers of the Bavarian Guards was killed and wounded, and that the other Regiments had suffered very much, the Enemy continuing their Fire with great obsti∣nacy; the English that had left the Terra Nova, not being able to do any thing on that side, sustained the Spaniards and Bavarians under the Command of my Lord Cutts, who at the same time ordered a Lieutenant of Colonel Maccay's Regiment with 30 Men to pass the Pallisado's, and Attack a Battery of the Enemies; which he executed with the greatest Bravery and Resolution, turning seven of the Ene∣mies own Cannon against them, securing at the same time several of their Mines ready to spring; and the English and Bavarians planting their Colours upon the Pallisado's made a good Lodgment. While this happened, Major General La Cave with the Brandenburgers, and Major General Swe∣rin with the Dutch, made each of them likewise a Lodg∣ment, which they improve in order to an Attack; and the Batteries are now ordered to play on the Terra Nova to make that Attack more practicable. 31th. The Enemy appeared with about 11 Squadrons near our grand Guard, but were soon repulsed, and the follow∣ing List was given in of the kill'd and wounded. Of the English in the Assault under the Command of my Lord Cutts, Lord Cutts wounded; of Coulthorp's Regiment, the Co∣lonel, a Captain, 1 Subalteran, and 101 Soldiers killed. The Lieutenant Colonel, 3 Captains, 5 Subalterans, and 149 Soldiers wounded. Colonel Frederick Hamilton's Regiment, 3 Captains, 7 Subalterans, and 86 Soldiers killed. 6 Captains, 8 Subal∣terans, and 185 Soldiers wounded, the Lieutenant Colonel kill'd or Prisoner.
Colonel Maccay's Regiment, 1 Captain, 1 Subalteran, and 70 Soldiers killed; the Colonel bruised; the Major, 4 Cap∣tains, 11 Subalterans, and Soldiers wounded. Colonel Buchanan's Regiment, 2 Captains, 2 Subalterans, and 62 Soldiers killed; the Lieutenant Colonel, 6 Captains, 6 Subalterans, and 138 Soldiers wounded; Volantiers wounded, Col. Winsor, Mr. Thompson, Mr. Stanhop. Sept. 1st. N. S. This Day his Majesty dined very early, and was in the Afternoon going to Namur, to give the necessary Directi∣ons concerning a further Attack of the Castle, on the way met an Adjutant sent by the Elector of Bavaria, to give his Majesty an Account that the Mareschal de Boufflers, and the Count de Guiscard, had desired to Capitulate; offering at first to do it for the Cohorn alone, but that upon the Ele∣ctor's refusal they had agreed for the whole. Upon his Ma∣jesty's Arrival there Hostages were Exchanged, and Propo∣sitions brought from the Castle to the Salsine; in which they demanded ten Days to expect Succour, which was absolutely denied them; but in the General it appears, that the Enemy suffered so much in the last Assault, and are o∣therwise so dispirited, that there's little doubt of their sub∣mitting to what shall be granted them. Hostages were ex∣changed on both sides for performance of what may be a∣greed unto. 2d. Early in the Morning the Articles of Surrender were concluded, and part of the Outworks given up presently after, for which a treble Discharge was made of all our Ar∣tillery, and three Salvo's in a running Fire along the Lines, which the Mareschal and Duke de Villeroy was an Ear-wit∣ness of with 100000 Men; but not being pleas'd with such rejoycings, retired with his Army from Gemblours towards Sombref, marching all Night to get clear of his Majesty's pursuit. We have Rain in abundance.
ARTICLES proposed by the Mareschal de Boufflers to his Electoral Highness of Bavaria, jointly with the Allies, for the Capitulation of the Castle of Namur. 1. THat the said Castle with the lower Town shall be de∣livered up to the Troops of the Allies the 10th of this instant September, in case it be not relieved: And that during the said time there shall be committted no Act of Ho∣stility between the Besieged and the Besiegers. 2. That on the said 10th of September, there shall be given up to the said Troops of the Allies the first Gate of Entry into the said Castle on the side of the Country, where a Guard of the Troops of the Garrison shall be likewise placed to prevent the Troops mixing together, and all disorders. Answer to the First and Second Articles. The outward Fortifications, viz. the Fort of Cohorn, the Redoubt Cassematte, the Cassotte, and the Horn-work of Bule shall be deliver'd up to morrow morning, be∣ing the 2d Instant, at 9 in the Morning. 3. That the Mareschal de Boufflers, the Count de Guiscard, Lieutenant General of the King's Armies, Governour of Na∣mur, with all the General Officers, and Field Officers of the place, the Officer and Guard of the Mareschal, the Troops as well French as Strangers, the Officers of the Artillery, and all others whatsoever that are in the Castle for the Service of the most Christian King, shall march out on the 12th of this Month through the Breaches, with their Arms, Baggage and Horses, Drums beating, Match lighted, and Colours flying, with 12 Pieces of great Cannon and Mortars, as the besieged
shall choose, with their Carriages, and Arms and Ammuniti∣on for 12 Discharges for every Piece, in order to repair al∣together to Givet, along the Meuse by the nearest way, and in two or three days at the choice of the besieged, and on any pretence whatsoever they shall not be obliged to go another way: And a Convoy shall be given them by the Allies, as well for the Security of the Garrison as the Equipages. Answer. They shall march out the 5th of this Month at 7 in the Morning with 2 Pieces of Cannon of 24 Pounders, two 12 Pounders, and two 6 Pounders, and 2 Mor∣tars; and the rest of the Article is granted. 4. That for transporting the said 12 Pieces of Cannon and Mortars, the Equipages of the Troops, and the Sick and Wounded of the said Garrison, there shall be furnished by the Allies, and at their Charge, 100 Carriage Horses with their Harnesses, 100 Waggons drawn each by 4 Horses, and 50 great Boats on the Meuse, with a sufficient number of Water-men and Horses to conduct them to Givet; all which shall be provided the 10th of this Month, that so they may load them time enough to depart with the Garrison, and to take the same way, that they may arrive at the same time at Givet. 5. That the Sick and Wounded remaining in the Town of Namur, who are in a Condition to depart with the Garrison of the Castle, may do so at the same time; and that Boats and Water-men shall be likewise furnisht them at the charge of the Allies to transport them to Givet. Answer to the Fourth and Fifth Article. There shall be provided for them a sufficient number of Horses for the Cannon and Mortars, 80 Waggons,
and as many Boats as can be found in two days be∣fore that which is fixed for the going out of the Gar∣rison, and the rest as fast as they can be got; so as that the whole shall be furnished by the 12th of this Month. The Besieged may leave Officers and Commissaries to take care of the Sick and Wounded, and the Equi∣pages who cannot depart with the Garrison on the 5th for want of Boats, and Pass-ports shall be given them; and the rest of these Articles are granted. 6. That such of the Sick and Wounded as are at present in the Castle and lower Town, and who shall not be in a Condi∣tion to be transported to Givet, at the same time the Garri∣son marches out of the Castle, shall be transported to the Town of Namur, by such Carriages and other Conveniencies, as the Besiegers shall furnish before the Evacuation of the Ca∣stle; and that convenient Lodgings shall be provided by the Allies in the said Town for the Officers, Dragoons, and Soldi∣ers, with Beds, Provision and Medicaments at the Charge of the Allies, until their perfect Recovery, in the same manner as they are used to be treated and provided for in the most Christian King's Hospitals; and also Physicians, Surgeons, and other persons to be employed to take care of them. And as soon as any of the Sick and Wounded shall be recovered, they shall be furnished by the Allies with Pass-ports, Boats and Water-men, to conduct them by the Meuse in safety to Givet, together with the Physicians, Surgeons, and others that shall be proposed to take care of them on the way. Granted. 7. That Monsieur de Megrigny, Mareschal de Camp of the King's Armies, the Sieur Fellet, Director of the Fortificati∣ons, the Engineers, Ʋndertakers, and others employed on the Fortifications, shall enjoy the benefit of this Capitulation, and shall march out with the Troops, in order to repair by the
same way to Givet, with their Equipages and Effects. Granted. 8. That the Sieur de Fumeron, employed for the Finan∣ces, the Commissaries of the War, the Receivers of Contribu∣tions, and of the Fortifications, the Treasurers extraordinary of the War, the Commissaries of Provisions and Hospitals, and generally all those employed in the Castle, whether named or not named in the present Capitulation, shall march out of the said Castle, together with the Garrison, in order to go by the same way to Givet. And on no pretence whatsoever, nei∣ther they nor their Equipages, Papers and Effects shall be stopped, whether they be in the Castle, or in the Town of Na∣mur. 9. That no Officer or other Person to whom the Burghers of Namur have lent any Money, or furnisht Goods or Mer∣chandize shall be stopt. Answer to the Eighth and Ninth Articles. Granted: Provided they give Security or Hostages to the Satisfaction of his Electoral Highness for what they may owe. 10. That there shall be provided by the Allies 6 covered Waggons for the Besieged, which shall go out of the Castle, and be conducted to Givet with the Garrison; and the Allies shall not take notice what they are loaded with, nor visit them. Granted. 11. That the Prisoners taken during the present Siege, be released on both sides: And that those who are in the Ar∣my of the Allies, or in the Town, shall be sent back to the Ca∣stle before the Garrison marches out; and the rest that are in places remote, shall be sent back to Dinant in 15 days, to reckon from this day, with the necessary Pass-ports,
that they may repair thither in safety by the nearest way. Granted. 12. That no Satisfaction shall be pretended of the Besieged, on account of any Cattle taken in the County of Namur before the Siege, nor the Houses that have been demolished in the lower Town, or elsewhere, for the defence of the place, no more than for the Boats burnt or broke during the Siege. Granted only for what concerns the Houses demolished: and the rest shall be paid. 13. That the Hostages which shall be given on both sides, for the due performance of that Capitulation shall be recipro∣cally restored after the full Execution of the same, and the ar∣rival of the Garrison at Givet. Granted. The Besieged shall be obliged faithfully to deliver up their Magazines, Ammunition, Cannon, Mortars, Carriages, and Dependances, and all other Instruments of War, none reser∣ved or excepted, which shall be as well in the Castle, as in the Outworks, to morrow Morning the 2d of this Month, to such Commissaries as shall be appointed by his Electoral Highness for that purpose. They shall be obliged faithfully to discover their Mines and Fousages to the Officers of the Miners who shall be sent to in∣spect the same. They shall likewise deliver up all the Provisions that are in the Magazines, besides what they shall spend to the time of their quitting the Castle, and what shall be necessary for them in their march to Givet, without wasting or spoiling any; of which they shall give inspection to morrow, to the Commissaries to be appointed by his Electoral Highness for that purpose.
That all the Spaniards, Italians, and others, Subjects of his Catholick Majesty, which shall be found among the Troops of the Garrison of the Castle, shall have liberty to return back, without any molestation or trouble to be given them on one side or other. Given at the Camp before the Castle of Namur, Sept. the 1st. 1695. Two Counterparts of this Capitulation were Signed, one by the Elector of Bavaria, and the other by the Mareschal de Boufflers, and Monsieur de Guiscard. The Garrisons of Dixmuyde and Deynse have the greatest reason to rejoyce at this Surrender; for whilst the Enemy had any prospect of relieving the Castle, those unfortunate Men were inhumanly used, purposely to force them to take up in the French Service: Nay, the Officers were not ex∣empt from their Barbarity, being (with the Soldiers) kept in the Common Prisons among Criminals and Persons con∣demned to the Gallies, notwithstanding they Capitulated, and were to be made Prisoners at War. Villeroy was plea∣sed (whether by order or not) to take no notice either of Capitulation, or Cartel of Agreement, which expresly or∣ders, That all Prisoners whatsoever, taken either in the Field or in Towns, shall be released and sent back to their proper Masters in fifteen days by Exchange, or upon paying their Ransoms, which is settled from the General Officer to the Private Centinel. 3d. His Majesty had an Account that the Mareschal de Villeroy continued his March all last Night to Sombref with such precipitation, that he left a great many Foragers be∣hind him, and that this day he continued his March to∣wards the Sambre, upon which his Majesty ordered 20 Bat∣talions from his Camp at Bonquet to that before the Castle of Namur.
4th. The 20 Battalions arrived in the Camp before Na∣mur, and his Majesty soon after them, where he had Ad∣vice of the Mareschal de Villeroy passing the Sambre in great disorder near Charleroy, where that General had a long Con∣ference with the Governour of that Place, and afterwards caused five Pieces of Cannon to be discharged for a Signal to the Foragers to return to his Camp, and this day con∣tinued his March towards Philipville. Near 4000 Men has Deserted from him since his March from Gemblours. He Detach'd one Regiment of Horse, and two of Dragoons, from Sombreff towards Dinant. 5th. This Morning the Garrison, according to the Ca∣pitulation, marched out at the Breaches of the Terra Nova, being 4190 Foot, and 1205 Dragoons (of which only 160 were mounted) most of them in a very ill condition, with the Mareschal de Boufflers and the Count de Guiscard at the Head of them. The King was incognito in a Coach, and the Elector of Bavaria to see them. They had not gone far when Brigadier L'estang advan∣ced towards Mareschal de Boufflers, and told him, He had Orders from his Majesty to Arrest him, by way of Reprisal for the Garrisons of Dixmuyde and Deynse, which were de∣tained and ill treated by the French, contrary to their Capi∣tulation and the Cartel. At which he seem'd much con∣cerned, but being forced to submit, was carried away Pri∣soner to the Town of Namur, having first had the Offer of his Liberty upon his parol and promise to return in four∣teen days, or to procure the Liberty of our Men within that time: But he chose rather to be made a Prisoner until his Master's will was known in that Affair. Thus ended this great Siege: great, I say, because there never were Attacks carried on before any Fortress with greater Courage and Resolution, nay and Success, nor bet∣ter defended by Besieged. And great, considering its im∣portance and situation at the Confluence of the Rivers Maese
and Sambre; the reducing of which secures Liege, and Pla∣ces adjacent, which before lay exposed, and opens to the Confederates a Passage into France. And seeing they could not defend it, after having fortified it with so many new and very strong Out-works, and filled it with such a num∣ber of Troops, and vast Magazines (part whereof was de∣signed for the Attacking of Liege) that with Assistance of such an Army they lookt upon the place impregnable, they will be glad to have their boasting Relations forgot which they printed when they became Masters of the Place in the Year 1692. According to the French Gazette printed at Paris, the Garrison consisted (at the beginning of the Siege) of 21 Battalions of Foot, 7 Regiments of Dragoons, and one of Horse, with a Mareschal of France at the Head of them, besides other General Officers; and after a long Resistance, had an Army of 100000 men drawn together from the Rhine, their Seacoasts and other Parts, who instead of Re∣lieving it, contented themselves with making some motions that way, and with being Witnesses of the Extraordinary Bravery and Courage of the Forces of the Allies, and par∣ticularly of the English and Scotch, which appeared in the last, as well as all the other Attacks during the Siege, to a degree that cannot be expressed as it ought, or sufficiently commended; for considering the Advantage the Enemy had in their numbers of men, that they were posted so as to cut off any orderly Retreat we could possibly make, that if they had Engaged us we must have vanquisht or perisht, being shut up between three Rivers: But the Vigilance of the Allies was superiour to that of the Enemies, having o∣vercome them without fighting, by their Wisdom, Valour, Union and Conduct, which at that time all concurr'd to this great Success. But the great Mercy of the Almighty was then most visible in preserving our most Sacred King, who exposed himself in all Places of the greatest Danger,
and on all Occasions, as well before the Town and Castle, as in the Field, therefore to God be the Praise and Thanks. An Account of the Artillery and Ammunition found in the Castle of Namur, upon a Survey the third and fourth of September 1695. by the Commis∣saries appointed for that purpose. Cannon.   24 Pounders 7 16 3 12 2 10 9 8 4 6 12 5 18 4 10 3 3 2 1   69 Mortars with the Arms of France 4 Hauwitzers with the same 4 Powder in several places, about two hundred eighty one thousand weight.   Great Bombs of 500 l. weight 50 Ordinary Bombs about 2000 Lesser Bombs 1000 Grenadoes of 24 l. weight 750 Ordinary Grenadoes fixt 40000 Cannon Ball 150 Barrels. Tun. Saltpeter and Brimstone, about 15 Spare Muskets 800 Besides what Guns, small Arms and Ammunition the E∣nemy,
after the Capitulation, threw into the Sambre, as was suspected. The Arms may be easily recovered thence. 6th. The King ordered the Guard to be taken off the Mareschal de Boufflers, upon his giving his parol to remain a Prisoner: And his Majesty, with the Duke of Bavaria and the General Officers, viewed all the Breaches, in order to their being repaired, and put in a defensible Condition; and likewise gave order for some additional Works. The same day Prince Vaudemont left the Army, and returned to Brussels, with orders for the English Troops to march thence to the Burnt-bridge, whence Count Tilly from Lo∣vain was to joyn them with other Forces, and march into Flanders. 7th. The King Detach'd the Brandenburghers, Hessians, and Lunenburghers from his Camp to Namur, to assist the other Battalions there to level the Trenches and other Works, and to mend the Breaches; who are afterwards to march further, and observe the French between the Sambre and the Meuse, and towards the Condros. 8th. His Majesty with the whole Army marcht from Bouquet to Sombref, about two Leagues; the Mareschal de Boufflers was the same day removed from Namur to Mae∣stricht, under the Conduct of Monsieur de L'Estang; and the Hostages for performance of the Capitulation of the Ca∣stle of Namur returned on either side. This day the King sent  the fourth Troop of Dutch Guards, and some of his Horses and Equipage towards Loo. 9th. The Landgrave of Hesse took his leave of his Maje∣sty, in order to his return to Cassal; and the Army march∣ed from Sombref to Bois Seigneur Isaac, his Majesty's Quar∣ters being in the Cloyster of that Name. The Mareschal de Villeroy marched the same day from Binch to Cambron near Aeth, having his Quarters at Aucvre, in the same place where his Majesty lay last Campaign, when our Forces en∣campt on the same Ground.
10th. His Majesty continued his March from Bois Seig∣neur Isaac to Limbeck near Hall, his Majesty having his Quarters in a Chatteau belonging to the Prince of Stein∣huise. 12th. His Majesty took a Review of the whole Army, and the Foot were short of their Complement, the Horse and Dragoons made it up by the extraordinary good Con∣dition his Majesty found them in. In the Evening the E∣lector of Bavaria returned from Brussels to the Army, and informs his Majesty that the Mareschal de Boufflers has sent the Captain of his Guards from Maestricht to acquaint him, That the King his Master is willing to restore the Garrisons of Dixmuyde and Dynse, in order to his being set at liberty. And his Majesty has taken the said Mareschal's word, that the said Garrisons shall be sent back, so soon as the French King has Notice of his Arrival at Dinant. 'Tis said the Mareschal is made a Duke and Peer of France. We have had a great deal of Rain of late, which in all probability will put an end to this Campain, without any further Acti∣on. 13th. His Majesty sent off the heavy Baggage to Brus∣sels (with one of his Majesty's Beds) and the Servants thereunto belonging, with orders to stay there until further orders, that if the King should have occasion to return to the Camp again, there might be a Bed and Necessaries rea∣dy. Quarter-Master Verhaest was likewise dispatched for∣ward towards Breda, to order re-lays of Horses for the Coaches. 14th. His Majesty left the Army at Limbeck, under the Command of the Elector of Bavaria, &c. and went to Macklyn, where his Majesty lay that Night. 15th. His Majesty continued his Journey from Macklyn to Breda, where his Majesty arrived that Evening, and was waited on by the Pensioners of Holland, and several Mem∣bers of the States, to take his Majesty's Directions about
the finishing and regulating some particular Affairs necessa∣ry to be done before his Majesty's going over for England: Great rejoycing were every where as his Majesty passed, for his safe and successful return from the Camp. 16th. His Majesty viewed the Fortifications, and gave Directions for the facing with Brick a Half-moon, according to the rest of the Works, it being washed partly away up∣on one Angle by the beating of the Water against it. Af∣ter which his Majesty was waited on and complemented by the Magistracy, for his Majesty's Successful Campaign and safe Return to them. 17th. Early in the Morning his Majesty set out of Bre∣da for the Grave, where his Majesty dined, and viewed the Fortifications: Afterwards went thence to Dieren, five Leagues from Loo, where his Majesty diverted himself with Hunting and shooting until the 20th. This Day the King hunted from Dieren, and the Stag running towards Loo, his Majesty came there that Night, where his Majesty expected the Elector of Branden∣burg. At the same time had advice that the Mareschal de Bouf∣fters parted from Maestricht the 18th of this Month, having first viewed the Fortifications of that place, and was con∣ducted to Dinant. And that a Party from Aeth had suprized the grand Guard of the Enemy (which still encamped at Chievre) killed several, and carried 2 Officers and 30 private Soldiers Prisoners to that Garrison. 21th. His Majesty received an Express from the Elector of Brandenburg, that the Landgrave of Hesse Cassel was come to Cleve to confer with his Electoral Highness about some Troops that are to be quartered about Collogne, which retarded his Highnesses waiting on his Majesty for some days. 22th. His Majesty hunted, attended with several Persons of Quality, but did not receive the expected Satisfaction,
the Deer ran well, and the Dogs were in extraordinary good Condition; but they being English bred, required English management, which was wanting by reason the Serjeant was disabled by a fall from his Horse. 23th. His Majesty went a shooting, and killed several brace of Pheasant and Partridge, and one Hare. The Bag∣gage left at Brussels was (according to order) arrived at the Hague. And by the Post just come in, we are told that the Mareschal de Boufflers, at his arrival at Dinant, gave to each Officer that conducted him a fine Sword, and to each Dragoon a Louis d'Or, expressing a great many Comple∣ments for his noble Entertainment whilst a Prisoner. The Mareschal de Villeroy lay still in his old Camp, and the Duke of Bavaria in his. 24th. His Majesty received advice that the French King had sent orders to the Intendants of the New Conquest to cause the Garrisons of Dixmuyde and Deynse to be set at Li∣berty, in order to their return; and particularly, all those who had taken Service under him, were to be discharged likewise, and Convoys appointed to see them delivered at the Frontiers of the Spanish Netherlands. Great Preparati∣ons are made for a Publick Rejoycing all Holland over, so the taking of Namur. 25th. News came from England with Letters from Ire∣land, giving an Account that the Parliament of that King∣dom went on with great cheerfulness and dispatch, and had unanimously voted the Supply for his Majesty, and made great progress therein: That the Packet Boat is not yet heard of with the English Mails of the 30th of August, and the 6th Instant. 26th. The King hunted with great Satisfaction, killing a Brace of Deer; and the same Day had an Account that the Elector of Bavaria marched with the Army from Limbeck to Lennick St. Quintin, where his Highness encampt the 22th; and that the Mareschal de Villeroy marched from
the Plain of Cambron near Aeth to Lewze, having sent off Detachments to cover the Country of Luxemburg, their Lines and Dunkirk; and that the Parties sent out from Aeth had, since the French encampt at Cambron, taken 700 of their Horses, and divers Prisoners. 27th. The Prince of Nassau, Governour and Stadtholder of Frizeland, came to wait on his Majesty with two For∣reign Ministers, viz. that of Zell and Lunenburg. 28th. This Day arrived here the Prince of Anhalt Dessau to wait on his Majesty, which being the Day appointed by the States for a General Thanksgiving, it was observed here, a Sermon being preached here on this Occasion (by one of the King's Chaplains) by his Majesty's Command; and in∣stead of Fire works and Humiliations, we drank the King's Health in a Glass of good Wine. Great Rejoycings and Fire-works ran universally through the Province. 29th. Was, a general Hunting day, and his Majesty ex∣treamly well pleased with the Sport: In the Evening Prince Vaudemont arrived from Brussels, and Mr. Smetteau the Minister of Brandenburg from the Hague, to meet the Ele∣ctor, who was hourly expected at Loo, where is a great Court at present to attend his Majesty. 30th. His Majesty had Letters from the Elector of Ba∣varia that he was still encampt at Quintins Linnick, and did not think it convenient to remove from thence as yet; that to preserve the Tents from Mildew he had caused the Foot to make Huts, and had Contoned the Horse and Dragoons in the adjacent Villages. October the 1st. Letters from Newport in Flanders bring the following Account, That the two Mails above-mention∣ed from England, were put on Board a hired Sloop at Har∣wich for that purpose, the Master and Boy being English, and 6 Frenchmen the rest of the Crew, they were met Half-Seas over, and taken by a French Privateer without
any Resistance; nor had the Master the Honesty to heave the Mails over-board, but suffered them to be taken likewise and carried to Dunkirk. 3d. Mr. Abel the famous Musician (or Singing-Master) who went to France with the late King James, and there re∣mained until some Months ago, that want of Bread, of Bu∣siness I mean, sent him to the Courts of some of the Ger∣man Princes, particularly that of Berlin, where his Voice and good Management procured him the Elector of Bran∣denburg's Picture set in Gold with Diamonds, is this day come to this Place, and by the Earl of Essex and Mr. Blaith∣wait introduced to kiss the King's Hand, and designs for England again. 4th and 5th. The King sent Orders for re-lays of Coach-horses, and the Waggons for transporting the Equipage from Loo to the Hague: the same day had the ill News from Hungary of the Turks taking Lippa and Titull, putting the Garrison of the former to the Sword, except the Com∣mandant and three others; afterwards burnt and destroyed both those places; the Elector of Saxony being advanced within three days march of Lippa, to engage the Enemy to a Battel if possible. 6th. Most of the King's Domesticks were sent towards the Hague; and his Majesty received Advice of the Arrival of the late Garrisons of Dixmuyde and Deynse at Ghent, the Governours of each place being at their Arrival there made Prisoners, and are to be tried by a Court-Martial. Mr. Smetteau the Brandenburg Minister and Plenipotentiary, went hence this morning to make provision for Lodging the Elector at his House. 7th. Early in the Morning his Majesty left Loo, and in the Evening arrived at the Hague with the Prince of Vaude∣mont; the Elector of Brandenburg, by reason of bad ways, could not reach Loo whilst his Majesty was there, is coming to this place, and expected in two days. His Majesty was
received with all Demonstrations of Joy for his safe Return, and great Preparations were made by the Burghers upon this Occasion, but his Majesty thought sit to decline the Cere∣mony. 8th. His Majesty was Complimented by the States Ge∣neral, Council of State, &c. and by all the Forreign Mini∣sters, Nobility and Gentry, making the greatest Court that has been seen at the Hague since the War. 9th. Orders were given for all things to be in a readiness to embark upon the first fair Wind, the Convoy being ar∣rived in the Goree under the Command of Sir Clousley Sho∣vel. 10th. His Electoral Highness of Brandenburg arrived at the Hague this Evening, and was conducted to Prince Mau∣rice's House, that of his Highness's Envoy being too little to entertain his Train. His Majesty immediately after his Arrival waited on his Highness, and were together above an hour. Afterwards all the People of Quality, the Pensi∣oner, &c. from the States General, and Mr. Abell our Eng∣lish Singing-Master amongst the rest, diverted his Highness with some new Musick, composed on the taking Na∣mur. 11th. The Elector Dined with his Majesty and Persons of the first Rank. The same day came the ill News of the Defeat of 8000 Imperialists by 40000 of the Turks near Lug, on the Borders of Transilvania, after a whole days Defence, with the greatest Courage and Bravery possible; that General Veterani was mortally wounded, and taken Prisoner with divers Officers, and that General Truchses had retreated by the favour of the Night to Caransebes, having lost about 2000 men, and that 10000 of the Enemy were killed in this Action; the Elector of Saxony being advan∣ced within 3 days march of the Enemy.
12th. His Majecty and Elector of Brandenburg were splendedly Entertained by my Lord Villiers, Plenipotentia∣ry and Ambassadour from his Britanick Majesty to the States General: And his Majesty designed to embark for England, but the Wind shifting Westerly, Orders were re∣peated for a general readiness when the Wind should pre∣sent. 13th. My Lord Portland gave a Noble Entertainment to his Majesty, his Electoral Highness, &c. and afterwards went abroad together to Surfleet, a little mile from the Hague. 14th. His Majesty had an Account that the French Fleet, which had been fitted out with so much diligence at Toulon, were ordered to be disarmed, except six, who were order∣ed to take in 3 months Provisions, and to Convoy some Merchant Ships from France to the Levant; the Galleys to be disarmed likewise, and sent back to Marseilles; and that the Enemy, upon the Marquis de Castanago's reinforcement, were demolishing Palamos in Catalonia, in order to retreat from that place, before the Spaniards could get up with their Forces, who now were Superiour to those of the E∣nemy; and that Admiral Russel was sailed towards the Streights with the Fleet under his Command. 15th. Prince Vaudemont entertained his Majesty and the Elector of Brandenburg: The same Evening arrived the Duke of Holstein Ploen from Flanders, to acquaint his Ma∣jesty with the disposition of the Troops in those parts, to prevent the Enemy from making any Incursion in the Frost, and that Villeroy had detach'd through the Lines, a Body of men towards Furnes with Pioneers, as if they had a design upon Newport; but that place being well provided, its sup∣posed they only intend to make some addition to their Lines about Ipres. 16th. His Majesty was at the French Church, and after∣wards with the Elector, made several Tours in the Fore∣hoat,
according to his usual custom in his Coach▪ after the manner of that call'd the Ring in Hide-Park. Aftwards had Advice of the Enemies Motion about Dinant, upon which his Majesty ordered all the Officers to return to their respe∣ctive Posts from the Hague. 17th. His Majesty with the Elector of Brandenburg, &c. hunted a Hare, and in the Evening supped together, was afterwards a considerable time in private with his Highness, and 'tis said that Prince is to send 20000 men next Cam∣paign to joyn the Allies in Flanders. 18th. The Wind came about to the Eastward, and a good Gale, but his Majesty's going on Board was retarded until Provisions could be sent to the Yachts. His Majesty took leave of  Highness and the States, &c. and ordered all his  and Baggage on Board. 19th. At 8 in the morning his Majesty left the Hague and went to Oranju Polder, where his Majesty went on rd his Yacht, and about Noon sailed with a fair Wind and a fresh Gale, being attended by Sir Clousley Shovel with a Squadron of English and Dutch Men of War. 20th or 10th old Style, with Day-light made the Fo∣lad, and about 10 in the Forenoon his Majesty landed at Mrgt, after an extraordinary Passage, and took Coach for Canty, where his Majesty lay that Night at the Deane∣ry, ed every where with multitudes of his good Sub∣jects, and received with all possible Demonstrations of Joy for his Majesty's safe Return, after so much danger in Ex∣posing his Royal Person on all Occasions during the Siege of Namur, &c. FINIS.
