F2436 12251600 57123
GOOD THOUGHTS In Worse TIMES. Consisting of Personall Medita∣tions. Scripture Observa∣tions. Meditations on the Times. Meditations on all kind of Prayers. Occasionall Medi∣tations. By THO. FULLER. B. D. LONDON, Printed by W. W. for John Williams at the Crowne in St Pauls Church∣yard. 1647.
TO THE CHRISTIAN READER. WHen I read the Description of the Tumult in Ephesus, Acts 9. 32. (wherein they would have their Diana to be Jure Divino, that it
fell down from Iupi∣ter) it appears to me the too Methodicall caracter of our present confusions. Some ther∣fore cryed one thing, and some another, for the assembly was confused and the more part knew not wherefore they were come together. O the distractions of our age? And how many thousand know as li∣tle why the sword was
drawn, as when it will be sheathed. Indeed, (thankes be to God) we have no more house burnings but many heart burnings, and though outward bleed∣ing bee stanched, it is to be feared that the broken vaine bleeds inwardswhich is more dangerous. This being our sad condition, I perceive controversiall writing (sounding somewhat
of Drums & Trum∣pets,) doe but make the wound the wider, Meditations are like the Ministrel the Pro∣phet called for, to pa∣cifie  2 Kings. 3 15. his mindaliscom∣posed with passion, which moved mee to adventure on this Treatise, as the most innocent and inoffen∣sive manner of write∣ing. I confesse a Volumn of another Subject, and
larger Size, is expect∣ed from mee. But in London I have learnt the difference, betwixt downright breaking, and craving time of their Creditors. Many sufficient Merchants though not Soluable from the present make use of the latter, whose example I follow. And though I cannot pay the Principall, yet I desire such small Treatises may be accepted, from
me as Interest or con∣sideration mony, un∣till I shal God willing be enabled to discharge the whole Debt. : 3 If any wonder that this Treatise comes Patron-lesse into the World, let such know that Dedications be∣gin now adayes to grow out of fashion. His Policy was com∣mended by many, (and proved profitable un∣to himselfe) who in∣sted
of Select God∣fathers, made all the Congregation Wit∣nesses to his Child, as I invite the World to this my Booke, reque∣sting each one would patronise therein such parts and passages thereof, as please them, so hoping that by seve∣rall persons the whole will be protected. I have Christian Reader, (so far I dare goe, not inquiring into
the Syre-name of thy Side or Sect) nothing more to urthen thy Patience with. Onely I will add, that I finde our Saviour in Tur∣tullian and ancient Latine Fathers, con∣stantly stiled a Seque∣er. Se∣questrator in the pro∣per notion of the Word. For God and man beeing at ods, the difference was Seque∣stied or referred into Christs his hand to
end and umpire it. How it fareth with thine estate on earth I know not, but I earnestly de∣sire, that in heaven both thou and I may e∣ver bee under Se∣questration in that Mediator for Gods glory and our good, to whose protection thou art committed By Thy Brother in all Christian Offices. THO. FULLER.
PERSONALL MEDITATIONS. I. Curiosity Curbed. OFTEN have I thought with my selfe, what Dis∣ase I would be best con∣ented to die of. None please mee. The Stone, the Cholick terrible, as expected, intollerable, when felt. The Palsie is death before Death. The
Consumption a flatte∣ring Disease, cozening men into Hope of long life at the last gaspe. Some sicknesse besot, o∣thers enrage men, some are too swift, and others too slow. If I could as easily de∣cline diseases as I could dislike them, I should be immortall. But away with these thoughts. The Marke must not chuse what Arrow shall be shot against it. What God sends I must receive. May I not be so curious to know what weapon shall wound me, as carefull to provide the Plaister of
Patience against it. Only thus much in generall: commonly that sicknesse seiseth on men, which they least suspect. He that expects to be drown'd with a Dropsie may bee burnt with a Fevour, and she that feares to bee swlne with a Tympany may be shriveled with a Consumption. II. Deceiv'd, not hurt. HEaring a passing-Bell, I prayed that the sick mn might have through Christ, a safe Voyage to his long home. Afterwards I
understood that the par∣ty was dead some houres before; and it seemes in some places of London the Tolling of the Bell, is but a Preface of course to the ringing it out. Bells better silent then thus telling Lyes. What is this but giving a false ala∣rum to mens Devotions, to make them to be ready armed with their Prayers for the assistance of such, who have already fought the good sight, yea and gotten the Conquest? Not to say that mens Charityherein may be sus∣pected of Superstition in
Praying for the Dead. However my Heart thus powred out, was not spilt on the ground. My prayers too late to doe him good, ame soone enough to speake my good will. What I freely tendred God airely tooke, according to the integrity of my Inten∣tion. The Partie I hope is in Abraham's and my prayers I am sure are returned into my owne osom. III. Nor full, nor fasting. LIving in a Country Uillage where a Bu∣riall
was a rarity, I never thought of Death, it was so seldome presented unto me. Comming to London where there is plenty of Funeralls, (so that Coffins crowd one∣another, & corps in the grave justle for Elbow roome) I slight and neg∣lect death because grown an object so constant and common. How foule is my sto∣mach to turne all foode into bad humours? Fu∣neralls neither few nor frequent, worke effectu∣ally upon mee. London is a Library of Mortality. Uolumes of all sorts and
sizes, rich, poore, infants, children, youth, men, old men daily die; I see there is more required to make a good Scholler, then onely the having of many bookes: Lord be thou my Schoolemaster, and teach mee to number my dayes that I may apply my heart unto Wisedome. IIII. Strange and True. I Read in the Rev. 13. 7. Revela∣tation of a Beast, one of whose Heads was as it were wounded to Death. I expected in the next verse, that the Beast
should die, as the most probable consequence, considering 1. It was not a scratch, but a wound. 2. Not a wound in a fleshly part, or out-limbs of the body, but in the very head, the Throne of Reason. 3. No light wound, but in outward Appari∣tion, (having no other Probe but St. Johns Eyes to seach it) it seemed deadly. But marke what imme∣diately followes, and his deadly wound was healed. Who would have sus∣pected this inference
rom these premises. But  not this the lively Em∣lem of my naturall cor∣uption? Sometimes I conceive that by Gods Grace I have conquered and kill'd, subdued and laine, maim'd and mor∣tid the deedes of the sh: never more shall I be molested or bufseted, with such a bosom sinne when, alas! by the next eturne, the news is, it is rvived, and recovered. Thus Tenches though grievously gashed, pe∣sently plaister them∣selves whole by that li∣mie and unctious hu∣our they have in them;
and thus the inherent Balsam of Badnesse quickly cures my cor∣ruption, not a scarre to be seene. I perceive I shall never finally kill it, till first I be dead my selfe. V. Blushing to be Blush∣ed for. A Person of great Qua∣lity was pleased to lodge a nigt in my House. I durst not invite him to my Family-Prayer, and therefore for that time omitted it: thereby making a breach in a
good custome & giving Sathan advantage to as∣sault it. Yea the loose∣ning of such a Linke, might have endangered the scattering of the Chaine. Bold Bashfulnesse, which durst offend God, whil'st it did feare man. Especially considering that though my Guest was never so high, yet by the Lawes of Ho∣spitality, I was above him, whilst he was under my Roofe. Hereafter whosoever cōmeth with∣in the Dores, shall bee requested to come with∣in the Discipline of my
house; If accepting my homely diet, he will not refuse my home-devoti∣on; and sitting at my Ta∣ble, will be intreated to kneel downe by it. VI. Alash for Lazinesse. SHamefull my sloath, that havedeferred my Night-Prayer, till I am in bed. This lying along is an improper posture for piety. Indeed there is no contrivance of our body, but some good man in Scripture hath hanseled it with Prayer. The Publican standing,
Iob Iob. 8. ting, Hezekih, lying on his bed,  Kings . Elih with his face between his lggs. But of all gestures give me St. Paules, Eph 3. 12. For this caue I bow my knees to the Father of y L Jsus Christ. Kn whn they may, then they must be bnded I have read a Copy of a grant of liberty, from Queene Mary to Henry Rffe Earle of Sussex, giving him Weavers fn. Mon. p 635. leave to weare a Night-Cap or Co in her Majsties pre∣sence, counted a great fa∣vour because of his In∣firmity. I know in case of necessity, God would
gratiously accept my de∣votion, bound downe in a sicke dressing; but now whilst I am in perfect health, it is inexcusable. Christ commanded some to take up their bed, in token of their full reco∣very; My lazinesse may suspect, least thus my bea taking me up, prove a presage of my ensuing sicknesse. But may God pardon my Idlenesse this once, I will not againe offend in the same kind, by his grace hereafter.
VII. Roote, Branch, and Fruit. A Poor man of Sevil in Spaine, having a fair and fruitfull Peare-tree, one of the Fathers of the Inquisition desired (such Tyrants requests, are com∣mandes) some of the fruit thereof. The poore man, not out of gladnesse to gra∣tifie, but feare to offend, as if it were a sinne for him to have better fruit, then his betters, (suspecting on his deniall the Tree might be made his owne Rod, if not his Gallows)
plucked up tree, roots and all, and gave it unto him. Allured with love to God, and advised by my owne advantag, what he was frighted to do, I wil freely performe. God cal∣leth on mee to present hm with Math. 3.8. fruits, meet for re∣pentance. yea let him take all, soule and body, powers, and parts, faculties, and members of both, I offer a sacrifice unto himselfe. good reason, for indeed the Tree was his, before it was mine, and I give him of his owne. Besdes it was doubt∣full, whether the poore
ateriall Tree, be∣ng removed, would grow . Some plants, trans∣planted (especially when old) become sullen, and do not enjoy themselves, in a oile wherewith they were nacquainted. But sure I am when I have given my selfe to God, the mov∣ng of my soule shall be the ending of it, he will dresse so  and  Ioh 15.2. so prune and purge mee, that I shall bring forth ost fruit in my Age. VIII. God speed the Plow. I Saw in seed-time an Husbandman at Plow, in
very raining day, askin him the reason, why h would not rather leav off, then labour in suc foule weather, his answe was returned me in the Country Rythme. Sow Beanes in the Mud And they'le come up like Wood. This could not bu minde mee of Psa. 126. 5, 6. David expression, They that so inteares, shall reape i joy. He that goeth fort and weepeth, bearing pre∣cious seed, shall doubtless come againe with rejoyce∣ing, bringing his sheave with him. These last five yeare
have been a wett and oeful Seeds time to me, nd many of my afflicted Brethren. Little hope have wee, as yet, to come gaine to our owne omes; and in a literall sense, now to bring our sheaves, which wee see o∣thers dayly carry away, on their shoulders. But if we shall not share in the former, or latter har∣vest here on Earth, the third and last in Heaven, wee hope undoubtedly o receive.
IX. Cras Cras. GReat was the Abun∣dance and boldne of the Frogs in Exod. 8. 3. Egypt, which went up and came into their Bedchambers, and beds, and kneading∣troughs, and very Ovens. Strange that those Fenn∣dwellers should approach the siery Region; But stranger, that Pharoah should bee so back ward to have them removed, and being demanded of Moses when hee would have them sent away, an∣swered,
to Exod. 8. 10. Morrow Hee uld bee content with eir company one ght, at bed and at bord, ath belike to acknow∣dge either Gods justice  sending, or power in emanding them, but ill hoping that they ca∣ally came, and might sually depart. Leave I any longer to onder at Pharoah, and en admire at my selfe. hat are my sinnes but  many Toades, spit∣g of venome & spawn∣ng of Poyson; croaking  my judgement, cree∣ing into my Will, and rawling into my affecti∣ons,
This I see, and suffer and say with Pharoah, t Morrow, to morrow I w amend. Thus as the Hbrew Tongue, hath n proper Present-tense, bu two Future-tenses, so a the performances of m reformation, are onely i promises for the time to come. Grant, Lord, I may seosonably drowne this Pharoah-like procrastina∣tion in the Sea of repen∣tance, least it drowne me in the Pit of perdition.
X. Green when Gray. N September I saw a tree bearing Roses, hilst others of the same ind, round about it, were barren; demanding he cause of the Gardi∣er, why that Tree was n exception from the ule of the rest, this rea∣son was rendred, because that alone being clipt close in May, was then hindred to spring and sprout, and therefore tooke this advantage by it selfe, to bud in Au∣tumne.
Lord, If I were curb' and Snip't in my youn∣ger yeares by feare o my parents, from those vicious excrescencies, to which that age wa subject, give mee to have a godly jealousie o∣ver my heart, suspecting an -Spring, least corrupt nature, (which without thy rraining grace will have a Vent) break forth in my redu∣ced yeares into youth∣full vanities.
XI. Miserere. THere goes a Traditi∣on of Ovid, that fa∣ous Poet (receiving ome countenance from is owne co fession De tristi∣bus lib. 2 Eleg. 10.) hat when his Father was bout to beate him, for ollowing the pleaant, ut profitlese study of etrie, he u correct∣on promiss'd his Father, ever more to make a erse, and made a Verse, n his very Promise. Proably the same in sense, ut certainely more ele∣gant
for composure, the this verse with commo credulity hath taken up. Parce precor, Genitor, posthac non versisicabo. Father on me pitty take Verses I no more will make. When I so solemnely promise my Heavenly Father to sinne no more. I sinne in my very pro∣mise, my weake prayer made to procure my par∣don, increase my guilti∣nesse, O the dulnesse and deadnesse of my heart therein! I say my pray∣ers as the Exod. 2. 11. Iewes eate the
ssover in haste. And hereas in bodily Acti∣s motion is the cause  heate; cleane contra∣, the more speed I make in my prayers the older I am in my De∣otion. XII. Monarchy and mercy. N reading the Roman, (whilst under Consulls)  Belgick Historie of the nited Provinces, I re∣ember not any ca∣itall offender being ondemned, ever forgiven ut alwayes after Sen∣tence,
followes executio It seemes that the ve constitution of a mul tude is not so inclina to save as to destro Such Rulers in Aristocr cies or Popular State cannot so properly  called GODS, becau though having the gre Attributes of a Deity Power, and Iustice, the want (or wil not use then  god-like pro∣perty of GODS, clemen to forgive. May I dye in that Go∣vernment, under which was borne, where a M∣narch doth comman Kings where they se
use, have gratiously anted pardons, to men pointed to death; rein the lively Image  GOD, to whom belongs  and Dan 9 9. forgive∣sse. And, although I ill endeavour so to be∣ve my selfe, as not to ed my Soveraignes fa∣ur in this kind, yet be∣use none can warrant s Innocency in all ings, it is co fortable ing in such a common∣ealth, where Pardons retofore on occasion ve been, and hereaf∣ may be procured.
XIII. What helps not hurt A vaine thought are in my heart, instaly my corruption ∣taines it selfe to be  Advocate for it, pleading that the worst th could be said against  was this, that it was Vaine thought. And is not this the b that can be said for  Remember O my sou the Luk. 13 7. Fig tree was chared not with bearing noous, but no fruit. Yea barren Fig-tree bare
fruit of Annoyance, Cut it downe why cumbreth it the groun? vain thoughts doe this ill in my heart that they doe no good esides the ig-tree Pester'd but one part of of the Garden, good Grapes might grow, at the same time, in other Places of the Vineyard. But seeing my Soule is so intent on its object, that it cannot attend two things at once, one Tree for the time being is all my Vineyard. A vaine Thought engrosseth all the Ground of my heart, till that be rooted out, no good meditation can
grow with it or by it. XIIII. Alwayes seen, never minded. In the most healthfull times, two hundred and upwards, was the con∣stant weekely tribute paied to mortality in London. A Large Bill but it must be discharged Can one City spend ac∣cording to this weekely rate, and not be Banke∣rupt of People? At least wise must not my short be called for, to make up the reckoning?
When onely seven young-men and those chosen, Plut.  lives in Thesco. by Lot, were but yearely taken out of Athens, to be devoured by the monster Mino∣taure, the whole Citty was in a constant fright, children for themselves, and parents for their children. Yea their esca∣ping of the first, was but an introduction to the next yeares Lottery. Were the dwellers and lodgers in London weekly to cast Lotts, who should make up this two hundred, how would every one be af∣frighted? Now none re∣gard
it. My security concludes the aforesaid number, will amount of Infants and old folke. Few men of middle age and amongst them, sure∣ly not my selfe. But oh! is not this putting the e∣vill day far from me, the ready way to bring it the nearest to me? The Lot is weakly drawn (though not by mee) for mee, I am therefore concerned seriously to provide, lest that deaths Price, prove my Blanke.
XV. Not whence, but whither. FInding a bad thought in my heart, I disput∣ed in my selfe the cause thereof, whether it pro∣ceeded from the Devil, or my owne corruption, examining it by those Signes, Divines in this case recommended. 1. Whether it came in incoherently, or by de∣pendance on some object presented to my senses. 2. Whether the thought was at full age at the first instant, or infant-like,
grew greater by degrees. 3 Whether out or in the road of my naturall inclination. But hath not this In∣quiry, more of curiosity then Religion? Hereaf∣ter derive not the Pedi∣gree, but make the mitti∣mus of such Malefactors. Suppose a confederacy betwixt Theeves with∣out, and false servants within, to assault and wound the Master of a family: thus wounded, would he discuss, from which of them, his hurts proceeded, No surely, but speedily send for a Surgeon, before he bleed
to death. I will no more put it to the Question, whēce my bad thoughts come, but whither I shall send them, least this curious controversy insensibly betray mee in∣to a consent unto them. XVI. Storme, steere on. THe Mariners sayling with St. Paul, bare up bravely against the Tempest, whilst either Art or industry could be∣friend them. Finding both to faile, and that they could not any lon∣er
be are up into the winde, they even let their Ship drive. I have indeavou∣red Act. 26. 15. in these distemperate times, to hold up my spi∣rits, and to steere them steddily. An happy peace here, was the port wher∣at I desired to arive. Now alasse the Storme growes to surdy for the Pilot. Hereafter all the skill I will use, is no skill at all, but even let my ship saile whither the winds send it. Noahs Arke was bound for no other Port, but preservation for the pre∣sent, (that Sh being all the Harbour) not inten∣ding
to sind land, but to sloat on water. May my Soule, (though not sail∣ing to the desired Ha∣ven) onely be kept from sinking in sorrow. This comforts mee that the most weather∣beaten Vessell cannot properly be seized on for a Wrack, which hath any quick cattle re∣maining therein. My spirits are not as yet for∣feited to despaire, having one lively spark of hope in my heart, because God is even where he was be∣fore.
17. Wit-out-Witted. IOab chid the man, (un∣known in Scripture by his name, well knowne for his wisedome,) fo not killing Absalon when hee saw him han∣ged in the Tree, promi∣sing him for his paines, ten shekles and a girdle. But the man, (having the Kings command to the contrary,) refused his proffer. Well hee knew that politick Stats men would have dange∣rous designes fetcht out
of the fire, but with o∣ther mens fingers. His Grdle promised might in payment, prove an haltar. Yea hee added moreover, that had hee kild Absalon, Joab himself 2 Sam. 18. 13. would have set himselfe against him. Satan daily solicits me to sinne, (point blancke a∣gainst Gods Word,) bai∣ting me with profers best pleasing my corruption. If I consent, he who last tempted, first Rev. 12.10. accuseth me. The fauning Spann∣nell, turnes a fierce Lion and roareth out my faults in the Eares of Heaven. Grant, Lord,
when Satan shall next serve me, as Joab did th nameless Israelite, I ma serve him, as the name lesse Israelite, did Joa flatly refusing his deceit∣full Tenders. XVIII. Hereafter. DAvid fasted & prayed for his sick Sonn, that his life might be prolonged. Put when he was dead, this considera∣tion comforted him. I shall Sam. 2. 12. 23. goe to him, But hee shall not returne to me. Peace did long lie lan∣guishing
in this Land. No small contentment that to my poore power, I have prayed and preached for the preservation thereof. Seeing since it is departed this Supports my soule, having little hope that Peace here should returne to mee; I have some assurance that I shall goe to peace heareafter. XIX. Bad at best. LOrd, how come wick∣ed thoughts to per∣plex me in my Prayers,
when I desire and en∣deavour onely to attend thy Srvice? Now I per∣ceive the cau thereof. at other times I have willingly entertained them, and now they en∣tertaine themselves a∣gainst my will. I acknow∣ledge thy justice, that what formerly I have in∣vited, now I cannot ex∣pell. Give me here af∣ter alwayes to bolt out such ill guestes. The best way to be rid of uch bad thoughts in my Prayers is not to receive them out of my Prayers.
XX. Compendium dispendiune. POpe Boniface the th at the end of each hundred yeares,  a Iubilee at Rme, wherein people, bring∣ing themselves, and mo∣ney thither had Pardon for their sinnes. Put Centenary yeares return'd but seldome Popes were old before and vetuous when they came to their place. Few had the happinesse to fill their Coffers with Iu∣bilee-Coyne. Hereupon,
Examen. con. Tri∣dent. pag. 736. Co∣lum. 2. Clement the sixth re∣duced it to every fif∣teenth yeare. Gregory the eleventh to every three and thirtieth. Paul the se∣cond, and Sixtus the fourth to every twenti∣eth fifth yeare. Yea, an Agitation is re∣ported in the Conclave, to bring downe Iubilees to fifteenth, twelve, or ten yeares, had not some Cardinalls, (whose poli∣cy was above their cove∣teousnes) opposed it. I serve my prayers, as they their Iubilees. per∣chance they may extend to a quarter of an houre, when powred out at
large. But some dayes I begrutch this time as too much, and omit the reface of my Prayer, with some passages con∣ceived lesse material, and unne two or three Peti∣ions into one, so contract∣ing them to halfe a quar∣ter of an Houre. Not long after, this also seemes two long; I decon∣tract and abridge the A∣bridgement of my Prayers, Yea, (be it confessed to my shame and sorrow that hereafter I may a∣mend it) too often I shrinke my Prayers to a mnute, to a moment, to a Lord have mercy upon me.
SCRIPTURE OBSERVATIONS. I. Prayer may Preach. FAther, I thank thee (said our John 11 41. Sa∣v our, being rea∣dy to aise Lazars, that thou hst head me. And I now that thou he  me , but because of the Pople that stand by, I said it, that they may be∣lieve that thou hast sent
me. It is lawfull for Mi∣nisters in their publique Prayers to insert passages for the Edifying of their Auditors, at the same time petitioning God & informing their Hearers. For our Saviour glancing his Eyes at the Peoples instruction, did no whit hinder the stead fastnesse of his lookes, lifted up to his Father. When before Sermon I pray for my Soveraigne & Master KNG of great Britaine, France, and Ire∣land, Defnder of the Faith, in all causes, and over all persons, &c. Some (who omit it them∣selves)
may censure it in me for superfluous: But never more neede to teach men the Kings Ti∣tle, & their owne uty, that the simple may be informed, the forgetfull remembred thereof, and that the affectedly Igno∣rant, who will not take Advice, may have all ∣cuse taken from them. Wherefore in powring forth my prayers to God, well may I therein spin∣kle some by-drops for the Instruction of the people.
II. The Vicious Meane. ZOphar the Naama∣thte mentioneth a sort of men, in whose mouthes wickednesse is sweet, Job 20.12. They hide it un∣der their tonue, they spare it, and forsae it not, but keepe it still in their mouth. This furnisheth me with a Tripartite di∣vision of men in the World. The first and best are those, who  sin out, loathing it in their judg∣ments, and leaving it in their practice.
The second sort, noto∣riously wicked, who swalow sinne downe, actually and openly com∣mitting it. The third endeavou∣ring and expedient be∣twixt Heaven and Hell, neither doe nor deny their lusts; neither spit∣ting them out nor swal∣lowing them downe, but rolling them under their tongues, epicurizing ther∣on, in their filthy fancies and obscene speculati∣ons. If God at the last day of judgement hath three hands, a right for the Sheep, a left for the
Goates, the middle is mos proper for these third sort of men. But both these latter kinds of sin∣ners shall be confounded together. The rather be∣cause a sinne thus rolled, becomes so soft and sup∣le, and the Throat is so short and slippery a pas∣sage, that insensibly it may slide downe from the mouth into the Sto∣mach, and contempla∣tive wantonnesse quickly turnes into practicall un∣cleanesse.
III. Store no Sore. IOb had a custome to offer burnt offerings ac∣cording to the number of his Sonnes, for Iob. 1.5. he said, It may be that my Sonnes in their feasting hav sinned, and cursed God in their hearts. It may be, not it must be, he was not certaine but sus∣pected it. But now; what if his Sonnes had not sin∣ned? was Iob's labour lost, and his Sacrifice of none effect? Oh no! on∣ly their property was al∣tered;
In case his Sonnes were found fulty, hs Sacrifices for them were propitiatorie, & through Christ obtained their pardon: In case they were innocent his offe∣rings were Eucharisticall, returning thankes to Gods restraining grace, for keeping his Sonnes from such sinnes, which otherwise they would have committed. I see in all doubtfull matters of Devotion, it is wisest to be on the su∣res side, better both lock, and bolt, and barre it, then leave the least doore of danger open. Hast
thou done what is dispu∣table whether it be well done? Is it a measuring cast whether it be lawfull or no? So that thy consci∣ence may seeme in a manner to stand Neuter, Su a conditional pardon out of the court of hea∣ven, the rather because our selfe-love is more prone to flatter, then our godly jealousie to suspect our selves without a cause, with such humili∣t heaven is well pleased. For suppose thy selfe o∣ver-cautious needing no forgivenesse in that par∣ticular, God will inter∣pret the pardon thou
prayest for to be the prai∣ses presented unto him. IIII. Line on Line. MOses in Gods name did counsell Joshua, Deutronomie 31. 23. Be strong, and of a good cou∣rage, for thou shalt bring the children of Israel int the land which I sware to them. God immediately did command him, Josh. 1. 6. Be strong and of a good courage, and againe v. 7. Onely be thou strong and very couragious; and againe v. 9. Have I no
commanded thee? be strong and of a good courage, be not affraid, neither be not dismaid, Lastly the Ru∣benites, and Gadites heartily desired him, v. 18. Onely be strong and of a good courage. Was Joshua a dunce or a coward? did his witt or his valour want an edge? that the same pre∣cept must so often be press'd upon him, no doubt neither but God saw it needfull, that  should have courage of Proofe, who was to en∣counter both the froward Iew, and the fierce Canaa∣nite.
Though metal on me∣tal, colour on colour be falfe Heraldry, Esa. 28.10. line on line, precept on precept, is true divinity. Be not therefore of∣fended ô my soule, if the same Doctrine be often delivered unto thee by different Preachers: If the same precept (like the Gen. 3.24. sword in Paradise, which turned every way) doth hunt and haunt thee, tracing thee which way soever thou turnest rather conclude that thou art deeply concerned in the practice thereof which God hath thought fit should be so frequent∣ly
inculcated into thee. V. O the Depth. HAd I beheld Sodome in the beauty thereof and had the Angel told me, that the same should be suddainly destroyed, by a mercilesse Element, I should certainly have concluded that Sodome should have been drownd led thereunto by these considerations. 1. It was situated in the Plaine of Irdan, a flat, low, level Country. 2. It was well watered
Gen. 3. 10. every where, and where alwayes there is water enough there may some∣times be too much. 3. Iordan had a quali∣ty in the first moneth to overflow Chr. 12. 15. all his bankes. But no dropp of mois∣ture is spilt on Sodom, it is burnt to Ashes. How wide are our conjectures, when they guesse at Gods judgements? How farre are his wayes aboe our apprehensions? Especi∣ally when wicked men with the Sodomites wan∣der in strange sinnes out of the Rode of common corruption, God meets them with strange pu∣nishments,
out of the reach of common con∣ception, not coming within the compasse of a rationall suspition. VI. Selfe, Selfe-hurter. VVHen God at the first day of judg∣ment, arraigned Eve, she transferred her fault on the Gen. 3. 13. Serpent which be∣guiled her. This was one of the first fruits of our depraved nature. But ever after regenerate men in Scripture making the confession of their sinnes,
(whereof many prece∣dents) cast all the fault on themselves alone, yea Da∣vid when he numbred the People, though it be express'd that 1 Chro. 21.1. Satan provked him thereun∣to, and though David prbably might be sensi∣ble of his temptation, yet he never accused the De∣vil, but derived all the guilt on himselfe 1 Chro. 21.17. I, it is that have sinned, good reason for Satan hath no impu sive power, he may strike fire, till he be wa∣ry, (if his Malce cn be weary) except mans cor∣ruption brig he nder, the match, cannot be
lighted Away then with that Plea of Course. THE DEUILL OWED ME ASHAME Owe thee he might, but pay thee he could not, unlesse thou wer't as willing to take his Black money, as he to tender it. VII. God, behold a Troope commeth. THe 2 Sam 1. Amalakite who brought the Tidings to David began with Truth, rightly reporting the overthrow of the Israelites, Cheaters must
get some Credit, before they can cozen, and all Falsehood, if not founded in some Truth, would not bee fixed in any Beliefe. But proceeding he told six lyes succes∣sively. 1. That Saul called him. 2. That he came at his call. 3. That Saul demanded who he was. 4. That hee return'd his Answer. 5. That Saul commanded him to kill him, 6. That he kill'd him ac∣cordingly.
A wilfull Falsehood told, is a Cripple not able to stand by it selfe, with∣out some to support it, it is easie to tell a lye, hard to tell but a lie. Lord, If Ibe so unhap∣pie to relate a Falshood; give me to recall it or re∣pent of it. It is said of the Pismires, that to prevent the Growing (and so the corrupting) of that Corne which they hoord up, for their Winter pro∣vision, they bite off both the ends thereof, wherein the generating Power of the Graine doth confist. When I have committed a sinne, O let me so order
it, that I may destroy the Procreation thereof, and I, by a true sorrow, con∣demne it to a blesed Barrennesse. VIII. Out meanes in Miracles. VVHen the Angell brought * Saint Peter out of Prison, the Iron gate opened of it's owne accord. But com∣ming to the House of Ma∣ry the Mother of John, Marke was faigne to stand before the Doore, and knock. When Iron gave Obedience, how
can Wood make opposi∣tion? The Answer easie. There was no man to o∣pen the Iron-Gate, but a Portresse was provided of Course to unlock the doore, God would not therefore shew his Fing∣er, where men's hands were appointed to do the worke. Heaven will not Super-institute a miracle, were ordinary meanes we formerly in peacea∣ possession. But if they  depart or resigne ( confessing  ufficiency) there  succeed in their vacancy.
Lord, if onely Wooden obstacles (such as can be removed by might of man) hindred our hope of peace, the Arme of flesh might relieve us. ut alasse they are Iron Obstructions, as come not within human power or policy to take a way. No proud flesh shall there∣fore presumptuously pretend to any part of the praise, but ascribe it soly to thy selfe, if now thou shouldest be pleased after seaven yeares hard Apprentiship in civill Wares, miraculously to burn our Indentures, and restore us to our former liberty.
IX. Military Mourning. SOme may wonder at the strang incoherence in the Words and Acti∣ns. 2 Sm. 1. 17. And David Lamented, with this Lamentation, ver Saul, and over Jona∣han his Sonne. Also hee ad them teach the chil∣dren of Judah the use of  Bow. But the Connexion Is excellent. For that is the most Souldier-like-Sor∣ow, which in middest of griefe can give Order, for
Revenge, on such as have slaine heir Friends. Our generall Fast was first appointed to  the Massacre of our ethren in Ireland. But it is in vaine, to have a Finger in the Eye, if we have not also a Sword  the other hand; Such tam lamenting of lost friends is but lost lamentation We must bend our Bow in the Camp, as well as ou knees in the Churches, an second our posture of Pi∣ety with martiall provi∣sion.
X. No stoole of wickednesse. SOme times I have dis∣puted with my selfe, which of the two were most guilty. David wh said in hast all men are Psal. 116 11. lyars, or that wicked man who Psal. 50. 20. sat and spake a∣gainst his Brother, and slandered his owne Mo∣thers Sonne. David seemes the grea∣ter offender; for Man∣kind might have an acti∣on of defamation against him, yea, he might justly be challenged for giving
all men the lye. But marke David was in hast, he spake it in Transitu, when he was passing, or rather posting by, or if you please, not David, but Davids Haste rashly vented the words. Wher∣as the other Sate, a sad solemne, serious, preme∣ditate, deliberate posture, his malice had a full blow with a steddy hand, a the credit of his Brother. Not to say that SATE car∣ries with it the counte∣nance of a Iudiciall pro∣ceeding, as if he made  Session or Bench-business thereof, as well condemn∣ning as accusing unjustly.
Lord, pardon my cur∣sory, and preserve me from sedentary sinnes. If in haste or heate of passi∣on I wrong any, give me at leisure to aske thee and them forgivenesse. But O let me not sit by it, tudiously to plot, or  mischiefe to any out of malice prepense. To hed bloud, in coole loud, is bloud with a witnesse. XI. By Degrees. Ee by what staires wicked 2 Kings. 16. Ahaz, did
climb up to the heigth of prophanesse. First he Verse 10 saw an Ido∣latrous Altar at Damascus. Our eyes when gazing on sinfull Objects are out of their calling and Gods keeping. Secondly he lik'd it. There is a secred Fasci∣nation in superstition, and our soules soone be∣witched, with the gaw∣dinesse of false service from the simplicity o Gods worship. Thirdly he made th like to it. And herein * Ver 11. Vriah the Priest (Patr and Chaplaine well me was the Midwife to del
ver the Mother-Altar of Damascus of a Babe, like unto it, at Hierusale. Fourthly He Ver. 13. sacrifi∣ced on it. What else could be expected, but that when he had tuned this new instrument of Idola∣try, he would play upon it. Fifthly, he commanded the Ver. 15. People to doe the like. Not content to confine it to his personall impiety. Lastly, he removed Gods Altar away. That venera∣ble Altar, by divine ap∣pointment peaceably possess'd of the place, for 200. yeares and upwards, must now be violentlye∣jected
by a usurping Vp∣start. No man can be starke naught at once. Let us stop the progresse of sin in our Soule at the first Stage, for the further it goes, the faster it will in∣crease XII. The best Bedmaker. VVHen a good man is ill at ease, God promiseth to make all his Psal. 41.3. Bed in his sicknesse. Pil∣low, Bolster, Head, feet, sides, all his bed. Surely that God who made him,
knowes so well his mea∣sure and temper, as to make his bed to please him. Herein his Art is excellent, not sitting the Bed to the person, but the person to the Bed, in∣susing patience into him. But O how shall God make my Bed, who have no bed of mine owne to make? Thou foole, hee can make thy not having a bed, to be a bed unto thee. when Jacob slept on the en. 28.12. ground who would not have had his hard lodging, therewithall to have his heavēly dreame? Yea the poore woman in Jersey, Fox Martir 3. volum. which in the
reigne of Queen Mary, was delivered of a child, as she was to be burnt at the Stake, may be said to be brought to bed in the fire. Why not? If Gods justice threatned to cast Rev. 2.22. Jezabel into a Bed of fire, why might not his mercy make, the very flames a soft bed to that his patient Martyr. XIII. When begun, ended. THe Scripture giveth us a very short ac∣count of some Battailes, as if they were flightes
without sights, and the Armies parted as soone as met. as Gen 14. 10. 1 Sam. 31.1 2 Cro. 25. 22. Some will say the spi∣rit gives in onely the summe of the successe, without any particular passages in acheiving it. But there is more in it, that so little is said of the fight. For sometime the Question of the Victory, is not disputed at all, but the bare propounding decides it. The stand of Pikes, oftimes no stand, & the footemen so fitly call∣ed as making more use of their feet then their hands. And when God
sends a qualme of feare over the souldiers hearts, it is not all the skill and valour of their comman∣ders, can give them a cor∣diall. Our late Warre hath given us some instances hereof. Yet let not men tax their Armyes for cowardise, it being pro∣bable, that the badnesse of such as staid at home of their respective sides, had such influence on those in field, that Soul∣diers hearts might be feare-broken, by the score of their sinnes, who were no Souldiers.
XIIII. Too late, Too late. THe Elder Brother laid a I uke 15. 14. sharpe and true charge against his Brother prodigal, for his riot and luxury. This no∣thing affected his Father, the mirth, meat, musick at the feast, was notwith∣standing no whit abated. Why so? Because the el∣der Brother was the younger in this respect, & came too late. The o∣ther had got the speed of him, having first accused
himselfe, (9 verses be∣fore) and already ob∣tained his pardon. Satan, (to give him his due) is my Brother, and my elder by creati∣on. Sure I am, hee will be my greivous accuser. I will endeavour to pre∣vent him, first condemn∣ing my selfe to God my Father. So shall I have an Act of indempnity before he can enter his action a∣gainst mee.
XV. Lawfull Stealth. I find two (husband and wife) both stealing, and but one of them guilty of felony. And Rachel Gen. 31. 19. had stolne the I∣mages that were her Fa∣thers, and Jacob stole a∣way unawares to Laban the Syrian. In the former a complication of Theft lying, sacriledge, and I∣dolatry; In the latter no sin at all. For what our conscience tels us is law∣full, and our discretion, dangerous, it is both con∣science
and discretion to doe it with all possible secrecy. It was as lawfull for Jacob in that case pri∣vately to steale away, as it is for that man, who findes the Sun-shine too hot for him, to walke in the shade. God keep us from the guilt of Rachels stealth. But for Jacobs stealing a∣way, one may confess the fact, but deny the fault therein. Some are said to have gotten their life for a prey if any, In that sense, have preyed on, (or if you will) plundered their own liberty, stealing away from the place, where
they conceived their selves in danger, none can justly condemne them. XVI. Text improved. I Heard a Preacher take for his Text, Am I not thy Asse, Num. 2.2.30. upon which thou hast ridden e∣ver since I was thine unto this day, was I ever wont to doe so unto thee? I won∣dred what he would make thereof, fearing hee would starve his Audi∣tors for want of matter. But hence he observed. 1. The siliest and sim∣plest
being wronged, may justly speake in their own defence. 2. Worst men, have  good Title to their own Goods. Balaam a Sorcerer yet the Asse confesseth twise he was his. 3. They who have done many good offices, and faile in one, are often not onely unrewarded for for∣mer service, but punished for that one offence. 4. When the creatures formerly officious to serve us, start from their wont∣ed obedience (as the Earth to become barren and Aire pestilential) man ought to reflect on his owne sinne as
the sole cause thereof. How fruitfull are the seeming Barren places of Scripture. Bad Plow-men, which make Balkes of such Ground. Whereso∣ever the surface of Gods Word doth not laugh and Sing with Corne, there the heart thereof within is merry with Mines, affording, where∣not plaine matter, hid∣den mysteries. XVII. The Royall bearing. GOd is said to have brougth the Israe∣lites
out of Aegypt an Exod. 19 4. Aeagles-wings. Now Ea∣gles, when removing their Young-ones, have a diffe∣rent posture from other Foule, proper to them∣selves (fit it is that there should be a distinction betwixt Soveraigne and Subjects) carrying their prey in their Talons, but young ones on their backs, so interposing their whole bodyes betwixt them and harme. The Old Eagles body, is the young Eagles-sheild, and must be shott through, before her young ones can be hurt. Thus God, in saving
the Iewes, put himselfe betwixt them and dang∣er. Surely God so loving under the law, is no lesse gracious in the Gospell: Our soules are better se∣cured, not onely above his Wings, but in his bo∣dy; your life is hid Colos. 3. 3. with Christ in God. No feare then of harme, God first must be pierced, before wee can be prejudiced. XVIII. None to him. IT is said of our Saviour, his Fan Mat. 3. 12. is in his hand.
How well it fits him, and he it? could Satans clut∣ches snatch the Fan, what worke would he make? He would Fan, as he doth I ke 22. 31. winnow, in a tempest, yea, in a Whirle-winde, and blow the best away. Had man the Fan in his hand especially in these di∣stracted times, out goes for Chaffe, all oposite to the opinions of his party Seeming sanctity wil car∣ry it away from such who with true, (bu weak grace,) have ill na∣tures and eminent cor∣ruptions. There is a kind of dar∣nell, called Lolium Muri∣num
because so counter∣feiting Corne, that even the Mice themselves, (ex∣perience should make them good Tasters,) are sometimes deceived ther∣with. Hypocrites in like manner so act holinesse, that they passe for Saints before men, whose cen∣sures often barne up the chaffe, and burne up the graine. Well then! Christ for my share. Good luck have hee with his honour. The Fan is in so good a hand, it cannot be mended. Onely his hand, who knowes hearts is proper for that employment.
XX. Humility: IT is a strange passage, Rev. 7.13, 14. And one of the Elders answered say∣ing unto mee, what are these who are arrayed in white robes, and whence came they? And I said un∣to him, Sir, thou knowest. And he said unto me, these are they who have come out of great Tribulation, &c. How comes the Elder when asking a question to be said to answer? On good reasō: for his Quaere in effect, was a resolution,
He ask't St. Iohn, not be∣cause he thought he could, but knew he could not answer. That Johns ingenuous confession of his ignorance might in∣vite the Elder to inform him. As his Question is called an answer, so Gods Com∣mnds are Grants. When he enjoynes us, Repent, Believe, it is onely to draw from us a free ac∣knowledgment of our impotency to performe his commands. This con∣fession being made by us, what he enjoynes he will enable us to doe. Mans
owning his weaknesse, is the onely Stock for God thereon to graft the grace of his assistance.
MEDITATIONS on the TIMES. I. Name-Generall. HEber had a Sonne borne in the dayes when the Gen. 10 25. Earth was divided. Conceive we it just after the Con∣fusion of Tongues, when
Mankind was parcelled out into severall Colo∣nies. Wherefore Heber to perpetuate the memo∣rie of so famous an acci∣dent, hapning at the birth of his Sonne, cal∣led him Peleg, which in the Hebrew tongue sig∣nifieth Partition or Divi∣sion. We live in a Land and Age of dissention. Coun∣ties, Cities, Townes, Villages, Families, all divided in opinions, in affections. Each man al∣most divided from him∣selfe, with feares and distractions. Of all the children, borne in Eng∣land
within this last five yeares and brought to the Font, (or if that dis∣pleas, to the Bason) to be baptized, every Male may be called Peleg, and Female, Palgah in the sad Memoriall of the time of their Nativity. II. Wofull Wealth. BArbarous is the cus∣tome of some English People on the Sea side, to prey on the goods of poore shipwrack't Mer∣chants. But more dive∣lish in their designe, who
make false fires, to undi∣rect Sea-men in a Tem∣pest, that thereby from the right Road, they may be misled into danger and destruction. England hath been toss'd with an Hirricano of a civill Warre. Some men are said to have gotten great wealth thereby. But it is an ill leap when men grow rich per saltum, taking their rise from the mise∣ries of a Land, to which their owne sinnes have contributed their share. Those are farre worse, (and may not such be found?) who by cun∣ning
insinuations, and false glosings, have in these dangerous dayes trained and betrayed simple men into mis∣cheife. Can their pelfe pros∣per? not got by valour or industry, but deceit; surely it cannot be whol∣some, when every mor∣sell of their meate is Mummie, (good Physick but bad food) made of the corps of mens estates. Nor will it prove happy, it being to be feared, that such who have been enriched with other men's Ruines, will be ru∣ined by their own riches.
The child of Ten yeares, is old enough to remem∣ber the beginning of such men's Wealth, and the man of threescore and ten is young enough to see the ending thereof. III. A new Plot. VVHen Herod had beheaded Iohn the Baptist, some might expect that his Disciples would have done some great matter, in revenge of their Masters Death. But see how they behave themselves. And his Marti 14 12.
Disciples came and tooke up the body and buried it, and went and told Iesus. And was this all? and what was all this? Alasse poore men! It was some solace to their sorrowfull Soules, that they might lament their losse to a fast friend, who though for the present unable to helpe, was willing to pit∣ty them. Hast thou thy body unjustly imprisoned, or thy goods violently de∣tained, or thy credit causelesly defamed? I have a designe whereby thou shalt revenge thy selfe, even goe and tell
IESUS. Make to him a plaine and true report of the manner and mea∣sure of thy sufferings, Especially there being a great difference betwixt IESVS then clouded in the flesh, and IESVS now shining in glory, having now as much pit∣ty and more power to redresse thy greivances. I know it is counted but a cowardly Trick, for Boyes when beaten but by their equals, to cry that they'l tell their Father. But during the present necessitie, it is both the best wisedome and va∣lour, even to complaine
to thy Father in Heaven, who will take thy case into his serious conside∣ration. IIII. Providence. MArvelous is Gods goodnesse, in pre∣serving the young Ostrid∣ges. For the old one, leaveth her Iob. 39. 14. Egges in the earth, and warmeth them in the dust, forgetting that the foot may crush them, or that the wild Beast may breake them. But Divine providence so disposeth it, that the bare Nest
hatcheth the Egges, and the warm'th of the sandy Ground discloseth them. Many Parents (which otherwise would have been loving Pelicans) are by these unnaturall Warres, forced to be Ost∣ridges to their own chil∣dren, leaving them to the Narrow mercy of the wide world. I am confi∣dent that these Orphanes (So may I call them whilst their Parents are a live) shall be comfor∣tably provided for. when worthy Master Samuel Herne famous for his li∣ving, preaching, and writing lay on his death
Bed, (rich onely in good∣nesse and children) his Wife made much woma∣nish lamentation, what should hereafter become of her little ones, Peace (sweet heart said hee) that God who feedeth the Psal. 147 9. Ravens will not starve the Hernes. A speech cen∣sured as light by some, observed by others as propheticall, as indeed it came to passe, that they were well disposed of. Despaire not therefore O thou Parent of Gods blessing for having many of his blessings, a nume∣rous off-spring. But de∣pend on his providence
for their maintenance: finde thou but faith to believe it, he will finde meanes to effect it. V. Coles Pro. 25. 22. for Fagot. IN the dayes of King Edward the sixth when Bonner was kept in Pri∣son, reverend Ridley ha∣ving his Bishoprick of London would never goe to Dinner at Fulham without the company of Bonners Fox Mar∣yrolog. 3. Volum. p. 432. Mother and Sister; The former al∣wayes sitting in a chaire, at the upper end of the
Table, these Guests, were as constant as Bread and Salt at the board, no meale could be made without them. O the meeknesse, and mildnesse of such men as must make Martyres! Active charity alwayes goes along with passive obedience. How many Ministers Wives & childrē, now a∣dayes are outed of house and home ready to be starved, How few are in∣vited to their Tables, who hold the sequestra∣tions of their Husbands or Fathers benefices? Yea many of them are so farr
from being bountifull, that they are not just, de∣nying or detaining from those poore soules that pittance, which the Par∣liament hath alotted for their maintenance. VI. Fugitives over taken. THe City of Geneva is seated in the Mar∣ches of severall Domini∣ons, France, Savoy, Swit∣zerland; Now it is a Fun∣damentall Law in that signiory, to give free ac∣cesse to all Offenders, yet so as to punish their
Offence, according to the custome of that place wherein the fault was committed. This neces∣sary severity doth sweep their state from being the sink of Sinners, the Rendevouz of Rogues, and Head-Quarters of all Malefactors, which o∣therwise would fly thi∣ther in hope of Indemp∣nity. Herein I highly a∣prove the Discipline of Geneva. If we should live to see Churches of severall Governments permitted in England, it is more then probable that many Offenders, not out of
conscience, but to escape Censures, would fly from one Congregation to ano∣ther, What 1 Sam. 25. 10. Nabal said snllenly and spightfully, one may sadly foresee, & fore-say of this Land, many servants now adayes will breake every man from his Master; many guilty persons abando∣ning that Discipline un∣der which they were bred and brought up, will shift and shelter themselves under some new Model of Govern∣ment. Well were it then if every man, before he be admitted a Member of a new Congregation,
doe therein first, make sa∣tisfaction for such scan∣dalous sinnes, whereof he stands justly charged in that Church which he deserted. This would conduce to the advance∣ing of vertue and the re∣trenching of notorious licentiousnesse. VII Both and Neither. A City was built in Germany upon the River Weser, by Charles the Emperour, & Vuide∣kind, First Christian-Duke of Saxony; and be∣cause
both contributed to the Structure thereof, it was called Muners cosmog. li. 3. cap. 45c. MYNE∣THYNE, (at this day, by corrupt pronunciation Mindin) to shew the joynt-interest both had in the place. Send Lord, in thy due time, such a Peace in this Land, as Prince and Peo∣ple may share therein; that the Soveraigne might have what hee justly calls myne, his lawfull Prerogative, and leave to the Subjects their Propriety. Such may be truely termed an Ac∣commodation which is ad commmodum utrius{que}
for the benefit of both par∣ties concerned therein. VIII. Fed with Fasting. THe Salmon may passe for the Ridle of the River. The oldest fisher∣man never as yet met with any meate in the maw thereof, thereby to advantage his conjecture on what Bil of fare that fish feedeth. It eats not flys with the Pearch, nor swollowes wormes with the Roach, nor suckt dew with the Oisters, nor devoureth his fellow
fishes with the Pike, what hath it in the wa∣ter, but the water? yet Salmons grow great, and very fat in their season. How doe many (exiles in their owne country) subsist now adayes of no∣thing, and wandering in a wildernesse of want (except they have Man∣na miraculously from Heaven) they have no meate on earth from their owne meanes. At what Ordinary or rather Ex∣traordinary do they diet? that for all this have cheerefull faces, light hearts, and merry coun∣tenances. Surely some se∣cret
comfort supports their soules. Such never desire, but to make one meale all the days of their lives, on the Pro. 15. 15. continuall Feast of a good conscience. The Fattest Capons yeild but sad Merry-thoughts to the greedy Glutton, in comparison of those de∣lightfull dainties which this Dish dayly affords such, as feed upon it.
IX. Bare in fat Pasture. FOrresters have infor∣med mee, that Out∣lodging Deere are seldom seen to be so fat as tl ose as keep themselves with∣in the Parke. Whereof they assigne this Reason that those Straglers (though they have more ground to range over, more Grasse and Graine to take their repast upon, yet they) are in constant feare as if conscious, that they are Trespassers, be∣ing out of the Protection,
because out of the Pale of the Parke. This makes their Eyes and Eares al∣wayes to stand Sentinells for their mouthes, least the Master of the ground pursue them for the dam∣mage done unto him. Are there any which unjustly possesse the Houses of others? Surely such can never with qui∣et and comfort enjoy ei∣ther their places or themselves. Thy alwayes listen to the least Noise of Newes, suspecting the Right owner should be reestated, whose restitu∣tion of necessity inferres the others Ejection, Lord
that though my meanes be never so small, grant they may be my meanes, not wrongfully detained from others, having a truer Title unto them. X. Much good doe you. ONe Plutarch moralls. Nicias a Philo∣sopher having his shooes stollen from him, may they (said he) fit his feet that tooke them away. A wish at the first view very harmelesse, but there was that in it, which poysoned his cha∣rity into a malicious re∣venge.
For he himselfe had hurl'd or crooked feet, so that in effect he wish'd the Theefe to be lame. Whosoever hath plun∣dred mee of my Bookes and Papers, I freely for∣give him; and desire that he may fully understand & make good use there∣of, wishing him more joy of them, then he hath right to them. Nor is there any Snake, under my Herbes, nor have I (as Nicias) any Reser∣vation, or latent Sense to my selfe, but from my heart doe desire, that to all purposes and intents my Bookes may be bene∣ficiall
unto him. Onely requesting him, that one passage in his (lately my) Bible [namely Eph 4. 28.] may be taken into his serious consideration. XI. The use of the Alphabet. THere was not long since a devout, but ig∣norant Papist dwelling in Spaine. He perceived a necessity of his owne pri∣vate Prayers to God, be∣sides the Pater Nosters, Ave Maries, &c. used of course in the Romish Church. But so simple
was he, that how to pray hee knew not. Onely e∣very morning humbly, bending his knees, and lifting up his Eyes, and hands to Heaven, he would deliberately re∣peate the Alphabet. And now (said he) O good God put these letters together to spell syllables, to spell words, to make such sense, as may bee most to thy glory, and my good. In these distracted times, I know what ge∣neralls to pray for. Gods glory, Truth and Peace, his Majesties honour, Priviledges of Parlia∣ment, liberty of Subjects,
&c. But when I desnd to particulars, whē, how, by whom I should desire these things to be effected I may fall to that poore∣pious mans. A. B. C. D. E. &c. XII. The good effect of a bad cause. GOd in the Leviticall Law, gave this re∣ward, to the woman causelesly suspected of her Iealous husband, that the bitter water, which she was to drinke in the Priests presence, should
not onely doe her no harme, but also procure her children, Numb. 5.28. if barren before. that water (drunk by her to quench the fire of her husbands jealousie,) proved like the Spaw un∣to her, so famous for causing fruitfulness. Thus her innocence was not onely cleared, but crow∣ned. His gracious Majesty hath been suspected to be Popishly inclined. A suspition like those mush∣roomes, which Pliny Nat. hist. lib. 19 ch. 2. re∣counts amongst the mi∣racles in nature, because growing without a Roote. Well he hath passed his
purgation, a bitter Mor∣nings-Draught, hath he taken downe for many yeares together. See the operation there∣of; his constancy in the Protestant Religion, hath not onely been assured to such who unjustly were jealous of him, but also by Gods blessing, he day∣ly growes greater, in men's hearts, pregnant with the love and affecti∣on of his subjects.
XIII. The child man. Iohn Gerson the pious and learned Chancelour of Paris, beholding and bemoaning the generall corruption of his Age, in doctrine and manners, was wont to get a In his life juxta finem. Quire of little children about him, and to intreate them to pray to God in this be∣halfe. Supposing their prayers, least defiled with sinne, and most accepta∣ble to heaven. Men now adayes are so infected with  alice,
that little children are the best chaplaines to pray for their Parents. But O where shall such be found, not resenting of the faultes and facti∣ons of their Fathers? Ger∣sons plot will not take effect. I will try another way. I will make my ad∣dresse to the Holy child Jesus, So is he stiled Act. 4. 27. e∣ven when glorified in Heaven; not because he is still under Age (like Popish Pictures, placeing him in his Mothers armes and keeping him in his constant infancy) but be∣cause with the strength
and perfection of a man he hath the Innocence and humility of a child Him onelywill I employ to interceed for me. XIIII. Worse, before better. STrange was the beha∣viour of our Saviour, towards his beloved La∣zarus, John 11 6. informed by a messenger of his sicknesse he aboade two dayes still in the place where I was. Why so slow? bad send∣ing him, or to him, on a dying mans errands. But the cause was, because
Lazarus was not bad e∣nough for Christ to cure, intending not to recover him from sicknesse, but revive him from Death, to make the glory of the miracle greater. England doth lie des∣perately sick, of a violent disease in the Bowels thereof. Many messen∣gers we dispatch (month∣ly fasts, weekly Sermons, daily Prayers) to informe God of our sad conditi∣on. He still stayes in the same place, yea, which is worse, seemes to go back∣ward, for every day lesse likely-hood, lesse hope of helpe. May not this bee
the reason that our Land must yet bee reduced to more extremity, that God may have the higher honour of our Delive∣rance. XV. All sinne, all suffer. THE Mariners that guided the ship in the Tempest, Acts 27.32. had a designe for their owne safety with the ru∣ine of the rest; intending (under pretence of ca∣sting out an Anchor) to escape in a Bote, by themselves. But the Sol∣diers
prevented their purpose, and cut off the cord of the Boate, and let it fall into the Sea. One and all: all sinck, or all save. Herein their Marti∣all Law did a piece of exemplary Justice. Doe any intend wil∣lingly (without speciall cause) to leave the Land, so to avoid that misery which their sinnes with others have drawne up∣on it; might I advise them, better mourne in, then move out of Sad Zi∣on. Hang out the Joh. 2. Scar∣let lace at the casement, (eyes made red withsor∣row for sinne) but slide
not downe out of the window without better warrant. But if they be disposed to depart, and leave their native Soyle, let them take heede their Fly-boate meets not with such Souldiers as will send them back, with shame and sorrow, into the Ship againe. XVI. Eate worthily. SAul being in full pur∣suite of the flying Phi∣listines made a Law, that no Israelite should Sam. 14.24. eat untill evening. But it was the judgement of Jona∣than
that the Army if permitted to eate had done greater execution on their Enemies. For time so lost was gained being layed out in the necessa∣ry refection of their bo∣dyes. Yea marke the issue of their long fasting. The People at night coming with ravenous Appetites did eat the fles with the Vers. 32. bloud, to the provoak∣ing of Gods anger. Many English people having conquered some stesly lusts which fight against their soules, were still chasing them, in hope finally to subdue them.
Was it a pious or poli∣tique designe to forbid such the rceiving of the Sacrament; their spiritu∣all food? I will not positively conclude that such if suf∣fere to strengthen them∣selves with that heaven∣ly repast, had thereby been enabled more effec∣tually to cut downe their corruptions. Onely two things I will desire. First that such Jona∣thans, who by breaking this custome have found benefit to thēselves, may not be condemned by o∣thers. 2ly I shal pray that two hungry yeares make
not the third a glutton. That Communicants, two twelve moneths together forbidden the Lords Sup∣per, come not, (when ad∣mitted thereunto) with better stomach then heart, more greedinesse then preparation. XVII. Devotions Duplicat. VVHen the Iewish Sabbath in the Primitive times, was newly changed into the Christians-Lords. day, ma∣ny devout people, twist∣ed both together in their
Observation, abstaining from servile-Workes, and keeping both Saturday and Sunday wholy for holy Employments. During these Civill Warres, Wednesday and Fryday Fasts have been appointed by Different Authorities. What harme had it been, if they had been both generally ob∣served. But alas! When two Messengers being sent to∣gether on the same Er∣rand fall out and fight by the way, will not the worke be worse done then if none were employed? In such a Paire of fasts it is
to be feared that the di∣visions of our Affections rather would increase then abate Gods Anger against us. Two Negatives make an Affirmative. Dayes of humiliations are appoin∣ted for men to deny themselves, and their sin∣full Lusts. But doe not our two Fasts more Pe∣remptorily affirme and avouch our mutuall ma∣lice and hatred? God for∣give us, we have cause enough to keepe ten but not care enough to keepe one monethly day of hu∣iliation.
XVIII. Law to themselves. SOme 60. yeares since in the Vniversity of Cambridge it was solemn∣ly debated betwixt the Hads, to debarre young Schollers of that liberty allowed them in Christ∣mas, as inconsistent with the discipline of Students. But some grave Gover∣nours maintained the good use thereof, because thereby in twelve dayes they more discover the dispositions of Schollers then in twe ve moneths
before. That a vigilant vertue indeed, which would be earely up at prayers and Study, when all Authority to punish lay a sleepe. Vice these late yeares hath kept open house in England. Welcome all commers without any ex∣amination. No Penance for the Adulterer, stocks for the drunkard, Whip for the petty Larciner, Brand for the Felon, Gallowes for the Murde∣rer. God all this time us tries as he did Cro. 2. 32.31. Hezekiah, that he might know all that is in our hearts, Such as now
are chast, sober, just, true, shew themselves acted with a higher Prin∣ciple of Piety, then the are a voyding of Punish∣ment. XX. The new disease. THere is a desease of Infants (and an In∣ant-disease, having carcely as yet gotten a proper name in Latin) cal∣ed the Ricketts. Where∣in the Head waxeth too great, whil'st the Legges, and lower parts waine too Little. Awoman in
the West hath happily healed many, by Cauteri∣zing the Veine behind the Eare. How proper the Remedy for the Malady I engage not, experience oftimes out-doing Art, whil'st wee behold the Cure easily effected, and the naturall cause thereof hardly assigned. Have not many now adaies the same sicknesse in their Soules? their Heads swelling to a vast proportion, and they wōderfully inabled with knowledge to discourse. But alasse how little their Leggs? Poore their Pra∣ctise, and lazy their Wal∣king
in a godly conversa∣tion. Shall I say that such may be cured by searing the Veine in their Head, not to hurt their hea∣ring, but hinder the (itch∣ing) of their eares. Indeed his Tongue deserves to be burnt, that tlekes of searing the eares of others; For faith commeth by hearing. But I would have men not heare fewer Sermons, but heare more in hearing fewer Sermons. Lesse Preaching better heard, (Reader lay the Emphasis, not on the word Lesse, but on the Word better) would make a wiser and
stronger Christian, dige∣sting the Word from his head into his heart to practice it in his Conver∣sation.
MEDITATIONS on all kind of PRAYERS. 1. Newly awaked. BY the Leviticall Law, the firstling of every cleane Creature which opened the Eod. 34. 19. Matrix was holy to God. By the morall Ana∣logy thereof, this first glance of mine Eyes, is
due to him. By the custome of this King∣dome, there accreweth to the Land-Lord a fine and Herriot from his Te∣nant, taking a further E∣state in his Lease. I hold from God this clay Cot∣tage of my Body; (An homely Tenement, but may I in some measure be assured of a better before outed of this.) Now be∣ing raised from last nights sleepe I may seeme to re∣nue a life. What shall I pay to my Land-Lord? even the best quick crea∣ture which is to be found on my Barren Copy-hold namely the calves of my
lips, praising him for his Protection over mee. More he doth not aske, lesse I cannot give, yea such is his goodnesse and my weaknesse, that be∣fore I can give him thankes, he giveth me to be thankfull. II. Family-Prayer. LOng have I search't the Scriptures to find a positive precept en∣ioyning, or precedent observing dayly Prayer in a Family, yet hitherto have found none proper
for my purpose. Indeed I read, that there was a 1 Sam. 20.9. yearely Sacrifice offered at Bethlehem for the Fa∣mily of Iesse; but if hence we should inferre House∣hold holy dutyes, others would conclude they should onely be Annuall. And whereas it is said, poure out thine indignati∣on on the heathen, and on the Families which have not called on thy name, the word taken there in a large acception repro∣veth rather the want of nationall, then domesti∣call service of God. But let not propha nesse improve it selfe, o
censure family-Prayer for will-wrship, as wanting  warrant in Gods word. For where God injoyn∣th a generall du y as to erve and feare him, there ll prticular meanes, (whreof Prayer a Prin∣cipall) tnding thereun∣o are commanded. And urely the Pious House∣olds of Gen. 18. 19. Abraham, Josh. 24. 15. Io∣hua, and Acts 10. 2. Cornelius, had ome holy Exercises to hemselves, as broader hen their personall de∣votion, so narrower then he publique service, just adequate to their owne private family.
III. Selfe without Other∣selfe. SOme loving Wife may perchance be (though not angry with) grieved at her Husband, for excluding her from his Private Prayers, thus thinking with herselfe; Must I be discommo∣ned from my Husbands Devotion? what? Seve∣rall Closset-Chappells, for those of the same Bed and Board? Are not our cre∣dits embarqud in the same Bottom, so that they
swim or sinke together? May I not be admitted an Auditour at his Petitions, were it onely to say AMEN thereunto? But let such a one se∣riously consider what the Zach 12 12. Prophet saith, The Fa∣mily of the House of David apart, and their Wives a∣part; the Family of the House of Nathan apart, & their Wives apart. Perso∣nall private Faults must be privately confessed. It is not meet, shee should know all the Bosom sins of him, in whose Bosom she lieth. Perchance be∣ing now offended, for not hearing her Hus∣bands
Prayers she would be more offended, if shee heard them. Nor hath se just cause to com∣plaine, seeing herein Na∣thans Wife, is equall with Nathan himselfe; what liberty she allow∣eth, is allowed her, and may as well as her Hus∣band claime the privi∣ledge privately and A∣part to power forth her soule unto God in her daily devotions. Yet man and wife, at other times ought to communicate in their prayers, all other exclud∣ed.
IV. Groanes. HOw comes it to passe that Groanes made in men by Gods Spirit cannot bee uttered? I finde two Reasons thereof. First, because those Groans are so low, and little, so faint, fraile, and feeble, so next to no∣thing; these still-borne Babes only breath with∣out crying. Secondly, because so much diversity, yea con∣trariety of Passion, is crowded within the
compasse of a Groane. In it is comprized sorrow for our sins, joy in Christ, fear of hell, hope of hea∣ven, love of God, hatred of sinne. Now as when many men at the same time pressing out at a narrow Wicket, all stick, and stop each other, so no wonder if so many passions at the same time, striving to vent them∣selves at the narow Out∣let of a Groane, are stay∣ed from being expres∣sive, and the Groane be∣come unutterable. How happy is their condition, who have God for their Interpre∣ter?
who not onely un∣derstands what they do, but what they would say. Daniel could tell the meaning of the Dreame, which Nebuchadnezzar had forgotten. GOD knowes the meaning of those Groanes which ne∣ver as yet knew their owne meaning, and un∣derstands the Sense of those Sighes, which never understood themselves.
V. Ejaculations their use. EIaculations are short Prayers, darted up to God on emergent occasi∣ons. If no other Artilery had been used this last seven yeares in England, I will not affirme more soules had been in hea∣ven, but fewer corpes had been buried in Earth. O that with David we might have said my heart Psal. 37. is fixed, being lesse bu∣sied about fixing of Mus∣kets. The principall use of
Ejaculations, is against the fiery Ephes. 6. 16. dartes of the I evill. Our Adversary injes, (how he doth it God kowes, that hee doth it we know,) bad motions into our hearts, and that we may be as nimble with our Anti∣dotes, as he with his poy∣sons, such short prayers are proper and necessary. In bard Hvens (so choacked up with the envious sands that great Ships drawing many soote water can not come neare) lighter and lesser Pinnasses may freely and safely arive. When wee are time-bound, place∣bound,
or person bound, so that wee cannot com∣pose our selves to make a large solemn prayer, this is the right instant for Ejaculations, whether o∣rally uttered, or onely poured forth in wardly in the heart. VI. Their Priviledge. EIaculations take not up any roome in the Soule. They give liberty of callings, so that at the same instant one may fol∣low his proper vocation. The husbandman may
dart forth an Ejaculation and not make a balke the more. The Seaman never the lesse steere his ship right, in the dark'st night. Yea the Soldier at the same time, may shoot out his Prayer to God, and aime his Pistoll at his E∣nemy, the one better hit∣ting the marke for the other. The feild wherein Bees feed is no whit the barer for their biting, when they have tooke their full re past on flowers or grasse, the Ox may feed, the sheep fat on their re∣versions. The reason is because those little chy∣mists
destil onely the re∣fined part of the floure, leaving the grosser sub∣stance thereof. So Eja∣culations bind not men to any bodily observance, onely busie the spirituall half, which maketh them consistant with the pro∣secution of any other Im∣ploiment. VII. Extemporary Prayers. IN Extemporary prayer what men most admire God least regardeth. Namely the volubility of the tongue. Herein a Ter∣tullus
may equal, yea ex∣ceed Saint. Paul himselfe whose 2 Cor. 10.10. speech was but meane. O, it is the heart, keeping time and tune with the voyce which God listneth unto. O∣therwise the nimblest Tongue tires, and loud∣est voyce growes dumbe before it comes halfe way to heaven. Make it (said God to Moses) in all Heb. 8.5. things, like the pat∣terne in the mount. One∣ly the conformity of the wordes with the mind, mounted up in heavenly Thoughts is accepta∣ble to God. The gift of extemporary Prayer,
ready utterance may be bestowed on a Repro∣bate, but the grace there∣of, [religious aflections] is onely given to Gods Servants. VIII. Their causelesse Scandall. SOme lay it to the charge of Extempora∣ry prayers, as if it were a diminution to Gods Majesty to offer them unto him, because (allu∣ding to Davids expressi∣on to 2 Sam. 24. 24. Ornan the Jebu∣fite,) they cost nothing, but come without any paines or industry to
provide them. A most false aspersion. Surely preparation of the heart, (though not premeditation of every word) is required there∣unto. And grant the par∣ty praying at that very instant fore-studieth not every expression, yet surely he hath formerly laboured with his heart and tongue too, before he attained that dexteri∣ty of utterance, properly and readily to expresse himselfe. Many houres in night no doubt he is waking, and was by him∣selfe practising Scripture phrase, and the language
of Canaan, wl ilst such as censure him, for his la∣zinesse, were fast a sleep in their eds. Supp one should make an entertainment for strangers with flesh, fish, foule, Venison, fruit, all out of his owne fold, field, ponds, Parke, Or∣chard, will any say that this feast cost him noth∣ing who made it? Surely although all grew on the same, and for the present he bought nothing by the penny, yet he or his An∣cestors for him did at first dearely purchase these home-accommoda∣tions, when that this en∣tertainment
did arise. So the party who hath attained the faculty and facility of extemporary Prayer, (the easie act of a laborious habit) though at the instant not ap∣pearing to take paines, hath bin formerly indu∣strious with himselfe, or his parents with him (in giving him pious edu∣cation) or else hee had never acquired so great perfection, seeing only long practice makes the Pen of a ready writer.
IX. Night-Prayer. DEath in Scripture is compared to Sleepe. Well then may my night-Prayer be resembled to making my will. I will be carefull not to die intes∣tate; as also not to de∣ferre my will-making, till I am not Compos mentis till the Lethargie of drou∣sinesse seize upon mee. But being in perfect memory I bequeath my soule to God; the rather because I am sure the Di∣vell will accuse mee when
sleeping. O the advan∣tage of spirits above bo∣dyes! If our Clay-Cottage be not cooled with rest, the Roofe falls a fire. Satan hath no such need: the Rev. 12. 10. Night is his fittest time. Thus mans Vacation is the Terme for the Beasts of the Forrest, they move most, whil'st he lies quiet in his bed. Least therefore, whilst Sleeping I be out-lawed for want of appearance to Satan's charge; I committ my cause to him, who nei∣ther mbers nor sleepes; ANSWER FOR ME O MY GOD.
X. A Nocturnall. DAvid surveying the Firmament, brake forth into this considera∣tion, When I considered the Heavens the worke of thy Fingers, the Psal. 8.3. Moon & thestarres, which thou hast created; What is man &c. How cometh he to mention the Moone and Starres, and omitt the Sunne. The other being but his Pensioners, shining with that exhibition of Light, which the boun∣ty of the Sun alots them.
It is answered; this was Davids night medi∣tation, when the Sunne departing to the other World, left the lesser lightes onely Visible in Heaven, and as the Skie is best beheld by Day in the glory thereof, so it is best surveyed by Night, in the variety of the same. Night was made for man to rest in. ut when I cannot sleep, may I with this Psalmist entertaine my waking, with good Thoughts. Not to use them as Opium, to invite my corrupt nature to , but to bolt out bad thoughts, which o∣therwise
would possesse my soule. XI. Set Prayers. SEt Prayers are pre∣script Formes of our own, or others composing such are lawfull for any, and needfull for some to use. Lawfull for any. Other∣wise God would no have appointed the Priests, (presumed o themselves best able to pray) a forme of blessing the people. Nor would our Saviour have set u
his Prayers, which (as the Towne-Bushell is the Stan∣dard both to measure Corne, and other Bushels by,) is both a Prayer in it selfe, and a pattern or plat-forme of Prayer, such as accuse Set-formes to be pinioning the wings of the Dove, will by the next returne affirme that Gir∣dles and Garters made to strengthen and adorne, are so many shackles and fetters, which hurt and hinder mens free motion. Needfull for some. Namely for such who as yet have not attained (what all should endea∣vour) to pray extempore,
by the Spirit. But as little children, (to whom the plainest and evenest Roome at first, is a Laba∣rinth) are so ambitious of going, an-hye-lone, that they scorne to take the guidance of a Forme, or Bench to direct them, but will adventure by themselves, though often to the cost of a knock and a fall: So many confesse their weaknes in denying to confesse it, who refuse∣ing to be beholden to a set-forme of Prayer, pre∣ferre to fay non-sence ra∣ther then nothing in their extempore Expres∣sions. More modesty, and
no lee Piety it had been for such men, to have prayed longer with Set∣formes, that they might pray better without them. XII. The same againe. IT is no base and beg∣gerly shift, (arguing a narrow and necessitous heart) but a peice of holy and heavenly Thrist of∣ten to use the same Pray∣er againe. Christs Practice is my Directory herein, who the third time said the same Mat. 26. 44. words.
A good Prayer is not like a Stratagem in Warre to to be used but once. No, the oftener, the better. The cloathes of the Isra∣elites whilst they wande∣red fortie yeares in the Wildernesse, never waxed old as if made of Perpetu∣ano indeed. So a good Prayer, though often u∣sed is still fresh and faire in the Eares and Eyes of Heaven. Despaire not then thou simple Soule; who hast no exchange of Raiment, whose Prayers cannot ap∣peare every day, at hea∣vens Court, in new cloaths Thou maist be as good a
Subject, though not so great a Gallant, com∣ing alwayes in the same sute. Yea perchance the very same, which was thy Fathers and Grand-Fathers before thee, (a well composed Prayer is a good Heire-toome in a family, & may heredita∣rily bedescended to many Generations,) But know thy comfort, thy Prayer is well know to heven to it, which it is a co∣stant customer. Onely adde new, or new de∣grees of old affections thereunto, and it will be acceptable to God, thus repaired, as if new erect∣ed.
XIII. Mixt-Prayers. MIxt-Prayers are a methodicall com∣position, (no casuall con∣fusion) of extempore and Premeditate Prayers put together. Wherein the Standers, still are the same, and the essentiall Parts, (confession of sin, begging of Pardon, cra∣ving grace for the future, thanking God for for∣mer Favours &c.) like the Bones of the Prayer remaine alwayes unalte∣red. Whilst the moveable
petitions (like the flesh & Colour of thy Prayers) are added, abridged, or altered, as Gods Spirit adviseth and enableth us, according to the emer∣gencies of present occasi∣ons. In the Mid-land-Sea Galleys are found to be most usefull, which part∣ly runne on the Legges of Oares, and partly flye with the Wings of Sailes, whereby they become serviceable both in a wind and in a calme. Such the conveniency of mixt∣prayer, wherein infused and acquired graces meet together, and men part∣ly
move with the brea th of the holy Spirit, partly row on by their owne In∣dustry. Such medley pray∣ers are most usefull, as ha∣ving the stedinesse of pre∣meditate, and the activi∣ty of extemporary prayer, joyned together. XIIII. Take your company along. IT is no disgrace for such who have the guift and grace of Extemporary prayer, sometimes to use a set-forme, for the bene∣fit and behoof of others.
Iaacob though he could have marched on a man's pace, yet was carefull not to over-drive the chil∣dren, and Eewes Gen. big with young. Let Ministers re∣member to bring up the Rre in their Congregati∣ons, that the meanest may goe along with them in their Devotions. God could have crea∣ted the World ex tempore, in a moment, but was pleased (as I may say',) to make it premediatly in a set-method of six dayes, Not for his own, Ease, but our Instruction, that our Heads and Hearts might the better keep pace with
his Hands, to behold and consider his Workman∣ship. Let no man disdaine to set his owne nimble∣nesse backward that o∣thers may goe along with him. Such degrading ones-selfe is the quickest proceeding in Piety, when men preferre the edification of others be∣fore their owne credit and esteeme. XV. Prayer must be Quotidian. AMongst other Argu∣ments inforceing the
necessity of Daily-Pray∣er, this not the least that Christ injoynes us to petition for dayly Bread. New-Bread we know is best, and in a spirituall sense, our Bread, (though in it selfe as stale and mol∣die as that of the Gibeo∣nites) is every day new, because a new and hot blessing (as I might say) is dayly beg'd, and be∣stowed of God upon it. Manna must dayly be gathered, & not provisio∣nally be hoorded up, God expects that men every day addresse themselves unto him, by petitioning him for sustenance.
How contrary is this to the Common-practice of many. As Camells in Sandy-Countries are said to drink but once in se∣ven dayes, and then in praesens, praeteritum, & futurum, for time past, present, and to come, so many, fumble this, last,  next Weekes devotion all in a prayer. Yea some de∣ferre all their praying till the last day. Constantine had a con∣ceite that because Baptis∣me wash't away all sinns, he would not be baptized till his Death-bed, that so his soule might never loose the purity thereof,
but immediately mount to Heaven. But sudden Death preventing him, he was not baptized at all, as some say, or onely by an Arrian Bishop as others airme. If any erroniously on the same supposition put off their Prayers to the last, let them take heed, least long delayed, at last they prove either none at all or none in effect. XVI. The Lords Prayer. IN this age wee begin to think meanely of the
Lords Prayer, Oh how basely may the Lord think of our Prayers. Some will not forgive the Lords prayer for that passage therein, as we for∣give them that trespasse against us. Others play the witch∣es on this prayer. Witch∣es are reported (amongst many, other hellish Obser∣vations, whereby they oblige themselves to Satan) to say the Lords prayer backwards. Are there not many, who though they doe not pronounce the syllables of the Lords prayer retro∣grade (their discretion
will not suffer them to be betraied, to such a non∣sence sin,) yet they trans∣pose it in effect, desiring their Dayly-Bread, before Gods Kingdom come, pre∣ferring temporall bene∣fits before heavenly bles∣sings. Oh; if every one by this marke should be try∣ed for a Witch, how hard would it goe with all of us. Lamiarum plena sunt omnia. XVII. All Best. AT the siedge and takeing of New-Car∣thage
in Spaine there was disention betwixt the Souldiers, about the Crown Murall due to him, who first footed the Walles of the City, Two pretended to the Crown. Parts were taken, and the Roman Army siding in factions, was likely to fall foule, and mutually fight against it selfe. Scipio the Generall prevented the danger by providing two Murall Plutak in Scipo's life. pag. 1807. Crownes, giving one to each who claimed it, affirming that on the examination of the prooffes, both did ap∣peare to him at the same instant to climb the wall.
O let us not set severall kinds of Prayers at vari∣ence betwixt themselves, which of them should be most usefull, most ho∣nourable. All are most excellent at several times, Crown Grones, Crown Ejaculations, crown Ex∣temporary, crown Sett, crown Mixt prayer, I dare boldly say, he that in some measure loves not all kind of lawfull Prayers, loves no kind of lawfull Prayers. For if we love God the Father, we can hate no Ordinance, his child though perchance an occasion may affect one above another.
XVIII. All manner of Prayer. IT is an antient Strata∣gem of Satan, (yet still he useth it, still men are cheated by it,) to set Gods Ordinance at Vari∣ance, (as the Desciples fell out amongst themselves) which of them should be the greatest. How hath the Readers Pue been clash't against the Preach∣ers Pulpit, to the shaking almost of the whole Church, whether that the Word Preached or read be most effectuall to Salva∣tion.
Also whether the Word prech'd or catechi∣z'd, most usefull. But no Ordinance so abused as Prayer. Prayer hath been set up against Preach∣ing, against Catechzing, against it selfe. Whether publick or private, Church or Closet, Set or Extempo∣re Prayer the best. See how St. Paul determines the controversie Eph. 6. 18.  with all manner of Prayer, (so the Geneva Translation) and suppli∣cation in the Spirit. Pre∣ferring none, commend∣ing all lawfull Prayer to our practise.
XX. To God alone. AMongst all manner of prayer to God, I find in Scripture neither promise, precept, nor Precedent to warrant Prayers to Saints. And were there no other reason, this would in∣courage me to pray to Christ alone because. St. Paul struck Elimas blind, Christ made blind Bartemeus See. St. Peter kill'd Ananias and Saphi∣ra with his Word, Christ with his Word revived
dead Lazarus. The Dis∣ciples forbad the Syno∣phaenician woman, to call after Christ, Christ called unto her after they had forbidden her. All my Saviours Workes are save∣ing workes, none exten∣ding to the death of man∣kind. Surely Christ being now in Heaven, hath not lesse goodnesse because he hath more glory, his Bowels still earn on us. I will therefore rather pre∣sent my Prayers to him, who alwayes did heale, then to those who some∣times did hurt. And though this be no con∣vinceing
Argument to Papists, 'tis a comfortable Motive to Protestants. A good Third, where so good Firsts and Seconds have been lay'd before.
OCCASIONAL MEDITATIONS. I. Love & Anger. I saw two chil dren fight∣ing toge∣ther in the street. The Father of the one passing by, frch't his sonne a∣way and corrected him;
the other lad was left without any check, though both were equally faulty in the Fray. I was halfe offended that, being guilty alike, they were not punished alike: But the Parent would only meddle with him o∣ver whom he had an un∣doubted Dominion, to whom he bare an unfay∣ned affection. The wicked sinne, the Godly smart most in this world. God singleth out his owne sonnes, and beateth them by them∣selves: Whom hee loveth he Heb. 12. 6. Chasteneth. Whilest the ungodly; preserved
from affliction, are reser∣ved for destruction. It being needlesse that their haire should bee sha∣ved with an hired Isa. 7. 20. Rasor whose Heads are inten∣ded for the Mat. 3. 10. Axe of di∣vine Justice. II. Upwards, Upwards. HOW large Hou∣ses doe they build in London on little Ground? Revenging themselves on the Nar∣rownesse of their Roome with store of Stories. Excellent Arithm tick!
from the Roote of one Floore, to multiplie so ma∣ny Chambers. And though painfull the climbing up, pleasant the staying there, the higher the Healthfuller, with clearer Light and sweet∣er Aire. Small are my Meanes on Earth. May I mount my Soule the higher in Heavenly Meditations, relying on divine provi∣dence; (he that fed many thonsands with Mat. 14. 5. five Loaves, may feed me and Mine with the FIFTH PART of that one Loafe, that once was all mine. Higher my Soule!
higher! In bodily Bnil∣bings, commonly the Garrets are most emptie, but my minde the higher mounted, will bee the better furnished. Let severance to Death bee my uppermost Chamber, the Roof of which Grace is the Pavement of Glory. III. Bewre wanton wit. I saw an Indentu e too fairely engrossed; for the writer (beter Scrive∣ner then Clearke) had so filled it with flourishes that it hindred my rea∣ding
thereof, the wanton∣nesse of his Pen made a new Alphabet, and I was subject to mistake his Dshes for reall Letters. What dammage hath unwarie Rhetorick done to Religion? Many an innocent Reader hath ta∣ken Damasen & Theophi∣lact at their word, count∣ing their eloquent Hyper∣boles of Christs presnce in the Sacrament, the ex∣act Standards of their judgement, whence after ages brought in Tansub∣stantiation. Yea from the Fahers elegant Apostra∣phe'es to the Dad (live∣ly Pictures by hasty
Eyes may be taken for li∣ving Persons) Prayers to Saints tooke their O∣riginall. I see that truths Secretary must use a set Hand, in wrighting im∣portant points of Divini∣ty. Ill dancing for nim∣lle Wits, on the Precipisses of dangerous Doctrines. For though they cscape by their agility, others (encouraged by their examples) may bee brought to destrction.
IV. Ill. done Un done. I Saw one, whether ut of haste, or want  skill, put up his Sword the wrong way; It cut even when it was shea∣thed, the edge being transposed where the back should have been: So that, perceiving his errour, he was feigne to draw it out, that hee might put it up againe. Wearied and wasted wth civill Warre, Wee that formerly loathed the Mann of Peace (be∣cause
Common) could now be content to feede on it, though full of Wormes and putrified: Some so desirous thereof that they care not on what Termes the Warre be ended, so it bee en∣ded: But such a Peace would bee but a Truce, and the conditions thereof would no longer bee in force, then whilest They are in Force. Let us pray that the Sword be shea∣thed he right way, with Gods glory; and with∣out the dangerous dslo∣cation of Prince and Pe∣ples Right: otherwise it may justly be suspected,
that the Sword put up, will be drawn out again, And the Articles of an il Agreement, though en∣grossed in Parchment, not take effect, so long as Paper would continue. V. A Pace a pace. ROwing on the Thames, the water∣man confirmed mee in what formerly I had learnt from the Maps; how that River west∣ward runnes so crooked as likely to lose it selfe in a Labyrinth of its owne
making. From Reading to Lonon, by land, thirty by water an hun∣dred miles. So wanton∣ly that Streame disport∣eth it selfe, as if as yet unresolved whether to advance to the Sea, or retreat to its fountain. But the same being past London (as if sensible of its former Lazinesse, and fearing to be checkt of the Ocean, the mother of all Rivers, for so long loytering; or else, as if wearie with wandring and loth to lose more way: Or lastly, as if conceiving such Wilde∣nesse inconsistent with
the Gravity of his Chan∣nel, now grown old, and ready to bee urted in the Sea) runnes in so di∣rect a Line, tht from London to Gravesend, the number of the  are eqally twenty both by Land and by Water. Ala! How much of my life is lavisht away? Oh the Intricacies, Win∣dings, Wandrings, Tur∣nings, Tergiversations of my decefull Youth! I have lived in the mid∣dest of a crooked Generati∣on Philip. 2 15., and with them have turned aside unto Psal. 125 5. crooked waes. High time it is now for mee to make
Streight Heb. 12. 13. Paths for my feet and to redeeme what is past, by amending what is present and to come. Flux, Flux (in the Ger∣mane Tougue; Quick, Quick) was a Moto of Bshop In his Life. p. 10. Jewels, presa∣ging the approach of his Death. May I make good use thereof, Make haste, Make haste, God knows how little time is lst me and may I bee a good Husband to improve the short remnant there∣of.
VI. Alwaies the Rising Sunne. I Have wondred why the Romish Church do not pray to Saint Abra∣ham, Saint David, Saint Hezekiah, &c. as well as to the Apostles, and their Successors since Christs time; For those antient Patriarks, by the confes∣sion of Papists, were long since relieved out of Lim bo (soon out, who were never in) and admitted to the sight and presence of God, especially Abra∣ham, being Father of the
Faithfull, as well Gentile as ew, would (according to their Principles) bee a proper Patron for their Petitions. But it seemes that mo∣derne Saints rob the old ones of their honour, a Garnet, or late Bernard of Paris, have severally more Prayers made unto them then many old Saints have together. New Beesoms sweepe cleane; new Jer. 2. 13. Cisternes of fond mens owne hew∣ing, most likely to hold water. Protestants, in some kinde, serve their living Ministers, as Papists their
dead Sauts. For aged Pastors, who have bor the Heat of the Day, in our Church, are justled out of respect by young Prea∣chers, not having halfe their Age, nor a quarter of their Learning and Re∣ligion. Yet let not the former bee disheartened, for thus it ever was and will be, English-Atheni∣ans,  for Novelties, new Sects, new Schismes, new Doctrines, new Disci∣plines, new Prayers, new Preachers.
VII. Charitie, Charitie, CHurch Storie reports of Saint John, that being growne very Aged (well nigh a hundred yeeres old) wanting strength and voice to make a long Sermon, hee was wont to goe up into the Pulpet, and often re∣pete these Words, Babes k epe your selves from I∣dols, Brethren Love one a∣nother. Our Age may seeme suffiiently to have pro∣vided against the growth
of Idolatry in England. O that some order were ta∣ken for the increase of Charity! It were Liber∣ty enough, if for the next seaven yeeres, all Ser∣mons were bound to keepe Residence on this Text. Brethren Love one another. But would not some fall out with themselves, if appointed to Preach Uni∣ty to Others. Vindica∣tive Sirits, if confined to this Text, would confine the Text to their Passion: by Brethren understand∣ing only such of their own Party. But O, seeing o∣ther Monopolies are dissol∣ved
let not this remain, against the fundamentall Law of Charity. Let all bend their heads, hearts and hands, to make up the breaches in Church and State. But too many now a daies are like Pha∣raohs Magicians, who could conjure up Exod. 8. 7. with their Charmes more new Frogs, but could not remove or drive away those multitude of Frogs which were there be∣fore. Unhappily hap∣py in making more rents and discentions, but una∣ble or unwilling to com∣pose our former differen∣ces.
VIII. The Sensible Plant. I Heard much of a Sen∣sible Plnt, and coun∣ted it a senselesse relati∣on (a rational Beast, car∣rying as little contradi∣ction) untill beholding it, mine Eyes ushered my Judgement into a beleef thereof. My comprehen∣sion thereof is this. God having made three great Staires [Vegetable, Sesi∣ble and Reasonable Crea∣tres] that men thereby might climbe up ito the knowledge of a Deity,
hath placed somethings of a middle nature (as halfe Paces betwixt the Staries) so to make the Step lesse, and the ascent more easie for our Medi∣tations. Thus this active Plant (with visible motion) doth border and confine on Sensible Creatures. Thus in Affrick, some most agil and intelligent Marmasits may seeme to shake (fore feete shall I say or) hands, with the rudest Salvages of that Countrey, as not much more then one remove from them, in knowledg and civility.
But by the same pro∣portion may not man, by custome and improve∣ment of Piety, mount himselfe neere to an An∣gelicall nature. Such was Enoch, who whilest live∣ing on Earth, Gen. 5. 22. Walked with God. O may our Conversation be in Philip. 3 20. Hea∣ven. For shall a Plant take a new degree & proced Sensible, and shall man have his Grace Stayed for want of sufficiency, and not vvhilest living here, Commence Angel, in his holy and heavenly affe∣ctions.
IX. Christ my King. I Reade how king Ed∣ward the first, ingenu∣ously surprized the Welch into subjection, proferring them such a Prince as should be 1. The Son of a King. 2. Borne in their owne Countrey. 3. Whom none could taxe for any fault. The Welch accepted the Conditions, and the King tendred them his sonne Edward, an Infant, newly borne in the Ca∣stle
of Carnarvan. Doe not all these Qua∣lifications mystically Center themselves in my Saviour? 1. The King of Heaven saith unto him, thou art my Sonne, Psal. 2 7. this day have I begotten thee. 2. Our true Countrey man, Reall flesh, whereas hee tooke not on him the na∣ture of Angels. 3. Without spot or ble∣mish, like to us in all things, sin only excepted. Away then with those wicked men, who Luk 19. 14. Will not have this King to rule over them. May he have Dominion in and over
me. Thy Kingdome come. Heaven and Earth can∣not afford a more proper Prince for the purpose, exactly accomplished with all these comforta∣ble qualifications. X. Tribulation. I Finde two sad Etymo∣logies of Tribulation. One from (Tribulus) a three forked Thorn, which  that such affli∣ctions which are as full of Paine and Anguish unto the soule, as a Thorn thrust into a tender part
of the Flesh is unto the Bo∣dy, may properly be ter∣med Tribulations. The other, from Tri∣bulus, the Head of a Flail, or Flagell, knaggie and knotty (made common∣ly as I take it, of a thick black-Thorne) and then it imports, that Afflictions, falling upon us as heavie as the Flaile, threshing the Corne, are stiled Tri∣bulations. I am in a Streight which deduction to em∣brace, from the sharpe or from the heavie Thorne. But which is the worst, though I may choose whence to derive the
Word, I cannot choose so, as to decline the thing I must * through much Tri∣bulation, Acts 14. 22. enter into the Kingdome of God. Therefore I will labor not to bee like a young Colt, first set to Plough, which more Tires him∣selfe out with his owne untowardnesse (whip∣ping himselfe with his mis-spent mettle) then with the weight of what he drawes; and will labour patiently to beare what is imposed upon me.
XI. Beware. I Saw a Cannon shot off. The men, at whom it was levelled, fell flat on the ground, and so esca∣ped the Bullet. Against such blowes, falliug is all the fencing, and Prostra∣tion all the Armour of proofe. But that which gave them notice to fall downe was their perceiving of the fire before the Ord∣nance was discharg'd. Oh the Mercy of that Fire! which, as it were, repen∣ting
of the mischiefe it had done, and the mur∣ther it might make, ran a Race, and outstript the Bullet, that men) at the sight thereof) might bee provided, when they could not resist to pre∣vent it. Thus every mur∣thering Piece, is also a Warning Piece against it selfe. God, in like manner, warnes before he wounds; frights before hee fights. Yet forty dayes and Nine∣vegh shall be destroyed. Oh Let us fall down before the Lord our Maker; Then shall his Anger be plea∣sed to make in us a daily
Passe over, and his Bullets levelled at us shall flie a∣bove us. XII. The first - Fruits. PApists observe (such are curious priers in∣to Protestants carriage) that Charity in England lay in a swound, from the dissolution of Abbies, in the reigne of King Henry the eighth, till about the tenth of Queen Elizabeth. As if in that age of Ru∣ine, none durst raise Reli∣gious Buildings, and as if the Axe and Hammer, so long taught to beat down,
had forgot their former Use to build up for pious intents. At last comes * Willi∣am Lambert, Esqure, and first founds an Hospitall See Cem∣dens Bt. in Kent pag. 327. at Greenwich in Kent, cal∣ling that his Society (like politique Joab, af∣ter 2 Sa. 12, 28. Davids name.) The poore people of Queene E∣lizabeth. And after this worthy man followed many, that wee may al∣most dazle Papists Eyes with the Light of Prote∣stants Good works. The same Papists perchance may now conceive Charity so dishearte∣ned in our dayes (by
these civill Warres and the consequences there∣of) that no Protestants hereafter should bee so desperate as to adven∣ture upon a publique good Deede. O for a LAMBERT. Junior (& I hope some of his Li∣nage are left Heires to his Lands and Virtues) who shall breake through the Ranks of all Discourage∣ments; so that now En∣glish Protestants, being to begin a new Score of good Works, might from him date their Epoche. Such a Charity deserves to bee Knighted for the Valour thereof.
XIV. The Recruit. I Reade how one main Argument which the Apostle Paul enforceth on Timothy, To make full proofe of his Ministery is this, 2 Tim. 4 6. For I am now ready to be offered, and the time of my departure is at hand. Thus the dying Saints, drawing neere to Hea∣ven, their marke, is the best spur for the surviving to make the more speed in their Race. How many excellent Divines have these sad
times hastened to their long home? (So called in Scripture Eccles. 125. not because long going thither, but long [ever] tarrying there.) How many have beene sorrow-shot to their Heart? O that this would edge the endea∣vours of our Genration, to succede in the dead places of worthy men. Pitzeus in vita Stapletoni Shall the Papists curi∣ously observe and suffi∣ciently boast, that their Stapleton was borne on the same day, on which Sir Thomas More was be∣headed, (as if his cradle made of the others cof∣fin,) and shall not our
Nurseries of learning supply the void roomes of our Worthies deceased. No sin I hope to pray, that our Timothyes come not short of our Pauls, as in time, so in learning and religion. XV. The Mongrel. I Finde the naturall Philosopher, making a Caracter of the Lions disposition, amongst other In viros prius qu in termi∣nas saevit. Pin. Nat. Hist. lib. 8. cap. 10. his qualities reporteth that first the Lion * feed∣eth on Men, and after∣wards (if forced with ex∣tremitie
of hunger) on Women. Satan is a roaring Lion seeking whome hee may de∣voure. Only hee inverts the method, and in his bill of fare takes the second course first. Ever since hee over tempted our Grand-mother Eve, en∣couraged with successe, hee hath preyed first on the weaker Sex. It seemes Hee hath all the vices, not the virtues of that King of Beasts, a Woolfe Lion, having his cruelty without his Geue∣rositye.
XVIII. Edification. I Read in a learned Phisitian, how our pro vident Mother, Nature, foreseeing men (her wan ton children) would bee tampering with the edge∣tooles of Minerals, hid them farre from them, in the bowels of the Earth, whereas shee exposed Plants and Herbs more obvious to their Eye, as fitter for their use. But some bold Empericks, neglecting the latter (as too common) have ad∣ventured
on those hid∣den Minerals, oft times (through want of skill) to the hurt of many, and hazard of more. God, in the new Te∣stament, hath placed all historical and practical matter (needfull for Christians to know and beleeve) in the beginning of the Gospell. All such Truths lie above ground, plainly visible, in the lit∣teral sence. The Prophe ticall and difficult part comes in the close; But though the Testament was written in Greeke, too many reade it like Hebrew, beginning at the
end thereof. How many trouble themselves a∣bout the Revelatiou, who might bee better busied in plaine Divinity? Safer prescribing to others, and practising in them∣selves, positive Piety; leaving such Mistical Mi∣nerals to men of more judgement to prepare them.
XIX. Mad, not mad. I Finde St. Paul in the same chapter confesse and deny madnesse in him∣selfe. Acts. 26. verse 11. And being exceeding mad against them, I persecuted them even unto strange Ci∣ties, verse 25. when Fe∣stus challenged him to be beside himselfe, I am not mad most noble Festus. Whilest hee was mad in∣deede, then none did suspect or accuse him to be distracted; but when converted, and in his
right minde, then Festus taxeth him of madnesse. There is a Country in Affrica, Munster Cosmog. wherein all the natives have pendulous Lips. hanging downe like dogs-eares, alwaies raw and sore; Here only such as are handsome are pointed at for Monsters in this Age, wherein pol∣luted and uncleane Lips are grown Epidemicall, if any refraine their tongues from common Sins, alone are gazed at as Strange Spectacles.
XX. The deepest Cutt. I beheld a Lapidary cutting a Diamond, with a Diamond Hammer and Anvil both of the same kinde. God In Scipture stiled his servants his Malac. 18.19. Jewels. His Diamonds they are, but alas, rude, rough, un∣polished, without shape or fashion, as they arise naked out of the Bed of the Earth, before Art hath dressed them. See how God by rubbing one Acts 15. 24. rough Diamond against
maketh both smooth. Barnabas afflicts Paul and Paul afflicts Barnabas, by their hot falling out, Hie∣rom occasioneth trouble to Ruffinus, and Ruffinus to Hierom. In our unnaturall war, none I hope so weake and wilfull as to deny many good men (though misled) engaged on both sides. O how have they scratcht. and raced, and pierced, and bruised, and broken one another? Behold Heavens hand grating one Diamond with another; as for all those who un-charita∣bly deny any good on
that Party which they dislike, such shew them∣selves Diamonds indeede in their hardnesse (cruel censuring) but none in any commendable qua∣litie, in their Conditi∣ons. FINIS. Page 57, Line 8. for Such, reade Sue.
